Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


H.


&


LECTUEES  INTEODUCTOET  TO


THB  BTVDT  OP


THE  ACTS,  THE  CATHOLIC  EPISTLES,   AND

THE  REVELATION.


■^^o


LECTURES


IXTBODUCTOET  TO  THB  STt'DT  OP


THE  ACTS,  THE  CATHOLIC  EPISTLES,


ASfD


THE   REVELATION.


BT


WILLIAJI  KELLY.


\


LONDON :
W.  H.  BROOM,  28,  PATERNOSTER  ROW.


1870.


y^^.     J^,


^<p^.


.'V


PREFACE.


The  third  and  concluding  series  of  these  Lectures,
delivered  in  London  between  21st  April  and  14th  May
of  this  year,  and  corrected  from  short-hand  notes,  is
now  in  the  mercy  of  God  brought  to  a  completion.  It
is  hoped  that  they  may  serve  as  a  stimulus  and  help
to  a  comprehensive  study  of  the  scriptures  surveyed.
The  inspired  history  of  the  church  as  planted  of  God
here  below,  as  well  as  of  the  characteristic  ministry  of
the  two  great  apostles  who  laboured  among  the  circum-
cision and  the  uncircumcision,  here  passes  before  us.
This  is  followed  by  a  sketch  of  the  letters  of  James  and
of  Peter,  of  John  and  of  Jude.  The  whole  is  wound
up  by  a  summary  view  of  the  grand  book  of  Christian
prophecy,  which  discloses  the  consequences,  under
God*s  government,  of  the  ruin  of  Christendom  up  to
the  end,  when  God  is  all  in  all.  May  the  reader  be
strengthened  of  the  Spirit  all  the  better  to  enjoy  the
rich  pasture  provided  in  the  exhaustless  depths  of
God's  own  word !

Guernsey,  J^h  Deeemier,  1869.


^:  :./•


CONTENTS.


I.

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  i.-vii.  The  starting-point  of  the
dealings  of  God  in  the  new  creation  is  the  risen  ascended  man  Christ
Jesns,  1.  The  title  *'Act8  of  the  Apostles"  only  a  human  one,  and
fax  from  giving  an  adequate  statement  of  its  contents,  2.  Difficulty
at  first  sight  to  see  why  the  Spirit  of  Gk)d,  having  shown  us  Jesus
risen  and  ascended  in  concluding  Luke's  gospel,  should  go  over  the
same  ground  in  the  ox)ening  of  the  Acts,  3.  The  Lord  does  not  act
independently  in  His  risen  character  any  more  than  He  did  as  man
here  below,  3.  Besurrection  does  not  supersede  the  Holy  Ghost,  4.
How  the  Lord  met  the  scant  intelligence  conveyed  in  the  question
about  the  immediate  restoration  of  the  kingdom  to  Israel,  5.  The
basis  of  Christianity,  6.  Waiting  for  the  power  of  the  Spirit  to
act  in  gift  on  others,  7.  "Ordained  to  be,"  7.  Paul  not  one  of
the  twelve,  8.  "They  gave  forth  their  lots,"  9.  Note  on  the
foregoing,  9.  The  parted  tongues  showed  that  Gk>d  thought  of  the
G^tile  as  well  as  of  the  Jew,  10.  The  amazement  of  the  multitude,
11.  Joel's  prophecy  and  its  bearing,  12.  Messiah  characterized
by  the  most  absolute  trust  in  God  in  life  and  in  death  supported  by
Psalm  xvi.  13,  and  by  other  psalms,  14.  How  God  opened  a  way
for  the  acceptance  of  Messiah  when  apparently  all  was  lost  to  Israel,
15.  No  true  repentance  unto  life  without  faith,  16.  The  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  always  consequent  on  £Euth,  never  identiccd  with  it,  17.
True  belief  goes  with  true  repentance,  but  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost
consequent  on  both,  18.  dtrfiivtac  (gladly)  may  be  omitted,  18.  The
apostles*  doctrine  and  fellowship— breaking  of  bread  and  prayers,  19.
How  far  did  the  early  believers  realize  the  truth  of  the  one  body?  20.
Breaking  bread  at  home,  21.   The  meaning  of  am^o^lvovc,  22.   "  His


Vm  CONTENTS.

■ervant  Jeans,"  23.  Peter's  sermon  to  the  men  of  Israel,  24 ;  which
18  an  appeal  to  the  nation  as  such,  25,  and  individually  to  the  rulers  of
the  people  and  elders  of  Israel,  26.  Guilty  conscience  betrays  its
conscious  weakness  however  wilful,  27 ;  and  lack  of  conscience  could
not  be  hid,  27.  The  meaning  of  "filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,"  28.
Possessions  laid  at  the  apostles'  feet,  29.  There  is  rarely  a  manifes-
tation of  God  in  the  church  without  a  dark  shadow  accompanying  it
frqim  the  evil  one,  29.  All  sin  now  is  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  30.
For  Christains  to  use  the  law  is  to  lower  the  test  of  judgment  incom-
parably, 31.  Many  a  thing  has  been  untruly  said  since  the  lie  of
Ananias  and  Sapphira  whidi  has  not  been  judged  as  theirs  was,  32.
Power  by  angelic  deliverance  and  power  by  men  in  providence  dis-
played, 33.  Persecution  and  its  privileges,  33.  Murmurings,  34.
The  church  of  God  is  not  a  system  of  rules  but  a  living  power,  35.
Appointment  and  choice,  35.  Grace  while  it  discerns  knows  how  to
rise  above  evil,  36.  Stephen,  full  of  grace  and  power,  36,  sets  before
the  council  the  prominent  facts  of  Israel's  history,  37.  Abraham's
non-possession,  Joseph's  rejection,  37,  Moses'  disappointment,  Solo-
mon's insufficient  temple-dwelling,  38,  all  laid  to  the  charge  of  the
Holy  Ghost -rejecting  Israel,  who,  filled  with  rage,  stone  the  witness
to  their  sin,  39.  The  loud  voice  and  the  whisper  of  the  expiring
martyr  tell  each  their  own  tale,  40.

n.

Thb  Acts  of  thb  Apobtlbs  viiL-zii.  A  turning-point  in  the
history  of  the  church,  the  unfolding  of  the  truth  of  God,  and  the
manifestation  of  His  ways,  41,  in  the  revelation  of  Christ  as  an  object
for  the  Christian  in  heaven  and  outside  the  narrow  boundaries  of
Judaism,  42.  There  is  no  narrowness  in  a  rejected  heavenly  Christ,
43.  Saul's  ruthless  and  blind  persecution,  44.  Philip  preaches  Christ,
substantiating  his  testimony  with  miracles,  45 ;  which  latter  attract
the  attention  of  the  fleshly-minded  Simon,  46,  for  the  power  attaching
thereto,  47.  But  the  power  attaching  to  g^ifts  is  subordinate  to  the  pos-
aesiion  of  a  divine  Person,  48.  The  contrast  between  the  first  and
subsequent  bestowals  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  49.  The  free  sovereignty  of
the  Holy  Ghost  accompanied  by  the  greatest  care  on  God's  part  to
TOMntain  unity  between  the  several  spheres  of  His  action,  50.  The
laying  on  of  hands  not  essential  to  the  bestowal  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  51.
It  was  a  sign  of  identification  as  weU  as  of  divine  blessing,  52.  The
tide  of  blessing  begins  to  flow  further  from  Jerusalem,  53.  A  man  of
Ethiopia,  54,  hears  the  word  and  grace  put  together,  and  receiving


CONTENTS.  IX

light  is  baptized,  and  rcturnB  to  his  own  country  filled  with  joy,  55,
no  longer  a  proselyte  to  Judaism  but  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  56.  The
call  of  the  apostle  of  the  GentUes,  57.  A  sudden  burst  of  glory  causes
Saul  to  surrender  instantly,  57.  The  mighty  effect  on  his  soid,  68.
The  precious  message  of  the  Lord  to  him  through  Ananias,  59.  He
preaches  that  Jesus  is  Son  of  God,  59.  The  doctrine  of  the  Sonship
did  not  in  the  smallest  degree  sot  aside  the  Messiahship,  60.  An
important  lesson  as  to  reception,  61.  An  object  of  g^raco  can  afford  to
be  gracious,  62.  Grace  can  credit  grace  easily,  understands  the  way  of
the  Lord,  and  disarms  suspicion,  62.  Note  on  **  church"  or  "churches,"
63.  The  progress  of  the  apostle  Peter,  64.  Cbmelius,  65,  a  converted
man  before  Peter  wont  to  him,  66.  Had  life  but  not  peace,  (i7»  and
was  by  no  means  ignorant  of  the  word  that  Gt>d  had  sent  to  the
children  of  Israel,  68 ;  and  so  believing  God  as  far  as  ho  knew  Him,
could  at  least  pray  for  further  blessing  till  it  came,  69 ;  and  he  got,
not  the  truth  of  the  church  one  body,  but  that  God  was  meeting
Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews,  70,  tmd  that  salvation  was  the  heart  under-
standing deliverance  not  merely  from  judgment,  but  from  this  present
evil  world,  71,  whereupon  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given,  not  by  the
laying  on  of  hands  as  at  Samaria,  72,  but  direct  from  God  Himself,
and  the  Gentiles  are  forthwith  baptized  with  water, — not,  however,  as
a  ministerial  act,  73.  Peter  explains  this  wondrous  transaction  to  those
who  hud  not  witnessed  it,  74.  Note  on'^EXXiyi'ac  and  'EXX»/vt(rr£lc,  75.
How  blessed  to  see  the  free  activity  of  the  Holy  Ghost  without  any
kind  of  communication  of  man !  76.  What  a  rebuke  to  those  who
would  make  the  church  a  mere  cre«iture  of  government !  77.  The
wisdom  of  Barnabas  in  seeking  Saul,  and  the  recognition  of  a  gracious
heart  among  God's  instruments,  78.  Peter  rescued  from  prison  by
the  prayers  of  the  saints,  79.

Appendix  to  Lecture  ii.  Extract  from  Mr.  E.  Litton's  work  on
"  The  Church  of  Christ  in  its  Idea,  Attributes,  and  Ministry,"  80-88.

III.

The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  xiii.-xx.  The  missionary  journeys  of
the  apostle  Paul,  89.  A  formal  act  of  separation  which  is  in  no  way
ordination,  89.  Ministry  and  its  distinction  from  official  charge,  90.
The  difference  between  denying  exchmve  or  one-man  ministry  and
upholding  a  stated  ministry,  91.  What  the  church  gives  the  church
has  a  voice  in,  but  what  the  Lord  gives  He  is  the  Sovereign  disposer
of,  92.  Also  the  Holy  Ghost  can  set  apart  among  the  servants  to  a
peculiar  service,  93.    The  laying  on  of  hands  in  the  case  of  Barnabas

A  2


X  CONTENTS.

and  Saul  was  a  fraternal  recommendation  to  the  grace  of  Qod  in  the
work  to  which  they  had  been  separated  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  94.  The
minister  cannot  override  the  church,  nor  the  church  rightly  control
the  minister,  95.  "  John  to  their  minister/'  what  it  means,  96.  The
judicial  sentence  from  the  Lord  on  Elymas  the  sorcerer,  97.  Paul
and  his  company — a  word  on  spiritual  influence,  98.  The  liberty  of  a
Jewish  synagogue  contrasted  with  the  present  narrowness  of  Chris-
tendom to  receive  the  word  of  truth,  99.  John  and  his  unambitious
testimony  to  Messiah,  100.  "Raised  up  Jesus"  does  not  refer  to
resurrection,  101.  The  true  application  of  the  second  psalm  to  this
subject,  102.  The  hatred  which  the  unbelieving  Jews  felt  to  the
preaching  of  the  gospel  to  Gentiles,  103.  The  scripture  which  applied
to  Christ  appropriated  by  the  apostles  themselves,  104.  Christian  faith
appropriates  to  itself  what  is  said  of  Him.  105.  Unbelief  always  flies
to  influence  of  some  kind,  just  as  faith  does  to  God,  106.  The  sim-
plicity of  grace  and  the  wisdom  of  patience  will  always  in  the  end
triumph  over  what  men  call  heroism,  107.  Scripture  always  shows  us
people  dealt  with  as  they  are,  not  all  according  to  one  fixed  and  rigid
rule,  1()8.  Truth  may  be  declared  sometimes  by  vindicating  God  and
deprecating  what  is  ficdse,  109.  **  When  they  had  ordained  thorn,"
how  subversive  of  the  true  sense  of  the  passage!  110.  Note  on
XCiporov^eravrccy  111.  The  folly  of  making  elders  without  a  properly-
constituted  appointing  power,  as  an  apostle  or  his  delegate,  112.  God
does  not  bestow  power  in  a  period  of  disorder  as  in  a  time  of  order,
113.  The  louder  the  vaunt  the  less  real  is  the  claim  to  ornaments  of
which  God  stripped  His  guilty  people,  114.  Hindrances  brought  in
by  the  Judaisers,  not  to  the  apostle's  work  only,  but  to  his  doctrine,
116.  The  matter  referred  to  Jerusalem,  116.  Fallacy  of  the  thought
that  questions  were  settled  by  a  mere  word  in  apostolic  days,  117.
Peter  preaching  Paul's  doctrine,  118.  James  confirms  the  same,
quoting  the  prophets,  119.  Leading  men  among  brethren,  120,  who
accompany  Paul  and  Barnabas  with  the  letter  to  the  Gentile  brethren
at  Antioch,  121.  There  is  a  duty  of  conferring  together  on  the  part
of  those  who  labour,  122.  Paul  choosing  Silas  as  his  fellow-labourer
is  recommended  by  the  brethren  unto  the  grace  of  God,  123.  The
fint  appearance  of  Timothy  on  the  scene,  124.  His  circumcision  by
Paul  very  remarkable,  125,  but  a  proof  how  grace  can  triumph  over
law,  126.  Transactions  at  Philippi,  127.  Opposition  to  the  truth  in
Europe  takes  rather  the  form  of  patronage,  128.  Thessalonica,  Borca,
Athens,  129.  Analysis  of  Paul's  address  to  the  Athenians,  130.
Poets  in  their  dreams  often  stumble  over  truths  beyond  themselves,


<v


CONTENTS.  XI

131.  The  sadden  intervention  of  the  man  who,  raised  from  the  dead,
is  going  to  deal  with  this  habitable  earth,  132.  The  saccess  of  the
gosx)el  in  Corinth,  133.  Paul  as  a  tent-maker  proscribed  by  ecclesi-
astical canons,  133.  ApoUos  helped  in  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly
by  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  134.  The  condition  of  certain  believers  at
Ephesus  who  had  not  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  135.  There  are  many
souls  not  at  all  in  liberty,  not  having  received  the  spirit  of  adoption,
13G.  They  have  looked  for  something  about  to  come,  rather  than  at
that  which  is  come,  137.  The  definitive  usage  of  the  Lord's-ddy,  orthe
first  day  of  the  week,  as  the  fitting  time  for  the  breaking  of  bread,
138.  Note  on  elders  and  bishops,  138.  The  marked  absence  of  any
reference  to  succession  where  it  would  have  been  most  fitting  had  it
been  intended,  139.

IV.

Tub  Acts  of  thb  Apostles  xxi.-xxviii.  Paul's  course  from  Jeru-
salem to  Home  a  remarlcablo  episode  in  the  apostle's  history,  140.
Seven  days'  stay,  141.  The  children  of  Gk)d  should  if  practicable  be
together  every  day,  142.  Christianity  should  ramify  the  whole  course
of  a  man's  life  after  he  belongs  to  Christ,  143.  Wives  and  children,
144.  Philip's  four  daughters  who  prophesied,  145.  On  the  right
exercise  of  a  woman's  gift,  146.  Public  preaching  of  the  gospel  by
women  is  never  contemplated  in  scripture,  147.  Paul  in  Jerusalem  in
company  with  James  and  the  elders,  148.  The  condition  of  Jewish
and  Gentile  Christians  in  the  early  days  of  the  church,  149.  Paul  no
exception  to  that  patience  that  could  bear  with  Jewish  prejudices,  150.
Paul  was  a  man  who  puts  all  that  have  been  since  his  day  into  the
shade,  151.  Painfiilness  of  having  to  touch  in  any  way  on  that  which
might  seem  to  reflect  on  the  conduct  of  the  great  apostle,  152.  The
smallest  slip  of  a  blessed  man  like  Paul  has  the  greater  weight
because  of  his  position,  153.  W^at  comes  of  listening  to  those  whose
measure  is  less  than  the  truth  of  God  as  revealed,  154.  The  tumult
in  the  temple  precincts,  155.  The  address  in  Hebrew  narrating  his
conversion,  156.  Uis  claim  to  Roman  citizenship.  Modem  martyrs  in
theory,  157.  To  state  a  fact  which  the  law  recognises  is  very  different
to  going  to  law,  158.  The  injustice  of  the  chiliarch  in  delivering  his
prisoner  to  the  Jewish  council,  159.  A  further  trait  of  the  uncertainty
of  the  g^und  the  apostle  was  now  treading,  160.  Let  us  beware  how
we  slight  the  least  warning  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  161.  The  object  before
the  apostle  in  setting  party  against  pai-ty  in  the  council  was  not
Christ,  162.    The  name  of  Christ  is  ill-served  by  making  use  even  of


XU  CONTENTS.

the  most  reputable  of  His  advorsarios,  163.  The  Lord  has  nothing  but
oomfort  to  administer,  even  when  His  servants  make  mistakes,  164.
Lyaias*  crafty  letter,  165.  The  hired  rhetoric  of  Tortullus,  166.  Paul's
temperate  and  frank  reply,  167.  Felix  and  Festus,  168.  Agrippa  and
Bemice,  169.  Paul's  defence  before  Agrippa,  170.  He  narrates  his
conversion,  171.  "Delivering  thee  from  the  people,"  &c.  does  not
convoy  the  true  sense,  172.  Our  mission  as  Christians  is  not  so  much
against  evil  as  for  good^  173.  If  you  would  effectually  help  others,
yon  muM  always  be  above  the  motives  and  ways  that  sway  them,  174.
The  Roman  governor's  stigma  on  the  truth,  175.  Agrippa's  half-
wrung  confession,  176.  The  grace  and  truth  of  Paul's  answer  cm-
bracing  the  standing  and  state  of  a  Christian,  177<  Paul's  voyage,
and  the  old  vigour  manifest  as  soon  as  he  is  out  of  the  charmed
circle,  178.  Kindness  of  brethren  in  Italy  most  refreshing  to  the
apostle's  heart,  179.  The  long-suspended  sentence  on  Israel,  18(\
Conclusion,  181.

V.

Thb  Epistlb  of  James.  Suddenness  of  the  transition  from  Paul's
to  James'  writings,  182.  Condition  of  the  church  at  Jerusalem  and
the  early  Christians,  183.  Luther's  rejection  of  this  epistle,  184.  Our
business  is  to  gather  what  God  has  to  teach  us,  185.  This  epistle  is  a
final  summons  to  Israelites  wherever  they  might  bo,  186,  and  enjoins
iho  manifestation  of  godliness  toward  both  God  and  man,  187.
Bleesing  now  is  not  in  honour  and  ease,  but  contrariwise,  188.  GKkI
rovenes  the  judgment  of  the  world  as  to  temporary  circumstances,
189.  Trial  of  faith  and  temptation  of  flesh,  190.  Temptation  as
handled  by  James  and  Paul,  191.  Haste  to  solve  difficulties  is  prac-
tically a  finding  fault  either  with  God  or  with  His  word,  192.  God  is
not  only  good,  but  He  is  a  giver,  193,  and  a  commimicator  of  His  own
spiritual  nature,  194.  The  link  between  Peter,  James,  John,  and
Paul,  195.  Paul  and  James  never  contradict  each  other,  becau8C,
though  they  use  the  same  words,  they  do  not  treat  of  the  same
subjects,  196.  The  implanted  word  in  contrast  to  an  external  law,  197.
The  law  of  liberty,  198,  and  the  law  of  bondage,  199.  The  will
restrained  and  the  will  led  on,  200.  Pure  and  undefiled  religion,  wliat
is  it  F  201.  There  was  to  Israel  a  peculiar  danger  of  taking  up  the
doctrines  of  Christianity  as  a  system,  202.    Human  faith  cannot  save,

203.  The  works  of  Abraham  and  Rahab  viewed  apart  from  faith,

204.  Bring  in  faith,  and  they  stand  out  clothed  in  the  light  of  heaven,
206.    The  tongue  in  private  and  in  public,  206.    Little  matters  pro-


CONTENTS.  xm

duoe  great  results,  207.  James  always  keeps  in  mind  the  practical
every-daj  Tiew  of  things,  208.  Two  kinds  of  wisdom,  209.  The
wisdom  from  abore  is  sore  of  its  ground,  and  needs  not  to  contend,
210.  James  addresses  others  besides  Christians,  211.  New  punc-
tuation of  a  difficult  verse,  212.  "Saved  sinners"  not  a  scriptural
expression,  213.  We  had  better  get  rid  of  phrases  which  deserve  no
better  name  than  religious  cant,  214.  The  forming  of  resolutions
without  €k>d  deprecated,  215.  Heaping  treluure  tn,  not  for^  the  last
days,  216.  The  selfishness  that  comes  into  direct  personal  collision
with  the  Lord  of  glory,  217.  Murmurings,  religious  asseverations,
218.  The  oath  required  by  the  magistrate,  219.  God's  discipline
governmental,  220.    Confession,  221.    Conclusion,  222.

VI.

Thb  Epistles  op  Pbtbb.  The  epistles  of  Peter,  addressed  to  the
elect  Jews  of  his  day,  mRiTifAin  whatever  there  is  in  common  between
the  Christian  and  the  saints  of  the  Old  Testament,  223.  The  general
principles  of  GKkI  are  in  nowise  enfeebled  by  Christianity,  224.  Elec-
tion always  individual  in  Christianity,  225.  Sanctification  of  the
Spirit,  226.  Wherever  there  is  a  real  work  of  God's  Spirit,  the
sanctification  of  the  Spirit  is  made  good,  227.  Sanctification  in  Peter
precedes  justification,  228.  To  confound  this  with  practical  holiness
upsets  the  gospel,  229.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  is  not  sanctification  of
the  Spirit,  230.  The  first  impulse  of  a  converted  man  is  to  do  the
will  of  God,  231.  We  are  called  to  obey  as  Christ  obeyed,  232.  That
hif%d  of  obedience,  233.  Sprinkling  of  blood  under  the  law  did  not
imply  atonement,  234.  The  distinction  between  Peter's  and  Paul's
testimony,  235.  We  need  Christ  interceding  for  us  as  well  as  the
privilege  of  being  in  Christ,  236.  A  whole  Christ  is  given  and  needed,
237.  Saints  are  kept ;  for  Christian  doctrine  is  not  as  men  so  often
say — ^that  of  saints  persevering,  238.  As  far  as  unbelief  works  it  is
just  so  far  death  in  effect,  239.  The  appearing  of  Jesus,  240.  The
value  of  fidth  at  that  day,  241.  Christianity  could  not  be  displayed
while  Christ  was  here,  242.  It  was  when  He  who  died  went  to
heaven  that  Christianity  appeared  in  its  full  force,  243.  How  much
we  are  indebted  to  the  Spirit  who  now  reveals  a  Christ  already  come,
244.  Three  distinct  truths,  245.  Christianity  comes  between  the  first
and  second  coming  of  Christ,  246.  The  holiness  of  the  Christian  is
fuller  and  deeper  than  that  of  the  Jew  could  be,  247.  Two  motives
for  holiness,  248.  Man  claims  the  exercise  of  a  will  which  he  denies
to  God,  249.    What  brings  a  man  into  peace  is  the  certainty  that  all


XIV  CONTENTS.

IB  clear  with  GK)d,  250.  Christiaiiity  alone  settles  all  questions,  251,
*♦  That  ye  may  grow  thereby  unto  salvation,*'  252.  Two  characters  of
priesthood,  253.  Holy  and  royal  priesthood,  254.  **  Not  a  people  but
now  a  people,"  255.  It  is  only  a  theologian  who  finds  a  difficulty,  256.
The  people  of  Gk)d  are  called  out  for  heaven,  and  thus  are  strangers
on  earth,  257.  Exhortations. — The  personal  snares  of  every  day,  258.
Obedience  to  Gkxl  and  man,  259.  Slaves,  wives,  husbands,  200.  Suffer-
ing ought  never  to  be  for  sin,  261.  The  spirits  in  prison,  262.  The
reason  Peter  notices  Noah's  preaching,  263.  Salvation  never  short  of
nor  separate  from  the  power  of  resurrection,  264.  Gk)d,  while  dealing  in
grace,  never  abandons  righteous  government,  265.  Liberty  of  ministry,
266.  On  speaking  in  the  Church  of  God,  267.  The  gift  and  the  ability  to
use  it,  268.  The  flock  of  God  and  its  shepherds,  269.  "  God's  heritage ' '
a  hlae  rendering,  270,  leading  people  to  say  **my  congregation,"  etc.
271.  The  second  epistle  brings  in  CKkI's  righteous  government  in  its
judgment  of  Christendom  or  corrupted  Christianity,  272.  Called  by
glory  and  virtue,  273,  its  signification,  274.  The  kingdom  the  main
subject  of  Peter's  testimony,  275.  Prophecy  a  lamp  for  the  darkness,
276.  What  means  the  "day-star,"  277.  The  light  of  the  lamp  is
not  enough  for  the  Christian,  he  needs  daylight,  278.  Mischievous
interpretations,  279.  Comparison  of  2  Peter  iii.  3,  280.  What  is
private  interpretation  P  281.  All  prophecy  runs  on  to  the  kingdom  of
Christ,  282.  False  teachers  in  Christendom ;  Christendom  hastening
to  heathen  conclusions,  283.  The  day  of  the  Lord  and  the  scoffers,
284.

VII.

Thb  FntST  Epistlb  op  John.  The  characteristic  of  John's  epistles
is  ""Christ  in  us,"  285.  "That  which  was  from  the  beginning,"  286.
Christ's  personal  being  as  man  here  below,  287.  The  life  was  mani-
fested, 288.  The  expression  of  eternal  life  is  modified  in  a  saint,  289,
but  is  fully  pourtrayed  in  Christ,  290.  Fellowship  with  the  Son  of  God,
291.  Fulness  of  joy,  292.  A  manifestation  and  a  message,  293.  The
message,  294.  Qod  is  light  in  contraat  to  the  contrary  notion  of
heathens,  295.  Christianity  is  a  life  beyond  the  law,  296.  Walking
in  the  light  and  according  to  it,  297.  Every  Christian  walks  in  the
light,  298.  Fellowship  one  with  another,  299.  A  Christian  is  one
who  instead  of  hiding  his  sins  confesses  them,  300.  The  detection  of
what  is  contrary  to  God  in  us,  301.  Restoration  founded  also  on  pro-
pitiation, 302.  The  grand  characteristic  of  life  in  Christ  is  obedience,
302.  Knowing  that  we  know  G^ :  what  it  means,  303.  No  view  of
Christ  is  true  that  makes  Him  in  that  view  more  precious  than  Ho


CONTENTS.  XV

WB8  when  manifested  in  this  world,  304.  The  difference  between
keeping  God's  word  and  merely  doing  what  is  right,  305.  Obedience
pats  Qod  in  His  place  and  man  down,  306.  Love  now  comes  in  in
connection  with  obedience  as  a  test  of  one  bom  of  Qod,  307.  Fathers,
young  men  and  babes,  308.  The  two-fold  character  of  antichrist,
309.  Bighteoosnees,  310.  Manifestation,  311.  Without  Christ  yon
cannot  understand  any  part  of  the  Bible  spiritually,  312,  Sin  is  law-
lessness, 313.  A  translation  cannot  be  correct  which  contradicts  other
passages  of  undoubted  holy  writ,  314.  The  common  translation  of
1  John  iii.  4,  lowers  the  sense  of  what  sin  is,  315.  The  family  of  Qod
and  the  fiamily  of  the  devil,  316.  Every  creature  lives  according  to
its  nature,  317.  Righteousness  and  love  combined,  318.  The  great
danger  of  trifling  with  the  practical  consequences  of  truth,  319.  We
in  Him  and  He  in  us,  320.  Danger  of  separating  the  Holy  Spirit
from  Christ,  321.  A  test  for  knowing  what  is  and  what  is  not  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  322.  There  is  no  evil  spirit  but  what  winces  at  and
refuses  to  endorse  the  glory  of  Christ,  323.  The  difference  between
what  is  of  the  world  and  what  is  of  Gk)d,  324.  The  word  is  the  test
next  to  the  person  of  Christ,  325.  Life  and  propitiation  in  our  Lord
and  His  work,  326.  Intimacy  and  mutuality,  327.  Arminianism  and
Calvinism  both  prejudicial  to  the  grace  of  Gk)d,  328.  What  is  meant
by  dwelling  in  Qod,  329.  Who  is  my  brother  P  330.  God  concludes
as  He  began  in  setting  forth  Christ,  331.  How  to  love  God's  children,
332.  John  keeps  us  fully  in  the  consciousness  of  our  deliverance,  but
also  of  our  responsibility,  333.  The  Spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood,
334.  Sin  unto  death,  335.  The  last  verses  sum  up  the  whole  matter,
336.    Appendix  on  1  John  v.  7,  8,  337-347.

vni.

The  Sbcond  and  Third  Epistles  op  John  and  Judb.  Why  the
2nd  Epistle  is  addressed  to  a  woman,  348.  When  the  glory  of  Christ
is  in  question  everything  must  give  way  before  it,  349,  and  then  a
woman  and  her  children  are  bound  to  judge,  350.  **  The  truth  "  a
characteristic  point  in  John's  Epistles,  351.  How  the  inspiration  has
been  questioned,  352.  The  question  of  utility  not  to  be  entertained,
353.  Is  my  soul  in  communion  with  God  about  His  own  Son  ?  354.
The  truth  produces  truthfulness,  355.  The  phrase  "Jesus  Christ  come
in  the  flesh"  signifies  His  Deity  and  humanity,  356.  Every  false  teacher
is  a  deceiver,  but  he  who  lowers  the  glory  of  Christ  is  antichrist,  357.
No  person  can  take  Old  Testament  ground  now  that  Christianity  has
been  revealed,  358.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  not  to  be  easily  moved  about


XVI  CONTENTS.

by  eveiy  wind  of  doctrine,  359.  It  is  impossible  to  discover  a  truth
of  God  that  is  not  in  the  Bible,  360.  The  truth  is  stated  comprehen-
flively,  for  otherwise  Satan  would  alter  particular  forms  of  error  to
save  appearances  for  the  simple,  361.  Bidding  Gk)d  speed  does  not
convoy  the  sense  of  xaip£iv,  362.  It  is  simply  "  good  morning,'*  363.
The  third  Epistle  presents  the  positive  as  the  second  did  the  negative
side,  364.  The  third  prevents  our  being  too  narrow,  366.  False
teachers  invariably  select  women  and  children  in  whom  to  instil  their
doctrines,  366.  Men  characterised  by  selfishness  as  women  are  by
warm  affection,  367.  Both  Gkdus  and  the  elect  lady  are  loved  "in
the  truth,"  368.  Stranger  brethren,  369.  Diotrephes  the  type  of  the
clerical  spirit,  370.  Persons  having  large  gift  can  the  more  afford  to
give  the  fullest  scope  to  the  lesser  gifts,  371.  The  key  note  of  the  first
Epistle  is  hoard  right  through  to  the  third,  372.  The  Epistle  of  Jude.
The  doubts  of  those  who  have  compared  it  with  2nd  Peter,  373,  betray
their  incompetence  to  judge,  374.  It  is  never  taught  in  scripture  that
the  Lord  redeemed  a  heretic  or  any  other  man  that  was  not  saved,  375.
Redemption  and  purchase  by  no  means  the  same  things,  376,  as  Cal-
vinists  and  Arminians  each  contend,  377.  The  Epistle  of  Jude  indi-
vidualizes the  saints,  378.  The  similarity  and  dissimilarity  of  this
Epistie  with  2nd  Peter,  379.  Peter  speaks  of  unrighteousness — Jude
of  apostasy,  380.  Examples,  381.  Peter's  breadth  and  Jude's  pre-
dseness,  382.  Jude  looks  at  a  dealing  suited  and  due  to  apostates,  383,
and  urges  on  the  saints  grace  rather  than  godliness  as  Peter  does,  384.
Making  a  difference,  385.  Reference  to  Jude's  question  in  John  ziv.
22,  386.  Remark  on  the  so-called  Catholic  Episties,  386.  Conclusion,
387.

rx.

The  Revelation  i.-iii.  The  moral  fitness  of  John  to  be  the  instru-
ment of  communicating  the  closing  volume  of  the  New  Testament,  388.
The  position  of  Christ  as  a  man  maintained  throughout,  389.  Terms
in  contrast  with  those  used  in  the  gospel,  390.  Intervention  noticeable
on  every  side,  391.  The  reason  why  gathered  from  Old  Testament
analogy,  392.  John  corresponds  to  Daniel,  393.  The  word  of  God
in  its  connexion  with  what  John  saw,  394.  The  Lord's  gracious  word
of  encouragement  in  anticipation  of  the  doubts  and  cavils  of  unbelief,
395.  The  spiritual  usage  of  seven  in  prophetic  scripture,  396.  Why
the  Holy  Ghost  is  described  as  the  seven  spirits,  397.  To  dislocate
the  New  Testament  absolutely  from  the  Old,  or  to  see  no  more  than
a  repetition  of  the  Old  in  the  New,  is  an  almost  equal  error,  398.
Qod  is  introduced  in  Old  Testament  style  and  character,  but  applied


CONTENTS.  XVU

to  New  Testament  subjects.  The  Holy  Ghost  also,  399.  The  voice
of  the  Christian  heard  exceptionally,  400.  The  Lord  CKkI  the  Eter-
nal puts  EUs  Toucher  on  the  book  from  the  beginning,  401.  Why  the
visions  were  given  on  the  Lord's  day,  402.  The  voice  behind,  and  the
voice  saying.  Gome  up  hither,  403.  We  are  called  to  walk  according
to  the  place  and  relationships  in  which  we  stand,  404.  All  measured
according  to  Gkxl*s  own  mind,  406.  A  threefold  glory,  400.  Death
and  hades,  407.  The  things  that  are,  408.  What  is  meant  by  the
angel,  409.  The  church  in  Ephesus,  410.  Its  state,  411.  Its  de-
cline, 412.  Smyrna,  413.  The  Patristic  party,  414.  Succession  and
ordinances  become  defined  as  a  system  about  this  time,  416.  Perga-
mos,  416.  Clericalism  and  its  effects,  417.  Nicolaitanism  become  a
doctrine,  418.  Thyatira,  419.  Jezebel,  420.  The  remnant  in  Thyatira,
421.  Associated  with  Christ  in  His  kingdom,  422.  Sardis,  423.  Pro-
testantism, 424.  Luther  never  clear  in  his  soul  about  justification  by
faith,  426.  Romanists  ignorant  of  the  Bible,  426.  Infidelity  and
superstition  allied,  427.  Philadelphia,  428.  A  re-commencement,  429,
formed  after  a  rejected  Christ,  429.  The  synagogue  of  Satan,  431.
The  hour  of  temptation,  432.  Only  escaped  by  removal  from  the
scene  altogether,  433.  Laodicea,  434.  Half-hearted  neutrality  about
Christ,  436.    Gold  and  white  raiment,  436.

X.

The  Revelation  iv.-xi.  18.  Rosum6  of  seyen  churches,  437.  From
chap.  iv.  onward  we  find  no  longer  a  church  condition  on  earth,  438.
The  thousands  of  books  written  on  Revelation,  from  the  Patristic  age
downwards,  never  mention  this  till  a  comparatively  recent  date,  439.
No  merely  human  intelligence  can  interpret  the  Bible,  440.  The  church
is  not  properly  speaking  the  subject  of  prophecy,  441.  The  throne  in
Heb.  iv.  and  Rev.  iv.  contrasted,  442.  The  four  and  tweiity  elders,
443.  "  The  dead  in  Christ,"  444.  The  judicial  characteristics  of  the
throne,  446.  The  sea  of  glass  a  symbol  of  fixed  purity,  446.  Who  are
the  living  creatures  ?  448.  The  Lamb  presented  for  the  first  time  in
this  scene,  449.  The  seven-sealed  roll,  450.  Why  angels  are  absent
in  chap.  iv.  and  present  in  chap,  v.,  461,  explained,  462.  The  opening
of  the  seals,  463.  The  white  horse,  the  red  horse,  464,  the  black  horse,
466,  the  pale  or  livid  horse,  456.  The  souls  under  the  altar  cry,  466.
The  answer  to  that  cry,  457.  The  earliest  and  latest  persecutions
brought  together,  468.  Symbols  and  plain  language  contrasted,  469.
False  conclusions  about  the  day  of  judgment  under  the  sixth  seal,  460.
The  sealing  of  one  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand,  461,  and  a  crowd


XVm  CONTENTS.

of  Gentiles  without  number,  461,  reserved  for  blessing  on  the  earth,
462.  The  g^ospel  of  the  kingdom,  463.  '*  Before  the  throne  of  Qod  *'
describes  character,  464.  The  seventh  seal,  465.  Everything  is
angelic  under  the  trumpets,  466.  The  meaning  of  "the  third  part'*
in  the  prophecy,  467.  The  second,  third,  and  fourth  angels,  468.  The
woe-trumpets,  469.  The  first  two — the  locusts  and  the  Euphratean
horsemen — have  a  correspondence  to  the  sealed-remnant  and  saved-
Grentile  companies,  470.  A  parenthesis  between  the  sixth  and  seventh
trumpets  corresponding  to  a  similar  one  between  the  sixth  and  seventh
seals,  471.  llie  mystery  of  GKkL  is  His  present  seeming  inaction  as  to
government,  472.  The  little  book,  why  little  and  open,  472.  The  two
witnesses,  473,  an  adequate  testimony  in  those  days,  474,  who  are
preserved  in  spite  of  the  beast  till  their  work  is  done,  475,  after  which
their  unburied  corpses  lie  in  the  broadway  of  Jerusalem,  476.  The
seventh  trumpet,  476.  The  advent  of  the  world-kingdom  of  our  Lord
and  of  His  Christ,  477.    Conclusion,  478.

XI.

The  Revelation  xi.  19.-xvi.  The  commencement  of  what  may  be
called  the  second  volume  of  the  Ilcvelation,  479.  The  temple  of  God
open — The  resumption  of  the  old  links  with  His  ancient  people  Israel,
480.  The  ark  of  His  covenant  is  the  sign  of  the  unfiling  certiiinty
of  that  to  which  God  bound  Himself,  481.  Israel's  threefold  s^inbol
of  authority,  482.  What  constitutes  the  Roman  Empire,  483.  Ex-
planation of  the  woman  and  her  male  child,  484.  AVliy  introduced
here,  485,  and  no  mention  of  aught  save  birth  and  rapture,  486,  all  a
mystical  representation  of  Christ's  relations  with  Israel  and  of  His
removal  out  of  the  scene,  487,  the  church  also,  488.  The  ejection  of
Satan  from  heaven,  489,  and  his  efiforts  to  destroy  the  saints  on  the
earth,  490.  Two  leaders  introduced  to  catch  a  twofold  class  of  men,
491.  These  are  the  two  beasts ;  the  first  civil  power,  the  second  reli-
gion, and  both  apostate,  492.  Why  called  beasts,  493.  The  revival  of
the  Roman  Empire,  494.  The  man  of  sin,  495,  a  trinity  of  evil,  496.
What  Christendom  is  hastening  to,  497.  Dwellers  on  the  earth,  498.
The  second  beast,  499.  The  locality  of  each  beast,  500.  The  mean-
ing of  the  two  horns,  501.  Popery  is  more  anii-church  than  anti-
ehrist,  502.  The  second  beast  claims  to  be  the  Jehovah-God  of  Israel,
503.  The  number  of  the  beast,  504.  Its  application  to  the  first  rather
than  the  second  beast,  505.  What  God  does  with  His  own  in  these
scenes,  506.  The  everlasting  gospel,  why  so  called,  507,  not  to  be  con-
founded with  the  gospel  now  preached,  508.    It  is  the  universal  mes-


CONTENTS.  XIX

sage  of  God  to  man  and  connected  with  His  creation  glory,  509.  Fear
God  and  give  glory  to  Him,  610.  God  about  to  poor  a  judicial  delusion
on  Christendom,  611.    Intelligence  and  its  evils,  612.    Identity  of  the
everlasting  gospel  with  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  613.     Four  warn-
ing and  a  declaration,  614.    The  harvest  and  vintage  of  the  earth,
51o,  thus  forming  seven  distinct  acts  in  which  G^  will  interfere  in
the  way  of  forming  a  testimony,  616.    Another  sign  connected  with
the  previous  one  in  chap,  zii.,  616.  The  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire,
517.    Which  saints  will  pass  through  the  tribulation,  518.     "  King  of
nations'*  not  **  King  of  saints,**  619.     The  seven  last  plagues,  520.
The  whole  apostate  sphere  smitten,  and  not  the  Roman  earth  merely,
521.    The  gathering  to  Armagedon,  622.    Conclusion,  623.

XII.

The  Revelation  xvii.-xxii.  Babylon  and  the  beast,  624,  or  corrup-
tion and  violence,  626,  cannot  be  referred  to  pagan   Rome   or  to
Jerusalem,  626, — for  the  full  explanation  of  the  prophecy  wo  must
look  onward  to  the  latter  day,  627,  rather  than  to  Romanism,  although
there  is  a  measure  of  analogy,  628, — or  Babylon  in  Chaldca,  529.   The
mystery  of  good  and  the  mystery  of  evil,  630.     Christ  has  not  only
a  supremo  but  an  exclusive  place,  531.     The  prophet's  amazement  at
the  mystery,  532.     The  time  is  coming  when  power  will  cease  to  be
ordained  of  God,  633.   A  great  reversal  of  man's  history  and  political
maxims,  534.     The  resurrection  of  an  empire  by  the  power  of  Satan,
535.    The  ten  kingdoms,  536.     A  partial  application  of  the  prophecy
justified,  537.     Necessity  of  the  ten  kings  getting  their  power  at  tho
same  time  as  the  beast,  538.     Constitutionalism,  539.     The  balance  of
power,  540.     The  revived  Latin  empire  will  destroy  Babylon,  541,
in  order  to  leave  itself  a  clear  field,  542.     Nothing  but  Rome  answers
to  *'  the  woman,"  543.    Civilization  and  what  it  comprises,  544.  Why
God  visits  with  such  severity  at  tho  close,  645.     The  day  of  the  Lord
on  the  world  in  no  way  sets  aside  His  judgment  on  individuid  souls,
646.    A  mysti^rious  lawlessness,  which  not  merely  embraces  Christian
times,  but  the  end  of  the  age  after  the  church  has  gone,  547.    The
bride,  648.    Righteousnesses,  649.    The  guests  at  the  marriage  supper
of  the  Lamb,  550.     The  spirit  of  prophecy  is  the  testimony  of  Jesus,
651.    Heaven  opened  for  the  exit  of  Christ  Himself,  552.    Who  those
are  who  foUow  the  Lamb  out  of  heaven,  653.     Judgment  in  the  hand
of  CTirist,  554.  The  end  of  tho  beast  and  the  false  prophet,  655.    The
first  resurrection,  656.     Who  are  the  persons  invested  with  judicial
authority 'r  657.    Three  classes  of  martjrs,  668.   Tho  first  resurrection


XX


CONTENTS.


does  not  mean  all  rising  at  the  same  moment,  559.  The  term  <*  the  last
day  "  does  not  mean  a  specific  moment  of  time,  560.  At  the  conclusion
of  the  1000  years  Satan  reappears  on  the  soene,  561,  and  the  righteous
and  the  wicked  form  two  distinct  aiiays,  562,  and  now  there  is  one
throne,  Christ  judges  the  dead,  563.  The  age  of  -visible  glory  in-
efficacious to  change  the  heart  of  man,  564.  Extraordinary  increase
of  population  in  the  millennial  day,  565,  and  extension  of  man's  present
natural  life,  566.  The  book  of  life,  567.  Death  and  hades  terminated,
568.  The  tabernacle  of  God  with  men,  569.  The  Lamb's  wife
contrasted  with  the  groat  harlot,  570,  and  used  for  blessing  as  the
harlot  had  been  used  for  mischief,  571.  The  city  the  holy  vessel  of
divine  power  for  governing  the  earth  during  the  millennium,  572.
Paid  wfll  not  be  forgotten  although  his  name  be  not  among  the  twelve,
573.  The  heavenly  city  needs  not,  as  the  earthly,  a  temple  as  a  means
of  commimication,  574.  The  nations  (not  "  of  them  that  are  saved  ")
shall  walk  in  the  light  of  it,  575.  Admonitions,  576.  To  the  Chris-
tian this  book  is  not  sealed,  577.  It  is  Christ  who  says,  **I  come
quickly'*  The  church  says,  "Come,"  578,  and  so  can  the  feeblest
believer,  be  he  ever  so  unintelligent,  579.    Conclusion,  580.


l'*^-


INTRODUCTORY    LECTURES


on


THE  ACTS,  THE  CATHOLIC  EPISTLES,  AND

THE  REVELATION.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.

Chaps.  L-yB.

First  of  all  we  see  man  in  an  entirely  new  place — man
risen  from  among  the  dead  and  ascending  to  heaven.
The  risen  ascended  man,  Christ  Jesus,  is  the  new
starting-point  of  the  dealings  of  God.  The  first  man
afibrded  the  great  and  solemn  and  saddening  lesson  of
human  responsibility.  The  cross  had  just  closed  the
history  of  the  race ;  for  Jesus  in  no  way  shrank  from
all  that  was  connected  with  the  creature  responsible
here  below,  but  met  it  to  God's  glory.  He  alone
was  capable  of  doing  all ;  He  alone  solved  every  ques-
tion ;  and  this  as  a  perfect  man,  but  not  a  perfect  man
only,  because  He  was  very  God.  Thus  was  glory
brought  to  His  Father  all  through  His  life, — ^to  God  as
such  in  His  death ;  and  glory  to  God  not  merely  as  one
who  was  putting  man  to  the  test,  but  who  was  remov-
ing from  before  His  face  the  root  and  the  fruits  of  sin ;

B


2  nrrBODUCTORY  lectures.

for  this  is  the  wonderful  specialty  of  the  death  of  the
Lord  Jesus,  that,  in  Him  crucified,  all  that  had  hindered,
all  that  had  dishonoured  God,  was  for  ever  met,  and
God  infinitely  more  and  after  a  better  sort  glorified  than
if  there  never  had  been  sin  at  alL

Thus  on  the  setting  aside  of  the  old  creation,  the  way
was  clear  for  man  in  this  new  place ;  and  we  shall  see
this  in  the  blessed  book  before  us — ^the  Acts  of  the  Apos-
tles, although  I  am  far  from  meaning  that  the  title  is  an
adequate  statement  of  its  contents :  it  is  but  its  human
name,  and  man  is  not  capable  even  of  giving  a  name.
It  is  a  book  of  deeper  and  more  glorious  purpose  than
acts  of  the  apostles  could  be,  however  blessed  in  their
place.  Flowing  down  from  'the  risen  man  in  heaven,  we
have  God  Himself  displaying  fresh  glory,  not  merely
for  but  in  man,  and  this  so  much  the  more  because  it
is  no  longer  a  perfect  man  on  earth,  but  the  working  of
the  Holy  Ghost  in  men  of  like  passions  as  ourselves.
Nevertheless,  through  the  mighty  redemption  of  the
Lord  Jesus,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  able  to  come  down  holily
and  righteously,  willing  in  love  to  take  His  place,  not
merely  in  the  earth,  but  in  that  very  race  that  had  dis-
honoured God  down  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  when  man
could  go  no  lower  in  scorn  and  hatred  of  that  one  man
who  in  life  and  death  has  thus  changed  all  things  for
God  and  for  us.

Accordingly  this  first  chapter,  and  more  particularly
the  verses  (1-11)  that  I  have  read,  show  us  the  ground-
work, by  no  means  unconnected  with  all  that  follows,
but  the  most  fitting  introduction,  as  the  facts  were  the
necessary  basis  of  it;   and  this  the  more  strikingly


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  3

because  at  first  sight  no  man  perhaps  could  have
understood  it  thus.  Indeed  I  doubt  that  any  believer
could  have  scanned  this  until  there  was  a  fair  measure
of  intelligence  in  the  revealed  truth  of  God.  And
I  do  not  mean  merely  now  that  truth  which,  being
received,  constituted  him  a  believer,  but  the  large  in-
finite truth  which  it  is  the  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost
to  bring  out  in  this  book  as  also  throughout  the  New
Testament.  At  first  sight  many  an  one  may  have  found
a  difficulty  why  it  was  that  the  Spirit  of  God,  after
having  in  the  gospel  of  Luke  shown  us  Jesus  risen  and
Jesus  ascended,  should  take  it  up  again  in  the  beginning
of  the  Acts.  If  we  have  had  such  questions,  we  may
at  least  learn  this  lesson,  that  it  is  wise  and  good,  yea,
the  only  sound  wisdom  for  us,  and  that  which  pleases
our  God,  to  set  it  down  as  a  fixed  maxim  that  God  is
always  right,  that  His  word  never  says  a  thing  in  vain,
— that  if  He  appear  to  repeat,  it  is  in  no  way  repe-
tition after  a  human  infirm  sort,  but  with  a  divine  pur-
pose; and  as  the  resurrection  and  the  ascension  too
were  necessary  to  complete  the  scheme  of  truth  given
us  in  the  gospel  of  Luke,  so  the  risen  man  ascending
to  heaven  was  necessary  to  be  brought  in  again  as  a
starting-point  by  the  very  same  writer,  when  God  gives
by  him  this  new  unfolding  of  the  grace  and  ways  of
God  in  man.

We  see  then  the  Lord  Jesus  risen  from  the  dead.  We
have  the  remarkable  fact  that  He  does  not  act  indepen-
dently of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  His  risen  character  any
more  than  as  man  here  below.  In  short,  He  is  man,
although  no  longer  in  that  life  which  could  be  laid
down  but  risen  again;   and  the  blessedness  of  man

B  2


4  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

always  is  to  act  and  speak  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  So
with  the  Lord  Jesus,  until  the  day  in  which  He  was
taken  up,  it  is  said,  after  that  He,  through  the  Holy
Ghost,  had  given  commandments  unto  the  apostles
whom  He  had  chosen.  Hesurrection  does  not  supersede
the  Holy  Ghost.  The  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  may
be  very  different  in  resurrection,  but  there  is  still  the
blessedness  of  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  working
by  Him  even  though  risen  from  the  dead.  It  is  not
only  that  the  disciples  needed  the  Spirit  of  God,  but
that  Jesus  was  pleased  still  through  the  Holy  Ghost  to
deal  with  us  so.  But  this  is  not  alL  Assembled  with
them.  He  explains  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  to  be  given
to  themselves,  and  this  not  many  days  hence.  It  was
the  more  important  to  state  this  great  truth,  because
He  had  said  a  short  time  before  "  Beceive  ye  the  Holy
Ghost ;"  and  the  ignorance  that  is  natural  to  us  might
have  used  the  words  in  John  xx.  to  deny  the  further
power  and  privilege  that  was  about  to  be  conferred  in
the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.  They  were
both  of  the  deepest  importance.  It  is  not  for  us  to
compare  for  our  preference.  But  of  this  I  am  per-
suaded, that  to  have  the  Holy  Ghost  according  to  the
Lord's  words  on  the  resurrection-day  has  its  own  bless-
edness as  decidedly  as  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent
down  from  above :  the  one  being  more  particularly  that
which  forms  the  intelligence  of  the  new  man;  the
other,  that  power  which  goes  forth  in  testimony  for  the
blessing  of  others.  I  need  not  say  the  order  too  was
perfect^ — not  in  power  for  others  firsts  but  as  spiritual
intelligence  for  our  own  souls.  We  are  not  fit  vessels
for  the  good  of  others  until  God  has  given  us  divine


*x .  .'•


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  5

consciousness  of  a  new  being  according  to  Christ  for
ourselves.

But  there  is  more  stilL  It  was  necessary  too  that
they  should  know  the  vast  change.  Their  hearts,  spite
of  the  blessing,  had  little  realized  the  ways  of  God  that
were  about  to  open  for  them.  Thus  not  only  do  we  hear
the  Lord  intimating  that  the  promise  of  the  Father
must  be  poured  out  upon  them,  but  further,  even  after
this,  they  asked  Him  whether  He  was  at  this  time
about  to  restore  again  the  kingdom  to  IsraeL  This
furnishes,  as  our  foolish  questions  often  do,  the  inlet  for
divine  instruction  and  guidance.  We  need  not  always
repress  these  enquiries  from  the  Lord :  it  is  well  to  let
that  which  is  in  the  mind  come  out,  especially  if  it  be
to  Him.  Nor  must  His  servants  be  impatient  even  at
the  curious  questions  of  those  that  least  understand;
for  the  importance  is  not  so  much  in  that  which  is
asked  as  in  the  answer.  Certainly  this  was  ever  the
case  with  our  Lord  and  the  disciples.  "It  is  not  for
you,"  says  He,  "to  know  the  times  and  the  seasons,
which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  authority,  but  ye
shall  receive  power."  The  measures  and  the  fit  moments
that  had  to  do  with  earthly  changes  were  in  the  sole
control  of  Him  to  whom  all  belonged.  "  But  ye  shall
receive  power"  (for  the  two  words  are  different),  "after
that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  come  upon  you :  and  ye  shall
be  witnesses  unto  me."  It  was  not  the  time  for  the
kingdom  in  the  sense  of  manifested  power;  and  this
was  in  their  desires.  The  kingdom  in  a  mysterious
form  no  doubt  there  is,  and  we  are  translated  into  it ;
and  it  is  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  But  emphatically  it
was  to  be  a  time  of  testimony  till  He  returns  in  glory.


6  .    ntTEODOCrOBT  LECrORES.

Soch  IB  oar  place.  Blest  perfectly  according  to  all  the
acceptance  of  Christ  exalted  in  the  gloiy  of  God,  our
business  is  to  be  witnesses  to  Him.  And  so  the  Lord
tells  the  apostles,  "Te  shall  receive  power  when  the
Holy  Ghoat  is  come  upon  you :  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses
unto  me  both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judaea,  and  in
Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  tiie  earth."

Then  we  have  the  finishing  touch,  if  one  may  so  say,
to  this  introduction.  The  Lord  ascends  to  heaven,  but
Qot  with  whirlwind  nor  with  chariot  of  fire.  It  is  not
simply  that  He  was  not,  for  God  took  Him,  as  is  said  of
Enoch,  but  in  a  way  more  suitable  to  His  glory  it  is
written  here  that  "he  was  taken  up,  and  a  cloud"  (the
special  token  of  the  divine  presence)  "  received  him  out
of  their  sight."

"While  they  looked  steadfastly  toward  heaven,  they
hear  from  the  angels  who  stood  by  them  in  white,  that
this  Jesus  that  was  taken  up  from  them  should  thus
come  in  like  manner  as  they  had  beheld  Him  going
into  heaven.

Thus  the  only  true  foundation  is  laid,  and  heaven
becomes  the  point  of  departure — not  the  earth,  nor  the
first  man,  but  the  second  man,  the  last  Adam,  from  the
only  place  that  was  suitable  for  Him  according  to  the
counsels  of  God.  Such  is  the  basis  of  Christianity.
Altogether  vain  and  impossible,  had  not  redemption
been  accomplished,  and  a  redemption  by  blood  and  in
the  power  of  resurrection.  Eedemption  in  se  does  not
give  us  the  full  height  and  character  of  Christianity :
man  risen,  and  ascended  to  heaven,  after  the  full  ex-
piation of  sins  on  the  cross,  is  necessary  to  its  true  and
complete  ezpiession.


*  V(


%^,


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  7

A  further  scene  follows,  by  no  means  possible  to  be
absent  without  a  blank  for  the  spiritual  understanding.
It  must  be  proved  manifestly  that  God  had  given  even
now  a  new  place  of  blessing,  and  a  new  power  too,  or
spiritual  competency,  to  the  disciples.  At  the  same
time  they  would  have  to  wait  for  power  of  the  Spirit  in
gift  to  act  on  others.  Accordingly  we  see  the  disciples
together,  "continuing  with  one  accord  in  pmyer  and
supplication ;"  and  in  those  days  Peter  stands  up,  and
brings  before  them  the  gap  made  in  the  apostolic  body
by  the  apostasy  and  death  of  Judas.  Observe  how  he
brings  out  with  an  altogether  unwonted  force  the  scrip-
ture that  applied  to  the  case.  This  was  in  virtue,  not
of  the  promise  of  the  Father  for  which  they  were  wait-
ing, but  of  that  which  they  had  already  from  Jesus
risen  from  the  dead.  Hence  without  delay  the  disciples
proceed  to  act.  Peter  says,  "  Of  these  men  which  have
companioned  with  us  all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus
went  in  and  out  among  us,  beginning  from  the  baptism
of  John,  unto  that  same  day  that  he  was  taken  up
from  us,  must  one  be  a  witness  with  us  of  his  resur-
rection."

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  words  "  ordained  to  be  "
are  left  out  Every  one  ought  to  be  aware  indirectly,
if  not  from  his  own  knowledge,  that  there  is  nothing
in  Greek  to  represent  them.  There  is  not,  and  there
never  was,  the  smallest  pretence  of  divine  authority
for  their  insertion.  It  is  hard  to  say  how  godly  men
endorsed  so  pure  an  interpolation — with  what  object
can  be  easily  surmised :  it  does  not  require  a  word  from

me.
"And  they  appointed  two,  Joseph  called  Barsabas^


8  INTBODUCTORY  LECTURES.

who  was  sumamed  Justus,  and  Matthias."  For  these
two  had  qualiiications,  as  fieir  as  man  knew,  suitable  to
the  requirements  for  an  apostle,  being  the  companions
of  the  earthly  path  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  They  had  seen
Him  risen  from  the  dead.  Unable  to  judge  between
them  definitely,  the  rest  spread  the  matter  before  the
Lord  who  must  choose  His  own  apostle.  The  mode
of  the  disciples  in  this  case,  it  is  true,  might  seem
peculiar  to  us;  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  they  were
guided  of  the  Lord.  There  is  no  reason  from  scripture
to  believe  that  Peter  and  the  others  acted  hastily,  or
were  mistaken.  The  Spirit  of  God  in  this  very  book
sanctions  the  choice  that  was  made  that  day,  and  never
alludes  to  Paul  as  the  necessary  twelfth  apostle.  To  do
so  would  be,  in  my  judgment,  to  weaken  if  not  to  ruin
the  truth  of  Grod,  Paul  was  not  one  of  the  twelve.  It
is  of  all  consequence  that  he  should  be  permitted  to
retain  a  special  place,  who  had  a  special  work.  All
was  wisely  ordered.

Here  then  they  prayed,  and  said, "  Thou,  Lord,  which
knowest  the  hearts  of  all  men,  shew  whether  of  these
two  thou  hast  chosen."  Man  never  chooses  an  apostle ;
apostles  did  not,  could  not,  elect  an  apostle :  the  Lord
alone  chose.  And  so  they  gave  forth  their  lots  after  a
Jewish  fashion.  The  twelve  apostles  were  clearly,  as  it
seems  to  me,  in  relation  to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,
"  and  they  gave  forth  their  lots."  This  was  sanctioned
of  God  in  the  Old  Testament  when  Israel  was  before
Him ;  it  will  be  sanctioned  of  God  when  Israel  returns
on  the  scene  in  the  latter  day.  No  doubt,  when  the
assembly  of  God  was  in  being,  the  lot  disappears ;  but
the  assembly  of  God  was  not  yet  formed.    All  would


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  9

be  in  order  in  due  time.  "  They  gave  forth  their  lots ;  *
and  the  lot  fell  upon  Matthias ;  and  he  was  numbered
with  the  eleven  apostles."  We  shall  find  a  little  later,
yet  before  Paul  appears,  that  "  the  twelve"  are  recog-
nised.    So  says  the  Spirit  of  God.

But  now,  when  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  running  its

•  The  true  reading,  as  attested  by  X,  A,  B,  C,  D  (corr.),  and  many
ancient  versions,  is  avrot^  (not  aifrwv,  as  in  D,  E,  the  mass  of  cur-
lives,  &c.).  The  meaning  is,  **  they  gave  lots  for  them."  This  meets
the  chief  reasoning  founded  on  the  conmion  text  which  Mosheim
urges  with  his  usual  force  against  the  view  in  which,  he  confesses,  aU
the  commentators  agree  (t.f.,  in  representing  Matthias  as  having  been
chosen  an  apostle  by  lot,  agreeably  to  the  ancient  Jewish  practice).
It  is  evidently  of  no  consequence  who  they  were  that  set  forth  or
appointed  ['mTtifrav)  the  two:  some,  like  Alford,  arguing  that  the
whole  company  thus  produced  them ;  others,  like  Mosheim,  contend-
ing that  it  must  in  all  propriety  have  been  the  eleven  apostles.  I
think  that  the  vagueness  of  the  phrase,  without  a  defined  subject,
shows  that  the  stress  laid  on  either  side  is  a  mistake.  It  suffices  to
say,  that  two  candidates  were  brought  forward,  possessed,  as  far  aa
either  apostles  or  disciples  could  say,  of  adequate  qualifications.  The
Lord  alone  could  decide:  to  Him  all  looked  after  the  manner  so
familiar  to  the  people  of  Qod.  But  Mosheim' s  conclusion  destroys
the  whole  point,  besides  doing  violence  to  the  text  by  confounding
tXripoc  ** lot"  with  ^fj^oc  vote  or  sufirage.  It  would  bring  in  man's
win  and  voice  where  the  prayer  just  offered  was  an  abandonment  of
it  for  the  intervention  of  the  heart-searching  Gkxl.  This,  no  doubt,
was  natural  to  one  who  was  swayed  by  Lutheran  prejudice,  and
strengthened  by  the  practice  which  undoubtedly  prevailed  (from  the
third  century  at  latest),  the  assembly  deciding  by  suffrage,  not  by  lot,
between  the  candidates  proposed  by  those  who  took  the  lead  in  their
affairs.  There  seems  little  difficulty  in  understanding  a  Hebniistic
extension  of  the  word  "gave"  (1  Sam.  xiv.  41)  for  the  more  common
" cast";  and  as  to  the  pronoun,  it  is  as  intelligible  and  correct  in  the
dative,  aa  in  the  genitive  it  is  perplexing  in  sense,  and,  I  think,  inaccu-
rate in  form ;  for  the  article  would  be  requisite  with  the  substantive
if  it  were  the  true  reading.  Compare  J.  L.  Moshimii  de  rebus
Christianorum  ante  Const.  M.  Comm.  Saec.  Pr.  }  xiv.  pp.  ',  8-80.


10  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

course,  they  were  all  with  one  accord  together;  for  God
put  the  disciples  in  waiting  in  the  attitude  of  expec-
tation and  prayer  and  supplication  before  Him.  It  was
good  that  they  should  feel  their  weakness;  and  this
was  indeed  the  condition  of  true  spiritual  power,  as  it
always  is  for  the  soul  (if  not  for  testimony,  certainly
for  the  soul).  "And  suddenly  there  came  a  sound  from
heaven  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind,  and  it  filled  all
the  house  where  they  were  sitting.  And  there  appeared
unto  them  cloven  tongues  like  as  of  fire,  and  it  sat  upon
each  of  them.  And  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  began  to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the
Spirit  gave  them  utterance."  The  manner  of  the  Holy
Spirit's  appearing  thus  it  is  well  to  notice.  It  was
exactly  adapted  to  the  intent  for  which  He  was  given.
It  was  not,  as  in  the  gospels,  a  testimony  to  the  grace
of  the  Lord,  although  nothing  but  grace  could  have  given
Him  to  man.  It  was  not,  as  we  find  it  afterwards  in  the
Eevelation,  where  mention  is  made  of  the  seven  Spirits
of  God  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth.  The  tongues  were
parted ;  for  it  was  not  a  question  of  people  being  now
made  to  speak  of  one  lip.  God  was  meeting  man  where
he  was, — not  setting  aside  the  ancient  judgment  of  his
pride,  yet  graciously  condescending  to  man,  and  this  to
mankind  as  they  were.  It  was  no  sign  of  government,
still  less  of  government  limited  to  a  special  nation.  The
parted  tongues  clearly  showed  that  God  thought  of  the
Gentile  as  of  the  Jew.  But  they  were  "  as  of  fire ;"  for
the  testimony  of  grace  was  none  the  less  founded  on
righteousness.  The  gospel  is  intolerant  of  eviL  This  is
the  wonderful  way  in  which  God  now  speaks  by  the
Holy  Ghost  Whatever  the  mercy  of  God,  whatever  the


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  11

proved  weakness,  need,  and  guilt  of  man,  there  is  not
Dor  can  be  the  least  compromise  of  holiness.  God  can
never  sanction  the  evil  of  man.  Hence  the  Spirit
of  God  was  thus  pleased  to  mark  the  character  of  His
presence,  even  though  given  of  the  grace  of  God,  but
founded  on  the  righteousness  of  God.  God  could
afford  fully  to  bless.  It  was  no  derogation  from  His
glory;  it  was  after  all  but  His  seal  on  the  perfectness
of  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Not  only  did  He  show
His  interest  for  man,  and  His  grace  to  the  evil  and  lost,
but,  above  all.  His  honour  for  Jesus.  There  is  no  title
nor  ground  so  secure  for  us.  There  is  no  spring  of
blessing  that  we  are  entitled  so  to  boast  of  as  the  Lord:
there  is  none  that  so  delivers  from  self.

At  this  time  too  there  were  dwelling  at  Jerusalem
men  from  all  nations,  we  may  say,  generally  speaking,
under  heaven — "  Jews,  devout  men."  And  when  it  was
noised  abroad  that  the  Holy  Ghost  had  thus  been  given
to  the  congregated  disciples  "the  multitude  came  to-
gether, and  were  confounded,  because  that  every  man
heard  them  speaking  in  his  own  language.  And  they
were  all  amazed  and  marvelled,  saying  one  to  another.
Behold,  are  not  all  of  these  which  speak  Galilaeans  ?
And  how  hear  we  every  man  in  our  own  tongue,  wherein
we  were  bom  ?  Parthians,  and  Medes,  and  Elamites,
and  the  dwellers  in  Mesopotamia,  and  in  Judaea,  and
Cappadocia,  in  Pontus,  and  Asia,  Phrygia,  and  Pam-
phylia,  in  Egypt,  and  in  the  parts  of  Libya  about  Gyrene,
and  strangers  of  Rome,  Jews  and  proselytes,  Cretes  and
Arabians,  we  do  hear  them  speak  in  our  tongues  the
wonderful  works  of  God.  And  they  were  all  amazed,
and  were  in  doubt,  saying  one  to  another.  What  meaneth


12  uttkoductory  lectures.

this  ?  Others  mocking  said,  These  men  are  full  of  new
(or  sweet)  wine.  But  Peter,  standing  up  with  the
eleven,  lifted  up  his  voice,  and  said  unto  them,  Ye
men  of  Judsea,  and  all  ye  tliat  dwell  at  Jerusalem,"
For  he  first  addresses  them  on  a  narrower  groimd  than
that  into  which  he  afterwards  branches  out,  and  both
with  a  wisdom  that  is  not  a  little  striking.  Here  he  is
about  to  apply  a  portion  of  the  pnjphecy  of  Joel.  It
will  be  seen  that  the  prophet  takes  exactly  the  same
limited  ground  as  Peter  does.  That  is,  the  Jews,  pro-
perly so  called,  and  Jerusalem,  stand  in  the  foreground
of  Joel's  prophecy:  so  admirably  perfect  is  the  word
of  God  even  in  its  smallest  detail.

The  point  he  insists  on,  it  will  be  noticed,  was  this
— that  the  wonder  then  before  them  in  Jerusalem  was
after  all  one  for  which  their  own  prophets  ought  to
have  prepared  them.  "  This  is  that  wliich  was  spoken
by  the  prophet  JoeL"  He  does  not  say  that  it  was  the
fidfilment  of  the  prophet.  Men,  divines,  have  so  said,
but  not  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  apostle  simply  says,
"This  is  that  which  was  spoken."  Such  was  its
character.  How  far  it  was  to  be  then  accomplished
is  another  matter.  It  was  not  the  excitement  of
nature  by  wine,  but  the  heart  filled  with  the  Spirit
of  God,  acting  in  His  own  power  and  in  all  classes.
"And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days,  saith
God,  I  will  pour  out  of  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh:
and  your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy,  and
your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  and  your  old  men
shall  dream  dreams:  and  on  my  servants  and  on  my
handmaidens  I  will  pour  out  in  those  days  of  my  Spirit;
and  they  shall  prophesy :  and  I  will  shew  wonders  in


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  13

heaven  above,  and  signs  in  the  earth  beneath ;  blood,
and  fire,  and  vapour  of  smoke :  the  sun  shall  be  turned
into  darkness,  and  the  moon  into  blood,  before  that
great  and  notable  day  of  the  Lord  come :  and  it  shall
come  to  pass,  that  whosoever  shall  call  on  the  name  of
the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  There  he  stops,  as  far  as  Joel
is  concerned.

Then,  verse  22,  he  addresses  them  as  "  men  of  Israel,**
not  merely  of  Judaea  and  Jerusalem,  but  now  break-
ing out  into  the  general  hopes  of  the  nation,  he  at
the  same  time  proves  their  common  guilt.     "Ye  men
of  Israel,  hear  these  words ;  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  man
approved  of  God  among  you  by  miracles  and  wonders
and  signs,  which  God  did  by  him  in  the  midst  of  you,
as  ye  yourselves  also  know :   him,  being  delivered  by
the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  ye
have  taken,  and  by  wicked  hands  have  crucified  and
slain:   whom  God  hath  raised  up,  having  loosed  the
pains  of  death:   because  it  was  not  possible  that  he
should  be  holden  of  it."

And  this  the  apostle  supports  by  what  David  had
spoken  in  Psalm  xvL:   "I  foresaw  the  Lord  always
before  my  face."     The  same  psalm  affords  the  clearest
proof   tliat   the    Messiah   (and    no   Jew   could   doubt
that  the  Messiah  was  in  question  there)  would  be  cha-
racterised by  the  most  absolute  trust  in  God  through
all  His  life ;  that  He  was  to  lay  down  His  life  with
trust  in  God  just  as  unbroken  and  perfect  in  death
aa  in  Ufe ;  and  finally  that  He  would  stand  in  resur-
rection.    It  is  tlie  psalm  therefore  of  confidence  in  God
that  goes  right  through  life,  death,  resurrection.   It  was
seen  in  Jesus,  and  clearly  not  appUcable  to  David  its


14  .  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

writer.  Of  all  whom  a  Jew  could  have  put  forward  to
claim  the  language  of  such  a  psalm,  David  would  have
been  perhaps  the  uppermost  one  in  their  hearts.  But  it
was  far  beyond  that  famous  king,  as  Peter  argued:
"  Men  [and]  brethren,*  let  me  freely  speak  unto  you  of
the  patriarch  David,  that  he  is  both  dead  and  buried,
and  his  sepulchre  is  with  us  unto  this  day.  Therefore
being  a  prophet,  and  knowing  that  Gk)d  had  sworn  with
an  oath  to  him,  that  of  the  fruit  of  his  loins,  according
to  the  flesh,  he  would  raise  up  Christ  to  sit  on  his
throne ;  he  seeing  this  before  spake  of  the  resurrection
of  Christ,  that  his  soul  was  not  left  in  hell,  neither  his
flesh  did  see  corruption.  This  Jesus  hath  God  raised
up,  whereof  we  all  are  witnesses."

Thus  the  fresh  and  notorious  facts  as  to  Jesus,
and  no  one  else,  completely  agreed  with  this  inspired
testimony  to  the  Messiah.  Nor  was  it  confined  to  a
single  portion  of  the  Psalms.  "Therefore  being  by
the  right  hand  of  God  exalted,  and  having  received  of
the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath  shed
forth  this  which  ye  now  see  and  hear."  But  David  is
not  ascended  into  the  heavens.  Thus  Peter  cites  another
psalm  to  show  the  necessary  ascension  of  Messiah  to
sit  at  the  right  hand  of  Jehovah,  just  as  much  as  he
had  shown  resurrection  to  be  predicted  of  Him  as  of
no  other ;  "  for  he  says  himself,  Jehovah  said  unto  my
Lord,  Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand,  imtil  I  make  thy  foes
thy  footstool"    Who  was  the  man  that  sat  at  God's

*  It  may  bo  well  to  g^oard  the  English  reader  from  supposing  that
two  classes  are  intended.  The  phrase  is  literally  **  men-brethren,"
and  means  simply  men  who  were  brethren. — Let  me  add,  that  the
true  text  in  the  last  clause  of  verse  30  is  simply,  **  to  seat  frt)m  the
fruit  of  his  loins  on  his  throne."


r^^:^'


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  15

right  hand?     Certainly  none  could  pretend  it  wa3
David,  but  his  Son,  the  Messiah ;  and  this  entirely  cor-
responded with  the  facts  the  apostles  had  beheld  per-
sooally.     "Therefore  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know
assureiily,  that  God  hath  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom
ye  have  crucified,  both  Lord  and  Christ."     Thus  the
proof  was  complete.   Their  psalms  found  their  counter-
part in  the  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension  of  the
Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.     God  had  made  Him  "both
Lord   and   Christ;"    for  here   the   testimony  is  very
gradual,  and  the  wisdom  of  God  in  this  we  may  well
admire  and  profit  by.     In  meeting  the  Jews,  God  con-
descended to  put  forth  the  gloiy  of  His  own  Son  in  the
way  that  most  of  all  attached  itself  to  their  ancient
testimonies  and  to  their  expectations.     They  looked  for
a  Messiah.     But  apparently  all  was  lost ;  for  they  had
refused   Him  ;    and   they   might   have  supposed   that
the  loss  was  irretrievable.     Not  so:   God  had  raised
Him  from  the  dead.     He  had  shown  Himself  there-
fore against  what  they  had  done ;  but  their  hope  itself
was  secure  in  the  risen  Jesus,  whom  God  had  made  to
be  Lord  and  Christ.     Jesus,  spite  of  all  that  they  had
done,  had  in  nowise  given  up  His  title  as  the  Clirist;
God  had  made  Him  such.     After  they  had  done  their
worst,  and  He  had  suffered  His  worst,  God  owned  Him
thus  according  to  His  own  word  at  His  own  riglit  hand.
Other  glories  will  open  there  too ;  but  Jesus  Christ,  of
the  seed  of  David,  as  Paul  says,  was  to  be  raised  from
the  dead  according  to   his  gospel.     Timothy  was  to
remember  this ;  and  Paul  can  descend  to  show  the  con-
nection of  the  glorious  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  with
the  Jew  on  earth,  as  he  loved  for  his  own  relationsliip


16  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

to  behold  Him  in  heavenly  glory.  Thus  the  link  with
the  expectations  of  the  earthly  people,  though  broken
by  death,  is  reset  for  ever  in  resurrection.

Surprised,  grieved,  alarmed  to  the  heart  by  that
which  Peter  had  thus  forcibly  brought  before  them,
they  cry  to  him  and  the  other  apostles,  "  Men  [and]
brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?"  This  gives  the  oppor-
tunity for  the  apostle  to  set  out  in  the  wisdom  of  God
a  very  weighty  application  of  the  truth  for  the  soul
that  hears  the  gospel:  "Eepent,"  says  he,  which  is  a
far  deeper  thing  than  compunction  of  heart.  This  they
had  already,  and  it  leads  to  that  which  he  desired  for
them :  "  Eepent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you  in
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and
ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  There  is
no  true  repentance  unto  life  without  faith.  But  it  is
according  to  God  that  repentance  is  put  forward  here
rather  than  faith.  The  Jews  had  the  testimony  of  the
gospel,  as  well  as  the  law;  and  now  it  had  been  pressed
on  them  by, Peter.  Because  they  believed  that  testi-
mony, brought  home  to  their  consciences,  as  we  have
seen,  their  hearts  were  filled  with  sorrow.

But  the  apostle  lets  them  know  that  there  is  a  judg-
ment of  self  that  goes  far  below  any  outburst  of  grief, —
any  consciousness  and  hatred,  even  of  the  deepest  act
of  evil,  as  undoubtedly  the  crucifying  of  Jesus  was.
Bepentance  is  the  abandonment  of  self  altogether,  the
judgment  of  what  we  are  in  the  light  of  God.  And
this  was  to  be  marked,  therefore,  not  only  by  the  nega-
tive sign  of  giving  themselves  up  as  altogether  evil
before  God,  but  by  receiving  the  rejected  and  crucified
man^  the  Lord  Jesus.    Hence,  to  be  baptized  each  one


*  f ,  -  -


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  17

of  them  in  His  name  for  the  remission  of  sins  follows ;
"  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."

This,  therefore,  is  entirely  distinct  from  faith  or  re-
pentance. Believing,  they  had  of  necessity  a  new  nature
they  had  life  in  Christ;  but  receiving  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  is  a  privilege  and  power  beyond ;  and  in
this  case  it  was  made  to  be  attendant  on  one's  being
baptized  as  well  as  repenting,  because  in  Jews  it  was
of  the  utmost  moment  that  they  should  give  a  public
witness  that  all  the  rest  and  confidence  of  their  souls
lay  in  Jesus.  Having  been  guilty  of  crucifying  the
Lord,  He  must  be  manifestly  the  object  of  their  trust.
And  so  it  was  that  they  were  to  receive  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost.

But  indeed  this  gift  is  always  consequent  on  faith
— never  identical  with  it.  This  is  as  sure  as  it  is
important  to  assert  and  to  insist  on,  as  well  as  to
believe.  It  is  no  question  of  notion  or  tradition,  the
subject  of  which  runs  in  quite  another  direction.  I  do
not  even  allow  it  to  be  an  open  question,  nor  a  matter
of  opinion ;  for  plainly  in  every  instance  of  each  soul,
of  whom  Scripture  speaks,  there  is  an  interval  however
short.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  follows  faith,  and
is  in  no  way  at  the  same  instant,  still  less  is  it  the
same  act.  It  supposes  faith  already  existing,  not  un-
belief;  for  the  Holy  Ghost,  though  He  may  quicken,  is
never  ffiven  to  an  unbeliever.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  said
to  seal  the  believer ;  but  it  is  a  seal  of  faith,  and  not
of  unbelief.  The  heart  is  opened  by  faith,  and  the
Holy  Ghost  is  given  by  the  grace  of  God  to  those  that
believe,  not  in  order  to  their  believing.  There  is  no
such  thing  as  the  Holy  Ghost  given  in  order  to  believe.

c


18  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

He  quickens  the  unbeliever,  and  is  given  to  the  believer.
Although  we  do  not  hear  of  faith  in  the  passage,  yet
from  the  fact  that  the  converted  only  were  called  on  to
repent,  we  know  that  they  must  have  believed.  True
believing  necessarily  goes  along  with  true  repentance.
The  two  things  are  invariably  found  together ;  but  the
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  consequent  on  them  both.

And  so  the  apostle  explains.  He  says,  "  For  the  pro-
mise is  unto  you,  and  to  your  children,  and  to  all  that
are  afar  oflf,  even  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall
call."  His  words  seem  to  carry  a  sense  beyond  Israel :
how  far  he  entered  into  the  force  of  them  himself  it  is
not  perhaps  for  any  of  us  to  say.  We  know  that  after-
wards, when  Peter  was  called  upon  to  go  to  the  Gentiles,
he  foimd  diflBculties.  It  is  hard  to  suppose,  therefore,
that  he  fully  understood  his  own  words.  However
this  may  be,  the  words  were  according  to  God,  whether
or  not  fully  appreciated  by  Peter  when  he  uttered  them.
God  was  going  to  gather  out  of  the  Jews  themselves
and  their  children,  but,  more  than  that,  "those  that
were  afar  oflf,  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shoidd  call."

And  then  we  have  the  beautiful  picture  that  the
Spirit  of  God  gives  us  of  the  scene  that  was  now  formed
by  His  own  presence  here  below.  "Then  they  that
[gladly]*  received  his  word  were  baptized:    and  the

*  It  apx)ear8  to  me  that  Aofikvufc,  '*  gladly,'*  was  inserted  in  the
commonly  received  text  against  the  best  testimony,  as  weU  as  internal
reasons.  For  the  great  uncials  (Ki  A,  B,  C,  D,  &c.),  supported  by
the  Vulgate  and  Aethiopic,  omit  the  word,  which  was  probably
suggested  by  chap.  xzi.  1 7,  where  it  falls  in  as  admirably  as  here  it
sounds  somewhat  out  of  season.  Nearly  the  same  authorities  concur
in  omitting  cat,  **and,"  between  "the  feUowship"  and  "the  breaking
of  bread."  This  serves  to  strengthen  the  view  that  "the  feUowship"
goes  with  "the  teaching  of  the  apostles,"  though  put  as  two  objects


k*%


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  19

same  day  there  were  added  unto  them  about  three
thousand  souls."  They  were  added  to  the  original
nucleus  of  disciples,  and  "  continued  steadfastly  in  the
apostles'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  [and]  in  breaking  of
bread  and  prayers."

Thus,  after  being  brought  into  the  new  association,
there  arose  a  need  of  instruction;  and  the  apostles
were  pre-eminently  those  that  God  vouchsafed  in  the
iafant  days  of  His  assembly.  Inasmuch  as  it  was  of
the  utmost  importance  that  all  should  be  thoroughly
established  in  the  grace  and  truth  that  came  by  Jesus
Christ,  they  had  a  place  peculiar  to  themselves,  as
above  all  others  chosen  of  the  Lord  to  lay  the  founda-
tion of  His  house,  and  to  direct  and  administer  in  His
name,  as  we  see  through  the  New  Testament.  And
then  as  the  fruit  of  it,  and  specially  Connected,  there
was  "the  fellowship"  of  which  we  next  read.  Next
followed  the  breaking  of  bread,  the  formal  expression
of  Christian  fellowship,  and  the  special  outward  sign
of  remembering  Him  to  whose  death  they  owed  all.
Finally,  but  closely  following  the  Lord's  supper,  come
"the  prayers,"  which  still  showed  that,  however  great
might  be  the  grace  of  God,  they  were  in  the  place  of
danger,  and  needed  dependence  here  below.

"And  fear  came  upon  every  soul:  and  many  wonders  and
signs  were  done  by  the  apostles.  And  all  that  believed
were  together,  and  had  all  things  common."  This  peculiar
feature  is  found  in  Jerusalem,  beautiful  and  blessed  in
its  season,  but,  I  have  no  doubt,  special  to  the  Jeru-

instead  of  being  combined  by  a  single  article  in  one  idea;  and  it
would  throw  the  breaking  of  bread  and  the  prayers  similarly  to-
gether.

0  2


20  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

salem  condition  of  the  church  of  God.  We  can  easily
understand  it.  In  the  first  place  all  that  composed  the
church  were  at  that  time  in  the  same  place.  We  can
feel  readily,  therefore,  that  there  would  be  a  real  and
strong  family  feeling,  but  I  doubt  whether  their  mutual
affections  then  rose  higher  than  the  sense  of  their  being
God's  family.  They  really  did  constitute  the  body  of
Christ ;  they  were  baptized  by  one  Spirit  into  one  body;
but  to  be  that  one  body,  and  to  know  that  such  they
were,  are  two  very  different  things.  The  development
was  reserved  for  another  and  still  weightier  witness  of
the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  having  in  its  strength
the  sense  of  family  relationship,  the  wonderful  victory
of  grace  over  selfish  interests  was  the  fruit  of  it.  If  he
or  she  belonged  to  the  household  of  God,  this  was  the
governing  thought — not  one's  own  possessions.  Grace
gives  without  seeking  a  return ;  but  grace  on  the  other
side  seeks  not  its  own  things,  but  those  of  Christ.

Another  trait  is,  that  all  savoured  of  divine  as  well
as  family  life.  The  breaking  of  bread  every  day,  for
instance,  was  clearly  a  striking  witness  of  Christ  ever
before  their  hearts,  though  also  a  kindred  effect  of  the
same  feeling.  Thus  they  sold  their  possessions  and
goods,  and  parted  them  to  all,  as  one  might  have
need.

And  they  "  continued  daily  with  one  accord  in  the
temple."  This  is  another  peculiarity.  There  was  by  no
means  as  yet  a  manifest  severance  of  the  tie  with  Judaism,
at  least  with  the  circumstances  of  its  worship.  We  know
that  in  principle  the  cross  does  make  a  breach,  and  an
irreparable  one,  with  all  that  is  of  the  first  man ;  but
the  power  of  old  habits  with  the  joy  that  overflowed


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  21

their  souls  made  them  for  the  moment  to  be,  I  may  say,
better  Jews.  There  was  that  now  within  which  was
far  stronger  liquor  than  had  ever  filled  the  old  skins  of
the  law,  and  these  were  sure  to  be  broken  in  no  long
time.  But  for  the  present  nothing  was  farther  from  the
disciples'  minds :  they  continued  daily  with  one  accord
in  the  templa  Along  with  it  was  joined  this  new
element — breaking  bread  at  home ;  not  "  from  house  to
house,"  as  if  it  were  a  migratory  service.  There  is  no
real  ground  to  infer  that  they  shifted  the  scene  of  the
Lord's  supper  from  one  place  to  another.  This  is  not
the  meaning.  The  margin  is  correct.  They  broke  bread
at  home,  in  contrast  with  the  temple.  It  might  be  the
very  same  house  in  which  the  breaking  of  bread  always
took  place.  They  would  naturally  choose  the  most
suitable  quarters,  which  combined  convenience  as  to
distance  with  commodiousness  in  receiving  as  many
brethren  and  sisters  as  possible.

Thus  these  two  features  were  seen  to  meet  together
in  the  Pentecostal  church — the  retaining  of  Jewish
religious  habits  in  going  up  to  the  temple  for  prayer,
and  at  the  same  time  the  observemce  of  that  which
was  properly  Christian — the  breaking  of  bread  at
home.  No  wonder  the  new-found  joy  overflowed,  and
they  were  found  "eating  their  meat  with  gladness
and  singleness  of  heart."  There  is  no  reason  to  con-
found the  breaking  of  bread  with  eating  their  meat.
They  are  two  different  things.  We  find  the  religious
Ufe,  so  to  speak,  expressed  in  their  going  up  to  the
temple,  and  in  their  breaking  bread  at  home.  We  find
the  effect  upon  their  natural  life  in  their  "  eating  their
meat  with  gladness  and  singleness  of  heart,  praising


22  INTRODTJCTORY   LECTURES.

Grod,  and  having  favour  with  all  the  people."    There  is
the  same  double  character.

"And  the  Lord  added  to  the  church,"  or  '"together"
(for  there  is  a  fair  question  that  may  be  raised  as
to  the  text  in  this  last  clause)  "daily  such  as  should
be  saved,"  or  those  that  God  was  about  to  separate
from  the  destruction  that  was  impending  over  the
Jewish  nation,  and,  further,  to  bring  by  a  blessed
deliverance  into  the  new  Christian  estate.  The  word
atoCofihnm  does  not  express  the  full  character  of  Chris-
tian salvation  which  was  afterwards  known.  Of  course
we  know  that  they  were  saved;  but  this  is  not  what
the  word  in  itself  means.  It  is  simply  that  the  Lord
was  separating  those  that  were  to  be  saved.  The  English
version  gives  it  on  the  whole  very  justly.  Carefully
remember  that  the  meaning  is  not  that  they  were  saved
then.  The  phrase  in  Luke  has  nothing  to  do  with  that
question;,  it  refers  simply  to  persons  destined  to  sal-
vation without  saying  anything  farther.

In  the  next  chapter  (iii)  a  miracle  is  related  in  detail,
which  brought  out  the  feelings  of  the  people,  especially
as  represented  by  their  leaders  (chap.  iv.).  In  going  up
to  the  temple,  (for  the  apostles  themselves  went  there,)
Peter  and  John  met  with  a  man  that  was  lame ;  and  as
he  asked  for  alms  Peter  gave  him  something  better  (as
grace,  poor  in  this  world's  resources  and  estimate,  al-
ways loves  to  do  so).  He  tells  the  expecting  man,
"  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none,  but  such  as  I  have  give
I  thee.  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  rise
up  and  walk."  The  man  instantly  rises,  according  to
the  power  of  God,  and  is  found  with  them,  "  walking.


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  23

and  leaping,  and  praising  God ;  and  all  the  people  saw
him."

This  arrests  universal  attention,  and  Peter  preaches
a  new  discourse — that  which  has  been  justly  enough
called  a  Jewish  sermon.  It  is  thus  evident  that  his
indication  of  the  Christian  place  of  blessing  in  the
chapter  before  (iL)  does  not  hinder  him  from  setting
before  the  men  of  Israel  (for  so  he  addressed  them
here),  first,  their  awful  position  by  the  rejection  of
Jesus,  and,  next,  the  terms  that  God  in  His  grace  sets
before  them  in  answer  to  the  intercession  of  Christ.
"  The  God  of  Abraham,  and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,  the
God  of  our  fathers,  hath  glorified  his" — not  "son,"  but
— ^'servant  Jesus."  We  know  Him  (and  the  Spirit  of
God,  who  wrote  this  book,  infinitely  better  knew  Him)
to  be  the  Son  of  God.  But  we  must  always  hold  to
what  God  says ;  and  the  testimony  of  God  did  not  yet
— and  especially  in  dealing  with  the  Jews — set  forth
all  the  glory  of  Christ.  It  was  gradually  brought  out ;
and  the  more  that  man's  unbelief  grew,  so  much  the
more  God's  maintenance  of  the  Lord's  glory  was  mani-
fested. And  so,  if  they  had  with  scorn  refused  Him  in
the  presence  of  Pilate,  when  he  was  determined  to  let
him  go, — if  they  had  denied  the  Holy  One  and  Just,
and  desired  a  murderer  to  be  granted, — if  they  had
killed  the  Prince  [leader,  originator]  of  life,  whom  God
raised  from  the  dead,  they  had  simply  shown  out  what
they  were.  On  the  other  hand.  His  name,  through
faith  in  His  name,  (and  they  were  witnesses  of  its
power,)  had  made  this  man  strong,  whom  they  saw  and
knew :  "  Yea,  the  faith  which  is  by  him  hath  given  him
this  perfect  soimdness  in  the  presence  of  you  alL    And


24  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

now,  brethren,  I  wot  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it,
as  did  also  your  rulers.  But  those  things,  which  Grod
before  had  shewed  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  prophets,
that  Christ  should  suffer,  he  hath  so  fulfilled."

And  then  he  calls  upon  them  to  repent,  and  be  con-
verted, that  their  sins  might  be  blotted  out,  so  that
times  of  refreshing  might  come  from  the  presence  of
the  Lord.  "And  he  shall  send  Jesus  Christ,  who  was
fore-appointed  for  you :  whom  the  heaven  must  receive
until  the  times  of  restitution  of  all  things,  which  God
hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  holy  prophets  since
the  world  began."  God  has  accomplished  His  word
by  Moses  the  prophet ;  for  Moses  in  no  way  took  the
place  of  being  the  deliverer  of  Israel,  but  only  a  wit-
ness of  it,  a  partial  exemplification  of  God's  power
then,  but  looking  onward  to  the  great  Prophet  and
Deliverer  that  was  coming.  Now  He  was  come ;  and
so  Peter  sets  before  them,  not  only  the  coming,  the
Blesser's  arrival  and  rejection  in  their  midst,  but  the
awfulness  of  trifling  with  it.  Whoever  would  not  bow
to  Him  was  to  be  cut  off  by  their  own  Moses's  declara-
tion :  "  Every  soul  who  will  not  hear  that  prophet  shall
be  destroyed  from  among  the  people."  And  so  it  was
that  all  the  prophets  had  testified  of  those  days :  and
they  were  the  children  of  the  prophets,  and  of  the
covenant  which  God  made  with  their  fathers,  saying
unto  Abraham,  "And  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the  kindreds
of  the  earth  be  blessed."  The  Seed  was  now  come.  It
was  for  them,  therefore,  to  declare  themselves.  Alas !
they  hsui  already  set  up  their  will  against  Him ;  but  at
His  intercession  (what  grace  t)  God  was  willing  to  par-


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  25

don  it  all,  did  they  but  repent  and  be  converted  for
tlie  blotting  out  of  their  sins.

Thus  we  have  here  an  appeal  to  the  nation  as  such  ;
for  in  all  this  it  will  be  observed  he  does  not  speak  a
word  to  them  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  Head  of  the  church.
We  have  no  hint  of  this  truth  yet  to  anybody.  Nay,
we  have  not  Jesus  spoken  of  even  in  the  same  height
as  in  the  preceding  chapter  ii.  We  have  Him  in  heaven,
it  is  true,  but  about  to  return  and  bring  in  earthly
power,  blessing,  and  glory,  if  Israel  only  turned  with
repentance  to  Him.  Such  was  the  testimony  of  Peter.
It  was  a  true  word ;  and  it  remains  true.  When  Israel
shall  turn  in  heart  to  the  Lord,  He  who  secretly  works
this  in  grace  will  return  publicly  to  them.  When  they
shall  say  "Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of
Jehovah,"  the  Messiah  will  come  in  fulness  of  blessing.
The  heavens  will  retain  Him  no  more,  but  give  Him  up
who  will  fill  earth  as  well  as  heaven  with  glory.  No
word  of  God  perishes :  all  abides  perfectly  true.

Meanwhile  other  and  deeper  counsels  have  been
brought  to  light  by  the  unbelief  of  Israel.  This  unbelief
comes  out  in  no  small  measure  in  the  next  chapter,  which
follows  but  might  properly  have  formed  a  part  of  chapter
iii;  for  in  sense  it  is  a  continuous  subject.  "And  as  they
spake  unto  the  people,  the  priests,  and  the  captain  of
the  temple,  and  the  Sadducees,  came  upon  them,  being
grieved  that  they  taught  the  people,  and  preached
through  Jesus  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.  And
they  laid  hands  on  them,  and  put  them  in  hold  unto
the  next  day:  for  it  was  now  eventide.  Howbeit  many
of  them  which  heard  the  word  believed ;  and  the  num-
ber of  the  men  was  about  five  thousand."   Then,  on  the


26  INTKODUCTORY   LECTTRES.

morrow,  we  have  the  cooncil ;  and  Peter,  being  by  the
chiefs  demanded  bj  what  power  or  name  they  had
wrought  the  deed,  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  answers,
"Ye  mlers  of  the  people,  and  elders  of  Israel,  if  we
this  day  be  examined  of  the  good  deed  done  to  the
impotent  man,  by  what  means  he  is  made  whole ;  be  it
known  imto  you  all,"  (he  is  throughout  bold  and  im-
compromising)  "  and  to  all  the  people  of  Israel,  that  by
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth,  whom  ye  cru-
cified, whom  God  raised  from  the  dead,  even  by  him
doth  this  man  stand  here  before  you  whole.  This  is  the
stone  which  was  set  at  nought  of  you  builders,  which
is  become  the  hesui  of  the  comer."  Thus  again  reference
is  made  to  their  own  testimonies.  ''Neither  is  there
salvation  in  any  other;  for  there  is  none  other  name
under  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be
saved"

Unscrupulous  as  they  were,  they  were  thus  con-
founded by  the  calm  confidence  with  which  the  truth
armed  the  apostles;  and  the  more  so,  because  their
tone  and  language  gave  evidence  that,  whatever  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  wrought,  it  did  not  set  aside
their  condition  as  illiterate  men.  Their  words,  &c.,
bore  no  polish  of  the  schools ;  and  truth  spurns,  as  it
needs  not,  dialectic  subtlety.  This  magnified,  therefore,
the  power  of  God  so  much  the  more,  as  man's  skill  was
nulL  But  at  the  same  time  there  was  the  witness  of
the  miracle  that  had  been  done.  In  presence,  then,  of
the  apostles  clothed  with  the  irresistible  might  of  the
Lord,  and  of  the  man  whose  healing  silently  attested  it
even  as  to  the  body,  they  could  only  command  them  to
go  aside,  while  they  conferred  together.    A  guilty  con-


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  27

science  betrays  its  conscious  weakness,  however  wilfuL
God  invariably  gives  sufl&cient  testimony  to  condemn
man.  He  will  prove  this  in  the  day  of  judgment ;  but
it  is  certain  to  our  faith  now.  He  is  God,  and  cannot
act  below  Himself  when  it  is  a  question  of  His  own
revelation.

On  such  occasions  even  those  who  profess  most  are
apt  to  speak  together,  as  if  there  were  no  God,  or  as
if  He  did  not  hear  them  saying,  "  What  shall  we  do  to
these  men  ?  for  that  indeed  a  notable  miracle  hath
been  done  by  them  is  manifest  to  all  them  that  dwell
in  Jerusalem ;  and  we  cannot  deny  it."  They  would,
if  they  could.  Their  will  was  engaged  (sad  to  say!)
against  God,  against  the  truth,  against  Jehovah  and
His  anointed.  "But  that  it  spread  no  further  among
the  people,  let  us  straitly  threaten  them,  that  they  may
speak  henceforth  to  no  man  in  this  name."  Thus  their
lack  of  conscience  could  not  be  hid :  witness  their  oppo-
sition to  facts  that  they  knew,  and  to  truth  that  they
could  not  deny.  The  apostles  cannot  but  take  the  real
seat  of  judgment,  searching  the  hearts  of  their  judges :
"Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight  of  God  to  hearken
unto  you  more  than  imto  God,  judge  ye.  For  we  cannot
but  speak  the  things  which  we  have  seen  and  heard.
So  when  they  had  further  threatened  them,  they  let
them  go,  finding  nothing  how  they  might  punish  them,
because  of  the  people :  for  all  men  glorified  God  for
that  which  was  done.  And  being  let  go,  they  went  to
their  own  [company]."  It  is  seen  in  this  passage  how
truly  it  has  been  said  that  we  have  a  new  family.  They
went  to  their  own  [company],  and  reported  all  that  the
chief  priests  and  elders  had  said  unto  them."    Accord-


28  cnrBODUCTOST  lectures.

ingly  we  find  them  speakmg  to  God  in  a  new  manner,
and  suitably  to  the  occasion:  ^Loid,  thou  art  Grod,
which  hast  made  heaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and
all  that  in  them  is :  who  by  the  month  of  thy  servant
David  hast  said.  Why  did  the  heathen  rage,  and  the
people  imagine  vain  things  ?  The  kings  of  the  earth
stood  up,  and  the  rulers  were  gathered  together  in  this
city  [these  last  words  being  wrongly  omitted  in  the
received  text]  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  Christ
For  of  a  truth  against  thy  holy  servant  [again  it  is
servant]  Jesus,  whom  thou  hast  anointed,  both  Herod
and  Pontius  Pilate,  with  the  Glentiles,  and  the  people
of  Israel,  were  gathered  together,  for  to  do  whatsoever
thy  hand  and  thy  coimsel  determined  before  to  be  done.
And  now,  Lord,  behold  their  threatenings :  and  grant
imto  thy  servants,  that  with  all  boldness  they  may
speak  thy  word,  by  stretching  forth  thine  hand  to  heal ;
and  that  signs  and  wonders  may  be  done  by  the  name
of  thy  holy  servant  Jesus."  And  God  answered.  "  When
they  had  prayed,  the  place  was  shaken  where  they  were
assembled  together;  and  they  were  all  filled  with  the
Holy  Ghost."  They  had  received  the  Holy  Ghost  be-
fore; but  to  be  "filled"  with  Him  goes  farther,  and
supposes  that  no  room  was  left  for  the  action  of  nature,
that  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  absorbed  all  for  the
time  being.  "They  were  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  they  spake  the  word  of  God  with  boldness."  Such
was  the  effect.    They  were  to  be  witnesses  of  Him.

"And  the  multitude  of  them  that  believed  were  of
one  heart  and  of  one  soul:  neither  said  any  of  them
that  ought  of  the  things  which  he  possessed  was  his
own ;  but  they  had  all  things  in  common."    The  Spirit


**i.  :.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE   APOSTLES.  29

of  God  repeated  this,  I  suppose,  as  having  a  further
proof  of  His  action  on  their  souls  at  this  time,  because
many  more  had  been  brought  in.  "And  with  great
power  gave  the  apostles  witness  of  the  resurrection  of
the  Lord  Jesus:  and  great  grace  was  upon  them  all.
Neither  was  there  any  among  them  that  lacked :  for  as
many  as  were  possessors  of  lands  or  houses  sold  them,
and  brought  the  prices  of  the  things  that  were  sold,
and  laid  them  down  at  the  apostles'  feet," — a  slightly
diflTerent  development  from  the  second  chapter.  There
we  find  that  there  was  what  might  seem  a  greater
freeness,  and  perhaps  to  some  eyes  a  more  striking
simplicity.  But  all  is  in  season,  and  it  seems  to  me  that,
while  the  devotedness  was  the  same  (and  the  Spirit  of
God  takes  pains  to  show  that  it  was  the  same,  spite  of
largely  increased  numbers,  by  the  continued  mighty
action  of  the  Holy  Ghost),  still  with  this  advance  of
numbers  simplicity  could  not  be  kept  up  in  the  same
apparent  manner.  The  distribution  made  to  each  before
was  more  direct  and  immediate;  now  it  takes  effect
through  the  apostles.  The  possessions  were  laid  at  the
apostles*  feet,  and  distribution  was  made  to  every  one
according  as  he  had  need.  Among  the  rest  one  man
was  conspicuous  for  the  heartiness  of  his  love.  It  was
Barnabas,  of  whom  we  are  afterwards  to  hear  much  in
other  ways  of  still  more  lasting  moment.

But  there  is  rarely  a  manifestation  of  God  in  the
church  without  a  dark  shadow  that  accompanies  it  from
the  evil  one.  And  further  we  find  this  immediately.
We  are  not  to  be  alarmed  by  the  presence  of  evil,  but
rather  to  be  sure  that  where  God  works  Satan  will


30  INTRODTJCTOBY   LECTURES.

follow,  seeking  to  turn  the  very  good  in  which  the
Spirit  acts  into  a  means  for  introducing  his  own  coun-
terfeit to  the  dishonour  of  the  Lord.  Thus  in  the
present  instance  Ananias  and  Sapphira  sell  some  of
their  property,  but  keep  back  part  of  the  price;  and
this  was  done  deliberately  by  concert  for  the  purpose  of
gaining  the  character  of  devotedness  without  its  cost.
In  principle  they  msuie  the  church  their  world,  in  which
they  sought  to  give  the  impression  of  a  faith  that  con-
fided in  the  Lord  absolutely,  while  at  the  same  time
there  was  a  secret  reserve  for  themselves.  Now  the
manifest  point  of  that  which  was  then  wrought  by  the
Spirit  of  God  was  grace  in  faith :  there  was  in  no  way
a  demand.  Nothing  could  more  falsify  the  fruit  of  the
Spirit  of  God  here  than  converting  it  into  a  tacit  rule  :
there  was  no  compulsion  whatever  in  the  case.  Nobody
was  asked  to  give  anything.  What  was  gold  or  silver,
what  houses  or  lands,  to  the  Lord  ?  The  worth  of  it
all  depended  on  its  being  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of
God — the  fruit  of  divine  grace  in  the  heart.  But  Satan
tempted  them  in  the  manner  here  described;  and  Peter,
by  whatever  means  he  arrived  at  the  conviction  of  it,
arraigns  the  husband  alone  first.  "Ananias,  why  hath
Satan  filled  thine  heart  to  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost  ?"

It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  remember,  that  all  sin  now
is  against  the  Spirit.  There  may  be,  no  doubt,  the  un-
pardonable sin  of  blasphemy  against  Him ;  but  in  truth
all  sin  is  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  for  this
simple  reason,  that  He  has  taken  His  place  here.  In
Israel  the  sin  was  against  the  law,  because  the  law  was
the  testimony  that  God  set  in  His  sanctuary.  By  the
law  sin  was  measured  in  Israel ;  but  it  is  not  so  for  the


>  ^*


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  31

Christian.  There  is  now  a  far  more  serious  and  search-
ing and  thorough  standard.  Those  that  use  the  law
now  as  a  measure  among  Christians  lower  the  test  of
judgment  incomparably.  Such  a  misuse  of  the  law  for
righteous  men  does  not  at  all  prove  that  they  are
anxious  about  holiness  or  righteousness;  it  is  a  proof
of  their  ignorance  of  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  the  just  and  necessary  effects  of  His  presence.
One  has  no  thought,  I  repeat,  of  implying  that  it  is  not
well  meant.  To  be  sure  it  is.  It  is  simply  that  they  do
not  understand  the  distinctive  character  of  Christianity.

But  this  is  a  most  serious  error ;  and  I  doubt  much
whether  all  who  in  appearance  and  by  profession  take
the  place  of  owning  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  of  God
have  by  any  means  an  adequate  sense  either  of  the
privileges  which  are  theirs  or  of  the  gravity  of  their
responsibility.  Now,  Peter  had.  The  days  were  early.
There  was  much  truth  that  had  yet  to  be  commimicated
and  learnt ;  but  the  power  of  the  presence  of  the  Holy
Ghost  made  itself  felt.  He  at  least  seems  to  have
realised  the  bearing  of  all,  and  so  he  deals  with  the  sin
of  Ananias  as  one  who  had  lied  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  He
had  kept  back  part  of  the  price  of  the  land.  "  WhUes
it  remained,  was  it  not  thine  own  ?  and  after  it  was
sold,  was  it  not  in  thine  own  power  ?"  It  was  stiU  his
own.  "Why  hast  thou  conceived  this  thing  in  thine
heart  ?  thou  hast  not  lied  imto  men,  but  unto  God."

Forthwith  Ananias  comes  under  the  judgment  of  the
Lord.  He  feU  asleep,  and  great  fear  came  upon  all
them  that  heard  these  words.  "And  the  young  men
arose,  wound  him  up,  and  carried  him  out,  and  buried
him.    And  it  was  about  the  space  of  three  hours  after,


32  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

when  his  wife,  not  knowing  what  was  done,  came  in.
And  Peter  said  to  her,  Tell  me  whether  ye  sold  the
land  for  so  much  V*  Thus  there  was  an  appeal  to  her
conscience,  without  an  atom  of  harshness  in  it.  She
had  longer  time  to  weigh  what  they  were  about;  but
in  truth  it  was  a  conspiracy;  not  so  much  to  injure
others  as  to  exalt  themselves ;  but  the  end  was  as  bad
as  the  means  were  evil  and  odious  in  the  sight  of  God.
Christ  entered  into  none  of  their  thoughts  or  desires.
Many  a  thing  has  been  said  imtruly  since,  which  was
not  so  judged  of  God.  But  there  was  an  especial  offence
at  this  time,  in  that,  He  having  wrought  so  wondrously
in  blessing  man  with  the  best  blessings  through  Christ
our  Lord,  the  practical  denial  of  the  presence  of  the
Spirit  should  have  so  deliberately  and  quickly  mani-
fested itself  for  the  express  purpose  of  exalting  the  flesh
which  Christianity  has  set  aside  for  ever.  Hence  Peter
says,  "  How  is  it  that  ye  have  agreed  together  to  tempt
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ?  behold  the  feet  of  them  which
have  buried  thy  husband  are  at  the  door,  and  they  shall

carry  thee  out And  great  fear  came  upon  all  the

church."

Then  we  find  the  Lord  accomplishing  His  word:
greater  works  were  to  be  done  by  them  than  even  He
Himself  had  wrought :  never  do  we  hear  of  the  Lord's
shadow  curing  the  sick.  And  believers  were  the
more  eulded  to  the  Lord.  The  unbelievers  were  warned,
"  and  of  the  rest  durst  no  man  join  himself  unto  them."
Souls  that  bowed  to  the  word  were  attracted,  multitudes
both  of  men  and  women;  and  the  enemy  was  awed,
in  some  quarters  alarmed,  and  irritated  in  others.  "  The
high  priest  rose  up,  and  all  they  that  were  with  him^


THE  ACTS   OF  THE   APOSTLES.  33

and  were  filled  with  indignation.   They  laid  their  hands
on  the  apostles,  and  put  them  in  the  common  prison."

But  the  angel  of  the  Lord  shows  his  power ;  for  this
chapter  is  remarkable  in  giving  us  a  picture  not  merely
of  the  sweet  activity  of  grace,  but  of  divine  power  in
presence  of  evil.  We  have  seen  the  positive  interference
of  the  Spirit  of  God.  At  the  end  of  the  chapter  before
we  had  the  second  witness  of  it,  after  the  foundation
laid,  and  first  witness  given,  in  chapter  ii  But  here  we
have  the  proofs  of  His  presence  in  other  ways — power  in
dealing  with  the  evil,  and  judging  it  within  the  church
of  God;  next,  power  by  angelic  deliverance;  thirdly,
power  by  men  in  providence.  Gamaliel  in  council  is
just  a^  truly  the  efiect  of  God's  power  working  by  man,
as  the  angel  in  opening  the  doors  of  the  prison  and
bringing  the  apostles  out, — not,  of  course,  so  wonderful,
but  as  real  a  part  of  God's  working  in  belialf  of  His
assembly  and  servants.

But  there  is  another  case.  The  very  same  men  who
were  delivered  by  divine  power  are  allowed  to  be  beaten
by  man.  Nay,  not  only  do  they  take  it  quietly —  these
men  about  whom  all  the  power  of  God  was  thus  seen
in  action  in  one  form  or  another;  but  they  rejoice
that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suffer.  Are  we  pre-
pared for  the  same  thing  ?  Be  assured,  brethren,  if  we
have  any  tie  with  Chi'ist  by  grace,  we  belong  to  the
same  company :  it  is  our  own  company;  it  is  a  pai-t  of
our  own  heritage  of  blessing.  It  is  not,  I  admit,  accord-
ing to  the  spirit  of  the  age  to  deal  with  us  after  the
same  sort ;  but  there  is  no  real  change  for  the  better  in
the  world  to  hinder  the  outbreak  of  its  violence  at  any
time.     Is  it  not  well  therefore  for  us  to  realize  to  what

D


k


34  DTTEODUCTORY   LECTURES.

we  belong,  and  what  the  Lord  looks  for  from  us,  and
what  it  is  He  has  recorded  for  our  instruction  as  well
as  comfort  ?

After  all  this  then  we  find  that  "  they  departed  from
the  presence  of  the  council,  rejoicing  that  they  were
counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  His  name.  And
daily  in  the  temple,  and  in  ever}'  house,  they  ceased
not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus  Christ."  It  ia  impossible
that  a  human  authority  could  be  entitled  to  set  aside
the  direct  command  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  Lord  had
commanded  them  to  go  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every
creature.  Men  had  forbidden  this.  It  is  very  clear
that  the  apostle  Peter  gives  the  prohibition  only  a
human  place  now  (ch.  v.  29).  If  men  had  told  them
to  be  silent,  and  the  Lord  bid  them  preach,  the  highest
authority  must  be  paramount.

Another  form  of  evil  betrays  itself  in  the  next  chap-
,ter  (vi.);  and  here  again  we  find  in  the  very  good  that
God  had  wrought  evil  murmuring  is  found.  It  is  not
merely  individuals  as  before ;  in  some  respects  it  is  a
more  serious  case:  there  are  complaints  heard  in  the
church — the  nmrmuring  of  Grecians  against  the  He-
brews (that  is,  of  the  foreign  speaking  Jews  against
the  Jews  proper  of  the  Holy  Land),  because  their
widows  were  neglected  in  the  daily  ministration.  This
fonns  the  occasion  for  the  provisional  wisdom  of  the
Spirit  of  God.

We  have  already  seen  with  abundant  evidence  how
truly  the  church  is  a  divine  institution,  founded  upon
a  divine  person  (even  the  Holy  Ghost)  coming  down
and  making  it,  since  redemption.  His  dwelling-place


THE  ACTS  OF  THE   APOSTLES.  35

here  below.  Besides,  we  may  now  learn  the  working
of  this  living  power  that  is  drawn  out  by  the  circum-
stances which  call  it  forth.  It  is  not  a  system  of
rules;  nothing  is  more  destructive  of  the  very  nature
of  the  church  of  God.  It  is  not  a  human  society,
with  either  the  leaders  of  it  or  the  mass  choosing
for  themselves  what  or  whom  they  think  best,  but  the
Spirit  of  God  who  is  there  meets  in  His  wisdom  what-
ever may  be  necessary  for  the  glory  of  Christ.  All  this
is  preserved  in  the  written  word  for  our  instruction  and
guidance  now.

Here  we  have  the  institution  of  seven  men  to  look
after  the  poor  who  were  in  danger  of  being  forgotten,
or  in  some  way  neglected — at  any  rate,  so  they  had  com-
plained. To  cut  off  the  appearance  of  it,  and  at  the
same  time  to  leave  the  apostles  free  for  their  own  proper
work  of  a  more  spiritual  kind,  "the  twelve  called  the
multitude  of  the  disciples  unto  them,  and  said.  It  is
not  reason  that  we  should  leave  the  word  of  God,  and
serve  tables.  Wherefore,  brethren,  look  ye  out  among
you  seven  men  of  honest  report,  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost
and  wisdom,  whom  we  may  appoint  over  this  busi-
ness."

Thus  we  find  two  things ;  not  only  the  apostles  for-
mally appointing,  but  the  multitude  of  the  believers
left  to  choose,  where  it  was  a  question  that  concerned
the  distribution  of  their  gifts.  On  the  part  of  those
that  governed  the  church  of  God,  there  ought  not  to
be  the  appearance  of  coveting  the  property  of  God's
people,  or  the  disposal  of  it.  At  the  same  time  the
apostles  do  appoint  those  who  were  thus  chosen  over
this  matter.    They  were  called  of  God  to  act,  and  so

D  2


36  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

they  do.     "But  we  will  give  ourselves  continually  to
prayer  and  the  ministry  of  the  woixl."

The  principle  of  the  choice  too  is  striking;  for  all
these  names,  it  would  appear,  were  Grecian.  What
gracious  wisdom !  This  was  clearly  to  stop  the  mouths
of  the  complainants.  The  Hellenists,  or  Grecians,
were  jealous  of  the  Palestinian  Jews.  The  persous
appointed  were,  judging  from  their  names,  every  one
of  them  Hellenists,  or  foreign-speaking  Jews.  The
troublers  ought  to  have  been  not  only  satisfied  but  some-
what ashamed.  Thus  it  is  that  grace,  while  it  discerns,
knows  how  to  rise  above  evil ;  for  munnuring  against
others  is  not  the  way  to  correct  anything  that  is  wrong,
even  if  it  be  real.  But  the  gi-ace  of  the  Ijovd  always
meets  circumstances,  and  turns  them  to  a  profitable
account,  by  a  manifestation  of  wisdom  from  above.
The  field  wiis  about  to  be  enlai-ged;  and  although  it
was  but  a  poor  root  of  man's  complaints  which  led  to
this  fresh  line  of  action,  God  was  moving  over  all,  could
use  these  seven,  and  would  give  some  of  them  a  good
degree,  as  we  find  in  Stephen  soon  and  in  Philip  later.
But  He  marked  it  in  another  way  too,  wliich  showed
His  approbation.  "  The  word  of  God  increased,"  spite
of  murmuring ;  "  and  the  number  of  the  disciples  mul-
tiplied in  Jerusalem  greatly;"  and  a  new  feature  appears
— "a  great  company  of  the  priests  were  obedient  to  the
faith."

Stephen  then,  full  of  grace  and  power  (but  One  could
be  said  to  be  full  of  grace  and  truth),  is  found  doing  great
wonders.  This  draws  out  the  opposition  of  the  leaders  of
the  Jews,  who  "were  not  able  to  resist  the  spirit  and
the  wisdom  with  which  he  spake.    Then  they  suborned


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  37

men,  who  said,  We  have  heard  him  speak  blasphemous
words  against  Moses,  and  against  God.  And  they
stirred  up  the  people,  and  the  elders,  and  the  scribes,
and  came  upon  him,  and  caught  him,  and  brought  him
to  the  council,  and  set  up  false  witnesses,  which  said,
This  man  ceaseth  not  to  speak  blasphemous  words
against  this  holy  place,  and  the  law :  for  we  have  heard
him  say,  that  this  Jesus  of  Nazareth  shall  destroy  this
place,  and  shall  change  the  customs  which  Moses  de-
livered us."

Accordingly,  thus  accused,  Stephen  answers  the  appeal
of  the  high  priest,  "Are  these  things  so  V  And  in  his
wonderful  discourse  (chap,  vii.),  on  which  I  can  but
touch,  he  sets  before  them  the  prominent  facts  of  their
history,  which  bear  on  God's  question  with  the  Jews  at
this  moment.  God  had  brought  out  their  forefather
Abraham,  but  He  never  gave  him  actually  to  possess
this  land.  Why,  then,  boast  of  it  so  much  ?  Those  who,
according  to  nature,  vaunted  loudly  of  Abraham  and  of
God's  dealings,  were  clearly  not  in  communion  with
God,  or  even  with  Abraham.  Spite  of  the  love  and
honour  that  God  had  for  their  forefathers,  he  never
possessed  the  land.  Why,  then,  set  such  stress  on  that
land?

But  more  than  this.  There  was  one  of  the  de-
scendants of  the  fathers  who  stands  out  most  espe-
cially, and  above  all  of  the  family  of  Abraham,  in  the
book  of  Genesis — one  man  who,  more  than  any  other,
was  the  type  of  the  Messiah.  Need  I  say  it  was  Joseph  ?
And  how  did  he  fare  ?  Sold  by  his  brethren  to  tlie
Grentiles.  The  application  was  not  difficult  They
knew  how  they  had  treated  Jesus  of  Nazareth.    Their


38  INTRODUCrrOKY   LECTURES.

consciences  could  not  fail  to  remind  them  how  the
Gentiles  would  have  willingly  let  Him  go,  and  how
their  voices  and  wiU  had  prevailed  against  even  that
hardened  governor  of  Judaea,  Pontius  Pilate.  Thus  it
was  manifest  that  the  leading  points  of  Joseph's  tale,
as  far  as  the  wickedness  of  the  Jews,  and  the  selling  to
the  Gentiles,  were  rehearsed  again  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth.

But,  coming  down  later  still,  another  man  fills  the  his-
tory of  the  second  book  of  the  Bible,  and  indeed  has  to
do  with  all  the  remaining  books  of  the  Pentateuch.  It
was  Moses.  What  about  him  ?  Substantially  the  same
story  again :  the  rejected  of  Israel,  whose  pride  would
not  hear  when  he  sought  to  bring  about  peace  between
a  contending  Israelite  and  his  oppressor,  Moses  was
compelled  to  fly  from  Israel,  and  then  found  his  hiding-
place  among  the  Gentiles.  How  far  Stephen  entered
intelligently  into  the  bearing  of  these  types  it  is  not
for  one  to  say;  but  we  can  easily  see  the  wisdom  of
God;  we  can  see  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  with
which  he  spake.

But  there  was  another  element  also.  He  comes
down  next  to  their  temple ;  for  this  was  an  important
point.  It  was  not  only  that  he  had  spoken  of  Jesus
of  Nazareth,  but  they  had  also  charged  liim  with
saying  that  He  would  destroy  this  place,  and  change
their  customs.  What  did  their  own  prophets  say?
"But  Solomon  built  him  a  house.  Howbeit  the  most
High  dwelleth  not  in  [places]  made  with  hands;  as
saith  the  prophet.  Heaven  is  my  throne,  and  earth  is
my  footstool :  what  house  wiU  ye  build  me  ?  saith  the
Lord :  or  what  is  the  place  of  my  rest  ?  Hath  not  my
hcLud  made  all  these  things  ?"    In  short,  he  shows  that


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  39

Israel  had  sinned  against  God  in  every  ground  of  rela-
tionship. They  had  broken  the  law;  they  had  slain
the  prophets;  they  had  killed  the  Messiah;  and  they
had  always  resisted  the  Holy  Ghost.  What  an  awful
position !  and  the  more  awful,  because  it  was  the  simple
truth.

This  brought  out  the  frenzied  rage  of  Israel,  and
they  gnashed  on  him  with  their  teeth;  and  he  that
charged  them  with  always  resisting  the  Holy  Ghost,  as
their  fathers  did,  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  looks  up  into
heaven,  and  sees  the  Son  of  man,  and  bears  witness
that  he  sees  Him  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God.
And  thus  we  have  what  I  began  with :  we  have  the
manifestation  of  the  character  of  Christianity,  and  the
perception  of  its  power,  and  the  efiect  produced  upon
him  that  appreciated  it.  We  have  not  merely  the  Lord
going  up  to  heaven,  but  His  servant,  who  saw  heaven
open,  and  Jesus,  the  Son  of  man,  standing  at  the  right
hand  of  God.

But  there  is  more :  for  while  they  rushed  now  to
sQence  the  mouth  which  so  completely  proved  their
nation's  habitual  sin  against  the  Spirit,  they  stoned  him
indeed,  but  they  stoned  him  praying,  and  saying,  "Lord
Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."  They  could  not  silence  the
words  that  told  how  deeply  he  had  drunk  into  the  grace
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  They  could  not  silence  his  con-
fidence, his  peaceful  entrance  into  his  place  with  Christ,
associated  consciously  with  Him  as  he  was.  And  then
we  learn  (it  may  be  without  a  thought  on  his  part)  how
grace  conforms  to  the  words  of  Jesus  on  the  cross,  and
certainly  without  the  smallest  imitation  of  it,  but  so
much  the  more  evincing  the  power  of  God.     For  Jesus


40


INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.


could  say,  and  He  alone  cotdd  say  rightly,  "Father,
into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  Jesus  alone
fittingly  could  say,  "I  commend  my  spirit."  He  who
could  lay  down  His  life,  and  could  take  it  again,  could
80  speak  to  the  Father.  But  the  servant  of  the  Lord
could  say,  and  rightly  and  blessedly,  "Lord  Jesus,  receive
my  spirit."  Nor  was  this  all ;  the  same  heart  that  thus
confided  absolutely  in  the  Lord,  and  knew  his  own
heavenly  portion  with  Jesus,  kneels  down  and  cries
with  a  loud  voice.  This  was  not  directed  to  Jesus  only:
no  loud  voice  was  needed  there :  a  wliisper  would  be
enough  for  Him.  The  loud  voice  was  for  man,  for  his
dull  ears  and  imfeeling  heart.  With  a  loud  voice  he
cries,  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  What
simplicity,  but  what  fulness  of  communion  with  Jesus !
The  same  who  had  prayed  for  them  reproduced  His
own  feelings  in  the  heart  of  His  servant.

I  shall  not  now  develop  this  subject  more  than  other
scenes  of  the  deepest  interest,  but  just  simply  and
shortly  commend  to  all  that  are  here  the  beautiful
witness  that  it  affords  us  of  the  true  place,  power,  and
grace  of  a  Christian.


•  r


.^j:.^'


H.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.

Chaiw.  Yiii.-xii.

We  are  now  arrived  at  a  tumiug-point  iu  the  history,
not  merely  of  the  church,  but  of  the  unfolding  of  the
truth  of  God,  and  the  manifestation  of  His  ways.  The
death  of  Stephen,  therefore,  has  in  various  points  of
view  a  great  significance.  And  no  wonder.  His  was
the  first  spirit  that  departed  to  be  with  Christ  after  the
Holy  Ghost  was  given.  But  it  was  not  merely  one  who
departed  to  be  with  the  Lord,  which  was  far  better ;
it  was  by  the  act  of  the  Jews  in  the  infuriate  spirit  of
persecution.  The  very  same  people  had  done  it  who
had  so  lately  received  with  the  utmost  favour  (not  the
tnith,  nor  the  grace  of  God,  which  is  inseparable  from
His  tnith,  but),  at  any  rate,  the  mighty  impress  of  the
grace  as  well  as  of  the  truth  which  had  produced  un-
wonted largeness  of  heart,  unselfishness  of  spirit,  and
joy  and  liberty,  that  struck  the  minds  of  the  Jews
accustomed  to  the  coldness  of  death  in  their  own
system.

But  now  all  was  changed.  What  was  most  sweet
soon  became  bitter,  as  it  often  is  in  the-  things  of
God.  And  when  they  understood  the  bearing  of  that
which  God  had  wrought  here  below — that  it  judged


42  DTTRODUCrORY   LECTURES.

man ;  that  it  gave  no  countenance  to  the  religiousness
in  which  they  boasted;  that  it  showed  most  conWnc-
ingly,  and  so  much  the  more  bitterly  because  con-
vincingly, what  God  all  through  His  testimony  with
them  had  expressly  intimated,  by  the  prophets  as  well
as  in  the  types  of  the  law  itself,  that  He  had  deeper
purposes ;  that  nothing  on  earth  coidd  satisfy  Him ;
that  it  was  in  His  mind,  on  the  proved  ruin  of  Israel,
to  bring  in  heaven  and  its  things  for  a  heavenly  people
even  while  here  below : — now  that  this  was  made  mani-
fest, above  all,  in  the  testimony  that  Stephen  had
rendered  to  the  very  man  that  they  had  rejected  and
crucified,  seen  in  glory  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  it
was  unbearable.  Could  it  be  otherwise,  when,  spite
of  proud  unbelief  and  conceit  of  distinctive  privilege,
they  were  forced  to  feel  that  they  were  none  the  less
the  constant  resisters  of  the  Holy  Ghost  like  their
fathers,  who  had  been  guilty  themselves,  and  suffered
the  consequence  of  their  guilt  in  their  prostration  to
the  Gentiles ;  to  feel  now  that  they  themselves  were  no
better,  but  rather  worse ;  that  there  was  the  same  un-
belief bringing  out  its  effects  even  more  tremendously ;
that  they  were  guilty  of  the  blood  of  their  own  Mes-
siah, who  was  now  risen  and  exalted  in  the  highest
seat  of  heaven  ?  All  these  things  were  pressed  home
by  Stephen ;  indeed,  I  have  simply  touched  on  a  very
small  part  of  his  most  telling  address.

But  the  close  lets  us  see  more  than  this.  There  was
the  revelation  now  of  Christ  as  an  object  for  the  Chris-
tian in  heaven,  and  the  revelation  of  Him  too  in  a  way
entirely  outside  the  narrow  boundaries  of  Judaism.
Stephen  speaks   of  Him  as  Son  of  man.     This  is  an


•  I


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  43

essential  feature  of  Christianity.  Unlike  the  law,  it  ad-
dresses all ;  there  is  no  narrowness  in  a  rejected  heavenly
Christ.  By  the  Holy  Ghost  there  is  imparted  all  the
finnness  of  a  divine  bond,  and  all  the  intimacy  of  a
real  living  relationship  of  the  nearest  kind.  At  the
same  time,  along  with  this  is  seen  universality  in  the
going  out  of  both  the  truth  and  grace  of  God,  which
could  not  but  be  foreign  to  the  law.  And  although  its
character  had  to  be  yet  more  brought  out  by  another
and  far  greater  witness  of  divine  things  who  was  still
in  the  blindness  of  Jewish  unbelief — at  this  very  mo-
ment himself  taking  his  own  miserable  part,  though
with  a  good  natural  conscience,  in  the  death  of  Ste-
phen,— all  told  powerfully  upon  the  Jews,  but  lacerated
their  feelings  to  the  utmost.

I  have  already  touched  upon  the  practical  effects,
and  therefore  will  not  enlarge  on  these  now.  My
object,  of  course,  is  simply  to  give  a  sketch  of  the
important  book  now  before  us,  endeavouring  to  connect
(as,  indeed,  evidently  the  chapter  does  connect)  what  was
coming  with  what  was  past.  Saul  was  consenting  unto
Stephen's  death,  and  Saul  was  the  expression  of  Jewish
feeling  in  its  best  aspect.  It  was  now  guilty  of  resist-
ing imto  blood,  not  merely  as  their  fathers  had  done,
but  the  heavenly  testimony  of  Jesus.  Nevertheless
the  God  that  vindicated  the  honour  of  the  crucified
Jesus  did  not  forget  the  martyred  Stephen ;  and  though
there  was  an  outburst  of  persecution,  which  scattered
abroad  throughout  the  region  of  Judaea  and  Samaria  all
the  believers  that  were  in  Jerusalem  except  the  apos-
tles, devout  men  were  not  wanting  who  carried  Stephen


44  IXTBODrCTORY  LECTUSES.

to  his  burial  Clearly  they  were  not  Christiaiis;  but
God  has  all  hearts  in  His  keeping.  And  they  "  made
great  lamentation  over  him."  This  was  suitable  to
them.  Theirs  was  not  the  joy  that  saw  into  the  pre-
sence of  GoA  They  felt  in  a  measure,  and  justly,  the
tremendous  deed  that  had  been  done.  And  as  there
was  reality  at  least  in  their  feeling,  they  made  suitable
lamentation.  But  "  as  for  Saul,  he  made  havoc  of  the
church,  entering  into  every  house,  and  dragging  off
men  and  women,  committed  them  to  prison."  Reli-
gious persecution  is  invariably  ruthless  and  blind  even
to  the  commonest  feelings  of  humanity.

"Therefore  they  that  were  scattered  abroad  went
everywhere  preaching  the  word;"  for  the  Grod  who
not  only  has  hearts  at  His  command,  but  controls  all
circumstances,  was  now  about  to  accomplish  that  which
He  had  always  at  heart,  making  the  disciples  to  be
witnesses  of  Jesus  to  the  very  ends  of  the  earth,  though
first  of  all  to  Judaea  and  Samaria.  Accordingly  we
find,  as  the  testimony  had  gone  forth  throughout  Jeru-
salem at  least,  so  now  the  old  rival  of  Jerusalem  comes
within  the  dealings  of  God.  Philip,  who  had  been
appointed  by  the  apostles  at  the  choice  of  the  multitude
of  the  disciples  to  care  for  the  distribution  to  the  poor,
goes  down  to  the  cities  of  Samaria  preaching  Christ.
This  did  not  at  all  flow  from  his  ordination.  His  ap-
pointment was  to  take  care  of  the  tables.  His  preach-
ing Christ  was  the  fruit  of  the  Lord's  calL  Where
man  chooses  for  human  things,  we  have  the  Lord  recog-
nising it.  He  would  have  His  people,  where  they
give,  to  have  a  voice.  He  would  meet  them  in  grace,
stopping  complaints,  and  showing  that  He  honours  and


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  45

confides  in  their  suitable  choice.  But  not  so  in  the
ministry  of  the  word  or  testimony  of  the  Lord.  Here
the  Lord  alone  gives,  alone  calls,  alone  sends  forth.
Philip,  besides  being  one  of  the  seven,  was  an  "  evan-
gelist," as  we  are  told  expressly  in  another  part  of  this
very  book  (chap.  xxi.  8).  It  is  important  to  distinguish
between  the  two  things — one,  the  charge  to  which  man
appointed  him;  the  other,  the  gift  which  the  Lord
conferred.  (Ephes.  iv.)  I  merely  make  the  remark  in
passing  ;  though  it  will  not  be  needed  for  most  here,  it
may  be  for  some.

Philip  goes  down,  then,  preaching  Christ ;  "  and  the
people  with  one  accord  gave  heed  unto  those  tilings
which  Philip  spake,  hearing  and  seeing  the  miracles
which  he  did."  But  the  testimony  of  miracles  is  apt
to  act  upon  the  flesh.  They  are,  indeed,  a  sign  to  un-
believers, and  that  snch  is  the  result  we  find  shown  us
by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  chapter  before  us.  However
graciously  given  of  the  Lord  as  a  token  to  attract  the
careless  minds  of  men,  they  are  dangerous  when  they
are  made  the  resting-place  and  the  object  of  the  mind ;
and  this  was  the  fatal  mistake  made  then,  and  not
merely  there  but  by  many  millions  of  souls  from  that
day  to  this.  Faith  never  rests  on  any  other  ground
than  God's  word.  All  else  is  vain,  and  apt  to  accredit
as  well  as  entice  man.  There  was  indeed  the  unmis-
takable action  of  the  Spirit  of  God  on  this  occasion —
the  power  that  cast  out  unclean  spirits  and  healed  the
sick,  as  well  as  the  means  of  spreading  joy  through-
out that  city  for  the  souls  of  men.  Evidently  it  was
power  in  external  display,  then  so  richly  manifested,
which  acted  on  the  fleshly  mind  of  Simon,  himself


46  DTTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

ha\'ing  the  reputation  of  a  great  one,  and  before  this
the  vessel  of  some  kind  of  demoniacal  power — the
miserable  power  of  Satan,  with  which  he  dazzled  the
eyes  of  men.  But  now  finding  himself  eclipsed,  like
a  wily  man,  his  object  was  to  avail  himself  of  this
superior  energy  if  it  were  possible.  His  aim  was  not
Christ ;  it  was  all  for  himself.  He  wished  to  gain  fresh
influence,  not  to  lose  his  old:  why  not,  by  this  new
method,  if  possible,  turn  things  to  his  own  account  ?

Accordingly,  among  the  train  of  those  that  received
the  gospel  and  were  baptized,  Simon  is  found.  Philip
had  not  the  discernment  to  see  through  him  :  evangelists
are  apt  to  be  sanguine.  It  may  be  that  the  Loixl  had  not
allowed  the  tnie  character  of  Simon  to  be  manifested
to  every  eye  at  that  moment.  It  did  not  escape  the
discerning  eyes  of  Peter  a  little  afterward.  But  as  we
are  told  here,  "  When  they  believed  Philip  preaching
the  things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  they  were  baptized  both  men  and
women ;  and  Simon  himself  believed  also."  Scripture
does  show,  though  it  does  not  sanction  as  divine,  a  faith
that  is  founded  on  evidence.  And  it  continues  still.  So
John  often  speaks  of  it ;  and  the  very  one  that  tells  us
most  of  the  divinely  given  character  of  true  faith — who
most  of  all  lets  us  into  its  secret  power  and  blessed-
ness, even  eternal  life  as  bound  up  with  it, — that  same
John  is  the  one  who  more  than  any  other  furnishes  in-
stances of  a  mere  humanly  produced  faith.  Such  was
the  faith  of  Simon.  The  gospel  of  Luke  also  describes
what  is  similar ;  that  is  to  say,  a  faith  not  insincere  but
human,  not  wrought  of  the  Spirit  but  founded  on  the
mind  yielding  to  reasons,  proofs,  evidences,  which  are  to


'>^^'.-<i'


THE  ACTS   OF  THE   APOSTLES.  47

it  overpowering;  but  there  is  nothing  of  God  in  it;
there  is  no  meeting  between  the  soul  and  God.  With-
out this,  faith  is  good  for  nothing,  nor  is  God  Himself
honoured  in  His  own  word.  Power  was  what  struck
Simon's  mind — himself  a  devotee  of  power,  who  in
times  past  had  sunk  indeed  low,  even  to  the  enemy  of
God  and  man  in  order  from  any  source  to  be  the  vessel
of  a  power  beyond  man.  He  could  not  deny  the  might
that  proved  itself  without  effort  superior  to  anything
he  had  ever  wielded.  This  was  what  attracted  him;
and,  as  it  is  said  here,  "he  continued  with  Philip"
(there  was  no  other  bond  of  connexion),  "  and  wondered,
beholding  the  miracles  and  signs  which  were  done."
A  believer  would  have  wondered  more  at  the  grace  of
God,  and  bowed  in  adoration  before  Him.  Conscience
would  have  been  searched  by  the  truth  of  God;  and
the  heart  would  have  been  filled  with  praise  at  the
grace  of  God.  Neither  one  nor  other  ever  entered  into
the  thoughts  or  feelings  of  Simon.

And  "when  the  apostles  which  were  at  Jerusalem
heard  that  Samaria  had  received  the  word  of  God,  they
sent  unto  them  Peter  and  John."  It  was  of  the  greatest
importance  that  unity  should  be  kept  up  practically, —
not  merely  that  there  should  be  proclaimed  the  truth
that  there  is  imity,  but  that  there  should  be  the  main-
tenance of  it  in  practice.  Accordingly  Peter  and  John,
two  of  the  chiefs  among  the  apostles,  come  down  from
Jerusalem.  But  there  was  another  reason  too.  It  was  so
ordered  of  God  that  the  Holy  Ghost  should  not  at  first
be  conferred  on  the  disciples  at  Samaria :  I  do  not  mean
merely  on  such  as  Simon  or  false  brethren,  but  even  on
those  that  were  true.      Undoubtedly  they  could  not


48  IKTRODUCTORY  LECTUKES.

have  believed  the  gospel,  had  there  not  been  the  quick-
ening operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  we  must  dis-
tinguish between  the  Holy  Ghost  giving  life  and  the
Holy  Ghost  Himself  given.

Another  thing  too  let  me  again  and  again  remark:
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  never  means  those  mighty
wonders  of  power  which  had  acted  on  the  greedy
and  ambitious  mind  of  Simon  Magus.  The  gift  of
the  Spirit  is  not  at  all  the  same  thing  as  the  gifts.
These  gifts,  at  least  such  as  were  of  an  extraordinary
sort,  were  the  outward  signs  of  that  gift  in  early  days ;
and  it  was  of  great  importance  that  there  should  be  a
decisive  palpable  testimony  to  it.  Tlie  presence  of  the
Holy  Ghost  was  a  new  and  quite  unexampled  thing
even  among  believers.  Hence  it  is  there  were  mighty
powers  that  wrought  by  those  who  were  employed  by
the  Holy  Ghost;  as,  for  instance,  by  Philip  himself;  after-
wards also  by  the  disciples,  when  Peter  and  John  came
down  and  laid  their  hands  upon  them  with  prayer.  The
Holy  Ghost  came  upon  them,  not  merely,  it  will  be
observed,  certam  spiritual  powers,  but  the  Holy  Ghost
Himself.  They  had  not  those  powers  only,  but  this
divine  person  given  to  them.  Scripture  is  clear  and
unequivocal  as  to  the  truth  of  the  case.  I  can  under-
stand difficulties  in  the  minds  of  believers ;  and  no  one
would  wish  to  force  or  huny  the  convictions  of  any ;
nor  would  it  be  of  the  slightest  value  to  receive  even  a
truth  without  the  faith  that  is  produced,  and  exercised,
and  cleared  by  the  word  of  God.  But  at  the  same  time
to  my  own  mind  it  seems  to  be  only  homage  to  Gkni's
word  to  afi&rm  positively  that  of  which  I  am  sure.

I  therefore  must  say  that  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost


<V


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  49

here  is,  in  my  judgment,  clearly  distinct  from  any-
thing in  the  way  of  either  a  spiritual  gift  for  souls  or  a
miraculous  power,  as  it  is  called.  There  followed  also
such  signs,  or  outward  powers;  but  the  Holy  Ghost
was  given  Himself,  according  to  the  Lord's  word — the
promise  of  the  Father,  a  promise  which,  as  all  know,
was  in  the  first  instance  assured  to  those  who  were
already  believers,  and  which  was  made  good  to  them
because  they  were  believers,  not  to  make  them  so.
When  redemption  was  accomplished,  it  was  the  seal  of
the  £aith  and  the  life  which  they  already  had.  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  the  facts  at  Samaria  were  analogous ;
but  this  remarkable  feature  is  to  be  noticed,  that  the
Holy  Ghost  was  here  conferred  by  (not,  as  at  Jerusalem,
apart  from)  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  apostles.
Of  this  we  heard  nothing  in  the  divine  history  of  the
day  of  Pentecost ;  and  I  think  that  scripture  is  abun-
dantly plain  that  there  could  have  been  nothing  of  the
kind  then  and  there.  First  of  all,  the  apostles  and  the
disciples  themselves  received  it  as  they  were  waiting.
The  Holy  Ghost  came  down  upon  them  suddenly,  with
no  previous  sign  whatever,  except  that  which  was
suitable  to  the  Holy  Ghost  when  sent  down  from
heaven — the  mighty  rushing  wind,  and  then  the  tokens
of  His  presence  upon  each  were  manifested.  Yet  there
was  no  such  requirement  as  imposition  of  hands  in
order  to  be  the  medium  of  it.  But  it  would  seem  that
special  reasons  operated  at  Samaria  to  make  it  necessary
there.  It  was  of  all  moment  to  keep  up  the  links
practically  between  a  work  which  might  have  looked  to
many  there,  as  now,  not  a  little  irregular.  It  was  wrouglit
not  by  those  that  had  previously  been  alwajrs  the  great

£


50  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

spiritual  witnesses;  for  we  hear  of  none  ministering  but
the  apostles,  and  indeed  not  even  of  all  the  apostles
speaking,  though  it  may  be  that  they  did.  But  here
we  have  clearly  a  man  who  had  been  chosen  for  another
and  an  external  purpose  by  the  church,  but  whom  the
Lord  uses  elsewhere  for  a  new  and  higher  purpose,  for
which  He  had  qualified  him  by  the  Holy  Ghost

Nevertheless,  care  was  taken  to  hinder  all  appearance
of  independence  or  indifference  to  unity.  There  was
the  freest  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost, — sovereignly  free, —
and  it  is  impossible  to  maintain  this  too  stringently;
and  there  was  the  utmost  care  that  all  should  be  left
open  for  the  Holy  Ghost  to  act  according  to  His  own
will,  not  only  within  the  church,  but  also  by  evange-
lizing outside.  For  all  that  God  took  precaution  to
bind  up  together  the  work  at  Samaria  with  that  which
He  had  wrought  at  Jerusalem.  Hence,  though  Philip
might  preach  and  they  receive  the  gospel,  the  apostles
come  down,  and  with  prayer  lay  their  hands  upon  theili,
and  then  they  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.  To  a  reflecting
believer  it  will  be  plain  that  the  reasons  for  this  do  not
hold  at  the  present  time.  I  merely  make  this  remark
lest  any  should  draw  from  this  the  inference  that  there
is  a  necessity  for  men  commissioned  from  G^d  to  lay  on
hands  now  in  order  to  confer  such  a  spiritual  blessing.

The  fact  is,  that  the  notion  of  imposition  of
hands  being  a  imiversal  medium  of  conveying  the
Holy  Ghost  is  certainly  a  mistake.  On  the  greatest
occasions,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given,  we  have
no  ground  to  believe  that  hands  were  laid  on  any.
There  were  two  exceptional  occasions  on  which  one  or
more  of  the  apostles  so  acted,  but  at  times  of  more


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  51

general  interest  and  importance  nothing  of  the  sort
was  heard  of.  Take,  as  the  most  solemn  moment  of  all,
the  day  of  Pentecost.  Who  that  honours  scripture  can
pretend  that  hands  were  laid  on  any  then  ?  Yet  the
Holy  Ghost  was  given  in  especial  power  on  that  day.
But  what  is  more  to  the  purpose  for  us  Gentiles,  when
Cornelius  and  his  household  were  brought  in,  not  only
no  appearance  of  it  is  visible,  but  positive  proof  to
the  contrary.  Peter  was  present,  but  he  certainly  laid
no  hand  of  his  on  a  single  soul  that  day  before  the
Holy  Ghost  was  given.  So  far  from  it,  as  we  shall  find
by  and  by  in  chapter  x.,  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given
while  he  was  yet  speaking,  before  they  were  so  much
as  baptized.  On  the  day  of  Pentecost  they  were  bap-
tized first,  and  then  they  received  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  At  Samaria  they  had  been  baptized  for  some
time,  as  we  know.  On  believing  they  were  baptized,  as
we  are  told  in  Acts  viii.;  but  they  received  the  Holy
Ghost  after  an  interval,  through  the  action  of  the  apostles.

I  refer  to  this  just  to  show  how  far  scripture  is  from
countenancing  the  cramped  ideas  of  men,  and  that  the
only  way  of  truth  is  to  believe  all  the  word  of  God,
searching  out  the  special  principle  of  God  by  which  He
instructs  us  in  the  different  characters  of  His  action.
Surely  He  is  always  wise  and  consistent  with  Himself.
It  is  we  who  by  confounding  matters  lose  consequently
the  blessedness  and  beauty  of  the  truth  of  God.

Now  the  reason,  as  it  appears  to  me,  why  divine
wisdom  led  to  this  striking  difference  at  Samaria,  was
the  necessity  of  hindering  that  independence  to  which
even  Christians  are  so  liable.  There  was  special  ex-
posure to  this  evil  which  called  for  so  much  the  greater

B  2


52  INTRODUCrORY  LECTURES.

goard  against  it  at  Samaiia.  How  painful  must  it  be
to  the  Spirit  of  God  if  the  old  pride  of  Samaria  were  to
rise  up  against  Jerusalem !  God  would  cut  off  the  very
appearance  of  this.  There  was  the  free  action  of  His
Spirit  towards  Samaria  without  the  apostles,  but  the
Holy  Ghost  was  given  by  the  laying  on  of  their  hands.
This  solemn  act  was  not  merely  an  ancient  sign  of
divine  blessing,  but  of  identification  also.  Such,  I  sup-
pose, therefore,  was  the  principle  that  lay  at  the  bottom
of  the  difference  of  the  divine  action  on  these  two
occasions.

Then  we  find  Simon  struck  not  so  much  by  an  indi-
vidual's endowment  with  miraculous  power,  as  by  the
fact  that  others  received  it  by  the  apostles'  laying  on  of
hands.  At  once,  with  the  instinct  of  flesh,  he  sees  a  good
opportimity  for  himself,  and,  judging  of  others'  hearts
by  his  own,  presents  money  as  the  means  of  acquiring
the  coveted  power.  But  this  detects  the  man.  How
often  our  words  show  where  we  are !  How  continually
too  where  we  least  think  they  do !  It  is  not  only  in
cases  of  our  judgment  (for  there  is  nothing  that  so  often
judges  a  man  as  his  own  judgment  of  another) ;  but
also  where  the  desire  goes  out  after  that  which  we
have  not  got.  How  aU-important  for  our  souls  that
we  should  have  Christ  before  us,  and  that  we  should
have  no  desire  but  for  His  glory !  Not  a  ray  of  the
light  of  Christ  had  entered  the  heart  of  Simon,  and
BO  Peter  at  once  detects  the  fahe  heart.  With  that
energy  which  characterized  him  he  says,  "Thy  money
perish  with  thee,  because  thou  hast  thought  that  the
gift  of  God  may  be  purchased  with  money.  Thou  hast
neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter :  for  thy  heart  is  not


L*?l,


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  53

light  in  the  sight  of  God"  At  the  same  time  there  is
the  pity  that  belongs  to  one  who  knew  the  grace  of
God,  and  saw  the  end  of  all  in  His  judgment.  "  Ee-
pent,  therefore,  of  this  thy  wickedness,  and  pray  God
if,  perhaps,  the  thought  of  thy  heart  may  be  forgiven
thee ;  for  I  perceive  that  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitter-
ness, and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity."  God  has  no
pleasure  in  the  death  of  a  sinner.  Simon  can  only
answer,  "Pray  ye  to  the  Lord  for  me."  He  had  no
confidence  in  the  Lord  for  himself — not  a  particle ;  for
just  as  those  who  have  confidence  in  the  Lord  have  not
an  atom  in  man,  his  sole  hope  of  blessing  for  his  soul
lay  in  the  influence  of  another  man,  not  in  Christ's
grace.  "  Pray  ye  to  the  Lord  for  me,  that  none  of  those
things  which  ye  have  spoken  come  upon  me."

The  apostles  then,  after  preaching  in  the  various
villages  of  the  Samaritans,  return  to  Jerusalem.  But  not
so  the  word  of  God.  The  gospel  goes  forth  elsewhere;  it
is  in  no  way  bound  to  Jerusalem.  On  the  contrary,  the
grand  bearing  of  this  chapter  is  that  now  the  tide  of
blessing  is  flowing  away  from  Jerusalem.  The  holy  city
had  rejected  the  gospel  It  was  not  enough  that  they
had  rejected  the  Messiah,  nor  even  that  He  was  made
Lord  and  Christ  on  high.  They  refused  utterly  the  Holy
Ghost's  testimony  to  the  Son  of  man  glorified  in  heaven,
and  slew  or  scattered  the  witnesses.  Who  then  was
specially  used  as  the  instrument  of  the  free  action  of
the  Holy  Ghost  elsewhere,  without  plan,  without
thought  of  man,  and  apparently  the  simple  result  of
circumstances,  but  in  truth  God's  hand  directing  all  ?
Philip  is  told  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord  to  arise  and  go
towards  the  south — ^towards  "Gaza,  which  is  desert."


54  DTTRODrCTOBT  LECmUBS.

''And  he  arose  and  went"  Strikingly  beantifdl  it  is
to  see  the  devoted  simplicitj  with  which  he  answers  to
the  call  of  his  blaster.  I  will  not  pretend  to  say  that
it  cost  him  little,  but  am  sure  it  would  have  been  a
heavy  trial  to  many  a  man  of  God  to  leave  that  which
was  so  bright,  where  He  had  wrought  powerfully  in
using  himself  for  His  own  glory.  But  he  is  truly  a
bondman,  and  at  once  is  ready  to  go  at  the  bidding  of
the  Lord,  who  had  given  him  to  reap  in  joy  where  He
had  Himself  tasted  the  firstfruits  in  the  days  of  His
own  ministry  here  below.  Samaria,  which  had  held  out
against  the  truth,  was  now  yielding  the  harvest  that  a
greater  than  Philip  had  sown;  and  there  was  joy  in  that
very  Samaria  where  greater  works  were  now  done  ac-
cording to  His  own  word.

But  this  was  not  enough  for  Grod.  A  man  of  Ethi-
opia, a  eunuch  of  great  authority  under  the  queen  of
the  Ethiopians,  was  returning  after  having  gone  up  to
Jerusalem  to  worship.  He  was  going  back  without  the
blessing  that  his  earnest  heart  yearned  after.  He  had
gone  up  to  the  great  city  of  solemnities,  but  the  bless-
ing was  no  longer  to  be  found  there.  Jehovah's  house
had  been  left  doubly  desolate;  Jerusalem  had  this
added  to  her  other  sins  that,  when  the  blessing  had
come  down  from  heaven,  she  would  not  have  it.  She
despised  the  Holy  Ghost  as  she  had  despised  the
Messiah;  and  no  wonder  therefore  that  he  who  had
gone  up  to  Jerusalem  to  worship  was  returning  with
the  yearnings  of  his  heart  stiU  imsatisfied.  And  not
the  angel  but  the  Spirit  guides  now.  The  angel  had  to
do  with  providential  cireumstances,  but  the  Spirit  with
that  which  directly  deab  with  spiritual  need  and  bless-


%.


L^,


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  55

ing.  So  says  the  Spirit  to  Philip,  "  Gro  near  and  join
thyself  to  this  chariot"  Philip  acts  at  once,  with
alacrity  hears  the  eunuch  read  the  prophet  Isaiah,  and
puts  the  question  whether  he  understood  what  was
read.  The  answer  is,  "How  can  I,  except  some  man
should  guide  me  ?"  Thereon  Philip  is  invited  to  come
up  and  sit  with  him,  Isaiah  liii  being,  as  we  know,  the
portion  in  question ;  and  the  eunuch  asks  of  whom  the
prophet  spoke  these  words — "  of  himself  or  some  other
man  ?*'  so  gross  was  his  darkness  even  as  to  the  general
point  of  the  chapter.  "  Then  Philip  opened  his  mouth,
and  began  at  the  very  same  scripture,  and  preached
unto  him  Jesus."  It  was  enough.  That  one  name,
through  faith  in  it,  what  could  it  not  accomplish  ?  The
fiEicts  were  notorious ;  but  of  this  we  may  be  sure,  that
never  had  they  been  put  together  before  the  mind  of
the  Ethiopian  as  then,  never  connected  with  the  living
Word  and  His  grace.  They  were  now  put  in  contact
with  his  wants,  and  all  was  instantly  light  in  his  soul.
Oh,  what  a  blessing  it  is  to  have  and  know  such  a
Saviour !  What  a  joy  to  be  warranted  to  proclaim  Him
to  others  without  stint,  even  to  a  soul  as  dark  as  the
Ethiopian,  who  was  then  and  there  baptized !

Remember  that  verse  37  is  only  an  imaginary  conver-
sation between  him  and  Philip.  The  man  just  now  so
ignorant  is  not  the  channel  that  God  was  about  to  use
for  bringing  out  the  remarkable  confession  that  is  intro-
duced prematurely  here.  It  was  reserved  for  another  of
whom  we  shall  read  in  the  next  chapter.  This  scene
does  show  the  stranger  discovering  the  predicted  Mes-
siah in  Jesus  of  Nazareth — the  Messiah  suffering,  no
doubt,  but  accomplishing  atonement.     Certainly  the


56  INTRODUCTORT  LECTURES.

Ethiopian  received  the  truth ;  but  verse  37  had  better
be  passed  by  in  your  minds,  at  least  in  this  connexion.
All  who  are  informed  in  these  matters  are  aware  that
the  best  authorities  reject  the  entire  verse.

"  He  went  on  his  way  rejoicing."  Though  the  Spirit  of
the  Lord  catches  away  Philip,  so  full  is  his  heart  of  the
truth  that  we  may  be  sure  all  that  occurred  confirmed
it  in  his  eyes.  How  could  anything  seem  too  great  and
good  to  him  whose  heart  had  just  made  the  acquaint-
ance of  Jesus?  Did  he  not  feel  so  much  the  more
settled  in  Jesus  as  there  was  no  other  object  now  before
his  soul?  It  was  the  Lord  that  had  brought  Philip,
and  it  was  His  Spirit  that  had  taken  him  away;  but  it
was  He  too  who  had  given  him  and  left  him  Jesus  for
ever.  Philip  is  found  at  Azot\is,  and  passing  through
he  preaches  elsewhere.

At  this  point  we  come  to  the  history  of  the.  call  of
another  and  yet  more  honoured  witness  of  divine  grace
and  Christ's  glory.  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  yet  breathing
out  his  threats  and  slaughter  when  the  Lord  was  pur-
suing His  onward  gracious  work  among  the  Samaritans
and  strangers.  The  returning  treasurer  of  Queen  Can-
dace  was  a  proselyte,  I  suppose,  from  the  Gentiles,  liv-
ing among  them,  not  as  a  Gentile  himself,  but  practically
a  Jew,  whatever  the  place  of  his  birth  and  residence.
The  time  for  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  strictly  was  not
yet  come,  though  the  way  is  being  prepared.  The
Samaritans,  as  you  know,  were  a  mongrel  race ;  the
stranger  may  have  been  possibly  a  proselyte  from
among  the  Gentiles ;  but  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  is
now  to  be  called.  Such  is  the  unfolding  of  the  ways  of
G^d  at  this  point


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  57

Saul  in  his  zeal  had  desired  letters  giving  him
authority  to  punish  the  Christian  Jews,  and  was  found
on  his  way  journeying  near  the  Gentile  city  that  he
sought.  "Suddenly  there  shined  round  about  him  a
light  from  heaven :  and  he  fell  to  the  earth,  and  heard
a  voice  saying  unto  him,  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest
thou  me  ?  And  he  said,  Who  art  thou.  Lord  ?"  All
depended  upon  this.  "And  the  Lord  said,  I  am  Jesus
whom  thou  persecutest."  What  a  revolution  this  word
caused  in  that  mighty  heart !  Confidence  in  man,  in
self,  was  overthrown  to  its  foundations — all  that  his  life
had  been  zealously  building  up.  "  I  am  Jesus  whom
thou  persecutest."  It  was  the  Lord  undoubtedly,  and
the  Lord  declared  He  was  Jesus,  and  Jesus  was  Jehovah.
He  dared  not  doubt  longer :  to  him  it  was  self-evident
If  Jesus  was  Jehovah,  what  then  had  bis  religion  been?
what  had  high  priest  or  Sanhedrim  done  for  him  ?  Was
it  not  then  God's  high  priest,  God's  law  ?  Unques-
tionably it  was.  How  then  could  so  fatal  an  error
have  been  committed  ?  It  was  the  fact.  Man,  Israel,
not  merely  Saul,  was  altogether  blinded:  the  flesh
never  knows  God.  The  despised  and  hated  name  of
Jesus  is  the  only  hope  for  man,  Jesus  is  the  only
Saviour  and  Lord.  His  glory  burst  on  the  astonished
eyes  of  Saul,  who  surrenders  immediately.  It  was  not
without  the  deepest  searching  of  heart,  though  smitten
down  at  once ;  for  how  could  there  be  a  question  as  to
the  divine  power  ?  How  could  its  reality  be  doubted  ?
As  little  could  there  be  a  question  as  to  the  grace
exercised  toward  him,  though  the  manner  was  not  after
that  of  man.  The  light  that  shone  suddenly  on  him
was  from  heaven.     But  it  was  God's  way.    The  voice


58  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

that  said,  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  V  was .
from  Jesus.     "Who  art  thou,  Lord?"  he  cried,  and
hears,  "I  am  Jesus  whom  thou  persecutest."     How
could  he  resist  the  heavenly  vision  ?

Observe  that,  although  the  next  words  are  beyond  a
question  scriptural,  and  so  far  the  case  differs  from
verse  37  referred  to  in  the  last  chapter,  the  last  clause  of
verse  5  and  the  first  of  verse  6  belong  properly  speak-
ing to  two  other  chapters  (xxiL  xxvi.)  rather  than  to
this.  I  do  not  therefore  comment  upon  these  additions
here :  they  will  remain  for  their  own  real  and  suitable
places.  But  Saul  does  arise  from  the  earth.  "And  the
men  which  journeyed  with  him  stood  speechless,  hear-
ing a  voice,  but  seeing  no  man."  But  he  had  heard  the
voice  of  His  mouth,  and  His  words  were  spirit  and  life,
eternal  life,  to  his  soul.  Three  days  and  nights  he
neither  eats  nor  drinks.  The  profound  moral  work  of
God  proceeded  in  that  converted  heart.  Nevertheless
even  he,  apostle  though  he  were,  must  enter  by  the
same  lowly  gate  as  another.  And  so  we  have  the  story
of  Ananias,  and  the  ways  of  the  Lord, — not  of  some
great  apostle,  nor  even  of  Philip,  but  a  disciple  at
Damascus  named  Ananias,  to  whom  the  Lord  spoke  in
a  vision.  And  he  goes,  the  Lord  communicating  another
vision  to  the  apostle  himself,  in  which  he  sees  Ananias
coming  in,  and  putting  his  hand  on  him  that  he  might
receive  his  sight.

The  Spirit  puts  us  in  presence  of  the  freedom  of
the  servant,  as  he  pleads  with  the  Lord,  for  neither
man  nor  even  the  child  of  God  ever  reaches  up  to  the
height  of  His  grace.  Ananias,  wholly  unprepared  for
the  call  of  such  an  enemy  of  the  gospel,  slow  of


L»?V,


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  59

heart  to  believe  all,  expostulates,  as  it  were,  with  the
Saviour.  "  Lord,"  says  he,  "  I  have  heard  by  many  of
this  man,  how  much  evil  he  hath  done  to  thy  saints
at  Jerusalem:  and  here  he  hath  authority  from  the
chief  priests  to  bind  all  that  call  on  thy  name."
But  the  Lord  said  imto  him,  "  Go  thy  way :  for  he  is  a
chosen  vessel  unto  me,  to  bear  my  name  before  the
Gentiles,  and  kings,  and  the  children  of  Israel."

Even  here  the  intimation  is  sufficiently  plain  that  the
Gentiles  were  in  the  foreground  of  the  work  designed
for  Saul  of  Tarsus.  But  this  was  not  all.  It  was  to  be
emphatically  a  witness  of  grace  in  sufifering  for  Christ's
name:  "For  I  will  show  him  how  great  things  he
must  suffer  for  my  name's  sake."  And  so  it  was.
Ananias  goes,  puts  his  hand  on  him,  addresses  him  by
the  sweet  title  of  relationship  Christ  began,  consecrated,
and  has  given,  telling  him  how  the  Lord,  even  Jesus,
had  appeared  imto  him.  How  confirmatory  it  must  have
been  to  the  apostle's  heart  to  learn  that  Ananias  was
now  sent  by  the  same  Lord  Jesus,  without  the  slightest
intimation  from  without,  whether  of  Saul  himself  or  any
other  man !  "  The  Lord  hath  sent  me  that  thou  mightest
receive  thy  sight,  and  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost."
And  every  word  was  made  good.  "  Saul  arose  and
was  baptized,  and  when  he  had  received  meat  he  was
strengthened,  and  remained  with  the  disciples  for  some
time."

In  due  time  follows  the  further  development  of  the
truth  as  to  Christ  in  testimony.  "  He  preached  in  the
synagogues  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God."  Such  was
the  emphatic  and  characteristic  presentation  of  His
person  assigned  to  the  apostle,  and  this  at  once.   It  was


60  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

not  that  Peter  did  not  know  the  same,  we  are  all  aware
how  blessedly  he  confessed  Him  to  be  (not  Messiah
only,  but)  the  Son  of  the  living  God  while  Jesus  was
here  below.  Nor  is  it  that  the  other  disciples  had  not
the  same  faith.  Surely  it  was  true  of  all  who  really
believed  and  knew  His  glory.  Nevertheless  "  out  of  the
abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh ;"  and  he
who  loves  to  present  the  Lord  in  the  depth  of  His
personal  grace,  and  the  height  of  His  glory,  has  surely
a  spiritual  fitness  for  the  expression  of  the  heart's  joy
in  that  which  faith  has  created  within.  Thus,  although
the  others  no  doubt  had  the  same  Saviour  taught  them
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  still  there  was  not  in  every  case  the
same  measure  of  entrance  or  appreciation.  Paul  had
it  not  more  suddenly  than  with  a  heavenly  splendour
which  was  peculiar  to  himself;  and  thus  there  was  a
vast  work  soon  wrought.  There  was  a  bringing  out  of
that  which  belonged  to  Christ,  not  merely  the  place
which  Christ  took,  but  that  which  He  is  from  all
eternity,— consequently  that  which  is  most  of  all  in-
trinsically precious.  He  preached  Him,  and  this  boldly
in  the  synagogue  too,  "that  he  is  the  Son  of  God."
All  that  heard  were  amazed.  "  But  Saul  increased  the
more  in  strength,  and  confoimded  the  Jews  that  dwelt
at  Damascus,  proving  that  this  is  very  Christ."  The
doctrine  of  His  Sonship  did  not  in  the  smallest  degree,
of  course,  set  aside  the  Messiahship.  This  remained;  but
he  preached  Him  rather  in  His  own  personal  glory, —
not  as  the  Son  of  David,  the  servant,  which  was  the
great  burden  of  Peter's  preaching,  made  Lord  and
Christ ; — not  that  He  was  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven,  as
Stephen  witnessed ;  but  that  this  Jesus,  the  Christ,  is


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  61

the  Son  of  God ;— clearly  therefore  more  particularly
bound  up  with  the  divine  nature,  or  godhead  glory  of
Himself.

After  this  comes  no  slight  discipline  for  Saul.  As
the  Jews  watched  the  gates  to  kill  him,  the  disciples
took  him  by  night  and  let  him  down  the  wall  in  a
basket.  Thus  we  find  the  utmost  simplicity  and  quiet-
ness. There  is  no  show  of  doing  great  things;  nor
do  we  read  of  daring  in  any  way:  what  is  there  of
Christ  in  the  one  or  the  other  ?  Contrariwise,  we  see
that  which  outwardly  looks  exceedingly  weak ;  but  this
was  the  man  that  was  in  another  day  to  say  that  he
gloried  in  his  infirmities.  He  acts  on  that  of  which
he  afterwards  wrote.     He  was  led  of  God.

Then  we  learn  another  important  lesson.  "  Wlien  Saul
was  come  to  Jerusalem,  he  assayed  to  join  himself  to  the
disciples :  but  they  were  all  afraid  of  him,  and  believed
not  that  he  was  a  disciple."  God  did  not  clothe  him
with  such  overwhelming  influence  that  doors  were
thrown  open  to  him  though  the  greatest  of  the  apostles.
Oh  why  should  any  confessor  of  Christ — why  should
any  child  of  God — shrink  from  rendering  godly  satis-
faction to  those  that  seek  it  ?  Why  so  much  haste  and
impatience  ?  Why  should  there  be  unwillingness  to
meet  and  submit  to  others  when  it  is  a  question  of  re-
ception ?  What  earnest  desire  should  there  not  be  to
bow  to  all  that  which  is  due  to  the  church  of  God  ?
Here  we  find  not  even  the  apostle  Paul  was  above  it.

Not  on  the  other  hand  that  there  ought  to  be  a  spirit
of  suspicion  or  distrust  in  the  church  or  any  Christian.
I  am  far  from  saying  that  it  was  comely  on  their  part
to  indulge  in  hesitation  touching  this  wondrous  display


62  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

of  divine  grace.  But  what  I  want  to  press  for  our
profit,  beloved  brethren,  is  that  at  any  rate  he  who  is
the  object  of  grace  can  afford  to  be  gracious.  Nor  is
there  a  more  painful  want  of  it  than  that  kind  of  res-
tiveness  which  is  so  ready  to  take  offence  at  the  small-
est fear  or  anxiety  on  the  part  of  others.  Surely  to
shrink  from  their  enquiries  is  nothing  but  self  on  our
part.  If  Christ  were  the  object  of  our  souls,  we  should
bow  as  one  did  called  of  God  with  incomparably  better
tokens  of  the  Lord's  favour  than  any  other, — this  blessed
man.  Said  of  Tarsus.  But  if  the  church  were  distrustful,
the  Lord  was  not  unmindful,  and  knew  how  to  give
courage  to  the  heart  of  His  servant.  There  was  among
them  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  whom
we  have  had  a  happy  report  before,  as  we  shall  hear
many  (though  not  altogether  unmingled)  good  tidings
to  the  end.  For  indeed  he  was  but  man.  Nevertheless,
being  a  good  man  and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  seeks
out  and  takes  Saul  to  the  apostles  when  others  stood
aloof,  and  declared  unto  them  "how  he  had  seen  the
Lord  in  the  way,  and  that  he  had  spoken  to  him,  and
how  he  had  preached  boldly  at  Damascus  in  the  name
of  Jesus ;  and  he  was  with  them  coming  in  and  going
out  at  Jerusalem."  Grace  can  credit  grace  easily,  imder-
stands  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and  disarms  suspicion.  It
is  beautiful  to  see  how  the  Lord  thus,  even  in  the  his-
tory of  that  which  was  unprecedented  and  might  seem
to  lie  outside  Christian  wants,  provides  in  His  blessed
word  for  the  every  day  difficulties  we  have  to  prove  in
such  a  day  of  weakness  as  ours.

After  this  wonderful  working  of  God  the  church  had
rest.    I  say,  "the  church;**  for  there  need  be  no  doubt.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  63

I  think,  that  3uch  is  the  true  fonn*  of  what  is  given  us

*  The  external  authority  ia  very  decidedly  for  the  singular  against
the  plural.  Thus  all  the  first-rate  Uncials,  the  Sinai,  Vatican,  Alex-
andrian, and  Palimpsest  of  Paris,  supported  by  some  of  the  best
curriTes  and  all  the  best  ancient  versions,  oppose  the  vulgar  reading.

The  following  extract  from  the  late  Dr.  Carson's  Letters  in  reply  to
Dr.  John  Brown's  Vindication  of  Presbyterianism  will  show  how  far
an  able  and  excellent  man  went  astray  in  defending  Congregationalism
through  not  knowing  that  his  argument  was  based,  not  on  Qod's
word,  but  on  man's  corruption  of  it.     I  quote  from  the  original
edition  (Edinburgh,  1807):  **Acts  xi.  31.     *Then  had  the  churches
rest  throughout  all  Judea,  and  Galilee,  and  Samaria,'  &c.    Here  I
would  be  glad  to  know  how  this  can  be  interpreted  upon  any  other
principle  than  that  church  in  the  single  number  was  solely  appro-
priated to  a  single  congregation,  when  applied  to  an  assembly  of
Christ's  disciples.     It  is  not  the  church  of  Judea,  the  church  of
Galilee,  and  the  church  of  Samaria,  but  the  churches  of  Judea,  &c.
Kay,  more,  had  these  been  Presbyterians,  all  under  the  same  govern-
ment, the  phraseology  would  not  have  been  even  the  church  of  Judea,
and  the  church  of  Galilee,  and  the  church  of  Samaria,  but  all  these
would  have  been  in  one  church,  and  even  then  but  a  small  part  of  a
church.    This  phraseology  would  have  been  somewhat  like  this,  *  The
church  had  rest  throughout  Judea,  Galilee,  and  Samaria,' — t.f.,  the
part  of  the  church  that  lies  in  these  countries."  (p.  378.)  How  startled
this  good  man  but  excessively  keen  controversialist  must  have  been,
had  he  learnt  that,  beyond  all  just  question,  the  only  tenable  text  here
is  destructive  of  the  notion  of  independent  churches,  and  in  reality
gives  the  appellation  to  the  entire  body  of  the  disciples  throughout
these  regions,  as  standing  on  one  common  ground,  and  enjoying  full
intercommunion,  though  in  these  different  districts.    But  that  branch
of  criticism  which  consists  in  a  full  knowledge  of  the  sources,  a  nice
discrimination  of  the  various  readings,  and  a  sound  judgment  in
deciding  the  preferable  text,  as  it  is  rarely  foimd,  so  it  certainly  was
not  the  forte  of  Dr.  C.    One  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,  Dr.  £.
Wells,  in  his  ''  Help  for  the  more  easy  and  clear  understanding  of  the
Scriptures"   (Oxford,   1718),  not  only  adopted  the  singular  in  his
Greek  text  and  his  English  paraphrase,  but  pointed  out  in  his  Anno-
tations the  great  weakness  of  the  argument  drawn  by  dissenters  from
the  plural  IccXiiami,  as  if  it  feivoured  their  system  of   separate
churches.


64  INTRODUCTOBY  LECTURES.

in  verse  31.  The  common  text  and  translations  have
"the  churches;'*  but  I  believe  that  this  faulty  form
crept  in  here,  because  the  sense  of  the  oneness  of  the
church  so  speedily  passed  away.  Hence  people  could
not  understand  that  it  was  one  and  the  same  church
throughout  aU  Judaea,  and  Galilee,  and  Samaria.  It
was  plain  enough  to  see  the  Christian  assembly  in  a
city,  even  if  it  were  as  numerous  as  in  Jerusalem,
where  it  must  have  met  in  not  a  few  different  localities
and  cliambers.  The  church,  not  merely  in  a  city  but
in  a  province  or  country,  is  intelligible  enough  to  man ;
but  it  soon  became  more  difficult  to  see  its  imity  in
various  and  differing  provinces.  The  change  of  reading
here  seems  to  prove  it  was  too  much  for  the  copyists  of
this  book.  The  reading  sanctioned  by  the  best  and
most  ancient  authorities  is  the  singular  —  not  the
churches,  but  "the  church."  "Then  had  the  church  rest
throughout  all  Judaja  and  Galilee  and  Samaria."  Un-
doubtedly throughout  these  districts  churches  existed ;
but  it  was  all  one  and  the  same  church  too,  and  not
different  bodies.

The  end  of  the  chapter  shows  us  the  progress  of
Peter.  He  visits  round  about.  It  was  no  longer  a
question  of  Jerusalem  only  even  for  Peter,  but  without
being  caUed  to  the  same  largeness  of  work  practically
as  the  apostle  Paid,  he  nevertheless  passes  throughout
"aU  quarters"  of  Palestine,  and  comes  down  to  the
saints  at  Lydda,  and  is  seen  by  those  of  Saron.  At
Joppa  too  was  wrought  a  still  more  striking  miracle
of  the  Lord  in  Tabitha's  case,  already  dead,  than  in
that  of  Eneas,  who  had  been  paralysed  for  years.  On
these  I  need  only  remark  how  grace  used  them  for


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  65

the  spread  of  the  testimony.  "All  that  dwelt  in  Lydda
and  Saron  saw  him,  and  turned  to  the  Lord."  "  It  was
known  throughout  all  Joppa,  and  many  believed  on  the
Lord."  But  at  this  point  a  still  more  important  step
was  about  to  be  taken ;  and  the  Lord  enters  on  it  with
due  solemnity,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  following  chap,  (x.)

Little  did  the  great  apostle  of  the  circumcision  anti-
cipate what  was  before  him  as  he  tarried  many  days  in
Joppa  with  one  Simon  a  tanner.     For  hence  the  Lord
called  him  to  a  new  sphere — a  task  which,  to  a  Jewish
mind,  was  beyond  measure  strange.     It  would  be  a
mistake  to  suppose  that  God  had  not  wrought  on  the
heart  of  Gentiles.    We  see  such  in  the  gospels.     Cor-
nelius was  one  of  those  who,  among  the  Gentiles,  had
abandoned  idolatry ;  but  more  than  this  was  sometimes
found.     There  were  Gentiles  who  truly  looked  to  the
Lord,  and  not  to  self  or  man ;  who  had  been  taught  of
Him  to  look  for  a  coming  Saviour,  though  they  quite
rightly  connected  that  Saviour  with  Israel;  for  such
was  the  burden  of  the  promise.    As  there  was  a  Job  in
the  Old  Testament,  independent  of  the  law  and  perhaps
before  it,  so  we  find  a  Cornelius  before  the  glad  tidings
in  the  New  Testament  had  been  formally  sent  to  the
nations.    All  know  that  there  were  Jews  waiting  for
the  Saviour.     It  is  of  interest  to  see,  and  should  be
better  known,  that  among  the  Gentiles  were  not  want-
ing such  as  worshipped  no  idols  but  served  the  true
and  living  God.    No  doubt  their  spiritual  condition
was  defective,  and  their  outward  position  must  have
seemed  anomalous ;  but  Scripture  is  decisive  that  such
godly  Gentiles  there  were.

F


66  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

It  is  a  fallacy  then  to  suppose  that  Cornelius  had  no
better  than  merely  natural  religion.  He  was  assuredly,
before  Peter  went,  a  converted  man.  To  regard  him  as
unawakened  at  that  time  is  to  mistake  a  great  deal  of
the  teaching  of  the  chapter.  Not  that  one  would  deny
that  a  mighty  work  was  then  wrought  in  Cornelius.
We  must  not  limit,  as  ignorant  people  do,  the  operation
of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  new  birth.  No  man  in  his
natural  state  could  pray,  nor  serve  God  acceptably,  as
Cornelius  did.  One  must  be  bom  again;  but,  like
many  others  who  had  really  been  quickened  in  those
days  (and  it  may  be  even  now,  I  presume),  a  soul
might  be  bom  again,  and  yet  far  from  resting  in  peace
on  redemption,  far  indeed  from  a  sense  of  deliverance
from  all  questions  as  to  his  soul.  There  is  this  difier-
ence,  no  doubt,  between  such  cases  now  and  that  of
Comelius  then, — that,  before  the  mission  of  Peter,  it
would  have  been  presumptuous  for  a  Gentile  to  have
pretended  to  salvation ;  now  it  is  the  fruit  of  imbelief
for  a  believer  to  question  it.  A  soul  that  now  looks  to
Jesus  ought  to  rest  without  question  on  redemption;
but  we  must  remember  that  at  this  time  Jesus  was  not
yet  publicly  preached  to  the  Gentiles — ^not  yet  freely
and  fully  proclaimed  according  to  the  riches  of  grace.
Therefore,  the  more  godly  Comelius  was,  the  less  would
he  dare  to  put  forth  his  hand  for  the  blessing  before
the  Lord  told  him  to  stretch  it  out.  He  did  what,  I
have  no  doubt,  was  the  right  thing.  He  was  truly  in
eamest  before  God,  As  we  are  told  here — and  the
Spirit  delights  to  give  such  an  account — "he  was  a
devout  man,  and  one  that  feared  God  with  all  his


.^•*.-'


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  67

house,  which  gave  much  alms  to  the  people,  and  prayed
to  God  alway."

Such  was  the  man  to  whom  Gk)d  was  about  to  send
the  gospel  by  Peter.  Thus  we  must  carefully  remember
that  the  gospel  brings  more  than  conversion  to  God.
It  is  the  message  of  life,  but  it  is  also  the  means  of
peace.  Before  the  gospel  was  preached  to  every  crea-
ture, a  new  nature  was  communicated  to  many  a  soul ;
but  till  then  there  was  not  and  could  not  be  peace.  The
two  things  are  both  brought  us  in  the  gospel — life
brought  to  light,  and  the  peace  preached  that  was  made
by  the  blood  of  the  cross.  At  the  same  time  scripture
shows  there  might  be  and  often  was  an  interval  after
the  gospel  did  go  forth.  So  from  experience  we  know
there  is  many  a  man  that  you  cannot  doubt  to  be  truly
looking  to  the  Lord,  yet  far  from  resting  in  the  peace
of  God.  Cornelius,  I  apprehend,  was  just  in  this  case.
He  would  no  more  have  perished,  had  it  pleased  God
to  have  taken  him  away  in  this  state,  than  any  Old  Testa-
ment saint,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile.  No  believer  could
be  so  ignorant  of  God  and  His  ways  of  old  as  to  imagine
there  ought  to  be  any  doubt  about  those  who  neverthe-
less were  full  of  anxieties  and  troubles,  and  through  fear
of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage.

Even  now,   although    it    is    the    gospel    that  God

sends  out,  we  know  well  how  many,  through  a  misuse

of  Old  Testament  teaching,  plunge  themselves  into

distress  and  doubt.     God  does  not  suggest  a  doubt  of

His  own  grace  to  them,  or  of  the  efficacy  of  Christ's

sacrifice  for  them :  unbelief  does.     It  was  not  so  with

Cornelius.     He  was  not  entitled  to  take  the  peace  of

the  gospel  till  God  warranted  Peter  to  bring  it  to  him.

p  2


68  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

This  was  precisely  what  God  was  now  doing ;  and  the
remarkable  fact  appears,  that  God  did  not  wait  for  the
apostle  of  the  Gentiles  to  bring  the  good  news  to  Cor-
nelius. Is  not  this  interlacing  after  a  divine  sort  ?  It
was  not  to  be  done  by  mere  systematic  rule  of  a  human
pattern.  But  just  as  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles
was  the  one  that  wrote  the  final  word  of  testimony  to
the  Christian  Jews  in  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  so
the  great  apostle  of  the  Jews  was  the  one  sent  to  fling
open  the  door  to  the  Gentile.  It  was  Peter,  not  Paul,
who  was  sent  to  Cornelius.  The  chapter  itself  proves
that  he  had  to  be  forced  to  go.  He  seems  to  have  lost
sight  of  the  words  of  the  Lord  Jesus — that  he  was  told
by  Jesus  risen  from  the  dead  to  preach  the  gospel  to
every  creature.  There  was  to  be  a  testimony  to  all  the
nations.  The  promise  was  not  merely  to  them  and  to
their  children,  but  to  all  "  afar  off,  as  many  as  the  Lord
their  God  should  call."  At  any  rate,  the  Lord  now
graciously  interferes,  and  as  he  gives  Cornelius  to  see  a
vision  most  instructive  to  him,  so  next  day  also  there
is  to  Peter  another  vision  from  the  Lord.

Answering  to  the  vision,  messengers  bring  the  apostle
to  the  household  of  Cornelius,  and  Peter  opens  his
mouth  to  the  following  effect : — "  Of  a  truth  I  perceive
that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons:  but  in  every
nation  he  that  feareth  him,  and  worketh  righteousness,
is  accepted  with  him.  The  word  which  God  sent  unto
the  children  of  Israel,  preaching  peace  by  Jesus  Christ :
(he  is  Lord  of  aU :)  that  word,  I  say,  ye  know."  I  call
your  attention  to  this.  Cornelius  was  not  in  ignorance
of  the  gospel  going  out  to  the  children  of  Israel,  but  it
was  precisely  becaiise  he  was  a  lowly-minded  believer


THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  69

that  he  did  not  therefore  arrogate  the  blessing  to  him-
self. The  very  essence  of  faith  is,  that  you  do  not  run
before  God,  but  receive  what  and  as  He  sends  to  you.
God  had  published  it  already  to  the  sons  of  Israel,
and  the  good  man  rejoiced  in  it.  But  for  himself  and  his
household,  what  could  he  do  but  pray  till  the  rich  bless-
ing came  ?  He  valued  the  ancient  people  of  God ;  nor
is  he  indeed  the  only  centurion  that  loved  their  nation.
We  are  told  of  another  who  also  built  for  the  Jews
their  synagogue.  Thus  Cornelius  was  aware  that  God
had  sent  the  gospel  to  the  Jews;  but  there  was  precisely
where  he  necessarily  stopped  short.  Was  that  word  for
him  ?

"  That  word  ye  know,"  says  Peter,  "  which  was  pub-
Ushed  throughout  all  Judsea,  and  began  from  Galilee,
after  the  baptism  which  John  preached ;  how  God
anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and
with  power:  who  went  about  doing  good,  and  healing
all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil ;  for  God  was  with
him  .  .  .  whom  they  slew  and  hanged  on  a  tree :  him
God  raised  up  the  third  day,  and  showed  liim  openly  "
(not  to  all  the  people,  but)  "unto  witnesses  chosen  before
of  God,  even  to  us,  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  him
after  he  rose  from  the  dead.  And  he  commanded  us  to
preach  unto  the  people."  Clearly  the  Jew  is  meant.
"  He  commanded  us  to  preach  unto  the  people,  and  to
testify  that  it  is  he  which  was  ordained  of  God  to  be
the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  To  him  give  all  the
prophets  witness,  that  through  his  name  whosoever,''  &c.

Here  comes  the  telling  word  for  him  that  feared  the
Lord  and  bowed  to  His  word,  though  he  was  a  Gentile,
"Whosoever  believeth  on  him  shall  receive  remission


70  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

of  sins."  Peter  had  not  long  leamt  it  himself.  Had  be
not  read  or  heard  those  words  in  the  prophets  ?  No  doubt
he  had  read  them  many  a  time,  but  no  better  than
we  have  read  them,  and  many  other  words  likewise ;
and  how  little  we  understood  any  of  them  to  profit
until  the  mighty  power  of  God  gave  it  efl&cacy  in  our
souls!  In  this  case  Peter  had  God's  own  direct  warrant
in  the  vision,  not  of  the  church  (for  this  was  not  the
meaning  of  the  sheet  let  down  from  heaven),  but
decidedly  of  the  call  of  the  Gentiles.  It  was  the
obliterating  of  mere  fleshly  distinction  between  Jew
and  Gentile.  God  was  meeting  sinners  as  such,  what-
ever they  might  be,  giving  no  doubt  a  heavenly  charac-
ter to  what  had  a  heavenly  source  with  a  heavenly
result.  But  there  is  not  yet  the  revealed  truth  of  the
body,  though  involved  in  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  Saul
of  Tarsus  when  he  said,  "  Why  persecutest  thou  me  ?"
Here  it  is  not  this,  but  simply  the  indiscriminate  grace
of  God  to  sinners  of  the  Gentiles  as  certainly  as  to  the
Jews — to  those  who,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Jews,  were
nothing  but  refuse,  vile,  and  imclean.

Peter  then,  with  this  new-bom  conviction  in  his  soul,
reads  the  prophets  with  entirely  fresh  light  and  other
eyes.  Full  of  the  truth  himself,  he  speaks  with  the
utmost  simplicity  to  Cornelius,  who  with  his  household
hears  the  blessed  word.  "  To  him  give  all  the  prophets
witness."  It  was  one  concurrent  evidence.  "  To  him
give  all  the  prophets  witness,  that  through  his  name
whosoever  believeth  in  him."  There  is  no  question  of  a
Jew,  but  "Whosoever  believeth  in  him."  Alas !  the  Jews
did  not  believe  in  Him ;  but  whosoever  did,  let  him  be
Jew  or  Gentile,  "  shall  receive  remission  of  sins."    This


i*«


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  71

precisely  Cornelius  had  not  known,  nor  could  any  one
have  known  it  till  the  work  of  redemption  was  done.
The  Old  Testament  saints  were  just  as  safe  before  the
work  of  Christ  as  they  were  afterwards,  but  this  work
put  them  on  a  ground  of  conscious  salvation  before
God.  It  was  not  a  question  of  being  saved  in  the  day
of  judgment;  nor  is  this  the  meaning  of  the  term
"  salvation  "  in  the  New  Testament.  Salvation  means
that  the  heart  enters  into  deliverance  by  grace  as  a
present  known  public  standing  in  the  world.  Nobody
could  have  this  till  the  gospel,  and  even  after  its  publi-
cation God  Himself  sent  specifically  to  the  Gentiles;
for  He  has  His  ways,  as  well  as  His  times  and  seasons.
Gtjd  will  always  be  Himself,  and  cannot  be  other  than
Sovereign.

Thus  we  see  God  had  allowed  things  apparently  to
take  their  course.  Israel  had  the  truth  presented  to
them  as  it  was  afterwards  to  aU.  It  was  their  respon-
sibility now  as  ever  to  accept  the  gracious  offer  of  God.
K  Israel  would  have  received,  the  Lord  would  have
given.  It  was  even,  and  urgently,  pressed  on  them,  but
they  refused  with  disdain  the  message,  and  rejected  the
messengers  to  blood.  Accordingly  the  rejection  of  the
very  witness  of  Christ,  speaking  by  the  Holy  Ghost —
the  rejection  of  Him  to  heaven — becomes  the  turning-
point;  and  then  by  the  Lord  from  heaven  is  now  called
forth  the  witness  of  grace  as  well  as  of  the  glory  of
Christ.  Finally,  after  the  call  of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  Peter
himself  (as  well  for  other  reasons  as  in  order  to  cut  off
the  semblance  of  discord  in  the  various  instruments  of
His  grace)  is  brought  in  to  show  the  perfect  balance  of
divine  truth  and  the  wonderful  harmony  of  His  ways.


72  INTRODUCTORY  LECTUTES.

Thus  the  church  would  still  retain  its  substantial
character,  and  the  testimony  of  God  still  bear  the  same
common  likeness,  while  room  was  left  for  whatever
speciality  of  form  Grod  might  be  pleased  to  give  the
truth,  and  the  unfolding  of  the  ways  in  which  God
might  employ  one  or  another.  Peter  was  the  one  then,
not  Paul,  that  announced  the  gospel  to  Cornelius,  who
by  the  Holy  Ghost  received  it,  and  was  not  merely  safe
but  saved.  It  was  no  longer  simply  a  cleaving  to  a  God
of  goodness  who  could  not  deceive  and  would  not  dis-
appoint the  soul  that  hoped  in  His  mercy,  but  the  con-
scious joy  of  knowing  his  sins  all  gone,  and  himself
distinctly  put  on  the  groimd  of  accomplished  redemp-
tion as  a  known  present  thing  for  his  own  soul  in  this
world.     Such  is  salvation.

"  While  Peter  yet  spake  these  words,  the  Holy  Ghost
fell  on  all  them  which  heard  the  word.  And  they  of
the  circumcision  which  believed  were  astonished,  as
many  as  came  with  Peter,  because  that  on  the  Gentiles
also  was  poured  out  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Thus
on  the  great  Gentile  occasion,  as  before  on  the  Jewish
at  Pentecost,  the  medium  of  man  completely  disappears.
It  was  as  thoroughly  according  to  God  that  the  apostle
should  not  lay  his  hands  on  any  this  day,  as  it  was
according  to  His  wisdom  that  they  should  lay  their
hands  on  the  Samaritans.  It  is  granted  that  man  sees
difficulty  in  this:  there  is  what  he  cannot  reconcile;
but  be  assured  that  the  great  point  is,  first,  to  believe.
Settle  it  invariably  that  God  is  wiser  than  we.  Is  this
too  much  to  ask  ?  After  all,  though  it  seems  so  simple
as  to  be  a  truism,  though  nothing  can  well  be  conceived
more  certain ;  nevertheless,  practically  it  is  not  always


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  73

the  plainest  and  surest  truth  that  carries  all  before  it  in
our  souls.  But  to  believe  is  the  secret  of  real  growi^h
in  the  revealed  wisdom  of  God.

On  this  occasion  they  of  the  circumcision  see  that
the  Grentiles  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  for
they  hear  them  speak  with  tongues  and  magnify  God,
and  they  were  astonished.  Then  Peter  says  to  them,
"Can  any  man  forbid  water?"  It  was  a  public  privilege
he  was  warranted  to  confer  on  the  Gentiles  thus  bap-
tized of  the  Spirit.  Water  baptism  is  neither  slighted
nor  is  it  put  forward  as  a  command  or  condition.  The
previous  gift  of  the  Spirit  without  the  intervention  of
any  human  hand  was  the  most  effectual  stopper  on
the  mouths  of  the  brethren  of  the  circumcision  who
were  ever  prone  to  object,  and  would  surely  have  for-
bidden water,  if  God  had  not  undeniably  given  them
the  unspeakable  gift  of  the  Spirit.  But  this  manifesta-
tion and  fruit  of  gracious  power  silenced  even  the
unruly  and  hard  spirits  of  the  circumcision.  "  And  he
commanded  them  to  be  baptized."

It  may  be  observed  passingly,  that  thus  plainly
baptizing  is  in  no  way  a  necessarily  ministerial  act.  It
may  be  all  right  and  in  perfect  keeping  that  one
preaching  the  gospel  should  baptize;  but  occasion  might
well  arise  where  he  who  preached  would  avoid  it  him-
self. We  know  that  Paul  thanked  God  that  so  it  was
with  himself  at  Corinth;  and  we  see  that  Peter  here
did  not  baptize,  but  simply  "conmianded  them  to  be
baptized."  God  is  always  wise.  It  is  too  familiar  how
soon  human  superstition  perverted  this  blessed  institu-
tion of  the  Lord  into  a  sacramental  means  of  grace,
duly  administered  by  one  in  the  line  of  succession.


74  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

The  next  chapter  (xi.)  shows  us  Peter  having  to  give
an  account  of  himself  before  those  who  had  not  witnessed
the  efifects  of  the  mighty  power  of  God  in  the  house  of
Cornelius.  When  the  matter  is  rehearsed,  the  great
argument  is  this, — "  Forasmuch  then  as  God  gave  them
the  like  gift  as  he  did  imto  us,  who  believed  on  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  what  was  I,  that  I  could  withstand
God?"  This  brought  the  question  to  a  simple  issue;
but  here  again,  let  it  be  noticed  that  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  belongs  to  those  that  believe.  It  is  not
His  operation  in  enabling  souls  to  believe,  but  a  precious
boon  given  to  such  as  believed.  "When  they  heard
these  things,  they  held  their  peace,  and  glorified  God,
saying,  Then  hath  God  also  to  the  Gentiles  granted  re-
pentance imto  life."  The  Spirit  of  God  alone  quickens
a  person  by  faith  in  Christ.  Without  the  action  of  the
Holy  Ghost  faith  is  impossible;  but  this  capacitating
powxr  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  tw^o  very
different  things,  and  the  latter  consequent  on  the  former.
If  God  had  given  them  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  was  mani-
fest in  sensible  results,  it  was  very  evident  that  they
must  have  by  God's  grace  had  repentance  unto  life.
The  Spirit  given  to  the  believer  was  a  privilege  over  and
above  faith,  and  supposed,  therefore,  their  repentance
unto  life.

Then  follows  another  grave  fact.  It  appears  that  the
scattered  men  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene,  who  had  gone  in
consequence  of  the  persecution  everywhere,  and  among
other  places  to  Antioch,  preaching  the  word  to  none  but
the  Jews,  took  courage  now  and  spoke  (not  to  the
Grecians  —  for  this  had  been  done  long  ago,  but)
unto  the  Greeks,  preaching  the  Lord  Jesus."    Those  to


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  75

whom  they  addi-essed  themselves  were  really  Gentiles.
The  word  "Grecians"  does  not  mean  "Greeks,"  but
rather  Greek-speaking  Jews ;  to  whom  the  gospel  had
been  preached  long  before,  as  the  cases  of  Stephen,  for
instance,  and  Philip  clearly  testify.  Chapter  vL  shows
us  the  party  in  question  murmuring.  They  were  in  the
church  already.  But  the  point  here  is  lost  in  our  Eng-
lish vei-sion.  There  is  a  mistake,  not  only  in  our
vernacular  Bible,  but  also  in  the  common  Greek  text
which  is  equally  faulty  as  the  authorized  version.  The
true  text,*  which  has  sufficient  if  not  the  most  ancient

♦  The  copyists  of  old  seem  to  have  confounded  in  writing,  as  the
Latin  and  most  other  ancient  translators  did  in  rendering,  "EXXi;  vac
(Greeks)  and  'EXXiyvicrrdc  (HeUenists),  here  and  elsewhere.  Thus  it
might  seem  incredible,  if  it  were  not  the  notorious  &ict,  that  the  only
two  known  manuscripts  in  favour  of  that  which  is  here  most  certainly
requisite  are  the  Alexandrian  and  the  Cambridge  Graeco- Latin  of
Beza.  The  Vatican  and  all  others,  uncial  and  cursive  (as  far  as
collated  and  known),  support  the  error.  Of  the  fathers,  Eusebius
among  the  Greek,  and  Cassiodorus  among  the  Latins,  are  in  favour  of
the  true ;  others  are  in  strange  conflict,  their  text  having  the  wrong
reading  (})erhaps  through  mistaken  scribes),  and  their  comment
correcting  it.  The  reading  of  the  Sinai  MS.  {tiayytXtfrrdc)  is  a  more
blunder,  not  uncommon  in  that  most  ancient  but  not  very  accurate
document,  arising  from  confusion  through  a  contiguous  word ;  it
would  give  the  sense  of  "unto  the  preaehersy  preaching  the  Lord
Jesus."     But  the  correction  conflrms  the  true  reading.

The  importance  of  closer  attention  to  the  text  is  well  shown  by  Cal-
vin's remarks  on  this  verse.  He  was  led  into  no  small  perplexity  by
the  reading  current  in  his  day,  and,  to  the  shame  of  Christendom,  stiU
tolerated  as  the  received  reading.  Yet  his  masculine  good  sense  held
to  the  truth,  though  he  did  not  know  the  solid  basis  on  which  it  here
stands.  I  cite  from  the  Calvin  Tr.  Society's  edition  of  his  Comm.  on
the  Acts,  i.  pp.  466,  467.  "  Luke  doth  at  length  declare  that  certain
of  them  brought  this  treasure  even  unto  the  Gentiles.  And  Luke
calleth  these  Grecians  not  'EXXi;  vcc  but '  EXXij  viorrai  [P].  Therefore  some
say  that  those  came  of  the  Jews,  yet  did  they  inhabit  Greece  [and


76  D»TKODUCTOBY  LECTUKES.

authority,  tells  us  that  they  spoke  to  Greeks  or  Gentiles.
Thus  we  see  the  Lord  was  working,  and,  as  so  con-
stantly happens,  it  was  not  only  that  He  called  out  Paul
for  the  Gentiles ;  it  was  not  only  that  He  sent  Peter  to
a  Gentile ;  but  now  these  men,  who  might  have  been
despised  as  irregular  labourers,  were  in  the  current  of
the  same  work  of  God,  even  if  they  knew  nothing  of
it,  save  by  divine  instinct.

How  blessed  it  is  to  see  the  free  actiWty  of  the  Holy
Ghost  without  any  kind  of  communication  of  man  !  It
is  always  thus  in  the  ways  of  Grod.  It  is  not  only  that
God  uses  one  and  another :  this  He  does  and  we  may
bless  Him  that  so  He  does ;  but  the  God  who  employs
means  is  also  above  them,  and  He  needs  now  only  to

these  would  be  right  if  the  reading  had  been  reaUy  'EXXijvtardc  and
not  'EXXf^vd^];  which  I  do  not  aUow.  For  seeing  the  Jews,  whom
he  mentioned  a  little  before,  were  partly  of  Cyprus,  they  must  needs
be  reckoned  in  that  number,  because  the  Jews  count  Cyprus  a  part  of
Greece.  But  Luke  distinguisheth  them  from  those,  whom  he  calleth
afterward  'EXXijviorac  [this  is  precisely  where  he  is  mistaken;  his
reasoning  is  sound,  but  his  knowledge  defective].  Furthermore,
forasmuch  as  he  had  said  that  the  word  was  preached  at  the  beginning
only  by  the  Jews,  and  he  meant  those  who,  being  banished  out  of
their  own  country,  did  live  in  Cyprus  and  Phenice,  correcting  this
exception,  he  saith  that  some  of  them  did  teach  the  Grecians.  This
contrariety  doth  cause  me  to  expound  it  of  the  Gentiles."  Quite
right:  only  the  true  text  delivers  from  the  need  of  wresting  the
force  of  a  word,  and  is  as  simply  as  possible  Greeks,  not  Grecians,
and  moans  Gentiles  without  the  smallest  difficulty  or  discussion.

But  it  is  still  more  strange  as  evidence  of  the  slipshod  criticism  of
the  Reformers  that  Bcza,  who  was  more  of  a  scholar  than  his  pre-
decessors, uniformly  edits  'EXXf^vierrdcy  and  writes  a  blundering  note
to  the  effect  that  it  is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  'EXXijvac.  And  yet  he
had  in  his  possession  that  famous  Graeco-Latin  Uncial  (D)  which  he
presented  to  the  University  of  Cambridge  in  1581,  which  MS.  sup-
ports the  Alexandrian.


•V


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  77

draw  out  by  circumstances  the  souls  of  some  siuiple
Christian  men  wlio  had  faith  and  love  to  seek  the
Gentiles  without  requiring  the  same  vigorous  and  extra-
ordinary means,  under  His  mighty  hand,  as  even  the
apostle  did.  Great  workman  as  Peter  was,  he  required
the  intervention  of  God  in  a  vision  to  send  him  to  do
a  work  that  these  unnamed  brethren  undertook  in  their
confidence  of  His  grace,  without  any  vision  or  sign
whatsoever.  It  seems  to  have  been  the  working  of
divine  gi'ace  in  their  souls,  and  nothing  else.  At  first
they  were  more  timid ;  they  spoke  only  to  Jews.  By
and  by  the  power  of  the  gospel  and  the  action  of  tlie
Holy  Ghost  fill  their  souls  with  desires  as  to  the  need
of  others.  The  Gentiles  were  sinners:  why  should  they
not  dare  to  speak  to  the  Gentiles  ?  "  And  the  hand  of
the  Lord  was  with  them,"  as  we  are  told,  "  and  a  great
number  believed  and  turned  unto  the  Lord."  But  what
a  rebuke  is  this  to  those  that  would  make  the  clmrch
to  be  merely  a  creature  of  government,  or  in  any  wise
to  be  of  man's  will,  which  is  still  worse.  How  blessed
to  see  that  it  is  a  real  organic  whole,  not  only  a  living
thing,  but  that  He  who  is  the  spring  of  its  life  is
the  Holy  Ghost  Himself — a  divine  person,  wlio  can-
not but  answer  to  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  whom
He  is  come  down  to  glorify.

Next  we  find  Barnabas  stirred  up  to  another  and  a
characteristic  enterprise.  He  had  before  this  delivered
Saul  from  the  effects  of  undue  anxiety  and  distrust  in
the  minds  of  the  disciples.  He  would  have  Saul  to
return  good  for  what  I  may  venture  to  call  a  measure
of  evil  towards  him.  As  there  was  need  in  the  church
at  Antiocli,  he  goes  and  finds  him.   He  had  a  conviction


78  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

that  this  was  the  instrument  the  Lord  would  use  for
good.  Thus  we  see  that,  while  we  have  the  angel  of
the  Lord  in  certain  cases,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  ex-
pressly in  others,  we  have  also  simply  the  holy  judg-
ment of  the  gracious  heart  This  is  all  quite  right.  It
is  not  to  be  treated  as  mere  human  arrangement  It
was  not  only  right,  but  recorded  of  God  that  we  might
see  and  profit  by  it.  Barnabas  was  quite  justified  in
seeking  SauL  "And  it  came  to  pass  that  a  whole  year
they  assembled  themselves  with  the  church  and  taught
much  people.  And  the  disciples  were  called  Christians
first  in  Antioch."  The  place  once  so  famous  for  its
nicknames  was  now  to  give  a  name  that  will  never
perish — a  name  of  incalculable  sweetness  and  blessing,
connecting  Christ  as  it  does  with  those  that  are  His.
It  was,  no  doubt,  a  Gentile  title.  There  would  be  no
particular  force  in  giving  it  to  Jews,  for  all  Jews
professed  to  be  looking  for  Christ  What  a  wonderful
change  for  these  poor  Gentiles  to  know  Christ  for
themselves,  and  to  be  called  after  Christ!  All  was
ordered  of  God.

Then  we  find  that  if  the  church  at  Jerusalem  had
become  impoverished,  the  Gentiles  minister  of  their
carnal  things  to  them.  Saul  (as  he  is  stiU  called)
and  Barnabas  are  made  the  channels  of  bringing  the
contributions  to  the  elders  not  named  before.  How
these  elders  were  appointed,  if  indeed  they  were  so
formally,  does  not  appear.  Among  the  GentUes  we
know  that  they  were  installed,  as  we  shall  see  a  little
later,  by  apostolic  choice.  Whether  this  was  the  case
among  the  Jews  scripture  does  not  say ;  but  that  there
were  persons  who  had  this  responsible  place  among


.*■ '^-'


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  79

them,  as  among  the  Grentile  churches  afterwards,  we
see  clearly.

Finally,  and  in  few  words  (for  I  do  not  intend  to  say
more  on  chapter  xii.  to-night),  we  have  the  completing
of  this  second  part  of  our  narrative  in  this  cliapter.
We  are  given  a  striking  prefiguration  of  the  evil  king
that  will  be  found  in  the  latter  day ;  he  that  Avill  reign
over  the  Jews  under  the  shadow  and  support  of  the
Gentiles  as  Herod  was,  and  not  less  but  more  than  his
prototype  bent  on  the  murder  of  the  innocents,  and
with  Ins  heart  full  of  evil  for  others  who  will  be
rescued  by  the  goodness  of  the  Lord.

James  sheds  his  blood,  as  Stephen  had  before ;  for
this  Peter  was  destined  by  man,  but  the  Lord  disap-
pointed him.  The  disciples  gave  themselves  to  prayer,
yet  they  little  believed  their  own  prayers.  Neverthe-
less we  learn  hence  that  they  had  prayer-meetings  in
those  days;  and  so  they  gave  themselves  up  to  this
special  prayer  for  the  servant  of  the  Lord,  who  did  not
fail  to  appear  by  an  agent  of  His  providential  power.
All  this  confirms  its  having  a  Jewish  aspect,  regarded
as  a  tjrpe,  and  was  very  natural  in  James  and  Peter,
who  had  to  do  specially  with  the  circimicision.

It  is  needless  now  to  dwell  on  the  scene,  more  than
just  to  point  out  that  which  is  familiar,  no  doubt,  to
many  that  are  here — the  manner  in  whicli  the  Lord
judged  the  apostate;  for  Herod — owned  shortly  after
by  the  people  whom  he  had  sought  to  please,  dis-
appointed in  one  place,  but  exalted  in  another — was
hailed  as  a  god ;  and  at  that  moment  the  angel  of  the
Lord  deals  with  his  pride,  and  he  is  devoured  of  worms


80  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

— a  sad  image  of  the  awful  judgment  of  God  that  will
fall  upon  one  who  will  sit  "in  the  temple  of  God,
shewing  himself  that  he  is  God."

In  the  portion  which  follows  we  shall  see  the
manner  of  the  Spirit  of  God's  working  by  the  great
apostle  of  the  Gentiles.


APPENDIX.


It  may  be  interesting  to  many  readers  to  read  as  follows  from
Mr.  Edward  A.  Litton*  s  work  on  **  The  Church  of  Christ  in
its  Idea,  Attributes,  and  Ministry;  with  a  particular  refer-
ence to  the  Controversy  between  Romanists  and  Protestants."
There  are,  of  course,  imperfect  expressions,  inasmuch  as  the
truth  itself  is  but  partially  apprehended ;  but  one  is  glad  to
see  views  so  decidedly  in  advance  of  ordinary  evangelicalism,
with  equal  decision  against  mere  churchism.

<*  In  the  opening  chapters  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the
Christian  dispensation  is  seen  iu  actual  operation;  for  that
with  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost
that  dispensation  properly  commences  will  probably  be  ad-
mitted by  all  parties.  Moreover,  in  these  chapters  the  Church
of  Christ  is  first  spoken  of  as  in  actual  existence.  What  in
our  Lord's  discourses  is  a  matter  of  anticipation  or  prophecy,
here  appears  as  a  matter  of  fact.  Though  not  at  first  fully
aware  of  the  great  change  which  had  taken  place  in  their
religious  standing,  still  less  of  its  ultimate  consequences,  the
first  believers  at  once  formed  a  separate  community  in  the
bosom  of  the  Jewish  theocracy ;  a  community  having,  for  its
distinctive  marks,  adherence  to  the  twelve  Apostles,  baptism
in  the  name  of  Christ,  and  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's


'\f'i


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  81

Sapper.*  Thenceforth  the  Church  becomes  a  matter  of  his-
tory ;  and  its  history  is  nothing  less  than  that  of  the  vicissi-
tudes, prosperous  and  adverse,  which  the  kingdom  of  God
upon  earth  has  in  the  lapse  of  ages  passed  through.

"  It  has  already  been  remarked  that,  far  from  intending  to
establish  a  mere  invisible  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  our  Lord
contemplated  His  Church  as  having  a  visible  existence,  His
followers  as  collected  into  societies  [that  society  called  the
Church  or  assembly  of  God],  With  this  view  He  Himself
instituted  certain  external  badges  of  Christian  profession,  to
come  into  use  when  they  should  be  needed,  and  took  mea-
sares  to  qualify  a  small  and  select  company  of  believers,  by
attaching  them  constantly  to  His  person  while  His  earthly
ministry  lasted,  and  giving  them  a  formal  commission  with
extraordinary  powers,  when  He  left  the  world,  to  preside
over  the  affaira  and  direct  the  organisation  of  Christian
societies.  These  essential  conditions  of  the  existence  of  any
regular  society  we  find  from  the  very  first  in  being  in  the
Church :  the  Apostles  were  the  officers,  and,  collectively,  the
organ  of  the  community;  members  were  admitted  into  it  by
baptism;  and  they  testified  their  continuance  therein  by
participating  in  the  sacrament  of  Christ's  body  and  blood.
As  we  advance  further  in  the  inspired  history,  we  find  addi-
tions made  to  these  simple  elements  of  social  fellowship ;  the
organisation  of  the  Christian  society  becomes  more  complex
and  systematic;  questions  of  polity  and  order  occupy  no
small  portion  of  the  apostolic  epistles;  and  we  have  every
reason  to  believe,  if  not  from  Scripture  alone,  yet  from  the
unanimous  voice  of  authentic  history,  that  towards  the  close

*  Is  it  not  distressing  to  find,  in  this  thoughtful  production  of  one
in  much  above  the  traditions  of  men  and  the  bias  of  party,  the  pal-
pable omission  of  the  grandest  and  most  momentous  distinction  of
the  church,  namely,  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from
hoayen  ?    Unbelief  here  is  alas !  characteristic  of  Christendom.

G


82  DiTEODUCrORY  LECTUEES.

of  the  apostolic  age  Christianity  had  almost  eTeiywhere  crys-
tallised itself  into  a  certain,  definite,  and  well  known  form
of  ecclesiastical  polity"  (pp.  192,  193).

''  St.  Panl,  in  chap  xiv.  of  the  first  epistle  to  the  Corinth-
ians, presents  ns  with  a  graphic  picture  of  the  mode  in  which
Christians  in  the  first  age  of  the  Church  celehrated  puhlic
worship.  The  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  constituted
the  yisihle  symhol  of  their  profession,  and  the  pledge  of  their
union  with  Christ  and  with  each  other ;  hut  the  governing
function  in  the  assemhly  was  the  ministry  of  the  Word,
whether  it  assumed  the  extraordinary  forms  of  'tongues'
or  a  'revelation,'  or  'prophecy,'  or  'the  interpretation  of
tongues,'  or  consisted  of  the  stated  instruction  of  regular
pastors  and  teachers.  Among  the  various  spiritual  gifts  then
common  in  the  Church,  the  chief  place  was  to  he  assigned  to
prophecy;  for  'he  that  prophesieth  speaketh  imto  men  to
edification,  and  exhortation,  and  comfort.'  Of  any  typical  or
sacrificial  element,  St.  Paul  makes  no  mention:  the  whole
service,  with  the  exception  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  was  mani-
festly homiletic  or  verbal.  That  the  gifts  mentioned  in  the
chapter  were,  for  the  most  part,  extraordinary,  and  in  pro-
cess of  time  were  to  cease,  makes  no  difference  as  regards  the
argument ;  for  it  is  the  essential  character  of  Christian  wor-
ship, not  the  particular  vehicle  of  its  expression,  that  is  the
point  now  under  consideration"  (pp.  256,  257).

"The  Church  of  Christ  was  not  properly  in  existence
before  the  day  of  Pentecost ;  much  less  did  she,  before  that
era,  go  forth  on  her  mission  to  evangelize*  the  world.  A
body  of  believers  indeed  had  been  by  Christ  gathered  out  of
the  Jewish  people  to  be  the  first  recipients  of  the  Pentecostal

*  It  is  well  to  avoid  a  figure  which  churchism  has  ever  turned  to
its  own  agg^ndisement  and  the  Lord's  dishonour.  The  Church
neither  preaches  nor  teaches,  but  Christ  sends  those  who  evangelize
the  world  and  teach  the  Church.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  83

effasion ;  but  before  that  event,  this  body  could  not  be  called
distmctively  His  Church.  It  is,  then,  nothing  but  the  fact,
tiiat  the  invisible  Church,  or  rather  that  which  in  the  Church
is  invisible,  preceded  that  which  is  visible.  The  spiritual
power  which  wrought  so  wonderful  a  change  in  the  Apostles
must  first  descend  from  heaven,  and  give  to  the  Church  its
inner  form  as  its  spiritual  characteristic!  afterwards  the
Apostles  preach  and  organize.  First,  there  are  saints,  or  men
in  whom  Christ  is  formed  by  an  invisible  operation  of  His
Spirit,  whose  origin,  however,  is  not  unknown;  then  these
saints  proceed  to  execute  their  appointed  mission"  (p.  272).

"  Were  the  question  put  to  a  person  of  plain  understand-
ing, unacquainted  with  the  controversies  which  have  arisen
on  the  subject,  What,  according  to  the  Apostolic  Epistles,  is
a  CTiristian  Church,  or,  how  is  it  to  be  defined?  he  would
probably,  without  hesitation  or  dif&culty,  reply,  that  a  Chris-
tian Church — as  it  appears,  for  example,  in  St.  Paul's  epistles
— is  a  congregation  or  society  of  faithful  men  or  believers,
whose  unseen  faith  in  Christ  is  visibly  manifested  by  their
profession  of  certain  fundamental  doctrines,  by  the  adminis-
tration and  reception  of  the  two  sacraments,  and  by  the  exer-
cise of  discipline.  He  would  direct  attention  to  the  fact,
that  the  ordinary  greeting  of  St.  Paul,  at  the  beginning  of
each  epistle,  is  to  the  *  saints  and  faithful  brethren*  con-
stituting the  Church  of  such  a  place,  fellow-heirs  with  him-
self of  eternal  life ;  and  that  throughout  these  compositions,
the  members  of  the  Church  are  presumed  to  be  in  living
union  with  Christ,  reasonings  and  exhortations  being  ad-
dressed to  them,  the  force  of  which  cannot  be  supposed  to  be
admitted,  except  by  those  who  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God ;
in  short,  that  the  members  of  the  Corinthian  or  the  Ephesian
Church  are  addressed  as  Christians ;  and  a  Christian  is  one
who  is  in  saving  union  with  Christ.*'

"  In  proportion  to  the  apparent  simplicity  of  the  question,

o  2


84  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

would  be  his  surprise  to  hear  it  affirmed  that  he  is  mistaken,
and  that,  in  addressing  a  Christian  society  as  a  congregation
of  Christians,  St.  Paul  merely  regards  it  as  a  society  of  men
professing  the  same  faith,  and  participating  outwardly  in  the
same  sacraments  (it  being  immaterial  to  the  idea  whether
they  possess  saving  faith  or  not) ;  a  society  invested  with
spiritual  privileges,  but  not  necessarily  realizing  those  privi-
leges, and  that,  consequently,  we  must  lower  the  import  of
the  terms,  'saints'  and  'faithful  in  Christ  Jesus,'  to  signify
outwardly  dedicated  to  God,  and  professing  with  the  lips  the
doctrines  of  Christianity That  the  mode  of  inter-
pretation alluded  to  involves  a  deviation  from  the  obvious
meaning  of  the  New  Testament  phraseology  is  not,  indeed,
sufficient  reason  for  at  once  rejecting  it ;  but  it  does  warrant
us  in  requiring  that  the  necessity  for  such  deviation  shall  be
clearly  made  out.  And  in  the  present  case  this  requirement
is  the  more  reasonable  from  the  circumstance  that  the  Apos-
tles uniformly  identify  themselves,  as  regards  their  Christian
standing  and  hopes,  with  those  to  whom  they  write.  '  Blessed
be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath
blessed  us  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  Christ; '  'that  I  may
be  comforted  by  the  mutual  faith  both  of  you  and  me ; ' —
did  St.  Paul,  when  he  thus  wrote,  regard  himself  as  but
nominally  interested  in  the  blessings  of  redemption  ?  "Was
his  faith  nothing  more  than  a  profession  of  Christian  doc-
trine ?  K  he  must  have  meant  something  more  than  this ;  if
his  own  faith  and  his  own  sanctity  were  living  and  real,  the
eflPect  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  operation;  then,  inasmuch  as  he
makes  no  distinction  as  regards  this  point  between  himself
and  those  whom  he  addresses,  we  must  suppose  that  he  looked
upon  them  also  as  real  saints  and  believers.  The  language
of  the  inspired  writers  of  the  New  Testament  is  the  expres-
sion of  that  Christian  experience,  or  conscious  participation
in  the  blessings  vouchsafed  through  Christ,  which  the  Holy


"».Li!«


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  85

Ghost  had  shed  abroad  in  their  hearts :  their  idea  therefore
of  a  saint,  or  a  believer,  being  derived  from  their  own
spiritaal  consciousness,  must  have  been  the  highest  of  which
the  words  will  admit.  Eat  in  the  sense  in  which  they  sup-
posed themselves  to  be  Christians,  do  they,  to  all  appearance,
apply  that  title  to  those  to  whom  they  write '*  (pp.  280-283).

To  the  argument  drawn  from  the  use  of  similar  terms
under  the  Mosaic  covenant  in  a  merely  national  and  external
sense  to  prove  that  they  mean  the  same,  and  nothing  more,
under  the  gospel,  our  author  answers,  "  Here,  in  fact,  is  the
real  source  of  the  error.  While  the  typical  character  of  the
Mosaic  institution  in  general  is  recognised,  it  has  not  been
sufiRciently  borne  in  mind  that  the  Jewish  nation  itself  in  its
external  or  political  aspect,  was  a  type,  and  nothing  more,

of  the  Christian  Israel We  have  only  to  extend

this  undoubted  principle  of  interpretation  to  the  Jewish
people  itself  in  its  national — that  is,  its  legal — character,  to
perceive  that  the  terms  by  which,  in  the  Old  Testament,  its
privileges  are  expressed,  assume,  when  applied  to  Christians,
a  different  meaning,  or  rather  betoken  the  spiritual  realities
of  which  the  former  were  but  the  types'*  (pp.  286,  287).

"To  all  this,  however,  it  will  be  replied,  that  the  nature
of  a  visible  church,  which  we  know  must  in  all  cases  be  a
body  of  mixed  character,  as  well  as  the  actual  state  of
several  of  the  churches  to  whom  St.  Paul  addressed  hia
epistles,  forbid  the  supposition  that,  in  terming  them  com-
munities of  saints  and  believers,  he  could  have  used  these
words  in  their  highest  signification.  This  is  the  second
diflSculty  which  it  is  conceived  lies  in  the  way  of  our  inter-
preting the  apostle's  language  literally.  But  a  moment's
reflection  will  show  that  the  difficulty  is  only  imaginary.
We  must  recollect  that  in  the  Apostolic  Church  an  effective
discipline — the  very  idea  of  which  seems  to  be  lost  amongst


86'  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

US — existed.  Ey  means  of  this  discipline,  they  having  been
separated  from  the  society  whose  overt  acts  were  contrary  to
their  Christian  profession,  the  apostle,  not  being  endowed
with  the  divine  prerogative  of  inspecting  the  heart,  was
compelled  to  take  the  rest  at  their  profession,  and  to  deal
with  them  as  real  Christians  so  long  as  there  was  no  visible,

tangible  proof  to  the  contrary Without  pronouncing

upon  the  state  of  individuals  in  the  sight  of  God,  he  assumed
the  whole  body  to  be  what  they  professed  to  be — a  body  of
real  Christians.  For  it  must  be  remembered  that,  however
far  his  profession  may  be  from  being  a  true  one,  every  pro-
fessor of  Christianity  professes  to  be  a  true,  not  a  mere
nominal,  Christian.  Except  on  this  assumption  the  apostle
could  not  have  proceeded  to  enforce  Christian  duties  by
Christian  motives  "  (pp.  298,  299).

"  Nor  is  there  any  weight  in  the  objection  that  many  of
these  primitive  Churches  were  very  defective  in  doctrine  or
in  practice,  or  in  both ;  that  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  Corin-
thians as  being,  on  account  of  their  divisions,  '  carnal,'  and
not  *  spiritual,*  as  'babes  in  Christ,*  and  sharply  reproves
them  for  their  laxity  of  discipline  in  the  case  of  the  inces-
tuous person,  and  their  want  of  discipline  in  the  celebration
of  the  Lord's  Sapper.  For  it  is  not  maintained  that  the  first
Christians,  any  more  than  those  of  our  own  day,  were  or
could  be  perfect;  and  all  that  can  be  fairly  gathered  from
what  St.  Paul  says  of  the  Corinthians  is,  that  they  were
imperfect  and  inconsistent.  In  the  remarks  sometimes  made
upon  this  subject  it  seems  to  be  assumed  that  there  is  no
medium  between  our  affirming  of  persons  that  they  are  not
perfect  Christians,  and  that  they  are  not  Christians  at  all;
whereas  in  fact  there  is  no  Christian,  however  holy,  who
comes  up  to  the  ideal  of  Christian  practice.  ...  To  return
to  the  case  of  the  Corinthians :— on  what  principle,  let  us
ask,  did  St.  Paul  reprove  them  for  their  inconsistencies?


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  87

Did  be  address  them  as  absolutely  destitute  of  the  vital
principle  of  grace,  or  as  possessing  it,  but  needing  exhortation
to  walk  conformably  thereto  ?  The  latter  is,  unquestionably,
the  ground  which  he  takes"  (pp.  302,  303).

"  Christianity,  as  it  appears  in  the  New  Testament,  knows
nothing  of  the  atomistic  theory  of  modern  independentism.
There  can  be  little  doubt  that,  even  in  the  apostolic  age,  the
church  of  each  considerable  city — such  as  Rome  or  Ephosus
— consisted,  not  of  one  congregation,  but  of  several,  who
were  collectively  styled  the  church  of  that  place ;  certain  it
is  that  such  was  the  case  towards  the  close  of  the  first
century.  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  The  expansive  power
of  Chiistianity  called  it  to  break  forth  on  all  sides;  and
speedily  the  onginal  congregation,  or  in  modem  language  the
mother  church,  of  each  city  gave  birth  to  other  societies  of
Christians  in  the  surrounding  neighbourhood.  .  .  .  Ko  notion
is  more  at  variance  with  the  spirit  of  apostolic  Christianity
than  that  of  societies  of  Christians  existing  in  the  same
neighbourhood,  but  not  in  communion  with  each  other,  and
not  under  'common  government*"  (pp.  449,  450).

**  It  is  a  perilous  mode  of  reasoning,  and  likely  to  lead  to
nniversal  scepticism,  to  maintain,  for  the  sake  of  theoretical
consistency,  that  the  visible  fruits  of  the  Spirit  do  not  pos-
sess a  sufficiently  distinctive  character  to  enable  us  to  pro-
nounce where  they  are  and  where  they  are  not:  not  to
mention  that  the  sin  of  denying  the  evident  operation  of  the
Holy  Spirit  is  spoken  of  by  our  Lord  in  terms  far  too  awful
not  to  make  us  tremble  at  the  thought  of  verging  towards  it.
The  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  whether  they  be  produced  within
our  own  inclosure  or  beyond  it,  are  always  the  same,  and
always  to  be  recognized;  otherwise  our  Lord  would  never
have  given  us  the  simple  test  whereby  we  are  to  distinguish
false  from  true  prophets — *by  their  fruits  ye  shall  know
them.'     If  men  profess  themselves  not  to  be  able  to  do  so,


88  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

they  simply  profess  that  they  have  neither  consciences  nor
moral  sense."  [Alas !  the  power  of  the  Spirit  to  this  end  is
lost  sight  of.]  ,  .  .

"  One  visible  manifestation,  then,  of  the  sanctity  of  the
Church  is  the  holy  walk  and  conversation  of  individual
Christians;  but  there  is  another,  and  more  formal,  mode  in
which  she  professes  herself  to  be  holy,  and  that  is,  by  the
exercise  of  discipline.  The  personal  holiness  of  the  Chris-
tian is  a  property  of  the  individual,  not  of  the  society  as
such;  hence  a  professing  Christian  society,  however  large  a
proportion  of  holy  men  it  may  contain,  does  not  predicate
of  itself  that  it  is  a  part  of  Christ's  holy  Church  as  long  as
it  exercises  no  formal  official  act  implying  that  assumption.
The  exercise  of  discipline  is  the  true  and  legitimate  expres-
sion of  the  sanctity  of  a  visible  Church  considered  as  a
society.  Hence  the  great  importance  of  discipline.  It  is  not
merely  that  the  absence  of  it  operates  injuriously  upon  the
tone  and  standard  of  piety  within  the  Church  ;  it  affects  the
claims  of  the  society  as  such  to  be  a  legitimate  member  of
the  visible  Church  Catholic.  A  Christian  society  which
should  openly  profess  to  dispense  with  discipline,  and  tolerate
on  principle  open  and  notorious  evil  doers  [or  still  worse
heretics,  Antichrists,  or  their  abettors]  within  its  pale,  would
thereby  renounce  its  title  to  one  of  the  essential  attributes  of
the  Church;  it  would  sever  all  ostensible  connexion  between
itself  and  the  true  Church  [or  rather  Christ  and  His  sacrifice :
see  1  Cor.  v.],  of  which  sanctity  is  an  inseparable  property ;
in  short,  it  would  unchurch  itself.  For  every  particular
church  is  so  called  on  the  supposition  of  its  being  a  manifes-
tation, more  or  less  true,  of  the  one  holy  Church — the  body
of  Christ.  .  .  .  How  essential  to  the  idea  of  a  Church  the
exercise  of  discipline  is,  may  be  seen  from  the  embarrassing
contrarieties  between  theory  and  practice  which  the  viilual
suspension  of  it  in  the  Church  of  England  is  constantly
occasioning"  (pp.  515-517).


^xi  a ,


{{{.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.

Chaps,  xiii-zz.

We  now  enter  on  the  missionary  journeys,  as  they  are
called,  of  the  apostle  Paul.  The  work,  under  the  Spirit,
opens  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  Not  merely  are  Gentiles
met  in  grace  and  brought  into  the  house  of  God:  He
had  already  wrought  in  their  souls  individually — this
we  have  seen  before,  in  Peter's  mission  to  Cornelius  and
his  household ;  but  grace  goes  out  henceforth  in  quest
not  of  Jews  only  but  of  Gentiles,  as  the  special  sphere
which  was  assigned  to  Paul  by  God,  and  this  also  in
coHDperation  with  the  other  apostles ;  for  thus  they  had
agreed.

But  there  are  preliminary  circumstances  of  no  little
interest  and  moment,  which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  been
pleased  to  give  us  before  the  record  of  these  journeys.
I  have  read  at  the  beginning  of  chapter  xiiL  the  prin-
cipal scene  of  this  kind.  Saul  of  Tarsus  had  already
been  called,  but  here  we  have  a  formal  act  of  separation.
This  is  the  true  description  of  it  in  scripture.  It  was
in  no  way  what  men  call  "  ordination."  This  he  takes
particular  pains  to  deny  in  explicit  terms.  It  was  not
only  that  man  was  in  no  sense  the  source  of  ministry;
for  this  would  be,  no  doubt,  disavowed  by  the  godly
everywhere;   but  he  employs  the  strongest  words  in


90  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

showinf^  that  it  was  not  by  men  as  the  channel  As
there  are  cases  where  man  is  the  channel  of  conveying
both  a  gift  and  authority,  we  can  see  how  artfulness  or
ignorance  can  readily  enough  embroil  the  entire  subject,
and  thus  prepare  the  way  for  the  building  up  of  the
clerical  system.  There  is  no  ground  for  it  in  scripture.
Ministry  there  is,  and  as  a  distinct  though  connected
thing,  an  official  charge :  both  are  beyond  question.
These  two  things  are  clearly  recognized  by  the  Holy
Ghost.  Here  we  have  nothing?  of  official  charcje.  So
far  as  the  apostle  Paul  had  both  a  gift  and  a  charge,
and  he  had  both  (and  the  apostleship  differs  from  the
gift  of  a  prophet  as  well  as  the  rest  in  this,  that  it  is
not  a  gift  only  but  a  charge),  all  had  been  settled
between  the  Lord  and  His  servant.  But  now  it  pleased
God  at  this  particular  epoch  to  call  forth  Barnabas,  who
was  a  kind  of  transition  link  between  the  twelve,  with
Jerusalem  for  their  centre  and  the  circumcision  for  their
sphere,  and  the  free  and  unfettered  service  of  Paul
among  the  Gentiles.  It  pleased  Him  to  separate  these
two  chosen  vessels  of  His  grace  for  the  work  to  which
He  was  calling  them.

Let  us  look  for  a  moment  at  the  state  of  things  at
Antioch  before  we  pass  on.  "And  there  were  in  the
church"  (or  assembly)  "that  was  at  Antioch  [certain]*
prophets  and  teachers."  What  is  commonly  called  a
stated  ministry  was  there.  All  should  give  full  weight
to  facts  which  if  denied  or  overlooked  would  only
weaken  the  testimony  which  God  has  given.

It  is  the   continual    effort   of   those   who    oppose

*  Tho  best  uncials,  cursives,  and  ancient  versions,  omit  rivkc,
**  certain."


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  91

the  truth  of  the  church,  and  who  deny  the  present
ruined  condition  of  it,  to  insinuate  against  such  as  have
learnt  from  God  to  act  on  His  own  word,  that  they  set
aside  ministry,  and  more  particularly  what  they  call
•*  stated  ministry."  They  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  They
deny  an  exclusive  or  one-man  ministry.  They  deny  that
abuse  of  ministry  which  would  shut  out  of  its  own
circle  the  operation  of  all  gifts  but  one,  which  is  jealous
of  every  other  save  by  its  own  will  or  leave,  which  has
no  sufficient  confidence  in  the  Lord's  call  or  in  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  given  for  profit,  which  con-
sequently makes  a  duty  of  both  narrowness  and  self-
importance  through  a  total  misunderstanding  of  scrip-
ture and  the  power  and  grace  of  God.  Not  for  a  moment
do  I  deny  that  all  who  are  in  any  definite  measure
taught  of  God  as  to  His  will  in  the  service  of  Christ
must  disavow  clericalism  in  every  shape  and  degree  as
a  principle  essentially  and  irreconcilably  opposed  to  the
action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  church.

But  it  is  important  to  affirm  that  none  understand
the  action  of  the  Spirit  who  expose  themselves  and
the  truth  (which  is  still  more  serious)  to  the  deserved
stigma  of  denying  the  real  abiding-place  of  ministry.
This  is  not  in  anywise  the  question.  All  Christians  who
have  light  from  God  on  these  matters  acknowledge
ministry  to  be  a  divine  and  permanent  institution.  It
is  therefore  of  very  great  importance  to  have  scriptural
views  of  its  source,  functions,  and  limits.  The  truth  of
scripture,  if  summed  up  as  to  its  character,  amounts  to
this — that  ministry  is  the  exercise  of  a  spiritual  gift.
This  I  believe  to  be  a  true  definition  of  it.  The  minds
of  most  Christians  are  encumbered  with  the  notion  of  a


92  DTTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

particular  local  charga  Such  a  charge  is  altogether
distinct  from  ministry:  it  is  only  confusion  to  suppo^^
that  they  are  the  same  thing,  or  inseparable.  Ministry
in  itself  has  nothing  to  do  with  a  local  charge.  The
same  person,  of  course,  may  have  both :  this  might  or
might  not  ba

A  man,  for  instance,  as  we  find  in  the  case  of  Philip
and  others,  might  have  a  local  charge  at  Jerusalem;
and  there  we  saw  the  church  choosing,  because  it  was
that  kind  of  office  which  had  to  do  with  the  distribution
of  the  church's  bounty.  This  is  the  principle  of  it.
What  the  church  gives  the  church  has  a  voice  in.  But
the  Lord  gave  Philip  a  spiritual  gift,  and  there  the
church  bows  and  accepts,  instead  of  choosing.  In  point
of  fact  the  particular  gift  that  Philip  received  from  the
Lord  was  not  one  that  properly  finds  its  exercise  within
the  assembly,  but  rather  without:  he  was  an  evangelist.
But  tliis  establishes  what  I  have  been  asserting;  that
is,  that  you  may  have  a  person  without  a  charge  who
has  a  very  special  gift,  and  this  for  public  ministry.

The  elders  or  bishops,  of  whom  we  shall  hear  more
by-and-by,  had  a  still  more  important  charge.  It  was
the  office  of  oversight,  or  of  a  bishop,  that  was  found  in
every  fully- constituted  assembly  where  there  could  be
time  for  the  development  of  that  which  was  recjuisite
in  order  to  it.  But  whether  there  were  charges  or  none,
whether  the  due  appointment  was  or  was  not,  the  Lord
did  not  fail  to  give  gifts  for  the  carrying  on  of  His  own
work.  Now  those  persons  who  possessed  gifts  exercised
them,  as  they  were  bound  to  do;  for  here  was  no  question
of  appointment,  and  indeed  their  exercise  had  nothing
whatever  to  do  with  the  leave,  permission,  or  authority


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  93

of  any,  but  solely  flowed  from  the  Lord's  own  gift.  This
was  properly  ministry  in  the  word.  But  there  never
was  such  an  idea  broached,  still  less  acted  on,  as  the
exclusive  ministry  which  in  modem  times  has  been  set
up,  as  if  it  were  the  only  right  thing  in  theory  or
practice.  In  point  of  fact  it  is  thoroughly  wrong,  not
only  not  defensible  by  the  word  of  Grod,  but  flagrantly
opposed  to  it.

Here,  for  example,  we  have  the  picture  of  an  assembly
drawn  by  the  Spirit.  It  is  the  more  instructive,  because
it  cannot  be  pretended  that  here,  as  in  the  church  at
Jerusalem,  there  were  elements  which  savoured  of  the
anterior  or  Jewish  state  of  things.  It  was  among  the
Gentiles.  It  was  where  Saul  himself  laboured ;  but  then
there  were  other  servants  of  the  Lord  beside  Saul, — aa
Barnabas,  and  Simeon,  and  Lucius,  and  Manaen.  Nor  are
these  mentioned  as  if  they  were  the  only  persons  who
there  exercised  the  gifts  of  prophecy  and  teaching :  no
doubt  they  were  the  more  important  men.  "  As  they
ministered  to  the  Lord,  and  fasted,  the  Holy  Ghost  said,
Separate  me  Barnabas  and  Saul "  (for  he  is  still  called
Saul,  which  was  his  Hebrew  name)  "for  the  work  where-
unto  I  have  called  them."  It  was  the  Lord  that  called
them.

But  there  is  more  than  this :  the  Holy  Ghost  can
also  set  apart  among  the  servants  to  a  peculiar  ser-
vice. This  is  emphatically  brought  in  when  it  was  a
question  of  Barnabas  and  Saul.  Not,  of  course,  but
that  the  Holy  Ghost  had  to  do  with  the  action  of  a
Peter,  or  a  John,  or  of  any  others  that  have  come  before
us  in  the  previous  accounts  of  this  book;  but  it  is
expressly  said  here — and  not  without  an  admirable  rea-


94  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

son,  and  of  the  deepest  interest  to  us,  because  God  is
here  preparing  the  road  and  instructing  His  servants  as
to  His  ways,  more  particularly  in  the  church  among  the
Gentiles.  Hence,  the  Holy  Ghost  comes  into  a  very
decided  and  defined  prominence  here:  "Separate  me
Barnabsw  and  Saul  for  the  work  whereunto  I  have  called
them."  The  Holy  Ghost  is  in  the  church ;  He  is  per-
sonally acting,  and  not  merely  as  giving  power,  but  in
distinct  and  special  call.  It  is,  no  doubt,  subordinate
to  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  but,  nevertheless,  as  a
divine  person  must  who  does  not  abnegate  His  own
sovereignty,  so  it  is  said  "  6W  he  wilL*'

"  And  when  they  had  fasted  and  prayed,  and  laid
their  hands  on  them,  they  sent  them  away."  This  was
not  to  confer  authority,  which  would  set  one  scripture
against  another.  Galatians  i.  1  denies  such  an  inference.
We  shall  find,  before  we  have  done  with  the  history,
what  the  character  of  this  action  was,  and  wherefore
hands  were  laid  upon  them:  the  end  of  chapter  xiv.
explains  it  to  us.  It  is  said  there  (verse  26)  that  they
sailed  to  Antioch  (which  was  the  starting-point),  from
whence  "  they  had  been  recommended  to  the  grace  of
God  for  the  work  which  they  fulfilled."  Such,  then,
was  the  object  and  meaning  of  the  hands  laid  on  Bar-
nabas and  Saul.  It  was  not  the  presumptuous  thought
that  men,  who  were  really  inferior  to  themselves
spiritually,  could  confer  upon  the  apostles  what  they  did
not  themselves  possess  to  the  same  extent ;  it  was  but
a  fraternal  recommendation  to  the  grace  of  Grod,  which
is  always  sweet  and  desirable  in  the  practical  service
of  the  Lord.  "So  they,  being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy
Ghost:"  nothing  can  be  more  distinct  than  the  place


•>-


•^.'


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  95

that  the  Spirit  of  God  has  assigned  Him,  nothing  more
emphatic  than  the  manner  in  which  the  inspired  writer
draws  attention  to  the  fact  in  these  commencing  verses.
All  now  depends  upon  His  power :  He  is  on  earth,  the
directing  power  of  all  that  is  carried  on.  That  power
does  not  belong  to  the  church,  which  has  indeed
responsibility  in  the  last  resort  in  the  judgment  of  evil,
but  otherwise  never  can  meddle  with  ministry  except
to  the  dishonour  of  the  Lord,  its  own  hurt,  and  the
hindrance  of  ministry.  On  the  the  other  hand,  ministry
never  can  meddle  with  what  properly  belongs  to  the
church.  They  are  two  distinct  spheres.  The  same
person,  of  course,  may  be  a  minister  while  he  has  his
place  as  a  member  in  the  body  of  Christ.  But  as  he  is
not  permitted  to  use  his  ministry  to  override  the  church
in  any  respect,  but  rather  to  subserve  its  right  action,
helping  it  on  as  far  as  may  be  in  his  power  by  the
Holy  Ghost,  so  on  the  other  hand  the  church  can  in
nowise  rightly  control  that  ministry  which  flows  not
from  the  church,  but  directly  from  the  Lord.

The  present  state  in  nowise  alters  or  modifies  the
principle:  on  the  contrary,  it  is  an  immense  comfort
that  as  ministry  never  did  flow  from  the  church,  so  the
present  broken  state  of  the  church  cannot  overthrow  the
place  and  responsibility  of  those  who  minister  in  the
word.  The  fact  is  they  are  quite  distinct,  although  co-
ordinate, spheres  of  blessing.

Barnabas  and  Saul  go  forth,  then,  to  Cyprus,  the
native  place  of  Barnabas ;  and  coming  there  they  preach
the  word  of  God  in  the  synagogues  of  the  Jews.  There
is  great  care,  and  so  much  the  more  because  Saul  was
apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  to  go  to  the  Jews;  and  it  i^


96  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

lovely  to  see  the  ways  of  God  in  this  respect.  Above
all  others  Luke,  as  we  know,  brings  out  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  Himself  in  His  grace  towards  the  Gentiles.
Nevertheless  there  is  no  gospel  so  eminently  Jewish  as
Luke's  in  its  commencement, — not  even  Matthew's.  We
have  no  such  scene  in  the  gospel  of  Matthew,  and  still
less  in  Mark's  or  John's, — no  such  scene  of  the  temple
both  of  the  exterior  and  interior.  We  have  no  such
account  of  the  godly  Jewish  remnant.  We  have  no
such  care  in  showing  the  obedience  of  Joseph  and  Mary
to  the  requisitions  of  the  law  as  in  the  first  two  chap-
ters of  the  gospel  of  Luke.  The  fact  is,  that  what  is
shown  first  in  the  gospel,  then  in  the  Acts,  is  "  to  the
Jew  first  and  also  to  the  Gentile."  And  so  we  find  in
the  service  of  these  blessed  men  who  now  go  forth.

They  had,  by  the  way,  also,  we  are  told,  John  to  their
minister.  We  must  not  make  an  ecclesiastical  institu-
tion out  of  this.  No  doubt  the  expression  might  to
ignorant  minds  convey  some  such  notion.  Nor  do  I
pretend  to  say  what  might  have  been  the  motives
of  those  who  translated  it  so  as  to  give  such  a  colour
to  the  passage.  Manifestly,  however,  the  thing  were
absurd ;  because  it  would  be,  not  a  ministry  to  others,
but  to  Paul  and  Barnabas.  Clearly  therefore  Mark's
service  lay  here,  I  suppose,  in  searching  out  proper
lodgings,  and  getting  people  to  hear  the  apostles  preach,
and  that  kind  of  care  which  a  young  man  would  be
expected  to  bestow  on  those  whom  he  was  privileged  to
accompany  and  attend  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.

On  this  occasion  they  met  with  the  deputy  of  the
island,  Sergius  Paulus,  who  was  besieged  by  the  efforts
of  a  certain  sorcerer  that  sought  to  exercise  and  retain


<<r


THE  ACTS  OP  THE  APOSTLES.  97

influence  over  the  mind  of  the  great  man.  Bat  the  time
was  come  for  falsehood  to  fall  before  the  truth.     When
he  therefore  attempted  to  turn  his  old  arts  against  the
gospel,  and  those  that  were  the  instruments  of  bringing
it  to  the  island,  God  asserted  His  own  mighty  power.
For  when  Elymas  withstood  Barnabas  and  Saul,  Saul,
"who  also  is  called  Paul"  (the  Spirit  of  God  taking  this
opportunity  of  bringing  forward  his  Gentile  name  in  a
mission  that  was  to  be  pre-eminently  among  the  Gen-
tiles, although  beginning  with  the  Jew  according  to  the
ways  of  God),  being  then  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
sets  his  eyes  on  the  evil  worker,  gives  him  his  true
character,  searches  him  through  and  through,  and,  more
than  this,  pronounced  a  sentence,  a  judicial  sentence,
from  the  Lord,  which  was  at  once  accomplished.     As
we  are  told,  "Immediately  there  fell  upon  him  a  mist
and  a  darkness,  and  he  went  about  seeking  some  to  lead
him  by  the  hand."   It  was  the  sad  sign  of  his  guilty  race,
the  Jews,  who,  by  their  opposition  to  the  gospel  of  the
grace  of  God,  and  more  particularly  among  the  Gentiles,
are  now  doomed  to  the  same  blindness  after  a  spiritual
sort     "  Then  the  deputy,  when  he  saw  what  was  done,
believed,  being  astonished  at  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord."
Beautiful  contrast  with  Simon  Magus !  What  astonished
Simon  Magus  was  the  power  displayed;  what  astonished
the  deputy  was  the  truth.     The  admiration  of  power  is
natural  to  man,  and  particularly  to  fallen  man.     He,
conscious   of  his  weakness,  covets  the  power  that  he
would  like  to  wield,  having  still  the  consciousness  of
the  place  to  which  he  was  called,  but  from  which  he  has
fallen;   for  God  put  every  creature  under  him,  and
although  through  sin  he  is  fallen  from  his  estate,  he  has

H


98  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

in  nowise  abandoned  his  pretensions,  and  he  would  fain
have  the  power  that  would  enable  him  not  to  hold  up
only,  but  to  reverse  if  possible  the  sad  consequences  of
the  fall.  Delight  in  the  truth,  a  heart  for  that  which
God  reveals,  flows  only  from  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  this
was  the  happy  portion  of  the  deputy.  He  believed,  and
believed  after  a  very  different  sort,  with  a  divinely
exercised  conscience  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  in-
stead of  a  merely  intellectual  credit  receiving  upon
evidence  that  which  approved  itself  to  the  judgment
of  his  mind.

Next  we  read  of  Paul  and  his  company,  for  from  this
moment  he  takes  the  chief  place,  and  others  are  desig-
nated because  of  their  companionship  with  him.  Was
this  place  in  anywise  contrary  to  the  will  of  the  Lord  ?
Was  it  not  thoroughly  according  to  it  ?  We  all  know
that  there  is  sometimes  a  little  jealousy  of  any  such
spiritual  influence.  I  cannot  but  think,  however,  that
the  feeling  is  owing  more  to  the  natural  independence
of  the  mind,  than  the  simplicity  that  delights  in  the
working  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  sanctioned  expres-
sion of  God's  holy  word.  I  say,  then,  that  Paul  and  his
company  "  loosed  from  Paphos,  and  came  to  Perga  in
Pamphylia:  and  John,  departing  from  them  (for  he
was  not  at  all  in  faith  up  to  the  level  of  the  work — at
any  rate  of  Paul),  returned  to  Jerusalem,"  his  natural
home.

The  others  proceed  on  their  way  to  Antioch  in
Pisidia,  and  there  they  are  found  on  the  sabbath -day
in  the  synagogue.  "  And  after  the  reading  of  the  law
and  the  prophets,  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue  sent  unto
them,  saying.  Ye  men  and  brethren,  if  ye  have  any


THE  ACTS  OF  THE   APOSTLES.  99

word  of  exhortation  for  the  people,  say  on."  What  a
painful  contrast  with  that  which  is  found  in  Christen-
dom !  Even  among  the  poor  Jews,  spit^  of  all  the
coldness  and  narrowness  of  their  system,  there  was  then
a  greater  openness  of  heart,  and  a  simplicity  to  receive
whatever  could  be  communicated,  than  one  sees  where
there  ought  to  be  the  rivers  of  living  water, — where
there  should  reign  the  cherished  desire  among  all  that
belong  to  the  Lord,  that  the  best  help  at  all  cost  be
rendered  to  every  saint  of  God,  as  well  as  to  every  poor
perishing  sinner.  However,  here  among  these  Jews,  the
rulers  were  anxious  to  get  all  the  help  possible  from
others  for  the  understandincj  of  the  word  of  God,  and
for  its  just  application.  Although  they  knew  nothing
whatever  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  (except,  of  course,  that
they  were  Jews,  or  looked  like  them),  they  called  on
them  forthwith  to  address  all.  "And  Paul  beckoning
with  his  hand  said.  Men  of  Israel,  and  ye  that  fear

There  were  proselytes  as  well  as  children  of  Jacob.
Many  Gentiles  had  renounced  idolatry  in  all  the  great
cities  where  Jews  were  found  at  this  time.  Undoubtedly,
80  far,  Judaism  had  prepared  the  way  for  the  Lord
among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  in  whose  midst  Jews
were  scattered.  Disgust  had  grown  up  in  the  Gentile
mind.  The  abominations  of  Paganism  had  risen  up  to
a  fearful  height.  At  this  very  time  there  were  not  a
few  who  though  Gentiles  were  not  idolaters  (and  you
must  bear  this  in  mind),  and  really  did  fear  God.

To  all  these  Paul  addresses  himself:  "The  God  of  this
people  of  Israel  chose  our  fathers,  and  exalted  the  people
when  they  dwelt  as  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and

u  2


100  INTKODUCTORY  LECTURES.

with  an  high  arm  brought  he  them  out  of  it."  The
history  is  pursued  until  he  comes  to  David,  as  the
object,  of  course,  was  to  bring  in  the  Son  of  David ;
for  the  apostle,  led  of  the  Lord,  speaks  with  that  con-
siderate skill  which  love  does  not  fail  to  use,  formed
under  the  Spirit  of  God.  Thus  having  brought  in  the
Messiah,  we  are  shown  how  He  had  been  announced  by
the  Baptist.  There  was  no  collusion  about  it  John
had  first  preached,  before  His  coming,  the  baptism  of
repentance  to  all  the  people  of  Israel.  As  he  fulfilled
his  course,  he  acknowledged  that  he  was  not  the
Messiah.  Thus  God  gave  an  admirable  witness  of  the
Messiah  that  was  just  at  hand.  It  was  no  question  of  a
great  man,  or  great  deeds,  but  of  God's  accomplishing
His  purpose.  Had  a  particle  of  ambition  influenced
John,  he,  with  an  immense  following  among  the  people,
might  readily  have  set  up  to  be  the  Messiah  himself.
The  truth  was,  that  he  was  not  the  Bridegroom  but  His
friend,  and  the  fear  of  God  shut  out  these  base  desires,
and  he  felt  it  his  joy  and  his  duty  to  do  the  will  of  God,
and  be  the  witness  of  Him  that  was  coming.

Thus  Paul  announces  the  Messiah  himself  "Men
and  brethren,  children  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  and
whosoever  among  you  feareth  God,  to  you  is  the  word
of  this  salvation  sent."  Next  he  brings  boldly  forward
the  awful  position  in  which  the  Jews  had  put  them-
selves. "They  that  dwell  at  Jerusalem,  and  tlieir
rulers,  because  they  knew  him  not,  nor  yet  the  voices
of  the  prophets  which  are  read  every  sabbath  day,  they
have  fulfilled  them  in  condemning  him."  Along  with
spiritual  blindness  there  was  as  usual  the  grossest  want
of  common  righteousness.     "And  though  they  found


i^t.


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  101

no  cause  of  death  in  him,  yet  desired  they  Filate  that
he  should  be  slain.  And  when  they  had  fulfilled  all
that  was  written  of  him,  they  took  him  down  from  the
tree,  and  laid  him  in  a  sepulchre."  God  was  against
them,  and  as  for  the  man  whom  they  had  crucified,  He
"  raised  him  from  the  dead :  and  he  was  seen  many
days  of  them  which  came  up  with  him  from  Galilee  to
Jerusalem,  who  are  his  witnesses  unto  the  people.  And
we  declare  unto  you  glad  tidings,  how  that  the  promise
which  was  made  unto  the  fathers,  God  hath  fulfilled  the
same  unto  us  their  children,  in  that  he  hath  raised  up
Jesus."

It  is  not  warrantable  to  say  "raised  up  Jesus
againJ*  You  may  read  it  either  "raised  up  Jesus"  or
"  raised  Jesus  again;''  but  you  cannot  give  both.  The
word  cannot  at  the  same  time  include  both,  though  it
may  in  certain  cases,  according  to  the  context,  mean
either.  The  proper  rendering  here  is  "raised  up  Jesus."
This  is  the  meaning  required  by  the  facts.  It  refers  to
Jesus  given  to  the  Jews  as  the  Messiah  according  to
the  prophets.  It  is  also  the  commonest  thing  possible
for  the  word  to  apply  to  resurrection.  But  then  in
itself  it  takes  in  a  much  wider  range  than  simply  resur-
rection. The  word  "raised  up"  requires  ''from  the
dead"  to  make  it  definitely  mean  resurrection.  But
this  is  not  the  case  here,  till  we  come  to  verse  34.  I
therefore  believe  that  resurrection  is  not  meant  in  the
earlier  text  at  all,  but  raising  up  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,
as  it  is  also  written  in  the  second  Psalm :  "  Thou  art
my  Son  :  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee."  This  is  con-
firmed, and  I  think  proved  by  the  next  verse,  where  we
have  the  additional  statement:   "And  as  concerning


102  DTTBODrCTOBY

that  be  raised  him  up  from  the  dead."  Thus  we  have
two  distinct  steps: — verse  33  a£Biins  that  God  had
fulfilled  the  promise  in  raising  up  the  Messiah  in  the
earth  for  His  people ;  verse  34  adds  that,  besides  tliis.
He  raised  Him  up  from  the  dead.  This  is  important,
because  it  serves  as  a  key  to  the  true  application  of  the
second  Psalm,  which  is  often,  and  I  believe  mistakenly,
applied  to  the  resurrection.  The  reference  is  to  the
Messiah,  without  raising  the  question  of  actual  bodily
resurrection,  which  is  first  introduced  distinctly  in  Psalm
xvi,  though  implied  in  Psalm  ^iiL  So,  in  the  Apostle's
discourse,  the  resurrection  from  the  dead  is  founded  not
upon  the  second  Psalm,  but  on  a  well  known  passage
in  the  prophet  Isaiah  (Iv.  3),  and  also  in  the  sixteenth
Psalm  already  referred  to.

But  here  the  apostle  (instead  of  pointing  out  that  God
had  made  the  rejected  Jesus  to  be  Lord  and  Christ,
which  was  Peter^s  doctrine,  and,  of  course,  perfectly
true)  uses  it  according  to  his  own  blessed  line  of  truth,
and  uiges  on  their  souls,  that  "through  this  man  is
preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins ;  and  by  him**
(not  the  Jew  alone,  but)  "  all  that  believe  are  justified
from  all  things  from  which  they  could  not  be  justified
by  the  law  of  Moses."  Thus  early,  vigorously,  and
plainly  did  the  apostle  proclaim  this  great  truth — no
doubt  for  all  among  the  Jews  who  bowed  to  it,  but
stated  also  in  terms  that  should  embrace  a  Gentile
believer  even  as  an  Israelite.  The  law  of  Moses  could
justify  from  nothing.  "All  that  believe  are  justified
from  all  things."  The  whole  is  wound  up  by  a  solemn
warning  to  such  as  despise  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and
this  founded  on  or  rather  cited  from  more  than  one


L*  '-•


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  103

of  their  own  prophets.  (Compare  Isaiah  xxix.  and
Hab.  L)

"And  when  the  Jews  were  gone  out  of  the  synagogue*
the  Gentiles  besought  that  these  words  might  be
preached  to  them  the  next  sabbath.  Now  when  the
congregation  was  broken  up,  many  of  the  Jews  and
religious  proselytes  followed  Paul  and  Barnabas :  who,
speaking  to  them,  persuaded  them  to  continue  in  the
grace  of  God.  And  the  next  sabbath  day  came  almost
the  whole  city  together  to  hear  the  word  of  God."  This
stirred  up  the  Jews :  it  was  a  new  element,  and  kindled
their  jealousy  at  once.  We  have  had  the  irritation  and
the  murderous  opposition  of  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem.
We  can  understand  that  they  disliked  what  they  con-
sidered a  new  religion,  which  claimed  to  come  with  the
highest  sanction  of  the  God  of  Israel,  more  particularly
as  it  made  them  feel  to  the  very  quick  their  own  sins,
their  present  and  past  resistance  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as
well  as  their  recent  slaughter  of  their  Messiah.  But  a
new  feature  comes  out  here  which  the  Spirit  of  God
lets  us  see  henceforth  in  all  the  journeys  and  labours  of
the  apostle  Paul;  that  is,  the  hatred  which  the  un-
believing Jews  felt  at  the  preaching  of  the  truth  to  the
Gentiles.  "  When  the  Jews  saw  the  multitudes,  they  were
filled  with  envy."  The  scene  now  lay  outside  among  the
nations  whom  they  despised.  If  the  gospel  were  a  lie,
why  feel  so  acutely?  It  was  not  love  or  respect  for
Gentiles.  But  Satan  stirred  up,  not  now  simply  their
religious  pride  but  their  envy,  and,  filled  with  it,  they
"spake  against  those  things  which  were  spoken  by
Paul,  contradicting  and  blaspheming."

The  law  had  never  wrought  such  a  change  among  men.


104  INTRODUCrOBY  LECTUKES.

It  might  correct  the  grossness  of  idolatry  and  condemn  its
folly,  thereby  some  here  and  there  might  fear  God ;  but
it  never  did  win  hearts  after  such  a  sort  Thus  the  evil
of  their  own  hearts  was  brought  out  among  the  Jews,
and  the  more  in  proportion  as  the  might  of  the  grace  of
God  proved  itself  in  attracting  souls  to  the  Lord.  "Then
Paul  and  Barnabas  waxed  bold,  and  said.  It  was  neces-
sary that  the  word  of  God  should  first  have  been  spoken
to  you."  How  wondrous  and  how  beautiful  the  ways
of  divine  love !  "  But  seeing  ye  put  it  from  you,  and
judge  yourselves  unworthy  of  everlasting  life" — how
solemn  to  judge  oneself  unworthy  of  everlasting  life,  as
every  unbeliever  does ! — "  lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles."

This  was  spiritual  wisdom;  but  was  it  simply
instinct?  It  was  not  There  may  have  been  those
that  turned  to  the  Gentiles  from  no  deeper  or  more
defined  reason,  as  we  saw  last  night  There  were  those
who  perceived  that  the  gospel  was  too  great  a  boon
to  be  confined  to  the  ancient  people  of  God,  that  it
was  adapted  to  the  imiversal  need  of  men,  and  that
it  became  God's  grace  to  let  it  forth  to  the  Gentiles;
and  they  acted  on  their  conviction,  and  the  Lord  was
with  them,  and  many  believed.  But  it  was  not  spiritual
instinct  here :  it  was  a  still  holier  and  lowlier  thing,  yet
higher  and  more  blessed.  It  was  intelligent  obedience,
where  it  might  not  be  supposed  that  one  could  find  a
sufficiently  clear  direction.  But  the  eye  of  love  can
discern ;  it  is  ever  on  the  alert  to  obey  from  the  heart

"For  so,"  says  he,  "hath  the  Lord  commanded  us,
saying,  I  have  set  thee  to  be  a  light  of  the  Gentiles."
What  had  this  to  do  with  Paul  and  Barnabas  ?  Every-
thing.   Beyond  controversy  Christ  is  directly  in  view  of


•  v


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         105

the  prophet,  and  perhaps  some  would  be  disposed  to
shut  up  the  words  only  to  Christ ;  but  not  so  the  Holy
Spirit,  who  therefore  extends  its  bearing  to  Paul  and
Barnabas.  Did  not  Paul  afterwards  write  '*  to  me  to
live  is  Christ"?  Christ  was  all  to  them.  Christian
faith  appropriates  to  itself  what  was  said  to  Him.  What
a  place  is  this !  what  a  power  in  His  name !  No  doubt
it  was  heretofore  a  hidden  mystery  that  man  should  be
so  associated  with  a  Christ  rejected  by  (and  so  separated
from)  the  ancient  people  of  God.  But  what  said  He  to
the  man  despised  and  set  at  naught  by  them  ?  This
was  the  very  time  when  the  Messiah,  lost  to  Israel,
becomes,  in  a  new  and  intimate  way,  the  centre  for
God  to  associate  fully  in  grace  with  Him.  Thus  what
belongs  to  Him  belongs  to  them,  and  what  God  says
about  Him  is  direction  for  them.  "  I  have  set  thee  to
be  a  light  of  the  Gentiles,  that  thou  shouldest  be  for
salvation  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."

There  was  no  rashness  or  presumption,  but  the  sound-
est wisdom  in  this.  Was  it  only  for  the  Apostles  ?  Is
there  no  principle  in  this  of  all  importance  for  us,  my
brethren?  Does  it  not  prove  distinctly  that  it  is  not
merely  where  we  get  a  literal  command  that  we  may
and  ought  to  discern  a  call  to  obedience  ?  The  apostles,
as  men  of  faith,  were  bold  about  it :  "  For  so  hath  the
Lord  commanded  us"  Yet,  I  suppose,  not  two  souls
besides  in  the  whole  earth  would  have  seen  a  command
to  them.  Unbelief  would  have  asked  proof,  and  have
been  ill-satisfied ;  but  faith,  as  evermore,  is  happy  and
makes  happy.  "And  when  the  Gentiles  heard  this,
they  were  glad,  and  glorified  the  word  of  the  Lord :  and
as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal  life  believed.    And


106  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

the  name  of  the  Lord  was  published  throughout  all  the
region."  But  the  Jews  were  not  to  give  up  their  envy.
The  greater  the  blessing,  the  more  their  hearts  were
vexed  with  it.  "  The  Jews  stirred  up  the  devout  and
honourable  women."  They  were  more  open,  doubtless,
to  their  efforts ;  and  so  were  "the  chief  men  of  the  city."
As  faith  looks  to  God  and  the  truth,  unbelief  flies  to
influence  of  one  kind  or  another, — of  females  on  the
one  side,  and  of  great  men  on  the  other.  Thus  they
raised  persecution  against  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  ex-
pelled them  out  of  their  coasts.  *'  But  they  shook  off
the  dust  of  their  feet  against  them,  and  came  unto
Iconium.  And  the  disciples  were  filled  with  joy,  and
with  the  Holy  Ghost"  As  the  enemy  makes  good  the
occ6wion  of  evil,  so  God  turns  the  wickedness  of  the
adversary  to  the  blessing  of  His  own.

The  apostles  pass  thence  into  another  place;  they  are,
as  ever,  unwearied  in  their  love.  There  is,  perhaps,  no
feature  more  noticeable  and  instructive  than  the  fact,
that  nothing  turns  away  the  heart  of  Paul  from  the
pooT  Jews.  He  loved  them  with  an  imrequited  affection ;
he  loved  them  spite  of  all  their  hatred  and  their  envy.
Into  the  synagogue  he  went  again  here  (as  in  each  new
place  that  he  visits),  and  so  spake,  "  that  a  great  multi-
tude both  of  the  Jews  and  also  of  the  Greeks  believed.
But  the  unbelieving  Jews"  (they  were  generally  just
the  same  to  Paul  in  one  place  as  in  another)  "  stirred
up  the  Gentiles,  and  made  their  minds  evil  afiected
against  the  brethren.  Long  time  therefore  abode  they
speaking  boldly  in  the  Lord,  which  gave  testimony  unto
the  word  of  his  grace,  and  granted  signs  and  wonders
to  be  done  by  their  hands.     But  the  multitude  of  the


o.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  AI«OSTLES.  107

city  was  divided :  and  part  held  with  the  Jews,  and
part  with  the  apostles.  And  when  there  was  an  assault
made  both  of  the  Gentiles,  and  also  of  the  Jews  with
their  rulers,  to  use  them  despitefully,  and  to  stone  them,
they  were  ware  of  it,  and  fled."  They  thus  bowed  to
the  storm.  Nothing  at  all  of  what  men  call  heroism
marked  the  apostles;  there  was  what  is  very  much
better — the  simplicity  of  grace:  patience  is  the  true
wisdom,  but  God  only  can  give  it

They  go  accordingly  elsewhere,  and  there  preach
the  gospel  At  Lystra,  which  they  visited,  the  case
came  before  them  of  a  man  crippled  in  his  feet,  "  im-
potent in  his  feet,"  who  had  never  walked.  Paul,
perceiving  that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed,  beholds  him
steadfastly,  and  bids  him  stand  upright  on  his  feet.  The
Lord  at  once  answering  to  the  call,  the  man  leaped  and
walked.  "  And  when  the  people  saw  what  Paul  had
done,  they  lifted  up  their  voices,  saying  in  the  speech
of  Lycaonia,  The  gods  are  come  down  to  us  in  the  like-
ness of  men."  Accordingly  they  called  Barnabas  (who,
it  is  evident,  had  the  more  imposing  presence)  Jupiter;
and  Paul,  because  he  was  the  more  eloquent  of  the  two,
they  designated  Mercury.  "Then  tlie  priest  of  Jupiter"
— for  the  city  was  famous  for  its  devotedness  to  tlie
so-called  father  of  gods  and  men, — "brought  oxen
and  garlands  into  the  gates,  and  would  have  done
sacrifice."  "  Wliich  when  the  apostles,*  Barnabas  and
Paul,   heard   of,  they  rent  their  clothes,  and  ran  in

*  So  the  Spirit  of  God  calls  them  both;  and  it  is  an  important
point  to  obecrve ;  it  is  not  restricted  to  the  twelve.  Here  we  find  the
Holy  Ghost  acted  in  this  manner.  Wo  havo  apostleship  cntiroly
apart  from  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  And  not  merely  is  Paul  apostle,
but  Barnabas  was  recognixed  also.


108  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

among  the  people,  crying  out,  and  saying,  Sirs,  why
do  ye  these  things?  we  also  are  men  of  like  passions
with  you,  and  preach  unto  you  that  ye  should  turn
from  these  vanities  unto  the  living  God,  which  made
heaven,  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  all  things  that
are  therein."

What  is  notable,  I  think,  especially  for  all  those
engaged  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  is  the  variety  in
the  character  of  the  apostolic  addresses.  There  was
no  such  stiffness  as  we  are  apt  to  find  in  our  day  in  the
preaching  of  the  gospel.  Oh,  what  monotony!  what
sameness  of  routine,  no  matter  who  may  be  addressed  !
We  find  in  scripture  people  dealt  with  as  they  were,
and  there  is  that  kind  of  appeal  to  the  conscience  which
was  adapted  to  their  peculiar  state.  The  discourse  in
the  synagogue  was  founded  on  the  Jewish  scriptures;
here  to  these  men  of  Lycaonia  there  is  no  allusion  to
the  Old  Testament  whatever,  but  a  plain  reference  to
what  all  see  and  know — the  heavens  above  them,  and
the  seasons  that  God  was  pleased  from  of  old  to  assign
round  about  them,  and  that  continual  supply  of.  the
fruits  of  His  natural  bounty  of  which  the  most  callous
can  scarce  be  insensible.  Thus  we  see  there  was  the
ministration  of  suited  truth,  as  far  as  it  went,  of  what
God  is,  and  what  is  worthy  of  Him,  opening  the  way
for  the  glad  tidings  of  His  grace.  How  different  from
the  vileness  of  a  Jupiter  or  of  a  Mercury,  a  god  devoted
to  corruption  and  selfwill,  and  another  god  devoted  to
stealing!  Was  this  the  best  religion  and  morality  of
the  heathen,  making  gods  just  like  themselves  ?  Such
certainly  is  not  the  true  God.  Who  can  deny  all  to  be
vanity  even  in  the  minds  of  the  most  civilized  and


.-Ti


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  109

refined  of  the  Gentiles  ?  The  true  God,  although  He
had  suffered  all  nations  to  walk  in  their  own  ways
in  times  past,  nevertheless  did  not  "  leave  himself  with-
out witness  in  that  he  did  good,  and  gave  us  rain  from
heaven,  and  fruitful  seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food
and  gladness/'  This  was  no  more  than  an  introduction
for  that  which  the  apostle  had  to  say ;  it  was  the  truth
80  far  rebuking  the  folly  of  idolatry.  It  was  in  no  way
the  good  news  of  eternal  life  and  remission  of  sins  in
Christ ;  but  it  was  that  which  either  vindicated  God,  or
at  least  set  aside  what  was  undeniable  and  before  all
eyes  the  debasing  depravity  of  their  false  gods  and
pagan  religion.

"  And  there  came  thither  certain  Jews  from  Antioch
and  Iconium,  who  persuaded  the  people,  and,  having
stoned  Paul,  drew  him  out  of  the  city,  supposing
he  had  been  dead."  "And  having  stoned  Paul" —
how  like  his  Master !  How  sudden  the  change !  About
to  be  worshipped  as  a  god,  and  the  next  thing  after  it
to  be  stoned  and  left  for  dead!  Alas!  here  also  the
Jews  instigated  the  Gentiles.  "  Howbeit,  as  the  disciples
stood  round  about  him,  he  rose  up  and  came  into  the
city :  and  the  next  day  he  departed  with  Barnabas  to
Derbe."  Such  is  the  victory  that  overcomes  the  world;
such  the  power  and  perseverance  of  faith.  They  go  on
undaunted,  yea,  confirming  the  souls  of  the  disciples  in
various  places,  "exhorting  them  to  continue  in  the  faith,
and  that  we  must  through  much  tribulation  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  God."  Impossible  for  the  world  to
overthrow  those  who  bear  the  worst  it  can  do,  give  God
thanks,  and  wait  for  His  kingdom.

But  here  take  note  of  another  part  of  their  service —


110  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

the  confinnation  of  the  souls  of  those  who  had  already
believed.  It  is  not  simply  bringing  souls  in,  and  then
leaving  them  to  other  people;  the  apostles  would
stablish  them  in  the  faith  as  they  were  taught.  But  this
was  not  all.  "  When  they  had  ordained  them."  Let  me
take  the  liberty  of  saying  that  "ordained"  is  a  very
misleading  term,  which  conveys  an  ecclesiastical  idea
without  any  warrant  whatever.  Not  that  "ordained"
is  an  interpolation  here  as  in  the  first  chapter  of  Acts,
but  certainly  the  meaning  given  is  fictitious.  The  true
force  of  the  phrase  is  simply  this,  "they  chose  them
elders."  In  more  ways  than  one  it  is  important ;  be-
cause, as  a  simple  choice  takes  away  "  ordination,"  and
with  it  that  mysterious  ritual  which  the  greater  bodies
like,  so  on  the  other  hand  the  apostles'  choosing  for
them  elders  takes  away  all  that  gives  self-importance  to
the  little  churches.  For  it  is  neither  the  smaller  bodies
choosing  for  themselves,  nor  an  imposing  authority
vested  in  their  great  rivals,  but  a  choice  exercised  by
apostles;  that  is,  they  chose /or  the  disciples  "elders  in
every  church."

I  am  well  aware  that  persons  of  respectability  have
not  been  wanting  who  have  tried  to  make  out  that  the
Greek  word  means  that  the  apostles  chose  them  by
taking  the  sense  of  the  assembly.  But  this  is  mere
etymological  trifling.  There  is  not  the  slightest  warrant
for  it  in  the  usage  of  scripture.  It  is  not  requisite  for
a  man  to  be  a  scholar  in  order  to  reject  the  thought  as
false.  Thus  the  word  ''them'*  refutes  it  for  any  intelligent
reader  of  the  English  Bible.  It  is  not  merely  that  apostles
chose.  If  it  be  said  that  the  people  must  have  chosen  for
them  to  ordain,  the  answer  is,  that  the  people  did  not


^J*>


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  Ill

choose  at  alL  This  is  proved  by  the  simple  declaration
that  the  apostles  chose /or  the  disciplea  Such  is  the  way
to  fill  up  the  sentence — "They  chose  them  elders."*  To
make  out  the  meaning  of  what  Presbyterians  or  Con-
gregationalists  have  contended  for,  it  should  have  been
said  that  they  chose  hy  them,  or  some  phrase  meaning
that  they  chose  by  the  votes  of  the  assembly.  Here
there  is  no  ground  whatever  for  such  a  sense,  but  on
the  contrary  that  the  apostles  chose  elders  for  the  rest.

*  It  19  scarcely  necessary  to  refute  at  length  the  notion  of  the
Others,  and  of  some  modems  like  Bishop  Bilson  (Perpetual  Govern-
ment of  Christ's  Church,  p.  13,  Eden's  edition,  Oxford,  1842),  that
XiipoTovfiiTaPTiQ  here  means  ordaining  by  imposition  of  handH.  That
the  word  was  so  used  in  later  times  by  ecclesiastical  writers  is  true ;
that  this  is  its  meaning  in  scripture  is  palpable  error.  It  is  to  con-
found xiipoTovia  with  x^^P'*^^^^^  (^^  i^  equivalent,  17  iirlQKJiQ  rcuv
Xetp^iv).  On  the  other  hand  the  idea  that  %ccporov^<Tavrcc  means
that  the  apostles  conceded  to  the  disciples  the  power  of  selecting  by
vote,  whilst  they  reserved  to  themselves  the  right  of  approval  and
institution,  is  still  harsher  and  in  short  unexampled  in  all  Greek
^Titings  profane  or  sacred,  ancient  or  medisoval.  In  the  earlier  Greek
authors  who  write  of  their  public  affairs,  the  word  often  occurs  in  the
sense  of  choosing  by  suffrage  (as  opposed  to  lots) ;  later  on  it  meant
appointment  irrespective  of  votes.  But  it  is  never  used,  so  far  as  I
know,  to  express  that  tome  appointed  on  the  ground  of  election  by
otkert.  And  I  am  glad  to  say  not  merely  that  a  candid  Presbyterian
like  Prof.  G.  Campbell  treats  Beza's  version  {per  suffragia  creasnent)
with  the  utmost  severity  as  '*a  mere  interpolation  for  the  sake  of
answering  a  particular  purpose,'*  but  that  the  Presbyterian  divines  of
1645  in  the  "Jus  Divinum"  point  out  the  flagrant  inconsiotoncy  of
such  an  interpretation  with  the  express  language  of  the  text.  None
but  Paul  and  Barnabas  chose  (whatever  the  manner) ;  and  they  chose
for  the  disciples,  not  by  their  votes,  which  would  be  incompatible  with
their  own  choice.  Compare  Acts  z.  41,  2  Cor.  viii.  19.  In  the  former
case  God  chose  beforehand  the  witnesses,  but  others  gave  no  votes;  in
the  latter  the  churches  chose  brethren  to  be  their  confidential  mes-
sengers, but  they  never  thought  of  collecting  the  suffrages  of  other
people.    Scriptmral  usage  in  every  instance  is  simply  choice.


112  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

"They  chose  them  elders  in  every  church,  and  prayed
with  fasting,  commending  them  to  the  Lord,  on  whom
they  believed."

It  is  vain  to  deny  or  parry  the  importance  of  this
decision  of  scripture  on  the  subject  of  presbyters.
Not  unfrequently  there  is  an  attack  made  on  those  who
really  desire  to  follow  the  word  of  God,  by  men  who
ask,  "  Where  are  your  elders  ?  You  profess  to  follow
scripture  faithfully:  how  is  it  that  you  have  not  elders?"
To  such  I  would  answer,  "When  you  provide  apostles
to  choose  elders  for  us,  we  shall  be  exceedingly  obliged
for  both."  How  can  we  have  elders  appointed  according
to  scripture  unless  we  have  apostles  or  their  delegates  ?
Where  are  the  men  now  who  stand  in  the  same  position
before  God  and  the  assembly  as  Paul  and  Barnabas?
You  must  either  have  apostles,  or  at  the  very  least
apostolic  men  such  as  Timothy  and  Titus;  for  it  is
quite  evident  that  merely  to  call  people  elders  does  not
make  them  such.  Nothing  would  be  easier  than  to
bestow  the  title  of  elders  within  a  sect,  or  for  the  law
of  the  land  to  sanction  it.  Any  of  us  could  set  our-
selves up,  and  do  the  work  in  name,  no  doubt;  but
whether  there  would  be  any  value  in  the  assumption,
or  whether  it  would  not  be  really  great  sin,  presumption,
and  folly,  I  must  leave  to  the  consciences  of  all  to  judge.

Thus  we  know  with  divine  certainty  that  the  elders
were  chosen  for  the  disciples  by  the  apostles  in  every
church.  Such  is  the  doctrine  of  scripture,  and  the  fact
as  here  described.  It  is  evident  therefore,  that  unless
there  be  duly  qualified  persons  whom  the  Lord  has
authorised  for  the  purpose,  and  in  virtue  of  their  most
singular  relation  to  the  assembly, — unless  there  be  such


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         113

persons  as  apostles,  or  persons  representing  apostles  in
this  particular,  there  is  no  authority  for  such  appoint-
ment: it  is  mere  imitation.  And  in  questions  of  au-
thority it  must  be  evident  that  imitation  is  just  as
foolish  as  where  it  is  a  question  of  power.  You  cannot
imitate  the  energy  of  the  Spirit  except  by  sin,  neither
can  you  arrogate  the  authority  of  the  Lord  without
rebellion  against  Him.  Notwithstanding,  I  do  not  doubt
that  this  is  often  done  with  comparatively  good — let  us
conceive  the  best — intentions  on  the  part  of  many,  but
with  very  great  rashness  and  inattention  to  the  word  of
God.  Hence  those  are  really  wrong,  not  to  say  in-
excusable, who  assume  to  do  the  work  that  apostles  or
their  delegates  alone  could  do,  not  such  as  content
themselves  with  doing  their  own  duty,  and  refuse  a
delicate  and  authoritative  task  to  which  they  are  not
called  of  the  Lord.

What,  then,  is  the  right  thing  ?  All  that  we  can  say
is,  that  Grod  has  not  been  pleased,  in  the  present  broken
state  of  the  church,  to  provide  all  that  is  desirable  and
requisite  for  perpetuating  everything  in  due  order.  Is
this  ever  His  way  when  things  are  morally  ruined  ?
Does  He  make  provision  to  continue  what  dishonoured
Him  ?  So  far  from  contrariety  in  this  to  the  analogy
of  His  dealings,  it  seems  to  me  quite  according  to  them.
There  was  no  such  state  of  things  in  Israel  in  the  days
of  the  returned  cai)tive8,  as  in  the  days  of  the  Exodus,
but  Nehemiah  was  just  as  truly  raised  up  of  God  for
the  return  from  Babylon,  as  Moses  was  for  the  march
out  of  Egypt.  Still  the  two  conditions  were  quite
different^  and  the  mere  doing  by  Nehemiah  what  Moses
did  would  have  been  ignorance  of  his  own  proper  place.


114  INTKODUCTORY  LECTTURES.

Such  imitation  would  have  possessed  no  power,  and
would  have  secured  no  blessing.

It  is  a  precisely  similar  course  that  becomes  us
now.  Our  wisdom  is  to  use  what  God  has  given  us,
not  to  pretend  to  the  same  authority  as  Barnabas  and
Paul  had.  Let  us  follow  their  faith.  God  has  con-
tinued everything,  not  that  is  needful  only,  but  far
over  and  above  it  for  the  blessing,  if  not  for  the  pristine
power  and  order,  of  the  church  of  God.  There  is  not
the  slightest  cause  but  want  of  faith,  and  consequent
failui-e  in  obedience,  that  hinders  the  children  of  God
from  being  blessed  overflowingly  even  in  this  evil  day.
At  the  same  time  God  has  so  ordered  it,  that  no  boast
is  more  vain  than  that  of  possessing  all  the  outward
apparatus  of  the  church  of  God.  In  fact,  the  louder
the  vaunt,  the  less  real  is  the  claim  to  ornaments  of
which  God  stripped  His  guilty  people.  None  can  show
a  display  of  order  and  charge  so  settled  and  regular,
as  to  bear  a  comparison  with  the  state  of  the  church  as
it  was  founded  and  governed  by  the  apostles.*

Far  from  thinking  that  it  is  not  good  and  wise,  I
admire  the  ways  of  the  Lord  even  in  this  deprivation
of  ground  for  boasting.  I  believe  that  all  on  His  part
is  thoroughly  as  it  should  be,  and  really  best  for  us  as
we  are.  Nor  is  it  that  we  should  not  feel  the  want  of
the  godly  order  as  of  old;  but  I  need  not  say  that  if
we  feel  the  want  of  elders,  the  value  of  apostles  was
incomparably  greater.    Apostles  were  far  more  impor-

*  ''But  it  is  a  characteristic  of  the  Church  system**  (says  Mr.
Litton  in  his  "  Chiirch  of  Christ,"  p.  636,  speaking  of  sacramentalists)
**  to  be  most  peremptory  and  exclusive  in  its  decisions  where  Scriptore
supplies  the  slenderest  foundation  for  them.*'


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         115

tant  than  elders,  and  very  much  more  the  means  of
blessing  to  the  church  of  God.  But  the  right  appoint-
ment of  elders  necessarily  lapses  with  the  departure  of
the  apostles  from  the  earth.  It  is  not  so  with  gifts,  nor
therefore  with  ministry;  for  all  this  is  essentially  inde-
pendent of  the  presence  of  the  apostles,  and  bound  up
with  the  living  action  of  Christ  the  head  of  the  church,
who  carries  out  His  will  by  the  Holy  Ghost  here
below.

Now  we  enter  upon  another  and  an  important  chap-
ter in  its  way,  that  is  to  say,  the  efforts  of  the  Judaisers,
who  were  now  beginning  (not  to  hinder  the  apostle's
work  merely,  but)  to  spoil  the  doctrine  which  he
preached.  This  is  the  particular  point  we  may  see  in
chapter  xv.  Accordingly  the  source  of  this  trouble  lay
not  among  unbelieving  Jews,  but  among  such  as  pro-
fessed the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  "Certain  men
which  came  down  from  Judea,  saying,  Except  ye  be
circumcised  after  the  manner  of  Moses,  ye  cannot  be
saved.  When,  therefore,  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  no
small  dissension  and  disputation  with  them,  they  de-
termined that  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  certain  other  of
them,  should  go  up  to  Jerusalem.''  Jerusalem,  alas!
was  now  the  fountain  of  the  evil :  it  was  from  the
assembly  in  Jerusalem  that  this  pest  emanated.  Satan's
effort  was  to  pollute  the  doctrine  of  the  grace  of  God,
who  allowed  that  the  authority  and  the  power  too  of
Paul  and  Barnabas  should  be  entirely  ineffectual  to  stop
the  evil.  This  was  turned  to  good  account,  because  it
was  far  more  important  to  stem  the  tidal  in  Jerusalem,
and  to  have  the  sentence  of  the  apostles,  elders,  and  all

X  2


116  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

thoroughly  against  these  evil  doers,  than  simply  the
censure  of  Paul  and  Barnabas.  It  could  not  but  be
that  Paul  and  Barnabas  should  oppose  those  that  set
aside  their  doctrines ;  but  the  question  for  the  Judaisers
•was,  What  about  the  twelve?  Thus,  the  carrying  of
the  question  to  Jerusalem  was  a  most  suitable  and  wise
act.  It  may  not  be  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  at  all
designed  it  as  such — I  do  not  suppose  they  did:  no
doubt  they  endeavoured  to  put  it  down  among  the
Gentiles,  but  they  could  not  do  so.  The  consequence
was  that  perforce  the  question  was  reserved  for  Jerusa-
lem, where  Paul  and  Barnabas  go  up  for  what  Paul
knew  involved  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  "And  being
brought  on  their  way  by  the  church,  they  passed
through  Phenice  and  Samaria,  declaring  the  conversion
of  the  Gentiles ;  and  they  caused  great  joy  unto  all  the
brethren."  Thus,  you  see,  going  upon  this  painful  con-
troversy, their  hearts  were  filled  with  the  grace  of  God.
It  was  not  the  question  they  were  full  of,  but  His  grace.
"  And  when  they  were  come  to  Jerusalem,  they  were
received  of  the  church,  and  of  the  apostles  and  elders,
and  they  declared  all  things  which  Grod  had  done
with  them."  There  again  is  uttered  what  filled  their
hearts  with  joy, — an  important  thing.  For  I  am  sure  that
often,  where  there  is  any  duty  of  a  painful  kind,  and
where  the  heart  of  any  servant  of  the  Lord,  no  matter
how  rightly,  gets  filled  with  it,  this  very  earnest  pressure
becomes  really  a  hindrance.  Because  such  is  man,  that,
if  you  become  thus  over-occupied  with  it,  others  will
infallibly  put  it  down  to  some  wrong  object  on  your
part ;  whereas  on  the  contrary,  others  do  not  so  oppose
where  you  trust  the  Lord  simply,  only  dealing  with  the


■;V


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         117

matter  when  it  is  your  duty  to  deal  with  it  and  passing  on.
Meanwhile,  your  heart  goes  out  to  that  which  is  accord-
ing to  His  own  grace ;  and  there  is  so  much  the  more
power,  when  you  must  speak  on  that  which  is  a  matter
of  pain.

It  was  thus  according  to  the  grace  and  wisdom  given
to  these  beloved  servants  of  the  Lord.  When  the  question
came  before  them,  "  there  rose  up  certain  of  the  sect  of
the  Pharisees  which  believed."  This  is  a  new  feature,  it
will  be  observed ;  that  is,  it  is  not  merely  the  envious
unbelieving  Jews,  but  the  working  of  legalism  in  the
believing  Jews.  This  is  the  serious  evil  that  now  begins
to  show  itself.  They  insist  "  that  it  was  needful  to  be
circumcised,  and  to  command  them  to  keep  the  law  of
Moses."  In  fact  they  thought  that  Christians  would  be
all  the  better  for  being  good  Jews.  This  was  their  object
and  their  doctrine,  if  such  it  can  be  called.  "And  the
apostles  and  elders  came  together  to  consider  of  this
matter.  And  when  there  had  been  much  disputing,"  &c.

All  this  leads  us  into  the  interior  of  those  days,  and
proves  that  the  idea  of  everything  being  settled  just
by  a  word  is  only  imagination ;  it  never  was  so,  not  even
when  the  whole  apostolic  college  were  there.  We  find
the  liveliest  discussions  among  them.  "And  when  there
had  been  much  disputing,  Peter  rose  up,  and  said  unto
them,  Men  [and]  brethren,  ye  know  how  that  a  good  while
ago  God  made  choice  among  us,  that  the  Gentiles  by  my
mouth  should  hear  the  word  of  the  gospel,  and  believa
And  God,  which  kuoweth  the  hearts,  bare  them  witness,
giving  them  the  Holy  Ghost,  even  as  he  did  unto  us ;
and  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them,  purifying
their  hearts  by  faith."    Peter  we  hear  on  this  occasion


118  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

preaching  Paul's  doctrine,  just  as  we  saw  that  Paul  might
among  the  Jews  preach  somewhat  like  Peter: — God
"  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them,  purifying  their
hearts  by  faith.  Now  therefore  why  tempt  ye  God,  to
put  a  yoke  upon  the  neck  of  the  disciples,  which  neither
our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to  bear  ?  But  we  believe
that  through  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ " — not
"  they  shall  be  saved,"  nor  "  they  shall  be  saved  even  as
tre."  This  is  probably  what  we  might  have  said,  but  it
is  not  what  Peter  said.  "  We  believe  that  through  the
grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  we  shall  be  saved, — ^we
Jews  shall  be  saved — even  as  they  [the  uncircumcised
GentQes]."

How  sweet  is  the  grace  of  God,  and  what  an  un-
expected blow  to  the  pretensions  of  the  Pharisees
that  believed !  And  this  too  from  Peter !  If  Paul  had
said  it,  there  would  have  been  less  to  wonder  at.  The
apostle  of  the  Gentiles  (so  they  were  prone  to  think)
would  naturally  speak  up  for  the  Gentiles,  but  how
about  Peter  ?  what  induced  the  great  apostle  of  the  cir-
cumcision so  to  speak  ?  and  this  in  the  presence  of  the
twelve  in  Jerusalem  itself?  How  was  it  that  without
the  plan  of  man,  and  contrary  no  doubt  to  the  desires  of
the  wisest,  the  failure  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  to  settle  the
matter,  conciliatory  and  gracious  as  they  were,  only
turned  to  the  glory  of  the  Lord  ?  It  was  the  evident
hand  of  God  to  the  more  magnificent  vindication  of  His
graca

"  Then  all  the  multitude  kept  silence,  and  gave  au-
dience to  Barnabas  and  Paul,  declaring  what  miracles
and  wonders  God  had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  by
them.    And  after  they  had  held  their  peace,  James


v'#.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  i^STLES.  119

answered,  saying "  (for  he  now  takes  the  place  of  pro-
posing or  giving  a  judgment),  "Men  [and]  brethren,
hearken  unto  me:  Simeon  hath  declai'ed  how  God  at  the
first  did  visit  the  Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a  people
for  his  name.  And  to  this  agree  the  words  of  the  pro-
phets ;  as  it  is  written,  After  this  I  will  return,  and  will
build  again  the  tabernacle  of  David,  which  is  fallen
down ;  and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins  thereof,  and  I
will  set  it  up :  so  that  the  residue  of  men  may  seek
the  Lord,  and  all  the  Gentiles,  upon  whom  my  name  is
called,  saith  the  Lord  who  doeth  these  things  known
from  eternity."

Thus  we  see  that  in  James's  mind  what  Peter  and
Paul  and  Barnabas  had  pressed  was  according  to  the
declarations  of  the  prophets,  not  in  conflict  but  agree-
ment with  them.  He  does  not  say  more  than  this  ;  he
does  not  mean  that  such  was  their  fulfilment;  nor  is  any
special  application  set  before  us.  They  teach  that  the
Lord's  name  should  be  called  on  the  Gentiles,  not  when
they  become  Jews.  That  they  should  be  blessed  and
recognized,  therefore,  was  in  accordance  with  prophecy.
There  were  Gentiles  as  such  owned  of  God,  without
becoming  practical  Jews  by  being  circumcised, — Gentiles
upon  whom  the  name  of  the  Lord  was  called.

This  was  the  argument  or  proof  from  Amos ;  and  it
was  conclusive.  "  Wherefore  my  sentence  is  (or,  I  judge),
that  we  trouble  not  them  which  from  among  the  Gen-
tiles are  turning  to  God :  but  that  we  write  to  them,
that  they  abstain  from  pollutions  of  idols,  and  from  for-
nication, and  from  the  thing  strangled,  and  from  blood."
This,  in  the  latter  part  of  it,  is  simply  the  precepts  of
Noah,  the  injunctions  that  were  laid  down  before  the


120  INTKODUCTORY  LECTURES.

call  of  Abrara,  and,  again,  that  which  was  evidently
due  to  God  Himself  in  regard  to  the  human  corruption
that  accompanies  idolatry;  so  that  things  were  then
left  in  a  manner  alike  simple  and  wise.  There  could
be  no  right-minded  Gentiles  who  would  not  acknow-
ledge the  propriety  and  necessity  of  that  which  the
decree  insists  on.

"Then  pleased  it  the  apostles  and  elders,  with  the
whole  church,  having  chosen  to  send  men  from  among
them  to  Antioch  with  Paul  and  Barnabas;  namely,
Judas  surnamed  Barsabas,  and  Silas,  chief  men  among
the  brethren."

It  will  be  observed,  by  the  way,  that  there  were  lead-
ing men  among  the  brethren.  Some  seem  jealous  of
this;  others  of  hostile  mind  talk  as  if  it  contradicts
brotherhood;  but  according  to  scripture,  as  in  the
nature  of  things,  it  is  manifestly  right.  It  is  only
crotchetty  people  who  have  made  a  mistake.  There
must  not  be  any  allowance  of  jealousy  where  God
speaks  so  plainly.  This  would  be  indeed  to  quarrel
with  the  mercies  of  God  among  us.  The  letter  was
written,  if  I  may  so  say,  under  the  seal  of  the  Spirit
of  God,  from  "the  apostles,  and  elders,  and*  brethren,''
to  the  brethren  of  the  Gentiles  in  Antioch,  and  Syria,
and  Cilicia.  On  its  contents  I  need  not  enlarge :  they
are  familiar  to  all.

"Judas  and  Silas,  being  prophets  also  themselves,
exhorted  the  brethren  (i.e.,  at  Antioch)  with  many  words,
and  confirmed  {i.e.,  strengthened)  them.  And  after  they

*  There  is  very  grave  authority  (X,  A,  B,  C,  D,  &c.)  for  dropping
jcat,  **and,**  and  so  throwing  together  ot  irp.  dd.  "the  elder  brethren"
(in  the  sense,  however,  of  "  the  elders").


iJi.  :-


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         121

had  tarried  there  a  space,  they  were  let  go  in  peace
from  the  brethren  unto  those  that  sent  them."  (I  give
more  exactly  than  in  the  common  text.)

It  was  important  to  have  the  presence  of  men  who
were  themselves  competent  witnesses  of  what  had  been
debated  and  decided  at  Jerusalem.  This  was  far  more
than  being  the  mere  and  cold  bearers  of  a  letter.  They
knew  the  motives  of  the  adversaries ;  they  were  familiar
with  the  spiritual  interests  at  stake,  beside  knowing  the
feeling  of  the  apostles,  and  of  the  church  at  large.
These  men  accordingly  accompanied  Paul  and  Barna-
bas. But  this  led  also,  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  to  an
important  point  in  the  journeyings  of  the  great  apostle ;
for  Paul  and  Barnabas,  it  is  said,  "continued  in  An-
tioch,  teaching  and  preaching  the  word  of  the  Lord,
with  many  others  also."  (What  largeness  and  love!
How  different  from  the  days  when  an  exclusive  title
protects  unfit  or  haughty  men,  and  money  ditiiculties
hamper  both  teachers  and  taught!)  "And  some  days
after  Paul  said  to  liamabas"  (the  younger  takes  the
lead),  "  Let  us  go  again  and  visit  the  brethren  in  every
city  where  we  have  preached  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and
see  how  they  do."

Paul  loved  the  church ;  he  was  not  only  a  great
preacher  of  the  gospel,  but  he  was  deeply  interested  in
the  state  of  the  brethren,  and  he  valued  their  edifica-
tion. Barnabas  proposed  to  take  with  them  John,  who
was  also  called  Mark ;  Paul,  however,  would  not  agree
to  it.  "  But  Paul  thought  not  good  to  take  him  with
them,  who  departed  from  them  from  Pamphylia,  and
went  not  with  them  to  the  work.  And  the  contention
was  so  sharp  between  them,  that  they  departed  asunder


J


122  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

one  from  the  other."  The  Spirit  of  God  takes  good
care  to  record  this;  it  was  needful  that  it  should  be
noted.  It  should  act  as  a  warning ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  it  would  also  prepare  the  minds  of  the  children  of
God  for  the  fact,  that  even  the  most  blessed  men  may
have  their  difl&culties  and  differences.  We  must  not  be
too  much  cast  down  if  we  meet  with  anything  of  the
kind.  I  do  not  make  this  remark  in  any  wise  to  make
light  of  such  disagreements,  but  alas!  we  know  that
these  things  do  arise.

But  there  is  more  for  our  instruction  :  "  Paul  chose
Silas."  This  is  a  weighty  practical  consideration.  There
are  persons,  I  am  aware,  who  think  that  in  the  work  of
the  Lord  all  must  be  left  absolutely  without  thought  of
one's  own  or  concert  to  the  Lord  Himself.  Now  I  do
not  find  this  in  the  word  of  God.  I  do  believe  iu
simple-hearted  subjection  to  the  Lord.  Assuredly  faith
in  the  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  of  all  importance, —
both  in  the  church,  and  also  in  the  service  of  Christ.
Yet  there  is  not  liberty  alone  but  a  duty  of  conferring
together  on  the  part  of  those  who  labour.  There  may
be  spiritual  wisdom  in  what  is  often  called  "  arrange-
ment." So  far  from  regarding  it  as  an  infringement
of  scripture,  or  of  what  is  due  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  I
believe  there  are  cases  in  which  not  to  do  so  would  be
independence,  and  a  total  mistake  as  to  the  ways  of  the
Lord.  It  is  quite  true  that  Paul  would  not  have  an
improper  person  forced  on  him  in  the  work.  He  had
come  to  the  conclusion  that,  though  Mark  might  be  a
servant  of  the  Lord  and  of  course  have  his  own  right
sphere,  he  was  not  exactly  the  labourer  that  was  suited
for  the  mission  to  which  the  Lord  was  calling  himselt


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         123

Consequently  his  mind  was  made  up  not  to  take  Mark
with  him.  Barnabas,  on  the  contrary,  would  have  Mark
with  them,  and  at  length  so  strongly  urged  this  as  to
make  it  the  necessary  condition  of  his  own  association
with  the  apostle.  The  consequence  was  that  the  apostle
preferred  even  to  forego  the  presence  of  his  beloved
friend  and  brother  and  fellow-servant,  Barnabas,  rather
than  have  an  unsuitable  person  forced  upon  him.

I  have  little  doubt  that  the  brethren  in  general  judged,
and  this  spiritually,  that  Paul  was  in  the  right  and
Barnabas  therefore  wrong.  For  the  apostle  chose  Silas
and  departed,  as  we  are  told,  "recommended  by  the
brethren  unto  the  grace  of  God,"  without  a  word  about
the  brethren  recommending  Barnabas  and  John.  Not
that  one  would  in  the  least  doubt  that  Barnabas  con-
tinued to  be  blessed  of  God.  And  as  for  John  (Mark),
we  ai-e  expressly  informed  of  his  ability  in  the  ministry
at  a  later  day.  The  apostle  takes  particular  pains  to
show  his  respect  and  love  for  Barnabas  after  this  in  an
inspired  epistle  (1  Cor.  ix.);  and  what  is  yet  more  to
the  purpose,  he  makes  the  most  honourable  mention  of
Mark  in  more  than  one  of  his  later  epistles.  (Col.  iv.
and  2  Tim.  iv.)  How  good  of  the  Lord  thus  to  let  us
see  the  triumph  of  His  grace  in  the  end  !  And  what  a
joy  to  the  loving  heart  of  the  apostle  to  record  it !

At  the  same  time  the  entire  history  furnishes  a  most
important  principle  in  the  practical  service  of  the  Lord.
We  ought  not  to  be  in  anywise  bound  by  an  esprit  de
corps;  where  His  testimony  is  concerned,  we  must  be
prepared  to  break  with  flesh  and  blood — to  say  to  a  father
and  mother,  I  have  not  seen  them,  neither  to  acknowledge
one's  brethren,  nor  to  know  one's  own  children.    Nor


124  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

must  we  think  overmuch  about  the  trial ;  for  beyond  a
doubt  many  will  be  grieved  by  that  measure  of  faith-
fulness to  the  Lord  which  condemns  themselves.  This
we  must  bear  as  a  part  of  the  burden  of  His  work.
On  the  other  hand,  need  it  be  said  that  nothing  is
more  uncomely  than  a  rudely  personal  and  slashing
habit  with  others  in  carrying  out  the  will  of  the
Lord  ?  There  is  in  it  neither  grace,  nor  righteousness,
nor  wisdom,  but  self  and  self-deception;  for  it  looks  like
zeal — this  fire  of  Jehu.  At  the  same  time  there  is  such
a  thing  as  looking  to  God  to  have  an  exercised  judg-
ment, as  to  your  associates  no  less  than  your  work.  The
Lord  alone  can  give  the  single  eye  with  self-judgment
which  enables  us  in  the  Spirit  to  discern  aright  whom
we  ought  to  decline,  and  whom  to  choose,  if  companions
offer  or  should  be  sought  in  the  work.

In  chapter  xvi  we  enter  on  some  fresh  points  of
interest  We  have  before  us  the  first  appearance  of
Timothy,  who  was  afterwards  to  figure  so  much  in  the
history  of  Paul  and  the  service  of  the  Lord.  Here  too
we  find  a  principle  of  no  small  moment  for  our  guidance,
and  the  more  so  as  Paul  did  that  for  which,  one  can  con-
ceive, a  great  many  might  judge  him.  It  is  wonderful
how  apt  people  are,  and  especially  those  who  do  not
know  much,  to  judge  such  as  know  far  better  than
themselves.  There  is  nothing  so  easy  as  to  form  a
judgment,  but  whether  there  be  adequate  grounds  and
a  sound  conclusion  are  other  questions.  Here  the  apostle
is  said  to  have  taken  Timothy  (whose  mother  was  a
Jewess  and  his  father  a  Greek,  himself  a  disciple  of
good  report  among  the  brethren)  to  go  forth  with  him.
But,  singular  to  say,  Paul  circumcises  him.     What


*^lrr


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         125

constemation  this  must  have  made  amongst  the
brethren,  especially  the  Gentiles !  It  was  just  after  the
battle  of  Gentile  independence  of  circumcision  had  been
fought  and  won.  They  surely  must  have  thought  that
Paul  was  losing  his  wits  himself  to  circumcise  Timothy!
Not  even  a  Jew  would  have  gone  so  far.  Could  it  be
that  the  apostle  of  the  uncircumcision  had  at  length
succumbed  to  the  adversary  ?  or  that  he  was  swayed  by
his  early  prejudices  so  as  to  forget  all  his  own  past
testimony  to  the  cross  and  death  and  resurrection  of
Christ?

Now  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  so  far  from  Paul
being  under  legal  prepossession  in  this  act,  on  the  con-
trary he  never  did  anything  in  his  course  that  showed
him  to  be  more  completely  above  it.  To  circumcise
Timothy  was  precisely  what  the  law  would  not  have
done.  It  is  well  known  that,  if  there  was  a  mingled
marriage  (i,  e.,  between  a  Jew  and  a  Gentile),  the  law
would  have  nothing  to  say  to  the  offspring.  Legally  the
Jewish  father  could  not  own  his  own  children  born  of
a  Gentile  mother,  or  vice  versa,  (See  Ezra  x.)  Now
Timothy  being  the  fruit  of  such  a  marriage,  there  could
be  no  claim,  even  if  there  was  license,  to  circumcise
him ;  and  (just  because  there  was  no  such  claim,  he
being  on  the  one  side  sprung  of  a  Greek,  though  his
mother  was  a  Jewess,  because  it  could  not  be  com-
manded) Paul  condescends  out  of  grace  to  those  who
were  on  a  lower  ground,  and  stops  their  mouths  most
effectually.  Grace  knows  how  and  when  to  bend,  no
less  than  to  be  as  unflinching  as  a  rock;  but  this  is
precisely  what  even  believers  in  general  are  least  able
to  understand.    Righteousness  (that  is,  consistency  with


126  INTEODUCTORY  LECTURES.

oar  relationship)  is  not  alL  God  is  gracious,  and  so  may
we  be  by  His  grace,  and  thus  feel  how  such  as  are  really
on  a  true  and  real  ground  of  grace,  and  in  a  position
according  to  the  word  of  God,  can  have  the  truest  sym-
pathy with  those  who,  though  of  God,  are  on  a  totally
different  ground,  doing  and  saying  what  must  astonish
others  possessed  of  little  grace.  Is  not  this  a  thing  to
be  weighed  ?  We  may  find,  there  is  little  doubt,  the
importance  of  it  before  we  have  got  through  our  little
career.  It  is  a  question  that  often  comes  up  in  various
forms ;  but  I  believe  there  is  only  one  means  of  solving
it.  While  the  heart  thoroughly  holds  fast  the  truth  of
God,  let  us  seek  at  the  same  time  to  understand  the
workings  of  that  truth  according  to  the  grace  of  God.

This  was  the  secret  of  the  apostle's  action  here,  but
it  did  not  hinder  in  the  least  his  use  of  the  decision
arrived  at  in  the  recent  council  at  Jerusalem.  For  "  as
they  went  through  the  cities,  they  delivered  to  them  to
keep  the  decrees  that  were  ordained  of  the  apostles
and  elders  that  were  at  Jerusalem.  And  so  were  the
churches  established  in  the  faith,  and  increased  in
number  daily."

Then  we  find  another  important  fact.  Paul  was
stopped  in  his  Asiatic  joume}rings,  as  we  are  told  here,
and  "  forbidden  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  preach  the  word
in  Asia."  So  completely  is  the  Spirit  of  God  regarded
as  the  directing  person  in  the  church.  "After  they  were
come  to  Mysia,  they  assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia :  but
the  Spirit  of  Jesus  (for  such  should  be  the  text)  suffered
them  not.  And  they  passing  by  Mysia  came  down  to
Troas.  And  a  vision  appeared  to  Paul  in  the  night ;
there  stood  a  man  of  Macedonia^  and  prayed  him,  say-


**.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         127

ing.  Come  over  into  Macedonia,  and  help  us."  In  various
ways,  therefore,  divine  guidance  was  never  wanting.

Accordingly  they  come  to  the  first  spot  in  Europe  that
was  blessed  with  the  preaching  of  the  great  apostle  of
the  Gentiles.  They  came  to  Philippi,  "which  is  the
first*  city  of  that  part  of  Macedonia,  a  colony :  and  we
were  abiding  in  the  city  itself  certain  days."

Here  we  read  of  Lydia's  heart  opened,  and  of  her
household.  The  action  of  the  Spirit  as  to  the  family
seems  to  have  obtained  remarkably  among  Gentiles;
among  the  Jews,  as  far  as  I  know,  we  do  not  hear  of  it.
We  have  found  already  districts  among  the  Jews,  as  also
among  the  Samaritans,  which  were  powerfully  impressed
(to  say  the  least)  by  the  gospel;  but  among  the  Gentiles
families  seem  particularly  visited  by  divine  grace  as
recorded  by  the  Spirit.  Take  for  example  Cornelius  the
jailor,  Stephanas:  indeed  you  find  it  over  and  over
gain.  This  is  exceedingly  encouraging — especially  to  us.

But  grace  never  acts  in  power  without  stirring  up  the
enemy,  and  in  ways  calculated  most  to  oppose  and  under-
mine. His  tactics  in  Europe  differed  from  those  in  Asia
— at  least  in  this  the  first  place  where  the  gospel  was
preached  The  earliest  case  of  any  one  or  thing  which
the  word  of  Grod  names  is,  as  a  rule,  remarkably  charac-

•  Philippi  waa  not  the  "chief"  city  of  Macedonia,  but  Thcssa-
lonica ;  and  as  Wieseler  has  shown,  even  if  the  subdivisions  had  been
known  then  of  Macedonia  Prima,  Sec.  &c.,  Amphipolis  (not  Philippi)
was  the  chief  city  of  that  part  or  district.  The  literal  and  correct
translation  therefore  is  "first,"  geographically  speaking.  Eckhel
(iv.  p.  477,  as.)  copies  the  coin,  col.  avo.  ivl.  philip.  It  was  there-
fore probably  a  colony  founded  by  C.  J.  Ccesar,  and  afterwards  in-
creaaed  by  AngnstuB.


128  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

teristic.  Applying  this  to  what  is  in  hand,  we  find  that
Satan's  peculiar  method  in  Europe  was  not  so  much  by
overt  opposition  but  rather  by  affecting  patronage.  The
maiden  with  the  spirit  of  divination  did  not  take  the
method  of  decrjring  the  servants  of  the  Lord  but  of  ap-
plauding them.  As  it  is  said  here,  "  she  followed  Paul
and  us"  (for  Luke  was  now  with  the  apostle)  with
the  cry,  "  These  men  are  the  servants  of  the  Most  High
God,  which  show  unto  us  the  way  of  salvation."  This
she  did  many  days,  for  at  first  the  apostle  avoided  action
to  give  no  importance  by  any  assaults  of  an  open  kind
on  the  evil  spirit.  But  after  no  notice  was  taken  for
some  days,  he  being  grieved  at  her  boldness  turns  and
says  to  the  spirit, "  I  command  thee  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ  to  come  out  of  her."  This  roused  the  whole  city.
The  masters  were  troubled  because  the  source  of  their
gains  was  gone ;  and  the  magistrates  disliked  anything
that  produced  an  uproar.  The  result  was  that  the
multitude  rose  up  together,  the  praetors  rent  off  their
clothes,  and  the  apostle  and  his  companion  were  beaten
and  cast  into  prison,  with  a  charge  to  the  jailor  to  keep
them  safely.  There  the  Lord  wrought  marvellously.  At
midnight,  while  others  slept,  Paul  and  Silas  in  praying
were  singing  the  praises  of  God,  who  soon  answered  them.
"Suddenly  there  was  a  great  earthquake,  so  that  the
foundations  of  the  prison  were  shaken :  and  immediately
all  the  doors  were  opened."  The  consequence  of  the
truth  afterwards  presented  was  in  God's  grace  the  con-
version of  the  jailor.  It  is  not  now  the  time  to  dwell
on  the  details,  beautiful  as  the  scene  is,  and  attractive
to  the  heart  as  it  may  well  be.  The  praetors  were
soon  forced  to  acknowledge  the  wrong  they  had  done  in


THB  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         129

beating  Bomans  uncondemned,  contrary  to  the  law  of
which  they  were  the  administrators.  Thus  the  world
was  rebuked,  the  brethren  comforted,  and  Paul  and  his
companions  departed  to  other  fields  of  suffering  and
service.

The  next  chapter  (xviL)  sketches  for  us  the  first
entrance  of  the  gospel  into  Thessalonica.  It  may  be
noted  how  remarkably  the  kingdom  was  preached  there.
But  those  of  Berea  earned  for  themselves  a  still  more
honourable  character,  being  distinguished  not  so  much
by  the  prophetic  style  of  teaching  addressed  to  them,
as  by  their  own  earnest  and  simple-hearted  research
into  the  word  of  God.

Finally,  the  apostle  is  at  Athens,  and  there  he  makes
one  of  the  most  characteristic  appeals  preserved  to  us
in  this  striking  book,  but  an  appeal  by  no  means  to
the  credit  of  human  refinement  and  intellect   For  thei*e
is  no  place  where  the  apostle  condescends  more  to  the
elementary  forms  of  truth,  than  in  that  city  of  art,
poetry,  and  high  mental  activity.    His  text  is  taken,  we
may  say,  from  the  well-known  inscription  on  the  altar,
"To  the  unknown  God."    He  would  let  them  know
what,  in  the  midst  of  their  boasted  knowledge,  they
themselves  confessed  they  knew  not.     His  discourse
was  pregnant  with  suited  truth,  for  he  points  out  the
one  tme  God,  who  made  the  world  and  all  things  there-
in— a  truth  that  philosophy  never  acknowledged,  and
now  denies,  and  would  disprove  if  it  were  possible.

"God  that  made  the  world  and  all  things  therein,  see-
ing that  he  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth'* — another  truth
that  unbelief  disowns — that  God  is  not  only  the  maker


130  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

but  the  Lord,  the  master  and  disposer,  of  all — "He
dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands."  Thus  the
apostle  finds  himself  at  issue  with  both  the  Gentiles
and  the  Jews.  "Neither  is  worshipped  (served)  with
men's  hands,  as  though  he  needed  anything," — contrary
to  all  religion  of  nature,  wherever  and  whatever  it  may
be.  "Seeing  he  giveth"  (such  is  His  character)  "to
all  men  life  and  breath  and  all  things  ;  and  hath  made
of  one  blood : "  here  again  he  is  at  issue  with  man's
ideas,  especially  with  those  of  Hellenic  polytheism,  for
the  unity  of  the  human  race  is  a  truth  that  goes  with
that  of  the  true  God.  It  was  seen  among  men  that
various  races  had  each  their  own  national  god,  and  thus
naturally  the  falsehood  of  many  gods  was  bound  up
with  and  fostered  the  kindred  pretension  of  many  inde-
pendent races  of  men.  This  was  a  darling  idea  of  the
pagan  world.  They  held  themselves  to  have  sprung
from  the  earth  in  some  singularly  foolish  manner,  at  the
same  time  maintaining  that  each  was  independent  of
the  other.  On  the  other  hand,  the  truth  which  divine
revelation  discloses  is  that  which  man's  mind  never  did
discover,  but,  when  propounded,  at  once  brings  convic-
tion along  with  it.  Is  it  not  humbling  that  the  most
simple  truth  about  the  simplest  fact  should  be  entirely
beyond  the  ken  of  the  proudest  intellects  unaided  by
the  Bible  ?  One  would  think  that  man  ought  to  know
his  own  origin.  It  is  just  what  he  does  not  know.  He
must  know  God  first,  and  when  he  does  all  else  be-
comes plain.  "  He  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations
of  men  for  to  dwell  on  the  face  of  the  earth."

Again,  "He  hath  determined  the  times  before-ap-
pointed" (everything  is  under  His  guidance  and  goverof*


.^'•:^-


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         131

ment) ;  ''and  the  bounds  of  their  habitation ;  that  they
should  seek  God,  if  haply  they  might  feel  after  him,  and
find  him "  (" God"  it  should  be  here,  according  to  the
best  authorities:  "The  Lord"  is  not  in  keeping  with
the  teaching  in  this  place.  He  shows  them  that  God
is  the  Lord,  but  this  is  another  matter),  "  though  he  be
not  far  from  every  one  of  us :  for  in  him  we  live,  and
move,  and  have  our  being ;  as  certain  also  of  your  own
poets,"  &c  Thus  he  turns  the  acknowledgment  of  their
own  poets  against  themselves,  or  rather  against  their
idolatry.  Strange  to  say  that  the  poets,  however  fanciful,
are  wiser  than  the  philosophers.  How  often  they  stum-
ble in  their  dreams  on  things  beyond  that  which  they
themselves  would  have  otherwise  imagined!  Thus  some
of  the  poets  among  them  (Cleanthes  and  Aratus)  had
said,  "For  we  are  aUo  His  offspring."  "Forasmuch,
then,  as  we  are  the  offspring  of  God,  we  ought  not  to
think  that  the  Godhead  (the  Divine)  is  like  unto  gold,
or  silver,  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and  man's  device."
How  clearly  was  shown  the  folly  of  their  boasted  reason !
What  can  be  simpler  or  more  conclusive  ?  Since  we
are  the  offspring  of  God,  we  ought  not  to  think  that
God  can  be  made  by  our  hands.  This  is  in  effect  what
their  practice  amounted  to.  Gods  of  silver  and  gold
were  the  ofispring  of  men's  art  and  imagination.

"And  the  times  of  this  ignorance"  (what  a  way  to
treat  the  boasting  men  of  Athens  1)  "God  winked  at;  but
now  commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent."  Mani-
festly there  is  a  thrust  at  conscience.  This  is  the  reason
why  he  insists  here  on  God's  call  to  repent  It  is  no
use  to  talk  of  science,  literature,  politics,  religion.  Old
or  new  speculations  in  philosophy  are  alike  vain.     Grod

K   2


132  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

is  now  enjoining  on  all  everywhere  to  repent.  Thus  he
puts  the  sage  down  with  the  savage,  because  God  is
brought  in  as  the  judge  of  alL  It  is  evident  that  divine
truth  must  be  aggressive;  it  cannot  but  deal  with  every
conscience  that  hears  it  throughout  the  world.  The
law  might  thunder  its  claims  on  a  particular  people ;  but
the  truth  deals  with  everybody  as  he  is  before  God.
The  ground  of  the  appeal  too  is  most  serious:  "Because
he  hath  appointed  a  day  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the
world."  Solemn  prospect!  This  he  urges  home  on
them,  and  in  a  manner  peculiar  but  suitable  to  the
moral  condition  of  Athens.

God  is  about  to  judge  the  habitable  earth  (oLcovfUmriv)
in  righteousness.  He  does  not  here  speak  of  judging
the  dead.  It  is  the  sudden  intervention  of  the  man
who,  raised  from  the  dead,  is  going  to  deal  with  this
habitable  earth.  Such  is  the  unquestionable  mean-
ing of  the  text.  The  "  world "  here  means  the  scene
dwelt  in  by  man.  It  is  in  no  way  a  question  of  the
great-white-throne  judgment.  Certainly  all  that  he  put
before  them  was  admirably  calculated  to  arouse  them
from  their  m)rthic  dreams  to  the  light  of  truth,  without
gratifying  their  love  of  the  speculative.  "He  will  judge
the  world  in  righteousness  by  that  man  whom  he
hath  ordained ;  whereof  he  hath  given  assurance  to  all
men,  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead."

The  allusion  to  the  resurrection  became  at  once  the
signal  for  unseemly  jest.  "  And  when  they  heard  of  the
resurrection  of  the  dead,  some  mocked :  and  others  said,
We  will  hear  thee  again  of  this  matter.  So  Paul  de-
parted from  amoDg  them."  There  was  but  little  fruit
even  for  the  apostle  and  from  this  wonderful  discourse.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         133

Some,  however,  did  cleave  to  him,  and  believed:  "among
the  which  was  Dionysins  the  Areopagite,  and  a  woman
named  Damaiis,  and  others  with  theuL"

But  in  the  grossly  voluptuous  state  of  Corinth  the
gospel,  strange  to  say,  was  to  take  a  great  and  effectual
hold  on  a  certain  part  of  the  population.  Not  so  at
Athens :  few  were  the  souls,  and  comparatively  feeble
the  work  there.  But  in  Corinth,  proverbially  the  most
corrupt  of  Grecian  cities,  how  unexpected  yet  how  good
the  ways  of  the  Lord !  He  had  much  people  in  that
city.  It  was  an  immense  comfort,  both  in  his  labours
there  and  afterwards,  when  the  work  seemed  spoiled.
He  could  still  believe,  and  spite  of  all  look  for  the  re-
covery of  those  that  had  been  turned  aside.  The  Lord
is  ever  kind  and  true ;  and  so  Paul  went  on  with  good
courage,  however  tried  and  humbled  on  their  account.

Here  take  note  of  another  remarkable  fact.  The
apostle  does  what  is  proscribed  by  all  ecclesiastical
canons,  as  far  as  I  know,  everywhere :  that  is  to  say,
he  works  with  his  hands  at  the  simple  occupation  of
tent-making.  "And  he  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  every
sabbath,  and  persuaded  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks.  And
when  Silas  and  Timotheus  were  come" — he  takes  this
as  the  occasion  for  testifying  to  the  Jews  fully — being
"  pressed  "  (not  exactly  in  the  spirit,  as  it  is  said  in  the
common  text,  but)  "  in  regard  of  the  word,"  he  testifies
that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.  "  And  when  they  opposed
themselves,  and  blasphemed,  he  shook  his  raiment,"  with
the  warning,  "Your  blood  be  upon  your  own  head;  I  am
clean :  from  henceforth  I  will  go  unto  the  Gentiles."
,  Accordingly  the  work  goes  on  among  the  Gentiles,


134  CTTBODCCTORT  LECTU&ESL

though  the  Lord  was  not  withoat  witness  among  the
Jews.  And  this  leads  to  a  vast  deal  of  feeling  and
clamour :  **  and  all  the  Greeks  took  Sosthenes,  the  chief
mler  of  the  synagogue,  and  beat  him  before  the  judg-
ment seat"  Here  the  ruler  was  not  only  unwilling  to
entertain  the  question,  but  supercilious,  and  indifferent
to  the  general  disorder.

Just  at  the  same  time  another  remarkable  feature
appears  here.  In  Cenchrea  Paul  shaves  his  head  accord-
ing to  a  vow.  It  is  plain  that,  whatever  might  be  the
strength  of  divine  grace,  there  was  a  certain  concession
to  his  old  religious  habits,  even  in  the  greatest  of  apos-
tles, and  the  most  blessed  instrument  of  New  Testament
inspiration.

However  this  may  be,  the  end  of  the  chapter  gives
another  remarkable  witness  of  graca  ApoUos  is  brought
before  us,  taught  by  Aqnila  and  Priscilla,  who  "took
him  unto  them,  and  expounded  unto  him  the  way  of
Grod  more  perfectly."  I  doubt  whether  it  would  have
been  according  to  the  will  of  God  for  a  woman  to  have
done  so  alone ;  but  she,  along  with  her  husband,  in-
structed him  as  they  could.  Kow  Priscilla,  as  I  cannot
doubt,  knew  more  than  her  husband ;  it  was  therefore
desirable  that  she  should  contribute  her  help.  Still
the  Lord's  ways  are  invariably  wise;  and  it  is  very
evident  that  it  was  in  conjunction  with  her  husband,
not  independently  of  him,  that  this  grave  task  was
carried  on.

Another  important  fact  opens  chapter  xix.  Paul
found  at  Ephesus  a  dozen  disciples,  who  were  in  a  very
ambiguous  position;  for  they  were  not  exactly  Jews,


THK  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  135

and  they  were  certainly  not  in  the  true  sense  Chris-
tians :  they  were  in  a  transition  state  between  the  two.
Does  this  appear  to  you  at  all  startling  ?  It  is  likely
that  it  may  disturb  those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  think-
ing, or  at  least  saying,  that  all  persons  must  be  in  one
of  the  two  states — that  it  is  impossible  to  be  in  a  middle
position  between  them.  But  this  is  not  the  fact.  It  is
always  well  to  face  the  word  of  God;  and  God  has
written  nothing  in  vain.

I  say,  then,  that  these  men  were  recognized  at  Ephesus
as  believers,  but  it  is  very  evident  that  they  were  not
resting  on  the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  They  had  faith,
they  looked  to  His  person;  but  they  had  not  intelligently
laid  hold  of  His  work  for  the  peace  of  their  souls.  So
when  Paul  comes  there  and  iSnds  these  disciples,  he
says,  "  Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  since  ye  be-
lieved ?"  Not  the  slightest  doubt  is  started  about  their
believing,  but  he  does  raise  a  very  serious  question  about
another  thing: — "Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost
since  ye  believed  ?"  Why  he  asked  this  it  is  not  for  us
to  say  for  certain.  It  is  likely  that  he  saw  something
that  indicated  to  his  penetrating  eye  souls  not  at  rest
and  in  the  liberty  of  grace.  In  spirit  they  were  still  un-
der the  law.  It  is  the  state  described  in  the  latter  part
of  Eomans  vii.  Of  course  I  use  this  description  with
reference  to  Bomans  vii.  by  anticipation,  because  that
Epistle  was  not  yet  written.  But  people  were  in  that
state  before  it  was  written  as  well  as  since;  and  the
object  of  the  epistle  was  to  deliver  them  out  of  it.

Paul  then  enquired,  "  Have  ye  received  the  Holy
Ghost  since  ye  believed  ?  And  they  said  unto  him,  We
have  not  so  much  as  heard  whether  there  be  any  Holy


136  KTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

Ghost."  It  is  not  that  they  did  not  know  the  existence
of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Such  is  not  at  all  the  meaning;
of  the  text.  All  Jews  had  heard  in  the  scripture  of
the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  more  particnlariy  John's  disciples
were  well  instructed  in  the  fact,  not  only  of  His
existence,  but  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  about  to  be
sent  down  on  believers,  or  rather  that  they  were  going
to  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost  This  is  what  is
referred  to.  Had  that  baptism  taken  place  ?  They  were
not  aware  of  it ;  they  had  not  yet  received  the  great
blessing.  Thus  it  is  seen,  they  were  believers,  though
they  had  not  received  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
Such  is  the  account  that  scripture  gives  of  their  stata

It  is  well  to  note  this,  because  we  may  find  persons
now  in  a  state  somewhat  analogous.  There  are  many
souls  who  are  not  at  all  in  liberty,  not  having  yet
received  the  Spirit  of  adoption.  Yet  are  they  persons
that  we  can  truly  accept  as  bom  of  God ;  they  detest
sin;  they  love  holiness;  they  really  adore  the  Lord
Jesus,  having  no  doubt  at  all  as  to  His  glory,  and  that
He  is  the  Saviour.  For  all  this  they  are  not  able  to
— what  they  call — "apply"  the  truth  to  their  own  case
and  settled  relationship.  They  cannot  always  appro-
priate the  blessing.  They  are  not  at  ease  and  at  liberty
in  their  souls.  We  must  not  put  such  people  down  as
tmbelievers,  on  the  one  hand ;  neither  must  we  rest,  on
the  other  hand,  as  though  they  had  received  everything.
Those  are  two  errors  to  which  many  are  prona  Scripture
allows  neither,  perfectly  providing  for  every  case.  What
the  apostle  did  was  this :  he  was  far  from  questiomiig
the  i-eality  of  their  faith,  but  he  showed  that  it  was  not
yet  exercised  on  the  full  object  of  faith.    They  had  not


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         137

yet  entered  into  the  just  results  of  redemption.  Accord-
ingly he  enquires  how  this  came  to  pass — to  what  they
had  been  baptized  They  say,  To  John's  baptism.  This
explains  alL  John's  baptism  was  only  transitional.  It
was  of  God,  but  it  was  simply  in  prospect  of  the  bless-
ing, not  in  possession  of  it.  Such  too  was  the  state  of
these  men.  The  apostle  then  puts  before  them  the  truth.
"They  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.
And  when  Paul  had  laid  his  hands  upon  them,  the  Holy
Ghost  came  upon  them  ;  and  they  spake  with  tongues."

This  is  highly  important  to  be  understood,  though
(I  need  not  say)  still  more  to  be  believed.  We  have  the
apostle  in  an  exceptional  w^ay  laying  his  hands  on  dis-
ciples in  this  condition,  just  as  Peter  and  John  laid  their
hands  on  the  Samaritan  believers  who  thereby  received
the  Holy  Ghost  Thus  God  takes  particular  pains  to
show  that  the  apostle  Paul  had  the  same  sii^n  and
voucher  of  his  apostleship  as  attached  to  Peter  and
John  before.  We  are  not,  however,  to  suppose  that  a
man  cannot  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  except  by  such  an
act :  this  would  be  a  false  impression  and  a  misuse  of
scriptura  As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  and  sought  to  ex-
plain long  ago,  the  two  general  cases  of  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost  are  entirely  irrespective  of  any  such  act;
the  special  cases,  where  hands  were  imposed,  owed  their
existence  to  peculiar  circumstances  that  do  not  call  for
detailed  remarks  at  this  late  hour.

Then  we  hear  of  the  mighty  spread  of  the  work, —
not  only  the  power  with  which  God  clothed  the  apostle,
but  also  that  which  rebuked  the  superstitious  use  of  the
name  of  Jesus  by  those  who  without  faith  pretended  to
it.    The  chapter  ends  with  the  tumult  at  Ephcsus.


138  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

In  chapter  xx.  we  learn  the  definitive  usage,  which  the
Spirit  sanctions  and  records  for  us,  of  the  Lord's  day,  or
the  first  day  of  the  week,  as  the  fitting  time  for  the
breaking  of  bread.  So  we  find  it  among  the  Gentiles
in  chapter  xx.  7.  I  am  aware  that  there  are  those  who
seem  to  think  there  is  no  liberty  to  break  bread  on  any
other  day.  I  cannot  but  differ  from  such  a  conclusion.
There  appears  to  me  full  liberty  to  break  bread  any  day
provided  that  some  adequate  or  just  reason  call  for  it :
Acts  ii.  is,  to  my  mind,  conclusive  authority  for  this.
At  the  same  time,  while  there  is  liberty  to  break  bread,
wherever  there  arises  a  sufiScient  ground  for  it  in  the
judgment  of  the  spiritual  on  any  day  of  the  week,  it  is
obligatory^  if  we  may  use  such  a  term  on  such  a  theme,
on  all  saints  walking  with  the  Lord  to  break  bread  on
the  Lord's  day,  remembering  always  that  the  obligation
flows  from  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  is  perfectly  consistent
with  the  most  thorough  sense  of  liberty  before  the  Lord.
In  short,  then,  the  regularly  sanctioned  day  for  breaking
bread  among  the  Gentiles  is  the  first  day  of  the  week
(not  of  the  month,  or  quarter,  or  year) ;  but  under  special
circumstances  the  early  disciples  used  to  break  bread
every  day.  This  appears  to  be  the  true  answer  to  ques-
tions raised  on  this  point.

Finally,  in  the  same  chapter  (without  entering  into
particulars  at  present),  we  may  note  the  meeting  of  the
elders*  with  Paul,  and  the  important  truth  that  they

•  It  may  be  observed  here  that  those  whom  the  inspired  historian
caUs  **  the  elders  of  the  church  *'  (•*.  e.,  in  Ephesus)  the  apostle  detdg-
natee  overseers,  or  bishops  {liei<rti6novQ).  They  are  not  in  scripture
two  orders  of  spiritual  rulers  but  one  office.  It  is  not  merely  that  the
bishops  were  styled  presbyters  (the  higher  dignity  including  the
lower),  but  the  presbyters  Paul  calls  bishops,  whidi  could  only  be


ir^ji;


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         139

are  not  thrown  upon  any  successors  to  the  apostle,
nor  does  he  speak  of  any  successors  in  their  own  office,
but  "commends  them  to  Grod  and  to  the  word  of  his
grace."  This  is  the  more  worthy  of  attention  because
he  warns  them  of  grievous  wolves  without,  and  perverse
men  from  within.  Thus  there  was  every  reason  for
speaking  of  succession,  if  it  really  possessed  the  place
which  tradition  gives  it,  both  to  apostles  on  the  one
hand,  and  to  elders  on  the  other ;  but  there  is  a  marked
absence  of  any  such  provision.  Not  only  is  it  not
pointed  to,  but  a  wholly  different  comfort  is  administered.

becaiiae  they  are  both  descriptive  of  the  same  men  and  office.  This  is
supposed  also  in  Phil.  i.  1,  1  Tim.  iii.,  Tit.  i.  5,  7,  1  Peter  v.  1,  2.  On
the  other  hand  presbyters  never  appointed  to  that  office,  though  an
apostle  associated  them  with  himself  in  laying  hands  on  Timothy
▼hen  he  conferred  on  him  a  xaptcr/ia.  But  scripture  never  calls  Timothy
a  presbyter  or  bishop,  but  an  evangelist,  though  he  was  also  employed
of  the  Lord  in  a  highly  responsible  place  at  Ephesus,  and  seems  to
have  exercised  a  quasi-apostolic  charge  over  the  presbyters  as  well  as
the  saints  in  g^cral  there.

I  am  sorry  to  add  an  instructive  sample  of  the  blinding  influence  of
ecclesiastical  tradition  over  a  pious  mind  at  an  early  day.  It  is  a
citation  from  Irenaeus'  famous  work  against  heresy  (iii.  xiv.  2),  or
rather  the  Latin  version  which  alone  represents  him  here: — "Li
Mileto  enim  convocatis  episcopis  et  prosbyteris,  qui  erant  ab  Ephoso
et  a  reliquis  proximis  civitatibus,  quoniam  ipse  fostinaret,"  &c.  Un-
deniably there  is  a  double  misstatement  here:  (1)  the  bishops  and
presbyters  must  be  regarded  as  at  least  contrary  to  fact;  (2)  they
were  expressly  of  the  church  in  Ephesus,  not  from  other  neighbouring
cities.  We  cannot  wonder  that  lator  writers  of  less  integrity  and
singleness  of  eye  than  the  martyr  bishop  of  Lyons  went  farther  and
without  scruple  in^the  effort  to  justify  the  growing  departure  from  the
normal  state  of  the  church,  its  doctrines,  ministry,  and  discipline,  as
laid  down  in  God's  word.  I  could  not  but  consider  the  note  of  Massuot,
the  Benedictine  editor,  a  disgrace  to  a  Christian  scholar,  or  even  to  an
honest  man,  if  one  did  not  bear  in  mind  that  the  eyes  of  such  persons
'are  useless  spiritually  when  they  read  the  Fathers.


w.

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.

Chaps,  xzi.-xxviii.

The  closing  chapters  from  xxL  to  the  end  of  the  book
are  devoted  to  an  episode  full  of  interest  and  profit —
Paul's  course  from  Jerusalem  to  Rome.  And  here  we  find
ourselves  in  an  atmosphere  considerably  diflTerent  from
what  we  have  had  before.  It  is  no  longer  the  mighty
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  either  inaugurating  the  great
work  of  God  on  the  earth  at  Jerusalem,  nor  His  equally
wonderful  energy  in  breaking  through  the  old  bottles  of
Judaism,  when  grace  flowed  freely,  first  to  Samaria,  then
to  the  Gentiles,  and  in  principle,  as  we  know,  in  due  time
to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Neither  have  we  the  apostle
separated,  as  it  is  said,  imto  the  gospel  of  God.  These
were  the  three  great  divisions  and  the  main  contents  of
the  book  up  to  the  point  we  are  arrived  at.  But  now
the  apostle  is  about  to  become  a  prisoner,  nor  this
without  warning.  The  Holy  Ghost,  as  we  may  see  on
the  surface  of  the  verses  I  have  read,  admonished  the
apostle  time  after  time ;  but  the  apostle  shows  us  the
most  striking  combination  of  what  was  truly  heavenly
in  faith  and  life  with  the  strongest  clinging  of  heart  to
his  brethren  after  the  flesh.  This  is  what  makes  the
diflBculty  of  appreciating  his  history  by  no  means  small


>-


jT'


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         141

But  one  may  say  that  what  was  infirmity  must  be
allowed  to  be  infirmity  on  the  noblest  side  (if  any  thing
be  so,  which  I  do  not  deny,)  of  the  human  heart.
Nevertheless  we  have  the  immediate  efiect  in  the  lesson
that  even  this  does  force  us  into  altogether  new  circum-
stances wherein  God  never  fails  to  magnify  Himself.
He  knows  how  to  turn  even  that  which  may  have  been
in  itself  mistaken  to  His  own  glory,  and  then  He  in
grace  forms  new  channels  and  suited  ways,  not  without
a  righteous  judgment  of  the  error  even  if  it  were  in  the
best,  and  so  much  the  more  remarkably  because  it  was
in  the  best.  And  this  I  believe  to  be  the  prominent
lesson  of  these  later  chapters  of  the  Acts.-

Let  us,  however,  pursue  the  course  of  the  divine
instruction.

The  apostle  goes  on  his  way  and  finds  disciples,  and
tarries  among  them,  as  we  are  told,  at  Tyre  for  "  seven
days."  This  seems  to  have  been  a  common  term  of  stay
— we  can  readily  conceive  why.  One  great  reason,  T  do
not  doubt,  was  to  enjoy  the  fellowship  of  the  saints
together,  to  spend  with  the  Christians  in  a  new  place
that  day  which  has  the  strongest  possible  claim  on  the
heart  that  is  true  to  Jesus — the  first  day  of  the  week.
This  was  expressly  shown  in  chapter  xx.  The  Spirit  of
God  does  not  repeat  the  same  express  statement  here.
Neveitheless  I  do  not  think  we  are  far  astray  if  we
connect  the  seven  days  of  the  apostolic  visit  with  that
which  was  stated  plainly  in  verses  6,  7,  of  that  chapter.
At  Troas  it  was  said  that  "we  abode  seven  days;
and  upon  the  first  day  of  the  week,  when  the  disciples
(or  rather,  we)  came  together  to  break  bread,  Paul
preached"     Here  there  is  no  such  positive  affirmation.


142  INTKODUCTOKY  LECTURES.

but  still  the  mention  in  a  similar  way  of  seven  days
with  the  disciples  may  well  open  a  question  for  spiritual
judgment  what  the  motive  was  for  such  a  term.  I  do
not  doubt  myself  that  it  was  to  have  the  joy  of  meeting
all  saints  in  each  locality  as  opportunity  served,  and  of
cheering  and  strengthening  them  on  their  course.

No  doubt  the  spiritual  instincts  of  the  children  of
God  would  lead  them  always  to  desire  to  be  together.
For  my  own  part  I  cannot  understand  a  child  of  God
who  on  principle  could  abstain  from  any  occasion  that
summoned  round  the  name  of  the  Lord  the  members  of
the  household  of  faith.  It  appears  to  me  that,  far  from
being  a  waste  of  time  or  from  any  other  object  being
of  the  same  moment,  it  is  simply  a  question  whether
we  value  Christ,  whether  we  truly  are  walking  in  the
Spirit,  if  we  live  in  the  Spirit,  whether  the  objects  of
the  constant  active  love  of  God  are  also  in  measure  the
objects  of  our  love  in  Christ's  name.

I  think  therefore  that  it  is  according  to  the  Lord  that
the  children  of  God  should  if  practicable  be  together
every  day.  To  this  the  power  of  the  Spirit  would  lead  :
only  the  circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed  in  this
world  necessarily  hinder  it  Therefore  the  true  principle
according  to  the  word  of  God  is  a  coming  together
whenever  it  is  practicable ;  and  we  do  well  to  cherish  a
real  exercise  of  heart  and  conscience  in  judging  what
the  practicability  is,  or  rather  whether  the  imprac-
ticability be  real  or  imaginary.  Very  often  it  will  turn
out  to  be  in  our  will,  an  excuse  for  spiritual  idleness,  a
want  of  afiection  to  the  children  of  God,  and  a  want  of
sense  of  our  own  need.  Accordingly  obstacles  are  allowed
in  own  minds,  such  as  the  claims  of  business,  or  the


.ii^


THE  ilCTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  143

bmily,  or  even  the  work  of  the  Lord.  Now  all  these
have  their  place.  Surely  God  woidd  have  all  His
children  to  seek  to  glorify  Him,  whatever  may  be  their
duty.  They  have  natural  duties  in  this  world ;  and  the
wonderful  power  of  Christianity  is  seen  in  filling  with
what  is  divine  that  which  without  Christ  would  be
merely  of  nature;  and  this  should  ramify  the  whole
course  of  a  man's  life  after  he  belongs  to  Christ.  And
so  again  the  claims  of  children  for  instance,  or  parents,
or  the  like,  cannot  be  disputed ;  but  then  if  they  are
really  taken  up  for  Christ,  I  do  not  think  it  will  be
found  that  it  is  to  the  loss  of  either  parents  or  children,
or  that  the  little  time  is  missed  in  the  long  run  that  is
spent  in  seeking  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  and  in  com-
munion according  to  our  measure.  We  ought  to  be  open
for  both ;  and  we  shall  ourselves  never  have  any  power
to  help  unless  we  have  the  sense  of  the  need  of  help
from  others ;  but  both  will  be  found  together.

It  appears  to  me  that  through  the  blessed  apostle  the
Spirit  of  God  gives  us  in  these  passing  touches,  and  in
recounting  them,  valuable  hints  as  to  the  spirit  that
animated  him  in  his  coursa  We  may  know  in  some
slight  degree  what  it  is  to  be  long  on  a  journey  without
due  rest,  food,  or  shelter;  and  passing  from  one  country
and  continent  to  another  was  by  no  means  then  the
easy  thing  that  it  is  in  modern  times.  We  have  all  the
habit  of  being  rapidly  enough  in  motion,  and  anxious
to  get  to  the  end.  We  can  understand  how  the  apostle,
witii  so  many  hindrances  in  the  way,  might  feel  the  com-
fort of  these  repeated  stays,  seven  days  in  one  place,
seven  days  in  another,  as  we  have  seen,  expressly  show-
ing the  desire  of  his  heart  after  communion  as  well  as


144  INTRODUCTOHY  XECTTURES.

confirming  their  souls.  Such  is  what  we  find  in  this
blessed  man's  course:  in  our  little  measure  surely  it
ought  to  be  so  with  us.

On  this  occasion,  however,  the  disciples  told  Paul
through  the  Spirit  that  he  should  not  go  up  to  Jeru-
salem. This  was  serious.  There  is  no  other  comment
upon  it.  We  know  not  what  the  apostle  said  or  did,
further  than  this,  that  the  apostle  certainly  went  up  to
Jerusalem  all  the  same.  "  When  we  had  accomplished
these  days,  we  departed  and  went  our  way."  Then  we
have  the  beautiful  scene  of  the  wives  and  the  children.
This  has  its  value.  There  is  a  marked  absence  of
allusion  to  children  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  where
much  is  said  among  men  and  saints  and  servants  of
God.  But  we  do  hear  of  them  in  that  which  is  con-
fessedly suitable.  Here  they  are  brought  forward,  but
•not  as  a  superstitious  church  ere  long  did,  among  other
things,  to  jeceive  a  portion  from  the  table  of  the  Lord :
things  were  soon  to  change  if  not  to  arrive  at  that
pass  yet ;  but  we  do  see  them  in  the  expression  of  the
love  that  filled  all,  and  the  desire  to  reap  to  the  very
last  moment  the  blessing  of  having  an  apostle  in  their
midst.  In  short,  the  children  were  there  no  less  in
token  of  respectful  love  to  him  who  was  going,  but  also
set  in  the  attitude  to  receive  whatever  blessing  the
Lord  might  be  pleased  to  bestow  upon  them.  ''  And
they  all  brought  us  on  our  way  with  wives  and  chil-
dren," it  is  said,  "  till  we  were  out  of  the  city,  and  we
kneeled  down  and  prayed,  and,  when  we  had  taken  oar
leave  one  of  another,  we  took  ship,  and  they  returned
home  again."

Another  means  of  letting  us  into  the  ways  of  God


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         145

among  His  people  is  found  at  Csesarea.  "  We  entered
into  the  house  of  Philip  the  evangelist,  which  was  one
of  the  seven."  We  cannot  well  have  forgotten  hia
lahours  in  earlier  days  at  Samaria,  and  round  about.
But  we  are  told  here  what  we  had  not  learnt  then,  that
"the  same  man  had  four  daughters."  As  unmarried,
they  were  remaining  in  their  father's  house ;  and  they
prophesied.  There  is  no  reason  why  a  woman  should
not  have  this  or  most  other  gifts  as  much  as  a  man.  I
do  not  say  the  same  kind  of  gift  always.  Surely  God  is
wise  and  gives  suited  gifts  whether  to  men  or  women,
or,  it  may  be,  I  was  going  to  say,  to  children.  The  Lord
IB  sovereign  and  knows  how,  as  putting  all  who  now
believe  in  the  body  of  Christ,  so  also  to  give  them  a
work  suitable  to  the  purposes  of  His  own  grace.  Cer-
tainly He  did  clothe  these  four  daughters  of  Philip  with
a  very  special  spiritual  power.  They  had  one  of  the
highest  characters  of  spiritual  gift — they  prophesied.
And  if  they  were  invested  with  this  power,  certainly  it
was  not  to  be  put  under  a  bushel  but  to  be  exercised :
the  only  question  is  how.

Now  scripture,  if  we  be  but  subject,  is  quite  ex-
plicit as  to  this.  In  the  first  place,  prophecy  stands
confessedly  in  the  highest  rank  of  teaching,  but  it  is
teaching.  Next,  the  apostle  is  himself  the  person  who
tells  us  that  he  does  not  suflFer  a  woman  to  teach.  This
is  clearly  decisive ;  if  we  bow  to  the  apostle  as  inspired
to  give  us  God's  mind,  we  ought  to  know  that  it  is  not
the  place  of  a  Christian  woman  to  teach.  He  is  speak-
ing on  this  topic,  not  in  1  Cor.  xi.,  but  in  chap.  xiv.
He  is  drawing  the  line  between  men  and  women  in
1  Timothy  ii    The  latter  epistle  forbids  the  women  as

L


146  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

a  class  to  teach.  The  other  and  still  closer  word  in  the
former  epistle,  commands  them  to  be  silent  in  the  assem-
bly. At  Corinth,  apparently,  there  was  some  diflSculty
as  to  godly  order  and  the  right  relations  of  men  and
women,  because  the  Corinthians,  being  a  people  of
speculative  habits,  instead  of  believing,  reasoned  about
things.  It  was  the  tendency  of  the  Greek  mind  to
question  everything.  They  could  not  understand  that,
if  God  had  given  a  woman  as  good  a  gift  as  a  man,  she
was  not  equally  to  use  it.  We  can  all  feel  their  diffi-
culty. Such  reasoners  are  not  wanting  now.  The  fault
of  it  all  was,  and  is,  that  God  is  left  out.  His  will
was  not  in  the  thought  of  the  Corinthians.  There  was
no  waiting  on  the  Lord  to  ascertain  what  was  His  mind.
Clearly,  if  He  has  called  the  church  into  being,  it  can-
not but  be  made  for  His  own  glory.  He  has  His  own
mind  and  will  about  the  church,  and  He  has  therefore
spread  out  in  His  word  how  all  the  gifts  of  His  grace
are  to  be  exercised.

Now  the  passages  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  and  in  1  Tim.  ii.
appear  to  me  to  be  perfectly  plain  as  to  the  relative
place  of  the  woman,  whatever  may  be  her  gift.  This  may
be  said  to  decide  only  as  to  one  sphere — ^the  assembly
— where  the  woman,  according  to  scripture,  is  precluded
from  the  exercise  of  her  gift.  I  may  say  further,  that
in  those  days  it  did  not  occur  to  them  that  women
would  go  forth  publicly  to  preach  the  word.  Bad  as
the  state  of  things  was  in  early  days,  they  seem  to  me
to  have  looked  for  a  greater  sense  of  modesty  on  the
part  of  women.  There  is  not  the  slightest  doubt  that
many  females  with  the  best  intentions  have  thus
preached,  as  they  do  stiU.  They,  or  their  friends,  defend


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         147

their  course  by  appeals  to  the  blessing  of  God  on  the
one  hand,  and  on  the  other  to  the  crying  need  of
perishing  sinners  everywhere.  But  nothing  can  be  more
certain  than  that  scripture  (and  this  is  the  standard)
leaves  them  without  the  slightest  warrant  from  the
Lord  for  their  line  of  conduct.  Public  preaching  of  the
gospel  on  the  part  of  women  is  never  contemplated  in
scriptura  It  was  bad  enough  for  the  Corinthians  to  think
that  they  might  speak  among  the  faithful.  It  might
have  seemed  that  there  women  had  the  shelter  of  godly
men ;  that  there  they  were  not  oflfensively  putting  them-
selves forward  before  all  sorts  of  people  in  the  world,  as
must  be  the  case  in  evangelising.  Among  the  godly
they  may  have  imagined  a  veil,  so  to  speak,  drawn  over
them  more  or  less.  But  in  modern  times  the  end  is
supposed  to  justify  the  means.  Gross  as  the  Corinthians
were,  I  must  confess  that  to  my  mind  the  plans  of  our
own  day  seem  even  more  grievous,  and  with  less  excuse
for  theuL

However  this  may  be,  we  see  here  that  the  daughters
of  Philip  did  prophesy.  No  doubt  it  was  in  their
father's  house,  as  already  intimated  :  otherwise  the  word
of  Gk)d  would  thus  be  set  one  part  against  another.

While  they  tarried  there,  a  certain  prophet  came  down
from  Judsea,  who  repeats  the  warning  to  the  apostle.
Binding  his  own  hands  and  feet  with  Paul's  girdle  he
declares, "  So  shall  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem  bind  the  man
that  owneth  this  girdle,  and  shall  deliver  him  into  the
hands  of  the  Gentiles."  And  thus  it  was  accomplished
to  the  letter.  Nevertheless,  spite  of  the  tears  of  the
saints,  spite  of  the  warning  of  this  prophet,  as  of  others
before,  Paul,  with  mind  made  up,  answers, "  What  mean

L  2


148  INTRODUCTOKY   LECTURES.

ye  to  weep  and  to  break  my  heart  ?  for  I  am  ready  not
to  be  bound  only,  but  also  to  die  at  Jerusalem  for  the
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.*'

After  all  the  apostle  goes  accordingly,  and  in  Jeru-
salem the  brethren  receive  him  gladly.  "And  the
day  following  Paul  went  in  with  us  unto  James;  and
all  the  elders  were  present."  It  is  evident  from  tliis
picture  that  all  ecclesiastically  was  in  due  order  at
Jerusalem.  An  apostle  was  there  who  had  an  appa-
rently high  place  of  local  dignity.  Besides  there  were
the  ordinary  overseers  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  had  set  as
guides  and  leaders  in  the  assembly  (that  is,  the  local
charge  of  elders).  "And  when  Paul  had  saluted  them,
he  declared  particularly  what  things  God  had  wrought
among  the  Gentiles  by  his  ministry."  They  owned  the
way  in  which  the  Lord  had  been  glorified.  At  the  same
time  their  word  to  him  is,  "Thou  seest,  brother,  how
many  thousands"  (the  true  meaning  is  tens  of  thousands,
myriads,  which  may  probably  give  some  a  larger
thought  than  is  familiar  of  the  vast  and  rapid  spread
of  the  gospel  at  that  time  among  that  nation)  "of  Jews
there  are  which  believe;  and  they  are  all  zealous  of  the
law ;  and  they  are  informed  of  thee,  that  thou  teachest
all  the  Jews  which  are  among  the  Gentiles  to  forsake
Moses,  saying,  that  they  ought  not  to  circumcise  their
children,  neither  to  walk  after  the  customs."  This  was
a  mistake.     Such  was  not  the  course  of  the  apostle.

What  Paul  really  taught  was  the  impropriety  of  putting
Gentiles  under  the  law :  he  did  not  interfere  with  the
Jews  at  this  time.  Later  a  distinct  and  peremptory
message  came  from  the  Holy  Ghost;  but  the  process
of  the  Lord  with  them  was  gradual — His  method  with


THE  ACTTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  149

His  ancient  people  I  deem  of  importance  for  us  to  learn
and  imitate.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  it  was  in  the
mind  of  God  in  due  time  to  bring  out  fully  the  deliver-
ance of  both  Jew  and  Gentile  from  the  law ;  but  this
was  not  done  all  at  once,  at  least  as  regards  the  Jew.
What  the  apostle  set  himself  decidedly  against  was  the
efiFort  to  bring  the  Gentiles  under  law ;  and  this  was  pre-
cisely what  Pharisaic  brethren  were  zealous  for.  Whether
Judaizing  Christians  or  the  Gentiles  themselves  took  up
the  law,  the  apostle  did  most  resolutely  reject  and
condemn  the  fatal  error.  But  as  regarded  the  Jews
themselves  there  was  the  truest  forbearance,  flowing
from,  not  characteristic  largeness  of  heart  only,  but
tender  consideration  for  scrupulous  consciences.  If
God  had  not  yet  sent  out  the  final  word  that  told
them  the  old  covenant  was  ready  to  vanish  away,  how
could  he  who  so  closely  followed  His  ways  be  hasty  ?
The  early  days  were  really  a  time  of  transition,  where
Christ  was  ministered  first  to  Jew  and  then  to  Gentile.
The  Gentile,  never  having  been  under  law,  was  far  more
simple  than  the  Jew  in  appreciating  the  liberty  of  the
gospel.  The  Jew  was  tolerated  in  his  prejudices  until
the  closing  message  came  from  God,  warning  them  of
the  danger  of  apostasy  from  the  gospel  through  their
adhesion  to  the  law.

Having  dwelt  on  this  in  sketching  the  epistle  to  the
Hebrews,  there  is  the  less  reason  to  say  more  about  it
now.  But  that  epistle  was  to  the  Hebrew  believers  the
last  trumpet  which  summoned  them  to  renounce  all
connection  with  the  old  system.  Up  to  that  time  there
had  been  a  gradual  transition,  the  gap  widening,  the
difference  more  pronounced,  but  still  every  tie  was  not


150  INTKODUCTOKY  LECTTURES.

broken  till  this  the  final  call.  Such  a  way  strikes  me
as  worthy  of  our  God — a  way  which  to  our  precipitate
minds  might  seem  somewhat  difficult,  because  we  have
been  mostly  trained  as  Gentiles.  Since  we  have  entered
into  the  truth  of  God  more  perfectly,  we  have  seen  the
enormous  mischief  of  bringing  in  the  law  and  mixing  it
up  with  the  gospel

Let  us  remember  then  that,  whilst  the  Holy  Ghost
always  maintained  liberty  for  the  Gentile,  there  was
unquestionably  a  time  of  waiting  on  the  Jew.  Even
the  apostle  Paul  was  no  exception  to  patience  with
their  prejudices.  As  to  the  twelve,  they  seem  to  have
feebly  enough  entered  into  this  liberty  from  the  law.
Doubtless  Paul,  as  being  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  called
fix)m  heaven  by  the  risen  Jesus,  and  witness  of  sovereign
grace,  apprehended  it  after  a  different  sort  and  richer
measure ;  but  we  shall  find  that  even  he  could  warmly
sympathise  to  a  great  extent  with  the  feelings  of  a
Jfew.  He  is  the  one  to  whom,  under  God,  we  are
indebted  for  knowing  anything  about  Christianity  in
its  full  form  and  real  strength ;  yet,  for  all  that,  it  is
quite  evident  that  he  had,  if  not  Jewish  prejudice,
certainly  the  warmest  Jewish  attachments;  and,  in
point  of  fact,  it  was  the  strength  of  his  affection  to  the
ancient  people  of  God  that  brought  him  into  the  trouble
recorded  in  these  concluding  chapters  of  this  book,  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles.

This,  we  must  remember,  to  a  certain  extent,  may  be
viewed  as  an  answer  to  the  love  found  in  our  blessed  Lord
Himself;  but  then  there  were  striking  differences.  In  our
Lord,  love  for  Israel  was,  as  all  else,  perfect :  there  was
not,  nor  could  be,  the  faintest  admixture  of  a  blemish.


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         151

We  know  well  the  bare  hint  of  such  a  thought  would
be  repulsive  to  our  faith  and  our  love  for  His  person.
To  the  Christian  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  it  for  an
instant.  At  the  same  time,  we  know  His  love  for  that
people  was  felt  and  expressed  up  to  the  last.  It  was
His  persistent  love  which  brought  Him  into  the  circum-
stances of  utter  rejection  when  God's  time  was  come,
and  He  suffered  all  the  consequence  of  their  hatred
(though  infinitely  more  also  for  sin  in  atonement,
which  was  His  alone).  Now  the  apostle  knew  what  it
was  to  love  Israel  and  suffer  for  that  love.  Not  only
among  the  Gentiles,  but  among  the  saints,  the  more  he
loved  the  less  he  was  loved.  This  was  true ;  but,  if  in
general  true  there,  emphatically  was  it  to  be  verified
among  the  Jews.  Thus  stands  the  wonderful  fact  in
the  history  of  the  apostle  Paul:  the  very  man  who
brought  out  the  church  distinctly,  and  showed  its
heavenly  character  as  none  other  approached ;  the  very
man  that  proved  the  absolute  abolition  of  the  old
ties  and  relations,  swallowing  up  all  in  Christ  exalted
to  the  right  hand  of  God : — he  is  the  man  whose  heart
retained  the  strongest  attachment  of  love  to  the  ancient
people  of  God.  And  I  have  not  the  smallest  doubt
that  God  gives  us  in  this  case  a  grave  but  gracious
warning  of  its  danger.  Were  it  an  apostle,  were  it  the
greatest  of  the  apostles,  still  Paul  was  not  Christ,  and
what  in  Christ  could  be  and  was  absolute  perfection,  in
Paul  was  not.  Yet  Paul  was  a  man  who  puts  all  that
have  been  since  that  day  into  the  shade.

If  I  may  express  my  feelings  here,  let  me  say  that
I  felt  nothing  a  greater  trial  to  my  own  spirit  than
touching  on  this  very  theme.     I  could  not  point  out


152  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

any  one  thing  I  shrink  from  more  than  having  the  ap-
pearance of  reflecting  on  such  a  servant  of  Christ.  Yet
God  has  written  the  history  of  all  this,  and  He  has
written  it  surely  not  for  sentiment  and  silence,  but  for
utterance  and  common  profit.  He  has  written  it,  no
doubt,  that  we  should  feel  our  own  great  shortcomings,
and  that  we  should  beware  of  our  spirit  in  setting  up
to  condemn  such  an  one  as  the  great  apostle  of  the
Gentiles.

Still,  I  repeat,  the  Holy  Ghost  has  recorded  here
His  own  warnings  on  the  one  side,  and  on  the  other
the  refusal  of  the  apostle  to  act  on  them,  if  I  may
venture  so  to  say,  though  it  were  through  fulness  of
tender  love,  and  an  ever-burning  affection  for  his  bre-
thren after  the  flesL  Alas !  when  we  think  of  our
faults;  when  we  reflect  how  little  they  spring  from
anything  that  is  lovely ;  when  we  recollect  how  much
they  are  mixed  with  worldliness,  and  impatience,  aad
pride,  and  vanity,  and  self;  when  we  observe  that  he
was  so  deeply  chastened,  and  met  with  such  a  distress-
ing stop  to  the  worldwide  work  which  God  had  given
him,  in  what  a  light  do  our  faults  appear !  He  had  a
pressure  of  trial  such  as  few  men  ever  knew  beside
himself;  and,  what  might  embitter  it  to  him,  all  this
the  natural  effect  of  slighting  the  admonitions  of  the
Spirit  of  God  by  yielding  to  his  undying  love  for  a
people  out  of  whom,  after  all,  he  had  been  divinely
sej^arated  to  the  work  the  Lord  had  given  him  to  do.
God  having  given  us  the  account,  whatever  may  be
one's  own  feelings,  can  it  be  doubted  that  we  are  bound
to  read,  and  by  grace  to  seek  to  understand  ?  Yea,  not
this  only,  but  may  we  apply  it  for  the  present  blessing  of


•\.  ■


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         153

our  souls,  and  for  our  progress  in  the  path  of  Christ
here  below,  whatever  it  may  be.  We  may  have  the
smallest  possible  sphere;  but,  after  all,  a  saint  is  a
saint,  and  very  dear  to  God,  who  magnifies  Himself  in
the  least  of  those  that  are  His.

It  is  assuredly  for  our  profit  and  to  God's  own
glory  that  the  Holy  Ghost  has  written  this  remarkable
appendix  to  the  history — the  onward  history — of  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Here  we  have  a  check  which
brings  in  new  things,  the  fruit  of  persisting  in  going
up  to  Jerusalem  spite  of  the  Spirit's  testimony  against
it  The  more  blessed  the  man,  the  more  serious  the
miss  of  firm  footing.  There  is  one  step  outside  what
the  Spirit  enjoined,  whatever  may  be  the  mingling  of
that  which  is  beautiful  and  lovely ;  at  the  same  time,  it
was  not  the  full  height,  so  to  speak,  of  the  guidance  of
the  Spirit  of  God.  This  exposed  the  apostle  to  some-
thing more,  as  it  always  does ;  and,  indeed,  so  much  the
more,  because  it  was  such  an  one  as  Paul.  The  same
principle  is  plain  in  David's  life.  The  lack  of  energy,
which  might  have  been  comparatively  a  little  hurt  to
another,  became  the  gravest  snare  to  David ;  and,  found
out  of  the  path  of  the  Lord,  he  soon  slips  into  the
meshes  of  the  devil.  Not  that  I  mean  anything  in  the
least  degree  tantamount  in  the  apostle  Paul ;  far  from
it ;  for,  indeed,  in  this  case  the  apostle  was  mercifully
preserved  from  anything  that  gave  the  smallest  activity
to  the  corruption  of  nature.  It  was  simply  a  defect,  as
it  app)ears  to  me,  of  watching  against  his  own  love  for
Israel,  and  thus  setting  aside,  consequently,  the  warn-
ings that  the  Spirit  gave.  The  tears  and  appeals  seem
to  have  rather  stimulated  and  strengthened  his  desire.


154  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

and  accordingly  this  exposed  him  to  what  was  a  snare,
not  immoral  but  religious,  through  listening  to  others
below  his  own  measure.  He  took  the  advice  of  James.

"  What  is  it,  therefore  ?  The  multitude  must  needs
come  together :  for  they  will  hear  that  thou  art  come.
Do  therefore  this  that  we  say  to  thee.  We  have  four
men  which  have  a  vow  on  them;  them  take,  and  purify
thyself  with  them,  and  be  at  charges  with  them,  that
they  may  shave  their  heads" — what  a  position  for  the
apostle  to  find  himself  in ! — "  and  all  may  know  that
those  things,  whereof  they  were  informed  concerning
thee,  are  nothing."  Without  pretending  that  there  was
nothing  in  the  previous  line  of  Paul  tending  to  this
(compare  chapter  xviii  18),  it  is  evident  that  the  object
was  to  give  the  appearance  that  he  was  a  very  good
Jew  indeed.  Was  this  warrantable,  or  the  whole  truth  ?
Was  he  not  a  somewhat  ambiguous  Jew?  I  believe
that,  as  we  have  seen,  there  was  an  undisguised  respect
for  what  once  had  the  sanction  of  God.  And  here  was
just  the  difference  in  his  case  from  our  blessed  Lord's
perfect  ways.  Up  to  the  cross,  we  all  know,  the  legal
economy  or  first  covenant  had  the  sanction  of  God;
after  the  cross,  in  principle  it  was  judged.  The  apostle
surely  had  weighed  and  appraised  it  all;  he  did  not
require  any  man  to  show  him  the  truth.  At  the  same
time  there  was  no  small  mingling  of  love  for  the  people ;
and  we  know  well  how  it  may  intercept  that  singleness
of  eye  which  is  the  safeguard  of  every  Christian  man.

The  apostle  then  listens  to  his  brethen  about  a  matter
in  which  he  was  incomparably  more  competent  to  form
a  sound  judgment  than  any  of  them.  Accoi-dingly  he
suffers  the  consequence.     He  is  found  purifying  himself


THE  ilCTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  155

along  with  the  men  who  had  a  vow.  He  enters  the
temple,  "  to  signify  the  accomplishment  of  the  days  of
purification,  until  that  an  offering  should  be  offered  for
every  one  of  them.  And  when  the  seven  days  were
almost  ended  " — which  it  is  well  known  had  to  do  with
the  Nazarite  vow — "the  Jews  which  were  of  Asia,  when
they  saw  him  in  the  temple,  stirred  up  all  the  people
and  laid  hands  on  him,  crying  out,  Men  of  Israel,
help!  This  is  the  man  that  teacheth  all  men  every
where  against  the  people,  and  the  law,  and  this  place ;
and  further  brought  Greeks  also  into  the  temple,  and
hath  polluted  this  holy  place."  The  next  verse  shows
us  why.  It  was  a  mistake ;  nevertheless  it  was  enough
to  rouse  the  feelings  of  all  Israel  "All  the  city  was
moved,  and  the  people  ran  together,"  and  the  issue  was
a  frightful  tumult,  and  the  apostle  was  in  danger  of
being  killed  by  their  violent  hands,  when  the  chief
captain  comes  and  rescues  him.  This  paves  the  way  for
the  remarkable  address  which  the  apostle  delivers  in  the
Hebrew  tongue,  given  in  the  next  chapter.

The  mention  of  the  Hebrew  tongue  appears  to  con-
firm the  true  key  to  the  difference  between  this  account
of  the  apostle's  conversion  and  others.  It  is  not  precisely
in  this  book  as  in  the  gospels,  where  a  different  way  of
presenting  the  same  fact  or  discourse  of  our  Lord  Jesus
obtains,  according  to  the  character  of  the  design  in
hand ;  yet  is  it  the  same  principle  at  bottom.  Even  in
the  same  book  a  difference  of  design  may  be  traced.
There  may  be  observed  this  in  the  three  accounts  in
which  Paul's  conversion  is  given :  first,  the  historical
account ;  secondly,  Paul's  own  statement  to  the  Jews ;
and,  thirdly^  Paul's  to  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  as  to  the


156         .  INTRODUCTOKY  LECTURES.

Boman  governor  and  king  Agrippa.  This  is  the  true
reason  of  the  difiference  there  is  in  the  manner  in  which
facts  are  presented.  We  need  not  enter  minutely  into
detail.

On  examination  you  will  find  what  is  said  to  be
correct,  that  here  as  is  evident  he  adopts  a  language
which  was  for  the  veiy  purpose  of  arresting  the
attention  in  appealing  to  the  afiTections  of  the  Jew;
he  speaks  in  their  familiar  tongue,  and  accordingly
gives  an  account  of  his  conversion  in  such  a  way  as  he
considered  conciliatory  to  the  feelings  of  the  Jews.  To
these  there  was  one  thing  which  was  unpardonable;
but  this  was  the  very  glory  of  his  apostleship,  the  direct
object  for  which  God  raised  him  up.  Thus,  with  the
most  gracious  of  intentions,  and  with  the  warmest  love
towards  his  countrymen  after  the  flesh,  the  apostle  gives
an  account  of  his  conversion  and  the  miraculous  cir-
cumstances that  attended  it,  of  his  meeting  with  Ananias,
a  devout  man  according  to  the  law,  which  he  takes
particular  pains  to  state  there,  and  of  the  trance  into
which  he  afterwards  fell  at  Jerusalem  in  the  temple
whilst  praying.  But  he  tells  them  out  that  which  he
must  easily  have  known  (and  so  much  the  more  because
of  his  accurate  understanding  of  the  feelings  of  the
Jews)  would  rouse  them  to  the  uttermost :  in  short,  he
lets  them  know  that  the  Lord  called  him  and  sent  him
to  the  Gentiles.

It  was  quite  enough.  The  moment  the  sound  of
"Gentiles"  reached  their  ears,  all  their  feelings  of
Jewish  pride  took  fire,  and  at  once  they  cried  out,
"  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from  the  earth !  It  is  not
fit  that  he  should  live."    As  they  cried  and  cast  off


*-^1


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  15T

their  clothes  to  throw  dust  into  the  air,  the  chiliarch
commanded  him  to  be  brought  into  the  castle,  and  bade
that  he  should  be  examined  by  scourging.  There  he
put  himself  in  the  wrong ;  for  Paul  was  not  only  a  Jew
but  a  citizen  of  Eome ;  and  he  was  so  by  a  better  title
than  the  commandant  who  thus  ordered  him  to  be
bound.  The  apostle  quietly  states  the  fact.  I  dare  not
judge  him,  though  there  may  be  some  Christians  who
would :  he  was  clearly  entitled  to  remind  those  that
were  the  guanlians  of  the  law  of  their  own  transgression.
He  uses  no  means  further,  but  merely  tells  them  how
things  stood.

It  appears  to  me  that  it  is  a  morbid  squeamish-
ness  rather  than  true  spiritual  wisdom  that  would  cavil
at  such  an  act  on  the  part  of  the  apostle.  Every
one  knows  that  it  is  easy  to  be  a  martyr  in  theory,
and  that  those  who  are  martyrs  in  theory  are  seldom  so
in  practice.  Here  was  one  destined  to  torture,  and
really  one  of  the  most  blessed  witnesses  of  the  Lord  all
through.  Faith  enables  one  to  see  things  clearly.
Should  the  guardians  of  law  break  the  law?  Faith
never  teaches  one  to  court  danger  and  difficulty,  but  to
walk  the  path  of  Christ  in  peace  and  thankfulness.
The  Lord  has  not  called  His  servants  to  desert  it.  I
dare  say  some  of  us  may  have  been  struck  with  the
fact  that  the  Lord  told  them  when  they  were  persecuted
in  one  city  to  flee  to  another.  Assuredly  this  is  not
courting  mai-tyrdom,  but  the  very  reverse;  and  if  the
Lord  Himself  gave  such  a  word  to  His  servants  in  Judaea
and  to  His  disciples  (as  is  well  known),  it  appears  to
me  that  it  is  at  least  hazardous  without  grave  spiri-
tual ground  to  face  a  danger  so  decided  of  condemning


158  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

the  guiltless  who  are  entitled  to  our  reverence.  Here
we  have  no  sign  of  anything  said  by  the  Holy  Ghost
in  the  form  of  warning;  and  therefore,  observe,  it  is
not  in  the  least  degree  a  setting  aside  what  is  clearly
laid  down  elsewhere.  We  have  seen  the  Holy  Ghost
admonishing  the  apostle,  when  carried  far  in  ardent
love,  and  we  can  easily  see  that  He  had  a  sovereign
title,  both  to  guide  and  to  correct — even  if  it  were  an
apostle.

Nothing  of  the  kind  appears  here.  It  was  a  fact  which
the  Eoman  officer  had  overlooked  illegally,  and  the
apostle  was  entitled  to  state  the  fact.  It  was  in  no  way
a  going  to  law.  Need  it  be  said  that  such  a  recourse  to
the  powers  that  be  would  have  little  become  a  follower
and  servant  of  Jesus?  It  was  in  no  way  using  such
means  as  man  would  have  employed ;  it  was  the  sim-
plest possible  statement  of  a  circumstance  serious  in  the
eye  of  the  law,  and  it  had  its  effect.  "And  as  they
bound  him  with  thongs,  Paul  said  to  the  centurion  that
stood  by.  Is  it  lawful  for  you  to  scourge  a  man  that  is  a
Eoman,  and  uncondemned?  When  the  centurion  heard
that,  he  went  and  told  the  chiliarch,  saying,  Take  heed
what  thou  doest;  for  this  man  is  a  Eoman.*'  The
chiliarch  enquires  accordingly.  You  must  remember
that  to  say  you  were  a  Eoman,  if  you  were  not,  was  a
capital  offence  against  the  government,  which  of  course
they  never  failed  to  visit  with  the  severest  punishment.
To  claim  it  untruly  was  too  dangerous  to  be  often
attempted,  as  it  exposed  a  man  to  the  imminent  risk  of
death.  The  officials  of  the  Eoman  empire  were  rarely
disposed  therefore  to  question  such  a  claim,  especially
where  it  was  made  by  a  man  who,  on  the  face  of  it»


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         159

was  such  a  character  as  the  apostle,  little  as  he  might
be  known  to  any  of  them.

So  "  straightway,"  it  is  said,  "  they  departed  from  him
which  should  have  examined  him,  and  the  chiliarch
also  was  afraid  after  he  knew  that  he  was  a  Eoman,
and  because  he  had  bound  him."  However,  man  strives
to  preserve  his  dignity  after  his  own  fashion.  "  On  the
morrow,  because  he  would  have  known  the  certainty
wherefore  he  was  accused  of  the  Jews,  he  loosed  him
from  his  bands,"  (that  is  to  say,  he  leaves  him  still  a
prisoner  which  he  had  no  right  to  do,)  "  and  commanded
the  chief  priests  and  all  their  council  to  appear,  and
brought  Paul  down  and  set  him  before  them."  The
apostle  seeks  no  further  redress,  and  was  as  far  as
possible  from  the  desire  or  thought  of  punishing  the
man  for  the  mistake  he  had  made.  For  this  evidently
would  have  been  a  departure  from  grace :  but  the  occasion
helps  to  give  a  little  insight  into  this  wonderful  man  of
God.  For  when  the  high  priest  Ananias  commanded
those  that  stood  by  to  smite  him  that  said  he  had
Uved  in  all  good  conscience,  Paul  turns  quickly  upon
him  with  the  words  "God  shall  smite  thee,  thou  whited
wall"  (and  so  He  did) ;  "for  sittest  thou  to  judge  me  after
the  law,  and  commandest  me  to  be  smitten  contrary  to
the  law  ?  And  they  that  stood  by  said,  Revilest  thou
God's  high  priest?  Then  said  Paul,  I  wist  not,  bre-
thren, that  he  was  the  high  priest:  for  it  is  written,
Thou  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  the  ruler  of  thy  people."

This  is  a  fine  instance  of  the  most  simple,  and  at  the
same  time  admirable,  way  in  which  grace  recovers,  even
if  there  be  a  momentary  slip  of  haste  mingling  with  it.
There  can  be  no  doubt  at  all  that  the  high  priest  had


160  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

acted  in  a  way  entirely  contrary  to  the  law.  There  was
therefore  an  indisputable  right  to  rebuke  him.  At  the
same  time  I  suppose  that  his  decided  cl^aracter,  and  his
keen  sense  of  the  glaring  injustice,  did  betray  itself  in
liis  utterance.  Further,  it  is  an  instance  of  what  is
found  oft^n  elsewhere  in  Scripture.  God  may  be  with
a  deed  which  on  one  side  of  it  may  have  haste  mingling
with  it,  but  on  the  other  real  truth  and  righteousness.
What  was  done  here  by  the  high  priest  was  glaringly
contrary  to  the  law  of  which  he  was  the  professed  ad-
ministrator. Nor  certainly  did  God  permit  these  solemn
words  to  fall  to  the  ground  without  bearing  fruit.  Paul  at
once,  however,  corrects  himself,  and  owns  that  had  he
known  him  to  be  the  high  priest,  he  would  not  have
spoken  so;  that  is  to  say,  whatever  might  be  the  charac-
ter of  the  man,  Paul  wAs  not  one  to  lower  the  office.  He
would  leave  it  to  God  to  judge  that  which  was  unworthy
of  it.

There  is  another  thing  that  claims  our  notice.  Is
there  not  a  certain  peculiarity  discernible  in  a  measure
in  the  apostle  now  ?  First  of  all  tliere  was  haste  of
spirit.  Is  there  as  firm  treading  as  before  in  the  path
where  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  rested  on  him  ?
Do  we  not  find  an  adroitness,  may  I  venture  to  say^
though  wishing  in  no  way  to  utter  a  word  too  much,  as
is  easily  done  ?  But  still  is  there  not  a  cleverness  in
the  way  in  which  the  apostle,  when  he  perceived  that
one  part  of  the  council  were  Sadducees  and  the  other
Pharisees,  cried  out,  "Men  and  brethren,  I  am  a  Pharisee,
the  son  of  Pharisees;*  of  the  hope  and  resurrection  of
the  dead  I  am  called  in  question  "  ?

*  The  plural  form  is  reoommended  to  us  by  the  most  ancient


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         161

'  This  does  not  seem  according  to  the  simple  and  full
activity  of  the  Spirit  of  God  that  we  have  seen  in  the
apostle  when  he  was  away  from  Jerusalem.  He  had
gone  where  he  had  been  divinely  warned  not  to  go ;
and  it  matters  not  who  it  is,  if  it  were  even  the  greatest
of  the  apostles,  is  there  not  a  sensible  difference  when
there  is  the  smallest  divergence  from  the  peaceful  guid-
ance of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  And  if  this  is  true  of  him,
what  shall  we  say  of  ourselves  ?  Do  not  allow  your
lips  to  utter  strong  things  about  the  apostle  Paul ;  but
let  your  awn  consciences,  and  let  mine,  take  heed  to  our
own  ways,  and  above  all  beware  of  this — that  we  be  not
found  slighting  one  word  that  comes  to  us  from  the
Holy  Ghost.  Let  us  weigh  and  cherish  every  expression
of  God*8  mind.  In  this  case  the  apostle  Paul  could
not  doubt  it.  It  was  not  doubt ;  but  he  strengthened
himself  now  that  the  time  was  come  to  suffer.  He  had
made  np  his  mind  for  the  worst  that  man  might  or  could
do.  Was  it  all  that  was  there?  In  truth  there  was
more  than  this;  but  I  think  the  comparative  lack  of
calm,  the  exposure  to  haste,  and  the  other  features  that
appear  in  this  remarkable  history,  are  meant  to  be  signs
to  our  souls  of  the  real  truth  of  the  case  as  it  now
stood.

The  consequence  was  soon  apparent  on  this  occasion.
The  diversion  produced  was  no  doubt  what  men  would
call  politic ;  that  is,  the  apostle  designed  to  divide  and
conquer.     He  made  good  use  of  the  one  party  that  had

imcialB,  some  good  cursives,  the  Vulgate  and  the  Syriac ;  the  singul^ir
prevailfl  in  the  great  majority  of  copies  and  Torsions.  Being  more
natmal  or  customary,  though  fsur  less  energetic,  we  can  understand
oopyifts  taHmg  into  it.

M


162  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

whatever  there  was  of  zeal  and  orthodoxy.  There  is
not  the  smallest  pandering  to  the  Sadducees,  which
would  have  been  far  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  Now  I
am  very  far  from  saying  or  implying  any  nnworthy
ways ;  but  I  do  mean  that  there  was  a  kind  of  availing
himself  of  the  difiference  that  reigned  between  these
that  held  to  the  word  of  God  with,  at  any  rate,  an
outward  religious  respect,  and  those  that  despised  it;
and  this  is  a  danger  that  no  man  is  free  from,  particu-
larly in  circumstances  of  danger.  The  apostle  yielded
to  it  then.  He  stated  the  fact  that  the  hope  and
resun*ection  of  the  dead  were  in  question ;  but  still  the
question  arises.  What  was  his  motive  for  putting  it
so  ?  What  does  the  Spirit  of  God  bring  out  before  us
here  ?  Was  it  simply  the  truth  ?  Was  it  only  Christ  ?
I  doubt  so.

It  seems  clear  that  the  discerning  eye  of  the  apostle
saw  the  horrible  state  of  the  high  priest  and  his
party, — that  whatever  might  be  the  honour  of  the
office,  yet,  in  the  defiled  and  defiling  hands  that  now
held  it,  it  was  only  used  for  their  own  worst  purposes
against  the  truth  and  grace  of  God.  Accordingly  he
availed  himself  of  the  strong  feeling  of  the  sounder  part
of  the  nation,  and  thus  gained  what  might  have  seemed
unexpected  adherents  among  the  Pharisees.  It  did  not
give  him  alter  all  the  advant^e.  To  the  believer  is  not
this  always  the  result  ?  I  doubt  very  much  the  weight
of  such  a  gain.  Have  we  not  learnt  that  the  true  gain  is
Christ  ?  and  that  to  take  our  side  unqualifiedly  with  the
Lord,  by  God's  grace  to  shut  our  eyes  to  all  consequences,
and  our  ears  to  all  censure,  and  just  go  on  holding  to
that  which  we  know  is  acceptable  in  His  eyes  and  for


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         163

His  own  glory, — ^is  not  this  the  only  true  path  of  ser-
vice, as  it  certainly  is  the  precursor  of  victory?  In
this  case  it  would  be  a  victory  unmixedly  for  the
Master.  Such  an  idea  as  one's  own  victory  ought  not
to  be  in  a  Christian  man's  mind.  Let  our  desires  be
simply  for  the  Lord — for  His  grace  and  truth,  for  His
own  work  and  glory  in  the  church.  His  name  is  ill-
served  by  making  use  even  of  the  most  reputable  of
His  adversaries.  Those  zealous  for  the  law,  one  cannot
but  know,  are  opposed  to  the  gospel, — the  Pharisee  no
less  than  the  Sadducee.  The  apostle  presents  to  the
multitude  "the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead."
He  does  not  commit  himself  to  speaking  about  Jesus ;
he  does  not  say  a  woi-d  of  the  gospel.  Had  he  brought
in  either,  all  would  have  come  to  nothing :  the  Pharisee
would  have  resented  the  word  just  as  much  as  the
Sadducee.  Leaving  out  what  was  adverse  to  his  pur-
pose, he  puts  forward  that  which  he  knew  would  set
one  part  of  his  enemies  against  the  other.

Yet  here  was  vouchsafed  no  small  comfort  from  the
Lord  to  His  servant.  "  And  when  there  arose  a  great
dissension,  the  chief  captain,  fearing  lest  Paul  should
have  been  pulled  in  pieces  of  them,  commanded  the  sol-
diers to  go  down,  and  to  take  him  by  force  from  among
them,  and  to  bring  him  into  the  castle.  And  the  night
following  the  Lord  stood  by  him,  and  said,  Be  of  good
cheer,  Paul:  for  as  thou  hast  testified  of  me  in  Jeru-
salem, so  must  thou  bear  witness  also  at  Eome."  What
a  proof  of  what  the  Lord  is,  even  in  (yea,  because  of)
those  very  circumstances  when  the  apostle's  heart
might  have  been  exceedingly  cast  down!  He  had
persisted  in  going  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  brought  himself

M    2


164  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

into  what  certainly  looks  like  a  false  position,  and  as  a
fact  exposed  him  to  a  number  of  disasters  and  painful
oppositions.  The  Lord  at  this  very  time,  when  things
looked  gloomiest,  appeared  to  His  servant,  and  com-
forted him.  Instead  of  a  word  of  reproach,  on  the
contrary  it  is  all  that  could  bid  him  good  cheer.

How  good  the  Lord  is !  How  perfect  in  His  ways !
He  knows  how  to  deal  with  a  mistake  whenever  there
is  one,  while  He  righteously  deals  with  it  so  much  the
more  in  one  who  ought  not  to  have  made  it,  a  mistake
in  his  case  being  a  thousand  times  more  serious  than
in  another.  Nevertheless,  the  Lord  has  nothing  but
comfort  to  administer  at  such  a  time.  "  Be  of  good
cheer,  for  as  thou  hast  testified  of  me  in  Jerusalem,  so
must  thou  bear  witness  of  me  in  Eome."  He  was  not
going  to  be  killed.  This  was  just  before  the  conspiracy
appeared.  What  could  man  do?  Why  should  he  be
afraid  then  ?  The  Lord  meant  him  to  go  to  Eome  :  his
heart's  desire  was  to  go  there.  That  is  what  his  heart
was  set  upon  next  to  Jerusalem ;  and  he  had  his  way
in  going  to  Jerusalem ;  and  now  the  Lord  was  about  to
take  him  to  Eome.  To  Eome  he  was  going,  but  he  was
to  visit  it  bearing  the  marks  of  having  been  up  to
Jerusalem.  He  was  going  to  Eome  a  prisoner ;  bringing
the  message  surely  of  the  grace  of  God,  but  not  without
the  experience  of  what  it  cost  to  have  yielded  to  his
love  for  the  ancient  people  of  God.  He  was  going  to
Eome  with  a  deeper  sense  of  what  his  true  calling  was.
His  allotted  work  lay  among  the  Gen  tiles — pre-eminently
and  especially  among  the  uncircumcision.  Why  did  he
not  cleave  simply  and  solely  to  his  calling  ?

Nor  were  the  foes  of  the  gospel  scrupulous,  spite  of


•  *


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         165

their  boasted  attachment  to  the  law  of  God.  A  con-
spiracy was  forming  among  the  unhappy  Jews,  and  the
Lord  in  His  providence  brings  it  to  light  by  one  that
was  kinsman  of  the  apostle,  to  whose  heart  the  ties  of
flesh  and  blood  appealed  with  some  strength,  if  there
were  no  higher  motive.  No  doubt  he  must  have  been  a
Jew  to  have  been  in  the  secrets  of  that  portion  of  the
nation  which  was  bent  upon  the  destruction  of  the
apostle.  He  divulges  the  secret,  first  to  Paul,  sub-
sequently to  the  chiliarch.  Accordingly  Lysias  (for
this  was  his  name)  gets  ready  a  detachment  of  soldiers,
and  horsemen,  and  spearmen,  during  the  night,  and
sends  Paul  to  Felix  the  governor  with  a  letter.  Little
did  the  Boman  think  that  his  letter  was  to  be  read  by
you  and  me ;  little  did  he  know  that  there  was  an  eye
that  looked  him  through  and  through  as  he  wrote.  That
the  false  and  the  true  should  be  proclaimed  on  the
housetops  he  never  counted  on.  "Claudius  Lysias  unto
the  most  excellent  governor  Felix,  sendeth  greeting.
This  man  was  taken  of  the  Jews,  and  should  have  been
killed  of  them;  then  came  I  with  the  troop  and  rescued
him,  having  understood  that  he  was  a  Eoman.*'  He
understood  nothing  of  the  sort;  he  was  merely  deceiving
his  superior,  seeking  in  fact  to  make  capital  out  of  that
which  was  error  and  fault;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  he
began  with  a  positive  infraction  of  Eoman  law.  He  had
bound,  and  this  for  the  purpose  of  scourging,  one  no  less
a  citizen  than  himself  He  was  guilty  of  claiming
credit  and  zeal,  where  he  had  been  both  remiss  and
hasty.  Oh,  how  little  does  the  world  think  that  the
secrets  of  the  most  private  letter, — the  counsels  of  the
cabinet, — the  movements  of  kings,  of  governors,  and


166  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

ministers  of  state,  of  military  chiefs  and  their  men,  no
matter  who  or  what,  are  all  before  One  who  sees  all  and
forgets  nothing.

Paul,  however,  is  rescued;  and  now  comes  another
scene.  Ananias,  the  high  priest,  descends  with  the
leaders  to  try  their  fortune  before  the  governor  with  the
captive.  On  this  occasion  they  hire  an  orator  to  plead
for  them.  If  he  begins  with  the  grossest  flattery  and
pomposity  of  speech,  the  apostle  answers  with  as  strik-
ingly admirable  and  quiet  dignity,  exactly  suited  to  the
circumstances.

Here  the  apostle,  then,  when  the  governor  beckoned
him  to  speak,  explains  how  utterly  false  were  all  the
charges  of  this  hired  rhetorician.  He  loved  his  nation
too  well  instead  of  being  in  anywise  their  troubler,  as
he  had  been  represented.  "As  thou  mayest  under-
stand, that  there  are  yet  but  twelve  days  since  I  went
up  to  Jerusalem  to  worship.  And  they  neither  found
me  in  the  temple  disputing  with  any  man,  neither
raising  up  the  people,  neither  in  the  synagogue,  nor  in
the  city."  There  was  therefore  no  such  case  as  Tertullus
had  set  forth :  "  We  have  found  this  man  a  pestilent
fellow,  and  a  mover  of  sedition  among  all  the  Jews
throughout  the  world,  and  a  ringleader  of  the  sect  of
the  Nazarenes;  who  also  hath  gone  about  to  profane  the
temple."  He  had  only  been  a  few  days  in  Jerusalem,
and  was  there  worshipping,  not  seeking  to  trouble  any-
body. "Neither  can  they  prove  the  things  whereof
they  now  accuse  me.  But  this  I  confess  unto  thee,  that
after  the  way  which  they  call  heresy,  so  worship  I  the
God  of  my  fathers,  believing  all  things  which  are
written  in  the  law  and  in  the  prophets :  and  have  hope


>.'J


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  167

towards  (Jod,  which  they  themselves  also  allow,  that
there  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  of  the
just  and  unjust."  Then  he  frankly  states  what  had
brought  him  up  on  this  occasion.  "I  came  to  bring
alms  to  my  nation,  and  offerings."  He  really  did  love
them.  "  Whereupon,"  he  8a3r8,  "  certain  Jews  from  Asia
found  me  purified  in  the  temple,  neither  with  multitude,
nor  with  tumult ;  who  ought  to  have  been  here  before
thee,  and  object  what  wrong  they  had  against  me."  But
the  witnesses  were  not  found.  In  point  of  fact,  there  was
nothing  tangible  to  allege  against  him.  It  was  merely
the  outburst  of  priestly  hatred  and  popular  fury,  fol-
lowed by  a  conspiracy  formed  to  murder;  and  when
this  failed,  the  effort  was  to  bring  about  a  judicial
condemnation.  Who  could  fail  to  see  the  mere  will  and
malice  of  man  ?    It  had  no  other  origin  or  character.

"  When  Felix  heard  these  things,  he  adjourned  them,
saying.  When  Lysias  the  chiliarch  shall  come  down,
I  will  know  the  uttermost  of  your  matter.  And  he
commanded  a  centurion  to  keep  Paul,  and  to  let  him
have  liberty."  His  wise  experienced  eye  at  once  saw
how  things  were:  there  was  not  the  slightest  ground
for  the  charges  against  the  apostle.  Hence  the  unusual
order  not  of  liberty  only,  but  that  none  of  his  ac-
quaintance were  to  be  forbidden  to  come  or  to  minister
to  him.  Nay,  more  than  this :  "  When  Felix  came  with
his  wife  Drusilla,  who  was  a  Jewess,  he  sent  for  Paul,
and  heard  him  concerning  the  faith  of  Christ."  But
there  was  no  compromise:  he  heard  what  he  did  not
expect.  It  was  not  the  resurrection  now;  it  was  an
appeal  to  conscience  morally,  or,  as  it  is  said  here,
''He  reasoned  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judg-


168  INTBODUCTORY  LECTURES.

ment  to  come."  All  has  its  season,  and  this  was  a  word
exactly  suited  to  the  man  and  the  woman  to  whom  Paul
preached.  It  was  well  timed.  Any  one  who  is  at  all
acquainted  with  the  history  of  this  personage — for  he  is
an  historical  character — ^knows  that  he  was  peculiariy
guilty,  and  that  these  words  of  the  apostle  were  directly
levelled  at,  and  a  condemnation  therefore  of,  his  moral
delinquency.

Felix  trembles,  accordingly,  and  talks  about  hearing
him  at  another  time ;  but  that  convenient  time  never
came.  **  He  hoped  also  that  money  should  have  been
given  him."  How  truly,  therefore,  and  how  season-
ably, had  Paul  "reasoned  to  him  of  righteousness!"
"He  hoped  also  that  money  should  have  been  given
him  of  Paul,  that  he  might  loose  him :  wherefore  he
sent  for  him  the  oftener,  and  communed  with  him."
Besides,  you  see  the  character  of  the  man  in  what
follows.  "After  two  years  Porcius  Festus  came  in  Felix's
room :  and  Felix,  willing  to  show  the  Jews  a  pleasure,
left  Paul  bound."  There  was  no  justice  to  be  got  out
of  this  unjust  judga  It  was  not  that  he  wanted  sense,
or  wisdom,  or  judgment.  He  had  all  these,  and  so  much
the  worse  for  him;  but  he  was  willing  to  sacrifice
everything  for  his  own  ends.  He  had  been  foiled  in  his
desire  for  money ;  and  now  to  please  those  Jews  whom
he  heartily  despised — willing  to  do  something  that
would  ingratiate  himself  with  them  without  costing
him  anjrthing — he  leaves  Paul  bound.

Festus  in  due  time  appears  to  our  view  in  the  next
chapter  (xxv.)  He  had  the  same  desire.  He  was  no
better  than  his  predecessor.  Festus  proposes  in  a
singular  way  that  Paul  should  go  up  to  Jerusalem.  This


10


'\-^l


THE  ACTS   OF  THE  APOSTLES.  169

was  an  unheard  of  thing  for  a  Eoman  governor — the
chief  representative  of  the  empire — to  send  one  who
had  been  brought  before  him  back  to  Jerusalem  to  be
judged  by  the  Jews.  Paul  at  once  takes  his  stand  on
the  well-known  principle  of  the  Roman  empire  that
ought  to  have  guided  Festus.  He  says,  *'I  stand  at
Caesar's  judgment-seat,  where  I  ought  to  be  judged  :  to
the  Jews  have  I  done  no  wrong,  as  thou  very  well
knowest  But  if  I  be  an  offender,  and  have  committed
any  thing  worthy  of  death,  I  refuse  not  to  die ;  but  if
there  be  none  of  these  things  whereof  they  accuse  me,
no  man  may  deliver  me  unto  them.  I  appeal  unto
Ca&sar."  This  is  clearly  a  matter  of  spiritual  judgment.
Paul  had  now  committed  himself  to  this  course,  as  later
he  actually  went  before  Csesar.  It  was  irrevocable.
There  was  no  human  possibility  of  change  now.  He
had  uttered  the  word ;  before  Ca3sar  he  niust  go.
Nevertheless,  a  short  time  after  this  we  find  Agrippa
comes  down,  and  the  Eoman  governor,  knowing  well  the
active  mind  of  the  king,  tells  him  the  story  of  Paul.
He  felt  his  own  weakness  in  having  to  do  with  such  a
case,  and  he  knew  the  interest  of  Agrippa.  Agrippa
accoixlingly  tells  the  governor  that  he  would  like  to
hear  the  man  himself.

On  the  next  day,  "when  Agrippa  therefore  was
come,  and  Bemice,  with  great  pomp,  and  was  entered
into  the  place  of  hearing,  with  the  chiliarchs  and
principal  men  of  the  city,  at  Festus*  commandment
Paul  was  brought  forth."  And  here  we  find  a  remark-
ably fine  contrast  with  all  the  glitter  and  pomp  of  the
court.  The  king  himself  was  a  most  capable  man,  but
destitute  of  moral  purpose.      His  wife,  however  she


170  INTRODUCTOKY  LECTURES.

might  be  favoured  naturally,  was  alas !  a  woman  of  no
character  whatever.  Both  of  them  were  under  the  most
painful  cloud  of  suspicion  even  in  the  minds  of  the
heathen  themselves,  not  to  speak  of  the  Jews.  These  are
the  persons  who,  with  the  Boman  governor,  sit  in  judg-
ment upon  the  apostle.  And  then  comes  forth  the  prisoner
bound  with  chains.  But  oh  what  a  chasm  separated  them
from  him !  What  a  difference  in  the  eyes  of  God  !  What
a  sight  it  was  to  Him  to  behold  these  judges  dealing  with
such  a  man  without  one  shred  to  cover  them  of  what
was  of  Himself — nay,  with  that  which  was  most  shame-
ful and  debasing.  In  all  the  splendour  of  earth's  rank
and  dignity  they  sat  to  hear  the  poor  but  rich  prisoner
of  the  Lord.  And  Agrippa  (chap,  xxvi.)  said  to  him,
"Thou  art  permitted  to  speak  for  thyself  Then  Paul
stretched  forth  the  hand,  and  answered  for  himself:  I
think  myself  happy,  king  Agrippa,  because  I  shall
answer  for  myself  this  day  before  thee."  If  we  find  the
full  peace  and  blessedness  of  this  honoured  man  of  God,
wliat  the  Lord  wrought,  and  the  mighty  power  of  His
grace,  we  see  the  most  dignified  yet  lowly  courtesy
towards  those  who  listened,  Agrippa  especially.  "  Be-
cause I  know  thee  to  be  expert  in  all  customs  and
questions  which  are  among  the  Jews :  wherefore  I
beseech  thee  to  hear  me  patiently."

He  expounds  therefore  all  his  history,  how  he  had
been  trained  from  his  youth  in  the  strictest  sect  among
the  Jews,  and  again  mentions  how  he  was  judged  for
the  hope  of  the  promise  made  of  God  to  "  our  "  fathers.
Thus  he  reasons  on  the  resurrection :  "  Why  should  it
be  thought  a  thing  incredible  with  you  if  God  raises
the  dead?"     He  at  once  brings  in  this  which  every


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         171

Pharisee  acknowledged,  and  which  was  the  main  test
of  orthodoxy  among  the  Jews.  This  is  applied  to
the  history  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  In  fact,  all  turned
on  it  If  it  was  true  that  God  had  raised  Him  from
the  dead,  what  was  the  position  of  the  Jews,  and  what
the  glory  of  Jesus?  All  turned  therefore  on  the
resurrection.

Then  he  points  out  the  facts  of  his  own  conversion.
It  was  not  favourable  circumstances  that  had  thrown
him  in  the  way  of  the  gospel ;  it  was  the  very  reverse
of  attachment  to  the  Christians  or  of  any  lukewarin-
ness  toward  the  law.  All  his  prepossessions  were  fur
Israel,  all  his  prejudices  against  the  gospel.  Never-
theless while  he  had  carried  this  to  the  uttermost,
while  with  the  authority  of  the  chief  priests  he  had
sought  to  persecute  them  to  death,  the  grace  of  God
surmounted  all  either  of  religious  ties  or  religious
hatred  in  the  heart  of  PauL  "When  I  went  to  Damas-
cus," he  says,  "with  authority  and  commission  from  the
chief  priests,  at  midday,  0  king,  I  saw  in  the  way  a
light  from  heaven,  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun.'*

And  not  more  surely  was  the  heavenly  light  which
streamed  upon  the  apostle  above  all  nature's  light,  than
the  grace  which  God  showed  that  day  completely
eclipsed  all  that  was  of  man  in  his  heart  and  previous
history.  All  disappeared  before  the  all -overcoming
strength  of  the  goodness  of  God  in  Christ.  "And  when
we  were  all  fallen  to  the  earth,  I  heard  a  voice  speaking
imto  me,  and  saying  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  Saul,  Saul,
why  persecutest  thou  me?  It  is  hard  for  thee  to
kick  against  goads.  And  I  said.  Who  art  thou.  Lord  ?
And  he  said,  I  am  Jesus  whom  thou  persecutest."    The


172  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

work  was  done.  I  say  not  that  there  was  all  the  peace
and  blessedness  ho  was  afterwards  to  enjoy,  but  there
was  effected  then  the  entrance  of  that  spiritual  light  of
Christ  that  dealt  with  his  conscience  in  all  its  depths.
At  once,  down  to  the  very  roots  of  his  moral  being,  all
was  stirred  up,  and  the  good  seed,  the  seed  of  everlasting
life,  was  sown  underneath.  He  is  bidden  to  rise  and
stand  upon  his  feet.  "For  I  have  appeared  unto  thee
for  this  purpose,  to  make  thee  a  minister  and  a  witness
both  of  these  things  which  thou  hast  seen,  and  of  those
things  in  the  which  I  will  appear  unto  thea"

The  word  is  not  exactly  as  we  have  it — "  delivering
thee  from  the  people  and  from  the  Gentiles."  It  is  hard
here  to  see  the  propriety  of  that  term  "  delivering  "  in
our  common  Bibles.  In  this  connexion  it  was  not  a
question  so  much  of  a  rescue  as  of  taking  him  out  from
the  people  and  from  the  Gentiles.  The  Lord  was  severing
him  from  the  Jew  no  less  than  the  Gentile.  It  is  also
more  than  Peter  speaks  of  in  chapter  xv.  (taking  out
from  the  Gentiles  a  people  for  His  name) ;  which  we
have  seen  already,  as  it  was  of  prime  importance  to
insist  on  it  at  the  great  council  of  Jerusalem.  It  was
of  course  still  true  that  God  is  taking  out  a  people  for
His  name ;  but  in  the  case  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  the  Lord
speaks  of  taking  him  out  from  the  Jew  no  less  than  the
heathen.  It  is  a  separation  therefore  unto  the  new  work
of  God  from  both  Jew  and  (7 entile.  "Unto  whom,"
speaking  of  the  Gentiles,  "  now  I  send  thee,  to  open
their  eyes,  and  to  turn  them  from  darkness  to  light,  and
from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,  that  they  may
receive  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  inheritance  among  them
that  are  sanctified  through  faith  that  is  in  ma"


'\^


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.         173

Nor  was  Paul  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  vision.
He  bowed  to  the  Lord.  He  was  right,  as  became  a  man
taught  of  God.  And  he  "showed  first  unto  them  of
Damascus,  and  at  Jerusalem,  and  throughout  all  the
region  of  Judaea,  and  then  to  the  Gentiles,  that  they
should  repent  and  turn  to  God,  and  do  works  worthy  of
repentance."  For  these  were  the  true  causes  of  Jewish
hostility.

There  was  no  setting  himself  up  against  the  law.
God  forbid  that  this'  should  ever  be  an  object  for  a
Christian  man !  He  does  not  call  us  to  a  negative
testimony,  even  if  legitimate ;  He  calls  us  to  a  task  far
more  truly  of  Himself.  It  is  not  against  evil  so  much
as  for  good  that  God  gives  us  a  mission.  We  must
hold  this  fact  always  as  a  fixed  principla  I  grant  you
that  he  who  is  called  out  to  a  purpose  that  is  worthy  of
God  does  judge  what  is  evil ;  nay,  not  merely  this,  but
judges  especially  what  looks  ever  so  good.  Correcting
evil  by  power  is  not  the  present  purpose  of  God  for  the
Christian  or  the  church ;  and  be  assured  His  will  is
the  only  true  directory  and  the  only  safe  ground  for  us
in  everything.

Let  us  then  always  enquire,  what  according  to  scrip-
ture does  God  design  and  desire  for  His  people  now  ?
What  is  His  real  revealed  work  now  ?  To  what  there-
fore is  He  calling  you  and  me  ?  To  what  did  He  set
apart  the  apostle  then?  It  was  certainly  not  the
pulling  down  of  the  Jews  or  their  legal  economy.  Judg-
ment was  coming  on  that  nation  soon,  but  as  long  as
God  forbore  Paul  lingered  over  them  in  patient  love;
and  was  he  not  quite  right  ?  But  God  was  calling  out  a
people  £rom  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  from  the  Jews,  and


174  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

separating  him  from  all  his  antecedents,  from  everything
that  his  heart  was  so  fondly  bound  up  in :  for  never
was  mortal  man  that  loved  Israel  more  than  the  apostle
Paul  did.  But  God  took  him  out  of  all  his  old  Jewish
associations  as  well  as  the  Grentiles,  to  whom  now  He
sent  him.

It  is  evident  that  we  must  be  separated  from  human
influences  even  of  the  best  kind,  in  order  to  be  a  fit
vessel  for  God's  purposes  where  the  need  is  greatest
If  you  would  effectually  help  others,  you  must  always
be  above  the  motives  and  ways  that  sway  theuL  Im-
possible to  deal  rightly  with  a  person  if  you  are  merely
on  the  same  level  with  him.  This  is  the  reason  why,
if  a  brother  be  overtaken  in  a  fault,  what  is  wanted  is  a
truly  spiritual  soul  to  seek  his  restoration.  A  careless
Christian  would  spoil  the  case ;  because,  if  he  who  is
in  fault  can  put  his  finger  on  something  like  his  own
shortcoming  in  the  one  who  deals  with  him,  it  gives
him  an  excuse  for  his  own  sin,  and  a  ground  for  cen-
suring his  censor.  Whereas,  if  there  had  been  the  true
effect  of  the  grace  of  God  in  him  who  appeals  to  his
soul ;  if  grace  has  both  brought  out  from  all  that  is  evil
and  sustained  in  good,  so  that  he  can  be  accused  of
nothing  against  tl^e  Lord,  I  need  not  say  how  Grod
honours  it  as  His  will  and  special  provision  for  dealing
with  those  who  are  involved  in  any  fault  Here,  in  the
apostle  Paul,  is  the  same  principle,  though  in  a  feir
deeper  and  larger  way.  Indeed,  it  is  but  the  assertion
of  grace — that  mighty  principle  of  God's  goodness  in
power,  working  spite  of  evil  according  to  all  that  is  in
His  heart

Paul,  then,  was  taken  clean  out  of  everything,  both


THB  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  175

Jew  and  Gentile,  but  sent  to  the  Grentile  especially.
And  the  baie  sound  of  this  it  was  that  horrified  the
Jews ;  nor  could  they  reconcile  how  one  who  had  burn-
ing love  to  the  Jew  could  at  the  same  time  be  the
prominent,  untiring  witness  of  grace  to  the  Gentiles.
In  their  legal  pride  they  could  not  foi^ve  it.  The
most  hostile  feelings  broke  out  against  Paul,  coupled
with  the  madness  of  envy  and  jealousy  against  the
Grentiles.  So  he  tells  them,  ''For  these  causes  the
Jews  caught  me  in  the  temple,  and  went  about  to  kill
ma  Having,  therefore,  obtained  help  of  God,  I  con-
tinue unto  this  day,  witnessing  both  to  small  and  great,
saying  nothing  else  than  those  things  which  Moses  and
the  prophets  did  say  should  come;  whether  Christ
should  suffer;  whether  he  should  be  the  first  through
resurrection  of  the  dead  to  announce  light,"  &c.

As  he  thus  explains,  the  Eoman  governor  interrupts
him  in  the  exclamation,  that  much  learning  had  made
him  mad.  Paul  replies,  "  I  am  not  mad,  most  noble
Festus,  but  speak  forth  the  words  of  truth  and  sober-
ness." Tljere  is  all  possible  respect,  it  will  be  observed;
at  the  same  time,  he  could  not  without  protest  allow  the
ignorance  of  a  blind  heathen  to  put  such  a  stigma  on
the  truth.  He  appeals  to  one  beside  Festus — certainly
an  impartial  witness  as  far  as  Christianity  was  con-
cerned. "  For  the  king  knoweth  of  these  things,  before
whom  also  I  speak  freely;  for  I  am  persuaded  that
none  of  these  things  are  hidden  from  him;  for  this
thing  was  not  done  in  a  comer."  The  alleged  facts  of
the  life  and  death  and  resurrection  of  Je^us  were  not
unknown  to  Herod  Agrippa.  They  were  universally
talked  of  by  all  who  concerned  themselves  with  Israel.


176  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

Suddenly  he  turns  with  a  direct  question :  "  King
Agrippa,  believest  thou  the  prophets?  I  know  that
thou  believest  them.  Then  Agrippa  said  unto  Paul,
Almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian."  Though
I  do  not  ^ree  with  some  modem  efforts  •as  to  this
clause,  I  admit  that  the  word  "almost"  hardly  gives
the  true  force.  "  In  a  little  degree  you  are  persuading
me."  In  what  spirit  was  this  said  ?  It  seems  to  be  a
sentiment  into  which  he  was  surprised,  and  in  this
sense  wrung  out  from  him.  He  could  not  deny  the
truth  of  what  the  apostle  asserted.  He  would  not
disclaim  his  own  prophets.  He  was,  in  point  of  fact,
shut  up  in  a  corner  as  far  as  regarded  the  facts  and  the
prophecies  that  spoke  of  them  beforehand.  Thus,  cool
a  man  of  the  world  as  he  was,  the  surprise  of  the
pointed  enquiry  of  the  apostle  obliged  him  to  acknow-
ledge that  in  a  little  degree  Paul  was  persuading  him
to  be  a  Christian.  This  does  not  intimate,  of  course,
that  he  really  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus ;  but  the  pre-
misses of  the  apostle  did  involve  the  conclusion  that
Jewish  prophecy  pointed  to  Jesus  Christ,  so  that  Agrippa
could  not  but  own  a  certain  impression  made  on  his
mind.

But  Paul  answers  in  a  spirit  truly  admirable,  and
this  not  alone  with  wisdom,  nor  with  loving  desire
only.  There  is  another  element,  too,  exceedingly  sweety
as  showing  the  state  of  the  apostle  at  this  time,  and
his  own  soul's  deep  present  enjoyment  of  the  Lord  and
of  His  grace.  "  I  would  to  Grod  that  not  only  thou,
but  also  all  that  hear  me  this  day,  were  both  in  a  little
and  in  a  great  degree  such  as  I  am,  except  these  bonds/'
I  hardly  know  such  an  answer  from  man's  lips.     We


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  177

hare  wonderful  words  of  others  as  well  as  of  Paul  else-
where ;  but  to  my  mind,  throughout  the  compass  even
of  this  blessed  book,  it  would  be  hard  to  find  an  expres-
sion of  grace  and  truth,  with  the  condition  of  happiness
which  the  Spirit  vouchsafes,  more  admirably  suited  to
the  circumstances  of  all  concerned — more  perfectly
reflecting  what  God  gives  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.

Paul  could  not  wish  his  bonds  for  any,  however  he  might
glory  in  them  for  himself  He  boasted  to  be  a  prisoner
of  Jesus  Christ ;  but  he  could  not  desire  such  fare  then
at  least  for  such  as  he  desired  to  be  brought  to  the
Lord.  The  time  might  come,  no  doubt,  when  those
who  proved  good  soldiers  in  that  warfare  might  rejoice,
even  as  he  rejoiced,  in  his  sufferings  for  Christ's  sake
and  for  his  body's  sake,  as  well  as  for  the  gospel.  But
this  he  could  with  all  his  heai-t  wish, — that  thev  mij^ht
be,  not  only  in  some  measure  (even  if  it  were  only  a
little),  but  in  a  great  degree  such  as  he  was.  It  is  not
merely  that  they  might  be  Christians;  still  less  that
they  might  be  converted ;  but  "  such  as  I  am."

The  wish  embraces  both  the  reality  or  standing  and
the  state  of  the  Christian;  yea,  such  enjoyment  as
filled  Paul's  own  heart  at  the  very  moment  when  he
stood  in  bonds  before  this  splendid  court.  Did  not
Paul  know  the  dark  cloud  that  hung  over  Agrippa  and
Bemice,  not  to  speak  of  others  ?  Grace  surmounts  all
evil,  as  it  overcomes  and  forgives  the  worst  enemies.
There  is  not  one  bitter  reflection,  nor  a  denunciatory
word.  Grace  wishes  its  best  even  for  those  who  are
bent  on  the  pleasures  6f  sin  for  a  seasoa  We  know
that  judgment  is  sure  and  just ;  but  grace  can  rise  to  a
higher  kind  of  justice — not  that  of  earth  or  of  man,


178  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

but  of  Gkxl,  who  can  be  just,  and  justify  him  that
believes — "  the  righteousness  of  God  by  faith  of  Jesus
Christ."  This  was  what  filled  his  heart,  and  it  was  the
full  unhindered  strength  of  God's  own  grace  made  good
and  seen  in  Christ  that  was  now  working  in  his  own
soul.  It  was  drawn  out  by  his  delight  and  enjoyment
of  the  Christ  to  whom  he  had  been  bearing  witness,
whose  glory  made  pale  all  that  a  Roman  governor  or  a
Jewish  king  could  boast.  It  was  not  the  surprise,  but
the  overflowing  heart  of  one  who  looked  right  into
eternity — who  recalled  once  more  the  brightness  of  the
glory  of  heaven,  wherein  he  had  seen  Christ  Himself
brighter  than  all  that  glory — the  source,  power,  and
fulness  of  it  all,  and  the  giver  of  it  also  to  those  who
believe.  It  was  this  that  filled  him  then,  and  strength-
ened him  to  utter  such  an  expression  of  divine  love.

The  court  breaks  up,  Agrippa  acknowledging  himself
that  Paul  might  have  been  set  at  liberty,  if  lie  had  not
appealed  to  Caesar.     This  is  to  be  noted.

The  next  chapter  details  the  singularly  instructive
voyage  of  the  apostle :  where,  instead  of  being  a  pri-
soner, he  looks  as  if  he  was  really  the  master  of  the
ship ;  and,  indeed,  had  his  word  been  duly  heeded  in
time,  they  would  have  been  preserved  in  safety.  How
wonderful  a  thing  faith  is !  How  blessed  the  faithful-
ness that  flows  from  faith;  how  completely  it  is  the
power  of  God  in  whatever  position  a  man  may  be !

Here  you  find  the  apostle  on  his  way  to  the  Gentiles.
All  was  clear  now.  He  is  away  from  that  which  was
a  charmed  circle  to  him,  where  his  bow  did  not  abide
in  strength,  but  now,  as  before  Festus  and  Agrippa,  has


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  179

retained  to  his  old  vigour.  All  is  found  in  its  place :  no
proofe  are  wanted  where  every  fact  proves  it

The  last  chapter  shows  us  not  only  the  journey  to
Bome^  but  the  apostle  I'eaching  it.  There,  too,  we  find
how  truly  the  power  of  God  is  with  him.  He  is  re-
ceived and  no  small  kindness  shown  by  the  inhabitants
in  the  island  of  Malta  And  Paul  illustrates  how  far
any  word  of  the  Lord  is  in  vain  by  accomplishing  one
of  the  peculiar  promises  in  the  disputed  verses  at  the
end  of  Mark.  This  strikes  the  minds  of  these  heathen,
80  that  afterwards  we  find  the  father  of  the  great  man
in  the  island  with  Paul,  who  prays  and  lays  bis  hands
upon  him  and  heals  hinL  "When  this  was  done,  others
also  which  had  diseases  in  the  island  came,  and  were
healed :  who  also  honoured  us  with  many  honours;  and
when  we  departed,  they  laded  us  with  such  things  as
were  necessary."

Arrived  in  Italy,  they  taste  the  comfort  of  brotherly
lova  "We  found  brethren,  and  were  desired  to  tarry
with  them  seven  days ;  and  so  we  went  toward  Eoma
And  from  thence,  when  the  brethren  heard  of  us,  they
came  to  meet  us  as  far  as  Appii  Forum,  and  Tres
Tabemse ;  whom,  when  Paul  saw,  he  thanked  God  and
took  courage."  What  a  joy  it  is  for  a  humble  brother
to  be  the  means  of  inspiring  the  apostle  Paul  with  fresh
cheer  along  the  road  of  Christ;  and  how  we  defraud
ourselves  as  well  as  our  brethren  of  so  much  blessing
by  our  little  faith  and  scanty  love  in  identifying  our-
selves with  the  most  despised  and  suffering  for  the
name  of  the  Lord !  To  what  a  work  are  we  not  called !
What  a  wonderful  mission  is  that  which  the  Lord  con-

N   2


180  DITRODUCrOBT  LECTURES.

fers  upon  the  simplest  soul  that  names  the  name  of
Jesns !  May  He  wake  ns  up  to  feel  how  blessed  we
are,  and  what  a  spring  of  blessing  He  is!  Ont  of  them,
it  is  said,  "shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water."  Here,
observe,  it  was  the  apostle  himself;  and,  though  it  may
seem  strange  to  some,  even  he  could  find  the  sweetness
and  the  power  of  the  ministry  of  lova

To  Bome  Paul  goes,  and  there  he  dwells  with  a  soldier
that  keeps  him ;  and  in  due  time  he  sees  the  Jews,  and
lays  before  them  the  gospel  at  fuU  length.  Alas !  it  was
the  same  tale;  for  man  is  everywhere  the  same,  but
God  is  too.  "Some  believed  the  things  which  were
spoken,  and  some  believed  not  And  when  they  agreed
not  among  themselves,  they  departed,  after  that  Paul
had  spoken  one  word.  Well  spake  the  Holy  Ghost  by
Esaias  the  prophet  unto  our  fathers,  saying.  Go  unto  this
people,  and  say,  Hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  not
understand  ;  and  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  not  perceiva"

The  sentence,  the  long-suspended  sentence,  of  judicial
hardening  was  now  about  to  fall  in  all  its  withering
strength.  It  had  been  hanging  over  the  nation  ever
since  the  days  of  Isaiah  the  prophet ;  for  not  without
ground  was  it  uttered  then.  Still  the  patience  of  God
pursued  its  way,  till  Jesus  came  and  was  rejected,  when
the  clouds  gathered  more  thickly.  Now  not  only  the
Holy  Ghost  was  come,  but  He  had  testified  of  the  risen
glorified  man  from  Jerusalem  to  Borne.  But  if  He
had  testified,  the  Jews,  instead  of  being,  as  they  ought
to  have  been,  the  first  to  receive  God's  testimony,  were
in  point  of  fact  the  first  to  refuse — ^the  most  active  and
obstinate  emissaries  of  unbelief  and  of  Satan's  power, —
not  only  not  entering  in  themselves,  but  forbidding


THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.


181


those  who  would  Accordingly,  then  and  most  justly
fell  that  pall  of  judgment  because  of  unbelief  under
which  they  lie  to  this  day.  But  the  gospel  goes  to  the
Gentiles ;  and  spite  of  all  that  had  wrought  hitherto,  or
might  work  hereafter,  they  were  to  hear,  and  they  have
heard ;  and  we  are  ourselves,  thanks  be  to  God,  the  wit-
nesses of  it.


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.

To  the  reader  who  enters  on  the  consideration  of  the
epistle  of  James  from  the  epistles  of  Paul,  the  change
is  great  and  sudden,  and  by  no  means  least  of  all  from
the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  which,  in  the  arrangement
of  the  English  Bible,  immediately  precedes  James.
The  main  object  of  that  epistle  was  to  consummate  the
breach  of  the  old  relationships  of  such  Christians  as
were  Jews  in  times  past,  and  to  lead  them  out  de-
finitively from  all  earthly  connexion  into  their  heavenly
association  with  Christ.

It  is  not  so  when  we  enter  from  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles;  as  in  truth  it  is  so  arranged  in  the  great  mass
of  ancient  authorities,  and  some  versions  which  follow
them.  These  "  general  epistles,"  as  they  are  called,  are
placed  not  after  the  Pauline  but  before  them.  Thus
the  break  is  by  no  means  so  marked,  but  on  the  contrary
natural  and  easily  understood;  for,  in  point  of  fact^
James  coalesces  with  the  state  of  things  that  we  find  in
the  churches  of  Judaea,  and  notably  in  the  church  at
Jerusalem.  They  were  zealous  of  the  law;  they  went  up
to  the  temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer; — not  only  Israelites,
but  even  priests,  a  great  company,  we  hear  at  one  time
were  obedient  to  the  fEuth.    We  have  no  ground  what-


^^v^.


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  183

ever  to  suppose  that  these  left  off  either  sacrifices  or
the  functions  properly  sacerdotal.  This  sounds  strange
now  as  men  constantly  look  and  judge  out  of  their  own
present  state;  but  it  is  impossible  to  understand  the
scriptures  thus.  You  must  take  what  the  Bible  gives,
and  thus  seek  to  form  a  just  judgment  according  to
God.

It  is  perfectly  plain  from  the  early  portion  of  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  confirmed  too  by  the  latest
glimpses  which  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  us  of  the  church
in  Jerusalem,  that  there  was  still  a  great  and  decided
cleaving  to  that  which  was  properly  Jewish  on  the  part
of  the  early  Christians  there.  They  used  the  faith  of
Christ  rather  for  conscientious,  godly,  thorough  carrying
out  of  their  Jewish  thoughts.  Whatever  people  may
say  or  think  about  it,  there  is  no  denying  this.  What-
ever they  may  know  to  be  their  own  proper  place  as
Christians  who  never  were  in  such  a  position,  and,  so
far  from  being  led  into  it,  guarded  from  it  strenuously
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  there  is  no  question  that  the  facts
which  scripture  presents  to  us  regarding  the  church  in
Jerusalem  are  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  state  them.

Again,  the  epistle  of  James  was  written  not  merely
to  the  church  in  Jerusalem,  but  to  the  twelve  tribes  that
were  scattered  abroad.  This  prepares  us  for  something
even  larger,  not  merely  for  Christian  Jews,  but  for
Israelites,  for  such  wherever  they  may  be — not  merely
in  the  land  but  out  of  it — ^''scattered  abroad;"  as  it  is
said,  "the  twelve  tribes  that  were  scattered  abroad."  In
short  it  is  evident  that,  among  inspired  epistles,  James's
address  has  a  special  and  an  exceptional  place.  Where
this  has  not  been  taken  into  account,  there  need  be  no


184  INTEODUCTORY  LECTURES.

surprise  that  men  have  misunderstood  the  epistle  of
James.  We  all  know  that  the  great  Beformer,  Luther,
treated  this  portion  of  the  word  of  God  with  the  most
undeserved  distrust  and  even  contempt.  But  I  am  per-
suaded that  no  man,  I  will  not  say  despises,  but  even
attempts  to  dispense  with,  the  epistle  of  James  except
to  his  own  exceeding  loss.  Luther  would  have  been
none  the  worse,  but  all  the  stronger,  for  a  real  under-
standing of  this  writing  of  James.  He  needed  it  in
many  ways ;  and  so  do  we.  It  is,  therefore,  a  miserable
cheat  where  any  souls  allow  their  own  subjective
thoughts  to  govern  them  in  giving  up  this  or  any  portion
of  the  word  of  God ;  for  all  have  an  important  place,
each  for  its  own  object.  Is  it  too  much  to  ask  that  a
document  be  judged  by  its  express  and  manifest  design  ?
Surely  we  are  not  to  take  Paul's  object  in  order  to  inter-
pret James  by.  What  can  be  conceived  more  contrary,
I  will  not  say  to  reverence  for  what  claims  to  be  in-
spired, but  even  to  all  sense  and  discrimination,  than
such  a  thought  ?  And  it  is  thus  that  men  have  stumbled
and  fallen  over  this — it  is  little  to  say — precious  and
profitable,  and  above  all,  practically  profitable  portion  of
the  word  of  God.

At  the  same  time  we  must  read  it  as  it  is,  or
rather  as  God  wrote  it;  and  God  has  addressed  it|
beyond  controversy,  not  merely  to  Christitm  Jews,  nor
even  to  Jews,  but  to  the  twelve  tribes  that  were  scattered
abroad.  Thus  it  embraces  such  of  them  as  were  Chris-
tians ;  and  it  gives  a  very  true  and  just  place  to  those
who  had  the  faith.of  the  Lord  Jesua  Only  it  is  a  mistake
to  suppose  that  it  contemplates  nobody  else.  People  may
come  to  it  with  the  thought  that  all  the  epistles  were


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  183

addressed  to  Christians,  but  this  is  simply  wrong.  If
you  bring  this  or  any  other  preconception  to  the  word  of
Grod,  no  wonder  His  word  leaves  you  outside  its  divine
and  holy  scope.  For  He  is  ever  above  us  and  infinitely
wise.  Our  business  is  to  gather  what  He  has  to  teach
us.  There  is  no  more  fruitful  source  of  error  than
such  a  course.  No  wonder,  therefore,  when  persons  ap-
proach scripture  with  preconceived  thoughts,  hoping  to
find  confirmation  there  instead  of  gathering  God's  mind
from  what  He  has  revealed, — no  wonder  that  they  find
disappointment.  The  mischief  evidently  is  in  themselves
and  not  in  the  divine  word.  Let  us  prayerfully  seek  to
avoid  the  snare.

James  writes  then  after  this  double  manner.  He  says
"a  servant  of  Grod,"  Clearly  there  we  have  a  broad
ground  which  even  a  Jew  would  respect.  On  the  other
hand,  to  "a  servant  of  God  "  he  adds,  "  and  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ"  Here  at  once  would  spring  up  a  diver-
gence of  feeling  among  theuL  The  mass  of  Israelites
would  of  course  altogether  repudiate  such  a  service ;  but
James  writes  of  both.  Observe  he  does  not  speak  of
himself  as  the  brother  of  the  Lord,  although  he  was,  and
is  so  styled  "  the  Lord's  brother "  in  the  epistle  to  the
Galatians.  It  seems  needless  to  explain  that  the  James
who  wrote  this  epistle  wsw  not  the  son  of  Zebedee ;  for
he  had  fallen  under  the  violence  of  Herod  Agrippa  long
before  this  epistle  was  written — at  a  comparatively  early
date.  I  do  not  doubt  that  the  writer  is  the  one  called
"James  the  just,"  and  "the  Lord's  brother  ;"  but  with
all  propriety,  and  with  a  beauty  that  we  should  do  well
to  ponder  and  learn  from,  he  here  avoids  calling  himself
the  Lord's  brother.  It  was  quite  right  that  others  should


186  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

SO  designate  him ;  but  he  calls  himself  "  the  servant,"
not  merely  "  of  God,"  but  "  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."

He  writes,  as  seen,  to  the  twelve  tribes  scattered
abroad,  and  sends  them  greeting.  It  is  not  the  saluta-
tion that  the  Epistles  of  Paul  and  the  other  apostles
have  made  so  familiar  to  us,  but  exactly  the  form  of
salutation  that  was  used  in  the  famous  epistle  of  Acts
XV.  from  the  apostles  and  elders  in  Jerusalem,  who
wrote  to  the  Gentile  assemblies  to  guard  them  from
yielding  to  legalism.  And  as  he  was  the  person  who
gave  the  sentence,  it  is  not  without  interest  to  see  the
link  between  what  was  written  on  that  day,  and  what
James  writes  here.

The  object  of  the  Spirit  of  God  was  to  give  a  final
summons  by  him  who  held  a  pre-eminent  place  in
Jerusalem  to  the  entire  body  of  Israelites,  wherever
they  might  be.  This  is  evident  on  the  face  of  it.  Nor
is  this  an  opinion,  but  what  God  says.  We  are  so  told
expressly.  Controversy  here  is,  or  ought  to  be,  entirely
out  of  the  question.  The  apostle  James  it  is  who  lets
us  know  that  such  was  his  object  in  writing.  Accord-
ingly the  epistle  savours  of  this.  No  doubt  it  is  peculiar,
but  not  more  so  in  the  New  Testament  than  Jonah  is
in  the  014  As  a  whole,  you  are  aware  that  the
prophets  addressed  themselves  to  the  people  of  Israel
Jonah's  special  mission  was  to  Nineveh,  to  the  most
famous  Gentile  city  of  that  day.  Just  as  the  Hebrew
scriptures  are  not  without  this  exception,  so  in  the  New
Testament  you  have  another  exception.  What  could
better  convict  the  narrowness  of  man's  mind,  who
would  like  to  have  it  all  thoroughly  square  according
to  his  notions.    As  a  whole,  the  New  Testament  ad*


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  187

dresses  itself  to  the  Christian  body;  but  James  does
not  That  is  to  say,  in  the  Old  Testament  we  have  an
exceptional  address  to  the  Gentiles ;  in  the  New  Testa-
ment we  have  an  exceptional  address  to  the  Jews.  Is
not  all  this  qoite  right  ?  One  sees  thoroughly,  in  the
midst  of  the  utmost  difference  otherwise,  how  it  is  the
same  divine  mind — a  mind  above  the  contractedness  of
man.  Let  us  hold  this  fast !  We  shall  find  it  profitable
in  everything,  as  well  as  in  the  word  that  we  are  now
reading.

**  My  brethren,"  says  he,  "  count  it  all  joy  when  ye
fall  into  divers  temptations ;  knowing  this,  that  the
trial  of  your  faith  worketh  patience.  But  let  patience
have  its  perfect  work,  that  ye  may  be  perfect  and
entire^  wanting  nothing."  Thus  it  is  at  once  apparent
that  we  are  on  practical  ground — the  manifestation  of
godliness  toward  both  man  and  God, — that  here  the
Holy  Ghost  is  pressing  this  as  the  very  first  injunction
of  the  epistle.  "  Count  it  all  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers
temptations.''  Temptations,  trials  (for  clearly  he  refers
to  outward  trials),  are  in  no  way  the  dreadful  ogres  that
unbelief  makes  them  to  be.  "  We  are  appointed  there-
unto," says  the  apostle  Paul  The  Israelites  no  doubt
found  it  hard,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  deigns  here  to
instruct  them.  They  were  not  to  reckon  trial  a  grievance.
•'Count  it  aU  joy  when  ye  fall  into  divers  temptations."
The  reasdn  is  that  God  uses  it  for  moral  purposes  ;  He
deals  with  the  nature  which  opposes  itself  to  His  will.
"Knowing  this,  that  the  trying  of  your  faith  worketh
patience"  (or  endurance).  "  But  let  patience  have  its
perfect  work,  that  ye  may  be  perfect  and  entire,  wanting
nothing."


188  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

And  how  is  this  then  to  be  effected  ?  Here  is  brought
in  another  essential  point  of  the  epistle.  It  is  not  only
a  question  of  trials  that  come  upon  the  believer  when
he  is  here  below.  Clearly  he  is  in  this  place  addressing
his  brethren  in  Christ  He  does  not  simply  look  at  the
whole  twelve  tribes,  but  at  the  faithful;  as  we  find  in
the  beginning  of  the  next  chapter,  **  My  brethren,  have
not  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord  of
glory,  with  respect  of  persons."  So  I  think  it  is  clearly
here  men  capable  of  understanding  what  was  spiritual.
"  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  Gk)d."

These  are  the  two  most  important  points  pressed  prac-
tically throughout  the  epistla  One  is  the  profit  of  not
enjoying  the  pleasant  only,  but  the  rough  and  hard  that
God  sends  for  our  good.  Blessing  now  is  not  in  ease  and
honour,  but,  contrariwise,  counting  joy  in  trial,  accepting
what  is  painful  from  God,  certain  that  He  never  mistakes,
and  that  all  is  ordered  of  Him  for  the  perfect  blessing
of  His  own  peopl&  But  then  this  leads  the  way,  and
makes  one  feel  the  need  of  wisdom  from  God  in  order
intelligently  and  happily  to  profit  by  the  trial ;  for,  as
we  know,  the  blessing  of  all  trial  is  "  to  them  that  are
exercised  thereby."  In  order  to  discern  we  need  wisdom.
This  he  brings  in:  "  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom."  There
is  thus  the  need  of  dependence  on  God,  the  spirit  of
habitual  waiting  on  Him — of  bowing  to  Him,  and,  in
short,  of  obedienca  *'  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let
him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and
upbraideth  not."  We  shall  see  by  and  by  whence  this
flows,  but  we  have  merely  now  a  general  exhortatioa

"  Let  him  ask  in  feith,"  says  he,  "  nothing  wavering.
For  he  that  wavereth  is  like  a  wave  of  the  sea  driven


THE  EHSTLE  OF  JAMES.  189

witb  the  wind  and  tossed.  For  let  not  that  man  think
that  he  shall  receive  anything  of  the  Lord.  A  double-
minded  man  is  unstable  in  all  his  way&"  Thus  he
shows  that  faith  supposes  confidence  in  God,  and  that
this  doubtful  mind,  this  hesitancy  about  God,  is  in
point  of  fiact  nothing  but  unbelief.  Accordingly  it
is  a  practical  denial  of  the  very  attitude  you  take  in
asking  God.  It  is  blowing  hot  and  blowing  cold ;  it  is
appealing  to  ask  God,  when  in  point  of  fact  you  have
no  confidence  in  Him.  Let  not  such  a  one,  therefore,
expect  anything  of  the  Lord.

In  the  next  place  he  proceeds  to  show  too  how  this
works  practically:  "Let  the  brother  of  low  degree
rejoice  in  that  he  is  exalted :  but  the  rich,  in  that  he
is  made  low:" — such  are  the  ways  of  God — "because
as  the  flower  of  the  grass  he  shall  pass  away."  All  that
is  founded  on  a  mei*e  temporary  set  of  circumstances  is
doomed,  and  in  no  way  belongs  to  the  nature  of  God  as
revealed  in  truth  and  grace  by  the  Son  of  God.  Hence,
therefore,  God  reverses  the  judgment  of  the  world  in  all
these  matters, — "  Let  the  brother  of  low  degree  rejoice
in  that  he  is  exalted :  but  the  rich,  in  that  he  is  made
low."  The  reason  also  is  given  :  "  For  as  the  flower  of
the  grass"  (which  is  mere  nature)  "  he  shall  pass  away.
For  the  sun  is  no  sooner  risen  with  a  burning  heat,  but
it  withereth  the  grass,  and  the  flower  thereof  falleth,  and
the  grace  of  the  fashion  of  it  perisheth :  so  also  shall
the  rich  man  fade  away  in  his  ways."

On  the  other  hand,  one  may  and  should  be  "  blessed."
Here  we  have  the  fuU  contrast,  and  the  reason  why  all
this  is  brought  in ;  for  there  is  a  perfect  chain  of  connec-
tion between  these  verses,  little  as  it  may  appear  at  first


190  INTRODUCTOKY  LECTURES.

sight.  ''  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endiireth  temptation,"
instead  of  being  exposed  either  to  the  instability  of
unbelief  which  we  saw,  or  to  the  mere  dependence
on  natural  resources  which  was  next  proved.  The  man
that  endures  temptation,  that  accepts  it  and  counts  it
joy,  blessed  is  he ;  "  for  when  he  is  tried  he  shall  receive
the  crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord  hath  promised  to
them  that  love  him."

This  leads  to  another  character  of  trial  in  inward
evil,  not  in  outward.  There  is  a  temptation  which
comes  from  the  devil  as  truly  as  there  is  a  temptation
that  comes  from  God,  and  is  good  for  man.  That  is,
there  is  a  trial  of  faith,  and  there  is  a  temptation  of
flesh.

Now  it  is  clear  that  the  trial  of  faith  is  as  precious
as  it  is  profitable ;  and  of  this  exclusively  he  has  been
speaking  up  to  this  point.  Now  he  just  turns  aside  to
notice  the  other ;  and  it  is  the  more  important  to  weigh
it  well  because,  as  far  as  I  know,  it  is  the  only  place  in
scripture  where  it  is  definitely  presented.  Temptations
elsewhere  mean  trials,  not  inward  solicitations  of  evil ;
they  have  no  bearing  upon,  nor  connection  with,  the  evil
nature,  but  on  the  contrary  are  the  ways  in  which  the
Lord  out  of  His  love  tries  those  in  whom  He  has  con-
fidence, and  works  for  the  greater  blessing  of  those  whom
He  has  already  blessed.  Here,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find
the  common  sense  of  temptation.  Alas !  the  very  fact  of
its  being  common  proves  where  people  are, — how  little
they  have  to  do  with  God,  how  much  in  common  with
the  world.  "  Let  no  man  say  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am
tempted  of  God."  Now  he  is  touching  upon  another
character ;  "  for  God  cannot  be  tempted  by  evils," — ^you


li^'


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  191

must  read  it  as  it  is  in  the  margin, — "neither  tempteth
he  any  man :  but  every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is
drawn  away  of  his  own  lust,  and  enticed."

Thus  it  is  not  only  that  God  is  inaccessible  to  evil
Himself,  but  He  also  never  tempts  to  evil  at  any  one
time  whatsoever.  There  is  no  such  thought  that  enters
the  mind  of  God.  He  moves  supremely  above  evil:
this  is  the  ground  of  the  blessing  of  every  child  of
God,  which  he  will  show  presently,  when  he  has  finished
the  subject  of  evil  that  comes  through  man's  nature.
Evil  is  from  himself;  for,  as  he  says,  "Every  man  is
tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust,  and
enticed.  Then  when  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth
forth  sin :  and  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth
death."  This  is  not  the  way  in  which  the  apostle  Paul
handles  the  matter.  It  is  not  that  there  is  the  very
smallest  contradiction  between  the  two.  They  are  per-
fectly harmonious;  but  then  it  is  a  different  way  of
looking  at  the  matter;  and  the  reason  is  obvious,  be-
cause what  Paul  treats  of  in  Eomans  viL,  which  is  the
scripture  I  refer  to,  is  not  the  conduct  but  the  nature.
Now,  if  you  look  at  nature,  it  is  plain  that  sin  is  there
first,  and  in  consequence  of  the  sin  that  dwells  in  the
nature,  there  are  lusts  as  the  effects  of  it.  Here  he  looks
at  sin  in  the  conduct,  and  accordingly  there  are  evil
workings  within,  and  then  the  outward  act  of  sin.
Thus  we  see  it  is  only,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  a  very  great
want  of  perception,  and  a  dulness  that  certainly  is
unworthy — nay,  worthy — of  any  person  that  sets  up  to
judge  the  word  of  God — a  shameful  position  for  a  crea-
ture— for  a  man — above  all  for  a  Christian  to  take.
But  it  is  here,  as  is  the  case  everywhere,  blindness  and


192  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

ignorance  in  those  that  set  one  part  of  scripture  against
another.

To  this,  perhaps,  it  may  be  said,  "  Do  you  never  find
a  difficulty  V*  To  be  sure,  but  what  is  the  place  of  any
one  who  finds  a  difficulty  in  the  word  of  God  ?  Wait
upon  God.  Do  not  you  try  to  settle  difficulties,  but
put  yourself  in  the  attitude  of  dependence.  Ask  wis-
dom, and  ask  it  all  of  God,  who  gives  liberally  and
upbraids  not.  He  will  surely  clear  up  whatever  is
for  His  own  glory.  There  is  not  a  man  of  exercised  soul
in  tliis  building,  or  any  other,  who  has  not  proved  the
truth  of  what  I  am  now  saying.  There  is  not  a  man
who  has  been  led  in  any  measure  to  the  understanding
of  the  ways  of  God  that  has  not  proved  the  very  passages,
which  he  once  found  so  difficult  when  they  were  not
understood,  to  be  the  means  of  exceeding  light  to  his
soul  when  they  were.  And  therefore,  haste  to  solve
difficulties  is  really  and  practically  a  finding  fault  either
with  God  or  with  His  word ; — with  His  word,  because  it
is  deeper  than  we  are ;  with  Himself,  because  He  does
not  give  the  babe  the  knowledge  that  would  be  proper
to  the  grown  man.  Now  it  is  evident  that  this  is  only
foolishness.  It  is  just  the  haste  that  hinders  blessing
and  progress.  However,  nothing  can  be  simpler  than
that  which  the  apostle  here  describes  and  recommends
to  us,  and  nothing  more  certain.

Now  we  come  to  the  other  side.  "  Do  not  err,  be-
loved brethren.  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift
is  from  above."  We  have  had  the  evil  traced  to  its
source,  which  is  the  fallen  nature  of  man,  no  doubt
wrought  on  by  Satan,  but  without  here  bringing  the
enemy  before  us.    We  shall  find  this  by  and  by,  in


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  193

cliapter  iv. ;  but  here  lie  simply  looks  on  man's  nature,
and  then  he  raises  his  eyes  to  God.  "  Every  good  gift
and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down
from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness,
neither  shadow  of  turning."  The  first  point  therefore
in  the  mind  of  the  Holy  Ghost  here  is  to  vindicate  God
at  all  cost,  and  this  entirely  apart  from  us.  As  evil
comes  from  us,  so  all  that  is  good  comes  from  God;
and  not  only  is  Grod  the  spring  of  every  good — every
good  giving  and  every  perfect  gift  being  all  from  God
-—(the  manner  of  it  as  well  as  the  thing  itself  that  is
given) ;  but^  besides,  there  is  no  change  in  God,  the
creature  in  its  best  estate  is  nothing  but  change.

Thus  there  is  a  most  complete  vindication  of  God's
moral  glory  in  this  verse,  contrasted  with  man  in  his
weakness,  and  ruin,  and  eviL  But  he  goes  farther,
and  asserts — and  asserting,  too,  in  the  most  admirable
manner — the  truth  of  the  sovereign  action  of  grace.
He  has  claimed  this  for  God  already ;  but  now  we  come
to  see  the  application  to  us.  It  is  not  only,  therefore,
that  Grod  is  good,  but  that  He  is  a  giver,  and  tliis  of
nothing  that  is  not  good,  and  of  all  that  is  good.
Stainless  in  His  holiness,  and  invariable  in  His  light,
God  is  active  in  His  love;  and  as  the  fruit  of  this
energetic  sovereign  love  He  does  not  bless  merely,  sweet
as  it  is  fix>m  Him.  Blessing  is  altogether  short  of  that
which  we  know  now  in  Christianity — of  that  which
even  James  treats  of,  according  to  his  very  broad
and  comprehensive  epistle.  In  the  bright  day  that  is
coming  God  will  bless  the  creature.  In  the  dark  day
that  man  calls  ''now,"  God  more  than  blesses  —  far
mate  than  blesses — those  who  believe.    We  are  our-

0


194  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

selves  bom  of  EUm :  He  communicates  His  nature  to  the
believer.  He  does  so  unsought,  and  surely  undeserved.
Undeserved !  Why  there  was  nothing  but  evil :  he  had
shown  this  immediately  before.  There  was  nothing
good  from  man's  nature  as  a  fallen  creature, — nothing
but  good  from  God.

Then,  let  it  be  repeated,  it  is  not  merely  good  we
see  here,  but  a  communication  of  His  own  spiritual
nature;  and  this  He  is  doing  by  the  word  of  truth.
Scripture  is  the  medium.  The  revelation  of  Himself  by
wliich  He  acts  on  souls  is  accordingly  here  brought
before  us,  no  less  than  His  own  sovereign  will  as  the
source  of  it.  "  Of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  with  the
word  of  truth,  that  we  should  be  a  kind  of  first-fruits
of  his  creatures."  He  means  to  bring  in  fulness  of  bless*
ing  by  and  by.  This  will  be,  as  far  as  government  is
concerned,  in  the  millennium ;  but,  being  only  govern-
ment, evil  will  remain  to  be  controlled  and  kept  down
to  His  own  glory.  This  could  in  no  wise  satisfy  God's
nature,  and  so  scripture  reveals  a  time  coming  when  all
will  be  according  to  God.  Then  will  be  in  the  fullest
sense  His  rest, — when  all  question  of  His  working  and
of  man's  responsibility  will  be  over, — when  He,  entering
into  the  result,  will  grant  us  to  enter  into  His  rest  Then
shall  we  be  not  merely  first-fruits  of  His  creatures,  but
aU  in  rest  and  glory  according  to  the  new  heavens
and  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.

Meanwhile  we  who  are  thus  begotten,  the  first-
finiits,  have  the  wondrous  blessing  here  set  fortL  It
is  not  merely  that  we  are  objects  of  this  blessing.
Alas  1  how  often  a  blessing  has  been  given,  and  as  often
lost,  being  turned  to  His  shame  and  men's  corruption.


J^-  '-


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  195

Gk>d  blessed,  as  we  know,  at  the  very  beginning — ^blessed
everything  that  He  had  made;  but  there  was  no  stability
in  a  blessing  itsel£  To  ensure  stability,  all  must  rest
(m  one  who  is  God  as  well  as  man,  giving  us  a  nature
according  to  Gk»d.  In  those  that  are  fallen  there  must
be  the  communication  of  the  divine  nature ;  and  this
there  is  in  Christ,  and  so  there  always  has  been.  It
may  not  be  always  consciously  known,  and  it  was  not
in  Old  Testament  times ;  but  in  order  that  there  should
be  a  basis  of  immutable  blessing,  and  of  communion  in
any  measure  between  God  and  the  creature,  there  must
be  the  communication  of  the  divine  nature.  Of  this,
accordingly,  James  here  speaks.  How  it  links  itself
with  Peter,  and  John,  and  Paul,  we  need  not  stop  now
to  enquire.  We  see  at  once  that  he  who  could  despise
such  an  epistle  as  this  is  a  man — not  to  be  despised
indeed,  for  God  would  not  have  us  despise  any  as  He
despises  none  Himself;  ut  certainly — to  call  forth  pain
and  sorrow  that  such  thoughts  should  ever  have  been
allowed  in  a  soul  bom  of  God  and  withal  a  servant  of
Jesus  Christ.

Founded,  then,  on  this,  the  communication  of  His
own  nature,  with  its  moral  judgment,  we  have  the
practical  exhortation : — "  Wherefore,  my  beloved  bre-
thren, let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear."  Hearing  is
exactly  the  attitude  of  dependence.  Now  one  who  is
the  servant  of  God  looks  up  to  God,  confides  in  God,
and  expects  from  God.  This  is  the  place  which  becomes
him  that  is  bom  of  God.  "Wherefore,  my  beloved
brethren,  let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak."
Speech  is  apt  to  be  the  expression  of  our  nature — of

ourselves.  Be  slow  then  to  speak,  swift  to  hear.  Clearly

o  2


196  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

he  has  God  in  yiew,  and  has  His  word  before  him,
and  that  which  woiQd  make  His  word  understood.
Let  US,  too,  be  "swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak."

But  another  thing  is  to  be  heeded.  It  is  not  only
that  the  nature  of  man  expresses  itself  in  the  tongue,  but
in  the  feelings  of  the  heart;  and  alas!  in  the  wrath  of  a
fallen  creature.  Let  us  be,  then,  not  only  slow  to  speak,
but "  slow  to  wratL"  You  see  at  once  that  we  have
an  exhortation  founded  on,  first,  the  spiritual  anatomy,
if  I  may  so  say,  of  our  nature,  and  then  we  are  given
to  know  the  wondrous  character  of  the  new  life  that
we  have  received  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  know
to  be  ours,  because  we  are  "b^otten  by  the  word  of
truth."  Next,  he  gives  the  reason ;  '*  for,"  says  he,  **  the
wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteousness  of  God."

It  need  scarcely  be  remarked  that  it  is  no  question  here
of  the  righteousness  of  God  in  a  doctrinal  sense.  James
does  not  deal  with  such  matters;  he  never  takes  up
the  question  how  a  sinner  is  to  be  justified.  Therefore^
certainly,  he  in  no  way  contradicts  Paul,  any  more  than
in  what  is  said  of  faith,  or  justification;  indeed  he  does
not  at  all  treat  of  the  same  question  that  Paul  has
before  him.  Where  two  persons  really  take  up  the  same
matter,  and  then  give  us  contrary  expressions,  they  of
course  contradict  each  other ;  but  if  they  deal  with  two
totally  different  points,  although  they  may  be  ever  so
closely  connected,  contradiction  there  is  none:  and
such  precisely  is  the  fact  as  to  Paul  and  James  in  the
matter  before  us,  without  sa]dng  a  word  of  the  inspires
tion  which  makes  it  impossible.  They  both  employ  tiie
words,  "faith,"  "works,"  and  "justify,"  but  they  are  not
settling  the  same  question,  but  two  different  ones.    We


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  197

dull  find  the  reason  of  this  by  and  by,  but  I  the  more
willingly  make  this  remark  in  passing,  in  order  to  help
any  souls  who  find  a  difficulty ;  because  it  often  proves
a  snare,  particularly  to  those  who  rest  over-much  on
verbal  analogies.

Let  us  look  to  the  grace  of  the  Lord  to  understand
the  scriptura  It  is  the  habit  of  many,  if  they  find  the
same  expression,  to  give  it  always  the  same  meaning.
This  is  true  neither  in  every-day  language  nor  in  God*s
word.  Here,  for  instance,  we  have  the  righteousness
of  God  clearly  in  a  difierent  sense  from  that  so  familiar
to  us  in  the  Pauline  epistles.  He  is  speaking  of  what  is
not  pleasing  to,  because  inconsistent  with,  His  nature ;
and  clearly  the  wrath  of  man  is  ofTensive  to  Him.  It
works  nothing  suitable  to  His  moral  nature.  The  pass-
age speaks  of  practice,  not  of  doctrine.

"  Wherefore  lay  apart  all  filthiness  and  superfluity  of
naughtiness,  and  receive  with  meekness  the  implanted
word,  which  is  able  to  save  your  souls."  It  will  be  observed
how  far  it  is  from  being  an  imposed  law.  Particular  pains
are  taken  to  guard  from  this  prevalent  idea.  A  Jew
would  have  been  likely  to  have  thought  of  it  thus ;  for
he  naturally  turned  to  the  law  as  the  one  and  only
standard.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  James  is  far  from
leaving  out  the  use  of  the  law :  we  shall  find  it  in  this
very  epistle.  Still  he  is  careful  in  this  place  to  show
that  the  word  deals  inwardly  with  the  man, — that  it  is
this  implanted  word,  as  he  calls  it,  and  not  an  external
law,  that  is  able  to  save  the  souL  The  word  enters
by  faith,  or,  as  the  apostle  has  it  in  Hebrews,  is  "  mixed
with  fiaith  in  them  that  hear  it."  "  But  be  ye  doers  of
the  word,  and  not  hearers  only,  deceiving  your  own


198  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

selves."  It  is  plain  that  we  find  ourselves  throughout
on  the  practical  side  of  the  manifestation  by  life.  This
is  the  governing  thought  and  aim  of  the  epistle.

"  For  if  any  be  a  hearer  of  the  word,  and  not  a  doer,
he  is  like  unto  a  man  beholding  his  natural  face  in  a
glass."  He  may  have  ever  so  clear  a  view  of  himself ;
he  sees  clearly  what  he  is  like  for  a  moment;  but  he  as
soon  forgets  alL  "  He  beholdeth  himself,  and  goeth  his
way."  The  image  is  faded  and  gone.  He  "  straightway
forgetteth  what  manner  of  man  he  was."  Oh,  how  true
is  this,  and  how  admirably  drawn  to  the  life!  It  is
that  glimpse  of  conviction  by  the  truth  that  comes
before  souls  when  they  are  forced  to  discern  what  the
spring  of  their  thoughts  is,  what  their  feelings  are  when
the  light  of  (Jod  flashes  over  and  through  a  man ;  but
how  soon  it  passes  away,  instead  of  entering  in  and
abiding  within  the  soul !  It  is  the  power  of  the  Spirit
of  God  alone  that  can  grave  these  things  on  the  heart
But  here  the  apostle  is  exposing  the  absence  of  an
internal  work  where  intelligence  is  severed  from  con-
science, and  this  he  illustrates,  as  we  have  seen,  by  the
man  that  gets  a  glance  in  a  glass,  and  then  all  is  gone
directly  his  back  is  turned.  Whereas  there  is  power  and
permanence  with  him  who  fixes  his  view  on  "the  perfect
law  of  liberty."

And  here  it  seems  seasonable  to  say  that,  so  fai  from
James  being  legal  in  the  evil  sense  of  the  word,  he  is
the  inspired  man  who,  at  least  as  much  as  any  other,
slays  l^ality  by  this  very  expression.  For  this  end
there  is  not  a  more  precious  thought  nor  a  mightier
word  in  all  the  New  Testament.  In  its  own  province
there  is  nothing  better,  plainer,  or  more  striking.    The


THE  EPISTLE   OF  JAMES.  199

reason  why  people  often  find  legality  in  James  is  because
they  themselves  bring  it.  They  are  imder  that  influence
in  their  souls,  and  accordingly  they  cloud  the  light  of
James  with  that  which  was  meant  to  veil  the  guilty  in
darkness.

What  then  is  the  law  of  liberty?  It  is  the  word
of  Gk)d  which  directs  a  man  begotten  by  the  word
of  truth,  urging  and  cheering  and  strengthening  him  in
the  very  things  that  the  new  life  delights  in.  Conse-
quently it  has  an  action  exactly  the  opposite  of  that
exercised  by  the  law  of  Moses  on  the  Israelite.  This  is
evident  from  the  bare  terms :  "  Thou  shalt  not  do  "  this,
"  thou  shalt  7wt  do  "  that.*  Why  ?  Because  they  wanted
to  do  what  God  prohibited.  The  desire  of  man  as  he  is
being  after  evil,  the  law  put  a  veto  on  the  indulgence  of
the  will.  It  was  necessarily  negative,  not  positive,  in
character.  The  law  forbad  the  very  things  to  which  man's
own  impulses  and  desires  would  have  prompted  him,
and  is  the  solemn  means  of  detecting  rebellious  fallen
nature.  But  this  is  not  the  law  of  liberty  in  any  wise,
but  the  law  of  bondage,  condemnation,  and  death.

The  law  of  liberty  brings  in  the  positive  for  those  who
love  it — not  the  negation  of  what  the  will  and  lust  of

*  If  my  memoiy  serve  me,  a  celebrated  man  of  the  day  wrote  an
enay  on  Uberty,  in  which  he  observes  that  Christians  are  thrown  on
the  law  of  Moses  in  default  oi  positive  morality  in  the  New  Testament.
Can  anything  be  conceived  more  superficial  than  such  a  remark  P  or  a
more  evident  token  of  the  blindness  of  unbelief  in  him  who  made  it  ?
But  it  must  reaUy  be  so  where  Christ  is  not  known.  Is  it  not  also
striking  aa  a  proof  that  superstition  is  at  bottom  infidel  as  truly  as
free-thinking.  In  thia  the  theologian  and  the  sceptic  come  to  the  same
oondnsionf  and  from  the  same  source — a  lack  of  seeing  and  appreciat-
ing Jesoa.  Life  in  Christ  in  positive ;  the  law  was  essentially  negative.
The  word  of  God  expresses  that  life,  and  the  Spirit  gives  it  power ;
but  thif  needfl  faith  which  aU  have  not.


200  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

man  desires,  so  much  as  the  exercise  of  the  new  life — ^in
what  is  according  to  its  own  nature.  Thus  it  has  been
often  and  very  aptly  described  as  a  loving  parent  who
tells  his  child  that  he  must  go  here  or  there ;  that  is,  the
very  places  which  he  knows  perfectly  the  child  would
be  most  gratified  to  visit.  Such  is  the  law  of  liberty  :
as  if  one  said  to  the  child,  "  Now,  my  child,  you  must
go  and  do  such  or  such  a  thing,"  all  the  while  knowing
that  you  can  confer  no  greater  favour  on  the  child.  It
has  not  at  all  the  character  of  resisting  the  will  of  the
child,  but  rather  of  directing  his  affections  in  the  will
of  the  object  dearest  to  him.  The  child  is  regarded  and
led  according  to  the  love  of  the  parent,  who  knows  what
the  desire  of  the  child  is — a  desire  that  has  bpen  in
virtue  of  a  new  nature  implanted  by  God  Himself  in
the  child.  He  has  given  him  a  life  that  loves  His  ways
and  word,  that  hates  and  revolts  from  evil,  and  is  pained
most  of  all  by  falling  through  unwatchfulness  under
sin,  if  it  seemed  ever  so  little.  The  law  of  liberty
therefore  consists  not  so  much  in  a  restraint  on  gratify-
ing the  old  man,  as  in  guiding  and  guarding  the  new  ;
for  the  heart's  delight  is  in  what  is  good  and  holy  and
true;  and  the  word  of  our  Grod  on  the  one  hand
exercises  us  in  cleaving  to  that  which  is  the  joy  of  the
Christian's  heart,  and  strengthens  us  in  our  detestation
of  all  that  we  know  to  be  offensive  to  the  Lord.

Such  is  the  law  of  liberty.  Accordingly  "whoso
looketh  into  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,  and  continueth
therein,  he  being  not  a  forgetful  hearer,  but  a  doer  of
the  work,  this  man  shall  be  blessed  in  his  deed'*  (or
rather  "doing").  There  is,  however,  the  need  of  at-
tending to  the  other  side  of  the  picture :  ''  If  any  mai^


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  201

teem  to  be  rdigioos,  and  bridleth  not  his  tongue,  but
deceiveth  his  own  hearty  this  man*s  religion  is  vain."

Then  the  chapter  closes  with  giving  us  a  sample  of
what  pure  and  undefiled  religion  is,  but  chiefly  as  we
observe  in  a  practical  way — the  main  object  and  never
lost  sight  o£  There  is,  first,  the  ''  visiting  the  fatherless
and  widows  in  their  afiSiction,'' — persons  from  whom  one
could  gather  nothing  flattering  to  the  flesh,  or  in  any
way  calculated  to  minister  to  self;  there  is,  on  the  other
hand,  the  keeping  one's  self  unspotted  from  the  world.
How  often  one  hears  people  in  the  habit  of  quoting
from  this  verse  for  what  they  call  practice,  who  dwell
on  the  first  part  to  the  exclusion  of  the  last  How
comes  it  that  the  last  clause  is  forgotten  ?  Is  it  not
precisely  what  those  who  quote  would  find  the  greatest
difficulty  in  honestly  proving  that  they  value  ?  Let  us
then  endeavour  to  profit  by  the  warning,  and  above  all
by  the  precious  lesson  in  the  word  of  our  God.

In  all  that  we  have  had  the  question  naturally  arises,
Wherein  lies  the  special  propriety  of  such  exhortations,
or  why  are  they  addressed  to  the  twelve  tribes  ?  Surely
we  may  ask  this ;  for  those  who  value  the  word  of  God
are  not  precluded  from  enquiring  what  the  object  is.
Bather  are  we  encouraged  to  ask  why  it  was  according
to  the  wisdom  of  God  that  such  words  as  these  shoidd
be  presented  to  Israel,  and  especially  to  such  of  the
twelve  tribes  as  had  the  faith  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
James  enters  upon  this  expressly  in  the  next  chapter.

"  My  brethren,  have  not  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  the  Lord  of  glory,  with  respect  of  persons.  For
if  there  come  unto  your  assembly  a  man  with  a  gold
ring,  in  goodly  apparel,  and  there  come  in  also  a  poor


202  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

man  in  vile  raiment ;  and  ye  have  respect  to  him  that
weareth  the  gay  clothing,  and  say  unto  him,  Sit  thou
here  in  a  good  place ;  and  say  to  the  poor,  Stand  thou
here,  or  sit  here  under  my  footstool ;  are  ye  not  then
partial  in  yourselves,  and  are  become  judges  of  evil
thoughts  ?  Hearken,  my  beloved  brethren.  Hath  not  God
chosen  the  poor  of  this  world  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of
the  kingdom  which  he  hath  promised  to  them  that  love
him?  But  ye  have  despised  them."  Here,  it  would  seem,
we  begin  to  learn  more  definitely  the  reason.  We  can  see
the  need,  value,  and  wisdom  of  what  has  been  said,  but
we  may  find  here  the  occasion  of  it :  with  Israel  there
was  peculiar  danger  of  taking  up  the  doctrines  of  Chris-
tianity as  a  system.  As  a  people  who  had  an  exception-
ally religious  standing,  they  were  yet  more  exposed  to
this  than  the  Gentiles.  The  Jewish  mind  on  its  own
side  was  just  as  prone  to  make  a  code  of  Christianity  as
the  Gentiles  were  to  couple  it  with  philosophy.  The
Greek  mind  might  speculate  and  theorize  about  it»
but  the  Jew  wordd  make  a  quasi-Talmud  of  it  in  its
way.  His  tendency  would  be  to  reduce  it  merely  to  a
number  of  thoughts,  and  thus  an  outward  system.

At  this  precisely  is  the  epistle  levelled,  namely,  the
severing  faith  from  practica  Against  this  the  Holy
Ghost  launches  His  solemn  and  searching  words  in  the
rest  of  the  chapter.  This  brings  in  the  allusion  to  the
law :  "If  ye  fulfil  the  royal  law  according  to  the  scripture.
Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,  ye  do  well :
but  if  ye  have  respect  to  persons,  ye  commit  sin,  and
are  convinced  of  the  law  as  transgressors."  Then  follows
a  grave  and  searching  consideration  for  those  who  talk
about  the  law, — "for  whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  203

law,  and  yet  ofifend  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all.  For
he  that  said,  Do  not  commit  adultery,  said  also,  Do  not
kilL  Now  if  thou  commit  no  adultery,  yet  if  thou  kill,
thou  art  become  a  transgressor  of  the  law."  From  this
use  of  these  two  things,  that  is,  the  royal  law  which
thus  goes  forth  towards  one*s  neighbour,  and  again  the
law  in  general,  he  turns  to  take  up  the  law  of  liberty
which  has  been  explained  before.  "  For  he  shall  have
judgment  without  mercy,  that  hath  showed  no  mercy ;
and  mercy  rejoiceth  against  judgment."

This  introduces  then  the  famous  passage  which  has
been  the  perplexity  of  so  many  minds :  "  What  should
it  profit,  my  brethren,  though  a  man  may  say  that  he
hath  fiedth,  and  have  not  works  ?  Can  faith  save  ?"  It  is
evident  that  it  cannot.  A  faith  that  is  unproductive
has  no  living  link  with  God.  What  is  the  good  of  a
fiskith  that  consists  in  mere  assent  to  so  many  dogmas,
and  thus  proves  its  human  source  ?  The  faith  that  is
given  us  of  God  saves,  not  that  which  is  the  fruit  of
man's  nature.  We  have  seen  this  already,  and  so  therefore
the  grand  principle  of  the  first  chapter  leads  as  simply
as  possible  into  the  application  of  it  in  the  second.  Here
all  is  exemplified  in  a  plain  but  striking  way.  "  If  a
brother  or  a  sister  be  naked,  and  destitute  of  daily  food,
and  one  of  you  say  unto  them.  Depart  in  peace,  be  ye
warmed  and  filled ;  notwithstanding  ye  give  them  not
those  things  which  are  needful  to  the  body ;  what  doth
it  profit?"  Evidently  nothing.  "Even  so  faith,  if  it
hath  not  works,  is  dead,  being  alone.  Yea,  a  man  may
say.  Thou  hast  faith,  and  I  have  works :  show  me  thy
&ith  without  thy  works,  and  I  will  show  thee  my  faith
by  my  works.    Thou  believest  that  there  is  one  God ;


204  INTEODUCTOBY  LECTUKESL

thou  doest  well :  the  devils  also  believe  and  tremble/'
If  there  is  any  difference,  the  advantage  is  really  on  the
side  of  those  misleaders  of  poor  ruined  men.  At  least
they  do  feel ;  and  so  far  there  is  a  greater  effect  produced
than  on  these  reasoning  Jews.  "  But  wilt  thou  know,
O  vain  man  V*  says  he.  It  is  not  all  that  the  Corinthian
was  vain  in  his  speculations,  but  the  Jew  not  less,  who
thus  spoke  and  acted.  "  Wilt  thou  know,  0  vain  man,
that  faith  without  works  is  dead.*'

Yet  the  remarkable  feature  we  have  also  to  weigh
here  is  that  when  works  are  thus  introduced,  atten-
tion is  directed  to  what  would  be  perfectly  valueless  if
they  were  not  the  result  of  faith, — nay,  worse  than
valueless,  positively  evil,  and  entailing  the  severest
punishment.  For  if  we  merely  look  at  Abraham,  or  at
Eahab,  apart  from  God,  apart  from  faith, — ^if  we  r^ard
their  ways  here  cited  as  a  question  of  human  good  works
— who  in  the  world  would  ever  so  style  that  which
Abraham  or  Kahab  did  ?  It  is  perfectly  plain  that  ac-
cording to  man  Abraham  would  have  been  in  danger  of
losing  his  liberty,  if  not  his  head,  for  intent  to  kill  Isaac;
and  unquestionably,  judged  by  her  country's  law,  the
conduct  of  Eahab  must  have  exposed  her  to  the  worst
punishment  of  the  worst  political  crima  But  this
wordd  be  judging  their  actions  apart  from  God,  because
of  whose  will  they  were  done,  and  apart  from  faith,  which
alone  gave  these  works  their  life  and  character.  Other-
wise Abraham  in  man's  eye  was  a  father  ready  to
murder  his  own  son :  what  could  be  worse  than  this  ?
In  short,  if  we  regard  his  work  apart  from  faith,  it  is
perhaps  the  darkest  evil  conceivabla  And  what  was
Bahab's  act  but  treason  against  her  country  and  her


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  205

king  ?  Was  she  not  willing,  so  to  speak,  to  hand  over
the  possession  of  the  city  in  which  she  had  been  bom
and  bred  to  those  who  were  going  to  raze  it  to  the
jEoundations  ?

The  moment  we  bring  into  view  God  and  His  will
and  His  purposes,  it  is  needless  to  say  that  these
two  memorable  acts  stand  out  clothed  with  the  light
of  heaven.  The  one  was  the  most  admirable  submis-
sion to  Gkxl — with  unqualified  confidence  in  Himself,
even  when  one  could  not  see  how  His  sure  promise
could  stand,  but  sure  it  would.  A  man  that  did  look
straight  up  to  God,  swift  to  hear  and  slow  to  speak,  was
Abraham; — a  man  in  whom  the  loud  voice  of  nature
was  utterly  silenced,  that  God's  will  and  word  might
alone  govern  his  souL  So,  if  it  were  his  only  son  that
came  of  Sarah,  so  much  the  more  bound  to  his  heart
because  so  singularly  given  in  the  pure  favour  of  God,
yet  he  would  give  him  up,  and  be  prepared  with  his  own
hand  to  do  the  dreadful  deed.  Oh,  if  ever  there  was  a
work  of  faith  since  the  world  began,  it  was  that  work
for  which  Abraham  was  ready — yea,  did  put  his  hand  to.
So  on  Sahab's  story  I  need  not  dwell,  except  just  to
show  how  remarkably  guided  of  divine  wisdom  was
James's  allusion.  How  truly  it  bears  the  very  stamp  of
inspiration,  and  the  more  so  because  we  know  the  apos-
tle Paul  refers  to  Abraham  at  least  for  a  totally  different
purpose !  But  not  more  certainly  was  Paul  inspired  to
present  Abraham's  faith  and  Abraham's  act  too  in  this
closing  circumstance  of  his  life  (we  may  say,  the  great
and  final  test  of  his  faith),  not  more  was  Paul  guided
in  his  application,  than  James  was  in  that  which  has
been  just  now  before  us.


206  INTEODUCTORy  LECTURES.

The  great  point  of  all  seems  this :  that  there  were
works,  but  the  works  that  James  insists  on  are  works
where  faith  constitutes  their  special  excellence,  and  in-
deed alone  cordd  be  their  justification.  Is  this  then  in
any  way  allowing  the  value  of  works  without  faith?
The  very  reverse  is  trua  He  does  call  for  works,  and  is
not  content  simply  with  faith,  but  the  works  he  pro-
duces are  works  that  owe  all  their  value  to  faith.

Thus,  therefore,  the  indissoluble  union  between  faith
and  works  never  was  more  blessedly  maintained  than
in  the  very  circumstances  that  James  thus  brings  before
us.  So  far  is  he  from  shaking  faith  that  he  supposes  it,
and  the  works  which  he  commends  are  stamped  with  it
in  the  most  definite  and  striking  manner.

Then  we  come  to  some  fresh  practical  exhortationa
As  we  have  found,  he  particularly  warns  against  the
tongue  as  the  expression  of  the  heart's  excitement  if
not  of  malice.  "Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the
mouth  speaketh."  Here  we  open  with  its  application
in  another  and,  if  possible,  still  more  important  province;
that  is,  in  the  matter  of  speaking  to  public  edification.
We  have  to  remember  that  the  danger  is  not  only  in
what  may  be  breathed  in  private;  but,  adds  he,  "Be  not
many  masters,*' — that  is,  in  the  sense  of  teachers —
**  knowing  that  we  shall  receive  the  greater  condemna-
tion." For  surely  that  which  a  man  says  publicly  will
be  used  to  measure  himself;  and  it  is  well  to  be  pre-
pared for  it.  K  we  ought  as  a  rule  to'be  slow  to  speak,
there  is  no  exception  in  setting  up  to  teach  others ;  for
thus  we  certainly  incur  severer  judgment  It  is  an
exhortation  that  shows  on  the  one  hand  the  danger  and
wrong  of  being  over  ready  to  seize  an  open  door  through


k  -r.


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  207

anxiety  to  display  one's  self;  on  the  other  hand,  it
supposes  the  perfect  liberty  that  reigned  among  believers.
Impossible  that  such  an  exhortation  cordd  apply  where
there  exists  the  regime  of  an  exclusive  ministry.

Thus  evidently  not  only  does  James's  doctrine  set
forth  clearly  the  blessed  truth  of  a  new  nature,  as  already
shown,  but  his  exhortation  supposes  just  the  same  open-
ness among  Christians  in  the  exercise  of  ministerial
gift  as  was  found,  e.^.  in  1  Cor.  xiv.,  and  in  practice
throughout  the  church  of  God.  So  far  from  there  being
any  contradiction  of  others  in  the  epistle  of  James,  al-
though there  is  not  a  little  which  in  form  is  new  (for  the
twelve  tribes)  both  in  its  breadth  and  in  its  speciality,
the  mind  of  God  is  one.  The  inspiring  Spirit,  even  in
the  most  peculiar  production  of  the  New  Testament
epistles,  gives  us  what  harmonizes  with  every  other  part,
and  cements  the  whole  fabric  of  divine  truth.

There  is  a  moral  reason  added :  "  For  in  many  things
we  offend  all.  If  any  man  offend  not  in  word,  the  same
is  a  perfect  man,  and  able  also  to  bridle  the  whole  body."
He  does  not,  I  apprehend,  restrict  himself  to  public
speaking,  though  opening  with  it,  as  we  have  seen.
"  Behold  we  put  bits  into  horses'  mouths."  He  shows
that  it  may  seem  a  little  thing  to  man,  but  we  must  not
excuse  what  is  wrong  because  it  may  appear  to  have  a
little  source.  He  proves  that  the  least  things  are  often
those  which  govern  other  bodies  incomparably  larget.
"  Behold  also  the  ships,  which  though  thoy  be  so  great,
and  are  driven  of  fierce  winds,  yet  are  they  turned
about  with  a  very  small  helm."  This  is  applied  to  the
subject  in  hand.  "  The  tongue  is  a  little  member,  and
boasteth  great  things.     Behold,  how  great  a  matter  "  (or


208  INTBODUCTOEY  LECTURES.

•wood,  as  it  is  given  in  the  margin)  "a  little  fire  kindleth!
And  the  tongue  is  a  fire,  a  world  of  iniquity :  so  is  the
tongue  among  our  members,  that  it  defileth  the  whole
body,  and  setteth  on  fire  the  course  of  nature ;  and  it  is
set  on  fire  of  helL"  In  all  the  Bible  we  meet  no  more
energetic  and  truthful  picture  of  the  desperate  evil  to
which  men  are  exposed  by  that  little  active  member.
"  For  every  kind  of  beasts,  and  of  birds,  and  of  serpents,
and  of  things  in  the  sea,  is  tamed,  and  hath  been  tamed
of  mankind :  but  the  tongue  can  no  man  tama"  The
comfort  is  that  God  can  deal  with  it — Gk)d  who  gives
the  believer  His  own  nature,  and  knows  how  to  bring
down  the  old  nature  so  that  there  may  be  scope  for  the
manifestation  of  what  is  of  Himself

Nor  does  James  spare  the  gross  inconsistency  too
often  experienced.  "  Therewith  bless  we  God,  even  the
Father ;  and  therewith  curse  we  men,  which  are  made
after  the  similitude  of  God.  Out  of  the  same  mouth
proceed  blessing  and  cursing.  My  brethren,  these
things  ought  not  so  to  be."  This  is  fortified  by  various
illustrations,  and  followed  up  by  the  picture  of  the  wise
man,  who  is  proved  to  be  such,  not  by  famous  know-
ledge, but  practically.  It  is  always  the  every-day
application  that  is  in  the  mind  of  James.  It  is  ever
the  right  thing,  as  it  was  exactly  what  was  most  called
for  then  and  there.  Had  he  in  this  epistle  launched
out  into  the  vast  expanse  of  the  truth,  he  would  only
have  given  an  impulse  to  the  heaping  up  of  more
dogmas.  Such  a  course  would  only  have  aggravated
the  evil  instead  of  uprooting  it  Himself  a  wise  man
in  his  ordinary  ways,  there  was  divine  wisdom  given
him  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  thus  dealing  so  directly  with


■*^r.-,,


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  209

the  snares  of  the  twelve  tribes,  and  even  of  that  portion
which  professed  the  faith  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

Hence,  if  a  man  be  wise,  the  question  arises,  how  is
it  to  be  proved  ?  Assuredly  not  in  talking  much,  which
usually  tends  to  talking  ilL  "  Let  him  show  out  of  a
good  conversation  his  works  with  meekness  of  wisdom."
If  on  the  contrary  there  were  bitter  envy  and  strife
in  their  hearts,  how^  could  they  boast  against  the  truth,
or  lie  against  it  ?  Uow  cuttingly  severe,  and  this  sim-
ply from  laying  bare  things  as  they  were !  Yet,  what
an  exposure !  Think  of  people  glorying  in  their  shame !
"And  lie  not  against  the  truth."  It  was  a  practical
incongruity  and  contradiction  of  the  mind  of  God.

Then  we  are  shown  two  kinds  of  wisdom, — just  as
with  r^ard  to  temptations  there  were  two  sorts  of  them
— one  blessed  from  God,  and  a  real  glory  to  the  man
that  endures  ;  and  the  other  a  shame,  because  it  springs
from  his  own  fallen  nature.  No  otherwise  is  it  witli
wisdom.  "This  wisdom  descendeth  not  from  above,
but  is  earthly,  sensual,  devilish.  For  where  envying
and  strife  is,  there  is  confusion  and  every  evil  work."
Its  works  prove  its  nature  and  its  source.  There  is
o^nfusion  in  every  evil  way,  "  but  the  wisdom  that  is
from  above  is  first  pure,  then  peaceable."  Never  reverse
this  order ;  it  is  not  only  that  this  wisdom  is  pure  and
peaceable,  but  it  is  first  pure,  then  peaceable.  It  first
maintains  the  character  and  glory  of  God,  and  then
seeks  the  fruits  of  peace  among  men.  But  this  is  not
alL  It  is  gentle,  and  easy  to  be  entreated,  or  yielding.
Instead  of  ever  giving  battle  for  its  rights  supposed  or
real,  there  is  clearly  the  yieldingness  of  grace  about  it.
It  is  not  the  stubbornness  of  self-assertion  or  opinion-

P


210  DTTRODUCTOEY  LECTUBES.

ativeness.  This,  on  the  contrary,  stamps  the  sensual
aspiring  wisdom  of  man ;  but  what  comes  down  from
above  is  gentle,  yielding,  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,
uncontentious,  and  unfeigned.  When  a  man  is  con-
scious that  his  wisdom  is  of  a  suspicious  kind,  one
can  understand  him  unwilling  to  have  his  mind  or
will  disputed;  but  the  truth  is,  that  there  is  nothing
which  so  much  marks  the  superiority  of  grace  and
truth  and  wisdom  that  God  gives  as  patience,  and  the
absence  of  anxiety  to  push  what  one  knows  is  right
and  true.  It  is  an  inherent  and  sure  sign  of  weakness
somewhere,  when  a  man  is  ever  urgent  in  pressing  the
value  of  his  own  words  and  way,  or  cavilling  habitually
at  others.  "The  wisdom  that  is  from  above  is  first  pure,
then  peaceable,  gentle,  and  easy  to  be  entreated:"  it
is  also  "  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits,  without  conten-
tion, and  without  hypocrisy."  It  is  characterised  by
the  self-judgment  which  delights  in  and  displays  the
ways  of  God.  "  And  the  fruit  of  righteousness  is  sown
in  peace  of  them  that  make  peace."  Thus  if  there  is
peace  in  the  way,  righteousness  is  alike  the  seed  and
the  fruit.  The  seed,  as  ever,  must  produce  its  own
proper  fruit.  "The  fruit  of  righteousness  is  sown  in
peace  of  them  that  make  peace."  What  an  honour  to
be  sons  of  peace  in  a  world  ever  at  war  with  God  and
those  who  are  His  I

Alas !  we  find  in  chapter  iv.  the  contrary  of  this —
wars  and  fightings,  "whence  come  they?"  Not  from
the  new  nature  of  which  God  is  the  blessed  source,  but
from  the  old.  "Come  they  not  hence,  even  of  your  lusts
that  war  in  your  members  ?  Ye  lust,  and  have  not :  ye
kill,  and  desire  to  have,  and  cannot  obtain :  ye  fight  and


A^li^.


THE  EPISTLE  OP  JAMES.  211

war,  yet  ye  have  not,  because  ye  ask  not.  Ye  ask,  and
receive  not,  because  ye  ask  amiss,  that  ye  may  consume
it  upon  your  lusts.  Ye  adulterers  and  adulteresses,
know  ye  not  that  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity
with  God  ?"  I  hope  it  will  not  be  contended  that  these
were  persons  bom  of  God.  It  seems  to  me  that  what
was  stated  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  discourse  is
an  important  key  for  interpreting  expressions.  On  the
other  hand,  the  effect  of  forgetting  to  whom  the  words
are  addressed,  and  of  assuming  that  the  epistle  contem-
plates none  but  such  as  are  born  of  God,  is  that  you  are
obliged  to  explain  away  the  strength  of  the  divine  word.
Receive  its  address  in  simplicity  of  faith,  and  every
word  of  God  is  intelligently  found  to  tell.  You  do  not
require  to  enfeeble  a  single  phrase.  James  does  con-
template Christians,  but  not  Christians  only.  He  is
writing,  as  he  says  himself,  to  the  Israelitish  stock,  and
not  merely  to  those  of  Israel  that  believe.  Expressly
he  addresses  the  whole  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  Whether
they  believe  or  not,  they  are  all  addressed  in  this  epistle.
Consequently  there  is  a  word  for  those  of  them  that
were  clearly  not  bom  of  God,  as  well  as  for  those  who
were.

Under  this  impression  I  read,  "Whosoever  therefore
will  be  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  God.
Do  ye  think  that  the  scripture  saith  in  vain.  The  spirit
that  dwelleth  in  us  lusteth  to  envy?"  Need  it  be  told
you  that  this  verse  has  been  a  matter  of  much  difficulty
to  many  minds  ?  Although  I  am  not  at  all  prepared  to
dogmatize  about  its  force,  it  appears  to  me  a  harsh  ex-
pression to  suppose  that  the  spirit  here  described  means

no  tnore  than  man's  spirit.    I  do  not  know  how  a  man's

p  2


212  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

spirit  can  with  propriety  be  said  to  dwell  in  a  man.
One  can  understand  "the  spirit  of  a  man  that  is  in
him ;"  as  the  apostle  Paul,  when  describing  the  human
spirit,  does  put  it  in  1  Cor.  ii,  but  hardly  the  spirit  that
dwelleth  in  a  man.  But  if  here  it  be  not  the  spirit  of
man,  the  only  spirit  elsewhere  said  to  dwell  in  man
(t.  e.,  the  believer)  is  the  Spirit  of  God.  But  herein  is
just  what  causes  the  difficulty.  How,  if  it  be  th^  Spirit
of  God,  can  He  be  put  in  such  a  connexion  here  ?  Must
we  translate  and  punctuate  as  in  the  common  Greek
Testament  and  English  Bible  ?

Hence  many  are  of  opinion  (and  to  this  I  am  rather
disposed,  though  I  would  not  venture  to  say  more)  that
the  verse  ought  to  be  thus  divided : — "  Do  ye  think  that
the  scripture  speaketh  in  vain?  Does  the  Spirit  that
dwelleth  in  us  lust  unto  envy  V*  Clearly  both  the  word
condemns  and  the  Holy  Spirit  leads  in  a  wholly  different
direction.  (Compare  Gal.  v.)  The  natural  spirit  of  man
does  lust  to  envy,  no  doubt ;  but  the  Spirit  that  dwells
in  us  opposes  the  flesh  at  all  points,  as  we  know  scrip-
ture does.

And  this  connects  itself,  as  it  seems  to  me,  with
what  follows:  "But  he  giveth  more  grace."  That  is,
so  far  from  lusting  to  envy,  God  is  acting  in  goodness.
It  is  grace  alone  that  has  communicated  the  nature  of
God ;  it  is  grace  alone  that  strengthens  the  new  nature
by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  who  dwells  in  us ;  and
yet  more  than  this,  "  He  giveth  more  grace.  Wherefore
he  saith,  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  unto
the  humble."  He  who  realises  with  God  what  this
worid  is,  and  what  man's  nature  is,  is  humble  before
Him ;  as  also  more  grace  is  given  to  sucL     The  sense


^^


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  213

of  all  around  and  within  leads  him  out  in  self-judgment
before  Grod.

This,  then,  I  suppose — though  not  venturing  to  speak
with  more  decision — is  the  practical  result.  "Submit
yourselves  therefore  to  God.  But  resist  the  devil,  and
he  will  flee  from  you."  How  much  is  covered  by  these
two  exhortations  1  One  is  the  source  of  all  that  is  good,
and  the  other  the  guard  against  all  that  is  evil.  "  Draw
nigh  to  God,  and  he  will  draw  nigh  to  you.  Cleanse
your  hands,  ye  sinners."  Will  it  be  contended  that
sinners  means  saints  ?  They  are  utterly  different.  There
prevails  among  too  many  evangelical  persons  a  mis-
chievous habit  of  talking  about  "saved  sinners."  To
my  mind  it  is  not  only  inexact  but  misleading  and
dangerous.  Scripture  knows  no  such  being  as  a  "saved
sinner."  We  may  well  rejoice  over  a  "  sinner  saved  "  if
we  know  the  mercy  of  it  in  our  souls;  but  if  we  license
the  phrase — a  "saved  sinner,"  the  moral  effect  is,  that,
when  and  though  saved,  he  is  still  free  to  sin.  Not  that
any  one  acquainted  with  the  truth  denies  that  a  saved
soul  has  still  the  flesh  in  him,  and  is  liable  to  sin  if
unwatchfuL  Still  he  who  is  saved  has  a  new  life  and
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  sin  is  not  natural  for  him:
he  is  bound  to  walk  in  the  Spirit  as  he  lives  in  it.  Evi-
dently, if  he  sin,  he  must  go  athwart  his  new  nature
and  position,  and  the  blessed  deliverance  which  God
has  given  him  in  Christ.

Thus  there  is  often  a  great  deal  of  importance  even
in  the  way  in  which  a  truth  is  stated.  The  manner
of  stating  a  truth,  however  well-meant,  may  sometimes
stumble  souls,  through  our  own  want  of  subjection  to
the  precious  truth  and  the  wonderful  wisdom  of  God  in


214  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

His  word.  Instead  of  helping  on  holiness,  one  may
on  the  contrary,  by  an  unguarded  word,  give  somewhat
of  a  loose  rein  to  the  old  nature.  This  no  part  of
scripture  doea  It  is  perfectly  true  that,  when  God
begins  to  deal  with  a  soul,  He  certainly  begins  with  him
as  a  sinner ;  but  He  never  ends  there.  I  am  not  aware
of  any  part  of  the  word  of  God  in  which  a  believer,
save  perhaps  in  a  transitional  state,  is  ever  referred  to  as
a  sinner.  No  doubt  that  he  who  was  in  the  front  rank
of  all  the  saints  and  servants  of  God,  when  he  looked
at  what  he  was  in  himself  glorying  in  the  law  and
nature,  could  and  did  characterize  himself  as  a  chief  of
sinners,  especially  when  he  thought  of  the  immeasur-
able riches  of  God*s  grace  of  which  he  was  so  favoured
a  communicator  to  souls.  In  this  we  do  and  must  all
join  in  our  measure.  At  •the  same  time  it  is  evident
that  to  be  a  saint  and  a  sinner  at  the  same  time  is
simply  a  flat  contradiction.

In  shorty  holy  scripture  does  not  sanction  such  a
combination,  and  the  sooner  we  get  rid  of  phrases,
which  deserve  no  better  name  than  religious  cant,  the
better  for  all  parties.  It  would  be  waste  of  time  to
speak  of  such  a  thing  now,  if  it  were  not  of  practical
moment ;  but  I  am  convinced  that  it  is,  and  that  this  and
other  stereotyped  phrases  of  the  religious  world  gravely
need  and  will  not  bear  an  examination  in  the  light  of
scripture.  The  traditions  of  Protestants  and  Evan-
gelicals are  no  better  than  those  of  Boman  Catholics,
any  more  than  of  Jews  who  were  before  them  alL  Our
wisest  course  is  to  discard  every  unscriptural  phrase
which  we  find  current  and  influential.

I  press,  then,  that  the  word  "sinners"  here  clearly


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  215

to  my  mind  shows  that  the  Spirit  of  God  in  this  epistle
takes  in  a  larger  range  than  most  allow.  Also  it  is
no  mean  confirmation  of  what  has  been  already  ad-
vanced as  to  James.  "  Cleanse  your  hands,  ye  sinners ;
and  purify  your  hearts,  ye  double  minded.  Be  afflicted,
and  mourn,  and  weep :  let  your  laughter  be  turned  to
mourning,  and  your  joy  to  heaviness.  Humble  your-
selves in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  lift  you
up.  Speak  not  evil  one  of  another,  brethren.  He  that
speaketh  evil  of  his  brother"  is  really  speaking  evil
of  God's  own  law  and  judging  it.

But  he  presses  also  the  necessity  of  dependence  on
God  in  another  form  in  the  end  of  our  chapter.  That  is,
we  are  warned  against  forming  resolutions,  plans  of  our
future  doings  and  the  like.  This  too  is  a  practical  sub-
ject We  ought  all  to  know  how  much  we  need  to  watch
against  such  an  ignoring  of  God  above  us,  and  the
coming  of  the  Lord.  As  he  says  here,  "  Go  to  now,  ye
that  say,  To-day  or  to-morrow  we  will  go  into  such  a
city,  and  continue  there  a  year,  and  buy  and  sell,  and
get  gain:  whereas  ye  know  not  what  shall  be  on  the
morrow  " — not  even  on  the  morrow.  "  For  what  is  your
life?  It  is  even  a  vapour,  that  appeareth  for  a  little
time,  and  then  vanisheth  away,  instead  of  your  saying,
If  the  Lord  will,  and  we  live,  we  will  also  do  this,  or
that  But  now  ye  glory  in  your  boastings:  all  such  glory-
ing is  evil"  He  does  not  conclude,  however,  without
another  appeal  to  conscience.  "Thei*efore  to  him  that
knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin."
It  is  the  law  of  liberty,  and  of  infinite  purity  and
power.  It  is  not  only  that  sin  consists  in  doing  e\'il,
but  in  not  doing  the  good  that  we  know.     May  we


216  INTBODUCTORY  LECTURES.

never  forget  what  the  new  nature  loves  and  feels  to  be
true  and  holy  according  to  Christ

Then  in  chap.  v.  we  have  a  solemn  word  for  rich
men,  to  weep  and  howl  for  their  miseries  that  shall  come
upon  them.  Will  any  man  argue  still  that  this  means
the  saints  of  God  ?  Are  they  the  persons  called  to  weep
and  howl  for  the  miseries  that  are  coming  upon  them  ?
Are  they  told  to  weep  and  howl?  "Your  riches  are
corrupted,  and  your  garments  are  motheaten.  Your
gold  and  silver  are  cankered;  and  the  rust  of  them
shall  be  a  witness  against  you,  and  shall  eat  your  flesh
as  it  were  fire.  Ye  have  heaped  treasure  together" —
not  exactly  "/or  the  last  days."  This  would  be  hardly
intelligible.  What  there  can  be  little  doubt  the  Holy
Ghost  meant  us  to  gather  is,  "  Ye  have  heaped  together
riches  in  the  last  days."  This  aggravated  the  selfishness
of  their  ways  and  their  indiflference  to  others.  It  is
bad  enough  to  heap  treasure  at  any  time ;  but  to  heap
it  up  in  the  last  days  was  to  add  not  a  little  to  the
evil  in  the  Lord's  eyes.  "Is  it  a  time,"  said  the  indignant
prophet,  to  his  covetous  and  deceitful  attendant,  ''to
receive  money,  and  to  receive  garments,  and  olive-yards,
and  vineyards,  and  sheep,  and  oxen,  and  men-servants,
and  maid-servants  ?"  Was  it  a  time,  when  God  was  deal-
ing with  unwonted  power  and  grace  even  for  Gentiles  ?
Was  this  the  time  for  an  Israelite  to  lie  for  profit  and
get  gain  by  it  ?  And  so  here ;  when  the  last  days  were
proclaimed  by  God*s  word  in  solemn  warning,  the  heap-
ing up  of  treasure  in  such  days  as  these  was  indeed
most  offensive  to  Him.

"  Behold,  the  hire  of  the  labourers  who  have  reaped
down  your  fields,  which  is  of  you  kept  back  by  fraudi


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  217

crieth :  and  the  cries  of  them  which  have  reaped  are
entered  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  sabaoth.  Ye  have
lived  in  pleasure  on  the  earth,  and  been  wanton ;  ye
have  nourished  your  hearts,  as  in  a  day  of  slaughter.
Ye  have  condemned  and  killed  the  just."  What  an  un-
expected moral  link !  The  apostle  shows  that  the  spirit
of  heaping  up  riches  in  the  last  days  is  the  same  that
in  other  circumstances  slew  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous.
It  is  not  a  connection  that  we  could  have  anticipated,
but  it  is  just  such  an  ome  as  would  be  discerned  by  the
Holy  Ghost  ever  sensitive  to  the  Lord's  glory ;  and  so
in  fact  it  is  as  we  may  feel  on  reflection.  It  was  this
selfishness  that  came  into  direct  personal  collision  with
the  Lord  of  glory,  *'  who,  though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  our
sakes  became  poor,  that  we  through  his  poverty  might
be  made  rich."  We  can  understand  that  those  whose  one
object  was  their  own  importance,  glory,  and  ease  in  this
world,  necessarily  felt  that  such  an  one  was  a  living  wit-
ness against  them,  and  convicted  them  of  flagrant  oppo-
sition to  the  grace  of  God,  who  taught  by  Jesus  in  word
and  deed  that  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive.
For  this  doctrine  and  practice  the  Pharisees  were  quite
unprepared.  (See  Luke  xvi.)  Accordingly  their  hatred
grew  until  it  resulted  in  the  cross  of  the  Lord ;  and
hence  this  is  one  of  the  elements,  though  of  course  not
the  only  one,  which  calls  down  the  judgment  of  God ;
and  the  Spirit  of  God  so  treats  it  here  :  "  Ye  have  killed
the  just."  The  allusion  is  to  the  Lord,  not  the  just  in
general^  but  the  Just  One,  even  Christ,  *'  and  he  doth  not
resist  you."

Be  patient  therefore,  brethren,  unto  the  coming  of
the  Lord     ''Behold,  the  husbandman  waiteth  for  the


218  INTBODUCTOBY  LECTUBES.

precious  fruit  of  the  earthy  and  hath  long  patience  for
it,  until  he  receive  the  early  and  the  latter  rain.  Be  ye
also  patient;  stablish  your  hearts:  for  the  coming  of
the  Lord  draweth  nigh."

Then  he  calls  them  again  so  much  the  more  to  avoid
a  murmuring  spirit  against  one  and  another,  because  the
judge  stood  at  the  door.  He  exhorts  them  to  endurance
and  to  patience.  This  reappears  as  a  final  appeal  We
had  it  at  the  commencement  of  the  chapter ;  we  have  it
again  here  that  it  should  by  all  means  be  remembered.
"  Take,  my  brethren,  the  prophets,  who  have  spoken  in
the  itame  of  the  Lord,  for  an  example  of  suffering  afflic-
tion, and  of  patienca  Behold,  we  count  them  happy
which  endure.  Ye  have  heard  of  the  patience  of  Job.
and  have  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord;  that  the  Lord  is
very  pitiful,  and  of  tender  mercy."

Then  another  snare  is  connected  with  this  for  avoid-
ance: "Above  all  things,  my  brethren,  swear  not,
neither  by  heaven,  neither  by  the  earth,  neither  by
any  other  oath :  but  let  your  yea  be  yea ;  and  your
nay,  nay ;  lest  ye  fall  into  condemnation."  What  has
the  apostle  in  view  here?  The  oath  before  a  magis-
trate? In  no  wise  does  scripture  slight  that  solemn
obligation.  The  Lord  Himself  respected  the  adjuration
of  the  high -priest;  and  in  no  passage  what43ver  do
we  see  a  depreciatory  allusion  to  a  judicial  oath  in
the  sermon  on  the  mount,  or,  in  what  James  says  here,
or  in  any  other  part  of  the  Bible,  but  the  contrary.
The  Lord  was  addressing  Jewish  disciples,  James  writes
to  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  who  are  in  the  dis-
persion ;  but  what  they  both  set  their  faces  against  was
the  habit  of  bringing  in  religious  {asseverations  for  the


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  219

purpose  of  confirming  their  word  every  day>  besides  the
profaning  of  the  Lord's  name  in  matters  of  this  life.
This  in  point  of  fact  weakens  instead  of  establishing
what  is  said ;  for  it  is  evident  that  whatever  is  uncalled
for  gives  no  strength  to  an  assertion,  but  is  just  a  fruit
and  proof  of  weakness.  Where  there  is  simple  truth,
nothing  is  needed  but  the  quiet  statement  of  the  fact.

There  were  no  people  so  prone  to  ordinary  swearing
as  the  Jews.  Accordingly,  I  have  not  the  slightest  doubt
that  what  our  Lord  and  His  servants  reprobated  was
the  introduction  of  an  oath  in  common  conversation;
and  this,  it  is  plain,  does  not  apply  to  an  oath  adminis-
tered by  a  magistrate.  Indeed,  it  seems  to  me  in  itself
sinful  for  a  man  to  refuse  an  oath  (supposing  its  form
otherwise  unobjectionable)  if  required  to  do  so  by  proper
authority.  It  would  be  to  me  a  virtual  denial  of  God's
authority  in  civil  government  here  below.  I  believe,
therefore,  that  it  is  the  bounden  duty  of  every  man  to
whom  an  oath  is  put^  to  take  it  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.
I  admit  it  must  be  put  by  competent  authority.  There-
fore we  are  not  to  assume  that  the  passage  in  Matthew
v.,  or  this  portion  of  James,  has  the  smallest  reference
to  judicial  swearing.  How  could  one  think  that  those
who  indulge  in  such  thoughts  show  any  real  intelligence
as  to  the  woixl  of  God?  They  certainly  exhibit  a
certain  care  for  conscientiousnesa  This  is  not  in  the
least  denied.  But  we  have  to  take  care  that  we  are
guided  of  God  in  this,  which  is  important  in  the  pre-
sent day  when  we  know  that  the  spirit  of  the  age  is
endeavouring  to  blot  out  God  in  all  that  touches  man
here  below.  The  Lord  was  silent  till  adjured  by  the
bigh -priest :  was  not  His  conduct  thus  perfectly  con-


220  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

sistent  with  His  own  teaching?  An  oath,  therefore,
should  not  be  refused  when  put  by  a  magistrata  I  am
supposing,  of  course,  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  terms
of  the  oath  that  would  involve  false  doctrine  or  coun-
tenance a  superstition.  For  instance,  in  a  Koman
Catholic  country  there  might  be  reference  to  the  virgin,
or  angels,  or  saints.  Such  an  oath  I  do  not  think  that
a  Christian  man  would  be  at  liberty  to  take.  But  I  am
supposing  now  that  a  person  is  required  in  the  name  of
God  to  declare  what  he  believes  to  be  the  truth  in  a
matter  of  which  he  is  a  witness,  the  truth,  the  whole
truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.  It  appears  to  me
that  so  far  from  his  being  at  liberty  to  refuse  this,  he
is  on  the  contrary  guilty,  through  ignorance,  of  no
small  sin  in  cavilling  about  the  matter.

The  rest  of  the  chapter  takes  up  another  subject — ^the
case  of  God's  discipline.  It  is  governmental.  "  Is  any
among  you  afflicted?  let  him  pray.  Is  any  merry?  let
him  sing  psalms."  This  does  not  mean  expressly  the
inspired  psalms.  Persons  are  apt  to  think  of  the
psalms  of  David  whenever  there  is  the  introduction  of
the  word.  Doubtless  old  habits  and  associations  lead  to
this ;  but  there  is  no  ground  for  it  in  the  Bibla  No
more  is  meant  here  than  that,  being  happy,  he  is  to  give
vent  to  his  joy  in  the  praise  of  the  Lord.  It  is  nothing
more.  "  Is  any  among  you  sick  ?  let  him  call  for  the
elders  of  the  church;  and  let  them  pray  over  him,
anointing  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  This
we  know  was  an  old  custom.  It  was  used  even  by  those
who  were  clothed  with  miraculous  power.  When  the
apostles  were  sent  forth  of  our  Lord,  they  were  directed
by  Him  to  anoint  the  sick  with  oiL  (Mark  vi.)  And  so


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JAMES.  221

here  the  elders  were  to  act  in  the  same  remarkable  style.
Nor  do  I  deny  that  there  are  answers  to  prayer  of  a
very  striking  kind.  I  do  not  call  these  answers  mira-
culous powers,  because  the  true  power  of  this  kind  is
that  exercised  by  a  person  raised  up  of  the  Lord  for  the
purpose,  and  who  knows  that  he  can  count  upon  it  in
the  case  where  He  pleases  to  show  it ;  whereas  in  an
answer  to  prayer  there  is  a  trial  and  exercise  of  faith
about  it,  just  as  with  those  who  were  praying  for  Peter
when  he  was  in  prison.  There  was  no  miracle  in  their
part  of  the  business,  as  far  as  they  were  concerned.
There  was  a  remarkably  direct  intervention  of  God,  but
it  was  in  no  way  connected  with  any  gift  of  miracles
committed  to  the  people  who  were  praying.  "And  the
prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick,  and  the  Lord  shall
raise  him  up."  Here  it  is  a  question  of  God's  judg-
ment The  person  is  chastened  in  sickness  for  some
evil ;  it  is  now  judged ;  grace  intervenes,  and  God
heals.

Then  comes  the  general  spirit  of  confession.  "Confess
your  faults  one  to  another,  and  pray  for  one  another,
that  ye  may  be  healed."  It  is  the  true  love  that  interests
itself,  not  only  in  that  which  is  good,  but  even  in  what
is,  alas!  the  fruit  of  unjudged  evil.  But  there  is  a
careful  abstinence  from  urging  confession  to  the  elders,
I  cannot  doubt,  in  the  far-seeing  wisdom  of  God,  who
loves  souls  and  hates  superstition.  "  The  effectual  fer-
vent prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much."  Elias
is  cited  in  support  of  this.  Finally  we  have,  "  Brethren,
if  any  of  you  do  err  from  the  truth,  and  one  convert
him;  let  him  know,  that  he  which  converteth  the  sinner
from  the  error  of  his  way  shall  save  a  soul  fix)m  death,


222


INTRODUCTOBY  LECTURES.


and  shall  hide  a  mnltitude  of  sins."  It  is  doubtless
put  in  a  general  form.  At  the  same  time  it  only  con-
firms, as  it  appears  to  me,  what  has  already  been  shown
to  be  the  comprehensive  character  of  the  epistle.

In  the  next  lecture  we  shall  enter,  if  the  Lord  will,
on  what  belongs  more  to  the  ordinaiy  train  of  our
Christian  associations.


^fl^


Vi.


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.

The  epistles  of  Peter  are  addressed  to  the  elect  Jews
of  his  day,  believing  of  course  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and
scattered  throughout  a  considerable  portion  of  Asia
Minor.  The  apostle  takes  particular  care  to  instruct
them  in  the  bearing  of  many  of  the  types  that  were
contained  in  the  Levitical  ritual  with  which  they  were
familiar.  But  while  he  contrasts  the  Christian  position
with  their  former  Jewish  one,  in  order  to  strengthen
them  as  to  their  place  and  calling  now  in  and  by  Christ,
he  takes  care  also  to  maintain  fully  whatever  common
truth  there  is  between  the  Christian  and  the  saints  of
the  Old  Testament  For  it  is  hardly  necessary  to  say
to  any  intelligent  believer,  that  whatever  may  be  the
new  privileges,  and  consequently  fresh  duties  which
flow  from  them,  there  are  certain  unchangeable  moral
principles  to  which  God  holds  throughout  all  time.
These  were  insisted  on  in  the  Old  Testament,  par-
ticularly in  the  psalms  and  the  prophets.  And  the
apostle  guards  against  the  wrong  conclusion,  that,
because  in  certain  things  we  stand  contrasted  with  the
Old  Testament  saints,  there  are  no  grounds  in  common.
Let  it  then  be  well  borne  in  mind,  that  God  holds  fast
that  which  He  has  laid  down  for  all  that  are  His  as  to


224  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

the  moral  government  of  God.  That  government  may
differ  in  character  and  depth ;  there  may  be  at  a  fitting
moment  a  far  closer  dealing  with  souls  (as  undoubtedly
this  is  the  case  since  redemption).  At  the  same  time
the  general  principles  of  God  are  in  nowise  enfeebled
by  Christianity,  but  rather  strengthened  and  cleared
immensely.  Take,  for  instance,  the  duty  of  obedience ;
the  value  of  a  gracious,  peaceful  walk  here  below ;  the
degree  of  confidence  in  God.  It  was  ever  right  that
love  should  go  out  towards  others,  whether  in  general
kindness  towards  all  mankind,  or  in  special  affections
towards  the  family  of  God.  These  things  were  always
true  in  principle,  and  never  can  be  touched  while  man
lives  on  earth.

It  is  equally  true,  however,  that  from  the  beginning
of  his  first  epistle,  Peter  draws  out  the  contrast  of
the  Christian  place  with  their  old  Jewish  one.  It
is  not  that  the  Jews  were  not  elect  as  a  nation,  but
therein  precisely  it  is  where  they  stand  in  contrast
with  the  Christian.  Whatever  may  be  found  in  hymns,
or  sermons,  or  theology,  scripture  knows  no  such  thing
as  an  elect  church.  There  is  the  appearance  of  it  ia
the  last  chapter  of  this  very  epistle,  but  this  is  due
solely  to  the  meddling  hand  of  man.  In  chapter  v.  we
read,  "  The  church  that  is  at  Babylon,  elected  together
with  you;"  but  all  concede  that  the  terms  "the  church
that  is  "  have  been  put  in  by  the  translators  ;  they  have
no  authority  whatever.  It  was  an  individual  and  not
a  church  that  was  referred  to.  It  was  probably  a  well
known  sister  there ;  and  therefore  it  was  enough  simply
to  allude  to  her.  "She  that  was  at  Babvlon,  elected
together  with  you,  saluteth  you."     The  very  point  of


THS  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  225

Christianiiy  is  this,  that  as  to  election  it  is  personal —
strictly  individuaL  This  is  precisely  what  those  who
contend  against  the  truth  of  election  always  feel  most :
they  will  allow  a  sort  of  body  in  a  general  way  to  be
elect,  and  then  that  the  individuals  who  compose  that
body  must  be  brought  in,  as  it  were,  conditionally,
according  to  their  good  conduct.  No  such  idea  is  trace-
able in  the  word  of  Grod.  God  has  chosen  individuals.
As  it  is  said  in  Ephesians :  He  has  chosen  us,  not  the
church,  but  ourselves  individually.  "The  church,"  as
such,  does  not  come  in  till  the  end  of  the  first  chapter.
We  have  first  individuals  chosen  of  God  before  the
foundation  of  the  world.

Here  too  the  apostle  does  not  merely  speak,  nor  is  it
ever  the  habit  of  scripture  to  speak,  in  an  abstract  way
of  election.  The  saints  were  chosen  "  according  to  the
foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father;"  for  it  was  no  ques-
tion now  of  a  Governor  having  a  nation  in  whom  He
might  display  His  wisdom,  power,  and  righteous  ways.
They  had  been  used  to  this  and  more  in  Judaism,  but
it  had  all  passed  away.  The  Jews  had  brought  His
government  into  contempt  by  their  own  rebellion  against
His  name ;  and  Jehovah  Himself  had  found  it  morally
needful  to  hand  over  His  own  nation  into  the  power  of
their  enemies.  Consequently  that  nation  as  a  display  of
His  government  was  a  thing  of  the  past.  A  remnant,
it  is  true,  had  been  brought  up  from  Babylon  for  the
purpose  of  being  tested  by  a  new  trial  by  the  presen-
tation of  the  Messiah  to  them ;  but  alas !  only  to  their
responsibility,  not  to  their  faith;  and  if  it  be  respon*
siWlity,  whether  to  do  the  law  or  to  believe  the  Messiah,
it  is  all  one  as  far  as  the  result  in  man  is  concerned.

Q


226  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

The  creature  is  utterly  ruined  in  every  way,  and  with
so  much  the  speedier  manifestation  the  more  spiritual
the  trial.

Thus,  as  is  known,  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah  was
incomparably  more  fruitful  of  disastrous  consequences
to  the  Jew  than  even  had  been  of  old  their  breach  of
the  divine  law.  This  accordingly  gave  occasion  for
God  to  exercise  a  new  kind  of  choice.  Undoubtedly
there  was  always  a  secret  election  of  saints  after  the
fall  and  long  before  the  call  of  Abraham  and  his  seed ;
but  now  the  choice  of  saints  was  to  be  made  a  manifest
thing,  a  testimony  before  men,  though  of  course  not
till  glory  come  absolutely  perfect.  Accordingly  Grod
chooses  now  not  merely  out  of  men  but  out  of  the  Jews.
And  this  is  a  point  that  Peter  presses  on  them, — a
startling  thought  for  a  Jew,  yet  they  had  only  to  reflect
in  order  to  know  how  true  it  is :  "  Elect  according  to  the
foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father."  He  is  forming  a
family,  and  no  longer  governing  one  chosen  nation.
Those  addressed  from  among  the  Jews  were  among  the
chosen  ones,  "elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of
God  the  Father."

But  there  is  more  than  this:  it  was  no  longer  a
question  of  ordinances  visibly  separating  those  subject
to  them  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  It  was  a  real  inward
and  not  merely  external  setting  apart ;  it  was  through
"  sanctification  of  the  Spirit."  God  set  them  apart  unto
Himself  by  the  effectual  working  of  the  Holy  Ghost
We  do  not  hear  now  of  the  gift  of  the  Spirit.  Sanc-
tification of  the  Spirit  is  altogether  distinct  firom  that
gift.  His  sanctification  is  the  effectual  work  of  divine
grace,  which  first  separates  from  the  world  a  peisoiiy


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  227

whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  unto  GoA  When  a  man  for
instance  turns  to  God,  when  he  has  faith  in  Jesus,
when  he  repents  towards  God,  even  though  it  may  be
faith  but  little  developed  or  exercised,  and  although  the
repentance  may  be  comparatively  superficial  (yet  I  am
supposing  now  real  faith  and  repentance  through  the
action  of  the  Holy  Ghost),  these  are  the  tokens  of
the  Spirits  sanctification.

There  are  those  who  constantly  think  and  speak
of  sanctification  as  practical  holiness,  and  exclusively
80.  It  is  granted  that  there  is  a  sanctification  in  scrip-
ture which  bears  on  practice.  This  is  not  the  point
here,  but  if  possible  a  deeper  thing ;  and  for  the  simple
reason,  that  practical  holiness  must  be  relative  or  a
question  of  degree.  The  "  sanctification  of  the  Spirit "
here  spoken  of  is  absolute.  The  question  is  not  how  far
it  is  made  good  in  the  heart  of  the  believer;  for  it  really
and  equally  embraces  all  believers.  It  is  an  effectual
work  of  God's  Spirit  from  the  very  starting-point  of
the  career  of  faith.  Elect  of  course  they  were  in  God*s
mind  from  all  eternity,  but  they  are  sanctified  from  the
first  moment  that  the  Holy  Ghost  opens  their  eyes  to
the  light  of  the  truth  in  Christ.  There  is  an  awakening
of  conscience  by  the  Spirit  through  the  word  (for  I  am
not  speaking  now  of  anything  natural,  of  moral  desires
or  emotions  of  the  heart).  Wherever  there  is  a  real
work  of  God's  Spirit — not  merely  a  testimony  to  the
conscience  but  an  arousing  of  it  eflTectually  before  God
— ^the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  is  made  good.

If  asked  why  this  should  be  accepted  as  the  meaning
of  the  expression,  I  acknowledge  that  one  is  bound  to
give  a  reason  for  that  which  no  doubt  differs  from  the

Q  2


228  iNTRODUcrroRY  lectures.

view  of  many,  and  I  answer,  that  in  my  judgment  the
just  and  only  meaning  of  the  word  is  proved  from  the
fact  that  the  saints  are  said  to  be  "  elect  according  to
the  foreknowledge  of  G^od  the  Father,  through  sanc-
tification  of  the  Spirit,  unto  obedience  and  sprinkling  of
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ."

The  order  here  is  precise  and  instructive.  Now  prac-
tical holiness  follows  our  being  sprinkled  with  the  blood
of  Jesus  Christ,  whereas  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit
bf  which  Peter  here  treats  precedes  it.  The  saints  are
chosen  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  unto  obe-
dience. This  is  somewhat  difficult  for  theology,  because
in  general  even  intelligent  and  godly  souls  are  much
shut  up  in  the  prevalent  commonplaces  of  men.  Never
should  I  for  one  blaine  their  tenacity  in  adhering  to  the
truth  and  duty  of  advancing  in  practical  holiness,  or
what  they  call  sanctification.  This  is  both  true  and
important  in  its  place.  The  fault  is  in  denying  the  other
and  yet  more  fundamental  sense  of  sanctification  here
shown  by  Peter  in  its  right  relation  to  obedience.  A
truth  is  not  the  truth.  True  growth  in  practice  confess-
edly is  after  justification ;  sanctification  in  1  Peter  1  2
is  before  justification.  It  is  very  evident  when  a  man  is
justified,  he  is  under  the  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Christ
He  is  no  longer  waiting  for  the  sprinkling  of  that  pre-
cious blood,  he  is  already  sprinkled  with  it  before  (Jod.
But  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  laid  down  here  is
in  order  to  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus;  and
therefore  unless  you  would  destroy  the  grace  of  GJod,
and  reverse  a  multitude  of  scriptitres  as  to  justification
by  faith,  this  sanctification  cannot  be  one's  practice  of
day  by  day.


THE  EPISTLES   OF  PETER.  229

Confound  the  one  with  the  other  and  you  upset  the
gospel :  distinguish  sanctification  in  principle  from  the
beginning  for  all  from  sanctification  in  practice  in  the
various  measures  of  believers,  and  you  learn  the  truth
of  what  Peter  here  teaches,  which  is  forgotten  for  the
most  part  m  Christendom.  If  you  say  that  practical
holiness  precedes  the  being  brought  under  the  blood  of
Jesus,  I  ask.  How  is  one  to  become  holy  ?  Whence  is
the  power  or  the  growth  in  holiness  ?  Certainly  such  is
not  the  teaching  of  God's  word  anywhere,  still  less  is  it
what  the  apostle  Peter  insists  on  here.  There  is  a  wider
and,  if  possible,  a  deeper  thought  than  the  measure  of
our  walk,  which,  after  all,  differs  in  all  the  children  of
God, — no  two  being  exactly  the  same, — and  all  of  us
depending  on  self-judgment  as  well  as  growth  in  the
knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  of  His  grace.  The  word  of
Cxod,  prayer,  the  use  that  we  make  of  the  opportunities
tliat  His  goodness  afifords  us,  both  public  and  private, —
all  the  means  that  teach  and  exercise  us  in  the  will  of
God  no  doubt  contribute  to  this  practical  holiness.

But  here  the  apostle  speaks  of  none  of  these  things,
but  only  of  the  Spirit  separating  the  saints  to  obey  as
Jesus  obeyed,  and  to  be  sprinkled  with  His  blood.  And
60  we  find  it  in  fact  and  in  Scripture.  Thus,  for  instance,
Saul  of  Tarsus  had  this  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  the
moment  that,  struck  down  to  the  earth,  he  received  the
testimony  of  the  Lord  speaking  from  heaven.  He  went
through  a  profound  work  in  his  conscience  after  that
For  three  days  and  nights,  as  we  all  know,  he  neither
ate  nor  drank.  All  this  was  thoroughly  in  season ;  and
after  it,  as  we  are  told,  the  blindness  was  taken  away,
and  he  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.    This  is  not  the


230  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

sanctification  of  the  Spirit.  It  was  clearly  the  conse-
quence of  the  Holy  Ghost  being  given  to  him,  but  the
gift  of  the  Spirit  is  not  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit
Sanctification  of  the  Spirit  is  that  primary  action  that
was  experienced  before  Saul  entered  into  peace  with
God.  When  a  man  is  roused  to  hate  his  sins  through
God's  testimony  reaching  him,  and  convicting  him
before  God,  and  not  in  his  own  eyes, — when  a  man  is
ashamed  of  all  that  he  has  been  in  presence  of  God*8
grace,  ever  so  little  known  and  understood, — still  where
a  real  work  goes  on  in  the  soul,  sanctification  of  the
Spirit  is  true  there.  Now  this  ought  to  be  a  great  com-
fort even  to  the  feeblest  of  God's  children,  not  an  alarm.
There  is  not  one  of  them  who  has  not  really  sanctifica-
tion of  the  Spirit.  They  may  be  troubled  as  to  the
question  of  practical  holiness,  but  the  fundamental  and
essential  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  is  that  which  is
already  true  of  all  the  children  of  God.  I  am  not
speaking  of  a  particular  doctrine.  It  is  not  a  question
of  that ;  but  of  a  soul  quickened  by  the  Spirit  through
the  truth  received  in  ever  so  simple  and  limited  a
manner.  But  it  is  a  reality,  and  from  that  time  this
sanctification  of  the  Spirit  becomes  a  fact.

But  then,  to  what  are  they  sanctified  of  the  Holy
Ghost  thus  ?  Unto  Christ's  obedience  and  the  sprinkling
of  His  blood ;  for  *' Jesus  Christ^*  belongs  to  both  these
clauses.  This  again  is  a  difficulty  to  some  minds.  They
would  rather  have  placed  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood
first,  and  obedience  next.  I  can  understand  them,  but
do  not  in  the  least  agree  with  them.  Indeed  such  diffi-
culties serve  to  show  where  people  aiu  The  root  of
all  is  that  people  are  occupied  about  themselves  firsts


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  231

instead  of  leaning  on  the  Lord.  No  doubt  if  a  person
were  at  once  to  be  brought  into  the  comfort  of  full  peace
with  God  throi^h  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus,
this  would  suit  the  heart's  sense  of  its  own  need.  But
it  is  not  what  the  word  of  God  gives  us  by  that  con-
verted soul,  to  whose  case  I  have  adverted.  What  is  it
that  Saul  of  Tarsus  says  as  the  effect  of  the  light  of
God  shining  on  his  soul  ?  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have
me  to  do?"  And  was  not  this  before  he  knew  all  the
comfort  and  blessing  of  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of
Jesus?

The  first  impulse  of  a  converted  man  is  to  do  the
will  of  God.  There  may  be  no  sense  of  liberty  yet,
nor  even  joy  in  the  Lord ;  there  can  be  no  solid  peace
whatever.  All  this  will  cpme  in  due  time,  and  it  may
be  very  rapidly,  even  the  self-same  hour ;  but  the  very
first  thing  that  a  soul  bom  of  God  feels  is  the  desire  at
all  cost  to  do  the  wiU  of  God.  It  is  exactly  what  filled
Jesus  perfectly.  It  was  not  a  question  of  what  He  was
to  gain  or  what  He  was  to  avoid ;  but  as  it  is  written,
"Lo,  I  come,  to  do  thy  will,  0  God."  To  my  mind,
nothing  is  more  wonderful  in  our  blessed  Lord  here
below  than  this  devotedness  to  His  Father,  not  merely
now  and  again,  but  as  the  one  motive  that  animated
Him  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  His  course  here
below.  He  came  to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  this  not  as
the  law  proposed,  in  order  that  it  might  be  well  with
Him,  and  He  might  live  long  in  the  earth ;  He  never  had
such  a  motive  though  He  fulfilled  the  law  perfectly.  On
the  contrary.  He  knew  quite  well  before  coming  that  He
was  not  here  for  a  long  life,  but  to  die  on  the  cross.  He
was  about  to  be  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  giving  Himself  up


232  iNTRODucrroRY  LEcrruREa

spite  of  suffering,  not  only  from  man,  but  from  God.  But
at  all  cost  God's  will  must  be  done;  "by  the  which  will
we  are  sanctified  through  the  offeiing  of  the  body  of
Jesus  Christ  once  for  all"  The  self-same  principle  is
true  in  the  believer,  although  of  course  it  is  pure  grace
toward  him,  whereas  it  was  moral  perfectness  in  Jesus.
In  our  case  it  is  all  through  Jesus.  It  is  the  Holy  Ghost
no  doubt  producing  it  It  is  the  instinct  of  that  new
nature, — of  life  in  the  believer,  who,  being  born  of
God,  has  this  necessary  feeling  of  the  new  nature,  the
desire  to  do  the  will  of  God.  In  point  of  fact  Christ  is
the  life  of  the  believer;  and  we  can  well  understand,
therefore,  that  the  life  of  Christ,  whether  viewed  in  all
its  perfection  in  Him,  or  whether  it  is  seen  modified  in
ourselves,  is  nevertheless  just  the  same  life, — ^in  our  case
hindered  alas !  by  all  sorts  of  circumstances,  and  above
all  by  the  evil  of  our  old  nature  that  surrounds  it, —
in  Him,  as  we  know>  absolutely  perfect  and  without
mixture.

In  this  case,  then,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  order  is
divinely  perfect,  and  manifestly  so.  Being  sanctified
of  the  Spirit,  we  are  called  to  obey  as  Christ  obeyed.
It  is  another  character  and  measure  of  responsibility.
The  Jew,  as  such,  was  bound  to  obey  the  law.  To  him
it  was  a  question  of  not  doing  what  his  nature  prompted
him  to  do.  But  this  was  never  the  case  with  Jesua
He  in  no  case  desired  to  do  a  single  thing  that  was  not
the  will  of  God.  Now  the  new  nature  in  the  believer
never  has  any  other  thought  or  feeling;  only  in  our
case  there  is  also  the  old  nature  which  may,  and  whioh
alas !  does  struggle  to  have  its  own  way.  Therefore
God  has  His  own  wise,  holy,  and  gracious  mode  of  deal-


"f.


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  233

ing  with  it  We  shall  see  that  this  comes  later  on  in
oar  epistle,  and  therefore  I  need  say  no  more  upon  it
now.

Here  we  have  the  first  great  primary  fact,  that  the
Christian  Jew  does  not  belong  any  more  to  the  elect
nation  ;  but  is  taken  out  of  this  his  former  position,
and  is  elect  after  a  wholly  new  sort.  In  this  case,  those
actually  addressed  had  belonged  to  that  elect  people,
but  now  they  were  chosen  according  to  the  foreknow-
ledge of  Grod  the  Father.  It  was  no  after-thought,  but
His  settled  plan.  It  was  the  foreknowledge  of  God
the  Father  in  virtue  of  (^)  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,
and  this  unto  the  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ  (that  kind
of  obedience),  and  the  sprinkling  of  His  blood.  These
two  points  are  carefully  to  be  weighed — Christian
obedience,  and  the  sprinkling  of  His  blood.  I  consider
them  both  to  stand  in  manifest  contrast  with  the  same
two  elements  under  the  law  in  Exodus  xxiv.,  which
appears  to  be  in  view.  In  that  chapter  we  have  Israel
agreeing  to  do  whatever  the  law  demanded,  and  there-
upon the  blood  of  certain  victims  is  taken  and  sprinkled
on  the  people,  as  well  as  on  the  book  that  bound  them.

It  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  blood  there
is  used  as  a  sign  of  the  putting  away  of  sin.  This  is
not  by  any  means  the  only  meaning  of  blood,  even
where  it  was  sacrificially  employed.  The  meaning  in
that  sense  I  take  to  be  this :  that  the  people  formally
pledged  themselves  to  legal  obedience,  and  bound  them-
selves in  this  solemn  manner  to  obey.  Just  as  the
blood  sprinkled  was  from  the  animals  killed  in  view  of
the  old  covenant,  so  they  shrank  not  from  that  dread
and  extreme  exaction  if  they  failed  to  obey  the  will


234  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

of  God.  It  was  an  imprecation  of  death  on  themselves
from  God  if  they  violated  His  commandments.  There-
fore it  is  observable  there  was  the  sprinkling  of  the
book  along  with  it.  This  had  nothing  at  all  to  do  with
atonement — a  supposition  which  only  arises  from  people
closing  their  eyes  to  other  truths  in  the  Bible,  to  their
own  great  loss  even  in  the  truth  they  hold.  We  must
leave  room  for  all  truth.  Atonement  has  its  own  in-
comparable place.  But  certainly  when  the  Israelites
were  binding  themselves  to  obey  the  law,  it  was  as  far
as  possible  from  a  confession  of  atonement  It  is  a
total  fallacy,  injurious  to  God's  glory  and  to  our  own
souls,  to  interpret  the  Bible  after  this  fashion.  It  only
makes  confusion  in  jumbling  up  law  and  gospel,  to  the
detriment  of  both,  and  indeed  to  the  destruction  of  all
the  beauty  and  force  of  truth.

In  the  case  of  the  Christian  all  is  changed.  For  Christ
communicated  a  new  nature  which  loves  to  obey  God's
will,  which  accordingly  is  given  us  from  conversion,
before  (and  it  may  be  long  before)  a  person  enjoys  peace.
From  the  time  that  this  new  nature  is  given,  the  pur-
pose of  the  heart  is  to  obey.  Such  was,  unhindered  by
imperfection,  the  obedience  of  Jesus.

But  besides  this,  the  gospel,  instead  of  putting  a
man  under  blood  as  a  threat  or  imprecation  of  death
in  case  of  failure,  the  awful  sign  of  his  doom  before  his
eyes  if  he  disobeyed,  puts  him  under  the  sprinkling  of
the  blood  of  Jesus,  which  assures  him  of  plenary  for-
giveness. With  this  he  is  intended  to  start  as  a  Christian;
he  besrins  his  career  with  that  blessed  shelter  which
tells  him  that,  although  he  has  entered  on  the  path  of
Christian  obedience,  he  is  a  forgiven  and  justified  man


HUE   EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  235

io  the  sight  of  GkxL  Such  is  the  suited  and  striking
preface  with  which  our  apostle  commences,  contrasting
the  portion  of  the  believer  in  Christ  with  that  of  the
Jew,  as  it  stands  in  their  own  sacred  books,  which  we
as  well  as  they  acknowledge  to  have  divine  authority.

Next  follows  the  salutation,  "Grace  unto  you,  and
peace,"  the  usual  Christian  or  apostolic  style  of  address.
"Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  who  according  to  his  abundant  mercy  hath
begotten  us  again  unto  a  living  hope  by  the  resurrection
of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  to  an  inheritance  incor-
ruptible, and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  re-
served in  heaven  for  you,  who  are  kept  by  the  power  of
God  through  faith  unto  salvation  ready  to  be  revealed
in  the  last  time."  Thus  he  loves  to  bring  out  again
confirmatorily  the  new  relationship  in  which  they  stood
to  God.  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ."  It  is  not  here  blessing  them  in  heavenly
places  in  Christ.  Such  is  not  the  topic  of  Peter;  it  had
been  given  to  another  instrument  more  fitted  for  reveal-
ing the  heavenly  position  of  the  believer.  But  if  it  is
not  union  with  Christ,  if  not  our  full  place  in  Him
before  God,  there  is  a  clear  statement  of  our  hope  of
heaven.  And  this  is  what  Peter  immediately  enlarges
on.  Speaking  of  God  he  says,  "Who  according  to
his  abundant  mercy  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  living
hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,
to  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  that
fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven."  It  is  not  the
universal  inheritance  of  which  the  apostle  Paul  treats ;
80  that  clearly  we  have  the  distinction  between  his
testimony  and  Paul's  very  definitely.


236  DTTBODUCrORT  LEGTUBES.

Bear  in  mind  that  the  one  is  just  as  truly  Christian
as  the  other.  There  is  no  difference  in  their  authority^
but  each  has  its  own  importance.  The  man  that  would
make  all  his  scripture  to  be  the  epistle  to  the  Ephesians
would  soon  find  himself  in  want  of  Peter.  And  I  am
persuaded  that  a  hardness  of  character,  quite  intolerable
to  men  of  spiritual  minds,  would  inevitably  be  generated
by  making  all  our  food  to  consist  in  what  could  be
extracted  from  Ephesians  and  Colossians,  the  effect  of
which  would  soon  become  painfully  sensible  to  others.
The  consequence  would  be  that  much  of  the  exercise  of
spiritual  affection  which  humbles  the  soul,  a  vast  deal
which  renders  needful  the  gracious  present  care  of  the
Lord  Jesus  as  advocate  and  priest  on  high,  would  be  of
necessity  left  out.  In  other  words,  if  we  think  of  firm-
ness, as  well  as  the  sense  of  belonging  to  heaven, — a  bright
triumphant  consciousness  of  glory,  surely  we  must  enter
into  and  enjoy  the  precious  truth  of  our  union  with
Christ.  But  this  is  not  all ;  we  need  Christ  interceding
for  us,  as  well  as  the  privilege  of  being  in  Christ ;  we
need  to  have  Him  active  in  His  love  before  our  God,
and  not  merely  a  condition  in  which  we  stand.  Peter
treats  chiefly  of  the  former,  Paul  of  both,  but  chiefly  of
the  latter.  Such  was  the  ordering  of  matters  under  God's
hand  for  both.  The  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  of  all  the
Pauline  epistles  is  that  which  most  approaches  the  tes-
timony of  Peter,  and  coalescing  in  it  to  a  large  extent
There  we  have  not  \mion  with  the  Head,  but  "the  hea-
venly calling;"  and  substantially  the  latter  line  of  truth
is  that  which  we  have  in  1  Peter.

Nor  is  it  only  that  we  find  here  the  sprinkling  of  the
blood  of  Jesus^  but  the  life  that  grace  has  given  us


'^J>s-


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  237

is  characterized  by  resurrection  power.  "  We  are  be-
gotten again,'*  says  he,  "  to  a  living  hope  by  the  resur-
rection of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."  The  blood  of
Jesus  Christ,  however  precious  and  indispensable,  does
not  of  itself  constitute  a  man  a  Christian  either  in
iatelligence  or  in  fact  of  standing.  It  is  the  foundation
for  it;  and  every  one  who  rests  on  the  blood  of  Clirist  is
surely  a  Christian ;  but  I  repeat  that,  both  for  position
before  Qod  and  intelligent  perception  and  power  of  soul,
we  need  and  have  much  more.  Supposing  God  only
gave  the  believer  according  to  his  own  thoughts  (often
meagre);  supposing  one  believed  in  the  power  of  the
precious  blood  of  Jesus  ever  so  truly,  and  had  nothing
more  than  this  our  real  portion  by  the  Spirit,  such  an
one,  I  maintain,  would  be  a  sorry  Christian  indeed.  No
doubt  as  far  as  it  goes  it  is  all-important,  nor  could  any
one  be  a  Christian  without  it  Still  the  Christian  does
need  the  effect  of  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  following  up
the  sprinkling  of  His  blood — I  do  not  say  the  resur-
rection without  His  blood,  still  less  the  glory  without
either.  A  whole  Christ  is  given  and  needed.  I  do  not
believe  in  these  glory-men,  or  resurrection-men  either,
without  the  blood  of  Jesus ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  as
little  are  we  in  scripture  limited  to  that  most  wonderful
of  all  foundations — redemption  through  Christ  Jesus
our  Lord.  To  restrict  yourself  to  it  would  be  a  wrong,
not  so  much  to  your  own  soul  as  to  God's  grace ;  and
if  there  be  any  difference,  especially  to  Him  who  suf-
fered all  things  for  God's  glory  and  for  our  own  infinite
blessing.

In  this  case  then  we  have  the  Christian  by  divine
grace  possessed  of  a  new  nature  which  loves  to  obey.


238  INTEODUCTORY  LECTURES.

He  is  sprinkled  with  Christ's  blood,  which  gives  him
confidence  and  boldness  in  faith  before  6od,  because
he  knows  the  certainty  of  the  love  that  has  put  away
his  sins  by  blood.  But,  besides  this,  what  a  spring  is
conveyed  to  the  soul  by  the  sense  that  his  life  is  the
life  of  Jesus  in  resurrection.  So,  he  adds,  there  is  a
similar  inheritance  for  the  saints  with  Christ  Himself
— "an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  that
fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven,"  where  He  has
already  gone.  More  than  this,  there  is  full  security,
spite  of  our  passing  through  a  world  filled  with  hatred
and  peril,  for  the  Christian  above  all.  "  For  you,"  says
he,  "who  are  kept;*'  for  Christian  doctrine  is  not,
as  men  so  often  say,  that  of  saints  persevering.  In
this  I,  for  one,  do  not  believa  One  sees  alas!  too
often  saints  going  astray,  comparatively  seldom  perse-
vering as  the  rule,  if  we  speak  of  their  consistent
fidelity  and  devotedness.  But  there  is  that  which  never
fails, — "the  power  of  God  through  faith," — by  which
the  believer  is  kept  to  the  end.  This  alone  restores  the
balance;  and  thus  we  are  taken  out  of  all  conceit  of
our  own  stability.  We  are  thrown  on  mercy,  as  we
ought  to  be ;  we  look  up  in  dependence  on  One  who  is
incontestably  above  us,  and  withal  infinitely  near  to  ua
This  ought  to  be  the  spring  of  all  our  confidence, —
even  in  God  Himself,  with  His  own  power  preserv-
ing us.  There  is  given  to  the  soul  of  him  who  thus
rests  on  God's  power  keeping  him  a  wholly  different
tone  from  that  of  the  man  who  thinks  of  his  own  per-
severance as  a  saint.  Far  better  is  it,  then,  to  be  "kept
by  the  power  of  God  through  faith."  In  this  way  it
is  not  independent  of  our  looking  to  Him.


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  239

But  there  is  discipline  also.  God  puts  us  to  the
proof;  and,  undoubtedly,  if  there  be  unbelief  working,
we  must  eat  the  bitter  fruit  of  our  own  ways.  It  is
good  that  we  should  feel  that  it  is  unbelief,  and  that
unbelief  can  produce  nothing  but  death.  This  may  be
in  various  measures,  and  therefore  no  more  is  meant
than  so  far  as  want  of  fedth  is  allowed  to  work.  In
the  unbeliever,  where  it  does  work  unhinderedly,  the
consequences  are  fatal  and  everlasting.  In  the  believer
the  evil  heart  of  unbelief  is  modified  necessarily  by  the
fact  that,  believing  on  Christ,  he  has  everlasting  life.
But  still,  as  far  as  unbelief  does  work,  it  is  just  so  far
death  in  effect.  The  saints,  then,  are  "kept  by  the
power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation."  And  here
it  is  well  to  observe,  as  an  important  fact  to  be  recog-
nised, that  salvation  in  Peter  s  epistle  looks  onward  to
the  future,  where  it  is  not  otherwise  qualified.  Salvation
is  here  viewed  as  not  yet  come.  In  the  general  sense
of  the  word,  salvation  awaits  the  revelation  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ.  It  supposes  that  the  believer  is  brought
out  of  all  that  is  natural  even  as  to  the  body — that  he
is  already  changed  into  the  likeness  of  Christ.  "  Salva-
tion," says  Peter,  '"ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last
time."  This  is  the  reason  why  he  connects  it  with  the
appearing  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  not  merely  the  work
effected,  but  salvation  revealed ;  and  hence  it  necessarily
awaits  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.

There  is  another  sense  of  salvation,  and  our  apostle,
as  we  shall  shortly  find,  does  not  in  anywise  ignore  it ;
but  then  he  qualifies  the  term.  When  he  refers  it  to
the  present,  it  is  the  salvation  of  souls,  not  of  bodies.
This  also  is  a  very  important  point  of  difference  for  thQ


240  DTTRODUCrOBT  LBCTUBE8.

Christian,  on  which  it  will  be  desirable  to  spea]
sently.  On  the  other  hand,  as  here,  when  sal
simply  and  fhlly  is  meant,  we  are  thrown  on  the  i
tion  of  the  last  time.  "Wherein  ye  greatly  i
though  now  for  a  season,  if  need  be,  ye  are  in  hea
through  manifold  temptations."  Such  is  the  p
trial  through  which  the  believer  goes  forward,  p
to  the  proof  the  fedth  which  God  has  given  h
"  That  the  trial  of  your  fiedth"  (not  of  flesh  as  und
law)  ''being  much  more  precious  than  of  gok
perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire,  might  be
unto  praise  and  honour  and  glory  at  the  appea]
Jesus  Christ"

It  is  not  said  to  be  at  Christ's  coming.  Thi
of  our  faith  will  not  be  revealed  then,  but  "
appearing  of  Jesus."  This  is  the  reason  why  ti
pearing  of  Jesus  is  brought  in  here.  The  com
Jesus  might  be  misunderstood,  as  being  a  much
comprehensive  term  than  His  appearing  or  reve
His  coming  (xopoixrui)  is  that  which  effects  the  r
and  reception  of  the  saints  to  Himself;  and  H
pearing  is  that  which  subsequently  displays  th^
Himself  before  the  world,  and  therefore  expresses
part  of  His  presence,  being  the  special  (not  the  g<
term.  The  appearing  of  Jesus  is  exclusively  wh
Lord  will  make  Himself  visible,  and  be  seen  by
eye.  It  is  evident  that  the  Lord  might  come  and
Himself  visible  only  to  those  in  whom  He  is  diff
interested,  and  who  are  themselves  personally  as8(
with  Him ;  and  such,  I  have  no  doubt,  is  the  ti
scriptura  But  then  He  may  do  more  and  c
Himself  to  the  world.    Such  is  the  ''appearij


<*f.


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETEB.  241

Jesus,  and  of  this  the  apostle  Peter  speaks  when  the
revelation  of  the  sous  of  God  in  glory  will  take  place.
Then  it  is  that  the  trial  of  the  faith  of  the  Christian
will  be  made  manifest  in  glory.  Wherever  the  saints
have  shown  faith  or  unbelief,  whether  hindered  by  the
world,  the  flesh,  or  the  devil,  whatever  the  particular
snare  that  has  drawn  them  aside,  all  will  be  made  plain
then.  There  will  be  no  possibility  of  self-love  keeping
up  appearances  longer;  unbelief  will  cost  as  dear  in
that  day  as  it  is  worthless  now ;  but  the  trial  of  faith,
where  it  has  been  genuine,  will  be  "  found  unto  praise
and  honour"  then.  Proved  unbelief  will  be  certainly  to
the  praise  of  none,  but  where  feeble  faltering  faith  has
been  put  in  evidence  by  the  trial,  while  surely  forgiven
in  the  grace  of  God,  nevertheless  the  failure  cannot  but
be  judged  as  such.  The  flesh  never  counts  on  God  for
good.  AU  unbelief  therefore  will  be  shown  plainly  to  be
of  the  flesh,  not  of  the  Spirit,  and  never  excusable.

But  this  gives  the  apostle  an  occasion  to  speak  of
Jesus,  especially  as  he  had  spoken  of  His  appearing,
and  this  in  a  way  that  remarkably  brings  out  the
character  of  Christianity.  "  Whom,"  says  he,  "  having
not  seen,  ye  love."  It  is  a  strange  sound  and  fact  at
first,  but  in  the  end  precious.  Who  ever  loved  a  person
that  he  never  saw  ?  We  know  that  in  human  relations
it  is  not  so.  In  divine  things  it  is  precisely  what  shows
the  power  and  special  character  of  a  Christian's  faith.
"Whom  having  not  seen,  ye  love;  in  whom,  though
now  ye  see  him  not,  yet  believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory :  receiving  the  end  of
your  faith," — not  yet  the  body  saved,  but  soul-salvation
-"-''the  salvation  of  souls."    This  at  once  gives  us  a

B


242  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES.

true  and  vivid  picture  of  what  Christianity  is,  of  signal
importance  for  the  Jews  to  weigh,  because  they  always
looked  forward  for  a  visible  Messiah, — the  royal  Son  ol
David — the  object,  no  doubt,  of  all  reverence,  homage,
and  loyalty  for  all  Israel  But  here  it  is  altogethei
another  order  of  ideas.  It  is  a  rejected  Messiah  who  ie
the  proper  object  of  the  Christian's  love,  though  he
never  beheld  Him ;  and  who  while  unseen  becomes  so
much  the  more  simply  and  unmixedly  the  object  of  his
faith,  and  withal  the  spring  of  ''joy  unspeaJcable  and
full  of  glory."

While  this  is  in  full  and  evident  contrast  with
Judaism,  it  needs  little  proof  that  it  is  precisely  what
gives  scope  for  the  proper  display  of  Christianity,  whict
could  not  be  seen  in  its  true  light  if  at  all  till  Jesus  lefl
the  world.  Whilst  the  Lord  was  here,  it  is  ignorance  and
error  to  call  such  a  state  of  things,  however  blessed  and
needed,  Christianity.  Of  course  it  was  Christ,  which
after  all,  was  far  more  important  in  one  sense  than  the
work  He  wrought  for  bringing  us  to  God.  All  on  whicli
one  could  look  with  delight  and  praise  was  concen-
trated in  His  own  person.  What  were  the  disciples
then?  Members  of  His  body?  Who  told  you  thisl
None  can  find  it  in  Scriptura  Up  to  that  time  mem-
bership of  Christ,  or  to  be  in  Christ,  was  not  a  fact,  and
consequently  could  not  be  testified  to  any  soul,  noi
known  to  the  most  advanced  believer.  What  Christ
was  to  them  then  was  all:  not  in  the  least  did  any
suspect  (for  indeed  it  was  not  yet  tnie)  that  any  were
in  Him.  The  Lord  spoke  of  a  day  when  they  shonkl
know  it;  but  as  yet  the  foundation  was  not  even  laid  fbi
it.    This  was  done  in  the  mighty  work  of  the  Saviooi


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  243

on  the  cross ;  and  not  the  fact  only  but  its  results  were
made  good  when  Christ,  after  having  breathed  His
own  risen  life  into  them,  went  up  to  heaven  and  sent
down  the  Holy  Ghost  that  they  might  taste  the  joy
and  have  the  power  of  it.  This  gives  room  for  all  the
practical  working  of  Christianity.  It  was  necessary  to
its  existence  that  Jesus  should  go.  There  could  have
been  no  Christianity  if  Jesus  had  not  come;  yet  as  long
as  He  was  visibly  present  on  earth,  Christianity  proper
could  not  even  begin.

It  was  when  He  who  died  went  to  heaven  that
Christianity  appeared  in  its  full  force ;  and  accordingly
then  came  out  faith  in  its  finest  and  truest  character.
While  He  was  here,  there  was  a  kind  of  mingled  ex-
perience. It  was  partly  sight  and  partly  faith  ;  but
when  He  went  away,  it  was  altogether  faith,  and  nothing
but  faith.  Such  is  Christianity.  But  then,  again,  as
long  as  Christ  was  here,  it  could  not  be  exactly  hope.
How  could  one  hope  for  One  who  was  here,  however
different  His  estate  from  what  was  longed  for  and  ex-
pected ?  Thus  neither  faith  had  its  adequate  and  suited
sphere,  nor  had  hope  its  proper  character  till  Jesus
went  away.  When  He  left  the  earth,  especially  as  the
Crucified,  then  indeed  there  was  room  for  faith;  and
nothing  but  faith  received,  appreciated,  and  enjoyed  all.
And  before  He  went  away.  He  had  left  the  promise  of
His  return  for  them.  Thus  hope  also  could  spring  forth
as  it  were  to  meet  Him ;  as,  indeed,  it  is  the  work  of
the  Holy  Ghost  to  exercise  the  faith  and  hope  He  has
given.

This,  then,  may  serve  to  show  the  true  nature  of

Christianity,  which,  coming  in   after   redemption,  is

&  2


244  INTRODUCTOBY  LECTURES.

founded  on  it,  and  forms  in  us  heavenly  associations
and  hopes  while  Jesus  is  away,  and  we  are  waiting  for
Him  to  return.  Perhaps  it  is  needless  to  say  how  the
heart  is  tried.  There  is  everything,  as  we  have  seen,
to  give  not  only  faith  and  hope  their  full  place,  but  also
love.  As  we  are  told  here,  "  Whom  having  not  seen,
ye  love;  in  whom,  though  now  ye  see  him  not,  yet
believing," — no  wonder  he  adds, — "  ye  rejoice  with  joy
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  But  none  of  these
wonders  of  grace  could  have  been,  unless  by  redemption
we  receive  the  end  of  our  faith  meanwhile,  namely,
soul-salvation.

A  very  important  development  follows  in  the  next
verses,  "Of  which  salvation  the  prophets  have  enquired
and  searched  diligently,  who  prophesied  of  the  grace
that  should  come  unto  you."  How  little,  it  seems,  the
Old  Testament  prophets  understood  their  own  prophe-
cies! How  much  we  are  indebted  to  the  Spirit  who
now  reveals  a  Christ  already  come !  The  prophets  were
constantly  saying  that  the  righteousness  of  God  was
near  at  hand,  and  His  salvation  to  be  revealed.  Thence,
we  see,  they  did  speak  of  these  very  things.  They
"prophesied  of  the  grace  that  should  come  unto  you:
searching  what,  or  what  manner  of  time  the  Spirit  of
Christ  which  was  in  them  did  signify,  when  it  testified
beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glories  after
tliese."  Take  Psalm  xxii  or  Isaiah  liii.,  where  we  have
the  sufferings  which  belonged  to  Christ,  and  the  glories
after  these.  But  mark,  "To  whom  it  was  revealed,
that  not  to  themselves,  but  to  us  they  did  minister
the  things  which  are  now  reported  to  you  in  virtue
of  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  from  heaven."    This  is  Chris-


'■^tJ.h


THE  EPISTLES   OF  PETER.  245

tianity.  It  is  very  far  from  identifjring  the  state  and
testimony  of  the  prophets  with  ours  now  under  grace
and  a  present  Spirit.  He  shows  that  first  of  all  there
was  this  testimony  of  that  which  was  not  for  them-
selves but  for  us,  beginning  of  course  with  the  converted
Jewish  remnant, — these  Christian  Jews  who  believed
the  gospel  which  in  principle  belongs  to  us  of  the
Gentiles  just  as  much  as  to  them.

Christianity  is  come  to  us  now;  but  when  really
known,  it  is  not  at  all  a  mere  question  of  prophetic
testimony,  even  though  this  be  of  God,  but  there  is  the
preaching  of  the  gospel  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down
from  heaven.  The  gospel  sets  forth  present  accomplish-
ment— redemption  now  a  finished  work  as  far  as  the
soul  is  concerned.  At  the  same  time,  the  day  is  not
yet  come  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  as  a  whole.
This  is  the  important  diflference  here  revealed.  There  are
three  distinct  truths  in  these  verses,  as  has  been  often
remarked,  and  most  clearly,  as  we  have  seen.  "  Where-
fore gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  be  sober,  and  hope
to  the  end  for  the  grace  that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you
at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ."  Then  the  prophecies
will  be  fulfilled.  Thus  the  Lord  Jesus,  being  already
come  and  about  to  come  again,  brings  before  us  two  of
these  stages,  while  the  mission  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for
the  gospel  fills  up  the  interval  between  them.  Had
there  been  only  one  coming  of  Christ,  then  the  accom-
plishment that  we  have  now,  and  the  fulfilment  of  the
prophecies  that  is  future,  would  have  coalesced,  so  far
as  this  could  have  been;  but  two  distinct  comings  of
the  Lord  (one  past,  and  the  other  future)  have  broken
up  the  matter  into  these  separate  parts.    That  is,  we


246  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

have  had  accomplishment  in  the  past ;  and  we  look  for
future  fulfilment  of  all  the  bright  anticipations  of  the
coming  kingdom.  After  the  one,  and  before  the  other,
the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  fipom  heaven  is  the  power
of  Christian  blessedness,  and  as  we  know  also  of  the
church,  no  less  than  of  preaching  the  gospel  everywhere.
And  when  the  Lord  Jesus  appears  by  and  by,  there
will  be  not  the  gospel  as  it  is  now  preached,  nor  the
Holy  Ghost  as  He  is  now  sent  down  fipom  heaven,
but  the  word  going  forth  and  the  Spirit  poured  out
suitably  to  that  day.  There  may  be  a  still  more  diffu-
sive action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  when  He  is  shed  upon
all  flesh,  not  merely  as  a  sample,  but  to  an  extent
(I  do  not  say  depth)  beyond  what  was  accomplished
on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  In  due  time  there  will  be
the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  to  the  letter.  Chris-
tianity accordingly,  it  will  be  observed,  comes  in
between  these  two  extremes — after  the  first,  and  before
the  second,  coming  of  Christ ;  and  this  is  exactly  what
Peter  shows  us  in  this  epistle.  "  Wherefore  gird  up  the
loins  of  your  mind,  be  sober,  and  hope  perfectly,"  &c.
Again  in  the  14th  verse :  "As  children  of  obedience,  not
fashioning  yourselves  according  to  the  former  lusts  in
your  ignorance:  but  as  he  which  hath  called  you  is
holy,  be  ye  also  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation ;
because  it  is  written,  Be  ye  holy;  for  I  am  holy."  There
is  an  instance  of  what  I  referred  to — that  the  essential
moral  principles  of  the  Old  Testament  are  in  nowise
disturbed  by  Christianity.  And,  indeed,  you  find  this
not  merely  in  Peter  but  in  Paul.  Paul  will  tell  you
so,  even  after  he  shows  that  the  Christian  is  dead  to
the  law ;  and  then  a  term  is  used  to  show  that  he  does


^jT^


THE  EPISTLES   OF  PETER.  247

not  at  all  mean  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  is  not
fulfilled  in  us,  but  that  it  is.  In  fact,  the  righteousness
of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  no  one  but  the  Christian.  A
man  under  the  law  never  fulfils  the  law  :  the  man  who
is  under  grace  is  the  one  that  does,  and  the  only  one ;
for  the  righteousness  of  the  law  is  fulfilled  in  those
"who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."
So  Peter  takes  up  a  passage  of  Leviticus,  and  shows
that  it  is  strictly  true — ^yea,  if  one  can  employ  such
aa  expression,  more  true  (of  course  meaning  by  this
more  manifestly  true)  under  the  Christian  than  under
the  Jewish  system  As  all  know,  many  things  were
allowed  then  for  the  hardness  of  the  heart,  which  are
thoroughly  condemned  now.  That  is,  the  holiness  of
the  Christian  is  fuller  and  deeper  than  that  of  the  Jew.
Hence  he  can  fairly  take  up  the  quotation  from  the
law,  not  at  all  conveying  that  we  were  under  law,  but
with  an  a  fortiori  force.  As  Christians,  we  are  under
a  far  more  searching  principle,  namely,  the  grace  of
God  (Bom.  vL),  which  assuredly  ought  to  produce  far
better  and  more  fruitful  results.

It  is  clearly  seen  how  he  treats  these  Jews,  and  what
they  used  to  boast  o£  "But  as  he  which  hath  called
you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation;
because  it  is  written,  Be  ye  holy;  for  I  am  holy.  And
if  ye  call  on  the  Father" — that  is,  if  ye  call  on  Him
as  Father — "who  without  respect  of  persons  judgeth
according  to  every  man's  work,  pass  tho  time  of  your
sojourning  in  fear :  forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  ye  were
not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and
gold,  from  your  vain  conversation  received  by  tradition
from  your  fathers;  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,


248  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot :  who
verily  was  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of  the
world,  but  was  manifest  in  these  last  times  for  you,  who
by  him  do  believe  in  God,  that  raised  him  up  from  the
dead,  and  gave  him  glory;  that  your  faith  and  hope
might  be  in  God/'  What  can  be  more  magnificent
than  this  setting  of  the  Christian  on  his  own  proper
basis?

It  will  be  observed  here  that  there  are  two  motives  to
holiness:  the  first  is  that  He  has  called  us;  the  next,  that
we  call  Him,  and  this  by  the  sweet  and  near  title  of
Father.  It  is  no  longer  relationship  with  and  recognition
of  a  God  that  rules  and  governs.  This  was  known  in
Israel,  but  it  could  in  no  wise  draw  out  the  affections  in
the  same  way  as  calling  Him  Father.  We  are  told  and
meant  to  know,  that  as  He  called  us  by  His  grace,  so
we  should  call  on  Him  as  Father.  It  is  after  the  pat-
tern, not  of  a  subject  with  a  sovereign,  but  of  a  child's
dependence  on  a  parent.  To  this  double  motive  there
is  added  another  consideration  on  which  it  all  rests,  and
without  which  neither  of  these  things  could  be.  How
is  it  that  He  has  been  pleased  thus  to  call  us  ?  and  how
is  it  that  we  can  call  Him  Father  ?  The  answer  is  this :
"Forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  ye  were  not  redeemed
with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold,  from  your
vain  conversation  received  by  tradition  from  your  fathers ;
but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  The  Jews  were
all  familiar  with  a  ransom  price  that  used  to  be  paid  in
silver.  But  it  did  not  matter  whether  one  gave  silver
or  gold,  it  was  all  corruptible ;  and  to  what  did  it  come
at  last  ?  The  precious  blood  of  Christ  is  another  thing
altogether;  and  there  alone  is  efficacy  found  before  God;


■l**.


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  249

80  also  His  incorruptible  seed  revealing  Himself  is
planted  in  the  heart  of  the  saint.

They  were  redeemed  then  with  the  precious  blood  of
Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot.
It  was  no  new  thought  Though  but  newly  brought
out,  it  was  in  point  of  fact  the  oldest  of  all  purposes.
Did  they  boast  about  their  law,  the  apostle  can  say  that
Christianity — the  present  blessed  revelation  of  grace  in
Christ — was  in  God's  mind  before  the  foundation  of  the
world.  Therefore  there  could  be  no  comparison  on  that
score,  not  even  for  a  Jew.  And  this  was  an  important
point ;  for  the  Jews  reasoned,  that  because  God  brings
out  one  thing  to-day.  He  could  not  bring  out  another  to-
morrow. They  consider  that,  because  God  is  unchange-
able. He  has  not  a  will  of  His  own.  Why  even  your
dog  has  a  will;  and  I  am  sure  you  have  a  will  your-
selves. And  here  is  the  wonderful  infatuation  of  un-
belief. That  very  system  of  reason  that  makes  so  much
of  the  will  of  man,  and  is  not  a  little  proud  of  it,  would
deprive  God  Himself  of  a  will,  and  under  penalty  of
man's  accusation  of  injustice  forbids  its  exercise  accord-
ing to  His  own  pleasure.  But  thus  it  is  He  brings  out
one  part  of  His  character  at  one  time,  and  another  part
at  another  time.  Therefore  he  would  have  them  know
that,  as  to  the  novelty  Mrith  which  they  reproach  Chris-
tianity, it  was  altogether  a  mistake ;  for  the  Lamb
without  blemish  and  without  spot,  though  only  lately
slain,  was  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of  the
world.  When  he  refers  to  Him  as  a  "lamb  without
blemish  and  without  spot,"  he  evidently  points  to  their
types,  yea,  to  Christ  before  the  types,  because  we  had
that  from  the  very  beginning  in  the  firat  recorded


250  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES,

sacrifice,  long  before  there  was  a  Jew,  and  still  more
before  the  law.  To  what  did  it  all  point  ?  To  "  the  pre-
cious blood  of  Christ  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and
without  spot."  It  is  plain  that,  if  God  foreordained
it,  He  at  the  same  time  took  care  to  act  on  it,  and  this
is  long  before  either  Judaism  or  the  law.

Thus  there  was  a  most  thorough  conviction  of  the
folly  of  the  Jewish  argument  as  to  Christianity  being  a
mere  novelty;  but  it  was  "manifest  in  these  last  times
for  you  who  by  him  do  believe  in  God."  Here  it  is  not
merely  believing  in  the  Messiah,  but  believing  in  "  God
that  raised  him  up  from  the  dead."

Now  I  do  not  believe  there  ever  can  be  settled  peace
in  a  man's  soul  till  he  has  confidence  in  Grod  Himself,
according  to  the  truth  of  His  raising  up  Christ  from  the
dead.  Simply  to  believe  in  Christ  may  make  a  man
quite  happy,  but  it  never  of  itself  gives  solid  unbreak-
able peace.  What  brings  a  man  into  that  peace  which
resists  all  efforts  from  without  to  take  it,  all  weakness
within  in  giving  it  up,  is  the  certainty  that  all  is  clear
with  God.  It  is  He  that  raises  the  question  of  con-
science in  His  sight,  and  this  is  so  much  the  morei
dreadful,  because  when  renewed  we  know  better  our
own  subtlety  and  His  unstained  essential  holiness.  It
belongs  to  the  condition  in  which  man  is  that,  being
fallen,  and  yet  having  a  conscience  of  the  good  that
alas !  he  does  not  do,  and  of  the  evil  that  he  does,  he
has  a  dread  of  God,  knowing  that  He  must  bring  into
judgment  the  good  that  he  knew  but  did  not,  and  the
evil  that  he  knew  and  did.  So  guilty  man  cannot  but
quake,  still  by  scepticism  he  may  reason  himself  out  of
his  fears,  or  he  can  find  a  religion  that  soothes  and


sRi


'iJfJ?


THE  EPISTLES   OF  PETER.  251

destroys  his  conscience.     But  that  man  has  this  con-
science in  his  natural  state  is  most  certain.

Christianity  alone  settles  all  questions.  There  we  have
not  merely  the  blessed  Saviour  who  in  unspeakable  love
comes  down  and  attracts  the  heart,  and  searches  the
conscience,  but  He  settles  all  for  us  with  God  by  re-
demption. Nor  is  it  only  that  He  comes  down  from
God,  but  He  goes  up  to  God.  That  we  receive  the  peace
we  need  as  Christians  is  mainly  connected,  not  with  His
coming  out  from  God,  but  with  His  going  back  to  God ;
as  it  is  said  here,  "Who  by  him  do  believe  in  God  that "
— ^what  ?  Gave  Him  to  shed  His  blood  ?  There  can  be
nothing  without  this  :  impossible  to  have  any  holy  and
permanent  blessing  for  the  soul  without  it ;  neverthe-
less this  is  not  what  is  said.  We  have  the  value  of
Christ's  blood  already  spoken  of,  but  now  it  is  added
of  God  that  He  "raised  him  up  from  the  dead,  and
gave  him  glory."  Where  ?  In  His  own  presence.  Even
the  kingdom  on  earth  does  not  suffice.  According  to
Christian  light  nothing  will  do  but  ability  to  stand
before  the  glory  of  God.  And  this  by  Christ's  work  is
made  good  for  us,  because  the  very  one  that  became  re-
sponsible for  our  sins  on  the  cross  is  in  glory  now.  God
has  raised  Him  firom  the  dead  and  given  Him  glory.
The  consequence  is  that  all  for  ever  is  made  clear  and
settled  for  those  who  believe  in  God,  that  our  "  faith  and
hope  might  be " — not  " in  Christ"  though  it  is  so,  as-
suredly, but  more  than  this — "  in  God."  This  is  the  more
important,  because  of  itself  it  completely  dissipates
a  thought  as  common  as  it  is  grievous  to  the  Lord,  that
Christ  is  the  one  in  whom  the  love  is,  and  that  His
task  for  the  most  part  is  to  turn  away  the  totally  oppo-


252  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

site  feeling  that  is  in  God  Himself.  Not  so ;  for  as  He
came  out  in  the  love  of  God,  who  none  the  less  must
by  this  very  Christ  judge  every  soul  that  lives  in  sin  and
unbelief,  He  would  not  go  back  to  heaven  until  He  had
by  His  own  sfiwjrifice  completely  put  sin  away.  But  this
was  the  will  of  God.  (Psalm  xl. ;  Heb.  x.)  Thus  He
goes  in  peaceful  triumph  into  the  presence  of  God,
establishing  our  faith  and  hope  in  God,  and  not  merely
in  Himself

But  there  is  another  thing  to  be  considered.  "  Seeing
ye  have  purified  your  souls  in  obeying  the^ruth  through
the  Spirit  unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren," — for
this  is  the  sure  effect — "see  that  ye  love  one  another
with  a  pure  heart  fervently."  There  was  the  best  and
weightiest  reason  for  this,  because  the  nature  thus  pro-
duced in  them  is  this  holy  nature  that  comes  by  grace
from  God  Himself.  "  Being  born  again,  not  of  corrup-
tible seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  word  of  God,
which  liveth  and  abideth ;  because  all  flesh  is  as  grass,
and  all  its  glory  as  the  flower  of  grass.  The  grass
withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof  falleth  away ;  but  the
word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.  And  this  is  the
word  which  by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  yoit"

Next  he  shows  some  of  the  privileges  as  well  as  wants
of  the  Christian.  First  he  is  surrounded  by  an  evil
world,  but,  besides,  he  has  not  lost  in  fact  something
nearer  that  is  quite  as  bad  as  what  is  in  the  world.
"  Laying  aside,"  he  says,  "  all  malice,  and  all  guile,  and
hypocrisies,  and  envies,  and  all  evil  speakings,  as  new-
born babes,  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  that  ye
may  grow  thereby  to  salvation."  "To  salvation"  you
will  not  find  in  your  common  Bibles,  but  it  is  none  the


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETEE.  253

less  true  for  all  that  The  apostle  represents  us  as
growing  by  the  word  to  salvation  (i,  e.,  the  end  in  glory).
It  is  not  often  that  words  are  thus  left  out  The  more
usual  fault  of  those  who  copied  the  scriptures  was  that
they  added  words.  They  assimilated  passages  one  to
another ;  they  thought  that  what  was  right  in  one  case
must  be  right  in  another;  and  thus  the  tendency  was  to
blunt  the  fine  edge  of  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  which  is
the  word  of  God.  But  in  this  case  they  omitted.  At
first  sight,  perhaps,  these  words  may  be  startling  to
some,  that  is,  to  such  as  think  that  the  sense  of  "  salva-
tion" is  weakened  thereby.  But  you  need  never  be
afraid  of  trusting  God  or  His  word.  Never  fear  for  the
honour  of  the  scripture,  never  shrink  from  committing
yourself  to  what  God  says.  I  have  no  hesitation  in
saying  that  this  is  in  my  judgment  what  God  said,  if
we  are  to  be  guided  by  the  most  ancient  and  best
authorities.  *

"  If  so  be  ye  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious  ;
to  whom  coming  as  unto  a  living  stone,  disallowed
indeed  of  men,  but  chosen  of  God  and  precious,  ye  also
as  lively  stones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  a  holy
priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to
God  by  Jesus  Christ"  Two  characters  of  priesthood
are  here  shewn  us.  We  have  first  seen  one  of  them, —
"a  holy  priesthood;"  there  is  another  lower  down,  in
verse  9,  where  he  says,  "  Ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a
royal  priesthood."     Both  flow  from  Christ  aild  are  in

*  In  ioLci  but  one  uncial  (Cod.  Angelicas  Romanus)  of  the  ninth
century  with  many  cursives  warrants  the  omission ;  but  M,  A,  B,  C,
E,  more  than  fifty  cursives,  and  all  the  versions  but  tho  Arabic  of  the
Pariaian  Polyglott  support  tho  words.  The  early  quotations,  Greek
and  Latin,  save  of  Oecumenius,  point  to  the  samo  reading.


254  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

communion  with  Him  who  is  now  carrying  on  a  priest-
hood according  to  the  pattern  of  Aaron,  but  in  His  own
person  is  a  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchisedea  That  is,
He  is  a  royal  priest  just  as  truly  as  His  functions  are
now  exercised  on  the  ground  of  sacrifice,  interceding
after  the  Aaronic  pattern  within  the  veil  but  a  veil  that
is  rent.  He  is  now  fulfilling  the  Levitical  types  in  the
holiest  of  all.  On  this  is  founded  the  spiritual  priest-
hood, and  in  consequence  we  who  are  His  draw  near
and  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices.  Besides  that,  not  only
is  there  holiness  in  drawing  near  to  God,  but  royal
dignity  stamped  upon  the  believer.  This  too  is  of  the
greatest  importance  for  us  all  to  remember  and  seek  to
realize  by  faith.  Where  is  each  to  be  proved  ?  Before
God  we  bow  down  in  praise  and  adoration ;  before  the
world  we  are  conscious  of  the  glory  grace  has  given  u&
We  do  honour  to  the  world  and  shame  to  this  our  place
by  seeking  its  favours.  Alas!  how  often  and  readily  the
Christian  forgets  his  proper  dignity.  Let  us  then  bear
in  mind  that  we  are  a  royal  priesthood  "  to  show  forth,"
as  it  is  said  here,  "  the  virtues  of  him  who  hath  called
us  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light."  But
when  it  is  a  question  of  drawing  near,  let  us  not  foi^t
that  we  are  a  holy  priesthood.  We  can  all  understand
this :  holiness,  when  one  has  to  do  with  God ;  royalty,
before  the  world  when  the  temptation  is  to  forget  our
heavenly  honour.

"  Which  in  time  past  were  not  a  people,  but  are  now
the  people  of  God :  which  had  not  obtained  mercy,
but  now  have  obtained  mercy."  Here  again  we  have  a
scripture  of  the  Old  Testament  applied;  and  this  has
often  been,  and  still  is  to  this  day,  exceedingly  mis-


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  255

understood ;  as  if  the  persons  here  spoken  of  must  be
Gentiles  because  they  are  called  the  strangers  of  the
dispersion.  It  means  Jews,  and  none  but  Jews,  who
believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  What  he  refers  to  is  the
loss  of  their  title  to  be  the  people  of  God,  which  Israel
sustained  at  the  time  of  the  Babylonish  captivity.  They
then  ceased  to  be  manifestly  God's  people.  Accord-
ingly their  land  became  the  possession  of  the  Gentiles  ;
and  so  it  has  gone  on  to  this  day.  As  we  know,  from
that  day  to  this  there  has  never  been  a  real  recovery,
but  only  the  return  of  a  remnant  for  special  purposes
for  a  season.  The  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  still  in
course  of  accomplishment.  They  are  not  yet  finished ;
and  they  must  be  punctually  fulfilled.  Hence  it  is
evident  that,  as  long  as  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  pro-
ceed, the  Jews  cannot  r^ain  their  ancient  title,  nor
become  the  real  owners  of  Emmanuel's  land.  ludeed,
it  is  too  plain  a  fact  for  any  one  to  dispute.  All  this
time  they  are  not  a  people ;  they  are  dependent  on  the
will  of  their  Gentile  masters.  But  even  now  grace
gives  the  believer  (here  believing  Jews)  to  enter  that
place ;  we  are  now  God's  people.  We  do  not  wait  for
times  and  seasons.    Israel  must  wait ;  but  we  do  not.

This  is  just  the  diCTerence  between  the  Christian  and
the  Jew.  The  Christian  does  not  belong  to  the  world,
and  consequently  is  not  bound  by  accidents  of  time.
He  has  everlasting  life  now,  and  is  a  heavenly  person
even  while  upon  the  earth.  This  is  Christianity.  Thus
he  says  to  the  Jews  addressed  that  they  were  not  a
people  (that  is,  in  the  days  of  their  unbelief),  but  are
now.  So  far  was  their  believing  in  Christ  from  taking
them  out  of  the  people,  it  is  then  alone  that  they  became


256  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

a  people.  They  "  were  not  a  people,  but  now  are  the
people  of  God;"  they  "had  not  obtained  mercy,  but
now  have  obtained  mercy."  It  is  a  quotation  from
Hosea  ii.

And  this  is  exceedingly  interesting,  because  if  the
prophet  be  compared,  it  will  be  seen  to  illustrate  what
has  been  remarked  before — the  difference  between  the
present  accomplishment  made  good  in  our  hearts  by
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  future  fulfilment  of  the  pro-
phecies.    If  persons  take  the  actual  application    as
the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies,  it  in  fact  not  only
nullifies  the  future  of  scripture,  but  destroys  the  beauty
and  point  of  the  present;  for  what  the  apostle  intimates
is,  that  they  had  obtained  mercy  now,  though  none
were  yet  sown  in  the  earth.     These  Christian  Jews
were  not  sown  in  the  earth.     The  earth  will  be  sown,
with  the  seed  of  God  when  the  Jewish  nation,  as  such,
obtains  mercy.     They  will  be  the  greatest  people  on
the  face  of  the  earth,  and  all  the  Gentiles  shall  own  it.
They   will  have   everything  at  their   command,   and
worthily  use  all  for  God.     Not  only  are  they  to  be  set
publicly  at  the  head  of  the  nations,  but  God  himself
will  link  His  own  glory  from  above  with  them  as  His
earthly  people  here  below,   and  nothing   but  peace,
righteousness,  and  plenty  will  be  found  all  over  the
earth  in  that  day  of  glory.     Such  will  be  "  that  day,"
and  of  that  day  Hosea  prophesies.  You  can  easily  jxidgfi
whether  that  day  is  come  now.     It  is  only  a  theologian
who  finds  a  difficulty.     His  traditions  wrap  him  up  in
fog.

I  do  not  think  it  requires  much  argument  to  show
whether    under  the  gospel  the  Jews   or   the   world


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  257

are  in  such  a  condition  as  the  prophet  describes,  or
whether  there  is  anything  in  progress  that  is  intended
or  calculated  to  bring  about  such  a  result.  But  what
will  not  men  believe,  provided  it  be  not  in  the  Bible  ?
I  admit  that  what  is  in  the  Bible  requires  faith ;  and
this  is  as  it  should  be.  It  is,  however,  too  evident  that
there  is  nothing  like  incredulity  for  swallowing  any-
thing that  panders  to  the  first  man,  and  leaving  out
the  glory  of  the  Second.  In  the  word  of  God,  then,  we
find  that  the  accomplishment  of  the  prophecy  supposes
an  earthly  place,  with  visible  power  and  glory  given  to
the  Jewish  people.  But  the  wonderful  place  given  to
the  Christian  is  that,  though  we  do  become  the  people
of  God  now,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  and  although  the
believing  Jew  does  obtain  mercy  now,  he  is  not  sown
on  the  earth,  but  called  out  for  heaven,  and,  in  con-
sequence, becomes  a  pilgrim  and  stranger  here  below
till  Jesus  appears.  This  will  not  be  the  case  when  the
Jews  shall  be  brought  back  to  the  land.  In  a  certain
sense  they  are  strangers  now ;  but  it  is  an  awful  sense,
because  it  is  the  fruit  of  judgment.  They  are  scattered
over  the  earth,  and  can  find  no  rest  for  their  souls,  any
more  than  their  feet.  This  is  notorious  to  every  one
•^ven  to  themselves.  Least  of  all  can  the  Jews  be
said  to  be  sown  in  the  land  of  Palestine.  I  do  not  mean
that  they  may  not  acquire  previously  a  delusive  glory ;
nor  that  the  antichrist  by  fraud  will  not  palm  himself
ofiF  as  the  Messiah,  and  settle  some  of  them  in  the  land,
according  to  Dan.  xi.  Nor  do  I  believe  that  this  day
is  far  off.     The  hour  of  temptation  is  near.

But  while  fully  looking  for  this,  it  is  sweet  to  see  the
place  of  the  believing  Jew  now  as  divine  wisdom  here

s


258  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

applies  Hosea,  mutatis  mutandis.  Although  he  is  of  the
people  of  Grod,  instead  of  getting  an  earthly  character
by  Christianity,  on  the  contrary  he  becomes  a  pilgrim
and  stranger.  "  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you  as  stran-
gers and  pilgrims,  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  which  war
against  the  soul.''  It  is  as  if  God  had  purposely  pat
verse  11  to  negative  the  conclusions  which  men  have
drawn  from  a  misunderstanding  of  verse  10.

Then  he  begins  his  exhortations,  and  first  of  all  with
the  personal  snares  of  every  day,  with  what  the  Chris-
tian had  to  contend  with  in  himself  Next  he  proceeds
to  bring  in  what  had  to  do  with  others.  There  he  says,
**  Submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of  man  for  the
Lord's  sake:  whether  to  the  king,  as  supreme;  or  to
governors,  as  to  them  that  are  sent  by  him  for  the
punishment  of  evildoers,  and  praise  to  them  that  do
well"

I  suppose  there  was  a  danger  of  these  Christian  Jews
being  somewhat  turbulent.  Certainly  the  Jews  of  old
were  rarely  good  subjects.  They  were  apt  to  rise  against
oppression  and  to  fail  in  obedience  to  a  superior,  at  least
among  the  heathen.  They  were  ever  a  rebellious  people,
as  we  know;  and  the  Christian  Jews  were  in  danger  of
using  their  Christianity  in  order  to  justify  insubjection.
We  can  easily  comprehend  it.  They  could  see  how  gross,
dark,  and  dissolute  these  Pagan  governors  were ;  and  in
such  circumstances  one  needs  the  distinct  sense  of  God's
will  to  abide  in  the  duty  of  obedience.  "  How  can  we
obey  men  that  worship  stocks  and  stones,  whose  very
religion  makes  them  immoral  and  degraded  ?"  However
this  may  have  been,  it  is  of  all  importance  for  the


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  259

Christian  that  he  should  be  established  in  the  place  of
patient  sabmission;  as  we  see  Paul  elsewhere  taking
especial  pains  to  insist  that  the  Christians  in  Borne
should  obey,  even  where  they  had  to  do  with  one  of  the
most  abandoned  men  that  had  ever  governed  the  empire,
persecuting  themselves  to  death  a  short  time  after.
Nevertheless  the  apostle  there  claims  the  most  un-
qualified subjection  to  the  powers  that  be.  So  here  we
find  that  the  Christian  Jews,  who  might  have  exonerated
themselves  from  the  burden  laid  on  them  by  their
heathen  masters,  are  earnestly  exhorted  by  the  apostle
Peter  to  do  their  bidding  for  the  Lord's  sake.  I  do  not
say  that  there  are  no  limits.  Obedience  is  always  right,
but  not  to  man  when  he  would  force  the  dishonour  of
God.  Nevertheless  obedience  abides  the  principle  of  the
Christian.  But  the  lower  obedience  is  absorbed  by  the
higher  one  when  they  come  into  collision ;  and  this  is
the  only  seeming  exception.

After  this  Peter  not  only  branches  out  into  the  out-
ward life,  but  takes  particular  note  of  the  family  and
its  relationships.  Some  of  those  addressed  were  domes-
tics, whether  or  not  they  were  slaves.  The  apostle  Paul
pressed  on  the  Christian  slave  the  beauty  and  respon-
sibility of  obedience ;  but  Peter  insists  on  it  whether  a
man  be  a  slave  or  not.  This  is  founded  on  the  very
principle  of  Christianity  itself;  that  is,  doing  good,
suffering  for  it,  and  taking  it  patiently.  I  admit  it
requires  faith ;  but  then  the  Lord  cannot  but  look  for
faith  in  Christian  people.  Nay,  we  have  Christ  Himself
brought  in  to  enforce  and  illustrate  it.  It  is  not  merely
the  Christian  who  is  called  to  this,  but  this  is  what
Christ  was  called  to.    "  Christ  also  suffered  for  us,  leav-

8   2


260  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

ing  us  an  example,  that  ye  should  follow  his  steps :  who
did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth  :  who,
when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again."  To  be  reviled
was  a  pain  to  which  as  domestics  they  would  be  par-
ticularly exposed,  as  well  as  to  suffer  in  all  sorts  of
ways.  What  had  Christ  not  gone  through  in  the  same
path  ?

"  When  he  suffered,  he  threatened  not ;  but  committed
himself  to  him  that  judgeth  righteously ;  who  his  own
self  bare  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree."  He
suffered  in  other  ways ;  in  this  He  stands  alone  for  us ;
"that  we,  being  dead  to  sins,  should  live  unto  righteous-
ness :  by  whose  stripes  ye  were  healed.  For  ye  were  as
sheep  going  astray;  but  are  now  returned  unto  the
Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  your  souls."  Since  He  came
and  showed  the  perfect  pattern,  it  was  less  than  ever
the  time  to  sanction  disobedience;  it  was  more  than
ever  unbecoming  to  shirk  the  path  of  suffering.

The  exhortation  is  not  limited  to  slaves.  Here  we  find
the  various  relations  of  life  practically  met.  At  any  rate
the  most  important  part  is  noticed ;  and  in  particular
the  great  social  bond,  wives  and  husbands  (chap.  iii).
Then  comes  the  general  exhortation :  "Finally,  be  ye  all
of  one  mind,  having  compassion  one  of  another,  love  as
brethren,  pitiful,  lowly-minded :  not  rendering  evil  for
evil,  or  railing  for  railing:  but  contrariwise  blessing;
knowing  that  ye  are  thereunto  called,  that  ye  should
inherit  a  blessing."  What  a  place  for  the  Christian ! —
called  to  blessing,  and  to  be  a  blessing.  And  this  is
fortified,  singular  to  say,  (but  confirming  what  has  been
already  remarked)  by  the  Psalms.  He  had  quoted  the
law  in  chap,  i,  the  prophets  in  chap,  ii.,  and  now  the


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER,  261

psalms  in  chap.  iii.  Thus  all  the  living  oracles  of  God
are  turned  into  use  for  the  Christian,  only  you  must
take  care  that  you  do  not  abuse  them  or  any  part  of
them.

"For  he  that  will  love  life,  and  see  good  days,  let
him  refrain  his  tongue  from  evil,  and  his  lips  that
they  speak  no  guile  :  let  hira  eschew  evil,  and  do  good ;
let  him  seek  peace,  and  ensue  it.  For  the  eyes  of  the
Lord  are  over  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  are  open  unto
their  prayers :  but  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  against  them
that  do  evil."  And  then  he  asks,  "And  who  is  he  that
will  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ?
But  and  if  ye  sufiFer  for  righteousness*  sake,  happy  are
ye :  and  be  not  afraid  of  their  terror,  neither  be  troubled ;
but  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts."

This  leads  to  another  important  point ;  that  if  we  do
suffer,  it  ought  never  to  be  for  sin,  and  for  the  affecting
reason  that  Christ  has  once  for  all  suffered  for  sins.  Let
this  be  enough.  Christ  has  suffered  for  sins ;  He  has  had
there,  if  we  may  so  say,  a  monopoly ;  and  there  let  it
end :  why  should  we  ?  He  alone  was  competent  to
suffer  for  sin.  We  ought  never  to  suffer  but  for  His
name,  unless  it  be  for  righteousness,  as  is  said  here, —
"For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for
the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God,  being  put  to
death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  in  the  Spirit :  by
which  also  he  went  and  preached  unto  the  spirits  in
prison."

Carefully  observe  that  Peter  does  not  say  that  Christ
went  to  prison  and  preached  to  the  spirits  there.  No
such  words  are  used,  nor  is  this  what  he  means.  The
spirits  are  characterised  as  in  prison.     They  are  waiting


262  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

there  for  the  day  of  judgment.  God  may  have  judged
them  in  this  world,  but  this  is  not  alL  He  is  going  to
judge  them  in  the  next  world.  There  may  have  been  a
judgment,  but  this  is  not  the  judgment  So  he  says
these  very  spirits  which  are  spoken  of  were  "  once  dis-
obedient, when  the  longsuflFering  of  God  waited  in  the
days  of  Noah,  while  the  ark  was  preparing,  wherein
few,  that  is  eight  souls,  were  saved  through  water."

It  is  not  a  description  of  all  that  died  in  unbelief,
but  of  a  generation  favoured  with  a  special  testimony
and  smitten  by  a  particular  stroke  of  judgment.  The
preaclung  was  in  the  days  of  Noah.  It  was  just  before
that  judgment  fell  on  them,  and  this  because  they
despised  the  testimony  of  Christ  through  Noah.  Just
as  the  Spirit  of  Christ  prophesied  in  the  prophets,  so
the  Spirit  of  Christ  preached  by  Noah.  There  is  no
difficulty  that  I  see  about  it.  There  is  nothing  at  all  in
the  verse  that  warrants  a  web  of  doctrine  strange  to
the  rest  of  the  Bible.  It  is  a  mistake  to  construe  it  of
one  that  knows  not  what  took  place  in  the  lower  parts
of  the  earth.  Nothing  is  said  of  preaching  in  prison,
but  to  the  imprisoned  spirits — not  when  they  were
there.  He  is  speaking  about  the  people  that  heard
Noah,  and  despised  the  word  of  the  Lord  then.  It  was
not  Noah's  own  spirit  that  preached ;  it  was  the  Spirit
of  Christ.

It  may  be  well  to  point  out  that  the  Spirit  is  used
particularly  in  connection  with  Noah,  as  we  find  in
Genesis  vL:  **My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with
man,  for  that  he  also  is  flesh."  There  was  a  term  of
patience  assigned:  ''Yet  his  days  shall  be  a  hundred
and  twenty  years."   That  is,  the  Spirit  went  on  striving


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  263

in  testimony  to  men  all  that  time.  Then  the  flood
came  and  took  them  all  away ;  but  their  spirits  are  now
kept  in  prison  waiting  for  that  judgment  which  has  no
end.  And  why  does  Peter  notice  them  particularly?
For  this  reason, — that  very  few  were  saved  then,  whilst
a  great  many  perished.  On  reflection  it  will  be  evident
that  there  is  no  instance  so  suitable  as  this  for  the
aigument  in  hand — so  few  saved  and  so  many  perishing.
The  unbelieving  might  taunt  the  Christians  with  their
scanty  numbers,  while  the  great  mass  still  remained
Jews,  and  with  the  absurdity  of  such  a  conclusion  to  the
coming  of  Messiah.  There  is  no  force  in  that  argument,
the  Christian  can  reply;  for,  when  the  flood  came,
only  a  few  were  saved  after  all,  ad  is  shown  by  the  first
book  of  Moses,  their  own  indisputably  inspired  history.
It  is  beyond  cavil  that  the  many  perished  then,  and  still
fewer  were  saved  than  the  Christian  Jews  at  that  time.
Thus  the  passage  is  sufficiently  plain.  There  is  not  the
slightest  excuse  for  misinterpreting  the  language,  or  for
allowing  anything  unknown  to  the  rest  of  scriptura
It  is  a  solemn  warning  to  unbelief  founded  on  plainly
revealed  facts  before  all  eyes  in  this  world,  and  not
something  to  be  understood  as  relating  to  another
world.

"The  like  figure  whereunto  even  baptism  doth  also
now  save  us  (not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the
flesh,  but  the  request  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God)
by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.*'  This,  again,  is
somewhat  peculiarly  put  in  our  version.  It  is  not
exactly  "  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience."  The  real
meaning  may  make  the  difficulty  appear  to  be  greater
for  a  moment  (as,  I  suppose,  the  truth  often,  if  not


264  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

always,  does) ;  but  when  received  and  understood,  what
has  such  strength  of  appeal  to  the  conscience  ?  The
word  is  a  somewhat  difficult  one;  but  I  believe  the
force  is  that  it  is  what  conscience  wants  and  asks  for
from  God.  Now,  when  a  conscience  is  touched  by  the
Holy  Spirit,  what  is  it  that  satisfies  such  a  conscience  ?
Clearly  nothing  less  than  acceptance  in  righteousness
before  God;  and  this  is  precisely  the  position  that
baptism  does  set  forth.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  not  simply
the  blood  of  Christ,  which  indeed  is  never  the  meaning
of  baptism ;  still  less  is  it  the  life  of  Christ :  baptism
means  nothing  of  the  sort.  It  really  is  founded  on  the
death  of  Christ ;  and  therein  further  our  due  place  is
shown  us  by  His  resurrection.  Thus  he  says,  "The
like  figure  whereunto  even  baptism  doth  also  now  save
us.*'  Never  do  we  see  salvation  in  its  real  force  so
affirmed  apart  from  resurrection.  You  may  find  that
which  meets  guilt  in  death,  but  never  is  salvation  short
of  or  separable  from  the  power  of  resurrection.  Hence,
when  he  says  it  saves  us,  he  necessarily  brings  in  resur-
rection. ''  Baptism  doth  also  now  save  us  (not  the  put-
ting away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh  .  .  .")  He  did  not
mean  the  mero  outward  act  of  baptism.  This  could  save
nobody;  but  what  baptism  represents  does  save.  It
declares  that  the  Christian  man  has  a  new  place  and
standing — not  in  the  first  Adam  at  all,  but  in  the
Second  in  the  presence  of  God — man  without  sin,  and
accepted  according  to  the  acceptance  of  Christ  before
God.  This  it  is  that  baptism  sets  forth ;  and  what  of
course  as  a  sign  it  brings  one  into.  **  Baptism  doth  also
now  save  us  (not  the  putting  away  of  the  filth  of  the
flesh,  but  the  request  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God)


If;


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  265

by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  gone  into
heaven,  and  is  on  the  right  hand  of  God ;  angels  and
authorities  and  powers  being  made  subject  unto  him."

"Forasmuch  then  as  Christ  hath  suflFered  for  us  in
the  flesh,  arm  yourselves  likewise  with  the  same  mind/*
In  this  chapter  (iv.)  we  come  to  the  divine  government
in  dealing  with  nature  opposing  itself  to  the  will  of  God.
"For  he  that  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from
sin."  If  you  yield  to  nature,  you  gratify  it ;  but  if  you
suffer  in  refusing  its  wishes,  then  "he  that  hath  suffered
in  the  flesh  hath  ceased  from  sin."  It  is  practical ;  and
holiness  costs  suffering  in  this  world.  Suffering  is  the
way  in  which  power  in  practice  is  found  against  the
flesh ;  so  that  "  he  no  longer  should  live  the  rest  of  his
time  in  the  flesh  to  the  lusts  of  men,  but  to  the  will  of
God."  The  time  past  might  well  suffice  for  the  wretched
gratification  of  sel£  Do  men  wonder  at  one's  abstain-
ing? They  are  going  to  be  judged.  "For  for  this
cause  was  the  gospel  preached  to  the  dead  also,  that
they  might  be  judged  according  to  men  in  the  flesh,  but
live  according  to  God  in  the  spirit."  Thus  he  shows
that  even  if  you  look  at  those  that  are  dead,  there  was
no  difference.  They  too,  those  who  had  been  before
them,  had  been  put  to  the  proof  in  this  way.  He  is
keeping  up  the  link  with  saints  of  old  by  a  general
principla  Whatever  the  form,  God  never  gives  up  His
righteous  government,  though  there  is  His  grace  also.
Hence,  if  any  received  the  gospel,  they  were  delivered
from  judgment,  and  lived  according  to  God  in  the  Spirit.
If  they  despised  it,  they  none  the  less  suffered  the  con-
sequences.


266  INTEODUCTORY  LECTURES.

''But  the  end  of  all  things  is  at  hand:  be  ye
therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer.  And  above
all  things  have  fervent  charity  among  yourselves :  for
charity  shall  cover  the  multitude  of  sins."  After  this
episode  which  has  to  do  with  men  here,  not  in  the
unseen  world,  he  returns  to  the  relative  duties  of  Chris-
tians, and  exhorts  them  to  watchfulness  with  sobriety,
to  fervent  love,  and  also  to  ''use  hospitality  one  to
another  without  grudging."  And  then  he  takes  up  what
is  distinctly  spiritual  power,  which  should  be  used
not  in  charity  only  but  with  conscience  before  ftod,  and
for  His  glory  through  our  Lord  Jesus.  We  saw  in  a
similarly  characteristic  way  in  the  epistle  of  James  the
connection  of  his  moral  aim  with  teaching.  But  they
both  suppose  an  open  door  for  ministry  among  Chris-
tians in  the  Christian  assembly.  Why  was  there  the
mighty  action  of  the  Spirit  of  God  producing  such
various  gifts  for  profit  if  they  did  not  create  the  respon-
sibility to  exercise  them  ?

No  Christian  should  think  or  talk  about  a  right
of  ministry;  for  although  liberty  of  ministry  may  be
legitimate  enough  in  itself,  still  I  think  it  is  a  phrase
apt  to  be  misunderstood.  It  might  easily  be  interpreted
as  if  it  meant  a  right  for  any  one  to  speak.  This  I  deny
altogether.  God  has  a  right  to  use  whom  He  pleases,
according  to  His  own  sovereign  will  and  wisdom ;  but
the  truth  is,  that  if  you  have  received  a  gift,  you  are  not
only  at  liberty  but  rather  Jxnind  to  use  it  in  Christ's  nama
It  is  not  a  question  of  merely  having  license.  Such  a
principle  may  be  very  well  for  man  ;  but  responsibility
is  the  word  for  men  of  God,  "as  each  man  hath  re-
ceived the  gift."    It  is  not  merely  certain  men,  one  or


L50


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  267

two,  but  "  as  each  man,"  whatever  the  number,  whether
few  or  many.

"As  each  man  hath  received  the  p^ft,  even  so
minister  the  same  one  to  another,  as  good  stewards
of  the  manifold  grace  of  God.  If  any  man  speak,
[let  him  speak]  as  [the]  oracles  of  God."  According  to
this  none  ought  ever  to  speak  unless  he  has  a  thorough
conviction  that  he  is  giving  out  God's  mind  and  mes-
sage, as  suited  for  that  time  and  those  souls.  Were
this  felt  adequately,  would  it  not  hinder  a  great  many
from  speaking?  Nor  is  there  any  reason  to  fear  that
silence  in  such  a  case  would  inflict  a  real  loss  on  the
church  of  God.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  of  such  prime
importance  that  much  need  be  said.  The  great  matter
is,  that  what  is  spoken  should  be  from  God.  Persons
ought  not  to  speak  unless  they  have  a  certainty  that
what  they  wish  to  say  is  not  only  true  (this  is  not  what
is  said)  but  the  actual  will  of  God  for  the  occasion.
The  speaker  should  be  God*s  mouthpiece  for  making
His  mind  known  there  and  then.  This  is  to  speak  "as
oracles  of  God."  It  is  not  merely  speaking  according
to  His  oracles,  which  is  the  usual  way  in  which  men
interpret  the  passage,  and  thence  derive  their  license
for  speaking  as  they  judge  fitting  without  thinking  of
God's  will.  They  think  they  have  an  understanding  of
scripture,  and  that  they  may  therefore  speak  to  profit ;
but  it  is  a  totally  different  thing  if  one  desire  only  to
speak  as  God's  mouthpiece,  though  it  is  granted  that
one  may  here  as  elsewhere  mistake  and  faiL

The  principle,  however,  is  sound ;  and  may  we  heed
it  in  conscience,  looking  to  the  Lord's  grace  in  our
weakness.     ''If  any  man  speak,  [let  it  be]  as  oracles


268  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

of  God;  if  any  man  minister,  [let  it  be]  as  of  the
ability  which  God  givetL"  I^t  it  be  observed  here
that  ministry  is  distinguished  from  speaking.  What
a  vast  change  must  have  passed  over  Christendom,
seeing  that  now  a  man  is  chiefly  thought  a  minister
because  he  speaks !  whereas  real  service  of  the  saints
is  as  precious  in  its  place  as  any  speaking  can  be.  "If
any  man  speak,  let  him  speak  as  the  oracles  of  God ;
if  any  man  minister,  let  him  do  it  as  of  the  ability
which  God  giveth."  Ministry,  then,  is  clearly  in  itself
a  distinct  thing  from  speaking;  it  is  another  kind  of
service  to  which  he  is  called  of  God.  It  is  granted
that,  even  in  connection  with  spiritual  gift  in  the  way
of  speaking,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  the  natural  ability
of  the  person  taken  into  account;  but  this  is  not  the
gift,  though  it  be  the  suited  vehicle  for  it.  We  must
always  distinguish  the  ability  of  the  man  from  the
spiritual  gift  which  the  Lord  gives ;  and,  besides  both,
there  is  also  the  right  use  of  the  gift.  One  must  ex-
ercise and  give  oneself  up  to  the  cultivation  of  that
gift  which  God  has  given.  There  is  nothing  contrary
to  sound  truth  or  principle  in  that,  but  indeed  a  very
great  defect  in  those  who  do  not  believe  it ;  in  fact,  it
is  flying  in  the  face  of  scripture.  And  scripture  is
clear  and  peremptory  as  to  all  these  things.  "  He,"  it
is  said  of  Christ,  "  gave  them  gifts,  to  each  man  accord-
ing to  his  several  ability."  There  we  have  the  gift,  and
this  given  according  to  the  man's  ability  before  he  was
converted.  That  is  the  outward  framework  of  the  gift,
which  latter  is  suited  no  doubt  to  that  ability ;  but  the
gift  itself  is  the  power  of  the  Spirit  according  to  the
grace  of  Christ     No  ability  constitutes  a  gift ;  but  the


ISI


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  269

spiritual  gift  does  not  supersede  natural  ability,  which
becomes  the  channel  of  the  gift,  as  the  gift  is  given  and
works  in  accordance  with  that  ability.  But  thei*e  is
need  also  of  present  strength  from  God  to  those  who
look  to  Him,  Thus  He  is  in  all  things  glorified  through
Jesus  Christ,  "to  whom  be  praise  and  dominion  for
ever  and  ever."

Next  we  have  the  trial  that  the  saints  were  passing
through  alluded  to,  and  the  call  to  suffer  not  for  right-
eousness merely  but  for  Christ's  sake.  Finally  a  warn-
ing is  given  as  to  the  importance  of  suffering  according
to  God's  will,  committing  meanwhile  their  souls  in  well-
doing to  Him  as  a  faithful  Creator.  He  is  righteous;
He  is  jealous  of  His  house ;  but  if  this  be  serious  for
His  own,  where  shall  the  sinner  appear  ?

Again  we  have  an  exhortation  to  the  elders  (chap.  v).
Here  it  is  a  pain  to  be  obliged  once  more  to  make  a
depreciatory  remark  on  our  common  English  version.  It
is  indeed  a  forcible  and,  in  general,  a  faithful  version,
but  it  not  seldom  fails  in  accuracy.  The  elders  are  told
to  feed  or  shepherd  the  flock  of  God  which  was  among
them,  exercising  the  oversight,  not  by  necessity,  but
willingly;  not  for  base  gain,  but  readily,  &c.  They  have
to  bear  in  mind  first  that  the  flock  is  God's.  If  a  man
does  not  carry  the  sense  in  his  soul  that  it  is  God's  flock,
I  do  not  think  he  is  fit  to  be  an  elder  or  in  any  other
oflSce  of  spiritual  trust ;  he  is  far  from  the  right  ground
for  being  a  blessing  to  what,  after  all,  is  God's  flock.
In  short,  we  find  here  too  a  guard  which  shows  the
meaning  more  clearly.  "  Feed  the  flock  of  God  which
is  among  you,  taking  the  oversight  thereof,  not  by  con-


270  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

straint,  but  willingly;  not  for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a
ready  mind ;  neither  as  being  lords  over  God!8  heritage."

It  will  be  observed  that  "God's"  is  inserted  in  italica
Now  there  need  be  no  hesitation  in  declaring  that  the
phrase  does  not  mean  God's  heritage  at  all,  but  another
idea  wholly  different.  The  true  drift  is  this — "Nor
as  lording  it  over  your  possessions."  The  elders  are
not  to  treat  the  flock  as  if  it  belonged  to  them.  This
is  exactly  what  modem  presbyters  think  they  may
and  ought  to  do  every  day  of  their  lives.  It  is  into
this  very  snare  that  unbelief  has  brought  men  in
Christendom.  It  is  the  constant  and  notorious
source  of  the  difficulties  that  one  has  continually
to  contend  with,  because  feelings  are  roused  by  this —
all  sorts  of  jealousies  and  wounded  feelings  are  created
by  a  position  so  false.  In  shoii,  one  may  find  here  and
there  a  truly  excellent  man,  and,  we  will  suppose,  a
number  of  godly  people.  But  then  they  are  "  his  con-
gregation;" they  thifUc  so,  and  the  godly  man  really
believes  it  He  thinks  they  are  his  congregation,  and
they  think  so  too.  The  consequence  is  that  when  minds
get  disturbed,  it  may  be,  about  their  position,  then
all  sorts  of  difficulties  come  in.  He  feels  exceedingly
wounded  because,  as  he  will  tell  you  very  often,  "  Why,
it  is  one  of  the  best  of  my  people.  I  have  lost  the
cream  of  my  congregation."  Accordingly  he  is  ex-
ceedingly annoyed  because  one  of  the  most  spiritual  of
his  congregation  goes  away,  though  it  may  be  to  follow
God's  word  more  faithfully;  and  no  doubt  there  is  a
great  deal  of  pain  and  feeling  on  the  part  of  the  mem-
ber of  the  congregation  who  is  leaving  his  minister.

Now  all  this  is  here  judged  and  set  aside  as  quite


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETEB.  271

wrong.  The  elders  are  exhorted  and  warned.  There
are  those  who  guide,  and  it  is  a  most  proper  thing.  At
the  time  of  this  epistle,  it  was  in  due  order.  Now,  I
need  not  tell  you,  things  are  in  a  certain  measure  of
confoffion.  You  may  have  the  real  substance  of  the
truth,  but  you  cannot  have  it  in  all  official  propriety  at
the  present  time.  However,  apart  from  that,  on  which
I  do  not  mean  to  enter  more  to-night,  one  thing  is
remarkable,  that  even  when  all  was  in  apostolic  order,
and  where  pastors  and  teachers  and  prophets  and  so
on  were,  and  besides,  where  the  elders  had  been  fitly
appointed  by  the  apostles  themselves  or  by  apostolic
men,  even  there  and  at  that  very  time  they  were  ex-
horted against  the  notion  of  considering,  "  This  is  my
congr^ation,  and  that  is  your  leader."  Nothing  of  the
sort  is  ever  said  in  God's  word  but  what  excludes  it.

What  they  were  here  directed  to  was  to  "feed  the
flock  of  God."  I  repeat,  it  is  God's  flock,  not  yours ;
and  you  are  not  to  lord  over  it  as  if  it  were  your
own  belongings.  If  it  were  your  heritage,  you  would
have  certain  rights ;  but  the  truth  is  that  he  who  stands
in  the  position  of  an  elder  has  no  small  responsibility.
Assuredly  he  is  to  shepherd  the  flock,  and  this  as
God's  flock,  not  his  own.  Where  this  is  duly  weighed,
it  is  wonderful  what  a  change  is  produced  in  the  mind,
tone,  and  temper — a  change  both  in  those  who  tend
the  flock,  and  in  those  who  are  cared  for ;  because  then
God  is  looked  to,  and  there  is  no  petty  feeling  of  in-
fringing the  rights  of  man  in  one  form  or  another.  It
is  not  then  a  question  of  wounding;  for  why  should
it  hurt  you,  if  I  see  a  particular  truth  and  must  act
according  to  it  ?    Why  should  this  be  a  cause  for  vexa-


272  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

tiou  ?  The  truth  is  that  the  assumption  of  "  my  flock,"
or  "  yours,"  is  the  root  of  endless  mischiet  It  is  God's
flock ;  and  if  a  person  is  charged  of  the  Lord  tcfihep-
herd  His  flock,  how  blessed  the  trust !

The  rest  of  the  chapter  consists  of  exhortations  to
the  younger  ones,  and  finally  to  all,  with  a  prayer  that
"the  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  called  us  unto  his
eternal  glory  by  Christ  Jesus,  when  ye  have  suffered  a
while,  himself  shall  make  you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,
settle  you.  To  him  be  the  glory  and  the  might  for
the  ages  of  the  ages.  Amen.  By  Silvanus,  the  faithful
brother,  as  I  suppose,  I  have  written  to  you  briefly,
exhorting  and  testifying  that  this  is  the  true  grace  of
G^d  wherein  ye  stand.  She  that  is  at  Babylon,  elected
together  with  you,  saluteth  you ;  and  Marcus  my  son.
Greet  ye  one  another  with  a  kiss  of  love.  Peace  be
with  you  all  in  Christ  Jesus."

In  the  second  Epistle  of  Peter  (and  here  I  must  be
brief,  because  of  the  hour ;  and  I  may  be  brief  because
Jude  will  afibrd  us  a  further  consideration  of  it)  we
have  the  same  substantial  truth  of  God's  righteous
government  maintained.  But  the  apostle  here  supple-
ments his  first  letter  by  bringing  in  its  efi*ect  on  the
world  in  that  coming  day,  and  especially  in  its  judgment
of  Christendom  or  corrupted  Christianity.  Written  of
course  for  the  guidance  of  the  saints,  it  may  well  serve
as  a  warning  to  sinners,  whether  in  the  profane  world
or  as  to  those  that  abuse  righteousness  and  truth.

There  is  an  expression  in  chapter  L  3  to  which  I
particularly  call  your  attention.  "According  as  his
divine  power  hath  given  unto  us  all  things  that  pertain


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  273

unto  life  and  godliness,  through  the  knowledge  of  him
that  hath  called  U8  by  gloiy  and  by  virtue."  It  is  really
not  to  glory  and  virtue,  but  by  His  own  glory  and  by
virtue.  This  seems  to  me  an  important  statement  of
the  Holy  Ghost's  to  understand.  What  serves  to  make  it
plain  is  this : — ^Adam  was  not  •*  called  "  when  in  Para-
dise. When  innocent,  he  was  not  called  by  God*s  own
glory  and  by  virtue.  What  Adam  was  bound  to  do  was
just  to  stay  where  he  was.  That  is,  he  was  responsible
to  do  the  will  of  God,  co*,  rather,  not  to  do  what  God
prohibited  in  his  case.  There  was  a  simple  test  of
obedienca  It  was  not  a  thing  that  Adam  really  needed
in  the  smallest  degree.  He  had  everything  that  he
wanted  and  much  more,  for  God  showed  Himself  to  be
one  that  delights  in  abundantly  blessing  when  He  put
man  in  Paradise.  The  business  of  man,  then,  was  to
keep  his  first  estate ;  he  should  have  simply  abode  in
his  position.  When  he  listened  to  the  devil,  this  was
a  call  not  by  Grod's  own  glory  and  virtue,  but  to  do  the
devil's  will.  It  was  a  seeking  of  his  own  independence
by  disobejdng  God's  express  word.  Our  calling  is  by
God's  own  glory.

The  whole  principle  of  Christianity  is  just  this.
It  takes  the  believer  out  of  the  place  in  which  he
naturally  is,  and  alas!  now  in  sin;  and  therefore  it
is  spoken  of  as  a  calling.  The  Christian  "calling"
supposes  that  the  gospel,  where  received,  deals  with  the
soul  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  Grod ;  and  that  he
who  receives  it  is  called  out  of  the  condition  in  which
man  is  now  plunged  by  sin,  not  put  back  again  into  the
position  of  Adam,  but  taken  into  another  position
altogether.    It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  man  on  earth ;

T


274  INTBODUCTOBT  LECTUSES.

he  is  called  by  God's  own  glory  and  by  virtue.  It  is  by
God's  own  glory,  because  if  God  saves,  He  calls  to  stand
in  nothing  less  than  that  glory.  The  declared  efiTect  of
sin  is,  as  it  is  said  in  Somans  iii,  that  all  "  come  short
of  the  glory  of  God."  By  this  they  are  now  measured.
Are  they  fit  to  stand  in  presence  of  the  glory  of  God  ?
The  glory  of  God  is  the  standard  of  judgment  now  for
a  sinner;  it  is  no  question  of  regaining  the  lost  paradise
or  of  keeping  the  law,  even  if  it  were  possibla  The
blessedness  of  the  gospel  is  that  it  calls  a  man  not  to
put  him  in  the  place  of  the  unfallen  man  or  of  a  Jew
on  the  earth,  but  by  God's  own  glory;  and  along  with
this  *'  by  virtue."  There  is  a  holy  restraint  put  on  the
allowance  of  the  flesh  in  any  respect  whatever.  It
brings  in  not  ''virtue"  as  the  first  great  point,  but  God's
own  glory,  and  then  virtue  along  with  this  (that  is,  the
moral  courage  which  refuses  the  gratification  of  the  old
nature).

"Whereby  a-e  given  unto  us  exceeding  great  and
precious  promises  :  that  by  these  ye  might  be  partakers
of  the  divine  nature."  Such  is  the  efficacy  of  the
call  of  grace.  A  new  nature  is  communicated  which
loves  the  will  of  God,  and  abhors  the  evil  whereby
Satan  has  inundated  the  world.  "  Having  escaped  the
corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust."  Then  he
shows  there  is  no  time  for  waiting  or  ease.  ''And
beside  this,  giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith
virtue"  (or  the  moral  courage  I  have  already  described) ;
and  to  virtue  knowledge;  and  to  knowledge  temperance;
and  to  temperance  patience ;  and  to  patience  godliness ;
and  to  godliness  brotherly  kindness ;  and  to  brotherly
kindness  love."    These  last  two  qualities  are  not  the


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  275

game.  ''Love*'  is  a  great  deal  more  and  deeper  than
''brotherly  kindness."  The  latter  makes  one's  brother
the  prominent  object;  the  former  tests  everything  by
Qod  and  His  will  and  glory.  Therefore  you  may  find  a
Christian  very  full  of  brotherly  love,  but  sadly  at  fault
when  the  test  of  love  comes,  which  feels  and  insists
that  the  first  of  all  duties  is  that  God  should  have  His
way.  •'By  this  we  know,"  as  John  said,  (and  who
knew  love  better  ?)  "  that  we  love  the  children  of  God,
if  we  love  God,  and  keep  His  commandments."

In  the  next  part  of  the  chapter  we  have  the  kingdom
introduced,  which  is  really  the  main  object  of  Peter's
testimony  in  the  first  epistle  as  well  as  in  the  second.
Being  about  to  depart  himself,  he  as  it  were  throws
open  the  blessed  prospect  of  the  Lord's  interference  to
put  aside  evil  in  the  world,  and  display  His  own
power  and  goodness  here  below.  Such  is  the  kingdom
that  will  be  brought  in  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  His  coming,  or  presence,  embraces  the  king-
dom within  its  wide  circumference.

But  then  in  stating  this,  the  utmost  pains  are  taken
to  show  that  there  is  something  better  than  the  prospect
of  the  kingdom,  glorious  as  it  is ;  and  this  is  of  capital
importance  to  see  clearly.  Thus  verse  19  opens  the
matter,  which  I  must  give  you  rather  more  exactly  than
as  it  stands  in  our  version :  "  We  have  also  the  word
of  prophecy  more  confirmed,  whereunto  ye  do  well  that
ye  take  heed."  They  were  quite  right  in  holding  fast
the  old  prophetic  scriptures.  Even  as  Jews  they  had
known  those  portions  of  the  word  of  God,  and  the
apostle  in  no  way  blames  them  for  adhering  to  them
tenacioasly.    So  far,  it  was  quite  right    "Ye  do  well

T  2


276  nrntODUCTORY  lectuhes.

that  ye  take  heed"  to  them.  It  was  needless  to  press
attention  with  greater  warmth ;  but  still  he  commends
the  heed  they  paid  to  the  prophetic  word  of  the  Old
Testament.  Yet  study  it  either  in  the  New  Testament
or  in  the  Old  Testament,  one  cannot  but  dread  when
prophecy  becomes  the  all-absoi-bing  object  It  is  not
meant  deeply  to  engage  the  affections.  It  may  occupy
the  mind  to  the  exclusion  of  what  is  better  stilL  Its
nature  forbids  it  from  adequately  filling  the  heart
that  is  purified  by  faith;  nor  does  the  apostle  mean
that  it  should  ever  have  such  a  place.  When  he  says,
**  Ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed  to  it,**  he  adds  the  in*
structive  comparison,  "as  unto  a  lamp  that  shineth  in
a  dark  place."  This  is  what  prophecy  resembles.  He
does  not  then  stop,  but  points  us  to  another  and  brighter
light — "  until  the  day  dawn,  and  the  morning-star  arise
in  your  hearts."  He  means  that  prophecy  is  a  divinely
given  lamp  for  this  dark  scene.  None  can  despise
without  loss  the  light  it  casts  on  this  obscure  place,
the  world  which  is  going  to  be  judged.  It  shows  ns  the
awful  end  and  thereby  guards  us  all  the  way  through.

As  a  lamp  for  the  dark,  prophecy  is  therefore  excel*
lent;  it  is  given  of  God  for  this  purpose;  and  no
Christian  can  afford  to  slight  or  overlook  it  as  an
unprofitable  study,  which  does  not  claim  and  cannot
reward  his  heed.  They  were  quite  right,  then ;  but  ki
them  see  to  it  that  the  heart  possess  a  far  better  trea*
sure.  And  what  can  this  be  ?  Not  Christianity  indeed
as  a  whole,  but  the  Christian  hope.  The  Lord's  coming,
and  all  that  is  bound  up  with  Him  on  high  as  the  hope
of  the  Christian  and  of  the  church,  must  not  be  lowered
to  a  mere  prophetic  event    Prophecy  deals  with  the


THE  BPI8TLKS  OF  PSTKB.  277

earth,  with  the  Jew,  with  the  nations,  with  evil  here
below ;  prophecy  declares  men  to  be  so  bad  that  the
Lord  must  come  and  judge  them,  and  then  introduce
His  own  kingdom,  no  longer  morally  and  in  testimony,
but  in  power  and  glory.  But  is  this  all  that  Christ  is
for  us  ?  Do  you  confound  the  Christian  hope  with  the
judgment  of  Babylon,  the  overthrow  of  the  Gentiles^
the  restoration  of  Israel?  A  Christian  has  the  faith
that  in  principle  all  evil  has  been  judged  long  ago  in
the  cross;  that  it  has  been  absolutely  and  perfectly
condemned,  beyond  whatever  can  be  in  the  creature  here
below.  His  hope,  therefore,  rises  far  above  the  reve-
lation of  that  display  of  power  in  righteousness  as  well
as  mercy  which  is  to  put  aside  evil,  and  then  bless  a
long  guilty  and  miserable  world  with  peace  and  joy
and  every  form  of  creature  goodness.  The  Christian
hope  is  the  taking  the  Christian  out  of  the  world  alto-
gether to  be  in  glory  with  Christ,  the  object  of  his
heart  Therefore  Peter  says,  "  Until  the  day  dawn,  and
the  day-star  arise  in  your  hearts/'  When  does  he  mean
by  this  expression  ?  When  the  Christian  lays  hold  of
this  hope;  when  he  is  not  merely  warned  by  pro-
phecy, but  has  his  heart  reached  and  filled  with  the
heavenly  hope,  the  light  of  a  better  day,  yea,  Christ
Himself  the  source  and  centre  of  it  all.

Accordingly,  "  till  the  day  dawn  "  does  not  mean  till
the  day  come — till  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arise  with
healing  in  His  wings,  and  the  wicked  are  trodden  down
like  ashes  under  the  feet.  This  is  not  at  all  the  mean-
ing of  the  phrase.  It  is  the  dawn  of  day  in  the  heart ;
it  is  a  hope  that  should  be  realized  now  because  we  are
children  of  the  day.  Consequently  we  ought  to  have,  as  a


278  INTHODUCTORT  LECTURES.

present  thiDg,  that  daylight  dawniDg,  and  the  morning
star  arising  in  our  hearts.  A  soul  bom  of  Grod  might
believe  all  that  is  in  the  prophecies — and  it  is  weU  to
heed  it  all — but  this  is  not  enough.  Not  the  downfall
of  Nineveh,  nor  the  judgment  of  the  great  whore,  nor
the  destruction  of  the  beast,  is  the  Christian  hope.  Our
hope  is  that  we  and  all  Christians  are  to  be  taken  out
of  the  world,  and  translated  into  heavenly  glory.  Con-
sequently the  light  of  the  lamp  does  not  suffice;  we
need  also  daylight.  Good  as  the  lamp  is,  its  main
value  in  an  obscure  place  is  "till  daylight  dawn" — not
till  we  acquire  more  of  its  own  light,  but  till  a  brighter
character  of  light,  daylight,  dawn.  It  is  not  the
actual  arrival  of  the  day  that  he  means,  but  the  light
of  day  before  itself  comes :  "  Till  daylight  dawn,  and
the  morning -star  arise  in  your  hearts."  Christ  is  made
known  in  this  heavenly  light  for  the  Christian.  It  is
not  Christ  dealing  with  the  world  and  judging  the
nations.  This  is  the  way  in  which  Christ  is  described
in  prophecy.  But  not  thus  is  Christ  set  before  the
Chiistian.

In  short,  the  apostle  means  that  it  is  well  to  hold
fast  the  prophetic  lamp,  which  he  did  not  want  to
disparage  in  any  way,  provided  it  were  kept  iu  its
proper  place.  It  foreshows  the  judgment  of  the  world,
and  it  separates  the  believer,  if  he  believes  it^  firom
the  world.  But  this  is  negative.  Do  we  not  our-
selves belong  to  another  scene?  It  is  all  well  then
to  turn  our  back  on  the  world,  which  the  prophetic
lamp  judged ;  but  are  we  also  turning  our  faces  to  the
light  that  dawns  from  above  ?  There  are  many  Chris-
tians now  that  seem  to  be  all  occupied  with  the  vast


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  279

clianges  either  in  progress  or  in  anticipation  for  the
earth.  About  them  they  fritter  away  thought  and
time  with  no  worthy,  positive,  sanctifying  object  for
their  affections.  How  can  one  have  affection  for  the
judgment  of  Babylon  and  the  beast  ?  I  am  not  called
to  anything  of  the  sort  The  lamp  shows  it  me,  and  I
am  glad  to  be  warned  and  responsible  to  warn  others.
But  am  I  not  called  to  have  the  only  worthy  object
filling  my  heart  ?  It  is  Christ  Himself ;  and  this  not
in  the  execution  of  judgment,  but  in  the  fulness  of
grace  about  to  take  us  out  of  the  world  to  heaven,  and
not  merely  to  be  assessors  with  Himself  in  judging  the
world  when  He  appears  in  glory.

Therefore  I  do  most  strenuously  oppose  the  petty
efforts  that  have  been  made  to  sever  the  expression  "  in
our  hearts  "  from  this  verse.  It  is  a  sorrow  to  see  them,
and  to  know  that  any  Christians  could  be  influenced  by
them.  Only  this  morning  I  was  looking  at  a  book  in
which  there  was  a  most  misleading  parenthesis  intro-
duced, as  if  the  meaning  were,  "Ye  do  well  to  take  heed
in  your  hearts;"  thus  severing  the  connexion  of  "in
your  hearts"  from  "the  day  dawn  and  the  day-star
arise."   What  can  one  call  this  but  abominable  ?

There  is  another  way  also  in  which  I  have  seen  the  truth
sought  to  be  destroyed,  by  connecting  "  in  your  hearts  "
with  "knowing  this  first,"  contrary  to  all  analogy  of
Peter  or  any  one  else,  and  in  fact  without  the  smallest
reason,  but  with  the  evident  object  of  obliterating  for
the  heart  the  value  of  the  heavenly  hope.  Such  dealings
with  the  text  I  cannot  characterise  as  mistakes  only,  but
as  unwarrantable  meddling  with  the  word  of  God.  There
is  not  the  slightest  foundation  for  either  the  one  punc-


280  INTRODUCTOKY  LECTUBKa.

tuation  or  the  other.    The  English  version  is  perfectly
correct  in  this  at  least.

And  it  may  help  some  enquirers  perhaps  if  I  show
them  that  Peter  elsewhere  thoroughly  confirms  this  to
a  plain  English  reader.  In  the  first  epistle  it  is  written,
''Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts.''  It  is  clear
that  the  expression  *'  in  your  hearts  "  is  no  unimportant
phrase  in  Peter's  epistles.  If  we  do  not "  sanctify  the
Lord  God  in  our  hearts/'  we  shall  not  gather  much
good  either  from  prophecy  or  from  the  heavenly  hope ;
but  if  we  do,  it  is  of  the  highest  moment  for  us  to
have  Christ  as  the  morning -star  arising  in  our  hearts,
and  not  such  a  knowledge  of  prophecy  satisfying  us
as  a  godly  Jew  might  once  have  possessed.  Compare
also  *' knowing  this  first"  in  2  Peter  iiL  3.  Theite  is  no
connexion  with  **  in  your  hearts "  there  any  more  than
here.

It  is  difficult  to  speak  with  patience  of  these  rash
ways  with  the  word  of  God.  I  hold  it  to  be  a  grievous
sin  indeed  to  warp  scripture  from  the  purpose  for
which  God  has  written  it  If  it  be  said  that  these
innovations  meant  only  what  is  good,  the  question  is
whether  any  are  at  liberty  without  the  best  reasons  to
change  the  form  of  the  text,  and  particularly  to  do  so
without  telling  you.  In  this  very  place  for  instance,  in
a  book  which  professes  to  be  the  authorised  version  of
the  Bible,  you  unsuspectingly  take  up  the  book  without
knowing  any  change  has  been  made  in  the  punctuation,
and  your  hope  is  destroyed  before  you  know  why, — ^that
is,  if  you  trust  their  form  of  the  book,  which  the  com-
pilers meant  you  should.

There  is  another  phrase  that  follows,  on  which  it  may


-.**»,


THE  EPISTLES  OF  PETER.  281

be  well  to  say  a  word :  "  No  prophecy  of  the  scripture
is  of  any  private  interpretation."  Many  a  soul  asks,
What  is  meant  by  this?  Of  course,  the  error  of
Catholicism  is  not  to  be  thought  of :  the  remedy  against
making  prophecy  of  private  interpretation  is  in  no  way
ecclesiastical  tradition.  I  am  speaking  now  to  persons
uninfluenced  by  such  thoughts,  and  need  not  expose
its  irrelevant  absurdity.  But,  again,  there  are  many
Protestants  like  Bishop  Horsley  who  think  it  means
that  the  way  to  hinder  prophecy  from  being  of  private
interpretation  is  to  take  history  to  interpret  prophecy.
In  this  I  do  confess  I  see  little  change  for  the  better.
Whether  you  take  the  church  to  interpret  prophecy,
or  look  into  the  world  to  read  its  interpretation,  it  is  but
a  sorry  choice,  and  as  far  as  possible  either  way  from
the  sense.  The  meaning  is,  that  no  prophecy  of  scrip-
ture is  of  its  own  insulated  interpretation.  Limit  a
prophecy  to  the  particular  event  that  is  supposed  to
be  intended  by  that  scripture,  and  you  make  it  of
private  interpretation.  For  instance,  if  you  so  regard
the  prophecy  of  Babylon's  fall  in  Isaiah  xiii.  xiv.,  you
make  this  prophecy  of  private  interpretation.  How?
Because  you  make  the  event  to  cover  the  prophecy,
you  interpret  the  prophecy  by  the  event.  But  this
is  precisely  what  scripture  prophecy  is  made  not  to
be;  and  it  is  to  hinder  the  reader  from  this  error
that  the  apostle  writes  as  he  does  here.  The  truth,  on
the  contrary,  is  that  all  prophecy  has  for  its  object  the
establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ;  and  if  you
sever  the  lines  of  prophecy  from  this  great  central  point
on  which  they  all  converge,  you  destroy  the  intimate
connection  of  these  prophetic  lines  with  the  centre.     It


282  INTKODUCTORY  LECTURES.

is  like  lopping  off  the  branches  from  the,  tree  to  which
they  belong,  or  limbs  from  the  body  of  which  they  are
int^ral  parts.

So  it  is  with  prophecy.  All  prophecy  runs  on  to  the
kingdom  of  Christ,  because  it  comes  &om  the  Holy
Ghost.  If  it  were  the  forecasting  of  men,  a  man  might
apply  it  to  a  particular  event ;  and  there  it  would  end.
It  might  be  a  sagacious  conjecture  or  not.  But  sup-
posing it  to  be  ever  so  correct,  after  all  it  is  only  within
the  limits  of  a  man's  mind.  But  not  so  with  prophecy
of  scripture.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  satisfied  with  no
aims  short  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  hence  there-
fore prophecy  as  a  whole  looks  onward  to  that  bright
end.  It  may  have  had  a  partial  accomplishment,  a  just
application  by  the  way,  but  it  never  stops  short  of
His  coming  and  "  that  day."  For  the  very  same  reason,
when  Moses  and  Elias  were  put  by  Peter  on  the
smallest  approach  to  equality  with  the  Lord  Jesus  on
the  mount,  the  Father  set  aside  Moses  and  £lias  with
the  words,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son :  hear  ye  him.*'
His  object  is  not  Moses,  or  Elias  either:  it  is  Christy
the  beloved  Son  of  God.  So  the  Holy  Ghost  in  pro-
phecy does  the  self- same  thing.  He  had  the  same
object  as  the  Father — the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesua  Only
as  the  Father  held  to  the  glory  of  His  Son  as  such,
the  Holy  Ghost  in  prophecy  looks  to  the  kingdom  to
be  put  under  the  Lord  Jesus:  and  so  "the  prophecy
came  not  in  old  time  by  the  will  of  man;  but  holy
men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy
Ghost."  They  could  not  therefore  have  any  object
other  than  that  of  the  Holy  Ghost  who  inspired  them ;
and  so  prophecy  must  be  interpreted,  not  isolatedly,


THE  EPISTLES   OF  PETEB.  283

but  as  forming  part  of  the  Spirit's  testimony  to  the
purpose  of  Gkxl  in  glorifying  Christ

The  second  chapter  shows  ns  the  opposite  side —
Satan's  instruments  in  defaming  Christ  and  injuring
souls — the  false  teachers  in  Christendom,  just  as  there
had  been  false  prophets  among  the  people  of  old.  What
an  aveful  character  is  given  to  them,  justifying  the
judgment  that  is  coming  upon  them  !

In  the  last  chapter  we  have  not  merely  false  teachers,
corrupt  in  their  ways  as  in  their  doctrines,  but  scoffers
ridiculing  the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  What  is  the
answer  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  this  ?  Their  ground  was  the
assumed  imchangeableness  of  the  world.  Oh  the  folly
of  man  when  he  opposes  God !  What  a  confirmation
it  is  that  at  this  present  time  philosophy  is  precisely
coming  to  this !  Christendom  is  going  back  to  heathen
conclusions  as  fast  as  possible.  It  does  not  matter
whether  we  look  at  the  popular  physiologists,  geologists,
naturalists,  astronomers,  economists,  metaphysicians,
historians,  or  any  others  you  like,  they  are  in  general
hastening  to  this  humiliating  end;  that  is  to  say,  a
denial  of  the  distinct  statements  of  scripture  and  an
exclusion  of  God  from  His  own  world.  Their  idea  is,
that  a  sort  of  cycle  governs  nature,  ever  repeating  itself
through  the  same  round.  It  is  the  same  at  bottom  as
Peter  denounces  here — the  notion  that  there  is  a  per-
petuity in  the  state  of  things  around  us.

Consequently  such  as  believe  in  nature  must  scoff
at  the  asseHion  of  the  Lord  coming  to  change  the
face  of  all  things.    The  apostle  warns  them  to  aban-


284  INTKODUCTOBY  LKCTUBE8.

don  that  delusion;  for  after  all  Ood  has  intervened'
already.  The  God  that  caused  the  flood,  and  destroyed
the  world  that  once  was,  can  destroy  the  world  again.
And  this  is  precisely  what  the  Lord  is  going  to  do.
Therefore,  if  you  tauntingly  say,  "Where  is  the  promise
of  his  coming?"  I  answer  you,  not  that  He  is  coming
for  you,  but  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  coming  on  the
world.  What  can  scofiers  have  to  do  with  the  coming
of  the  Lord  for  His  own  people  ?  You  may  ask  with  a
scoff,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?"  But  we
can  answer  with  assurance  that  the  day  of  the  Lord
will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night — as  sudden,  unexpected,
and  unwelcome,  for  the  judgment  and  destruction  of
the  creation  which  is  your  rest  and  ruin.  When  every*
thing  has  disappeared  that  can,  and  aU  that  is  to  be
shaken  shall  have  been  dissolved,  the  result  will  be  the
new  heavens  and  new  earth,  "wherein  dwelleth  right-
eousness," without  one  scoffer  more.

The  believer  then  in  the  face  of  this  is  exhorted  to
holy  conversation  and  godliness.  "Ye  therefore,  beloved,
seeing  that  ye  know  these  things  before,  beware  lest
ye  also,  being  led  away  by  the  error  of  the  wicked,
should  fall  from  your  own  stedfastnesa;"  for  there  is
danger  of  the  Christian's  contamination  by  the  spirit  of
the  world.  What  then  is  the  preservative?  "Grow
in  grace,  and  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour
Jesus  Christ  To  him  be  glory  both  now  and  to  the
day  of  eternity.    Amen."


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.

Thb  Epistles  of  John  have  evidently  a  character
altogether  peculiar  to  themselves.  Christ  Himself  per-
sonally is  more  before  us  than  in  any  other  of  the
inspired  epistles.  Nevertheless  there  is  this  difference
between  the  Gospel  and  the  Epistles  of  John :  that  his
gospel  necessarily  treats  of  Christ  in  a  direct  and  im-
mediate way,  and  then  tlie  provision  that  He  made,
when  He  was  about  to  leave  the  world  and  His  disciples
in  it,  by  the  Holy  Ghost  taking  His  place  down  here
(these  being  the  two  chief  subjects  of  the  Gospel  of
John) ;  in  the  Epistles,  on  the  other  hand,  while  Christ
is  still  prominent,  the  main  characteristic  is  to  show
Christ  is  in  us,  as  well  (so  to  speak)  as  Christ  in  Himself
— that  it  is  the  self-same  life,  Christ  personally  being
its  full  perfect  expression.  In  order  to  set  out  this
astonishing  truth  witii  all  clearness,  the  Epistle  opens
directly  with  the  Lord,  and  this  as  He  was  manifested
in  this  world.  The  Gospel  begins  with  Christ  before  all
worlds.  Such  is  not  the  manner  in  which  the  Holy
Ghost  begins  here.

I  am  aware  that  some  have  been  disposed  to  take
"  That  which  was  from  the  beginning,"  as  if  it  taught


286  INTBODUCTOtfT  LBCTUBES.

the  same  trath  as  "  In  the  b^:iimiiig  was  the  Word."
No  doubt  there  is  an  allusion,  but  there  is  also
a  marked  difference.  We  gain  nothing  by  forcing
scripture:  we  always  lose  somewhat  In  the  Gospel,
where  Christ  Himself  directly  and  immediately  is  the
object,  the  Holy  Ghost  starts  with  revealing  His  divine
subsistence  when  there  was  none  but  God :  "  The  Word
was  with  God,"  and  lest  there  should  be  any  question
of  His  glory,  "  the  Word  was  God " — not  the  creature.
"  The  same  was  in  the  beginning  with  G<xL"  Thus  He
had  a  distinct  personal  existence,  which  had  been  from
everlasting.  No  matter  how  far  one  goes  back,  we  may
still  find  the  Word,  and  the  Word  with  God :  it  is  not
said  exactly  with  the  Father,  but  with  God.  We
never  in  scripture  find  the  "  Word "  coupled  with  the
**  Father.*'  We  do  find  it  in  what  is  not  scripture^  as
I  shall  show  before  we  have  done  with  considering  this
Epistle.  In  unquestionable  scripture,  "  the  Ward  "  and
"GW"  are  correlative,— the  "San"  and  the  "Father."
Man  cannot  even  imitate  the  word  of  Gkxl  without
exposing  his  own  weakness.

The  Gospel  therefore,  in  order  to  assert  His  glory,
goes  back  before  all  time.  And  "in  the  beginning" —
no  matter  where  you  may  ask  to  place  the  point  within
eternity — the  Word  was  there.  But  this  is  not  at  all
the  object  of  the  Epistle.  It  is  assumed  no  doubt,  but
it  is  to  show  how  truly  the  life  is  the  very  same.  It
is  not  union.  Life  is  never  confounded  with  union,
though  in  the  Christian  closely  connected.  Union  is
by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven,  but  life  was
before  this,  whether  in  Christ  personally,  or  even  in  us.
Christ  Himself  is  our  life.


,C'^


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  287

Hence,  when  flesh  had  hindered  and  overlaid  the
power  of  the  Spirit;  when  the  world  was  gaining
vast  influence;  when  Satan  was  working  with  all
subtlety  to  undermine  the  foundations,  the  Holy  Ghost
directs  attention  to  Christ,  in  whom  the  life  was  mani-
fested. In  what  the  Son  of  God  was  before  entering
the  world,  there  could  be  no  instruction  for  us  how  the
life  is  to  be  now  displayed  in  us ;  and  what  God  looks
for, — how  by  the  Holy  Ghost  He  nourishes  and  exer-
cises us.  The  weightiest  instruction  turns  on  what
Christ  was  here,  having  to  do  with  man — with  Satan —
above  all,  with  His  God  and  Father.  So  have  we.
Hence,  therefore,  it  is  not  here,  "He  was  in  the  be-
ginning with  God,"  but  *'That  which  was  from  the
beginning."

This  is  a  phrase  (^ir  (Spx^O  constantly  used  as  to
the  manifestation  of  the  one  or  thing  spoken  of:  it
matters  not  whether  it  be  good  or  evil.  We  find  the
formula  used,  for  instance,  of  Satan.  There  is  no
reference  to  what  he  was  before  he  became  the  devil ;
there  is  silence  as  to  his  subsistence  as  an  unfallen
angely  but  when  he  departed  from  God,  he  sins  from  the
beginning.  Such  is  his  character  as  devil :  he  sinned.
As  for  our  Lord  Jesus,  He  was  manifested  as  man  here
below;  but  before  we  hear  of  what  was  manifested,  John
says,  "That  which  was  from  the  beginning."  He  had
a  personal  being  as  man  here  below — a  divine  person
no  doubt,  but  He  took  a  real  place  in  this  world.  This
seems  to  be  referred  to  in  the  expression  "which  was
from  the  b^inning."  Next  we  have  the  fact  tliat  others
are  directed  towards  Him — what  we  have  "heard"
about  Him — what  we  have  "seen  with  our  eyes."  It


288  INTKODUCTOKY  LECTURES.

was  not  a  mere  phantom,  but  a  real  person  in  this
world — hence  "that  which  we  have  looked  upon,"  or
contemplated.  Even  though  from  above,  He  was  really
an  object  seen;  He  was  not  a  passing  shadow,  but  a
person,  "which  we  have  looked  upon,  and  our  hands
have  handled  "  (coming  down  as  it  were  into  fiie  closest
familiarity)  "concerning  the  word  of  lifa"  It  will  be
understood  that  all  these  difierent  clauses  refer  to  the
Word  of  life — what  was  from  the  beginning  about  the
Word  of  life :  what  we  have  heard  about  the  Word  of
life :  what  we  have  seen,  and  so  on.

''And  the  life  was  manifested."  The  second  verse
yet  makes  the  first  plainer ;  for  there  we  find  His  pre-
existence  with  the  Father,  when  the  apostle  has  stated
His  manifestation  (for  that  expression  "the  life  was
manifested"  is  a  kind  of  summary  of  what  had  been
laid  down  in  the  preceding  verse)  :  "The  life  was
manifested,  and  we  have  seen,  and  bear  witness,  and
announce  to  you  that  eternal  life,  which  was  with  the
Father."  Now  here  we  have  the  Son's  eternal  being,
80  that  there  is  no  holding  it  back  in  this  verse.  It  is
supposed  and  treated  of  as  a  known  truth ;  but  the
present  object  is  to  put  forward  the  Lord  Jesca  as  He
was  displayed  in  this  world ;  for  "  it  was  manifested  to
us :  that  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  "  (taking  up  the
two  verses)  "announce  we  to  you,  that  ye  also  may
have  fellowship  with  us :  and  truly  our  fellowship  is  with
the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ"  Thus  the
evident  aim  here  is  to  show  that  there  has  been  a  mani-
festation— an  adequate  personal  revelation  of  God  the
Father.  The  only  such  adequate  manifestation  was  Christ
Himself.  But  it  was  Christ  Himself  in  this  wodd,  ainan


PV*


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  289

as  truly  as  any  other,  though  infinitely  above  man,  but  a
man  who  displayed  what  divine  life  is  in  all  imaginable
circumstances.  He  became  a  babe,  a  child,  a  full-
grown  man.  He  grew  up  subject  to  His  parents ;  He
entered  on  public  life,  as  before  He  was  traced  in  the
imobtrusive  privacy  of  His  home  after  the  flesh.
He  is  then  found  confronted  with  the  enemy,  going
forth  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  dealing  with  every
kind  of  pain  and  sorrow  that  pressed  down  humanity,
in  everything  showing  out  what  Grod  is,  but  in  every-
thing also  displaying  what  man  ought  to  have  been,
and  was  not — Himself  always  absolute  perfection,  but
perfection  as  man  in  dependence  on  God.

What,  it  may  be  asked,  has  this  to  do  with  us  ?
Everything.  It  is  not  true  that  we  only  want  propitia-
tion, or  as  guilty  sinners  to  be  justified.  We  want  life
— eternal  life.  But  have  not  the  children  of  Grod
eternal  life?  Certainly,  but  where  shall  I  look  at  it?
I  see  a  beautiful  trait  of  the  divine  life  in  this  saint ;
I  see  something  else  sweet,  and  at  the  same  time
humbling  to  my  soul,  in  another — perhaps  where  least
expected.  But  in  all  there  is  weakness  and  even
positive  failure.  Who  would  not  confess  it  ?  who  does
not  feel  it?  This,  then,  after  all,  is  but  an  unworthy
expression  of  what  divine  life  is,  because  it  is  shaded
too  often  and  modified  by  the  effect  of  the  world,  by
the  allowance  of  nature,  by  a  thousand  thoughts,  feel-
ings, ways,  habits  which  do  not  savour  of  Christ.  All
these  things  break  in  upon  and  mar  the  perfect  out-
shining of  that  new  life  that  is  communicated  to  all
the  children  of  God.     And  here  is  the  blessedness  of

what  the  Holy  Ghost  at  once  ushers  in  without  a  single

u


290  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

note  of  preface, — without  the  smallest  allusion  to  any
other  person  or  topia  With  Christ  before  Him,  could  it
be  otherwise  ?  There  was  but  one  adequate  and  worthy
object  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  it  was  Christ  Neither
was  it  at  all  requisite  to  say  for  whom  John  was  in-
spired to  write  thus.  Of  necessity,  Christ  was  for  His
own.  For  whom  could  Christ  be  portrayed,  if  not  for
the  Christian  ?  But  then  the  suitable  homage  to  Christ
was  to  bring  into  prominence  none  but  Christ  Himself;
and  so  we  find  the  epistle  of  John  opening  in  a  way
unlike  any  other.  There  may  be  some  approach  to
analogy  in  the  remarkable  manner  the  apostle  Paul
writes  to  the  Hebrews.  He  who  writes  and  those  who
are  written  to  are  in  the  back  ground,  that  God  may
unfold  His  ancient  oracles  about  the  Messiah  His  Son.
But  in  Hebrews,  the  reason  is  rather  the  grace  that  con-
descended to  Jewish  weakness.  In  John,  the  reason  is
the  all -eclipsing  glory  of  Him,  the  Eternal  life,  who
deigns  in  grace  and  by  redemption  to  be  our  lifa  It
was  John's  allotted  province  thus  to  bring  Christ  before
those  that  are  His ;  and  he  has  done  so  in  the  power
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  with  a  wisdom  that  proves
itself  altogether  divine  to  him  who  has  ears  to  hear.

Through  such  a  revelation  as  this  the  great  comfort  is
that  God  is  showing  His  children,  conscious  of  their
own  weakness,  what  in  tliis  respect  grace  has  given
them  in  Christ — what  the  very  life  is  that  they  have
received.  Often  cast  down  and  groaning  in  the  feeling
of  how  little  they  manifest  the  life  of  Christy  and  need-
ing to  know  what  His  life — their  life — Christ — ^is  in  its
own  excellency,  they  are  directed  to  Himself.  In  its
perfection  it  is  seen  in  Christ  alone.


L&l


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  291

This  it  is  therefore  that  opens  our  epistle ;  and  what
is  the  effect  ?  "  These  things  which  we  have  seen  and
heard  we  announce  to  you,  that  ye  also  may  have
feUowship  with  us."  The  apostles  had  fellowship  with
the  Son  of  God,  and  they  were  particularly  chosen  out,
as  we  find  in  the  Lord's  prayer  (the  proper  prayer  of  the
Lord,  not  that  which  is  commonly  so  called  in  Matt.  vL,
Lake  xi,  blessed  as  it  is,  but  in  John  xvii.)  For  it  is
evident  that  the  apostles  have  a  singularly  distinguished
place  assigned  them.  But  Christians  also  are  imme-
diately concerned;  for  there  is  no  doubt  that  others
were  to  be  brought  in  and  to  believe  through  their  word.
And  thus  they  are  expressly  the  objects  of  their  Lord's
communications  to  the  Father.

Here,  too,  the  design  was  that  others  should  have

fellowship  with  the  Son  of  God :  the  first  favoured  ones

were  not  to  keep  it  to  themselves,  but  to  spread  abroad

the  riches  of  His  grace.     As  we  see  in  John  xvii.  that

others  were  to  believe  through  the  apostles'  word,  so

here  John  acts  on  the  intimation  himself     The  object

is,  "  that  ye  also  may  have  fellowship  with  us ;   and

truly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his

Son  Jesus  Christ."  It  is  with  " the  Father,"  because  He

oommunicates  what  He  loves  best.  Never  was  anything,

or  one  in  His  sight,  so  precious  as  the  manifestation  of

His  own  Son  in  manhood  here  below.     It  was  what

opened  the  heavens,  so  to  speak;  it  was  what  caused

the  Father's  voice  to  be  heard;   and  this  in  various

critical  circumstances,  where  it  might  have  seemed  that

a  dishonouring  shade  hung  over  the  Anointed  of  God.

But  not  so;  it  was  but  an  appearance  in  the  eyes  of

dimly  seeing  man — Christ  was  perfection  always.  Take,

u  2


>»


AA  be  co"^"    -Cnitbet,  *^"  ,  pffect  *        ,_  ioV  ^*^     „

a  to  s^^     .A    osaxxt^^^J   ^.  V  ^e  a

^o»  ^        nA  tie**  °;  Ji  3e3tt9.  «>
^g^^^'^'ntTeaeTtvY^^^'eatetx'


;»we  ^^^  ,ve  l^oTXiat^a.rtbeieas*  Tag*^*'  °'  Z.  «^
«?^        -SJot  co^       »  tiatt  oi  SCI  y  ^f^x.  \  '^xS

,UV1  ^«^  V  ^^\rX-«-^  '^*'  Xlt  GoA  ««^f  o


L"^'


^m


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  293

who  has  reconciled  us  by  Jesus  Christ, — to  appreciate
and  adore  our  God  and  Father  who  has  manifested  His
glory  in  Christ  His  Son.  Short  of  this  we  cannot
rightly  stop.  We  may  pause  midway,  but  we  ought  to
be  going  on  until  we  can  rest  perfectly  in  this  blessed
communion  of  love — fellowship  "  with  the  Father,  and
with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ."

The  eflfect  then,  I  repeat,  is  fulness  of  joy.  And  mark,
all  this  is  simply  from  the  manifestation  of  grace  in
Jesus  Christ  the  Lord.  There  is  not  one  question  of
ourselves,  but  the  simplest  receiving  what  God  has
brought  and  given  us  in  His  own  Son ;  the  intended
issue  is  the  overflowing  of  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.

But  if  we  had  a  manifestation,  there  is  also  a  message.
The  manifestation,  with  its  connexions  and  result,  was
given  us  in  the  first  four  verses.  The  message  begins
from  the  fifth  verse.  If  you  have  this  life  of  Christ,  if
I  too  have  it,  if  we  who  believe  are  brought  thus  into
fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  the  Son  Jesus
Christ, —  if  we  possess  the  wondrous  place  of  being  (so
to  speak)  in  the  family  circle,  and  the  most  intimate
a£fections  of  our  God  and  Father  through  the  Son  of
His  love,  I  cannot  be  there,  nor  you,  without  the
creating  of  a  certain  demand  on  our  souls  by  virtue  of
the  divine  nature  of  which  grace  has  made  us  alike
partakers.  No  doubt  love  is  the  spring,  but  it  is  in
truth ;  and  the  God  who  thus  brings  us  by  His  own  Son
into  the  present  enjoyment  of  life  everlasting  makes  the
soul  sensible  of  the  antagonism  between  the  state  of
nature  and  of  all  around  us  with  God  Himself  But
mark  the  grace  of  God :  not  a  word  of  that  whatever


294  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

until  fulness  of  joy  is  established,  and  this  solely  by
the  gift  of  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  to  us,  and  eternal  life
in  Him.  But  having  given  us  the  joy,  now  He  turns  us
back,  as  it  were,  and  gives  the  eye  inwardly  to  discern
as  those  enabled  to  see  according  to  God, — to  judge  all
that  is  of  self,  and  consequently  all  false  pretensions
wherever  they  may  be.  It  could  not,  ought  not  to  be
otherwise.  We  can  afiford  to  judge  ourselves  now  that
we  have  the  fulness  of  the  blessing,  which  is  eternal
life.  Remember  it,  and  Him  in  whom  it  is,  and  by
whom  only  we  could  have  it.  God  the  Father  has  given
in  Christ  that  sure  blessing,  and  assured  it  for  ever,  in
order  that  the  soul  may  be  free  to  look  at  anything,
and  to  take  up  everything  in  the  interests  of  His  own
holiness  and  glorj'-,  as  having  fellowship  with  the  Father
and  the  Son.

"This  then  is  the  message  which  we  have  heard  of
him,  and  declare  unto  you,  that  God  is  light."  It  is  not
the  Father  now.  In  the  early  verses  it  was  expressly
and  only  as  the  Father,  because  there  it  was  the  outflow
of  grace  through  the  Son.  But  now,  this  nature  being
communicated,  we  cannot  if  we  would  avoid  having  to
do  with  God;  and  we  feel  for  His  will,  holiness,  and
glory,  just  because  we  are  so  blest  by  His  gi*ace.  **  This
then  is  the  message  which  we  have  heard  of  him,  and
declare  unto  you."  It  is  not  the  law  but  a  message.
Grace  does  not  put  under  law,  but  it  does  communicate
the  judgment  of  God  Himself  on  all  that  is  contrary  to
His  nature.

The  message  is  that  God  is  light.  Heathenism  was
founded  on  a  quite  contrary  assumption.  They  sup-
posed darkness  to  be  the  source  of  everything;  but


hS'«;fJ


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  295

not  such  is  God  to  the  Christian.  "God  is  light."
Consequently  all  is  detected  and  judged.  "  God  is  light,
and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  alL''  Even  Moses,  in
view  of  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts,  allowed  a  little
darkness ;  tor  the  law  made  nothing  perfect;  it  was  not
the  perfect  expression  of  Grod :  Christ  only  is  this.  It
is  only  divines,  or  those  misled  by  their  errors,  who
give  His  glory  to  the  law  as  the  image  of  God.  But
according  to  scripture  (and  it  "cannot  be  broken")  Christ
is  the  image  of  God  :  never  is  the  law  so  styled.  The
law  had  not  to  reveal  God  but  to  deal  with  man, —  it
condemned  the  first  Adam.  God  under  law  had  fallen
sinful  presumptuous  man  before  Him.  Law  was  really
the  expression  of  the  lowest  claim  that  God  could  assert
over  the  first  man  had  he  been  able  to  meet  it.  He  could
not  abate  those  terms.  It  was  the  veiy  least  measure —
the  ten  words — that  God  could  accept  even  from  a  sinful
man.

But  it  was  altogether  different  when  the  Son  of
God  came.  Undoubtedly  He  vindicated  the  law,  which
fell  through  all  other  hands.  Perfectly  and  in  all  things
He  retrieved  the  honour  of  God,  which  might  else  have
seemed  only  committed  to  man  to  be  sullied.  Alas  !  the
first  man  had  done  nothing  but  sin  or  break  the  law  of
God.  The  last  Adam  not  only  rescued  the  jewel  from
the  filth  of  the  men  who  had  brought  it  into  obloquy  and
turned  it  if  not  to  corruption  to  their  own  ruin,  but  set
it  off  so  as  to  shed  its  own  lustre  and  glorify  the  God
who  gave  it.  The  mischief  lay  in  sin,  never  in  the
smallest  degree  in  the  law.  There  was  everything  wrong
in  the  first  man ;  and  this  was  the  true  secret.  But  to
lower  the  Son  of  God  to  a  mere  doer  of  the  law  is  un-


296  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

consciously  to  deny  His  divine  glory ;  nay,  it  is  unwit-
tingly to  deny  even  His  human  perfection.  No  doubt
the  Lord  never  failed  to  magnify  the  divine  law ;  but  I
venture  to  say  He  never  did  one  thing  in  which  He  did
not  go  beyond  the  law.  It  must  be  maintained  further
that  not  to  speak  of  Christ,  the  Christian,  who  does  not
go  beyond  the  law  does  not  understand,  enjoy,  or  adorn
Christianity.  And  so  far  is  this  rising  above  the
character  of  law  in  our  walk  from  being  an  extraordinary
effort,  it  is  what  the  Christian  man  is  called  to  do  every
day  in  his  life.  I  admit  this,  that  you  cannot  even
contemplate  such  a  thing  until  you  know  your  place  in
Christ,  and  that  Christ  risen  is  your  life ;  but  when  this
is  a  settled  truth  for  your  soul,  you  will  soon  understand
its  certainty  and  preciousness,  as  well  as  your  own  new
responsibility,  as  living  in  the  Spirit,  to  walk  also  by
the  Spirit.

Let  me  repeat  once  more  the  message — "  God  is  light,
and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  Nothing  is  now
allowed  in  view  of  the  hardness  of  their  hearts.  This
was  the  license  under  law,  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Himself
tells  us,  but  it  will  not  stand  the  revealed  light  of  the
gospel.  There  is  nothing  tolerated  except  what  suits  the
nature  of  God  Bttmself.  Christ,  the  reality  of  it  in  His
own  person  and  ways  on  earth,  alone  has  brought  us  the
revelation  of  this  truth.  Where  was  it  ever  seen  or
heard  of  before  ?  It  was  seen  and  heard  in  every  way,
in  every  word,  of  Jesus.  It  was  so  because  He  was
God,  but  it  was  never  so  till  He  became  man.  It  is
there  we  see  adoringly  the  wondrous  truth  of  the  peraou
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  As  long  as  He  remained  simply  God,
no  such  manifestation  was  or  could  be.    Had  He  been


LfTTTJ


TH«  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  297

merely  man,  it  would  have  been  simply  impossible;  but
being  not  only  what  He  was,  but  who  He  is,  in  Him  here
below  we  have  God  as  well  as  man  perfectly  displayed.
This  it  is  that  judges — judges  everything  in  us.

Accordingly  there  follows  the  various  testings  of  this
divine  nature  in  the  believer.  "  If  we  say  that  we  have
fellowship  with  him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie,  and
do  not  the  truth."  It  is  no  longer  a  question  merely  of
an  open  falsehood.  Of  course  this  cannot  but  remain
always  immoral  and  inexcusable;  and  its  true  gravity  is
brought  out  incomparably  more  under  the  gospel  than
ever  it  was  under  the  law.  But  then  what  is  spoken  of
here  goes  far  deeper  than  a  pronounced  lie;  it  might
be  only  such  virtually  and  practically — a  lie  that  we
live  and  do  where  we  may  not  speak  one.  "  If  we  say
we  have  fellowship  with  him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we
lie,  and  do  not  the  truth."  The  Christian  walks  in  the
light;  and  the  reason  why  he  walks  there  is  this,  because
he  sees  Christ,  who  alone  is  the  light  of  life.  And  if  he
sees  and  follows  Christ,  which  all  His  sheep  do,  he
cannot  but  walk  in  the  light,  because  following  Jesus,
who  is  the  light,  he  necessarily  walks  in  the  light

I  do  not  say  that  he  necessarily  walks  according  to
the  light.  This  is  a  very  different  matter,  often  con-
founded with  it,  but  in  fact  wholly  distinct,  though  it
too  ought  to  be.  But  every  Christian  walks  in  the  light.
If  he  is  walking  according  to  it,  then  glory  is  brought
to  the  Lord ;  if,  as  is  too  often  the  case,  he  fails  to  walk
according  to  the  light,  he  dishonours  the  Lord  so  much
the  more  because  he  does  walk  in  the  light.

A  Jew  as  such  did  not  walk  in  the  light.  When  Grod
had  His  dealings  with  Israel,  there  was  nothing  of  the


298  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

kind.  He,  though  always  light  Himself,  dwelt  in  the  thick
darkness.  Not  that  He  was  darkness :  this  never  was
nor  could  be;  but  He  dwelt  in  the  dark,  veiled  and  shut
up  by  curtains  and  clouds  of  incense,  sacrifices  and
priests.  Thus  He  dwelt  because  man  was  in  the  dark ;
and  God,  by  the  very  fact  that  He  dwelt  surrounded  by
His  people  Israel,  dwelt  in  dark  seclusion  in  view  of  the
condition  of  Israel — the  first  man — in  whose  midst  He
deigned  to  dwell.

But  now  that  Christ  the  Son  is  come,  the  full  un-
clouded light  of  God  shines  out  in  love.  Accordingly,
as  we  have  seen.  He  reveals  Himself  as  light,  with
whom  is  no  darkness  at  all.  More  than  this,  "  if  we
say  we  have  fellowship  with  him,  and  walk  in  darkness,
we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth."  Further,  "  If  we  walk  in
the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowship  one
with  another,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  This  total  and  evident  con-
trast is  what  every  Christian  by  his  Christian  profession
assumes.  If  you  are  a  Christian  at  all,  you  walk  in  the
light ;  it  is  where  you  walk,  and  not  here  a  question  of
how.  The  apostle  John  is  not  here  at  all  discussing
how  far  it  may  be  made  good,  or  how  far  you  have
realised  it — albeit  an  important  question  for  conscience.
Here  he  is  showing  what  is  true  and  real,  and  so  abso-
lutely necessary  that  it  is  involved  in  the  very  being  of
a  'Christian  man.

"But  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light"
(for  Christ  can  be  no  less  a  standard  than  this)  "we
have  fellowship  one  with  another,  and  the  blood  of
Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."
Manifestly  he  is  describing,  not  some  special  class


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  299

among  the  faithful,  but  all  genuine  Christians,  whoever
they  may  be.  As  having  seen  and  followed  the  Lord
Jesus,  they  walk  in  the  light,  and  being  in  that  light,
where  all  sin  is  judged,  there  is  fellowship  mutually.
For  the  fellowship  here  is  not  with  the  Father  and  the
Son :  this  had  been  already  settled  in  the  early  verses.
But  here  John  is  speaking  of  the  communion  of  Chris-
tians one  with  another ;  and  he  says  that  being  in  the
light  of  God  (because  the  light  is  no  less  than  Christ),
the  hindrances  to  fellowship  are  judged: — "We  have
fellowship  one  with  another."  You  see  it  every  day,
and  wherever  you  may  be.  If  you  pass  through  any
circumstances  where  you  look  to  find  no  Christian,  a
little  word  is  dropped, — Christ's  own  name,  or  that
which  betrays  to  your  heart  the  sense  of  His  grace,  and
at  once  you  are  knit  to  the  man,  no  matter  who, —
indeed,  the  more,  so  to  speak,  because  of  the  sound  fall-
ing on  your  heart  in  such  unexpected  circumstances : —
"  We  have  fellowship  one  with  another."  Then  there  is
another  comfort  not  less  needed — "that  the  blood  of
Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  Such  is  the
precious  place  grace  has  given  us,  the  ever  abiding
power  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleansing  us  from
every  sin.

This  is  not  put  here  as  a  provision  against  our  failure
and  for  our  restoration.  The  apostle  treats  of  the  place
in  which  we  are  set  by  the  grace  of  God  from  the
b^inning  of  our  Christian  career,  and  which  remains
unchanged  right  through.  No  doubt  the  apostle  does
not  contemplate  such  a  thing  here  as  the  departure  of
a  real  Christian  from  Christ.  Still  less,  if  possible,  does
he  contemplate  a  Christian's  trifling  with  sin:  this


300  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

could  not  be,  for  the  Spirit  of  God  never  does.  We
shall  find,  however,  in  its  own  just  place,  that  if  he
slip  into  evil  of  a  practical  kind,  or  sin,  God  does  not
leave  him  without  a  resourca  The  grace  that  never
fietils  appears  for  the  child,  if  he  have  been  drawn  aside.
But  this  is  not  at  all  the  object  in  the  verse  before  us,
which  is  simply  the  assertion  of  the  Christian's  place ;
and  this,  too,  when  it  is  a  question  of  6od*s  own  nature,
which  might  produce  (not  searching  only,  but)  trial  and
anxiety  in  the  spirit  But  if  there  is,  the  very  place
where  the  power  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cannot
fail  to  cleanse  you  from  all  sin  is  asserted.

But  there  might  be  another  form  of  pretension.  In-
stead of  setting  up  to  fellowship  with  God,  while
indifferent  to  His  will,  without  sense  of  or  care  for
standing  in  the  light  of  God,  the  flesh  might  assume
another  character  of  delusion — the  denial  of  sin.  "  If
we  say  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the
truth  is  not  in  us."  By  a  Christian  is  not  meant  one
insensible  to  his  own  sinfulness.  The  truth  is  in  him ;
and  he  confesses  instead  of  hiding  or  ignoring  his  sins.
He  has  fellowship  with  God ;  but,  far  from  sa3dng  along
with  this  "I  have  no  sin,"  he  is  the  very  man  that  hates
and  spreads  out  his  sins  before  God.  Accordingly  verse
9  tells  the  tale  of  that  which  grace  and  truth  effect  in
the  Christian :  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithfnl
and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from
all  unrighteousness."  So  the  Christian  does  from  the
very  starting-point  of  his  career.

Still  less  does  the  Christian  refuse  to  own  that  he  has
sinned.  This  is  a  yet  grosser  form  of  contrariety  to  the
truth  of  God.   Therefore  the  condemnation  is  still  more


ifiSr


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  301

stem :  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  not  sinned,  we  make
him  a  liar,  and  his  word  is  not  in  ns."  The  word  of
Ghxl,  not  to  speak  of  conscience,  declares  so  plainly  that
all  have  sinned,  that  it  proves  the  audacity  of  unbelief
and  rebelliousness  in  those  that  deny,  and  this  denial  is
incomparably  more  guilty  since  Christ  came,  to  whose
name  these  deniers  laid  claim.

This  then  closes  the  second  part  of  the  chapter.  The
first  was  the  manifestation  of  the  fulness  of  grace  in
Christ ;  the  next,  the  detection  of  what  is  contrary  to
God  in  us.  Hence  we  are  now  judged  before  God  in
His  light  Having  a  nature  which  feels  according  to
God,  we  at  once  discover  what  is  inconsistent  with
Himself  For  this  very  reason  the  Christian  would  be
extremely  cast  down  if,  when  drawn  aside  through  the
power  of  the  enemy,  there  were  not  the  provision  of
grace  to  meet  and  restore  his  soul.  Hence  two  verses
follow  in  the  beginning  of  chapter  ii.  as  a  sort  of  appen-
dix to  the  doctrine  and  application  of  the  first  chapter  :
"  My  little  children,  these  things  write  I  unto  you,  that
ye  sin  not  And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate
with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous :  and  he  is
the  propitiation  for  our  sins ;  and  not  for  ours  only,  but
also  for  .  . .  the  whole  world."  I  leave  out  "i?ie  sim  of"
It  is  clear  enough  that  they  ought  never  to  have  been
inserted  in  the  common  English  Bible.  Not  only  are
they  not  required  for  the  sense,  as  words  generally  are,
but  they  injure  the  sense,  and  really  insinuate  erroneous
doctrina  If  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  were  met  by
the  propitiation  of  Christ,  the  whole  world  would  be
saved.     No  such  statement  occurs  anywhere  in  the


302  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

word  of  God.    There  is  a  righteous  ground  in  the  sacri"
fice  of  Christ  on  which  God  can  meet  the  whole  world
— not  only  bear  with  it,  but  send  the  gospel  to  every
creature.    This,  however,  is  a  totally  different  statement
from  a  "  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."
In  the  real  phrase  it  is  clear  that  we  have  the  beautiful
wisdom  of  scripture,  and  at  the  same  time  an  exact
expression  of  the  Lord's  rich  grace  without  exaggeration :
"My  little  children,  I  write  unto  you  that  ye  sin  not;"
but  if  any  one  should  alas!  sin,  instead  of  cause  for
despair,  "we  have    an    advocate  with    the    Father."
Wondrous  mercy !    Jesus  as  much  lives  to  take  up  the
failure  of  His  own,  as  He  died  to  put  away  their  sins  by
His  blood.     This  too  is  founded  on  propitiation;  but
there  is  besides  the  blessed  fact  that  He  is  the  right-
eousness of  the  believer  in  the  presence  of  God.     Hie
one  expiatory  sacrifice  avails  in  abiding  value;    His
place  is  before  God  as  our  righteousness ;  and  there  for
the  failing  He  carries  on  His  living  active  advocacy
with  the  Father.

Such  is  the  doctrinal  ground  of  this  epistle,  with  the
added  special  provision  for  those  who  may  faiL

From  chapter  ii.  3  we  begin  the  consideration  of  the
characteristics  of  life  in  Christ  which  the  believer  pos-
sesses, and  is  bound  to  manifest.  What  is  the  leading
trait  ?  what  the  especial  features  of  divine  life  in  man  ?
It  is  not  power,  nor  love,  nor  even  righteousness.  What
is  it  then?  Obedience.  This,  it  is  clear,  gives  no
importance  to  man.  It  necessitates  the  just  subjection
of  the  creature,  and  maintains  also  the  majesty  of  God«
How  dreadful  when  grace,  so-called,  lowers  His  glory  in


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  303

the  eyes  of  any  soul !  It  is  not  denied  that  danger  there
is ;  but  the  danger  is  fully  met  by  the  precious  word  of
God :  "And  hereby  we  do  know  that  we  know*  him,  if
we  keep  his  commandments."  Do  not  call  this  legal :
where  is  anything  of  the  sort  in  John  ?  Indeed  there
can  be  nothing  legal  in  one  who  under  the  Holy  Spirit
unfolds  Christ.  And  let  me  say  further  that,  where
love  is,  nothing  is  sweeter  than  the  doing  the  will  of
the  one  that  is  loved,  particulariy  where  we  know  that
He  whose  will  we  do  is  absolutely  good  and  wise  in  all
that  He  lays  upon  us.  We  know  that  this  is  the  case
with  God.

"And  hereby  we  do  know  that  we  know  him,
if  we  keep  his  commandments.  He  that  saith,  I
know  him,  and  keepeth  not  his  commandments,  is  a
liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him."  He  is  no  Christian
at  all,  any  more  than  those  that  pretended  to  have
fellowship  with  Him  and  walked  in  darkness,  or  said
they  had  no  sin,  or  denied  that  they  had  sinned.  The
contrast  is  of  real  Christians  with  mere  pretenders.  It
is  not  a  comparison  between  faithful  Christians  and
unfaithful  ones.  Banish  all  this  kind  of  notion  fix)m
your  minds.  It  is  delusion,  and  you  lose  thereby  the
profit  for  your  soul.  It  is  not  what  the  Lord  is  treating
of  here.  He  is  putting  down  a  new  class  of  evil  that
was  beginning  to  spring  up,  of  persons  pretending  to
fresh  light,  but  involving  a  departure  from  the  only
light  of  God, — persons  who  indulged  in  fine-spun  specu-
lations and  claimed  undiscovered  truth,  but  were  in  the

*  The  first  "  know  "  is  in  the  preseht,  this  (the  second]  in  the  per-
fect, iyvwKafity^  which  means  (not  "haye  known,"  but)  "hare  the
knowledge  of."


304  INTRODUCTOBY  LECTURES.

awful  predicament  of  contradicting  the  revealed  mind
of  God.  It  was  a  different  Christ,  who  was  not  another
but  antichrist,  as  we  shall  see, — a  different  truth  which
WCU3  not  really  truth.

The  characteristic  object  of  the  epistle  is  to  main-
tain that  none  can  ever  rise  above  the  Christ  already
manifested  in  this  world.  After  all  you  may  have
learnt  from  Paul  or  any  other,  know  as  you  may  the
Christian's  place  in  grace  and  all  he  hopes  for  in
glory,  if  you  want  to  behold  perfection  in  man  you
must  look  back  at  what  Christ  was  in  this  world — the
self-same  Jesus  who  is  now  in  the  glory  of  God.  Such
is  Christ  everywhere.  There  is  a  season  when  one  needs
most  of  all  to  think  of  the  cross.  There  is  a  season
when  one  needs  the  comfort  of  having  Him  as  the  Priest
in  heaven.  There  is  a  season  when  one  can  appreciate
Him  as  the  glorious  Head  of  the  churcL  But  it  is
false  that  any  of  these  points  of  view  is  to  make  Christ
less  precious  as  manifested  in  this  world.  Nor  is  there
one  who  treats  it  with  such  decision  and  solemnity  as
John.  The  time  was  come  for  this :  "  Even  now  are
many  antichrists."  It  is  the  very  point  and  object  of
our  apostle's  writing  to  maintain  the  indefeasible  glory
and  the  infinite  excellence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  every
respect,  and  this  as  displaying  God  the  Father  in  this
world.  This  Satan  was  seeking  to  annul  through  the
false  teachers  now  in  view.  Therefore  are  we  shown
from  the  first,  as  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain,  the
fulness  of  grace  that  came  in  His  person,  as  well  as  the
revelation  of  the  moral  nature  of  God.  But  now  we
have  the  first  great  test  of  the  reality  of  divine  life  in
man,  namely,  obedience.     In  this  the  unbeliever,  no


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  305

matter  what  his  profession  may  be,  is  sure  to  fail.  His
will  is  unjudgeA  He  either  seeks  his  own  way  in
pleasure,  or  he  bows  to  man  in  superstitious  asceticism,
without  knowledge  of  the  true  God  or  confidence  in
His  grace.  His  failure  is  not  perhaps  in  notions,  but
in  obedienca  On  the  other  hand  the  Christian  keeps
the  commandments  of  God ;  but  he  goes  farther.  It  is
said,  "  Whoso  keepeth  his  word."  It  is  more  than  what
is  commanded.

He  loves  to  do  whatever  may  be  the  will  of  God,  no
matter  what  the  form.  It  may  be  simply  seeing  how  He
manifests  His  character  in  Christ :  this  is  enough.  The
obedient  heart  enters  into  and  ascertains  the  will  of
God  where  disobedience  would  find  nothing  but  diffi-
culties, obstacles,  and  uncertainties.  There  is  always  to
such  either  a  lion  in  the  way  or  no  light.  We  find  it
too  often  in  our  families.  See  a  child  whose  heart  is
not  in  obedience :  what  readiness  of  excuse  !  "  Indeed,
I  did  not  know.  You  never  told  me.  Why  did  you  not
forbid  me  before  ?"  On  the  other  see  the  obedient  child.
She  has  watched  her  mother's  looks  even  when  not  the
appearance  of  a  command  was  heard.  She  knows  right
well  what  will  please  her  parent.  Just  so  should  we
cherish  the  will  of  our  Father  as  obedient  children.  It
is  not  in  this  case  the  keeping  of  the  express  com-
mands, but  of  His  word.  Let  me  add,  that  this  is  the
answer  to  all  the  pride  of  man's  heart.  For  take  the
most  moral  man  you  ever  saw :  on  what  does  he  rest  ?
He  does  this  and  that  because  he  judges  them  right.
This  is  his  boast :  "I  always  do  what  I  believe  is  right"
Such  is  the  desire  of  the  moral  man.  I  answer,  that
even  if  always  consistent,  and  you  always  did  a  thing

X


306  INTRODUCTOBY  LECTURES.

because  it  is  right,  you  must  inevitably  be  always
"wrong.

The  true  ground  for  a  believer,  and  that  which
pleases  God,  is  this, — not  to  do  a  thing  simply  because
it  is  right,  but  because  it  is  His  will.  The  life  that  is
formed  on  obedience  is  of  an  altogether  diflferent  tex-
ture and  source.  To  do  things  because  they  are  right
is  to  do  without  God  and  His  word.  It  is  merely  idol-
izing self.  The  man  becomes  judge  of  all:  "I  think
this,  I  do  that,  because  it  is  right  in  my  judgment."
Obedience  alone  puts  man  down,  and  God  in  His  place.
This  only  is  right.  Hence  therefore  we  find,  as  the  first
distinguishing  trait  of  the  divine  life,  the  exercise  of
obedience:  not  only  are  His  commandments  to  be  kept,
but  also  His  word.

But  there  is  more  than  this.  "He  that  saith  he
abideth  in  him  ought  himself  also  so  to  walk,  even  as
he  walked."  I  need  not  only  commandment  and  word,
but  Himsdf  as  a  living  person  before  my  eyes.  It  is
always  thus  in  John,  who  treats  of  Christ  Himself
Thus  while  providing  for  the  deepest,  there  is  a  grace
which  wins  the  simplest  It  is  clearly  Christ  Himself
as  He  walked  day  by  day  in  this  poor  world.

But  there  follows  another  and  a  remarkable  word,
which  needs  a  little  explanation.  "  Beloved,"  says  he
(for  this  is  the  true  word  in  verse  7),  "  I  write  no  new
commandment  unto  you,  but  an  old  commandment
which  ye  had  from  the  beginning."  It  means,  as  before,
from  the  time  that  Christ  was  manifested  in  this  world.
"The  old  commandment  is  the  word  which  ye  have
heard  from  the  beginning.  Again,  a  new  commandment
I  write  unto  you,  which  thing  is  true  in  him  and  in  you."


THE  FIBST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  307

The  old  commandment  was  manifested  in  Christ  Him-
self.  He  alone  was  always  the  obedient  one.  It  is  now
not  merely  an  old  commandment,  but  a  new  one,  yet  the
very  same.  Why  ?  Because  it  is  the  same  life,  whether
viewed  in  the  Christian  or  in  Christ.  If  I  look  at  Christ
Himself,  it  is  the  old  commandment  seen  in  Him  from
the  beginning ;  but  now  it  is  no  longer  this  solely,  but
a  new  commandment,  "  which  thing  is  true  in  him  and
in  you."  It  is  the  same  life,  seen  in  Christ  in  its  perfec-
tion, in  us  often  hindered  and  obscured  by  the  activity
of  what  is  of  the  first  man.  Christ  alone  was  its  fulness ;
now  we  have  it  in  Him.  As  John  tells  us,  it  is  true  in
Him  and  in  you  because  it  is  the  very  same  life.

''  He  that  saith  he  is  in  the  light,  and  hateth  his
brother,  is  in  darkness  even  until  now."  Love  now
comes  in.  It  is  not  disobedience  only  which  detects  that
a  man  is  not  really  born  of  God,  but  also  hatred.  He
that  loves  not  is  not  bom  of  God.  "  But  he  that  hateth
his  brother  is  in  darkness,  and  walketh  in  darkness,  and
knoweth  not  whither  he  goeth,  because  that  darkness
hath  blinded  his  eyes."  This  was  the  more  important
to  press,  because  these  false  teachers  had  not  the  smallest
concern  about  their  brethren.  What  they  sought  was
self — in  one  form  or  another;  and  consequently  light,
as  they  called  it,  was  no  more  than  the  invention  of
novel  notions.  But  the  true  way  in  which  divine  light
(Christ)  shows  itself  is  in  obedience  as  its  efifect,  and  so
surely  in  love.  You  cannot  obey  God  without  loving
your  brethren  also.

This,  however,  leads  into  a  remarkable  parenthesis  in
the  epistle,  on  which  we  need  not  dwell,  because  it  is

X  2


308  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

perhaps  more  than  any  other  part  of  the  epistle  familiar
to  all.  The  great  characteristic  throughout,  being  life  in
the  Son  of  God,  forbids  the  apostle  from  entering  into
the  different  measures  of  attainment  as  a  rule ;  yet  as
it  is  a  fact  that  there  are  some  more  mature,  some  more
vigorous,  and  some  comparatively  feeble  in  the  expres-
sion of  Christ  here  below,  the  Spirit  of  God  in  this
parenthesis  notices  these  differences  briefly.

Before  this  is  done,  He  lays  down  what  they  had  all
in  common.     They  were  forgiven  for  Christ's  name.

Then  the  fathers  were  known  by  their  knowledge  of
Christ — a  beautiful  and  blessed  distinction.  They  had
"known  him  that  w£is  from  the  beginning."  This  we
have  seen  to  be  the  great  text  of  the  whole  epistle,  and
it  is  the  more  remarkable  that  he  does  not  mention  any
depths  or  heights  of  knowledge.  Not  a  word  is  said
about  dispensations,  or  prophecy,  or  anything  that  is
thought  abstruse.  There  was  one  that  was  beyond  all
others  and  included  everjrthing  else :  it  was  Christ
Himself  The  fathers  were  those  marked  by  knowing
Him.  Wherever  they  might  have  learned,  however  their
vigour  might  once  have  gone  forth,  they  came  back  to
what  they  started  with — even  Christ.  It  was  a  deeper
appreciation  of  Christ,  and  this  as  manifesting*  God  the
Father  here  below.     Such  are  the  fathers.

The  young  men  went  forward  in  the  ways  of  God,
undaunted  by  difficulties,  feeding  on  the  word,  and
overcoming  the  wicked  one.  The  babes  (watSia)  had  a
real  enjoyment  of  the  Father's  love.

The  apostle  traverses  the  ground  again,  and  in  doing
so  simply  repeats  in  so  many  words  what  he  had  said
of  the  fathers,  adding  a  little  more  as  to  the  yoimg


L*'Pi


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  309

men,  and  most  of  all  when  he  comes  to  the  babes.  The
gracious  condescension  of  love  in  this  must  be  manifest
to  any  spiritual  mind.  Those  are  peculiarly  the  objects
of  our  Fathers  care  who  need  it  most.  The  babes
therefore  have  the  chief  place  in  this  expanded  form.
The  fathers  did  not  so  much  want  it  It  is  in  address-
ing the  babes  that  we  find  the  development  of  the
antichrists.  They  require  to  be  guarded  against.  They
abound  in  snares  and  seductions.  We  have  therefore
very  important  light  as  to  the  nature  of  the  antichrists;
and  this  consists  of  two  great  parts.  All  Jewish  hope
is  denied,  and  so  is  all  Christian  truth.  He  denies  the
Christ,  that  is,  the  Jewish  expectation.  He  denies  the
Father  and  the  Son,  and  that  is  the  sum  of  Christianity.
Such  the  antichrist  will  be — the  result  of  a  total  rejec-
tion of  both  Old  Testament  and  New.  He  denies  the
object  of  a  Jew's  faith,  and  also  the  person  into  whose
love  and  fellowship  the  gospel  brings  those  who  believe
now.  All  this  will  be  completely  swamped  by  the
antichrist.  This  is  the  very  point  to  which  things  are
rapidly  carrying  men  in  the  world  at  the  present  mo-
ment. I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  more  than  currents
everywhere  are  setting  in  toward  that  direction ;  but
undoubtedly  there  is  an  undermining  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, and  a  total  ignoring  as  well  as  a  growing  rejection
of  the  true  grace  of  God  in  the  New.

After  all  this  is  closed,  in  verse  28,  the  whole  family
are  seen  joined  together  as  little  children  once  more.
"  And  now,  little  children,  abide  in  him ;  that,  when  he
shall  appear,  we  may  have  confidence."  The  way  in
which  people  commonly  understand  it  is,  that  you  may


310  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

have  confidence,  but  it  is  **we  may  have  confidence,  and
not  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his  coming."  This  is
exceedingly  blessed.  He  appeals  to  divine  love  in  the
saints.  Do  you  be  careful  how  you  are  walking;  that
when  Christ  appears,  we  may  not  be  ashamed  because
of  the  little  you  have  profited  by  the  grace  and  the
truth  of  God  we  have  been  ministering  to  you  in  Christ.
This  seems  the  meaning  of  it.  "  If  ye  know  that  he  is
righteous,  ye  know  that  every  one  that  doeth  righteous-
ness is  bom  of  him."

Now  he  is  going  to  enlarge  on  the  subject  of  right-
eousness. However,  before  he  enters  into  it  fully,  he
gives  us  a  prefatory  note  beginning  with  the  last  verse
of  chapter  ii.,  and  then  shows  us  the  privileges  into
which  grace  brings  those  who  are  born  of  God.

"Behold,  what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath
bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called  children  of
God."  It  may  be  mentioned  hei*e  that  "  sons  of  God"
is  never  the  expression  of  the  writings  of  John.  We
have  "sons  of  God"  as  well  as  "children"  in  Paul's
epistles.  But  "children  of  God"  the  Holy  Ghost
employs  exclusively  both  in  the  gospel  and  in  this
epistle  of  John.  Is  it  asked  what  is  the  difference  ?  It
lies  in  this,  that  son  (yiosi)  is  more  the  public  title,
whereas  child  (tckvov)  conveys  rather  the  closeness  of
connexion  by  birth.  It  expresses  community  of  nature
as  bom  of  God.  For  it  will  be  understood  that  a  person
who  was  not  a  child  might  be  adopted  as  a  son;  but  the
Christian  is  not  only  a  son  adopted  by  our  God — he  is
really  a  child  as  being  a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature.
This  only  it  is  John  puts  forward  and  prominently
speaks  of ;  and  it  is  seen  at  once  how  it  connects  itself


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  311

with  his  doctrine  everywhere.  We  are  bom  of  God, —
bom  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  made  partakers  of  the
divine  nature  (in  the  sense,  of  course,  of  having  the  life
that  was  in  Christ).  "  Therefore  the  world  knew  us  not,
because  it  knew  him  not"

So  absolutely  is  the  life  of  Christ  found  in  us,  that
we  have  the  same  fare,  so  to  speak,  as  Christ  in  this
world.  The  world  did  not  know  Him;  therefore  it
does  not  know  us.  It  is  simply  because  of  Christ,  un-
known then  personally,  unknown  now  in  us  who  live
of  His  life.  When  He  was  here,  it  was  no  other  life
than  that  which  we  now  have  in  Him.  The  world
never  knew,  never  appreciated,  the  life  that  was  in
Christ;  neither  does  it  recognise  that  which  is  in  the
children  of  God.  But  this  can  in  no  way  hinder  the
blessedness  of  the  result  for  the  children  of  God.

This  is  no  mere  empty  title.  "  Beloved,  now  are  we
the  sons  (children)  of  God ;  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  '*
(that  is,  it  has  not  been  manifested)  "what  we  shall  be."
As  far  as  the  word  of  God  could  show,  (and  how  well
it  does !)  it  is  clearly  revealed  there.  This  remark  is
added  to  cut  oflf  misapprehension  of  the  sense,  as  it
may  hinder  the  vagueness  that  prevails  in  many  minds.
Indeed,  an  hope  has  been  revealed  to  us  most  distinctly:
what  we  shall  be  is  revealed  not  only  elsewhere,  but
here  also.  The  apostle  does  not  at  all  overlook  this.
But  "  it  doth  not  yet  appear,"  in  the  sense  that  it  has
not  yet  been  manifested  as  a  fact  before  the  world ;  but
" toe  know"  says  he,  and  we  only  know  because  it  has
been  revealed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  word.  "We
know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him ;
for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."   There  is  no  haze  over


312  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

the  future  of  the  child  of  God.  He  has  the  certainty
in  his  soul,  because  he  has  the  revealed  assurance  in
scripture  that  he  shall  be  like  Christ.  Christ  being  his
life  now,  no  wonder  that  he  must  be  like  Clirist  then ;
and  this  too  is  founded  on  a  ground  blessedly  sure  and
simple,  and  at  the  same  time  full  of  glory  to  Christ:
"We  shall  see  him,*'  This  is  enougL  Such  and  so  great
is  the  gracious  assimilating  energy  of  the  Second  man,
that  for  us  to  see  Him  is  to  be  like  Him.  When  we
saw  Him  here  on  earth  by  faith,  we  were  made
spiritually  like  Him;  when  we  shall  see  Him  bodily  by
and  by,  we  shall  be  like  Him  even  in  our  bodies.

Such  then  is  the  portion  of  the  Christian  by  grace ;
and  here  is  the  moral  consequence :  "  Every  one  that
hath  this  hope  on  him" — founded  on  Him — "purifieth
himself,  even  as  he  is  pure."  Thus  for  the  Christian  it
is  not  any  longer  a  law  that  demands  this  thing  or  that.
There  is  the  full  operation  of  the  Spirit  by  the  entire
word  of  God,  no  part  of  scripture  being  excluded  from
the  enjoyment,  instruction,  and  admonition  of  the
Christian.  At  the  same  time,  what  gives  all  scripture
its  fulness  of  application  to  the  believer  is  the  pos-
session and  knowledge  of  Christ  Himself.  Without
Him  you  cannot  understand  any  part  of  the  Bible
spiritually — that  is,  neither  certainly  nor  thoroughly.
It  is  Christ,  who  not  only  gives  us  intelligence,  but
gives  it  power  by  the  Spirit  over  and  in  us.

Then  John  proceeds  naturally  to  trace  the  difference
between  the  two  families  :  "  Every  one  that  committeth
sin  committeth  also  lawlessness."  I  give  you  the  sense
rather  more  exactly  than  it  stands  in  our  common
version.     There  is  no  allusion  to  transgi'essing  the  law.


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  313

Perhaps  there  is  hardly  a  worse  translation  than  this  in
the  New  Testament,  nor  one  as  to  which  even  scholars
seem  duller.  Sin  is  declared  to  be  lawlessneas.  Beyond
a  shadow  of  doubt  it  may  be  asserted  that  the  apostle
does  not  define  sin  as  "  the  transgression  of  the  law."  It
is  a  false  version  which  nothing  can  justify,  and  I  am
perfectly  persuaded  the  more  any  man  understands
either  the  word  of  God  in  general  or  the  language  in
which  John  wrote,  with  the  less  hesitation  he  will  con-
fess this.  That  a  person  who  is  only  spelling  out  his
Greek,  and  learning  to  render  by  the  help  of  the
Authorized  Version,  may  make  ditiiculties  about  the
matter  is  intelligible;  but  it  is  hard  to  see  how  an
unbiassed  honest  man  who  knows  the  language  could
have  the  slightest  question  about  it.  Do  I  insinuate  that
our  translators  were  not  men  of  integrity,  able,  erudite,
and  pious  ?  They  were  under  no  small  difficulties,  but
they  tried  to  do  their  best.  Possibly  their  attention
was  never  drawn  to  the  point.  Even  intelligent  men
were  considerably  muddled  as  yet  from  the  past  as  well
as  the  actual  struggles  of  that  day.  But  instead  of  either
finding  fault  with  them  or  endorsing  all  they  said,  what
we  have  to  do  is  to  profit  by  whatever  is  good  and  true,
and  at  the  same  time  to  be  warned  by  whatever  mistakes
others  have  made.

Now  I  maintain,  not  only  that  the  word  (avofila)  will
not  bear  such  a  meaning,  but  that  it  is  altogether  foreign
to  the  scope  of  the  passage  and  the  drift  of  the  apostle*s
reasoning.  He  is  not  speaking  of  particular  acts,  but
about  nature  manifesting  itself  in  our  ways.  "  Every  one
that  committeth  sin  committeth  also  lawlessness."  A
man  who  sins  shows  his  will  alienated  from  God — an


314  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

evil  nature  derived  from  him  who  fell  through  Satan.
Here  the  apostle  regards  man  as  doing  nothing  else  but
his  own  will,  which  is  exactly  what  the  natural  man
does.  He  acts  independently  of  God,  and,  as  far  as  he
is  concerned,  never  does  anything  but  his  own  wilL
John  is  not  speaking  of  positive  overt  acts,  but  of  the
man's  habitual  bent  and  character — ^his  life  and  nature.
The  sinner,  then,  sins,  and  in  this  merely  shows  out
his  state  and  the  moral  roots  of  his  nature  as  a  sinner
(namely,  lawlessness).  He  has  neither  heart  nor  con-
science towards  God  :  he  does  what  he  likes  as  far  as  he
can.  He  practises  lawlessness ;  and  sin  is  lawlessness.

What  makes  it  of  practical  as  well  as  dogmatic  import-
ance is,  that  the  common  view  entails  the  accompanying
error  that  the  law  is  always  in  force  for  all  the  necessary
expression  of  God's  mind  and  will.  But  this  we
know  from  many  scriptures  is  not  true.  The  Bible
is  thoroughly  explicit,  that  one  particular  nation  was
said  to  be  under  law,  and  that  the  rest  of  mankind  had
no  such  position,  though  responsible  on  their  own
ground.  (See  Eom.  ii.  12-15;  iii.  19.)  Here,  therefore,
the  translation  cannot  be  correct  which  contradicts
other  passages  of  undoubted  holy  writ;  for  if  the
common  version  of  1  John  iii  4  held  good,  the  rest
of  mankind  outside  the  Jews  could  not  have  been
sinners  at  all,  because  they  were  not  under  law.  Thus,
evidently,  this  error  throws  the  whole  doctrine  of  what
sin  is  and  of  God's  dealings  with  men  into  hopeless
confusion.  It  necessarily  darkens  some  vitally  mo-
mentous parts  of  God's  word  as  to  past,  present,  and
future.  For  instance,  according  to  the  scripture  already
referred  to,  in  the  day  of  judgment  God  will  by  Jesus


m^^


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  315

Christ  deal  with  the  Jew  according  to  the  law,  with  the
Gentiles  that  have  it  not  according  to  conscience  ;  and,
by  parity  of  principle,  with  professing  Christians  ac-
cording to  gospel  light.  There  is  no  hint  of  judging
all  by  the  measure  which  was  given  to  Israel.  The
idea  springs  from  a  source  no  better  than  traditional
ignorance.

Again,  taking  Romans  iv.  15  ;  and  v.  13, 14,  it  would
perplex  all  to  bring  in  the  common  version  of  1  John
iii  4 ;  for  it  would  follow  thence  that  there  was  no  sin,
because  it  had  not  the  form  of  a  transgression  of  law
between  Adam,  who  had  a  law,  and  Moses,  by  whom
the  law  was  given.  So  fatal  may  be  a  mis-translation
of  scripture.  In  fact,  practically,  it  lowers  the  sense
of  what  sin  is  throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of
Christendom,  others  having  fallen  into  an  error  similar
to  that  of  our  own  translators.  It  is  therefore  as  certain
as  it  is  important  to  see  that  sin  embraces  much  more
than  a  transgression  of  the  law.  In  this  case  there
could  be  no  such  thing  as  sin  without  the  law,  and  all
would  be  judged  alike  as  under  the  law  and  trans-
gressors of  it,  contrary  to  the  express  word  of  God.
Our  version  is  wrong.  Sin  is  not  the  transgression  of
the  law,  though  every  transgression  of  the  law  is  a  sin.
The  true  meaning,  as  I  have  said,  is,  "sin  is  lawless-
ness."

As  for  the  Christian,  then,  to  resume  our  sketch,  all
is  dififerent  (not  conduct  only  but  rather  a  new  nature)
from  man  as  such.  We  know  that  He  (Christ)  was
manifested  to  take  away  our  sins,  and  in  Him  is  no  sin.
"Whosoever  abideth  in  him" — and  this  is  the  conse-
quence of  really  knowing  Christ — "  sinneth  not."  Such


316  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

is  the  life  of  the  Christian  that  this  is  the  consequence
of  abiding  in  Him.  If  grace  has  turned  my  soul  to
Him,  if  I  am  resting  on  Christ  as  my  Saviour  and  Lord,
my  life  and  righteousness,  I  shall  also  by  grace  abide
in  Him,  and  "  Whosoever  abideth  in  him  sinneth  not."
In  fact,  who  ever  sinned  with  Christ  before  his  eyes?
When  a  Christian  is  drawn  aside,  another  object  usurps
the  place  of  Christ,  and  his  own  will  exposes  him  to
the  wiles  of  Satan  working  on  his  fleshly  nature  through
the  world.  And  "Whosoever  sinneth  hath  not  seen
him,  neither  known  him."  He  evidently  speaks  of  one
unconverted — a  man  in  his  natural  state.  If  he  had  only
seen  and  known  Christ,  how  changed  all  would  be !

"  Little  children,  let  no  man  deceive  you."  This  the
false  teachers  and  antichrists  were  doing.  They  had
invented  the  awful  theory  that  the  great  blessing  of
Christ  had  swept  away  all  need  of  self-judgment  and
holiness — that  sin  was  gone  in  every  sense.  Hence  a
believer  might  take  his  ease  in  the  world.  If  Christ
had  taken  away  all  sin,  why  talk  more  about  it  ?  What
need  of  repentance  or  confession,  as  the  croakers  talked
who  refused  to  go  on  to  higher  life  and  truth  ?  **  Little
children,  let  no  man  deceive  you :  he  that  doeth  right-
eousness is  righteous,  even  as  he  is  righteous.  He  that
doeth  sin  is  of  the  devil."

Here  we  see  the  ground  for  saying  that  John  traces
all  up  to  two  distinct  families — the  family  of  Grod  and
that  of  the  devil.  "  The  devil  sinneth  from  the  begin-
ning :"  such  is  his  character,  though  he  is  not  under
law.  "  For  this  purpose  the  Son  of  God  was  manifested
that  he  might  destroy  the  works  of  the  deviL"  That
was  His  character,  and  the  result  of  His  appearing  and


ri>4


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  317

work  in  this  world.  "  Every  one  that  has  been  born  of
God  doth  not  sin."  Such  is  the  deduction:  "for  his  seed
remaineth  in  him;"— the  life  that  God  has  given  through
faith,  Christ  Himself  being  the  source  and  expression  of
it — "and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  has  been  born  of  God."
There  is  shown  the  new  nature.  It  is  a  matter  of  course
that  every  one  lives  according  to  his  nature :  only  the
Christian,  having  two,  must  mortify  the  evil  and  walk
according  to  the  good.  Take  the  simplest  animal, — the
bird  above,  or  the  reptile  below,  or  any  other  around  us,
—every  creature  lives  according  to  its  nature.  So  does
the  sinner.  He  lives  according  to  that  nature  which  is
now  under  Satan's  power.  The  believer  lives  in  Christ.
John  is  not  here  looking  at  modifications  through  circum-
stances, it  is  to  be  observed.  He  is  not  here  looking  at
particular  cases  of  unfaithfulness.  John  as  a  rule  does
not  occupy  himself  with  the  details  of  fact.  He  looks
at  truth  in  its  own  proper  abstract  character  apart  from
passing  circumstances ;  and  if  you  do  not  read  John's
writings  thus,  especially  the  epistle  before  us,  I  am
afraid  that  there  is  little  prospect  that  you  will  ever
undei'stand  them.

Having  shown  this,  he  now  brings  in  the  other  test,
that  is,  not  simply  righteousness  but  love,  "  This  is  the
message  that  ye  heard  from  the  beginning,  that  we  should
love  one  another.  Not  as  Cain" — no  love  was  there.
"  Not  as  Cain,  who  was  of  that  wicked  one,  and  slew  his
brother."  There  is  the  connexion.  He  has  brought  in  the
wicked  one  and  his  family.  Man  now  is  not  only  a  sinner,
but  especially  shows  his  character  in  this,  that  ho  ex-
hibits no  love.  By  love  he  means  what  is  of  God,  and  this
exclusively.  He  does  not  of  course  deny  natural  afTection^


318  DiTBODUCTORY  LECTURES.

but  insists  on  love  as  divine.  Cain  had  no  love,  and
proved  it  bj  slaying  his  own  brother.  ''And  wherefore
slew  he  him  ?  Because  his  own  works  were  evil,  and  his
brother's  righteous."  He  here  traces  the  link  that  binds
righteousness  with  love.  We  have  had  righteousness
separately  as  well  as  love :  now  he  shows  that  the  two
things  are  intertwined,  and  are  found  only  in  the  same
persons.  But  here  too,  as  in  Christ  was  no  sin,  so  in
Him  we  behold  perfect  love,  and  in  the  world  hatred.
Ought  we  then  to  be  surprised  at  the  world's  hatred  t
Hence,  ''We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto
life,  because  we  love  the  brethren.  He  that  loveth  not
his  brother  abideth  in  death.  Every  one  that  hateth  his
brother  is  a  murderer."

Thus  things  are  followed  to  their  full  result,  as  we
have  seen  them  traced  to  their  hidden  sources  before
God.  How  dififerent  was  all  with  Christ!  "Hereby
perceive  we  the  love"  ...  To  add  "of  God"  spoils  the
sentence.  There  is  no  ground  for  interpolating  any  words.
But  One  showed  such  love,  and  He  was  man  as  surely
as  God.  "  Hereby  perceive  we>he  love,  because  he  laid
down  his  life  for  us."  If  you  want  to  know  what  love
is,  look  here.  This  was  love  indeed.  "And  we  ought  to
lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren."  The  same  life  of
wliich  we  live  was  in  Him :  ought  it  not  to  be  exercised
in  similar  love?  We  may  not  often  be  called  to  lay
down  our  life  for  our  brethren  ;  but  are  there  not  plain,
simple,  common  ways  by  which  it  may  be  tested  every
day  ?  My  brother  may  have  need :  it  is  no  use  talking
about  readiness  to  die  for  my  brother,  if  I  at  once  shrink
back  from  meeting  his  ordinary  and  perhaps  urgent
necessity  ?     There  is  nothing  gi*eat  here ;  it  is  homely,


Tin:  YUi<T  ]:ri>Ti.i:  nr  .muv.  ::i'.)

but  how  practical  1     How  it  put3  the  heart  to  the  test,
and  one  that  might  be  presented  any  day  of  the  week !

''Whoso  hath  this  world's  good,  and  seeth  his  brother
have  need,  and  shutteth  up  his  bowels  of  compassion
fiom  him,  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in  him  ?  My
Utile  children,  let  us  not  love  in  word,  neither  in  tongue ;
but  in  deed  and  in  truth.  And  hereby  we  know  that
we  are  of  the  truth,  and  shall  assure  our  hearts  before
hiuL  For  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater  than
our  heart,  and  knoweth  all  things."  He  here  puts
before  them  the  great  danger  of  trifling  with  the  practi-
cal consequences  of  the  truth.  Suppose  that  a  man
knows  what  God  says  and  wishes,  and  yet  does  not
act  upon  it,  what  is  the  consequence  ?  He  must  get  into
consciousness  of  distance  from  God.  ''To  him  that
knoweth  to  do  good  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin,"
says  James.  So  we  have  the  same  question  here.  The
point  is  not  a  man's  losing  his  place  in  Christ,  but  his
ground  of  confidence  with  God.  Communion  is  almost
as  strikingly  a  characteristic  point  of  John,  as  life  in
Christ,  and  the  love  from  which  both  flow.  He  is  not
satisfied  that  men  should  be  simply  Christians,  but  that
they  should  enjoy  Christ  practically.  An  idle  word,
a  passing  thought  unjudged,  might  disturb  this.

**  Beloved,  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we
confidence  toward  God."  Looking  up,  a  simple  soul  goes
on  with  the  Lord.  "Then  have  we  confidence  toward
God.  And  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  him,  be-
cause we  keep  his  commandments,  and  do  those  things
that  are  pleasing  in  his  sight.  And  this  is  his  command-
ment. That  we  should  believe  on  the  name  of  his  Son
Jesus  Christ"    It  is  the  beginning  of  everything  good,


320  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

and  goes  right  through  to  the  end,  as  I  need  not  say.
There  is  the  one  and  only  starting-point  in  the  mind  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  who  always  gives  Christ  His  own
primary  place.  To  be  saved  even  is  not  put  as  the  first
duty,  but  to  "  believe  on  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  and  love
one  another,  as  he  gave  us  commandment.  And  he
that  keepeth  his  commandments  dwelleth  in  him,  and
he  in  him."

Here  we  come  to  a  very  important  expression,  which
we  find  more  particulariy  in  chapter  iv.  It  is  not  sim-
ply our  dwelling  in  Him :  this  we  had  already  in  ch.  i.
(and  abiding  in  Him  is  the  same  word) ;  but  He  dwells
in  ?/5.  Wonderful  truth !  This  is  here  applied  to  one
of  these  two  things.  "  Hereby  we  know  that  he  abideth
in  us,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  which  he  hath  given  us.**
The  Holy  Ghost  given  to  us  is  the  palmary  proof  that
God  abides  in  us.  He  dwells  in  us  by  His  Spirit.  This
does  not  necessarily  involve  our  abiding  in  God ;  but
if  God  gives  His  Spirit  to  any  believer,  He  abides  in
that  man.  We  shall  find  more  than  this  in  what
follows ;  but  before  these  truths  are  explained  moia9
fully,  John  cautions  the  saints.

Hence  chapter  iv.  begins  with  this  warning.  He  is
going  to  tell  us  about  the  Spirit  of  God  and  His  abid-
ing in  us,  but  he  would  have  us  on  our  guard  because
there  are  evil  spirits,  as  certainly  as  the  Holy  Spirit,
and  this  as  proved  by  the  false  prophets  that  have  gone
out  into  the  world.  "Believe  not  every  spirit"  There
is  nothing  that  exposes  the  believer  (and  it  has  always
been  so)  to  greater  danger,  than  severing  the  Holy
Spirit  from  Christ    The  apostle  ever  binds  His  power


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE   OF  JOHN.  321

with  Christ's  name.  We  shall  be  kept  in  the  truth  if
we  remember  that  the  one  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is
to  glorify  Christ,  and  this  therefore  becomes  the  test
in  practice :  the  Spirit  of  God  must  ever  operate  to
keep  Christ  before  our  eyes.  If  not,  we  are  not  far  from
a  snare.  Connect  the  Spirit  with  the  church  merely,
and  then  you  will  have  popery;  connect  Him  simply
with  individuals,  and  you  will  have  fanaticism.  He  is
a  free  and  evident  witness  to  Christ.  There  is  the
truth.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  sent  down  to  take  of  the
things  of  Christ,  and  to  show  them  to  us.  He  is  come
to  glorify  (not  a  priest  nor  even  the  church,  but)  Christ
Himself.  This,  I  admit,  is  the  truest  glory  of  the  saint
and  the  church — their  greatest  blessedness  and  joy.
In  Christ's  name  the  church  is  formed  by  the  Holy
Ghost;  through  Him  also  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  the
believer.  This  is  not  doubted ;  but  all  this,  and  the
testimony  and  ways  of  each  and  all  are  invariably  for
exalting  our  God  by  Christ  Himself  If  they  fail  here,
the  salt  has  lost  its  savour.

Take,  I  will  not  say  the  grossness  of  popery  but,  the
Quaker  system,  as  an  instance  which  painfully  reverses
the  truth.  The  reason  is  plain :  the  Spirit  is  practically
severed  from  Christ,  and  the  result  is  that,  under  colour
of  humility,  their  testimony  constantly  tends  to  exalt
the  first  man.  Every  child  of  Adam  is  supposed  to  have
the  Spirit  of  God.  The  consequence  is  that  the  truth
is  darkened,  impaired,  and  destroyed,  and  all  due  sense
of  the  ruin  of  man  destroyed  by  their  extreme  form
of  Pelagianisin,  deifying  not  ordinances  indeed  but
conscienca

However  this  may  be,  here  we  find  the  apostle

Y


%


322  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

solemnly  warning  the  saints  against  false  prophets.
Many  such  men  were  gone  into  the  world.  We  want
therefore  some  sure  means  of  discerning  them.  It  is
not  a  question  of  deciding  who  are  Christ's  and  who
are  not ;  but  rather  what  sort  of  spirit  it  is  that  acts  by
this  teacher  or  that.  It  is  not  at  all  the  point  to  pro-
nounce on  man's  state  before  God  or  his  destiny.  People
have  always  been  prone  enough  to  form  and  give  opinions
when  the  Lord  forbids  it.  It  is  clear  that  we  are  called
of  the  Lord  frankly  to  accept  persons  as  bom  of  God
when  they  render  a  true  testimony  to  Christ;  but^  on
the  other  hand,  we  ought  to  beware  of  endorsing  those
whose  testimony  in  word  or  deed  is  against  the  name  of
Jesus.

This  then  is  the  test  of  what  is  or  is  not  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  "Hereby  ye  know  the  Spirit  of  God:
every  spirit  that  confesseth  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the
flesh  is  of  God."  Let  me  beg  the  reader  here  to  leave
out  a  word  or  two  which  are  not  printed  in  italics.
"  Every  spirit  that  confesseth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come
in  the  flesh  is  of  God."  The  difference  is  great.  Aa  it
reads  in  the  Authorised  Version,  it  is  altogether  inade-
quate. It  may  be  in  the  recollection  of  not  a  few  here
that  a  generation  ago  there  were  manifestations  of  spirits
(evil,  I  doubt  not),  which  did  not  deny  that  Jesus  came
in  the  flesh.  On  the  contrary,  they  seemed  to  lay  the
greatest  stress  on  the  fact  of  His  incarnation,  and  chid
the  orthodox  for  want  of  heed  to  this  truth  if  not  of
faith  in  it.  The  point  of  their  own  false  doctrine  lay
in  maintaining  that  Jesus  took  the  flesh  in  the  same
condition  of  corruption  in  which  all  others  are  bom,
and  that  Jesus  showed  His  perfection  in  subduing  and


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  323

purifying  the  flesh.  Of  course  you  will  understand  that
my  reference  is  to  the  Irvingite  movement.  To  confess
therefore  that  Jesus  is  come  in  the  flesh  is  not  satis-
factory.

What  then  does  the  apostle  say  and  mean  here  ?  Every
spirit  that  confesseth  Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh  is
of  God.  This  is  to  confess  His  person ;  not  His  deity
alone,  still  less  His  humanity  alone,  but  Him  who  thus
came.  The  one  is  a  bare  acknowledgment  of  a  fact ;  the
other  is  the  confession  of  a  divine  person,  yet  a  man.
Now  there  is  no  demon  that  ever  acknowledges  the
person  of  Christ.  There  is  no  evil  spirit  but  winces  at
and  refuses  to  endorse  the  glory  of  Christ ;  whereas  the
direct  object  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  always  to  maintain
His  person  in  all  the  fulness  of  His  glory,  and  in  all
His  grace.  Let  none  take  it  as  a  statement  of  His
human  nature.  This  is  not  the  meaning.  The  real
humanity  of  Jesus  is  contained  in  it,  but  it  is  by  no
means  the  whole  or  chief  part  of  the  confession.  Take
any  man — yourself,  for  instance;  who  would  describe
you  as  having  come  in  the  flesh?  No  man  that  had
common  sense;  because  one  might  well  ask  in  what
other  way  you  could  come.  Here  was  the  difference
between  the  Son  of  God  and  any  other  that  ever  was
bom.  All  mankind  must  come  in  the  flesh  if  they  come
at  all.  The  wonderful  thing  was  that  this  divine  person
should  come  in  the  flesh.  For  what  claim  had  flesh  on
Him  in  the  slightest  degree  ?  Nothing  but  His  grace
hindered  His  coming  in  His  proper  divine  glory.  Had
He  been  thus  manifested  in  this  world,  of  course  it
must  have  involved  the  destruction  of  all  the  race.
According  to  the  will  and  counsels  of  the  Godhead  He

Y   2


324  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

was  pleased  to  come  in  the  flesh.  It  was  not  the  mani-
festation of  glory  save  of  His  person  morally  and  in
love,  but  of  that  very  grace  which  we  have  seen  from
the  beginning  of  tliis  epistle,  and  which  runs  through
to  the  end.

The  spirits,  then,  which  are  not  of  God  refuse  (save
when  divine  power  bent  and  broke  them)  to  own  the
personal  glory  of  Christ,  while  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God
loves  to  own  it.  Such  is  the  test.  If  therefore  any
doctrine  undermine  the  glory  of  Christ,  you  have  an
unequivocal  proof  that  it  is  of  Satan  as  certainly:
whatever  exalts  Christ,  according  to  the  word,  is  of
God.

This  leads  him  to  speak  of  the  diflFerence  of  what  is
in  the  world  from  that  which  is  of  God.  In  the  world
there  is  ever  at  work  a  restless  spirit  of  contrariety  to
Christ.  It  is  the  spirit  of  antichrist,  which  will  be
manifested  fully  in  its  own  season.  Hence  it  is  said,  **  Ye
are  of  God,  little  children,  and  have  overcome  them  :
because  greater  is  he  that  is  in  you,  than  he  that  is  in
the  world.  They  are  of  the  world:  therefore  speak
they  of  the  world,  and  the  world  heareth  them.  We
are  of  God :  he  that  knoweth  God  heareth  us ;  he  that
is  not  of  God  heareth  not  us.  Hereby  know  we  the
spirit  of  truth  and  the  spirit  of  error."  These  false
teachers  being  of  the  world,  speak  of  what  has  their
heart,  and  this  attracts  the  world.  There  is  sympathy
between  the  world  and  them.  "  We  are  of  God,"  says
the  apostle,  speaking  of  himself  and  his  fellows  raised
up  to  declare  the  word  of  God  fully.  He  is  peremptory;
and  this  rouses  the  spirit  of  unbelief  as  it  meets  faith :
**  He  that  knoweth  God  heareth  us ;  and  he  that  is  not


.    THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  325

of  God  heareth  not  us."  Here  again  is  a  serious  test.
It  is  not  only  the  confession  of  Christ,  but  that  man  is
proved  to  be  of  the  world  who  refuses  subjection  to
the  apostolic  word.  Many  a  man  might  profess  to
acknowledge  the  literal  words  of  Jesus ;  many  another
might  own  only  those  of  the  Old  Testament.  If  you
do  no  more  than  this  now,  you  cannot  be  of  God.  He
who  is  really  of  God,  while  thoroughly  owning  every
word  He  wrote  of  old,  feels  especially  the  blessedness
of  that  which  He  has  now  given  by  His  holy  apostles
and  prophets.  (Compare  Eph.  ii.  iii.)  This  was  of  the
utmost  moment  to  urge  at  the  time  the  gospels  and
epistles  appeared.  At  the  same  time,  though  not  of
course  in  exactly  the  same  shape  and  manner,  it  always
abides  a  grand  test,  next  to  the  person  of  Christ.  The
time  hastens  which  will  prove  how  few  among  those
that  acknowledge  the  New  Testament  really  hear  and
believe  it.  The  saddest  proof  that  they  do  not  believe
it  to  be  God's  word  will  be  their  giving  it  up.  Did
they  believe  it,  they  would  no  more  abandon  it  than
the  true  mother  would  allow  the  child  to  be  cut  in
twain.

But  this  brings  us  to  another  point — not  the  truth,
but  loving  one  another.  The  truth  comes  first,  and  then
love.  "  For  love  is  of  God ;  and  every  one  that  loveth
is  bora  of  God,  and  knoweth  God.  He  that  loveth  not
knoweth  not  God"  (whatever  may  be  his  pretensions
and  his  talk) ;  "  for  God  is  love."

This  leads  him  to  speak  of  the  way  in  which  God  has
shown  His  love.  He  brings  it  out  in  three  forms.  First,
there  is  the  wondrous  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ
which  is  the  foundation  of  the  gospel ;  and  in  a  twofold


326  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

way  also  He  was  manifested  in  Christ — as  life,  aud  as
propitiation.  If  we  had  not  Christ  as  life,  we  never
could  understand  God.  Could  we  have  understood  Him
by  having  Christ  as  our  life  without  propitiation,  as  His
holiness  and  judgment  would  have  been  slighted,  so  we
could  only  be  intensely  miserable.  To  have  the  know-
ledge of  what  God  is  and  of  what  we  are,  and  withal
not  to  have  our  sins  borne  away,  must  be  alike  His
dishonour  and  our  everlasting  shame  and  anguish ;  and
so  many  a  quickened  soul  who  is  ignorant  of  the  efficacy
of  redemption  proves  in  its  measure.  God  in  His  great
mercy  does  not  permit  any  to  know  it  to  its  depths.
But  how  many  of  us  have  known  what  it  is  to  be  con-
verted, and  yet  for  a  while  ignorant  of  the  judgment  of
sin,  and  its  absolute  removal  for  us  by  the  cross  of
Christ !  Consequently  one  had  no  taste  for  the  world,  a
horror  of  sin,  a  real  desire  to  do  God's  will,  but  not  the
least  rest  for  heart  and  conscience  in  Christ  before  God.
It  is  a  mercy  to  be  thus  converted,  a  misery  to  abide  in
this  state.  What  a  joy  that  God  does  not  divorce  but
unites  for  us  life  and  propitiation  in  our  Lord  and  His
work !  Let  not  man  meddle  here.  What  God  has  joined
let  no  man  put  asunder.  He  has  given  the  same  Christ
who  is  life  to  be  also  a  propitiation  for  our  sins.  Such
is  the  teaching  of  the  verses  9,  10,  both  being  the  dis-
play of  the  love  of  God,  and  in  contrast  with  law  (the
latter  especially),  which  had  no  life  to  give,  and  coiild
only  judge,  not  put  away,  sin.

But  this  is  not  all.  "If  God  so  loved  us"  (and  He
has  demonstrated  it  as  nothing  else  could),  "we  also
ought  to  love  one  another.  No  man  hath  seen  God  at
any  time.     If  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us.


^^i


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  327

and  his  love  is  perfected  in  us."  It  is  a  wonderful  word,
evidently  connecting  itself  (whether  written  before  or
after  is  of  no  account)  with  what  is  said  in  John  i.  18.
There  Christ  stands  the  manifestation  of  God  in  love.
Here  the  saints  are  called  to  be  no  less.  Beloved
brethren,  how  far  do  we  manifest  our  God  and  Father
by  this  divine  love  that  never  seeks  its  own,  and  is  at
all  cost  bent  on  the  good  of  its  objects,  His  children,
yea  all,  even  enemies  ?

"  Hereby  we  know  that  we  dwell  in  him,  and  he  in
us,  because  he  hath  given  us  of  his  Spirit."  This  goes
farther  than  the  last  verse  of  chap,  iii.,  which  said  that
He  dwells  in  us,  not  we  in  Him.  But  we  shall  see  more
of  this,  and  therefore  I  do  not  pause  on  it  now.  "And
we  have  seen  and  testify  that  the  Father  hath  sent  the
Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Whosoever  shall
confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  God  dwelleth  in
him,  and  he  in  God."

I  hardly  know  anything  that  concerns  us  more  pro-
foundly affecting  than  these  verses;  for  what  can  be
conceived  near  to  God,  if  it  be  not  dwelling  in  God  and
God  in  us  ?  There  is  no  image  that  tells  out  intimacy
and  mutuality,  so  to  speak,  more  than  this.  And  when
we  think  who  and  what  God  is,  as  well  as  what  we  are,
it  is  indeed  a  great  word  to  say.  Of  whom  does  the
apostle  say  it  ?  Of  every  Christian ;  and  this  too  as
the  simple  fruit  of  the  gospel.

But  let  us  look  a  little  at  the  force  of  the  passage
more  closely.  In  the  one  case  we  read,  "  Hereby  know
we  that  we  dwell  in  him,  and  he  in  us,  because  he  hath
given  us  of  his  Spirit;"  in  the  other  it  is,  "  Whosoever
shall  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,  God  dwelleth


328  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

in  him,  and  he  in  God."  It  is  not  now  said,  "  Hereby
we  know.''  In  this  instance,  perhaps,  the  person  may  be
without  objective  knowledge  of  it :  this  does  not  hinder
the  truth  of  the  blessing.  If  you  confess  that  Jesus  is
the  Son  of  God,  God  dwells  in  you,  and  you  in  God.
He  dwells  in  you,  having  given  His  Spirit  to  be  in
you.

This  is  the  way  in  which  His  dwelling  in  man  is
elBected ;  but  the  consequence  of  that  gift  to  you  is
that  you  make  God  your  refuge  and  delight.  There  is
no  such  thing  as  the  dwelling  of  the  Spirit  in  a  saint
without  bringing  the  soul  to  judge  itself,  as  well  as  to
peace  with  God.  To  this  it  seems  to  me  that  every  Chris-
tian comes  by  grace  sooner  or  later,  though  not  always
at  first.  He  will  be  brought  to  it  in  God's  goodness,
were  it,  as  it  is  ofteu,  on  a  death-bed.  We  do  not  always
judge  aright.  There  may  be  not  seldom  hindrances  to
comfort  through  bad  teaching,  as  well  as  through  un»
judged  sin.  Of  these  I  do  not  speak  now,  nor  of  defect
in  intelligence.  Still  less  do  I  speak  of  the  effects  of
the  Calvinistic  system  or  of  Arminianism,  both  of  which
are  prejudicial  to  enjoying  the  grace  of  God.  Calvinists
are  apt  to  think  an  Arminian  cannot  have  peace.  This
is  all  nonsense :  he  may  enjoy  peace  with  God  as  really
as  the  Calvinist.  Indeed  experience  would  say  it  is
more  frequent  than  with  those  of  the  opposite  school,
though  each  in  a  different  way  look  within  (I  believe,
unscripturally).  The  truth  is  that  peace  rests  on  our
faith  of  Christ  and  His  work.  Arminianism  is  no  more
to  me  than  Calvinism,  and  I  doubt  that  I  admire  one
more  than  the  other.  As  systems  they  seem  to  me
narrow,  unsound,  and  pernicious.  But  I  thank  God  that


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  329

to  not  a  few  who  are  committed  to  both  sides  He  has
given  to  taste  of  His  own  grace  in  Christ.

Be  this  as  it  may,  if  I  confess  Jesus  the  Son  of
God  as  Him  on  whom  ray  soul  rests,  and  on  His
rich  redemption,  the  Holy  Ghost  says,  "  I  can  dwell
there."  He  does  dwell  there;  and  if  so.  He  is  gra-
ciously pleased  to  draw  out  the  heart  to  confide  and
repose  in  God.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  dwelling  in
God.  It  is  to  find  in  God  one's  hiding-place,  as  well
as  spring  of  counsel  and  cheer  and  strength.  One
turns  to  Him  in  each  trial  and  difficulty  as  well  as
joy.  I  am  pretty  sure  there  is  not  one  of  us  who
uses  this  privilege  as  he-  ought.  Nor  does  John  speak
of  degree  at  all.  Such  a  thought  is  foreign  to  the
abstract  style  of  the  apostle  John.  He  treats  of  a  great
fact  for  the  Christian,  though  it  may  be  more  or  less
realized,  and  **  God  dwelleth  in  him,  and  he  in  God."
This  is  what  faith  receives  and  has.  The  beginning  is
God  making  His  abode  in  us;  the  result  is  that  we
dwell  in  God.  But  sometimes  he  puts  it  in  the  order  of
our  dwelling  in  God  and  God  in  us.  It  would  seem
that  he  then  speaks  of  experience,  where  he  puts  our
part  first,  and  then  God's  abode  in  us.

I  must  briefly  point  out  the  third  ground, — not  the
display  of  love,  or  its  operation  in  us,  but  the  perfec-
tion pf  love  with  us  (verse  17).  It  is  not  only  that
we  know  that  we  dwell  in  God  and  He  in  us  by  this,
that  He  has  given  to  us  of  His  Spirit ;  but  herein  has
love  been  perfected  with  us,  that  we  may  have  bold-
ness in  the  day  of  judgment ;  because  as  He  is,  so  are
we  in  this  world.  It  is  not  a  state  given  to  us  in  the
day  of  judgment;  we  are  so  dealt  with  now;  but  this


330  IKTRODUCTOBT  LECTURES.

gives  boldness  even  with  the  thought  of  the  day  of
judgment  before  us.  How  could  it  be  otherwise?  If
I  really  believe  and  am  sure  that  God  has  made  me  now
to  be  what  Christ  is,  what  can  the  effect  of  the  day
of  judgment  be  but  to  display  the  perfections,  not  only
of  what  Christ  is  for  me,  but  of  what  you  and  I  aie
by  and  in  Christ  our  Lord  ?    And  this  we  are  now.

The  last  chapter  speaks  of  another  thing.  Here  I
must  be  brief  indeed.  It  is  connected  with  the  chai^
at  the  end  of  chapter  iv.  to  love  one's  brother.  The
apostle  had  shown  the  various  displays  of  divine  love,
with  the  falsehood  of  professing  to  love  Grod  while  one
hated  a  brother.  But  this  might  elicit  the  question,
who  my  brother  is.  We  need  simplicity,  as  with  our  Grod,
so  with  His  children.  It  is  in  vain  to  pretend  that  this
is  hard  to  find  out.  The  Spirit  of  God  does  lay  down
unsparingly  and  in  all  their  fulness  the  tests  of  divine
life ;  but  now  let  the  question  be  raised,  who  my  brother
is,  and  the  answer  is  as  plain  as  possible:  "Every  one
that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  bom  of  God."

Is  it  not  sweet  that  after  all  the  fulness  of  truth  had
been  revealed,  after  all  the  display  of  Christ  in  glory
had  been  made  by  the  apostle  Paul,  after  the  apostle
John  had  set  us  in  presence  of  the  divine  nature  and
eternal  life  in  His  person,  we  have  here  such  a  proof
of  the  unchangeable  testimony  to  the  Lord  Jesus  as
Christ  ?  What  was  the  truth  that  Peter  and  the  rest
preached  at  Pentecost?  That  Jesus  is  the  Christ
What  is  the  truth  with  which  the  epistle  of  John
concludes?  That  Jesus  is  the  Christ.  There  is  no
wavering  in  what  is  divine.


m^3


THE  FIKST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  331

No  doubt  there  is  the  unfolding  of  truth  admirably
suited  to  all  the  varying  needs  of  the  church ;  but  when
you  come  to  the  question  after  all — who  and  what  is
God's  child  and  my  brother  ? — this  is  what  he  is :  the
man  that  believes  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  I  grant  you  it
is  the  very  lowest  confession  that  the  Holy  Ghost  could
accept ;  and  it  would  be  a  very  poor  thing  if  the  Chris-
tian only  believed  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ  If  made
exclusive,  what  an  unworthy  dealing  with  all  the  glory
of  Jesus)  But  it  is  to  me  a  blessed  thing  that  the
Holy  Ghost  maintains  to  the  end  the  value  of  what  He
b^an  with;  not  that  more  was  not  made  known,  but
that  this  abides  in  freshness  and  power.  No  doubt
such  a  confession  might  be  most  unintelligent,  but  at
least  there  is  this  divine  reality  in  his  soul — he  does
believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  That  this  should  be
said  at  the  beginning  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we
can  all  understand ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  none  but
God  would  have  thought  of  insisting  on  it  at  the  end
of  the  Christian  testimony ;  as  if,  among  the  last  words
that  the  Holy  Ghost  uttered.  He  should  say — I  have
been  leculing  you  into  all  depths  and  all  heights ;  I  have
laid  open  in  fresh  scriptures  the  full  circle  of  revealed
truth,  but  I  stand  to  what  I  began  with.  Learn  the
truth,  have  it  developed  in  your  souls,  not  by  the  truth
developing,  but  by  your  growing  up  into  it ;  but  never
give  up  first  principles.  "Every  one  that  believeth  that
Jesus  is  the  Christ  is  bom  of  God :  and  every  one  that
loveth  him  that  begat  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten
of  him."  It  is  not  now  loving  God  only,  but  His
children ;  and  thus  your  love  is  proved  to  be  divine,
and  that  you  really  love  Ood  Himself.    But  there  is


332  nrrRODUCTORY  lectures.

another  query  often  put :  How  am  I  to  know  that  I  do
love  the  children  of  God?  Be  sure  you  are  in  the
right  path.  Here  it  is — **By  this  we  know  that  we
love  the  children  of  Gk>d."  It  is  not  by  gratifying
them,  or  going  where  they  go  perhaps,  or  forcing  them
where  you  go.  You  might  be  totally  mistaken;  you
might  hurry  souls,  or  be  drawn  away  by  them  yourself.
There  is  no  love  in  either  one  or  other,  but  there  is  in
this — "when  we  love  God  and  keep  his  command-
ments." If  my  soul  goes  out  to  Him  in  love,  and  I
show  it  by  unreserved  fidelity  to  His  will,  there  is
nothing  that  is  more  truly  an  exercise  of  love  to  His
children.  You  may  seem  to  the  careless  not  thinking
of  them,  but  you  are  then  loving  them  best.  When  you
make  an  object  of  the  children  of  God,  there  is  no
real  love.  When  you  are  really  devoted  to  God  and  to
His  will,  you  truly  love  the  children  of  God.

"  For  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  his  com-
mandments :  and  his  commandments  are  not  grievous."
The  law  was  a  yoke  so  grievous  that  neither  their
fathers  nor  they  were  able  to  bear;  but  it  is  not  so
with  the  truth  of  God.  The  law  of  God  was  for  the
punishing  as  well  as  testing  of  the  old  man ;  the  word
of  God  is  the  food  and  directory  of  the  new  man.  But
is  not  the  world  a  great  hindrance?  No  doubt;  but
there  is  a  something  that  overcomes  the  world;  and
what  is  this  ?  Faith.  But  mark,  he  does  not  say  that
"every  one  who  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ"  over-
comes the  world.  Perhaps  you  may  see  some  whom  you
cannot  doubt  are  the  real  children  of  God,  but  they  do
not  overcome  the  world.  What  then  will  enable  them
to  overcome  the  world?    Believing  that  Jesus  is  the


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  333

Son  of  GroA  "The  Christ,"  I  might  perhaps  say,  connects
Him  with  the  world,  with  the  Jews  and  the  nations  He
is  to  govern;  *'the  Son  of  Ood''  connects  Him  with  the
Father  above  the  world.  Such  is  the  difference.  Thus,
while  holding  fast  and  giving  all  its  value  to  the  con-
fession that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  of  God,  I  am  not  to  be
tied  to  it  We  need  a  growing  sense  of  what  Christ  is,
and  of  His  glory,  in  order  to  resist  the  downward  ten-
dency and  the  ensnaring  power  of  the  world  around ;
and  true  power  over  the  world  is  by  advancing  in  the
knowledge  of  Christ.  There  is  no  other  thing  that  will
wear  so  welL  "  Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,
but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  ?"

"This  is  he  that  came  by  (8ia)  water  and  blood."  John
keeps  us  fully  in  the  consciousness  of  our  deliverance,
but  also  of  our  responsibility  (i.  e.,  as  God's  children).
"  This  is  he  that  came  by  water  and  blood,  even  Jesus
Christ ;  not  by  (cV)  water  only,  but  by  water  and  blood.
And  it  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness,  because  the
Spirit  is  the  truth.  For  there  are  three  that  bear  witness,
the  Spirit,  and  the  water,  and  the  blood :  and  these  three
agree  in  one."  This,  and  no  more  here,  is  genuine  scrip-
ture. A  good  deal  of  the  two  verses  is  and  ought  to  be
left  out,  if  all  legitimate  authority  is  heeded  by  us.

The  historical  fact,  which  becomes  the  basis  of  the
teaching,  is  that  recorded  in  the  Gospel,  chap.  xix.  34,
to  which  special  attention  is  drawn  in  the  following
verse,  as  recorded  by  John  who  saw  it ;  "and  his  record
is  true ;  and  he  knoweth  that  he  saith  true,  that  ye  might
believe."  Here,  instead  of  putting  that  inspired  witness
forward,  the  Spirit  takes  this  place,  the  greatest  of  all
present  witnesses  for  Christ.    The  idea  of  baptism  here


^


334  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

is  as  childish  for  "  the  water "  as  the  Lord's  Supper  is
confessed  to  be  for  "the  blood."  Purification,  propitia-
tion, and  power  answer  to  the  three,  all  flowing  to  us
in  or  consequent  on  the  death  of  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.

"If  we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  Gkxi
is  greater :  for  this  is  the  witness  of  God  which  he  hath
witnessed  concerning  his  Son.  He  that  believeth  on
the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself:  he  that
believeth  not  hath  made  him  a  liar;  because  he  hath
not  believed  in  the  witneas  which  God  hath  witnessed
concerning  his  Son,"  &c.  That  is,  God  bears  His  tes-
timony in  this  wondrous  triad — the  Spirit,  the  water,
and  the  blood, — three  witnesses,  yet  only  one  testi-
mony :  namely,  that  there  is  no  life  in  the  first  man
at  all,  and  that  all  the  blessing  is  in  the  Second ;  that
He  it  is  who  by  His  death  expiates  my  sins  and  pui^es
me,  and  that  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  me  the  joy  of  both
by  faith.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  come  not  to  bear  witness
to  the  first  man — He  has  only  to  convict  him  of  sin —
but  He  testifies  to  the  glory  of  the  Second  man,  the
riches  of  God's  grace  in  Him,  and  the  efficacy  of  His
work  in  death  for  the  believer.  The  church  was  becom-
ing a  ruin ;  but  the  believer  has  the  witness  in  himself.
Eternal  life  is  superior  to  all  change ;  and  that  he  has
— even  Christ — an  object  of  outward  testimony,  but
also  by  grace  in  himself.

This  is  farther  pursued,  showing  that  it  is  in  the  Son
of  God.  "He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life;"  and  if  a  man
has  not  the  Son  of  God,  it  does  not  matter  what  else  he
may  have,  he  has  not  Kfe.  It  is  in  the  Son,  and  only
in  Him.

Then  comes  the  conclusion.  "These  things  have  I


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  OF  JOHX.  335

written  unto  you  that  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son
of  God ;  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life."
And  there  he  stops.  What  is  added  as  the  last  clause
of  verse  13  only  spoils  the  verse.  It  was  put  in  by
man.  '*  And  this  is  the  confidence," — it  is  not  a  ques-
tion of  life  only,  but  of  confidence.  "  And  this  is  the
confidence  that  we  have  in  him,  that,  if  we  ask  any-
thing according  to  his  will,  he  heareth  us."  Thus  after
life  comes  confidence,  and  then  the  formal  close  of  all
follows,  as  we  see  in  verses  18-21.  "And  if  we  know  that
he  hear  us,  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have
the  petitions  that  we  have  asked  of  him."  But  is  there  not
such  a  thing  as  sin  ?  Yes.  "  If  any  one  see  his  brother
sin  a  sin  which  is  not  unto  death,  he  shall  ask,  and
he  shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  sin  not  unto  death.
There  is  a  sin  unto  death :  concerning  that  I  do  not  say
that  he  should  make  request.  All  unrighteousness  is
sin :  and  there  is  a  sin  not  unto  death."

Let  me  make  a  brief  remark  on  this.  The  "  sin  unto
death"  has  nothing  to  do  with  eternal  death,  but  with
the  close  of  this  life.  It  means  not  some  extraordinarily
grievous  act,  but  any  sin  whatever  under  special  circum-
stances. For  instance,  when  Ananias  and  Sapphira  lied
in  presence  of  the  grace  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  then
bestowing  on  the  church,  this  was  "sin  unto  death."
Many  a  man  since  then  has  told  a  lie  which  has  not  been
80  judged :  it  was  not  therefore  a  "sin  unto  death."  The
circumstances  of  the  case  have  an  important  influence
in  modifying  it  and  giving  it  character.  So  with  any
other  sin.  I  mention  this  because  it  is  there  precisely
where  spiritual  power  is  necessary  very  often ;  and  all
children  of  God  might  not  see  the  bearing  of  a  sin


336  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

and  its  peculiar  heinousness  under  a  given  state  of
things ;  but  when  once  it  is  shown,  they  can  understand
it  perfectly,  because  they  have  the  life  of  Christ  in
them,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  too.  "  All  unrighteousness
is  sin,  and  there  is  a  sin  not  unto  death."  We  must
not  think  that  all  sin  is  unto  death ;  but  any  sin  under
peculiar  circumstances  might  be.

And  then  the  last  verses  sum  up  the  whole  matter.
"  We  know  that  every  one  that  is  born  of  God  sinneth
not."  We  saw  that  to  be  born  of  God,  to  have  life,  is
the  great  doctrine  of  the  epistle.  Here  is  its  character.
Such  an  one  does  not  sin,  "  but  he  that  has  been  born
of  God  keepeth  himself,  and  the  wicked  one  toucheth
him  not."  Here  we  have  not  merely  its  character,  but
its  source.  The  character  was  Christ ;  the  source  is  God.
"We  know  that  we  are  of  God,  and  the  whole  world
lieth  in  the  wicked  one."  This  is  the  other  sphere.  "And
we  know  that  the  Son  of  God  hath  come."  Now  we
have  the  object  given.  "The  Son  of  God  hath  come,
and  hath  given  us  an  understanding  that  we  may  know
him  that  is  true ;  and  we  are  in  him  that  is  true,  in  hL<j
Son  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life.
Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols" — objects
apt  to  rise  with  blinding  power  between  their  eyes  and
Christ.


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  337


APPEKDIX  ON  1  JOHN  V.  7,  8.

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  excellent  persons  in  all  ages
have  been  prone  to  rest  some  of  their  defences  of  the  truth
on  untenable  ground.  The  danger  is  that  when  any  of  these
mistakes  in  proof  are  set  aside,  especially  by  foes  of  the  truth,
not  only  are  such  uninformed  and  incautious  disputants  apt
to  fight  stubbornly  for  what  is  indefensible  (i. «.,  really  for
self),  but  others,  partly  through  timidity,  partly  through
ignorance,  may  dread  that  the  truth  itself  is  imperilled,  or
be  even  disposed  to  stand  in  doubt  of  it,  confounding  the  ill-
conduct  of  its  advocates  with  its  own  impregnable  evidence.

Thus  one  hears  with  humiliation  that  any  man  of  learning
should  seek  to  shelter  the  famous  passage  of  the  three
heavenly  witnesses  from  the  reprobation  which  to  say  the
least  an  interpolated  gloss  deserves,  and  from  none  so  heartily
as  from  pious  men  jealous  for  the  divine  glory  of  the  Lord
Jesus.  Truth  is  itself  too  sacred  to  admit  of  giving  quarter
to  that  which  is  spurious,  the  continued  sanction  of  which  is
hostile  to  the  authority  of  the  Bible,  and  in  particular  to  the
very  point  which  the  suspicious  article  is  meant  to  support.
Let  us  remember  that  the  study  of  the  authorities  on  which
the  Greek  Testament  rests  has  greatly  developed  during  the
last  seventy  years,  and  especially  perhaps  the  last  thirty.
During  this  time  many  fresh  manuscripts,  some  of  great  value
and  antiquity,  have  been  brought  to  light,  along  with  a  fuller
and  more  exact  collation  of  all  that  had  been  previously
known ;  and  this  makes  an  error  of  the  kind  less  excusable
and  more  painful,  if  it  be  in  a  quarter  one  respects.

I  will  not  cite,  however,  from  any  volume  of  the  day,  but

Z


338  INTllODUCTOKV    LKCTrilF.S.

confront  a  sentence  of  the  famous  J.  Calvin  with  tlic  lai  ts,
that  every  intelligent  Christian  who  may  want  information^
but  values  nothing  but  the  truth,  may  be  enabled  to  judge
for  himself.  '^  Since,  however,  the  passage  flows  better  when
this  clause  [from  '<in  heaven"  to  ''in  earth"  inclusively]
is  added  (!)  and  as  I  see  that  it  is  found  in  the  best  and
most  approved  copies  (! !)  I  am  inclined  to  receive  it  as  the
true  reading."*  (Calvin,  Translation  Soc.  Comment,  on
the  Cath.  Epistles,  p.  257.  Edinburgh,  1855.)  Then,  again,
Beza,  who  ought  to  have  known  more  of  the  manuscripts,
follows  in  the  wake  of  his  leader.  Such  statements,  I  con-
fess, are  inexplicable,  save  on  the  supposition  both  of  strong
prejudice  and  of  surprising  inattention  to  the  facts  of  the
case.  For  so  decisive  is  the  testimony  of  ancient  documents
(whether  manuscripts,  versions,  or  citations  by  the  earliest
ecclesiastical  writers),  that  if  this  portion  can  be  allowed  to
be  scripture  against  their  testimony,  a  fatal  blow  is  inflicted
on  all  certainty  of  evidence  for  the  rest  of  the  New  Testa-
ment; for  all  the  uncials  preserve  a  dead  silence  as  to  it,
more  than  160  cursives,  all  the  lectionaries,  all  the  ancient
versions  except  the  Liitin,  and  even  of  the  Latin  more  than
fifty  of  the  oldest  and  best  copies,  and  of  the  rest  it  is  in
some  cases  inserted  by  a  later  hand,  and  with  that  uncertainty
of  position  which  often  accompanies  an  interpolation ;  while
it  is  not  once  quoted  in  any  genuine  remains  of  the  early
Gbreek  or  even  Latin  fathers,  even  where  the  occasions  seem
most  to  call  for  it.  Its  supposed  citation  by  TertuUian,
Cyprian,  Jerome,  &c.  is  an  illusion.

Hence  Erasmus,  in  his  first  (1516)  and  second  (1519)
editions  of  the  Greek  New  Testament,  so  far  faithfrdly  followed
his  MS.,  and  did  not  print  verse  7.     It  woiild  seem  that  the

•  "Quia  tamen  optime  fluit  contextoB  si  hoc  mombrtun  addatur,
et  video  in  optimis  ac  probatiBsiinis  fidoi  codicibns  haberi,  ego  quoqne
Ubenter  amplector.*' — Qymm,  in  toe,  Ed.  Oenev.  p.  74.


THE  FIBST  £PISTLK  OF  JOHN.  339

Complutensiaii  editors  mast  have  boldly  translated  the  Latin
version  as  it  stands  in  the  majority  of  the  extant  copies ;  for
in  the  captious  attack  now  before  me  {Annoiatian&s  Jacohi
Zopidis  Stunieae  contra  ErMtnus  Rot,  in  defens,  translation^
JT.  T.   Complut.  1520),  the  ablest  of  them  does  not  pretend
to  diplomatic  authority  for  the  Greek  they  venture  to  print,
bat  arraigns  the  Greek  MSS.  as  corrupted,  and  backs  up  the
common  text  of  the  Vulgate  by  a  quotation  from  Jerome*  s  (?)
J^ologue  to  the  Canonical  Epistles,     *'  Sciendum  est  hoc  loco
gTsecorum  codices  apertissime  esse  corruptos :  nostros  (!)  veio
veritatem  ipsam  ut  a  prima  origine  traducti  sunt  continere.
Quod  ex  prologo  beati  Hieronymi  super  epistolas  canonicas
manifeste  apparet.     Ait  enim  Quae  si  sic  ut  ab  eis  digests
sunt  ita  quoqne  ab  interpretibus  Meliter  in  latinum  verte-
rentur  eloquium :  nee  ambiguitatom  legentibus  facerent :  nee
sermonnm  sese  varietas  impugnarct  illo  prsecipue  loco  ubi  de
imitate  trinitatis  in  prima  loannis  epistola  positum  legimns.
In  qua  etiam  ab  infidelibus  translatoribus  multum  erratum  esse
a  fidei  veritate  comperimus  trium  tantummodo  vocabula  hoc
est  aquae  sanguinis  et  spiritus  in  ipsa  sua  editione  ponentibus
et  patris  verbique  ac  spiritus  testimonium  ommittentibus  in
quo  maxime  et  fides  catholica  roboratur  et  patris  et  filii  et
spiritus  sancti  una  divinitatis  substantia  comprobatur."     [I
give  the  quotation  as  S.  cites  it,  not  as  it  stands  in  the  Bene-
dictine edition  of  Jerome* s  works.]

Erasmus  had  already  replied  to  our  notorious  countryman,
Edward  Lee  (afterwards  Popish  archbishop  of  York),  that
he  did  not  find  in  the  Greek  what  was  so  common  in  the
Latin,  and  edited  accordingly,  without  expressing  approval
or  blame ;  that  he  had  at  different  times  seen  seven  manu-
scripts, in  none  of  which  was  anything  that  answered  to  the
ordinary  Vulgate.  "Porro  quod  Hieronymus  in  Praefatione
sua  testatur  hunc  locum  ab  hsereticis  depravatum,  si  velim
uti  jure  moo,  possem  appellare  ab  Hieronymi  auctoritate,

s  2


340  INTKODUCTORY  LECTURES.

quod  Leu9  facit  quoties  ipsi  commodum  est"  And  then  he
proceeds  to  expose  the  exaggeration  of  Lee,  and  to  propose
a  conjectural  correction  in  the  citation  firom  the  prologue.
(Desid.  ErasmL  0pp.  torn,  ix.,  coll.  275,  276.)  The  truth
is,  that,  by  the  common  consent  of  the  learned,  including
tiie  Benedictine  and  other  editors  of  Jerome's  writings,  this
prologue  is  confessed  not  to  be  his  production,  but  of  a  much
later  age,  and  by  an  inferior  hajid.  To  his  Spanish  critic  he
answers,  **Hic  ex  auctoritate  Hieronymi  [which  we  have
just  seen  is  no  authority  at  all,  being  a  forgery],  docet
Stunica  Grsecos  codices  palam  esse  depravatos.  Sed  interim
ubi  dormit  codex  iUe  Rhodiensis  f  Porro  nos  non  susceper-
amus  negotium  emendandi  Grsecos  codices,  sed  quod  in  illis
esset,  bona  fide  reddendi."  Then,  after  a  long  argument
intended  to  neutralize  the  alleged  statement  of  Jerome's
(which  Erasmus  says,  and  no  wonder,  he  does  not  quite
understand),  he  adds,  '<  Cum  Stunica  mens  toties  jactet  Kho-
diensem  codicem,  cui  tantum  tribuit  auctoritatis,  mirum  est,
non  hic  adduxisse  illius  oraculum,  prsesertim  cum  ita  fere
consentiat  cum  nostris  codicibus,  ut  videri  possit  Zeshia  regula,
Yeruntamen  ne  quid  dissimiilem,  repertus  est  apud  Anglos
Grsccus  codex  unus,  in  quo  habetur,  quod  in  vulgatis  deest.
Scriptum  est  enim  hunc  ad  modum :  "Ori  rpus  tltrw  oc
fiapTvpovvT€s  €v  T^  ovpav^  Ilar^p,  Aoyos,  koI  Uv^fia  [ayioi'  is
omitted],  koI  ovtoi  oi  rp€Ls  ty  cmtcv.  koI  Tp€is  clcrlv  [oc  ia
omitted]  fjLaprvpcvvrts  cv  t^  yj,  ttvcO/aix,  v^tapf  Ktu  alfiOf  ct  r^
fjuifyrvpiay  tw  ayOfnairmvy  &c.  Quanquam  hand  scio  an  casu
factum  sit,  ut  hoc  loco  non  repetatur,  quod  est  in  Grscis
nostris,  koul  ol  rpus  vs  i^tv  turLv.  Ex  hoc  igitur  codice  Britam'
nico  reposuimus,  quod  in  nostris  dicebatur  deesse  :  ne  cui  sit
causa  calumniandi.  Quanquam  et  hunc  suspicor  ad  Latinorom
codices  fuisse  castigatum.  Fosteaquam  enim  Graei  concordiam
inierunt  cum  Ecclesia  Itomana,  studuerunt  et  hao  in  parte
cum  Romanis  consentire."  (lb.  coll.  351-353.)


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  341

Therefore  Erasmus  in  his  third  edition  (1522)  inserted
verse  7,  correcting  two  errors  and  supplying  the  omission  at
the  end  of  verse  8  in  what  he  called  the  Cod.  Brit,  (or
Montfort  MS.),  which  probably  had  the  Acts  and  Epistles
added  about  this  very  time  to  the  Gospels  written  a  few  years
before,  as  the  Bevelation  was  added  by  another  hand  later
still— copied,  it  would  seem,  from  the  well-known  Leicester
MS.  Erasmus  put  in  the  passage  to  keep  his  promise,  not
because  he  counted  it  genuine.  Is  it  too  strong  to  fear  that
a  document  so  framed,  which  cannot  be  traced  beyond  a  friar
named  Froy,  and  which  came  in  so  opportunely  to  supply  an
apparent  authority  for  a  Greek  text  (of  which  more  presently)
for  the  three  heavenly  witnesses,  points  to  a  dishonest  source  ?

It  is  remarkable  too,  as  Sir  I.  Kewton  noticed  long  ago,
that  there  is  a  marginal  note  by  the  side  of  this  passage  in
the  Complut.  Polyglot,  as  in  1  Cor.  xv.  51  and  Matt.  vi.  13,
where  the  Vulgate  is  in  conflict  with  the  Greek  MSS.  It  is  a
pity,  however,  that  they  were  not  as  explicit  on  1  John  v.  7
as  there,  and  that  they  did  not  cleave  to  the  Greek  against
the  Latin,  as  they  did  in  rejecting  its  absurd  misrepresentation
of  1  Cor.  XV.  51.  They  do  indeed  cite  Thomas  Aquinas  for
1  John  V.  7.  **  Now  to  make  Thomas  thus  in  a  few  words  do
all  the  work  was  very  artificial"  (says  Sir  I.  N.,  Works,  vol.
V.  p.  522) ;  "  and  in  Spain,  where  Thomas  is  of  apostolical
authority,  it  might  pass  for  a  very  judicious  and  substantial
defence  of  the  printed  Greek.  But  to  us  Thomas  Aquinas
is  no  apostle.  We  are  seeking  for  the  authority  of  Greek
manuscripts.''

To  what  then  is  the  passage  due  ?  It  is  as  clear  as  any-
thing of  the  sort  can  be,  that  what  we  call  verse  7  sprang
from  Augustine's  remarks  on  what  now  stands  as  verse  8,
possibly  suggested  by  words  of  Cyprian  to  a  similar  effect.
Compare  his  treatise  contra  Maximinum  Arian.  Episcop.  1.  ii.
c.  22.  (Tom.  viii.  col.  725,  ed.  Ben.)  K'ot  that  the  celebrated


342  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

bishop  of  Hippo  cites  the  passage:  what  he  sajB  is  pro-
fessedly his  comment  or  gloss  on  the  words  spirit,  water,  and
blood.  '^  Si  Tero  ea,  quae  his  significata  sunt,  velimus
inquirere,  non  absurde  occurrit  ipsa  Trinitas,  qui  unus,  solus,
verus,  summus  est  Deus,  Pater,  et  Filius  et  Spiritus  sanctus,
de  quibus  verissime  dici  potuit,  Tr$%  sunt  testes^  et  tres  unum
8unt:  ut  nomine  Spiritxis  significatum  accipiamus  Deum
Patrem :  de  ipso  quippe  adorando  loquebatur  Dominus
ubi  ait,  Spiritus  est  Beus,  (Id.  iv.  24.)  Nomine  antem
sanguinis  Filium  quia,  verhum  caro  factum  est,  (Id.  i.  14.)
Spiritum  sanctum,"  &a  From  the  reputation  of  Augustine
this  fancifol  idea  at  first  gained  currency  and  acceptance,
though  not  always  in  precisely  the  original  shape;  then  it
seems  to  have  been  inserted  in  the  margin  as  a  gloss,  till  at
length,  through  the  ignorance  of  the  transcribers  and  the
clergy  in  general,  it  positively  crept*  into  that  text  which
the  Council  of  Trent,  with  a  temerity  as  amazing  as  the  lack
of  knowledge  it  betrays,  pronounced  authentic.  Hence  the
danger  of  demoralising  Eoman  Catholic  scholars,  some  of
whom,  like  R  Simon,  were  doomed  to  do  a  perpetual  violence
to  their  conscience,  while  others,  bolder  in  evil,  misdirect
every  weapon  that  ingenuity  can  devise  to  make  the  worse
appear  the  better  reason.  Most,  no  doubt,  intrench  them-
selves with  a  sort  of  blind  honesty  in  their  last  stronghold :

*  Jerome  (Epist.  cvi.  ad  Sunn,  et  Fret.)  speaks  of  a  similar  ooorse
of  mistake  in  copying  his  own  version.  "  Et  miror  quomodo  e  latere
Adnotationem  nostram  nescio  quis  temerarius  scribendam  in  oorpore
putaverit,  quam  nos  pro  eruditione  legentis  scripsimus  hoc  mode/'  &c
(S.  Hieronymi  0pp.  torn.  i.  p.  659,  Ed.  Ben.)  But  we  need  not  go
outside  the  commonly  received  text  of  the  Greek  New  Testament  in
order  to  find  another  instance  of  what  was  first  a  marginal  gloss,  which
at  length  crept  into  the  text ;  for  such  seems  to  be  the  history  of  Acts
viii.  37.  It  is  curious  that  here  the  conditions  are  reversed  as  between
Erasmus  and  the  Complutensian  editors ;  for  he  owns  the  verse  want-
ing in  his  Greek  copies,  yet  inserts  it  in  deference  to  the  Latin,  whilst
they  foUow  the  Greek  spite  of  the  Latin.


THE  FIRST   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  343

they  believe  what  the  church   believes — a  pitiful  answer
where  it  is  a  question  of  revealed  truth.

As  to  internal  evidence,  it  is  equally  conclusive  against  the
passage  foisted  in.  To  bear  witness  ''in  heaven''  is  nonsense ;
to  say  "  on  earth  "  is  superfluous ;  for  earth  is  the  constant
scene  of  testimony.  Again,  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  the
true  scriptural  correlatives — never  the  Father  and  the  Word,
which  last  is  in  correlation  with  Qod^  as  we  see  in  John  i.
Further,  since  Pentecost  the  Holy  Ghost  is  distinctively  said
to  be  sent  down  from  heaven,  and  this  with  a  view  to  the
testimony  of  the  gospel,  instead  of  bearing  record  in  heaven
with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  Lastly,  those  who  adopt  the
passage  as  it  stands  in  the  vulgar  Latin  copies  are  led  to
lower  the  character  of  the  witness  borne;  for  as  they  of
course  treat  the  first  three  as  divine,  so  they  regard  the  last
three  as  earthly  and  created  witnesses,  making  the  irvtvyua.  to
be  no  other  than  **the  created  soul  of  Christ  which  he
breathed  forth  on  the  cross,  thus  witnessing  that  he  wais  true
man."  It  would  be  awkward  to  make  the  same  Spirit  witness
both  in  heaven  and  on  earth.

Objections  to  the  omission  of  verse  7  have  been  imagined,
as  many  are  aware,  for  various  reasons,  all  of  which  seem  to
me  weakness  itself.  1.  As  to  the  supposed  breach  of  con-
nexion, one  has  only  to  read  verse  6  in  order  to  be  convinced
that,  on  the  contrary,  the  three  heavenly  witnesses  come  in
most  strangely  between  the  water  and  the  blood  and  the
Spirit,  of  which  that  verse  treated,  and  verse  8,  which  pur-
sues the  same  subject.  Internally  therefore,  as  much  as
externally,  verse  7  can  only  be  viewed  as  an  intrusion.
The  Trinity  (fundamental  a  truth  as  it  is,  and  without  it
Christianity  is  a  myth)  has  no  possible  link  with  the  context.
Christ  in  death,  yet  withal  life  eternal,  is  the  point  on
which  the  three  witnesses  converge  with  their  one  testimony.
2.  The  expression  ol  fjLafynjpovvT€s,  said  of  the  Spirit,  the


344  INTEODUCTORY  LECTURES.

water,  and  the  blood,  is  no  difficulty  without  yerse  7,  because
they  are  evidently  personified,  3.  The  wonder  is  great  how
Bishop  Middleton,  the  able  investigator  of  the  usage  of  the
Greek  article,  could  have  so  palpably  erred  as  to  say  that  the
TO  before  ty  in  verse  8  presupposes  tv  in  verse  7,  and  therefore
that  both  verses  stand  or  fiEdl  together.  Previous  reference  is
only  one  of  the  sources  of  the  article.  ^Ev,  I  grant,  might  be
used  of  the  persons  in  the  Trinity  (compare  John  x.  30  for
the  Father  and  the  Son) ;  but  ro  ci^  is  absolutely  necessaiy
for  the  Spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood,  where  identity  of
nature  is  not  in  question  but  unity  of  scope.  Compare  Phil,
ii.  2.  Other  arguments,  such  as  that  founded  on  two  editions
of  the  Epistle,  or  on  the  influence  of  Arians,  or  on  the  negli-
gence of  transcribers,  do  not  call  for  a  detailed  consideration
in  this  place  if  at  all.

Of  the  state  and  manner  in  which  the  passage  is  found  in
the  few  real  or  factitious  Qreek  manuscripts  that  contain  it,
we  may  observe,  (1)  that  both  in  the  GreBco- Latin  Cod.
Ottobon.  (Vat.  298)  and  in  the  Greek  Cod.  Montfort.  (Trin.
Coll.  Dubl.  G.  97)  the  three  heavenly  witnesses  are  set  down
without  the  Greek  article  to  any  one  of  them  (wor^p,  Aoyor,
fcol  TTvcvfui  aycov) ! — a  construction  which  indicates  not  ob-
scurely the  hand  of  one  used  to  Latin  (which  has  no  article)
and  grossly  ignorant  of  Greek;  (2)  that  the  same  Cod.
Ottobon.  gives  dvo  tov  ovpavov,  translated  in  the  corresponding
Latin  by  in  celo,  though  not  diro,  as  Scholz  has  strangely  read,
but,  iwl  T^s  yrjs;  (3)  that  whilst  the  Cod.  Ottobon.  represents
that  the  Father,  Word,  and  Holy  Spirit  (cis  to  tv  curi)  "  are
to  one  purpose,"  or  agree  in  one,  (translated  by  itself  unum
9unt!)  the  Cod.  Montfort.  says  li^  curt,  ''are  one;"  and  both
(like  the  Complut.  Polyglot)  leave  out  the  grand  point  of
the  genuine  scripture ;  for  neither  gives  the  smallest  hint  of
the  revelation  that  the  three  witnesses,  the  Spirit  and  the
water  and  the  blood,  conspire  in  one  testimony.     I  may  say


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  345

that  the  Montfort  MS.  unquestionably  LatinizeB  elsewhere  in
1  John,  and  in  the  immediate  context,  in  opposition  to  all
other  Greek  manuscripts.

As  for  the  only  other  documents  as  yet  produced  in  favour

of  the  amplified  text,  suffice  it  to  say  that  the  Codex  Ravianus

of  Berlin  is  now  (as  well  as  one  of  those  at  "Wolfenbiittel)

acknowledged  to  be  a  forgery,  copying  the  very  characters

(in  themselves  peculiar)  of  the  Complutensian  Polyglot,  and

even  repeating  some  of  its  misprints!     That  which  Scholz

cited  as  173  in  his  list  is  the  Codex  Begins  Neapolitanus,

which  in  the  text  really  confirms  the  truth,  but  adds  on  the

margin  in  more  recent  characters  the  disputed  clause.     Here

only,  as  compared  with  Codd.  Ottobon.  and  Montfort.,  the

article  is  duly  inserted;  but  there  is  this  unfortunate  flaw

in  its  value,  that  while  the  manuscript  was  written  in  the

eleventh  century,  the  addition  cannot  claim  a  higher  antiquity

than  the  sixteenth,  if  indeed  so  high.    Such  evidence  as  this

might   be  easily  multiplied  by  dishonest  hands;    but   the

weight  of  it  all  would  be  nil.

It  may  be  worth  while  to  mention,  as  corroborating  the

testimony  to  the  source  of  this  mistake,  not  without  fraud,

that  its  earliest  known  occurrence  in  Greek  is  in  the  Greek

Version  of  the  Acts  of  the  fourth  Lateran  Council  (in  1215),

where  it  stands  thus :  ort  rpcw  €1(t\v  ol  /xa/yrupoiWcff  cv  ovpav^

o  irar^p,  Xoyo^,  kcX  irvtvfia  ayuov  koi  tovtoi  (sic !)  oi  rpcw  Jy

titjty.     €v$vs  TC  vpwrridria'i  ....  KoOds  iv  T«rt  KwSrq$Ly  (sic !

=  dKrtypa<^ir)  tvpta-Ktrai.     So  the  passage  stands   both   in

Hardouin's  Collection  (tom.  vii.  p.  18)  and  in  Mansi's  (tom.

xxii.  p.  984).     I  can  hardly  doubt  that  this  it  was  which

encouraged  the  Complutensian  editiors  to  venture  on  their

during  importation  into  the   Greek  New   Testament  of   a

passage  which,  however  well  meant  doctrinally,  bears  the

indelible  trace  of  human  infirmity,  even  after  Stunica  and

his  companions  did  their  best  to  make  decent  Greek  of  it  by


346  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

inserting  tw  before  ovpam,  6  before  Xoyos,  and  to  before  (not
WT.  but)  ayujv  wvcvfta,*  correcting  also  Tovrot,  which  was  no
doubt  a  blunder  for  ovrot.  But  they  went  a  little  too  far
when  they  changed  ty  into  cty  to  Ii^  after  the  first  three,  and
left  out  €19  TO  ty  after  to  irvajfjM  kcu  to  v&i>p  koX  to  alfia  where
these  words  beyond  controversy  ought  to  be.  No  doubt  they
were  guided  by  Latin  copies  made  since  Th.  Aquinas'  day
and  that  council.  They  refer  in  their  marginal  note  to  the
perverse  doctrine  of  Joachim  on  the  Trinity,  which  was  con-
demned at  this  very  council  of  the  Lateran.

If  we  turn  to  Thomas  Aquinas,  as  referred  to,  the
erroneous  statement  is  sufficiently  staiHing.  He  cites  verse
7  as  it  stands  in  the  later  Latin  copies,  and  reasons  on  the
heterodoxy  of  Joachim,  who  applied  the  unity  there,  not  to
essence,  but  to  affection  and  consent.  Then,  quoting  verse
8,  he  says,  "  In  quibusdam  Libris  attcxitur :  et  hi  tres  unum
sunt;  sed  hoc  in  veris  exemplaribus  non  habetur(!),  sed  in
quibusdam  Libris  dicitur  esse  appositum  ab  hajreticis  Arianis
ad  pervertendum  intellectum  sanum  auctoritatis  praemissae
de  unitate  essentiali  trium  personarum  (! !)."  (Divi  ThomsB
Aquinatis.  Opera,  torn,  viii.,  p.  83,  Venetiis,  1776.)  This
probably  accounts  for  the  omission  of  the  clause  that  con-
cludes verse  8  in  the  Complutensian  Polyglot,  as  well  as  in
some  of  the  Greek  copies  manufactured  after  the  fourth
Lateran  Council.  Some  excuse  may  be  allowed  for  one  like
the  "  angelic  doctor,"  who  was  unacquainted  with  the  Greek
scriptures;  but  why  then  did  he  dogmatise  on  so  serious  a
subject?  Total  ignorance  is  the  only  conceivable  palliation
of  his  assertions,  which  are  notoriously  opposed  to  truth.

*  Hence  Calecas  in  the  fourteenth  century,  and  Bryennius  in  the
fifteenth,  as  Bishop  Marsh  noticed,  being  native  Greeks,  and  feeling
the  deficiency  of  the  Lateran  Acts  in  Greek,  wrote  6  \6yoQ  cat  rb
trvivfia  rb  Hyiov,  The  copyist  of  the  Montfort  MS.  omitted  the  article
even  before  irar^p,  not  to  speak  of  the  other  words  which  require  it


\


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.


347


And  what  can  one  think  of  the  deliberate  sanction  given  to
all  this  by  Cardinal  Ximcnes  and  his  editors  in  the  renowned
Polyglot  of  Alcala  ?  Are  we  to  shelter  them  also  under  such
a  plea  ?     K  not,  what  then  ?

Again,  what  can  one  judge  of  the  knowledge  or  the  moral
integrity  of  keeping  up  suph  a  note  to  1  John  v.  7  in  modem
reprints  of  Jerome's  works  {e,g,  the  Abb6  Migne's,  Paris,  1845)
as  the  following?  "CaBterum  nota  sunt  pro  ejus  versiculi
germanitate  testimonia  Patrum  Africanorum,  Tertulliani,
Cypriani,  Eugenii,  Fulgentii,  Vigilii,  Victoris,  e[t]quatuor
centum  Episcoporum  in  fidei  professione,  quam  Yandalorum
regi  obtulerunt.  Major  omni  exceptione  est  Cassiodorus,"  &c.
(PatrologiaB  Curs.,  tom.  xxix.,  coll.  846.)  Not  to  speak  of
the  silence  of  the  Greek  fathers  on  a  question  of  the  Greek
text,  it  has  been  proved  repeatedly  and  minutely  that  not
one  of  these  could  have  read  the  passage  in  the  Greek  as  it
now  appears  in  the  Vulgate.  All  that  can  be  fairly  drawn
from  Victor  Vitensis'  story  of  the  symbol  of  faith  presented
by  the  African  bishops  to  Hunneric  is  that  the  three  heavenly
witnesses  must  have  been  then  read  in  their  Latin  copies.
But  it  is  certainly  not  so  in  the  oldest  and  best  Latin  manu-
scripts that  are  extant,  as  all  intelligent  Romanists  must
know.


THE  SECOND  AND  THIRD  EPISTLES  OF  JOHN,

AND  JUDE.

There  is  this  peculiarity  about  the  second  Epistle  of
John,  that  it  alone  of  all  the  inspired  communications
is  directly  addressed  to  a  woman,  and  not  this  only  but
also  to  her  children.  There  are  certainly  good  but  special
reasons  for  a  course  so  exceptional  We  know  how
much  the  word  of  God,  not  to  speak  of  every  spiritual
instinct,  would  lead  a  Christian  woman  however  gifted
to  seek  a  place  of  retirement  and  of  unobtrusive  service.
We  feel  how  all  that  is  blessed  of  God's  grace,  and  I
may  add  of  God's  gift,  is  only  so  much  the  more  set  off
when  woman,  while  thoroughly  using  whatever  the
grace  of  the  Lord  entrusts  to  her,  understands  never-
theless the  place  in  which  it  has  pleased  Him  to  put  her
here  below.  Yet  here  we  have  one  of  the  most  stringent
epistles  the  Holy  Ghost  ever  wrote  addressed  to  a
woman — the  elect  lady — and  to  her  children,  as  the  im-
mediate objects  of  it, — not  to  an  extraordinary  apostolic
commissioner,  nor  an  elder,  nor  an  assembly,  still  less  an
assembly  with  bishops  and  deacons.  Why  so  ?  Because
there  was  a  question  before  the  Holy  Ghost  of  such
unspeakable  urgency  and  magnitude  that  all  considera-


THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  349

tions  must  give  way  to  it  God  so  ordered  things  that
the  Epistle  should  be  sent  to  a  woman  originally,  for
the  very  purpose  of  showing  that,  whatever  may  be  the
ordinary  ways  of  God  in  His  church,  there  are  occasions
and  seasons  in  which  the  very  foundation  of  His
grace  and  of  His  moral  glory  must  be  maintained  at
all  cost.  Wherever  this  is  the  case,  no  excuse  can  be
tolerated  on  the  score  of  sex  or  youth.  Do  not  tell
xne  that  it  is  only  a  child  or  a  woman.  If  Christ  is  in
the  question,  all  else  must  give  way.  Nor  is  this  a
sacrifice  but  real  gain.

What  has  been  remarked  may  serve  to  show  us  the
all-absorbing  consequence  of  what  the  Holy  Ghost  here
takes  in  hand.  Christ  was  undermined  by  those  who
held  His  name.  It  was  a  question  of  a  true  or  of
a  false  Christ.  Sex  was  nothing  now,  youth  not  more
to  be  considered — all  very  important  when  things  flow
on  regularly  and  in  their  ordinary  channels.  We  all
know  how  unbecoming  it  would  be  for  either  the  one
or  the  other  to  be  put  forward,  still  more  to  put  them-
selves there ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  addresses  Himself  to
them  here.  And  we  shall  see,  as  is  always  the  case,
that  what  might  seem  an  anomaly  in  the  word  of  God,
when  properly  looked  into,  will  prove  to  be  full  of
grave  instruction  for  all  our  souls.  No  pther  conceivable
address  would  have  been  so  appropriate  for  the  second
Epistle  of  John.

Had  the  present  been  written  in  general  terms,  like
the  first  Epistle,  much  would  have  been  lost;  just  as,
on  the  other  hand,  I  could  scarcely,  for  my  own  part,
imagine  the  first  Epistle  written  to  the  elect  lady  and
her  children.     All  is  precisely  as  it  should  be.     There


350  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

we  find  points  of  universal  interest  to  the  children  of
God,  and  it  is  a  question  of  addressing  all  this  family,
fathers,  young  men,  and  babes.  But  here,  where  the
tide  of  evil  was  now  setting  in  strongly,  where  searching
enquiries  must  be  on  foot,  where  not  the  ordinary  evils
only  were  increasing  in  an  ever  and  rapidly  accumulat-
ing volume,  but  the  deepest  peril  for  the  basis  of  aU  our
hopes,  the  warning  is  addressed  fittingly  both  to  the
family  and  to  individuals.  Where  the  first  Epistle  noticed
these  things  in  a  general  way  to  all,  here  we  come  to
greater  precision  in  the  evil,  and  here  too  we  have  to  do
with  particular  persons.

How  often  one  has  heard  it  urged  that  it  is  not
for  a  woman  to  take  upon  herself  to  judge,  and  that
no  wise  man  can  mean  to  say  that  these  are  ques-
tions for  children — that  they  are  points  of  delicacy
which  most  of  all  require  deep  theological  knowledge
and  mature  judgment ;  and  would  you  expect  the  assem-
bly of  God  to  judge  such  matters  ?  But  the  Holy  Ghost
here  appeals  to  a  woman  and  her  children,  and  they  are
bound  to  judge ;  if  they  do  not,  Christ  is  set  at  nought
for  their  own  ease.  It  was  now  a  question  of  Christ —
the  Christ  of  God.  We  shall  see  all  this  more  clearly
as  we  proceed.  I  am  only  now  endeavouring  to  show
the  beautiful  appropriateness  of  that  which  to  a  super-
ficial eye  might  seem  somewhat  out  of  order  in  the
address  of  this  Epistle.  "  The  elder  unto  the  elect  lady
and  her  children,  whom  I  love  in  the  truth ;  and  not  I
only,  but  also  all  they  that  have  known  the  truth."

This  is  another  very  characteristic  point  in  the  second
Epistle  of  John.  Indeed  it  runs  all  through  John.  In
the  Gospel,  as  we  know^  Christ  Himself  is  set  forth


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE   OF  JOHN.  351

expressly  as  the  truth ;  and  then  his  Epistles,  as  we  have
seen  and  may  yet  see,  abound  in  the  same  tenacity  to
what  was  revealed  by  and  in  Christ.     Here  we  find  it
still.     It  is  interwoven  into  the  very  salutation  of  the
epistle — "The  elder  unto  the  elect  lady  and  her  children,
\irhom  I  love  in  the  truth."    At  once  the  issue  is  under-
stood.    What  was  at  stake  is  here  before  the  mind  of
those  who  read  so  remarkable  an  address.     If  Mary,
about  to  become  the  mother  of  Jesus,  might  wonder  at
the  singularity  of  the  angel's  salutation,  assuredly  this
was  meant  to  search  the  conscience  and  stir  the  souls
of  the  elect  lady  and  her  children,  when  an  inspired
apostle  addresses  to  them  a  communication  of  unwonted
solemnity.     How  great  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  infinite
the  condescension,  that  shows  how  precious  is  every
believer  to  Him  !  We  find  nothing  like  this  in  any  of  the
preceding  epistles,  as  to  the  Galatians  or  the  Komans,
the  Corinthians  or  the  Ephesians,  yet  I  do  affirm  that
this  is  precisely  what  was  wanted  here.     It  was  a  more
fundamental  question,  and  the  error  more  fatal    It  was
no  defence  or  assertion  of  justification  by  faith.  John  is
not  setting  forth  the  proper  order  of  the  assembly  of
God;   nor  is  he  leading  the  saint  into  the  heavenly
privileges  of  the  individual  or  the  body.    Christ  was  in
question  or  nothing.    Nothing,  did  I  say  ?    Worse  than
nothing.     It  was  either  the  Christ  of  God  in  all  His
divine  glory,  or  the  greatest  evil  into  which  a  man  can
possibly  be  plunged  by  the  enemy.     It  was,  in  short,
war  to  the  knife — the  great  controversy  between  Christ
and  antichrist.     Solemn  to  think  and  say,  the  self-same
crisis  affects  every  soul  now  present !
I  remember  years  ago  reading  a  book  by  a  celebrated


352  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

character,  who  has  now  passed  away  from  the  scene,  in
which  he  dared  to  raise  the  question  whether  there  was
any  particular  sign  in  2  or  3  John,*  why  they  shonld
be  accepted  as  divinely  inspired,  more  than  such  comr
positions  as  the  pastoral  letters  of  Ignatius.  It  was  not
that  the  writer  took  the  place  of  being  an  infidel:  in
fact  he  was  Rector  of  the  English  College  at  Home,  and
since  a  Cardinal  in  this  country.  This  dreadful  feature
of  ecclesiasticism  is  not  so  uncommon  to  find ;  namely,
an  infidel  argument  under  the  cowl  of  a  monk  or  in  the
lips  of  their  most  learned  professors.  Therefore  one
must  not  be  surprised  if  one  ever  so  eminent  ecclesi-
astically gave  the  plainest  evidence  that  he  had  no  faith
in  the  word  of  God,  that  he  did  not  participate  in  its
power.  Thus  the  strongest  form  of  the  assertion  of
church  authority  may  really  betray  under  its  robes  no
better  than  vulgar  infidelity.     He  asked  t  how  you

*  "I  would  ask  you,  for  instance,  how  you  would  demonstrate  (I
will  not  speak  now  of  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament ;  I  wiU  take
that  for  granted,  from  the  historical  evidence,  that  our  Saviour  and
His  apostles  received  them  as  sufficient  to  satisfy  you  with  regard  to
them;  but  Christians  are  more  particularly  interested  in  the  New
Testament)  how  you  would  demonstrate  from  internal  feu^ts  the  inspi-
ration of  the  second  and  third  Epistles  of  St.  John,  finding  in  them
neither  a  prophecy  nor  any  thing  else  that  could  not  have  been
written  by  a  very  holy  and  pious  man,  without  any  aid  from  inspira-
tion. In  some,  indeed,  of  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  you  wiU  find  it
exceedingly  difficult  to  discover  passages  so  decidedly  proving  a  divine
assistance  in  him  who  wrote  them  as  to  satisfy  you  that  they  were
inspired." — Lectures  (p.  28)  on  the  Doctrines  and  Fractices  of  th4  Roman
Catholic  Churehf  ^r.  By  the  Rev.  Nicholas  Wiseman,  d.d.,  &c.
London :  Hodson,  Fleet  Street     1836.

t  In  the  corrected  edition  of  this  lecture  I  find,  '*  What  internal
mark  of  inspiration  can  we  discover  in  the  third  epistle  of  St.  John  to
show  that  the  inspiration  aotneiimes  must  have  been  granted  here  P  Is
there  cmything  in  that  epistle  which  a  good  and  pious  pastor  of  ths  pri-


THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  353

would  demonstrate  from  internal  facts  the  inspiration
of  the  second  and  third  Epistles  of  St.  John,  finding  in
them  neither  a  prophecy  nor  anything  else  which  could
not  have  been  written  by  a  very  holy  and  pious  man,
-withoiU  any  aid  whatsoever  from  inspiration!  The  same
poisonous  argument  taints  in  a  still  baser  and  more
iiudacious  form  Dr.  Milner's  "End  of  Controversy:"
indeed  it  pervades  Komanism  as  a  whole,  and  proves  its
^essentially  intidel  character.

I  think,  my  brethren,  tliat  our  experience  might  sup-
ply ample  ground  for  an  answer,  though  probably  not
of  such  a  character  as  would  satisfy  one  who  could
make  such  an  objection.  There  is  a  day  coming  when
judgment  will  decide;  but  conscience,  acted  upon  by
the  Holy  Ghost,  can  form  a  conviction  now — not  of
course  infallibly,  for  (iod  alone  is  or  can  be  infallible —
but  adequately  for  tlie  need  of  the  soul.  I  do  say,  that
the  loss  would  have  been  immense  if  we  had  not  had
even  these  two  Epistles,  putting  the  matter  on  no  higher
ground  than  this.  I  need  not  say  that  I  refuse  to  treat  a
question  of  scripture  on  a  mere  ground  of  utility.  Still,
we  are  certain  that  God  has  written  nothing  in  vain  ;
and  if  in  a  grave  crisis  of  late  any  one  scripture  was
needed  and  must  have  been  missed,  without  which  we
might  have  found  ourselves  at  a  loss  how  to  act  firmly
under  as  trying  circumstances  as  ever  befell  any  soul
in  this  room,  or  any  other,  it  would  have  been  precisely
the  second  Epistle  of  John.

mitive  agen  might  not  have  writtm  ?  anythiDg  superior  (!)  in  sentiment
or  doctrine  (! !)  to  what  an  Ignatius  or  a  Polycarp  might  have  indited  P**
(Lect.  ii.  p.  38,  ed.  1836.)  Truly  **  the  natural  man  receiveth  not  the
things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  .  .  .  neither  can  he  know  them,  because
they  are  spiritually  discerned."

2  A


354  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

The  apostle  then  lets  them  know  that  he  loved  them
all  in  the  truth ;  for  a  believer,  young  or  old,  man,
woman,  or  child,  is  best  loved  just  for  the  sake  of  the
truth.  He  that  departs  from  the  truth,  what  is  he  ?  A
rebel.  But  they  that  walk  in  the  truth,  even  were  they
children  or  ever  so  lowly,  are  precious  to  God ;  and  His
Spirit  waits  on  such,  and  writes  to  them,  and  lays  on
them  to  decide  before  God,  in  their  own  sphere  of  duty,
this  most  grave  question :  "  Is  my  soul  in  communion
with  God  about  His  own  Son  ?  Whatever  may  be  the
reputation  of  others,  whatever  my  own  weakness  and
call  to  walk  humbly,  do  I  feel  that  the  one  thing  which
is  to  determine  all  others  for  me  is  the  truth,  the  truth
of  Christ  Himself?"  If  it  be  so,  all  else  will  in  the
main  be  right.  Hence  John  writes  to  this  effect  to  the
elect  lady,  whom  he  loved  in  truth,  and  to  her  children.
Nor  was  this  affection  of  a  personal  or  circumstantial
character :  "  Whom  I  love  in  the  truth ;  and  not  I  only,
but  also  all  they  that  have  known  the  truth."  The
revelation  of  God  in  Christ  does,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,
l)ind  together  in  love  all  who  know  the  truth.  It  was
on  account  of  the  truth  that  he  now  wrote — as  it  is
said,  "  for  the  truth's  sake."

How  unweariedly  he  puts  forward  that  which  was
now  to  test  them  severally!  (verse  2.)  "For  the  truth's
sake,  which  dwelleth  in  us,  and  shall  be  with  us  for
ever.  Grace  be  with  you,  mercy  and  peace."  As  has
been  ofl€n  and  truly  remarked,  where  individuals  are
thus  before  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  need
of  "  mercy  "  is  supposed  and  shown.  "  From  God  the
Father,  and  frofn  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the
Father,  in  truth  and  love" — an  expression  found,  as


THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  355

far  as  I  remember,  nowhere  else.  It  was  just  in  its
right  place  here.  Satan  w^as  undermining  the  glory  of
"  the  Son  of  the  Father."  But  if  He  be  not  this,  how
can  I  go  to  Him  ?  How  rest  my  soul,  my  all,  on  Him  ?
How  can  God  look  to  Him  and  His  work  for  every
soul  that  is  brought  to  Himself?

Hence  the  apostle's  source  of  joy.  "I  rejoiced  greatly
that  I  found  of  thy  children  walking  in  truth,  as  we
have  received  a  commandment  from  the  Father."  Walk-
ing in  truth  is  the  result  of  having  the  truth.  The
truth  produces  truthfulness.  The  man  who  has  not  got
the  truth  cannot  possibly  walk  in  truth,  and  will  not
long  wear  the  semblance  of  it.  To  walk  thus  was  the
efiFect  of  the  truth  itself  known  :  they  walked  in  truth,
*'  according  as  we  received  commandment  from  the
Father."

"And  now  I  beseech  thee,  lady,  not  as  though  I
"wrote  a  new  commandment  to  thee,  but  that  which
we  had  from  the  beginning,  that  we  love  one  another."  •
It  was  the  old,  but  ever  new  word:  old,  because  it
was  manifested  in  Christ  Himself;  new,  because  it  is
true  in  us  as  in  Him.  Divine  love  flows  from  love,
and  reproduces  itself  in  all  who  know  Christ  the  truth.
But  what  is  love?  "And  this  is  love:"  not  indepen-
dency of  each  other,  not  agreeing  to  differ,  or  any  of
those  inventions  of  men  which  are  not  only  a  depar-
ture from  the  truth,  but  in  point  of  fact  morally  evil
and  injurious.  "This  is  love,  that  we  walk  after  his
commandments."  You  cannot  separate  it  from  Christ ;
you  cannot  separate  it  from  obedience.  It  is  love  in
exercise,  and  it  is  also  love  that  is  communicated  by
faith  in  Jesus.    "  This  is  the  commandment,  That,  as

2  A  2


356  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning,  ye  should  walk  in
it."

Now  he  gives  the  reason  why  he  writes  thus  solemnly
to  this  lady  and  her  children.  "  For  many  deceivers  are
entered  into  the  world,  who  confess  not  Jesus  Christ
coming  in  the  flesh.  This  is  the  deceiver  and  the  anti-
christ." "  Many  deceivers  are  entered  into  the  world  ;"
and  therefore  it  is  needful,  yea  imperative,  to  press  the
claims  of  the  truth  of  God.  "Who  confess  not  Jesus
Christ  coming  in  the  flesh."  It  is  put  here  rather
differently  from  its  shape  in  the  first  Epistle.  There
the  allusion  was  to  the  fact,  but  this  as  stamping  a
permanent  character  on  Christ — the  Christ  that  came.
Here  it  is  not  so  much  a  question  of  His  having  come,
but,  as  it  seems  to  me,  indicating  if  possible  a  deeper
shade  of  infidelity.  No  doubt  the  same  persons  are  re-
ferred to,  but  it  would  seem  as  having  developed  their
infidelity  rather  more.  For  there  is  the  rejection  not
only  of  the  fact,  but  even  of  its  possibility.  They  con-
ceived the  thought  that  in  some  way  or  another  it  was
derogatory  to  Him.  They  denied,  some  His  deity,  some
His  humanity.

In  commenting  on  1  John  iv.,  I  have  already  re-
marked that  "Jesus  Christ  come  in  the  flesh"  sup-
poses neither  His  deity  alone,  nor  His  humanity  only,
but  both.  There  is  no  propriety  in  the  expression,  it
appears  to  me,  unless  it  means  both  united  in  the  same
person.  In  point  of  fact  it  is  the  veering  to  one  side
or  the  other — choosing  a  part  of  the  truth  of  Christ  so
as  to  set  aside  the  rest — that  is  so  fruitful  a  source  of
error  here  and  everywhere,  though  here  most  fatally.
"This  is  the  deceiver  and  the  antichrist"     It  is  fir


THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  357

"Worse  than  bringing  in  division  and  ofifence,  bad  as

these  are ;  nay,  it  is  far  more  serious  than  even  the

undermining  of   morality,   ruinous  as   this   must   be.

To  sap   or  corrupt  morality  is   no  doubt  to  destroy

oneself,  and  perhaps  often  others ;  but  this  is  to  defame

and  degrade  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Father.     This,  then,

is  a  bolder  eflfort  of  Satan,  and  therefore  John  calls  one

guilty  of  it  not  only  "  the  deceiver"  (every  false  teacher

is  more  or  less  a  deceiver),  but  in  this  case  also  "the

antichrist."

Hence  he  calls  them  to  look  at  home  diligently  lest
they  should  stray.  For  God  alone  keeps  the  soul,  and
this  by  and  in  the  truth.  "  Look  to  yourselves,  that  we
lose  not  those  things  which  we  have  wrought,"  (of  which
the  apostles  had  been  the  instrument,)  "but  that  we
receive  a  full  reward."

Then  he  lays  down  the  great  principle  in  verse  9  : —
"Whosoever  transgresseth,  and  abideth  not  in  the
doctrine  of  Christ,  hath  not  God.  He  that  abideth  in
the  doctrine  of  Christ,  he  hath  both  the  Father  and  the
Son,"  It  is  a  larger  principle  than  simply  denying
Christ  coming  in  the  flesh.  No  matter  where  it  is,  or
how  it  is,  if  you  overthrow  the  person  of  Christ,  you
transgress  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  In  the  seventh  verse
we  had  a  particular  case ;  but  from  it  the  Spirit  of  God
rises  up  to  this  statement  of  truth  which  meets  every
such  casa  "  Whosoever  transgresseth,  and  abideth  not
in  the  doctrine  of  Christ "  (that  is,  in  the  teaching  which
the  Holy  Ghost  has  given  in  His  word  about  Christ,  not
about  His  work,  but  about  His  person),  "  hath  not  God  "
in  any  sense  or  measure,  now  that  Christ  is  preached.
The  greatest  error  about  His  work  is  not  so  directly


358  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

fatal  to  the  soul,  because  it  does  not  so  immediately
assail  the  personal  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Here  it  is
the  doctrine  of  Christ  Himself;  and  as  one  must  beware
of  straying  at  first,  let  him  also  beware  of  not  continuing
in  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  A  man  might  have  professed
His  name,  and  gone  on  some  time  with  the  assembly  of
God,  accepted  as  a  believer,  or  even  a  teacher ;  but  if  he
does  not  abide  in  the  truth  of  Christ,  it  does  not  signify
what  he  may  have  been,  it  matters  not  in  the  least  how
much  he  may  seemingly  have  been  blessed,  it  is  all  over
with  him  if  he  does  not  abide  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,
and  it  becomes  a  necessity,  not  merely  for  the  safety  of
oneself  and  others,  but  for  God*s  glory,  which  is  con-
cerned here  more  sensitively  than  anywhere  else.  "Who-
soever transgresseth,  and  abideth  not  in  the  doctrine  of
Christ,  hath  not  God."

It  might  be  said  that  at  any  rate  a  man  might  have
the  truth  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  there  were  such  before
Christ  was  manifested  in  the  world ;  and  if  the  person
fails  to  enter  into  all  the  truth  that  Christianity  has  told
out,  can  he  be  worse  off  than  those  who  lived  and  died
before  Jesus  came?  The  answer  is  that  such  special
pleading  is  all  in  vain ;  he  is  incomparably  guiltier  and
worse  off,  because  now  the  standard  is  not  what  G<xi
once  gave,  but  what  He  is  giving  now  in  a  Christ  fully
revealed.  Therefore  it  will  not  do  to  talk  of  what  others
knew  not.  This  is  an  important  practical  criterion;
because,  although  not  to  the  same  extent,  it  does  meet
the  difficulty  which  people  constantly  all^e  founded
on  what  their  forefathers  did — possibly  excellent  men —
two  or  three  hundred  years  ago.  What  is  that  to  the
present  moment?    If  God  by  His  Spirit  causes  His


THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  359

truth  to  reach  us  in  a  form  and  power  suited  to  this
day,  if  God  brings  it  home  more  clearly  on  this  point  or
that>  these  are  the  things  which  put  the  soul  under  a
fresh  responsibility;  and  this  seems  indicated  in  the
form  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  deals  with  the  error
here.  "  Whosoever  transgresseth,  and  abideth  not  in
the  doctrine  of  Christ,  hath  not  God/'  It  is  not  only
that  he  lacks  the  blessedness  of  the  Christian  revelation,
but  he  has  not  God — he  has  no  part  nor  lot  with  God  at
alL  The  Old  Testament  saints  had  God  variously  re-
vealed. They  received  His  word  and  rejoiced,  according
to  the  measure  of  their  faith,  in  the  truth  as  God  then
made  it  known  to  them.  But  now  that  Christ  is  come,
now  that  the  Holy  Ghost  has  been  sent  down,  now  that
the  unfolding  of  Christ's  personal  glory,  of  His  exalta-
tion, and  of  the  infinite  grace  of  His  work,  has  been
proclaimed,  it  is  altogether  hopeless  to  seek  a  cover  of
present  unbelief  under  the  ignorance  of  past  years.  It
is  the  present  unfolding  of  God's  mind  that  puts  every
soul  to  the  test.  Therefore  not  to  accept  it,  and  not  to
abide  in  it  when  it  is  received,  to  go  back  from  it  or  to
transgress,  swerving  to  one  side  or  the  other,  or  aban-
doning it,  comes  to  the  same  substantial  sin  and  ruin.

On  the  other  hand,  here  is  the  comfort  for  the  elect
lady  and  her  children,  and  for  any  one  else  who  cleaves
to  the  truth.  "He  that  abideth  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ,
he  hath  both  the  Father  and  the  Son."  There  is  great
blessedness  in  thus  abiding,  brethren ;  it  is  a  grand  thing
not  to  be  easily  shaken,  not  to  be  moved  to  and  fro  by
every  wind  of  doctrine,  more  particularly  in  anything
about  Christ.  Beware  of  this.  Weigh  seriously  every
thought,  no  matter  from  whom  it  may  come — any  word


360  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

that  even  seems  to  turn  you  away  from  what  you  have,
and  to  weaken  the  assurance  you  have  from  God.  Never
allow  yourself  to  be  shaken  from  old  truth,  if  indeed
you  have  it  and  know  it.  At  the  same  time  always  hold
your  soul  open  for  more;  and  take  care  that  you  do
not  confound  notions  you  have  gathered  (perhaps  from
tradition,  possibly  from  your  own  mind)  with  the  truth
of  Christ,  lest,  when  the  tradition  is  touched,  you  may
begin  to  yield  to  the  spirit  of  unbelief,  and  either  give
up  truth  you  used  (or  seemed  at  least)  to  hold,  or  burst
out  against  the  truth  of  God  in  others  who  know  it
better  than  yourself.

In  these  things  assuredly  we  need  to  have  the  pro-
mised guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  cannot  start
or  go  on  without  it,  nor  would  we  do  so  even  if  we
could.  It  is  the  very  blessedness  of  our  souls  to  l>e
kept  by  so  holy  a  guide  and  in  safe  companionship.
But  then,  just  as  in  our  ordinary  walk,  if  we  live  in  tlie
Spirit,  we  must  walk  in  the  Spirit ;  so  also,  if  we  have
been  taught  of  the  Spirit,  we  must  go  forward  and
persevere  in  the  Spirit.  This  does  not  in  the  smallet^t
degree  clash  with  "  abiding."  The  only  way  to  be  kept
is  holding  fast  what  God  has  really  taught  us,  yet  using
this  as  the  groundwork  for  making  progress.  Such  is
the  true  way  to  "abide."  "He  that  abideth  in  the
doctrine  of  Christ,  he  hath  both  the  Father  and  the
Son."  Now  that  the  doctrine  of  Christ  is  fully  brought
out  in  the  word  of  God,  the  more  sure  it  is  that  there  is
nothing  to  add.  Impossible  to  discover  a  truth  of  God
that  is  not  already  in  the  Bible.  But  there  is  not  a
little  to  learn  which,  I  am  persuaded,  is  there  already.
We  must  not  confound  these  two  things.     Who  would


THE  SECOND   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  361

assume  that  you  and  I  know  all  that  is  in  the  Bible  ?
If  then  a  line  of  truth  be  pointed  out  anywhere  in
scripture,  do  not  calumniously  pretend  that  it  is  some
further  development,  because  you  have  been  so  dull  as
not  to  see  it.  It  is  the  very  point  of  faith  to  know  that
as  God  Himself  is  infinite,  so  His  word  contains  bound-
less riches  for  us.  There  is  that  which  may  by  the
Holy  Ghost  be  always  apprehended  more  and  more
fully;  and  yet  after  all  it  is  the  same  holy  deposit  as
i¥as  given  to  the  Christian  from  the  beginning.

The  apostle  now  comes  to  the  practical  consequence.
He  has  laid  down  the  principle  in  the  ninth  verse :  now
comes  the  practice.  "  If  there  come  any  unto  you,  and
bring  not  this  doctrine,  receive  him  not  into  your  house,
neither  bid  him  God  speed :  for  he  that  biddeth  him
God  speed  is  partaker  of  his  evil  deeds."  Mark  how  it
is  put.  It  is  not — bring  not  the  true  humanity,  or  the
proper  Deity ;  because  Satan  might  change  the  doctrine
8omewhat,  so  as  to  save  appearances  for  the  simple.
Therefore  it  would  not  do  merely  to  specify  some  one
l>articular  form  of  error,  because  then  the  devil  would
have  only  to  evade  that  form,  and  there  would  be  no
resourca  But  here  it  stands  firm  yet  comprehensive :
if  a  man  come  to  you,  and  does  not  bring  this  doctrine
(that  is,  the  doctrine  of  Christ),  do  not  you  receive  him.
No  matter  what  may  be  the  particular  manner  in  which
the  enemy  has  warped  his  soul,  and  through  him  dis-
honoured Christ ;  no  matter  what  may  be  the  peculiar
nature  of  the  false  doctrine, — if  a  man  come  to  you,  and
bring  not  the  divinely  revealed  doctrine,  the  Holy
Ghost's  teaching  of  Christ  in  the  written  word, — "re-
ceive him  not  into  your  house,  neither  bid  him  greeting."


362  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

That  is  to  say,  do  not  bid  him  a  commou  salutatioa
There  is  nothing  about  ''Gk)d  speed"  in  the  word  (xouipco^)
though  ''good  speed"  might  be  tolerabla  The  strongei
terms  are  merely  put  in  by  the  English  translators.  It
was  the  ordinary  form  of  courteous  greeting  every  day.

This  is  to  my  mind  a  serious  thought  Do  you  think
my  brethren,  that  we  all  follow  this  out  as  we  ought
Are  we  not  conscious  of  shrinking  from  the  cost,  anc
of  a  fear  if  not  anxiety  lest  we  should  be  counted  un-
courteous  ?  I  can  speak  for  one  certainly ;  and  I  doubl
much  whether  in  general  we  are  suf&ciently  alive  U.
the  solemnity  of  what  Satan  is  always  pursuing.  MoTf
particularly  let  me  add,  that  we  stand  in  a  position
failure  in  which  tends  to  expose  all  Grod  s  children  U
the  efforts  of  the  enemy.  There  are  none,  I  presume
whom  he  would  so  much  desire  to  drag  into  the  mile.
and  thus  defile  the  name  of  Jesus.

If  then  such  an  one  come,  of  course  without  the
doctrine,  yet  taking  the  ground  of  truth,  you  are  %c
receive  him  not.  Where  ?  To  the  Lord's  table  ?  No ;
this  could  not  have  been  said  to  the  elect  lady  and  bei
children.  The  exhortation  is  quite  independent  of  publk
fellowship.  The  question  of  the  Lord's  table  is  not
even  raised.  They  are  not  even  to  receive  him  intc
their  private  house,  nor  to  accost  him  with  commoi]
greeting.  Why  this  most  severe  and  peremptory  ex-
clusion? ''For  he  that  biddeth  him  greeting"  (not  to
much  as  receiving  him  into  the  house,  but  interchanging
words  of  courtesy  with  such  a  man,  knowingly,  ol
course,  and  deliberately)  "is  a  partaker  of  his  evil  deeda"
You,  as  a  confessor  of  Christ,  put  your  sanction  on  tbk
denier  of  Christ    You  could  not  do  worse  except  denjf


i,lffi


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  363

Christ  yourself ;  indeed,  in  a  certain  sense  you  are  more
guilty  than  even  if  you  were  drawn  for  a  time  into  the
abominable  thing  yourself,  because  then  you  would
be  honestly  acting  out  what  you  had  been  deceived  by
Satan  into  believing;  but  the  more  you  hold  the  true
Christ,  if  you  tamper  with  those  who  do  not,  the  more
shameless  you  are  in  unfaithfulness  to  Christ.

To  some  this  may  seem  strong ;  but  who  has  written
it?  who  urges  it?  Is  it  a  man  without  God?  Is  it
not  the  Spirit  of  God  who  charges  us  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  Jesus  thus  sensitively  to  feel  for  the  truth  of
Christ  ?  Let  us  not  be  deaf  to  such  a  claim  from  such
a  person.  Let  us  not  reserve  our  warm  feelings  for  our
friends,  and  leave  only  indifference  for  the  name  of
Jesus.  He  that  greets  kindly  the  man  that  brings  not
the  doctrine  of  Christ  is  a  traitor  to  Christ.

Let  me  here  repeat  that  it  is  not  "God  speed,"  for
this  might  give  a  false  idea.  It  sounds  as  if  we  were
wishing  him  well  in  his  work.  This  would  be  commonly
inferred  by  one  unaccustomed  to  read  the  language  of
the  Holy  Ghost.  But  it  conveys  nothing  of  the  sort —
merely  a  Greek  "  good  morning  " — what  would  pass  in
the  current  language  of  the  day  among  one's  fellows.

He  then  who  has  anjiihing  to  say  to  the  defamer  of
Christ  which  could  be  fairly  interpreted  as  a  sanction,
let  it  be  ever  so  small,  becomes  a  partaker  of  his  evil
deeds.  It  is  not  a  question  of  being  a  partner  in  his
evil  doctrine.  The  elect  lady  and  her  children  were  of
course  believed  to  hold  sound  doctrine;  but  they  are
here  peremptorily  called  to  refuse  any  measure  of  coun-
tenance to  one  who  did  not  bring  the  doctrine  of  Christ
— not  only  not  to  receive  him  into  the  house,  but  not


364  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

to  salute  him  outside  it.     It  was  a  part  of  the  loyalty
they  owed  to  Christ.

John  concludes  thus  :  ''  Having  many  things  to  write
to  you,  I  would  not  with  paper  and  ink :  but  I  hope
to  come  to  you,  and  speak  mouth  to  mouth,  that  your
joy  may  be  fuU.  The  children  of  thine  elect  sister
greet  thee."  There  was  hearty  love,  but  it  was  only  in
the  truth,  of  which  Christ  alone  is  the  test  and  obe-
dience the  effect.


The  third  Epistle  of  John  again  calls  us  to  weigh
the  Lord's  admirable  wisdom  in  its  address, — "  The  elder
unto  the  well-beloved  Gaius," — as  we  have,  I  trust,  been
satisfied  of  the  same  in  the  second  Epistle's  address  to
"  the  elect  lady  and  her  children."  Without  the  third
Epistle  we  should  have  an  immense  loss ;  for  here  too
we  may  meet  the  unbelieving  slight  already  noticed  in
a  scribe  of  this  age  by  a  direct  assertion  of  its  living
value.  A  precious  and  needed  supplement  is  supplied
especially  for  these  evil  days.  If  we  had  only  the  second
without  the  third  Epistle  of  John,  we  should  have  the
negative  side  without  the  positive — the  evil  warned
against  rather  than  the  good  enforced.  Both  are  most
needful.  What  would  have  been  the  effect  of  the  second
Epistle  of  John,  if  that  alone  of  the  two  had  been  ours
at  the  present  moment  ?  I  have  sought  to  show  how
admirable  it  is — matchless  for  its  own  purpose — and
impossible  to  supply  its  place  from  any  other  part  of
scripture,  yet  in  thorough  accordance  with  it  alL  It  is
admitted  that  the  principle  of  the  Epistle  is  found  all
through  the  New  Testament ;  but  the  strength  of  the


THE  THIRD  EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  365

application,  the  incisive  edge  of  its  holy  jealousy  for
Christ,  is  only  to  be  found  there.  Yet,  supposing  we
had  not  the  third  of  John,  what  would  be  the  too  sure
eCTect?  I  am  persuaded  we  should  be  in  danger  of
becoming  painfully  narrow ;  we  should  be  in  constant
dread  of  an  antichrist  in  those  that  surrounded  us  ;  we
should  do  little  but  search  with  suspicion,  lest  each  new
comer  to  the  house  should  not  bring  the  doctrine  of
Christ.

Now  we  are  not  called  to  be  thus  on  the  watch  for
another's  evil  We  ought  never  to  be  suspicious.  It  is
not  faith,  but  flesh  that  expects  iniquity.  On  the  other
hand,  if  a  man  comes  and  does  not  bring  the  doctrine
of  Christ,  it  is  not  to  be  branded  as  suspicion  or  want
of  love  if  one  regard  him  as  antichrist.  It  is  according
to  the  truth  we  love,  and  is  the  wisdom  that  comes  from
above ;  nay,  it  is  real  obedience  and  loyalty  to  Christ.
But  to  allow  doubts  and  questions  of  one  who  neither
in  himself  nor  in  his  associations  makes  light  of  Christ's
glory  is  inexcusable.  Here  comes  one  bearing  the  Lord's
Dame,  not  without  a  Barnabas  who  knows  and  can
commend  him :  to  indulge  in  surmises,  if  without  the
least  evidence  of  this  or  that  about  him,  is  clearly  not
according  to  Christ.  It  is  here,  I  think,  that  we  may
learn  more  of  the  value  and  special  function  of  this
third  Epistle  of  John,  which  is  as  decided  in  the  cherish-
ing of  warm  afiections  towards  the  faithful  servants  of
the  Lord,  as  the  second  Epistle  was  peremptory  in  its
v^aming  against  the  allowance  of  the  profession  of
Christ's  name,  to  shut  our  eyes  to  the  I'act  that  there
are  men  who  abuse  that  name  to  overthrow  His  person
and  truth.


366  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

The  third  Epistle  accordingly  is  not  addressed  to
lady  and  her  children.     This  would  not  suit  its  objecl
Too  often,  as  we  know,  ladies  and  their  children
no  exhortation  to  go  forth  with  sufficiently  warm  affec-
tion after  preachers.    This  is  notorious.    There  are  fei
more  common  snares  in  the  church  of  God  than  th(
undue  influence  which  some  exercise,  if  they  do  nol
seek,  over  females  and  young  people.    I  do  not  s]
of  such  as  seek  the  conversion  of  souls,  but  of  those
whose  zeal  goes  forth  in  unedifying  questions  which-^*^
form  parties,  chiefly  through  the  medium  of  women  an<
children.     Undoubtedly  this  has  always  been  the  case.
If  you  search  through  the  history  of  the  church,  yoi
will  invariably  find  that  where  men  have  wrong  pur-
poses in  view,  they  do  not  seek  intelligent  men, — those
who  can  take  and  keep  their  ground,  still  less  those  to
whom  God  has  given  grace  as  faithful  servants  of  in-
dependent judgment :  they  shrink  from  these,  and  avoid
a  conference  which  might  be  profitable,  getting  into
holes  and  comers,  where  they  can  at  leisure  indoctrinate
their  little  coteries  with  the  doctrines  that  they  bring
in  privily.

Of  all  this  and  more  we  have  had  sorrowful  ex-
perience. It  is  not  a  thing  we  have  merely  read  about
others  in  bygone  days.  We  have  seen  and  known
it  ourselves:  its  grief  we  have  bitterly  felt;  and  we
ought  to  mention  this  snare,  and  could  not  refrain,  if
indeed  we  have  love  for  the  children  of  Grod  and
jealousy  for  the  glory  of  Christ.  Undoubtedly  then  it
remains  true  that  there  is  the  solemn  fact  of  Satan's
enmity,  and  of  his  using  those  who  bear  the  name  of
Christ  to  overthrow  His  glory,  as  far  as  he  can.     It  is


Tin:  THIRD  ki'Istm:  (^v  .imuv.  ,;(,.

tlie  Holy  Ghost  who  warns  of  this,  though  the  word  and
experience  prove  how  mighty  He  is  in  behalf  of  the
love  and  glory  of  Christ.  For  indeed  there  are  men
fedthfal  and  true  to  that  name ;  and  we  are  as  much
1)onnd  to  go  forth  with  loving  desire  and  succour,  to
cheer  and  help  them  in  every  way,  showing  honour  to
them,  as  again  we  are  responsible  that  no  circumstances,
BO  past  reputation,  no  present  amiability,  no  ties  of
flesh  and  blood,  no  consideration  of  any  human  sort,
shall  weaken  our  solemn  separation  from  and  abhon*ence
of  that  which  overthrows  Jesus.

This  third  Epistle  then  is  addressed  to  Gains — no
doubt  a  truly  hospitable  and  gracious  man.  We  all
know  too  well  that  men  are  apt  to  be  somewhat  selfisli.
Women,  as  we  must  be  aware,  are  even  by  nature
characterised  by  affection.  Men,  if  they  have  what  one
looks  for  from  them,  ought  to  have  a  little  judgment;
but  then  their  judgment  may  be  warped  by  selfishness,
though  no  doubt  this  may  be  often  concealed,  perhaps
from  themselves,  by  pleas  of  prudence  and  so  forth.
Women,  as  a  class,  have  warmer  and  quicker  affec-
tions.

Here  then  the  wisdom  of  God  is  very  observable.  The
kindest  of  men  require  to  be  stirred  up,  and  need  to  be
exhorted  strongly  as  to  what  they  owe  to  those  who  go
forth  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  With  women  this
is  hardly  to  be  pressed.  On  the  contrary,  as  a  general
rule,  they  rather  call  for  a  little  cooling  down.  But  as
for  men,  I  have  rarely  seen  the  man  that  was  not  in
want  of  an  occasional  admonition  or  encouragement  in
this  kind  of  love.  Do  we  not  recognize  in  a  new  form
the  wisdom  of  our  God?    "The  elder  unto  the  well-


368  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

beloved  Gains,  whom  I  love  in  the  truth."  He  waa
already  a  large-hearted  man,  but  he  was  none  the  worse
for  being  somewhat  cheered  on.  There  is  a  danger  of
being  disheartened  in  these  labours  of  love.  There  are
many  difficulties  and  many  disappointments,  and  there
is  no  man  who  may  not  sometimes  need  a  word  from
God  to  keep  his  courage  up,  and  his  confidence  in  the
Lord,  that  the  springs  of  his  love  may  flow  fresh  and
strong.

Here  we  have  the  fact  that  to  the  *' well-beloved  Gaius"
the  apostle  writes  with  this  intent.     He  loved  him  also
in  the  truth.     Whether  it  was  tlie  elect  lady  and  her
children,  or  the  well-beloved  Gaius,  it  is  all  the  same
thing.  It  was  not  because  of  his  hospitality,  but  "whom
I  love  in  the  truth."     No  doubt  the  apostle  did  much
value  his  generosity  and  care;  but  even  in  matters
wholly  different  from  those  of  his  second  Epistle,  the
distinguishing  feature  which  presses  on  his  soul  was
this : — "  whom  I  love  in  the  truth."     "  Beloved,  I  wish
above  all  things  that  thou  mayest  prosper  and  be  in
health,  even  as  thy  soul  prospereth."    He  was  not  in-
different even  as  to  the  bodily  well-beiug  of  Gaius.  The
Holy  Ghost  thus  inspires  him  to  write  it.     It  is  not  a
private  letter,  nor  was  it  an  uninspired  codicil  added  to
what  was  inspired;   but  here  it  stands  in  a  genuine
apostolic  epistle,  written  by  John  the  elder  to  his
brother.     He  wished  that  he  might  prosper  and  be  in
health,  even  as  his  soul  prospered.    "For  I  rejoiced
greatly,  when  the  brethren  came  and  testified  of  the
tmth  that  is  in  thee,  even  as  thou  walkest  in  tmtL    I
have  no  greater  joy  than  to  hear  that  my  children  walk
in  truth."    It  was  sweet  to  the  apostle  to  hear  such  a


THE  THIRD   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  369

testimony  to  the  steadfastness  of  Gaius  in  the  truth,  as
it  was  to  hear  of  all  he  loved.

"Beloved,  thou  doest  faithfully  whatsoever  thou  doest
to  the  brethren,  and  this*  strangers."  The  common  text
and  our  English  version  seem  a  little  peculiar  in  the
]>hraseology  here,  conveying  the  idea  that  these  strangers
were  not  brethren.  This  clearly  was  not  the  intention.
He  has  before  his  mind  brethren  that  were  strangers.
It  was  not  merely  brethren  that  lived  in  the  place  where
Gaius  was :  this  might  be  a  manifest  token  of  happy
friendship.  But  there  was  a  greater  proof  of  love  and
hospitality  in  the  kindness  he  practised  to  stranger
lirethren,  to  Christians  whom  he  did  not  know.  "  Whicli
have  borne  witness  of  thy  love  before  the  church :
^'hom  if  thou  bring  forward  on  their  journey  worthily
of  God,  thou  shalt  do  well :  for  on  account  of  the  name
they  went  forth,  taking  nothing  of  the  Gentile9.  We
therefore  ought  to  take  up  such,  that  we  might  be
fellow-helpers  to  the  truth."

This  was  a  special  claim  on  brethren.  They  did  not
throw  themselves  on  man,  on  the  world,  on  nature,  but
on  Christ  only.  It  was  for  His  name's  sake  they  went
forth.  They  looked  nowhere  else ;  and  the  apostle  says,
•*  We  therefore  ought  to  take  up  such" — not  ye  but
•*m;c."  How  beautifully  he  who  lay  on  Jesus'  bosom
puts  himself  along  with  Gaius !  Had  the  apostle  been
placed  in  the  same  circumstances  as  Gaius,  no  doubt  he
would  have  done  so ;  but  his  place  as  apostle  did  not
absolve  him  from  the  practical  manifestation  of  love
to  servants  of  the  Lord  who  might  be  in  a  position

•  The  reading  of  the  most  ancient  and  best  MSS.  and  Versions  is
rovTo  (and  not  as  in  Text.  liec.  ci'c  roitQ)  ^.

2  B


370  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

altogether  different  from  his  own.  That  this  is  the  casa
is  most  evident,  because  in  the  verse  but  one  before  Ha
says  "thou;"  in  the  verse  after  he  says  "L"  Un-
questionably then,  when  he  changes  the  "thou"  either
to  "we**  or  to  "  I,"  he  means  what  he  says.

Thus  we  find  that  if  there  was  sorrow  expressed  in.
the  second  Epistle  at  finding  the  deceivers  and  the  anti^
Christ  seeking  an  entrance  among  the  simple,  iu  tha
third  Epistle  there  is  the  joy  of  welcoming  these  faithfuL
brethren  who  went   forth  for  Christ,  and   his  loving
hospitable  heart  who  is  thus  praised  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
aud  his  name  indelibly  recorded  in  the  scriptures  o^
truth  with  theirs  as  fellow-labourers.

But  the  bright  picture  has  its  shade.  *'  I  wrote  unto
the  church  :  but  Diotrephes,  who  loveth  to  have  the
pre-eminence  among  them,  receiveth  us  not  Wherefore,
if  I  come,  I  will  remember  his  deeds  which  he  doetb,
prating  against  us  with  malicious  words :  and  not  con-
tent therewith,  neither  doth  he  himself  receive  the
brethren,  and  forbiddeth  them  that  would,  and  casteth
them  out  of  the  church."

We  have  another  evil  designated  very  clearly  here.
Diotrephes  is  the  scriptural  example  of  the  clerical
tribe,  as  contra-distinguished  from  the  ministry  of  Christ.
There  is  no  service,  because  there  is  no  love.  He  is  the
representative  of  the  spirit  which  opposes  the  free  action
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  setting  itself  even  against  apostolical
authority  in  order  to  gain  or  maintain  his  own  individual
pre-eminence.  Self-importance,  jealousy  of  those  over  us,
impatience  of  others  equally  called  to  serve,  scorn  of  the
assembly,  yet  sometimes  humouring  the  least  worthy  for
its  own  ends — such  are  the  characteristics  of  clericalism.


THE  THIRD   EPISTLE  OF  JOHN.  371

I  do  not  mean  in  clergymen  only;  for  there  are  men  of
God  incomparably  better  than  their  position  tends  to
make  them;  as  on  the  other  hand  this  evil  thing  is
nowhere  so  offensive  as  where  the  truth  that  is  owned
wholly  condemns  it.

If  Diotrephes  had  been  called  to  serve  the  Lord,  of
which  there  is  little  appearance,  were  there  not  hundreds
and  thousands  not  less  truly  called  to  the  same  work  as
servants  of  Christ  by  a  title  from  Christ  not  less  real
than  what  he  held  himself?  Was  he  not  bound  to
respect  the  title  of  others  ?  You  cannot  plead  the  title
of  Christ  for  yourself  without  maintaining  the  authority
of  Christ  for  another.  He  who  does  so  honestly  and
truly  could  not  possibly  claim  an  exclusive  title.  This
was  precisely  what  Diotrephes  did,  and  it  is  the  distinc-
tive jioint  of  the  clerical  system.  It  is  not  a  question
of  ministry,  nor  even  of  what  people  call  "stated
ministry."  Who  doubts  stated  ministry  ?  At  the  same
time  who  can  deny  that  God  uses  servants  of  His  who
are  not  stated  ?  I  believe  that  He  maintains  His  own
title  in  the  church  of  God  to  raise  a  man  up  to  say  a
word,  and  it  may  be  an  important  word,  who  might  not
be  called  on  to  speak  again, — only  used  for  a  particular
purpose.  God  of  old  reserved  such  a  right,  and  certainly
He  has  not  given  it  up  now:  no  doubt  there  is  a
variety  of  ways  in  which  He  employs  those  who  may
not  have  any  well  defined  place  in  the  church  of  God.
To  abolish  all  these  to  a  dead  level  for  himself  to  lead
and  govern  was  the  unchecked  desire  of  Diotrephes.  It  is
nothing  more,  if  not  less,  than  we  oft«n  see  now.  Sup-
posing persons  have  large  gifts,  the  more  can  they  afford
to  give  the  fullest  scope  to  the  lesser  gifts ;  nor  is  there

2  B  2


372  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

any  surer  sign  of  weakness  in  one's  work  than  any  un-
willingness to  accredit  the  work  of  others.  He  that
values  his  own  call  on  the  Lord's  part  to  serve  Him  is
bound  by  all  means  to  hold  in  His  name  the  door  open
for  every  one  that  is  called  to  labour.  But  so  Diotrephes
did  not.  Did  he  profess  to  desire  only  what  edified
most,  and  so  set  himself  against  lesser  gifts  ?  He  dared
to  rise  up  against  the  apostle  himself  The  truth  is,  he
cared  for  himself,  and  loved  to  have  the  pre-eminence.
We  have  no  reason  to  gather  that  he  loved  anything  or
anybody  else.  Such  was  the  man  who  had  ventured  to
oppose  John ;  and,  as  we  see,  the  apostle  says  he  would
remember  him.     The  Lord  did  not  forget  it.

But  he  could  not  close  the  Epistle  with  anything  so
painful.  Turning  to  a  happier  theme,  he  says,  "  Beloved,
follow  not  that  which  is  evil,  but  that  which  is  good.
He  that  doeth  good  is  of  God :  but  he  that  doeth  evil
hath  not  seen  God."

How  the  key-note  of  the  first  Epistle  is  heard  right
through  the  last !  If  there  were  self-exalting  men  with
and  without  gift,  office,  or  influence,  others  there  are  of
a  different  mind.  "  Demetrius  hath  good  report  of  all
men,  and  of  the  truth  itself:  yea,  and  we  also  bear
record ;  and  ye  know  that  our  record  is  true."

Then  with  the  salutation  he  closes.  "I  had  manv
things  to  write  to  thee,  but  I  wish  not  with  ink  and  pen
to  write  to  thee :  but  I  hope  to  see  thee,  and  we  will
speak  mouth  to  mouth  soon.  Peace  be  to  thee.  The
friends  salute  thee.  Greet  the  friends  by  name.''  There
ar^  minute  differences  of  interest  between  this  conclu-
sion and  that  of  the  second  Epistle,  but  I  avoid  details
and  pass  on.


Tin:  r.i'isTi.K  <.f  .ni'i:.  .S7.">

We  enter  now  on  the  last  of  those  letters  as  they
stand  in  the  common  Bible,  the  Epistle  of  Judb.  I
will  take  this  opportunity  of  instituting  briefly  a  com-
parison with  part  of  the  second  Epistle  of  Peter,  which,
you  may  remember,  I  passed  over  with  a  partial  notice
i^hen  discoursing  on  that  subject.  Doubts  have  been
entertained,  as  most  are  aware,  by  men  of  some  learning.
Prom  their  similarity  in  various  ways  they  have  con-
ceived that  Peter  must  have  borrowed  from  Judas  or
«Judas  from  Peter ;  and  that,  in  point  of  fact,  if  one  is
inspired,  the  other  cannot  be.

Brethren,  this   sort  of  thought   and   speech   is  the
result  of  nothing  but  unbelieving  speculation.     And  I
will  go  even  farther  (for  it  is  a  serious  thing  thus  to  treat
scripture):  I  say  that  the  speculation  is  as  shallow  as  it
is  unbelieving.    Although  no  doubt  there  are  those  who
consider  themselves  to  show  their  superior  wisdom  by
their  doubts,  I  must  take  the  liberty  of  saying  that  to
tlispute  the  inspiration  of  either  2  Peter  or  Judas  demon-
strates their  ignorance  of  both.    I  do  not  mean  at  all  to
afiirm  that  those  guilty  of  such  license  are  ignorant  on
every  subject.    Far  from  it.     A  person  drawn  into  such
views  may  be  possessed  of  large  and  superior  informa-
tion in  what  has  occupied  his  life,  and  there  may  be
even  certain  portions  of  the  word  of  God  in  which  he
is  really  taught  of  the  Spirit  of  God.     But  for  all  that
these  doubts  are  as  unfounded  as  they  are  dangerous,
and  dishonouring  to  the  Holy  Ghost.     I  am  aware  that
some  names  of  great  weight  among  Protestants,  as  well
•  as  others  quite  opposed  in  position,  have  yielded  to
these  unworthy  questionings  of  scripture.    To  this  I
refer  that  those  who  are  present  may  understand  that  it


374  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

is  not  for  want  of  examining  their  objections,  and
weighing  well  what  they  say  against  the  truth,  that  I
have  ventured  to  express  a  severe  judgment  on  their
opinion.

I  hope  to  show  that  Judas  has  not  boiTOwed  from  Peter
any  more  than  Peter  from  Judas,  but  that  both  were
inspired  men,  who  wrote  in  the  direct  order  and  power
of  the  Holy  Spirit  I  do  not  at  all  mean  to  imply  by
this  that  one  did  not  write  before  the  other,  and  that
one  may  not  have  read  what  the  other  wrote.  Whether
this  were  so  or  not  matters  little  really  to  the  question.
It  is  plain  and  demonstrable  that  the  Spirit  of  God,  if
one  did  know  of  the  other's  communication,  has  taken
good  care,  while  giving  a  great  deal  that  is  common  to
both,  to  give  points  of  difference  of  the  most  essential
kind.  In  point  of  fact,  therefore,  the  criticism  that  comes
to  the  conclusion  that  the  one  is  borrowed  from  the
other  simply  betrays  its  own  blind  incompetence.  The
differences  are  as  striking  at  least  as  the  resemblances,
and  abundantly  show  that  Judas  has  not  borrowed  from
Peter,  and  that  Peter  has  a  line  as  peculiarly  his  own  as
that  of  Judas,  and  not  more  so.

We  have  seen  in  the  Epistles  of  Peter  that  the  lead-
ing truth,  besides  the  bringing  out  of  the  grace  of
Christ,  is  the  righteous  government  of  God  under  which
the  saints  are  placed.  We  have  seen  that  this  righteous
dealing  does  not  merely  affect  the  saints,  but  will  most
seriously  bring  the  world  under  its  weight  before  God
has  closed  the  matter.  Thus  in  the  second  Epistle  of
Peter,  naturally,  where  we  see  the  future  judgment
carried  on  even  to  the  end  of  the  thousand  years,  with
the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth


THE  EPISTLE   OF  JUDE.  375

righteousness,  the  point  from  which  the  Holy  Ghost
views  matters  is  men  judged  according  to  the  principles
of  Gods  righteous  government.  In  the  case  of  Chris-
tians all  of  course  flows  from  and  through  grace ;  but
those  that  have  despised  the  grace  of  God  will  not  be
able  longer  to  despise  His  government.

The  second  Epistle  accordingly  takes  this  up,  and
shows  that  as  among  the  Jews  there  were  false  prophets,
so  now  there  are  false  teachei-s.  Of  these  the  Spirit
of  God  gives  some  very  solemn  traits.  It  is  said  that
they  have  brought  in  damnable  heresies,  even  denying
the  sovereign  Master  that  bought  them.  A  word  on
this  may  relieve  the  minds  of  persons,  to  whom  it  often
seems  harsh  that  the  Lord  had  bought  false  teachers
and  heretics.  You  must  distinguish  between  being
bought  and  being  redeemed.

It  is  never  taught  in  Scripture  that  the  Lonl  redeemed
a  heretic,  or  any  other  man  that  was  not  saved.
There  is  not  a  syllable  in  God's  word  that  enfeebles  the
certainty  of  eternal  life  for  the  believer;  but  it  is  none
the  less  clearly  taught  there  that  the  Lord  has  "bought"
every  man  whatever,  saved  or  not,  and  believer  or  not.
The  result  for  man  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  Lord's
purchase.  He  has  bought  the  world  and  everything  that
belongs  to  it.  This  is  the  doctrine  everywhere,  whether
in  parable  or  in  doctrine,  whether  in  gospel  or  epistle ;
and  this  is  the  constant  statement  of  the  Spirit.  Of
course,  therefore,  these  bad  people  were  bought  as  well
as  the  rest.

But  redemptian  is  another  thought,  and  so  far  from
purchase  being  the  same  as  redemption,  the  two  things
are  decidedly  in  contrast.     The  object  of  redemption  is


376  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

to  deliver  a  person  from  the  power  of  the  adversary,  to
bring  one  who  is  a  captive  out  of  slavery,  to  set  him  fi^ee
by  the  ransom  paid.  This  is  only  true  of  the  believer;  he
alone  is  brought  out  of  captivity  and  made  free.  It  is  an
efficacious  not  a  nominal  deliverance,  and  belongs  only
to  faith.  It  is  not  merely  that  there  is  purchase-money  ;
this  is  not  enough  for  redemption,  which  is  a  question
of  setting  a  slave  or  prisoner  free,  and  this  is  never  the
case  unless  a  soul  believes  in  Christ.  But  it  is  a  different
thing  with  purchase :  you  may  buy  that  which  is  inani-
mate, and  that  which  is  bought  belongs  to  you  indeed,
but  possibly  for  harm  and  shame.  Supposing  you  could
purchase  a  person,  what  is  the  effect  of  the  transaction  ?
You  make  him  a  slave :  thus  it  is  the  very  reverse  of
redemption.  Eedemption  makes  the  slave  free,  but  pur-
chase makes  what  you  buy  your  property  or  your  slave.

These  two  facts  are  both  true  of  Christians,  and  meet
in  Christ's  blood.  The  Christian  is  both  redeemed  and
purchased ;  but  he  alone  is  redeemed.  But  besides  being
redeemed,  he  is  bought  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and
therefore  it  is  that  he  becomes  Christ's  slave.  He  is  a
bondman  of  Christ  Jesus.  Perfectly  freed  by  redemp-
tion, he  is  made  thoroughly  a  slave  by  purchase ;  and
this  is  precisely  the  anomaly  the  natural  man  never
understands.  As  for  the  theologians,  some  of  them  are
not  natural  men ;  but  one  might  ask  in  despair,  what  it
is  they  ever  seem  to  understand  ?  The  fact  is  that  they
have  so  confused  the  two  things  as  to  make  the  subject
hopeless  in  their  hands.

It  is  clear  that  the  dispute  between  those  called
Calvinists  and  the  so-called  Armiuians  turns  much
on  this  point,  which  is  then  very  important.     Both  of


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE.  377

them  agree  in  the  error  that  redemption  and  purchase
mean  the  same  thing.  The  consequence  is  that  they
never  can  settle  the  question.  The  Calviuist  is  quite
right  in  his  premiss  that  redemption  belongs  solely  to
the  household  of  faith ;  the  Arminian  is  no  less  right  in
his  premiss  that  purchase  belongs  to  every  creature
under  the  effects  of  sin.  But  they  are  both  equally
mistaken  in  assuming  them  to  be  the  same  thing ;  and
there  they  wrangle,  as  they  might  for  ever,  without  ad-
vancing an  inch  toward  settling  the  matter,  because  each
holds  a  truth  that  the  other  denies.  The  truth  in  this
question,  as  in  many  others  which  have  distracted
Christendom,  is  that  faith  receives  that  which  the  con-
tending parties  lose  in  the  dispute ;  faith  bows  to  the
whole  truth,  instead  of  being  shut  up  to  a  part  of  it.
Here  then  in  2  Peter  ii.  it  will  be  seen  that  it  is  onlv  a
question  of  purchase,  which  does  not  imply  that  these
men  were  ever  born  of  God.

In  the  next  place  we  are  given  to  see  the  effects
of  their  teaching  and  conduct: — "And  many  shall
follow  their  pernicious  ways,  by  reason  of  whom  the
way  of  truth  shall  be  evil  spoken  of"  Next  their
covetousness  is  brought  before  us,  and,  more  than
this,  the  certainty  that  sure  judgment  awaits  them —
that  their  destruction  does  not  slumber,  but  is  near
and  sure.  Then  Peter  says  (mark  the  expression),
"For  if  God  spared  not  angels  that  sinned" — it  is
simply  a  question  of  sinning  in  this  epistle,  of  right-
eousness and  unrighteousness — "but  cast  them  down
to  hell,  and  delivered  them  to  chains  of  darkness,  to
be  reserved  for  judgment;  and  spared  not  the  old
world,  but  saved   Noah,  one  of  eight,  a  preacher  of


378  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

righteousness,  bringing  in  the  flood  upon  the  world  of
the  ungodly,"  &c.  These  are  the  topics  with  Peter,  even
sin  and  unrighteousness.  Hence  he  speaks  of  God  who,
"  turning  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  into  ashes,
condemned  them  with  an  overthrow,  making  them  an
ensample  unto  those  that  after  should  live  ungodly;  and
delivered  just  Lot**  (it  is  righteousness  again),  "dis-
tressed with  the  filthy  conversation  of  the  godless  :  (for
the  righteous  man  dwelling  among  them,  in  seeing  and
hearing,  vexed  his  righteous  soul  from  day  to  day  with
their  lawless  deeds)/'  Nor  is  this  more  than  the  begin-
ning, not  the  end.  They  were  accordingly  reserved  for
a  still  greater  punishment  by  and  by.  This  is  what  is
traced  more  particularly  throughout  the  Epistle  on  the
vastest  scale,  and  finally  in  the  next  chapter.

But  in  Judas  we  may  see  a  wholly  diflTerent  character
of  evil.  "Jude,  the  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  and
brother  of  James,  to  the  called  that  are  sanctified  by
God  the  Father,  and  preserved  in  Jesus  Christ:  mercy
to  you,  and  peace,  and  love,  be  multiplied,"  Though
professedly  the  epistle  of  Judas  is  to  the  saints  at  laige,
the  Holy  Ghost  brings  in  the  same  wish  of  mercy  as
is  more  usually  addressed  to  an  individual  soul.  In
fact  this  Epistle  does  individualize  the  saints,  and  it
is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  look  at  truth  for  the
individual  in  this  place,  and  to  lay  hold  of  it  for  our
own  souls.  "Beloved,  when  I  gave  all  diligence  to
Mrrite  unto  you  of  the  common  salvation,  it  was  need-
ful for  me  to  write  to  you,  and  exhort  you  that  ye
should  earnestly  contend  for  the  faith  which  was  once
delivered  to  the  saints."  This  is  not  so  much  the  case
with  Peter ;  he  does  not  speak  of  any  such  contention.


L?i


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE.  379

"For  there  are  certain  men  crept  in  unawares,  who  were
before  of  old  marked  out  for  this  sentence,  ungodly
men."  Mark,  it  is  not  merely  sin,  or  unrighteousness :
here  are  seen  "ungodly  men,  turning  the  grace  of  our
Grod ;"  for  it  is  not  men's  righteousness  here,  nor  His
righteous  government  The  evil  is  "  turning  the  grace
of  our  God  into  lasciviousness,  and  denying  "  the  only
Sovereign  Master,  "  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."

Thus  the  measure  of  likeness  makes  the  real  difference
between  the  Epistles  far  more  striking  than  if  this  Epistle
had  been  written  without  any  points  of  contact  with
the  other.  Of  one  thing  we  may  be  sure,  that  whether
or  not  Peter  referred  to  Judas,  or  Judas  to  Peter,  the
Holy  Ghost  had  both  in  view,  and  distributed  to  each
as  He  would;  and  there  are  no  finer  samples  of  the
action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  touching  of  similar
lines  of  truth,  and  at  the  same  time  of  converging  with
the  most  consummate  wisdom,  and  the  most  admirable
delicacy  of  expression  as  well  as  of  truth,  than  these
two  Epistles,  that  treat  of  the  existent  and  coming  evil
under  different  points  of  view.  Supposing  two  persons
take  totally  different  lines,  it  is  evident  that  nothing  is
easier  than  for  each  to  pursue  his  own  line;  but  suppos-
ing they  come  continually  close  together,  it  is  plain  that
there  is  far  more  difficulty  to  preserve  intact  the  truth
that  is  given  to  each.  The  latter  is  the  case  with  Peter
and  Judas :  but  the  Holy  Ghost  has  done  the  work  to
perfection.

"I  will  therefore  put  you  in  remembrance,  though
once  for  all  knowing  all  things,  how  that  the  Lord,
having  saved  a  people  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the
second  place  destroyed  them  that  believed  not."


380  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

There  is  not  a  word  about  this  in  Peter.  Why  here  ?
Because  what  the  apostle  Judas  is  showing  is  not  merely
unrighteousness  in  conduct,  but  the  abandonment  of  a
position  of  grace,  and  the  virtual  turning  it  into  lascivi-
ousness.  In  fact  the  grand  subject  of  Peter  in  his  second
Epistle  is  unrighteousness;  the  distinctive  subject  of
Judas  is  not  this  but  apostacy  (that  is,  a  departure  from
the  place  that  the  grace  of  God  give^  at  any  given  time
to  His  own  people).  Accordingly  the  warning  is  founded
on  a  saved  people  in  the  next  place  destroyed,  as  with
Israel  brought  out  of  Egypt.  It  was  not  persons  that  be-
haved badly,  but  a  deadlier  evil ;  they  did  not  believe ;
they  abandoned  His  truth  and  ways.  "And  angels  who
kept  not  their  first  estate,  but  left  their  own  habitation,
he  hath  in  keeping  in  everlasting  chains  under  darkness
unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day."

There  again  it  is  the  same  principle.  This  makes  it
all  the  more  striking,  inasmuch  as  Peter  speaks  of
angels  too,  but  not  at  all  from  the  same  point  of  view.
In  Peter's  case  it  is  simply  said  that  God  spared  not  the
angels  who  sinned,  without  a  word  about  leaving  their
first  estate  or  not  keeping  it.  Judas  speaks  of  "  angels
which  kept  not  their  first  estate,  but  left  their  own
habitation."  They  apostatized  also,  and  in  this  case  the
terms  are  excessively  strong,  as  the  guilt  is  yet  worse.

And  now  comes  another  example  from  among  men,
and  this  too  used  by  Peter.  When  I  say  used  by  Peter,
I  do  not  pretend  to  attempt  to  decide  the  time  when  the
two  Epistles  were  written ;  nor  does  it  signify  that  I  am
aware  of  Peter  says,  "  And  turning  the  cities  of  Sodom
and  Gomorrah  into  ashes,  condemned  them  with  an
overthrow,  making  them  an  ensample  unto  those  that


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE.  381

after  should  live  ungodly."  Whereas  Judas  has  it:  "Even
as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the  cities  about  them  in
Uke  manner,  giving  themselves  over  to  fornication,  and
going  after  other  flesh,  are  set  forth  for  an  example,
suffering  the  judgment  of  eternal  fire."  In  this  C6i.se
it  is  evident  that  it  is  a  breaking  out,  not  merely  into
sin,  but  into  that  which  was  beyond  measure  flagrant,
not  evil  alone,  but  contrary  even  to  fallen  nature.  This
is  what  is  spoken  of  here.  The  very  same  persons  are
described  in  a  different  manner,  according  to  the  object
of  the  Holy  Ghost.

So  again  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  angels.  By  Peter
it  is  said,  "  Whereas  angels,  whicli  are  greater  in  power
and  might,  bring  not  railing  accusation  against  them
before  the  Lord."  Judas  gives  us  the  more  specific  charge
rather  than  their  general  delinquency :  "  Likewise  also
these  filthy  dreamers  defile  the  flesh,  despise  dominion,
and  speak  evil  of  dignities.  Yet  Michael  the  archangel,
when  contending  with  the  devil  he  disputed  about  the
body  of  Moses,  durst  not  bring  against  him  a  railing
accusation,  but  said,  The  Lord  rebuke  thee."

Thus  it  is  evident  that  in  every  instance  Peter  takes
up  the  broad  ground  of  righteousness  and  unrighteous-
ness, while  Judas  singles  out  the  special  character  of
departure  from  the  truth  and  perversion  of  the  grace  of
God  (that  is,  apostacy  in  short).

But  there  is  another  difference  too.  They  both  treat
of  the  coming  of  the  Lord :  only  Peter,  true  to  his  charac-
ter, takes  the  largest  and  most  expansive  aspect  possible.
He,  and  he  alone,  embraces  within  the  day  of  the  Lord
the  whole  of  the  millennium,  and  even  that  which  is  just
before  the  millennium,  and  that  which  is  just  after  it.


382  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

He  looks  at  what  immediately  precedes  the  millenniuia,
because  that  day  really  includes  divine  judgments  iix
Jerusalem  and  neighbouring  and  even  distant  lands,  as
various  steps  of  the  preliminary  judgment  of  the  quiclc:
(or  men  found  in  more  or  less  open  rebellion  against  th^
Lord,  and  despite  of  His  people)  before  the  reign  for  ai-
thousand  years,  properly  speaking,  begins.     The  millen —
niura  follows  this  epoch, — it  may  be  only  a  little  whil^
after,  but  still  it  is  after.     So  again  the  dissolution  oC
the  heavens  and  the  earth  does  not  fall  within  the  mil —
lennium  but  afterwards.     There  will  be  a  short  subse —
quent  space,  during  which  Satan  will  muster  all  bom.
during  the  thousand  years  who  are  not  born  of  God.  Fir^
will  devour  the  assembled  rebels, — the  bursting  foitb.
of  divine  judgment  once  more  on  man,  until  the  eter-
nal judgment  takes  its  final  course,  and  the  heavens  and.
the  earth,  then  completely  consumed,  have  given  place
to  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  in  their  fullest
sense.     All  these  vast  events  are  comprehended  withia
(not  the  millennium,  but)  the  day  of  the  Lord,  either  a
little  before  it  in  the  one  case,  or  a  little  after  it  in  the
other.

This  illustrates  the  immense  breadth  of  Peter.  So  he
treats  moral  questions  and  dispensational  changes,  re-
garding  all  in  this  extensive  way.  But  it  is  otherwise
with  Judas,  whose  pen  makes  every  thing  precise,  just
as  he,  and  he  alone,  gives  us  in  a  few  brief  words  the
very  gall  and  venom,  as  it  were,  of  the  apostacy.  "  Woe
to  them !  for  they  have  gone  in  the  way  of  Cain,  and
run  greedily  after  the  error  of  Balaam  for  reward,  and
perished  in  the  gainsaying  of  Core."

The  only  part  of  this  evil  that  Peter  takes  up,  because


"^s^l


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE.  383

he  merely  looks  at  it  broadly  and  as  a  question  of
righteoas  government,  is  the  following  of  Balaam,  who
loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness.  But  here,  although
Judas  seems  to  give  us  more,  it  is  in  point  of  fact  all
defined  with  the  greatest  possible  nicety,  the  brief
moral  history  of  the  apostacy.  "  These  are  spots  (more
probably,  sunken  rocks)  in  your  feasts  of  love,  when
they  feast  with  you,  feeding  themselves  without  fear:
clouds  they  are  without  water,  carried  along  by  winds ;
trees  of  late  autumn,  without  fruit,  twice  dead,  plucked
up  by  the  roots :  raging  waves  of  the  sea,  foaming  out
their  own  shames :  wandering  stars,  to  whom  is  reserved
the  blackness  of  darkness  for  eternity.  And  Enoch
also,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  prophesied  as  to  these,
saying,  Behold,  the  Lord  came  with  his  holy  myriads,  to
execute  judgment  upon  all,  and  to  convince  all  the  un-
godly among  them  of  all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they
have  ungodlily  committed,  and  of  all  the  hard  speeches
which  ungodly  sinners  have  spoken  against  him.  These
are  murmurers,  complainers,  walking  after  their  lusts ;
and  their  mouth  speaketh  great  swelling  words,  having
men's  persons  in  admiration  because  of  advantage.  But
ye,  beloved,  remember  the  words  spoken  before  of  the
apostles  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  that  they  told  you
there  should  be  mockers  in  the  last  time,  walking  after
their  own  lusts  of  ungodliness."

Thus  it  is  not  the  day  of  the  Lord  as  in  the  very
comprehensive  application  of  Peter;  but  the  fact  of  His
coming  and  executing  judgment  on  those  seized  as  it
were  in  flagrant  sin,  caught  in  tKe  very  act.  Judas
looks  at  a  dealing  suited  and  due  to  apostates.

But  there  is  another  point  of  precision  that,  absent


384  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

from  2  Peter,  is  peculiar  to  Judas.  He  does  not  merely
resent  the  mocking  taunt,  "  Where  is  the  promise  of  his
pi*esence  ?"  nor  explain  the  delay  by  His  long  suffering
and  saving  of  sinners;  he  does  not  merely  call  on  the
saint^  to  walk  becomingly  in  holy  conversation  and  godli-
ness, waiting  for  the  new  and  eternal  scene  wherein  dwells
lighteousness.  The  characteristic  word  of  Judas  savours
of  special  grace.  "  But  ye,  beloved,  building  up  your-
selves on  your  most  holy  faith,  praying  in  the  Holy
Ghost,  keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  waiting  for
the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life."
This  is  distinct  Christian  privilege,  and  not  merely  the
necessary  godliness  which  is  always  binding.

"And  of  some  have  compassion,  making  a  difference."*

♦  It  is  right  to  notice,  if  only  in  a  note,  that  the  maniiacripts  here
are  eingularly  in  conflict  as  to  the  readings.  The  Sinai  and  the
Vatican,  with  the  corrector  of  the  Rescript  of  Paris,  read  iXcart,
which  is  only  another  form  of  the  common  reading  IXf fire,  *'  compas-
eionate."  But  there  is  the  awkward  repetition  of  the  same  word
again  as  a  later  clause ;  for  the  older  manuscripts  present  a  threefold
division  in  the  sentence.  According  to  the  weightiest  authorities,  it
would  seem,  on  the  whole,  that  it  should  stand  thus :  rai  oDc  ft^v
fXkyxi^i  ^laKpivofikvovQy  oOc  Si  Oiti^iTt  Ik  Tcvpb^  apird^ovrtCf  oDc  Si
iXiart  iv  0oj3^)  nitrovvrfc  Kai  rbv  Airb  r^c  (rapKbQ  IffTriXv/jLiwov
Xirutva.  *' And  some  convict  when  contending,  hut  others  save,  snatch-
ing them  from  the  fire,  and  others  compassionate  in  fear,  hating  even
the  garment  that  is  spotted  hy  the  flesh."  It  is  cui-ious  that  Dr.  £.
Wells,  in  his  *•  Help  for  the  more  easy  and  clear  understanding  of  the
Holy  Scriptures"  (the  part  containing  these  Epistles  heing  published  at
Oxford,  in  1715),  adopted  this  text  substantially,  which  he  thus  trans-
lated :  "And  some  being  wavering,  rebuke;  and  others  save,  pulling
them  out  of  the  fire ;  and  of  others  have  compassion  with  fear/*  &c.
He  rejected  the  twofold  division,  a^d  corrected  the  form  of  single
words  mainly  on  the  authority  of  the  Alexandrian  MS.,  with  some
others  of  less  weight,  confirmed  by  the  Vulgate,  the  Syriac,  and  the
Ethiopic  Versions.  With  the  exception  of  the  error  already  pointed
out,  the  oldest  uncials  agree,  we  may  say,  in  the  text  here  presented.


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDB.  385

Some  complain  if  there  be  a  making  a  difference.  I
believe,  brethren,  that,  though  grace  and  wisdom  be
eminently  needed  for  it,  yet  there  can  be  no  sounder
principle  than  this.  I  repeat,  however,  that  necessarily
spiritual  discrimination  is  wanted  for  each  case.  God
is  faithful,  who  withholds  no  good  thing,  and  to  the
humble  gives  more  grace.  In  the  long  run  divinely-
given  wisdom  becomes  more  and  more  apparent  in  these
matters.  *'  But  others  save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out
of  the  fire;  hating  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the
flesh."

Then  he  winds  all  up  by  bringing  before  us  our  own
blessed  position  in  a  manner  altogether  different  from
Peter.  "But  to  him  that  is  able  to  keep  you+  from
falling."     It  is  not  merely  that  He  is  able  to  bring  us

save  that  the  Vatican  makes,  to  my  mind,  a  mess  by  omitting  the
first  oSc  ikf  which  seems  to  have  been  an  unintentional  slip,  as  the
clauae  is  thereby  rendered  scarce  translatable  or  intelligible.  Insert
the  words  with  the  Sinai  and  other  ancient  MS8.,  and  aU  is  plain.
Hence  this  is  the  form  of  the  sentence  preferred  by  Tischendorf  and
other  modem  editors.  The  nom.  ^laicpcvo/icvoc  of  the  received  text
(which  the  English  Version  foUows)  can  hardly  be  traced  higher  than
the  ninth  century :  if  it  were  preferable,  the  meaning  would  be  as
given  there.  But  if  the  more  ancient  reading  in  the  accusative  stand,
verse  9  of  this  Epistle  supplies  the  probable  sense  here.

In  verse  25  /aov^  (without  aS^i^  brought  in  from  Bom.  xvi.  29)  is
the  light  reading,  with  the  very  important  additions  of  S.A  'l.X.  r.
K.  i^.y  and  irp6  ir,  r.  al.  Copyists  are  apt  to  enlarge  and  assimilate;
they  do  not  so  often,  as  here,  omit.

t  Those  who  idolise  a  few  of  the  most  ancient  MSS.,  to  the  prac-
tical exclusion  of  other  witnesses  and  internal  evidence,  would  do
well  to  ponder  the  &ct  that  the  Sinai  MS.  here  joins  the  Parisian
'Rescript,  and  the  Passionei  MS.  with  very  many  cursives  and  most
versions  in  reading  v/iac,  **you ;"  whilst  the  Alexandrian  reads  iffia^,
**  08,"  and  the  Vatican  and  the  Moscow  MS.  of  Matthaci  with  more
than  thirty  cursivei  give  avrovQ,  **  them,"  to  which  modem  editors
indme.

2  c


386  INTKoDUCToKV    LIXTL'KK.^.

into  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,  \vlii(  li  of
course  is  common  to  all  the  people  of  God,  t^  the
righteous  of  all  times;  but  here  we  have  the  special
inner  blessedness  of  those  that  wait  for  Christ,  and  are
caught  up  to  be  with  Him  where  He  is.  "But  to
him  that  is  able  to  keep  you  (?)  from  falling,  and  to
present  faultless  before  his  glory  with  exultation,  to
the  only  God  our  Saviour,  through  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord,  be  glory,  majesty,  might,  and  authority,  from  be-
fore all  eternity,  and  now  and  to  all  the  ages.  Amen."
This  is  the  Lord,  not  coming  to  deal  with  the  wicked,
but  to  take  us  up  to  be  with  Himself.  It  is  not  the
judgment  of  the  unrighteous,  nor  the  righteous  govern-
ment of  the  nations  on  the  earth,  but  specifically  the
comino:  of  our  Lord  Jesus  for  His  saints.  Now  he
understood  how  Jesus  could  manifest  Himself  to  His
own  as  He  does  not  to  the  world,  not  only  in  the  power
of  the  Holy  Ghost  while  He  is  away  (compare  Johu
xiv.  22),  but  when  He  comes  again  to  receive  us  to
Himself,  to  be  where  He  is  in  the  Father's  house.


I  have  thus  closed  this  sketch  of  the  so-called
Catholic  or  general  Epistles,  which,  I  may  be  allowed
to  say,  seems  a  not  very  appropriate  classification ;  for
James  expressly  addressed  the  twelve  tribes  who  are  in
the  dispersion,  as  Peter  the  elect  sojourners  scattered  in
Asia  Minor,  his  second  Epistle  being  expressly  said  to
be  written  to  the  same  as  the  first.  Then  what  is  called
the  first  Epistle  general  of  John  has  more  the  air  of  a
treatise  than  of  an  epistle;  nor  is  it  clear  that  it  too
did  not  primarily  contemplate  believers  ftovn  among


THE  EPISTLE  OF  JUDE.  387

the  Jews,  though  undoubtedly,  like  the  rest,  meant  for
the  direct  instruction  of  the  entire  assembly  of  God.
His  second  and  third  Epistles  are  as  distinctly  personal
in  address  as  the  Epistle  of  Paul  to  Philemon.  This
may  have  been  Calvin's  reason  for  not  including  them
in  his  exposition  of  the  Catholic  Epistles  :  why  he  did
not  write  on  them  at  all  is  less  intelligible.  It  is  cer-
tainly not  because  they  are  not  worthy  in  themselves,
or  of  slight  value  to  the  Christian,  not  to  speak  of  the
homage  due  to  the  revealed  word  of  our  God.  Why
he  did  not  write  on  the  Kevelation  is  plain  enough:
neither  he  nor  any  of  the  Reformers  had  any  real
understanding  of  the  book  as  a  whole,  though  they
were  not  wrong  in  applying  Babylon  to  Eome,  and
this  in  good  earnest.  The  Epistle  of  Judas  is  in  itself
at  least  as  general  as  any  of  those  so  classed;  but  there
seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  he,  like  his  brother
James,  and  like  Peter,  had  the  circumcision  for  the
immediate  circle  of  his  ministry.  John  affords  most
ground  for  the  inference  that  the  Lord  employed  him
to  be  the  vehicle  of  divine  messages  among  the  Gentiles
also.   (See  Rev.  i.-iii.)

May  the  Lord  bless  His  own  word,  and  enable  us  to
prize  every  tittle  of  it ;  and  may  it  have  both  attraction
and  authority  over  our  souls,  who  desire  to  grow  in
grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of  Himself !


2  0  2


IX.


THE    REVELATION.

Chaps,  i.-iii.

•

That  God  should  have  chosen  John  to  be  the  instru-
ment of  communicating  the  closing  volume  of  the  New
Testament  is  worthy  of  our  consideration.  It  is  not  a
new  thing  for  God  thus  to  set  out  the  strongest  contrasts
by  the  same  inspired  writer.  He  who  was  emphatically
the  apostle  of  the  uncircumcision  was  the  appointed
witness  of  Christ  to  those  who  had  been  Jews.  The
final  and  above  all  the  decisive  message  of  grace,  which
called  the  Jews  outside  all  earthly  associations  to  Christ
in  heaven,  was  given  neither  by  Peter  nor  by  James,
and  by  no  other  than  PauL  So  too  the  witness  of  grace
and  truth  which  came  by  Jesus  Christ  was,  in  His
mind,  if  not  in  man's,  the  most  suited  medium  for  re-
vealing the  coming  judgments  of  God.  In  truth,  the
moral  reason  lay  in  this :  that  Christ,  if  rejected  as  the
object  of  faith,  and  the  only  channel  of  grace,  becomes
an  executor  of  judgment  *  This  we  find  formally  and
doctrinally  in  his  gospel,  (chap,  v.)  And  now  that  grace
and  truth  were  about  to  be  utterly  set  at  naught,  as
He  Himself  had  been  before  by  that  which  bore  His
name  on  the  earth,  John  was  more  than  any  other
suited  to  let  us  see  the  solemn  visions  o^  Qod  avenging


P5?IE%


THE   KEVBLATION.  389

the  slighted  rights  of  His  own  Son ;  and  this,  firsts  by
providential  judgments ;  lastly,  by  Christ  Himself  com-
ing in  the  personal  execution  of  judgment.

Hence,  although  there  are  the  most  complete  contrasts
in  form,  subject,  and  issues  between  the  gospel  and
the  revelation  of  John,  after  all  the  person  of  the  Lord
Jesus  is  pre-eminently  kept  before  us  as  the  object  of
God's  care  and  honour  in  both ;  and  therefore  it  is  that
even  the  souls  that  could  not  enter  into  the  main
topics  of  its  prophetic  visions  have  always  found  un-
speakable comfort  in  the  various  displays  of  Christ
Himself  furnished  by  this  book,  especially  in  times  of
trial,  rejection  and  persecution.  Who  that  knows  eccle-
siastical history,  who  that  has  present  acquaintance
with  souls,  is  not  aware  that  the  saints  of  God,  with
ever  so  little  light,  have  been  exceedingly  nourished
and  helped  by  the  Apocalypse ;  while  men  of  learning
have  made  it  as  dry  as  an  old  almanac  ?

It  is  "  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  God  gave
unto  him."  Even  in  the  gospel,  which  is  so  fragrant
with  His  divine  love,  we  have  the  frequent — not  to
say  constant — admonition  of  this  remarkable  position
which  Christ  takes.  In  short  He  is  carefully  regarded
as  man  on  earth,  as  the  sent  One  who  lives  on  account
of  the  Father — in  the  gospel  as  a  man  on  earth,  in  the
revelation  as  a  man  most  truly  wherever  He  may  be
seen,  whether  in  heaven  or  on  earth.  This  book  then
is  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  "which  God  gave  unto
him.'*  In  the  gospel  it  is  said,  God  gives  Him  to  have
life  in  Himself.  Nothing  can  more  demonstrate  how
loyally  He  accepts,  and  will  not  speak  inconsistently
with,  the  place  of  man  to  which  He  stooped.  For  in  Him


390  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

was  life :  yea,  He  was  that  eternal  life  which  was  with
the  Father  before  the  worlds  were.  Nevertheless,  hav-
ing become  a  raan  in  divine  grace.  He  speaks  according
to  that  lowly  position  which  He  entered  here.  In  glory
it  is  just  the  same,  as  we  see  in  the  book  before  us.
"  The  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  God  gave  unto
him,  to  show  unto  his  servants."  It  is  not  now  to  bring
them  whether  or  not  servants  out  of  that  position  or  even
worse,  and  entitling  them  to  take  the  place  of  children  of
God.  This  characterises  the  gospel,  because  it  distinc-
tively is  the  revelation  of  grace  and  truth  in  Jesus
Christ,  the  only-begotten  Son.  Here  it  is  what  God  was
going  to  do  for  His  glory  as  the  rejected  man.  He  is
going  therefore  to  show  unto  His  "bondmen" — a  term
that  would  suit  not  only  Christians  now,  but  those  who
might  be  in  another  relationship  after  we  have  been
taken  away  from  the  world.  Hence,  evidently,  there
is  a  comprehensive  term  employed  with  divine  wisdom,
"  to  show  unto  his  servants  things  which  must  shortly
come  to  pass."  It  is  not  to  make  known  what  was  in
Christ  before  all  worlds,  but  to  disclose  the  great  facts
in  which  God  was  about  to  maintain  the  glory  of  the
First-begotten,  when  He  introduced  Him  into  the  world.
"And  he  sent  and  signified  it  by  his  angel  unto  his
servant  John."

The  angel,  it  is  needless  to  say,  is  not  without  good
reason  named  in  relation  to  the  revelations  which  God
was  here  giving.  In  the  gospel  we  hear  of  eternal  life
in  the  Son,  and  this  in  the  grace  of  God  given  to  the
believer.  There  the  Holy  Ghost  was  the  only  one  com-
petent to  minister  and  effectuate  such  grace  according
to  the  counsels  of  God,  and  in  the  ordering  of  His  love.


i'Vfi


THE   REVELATION.  391

But  here  we  have  visions — visions  of  God's  judicial
ways — visions  of  what  would  call  for  judgment  in  the
ever  growing  iniquity  of  man.  He  therefore  "  sent  and
signified  this  by  his  angel  unto  his  servant  John."  It  is
another  and  a  remarkable  difference.  In  the  gospel  John
may  speak,  but  he  speaks  as  one  who  had  seen  the  Lord,
— as  one  who  could  bear  his  own  personal  voucher  for
whatever  he  utters.  He  may  speak  but  seldom  of  him-
self, and  this  he  does  so  effectually  that  there  are  not
wanting  those  who  have  questioned  whether  after  all  he
were  "  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved."  Undoubtedly
the  inference  is  mistaken ;  still  there  is  no  possibility  of
charging  the  writer  with  putting  himself  forward  in  the
manner  in  which  he  has  written.  This  is  a  very  signifi-
cant circumstance,  more  particularly  as  in  the  epistles,
which  contemplate  the  Christian  company  or  a  family  or
a  friend,  the  one  aim  and  effort  is  to  place  the  children
of  God  in  immediate  communion  through  Christ  with
Himself:  an  inspired  apostle  writes  it  no  doubt,  and
the  various  members  of  God's  family,  as  well  as  the
servants  of  the  Lord,  are  owned  in  their  place.  At  the
same  time  it  is  manifestly  He  who  is  God  and  Father
instructing,  comforting,  and  admonishing  His  own.

We  have  intervention  on  every  side.  God  gives  a  re-
velation of  Jesus ;  and  Jesus  passes  it  on  to  His  angel,  or
rather  by  His  angel  to  His  servant  John;  and  then  John
at  last  sends  it  to  other  servants.  Thus  we  have  all  sorts
of  links  in  the  chain.  And  why  so  ?  For  it  is  some-
what novel,  especially  in  the  New  Testament.  How
comes  this  remarkable  introduction  of  God  to  Jesus,
then  from  Him  through  an  angel  to  one  servant,  who
sends  to  other  servants  ?   How  is  it  that  we  here  miss


392  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

that  character  of  direct  dealing  with  us — that  iminedi-
ateness  of  address  which  is  found  elsewhere?  The
reason  is  as  solemn  as  it  is  instructive.  It  is  implied
indeed  in  the  analogy  of  the  Old  Testament ;  for  God
did  not  always  address  His  people  there.  He  did
originally,  as  for  instance  in  the  ten  words,  though
afterwards  in  this  very  particular  intervention  came
in.  But  habitually  God's  messengers  were  sent  to  Israel,
even  when  prophets  were  raised  up.  At  first  all  ad-
dressed the  people  in  His  name.  The  word  of  Jehovah
was  sent  to  Jehovah's  people.  But  what  an  affecting
change  took  place  at  length !  The  time  soon  came  when
the  message  was  not  sent  to  the  people  directly.  It
was  given  to  a  chosen  witness — no  doubt  really  meant
for  the  people,  but  delivered  to  Daniel,  and  only  so.

This  prepares  us  for  the  true  meaning  of  the  re-
markable change  in  the  Apocalypse  as  compared  with
the  rest  of  the  New  Testament.  When  the  children  of
Israel  had  hopelessly  betrayed  the  Lord — ^when  their
departure  was  complete  before  His  eyes — not  only  in
the  first  rent-off  portion,  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel,  but
even  the  remaining  two, — when  there  was  a  stay  and  a
lengthening  of  the  tranquillity, — when  not  only  Judah,
but  even  the  house  of  David,  the  anointed  king,  the
last  regular  link  between  God  and  His  people,  failed,
then  we  find  that  God  addressed  not  His  people,  but
an  only  chosen  faithful  servant  as  His  witness.  It  was
a  sure  token  that  all  was  over  for  the  present,  for
any  immediateness  of  communion  between  God  and
His  people.  God  could  no  longer  recognise  them  as
His  own.  Applying  tliis  to  the  present  time,  and  our
own  circumstances,  is  it  not  most  grave  ?  I  do  not  in


THE   REVELATION.  393

the  least  doubt  that  God  proves  Himself  faithful  in  the
worst  of  times.  It  would  be  the  falsest  possible  deduc-
tion to  suppose  that  Daniel  and  his  three  companions,
possibly  others  also,  were  not  personally  as  pleasant  to
the  Lord  as  David  was.  Did  He  not  look  with  ex-
ceeding satisfaction  in  His  grace  upon  that  servant
who  felt  and  answered  to  His  own  feelings  about  His
people  ?  It  was  precisely  because  He  did  that  Daniel
received  so  exceptional  an  honour.  In  a  certain  sense  it
was  better  to  be  a  Daniel  in  the  midst  of  ruin  than  to
have  had  the  best  position  when  times  were  prosperous,
and  when  things  looked  fair.  It  was  a  greater  proof  of
fidelity  when  all  was  out  of  course  to  stand  faithful
than  to  be  faithful  when  all  things  were  regular.  Thus
grace  is  always  equal  to  every  difficulty.

But  it  is  a  solemn  thing  to  feel  that  such  a  crisis  was
even  then  come,  as  far  as  regarded  the  church  of  God
here  below.  John  stands  in  a  position  analogous  to
Daniel;  he  becomes  now  the  object  of  the  communi-
cations of  the  Lord  Jesus,  not  that  which  still  bore  the
name  of  the  Lord  here  below.  However  the  grace  of
the  Lord  might  act,  however  He  might  animate  as  well
as  warn,  still  the  address  is  made  directly  to  His  servant
John,  and  not  to  the  church ;  and  even  where  we  have
addresses,  as  we  shall  find  afterwards  in  the  second  and
third  chapters,  they  are  not  immediately  to  the  churches,
but  sent  to  their  angels.  It  is  manifest  that  all  carries
out  the  same  solemn  impression.

John  then,  as  it  is  said,  "testified  the  word  of  God,
and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ."  But  this  is  here
restricted :  it  does  not  mean  the  truth  in  general,  nor
the  gospel  in  particular,  though  we  cannot  doubt  that


394  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

John  did  preach  the  gospel,  and  did  nourish  the  church
of  God  in  all  His  revealed  truth;  but  this  is  not  the
subject  of  the  Apocalypse,  nor  the  meaning  of  our  text.
All  is  here  limited  to  what  he  saw.  This  is  of  import-
ance to  apprehend  the  scope  of  the  passage  and  the
character  of  the  book  We  may  safely  strike  out  the
word  "and,'*  if  we  respect  the  best  authorities.  The
meaning  then  is  that  John  testified  the  word  of  God
and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  how  are  we  to
describe  or  understand  "  the  word  of  God"?  Is  it  any
special  part,  or  the  word  of  God  as  a  whole?  What
exactly  is  meant  by  "the  word  of  God,  and  the  testimony
of  Jesus  Christ "  in  this  connexion  ?  The  answer  is
given  by  the  last  clause  when  "  and  "  is  taken  away  : —
the  visions  that  he  was  going  to  behold  and  record  in
this  book — whatsoever  things  he  saw.  Thus,  besides
what  the  apostle  had  in  his  ordinary  relation  with
Christians,  and  his  already  lengthened  tenure  in  the
service  of  Christ,  he  receives  now  a  new  character  of
word  and  testimony.

Accordingly  the  apocalyptic  visions  can  be  slighted
only  by  ignorant  unbelief;  for  they  no  less  than  the
gospel  or  epistles  are  here  styled  "the  word  of  God,
and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ."  They  are  thus
carefully  ushered  in,  but  in  that  prophetic  method
which  was  morally  fitting,  in  a  series  of  visions  which
John  saw.  This  is  of  so  much  the  greater  emphasis,
as  it  is  apparently  designed  in  an  express  manner  to
counteract  the  tendency  (but  too  common  spite  of  it)  to
treat  the  Apocalypse  as  if  it  were  of  doubtful  value  and
of  precarious  authority.  But  no :  it  is  confessed  to  John
by  Jesus  as  the  word  of  God  and  His  own  testimony.  We


THE   REVELATION.  395

know  how  many  scholars  have  dared  to  insult  the  book
in  their  folly,  as  I  think  we  may  say,  with  the  justest
rebuke  of  their  offensive  language.  None  the  less  is  it
"  the  word  of  God,  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ,"
even  if  it  consists  not  of  that  which  ministers  directly
to  the  edification  of  the  Christian  in  his  own  position,
but  indirectly  as  announcing  the  doom  of  such  as  despise
God  and  do  their  own  will  in  the  face  of  His  revelation.
Nevertheless  it  is  God's  word  and  Christ's  testimony,
though  as  a  whole  composed  of  visions.

In  order  to  make  this  more  realised  by  the  believers
then  or  at  any  other  time,  be  it  remarked  that  we  have
another  word  remarkably  annexed  which  lies  altogether
out  of  the  beaten  path  of  the  Lord.  May  we  not
presume  that  it  is  for  the  express  purpose  of  graciously
encouraging  His  servants  as  well  as  to  anticipate  the
doubts  and  cavils  of  unbelief?  "Blessed  is  he  that
readeth,  and  they  that  hear  the  words  of  this  prophecy,
and  keep  those  things  which  are  written  therein."

The  stated  ground  that  follows  is  also  to  be  weighed  ;
for  it  is  not,  as  men  oft^n  assume,  because  we  are  to  be
in  the  predicted  circumstances,  it  is  not  because  the
Christian  or  the  church  must  pass  through  the  troubles
it  describes :  not  a  word  to  this  effect  is  implied,  but  a
different  reason  is  given.  In  short,  as  the  book  itself
afterwards  shows  that  the  church  will  be  on  high
outside  the  scene  of  its  varied  troubles  and  inflicted
judgments,  so  the  motive  assigned  in  the  preface  is  of  a
strikingly  holy  natui'e,  adapted  to  those  who  walk  by
faith,  not  by  sight,  and  free  from  all  selfish  considera-
tions— ^"for  the  time  is  at  hand."  It  is  not  that  the  time
is  actually  come  so  that  we  must  go  through  all  or  any


396  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

part ;  but  the  time  is  at  hand.  God  therefore  writes  for
our  comfort,  admonition,  and  general  blessing  in  what-
ever way  it  may  be  wanted ;  He  takes  for  granted  that
we  are  interested  in  whatever  He  has  to  say  to  us.
"  The  time  is  at  hand."  It  is  a  false  principle  therefore
that  we  can  only  be  profited  by  that  which  concerns
ourselves,  and  supposes  us  to  be  in  the  actual  circum-
stances described.

Then  comes  the  salutation.  Here  too  all  is  as  pecu-
liar as  it  is  suitable  to  the  book  on  which  we  enter:
"  John  to  the  seven  churches  which  are  in  Asia."  In
no  other  place  do  we  find  anything  akin  to  this.  We
read  of  the  saints  in  one  place  or  another.  A  particular
assembly,  or  even  the  assemblies  of  a  district  (Gal.  L),
may  be  addressed.  Never  but  here  occurs  an  address
to  a  certain  number  of  assemblies,  particularly  one  so
definite  and  significant  symbolically  as  seven.  Surely
something  is  meant  outside  the  ordinary  course  of
things,  where  so  unexampled  a  style  of  address  is  found.
The  spiritual  usage  of  seven  in  prophetic  scripture  can-
not be  questioned.  Nor  is  it  confined  to  prophecy,  for
the  same  force  holds  good  wherever  symbol  is  employed.
In  typical  scripture,  as  well  as  in  prophecy,  seven  is  the
regular  known  sign  of  spiritual  completeness.  Who
then  but  uninstructed  minds  can  doubt  that  the  Lord
meant  more  than  the  actual  assemblies  that  were  ad-
dressed in  the  province  of  Asia?  That  letters  were  written
to  literal  congregations  from  Ephesus  to  Laodicea  seems
to  be  unquestionable;  but  I  cannot  doubt  that  these  were
chosen,  and  the  addresses  so  shaped  to  them  as  to  bring
before  those  who  have  ears  to  hear  the  complete  circle
of  the  Lord's  testimony  here  below  as  long  as  there


THE   REVELATION.  397

should  be  anything  possessed  (responsibly  if  not  really)
of  a  church  character.  The  state  of  things  might  be
ever  so  ruined;  it  might  be  even  gross  and  false  (as
much  was  in  several);  but  still  there  was  an  ecclesiasti-
cal profession  if  only  for  His  judgment,  which  we  do
not  find  after  chap.  iv.  No  such  condition  appears  after-
wards. The  Lord  no  longer  dealt  so  when  this  kind  of
footing  vanished  for  the  responsibility  of  man.  In  short,
as  long  as  church  responsibility  exists  here  below,  these
addresses  apply,  and  no  longer.

So  says  he  "To  the  seven  churches  which  are  in
Asia:  Grace  be  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  him  which
is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come."-  It  is  not
"from  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."*
The  salutation  is  from  God  in  His  own  being,  the  ever-
existing  One,  He  who  is,  and  who  was,  and  who  is  to
come.  This  of  course  connects  His  present  existence
with  the  future  as  well  as  the  past.  "And  from  the
seven  Spirits  which  are  before  his  throne."  Here  again
we  find  a  description  of  the  Holy  Ghost  decidedly
diflferent  from  what  meets  us  in  the  New  Testament
generally.  The  allusion  is  clear  to  Isaiah  xi.,  where  the
seven-fold  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  government  is
described  as  connected  with  the  person  and  for  the  king-
dom of  the  Messiah.  "And  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  shcJl
rest,"  &c.  This  seems  taken  up  here,  and  applied  in  a
far  larger  way  for  purposes  suitable  to  the  Apocalyptic
prophecy.  Indeed  the  same  remark  will  be  found  true  of
all  the  use  that  is  made  of  Old  Testament  citations  and
allusions  in  the  Apocalypse.  Constant  reference  is  made
to  the  law,  Psalms,  and  prophets,  but  it  is  never  a  mere
repetition^  as  the  literalists  suppose^  of  what  was  found


398  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

there.  This  would  be  in  effect  to  deprive  ourselves  of
the  Apocalypse,  instead  of  understanding  and  gathering
its  peculiar  profit.  If  one  identifies  the  Jerusalem  of
Isaiah  with  the  New  Jerusalem  of  the  Eevelation,  or
the  Babylon  of  Jeremiah  to  explain  the  Apocalyptic
Babylon,  it  is  clear  that  one  simply  loses  all  the  special
instniction  that  God  has  given  us.  This  is  one  of  the
main  sources  of  confusion  on  the  subject  of  the  Apoc-
alypse to  this  day.  At  the  same  time,  if  we  do  not
start  with  the  Old  Testament  revelations  of  Babylon  or
Jerusalem,  or  the  instruction  derived  from  the  prophets
generally,  we  are  not  prepared  for  appreciating  or  even
understanding  the  Apocalypse  as  a  whole.  Thus,  either
to  dislocate  the  New  absolutely  from  the  Old,  or  to
see  no  more  than  a  repetition  of  the  Old  in  the  New,  is
an  almost  equal  error.  There  is  a  divine  link  in  the
sense  as  there  was  in  the  Spirit's  mind  an  undistin-
guished reference;  but  then  the  Apocalypse  gives  it
an  incomparably  larger  range,  and  a  more  profound
character.  The  Apocalypse  looks  on  things  after  the
Holy  Ghost  had  taken  His  place  in  the  Christian  and
in  the  church  on  earth — above  all,  after  the  Son  had
appeared,  manifested  Grod  the  Father,  and  accomplished
redemption  here  below.  Hence  all  the  fulness  of  divine
light  that  had  come  out  in  Christ's  person  and  work,  ^a
well  as  by  the  Spirit  in  the  church  of  God,  is  necessary
to  be  taken  into  account  in  order  to  give  the  Apocalypse
its  just  bearing.

The  seven  Spirits  therefore  refer,  as  I  believe,  to  the
Holy  Ghost  acting  in  the  way  of  government.  It  is
the  fulness  of  the  Holy  Ghost's  energy  as  an  overruling
power.    What  the  application  of  this  may  be  depends


THE   REVELATION.  399

on  the  context  where  it  is  used.  We  shall  find  it  in
relation  to  Christ  dealing  with  church  matters  in  chap-
ter iii. ;  we  shall  find  it  in  His  relation  to  the  earth  in
chapter  v. :  but  it  is  always  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  in
governmental  power,  and  not  the  same  Spirit  viewed
in  His  unity  forming  the  church  into  one  body.  This
we  have  had  already  in  the  Pauline  epistles,  where  the
proper  sphere  of  the  Christian  as  a  member  of  Christ's
body  is  treated  especially,  and  indeed  only  there.

God  as  such  is  then  introduced  in  Old  Testament
style  and  character,  but  at  the  same  time  applied  to
New  Testament  subjects;  the  Holy  Ghost  also  is  simi-
larly brought  before  us.  And  so  too  with  our  Lord
Jesus,  as  we  shall  see.  Indeed,  there  is  nothing  more
remarkable,  especially  when  we  bear  in  mind  who  the
writer  is,  than  the  absence  here  of  His  proper  relation-
ship to  the  children  of  God.  The  revelation  of  grace  is
precisely  what  is  not  found  in  this  book.  "Jesus  Christ'*
appears  as  "  the  faithful  witness."  This  clearly  is  what
He  was  on  the  earth.  In  a  very  different  form  it  is  the
topic  of  John  everywhere :  we  may  trace  Him  as  going
up  to  heaven,  where  Paul  above  all  contemplated  Him
glorified;  but  John's  task  is  ever  to  point  to  Christ  in
connection  with  what  He  was  here  below.  If  he  speaks
of  Him  as  the  Lamb  above,  the  description  is  founded
on  His  being  the  rejected  sufferer  on  earth.  "  He  is  the
faithful  witness,  the  first-begotten  of  the  dead,  and  the
prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth ;" — the  last  displayed
when  He  comes  from  heaven  to  earth,  as  He  stands  in
resurrection  the  first-begotten  of  the  dead.  But  what
He  is  in  heaven  is  exactly  what  is  not  given  here.
There  is  the  most  careful  exclusion  of  His  heavenly


400  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

position  from  the  relationships  of  the  Lord  Jesus  that
are  here  brought  before  us.  Even  that  which  connects
Him  with  the  Christian,  as  the  One  that  intercedes  for
him  in  the  presence  of  God,  is  here  left  out,  though  I
doubt  not  we  may  see  Him  as  the  angel  high  priest  for
others  in  chapter  viii.

The  Lord  Jesus,  then,  is  brought  before  us  as  man
purposely  in  the  last  place.  God  was  announced  in  His
own  everlasting  being ;  the  Holy  Ghost  in  His  fulness
of  governmental  power ;  the  Lord  Jesus  in  that  which
was  connected  with  the  earth,  even  if  He  were  risen
from  the  dead ;  and  this  put  in  the  last  place,  because
He  is  viewed  only  in  an  earthly  point  of  view.

But  for  all  that  the  voice  of  the  Christian  is  at  once
heard — and  so  much  the  more  remarkably,  because  it
is  one  of  the  few  exceptional  ripples  which  cross  the
ordinary  current  of  the  book  at  the  end,  as  well  as  at  the
beginning.  Thus  it  is  not  without  example  elsewhere ;
but  it  is  not  what  we  hear  when  we  have  fairly  entered
on  the  course  of  the  visions.  Before  they  begin  the
Christian  is  heard,  as  also  the  bride  after  they  close.
Here  the  name  of  Jesus  is  enough  to  stir  the  heart  in
a  sweet  and  suited  doxology.  He  may  not  be  d&scribed
in  His  relationships  to  us,  but  He  who  is  described  is
the  one  that  we  love.  And  so  "  to  him  that  loveth  us  "
(for  this  is  the  true  rendering,  and  not  merely  that  loved
us) — "To  him  that  loveth  us,  and  washed  us  bom  our
sins  in  his  own  blood;  and  hath  made  us  kings  and
priests  unto  God  and  his  Father;  to  him  be  the  glory  and
the  might  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages."  And  as  this  is
the  heart's  outpouring  of  its  own  delight  in  Jesus,  so
the  next  verse  gives  a  warning  testimony  suitable  to  the


THB   REVELATION.  401

book,  lest  there  should  be  any  weakening  of  what  Jesus
will  be  to  those  who  stand  in  no  such  nearness  to  Him.
"  Behold  he  cometh  with  the  clouds ;  and  every  eye
shall  see  him,  and  they  which  pierced  him :  and  all
kindreds  of  the  eaith  shall  wail  because  of  him."  This
has  nothing  to  do  with  His  presence  for  us ;  but  after
our  own  delight  and  thanksgiving  have  gone  fortli
towards  Jesus,  the  testimony  to  others  most  suitably
follows  the  song  of  praise  that  had,  I  may  say,  involun-
tarily burst  forth  at  His  name.  It  is  Christ  coming  in
judgment.  He  shall  be  seen  by  every  soul — ^if  there  be
any  difference — to  the  sorest  anguish  above  all  of  those
that  pierced  Him  (t.  e.  the  Jews).     "  Even  so,  Amen."

"I  am  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  saith  the  Lord  God,
that  is,  and  that  was,  and  that  is  to  come,  the  Al-
mighty." He  who  is  the  first  and  the  last,  compre-
hending all  in  communicating  His  mind,  which  includes
everything  that  can  be  given  to  man — He  it  is  who.  here
speaks — the  Lord  God,  the  Eternal.  He  puts  His
voucher  on  the  book  from  the  beginning.

Then  John  describes  himself  in  a  manner  adapted  to
the  testimony  he  is  called  to  render:  "I  John,  your
brother,  and  companion  in  the  tribulation  and  kingdom
and  patience  in  Christ  Jesus,  was  in  the  isle  which  is
called  Patmos,  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for  the  testi-
mony of  Jesus."  It  must  be  evident  to  a  spiritual
mind  how  remarkably  suited  all  here  is  to  what  was
afterwards  about  to  come  out  The  whole  book  suj)-
poses  saints  in  suffering,  and  this  too  in  the  form  of
tribulation,  with  their  spiritual  experience  formed  into
the  associations  of  Christ's  kingdom  rather  than  those
of  His  body  the  church,  yet  surely  suffering  on  account

2  D


402  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

of  the  word  of  God  and  the  testimony  of  Jesus.  Par-
ticular care  is  taken  here  to  show  it  to  us.  Not  that
the  full  church  or  Christian  relationship  was  lacking  to
John  personally;  but  he  stands  here  a  representative
man  for  others  as  well  as  ourselves.  While,  therefore,
he  had  all  that  is  properly  Christian,  he  also  had  very
special  communications  of  another  character  for  saints
who  will  follow  us  at  the  end  of  this  age.  Thus  he
introduces  himself  here,  not  as  a  joint  partaker  of  Grod*s
promise  in  Christ  by  the  gospel,  but  in  His  kingdom
and  patience  in  Christ.  It  is  true  for  us  all ;  but  it  is
in  harmony  with  the  latter  day  sufferers,  not  what
specially  linked  him  with  the  Christians  and  the  churcL
Thus  the  place  taken  here  is  of  course  that  of  a
Christian;  but  that  is  put  forward  which  belonged  to
others  who  would  not  be  in  the  same  corporate  standing
as  ourselves.  At  the  same  time  there  is  the  most
careful  guard  against  the  supposition  that  he  was  not
in  the  full  enjoyment  of  his  own  place  in  Christ.

This  seems  to  be  one  reason  why  it  pleased  God  to
give  the  visions  of  this  book  on  the  Lord's  day.  "  I  was
in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day."  This  is  the  character-
istic day  of  the  Christian ;  it  is  the  birthday  of  his
distinctive  blessing,  and  it  assuredly  ought  to  be  the
especial  joy  of  his  heart,  not  the  less  because  it  is  the
first  day,  the  resurrection  day  of  grace  and  new  creation,
not  the  seventh  day  of  creation  rest  and  law.

On  that  day  the  inspired  writer  John  was  in  the
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  with  a  view  to  take  in  and
give  out  the  visions  he  was  to  see.  "And  I  heard  behind
me  a  great  voice  as  of  a  trumpet."  It  was  significant,  I
think,  that  the  voice  was  behind  him.     The  main  object


THE   REVELATION.  403

of  all  prophecy  tended  rather  to  have  thrown  him  for-
iTFard.  But  before  the  Spirit  of  God  could  fitly  launch
him  into  the  visions  of  the  future,  there  must  be  a  re-
trospective glance.  In  the  Spirit  he  must  be,  both  to
shut  out  evBry  impression  from  external  objects,  and
to  give  him  an  entrance  into  all  that  God  was  about
to  reveal;  but  first  of  all  we  should  recognise  the  fact
that  it  was  on  the  Lord's  day ;  and  next  that,  before  he
^was  shown  what  was  before,  he  must  turn  to  the  voice
behind  him  and  learn  what  the  Lord  judged  of  that
'which  bore  His  name  on  the  earth.

Omit  the  opening  clause  and  begin,  "saying,  What

thou  seest,  write  in  a  roll,  and  send  it  to  the  seven

churches  which  are  in  Asia."  The  reference  of  the  voice

behind  is  exclusively  to  the  seven  churches.     When

another  subject  is  about  to  open,  the  first  voice  which

he  heard  as  of  a  trumpet  talking  with  him  said  "  Come

up  hither ;"  there  is  no  question  then  of  a  voice  behind.

He  is  forward  going  to  look  into  the  future.     But  there

must  first  be  a  retrospective  notice,  in  which  the  Lord

would  pronounce  His  judgment  of  that  which  bore  the

name  of  Christendom  here  below.     "  What  thou  seest,

write  in  a  book,  and  send  it  to  the  seven  churches

which  are  in  Asia;  unto  Ephesus,  and  unto  Smyrna,

and  unto  Pergamos,  and  unto  Thyatira,  and  unto  Sardis,

and   unto   Philadelphia,  and  unto  Laodicea.     And  I

turned  to  see  the  voice  which  was  speaking  with  me.

And  having  turned,  I  saw  seven  golden  lampstands."

We  are  told  afterwards  what  those  meant.

One  like  the  Son  of  man  is  next  seen  "  in  the  midst
of  the  seven  candlesticks," — which,  as  we  are  told,
were  the  seven  churches,  but  these  viewed  according

2  D  2


404  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

to  the  Lord's  mind  about  them  as  a  standard  of  divine
righteousness.  This  is  the  reason  why  they  were
golden.  Not  only  is  the  same  principle  general  or  con-
stant, but  it  is  remarkably  characteristic  of  John's  own
writings.  For  instance,  the  standard  for  the  Christian
Ls  not  in  anywise  the  law  (which  was  so  for  the  Jew);
for  us  it  is  Christ  Himself,  and  cannot  without  loss  be
anything  else.  "  He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  him,  ought
himself  also  so  to  walk" — how?  Like  an  Israelite?
Not  at  all :  the  Christian  ought  to  remember  that  he  is
a  heavenly  man,  not  an  earthly  one.  He  "  ought  him-
self also  so  to  walk  even  as  he  (Christ)  walked."  He  is
not  under  law  but  under  grace.  The  reason  is  manifest,
because  the  way  in  which  we  are  called  to  walk  is
always  according  to  the  place  and  relations  in  wliich  we
stand.  Nothing  can  be  simpler.  If  I  am  a  servant^  I
ought  to  behave  like  a  servant.  If  I  am  a  master,  the
conduct  that  might  be  proper  in  a  servant  would  not
become  me.  The  mixture  of  relations  is  always  wrong ;
the  oversight  of  them  is  loss,  their  denial  ruinous.  For
every  position  we  are  set  in,  no  matter  where  it  is  or
what,  there  is  always  the  gracious  power  of  God  as  our
resource;  but  it  is  to  sustain  the  person  walking  in
consonance  with  the  relationship  in  which  God  has  been
pleased  to  put  him.

We  are  not  now  speaking  of  an3rthing  conventional
life  in  Christ,  where  there  is  spiritual  intelligence^  takes
one  out  of  the  vanities  of  the  world  in  principle  This
remark  it  may  be  well  to  add,  because  a  Christian  might
say  "As  I  am  a  gentleman,  I  must  walk  like  one,  and  still
better  now  that  I  have  Christ."  But  nay,  this  will  not
do  for  Christ    Did  He  thus  walk  ?    And  are  you  net


THB  REVELATION.  405

to  walk  as  He?    Do  you  not  in  this  merely  sink  to
the  world's  level  ?  Are  you  not  just  taking  advantage  of
an  earthly  position  to  escape  part  of  what  Christ  calls
you  to?     One  knows  how  readily  the  heart  can  thus
escape  from  what  is  really  the  blessedness  of  the  witness
which  the  Lord  has  placed  in  our  hands.   Is  this  Christ?
We  speak  then  of  what  Christ  has  put  us  in,  not  about
nature  and  its  wishes  and  feelings.  If  you  have  nothing
but  nature,  it  would  be  intelligible ;   but  if  you  have
seen  the  Son  of  God  and  believed  in  Him,  if  by  grace
you  have  the  same  life  which  was  in  Him,  so  that  this
thing  is  true  of  Him  and  of  you,  no  possible  standard
can  suit  for  you  as  a  Christian  short  of  Christ  HimselC
Thus  then  it  is  with  the  seven  golden  lampstands.  All
must  be  and  was  measured  according  to  God's  own
mind,  and  the  place  in  which  He  set  the  assemblies.
Consistency  with  Him  as  a  revealed  God  in  Christ  is
their  rula   Therefore  they  appear  as  golden  lampstands.
But  John  saw  "in  the  midst  of  the  [seven]  lamp-
stands  one  like  the  Son  of  man,  clothed  with  a  garment
down  to  the  foot."  There  is  not  now  the  sign  of  activity
in  service — not  the  robe  tucked  up,  as  often  remarked.
The  Son  of  man  is  seen  clad  in  the  flowing  robe  reach-
ing to  the  feet,  and  He  is  "  girt  about  the  paps  with  a
golden  girdle.     His  head  and  his  hairs  were  white  like
wool,  as  white  as  snow;  and  his  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of
fire ;  and  his  feet  like  unto  fine  brass,  as  if  they  burned
in  a  furnace;  and  his  voice  as  the  sound  of  many  waters.
And  he  had  in  his  right  hand  seven  stars :  and  out  of
his  mouth  went  a  sharp  two-edged  sword :  and  his  coun-
tenance was  as  the  sun  shineth  in  his  strength.''
Here  we  have  to  remark  that  Christ  is  seen  in  a


406  INTRODUCTORY   LECTURES.

judicial  point  of  view.  He  is  spoken  of  as  Son  of  man ;
and,  as  we  know,  this  is  the  quality  in  which  it  is  given
Him  to  execute  every  kind  of  judgment.  It  is  expressly
so  taught  in  John's  own  gospel  (chap,  v.)  Yet  with  all
this  another  feature  betrays  John,  and  suits  him  as  the
writer  most  strikingly.  He  that  is  seen  as  Son  of  man
is  really  described  with  those  marks  which  belong  dis-
tinctively to  the  "Ancient  of  days."  Daniel  sees  the
"Ancient  of  days"  in  one  way,  and  the  Son  of  man  in  quite
another.  John  sees  the  Son  of  man  with  the  qualities
of  the  Ancient  of  days.  He  is  man ;  but  the  man  seen
then  and  thus  is  a  divine  person,  the  eternal  God  Him-
self. Now  I  ask  any  fair  mind,  whose  style  does  this
identification  of  nature  suit  but  the  writer  that  we  are
now  reading?  No  doubt,  morally  speaking.  He  must
needs  execute  judgment ;  but  John  could  not  lose  sight
of  His  divine  glory,  even  where  the  subject  is  judg-
ment, and  the  kingdom  everjrwhere  prominent.

Another  thing  is  observable,  when  one  looks  into
what  is  said  here.  A  threefold  glory  of  Christ  appears:
what  is  personal ;  what  is  relative ;  and  finally,  what
is  official  But  there  is  more  also.  John  says,  "And
when  I  saw  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  as  dead.  And  he  laid
his  right  hand  upon  me,  saying  unto  me.  Fear  not ;  I
am  the  first  and  the  last."  Such  terms  alone  become
one  who  is  divine.  He  who  is  first  is  necessarily  God ;
and  He  who  is  first,  being  God,  must  certainly  be  last
Jesus  declares  Himself  to  be  all  this ;  yea,  more  than
this — "  the  living  one,  and  I  became  dead."  The  phrase
is  the  strongest  possible  way  of  putting  the  matter.
It  is  not  merely  that  He  died — this  is  not  what  He  says
here,  though  it  is  said  elsewhere,  and  very  truly.    But


THE  REVELATION.  407

He  says  that  He  became  dead.  This  seems  to  imply
His  own  willingness  to  die,  as  indeed  He  became  what
did  not  belong  to  Him  personally,  and  what  in  short
seemed  extraordinarily  incongruous  with  the  glorious
person  that  had  been  already  described.  This  seems
conveyed  in  the  peculiarity  of  the  words :  so  careful
is  the  Holy  Ghost  to  watch  over  the  glory  of  Christ
even  in  that  which  told  out  the  depths  of  His  humilia-
tion. "  I  became  dead  (records  John),  and,  behold,  I
am  alive  imto  the  ages  of  the  ages."  We  must  leave
out  the  word  "  Amen" — it  is  spurious,  and  only  mars
the  sense.

Let  it  suffice  once  for  all  to  hope  you  will  understand
me  always  to  speak  of  the  text  on  the  basis  of  the
ancient  and  best  authorities.  There  is  positive  evidence
of  the  most  convincing  and  satisfactory  kind  for  the
insertions,  omissions,  or  changes,  which  may  be  men-
tioned from  time  to  time.  Do  not  imagine  that  there
is  anything  like  arbitrary  innovation  in  this.  The  real
innovators  were  those  who  departed  by  slip  or  by  will
from  the  very  words  of  the  Spirit;  and  the  arbitrariness
now  would  be  in  maintaining  what  has  not  sufficient
authority,  against  that  which  is  as  certain  as  can  be.
The  error  then  is  not  in  seeking  the  best  supported
text,  but  in  allowing  tradition  to  tie  us  to  comparatively
modern  and  certainly  to  corrupted  readings.  We  are
bound  in  everything  to  yield  to  the  best  authorities.
So  in  the  next  words  our  Lord  really  says,  "And  I
have  the  keys  of  death  and  of  hades."  Not  the  com-
mon text,  but  this  is  the  true  order.  No  one  goes  to
hades  before  he  dies — death  being  in  relation  to  the
body,  hades  to  the  separate  spirit.


408  INTRODUCTOBT  LECTURES.

"Write  therefore  [which  is  undoubtedly  genuine]
the  things  which  thou  hast  seen,  and  the  things  which
are,  and  what  shall  be  hereafter."  This  gives  us,  as  is
obvious  and  familiar  to  almost  every  reader,  the  three-
fold division  of  the  book  of  Bevelation.  The  things
that  he  saw  were  the  glory  of  Christ  in  relation  to  this
book,  as  described  in  the  first  chapter,  on  which  we
have  already  touched.  '' The  things  which  are"  present
the  prolonged  condition  set  forth  in  the  addresses  to
the  seven  churches.  The  expression  is  very  striking,
because  it  not  unnaturally  implies  that  the  churches
were  somehow  to  exist  continuously.  We  can  see  now
why  it  was.  It  is  very  possible,  when  the  epistles  were
sent  out  in  the  days  of  John,  that  no  particular  em-
phasis would  be  laid  on  ''the  things  that  are;"  but
inasmuch  as  these  things  have  been  going  on  from  that
day  to  the  present,  we  can  see  the  immense  force  such
a  phrase  thereby  acquires.

At  the  same  time  another  way  of  looking  at  the
book  is  by  taking  "  the  things  that  are  "  as  already  past
and  gone.  I  do  not  doubt  that  God  intended  this,  and
that  we  are  thus  given  a  double  aspect  of  the  book.
I  have  no  intention  to  enter  at  any  length  on  this  way
of  looking  at  the  churches  as  quite  by-gone,  and  tiie
prophecy  as  at  once  flowing  on;  but  I  mention  it  because
it  seems  due  to  truth  to  name  this  as  well  as  the  other,
according  to  which  "what  shall  be  after  these"  is  when
the  church  condition  is  no  longer  applicable  at  all.

"What  shall  be  after  these*'  must  be  owned  as  the  true
translation  of  the  words.  '^Hereafter'*  gives  vagueness:
''after  these'*  makes  it  precise,  and  is  the  plain  literal
meaning.    "  The  mystery  of  the  seven  stars  which  thou


THE  REVELATION.  409

sawest  on  my  right  hand^  and  the  seven  golden  lamp-
stands.  The  seven  stars  are  angels  of  the  seven  churches:
and  the  seven  lampstands  are  seven  churches."

In  each  letter  the  Lord  addresses  "  the  angeL"    Who
and  what  is  he  ?    We  never  hear  of  angel  as  an  official
title  in  the  ordinary  arrangements  of  the  New  Testament.
But  it  is  not  at  all  wonderful  as  occurring  here,  where
vre  do  find  what  is  extraordinary.     The  angel  is  a  terra
that  suits  such  a  prophetic  book  as  the  Eevelation.
Does  it  mean  what  we  commonly  call  an  angelic  being  ?
Not  so,  I  apprehend,  where  angels  of  the  churches  are
spoken  of.    If  we  hear  of  the  Apocalyptic  angel  of  fire,
we  readily  understand  this;  and  if  we  hear  of  the  angel
of  Jesus  Christ  as  of  Jehovah  elsewhere,  we  find  no
insuperable  difficulty.    But  it  is  another  thing  when  we
hear  of  the  angel  of  this  or  that  assembly.     Again,  we
can  understand  an  angel  employed — a  real  angelic  being
— as  the  means  of  communication  between  the  Lord
and  His  servant  John ;  but  it  would  be  harsh  to  sup-
pose that  His  servant  John  writes  a  letter  from  Christ
to  a  literal  angelic  being.  This  is  the  difficulty  in  which
those  are  involved  who   suppose  that  angelic  beings
are   here  meant.     I  do  not  believe  it.     The  meaning
appears  to  be  that,  as  "  angel "  is  used  in  the  sense  of
representative,  whether  an  angelic  being  or  not,  so  in
refeiiiuce  to  the  assemblies  the  Lord  here  avails  Himself
of  this  general  truth.     An  angel  setting  forth  represen-
tation (human  or  not),  an  ideal  representative  of  each
assembly  is  meant.     In  certain  cases  we  know  that  it
might  be  a  literal  representative ;   for  instance,  wlien
John  the  Baptist  sends  some  of  his  disciples,  there  was
a  representation  of  his  mind  by  men.    The  disciples  go


410  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

aud  give  the  message  of  him  that  they  followed.  But  it
assumes  a  somewhat  different  shape  when  it  becomes
a  question  of  assemblies  which  had  not  been,  so  far  as
we  know,  sending  messengers  at  alL

If  therefore  we  look  at  the  abstract  nature  of  the
angel  of  the  church,  what  is  implied  by  the  term  ?  I
take  it  to  be  this:  that  the  Lord  had  in  view  not  neces-
sarily an  elder,  nor  a  teacher,  but  one  who  might  be
either  or  both,  and  before  His  mind  truly  represented,
and  was  in  a  special  way  bound  up  with  the  respon-
sibility of  the  state  of  the*  assembly.  Whoever  that
might  be  (one,  or  perhaps  more,)  was  meant  by  the
angel.

"To  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Ephesus  write;
These  things  saith  he  that  holdeth  the-  seven  stars  in
his  right  hand,  who  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  seven
golden  lanipstands."  Here  we  are  evidently  on  broad
ground.  The  characteristics  are  general.  The  first
epistle,  the  message  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Ephe-
sus, looks  at  the  state  of  the  Christian  testimony  on
the  earth  in  its  most  comprehensive  form,  and,  as  I
suppose,  from  the  days  of  the  apostle  John  himself
The  Lord  accordingly  presents  Himself  with  similar
latitude.  "  He  that  holdeth  the  seven  stars  in  his  right
hand."  It  is  His  position  both  ministerial  and  ecclesi-
astical—  His  relationship  to  the  angels,  or  those  that
morally  represented  the  assemblies  to  His  eye,  as  well  as
to  the  churches  themselves.  The  star  is  that  which  acted
on  the  assembly ;  it  professedly  was  the  vessel  of  light
from  the  Lord  for  bearing  on  the  condition  of  the  saints
of  God.    If  that  light  was  ineffectual,  if  there  was  evil


THE  REVELATION.  411

mixed  with  it^  the  state  of  the  assembly  would  partake
of  it  If  it  was  bright,  the  assembly  would  be  elevated
morally  thereby.  This,  I  think,  is  meant.  Then,  in  Him
that  held  them  all  in  His  right  hand,  and  walked  in
the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  lampstands,  we  have
Christ  not  merely  as  holding  fast  those  ideal  repre-
sentatives, but  as  also  taking  interest  in  the  assemblies
themselves.  In  short,  it  is  Ciirist  in  His  fullest  but
most  general  ministerial  and  ecclesiastical  aspect,  viewed,
of  course,  according  to  the  tenor  of  the  book.

The  state  of  the  church  in  Ephesus  has  the  same
generality.  "I  know  thy  works,  and  thy  labour,  and
patience,  and  that  thou  canst  not  bear  evil  [men] ;  and
thou  didst  try  them  which  say  they  are  apostles  and
are  not,  and  didst  find  them  liai*s."  There  was  faithful-
ness, and  this  very  particularly  in  dealing  with  the
wickedness  which  Satan  sought  to  bring  in  at  that  time.
The  apostles  were  disappearing,  and  perhaps  had  all  dis-
appeared save  John.  I  do  not  of  course  affirm  this;  but
naturally  as  the  apostles  were  departing  to  be  with  the
Lord,  Satan  would  endeavour  to  furnish  instmments
nothing  loth  to  claim  succession.  The  church  in  Ephesus
tried  these  pretended  apostles,  specially  the  angel,  as
one  that  helped  them  much  by  grace  from  the  Lord.
The  star,  as  we  are  told  here,  so  far  acted  upon  the
church  for  good.  When  thus  tried,  they  tried  and  found
wanting  those  who  set  up  to  be  apostles.

But  there  is  much  more  here.  Persistent  faithfulness
and  devotedness  still  characterised  them  at  Ephesus.
*'Thou  hast  patience,  and  didst  bear  for  my  name,  and
hast  not  wearied.  But  I  have  against  thee,  that  thou
hast  left  thy  first  love."    This  is  the  Lord's  complaint


412  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

against  them.  It  is  plain  that  it  is  here  as  ever  the  first
departure — the  most  general  symptom  of  declension.
What  injures,  and  finally  ruins,  is  invariably  from
within,  not  from  without.  In  vain  does  Satan  seek  to
cast  down  those  who  resting  on  Christ's  love  have  Him
as  the  loved  object  of  their  life  and  soul.  Was  it  not
thus  when  the  epistle  to  the  Ephesians  was  written  by
Paul  ?  Had  they  not  left  their  first  love  ?  It  was  not
as  once.  There  was  failure  in  this  respect.  They  had
here  relaxed,  but  not  in  their  works.  These  went  on
diligently,  as  we  learn  here.  There  were  works,  and
labour,  and  endurance.  But  where  was  the  work  of
faith  ?  Where  was  the  labour  of  love  ?  Where  was  the
endurance  of  hope?  That  which  had  produced  the
mighty  results  was  no  longer  active,  nor  could  be.  The
eficct  went  on  ;  the  spring  was  gone.  They  had  abated
in  their  first  love.  It  was  all  over  with  them,  unless
they  judged  themselves,  and  in  the  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost  Christ  regained  His  place.  "  Remember  therefore
whence  thou  art  fallen,  and  repent,  and  do  the  first
works;  or  else  I  am  coming  to  thee  quickly,  and  will
remove  thy  lampstand  out  of  its  place,  except  thou
shalt  repent.**  Whether  it  be  Christ  that  is  represented
or  the  description  of  the  state  of  the  church,  whether  it
be  the  fault  that  is  charged  home,  or  the  remedy  that  is
proposed,  whether  it  be  the  judgment  that  is  threatened
or  the  promise  that  is  held  out, — all  is  of  the  most
general  description.  So  thoroughly  does  the  Lord  adhere
to  topics  of  the  largest  and  most  common  import  in  the
letter  to  the  angel  of  the  assembly  in  Ephesus.  "  But
this  thou  hast,  that  thou  hatest  the  deeds  of  the  Nicolai-
tans,  which  I  also  hate.     He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him


THE  REVELATION.  413

hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  charches.  To  him  that
overcometh  will  I  give  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which
is  in  the  paradise  of  [my]  God."  Here  again  it  is  all
comprehensive.  What  can  be  wider  than  to  eat  of  the
tree  of  life  which  is  in  the  paradise  of  God  ?

In  the  writing  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Smyrna,
a  totally  different  state  of  things  meets  us.  It  is  essen-
tially a  special  case  instead  of  the  general  one  we  have
seen.  The  Lord  was  pleased  to  afflict  after  the  declen-
sion from  apostolic  purity,  and  above  all  from  first  love.
He  allowed  all  sorts  of  trial  to  befall  His  people  by
letting  loose  the  power  of  Satan,  working  by  Gentile
persecutors.  And  this  is  seen  to  be  the  occasion  of  the
letter  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Smyrna.  "And  these
things  saith  the  First  and  the  Last,  who  became  dead  and
lived ;  I  know  [thy  works,  and]  thy  tribulation,  and  thy
poverty,  (but  thou  art  rich !)  and  the  blasphemy  of  them
which  say  they  are  Jews  and  are  not,  but  a  synagogue
of  Satan."  Here  observe  it  is  not  now  a  trial  by  false
apostles.  A  new  evil  appears.  As  long  as  tnie  apostles
were  on  earth,  Satan  was  never  able  to  have  Judaism
recognized  in  the  church  of  God.  The  council  in  Jeru-
salem expressly  exempted  the  Gentiles  from  being  put
under  the  yoke  of  law.  And  the  apostle  Paul  showed
that  it  was  really  to  annul  Christ — to  fall  from  grace —
if  the  law,  introduced  either  for  justification  or  for  a
rule  of  life,  were  imposed  on  the  Christian.  For  justi-
fication this  is  manifest ;  for  a  rule  of  life  it  is  not  so
apparent,  but  it  is  just  as  real  a  denial  of  the  gospel.  If
Christ  be  the  rule  of  life  for  the  Christian,  and  the  law
be  the  rule  of  death  for  a  Jew,  it  is  evident  that  for  a


414  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

Christian  to  abandon  that  for  this  tends  to  apostacy.
The  early  fathers  thus  Judaized;  and  the  leaven  has
gone  on  working  ever  since.  To  take  the  position  of  a
Jew  thus  is  to  be  one  of  those  that  say  they  are  such
and  are  not,  but  are  alas  I  Satan's  synagogue.

The  Lord  here  contemplates  these  evil  workers  (which
is  what  the  criers  of  works  come  to)  forming  a  distinct
party.  It  is  not  merely  Satan  struggling  to  get  in
Juda^ism,  but,  as  He  says  here,  "the  blasphemy"  (railing,
calumny)  "  from  them  which  say  they  are  Jews,  and  are
not,  but  a  synagogue  of  Satan."  They  have  now  a  com-
pact character,  and  can  be  spoken  of  as  a  synagogue.
It  was  not  merely  the  tendency  of  individuals.  Indi-
viduals there  were  before,  but  this  is  much  mora  It  is
a  formed  and  known  party  of  the  highest  possible  pre-
tensions. They  set  up  to  be  more  righteous  and  holy
than  the  rest,  whom  they  denounced  as  Antinomian
because  they  stood  in  the  true  grace  of  GU>d.  They  were
themselves  corrupters  and  destroyers  of  true  Christianity
without  knowing  it.  Deceived  by  Satan,  they  were  his
zealous  instruments,  so  much  the  more  actively  deceiv-
ing others,  because  earnest  and  honest  after  the  flesh.

The  patristic  party — those  commonly  called  "the
Fathers" — seem  to  be  the  leaders  of  the  party  here
referred  to.  They  have  the  awful  ignominy  of  Judaizing
the  church  of  God.  They  have  exercised  this  influence
in  all  ages,  and  this  is  where,  as  I  judge,  their  formation
as  a  system  is  stigmatized  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
Offensive  against  Himself,  they  were  wholly  opposed
in  principle  to  grace.  Their  character  is  plain. .  They
dragged  down  the  Christian  ifrom  his  own  heavenly
associations  to  that  of  a  spurious  Jew.    What  is  still


TiiK  Kr:vi:LATi<)N".  11.")

more  in  John  the  significant  point,  they  lost  all  the
truth  of  a  real  life  given  to  us  in  Christ.  Thus  whether
it  be  the  depraving  of  souls  or  the  forming  sects  after
an  earthly  mould  among  those  who  were  heavenly  ac-
cording to  Paul,  or  whether  it  be  the  taking  them  away
fiom  the  life  of  Christ,  and  from  walking  as  He  walked,
and  simply  putting  them  under  Jewish  ordinances,  the
Fathers,  I  fear,  as  a  class,  fully  earned  the  awful  dis-
tinction here  assigned  by  the  Lord.

When  man  thus  regulated  after  the  Jewish  pattern,
the  whole  beauty  and  aim  of  the  church  of  God  was
rained  in  principle.     But  the  point  of  interest  here  is,
that  succession  and  ordinances  became  defined  as  a
system  about  this  very  time.     It  is  the  great  fact,  in
contrast  with  the  inspired  epistle,  that  you  find  even
among  the  ante-Nicene  Fathers.     Here  the  Lord  seems
to  me  to  notice  its  working  at  the  same  time  that  God
was  in  a  measure  using  for  good  those  that  were  faithful
in  the  heathen  persecutions.     Even  then  Satan  was  not
idle  in  forming  his  synagogue  "  of  those  that  said  they
were  Jews,  and  are  not."   On  the  other  hand  Christ  said
in  view  of  the  sufiferer,  "Fear  none  of  those  things
which  thou  shalt  suffer:  behold,  the  devil  shall  cast
some  of  you  into  prison,  that  ye  may  be  tried ;  and  ye
shall  have  tribulation  ten  days."    The  trial  was  not  un-
limited :  the  Lord  defined  the  term  of  their  endurance.
"  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the
crown  of  life."    "  He  that  overcometh  shall  not  be  hurt
of  the  second  death."    They  might  be  hurt  by  the  first,
they  would  not  be  by  that  which  follows  and  is  final.
It  is  a  question  of  faith  in  God.    Through  much  tribu-
lation we  must  enter  the  kingdom.


416  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

"  And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Pergamos  "  comes
a  very  different  message.  This  too  is  special.  "  These
things  saith  he  which  hath  the  sharp  sword  with  two
edges;  I  know  thy  works,  and  where  thou  dwellest."
It  is  a  serious  thing  where  and  how  we  dwelL  '*  Thou
dwellest  even  where  Satan's  throne  is."  How  came
this?  One  can  understand  their  passing  through  the
scene  of  his  power,  but  to  be  dwelling  there  is  signifi-
cant. Did  they  like  to  be  near  a  throne,  although  it
were  the  throne  of  Satan — to  dwell  there?  Did  they
love  the  shadow  or  the  glitter  of  human  power  ?

Yet  the  Lord  owns  whatever  is  good.  "  Thou  holdest
fast  my  name,  and  hast  not  denied  my  faith."  It  is
remarkable  that  after  the  greatest  persecutions,  when
Christendom  and  even  Christians  had  been  seduced  into
accepting  the  patronage  of  the  world,  up  to  that  point
there  remained  real  faithfulness  in  refusing  all  efforts  to
deny  the  deity  of  Christ.  Under  the  same  Constantino,
who  was  the  instrument  of  thus  casting  the  world's
shield  over  Christianity,  was  the  battle  fought  and  won
against  the  Arian  foe.  It  was  under  his  authority,  and
indeed  by  his  call,  that  the  famous  council  sat  at  Nicea,
and  the  faith  of  the  Trinity  was  publicly  established.  I
do  not  mean  of  course  for  Christians,  who  needed  no  such
bulwark  as  this,  but  for  Christendom.  Thus  the  creed
commonly  called  Nicene,  which  had  for  its  object  the
assertion  of  Christ's  consubstantial  deity,  was  published
at  this  same  time.  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  state
of  things  is  referred  to  here :  "  Thou  boldest  fast  my
name,  and  hast  not  denied  my  faith,  even  in  those  days
wherein  Antipas  was  my  faithful  martyr,  who  was  slain
among  you,  where  Satan  dwelleth."    What  a  solemn


THE  REVELATION.  417

conjunction,  that  there  should  be  this  close  proximity
between  Satan's  throne  without,  but  withal  the  mercy
of  God  still  maintaining  that  fundamental  faith  of
Christ's  own  personal  glory  !

"  But  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,  because  thou
hast  there  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  Balaam."
Clericalism  came  in  rapidly  after  this.  The  world's
authority  brought  in  worldly  objects,  and  now  the
ministry  became  a  clergy,  a  more  or  less  profitable  pro-
fession. The  framers  of  this  were  those  that  held  the
doctrine  of  Balaam.  Simultaneously  with  this  of  course
there  was  the  introduction  of  all  kinds  of  compromise
with  the  world.  The  clergy  encouraged  by  a  misuse  of
scripture  every  sort  of  commerce  with  the  world's  evil
ways ;  as  it  is  said  here,  "  who  taught  Balak  to  cast  a
stumblingblock  before  the  children  of  Israel,  to  eiit
things  sacrificed  to  idols,  and  to  commit  fornication."
I  do  not  doubt  that  all  this  is  symbolically  expressed.
But  the  drift  is  plain  enough  where  the  conscience  is
not  blunted.  Where  the  same  evils  exist,  and  all  that
which  would  keep  the  church  as  a  chaste  virgin  espoused
to  Christ  is  gone,  no  wonder  that  these  warnings  arc
misundei'stood.  The  world  had  got  in,  as  it  still  remains,
and  alas !  palliated  most  by  those  who  owe  their  pro-
fessional status  to  this  frightfully  corrupt  and  coiTupting
influence.  And  the  same  spirit  of  unbelief  which  let
in  the  mischief  keeps  it  in,  decrying  the  true  application
of  the  two-edged  sword  now  as  then.  The  Christians
were  dazzled  by  the  world's  power  and  glory,  which  was
put  forth  doubtless  in  protecting,  not  themselves  only,
but  the  public  faith  of  Christendom  in  that  day.  At
the  same  time  they  fatally  compromised  Christ  by

2  E


418  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

alliance  with  the  world,  and  there  followed  the  practical
return  to  the  world  out  of  which  grace  had  taken  the
church  in  order  to  union  with  Christ  in  glory.

"  So  hast  thou  also  them  that  hold  the  doctrine  of  the
Nicolaitans,  which  thing  I  hate."  The  first  of  these
epistles  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Ephesus  denounced
"the  deeds  of  the  Nicolaitans;"  but  now  the  iniquity
in  question  (Antinomianism  it  would  seem)  had  become
a  doctrine.  "Repent;  or  else  I  am  coming  to  thee
quickly,  and  will  war  against  them  with  the  sword  of
my  mouth."  Thus  the  Lord  was  no  longer  fighting  in
defence  of  His  own  people,  nor  was  He  employing  the
enemy's  hatred  and  persecution  to  nip  in  the  bud  or
prune  evil  excrescences.  We  have  seen  this  just  before.
A  greater  trial  appears  now.  Yet,  alas!  the  state  of
those  that  bore  His  own  name  was  such  that  He  was
obliged  to  deal  thus  steinly  with  them.

"  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit
saith  to  the  churches.  To  him  that  overcometh  will
I  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna."  When  the  church
was  seeking  the  place  of  public  glory,  the  encourage-
ment to  faith  was  the  hidden  manna.  Let  there  be  at
least  individual  even  if  unvalued  faithfulness  to  the
Lord  Jesus.  There  were,  I  doubt  not,  some  saints  true
to  His  name,  though  it  was  not  the  time  when  they
were  led  or  forced  into  the  position  of  a  remnant.  It
was  not  yet  a  question  of  coming  out  from  the  public
body.  There  might  not  be  energy  of  faith  for  this,  but
at  any  rate  fidelity  to  Christ  was  not  lacking,  and  where
this  was — "To  him  that  overcometh,"  says  the  Lord,  "I
will  give  to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna,  and  will  give  him
a  white  stone,  and  on  the  stone  a  new  name  written.


^rvji


'  THE  REVELATION.  419

which  none  knoweth  save  he  that  receiveth  it."  To  the
trae  heart  His  approval  is  enough,  and  sweeter  than
triumph  before  the  universe.

•

Then  follows  the  last  of  these  four  churches.  "And
to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Thyatira  write."  I  cannot
doubt  that  this  letter  contains  an  apt  adumbration,  as
far  as  could  be  there  in  present  facts,  of  what  was  found
in  mediaeval  times.  "These  things  saith  the  Son  of
God,  who  hath  his  eyes  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  his
feet  like  fine  brass.'*  Christ  is  revealed  now,  not  only
in  the  all -discerning  power  of  moral  judgment,  but
also  judicially  prepared  to  act  against  evil — "  His  feet
like  fine  brass."  "I  know  thy  works,  and  thy  love,
and  faith,  and  service,  and  patience,  and  thy  last  works
(to  be)  more  than  the  first"  There  was  considerable
devotedness  in  the  middle  ages,  spite  of  the  darkness
and  ignorance  that  prevailed  in  point  of  doctrine.  But
those  who  loved  the  Lord  showed  their  love  then  not  so
much  by  intelligence  in  His  ways,  as  by  unsparing  and
habitual  self-denial.  I  am  not  now  speaking  of  what
was  done  out  of  superstition,  either  to  Mary  or  the
church,  when  each  was  made  a  sort  of  bona  Dea,  but
of  the  fruit  of  looking  to  Christ  however  simply.

"  Notwithstanding  I  have  a  few  things  against  thee,
because  thou  sufierest  that  woman  (perhaps  *thy  wife')
Jezebel."  This  was  a  new  kind  of  evil  altogether.  It
is  not  simply  clericalism  now,  nor  persons  holding  the
doctrine  of  Balaam ;  but  a  formal  state  of  things,  as  the
symbol  of  a  woman  regularly  represents.  Examine
the  use  of  woman  symbolically,  and  you  will  find,  I
believe,  that  this  is  true.     The  man  is  the  agent  that

2  E  2


420  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

goes  forward ;  the  woman  is  the  state  of  things  that  is
produced  Jezebel  therefore  is  the  appropriate  symbol
now,  as  Balaam  was  just  before.  The  activity  was  in
the  clergy,  who  brought  in  the  basest  compromise  with
the  world,  and  sold  the  honour  of  Christ  for  silver  and
gold,  for  ease  and  dignity.  Here  we  find  Jezebel  later.
This  was  the  public  state  of  things  produced  in  the
middle  ages,  and  tolerated  where  the  Lord  was  named.
As  it  is  said  here,  "Because  thou  sufferest  that  woman
Jezebel,  which  calleth  herself  a  prophetess."  It  is  pre-
cisely the  claim  of  the  so-called  church, — the  assumption
of  permanent  infallibility — the  setting  up  to  be  a  sort
of  inspired  authority  to  enunciate  doctrine,  and  to
direct  everything  in  the  name  of  God.  Is  not  this
exactly  what  Eomanism  does  ?  Does  it  not  then  stand
in  the  place  of  Jezebel  ? — "  Who  calleth  herself  a  pro-
phetess, and  teachest  and  seducest  my  servants  to  com-
mit fornication,  and  to  eat  things  sacrificed  to  idols."
All  was  the  fruit,  doubtless,  of  what  had  been  works
before,  but  in  far  greater  maturity  now.  "And  I  gave
her  space  that  she  should  repent;  and  she  will  not
repent  of  her  fornication.  Behold,  I  will  cast  her  into  a
bed,  and  those  that  commit  adultery  with  her  into  great
tribulation,  except  they  repent  of  their  deeds.  And  I
will  kill  her  children  with  death."  Jezebel  was  a  mother
indeed — a  holy  mother,  said  the  deceivers  and  deceived.
^Tiat  said  the  Lord?  what  said  those  who  preferred
"great  tribulation,"  rather  than  commit  adultery  with
her  ?  This  flagrant  church- world  corruption  was  now  a
settled  institution.  It  is  no  mere  transient  cloud  of
error;  it  is  a  body  in  the  highest  worldly  position — a
queen,  but  also  pretending  to  the  highest  spiritual  power


THE  KEVELATION.  421

— a  prophetess  so-called,  that  was  now  permanently
settled  in  Christendom,  giving  birth  to  a  distinct  progeny
of  iniquity — "  her  children."  But  says  He  who  has  eyes
like  a  flame  of  fire,  "I  will  kill  her  children  with  death;
and  all  the  churches  shall  know  that  I  am  he  which
searcheth  the  reins  and  hearts :  and  I  will  give  to  each
according  to  your  works."

"  But  to  you  I  say,  the  rest  (or  remnant)  in  Thyatira."
The  remnant  is  here  plain.  Thus  we  must  read  the  text
and  translate  it  We  must  leave  out  "  and  unto."  The
common  text  which  gives  rise  to  the  current  versions
spoils  the  sense  completely.  It  is  to  the  rest,  or  the
remnant  in  Thyatira,  "as  many  as  have  not  this  doctrine,"
that  the  Lord  turns.

Let  us  weigh  a  little  more  these  remarkable  words.
Here  we  have  for  the  first  time  the  formal  recog-
nition of  saints  not  included  in  the  public  state  of  the
assembly,  yet  not  so  openly  separate  as  was  found  at  a
later  day.  Still  they  become  a  witnessing  body  more  or
less  in  spirit,  apart  from  that  which  set  up  the  highest
pretension  but  in  profoundly  wicked  communion  with
Jezebel,  as  the  Lord  judged  and  stigmatized  what  man
called  "our  mother,  the  holy  Catholic  church."  "To
you  I  say,  the  rest  in  Thyatira,  as  many  as  have  not
known  this  doctrine,  and  which  have  not  known  the
depths  of  Satan,  as  they  speak ;  I  will  put  upon  you
none  other  burden.  But  that  which  ye  have  already
hold  fast  till  I  come."  Thus  the  Lord  speaks  with
exceeding  tenderness  of  those  that  were  true  to  His
name.  He  did  not  expect  great  things  from  them.  I
do  not  the  least  doubt  that  those  who  are  commonly
called  the  Waldenses  and  Albigenses,  and  others  per-


422  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

haps  of  similar  character,  are  referred  to  here.  They
were  true  and  ardent,  but  with  no  considerable  light  of
knowledge  if  measured  by  a  fuller  and  richer  testimony
which  the  Lord  was  afterwards  to  raise  up,  as  foreshown
in  the  next  chapter.

The  Lord  at  the  close  gives  a  promise  suited  to  the
condition.  "  He  that  overcometh,  and  he  that  keepeth
my  works  unto  the  end,  to  him  will  I  give  power  over
the  nations."  This  wicked  Jezebel  not  only  persecuted
the  true  saints  of  the  Lord,  but  sought  universal  supre-
macy— a  world-wide  dominion  over  souls.  The  Lord
bids  them  in  eflTect  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  her,  and
He  will  give  the  true  power  when  He  takes  it  Himself.
Let  them  abide  in  the  place  of  patience,  even  though
there  be  tribulation,  as  there  must  be  if  they  are  content
to  endure  for  Christ's  sake  now.  "But  he  that  over-
cometh, and  he  that  keepeth  my  works  unto  the  end,  to
him  will  I  give  power  over  the  nations:  and  he  shall
rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron;  as  a  vessel  of  the  potter
shall  they  be  broken  to  shivers :  even  as  I  received  of
my  Father."  The  faithful  will  share  Christ's  power  at
His  coming,  and  be  associated  with  Himself  in  His
kingdom.  But  even  this  is  not  enough  for  grace.  "And
I  will  give  him  the  morning  star."  This  is  not  asso-
ciation with  Christ  in  His  public  reign,  but  in  that
which  is  proper  to  Him  above  the  world  altogether.
The  heavenly  hope  of  being  with  Christ  is  promised
as  well  as  part  in  the  kingdom.

And  here,  it  has  been  well  observed,  a  notable  change
takes  place.  The  call  to  hear  begins  to  follow  the
promise,  instead  of  being  before  it.    The  reason  is  that


THE  REVELATION.  423

a  remnant  is  now  formed.  This  does  not  go  along  with
the  public  state  of  the  church  now.  The  Lord  thence-
forth puts  the  promise  first,  and  this  apparently  because
there  is  no  use  longer  to  expect  the  church  as  a  whole
to  receive  it.  The  address  is  to  the  overcomer,  who  is
accordingly  put  before  the  call  to  hear.  In  the  three
previous  churches  it  may  be  noticed,  the  call  to  hear  is
first,  because  the  Lord  is  still  dealing  with  the  general
conscience  of  the  church.  This  is  given  up  now.  There
is  a  remnant  only  that  overcome,  and  the  promise  is  for
them.  The  Lord  simply  takes  notice  of  these  in  His  call.
As  for  others  it  is  all  over  with  them.

Accordingly  the  division  of  the  next  chapter  (iii.)
seems  to  be  happy  at  this  point.  There  is  an  immense
change  in  turning  to  the  last  three  churches.  The
ground  of  such  a  thought  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  intro-
duction to  Sardis  indicates  the  Lord  beginning  again
a  new  state  of  things.  The  ancient  ecclesiastical  or
catholic  phase  of  the  church  terminates  with  Thyatira :
nevertheless, Thy atira  in  this  has  the  peculiar  trait  that
it  is  the  close  of  the  public  state  of  the  church,  and  the
beginning  of  those  conditions  which  go  on  till  the
Lord's  coming.  Thyatira,  I  have  no  doubt,  contains
within  it  the  mystic  representative  of  Romanism.  This
can  hardly  be  denied  to  Jezebel  at  least ;  whilst  "  the
remnant"  represents  those  who,  without  being  Pro-
testants, form  a  witnessing  company  apart  from  popery,
yet  before  the  rise  of  Protestantism.  The  beginning  of
the  third  chapter  introduces  the  protestant  state  of
things.

Thus  we  have  had  the  general  condition  falling  into


424  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

decline;  we  have  had  the  early  persecution  from  the
heathen ;  we  have  had  the  power  of  the  world  patron-
izing the  church ;  and  we  have  had  finally  Bomanism,
which  alone  (from  the  allusion  to  Christ  s  coming)  is
supposed  to  go  on  to  the  end.

"And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  in  Sardis  write;
These  things  saith  he  that  hath  the  seven  Spirits  of
God,  and  the  seven  stars."  There  is  an  evident  allusion
to  the  manner  in  which  the  Lord  presented  Himself  to
the  church  in  Ephesus.  Ephesus  was  the  first  presen-
tation of  the  general  public  stata  Sardis  gives  the  rise
of  the  new  state  of  things,  not  strictly  ecclesiastical  —
the  Lord  acting  in  the  way  of  testimony,  and  not  so
much  in  ecclesiastical  order.  Hence  it  is  not  said  here
that  He  walks  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  lampstands :
that  was  ecclesiastical  strictly.  But  here  He  has  the  seven
Spirits  of  God.  He  is  God.  All  power,  all  governing
might,  is  in  His  hands,  and  the  seven  stars,  that  is  to
say,  all  the  instrumental  means  by  which  He  acts  upon
the  church.  "  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name
that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead."   Such  is  Protestantism,

"Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  things  which  I'emain,
that  are  ready  to  die :  for  I  have  not  found  thy  works
perfect  before  God."  Hence  what  judges  Protestant-
ism is  this,  that  they  have  the  testimony  of  Gods
word  much  more  fully  than  those  who  had  sunk  into
the  mere  ecclesiastical  formalism  of  the  middle  ages.
There  the  word  of  God  had  been  kept  away,  because
the  clergy  and  the  word  of  God  can  never  go  together
thoroughly.  It  is,  and  always  must  be,  the  effect  of  the
clerical  principle  to  substitute  the  authority  of  man.


Tin:  i:i:vKLATi<'X.  4'2^*

more  or  less,  for  that  of  the  Lord,  and  to  weaken  aud
hinder  the  immediate  action  of  the  Spirit  by  the  word
of  God  on  the  conscience.  I  am  speaking  not  of  indi-
vidual clergymen  at  all,  but  of  clericalism  wherever
found.  Catholic  or  denominational,  nationalist  or  dis-
senting.

But  the  Protestant  principle  is  a  very  different  one.
People  may  not  be  true  to  their  principles,  and  often
are  not.  Still,  after  all,  one  of  the  grand  points  fought
for  at  the  Beformation,  and  gained  for  Protestantism,
whatever  might  be  its  defects,  was  this ; — that  man  was
put  fairly,  freely,  and  openly  in  presence  of  the  Bible.
6od*s  word  was  there  to  deal  with  human  conscience.
I  do  not  speak  of  justification  by  faith ;  for  even  Luther,
as  I  think,  never  got  thoroughly  clear  as  to  the  truth
of  it  And  though  Catholics  are  miserably  deluded,
Protestants  do  not  understand  justification  to  this  day.
They  have  the  truth  in  a  measure,  but  not  so  as  to
clear  souls  from  bondage,  or  bring  them  distinctly  into
liberty,  peace,  and  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  Even
Luther  never  had  peace  in  his  soul,  as  the  settled  state
in  which  he  walked.  We  have  most  of  us  heard  what
conflicts  he  had,  and  not  merely  at  the  beginning  of
his  career  but  to  the  end.  I  do  not  mean  conflicts
about  the  church,  but  about  his  soul.  It  is  needless
here  to  cite  passages  from  his  extant  writings,  which
prove  how  sorely  he  was  tried  by  inward  conflicts  of
unbelief,  which  amply  prove  how  far  he  was  from  the
calm  enjoyment  of  the  peace  of  the  gospel;  but  it  is
an  error  to  impute  them  in  themselves  to  any  other
cause  than  a  lack  of  clear  knowledge  of  grace.  In  such
a  state,  all  sorts  of  things  may  trouble  the  man  who


426  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

•

cannot  rest  without  a  question  on  the  Lord,  no  matter
how  able  and  honoured  he  may  be.  I  am  sure  Luther
is  one  from  whom  we  may  all  learn  much;  whose
courage,  faithfulness,  self-renunciation,  and  endurance
are  edifying  and  instructive.  At  the  same  time  it  is
useless  to  blink  the  fact :  energetic  as  he  was  and  used
of  God  largely,  he  was  far  behind  in  the  understanding
both  of  the  church  and  of  the  gospel

Yet,  spite  of  drawbacks,  an  open  Bible  was  won  for
God's  children  in  particular,  and  for  man  also.  This
very  thing  condemned  the  state  of  Protestantism  that
resulted;  because,  while  it  was  freely  read,  there  was
scarce  any  thought  of  forming  all  upon  the  Bible,  and
regulating  all  by  it.  Nothing  is  more  common  among
Protestants,  than  to  admit  a  thing  to  be  perfectly  true
because  it  is  in  the  word  of  God,  without  the  smallest
intention  or  thought  of  acting  upon  it.  Is  not  this  a
very  serious  fact?  The  Romanists  are  in  general  too
ignorant  to  know  what  is  or  is  not  in  the  Bible.  Except
the  common -places  of  controversy  with  Protestants,
they  know  little  of  Scriptura  Tell  them  that  this  or
that  is  to  be  found  in  the  Bible,  and  they  look  amazed.
They  may  not  know  it  as  a  whole,  having  never  read
it  save  (?)  under  the  eye  of  the  directing  priest,  their  con-
fessor. The  Protestant  reads  the  Bible  more  at  liberty,
which  is  a  real  good  and  precious  boon;  but  for  this  very
reason,  the  Protestant  incurs  no  light  responsibility.

"  I  have  not  found  thy  works  perfect  before  my  God.
Remember  therefore  how  thou  hast  received  and  heard,
and  hold  fast,  and  repent.  If  therefore  thou  shalt  not
watch,  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  thief.''  It  is  a  sweep-
ing intimation  of  the  very  same  way  in  which  the  Lord


THE  REVELATION.  427

threatens  to  come  on  the  world.  Now  if  there  be  in
the  state  of  Protestantism  one  thing  more  marked  than
another,  it  is  that  they  always  fall  back  on  the  world  to
deliver  themselves  from  the  power  of  the  priest  or  the
church.  This  has  ever  been  the  chief  snare,  as  it  is  now.
If  even  what  belongs  to  the  world  be  touched,  they  are
in  no  small  agitation  about  it.  I  am  far  from  saying
this  because  I  do  not  feel  for  them  much.  Nor  is  it
that  I  have  any  doubt  that  it  is  a  great  sin  to  wipe
ofiF  all  public  recognition  of  God  in  the  world.  Impos-
sible to  believe  that  e.g.  the  unblushing  worldliness  one
sees  in  the  combination  of  Dissenters  with  Papists  and
infidels  springs  from  just,  pure,  holy,  and  unselfish
motives.  It  is  rather  to  be  imputed  to  the  encroaching
spirit  of  infidelity,  where  there  is  not  also  a  truckling
to  superstition.  Doubtless  the  infidels  hope  to  gain  the
day,  as  the  superstitious  are  very  confident  on  their
part ;  but  the  truth  of  it  is  that  the  devil  will  get  the
upper  hand  to  the  destruction  of  them  both,  and  then
find  that  the  Lord  will  appear  in  His  day  for  His  own
judgment  of  all  the  adversaries.

The  Lord  then  warns  the  angel  at  Sardis,  that  if  he
should  not  watch,  He  Himself  will  come  on  him  as  a
thief,  and  he  shall  not  know  what  hour  Christ  will  come
on  him.  This  is  not  at  all  the  way  in  which  His  coming
is  spoken  of  for  His  own.  They  are  waiting  for  Him —
expectantly  without  such  an  idea  as  His  thief-like  sur-
prise. How  can  it  surprise  those  who  are  ever  awaiting
Him  ?  His  coming  is  their  joy,  and  for  this  they  watch
more  than  watchman  for  the  dawn.  The  figure  of  the
thief  can  be  employed  only  for  the  world  or  the  worldly-
minded.    So  solemnly  then  does  this  language  suppose


428  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

that  the  assembly  at  Sardis  have  passed  out  of  the
practical  attitude  of  waiting  for  the  Lord  as  a  loved
object.  All  intimates  that  they  are  in  great,  and  no
doubt  just;  dread  of  Him  as  a  judge.  They  have  slipped
into  the  world,  and  share  its  fears  and  anxieties.  They
have  lost  the  sense  of  Christ's  peace  left  with  them.
They  have  not  the  joy  of  His  coming  for  them  in  perfect
love,  to  receive  to  Himself  those  whom  He  loves.  The
unwelcome  visitation  of  a  thief  would  be  utterly  incon-
gruous if  they  were  enjoying  the  sweet  hope  according
to  His  own  word,  that  He  is  coming  for  them  quickly.
He  that  overcomes  should  be  clothed  in  white,  for
there  were  a  few  in  Sardis  who  had  not  defiled  their
garments,  and  who  should  thus  walk  with  Him  in  white ;
because  they  are  worthy.  This  has  been  always  the
case.  Precious  souls  are  there,  and  our  happy  service
is  to  help  these  then,  if  we  can,  to  a  better  knowledge
of  His  grace, — not,  of  course,  to  make  light  of  their
being  where  they  are,  or  of  their  doing  what  they  do,
yet  in  the  fullest  love  to  feel  about  them  as  the  Lord
does.  "  He  that  overcometh, — he  shall  be  clothed  in
white  raiment ;  and  I  will  not  blot  his  name  out  of
the  book  of  life,  and  will  confess  his  name  before  jiiy
Father,  and  before  his"  angels."

In  the  next  place  comes  Philadelphia.  "And  to  the
angel  of  the  church  in  Philadelphia  write  ;  These  things
saith  he  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  true,  he  that  hath  the
key  of  David,  he  that  openeth,  and  no  man  shall  shut ;
and  shutteth,  and  no  man  shall  open."  Every  word  of
Christ's  presentation  of  Himself  diflFers  from  the  view
of  Him  given  in  chapter  L   This  marks  particularly  the


THE   REVELATION.  429

change  in  the  chapter,  and  especially  in  the  part  before  us.
The  address  to  Sardis  also,  although  allusive  to  that  of
Ephesus,  is  nevertheless  no  less  clearly  meant  to  stand
contrasted  with  it.  It  is  a  recommencement,  and  so  far
is  analogous  with  that  to  Ephesus  :  still,  the  manner  in
which  the  Lord  is  presented  is  quite  new.  His  having
the  seven  Spirits  of  God  was  distinct  from  the  Ephesian
picture;  nor  is  anything  at  all  similar  in  the  description
of  the  Lord  Jesus  given  before.  It  is  a  new  state  of
things ;  but  when  we  come  to  Philadelphia  there  is  far
more  evidence  of  all  things  new.  **  These  things  saith
he  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  true."  When  the  Lord  is  seen
in  the  vision  of  chapter  i.,  these  are  not  the  ways  in
which  He  is  described  at  all — "He  that  hath  the  key
of  David."

In  the  descriptions  of  the  second  chapter  what
was  said  about  the  Lord  is  a  repetition  of  what  was
found  in  the  vision  John  had  just  seen.  The  only
exception  is  in  Thyatira,  where  He  is  described  as  the
Son  of  God;  and,  as  already  remarked,  Thyatira  is
exactly  transitional.  It  is  the  beginning  of  the  changed
condition.  It  is  a  church  state  in  responsibility  though
not  in  real  power,  being  an  ecclesiastical  body  which
presents  horrors  in  the  Lord's  eyes,  but  not  without  a
remnant  dear  to  Him.  This  at  the  same  time  goes  on
down  to  the  end,  and  brings  in  the  Lord's  coming ;  for,
it  will  be  observed,  the  coming  of  the  Lord  is  not
introduced  in  any  of  the  first  three,  but  from  Thyatira
it  is,  because  the  condition  intended  goes  on  to  the
coming  of  the  Lord.  Ephesus  does  not,  nor  Smyraa,
nor  Pergamos :  the  only  semblance  of  it  is  in  threats
of  present  judgment.  Thyatira  does,  and  so  Sardis,  and
also  Philadelphia.


430  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

But  Philadelphia  also  prominently  brings  out  the
Lord  in  person  as  also  in  His  moral  glory.     It  is  now
Christ  Himself,  and  this  as  One  that  faith  discovers  in
new  beauty,  not  dependent  merely  on  visions  of  glory
which  had  been  seen  before,  but  Christ  as  He  really  is  in
Himself — "  He  that  is  holy,  he  that  is  trua"    But  more
than  this,  it  is  Christ  seen  according  to  the  largeness  of
His  glory.     Faith  sees  that  the  blessed  One,  the  holy
and  the  true,  is  the  same  that  has  the  key  of  David.
Old  Testament  prophecy — dispensational  truth — is  in-
troduced now.     It  is  "he  that  openeth,  and  no  man
shall  shut."     There  is  perfect  liberty  now — liberty  for
service,  liberty  for  every  one  that  belongs  to  the  Lord.
"I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  and  none  can  shut
it :  for  thou  hast  a  little  strength."     They  are  supposed
to  be  not  marked  by  such  mighty  doings,  as  Sardis
was.     Sardis  did  great  exploits,  Philadelphia  nothing  of
the  sort.     Are  we  content  to  be  little,  my  friends?  to
be  of  no  esteem  in  the  world  ?  never  to  be  marked  by
anything  that  men  can  wonder  at  or  admire  ?   I  am  sup-
posing now  a  scale  which  attracts  the  world's  attention.
This  is  exactly  what  is  not  true  of  Philadelphia,  which
is  rather  formed  after  a  rejected  Christ.     We  all  know
of  what  small  account  He  was  on  earth;  and  so  it  is
with  Philadelphia.  Has  it  no  price  in  His  eyes  1  "  Thou
hast  kept  my  word,  and  hast  not  denied  my  name."
Just  as  Jesus  was  marked  by  valuing  the  word  of  God,
and  loving  it — being  the  only  One  that  could  truly  say
to  Satan  as  true  of  Himself,  "Man  shall  not  live  by
bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of
the  mouth   of  God,"  so   here  Philadelphia  is  distin-
guished by  the  same  living  by  faith.     To  some  it  might


THE   REVELATION.  431

appear  a  small  thing  not  to  deny  Christ's  name,  but
nothing  is  more  precious  to  the  Lord.  Once  it  was  a
question  of  not  denying  His  faith,  as  was  found  in
Pergaraos;  but  here  it  is  Himself  personally.  What  He
is  is  the  main  point.  Mere  orthodoxy  does  not  suffice,
but  His  person,  though  absent,  and  the  glory  due  to
Him.

"Behold,  I  will  make  them  of  the  synagogue  of  Satan,
which  say  they  are  Jews,  and  are  not."  Is  not  this  the
revival  of  that  dreadful  scourge  that  had  afflicted  the
early  church  (even  Smyrna)?  Have  we  not  heard  of
it  ?  And  have  we  not  seen  it  ourselves  ?  How  comes
it,  that  for  so  many  hundreds  of  years  only  a  part  of
what  the  Fathers  had  laboured  at  sunk  into  the  minds
of  men,  a  certain  portion  being  rejected,  as  we  know,
by  Protestantism ;  but  now,  when  God  brings  out  this
fresh  testimony,  there  rises  a  counter-testimony  ?  Satan
revives  the  old  Judaizing  spirit,  at  the  very  time  that
God  re-asserts  the  true  principle  of  Christian  brother-
hood, and,  above  all,  makes  Christ  Himself  to  be  all  to
His  people.  And  here  we  have  for  our  instruction  the
fact,  that  the  synagogue  of  Satan — of  those  who  say
they  are  Jews,  and  are  not — revives.  How  stand  the
facts  ?  How  are  they  even  in  this  country  ?  What  is
commonly  called  Puseyism  tends  to  this ;  and  that  sys-
tem is  not  confined  to  this  country.  You  must  not
think  it  is  merely  a  question  of  England;  it  holds
equally  abroad,  as  in  Germany  and  elsewhere — in  fact,
wherever  Protestantism  is  found,  and,  above  all,  wher-
ever this  is  provoked,  either  by  scepticism  on  the  'one
hand,  or  on  the  other  by  truth  that  condemns  both  with
the  brightness  of  heavenly  light.     In  order  to  defend


432  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

themselves  on  a  religious  footing,  men  fall  back  on  a
system  of  ordinances  and  of  the  law.  This  is,  I  think,
Avhat  is  meant  by  the  synagogue  of  Satan  here.

But  the  Lord  will  compel  the  recognition  of  His  own
testimony.  I  do  not  say  when,  where,  or  how;  but  as
surely  as  He  lives,  will  the  Lord  vindicate  the  truth  He
has  given,  and  the  testimony  He  has  raised  up  for  His
name.  "  I  will  make  them  to  come  and  worship  before
thy  feet,  and  to  know  that  I  have  loved  thee."

Nor  is  this  all.  Not  only  will  the  Lord  thus  vin-
dicate what  is  of  Himself,  but,  as  we  know,  there  is  an
awful  time  coming  on  this  world — an  hour,  as  it  is  said
here,  not  simply  of  tribulation,  but  of  temptation  or
trial.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  hour  of  trial
embraces  the  whole  Apocalyptic  period;  that  is,  not
merely  the  awful  time  when  Satan  in  a  rage  is  expelled
from  on  high,  and  when  the  beast,  energised  by  him,
rises  to  his  full  head  of  power,  but  the  previous  period
of  trouble,  seduction,  and  judgment.  In  short,  "the
hour  of  temptation "  is,  I  conceive,  a  larger  term  alto-
gether than  the  "great  tribulation"  of  Rev.  viL,  and
still  more  than  the  unparalleled  tribulation  which  is  to
befall  the  land  of  Israel.  (Dan.  xii.  Matt  xxiv.  Mark
xiii.)  If  so,  how  rich  and  full  is  the  promise :  "Because
thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my  patience,  I  also  will
keep  thee  from  the  hour  of  temptation,  which  shall
come  upon  all  the  world,  to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  the
earth."  In  vain  men  try  to  escape !  The  hour  of  temp-
tation must  come  upon  all.  I  dare  say  that  some  of  ns
remember  when  people  used  to  fly  to  Canada  in  order
to  escape  "the  great  tribulation"  which  they  expected
to  fall  on  the  empire  of  the  beast    Men's  scheme  was


'v.!i;


THE   REVELATION.  433

a  mistake,  their  flight  foolish.  The  hour  of  temptation
will  catch  them,  no  matter  where  they  may  hide.  Tlie
hour  of  temptation  shall  come  upon  all  the  habitable
world,  "to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth,"  be  they
where  they  may.

Who  then  can  escape  ?  Those  who  at  Christ*s  call
are  caught  up  to  heaven.  They  will  not  be  in  that
hour.  It  is  not  only,  be  it  observed,  that  they  will  not
be  in  the  place,  but  they  will  be  kept  out  of  the  hour,
of  that  coming  temptation.  What  a  full  exemption  !
Such  is  the  strength  of  the  promise  and  the  blessed-
ness of  it,  that  the  Lord  promises  His  own  to  be  kept
from  the  time.  The  only  possible  way  I  can  understand
of  exempting  any  from  the  time  is  by  taking  them  out
of  the  scene.  The  Irvingites  used  to  talk  about  the  Lord
having  a  little  Zoar.  It  is  not  at  all  however  a  question
of  a  place  of  shelter,  but  of  complete  removal  from  the
period  that  is  filled  by  the  great  trouble  or  trial  that
will  come  upon  the  habitable  world.  How  can  this  be
secured  but  by  removing  them  out  of  the  scene  before
the  time  arrives  ?  Such  I  believe  the  promise  here  to
import.  The  godly  remnant  of  Jews,  having  to  do  witli
a  special  and  most  fierce  but  circumscribed  tribulation,
have  only  to  flee  to  the  mountains  in  order  to  escape
till  Jesus  appears  in  glory,  to  the  confusion  of  their  foes.
It  is  quite  another  thing  for  Christians.

"  Behold,  I  come  quickly!"  There  is  not  a  word  about
His  coming  as  a  thief  now,  but  with  joy.  The  Lord
has  revived  the  true  hope  of  His  return  ;  there  are
those  who  are  thus  waiting  for  Christ,  and  this  epistle
seems  emphatically  to  apply  to  such.  "  Behold,  I  come
quickly!"     In  principle  it  is  true  of  all  that  are  really

2  F


434  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

faithful,  but  there  may  be  Christians,  as  we  know  there
are,  involved  in  one  or  other  of  the  various  states  which
have  been  described,  and  which  apparently  go  on  to
the  close.  It  is  in  vain  therefore  to  look  for  a  formal
obliteration  of  these  co-ordinate  conditions,  which  can-
not be  till  the  Lord  comes.  "  Hold  that  fast  which  thou
hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown.  Him  that  overcometh
will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  my  God,  and  he
shall  go  no  more  out :  and  I  will  write  upon  him  the
name  of  my  God,  and  the  name  of  the  city  of  my  God,
which  is  new  Jerusalem,  which  cometh  down  out  of
heaven  from  my  God :  and  I  will  write  upon  him  my
new  name."  He  will  be  as  much  marked  by  power  in
the  day  of  glory,  as  by  contented  weakness  in  the
present  scene  of  grace.

We  have  yet  the  last  epistle  to  the  angel  of  the
church  in  Laodicea.  But  of  this  I  would  say  but  a  few
words,  considering  tlie  late  hour.  The  Laodicean  picture
is,  in  my  judgment,  the  result  of  dislike  and  contempt
for  the  testimony  that  the  Lord  had  previously  raised
up.  If  people  despise  the  truth  possessed  by  those  who
are  waiting  for  the  Lord,  they  are  in  danger  of  falling
into  the  awful  condition  that  is  here  set  forth.  Christ
is  no  longer  the  loved  and  only  object  of  the  heart ;  nor
is  there  the  sense  of  the  blessedness  of  His  corainn.
which  leads  into  waiting  for  Him;  still  less  is  there  a
glorying  in  weakness  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest
on  them.  There  is  the  desire  to  be  great,  to  be  esteemed
of  men,  "rieli,  and  increased  in  goods,  and  in  need  of
nothing."  You  find  here  a  scope,  therefore,  that  leaves
ample  room  for  man.    Hence  it  is  that  the  Lord  intro-


THE   REVELATION.  435

duces  Himself  to  them  as  the  Amen, — the  end  of  every
thing  human, — where  all  the  security  is  in  the  faithful-
ness of  God.  He  only  is  "  the  faithful  and  true  witness."
That  is  exactly  what  the  church  ought  to  have  been  and
was  not ;  and  therefore  He  has  to  take  that  place  Him-
self. It  was  so  before  when  He  was  here  below  in  grace,
and  now  He  must  resume  its  power  and  glory  and  judg-
ment, than  which  one  can  hardly  conceive  a  greater  and
more  solemn  rebuke  on  the  condition  of  those  who
ought  to  have  been  His  witnesses.  Besides  He  is  "  the
beginning  of  the  creation  of  God."  It  is  a  setting  aside
of  man  altogether;  and  the  reason  is  that  Laodicea  is
the  glorification  of  man  and  of  man's  resources  in  the
church.  "  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  art  neither  cold
nor  hot :  I  would  that  thou  wert  cold  or  hot.  So  then
because  thou  art  lukewarm,  and  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I
will  spue  thee  out  of  my  mouth."  They  are  neutral  in
principle  and  practice,  being  half-hearted  about  Christ.
And  I  am  persuaded  there  is  no  place  which  is  more
likely  to  generate  neutrality  than  a  sound  and  true  posi-
tion, if  there  be  not  self-judgment  maintained  and  godly
sincerity.  The  more  you  stand  in  the  forefront  of  the
battle,  with  the  responsible  testimony  of  God,  the  more
you  have  the  grace  and  truth  of  God  brought  out  before
and  by  you,  if  the  heart  and  conscience  be  not  governed
and  animated  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  through
that  truth  and  grace  that  is  in  Christ,  sooner  or  later,
there  will  be,  beyond  a  question,  a  lapse  back  into  a
position  of  neutrality,  if  not  of  active  enmity.  There
will  be  indifference  to  all  that  is  good;  and  the  only
kind  of  zeal,  if  there  be  zeal,  will  be  for  what  is  bad.
This  is  exactly  Laodiceanism.  "  So  then  because  thou

2  7  2


436  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

art  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spue  thee  out  of  my
mouth.  Because  thou  sayest,  I  am  rich,  and  increased
in  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing ;  and  knowest  not
that  thou  art  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and
blind,  and  naked:  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold
tried  in  the  fire."  They  wanted  everything  that  was
precious : — "  gold "  or  divine  righteousness  in  Christ ;
"  white  raiment,"  that  is  to  say,  the  righteousnesses  of
saints ;  "  that  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not  appear;
and  anoint  thine  eyes  with  eyesalve,  that  thou  mayest
see.*'  They  had  lost  the  very  perception  of  what  was
for  God.  All  was  dark  as  to  truth,  and  uncertain  as  to
moral  judgment.  Holy  separateness  and  savour  were
gone.  "As  many  as  I  love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten:  be
zealous  therefore,  and  repent.  Behold,  I  stand  at  the
door,  and  knock :  if  any  man  hear  my  voice,  and  open
the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with  him,
and  he  with  me."  The  Lord  presents  Himself  even  there
in  the  most  gracious  way  to  meet  their  need.  But  the
utmost  promised  in  the  word  that  closes  the  epistle  goes
not  beyond  reigning  with  Him.  It  is  nothing  special.
For  every  one  that  is  in  the  first  resurrection  is  destined
to  reign  with  Christ,  as  even  will  the  Jewish  sufferers,
earlier  or  later,  \mder  the  antichrist.  It  is  all  a  mistake,
therefore,  to  suppose  that  this  is  a  singular  distinction
It  amounts  to  this — that  the  Lord  will  hold,  after  all,
to  His  own  truth,  spite  of  unfaithfulness.  There  may  be
individual  reality  even  where  the  associations  are  miser-
ably untoward.


X.


THE    REVELA.TION.

Chaps,  ir.-xi.  18.

We  have  already  seen  the  bearing  of  the  seven  churches
to  which  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  send  the  letters  con-
tained in  the  second  and  third  chapters.  We  have
found,  I  trust,  substantial  reason  and  ample  evidence
in  their  own  contents,  as  well  as  in  the  character  of  the
book  itself,  to  look  for  a  meaning  far  more  comprehen-
sive than  a  literal  historical  notice  of  the  condition  of  the
Asiatic  churches  which  were  then  primarily  addressed.
It  is,  of  course,  ground  well  known  to  all  that  John  wrote
to  seven  churches ;  but  that  no  more  was  meant  than
the  existing  eissemblies  is  more  than  ought  to  be  as-
sumed. The  septenary  number  is  significant,  and  the
division  of  the  seven  into  two  parts.  Again,  the  order
of  their  contents,  as  well  as  their  nature  severally,
points  to  the  same  conclusion.  Further,  it  is  plain  that
certain  phases  do  not  necessarily  abide,  while  at  a
given  point  in  their  course  the  language  implies  the
state  of  things  meant  by  them  to  continue  up  to  Christ's
return.  That  point  is  Thyatira,  and  thenceforward  the
same  feature  is  in  Sardis,  Philadelphia,  and  of  course
Laodicea.  Beginning  successively,  these  go  on  together.
But  it  is  equally  remarkable  that  the  first  three  churches


438  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

do  not.  What  I  gather  from  it  is,  that  the  three  earlier
churches  are  severed  in  character  from  the  rest;  for
though  all  are  alike  typical,  only  the  last  four  are  used
as  fore-shadows  of  successive  states  of  things  about  to
ensue,  and  then  be  concurrent  up  to  the  Second  Advent.
We  can  easily  imderstand  two  things  :  tirst,  the  succes-
sion of  seven  different  states  represented  by  those  seven
churches ;  and,  secondly,  that  of  the  seven,  three  passed
away,  only  retaining  a  moral  bearing ;  whereas  the  last
four  have  not  this  only,  but  a  prophetic  and  succes-
sional  bearing,  and  from  the  epoch  of  their  appearance,
run  along-side  of  each  other  till  the  coming  of  the
Lord  Jesus.

But  the  remarkable  fact  which  meets  us  from  chap-
ter iv.  and  onward  is,  that  we  no  longer  find  any
church  condition  on  the  earth.  This  confirms  the  same
fact.  Had  these  churches  not  been  meant  to  have  an
application  beyond  the  literal  one,  how  could  it  be
accounted  for  ?  If,  on  the  other  hand,  besides  that  his-
torical application,  they  w^re  meant  to  be  prophetical,
we  can  easily  comprehend  that  the  Lord  did  address
assemblies  then  existing,  but  meant  by  them  to  give
views  of  successional  states  that  should  be  found  up
to  the  close,  when  four  of  these  states  go  on  together.
Thyatira  brings  before  us  the  public  character  of  cor-
rupted Christendom-y-that  which  is  notoriously  found
in  Popery.  Then,  again,  Sardis  is  that  which  is  well
known  as  Protestantism :  there  might  be  orthodoxy,  but
withal  a  manifest  want  of  real  life  and  power.  This  is
followed  by  the  revival  of  the  truth  of  Christian
brotherhood,  with  an  open  door  for  the  work  as  well  as
word  of  the  Lord,  and  His  coming  acting  powerfully.


THE   REVELATION.  439

not  merely  on  the  mind  as  a  conviction,  but  on  the
affections  as  attaching  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  This  is  found
in  Philadelphia.  Then  Laodicea  shows  us  the  final
state  of  indifference  that  would  be  produced  by  the
rejection  of  these  warnings  and  encouragements  of  the
Lord.

From  the  fourth  chapter  we  have  the  Spirit  of  God
leading  the  prophet  into  the  understanding  of  not
the  church-state,  but  that  which  will  follow  when
churches  are  no  longer  before  the  mind  of  the  Lord —
when  it  becomes  a  question  of  the  world,  not  without
testimonies  from  God  in  the  midst  of  gradually  swell-
ing troubles;  but  His  witnesses  henceforward  of  Jewish
or  Gentile  character,  never  more  after  that  of  the
church  on  earth.  Believers  we  do  see,  of  course, — some
of  them  of  the  chosen  people,  others  of  the  nations;  but
we  hear  of  no  such  church  condition  as  was  found  in
the  second  and  third  chapters.  One  of  the  most  striking
proofs  of  the  way  in  which  the  patent  facts  of  tlie
word  of  God  are  habitually  passed  over  is,  that  this
has  been  so  constantly  overlooked.  There  have  been
hundreds,  perhaps  thousands,  of  books  written  on  the
Revelation,  yet  it  is  only  of  comparatively  recent  date
that  so  plain,  sure,  and  grave  a  feature  seems  to  have  been
seen.  I  speak  now  from  some  acquaintance  with  that
which  has  been  written  on  the  book  from  the  Fathers
down  to  our  own  days.  As  far  as  I  remember,  there
does  not  occur  in  hundreds  of  the  ablest  books  about
it  which  have  passed  through  my  hands,  the  slightest
reference  even  to  this  undeniable  and  important  fact
which  lies  on  the  surface  of  the  prophecy.

I  draw  from  this  nothing  complimentary  to  man's


440  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

mind,  but  the  contrary.  It  loudly  confirms  those  who
are  convinced  of  the  necessity  of  the  teaching  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  to  profit  even  by  what  is  plain,  certain,  and
obvious.  There  is  no  book  so  remarkable  as  the  Bible  in
this  respect:  no  learning  nor  acquirement,  no  brightness
of  mind  or  imagination,  will  ever,  without  His  power,
enable  any  soul  to  seize,  enjoy,  and  use  aright  its  com-
munications. They  may,  no  doubt,  perceive  one  fact
here  and  another  there ;  but  how  to  employ  even  these
for  good  will  never  be  known  unless  the  Spirit  of  (Jod
give  us  to  look  straight  to  Christ.  He  that  has  Christ
before  him  is  soon  sensible  of  a  difiference  of  relation-
ship and  its  results.  Christ  has  special  ways  of  dealing
with  the  church  that  are  suitable  to  none  elsa  This
closes  with  the  end  of  the  third  chapter.

The  inference  is  obvious.  New  things  come  before
the  Lord,  as  well  as  the  reader.  Now,  as  notoriously
the  great  mass  of  persons  who  bear  the  name  of  the
Lord  have  assumed,  without  the  smallest  proof  from
scripture,  that  the  church  has  always  been  and  always
will  be  while  the  work  of  converting  souls  proceeds
on  earth,  it  is  cle^r  that  this  assumption  erects  an
impassable  barrier  against  the  truth.  No  wonder
people  fail  to  understand  the  Bible  when  they  enter
on  its  study  with  a  principle  which  opposes  at  all
points  the  revealed  truth  of  God.  There  is  no  such
notion  in  the  Bible.  It  is  found  in  no  part  either  of  the
Old  or  of  the  New  Testament;  as  little  as  anywhere  else
is  it  tolerated  by  the  book  now  before  us.  Thus  we  see
churches  existing  when  the  book  begins;  but  they  are
found  no  more,  when  the  introductory  portion  closes
and  the  proper  prophecy  is  entered  on.     A  church


"•-


THE   REVELATION.  441

condition  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  the  subject  of  pro-
phecy, which  deals  with  the  world,  and  shows  us  divine
judgments  coming  on  its  evil,  when  God  is  about  to
make  room  for  good  according  to  His  own  mind.  Such
is  the  great  theme  of  the  book  of  Revelation.  But
inasmuch  as  there  were  Christian  assemblies  then,  the
Spirit  of  God  is  pleased  to  preface  it  with  a  most
remarkable  panoramic  view  of  the  church  condition  as
long  as  it  should  subsist  before  the  Lord  on  the  earth.
And  we  have  seen  this  given  with  the  most  striking
wisdom,  so  as  to  suit  at  the  time  of  John,  yet  also  as
long  as  the  church  goes  on  always  to  apply,  and  in-
creasingly, not  every  part  at  once,  but  with  sufficient
light  to  give  children  of  God  full  satisfaction  as  to  the
mind  of  the  Lord.  In  fact,  it  is  the  same  here  as  in
every  other  part  of  scripture :  none  can  really  profit
by  the  word,  whether  in  Genesis  or  in  the  Revelation,
without  the  Spirit,  and  this  can  only  be  to  the  glory  of
Christ.

If  this  be  so,  we  can  understand  the  vast  importance
of  the  change  that  is  here  observable.  The  prophet
enters  by  the  door  into  heaven.  Of  course  this  was
simply  a  vision.  The  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  gave
him  thus  to  enter  and  behold ;  it  was  not  a  question  of
sensible  facts.  He  was  immediately  in  the  Spirit,  it  is
said ;  and  in  heaven  he  beholds  a  throne  set,  and  this,
from  its  effects  and  surroundings,  a  judicial  throne.  It  is
not  at  all  the  same  character  of  the  throne  of  God  as  we
know  and  approach  now.  We  come  boldly  to  the  throne
and  find  grace  and  mercy  to  help  in  time  of  need.  But
we  find  nothing  of  the  sort  here,  either  in  the  throne
or  in  what  issues  from  it.     Even  a  child  might  read


442  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

better  the  force  of  the  symbols  employed  for  our  instruc-
tion. What  is  meant  by  lightnings  and  voices  and
thunderings  ?  Is  it  too  much  to  say  that  he  who  could
confound  the  aspect  of  the  throne  in  Hebrews  iv.  with
that  of  Revelation  iv.  must  have  a  singularly  constituted
mind  ?  I  cannot  understand  how  any  attentive  reader
could  fail  to  see  the  difference,  not  to  speak  of  one
spiritually  taught.  Indeed,  the  amazing  thing  is,  how
any  person  in  his  sober  senses  could  conclude  that  the
two  descriptions  characterize  the  same  state  of  things.
They  stand  really  in  the  strongest  possible  contrast.

Here  we  have  the  throne»  not  of  divine  mercy,  but
invested  with  what  was  proper  to  Sinai:  it  discerns,
denounces,  and  destroys  the  evil  of  the  earth.  Thus  it
is  the  seat  and  source  of  judgment  on  the  ungodly.  I
admit  that  it  is  not  yet  the  throne  of  the  Son  of  man
reigning  over  the  world.  The  time  is  not  come  at  this
point  for  the  church  to  reign  with  Christ  over  the  earth.
In  chapter  v.  the  reigning  over  the  earth  is  spoken  of  as
a  future  thing  (''shall  reign  over  the  earth"),  and  not
yet  a  fact.  Clearly,  therefore,  we  see  here  a  transitional
state  of  things  after  the  church  condition  ends,  and
before  the  millennial  reign  begins.  Such  is  the  manifest
truth  necessary  to  understand  the  Revelation.  As  long
as  you  do  not  admit  this,  you  will  never,  in  my  judg-
ment, understand  the  Apocalypse  as  a  whole

Then  we  are  told  that  the  likeness  of  Him  that  sat  on
the  throne  is  compared  to  a  jasper  and  a  sardine  stone.
This  obviously  does  not  refer  to  the  divine  essence,
which  no  creature  can  approach  to  or  look  upon.  It  is
God's  glory  so  far  as  He  was  pleased  to  allow  it  to  be
made  visible  to  the  creature.     Consequently  it  is  com-


THE   REVELATION.  443

pared  to  those  precious  stones  of  which  we  hear  in  the
city  afterwards.

But  there  are  other  notable  features  of  the  throne.
We  are  told  that  round  about  it  "  there  was  a  rainbow
in  sight  like  an  emerald"  God  marks  here  His  remem-
brance of  creation.  The  rainbow  is  the  familiar  sign  of
the  covenant  with  creation,  and  it  was  presented  promi-
nently to  the  prophet's  mind.  The  various  points
noticed  are  as  in  God's  mind,  not  merely  as  in  man's
eyes.  Thus  the  rainbow  is  not  seen  in  a  shower  of  rain
upon  the  earth.  It  is  a  question  of  the  simple  truth
that  was  set  forth  by  it,  and  nothing  more.  So  it  is
with  all  the  other  objects  seen  in  this  vision.

Next,  "  round  about  the  throne  were  four  and  twenty
elders."  The  allusion  is  evident  to  the  four  and  twenty
courses  of  priesthood.  Only  it  will  be  observed  that  it
is  not  the  whole  number  (the  twenty-four  classes  of
men),  but  simply  the  chief  priests  of  these  courses.
The  twenty-four  elders,  in  my  opinion,  refer  to  the  heads
of  the  priesthood.  Therefore  this  is  of  some  importance
to  bear  in  mind,  because  we  find  subsequently  others
that  are  recognized  as  priests  who  were  not  yet  in  hea-
ven, who  indeed  were  only  called  out  on  the  earth  after
this.  Unquestionably  these  others  became  priests,  but
no  more  elders  are  recognized.  No  addition  is  ever
made  to  the  company  of  elders;  they  are  a  fixed  number.
Priests  there  are  afterwards,  but  no  heads  of  priesthood
save  these  elders.

These  heads  of  priesthood,  I  have  no  doubt  then,  are
the  glorified  saints  above;  and  in  that  glorified  body,
as  I  apprehend,  are  the  Old  Testament  saints  as  well  as
the  New.     You  will  see  from  this,  that  I  am  as  far  as


444  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

possible  from  wishing  to  undervalue  the  grace  of  God
to  those  of  old.  It  seems  to  me  that  there  are  good
grounds  to  infer  from  the  prophecy  itself  that  the
twenty-four  elders  are  not  merely  the  church,  but  all
those  saints  that  rise  up  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord
Jesus  (as  it  is  written,  they  that  are  Christ's  at  His  com-
ing or  His  presence).  This  is  unquestionable  to  my  mind.
The  rising  from  the  dead  includes  all  saints  up  to  that
time,  and  of  course,  at  the  same  time,  the  change  that  is
described  in  the  latter  part  of  the  same  chapter.  (1  Cor.  xv.)
All  saints  deceased  or  then  alive  appear  to  me  meant.
Thus  the  Old  Testament  saints  and  those  of  the  New  are
changed ;  for  the  "  dead  in  Christ "  ought  scarcely  to  be
limited  merely  to  the  body  of  Christ.  But  the  phrase
"  the  dead  in  Christ"  means  all  that  have  their  relation-
ship in  Christ,  and  not  merely  in  Adam ;  they  did  not
die  in  the  flesh,  but  died  in  Christ  It  is  not  a  question
of  Adam  the  first,  but  of  the  Second ;  but  as  the  one
embraces  all  the  Adam  family,  it  seems  to  me  the  other
should  be  equally  broad.  Thus  we  must  leave  room  in
the  twenty-four  elders  for  the  glorified,  whether  in  the
Old  Testament  times  or  in  the  New.  This  does  not  in
the  smallest  degree  compromise  the  special  character  of
the  church.  It  will  be  shown  how  remarkably  this  is
preserved  and  manifested  in  a  later  point  of  the  visions.
At  present  I  merely  wish  to  state  briefly  what  I  believe
to  be  the  force  of  the  symbol  here.

These  twenty-four  elders,  again,  are  clothed  in  white
raiment,  as  also  they  have  crowns  of  gold.  They  are
seated  on  thrones.  It  is  impossible  to  apply  this  to
angelic  beings.  Angels  are  never  so  crowned  or  en-
throned.    Nowhere  do  we  hear  of  an  angel  called  to


THE   REVELATION.  445

any  such  dignity.  Power  no  doubt  they  might  wield,
but  never  do  they  reign ;  they  have  the  execution  of  the
will  of  God  in  outward  things,  but  never  do  they  ad-
minister it  after  this  royal  pattern.  This  is  destined
for  the  glorified  saints — for  the  redeemed,  and  not  for
angels;  and  this  because  Christ  has  given  them  the
title  of  grace  by  His  blood.  As  it  was  said  in  a  pre-
vious chapter,  He  has  made  us  a  kingdom, — priests  to
His  God  and  Father.  In  chapter  iv.  we  have  symbols
which  answer  rather  to  the  kingly  title,  as  in  chapter  v.
the  same  persons  appear,  discharging  functions  after  a
priestly  type.  In  Revelation  iv.  the  elders  are  crowned
and  enthroned;  in  chapter  v.  they  have  golden  vials  (or
bowls)  of  odours  (i.  e.,  incense),  which  are  the  prayers  of
the  saints.  In  the  one,  therefore,  their  kingly  place  is
more  involved, — in  the  other  their  priestly  occupation.
This  is  never  applied  to  ordinary  angels  as  such.  The
only  angel  ever  seen  in  priestly  action  is  when  the  Lord
Jesus  assumes  the  character  of  an  angel-priest  (chapter
viii.);  not  of  course  that  He  becomes  a  literal  angel,  but
God  was  pleased,  for  reasons  of  sufficient  weight,  thus
to  represent  Him  at  the  altar  under  the  trumpets.

Next  we  find  that  attention  was  directed  both  to  what
characterized  the  throne  judicially,  and  also  to  the  Holy
Ghost  as  having  a  symbolic  description  suitable  to  the
scene — seven  lamps  or  torches  of  fire  burning  before  the
throne,  which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of  God.  Thus  it  is
not  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  gracious  power  which  cha-
racterizes His  relationship  to  the  church,  but  in  govern-
mental judgment,  because  it  is  a  question  of  a  sinful
guilty  world — of  the  creature,  and  not  the  new  creation.

So  too  we  see  that  the  four  living  creatures  are  brought


446  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

before  us.  "  Before  the  throne,"  it  is  written,  "  there  was
a  sea  of  glass  like  unto  crystal"  Instead  of  its  being  a
laver  of  water  to  purify  the  unclean,  it  is  a  sea,  not
liquid,  but  of  glass.  It  is  fixed  purity  now.  Hence  it
is  no  question  of  meeting  what  was  contracted  in  this
defiling  world.  Those  that  are  here  in  relation  to  it  have
passed  out  of  their  failure  and  need ;  they  are  in  heaven
and  already  glorified.  And  I  may  just  repeat  what  has
been  often  said  before,  that  all  scripture  testifies  to
glorified  bodies,  without  a  word  about  glorified  spirits.
The  twenty-four  elders  do  not  mean  those  members  of
Christ  who  have  gone  by  death  into  His  presence.  The
numerical  symbol  in  fact  is  inconsistent  with  such  an
idea — for  this  simple  reason,  that,  interpret  the  twenty-
four  as  you  please,  it  must  mean  a  complete  company.
Now  the  saints  cannot  be  said  to  be  complete  in  any
sense  whatsoever  till  Christ  have  come,  who  will  trans-
late all  the  Christians  alive  then  on  earth,  with  all  the
saints  who  had  previously  fallen  asleep  in  Him,  to  be
glorified  with  Himself  above.

There  is  no  time  that  you  can  look  at  the  departed
spirits,  but  there  are  some  on  earth  who  require  to  be
added  in  order  to  exhibit  the  number  complete.  In
point  of  fact,  so  far  is  scripture  from  ever  representing
the  separate  condition  of  the  spirits  as  a  complete
state,  tliat  its  testimony  is  distinctly  adverse.  The
church  is  viewed  as  in  a  certain  sense  complete  at  any
given  moment  on  the  earth,  not  because  of  the  greater
importance  of  those  who  are  on  the  earth  compared
with  such  as  are  in  heaven,  but  because  the  Holy
Ghost  was  sent  down  from  heaven,  and  is  on  earth.
This  is  the  reason  why,  (He  being  the  one  bond  of  the


-J.


THE   REVELATION.  447

church,)  where  He  is,  the  church  must  be.  Accordingly
there  never  can  be  any  complete  state  of  the  church  at
any  given  moment  in  heaven,  but  on  earth  rather  till
Jesus  come.  But  when  we  speak  of  absolute  complete-
ness, it  is  clear  that  this  cannot  be  till  the  Lord  come
and  has  taken  all  the  heavenly  saints  out  of  the  world,
and  they  go  up  into  His  presence  above.  Then  there
is  completeness;  and  this  is  the  state  that  is  represented
by  the  twenty-four  elders.  So  that  we  have  here,  there-
fore, still  more  confirmation  of  what  has  been  already
pressed, — that  the  entire  description  pre-supposes  the
church  condition  done  with,  and  a  new  state  entered  on.
Such  is  the  unforced  meaning  of  this  vision  of  the
blessedness  and  glory  of  those  who  had  been  on  earth,
but  are  now  glorified  in  heaven.  It  is  a  complete  com-
pany in  the  fullest  sense ;  the  heads  of  the  heavenly
priesthood.  They  have  passed,  therefore,  out  of  the  need
of  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word.  It  is  a  sea,  not
of  water,  but  of  glass,  like  crystal.  This  stamps  the
fact  in  a  most  evident  manner.

Further,  we  have  to  notice  the  cherubic  symbol.
"And  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and  around  the  throne,
were  four  beasts  full  of  eyes  before  and  behind."  Thus
there  was  perfect  discernment  conferred  on  them  by
God.  The  living  creatures  I  understand  to  be  symbolic
of  the  agency — whatever  may  be  the  agents — that  God
employs  in  the  execution  of  His  judicial  power.  Con-
sequently the  qualities  of  power  are  those  fitting  and
necessary  for  that  execution.  "  The  first  was  like  a  lion;
the  second  like  a  calf  (a  young  bull  or  steer) ;  the  third
had  the  face  as  of  a  man ;  and  the  fourth  was  like  a
flying  eagle."     We  have  thus  majestic  power,  patient


448  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

endurance,  intelligence,  and  rapidity,  all  which  enter
into  the  judicial  dealings  that  follow.

The  question  arises,  and  a  very  interesting  one  it  is,
not  what,  but  who,  are  these  living  creatures?  We  have
seen  the  qualities  in  their  agency;  but  who  are  the
agents  ?  This  is  a  delicate  point.  At  the  same  time  I
think  that  scripture  gives  adequate  light,  as  to  those
who  wait  on  God,  for  everything  which  it  is  important
lor  us  to  know.

It  will  be  observed  that  in  chapter  iv.  (and  it  is  a
remarkable  fact)  there  are  no  angels  mentioned.  You
have  the  throne  of  God ;  you  have  the  elders,  and  also
the  four  living  creatures,  but  not  a  word  about  angels.
The  living  creatures  celebrate  God,  not  yet  as  the  Most
High,  but  as  the  "  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  Almighty,
which  was,  and  is,  and  is  to  come."  And  when  they  do
thus  "give  glory  and  honour  and  thanks  to  him  that
sat  on  the  throne,  who  liveth  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages,
the  twenty- four  elders  fall  down  before  him  that  sat  on
the  throne,  and  worship  him  that  liveth  unto  the  ages  of
the  ages,  and  cast  their  crowns  before  the  throne,  saying,
I'hou  art  worthy,  0  Lord  and  our  God,  to  receive  glory
and  honour  and  power :  for  thou  createst  all  things,  and
because  of  thy  will  they  were  and  were  created."  I  give
it  in  its  exact  form.  There  is  this  particular  stamped  on
the  elders,  that  they  always  speak  with  understanding.
It  will  be  true  in  its  measure  even  of  the  Jewish  rem-
nant that  are  to  be  called  after  the  rapture.  They  are
designated  as  *'the  wise  that  shall  understand:"  so  we
know  from  Daniel  and  others.  But  the  elders  have  a
higher  character,  because  they  invariably  enter  into  the
reason  of  the  thing.    This  is  an  exceedingly  beautiful


"TJ/P


THE  REVELATION.  449

feature,  which  I  suppose  also  to  be  connected  with  the
fact  that  they  are  called  elders.  They  are  those  who
have  the  mind  of  Christ.  They  apprehend  the  counsels
and  ways  of  God.

In  chap.  iv.  we  see  that  the  living  creatures  and  the
elders  are  closely  connected,  but  no  more.  We  shall
find  in  chap.  v.  that  they  join  together.  Not  merely
are  they  connected  there  but  they  positively  combine.
This  is  shown  us  in  the  case  where  the  Lamb  ''takes
the  book,  the  four  living  creatures  and  four  and  twenty
elders  fell  down  before  the  Lamb,  having  every  one  of
them  harps,  and  golden  vials  full  of  odours,  which  are
the  prayers  of  saints.  And  they  sing  a  new  song."  The
remarkable  fact  that  it  is  important  to  heed  here  is  this.
Chapter  v.  shows  us  for  the  tirst  time  the  Lamb  pre-
sented distinctly  and  definitely  in  the  scene.  It  wa9
not  so  even  in  chapter  iv.,  where  we  have  seen  the  dis-
play of  the  judicial  glory  of  God  in  His  various  earthly
or  dispensational  characters,  save  His  millennial  one,
and  of  course  not  His  special  revelation  to  us  now  as
Father.  In  itself  we  know  that  Jehovah  God  embraces
equally  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  But
here  the  Holy  Ghost  is  distinctively  seen  as  the  seven
Spirits  of  God  under  a  symbolic  guise ;  here  the  Lord
Jesus  is  not  yet  discriminated.  The  glorious  vision  of
Him  who  sits  on  the  throne  may  include  therefore  both
the  Father  and  the  Son  ;  it  is  rather  God  as  such,  than
the  revelation  of  personality — the  general  or  generic
idea,  not  personal  distinction  formally.  But  in  chap.  v.
a  challenge  is  made  which  at  once  displays  the  worth,
victory,  and  peace  of  the  Lamb,  that  holy  earth-rejected
Safferer,  whose  blood  has  bought  for  God  those  who

2  G


450  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

were  nnder  the  ruin  of  sin  and  misery.  There  is  to  be
then  the  full  blessing  of  man  and  the  creature  on  God's
part,  yea,  man  not  only  delivered,  but  even  before  the
deliverance  is  displayed  led  into  the  understanding  of
the  mind  and  will  of  Gknl.  Christ  is  just  as  necessarily
the  wisdom  of  God  as  He  is  the  power  of  God.  With-
out Him  no  creature  can  apprehend,  any  more  than  a
sinner  knows  salvation  without  Him.  We  need,  and  how
blessed  that  we  have,  Christ  for  everything!  Thus,
whatever  the  glory  of  the  scene  before  the  prophet  in
chapter  iv.,  that  which  follows  shows  us  the  wondrous
person  and  way  in  which  man  is  brought  into  the  con-
sciousness of  the  blessing,  and  the  appreciation  of  the
divine  ways  and  glory.

"And  I  saw  on  the  right  hand  of  him  that  sat
on  the  throne  a  roll  written  within  and  on  the  back,
sealed  with  seven  seals"  (chap.  v.  1).  The  creature
could  not  open  these  seals, — none  anywhere.  But  the
strong  angel  proclaims,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  at  length
comes  forward  to  answer  the  proclamation.  He  takes
up  the  challenge,  appearing  after  a  sufficient  space  had
proved  the  impotence  of  all  others.  The  comfort  as-
sured to  John  by  the  elder  is  thus  justified ;  for  the
elders  always  understand.  And  he  sees  the  Lion  of  the
tribe  of  Judah  to  be  the  Lamb,  despised  on  earth,
exalted  in  heaven,  who  advances  and  takes  the  roll  out
of  the  right  hand  of  Him  that  sat  on  the  throne.  And
then  they  all — living  creatures  and  elders  together— fell
down  before  the  Lamb  with  a  new  song.

It  is  striking  that  after  this,  as  we  are  told,  "I  saw,  and
I  heard  the  voice  of  many  angels  round  about  the  throne
and  the  living  creatures  and  the  elders:  and  the  num-


THE   REVELATION.  451

ber  of  them  was  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand,  and
thousands  of  thousands ;"  who  said  with  a  loud  voice,
"Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive  power."
Here  we  have  the  angels,  who  are  now  distinctly
and  prominently  brought  forward.  Why  is  this  ?  How
comes  it  that  no  angels  appear  in  chap.  iv.  ?  And  why
is  it  that  we  have  them  in  chap.  v.  ?  There  is  always
the  wisest  reason  in  the  ways  of  God  of  which  scripture
speaks,  and  we  are  encouraged  by  the  Spirit  to  enquire
humbly  but  trustfully.  What  is  marked  by  it  seems  to
be  this:  that  the  assumption  of  the  book  into  the  hands
of  the  Lamb,  and  His  preparing  to  open  the  seals,
marks  a  change  of  administration.  Up  to  that  point
of  time,  angels  have  held  a  sort  of  executory  ministry
of  power  from  God.  Where  judgments  were  in  question,
or  other  extraordinary  intervention  on  His  part,  angels
were  the  instruments ;  whereas  from  this  point  of  time,
it  appears  to  me  that  the  Spirit  of  God  marks  the  fact
of  a  vast  change,  however  they  may  still  be  employed
during  the  interval  of  the  last  of  Daniel's  seventy  weeks.
It  is  providence  yet,  not  manifested  glory.

The  title  of  the  glorified  saints  is  thus  asserted.  We
know  for  certain,  as  a  matter  of  doctrine  in  Heb.  ii,
that  the  world  to  come  is.  to  be  put  not  under  angels
but  the  redeemed.  Here  it  appears  to  me  that  the
seer  is  admitted  to  a  prophetic  glimpse  that  falls  in
with  the  doctrine  of  St.  Paul.  In  other  words,  when
the  Lamb  is  brought  definitely  into  the  scene,  then,  and
not  before,  we  see  the  elders  and  the  living  creatures
united  in  the  new  song.  As  one  company,  they  join  in
praising  the  Lamb.  They  sing,  "  Thou  art  worthy,  for
thou  hast  redeemed,"  and  so  on.     Thus  we  have  them

2  o  2


452  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

combined  in  a  new  fashion;  and,  what  is  more,  the
angels  are  now  seen  and  definitely  distinguished.  Sup-
posing, for  instance,  that  previously,  the  administration
of  judgment  was  in  the  hand  of  angels,  it  is  easily
understood  that  they  would  not  be  distinguished  from
the  living  creatures  in  chap.  iv. ;  because,  in  point  of
fact,  the  living  creatures  set  forth  the  agencies  of  God's
executory  judgment ;  whereas  in  chap,  v.,  if  there  be  a
change  in  administration,  and  the  angels  that  used  to
be  the  executors  are  no  longer  so  recognised  as  such  in
view  of  the  kingdom,  but  the  power  is  entrusted  to  the
hands  of  the  glorified  saints,  it  is  simple  enough  that
the  angels  fall  back,  being  eclipsed  by  the  heirs,  and
no  longer  in  the  same  position.  If  previously  they
might  be  understood  to  be  included  under  the  living
creatures,  they  are  henceforward  to  take  their  place
simply  as  angels,  and  are  therefore  no  longer  compre-
hended under  that  symbol  This,  the  suggestion  of
another,  appears  to  commend  itself  as  a  true  explanation
of  the  matter.

From  this,  if  correct,  as  I  believe  it  to  be,  it  follow^
that  the  four  living  creatures  might  be  at  one  time
angels,  and  at  another  saints.  What  the  symbol  sets
forth  is  not  so  much  the  persons  that  are  entrusted
with  these  judgments,  as  the  character  of  the  agencies
employed.  Scripture,  however,  affords  elements  to  solve
the  question,  first  by  the  marked  absence  of  angels^
who,  as  we  know,  are  the  beings  that  God  employed  in
His  providential  dealings  with  the  world,  and  this  both
in  Old  Testament  times,  and  still  in  the  days  of  the
New  Testament  The  church  is  only  in  course  of  for-
mation;  but  when  it  shall  be  complete,  when  the


t.'f*^


THE   KEVELATION.  453

glorified  saints  are  caught  up,  and  the  First-begotten  is
owned  in  His  title,  they  too  will  be  owned  in  theirs.
For  as  the  Lord  is  coming  to  take  visibly  the  kingdom,
we  can  readily  understand  that  the  change  of  adminis-
tration is  first  made  manifest  in  heaven  before  it  is
displayed  upon  earth.  If  this  be  correct,  then  the
change  is  marked  in  chapter  v.  The  general  fact  is  in
chapter  iv. ;  the  approaching  change  is  anticipated  in
chapter  v.  This  appears  to  be  the  most  satisfactory  way
of  accounting  for  that  which  is  here  brought  before  us.
All  the  results  are  celebrated  for  every  creature  when
once  the  note  is  struck  (ver.  13).

Next  we  come  to  the  opening  of  the  seals.  Chapter
vi.  has  a  character  of  completeness  about  it,  with  this
only  exception, — that  the  seventh  seal  is  the  introduction
to  the  trumpets  in  the  beginning  of  chap,  viii  This  does
not  call  for  many  words  on  the  present  occasion.  "And
I  saw  when  the  Lamb  opened  one  of  the  seven  seals,  and  I
heard  one  of  the  four  living  creatures  saying  as  with  a
voice  of  thunder,  Come."  Ought  we  to  have  here,  and  after
the  other  three  horses,  the  words  " and  see"?  It  appears
that  they  are  wanting  in  the  best  text*  in  all  these  pass-
ages. In  every  one  of  the  cases  the  sentence  ought  to
be  "come."  The  difference  comes  to  this,  that  "come  and
see"  would  be  addressed  to  John;  whereas  according  to
the  better  MSS.  the  "  come  "  is  addressed  by  the  living
creature  to  the  rider  on  the  horse.  Clearly  this  makes
a  considerable  difference.     One  of  the  living  creatures

•  Yet  in  every  instance  the  Sinai  MS.  supports  the  inferior  copies
against  the  Alexandrian,  and  the  Rescript  of  Paris  with  the  better
cursives,  &c.


454  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

steps  forward  when  the  first  seal  is  opened,  and  says,
Come;  and  at  once  comes  forth  a  rider  on  a  white
horse.

Let  us  inquire  into  the  force  of  each  severally.  "I  saw,
and  behold  a  white  horse:  and  he  that  sat  on  it  had
a  bow ;  and  a  crown  was  given  to  him :  and  he  went
(or  came)  forth  conquerinp;  and  that  he  might  conquer.**
It  is  the  answer  to  the  call.  The  first  then  comes  forth,
and  the  character  of  his  action  is  prosperity  and  conquest.
Everything  shows  this.  It  is  the  earliest  state  that  the
Spirit  of  God  notices  as  brought  about  in  the  world.
After  the  mighty  change  we  have  already  seen  to  have
taken  place  in  heaven,  there  is  a  mighty  conqueror  that
will  appear  here  below.  We  are  all  aware  that  this  has
been  applied  to  a  great  variety  of  things  and  persons.
Sometimes  it  has  been  supposed  to  mean  the  triumphs  of
the  gospel,  sometimes  Christ's  coming  again,  and  as
often  antichrist,  and  I  know  not  what.  But  what  I
think  we  may  safely  gather  from  it  is  this,  that  God
employs  a  conqueror  who  will  carry  everything  before
him.

It  is  not  necessarily  by  bloodshed,  as  in  the  second
seal,  which  gives  us  carnage  if  not  civil  war.  Hence  the
rider  is  not  on  a  white  horse,  the  symbol  of  victory ;
but  remounted  on  another,  a  red  horse,  with  a  commis-
sion to  kill,  and  a  great  sword.  Imperial  power  which
subjugates  is  meant  by  the  horse  in  every  state ;  but  in
the  fii*st  case  imperial  power  seems  to  subject  men  blood-
lessly.  The  measures  are  so  successful — the  name  itself
carries  such  weight  with  it — that,  in  point  of  fact,  it  is
one  onward  career  of  conquest  without  necessarily
involving  slaughter.     But  in  the  second  seal  the  great


THE   REVELATION.  455

point  is  "  that  they  should  slay  one  another."     It  was
possibly  even  civil  warfare.    There  the  horse  was  red.

In  the  third  seal  it  is  a  black  horse,  the  colour  of
mourning.  Accordingly  we  read  now  of  a  choenix  of
wheat  for  a  denarius,  and  three  chosnixes  of  barley  for
a  denarius.  That  is,  the  price  was  the  rate  of  scarcity.
The  ordinary  price  a  little  while  before  we  know  to
have  been  incomparably  less;  for  notoriously  a  denarius
would  have  procured  as  much  as  fifteen  choenixes.
Now  it  is  needless  to  say  that  fifteen  times  the  ordinary
price  of  wheat  would  make  a  serious  difference;  but
however  this  may  have  been,  certainly  the  rate  current
in  St.  John's  day  is  not  a  question  that  is  easily  settled*
Naturally  rates  differ.  The  increase  of  civilization  and
other  causes  tend  to  make  it  a  little  uncertain.  That
there  is  a  difficulty  in  ascertaining  with  nicety  the  prices
at  this  particular  epoch  is  plain  from  the  fact  that  men
of  ability  and  conscience  have  supported  every  possible
variety  of  opinion — plenty,  scarcity,  and  a  fair  supply
at  a  just  price;  but  1  do  not  think  it  is  worth  while  to
spend  more  time  on  the  point.  The  colour  of  the  horse,
to  my  mind,  decisively  proves  what  the  nature  of  the
case  is.  Mourning  would  be  strange  if  it  were  either  a
a  time  of  plenty  or  one  governed  by  a  just  price;  black
suits  a  time  of  scarcity.  Some  will  be  surprised  to  hear
that  each  of  these  views  has  had  defenders.  There  are
only  three  possible  ways  of  taking  it ;  and  each  one  of
these  has  had  staunch  support.  Every  one  of  these  diffe-
rent interpretations  has  been  insisted  on  by  learned  men,
who  are  as  liable  as  others  to  waver  sometimes  to  one
side,  sometimes  to  another.  There  is  no  certainty  about
them.     The  word  of  God  makes  the  matter  plain  to  a


456  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

simple  mind.  The  unlettered  in  this  country  or  any
other  cannot  know  much  details  about  the  price  of
barley  or  wheat  at  the  time  of  St.  John,  or  later ;  but
he  does  see  at  once  that  the  black  colour  is  significant,
especially  as  contrasted  with  white  and  red,  and  not  at
all  indicative  of  joy  or  justice,  but  very  naturally  of
distress;  and  therefore  he  feels  bound  to  take  this  in
company  with  the  other  points  of  the  third  horse  and
its  rider.

The  fourth  seal  was  a  pale  or  livid  horse,  the  hue  of
death.  Accordingly  the  name  of  its  rider  is  Death,  and
Hades  followed  with  him.  To  make  the  force  still
plainer,  it  is  said  that  authority  was  given  to  him  over
the  fourth  of  the  earth,  to  slay  with  the  sword,  and
with  hunger,  and  with  death  (pestilence  perhaps),  and
by  the  beasts  of  the  earth.

The  fifth  seal  shows  us  souls  under  the  altar,  who  had
been  slain  for  the  word  of  God,  and  for  their  testimony,
who  cried  aloud  for  vengeance  to  the  Sovereign  Kuler.
They  are  vindicated  before  God,  but  must  wait :  others,
both  their  fellow-servants  and  their  brethren,  must  be
killed  as  they  were  ere  that  day  comes.

The  sixth  seal  marks  a  vast  convulsion,  a  partial
answer  to  the  cry  as  I  suppose.  Many  a  person  thinks
that  those  in  question  are  Christians.  But  if  we  look
more  clearly  into  the  passage,  we  may  learn  that  this
again  confirms  the  removal  of  the  church  to  heaven
before  this.  "  How  long,  0  Sovereign,  holy  and  true,  dost  '
thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell
on  the  earth  V*  Is  this  a  prayer,  or  desire  according  to
the  grace  of  the  gospel  ?  Eeasoning  is  hardly  needful  on
a  point  so  manifest.     I  think  that  any  one  who  under-


THE   KEVELATION.  457

Htands  the  general  drift  of  the  New  Testament,  and  the
special  prayers  there  recorded  by  the  Holy  Ghost  for
our  instruction,  would  be  satisfied  but  for  a  false  bias
otherwise.  Take  Stephen's  prayer,  and  our  blessed
Lord,  the  pattern  of  all  that  is  perfect.  On  the  other
hand  we  have  similar  language  elsewhere :  but  where  1
In  the  Psalms.  Thus  we  have  all  the  evidence  that  can
be  required.  The  evidence  of  the  New  Testament  shows
that  these  are  not  the  sanctioned  prayers  of  the  Chris-
tian ;  the  evidence  of  the  Old  Testament,  that  just  such
were  the  prayers  of  persons  whose  feelings  and  experi-
ence and  desires  were  founded  on  Israelitish  hopes.

Does  not  this  exactly  fall  in  with  what  we  have
already  proved — that  the  heavenly  glorified  saints  will
have  passed  out  of  the  scene,  and  that  God  will  be  at
work  in  the  formation  of  a  new  testimony,  which  will  of
course  have  its  own  peculiarities, — not  of  course  obli-
terating the  facts  of  the  New  Testament,  but  at  the
same  time  leading  the  souls  of  the  saints  more  particu-
larly into  what  was  revealed  of  old,  because  God  is
going  to  accomplish  what  was  predicted  then  ?  The
time  is  approaching  for  God  to  take  the  earth.  The
great  subject  of  the  Old  Testament  is  the  earth  blessed
under  the  rule  of  the  heavens,  and  Christ  the  head  of
both.  The  earth,  and  the  earthly  people  Israel,  and  the
nations,  will  then  enjoy  the  days  of  heaven  here  below.
Accordingly  these  souls  show  us  their  condition  and
hopes.  They  pray  for  earthly  judgments.  They  desire  not
that  their  enemies  should  be  converted,  but  that  God
should  avenge  their  blood  on  them.  Nothing  can  be
simpler,  or  more  sure  than  the  inference.  "And  it  was
said  unto  them,  that  they  should  rest  yet  for  a  little


458  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

season,  until  both  their  fellow-servants  and  their  breth-
ren, that  were  to  be  killed  as  they  were,  should  be
fulfilled."

This  is  an  important  intimation,  as  we  shall  see  from
what  follows  in  the  Apocalypse.  They  are  told  that
they  are  not  the  only  band  of  the  faithful  who  are  given
up  to  a  violent  end:  others  must  follow  later.  Till
then,  God  is  not  going  to  appear  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  that  judgment  for  which  they  cried.  They
must  wait  therefore  for  that  further,  and,  as  we  know,
more  furious  outburst  of  persecution.  After  that,  God
will  deal  with  the  earth.  Thus  we  have  here  the  latest
persecution,  as  well  as  the  earlier  one,  of  the  Apoca-
lyptic period  distinctly  given.  The  apostle  Paul  had
spoken  of  himself  as  ready  to  be  offered  up :  so  these
were  and  are  seen  therefore  under  the  altar  in  the  vision-
They  were  renewed  indeed,  and  understood  wliat  Israel
ought  to  do ;  but  they  were  clearly  not  on  the  ground
of  Christian  faith  and  intelligence  as  we  are.  Of  course
it  is  a  vision,  but  still  a  vision  with  weighty  and  plain
intimations  to  us.  They  had  the  spirit  of  prophecy  to
form  the  testimony  of  Jesus.  Judgment  yet  lingers
till  there  was  the  predicted  final  outpouring  of  man's
apostate  rage,  and  then  the  Lord  will  appear  and  put
down  all  enemies.

At  the  same  time,  as  we  have  already  seen  passingly,
the  next  seal  shows  that  God  was  not  indifferent  mean-
while. The  sixth  seal  may  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of
immediate  consequence  of  the  foregoing  cry.  When
opened,  a  vast  shaking  ensues, — a  thorough  concussion
of  everything  above  and  below,  set  forth  mystically,  as
in  the  previous  seals.    "  The  sun  became  black  as  sack-


THE   KEVELATION.  459

cloth  of  hair,  and  the  whole  moon  became  as  blood  ;  and
the  stars  of  heaven  fell  on  the  earth,  even  as  a  fig  tree,
shaken  by  a  mighty  wind,  casteth  its  untimely  figs.
And  the  heaven  was  removed  as  a  scroll  rolled  up ;  and
every  mountain  and  island  were  moved  out  of  their
places."  This  is  merely  the  appearance  before  the  seer
in  the  vision.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  heaven  and
earth  will  be  physically  confounded  when  the  prediction
is  fulfilled.  He  saw  all  this  before  his  eyes  as  signs,  of
which  we  have  to  consider  the  meaning.  We  have  to
find  out  by  their  symbolic  use  elsewhere  what  is  in-
tended here  by  the  changes  that  passed  over  sun,  moon,
stars,  and  the  earth  in  the  vision.  And  the  result  of
course  depends  on  our  just  application  of  scripture  by
the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

Then  we  are  told  in  plain  language,  not  in  figures,
that  "  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  great  and  the  rich,
and  the  chiliarchs,  and  the  mighty,  and  every  bondman,
and  every  free  man,  hid  themselves  in  the  dens  and  in
the  rocks  of  the  mountains."  This  it  is  well  to  heed,
because  it  would  be  evident  that  if  it  meant  that  the
heaven  literally  was  removed  as  a  scroll,  and  every
mountain  and  island  was  moved  out  of  its  place,  there
could  be  no  place  to  hide  in.  Thus  to  take  it  as  other
than  symbolic  represention  would  be  to  contradict  the
end  by  the  beginning.  This,  then,  is  not  the  true  force.
Supposing  heaven  really  to  disappear,  and  the  earth  to
be  moved  according  to  the  import  of  these  terms  in  a
pseudo-literal  way,  how  could  the  various  classes  of  ter-
rified men  be  saying  to  the  mountains,  "  Fall  on  us  and
hide  us?"  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  the  vision,  like
its  predecessor,  is  symbolical ;  that  the  prophet  indeed


460  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

beheld  these  objects  heavenly  and  earthly  thus  darkened
and  in  confusion ;  but  that  the  meaning  must  be  sought
out  on  the  ordinary  principles  of  interpretation.  To
my  mind,  it  represents  a  complete  dislocation  of  all
authority,  high  and  low — ^an  unexampled  convulsion  of
all  classes  of  mankind  within  its  own  sphere,  the  effect
of  which  is  to  overturn  all  the  foundations  of  power
and  authority  in  the  world,  and  to  fill  men's  minds
with  the  apprehension  that  the  day  of  judgment  is
come.

It  is  not  the  first  time  indeed  that  people  have  so
dreaded,  but  it  will  be  again  worse  than  it  has  ever
been.  Such  is  the  effect  of  the  sixth  seal  when  its
judgment  is  accomplished,  after  the  church  is  taken
away  to  heaven,  and  indeed  subsequent  to  a  murder-
ous persecution  of  the  saints  who  follow  us  on  eartL
The  persecuting  powers  and  those  subject  to  them  will
be  visited  judicially,  and  there  will  ensue  a  complete
disruption  of  authority  on  the  earth.  The  rulers  will
have  misused  their  power,  and  now  a  revolution  on  a
vast  scale  takes  place.  Such  seems  to  me  the  meaning
of  the  vision.  The  effect  on  men  when  they  see  the
total  overturning  of  all  that  is  established  in  authority
here  below  will  be  that  they  will  think  the  day  of  the
Lord  is  come.  They  will  say  to  the  mountains  and
rocks,  *'  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  him
that  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the
Lamb:  for  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come;  and
who  is  able  to  stand?''  It  is  an  error  to  confound
their  saying  so  with  God's  declaration.  It  is  not  He
but  they  who  cry  that  the  great  day  of  the  wrath  is
come.    There  is  no  excuse  for  so  mistaken  an  interpret


THE   REVELATION.  461

tation.  It  is  what  these  frightened  multitudes  exclaim;
but  the  fact  is  that  the  great  day  does  not  arrive  for  a
considerable  space  afterwards,  as  the  Revelation  itself
clearly  proves.  The  whole  matter  here  is  that  men  are
so  alarmed  by  all  this  visitation,  that  they  think  it  must
be  His  coming  day,  and  they  say  so.  It  is  very  evident
that  the  great  day  of  His  wrath  is  not  yet  come,  because
a  considerable  time  after  this  epoch  our  prophecy
describes  the  day  of  His  coming.  It  is  described  in
chaps,  xiv.,  xvii.,  and  especially  xix.  When  it  really
arrives,  so  infatuated  are  the  men  of  the  world  that  they
will  fight  against  the  Lamb,  but  the  Lamb  will  overcome
them.  Satan  will  have  destroyed  their  dread  when  there
is  most  ground  for  it.

After  this,  so  far  is  the  great  day  of  His  wrath  from
being  come,  that  we  find  in  the  parenthesis  of  chap.  viL
God  accomplishing  mighty  works  of  saving  mercy.  The
first  is  the  sealing  of  144,000  out  of  the  tribes  of  Israel
by  an  angel  that  comes  from  the  sun-rising.  Next  there
is  vouchsafed  to  the  prophet  the  sight  of  a  crowd  of
Gentiles  that  none  could  number,  "  out  of  every  nation,
and  tribes,  and  peoples,  and  tongues,  standing  before  the
throne,  and  before  the  Lamb,  clothed  with  white  robes,
and  palms  in  their  hands ;  and  they  cry  with  a  loud
voice,  saying,  Salvation  to  our  God  that  sitteth  on  the
throne,  and  to  the  Lamb."

Here  it  is  not  simply  "  salvation,"  but  "  salvation  to
God,"  in  the  quality  of  sitting  upon  the  throne  (we  have
seen  in  this  book,  His  judicial  throne).  In  other  words,
the  ascription  could  not  have  been  made  before  chapter
iv.    Its  tenor  supposes  a  vast  change  to  have  taken


462  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

place.  It  is  not  the  fruit  of  a  testimony  during  all  or
many  ages.  All  this  is  merely  men's  imagination,  with-
out  the  smallest  foundation  in  scriptura  So  far  from
its  being  a  picture  of  the  redeemed  of  all  times,  it  is
expressly  said  to  be  a  countless  throng  out  of  Gentiles
contrasted  with  Israel,  and  this  in  relation  to  Grod
governing  judicially.  It  is  not  universal  therefore.
These  Gentiles  stand  in  manifest  contrast  with  the  sealed
out  of  Israel.  One  of  the  elders  talked  about  them,  and
explained  to  the  prophet,  who  evidently  without  this
would  have  been  at  fault  If  the  elders  mean  the
glorified  saints,  these  Gentiles  are  not.  Most  assuredly
they  cannot  be  all  saints,  because  the  hundred  and
forty-four  thousand  of  Israel  we  have  seen  expressly
distinguished  from  them.  Who  are  they  and  what?
They  are  a  multitude  of  Gentiles  to  be  preserved  by
gracious  power  in  these  last  days.  They  are  not  said  to
be  glorified ;  nor  is  there  reason  to  doubt  that  they  are
still  in  their  natural  bodies.  When  they  are  said  to  be
before  the  throne,  it  proves  nothing  inconsistent  with
this ;  because  the  woman,  for  instance,  in  chapter  xii.,
is  also  described  as  seen  in  heaven ;  but,  you  must  re-
member, this  is  only  where  the  prophet  saw  them  in  the
vision.  We  are  not  necessarily  to  gather  that  they  were
to  be  in  heaven ;  John  saw  them  there,  but  whether
it  might  mean  that  they  were,  or  were  not  to  be,  in
heaven,  is  another  question.  This  depends  on  other  con-
siderations that  have  to  be  taken  into  account,  and  it
is  for  want  of  due  waiting  on  God,  and  of  adequately
weighing  the  surrounding  circumstances,  that  such
serious  mistakes  are  made  in  these  matters.

In  this  case  it  is  perfectly  plain  to  my  mind  that  they


THE   REVELATION.  463

are  not  heavenly  as  such.  There  are  weighty  objections.
First  of  all,  we  find  them  definitely  contra-distinouislied
from  Israel,  who  clearly  are  on  earth,  and  thus  natu-
rally this  company  would  be  on  earth  too, — the  one
Jewish,  and  the  other  Gentile.  Next  they  come  out  of
the  great  tribulation.  Far  from  its  being  a  general  body
in  respect  to  all  time,  this  proves  that  it  is  a  very
peculiar  though  countless  group, — that  it  is  only  per-
sons who  can  be  preserved  and  blessed  of  God  during
the  epoch  of  the  great  tribulation.

In  the  millennial  time  there  will  be  a  great  ingather-
ing of  the  Gentiles ;  but  these  are  not  millennial  saints.
They  are  saints  from  among  the  Gentiles,  who  will  be
called  to  the  knpwledge  of  God  by  the  preaching  of  the
•'everlasting  gospel,"  or  the  "gospel  of  the  kingdom,"
of  which  we  hear  both  in  the  gospels  and  in  the  Revela-
tion. We  all  know  that  the  Lord  Himself  tells  the
disciples  that  this  "gospel  of  the  kingdom"  shall  be
"preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness  unto  all
nations "  (or  all  the  Gentiles) ;  "  and  then  shall  the
end  come."  Now  this  is  just  the  very  time  spoken  of
here.  It  is  clearly  not  a  general  summary  of  what  is
going  on  now,  but  a  description  of  what  is  yet  to  be,
specially  just  before  the  end  when  the  great  tribulation
bursts  out.  And  there  is  the  fruit  of  divine  grace  even
then  in  this  vast  crowd  from  the  Gentiles,  the  details  of
whose  description  fall  in  with  and  confirm  what  has
been  remarked  already.

I  have  already  drawn  attention  to  the  fact  that  they
are  distinguished  from  the  elders.  If  these  mean  the
church,  those  do  not ;  and  as  all  admit  that  the  elders
represent  the  glorified  saints,  the  inference  seems  to


464  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

me  quite  plain  and  certain.     Undoubtedly  we  might
have  the  same  body  represented  at  different  times  by
a  different  symbol,  but  hardly  by  two  symbols  at  th^
same  time.     We  may  have,  for  instance^  Christians  set
forth  by  a  train  of  virgins  at  one  time,  and  by  the
bride  at  another;  but  in  the  same  parable  there  is  a
careful  avoidance  of  confusion ;   and  no  such  incon-
gruous  mixture  occurs  in  scripture.     It  is   not  even
found  amongst  sensible  men,  not  to  speak  of  the  word
of  God.     So  here  the  prophet  tells  us  that  one  of  the
elders  answers  his  own  enquiry,   "  What   are    these
arrayed  in  white  robes  ?    and  whence  come   they  ?"
"  These  are  they  who  come  out  of  the  great  tribulation)
and  have  washed  their  robes,  and  mad£  them  white  in
the  blood  of  the  Lamb."     Clearly  therefore  they  ar6
believers  or  saints.     "Therefore  are  they  before  the
throne  of  God,"  which  I  take  to  be  not  a  description  of
their  local  place  but  of  their  character, — that  it  is  in
view  of,  and  in  connection  with,  the  throne.     This,  we
have  seen,  makes  it  to  be  limited  to  the  particular  time,
and  not  vague  or  general;   because  the  throne  henr
differs  from  what  it  is  now,  and  the  millennial  throne
will  be  different  from  both.     It  is  that  very  aspect  of
the  throne  which  may  be  called  its  Apocalyptic  charac-
ter, to  distinguish  it  from  what  was  before  or  will  be
afterwards.

Again,  not  merely  are  they  there  themselves,  but  it
is  said,  "He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall" — not
exactly  "dwell  among  them,"  but-^" tabernacle  over
them."  It  is  the  gracious  shelter  of  the  Lord's  care  and
goodness  that  is  set  forth  by  it.  This  is  of  importance :
because,  though  God  now  dwells  by  the  Holy  Gbosl


%iPl


THE  REVELATION.  465

in  the  church  as  His  habitation  through  the  Spirit,  it
will  not  be  so  when  these  Grentiles  will  be  called  to  thd
knowledge  of  Himself.  There  will  be — what  is  more
suited  to  their  character — His  protection.  Of  old  God
had  His  pillar  of  cloud,  which  was  a  defence  and  a
canopy  over  the  camp  of  Israel  (though  He  also  dwelt
in  their  midst) ;  here,  too,  He  graciously  shows  it  is
not  alone  the  sealed  of  Israel  that  enjoy  His  care,  but
these  poor  Grentiles.  It  is  added  that  "  they  shall  not
hunger  any  more,  neither  thirst  any  more ;  nor  in  any
wise  shall  the  sun  fall  on  them,  nor  any  heat."  I  con-
fess to  you  that  I  think  such  a  promise  is  much  more
exactly  adapted  to  a  people  about  to  be  on  the  earth,
than  to  men  in  a  glorified  state  above.  Where  would
be  the  propriety  of  a  promise  to  glorified  people  not
to  hunger  or  thirst  any  more  ?  If  to  a  people  on  earth,
we  can  all  understand  the  comfort  of  its  assurance.
"For  the  Lamb  that  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne
shall  tend  them,  and  shall  lead  them  unto  fountains  of
waters  of  life :  and  Grod  shall  wipe  away  every  tear
from  their  eyes."

Then  comes  at  length  the  seventh  seal.  This  is  im-
portant, because  it  guards  us  effectually  against  the
idea  that  the  sixth  seal  goes  down  to  the  end,  as  many
excellent  men  have  imagined  in  ancient  and  modem
times.  It  is  clearly  incorrect.  The  seventh  seal  is
necessarily  after  the  sixth.  If  there  is  an  order  in  the
others,  we  must  allow  that  the  seventh  seal  introduces
seven  trumpets  which  follow  each  other  in  succession
like  the  seals.  These  are  described  from  chap.  viii.  and
onward.    "I  saw  the  seven  angels  who  stand  befora

2  H


466  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

God;  and  to  them  were  given  seven  trumpeta"  Then
we  see  a  remarkable  fact,  already  alluded  to — an  angel
of  peculiarly  august  character  found  before  the  altar.
**And  another  angel  came  and  stood  at  the  altar,  hav-
ing a  golden  censer;  and  there  was  given  him  much
incense,  that  he  might  give  [efficacy]  to  the  prayers  of
all  the  saints  at  the  golden  altar  which  was  before  the
throne."  Hence  it  follows  that,  while  there  are  glorified
saints  above,  saints  are  not  wanting  on  earth  who  are
sustained  by  the  great  High  Priest,  however  little  their
light,  or  great  their  trial.  Thus  we  have  here  the  clear
intimation  that  while  the  glorified  are  above,  there  will
be  others  in  their  natural  bodies  yet  accredited  as
saints  here  below.

But  there  is  another  trait  which  demands  our  at-
tention. Under  the  trumpets  the  Lord  Jesus  assumes
the  angelic  character.  Everything  is  angelic  under  the
trumpets.  We  no  longer  hear  of  Him  as  the  Lamb.
As  such  He  had  opened  the  seals;  but  here  as  the
trumpets  were  blown  by  angels,  so  the  angel  of  the
covenant  (who  is  the  second  peraon  in  the  Trinity,  as
He  is  commonly  called)  falls  back  on  that  which  was
so  familiar  in  the  Old  Testament  presentation  of  Him-
self. Not  of  course  that  He  divests  Himself  of  His
humanity:  this  could  not  be;  or  if  it  could  be  imagined,
it  would  be  contrary  to  all  truth.  The  Son  of  (Jod  since
the  incarnation  always  abides  the  man  Christ  Jesus.
From  the  time  that  He  took  manhood  into  union  with
His  glorious  person,  never  will  He  cut  it  off.  But
this  evidently  does  not  prevent  His  assuming  whatever
appearance  is  suited  to  the  prophetic  necessity  of  the
case;  and  this  I  conceive  is  just  what  we  find  here


THE   REVELATION.  467

under  the  trumpets.  We  may  observe  that  an  increas-
ingly figurative  style  of  language  is  employed.  AH
other  objects  become  more  distant  in  this  series  of
visions  than  before;  and  even  Christ  Himself  is  seen
more  vaguely,  i.e.,  not  in  His  distinct  human  reality,
but  in  an  angelic  appearance.

Here  then  it  is  written  that  "the  angel  took  the
censer,  and  filled  it  with  fire  of  the  altar,  and  cast  it
unto  the  earth."  The  effect  was  "  voices,  and  thunders,
and  lightnings,  and  an  earthquaka"  Further,  in  this
new  septenary  we  must  prepare  ourselves  for  even
greater  visitations  of  God*s  judgments.  There  were
lightnings  and  voices  and  thimders  in  chap,  iv.,  but
there  is  more  now.  We  find,  besides  these,  an  earth-
quake added.  The  efiect  among  men  becomes  more
intense.

"And  the  first  sounded  his  trumpet,  and  there  was
hail  and  fire  mingled  with  blood,  and  they  were  cast
upon  the  earth."  This  I  take  as  a  violent  down-pour-
ing of  displeasure  from  God.  Hail  implies  this.  Fire,
we  know,  is  the  constant  symbol  of  God's  consuming
judgment,  and  it  is  mingled  with  blood.  It  is  destruc-
tion to  life  in  the  point  of  view  that  is  intended  here.
We  have  to  consider  whether  it  is  simple  physical
decease  or  dissolution  in  some  special  respect.

It  will  be  noticed  in  these  divine  visitations  that  the
third  part  is  particularly  introduced.  What  is  the
prophetic  meaning  of  "the  third"?  It  appears  to
answer  to  what  we  have  given  us  in  Rev.  xii  (t.  e.,  the
properly  Eoman  or  western  empire).  I  believe  that
it  would  thus  convey  the  consumption  of  the  Eoman
empire  in  the  west.     Of  course  one  cannot  be  ex-

2  H  2


468  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

pected  in  a  general  sketch  to  enter  on  a  discussion  of
the  grounds  for  this  view.  It  is  enough  now  to  state
what  one  believes  to  be  the  fact  If  this  be  so,  at  least
the  earlier  trumpets  (though  not  these  only)  are  a  specific
visitation  of  judgment  on  the  western  empire  of  Some.
Not  only  was  this  visited,  but "  the  third  of  the  trees
were  burnt  up,  and  all  green  grass  was  burnt  up."
This  is  a  contrast.  The  dignitaries  within  that  sphere
were  visited,  but  there  was  also  a  universal  interference
with  the  prosperity  of  men  here  below.

*'And  the  second  angel  sounded,  and  as  it  were  9,
great  mountain  burning  with  fire  was  cast  into  the  sea :
and  the  third  of  the  sea  became  blood;  and  the  third
of  the  creatures  which  were  in  the  sea,  which  had  life,
died ;  and  the  third  of  the  ships  were  destroyed.*'  It
was  in  this  case  a  great  earthly  power,  which  as  a
divine  judgment  dealt  with  the  masses  in  a  revolutionary
state  to  their  destruction.  Thus  not  merely  the  world
under  stable  government,  but  that  which  is  or  when  it  is
in  a  state  of  agitation  and  disorder;  and  we  find  the
same  deadly  effects  here  also,  putting  an  end,  it  would
seem,  to  their  trade  and  commerce.

"  The  third  angel  sounded,  and  there  fell  from  heaven
a  great  star,  burning  as  it  were  a  lamp,  and  it  fell  upon
the  third  of  the  rivers,  and  upon  the  fountains  of  the
waters."  Here  the  fall  of  a  great  dignitary  or  ruler,
whose  influence  was  judicially  turned  to  embitter  all
the  springs  and  channels  of  popular  influence,  is  before
us.  The  sources  and  means  of  intercourse  among  men
are  here  visited  by  God's  judgment

The  fourth  angel  sounded,  and  the  third  of  the  sun
and  moon  and  stars  was  smitten;  that  is  to  say,  the


THE  BEVELATION.  469

governing  powers — supreme,  derivative,  and  subordi-
nate— all  come  under  Grod's  judgment — all  within  the
west

"And  I  saw,  and  I  heard  an  eagle  flying  in  mid-
heaven,  saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Woe,  woe,  woe,  to
those  that  dwell  on  the  earth,  by  reason  of  the  remain-
ing voices  of  the  trumpet  of  the  three  angels  that
are  about  to  sound."  It  is  a  vivid  image  of  rapidly
approaching  judgments,  "angel"  being  substituted  for
the  better  reading  "eagle"  by  scribes  who  did  not
appreciate  the  symbolic  style  of  the  prophecy  here.

In  chapter  ix.  the  two  next,  or  fifth  and  sixth  trum-
pets, are  described  with  minute  care,  as  indeed  these  are
two  of  the  woe  trumpets.  There  remains  the  thii-d  woe
trumpet,  the  last  of  the  seven,  which  is  set  forth  at  the
end  of  chapter  xi.,  where  we  close.

The  first  of  the  woe  trumpets  consists  of  the  symbolic
locusts.  For  that  they  are  not  to  be  understood  in  a
merely  literal  way  is  clear,  if  only  for  this  reason,  that
they  are  expressly  said  not  to  feed  on  that  which  is  the
natural  food  of  locusts.  This  creature  is  simply  the
descriptive  sign  of  these  marauders.

To  another  remark  I  would  call  your  attention :  that
the  first  woe  trumpet  answers  in  the  way  of  contrast  to
the  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  that  were  sealed  of
Israel ;  as  the  second  woe  trumpet,  namely,  that  of  the
Euphratean  horsemen,  answers  by  a  similar  contrast  to
the  countless  multitude  of  the  Gentiles.  As  some  per-
haps may  think  that  this  contrast  must  be  vague  and
indefinite,  I  shall  therefore  endeavour  to  make  my  mean-
ing plainer.     It  is  expressly  said  that  the  locusts  of  the


470  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

vision  were  to  cjarry  on  their  devastations,  except  on
those  that  were  sealed.  Here  then  is  an  allusion  clearly
to  those  whom  God  set  apart  from  Israel  in  chapter

•  •

Vll.

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  Euphrateati  horsemen  we
see  far  more  of  aggressive  power,  though  there  is  also
torment.  But  torment  is  the  main  characteristic  of  the
locust  woe ;  the  horsemen  woe  is  more  distinctively  the
onward  progress  of  imperial  power,  described  in  most
energetic  colours.  They  fall  on  men  and  destroy  them ;
but  here  "  the  third  "  re-appears.  According  to  the  force
given  already,  this  would  imply  that  the  woe  falls  on  the
Gentiles  indeed,  and  more  particularly  on  the  western
Boman  empire.

It  seems  also  plain  that  these  two  woes  represent
what  will  be  verified  in  the  early  doings  of  the  antichrist
in  Judea.  The  first  or  the  locust  raid  consists  of  a
tormenting  infliction.  Here  accordingly  we  have  Abad-
don, the  destroyer,  who  is  set  forth  in  a  very  peculiar
fashion  as  the  prince  of  the  bottomless  pit,  their  leader.
It  is  not  of  course  the  beast  yet  fairly  formed ;  but  we
can  quite  comprehend  that  there  will  be  an  early  mani-
festation of  evil,  just  as  grace  will  effect  the  b^inning
of  that  which  is  good  in  the  remnant.  Here  then  we
have  these  initiatory  woes.  First  of  all  a  tormenting
woe  that  falls  on  the  land  of  Israel,  but  not  upon  those
that  were  sealed  out  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  On
the  other  hand,  we  find  the  Euphratean  horsemen  let
loose  on  the  Eoman  empire,  overwhelming  the  Gentiles,
and  in  particular  that  empire,  as  the  object  of  the
judgment  of  God.

Such  is  the  general  scope  of  chapter  ix.  As  to  enter-


THE   REVELATION.  471

ing  into  particulars,  it  would  be  quite  out  of  the
question  to-night.  Other  opportunities  do  not  fail  for
learning  more  minute  details,  and  their  application.

Chapter  x.  in  the  trumpets  answers  to  chap.  vii.  in
the  seals.  It  forms  an  important  parenthesis,  that
comes  in  between  the  sixth  and  seventh  trumpets,  just
as  the  sealing  chapter  (viL)  came  in  between  the  sixth
and  seventh  seals :  so  orderly  is  the  Apocalypse.  Ac-
cordingly we  have  here  again  the  Lord,  as  it  seems  to
me,  in  angelic  garb.  As  before  in  high-priestly  function,
He  is  the  angel  with  i*oyal  claim  here.  A  mighty  angel
comes  down  from  heaven,  clothed  with  a  cloud— the
special  sign  of  Jehovah's  majesty :  none  but  He  has  a
title  to  come  thus  clothed.  And,  further,  the  rainbow
is  on  His  head ;  it  is  not  now  a  question  of  round  the
throne :  here  there  is  a  step  in  advance.  He  is  ap-
proaching the  earth ;  He  is  about  to  lay  speedy  claim
to  that  which  is  His  right.  "  The  rainbow  was  on  his
head,  and  his  face  was  as  the  sun" — supreme  authority ;
"and  his  feet  as  pillars  of  fire" — with  firmness  of
divine  judgment.  "  And  he  had  in  his  hand  a  little  book
open :  and  he  set  his  right  foot  on  the  sea,  and  his  left
on  the  earth,  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  a  lion
roareth."

John  was  going  to  write,  but  is  forbidden.  The
disclosures  were  to  be  sealed  for  the  present.  "And
the  angel  whom  I  saw  stand  upon  the  sea  and  upon
the  earth  lifted  up  his  right  hand  to  heaven,  and
sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  the  ages  of  the  ages,  who
created  heaven,  and  the  things  that  therein  are,  and  the
earth,  and  the  things  that  therein  are,  and  the  sea,  and
the  things  that  are  therein,  that  there  should  be  no


472  INTRODUCTOKY   LECTURES.

loDger  delay."  There  was  no  more  to  be  any  lapse  of
time  allowed ;  but  God  would  terminate  the  mystery  of
His  present  seeming  inaction  as  to  government  He  is
now  allowing  the  world,  with  slight  check,  to  go  on  its
own  way.  Men  may  sin,  and,  as  far  as  direct  interven-
tion is  concenied,  Ood  appears  not,  though  there  may
be  interferences  exceptionally.  But  the  time  is  coming
when  God  will  surely  visit  sin,  and  this  immediately, —
when  there  will  be  no  toleration  for  a  moment  of  any-
thing which  is  contrary  to  Himself.  This  is  the  blessed
age  to  which  all  the  prophets  look  onward;  and  the
angel  here  swears  that  the  time  is  approaching.  There
is  going  to  be  no  more  delay ;  "  but  in  the  days  of  the
voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  when  he  is  about  to  sound,
the  mystery  of  God  also  shall  be  finished."  The  mystery
here  is,  not  Christ  and  the  church,  but  God's  allowing
evil  to  go  on  in  its  present  course  with  apparent  im-
punity.

And  then  John  is  told  at  the  end  of  the  chapter  that
he  must  "prophesy  again  before  peoples,  and  nations,
and  tongues,  and  many  kings."  The  meaning  of  this
more  clearly  appears  soon.  There  is  a  kind  of  appendix
of  prophecy  where  he  renews  his  course  for  especial
reasons.

Meanwhile,  I  would  just  call  your  attention  to  the
contrast  between  the  little  book  which  the  prophet  here
takes  and  eats,  and  the  great  book  we  have  seen  already
sealed  with  seven  seals.  Why  a  little  book?  and
why  open  ?  A  little  book,  because  it  treats  of  a  com-
paratively contracted  sphere ;  and  open,  because  things
are  no  longer  to  be  described  in  the  mysterious  guise
in  which  the  seals  and  yet  more  the  trumpets  set  them


THE  REVELATION.  473

out.  All  is  going  to  be  made  perfectly  plain  in  what
falls  under  it  here.  This  is  the  case  accordingly  in
chapter  xi.

The  angel  proceeds  to  say,  "Rise,  and  measure  the
temple  of  God,  and  the  altar,  and  them  that  worship
therein.  But  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple
leave  out,  and  measure  it  not;  for  it  is  given  to  the
Gentiles."  Jerusalem  appears  in  the  foreground.  This
is  the  centre  now,  though  the  beast  may  ravage  there.
"And  I  will  give*  to  my  two  witnesses,  and  they
shall  prophesy  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  threescore
days,  clothed  in  sackcloth."  Their  task  is  for  a  time
comparatively  short — ^for  three  years  and  a  half.  "  These
are  the  two  olive  trees,  and  the  two  candlesticks  standing
before  the  Lord  of  the  earth."  The  witnesses  are  two,
not  because  in  point  of  fact  they  are  historically  to  be
limited  to  only  two  individuals,  but  as  meaning  the  least
adequate  testimony  according  to  the  law.  To  make  it
two  literally  seems  to  me  a  mistaken  way  of  interpreting
prophecy,  and  the  Apocalypse  in  particular,  as  being
eminently  symbolical,  which  Daniel  also  is  in  measure.
To  forget  this  practically  is  to  involve  oneself  in  clouds
of  error  and  inconsistency.

Thus,  for  instance,  one  hears  occasionally,  for  the
purpose  of  illustrating  the  Revelation,  a  reference  to
Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  or  the  like;  but  we  must  remember  that
these  prophecies  are  not  in  their  structure  symbolical,
and  therefore  the  reasoning  that  is  founded  on  the  books
and  style  of  Jeremiah  or  Isaiah  (Ezekiel  being  partly
symbolical,  partly  figurative)  cannot  decide  for  Daniel

•  Probably  here,  as  in  Rev.  viii.  3,  the  word  implies  "efficacy"  or
<<  power,*'  as  the  translators  saw  in  one  text  if  not  in  the  other.


474  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

or  the  Apocalypse.  Here  then  are  symbols  which  have
a  language  of  their  own.  Thus  the  r^ular  meaning  of
"two,"  symbolically,  is  competent  testimony — enough
and  not  more  than  enough.  "  In  the  mouth  of  two  or
three  witnesses  shall  every  word  be  established."  Ac-
cording to  Jewish  law  a  case  could  not  be  decided  by
one  witness ;  there  must  be  at  least  two  for  valid  proof
and  judgment.

The  Lord  shows  us  that  He  will  raise  up  an  adequate
testimony  in  these  days.  Of  how  many  the  testimony
will  consist  is  another  matter,  on  which  I  have  little  or
nothing  to  say.  One  can  no  more  reason  on  this  than
on  the  twenty-four  glorified  elders.  Who  would  thence
infer  that  there  will  be  only  so  many  glorified  ones  ?
and  why  should  one  think  that  there  will  be  only  two  to
testify  ?  However  this  may  be,  those  who  are  raised  to
witness  are  to  prophesy  for  a  limited  time.  "And  if
any  man  desire  to  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth  out  of
their  mouth,  and  devoureth  their  enemies :  and  if  any
man  desire  to  hurt  them,  he  must  in  this  manner  be
killed."

Is  this  then,  I  ask,  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  ?  Is
it  thus  the  Lord  protects  those  that  are  the  preachers  of
the  gospel  of  His  own  grace  ?  Did  fire  ever  proceed
out  of  the  mouths  of  evangelists  ?  Did  a  teacher  ever
devour  his  enemies  ?  Was  it  on  this  principle  Ananias
and  Sapphira  fell  dead  ?  Are  these  the  ways  of  the
gospel  ?  It  is  evident  then  that  we  are  here  in  a  new
atmosphere — that  an  altogether  different  state  of  things
is  before  us  from  that  which  reigned  during  the  church
condition,  though  even  then  sin  might  be  unto  death  in
peculiar  cases.    I  refer  to  no  more  proofs  now,  thinking


THE  REVELATION.  475

that  enough  has  been  given.  "  These  have  authority  to
shut  heaven,  that  it  rain  not  in  the  days  of  their  pro-
phecy." That  is,  they  are  something  like  Elijah ;  and
they  have  "  authority  over  the  waters  to  turn  them  to
blood."  In  this  respect  they  resemble  Moses  also.  This
does  not  mean  that  they  are  Moses  and  Elias  personally;
but  that  the  character  of  their  testimony  is  similar,  and
the  sanctions  of  it  are  such  as  God  gave  in  the  days  of
those  two  honoured  servants  of  old.  "And  when  they
shall  have  finished  their  testimony,  the  beast  that  as-
cendeth  out  of  the  bottomless  pit  shall  make  war  against
them,  and  shall  overcome  them,  and  kill  them."  They  are
preserved  in  spite  of  the  beasts  till  their  work  is  done ;
but  directly  their  testimony  is  concluded,  the  beast  is
allowed  to  overcome  them.  It  is  just  as  it  was  with  the
Lord.  The  utmost  pressure  was  brought  against  Him  in
His  service.  So  their  hour,  we  may  say,  has  not  yet
come,  just  as  He  said  of  Himself  before  them.  There
was  all  possible  willingness  to  destroy  them  long  before,
but  somehow  it  could  not  be  done ;  for  the  Lord  pro-
tected them  till  they  had  done  their  mission.  We  see
this  in  the  character  of  grace  which  filled  the  Lord
Jesus — which  essentially  belonged  to  Him.  Here  we
meet  with  the  earthly  retributive  dealing  of  the  Old
Testament.  The  Spirit  will  form  them  thus;  and  no
wonder,  because  in  fact  God  is  recurring  to  that  which
He  promised  then,  but  has  never  yet  performed.  He  is
going  to  perform  it  now.  He  does  not  merely  purpose
to  gather  people  for  heavenly  glory ;  He  will  govern  on
earth  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles  in  their  several  places
— Israel  nearest  to  Himsel£  He  must  have  an  earthly
people  as  well  as  a  family  on  high.  When  the  heavenly


476  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

saints  are  changed,  then  He  b^ins  with  the  earthly.
He  will  never  mix  them  all  up  together.  This  would
make  nothing  but  the  greatest  confusion.

"And  their  corpse  shall  lie  on  the  broadway  of  the
great  city,  which  spiritually  is  called  Sodom  and  Egypt,
where  also  their  Lord  was  crucified.**  It  was  Jerusalem,
but  spiritually  called  Sodom  and  Egypt,  because  of  the
wickedness  of  the  people  and  their  prince.  It  had  no
less  abominations  than  Sodom;  it  had  all  the  dark-
ness and  the  moral  bondage  of  Egypt,  but  it  was
really  the  place  where  their  Lord  had  been  crucified,  i.e.,
Jerusalem.  So  the  witnesses  fell,  and  men  in  various
measures  showed  their  satisfaction.  **  And  [some]  from
among  the  peoples  and  tribes  and  tongues  and  nations
see  their  corpse  three  days  and  a  half,  and  do  not  suffer
their  corpses  to  be  put  into  a  tomb.  And  they  that
dwell  on  the  earth  rejoice  over  them,  or  make  merry,
and  shall  send  gifts  to  one  another,  because  these  two
prophets  tormented  those  that  dwell  on  the  earth."  But
after  the  three  days  and  a  half  God's  power  raises  up
these  slain  witnesses,  and  they  ascend  to  heaven  in  the
cloud,  and  their  enemies  behold  them.  ''And  in  that
hour  was  there  a  great  earthquake,  and  the  tenth  of  the
city  fell,  and  in  the  earthquake  were  slain  seven  thousand
names  of  men:  and  the  remnant  were  affrighted,  and
gave  glory  to  the  God  of  heaven.  The  second  woe  is
past ;  behold,  the  third  woe  cometh  quickly."

Lastly  we  have  the  seventh  trumpet  This  is  impor-
tant for  understanding  the  structure  of  the  book.  The
seventh  trumpet  brings  us  down  to  the  close  in  a  general
way.  This  is  quite  plain,  though  often  overlooked.  "And


THB  REVELATION.  477

the  sevenih  angel  sounded ;  and  there  were  great  voices
in  heaven,  saying,  Tlie  kingdom  of  the  world  of  our
Lord  and  of  his  Christ  is  come."  Tou  must  translate  it
a  little  more  exactly,  and  with  a  better  text  too.  The
true  meaning  is  this :  "  The  kingdom  of  the  world  "  (or
"  the  world-kingdom,"  if  our  tongue  would  admit  of  such
a  phrase)  "  of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ  is  come."  It  is
not  merely  power  in  general  conferred  in  heaven,  but
"the  world-kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ  is
come,  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever.  And  the
four  and  twenty  elders,  that  sit  before  God  on  their
thrones,  fell  on  their  faces,  and  worshipped  God,  saying.
We  give  thee  thanks,  0  Lord  God  the  Almighty,  that
art,  and  that  wast ;  because  thou  hast  taken  thy  great
power,  and  hast  reigned.  And  the  nations  were  angry,
and  thy  wrath  is  come."

Here,  it  will  be  observed,  the  end  of  the  age  is  sup-
posed to  be  now  arrived.  It  is  not  merely  frightened
kings  and  peoples  who  say  so,  but  now  it  is  the  voice
of  those  who  know  in  heaven.  Further,  it  is  *  the
time  of  the  dead  that  they  should  be  judged."  It  is
not  a  question  here  of  the  saints  caught  up  to  heaven,
but  a  later  hour,  "  that  thou  shouldest  give  reward  to
thy  servants  the  prophets,  and  to  the  saints,  and  to
those  that  fear  thy  name."  Not  a  word  is  said  here
about  taking  them  to  heaven,  but  of  recompensing
them.  There  will  be  no  such  thing  as  the  conferring
of  reward  till  the  public  manifestation  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  The  taking  of  those  changed  oat  of  the  scene
is  another  association  of  truth.  The  reward  will  fail
to  none  that  fear  the  Lord's  name,  small  and  great  He
will  also  "  destroy  those  that  destroy  the  earth."


478


INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.


This  is  the  true  conclusion  of  chapter  xi.  The  next
verse  (19),  beyond  a  question  to  my  mind,  though  ar-
ranged in  our  Bibles  as  the  end  of  this  chapter,  is
properly  the  beginning  of  a  new  series.  I  shall  there-
fore not  treat  of  it  to-night


xs.

THE    KEVELATION.

Chaps.  3d.  19-XTi.

We  begin  now  what  may  be  called  the  second  volume
pf  the  Eevelation.  The  prophetic  part  of  the  book
divides  into  two  portions  at  this  point.  This  is  another
land-mark  that  cannot  be  despised,  if  we  would  ac-
quaint ourselves  with  its  structure  and  the  bearing  of
its  contents.  And  it  is  absolutely  requisite  to  have,  at
any  rate,  a  generally  correct  understanding  of  its  out-
line ;  else  we  are  in  imminent  risk  of  making  confusion,
the  moment  we  venture  to  put  tlie  parts  together,  or
to  form  anything  like  a  connected  view  of  that  which
it  conveys  to  us.  The  meaning  will  be  made  plainer,
if  I  repeat  that  the  seventh  trumpet,  which  was  the
closing  scene  before  us,  brings  us  down  to  the  end  in  a
general  way.

This  is  constjintly  the  habit  of  prophecy :  take,  for
instance,  our  Lord's  prophecy  in  Matthew  xxiv.,  where,
first  of  all,  we  are  given  the  broad  outline  as  far  as
verse  14 — the  "  gospel  of  the  kingdom  "  preached  in  all
the  world  for  a  testimony  to  all  nations ;  and  then  the
end  comes.  Having  thus  brought  us  down  to  the  close
in  a  comprehensive  manner,  the  Lord  turns  back,  and
specifies  a  particular  part  of  that  history  in  a  confined


480  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

sphere,  namely,  from  the  time  that  the  abomination  of
desolation  is  set  up  in  the  holy  place.  This  clearly  is
some  time  before  the  end.  It  does  not  indeed  go  back
absolutely  to  the  beginning,  but  it  returns  a  certain
way,  in  order  to  set  forth  a  far  closer  and  more  precise
view  of  the  appalling  state  of  things  that  will  be  found
in  Jerusalem  before  the  end  comes.

Just  so  is  it  in  the  Bevelation.  The  seals  and  the
trumpets  which  follow  one  another  conduct  us  from  the
time  that  the  church  is  seen  in  heaven  glorified  till
judgment  closes,  i,e.  "the  time  of  the  dead,  even  that  they
should  be  judged,"  and  the  day  of  wrath  upon  the  earth.
Evidently  this  is  the  end.  Then,  in  the  portion  which
begins  with  the  last  verse  of  chapter  xi.,  we  return  for
a  special  prophecy.  The  prophet  had  been  told  that
he  must  prophesy  again  before  many  people  and  kings;
and  I  suppose  that  this  is  the  prophesying  again.

So  the  temple  of  Grod  is  now  seen  to  be  open.  It  is
not  a  door  opened  in  heaven  to  give  us  the  general  view
of  what  was  to  take  place  on  the  earth  as  regarded  in
the  mind  of  God.  This  John  did  see,  the  general  view
being  now  closed ;  and  we  enter  on  a  narrower  line  of
things.  The  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven,  and
there  was  seen  in  His  temple  the  ark  of  His  covenant
It  is  the  resumption  therefore  of  the  old  links  with  His
ancient  people  Israel  At  the  same  time  it  is  not  yet
the  day  of  blessedness  for  the  Jew.  Nor  is  heaven  itself
opened  for  Jesus,  attended  by  risen  saints,  to  appear  for
the  judgment  of  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet  with
their  train.  It  is  a  transition  state  of  things.  When  God
deigns  to  look  upon  and  gives  us  to  see  the  ark  of  His
covenant^  He  is  going  to  assert  His  fidelity  to  the  people^


THE  REVELATION.  481

Of  old  He  gave  promises,  and  will  shortly  accomplish
all  which  had  been  assured  to  their  fathers.  The  ark  of
His  covenant  is  the  sign  of  the  unfailing  certainty  of
that  to  which  He  bound  Himself.

"And  there  were  lightnings,  and  voices,  and  thunder-
iiigs,"  and  besides  not  "an  earthquake"  only,  but  **  great
hail."  In  the  first  scene  in  the  fourth  chapter,  when  the
door  was  seen  open  in  heaven,  there  were  "  lightnings,
and  voices,  and  thunderings,"  but  there  was  not  even
an  earthquake.  In  chapter  viii.  this  addition  appears.
Now  besides  there  is  hail.  Clearly,  therefore,  we  are
coming  to  far  greater  detail  in  the  way  of  judgments
from  heaven  on  the  earth.

Then  the  first  sign  was  beheld  above.  "There
appeared  a  great  sign  in  heaven."  We  are  not  to  sup-
pose that  when  the  prophecy  is  fulfilled,  any  woman
will  be  seen  either  in  heaven  or  elsewhere  as  its  accom-
plishment. This  is  a  fertile  source  of  mistake  in  the
interpretation  of  these  visions.  Her  being  seen  in  heaven
shows  that  it  is  not  a  mere  histoiy  of  what  is  taking
place  on  earth,  but  that  it  is  all  viewed  in  God's  mind.
Consequently  it  is  seen  above.  In  point  of  fact,  what
the  woman  represents  will  be  Israel  on  the  earth.  The
woman  is  a  symbol  of  the  chosen  people  viewed  as  a
whole,  for  a  future  state  of  things  that  God  means  to
establish  here  below.  She  was  "  clothed  with  the  sun."
Supreme  authority  is  to  be  seen  now  connected  with
Israel,  instead  of  her  being  in  a  state  of  desolation,
down-trodden  by  the  Gentiles.  "And  the  moon  under
her  feet "  is  an  allusion,  I  suppose,  to  her  old  condition
of  legal  ordinances,  which,  instead  of  governing  her,  are
now  subject  to  her — under  her  feet.     How  aptly  the

2  I


482  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

moon  sets  forth  the  reflected  light  of  the  Mosaic  system
is  evident  to  any  thouglitful  mind.  In  the  millennium
this  will  not  be  wholly  out  of  sight  as  now  under
Christianity,  but  re-appear :  only  it  will  be  in  manifest
subordination,  as  we  may  see  in  Ezekiel's  prophecy.
"And  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  twelve  stars."  There
is  the  evidence  of  human  authority  in  the  way  of  ad-
ministration here  below.  In  short,  whether  it  be  supreme,
derivative,  or  subordinate  authority,  she  is  seen  with  all
attached  to  her.  Israel  is  therefore  the  manifest  vessel
of  the  mighty  purposes  of  God  for  the  earth  ;  and  God
so  looks  at  her  and  presents  her  to  us.  Thus  it  is  as
complete  a  change  as  can  be  conceived  for  Israel.  But
this  is  not  all.  "She  was  with  child,  and  crieth,  travail-
ing in  birth,  in  pain  to  be  delivered."  It  is  not  yet  the
day  for  joyous  and  triumphant  accomplishment  of  the
divine  purpose,  when  before  Zion  travails  she  is  to  bring
forth,  and  before  her  pain  come  she  is  to  be  delivered  of
a  man-child.  There  is  weakness  and  suflTering  yet,  but
all  is  secured,  and  the  end  is  pledged.

Then  there  is  another  sign;  namely,  "a  great  red
dragon,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns,  and  seven
diadems  upon  his  heads."  It  is  Satan,  but  here  invested
with  the  form  of  the  most  determined  and  successful
enemy  that  Israel  ever  had;  for  bad  as  was  the  tyranny
of  Nebuchadnezzar,  it  is  evident  that  the  Soman  power
trod  down  Jerusalem  with  a  far  more  tremendous  and
permanent  tyranny.  This  therefore  makes  the  unfold-
iug  of  this  double  sign  so  much  the  more  striking.  It
is  not  that  she  is  delivered  yet ;  but  she  is  seen  by  the
prophet  according  to  the  mind  of  God.  This  is  to  be
her  place, — a  mighty  encouragement,  considering  what


THE  REVELATION.  483

she  must  pass  through  before  it  is  all  realized.  Before
this  is  effected,  the  enemy  is  shown  in  his  character  of
rebellious  apostate  power.  The  dragon  has  seven  heads
— I. «.,  the  completeness  of  ruling  authority;  and  ten
horns, — not  exactly  completeness,  but  at  any  rate  a  very
large  distribution  approaching  it,  in  the  instruments  of
the  power  wielded  in  the  west.  Man  is  never  thus  com-
plete. What  God  gave  the  woman  we  saw — twelve  stars.
The  dragon  has  only  ten  horns.  There  was  a  full  suc-
cession of  all  the  various  forms  of  government,  which  I
suppose  to  be  referred  to  in  the  seven  heads ;  but  God
would  not  give  it  that  completeness  of  administrative
power  even  in  form  which  belonged  to  the  woman.  All
will  be  in  due  order  when  the  Lord  Jesus  takes  the
government  of  the  earth  into  His  hands  in  the  age  to
come.  "Verily  I  say  unto  you,  That  ye  who  have
followed  me,  in  the  regeneration  when  the  Son  of  man
shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  on
twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel."
The  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb  are  destined  to  this
special  place  of  honourable  trust.

"His  tail  drew  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven."
Here  is  what  seems  to  show  that  the  third  part  has  a
distinct  connection  with  the  Eoman  empire.  We  saw
the  third  part  for  the  first  time  in  the  trumpets,  both  in
the  four  earlier  trumpets  and  also  in  the  sixth.  I  have
no  doubt  the  Roman  empire  is  particularly  in  view;  and
by  the  Roman  empire  we  are  to  understand  what  was
properly  Roman — the  western  portion,  not  what  the
Romans  actually  possessed,  because  they  conquered  a
great  deal  that  belonged  to  Greece  for  instance,  and
Babylon,  and  Medo-Persia.     This  was  far  east;  but

2  I  2


484  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

the  properly  Boman  part  was  western  Europa  There
the  dragon's  power  was  particularly  felt.  It  "  drew  the
third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  cast  them  unto
the  earth;  and  the  dragon  stands  before  the  woman  that
was  about  to  bring  forth,  that  he  might  devour  her  child
as  soon  as  she  should  bring  forth.  And  she  brought
forth  a  male  son,  who  is  about  to  shepherd  all  the
nations  with  a  rod  of  iron :  and  her  child  was  caught
up  unto  God,  and  unto  his  throne."

There  are  some  things  that  require  explanation  here.
First  of  all,  a  notion  prevails  that  the  woman  is  the
church.  There  may  be  some  Christians  now  present
who  have  been  so  taught.  A  few  words,  I  think,  are
quite  sufficient  to  dispel  the  illusion.  The  church  is
never  represented  as  a  mother  in  scripture:  still  less
could  it  be  the  mother  of  Christ.  Viewed  as  a  woman,
the  church  is  the  bride  of  Christ,  not  His  mother;
whereas  the  Jewish  body  may  be  truly  represented  as
His  mother  in  symbol.  Christ,  as  man,  came  of  the
Jews  after  the  flesh.  Accordingly,  it  is  very  plain  that
He  is  the  one  here  described  as  the  male.  The  same
truth  is  most  evident  from  the  scriptures,  whether  we
take  the  psalms  or  the  prophets.  "Unto  us,"  Isaiah
says,  "  a  child  is  born,  a  son  is  givea"  Again,  in  the
second  psalm,  we  find  that  the  one  who  is  not  merely
the  child  of  Isi*ael,  but  acknowledged  and  honoured  by
God  Himself  as  the  Son,  was  to  rule  the  nations  with
a  rod  of  iron.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  therefore,  that
the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  one  here  prominent  as  the  male
child.

This,  then,  furnishes  an  unquestionable  and  im-
portant key  to  the  meaning  of  the  scene  we  are  now


THE   REVELATION.  485

entering  upon.     The  woman  represents  Israel  in  the
mind  of  God, — Israel  in  its  full  corporate  character.

Another  remark  seems  to  me  just.  Although  Christ,  I
have  no  doubt,  is  referred  to  as  the  man-child  born  of
Israel,  it  may  be  no  small  difficulty  at  first  sight  to
some  minds  how  to  bring  in  the  birth  of  Christ  in  this
chapter.  Indeed,  it  is  a  very  fair  question,  and  ought
to  be  met.  Let  it  then  be  observed,  tliat  here  the  Spirit
of  God  is  not  proceeding  with  the  course  of  the  pro-
phecy. I  have  already  explained  that  He  goes  back.
Consequently,  so  far  all  is  perfectly  open  as  to  the  point
of  time  to  which  He  returns.  And  another  thing  should
be  taken  into  account — that  in  this  portion  there  is  no
date  serving  to  fix  the  time  when  the  birth  of  the  man-
child  takes  place.  But  then  it  may  be  asked,  why
shoidd  the  birth  of  the  man-child  be  introduced  here,
seeing  that  it  was  a  patent  fact  that  the  Lord  had  been
born,  had  lived,  and  died,  and  gone  to  heaven  long  be-
fore ?  There  was  nothing  new  to  telL  All  this  was
long  and  well  known  through  the  gospel,  as  well  as  in
oral  teaching  to  the  Christians ;  why  then  should  it
be  set  forth  so  strangely  in  this  prophecy  ?  The  reason
I  believe  to  be,  that  God  desired  in  this  very  striking
manner  to  rehearse  it  mystically,  and  not  at  all  in  full
open  statement,  so  as  to  combine  it  with  His  translation
to  heaven  and  to  His  own  throne.  There  was  a  further
link — with  the  re-opening  of  God*s  dealings  with  the
Jews,  and  the  eventual  restoration  of  the  nation.  All
are  introduced  here  together.

Thus  it  is  plain  that  God  is  not  at  all  disposing
these  matters  now  as  a  question  of  time,  but  of  con-
nexion  with   Christ  their  centre.     John  is  going  to


486  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

enter  into  the  final  scenes  after  this ;  but  before  this  is
done,  we  have  God's  counsel  shown  about  Israel  This
brings  forward  the  devil  in  his  evil  opposition  to  that
counsel;  for  it  was  surely  what  the  adversary  most  of
all  feared.  Satan  invariably  opposes  Christ  with  greater
tenacity  of  purpose  and  hatred  and  pride  than  any
other.  Eecognizing  in  Him  the  bruiser  of  himself  and
the  deliverer  of  man  and  creation,  there  is  a  constant
antagonism  between  Satan  and  the  Son  of  God  that  is
familiar  to  us  all  But  there  is  more  than  this :  Satan
sets  himself  against  His  connexion  with  the  poor  and
despised  people  of  Israel.  Nevertheless,  before  Grod
openly  espouses  the  part  of  Israel,  there  is  the  remark-
able fact  that  Christ  is  caught  up  to  Him  and  to  His
throne.  Not  a  word  is  said  of  His  life ;  not  a  word  even
about  His  death  and  resurrection.  As  far  as  this  pass-
age goes,  one  might  suppose  the  Lord  caught  up  on
high  as  soon  as  He  was  bom.  This  shows  ns  how  re-
markably mystical  the  statement  is.  It  is  history  neither
anticipated  nor  in  fact.  Had  it  been  an  historical  sum-
mary, we  must  have  had  His  life  noticed  with  those
mighty  events  on  which  all  hopes  for  the  universe
depend.  All  this  is  entirely  passed  over.  The  reason,
I  think,  is  just  this,  that  it  intimates  to  us,  as  in  Old
Testament  prophecy,  how  the  Lord  and  His  people  are
wrapped  up,  as  it  were,  in  the  very  same  symbol ;  even
as,  in  a  yet  more  intimate  way,  what  is  said  about  Christ
applies  to  the  Christian.

On  this  principle  then  I  cannot  but  consider  that
the  rapture  of  the  man-child  to  God  and  His  throne
involves  the  rapture  of  the  church  in  itself.  The  ex-
planation why  it  is  thus  introduced  here  depends  on


THE   REVELATION.  487

the  truth  that  Christ  and  the  church  are  one,  and
have  a  common  destiny.  Inasmuch  as  He  went  up  to
heaven,  so  also  the  church  is  to  be  caught  up.  "  So  also
is  Christ,"  says  the  apostle  Paul,  when  speaking  of  the
church ;  for  we  must  naturally  suppose  the  allusion  is  to
the  body  rather  than  to  the  head.  He  does  not  say,  so
also  is  the  church,  but  "  so  also  is  Christ."  In  a  similar
spirit  St.  John,  rn  this  prophecy,  shows  us  first  of  all
the  male  child  taken  to  a  place  in  heaven  entirely  out-
side the  reach  of  Satan*s  malice.  If  this  be  so,  and
granted  it  has  a  remarkable  bearing  on  what  has  been
already  asserted  as  to  the  book:  we  here  begin  over
again,  with  a  particular  point  of  view  as  the  object  of
the  Holy  Ghost  in  this  latter  portion.  Before  doing  so,
John  gives  us  first  the  general  purpose  of  God  about  the
Jews.

This  is  strictly  in  order.  We  might  have  thought
that  the  more  natural  way  would  be  first  of  all  to  state
the  rapture  of  the  man-child ;  but  not  so,  God  always
does  and  describes  things  in  the  wisest  and  best  method.
The  fact  is  that  Christ  being  born  of  Israel,  there  is  and
ought  to  be  fii-st  set  forth  the  tracing  of  His  connexion
with  Israel.  The  next  fact  is  the  devil's  opposition  to
the  counsels  of  God,  and  hindrance  for  the  time  being,
which  gives  occasion  to  the  Lord  Himself  taking  His
place  in  heaven,  and  eventually  to  the  church  following
Him  into  heaven.  After  this  comes  back  on  the  scene
the  Lord's  intention  to  make  way  for  the  effectuating  of
His  counsels  as  to  Israel  and  the  earth.  In  short,  there-
fore, the  first  portion  of  the  chapter  is  distinctly  a
mystical  representation  of  the  Lord's  relationship  with
Israel  and  of  His  removal  out  of  the  scene —the  effect


488  INTKODUCTORY  LECTURES.

of  tlie  antagonism  of  Satan ;  but  it  also  gives  room  for
God's  binding  up,  as  it  were,  with  Christ's  disappearance
in  heaven  the  church's  following  Him  there  in  due  time.
For  the  church  is  united  to  Christ.  In  this  way  the
rapture  of  the  man-chUd  is  not  a  mere  historical  fact.
Christ's  ascension  to  heaven  is  brought  in  here  because
it  contains  as  a  consequence  the  church's  subsequeut
removal  to  be  with  Him  where  He  is,  His  body  forming
one  and  the  same  mystic  man  before  Grod,  "  the  fiilness
of  him  that  fiUeth  aU  in  all."

If  this  then  be  borne  in  mind,  the  whole  subject  is
considerably  cleared.  **  She  brought  forth  a  male  son,
to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron."  There  is  not  the
slightest  difficulty  in  applying  this  to  the  man-child,
viewed  not  personally  and  alone  but  mystically ;  and  the
less,  because  this  very  promise  is  made  to  the  church  in
Thyatira,  or  rather  to  the  faithful  there.  It  will  be
remembered  that  at  the  end  of  Eev.  iL  it  was  expressly
said  that  the  Lord  would  give  to  him  that  overcame
power  over  the  nations,  and  he  should  rule  them  with  a
rod  of  iron,  just  as  He  Himself  received  of  His  Father.
Does  not  this  most  strongly  confirm  the  same  view?
"And  the  woman  fled  into  the  wilderness,  where  she
hath  a  place  prepared  of  God,  that  they  should  nourish
her  there  a  thousand  two  hundred  [and]  threescore
days."

In  verse  7  we  have  a  new  scene ;  and  here  we  come
much  more  to  facts, —  not  to  counsels  of  God  or  to
principles  viewed  in  His  mind,  but  to  positive  facts;
and  first  of  all  from  above,  as  later  on  we  shall  find
effects  and  changes  on  the  earth.  '*And  there  was  war
in  heaven:   Michael  and  his  angels  to  war  with  the


THE   REVELATION.  489

dragon;  and  the  dragon  warred  and  his  angels,  and
prevailed  not ;  neither  was  their  place  found  any  more
in  heaven.  And  the  great  dragon  was  cast  [down],  the
ancient  serpent,  called  the  Devil,  and  Satan,  who  de-
ceiveth  the  whole  world,  was  cast  unto  the  earth,  and
his  angels  were  cast  with  him.  And  I  heard  a  loud
voice  saying  in  heaven.  Now  is  come  the  salvation,  and
the  power,  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  autho-
rity of  his  Christ;  for  the  accuser  of  our  brethren  is
cast  [down],  who  accused  them  before  our  God  day  and
m'ght.  And  they  overcame  him  by  reason  of  the  blood
of  the  Lamb,  and  by  reason  of  the  word  of  their  testi-
mony, and  loved  not  their  life  unto  death.  Therefore
rejoice,  ye  heavens,  and  ye  that  dwell  in  them."  It  is
evident  that  at  this  time  persons  are  spoken  of  as  dwell-
ing in  heaven  who  sympathise  deeply  with  their  suffer-
ing brethren  on  earth.  Such  is  the  incontestable  fact ;
and  soon  after  Satan  will  have  lost  that  access  to  the
presence  of  God  in  the  quality  of  accuser  of  the  brethren
that  he  had  previously  possessed ;  nor  will  he  ever  regain
the  highest  seat  of  his  power  which  is  then  lost.  He  is
no  longer  able  to  till  heaven  with  his  bitter  taunts  and
accusations  of  the  saints  of  God.

"  Woe,"  however,  it  is  added  at  this  time,  "  to  the
earth  and  to  the  sea !  for  the  devil  has  come  down  unto
you,  having  great  wrath,  knowing  that  he  hath  a  short
season."  This  clearly  connects  the  dispossession  of
Satan  from  his  heavenly  seat  with  the  last  crisis  of
Jews  and  Gentiles  at  the  end  of  the  present  age.  We
find  here  the  hidden  reason.  Why  should  there  be
such  an  unwonted  storm  of  persecution  ?  why  such  tre-
mendous doings  of  Satan  here  below  for  a  short  time,


490  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

for  three  yeai-s  and  a  half,  before  the  close  ?  The  reason
is  here  explained.  Satan  cannot  longer  accuse  above ;
accordingly  he  does  his  worst  below.  He  is  cast  down
to  earth,  and  never  regains  the  heavens.  Again,  he  will
be  banished  from  the  earth,  as  we  shall  find,  into  the
bottomless  pit  by  and  by ;  and'  then,  although  let  loose
thence  for  a  short  time,  it  is  only  for  his  irremediable
ruin ;  for  he  is  cast  then  (not  merely  into  the  pit  or  abyss,
but)  into  the  lake  of  fire,  whence  none  ever  comes  back.

Such  is  the  revealed  course  of  the  dealings  of  God
with  the  great  enemy  of  men  from  first  to  last.

From  verse  13  the  history  is  pursued  not  from  the
heavens,  but  on  the  earth.  "And  when  the  dragon  saw
that  he  was  cast  unto  the  earth,  he  persecuted  the
woman  which  brought  forth  the  male  [child].  And  to
the  woman  were  given  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle,  that
she  might  fly  into  the  wilderness,,  into  her  place,  where
she  is  nourished  there  a  time,  and  times,  and  half  a  time,
from  the  face  of  the  serpent."  Thus  power  is  given  to
escape,  rapid  means  of  flight  from  Satan's  persecution.
It  is  not  power  to  withstand  Satan,  and  fight  the  battle
out  with  him,  but  the  facility  given  to  flee  from  his
violence.  This  seems  to  be  what  is  meant  by  the  two
wings  of  the  great  eagle — a  figure  of  vigorous  means  of
escape.  That  which  is  in  nature  the  most  energetic
image  of  flight  is  vividly  applied  to  the  case  before  us.

Then  we  find  the  enemy,  baffled  by  Grod's  provision,
using  other  efforts.  "And  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his
mouth  water  as  a  flood  after  the  woman,  that  he  might
cause  her  to  be  carried  away  by  the  flood."  That  is,
he  here  endeavours  to  stir  up  the  nations  (such  as
are,  I  suppose,  in  a  state  of  disorganisation)  to  ove^


L'"*-'


THE   REVELATION.  491

whelm  the  Jews.  In  vain;  for  "the  earth" — what  was
under  settled  government  at  this  time — "helped  the
woman,  and  the  earth  opened  her  mouth,  and  swallowed
up  the  flood  which  the  dragon  cast  out  of  his  mouth.
And  the  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  woman,  and  went
to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed,  that  keep
the  commandments  of  God,  and  have  the  testimony  of
Jesus."  By  these  are  meant  such  of  the  Jews  as
will  be  remarkable  for  their  power  of  testimony.  The
woman  represents  the  more  general  idea  of  that  peo-
ple. The  remnant  of  her  seed  are  the  witnessing
portion.  You  must  bear  in  mind  that  all  the  Jews  of
that  day  will  by  no  means  have  the  same  spiritual
power.  There  will  be  differences.  Some  will  be  much
more  energetic  and  intelligent  than  others.  Satan  has-
tens therefore,  and  endeavours  to  put  down  those  that
seem  most  useful  as  the  vessels  of  the  testimony  of
Jesus.

This  accordingly  leads  to  the  plans  that  Satan  sets  up
for  the  purpose  of  accomplishing  his  long -cherished
design  of  supplanting  not  only  gospel  and  law,  but  the
testimony  to  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  world.  And
there  are  two  especial  methods  which  Satan  will  adopt,
suited  to  catch  a  twofold  class  of  men  who  are  never
wanting  in  this  world — natural  men,  some  of  whom
like  power,  as  others  like  religion.  I  am  not  now  speak-
ing of  any  who  are  born  of  God ;  but  it  is  clear  that
man's  heart  runs  either  aft^r  intellect  and  power,  or  into
religious  formality.  The  devil  will  therefore  put  forward
two  main  instruments  as  leaders  of  systems  that  express
human  nature  on  either  side,  exactly  suiting  what  the


492  INTBODUCrORY  LECTURES.

heart  of  man  seeks  and  will  have.  Thns  Satan  has
designed  from  the  beginning  to  set  up  himself  in  man
as  God.  For  he  too  will  work  by  man,  as  God  Himself
is  pleased  to  develop  all  His  wondrous  ways  and  coun-
sels in  man.  As  the  Lord  Jesus  is  not  only  a  divine
person  but  the  expression  of  the  divine  glory  no  less
than  of  His  grace ;  and  as  the  church  is  the  object  of
His  love  in  heavenly  blessedness,  and  Israel  for  the
earth ;  so  the  enemy  (who  cannot  originate  but  only
corrupt  the  truth,  and  lie  by  a  sort  of  profane  imitation
of  the  counsels  of  God)  will  have  his  beasts  no  less
certainly  than  God  has  His  Lamb.  In  Eev.  xiii.  this
,  is  made  plain.  There  are  these  two  beasts ;  the  first
civil  power,  the  second  religion,  and  both  apostate.

"  And  I  stood  upon  the  sand  of  the  sea,  and  saw  a
beast  rise  up  out  of  the  sea,  having  seven  heads  and  ten
horns."  The  beast  that  emerges  from  the  revolutionary
lioman  world  is  just  adapted  for  the  dragon  to  fill  with
opposition  to  the  purposes  of  God.  In  chapter  xiL  the
dragon  was  seen  similarly  characterized  as  the  beast.
Both  have  the  forms  of  power  peculiar  to  the  Roman
empire.  But  there  is  a  difierence  also  :  "And  upon  his
horns  ten  diadems,  and  upon  his  heads  names  of  blas-
phemy." The  dragon  has  the  diadems  on  his  heads;
the  beast  shows  us  more  the  actual  facts — the  horns
crowned.  The  dragon  represents  the  enemy  of  Christ
in  his  political  employment  of  the  Roman  empire,  and
this  from  first  to  last ;  so  that  the  heads  or  successive
forms  of  power  are  said  to  be  crowned,  not  the  horns,
which  were  only  as  a  fact  to  be  developed  before  the
close  of  its  history — at  the  earliest  not  before  the  Gothic
barbarians  broke  up  the  empire  ef  the  west     On  the


THE   REVELATION.  493

other  hand,  in  the  beast  of  chap.  xiiL  we  see,  not  merely
the  hidden  spirit  of  evil  making  use  of  the  power  of
Bome  in  its  various  changes,  but  the  empire  in  its  final
state  when  the  deadly  wound  done  to  the  imperial  head
was  healed,  and  Satan  shall  have  given  to  it  thus  revived
his  power,  his  throne,  and  great  authority.  Now  this  is
the  very  time  when  the  ten  horns  receive  authority  as
kings ;  it  is  simultaneously  and  continuously  with  the
beast,  as  chap.  xvii.  informs  us ;  and  hence  the  horns  of
the  beast  are  seen  crowned  (not  merely  the  heads,  as  in
the  dragon's  case  previously).

Further,  the  beast  is  described  afterwards  in  remarkable
terms,  which  allude  to  the  beasts  so  well  known  in
Daniel  vii.  "And  the  beast  which  I  saw  was  like  a
leopardess,  and  its  feet  were  as  of  a  bear,  and  its  mouth
as  a  lion's."  Here  we  have  certain  qualities  that  resemble
the  three  first-named  beasts  of  the  prophet  Daniel.
Though  Satan  does  not  originate,  he  adopts  whatever
will  suit  of  that  which  has  been,  and  endeavours  by
this  most  singular  combination  to  bring  out  the  beast
or  fourth  empire  (for  there  is  none  to  succeed)  so  as  to
surpass  for  the  last  days  everything  known  of  old.

What  is  meant  by  a  beast  ?  An  imperial  system  or
empire,  but  withal  refusing  to  recognize  God  above.
Man  was  made  to  own  Him,  and  alone  does,  as  taught
of  God.  Man  alone  of  all  beings  in  the  earth  was
made  to  look  up  to  One  above,  and  is  responsible  to  do
the  will  of  God.  The  beast  does  not  look  up  but  down ;
it  has  no  sense  of  an  unseen  superior.  "  The  fool  hath
said  in  his  heait  that  there  is  no  God."  In  principle
this  is  true  of  every  unrenewed  man;  but  here  it  is  the
more  tremendous,  because  an  empire  ought  to  be  the


494  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

reflection  of  the  authority  that  God  in  His  providence
has  conferred  on  it.  No  empire  has  avoided  the  moral
sentence  implied  in  the  symbols,  but  this  beast  will  go
beyond  all-  that  have  ever  arisen.  At  the  time  that  the
prophecy  was  given  the  fourth  beast  was  in  existence ;
but  the  prophet  was  given  to  see  that  out  of  a  state
of  political  convulsion,  just  before  the  last  three  years
and  a  half,  and  connected  with  Satan's  expulsion  from
heaven  by  the  power  of  God,  this  beast  rises  up  out  of
the  sea.  That  is,  there  will  be  a  state  of  total  confusion
in  the  west,  and  an  imperial  power  will  rise  up.  This
is  the  one  here  described :  "And  I  saw  one  of  its  heads
as  it  were  wounded  to  death;  and  its  deadly  wound
was  healed  :  and  all  the  world  wondered  after  the  beast."
It  is  not  hard  to  see  sufficient  grounds  for  gathering
that  the  wounded  head  was  the  imperial  form  of  power.
The  empire  of  the  west  will  have  been  long  extinct,  when,
strange  to  say,  it  reappears  in  the  latter  day.  But  there
is  a  great  deal  more  than  simply  the  revival  of  imperial-
ism, which  draws  out  the  astonishment  of  the  world.
They  had  thought  it  all  over  with  the  Boman  empire.
They  could  easily  understand  a  new  empire;  they  could
readily  conceive  a  Teutonic  kingdom,  or  a  Muscovite
dominion,  or  any  other  of  large  space  and  population ;
but  the  revival  of  the  Koman  empire  will  take  the  world
by  surprise.  This  is  a  part  of  what  is  here  referred
to.  The  grounds  of  this  assertion,  however,  depend  on
chap,  xvii.,  so  that  I  cannot  now  enter  into  minute
evidence,  nor  do  I  wish  to  anticipate  what  will  come
before  us  in  the  next  lecture.  Let  it  suffice  to  give
wliat  I  believe  to  be  the  truth  revealed  about  it  as  we
pass  onward.


THE   REVELATION.  495

But  then  it  is  not  simply  that  this  empire  luid
qualities  of  power  that  belonged  to  more  than  one  of
the  previous  empires,  and  that  it  had  its  own  peculi-
arity in  that  it  was  marked  by  the  revival  of  imperialism
at  the  close.  We  are  told  that  "  they  worshipped  the
dragon,  because  he  gave  authority  to  the  beast :  and
they  worshipped  the  beast,  saying,  Who  is  like  the
beast  ?  and  who  is  able  to  make  war  with  him  ?"  It  is
evident,  therefore,  that  we  have  here  an  apostate  and
idolatrous  state  of  the  world.  The  dragon  js  worship-
ped, as  is  the  beast ;  and  2  Thess.  ii.  is  plain  that  worship
is  paid  to  another  personage  connected  with,  but  dis-
tinct from,  these  both,  called  "  the  man  of  sin,"  which
is  much  more  a  religious  power.  The  first  beast  is  a
political  body ;  the  religious  chief  will  not  be  in  the
west  at  all,  but  in  Jerusalem,  and  a  very  special  object
of  woi-ship  in  the  temple  of  God  there  at  the  close.

This  is  a  difficulty  to  some,  because  it  is  distinctly  said
that  this  man  of  sin  will  not  tolerate  any  other  object
of  worship.  But  then  you  must  remember  that  they
are  all  the  same  firm.  Therefore  to  worship  the  one  is
pretty  much  to  worship  the  other;  just  as  in  regard
to  the  true  God,  there  is  no  worship  of  one  person  in
the  Godhead  without  the  same  homage  to  the  others.
It  is  in  vain  for  any  to  pretend  to  worship  the  Father
without  worshipping  the  Son,  and  he  that  worships  the
Father  and  the  Son  can  only  worship  in  the  power  of
the  Holy  Ghost.  When  we  worship  God  as  such, —
when  we  say  "  God,"  we  do  not  mean  Father  only,  but
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  So  precisely  in  this  awful
counterpart,  the  fruit  of  the  energy  of  satanic  craft  and
power  at  the  close.     The  worshipping  of  the  dragon


496  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

and  of  the  beast  seems  therefore  quite  consistent  with
divine  worship  paid  to  the  man  of  sin.  The  fact  is,
they  are,  as  often  remarked  with  justice,  the  great
counter-trinity — the  trinity  of  evil  as  opposed  to  the
Trinity  of  the  Godhead.  The  devil  is  clearly  the  source
of  it  all ;  but  then  the  public  leader  of  his  power  politi-
cally is  the  be£ist;  and  the  grand  religious  agent,  who
works  out  all  plans  and  even  miracles  in  its  support,  is
the  second  beast  or  man  of  sin.

This  appears  to  be  the  true  and  mutual  bearing  of  all,
if  we  bow  to  all  these  scriptures.  I  am  aware  that  dif-
ferences of  thought  exist  here  as  in  almost  everything
else.  But  this  objection  has  no  force  at  all.  The  only
question  is,  what  best  satisfies  the  word  of  God, — what
most  faithfully  answers  not  merely  to  the  letter  of  it>
but  to  its  grand  principles?  I  am  persuaded,  therefore,
that  far  from  any  real  obstacle  in  the  fact  of  the^e
three  different  objects  being  combined  in  worship,  on
the  contrary  the  force  and  nature  of  the  case  cannot
well  be  understood  unless  this  is  seen.

Let  us  pursue  the  other  points  which  the  scriptures
set  before  us.  "And  there  was  given  him  a  mouth
speaking  great  things  and  blasphemies ;  and  power  was
given  him  to  continue  [or  act]  forty- two  months.  And
he  opened  his  mouth  in  blasphemy  against  God,  to
blaspheme  his  name,  and  his  tabernacle,  and  them  that
tabernacle  in  heaven."  Here  again  it  seems  evident  that
there  is  a  people  in  heaven  removed  from  exposure  to
the  power  either  of  Satan  or  of  the  public  instruments
of  his  malice  in  the  world.  There  are  also  saints  here
below.  The  tabernacle  above  may  be  blasphemed,  and
those  that  dwell  there  Satan  may  revile,  but  he  cannot


THE   REVELATION.  497

touch — cannot  even  accuse  longer  before  God.  He
turns  therefore  all  his  power  to  deal  with  man  on  the
earth.

"And  it  was  given  him  to  make  war  with  the  saints"
(clearly  those  that  are  not  in  heaven),  "and  to  overcome
them :  and  authority  was  given  him  over  every  tribe,
and  people,  and  tongue,  and  nation.  And  all  that  dwell
upon  the  earth  shall  worship  him."  It  will  be  seen  that
there  is  an  invariable  distinction  between  the  crowd  of
the  Gentiles  scattered  over  the  world,  and  "  those  that
dwell  on  the  earth."  The  difference  is  that  the  former
class  is  a  larger  term,  embracing  the  world  at  large ;
whereas  by  the  latter  is  meant  a  considerably  nar-
rower sphere,  whose  character  of  earthliness  is  the
more  decided,  because  it  had  known  the  heavenly  testi-
mony of  Christ  and  the  church.  The  name  might  be
still  held ;  but  apostate  hearts  deliberately  preferred
earth  to  heaven,  and  would  surely  have  their  portion  in
neither,  but  in  the  lake  of  fire.

It  is  solemn  to  see  that  this  is  what  Christendom
hastens  to  become :  infidelity  and  superstition  are  rapidly
fonning  it  now.  All  that  is  at  work  is  bringing  about
this  earthly  and  godless  state  of  things.  Never  since
the  gospel  was  preached  were  men  more  thoroughly
settling  down  in  the  endeavour  to  improve  the  earth,
and  consequently  to  forget  heaven  day  by  day,  only
thinking  of  it  as  a  dismal  necessity  when  they  die,  and
cannot  avoid  leaving  the  world.  But  as  to  turning  to
heaven,  both  as  a  hope  full  of  joy  and  as  a  home  for  the
affections,  whenever  was  it  more  thoroughly  kept  out  of
the  minds  of  men?  All  this  then  prepares  us  for  the
designation  given  to  the  people  that  did  hear  of  heaven

2  K


498  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

but  deliberately  gave  up  all  the  hopes  connected  with
it  to  settle  down  on  the  earth.  They  were  dwellers  on
the  earth.  The  others  are  "  every  tribe,  and  people,  and
tongue,  and  nation,"  that  have  heaixl  comparatively
little  about  the  gospel.  But  he  will  endeavour  to  deal
with  both ;  and  more  particularly  "  all  that  dwell  upon
the  earth  shall  worship  him,  whose  name  is  not  written
in  the  book  of  life  of  the  slain  Lamb  from  the  foun-
dation of  the  world."

Carefully  bear  in  mind  that  "  from  the  foundation  of
the  world  "  belongs  not  to  "  slain,"  but  to  the  writing  of
the  name.  John  does  not  mean  that  the  Lamb  was  slain
from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  but  that  the  name
was  not  written  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  in
the  book  of  life  of  the  Lamb  that  was  slain.  Compare
Eev.  xvii.  8.

"If  any  man  have  an  ear,  let  him  hear.  He  that
leadeth  into  captivity  shall  go  into  captivity."  The
importance  of  this  statement  was  to  guard  the  saints
themselves  from  taking  power  peremptorily  into  their
own  hands.  They  might  cry  to  Grod,  they  might  ask
Him  to  arise  and  judge  the  earth,  but  they  were  not  to
fight  themselves.  As  the  beast  would  take  power,  so
should  he  suffer  the  consequence.  He  might  lead  into
captivity,  but  into  captivity  he  must  go.  He  might  kill
with  the  sword,  but  he  must  be  killed  himself :  indeed,
his  would  be  a  still  more  awful  doom.  At  the  same
time  patience,  with  this  retributive  sanction  annexed,  is
put  in  as  a  general  principle,  and  stated  in  such  a  form
as  to  apply  to  any  one.  It  was  surely  and  particularly
meant  to  guard  the  saints  from  mistake  and  wrong.  I
do  not  think  the  direct  application  is  to  the  beast^  but


THE   REVELATION.  49i9

rather  warning  to  the  saints  of  God  "Here  is  the
patience  and  faith  of  the  saints."  This  gives  the  ap-
plication.

In  the  latter  part  of  the  chapter  we  have  a  second
beast.  This  calls  for  more  attention,  because  there  has
been  and  there  is  a  danger  of  some  confusion  and
difficulty  on  this  subject.  Let  it  be  observed  that  the
second  beast  it  is  which  more  particularly  resembles  in
wickedness  what  the  Lord  Jesus  was  in  goodness.  It  is
indeed  a  "beast;"  that  is,  it  has  a  kind  of  imperial
power,  though  very  likely  on  a  far  smaller  scale  than
the  first  beast.  Still  it  has  the  character  of  empire
attached  to  it.  It  is  a  beast,  and  not  merely  a  horn.  Then
the  horns  that  it  has  have  a  peculiar  character.  "  He
had  two  horns  like  a  lamb."  There  was  the  pretence  of
resembling  the  Messiah.  But  "  he  spake  as  a  dragon."
It  was  really  the  expression  of  Satan.  "And  he  exer-
cises all  the  authority  of  the  first  beast  in  his  presence."
It  is,  therefore,  plain  that  the  second  beast  is  really  the
more  energetic  of  the  two,  and  the  active  instrument  of
evil.

And  this  is  always  the  case  in  every  form  of  wicked-
ness that  has  ever  been  forged  for  this  world.  The  pro-
moters of  it — the  persons  that  exercise  the  influence,
sometimes  unseen,  sometimes  publicly — are  as  a  rule
those  that  put  religion  forward.  The  religion  of  the
earth  is  the  prolific  source  of  all  the  worst  evil  that  is
done  under  the  sun.  The  devil  could  not  accomplish
his  plans  if  there  was  not  such  a  thing  as  earthly  religion.
Is  not  this  an  awful  thing  to  think  of,  and  a  solemn
thing,  too,  for  those  that  have  the  smallest  connection
with  it?

2  K  2


500  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

Accordingly  in  this  case,  observe,  the  second  beast
which  resembles  Christ,  and  takes  that  place,  does
not  come  out  of  the  sea,  or  the  turbulent  state  of  the
'nations,  but  out  of  the  earth.  It  is  a  more  settled  state
of  things  when  this  beast  appears,  who  exercises  all  the
authority  of  the  first  beast  before  him  (that  is,  in  his
presence,  with  his  full  sanction :  it  is  not  usurpation ;
it  is  not  in  any  sense  something  done  without  him  ;  but
it  is  done  in  his  presence,  as  is  here  said);  "and  causeth
the  earth  and  them  which  dwell  therein  to  worship  the
first  beast"  (there  is  an  understanding  between  them),
"  whose  deadly  wound  was  healed."  It  is  remarkable
that  in  2  Thess.  ii  we  do  not  hear  of  his  causing  the
world  to  worship  the  first  beast ;  but  that  he  compels
or  at  at  any  rate  claims  worship,  and  is  himself  wor-
shipped as  God.  For  he  arrogates  divine  worship  to
himself.

It  makes  the  whole  matter  plain,  if  we  remem-
ber that  the  first  beast  means  the  £oman  empire,  and,
consequently,  its  seat  is  the  west  The  second  beast,
on  tlie  contrar}%  is  in  the  land  of  Palestine,  and  has  a
Jewish  form.  Any  one  who  looks  at  2  Thess  ii.  can
see  that  we  are  in  view  of  what  will  be  in  the  land  of
JuiUea,  and  not  in  Rome.  It  is  the  temple  of  God  that
is  particularly  seen,  where  the  man  of  sin  sets  himself
up  as  an  object  of  worship.  Only  we  must  remember
that  we  must  read  scripture  with  scripture.  Supposing  I
treat  the  second  chap,  of  2  Thessalonians  as  giving  me
all  that  the  Bible  tells  about  the  man  of  sin,  I  foreclose
scripture,  and  must  have  an  imperfect  account.  On  the
other  hand,  if  we  take  only  what  we  have  in  Revelation
xiii.,  we  shall  want  certain  elements  necessary  for  com-


f*fr


THE   REVELATION.  501

pleting  the  sketch.  1  believe  that  all  this  is  arranged
with  consummate  wisdom  by  God,  because  He  does  not
want  us  to  read  only  one  part  of  His  word ;  He  wishes
us  thoroughly  to  search  into  all  His  word.  He  will  not
give  a  proper  understanding  of  holy  writ,  unless  there  be
a  real  confidence  in  and  value  for  all  that  He  has  given
us.  Consequently  it  is  only  by  putting  together  these
scriptures,  as  to  which  there  is  ample  light  to  show
what  is  referred  to,  that  we  can  really  understand  the
subject.

Now  it  is  quite  plain  in  the  first  part  of  the  chapter
that  we  have  before  us  a  mighty  political  power.  It  is
equally  certain  that  2  Thessalonians  ii.  describes  not  a
vast  imperial  system  so  much  as  a  religious  power.  An
utterly  lawless  personage  is  the  man  of  sin,  but  still
essentially  a  religious  power.  It  claims  to  itself  what
belongs  to  God ;  and  this  is  precisely  what  we  find  con-
nected with  the  second  beast.

We  may  remark  another  feature  in  the  symbol  here.
It  had  two  horas.  The  reason,  as  I  suppose,  is  con-
nected with  the  whole  testimony  of  John.  Any  one
who  has  looked  into  it  will  see  that  even  as  to  our
blessed  Lord  Himself,  the  general  bent  is  to  show  what
He  was  on  earth — not  what  He  is  in  heaven.  I  admit
there  are  exceptional  passages  in  John  ;  but  while  Paul's
object  is  to  direct  us  to  Christ  in  heaven,  as  the  charac-
teristic point  of  his  witness,  John  on  the  contrary  draws
particular  attention  to  what  He  was  on  earth.

This  seems  to  me  of  importance  for  the  meaning  of
these  two  horns.  The  Lord  Jesus,  as  all  are  aware,  was
a  prophet  on  earth  ;  and  assuredly,  as  we  know.  He  will
reign  as  king  over  the  earth.     But  what  lies  between  ?


502  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

He  is  priest ;  but  He  is  priest  in  heaven.  Accordingly
it  is  not  the  place  of  John  but  of  Paul  to  bring  out  the
heavenly  priesthood  of  Christ.  John  never,  as  far  as  I
know,  developes  the  ofi&ces  of  Christ  above.  Not  but
that  he  points  out  what  connects  itself  with  them,  as  for
instance,  in  chapter  xiii.,  and  again  in  chapter  xiv.,  as
well  as  in  chapters  xvii.  and  xx.  of  the  Gospel.  But
these  are  quite  exceptions.  The  general  strain  of  John
is  to  dwell  on  Christ  manifesting  God  here  below.  Paul's
doctrine  is  man  glorified  in  heaven.

Accordingly  this  I  believe  to  be  the  key  to  the  two
horns  of  the  beast.  When  the  Antichrist  appears,  he
will  not  take  the  place  of  being  a  priest;  far  higher
will  be  his  assumption.  He  will  set  up  to  be  a  prophet
and  a  king,  yea,  a  king  imitating  what  Christ  will  be  to
Israel.  We  have  two  horns,  not  seven ; — it  is  an  imita-
tion, but  not  of  the  full  power  of  Christ.  In  the  Lord
we  see  perfection  of  power,  just  as  could  be  said  of  the
Holy  Ghost  in  His  fulness  of  power  for  government  In
the  Antichrist  there  is  the  pretension  to  what  belonged
to  Christ  connected  with  the  earth,  and  with  the  most
marked  absence  of  what  pertains  to  Him  in  heaven.

This  is  no  mean  evidence  by  the  way,  that  the  idea  of
applying  all  this  to  the  papacy  as  its  full  meaning  is  a
mistake ;  for  the  essential  feature  of  the  papacy  lies  in
its  assumption  to  be  a  living  earthly  representative  of
Christ's  priesthood.  It  is  precisely  the  corruption  of
what  is  heavenly  and  not  Messianic.  Popery  is  much
more  Sintichurch  than  anticAm^.    Such  is  the  difference.

But  when  Rev.  xiii.  is  fulfilled,  there  is  no  question
of  the  church  any  longer.  The  Christian  body  will  be  no
more  seen  on  earth;  the  saints  of  the  high  places  are


THE  REVELATION.  503

on  high.  Accordingly  it  is  not  a  mere  sham  clothing
with  the  priestly  power  of  Christ  which  the  antichrist
makes,  but  a  false  assumption  of  His  prophetical
place  which  was  on  the  earth,  and  of  His  kingly  sphere
which  will  be  on  the  earth.  This  personage  claims  both
powers.  He  has  two  horns  like  a  lamb,  and  is  active  in
the  performance  of  great  signs  and  wonders.  He  has  a
double  activity.  First  of  all,  he  borrows  the  controlling
influence  of  the  Roman  empire, — he  exercises  all  the
authority  of  the  first  beast.  Besides  this,  he  does  a  vast
deal  on  his  own  account  which  the  Roman  emperor  could
not  do.  "  And  he  worketh  great  signs,  that  he  should
even  make  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven  on  the  earth
in  the  sight  of  men."  That  is,  he  imitates  the  power  not
only  of  Christ  but  of  God.  He  claims  to  be  the  Jehovah
God  of  Israel  Just  as  Jesus  is  Jehovah  as  well  as  Mes-
siah, so  this  vessel  of  Satan's  power  in  Jerusalem  will
emulate  what  God  did  by  Elijah  to  disprove  the  claims
of  Baal.  Fire,  we  know,  came  down  and  consumed  the
sacrifice  of  old,  and  God  demonstrated  as  clearly  that
Baal  was  not  God,  as  that  Jehovah  was.  So  the  second
beast  will  do  wonders,  not  really,  but  in  appearance.
"  He  worketh  great  signs  that  he  should  even  make  fire
to  come  down  from  heaven  on  the  earth  in  the  sight  of
men,  and  deceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  by
reason  of  those  signs  which  it  was  given  him  to  work  in
the  sight  of  the  beast."

All  shows  that  this  is  the  antichrist.  The  first  beast
does  not  work  any  miracles  whatever.  He  astonishes
the  world  by  reviving  imperialism  ;  but  this  is  a  very
different  thing,  and  cannot  properly  be  called  a  sign.
It  may  and  will  amaze  men,  but  is  not  a  miracle.   But


504  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

the  beast  out  of  the  earth  or  land,  which  is  incom-
parably more  active  and  energetic  than  the  first,  does
work  great  signs  (no  doubt  by  Satan's  energy,  but  still
he  works  them) ;  and  the  consequence  is  that  he  "  de-
ceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth,"  saying  to  them
especially  "to  make  an  image  to  the  beast,  which  had
the  stroke  of  the  sword,  and  lived."  I  am  not  prepared
to  say  whether  this  is  or  is  not  the  abomination  of  deso-
lation set  up  in  the  holy  place.  It  seems  to  resemble
that  idol,  and  may  probably  be  the  same  thing.

"  And  it  was  given  him  to  give  life  to  the  image  of
the  beast,  that  the  image  of  the  beast  should  both  speak,
and  cause  that  as  many  as  would  not  worship  the  image
of  the  beast  should  be  killed.  And  he  causeth  all,
both  small  and  great,  rich  and  poor,  free  and  bond,  to
receive  a  mark  on  their  right  hand,  or  on  their  foreheads:
and  that  no  man  might  buy  or  sell,  save  he  that  had
the  mark,  the  name  of  the  beast,  or  the  number  of  his
name.  Here  is  wisdom.  Let  him  that  hath  understand-
ing count  the  number  of  the  beast:  for  it  is  a  man's
number;  and  his  number  [is]  six  hundred  threescore
[and]  six."

The  various  guesses  that  have  been  made  respecting
tliis  number  are  most  inadequate.  It  may  be  that  it
is  one  of  those  secrets  that  cannot  be  unravelled  until
the  person  appears,  when  we  may  be  sure  that  at  least
the  wise  will  understand  it.  That  we  are  to  understand
it  now  is,  I  think,  more  than  we  ought  to  assuma  To
what  moral  profit  could  it  possibly  serve  ?  Assuredly
everything  that  can  edify  and  refresh  the  soul,  and
that  can  be  used  by  the  Holy  Ghost  for  real  blessing
in  separating  us  from  the  world  and  attaching  us  to


'V*J


THE   REVELATION.  505

heaven,  and,  above  all,  to  Christ,  we  may  gather  from
the  Eevelation  rightly  understood  now.  Indeed,  I  be-
lieve we  can  gather  a  great  deal  more  than  those  who
are  to  be  in  the  circumstances  will  be  able  to  reap  in
their  day.  But  there  may  be  points  of  minute  applica-
tion kept  back  by  the  wise  reserve  of  God,  who  does  not
indulge  mere  curiosity,  as  this  would  be.  Such  know-
ledge will  be  of  practical  importance  only  when  the  time
comes;  and  therefore  I  do  not  doubt  that  this  is  just
one  of  those  points  in  which  the  Lrord  does  not  gratify
men's  minds  now.  1  have  heard  no  explanation  that
carries  any  force  along  with  it.  Many  of  those  which
have  been  offered  entirely  and  obviously  fail— for  in-
stance, "apostacy"  and  such  like  explanations.  "Apos-
tacy"  is  not  the  number  of  a  man;  nor  for  similar
reasons  can  "  apostate  "  stand,  nor,  perhaps,  "  the  Latin
man  "  or  kingdom,  though  certainly  entitled  to  attention.
Further,  it  does  not  seem,  as  generally  thought,  to  be
the  number  of  antichrist,  the  second  beast,  but  of  the
Roman  empire,  or  rather  Emperor,  in  final  antagonism
to  Jehovah  and  His  anointed.

Next  we  come  to  chapter  xiv.,  where  we  have  neither
the  counsels  of  God  as  opposed  by  Satan,  first  in  heaven
and  then  in  earth;  nor  the  plan  and  instruments  by
which  Satan  gives  battle  to  those  counsels.  All  this  we
have  had  in  chapters  xii.  and  xiii.  But  now  we  enter  on
another  line  of  things.  What  is  God  doing  with  His  own?
Nothing  ?  Impossible !  All  must  be  active  and  good.
God,  therefore,  is  pleased  to  reveal  to  us  a  variety  of
ways  in  which  He  will  put  forth  His  power,  and  send
both  testimony  and  warning  suited  to  the  crisis;  and


506  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

this  is  given  with  remarkable  completeness  throughout
the  seven  divisions  into  which  this  chapter  naturally
divides  itself.

The  first  is  a  certain  numbered  multitude  separated
to  the  Lamb  on  mount  Zion.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  about
to  insist  on  His  rights  in  the  midst  of  Israel ;  and  Ziou
is  the  known  centre  of  royal  grace.  Boyal,  I  say,  be-
cause it  is  Christ  asserting  His  title  as  Son  of  David ;
but  it  is  also  royal  grace,  because  it  supposes  the  total
ruin  of  Israel,  and  that  the  Lord  in  pure  favour  begins
there  to  gather  round  Himself  once  more.  This  accord-
ingly is  the  first  form  in  which  God  displays  His  action
for  the  last  days.  The  devil  may  have  his  beasts  and
horns ;  God  has  His  Lamb ;  and  the  Lamb  now  is  not
seen  on  the  throne  in  heaven,  or  taking  a  book.  He
stands  on  mount  Zion.  It  is  a  notable  point  of  progress
toward  the  kingdom  that  is  clearly  brought  before  us
before  the  close.

"And  I  looked,  and,  lo,  the  Lamb  stood  on  the  mount
Sion,  and  with  him  an  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand,
having  liis  name  and  his  Father's  name  written  on  their
foreheads/*  TheT/  are  not  spoken  of  as  conscious  of  any
such  relationship,  as  it  is  not  a  question  of  their  Father,
not  of  His  Father  and  their  Father.  Nothing  of  the  kind
is  ever  found  in  the  Apocaljrpse  but  "his  Father's  name
on  their  foreheads."  "And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,
as  a  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  a  voice  of  great
thunder:  and  I  heard  the  voice  of  harpers  harping  with
their  harps :  and  they  sing  [as  it  were]  a  new  song  in
presence  of  the  throne,  and  in  presence  of  the  four  living
creatures  and  the  elders :  and  no  man  could  learn  that
song  but  the  hundred  and  forty- four  thousand,  which


THE   REVELATION.  507

were  bought  from  the  earth.  These  are  they  who  were
not  defiled  with  women ;  for  they  are  virgins."

These  saints  had  not  corrupted  themselves;  and
the  name  of  the  Lamb  is  coupled  with  them.  With
Babylonish  wickedness  here  below  they  had  nothing  to
do ;  they  were  pure,  and  are  associated  with  the  holy
Sufferer.  "These  are  they  that  follow  the  Lamb  whither-
soever he  goeth.  These  were  bought  from  among
men,  first-fruits  to  God  and  to  the  Lamb.  And  in
their  mouth  was  found  no  guile:  for  they  are  without
fault"  ["  before  the  throne  of  God"  is  spurious].  Such
is  the  first  action  of  God.  It  is  a  complete  remnant^
not  said  to  be  from  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  such  as
we  saw  in  chapter  vii.;  but  this  is  particularly  of  the
Jews.  They  were  gathered  out  from  those  guilty  of
rejecting  the  Lamb.  And  now  God  answers  all  that  and
other  wickedness  by  this  merciful  and  honourable  sepa-
ration to  the  Lamb,  who  is  now  about  to  be  installed  in
His  royal  seat  on  mount  Zion.

The  next  scene  gives  us  an  angel  flying.  "And  I
saw,"  it  is  said,  "another  angel  fly  in  the  midst  of
heaven,  having  [the]  everlasting  gospel  to  preach  unto
those  that  sit  on  the  earth,  and  unto  every  nation,  and
tribe,  and  tongue,  and  people."  Why  is  it  called  "  ever-
lasting"? We  must  remember  that  the  gospel  which  is
being  preached  now  is  a  very  special  gospel,  and  in  no
way  an  everlasting  gospel.  Nobody  ever  heard  the
gospel  that  is  preached  now  till  Jesus  died  and  rose
and  even  went  to  heaven.  That  is  to  say,  the  gospel  as
it  should  be  preached  in  and  out  of  Christendom  depends
on  the  most  stupendous  facts  ever  accomplished  here
below,  for  which  God  waited  more  than  four  thousand


508  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

years  even  of  man's  dwelling  on  the  earth  before  He
would  or  could  righteously  send  it  forth.  Consequently
the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  as  we  know,  is  not
properly  (never  in  scripture)  called  the  "  everlasting
gospel."  I  suspect  that  most  use  these  terms  with-
out thinking  what  is  really  meant.  When  they  call
the  gospel  now  the  "everlasting  gospel,"  they  have
probably  some  vague  notion  that  it  connects  us  with
eternity.  They  think  it  a  fine-sounding  epithet,  con-
veying I  really  do  not  know  what ;  but  at  any  rate  it  is
to  be  supposed  that  there  is  some  idea  in  the  mind  of
those  that  so  characterize  "the  gospel  of  God."  It  is
certainly  a  mistake,  if  scripture  is  to  decide.

"Everlasting  gospel"  means  what  it  says.  It  means
those  glad  tidings  that  always  have  been  and  always
will  be  true:  whatever  else  God  has  made  known  to  man,
this  has  always  abode  unchanging.  What  is  it  then  ?  The
glad  tidings  of  God  always  were  that  He  purposes  to
bless  man  by  the  promised  seed  Christ  Jesus,  to  set  hira
up  over  the  rest  of  creation,  to  have  dominion  as  His
image  and  glory.  At  the  very  beginning  the  first  chapter
of  Genesis  proves  that  this  is  God's  mind  for  man  here
below.  The  end  of  all  things  will  proclaim  the  self-
same thing.  The  millennium  will  be  a  grand  demon-
strative testimony  to  it.  In  the  new  heavens  and  the
new  earth  man  will  be  thoroughly  and  for  ever  blest.

The  declaration  of  this  I  believe  to  be  the  everlasting
gospel.  In  the  latter  day  it  will  act  as  the  setting  aside
of  the  lie  of  Satan,  who  puts  and  would  fain  keep  man
in  a  position  of  estrangement  from  God,  who  is  morally
forced  to  be  the  judge  of  man  instead  of  being  the  blesser
of  all  upon  the  earth,  and  consequently  to  cast  him


THE   REVELATION.  509

into  helL  All  this,  it  is  plain,  is  the  fruit  of  Satan's
'wiles ;  but  the  everlasting  gospel  presents  God  as  the
blesser  of  man  and  creation,  as  it  always  was  in  His
mind,  and  as  He  will  certainly  bring  it  to  pass ;  not,  of
course,  for  every  individual  man,  because  those  who
despise  His  mercy  in  Christ,  and  those  especially  who
having  heard  despise  the  gospel  of  His  grace,  must  be
lost  for  ever.  I  am  speaking  now  of  what  always  was
before  Him,  and  always  kept  before  man  in  His  word.

The  way  in  which  the  subject  is  spoken  of  here
confirms  this.  "Fear  God,"  is  the  message,  "and  give
glory  to  him"  (there  is  thus  the  evident  contradiction
of  idolatry);  "for  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come."
Then  will  be  the  downfall  of  all  those  that  oppose  God,
not  only  of  all  the  vanities  of  the  nations,  but  of  all
those  that  heed  or  sustain  them  against  God.  "  Worship
him  that  made  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the
fountains  of  waters."  Clearly  therefore  it  is  the  uni-
versal message  of  God  to  man,  and  connected  with  His
creation  glory.  The  solemn  threat  of  His  speedy  judg-
ments is  a  ground  of  pressing  on  the  blinded  consciences
of  man  the  claim  of  the  honour  solely  due  to  Him.

There  are  no  doubt  many  who  think  it  an  extra-
ordinary circumstance  that  God  should  send  out  such  a
message  as  this  in  days  rapidly  approaching.  Let  me  say
why'  such  a  difficulty  is  felt.  It  is  because  men  conjec-
ture and  judge  out  of  their  own  position  and  their  own
relationships.  But  never  can  we  understand  anything
aright  as  long  as  we  reason  and  conclude  thus.  It
is  not  the  way  to  understand  any  part  of  the  Bible,
least  of  all  perhaps  prophecy.  If  it  be  a  questi«jn  of
our  conduct  or  duty,  it  is  indispe usable  to  stand  on


510  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

our  proper  relationship ;  we  must  abide  carefully  in
the  place  that  God  has  given  us,  while  bowing  to  the
word  of  God  that  applies  to  us  there.  How  can  we
act  intelligently  or  rightly  as  Christians  unless  we,
knowing  what  it  means,  believe  we  are  Christians?
We  only  glorify  our  God  and  Father  just  so  far  as  we
look  up  as  children  to  Him  as  our  Father,  and  as  saints
own  Him  as  our  God.  This  is  surely  trua  But  here
no  Christians  are  said  to  be  on  earth :  we  have  elect
Jews;  we  have  nations,  along  with  "those  that  sit
upon  the  earth."  That  is,  there  are  men,  apparently
apostates,  under  the  latter  designation,  as  well  as  the
general  mass  of  mere  nations,  tribes,  tongues,  and
peoples.  It  seems  then  that  God  comes  down,  as  it
were,  to  meet  them  on  the  lowest  possible  ground  of
His  own  truth.  And  what  is  that  ?  They  are  called  to
fear  God  and  give  glory  to  Him ;  and  this  is  on  the
ground  that  He  is  Judge,  just  about  to  deal  with  His
own  world.  He  calls  upon  them  to  abandon  all  that
idolatry  into  which  they  will  have  fallen,  particularly
in  those  days.

And  I  have  not  the  slightest  question  myself  that
at  this  present  moment  there  is  the  working  of  a  leaven
that  will  end  in  idolatry,  especially  (if  there  be  in  this
a  diflerence)  for  the  higher  orders  of  this  country,  who
will  drag  in  the  lower  also.  In  the  humbler  classes
there  is  in  another  way  that  grossness  of  love  for
sensible  objects  and  show  that  will  prepare  them  for
idolatry.  But  I  repeat  that  there  is  the  active  instilling
of  a  spirit,  no  doubt  more  subtle  and  refined  in  the
educated  classes,  which,  in  my  judgment,  will  infallibly
school  them  into  naturalistic  idolatry  before  many  years


THE   REVELATION.  511

are  over.  There  is,  on  the  one  hand,  the  material  ten-
dency of  modem  science  and  literature;  there  is,  on
the  other,  the  condescending  patronage  of  times  that  are
past.  On  these  dangerous  tracks  all  that  is  now  ener-
getically leavening  the  world  tends  to  bring  man  back
to  heathenism  again ;  i,  e.,  the  apostacy.

However  this  may  be  judged  by  those  who  hear  it,
we  must  remember  that  there  will  be  also  another
cause  of  a  most  solemn  nature,  which  is  plainly  re-
vealed :  God  is  going  to  pour  out  a  judicial  delusion  on
Christendom.  It  is  certain  that  He  will  not  only  inflict
severe  blows  of  judgment,  but  give  men  up  to  believe  a
lie — the  great  lie  of  the  devil.  Here  is  the  great  truth
of  all  times : — that  God,  the  God  who  has  now  revealed
Himself  in  Chiist  and  by  redemption,  alone  is  the  due
object  of  worship.  So  far  then  is  this  message,  to  my
mind,  from  being  a  strange  thing  that  it  appears  exactly
suitable  to  man  as  then  situated,  and  no  less  to  God's
wisdom  and  goodness.

Another  consideration  perhaps  may^  help  some  as
connected  with  this,  and  confirmatory  of  it,  founded  on
Matthew  xxv.,  where  the  nations  are  called  up  before
the  Son  of  man  when  He  sits  as  King  upon  the  throne.
It  will  be  remembered  that  He  tells  those  whom  He
designates  as  the  sheep  that,  inasmuch  as  they  did
what  they  had  done  to  His  brethren,  it  was  really  to
Him ;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  the  insults  fell  on  Him
which  were  aimed  at  them.  These  acts  of  kindness,  or
the  contrary,  will  be  owned  by  the  Lord  here.  It  is  no
use  for  people  to  call  it  the  general  judgment,  or  the
judgment  of  our  works.  It  is  not.  The  one  principle
before  as  in  this  scripture  is  His  dealing  with  the  living


512  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

Gentiles,  or  the  nations  according  to  their  ways  with
His  brethren  ;  and  it  will  require  real  power  of  God  to
act  aright  then.  The  pressure  against  His  messengers
will  be  enormous.  If  any  receive  them  well,  it  will  be
from  faith.  I  grant  that  the  measure  of  their  faith  is
small.  That  to  honour  His  brethren  is  virtually  to
honour  Himself,  they  do  not  themselves  know.  When
they  stand  in  presence  of  the  King,  how  astonished
they  are  that  He  should  regard  what  was  done  to  the
messengers  of  His  gospel  in  the  last  days  as  if  done  to
His  own.

Certainly  these  Gentiles  were  wrought  in  by  divine
grace,  yet  very  evidently  they  will  not  be  what  you
would  call  "intelligent."  But  then  how  often  must
we  beware  of  making  too  much  of  this !  What  a  con-
stant snare  it  is  to  slip  into  an  unconscious  criti-
cism !  Men  are  apt  to  give  themselves  an  exaggerated
importance  on  the  score  of  their  knowledge.  God.
I  am  sure,  always  attaches  a  far  higher  value  to  the
heed  paid  to  the  Lord  Himself,  and  this  too  in  those
that  He  sends  out.  It  is  always  a  crucial  test.  It  will
be  so  then  most  of  all,  because  these  messages  will  go
forth  to  the  nations  on  the  earth  when,  growingly  lifted
up  and  self-satisfied,  they  are  summoned  by  messengers,
poor  and  contemptible  in  their  eyes,  who  will  soleumly
proclaim  the  kingdom  just  coming — the  King  who  is
coming  in  person  to  judge  the  quick  apart  from  aud
before  the  judgment  of  the  dead.  But  some  souls  here
and  there  will  receive  them,  not  only  treating  them
kindly,  but  this  because  they  receive  the  message.  The
power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  alone  will  give  them  this
faith.     None  less  than  God  Himself  will  incline  their


THE   REVELATION.  513

heart.  Accordingly  the  Lord  will  refer  to  this  reception,
or  the  kindness  that  accompanied  it,  as  an  evidence  of
their  heeding  Himself  in  the  persons  of  His  messen-
gers.

This  I  consider  to  be  similar,  if  not  the  same,  as
the  everlasting  gospel ;  indeed  it  is  called  by  Matthew
the  "gospel  of  the  kingdom."  I  am  inclined  to  infer
that  the  "  gospel  of  the  kingdom  "  and  the  **  everlasting
gospel"  are  substantially  identical;  and  that  it  was  thus
described  because  it  was  always  in  the  purpose  of  God
to  establish  this  kingdom  over  the  world,  and  to  bless
man  himself  here  below.  This  Matthew,  in  accordance
with  his  design,  calls  rather  the  "gospel  of  the  king-
dom," because  Christ  is  going  to  be  King.  John,  it
would  seem,  calls  it  the  "  everlasting  gospel,"  because  it
is  in  contrast  with  special  messages  from  time  to  time,
as  well  as  with  all  that  had  to  do  with  man  as  he  is
here  below.  At  this  most  corrupt  time,  then,  the
message  will  be  sent  forth,  and  certain  souls  will  receive
it  by  God*s  grace.

Thus  the  second  scene  in  the  chapter  is  the  procla-
mation of  the  everlasting  gospel  unto  those  settled  down
on  the  earth,  and  to  the  nations,  &c.,  as  the  first  section
was  the  separation  of  a  remnant  of  Jews  to  the  Lamb  on
mount  Zion.

The  third  section,  which  may  be  passed  over  with
comparatively  few  words,  is  a  warning  respecting  the
fall  of  Babylon.  An  angel  comes  forth,  saying,  "Babylon
is  fallen,  is  fallen,  the  great  city,  which  made  all  the
nations  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  her  forni-
cation."

The  fourth  is  a  warning  about  the  beast.   "  And  the

2  L


514  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

third  angel  followed  them,  saying  with  a  loud  voice,  If
any  man  worship  the  beast  and  his  image,  and  receive
his  mark  on  his  forehead,  or  on  his  hand,  he  also  shall
drink  of  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  God,  which  is
mingled  without  mixture  in  the  cup  of  his  anger;
and  he  shall  be  tormented  with  fire  and  brimstone  in
the  presence  of  the  holy  angels,  and  in  the  presence  of
the  Lamb.  And  the  smoke  of  their  torment  ascendeth
up  unto  ages  of  ages :  and  they  have  no  rest  day  and
night,  who  worship  the  beast  and  his  image,  and  if
any  one  receiveth  the  mark  of  his  name."  So  far  these
divine  dealings  all  go  in  pairs :  as  the  work  among  the
Jews,  and  then  a  final  testimony  to  the  Gentiles ;  then
the  warning  about  Babylon,  and  another  about  the
beast.  "  Here  is  the  endurance  of  the  saints,  that  keep
the  commandments  of  God  and  the  faith  of  Jesus."

Then  we  come  to  the  fifth,  which  is  rather  different
It  is  a  declaration,  that  ''Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die
in  the  Lord  from  henceforth."  From  this  time  nobody
that  belongs  to  the  Lord  is  going  to  die,  and  those  that
die  in  the  Lord  {i,e.  in  fact  all  who  have  thus  died)  are
just  on  the  point  of  blessedness,  not  by  personal  exemp-
tion but  by  the  first  resurrection  and  the  reign  with  the
Lord,  which  will  terminate  all  further  persecution  and
death  for  His  name.  The  wicked  must  pay  the  wages
of  sin,  and  be  destroyed  by  the  judgments  of  God ;  but
there  shall  be  no  more  dying  in  the  Lord  after  this.  As
a  class  these  are  to  be  blessed  (not  to  die)  henceforth.
"  And  I  heard  a  voice  out  of  heaven  saying  unto  me,
Write,  Blessed  [are]  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Loid
from  henceforth.  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  shall
rest  firom  their  labours ;  for  their  works  do  follow  with


THE  REVELATION.  515

them."   There  is  an  end  of  such  sorrow  and  labour :  the
Lord  is  going  to  take  the  world  and  all  things  in  hand.

Accordingly  in  the  next  scene  "  I  saw,  and,  behold,  a
white  cloud,  and  upon  the  cloud  one  sitting  like  unto
[the]  Son  of  man,  having  on  his  head  a  golden  crown,
and  in  his  hand  a  sharp  sickle.  And  another  angel  came
out  of  the  temple,  crying  with  a  loud  voice  to  him  that
sat  on  the  cloud.  Send  thy  sickle,  and  reap;  for  the
hour  is  come  to  reap;  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is
dried.  And  he  that  sat  on  the  cloud  thrust  his  sickle
on  the  earth ;  and  the  earth  was  reaped."  It  is  not  here
a  question  of  gathering  in.  The  Son  of  man  is  seen
with  the  crown  of  gold,  King  of  righteousness,  not  yet
manifested  as  King  of  peace.

And  then  the  close  of  all  the  scenes  comes.  "  And
another  angel  came  out  of  the  temple  that  is  in  heaven,
having  himself  also  a  sharp  sickle.  And  another  angel
came  out  from  the  ajtar,  that  had  authority  over  the
fire;  and  called  with  a  loud  cry  to  him  that  had  the
sharp  sickle,  saying,  Send  thy  sharp  sickle,  and  gather
the  clusters  of  the  vine  of  the  earth ;  for  her  grapes  are
fully  ripened."  This  goes  farther.  For  the  harvest  the
call  was  out  of  the  temple ;  here  it  is  out  of  the  temple
that  is  in  heaven.  It  is  not  only  wrath  on  earth  but
from  heaven.  And  another  angel  comes  out  from  the
altar  {i.e.,  the  place  of  human  responsibility,  where  God
manifests  Himself  to  sinners  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,
judging  sins  but  in  grace).  So  much  the  more  tremen-
dous His  vengeance  on  the  earthly  religionists  who
despise  Christ  and  the  cross  in  deed  if  not  in  word.
This  angel  has  authority  over  the  fire,  the  sign  of  detec-
tive and  consuming  judgment.     In  short,  we  have  here

2  L  2


616  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

the  harvest  and  the  vintage, — the  two  great  forms  of  the
judgment  at  the  close  ;  the  harvest  being  that  judgment
that  discerns  between  the  just  and  the  unjust,  and  the
vintage  being  the  infliction  of  unmingled  wrath  on
apostate  religion,  "  the  vine  of  the  earth,"  which  is  the
object  of  God's  special  abhorrence.

It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  here  we  have  seven  distinct
acts  in  which  God  will  interfere  in  the  way  of  forming
a  testimony,  of  warnings  to  the  world  and  comfort  to
His  people,  and  finally  of  judging  the  results  as  far  as
the  quick  are  concerned.

But  a  very  peculiar  scene  is  described  in  chapters  xv.
xvi.  On  this  one  need  not  now  bestow  more  than  a  few
words.  "  I  saw  another  sign  in  heaven."  It  is  clearly
connected  with  what  we  have  had  in  chap.  xii.  "And
I  saw  another  sign  in  heaven,  great  and  marvellous,
seven  angels  having  seven  plagues,  the  last ;  for  in  them
is  tilled  up  the  wrath  of  God."  You  will  observe  that
it  is  not  yet  the  coming  of  Christ.  This  is  of  importance
to  show  the  structure  of  this  portion  of  the  book.  We
must  carefully  beware  of  supposing  that  the  seven  bowls
are  after  the  Son  of  man  is  come  for  the  harvest  and
the  vintage  of  the  earth.  We  shall  find,  so  far  from  this
being  the  case,  that  the  vision  must  go  back, — I  do  not
say  to  the  beginning  of  chapter  xiv.,  but  before  the  end
of  it.  The  very  last  of  the  bowls,  the  seventh,  is  the
fall  of  Babylon.  Now  that  act  of  judgment  would
correspond  to  the  third  dealing  of  God  in  chapter  xiv.
The  first  was  the  separation  of  the  Jews ;  the  second
the  everlasting  gospel  to  the  Gentiles;  and  the  third
the  fall  of  Babylon.    Thus  the  last  bowl  only  brings  us


THE   REVELATION.  517

up  to  the  same  point.  Hence  the  bowls  must  not  in  any
way  be  supposed  to  follow  after  chapter  xiv.,  but  only
after  its  earlier  part  at  the  utmost.  This  is  important,
because  it  may  help  some  to  gather  a  juster  idea  how  to
place  chronologically  the  various  portions  of  the  book.
The  last  bowl  is  also  the  last  outpouring  of  God's  wrath
before  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  comes.  Consequently  it
must  precede  the  latter  part  of  that  chapter.  It  syn-
chronizes, we  have  seen,  with  the  third  out  of  its  seven
consecutive  sections.  The  end  of  chapter  xvi.  does  not
in  point  of  time  fall  lower  than  the  third  step  in  those
of  chapter  xiv.  The  fourth  probably,  but  certainly  the
fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  are  events  necessarily  subse-
quent to  all  the  bowels.

Let  us  look  then  a  little  into  the  subject.  "  I  saw  as
it  were  a  sea  of  glass."  But  'here  it  is  distinguished  in
its  accompaniments  from  the  description  in  cha[)ter  iv.
There  the  elders  were  seen  on  thrones,  with  the  sea  of
glass  Ijearing  its  silent  but  strong  testimony  that  these
saints  had  done  with  earthly  need  and  danger,  —  that
those  who  required  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word  are
not  contemplated  in  this  scene.  This  is  all  intelligible
and  even  plain.  When  the  glorified  saints  are  caught  up
to  heaven,  they  no  longer  require  what  was  set  forth  by
the  laver  and  its  water  to  purify ;  for  the  sea  of  glass
attests  that  the  purity  was  fixed.  The  fact  is,  that  they
were  beyond  the  scene  where  water  was  needed  to
cleanse  their  daily  defilements.

Here  it  is  not  merely  a  sea  of  glass,  but  mingled  with
fire.  What  does  this  teach  ?  It  declares,  in  my  opinion,
that  these  saints  passed  through  a  time  of  fearful  fiery
tribulation,  as  did  not  the  elders.     The  absence  of  the


518  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

fire  in  connection  with  the  elders  is  just  as  significant
as  the  presence  of  fire  in  connection  with  the  saints  in
collision  with  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet,  of  whom
we  are  now  speaking.  If  people  ask  you,  "Are  the
saints  to  pass  through  the  time  of  tribulation?  The
right  answer  is,  What  saints  do  you  mean?  If  you
mean  those  that  are  presented  by  the  elders  caught  up
at  Christ's  coming,  clearly  they  will  not  Scripture  is
positive.  If  you  only  mean  that  some  saints  are  to  pass
through  that  tremendous  time,  it  is  unquestionable.  In
short,  we  have  only  to  distinguish,  and  all  becomes
perfectly  plain:  by  confounding  the  two  classes  all  is
made  a  mass  of  obscurity.  But  scripture  cannot  be
broken.

Here  then  we  find  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire.
"And  I  saw  as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire :
and  those  that  have  gained  the  victory  over  the  beast,
and  over  his  image,  and  over  the  number  of  his  name,
standing  on  the  sea  of  glass,  having  harps  of  God."
The  victory  over  the  beast  is  never  predicated  of  the
elders  in  any  sort ;  nor  is  there  any  connection  with  the
elders  here.  It  is  a  closing  scene  of  fearful  triaL  This
is  important.  The  victories  here  are  confined  to  the
time  when  Satan's  last  plans  become  consummated.
These  were  delivered  from  them  probably  before  the
beast  falls.  At  any  rate,  the  time  does  not  seem  of  prime
importance,  but  the  fact  is  undeniable  that  these  con-
querors belong  exclusively  to  the  time  of  the  last  efforts
of  the  devil  through  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet
They  are  strictly  speaking  therefore  Apocalyptic  saints,
and  the  final  company  of  them.  It  will  be  recollected
that  in  our  last  lecture  we  saw  the  first  suffereis.


THE   REVELATION.  519

Although  these  may  have  fiEdlen  under  the  hand  of  the
Itoman  Empire,  they  really  got  the  victory  over  it,  and
are  here  seen  standing  on  the  sea  of  glass  having  harps
of  God.  Their  melody  in  praise  of  the  Lord  was  none
the  worse  for  the  sea  of  tribulation  through  which  they
had  passed  into  His  presence.

"And  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses,  servant  of  God,
and  the  song  of  the  Lamb."  Thus  it  is  plain  that  they
are  not  Christians  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word.
Assuredly  they  are  saints  in  the  most  real  sense,  but  not
standing  in  the  relations  which  now  subsist ;  they  are
not  to  have  that  sort  of  bond  which  is  made  good  by
the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  those  who  are  now
in  association  with  Christ.  So  exclusive  is  it  that  those
who  may  have  been  under  Moses  are  under  him  no
more ;  they  own  no  master  or  head  save  Christ.  Whereas
the  souls  of  whom  we  read  here  still  retain  their  link
with  Jewish  things,  though  beyond  a  doubt  they  serve
God  and  the  Lamb.  Hence  we  hear  of  them  "  saying,
Great  and  marvellous  are  thy  works,  Lord  God  Al-
mighty; just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  0  King" — not
"of  saints,"  but  "of  nations."  There  is  no  such  thing  in
scripture  as  "  King  of  saints."  This  is  one  of  the  worst
readings  of  the  vicious  received  text  of  the  Bevelation.
I  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  both  that  it  is  against  the
best  witnesses,  and  that  it  conveys  a  heterodox  mean-
ing, and  is  consequently  mischievous.  For  what  can  go
more  practically  to  destroy  the  proper  relationship  of
the  saints  of  the  Lord  ?  Elsewhere  we  never  hear  of
such  a  thing  as  *'  King  of  saints,"  nor  has  it  any  just
sense.  To  the  saints  the  Lord  Jesus  stands  undoubtedly
as  their  Lord  and  master ;  but  king  is  a  relationship  with


520  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

a  nation  living  on  the  earth.  It  is  not  at  all  a  con-
nection that  pertains  to  the  new  man.  Besides,  these
if  mart3rred  belong  actually  to  heaven,  where  such  a
relationship  would  be  strange  indeed.  Thus  it  is  strange
doctrine  as  well  as  a  fictitious  reading.  The  allusion  is
to  Jeremiah  x.  7.  There  you  will  find  "king  of  nations,"
with  other  words  which  are  cited  here.  If  these  saints
were  not  exclusively  Gentiles,  at  least  they  compre-
hended such ;  and  this  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  in
reading  the  passage.  The  true  title  then  is  "king  of
Gentiles"  or  of  "nations."  No  doubt  King  of  the
Jews  He  is ;  but  those  in  particular  who  were  Gentiles
themselves  would  and  ought  to  rejoice  in  being  able  to
praise  Him  as  the  King  of  nations.

"Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  0  Lord,  and  glorify  thy
name  ?  for  thou  only  art  holy :  for  all  nations  shall
come  and  worship  before  thee"  (here  again  it  is  not
Israel,  but  all  nations  shall  come) ;  "  for  thy  judgments
are  made  manifest."  They  are  anticipating  the  triumph
that  is  reserved  for  God  in  the  day  of  the  glory  of
Christ's  coming.

"And  after  that  I  saw,  and  there  was  opened  the
temple  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  in  heaven :
and  the  seven  angels  came  out  of  tlie  temple,  that  had
the  seven  plagues,  clothed  in  pure  and  white  linen,  and
having  their  breasts  girded  with  golden  giixiles.  And
one  of  the  four  living  creatures  gave  the  seven  angels
seven  golden  bowls  full  of  the  wrath  of  God,  who  liveth
unto  the  ages  of  the  ages.  And  the  temple  was  filled
with  smoke  from  the  glory  of  God,  and  from  his  power;
and  no  one  was  able  to  enter  into  the  temple,  till  the
seven  plagues  of  the  seven  angels  were  fulfilled."     It  is-


">-■


THE   REVELATION.  521

hot  now  the  ark  of  God's  covenant  seen  in  the  opened
temple.  It  is  characterised  as  the  tabernacle  of  the
testimony,  and  judgments  follow  on  apostate  Gentiles,
not  the  revelation  of  the  divine  counsels  touching
Israel.

Then  (chap,  xvi.)  we  have  these  seven  bowls  poured
out.  It  is  not  now  "  the  third  "  as  under  the  trumpets,
with  which  the  analogy  is  close ;  there  is  no  restriction
to  the  western  empire  of  liome.  The  whole  apostate
sphere  is  smitten,  and  with  yet  more  severity.  The  first,
as  we  know,  was  on  the  earth ;  the  second  on  the  sea ;
the  third  on  the  rivers  and  fountains  of  waters;  and  the
fourth  on  the  sun.  Thus  all  the  different  departments
of  nature,  whatever  may  be  symbolized  by  them  (and
their  meaning  seems  to  me  neither  indeterminate  nor
obscure),  were  visited  by  the  bowls  of  God's  wrath.

The  three  later  bowls,  like  the  three  woe -trumpets,
come  to  closer  quarters  with  men.

The  fifth  angel  poured  out  his  bowl  on  the  throne
of  the  beast.  It  is  clear  therefore  that  we  have  here  a
Gentile  sphere  before  us,  which  fits  in  with  the  prefatory
scene.  "  The  fifth  angel  poured  out  his  bowl  upon  the
seat  of  the  beast;  and  his  kingdom  was  full  of  darkness;
and  they  gnawed  their  tongues  for  pain,  and  blasphemed
the  God  of  heaven  because  of  their  pains  and  their  sores,
and  repented  not  of  their  deeds.  And  the  sixth  angel
poured  out  his  bowl  upon  the  great  river  Euphrates;
and  the  water  thereof  was  dried  up,  that  the  way  of
the  kings  that  are  from  the  sun-rising  might  be  pre-
pared.''  The  Euphrates  was  the  boundary  that  separated
the  empire  on  its  oriental  frontiers  from  the  vast  hordes
of  uncivilized  north-eastern  nations  destined  to  come.


522  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

into  conflict  witli  the  powers  of  the  west  in  the  latter
day.  Thus  the  way  is  made  plain  for  them  to  come
forward  and  enter  into  the  final  struggle  This  seems
the  meaning  of  the  drying  up  of  the  great  river.  *And
I  saw  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs  out  of  the  mouth
of  the  dragon,  and  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  beast,  and
out  of  the  mouth  of  the  false  prophet  For  they  are
the  spirits  of  demons,  working  signs,  which  go  forth
unto  the  kings  of  the  whole  habitable  earth,  to  gather
them  to  the  battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  the
Almighty."  This  gives  proof  of  what  I  have  just  now
referred  to.  There  is  about  to  be  a  universal  uprising
and  fight  to  the  death  between  the  east  and  the  west
But  the  Lord  has  designs  which  neither  side  knows  nor
r^ards,  and  He  is  no  indifferent  spectator.  "  Behold,  I
come  as  a  thief  Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,  and
keepeth  his  garments,  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  they  see
his  shame.  And  they"  (for  I  take  it  so)  "gathered  them
together  unto  the  place  called  in  the  Hebrew  tongue
Armagedon."

Lastly  comes  the  seventh  angel,  who  deals  with  the
world  still  more  decidedly  and  universally  by  pouring
on  the  air.  "And  the  seventh  angel  poured  out  his  bowl
into  the  air;  and  there  came  a  great  voice  out  of  the
temple  of  heaven,  from  the  throne,  saying.  It  is  done.
And  there  were  lightnings,  and  voices,  and  thunders;
and  there  was  a  great  earthquake  " — and  not  only  great
but  unexampled — "such  as  was  not  since  men  were
upon  the  earth,  such  an  earthquake,  so  great"  Clearly,
therefore,  judgment  from  heaven  becomes  yet  more
unsparing  in  its  blows  on  man  here  below.  "  And  the
great  city  came  (^cvcro)  into  three  parts,  and  the  cities


l.'iJ


THE   REVELATIOlf.


523


of  the  nations  fell :  and  great  Babylon  was  remembered
before  God."  This  accounts  for  the  warning  of  the  fall
of  Babylon  referred  to  in  the  complete  series  of  God's
dealings  in  chap.  xiv.  To  that  chap.  xvL  now  brings  us
up  in  point  of  time.

This  must  suffice  for  to-night^  though  no  more  than
a  sketch  of  the  general  bearing  of  this  part  of  the
prophecy.


XM.


THE    REVELATION.

Chaps,  xvii.-xzii.

It  is  necessary  that  we  should  all  bear  in  mind,  if  we
have  not  observed  it  before,  tliat  Eev.  xvii.  does  not
pursue  the  chronological  course  of  the  prophecy.  It  is
a  description,  and  not  one  of  the  visions  that  carry  us
omvard.  The  seventh  bowl  contained  under  it  the  fall
of  Babylon,  which  "was  remembered  before  God,  to
give  to  her  tlie  cup  of  the  wine  of  the  fierceness  of
his  wratli."

This  chapter  explains  how  it  was  that  Babylon  was
so  olTcnsive  to  God,  and  wherefore  He  judged  her  thus
sternly.  But,  in  point  of  fact,  in  giving  the  description
of  Babylon,  the  Holy  Ghost  enters  even  more  into  an
account  of  her  relations  with  the  beast,  the  imperial
power  of  which  we  saw  not  a  little  last  night.  Accord-
ingly these  are  the  two  main  objects  of  judgment
brought  before  us  in  the  chapter.  It  is  true,  the  beast's
judgment  is  only  referred  to  as  a  defeat  under  the
hand  of  the  Lamb.  The  particulars  are  reserved  for  a
later  point  in  this  prophecy.  We  must  therefore  look  a
little  into  the  two  objects — Babylon  and  the  beast.


^


The  principle  is  very  clear.   Man  has  always  sinned


^-x


THE   REVELATION.  525

in  one  or  other  of  these  two  ways,  looking  now  at  sin
in  its  broadest  forms.  The  woman — the  strange  woman
— sets  forth  corruption,  human  nature  indulging  itself
in  its  own  evil  desires,  irrespective  of  God's  will.  The
beast  is  the  expression  of  the  will  of  man  setting  itself
up  in  direct  antagonism  to  God.  In  short,  one  may  be
described  as  corruption,  and  the  other  as  violence.

Tliere  is,  how^ever,  a  great  deal  more  than  this  on  the
subject,  and  given  with  great  precision  in  scripture,
because  this  is  merely  the  principle  of  sin  in  one  or
other  form  from  the  begiimiug.  It  will  be  observed  that
in  this  case  it  is  one  of  the  angels  that  had  the  seven
bowls  who  comes  forward  and  says  to  John,  "  Come
hither ;  I  will  show  unto  thee  the  judgment  of  the  great
whore  (or  harlot)  that  sitteth  upon  [the]  many  waters."
There  w^ere  two  particular  effects  of  her  evil :  the  one,
illicit  commerce  with  the  kings  of  the  earth  ;  the  other,
intoxicating  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  with  the  wine
of  her  fornication.

"  So  he  carried  me  away  in  the  Spirit  into  a
wilderness" — a  thorough  waste  as  to  the  knowledge  or
enjoyment  of  God.  The  woman  was  there  seen  sitting
on  a  scarlet-coloured  beast,  i.  e.,  the  well-known  imperial
power  of  the  lioman  Empire, — "  full  of  [the]  names  of
blasphemy"  in  its  wicked  opposition  to  God,  and  clothed
with  tlie  forms  we  have  already  seen — "seven  heads
and  ten  horns."  The  Spirit  of  God  regards  it  in  its
final  shape  and  completeness,  as  far  as  it  was  permitted
to  attain  it.  "The  woman  was  arrayed  in  purple  and
scarlet  colour,  and  decked  with  gold  and  precious  stone
and  pearls."  Everything  that  could  attract  the  natural
man  was  there;  and  all  that  which  to  him  looks  fieur


526  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

enough  on  the  side  of  religion.  But  she  has  a  golden
cup  in  her  hand  full  of  abominations  and  the  impurities
of  her  fornication.*  Idolatry  is  the  awful  stamp  that
she  bears,  and  this  too  both  in  what  she  gives  to  man,
and  in  what  is  written  on  her  forehead  before  (Jod.
"  Upon  her  forehead  was  a  name  written,  Mystery,
Babylon  the  great,  the  mother  of  the  harlots  and  of
the  abominations  of  the  earth."

Men  have  been  beguiled  here  and  there,  and  from  an
early  date,  to  set  aside  the  true  bearing  of  this  chapter.
Sometimes  they  have  contended  for  its  application  to
pagan  Rome.  Sometimes,  again,  they  have  sought  to
turn  it  aside  toward  Jerusalem  in  her  corrupt  state.
But  a  grave  consideration  soon  disposes  of  both  views
by  the  relation  to  the  beast,  and  more  particularly  by
what  will  be  shown  a  little  farther  on.  The  application
to  old  pagan  Rome  is  harsh  and  purposeless  enough;
but  the  attempt  to  refer  it  to  Jerusalem  is  of  all
schemes  the  most  absurd ;  for,  far  from  being  borne  up
by  the  imperial  power,  Jerusalem  was  trodden  down
by  it.  If  there  was  any  Gentile  power  since  John's  day,
which  did  not  sustain  but  persecute  and  suppress  Jeru-
salem, it  was  Rome,  instead  of  being  a  gaudy  harlot
mounted  on  that  vast  empire.

At  the  same  time  the  attempt  to  apply  Babylon  to
ancient  Rome  is  almost  as  unhappy;  and  for  a  plain
reason.  As  long  as  Rome  was  pagan,  there  was  neither
the  full  bearing  of  the  seven  heads,  nor  did  so  much
as  one  of  the  ten  horns  exist.  The  decem-regal  divi-
sion of  the  broken  empire  in  the  West,  as  all  know,  was

•  Most  copies,  it  would  seem,  read  ttiq  y^c*  "of  the  earth;"  the
Alex,  and  others  give  a^r^Ci  *'  of  her."    The  Sinai  MS.  has  both.


THE  REVELATION.  527

long  after  Eome  had  ceased  to  be  heathen.  Nobody  can
dispute  that  this  remar£:able  cluster  of  kingdoms  in
Europe  was  the  fruit  providentially  of  the  destroyed
unity  of  the  Boman  empire  when  the  barbarians  in-
vaded it.  With  that  love  of  freedom  which  they  carried
from  their  German  forests,  they  would  not  allow  the
one  iron  rule  of  the  ancient  empire  to  subsist  longer,
but  set  up  each  their  own  kingdom  in  the  different
fragments  of  the  dismembered  empire.  Thus  the  at-
tempt to  apply  it  during  the  pagan  period  is  altogether
futile  on  the  face  of  the  matter.  We  shall  j&nd  that  the
scripture  affords  much  light  to  decide  the  true  bearing
of  the  prophecy,  and  that  no  application  to  the  past  can
possibly  satisfy  the  conditions  satisfactorily.  If  ancient
times  failed  fully  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  chap-
ter, it  is  evident  that  the  middle  ages  are  passed  without
its  fulfilment  as  a  whole.  When  we  come  to  the  full
application  of  the  prophecy,  we  must  look  onward  to
the  latter  day.

This  falls  in  with  what  we  have  seen  of  the  book  in
general ;  but  I  do  not  deny  that  certain  elements  which
figure  in  the  Apocalypse  then  existed  and  still  exist.
No  one  can  soberly  deny  that  Babylon  in  some  sort  had
a  place  then ;  but  that  the  special,  and  above  all,  the  full
character  of  Babylon  was  manifested  as  here  portrayed
is  another  matter.  We  may  surely  say  her  cup  was  not
yet  full.  There  was  not  yet  fairly  out  before  men  what
God  foresaw  as  that  which  must  finally  provoke  His
judgment.  Again,  to  my  mind  it  seems  demonstrably
true  that  the  relation  to  the  beast  here  brought  before
us  must  in  all  fairness  be  allowed  to  look  onward  to
a  later  stage  of  Babylon.    Thus  there  is  no  question


528  INTRODUCTOBY  LECTURES.

that  some  of  the  actors  in  the  final  scenes  of  the  great
drama  were  already  there,  as  the  reigning  city,  and  the
Eoman  empire.  Moral  elements  too  were  not  wanting :
the  mystery  of  lawlessness  had  long  been  at  work,
though  the  enemy  had  not  yet  brought  in  the  apostacy,
and  still  less  the  manifestation  of  the  lawless  one.  But
whatever  subsisted  then,  that  which  the  Spirit  here  pre-
sents as  a  whole  cannot  be  found  realized  at  any  point
of  time  in  the  past.  We  must  perforce  therefore  look
for  a  still  more  complete  development  before  tlie  Lamb
judges  the  beast  after  the  ten  horns  along  with  it  shall
have  destroyed  Babylon.

There  is  another  remark  to  make.  It  is  hard  to  see
how  Roman  city,  or  anything  civil  connected  with  it,
could  be  called  "  mystery."  It  is  partly  because  of  this
that  many  excellent  men  have  endeavoured  to  apply  the
vision  to  Romanism;  and  I  admit  that  there  is  found
a  measure  of  analogy.  That  religious  system  htis  an
incomparably  nearer  connexion  with  this  mysterious
harlot  than  anything  we  have  yet  spoken  of.  There
is  no  doubt  that  Rome  in  some  form  is  the  woman
described  in  the  chapter :  the  seven  heads  or  hills  cleaily
point  to  that  city,  which  of  aU  cities  might  best  and
indeed  alone  be  known  as  ruling  over  the  kings  of  the
earth.  There  is  therefore  much  to  be  said  for  the  Pro-
testant application  of  the  chapter  as  compared  with  the
Praeterist  theory  of  pagan  Rome.  Yet  it  will  be  foirnd
imperfect,  for  reasons  which,  I  think,  will  be  clear  to
any  unbiassed  mind.

There  stands  the  solemn  brand  graven,  not  on  the
blasphemous  beast,  but  on  the  forehead  of  its  rider,
"  Mystery,  Babylon  the  great."    The  question  is,  why  js


THE  REVELATION.  629

she  thus  designated?  If  only  an  imperial  city,  what  has
this  to  do  with  mystery  ?  The  simple  fact  of  conquering
far  and  wide,  and  of  exercising  vast  political  power  in
the  earth,  does  not  constitute  any  title  to  such  a  name.
A  mystery  clearly  points  to  something  undiscoverable
by  the  natural  mind  of  man — a  secret  that  requires  the
distinct  and  fresh  light  of  God  to  unravel,  but  which
when  revealed  thus  is  plain  enough.  And  so  it  is  with
this  very  Babylon  that  comes  before  us  here.  Justly
does  she  gather  her  title  from  the  old  fountain  of  idols
and  of  combined  power  without  God :  confusion  being
here  the  characteristic  element,  the  designation  is  taken
from  the  renowned  city  of  the  Chaldeans,  the  first  spot
notorious  in  both  respects.

But  the  attempt,  again,  to  apply  what  is  said  here  to
a  future  city  of  Babylon  in  Chaldea  seems  to  me  no  less
vain.  There  is  a  distinct  contrast  between  the  city  John
describes  and  the  ancient  Babylon,  in  that  the  latter
was  built  on  the  plain  of  Shinar,  while  the  former  is
expressly  said  to  have  seven  heads,  and  these  explained
to  mean  seven  mountains.  I  admit  that  there  may  be
something  more  in  the  symbol  than  the  literal  hills  of
Eome,  because  they  are  said  to  be  also  seven  kings.  At
the  same  time  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  eliminate  such
a  feature  out  of  the. description.  It  is  written  to  be
believed,  not  to  be  ignored  or  explained  away.

In  short,  it  would  seem  that  God  has  hedged  round
His  own  draft  of  Babylon  so  as  to  make  it  quite  plain
that  Eome,  city  and  system,  figures  in  the  scene ;  and
this  too  necessarily  involving  a  mediaeval  description,
though  the  full  result  will  not  be  till  the  end  of  the  age ;
for  she  rides  the  beast  or  empire  characterized  so  as

2  M


530  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

naturally  to  involve  the  past  barbarian  irruption  and
the  resulting  ten-kingdomed  state.  Again,  that  it  sup-
poses Some  after  it  had  professed  the  name  of  Christ  I
think  is  not  to  be  doubted,  if  only  from  the  expression
"mystery"  attached  to  Babylon.  It  clearly  contrasts
this  mystery  with  another.  We  have  not  to  learn  what
the  other  mystery  means;  we  know  well  that  it  is
according  to  God  and  godliness.  But  here  is  a  mystery
altogether  different: — "Mystery,  Babylon  the  great,
the  mother  of  Uie  harlots  and  of  the  abominations  of
the  earth."

Here  were  joined  good  and  evil  in  godless  union,  for
the  worse,  not  for  the  better, — this  alliance,  unlioly  in
principle,  irremediable  therefore  in  practice,  between
God  and  the  natural  man,  who  substitutes  rites  for  the
grace  and  word  of  God,  for  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  the
power  of  the  Spirit,  and  employs  the  name  of  the  Lord
as  a  cover  for  grosser  covetousness  and  ambition,  jret
more  aspiring  than  the  vulgar  world.  All  these  things
have  their  place  in  Babylon  the  great  She  is  the
mother  of  the  harlots,  but  also  (and  with  still  deeper
guilt)  of  the  abominations  of  the  earth.  This  brings  in
idolatry,  real  shameless  idolatry  too,  not  merely  that
subtle  working  of  the  idolatrous  spirit  that  every  Chris*
tian  has  to  guard  against  Here  it  is  the  positive
worship  of  the  creature  besides  the  Creator,  yea,  and
notoriously  more  than  He.  For  who  knows  not  the
horrors  of  Mariolatry  ?  Babylon  is  the  parent  of  the
"abominations  of  the  eartL"  It  is  not  therefore  a
question  of  virtual  idols  suitable  to  ensnare  the  ohildxen
of  God,  but  of  that  which  is  adapted  to  the  eaiA
itself, — thorough-going  palpable  idolatry.


THE  REVELATION.  531

Such  is  God's  account  of  Babylon  the  great  Take
notice  of  this  (which  confirms  the  application  just  now
contended  for),  that  when  John  saw  the  woman  drunken
with  the  blood  of  the  saints,  and  with  the  blood  of  the
martyrs  of  Jesus,  he  wondered  with  great  wonder.  Had
it  been  simply  a  persecution  from  pagans,  what  was  there
to  wonder  at  in  their  deadly  hatred  of  the  truth  and  of
those  who  confess  it  ?  That  an  openly  heathen  metmpolis,
devoted  to  the  worship  of  Mars,  and  Jupiter,  and  Venus,
and  other  wicked  monstrosities  of  pagan  mythology
should  be  irritated  with  the  gospel  which  exposes  it  all,
and  should  consequently  seek  to  injure  the  faithful,  was
to  be  expected,  and  a  necessary  result,  directly  that  the
uncompromising  spirit  of  Christ  was  known.  Had  those
who  preached  said  nothing  about  heathen  vanities,  had
they  merely  presented  the  gospel  as  a  better  thing  than
anything  the  pagans  could  boast,  I  do  not  doubt  that
the  pagans  themselves  would  have  acknowledged  thus
much.  And  it  is  pretty  well  ascertained  that  there
was  a  discussion  among  them,  even  to  the  suggestion
by  one  of  the  most  wicked  of  their  emperors,  whether
Christ  should  not  be  owned  and  woi-shipped  in  the
Pantheon,  hundreds  of  years  before  Constantine,  indeed
from  the  earliest  epoch  of  the  gospel  But  there  never
was  the  thought  of  giving  Christ  the  only  place  He
could  take.  For  Christ  has  not  only  a  supreme  but  an
exclusive  place.  Now  there  was  nothing  more  repulsive
and  fatal  to  paganism  in  every  form  than  the  trutli
revealed  in  Christ,  which  exposed  every  thing  that  was
not  itself— not  the  truth,  definite  and  exclusive.  Con-
sequently Christianity,  as  being  directly  aggressive  on
the  falsehood  of  heathenism,  was  of  all  things  the  most

2  M  2


532  IMTBODUCTORT  LEGTUBES.

offensive  to  Borne.  That  pagan  Borne,  therefore,  should
set  itself  against  Christianity  was  to  be  expected,  and
so  the  fact  proved.

But  it  was  no  such  evil  which  astounded  the  prophet
He  was  filled  with  astonishment  that  this  mysterious
form  of  evil,  this  counter-testimony  of  the  enemy  (noi
antichrist,  but  antichurch),  should  seem  and  be  largely
accepted  as  the  holy  catholic  church  of  Grod,  that
Christendom,  if  not  Christianity,  should  at  the  same
time  become  the  bitterest  of  persecutors,  more  murder-
ously incensed  against  the  witnesses  of  Jesus  and  the
saints  of  God  than  ever  paganism  had  been  in  any
country  or  all  ages.  This  very  naturally  filled  him  with
intense  wonder.

"And  the  angel  said  unto  him.  Wherefore  didst  thou
wonder  ?  I  will  tell  thee  the  mystery  of  the  woman."
Had  he  really  penetrated  under  the  surface,  and  seen
that  beneath  the  fair  guise  of  Christendom  the  woman
was,  of  all  things  under  the  sim,  the  most  corrupt  and
hateful  to  God,  it  would  not  be  so  much  to  be  surprised
at.  Therefore  says  the  angel,  "  I  will  tell  thee  the
mystery  of  the  woman,  and  of  the  beast  that  carrieth
her,  that  hath*  the  seven  heads  and  the  ten  horns.  The
beast  that  thou  sawest  was,  and  is  not ;  and  shall  ascend
out  of  the  bottomless  pit,  and  go  into  perdition:  and
they  that  dwell  on  the  earth  shall  wonder,  whose  names
were  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  from  the  foimdatiou

*  The  description  here  is  simply  character,  not  dates.  If  a  person
drew  from  this,  for  instance,  that  the  beaat  was  to  carry  the  womao,
Babylon,  tchcn  it  had  as  a  fact  all  that  is  meant  by  the  seven  heada
and  the  ten  horns,  it  would  be  an  error.  The  angel  implies  nothing  of
the  sort.  It  is  a  question  here  of  distinctiye  character,  apart  from  that
of  time,  for  which  we  must  search  other  scriptures.


THE  REVELATION.  533

of  the  world,  beholding  the  beast  that  he  was,  and  is
not,  and  shall  be  present."  The  closing  phrase  here  is
the  description  of  the  beast  in  its  last  state,  in  which
it  will  come  into  collision  with  Babylon.  Let  \is  bear
this  in  mind.  It  will  help  to  show  ns  that,  what-
ever may  have  been  the  past  conditions  of  Babylon,
there  is  a  future  one ;  and  it  is  in  that  future  one  that
Babylon  is  to  perish.  For  remark,  the  beast  or  Roman
empire  is  described  here  as  that  which  once  existed,
which  then  ceased  to  exist,  and  which  assumes  a  final
shape  when  it  reappears  from  the  bottomless  pit.  Bad
as  pagan  Rome  was,  it  would  be  false  to  aflSrm  that  it
ever  had  come  out  of  the  bottomless  pit.  When  the
apostle  Paul  wrote  to  the  saints  at  Rome,  he  particularly
specified  at  that  very  time  the  duty  of  absolute  subjec-
tion on  the  part  of  Christians  to  the  powers  which  then
were.  Of  course  the  application  to  the  Roman  empire
would  be  immediately  in  the  mind  of  any  Christian  at
Rome.  There  was  no  doubt  at  all  of  the  character  of
the  emperor;  there  never  had  been  a  worse  than  he;
yet  God  took  that  very  opportunity  to  lay  this  on  the
Christians  as  their  duty  to  the  worldly  authority  out-
side and  over  them.  It  was  ruled  in  general  that  the
worldly  powers  were  ordained  of  God.  •  But  this  is  not
to  emerge  from  the  bottomless  pit.

But  there  is  a  time  coming  when  power  will  cease
to  be  ordained  of  God ;  and  this  is  the  point  to  which
the  last  condition  of  the  beast  refers.  God  in  His  pro-
vidence did  sanction  the  great  empires  of  old;  and
the  principle  continues  as  long  as  the  church  is  here
below.  Hence  we  have  to  own  the  divine  source  of
government  even  when  its  holders  abandon  aU  such


534  INTRODUCTOBY  LECTURES.

thoughts  themselves,  and  maintain  their  role  in  the
world  as  a  thing  flowing  from  the  people  irrespective  of
God.  But  the  day  is  coming  when  Satan  will  be  allowed
to  have  things  his  own  way.  For  a  short  time  (what  a
mercy  that-  it  must  be  only  for  a  short  time  t)  Satan
will  bring  forth  an  empire  suited  to  his  purposes,  as  it
springs  from  Satanic  principles  which  deny  Grod ;  and
this  is  part  of  what  appears  to  be  meant  by  the  beast
ascending  out  of  the  bottomless  pit  It  "  shall  go  into
perdition,"  it  is  therefore  added,  "  and  they  that  dwell
on  the  earth  shall  wonder,  whose  names  are  not  written
in  the  book  of  life  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,
when  they  behold  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not,  and
shall  be  present."  "  Yet  is  "  is  a  most  unfortunate  ex-
pression. It  is  the  fault,  however,  of  the  bad  Greek
text  of  Erasmus,  Stephens,  &c.  It  should  be,  "and  shall
be  present."*  There  is  no  thought  of  making  such  a
paradox  to  perplex  the  mind.  The  true  reading  here  is
neither  hard  nor  doubtful  save  to  unbelief.  There  is  no
paradox  in  the  message  whatever.  It  is  all  plain  and
simple — "the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not,  and  shall  be
present."

But  all  this  will  be  a  great  reversal  of  man's  history
and  political  maxims.  There  never  has  been  a  like
experience.  What  empire  has  existed,  then  sunk,  and
finally  reappeared,  with  higher  pretensions  and  power,
only  to  perish  horribly  ?     It  is  altogether  foreign  to

*  Even  the  CJomplutenaian  edition  give  the  right  text  here ;  and  it
would  seem  that  Erasmus  failed  to  use  his  MS.  aright.  For  according
to  unquestionahle  testimony  the  Reuchlinian  copy  has  cai  xapton
like  some  half-dozen  cursives,  which  was  probably  a  mistake  for
waptfnai.


.  ♦  r.


THE  REVELATION.  535

history.  One  of  the  most  approved  axioms  is,  that  king-
doms are  just  like  men  in  this  respect,  that  they  begin,
rise,  and  falL  As  man  does  not  believe  in  the  resur-
rection of  man,  it  is  no  wonder  that  he  does  not  believe
in  the  resurrection  of  an  empire.  The  chief  difference
is  that  in  man's  case  it  is  God  who  raises  him,  whereas
in  the  empire's  not  God  but  the  devil  will  raise  it  again.
Beyond  controversy,  however,  it  is  a  most  unusual  and
abnormal  reappearance,  which  is  altogether  exceptional
in  the  history  of  the  world.  Accordingly  the  resus-
citated Roman  empire  will  carry  men  away  by  a  storm
of  wonder  at  its  revival  Little  do  they  know,  because
they  believe  not  what  is  here  written,  that  it  is  about
to  come  out  of  the  abyss  or  bottomless  pit.  That  is,
Satan  will  be  the  spring  of  its  final  rise  and  power;
he,  and  not  Grod  in  any  way  whatever,  will  give  it  its
character.

"And  here  is  the  mind  which  hath  wisdom.  The
seven  heads  are  seven  mountains,  on  which  the  woman
sitteth.  And  there  (or  they)  are  seven  kings."  I  have
already  touched  on  the  double  force  of  the  symbol —
mountains.  "Five  are  fallen,  one  is,  the  other  hath
not  yet  come."  That  is,  the  sixth  head  (reigning  then
in  John's  day)  was  the  imperial  form  of  government.
Nothing  of  the  sort  can  be  plainer.  We  have  here  a
note  of  time  of  signal  value.  A  seventh  should  follow;
and  what  is  more,  the  seventh  was  in  one  aspect  to
be  an  eighth.  "And  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not,
even  he  is  an  eighth,  and  is  of  the  seven,  and  goeth
unto  destruction."  In  one  sense  it  would  be  an  eighth,
and  in  another  sense  it  would  be  of  the  seven ;  the
eighth  perhaps  because  of  its  extraordinary  resurrection


536  INTRODUCTOKT  LECTURES.

character,  yet  one  of  the  seven  because  it  is  outwardly
old  imperialism  again.  This  explains,  it  seems  to  me,
the  wounded  head  that  was  afterwards  healed.  It  is  of
the  seven  in  that  point  of  view,  because  it  is  imperial-
ism; but  it  is  an  eighth,  because  it  has  a  diabolical
source  when  raised  up  again.  In  this  way  there  never
has  been  anything  of  the  kind  before.

"And  the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  are  ten  kings,
which  have  not  yet  received  a  kingdom;  but  they
receive  authority  as  kings  (not  at  but  for)  one  hour
with  the  beast."  They  are  all  to  reign  concurrently
with  the  beast.  This  also  is  a  no  less  important  ele-
ment for  understanding  the  chapter.  All  who  have
looked  back  on  the  history  know,  that  when  the  ten
kings  appeared,  there  was  no  beast  or  imperial  power.
It  was  the  destruction  of  the  imperial  unity  of  Home
that  gave  occasion  for  the  well-known  ten  kingdoms
which  the  barbarians  set  up  afterwards.  I  am  not
raising  any  question  about  the  ten.  We  know  that
sometimes  there  were  nine,  sometimes  eleven  or  more ;
but  supposing  this  all  perfectly  certain,  J  affirm  that,
according  to  history,  they  did  not  receive  their  power
as  kings  for  one  and  the  same  time  with  the  beast.  This
is  the  meaning  of  "  one  hour  with  the  beast"

The  very  reverse  is  the  undeniable  fact.  They  received
their  power  as  kings  when  the  beast  ceased  to  exist
Thus  the  difference  is  complete  between  past  history  (if
we  look  at  the  extinction  of  the  empire  and  the  rise  of
the  ten  kingdoms)  and  the  certain  fulfilment  of  the  pro-
phecy in  the  future,  when  we  look  at  what  God  has
really  told  us.  I  do  not  acknowledge  the  language  to
be  either  difficult  or  ambiguous.   Man  alone  is  to  blame


THE  REVELATION.  537

who  has  misapplied  it.  Yet  one  allows  freely  a  partial
application  already.  We  can  quite  understand  that  Grod
would  comfort  His  people  in  the  dark  ages  by  this
book ;  and  a  very  imperfect  glimpse  at  its  real  meaning
might  in  His  grace  serve  to  cheer  them  on  in  their  trials
as  far  as  it  went.  From  Rome  saints  had  suffered ;  and
it  was  easy  to  see  that  the  revealed  persecutress  is
called  Babylon,  and  identified  with  the  governing  city
of  Rome.  So  far  they  were  right.  Nor  is  there  any  real
reason  to  wonder  at  their  deriving  help  from  partial
light.  It  was  but  an  imperfect  view  they  got  even  of
justification ;  a  far  scantier  perception,  if  they  could  be
said  to  have  had  any,  about  Christ's  Headship  of  the
church,  His  priesthood,  or  almost  anything  else.  And
thus  it  was  but  a  little  glimpse  they  had  of  prophecy.
But  we  can  understand  that  the  Lord  could  and  did
make  that  little  go  far,  and  do  no  little  good.

But  is  there  any  reason  why  we  should  content
ourselves  with  the  measure  enjoyed  of  old?  Such
is  the  hard  bondage  which  mere  historical  tradition
imposes  on  its  votaries.  Holding  on  to  what  others
knew  before  them,  or  little  more,  they  reduce  themselves
to  a  minimum  of  the  truth.  When  God  is  so  gracious.
His  word  rich,  full,  and  deep,  it  does  seem  sad  to  see
His  children  content  with  just  enough  to  save  their
souls,  or  keep  them  from  positive  starvation.  In  pre-
sence of  grace  I  do  not  think  this  is  for  His  glory,  any
more  than  for  their  own  blessing.  The  only  right
principle  in  everything  is  to  go  to  the  source  of  divine
truth,  and  to  seek  there  refreshment  and  strength  and
fitness  for  whatever  our  God  calls  us  to.  And  unques-
tionably God  has  been  awakening  the  attention  of  Bis


538  INTRODUCTOBT  LECTURES.

people  in  a  remarkable  manner  to  the  value  of  His
word,  and  not  least  of  all  to  the  portion  we  are  now
examiniDg.

It  is  plain  that  what  the  verse  contemplates  is  nei-
ther the  Soman  power  when  there  was  one  head  of  the
empire,  nor  the  eastern  or  Byzantine  part  of  it  after
that  partition,  nor  the  western  state  of  division  under
the  kings  who  succeeded  the  deposition  of  Augustulus ;
for  in  the  mediaeval  state  there  may  have  been  ten  kiugs
(in  contrast  with  the  ancient  state  of  the  beast  without
them),  but  no  beast  or  imperial  system  with  its  chiefs.
This  is  what  drove  men  to  the  idea  of  making  the
pope  to  be  the  beast.  But  that  idea  is  wholly  in-
sufficient to  cover  or  meet  the  word  of  (xod,  which  gives
clear  and  strong  reasons  that  prove  the  mistake  of
applying  this  to  the  pope  as  its  complete  fulfilment.
For  that  which  comes  distinctly  before  us  in  this
one  verse  is  the  twofold  fact,  that  the  ten  horns  here
contemplated  receive  their  kingly  power  for  the  same
hour  or  time  as  the  beast,  and  not  subsequently,  when
his  rule  was  extinguished.  He  gets  his  power  and  they
get  theirs  for  one  and  the  same  time.

This  disposes  of  many  a  web  of  comments ;  for  we
find  at  once  what  is  perfectly  simple,  what  any  child  of
God  who  believes  this  to  be  the  word  of  God  must  own.
Bringing  in  history  here  embroiled  the  subject;  and
those  who  appeal  most  to  its  evidence  are  the  very
men  who  seem  in  this  to  ignore  its  facts.  But  the  most
ordinary  knowledge  suffices;  for  who  does  not  know
from  the  Bible  that  there  was  a  Koman  empire  when
Christ  was  born,  one  emperor,  and  no  such  state  as  that
empire  divided  into  ten  kingdoms  ?    We  find  a  decree


1^\'.


THE   REVELATION.  539

going  forth  that  all  the  world  shall  be  enrolled.  Of
course  there  must  needs  be  a  consultation  with  the
kings,  when  the  kings  exist  and  become  an  accredited
part  of  that  empire,  as  rulers  subordinate  to  the  beast.
But  no ;  it  was  an  absolute  decree  that  went  forth,  and
this  indisputably,  from  a  single  head  of  the  undivided
empire.  Centuries  after  came  in,  not  only  the  division
into  east  and  west,  but  the  broken  up  state  of  the  west,
when  there  ceased  to  be  an  imperial  chief  But  the
prophecy  shows  us  the  beast  revived  and  the  separate
kings  reigning  for  the  same  time,  before  divine  judg-
ment destroys  them  at  the  coming  of  Christ  and  His
saints.     Hence  this  certainly  must  be  future.

How  this  precisely  fits  in,  let  me  say,  with  the  state
of  feeling  in  these  modem  times ;  for  "  constitutional-
ism," as  men  call  it,  is  the  fruit  of  the  Teutonic  system
supervening  on  that  of  the  broken  up  Roman  empire.  It
was  the  barbarians  who  brought  in  the  prevalent  ideas
of  liberty  as  well  as  feudalism,  and  accordingly  it  is
they  that  have  firmly  stood  for  freedom ;  so  that  all  the
efforts  to  reconstitute  the  empire  which  have  been
tried  over  and  over  again  have  hitherto  issued  in  total
failure.  The  reason  is  manifest ;  there  is  a  hinderer —
"  one  that  letteth."  It  cannot  be  done  till  the  moment
comes.  When  its  own  season  arrives,  as  it  surely  will,
the  divine  hindrance  is  to  be  removed,  and  the  devil
then  is  allowed  to  do  his  worst.  The  political  side  of
this  is  described  here  with  surprising  brightness  and
brevity.  The  ten  horn^  with  the  beast  are  all  to  receive
authority — the  beast  of  course  wielding  the  imperial
power,  they  as  kings,  all  during  one  and  the  same  time
before  the  end  comes.     Clearly,  therefore,  it  is  future.


540  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

It  is  impossible  to  refer  it  to  the  past  with  any  show
even  of  reasonable  probability,  I  will  not  say  of  reality
or  truth.     Scripture  and  facts  refute  all  such  theories.

"They  have  one  mind,  and  give  their  own  power  and
authority  to  the  beast."  Hitherto  the  reverse  of  this
has  been  true  in  history.  The  horns  have  constantly
opposed  each  other,  and  even  sometimes  the  pope.  Since
then  the  world  has  not  seen  the  imperial  power  to
which  all  bow.  Have  we  not  all  heard  of  the  balance  of
power?  This  is  what  nations  have  been  constantly
occupied  with,  lest  any  one  power  should  become  the
beast  If  some  few  have  joined  on  one  side,  some  are
sure  to  help  the  other,  because  they  are  jealous  of  any
one  acquiring  such  a  preponderant  authority  and  power
as  to  govern  the  rest.  But  in  the  time  really  contem-
plated here  all  this  political  shuffling  will  be  over.
"These  have  one  mind,  and  give  their  own  power
and  authority  to  the  beast/*  or  their  imperial  leader.
"  These  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb,  and  the  Lamb
shall  overcome  them  (for  he  is  Lord  of  lords  and  King
of  kings),  and  they  that  are  with  him,  called,  and
chosen,  and  faithful."

But  still  we  have  not  the  end  of  Babylon  yet  Her
part  in  the  corruption  of  the  high  and  the  intoxication
of  the  low — her  idolatrous  character — has  come  be-
fore us.  We  have  seen  her  connection  with  the  beast ;
but  there  is  a  conflict  coming.  The  woman  was  allowed
to  ride  the  beast — to  influence  and  govern  the  empire
first,  but  at  last  to  be  the  object  of  hatred  to  the  ten
homs  and  the  beast,  who  expose,  rob,  and  destroy  her.
"And  he  saith  to  me.  The  waters  which  thou  sawest,
where  the  harlot  sitteth,  are  peoples,  and  multitudes.


^


THE  REVELATION.  641

and  nations,  and  tongues."    Such  was  her  influence
stretching  out  far  beyond  the  beast.

The  Gothic  hordes  were  not  yet  incorporated  with
the  empire,  still  less  were  they  horns  of  the  beast,
nor  did  they  give  their  power  to  it,  but  destroyed  it
rather.  They  broke  up  the  beast  yet  more  than  Babylon.
Past  history  therefore  in  no  way  suits  the  prophecy.
"And  the  ten  horns  which    thou  sawest  upon   the
beast."     Here  I  am  obliged  to  say  that  our  authorized
version,  and  not  merely  it,  but  our  common  Greek  Testa-
ments, are  altogether  wrong.    This  is  known  so  well,
and  on  such  decided  grounds,  that  it  would  be  imbe-
coming  to  withhold  the  fact.    There  is  no  uncertainty
whatever  in  the  case.    It  is  certain  that  we  ought  to
read  (not  "upon"  but)  "and*  the  beast."    This  is  of
great  importance.     The  horns  and  the  beast  join  in
hating  the  whore.  Not  only  are  they  supposed  to  be  co-
existent, but  imited  in  their  change  of  feeling  against
Babylon.     The  friendships  of  the  evil  are  not  lasting.
"  These  shall  hate  the  whore,  and  shall  make  her  deso-
late and  naked,  and  shall  eat  her  flesh,  and  bum  her
with  fire."  It  is  not  the  gospel,  nor  the  Holy  Spirit,  but
the  lawless  revived  Latin  empire  with  its  vassal  king-
doms of  the  west,  that  combine  and  destroy  Babylon.
Unhallowed  love  will  end  in  hatred.     They  will  then
treat  her  with  contempt  and  shameful  exposure.     Next
they  will  seize  her  resources.   Finally  they  will  destroy

*  It  now  appears  that  the  Cod.  Reuchlin.  Capnionis,  which  was
used  by  Erasmus,  and  lately  discovered  after  a  long  obscurity  by  Dr.
Delitzsch,  roads  Kai  (not  iiri)  Tb  6,  as  the  Complut.  Polyglot,  and
all  editions  of  the  least  critical  value.  Scholz's  note  ("  rec.  cum  cdd.
pL")  is  a  myth.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  MS.  in  its  favour,  though
some  versions  represent  it.


542  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

her.  Can  anytliing  be  less  reasonable  (even  taking  that
ground,  low  as  it  is)  than  that  the  various  rulers  of  the
western  powers,  Catholic  kings,  join  the  Pope  in  de-
stroying his  own  city,  or  his  own  church,  whichever
Babylon  may  be  made  ?  Some  evade  the  difiBculty  by
referring  the  desolation  to  the  Gothic  powers ;  and  these
Protestants,  as  if  they  were  mere  PraBterists!  What
confusion !  Is  not  this  reason  enough  for  saying  that
not  even  the  shadow  of  solid  ground  appears  for  the
system  ?

Hence  the  efifort  of  some  to  prop  up  a  manifestly  false
reading.  It  is  due  to  the  exigency  of  a  notion  which
fears  and  is  irreconcilable  with  the  truth  in  this  place.
"The  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  and  the  beast"  would
give  unquestionably  the  right  form  of  the  verse.

Thus  everything  implies  their  simultaneous  presence
for  the  same  time  and  common  action  with  the  beast,
in  plundering  and  then  destroying  Babylon.  God  uses
them  for  this  object, — the  setting  aside  of  her,  the  great
religious  corruptress,  whose  centre  is  found  at  Home.
We  can  easily  understand  that  the  overthrow  of  the
ecclesiastical  power  is  necessary  to  leave  a  full  field  un-
impeded for  the  imperial  power  to  develop  itself  in  its
final  form  of  violence  and  rebellion  and  apostacy  against
the  Lord.  Yet  religion,  be  it  ever  so  corrupt,  acts  as  a
restraint  on  human  will,  as  a  government  does,  however
evil  Even  the  worst  of  governments  is  better  than
none.  That  a  corrupt  religion  is  better  than  none  I
will  not  say :  at  any  rate  it  troubles  men ;  it  is  a  thorn
in  the  side  of  those  who  want  no  religion  at  alL  Hence
the  horns  and  the  beast  join  together  and  desolate  the
harlot.    That  kings  had  dallied  with  her,  that  the  beast


r^


».  *•


THE  REVELATION.  543

had  once  borne  her  up,  will  only  turn  to  gall  the  more
bitter  to  her,  who,  faithless  to  Grod,  had  staked  the
usurped  and  abused  name  of  Christ  to  win  what  was
now  lost  for  ever.  "  For  God  put  [it]  into  their  hearts
to  do  his  mind,  and  to  do  one  mind,  and  to  give  their
kingdom  to  the  beast,  until  the  words  of  God  shall  be
fulfilled."  It  is  a  time  of  strong  delusion,  be  it  re-
membered.

''And  the  woman  whom  thou  sawest  is  the  great
city,  that  hath  kingship  over  the  kings  of  the  earth."
None  but  Rome  corresponds.  "The  woman"  is  the
more  general  symbol  designating  her  as  the  great  im-
perial city ;  "  the  harlot "  is  her  corrupt  religious  cha-
racter, embracing  papal  Eome,  but  not  ending  with
Popery  as  it  is.

Chapter  xviiL  need  not  delay  us  long.  It  is  a  descrip-
tion, not  of  Babylon's  relation  to  the  beast,  but  of  the
city's  fall,  with  certain  drives  put  into  the*  mouth  of
the  diflferent  classes  that  groan  because  of  her  extinction
here  below.  But  along  with  that  God  warns  of  her
ruin,  and  calls  on  His  people  (verse  4)  to  come  out  of
her.  "Come  out  of  her,  my  people,  that  ye  be  not
partakers  of  her  sins,  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her
plagues.  For  her  sins  have  reached  unto  heaven,  and
God  hath  remembered  her  iniquities."  Then  the  word
is,  "Award  her  even  as  she  awarded  you,  and  double
imto  her  double  according  to  her  works:  in  the  cup
which  she  mixed,  mix  to  her  double.  In  as  many  things
as  she  glorified  herself,  and  lived  luxuriously,  so  much
torment  and  sorrow  give  to  her:  for  she  saith  in  her
heart,  I  sit  a  queen,  and  am  not  a  widow,  and  I  shall


in  no  wise  see  sorrow."


544  IKTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

That  is,  Babylon  is  viewed  in  this  chapter  not  so
much  in  her  mysterious  and  religions  form,  giving
currency  to  every  kind  of  confusion  of  truth  and  error,
of  good  and  evil,  intoxicating,  corrupting,  and  seducing,
as  all  can  see,  through  her  wickedly  religious  influence ;
but  she  is  viewed  here  as  the  most  conspicuous  aider
and  abettor  of  the  world  in  its  luxuries  and  delights
and  the  pride  of  life, — of  what  men  call  "  civilization."
This  is  accordingly  traced  in  our  chapter  with  con-
siderable detail,  and  with  the  sorrow  and  vexation  of  all
the  different  classes  who  on  the  fall  of  Babylon  groaned
over  her  destruction,  and  the  loss  of  their  wealth  and
enjoyment.

But  the  graphic  account  does  not  end  imtil  the
Spirit  of  God  shows  us  another  view  of  Babylon  alto-
gether. A  mighty  angel  takes  a  stone  and  says,  when
he  cast  it  into  the  sea,  "Thus  with  violence  shall  be
thrown  down  Babylon  the  great  city,  and  shall  be  found
no  more  at  all."  The  reason  is  given  at  the  close ;  not
only  "by  thy  sorcery  were  all  the  nations  deceived,"
but  above  all  "in  her  was  found  [the]  blood  of  prophets
and  saints,  and  of  all  the  slain  upon  the  earth."

What  a  solemn  and  weighty  fact  in  the  government  of
God !  How  can  it  be  said  that  this  vile,  corrupt,  idola-
trous system  of  the  last  days  was  guilty  of  the  blood  of
aU  martyrs  ?  She  followed  and  had  iaherited  the  spirit
of  all,  from  the  days  of  Cain,  who  had  lifted  up  tiieir
hands  against  their  righteous  brethren.  Instead  of
taking  warning  from  the  wickedness  of  those  before
her,  who  had  seduced  on  the  one  hand,  and  persecuted
on  the  other,  she  had,  when  she  could,  gone  on  increasing
in  both,  imtil  at  last  the  blow  of  divine  judgment  came.


THE  REVELATION.  645

It  is  thus  that  God  is  wont  to  deal  as  a  rule  in  His  judg*
ments, — not  necessarily  on  the  one  that  first  introduces
an  evil,  but  on  those  that  inherit  the  guilt,  and  perhaps
aggravate  it,  instead  of  taking  warning  by  it.  And
when  God  does  judge,  it  is  not  merely  for  the  evil  of
those  then  judged,  but  of  all  from  the  first  budding  of
it  till  that  day.  This  is  not  unrighteous,  but,  oq  the
contrary,  the  highest  justice  from  a  divine  point  of
view.

We  may  illustrate  it  by  the  members  of  a  family.
Supposing,  for  instance,  a  drunken  father :  if  the  sons
had  one  spark  of  right  feeling,  not  only  must  they  feel
the  utmost  shame  and  pain  on  account  of  their  parent,
but  they  would  endeavour  (like  the  sons  of  Noah  who
had  a  due  sense  of  what  was  proper  to  their  father)  to
cast  some  mantle  of  love  over  that  which  they  could
not  deny,  yet  would  not  look  at,  but  surely  above  all
things  they  would  watch  against  that  shameful  sin.
But  alas !  there  is  a  son  in  the  family,  who,  instead
of  being  admonished  by  his  father's  wickedness,  takes
license  from  it  to  indulge  the  same.  On  him  the
blow  comes,  not  on  the  wretched  parent.  The  son  is
doubly  guilty,  because  he  saw  his  father's  nakedness
and  felt  it  enough  to  hide.  But  he  ought  to  have  with-
stood it — I  do  not  mean  in  vengeance  (for  that  belongs
to  the  Lord),  but  as  holily  hating  the  sin  itself,  yet
withal  in  the  deepest  compassion  for  his  parent.  But
far  from  that  he  has,  on  the  contrary,  persevered  in  the
same  evil  course,  as  badly  or  worse  than  his  father.
Then  and  thus  is  aggravated  guilt  in  the  case  of  this
wicked  son.

It  is  a  precisely  similar  case  here.   Babylon  had  once

2  N


546  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

heard  the  varied  testimoDy  of  Grod;  for  what  had  she  not
heard  of  truth  ?  The  gospel  had  been  preached  there,  as
she  of  Chaldea  was  not  without  law  and  prophet  Babylon
must  hear,  I  do  not  doubt,  the  final  testimony  of  Grod —
the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  that  is  to  go  forth  in  the  last
days ;  but  she  loves  her  pleasure  and  power,  and  refuses
truths  She  will  despise  everything  really  divine ;  she
will  only  use  whatever  of  Grod's  word  she  can  pervert
for  increasing  her  own  importance,  and  gaining  a  greater
ascendancy  over  the  consciences  of  men,  and  enjoying
herself  more  luxuriously  in  this  world ;  for  she  will  go
far  to  obliterate  all  remembrance  of  heaven,  and  to  make
this  world  a  kind  of  paradise  which  she  embellishes,
not  with  pure  and  undefiled  religion,  but  with  the  arts
of  men  and  the  idolatries  of  the  world.

This  it  is  precisely  which  will  bring  out  the  indig-
nant judgment  of  God  upon  the  last  phase  of  Babylon,
so  that  the  guilt  of  all  the  blood  shed  on  the  earth  shall
be  imputed  to  her,  and  she  may  be  judged  accordingly.
It  does  not  hinder,  of  course,  that  in  the  judgment
of  the  dead  each  man  is  judged  for  his  own  sin.  This
remains  true.  The  day  of  the  Lord  on  the  world  in  no
way  sets  aside  His  dealing  with  individual  souls.  The
judgment  of  the  dead  is  strictly  individual,  judgments
in  this  world  are  not.  His  blows  on  this  world  come
more  nationally  as  on  Israel ;  incomparably  more  severe,
as  in  possession  of  greater  privileges,  is  the  judgment
of  corrupt  Christendom,  or  Babylon  as  it  is  called  here.
But  according  to  His  principle  of  government  it  is  not
merely  personal  guilt,  but  that  which,  from  despising
the  testimony  of  God,  is  thus  morally  accumuilating
from  age  to  age  in  the  ratio  of  the  testimony  of  God


THE   REVELATION.  547

and  the  wickedness  that  has  been  indulged  by  men  in
spite  of  it    This  may  suffice  for  chapter  xviiL

''After  these  things  I  heard  as  it  were  a  great  voice  of
a  great  crowd  in  heaven,  saying,  Alleluia,  the  salvation,
and  the  glory,  and  the  power  of  our  God :  for  true  and
righteous  [are]  his  judgments :  because  he  judged  the
great  harlot,  which  did  corrupt  the  earth  with  her  for-
nication, and  avenged  the  blood  of  his  servants  at  her
hand.  And  they  said  Alleluia  a  second  time ;  and  her
smoke  goeth  up  unto  the  ages  of  the  ages."  The  Spirit
of  God  contrasts  with  the  fall  of  Babylon  the  marriage
of  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  Babylon  was  the  spurious
church  as  long  as  it  was  a  question  of  the  church,  and
the  final  corrupter  when  it  could  be  no  question  of  this
longer,  and  there  went  forth  the  closing  testimony  of
God.  I  do  not  doubt  that  there  was  a  corrupt  fonn
in  connection  with  Israel  in  times  past  That  is,  there
was  first  the  literal  Babylon,  of  course ;  but  here  it  is
symbolical.  A  mysterious  lawlessness  inherits  the  well-
known  name  of  Babylon  when  Rome  is  brought  forward ;
and  it  does  not  merely  embrace  Christian  times,  but  the
end  of  the  age  after  the  church  has  gone,  when  the
course  of  divine  judgment  comes.  Bear  this  in  mind :
to  leave  the  last  part  out  is  fatal  to  any  accurate  under-
standing of  the  Revelation.

We  find,  accordingly,  the  four  and  twenty  elders  and
four  living  creatures  here  brought  before  us  for  the
last  time.  That  is  to  say,  the  heavenly  saints  are  viewed
still  as  the  heads  of  the  glorified  priesthood,  and  also
the  executive  in  the  administration  of  God's  judgments.
But  a  voice  issues  from  the  throne,  saying,  ''Praise

2x2


548  INTEODUCTOBT  LECTTRES.

our  G^'kI,  all  ve  his  sen-ants,  and  re  that  fear  him.  Loth
siiiall  and  ^n*eat.  And  I  heard  as  it  were  a  voice  of
a  ;(n;at  multitude,  and  as  a  voice  of  many  waters,
and  as  a  voice  of  mighty  thunders,  saying,  Alleluia,
for  the  Lord  God  the  Almighty  reignetL*  Let  us  be
glad  and  exult,  and  give  the  glory  to  him:  for  the
marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath  made
herself  rearly."  Now  we  find  the  symbol  of  the  bride
bnjught  licfore  us,  and  the  elders  and  the  living  crea-
turris  disap[)ear.     The  bride  is  in  view.

Arrj  we  then  to  understand  that  the  elders  and  the
livin*^  creatures  are  together  taken  absolutely  as  the
bride  now  ?  that  those  who  were  meant  under  the
figures  of  the  elders  and  of  the  living  creatures  assume
the  name  and  figure  of  the  bride  ?  In  my  opinion  it  is
not  absolutely  so.  The  elders  do  show  us  the  heavenly
lif^ads  of  pri(istliood  (embracing,  as  I  believe,  the  Old
Testament  saints  and  those  of  the  New);  t,e.,  they  are
not  limited  to  the  church,  Christ's  body.  Then,  when
the  Limb  and  His  purchase  by  blood  are  celebrated  in
h(>aven,  the  four  living  creatures  join  the  elders,  though
each  is  distinct  The  glorified  saints  are  to  administer
]>ower  in  a  way  far  beyond  angels.  The  living  creatures
an;  iVom  cha]>ter  v.  coupled  with  the  elders,  as  we  find
tli(*m  in  the  lK>ginning  of  chapter  xix.

Hut  now,  when  those  symbols  disappear,  because
of  a  new  action  of  God  (namely,  the  consummation  of
the  church's  joy),  the  elders  and  the  living  creatures

*  It  in  iho  iioriHt  in  Grook,  which  in  such  a  cue  m  thii  H  ii  difBcalt
I'lirnvtly  to  rt'pniii^nt  in  Enf^liah;  for  neither  **  reined "  iiar'*hith
iiti^riiiHl  '*  could  conv(>y  thut  God  had  entered  on  Hie  Vng^jwit^  bit
nithiir  thiit  it  wim  \vi»i.


y


THE   REVELATION.  549

disappear,  and  we  have  not  the  bride  alone,  but  another
class  of  saints,  who  at  once  come  forward.  "And  to
the  bride  was  granted  that  she  should  be  arrayed  in
fine  linen,  clean  and  white:  for  the  fine  linen  is  the
righteousnesses  of  saints."  I  say  "  righteousTw^ses,"  not
"  righteousness."  It  is  not  what  Christ  puts  on  them,
but  a  recognition  even  at  this  time  of  whatever  has
been  of  Grod — the  working  I  do  not  deny  of  the  Spirit
of  Christ.  But  it  is  what  each  saint  has,  though  the
blessed  thought  here  is  that  the  church  has  it  not
merely  in  the  way  of  each  person  possessing  his  own ;
the  bride  has  the  whole  of  it  (that  is,  the  church  in
glory).  The  individual  has  his  own  fruit  too.  This
remains  true  also  in  its  own  place,  as  we  shall  find^
and  when  it  is  a  question  of  reward,  this  is  precisely
the  grand  point ;  but  when  it  is  a  question  of  the  bride
above,  that  is  the  way  in  which  it  is  presented  here,
as  we  may  see  clearly  from  verse  8.  The  Spirit  of  God
implies  that  it  is  decidedly  not  the  righteousness  here
which  is  by  another,  and  we  thereby  imjiuted  righteous,
but  righteousnesses  personal  and  actual.  Of  course
the  other  is  true.  Before  God  we  have  that  whicli  is
found  only  by  and  in  Christ,  which  is  another  and  a
higher  character  altogether  as  compared  with  the  right-
eousnesses of  the  saints.

Besides  the  bride  thus  arrayed,  "  He  saith  unto  me.
Write,  Blessed  are  they  which  are  called  unto  the
marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb."  Here  you  may  see  the
reason  for  saying  that  the  four  and  twenty  elders  and
the  four  living  creatures  are  not  absolutely  the  church,
because  when  that  symbol  applies,  and  the  one  of  the
bride  comes  forward,  we  have  got  others  too.    What  I


550  IMRODUCTORT  LECTTRES.

jadgp,  then,  is  that  the  guests,  or  those  that  were  called
to  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb,  refer  clearly  lo
the  Old  Testament  saints.  If  so,  thev  are  there  in  the
quality  not  of  the  bride,  but  of  those  invited  to  the
marriage  of  the  Lamb;  but  I  do  not  think  them  tie
Apocalyptic  saints  for  the  simple  reason  that,  as  shewn
in  the  next  chapter,  the  Apocal^'ptic  saints  are  net
raised  from  the  dead  vet.  These  remain  as  vet  in
the  condition  of  separate  spirits.  That  is  not  at  all  the
way  in  which  the  guests  are  spoken  of.  I  think,  there-
fore, that  the  elders  and  the  li\'ing  creatures  compieheiui
both  the  Old  Testament  saints  and  the  church,  the  bride
of  Christ, — ^that  consequently,  when  the  bride  is  men-
tioned, there  were  these  others  who  had  been  included
in  the  elders  and  the  living  creatures,  but  who  are  now
seen  as  a  separate  body.  No  doubt  all  this  may  seem  to
some  a  little  difficult,  but  it  is  no  use  evading  what  is
hai-d.  We  must  face  difficulties ;  we  must  bow  to  the
word ;  we  must  seek  to  learn  through  all.  We  do  nt»t
mend  matters  by  hasty  conclusions,  we  only  complicate
the  truth.  And  it  appears  to  me  that  here  we  are  bound
to  account  for  the  presence  of  these  others  that  are  at
the  marriage-supj)er  of  the  Lamb,  but  appear  as  guests^
and  not  at  all  in  the  quality  of  the  bride.  In  general
this  has  been  either  passed  over  in  the  chapter,  or  some
unsatisfactory  inference  has  been  flung  out,  which  can
only  embroil  the  prophecy.  I  do  not,  of  course,  com-
plain of  particular  persons,  but  of  the  general  vagueness
in  which  the  passage  has  been  taken — unless,  indeed,
the  more  common  course  be  not  to  ignore  it.

Then  the  prophet  falls  down  to  pay  homage  to  the
angel ;  and  this  gives  rise  to  a  weighty  admonition.    It


y


THE  BEVEULTION.  551

is  not  only  that  the  angel  corrects  the  act  by  asserting
that  he  is  a  fellow-servant  of  him  and  of  his  brethren
who  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus.  On  that  account  it
was  altogether  out  of  place  to  pay  homage  to  him  in-
stead of  to  the  God  who  had  sent  him  to  serve.  But  he
tells  us  further  that  the  Spirit  of  prophecy,  who  pro-
phesies in  this  book,  is  the  testimony  of  Jesus.  Thus  the
divine  testimony  is  not  confined  to  the  gospel  or  the
church,  but  the  prophetic  Spirit  which  characterizes  the
Revelation  as  a  whole,  after  the  church  is  translated,  is
equally  a  testimony  of  Jesus.  This  is  most  important,
because  it  might  be  (as  it  has  been)  forgotten  by  some
who  make  the  gospel  and  the  corresponding  presence  of
the  Spirit  to  be  the  same  at  all  times ;  as  others  have
thought,  because  chapter  iv.  and  sequel  treat  of  Jew
and  Gentile,  and  the  state  of  the  world  under  God's
judgments,  that  this  cannot  be  a  testimony  of  Jesus  at
alL  But  it  really  is.  "The  Spirit  of  prophecy" — and
such  it  is  all  through  the  Revelation  after  the  seven
churches  are  done  with — "is  the  testimony  of  Jesus."
We  know  the  Holy  Spirit  rather  as  a  spirit  of  com-
munion with  Christ.  By  and  by,  after  our  translation
to  heaven.  He  will  work,  and  as  vitally  in  those  who
bow  to  God,  when  it  will  be  the  reception  of  the  pro-
phetic testimony  which  is  here  owned  to  be  none  the
less  the  testimony  of  Jesus.

Then  heaven  is  opened,  and  for  a  sight  most  solemn.
It  is  not  now  the  temple  opened  there,  and  the  ark  of
the  covenant  seen  when  Israel's  security  is  seen,  as  the
object  of  God's  counsels ;  nor  is  it  a  door  opened  above,
as  we  saw  it  when  the  prophet  was  giving  his  introduc-
tion to  the  prophecy  of  God's  dealings  with  the  world


552  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

as  a  whole,  though  in  both  cases  all  manifestly  clusters
round  the  Lord  Jesus.  But  now  heaven  is  opened  for
yet  graver  facts,  and  of  incalculable  moment  for  man
and  the  universe  and  the  enemy.  It  is  Christ  Himself
about  to  be  displayed  in  BKs  rights  as  King  of  kings,
and  Lord  of  lords ;  and  this  in  the  face  of  the  world.
"And  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold  a  white  horse."
Victorious  power  put  forth  to  subdue  is  the  meaning  of
the  white  horse.  "And  he  that  sat  upon  him  called
Faithful  and  True,  and  in  righteousness  he  doth  judge
and  make  war."  It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  sustain-
ing His  saints  in  grace,  but  of  sovereign  power  for  judg-
ing the  earth.  "  His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and
on  his  head  were  many  diadems."  There  was  judicial
discernment  with  the  distinct  possession  of  all  titles  to
sovereignty.

"And  he  had  a  name  written,  that  no  man  knew
but  he  himself."  He  is  coming  forth  in  indisputable
himian  glory,  but  the  greatest  care  is  taken  to  let  us
know  that  He  had  that  which  was  above  man — above
the  creature;  for  "no  man  knoweth  the  Son  but  the
Father."  Here  it  would  seem  we  have  just  what  an-
swers to  that:  this  name  none  knew  but  He  Himself.
He  was  a  divine  person,  whatever  new  position  He
assumes  for  the  world.  "  And  he  was  clothed  with  a
vesture  dipped  in  blood."  He  comes  to  execute  ven-
geance, and  with  a  sign  of  death  for  rebels.  "And  his
name  is  called  The  Word  of  God."  He  was  the  word  of
God  in  the  revelation  of  grace ;  when  known,  by  and
by,  it  will  be  as  the  executor  of  God's  judgments.  He
equally  expresses  what  God  is.  The  gospel  of  John  aud
the  Eevelation  perfectly  disclose  both,  whether  in  grace


y


THE  BEVELATION.  553

or  in  judgment.  "And  the  armies  which  were  in  heaven
followed  him  upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine  linen,
white,  pure."

Here  we  learn  at  once  of  what  His  train  consists.
They  are  glorified  saints,  and  not  angels.  And  this  is
entirely  confirmed  by  chapter  xvii,  where  it  was  told
us  that  they  are  with  Him  when  He  comes.  When  the
beast  dares  to  fight  with  the  Lamb,  He  shall  overcome
the  beast;  and  they  that  are  with  Him,  "called  and
chosen  and  faithful" — terms,  as  a  whole,  entirely  in-
applicable to  the  angels.  The  angels  are  never  "  called,"
although  they  may  be  "chosen;"  and  though  termed
holy,  I  do  not  recollect  that  they  are  ever  spoken  of  as
"  faithful"  "  Faithful "  is  what  belongs  to  a  man.  It
supposes  the  effect  and  the  exercise  of  faith.  "  Called  "
is  most  evidently  inapplicable,  because  calling  supposes
that  the  person  is  brought  out  of  one  condition  and  raised
into  another  and  a  better  one.  This  is  never  the  case  with
an  angel.  The  fallen  angels  are  not  called,  and  the  holy
angels  never  need  to  be — they  are  kept  Calling  is  the
fruit  of  active  grace  on  God's  part  towards  man,  and
only  towards  him  when  fallen.  Even  man  himself  when
he  was  innocent  in  Eden  was  not  called.  Directly  he
had  sinned,  the  word  of  God  came,  and  he  was  called.
It  is  very  evident,  therefore,  that  the  saints  in  a  glorified
state  are  here  represented  as  following  the  Lord  out  of
heaven.  They  are  not  seen  here  as  the  bride.  This
would  have  been  altogether  inappropriate  for  such  a
progress :  when  the  King  comes  forth  riding  to  victory
in  the  judgment  of  wicked  men — of  the  world,  it  is  not
in  the  quality  of  bride,  but  of  armies  or  hosts,  that  the
saints  follow  Him;  and  these  include  no  doubt  the


554  INTRODUCTOEY  LECTURES.

guests  as  well,  t.e.,  all  the  glorified  take  their  place  in
His  train.

At  the  same  time  you  will  mark  that  these  are  not
said  to  be  executors  of  judgment  as  Christ  is.*  It  is
to  Him  that  God  has  given  all  judgment — not  neces-
sarily to  us.  We  may  have  a  special  task  in  it,  but  this
is  not  the  work  for  us,  as  it  seems  to  me.  Hence  there
is  no  sword  proceeding  out  of  our  mouth ;  nor  are  the
saints  or  heavenly  hosts  said  to  be  arrayed  in  such  a  sort
as  the  Lord.  It  is  simply  said  that  the  glorified  are  to
follow  the  Lord  in  victorious  power,  and  nothing  more,
"  clothed  in  fine  linen,  white,  pure."  Angels  we  know
from  other  scriptures  will  be  there,  but  of  this  we
hear  nothing  here.  But  "out  of  hU  mouth  goeth  a
sharp  sword,  that  with  it  he  should  smite  the  nations :
and  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron."  What
makes  it  the  more  notable  is  this,  that  the  rod  of  iron
is  promised  to  us — not  the  sword.  Then  there  is  the
reigning  power,  but  not  the  execution  of  judgment  in
this  awful  fasliion  which  is  attributed  to  the  Lord  Him-
self. But  He  ''treadeth  the  winepress  of  the  fury  of
the  wrath  of  the  Almighty  Grod" — another  character  of
judgment  never  attributed  to  the  saints,  that  I  know  of.
"  And  he  hath  on  his  vesture  and  on  his  thigh  a  name
written,  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords."

Then  follows  the  proclamation  of  the  angel»  and  the
invitation  to  the  supper  of  the  great  Grod,  to  eat  the
flesh  of  all  the  great  ones  of  the  earth.  '-  And  I  saw  an
angel  standing  in  the  sun ;  and  he  cried  with  a  loud

*  It  iB  the  more  Btrikingly  chmractezigtioy  beoAue  of  •ndi  lugmge
at  Pi.  czlix.  6-9,  which  spe«ki  of  all  the  Minte  ooDtanpkfead  on  earth
for  the  day  of  Jehovah.


THE  REVELATION.  555

voice,  saying  to  all  the  birds  that  fly  in  the  midst  of
heaven,  Come,  gather  yourselves  together  unto  the  great
supper  of  God;  that  ye  may  eat  flesh  of  kings,  and
flesh  of  chiliarchs,  and  flesh  of  strong  [men],  and  flesh
of  horses,  and  of  those  that  sit  on  them,  and  flesh  of
all,  both  free  and  bond,  both  small  and  great."  And
then  comes  the  gathering  and  the  battle.  "  And  I  saw
the  beast,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  their  armies,
gathered  together  to  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on
the  horse,  and  against  his  army.  And  the  beast  was
taken"  (taken  alive),  "and  with  him  the  false  prophet
that  wrought  signs  in  his  presence,  with  which  he
deceived  those  that  received  the  mark  of  the  beast,  and
those  that  worshipped  his  image."  Thus  the  second
beast  is  no  longer  seen  as  an  earthly  power,  but  as  a
prophet — of  course  a  false  prophet.  All  the  energy  to
mislead  men  in  the  presence  of  the  first  beast  was  long
in  his  hands,  and  now  nothing  more  is  spoken  of.  The
spiritual  power  is  wholly  in  the  hands  of  the  false
prophet.  It  will  be  understood  when  one  says  "  spiri-
tual" that  none  is  meant  save  of  a  wicked  kind.

"Alive  the  two  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  burning
with  brimstone."  Thus  eternal  judgment  was  executed
at  once.  They  were  caught  in  flagrant  treason  and  re-
bellion :  what  further  need  of  any  process  of  judgment
whatsoever  ?

"  And  the  remnant  were  slain  with  the  sword  of  him
that  sat  upon  the  horse,  which  [sword]  proceedeth  out
of  his  mouth :  and  all  the  birds  were  filled  with  their
flesh."  Their  doom  was  awful,  but  by  no  means  after
the  same  sort  as  their  two  leaders.

Then  another  and  immensely  important  act  is  de-


556  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

scribed — the  binding  of  Satan.  He  is  no  longer  to  be
allowed  to  prowl  about  the  world  ensnaring  and  de-
stroying. "And  I  saw  an  angel  coming  down  from
heaven,  having  the  key  of  the  bottomless  pit  and  a
great  chain  in  his  hand.  And  he  laid  hold  on  the
dragon,  that  old  serpent,  which  is  the  Devil,  and  Satan,
and  bound  him  a  thousand  years."  It  is  not  therefore
his  final  judgment.  The  angel  "cast  him  into  the
bottomless  pit,  and  shut  him  up,  and  set  a  seal  over
him,  that  he  should  no  more  deceive  the  nations,  till
the  thousand  years  should  be  completed:  after  these
things  he  must  be  loosed  a  little  time."

And  then  we  come  to  a  most  cheering  disclosure:
"And  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them,  and
judgment  was  given  unto  them :  and  [I  saw]  the  souls
of  those  beheaded  on  account  of  the  witness  of  Jesus,
and  on  account  of  the  word  of  God:  and  those  who  had
not  worshipped  the  beast,  nor  his  image,  and  had  not  re-
ceived his  mark  upon  their  forehead,  and  on  their  hand;
and  they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand
years."  I  do  not  suppose  that  many  words  are  required
by  the  present  audience  to  show  that  we  are  not  to
understand  the  scene  as  a  mere  figure  of  Christianity.
There  are  probably  but  few,  if  any,  here  who  do  not
understand  it  as  the  fore-shadow  of  a  real  resurrection.
In  short,  it  is  not  tropical  language,  as  when  it  is  said
of  the  prodigal  son — "This  my  son  was  dead,  and  is
alive  again ;"  or  of  the  restoration  of  Israel,  which  is
compared  to  a  resurrection  from  the  dead  for  the  rest  of
the  world.  Here  the  vision  was  of  thrones  with  sitters,
and  others  caused  to  join  them ;  and  the  inspired  ex-
planation is  that  it  is  the  first  resurrection — the  rising


^


THE  REVELATION.  557

ef  the  just  from  the  dead.  Let  us  look  at  the  different
groups  that  are  seen  to  have  part  in  the  first  resurrec-
tion.

First,  "  I  saw  thrones,  and  they  sat  upon  them."  The
thrones  were  ali^eady  filled.  Instead  of  judgment  being
executed  on  them,  it  was  given  to  them.  They  them-
selves were  to  judge.  Who  were  they  ?  Who  are  the
persons  thus  invested  with  judicial  authority  of  so
glorious  a  nature  and  to  reign,  as  we  see  later,  with
Christ  ?  Clearly  the  same  saints  whom  we  have  seen
first  set  forth  by  the  elders  in  heaven,  subsequently  by
the  elders  and  the  living  creatures,  next,  by  the  bride
and  the  living  creatures  at  the  marriage-supper,  and
finally  by  the  armies  that  followed  the  Lord  out  of
heaven.

It  is  no  longer  a  question  either  of  celebrating  the
ways  and  counsels  of  God,  or  of  the  war  with  the
beast  and  king.  Accordingly  it  is  another  figure.  It
is  reigning.  There  are  thrones  filled  with  certain  per-
sons, who  reign  along  with  Him.  Thus  the  language
of  symbol  is  as  definite  as  any  other.  There  is  no  lack
of  precision,  but  the  very  reverse.  Peculiar  energy
indeed  attaches  to  symbolic  language.  But  what  is
also  of  consequence  to  observe  is,  that  John  saw  souls
— the  souls  of  those  beheaded  on  account  of  the  wit-
ness of  Jesus,  and  on  account  of  the  word  of  God.
These  are  the  martyrs  of  chapter  vi,  those  long  since
seen  under  the  altar,  poured  out  like  burnt-offerings  to
God.  It  wiU  be  remembered  that  it  w£is  said  to  them
that  they  must  wait.  They  had  cried  to  the  Sovereign
ruler  to  avenge  their  blood  on  their  foes,  but  they  were
told  they  must  wait  a  little  for  some  others,  their  fellow-


558  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

servants  and  their  brethren,  to  die  as  they  had.  Here
accordingly  we  have  them  alL  For  there  follows  another
company  of  martyrs  who  suffered  when  the  beast  set  up
his  worst  and  final  pretensions.  When  the  second  beast
appeared,  he  even  strove  to  put  to  death  those  who
would  not  worship  the  beast,  nor  pay  homage  to  his
image,  nor  receive  his  mark.  These  compose  the  third
class  here  spoken  of.

The  first  were  such  as  came  out  of  heaven  after
Christ,  being  already  raised  from  the  dead  and  glorified.
Consequently  they  sat  upon  the  thrones  at  once ;  while
the  two  latter  classes,  described  in  the  rest  of  the  verse,
were  still  in  the  separate  state — ^"and  the  souls."  Take
this  quite  simply  and  literally.  It  does  not  mean  per-
sons merely,  but  the  souls  of  beheaded  persons.  He
saw  their  condition :  it  was  part  of  the  vision.

Here  were  thrones,  and  people  sat  upon  them,  changed
before  this  into  the  image  of  Christ's  glory.  Then  come
others  in  the  condition  of  separate  spirits  or  souls,
whom  the  prophet  saw — ^two  different  classes  of  them —
those  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus  and  the  word  of
Go3,  and  those  who  refused  the  beast  in  every  form.
The  proof  of  the  third  class  should  have  been  given
a  little  more  distinctly  than  in  our  version.  It  should
not  be  '*and  which  had  not'*  but  rather,  "and  (hose  who
had  not  worshipped  the  beast,  nor  his  image,  neither  had
received  his  mark  upon  their  forehead,  and  on  their
hand ;  and  they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thou-
sand years."  Thus  such  as  were  in  the  separate  state
were  reunited  to  their  bodies,  and  lived  and  reigned  like
those  who  were  already  on  the  thrones.  They  "lived
and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years."


^


THE  REVELATION.  559

Thus  nothing  can  be  simpler  or  more  beautiful  than
the  way  in  which  this  verse  sums  up  the  Revelation
as  a  whole.  The  visions  of  this  prophetic  book  open,
not  with  the  rapture  of  saints  to  heaven,  but  the  sight
of  saints  already  raptured,  often  before  the  seer  in  the
visions,  but  seen  always  in  a  complete  condition  with-
out addition  to  their  number.  Accordingly  the  rapture
of  the  church  with  the  Old  Testament  saints  must
have  already  taken  place,  all  (as  I  have  no  doubt)  being
caught  up  at  the  self-same  time  to  be  with  the  Lord
above.

We  have  seen  that  these  follow  the  Lord  out  of
heaven,  and  are  next  seen  enthroned.  When  the  Lord
takes  His  own  throne,  they  take  theirs  by  grace.  But,
further,  we  find  that  the  saints  who  had  suffered  for
Christ,  during  the  time  that  the  others  were  in  heaven,
are  now  reunited  to  their  bodies  and  live,  the  Lord
waiting  for  the  last  martyr  that  He  might  not  leave
out  one  of  those  who  had  died  for  His  name.  All  the
sufferers,  either  in  the  early  persecutions  of  chapter  vi.,
or  in  the  later  persecutions  (see  chap,  xv.)  up  to  Baby-
lon's extinction,  were  now  raised  from  the  dead.  They
lived,  and  were  put  therefore  into  a  place  and  condition
suitable  for  reigning  with  Christ,  no  less  than  the  Old
Testament  saints  and  the  church  itseK.  Such  is  the
meaning  of  the  verse — "  The  rest  of  the  'dead  lived  not
again  till  the  thousand  years  were  finished.  This  is  the
first  resurrection."

Let  it  be  carefully  observed  here  that  the  first  re-
surrection does  not  mean  aU  rising  exactly  at  the  same
moment.  This  is  a  mistake.  We  know  that  the  change
of  aU  those  caught  up  takes  place  in  the  twinkling  of


560  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

an  eye ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  various  bodies  an
not  raised  at  different  times.  For  certain  there  are  two
great  acts  of  resurrection, — one  when  the  Old  Testament
saints  and  the  church  are  caught  up  to  heaven,  the  other
when  Satan  was  bound  after  the  beast  and  false  prophet
were  thrown  into  the  lake  of  fire,  as  well  as  Babvlon
judged.  Thus  (without  speaking  of  the  resurrection  of
the  wicked  at  the  close)  there  were  certainly  more  acts
than  one,  not  to  speak  of  the  two  witnesses  put  to
death  and  caused  to  rise  after  three  days  and  a  hali^
when  the  spirit  of  life  entered  them,  and  they  not  only
arose,  but  went  up  to  heaven,  as  we  know.  I  speak
not  of  anything  that  might  be  deemed  exceptional  or
peculiar,  but  of  two  acts  of  raising  saints.  From  the
manner  in  which  resurrection  is  referred  to  in  scripture,
does  not  God  leave  room  for  this  ?  "  I  will  raise  him  up
at  the  last  day."  "At  the  last  day"  does  not  mean  merely
an  instant  of  time.  Whether  it  were  the  Old  Testament
saints  and  the  church,  or  the  Apocalyptic  saints,  if  I
may  so  distinguish  them,  it  was  in  an  instcuit  that  each
were  raised,  but  there  was  some  space  between  them.
What  is  there  to  Iiinder  it  ?  There  is  no  expression  in
the  word  of  Grod  which  binds  all  to  rise  at  the  same
instant  Those  that  do  rise  at  the  same  time  rise,  no
doubt,  in  a  moment;  but  that  there  are  to  be  various
acts  of  resurrection  is  not  only  not  contrary  to  scripture,
but  required  by  its  own  descriptions.  This  verse  declares
it,  and  there  is  no  other  interpretation  that  can  stand
even  a  moment's  fair  discussion.

This  being  so,  it  adds  inmiense  clearness  in  the  under-
standing of  the  book.  And  what  shall  we  say  of  the
wonderful  wisdom  of  the  Lord  ?    It  is  called  "  the  fixat


THE  REVELATION.  561

resurrection/'  This  does  not  intimate  we  have  seen  that
there  is  only  one  act  of  raising,  but  that  all  who  share
that  resurrection,  whenever  raised,  are  raised  before  the
millennium  begins ;  so  that  when  the  reign  of  Christ
takes  place,  all  such  have  part  in  the  first  resurrection,  in-
cludbig  Christ  Himself,  raised  at  least  1800  years  before
the  church ;  then  the  church,  with  the  Old  Testament
saints ;  then  these  Apocalyptic  saints  at  any  rate  some
years  after.  AU  this  gives  us  a  true  and  just  view  of
the  various  parties  that  have  a  share  in  the  resurrection.
"  This  is  the  first  resurrection.  Blessed  and  holy  is  he
that  hath  part  in  the  first  resurrection:  on  such  the
second  death  hath  no  power ;  but  they  shall  be  priests
of  God  and  of  Christ,  and  shall  reign  with  him  a  thou-
sand years."

It  has  been  remarked  by  another,  and  justly,  that  the
expression  "  they  shall  be  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ"
summarily  puts  out  of  court  the  interpretation  that
supposes  a  figurative  resurrection.  For  it  is  clear  that,
though  principles  might  reign,  to  be  priests  is  quite
inconsistent  with  a  mere  figure.  It  is  also  clearly  a  per-
sonal reward  to  those  who  had  sufiered.

When  the  thousand  years  expire,  Satan  reappears  on
the  scene  to  the  sorrow  and  ruin  of  the  Gentiles  who
were  not  born  of  God.  But  it  is  for  the  last  time,  not
of  the  age  only  but  of  the  various  dispensations  of  God.
"And  when  the  thousand  years  are  completed,  Satan
shall  be  loosed  out  of  his  prison,  and  shall  go  out  to
deceive  the  nations  which  are  in  the  four  quarters  of
the  earth,  Gog  and  Magog,  to  gather  them  together  to
^ar."  This  is  clearly  of  moral  importance.  The  glory
of  the  kingdom  does  not  preserve  when  men  in  their

2  0


562  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

natural  state  are  exposed  to  the  adversary.  The  mil-
lennial nations,  "the  number  of  whom  is  as  the  sand
of  the  sea/'  fall  a  prey  to  Satan.

"And  they  went  up  on  the  breadth  of  the  earth,
and  encompassed  the  camp  of  the  saints,  and  the  be>
loved  city."  The  beloved  city  is  Jerusalem ;  the  camp
of  the  saints,  I  presume,  is  a  larger  circle  and  embraces
all  of  Israel  and  the  Gentiles  who,  being  converted,
refuse  Satan's  deceit.  It  is  an  evident  contrast  with
the  state  supposed  in  the  wheat-and-tare  field  of
Christendom  which  is  found  at  the  end  of  the  age.
Wheat  and  tares  grow  together  till  the  process  of  judg-
ment separates.  At  the  end  of  the  millennium  the
righteous  and  the  wicked  form  two  distinct  arrays,
though  even  then  there  would  appear  to  be  a  line
drawn  between  the  surrounding  camp,  and  the  be-
loved city  Jerusalem  on  earth,  where  the  Jews  were.
The  unrenewed  of  the  nations  are  now  compassing
them  with  their  countless  hosts,  as  if  to  eat  them  up
like  grasshoppers.  "  And  fire  came  down  out  of  heaven
from  God,  and  devoured  them.  And  the  devil  that
deceiveth  them  was  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brim-
stone, where  both  the  beast  and  the  Mse  prbphet  [are],
and  they  shall  be  tormented  day  and  night  unto  the
ages  of  the  ages."

Then  follows  another  scene  still  more  solemn — the
most  awe-inspiring  of  all  we  can  contemplate,  at  the
same  time  full  of  blessing  for  the  Christian  to  look
onward  to  as  that  which  will  for  ever  put  aside  every
trace  of  evil,  and  vindicate  good  where  man  must
altogether  fail  Here  accordingly  is  seen  but  one  throna
It  ia  the  divine  judgment  of  man — eternal  judgment


THE  REVELATION.  563

Even  when  Grod  was  judging  providentially  in  the  be-
ginning of  the  Apocalyptic  visions  (chap,  iv.),  associated
thrones  were  seen.  When  Christ  came  personally  to
judge  and  govern  the  quick  (chapter  xx.  4),  there  were
thrones ;  for  the  risen  saints  reign  with  Him.  But  now
there  is  but  one  throne :  Christ  judges  the  dead.  **  And
I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  him  that  sat  on  it,  from
whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heavens  fled  away."  This
is  of  immense  moment  doctrinally,  because  it  decisively
proves  that  it  is  altogether  unfounded  to  assume,  as  is
popularly  done,  that  the  Lord  only  returns  at  this  junc-
ture. In  the  coming  of  the  Lord  all  include  His  coming
to  the  habitable  earth.  Now  manifestly,  if  the  Lord
does  not  come  before  this,  there  is  no  world  to  come
to ;  for  the  earth  and  heavens  are  fled.  The  common
notion,  therefore,  that  the  coming  of  the  Lord  is  at  this
point  is  an  evident  fallacy  upon  the  face  of  this  scrip-
ture that  describes  it,  not  to  speak  of  others  elsewhere.
It  is  not  a  syllogism  that  is  wanted  or  that  can  satisfy
here :  only  require,  only  believe,  the  word  of  God.  A
single  verse  dispels  clouds  of  arguments.  "  I  saw  a  great
white  throne,  and  him  that  sat  on  it,  from  whose  face
the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled ;  and  place  was  not  found
for  them."  I  admit  that  afterwards  no  doubt  the  new
heaven  and  the  new  earth  are  seen ;  but  who  contends
that  this  is  the  sphere  to  which  the  Lord  comes  ?  To
this  earth  He  is  coming,  and  not  merely  to  the  new
earth  in  the  eternal  state.  To  the  same  world  in  which
He  suffered,  according  to  the  scriptures.  He  will  come
back.  But  for  the  eternal  judgment  heaven  and  earth
are  fled  away;  and  then  we  see  the  new  and  eternal

imiverse.    Hence  He  must  have  come  back  previously

2  o  2


564  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

to  both.  With  this  agrees  His  comiDg  out  of  heaven  ii^
judgment  of  the  earth,  described  in  Rev.  xix.  He  came
to  the  world,  and  avenged  BUis  people  on  the  beast  and
the  false  prophet  with  the  kings  and  their  armies ;  and
after  that  the  risen  saints  reign  with  Him  over  it  a
thousand  years.  I  say  not  an  but  over  the  earth.  He
with  the  glorified  saints  will  have  their  home  on  high,
but  none  the  less  shall  they  reign  over  this  very  world
for  the  allotted  time.

Then,  as  we  have  seen,  comes  the  final  test  of  the
nations  of  the  earth  after  that  kingdom  has  run  its
course,  and  the  devil  let  loose  once  more  deceives  flesh
and  blood  after  the  analogy  of  all  other  dispensations.
That  age  of  visible  glory  is  inefficacious  to  change  the
heart  of  man,  though  in  the  absence  of  the  enemy  and
the  controlling  presence  of  the  great  King,  they  render
feigned  obedience  for  a  long  wliile.  It  can  govern  and
bless  but  not  convert  man.  Even  the  proclamation  of
the  grace  of  God  is  powerless  save  it  be  brought  home
by  the  quickening  energy  of  His  own  Spirit.  In  short,
no  testimony  can  avail,  no  work,  power,  or  glory  without
the  word  of  God  applied  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  But  in
this  is  shown — what  it  is  of  importance  to  see — the  true
nature  of  the  kingdom  or  millennial  reign.  "  That  day  "
does  not  mean  a  time  when  everybody  will  be  converted,
but  when  the  Lord  Jesus  will  govern  righteously — when
overt  evil  will  be  judged,  and  good  be  sustained  per-
fectly for  a  thousand  years.  When  any  wrong  is  done,
it  will  be  dealt  with.  As  far  as  the  display  of  govern-
ment goes,  it  is  according  to  Gx)d  morally,  and  for  His
glory,  though  I  deny  not  for  a  moment  that  there  are
elements  of  evil  which  are  never  allowed,  but  kept


THE   REVELATION.  565

under  if  not  expelled.  But  that  the  heart  of  man  even
so  is  not  renewed  becomes  manifest,  when  Satan  at  the
close  deceives  all  that  are  not  converted;  and  these,  as  we
are  told,  are  countless  "  as  the  sand  of  the  sea."

Do  not  wonder  at  the  vast  numbers,  or  at  their
defection.  The  thousand  years  of  peace  and  plenty  will
have  given  occasion  for  an  ever-growing  population,
spite  of  a  world  thinned  by  divine  judgments  which
open  that  era.  It  is  to  be  supposed  that  it  will  far  ex-
ceed anything  yet  seen  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  At
the  beginning  there  will  have  been  carnage,  as  we  know,
among  both  the  western  powers  and  the  eastern  powers.
In  fact,  we  may  say,  all  nations  will  be  desolated  by
judgments  of  one  kind  or  another ;  but  for  all  this  the
world  proceeding  for  a  thousand  years  with  every  out-
ward blessing,  and  the  most  admirable  government  ad-
ministered by  the  blessed  Lord  Himself,  will  issue  in
the  teeming  and  prosperous  races  of  mankind.  It  will
be  a  state  of  nature  unexampled  for  the  fruits  of  the
earth  and  the  enjoyment  of  all  that  God  has  made
here  below.  Consequently  there  will  be  an  increase  in
population  such  as  never  has  been  approached  since  the
world  was  made,  yet  it  afterwards  appears,  that  Satan
will  not  fail  to  turn  the  masses  of  the  nations  into  one
vast  rebellion  against  the  objects  of  God's  special  favour
on  the  earth — the  saints — wherever  they  may  be,  and
the  beloved  city  of  Israel,  as  we  have  seen.

Then  comes  not  the  destruction  only  of  these  rebels
by  divine  judgment,  but  the  dissolution  of  heaven  and
earth.  And  Jesus  sits  on  the  great  white  throne.  It  is
the  judgment  of  the  dead  as  such,  who  now  rise  and
give  account  of  their  (Jeeds.    All  the  dead  are  there


566  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

who  had  not  part  in  the  first  resurrection.  The  natnre
of  the  C6tse  exempts  of  course  the  saints  of  the  millen-
nium ;*  and  this  very  simply,  because  they  are  never  said
to  die  at  alL  There  is  no  scriptural  reason  to  infer  that
any  saint  dies  during  the  thousand  years,  but  rather  the
contrary.  Scripture  is  positive  in  Isaiah  Ixv.  that  death
during  the  millennium  only  comes  as  a  specific  judg-
ment because  of  open  rebellion.  When  a  person  dies,  it
will  be  a  positive  curse  from  God;  if  he  die  even  a
hundred  years  old,  it  will  be  like  a  baby  dying  now.
Man  converted  will  then  not  merely  reach  the  natural
term — if  I  may  so  say — of  a  thousand  years,  but  pass
that  bound.  If  alive  before  the  thousand  years,  he
will  live  after  the  thousand  years ;  in  fact,  literally  he
will  never  die,  though  I  do  not  doubt,  on  general  prin-
ciples, that  the  saints  of  the  millennial  earth  will  be
changed  at  the  very  time  when  the  heavens  and  earth
disappear.  Of  course  they  will  be  preserved  througli
that  crisis  in  some  sort  of  way  suitable  to  divine  wi.s-
dom.  God  has  not  told  us  how,  nor  is  it  our  business.
He  has  reserved  the  matter,  though  not  without  enougli
to  guide  our  thouglits,  as  we  have  seen.  It  is  one  of
those  cases  which  every  now  and  then  appear  where
God  checks  and  reproves  our  foolish  curiosity,  as  He
alone  knows  how  to  do  perfectly.  "  Flesh  and  blood,"  we
know,  "cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  According
to  the  general  scope  of  scripture,  then,  we  may  be  quite
sure  that  these  saints,  kept  during  this  universal  dis-

*  None,  however,  can  be  exempt  fW)m  being  manifested  before  the
judgment-seat  of  Christ,  or  from  giving  an  ac<K)unt  of  aU  done  in  the
body.  But  no  believer  comes  into  judgment.  (John  v.  24  compared
^th  Horn.  xiv.  and  2  Cor.  v.)


THE  REVELATION.  567

solution  of  the  atmospheric  heaven  and  the  earth,  will  be
translated  to  "the  new  heavens  and  new  earth  wherein
dwelleth  righteousness/'  in  a  condition  new  and  meet
for  the  eternal  state  into  which  they  are  ushered.  Let
others  speculate,  if  they  will :  I  am  persuaded  that  he
who  essays  to  conceive  the  details  is  merely  striving  to
draw  a  bow  beyond  the  power  of  man.  For  I  am  not
aware  that  any  scripture  treats  of  the  subject,  beyond
laying  down  principles  such  as  we  have  sought  to  apply
to  the  case.

"  And  the  dead  were  judged,"  but  not  out  of  the  book
of  life,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  judgment.  "  The
dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were  writ-
ten in  the  books,  according  to  their  works."  Why  then
is  the  book  of  life  mentioned  ?  Not  because  any  of  their
names  w'ere  written  therein,  but  in  proof  that  they
were  not.  The  book  of  life  will  confirm  what  is  gathered
from  the  books.  If  the  books  proclaim  the  evil  works
of  the  dead  that  stand  before  the  throne,  the  book  of
life  offers  no  defence  on  the  score  of  God*s  grace.  Scrip-
ture records  no  name  whatever  among  those  judged
written  there.  There  was  the  sad  register  of  undeniable
sin  on  the  one  side ;  there  was  no  writing  of  the  name
on  the  other  side.  Thus,  whether  the  books  or  the
book  be  examined,  all  conspire  to  declare  the  justice,
the  solemn  but  most  affecting  righteousness,  of  God's
final  irrevocable  sentence.  They  were  judged  every  man
according  to  their  works.  "And  if  any  one  was  not
found  written  in  the  book  of  life,  he  was  cast  into  the
lake  of  fire."  Thus  the  only  use  that  seems  made  of  the
book  is  negative  and  exclusive.  Not  that  any  of  those
judged  (and  the  scene  described  is  solely  a  resurrection


568  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

of  judgment)  are  said  to  be  written  there :  we  are  shown
rather  that  they  were  not  found  in  that  book.

Again,  death  and  hades  are  said  to  come  to  their  end,
personified  as  enemies.  ''And  death  and  hades  were
cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  This  is  the  second  death.**
Thus  was  concluded  all  dealing  on  the  Lord's  part  with
both  soul  and  body,  and  all  that  pertains  to  either.  The
race  was  now  in  the  resurrection  state  either  for  good  or
for  evil ;  and  thus  it  must  be  for  ever.  Death  and  hades,
which  had  so  long  been  executioners  in  a  world  where
sin  reigned,  and  were  still  doing  their  occasional  office
where  righteousness  is  to  reign,  themselves  disappear
where  all  traces  of  sin  are  consigned  for  ever.

In  the  first  eight  verses  of  chapter  xxi  we  have  the
new  heaven  and  the  new  earth,  but  besides,  awful  to  say,
the  lake  of  fire.  Indeed  it  must  be  so,  because,  as  we
read  in  the  end  of  the  last  chapter,  there  the  lost  were
cast.  But  still  it  is  a  very  solemn  fact  to  read,  and  that
which  we  are  bound  to  preach — that  even  in  the  per-
fect state  of  eternity,  while  there  is  the  brightness  of  the
heaven  and  of  the  earth  into  which  no  evil  can  enter,
you  have  all  the  evil  that  ever  has  been — all  the  wicked
of  every  clime  and  of  every  age  cast  into  the  fixed  con-
dition of  eternal  judgment  in  the  lake  of  fire.

Observe  another  very  important  fact.  All  the  dis-
pensational  names  of  God  disappear.  It  is  only  (Jod
and  man  now.  There  is  nothing  more  to  hear  of
nations;  nothing  more  to  do  with  separate  countries,
kindreds,  or  tongues.  It  is  the  eternal  state ;  and  also,
in  fact,  the  fullest  description  of  that  state  which  is
furnished  in  the  Bible.  But  a  very  different  point  of
interest  is  to  be  observed.


THE   REVELATION.  569

Although  there  is  such  a  levelling  of  human  distinc-
tions, and  men  have  to  do  directly  with  God — that  is
men  raised  from  the  dead  or  in  their  changed  condition
— ^we  still  see  the  holy  Jerusalem — "  the  holy  city,  new
Jerusalem,"  separate  from  the  rest  of  those  that  fill  the
new  heaven  and  earth.  This  is  of  great  importance,
because  if  the  new  Jerusalem  be,  as  I  have  no  doubt  it
is,  the  bride  the  Lamb's  wife,  then  we  have  her  separate
condition  asserted  in  eternity.  "  I  heard  a  great  voice
out  of  heaven,  saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of  God  "
(alluding  to  this  very  city)  "[is]  with  men."  That  is,  the
tabernacle  of  God  is  regarded  as  a  separate  object,  no
doubt  associated  with  men,  but  not  confounded  with
them.  Men  are  not  regarded  as  composing  this  taber-
nacle ;  they  co-exist.  "  The  tabernacle  of  God  [is]  with
men,  and  he  shall  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be
his  people,  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  their
God.  And  God  shall  wipe  away  every  tear  from  their
eyes ;  and  death  shall  be  no  more,  nor  sorrow,  nor  cry-
ing, nor  shall  there  be  any  more  pain :  for  the  former
things  are  passed  away."

All  things  are  thus  made  new ;  and,  further,  "  these
words  are  faithful."  Nothing  more  is  to  be  done.  "And
he  said  unto  me.  It  is  done.  I  am  the  Alpha  and  the
Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end.  I  will  give  to  him
that  is  athirst  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely.
He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit  these  things ;  and  I
will  be  to  him  God,  and  he  shall  be  son  to  me.  But  to
the  fearful,  and  unbelieving,  and  abominable,  and  mur-
derers, and  fornicators,  and  sorcerers,  and  idolaters,  and
all  liars,  their  part  [is]  in  the  lake  that  bumeth  with
fire  and  brimstone :  which  is  the  second  death."


I


570  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

Here  occurs  a  remarkable  cliange  in  the  sequence  of
the  visions,  though  easily  understood;  for  it  must  be
evident  that  there  is  nothing  to  follow  this  in  point  of
time.  We  have  just  seen  that  it  is  the  eternal  state.
Consequently,  here  we  must  most  unquestionably  go
back  to  be  shown  an  important  object  in  the  prophecy
which  could  not,  without  interrupting  its  course,  have
been  described  before.  In  short,  it  is  as  we  saw  in
chapter  xvii,  after  Babylon  had  been  brought  before
us  in  the  course  of  the  prophecy.  We  had  seen  Babylon
twice :  first,  in  the  circle  of  God's  warnings  and  testi-
monies; and  then  as  the  object  of  Grod's  judgment
under  the  seven  bowls.  Then  we  have  a  description  of
Babylon  given.  It  would  have  been  incongruous  to
bring  in  that  long  description  before,  because  this  must
have  interrupted  the  flow  of  the  prophetic  stream.

Exactly  the  same  thing  is  repeated  here,  and  what
makes  it  more  apparent  is  the  similarity  of  the  intro-
duction on  each  occasion.  "And  there  came  unto  me
one  of  the  seven  angels  which  had  the  seven  vials  full
of  the  seven  last  plagues,  and  talked  with  me,  saying,
Come  hither,  I  will  shew  thee  the  bride,  the  Lamb's
wife."  Who  does  not  see  that  this  is  precisely  analogous
to  the  verse  which  opened  the  description  of  Babylon  ?
I  take  it,  therefore,  that  God  intended  this  analogy  to
be  noted  by  us ;  that  it  is  not  a  pursuance  of  the  pro-
phecy, but  a  description  of  the  holy  city  previously
named,  just  as  the  other  was  a  description  of  the
corrupt  city,  whose  judgment  had  been  announced.
We  had  Babylon  with  a  spuriously  ecclesiastical  but  a
really  murderous  character,  and  at  the  same  time  guilty
of  corruption  with  the  kings  of  the  eartL   Here  is  seen


•   THE  REVELATION.  571

the  holy  city  coming  down  out  of  heaven  from  God,
which  is  declared  to  be  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  in
the  plainest  contrast  with  the  great  harlot.  Yet  to  this
heavenly  city,  after  Christ  comes,  the  kings  of  the  earth
bring  their  offerings  and  their  homage ;  but  there  is  no
excitement  of  the  nations,  no  filthiness  of  fornication,
no  abominations,  no  blood-guiltiness.  In  short,  Babylon,
the  disgusting  counterpart  of  the  holy  city,  in  earthly
ambition  seeks  the  kings  and  the  masses  for  her  own
present  objects,  while  the  other  suffers  now  and  will
reign  then.  The  one  therefore  throws  much  light  upon
the  other.

But  what  I  particularly  call  your  attention  to  is
the  exceeding  importance  of  heeding  the  retrospect  at
the  bride,  or  new  Jerusalem  here,  and  the  consequent
removal  of  the  difficulty  caused  by  taking  the  last
vision  of  this  book  as  part  of  the  prophetic  series
which  begins  in  chapter  xix.  Not  so.  It  is  an  added
digression  for  the  purpose  of  describing  an  object
already  named  passingly  in  the  foregoing  series,  which
closes  at  chap.  xxi.  8.  As  chapter  xvii.  was  a  descriptive
digression,  so  is  the  portion  from  chapter  xxi.  9.  The
account  given  of  Babylon  in  chapter  xvii.  does  not
follow  chapters  xiv.  or  xvi.  in  point  of  prophetic  time,
but  differs  from  them  in  structure.  It  gives  a  retrogres-
sive account  of  Babylon's  character,  and  shows  how
it  morally  compelled  the  divine  judgment.  So  here  a
description  is  given  of  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  and
we  learn  how  it  is  that  God  will  use  her  for  unmeasured
goodness  and  blessing  and  glory  in  the  millennium,  as
the  devil  during  this  age  has  used  Babylon  to  accom-
plish his  wicked  plans  here  below.     Just  as  the  city  of


572  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

man's  confusion  was  seen  in  her  vile,  degraded,  and
degrading  relations  with  the  beast,  this  city  is  seen  in
her  pure  and  glorious  relations  with  the  Lamb.

"And  there  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  which  had
the  seven  bowls  full  of  the  seven  last  plagues,  and  talked
with  me,  saying,  Come  hither,  I  will  shew  thee  the
bride,  the  wife  of  the  Lamb.  And  he  carried  me  away
in  [the]  spirit  to  a  mountain  great  and  high,  and  shewed
me  the  holy  city  Jerusalem,  coming  down  out  of  heaven
from  God."  It  is  not  into  a  wilderness  the  prophet  is
carried,  but  he  is  set  on  "  a  mountain  great  and  high,"
and  shown — not  the  great,  but  the  holy  city  Jerusalem.
The  great  city  was  either  guilty  Jerusalem  or  Babylon.
This  city  is  seen  now  as  the  holy  vessel  of  divine
power  for  governing  the  earth  during  the  millennium,
"  having  the  glory  of  God :  and  her  brightness  was  like
a  stone  most  precious,  even  like  a  jasper  stone,  clear  as
crystal"

Then  follows  a  description  of  the  wall,  gates,  foun-
dations, and  general  position.  "Having  a  wall  great
and  high,  having  twelve  gates,  and  at  the  gates  twelve
angels,  and  names  inscribed,  which  are  the  names  of
the  twelve  tribes  of  the  sons  of  Israel"  It  was  im-
portant, just  because  it  is  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  to
show  that  angels  are  there,  and  further,  that  Israel  is
not  forgotten.  The  very  name  indeed  shows  something
similar;  not  of  course  that  the  church  can  ever  be
earthly.  Still  God  does  not  forget  His  ways  with  His
people;  and  the  angels  here  are  only  in  the  quality
of  porters,  if  we  may  so  speak;  they  are  at  the  gates.
And  as  for  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  they  are  merely
written  there,  nothing  more.  No  hint  whatever  is  given


THE  KEVELATION,  573

that  they  constitute  the  city,  but  there  is  the  inscription
of  their  names  outside.    That  city  will  be  a  constant
remembrancer  of  those  who  went  before  restored  Israel
here  below,  as  undoubtedly  it  will  be  used  for  their
blessing  during  the  millennium,  but  not  for  theirs  only.
We  shall  find,  on  the  contrary,  its  aspect  is  toward  the
universe,  yet  is  there  the  special  place  of  Israel ;  and
quite  right  it  is  that  it  should  be  so.  **  On  the  east  three
gates;  on  the  north  three  gates;  on  the  south  three
gates;  and  on  the  west  three  gates.     And  the  wall  of
the  city  had  twelve  foundations,  and  in  them  the  names
of  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb."    These  would
appear  to  be  (save  Judas  Iscariot,  of  course)  the  twelve
apostles  that  were  peculiarly  associated  with  Christ  in
His  sufifering  path  on  the  earth.     God  is  sovereign.     It
is  not  meant  that  he  who  was  more  honoured  in  service
than  any  of  the  twelve,  he  whom  the  Lord  used  for
bringing  out  the  church  of  the  heavenly  places,  will  not
have  his  own  most  singular  dignity  in  tliis  glorious
scene.     Still  God  acts  in  a  wisdom  far  above  man,  and
holds  to  His  principles  even  there.  The  twelve  apostles
of  the  Lamb  will  accordingly  have  their  own  special
place.    We  can  fairly  trust  God  that  He  will  not  give  a
worse  place  to  Paul ;  yet  I  do  not  think  that  this  is  his
place.

"And  he  that  spoke  with  me  had  a  golden  reed  as  a
measure,  that  he  might  measure  the  city,  and  the  gates
thereof,  and  the  wall  thereof.  And  the  city  lieth  four-
square, and  its  length  is  as  much  as  the  breadth."  Thus
there  is  a  completeness  and  perfection  about  it  suited
to  its  present  character.

Afterwards  we  come  to  the  description  of  itself, — of


674  INTRODUCTOBY  LECTURES.

its  wall,  its  building,  its  foundations,  and  its  gates.
Here  it  is  the  city  described  in  itself,  on  which  we
need  not  now  enlarge.

Further,  a  negative  point  of  great  importance  is  pre-
sented by  the  seer.  ''And  I  saw  no  temple  therein:
for  the  Lord  God  the  Ahnighty  is  the  temple  of  it,  and
the  Lamb."  This  was  no  lack.  On  the  contrary,  it
proved  the  immediateness  of  communion.  The  temple
would  suppose  a  medium.  The  absence  of  a  temple  is
therefore  no  loss  but  a  gain  for  this  city.  It  furnishes
material  for  a  contrast  between  the  earthly  Jerusalem
and  the  heavenly  city,  because  if  there  be  one  thing
more  remarkable  than  another  in  Ezekiel's  description,
it  is  the  temple.  But  here  there  is  none;  a  temple  is  for
the  earth.  The  heavenly  city,  which  is  the  full  expres-
sion of  blessedness  on  high,  has  no  temple  because  it  is
all  a  temple.  "  The  Lord  God  is  the  temple  of  it,  and
the  Lamb,"  as  far  as  we  can  speak  of  any.  "And  the
city  has  no  need  of  the  sim,  nor  of  the  moon,  that  they
should  shine  for  it."  This  too  must  not  be  viewed  as  if
it  were  a  loss.  As  for  the  earthly  land  and  city,  the
moon  will  have  her  light  increased  to  that  of  the  sun,
and  the  sun  shall  be  sevenfold.  But  here  there  is
neither;  and  this  again  is  an  evidence  of  gain,  not  of
loss.  "For  the  glory  of  God  enlightened  it,  and  the
Lamb  is  the  lamp  thereof."    Creature  lights  are  gone.

After  "the  nations"  in  verse  24  omit  the  words  "of
them  which  are  saved."  You  must  with  the  best
authorities  leave  out  this  addition,  if  you  would  have
the  true  force  of  the  verse.  It  is  a  wholly  unwarranted
interpolation.  "  The  nations  shall  walk  in  the  light  of
it."    Any  one  of  spiritual  judgment  can  see  that  it


THE   REVELATION.  575

should  not  be  "nations  of  them  which  are  saved."
What  would  be  the  meaning,  if  so  read  ?  We  ccui  under-
stand a  remnant  saved  out  of  one  or  more  nations ;  but
who  ever  heard  of  "nations  of  them  which  are  saved"?
It  is  altogether  unfeasible,  and  it  shows  how  carelessly
we  read  the  Bible  that  people  are  not  stopped  by  such
an  expression.  The  fact  is,  in  the  very  best  authorities
it  does  not  exist  at  alL  The  "  saved"  is  a  term  which,  so
far  from  belonging  to  the  nations,  is  expressly  applied
to  the  Jewish  remnant  when  it  is  a  technical  term.
But  "  nations  of  them  which  are  saved,"  is  a  most
anomalous  expression,  and  betrays  man  as  the  author
of  it.

"  And  the  nations  shall  walk  in  the  light  of  it."  It
is  plain  that  they  are  not.m  this  city.  "The  kings  of
the  earth  do  bring  their  glory  and  honour  unto  it" — not
into  but  unto.  That  is,  it  is  simply  an  expression  of  the
homage  that  they  pay.  "And  the  nations  shall  walk  in
the  light  of  it:  and  the  kings  of  the  earth  do  bring
their  glory  and  honour  unto  it  And  the  gates  of  it
shall  not  be  shut  at  all  by  day :  for  night  shall  not  be
there.  And  they  shall  bring  the  glory  and  honour  of
the  nations  unto  it.  And  there  shall  in  nowise  enter
into  it  anything  that  defileth,  nor  making  abomination
and  a  lie  :  but  only  those  written  in  the  book  of  life  of
the  Lamb."  Moral  unfitness  has  its  just  censure ;  but
sovereign  grace  must  be  asserted  also.

Then  we  have  another  glorious  description.  "And
he  shewed  me  a  pure  river  of  water  of  life,  bright  as
crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  Grod  and  of  the
Lamb."  It  is  not  now  lightnings  and  thunders  and
voices.  These  were  simply  the  characters  of  provisional


676  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

judgment  that  filled  the  interval  after  the  church  was
gone,  and  before  the  reign  with  Christ  But  when
Christ  and  the  church  peacefully  reign,  such  is  the
imagery  that  suits — "  a  river  of  water  of  life,  bright  as
crystal,  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the
Lamb.  In  the  midst  of  the  broadway  of  it,  and  of  the
river,  on  this  side  and  on  that,  [the]  tree  of  life," — bear-
ing not  merely  as  the  original  one  did,  but  now  according
to  the  fulness  of  the  provision  of  Grod's  grace  for  man,
for  man  in  glory  first,  but  for  man  on  the  earth  also,
but  for  man  in  glory — "producing  twelve  fruits,  in  each
month  yielding  its  fruit :  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  for
the  healing  of  the  nations."  Man  on  the  earth  has  his
portion  in  the  goodness  of  a  God  who  is  manifesting
His  kingdom.  "  And  no  curse  shall  be  any  more :  and
the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it ;  and
his  servants  shall  serve  him."  All  this  description
closes  in  verse  5.

After  that  we  have  the  admonitions  to  the  end  of
this  book.     On  these  I  may  say  but  a  very  few  words.

Verse  6  commends  these  sayings  afresh.  And  the
coming  of  the  Lord  is  urged  in  connection  with  it.
"Behold  I  come  quickly:  blessed  is  he  that  keepeth
the  words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."  Then  again
the  character  of  it,  as  derived  from  Christianity  having
already  taken  its  place,  is  asserted.  "  Seal  not  the  say-
ings of  the  prophecy  of  this  book."  In  Daniel's  time,
and  even  to  Daniel  himself,  the  book  was  sealed.  The
old  oracles  were  sealed  then :  not  so  John's.  "And  he
saith  unto  me,  Seal  not  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy
of  this  book :  for  the  time  is  near."  In  Daniel's  time
it  was  not  at  hand.     To  the  church  the  end  is  always


THE  REVELATION.  577

near.  In  her  own  course,  and  in  the  matters  of  her
portion,  the  church  does  not  know  time  at  all.  Every-
thing that  belongs  to  the  body  of  Christ  is  unearthly
and  unworldly.  The  church  is  heavenly;  and  in  heaven
there  are  no  times  nor  seasons.  There  may  be  lights  of
the  heaven  to  mark  times  and  seasons  for  the  earth,
and  again  on  the  earth.  But  the  church  consists  of
souls  called  out  from  the  earth,  and  is  not  of  the  world:
consequently  to  the  church  the  time  is  always  at  hand.
When  Christ  at  God's  right  hand  was  announced,  even
from  the  very  beginning.  He  was  ready  to  judge  the
quick  and  the  dead.  He  remains  in  that  condition  of
readiness  from  the  time  when  He  sat  at  God's  right
hand  till  the  present.  The  church  goes  on  according
to  the  will  of  the  Lord,  who  might  according  to  His
own  purpose  lengthen  or  abridge  the  space.  It  is  en-
tirely in  His  hand,  and  in  none  other's.  Whereas  for
the  Jew,  there  are  necessary  dates  and  momentous
changes  that  nmst  take  place ;  and  hence,  as  Daniel
represents  the  Jew,  we  have  the  difference  kept  up.
To  the  Christian  this  book  is  not  sealed.  All  is  opened,
and  this  because  we  have  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in
us ;  "  for  the  Spirit  searcheth  all  things,  yea,  the  deep
things  of  God."  Therefore  we  find  in  connection  with
the  book  a  most  solemn  warning.  "Let  him  that  is
unrighteous  be  unrighteous  still :  and  let  the  filthy  be
filthy  still :  and  he  that  is  righteous,  let  him  be  right-
eous still:  and  he  that  is  holy,  let  him  be  holy  still."
When  the  hour  comes  that  is  spoken  of  here,  it  is  not
for  us,  but  for  those  who  will  be  found  after  we  are
gone.  All  is  then  fixed.  There  wiU  be  no  time  for  seek-
ing mercy,  as  it  were :  whatever  the  state  in  which  the

2  p


678  INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.

Lord  at  His  coming  will  find  ns,  all  is  closed  up  and
fixed.  Accordingly,  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly,  and  my
reward  is  with  me."  We  see  that  it  is  in  connection
with  the  foregoing — not  merely  His  coming  for  us  who
will  keep  the  sayings  of  it,  but  for  those  whom  He  will
find  here  below — "  to  give  to  each  as  his  work  is."

Further,  after  this  Jesus  introduces  Himself,  as  well
as'sends  His  angeL  "  I  Jesus  sent  mine  angel  to  testify
unto  you  these  things  in  the  churches.  I  am  the  root
and  the  offspring  of  David,  the  bright  the  morning
star.  And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come:  and
let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come :  and  let  him  that  is
athirst  come :  let  him  that  will  take  the  water  of  life
freely."  Thus  the  name  of  Christ,  not  merely  as  the
root  and  the  offspring  of  David,  but  as  the  bright
morning  star,  calls  out  responsively  the  heart  of  the
church,  and  this  too  under  the  guiding  activity  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  The  church  cannot  hear  of  Him  as  the
bright  morning  star  without  at  once  desiring  that  He
should  come.  She  does  not,  it  is  true,  say,  "Come
quickly."  This  would  not  be  fitting  for  the  church  nor
the  Christian.  Patience  or  endurance  of  hope  is  what
becomes  us.  But  it  is  blessed  that  ffe  says,  "  I  come
quickly;"  and  it  is  only  Christ  who  in  scripture  ever
says  so.  But  we  as  properly  say,  "  Come."  We  desire
that  He  should  come  quickly,  but  we  leave  this  to  Him,
because  we  know  His  love,  and  can  trust  Him.  We
know  that  if  He  tarries,  it  is  not  that  He  is  "slack
concerning  His  promise,"  but  that  "  His  longsuffering
brings  salvation  to  many."  And  who  woidd  defraud
either  the  soul  of  salvation,  or  the  Lord  of  showing  it  ?

"  And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come."   It  is  to


THE  REVELATION.  579

Jesus.  To  whom  else  could  they  say  it?  The  bride
breathes  out  this  word  to  the  bridegroom;  and  the  Holy
Ghost  it  is  that  gives  strength  to  her  desire  that  He
should  come.  But  there  is  a  message  also  for  others.
There  is  a  word  to  him  that  hears.  "Let  him  that
heareth  say,  Come."  He  is  urged  to  take  up  the  same
cry.  If  you  are  a  believer,  do  not  be  afraid,  even  if  you
know  but  little ;  for  the  Lord  neither  forgets  nor  slights
those  who  may  be  comparatively  unintelligent.  He  has,
I  think,  exactly  that  class  in  view  when  He  sanctions
the  calling  him  who  hears  to  say  "  Come."  The  bride
represents  those  that  arc  spoken  of  in  the  normal  posses-
sion and  enjoyment  of  their  privileges.  There  are  many
who  ai-e  not  so;  but  the  Lord  does  not  forget  them.
"  Let  him  that  heareth,"  then,  "  say,  Come."  If  they
liave  only  heard  His  voice,  this  after  all  is  the  incal-
culable boon ;  yea,  it  is  the  turning-point  of  all  blessing.
It  is  not  tlie  enjoyment  of  all,  but  it  is  the  hinge  on
which  all  depends.  It  is  the  way  to  all,  if  it  be  not
the  actual  entrance  into  and  enjoyment  of  it.  "Let  him
that  heareth,"  then,  be  encouraged  to  "say,  Come."
There  is  nothing  in  Jesus  to  hanu  him ;  there  is  every-
thing to  bless ;  there  is  Himself  to  be  enjoyed,  even
if  they  have  failed  in  the  full  knowledge  of  it  here
below.

But  then  while  there  is  such  a  call  to  Christ,  while
the  believer  is  not  to  be  afmid,  but  to  call  on  the  Lord
to  come,  the  church  does  not  forget  those  that  are  poor
sinners,  let  them  be  deeply  conscious  of  it,  or  let  them
be  those  that  are  only  made  willing  by  the  grace  of  God
(which  is  the  feeblest  expression  of  the  sinner's  need,
just  as  you  have  the  feeblest  expression  of  the  saint  in


580


INTRODUCTORY  LECTURES.


the  previous  call).  So  we  find  the  Lord  has  room  for  all
that  is,  the  fruit  of  His  own  grace  only, — for  the  appeal
of  grace,  even  when  there  is  not  the  answer  to  it  Yet
grace  despised  necessarily  ends  in  judgment  "  And  let
him  that  is  athirst  come ;  and  whosoever  will,  let  him
take  the  water  of  life  freely."

Then  the  book  concludes  after  a  solemn  warning
against  either  adding  to  or  taking  bom  its  contents.  "  He
that  testifieth  these  things  saith,  Surely  I  come  quickly.
Amen.  Even  so,  come.  Lord  Jesus."  "  Surely  I  come
quickly."  After  so  long  a  tarrying  how  blessed  !  After
so  many  sorrows,  trials,  difficulties,  dangers,  how  sweet
to  have  such  a  word,  and  to  know  that  He  who  speaks
is  the  holy  and  the  true,  and  surely  about  to  come  in
the  faithfulness  of  His  love  I  He  will  not  fail  to  take
up  the  gage  He  has  given  our  hearts.  He  is  coming,
and  coming  soon  for  us.

May  our  hearts  answer  freely  to  His  word  of  love
and  truth  with  our  "  Amen."    His  grace  be  with  all !


LONDON :
W.  H.  BHOOM,  PATE&NU8TER  KUW.


I-


^'  .-■■•;
