\ 
; 
: 
\\\ 


$4.75 


Lectures on 


Daniel the Prophet 


by 
H. A. IRONSIDE 


“To the Christians,’ Dr. Ironside 
writes, “the book of Daniel must ever 
be a precious and soul-stirring record 
of the love and care of our gracious 
God, who has given us the sure word 
of prophecy as a light shining in the 
gloom.” 

This prophetic book consists of reve- 
lations, deliverances and visions which 
God gave to Daniel, His faithful ser- 
vant, one of the few who were separate 
from the iniquity of that day. God 
has revealed the whole course of hu- 
man events, right up to the Great White 
Throne, so any who desire to know the 
truth of God’s ways until the time of 
the end may do so. Much of the proph- 
ecy has already been wonderfully ful- 
filled, as history will attest. 

Although Daniel is a difficult book, 
these studies will give the student a 
clear grasp of its contents. The chart 
and key which are included make plain 
what might otherwise be obscure. In 
addition, the appendix answers many 
questions which were brought to the 
speaker’s attention when delivering these 
lectures, 


The cloth of this book has been treated 
with waterproof pyroxylin and can be 
cleaned with a damp cloth. 


Lectures 
on 
Daniel the Prophet 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


https://archive.org/details/lecturesondanielOOO0Ohair_d9x0 


LECTURES 


ON 


DANIEL the PROPHET 


By H. A. IRONSIDE 


Author of **Notes on Proverbs; ** “‘ Notes on the Minor Prophets; ™ 
**Notes on Ezra, Nehemiah & Esther ;"" ‘‘Notes on Jeremiah:” 
* The Mysteries of God,” etc., etc. 


GS) 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS 
Neptune, New Jersey 


FIRST EDITION, JANUARY 1911 
SECOND EDITION, MARCH 1920 
TWENTY-FIFTH PRINTING, SEPTEMBER 1975 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, Inc., PUBLISHERS 


A Non-Profit Organization, Devoted to the Lord’s Work 
and to the Spread of His Truth 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


Preface 


el Be substance of the exposition in the fol- 

lowing pages was first delivered in the 
form of lectures, at which time shorthand notes 
were taken which have been revised since, and 
considerably altered by the writer. 

Much matter too has been eliminated to reduce 
the volume, which might have been too large, 
and thus wearisome tomanyreaders. It is hoped 
that enough has been retained to give a clear 
and succinct outline of the teaching of the book 
of Daniel. By referring from time to time to 
the chart accompanying the book, the lectures 
will be considerably simplified. 

Critical questions such as authenticity and auth- 
nership have not been gone into here, though the 
present writer has carefully examined practically 
all that has been urged against receiving this por- 
tion of the Holy Scriptures as being in very deed 
a part of the inspired wordofGod. Ifany reader 
has doubts or difficulties on these lines he is re- 
ferred to the erudite and able expositions and 
examinations of W. Kelly, Sir Robert Anderson 
and Dr. Pusey. 

With the prayer that God may be pleased to 
use this little book to stir up His own people 
to more devotion to Himself, a more ardent 
longing for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 
and our gathering together unto Him, and to the 
arousing of any who are still in their sins, these 
lectures are committed to Him who alone can 
apply them to heart and conscience. 

= 


Preface to Second Edition 


HAT a second edition of this little book 

has been called for is cause for unfeigned 

thankfulness to God, who, I trust, has been 

pleased to use it in some measure to quicken the 

faith of His beloved people, and to arouse a 

deeper interest in the study of the prophetic 
Word. 


Since these lectures were first put into print, 
great and stirring events have transpired. Al- 
ready one can see the handwriting on the wall, 
that tells of the utter collapse of man’s boasted 
civilization, apart from God, and the rise of the 
biasphemous powers predicted in Daniel and the 
Revelation. 

In revising the book very few changes have 
been made, and those only for the sake of euph- 
ony or greater clearness. May the Lord be 
pleased to continue to use it for His glory and 
the blessing of souls. 


H. A. Trons:pr 


Oakland, Calif., Januury, 1920 


INDEX 


LECTURE PAGE 


Introductory: Brief Analysis of the Chart. 
1. Chapter I. The Needed Moral Condition to 


Know and Understand God’s Mind - . . 
Ul. Chapter II. The Times of the Gentiles—the 

Great Image i RTA ar 25 
III. Chapter III. The Abomination of Desolation, 

in Type. Lp eed Ped cot etx stes inet 40 
tw Chapter IV. Nebuchadnezzar’s Humbling: 

Gentile Subjugation Typified 59 
V. Chapter VY. Belshazzar’s Impious Feast and 

Overthrow of ae ane World aay 

ABYC. pete othe, suite Sans a 78 
VI. Chapter VI. The Preservation of the Faith- 

ful Remnant, in Type é 98 
VII. Chapter VII. The Four Great World-Empires 

and the Western Little Horn Aree 
VIII. Chapter VIII. The Grecian Little Horn . 136 
IX. Chapter IX. The Seventy Weeks . 155 
X. Chapter X. Angelic Agency See 
XI. Chapter XI. 1-35. ‘The Wars of the Ptole- 

mies and Seleucide 5s at cg oll 
XII. Chapter XI. 36-45. The A-.tichrist . 210 
XIII. Chapter XII. The Time of the End . 230 


Appendix: Questions and Objections Answered 247 


5 


INTRODUCTORY 


Kry TO THE CHART. 


* (“HE chart accompanying this volume isare 

production of a large one, used for the 
purpose of aiding to a clear apprehension of the 
structure of the book of Daniel when the follow- 
ing lectures were delivered in public. 

A little careful study of the diagram will, it is 
hoped, make plain much that might otherwise be 
obscure to some who have given but littie atten- 
tion to prophetic teaching. 

The first chapter of Daniel, as noted, is intro- 
ductory, and does not itself have a prophetic 
character, but it pictures, for our instruction, 
the moral condition suited to enlightenment in 
regard to the Divine ways and counsels eimpha- 
sizing the need of holiness as a prerequisite to 
growth in the truth. 

Chapters two to nine are each complete in 
themselves, giving either actual prophetical in- 
struction or typical lessons of a like character. 
All, as will be readily observed, culminate i, 
‘the Time of the Bude 

What is meant by this last expression will be 
inade clear, if it be noted that a parenthetical 
period in the Divine plan is indicated by the broad 
space between the two heavy lines running right 

6 


Introductory ¥ 


across the chart, near to the centre. Every: 
thing noted or pictured above the upper heavy 
Jine, represents fulfilled prophecy, or history 
already accomplished. The line itself, it will be 
noticed (see the column headed *‘Chapter IX.”’), 
is coincident with the cross of Christ. Below 
the second line we have the ‘‘ Time of the End.” 
This second line represents the close of the pres- 
ent ‘‘ Church-period,”’ at the rapture of the saints, 
or the Lord’s coming to the air. Between the 
two, we have the whole gospel age, or dispensa- 
tion of the grace of God, in which He has been 
pleased to make known ‘‘for the obedience of 
faith,” the revelation of the mystery of Christ 
and the Church, ‘‘ which in other ages was not 
made known,” but was ‘*‘hid in God,” until the 
rejection and ascension of His beloved Son, fol- 
lowed by the descent of the Holy Spirit to bap- 
tize believing Jews and Gentiles into one body; 
thus securing, for the glory of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, a heavenly people who will share His 
throne as the bride of His heart, in the coming 
age, and through eternity. 

Now all this was still hidden in the days of 
Daniel. If the chart were folded so that the 
two dark horizontal lines touched, the paren- 
thetical period would be hidden, as was the 
mystery in Old Testament times. With this 
period covered, we have an outline of what was 
revealed to Daniei. The great image is then 
teen to be apparently continuous. and the ten- 


8 Introductory 


horned condition of the Beast of Chapter VIL 
follows immediately upon its first risiny up 

Chapters X. to XII. form one prephecy. The 
division into past and future occurs betweep 
verses 35 and 36 of Chapter XI. 

Daniel says very little about the Kingdom. as 
his special theme is ‘*The Times of the Gen- 
tiles’; but Chapters II. and VII., as also Chap- 
ter XII. lead us upto the Kingdom, though with 
little detail regarding it. 

If the reader will refer from time to time bacx 
to the chart while reading the Lectures it 
hoped all obscurity will be removed. 


LECTURES ON DANIEL 
THE PROPHET 


LECTURE I 
CHAPTER I 


THE NEEDED MORAL CONDITION TO KNOW AND 
UNDERSTAND GOD’S MIND 


N beginning a series of addresses on this book, 

I want you first to notice the title of the 
chart —“ Outline of the book of Daniel the 
Prophet.” I call especial attention to the name 
given to Daniel, because it is given to him, not 
by man, but by our Lord Jesus Himself, in the 
24th chapter of Matthew, 15th verse, and in 
Mark 18, verse 14.1. There we find Him warn- 
ing His disciples concerning the setting up of 
“the abomination of desolation spoken of by 
Daniel the prophet.” I emphasize this, because 
it is a common thing with some in our day to 
deny that there was a prophet Daniel. If you 
are even moderately familiar with the theories 
of the destructive “ critics,’ you must know 


1The R. V. omits the expression in the last passage noted, 


though retaining it in Matthew. 
9 


10--- Lectures on Daniel 


that the book of Daniel was about the first por- 
tion of Scripture to which they objected. They 
declared that it was utterly impossible to credit 
the idea that Daniel lived in the days of Nebu- 
chadnezzar, Darius, and Cyrus, and yet wrote a 
book which told of all these world-empires be- 
fore any of them, except the first two, had come 
into existence. Daniel, these learned teachers 
tell us, was simply a romancer, who lived over 
200 years later on, and he wrote his so-called 
prophecies after they had all become history. 

As a simple believer, who owes everything for 
eternity to what the blessed Christ of God ac- 
complished on Calvary’s cross, I prefer to accept 
His testimony, though it were in opposition to 
all the wise men of the day. He declared that 
Daniel was a prophet. He spoke not of Daniel 
the historian, nor Daniel the romancer, nor 
Daniel the novelist, but Daniel the prophet — 
Daniel the man who had enlightenment by the 
Spirit of God, and therefore could speak of the 
things that were not, as though they were. 
That is one thing I shall be insisting on in all 
these lectures. I stand for the full inspiration 
of all the reputed word of God, and necessarily. 
therefore, of the book of Daniel. 

The first chapter, as noted on the chart, is 
introductory. It sets forth the moral condition 
suited to enlightenment in the ways and coun- 
sels of God. In it we read of a little company 


The Needed Moral Conditivun 11 


of faithful men maintaining a state of separa- 
tion to God from evil, in a day when everything 
seemed to be against them, and it appeared as 
though there was none to whom they could turn 
for help. 

This little company, Daniel, Hananiah, Mish- 
ael and Azariah, four devoted young men, set 
themselves against all the evil of the kingdom 
of Babylon. They said, “We will not defile 
ourselves’: and these were the men to whom 
God could communicate His mind. I believe it 
is important to dwell upon this, because in our 
own day, alas, in many cases prophetic study 
has been taken up by very unspiritual persons. 
If we are going to get the mind of God in study- 
ing this book, we must remember that it con- 
sists of revelations, deliverances and visions 
given to a spiritually-minded man who was 
separated from the iniquity of his day; and if 
we are to understand it, we also need to be spir- 
itually-minded, and to walk apart from all that 
is unholy, all that would hinder progress in 
divine things. We need ever to have before us 
the words, “Look to yourselves, that we lose 
not those things which we have wrought, but 
that we receive a full reward” (2 John 8). 

The truth of God is learned through the con- 
science; and this is the reason why the most 
brilliant men can read the Bible through, over 
and over again, and never hear the voice of God 


12 Lectures on Daniel 


in it at all. It has been said that “ what is one 
man’s meat is another man’s poison.” The 
very word of God may become poison to an un- 
spiritual man, if he reads it without being in 
subjection to God,— reads it to find difficulties; 
and arises from its perusal more confirmed in 
his unbelief than he was when he sat down to 
consider it. But, on the other hand, the same 
book put into the hands of a spiritually-minded 
person — one who has bowed in God’s presence, 
owning his lost condition, who has trusted the 
Lord Jesus Christ as his Saviour, and who is 
now seeking to live for God, and to let his whole 
life be subject to His word — that man sits down 
to the same book, and he finds it to be food for 
his soul, building him up on his most holy faith. 

If you want enlightenment in divine things, 
see to it that you walk in the power of an un- 
grieved Spirit, for “the secret of the Lord is 
with them that fear Him.” 

In verses 1 and 2 we find fulfilled the word 
which God had previously declared by Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, and others of the prophets, would 
soon take place. For a number of years Jeho- 
vah had been sending prophets to the backslid- 
ing kings of Judah, warning them that the day 
of His patience had almost run out, and that 
though Israel had been His chosen people, yet 
because of their sin He was going to give them 
over to the power of their enemies, and the land 


The Needed Moral Condition 13 


of Palestine was to lie desolate. Singularly 
enough, as we might consider it, God connects 
this with their failure to keep the sabbatic year. 
He had told them, when they came into the 
land, that every seventh year must be His. For 
490 years they had not kept one sabbatic year. 
They doubtless thought they would do better 
by tilling the land annually, and that they 
would be richer as a result of taking their own 
way. God had told them that if they gave 
every seventh year to Him they would have 
abundance in the sixth year to last them until 
harvest in the eighth year; but they evidently 
did not believe Him, and they thought to better 
themselves by their own efforts. Thus, through 
covetousness — a sin that is eating like a canker 
among many of God’s professed people to-day — 
the word of the Lord was ignored and His com- 
mandment broken. For 490 years He seemed to 
be indifferent to this breach of obedience on their 
part; He appeared to wink at their sin. But 
He had taken account of it all; and when they, 
perhaps, thought His law had become as a dead 
letter, He sent Jeremiah to tell them that now 
they must go down to Babylon, as captives 
there for seventy years, while the land kept sab- 
bath! They had cheated God out of seventy 
years, they thought; but He squared the account 
by giving them into the power of Nebuchad- 
nezzar, king of the Chaldeans, who carried them 


14 Lectures on Daniel 


away to the land of Shinar; and there they re- 
mained until the seventy years had expired, 
while the lost sabbaths were being made up. 

It is a very common thing for men thus to for- 
get the claims of God, and to suppose that He 
will never assert Himself. Even saints have 
been known to fail in this respect. But none 
ever prospered who ignored the authority of 
Jehovah in the past; and none can prosper Dow 
who forget the obedience due as children to a 
Father, and as redeemed ones to Him who is 
not only Saviour, but Lord. In the world, and 
even in the Church nowadays, we hear a great 
deal about the rights of the people; but there is 
One whose rights we do not hear emphasized as 
often as we should — the rights of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Men of the world are utterly indifferent 
to His rights, and saints are only too apt to fall 
in with the spirit of the times; but a day is fast 
approaching when God is going to square the 
account. Men may not be concerned just now 
about what is due to Him; but the day is com- 
ing when He is going to awake from His seem- 
ing slumber, as He tells us in the 50th psalm; 
and then their proud, haughty knees will have 
to bow, and their tongues confess that Jesus 
Christ is Lord of all, to the glory of God the 
Father, when the once-rejected Saviour mani- 
fests His authority and power. Judah ignored 
God’s rights, and the result was they were sent 


The Needed Moral Condition 15 


down to Babylon, as we find in these opening 
verses. 

But there was a second and greater reason 
still why God chose to give His heritage over 
to the power of the Chaldeans. For centuries 
idolatry had been gaining ground among them. 
They had turned away from Him, the living and 
true God, to serve the false gods of the heathen. 
Now Babylon was the home of idolatry; so 
thither the Jews were sent, that they might learn 
to loathe the idols they had loved. And we find 
the lesson was well impressed. Ever since the 
captivity the Jewish nation, whatever its other 
sins, has been free from this great evil. Unhap- 
pily they are like the house empty, swept and 
garnished, from which the evil spirit of idolatry 
has been driven; but they refused Messiah when 
He came in lowly grace; and so, in the not very 
distant future, a host of wicked spirits will enter 
the empty house; and the Jews, save a pre- 
served and delivered remnant, will own and 
worship the “Man of sin.” But of this more 
anon. 

The four youths already mentioned were spe- 
cially distinguished among the rest of their cap- 
tive brethren. They were taken in charge by 
the king’s orders, that they might be trained to 
administer in state affairs, and fitted for posi- 
tions of trust and confidence. The name of each 
of them contains some form of the name of God 


“16 Lectures on Daniel 


in Hebrew, and indicates their pious ancestry: 
for, in Scripture, names have meanings that 
often help greatly in elucidating the Holy Spir- 
it’s mind on a given subject. 

All these young men were devoted to Jehovah, 
as their names imply. But that did not suit 
the prince of the eunuchs, into whose charge they 
were given; so he gave them new names that 
indicated their subjection to the Chaldeans, call- 
ing Daniel, Belteshazzar; and the others, Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abednego — names that con- 
tain the titles of heathen deities; as though he 
would thus force them to own themselves the 
subjects of senseless idols. But these labeled 
men (labeled as servants to heathen gods) stood 
firmly for the God of Israel, and refused to dis- 
honor Him by compliance with a demand that 
would have rendered them unclean before Him. 

The test came. They were to eat of the king’s 
meat; and all that meat was dedicated to idols; 
making it abhorrent and defiling to a godly 
Jew. But as the king had given his orders, it 
might have seemed as though these Hebrews 
had no choice in the matter. Many, at least, 
would have argued in this way, and said there 
was no individual responsibility in such a case. 
Nebuchadnezzar’s authority was derived from 
God. They had only to obey, they might rea- 
son, as the Lord Himself had put them in his 
power. But not thus did Daniel or his young 


The Needed Moral Condition Ag 


companions view it. They looked upon the 
king’s command as a trial of their faith. Would 
they keep themselves from the unclean in the 
land of the idolater? Would they be just as par- 
ticular about being true to God as if they were 
in their own land; giving due honor to His 
Word, and seeking to glorify Him by subjection 
thereto, though captives in the country of the 
oppressor? 

They stood the test in a most marked way, as 
did the apostles in a later day, who said, “ We 
ought to obey God rather than men.” Daniel 
besought the master of the eunuchs that he 
would give them pulse — vegetable food — to eat. 
Fearing the result upon their physical constitu- 
tions, he objected, dreading to incur the king’s 
wrath. But the devoted young men pleaded 
that, at least, an opportunity be given to prove 
whether they would not thrive as well upon 
pulse as the rest of the company did upon the 
king’s meat. To this Melzar consented, and the 
test showed that at the end of ten days Daniel 
and his three friends were fatter and fairer than 
any who were fed with the regulation diet. 
Permission was accordingly given to continue 
the same fare; and thus they were able to main- 
tain a position of separation from the unclean, 
even in the very home of idolatry. 

Now all this might have seemed to many of 
the Jews a very trivial matter; and some who 


18 Lectures on Daniel 


read the account in our day may also consider 
it all a mere quibble on the part of Daniel, Han- 
aniah, Mishael, and Azariah. But it brings out 
a principle of great force and beauty that should 
appeal to every Christian heart and conscience. 
Mark you, the only way to go on with God is 
by being faithful in little things. He who hon- 
ors the Lord by conscientious adherence to His 
Word in what some would call minor details is 
likely to be exercised about greater things. I 
have heard Christians refer to certain precepts 
in the Scriptures as non-essentials. But we may 
rest assured there are no non-essentials in our 
Bibles. ‘ The words of the Lord are pure words, 
as silver tried in the fire, purified seven times.” 
When people talk of non-essentials in regard to 
anything concerning which God has revealed 
His mind, it is well to ask, “ Essential or non- 
essential to what?” If it be a question of the 
soul’s salvation, undoubtedly the one great es- 
sential is faith in His blessed Son, whose finished 
work alone avails to put away sin and pro- 
cure peace with God. But if it be a question of 
what is essential to the enjoyment of commu- 
nion with God—essential to obtaining the 
Lord’s approval at the judgment-seat of Christ 
— then it is well to remember that in everything 
the believer is sanctified to the obedience of 
Christ. And it is here that we should seek to 
imitate Daniel, who had “ purposed in his heart ” 


The Needed Moral Condition 19 


that he would not defile himself. Paul and Bar- 
nabas besought the early Christians to “cleave 
to the Lord with purpose of heart.” It is only 
thus we will be kept from defilement. Anything 
that defiles the conscience at once breaks the 
link of communion with God, and hinders our 
advance in spiritual things. There can be no 
true progress if there be not care to preserve 
inviolate this inward monitor. “ Holding the 
faith and a good conscience; which some hay- 
ing put away, concerning faith have made ship- 
wreck,” is a solemn word worthy of being care- 
fully pondered. 

It was because of their carefulness in main- 
taining a good conscience that these Hebrew 
young men were given spiritual enlightenment 
above all the men of their times. They had an 
understanding in divine mysteries that others 
failed to enter into, because it remains true in all 
dispensations that “spiritual things are spiritu- 
ally discerned.” God does not commonly impart 
His secrets to careless men, but to those who 
are devoted to His interests. He may, in His 
sovereignty, use even a Balaam or a Caiaphas to 
utter divine truth; but cases like these are ex- 
traordinary. The rule is that “the secret of the 
Lord is with them that fear Him.” 

It is of grave importance that we bear this 
principle in mind in these Laodicean times. We 
live in days when everything that once was 


20 Lectures on Daniel 


deemed important is looked upon as a matter 
of indifference; when truth for which myriads 
of martyrs shed their blood is considered hardly 
worthy of being contended for — days when the 
claims of God as set forth in His faithful Word 
are openly set aside even by those who “call 
themselves by the name of the Lord,” and who 
profess to owe everything to the cross on which 
the Lord Jesus died. Latitudinarianism is the 
prevailing order, and few ask, with intention to 
obey, ‘“ What saith the Scripture?” Is it any 
wonder that a host of false teachings is com- 
ing in like a flood, and thousands on every hand 
are being swept away from their moorings? 
A good conscience — that is, a conscience in all 
things controlled by the word of God — once put 
away, shipwreck of the faith is almost certain 
to follow. It is not a question of shipwreck of 
faith in Christ; but by putting away a good 
conscience people make shipwreck of the faith’; 
and the term “the faith” means “the faith of 
God’s elect,” the truth He has revealed, and con- 
cerning which Paul wrote, “ Holding the mys- 
tery of the faith in a pure conscience.” It is the 
same as that spoken of by Jude, who writes ex- 
horting believers to “contend earnestly for the 
faith once delivered to the saints.” 

And so we may lay it down as an axiom 


1 The definite article will not be found in the A. V. of 1 Tim. 
1: 19, but will be shown in any good critical translation. 


The Needed Moral Condition 21 


proven by experience, and supported by Scrip- 
ture, that the only way we can advance in the 
truth is by maintaining a good conscience. Al. 
low one thing in your life unjudged that you 
know to be contrary to the word of God, or 
that you fear is not in line with God’s will for 
you, and you will soon find your spiritual eyes 
become darkened, your spiritual susceptibilities 
deadened, and no real progress made in your 
soul, but rather a steady decline. But where 
there is faithfulness in separation from that 
which is opposed to the mind of God; where 
His word is allowed to sit in judgment on all 
your ways, you will learn that “the path of 
the just is as a shining light, which shineth 
brighter and brighter unto the perfect day.” 
The Word will illumine each step before you as 
you take the one already pointed out. 

It is written of these four young men that 
“God gave them knowledge and skill in all 
learning and wisdom, and Daniel had under- 
standing in all visions and dreams.” In this he 
reminds us very much of Joseph, who also en- 
tered into the secrets of the Lord, and who was 
first characterized by fidelity to God; so that 
God’s smile, God’s approbation, meant more, 
was more to him than the smile or the friend- 
ship and approval of any human being. And 
just as it was with Daniel, who came “into 
favor and tender love with the prince of the 


22 Lectures on Daniel 


eunuchs,” so Joseph, exhibiting the godliness of 
his life and the transparency of his nature, came 
into favor with the keeper of the prison; and, 
to crown it all, we find God opening his under- 
standing, giving him wisdom in the interpreta- 
tion of dreams and visions, as here with Daniel. 

What a lesson for us —that purity of heart 
and faithfulness to God come before enlighten- 
ment in divine mysteries! If you attempt to 
reverse these things, you need not be surprised 
if you fall into all kinds of error. If you try to 
put knowledge before heart-purity; if you try 
to put a grasp of scripture truth before consci- 
entious living in the presence of God, you are 
almost certain to have a fearful fall awaiting 
you. It is right here that large numbers have 
failed, who may well be a warning to us. 

Thus this first chapter of Daniel comes to us 
as a serious reminder of the necessity of holiness 
on the threshold of this book of types and 
prophecies. It reminds us that if we want to 
go on, and learn all that God has revealed in 
the various chapters following, we need first to 
stop and ask ourselves, “ Am I, personally, right 
with God? Am I seeking to live so as to honor 
Him in all my ways?” It is the solemnity of 
this that I want to press upon my own soul, 
and upon each one here, as I close this lecture. 
Oh that both saved and unsaved may consider 
it well! 


Phe Needed Moral Condition 23 


If out of Christ, I would affectionately remind 
you of the danger in which you stand. Later 
we shall be speaking of woes and sorrows, in 
the throes of which this poor world will soon 
be. And is it here that you have your all? You 
are building your hopes for happiness in a wast- 
ing scene! Many things which in this book of 
Daniel are given as prophecy have now become 
history; many other portions will soon be ful- 
filled. Dear unsaved one, if you continue in 
your sins till “the time of the end,’— without 
God and without hope — your sorrows, your an- 
guish, your bitter, bitter woes will be more than 
tongue can tell. Think of what it will mean for 
gospel-rejecters to be going up and down in this 
scene after the Holy Ghost has been withdrawn 
— when Christendom has become completely 
apostate — when the word of God is no longer 
preached — when the saints of God have been 
called home to heaven — when Antichrist’s power 
shall be supreme, and there shall be a famine, 
not for bread or for water, but for the hearing of 
the words of the Lord! All this is just before 
you, in the near future. You may soon enter 
upon it, if you do not get right with God. Can 
you afford to longer trifle with events so momen- 
tous and fast hastening on? 

And if the Lord should not come in your day, 
and His judgments upon this guilty world be, 
in grace, deferred for a little, yet consider that 


24 Lectures on Daniel 


you have soon to pass out of this life, and stand 
before His righteous throne and your ovn evil 
record, when it will be forever too late to find 
a Saviour. Flee now, I pray you, to Him who 
bids the sinful, the weary, the thirsty, and the 
lost, find cleansing, rest, refreshment and salva- 
tion in Himself, who appeared once “to put 
away sin by the sacrifice of Himself ”— who 
shall soon “appear the second time,” apart 
from the sin-question, unto the final salvation 
of all His own! 

In view of all this, may we who are redeemed 
by His precious blood ever remember the word, 
“TI beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mer- 
cies of God, that you present your bodies a liv- 
ing sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which 
is your reasonable (or, intelligent) service” 
(Rom. 12:1). Thus shall we stand, like Danie} 
and his friends, apart from the world’s defiling 
ways. 


LECTURE II 
CHAPTER II 


THE TIMES OF THE GENTILES — THE GREAT 
IMAGE 


HIS seeond chapter has well been called 

“The A, B, C of prophecy.” . I suppose it 
contains the most complete, and yet the most 
simple, prophetic picture that we have in all the 
word of God. And you will notice that it is in 
the form of a dream given to a heathen mon- 
arch. Nebuchadnezzar was at this time the 
ruler of the greater part of the known civilized 
world, and of a great deal of that which was 
given over to barbarism. We speak of this as a 
world-empire, though, of course, in one sense of 
the word, it was hardly that: there were tribes 
and nations beyond the outskirts of his domin- 
ions that were not subject to Nebuchadnezzar — 
those upon the northern shores of the Mediter- 
ranean Sea, for instance, and portions of south- 
ern Egypt and the regions beyond. But God 
had given him the title to rule over all 
nations. This authority was given to Nebu- 
chadnezzar because of the rejection of Israel as 


God’s kingdom upon earth. Had they been 
25 


26 Lectures on Daniel 


faithful to God, had they always been obedient 
to Him, royalty never would have departed 
from Judah; but because of their disobedience 
and their manifold sins God gave their glory to 
the stranger, and dominion passed to the Gen- 
tiles in the person of Nebuchadnezzar. This 
was, in fact, the beginning of the distinctive 
period designated by the Lord Jesus in Luke 21: 
24 as “the Times of the Gentiles,’ which will 
continue until all derived power is overthrown 
and 


“ Jesus shall reign where’er the sun 
Doth his successive journeys run; 
His kingdom spread from shore to shore, 
Till moons shall wax and wane no more.” 


In the book of Jeremiah, as also in Kings and 
Chronicies, we read of Nebuchadnezzar coming 
up against thc land of Palestine, in the reign of 
King Jehoiakim; though at that time — at least, 
at the time of his first invasion — he was not the 
emperor, but his father sat upon the throne of 
the Babylonian dominion, and Nebuchadnezzar 
was vice-king. But when our chapter opens he 
had been reigning alone for two years. The 
glory of God had departed from Jerusalem, and 
the people of Judah became captives in the land 
of Shinar: “By the rivers of Babylon they sat 
down and wept, when they remembered Zion.” _ 

Now Goc was pleased to reveal an outline of, 


The Times of the Gentiles 27 


His ways to this heathen monarch. We learn 
from Daniel’s address to him that this great 
king had been concerned about what was com- 
ing on the earth. Look at the 29th verse: “As 
for thee, O king, thy thoughts came into thy 
mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass 
hereafter.” Nothing could be more natural. 
Nebuchadnezzar was the most powerful mon- 
arch the world had ever known; and as he lay 
upon his bed that night, he began to ponder and 
to wonder what would come to pass in after- 
years. He knew he could not stay here forever. 
He would have to pass away as other poten- 
tates had done before him. What would follow? 
It was not unwise for him to consider these 
things. Would that all men were more con- 
cerned about what the future has in store. The 
great business of the men of to-day seems to be 
just to secure wealth and pleasure for the pres- 
ent life; and the majority seem utterly indiffer- 
ent about what is to come to pass afterward. 
Now God has not left us in ignorance as to the 
future. He has given us the prophetic word 
to shed light on what is to come. If people 
were but willing to stop long enough to seri- 
ously read His book, in subjection to its holy 
Author, they would find that in it the whole 
course of human events, right up to the Great 
White Throne, has been clearly revealed; se 
that any one, who earnestly desires it, may 


28 Lectures on Daniel 


know the truth of God’s ways right on to the 
end. 

Nebuchadnezzar was wiser than many nowa- 
days; for he was exercised in regard to these 
things. As he lay upon his bed, he had an im- 
pressive dream; but in the morning it had gone 
from him. It still swayed his mind, however; 
he could not throw it off; he found it impossi- 
ble to overcome the impression made upon him; 
and yet, when he tried to recall what it was he 
had dreamed, he could not do so. So, accord- 
ing to the custom of his times, he sent for his 
wise men—the soothsayers, astrologers, and 
magicians. To them he said, “I have dreamed 
a dream, but it has gone from my mind; and I 
want you to tell me my dream, and then tell me 
the interpretation of it.” 

Miserable charlatans that they were, they 
pleaded the absurdity and impossibility of this; 
declaring, what was possibly true enough, that 
no king or ruler had ever asked anything so dif- 
ficult of his wise men; and they assured the 
king that if he would but relate the dream, they 
would explain its meaning. But he declared 
that if they had skill enough to interpret dreams, 
they ought to be able to tell him the dream 
also; and he threatened that if after a lim- 
ited time they did not accede to his demand, 
they should all be put to death; and not only 


The Times of the Gentiles 29 


they, hut all the wise men in his kingdom — 
which, of course, included Daniel. 

When Daniel learned of the decree, through 
Arioch the captain of the guard, he went in and 
besought Nebuchadnezzar to grant a brief res- 
‘pite, that he might seek the face of God regard- 
ing the matter. Communicating the serious- 
ness of the situation to his three friends, they 
together made supplication to the God of 
heaven. 

I want you to notice that title —“ The God of 
heaven.” Nothing shows the divine source and 
verbal inspiration of the Scriptures more clearly 
than the way in which the names and titles of 
the Deity are used throughout the Bible. Un- 
spiritual and ignorant men have sometimes 
tried to make capital out of the diversity of 
divine names, supposing different gods to be 
meant, and arguing therefrom a piecemeal ar- 
rangement of some of the books. But the fact 
of the matter is that all these names and titles 
are used in a most exact and careful manner. 
For instance, in the entire Old Testament, Jeho- 
vah is always used in one particular sense, and 
Elohim (God, plural form) in another. When it 
is the Creator that is brought before us, then 
we have the Hebrew word Elohim, implying 
the Triune God, now revealed in three persons 
BS Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. When it is a 


30 Lectures on Daniel 


question of God’s covenant with His people, of. 
His having to do with the men whom He has 
made and taken into relationship with Himself, 
then itis Jehovah. It is not only in Genesis, but 
throughout the Bible, that this holds good. 

Now as to this expression, “The God of 
heaven,” there are three books in the Old Testa- 
ment where it is used, and one in the New Testa- 
ment —the Revelation. The three Old Testa- 
ment books are Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel. 
All refer, practically, to the same period, when 
God had scattered His people among the nations, 
because of their sins. He had forsaken His 
throne at Jerusalem. The glory had gone up to 
heaven, and He was no longer called the Lord 
of the whole earth. He was now the God of 
heaven, and, so far as the world is concerned, 
that is still His title. He will never again be 
owned as the Lord of the whole earth until the 
Millennium. 

And so Daniel and his friends entreated the 
God of heaven. He answered their cry, and re- 
vealed the secret. Then we read, “ Daniel 
blessed the God of heaven.”” You will notice that 
we have three things here: First, prayer — 
“They desired mercies of the God of heaven.’ 
Then there is divine ministry — God revealed the 
thing unto Daniel in a night vision. And the 
result of that was worship —“ They blessed the 
God of heaven.” Where God is speaking, it stirs 


The Times of the Gentiles dl 


the hearts of His people, and it leads them out in 
worship and praise back to Himself. People 
have very low ideas about worship nowadays: 
they talk about worshiping God no matter 
what religious exercise they may be engaged in. 
But let us remember that even prayer is not 
worship, and ministry is not worship. Prayer 
is asking of God; ministry is when God gives 
something to man. But when man has asked, 
and God has given till the heart is full and it 
overflows in adoration back to God, this is wor- 
ship. 

My wife and I stood one day looking down on 
Niagara Falls. How our hearts were stirred as 
we watched that mighty cataract pouring its 
tremendous volume of water over the great cliff 
unceasingly. But soon we noticed that from 
below a mist or fine spray rose up that actually 
reached the point where we stood on the ledge 
above the Falls. I said to my wife, “ This is like 
worship — God’s mighty love and grace pouring 
down upon us, and then our love and praise ris- 
ing up and ascending back to Him, the source 
of all our blessing.” 

The Father is seeking worshipers; but people 
have to be born again ere they can worship Him. 
How can a poor guilty sinner, who has never 
been brought into the family of God, never been 
converted, be a worshiper in spirit and in truth? 
Yet we hear often of “public worship ”; but the 


32 Lectures on Daniel 


fact of the matter is, the public, as such, cannot 
worship in the Christian sense. 

But to turn back to Daniel. He comes in be- 
fore the king, and tells him that he is able to re- 
veal the secret. He makes it plain that it is 
not through any superior wisdom of his own 
that he is able to do this; but he tells Nebuchad- 
nezzar, “there is a God in heaven that revealeth 
secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebu- 
chadnezzar what shall be in the latter days.” 
It was of God that this great king was brought 
to the end of all human resources. If he had 
been able to remember his dream, he never would 
have realized that he had to do with God. He 
had first to be brought to the end of all human 
wisdom; he had to learn his own nothingness and 
ignorance, and the nothingness and ignorance of 
all his wise men, in order that the matchless wis- 
dom of God might be revealed to him. And the 
same lesson must be learned by us. If we are 
ever going to have to do with God, we have to 
learn the poverty of our own resources first. 

Have you ever noticed where the Lord Jesus 
Christ was crucified? It was at Golgotha — the 
place of a skull. If you were ever saved, you 
began at the place of a skull. That is not very 
nice for human pride; for it is the place of death, 
and the end of all human wisdom. You cannot 
reason it out; all the wise men of the earth can- 
not teach it you; you have to be brought to the 


The Times of the Gentiles 33 


place of an empty skull—the helplessness of 
death — where you realize that God is writing 
confusion on all the wisdom of this world. And 
so this great king had to be brought to the place 
where he learned that “ man’s extremity is God’s 
opportunity.” Then it was that the God of 
heaven, through His prophet, revealed to him the 
dream and its interpretation. 

Daniel says: “Thou, O king, sawest, and be- 
hold a great image. This great image, whose 
brightness was excellent, stood before thee; and 
the form thereof was terrible. This image’s 
head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms 
of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, his 
legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay. 
Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out with- 
out hands, which smote the image upon his feet 
that were of iron and clay, and brake them to 
pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, 
the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces to- 
gether, and became like the chaff of the summer 
threshing-floors; and the wind carried them 
away, that no place was found for them: and 
the stone that smote the image became a great 
mountain, and filled the whole earth” (vers. 31 
to 85). At once the king recognized the fact 
that it was indeed the dream he had forgotten. 

Daniel then proceeded with the interpretation. 
The image properly represents the whole period 
of the Times of the Gentiles; but it will be no- 


34 Lectures on Daniel 


ticed that on the chart the feet of the image have 
been separated from the legs of iron. The rea- 
son for that is this: During the present age, 
while it is true that the Gentile times are still 
running on, prophecy has to do, not with this 
age, but with the period that closed at the cross, 
and another brief season which will commence 
after the Church has been caught up to be with 
the Lord. God’s special work in this day of 
grace is the taking out from among the Gentiles 
a people to the name of His Son. He is not 
now dealing with nations as such, but with in- 
dividual souls, whom He is saving, and, by the 
baptism of the Holy Spirit, forming them into 
one body to be the bride of the Lamb in the ages 
to come. 

Daniel shows that the Times of the Gentiles 
began with Nebuchadnezzar. He is declared to 
be the head of gold of this “man of the earth ” 
(Ps. 10:18). It is not that he alone is the ful- 
filment of this picture, but he represents the 
Babylonian empire, which began with him and 
was to close with the downfall of Belshazzar his 
grandson. 

“ After thee,” says Daniel, “ shall arise another 
kingdom inferior to thee, and another third king- 
dom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the 
earth.” We do not need to go outside of Scrip- 
ture to find out the names of these empires. In 
chapter 5:31 we read, “ Darius the Median took 


The Times of the Gentiles 35 


the kingdom.” From the book of Esther we 
iearn that the Persian rulers bore rule over all 
the earth. Darius is generally supposed to be 
Cyaxares II., the last king of Media; or, as 
some think, Gobryas, the general who led the 
assault on Babylon under instructions from 
Cyaxares and Cyrus the Persian, who united 
Media and Persia in one great empire. Daniel 
elsewhere shows us that this Medo-Persian do- 
minion, after existing for several hundred years, 
would be overthrown by a mighty Grecian war- 
rior. This was fulfilled, as we know, by Alex- 
ander the Great. 

A fourth kingdom was to follow, which should 
be strong as iron, “forasmuch as iron breaketh 
in pieces and subdueth all things: and as iron 
that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces 
and bruise.” This can be no other than that 
great world-power which was in existence at 
the birth of the Lord Jesus, when “ there went 
out a decree from Cesar Augustus that all the 
world should be taxed.” Under this empire our 
Lord was crucified. After His death it contin- 
ued to exist for something like five hundred years, 
though eventually divided into two parts, the 
eastern and western empires. Of this division 
the two legs may be meant to speak, though one 
could hardly insist on this as strongly as some 
do, because, from the beginning, Kome is repre- 
sented by the legs of iron. 


36 Lectures on Daniel 


We do not have to go to history therefore to 
find out what these four great empires are; we 
find them all brought before us in Scripture, just 
in the order in which they were revealed to the 
king of Babylon. All this is confirmed by his- 
tory, as every student knows, and is thus a re- 
markable proof of the inspiration of the Bible. 
At this time that Nebuchadnezzar dreamed his 
dream the Persian kingdom did not exist. Per- 
sia was but a Babylonian satrapy. A Grecian 
empire might have seemed an utter impossi- 
bility. The Hellenic states were a lot of war- 
ring tribes and kingdoms, giving little promise 
of their future greatness. The city of Rome was 
just being founded — an insignificant little vil- 
lage on the banks of the Tiber. How did Daniel 
portray with such accuracy the future history of 
all these powers if unaided by the Holy Spirit 
of God? 

The metals of which the great image was 
composed deteriorate from the head to the feet, 
illustrating the continual decrease in the abso- 
lute power and magnificence of each kingdom. 
Nebuchadnezzar ruled as an unlimited despot. 
“Whom he would he slew, and whom he would 
he kept alive.” The rulers of the succeeding em- 
pires had their power more and more circum- 
scribed; until in the last state of the Roman 
empire we find iron mixed with miry clay, or 
brittle pottery — speaking of an attempted union 


The Times of the Gentiles 37 


between imperialism and democracy. Notice, 
also, that the specific gravity of the metals de- 
éreases each time, gold being the heaviest and 
iron the lightest, while feet of mingled iron and 
pottery would be lighter than all. No wonder 
such an image breaks in pieces the moment the 
Stone falls from heaven upon such feet! Gentile 
power may seem to be firmly settled on an im- 
movable base; it may appear to be powerful 
enough to resist every effort aimed at its over- 
throw; but the hour is coming, and has now 
drawn near, when the Stone will fall from 
heaven, and the whole thing will collapse in a 
moment. 

This brings us to the last form of the fourth 
kingdom; for the Roman empire, though at the 
present in abeyance, has not yet come to its end. 
The ten toes on the feet of the image represent 
(as a comparison with the ten horns on the 
Beast in chapter seven will make plain) ten 
kings who are to reign at one time, but who 
will form a confederacy on the ground of the 
ancient empire. This is something which the 
world has never yet seen. 

The commentators generally tell us that the 
ten-toed condition of the empire was reached in 
the fifth and sixth centuries, when the barbari- 
aus from the North overran the Roman empire, 
and it was divided into something like ten dif- 
ferent kingdoms. A number of different lists 


38 Lectures on Daniel 


have been made, of ten kingdoms each; but few 
writers agree as to the actual divisions. One 
thing they all seem to have overlooked: the ten 
kingdoms are to exist at one time, not through 
a period of several centuries, and all are to form 
one confederation. There is nothing in the past 
history of the kingdoms of Europe that answers 
to this. They were generally warring enemies, 
each seeking the destruction of others. We re- 
ject utterly this interpretation, therefore, of the 
ten toes. What event in the centuries of Rome’s 
decline and fall could possibly answer to the 
Stone falling from heaven and the institution of 
the kingdom of God? And how could it be said 
that all the dominions represented by the image 
have been ground to powder, when we see most 
of them still in existence, in some form or 
other? 

Some tell us that the Stone fell from heaven 
when the Lord Jesus was born into this world, 
and that His kingdom has been in existence and 
spreading through the world ever since. But 
Daniel says, “In the days of these kings shall 
the God of heaven set up a kingdom ”’; that is, 
in the days of the ten kings, that kingdom is to 
be established. Now the ten-kingdomed condi- 
tion of the empire had certainly not been reached 
at the incarnation. Rome remained an undi- 
vided kingdom for three hundred years after the 
birth of Christ; and for two hundred years more 


The Times of the Gentiles 39 


it existed as the Eastern and Western empires. 
Manifestly, then, the birth into this world of the 
Son of God is not the event here prophesied. 
Gentile dominion was not overturned and de- 
stroyed at that time, nor since; therefore we look 
on to the future for it. 

To attempt to locate the falling of the Stone 
in the fifth or sixth century is the height of ab- 
surdity. In what sense did the God of heaven 
then set up a kingdom? That was the very 
time when the bishop of Rome was struggling 
for supremacy over the Church and the nations; 
and it was followed by a thousand years of 
darkness, when the word of God was lost to the 
masses, superstition took the place of faith, iniq- 
uity ruled in high places, both civil and ecclesi- 
astical, and peace seemed to be taken from the 
earth. Surely all this is very different indeed 
from Christ’s predicted reign of righteousness 
and blessing. Manifestly then the Stone has not 
yet fallen from heaven, though how soon it will 
do so no mortal can say. 

I desire to trace out a little of what Scripture 
has to tell us elsewhere about this Stone. It is 
undoubtedly a figure of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Ps. 118: 22 tells us, long before He came into 
this scene, that He would be the Stone set at 
naught by the builders, and become the head of 
the corner; and in the New Testament this verse 
is declared to be prophetic of Christ. When He 


40 Lectures on Daniel 


came to earth He was indeed the Stone set at 
naught by the builders, the rulers of the Jews; 
but mark, He did not come as the Stone falling 
from heaven. That is the way He will come 
when He returns the second time. He came be- 
fore to His own; but His own received Him not. 
He came here as the Foundation Stone, the Head 
Stone of the corner; but they who should have 
owned His claims, cried in their unbelief and 
hatred, “ Away with Him; crucify Him; crucify 
Him!” Now God has taken Him up to heaven. 
Yonder, in the Father’s glory, the eye of faith 
beholds that exalted Stone. The day is coming 
when it is going to fall upon His enemies; and 
when it falls, it will grind to powder all Gentile 
dominion, and all those who have rejected the 
precious grace of God. 

In Isa. 8:14 Christ is prophetically described 
as a Stone of stumbling and a Rock of offence; 
and we are told that many will stumble and 
fall. Thus it was when He came in lowly grace: 
“ They stumbled at the stumbling Stone, as it is 
written.” They were looking for a great world- 
monarch; and when He came in humiliation, 
Israel nationally stumbled over Him; and they 
were broken — and they remain broken to this 
day. Whenever you see a Jew walking the 
streets of a Gentile city, you may say in your 
heart, There is a proof of the truth of what the 


The Times of the Gentiles AL 


Lord Jesus has said; “ Whosoever shall fall on 
this Stone shall be broken.” Broken, and scat- 
tered, and peeled, they have wandered in all the 
lands of the earth, hardly welcome anywhere, 
until, in these last days, God has been turning 
the hearts of the nations toward them, prepar- 
atory to their being taken back to their own 
land. By and by a remnant will return to the 
Lord; so Isa. 28:16 says, “Behold, I lay in 
Zion for a foundation a Stone, a tried Stone, a 
precious corner Stone, a sure foundation: he that 
believeth shall not make haste.” He then goes 
on depicting Israel’s deliverance at the second 
appearing of this Stone of salvation. He it is 
who is described by Zechariah — chap. 3:9 — 
as the Stone engraved with the engraving of a 
signet, upon which shall be seven eyes. 

But what about the nations in that day? 
The message of grace has gone out to them; 
and what has been the result? God has been 
taking out from among them a people for His 
name, but the mass have deliberately rejected 
the Christ of God; and that rejected Lord Jesus 
is soon going to fall upon them in judgment. 
Then will the rest of His word be fulfilled, “ On 
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to 
powder.” Israel stumbled over Him, and they 
were broken. He is going to fall upon the Gen- 
tiles in His wrath and indignation, and they 


42 Lectures on Daniel 


will be ground to powder, and driven away from 
before His face like the chaff of the summer 
threshing-floor. 

Do you ask, “When is the Stone going to 
fall?”’ It will be when the countries once occu- 
pied by the Roman empire in Europe will make a 
ten-kingdom coalition, electing one of their num- 
ber to be their supreme arbiter. We have him 
set forth in chapter 7 as the little horn rising 
out of the Roman empire — a passage which has 
been often applied to the Pope, but which we 
shall see has no application to him at all. In 
that day the iron of imperial power will be mixed 
with the brittle pottery of socialism and democ- 
racy; but they will not cleave together. 

We see this preparing at the present time. 
When, for instance, I read the account of the 
Peace Conferences, and similar conventions, I 
have no thought that lasting universal peace is 
going to be brought about in that way, while 
the Prince of Peace is still rejected. But I think 
I see the shadow on the wall of this revived Ro- 
man empire. From my study of the word of 
God, I quite expect one of two things: either 
universal war, or universal arbitration; and, as 
a result of either of these methods, the ten- 
kingdomed form of the Roman empire brought 
about. 

Ere that day arrives the Church will have 
been caught away to heaven; so no believer of 


The Times of the Gentiles 43 


the present dispensation will be upon the earth 
when these things are in process of fulfilment. 
But there may be many to whom these words 
shall come who will still be living on this earth 
in the days of the feet of the image — the last sol- 
emn period of the times of the Gentiles. Awful 
will it be to dwell in this scene then — to partici- 
pate in the judgment when the Stone falls from 
heaven. If these words reach one who is still 
out of Christ, let me warn you faithfully that if 
you go on rejecting the Lord Jesus a little longer, 
if you continue to harden your heart, if you 
“turn away the shoulder,” if you close your 
ears and shut your eyes to the truth of God, you 
may be numbered among those left behind when 
the Lord calls for His redeemed ones to rise to 
meet Him in the air; and then there will be, for 
you, nothing but “a certain fearful looking for 
of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall 
devour the adversaries.” Think what it will 
mean to be thus left for the vengeance of God! 
If you have not yet heeded the voice of Him 
who pleads in grace, get down on your face be- 
fore Him now, I beseech you, and cry, “I am 
vile, and repent in dust and ashes!” Then re- 
member that “If thou shalt confess with thy 
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thy 
heart that God hath raised Him from the dead, 
thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man 
believeth unto righteousness; and with the 


44 Lectures on Daniel 


mouth confession is made unto salvation.” 
Thus shall you be ready to hail His coming with 
joy, whose return would otherwise mean for 
you the end of mercy’s day, the sealing of your 
doom. 

I would remark in closing that while Nebu- 
chadnezzar fell upon his face and worshiped 
Daniel, and acknowledged that his God was a 
God of gods, a Lord of kings, and a revealer of 
secrets, yet there is no evidence that his con- 
science had been reached by the revelation made 
to him of God’s wisdom and power. He ad- 
vanced Daniel to a position of trust and confi- 
dence, and at his request set Shadrach, Meshach 
and Abednego over the affairs of the province of 
Babylon; but the God of Daniel he was not yet 
ready to own as his God and the only Saviour. 
He was still to him a god, albeit greater than 
other deities. He was soon to know Him as 
the God who alone ruleth in the kingdoms of 
men. 


LECTURE III 
CHAPTER III 
THE ABOMINATION OF DESOLATION — IN TYPE 


N that which now claims our attention we 
shall see how little Nebuchadnezzar had 
profited by the revelation God had made to him. 
We have already noticed that when Daniel ex- 
plained the meaning of the dream, Nebuchadnez- 
zar fell down before the prophet and did him 
homage. He had many nice things to say to 
him, and he gave him great rewards; but he 
was not brought to repentance or humbled in 
self-judgment before the God who had thus man- 
ifested His omniscient power. The king could 
appreciate the wisdom of Daniel; but he had no 
heart for the God who had inspired His servant. 
Nebuchadnezzar is not alone in that. Many 
there are who have a certain admiration for the 
ministry and the word of God, but yet who 
themselves go on practically all through their 
lives strangers to Him whose word His minis- 
ters declare. This was Nebuchadnezzar’s condi- 
tion exactly at this time. For in this third chap- 
ter we see that, instead of his being humbled by 


the revelation made, it simply served to exalt 
45 


46 Lectures on Daniel 


himself as one especially favored of beaven, and 
to magnify his thoughts of the human mind and 
his own greatness. 

This reminds me of another man who was 
favored with a remarkable revelation, of whom 
we read in the New Testament. I refer to the 
apostle Paul, who was caught up to the third 
heaven. And this man Paul, though a child of 
God and a most devoted servant of Christ in 
every way, had just the same kind of a heart 
that Nebuchadnezzar had; and so, in order that 
he might not be lifted up because of the abun- 
dance of the revelation, there was given him a 
thorn in the flesh, to remind him of his human 
weakness. Thus we are reminded that even di- 
vine truth, if not held in fellowship with God, 
may actually be used to puff one up. Mere 
knowledge, apart from divine love, puffs up. 
This is not the case with spiritual discernment, 
because the very first requisite for spirituality 
is humility. Spiritual discernment comes from 
God, and that will not exalt any one; but even 
scriptural knowledge, if divorced from godliness, 
will have a very deleterious effect upon the mind 
and heart. That was the way it was with Nebu- 
chadnezzar. But in the next chapter we shall 
see how he too got his thorn in the flesh, and its 
blessed result. 

What is emphasized here is that Nebuchadnez- 
zar is lifted up with pride, and he determines to 


The Abominatton of Desolation 47 


make a great image (probably a replica of the 
one he had seen in his dream), and call upon ali 
men to bow to it. It was really to set forth 
the power and glory of man; for it pictured 
Gentile dominion in independence of God. It is 
stamped with the same number that distin- 
guishes the Beast in Rey. 138 — the number of a 
man, six hundred sixty and six. You will no- 
tice the passage tells us that it was sixty cubits 
high and six cubits broad. Seven is the num- 
ber that speaks of spiritual completeness. Six 
seems to tell us of man’s greatest efforts to at- 
tain to perfection. 

The image was accordingly made, and set up 
in the plain of Dura. A command then went 
forth that upon the sounding of a great orches- 
tra, all the peoples, and nations, and languages, 
gathered together from all the various provinces 
of the empire, should fall down and worship it. 
If any refused, they were to be cast into a furnace 
of fire. 

The special place given to the great orchestra is 
very noticeable, as much so as in large worldly re- 
ligious gatherings at the present time. It excites 
the emotions, and, thus working upon the feel- 
ings, gives people a sense of devotion and relig- 
iousness, which after all may be very unreal. In 
the Old Testament dispensation musical instru- 
ments were used in the ornate temple services; 
but there is certainly no warrant for it in the 


48 Lectures on Daniel 


New Testamiunt. People may call it worship to 
sit and listen to a trained, and possibly uncon- 
verted, choir and orchestra rendering sweet and 
touching strains; but the music simply acts 
upon the sensuous part of our natures, and has 
nothing to do with true adoration of the Father 
and the Son, which must be in spirit and in 
truth to be acceptable to God. Those who plead 
for its use, because of the place it had in Old 
Testament times, should remember that that was 
a typical dispensation. The instruments then 
used typified the melody now made in the hearts 
of God’s redeemed ones. We sometimes sing, 
and very truly — 


“O Lord, we know it matters not 
How sweet the song may be; 
No heart but of the Spirit taught 
Makes melody to Thee.” 


A minister once remarked to me that many 
esthetic persons attended his church to worship 
God in music; so he sought to have the best 
performers and the finest music it was possible 
to obtain, as otherwise the people would not 
attend. What a delusion it all is! And yet 
people actually look upon that as really wor- 
shiping God, whether they have ever been con- 
verted or not! In reality they are only gratify- 
ing their own taste for melody and harmony — a 
taste God-given, I grant you, and proper enough 


The Abomination of Desolation 49 


in-its place, but not to be confounded with true 
worship. A heart filled with Christ gives forth 
the sweetest music that ever reaches the ear of 
God the Father. He says, “ Whoso offereth 
praise glorifieth Me.” Let us remember, then, 
that in the New Testament dispensation it is 
“singing and making melody in your hearts to 
the Lord” to which the Christian is exhorted. 
That is where the music is to be — a heart full of 
praises to the God of all grace. May we know 
more of it. 

I remember on one occasion taking a friend of 
mine — unquestionably an earnest Christian — 
into a little hall where perhaps a half hundred 
believers were gathered together one Lord’s day 
morning for worship. He had been accustomed 
to a service very much like that which I have 
referred to above. On that particular morning 
it seemed to me the Lord’s presence in our midst 
was especially manifest. One after another 
took part in praise and thanksgiving, as the Holy 
Spirit seemed to lead. Together we broke the 
bread and partook of the cup that speaks so 
loudly to the Christian heart of Him who gave 
Himself for us. At times there was hardly a 
dry eye in the room as we remembered Him who 
in infinite grace had redeemed us to God. Re- 
turning home, I inquired of my friend if he had 
enjoyed the meeting. He replied, “Oh, very 
well. There were many things about it that 


56 Lectures on Daniel 


appealed to me very much; but I did miss the 
music.” ‘ Why,” I replied, “did you not hear 
the music?” “Music?” was the answer, “why, 
there was none there.” “Indeed there was,” I 
answered; “each heart that was occupied with 
Christ was like a stringed instrument touched 
by His own blessed hand; and He, the chief 
singer on the stringed instruments,’ was there 
in our midst, leading out our hearts in worship 
and praise to the Father.” But, alas, mv friend 
did not seem able to enter into this! How is it 
with you, my hearer? Have you yet iearned 
what it is to “ worship in spirit and in truth”? 

But, turning back to our subject, we notice 
that the instruments were to play: the people 
were to be stirred up by the music, and then 
they were all to prostrate themselves before the 
great image that set forth the glory of man. 

But there were three in that great company 
who paid no heed to the king’s commandment. 
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego refused to 
bow; and malignant spies soon carried the 
news to the haughty monarch. They said, 
“There are certain Jews, .. . O king, have not 
regarded thee; they serve not thy gods, nor 
worship the golden image which thou hast set 
up.” Ina rage the king sent for the three deyo- 
ted men. He offered to give them another op- 


1See the postscript, or dedication, closing the propheey of 
Habakkuk. 


The Abomination of Desolation 51 


portunity to carry out his bidding; otherwise 
they must suffer the fate reserved for any who 
would net worship the image. Shadrach, Me- 
shach and Abednego were not like the time- 
servers of these degenerate days; they were not 
like the trucklers to the present age. They knew 
God had said, “Thou shalt not make unto thee 
any graven image. . . . Thou shalt not bow down 
thyself to them, nor serve them.” So these three 
Hebrews boldly faced the great king and said: 
“O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to an- 
swer thee in this matter. If it be so, our God 
whom we serve is able to deliver us from the 
burning fiery furnace, and He will deliver us out 
of thy hand, O king. But if not, be it known 
unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy 
gods, nor worship the golden image which thou 
hast set up.” Thus they witnessed a good con- 
fession, and in their God-given strength boldly 
stood before the king and all the people as the 
witnesses of Jehovah’s power and glory. 

In his rage and fury Nebuchadnezzar ordered 
that the furnace be heated seven times more 
than ordinarily, and that his instructions be 
carried out to the letter. So great was the fur- 
nace’s heat, that it consumed the men who cast 
them into the flames. Then we read that Nebu- 
chadnezzar arose and came to the furnace, and 
cried out in amazement: “ Did we not cast three 
men bound into the midst of the fire? ... Lo, 


52 Lectures on Daniel 


I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the 
fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the 
fourth is like a son of God” (or son of the gods). 
We know well who that fourth One was; so 
that the rendering that we have in tlhe Author- 
ized Version is correct as to the person, whether 
it is actually what Nebuchadnezzar meant or not. 
The blessed Son of God was there with His dear 
servants in their hour of trial. He had said 
long before, through the prophet Isaiah, “ When 
thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not 
be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon 
thee.” And every word of God shall be fulfilled, 
for “ He is faithful that promised.” 

We are not told that any one but Nebuchad- 
nezzar saw the form of this fourth One. He 
cried out at once, “Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego, ye servants of the most high God, 
come forth, and come hither.” And they came 
forth, not having the smell of fire upon them; the 
flame had simply burned away their bonds and 
left them free men. The result was that Nebu- 
chadnezzar was filled with admiration for the 
power of the great God of Shadrach, Me- 
shach, and Abednego. He made a royal decree, 
declaring that any one who should speak any- 
thing amiss against their God should be put to 
death. Yet, as before, when his drearn was inter- 
preted, he does not bow in repentance ai the feet 
of the Lord and own Him as his God. He simply 


The Abomination of Desolation 53 


speaks of Him as their God; and while he ad- 
mires His greatness and power, he does not wor- 
ship and serve the Lord Jehovah. 

How many people there are in the world just 
like that! They would not say anything against 
God our Father nor His Son the Lord Jesus 
Christ; they have a certain reverence in their 
hearts for God; they think of Him as their 
mother’s God perhaps, or the God of their 
fathers; but they cannot ery, “ My Lord and my 
God,” as Thomas did after he saw the print of 
the nails. And so again we are reminded that 
it is one thing to give assent to the truth of 
Scripture, and the revelation there given, as 
to the glory of the triune God; but it is quite 
another to have bowed the heart in His pres- 
ence, owned oneself a sinner lost and guilty, and 
trusted God’s blessed Son, the crucified and risen 
Saviour, as our own deliverer. Nebuchadnezzar 
owns His power, but he does not yet own His 
claims upon him. He had to pass through a hu- 
miliating experience ere he would come to that. 

But some one may be inquiring, What has all 
this to do with prophecy? Why did God cause 
this particular bit of history to be recorded in 
the book of the prophet Daniel? This would 
have been something very suitable in a histori- 
cal bock or a devotional book, but why do we 
have it here in a prophetic book? For a very 
good reason indeed. This event, though actual 


54 Lectures on Daniel 


history, is a typical scene picturing the @rial and 
deliverance of a faithful remnant of Daniel’s 
people that is to take place in the Time of the 
End. There will come a day when (like the 
great image set up by Nebuchadnezzar) what 
the Lord Jesus calls “ the Abomination of Deso- 
lation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet,” is go- 
ing to be set up in Jerusalem by the Antichrist 
of the future. See Matt. 24:15. 

After the Church has been caught away to 
heaven, at the close of this dispensation, the 
Jews (who are even now returning to Palestine 
in large numbers) will be deceived into owning 
the claims of a blasphemous impostor claiming 
to be the Messiah. He it is who is going to 
place the Abomination that maketh desolate. 
He will demand that all men worship the image 
that he sets up; and thus the scene of the plain 
of Dura will be reenacted. In that day, as in 
the past, a remnant among the Jews will refuse 
to own his claims or to obey his voice. This 
will be the signal for the breaking out of the 
great tribulation, “the time of Jacob’s trouble; ” 
but many of the faithful shall be saved out of 
it, just as these three Hebrew young men were 
preserved by God in the midst of, and eventually 
delivered from, the furnace of fire. 

Some may ask, What is the Abomination of 
Desolation? I cannot tell you positively; Scrip- 
ture has not clearly revealed it. It seems to be 


The Abomination of Desolation 55 


identified with the image of the Beast set up by 
the false prophet, as predicted in Rev. 13, and 
which he will cause all men to worship — all who 
have not the seal of God. This image of the 
Beast may not be a literal idol. It may be that 
it refers to some great popular movement; but 
it seems to be intimately connected with that of 
which our Lord warned His disciples. At any 
rate it speaks of a time when men will be called 
upon to acknowledge the power and the author- 
ity of that which is Satanic instead of Divine, 
and when practically all the world will be 
brought to own the Antichrist as the Messiah. 
It is a mistake to suppose that the Antichrist 
is the papacy. We shall see very clearly, I trust, 
when we come to consider the latter part of the 
eleventh chapter, that he will be a distinct per- 
sonality — a Jew by birth, who will bear rule in 
the land of Palestine, and be accepted by the 
Jews as their Messiah. He will deny the Father 
and the Son, and be energized and controlled by 
the devil. In that day apostate Christendom 
will join with apostate Judaism in owning alle- 
giance to this monster of iniquity. But, accord- 
ing to His promise, God will, even in that day 
when iniquity shall come in like a flood, lift up 
a standard against it. He will have His faith- 
ful little flock who will dare to stand, like Shad- 
rach, Meshach, and Abednego, for the truth 
which He wil! have made known to them; and 


56 Lectures on Daniel 


though because of this they become the victims 
of Satan’s rage and man’s hatred, yet they shall 
be delivered out of it all, to the glory of the God 
whom they shall serve. No weapon that is 
formed against them shall prosper; for the Most. 
High shall be their shield and buckler. 

Already we see preparations being made for 
these momentous events. While they are not to 
take place as long as the Church remains on 
earth, yet even now the land of Palestine is be- 
ing prepared by God to become once more the 
home of His earthly people, and the people are 
being prepared for their land. Think of the 
changes that have been taking place in the East. 
in the last fifty years! A half century ago a Jew 
was not allowed to dwell inside the walls of the 
city of Jerusalem, and there were less than fifty 
thousand Jews in all Palestine. Now there are 
more than that number living in Jerusalem it- 
self; and it is estimated that there are nearly 
three times that number dwelling in the land. 
And now, the latter rains which God had 
withdrawn in judgment for many centuries, are- 
returning to the land once more; and while they 
have not come every year, yet there has been. 
sufficient rain to encourage agriculturists to such 
an extent that thousands of acres have been. 
planted as olive-yards, vineyards, and fruit: 
farms; and most of these are owned and worked. 
by Jews. Of course all these things are very 


The Abomination of Desolation a7 


different from the fulfilment of the prophecies 
in regard to their regathering by omnipotent 
power. But they show us that things are shap- 
ing themselves for the carrying out of the pre- 
dictions as to the great tribulation, and the 
events that are to follow in rapid succession. 

In the hour of Antichrist’s dreadful reign it 
will mean much to be faithful to God; it will 
mean much not to own the Abomination of Des- 
olation; but grace will be given to the feeble 
remnant, and they shall glorify God in the fires. 
If such is to be the triumph of saints in a future 
day, what devotion and faithfulness should 
characterize us who are so much more highly 
favored in this present dispensation of the grace 
of God! And yet how many there are who fail 
to stand the test when it comes to maintaining 
that which God has committed to them! How 
little the most of us know of that spirit of devo- 
tion to Christ which led Athanasius of old to 
reply to the emperor’s taunt, “All the world 
is against you,” by the never-to-be-forgotten 
words, “ Then I am against all the world”! 

It was this spirit that enabled Paul to triumph 
when he stood before Nero; even though he had 
to say, “ At my first answer no man stood by 
me.” Left alone, he nevertheless bore a faithful 
witness, and “ was delivered out of the mouth of 


the lion.” 
What a rebuke are these devoted servants of 


58 Lectures on Daniel 


God to many of us to-day! How little do we 
know of standing for Christ and His truth, even 
if we have to stand alone! But how contempt- 
ible will our weakness and pusillanimity appear 
in that coming day of glory! Rest assured, there 
will not be a saint then who will regret having 
suffered for Christ, or borne reproach for His 
name’s sake; but there will be thousands who 
would give worlds, were they theirs to give, if 
they had been but more faithful and devoted 
while in this scene of testing. 

The time is short. Our day of testimony for 
an absent Lord will soon be over. Oh, let us 
not forget that we have 


“Only one life —’twill soon be past; 
Only what’s done for Jesus will last.’ 


LECTURE IV 
CHAPTER IV 


NEBUCHADNEZZAR’S HUMBLING: GENTILE 
SUBJUGATION TYPIFIED 


N the 33d chapter of the book of Job, verses 
14 to 17, we are told, “ God speaketh once, 
yea, twice, yet man perceiveth it not. In a 
dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep 
falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed, 
then He openeth the ears of men, and sealeth 
their instruction, that He may withdraw man 
from his purpose (or work), and hide pride 
from man.” This is how God often speaks to 
men where they have not open Bibles to give 
them the clear revelation of His will. He has 
many ways of reaching those who seem bent upon 
their own destruction. This fourth chapter of 
Daniel is a remarkable example of God’s match- 
less grace, and illustrates most preciously the 
words of Elihu. 

God had spoken once to Nebuchadnezzar in 
giving him the dream of the great image of the 
Times of the Gentiles. But the heart of the king 
was wilful, and he continued to go on with his 


own purpose, in his pride and folly. God spoke 
59 


60 Lectures on Daniel 


twice by the marvelous vision of the Son of God 
in the midst of the fiery furnace, keeping His 
faithful witnesses from all danger and harm. 
But again the proud king kept on his way, with 
unsubject heart and unsubdued will. Now God 
speaks the third time, and this in a most humil- 
iating manner, to this great world-ruler’s con- 
fusion before his princes. 

In the passage in Job, Elihu goes on to show 
that when dreams and visions do not avail, God 
sometimes allows disease to grip the body till 
the poor sinner is broken in spirit and crushed 
in heart, ready at last to cry, “I have sinned, 
and perverted that which was right, and it 
profited me not!” “Then He is gracious unto 
him, and saith, Deliver him from going down 
to the pit: I have found a ransom.” 

So, in this stirring chapter, written by Nebu- 
chadnezzar himself, and preserved and incorpo- 
rated into the volume of inspiration by Daniel, 
we have the interesting account of the means 
God used to bring this haughty king to the 
end of himself, and lead him to abase himself 
before the Majesty in the heavens. In other 
words, this is Nebuchadnezzar’s conversion, and 
seems clearly to show that a work of grace took 
place in his soul ere he laid down the sceptre 
entrusted to his hand by Jehovah. It is typical 
too, no doubt; for in Nebuchadnezzar we see 
a picture of all Gentile power —its departure 


Nebuchadnezzar's Humbling 61 


from God, its degradation and bestial character, 
and its final subjugation to God in the Time 
of the End, when Christ shall return in glory, 
and all nations shall prostrate themselves before 
Him, owning His righteous and benevolent sway. 
Nebuchadnezzar set up in intelligence was the 
embodiment of authority given from Heaven: 
“The powers that be are ordained of God.” But 
it is written, “ Man being in honor abideth not, 
but is as the beasts that perish.” This, the 
king’s madness clearly sets forth — the turning 
away of the nations from God, and the corrup- 
tion of governments to serve human ends. Has 
not this been characteristic of the great ones of 
this world? Instead of kings standing for God, 
and acting as His representatives to maintain 
justice and judgment in the earth, do we not find 
pride and self-will, covetousness and self-seek- 
ing, generally controlling them? All this is pic- 
tured by the debasement of Nebuchadnezzar, 
when his heart was changed to the heart of a 
beast, and he was driven forth to eat grass like 
the oxen of the fields. 

But the day draws near when God will assert 
Himself, and all Gentile dominion shall come to 
anend. Then the long-promised King will shine 
forth in His glorious majesty, and the kings of 
the earth shall bring their glory and honor unto 
the new Jerusalem, the heavenly throne-city of 
the coming kingdom. Then will the nations look 


62 Lectures on Daniel 


up as redeemed men, and not down as the beasts 
that perish. 

Even in this present age history teaches us the 
value of a national recognition of God’s moral 
government. We have heard of the heathen 
chieftain who came from his distant domain to 
visit Queen Victoria. One day he asked her if 
she would tell him the secret of England’s prog- 
ress and greatness. For answer, it is said, the 
queen presented him with a Bible, saying, “ This 
book will tell you.” Who can doubt that ac- 
cording to the measure in which that Book of 
books has been believed and loved by any people, 
God has honored them; and you will find that 
every nation that has welcomed and protected 
the gospel has been cared for and blessed in a 
special way. 

On the other hand, let there be a national re- 
jection of His Word, as in the case of the French 
nation, who were among the first favored by 
Him in Reformation times, but drove out the 
truth He gave them, and you will find disaster 
following disaster; for He who cannot lie has 
said, ‘Them that honor Me, I will honor; but 
they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed.” 

But let us now turn directly to our chapter 
for a concrete example of all this. It begins 
with: “ Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all peo- 
ple, nations, and languages, that dwell in all 


Nebuchadnezzar’s Humbling 63 


the earth.” This comes home to my heart in a 
most marked way. I realize that I am reading 
the personal testimony of one who was in some 
respects the greatest monarch this world has 
ever known; and I am privileged to have his 
own account of how he—a proud, self-willed 
man — was brought to repentance and to the 
saving knowledge of the God of all grace! For, 
as already intimated, I gather from this procla- 
mation that this mighty potentate was quick- 
ened from on high, and that a divine work was 
accomplished in his soul by that ever-blessed 
One who, in mercy, had revealed Himself to him. 

What a wonderful thing this is! And what a 
miracle! The fact is, every conversion is a mir: 
acle — every soul that is saved knows what it is 
to be dealt with in supernatural power. It is 
God alone who changes men about like this. 
He picks up a vile, wretched sinner, and makes 
him a holy, happy saint. He works in the 
drunkard’s soul, and changes him to a sober, 
useful member of society. He breaks down the 
proud and stubborn, and they become meek and 
lowly, easy to be entreated. Are not these things 
miracles? Surely; and they are being enacted 
all around us: and yet men sneer and say the 
miraculous never happens in this law-controlled, 
workaday world of ours! Oh that men might 
have their eyes opened to see, and their ears to 


64 Lectures on Daniel 


hear, what God in His grace is doing on the 
basis of the one offering for sin of His blessed 
Son upon the cross! 

“T thought it good,’ Nebuchadnezzar goes 
on, “to show the signs and wonders that the 
high God hath wrought toward me. How great 
are His signs! and how mighty are His won- 
ders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, 
and His dominion is from generation to gen- 
eration.” What a splendid confession this is, 
and how ditferent from his previous acknowl- 
edgments in chapters 2 and 3! Ah, his con- 
science has been reached now, and he knows God 
for himself, and delights to tell of His signs and 
wonders wrought toward him! He owns Him 
now not as a god, but as the one true and living 
God whose kingdom ruleth over all, and shall 
continue forevermore. 

This is not, of course, the mediatorial king- 
dom of Christ of which he speaks, but God’s 
moral government of the universe, which noth- 
ing ever alters for a moment. 

And now I would like to be very personal, and 
press some questions home upon each listener. 
Have you anything to tell about the signs and 
wonders that the high God has wrought toward 
you? Have you ever been brought into direct 
contact with Him, so that you can speak con 
fidently of what He has done for your soul? 
Have you been humbled by getting a sight of 


Nebuchadnezzar’s Humbling 65 


yourself as a lost, undone sinner before Him? 
Have you taken that place — your only rightful 
place — and owned yourself unclean and undone, 
in dire need of sovereign mercy? And do you 
know what it is to have fled for refuge to the 
very God against whom you have sinned so 
grievously, and to have found in His Son our 
Lord Jesus Christ a hiding-place from the judg- 
ment your sins deserved? I beseech you, do not 
attempt to turn these questions to one side; but 
if you cannot answer each one unhesitatingly 
in the affirmative, stop and ponder them again, 
and ask yourself if there is any valid reason 
why you should longer persist in your neglect 
of God’s way of salvation, and why you should 
longer leave your soul in jeopardy? Oh that 
Nebuchadnezzar’s testimony might speak loudly 
to your heart and conscience, if still a stranger 
to the God he had learned to adore. 

Something very definite had been done for his 
soul, and he delighted to tell of it, and to give 
an answer to every man as to the reason of the 
hope that was in him. 

Ere God awakened him, he had been “ at rest 
in his house, and flourishing in his palace.” 
Think of that! At rest and flourishing while 
still in his sins and a stranger to God! Ah, 
there is a deceitful rest, a deceitful peace, which 
lulls many a soui into a false security. To be 
untroubled is no evidence of safety. To be at 


66 Lectures on Daniel 


peace does not prove that all is well. I once 
caught hold of a blind man and drew him back 
just in time to keep him from plunging headlong 
into an open cellar-way. He thought all was 
well, and was in peace of mind as he walked 
along; and yet, two more steps, and he would 
have gone down! Be sure that your peace is 
one founded on the blood of Christ shed upon 
the cross, and you will then have that peace 
which is true and lasting. Every other is false 
and fleeting. The peace of God is that which 
comes from relying on the testimony of God, and 
follows exercise as to the sins that have sepa- 
rated the soul from Him. 

Nebuchadnezzar tells us how he was aroused 
from that false security in which he had dwelt 
for so long. “I saw a dream,” he says, “ which 
made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed 
and the visions of my head troubled me.” The 
vision was sent for this very purpose. God saw 
that he needed to be troubled — he needed to be 
awakened from his sleep of death. It was grace 
that thus exercised him. And in some way 
every soul that is saved has to pass through 
this period of soul-anxiety and concern. Nebu- 
chadnezzar turned, as before, to the wrong 
source for help in his time of difficulty. He cails 
in his magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and 
soothsayers, to whom he narrates his dream; 
but all to no purpose. They who before could 


Nebuchadnezzar’s Humbling 67 


not recall to his mind the dream that had van- 
ished cannot now interpret this one. But at 
last Daniel comes in, and to him the king turns 
expectantly. He tells how he had seen a great 
tree in the midst of the earth, which grew so 
strong and tall that the height reached the 
heavens, and the sight of it to the ends of the 
earth. Clothed with leaves and loaded with 
fruit, it supplied food for all. ‘The beasts of 
the field had shadow under it, and the fowls of 
the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and all 
flesh was fed of it.” But the king had seen a 
watcher and a holy one come down from heaven, 
who cried aloud, saying, “ Hew down the tree, 
and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, 
and scatter his fruit: let the beasts get away 
from under it, and the fowls from his branches: 
nevertheless, leave the stump of his roots in 
the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, 
in the tender grass of the field; and let it be 
wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion 
be with the beasts in the grass of the earth: 
let his heart be changed from man’s, and let a 
beast’s heart be given unto him; and let seven 
times pass over him. This matter is by the de- 
cree of the watchers, and the demand by the 
word of the holy ones: to the intent that the 
living may know that the Most High ruleth in 
the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomso- 
ever He will, and setteth up over it the basest 


68 Lectures on Daniel 


of men.” This was the dream, and the king anx- 
iously inquires if Daniel, or Belteshazzar, could 
declare the interpretation of it. 

The meaning was evidently clear to Daniel 
from the first; but we are told that he was 
astonished for one hour, and his thoughts 
troubled him. It is plain that Nebuchadnez- 
zar’s character had in it much that was noble 
and admirable; and this appealed to the prophet. 
He had also been highly favored by the king, © 
and the thought of the solemn judgment that 
was soon to fall upon his royal master sad- 
dened him. Nebuchadnezzar must have dis- 
cerned the anxiety and sorrow in the face of his 
minister; for he speaks in a way to give him con- 
fidence to proceed with the interpretation. It 
was not smooth words made up for the occa- 
sion that were wanted. Little as he realizes 
what is coming, he yet desires to know the 
truth. It is a blessed thing for any soul to get 
to the place where he can say: ‘‘ Give me God’s 
word, and let me know it is His word, and 
I will receive it, no matter how it cuts, and 
interferes with my most cherished thoughts.” 

“ My lord,” answers Daniel, “the dream be to 
them that hate thee, and the interpretation 
thereof to thine enemies.” He then goes on ta 
explain that the great tree represented Nebu- 
¢hadnezzar himself, who had been set by God in 
a special place of prominence in the earth as the 


Nebuchadnezzar’s Humbling 69 


head of all peoples and dominions. The cutting 
down of the tree signified that he was to be 
humbled to the very lowest depths, even to be- 
ing driven from among men; his dwelling to 
be with the beasts of the field, where he would 
eat grass as oxen, and be wet with the dew of 
heaven, until seven times had passed over him; 
till he should know that the Most High ruleth 
in the kingdom of men, and giveth it unto whom- 
soever He will. But the fact that the stump 
of the tree was left, indicated that his kingdom 
should be sure unto him after he had known that 
the heavens ruled. The prophet adds a word 
of faithful counsel, beseeching the king to break 
off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities 
by showing mercy to the poor, in the hope that 
thereby the days of his tranquillity might be 
lengthened. Observe that it is no question of 
earning eternal salvation of which Daniel here 
speaks. His advice has to do with the govern- 
ment of God upon earth, and Nebuchadnezzar’s 
acknowledgment and subjection to it. 

All happened exactly as Daniel had said; for 
Nebuchadnezzar, still unhumbled, though he had 
listened so respectfully to the words of the 
prophet, walked one day, a year later, in the 
palace of his kingdom, which was evidently upon 
an eminence overlooking his capital. As he 
walked he said to himself, “Is not this great 
Babylon, that I have built for the house of the 


70 Zectures on Daniel 


kingdom by the might of my power, and for the 
honor of my majesty?” Thus did Nebuchad- 
nezzar forget how he was indebted to the most 
high God for the position he occupied and the 
riches and the glory of it, and took all the credit 
to himself. While the word was in his mouth 
the decree was spoken, and he was informed by 
a voice from heaven that the time had come 
when the dream should be fulfilled. The same 
hour he lost his reason, and became a pitiable 
spectacle truly, unfit to associate with his fel- 
lows; and he was driven from men into the open 
fields, where he became in very deed like the 
beasts that perish. We need have no difficulty 
in crediting this solemn account when we re- 
member the treatment generally meted out to the 
insane in the oriental countries. Looked upon 
as the afflicted of God, they are left to wander 
at their own will, none interfering nor making 
them afraid. 

Now in all this we see a picture of Gentile 
power in its alienation from God and bestial 
character. What madness have not rulers and 
nations been guilty of who have trampled the 
word of God beneath their feet and despised His 
mercy and grace, refusing subjection to His goy- 
ernment! A great tree towering up, in its inde- 
pendence, toward heaven is a symbol frequently 
used in Scripture to set forth the great ones of 
this world. Ezekiel uses it as a picture of the 


Nebuchadnezzar’s Humbling 71 


Assyrian kingdom; and in the New Testament 
it is used by our Lord Jesus Christ as a symbol 
of the kingdom of heaven as it has become in 
the hands of men. 

“Until seven times pass over him.” I want 
to dwell a little on that, in connection with 
what has frequently been put forth by a certain 
school of prophetic teachers, called “ the-year- 
day theory.” This is a system of interpretation 
that takes prophetic seasons and times, and says: 
All days are to be understood as years, months 
as thirty years, and years as periods of three 
hundred and sixty years. Now “a time” is un- 
doubtedly, as all are agreed, a year. Seven 
times, then, would be seven years. If the year- 
day theory be true, it would apply here as well 
as elsewhere in this book. But what would 
seven times three hundred and sixty years mean 
in this connection? It would amount to two 
thousand five hundred and twenty years. In 
that case Nebuchadnezzar’s madness would still 
be going on, and he would have to eat grass as 
an ox for some fifty years yet. But if this be 
ridiculously impossible, then it is folly to at- 
ten pt to apply the theory elsewhere, as this is 
distinctly a time-prophecy. Now in every in- 
stance where any of these time-prophecies have 
already been fulfilled, and are clearly so stated 
in Scripture, it is evident that days, months, or 
years, were always fulfilled literally. For in- 


[2 rrectures on Daniel 


stance, God said of the antediluvians that their 
days should be one hundred and twenty years; 
and in exactly that length of time the world, 
that then was, was overthrown with a flood. 
Suppose the year-day theory had been held by 
Noah, he would have calculated that there cer- 
tainly could be no hurry in building the ark, 
inasmuch as the flood could not come for at 
least forty-three thousand two hundred years, 
or one hundred and twenty prophetic years of 
three hundred and sixty literal years each. 
Again: God told Moses that the children of 
Israel, because of their unbelief, should wander 
in the wilderness for forty years, according to 
the number of the days in which they had 
searched the land. Now here, if anywhere, we 
might be supposed to have authority for this 
year-day theory; but, on the contrary, we have 
the very opposite. Days mean days, and years 
mean years. In the book of Ezekiel the prophet 
was told to lie upon his left side for three hun- 
dred and ninety days, that he might bear the 
iniquity of the house of Israel. Then he was to 
lie upon his right side forty days, to bear the 
iniquity of the house of Judah; and God adds “I 
have appointed thee each day for a year.” ‘chis 
passage is often adduced as evidence of the scrip- 
turalness of the theory referred to. But surely 
it gives no title from which to reason that wher- 
ever times and seasons are specified in the pro- 


Nebuchadnezzar’s Humbling 73 


phetic scriptures the principle of a day for a 
year can be relied upon as correct. In the case 
of the great prophecy of the seventy weeks, it 
might appear that we have a case in point; but 
there, as we shall see when we come to consider 
the ninth chapter, the term week does not neces- 
sarily refer to seven days at all. 

The fact is that all kinds of contradictory 
systems have been built up on this year-day con- 
ception, and dates have been set again and again 
for the second coming of the Lord and the ful- 
filment of other prophetic events, only to result 
in disappointment and confusion, and to give 
occasion to the enemies of the truth to blaspheme 
when the dates specified have passed away with 
nothing of moment occurring upon them. The 
whole thing rests on supposing something that 
God had never revealed. 

In the instance before us Daniel declared that 
the king would be mad until seven times had 
passed over him; and in exactly seven years 
Nebuchadnezzar lifted up his eyes; his reason re- 
turned to him; he saw that God had been deal- 
ing with him; his lesson was learned; he blessed 
the most high God; he turned to Him in repent- 
ance; he owned Him as his God; and then 
wrote out this account of his conversion, that 
others might, with him, be humbled before the 
only true God and bless Him for His mercy. 

Thus will it be with the spared nations after 


G4 Lectures on Daniel 


the judgments that are to take place in the 
Time of the End. Nebuchadnezzar aptly typifies 
all Gentile power, as we have already noticed. 
It has been haughty, insolent, and heaven-defy- 
ing. Forgetting God, the true source of au- 
thority and power, it has become like the beasts 
of the earth. You know something of its course 
since it crucified the Lord of glory. The nations 
have been mad — as utterly bereft of all true rea- 
son as was the demented king of Babylon. But 
the day is nearing when God, in His grace, is 
going to end all this, and deliver a groaning 
world from the evils of selfish despotism and 
national jealousies. Christ’s personal return 
from heaven will conclude the long period of 
Gentile misrule. Creation groans for the hour 
when the one true King will be manifested ; when 
our Lord Jesus Christ “in His times will show 
who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King 
of kings, and Lord of lords.” 

“The blessed Potentate”— that is, a truly 
happy ruler! The world has never seen a happy 
potentate in the past. Shakespeare’s line has 
passed into a proverb, “ Uneasy lies the head 
that wears a crown.” But in the days of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, when He takes the rod of 
power and reigns in righteousness, the world, 
for the first time, will see a happy Potentate. 
Who can measure the happiness of the Son of 
God when He descends to take the kingdom for 


Nebuchadnezzar’s Humbling 75 


which He has waited so long; when He has His 
own beloved bride with Himself to share His 
glory! Then He shall see of the travail of His 
soul, and shall be satisfied. Those will be the 
days of heaven upon earth, of which we read in 
the Canticles, when “the time of the singing” 
shall have come, and all redeemed creation will 
rejoice beneath Immanuel’s rule. Our transla- 
tors have put in two little words in that verse 
which do not belong there. They have made 
it say, “The time of the singing of birds is 
come.” Oh, how they have weakened it! It 
should simply read, ‘‘ The time of the singing is 
come ”— the time when the heavenly saints will 
be hymning His praises from the glory; when 
Israel, blessed on the earth, will rejoice in His 
loving-kindness; when all creation will fall at 
His feet to worship, and He will joy over them 
with singing in that day of the gladness of His 
heart. Then He will show who is that happy 
and only Potentate. “That happy Potentate” 
excludes all sorrow and disappointment. “ That 
only Potentate” excludes every other ruler. 
Upon His head will be many crowns. Every 
other crown will be cast at His feet, and He will 
reign as King of kings and Lord of lords. 
Happy for those, in that day, who have humbled 
themselves in this, and who, like Nebuchadnez- 
zar, have owned the righteousness of His dealings 
with them; who have confessed their sins before 


76 Lectures on Daniel 


Him; and who will be able to exclaim with joy, 
when He descends in majesty, “ This is our God: 
we have waited for Him.” Of such He will cry 
with rejoicing, ‘Gather My saints together unto 
Me; those that have made a covenant with Me 
by sacrifice” (Ps. 50:5). 

Ere that day dawns, it is the path of wisdom 
to “kiss the Son lest He be angry, and ye perish 
from the way, when His wrath is kindled but a 
little’ Have you kissed the Son? I mean, 
have you bowed in contrition at the feet of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and trusted Him as your own 
Saviour, and owned Him as your rightful Lord? 
If you have, you can look up and say with happy 
confidence, “Come, Lord Jesus.” But whether 
you have or not, the Lord Jesus is coming — 
coming very soon; and unhappy indeed will be 
your state for all eternity if He find you in your 
sins, a stranger to God and to grace. ‘“ Because 
there is wrath, beware, lest He take thee away 
with His stroke; then a great ransom cannot 
deliver thee.” Now, that ransom avails for all 
who believe in Him. In that day the precious 
blood of Christ will not be offered for salvation 
to those who have done despite to the Spirit of 
grace, and finally refused to heed the gospel mes- 
sage. 


“ Oh, do not let the word depart, 
And close thine eyes against the light; 


Nebuchadnezzear’s Humbling G7 


Poor sinner, harden not thy heart; 
Thou would’st be saved —why not to-night? 


“The world has nothing left to give — 
It has no true, no pure delight; 
Look now to Jesus Christ, and live; 
Thou would’st be saved —why not to-night? 


“Our blessed Lord refuses none 
Who would to Him their souls unite; 
Then be the work of grace begun; 
Thou would’st be saved — why not to-night?“ 


LECTURE V 
CHAPTER V 


BELSHAZZAR’S IMPIOUS FEAST, AND OVERTHROW 
OF BABYLON — THE WORLD-SYSTEM, IN TYPE 


Y E are now to be occupied with the closing 
up of the history of the Babylonian em- 
pire — the last solemn scenes in connection with 
the downfall of the head of gold. We shall find 
in it, as in the previous two chapters, a typical 
picture; in this instance setting forth the over- 
throw of Gentile power, especially in its relig- 
ious character as Babylon the Great, in the Time 
of the End. The account given of the fall of 
mystical Babylon in the 17th and 18th chapters 
of Revelation is evidently based upon, and inti- 
mately connected with, what we have here. 
And first, it is proper to remark that while 
the account given by Daniel of the destruction 
of the proud capital on the Euphrates tallies in 
large measure with what has been left on record 
by Herodotus, the so-called “ Father of History,” 
and by other ancient writers, yet the scripture 
record is nevertheless challenged by a certain 
class of modern critics as unreliable, because 


of alleged discrepancies between the biblical 
78 


Belshazzar’s Impious Feast 79 


account and the inscriptions on some of the 
lately-deciphered monuments. The chief points 
in question are, the title given to Belshazzar, son 
of Nabonidus, and as to the identity of Darius 
the Median. But Belshazzar was reigning 
jointly with his father at this time, and certainly 
was “king of Babylon,” or “king of the Chal- 
deans,” in the sense of being prince-regent, with 
his seat in the imperial city. The title “king ” 
was not applied solely to the supreme monarch 
in that age; nor is it necessarily so used now. It 
will be noticed that in chapter 2, when Daniel 
was honored by Nebuchadnezzar, the great king 
made him second ruler in the kingdom. But in 
this chapter Belshazzar appoints him to the po- 
sition of third ruler, as he himself was clearly 
the second. So there is no discrepancy here, but 
rather that exactness which is ever found in 
Holy Scripture. 

As to Darius the Median, his name certainly 
does not appear in the monuments, and Herod- 
otus tells us that Cyrus was in command of the 
armies that conquered Babylon. But the name 
Darius need present no real difficulty, as ancient 
kings are often known by a number of different 
names. In fact, no two lists of the later Median 
kings, as given by the old historians, agree with 
each other; and the monuments seem to differ 
from them all. The last king of the Medians 
was Cyaxares II., who formed an alliance with 


80 Lectures on Daniel 


Cyrus his nephew, and led a part of the armies 
of the confederate kingdoms to battle. His age, 
as given by Herodotus, agrees with that of Da- 
rius, as given in this chapter. The two may 
therefore be identical. On the other hand, some 
suppose Darius to be the same as Gobryas, who, 
according to ancient records, conducted the 
siege of Babylon as representative of the allied 
kings. The discrepancy in names is no greater 
than that in the case of Cambyses and Atroda- 
tes, both names being applied to the same mon- 
arch; the one, by Xenophon; the other, by Nic- 
olas of Damascus; while it is a well-known fact 
that the lists of Median kings given by Ctesias 
and Herodotus differ in every instance, and the 
chronologies are hopelessly confusing and con- 
tradictory. Yet the rationalist eagerly seizes 
upon any apparent discrepancy between the 
records left by untrustworthy, and often posi- 
tively dishonest, chroniclers and the account 
given in the word of God. The Christian need 
not fear that history will ever disprove what 
we have recorded in our Bibles. In this case, 
Daniel was an eye-witness. He wrote the facts 
as he saw and knew them. His testimony, apart 
from the question of divine inspiration, is surely 
more to be relied upon than that of fawning 
courtiers, or hearsay historians, whose professed 
facts are often untrustworthy, highly colored, 
and opposed to each other. 


Belshazzar’s Impious Feast 81 


What especially comes before us in this chap- 
ter is the impiety of Gentile power as repre- 
sented in this rule of Belshazzar — rising to its 
full height in the desecration of the vessels that 
had been carried away from the temple of Jeho- 
vah at Jerusalem. God had committed govern- 
’ment to the nations, giving the supreme domin- 
ion to Nebuchadnezzar; but we find that from 
the beginning they failed to render to Him the 
honor and allegiance that were His due; and 
though Nebuchadnezzar himself was humbled 
later, his successors, Evil-Merodach,! Nabonidus, 
and his impious son, fail utterly to profit by the 
lesson their illustrious ancestor had learned at 
so great a cost to himself. 

In all this it is easy to see pictured the whole 
course of government as entrusted to man. 
Proud, haughty rulers delight to make capital 
out of the fact that “the powers that be are 
ordained of God’; but it is generally with no 
thought of seeking His glory or of acting as His 
representatives upon the earth, but rather to 
establish and augment their own power by de- 
‘ducing therefrom the doctrine of “the divine 
right of kings.” 

A little before our chapter opens, Cyrus the 
Great, king of Persia, had entered into an alli- 

1 Neriglissar and Laborosoarchod, who reigned each but for 


a brief season after the death of Evil-Merodach, were not of 
the blood-royal. 


82 Lectures on Damtei 


ance with Cyaxares II., his aged uncle; and the 
eombined kingdoms had subdued various na- 
tions to the north and south. They now deter- 
mined to annex the fast-decaying Babylonian 
empire to their dominions. In this, Cyrus was 
evidently the leading spirit, though while Cy- 
axares lived he was given precedence. Cyrus, 
though knowing it not, was “ the scourge of the 
Lord,” as Nebuchadnezzar had been before him. 
When Israel offended, God used the Chaldeans 
as His rod of chastening upon them. Now God 
would use the Medo-Persians for the punishment 
of the Chaldeans, who had shown themselves 
insensible to all His mercies to them. 

Babylon was at this time the most magnifi- 
cent and luxurious city in the world — devoted 
to every vice, and the centre and mother of idol- 
atry. From the days of Nimrod and the tower 
of Babel, till it was blotted out from under 
heaven, Babylon was the headquarters for the 
heathen mysteries. Its walls, supposedly im- 
pregnable, were so broad that several chariots 
could drive abreast upon them. The Euphrates 
ran right through the city, passing under the 
walls; and, of course, upon that river the peo- 
ple depended for their support: yet it was des- 
tined to become their enemy; for after an unsuc- 
cessful siege of many months, the Medo-Persian 
armies concluded that the only way to force an 


Belshazzar’s Invpious Feast 83 


entrance would be through the river-bed. Ac: 
cordingly a new channel was dug around the 
city without the Babylonians being aware of it. 
This channel connected with a near-by lake. On 
that very night, when the work of turning the 
waters of the river out of their course would be 
finished and the final assault be made, Belshaz- 
zar, utterly unconscious of the danger in which 
the city stood, was keeping an impious feast, 
with a thousand of his lords, in honor of the 
heathen deities. It was not merely a feast that 
manifested the pride of his heart; it bore a far 
worse character than this; for, in insult to Jeho- 
vah, Belshazzar orders the golden vessels of the 
temple in Jerusalem, which had been carried 
down to Babylon, to be brought for use in their 
heathen, impious feast. Thus they drank, and 
praised the gods of silver and gold, of brass and 
of stone, and forgot altogether, or blasphemed 
utterly, the God of Heaven. On this crowning 
act of impiety, their cup of iniquity being full, 
God’s sudden and sore judgment falls. God 
never strikes, when He is dealing with nations 
in judgment, until that moment. He could not 
allow the people of Israel to take possession of 
the land of Canaan before the days of Moses 
because “the iniquity of the Amorites was not 
yet full.” And so in Babylon’s case; He lingered 
long, and permitted His people to be slaves to 


84 Lectures on Daniel 


Nebuchadnezzar, his son, and his son’s son, as 
foretold by Jeremiah, till the wickedness of the 
Chaldeans had reached its height. 

At last the fateful moment had struck; and at 
the very time that Belshazzar stood before his 
lords with one of the cups from Jerusalem’s de- 
stroyed temple in his hand, praising his own 
vile demon gods, there came forth, in the full 
sight of all that multitude, the fingers of a man’s 
hand, which wrote in letters of fire upon the 
plaster the words of doom, “MENE, MENE, TE- 
KEL, UPHARSIN.” Doubtless every noble present 
could decipher the strange words; but none could 
give their meaning or connection. When it says 
they could not read the words, it means they 
could not read them understandingly. God had 
written them in their own language; but who 
could make sense of four apparently unrelated 
terms: ‘“ NUMBERED, NUMBERED, WEIGHED, DIVID- 
Inc”? All instinctively recognized them as a 
message from the other world; but who could 
interpret the decree? 

I think I see Belshazzar as he stands there 
with the wine-cup in his hand. I think I see the 
awful look of terror that comes over his counte- 
nance — the deadly pallor that overspreads his 
face. I see the cup fall from his nerveless hand; 
I note the way in which he clings to the pillar 
to support his trembling limbs. The word of 
God says “ his knees smote one against another.” 


Belshazzar’s Impious Feast 85 


He called in vain, with hollow voice, for the 
astrologers, the soothsayers, and those learned 
in Chaldean lore, to explain this dreadful por- 
tent; but “they could not read the writing, nor 
make known to the king the interpretation 
thereof.” While they were in fearful conster- 
nation, the queen-mother came in. She seems 
to have occupied a place apart from all the 
wickedness and revelry of that great company. 
Almost like the representative of another world, 
she appears to inform the king of one who can, 
she is certain, read the writing and give the in- 
terpretation of it. She says, “‘ There is a man in 
thy kingdom in whom is the spirit of the holy 
- gods; and in the days of thy father light and 
understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of 
the gods, was found in him; whom the king 
Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy 
father, made master of the magicians, astrolo- 
gers, Chaldeans, and soothsayers; forasmuch 
as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and un- 
derstanding, interpreting of dreams, and show- 
ing of hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, 
were found in the same Daniel, whom the king 
named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, 
and he will show the interpretation.” 
Belshazzar had been utterly indifferent to the 
man whom God had used in the days of his 
grandfatner Nebuchadnezzar; but Daniel had 
gone on in a quiet, humble way, seeking the ap: 


86 Lectures on Daniel 


probation of the One who is higher than the 
highest. Sent for in haste, he came in to rebuke 
by his very presence that godless multitude. 
Belshazzar addressed him in flattering terms, 
and promised him great honors if he would read 
the writing and show the interpretation of the 
thing. He should be clothed in scarlet, and have 
a chain of gold about his neck, and be the third 
ruler in the kingdom. 

Poor, misguided monarch! of how little value 
would all his honors be on the morrow! How 
little would it mean to hold a fief from him as 
third ruler in the kingdom, when the sun should 
rise the next day! Belshazzar little knew that 
while these momentous events were taking place 
in the palace, the waters of the river had been 
turned aside into the new channel, and the armies 
of the allied kings, a mighty horde, were coming 
in underneath the walls in the dry river-bed, un- 
noticed and undetected, because the very watch-. 
men of the city, Herodotus tells us, were all 
drunk. In the streets, as in the palace, myriads 
of revelers were spending the night in godless 
amusement; unclean orgies were being perpe- 
trated in honor of the pagan gods; and the Per- 
sian army was upon them ere they were aware 
of their danger. 

And Daniel, I suppose, knew nothing of this 
either; but it makes his words to Belshazzar all 
the more solemn and serious. ‘ Then Daniel an- 


Belshazzar’s Impious Feast ST 


swered and said before the king, Let thy gifts 
be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; 
yet I will read the writing unto the king, and 
‘make known to him the interpretation. O thou 
king, the most high God gave Nebuchadnezzar 
thy father a kingdom, . . . and for the majesty 
that He gave him, all people, nations and lan- 
guages trembled and feared before him: whom he 
would he slew; and whom he would he kept alive; 
and whom he would he set up; and whom he would 
he put down. But when his heart was lifted up, 
and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed 
from his kingly throne, and they took his glory 
from him: and he was driven from the sons of 
men; and his heart was made like the beasts, and 
his dwelling was with the wild asses: they fed 
him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet 
with the dew of heaven; till he knew that the 
most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and 
that He appointeth over it whomsoever He will.” 
And now note the fearful indictment of the 
wretched monarch before whom he _ stood, 
“ And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not hum. 
bled thy heart, though thou knewest all this, 
but hast lifted up thyself against the Lord o@ 
heaven; and they have brought the vessels of 
His house before thee, and thou and thy lords, 
thy wives and thy concubines, have drunk wine 
in them; and thou hast praised the gods of sil- 
ver and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stene, 


SS Lectures on Daniel 


which see not, nor hear, nor know; and THE 
GOD IN WHOSE HAND THY BREATH is, AND WHOSR 
ARE ALL THY WAYS, HAST THOU NOT GLORIFIED: 
then was the part of the hand sent from Him; 
and this writing was written.” 

Daniel did not speak to Belshazzar as he had 
before spoken to Nebuchadnezzar. He could not 
have the same respect for him that he enter- 
tained for his grandfather. You will remember, 
when Nebuchadnezzar told his dream of the 
great tree, that Daniel grieved to think of the 
suffering that he had to pass through, and said, 
“The dream be to them that hate thee, and the 
interpretation thereof to thine enemies.” Ten- 
derly and aifectionately he besought him to re- 
pent of his evil ways. But he did not talk like 
that to Belshazzar. He knew his doom was 
sealed, his day of mercy had gone by. He saw 
in him only a wretched, impious degenerate, 
who had sinned against light and knowledge, 
and deserved neither sympathy nor compassion, 
He realized that Belshazzar had gone steadily 
on in defiance of the God of heaven until the 
hour of his judgment had struck. Nothing now 
could avert the richly-deserved wrath of the Holy 
One. Faithfully the prophet proceeded to press 
home upon the guilty king his sinfulness and 
impiety; and then he solemnly went on to read 
and interpret the message sent from heaven. 
Even while he was speaking, the invading hosts 


Belehazeor’s lipioua F east 89 


were drawing nearer and nearer to the palace 
gates; but the guilty king, and his lords sur- 
rounding him, were altogether unaware of what 
had taken place down by the river. 

The meaning of the words is thus explained: 
Munz, “ numbered”—* God hath numbered thy 
kingdom, and finished it.” Belshazzar’s days of 
probation were passed and gone. The day of his 
sentence had come. 

THKEL, “ weighed ”—“ Thon art weighed in the 
balances, and art found wanting.” He who had 
exalted himself in his pride and folly was found 
to be “ altogether lighter than vanity.” 

And then, note, Daniel says, Punus, “ divided,” 
a form of the same word UrHarsin which he 
read from the wall, but implying that the divi- 
sion had already taken place; for instead of 
saying, “God is dividing thy kingdom,” he de- 
clares, “Thy kingdom is divided, and given to 
the Medes and Persians.” It was as much as 
to way the blow had already fallen: it was not 
that God was about to do this, but it had al- 
ready been accomplished. While Daniel was 
interpreting, the kingdom had passed to other 
hands. 

But the foolish and unrepentant king, despite 
all this, seems to fancy he is still secure. He 
offers Daniel the worthless honors he had prom- 
ised, attempting to carry out the pledges made 
to him, as though still in the zenith of his glory. 


90 Lectures on Daniel 


But the awful chronicle of the Holy Spirit is: 
“In that night was Belshazzar the king of the 
Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median took 
the kingdom, being about threescore and two 
years old.” Thus had the history of the head 
of gold come to a close, and the silver breast 
and arms had come upon the scene. God’s 
word had been fulfilled, and that night Babylon 
fell, to rise no more forever. In that destruc- 
tion, as already intimated, we may see prefig- 
ured the overthrow of all Gentile power and do- 
minion in the Time of the End; and especially of 
that evil system designated in the book of the 
Revelation “ Babylon the Great, the mother of 
harlots and abominations of the earth.” This 
is the world-religious system that will be de- 
stroyed just prior to the return of the Lord from 
heaven. 

There are those who teach that some time in 
the future, literal Babylon is going to be re- 
stored, to be again destroyed; but a careful 
reading of Jer. 50 and 51 will make it very clear, 
I think, to any spiritual mind that her destruc- 
tion is to be perpetual. The city is never to be 
revived. The Most High has visited His judg- 
ment upon it. But mystical Babylon will have 
reached its climax after the Church has been 
caught away to be with the Lord, when the pa- 
pacy and all her daughters will form one great 
apostate organization — the refuge of all the va- 


Belshazzar’s Impious Feast 91 


rious portions of Bible-rejecting Christendom. 
In this Babylon we see that of which the Baby- 
lon of history was a picture. 

Ancient Babylon, as we have seen, was the 
city of idolatry, and the expression of the pride 
of man’s heart, combining religion with self-seek- 
ing. Idolatry, properly speaking, began there. 
That was the place where the great tower was 
made, where men said, “ Let us make us a name.” 
It was no thought of building a tower to escape 
another possible flood that filled their minds. 
But they wished a centre around which to rally, 
that they might make themselves a great name 
upon the earth. God had told them to scatter 
abroad; but they were determined not to obey 
Him. Unsubject in will, they turned from Him 
to the worship of demons. That was the be- 
ginning of heathenism; there they commenced to 
worship and serve the creature more than the 
Creator; and every idolatrous system in the 
world is simply an off-shoot of that first parent 
stem. 

And so we find, in the mystic Babylon of the 
last days, the union of all human churches, only 
to be superseded by the worship of the Anti- 
christ. It speaks of a glory yet to be enjoyed 
by the professing Church, after the Body of 
Christ has been caught away to heaven, for a 
brief season, upon the formation of the ten- 
kingdomed empire, ere the kings and nations 


92 Lectures on Daniel 


of the earth sicken of the contemptible sham. 
and, becoming utterly atheist, burn the harlot’s 
flesh with fire, destroying forever the great 
world-church, who says in her heart, “I sit a 
queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sor- 
row.” 

Some may be asking, “ Do you not think that 
Babylon the Great is already in existence?” 
Surely: Babylon’s description in Rev. 17 coin- 
cides too exactly with history’s record of the 
papal church to warrant any denial of her iden- 
tity. What other church has sat upon the seven 
hills of that great city which ruleth over the 
kings of the earth? What other church has 
been for long centuries “ drunk with the blood 
of the martyrs of Jesus”? What other church 
possessed the power and wealth ascribed to her? 
And where else shall we find a religious organi- 
zation so delighting in names of blasphemy as 
she? 

But the Roman communion does not alone 
constitute great Babylon. The harlot has 
daughters who, like herself, profess to be pledged 
to a heavenly Bridegroom while committing 
fornication with the world that rejected Him. 
“Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not 
that the friendship of the world is enmity with 
God?” Spiritual fornication is, at large, the 
union of the church and the state; individually, 
of the Christian with the world — an unhallowed 


Belshazzar’s Impious Feast 93 


alliance, opposed to the whole teaching of the 
New Testament. So if Rome be emphatically 
the great harlot, the state-churches are her off- 
spring; and “ As is the mother, so are her daugh- 
ters.” 

Soon the daughters will be wending their way 
homeward, back to the arms of their evil mother. 
We hear much in our times of “the reunion of 
Christendom ”’; and we need not think of it as 
the dream of impractical religious enthusiasts. 
Christendom will be reunited undoubtedly. Ey- 
erything points to such an issue, and no serious 
student of the prophetic scriptures can question 
it for a moment. But when it comes to pass, it 
will be a Christless reunion; for it will not take 
place till the Body of Christ has been translated, 
and all who are left will have thrown off 
allegiance to the Word and Spirit of God, and 
to the Lord Jesus Christ. The apostasy must 
take place first. Then the man of sin will be re- 
vealed. 

Christendom’s sin is the rejection of the Holy 
Spirit; and with that necessarily comes the re- 
jection of the Scriptures given by the Spirit’s 
moving upon the hearts and minds of “holy 
men of God.” But, coupled with this, comes the 
desire for recognition as a power in the world, 
lording it over men’s consciences. So. when the 
true Church is caught away, all the professing 
Systems will doubtless come together in one, ang 


94 Lectures on Daniel 


proudly exclaim, “ Is not this great Babylon that 
we have built?” They will rejoice in a united 
Christendom — united in rejecting Christ, doing 
despite to the Holy Spirit, and throwing dishonor 
upon the word of God! All will be on a carnal 
and Satanic basis, and will last but for a brief 
season ere being overthrown with indignation by 
the nations, who will resent any religious obli- 
gations when the Spirit of life has departed. 

This is where we see everything drifting. 
Babylon’s pride and hauteur will become so in- 
sufferable that men will say, as in France, Spain, 
and other Latin dominions, lately: ‘“ We do not 
want any church at all; we will destroy the whole 
thing, and get along without it.” This is the 
openly-advocated doctrine of many Socialists, 
and is clearly what that vaunted system of eco- 
nomics is leading up to, little as so-called Chris- 
tian Socialists may realize it. 

God will “ put it into their hearts to fulfil His 
will.” He can use one evil thing to destroy an- 
other, as He has often done in the past. He used 
Persia to destroy Babylon, and yet the Persians 
were a sinful nation too, in due time to be over- 
thrown by another power. And so, in the time 
of the end, a godless government will be used to. 
destroy a Christless church, “for strong is the 
Lord God who judgeth her. Her doom will be 
as sudden and as overwhelming as was that 
which fell on the Babylon of Belshazzar. “Thus 


Belshazzar’s Impious Feast 95 


with violence shall that great city Babylon be 
thrown down, and shall be found no more at 
all. And the voice of harpers, and musicians, 
and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be heard no 
more at all in thee; and no craftsmen, of what: 
soever craft he be, shall be found any more in 
thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be 
heard no more at all in thee; and the light of a 
candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and 
the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride 
shall be heard no more at all in thee: for thy 
merchants were the great men of the earth; for 
by thy sorceries were all nations deceived. And 
in her was found the blood of prophets, and 
of saints, and of all that were slain upon the 
earth ” (Rev. 18: 21-24). 

Ere that hour of the vengeance of God has 
been reached, the message goes forth, ‘“ Come 
out of her, My people, that ye be not partaker 
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her 
plagues.” He who would be faithful to the Lord 
is called upon to walk apart from all that bears 
the impress of Babylon; remembering the word, 
“Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works 
of darkness, but rather reprove them.” In the 
first chapter of Genesis we read of God creating 
a division, dividing the light from the darkness. 
This division he would ever have maintained. 
The devil has been busy ever since, seeking to 
\mix up the light and the darkness. The man of 


96 Lectures on Daniel 


God is called to walk apart from the darkness, 
as a child of light and of the day. May it be 
so with us, for His name’s sake! 

And now, ere ciosing this solemn subject, I 
would address a word of warning to the un- 
saved. Belshazzar’s great offence was this: 
Though he knew of God’s dealings with Nebu- 
chadnezzar, he sinned right on, going against 
light and knowledge. None are so guilty as 
those who so act. And to all such the word 
comes witb awful force, “He that being often 
reproved hardeneth his neck shall suddenly be 
destroyed, and that without remedy.” Oh, be 
warned, I beseech you, if you have been for years 
familiar with these things; and do not longer 
dare to defy God to His face by casting His word 
behind your back. 

You little know how near you may be to the 
end of God’s patience with you. He lingers in 
grace, but He may soon strike in judgment. 
Your “ MENE”’ may very soon be written on the 
wall — your days numbered — your life finished! 
“TEKEL,” for you, may even now be true— 
weighed, and found wanting! 


“ Weighed in the balance, and wanting,— 
Weighed, but no Saviour is there,— 
Weighed, but thy scul has been trifling,— 
Weighed, aud found lighter than air.” 


And then “PrERES” shall seal your doom, ané_ 


Belshazzar’s Impious Feast 97 


your opportunities of mercy be forever gone; 
your body a corpse, and your soul in hell! Di- 
vided — separated from all that is good, from all 
that is holy —to be lost forever, shut up to a 
Christless eternity. 

O heed now the word of warning, I entreat you, 
and flee for your life to the city of refuge, which 
is Christ Jesus Himself, who says, “Him that 
cometh unto Me, I will in nowise cast out.” 


LECTURE VI 
CHAPTER VI 


THE PRESERVATION OF THE FAITHFUL 
REMNANT —IN TYPE 


N the interesting historical incident now 
brought before us by the pen of inspiration, 
we have portrayed what should be for the com- 
fort of every trusting soul: God’s tender care 
over all who walk uprightly before Him and 
confide in His love and power. Like the previous 
events it also has a typical character, setting 
forth the peculiarly trying position in which the 
faithful remnant of Judah will find themselves 
in the days of the Antichrist. 

Darius, the satrap of Babylon, was pleased, 
we are told, to set over the kingdom a hun- 
dred and twenty princes; and over these, three 
presidents, of whom Daniel was first. The 
prophet was thus appointed to a position very 
similar to that of a present day prime minister 
or secretary of state; and because of the excel- 
lent spirit that was in him, and his faithful- 
ness in administering the affairs of the king: 
dom, he was preferred above all the other 


dignitaries. In this exalted office, he became. 
98 


The Faithfu®? Remnant 99 


ag many in similar circumstances have heen, 
the object of the enmity and hatred of unprin- 
cipled political plotters, who sought their own 
advancement at the expense of his downfall. 
Themselves corrupt, they tried to find occasion 
against him, taking it for granted that he was 
actuated by the same selfish motives as they were. 
But though they endeavored in every way to 
obtain proof of some dereliction of duty on his 
part, concerning which they might accuse him 
to the king, they at last were forced to confess, 
“We shall not find any occasion against this 
Daniel, except we find it against him concern- 
ing the law of his God.” 

The cunning plotters, knowing the intensity 
of his religious convictions, put their heads to- 
gether therefore, and drew up a statute, which 
they felt sure, if they could but prevail on the 
king to sign it, would insure the downfall of 
his favorite. With this in mind, they came into 
the presence of the king, and pretending to 
great loyalty and zeal for the dignity of his 
office, they said: “ King Darius, live forever. 
All the presidents of the kingdom, the gover- 
nors and the princes, the counsellors and the 
captains, have consulted together to establish 
a royal statute, and to make a firm decree, 
that whosoever shall ask a petition of any god 
or man, for thirty days, save of thee, O king, 
aie shall be cast into the den of lions. Now, O 


100 Lectures on Daniel 


king, establish the decree, and sign the writ 
ing, that it be not changed, according to the 
law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth 
not.” 

Their statement was false upon the face of it, 
for one at least of the presidents there was, and 
he the chief of all, who had not been consulted 
in the matter; but it was he whose destruction 
they desired. Darius shows to poor advantage 
here, though in the main perhaps, an excellent 
man, but like many another, easily persuaded 
by the tongue of flattery. Without consulting 
with his chief minister he signed the decree; 
thus establishing it as a law unalterable even 
by royal veto. By the signing of this statute 
Darius practically put himself into the place 
that the man of sin, the lawless one, will oc- 
cupy in the last days. He became a type of 
the Antichrist, who shall “sit in the temple of 
God, showing himself that he is God.” And 
right here, it is of moment to remark that there 
‘may be a vast difference between what a man 
is in himself and the place he occupies in scrip- 
ture typology. Darius, as a man, was doubt- 
less a very different character to the coming 
false Messiah. He was kindly and amiable, 
and as we know, was afterwards deeply re- 
pentant for having permitted himself to act 
so foolishly. But as the king, making himself 
an object of worship, and denying the liberty of 


> 


The Faithful Remnant 101 


any to offer prayers or adoration to any other 
God save himself, he fittingly pictures the Anti- 
christ. 

We see the same principle brought out, for 
instance, in the case of David, who, looked at 
officially, is one of the most nearly perfect types 
of Christ that we have in the Old Testament; 
but who, as a man, possesses the same faults 
and commits as serious sins aS many another. 

After the vain-glorious monarch had allowed 
himself to be flattered into appending the seal 
royal to the infamous interdict, the plotters 
doubtless congratulated themselves that Daniel’s 
doom was sealed. His holiness of life was a 
continual rebuke to their impiety, and his in- 
tegrity but accentuated their crookedness. We 
are reminded, as we read of their inability to find 
anything whereof to accuse him save in the mat- 
ter of the Lord his God, of that verse in the 
Proverbs which tells us that “when a man’s 
ways please the Lord, He maketh even his 
enemies to be at peace with him” (or, silent 
to him), that is, they cannot truthfully allege 
anything against the man who walks with God. 

When Daniel knew that the writing was 
signed, there was on his part evidence of neither 
fear nor ostentation. He simply pursued his 
godly course, as though the decree were not in 
existence. Notice, verse 10 tells us, “ He went 
into his house; and his windows being open 


102 Lectures on Daniel 


in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled 
upon his knees three times a day, and prayed 
and gave thanks before his God, as he did afore- 
time.” Observe, it is not said that he opened 
his windows; it is quite the contrary, “ His win- 
dows being open; ’”’— to shut them now would be 
cowardice; whereas to have opened them, if he 
had previously been in the habit of keeping them 
closed, would have been to court persecution,— 
a foolhardy thing, which the child of God is 
never called upon to do. But Daniel remem- 
bered the words of Solomon, which he prayed 
concerning the people of Israel: “If they sin 
against Thee (for there is no man that sinneth 
not), and Thou be angry with them, and deliver 
them over before their enemies, and they carry 
them away captives unto a land far off or near: 
yet if they bethink themselves in the land 
whither they are carried captive, and turn and 
pray unto Thee in the land of their captivity, 
saying, We have sinned, we have done amiss, and 
have dealt wickedly; if they return to Thee with 
all their heart and with all their soul in the land 
of their captivity, whither they have carried 
them captives, and pray toward their land, which 
Thou gavest unto their fathers, and toward the 
city which Thou hast chosen, and toward the 
house which I have built for Thy Name: then 
hear Thou from the heavens, even from Thy 
dweiling-place, their prayer and their supplica- 


The Faithful Remnant 103 


tions, and maintain their cause, and forgive Thy 
people which have sinned against Thee” (2 
Chron. 6: 36-39). 

In full accord with this, Daniel went up into 
his house three times daily; and bowing down 
upon his knees before his windows, opened to- 
ward Jerusalem, he offered his prayers and 
thanksgivings, and made his confession to his 
God. And now when he knows that he takes 
his life in his hand each time he carries out his 
pious custom, he does not shrink for a moment, 
or seek in any way to hide from his enemies the 
fact that he has to do with the God of Israel. 
As he kneels with bowed head facing the direc- 
tion of the desolated city of Jehovah, Jerusalem, 
the place where the Lord had set His name, we 
may be assured that his prayer was none the 
less fervent, and his thanksgiving none the less 
real, because he knew, as he could not help but 
know, that malignant spies were waiting to re- 
port his conduct to the king, who, according to 
the unalterable laws of the Medes and Persians, 
was bound to carry out its provisions, and to 
visit upon each offender the penalty prescribed. 

Having secured the evidence they desired, the 
conspirators repaired to the royal presence, and 
made accusation against Daniel. Darius at 
once realized the mistake he had made; and we 
are told he “labored till the going down of the 
sun to deliver him.” But the unhappy ruler | 


104 Lectures on Daniel 


found himself helpless in the hands of his crafty 
advisers. He had to own the authenticity of 
the decree and of his signature. He could do 
no other than see that it was enforced. In this 
we see one great point of difference between the 
head of gold and the silver breast. Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s word was absolute. No law held him 
in check: ‘“ Whom he would he slew, and whom 
he would he kept alive.” But it was otherwise 
with the Persian rulers. The law of the state 
had authority even over kings. And in each 
empire that followed we find imperial power 
more and more curtailed, and the voice of the 
people making itself heard with ever greater 
force and intensity until the days of the feet of 
the image, part of iron and part of brittle pot- 
tery — a union of social democracy and imperi- 
alism. 

Darius found it impossible to evade the statute 
in the face of his insistent ministers, who de- 
manded that the decree be carried out, and the 
chief of the presidents be cast into the den of 
lions. The king seems to have had some sense | 
in his soul of the power of the God of Daniel, 
for, after giving the command, he said to him, 
confidently, “Thy God whom thou servest con- 
tinually, He will deliver thee.” 

So Daniel was cast in, and Darius had a bad 
xught of it, tossed between conflicting emotions 
ef hope and fear as to his servant’s fate. In the 


The Faithful Remnant 105 


morning we see him early at the mouth of the 
den, and in great distress calling to find out 
whether Daniel had been destroyed or delivered. 
* O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, 
whom thou servest continually, able to deliver 
thee from the lions?”’—his anxious query be- 
speaking both a measure of confidence in what 
he must have learned from Daniel himself as to 
the omnipotent power of his God, and yet his 
own lack of acquaintance with Him. But, to 
his joy, he found that Daniel’s God was as good 
as His word, and had preserved the prophet un- 
harmed in the midst of the ravenous beasts. 
Daniel’s reply is noble in its very simplicity: 
““O king, live forever,” he says. ‘ My God hath 
sent His angel, and hath shut the lions’ mouths, 
that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before 
Him innocency was found in me; and also before 
thee, O king, have I done no hurt.” 

The misguided king is delighted to find that 
his own wretched blunder had wrought no real 
damage to his minister, and at once commands 
him to be taken up out of the den; the law hav- 
ing been complied with fully, and the prophet 
having suffered no hurt. Thus was Daniel de- 
livered, “‘ because he believed in his God.” What 
a lesson to tried saints everywhere! ‘“ Who is 
he that shall harm you if ye be followers of 
that which is good?” It may not always please 
God to deliver from the trial, but He will al- 


106 Lectures on Daniel 


ways preserve in it, and eventually bring His 
own in peace out of it. 

The king now commands that Daniel’s ac- 
cusers with all their households, be cast into the 
den. It was a heathenish way of visiting retri- 
bution upon them, inasmuch as the wives and 
children were not offenders; but it was quite in 
keeping with Oriental conceptions of justice. 
The lions had the mastery of them, we are told, 
and broke all their bones in pieces the moment 
they came to the bottom of the den. Thus was 
the righteous one delivered out of trouble, while 
the wicked suffered in his stead. 

Darius then made a new decree, which was 
sent to all people, nations and languages in the 
Medo-Persian dominions, in which he bade men 
everywhere to tremble and fear before the God 
of Daniel: “ For He is the living God, and stead- 
fast forever, and His kingdom that which shall 
not be destroyed, and His dominion shall be 
even unto the end. He delivereth and rescueth, 
and He worketh signs and wonders in heaven 
and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from 
the power of the lions.” We may hope that 
Darius had thus learned the same lesson that 
had been taught to Nebuchadnezzar, in so differ- 
ent a school, long before. As for Daniel, the rec- 
ord says, he prospered in the reign of Darius, 
and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian. How 
much his influence had to do with the issuing of 


The Faithful Remnant 107 


the decree later on, permitting the Jews to re- 
turn to Jerusalem, we know not, but there can 
be little doubt that his voice would be heard by 
Cyrus in the matter. 

It will be necessary now to dwell somewhat 
particularly upon the typical character of all 
this. The whole scene points us on to a time 
when Daniel’s people will once more be restored 
to their land, and there shall rise up among 
them one who will magnify himself above all 
that is called God and is worshiped, so that he 
shall sit in the temple of God, showing himself 
that he is God. He will make a decree that 
prayer and worship shall be addressed to him 
alone, and every other god ignored. All this 
will be considered in its place, when we come 
to take up the latter part of chapter 11, where, 
from the thirty-sixth verse on, we have a vivid 
description of the Antichrist and his times. I 
do not touch here on the notion common to 
many Protestants that the papacy is the Anti- 
christ, because that too will be taken up then. 
What I especially wish to make clear now is 
that God’s word has distinctly foretold the re- 
gathering of the Jews to Palestine, though at 
first in unbelief, and that out of the whole com- 
pany a remnant will be taken up in grace and 
turned to the Lord. The mass will own the 
claims of the wilful one, who will pose as their 
Messiah, while the remnant will be distinguished 


108 Lectures on Daniel 


by their unyielding opposition to his decrees, 
and therefore, as in the case of Daniel in this 
chapter, will be called upon to pass through a 
period of severe testing, designated in both Testa- 
ments as the tribulation. But out of it all they 
shall eventually emerge in triumph, through the 
power of God, and they shall see visited upon 
their enemies the desolation and destruction 
which they had thought to visit upon this faith- 
ful remnant. 

And first, in order that it may be made plain 
that the restoration of Israel, so frequently re- 
ferred to by the prophets, is yet in the future, I 
would direct your attention to the eleventh 
chapter of the prophet Isaiah. You will do well 
to read the entire chapter at your leisure, 
though I shall here quote but a few verses, be- 
ginning with the 11th. ‘And it shall come to 
pass in that day, that the Lord shall set His 
hand again the second time to recover the rem- 
nant of His people, which shall be left, from As- 
syria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and 
from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, 
and from Hamath, and from the islands of the 
sea. And He shall set up an ensign for the na- 
tions, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, 
and gather together the dispersed of Judah 
from the four corners of the earth. ... And 
there shall be a highway for the remnant of His 
people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like 


The Faithful Remnant 109 


as it was to Israel in the day that he came up 
out of the land of Egypt” (vers. 11, 12, and 16}. 
That this passage has no reference to the return 
from Babylon in the past is evident, for it dis- 
tinctly tells us that the Lord shall set His hand 
the second time to recover the remnant of His 
people. The first time was when they came up 
(from the dominions of Cyrus and Artaxerxes, in 
‘the days of Ezra and Nehemiah. The second 
recovery will be when they are brought back, 
not only from those lands, but from Egypt and 
all the islands of the sea. How they will return 
is set before us in the eighteenth chapter of the 
same prophet. There we learn that some great 
maritime nation will further the work of resto- 
ration by bringing them in many ships from the 
most distant places to their ancient patrimony. 
“Tn that time shall the present be brought unto 
the Lord of hosts of a people scattered and 
peeled, and from a people terrible from their be- 
ginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trod- 
den under foot, whose land the rivers have 
spoiled, to the place of the name of the Lord of 
hosts, the mount Zion.” 

That this return must be carried out in order 
to fulfil the promises made by God to the fathers 
should be self-evident. In the thirtieth chapter 
of Jeremiah the Lord corroborates the word in 
Isaiah by saying, “ For, lo, the days come, saith 
the Lord, that I will bring again the captivity 


110 Lectures on Daniel 


of my people Israel and Judah, saith the Lord: 
and I will cause them to return to the land that 
I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess 
it.” And this return is still in the future, for 
in connection with it the pledge is given that 
when Jacob shall return he “shall be in rest, 
and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.” 
This could hardly be said of the previous return 
from Babylon; for at no time, until again cast 
out of their land after Messiah’s rejection did 
they dwell in rest and quietness undisturbed by 
their enemies, and possess the land. But they 
are Jehovah’s people, in spite of all their sins; 
and in His own time He will fulfil to the letter 
every pledge He has made. That they will have 
to pass through a season of severe testing ere 
entering into the promised rest is equally clear, 
as the same chapter and many another portion 
of Scripture witnesses. “For thus saith the 
Lord: We have heard a voice of trembling, of 
fear, and not of peace. Ask ye now, and see 
whether a man doth travail with child? where- 
fore do I see every man with his hands on his 
loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are 
turned into paleness? Alas! for that day is 
great, so that none is like it: it is even the time 
of Jacob’s trouble; but he shall be saved out of 
it” (vers. 5 to 7). 

We may turn back to Isaiah, chap. 24, for a 
fuller description of this time of trouble, the 


The Faithful Remnant Lil 


great tribulation. The first twelve verses pic- 
ture the land of Palestine as it will be in those 
days of distress. Throughout the chapter read 
“land” instead of “earth.” Now, notice verse 
13: “ When thus it shall be in the midst of the 
land among the people, there shall be as the 
shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning 
grapes when the vintage is done. They shall 
lift up their voice, they shall sing for the maj- 
esty of the Lord, they shall cry aloud from the 
sea.” Here we have the remnant distinguished 
from the mass; instead of being overwhelmed 
with despair because of their sorrows when cast, 
as it were, into this den of lions, they lift up 
their voices in song, like Daniel glorifying the 
God of heaven. To them will be fulfilled the 
precious promises of Isaiah, chap. 43, in the day 
that the Lord shall “say to the north, Give up; 
and to the south, Keep not back: bring My sons 
from far, and My daughters from the ends of 
the earth; even every one that is called by My 
name: for I have created him for My glory, I 
have formed him; yea, I have made him” (vers. 
6,7). These shall be Jehovah’s witnesses, testi- 
fying to the power and glory of the one true 
God, when apostate Christendom shall have been 
given up to the strong delusion to believe the 
lie of the Antichrist. 

The prophet Ezekiel, in chap. 36, foretells both 
their scattering and their regathering. Verse 24 


112 Lectures on Daniel 


says, “For I will take you from among the 
heathen, and gather you out of all countries, 
and will bring you into your own land.” The 
verses that follow show us that at that time 
they will be cleansed from their filthiness; a 
new heart and a new spirit given them; the 
Spirit of God put within them, who will cause 
them to walk in His statutes and keep His judg- 
ments, to do them. Now I ask any unprejudiced 
person, Has this ever been fulfilled in the past? 
When the remnant of Judah returned from 
Babylon, did they give any evidence of having 
been as a company regenerated, so that they 
found delight in the law of the Lord? Was not 
the contrary the case, as evidenced by their turn- 
ing away from His statutes even in the life-time 
of Ezra and his co-laborers, and their crucifixion 
later of the Lord of glory? 

The New Testament revelations on this sub- 
ject show us plainly that their recovery awaits 
the close of the present dispensation. In our 
Lord’s prophecy concerning the destruction of 
Jerusalem, as related in the twenty-first of Luke, 
He says: “ When ye shall see Jerusalem com- 
passed with armies, then know that the desola- 
tion thereof is nigh. . . . And they shall fall by 
the edge of the sword, and shall be led away 
captive into all the nations: and Jerusalem shall 
be trodden down by the Gentiles, wntil the times 
ot the Gentiles be fulfilled” (vers. 20 and 24). 


The Faithful Remnant 1138 


Jerusalem’s rehabilitation awaits, then, the fall- 
ing of the Stone upon the feet of the Gentile 
image; for, as we have already seen, that will 
conclude the Gentile Times. But now a con- 
nected passage in the eleventh chapter of Romans 
will show us just where and when to place the 
turning of the remnant to God. In the 25th 
verse of that chapter the apostle writes: “For 
1 would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant 
of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your 
own conceits, that blindness in part is happened 
to Israel, until the fulness of the Gentiles be 
come in.” Now we are not to confound the ful- 
ness of the Gentiles with the Times of the Gen- 
tiles. The latter expression takes in the entire 
course of Gentile domination in the Holy Land. 
As long as the Jew is not master in Palestine 
the Times of the Gentiles are running on. But 
the fulness of the Gentiles, as the context in this 
chapter makes clear, is an expression referring 
to spiritual blessing, not national nor temporal. 
This fulness will have come in when the message 
of the gospel has accomplished the purpose for 
which it was given, and God has completed His 
present work of taking out from among the Gen- 
tiles a people for His name. In other words, 
the fulness of the Gentiles and the rapture of 
the Church are coincident. Therefore between 


1In a little book entitled ‘‘The Mysteries of God,” I have 
zone into this somewhat at length. Same publishers. 


114 Lectures on Daniel 


the fulness of the Gentiles and the close of the 
Times of the Gentiles there will be a time-period, 
in which the great bulk of prophecy will have 
its fulfilment. This is the period designated in 
Daniel “the Time of the End.” A reference to 
the chart will help to make clear its proper po- 
sition. The line running across the chart be- 
neath the parenthetic portion, which represents 
the present age, sets forth the fulness of the Gen- 
tiles. The line below, immediately above the in- 
scription concerning the kingdom, represents the 
close of the Times of the Gentiles. Between 
these two lines we have the Time of the End; 
and it is then that the conversion and testing of 
the Remnant will take place. 

The later chapters of Zecnariah have much to 
tell us of that time of trouble, and the testimony 
that will be maintained in it. I refer you now 
to but two verses —chap. 18, vers. 8 and 9: 
“ And it shall come to pass, that in all the land, 
saith the Lord, two parts therein shall be cut 
off and die; but the third shall be left therein. 
And I will bring the third part through the fire, 
and will refine them as silver is refined, and will 
try them as gold is tried: they shall call on My 
name, and I will hear them: I will say, It is My 
people: and they shall say, The Lord is my God.” 

The greater part of the book of Revelation, 
from chapter four to the end of chapter nineteen, 
is concerned with the events of this Time of the 


The Faithful Remnant 115 


End. The saints seen on earth at that time are 
not Christians, but Jews, who will then be called 
upon to suffer for the sake of their once-rejected 
Messiah. I grant that in chapter seven, after 
the account of the sealed 144,000 out of all the 
tribes of Israel, we have pictured a great multi- 
tude, whom no man can number, of saved Gen- 
tiles; but they do not form part of the Church, 
nor do they appear throughout the book as in the 
place of testimony on earth. They come out of 
the great tribulation, emerging at last to take 
their place in the world-kingdom of our God and 
His Christ; but it is to the Israelitish remnant 
alone that a place of testimony is given. This 
remnant will then heed the word of the Lord; 
they will search the Scriptures; and from them 
they will learn of their place in the course of 
time. They will understand that the fulness of 
the Gentiles has come in, and that God is again 
taking up His earthly people. I have no doubt 
that this very book of Daniel which we are study- 
ing will show them where they are, and wil 
lead them to seek the face of God, and to stand 
for Him when all Christendom and the bulk of 
their own nation shall have gone into the last 
great apostasy. Through them a final call will 

1A pamphlet by J. N. Darby, “ What Saints will be in the 
Tribulation?” and another by the present writer, “ Who will 
be Saved in the Coming Period of Judgment?” can be had of 
the Publishers for 10 cts, in stamps. They would help the stu- 
dent who has difficulty here. 


116 Lectures on Daniel 


go out to the heathen who have never yet heard 
the gospel, nor rejected its precious message. 
The result of that ministry will be the ingather-. 
ing of the great multitude shown to us in the 
seventh chapter of Revelation. 

With this I close the present lecture, and urge 
each one to search the Scriptures for himself te 
see whether these things be so. 


LECTURE VII 
CHAPTER VII 


THE FOUR GREAT WORLD-EMPIRES AND 
WESTERN LITTLE HORN 


E now enter upon the second part of our 

book; and in this chapter we have a new 
beginning, as you will readily see by referring 
to the chart. Chapter seven covers practically 
the same ground as chapter two. It takes in 
the whole course of the Times of the Gentiles, 
beginning with Babylon and ending in the over- 
throw of all derived authority and the estab- 
lishment of the kingdom of the Son of Man. But 
the difference between the first and second di- 
visions is this: In what we have already gone 
over we have been chiefly occupied with prophetic 
history as viewed from man’s standpoint; but 
in the second half of the book we have the same 
scenes as viewed in God’s unsullied light. In 
the second chapter, when a Gentile king had a 
vision of the course of world-empire, he saw the 
image of a man —a stately and noble figure — 
that filled him with such admiration that he set 
up a similar statue to be worshiped as a god. 
But in this opening chapter of the second divi: 


Lit 


118 Lectures on Daniet 


sion, Daniel, the man of God, has a vision of 
the same empires, and he sees them as four 
ravenous wild beasts, of so brutal a character, 
and so monstrous withal, that no actual crea- 
tures known to man could adequately set them 
forth. 

There is something exceedingly solemn in this. 
If you read history as viewed simply by the 
natural man, you will find that a great deal of 
space is given to congratulating humanity upon 
their marvelous exploits; and one would sup- 
pose that we have now almost reached perfec- 
tion, so far as human government or political 
economy is concerned. Civilization and the 
progress of the race are presumably at the zenith 
of their glory. But if one reads history in the 
light of Holy Scripture, with the Spirit of God 
illuminating the page, it gives one a very dif- 
ferent impression indeed. We then begin to 
realize that the things that are most highly 
esteemed among men are abominations in the 
sight of God; and, concerning the great ones of 
the earth who wield power over the nations, 
we are reminded of what is written in psalm 
49:12, “Man being in honor abideth not; he 
is like the beasts that perish.” 

In Daniel’s visions he was given to see the 
course of each of the empires which these wild 
beasts figure. That is, each wild beast is of 
such a character as to picture the leading fea- 


World-Empires and Western Little Horn 119 


tures in the entire history of the empire which 
it represents. For instance, the whole course 
of Babylon is set forth in the winged lion, which 
afterward had its wings plucked, a man’s heart 
given to it, and was made to stand erect upon 
its feet. Then the whole course of Medo-Persia 
is pictured in the vision of the bear with three 
ribs in its mouth, which lifted itself up on one 
side. The entire history of the Grecian empire 
and its four-fold division is set forth in the four- 
headed and winged leopard. And the course of 
the Roman empire right on down to the Time 
of the End (a condition which has not yet been 
reached) is depicted in the beast, dreadful and 
terrible, with the great iron teeth and the ten 
horns. It is important to see this. Some take 
it for granted that, as the Roman empire has 
passed off the scene, all that is connected with 
this Roman beast is gone too, and so it has no 
further interest for us who live in the gospel 
dispensation ; but the contrary is the truth. 

But now, for a moment, look at the 17th 
verse. There the four beasts are said to be 
“four kings which shall arise out of the earth.” 
The context makes it plain, however, that the 
angel did not mean four individual kings; but 
in prophetic scripture the term “king” is very 
frequently used for “kingdom.” In verse 238 
we read, “ The fourth beast shall be the fourth 
kingdom on the earth.” Necessarily the prin- 


120 Lectures on Dansel 


ciple applies to all; though, on the other hand, 
I would have you notice that in connection with 
each of them, one king comes out prominently 
— in each case but the last, the one under whom. 
the kingdom first attains the dignity of a great 
world-power. Thus Nebuchadnezzar comes be- 
fore us as the one who stands distinctively fot 
Babylon; just as he was told in chapter two, 
“Thou art this head of gold.” But the winged 
lion represents both the glory and debasement 
of the Chaldean empire. Its wings were 
plucked, it lost its lion heart, and was given 
instead the weak heart of a man. Cyrus the 
Great is the leading figure when we think of 
Medo-Persia. Heit was who destroyed the chief 
cities of Babylon, of which the three ribs in the 
mouth of the bear seem to speak. The leopard 
clearly suggests Alexander the Great, the four 
wings speaking of the almost incredible swift- 
ness of his conquests. But the four heads set 
forth the four-fold division of his dominions made: 
among his leading generals after his death. But 
no great potentate in the past epitomizes in him-. 
self the Roman authority. We look to the future 
for one to arise who shall do this— even “ the. 
Beast ” described in Revelation, chap. 13, whe. 
will obtain sway over Europe just prior to the 
establishment of the kingdom of the Son of Man, 
when all authority, power and glory will be 
headed up in our Lord Jesus Christ. 


World-Emyptres and Western Little Horn 121 


Though these kingdoms are successive in their 
rising, one does not necessarily completely de- 
stroy the other; but the four great monarchies, 
with their characteristic features, are to run on 
in some form until Jesus comes. Till the dawn- 
ing of that glorious morning without clouds, 
this world will never be free from strife and 
bloodshed, pestilence, misgovernment, and kin- 
dred ills. All these things, Scripture shows us, 
are going to continue; while evil in the profess- 
ing Church will increase and abound until the 
long-looked-for hour of the establishment of the 
liberty of the glory. 

Sometimes people say, “I do not see how you 
can charitably desire the Son of God to come 
back the second time if it is really true that 
when He returns the day of grace will be over 
for those who have rejected His word.” But we 
know that the only hope of this poor world is 
the return of the true King. Matters will never 
be put right down here until they are put right 
by judgment. The preaching of the gospel is 
never going to establish the kingdom; nor did 
God intend that it should. After nineteen hun- 
dred years of gospel preaching, there are far 
more heathen in the world than there were when 
the Lord Jesus Christ appeared the first time. 
Those who are really Christians are just a little 
handful compared with the multitude that 
know not God. The gospel is not God’s way of 


122 Lectures on Daniel 


bringing in the kingdom and converting the 
world. This will be brought about only through 
judgment; and while we shrink from the awful 
thought of what is coming upon this poor scene, 
yet we realize it is the only way to the bless- 
ing creation is groaning for; and so we cry, 
“Come, Lord Jesus;” for we know that He is 
the only hope for its deliverance. Every con- 
flict between nations, every struggle between 
class interests, every cruelty that is practised 
upon the weak and defenceless — all these things 
lead us to ery, “ Come, Lord Jesus.” For when 
He comes, He is going to put an end to it all; 
when He comes, He is going to dry the tears 
of the oppressed; when He comes, He is going 
to give men a righteous rule, as Daniel saw 
pictured in the last of these visions. First, the 
four world-kingdoms, all of a brutish character, 
must run their course. Then, upon the utter 
breakdown of power in the hands of man, the 
world-kingdom of the Christ of God is to be 
set up, when righteousness shall cover the earth 
as the waters cover the sea. And we may rest. 
assured that our Lord will not come while there 
is one soul out of Christ who is yet anxious to 
be saved. 

Notice that the first three beasts are passed 
over in the interpretation given to Daniel. It 
has to do almost entirely with the fourth beast, 
dreadful and terrible; for this beast was to be 


World-Empires and Western Little Horn 123 


in control both at the first and second advent 
of our Lord. 

But I now desire to notice the whole chapter 
a little more carefully. It was in the first year 
of Belshazzar, king of Babylon, that Daniel had 
a dream, and visions of his head upon his bed. 
He saw the four winds of the heavens striving 
upon the great sea. The great sea was of course 
the Mediterranean; and it is well known that 
every one of the empires described in the proph- 
ecy borders upon the shores of the great sea. 
The kingdom of Babylon embraced the shores 
that stretched along the eastern and southeast- 
ern edge of the Mediterranean; Medo-Persia did 
the same; while Greece took in also the north- 
eastern shores, and the Roman empire completely 
surrounded it; hence its name, meaning “ Midst 
of the earth.” That was the sea Daniel was 
looking upon in his vision; and in a very real 
literal sense every one of these empires seems 
to spring up from the great sea. 

But if we turn over to the seventeenth chap- 
ter of Revelation —a book which dovetails pro- 
phetically with the book of Daniel — we get a 
mystic interpretation of the sea. In verse 15 
we read, “ He saith unto me, The waters which 
thou sawest, where the harlot sitteth, are peo- 
ples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.” 
fgaiah too tells us that the wicked are like the 
troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters 


124 nectures on Daniet 


cast up mire and dirt. So we are clearly justi- 
fied in interpreting the sea as a picture of the 
troubled nations. In other words, out of the 
unsettled state of the nations surrounding the 
Mediterranean sea these great empires should 
arise. 

The four winds striving upon the sea would 
indicate providential agencies working upon the 
minds of the people. You will find the figure of 
the winds atso used in that way in the book 
of Revelation. Of course, though men little 
realize it, all the great movements of the nations 
are in accordance with the actings of God’s provi- 
dence. Thus, in a very real sense, as another 
has aptly said, “ All history is His story.” No 
matter what the movements going on among men, 
God is above them all. He may be hidden be- 
hind the scenes; but, as shown so clearly in the 
book of Esther, He is moving all the scenes that 
He is behind. 

In the rise of Babylon to the dignity of the 
first dominion, we see the providence of God 
working among the nations to take away roy- 
alty from Judah, because of their sins. The race 
lapsing into idolatry after the flood, God com- 
mitted the headship to Abraham. But when 
Abraham’s seed violated the covenant, He took 
up Nebuchadnezzar, and set him over all na 
tions; but he also failed, though brought to owz 
the power and mercy of God at last. 


World-Empires and Western Little Horn 125 


In his vision Daniel saw four great beasts 
coming up from the sea, diverse one from an- 
other. The first was like a lion, and had eagles’ 
wings — speaking of majesty, ferocity, and swift- 
ness. It was in a marvelously short space of 
time that Babylon subdued all the surrounding 
nations, and brought them beneath its sway. 
But as Daniel looked he saw the wings plucked, 
and the beast lifted up from the earth and made 
to stand upon the feet as a man, and a man’s 
heart given to it. Thus all progress was at an 
end and majesty had departed, for one can 
scarcely think of anything more awkward and 
ungainly than a lion thus erect. The heart of a 
man tells of weakness such as we see displayed 
in Belshazzar. In fact, after Nebuchadnezzar’s 
death declension at once set in, and continued 
till the days when the Medes and Persians 
wrested the kingdom from his inglorious grand- 
son. When this vision was given to Daniel, the 
last stage had almost been reached; Belshazzar 
was already reigning. 

In the second instance Daniel saw a beast like 
to a bear come up from the sea, that raised 
itself up on one side. It had three ribs in its 
mouth, between its teeth, and a voice said. 
“ Arise, devour much flesh.” It was after the 
decay of the Babylonian empire that the Medo- 
Persian union was consummated. At first 
Media was the stronger, but it soon become evi- 


126 Lectures on Daniel 


dent that the Persians were to have the supe 
rior place. Thus the bear raised itself up on one 
side. The three ribs between the teeth speak of 
its having already destroyed its prey. It had 
destroyed the Babylonian lion, and the three 
ribs might stand for the three chief cities of the 
Chaldean empire — Babylon, Ecbatana, and Bor- 
sippa, which were all taken by the united armies 
of Cyrus and Cyaxares. The command to arise 
and devour much flesh indicates the extreme 
cruelties often practised by the Persians, and 
the wide extent of their conquests. 

The third beast had the appearance of a leop- 
ard, with four wings of a fowl upon its back, 
and with four heads. It sets forth a synopsis 
of the history of the Grecian empire. Something 
over three hundred years before Christ, Alex- 
ander the Great, as he is now known, was born 
as heir to Philip of Macedon. This was but 
one of the petty kingdoms of Greece; but after 
Alexander’s accession to the throne, Macedon, 
and through it all Greece, took a place in the 
affairs of the world and of nations that it had 
never taken before. He welded together the 
Grecian states and Asiatic kingdoms of the West, 
and then turned eastward, where he met and 
subdued the haughty Persians completely, and 
caused himself to be proclaimed emperor of the 
world, and had divine honors paid him. But 
his glory was short-lived, for he died, as a result 


World-Empires and Western Little Horn 127 


of licentious living and debauchery, in his early 
thirties. His dominions were shortly afterward 
divided among his four leading generals. The 
marvelous progress of Alexander — even greater 
than that of Nebuchadnezzar —is indicated in 
the vision; for the beast that stood for Babylon 
had two wings, while the Grecian leopard had 
four. 

There is an interesting story related by Jose- 
phus, to the effect that when Alexander was 
marching through Syria, after the conquest of 
Tyre, with his armies headed toward Jerusalem, 
which he intended to destroy, the high priest 
and his companions robed themselves in their 
priestly garments and marched in solemn pro- 
cession out of the city to meet the conqueror. 
Alexander is said to have recognized the high 
priest as one whom he had seen in a vision. 
From his hand he received a copy of this book 
of Daniel, in which the prophecies concerning 
himself were pointed out. Because of what was 
there written, he acepted the submission of the 
Jews, granted them religious toleration, and left 
their city unharmed. While we have no means 
now of deciding as to the truth or falsity of this 
story, we can readily see that it is not at all 
unlikely. 

The fourth beast is described in verses seven 
and eight: “After this I saw in the night vi- 
sions, and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and 


128 Lectures on Daniel 


terrible, and strong exceedingly ; and it had grea? 
iron teeth. It devoured and brake in pieces 
and stamped the residue with the feet of it. 
And it was diverse from all the beasts that were 
before it; and it had ten horns. I considered 
the horns, and behold, there came up among them 
another little horn, before whom there were three 
of the first horns plucked up by the roots: and 
behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a 
man, and a mouth speaking great things.” 

In its turn, the Grecian empire was Over: 
thrown; and, about half a century before Christ. 
Rome became the mistress of the world. ‘The 
very birth of the Lord Jesus in Bethlehem was 
brought about, humanly speaking, by a decree 
going forth from Cesar Augustus that all the 
world should be taxed (registered for a census). 
This brought Mary and her husband Joseph to 
the city of David, foretold by Micah as the birth- 
place of Him “ whose goings forth have been of 
old, from everlasting.” Upon the chart, I have 
represented this beast as of a composite char- 
acter, for I take it that it answers to the beast 
described in Revelation, chap. 18, as having the 
head of a lion, the body of a leopard, and the feet 
of a bear; thus including in itself the chief fea- 
tures of all the kingdoms pictured by the other 
beasts. It was the boast of the Romans that 
they never destroyed a civilization when they 
conquered the people; but they took from it 


World-Empires and Western Little Horn 129 


everything of merit and combining all into one, 
produced the greatest civilization the world had 
ever known. The course of this last beast has 
not yet been fully run. In the book of Revela- 
tion, it is described as having seven heads, one 
of which was wounded to death, and afterwards 
healed. The seven heads are said to be seven 
kings or forms of government. In John’s day, 
five had already passed away; the sixth or im. 
perial form, was then in existence. The other 
had not yet come, nor has it appeared up to the 
present time. It will have its fulfilment in the 
union of imperialism and democracy which we 
have already seen is to take place in the Time 
of the End. But as the interpretation of this 
vision is given farther on in the chapter, we 
will not go into it now. 

Daniel next saw thrones set up. You will 
notice that the Authorized Version says: “The 
thrones were cast down.” This literally renders 
the Chaldean expression here used, which im- 
plies the casting down of rugs and cushions to 
be used as an oriental divan-throne. But the 
English translation would seem to imply the 
destruction of thrones, so it is better rendered 
“set up.” Hecontinues: “ And the Ancient of 
Days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, 
and the hair of His head like the pure wool: 
His throne was like the fiery flame, and His 
wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued 


130 Lectures on Daniel 


and came forth from before Him: thousand thou- 
sands ministered unto Him, and ten thousané 
times ten thousand stood before Him: the judg: 
ment was set and the books were opened.” 
Daniel then saw that because of the blasphemous 
words of the little horn, the last beast was slain 
and his body destroyed and given to the burning 
flame. The other beasts had not been dealt with 
so summarily; they had their dominion taken 
away, but a prolonging in life was given them, 
as the margin puts it, thus agreeing with what 
we know as to their history. 

The Son of Man is then seen coming with the 
clouds of heaven unto the Ancient of Days whe 
gives him “dominion, and glory, and a king- 
dom, that all people, nations, and languages, 
should serve Him: His dominion is an everlast- 
ing dominion, which shall not pass away, and 
His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.” 
This completes the vision: the interpretation 
follows. 

Daniel was deeply exercised in spirit over all 
that he had seen; but an angel seems to have 
been standing by, and to him he applied for light 
as to “ the truth of all this.” He tells him that 
the four beasts represent four kings or kingdoms, 
as we have already seen; but “the saints of the 
most high (places) shall take the kingdom, and 
possess the kingdom forever, even forever and 
ever.” But Daniel desires fuller information as 


World-Empires and Western Little Horn 181 


to the meaning of the fourth beast, and especially 
of the little horn “that had eyes, and a mouth 
that spake very great things; whose look was 
more stout than his fellows;” who rooted up 
three of the ten horns, and who made war with 
the saints and prevailed against them; “ until 
the Ancient of Days came, and judgment was 
given to the saints of the most high (places) ; 
and the time came that the saints possessed the 
kingdom.”” The angel explains that out of the 
fourth kingdom shall arise ten kings — clearly 
at one time. From among these another shall 
arise after them who shall be diverse from the 
first, and shall subdue three of them. He will 
be characterised by blaspheming the name of the 
Most High. He can be none other than the 
Beast of Revelation chaps. 13 and 17. He will 
persecute the saints of the most high places — 
the Remnant-saints, of whom, as we have al- 
ready noticed, Scripture has much to say in con- 
nection with the last days. He it is of whom 
we read in the ninth chapter, who shall confirm 
a covenant with the Jews for seven years, but 
who shall violate his covenant in the midst of 
the specified period; and, as here stated, “ shall 
think to change times and laws: and they shall 
be given into his hand until a time and times 
and the dividing of time:” that is, he will be 
the persecutor of the Jewish Remnant for the 
last three years and a half of the Time of the 


132 Lectures on Daniel 


End. But at the expiration of that time, the 
judgment shall sit, the Lord Himself shall re- 
turn from heaven, and his dominion shall be 
taken away and he himself, as we learn in Rev. 
19, be cast alive into the lake of fire. 

Then “the kingdom and dominion, and the 
greatness of the kingdom under the whole 
heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints 
of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlast- 
ing dominion, and all dominions shall serve and 
obey Him.” Thus will be brought in that ever- 
lasting kingdom for which the groaning earth 
has been waiting so long. 

I am quite aware that there are many inter- 
preters who think they see in the little horn, as 
in the king of chap. 11:36, the papacy, which 
pretended to universal dominion after the down- 
fall of the Roman Empire. But the little horn is 
not to rise up until after that empire has reached 
its ten-kingdom condition; and this we have al- 
ready observed has never been the case in the 
past. At no time after the dismemberment of 
the empire, did ten kingdoms formed from its 
fragments unite in one. And then it is also 
important to remember that the papacy existed 
before the break-up of the empire; so that the 
pope, instead of rising up upon the head of the 
beast after all the other horns had obtained their 
strength, came up before the ten horns existeé 
at all, which is clearly contrary to what is here 


World-E'mpires and Western Little Horn 183 


stated as to the blaspheming little horn. And 
it is further to be observed that the little horn 
is wielding supreme power on earth at the com- 
ing of the Son of Man to set up His kingdom; 
whereas it is evident that the papacy has not 
been supreme, nor indeed recognized as a world- 
power for many years. 

In the Revelation, the papal church is repre- 
sented by the scarlet woman, riding the beast; 
but, in the Time of the End, the ten horns are 
tc unite in seeking and carrying out her destruc- 
tion. Notice carefully that in chapter seventeen, 
verses twelve and thirteen, it is written: “ And 
the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, 
which have received no kingdom as yet; but re- 
eeive power as kings one hour with the beast. 
These have one mind and shall give their power 
and strength unto the beast.” Whereas, in the 
sixteenth verse, we learn that their power shall 
be used for the destruction of Babylon the Great: 
“ And the ten horns which thou sawest, and (not 
upon) the beast, these shall hate the harlot, and 
shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat 
her flesh, and burn her with fire.” Thus it 
should be plain to any careful reader that the 
little horn of Daniel is the Roman beast of 
Revelation, and that he will be acknowledged 
as supreme arbiter of Europe in the coming day 
of tribulation, by the ten kingdoms; and he will 
be permitted to prosper and to persecute the 


4 Lectures on Daniel 


faithful remnant of Israel, after the Church has 
been translated to heaven, until the appearing 
of the Lord Jesus Christ with all His saints for 
the destruction of those who have refused His 
word. 

It is with the events of this brief season, called 
the Time of the End, that the great bulk of 
prophecy has to do. The present age is one 
never referred to in the Old Testament, save in 
the most general way; for the calling out of 
the Church was a mystery hidden in God 
throughout all past ages, ard only revealed in 
this dispensation for the obedience of faith. The 
Church may now be completed at any moment, 
and then the next great event will be the descent 
of the Lord in the air and the translation of His 
bride, thus preparing the way for the things 
that are coming upon the earth. 

In the last verse of our chapter, Daniel tells 
us that he kept these things in his heart. May 
we do the same. Surely, as Christians, noth- 
ing will give us to understand our own present 
place and portion so well, as to have a clear 
apprehension of the place that Israel and the 
nations have in the mind of God, as revealed in 
His word. In the present age it should be ac- 
counted a happy privilege to pass through this 
scene as strangers and pilgrims, sharing with 
Christ in His rejection. For us, this is the time 
to suffer for righteousness’ sake; — the time te 


World-Empires and Western Little Horn 135 


rejoice if accounted worthy to endure shame for 
His name’s sake. The glory is coming when He 
returns to take His great power and reign. Till 
then be it ours to “go forth unto Him with- 
out the camp, bearing His reproach.” 

O unsaved one, it is well that you too pon- 
der these things in your heart; that you be not 
blinded by the false and deceitful glare of the 
tinselled glory of this world. It is all doomed 
to pass away, and unhappy will be your lot if 
you, in that day, have no interests in a more 
stable scene. “The things that are seen are 
temporal, but the things that are unseen are 
eternal.” See to it, I plead with you, that you 
are numbered among those who have part in the 
everlasting kingdom so soon to succeed all the 
passing dominions of this world. God has, in 
grace, given His Son to die for your salvation; 
but remember that it is written: “As it is ap- 
pointed unto men once to die, but after this the 
judgment: so Christ was once offered to bear 
the sins of many; and, unto them that look for 
Him, shall He appear the second time without 
sin unto salvation.” If you would hail His 
promised advent with joy, you must know Him 
now as Saviour. Otherwise His return to this 
earth to reign would find you numbered among 
His enemies, to be destroyed from before His 


face. 


LECTURE VIII 
CHAPTER VIII 
THE GRECIAN LITTLE HORN 


N beginning this address, I would call your 
attention to a most interesting fact in re- 
gard to the structure of the book we are con- 
sidering. It was originally written in two 
languages. The first chapter, and verses 1 to 
3 of chap. 2, are in Hebrew. But from verse 4 
of the second chapter to the end of chap. 7, the 
language employed is Chaldean, or Aramaic. 
The balance of the book is in Hebrew. There 
seems to be a very simple and yet significant 
reason for this. The first section was for the 
special help and encouragement of the faithful 
among the scattered Jews; so it was written 
in their own language. But in the second sec- 
tion, God is tracing out the course of the Times 
of the Gentiles, and He led Daniel to write the 
record of it in the popular language of the day, 
that the Chaldeans might read it understand- 
ingly, and profit thereby. 
The portion to which we now turn, beginning 
with this eighth chapter and going on to the 


end of the book, concerns the Jews in a very 
136 


The Grecian Little Horn 137 


special way; so it was written in Hebrew, as 
was the first part. It is of importance to see 
the different applications of each of these sec- 
tions. God has nothing to say about the course 
of Christendom, or the Church of this dispen- 
sation, either here or elsewhere in the Prophets. 
He is giving us the truth both in regard to Judah 
and Israel and to the Gentiles as such. If we 
fail to observe this, Scripture will be all in con- 
fusion: that is, our apprehension of it. The 
principle is a simple one, but if kept in mind 
will aid greatly to a proper understanding of 
the word of God. When in the Prophets we read 
of Judah, we are not to suppose the Church is 
meant; nor yet when we read of Zion or of Jeru- 
salem. Judah means Judah, Zion means Zion, 
Jerusalem means Jerusalem, Israel means Israel, 
and the Gentiles have neither part nor lot in 
what is written concerning these. The Church, 
which is the body of Christ, is something very 
different. There are three, not merely two, 
classes of people in the world to-day — all con- 
templated in Scripture. “ Give none offence,’ 
says the apostle Paul, in writing to the Corin- 
thians, “neither to the Jews nor to the Gen- 
tiles nor to the Church of God.” These are the 
three classes; and if the various passages of 
Scripture referring to each are rightly divided, 
and not all mixed up together in the mind of 
the reader, he is in a fair way to get a proper 


138 Lectures on Daniel 


understanding of what is commonly called dis- 
pensational truth; which is nothing more nor 
less than giving to each dispensation or period 
of God’s special dealings with men, the portions 
that apply particularly to each. 

In studying the Chaldean part of this book 
we have noticed how the omniscient God has 
traced for us the course of the great empires 
of this world. We have had outlined for our 
learning their rise, progress, decline and. fall, 
emphasizing the truth that “righteousness ex- 
alteth a nation, but sin is a reproach to any 
people.” Now all this was written in the lan- 
guage spoken by the Gentiles at that time. But 
we are now to be largely occupied with that 
race long-despised and hated, but ever watched 
over by Jehovah,— His covenant people of old, 
beloved for the fathers’ sakes, no matter how 
great their failure and sin. That is why the 
last part of the book is written in Hebrew. It 
is true that we shall still read of some of these 
world powers (we are largely occupied with two 
of them in this chapter), but it is only as clear- 
ing the ground for light in regard to the future 
of the Jewish nation. 

A careful study of the book of Revelation 
will show you that it is very similar in struc- 
ture to the book of Daniel. After the first part 
(Rey. chaps. 1-3) which is devoted to the pro- 
phetic history of the Church, we have, from chap. 


The Grecian Little Horn 139 


4 to chap. 11:18 the judgments that are to fall 
upon apostate Christendom and the powers con- 
nected with it. Their history is traced right on 
down to the end, closing with “the time of the 
dead that they should be judged.” But the Lord 
had said to John: “Thou must prophesy 
again; ” and so he begins to take things up once 
more from the 12th chapter on, but it is all con- 
nected with God’s earthly people, the nation of 
Israel. Thus the first part has chiefly to do 
with the course of the world as such, and it 
turns the divine searchlight upon the great move- 
ments among the nations. But the second half 
has to do with the same people that we have 
before us in the last part of Daniel. As re- 
marked in the previous address, the one book 
dovetails into the other. Daniel cannot be un- 
derstood apart from the book of the Revelation ; 
and Revelation itself is in many places only in- 
telligible because of what had previously been 
made known to the prophet in Babylon. Let us 
remember then that our present chapter is the 
first of the Hebrew section; while the chapters 
we have lately been reading were in Aramaic, 
and especially concerned the Gentiles. 

The first verse shows us that two years 
elapsed between the visions of chapter 7 and 


1I am often asked to recommend a good exposition of 
Revelation: I know nothing better than “The Revelation 
of Jesus Christ,” by F. W. Grant. Cloth boards, $1.25. Same 


publishers. 


140 Lectures on Daniel 


what we have here; for it was in the third year 
of the reign of king Belshazzar that Daniel was 
given the vision of the ram and the he-goat. 
Either actually, or in spirit, he was in the palace, 
in the province of Elam by the river Ulai. Elam 
was the ancient name of the highlands east of 
Babylon, stretching from India to the Persian 
Gulf. It was in this very region that Cyrus was 
to obtain his first great victories; so it was fitting 
that in his vision Daniel should be in the land 
soon to be completely dominated by the Persians, 
because that which he saw had largely to do with 
Persia in her early triumphs and subsequent de- 
feat. 

He tells us that he lifted up his eyes, “and 
saw, and behold, there stood before the river 
a ram which had two horns: and the two horns 
were high; but one was higher than the other, 
and the higher came up last. I saw the ram 
pushing westward, and northward, and south- 
ward; so that no beasts might stand before him, 
neither was there any that could deliver out of 
his hand, but he did according to his will, and 
became great.” In verse 15 we have the inter- 
preting angel drawing near, whose mission it 
was to explain the meaning of the vision. We 
shall notice each part separately, connecting 
with it the interpretation given. In verses 19 
and 20, the angel says: “ Behold, I will make 
thee know what shall be in the last end of the 


The Grecian Little Horn 141 


indignation: for at the time appointed the end 
shall be. The ram which thou sawest having 
two horns are the kings of Media and Persia.” 
Thus we are not left to form our own judgment 
as to what the ram might represent, but we are 
distinctly told by the angel that it stands for 
the same dominion as the breast and arms of 
silver in Nebuchadnezzar’s great image, and the 
bear that was lifted up on one side, in the pre- 
vious vision. It is as though God would give us 
symbol after symbol to impress upon our minds 
the events to follow one another upon the earth 
prior to the establishment of the kingdom of His 
Son. “A threefold cord,” we are told elsewhere, 
“is not quickly broken.” 

Remember that when Daniel had the vision, 
Babylon was still the supreme power, though 
already in its decline. But Daniel was given 
this revelation as to the ram of Persia, when 
no human mind could possibly have predicted 
the place it was to take in the affairs of men. 
It is rather interesting to know that, accord- 
ing to standard authorities, the ram was the 
symbol of Persia, and a picture of one was 
borne on her banners, before her armies. The 
two horns, the higher of which came up last, 
clearly connect with the bear lifting itself up 
on one side: that is they set forth the fact that 
the Medo-Persian empire was composed of two 
nations — the ancient and venerable kingdom of 


142 Lectures on Daniel 


Media, and the then modern kingdom of Persia, 
which latter, after the confederation, became by 
far the more powerful of the two. Thus the 
horn that came up last was the higher. Daniel 
saw this ram pushing westward, northward and 
southward ; thereby indicating exactly the course 
of Persian conquest. The armies of Cyrus did 
not turn eastward to conquer the barbarous 
tribes toward the sun-rising; but they pressed 
toward the Mediterranean and Black Seas, and 
the Persian Gulf, and continued their conquests 
until all western Asia and Egypt were subject 
to them. 

While Daniel was considering what the ram 
could mean, he saw a he-goat come from the 
west on the face of the whole earth, which 
touched not the ground—it ran so swiftly. 
This goat had a notable horn between his eyes; 
and he came to the ram that had the two horns, 
and ran upon him in the fury of his power. 
Daniel vividly describes the terrific onslaught: 
“And I saw him come close unto the ram, and 
he was moved with choler against him, and smote 
the ram, and brake his two horns: and there 
was no power in the ram to stand before him; 
but he cast him down to the ground, and stamped 
upon him: and there was none that could de- 
liver the ram out of his hand.” The interpre- 
tation is given in verse 21: “The rough goat 
is the king of Grecia: and the great horn that 


The Grecian Little Horn 143 


is between his eyes is the first king.” Thus we 
are again freed from all necessity of exercising 
any ingenuity in order to find out the meaning 
of the vision; for God has Himself revealed it 
through His angel. 

Greece, at the time that Daniel prophesied, 
consisted of a number of independent and often 
warring states, bound together nevertheless by 
ties of consanguinity. It remained for Alexan- 
der the Third, commonly called the Great, the 
remarkably gifted son of Philip of Macedon, to 
consolidate these separate kingdoms into one 
loyal, united power, which was destined for a 
season to rule the world. Here, as everywhere 
in the book, the vision exactly answers to the 
after-history. I do not want to occupy you too 
much with history; for a knowledge of human 
records is certainly not necessary to enable one 
to understand the word of God; but on the other 
hand nothing is gained by ignorance, and faith 
is but confirmed, and God glorified, when we 
see how the wonderful exactness of His holy 
Word is witnessed to by the annals of uninspired 
men. 

The first thing of note I would have you ob- 
serve is this: the he-goat came from the west. 
Now, according to history, we know that an 
altogether new thing appeared in the rise and 
progress of Alexander the Great. Previous to 
that time, power had always risen up in the 


144 Lectures on Daniel 


east and reached out toward the west. The East 
was the cradle of the human race, and there the 
most ancient civilizations existed. The nations 
of the Orient thought of all the rest of the world, 
especially the distant lands of the west, as “ bar- 
barians,” for whom they entertained a haughty 
contempt. But from the despised West came the 
he-goat, with great choler. In great passion, he 
touched not the ground in the swiftness and the 
fury of his onslaught. In this it is easy to see 
a fitting symbol of the whirlwind campaign of, 
the army of the west headed by its intrepid com- 
mander. The overrunning of Asia by Alexander 
was not merely to gratify his ambition for world- 
empire, but it was a paying-off of old scores. 
The Greeks had never forgotten the disgrace and 
shame of earlier Persian conquests. Nor could 
they forgive the Persians for their unsuccessful 
descent, under Xerxes, upon the Hellenic States. 
For years they had brooded over these things, 
and had nursed the desire for a bloody and 
triumphant revenge; and at last they realized 
that the time had come to gratify their passion. 
Hence, it was with more than usual alacrity 
that they sprang to arms, and at Alexander’s 
beck and call, rushed upon the Persian hosts in 
angry mood, eager to settle up these old scores 
and execute vengeance upon their ancient ene- 
mies. So Daniel sees the he-goat moved with 
choler, and charging the ram in the fury of his 


The Grecian Little Horn 145 


power. By this terrific attack, the ram was cast. 
to the ground, and his two horns broken. All 
this was fulfilled when Alexander met the hosts 
of the last Darius, and completely defeated them. 
By this he became ruler of the world. 

But Daniel goes on to say: “The he-goat 
waxed very great: and when he was strong, the 
great horn was broken; and for it came up four 
notable ones toward the four winds of heaven.” 
In the interpretation, after explaining that the 
great horn was the first king of Grecia, the angel 
says: ‘“ Now that being broken, whereas four 
stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up 
out of the nation, but not in his power.” Alex- 
ander’s day of power was a very brief one; his 
early death testifying to his inability to hold 
in check his appetites and passions; and thus 
the great horn was broken. 

None of his own house succeeded Alexander; 
but, upon his untimely decease, his dominions 
were divided among his four leading generals, 
namely: Ptolemy, who was acknowledged as king 
of Egypt and the adjacent countries; Seleucas, 
who took Syria and Asia Minor; Lysimachus, 
who had the sovereignty of Thrace and the con- 
tiguous territory; and Cassander, to whom fell 
Macedonia and all Greece. Thus was the em- 
pire divided, and there was never again a master- 
hand commanding, until the Roman conquest in 
the last century before Christ. Two of these 


146 Lectures on Daniel 


divisions occupy a large place in prophecy; but 
Scripture never again occupies us with Thrace, 
and only once directly with Greece, and that in 
the ninth chapter of the book of Zechariah, verse 
13. But Syria and Egypt are the powers known 
in this book as the “ King of the North,’ and 
the “ King of the South.” Directions in Scrip- 
ture are always, unless otherwise specified, to 
be understood as having reference to Jerusalem 
as a centre; and so, when the Bible speaks of 
the north and the south, it is north or south of 
Jerusalem. Unless this is kept in mind, one 
may easily become confused. Up to a little more 
than fifty years before the coming of the Lord 
Jesus, these two kingdoms existed as independ- 
ent powers, with the land of Palestine between 
them. The Holy Land thus became a veritable 
battle-ground for their opposing armies, torn by 
dissensions for over two hundred years. The 
wretched history of those two centuries of horror 
is given us prophetically in the 11th chapter, 
and we shall take them up in detail when we 
come to consider that portion of the book. 

The chief reason for introducing all this was 
that we might be enlightened in regard to one 
who is to play a very important part in the Time 
of the End, and who is destined to arise out of 
the Syrian division of Alexander’s empire. For 
the present, and ever since the Roman conquest, 
the goat with the four horns has been apparently 


The Grecian Little Horn 147 


destroyed. But just as the Roman empire is to 
be revived in the last days, so we learn that two 
out of the four horns of the divided Grecian 
dominion will re-appear upon the prophetic map 
in that time of trial, and out of one of them 
shall that Little Horn arise who will be the bitter 
enemy of the returned Jews in that day. 

In verse 9 we read: “ And out of one of them 
came forth a little horn, which waxed exceeding 
great, toward the south, and toward the east, and 
toward the pleasant land. And it waxed great, 
even to the host of heaven; and it cast down some 
of the host and of the stars to the ground, and 
stamped upon them. Yea, he magnified himself 
even to the prince of the host, and by him the 
daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place of 
his sanctuary was cast down. And a host was 
given him against the daily sacrifice by reason 
of transgression, and it cast down the truth to 
the ground; and it practised and prospered.” I 
do not question for a moment that all this has 
had a fulfilment in the enormities of that mon- 
ster of wickedness, Antiochus Epiphanes, whose 
persecutions of the Jews and desecration of the 
temple are here described. But a comparison 
with the interpretation of the vision makes it 
equally clear, to my mind, that there remains 
another and more complete fulfilment yet to take 
place. 

Many confound the Little Horn here spoken 


148 Lectures on Daniel 


of with the Little Horn of chapter seven. But 
we have already noticed that he who rises up in 
the western ten-horned kingdom is the same as 
the Beast of Revelation, chapters thirteen and 
seventeen. He is a Roman, not a Grecian off- 
shoot. Here, we see one arising out of the old 
kingdom of Seleucas —a king of the north, not 
of the west. Antiochus in his bloodthirsty ca- 
reer was the type of one who will be Jerusalem’s 
bitter enemy in the time of the Lord’s indigna- 
tion. Now the Turks have for centuries been in 
possession of the lands once dominated by Seleu- 
cas. The future King of the North, therefore, 
will in all likelihood be the last sultan of the 
Ottoman empire, or the fierce leader of whatever 
power controls Turkey in Asia at that time. 
The Roman Little Horn will be an apostate 
Christian in league with the personal Antichrist, 
who will take unbelieving Israel under his wing 
so long as it suits his purposes. The Grecian 
Little Horn is likely an utter infidel, the suc- 
cessor to Mohammed, actuated by inveterate 
hatred to the Jews, and probably the bitter foe 
of the future emperor of the west. The angel 
tells Daniel, in verses 23 to 25, that “in the 
latter time of their kingdom, when the trans- 
gressors are come to the full, a king of fierce 
countenance, and understanding dark sentences, 
shall stand up. And his power shall be mighty, 
but not by his own power: and he shall destroy 


The Grecian Little Horn 149 


wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practice, and 
shall destroy the mighty and the holy people. 
And through his policy also he shall cause craft 
to prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify 
himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy 
many: he shall also stand up against the Prince 
of princes; but he shall be broken without hand.” 
Now it is evident that much that is here written 
cannot possibly apply to Antiochus. He an- 
swers quite fully to the vision, but he does not 
meet the requirements of the interpretation. In 
the first place, the prophecy is to have its com- 
plete accomplishment “when the transgressors 
are come to the full ”; an expression which might 
refer to the ripening of iniquity in Syria of old 
were it not that the kingdom was not destroyed 
upon the death of Epiphanes, as it would have 
been if its sins had reached the limit set by the 
Moral Governor of the universe. It seems far 
more likely that the expression refers to the 
Time of the End, when the whole world will be 
ripe for the judgment of God. 

This agrees with the angel’s words, “I will 
make thee know what shall be in the last end 
of the indignation ”; which is undoubtedly the 
end of the Times of the Gentiles. In that time, 
then, this predicted Little Horn shall stand up, 
a man of great intelligence and diplomacy, but 
of whom we read that “his power shall be 
mighty, but not by his own power.” Now these 


150 Lectures on Daniel 


words could hardly be applied to the “ little 
horn ” of the past, for he reigned as an independ- 
ent monarch, prosecuting his purposes as his 
own will dictated, until in measure thwarted 
by the interference of Rome. But there is a 
leader who occupies a large place in prophecy, 
denominated by Isaiah “ the Assyrian,” who will 
be Israel’s enemy in the last days, and who is 
to be destroyed by the personal appearance of 
the Lord Jesus Christ. Israel’s blessing and 
restoration are connected by Isaiah with his 
downfall. He seems clearly to be the same as 
the Little Horn here depicted, for he too relies, 
apparently, upon some other ally. The power 
that will back him is prophesied of in Ezekiel, 
chapter 38, and is evidently Russia, the great 
dominion of the north. Then, again, the Little 
Horn is to stand up against the Prince of princes, 
and be broken without hands. The Prince of 
princes can be none other than the Messiah; 
consequently these words were not fulfilled in the 
life and death of Antiochus. But they point 
us on to the Time of the End, when Messiah 
Himself shall appear in person on behalf of op- 
pressed Israel, and shall overthrow the Assyrian. 

What is said of the Little Horn as an individ- 
ual is largely applicable to the Ottoman empire 
as a whole. Fierce and relentless, it has ever 
been the enemy of the people of God; and it has 
existed for centuries, not because of any inher- 


The Grecian Little Horn 151 


ert power of its own, but because of the jeal- 
ousies of the nations of Europe. Were the Turk 
driven out of Constantinople, all Europe would 
be thrown into war, each great Power anxious 
to possess the dominions over which the Cres- 
cent now floats. Hence the abominable horrors 
of Armenian and Jewish massacres are permit- 
ted by civilized and so-called Christian nations 
because they do not dare to interfere, lest by so 
doing they jeopardize the peace of the world.! 
It is said of the Little Horn that he shall cause 
craft to prosper, and by peace shall destroy 
many. This too has been characteristic of the 
“unspeakable Turk,” especially in his dealings 
with the Jews. The monotheism of Mohamme- 
danism naturally appeals to the Jew; and the 
false prophet himself made marked advances to 
the seed of Israel, hoping thereby to win them 
over to Islam. But behind all the fair words 
and goodly promises of the sultans, the poison 
and the sword have ever lurked. The Little 
Horn of the latter times will embody in himself 
the spirit of the Ottoman empire. 

But we have not yet finished with the vision. 
In verses 18 and 14, Daniel says: “Then I 
heard one saint speaking, and another saint said 
unto that certain saint which spake, How long 

1 This was written several years before the world-war of 


1914 and the following years began. What is to result from 
this fearful conflict remains to be seen. 


152 Lectures on Daniel 


shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, 
and the transgression of desolation, to give both 
the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under 
foot? And he said unto me, Unto two thou- 
sand and three hundred days; then shall the 
sanctuary be cleansed.” The word for days is 
really ‘“ evening-mornings,” and refers, not to 
lengthened periods, but clearly and distinctly to 
twenty-four-hour days. It is a time-prophecy 
that has to do with the defilement of the tem-. 
ple by Antiochus. From the time that he pol- 
luted the sanctuary by sacrificing a sow upon 
the altar, and setting up a statue of Jupiter in 
the holiest of all, twenty-three hundred literal 
days elapsed until it was again purified and 
dedicated to the service of Jehovah. As if to 
warn us of the danger of allegorizing this pe- 
riod, the angel says to Daniel in verse 26, “ The 
vision of the evening and the morning which 
was told is true: wherefore shut thou up the 
vision; for it shall be for many days.” 

It was the failure to apprehend this that led 
the Millerites into their great blunder in the 
early part of the last century; and the same 
crude error has blinded their successors, the 
Seventh-Day Adventists, and resulted in the 
blasphemous sanctuary-theory which they hold. 
According to them, the Lord Jesus never entered 
the holiest until A.p. 1844, being twenty-three 
hundred year-days from the time when Cyrus 


The Grecian Little Horn 153 


issued the decree to build the temple. But it is 
all an unhallowed nightmare, utterly unsup- 
ported by Scripture. The twenty-three hundred 
days have long since been fulfilled in the history 
of Daniel’s people, the Jews; and that literally, 
after the desecration of the holy places by the 
Syrian tyrant. There is no hint that there re- 
mains another twenty-three hundred days to be 
fulfilled in the future, though the characters 
of the Little Horn of the vision, and the last 
great Assyrian of Isaiah, chapter 14, verses 24 
to 27, are so very much alike. This latter will 
undoubtedly be a man of great ability, but cun- 
ning, crafty, and deceitful — a worthy successor 
to the Ottoman rulers of the past. But he is to 
be broken in Immanuel’s land, and all his army 
shall be destroyed upon the mountains of Israel, 
when he dares to stand up against the Prince 
of princes, who shall come forth in glorious maj- 
esty for the deliverance of the faithful remnant 
whose hearts will cleave to Jehovah in that 
dreadful time of Jacob’s trouble. Already we 
can see events shaping themselves for the fulfil- 
ment of these things. The end cannot be far off. 
“ Blessed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his 
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his 
shame.” 

The effect of the vision on Daniel was that he 
fainted, and was sick certain days. “ After- 
ward,” he says, “I rose up, and did the king’s 


154 Lectures on Daniel 


business; and I was astonished at the vision, 
but none understood it.” The centuries since 
have borne witness to the truth of much of it; 
the days to come will manifest the balance. 
May our hearts be so impressed by these things 
that we too shall be deeply exercised before God 
about them, and that we may be found in a very 
real sense doing the King’s business while we 
wait for His personal return from heaven! 

Nor would I close without once more warn- 
ing the Christless to flee from the wrath to come. 
The clouds of doom are gathering, black and 
ominous, over this poor world. Soon the light- 
nings of wrath, the thunders of judgment, and 
the storm of vengeance, will break forth. How 
unspeakably sad will be your condition if ex- 
posed to the full fury of the tempest of the Di- 
vine indignation, with no Christ, no refuge nigh! 
Trust Him now while grace is offered to each 
sinful soul: else “ What wilt thou say when He 
shall punish thee? ” 


LECTURE IX 
CHAPTER IX 
THE SEVENTY WEEKS 


HE main feature of the chapter which is 

now to occupy our attention is the great 
prophecy of the seventy weeks. Sir Edward 
Denny, a noted prophetic student of the last 
century, used commonly to call this “ The back. 
bone of prophecy;” and this title seems wel) 
given, for if the seventy weeks be misunderstood, 
then an effort will necessarily be made to bend 
all the other prophetic scriptures into accord 
with that misinterpretation. But if we have 
a correct understanding of the teaching of this 
chapter, we can then see readily how all proph- 
ecy, without any forcing, falls right into place, 
and is intimately linked up with this the great- 
est of all time-prophecies. 

We will spend a little while first, in noting 
what led up to the giving of this special reve- 
lation. Daniel was himself a prophetic student. 
He was one who realized deeply in his own soul, 
though the words had not yet been written, that 
“ All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 


and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for 
155 


156 Lectures on Daniel 


correction, for instruction in righteousness, that 
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly fur- 
nished unto all good works.” And so we see, 
in the opening verses, this devoted man, in the 
first year of the reign of Darius, bending over 
the prophetic word in the Holy Scriptures. He 
did not have anything like as complete a Bible 
as we have; but he valued what he had, and 
searched diligently. In fact the last book that 
had been added to the Bible was that of Ezekiel. 
We do not know for certain that this ever came 
into his hands, but we do know from this pas- 
sage that he had, at any rate, the book of Jere- 
miah. As he studied it carefully, he noticed 
that twice in that book it was written that God 
would accomplish seventy years in the desola- 
tions of Jerusalem. 

Now as Daniel looked back and reckoned the 
years he had spent in the court of Nebuchad- 
nezzar, then the days that had followed during 
the period of Babylon’s difficulties, succeeded 
by the triumph of the Medes and Persians, and 
counted it all up, he evidently realized that the 
seventy years must have very nearly run out. 
Therefore, the day of the deliverance of the Jews 
must have drawn very near. He could proba- 
bly look back over almost seven decades him- 
self, for he had been carried away as a captive 
in the reign of Jehoiakim when he was but a 
lad, and he had become an old man. 


The Seventy Weeks 157 


We {ind that the study of prophecy exercised 
the heart and the conscience of Daniel; he was 
not merely interested in it from an intellectual 
standpoint. The mere computing of times and 
seasons could not satisfy this devout man of 
God; but when he learned from his Bible that 
the time had almost drawn near for the people 
of Judah to be restored to their land, it stirred 
him to the very depths of his soul, and brought 
him down to his knees. He might have said, “ If 
it is God’s purpose to restore His people, He 
will carry that purpose out, whatever their 
condition, and I need not concern myself about 
this matter.” But no, Daniel realized that when 
God is about to work, He begins by exercis- 
ing His people that they may be restored in 
soul if they have wandered from Him; and thus 
blessing would result upon their being brought 
into the place of self-judgment and humiliation 
before Him. 

Happy will it be for us if the study of his 
book has the same effect upon us that the study 
of the book of Jeremiah had upon Daniel. If 
not, I fear it will have a hardening effect, and 
will leave us in a worse condition than when 
we began. But if these things we have been 
going over, all that God has been bringing be- 
fore us, shall result in casting us down in low- 
liness before Him, and causing us to cry, “O 
Lord God, we have sinned, we have much rea- 


158 Lectures on Daniel 


son to be before Thee in confession and broken- 
ness, because of the failure of Thy people, the 
Church of which we form a part:” I say if it 
has this effect upon us, yea in us, it will be in- 
deed for God’s glory and our blessing. 

And, surely, we have serious cause to be on 
our knees before God, when we think of all the 
failure and the sin that has come in to mar our 
testimony. We will not feel much like finding 
fault with others, if really before God as to our 
own shame in all this. Sometimes when I hear 
people railing against this denomination and 
that company of Christians, while glorying in 
their own position and utterly ignoring their 
true state, I think how little such persons enter 
into the thoughts and feelings that filled the 
heart and wrung confession from the lips of this 
man, Daniel. Notice that he does not begin by 
accusing the Jews who had acted so badly in 
the days gone by, nor his contemporaries at that 
solemn moment in Israel’s history; but he sets 
his face unto Jehovah, to seek Him in prayer 
and supplication with fasting and sackcloth and 
ashes — the outward expression of deep and 
heartfelt repentance. We are told that he 
prayed unto the Lord his God and made his 
confession. He says, “ We have sinned and have 
committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, 
and have rebelled, even by departing from Thy 
precepts and from Thy judgments: neither have 


The Seventy Weeks 159 


we harkened unto Thy servants the prophets, 
which spake in Thy name.”’ He owns the right- 
eousness of God in the judgment that had come 
upon them; yet he dares to plead that to the 
Lord his God belong mercies and forgiveness, 
though they had so grievously rebelled against 
Him. In all His dealings with them, God had 
but confirmed His own words and made mani- 
fest the faithfulness of His testimony through 
Moses His servant. 

How much we may learn from all this! When 
we look around, and see the failure in the Church, 
the fleshliness and the worldliness that prevail 
on every hand, let us not be content to pass 
our judgment upon them, and lift up our hearts 
in spiritual pride and say: “Thank God, we 
are not as others;” but oh, let us remember 
that we too are part of that Church which has 
failed. We cannot dissociate ourselves from 
other Christians; we have to take our place 
with them, and bow our heads in the presence 
of God and own that we have sinned. If we 
could but remember this always, it would cure 
us of railing against the people of God who 
have less light than we have, or than we fancy 
that we have. 

I remember a dear servant of God writing to 
me a number of years ago from a place where 
he was laboring in the gospel: “ Prejudice is 
very strong here, and I regret to have to feel 


160 Lectures on Daniel 


that in large measure our own dear brethren 
are to blame for much of it. In times past they 
have spent so much time stoning what, no doubt, 
very much deserved to be stoned, but which we 
have no authority to stone.”' God has not 
raised us up to go around stoning His people. 
We have not been appointed to be the censors 
of Christendom. He has said: “ Who art thou 
that judgest another man’s servant? To his own 
master he standeth or falleth.” 

And so, aS we pass on our way, let us be exer- 
cised about individual holiness and faithfulness 
to God; concerned too, about corporate right- 
eousness and freedom from unholy associations; 
but do not let us seek to sit in judgment upon our 
fellow-Christians who may not happen to see 
eye to eye with us, but whose love for the Lord 
Jesus, and faithfulness to what they do see, 
might be an example well worthy of our imita- 
tion. No, let us rather take Daniel’s place of 
self-abasement and repentance in the presence 
of God, and throw our arms of love and faith 
about all His dear people and say: ‘“O God, 
we,’—not they,—“we have sinned and done 
this evil in Thy sight.” And when we get into 
that state, then we can count upon His bless- 
ing, and can look to Him expectantly for a 
measure of recovery. It is this that shines out 


1The beloved Paul J. Loizeaux, now with Christ, is the 
brother referred to. 


The Seventy Weeks 161 


so beautifully in our prophet. He identifies 
himself, though a man of unusual faithfulness 
(perhaps in fact, the most devoted man of his 
generation), with his failed and failing nation. 
In simplicity and faith he then looks up to 
God, beseeching Him to let His anger and His 
fury be turned away from Jerusalem and to 
cause His face to shine upon the sanctuary that 
was desolate. Note the earnestness and pathos 
of verses eighteen and nineteen with which he 
concludes his touching petition. “O my God, 
incline Thine ear, and hear; open Thine eves, and 
behold our desolations, and the city which is 
called by Thy name: for we do not present our 
supplications before Thee for our righteous- 
nesses, but for Thy great mercies. O Lord, hear; 
O Lord, forgive; O Lord, harken and do; defer 
not, for Thine own sake, O my God; for Thy 
city and Thy people are called by Thy name.” 
Prayer of such a character could not fail of 
an answer. While he was speaking and mak: 
ing his confession, the angel Gabriel, “ being 
caused to fly swiftly, touched him about the time 
of the evening oblation,’— that is at the time 
when the smoking sacrifice, pointing on to the 
offering of our Lord Jesus Christ, would have 
been ascending to God had Jerusalem not been 
in ruins. Gabriel declares that he has been sent 
to give Daniel skill and understanding in re 
gard to the times, foreknown of God, of Israel’s 


162 Lectures on Daniel 


blessing. I quote his message in full and ask 
you to note carefully every word. 

“ Seventy weeks are determined (or, cut off) 
upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish 
the transgression and to make an end of sins, 
and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to 
bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up 
the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the Most 
Holy (or, the Holy of Holies). Know there- 
fore and understand, that from the going forth 
of the commandment to restore and to build 
Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be 
seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks: the 
street shall be built again, and the wall, even 
in troublous times (or, the strait, or narrow 
times). And after threescore and two weeks 
shall Messiah be cut off, but not for Himself 
(or, and shall have nothing): and the people 
of the prince that shall come shall destroy the 
city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof shall 
be with a flood, and unto the end of the war 
desolations are determined (or, until the end 
shall be war and desolations as determined). 
And he shall confirm the covenant with many for 
one week: and in the midst of the week he shall 
cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and 
for the overspreading of abomination he shall 
make it desolate (or, upon the wing of abomina- 
tions shall come one who maketh desolate), even 
until the consummation, and that determineé 


The Seventy Weeks 163 


shall be poured upon the desolate (or, desola- 
tor).” 

Now in considering this prophecy in detail, 
it is important, first of all, to notice that the 
time-period of seventy weeks clearly refers to 
years. Daniel had been learning from the Scrip- 
tures, that the Lord would accomplish seventy 
years in the desolations of Jerusalem. But in 
answer to his prayer God makes known to him 
that in seventy weeks, or sevens of years, all 
prophecy in connection with His people Israel 
will be fulfilled. The word here rendered 
“weeks ” does not necessarily mean weeks of 
days, but it is a generic term (like our word 
dozen) a heptad, meaning a seven, and may be 
applied to whatever subject is under considera- 
tion. On the chart I have used the word heptad, 
which is the equivalent, in order to avoid con- 
fusion of terms. 

It is also important to notice that these sev- 
enty sevens or four hundred and ninety years 
are cut off from the entire period of time for 
Daniel’s people, the Jews, and his holy city, 
Jerusalem. Therefore the seventy weeks are 
only running on while there is a remnant in 
Jerusalem owned of God as His people. 

And this brings me to a third point, which 
many have not noticed; that the cycle of the 
seventy weeks is divided into three parts. This 
you can see clearly by referring to the chart. 


164 Lectures on Daniel 


First we have seven sevens, or 49 years. This 
is the period called the strait, or narrow, times 
in which the city and the walls of Jerusalem 
were rebuilt. The second part of the cycle con- 
sists of sixty-two weeks, or 434 years, after which 
Messiah was to be cut off and have nothing. 
This leaves one week, or seven years, yet to be 
fulfilled; and which never can be fulfilled until 
there is again a remnant of Judah in the city of 
Jerusalem owned by God as His people. 

A cycle of 490 years had closed in the Baby- 
lonish captivity... Now, God said He was about 
to give them another period of the same length, 
at the end of which things would come out dif- 
ferently. Notice how much was to be accom- 
plished ere this period would close. Their trans- 
gression would be finished; an end made of sins; 
reconciliation, or properly, atonement, would be 
made for iniquity; everlasting righteousness — 
that is, the millennial kingdom — brought in; 
vision and prophecy all sealed up because ful- 
filled; and the Holy of Holies anointed in the 
future temple at Jerusalem. 

Now it is very evident that there is a great 
deal here which has never yet been accomplished, 
consequently the 490 years have not yet been 
completed. 

But can we tell definitely when the seventy 


The Seventy Weeks 165 


weeks began? Yes, look at the twenty-fifth 
verse: “Know therefore and understand, that 
from the going forth of the commandment to 
restore and build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah 
the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and threescore 
and two weeks.” Now the going forth of the 
commandment to restore and build Jerusalem 
is given us in the second chapter of the book of 
Nehemiah, and there can be no question about 
the dates. The edict was given in the month 
Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the 
king, a year well known to historians as B.C. 
445. Observe the commandment that went forth 
in the days of Cyrus, of which we have a record 
in Ezra, chap. 1, is clearly not the starting point 
referred to here; for that edict had to do alone 
with the rebuilding of the house of God at Jeru- 
salem, that is, the temple of Zerubbabel. There 
is nothing said there about rebuilding the city 
or the wall. It is therefore the order of Artax- 
erxes that the angel here mentions as the true: 
starting point. Now from the time of this decree 
to the coming of Messiah the Prince, seven weeks, 
and sixty-two weeks, were to elapse, making in 
all sixty-nine weeks, or 483 years. The 49 years 
are distinguished from the rest because in them 
the city and the wall were rebuilt, and also, I 
doubt not, that our attention might be directed 
to the fact that the 490 years are divided into 
three series, and do not necessarily run on in 


166 Lectures on Daniel 


direct chronological order. It is true that the 
sixty-two weeks immediately followed the com- 
pletion of the seven weeks, but this does not alter 
the fact that God distinctly separates the sixty- 
two weeks from the seven that went before; just 
as the last week, or seven years, is separated 
from all that preceded. Now able chronologists 
have shown that the crucifixion of the Lord Jesus 
Christ occurred immediately after the expiration 
of 483 prophetic years, of 360 days each, from the 
time of Artaxerxes’ order. By reference to the 
other time-prophecies of this book it will become 
evident at once, I think, that this is the true 
method of computation. The time, times, and 
the dividing of time of chap. 7:25 and 12:7 
(representing exactly three years and a half, 
as is evident by a comparison with the seven 
times in which Nebuchadnezzar was driven forth 
from among men) are clearly identical with the 
1260 days of the Apocalypse. 

At the expiration of the sixty-nine weeks, 
therefore, the Messiah for whom Israel had 
waited so long had actually come, only to be cut 
off and rejected by the very people who shouid 
have hailed His advent with joy. Up to this 
time, the great prophetic clock had been ticking 
out the years one after another in fulfilment of 
what we have in this chapter; but upon the cru- 
cifixion of the Lord Jesus Christ the great clock 
stopped, and there has not been another tick 


The Seventy Weeks 167 


from it since; nor will there be until, in a com- 
ing day, the Jews shall be restored to their own 
land and a remnant be found among them who 
are ready to own the claims of God’s Christ. 
Because of Jerusalem’s rejection of her Prince, 
He has rejected them; and He prophesied, ere 
He died, that their city and temple would be 
thrown down and not one stone left upon an- 
other. This is also foretold in the twenty-sixth 
verse of our chapter. “The people of the prince 
that shall come shall destroy the city and the 
sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be with a 
flood, and unto the end shall be war and desola- 
tions as determined.” These words briefly de- 
scribe the history of Palestine from the coming 
of the Roman armies under Titus to the present 
time. Jerusalem, and Palestine as a whole, have 
been trodden down of all nations, and shall be, 
“until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.” 

Observe that it is not said in verse twenty-six 
that the prince shall come at that time. In fact 
it is distinctly stated that the city shall be de- 
stroyed not by the coming prince, but by his 
people. The prince is that dreadful character 
yet to arrive upon the scene, who will arrogate 
to himself supreme power in the days of the ten 
kingdom period of the Roman empire, which we 
have seen is still future. In other words, he is 
emphatically the Beast of Revelation chaps. 13: 
1 and 17:3. 


168 Lectures on Daniel 


He is the one who at once comes to the front 
in verse 27. He shall confirm a covenant with 
the many for one week. The 70th week will 
begin when the Jewish people are restored in 
unbelief to their land and city; and among them 
will be found a faithful remnant, owning their 
sin, and seeking Jehovah’s face. The many, that 
is the apostate mass of the people, will enter 
into covenant relations with the prince whose 
people formerly were the instruments of the de- 
struction of their city. That is, this great blas- 
phemous Roman leader will guarantee protec- 
tion and freedom of religious worship to them for 
seven years, in return for which they will prom- 
ise allegiance to him as their sovereign. In the 
midst of the week (that is, after three years and 
a half) he will violate his part of the covenant, 
and cause the sacrifices and oblations to Jehovah 
to cease. Idolatry of the most dreadful kind 
will be forced upon them. The direct result of 
which will be to distinguish the remnant from 
the mass, and thus to bring in the Great Tribula- 
tion which will continue for forty-two months,— 
“a time, times, and half a time,” or 1260 days. 

The last clause we may read either as we 
have it in the Authorized Version of our Bible 
as “that determined shall be poured upon the 
desolate,” or, as others read it, ‘“ the desolator.” 
That which God has determined shall be poured 
out upon poor desolate Judah because of their 


The Seventy Weeks 169 


rejection of their rightful King and Saviour; 
and then, when their cup has been filled to the 
brim by the dreadful persecutions of the Beast 
and Antichrist, these arch-enemies of God and 
His people shall themselves be punished with 
everlasting destruction from the presence of the 
Lord and the glory of His power. We have 
their doom clearly foretold in the book of Reve- 
lation, chap. 19:20. “ And the beast was taken, 
and with him the false prophet that wrought 
miracles before him with which he deceived them 
that had received the mark of the beast, and 
them that worshipped his image. These both 
were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with 
brimstone.” There they are seen a thousand 
years later, in chap. 20:10, when the devil, the 
instigator of all iniquity, shall be himself cast 
into the same fiery pit, “where the beast and the 
false prophet are, and shall be tormented day 
and night forever and ever.” 

It is plain then, from all that we have been 
going over, that this last week of the seventy 
has not yet been fulfilled; for if it had been the 
Jews would now be in their land, a holy, happy 
people, their temple anointed for divine service, 
their transgressions finished, and the years of 
their mourning ended. But God only counts 
time with Israel while they are owned as His 
people in the land of Palestine. All the years of 
their subjection to Gentile rule are looked upon 


170 Lectures on Daniel 


as wasted. In this present age of their rejec- 
tion, God is taking out from among the Gen- 
tiles a people to the name of the Lord Jesus,— 
the Church which will be His body and His bride 
for all eternity. When this great work is over 
“He will build again the tabernacle of David 
that is fallen down,’ and commence once more 
to fulfil Old Testament prophecy from the point 
reached at the cross of Christ. Meantime, the 
Gentile oppressor stalks haughtily through the 
land of Palestine, and the poor Jew is despised 
and hated in most of the lands of his wander- 
ings. The Lord Jesus gives us the history of 
Palestine in one pregnant sentence when He 
says, “ There shall be wars and rumors of wars, 
but the end is not yet.” This is characteristic 
of the entire dispensation, and shall be until the 
end. When will that end be? When the 70th 
week begins to run, and God once more takes up 
the nation of Israel and begins to fulfil the prom- 
ises made through the prophets. He will touch 
the pendulum of that great prophetic clock, as 
it were, and set it once more ticking off the years 
preparatory to ushering in the glorious king- 
dom of the Son of Man, when Jerusalem shall 
become the capital city of the world, and Pales- 
tine be again the garden of the Lord. 

Ere closing I briefly notice a rather peculiar 
interpretation which is frequently given to the 
27th verse. It is said that the Lord Jesus is 


The Seventy Weeks 171 


Himself to be “ the prince that shall eome ” who 
confirms the covenant for one week. His own 
crucifixion is supposed to be the event which 
caused the sacrifice and oblation to cease. But 
neither chronologically nor doctrinally will this 
stand for a moment, if examined in the light of 
other scriptures. With whom did the Lord 
Jesus ever confirm a covenant for seven years? 
His precious blood is called “the blood of the 
everlasting covenant;” not a covenant for one 
week of years. We may rest assured it is not 
Messiah at all, but the blasphemous prince who 
is yet to come, who will fulfil what is predicted 
in this verse. 

How near this world may be to the actual 
entering upon all these things no man can say, 
but it is the part of wisdom to learn from the 
prophetic Scriptures, and to turn now to Him 
who alone can save; to own Him as Redeemer 
and Lord, and thus be certain of being caught 
up to meet Him when He comes in the clouds, 
ere the time comes for His righteous judgment 
to be poured out upon this poor world. 


LECTURE X 
CHAPTER X 
ANGELIC AGENCY 


HE last great prophecy, or revelation, made 
known to Daniel is set before us in detail in 
chapters 10 to 12. It is the most minute of ali 
the prophecies given in the book. It commences 
with Daniel’s day, and culminates in the usher- 
ing in of the kingdom. 

It is of importance to notice that here, as else- 
where in the prophetic Scriptures, it is distine- 
tively Daniel’s people who are in view. (See 
verse 14.) We shall find nothing here, nor, for 
that matter, elsewhere in the Old Testament, 
about the Church of the present dispensation. 
It is because of lack of intelligence as to this that 
so much confusion has come in in the interpreta- 
tion of prophecy. 

We see from the opening verse of the book of 
Ezra, and from verse 1 of our chapter, that two 
years had elapsed between the time that king 
Cyrus gave permission to the Jews to return to 
Jerusalem, and the time that Daniel had this 
vision. He himself was not one of those who 


returned; doubtless from the fact that he was 
172 


Angelic Agency 173 


in a position requiring his attendance upon the 
king, and was aiso a very aged man, probably 
about ninety years old. We see him waiting 
quietly for the time when he is to leave the world 
behind, in which he has seen so many changes 
and upheavals; but his heart is exercised about 
the remnant of his nation who have gone up to 
the place of Jehovah’s name; and you find him 
in deep grief, deep sorrow of heart — that sorrow 
of heart which perhaps only those know who, 
as Daniel, enter into the true state of the people 
of God. Even those who had gone up to Jeru- 
salem failed from the very beginning in carry- 
ing out the mind of God in its fulness. They 
went up with a measure of enthusiasm, and were 
gathered back to their holy city in ruin; but 
alas, slothfulness and indifference to God’s glory 
soon began to eat like a canker among them, 
and alliances were formed with the strangers 
surrounding Jerusalem, so that God really got 
very little out of their returning to the place 
of His temple and altar. 

No doubt Daniel knew and felt all this; and 
his heart was grieved over it. He knew too 
that those who went up were very few indeed, 
in comparison with those who remained at ease 
in the land where their bondage had given place 
to indifferent toleration. While they, as we see 
them in the book of Esther, seem quite content 
with the measure of liberty they enjoy, and have 


174 Lectures on Daniel 


apparently no heart for that which had so large 
a place in the mind of Daniel, he is found bowed 
before God in deep grief, mourning three full 
weeks. (And here I would have you notice the 
marginal reading, “ weeks of days,” bearing out 
that to which I called your attention in the 
last lecture, in regard to the use of the word 
“week.”’) During this time of his mourning he 
tasted no pleasant bread, nor flesh, nor wine, 
neither anointing himself at all, till the three 
whole weeks were fulfilled. 

At the end of that time, as he was by the 
great river Hiddekel, in looking up, he saw a 
certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were 
girded with fine gold. His body is described as 
being like the beryl, and his face as the appear- 
ance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire. 
His arms and his feet were like polished brass, 
and the voice of his words like the voice of a 
multitude. The description cannot but recall 
to our minds that of the glorified Lord Himself 
as given in the first chapter of Revelation. But 
that this messenger who appeared to Daniel was 
not really a theophany, but a created angel, 
seems evident from the fact that he required 
the help of Michael in his conflict... When Dan- 


1Jt is with the greatest diflidence that I here dissent from 
the interpretation given by the late W. Kelly and a number 
of other able expositors. My sole reason for doing so is that 
given in the text. The careful student might profitably con- 
sult Mr. Kelly’s “ Notes on Daniel,” and weigh what is there 


Angelic Agency 175 


iel beheld him, the men who were with him fled 
to hide themselves, though they saw not the 
vision; but a great quaking fell upon them. 
Left alone in the presence of this majestic being, 
the prophet’s strength was turned into weak- 
ness, and his vigor into corruption, so that he 
was upon the ground as one in a deep sleep, yet 
hearing the voice of the angel. A hand was 
stretched forth which touched him and set him 
upon his knees, though he was still obliged to 
support himself with the palms of his hands. 
Then the messenger spoke, saying, “O Daniel, 
a man greatly beloved, understand the words 
that I speak unto thee, and stand upright: for 
unto thee am I now sent.” At this the prophet 
stood up trembling. 

The angel then said, “ Fear not, Daniel: for 
from the first day that thou didst set thy heart 
to understand, and to chasten thyself before 
thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come 
for thy words. But the prince of the kingdom 
of Persia withstood me one and twenty days: 
but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came 
to help me; and I remained there with the kings 
of Persia.” 

We get a remarkable insight here into the un- 
seen world, and the conflict even now being car- 
stated in regard to this glorious angel. Some do not con- 
sider the angel-speaker of verse 11 and on, the same as the 
being first described. 


176 Lectures on Daniel 


ried on in heavenly places. And may we not 
find here also the reason why many of our 
prayers do not seem to be answered when and 
as we would desire to have them? For three 
whole weeks Daniel had been before God in ear- 
nest supplication: he prayed, he besought, he 
interceded, on behalf of his pecple; yet no an- 
swer had come; and had Daniel ceased praying, 
he might have given up the object of his prayers, 
and declared that God turned a deaf ear to his 
petitions. But the angel tells him that at the 
very beginning of his supplication the command- 
ment went forth, and he was sent from the very 
throne of God to make known to Daniel that 
which would set his mind at rest in regard to 
God’s purpose and the final blessing of His peo- 
ple. But for twenty-one days this angel had 
been fighting his way through the fiends of the 
upper air. The prince of the kingdom of Persia 
(not Cyrus himself, but an evil angel evidently, 
delegated by Satan to seek to influence the hearts 
of the Persian kings against the people of God) 
had withstood this holy angel of the Lord for 
one and twenty days. Nor could the divinely- 
sent messenger prevail until Michael, here called 
“ one of the chief princes,” and in the New Testa- 
ment “ the archangel,” came to help him. 

Now I grant you that all this is very mysteri- 
ous. It is something altogether outside of the 
§phere of human cognizance. We know nothing 


“Angelic Agency 177 


whatever about the conflicts continuously being 
carried on in the unseen world, save what we 
can learn from our Bibles. But this much is 
clear: Here was a man who was praying ear. 
nestly on earth, and God had heard that prayer 
in heaven. In answer to it He sent an angel; 
but for three weeks there was some hindrance 
keeping that angel from reaching Daniel. That 
hindrance was in the unseen world, and by such 
a power that the archangel himself was needed 
to overcome it. 

Now I would like to bring a few other scrip- 
tures to your attention that have to do with 
this solemn subject. In the first chapters of the 
book of Job we find the sons of God presenting 
themselves before the Lord, and we are told that 
Satan came also. The sons of God are clearly 
an order of angelic ministers, engaged in carry- 
ing out the will of God in connection with this 
world, in accordance with the word, “ He maketh 
His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of 
fire. Are they not all ministering spirits, sent 
forth to minister unto them that shall be heirs 
of salvation?” Among these sons of God, Sa- 
tan, the foul leader of the evil hosts, walks un- 
abashed. He acts —shall I say? — as one who 
has no fear of rebuke in that company. He is 
there, as on other occasions in Scripture, as the 
great adversary and accuser of the brethren. He 
accuses Job to the very face of God; and, as 


178 Lectures on Daniel 


in the case of the apostle Peter and the other 
disciples, he seems to demand them that he may 
sift them as wheat. And the Lord does not 
deny his demand, but delivers Job into his hands 
—for Job’s own good, as we know. So we 
gather from this scripture that God is able to 
use even the devil to carry out His own pur- 
poses for the blessing of His children. He has 
not been outwitted by Satan, but uses him all 
through this present time. The devil is the 
sifter of God’s wheat. The Lord wants His 
wheat sifted; He does not want a lot of chaff. 
But when the devil is thus used to sift God’s 
wheat, when His children are thus put into the 
devil’s sieve, not one grain of the wheat is lost; 
the devil is simply used by God for the separa- 
tion of the chaff from the wheat; that is all. Do 
not despair then if, like Job and like Peter, you 
are put into the devil’s sieve. It is God Himself 
who is letting you be sifted like that, because He 
has seen the chaff in your life, and He wants the 
real to be separated from the false. But the 
point I had in mind in directing your attention 
to this scripture was that all might see that 
good and evil angels alike have direct access to 
the presence of God. 

In the eighteenth chapter of the book of 2d 
Chronicles we have the account of an alliance 
entered into by Ahab and Jehoshaphat. Ahab 
was a wicked king, the ruler of the ten tribes. 


Angelic Agency 179 


Jehoshaphat was in large measure a man of 
God; but unhappily he was a man who could 
not say “ No.” He was of too yielding a char- 
acter for his own good and the good of the 
kingdom of Judah over which he ruled. At 
Ahab’s request he had promised to go out to bat- 
tle to help him against his enemies, but he de- 
sired also to consult a prophet of the Lord. 
Ahab brought in a host of the prophets of Baal, 
who all predicted a glorious victory. But this 
did not satisfy Jehoshaphat; and so Micaiah, a 
prophet of Jehovah imprisoned for his faithful- 
ness, is brought from his dungeon to declare the 
mind of the Lord. When he came, the king of 
Israel said, “ Shall we go to battle?” And Mi- 
caiah replied, ironically, Oh yes, “ Go ye up, and 
prosper, and they shall be delivered into your 
hand.” But the king detected the tone of irony 
in his voice, and Ahab adjured him to tell him 
the truth. At that Micaiah drew aside, as it 
were, the veil from the other world, and de- 
clared that he had seen a multitude of spirits 
surrounding the throne of God. One of these, 
in obedience to the divine permission, had been 
sent forth to become a lying spirit in the mouth 
of Ahab’s prophets, that he might seduce the 
wretched idolatrous king to his destruction. 
Here again we see the same thing that is brought 
before us in the book of Job — angels, both good 
and evil, having access to heaven. 


180 Lectures on Daniel 


It is the same in the third chapter of Zecha- 
riah. What a beautiful picture we have there! 
Joshua, the high priest, is the representative of 
the whole nation of Israel: he stands before the 
Lord clothed in filthy garments — a picture of 
one chosen of God and yet defiled by sin. An 
adversary is there to accuse him, but the angel 
of Jehovah is standing by. Who is that mystic 
angel of Jehovah? Who but He of whom Jeho- 
vah said, “My name is in Him”? He speaks 
to us of the Lord Jesus Himself, the Messenger 
of the covenant. What does Jehovah say when 
Satan attempts to accuse? “The Lord rebuke 
thee, O Satan! is not this a brand plucked out 
of the fire?” This brings out two things: first, 
there is God’s sovereign electing grace; and then, 
there is redemption. That is why God could 
recognize and own the remnant of Israel in spite 
of their failures. Jehovah says, “‘ I have chosen 
him ”— that is His answer to Satan. For “the 
gifts and calling of God are without repentance.” 
But this is based upon redemption, for He says 
unto those who stoad by, “ Take away the filthy 
garments from him.” And unto him He said, 
“ Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass 
from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of 
raiment.” The presence of the Angel of the 
covenant points on to the cross; for it was at 
that cross the covenant would be ratified in His 
precious blood who became Man with the view 


Angelic Agency 181 


to the suffering of death, that He might cleanse 
from all iniquity those whom He redeemed to 
Himself. Thus we have full redemption, and 
the brand plucked out of the fire. 

Now let us link up with this that important 
passage in the twelfth chapter of Revelation. 
Remember that it speaks of something that is 
still future. “There was war in heaven: Mi- 
chael and his angels fought against the dragon; 
and the dragon fought and his angels, and pre- 
vailed not; neither was their place found any 
more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast 
out, that old serpent, called the Devil and Satan, 
which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast 
out into the earth, and his angels were cast out 
with him. And I heard a loud voice saying in 
heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and 
the kingdom of our God, and the power of His 
Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast 
out, which accused them before our God day and 
night ” (vers. 7-10). This gives us the end of 
Satan’s place as the accuser with access to the 
heavens. He is driven forth by that same Mi- 
chael who came to the assistance of the angel 
who speaks to Daniel in our chapter. This event 
will take place in the midst of the seventieth 
week of the ninth chapter; and after that no 
foul spirit will ever more have access to the 
presence of God. 

In the sixth chapter of the epistle to the Ephe 


182 Lectures on Danie? 


sians there is a passage of great importance. 
See verse 11: “Put on the whole armor of God, 
that ye may be able to stand against the wiles 
of the devil. For we wrestle not against flesh 
and blood, but against principalities, against 
powers, against the world-rulers of this dark- 
ness, against wicked spirits in heavenly places ” 
(literal translation). The Christian’s foes are 
these wicked spirits, who, like the prince of the 
kingdom of Persia, are ruling the hearts of men 
in these days of darkness. Against their wiles 
we are warned. The great business of Satan at 
the present time is to seek to deceive the people 
of God with things that seem to be in accord- 
ance with His mind, but which are really deceit- 
ful imitations. 

You remember, when Joshua and the people 
of Israel entered the land of Canaan, God told 
them to utterly destroy all the nations that 
dwelt in it. But the Gibeonites, filled with ter- 
ror, sent an ambassage to Joshua, pretending 
to have come from a long distance; and by 
means of their moldy bread, ragged clothes and 
worn shoes, deceived the leaders of Israel into 
entering into a league with them. Thus they 
were misled by not being on their guard against 
the wiles of the Canaanites. And we too will 
be deceived by the hellish stratagems of our great 
adversary if we be not careful to continuously. 


Angelic Agency 182 


ask counsel of the Lord. In this sixth chapter 
of Ephesians we are told that our warfare is with 
“the world-rulers of this darkness.” Who are 
these world-rulers? They are not the king of 
England, the emperor of Germany, the czar of 
Russia, or the president of this great republic 
— these great and often good men have to do 
with the temporal government of this world, they 
are “the powers that be,” ordained of God — 
yet they may be like the little figures on the 
chessboard, in the hands of the real world-rulers 
of this darkness.? 

This is what we learn in this tenth chapter of 
Daniel. The prince of the kingdom of Persia 
who withstood the angel of the Lord one-and- 
twenty days was one of the world-rulers of this 
darkness. The prince of Grecia of verse 20 was 
another one seeking to influence the hearts of 
the Grecian rulers against the will of God. And 
then, on the other hand, have you noticed what 
Michael is called in the last verse? He is desig: 
nated as “ Michael your prince”; and in chap- 
ter 12:1 he is called “the great prince which 
standeth for the children of thy people”; that 
is, Michael the archangel seems in a special 
manner to have a care for the people of Israel. 

1 How solemnly has this been demonstrated in the past five 


years! I have left the passage in the text as when first 
written, though at this time there is no longer a Czar of 


Russia. 


184 Lectures on Daniel 


Thus, while evil angels were seeking Israel’s 
ruin, Michael and his hosts of benevolent angels 
were protecting their interests. 

You will remember how efforts were being 
made at this very time to thwart God’s pur- 
poses concerning the Jews. Sanballat and his 
companions sought in every way they could to 
hinder the progress of the work of the Lord at 
Jerusalem. What was going on upon the earth 
was evidently intimately connected with, in fact 
the result of, what was going on in the upper 
air. Satan is called the prince of the power of 
the air; and his angelic subordinates and God’s 
holy angels were warring in connection with the 
attempt to carry out that which God Himself 
had planned for His earthly people. 

Perhaps the chief of all the world-rulers of 
this darkness is described in the twenty-eighth 
chapter of Ezekiel, verses 11 to 18. You will 
notice that in the first ten verses of the chapter 
the prince of Tyre is spoken of; but from the 11th 
verse on we have a very different being, one who 
is clearly superhuman, designated as the king 
of Tyre. Of him Ezekiel says, “ Thus saith the 
Lord God; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wis- 
dom, and perfect in beauty. Thou hast been in 
Eden the garden of God; every precious stone 
was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the 
diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, 
the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle, 


Angelic Agency 185 


and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and 
of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day 
that thou wast created. Thou art the anointed 
cherub that covereth; and I have set thee so: 
thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou 
hast walked up and down in the midst of the 
stones of fire. Thou wast perfect in thy ways 
from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity 
was found in thee. By the multitude of thy 
merchandise they have filled the midst of thee 
with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I 
will cast thee as profane out of the mountain 
of God: and I will destroy thee, O covering 
cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire. Thy 
heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou 
hast corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy 
brightness: I will cast thee to the ground, I will 
lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee.” 

Was all this true of any earthly king of Tyre? 
Surely not. But it was true of the great prince, 
the unseen ruler, who was leading on the king- 
dom of Tyre to its doom. Alas, how readily do 
rulers and nations obey the behests of these ma- 
lignant spirits, who, having lost heaven for them- 
selves, now seem to find their delight in encom- 
passing the ruin of mankind! And though God 
in His grace is seeking man’s blessing, and has 
given His Word and Spirit to guide in paths 
of righteousness and peace, as well as having 
sent forth hosts of unfallen elect angels to influ- 


186 Lectures on Daniel 


ence leaders and led to prefer justice and holi- 
ness to unrighteousness and iniquity, yet so per- 
verse is the heart of man that in his natural state 
he is ever ready to be led by the devil captive 
at his will. 

In the present age our conflict as Christians is 
said to be with principalities and powers who 
are not of flesh and blood. This makes it evi- 
dent that there are degrees in rank among angels, 
whether fallen or unfallen, as there are in human 
armies. The special effort of these organized 
hosts of hell is now to deceive the people of 
God by presenting something else for their hearts 
to take the place of Christ and His truth, and 
thus keep them out of their blessing. Coupled 
with this is the effort to hinder exercised souls 
from coming to the knowledge of the truth at 
all by imitating that which is of God, that those 
may be turned aside into the devious mazes of 
error who would otherwise seem about to obey 
the truth. 

Have you noticed how every precious truth 
of Scripture has its Satanic counterfeit? It has 
been so from the very beginning. Scarcely was 
the glorious gospel of grace proclaimed when the 
devil introduced men secretly among the assem- 
blies of God, whose object was to turn that very 
grace into lasciviousness. If the apostle taught 
that the Christian was not under law, but grace, 


Angelic Agency 187 


then the antinomian was almost at his heels to 
ery, “ Let us do evil, that good may come.” And 
it is the same in our day. Let the precious truth 
of the indwelling and gifts of the Holy Spirit 
be declared, and Satan will follow with false 
gifts and another spirit, leading even earnest 
souls into the wildest fanaticism. Let the truth 
of new birth be insisted upon, and the devil will 
raise up teachers after his own heart to tell men 
that being born again means simply “ rising out 
of the self-life into the spiritual, reaching out 
after the higher ideals, seeking to make that 
which is highest, noblest and best of ourselves; 
thus saving ourselves by character’.” This is 
a sample of the teaching heard in many a sup- 
posedly orthodox pulpit at the present time. 
Again, let one begin to preach that the Lord 
Jesus Christ is coming again; let him put forth 
the blessed truth of the rapture of the Church 
at the Lord’s return; and you will have the 
wicked spirits in heavenly places poisoning men’s 
minds with so many unscriptural and false con- 
ceptions about this solemn and important theme, 
that the second advent becomes a byword in the 
minds of some intelligent people and they be- 
come sick and tired of the whole thing. But 
these are just the wiles of the devil against which 
the believer is warned, and concerning which 


1A quotation from a “New Theology” sermon 


188 Lectures on Daniel 


we need to be on our guard, remembering the 
word, “Prove all things; hold fast that which 
is good.” 

Thank God, the hosts of the upper air are not 
all malevolent. You remember at the siege of 
Dothan, in answer to the prayer of Elisha, the 
Lord opened the eyes of the prophet’s servant, 
and he saw the mountains round about full of 
fiery chariots. ‘ The angel of the Lord encamp- 
eth round about those that fear Him.” O be- 
loved, we too need opened eyes! Then we would 
see the angelic host camping around us for our 
protection, and watching over us for good. Thus 
we would fight on with new courage, clad in 
the whole armour of God, knowing that against 
Christ’s Church, founded upon Himself, the gates 
of hell shall not prevail. 

And now, in closing this solemn subject, let 
me say a word to the unsaved. These wicked 
spirits of which I have been speaking are deter- 
mined upon your soul’s damnation. They will 
use every effort known to fiends to hinder your 
salvation and to seal your doom. How much 
then you need to learn the lesson that in your- 
self you have no strength or power; you are 
but a poor, weak, easily-deceived soul led by 
Satan and imposed upon by his wicked hosts. 
One alone can deliver you from your dreadful 
foes; that One is the blessed Lord Jesus Christ 
who died upon the cross “that through death 


Angelic Agency 189 


He might destroy (render powerless, or annul) 
him that had the power of death, that is, the 
devil; and deliver them who through fear of 
death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.” 
Call then upon Him, and be delivered from the 
fearful and superhuman enemies who desire your 
eternal ruin, for it is written that ‘“ Whosoever 
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be 
saved.” 

Let us now, after this long parenthesis, turn 
back to our chapter. In the 14th verse the angel 
tells Daniel that he had come to make him under- 
stand what should befall the prophet’s people, 
the Jews, in the latter days. At this Daniel set 
his face toward the ground and became dumb. 
Another angel then drew near and touched his 
lips, at which he spoke aloud and said unto the 
glorious being who stood before him, “O my 
lord, by the vision my sorrows are turned upon 
me, and I have retained no strength. For how 
can the servant of this my lord talk with this 
my lord? For as for me, straightway there re- 
maineth no strength in me, neither is there 
breath left in me.” The ministering angel 
touched him again, strengthening him and bid- 
ding him fear not but be strong. At this Daniel 
bade the revealing angel speak on. He tells 
him that he must return to fight with the prince 
of Persia, and that when he has gone forth, the 
prince of Grecia shall come. But first he is com- 


190 Lectures on Daniel 


missioned to show Daniel “that which is noted 
in the Scripture of truth.” This is clearly a 
record kept, not on earth, but in heaven; the 
omniscient God having outlined, long before it 
comes to pass on earth, the events to occur in 
the kingdoms of men. This revelation is given 
us in the next chapter. 

As “in the roll of the book” it was written 
of the eternal Son of God, “I delight to do Thy 
will, O my God; yea, Thy law is within My 
heart ”; and just as every step of His journey 
from the throne of the universe down to the 
cross of Calvary, and back to the throne, yea, 
on to the ages of ages, was foreknown from be- 
fore the foundation of the world, so has God 
foreseen all that is to transpire upon this planet 
in the affairs of men. In the “Scripture of 
truth ” recorded above, all is ever before His 
eyes: let Satan and evil men rage as they will, 
He “ worketh all things after the counsel of His 
own will.” 

The Christian heart may surely rest in this; 
rejoicing in this knowledge, that, at all times, 


“God sits as sovereign on His throne, 
And ruleth all things well!” 


LECTURE XI 
CHAPTER XI: I— 35 


THE WARS OF THE PTOLEMIES AND THE 
SELEUCIDAS 


N taking up the first part of this chapter, I 
want to impress upon you again the words 
of the apostle Paul, several times already alluded 
to in these lectures, that “ All scripture is given 
by inspiration of God and is profitable.” For in 
seeking to expand this particular portion, I shall 
be obliged to occupy you, almost entirely, with 
a running historical outline of events, covering 
a period of something like 200 years, in connec- 
tion with the wars that desolated the land of 
Palestine after the death of Alexander the Great. 
This may seem to some very dry and unspiritual ; 
but the subject, if it is to be made at all lucid 
and plain, seems to me to demand the kind of 
treatment I purpose giving it. And I feel sure, 
if carefully noted, it will give many to see, as 
never before, the absolute unerring precision of 
God’s holy word. 
We have here set forth for our learning a rec- 
ord that was first made in heaven; and it must 


be that God intended us to study it, and to un- 
191 


192 Lectures on Daniel 


derstand it, or He would not have included it 
in the volume of Scripture. And for this we 
must take some pains; for it is a portion of the 
Word which we cannot clearly understand un- 
less we take the trouble to investigate a little, 
and see how it has been fulfilled. Now if there 
are those who decry the study of historical and 
other subjects in connection with the word of 
God, I would remind such again of the pregnant 
sentence that “ All history is His story.” And 
surely the man of God can lose nothing but gain 
much, by observing how remarkably history con- 
firms prophecy, and thus sets its seal upon the 
divine inspiration of the Bible. The Holy Spirit 
never condemns our acquiring the knowledge of 
this world. That which is set aside as untrust- 
worthy, fruitful only of strife, speculation, and 
vain wrangling, is the “ wisdom ” of this world. 
That is, we are warned against human philoso- 
phy, against the reasoning of the human mind 
uninstructed by, and unopened to, divine illumi- 
nation; but we are not warned against the ac- 
quisition of true knowledge, if we couple with 
it the fear of God and the love of the Spirit. 
God does not put a premium upon ignorance. 
Some Christians are most short-sighted, narrow- 
minded and bigoted; intolerant of the opinions 
of others; or, in fact, of anything outside their 
own range of vision. Undoubtedly the best cure 
for this very unchrist-like spirit is to be more 


Wars of the Ptolemies and Seleucide 193 


in the company of the blessed Lord Himself; but 
to this may well be added a helpful, broadening 
knowledge of facts and events, especially in con- 
nection with Scripture. 

The angel who had appeared to Daniel tells 
him that in the first year of Darius the Mede, 
after Babylon’s overthrow, he had stood to 
strengthen him. In the second verse, he begins, 
as it were, to unroll the scroll of the Scripture 
of truth. “ Behold,” he says, “ there shall stand 
up yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth shall 
be far richer than they all: and by his strength 
through his riches he shall stir up all against 
the realm of Grecia” (ver. 2). We saw in chap- 
ter ten that this vision was given to Daniel in 
the third year of Cyrus. The three kings who 
were to follow were; first, his son Cambyses, 
who was succeeded, not by his own son Smer- 
dis, but by a wretched impostor generally called 
Pseudo-Smerdis. He looked very much like the 
son of Cambyses, and by trickery, had himself 
proclaimed emperor, and reigned in the name 
of Smerdis. Darius Hystaspes succeeded him, 
and he, in his turn was succeeded by Xerxes the 
Great. This Xerxes was not the last king of 
Persia, nor is it so stated here; though at first 
sight it might seem to be implied. But he was 
the fourth, and as prophesied, “far richer than 
they all.” He stirred up Asia against the realm 
of Grecia, and with an immense army of over 


194 Lectures on Daniel 


two millions and a half (if we can trust the com- 
putation of the historians of those days), crossed 
the Hellespont and invaded Greece. But the 
very size of his army defeated his own purpose, 
and his hosts were driven back into Asia. The 
Grecians never forgave this insult to their race, 
and nursed the desire for vengeance until the 
days of Alexander the Great, who is the “ mighty 
king” referred to in verse three. 

There is quite an interval between verses four 
and five, which is passed over in silence in order 
to connect the invasion of Alexander with the 
effort of Xerxes to conquer Greece. After Alex- 
ander had established his authority over all 
Greece, he determined to pass over into Asia 
with the special object of wiping out the dis- 
grace referred to. He met the forces of Darius 
Codomanus, utterly defeated them, and laid 
hold of all the Persian dominion, but passed 
away himself, very shortly afterwards, in a 
drunken revel. He died in the very prime of his 
life, a wretched victim of ill living. Thus was 
fulfilled the word, “ And when he shall stand up, 
his kingdom shall be broken.” The verse goes 
on to tell us that it “shall be divided toward 
the four winds of heaven; and not to his pos- 
terity, nor according to his dominion which he 
ruled: for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even 
for others besides those.” Now all this was ful- 
filled to the letter. Alexander had two sons, 


Wars of the Ptolemies and Seleucide 195 


Hercules and Alexander, but both were slain, 
one before, and the other after his death. His 
kingdom was then divided, as God had said it 
should be. After the battle of Ipsus, which took 
place in B. C. 301, his dominions were parceled 
out, as we have already seen in chapters seven 
and eight, among four of his generals. From 
this point on, our chapter occupies us only with 
the dominions and the doings of two of them 
and their successors, namely; Ptolemy Lagus, 
ruler of Egypt; and Seleucas, Satrap of Syria. 
Thus the great world-empire that Alexander had 
established at such a tremendous cost was broken 
into warring fragments, none of which ever again 
attained the splendor or power of his kingdom. 

From verse five to thirty-five we have the wars 
of the Seleucide and the Ptolemies for about 
two centuries. These rulers are called respec- 
tively the King of the North and the King of 
the South — the directions having to do of course 
with the land of Palestine, which in God’s eye 
is the centre of the earth. “When the Most 
High divided to the nations their inheritance, 
when He separated the sons of Adam, He set 
the bounds of the people according to the num- 
ber of the children of Israel. For the Lord’s 
portion is His people; Jacob is the lot of His 
inheritance ” (Deut. 32: 8, 9). 

The reason that the other two kingdoms do 
not here appear upon the page of prophecy is 


196 Lectures on Daniel 


thus made clear. The angel told Daniel he was 
going to show him what should befall his peo- 
ple; and those two kingdoms had no place in 
connection with Israel or their land. 

It will almost be necessary to take up what 
we are now to have before us verse by verse; 
and I pray God that as we do so, it may im- 
press every heart with the absolute perfection : 
of the Holy Scriptures, and their correctness 
down to the smallest detail. The King of the 
South mentioned in verse five was Ptolemy 
Lagus. The expression “one of his princes” 
may either refer to the fact that Ptolemy was one 
of Alexander’s princes, or, as others judge more 
likely, that Seleucas Nicator was in the begin- 
ning, subject to Ptolemy, who was strong above 
him, and had the greatest dominion of the four 
into which the empire had been divided. But 
upon the death of Lagus, when Ptolemy Soter 
succeeded him, conditions were reversed. The 
dominion of Seleucas was enlarged by the an- 
nexation of Babylon, Media, and the surround- 
ing nations. He threw off his allegiance to 
Egypt, and ruled independently. Naturally, 
this brought about a state of warfare and enmity 
between the two kingdoms; but, as we read in 
verse six, “in the end of years they shall join 
themselves together.” This was in the reign of 
Nicator’s grandson, Antiochus Theos. In his 
days a treaty of peace was arranged with 


Wars of the Ptolemies and Seleucide 197 


Ptolemy Philadelphus, which was confirmed by 
the king’s daughter of the South, Berenice, being 
given in marriage to Antiochus, who divorced 
his own wife Laodice for this purpose. But 
God had declared that she “ shall not retain the 
power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his 
arm: but she shall be given up, and they that 
brought her, and he that begat her, and he that 
strengthened her in these times.” All this was 
fulfilled as predicted. Laodice managed to stir 
up her friends against the king; and as a result 
Berenice and all her attendants were put to 
death. Antiochus then reinstated his divorced 
queen, who shortly afterwards poisoned him and 
had her son Seleucas Callinicus crowned in his 
stead. % 

“Out of a branch of the roots” of Berenice, 
that is from her family, one was to stand up 
in his place for office and come with an army 
into the fortress of the King of the North, and 
prevail against him (ver. 7). This refers to her 
brother, Ptolemy Euergetes, who, with a mighty 
army, forced his way across the land of Pales- 
tine, spreading desolation everywhere, actuated 
by the desire to avenge the murder of his sister, 
and to wipe out the dishonor inflicted on Egypt. 
He was everywhere successful, utterly defeating 
Callinicus and reaping an immense spoil. But 
tidings of a sedition in Egypt caused him to 
hasten back, carrying with him an immense num- 


198 Lectures on Daniel 


ber of captives with “their gods, with their 
princes, and with their precious vessels of silver 
and of gold.’ He did not return to Syria, and 
Callinicus himself died shortly afterwards by a 
fall from his horse. Ptolemy reigned four years 
longer, thus continuing “more years than the 
King of the North.” 

In the tenth verse the sons of Callinicus are 
contemplated. These are known in history as 
Seleucus Ceraunus and Antiochus the Great. 
They assembled a great force to inflict retribu- 
tion upon the Egyptians. But Ceraunus died 
in less than two years, leaving his brother sole 
ruler. He was one of the most notable kings 
of those days, and lost no time in pressing an 
Egyptian invasion. He led an army of seventy- 
five thousand against the hereditary foes of his 
house. But he proved no match for the indo- 
lent and despised King of the South, Ptolemy 
Philopator, who could barely be dragged away 
from his pleasures and follies to lead an army 
against the invaders. At the battle of Raphia, 
he defeated Antiochus with great slaughter, re- 
conquered all that had been wrested from him, 
put Antiochus under tribute, and returned to 
Egypt crowned with military glory. But like 
another Alexander, he then gave himself up to 
out-and-out wickedness and licentiousness, and 
upon a revolt soon after occurring in Syria, con- 


Wars of the Ptolemies and Seleucide 199 


cluded an ignoble peace with Antiochus, because 
too depraved and indolent to follow up his vic- 
tories. Upon his death, Egypt sank lower than 
it had been for years. All this we have briefly 
sketched in verses eleven and twelve. 

Upon the succession of his son Ptolemy Epiph- 
anes, a mere child, to the throne, Antiochus the 
Great formed an alliance with Philip the Third 
of Macedon, and sought also to rally the Jews 
to his standard. The faithful among them re- 
fused to serve in his army, but the apostates, 
called in verse fourteen, “the robbers of thy 
people,” readily entered into covenant with him 
and proved a very great help on a number of 
occasions. With his united armies he besieged 
the Egyptian garrison left in Jerusalem, and 
put it to the sword. He defeated Scopias the 
Egyptian general at Paneas, who fled to Sidon, 
a fenced city, but was there destroyed. The 
Egyptian armies, sent for the deliverance of 
Paneas, were likewise routed, and Antiochus 
found himself everywhere supreme. Upon his 
return from the Egyptian wars, he entered into 
“the glorious land,” that is Palestine, where, 
because of the help rendered by his Jewish 
troops, he bestowed upon the people many evi- 
dences of his favor. The last clause of verse six- 
teen should read, “ which by his hand shall be 
perfected.” It refers undoubtedly to the fact 


200 Lectures on Daniel 


that in his time Palestine became a more peace- 
ful and fruitful country than it had been for half 
a century. 

Verse seventeen was fulfilled in his effort to 
undermine the remaining influence and power 
of Ptolemy Epiphanes by giving him his daugh- 
ter Cleopatra to wife, having previously charged 
her that she should, after her marriage, in every- 
thing act for her father’s interests. But it was 
written, “she shall not stand on his side, neither 
be for him.” Cleopatra proved a faithful wife 
to Epiphanes, supporting him against her father, 
who was naturally much disappointed that his 
well-laid plans had completely miscarried. 

He determined now to extend the glory of his 
dominions by conquering Greece. The isles of 
the Aegean sea were first subjugated to his sway; 
and he then crossed over with his armies into 
Greece. But now a most unlocked-for event 
took place. The Iron Kingdom, destined to be 
the fourth and last upon earth, ere the estab- 
lishment of the kingdom of the Son of Man, was 
at this time just beginning to make its presence 
felt. The Grecians had entered into an alliance, 
offensive and defensive, with the Romans; and 
so they at once notified their powerful aitfies of 
the danger to which they were exposed. The 
senate commissioned Lucius Scipio Asiaticus to 
go to their relief with an army of tried warriors. 
He met Antiochus in battle and utterly defeated 


. 


Wars of the Ptolemies and Seleucide 204 


him, and on the most ignominious terms sent 
him back to his home. Scipio is undoubtedly the 
prince, or as some render it, captain, referred 
to in verse eighteen. Thus Antiochus, humbled 
and in deep distress, turned his face toward 
“the fort of his own land: ” but, according to the 
writing of the Scripture of truth, he was to 
stumble and fall and not be found. This he did, 
for in his need and desperation, attempting with 
a band of soldiers to plunder the temple of 
Jupiter at Elymais, he and his warriors were 
slain by the infuriated populace, incensed at 
what they considered an act of sacrilege of the 
gravest nature. 

In verse twenty we read, “ Then shall stand 
up in his estate one that causeth an exactor to 
pass over (margin), in the glory of the king- 
dom, but within few days he shall be destroyed, 
neither in anger, nor in battle.” This was the 
son of Antiochus, Seleucus Philopator, who in 
desperate need of money owing to the wretched 
condition in which his father had left the king- 
dom, sent Heliodorus to plunder the temple of 
Jehovah at Jerusalem. Upon his return with 
the booty, he treacherously assassinated his mas- 
ter after he had reigned twelve years, a “few 
days” as compared with the long reign of Antio- 
chus which extended to nearly forty years. 

From the twenty-first verse to the end of the 
thirty-fifth, we have before us the fearful mon- 


ster who has well been called the “ Antichrist 


202 Lectures on Daniel 


of the Old Testament,’ because of his unfailing 
enmity to the people and worship of Jehovah. 
He is the same as the one of whom we have 
already studied in the eighth chapter — the in- 
famous and blasphemous “ Little Horn” that 
sprang out of one of the four horns upon the 
head of the Grecian goat. His name is execrated 
to this day by all Jews in every land. He was 
called by his fawning courtiers Antiochus Epi- 
phanes, that is, the splendid or magnificent; but 
some wag of his day changed one letter of his 
name and called him Antiochus Epimanes, that 
is, the mad man; because of his wild pranks and 
almost insane follies and brutalities. He was 
stirred with such hatred against the Jews and 
their religion, that there was no atrocity too 
great for this wretched king to perpetrate. He 
is well described as a vile person, who came in 
peaceably, and obtained the kingdom by fiat- 
teries. At the beginning, he made a league both 
with the Jews and with Ptolemy Philometer, 
but proved false to each, as God had declared he 
would (vers. 22 to 24). “ The prince of the cove- 
nant ” in Israel was, I judge, a title given here 
to the high priest. It is a notorious fact that 
Epiphanes degraded the office to the last degree, 
selling the high priesthood to the vilest man to 
be found among the apostate part of the peopte. 

In accordance with verse twenty-five, he 
“stirred up his power and his courage against 


Wars of the Ptolemies and Seleucide 203 


the King of the South with a great army; ” and 
the King of the South, Philometer, came against 
him to battle “with a very great and mighty 
army,” but he was unable to stand because of 
devices forecasted against him, namely, through 
the treachery of his own sons and household 
servants who betrayed him to Antiochus, thus 
fulfilling verse twenty-six; “ Yea, they that feed 
of the portion of his meat shall destroy him, 
and his army shall overflow, and many shall fall 
down slain.” Professing great magnanimity, 
Antiochus proposed a truce, and the two kings 
met “at one table.” There they made promises 
which they never intended to keep, thus “ speak- 
ing lies ” (ver. 27). 

Angered by the exultation of the Jews who 
had heard that he had been slain in Egypt, Antio 
chus marched his armies against Jerusalem, 
which he caused to pass through all the horrors 
of a siege and sack, sparing neither age, sex, nor 
condition. In their desperation the Jews ap- 
pealed to the Romans, who had before interfered 
on behalf of the Grecians, and requested their 
assistance in what was to them a life and death 
struggle for their religion and their liberty. 
Marching against the Maccabees, Antiochus 
was met by Popilius Loenus and the other Ro- 
man envoys at the head of an army. Popilius 
demanded that Antiochus at once cease his in- 
terference with the Jews, and bind himself to 


204 Lectures on Daniel 


accept the decree of the Roman senate, keep the 
peace, and acknowledge Rome’s authority. Epi- 
phanes asked for time to consider the terms pro- 
posed for his acceptance. But Popilius with his 
sword or staff at once drew a circle around 
Antiochus and demanded that he decide before 
he stepped out of the ring. Having no alterna- 
tive, he submitted, evidently with no inten- 
tion of keeping the pledges he made. The “ ships 
of Chittim,” of verse 30, refer doubtless to the 
Roman galleys sent in response to the pitiful 
plea of the Jews. 

After the Romans had gone, Antiochus for- 
swore his allegiance and turned once more upon 
the devoted sons of Israel, “ having indignation 
against the holy covenant.” Certain traitorous 
Jews, here described as “them that forsake the 
holy covenant,” formed a league with him and 
betrayed their own compatriots to the tyrant 
who hated them. He set up a statue of Jupiter 
Olympus, whom he identified with himself, in 
the temple at Jerusalem; sacrificed a sow upon 
the altar, and put a stop to the oblations to 
Jehovah, declaring that he alone should be an 
object of worship. The faithful of Judah, horri- 
fied beyond measure at his unspeakable sacrilege, 
took up arms against him, led by the heroic 
family of the Maccabees, and were slaughtered 
by thousands. 

This was the placing of “ the abomination that 


Wars of the Ptolemies and Seleucide 205 


maketh desolate,” predicted in verse 31, in con- 
nection with the pollution of the sanctuary and 
the taking away of the daily sacrifice. 

The next chapter speaks of another abomina- 
tion of desolation, which our Lord Jesus Christ, 
in Matthew, chapter 24, declared was still fu- 
ture, when He was upon earth. Of that abomi- 
nation we shall read in the last chapter. The 
2300 days of chapter 8 commenced with this act 
of desecration by Antiochus. At the end of that 
_ period, the sanctuary was cleansed, and sacrifices 
to Jehovah re-instituted. 

Verses 32 to 35 describe the conditions pre- 
vailing among the Jews in that awful time of 
suffering, never to be paralleled until the great 
tribulation of the last days. In fact they pic- 
ture the whole history of the people of Judah 
from the time when they were joined to the Ro- 
man empire right on to the time of the end, or 
the 70th week of which we have already spoken. 

Between verses 35 and 36 there is an interval 
of many centuries. The history of the Kings of 
the North and South is now closed, and another 
dreadful character, of whom Antiochus Epiph- 
anes was merely a forerunner, or type, is at once 
introduced; the wilful king, the great personal 
Antichrist of the last days. Of him our next 
lecture will treat. 

And now, in concluding this historical out- 
line of the wars of the Kings of the North and 


206 Lectures on Daniel 


the South, I would press upon each one, that 
prophecy is indeed but history prewritten, and 
in this instance, even in the minutest details, 
history is seen to be prophecy fulfilled. Terrible 
indeed is the presumption of any, who with such 
a record in their hands refuse to heed its solemn 
lessons, and deliberately reject the testimony of 
the inspired word of God. It seems to me that 
even the natural mind, if at all unbiased and 
willing to learn, must be impressed by this re- 
markable correspondence between history and 
prophecy, leading any truly honest soul to ex- 
claim, “ God spake all these words!” 

And remember that He who spake these words 
is the God who has inspired all Scripture, and 
who will hold all men responsible to accept the 
testimony He gives them, upon pain of everlast- 
ing banishment from His holy presence if they 
persist in rebelling against His authority and re- 
fusing His word. That Word is given you now 
to warn you of your danger and point the way 
to salvation. That Word will be opened on the 
day of judgment; and if you appear there un- 
saved, you must be judged according to what is 
there written. And just as in the ages to come, 
when the redeemed look back over their path- 
way here on earth, they shall exclaim, like Israel 
in the land of Canaan, “ There hath not failed 
one word of all His good promise;” so will each 


Wars of the Ptolemies and Seleucide 207 


lost soul cry out in bitter anguish, “Not one 
word has failed of all that God declared in re- 
gard to the doom of the impenitent and the 
Christ rejecter! ” 

Oh, how important, then, that you have to 
do with the God who gave you the Bible, now, 
on the ground of the atoning work of His blessed 
Son, that you should know Him as your own 
personal Saviour. Would that you might be 
aroused by these addresses, you who have no 
hope and are without God in the world, to see 
the danger in which you stand, and your need 
of turning to Him, who once in infinite grace 
gave Himself for our sins on Calvary’s cross of 
shame. 

The Maccabees, in the days of Antiochus, 
were called the hammers of God, and God has 
asked, “Is not My word like a fire and a ham- 
mer that breaketh the rock in pieces?” Preach- 
ing the gospel is just like hammering away at 
hard hearts. Alas, that there is so little re- 
sponse! I have heard of a gentleman, a travel- 
ing man, who used to go to a town where there 
were many great factories and foundries. In 
that town scores of immense steel hammers were 
pounding away continuously. The noise was 
deafening, and this gentleman of whom I speak, 
found it impossible to sleep in that town, for 
there was no cessation of the noise day or night. 


208 Lectures on Paniel 


But the people of the town were so thoroughly 
used to it that they could sleep on through it 
all. But one night something went wrong with 
the power plant, and all the hammers stopped. 
At once all the town woke up. What awakened 
them? It was the unusual quiet and stillness 
succeeding the years of deafening sound. Be- 
loved friends, the day has now drawn very near 
when God’s hammers shall all cease their pound- 
ing. Soon gospel days will have ended, preach- 
ing the message of love and grace which you 
have refused so long will have ceased; and then, 
ah then! there will indeed be a great awakening 
—an awakening when it is too late to be saved; 
when the great men and the chief captains and 
the mighty men, and every bondman and every 
free man will hide themselves in the dens and 
in caves of the mountains and will cry to the 
rocks, “ Fall on us,” and to the hills, “ Cover 
us, and hide us from the face of Him that sitteth 
upon the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb; 
for the great day of His wrath is come, and who 
shall be able to stand? ” 

But no hiding place will avail in that day, 
for God will then be dealing no longer in grace, 
but in stern intrinsic justice with those who 
have not received the love of the truth that they 
might be saved. Their heart-rending cry will 
be, “ The harvest is passed, the summer is ended, 
and I am not saved.” 


Wars of the Ptolemies and Seleucide 209 


O dear unsaved one, weigh these things well, 
and trifle no longer with the question of the eter- 
nal destiny of your precious soul still unsettled. 
If you continue to do despite to the Spirit of 
grace, “ what wilt thou say when He ghal\ bonis. 
thee? * 


LECTURE XII 
CHAPTER XI: 36— 45 
THB ANTICHRIST 


$6 E know,” says the apostle John, “that 

Antichrist shall come.” He at once goes 
on to say that already there are many anti- 
christs; but he distinguishes clearly between 
these lesser forerunners of the final apostasy 
and the future impious personage who is so fre- 
quently mentioned in prophecy as the very in- 
carnation of lawlessness and blasphemy, but is 
only here distinctly called by name. 

I suppose there are very few prophetic teach- 
ers, of any scriptural discernment, who question 
the application of the present passage to Anti- 
christ. The only question would be as to his 
identity; and as to that, a great many different 
solutions of the problem have been proposed. 
According to many, Antiochus Epiphanes ful- 
filled in himself all that is here predicted of the 
wilful king. Others, who recognize the interval 
referred to in the last address, between verses 
35 and 36, apply the passage, together with the 
first part of Revelation, chapter 13, which they 


consider parallel with this, to the emperor Nero, 
210 


The Antichrist 211 


the first Roman persecutor of the Christians. 
To many of the fathers, Simon Magus, the im- 
postor of Acts, chapter 8, was the Antichrist. 
Some Romanist doctors applied the passage to 
Mohammed, the false prophet of Arabia; while 
Protestant interpreters without number, from 
Luther’s day to the present, have found in these 
words a description of the papacy. Others there 
are — and their judgment seems to me to be the 
correct one — who hold that neither any nor all 
of these characters fully meet the requirements 
of the case; and that consequently the Antichrist 
is still to arise in the future, and will only come 
upon the scene in the Time of the End. 

Before concluding this lecture I hope to make 
clear my reasons for not being able to accept 
the hypothesis that the papacy, while manifestly 
antichristian in character, is the Antichrist. At 
present I shall simply endeavor to bring out 
what seems to me to be the clear teaching of the 
passage. 

And first, in order that we may have plainly 
before our minds the part to be played by Anti- 
christ in the world’s great crisis, I desire briefly 
to attempt to point out the various leaders who 
are to occupy prominent positions in the coming 
day. 

We have already found, in our study of this 
book, that in the latter times, when the trans- 
gressors are come to the full, the Roman empire 


212 Lectures on Daniel 


is to be revived in a ten-kingdomed condition. 
Ten European powers are to be united in one 
federation. To bring this about there will be a 
union of socialistic and imperialistic policies. 
One of these ten kings will become arbiter of 
Europe. This chief ruler it is who is called in 
Revelation, chapter 18: 1-8, and other portions, 
emphatically, “The Beast.” In the seventh 
chapter of Daniel he is seen as the Little Horn 
of the West. In the Time of the End this Little 
Horn, the Beast, will have his seat in Rome. 
He will be utterly infidel, throwing off all pre- 
tension to the fear of God, and will set himself 
up as the only god worthy of adoration. To him 
apostate Christendom will pay universal homage 
after the destruction of the great anti-church, 
“Babylon, the mother of harlots and abomina- 
tions of the earth.” This worship will evidently 
not only be the acknowledgment that Deity 
dwells in this man, it will be also the recogni- 
tion of the blasphemous tenet (for which Chris- 
tian Science, so-called, and the self-styled New 
Thought are now preparing the way) that God 
and man are one. The Beast will be the em- 
bodiment of intellectual force and brilliancy, the 
peerless coming man for whom the nations have 
been waiting solong. Like Napoleon Bonaparte, 
who perhaps more nearly corresponded to this 
character than any other man that ever lived, he 
will dazzle the nations by his almost superhuman 


The Antichrist 213 


abilities and unparalleled success. To him men 
will gladly grant the title Napoleon arrogated to 
himself, “‘ The Man of Destiny.” 

In the East, as we saw in chapter eight, an- 
other power will for a time dispute the preemi- 
nence of the Beast. This will be the Little Horn 
of Asia. The last Gentile ruler of the lands now 
dominated by Turkey will be the one in whom 
this prophecy is fulfilled. He is in no sense to 
be confounded with the Little Horn of the sev- 
enth chapter. The one arises out of the Roman 
empire; the other, from one of the divisions of 
the empire of Alexander the Great. This latter 
king is identified, I believe, with the Assyrian 
of Isaiah, chap. 10:24, 25. He will be the spe- 
cial enemy of the Jews in the Time of the End. 
In the passage referred to we read, after the 
prophecy of the return of the remnant to their 
land, “ Therefore thus saith the Lord God of 
hosts, O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not 
afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee with 
a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, 
after the manner of Egypt. For yet a very little 
while, and the indignation shall cease, and Mine 
anger in their destruction.” We get the manner 
of this destruction in Isaiah, chap. 14: 24, 25: 
“The Lord of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely 
as I have thought, so shall it came to pass; and 
as I have purposed, so shall it stand: that I will 
break the Assyrian in My land, and upon My 


214 Lectures on Daniel 


mountains tread him under foot: then shall his 
yoke depart from off them, and his burden de- 
part from off their shoulders.” It is not to any 
past destruction of Assyria that these words re- 
fer; for this discomfiture is to take place after 
the restoration of Israel to Palestine in the last 
days. It will be God’s settlement of the so-called 
Eastern Question. 

We learned that this Little Horn will stand 
up in great wrath against the Jews, “but not 
in his own power.” He is evidently to have the 
backing of some more powerful nation, who for 
selfish purposes will aid him in his nefarious 
effort to destroy the people of God in that day. 
In Ezekiel, chapters thirty-eight and thirty-nine, 
we find, I have no doubt, a full account of the 
power referred to. There we read of “ Gog, the 
chief prince of Meshech and Tubal.” Scholars 
generally are agreed that in place of “ chief 
prince,” we should read, “ prince of Rosh”; and 
there can hardly be any question that Rosh 
means Russia. ‘“ Gog, the prince of Rosh, Me- 
shech, and Tubal,” will evidently be the last czar 
of all the Russias. Some suppose Meshech and 
Tubal to be identical with Moscow and Tobolsk, 
the ancient European and Asiatic capitals of the 
Slav empire. It would seem that this ruler will 
join with the Turkish sultan in opposing the pre- 
tensions of the Beast. We can already see events 
in Europe tending to this. There will be a west: 


The Antichrist 215 


ern and an eastern confederation, and Palestine 
will be the bone of contention between them. 

A fourth figure, destined to attract consider- 
able attention in the crisis will be the King of 
the South, a future ruler of an apparently inde- 
pendent Egypt, who, while opposed to Antichrist, 
nevertheless would seem to act in conjunction 
with the Beast in opposition to his hereditary 
enemies the Turks. 

In the book of the Revelation the apostle 
speaks of the drying up of the Euphrates, “ that 
the way of the kings of the East (or, from the 
sunrising) might be prepared.” The drying up 
of the Euphrates would seem to imply the break- 
ing up of the Turkish power; for as the Nile 
stands for Egypt, so does the Euphrates for the 
Ottoman empire. The kings of the sunrising 
may very well be a descriptive term referring 
to the nations of the Far East, the “ Yellow 
Peril,” dreaded by European statesmen, disput- 
ing the possession of the gate to the Orient with 
the Beast. 

If we are thus far correct in our effort to fore- 
east from Scripture the principals in the last 
great drama of Gentile dominion, we have located 
an emperor-king of the West, a king of the North, 
a king of the South, and an alliance of kings 
of the East, all of whose armies will be marching 
down upon Palestine at about the same time — 
Jehovah’s land to be the battle-ground for the 


216 Lectures on Daniel 


fearful Armageddon conflict. Thus Palestine 
will be exposed to all the horrors and ravages 
incident to the last premillennial war. It is for 
this time of horror, little as they realize it, that 
the Jews from eastern and southern Europe are 
now returning in large numbers to their ancient 
home. They are going back that their fore- 
fathers’ awful prayer may be fully answered, 
“His blood be upon us and upon our children.” 
Poor misguided people — the nation of the wan- 
dering foot —they fancy that at last a refuge 
is being provided for them where they will be 
safe from persecution and secure from danger; 
but they are really preparing unwittingly for 
the wine-press of the wrath of God, from which 
blood shall flow to the horses’ bridles for one 
thousand six hundred furlongs—the whole 
actual length of Palestine (Rev. 14:18 to 20). 

After the Church has been called away to 
heaven, there will arise in the city of Jerusalem 
a man who will present himself to the Jews as 
the Messiah long promised through the prophets. 
The apostate part of the nation will at once 
acknowledge his claims; they will say of him, 
“This is indeed the Messiah for whom we have 
waited so long; this is the one of whom our Scrip- 
tures speak.” I judge he will be largely instru- 
mental, in the beginning, in securing them con- 
cessions from the Turkish government, that they 
may be established in their land. Afterwards 


The Antichrist 217 


he will form a league with the Roman Beast, 
establishing a covenant between him and the na- 
tion for seven years, guaranteeing his protec- 
tion and the integrity of the new Jewish state. 
Such is the program already outlined by the 
great Zionist leader Zangwill, and the Jewish 
agitator Max Nordau, who said, some time ago, 
“We are ready to own any man as our Messiah, 
who will establish us again in the land of our 
fathers.” 

This will be, I doubt not, exactly what will 
take place in the coming day. Some great Jew 
— perhaps he is living now — is going to come to 
the front who will have much to do in bringing 
about this restoration. He will be acknowledged 
by the western powers as political head of Pal- 
estine. He is “the king” of verse 36 in our 
chapter, “ who shall do according to his will; 
and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself 
above every god, and shall speak marvelous 
things against the God of gods, and shall prosper 
till the indignation be accomplished: for that 
that is determined shall be done. Neither shall 
he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire 
of women, nor regard any god: for he shall mag- 
nify himself above all. But in his estate shall 
he honor the god of forces: and a god whom his 
fathers knew not shall he honor with gold and 
silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant 
things. ‘This shall he do in the most strong 


218 Lectures on Daniel 


holds with a strange god whom he shall acknowl- 
edge and increase with glory: and he shall cause 
certain literal rendering to rule over many, and 
shall divide the land for gain.” 

I now desire to bring to your attention the 
proofs that the Antichrist must be a Jew living 
in the land of Palestine, with his seat in Jeru- 
salem, who will be acknowledged by the nation 
of Israel as their Messiah; and in doing so I 
wish to contrast with this the position of the 
Roman Catholic pope, and point out why, to 
my mind, he cannot possibly be the one here 
prophesied of; for no pope has ever yet fulfilled 
these necessary qualifications; nor is there any 
likelihood that one ever shall. In the first place, 
it is important to notice that the name Anti- 
christ means simply the false Messiah; that is, 
he is the one to whom our Lord Jesus Christ re- 
ferred when He said, “‘ I am come in My Father’s 
name, and ye receive Me not; if another shall 
come in his own name, him ye will receive.” 
The Antichrist then is to be received by the Jews. 
Has this ever been the case with the popes, or 
is there any apparent possibility that the Jew- 
ish people will ever acknowledge the papacy 
(which has existed for long centuries) as their 
Messiah, the hope of their nation? It was to the 
Jews that Messiah was promised. To them He 
came in grace, only to be rejected. When the 


The Antichrist 219 


false Messiah comes they will own his claims, and 
hail his advent with joy. 

You should not imply from this that Judah 
alone will be deceived by him. From the second 
chapter of 2d Thessalonians (a passage we shall 
be considering later on), it is plain that apos- 
tate Christendom will also fall into his snare. 
The Roman Beast will be the civil ruler of the 
West, while Antichrist will be the religious ruler. 
The power behind both will be ‘that old ser- 
pent, which is the devil, and Satan.” This will 
be the anti-trinity — the devil, the Beast, and the 
false prophet. By these will all the nations of 
the earth be deceived. 

Now, as the Jews have never owned the pope 
as Messiah, neither has any pope made a seven- 
years’ covenant with them, nor yet had his throne 
in Jerusalem, nor dwelt in the land of Palestine, 
so it seems clear that there is practically noth- 
ing in Scripture to identify the papacy with the 
Antichrist. Do not misunderstand me, and 
think that I am pleading for the papacy. I 
believe it to be a most evil thing, but it is not 
the Antichrist. 

When he comes he is to do according to his 
will, and to exalt himself and magnify himself 
above every god. These gods are undoubtedly 
the idols of the heathen. But he is also to 
“speak marvelous things against the God of 


220 Lectures on Daniel 


gods, and he shall not regard the God of his 
fathers.” Now I submit that only in the wild- 
est hyperbole can such words be applied to the 
worst of the popes. It is true that some have 
permitted themselves to be addressed most blas- 
phemously. It is true that a Jesuit writer even 
dares to speak of “our Lord God the pope.” It 
is likewise true that the pope has been said to 
have an intimacy with the Father in which even 
the Lord Jesus Christ does not share. This is 
based upon the Lord’s words to Peter concern- 
ing his confession: ‘Flesh and blood hath not 
revealed it unto thee, but My Father which is in 
heaven.” From this, argue the Jesuit sophists, 
it is evident that the first pope (!) had special 
illuminations and secrets with the Father in 
which the Son did not share; and the same 
privilege, they have declared, belongs to his suc- 
cessors; so that it is safer in some cases to go 
to the pope than to Christ! Now all these 
things, I grant you, are terrible enough: they 
are horribly blasphemous, and must make every 
truly devout soul shrink in horror from such 
teaching. But when the last great antichrist 
arises there will be worse even than this. The 
pope, at least, has never claimed to be above 
every god. His very title disproves this. He is 
called the vicegerent of Christ, and he takes the 
place of being, in a very special sense, God’s rep- 
resentative upon the earth. It will be otherwise 


The Antichrist 221 


with the Antichrist. He refuses to own any 
God. He comes in his own name, and he utterly 
denies “the God of his fathers.” What are we 
to understand by this last expression? Can it be 
other than that he is a Jew, and that his fathers 
after the flesh were Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? 
Such is the invariable use of the expression in 
the Old Testament. I take it as conclusive evi- 
dence that the Antichrist is by birth a Jew, but 
a Jew who has apostatized from the God of his 
fathers. How could any but a Jew impose upon 
his nation as being the Messiah, when it is clearly 
predicted in their Scriptures that the Hope of 
Israel is to spring from the favored nation? 

We are also told, in verse 37, that he shall not 
regard the desire of women, nor any god; for he 
shall magnify himself above all. Now it seems 
evident that One only can be meant by “ the de- 
sire of women.” Every Jewish woman hoped 
that it might be the will of God that through 
her the Messiah would be born into the world. 
He was emphatically the Desire of women. An- 
tichrist utterly disregards Him, pretending to 
be himself the predicted One. 

But there is a god whom he owns, though eyvi- 
dently a merely natural and human personage. 
He “shall honor the god of forces, a god whom 
his fathers knew not, and whom he shall honor 
with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, 
and pleasant things.” This god can be no other 


222 Lectures on Daniel 


than the Little Horn, the Roman Beast. To 
him, as we have seen, Antichrist will turn for 
assistance and support; and, on his part, he will 
acknowledge and increase with glory this civil 
head of the empire, “ causing him to rule over 
many ” who might not otherwise have owned his 
sway, and dividing with him the land of Pales- 
tine for gain. Now I maintain that it is utterly 
incongruous to attempt to apply all this to the 
pope; but taken in its natural meaning, all is 
plain and simple. 

From the fortieth verse to the end of the chap- 
ter we have a graphic account of the beginning 
of the conflict of the last days. The King of the 
South marches against Jerusalem, and the King 
of the North comes down like a whirlwind with 
a vast army and navy, entering into the glori- 
ous land and the adjacent countries, with the 
exception of the lands anciently occupied by 
Edom, Moab, and Ammon. He is at first every- 
where triumphant. Egypt is unable to stand 
against his victorious armies, and he asserts his 
Sway over the land of the Pharaohs, and Libya, 
and Ethiopia. But alarmed by tidings out of 
the East and the North, he turns back with great 
fury to meet the powers — doubtless of the Beast 
and the kings from the sunrising. But upon the 
mountains of Israel, between the seas, he comes 
to his end, and none can help him. Thus the 
last King of the North, the Eastern Little Horn} 


The Antichrist 223 


_is finally destroyed. Of Antichrist’s destruc- 
_ tion we do not here read. That is given us in 
_ Revelation, chap. 19: 20. 
Ere closing, I wish to link up with this several 
_ other scriptures that add to our knowledge of 
_ the false Messiah. In the eleventh chapter of 
Zechariah, after the prophet, personifying the 
Lord Jesus as the Good Shepherd, is priced at 
thirty pieces of silver, Zechariah is bidden to 
take the instruments of a foolish shepherd. 
“For, lo,’ says God, “I will raise up a shep- 
herd in the land, which shall not visit those that 
be cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor 
heal that that is broken, nor feed that that stand- 
eth still: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, 
and tear their hoofs in pieces. Woe to the idol 
shepherd that leaveth the flock! the sword shall 
be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm 
shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall 
be utterly darkened” (vers. 16,17). This idol 
shepherd is clearly the same as the wilful king 
of our chapter. He is to be raised up in the 
land — an expression which can refer only to the 
land of Palestine. He is, beyond a doubt, the 
one to whom the Lurd Jesus was referring in 
John, chap. 5:48, who would come in his own 
name. The true Shepherd had been rejected, the 
false one they would receive. 

We may now turn to the thirteenth chapter 
of Revelation. In the first half of the chapter 


224 Lectures on Daniel 


we have the description of the Roman Beast. 
But, beginning with verse 11, we read of an- 
other Beast coming up out of the earth, or land; 
and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke 
as a dragon. That is, he looks like, and pre- 
sents himself as, the Lamb of God; but his speech 
is that of the great deceiver of souls. He ex- 
ercises all the power of the first Beast before 
him, demanding that all worship the first Beast; 
even doing great wonders, so that he maketh fire 
come down from heaven upon the earth in the 
sight of men, to deceive them, in order that they 
may acknowledge the claims of the Beast. He 
it is who sets up the abomination of desolation, 
causing men to make an image to the Beast, 
which all must worship on pain of death. All 
this is in perfect harmony with what we have 
learned as to the mutual relationship of the 
Beast and Antichrist in the book of Daniel. The 
lamblike Beast comes up from the earth. He 
is in the land, and his placing the abomination 
that maketh desolate is the signal given by the 
Lord Jesus for the faithful remnant to flee from 
Jerusalem. 

The signs and wonders by means of which 
he deceives the world are also mentioned in 2 
Thessalonians, chapter two. When laboring in 
Thessalonica, the apostle had shown them that 
before the day of the Lord would come Christ 
Himself would descend into the air, and all His 


The Antichrist 225 


saints would be caught up to meet Him. Of this 
He reminds them in 1 Thessalonians, chapter 
four. But it would seem that a report had got- 
ten abroad among them that the day of the Lord 
had already come, and he writes to correct this. 
He bids them not to be shaken in their minds, 
nor fearful in regard to this; for, he tells them, 
that day could not come until the apostasy had 
first taken place and the man of sin been re- 
vealed, “the son of perdition, who opposeth and 
exalteth himself above all that is called God, or 
that is worshiped; so that he as God sitteth in 
the temple of God, showing himself that he is 
God.” But he goes on to speak of a Hinderer, 
who at the present time is holding back the fiood- 
tide of evil. That Hinderer is the presence of 
the Holy Ghost in the Church on earth. At the 
rapture of the saints, when all the redeemed are 
caught up to meet the Lord in the air, the Holy 
Spirit will have returned to heaven. “ Then 
shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord 
shall consume with the spirit of His mouth, and 
shall destroy with the brightness of His com- 
ing: even him whose coming is after the working 
of Satan with all power and signs and lying 
wonders, and with all deceivableness of unright:- 
eousness in them that perish; because they re- 
ceived not the love of the truth, that they might 
be saved. And for this cause God shall send 
them strong delusion, that they should believe 


226 Lectures on Daniel 


e lie: that they all might be damned who believed 
not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteous- 
ness” (vers. 8 to 12). 

How perfectly this fits in with the testimony 
we have been examining in other parts of the 
word of God! While the Church is on earth the 
mystery of lawlessness is already working, but 
the full revelation of evil cannot be while we are 
in this scene. When that time comes we shall 
be above it all, having been caught up to meet 
the Lord in the air. 

The mystery of lawlessness and the many anti- 
christs of 1 John chap. 2:18 are intimately con- 
nected. So here we have a point of agreement 
with persons who think that the papacy is the 
Antichrist. We differ with them only as to the 
use of the article. The papal system is an anti- 
christ; and this is true of every system that 
turns souls away from the truth concerning 
Christ and His work as the alone ground of sal- 
vation. Christian Science is an antichrist; 
Theosophy is another; Mormonism is another; 
and so with Spiritism, and a host of other an- 
cient and modern cults and fads. The crown- 
ing evil of them all is perhaps what is now 
known as the New Theology, heralded from a 
thousand pulpits as the finished product of mod- 
ern thought, by men who glory in their freedom 
from subjection to the word of God, and do not 
hesitate to brand the Scrivtures as a collection 


The Antichrist 227 


of myths and fables, untrustworthy, and less 
to be relied upon than their own vapid utter- 
ances. Every little while some one who has been 
supposed to be an orthodox Christian preacher 
comes out with the declaration that he has dis- 
covered the unreliability of this or that book of 
the Bible, and his reckless assertions are re- 
ceived with delight by congregations of Christ- 
less, unconverted professors, who are glad to 
be absolved from allegiance to a book whose 
teachings make them uneasy in conscience while 
living for themselves in the world. 

If the day ever came that a man who had 
actually known the Lord Jesus as his own 
Saviour, and had enjoyed communion with Him, 
was forced by irresistible evidence to believe that 
the Bible was not true, and the precious gospel 
story an unreliable tradition of men, do you 
know what would happen? It would break his 
heart. He would never be found among the shal- 
low, empty religionists of the day, who can com- 
placently acquiesce in the vaporings of the so- 
called Higher Critics and New Theology 
preachers. He would be found weeping with 
Mary, and exclaiming in deepest grief, “ They 
have taken away my Lord, and I know not where 
they have laid Him.” 

But it is far otherwise with these unreal pro- 
fessors who drink in so greedily the veneered 
infidelity that Christless preachers proclaim. 


228 Lectures on Daniel 


What does it do for these men? When they 
thought the Bible true, it served as a check 
upon their lawless desires and appetites. They 
chafed under its restraints. But when the time 
comes that the whole thing goes out of the win- 
dow, and they become enfranchised, as they call 
it, they were never so happy in all their life! 
Ah, I assure you, beloved, people who really 
have known Christ would feel very differently 
about having to give up the precious word of 
God through which He had been revealed to their 
souls. You see, such are acquainted with the 
divine Person, the Son of the living God. The 
others had but a theory which they are thankful 
enough to be rid of. 

Those who preach these false gospels are the 
many antichrists of the present dispensation. 
When the lawless one himself is revealed, they 
will be the first to acknowledge his impious 
claims, deceived by the strong delusion sent from 
God that all might be judged who received not 
the love of the truth that they might be saved. 

Already it would seem as though that strong 
delusion were beginning. I know nothing sad- 
der, nothing more lamentable, than the awful 
power of these evil things that are spreading 
through Christendom, eating out its very life, 
like a moral or religious cancer. How seldom 
you ever see a soul brought back from the aw- 
ful abyss of Spiritism! How seldom persons 


The Antichrist 228 


are ever recovered from Theosophy or Chris- 
tian Science! And the reason is plain: there 
is a Satanic power, working in them all, that 
gains absolute control over those who have heard 
the gospel of God only to refuse and reject it. 
But, thank God, there are those to whom the 
words of the apostle apply: “ But we are bound 
to give thanks to God for you, brethren beloved 
of the Lord, because God hath, from the begin- 
ning, chosen you to salvation, through sanctifica- 
tion of the Spirit and belief of the truth.” 

God grant that each one that hears these words 
may thus be manifested as a child of God, born 
of the Holy Spirit and of the word, happy in 
the knowledge of peace made and redemption 
accomplished through the glorious work of 
Christ upon the cross. 


LECTURE XIillI 
CHAPTER XII 
THE TIME OF THE END 


HIS final chapter connects intimately with 

that which has gone before. “At that 
time,”— that is, at the time of the rise of the 
Antichrist and the overthrow of the Assyrian 
or King of the North,—“ shall Michael stand up, 
the great prince which standeth for the children 
of thy [Daniel’s] people.” There is very likely 
a close connection here with what we have re- 
corded in the twelfth chapter of the book of 
Revelation. There John sees war in heaven. 
The dragon and his angels fight to maintain 
their place in the upper air, where they may 
have access to the presence of God, that Satan 
the accuser, or adversary of Zechariah chap. 3, 
may still resist the Jews,— a remnant of whom 
will have turned to the Lord. But the time 
having come when God will act openly on their 
behalf, Michael and his angels are sent to expel 
the Satanic hosts from the heavens. Defeated 
above, the devil turns to vent his wrath upon 
the remnant, the seed of the woman, Israel, who 


is seen in the beginning of the chapter, and 
230 


The Time of the End 231 


“from whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ 
came.” He and His Church, together repre- 
sented in the Man-child, having been caught up 
to God and to His throne, there will no longer 
be found on earth any rightfully bearing the 
name of Christians. But the fulness of the Gen- 
tiles having come in, the Jews will be grafted 
back into their own olive tree, and to them will 
be committed the testimony for the Time of the 
End. Against this remnant-company all the 
malice of the devil will be directed,—“ And there 
shall be a time of trouble, such as never was 
since there was a nation even to that same time: ” 
but at that time Daniel’s people shall be delivered 
(not all who were Jews by natural birth, but) 
“everyone that shall be found written in the 
book.” These are they whose names are written 
in the Book of Life of the slain Lamb, from the 
foundation of the world; and for them the earthly 
kingdom has been prepared. 

Tested by the proclamation of the everlasting 
gospel on the one hand, and the placing of the 
abomination that maketh desolate on the other. 
there will be a national and religious awaken- 
ing on the part of those who have so long been 
sleeping among the dead. The second verse does 
not, I believe, speak of an actual physical resur- 
rection, but rather of a moral and national one. 
“Many of them that sleep in the dust of the 
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and 


232 Lectures on Daniel 


some to shame and everlasting contempt.” It 
is the same kind of language that is used both 
in Isaiah 26: 12-19, and Ezekiel 37, to describe 
Israel’s national and spiritual revival. For cen- 
turies they have been sleeping in the dust of the 
earth, buried among the Gentiles. Their awak- 
ening will have taken place at last; but while 
for some it will be to everlasting life and bless- 
ing in the glorious kingdom of the Son of Man 
soon to be established, for the apostates it will 
be to everlasting shame and contempt because of 
their submission to the Beast and the Antichrist. 

Then shall the wise (that is, the teachers 
among the remnant, the same class who are re- 
ferred to in the latter part of verse ten) ‘ shine 
as the brightness of the firmament; and they 
that turn many to righteousness, as the stars 
for ever and ever.’”’ While these words refer 
primarily to the faithful of Judah in that day, 
we also may find encouragement and cheer in 
them. ‘“ He that winneth souls is wise;” or as 
the Revised Version puts it, “He that is wise 
winneth souls.’ May ours be the wisdom that 
leads us so to walk as to commend the gospel 
of Christ to all with whom we come in contact, 
that thus we may be in very deed winners of 
souls, turning many to righteousness. 

Daniel was told to shut up the words and seal 
the book, even to the Time of the End. This is 
in marked contrast with the message of the an- 


The Time of the End 233 


gel to the apostle John, at the close of the book 
of Revelation. “And he saith unto me, Seal not 
the sayings of the prophecy of this book: for 
the time is at hand.” The present age or church 
period is looked at as being but a moment, so 
to speak, in the ways of God. Messiah having 
come and been rejected by Israel, the next thing 
in prophetic order is the Time of the End. If 
this dispensation be lengthened out a little 
longer, it is but an evidence of God’s long-suffer- 
ing to sinners, being not willing that any should 
perish ; but that all should turn to Him and live. 
Throughout the New Testament, the end is al- 
ways looked upon as having drawn nigh: there- 
fore, through the book of Revelation, the seal is 
removed, as it were, from the book of Daniel, 
and the latter prophecy is found to be the key 
to the former. The fourth verse closes with the 
statement that “ many shall run to and fro, and 
knowledge shall be increased.” Could anything 
more aptly set forth the chief characteristics of 
these last days? Men seem to have a perfect 
mania for traveling from place to place; and 
human inventions of all kinds are pressed into 
service to accelerate and make comfortable those 
who thus run to and fro. Coupled with this we 
have the ever-widening diffusion of the produc- 
tions of the press, so that knowledge of all kinds 
is indeed increased. May we not see in these 
things one evidence that we have almost reached 


234 Lectures on Daniel 


the special prophetic period denominated as ‘the 
“Time of the End’? 

From the fifth verse to the end of our chapter 
we seem to have a kind of an appendix. The 
writing of the “scripture of truth,’ which the 
angel began to unfold in the beginning of chap- 
ter eleven, was concluded in the fourth verse. 
What follows gives additional light as to times 
and seasons. The awe-inspiring being, described 
in chapter ten, is still with Daniel; but two 
other angels appear on the scene also, one stand- 
ing on each bank of the river. One of these 
speaks to the man clothed in linen and asks: 
“How long shall it be to the end of these won- 
ders?” He is evidently referring to the Great 
Tribulation; and he inquires its actual duration. 
The answer is given, with great solemnity, that 
it shall be “for a time, times, and a half; and 
when he shall have accomplished to scatter the 
power of the holy people, all these things shall 
be finished.” This agrees with the times given 
in chapter 7:25, during which the Little Horn 
was to be permitted to speak great things against 
the Most High, and to think to change times and 
laws. At its expiration the judgment was to sit 
and his dominion be taken away. This is of 
course the premillennial warrior-judgment de- 
scribed in the nineteenth chapter of Revelation. 
The angel’s declaration that “ when he shal! have 
aceomplished to scatter the power of the holy 


The Time of the End 235 


people, all these things shall be fulfilled,” refers 
undoubtedly to this Little Horn’s violent per- 
secution of the remnant, to be followed by the 
manifestation of Messiah. 

Daniel tells us that he heard but understood 
not. Through the book of Revelation we need 
not be perplexed as he was, for God has now 
unfolded all this, in order that we may more 
fully enter into His ways. The prophet was 
told to go his way; “For the words are closed 
up and sealed till the Time of the End.” In 
that time, ‘many shall be purified, and made 
white, and tried; but the wicked shall do wick- 
edly; and none of the wicked shall understand; 
but the wise shall understand.” 

Two other time-prophecies complete the book. 
The Great Tribulation, we know from other pas- 
sages, commences when the daily sacrifice shall 
be taken away and the abomination that maketh 
desolate set up, as foretold in verse 11. This 
is the verse, and not the thirty-first verse of 
chapter eleven, to which our Lord refers in His 
great prophecy in the 24th chapter of Matthew. 
Now we have just seen that the tribulation is to 
last for a time, times, and a half; equivalent 
to three and a half years, or twelve hundred 
and sixty days. But in this eleventh verse we 
learn that from the beginning of this tribulation, 
there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety 
days. The extra thirty days will, doubtless, be 


236 Lectures on Daniel 


devoted to the purging out of the kingdom of 
all things that offend and do iniquity, though 
the Lord will appear, on behalf of the remnant 
and for the destruction of the Beast and Anti- 
christ, at the expiration of the twelve hundred 
and sixty days. A longer period yet is given 
in verse twelve: ‘“ Blessed is he that waiteth, 
and cometh to the thousand three hundred five 
and thirty days.” Some have suggested that this 
would carry on the time to the celebration of 
the first millennial feast of tabernacles, as in 
the 14th chapter of Zechariah. At any rate it 
clearly points us on to the full establishment of 
the kingdom in power and glory. 

Till then Daniel is told to go his way, but the 
promise is given him, “Thou shalt rest, and 
stand in thy lot at the end of the days.” It is 
not likely that the prophet lived very much 
longer, as he would be an aged man at this time, 
probably past ninety years, and perhaps well 
on to a century old. Soon he was called from 
a scene in which he had lived to see many of 
his own prophecies fulfilled. His life began in 
the land of Judah. He died an exile, though 
honored and respected, in the land of the 
stranger. He held positions of trust and con- 
fidence under Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, and pos- 
sibly Cyrus. He saw the rise and fall of Baby- 
lon, the head of gold, and the lion with eagle’s 
wings. He beheld the sudden rise and accessiow 


The Time of the End 237 


to supreme power of the silver breast and arms 
— the ferocious bear that raised itself upon one 
side. During its season of domination he passed 
away, to rest—not in unconscious sleep, but 
in Abraham’s bosom: there to wait with all the 
faithful till the voice of Michael the archangel 
shall be heard, at the coming of the Lord Jesus 
Christ and our gathering together unto Him; 
for of Old Testament saints it is written that 
“they without us shall not be made perfect.” 
Answering the assembling-shout of the Lord in 
that hour of triumph, Daniel’s body shall rise 
from its unknown grave, in glory and incorrup- 
tion; and he shall take his place with Him for 
whose sake he had borne reproach so often in 
his life of faithful devotion to God; and thus 
he “ shall stand in his lot,” in the place appointed 
him, after all his works have been manifested 
at the judgment-seat of Christ. 

He will behold the rise and destruction of the 
last Beast, dreadful and terrible, in its ten- 
horned condition. He will see the once-rejected 
Stone fall from heaven in judgment upon the 
feet of the image of “the man of the earth;” he 
will see the Son of Man coming, as “a Lamb 
that looked as though it had been offered in 
sacrifice,” + to receive from the hands of the 
Ancient of Days the seven-sealed scroll of the 
title-deeds to this world. And among that holy 


1 Weymouth’s translation — Rev. 5: 6. 


255 Lectures on Daniel 


number of crowned priests who prostrate them- 
selves at His feet, none will join more loudly or 
more understandingly in the song of redemp- 
tion and glory than the one-time captive who 
“ purposed in his heart that he would not defile 
himself.” When the King of kings rides forth, 
clothed in a vesture dipped in blood, Daniel 
will follow in his train, an intelligent witness 
of all His ways in judgment, concerning which 
he once heard but understood not. In the king- 
dom of glory to follow, he who, of old, had stood 
before kings, will stand in the presence of the 
Prince of the kings of the earth, in the lot ap- 
pointed him. 

And in that day, all, from the beginning, who 
have esteemed the reproach of Christ greater 
riches than the treasures of earth,— all who have 
been content to suffer for righteousness’ sake, 
—all who have witnessed the good confession, 
will reign in life with Him who was once upon 
earth the Arch-sufferer, the most misunderstood 
of all that noble race “of whom the world was 
not worthy.” 

These things are all written in “ the Scripture 
of truth.” The day of their fulfilment is at 
hand. The Judge standeth at the door. Soon 
the mighty and glorious miracle that wiil close 
up this age of grace and introduce the coming 
hour of trial, will be performed by omnipotent 
power. I refer to the resurrection of the dead 


The Time of the End 239 


in Christ and the translation of the living saints. 
Not one will be left behind : for God has ordained 
that, just as the flood of old could not take place 
till Noah and all his household were safe in the 
ark, so, not one seal of the book to be taken by 
the Lamb can be broken, not a trumpet blown, 
not a vial of wrath poured out, till ali the re- 
deemed of this dispensation, with all the saints 
of the past, are safely gathered round the Lord 
in heaven. 

Each believer may truthfully use the solemnly 
precious words of Dr. Bonar, as his own: 


“T murmur not that now a stranger 
I pass along the smiling earth; 
I know the snare, I dread the danger, 
I hate the haunts, I shun the mirth. 


“My hopes are passing upward, onward, 
And with my hopes my heart has gone; 
Mine eye is turning skyward, sunward, 
Where glory lightens round yon throne. 


“ My spirit seeks its dwelling yonder; 
And faith foredates the joyful day, 
When these old skies shall cease to sunder 
The one dear love-linked family. 


“To light, unchanging and eternal, 
From mists that sadden this bleak waste, 
To scenes that smile, forever vernal, 
From winter’s blackening leaf I haste. 


240 Lectures on Daniel 


® Earth, what a sorrow lies before theel 
None like it in the shadowy past; 
The sharpest throe that ever tore thee» 
Even though the briefest and the iast. 


%T see the fair moon veil her lustre, 
I see the sackcloth of the sun; 
The shrouding of each starry cluster, 
The three-fold woe of earth begun. 


“T see the shadow of its sunset; 
And wrapt in these the Avenger’s form; 
I see the Armageddon-onset ; 
But I shall be above the storm. 


“There comes the moaning and the sighing, 
There comes tne hot tear’s heavy fall, 
The thousand agonies of dying; 
But I shall be beyond them all.” 


The great tribulation cannot begin while the 
members of Christ’s body are still upon the 
earth; for the Lord says to the Church of this 
dispensation: “Because thou hast kept the 
word of My patience, I also will keep thee from 
the hour of temptation which shall come upon 
all the world to try them that dwell upon the 
earth” (Rev. 3:10). This applies to all Chris- 
tians; for one who does. not keep the word of 
Christ’s patience is none of His. 

The earthly history of the Church wiil end 
when “the Lord Himself shall descend from 
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the arch- 


The Time of the End 241 


angel and the trump of God; and the dead 
in Christ shall rise first; then we which are alive 
and remain shall be caught up together with 
them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air.” 
Thenceforth we shall be forever with Him. 

But upon our departure to heaven the great 
clock of prophecy will again begin ticking off 
the times and seasons, and from the people of 
Israel a remnant will be born again; and, gath- 
ered out from the mass, they will become the 
Lord’s witnesses on earth in the Time of the 
End. A brother beloved } has likened the course 
of time to a railroad speedway. Sometimes I 
have been traveling on the railway on an ordi- 
nary way-train, with certain local stops to be 
made according to schedule. But a special has 
been sent out behind us, and we have been shunted 
on to a side-track till the special, or the limited 
express, has gone by. Then the signals direct 
us to once more get on to the main line and 
complete our regular course. Israel may be lik- 
ened to the way-train, running along through 
the course of the years, according to prophecy. 
But when Messiah appeared and they knew Him 
not, but crucified the Lord of glory (at the ex- 
piration of the 69 weeks of chapter 9), they were 
turned off upon the side-track, and they have 
been waiting there ever since, while the Special 

1 Mr. A. E. Booth, to whom I am indebted for this illustra- 
tion, 


242 Lectures on Daniel 


of the dispensation of the grace of God, the lim- 
ited Church-express, has been going by. When 
it has passed on, and left the main-track clear, 
God is going to give the signal, and the old Jew- 
ish way-train will take to the track again, ful- 
filling the balance of its schedule according to 
the seventieth week of the prophecy above re- 
ferred to, and in fact all the prophecies that 
have to do with the Time of the End. 

Those of us who are saved by God’s sovereign 
grace are on the Church-express, and are to be 
a heavenly people throughout the Millennium 
and to all eternity. Israel after the flesh are 
the earthly people; but they have forfeited all 
title to blessing through disobedience. Still 
God is determined to carry out His word to give 
them a place of special privilege on the earth; 
so He will renew a remnant of them by His Holy 
Spirit and His word, and will cleanse them from 
all filthiness and own them as His own once 
more. They will have their inheritance here 
upon the earth; but the Church and the Old 
Testament saints will have theirs in heaven. 

So all these dates — the times and the seasons 
that we have in Daniel and Revelation — have 
nothing to do with this present period, while 
the Church-express is going by. They are part 
of the official schedule for the Jewish way-train, 
and will direct its movements when the limited 
Church-train has passed on to glory. There is 


The Time of the End 243 


no time-table issued for the Special. No one 
can say when it will get by; but I feel very cer 
tain that, if you want to get aboard, you will 
have to do so soon, for everything points to a 
change of dispensations very shortly. None are 
aboard that train save those who have been 
cleansed from their sins by the precious blood 
of Christ, and sealed with the Holy Spirit of 
promise. Are you certain that you are numbered 
among them? Do you know that you have been 
born from above and that you are now a pos- 
sessor of life eternal? You cannot afford to be 
uncertain in regard to these things. They are 
too momentous,— too solemn and serious for you 
to go on from day to day hoping everything will 
turn. out all right in the end, when, in reality, 
everything now is all wrong so far as you are 
concerned, if you are out of Christ,— a stranger 
to the grace of God. What folly to trifle with 
matters of such grave importance trembling in 
the balance! 

If unsaved, and yet desirous of becoming a 
Christian, listen to the message my Lord bids 
me bring to you. Hesays: “If thou shalt con- 
fess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe 
in thy heart that God hath raised Him from the 
dead, thou shalt be saved; for with the heart 
man believeth unto righteousness, and with the 
mouth confession is made unto salvation.” Let 
me couple with this a verse in John’s first epis- 


244 Lectures on Daniet 


tle: “If we confess our sins, He is faithful and 
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us 
from all unrighteousness.” Now observe care- 
fully: In these two Scriptures there are two 
confessions God is calling upon every soul to 
make. First: Confess your sins to God. Then: 
Confess your Saviour to men. Is it not simple? 
As a poor lost sinner you are invited to come 
to the God you have sinned against, owning your 
guilt in His holy presence. When you thus 
come, He promises full forgiveness based upon 
the finished work of His beloved Son, who upon 
the cross bore the very sins you confess; and, 
in your room and stead, endured the judgment 
due them. Believing this — resting on the tes- 
timony of the unchanging word of God— you 
can turn to your old friends and former com- 
panions and say: “I now own the Lord Jesus 
Christ as my Saviour, and my Lord!” And He 
declares: ‘Whosoever therefore shall confess 
Me before men, him will I confess also before My 
Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall 
deny Me before men, him will I also deny before 
My Father which is in heaven.” Think of it: 
Confess Christ here, and He will confess you 
there. Deny Him here, and He will deny you 
there! 

Oh hasten to make the two confessions that 
will give you title to say: ‘He hath clothed me 


The Time of the End 245° 


with the garments of salvation.” Then, when 
Daniel stands in his lot at the end of the days, 
you too will stand in your lot among the re- 
deemed company who will follow the Lamb 
whithersoever He goeth. But if you persist in 
refusing Christ,— if you go on denying His name, 
—and die in your sins, you will have to stand 
in your lot before His judgment throne, to hear 
the words of doom: “Depart from Me, ve 
cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the 
devil and his angels; I know you not.” Awful 
words, these! Oh that they may never be spoken 
to you! 


With this I close these studies in the book of 
Daniel. We have seen, in these lectures, how 
wonderfully prophecy has been corroborated by 
human historical records as to the past. Surely 
it has impressed us with this fact, that not one 
word that God has spoken shall ever fall to the 
ground. ‘He will not call back His words.” 
All that is written will be fulfilled both as to 
Israel and the Church, as to God’s people and 
the nations, and as to each individual soul, 
whether saved or lost. ‘‘ Heaven and earth shall 
pass away,” declared the Lord Jesus, “but My 
‘word never!” To keep His word is to live. To 
yvefuse it is to die eternally! Let not Satan per- 
suade any that God will be better than His word: 


246 Lectures on Daniel 


He will fulfil it to the letter; though man may 
think otherwise, and hope for mercy apart from 
Christ. 


“The man may think that all is well, 
And every fear be calmed: 
He lives,—he dies,—he wakes in hell,— 
Not only doomed, but damned.” 


To the Christian, the book of Daniel must 
ever be a precious and soul-stirring record of 
the love and care of our gracious God, who al- 
ways watches over His own for blessing, no mat- 
ter how dark the night, and who has given us 
the sure word of prophecy as a light shining in 
the gloom, until the day dawn and the Day- 
star arise in our hearts. 


APPENDIX 


From a multitude of questions and objections handed 
to the speaker, and answered or replied to when lecturing 
on this book, a selection of those that might be diffi- 
culties to others has here been made, together with abbrevi- 
ated notes of the answers given. Only those bearing 
directly on the themes treated in Daniel have been pre- 
served. To go fully into them all would be impossible here; 
but where considered necessary reference is made to help- 
ful works which may readily be obtained from the same 
Publishers. 


QUESTIONS AND OBJECTIONS ANSWERED 


1—JIs it the Antichrist, or the Roman Little Horn, 
who will make the seven-years’ covenant with the Jews? 

Ans.—In a sense, both; for while the Little Horn is 
“the prince that shall come” of chapter nine, the Anti- 
christ will be the representative-head of the Jewish nation. 
They “shall divide the land for gain” (or, a price), chap. 
11:39. The covenant would seem to be made between 
them, the Antichrist acting on behalf of “the many ”— 
a term applied to apostate Judah. Just as “the counsel, 
or covenant, of peace” is between the Father and the 
Son (Zech. 6:13), so shall “the covenant of death” be 
sealed by the Beast and the false prophet. 

2.— Was not the placing of the Roman eagles (in the 
siege of Titus) upon the walls of Jerusalem the abomina- 
tion of desolation spoken of by Daniel and referred to 
by our Lord? 

Ans.— No; for the setting up of the abomination that 
maketh desolate is the beginning of the great tribulation; 

247 


248 Lectures on Daniel 


and that does not begin till Antichrist is raised up by 
Satan to impersonate the Messiah. 

3.— The Seventh-day Adventists teach that “the cleans- 
ing of the sanctuary” refers to Christ’s entering the 
holiest of all in heaven at the end of 2300 year-days, in 
1844, to cleanse it. Is not this the correct explanation 
of the passage? 

Ans.—It is a most wretched perversion of Scripture, 
and in its full character blasphemous beyond expression, 
as the Adventist sanctuary-theory makes Satan to be the 
sin-bearer, and thus the real saviour of the penitent! Could 
anything be more horrible? 

Scripture plainly teaches that our Lord “having by 
Himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of 
the Majesty on high.” Of necessity this implies His im- 
mediate entrance into the holiest, for the throne of God 
is there. “We have such a high priest, who is set on 
the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; 
a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, 
which the Lord pitched, and not man.” There on God’s 
throne, in the holiest, He has been sitting — not since 1844, 
but ever since His ascension. And because He is there 
—and the veil rent — believers are bidden to enter there 
in spirit too: “Having therefore, brethren, boldness to 
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus... let us 
draw near.” Think of our being invited to draw near 
and enter into the holiest, and the Son, our great High 
Priest, Himselr shut out till 1844! Could absurdity be 
more manifest? 1 

The sanctuary contemplated by Daniel is earthly, and 
the prophecy has already been fulfilled in 2300 evening- 
mornings after Antiochus Epiphanes polluted it by setting 
up a statue of Jupiter Olympus in the holiest. 


Appendia 249 


4.— Does not “ He shall think to change times and laws” 
refer to the pope, who changed the Sabbath from Satur- 
day, the seventh day, to Sunday, the first day? 

Ans.— As noted in Lecture 7, there is no reference to 
the pope in the passage. The pope did not change the 
Sabbath. He simply acknowledged the special place given 
to the Lord’s day. The Sabbath is, and always has been, 
the seventh day, and will be kept as such in the Millennium. 

The Lord’s day is something very different. It belongs 
to the present dispensation, and commemorates the resur- 
rection of our Saviour on the first day of the week. If 
under law, we are bound to observe the seventh day — the 
Sabbath; but if under grace, we should gladly devote 
the first day of the week to the worship and service of 
the Lord, as much as in us lies. 

The Sabbath question is too large to be gone into here. 
The troubled reader is referred to the foot-note to preceding 
question. 

5.— Why is the name of the great king of Babylon 
spelled Nebuchadnezzar in Daniel, but sometimes Nebu- 
chadrezzar in Jeremiah? 

Ans.— Ancient, as also modern, names were adapted 
to the speech of the various countries. Nebuchadnezzar 
seems to be the Hebraized form of the name. The monu- 
ments spell it with an “r,” in place of an “n,” as in parts 
of Jeremiah. 

6.— Will you give the exact dates for the computation 
of the 69 weeks of years that are supposed to have cul 
minated in the cross of Christ? 

Ans— The Scripture says, “ After threescore and two 
weeks [together with the seven previously mentioned] shall 
Messiah be cut off.’ Just how soon after is not told us; 
but able chronologists have shown that 69 sevens of years, 
of 360 days each, had passed ere Christ died. The clear- 
est explanation of the times seems to be that given by 


250 Lectures on Daniel 


Sir Robert Anderson in “The Coming Prince.” He caleu- 
lates that exactly 483 prophetic years had elapsed on the 
day that Christ rode into Jerusalem as the King predicted 
by Zechariah. 

7.— Why is Belshazzar called “son,” and Nebuchadnezzar 
his “ father,” if they were not so intimately connected? 

Ans.— Because in the Semitic languages “son” is com- 
monly used for “ descendant,” and “ father” for “ ancestor.” 
Thus the Israelites are sons of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 
And in the same way the kings of Judah are called sons of 
David, though many generations may have intervened. 

8.— Does not Ezek. 45:19, 20 refer to the cleansing of 
the heavenly sanctuary at the end of the 2300 year-days, 
as in Daniel, chap. 87? 

Ans.— See reply to Ques. No. 3. The sanctuary of 
Ezekiel, as the entire context makes plain, is the millennial 
temple, to be built in the midst of the land of Palestine, 
and hallowed for divine service in the time of the king- 
dom. From chapter forty to the end of the book, Ezekiel 
describes this temple, and gives its position, and the position 
of the tribes of Israel to the north and south of it. The 
verses referred to in the question speak of the special 
dedication service, when the temple will be ready for the 
renewal of the priestly service and the memorial sacrifices 
to be observed in the coming age by the earthly people — 
very much, I judge, as the Lord’s Supper is observed 
among Christians. 

9.— Do you not think it is in heaven that Christ is to 
reign, instead of on or over the earth? 

Ans——No. Heaven is never said to be a sphere of 
Christ’s kingdom. The heavens rule over the earth, but 
we do not read of saints reigning in heaven. When the 
Bible speaks of reigning with Christ, it implies holding 
something in check, which must be kept down. A king 
in a kingdom implies there is something to be repressed. 


Appendix 251 


People talk about the saints reigning in heaven, but Scrip- 
Sure never so speaks. The saints are on an equality in 
heaven: all are children with the Father; but in the king- 
dom one may have a greater place than another, as the 
kingdom has to do with rewards for service in this life. 
“Tf we suffer with Him, we shall also reign with Him.” 

Notice how Scripture puts it. In the present age, in 
man’s day, the Lord Jesus says, “Blessed are they that 
are persecuted for righteousness’ sake.” In our age Christ 
is not manifestly reigning; He is rejected, and we are 
called upon to suffer with Him, because Satan is the god 
of this age; this is not the time of His power; He is not 
reigning now, and so righteousness suffers. 

In the Millennium, or kingdom-period, we read, “A. 
king shall reign in righteousness.” In that day righteous- 
ness will not suffer; it will reign; that is, all evil will be 
kept down; but that there will be evil still is evident; for 
at the end of the Millennium Satan comes up from the 
bottomless pit, and finds a great host ready to follow him, 
showing that there will be many in the Millennium who 
will be simply kept under by the power of the King— 
such as have not been regenerated. People in the Millen- 
nium-period will need to be born again just as much as 
they do now. 

When we come to the new heavens and the new earth, 
does righteousness reign then? No; we read, “I saw a 
new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteous- 
ness.” The kingdom will be delivered up to the Father; 
God will dwell with His people; righteousness will dwell 
in the new heavens and the new earth; there will never 
be an enemy throughout eternity to lift up his head against 
God. Of course, the kingdom of God is for ever and 
ever. That is, He will never surrender His throne, or be 
superseded by any other. 

I have gone into this somewhat fully in “ The Mysteries of 


252. Lectures on Daniel 


God.” See the chapter on “ The Mystery of God Finished.” 

10.— Might not Daniel have avoided being cast into 
the den of lions if he had acted according to Matt. 6: 6, 
in making his prayer three times a day? Would he not 
then have avoided giving offence? 

Ans.— The prophet acted according to the dispensation 
in which he lived. The words of the Lord Jesus in Matt. 
6:6 have a different application, and are a rebuke to 
hypocritical pretenders to a holiness which they do not 
possess. In 1 Kings 8, note Solomon’s prayer. He re- 
quested mercies of the Lord for His people, when driven 
out of their land, if they should pray “toward this house.” 
Daniel acted accordingly, and evidently with the divine 
approval. 

11.— Does Daniel, chap. 7, go on to the day of God 
of 2 Peter, chapter three? What is the difference be- 
tween the day of the Lord and the day of God? 

Ans.— It is the bringing in of the kingdom, or the day 
of the Lord, that is contemplated in Daniel, chapter seven. 
The day of God is the eternal state. In 2 Peter, chapter 
three, the two are seen overlapping, as it were, in the 
last great conflagration, which is the close of the one and 
the beginning of the of'er. 

12.— Is the seventieth week identical with the great tribu- 
lation ? 

Ans.— The seventieth week will be a period of tribula- 
tion for all the earth-dwellers; but it is the last half of 
the week, or 1260 days, that is called “the tribulation, the 
great one.” This will be the season of Antichrist’s power, 
and the Beast’s war on the remnant. 

13.— Will Daniel and the rest of the Old Testament 
saints be raised with the saints of this dispensation at the 
time of the rapture of 1 Thess., chap. 4? 

Ans— The word is plain—“Christ the first-fruits. 
Afterward they that are Christ’s, at His coming.” This 


Appendix 253 


includes all saints from Abel to the end of the present age. 
14.— Will Old Testament saints be manifested with the 
Church at the judgment-seat of Christ? 
Ans.— Surely; else how could Daniel stand in his lot 
at the time of the end? 


“Prove ail things; hold fast that which is good.” 


THE END 


mab Sennen iy Se ere id ee itch 


+i & 
Conve 


25) 


‘desany ai iste serd dma Bi Peep ae 


ax ean ee ssn k eniete oe 


st 


H 4 
by: 
= 
: “= 
: 
= ; : 
~ i A - 
aa ae ee we 
ue ep 7 
rr em 


About the Author... 


H. A. IRONSIDE, internationally be- 
loved Bible teacher and preacher, was 
author of more than 60 volumes as well 
as many pamphlets and articles on Bible 
subjects. His writings include addresses 
or commentaries on the entire New 
Testament, all of the prophetic books 
of the Old Testament, and a great many 
volumes on specific Bible themes and 
subjects. 


Countless thousands of readers testify 
to Dr. Ivonside’s helpful faculty of get- 
ting to the heart of any Scripture, and 
his clear, easily grasped outlines of even 
the most complex passages make the 
Bible easier to study and to understand. 
He wrote as simply and as directly as 
he spoke—no one who has heard him 
preach will forget how vividly he made 
Bible texts come to life and linger in the 
memory and in the heart. 


For 18 of his 50 years of ministry, 
Dr. Ironside was pastor of the famous 
Moody Memorial Church in Chicago. In 
October 1948 he resigned to devote him- 
self to further writing and conference 
speaking. He went to be with the Lord 
on January 15, 1951. 


By H. A. IRONSIDE 


Commentaries 


Joshua 
Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther 
Psalms: Book one 
Proverbs 
Song of Solomon 
Isaiah 
Jeremiah, Lamentations 
Ezekiel 
Daniel 
The Minor Prophets 
Matthew 
Mark 
Luke 
John 
The Acts 
Romans 
First Corinthians 
Second Corinthians 
Galatians 
In The Heavenlies (Ephesians) 
Philippians 
Colossians 
Thessalonians 
Timothy, Titus, Philemon 
Hebrews, Titus 
James, Peter 
John, Jude 


Revelation 


Other V olumes 


The Continual Burnt Offering 
The Daily Sacrifice 
Doctor Ironside’s Bible 
Four Hundred Silent Years 
Holiness: The False and the True 
The Mission of and Praying in 
the Holy Spirit 


Pamphlets 


Baptism: What Saith the Scripture? 
The Eternal Security of the Believer 
Letters to a Roman Catholic Priest 
Levitical Offerings 
The Midnight Cry! 

Not Wrath... But Rapture 
Sailing with Paul 
Wrongly Dividing the Word of Truth 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, Inc. 
Neptune, New Jersey 


