4 BR eae SKS, * 
PWS vhiay oe iy 5 . Sue owed bied Sauee” cbse aes ; we 
Sashes ‘ * = ‘e 4 , 


ae) 
Mg 


‘a 


* 
rT 


Susteh be ie gegeams aela torent ah - 


LR neiene lg 


ie Pitty He 


che pe so 2 
ve. 
on 4) 
N = ®O Pee 
: ood 5. 
ca Bec 
; ~@O py 
Rey EU ; 
RS CWO - 
See “4 re: Lee 
He “ rltOu4 
s. 4 << . 
eS OK = nN @ —_ : 
i eS ~4 © 
oe eee my 7 . 
Sees 1) w ae 
neg Cee eS 4oo® 


HA, 


WO 


PAP Sees 
A eke 
i * 


+ 
} 
i 


ON THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE OF 
THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


LECTURES 


THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE OF 
THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


W. KELLY. 


LONDON : 
W. H. BROOM, PATERNOSTER ROW. 


1868. 


a4 


PREFACE. 


THE volume which is now before the reader consists of 
a course of lectures delivered in London during a brief 
part of this summer, and, after an interval of other 
work, which delayed the needful revision, printed from 
the shorthand writer’s report. Few, perhaps, will be 
more sensible of its defects than the author is. Never- 
theless the need of souls is so urgent on the one hand, 
and the broad outline of the truth is so plain and 
momentous on the other, that he does not hesitate to 
commit the work to the mercy and the blessing of 


the Lord, who loves His own that are in the world, 


-and loves them unto the end. 


Guernsey, November, 1867. 


CO NEE Nes. 


LECTURE If. Page 


eee x - 
Tur New Breru anp Erernat Lire. John iii. : : i 
LECTURE II. 


Tue “WELL oF WATER SPRINGING UP UNTO EVERLASTING 
Lirr.”’ John iv. ; : : ; d R 29 


LECTURE III. 
“Rivers oF Living Water.” John vii. 


~I 


or 


LECTURE IV. 


Tue PARACLETE OR CoM¥FoRTER. John xiv.—xvi. ‘ RIAL: 
LECTURE Y. 
‘RECEIVE YE THE Hoty Guost.” John xx. . ; - 1% 


LECTURE VI. J 
Tue Gtrr or THE Spirit AND THE Girts. Acts ii. vill. x. xix, ¥160 


LECTURE VII. 
In THE SpPrrit AND THE Spirit In you. Rom. viii. . eh 96 


LECTURE VIII. 
“ Baptizep BY OnE Spirit iro OnE Bopy.’’ 1 Cor. xii. . 282 


LECTURE IX. 


“An Hapiration oF Gop THROUGH THE Spirit.” Eph.ii. . 271 
LECTURE X. 
Tur Sprrir IN THE APOCALYPSE AS COMPARED WITH THE 
Epristixes. Rev. i. xix. ; : : ? . . 94 


APPENDIX : , ; A , Rips 2 5} 


} 


«sald ® a 


a 
y i - 
eens 


7 aes 
a eae as 


REY 


THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE OF 
THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


——_@—__ 


Lecture I. 
JOHN iii. 5, 
THE subject of which I propose to treat will demand, 
as the course of lectures may call for it, the develop- 
ment, according to God’s word, of many operations of 
the Holy Ghost only experienced under Christianity, 
which were unknown in the times which preceded the 
death and resurrection of our Lord Jesus. But I rejoice 
to begin this night with that which spreads itself over 
the entire dealings of God in His mercy towards His 
saints at all times. That is, we enter upon what is not 
special, save only as the knowledge of God Himself must 
distinguish souls in a lost world where grace chooses 
and saves—what is not special in the sense of being 
brought out and enjoyed, under peculiar circumstances 
and at a particular period, in the ways of God with 
man. On the contrary, what comes before us now is 
universal for God’s children, was found in the earliest 
days since sin entered into the world, was never super- 
seded, nor can be, till the last trace of sin is gone for 
ever. It is the one fundamental want for every soul 
of man who is brought out of the condition of fallen 
man—the common lot of man appointed, as we know, 
B 


2 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


to die, and after that to judgment. God would make 
Himself known, would reveal Himself; it might be only 
partially, after sundry measures, as well as in many 
manners, as the apostle tells us in Hebrews 1; but 
whatever was the measure or the mode of His revela- 
tions, God has always wrought in sovereign mercy to 
souls, and He has given of His own nature to those 
who believe in the earth. This is what is meant by 
being born again. Nor was there ever a time when it 
was more necessary than now, not only to assert what 
is special, but to cleave to that which is universal in 
the sense in which I am now speaking—to maintain 
that which never changes: while, at the same time, we 
leave ample space for whatever it may please God 
according to His own wisdom to bring in, amplifying, 
clearing, brightening, deepening, and that in every pos- 
sible form. There is progress, I need not say, in the way 
in which God does manifest Himself; at any rate, till 
Christ appeared, and the work of Christ was accom- 
plished. Not that I speak of progress since, but that, 
in the unfolding of the word of God from the begin- 
ning, there is most manifestly an enlarging view given 
of the divine ways—given until God, and not merely 
His ways, were fully manifested. 

Across the whole course of these varying dispen- 
gations, as I gladly allow, we have this great blessing 
enjoyed. And the reason is manifest: a God of good- 
ness on the one hand, and lost man on. the other. 
“My Father worketh hitherto,” said the Son, also 
working in grace. Conscience may give its intimations 
of a God and His judgment; but the mind of man 
never can rise up above the fact, or rather the inference, 
that there must be a God. God Himself is never thus 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. S 


known. Mind, as such, is incapable of finding out 
God; and, in point of fact, that which gave scope to 
the reason of man was his ruin. He reasons about 
God because he has lost God; and all that reasoning 
can discover in any of its processes is not what zs, but 
simply, granting this and that, what must be. But a 
God that simply must be is awful to a conscience 
burdened with its guilt. The God that must be for 
him—that is, for a sinner—must be a judge; and if God 
be the judge of sin and of sinners, what must be the 
sinner’s lot? If the righteous even with difficulty be 
saved, where shall the ungodly appear? Now, in the 
face of all this, God has not merely given a revelation, 
made promises, given even still more distinct prophetic 
delineations of what He meant to do: this He has 
done from the very first; but there was always more 
than this. And it is of very great consequence to souls 
even now to recognise that it is not only a direction of 
the soul of the believer toward God by faith, but that 
there is, and has always been, far more. It is not 
too much to assume that those who listen to me here 
have no need to be told what that link really is. I do 
not refer now to the new fact that God has sent down 
the Holy Ghost; but I say, that while there was always 
faith, there was always more than faith. It is a very 
imperfect and even pernicious view, that souls simply 
look to God. However true this is, it is but a part 
of the truth. Besides the look of faith, besides the 
laying hold of the word of God by the operation of the 
Spirit in the soul, there is such a thing as spiritual 
life; and there always was such a thing; for it is the 
necessary condition of having to do with God. There 
always was, as there is, a positive new nature given to 
B 2 


4 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


the believer; that is, it is not merely -a question of 
faith, but of a new life. Faith, of course, is the only 
means whereby this new nature is imparted, as I shall 
hope to show; and faith is the true means for the soul 
to assure itself that it is thus born of God. There may | 
be other evidences to other eyes and hearts; but faith 
is that which is intended of God to give its possessor 
the certainty that he is born of God. 

Now this truth and indispensable necessity, although 
it was always made good in souls, it is evident before 
Christ was very feebly understood, and, in point of 
fact, in the Old Testament times, was rather implied 
than explicitly taught. It may be presented in figure, 
and there may be moral expressions; but nowhere is 
there a distinct statement of a new birth, save as a pre- 
dicted privilege. The consequence was, when Nicodemus 
came to our Lord Jesus, arrested by that which he had 
seen, but, at the same time, with the sense of a deeper 
want in his soul, though totally ignorant of what he 
wanted, he was taken aback and confounded by our 
Lord’s strong assertion to him, that except one were 
born again, he could not even see the kingdom of God. 
The Jews had quietly settled down in the conviction 
that the Messiah could and would do everything for 
them. Nor were they, in one sense, wrong. When 
He came, even'the Samaritans were satisfied that Mes- 
siah would show or teach them all things; and the 
Jews knew that it was not a question merely of teaching, 
but that He would do all things; He would bring in 
everlasting righteousness, seal up the vision, anoint the 
most holy, deal with sin, iniquity, everything. They 
knew most imperfectly how it was to be done. Still, 
there was a vague, general, and, at the same time, sure 


~ 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 9) 


conviction on the mind of every Jew, except, we may 
say, the infidel portion of them, that the coming of the 
Messiah would be the turning-point of the world, and 
would be more especially the incoming of all promised 
and expected blessing for Israel. Hence it was most 
startling to hear so solemn an announcement from One 
now found present in their very midst, whom His 
forerunner, John the Baptist, declared to be the Mes- 
siah, from One who had manifested by miracles that He 
was really a teacher come from God at the very least. 
Yet this very One stopped Nicodemus at the threshold 
with the most cutting declaration of a necessity that 
he had never apprehended before, and this put in so 
broad a manner as to make it as absolute for a Jew as 
for a Gentile. “Except a man be,” &c. No exceptions 
were entertained, no question was raised about the 
chosen family of Abraham. It was a divine require- 
ment for those near, as well as the remote. “Except a 
man be born afresh, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” 

The consequence is, that Nicodemus puts, as we know, 
a most unintelligent question to our Lord, how such a 
thing could be: “ How can a man be born when he is 
old? Can he enter the second time into his mother’s 
womb and be born?” But at least his question proves 
that “born from above” is not at all the true meaning 
of the verse. Had the Lord given Nicodemus to judge 
that this was the meaning, such a question could not 
have been proposed. No; He meant to be born afresh, 
born from the very outset, so to speak. It appears to 
be the strongest possible expression of this; at any 
rate, | do not know a stronger one in Scripture. This 
accordingly brings out from our Lord Jesus the state- 
ment on which [ desire to enlarge a little to-night: 


6 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


“ Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of 
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom 
of God.” He that sees the kingdom enters the king- 
dom ; but there is no seeing nor entering, unless there be 
this new birth. What, then, is its source and character ? 

Our Lord here explains. He does it, as He habitually 
does in His discourses in this gospel to the Jews, after 
a figurative sort. In the chapter before, when there 
was a question about the temple, He adopted that figure 
for His own body—Himself. In the chapter that fol- 
lows, He takes up another from the circumstance of the 
wants of the Samaritan woman; and a well of water 
becomes the image of that infinite blessing on which 
we shall hope to dwell a little by-and-by; and so I 
might go through the gospel, and prove that this adop- 
tion of some well-known figure startles by the very 
fact that it is a figure, but by no means obscures; 
for this is never the object of figures in Scripture, or in 
any honest writing. The true object is rather to compress 
into one word the truth which might otherwise need to 
be expanded into many words; so that a word becomes 
what may be called an image-word of truth, and 
therefore bright with the hght of God. And so, I doubt 
not, it is in this case. Now these images were used in 
the Old Testament prophets, and used too in connection 
with this very’ blessing. This was therefore what, so 
to speak, enabled the Lord, with a justice that appealed 
to Nicodemus’s own conscience, to censure him who 
stood in the relation of teacher to Israel (for this is the 
meaning); not, I apprehend, in some special manner as 
the master, but the usual article of contrast with Israel 
as the scholar. 

Our Lord, then, does tacitly refer to passages in the 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 7 


Old Testament which ought to have made His allusion 
and meaning intelligible to Nicodemus. Take Isaiah 
xliv. for instance. Had not God there promised to pour 
water upon him that was thirsty? Had He not pro- 
mised to pour His Spirit upon the seed of Jacob? 
Had He not still more plainly declared, in Ezekiel 
xxxvl, that when He gathered Israel into the land, 
He would there take away their stony heart, and put 
into them a heart of flesh, sprinkle clean water upon 
them, and put His Spirit within them—the precise two 
elements of our Lord’s statement. Thus in this place 
the Saviour does most clearly keep in view these Old 
Testament figures. Indeed, it was not some absolutely 
new privilege; it was, on the contrary, only the asser- 
tion, according to His own special dignity and glory, of 
a universal need in a manner suitable to Himself. That 
is, the Lord does give the whole scope of truth as to this 
found throughout the Scriptures, but then He brings 
it all to a point, and clothes it with that force which 
was proper to the Son of God, if He took the place of 
a teacher upon the earth. How could He, if He taught, 
merely teach as another? “ Never man spake like this 
man.” Therefore, even while He is only taking up, so 
to speak, what was found before (at least, in prophecy), 
and what ought thence to have been known from of 
old, nevertheless He gives it a characteristic depth in 
the form in which He presents it to Nicodemus. Hence 
it is no question of being sprinkled, or having a new 
heart given, or “a new. spirit put within,” but, “ Except 
a man be born of water and of the Spirit”—an incom- 
parably momentous, primary, and practical truth. I 
deny not that there are other truths more apt to draw 
out the affections, and to fix them on the person of the 


8 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Saviour, bringing the soul into full liberty, peace, joy, 
as well as power here below. Surely there are; but 
none has so much the character of a foundation, save 
only Christ and His work in which God Himself was 
glorified, and glorified too in such a sort, that He could 
thus righteously bless and give His own nature to a 
poor sinner. With His own divine perfectness the 
Lord here, in a single word, changes all, so to speak ; 
for while the truth is adopted from others, nevertheless 
there is a new beauty, and there is such divine energy 
given to it, that we can well apprehend how glorious the 
person must be that utters the truth after such a sort. 
“Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit.” 
It is in truth a new nature; it is that which has no 
foundation in man, no source save in God; it is God 
Himself who has His own kingdom; it is God Himself 
that is the centre of it, who fills it in the person of 
Christ His Son, and, therefore, who should give a new 
nature. For what nature could be suitably presented ? 
It must be, and it is, the divine nature. “ Except a 
man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot 
enter into the kingdom of God.” And thus, then, we 
come to the terms. 

I have drawn attention to the force of being “born 
anew” found in the earlier statements. N ext, the briefer 
expression in the third verse is expanded in the fifth. 
But now, if we look at the manner in which this 
birth is characterized, it is of water. Water, in Serip- 
ture, is habitually employed as the figure of the word 
of God applied by the Spirit. It may be used also 
for the Spirit Himself in His own power; but still I 
need not point out the close connection there is between 
these two thoughts. However, here we have the Spirit 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 9 


distinguished from it, and this shows us at once the 
reason of the difference. The water is mentioned be- 
cause God would draw attention to the character of 
what is applied, to what deals morally with the man. 
He might not at first be aware that what made him 
sensible of his uncleanness was the Spirit of God. 
There must always indeed be in the soul, whenever 
the Holy Ghost thus acts, a consciousness that there is 
a dealing of some sort. In a word, there never is or 
can be unconsciousness where there is a real operation 
of God. But then a man might in nowise comprehend 
that it is the Spirit of God; but this he knows full 
well, that the word judges him—that it brings him 
in as guilty and altogether unfit for the presence of 
God. Thus, “water” is the expression of the word 
dealing morally with the soul, convicting the man of 
being unclean, and not merely cleansing. It is a 
question at first of the impartation of a new nature 
that the man had not before. And as we have found 
the outward, so we have also the inner character of 
this divine action: “Except a man be born of water 
and of the Spirit.” 

It may be well, at this point, to refer to a few 
texts of Scripture which show that, in different ways, 
this is the unquestionable meaning of the passage. 
Take the apostle Paul, in the epistle to Titus, chapter 
lii., where he says that God saved us by the washing of 
regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost. I pur- 
posely go no farther than this, because the next verse 
does convey a fuller character of blessing than what 
our Lord here expresses. So far there is a most evident 
link with our passage, even if the washing of regenera- 
tion be supposed to present another application of 


10 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


water, or another figure; still regeneration is in mani- 
fest harmony with the truth which our Lord had before 
Him, and was now pressing on Nicodemus. Again, 
when we turn to the epistle of James (i. 18), “Of his 
own will begat he us,” we find a beginning of a life that 
was not possessed before. It was not merely that God 
had so enlightened us; it was not merely that there 
were thoughts, views, truths, communicated to the 
mind, but there is a new kind of life or nature which 
the soul never had before. “Of his own will begat he 
us by the word of truth.” Not only have we the be- 
getting on God’s part, but also the word of truth, the 
instrumental means. It clearly connects itself with 
the “born of water” in our verse of John iii. Again 
we turn to the first epistle general of Peter, chapter 
i. 22, “Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying 
the truth through the Spirit [born of water and of the 
Spirit] unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that 
ye love one another with a pure heart fervently ; being 
born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorrupt- 
ible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for 
ever.” 

Texts need not be heaped up on a point which, it is 
to be presumed, will be familiar to most here, but I 
thought it well just to give enough to show how it 
runs through the inspired writers of God’s latest and 
fullest revelation. I have therefore purposely chosen 
passages from different apostles. It is a common truth 
whether Gentiles or Jews be written to, and whether 
Paul, or Peter, or James be the writers. It is the 
same fundamental truth ; but, in point of fact, it found 
its richest and fullest expression, its most definite and 
at the same time profoundest form, from the lips of our 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. Li 


Lord Jesus Christ. For such seems to me the divine 
communication in John ili. 3, d. 

Another truth of great importance is annexed to it. 
Not only is there a new nature; namely, as communi- 
cated by God’s word through the operation of His Spirit, 
indispensable always, as we see, for man’s entrance; but 
besides that, as the nature of man never can be ethereal- 
ized, so to speak, never can be so improved or modified 
as to rise up into any acquaintance with the things of 
God, never can be changed into divine nature by any 
spiritual process whatsoever ; so, on the other hand, the 
new nature cannot deteriorate, cannot be reduced into 
“the flesh,” or the nature of man as he is. As our 
Lord says, “That which is born of the flesh is flesh,” 
on the one hand, so on the other, “that which is born 
of the Spirit is spirit.” It partakes of the character of 
its source. Here we find that the great living agent, 
and not merely the instrument, is brought before us. 
This I conceive to be most important. Had there been 
the presentation of the water, or the word partially, it 
would have left the door open to the mind of man— 
which, after all, is really included in “the flesh”—and 
its pretensions would have led to a subtle kind of 
rationalism. But not so; “that which is born of the 
Spirit is spirit.” The word of God unquestionably is 
what He uses; but still man is not born of the word 
in the strict sense; it is by it, but not of it alone; it 
is of the Spirit, if you look to the real active personal 
source. 

“Marvel not,” then, He says, “that I said unto 
you, Ye must be born again.” Here He presses the 
truth home in the most distinct manner—not merely 
on man—as the want of all men who would enter 


12 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


God’s kingdom, but now “Ye must be born again.” 
This eminently leads Nicodemus to put his next ques- 
tion. Jesus answered and said unto him, (in answer to 
“How can these things be?”) “Art thou a master of 
Israel, and knowest not these things? Verily, verily, 
I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and 
testify that we have seen; and ye receive not our 
witness.” Obviously this is a statement of the utmost 
value, as showing the place of our Lord Jesus Christ 
in this chapter. He speaks as One who is familiar 
with God; not merely as One who acted from God, but 
who pronounced with His authority, speaking as One 
who is absolutely and perfectly at home with God. 
“We speak,” says He, “that we do know;” and the 
word implies intimate knowledge— intrinsic personal 
knowledge ; not that which was given, which a prophet 
might utter as presented to him, had he the means of 
revelation, but as One who knew God and His clory 
consciously. Such seems the reason why He says in 
this verse, “We speak that we do know.” God alone, 
He who was God, could thus rightly speak, and none 
other. In the consciousness of this divine knowledge, 
therefore, Jesus speaks, At the same time also He gives 
His testimony as to what He had seen. It was not 
only One who came from God, and so went to God, but 
also One who, while He was God speaks of scenes 
of glory in which He had been. He was with God as 
well as was God; He had looked round upon that 
which was suitable, if I may so say, to the presence of 
God; He was thoroughly acquainted with it all, not 
only what suited God Himself, but also the scene where 
God dwells. 

Accordingly, from this perfect knowledge of God 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 13 


and familiarity with heaven, He makes the decla- 
ration: “We speak that we do know, and testify 
that we have seen.” For this very reason man had no 
relish for it—nay, not only man in general, but the 
Jews had not. Their scene was the earth, and their 
constant idea, founded upon the testimony of God, as 
Jews, was God revealing Himself here; God blessing 
here; God putting down evil here; God delivering His 
people by judgments here. But now there was One in 
their midst who differed essentially from all that had 
ever been upon the earth, who was properly and ex- 
clusively the Son of God. But here, so to speak, He 
takes, if it be possible, a place closer than simply as 
One whom the Father owns upon earth, as beloved and 
a son to Him; because you can conceive such a thing 
possible without His being absolutely God in the fullest 
sense. but there is the union in Christ’s person, not 
only of the relationship which He holds as the object 
of the Father’s delight, but of the very nature of God 
Himself. Consequently there was not a thought in the 
Godhead apart from Him, if indeed rightly we can 
speak of thought as belonging to God; for, in point of 
fact, it is a wrong expression. God does not think— 
man does; but God knows. So Jesus, the Son of God, 
had this absolute knowledge entirely apart from reve- 
lation; He had this absolute knowledge of God, of that 
which was in keeping with God’s presence, and nature, 
and kingdom; and accordingly here upon earth He also 
communicates this. What a place to be in! What 
communion to be brought into, beloved brethren, in the 
midst of this sea of sin and iniquity, in the midst of 
men rising up, proud in their own poor thoughts, and 
evermore proving that they are fallen and far from 


14 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


God,—to have Him thus presented whom man would 
fain, and does, deny to be God! 

While I am on this subject,—which is one of the 
deepest possible interest,—that it was only He who was 
man that could make known God to man, I am per- 
suaded that it is not in the nature of the Godhead, so 
to speak, simply as such, to make itself known to man; 
and that the blessed scheme of God Himself, which 
was His way of saving us, is just as necessary in order 
that we should know Him, as it was for saving us. We 
are more apt to look at the incarnation of the Word, at 
the Lord Jesus Christ here below, as a means of our 
being delivered, and at the fruit of His work in atone- 
ment : we are apt to think less of the infinite privilege of 
knowing God; but, after all, to know the only true God, 
and Him whom He has sent, is everlasting life. Now, for 
this very reason God is never called the Truth, nowhere 
in Scripture, nor anything like it or equivalent. It is a 
favourite expression of rationalism and infidelity, and 
for this reason, that man of himself sets up to know 
God, but never does know Him; and rationalism, 
by the very fact that it is the pretension of man to 
know God of and in himself, never can; for God is 
only known in Christ, and for this reason I cannot 
know God, just because Iam not God. Unless I ama 
partaker of the divine nature, I cannot know Him. That 
is the reason why I have been insisting upon this truth 
of the new birth. It is not faith merely, though of 
course there is faith, and faith is the only possible way of 
being brought into the possession of this nature. Again, 
it 1s not only the word, but by the Holy Ghost’s appl- 
cation of the word ; of course, by the Holy Ghost as far 
as we are concerned. Nevertheless it is really the par- 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 15 


taking of a new nature by virtue of which we know God. 
Now, I say, as long as it was simply God acting, if it 
had been merely such, there never could have been such 
a participation of His nature; for a Being solely divine 
could not thus give of His own nature to man unless He 
had revealed Himself in man; and it was as looking 
forward to Christ, and always presenting Him as the 
object, that any soul ever did partake of the divine 
nature,—that any soul ever was born of God. I need 
not say that the Old Testament saints were thus born 
of God. Hence our Lord Jesus is not speaking pro- 
spectively, but, in point of fact, absolutely, as is His 
manner in John, unless there be exceptions expressly 
named; that is, He looks prospectively and retrospec- 
tively, looks right through the whole course of time 
into the kingdom of God. And this is the passport 
into it: a man must be born of God, or, as it is ex- 
plained here, born of water and of the Spirit. 

Now the way in which this is done is by God’s good 
pleasure, of His own sovereign love and wisdom, to bring 
Himself, so to speak, into the nature of man—to reveal 
Himself in man, as well as to man; that is, He Him- 
self remains in another condition, perfectly incapable 
of man’s being brought into it unless in this blessed 
way; but now revealing Himself in a man, IJ, a man, 
can know Him. By the working of the Holy Ghost, 
according to His own word, I can be brought into 
vital association with that blessed Man who is God. 
And thus it is that the profoundest truths of God, and 
those that might seem to have no immediate connection 
with that of which we have been speaking, are proved 
to be essential; and thus too all is rivetted together in 
the faith of the children of God; and, while they are 


16 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


admiring the wonderful way in which God has been 
pleased to send His Son born of a woman—only 
thinking of it as a necessity for putting away sin— 
they may learn that it is as necessary for all real know- 
ledge of God and communion with Him. I can know 
nothing, enjoy nothing of God, as I now know and 
enjoy Him under Christianity, unless He be pleased 
to reveal it through the man Christ Jesus. That is, 
according to the language of the day, so long as He is 
simply the absolute, I cannot. Will He deign to be- 
come relative to me? Will He come down into the 
condition in which Iam? For this is the simple mean- 
ing of what is meant by such out-of-the-way language. 

This seems to be precisely the need our Lord here has 
in view. He asserts in the strongest way that which 
pertains to Him as God: “We speak that we do know, 
and testify that we have seen.” But then He had come 
down here to speak to man, and accordingly it became 
a question of witness. He bears testimony to the truth 
that it is the sole means by which man is brought into 
this blessedness which we now enjoy: man must be 
born of water, and of the Spirit. But what was the 
reception it received from man? Man perceived his 
own things round about him, where he had been born 
and bred. He did not care for the things of God; nay, 
he was an enemy to God. Away from God, he dis- 
liked to hear of His things, and of the sphere in 
which they only should appear. Such was the ten- 
dency of man as he is by nature: “Ye receive not our 
witness.” And it is remarkable that this is found 
immediately after what might appear to be a very 
easy reception in the chapter before ours, where, as we 
all know, they believed, seeing the signs He wrought ; 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. Ly 


but there was no reception of His witness. There was a 
reception of the facts—that is, they received what they 
could see, and what they could judge. And man 
always thinks the better of himself on account of this, 
because receiving simply on evidence puts man in the 
position of a judge: he conceives, he infers, he con- 
cludes, and is all the bigger a man because he does. It 
is something that falls in with the pride of man, who 
sets himself up in the judgment-seat, even where a 
miracle of God’s power is in question; whereas here it 
is God’s witness. 

Who does not know every day this very thing? As 
long as souls are unexercised, they do not trouble them- 
selves about that which they hear; when men are 
in earnest, they question, or at least sift and weigh. 
The twofold fact of either resisting obstinately, or of 
what you may call an otzose reception of a testimony, 
_ equally proves that there is no real work in the con- 
science. The reason of this is simple. If the thing 
sunk into the heart as that in which it was deeply 
concerned, there would be at once activity there. It 
might appear to be even too good; but, for all that, 
the heart would be deeply moved, and the very anxiety 
would lead a person to examine farther. At the 
same time there would be the desire that it should be 
true wherever God was welcome to the soul, and this 
is the form the gospel takes: when a person is utterly 
dead in trespasses and sins, the testimony of God 
produces no effect. It is as easy to slight it on the 
one hand, as to profess it on the other. The effect of 
indifference is, that you will find easy profession or 
open hostility to the truth. In short, men lapse into the 
form either of a mere profession of faith on the one 

C 


18 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


hand, or open infidelity on the other; they are just 
two forms at bottom of the same thing in the human 
mind, totally different in appearance, but in truth 
equally unbelief. Whereas wherever a soul realizes the 
importance of it—and this must be so for the simple 
reason that to have what may be called this easy- 
going faith in the presence of what Jesus witnesses to 
us is utterly impossible—the truth, where it is believed 
in, must move the heart. It is impossible that if, 
justly condemned and feeling that hell must and ought 
to be my portion, I believe that God’s grace in Christ 
has delivered me from it, so that I now look assuredly 
to go to heaven with Jesus ;—it is impossible for one 
who believes all this to look coolly upon it. Therefore, 
when you find this kind of inert common-place tra- 
ditional faith, receiving things with the utmost rapidity, 
and with no real action upon the conscience and 
heart, it is quite evident that there is no vital work of 
God: it is a mere human conviction or feeling in the 
mind, and consequently good for nothing. Our Lord 
puts the case according to His own divine knowledge 
of testimony, and tells us of the resistance or in- 
difference it encounters from man. But along with this 
He hints at higher things: “If I have told you earthly 
things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I 
tell you heavenly things?” This leads us to an impor- 
tant point that modifies what had been laid down. If 
any here should find it outside their ordinary thoughts, 
I trust they will weigh the words of our Lord; for it 
is His truth, not human speculation, I would press. 
Our Lord Jesus had spoken in the strongest way of 
the absolute necessity of the new birth for every or 
any man that enters the kingdom of God. This we 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 19 


must take both backwards and forwards throughout the 
whole course of the dealings of God. Now, there is 
new language. From the moment that He presents 
Himself as bringing in this full divine testimony which 
man does not receive, He speaks of the blessing in a far 
richer and more precise style. All who are to be in 
the kingdom of God, whether in the earthly or in the 
heavenly things, whether below or above, when that 
kingdom is established and displayed in both its parts, 
all within it must be born again. But while a soul that 
receives the gospel now is born of God, it is very far 
short of expressing the full truth merely to speak of 
it as new birth. It is not so that Christ puts the 
matter, in the very discourse in which He insists most 
on being born of the Spirit. “If I have told you 
earthly things, and ye believe not [for which it was an 
essential condition to be born of God], how shall ye 
believe, if I tell you heavenly things?” Connected 
with these last, He says, “No man hath ascended up to 
heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the 
Son of man which is in heaven.” Thus He confirms 
what has been said before, that He is presenting Him- 
self as most truly man, the rejected Christ, the Son of 
man, but as certainly God. Heaven was that to which 
He belonged, or rather it to Him. This was an entirely 
new realm, and the surroundings are as new. As born 
of a woman, born under law, even He was seen and 
known on earth and in time, and spite of all His 
grace, power, and glory, man would not have Him; but 
He that was now manifested in the flesh here below 
was really the only-begotten Son in the bosom of the 


Father, and claims even as the rejected One to be the 


Son of man who is in heaven. Observe the language 
uses 


20 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


carefully. It is not merely that He had been in heaven, 
for that is altogether short of the truth; He 7s there; it 
matters not when, it matters not how—He is always the 
Son of man who is in heaven. His being the humbled 
man only gave occasion to a new glory for God and 
man, as it was the turning-point of a fresh and fuller 
knowledge of God by man. There was One who, Him- 
self the Infinite, entered into what was limited, in 
order ‘that they, men as they were, should enter into 
the knowledge of God, and see the Father in Him. 
They must be met by the word; they must hear One 
who is man, as He is God. It was grace, but it was 
truth ; it was the only way in which the truth could be 
revealed. Before this there was only a partial mani- 
festation; but the wonderful thing is that the full 
manifestation of the truth is found in man—One who 
is divine, but none the less man. Nothing therefore 
can be farther from the fact than the thought, that 
because Christ is come in the flesh, appearing in a 
limited sphere, the truth cannot be known. In point 
of fact, till the Word was made flesh, the truth could 
not be fully revealed. It is precisely in the combina- 
tion of seemingly incompatible elements united in the 
person of Jesus that you get the truth. For the law was 
given by Moses; grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. 
He alone is the One who conciliates God with His 
righteousness saving in grace, who at the same time 
humbled Himself and glorified God to the uttermost. 
It is this blessed man who is the pattern of all low- 
liness, who, nevertheless, blots out all the glory of man 
in one word like this: “No man,” He says, “hath 
ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from 
heaven.” Nor was it merely that He came down. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. ye ae 


Others might be caught up, as we know, by an act of 
power; but He could take it for His own proper por- 
tion, walking into it as simply as possible when the 
hour came. More than this, as we have seen, He 7s in 
heaven. It was not merely a question of going there, 
He was “the Son of man who is in heaven.” This 
therefore attaches to Him as a divine person, and could 
be said of none else; and more than this, it attaches 
to this one divine person, and to none other. As a man, 
I cannot rise above the things of man: such are the 
limits of the human spirit; it cannot per se reach up 
to God, or the things of God, who alone can reveal 
Himself—alone does reveal Himself in the Word, the 
Son, and this only efficaciously by the Holy Spirit. 
This is the reason why the Spirit of God is said to be 
the truth, as well as Christ; the one as objectively 
viewed, the other as inward power. 

‘The Lord Jesus, then, having brought in His own 
divine person after this manner, next discloses the need 
of a work to be done, in order to give God a righteous 
title to bestow the blessing of His own nature on sinful: 
man. Accordingly this He does thus: “As Moses 
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must 
the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth 
in him should not perish, but”—-what? be born again ? 
No—“ have eternal life.” Manifestly there is a differ- 
ence, and of the most weighty and suggestive character. 
There is no need of strong language to set it forth; for 
indeed it cannot well be exaggerated. Again, I am not 
in the least denying, if one were born of God or afresh 
in the Old Testament times, that he has divine life, or 
that this life is eternal. Therefore you will understand 
that in no way is the fact questioned that all the saints, 


a2 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


from beginning to end, have life everlasting. Still, we 
are bound to believe that the Lord is wise, and had an 
all-sufficient reason for introducing at this point so 
marked a difference. For now, for the first time, after 
having already asserted the universality of being born 
again, when He comes to express the application of 
this truth to the believer, founded on redemption, 
observe, founded on His own death as the Son of man 
lifted up on the cross, He will not describe it simply as 
a new birth, but gives it another style and quality in 
His expression of it. Of course, He, the Son, is the 
quickener of all saints, and therefore it is to me no 
question whether the Old Testament saints have not 
been quickened as really as ourselves: assuredly they 
must be and were. I hold, that there never was but one 
Saviour, and consequently that the new birth, which 
all need for God’s kingdom, is ever the impartation, 
by the Spirit, of the life which is in the Son of God. 
Nevertheless, I maintain with equal certainty, and 
on the positive authority of the word of my Saviour 
Himself, that He, when pleased to describe our place, 
refuses, if I may so say, to merge it merely in what 
belonged to all at all times. Thus, even to this universal 
and common truth, in its application to us since re- 
demption, He gives an uncommon expression. How 
marvellously, then, the Spirit of God has shown, in this 
simple way, the honour that He puts on Christ and on 
redemption, when He brings near this glorious fact, 
this work worthy of God,—the greatest, so to speak, in 
which God ever showed Himself forth, even in speaking 
of what is universal (in the sense of attaching to every 
child of His, in all ages and dispensations). Neverthe- 
less, now the Saviour presents it in this new title and 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 23 


ereatly enhanced quality. If we search into the Old 
Testament we may find eternal life spoken of, or what 
is tantamount to it; for we do not stand upon techni- 
calities, but speak of things in a practical point of 
view—we speak of a reality which our Lord utters, 
and has kept in the inspired record as of the utmost 
importance for all of us to take heed to. I say, then, 
that the Lord does not vary phrases needlessly, but that 
if He gives another form, He means that we are to 
take notice of the difference. Have we meekness of 
wisdom if we do not? 

This appears to me the sum of what we read in the 
Old Testament. Eternal life is spoken of in Daniel xii, 
for instance, and “life for evermore” comes before us 
in the end of Psalm cxxxiii.; but we may remark this 
in those two expressions of “life for evermore” and 
“eternal life’—they are bound up with the hope of 
Messiah’s presence and reign, when He brings in the 
kingdom of God as a matter of visible display. But 
the wonderful truth that appears in John is, that the 
glory of the Son’s person, being now manifested, brings 
us into the blessing entirely apart from all such future 
display. We wait for nothing else: the reason is, 
because we have Him. Consequently, although the 
kingdom may not yet be come in this sense, although 
there be not yet the establishment of public blessing, 
although in fact the Jews, instead of being blessed, are 
still subject to the curse under which they put them- 
selves, “His blood be on us and on our children,” and 
wrath come upon them to the uttermost (that is, the 
complete putting off of the promises, as far as they are 
concerned, for the time; and the postponement of the 
kingdom), spite of all this, we are ushered even now 


24. THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


into an unbounded scene of rich and divine blessing, 
and for this reason, because we have Christ, and have 
Him thus and now. 

What makes the thing so touching, as well as in- 
structive, lies in this, that we have now the comfort 
and joy of personal association with Himself. If only 
“born again,” surely it is a great mercy; but it does 
not give anything of the sort. I find this indispensable 
qualification for God’s kingdom from and through Christ 
doubtless; but it does not associate me in terms with 
Christ. Nobody could speak of Christ being born 
again: the man who did go would be a blasphemer, 
and must deny the person of Christ. Therefore, in 
speaking or hearing of “born again,” if this was merely 
the expression, it rather keeps one from realizing iden- 
tification with Christ; for it would remind us of the 
essential difference between what man acquires by grace 
and what was in Christ. But the moment He speaks 
of eternal life, I share in this at once. My portion in 
Him is eternal life; for He is that eternal life which 
was with the Father; so that instead of dissociation in 
the manner in which the Lord speaks of my participa- 
tion in the new nature, this blessedness is now pre- 
sented after a sort which is true of Christ Himself. Not 
merely is it a question of being brought into a common 
position, so to speak, of the body and the Head, which 
is not the point here (for there is always a deeper thing 
than this in John, who I believe in strictness does not 
treat of our corporate place): the point with him is 
community of life and nature, rather than the oneness 
of the body. 

At any rate, such is exactly what we find here ; 
that is, we now know that Christ speaks of His own 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 25 


manifestation here, His own bearing of divine testi- 
mony, and this not as a mere instrument according 
to God, but a personally divine testimony; for this 
is the scope of verse 11—‘“ We speak that we do 
know, and testify that we have seen.” Thus we see 
the fulness of the blessing made ours. He is not 
content with saying, Ye must be born again. This 
was always, and must be, true; but now, who can 
deny that, although it was the same blessing sub- 
stantially, the character in which He clothes it and 
brings it to my soul carries its own witness of the 
truth, that I receive by grace what He has and is? He, 
the Son, is the eternal life, as well as true God. But 
what availed it, as far as we were concerned, that God 
was thus manifested in Him here below? He abode 
alone; and man, too, abiding outside Him, was dead as 
well.as in impenetrable darkness. He, the Saviour, died 
and rose; and I receive Him, and know that he “that 
hath the Son hath life,” and that this life is eternal life. 

But if I merely look at the cross of the Lord Jesus 
Christ as the necessary basis of divine righteousness, 
whilst it was also the fullest display of pity for me a 
guilty and needy sinner, this of itself would never settle 
my soul in perfect peace before God, still less would it 
give an adequate knowledge of Him. ‘Therefore comes 
out another expression, repeating, it might seem, the 
same result, as in verses 13, 14, but really from a yet 
higher source; “for God,” says the Son, “so loved the 
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoso- 
ever believeth in him should not perish, but have ever- 
lasting life.” There had not been a word about God’s 
“love” before, any more than about “the world,” in this 
discourse; it was purely the intervention of the Son 


26 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


of man, and this, of course, in view of what was 
absolutely necessary. Just as a man must be born 
anew to enter the kingdom, so He must be lifted up on 
the cross, if there was to be an efficacious work in 
righteousness for the sinner. But now there is far 
more ; for that never could satisfy God’s love,—who is 
most defectively known if there be no more than a 
“must be.” Not so. Let me see what He is; let me 
know what He feels; let me have the witness of His 
Own grace in Christ. Is it a boon wrung out from 
God? Far be the thought! Does He, is He not, love ? 
Let me listen more to that which Jesus tells us, who 
knew as none but He could know or tell. Yea He, the 
Son, knew Him perfectly, and would make Him known 
as He is and feels even about the world. And So, 
therefore, He adds, crowning this blessed revelation 
in Himself of God’s grace and truth, shown in His 
work as in His very person too,— crowning it, I say, 
with a declaration truly divine: “God so loved the 
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whoso- 
ever believeth in him should not perish, but have ever- 
lasting life.” How blessed, my brethren, to have this 
eternal life, and to know that we have it ; to have it, 
too, not merely as that which is to come to us as the 
hard-won spoil of redemption, but also as the free and 
full and spontaneous fruit, so to speak, of His love, 
given us in Him who was Himself the most intimate 
object of the Father’s love. Thus to those who deserve 
nothing less God would display what He is in the 
best gift even He could give; not merely because J 
could not be blessed otherwise, but because He would 
according to His own heart bless me to the full. He 
has given me that life, which is never said to be in 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 27 


any other, in His Son, which in Him [I see to be abso- 
lutely perfect, which having in Him I am capable of 
fellowship here below with Himself. 

Surely, however blessed it is to have our sins and 
misery met, it is incomparably more to have the positive 
side of the blessing, to have that in which He Himself 
can and did delight in Jesus as He beheld Him walk 
in all dependance and obedience, in light and love—the 
more wondrous because in man on earth. It is that 
life which reciprocates His mind and feelings, enters 
into all His joys, takes part in all the grief with which 
He looks upon rebellious man and a ruined world, 
and now, alas! we must add a guilty Christendom. “In 
Him was life.” How blessed now for us to have in 
Him that very life already proved, spite of all and in 
the midst of all, to rise up to all that is in God; and 
yet exercised in every circumstance that can befall the 
heart of man! And this, brethren, is what, as possessed 
of eternal life in Christ, we are now partakers of in the 
grace of our God; for the life which we now live in 
the flesh, we live by the faith of the Son of God, 
founded on His redemption in love. It is, as a Chris- 
tian, no longer the old I, but Christ that lives in me: 
such is its source and character. Christ, too, is the 
object; but along with the object there is life, and this 
life is in Himself, in the Son of God, even eternal life. 

The Lord bless His own word, giving our souls to 
hold fast every truth that we have known, but to learn 
that God is still active in His love, and would impart 
greater freedom and fulness to us in realizing a growing 
sense of association with Christ. Assuredly this has 
been the secret; if indeed we have made already any 
real advance, it has always been in this direction. 


28 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Such are our best blessings; such, I am persuaded, 
they will prove throughout all eternity. May we, 
meanwhile, be strengthened with might by His Spirit 
in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in our 
hearts by faith, being rooted and grounded in love, that 
we may be able to comprehend the glory before us, and 
know His love that passeth knowledge, and so be filled 
with all the fulness of God. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 29 


Pecture iil. 


“CA well of water.’’—Joun iv. 


THE preceding chapter presented, in connection with 
the subject now before us, the Holy Ghost operating 
on man—that new birth, not of man’s nature, as men 
falsely say, but of God, though in man, that birth of 
water and of the Spirit, without which none can see 
or enter the kingdom of God. A nature which is of 
God is alone fit for the kingdom of God. A divine 
nature alone is capable of knowing and enjoying God ; 
and no bliss that is outside man, no work (infinitely 
precious as it might be) that is wrought for him, could 
of itself solely suffice for the presence of God. It 
might vindicate God as to sin, and even glorify Him 
infinitely. Such, we know, is the case with the work 
of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ; but I am bold to 
say, that nothing simply external to man, were it alone, 
could fit man, being a sinner, either to know God now, 
or to enjoy Him hereafter. But the same grace of God, 
which gives Christ for the accomplishment of the 
work of redemption, reveals Christ by the Holy Ghost 
through the word, and thus the soul is born of water 
and of the Spirit. More than that: now, since re- 
demption, he is entitled to know it in its fully revealed 
form, in the highest character of expression which suits 
even the Son of God Himself. That is, it is not merely 
being converted or born again, but having eternal life. I 


30 ‘THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


do not in the least deny that to be born again is sub- 
stantially to have eternal life. I am only accounting 
for, as we ought in my judgment to account for, the 
language of the Lord, which, instead of resting in the 
most general expression, or in the assertion of the 
universal necessity of being born again, deigns to give 
us the blessing since the cross enunciated in that 
character which suits Himself; for He is eternal life, 
even that eternal life which was with the Father, and. 
was manifested to us. Thus grace has wrought worthily 
of the Son of God. 

But now we come to another part of the subject. 
It is not the wants simply of man, nor the necessity 
for a nature which he has not, and which comes from 
God alone. When God sends His beloved Son into 
such a world as this, He never limits Himself to that 
which is indispensable to His presence. He acts as 
God; He imparts not only the nature itself, but a 
suitable power to work in it; He gives that which is 
the strength of its action, and the spring of joy proper 
to the divine nature. In a word, it is not eternal 
life only, blessed as this is, and, as we have seen, the 
richest form of expressing the new birth; but He gives 
the Holy Ghost. Now, the circumstances were, as they 
always are, suitable to that which God was unfolding. 

In the former chapter, the appeal of man was made 
with no common earnestness, spite of the difficulties 
that seemed to be great, and no doubt were, as far as 
his mind could judge. But now there was a further 
step of grace in the path of the Son of God: He was 
virtually rejected. Instead of men believing upon Him 
because of the miracles that He did, the jealousy of 
the Pharisees was excited, and the Son of God in 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. OL 


sorrow turns His back upon that Judea to which He 
came from God. He felt it, as He always did. It could 
not be otherwise ; it ought not to be otherwise. Love 
could not but feel, for it was not merely that He was 
rejected; He felt for them forsaking their own mercies, 
rejecting God Himself—rejecting Him, their Messiah; 
but this very rejection leads Him to the manifestation 
of such grace as was unheard of in Judea. A woman 
of Samaria, no meet company (one might think) for 
the Messiah, a poor female of the town of Sychar, 
evidently ruined even in human judgment, meets Him 
alone at the well of Jacob, where sat Jesus wearied with 
His journey, who opens soon the pathway to her heart. 

Jesus asks a drink of water. He ever comes near, 
not as the Messiah, though the Messiah, but as the 
Son of God who needed no glory, who did need to 
show grace; for man was lost, and God yearned over 
lost man; and there was but One that could meet the 
need—it was He. And so in His own love He stoops 
and asks. What would He not do to reach her heart ? 
And the woman was astonished; for the Jews had no 
dealings with the Samaritans. To her He was but “a 
Jew,’ and herself “a woman of Samaria.” How short 
of the truth on either side! But said He, “If thou 
knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to - 
thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of 
him, and he would have given thee living water.” She 
knew it not. She could hardly be said to know the 
law of God, though she might speak of it; but as to 
the gift of God—who had ever heard of such a thought ? 
Who, in favoured Israel, had realized the truth that 
God gives? That to which she clung yielded a quite 
contrary view of God: human religion regards Him as 


32 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


a receiver. It is true that she was but a sinful and lost 
woman; but such an one may have religious pride, and 
share the jealousy of that which had superior claims. 
At any rate, to her spirit—nay, even to those who 
ought to have known far better—God is always a 
claimant, and not one who gives as only God can give. 
Man’s mind never rises above this; least of all in that 
which he seeks for his soul. He may know the effects 
of divine wisdom and power, but God Himself is un- 
known, and never can be known, save in Christ, His 
Son. This she had not yet learnt. Not a suspicion 
had she who it was that said to her, Give me to drink. 
If she had known who He was, God, as a giver, must 
have been distinctly and gloriously before her soul. 
But grace was far from her thoughts; it was a Jew 
that asked of her a drink of water. She knew not the 
dignity of His person who was now a man on earth 
among men; she knew not that He was the Son, the 
only-begotten Son; she knew not the glory of Him 
who never proved His glory more than when He thus 
stooped down to sinners and their need; for what is 
there deeper on the part of God, or of God’s Son, than 
this expression of grace, stooping down in love—not 
in condescension, but in real goodness? Condescension 
is but patronage, human and worldly; and to me there 
is something repulsive in the notion, save for the little 
stage of man. There is no such thought, nor could be, 
in Him who is true, and alone manifested divine love 
—a love that had no motive outside itself, which was 
love in its own nature. And this Jesus was, and was 
now on earth to show it. What was there in any way 
or degree to attract in such an one as she? It was God 
giving; it was the Son humbling Himself; in outward 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. ao 


form, no doubt, asking, but asking that He might give, 
making her little gift of water but the occasion of that 
gift of living water, of which, if one drank, he should 
never thirst any more. This was indeed a new sound 


_ to her—this “living water.” 


I call your attention first of all to the expression. 
To be born of the Spirit is totally distinct from the 
gift of the Spirit. There is no connection whatever 
between the two thoughts. The one, of course, is just 
as true as the other. The first had always been. The 


Spirit of God had surely and unfailingly wrought in 


souls ever since sin came into the world; but the 


Spirit of God was never given till the Son was mani- 
fested, till God Himself took the place of a giver, and 
the Son took the place of humiliation in love to sinners, 
and asked the neediest of souls to give Him to drink, 
awakening confidence by His perfect grace. It is the 
great truth which everywhere shines out in this gospel: 
only thus and then could the living water be given. 
And you will mark, Christ is the giver. It is not a 
question of Himself, nor is it simply eternal life; we 
have had this fully, and Scripture repeats not itself. 
Although we most surely have absolute harmony in all 
the parts of the truth of God, still here we are on new 
ground in presence of another character of need alto- 
gether, deeper wants bringing out deeper grace. It is 
not a choice doctor, but an outcast and wretched woman, 
good for nothing in the eyes of any in this world. 
Such was the one to whom the depths of grace in the 
Son of God were more or less unveiled. 

The woman, it is true, made it palpable that 
as yet she was wholly unprepared for the inesti- 
mable gift. Wonder not at this. I do not think 

D 


34 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


that any one, fairly reading John iii. with the fourth 
chapter, could boast of the learned Nicodemus any 
more than of the ignorant woman of Samaria. In the 
former scene the truth insisted on was, if possible, still 
more incumbent on man to know. . How much had 
the teacher of Israel known of it? How far did he 
take it in then? In the later incident, the eift of 
living water was a truth that no one antecedently 
could have known. So far from being a matter of 
common need and urgently responsible Tenewde ta how 
could it be conceived? When had ever been given 
such a revelation of God and of His grace as Jesus 
had brought before this woman in John iv. 102 Where 
had there ever been such a display of divine eTace 
as God thus giving, the Son thus bowing down in love 
to one outside all righteousness, and the Holy Ghost 
this living source of refreshment for the heart? The 
woman however falls back upon that which is the 
constant resource of nature in this world, that is, tra- 
dition—“the well of our father Jacob.” It was an 
effort to escape from that which was too vast and 
deep and divine for her to take in. Jesus had left 
the place where His people dwelt under the shadow 
of God-imposed ordinance. Higher purposes were in 
accomplishment. Our gospel does not trace Him as 
come to bring out what was destined for the land of 
promise; for, after all, what is the promise? It is 
measured grace. He was come in immeasurable grace, 
for all was lost, where there ought not to have been an 
object to be the hiding-place of the soul. But where 
will not a sinner find one? She retreats behind this 
covering of pride, even for a woman of Samaria—*the 
well of her father Jacob.” He had drunk of it, and 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 35 


his cattle, as well as his children: who was it then 
that Jesus made Himself? Oh, the withering unbelief 
of the heart, so quick to darken the rich grace of God! 
Jesus, however, patiently bears with her folly, and says 
to her, “Whosoever drinketh of this water”— albeit 
Jacob’s well—“ Whosoever drinketh of this water shall 
_ thirst again: but whosoever drinketh of the water that 
| I shall give him shall never thirst.” More than this, 
“the water that I shall give him shall be in him a 
well of water springing up into everlasting life.” 

This supposes everlasting life; but it supposes a divine 
source of joy which everlasting life in itself never is 
nor can be. On the contrary, it would destroy all the 
truth of this new and divine nature to maintain that the 
life itself was a spring. Such is not the nature of life; 
it is essentially dependent; but here I find a spring, a 
continual source of supply. That is, it is not merely a 
new creature which, by the simple fact that it is a new 
creature and of God too, leans on Him whence it comes, 
and finds its support and strength in Another; but here 
there is a living source of joy. The very figure of the 
well aptly conveys as much, and much more, when we 
think of that which lay couched under the phrase 
“living water.” For it is not some absolutely indis- 
pensable requisite for relation with God which we have 
here. Alas! what would in this case have been the sad 
truth of all that had ever lived up to this time ? 

It was a new privilege; it was a fulness of joy that was 
only appropriate according to the ways and counsels of 
God, when the Son came. It was impossible that God 
should not adequately mark the coming of His Son, 
and His own manifestation in His Son’s presence here 
in grace, as well as the accomplishment of the infinite 

D 2 


36 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


work of redemption. Not that this work is spoken of 
here; but still it is involved in His humiliation. It is 
impossible, I repeat, that: God should not mark this 
greatest of all things before His mind and heart with 
some fresh blessing, some deep accession of joy to the 
believer. Those who know Him ever so little will 
confess that it could not be otherwise. Man may wish 
to level the fair scenes in the ways of God, and to blot 
out the landmarks He has made—always bright tokens 
of goodness in this world, always full of wisdom and 
blessing; but let man level as he may, and let his will 
intrude even into the things of divine revelation, God’s 
word stands and shall stand for ever. God’s design is 
to make everything for His Son’s glory. And so when 
the Son came, it is not merely that a new nature was 
given; this had always been in grace, that souls sepa- 
rated to His name might be born anew meet for His 
presence. But now, besides this nature and His looking 
on to the mighty work which would justify Him in the 
passing over of sins—now the new birth for the believer 
is brought to light in its true nature and value, eternal 
life in the Son. 

But we have seen there is even more than this. 
There is a divine power for him who receives ever- 
lasting life, a, well of water in him, as it is said here, 
springing up into everlasting life. Thus, clearly, it 1s 
not only the fact but the power of eternal life; and 
this not so much in a nature conferred, as in an un- 
failing flow connecting with the source. I admit the 
personality of the Spirit is not yet brought out here: 
this would be treated in due season. We have this truth 
afterwards, and it will come before us suitably on 
another occasion, I trust. But here we have each 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 37 


intimation exactly according to the mind of God and 
the accuracy of divine wisdom. We have not the 
question of a person yet: when the blessed Son of God 
goes away, and this is intimated fully, then another 
person comes and takes His place; and so the whole 
scheme stands out beautifully and in order. What now 
we find is power, rather than personality; but an in- 
ward power for him who has the everlasting life, in 
order that his soul may feel the full joy of grace. Of 
this then the Lord speaks when He says, “ Whosoever 
drinketh of the water that I shall give him,” &c. 

Now let us turn for a moment to what man is since 
the fall, and to what God is as He has revealed Himself 
in and by the Son to a poor fallen creature, if ever 
there was one. What was the change that took place 
when man fell? When Adam was made, had he any 
thirst in the spiritual sense of the word? None what- 
ever. For a sinless being there was no question of 
thirsting. This were a defect in the creation which our 
God did not and could not attach to it, when all was 
very good. I do not believe it was so, even speaking 
physically ; but I am sure, that in the sense in which 
our Lord discoursed, Adam had no craving after a food 
he did not possess; he was incapable of the thirst in 
question, because it supposes that the heart is not 
satisfied, that there is nothing around to satisfy it, that 
there is a continual desire after what it has not found 
nor can find. Not such was the condition of Adam 
then in innocence, made upright by the hand of God. 
His creature - satisfaction no doubt broke out, not 
certainly in spiritual worship, but at least in thankful- 
ness to God. He enjoyed the goodness and wisdom of 
God in countless good things around and beneath him- 


38 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


self. He sins, falls, and, along with the knowledge of 
good and evil that he acquired, there came in this 
desire after what never could satisfy. And this accord- 
ingly is the condition of every fallen being. Put in 
its best shape, it is hope; for man does and cannot but 
hope: frequent and bitter disappointments of this world 
may crush the spirit; yet even so who does not know 
how it survives, still hoping against hope? But this it 
was that came in with the fall; for the best form you 
can give it, in the point of view now brought before you, 
is hope as a constant pressure towards activity. Man, 
as was said in Scripture, is become as God. And so 
there was this desire to be some one—somebody—in 
this world; in fact, virtually to take the place of God 
Himself. Of course, the daring aspiration has checks 
from God, and even yet has not shown itself fully ; but 
it is in the heart, and sure to do its best—really its 
worst—when God withdraws all hindrances, and Satan 
works all out. The time is coming, and coming fast; 
but from the first day of sin to this, it has been just 
this desire after what man has not got stirring him to 
activity in a lost world. 

Contrariwise, Jesus comes and gives, not only eternal 
life, but the “living water;” and there is at once an 
adequate object for the heart, which there never 
was before, with fresh power to enjoy it. Of old, even — 
that which awakened the heart still took the character 
of hoping for that which was in prospect. There was 
trust in God and in His promises, so to speak; but 
now a mighty change took place. Christ was come; 
the hoped-for One was present. God Himself was here 
in the person of that Man sitting thus weary by the 
well of Sychar, the lowliest of men; none the less, but 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 39 


the more from the very depths of His lowliness, show- 
ing Himself to be the true God in His love. For God 
in His gift would give nothing less than God. Not 
only would He give the nature which is of God, but a 
divine power to be in man of enjoying this nature and 
the relationships proper to it, the object suited to it, 
the worship and the service in accordance with it. 
Herein we find at once what meets the fall and its 
consequences, according to God; what meets it not in 
the meagre way of simple adaptation to human ruin, 
a bare remedy or a repair, but in such a sort as to 
prove and display God Himself, giving the fullest scope 
to the resources that are in Him. It is the revealed 
grace of the Son in the power of the Spirit. It is 
Christianity in some of its simplest, highest, weightiest 
elements: a divine person come down in perfect love, 
if a Jew outside Judaism, with a guilty Samaritan 
woman before Him, asking not for His own sake but 
for hers, seeking the least thing she could give in 
order to arrest her attention, that He might bless her 
with His own greatest and imperishable blessing, and 
this now and for ever. It is not only a new nature, 
but a present power for and in man, but from God, 
and in itself most strictly divine. And this is just 
what we now have to rejoice our souls in. He has 
given us the Spirit of God; He has accomplished His 
word. God has sent the Spirit of His Son, as it is 
said, into our hearts, crying, “Abba, Father ;” “the love 
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost 
which is given unto us.” 

Not merely is there eternal life, but, over and above 
the gift of that life, the Holy Ghost Himself is given 
to us. And mark, then it is we find that the believer 


40 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


shall “never thirst again.” This is not said simply of 
one born afresh, nor even where we hear of eternal life 
alone; nor was it true in fact when souls were born 
again and no more; for up to the time of God’s giving 
in Christ and by Christ the Holy Spirit of grace, there 
was a craving after the things of the world; and God 
Himself did not wholly condemn this in a certain 
sense, but allowed it—it might be for the hardness of 
their heart. But still a man might, so to speak, have 
this world and have the next too—that kind of thing 
which even now we know men, grievously blinded as 
to the truth and ignorant of Christianity, think to be 
possible. Believers were not then treated as absolutely 
dead to flesh and world. In the Old Testament we 
find no such language even in the saints of God; we 
find it not in the fathers any more than in the children 
of Israel; we find the reverse more particularly in the 
whole form of the Jewish estate—a hope first in One 
that was coming, but at the same time no present 
deliverance from the course of the world as a judged 
system. There were actings of faith full of interest 
to us, in which saints rose above all that surrounded 
them by God’s grace; and so it is that God instructs 
us by that which we are told of Abel, Enoch, Noah, 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, and so on. 
But for all this, I speak of what is a plain fact in the 
midst of these things; for along with a hope that had 
not yet the object revealed to it, still less the infinite 
work of redemption accomplished, and laid as a basis 
for faith, there was also a measure of cleaving to what 
was found here on earth, which was not yet utterly 
and in every respect a judged thing. 

Vow, if the heart is not satisfied with Christ, how is 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 41 


it? It is because the Holy Ghost is not given to us; 
it is because I have Him not filling my heart to over- 
flowing with the grace of Jesus; it is because, though 
divinely attracted to Christ, I have no rest in Him— 
am still occupied with myself, grovelling in the mud of 
my nature, instead of being taken up by the power of 

the Spirit with that Christ who is my life. Thus Iam — 
not satisfied with Him only; I am also hankering after 
what is trash, what is worldly, what is carnal. What 
is the consequence? It may be, and indeed is, most 
sorrowful that it should and must be so; for God in 
Christ in the fulness of grace is not enough! The posses- 
sion and knowledge of a privilege constitutes an added 
responsibility, but the first thing is for faith to enter 
in and possess. Nor will He permit that our hearts 
should be occupied with these things merely as a 
matter of testimony, but of our own soul’s delight in 
the object by the power that He has given to us. 
But still what I do affirm now is this—that Chris- 
tianity is perfectly brought out, and it is brought out, 
too, according to the wisdom of God; for, first of all, 
the divine nature is revealed in the person who is its 
fulness and complete expression, and, more than this, 
the power to enjoy is given. The consequence is that, 
while the heart finds in the revealed object that which 
alone is adequate to satisfy, because He is a divine 
person, and moreover the Son of God who loved me, 
the power of hope is not lost. For I have also a hope— 
not now a mere hope as it was when of old there was 
nothing else, but in such a world as this, being still in 
the body, God does not give it up for us, who need 
such a stimulus. There is no thirsting again when in 
the Spirit we enjoy Christ, but there is hope still; but 


4.2 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


then He whom I hope for is the very same that I 
possess. The Christ I long for is the Christ I actually 
have, and I shall never find in that blessed One a whit 
of difference. I shall know Him better and praise 


Him more, for I shall be in a condition where my — 


infirmities are gone, and my very body will be in- 
corrupt and glorious, and nothing shall annoy, distract, 
or obscure; but I shall find Him the same Christ who 
loves me perfectly now. Is it not blessed to know that 
this is even now true to our souls—that we have Him 
here as certainly as we shall have Him above? Thus 
while there remains in one sense the profit of some- 
thing to be sought after, in another just as true our 
hearts have real rest as far as their object is concerned. 
We have not lost hope as a power for activity, rightly 
called forth and exercised in a ruined world. This 
would be indeed a loss, whilst we are here below. 
But hope must pass away. In heaven it is no longer a 
question of either faith or hope, as we know, for they 
always suppose an imperfect fallen condition, as far as 
things around are .concerned; but then the way in 
which we have the hope is, that we have in Christ 
revealed to our faith the perfect object for a renewed 
heart, and that we are ourselves blessed according to 
the perfectness of the work that He has done, so that 
conscience as well as affection have perfect rest. At 
the same time the old creation remains, and we in the 
body in the midst of it, so that we have in hope a 
blessed spur to the activity of love. May I not ask, 
Is not all this worthy of such a God as ours? And 
is it not God acting according to His perfect love with 
His children, whom He has thus blessed with and in 
Christ His own Son ? | 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 43 


But there is more than this. I need not enter upon 
that which has been often before us, and which it 
would be a joy to press, were it a question of the need 
of a soul in its unconverted state. I pass over, there- 
fore, that which evinces the necessity of reaching the 
mind through an awakened conscience. It is blessed, 
no doubt, that there should be the proof of love before 
this, for I apprehend conscience cannot bear to be 
probed unless there be a previous testimony of love; 
but who will maintain that any testimony of love could 
of itself suffice for a sinner? There must be a dealing 
with the conscience; and so we find it here. 

But what it is of moment now to draw attention to 
very briefly is the connection of this blessed power of 
the Spirit—the divine spring of joy in the soul—with 
that worship on which the woman, little knowing what 
she was about to draw out, questions the Saviour. She 
did so, indeed, as a speculation, perhaps even as a 
palliative for a conscience that was wounded, and that 
did not yet thoroughly bow before God; but whatever 
may have been the motive, the mixed motive, as I 
presume it really was (which, alas ! we know too well), 
this woman does at least bring out for our edification 
a blessed and most important bearing of the gift of 
the Spirit. For indeed we are not only objects of divine 
love; we are not only possessors of eternal life and of 
the Holy Ghost, but there are worthy ends in it accord- 
ing to God; and that which claims our notice here is, I 
apprehend, the highest one necessarily—what goes up, 
not what comes down. We have our place of worship, 
we have our place of service; and worship and ser- 
vice are just the two forms in which the Holy Ghost, 
acting in us as the water springing up into everlasting 


44 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


life, leads our souls. The worship of God Himself, our 
Father, is first and supreme. It must and ought to be 
so: how could it rightly be otherwise? But still we 
are in this world where souls are perishing, and if not 
perishing, how many. are most needy, and call for our 
service! I speak now of the children of God, and 
repeat that expression in the actual state of Christen- 
dom—it is penury indeed for them. And so accord- 
ingly the ministry of grace has its just application here 
below. 

In the foremost place, then, for the saint, and as the 
sole topic I wish to dwell on now in closing to-night, 
stands this connection of the Spirit with worship as 
explained by Christ. “Our fathers,” says the woman, 
“worshipped in this mountain,” (for she had her 
opinion, and a very decided one,) “and ye say that in 
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. 
Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour 
cometh, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet 
at Jerusalem, worship the Father.” Thus, in the pre- 
sence of the Son, not only false systems disappear, 
but even that which, as partial revelation, had its 
warrant from God: not only the mountain of Samaria, 
but Jerusalem itself. How comes this? It was even 
so. How could Jerusalem possibly hold its place in 
the presence of the rejected Son of God? The city of 
the great King! Had the great King been received as 
such, He would have taken His seat in that city ac- 
cording to the terms of ancient promise. But this was 
exactly what had been refused; and now His back was 
turned, as He Himself is despised by those who took the 
place of being the best and wisest there. This only 
brings out the fulness of divine grace, and, moreover, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 45 


attests that fulness of grace here, as always, is at- 
tached to the fulness of glory. Such flagrant sin 
touched the glory and gave occasion for the grace of 
God. Do not mistake. There is no indifference in 
God, who resists every sin done against Christ, in the 
very love that He bears to His guilty people, as well 
as that which cannot suffer the dishonour of His own 
Son; so, if it were only in the interests of the Church 
here below, He refuses to make light of the smallest 
blot or stain, or allowed affront put on Christ. Besides, 
man, religious man, had proved, and would yet more 
prove, the utter hollowness of ordinances to meet his 
wants or God’s glory. 

This woman had heard of what might be expected of 
the Messiah at His coming. Little did she know that 
He was speaking to her. There was no pomp nor judg- 
ment. As King, He of course might have sent forth 
armies, and burned up Jerusalem. But as the Son, He 
need say nothing now but these words: “The hour is 
coming, and now is,” &c. He that had made everything 
by a word blotted at once out, as it was suitable He 
should do, by a word, the place of Jerusalem from the 
earth as the centre of divine worship. Again, I say, not 
only the false systems, but even the partial revelation 
which merely dealt with man on the earth—what was 
suited, if one may thus speak, more justly to the first 
man—was doomed, and vanishes away, that the Son 
might abide—the Son of God. “Ye worship,” He says, 
“ye know not what: we know what we worship; for 
salvation is of the Jews.” There was presumption 
and ignorance in Samaria; nor does the Lord disguise 
the advantage every way of Israel. But it may be 
remarked, that Jesus never says so except outside: 


46 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


He vindicates the Jews when He was in the midst of 
their rivals, and Himself rejected. What grace! But 
the time was come for more; and you will always find 
something tantamount in the wonderful ways of God. 
The rejected Lord does not deny what had honour, even 
though active against Himself. He does not siight the 
line of promise; He does not forget in the smallest 
degree the great and profoundly interesting fact on 
which hung the blessing of all that had ever been 
blessed in the earth—“ Salvation is of the Jews.” But 
He does say, “The hour cometh”—yea, He enforces it 
and presses it out even to this moment, as it were, that 
was arrived—“and now is, when the true worshippers 
shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the 
Father seeketh such to worship him.” When God gave 
His law, He gave what was according to the relation- 
ship in which His people stood with Himself, as well 
as suitable, inasmuch as it was a moral dealing with the 
flesh in those that, as a people, had nothing else. But 
this is just the mighty change, now that Messiah is 
come and rejected, and the Father is calling and form- 
ing sons by Him the Son—nay, more than this, is 
giving them the Spirit of adoption, the Spirit of son- 
ship, that the true worshippers might worship Himself 
in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to 
worship Him. What, then, mean the sights and the 
sounds of this earth which now come before God in 
His professed worship? How stands the worship of 
the multitude now, of a nation, be it what or where it 
may? A flat and flagrant contradiction to His face of 
the Son of God ; and not merely of Him, though surely 
this were enough to grieve deeply the heart that loves 
Him, and fears His name. But God’s word shows how 


7 oe 
———— eC 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 47 


serious a thing it is to trifle with that which so nearly 
concerns the Holy Ghost. He is the present witness 
of the Son of man, rejected of men but exalted of 
God, who therefore attaches so much the more value 
to His name, because He is despised for His grace and 
humiliation ; and the Spirit is contemned, because He 
witnesses of a Son of man contemned of men. What 
a demonstration of that which God is, and what an 
evidence of man ! 

And now this day on which we are cast sees men 
rushing on madly, as if they were filled with evil spirits, 
whose only wish was to smite afresh the Son of God, 
and to do despite to.the Spirit of grace. The most 
outrageous forms of superstition are followed greedily 
and taken up, and not merely by those that are ac- 
counted ignorant, but by many who plume themselves 
on their knowledge, refinement, acquaintance even with 
the Bible itself. Yet, in the presence of such a testi- 
mony as our chapter—the words of Jesus Himself, 
these legendmongers take the place of being the people 
of God, yet worship God in such a sort as to prove 
them but worldly sects crusading against the Spirit of 
God, and going forward in bold and blind and utter 
contempt of all that our Saviour here lays down. 

None but a possessor of eternal life is competent to 
worship ; but even so it is in the power of the Holy 
Ghost given. Thus it is one who, having the Son, 
has life; it is one who has the Holy Ghost as the 
spring of joy within, and owns the Father. There is 
no other worship that is now acceptable. The Father - 
seeks none other; He does seek these. Let me appeal 
to you that are sitting around me at this moment, Are 
you thus true worshippers? Joy ever seeks communion. 


48 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Sorrow may pour itself out alone into the only ear that 
is adequate to give sympathy, to succour as none other 
can, and to deliver as He only does; but joy finds itself 
the richer, because it is a sharer of itself with others. 
And when do you first find this out? Never before the 
Holy Ghost is given. Thus, you see how all truth 
hangs together. As long as souls were simply born 
again, one might be here and another there; and so in 
the hope of their hearts, and in the desire of Christ’s 
coming, they poured out often a lament to God, and 
sighs and groans rose up over the delay, and earnest 
tears that the time might hasten when the promised 
One should appear. But He is come in divine grace, 
He has put away our sins, and along with this He has 
given us eternal life; and, moreover, there is power 
according to the gift of God, the power of drawing 
near in the Spirit to the Father; for it is through the 
Spirit that Jew and Gentile who now believe have 
access to Him. It is according to the necessary 
character of the truth that there should be communion 
of joy, and consequently communion of worship. Thus 
it is, therefore, that along with this blessed truth (as 
we shall find, and I hope to expound some other night) 
there is ample provision for common praise. There is 
the gathering of souls together; not only the blessing of 
each where it is, but now (and now for the first time in 
this world’s history) there is the singling out in this 
world, and the gathering together, the seeking, as it is 
said here, of the true worshippers, that these worship- 
- pers might themselves pour out their thanksgiving and 
adoration in common. Why? Because they have one 
Spirit, who accordingly unites them to the praise of God's 
grace, separate from all that are not true worshippers. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 49 


Up to this time worship had been mingled. The 
Samaritans worshipped they knew not what. For the 
Jews it was God, Jehovah the God of Israel, it was 
the Almighty Lord God of hosts that they worshipped ; 
but still there was one here and another there, and 
there was no attempt to bring out and join together, 
and it could not be so until the Son came, and the 
mighty work of redemption was wrought, and the Holy 
Ghost was given. The partition-wall yet stood. But 
now Christ is come, and what is it then to go back ? 
What is it to distrust the Spirit of God? What is it 
to apostatize from grace and truth? Oh! be assured, it 
is coming—that falling away; and I warn you most 
solemnly, I warn you that have to do with others in 
responsibility, never let your children, even though 
unconverted, have anything to do with the false wor- 
shippers of this world. I say not that men as such 
are competent to worship, but that they are beyond a 
doubt responsible to feel that they are not true worship- 
pers. I do say that you are wrong in giving children 
a rein in any respect, because they are unconverted, to 
mingle with the world and religiously take its course. 
I beseech you to watch carefully, and never to allow 
anything on the score of curiosity, or any other reason 
of a natural sort which may possibly be found, for 
there is no one so clever as the devil in furnishing good 
reasons for -bad things; but, beloved friends, treat it 
always as the deceit of the one that seduced Eve, 
whether under the smallest pretence for good that is to 
be got, or for any reason under the sun, you are called to 
do anything that is not God’s will. “The hour cometh, 
and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the 
Father.” Is there any worship but this that God allows? 

E 


50 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


I admit that His grace enters where you could not, 
neither ought to go; I allow that it can work any- 
where; yea, I know not why it might not work even 
when the sacrifice of the mass is offered for the living 
and the dead; for it is not sin that could hinder the 
erace of God. Surely, if sin could have hindered the 
Son, here was an instance; but it was because there 
was sin, it was to meet and deliver sinners out of sin, 
that the Son of God thus came. And so, I doubt not, 
it is, or at least it may be, in the Spirit of grace. But, 
I beseech you, let none suppose that grace means 
tolerating or dealing lightly with evil: there is nothing 
so sternly and thoroughly condemnatory of it. There 
is nothing that at the same time can avail to deliver; 
for while Another bears the judgment, the guilty one is 
saved in real divine love—and this not in death only, 
but in the power of His life as risen from the dead. 
Thus the Holy Ghost strengthens in good, as He is 
the energy of blessing and gives delight in it. Thus 
He is the only real power against evil in this world. 
Here is that which may well act on-the conscience of a 
saint. Have you ever worshipped God your Father in 
spirit and in truth? Or have you been content hitherto 
to mingle with the world and take part in its music, its 
architecture, its ritual? You know well that anybody 
can take part in these things. An instrument of man’s 
device that has no heart nor conscience does take a 
part, and a very lively part; and so naturally the world 
is welcome, and, in point of fact, worships. It is 
absolutely bringing back again the very substance and 
means of idolatry. Indeed, the apostle discerned this 
in the Galatians (chap. iv.) when they took up Jewish 
forms. But what would he have felt and said at the 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 51 


state of things now found—what is actively going on? 
And what makes it so especially solemn at this time is 
that it advances daily. And this will never cease till 
the awful close, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed 
from heaven, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them 
that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Are we not saved to worship 
now, and this in spirit and in truth ? 

I beseech my brethren in Christ, on the other hand, 
that it may be their hearts’ joy, when assembled for the 
purpose, to rise up into worship, and not to content 
themselves with mere speaking about it. Sometimes 
there seems too much of this when we come to worship 
the Lord. It is rather something said or prayed about 
worship than actually adoring Him. I may talk about 
worship in my prayer or from the word of God, perhaps 
even in the very hymn. Beloved, worship is not talking 
about worship. We do not come at such ‘times to ex- 
pound or enforce the matter: this may be all well to 
set forth at another time. If we are there to worship, 
let us be found engaged in the thing, adoring Him who 
should be before every soul to praise and magnify and 
delight in. Christian worship is the outflow to God of 
hearts that have seen and found their joy and satisfac- 
tion by the Holy Ghost in the Son and in the Father. 
The heart which has not a want that is not satisfied in 
the Christ we have found (given of God now in the midst 
of such a world as this) desires to praise, and cannot 
but praise, in fellowship with all that are thus blessed. 
It refuses to be associated with that which, being 
ignorant of grace or even sin, can have no communion 
with the Son and with the Father; it demands that the 
power which carries on the worship should be according 

E 2 


9 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


to the will of God, who has sent the Holy Ghost down 
from heaven for the purpose. And who that knows 
such a power to conduct the children aright in worship 
could be content with any leader save the Holy Ghost 
acting sovereignly in the assembly by whom He will? 
The consequence is, that Christian worship always has 
for its central object the Son of God revealing the 
Father, and necessarily supposes the special gift of the 
Holy Ghost as the power in us of enjoying God, and 
of praising Him adequately. It is only for the true 
worshippers who know the Father. It is a low character 
of worship to be merely occupied about ourselves and 
one another, and ever singing about our own privileges. 
Even edification, however precious, is not worship: it 
has the saints for its object, not the Father and the 
Son. It is all admirable in its way, of course; and I 
do not deny that, if we are really occupied with the 
Father of our Lord Jesus in adoration, there will be 
refreshment and edification ; but it remains ever true, 
that the proper aim of worship is our common praise 
going up to God, of ministry is the grace and truth of 
Christ coming down, and so building up the saints. 
Even thanksgiving, though a real part, seems to me the 
lowest form of Christian worship; and for this reason, 
that it is not so much the expression of our joy in God 
as in what He gives to us. Now, though this abides, and 
it is right we should ever feel what He has done for us 
and given to us, we are entitled as His children, and 
are so richly blessed as Christians, that we may yield 
our hearts to the Spirit’s revelations of what our God 
is in Himself, and so rejoice before Him. All has its 
place, and room is left for the state of souls, and the 
actual guidance of the Holy Ghost. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 53 


Another thing too, brethren, I may just observe by 
the way is, that the Saviour does not speak simply of 
worshipping “the Father.” He tells us that “ God is a 
spirit; and they that worship Him must worship Him 
in spirit and in truth.’ Assuredly Christian worship 
is not formal, but it is not the less real because it is 
spiritual. There are occasions when the Holy Ghost 
would make the worship to be especially directed 
towards the Son as an object, and there are occasions, 
I need not say, when the Father is more prominently 
before the assembly. One knows times also when the 
Lordship or the grace of Jesus might predominate, or 
when the most striking thought before us is.our rest in 
God Himself as such. I do not mean any one of 
these varieties taken exclusively, but I do say that the 
fact might be felt, that some one of these or of other 
presentations of our blessedness was giving tone and 
character to the worship. Form, of course, is blind to 
these differences, and would blot them out. Indeed, 
where the gift and presence of the Holy Ghost is not 
entered into, souls are not in a condition to understand 
or appreciate this. Surely, too, all is perfect grace; 
and I hardly know anything that demonstrates how 
blessed we are more than this, that not only can we 
rejoice in our Father, but joy in God, as it is said in 
Rom. v. 11. Reconciled to Him, and knowing His love 
by the Holy Ghost given to us, we have our boast in 
God as God, and for this simple reason, that all the 
nature of God, His whole moral character, has been so 
perfectly vindicated and satisfied as to our eternal 
blessing in Christ Jesus our Lord, that we know there 
is nothing in Him that does not range itself righteously 
for us now and evermore. He, who hates evil and has 


54. THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


a perfect abhorrence of it in His nature, altogether intol- 
erant of what He and we know to be still in us as a fact, 
has nevertheless been so absolutely glorified in Christ 
on our behalf, that He can rest in nothing but love, 
and we can go forth to Him in unceasing joy and praise. 
Not that we are spared from needful dealing: this, of 
course, would be loss indeed, and dangerous for us as 
we are in the body, and here below; and we have it 
from Him in the character of Father. The chastening 
we meet with now is from our Father. (Compare Heb. 
xii. and 1 Pet. i. 17.) Undoubtedly, our Father is God, 
but it is well to distinguish nature and relationships ; 
and this is the way of Scripture. Most needful it is 
that we should know this near relationship of Father, 
which, as we are told by John, characterizes the very 
babes of the family of God. But it is of the utmost 
moment also to know that it is the triumph of redemp- 
tion to set us in peace with God as such, and to make 
us boast in Him, now that all His nature can rest for 
us in Jesus, and in us by Jesus. 

Thus we can delight that He is our Father, and justly 
so; only there is a danger of being shut up to this, and 
losing sight of our deep and perfect rest in God as 
such. (1 Pet. 1.21.) Now, I say that, where the heart 
has not submitted to God’s righteousness, does not 
know fully the depth of redemption, there is more 
confidence in the relation of “Father,” than in having 
to do with “God.” There is a want of appreciation of 
the work of Christ, and, it may be, also an inadequate 
sense of His glory. And as there is a defectiveness in 
the faith and state of the heart, so this betrays itself 
in lack of liberty and fulness in worship, as of course, 
too, in the practical walk; for these things hang to- 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 55 


gether. “Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which 
cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may 
serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear: 
for our God is a consuming fire.” (Heb. xu. 28, 29.) 
For “Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with 
his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go 
forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his 
reproach. For here have we no continuing city, but 
we seek one to come. By him therefore let us offer 
the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the 
fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name.” (Heb. xii. 
12-15.) 

I do not apologize for these general remarks of a 
practical nature as to Christianity and Christians, any 
more than for some of a similar nature with respect to 
worship. They all tend to show how our blessings and 
responsibilities connect themselves with the gift of the 
Spirit—not merely the new birth, as always, but the 
gift of the Spirit consequent on the Son’s manifestation 
and rejection now. This blessing, that we have seen to 
be dependent on the presence of the Son in lowly love 
here below, is given by Him in virtue both of His glory 
and of His humiliation. In the chapter before, the 
being born again had nothing whatever to do with any 
- particular time, and is fully described by our Lord as 
the universal necessity for God’s kingdom, before He 
utters one word about His presence in this world, much 
less about redemption. In point of fact, no intelligent 
believer doubts it was true from the fall onwards, and 
that the Old Testament saints were born of water and 
the Spirit no less than those of the New Testament ; 
but here we find ourselves in the presence of blessing 
which awaits His coming, and is given in the full grace 


56 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


of God ; for truly our fellowship is with the Father, and 
with His Son Jesus Christ. It was also contingent upon 
redemption; but redemption is not directly brought 
into the passage, I suppose, because the object is to 
present more undividedly the grace of God as He now 
is known, the glory of the Son (whatever, yea in, His 
humiliation), and the consequent gift of the Spirit to 
the believer. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 57 


Pecture LUI. 


‘“‘ Rivers of living water.’’—JouN vil. 1-39. 


Our subject of to-night cannot be severed from what 
we have had in previous chapters, from the whole of 
the circumstances in this chapter, and above all from 
the manner in which our Lord here comes into view. 
Indeed, this is the secret of anything like an assured 
knowledge of the divine truth. It is not given us 
formally, but lovingly; it forms a part of those reve- 
lations of God, not to speak of the steps of His ways, 
which have Christ as the one great object before them, 
at least before Him. God would make everything to 
be for Christ; and where the soul is by His grace 
rendered simple,—not forcing truth, not taking it out 
of its own station in the divine route, not severing 
what God causes to flow from Christ and to exist for 
His own glory in Him. The progress may seem some- 
what slower, but in truth there is no progress otherwise. 
How and whence can there be solid blessing for the 
soul unless it be thus gathered from God? And not 
only this, but God’s objects are kept before our eyes. 
Thus the truth is not only divinely received, instead of 
acquiring knowledge after a human sort, but our hearts 
are formed according to the scope of His word, and we 
are brought thereby into the current of God’s aims and 
purposes. If we thus look at the chapter read, we 
soon discern that our Lord’s declaration about the Holy 


58 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Ghost has a character entirely different from that which 
has been already examined in chapters iii. and iv. 
of this gospel. There is an evident advance, and this, 
as always, is associated with the unfolding of Christ. I 
do not doubt that, as God reveals more and more of 
Him, there is a corresponding progress in the heart’s 
acquaintance with Him, and there is a proportionate 
increase of strength ministered by the word of God. 
First of all we had that which is necessarily foundation 
truth as to this subject; and this both in what is com- 
mon to all saints of all times, and in what is a revealed 
peculiarity since Christ— common as to the great sub- 
stance of it, peculiar as to the form which the blessing 
assumes now that God has revealed His Son. 

This foundation was laid in chapter ili.; and here I 
must briefly call attention to the evidently and per- 
fectly beautiful order of the gospel; for we have Christ, 
the Word, traced from eternity, wherein He was alone 
with God, down to the kingdom—the full manifestation 
not only of His personal glory, and this in relation to 
man and saints as well as God, but also its display in 
this world, and the effect of this display upon souls 
pursued down the stream of time to the millennial 
period, when He shall both diffuse joy by His own 
power where emptiness and dearth had been, and clear 
away all that which is offensive to God by the judg- 
ment He will personally take in hand, where man had 
defamed and perverted the house of His Father, even 
at Jerusalem. 

This it is plain brings us down regularly to the king- 
dom in which Christ will establish God’s glory here 
below. Then comes the question, How is a soul of 
man to have part in this kingdom of God? The third 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 59 


chapter of John meets this great question, and accounts 
also for the fact, that all through God had those He 
was preparing to have part in the kingdom that was 
coming. Having shown this, He also discloses the 
specially blessed form which the impartation of this 
nature assumes when He Himself, the Son of God, 1s 
revealed. There is no divine attribute or mercy to us 
that does not shine with increased lustre when Christ 
appears. Being the true light, whatever might be the 
blessings tasted before, as I need not say there were 
many, still let those blessings only come within the 
range of the light of Christ—and which of them does 
not present itself as an entirely new thing ?—so rich, 
so sweet, so blessed is the new texture and shape with 
which He clothes all, even though it may have been 
substantially true before. All the saints of God, from 
first to last, were necessarily partakers of a new and 
divine nature, capable of fellowship with God: now 
they know it to be eternal life, their actual portion, in 
His Son. 

But this is far from all our portion even now; for, as 
we saw in chapter iv., the humbled Son of God (in the 
hour that was coming and now is) gives the Holy Ghost 
—not a new birth as born of Him, but Himself—to be 
in us a power of fellowship with the Father and the 
Son. Christ was the promised One, but they would not 
have Him. The consequence is, that even promises, 
however blessed, give place to the revelations of the 
deep eternal glory of His person. Consequently, re- 
jected though He be in a lower glory, the only effect is 
to bring out the higher glory—I may say all the glory 
of the Son of God, but of the Son of God revealed in 
perfect grace upon the earth. Hence, not sought out 


60 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


by some great Jewish doctor, but Himself meeting with 
a poor worthless woman of Samaria, the Lord leads 
into the wondrous grace and truth of the Holy Ghost, 
as given by Him, that the believer even now may have 
fellowship with the Father, and with His Son Jesus 
Christ. The new birth in God’s mercy had always been 
true, and must ever be true, so long as He calls out 
souls; because man is a sinner dead and unclean, by 
his very nature incapable of inheriting the kingdom of 
God. But now we have a transcendant privilege over 
and above that kingdom, and awaiting nothing what- 
ever. And the reason is manifestly because the Son of 
God was there, and rejected of Israel, God would put 
honour on Him: everything must bow to His Son ; 
nothing could be too good for Him to bestow. The Son 
of God coming in grace and humiliation was only so 
much the stronger reason why it should be, and forth- 
with. Hence the heart enters by the perception of the 
Son’s glory into a taste of the Father’s love in the 
power of the Holy Ghost, whom Jesus gives as the 
revealer of all that love and glory. 

Accordingly this inestimable boon is the real spring 
of proper Christian worship, which displaces the old 
things ordained previously of God, as well as, of course, 
the will-worship of men. 

Now we enter on another topic. The Lord Jesus is 
shown us here walking no more in Jewry, because the 
Jews sought to kill Him. It is not merely that the 
leaders were jealous of Him, but now the people even 
—at least the people in Judea proper, for they are 
clearly meant. Their hatred was complete: only they 
lacked opportunity. They would be satisfied with 
nothing short of extinguishing this light of God as far 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 61 


as they could. But with the feast of tabernacles just 
at hand, His brethren call on Him to go into Judea, 
that His disciples also might see the works that He 
was doing. The Lord had been gradually driven away 
from the place of honour, of antiquity, of everything 
that boasted itself in religion. His works were now 
mainly in Galilee. His brethren were dissatisfied. They 
would gladly gain renown by the Lord Jesus; they 
wished to profit by His mighty deeds for this world. 
No man that did what He did but must seek, as they 
supposed, to do it openly. “If thou doest these things, 
show thyself to the world.” It was man’s thought; 
and so much the worse, because it came from the lips 
and heart of the brethren of Jesus after the flesh. 

But what had our Lord just shown in the chapter 
before? He had struck at the root of all such expec- 
tations ; for the multitude had then wished to make 
Him a king. They had reaped present relief by the 
Lord, who had made them bread; and this had reminded 
them, it may be, for the Jews often spoke of these 
things, of the expectation of the Messiah according to 
Psalm cxxxii. They wished to hurry on the kingdom; 
. for surely here was the King. Our Lord absolutely 
refuses ; and when the people still persist in addressing 
‘themselves to Him, He takes advantage of the miracle 
He had wrought, to point out to them the real object 
of His mission, which, in this gospel, is never the hope 
or thought of His being received as the Christ. Of 
course, it was known to God from the beginning, that 
the Jews would reject the Messiah; and so even the 
prophets foretold clearly and fully. The offer was 
made, and man was put to the proof; and in his 
failure God did not fail to work greater things. It was 


62 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


not that He did not give the amplest evidence of His 
Messiahship, but the gospel of John looks at Him 
according to the divine nature and His everlasting 
personal glory. He was a rejected One. Deeper coun- 
sels were in accomplishment then, even redemption by 
His blood. | 
Man understands not, cannot and will not learn, if 
One were on earth who is really the King, if this was 
the land, and they the people, that anything could be 
wanting. These surely are the elements for all that is 
good—the true King, the real people, the actual land— 
if it be a question of all the circumstances. But how 
comes this? God is not in their thoughts; sin is 
unjudged before Him. Contrariwise, Jesus only sought 
the will and glory of Him that sent Him. Therefore 
the kingdom now would have been an utter offence to 
Him. The kingdom with man in sin? with God’s 
glory unvindicated? Impossible that Jesus should 
take such a kingdom! And therefore it is that the 
very point of our Lord’s discourse was this—that in- 
stead of rising up to take the kingdom, He came down 
to do the will of Him that sent Him; and this will is 
to save—to receive whoever came, no matter how re- 
pulsive he might be to Himself. For He came not to 
seek His own will, or to choose any persons who might 
be agreeable to Himself. It was a question of eternal 
life now, and resurrection at the last day. When men 
were startled at these wonderful truths, He brings out 
a still deeper one—He was come to die. He came to 
give His life for the world, as He says. And more than 
that,—except they eat His flesh, and drink His blood, 
there would be no life in them. Thus it is the substi- 
tution of a descended and suffering Son of man for 


: 
q 
‘ 
q 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 63 


the expectations of a king, to bring in ease, plenty, and 
enjoyment here. 

Observe that in John v., He is the Son of God as 
working in communion with the Father, and so giving 
life. If people do not receive Him, they shall be 
judged by Him; for He is also the Son of man, to 
whom the Father commits all judgment. In John v1, 
a yet deeper thing appears. It is not the Son of man 
judging, but the Son of man coming to die, giving His 
flesh to be eaten, and His blood to be drank. There is 
nothing so blessed, so truly disclosing what God is, 
what Christ is, in perfect self-abnegation, and in a love 
that proved itself divine even while He was most evi- 
dently man. Who else came to die? All the long- 
looked-for royal glory of the Messiah fades, and is 
completely put aside for death; and this because, first 
of all, God must be magnified, sin judged, man blest 
perfectly according to God, even now entering into 
communion with God’s mind about the whole scene, 
communion with Christ Himself in His self-renouncing 
love and devotedness. This, I suppose, is what is meant 
by eating His flesh, and drinking His blood. It is not 
merely that He dies as an offering for them; there is 
more than that. There is communion with His death ; 
there is entrance by faith into the death it writes on 
the whole scene, and even the promised glory of the 
Messiah for the time is eclipsed. I do not the least 
deny that by-and-by He will take that glory and reign. 
Of course, we all know this is but deferred, and that 
Jesus will take it after even a more blessed sort, and 
founded upon an immutable basis; but it is plain that, 
for the present, death is what was before Jesus, and this, 
with its results, He lays before the listening people. 


64 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


His death having been thus brought in as the Son of 
man, and this, too, as the ground of communion with 
His own now—for they must eat His flesh, and drink 
His blood, or otherwise they have no life in them —we 
find in the next chapter (vii.) the feast of tabernacles, 
which typified the sure prospect of glory according to 
the promise of God. 

The brethren of the Lord, then, pressed His manifes- 
tation of Himself. Surely, thought they, now is the 
time! The Lord declares the solemn truth, that their 
time is always ready. They were of the world; they 
spoke of the world, and the world heard them. But as 
for Him, His time was not yet come. Oh, beloved 
brethren, when we think for a moment Who it was that 
uttered these words, when we remember that it was 
One who had made the whole scene, the rightful Heir of 
all promises, who was entitled to take all, to enter upon 
all, to enjoy all, what infinite grace is such language as 
this, “My time is not yet come”! At the same time, 
what condemnation of the sinner in “ your time is alway 
ready”! what sentence of death on all the thoughts of 
man! Man’s time is the present—is therefore always 
ready. This is his one thought; for he loves to magnify 
himself. This is the life he lives in; this the spring 
of all his activities. What makes the Lord’s way 
to be the more blessed is, that there was no question 
of power in Him. His brethren, as we are told, did 
not believe in Him; but they were assured enough of 
His ‘power. Not believing does not mean that they 
doubted His ability. Believing is not the same thing 
as confidence in His capacity to do what He pleased ; 
but not believing was betrayed in there being no sense 
of what was due to God, no apprehension of His glory, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 65 


no just judgment of man’s estate, no perception of 
grace in Christ, no feeling of the contradiction of all 
that was around to Jesus Himself. But He who had 
all the requisite power, who in an instant could have 
changed the face of things, awaits the right hour. His 
time was not yet fully come. 

The brethren go up to the feast, and there we find 
the thoughts of men reveal themselves as to Jesus; and 
the Jews exposed their unbelief even as His brethren 
had done before. They murmur, they reason; but it 
was only the thoughts of men; it was only the dreams 
of those who were without conscience toward God. 
Man’s mind never reaches up to God’s love. Human 
ideas are human ideas, and nothing else. There is no 
force in them; they are as powerless as the being from 
whom they spring, and they bear the stamp of death 
and of lovelessness upon them. But in Jesus it was 
not so. Power there was, we know, but there was what 
I dare to say was incomparably more blessed than power; 
He was divine in His love. He came, already tasting 
in spirit that utter humiliation that was before Him; 
and when men sought to kill Him, assuredly He was 
not without deep reflections of what He was about to 
encounter and endure. A single eye sees clear. What 
was withholden from His gaze? It was not unpondered, 
still less was it unlooked for; but for all that Jesus 
hastens it not. There was calm waiting on God; there 
was nothing like rushing into the scene alike of danger 
to Him, of sin against, and of man’s ruin; there was 
no despising what the world was going to do; for, alas! 
indeed, it was Satan’s short-sighted success and man’s 
own most destructive folly, supposing that the One was 
thus got rid of who troubled all here below. But love, 

F 


66 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


God Himself who is love, was in all His thoughts, in 
all His feelings. Accordingly Jesus waits till the feast 
was begun; and when they were fairly keeping it, He 
goes up and presents Himself there, cost what it might. 

First of all He announces that He was about to 
depart. Let me call your attention to this; for it is of 
all importance as a basis for the action of the Holy 
Ghost, of which I am about to speak to night. The 
gift in question supposed the death and departure 
of Jesus; it supposes that He was going where man 
could not follow, where the Jews must be left entirely 
behind. In the last day, accordingly, the great day 
of this feast, itself the last feast of the Jewish year, 
Jesus stood and cried, &e. 

Now let us reflect for a moment what this feast meant. 
It was that which was kept, as most of us know, in 
remembrance of the fact, that the people of God, 
having once been in the wilderness, were now gathered 
into the pleasant land. It was celebrated after the 
harvest and the vintage—the well-known signs in 
prophetic Scripture of the execution of God’s judgment 
in both its forms. There is a judgment that first decides 
between the good and the bad; and this is the harvest. 
Next, there is a judgment that falls unsparingly on what 
is altogether evil and hostile to God, and such is the 
vintage. God thus always kept before His people an 
intimation when, or at least how, they were to expect 
deliverance. It was a vain thought to look for present 
glory according to God before judgment was executed. 
Judgment must have its full course, and glory after- 
wards fills the scene. But this feast, as we know, was 
not like an ordinary one of Israel; it had this extra~ 
ordinary trait, that it was not bounded by seven days 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 67 


even, or that which sets forth the course of earthly 
time. There was a supernumerary day. There was not 
only the full week, that shows the ordinary cycle of 
human events, and even that blessed time of rest at 
the end, to which, according to the word of God, His 
counsels for His people and the earth turn. For God 
never gives up from His mind and purpose the rest that 
remains for the people of God. But it was not, in fact, 
on the seventh day, but the eighth, that Jesus took 
His stand. This was the day not of creation goodness, 
but of resurrection glory. On that day, then, Jesus 
stood and cried, saying, “If any man thirst, let him 
come unto me and drink.” 

Nothing can be more evident to a spiritual mind than 
the force of all this, which I have been endeavouring to 
present just as it comes before us in the chapter. 
Clearly it is not the Spirit of God, as He always wrought 
on souls even before Jesus came ; neither is it the Holy 
Ghost given as power of communion with Jesus when 
He is come as the Son of God. Here we have an hour 
that was not come, nor could come, till Jesus went 
away. Here we have a blessing that is not in any 
possible degree or form enjoyed by a human heart till 
the Lord Jesus died; nay, till He rose and went up 
into glory. But the point that our Lord is here bring- 
ing out so forcibly and with such astonishing wisdom 
in all the circumstances of the chapter is this—that the 
glory of Jesus at once—not the kingdom as yet, but while 
He is on high—brings into the scene the Holy Ghost 
given here below as all-overcoming and overflowing 
streams of blessing now conferred on him that believes, 
It is not what we have had already, but different from 
that. And no wonder; for what does God feel and do 

F 2 


68 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


about the death of Jesus? What sign, what worthy 
token does He give of the value of that unfathomable 
humiliation to which His Son went down ? 

The grace of the Son delighted to give freely the 
Holy Ghost to the believer, in order that he should 
enjoy communion with the Father and the Son who 
gave Himself. Who otherwise could taste or in the 
least enter into the love, and delight in the dignity of 
His person? It would be to put ourselves upon a par 
with Him, could we pretend to have communion with 
the Son by anything that pertains to us; for even a 
new nature would not suffice. The Holy Ghost is the 
only adequate power, as we have already seen. 

But here it is not in the quality of Son of God, but 
distinctively and emphatically as Son of man—as One 
who has been rejected to the uttermost—as One who 
died, rose, and was glorified in heaven. All this, mark, 
is when the judgment is not yet executed; not a blow 
fallen on man; not a single act of God in the way either 
of separating the good to Himself while leaving the rest, 
or of pouring out unsparing vengeance on what was re- 
ligiously hateful to Him. Before any of these judicial 
dealings on God’s part, the Son of man departs from the 
world, leaving it entirely undisturbed; goes up into 
heaven, and from the heaven into which He has gone 
sends down the Holy Ghost to be a divine link between 
him who believes upon earth and Himself, that glorified 
man at the right hand of God. ‘Thus, it is now the 
joy of the heart, by the power of the Holy Ghost, 
triumphing in the exalted Saviour, and then testifying 
far and wide. There is the One that I possess, and 
know to be my life. To purchase and cleanse me He 
died. He has now broken with this scene, having been 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 69 


rejected by the very people who ought to have received 
Him. The earthly promises have lapsed entirely for 
the time, though their centre and object and founder 
awaits another day to establish them gloriously; for 
nothing ever changes or fails that God is pledged to, 
though, as far as man is concerned, all for the present 
is ruined in His cross. But God only uses the interval 
to bring forward an incomparably higher thing. Instead 
of the Christ, yea, instead of the Son of man, bringing 
in His universal reign—instead of any other glory con- 
nected with the earth, there is a new order of things 
for which man is totally unprepared. While I am on 
earth—and how blessed this is!—He sends down the 
Holy Ghost from Himself in glory, that I may be 
acquainted, as it were, with the scene into ‘which I am 
going; that I may be habituated to it while I am on 
earth; that I may have the Holy Ghost, who knows it 
so well; that I may have Him linking up every interest, 
every affection, every thought and expectation of my 
heart with Him who is there. 

This is what the Lord Jesus sets before us in this 
passage: “In the last day, that great day of the feast, 
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst.” No 
matter what is to follow for others, He begins with 
the reality of man’s need for himself. In the things 
of God, what is more ruinous than theory? It is of 
all importance to beware of a mere plan or system 
of truth. We have souls, not minds only, though, 
when we have been brought to God in truth of heart, 
I admit that we may enter and delight in the pre- 
cious things of God. But there must be reality—“ If 
any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.” It 
supposes that man begins, as he ought, at the beginning 


70 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


of his soul’s destitution according to what God sees 
him to be, who surely gives him in Christ the answer to 
his real wants; for if He produces a sense of the 
wants, it is for the express purpose of satisfying them 
in His own grace. “Let him come unto me,” says 
Christ, “and drink. He that believeth on me, as the 
Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of 
living water.” Thus the thirsty soul does drink; and 
there is the heart’s satisfaction in that which the Holy 
Ghost ministers. But it does not rest there, and for 
this simple reason,—the humbled One that died in 
rejection, but in atonement, was now risen from the 
dead and glorified in heaven, whence is He the source 
of power—power of the Spirit—that carries, as it were, 
all before it. It may be a barren and miserable 
wilderness. This but enhances the wonder of it. The 
scene is not changed. The world, far from being made 
better, is manifest and judged in its true character as it 
never was judged before. The evil of man here below 
remains; the hostility of the world to God is unchanged; 
the total absence of one feeling in unison with God had 
been fully proved in the death of Christ. Yet, in the 
midst of such a state, the Holy Ghost is given, not 
only as a well of water for the believer himself, but 
as rivers of living water for others all around. How 
blessed are God’s ways and words! How worthily of 
Himself He meets the evil of the world, and the 
apparent triumph of Satan! The enemy is never more 
thoroughly defeated than when he seems to have it all 
his own way. The downfall of the Son of man, as it 
seemed to His enemies, was just the path in which 
He would finish the work of redemption, and, founded 
upon it, would enter into a new scene, from which He 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. th 


would give the believer present association with Him- 
self, by the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, and 
issuing in streams of refreshment for this dreary desert- 
world. 

Let me impress some serious questions on the souls 
that are here this night. How is it that Jesus appears 
to you, and how is it that you are related to Him, now 
that He is in heaven? Have you simply a hope that 
you are going to be there? This certainly is a hope, 
and as blessed as it is sure; and more than this,—we 
shall be with Him for ever. But is there only a hope? 
Is there nothing now for the heart? Is there no pre- 
sent power linking us with Jesus where He is? This 
seems to me what our Lord was here making known to 
His own. Jesus would not have us simply yearning 
for the day of glory; He would even now give our 
hearts the taste of it; He would even now make the 
strength and the joy of it our own; He would even 
now carry us out through this world as those who are 
not receivers but givers, and givers according to God’s 
richest mercy; for such it really is. These believers, 
who had come to Him in their deepest distress, who 
had drunk where all was utter weariness and want 
before, find that although He is gone, although disap- 
peared from the earth, He has left them rich indeed, 
beyond all thought of man heretofore, though in out- 
ward circumstances more exposed and desolate than 
ever. Thus all the portion stands in the clearest con- 
trast with that which even saints or prophets knew or 
looked for here below. Take, for instance, those in 
Old Testament times, and how sharp and decisive the 
lines of divergence. Look at the yearnings of heart 
in the Psalms; search into the prophecies of Jeremiah, 


72 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Ezekiel, or any other: is this their state? Why not? 
Not that they were not blest; not that they lacked 
honour from God, some of them being the vessels, as 
we know, even of inspiration itself. Yet for all that, 
when their actual experience is looked at, these saints 
of God, with bright visions of the future, had for the 
present no such power either of worship or of testimony. 

I do not mean to say that the Christian does not 
know deeper sorrows now than ever an Ezekiel or a 
Jeremiah knew. Iam far from saying that Christ, the 
great sorrower and sufferer, spares us communion with 
Himself; for I am sure He does not; nor would our 
hearts desire to lose the communion of whatever of His 
temptations our little hearts are able to bear. But of 
this be assured, that the deepest enjoyment of Christ, 
and of our union with Him, goes along with the deep- 
ening of the world’s rejection of God’s people, along 
with our being thoroughly cast out as evil, scorned as 
men never were of old; for nothing that assailed a Jew 
is to be compared with that which comes upon a Chris- 
tian. And the most painful part of it is, that the more 
one drinks into the place of a Christian—that is, really, 
the place of Christ; for it is the Holy Ghost associating 
us with Christ which is the whole matter of Christi- 
anity—the more a soul by the power of the Spirit 
enters into his place with Christ, the more thoroughly 
is he despised by this world. But then what glory, joy, 
and blessedness! How is it that Christians are often 
cast down? I mean not so much pressed sore because 
of the toils, and the sorrows, and the griefs of the way, 
but downcast in heart as before God in their thoughts 
of the Lord, and forgetful of their associations with 
heaven. Why is there a cloud, a dimness, a want of 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. ia 


the full and fresh joy of Him they belong to, and 
where they belong to, filling the heart? It is precisely 
because they fail to look up now into heaven by the 
Spirit, and so fail to look down on the world as a 
wilderness, however much the streams of living water 
may flow through them. They forget what Jesus has 
given them; they look on earth as a desirable place. 
Why should not Christ be exalted here? Why should 
not He and we have a name of glory here now? Not 
so: His hour is not yet come; nor is ours either; for 
we are one with Him. Here man’s hour was to Him 
scorn, rejection, and death. This was His place. Ours, 
too, is to be nothing here; it is to be utterly despised 
now, and hated of men. This was Christ’s lot on earth. 
Is there anything better in this world? Is there any 
even to compare with what Christ Himself had? He 
knew it as none ever can; but at least we may by His 
own grace be attached and cleave to Him, and so be 
drawn into and appreciate it in our small measure. 

For this seems to be just what the Holy Ghost is 
here given for. Observe in this connection the expres- 
sion, “ Rivers of living water.” The power of the Holy 
Ghost fills the heart with the glory into which Christ 
is gone. What can more precisely suit the wilderness 
when the wilderness proves most arid? when all around 
is utter barrenness, and there is not a single creature 
well of water to draw from, not a green spot to refresh 
the eye, not a palm-tree to find the least rest under? 
When a true sense of the desolation here below has 
entered into the heart, this is what fits and strengthens 
the soul according to God. Therefore do I raise the 
question, If in John iv. we have the Holy Ghost asso- 
ciating the believer with the Son and with the Father, 


74, THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


which thus carries him into worship, what is the new 
and special blessing here promised? Undoubtedly it is 
connected more with service than with worship. “ Out 
of his belly shall flow rivers of living water,” is sug- 
gestive rather of that which goes out abundantly; but 
assuredly it does suppose the believer by grace in an 
absolute superiority to the wilderness through which he 
is passing. There is a communicating power to others 
from that Spirit, who fills himself intimately with One 
who is Himself in rest, and gives His rest to the heart, 
making heaven to be a home very near, into which 
grace has given him the entrée because of Christ who 
is there. Thus the Holy Ghost so knits him now with 
the Lord Jesus, that all this world has to offer is but 
the vainest bauble. There is also the consciousness, on 
the other hand, of riches which man’s heart cannot con- 
ceive, and which, if we know them to be ours, we know 
all to be the fruit of nothing but our Saviour’s grace to 
us. In short, what we have here is not so much the 
Spirit of the Son leading us to delight in His person 
and grace, as well as in the Father’s love, but rather 
the power of the Holy Ghost imparted by the Man 
who is exalted into God’s glory, giving our own souls 
the consciousness of that glory as ours in Him, and 
filling us to overflowing in communications of Him to 
others here below. 

This may remind one a little of the difference (though 
it be another subject, no doubt,) between “the holy 
priesthood” and “the royal priesthood” in 1 Pet. ii. Let 
us refer to it for a moment, in order to make the point 
before us a little more sensible. The apostle Peter 
speaks of us there as invested with this double priest- 
hood. Surely it is not a needless repetition in any 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 75 


respect. There is no vague heaping up of epithets, but 
rather a distinct perception of our place as brought 
nigh to God. What, then, is the function of the “holy 
priesthood”? Offering up spiritual sacrifices. As so con- 
secrated one draws near to God, and accordingly we then 
hear of these sacrifices in relation to Him. But, on 
the other hand, we are also said to be a kingly priest- 
hood; and there the object is no longer the sacrifice of 
praise and thanksgiving, but to set forth the excellencies 
or virtues of Him that has called us out of darkness 
into His marvellous light. Thus the one exercises 
itself in our praising God through our Lord Jesus; the 
other sets forth His worth among men, as One who has 
dealt with us after a sort which God alone could plan 
or effect. This conscious dignity the Christian does 
well to have before him ever in this world. To seek 
earthly glory is, in fact, the real degradation of a 
Christian. 

Unquestionably many a Christian is called to pass 
through this world, earning bread for himself and his 
family. And it is well that it should be so. Few of us 
can bear not to be occupied thus. Nor is there any 
reason why our blessed Lord should not be served thus 
with all the heart, why there should not be a true and 
energetic and affectionate service rendered to His name, 
while the hands thus provide (whether for the family or 
for individual need) what little is required here below. 
But then the believer does it simply as a bread-trade— 
nothing more. The moment you give it the dignity of 
a profession, and regard it as something of honour in 
the world, you are lost to the testimony of Christ on 
high. I do not deny that the grace of God may call 
persons actively engaged in that which is highly 


76 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


esteemed among men. You have known, of course, of 
men thus called of God, while they were entering on or 
engaged in that which the natural heart values. And 
you may have seen some under such circumstances 
exhibit very great simplicity there. I am not saying 
now that it is wrong to have what men call a profession; 
I am using the heavenly glory of Christ to judge the 
spirit in which all that is in the world is ordered; and 
I do warn you against the vain-glory of men in aioe 
things—the desire and hankering after earthly distinc- 
tion, the valuing of things for self and family—carried 
away in our thoughts and feelings by that which the 
world thinks of them. As Christ’s hour was not yet 
come, so neither is ours. If we are His, we have nothing 
to do with anything, even the pettiest shred, of this 
world’s glory. Be assured, it is only a patch of dis- 
honour for the child of God now. It matters little 
what the world’s prize may be. Why should we want 
it? Are not all things ours? Shall we not judge the 
world—aye, angels? I do not dwell on the fact, that 
these present objects so often bear the very stamp of 
their own insignificance and worthlessness upon them, 
that their sages confess that the good is in the chace, 
not in the game. Who does not know that even a 
“ribbon” is enough reward for some men’s life-long 
exertions! These otherwise are sensible men. What 
would not the richest and noblest do or endure for a 
“carter” ? 

Suffer me, then, to press the importance to the 
Christian of watching against the world, and of looking 
to Christ on high, in taking up whatever he does, 
whether for himself or for his children. I do not mean 
anything so preposterous as that Christianity calls on 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. are 


all believers to seek one dead level of occupation, or 
that there is any faith in one’s abandoning the circum- 
stances in which one is called, if one can abide therein 
with God, or in seeking an occupation that is entirely 
unsuitable. This I do not call faith but folly. But 
giving full weight to all this, let me press, that if any- 
thing, no matter what it may be, is to be done day by 
day, whether it be making a shoe or making a deed, 
there is but one worthy motive for the Christian— 
doing all to the Lord. If assured that we are doing 
His will, we can do either the one or the other with a 
good conscience and a happy heart. The ruinous thing 
for the Christian is to forget that we are here to do 
~God’s will, and to be witnesses of a rejected Christ 
elorified in heaven. 

But what is the world’s greatest desire? Pushing 
forward, doing something great; and what we to-day 
achieve made a stepping-stone for something more to- 
morrow. All this is thoroughly a denial of the Chris- 
tian’s place, and proves that the heart’s desire is in the 
current of the world. It may be natural for a man to 
wish to be something easier and greater in the earth; 
but, beloved, where is the heart’s allegiance to Christ ? 
Is it so, that after all one prefers the first Adam to 
Christ? This is really the question: “ Do I value most 
the first Adam or the Second?” If my heart is given to 
the Second man, am I not to prove it in what I do every 
day? Is the honour of Christ only for the Sunday ? 
Surely this is not fealty to our Chief! Have you then 
been called by the grace of God to have His Son re- 
vealed in you while in a position which the world counts 
mean and dishonourable ? Be it so. What more admir- 
able opportunity for the faith which judges by Christ 


78 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


in glory whether you can thus abide with God? I do 
not ask you to follow this man or that, but to search 
the word of God, and judge how far in your position you 
can honour Christ as He is. For are we not to be His 
epistle, known and read of all men? Is it not thus 
that the rivers of living water flow from Him out of 
us? Believe me, there is nothing of Christ in clutch- 
ing what one has got, upholding one’s rights and 
dignities, even if ever so real in the world’s eyes, and 
resenting every inroad and liberty, in an age which 
slights authority. Quite as little of Christ is there in 
him of low degree, who keenly seizes opportunities to 
urge his way steadily forward to what he values in this 
world. On the other hand, whether you are high or 
low, as men speak, you have an opportunity of proving 
what you think of Christ. Whatever the trial may be, 
it is but a little offering to show what Christ is in our 
eyes. 

But for guidance there is no criterion but God’s word. 
Vain and foolish is our wisdom in such things: it is a 
question of the will of the Lord. Everything turns 
upon this. The whole matter for Christian conscience, 
no matter what the position of the believer may be, 
comes to this, that each of us has an opportunity of 
doing His will, of being His servant, of showing that we 
value Him infinitely above the world. My blessing is, 
no matter what the Lord gives me to do, therein to be 
content. Of the circumstances which are best for His 
glory, and for me His servant here below, He is the only 
good judge. Let me value them simply as an oppor- 
tunity of setting forth His praise, prizing most of all 
what the world hates. As to any occupation, I must 
repeat, that high or low in men’s eyes, it should be in 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 79 


mine nothing but a bread-trade. Undoubtedly the world 
dislikes this. What! an honourable profession only a 
bread-trade? Exactly so; a crucified Saviour now in 
glory makes short work of the world and all that is in 
it. Take an example. I am going to work as a shoe- 
maker. Is it my aim to be the best shoemaker in Lon- 
don? Suppose me a doctor: do I covet the largest 
practice in this city? Is there anything of Christ in 
these wishes? Is this practically to own the glorified 
Jesus? Am I really taking up my work from Him and 
doing it for Him? Our hearts know well, if the Lord 
actually gave us anything to do for Him, how love would 
express itself in doing the work well. Far be the 
thought that Christians should count it a virtue to be 
loose and negligent in the way they discharge their 
business! Certainly there is nothing that becomes a 
man, not to speak of a saint, in being a sloven. The 
point of faith, whatever we may have to do, is this,— 
that, be it a little thing or the greatest, it is all done for 
Him. 

Thus we testify, even in daily conversation, too, that 
we are not living to self or the world, but to Him who 
died and rose; and we shall surely have the power of 
the Spirit with us in all. Sweet testimony, though in 
the otherwise perishable things which pertain to this 
world ; but it is a testimony which shall not pass away. 
We are but passing through a strange land: our home 
is with Christ; but we are where the Lord has called 
and put us for the present. Here we stay as long as He 
bids us work for Him; we journey at the command- 
ment of the Lord; at the commandment of the Lord 
we abide. And so it is we are for Him to dispose of. 
We are in the wilderness; but meanwhile, instead of 


80 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


only drinking of a rock outside, we have a well within, 
yea, rivers of water flow out of us. It is the joy of 
Jesus reproducing itself here below—the power of the 
Spirit of God giving the heart now its present delight 
in Him above. There is the abounding sense that we 
belong to Him who is there now. All the glory of this 
world is judged as the meanest trash—as only the 
delusive tinsel of the devil to amuse a judged and 
perishing world. 

Beloved, I would ask how far your souls are seeking 
this, and this only. I would ask myself the same 
thing. I desire grace from God that none of the truth 
which He is pleased to bring before us may degenerate 
into words of barren knowledge. Pardon me if I feel 
that none have to watch against this danger so much 
as ourselves. The mercy of God has been awakening 
His children, has called, or rather recalled, them to this 
truth, and much more—to the faith that was once de- 
livered to the saints. It is an immense blessing, but 
along with it is just the responsibility and the danger. 
Who are most exposed to losing it and of becoming its 
bitter foes? Those who having known truth like this 
cease to live in it and to love it. How can it be lived 
in, unless Christ and not self be the object of our souls ? 
Substitute for Him any thought of our ease or repu- 
tation, and all is defiled, all becomes polluted in its very 
spring. The Lord only knows what might be the end 
of such folly, save only for the grace of God which, as 
it took us up when there was not one right affection 


towards Him, maintained us despite all our wretched- _ 


ness, so can intercept the full results of our unfaith- 
fulness and ingratitude. That blessed God who has 
Christ before Him, and has now the glorifying of Him 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 81 


by us in hand, does at the same time allow a sufficient 
play of moral responsibility in proof of what unbelief 
does even with a saint. But He can and does restore. 
May we count on His grace to keep as well as restore, 
while discerning His judgment of things and persons, 
and treating unsparingly all that which slights His 
word, and takes advantage of grace to deny the glory 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

May the Lord make and keep us lowly! May He so 
give us to see Himself in glory that all which is of this 
world may be ever judged in our eyes as awaiting only 
the hour of the harvest and of the vintage which is not 
yet come. Our joy is come in His glorification mean- 
while, and in the Holy Ghost given to us before that 
hour. Jesus we know in heavenly glory, and that He 
has already sent down the Holy Ghost to bring us into 
the present power of glory. May we be vessels of His 
testimony; it may be, needing to be broken that the 
rivers may flow out the more freely, but nevertheless 
channels through which the rivers of living water flow, 
to the praise of His own grace and glory ! 


82 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Lecture LV, 


THE PARACLETE, OR COMFORTER. 


John xiv. 26; xv. 26, 27; xvi. 7-14. 


WE enter on a sensibly different province of truth, 
relative to the Spirit of God, in the chapters of which 
a few verses have been read. It is no longer a question 
of the new birth, nor yet of the Holy Ghost as the 
power of fellowship with the sources of grace—fellow- 
ship with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ. 
Nor is it, again, the Holy Ghost as a power that flows 
from within outwards, giving the true testimony of a 
world-rejected but heavenly Lord before the hour comes 
for Him to show Himself, and them along with Him, 
to the world. These are the three subjects, as far as 
the Spirit of God is concerned, of John iii. iv. and vii. 

What, then, is the great commanding truth which 
our Lord brings before us in the chapters now read ? 
What is it that most prominently strikes the mind 
subject to the word of God, as one hears or reads these 
passages? There may be differences, and there are, in 
every one of these communications; but nevertheless 
they have, whether the fourteenth, fifteenth, or six- 
teenth chapters, one grand truth in common, which 
has not been presented in any part of the gospel before, 
of such immense value in itself, of such immensity, too, 
in its consequences, that we should in no way have 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 83 


been able to gather it from any of the previous com- 
munications of our Lord. The common principle in 
these chapters (xiv. xv. and xvi.) is this,—that it is 
not merely a source which imprints its own character 
on the new life that is given to the believer, nor a 
power working, whether inwardly or outwardly, and 
this in worship as well as testimony, but there is much 
more. We have the testimony of Christ strongly 
marked in these chapters; but there is another truth 
that rises above not only what we have had in the 
early part of John, but also which stands out in every 
one of these communications that come before us now. 
There is a divine person prominently brought before us. 
It is not merely a source or a power, but a person. 

And the occasion evidently accounts for this difference. 
The Lord Jesus was leaving—that blessed person who 
had called them to Himself, who had been forming 
their hearts during His earthly ministry by revealing 
the Father to them. The scene was about to close in 
His death, wherein God should be infinitely glorified. 
As He says Himself, “ Now is the Son of man glorified, 
and God”—not merely the Father (the Father was 
glorified, but there is more conveyed in this truth, and 
another thought altogether— God is glorified in him.” 
Sin was against and before God; consequently, it was 
impossible for God to overlook it. The moral nature 
of God must break forth in all its strength and indig- 
nation against sin. Jesus, the Son of man, the rejected 
Christ, takes the sin upon Himself, and becomes respon- 
sible for the iniquities of His people. Hence, in the 
cross, God acquired a glory which He never had before, 
and which it was impossible that He should ever receive 
again. God was glorified infinitely, and for ever. The 

GAZ 


84 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


consequence is, that, from that moment right out into 
eternity, the grand, and at the same time precious, 
task les before God of displaying, in every possible 
form, His estimate of the infinite suffering in which 
Jesus has glorified Him. The immediate result of that 
work was, that Jesus, being raised from the dead by 
the glory of the Father, takes His place at the right 
hand of God in heaven. Nothing else would have 
been for Him an adequate witness of the value of the 
cross. There are results which shall be accomplished 
in their day; there is no blessing that God ever has 
given, or ever will give, apart from the cross of the 
Lord Jesus. But, at the same time, the cross has so 
perfectly met all God’s justice, holiness, majesty, and 
love, all His character, in short, as well as His affec- 
tions, that God now has simply before Him, as far as 
Christ and those who receive Him are concerned, the 
happy task of gratifying His own nature to the full in 
the blessing according to all that is in His heart. This 
it is that alone accounts for all that He is now doing. In 
virtue of this, not only does He put Jesus at His own 
right hand, but sends forth the gospel—a thing He 
never did before—sends it to every creature. Thou- 
sands of years had rolled over this world (and God is 
the same God), yet had He never sent out such a mes- 
sage to man. There might be this gospel or that, good 
news to Abraham or to the children of Israel; but 
there never was the glad tidings of His grace spread 
abroad to every creature before. It was not God began 
to be love: Jesus Christ or His cross never produced 
love in God. It is the distinctive character of love in 
Him, that it is increate, uncaused, and unmoved by 
that which is outside itself. It is in His own nature. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 85 


Love would be and was there if there had been no 
object of it, for objects do not make love; but at the 
same time, in the sovereignty of God, His love goes 
out: and to the neediest, the most deplorably guilty, 
the most distant from Himself, the most hostile, He 
can afford to show love. It is the cross of Christ which 
vindicates Him in so doing. 

But this is not all. Jesus disappears from the world. 
It must be so. The world was not good enough for 
Him. Not even anything that God could do in it, no 
accomplishment of providence, no bestowal of the 
throne of David, nor yet the universal dominion of 
the Son of man over all nations, tribes, and tongues 
would have been a sufficient reward on God’s part for 
the cross of the Lord Jesus. Accordingly, God takes 
Jesus to His own right hand in heavenly glory; and 
this, it is evident, gives occasion to the wonderful teach- 
ing of John xiv. First of all, our Lord presents the 
certainty of His coming back again; for if He was 
going there, it was no abatement of His love. He 
went to prepare a place for them. As surely, therefore, 
as He went to the Father's house, He would come 
again, and receive them unto Himself; that where He 
was, they might be also. He had manifested the Father 
to them; He had shown Him here. They had known, 
or ought to have known, not only that the Father was 
in Him, but that He was in the Father. He was a 
divine person; He was the Son. This, of course, was 
in itself independent of His work; but, at the same 
time, it gave infinite value to that work. Now, He 
goes farther, and shows that, during His absence in the 
Father's house, He makes a provision suitable to His 
love, and worthy of the cross—an unheard of blessing, 


86 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


transcending anything that had ever been known by 
man upon the earth before. He opens it thus: “If ye 
love me, keep my commandments.” He would not 
have them spend their breath and affections in unavail- 
ing regrets for His absence, but prove their love in a 
real and substantial way—“keep my commandments.” 
On the other hand, He would prove His love in a 
characteristically divine way. “And I,” says He, “will 
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Com- 
forter, that he may abide with you for ever; even the 
Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because 
it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know 
him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.” 
Farther down He adds what makes the personality so 
very evident—“The Comforter, which is the Holy 
Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name.” Re- 
mark the words “will send in my name.” It is not 
merely “will give;” for we can understand the giving 
of mere power; we can understand a divine source of 
blessing springing up within; we can understand in- 
finite supplies of blessing flowing out. But here there 
is much more. It is unequivocally a divine person, 
“whom the Father,” He says, “will send in my name; 
he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to 
your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.” 

On this let us for a few moments dwell, considering 
what it is, or rather whom, God has given to us—whom 
the Father has sent in the name of the Son, the Lord 
Jesus. I do not deny that the Holy Spirit is sometimes 
presented under the figure of being poured out, or that 
which is shed forth. It is familiar to all and unques- 
tionable. In such figures the thought is clearly the 
profusion of the blessing, the rich and lavish extent, if 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 87 


I may so say, of what God the Father is giving for the 
glory of His Son. But besides the riches of the gift, 
and the abundance of the grace, here we have an 
altogether different thought. Here we have distinctness 
and definiteness to the very last degree. And no wonder. 
It is a person—not merely power. It is no question 
of fulness of blessing only, but of a divine person. 
Accordingly the language employed seems intended of 
the Lord to enforce and point to this grand truth, 
which, alas! He knew would be so readily forgotten by 
the Church of God. 

I admit also as certain, that by-and-by men here 
below shall receive another outpouring of the Holy 
Ghost. I admit the latter rain, even as the former. I 
admit the accomplishment of the beautiful type of 
Exodus xxvii, where the sound of the bells goes forth, 
not while the High Priest is within the holy place, not 
merely when He goes in, but also when He comes out 
again. And so, as one testimony was rendered when the 
High Priest went in, there will be another testimony of 
the Spirit when the High Priest comes forth once more. 
Just as when Jesus went into the heavens, there was 
the sound given forth by the power of the Spirit; so 
when He comes out again, there will be a new form 
and fulness of the Holy Spirit’s blessing diffused upon 
all flesh, as it is said in the promise; the only differ- 
ence being, that the future thing will surely not be 
for the same body that has received the first blessing 
of divine grace from the Holy Ghost, but, as we know, 
the ancient people of God shall be the object. God 
will re-visit Israel in grace; not, of course, confining 
the blessing to Israel, but even as God now has been 
pleased to seek out of every nation under heaven, so, 


88 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


only more largely, will it be in the days of Christ’s 
second coming and reign over the earth. 

In all this it might seem that we are only on vague 
ground ; and if this were all, we should be far from 
clear light as to the Spirit of God. Even so I know 
not that it would be lawful to speak of the influences of 
the Spirit as some now do. We are in the presence of 
an infinitely greater and commanding truth, but it is 
the very truth of which the Lord Himself speaks here. 
For indeed it is not a question simply of influences for 
the good of the soul, nor of springs of divine favour, 
nor of powers that flow in or flow out to any imaginable 
extent. Above and better than all this is the glorious 
fact, that now for the first time, and, as I fully believe, 
according to Scripture, for the only time, the personal 
presence of the Holy Ghost is known on the earth—the 
Holy Ghost actually come down from heaven, and here 
below as the fruit of redemption and of the Lord Jesus 
Christ’s departure to heaven. 

It is admitted fully that, along with this personal 
presence, there is a plentiful dispensing of power, as 
we have said. Nor do I doubt for a moment that 
by-and-by, when the Lord Jesus comes from hea- 
ven, there will be a larger effusion, a still more ex- 
tensive spread of God’s blessing all around; but where 
do we read of His sending the Spirit for that time ? 
Where do we read of the Father sendiny the Comforter 
in the name of Christ the Son? In no other period. 
It is here, and now only. I mean not that these are 
the only Scriptures that refer to it, but that these are 
the only times and circumstances and conditions in 
which the word of God puts not only the gift of the 

Spirit and His outpouring, but the mission of the Spirit. 


j 
f 
4 
: 
; 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 89 


It is a question here, I repeat, of His own personal 
descent from heaven; and nothing can be plainer from 
our Lord’s own words, as will be proved as we pass on. 

The key to all these statements lies in this :—the pre- 
sence of the Comforter. That personal presence of the 
Holy Ghost, which is here spoken of, is intimately con- 
nected with, as it is founded on, His own personal 
absence after redemption. On the other hand, the 
bright day of the Lord that is coming will be marked, 
not by Christ’s absence, but by His presence; not by 
His being in heaven, but by Himself coming to reign 
over the earth; and it has no such personal presence 
of the Spirit attached to it. Greater powers there may 
be in a certain way,—larger, if not deeper; but it will 
be another state of things altogether, and one of the 
most striking differences is found in a fact which may 
be passingly stated here; namely, that the Holy Ghost 
in that day will not lead a single person to worship 
God in the holiest of all. This state of things ceases. 
The veil is no longer rent in the millennial day, when 
the kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ shall be over the 
earth. Possibly such a statement as this may sound 
strong, and interfere rudely with doctrinal prejudices. 
To some theologians what could be more shocking to 
hear than that, after the work of redemption, there ever 
could be a recurrence to an earthly sanctuary, and a 
separating veil, and a human priesthood, and outward 
sacrifices over again? But in my judgment nothing is 
more certain, if indeed we bow to the Psalms and pro- 
phets, than such a state of things on earth under the 
millennial reign of the Lord. Gentile doctors may ex- 
plain it—or rather attempt to explain it away—as they 
will; but there the fact stands before them in the word 


90 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


of God imperishably, in the prophetic word evidently 
unaccomplished. It is in Scripture very particularly 
bound up with this mark, that when that day does come, 
and God renews His dealings with His ancient people 
Israel, there is no Pentecost among the renewed feasts. 
There is the Passover, as well as the feast of Tabernacles; 


but there is no feast of weeks. This evidently falls in 


with what I have been saying, that there will be a 
most copious effusion of the Spirit; so that even some 
outward gifts, communicated on the day of Pentecost 
and afterwards, should be designated powers of the 
world to come. Why are they called “powers of the 
world to come”? Because they are a sample of that 
energy which will work in unhindered effects then, 
making the vast universe to know the mighty deliver- 
ance which the Saviour has accomplished for “all 
things,” as well as for those that believe. The powers 
that were conferred by our Lord through the Holy 
Ghost, after He went up to heaven, are rightly therefore 
called “powers of the world to come,” such as healing 
diseases, cleansing the lepers, raising the dead, glving 
the blind to see and the lame to walk, and the like, 
because they were expressions of that power which will 
be known far and wide in the great day of the Lord’s 
reign, when He will heal all their diseases just as truly 
as He will pardon all their iniquities. Then He will 
bring in and unite both blessings. It is clear that this 
is altogether a different state of things from what we 
know now. 

Accordingly, now there is this surpassing privilege 
that God gives to make known His exceeding value for 
and delight in the work of the Lord Jesus. How comes 
this? That work without doubt has in God’s sight 


, 
: 
; 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 91 


unending and infinite worth. How comes it that there 
should be now such an impressive and altogether divine 
estimate of it? The reason I believe to be this. The 
day that is coming will be the accomplishment of 
promise and prophecy. The time is arrived for making 
good what God positively brought out in that form of 
detailed blessing that was given to His people on earth. 
They were an earthly people ; and accordingly the pro- 
mises in their literal bearing regarded them as such. 
Hence it is, that when that day comes, it will be of 
that which God definitely put before them, it will be of 
the earthly people and the earth (and especially the land 
of Israel) as the centre of their fulfilment. But God 
never limited Himself merely to the accomplishment 
of what He has promised; and, in point of fact, so far 
from your getting at the depths of God’s grace by 
grasping at the promises, as people say, on the contrary, 
one only gets to the limits, so to speak, of that which 
was suited to a man on earth, or a people on the earth, 
or the earth itself; but as surely as the heavens are 
higher than the earth, so the grace that lay, as it were,’ 
‘unmoved in His own bosom, that which never was 
measured out in promise nor defined in prophecy, must 
be according to the depth of the goodness of God Him- 
self. And therefore it is on one side that He retained 
this blessed reserve; not, of course, for the purpose of 
hiding it always, but nevertheless it was hidden from 
ages and generations—‘“hid in God,” as He elsewhere 
says. Now on the other side the secret is hid no more, 
and this because God can freely act now. He has the 
world-rejected Christ at His own right hand; and at the 
very sight of Him as He comes there, if one may so 
say, fresh from the cross, as there He comes bringing 


92 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


all the value of redemption into His presence, God 
gives not according to the measure of an earthly people’s 
need, or according to that which is suitable to this poor 
world, but what was worthy of Himself and of Christ. 
He gives what would be an honour in heaven itself. 
What can attest or prove this more than sending down 
the blessed Spirit, who knew heaven so well, and could 
enter into and reciprocate all the feelings of God the 
Father about the Son and about redemption? Hence it 
is we enter with such fulness into this infinite blessing. 

Accordingly, therefore, with all this weight of truth 
before us, these depths that were as yet unfathomed of 
divine grace, the Lord Jesus Christ speaks to His 
disciples. He would lead them into the counsels and 
reveal to them the mind of God the Father, the grace 
of the Saviour-God; but the means by which He 
pledges His name, and promises on His Father's part 
to more than make up for His own loss to the saints, is 
by the presence of “another Comforter.” 

But I apprehend the word “Comforter” sometimes 
fails (perhaps to most fails) to give an adequate notion 


of what it is that our Lord Jesus really meant us to. 


gather from thus speaking of the Holy Ghost. We 
might very naturally draw from it, that the term was 
in relation to ‘sorrow, that it intimated a person who 
would console us in the midst of the distresses of this 
lower world. And, indeed, the Holy Ghost does console 
us and comfort us. But this is only a very small part 
of the functions here conveyed by the word “ Paraclete.” 
This is the expression, if one would give an English 
reproduction of that which is in point of fact the very 
word our Lord employed. But the meaning of that 
word “ Paraclete” is not merely “Comforter,” but one 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 93 


who is identified with our interests, one who undertakes 
all our cause, one who engages to see us through our 
difficulties, one who in every way becomes both our 
representative and the great personal agent that trans- 
acts all our business for us. This is the meaning of 
the Advocate or Paraclete or Comforter, whatever 
equivalent may be preferred. Manifestly, then, it 
has an incomparably larger bearing than either “advo- 
cate” on the one hand, or “comforter” on the other: 
it includes both, but takes in a great deal more than 
either. In point of fact, it is One who is absolutely and 
infinitely competent to undertake for us whatever He 
could do in our favour, whatever was or might be the 
limit of our need, whatever our want in any difficulty, 
whatever the exigencies of God’s grace for the blessing 
of our souls. Such the Holy Ghost is now; and how 
blessed it is to have such an One! But remark here, 
that 1t never was known before. I have already hinted, 
and indeed plainly expressed the conviction, that it 
will never be known again, fully allowing that there 
will be, as to extent, a larger outpouring of blessing in 
the world to come. But the personal presence of the 
Spirit here below as an answer to the glory of Christ at 
the right hand of God!—such a state of things never 
can be repeated. While the High Priest is above, the 
Spirit sent down gives a heavenly entrance into His 
glory as well as redemption; when the High Priest comes 
out for the earthly throne, the Spirit then poured out 
will give a testimony suited to the earth over which the 
Lord will reign. 

If we bear this in mind, what a solemn impression is 
given as we look over Christendom! I have no doubt 
of the fact; but if it be so, it is a pregnant one, and 


94 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


full of serious reflections. It is always the great test- 
truth, if I may so express myself, which is the first to 
disappear, and, I think also, the last truth to be re- 
covered, once it is lost; for it is invariably what most 
reflects God’s glory. What can be, then, dearer to the 
Spirit, who is here to glorify the Son in glorifying the 
Father? And what should be of deeper moment to 
the saints? Wonder not if Satan strains every nerve 
and practises all his wiles to blot and misrepresent, to 
pervert or corrupt where he cannot destroy. If I judge 
Christendom by such a standard as this, what must be 
the sad conclusion? If one thing more than another 
ought now to characterize the children of God every- 
where, what should it be according to these words of 
the Saviour? The presence, the personal presence, of 
the Holy Ghost; the certainty that this divine person 
is come to replace Himself. Granted that sense does 
not see Him, and that mind. cannot enter in, as it is 
said here of the world. Evidently, if it were a question 
of either sense or mind, the world might be adequate. 
But contrariwise “the world seeth him not, neither 
knoweth him; nevertheless ye know him.” We know 
Him, and know Him also to be present, first, on the 
simple word of the Lord Jesus; but, secondly, too, from 
the conscious enjoyment of the presence of the Holy 
Ghost. 

I must begin by simply receiving Him on the word 
of the Lord; but when I do receive the truth into my 
soul, am I without the sense of His presence? Am 
I without the taste of the joy of the Holy Ghost being 
either in me or in the assembly of God? Surely our 
hearts can attest far otherwise. Therefore it is never — 
confined simply to belief. “Know ye not,” says the 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 95 


apostle, “know ye not that your body is the temple of 
the Holy Ghost?” That is, it is not merely a matter 
of faith. First of all, I do not doubt that a soul is 
brought into the blessing by the faith of Christ, and no- 
thing else; but to leave no room for the enjoyment that 
is found in Him subsequently, to reduce all to a bare 
matter of acceptance on God’s word of the Lord Jesus, 
would be indeed a poor witness on our part to the 
power of the indwelling Spirit, or to the revelation of 
the Saviour’s grace. What would be thought of one 
who had nothing to assure him that his wife really was 
thus related to him, except the fact that her name was 
so entered in the registrar’s office? It would be an 
extraordinary and a sorry pass to which things had 
come. And do you suppose that the Holy Ghost, a 
divine person sent down expressly to give us the power 
and joy and blessing and refreshment of the grace of 
God in the knowledge of Christ—do you suppose that 
this is less real for the new man, than the comfort of a 
companion that God has given a man for all that per- 
tains to this present life? Far from us be such a 
thought; and therefore it is, I repeat, surely a matter 
to be noticed and weighed. 

No doubt, if my soul, when awakened, only accepts 
the bare word of God in the gospel, and cares for, 
looks for, no more from Him who is here to glorify 
Christ, I must not wonder if I stop short of enjoyment 
which others taste; for the Holy Ghost resents such de- 
spite to His grace, such contentedness to know the least 
possible of Christ. There must be loss, if I will indeed 
be obstinate enough not to look for aught more. As 
far as it goes, it is in principle rationalistic, thus turn- 
ing the very word of God into a mere letter ; the heart 


96 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


refusing to go onward into the enjoyment of His blessed 
presence and power, simply because the gospel of sal- 
vation was believed on the word of the Lord. On the 
contrary, we find particular pains taken to show that 
individually there is a divine consciousness by the 
Spirit’s power of our relationship to God; also, in the 
assembly of God, I am entitled not only to believe that 
He is there, but, believing, also to taste the sweet and 
mighty effects of His presence. Hence it is that in Ro- 
mans viii., which refers to what concerns the soul’s new 
standing in Christ, it is not said merely that the Holy 
Ghost dwells in me, a believer, but that He “ beareth 
witness with our spirit that we are the children of 
God.” Does this mean no more than that a man 
believes the gospel? Matter of faith of course it is; 
and with this we must begin—with bare faith in God’s 
testimony of His own grace to our souls—a faith that 
rests on nothing else, on not a single emotion or expe- 
rience of any kind, but God’s word in the glad tidings 
of salvation by Christ. But suppose I settle down 
that this is all to which grace now entitles me, is this 
not a mistake on the other side almost as bad as to 
confound faith with feelings, or with experiences ? 
Where faith is real, it leads into a deep experience, 
both for the soul and in the Church of God. However, 


this may suffice for the subject on which I am now ~ 


treating. It seemed to me the more incumbent to refer 
to it, because the return from the ordinary muddle of 
inward evidences to simple faith exposes souls to limit 
everything as to the Holy Ghost to the bare word of 
the Lord. This is true as a ground-work; but we 
should look for more. And we must beware, in avoid- 
ing one error, not to fall into another and an opposite 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 97 


one. That the Lord sends me the word of life, I accept 
entirely as the starting-point of the Christian. It is a 
blessed and admirable thing that the Lord gives us to 
know, when hard pushed, it may be, by the adversary— 
to take the gospel on His naked word. But as surely 
as He who comes down and really dwells in us is a 
divine person—to suppose that He does not give the 
sensible enjoyment of His presence in our souls, and in 
the assembly of God, is a very great mistake indeed in 
my judgment. 

First of all, then, the Lord prays the Father, as He 
says, (for He takes a mediatorial place in this chapter, ) 
“I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another 
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.” We 
are thus in presence of a grand truth as to the Holy 
Ghost. Not only was He given, but besides, when He 
comes, He abides for ever, as it is said, “that he may 
abide with you for ever.” There is not a word about 
anybody else; it is the Christian that is in question 
here. Throughout these chapters of John we have in- 
variably, as the anticipated basis, redemption accom- 
plished on earth, and Christ exalted in heaven. These 
are accordingly the limits of the blessing here. It is not 
so much redemption indeed, in any of its manifold 
applications, but that truth as the ground of Christ’s 
glorification on high, and of the Holy Ghost’s coming 
down to the earth. Accordingly, here the Spirit is 
promised, not to be a visitor for a time, as the Lord 
Jesus was, but, in contrast with that transient stay, 
“that he may abide with you for ever.” 

This at once leads one to feel how solemn is the sight 
which everywhere meets our eyes in Christendom. If 
there be one truth more than another that has been 

H 


98 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


abandoned, it is this personal presence of the Holy 
Ghost. There is no adequate testimony to it whatever; 
and this is not said unadvisedly. I say it not merely of 
that great city which reigns over the kings of the earth, 
but of smaller cities that kings have built themselves to 
reign over, or those yet smaller cities their subjects love 
to reign over as rivals and an improvement upon both. 
I say it of the Protestant bodies, no matter what, no 
matter where, national or dissenting. It is a remarkable 
fact, that if you look at their confessions of faith, many 
of which were drawn up when men, no doubt, were far 
more simple and thorough-going than they are now—at 
the time of the Reformation, or at any subsequent great 
crisis—if there be one truth more especially absent 
from every one of these confessions that has come 
under my own observation, it is the testimony to this 
truth. You will find other truths: the necessity of 
being born again, the value of the work of Christ, 
the glory of His person as God and man. Not that 
they deny that the Holy Ghost is a divine person— 
surely they do not. But I am not speaking of His 
personality, or deity either, but of His personal mission 
to the earth, and of His presence now with Chris- 
tians, both individually and collectively—the presence 
of the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. Is it to be 
found anywhere acted on or confessed? Where is it set 
forth? I have never met with any approach to it, even 
in my reading; and of course I do not wish to give 
anyone the impression that I have not read a good deal 
upon the subject. I have searched diligently for it, and 
I have desired to learn what is really held by Christians — 
universally ; but never, in any one confession, creed, | 
article of faith, or rule, have I discovered the smallest 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 99 


expression of that which is evidently the great charac- 
teristic truth of Christianity—that truth which ought 
to be continually sounding out, and continually in 
practice within the Church. Is it not, then, a solemn 
consideration that this, the glory of the Christian, the 
strength of the Church of God, and the especial pri- 
vilege for which it was expedient that even Christ 
should go away, is never attested in any one system of 
Christendom known to me? 

It will be said that there are excellent persons, and 
good preaching, &c., at any rate among orthodox persons. 
Is this denied? Does it supply the lack? Perhaps it 
may be urged by some that at least the society of 
Friends, or Quakers, as they are commonly called, do 
make a great deal of the Holy Ghost. They are the 
very class which, with all respect to themselves person- 
ally, are, in my judgment, and unwittingly on their own 
part, most ignorant of the truth of the Holy Ghost’s 
presence. The reason is manifest why they are go 
thoroughly distant from, and so antagonistic to, the 
truth of the personal presence of the Holy Ghost. 
Their doctrine, which I surely ought to explain after 
having given so strong an opinion about that society, 
—Quaker doctrine is wholly inconsistent with the truth 
the Lord lays down here. They hold that the Spirit of 
God dwells in every man without exception; that, 
whether a Jew or a Turk, whether an infidel or a 
believer, not a single soul is without His indwelling 
The consequence is that they cannot believe in any 
special personal presence of the Holy Ghost; for they 
conceive that as it has always been, so it is the essential 
means whereby he who makes a right use of it can be 
saved. Thus evidently along with this error goes 

H 2 


100 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


another: they make justification to be gradual and 
progressive, not complete by faith of Christ and His 
work, but in proportion as men follow the inward light. 
I do not speak of all the members of that society: no 
doubt gospel truth has penetrated among not a few of 
them; and there are those (I do not care to name such 
now) who have lately preached without as well as 
within them, and are much to be respected, and have been 
somewhat used of God to the conversion of souls. But 
what they received for their own souls, and preached to 
the blessing of others, was not the proper doctrine of the 
Friends as set forth in the remains of their founders or 
Barclay’s Apology, but a certain measure of evangelical 
testimony which penetrated their enclosure, and was 
thence given out to others. 

But as to this doctrine, the fundamental tenet of 
the Friends is, that the Holy Ghost is given to every 
man without exception, that he, making right use of 
that manifestation of the Spirit, may have his soul 
saved at last. Now is not this the very antithesis 
of the truth of God? For Scripture does not say 
that the Holy Ghost is given to every man in the 
world, but teaches that the manifestation of the Spirit 
is given only to every man in the Church. The Chris- 
tian alone has the Holy Ghost. Not even the Old 
Testament saints knew this; nor will the millennial 
saints, as I believe, possess it as we do now, though there 
will be an outpouring on all flesh, we know. Even the 
people of Israel will not have Him as we now, blessed 
as they may be by-and-by, and endued with powers as 
extensive, and, indeed, outwardly transcending, I pre- 
sume, anything ever known in the bosom of the Church. 
For the millennial day will see the most marvellous 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 101 


displays of divine power that has ever wrought among 
men permanently in this world. I doubt not at all that 
the efforts on which man so prides himself now,—his 
inventions, his electric telegraphs, his railways, his steam- 
ships, &c., will disappear from the world to give place 
to what will incomparably surpass them; for God will 
never allow that man is able to exceed Himself. He 
will not leave room for the delusion that a day of sin, 
self-will, shame—a day when Jesus is rejected and the 
Spirit slighted—is to furnish the due materials for the 
reign of His Son over a reconciled earth. Who that 
knows the character and word of God can admit the 
possibility that He will let Israel, under their Messiah, 
be indebted to the monuments of rebellious Gentiles, 
when He sets His people up, and causes the light to 
shine, and the glory of Jehovah to arise upon Zion ? 
Impossible, to my mind, that God should make use of 
these effete means of man in that bright day. Just as 
Jericho of old must fall, and all the ancient centres of 
the holy land must give place, and God would mark out 
new ones for His people, so in the day that is coming, 
I am persuaded, the Holy Ghost will teach man how 
infinite is the power that He will put forth in the earth; 
for this will be the peculiarity of it: the Holy Ghost 
then will act on the earth and for the earth. Of course 
there will be no suspension of what He undertakes ; 
but the display of the power will be suited to the Lord 
as then reigning over the world, and the objects the 
Holy Ghost will have in hand. 

fow the Holy Ghost works after a different way, and 
to other ends. There was a great manifestation of 
power in apostolic days; but the great starting-point 
was the Holy Ghost sent down by Christ glorified at 


102 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


the right hand of God, and giving to souls vital asso- 
ciation with Him who is there. This, too, ever goes on 
while Christ is on high. It is the heavenly One making 
us heavenly by the Holy Ghost, the divine link between 
Him and them upon the earth. This is what our pas- 
sage speaks of here (and accordingly we have the 
believer contrasted with the world). He, says Christ, is 
“the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive.” 
The false doctrine I have referred to insists strongly 
that the world does receive the Spirit, and that it is in 
no way peculiar to the believer in point of fact. Here, 
on the contrary, it is a special possession of the Spirit ; 
it is His personal presence which only the Christian 
possesses, which the world cannot receive, “because it 
seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know 
him.” It is exclusively the privilege of the believer 
here below ; “for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in 
you.” Instead of merely giving them a transitory taste 
of blessedness, the Spirit dwells with them; and more 
than this, instead of merely dwelling with them, “he 
shall be zm them.” There is this double truth, the 
dwelling with and also the being in. These two things 
are of importance. From the time that He comes down 
He dwells; yet not merely does He dwell with them as 
One outside of them, which is true in an assembly of 
saints, but He was to be 72 them. That He dwells with 
us is of immense moment for the believer to hold— 
that the Holy Ghost does not merely visit occasionally, 
but really dwells with us, and that we may look to Him, 
knowing that He really is here. But besides, as the Lord 
adds, He shall be cm you, intimating that there would 
be the closest possible presence of the divine Spirit 
“in” as well as “with” those He was coming to; and 
this “for ever.” 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 103 


The effect is next shown. “I will not,” says He 
emphatically, “leave you orphans” (that is, by His 
departure from them); “I will come to you.” “Yet a 
little while and the world seeth me no more, but ye see 
me; because I live, ye shall live also.” Is not the Holy 
Ghost forming us into a body, uniting the believer to 
Christ as the head? There is more than this. Com- 
munity of nature is here taught; and not here the 
unity of the body, as we have in the epistles of Paul. 
“ Because I live, ye shall live also.” Nothing can be 
more intimate than this. Further: “At that day,” says 
He, showing the manner of it, “ye shall know that I 
am in the Father, and ye in me, and I in you.” But 
“that day” is come. This again shows how totally this 
presence of the Holy Ghost differs from His outpouring 
in the millennium. Will this verse be true of the 
saints then? It is clear that nothing of the kind will 
appear. I do not deny that suited blessings will be 
given in the mercy and power of God; far from it. I 
do not deny that there will be divine goodness working 
in the people of God, the objects of His grace. Surely 
it must be so. But it is plain to me, that the state of 
things, taken as a whole, here described by the Lord, 
will be perfectly impossible in the millennium. “At 
that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye 
in me, and I in you.” This is only applicable now. 
The basis on which it depends has been accomplished 
now, and now only. Christ has taken His place above, 
not merely in heaven, but, as He says, “in my Father.” 
“At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, 
and ye in me” while He is there, and, at the same 
time, “I in you” while we are here. It is evident 
therefore that this (verse 20) is the decisive proof that 


104 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


our Lord makes the wondrous gift of which He speaks 
here contemporaneous with His presence in heaven. 
Then only is made good our association with Himself 
on high by the Holy Ghost sent down. When our Lord 
Jesus Christ leaves heaven, and takes the kingdom, all 
these elements will be changed, and there will be a 
new state of things in accordance with the new position 
which our Lord is to take. The Holy Ghost acts or is 
given always in relation to the place of Christ. During 
His personal absence there is the personal presence of 
the Holy Ghost ; and as His own personal presence cha- 
racterises the age to come when He returns again, the 
action of the Holy Ghost is Sebi wigan modified by 
that new and fruitful fact. 

On the latter verses I shall not dwell, having wished, 
first, to present as distinctly as possible the truth, and 
to this end comparing what now is with what has been, 
or may be in the days that are coming, so as to bring 
out the peculiarity of our blessing. Faith always enters 
into the present mind of God, His counsels and ways, 
from looking at Christ. Therefore it is that, where 
Christ’s presence at the right hand of God in heaven 
is kept steadily before the soul, everything falls into 
its place. Where this is not the great key-truth of our 
souls in relation to God as well as to the world, all is 
lost—I mean, all that is distinctive of us as Christians. 
Of course, there may be faith in Christ for the forgive- 
ness of sins, and for a measure of peace with God; but 
IT am not speaking of the soul’s comfort, nor even of 
our being brought through this world, and saved for 
ever and ever by Christ. My thought is of the glory 
of God, and of that which suits His affections; of that 
which is good and holy, full of strength and blessed- 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 105 


ness for the Christian in relationship with God. As- 
suredly none of these things can be, unless the eye of 
faith is guided, and continually fixed upon Christ 
where He is. To have the eye continually directed 
toward Him where He is secures the free work of the 
Holy Ghost in the soul; and hence it is you find that 
those who do not believe in the personal presence of 
the Holy Ghost here below have no right apprehension 
of Christ Himself as the Head of the Church in heaven. 
They do not deny, nor so much as question in the 
least, that He is at the right hand of God. They 
formally proclaim that they believe in the Holy Ghost, 
the communion of saints, and so on. But it is no ques- 
tion now of repeating the words of a formulary ; nor am 
I confining my remarks to any particular system, because, 
in my opinion, the dissenting societies are every one of 
them founded with aims and views wholly irrespective 
of the Holy Ghost’s presence and operation in the 
assembly. Thus the present state of Christendom, in 
every form of it, whether national or dissenting, is 
founded on unbelief in the main distinctive truth of 
the Church, as far as the Holy Ghost is concerned. 

This is of capital importance to impress on the 
children of God. The question is not whether or 
where they may have got good for their souls. The 
Spirit of God blesses in the midst, and often in spite, 
of these systems. There are those dear to Christ in 
every one of them; there are in all not only living 
members but ministers of Christ, as I firmly believe, 
wherever the grand foundations of Christ’s person and 
work are acknowledged in any measure. But it is 
another thing altogether to say, “Am I where the Holy 
Ghost sent down from heaven can act freely, according © 


106 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


to the intentions of the Lord and the word of God? 
Am I where He is believed to be present? Is the 
meeting, the assembly, of which I form a part, the 
expression of the presence of the Holy Ghost?” I do 
not speak of preaching now, nor even of meetings for 
instruction, whether in the form of lectures, or of 
reading the word of God together. All these things 
have their place; but there remains distinct the great 
central occasion where the Church, the members of 
Christ, gather round the name of the Lord Jesus. 
Now, on such occasions, is this leading truth before 
our souls, that we have One who is competent for 
every difficulty ; One who cares for the glory of Christ ; 
One who (for the love He bears Christ, and the value 
He sets on this work, and His grace toward us who, by 
His own power, have received Christ, and rest upon 
His work,) maintains our interests, looks after us, gives 
all our joys, helps us in our sorrows, fortifies us against 
the wiles of the devil, enables us to be simple, lowly, 
truthful, faithful, by His own grace, and deals with us 
by the word of God where we are letting slip either 
what is due to Christ’s person, or to the truth of God. 
Now, I maintain, that of all truths none can, as 
far as the Christian body on earth is concerned, take 
precedence of 'this for urgency and moment. The 
reason is quite simple. If men believed there was a 
divine person sent down from heaven, and that He 
was really present with us, to be looked to as direct- 
ing the assembly, working by whom He would, do 
you think that this would not be the great prominent 
fact? I do not mean His merely operating; for the 
Holy Ghost may work in a Wesleyan Chapel, or by an 
Anglican clergyman. I entirely admit that, without 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 107 


the operation of the Holy Ghost, none could be con- 
verted, or get any truth from the word of God. Thus 
the operation of the Spirit is ike His own sovereign 
grace ; or, as the Lord compared it, to the wind, blowing 
where it lists. This is altogether another thing from 
the recognition of the presence of the Holy Ghost, and 
His acting freely and sovereignly by such of the mem- 
bers as He is pleased to employ in the Christian as- 
sembly. 

Do Christians believe that there is such a presence 
of the Spirit to be counted on? Surely the word 
of God is plain; and this is what the saints of God 
are called to own, and find their blessing in. Can this 
be fully known except where there is faith init? Ido 
not mean that every individual Christian has got a 
right measure of faith—perhaps not one of us has; 
we are all too feeble about this and every other truth. 
Therefore, of course, the assembly of God does not 
mean to claim all it desires for each of Christ’s mem- 
bers. It is not that all have arrived at that fulness of 
confidence and simplicity of reliance on the presence 
of the Holy Ghost that becomes us, especially as this 
is, we may say, one of the highest truths, though after 
all a very simple truth; for, as is usual, the highest 
truths are apt to be most simple when seen. What, for 
instance, can be simpler than Christ at the right hand of 
God in heaven? Yet, after all, is it not the kernel of 
the mystery, the choicest blessing of God in Him? So 
I know nothing plainer, yet profounder, than the pre- 
sence of the Holy Ghost on earth—the answer to that 
great truth of Christ at the right hand of God. At the 
same time, however simple it may be, it is most 
weighty. Every Christian, no matter where, should be 


108 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


instructed in this great truth; and I conceive we have 
a serious charge from God to labour for the instruction 
of the children of God wherever we meet them, as they 
have received Christ, that they should really believe 
also in the presence of the Holy Ghost on earth. But 
holding this, I do not admit it to be of God that every 
one who is received should be required to possess previous 
understanding or exercised faith in His presence. There 
are many individual members of Christ who are but 
feeble in it, and do not enter into its preciousness in 
any appreciable degree. But so long as the meeting, 
as a whole, is guided by the Spirit; so long as there is 
a recognition of His presence, without any known, fixed, 
or sanctioned hindrance to Him; so long as there are 
no human devices or rules of men, or other arrange- 
ments which interfere with the action of the Holy 
Ghost according to the word, there, I am persuaded, 
all children of God are bound to be, and may be, tho- 
roughly happy. Possibly, no doubt, mistakes may be 
made— we are all liable to err; but our comfort here is 
to know that we have One present who is alone equal 
to the correction of all errors, and who, in His own 
grace, has come down from heaven for the express pur- 
pose of seeing to the saints. Therefore, we need never 
clespair, no matter what the difficulties; we should never 
give up our soul’s confidence that the Holy Ghost, who 
is present with and in us, will see to every hindrance 
and danger. Let our faith only be towards Him ; let 
us only call on the name of the Lord; let us only be 
sure that He is here for the purpose—I will not say of 
honouring our faith, but, what is surer and better, for 
glorifying Christ. This can never fail. At the same 
time, if there be faith in His presence, as that which 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 109 


after all is the great thought of the meeting as a whole, 
though not necessarily of every member of it, divine 
power will be there. But unless the meeting be so 
far governed by this great truth, it is evident there may 
be all kinds of human rules brought in which contradict 
the action of the Holy Ghost there. Details as to this 
we find in the epistles, and some, at least, will come 
before us, as I trust, on another occasion. I only refer 
to the subject to connect it with John xiy. passingly, 
as showing the all-importance of this great truth of 
the personal presence of the Holy Ghost. 

Allow me to repeat my question here. Supposing 
a Protestant Christian, or any other you like, believed 
a divine person to be present, do you think all would 
not take shape and be governed by so immense a truth ? 
If it were only an earthly sovereign among men, I 
should like to know whether you or I would be anxious 
to appear to take the lead in any place where the ruler 
might be there for the purpose? Is it too much to 
say, Supposing the king passed through his dominions 
or entered any scene of his government, that the duty 
of a subject, even the highest, would be so much the 
more to pay him honour? At least such is my opinion. 
And I think nothing temporally is happier, speaking as 
a man now, than for a people to feel, and own, and 
respect the rights of the sovereign. I fear to too many 
it is a mere name, and that every trace of authority, 
even revealed truth, is coming to little better in these 
days —everything, both outward and inward. But 
wherever there is the real understanding and the right 
feeling of what the will of God is in the matter of 
earthly authority, it is manifest that no man or woman 
who had the sovereign in their own house—mark, even 


110 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


in their own house—could overlook such a fact, and 
behave as if he was not there. 

But, beloved, when we think of the Church of God, it 
is not our own house, but God’s; and what is due there ? 
Surely, if anybody may act there in full right, it is One 
who is God. Accordingly it is too plain and palpable 
to be mistaken, that there is not, nor can be, faith in 
the presence of the Holy Ghost, without giving Him 
the place of precedence and expecting His action in 
the various members according to Scripture. Indeed 
this is rarely pretended; for it is argued that in 
former days in the Church there were miracles, and 
apostles, and so on, but that all is changed now; so 
that these Scriptures are practically obsolete. Thus, 
when these people talk of the Holy Ghost, mostly they 
mean such great powers and wonderful officers as 
once existed; but as for a divine person for the first 
time deigning to come down and to be present on 
earth, and to act in the midst of the assembled saints 
of God,—the assembly that comes together to worship 
the Lord, and take His supper, or any other of the acts 
of Christian worship or edification, it is not believed. 
And the proof that it is not believed is, that every 
arrangement is made by man to take care that the 
machinery shall work just as if He were not there. 
They -hope that God will bless the means used, will 
work by the instruments they arbitrarily set up; but 
the object is to make all things go on thoroughly well 
to the evident ignoring of His own personal presence 
there. Now no man would act thus who had the 
thought even of an august human personage present. 
This would cause a change of tone. There would bea 
line of conduct entirely different from ordinary habits. 


{ 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 111 


No man would walk about his house so much at ease if 
he knew that the King was there; at least I should 
not admire the man who would, he would seem to 
me uncommonly full of himself. At the same time it 
is evident, that if there was the sense of a divine person 
present, all reverence, all the sense of His love, all that 
could be done to be subject to His direction there, 
would be the simple expression of one’s faith. 
Therefore it is, I feel, that owing so much as we do to 
the Lord, we need look well to it when we come together, 
that we act as those who believe in the presence of tha 
Holy Ghost. Let us try our ways and deportments. 
Even small things betray how far we have faith in His 
real presence. Still more let us take heed if we venture 
on a hymn, or pray, or say a word, or whatever the act 
may be. The Lord grant that we may not bring into 
disrepute that precious truth which He has given to 
our souls! I am persuaded that no attacks, no re- 
proaches from without, no persecution of enemies, no 
detraction of false brethren, no scorn of the world, can 
ever cast down those who have faith in the presence of 
the Holy Ghost. But of this I am equally sure, that 
our own practical unbelief, our delinquencies, our fre- 
quent grievous shortcomings, may and do open the door 
for the enemy; and these things more than any other 
circumstances are used of Satan to stumble such as are 
looking on in the present agitated and chaotic state of 
Christendom, anxiously looking out here and there to 
find some haven of rest in the midst of their trouble. 
And I do strongly press it on my brethren—for we all 
have a part, and, I do believe, not brothers only, but 
sisters also. I beseech them then to remember to what 
a place of dignity and responsibility they are called. 


h Ae THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Let them look well to it that their spirit, their very 
looks, their behaviour, their words, if indeed they do 
Say anything, may never be inconsistent with faith in 
the presence of the Holy Ghost. 

A very few words before I close on the other two 
chapters. The end of chapter xv. presents the Holy 
Ghost, the Comforter, in a slightly different way from 
chapter xiv. “When the Comforter is come’ —again I 
call your attention to the strong impression that it is a 
personal Being who comes—* When the Comforter is 
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, 
even the Spirit of truth, which proceedeth from the 
Father, he shall testify of me; and ye also shall bear 
witness, because ye have been with me from the begin- 
ning.” The particular point that I apprehend is taught 
here is this—the heavenly character of the Holy Ghost’s 
testimony. In chap. xiv. the Spirit brings to remem- 
brance what Jesus said; in chap. xv. He testifies of 
Christ Himself, and they testify because they have 
been with Him from the beginning. What the disci- 
ples saw, when they were with Him from the beginning, 
was, of course, the earthly side, and the Holy Ghost 
comes and gives His heavenly supplement. Thus, it is 
the Holy Ghost who comes from heaven, who knows 
the place and, the glory of Christ, and who is sent 
expressly, not merely to help them in the remembrance 
of what they saw and heard upon earth, but to bring 
down, for the knowledge and joy of their souls, what 
He alone could tell them of the heavenly glory of 
Christ. In a word, therefore, we have the Holy Ghost 
here regarded as the bringer of fresh knowledge—of a 
new and heavenly testimony of Christ, they, of course, 
not losing the previous earthly testimony, in which the’ 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 2S 


Holy Ghost indeed also strengthened them to bear 
witness of Christ. 
In chap. xvi. we have still more advance as to the 
Spirit of God. Our Lord had told them in chap. xiv., 
that instead of sorrowing because He was going away, 
they ought to rejoice; a word of wondrous grace, be- 
cause it shows how highly the Lord thinks of our love, 
and how He counts upon our unselfish delight in His 
own blessedness and glory. Surely it was a blessed 
transition for Him to step from the deepest sorrows 
and sufferings of the cross into the presence of God 
the Father in heaven! No wonder, therefore, that the 
Lord counts on their sense of all, and that they would 
rejoice because He was going to the F ather, though a 
great loss in itself to them. But now He takes up the 
other side, and says they ought to rejoice for them- 
selves, too, as it were. Sorrow had filled their heart ; 
He says, “ Nevertheless, I tell you the truth; It is ex- 
pedient for you that I go away.” Chapter xiv. says it 
is expedient for Him; the sixteenth chapter shows it 
is expedient for them; and for this reason, that if He 
did not go, the Comforter would not come— clearly 
proving what has been already stated, that there is a 
necessary absence of Christ from the earth in heaven in 
order for the Holy Ghost to descend. “If I go not away, 
_ the Comforter will not come; but if I depart, I will send 
him unto you.” Thus, we find the personal mission of 
the Holy Ghost, though in different connections, common 

to all these chapters. “And when he is come, he will 
-Yreprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judg- 
ment.” Here we have, first of all, His relation to the 
world. The Holy Ghost, in most important respects, 
takes the place of the law. In the dealings with Israel 

I 


114 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


the law was the great reprover; now it is the Holy 
Ghost, who, instead of being limited to a particular 
people, is come to reprove the world, no matter where, 
no matter in what state; it might be moral, or religious, 
or zealous for the law; but He reproves the world of 
sin—not merely of sins, but “of sin.” It is the state 
here below of sin. Again, He convinces them, it is 
added, “of righteousness and of judgment.” “Of sin”— 
not because they broke the law, but—*because they 
believe not on me; of righteousness”—not because I 
have kept the law for their righteousness, but—“ because 
I go to my Father, and ye see me no more.” kight- 
eousness now is inseparable from Christ; He is the 
only righteousness that is valid for a soul in the sight 
of God. One does not speak of what may be of social 
worth, what has its place on earth, or among men here 


below—all this, of course, has its proper place; but — 


now eternity Comes into view, and accordingly Christ 
is the only life, or way of life. Hence, not to believe 
in Him is fatal, no matter what else there may be. So, 
again, no matter what apparent righteousness there 
may be, there is no other righteousness at all for God. 
And even so it is not as displayed here below, but 
Christ glorified at the right hand of God the Father. 


This is righteousness, that the Father had put the — 


earth-rejected Christ there. In Christ, who Himself 
receives honour from the Father on high, do we find 


the righteousness we are made by grace. (See 2 Cor. v.) 


Then there is another and very solemn addition to 


the verse—“and ye see me no more.’ The world has— 
lost Christ. He came, and this not to judge, but to 
bring in blessing. He had all power, and could have 
introduced the kingdom, as far as His power and glory. 


: 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 115 


were concerned. But the state of the world in rela- 
tion to God was such, that to have done so would have 
slighted sin, and slurred over the glory of God that had 
been totally compromised. Therefore, in point of fact, 
although the Messiah came, and there was no defect in 
Him—although man was responsible to receive Him, 
nevertheless, man being guilty before God, it was quite 
impossible, morally, that the kingdom could be estab- 
lished then. It would have been a denial of man’s 
ruin and of God’s glory, and neither could be on the 
part of Jesus. Therefore it is that Jesus never presents 
Himself, as has been observed in this gospel, as the 
Christ. Others may so speak of Him, but He never 
speaks of Himself as Messiah (save as acknowledging 
the truth when it was confessed); and for this simple 
reason,—in the gospel of John He has ever the con- 
sciousness of being a rejected Christ, yet withal God 
Himself, the Son. Hence, therefore, although He may 
be on earth, and accomplish prophecy, and others call 
Him Christ, the Son of David, and so on, yet He styles 
Himself the Son of man, who, in His own glory, is the 
only-begotten Son of God. There is everywhere the 
calm distinct sense of His own personal glory, which no 
rejection or shame could possibly interfere with for 
a moment. Accordingly our characteristic and pro- 
per blessings are built upon His rejected but most 
glorious person (see Matt. Xv1.), and are the answer to 
His glory as the exalted man in the resurrection power 
of the Son of God. 

Thus, then, the Spirit of God takes a function at this 
present time towards the world, suitable to Him to whom 
He bears witness, making the Scriptures, as it were, the 
text on which He preaches of Christ. The world accord- 

7.2 


al 


116 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


ingly, not believing in Christ, is convicted of sin; and 
such, too, is His demonstration of righteousness and 
judgment. The righteousness is out of sight, and so 
slighted ; the judgment, too, is not executed here below, 
where the world has its own way; but the cross as 
well as exaltation of Christ is the standing proof that 
the prince of this world is judged in God’s sight. This 
world, as such, has never been worth a believing man’s 
heed since the cross of Christ. Up to that time there 
had been long and gracious patience on God’s part: 
since then God regards it as His enemy ; it is what the 
intelligent saint knows to be the deadly enemy to God; 
and just as flesh found its character, so the world also; 
both were decided by the cross of Christ. To she 
world the Spirit keeps up this testimony; and how? 
Not according to the doctrine which supposes all the 
world to have the Spirit, but by the express contrary, 
by being outside the world. If the world believed in 
Christ, the Holy Ghost would dwell there; but, being 
unbelieving, the Holy Ghost is outside it; and conse- 
quently He is a reprover of the world, and not one 
who dwells in it as a Paraclete. Such alone He is 
among the saints of God. 

Accordingly another point follows—how the Spirit 
deals with the disciples. This, being wholly different, 
is described in a new manner: “I have yet many things 
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. How- 
beit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide 
you into all truth.” The Holy Ghost will bring all 
things to remembrance. It is not merely testifying to 
Christ in His heavenly glory, but now there is no limit; 
it is Himself personally come, with and in the saints, 
as we saw. Accordingly He leads them into all truth. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. Py 


Here Christ says, “He shall not speak of himself.” 
Bear in mind, this does not mean that the Spirit shall 
never speak about Himself. I suppose there are many 
who imagine such to be the meaning of the clause ; 
but I must assure them that they are mistaken. The 
Holy Ghost speaks a great deal about Himself in the 
epistle to the Romans, in the epistles to the Corinthians, 
in the Ephesians, in the Galatians. I may say, that in 
almost all the epistles the Holy Ghost gives us a vast 
deal of instruction about Himself. This, then, is not 
the meaning at all, but that He does not speak from 
His own independent authority. He is acting in com- 
munion with the Father, and for the purpose of glori- 
fying the Son. Accordingly this is what evidently falls 
in with the context—“ He shall not speak of for, from] 
himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he 
speak.” He comes down to do honour to Christ: what 
He hears from the Father, as well as from the Son, this 
He tells us. He has on earth been pleased to take, if 
we may so say reverentially, a place subject to this 
design; even as the Son took a place here below subject 
to the Father. The Son was divine equally with the 
Father; nevertheless, He came simply to do His will 
as a servant on earth. So the Holy Ghost deigns now 
to be the servant of the Father’s purposes and the 
Son’s glory, even as the Son was the minister of the 
Father before. 

Hence it is said, “ Whatsoever he shall hear, that 
shall he speak: and he will show you things to 
come.’ Nor is it merely to lead us into all the truth 
that Jesus had revealed before. There were things we 
could not then bear. Also, He speaks of “things to 
come”—an important word for souls that despise God’s 


118 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


revelations of the future. It is not, I apprehend, merely 
that we have the revealed word of God, but, by virtue 
of His revelation now complete, and having the Holy 
Ghost Himself in us, the Church ought to be the inter- 
preter of everything around in this world. There is 
nothing that the believer is not now competent by the 
Holy Ghost to understand, if he only use the word of 
God in the power of the Spirit. The Christian has, in 
a certain sense, a prophetic as well as a priestly place. 
He is called to discern the times; he may read what 
passes in the world, and ought to do it. His senses, 
no doubt, may not be exercised to discern good and 
evil; and so he may be dull of hearing, as the apostle 
reproached the Hebrews; but I speak now of what, by 
virtue of the Holy Ghost, we are regarded here as 
competent for. 

“ He shall glorify me,” says the Lord. Here we find 
the prime object now made most apparent,—whether 
it be revealing the truth, speaking what He hears, or 
showing things to come; this is the centre around 
which, so to speak, all His offices and His functions 
find their full operation. “He shall glorify me: for 
he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you.” 
For this and other reasons, I believe, it is that we never 
hear, as far as I know, of the government or rule of 
the Holy Ghost. Among some it is a common expres- 
sion, and commoner among intelligent Christians than 
any others; but I do not think the better of it for this. 


The fact is, we cannot coin or consecrate a phrase for. — 


the truth. The acknowledgment of the presence of 


j 


the Holy Ghost is a truth of the gravest character; but 
presence and sovereign operations are not the same 
thing as rule. I believe I am subject to Scripture in 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 119 


this, as I certainly desire to speak also with all worthy 
respect of those whose language in this does not to my 
mind agree with the word of God. But I may observe 
that the reason seems to be, that the Spirit is making 
good the lordship of Christ: He is exalting Him, not 
glorifying Himself. Hence it is that the Spirit of God 
is never presented as ruling the Church. It is perfectly 
clear and sure He is the person who acts sovereignly. 
This I admit, and hold unqualifiedly; but when you 
speak of “government,” you assert something else, 
which does seem to me not according to the exactness 
of truth, and which tends to displace the Lord from 
His rightful position, and to disorder the relation of 
the saints towards the Lord. The rejected Jesus is the 
one Lord in the official sense (for in another the Father 
and Spirit are, as being God). The Holy Ghost is pre- 
sent to maintain this, the will and truth of God. Hence 
He acts in the midst of the saints to exalt Christ before 
our eyes. The Spirit works in and with and by us; 
but the Lord Jesus is our Lord, and is so revealed of 
the Spirit to us, who, therefore, puts us in the position 
of subjection to Him. He has taken the place of glori- 
fying Christ now, and imprints the character of His 
bondmen on us. 

However, this is only by the way. My main object 
to-night is to leave the distinct, and, I trust, full im- 
pression that these words of the Saviour are intended 
to let fall on the heart, of the personal presence of the 
Holy Ghost sent down from Jesus Christ at the right 
hand of God the Father. May this precious truth not 
merely have increasingly a place in our hearts as indi- 
viduals, but more than ever be prized in the assemblies 
of God on earth. The Lord keep a single soul from 


120 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


abandoning that truth, no matter what the difficulty, 
as well as from practically acknowledging any assembly 
where the Holy Ghost is not allowed His due place 
according to Scripture. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. yd | 


Lecture TT, 


JOHN xx.’ 17-23. 


Ir there is no part of Scripture, perhaps, which has 
not suffered from being dislocated from its context, 
there are few portions which have been injured more 
by this unnatural divorce than the one which I have 
just read. It is impossible to enter into the force of 
the particular communications, the dealing of the Lord 
with Mary Magdalene, and the words of the Lord as 
well as His acts on the same day at even, unless we 
bear in mind that it is in the strictest connection with 
His resurrection from the dead, and this, too, as the Son 
of God. It is by raising dead men that He is defined 
as such. (Rom. i. 4.) This emphatically is the view 
the Holy Ghost takes of Him in this chapter—not as 
raising others, but as rising Himself. The perfect ease 
of the circumstances, the undisturbed clothes laid not 
confusedly but in their due order, the napkin that was 
about His head in one place, the rest of the linen gar- 
ments in another,—these were the evidence to any one, 
who looked upon them with the least discerning eye, 
that all was done as peacefully, whatever the glory of 
it, as when a man rises from the bed on which he has 
spent a night of rest. In truth, it was the Son of God 
that had accomplished that work of grace on which He 
had been sent of the Father. It was not merely as an 
object of God’s power raised from the dead. This is 


y Ie THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


true in its place and season, and elsewhere enforced. 
God did raise Him from the dead; and Paul and Peter 
insist on it distinctly. But it is also true that He 
Himself arose from the dead. “ Destroy this temple,” 
says He, even in an early part of this gospel, “and in 
three days J will raise it up.” “I have power,’ He 
says again, in chapter x., “to lay down my life, and 
power to take it again.” At the same time, He takes 
care to add, “This commandment have I received of my 
Father.” Thus there was not only the perfect blending 
of obedience to His Father, but the divine power which 
determined Him to be Son of God by such a resurrec- 
tion. There was the very same power, only put forth 
still more blessedly, in which He had raised the dead 
Himself, as for instance, Jairus’s daughter, the widow’s 
son, Lazarus, and others. As He said, looking on to Laza- 
rus, “This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory 
of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.” 

So now He raises Himself. But even Peter and John 
(and the latter is the one who records it) show how 
feebly the truth of His resurrection, according to the 
Scripture, at first penetrated their minds. John tells 
it, albeit to his own shame and Peter’s too, that they 
saw and believed. They were true children of God, as 
we know; nevertheless they had but poorly entered 
into the revealed mind of God. They had not appre- 
hended the “must be” of the Scriptures (Luke xxiv. 
44-46) ; neither had they yet beheld the grace or the 
glory of God in the person of the Son of God as alone 
adequately expressed in His resurrection. They saw 
the facts; they discerned the evidences; and they re- 
turned tay their own home; for such is ‘ib powerless 
result, even where such faint are weighed by the mere 


———— se 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 125 


human spirit, however just the conclusion that may be 
drawn. 

It was not so with Mary. She might be as little 
acquainted with the glory of the resurrection, or the 
word of God about it, as Peter or John; but at all 
events there was an answer to her heart’s wants in 
Jesus; and, consequently, there was such a sorrow 
within, that she could not but hang over the place 
where His body had lain: she could not be contented 
so easily as the two apostles. In point of fact, there 
was no home for her in this world, and therefore it was 
that she lingered over the empty tomb of the Saviour. 
And what brings out, too, the perfect absorption of her 
spirit in her thoughts and love of Jesus was this, that 
when she looks again into that tomb which she had 
known to be empty just before (for so she had brought 
the word, and truly), and now sees two angels in white 
sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, 
where the body of Jesus had lain, she feels and mani- 
fests no such alarm as the women described elsewhere. 
Under ordinary circumstances, what surprise and fear 
such a sight must have been to her! Our evangelist 
attributes to her no such emotion in the smallest 
degree. Her heart was so possessed’ with the want of 
Jesus who was taken from her, that the presence of all 
the angels, I may say, would have left her compara- 
tively unaffected. The two angels who were there say, 
“Woman, why weepest thou?” And she tells out the 
feeling of her heart—“ Because they have taken’: away 
my Lord, and I know not where they have lain him. 
And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, 
and saw Jesus.” But at first, not recognising the 
Master, and thinking it was but the gardener, she 


124 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


answers His question too: “Sir, if thou hast borne 
him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I 
will take him away.” One word breaks the spell, 
recalls her to the truth, and reveals Himself. It was 
His voice, the Good Shepherd’s, calling His own sheep 
by name. “Mary,” says Jesus. She, at once turning 
herself towards Him, confesses Him her “Master ;” 
and then it is that we have the words on which I 
propose first to dwell a little. 

Let me observe that “Touch me not” is not by any 
means an adequate rendering of the expression; and 
inasmuch as I am addressing those who are familiarly 
acquainted with the Scriptures, and among them many 
individuals who, I presume, have more or less the power 
and means of judging what I say, I feel the more free 
to speak out plainly that which I believe to be the 
truth. The fact is, that the word which is employed 
here implies much more than simply a touch. It is 
the verb which should be translated “handle.” So, too, 
it should be in Colossians ii., to which I call your atten- 
tion for a moment. The apostle refers to the contrast 
between the dictates of tradition and ordinance and a 
dead and risen Christ, for the purpose of putting aside 
what only diverts from Christ. We have done with such 
language as “touch not, taste not, handle not,” which 
may suit men alive in the world, not those dead in the 
Christ. But, as every one knows who has considered at 
all the matter, the climax is really inverted in our com- 
mon English Bible. The order appears in a way exactly 
contrary to the truth; for the real thought is, first of 
all, “handle not;” then, “taste not;” and finally, not 
even “touch.” Thus, it is a descending climax, if I 
may so say, the most familiar thing of all, the hand- 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 125 


ling, being put first; then the tasting, which might be 
considerably less; and, finally, not even a touch. This 
is the manner of human safeguards; this is man’s way 
of preserving flesh in this world. He has no other 
means. What device but this can nature adopt to keep 
itself from being overwhelmed in an evil world,—what 
but these various restraints and negations of evil? 
Christianity is of a totally different nature. It is the 
revelation of a Deliverer, God and man in one person, 
who comes into the world, and dies to the evil in atone- 
ment, wins the victory over all, and rises victorious into 
the presence of God, where He eventually brings all 
that are His. This associates the Christian with Christ 
on the foundation of His work of reconciliation to 
God, and His triumph at the right hand of God. Thus 
Christianity is the practical carrying out of this into 
effect by the Holy Ghost first in the souls of Chris- 
tians, as by-and-by in their bodies also. And _ this 
manifestly is the great doctrine of the epistle to the 
Colossians as well as of Ephesians. What had those 
thus blessed with Christ and dead to the world to do 
with such ordinances as “handle not, taste not, touch 
not” ? 

That this account of the word is correct I have 
no doubt whatever, as indeed it is one that would 
not be disputed by any who are competent to judge of 
such a matter. It is, of course, entirely apart from any 
views that might be considered by adversaries to be 
peculiar (though I know not why such sounds should 
be heard: I cannot on any account admit that a fair 
interpretation of God’s word should be treated as a 
peculiar view). I hope it will not be regarded as a 
question of the number of those who really accept it. 


126 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


But however this may be, what I am now saying would 
be, and has been, admitted by persons of the most 
diverse views, provided they really search into and 
examine the matter of which I now treat. If this be 
so, the expression of our Lord to Mary Magdalene is 
not exactly given in “Touch me not.” It is rather, 
“Do not handle.” He tells her not to yield to her 
impulse in familiarly laying hold of His person. What 
confirms it is this, that the particular part of the word 
(un pou drrov, and not merely pi avn) supposes a con- 
tinuous handling of Him. In Colossians it is not SO ; 

there it is a single act, which might be ever so crannienll 
But here it is a continuous act; that is, it biti dte a give 
this force, “Do not persist in altri to me.” Such is 
the idea conveyed by the word and its form here. 

This appears to me to give much more force and 
distinctness to the passage, because Mary of Magdala 
here represents one who is still looking to Jesus accord- 
ing to the hopes of her nation, as well as the desires of 
the heart; one who could not but sorrow over His bodily 
absence, a would have had a mournful pleasure in 
thinking of His dead body even still there. ‘Thus we 
can readily understand the instinct, as it were, with 
which she laid hold of the Saviour directly that she 
knew Him. But at once He forbids it; and this is the 
more striking, because, as has been often remarked, in 
the gospel of Matthew, when the Galilean women seized 
His feet, He does not refuse it from them, but, on the 
contrary, accepted their homage. Nay, more, in this 
very chapter of John, we see how the Lord invites 
incredulous Thomas eight days after to reach his fingers, 
and thrust his hand into His side. 

Surely then we cannot fail to learn the weighty 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. Neg 


lesson that is conveyed under actions so various and 
even opposite, performed nearly about the same time, 
the Saviour refusing in the one case what He accepts in 
the other, and in a third even demands. There was 
certainly some wise intent in His mind. Nor is it to be 
allowed for an instant that our Saviour loved Mary 
Magdalene less than the others who followed Him from 
Galilee. To what, then, are we to impute the difference? 
and how are we to account for the fact, that the same 
Holy Ghost should give in Matthew the acceptance of 
bodily homage, and in John this renunciation of it? 
The reason is as simple as it is instructive. In the first 
gospel we have, it is true, the rejection of the Messiah 
by His people the Jews, and the purpose to which God’s 
grace would put that rejection, in meanwhile sending 
out the gospel to the Gentiles, and calling disciples out 
from them all, just because the iiauan nation had 
refused their King. How blessed that God’s grace 
refuses, as it were, to be inactive! It must go forth in 
the energy of His own love, and if the Jews refuse, it 
is impossible that He should not take fresh measures, 
and bring in even better blessings. If the ancient 
people forsook their own mercies, there are others, poor 
and wretched, who had been left comparatively un- 
heeded by His love in times past. If they were so 
unbelieving and ungrateful and blind to the day-spring 
from on high that had visited them, and if they had 
consummated their unbelief in the rejection and death 
of their own Messiah, God, who had turned that very 
rejection into the accomplishment of redemption, sends 
out the glad tidings to all nations under heaven. Yet, 
with all this development of the resources of grace to 
the Gentile, Matthew gives the Galilean women holding 


128 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Jesus risen and worshipping Him. What a testimony, 

that though the Messiah was rejected by the nation, and 

though God would turn that rejection to the account of 
His grace, there is the greatest care taken to maintain the 

hopes of Israel on an immutable foundation. Granted 

that their rejection of the Messiah was their ruin ; but 

was this all? It was righteous; but what would grace do? 

The time was coming when the mercy of God would 

turn their impenitent hearts to Him whom they had 

too long scorned, and so bind their hopes and weld 

them, so to speak, to the throne of the glorious Son of 
man in such a manner, that when the moment came for 

God to judge the world in righteousness, they would be 

received in grace. The chain of divine mercy would be 

found to be so strongly rivetted to the death and resur- 

rection of the Lord, that, though there might be a 

postponement of their hopes, there would be a basis 

never to be shaken, and the grace of God will then’ 
bless them to the full extent of His sovereign purposes 

in the latter day. 

This is to my mind fully intimated, as elsewhere, so 
in Matthew. Hence, the final chapter of this gospel 
furnishes a pledge of this, given not merely in word, as 
in the prediction of chapter xxiv., but in the typical 
worship of chapter xxviii. I believe that the facts 
conveying this are before us in the action already 
alluded to. The Galilean women are a kind of fore- 
shadowing of a remnant of the Jews, who in the latter 
day will be brought by grace and cling to Jesus, will 
seek and find in Him the Lord, will look for Him and 
cleave to Him. Nor will the Lord reject their worship, 
the form of it too implying His actual and bodily pre- 
sence, after He comes again and meets with His chosen 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 129 


people. The Jew, as such, is hardly called on to “walk 
by faith, and not by sight,” as a Christian is. For he will 
literally see the Lord; as it is said in Zech. xii., “ They 
Shall look upon him whom they have pierced.” But 
they shall look upon Him. It is not merely believing ; 
they shall look upon Him. Accordingly, the fact of 
these Galilean women receiving the Lord and thus 
holding Him fast, and of His accepting their worship, 
cannot but bring before us, in my judgment, the pledge 
of the Lord’s great mercy towards a remnant of the 
ancient people in the latter day, when He shall ap- 
pear to reign over them here below. And for this rea- 
son it is, as I suppose, that there is no ascension scene 
described—a great perplexity to critics, but as plain as 
possible to the believer. His ascension inserted here 
would have taken Him out-of this connection, whereas, 
on the contrary, the having Him here bodily in their 
midst, and not a word said in the chapter about His 
departure to heaven, leaves Him to be, as it were, the 
everlasting joy of those whose affliction He will have 
visited and banished in His mercy. But in John xx. 
we have exactly the converse of this. We have a 
woman who was fully imbued with Israelitish feelings, 
who evidences still a clinging to these expectations, 
which the Jewish heart would naturally indulge in now 
that Christ had reappeared from the grave, and with the 
more keenness, because the cross and the grave had for 
a season deprived her of all hope. She accordingly was 
not for letting Christ go. In this instinctive love she 
lays hold of Him, but He bids her not thus to cling to 
Him ; “for I am not yet ascended to my Father.” It is 
otherwise He is going to be known. He is about to quit 

the only scene which the remnant of Israel would connect 
K 


130 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


with the Messiah. That hope would not fade, but bloom 
in its own time and place. But now He was taking a 
remnant out of Israel. In point of fact, it was thus 
that Christianity began. “The Lord,” it is said, “ added 
to the Church daily such as should be saved.” 

Mary Magdalene was a kind of sample of this. She 
was one that up to this time had been cleaving to the 
hope that the Lord would come and bring in glory and 
blessing here on earth in the midst of Israel. But the 
Lord let her know that that is not the way in which He 
is pleased to bless now, nor is this the sort of blessing 
that this gospel reveals. The way in which He was to 
be known by the Christian is as ascended to His Father. 
Therefore it was unseasonable to think of keeping Him 
here. Even if it could be, how far below that which 
He had in His heart and was now intimating to the 
disciples through the astonished woman of Magdala! 
So far from being more distant from the saints, on 
the contrary, there 1s no such nearness as when we 
are united to Jesus at the right hand of God. This 
may seein to be a strange method of effecting union. 
It is anything but mecting the thoughts of flesh; but, 
in point of fact, flesh is not the means nor the manner 
of our association with the Saviour. If we look at 
Israel, it is thus after the flesh; for He was born of 
them, being a Jew naturally by descent and birth. It 
is not thus the Christian knows Him, but expressly in 
contrast with it; as St. Paul says, “Though we have 
known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know 
we him no more.” After a far better sort do we know 
Him. To know Him here below, the Messiah, was true 
blessedness ; and Christ gave in the case of the Gali- 
lean woman a pledge of this as it will be accomplished 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. LOE 


in a day still future. But it is not, for all that, the 
pattern of the knowledge of Christ that is found in 
Christianity. 

The essence of our privilege is, that when the work of 
redemption is done, Christ takes His place as the hea- 
venly man at the right hand of God. Accordingly, 
Christianity is not merely blessing coming down into 
the earth, though this was perfectly true, as preparing 
the way for itself. But the scene and character of our 
blessing is heavenly—the person of that blessed One 
who came down being now on high ; and we know our 
blessing in Him there. There is nothing more blessed 
as the manifestation of God than the Lord Jesus seen 
here below. But the special position which gives our 
place and association with Him is found only in Him 
on high, after He has done the work of putting away 
our sins, and of vindicating God’s nature to His glory 
about everything that could compromise His nature in 
this world. Christ is now gone up into heaven, and 
there He is revealed to our souls, and there we, too, are 
united with Him. Consequently, as He needs to go on 
high in order to it, go, too, the Holy Ghost needs to 
come down. Hence the presence of the Holy Ghost on 
earth is the necessary answer to the absence of Jesus 
at the right hand of God after redemption ; and these 
two are the great and necessary constituents of Chris- 
tianity. 

Accordingly, then, our Lord in the spirit of this bids 
Mary Magdalene not to be clinging to Him ; for He was 
not yet ascended to His Father. Thus He was now to 
be known. Thus the believers were to be put in 
relationship with Him,—taken out of their old thoughts 
and expectations, and put in connection with the love 
| Ke 


132 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


and glory into which He was just going, even the 
Father’s house on high. 

Let me refer to a scripture in the Old Testament which 
may help to give a little clearness as to the present 
work of God—a scripture, too, which is not always 
understood. If we turn to Micah v., there is the well- 
known passage relative to the birth of our Lord: 
“Thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little 
among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall 
he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; 
whose goings forth have been from of old, from ever- 
lasting.” Here we have His human birth of Israel, as 
well as His eternal glory—One who, though born of a 
woman and a Jew, was, nevertheless, “from of old, 
from everlasting.” 

Who this person is, there is not the smallest difficulty 
in determining. It is the same that is described in the 
first verse. He is the ruler of Israel of whom it was 
said, that they should “smite the judge of Israel with 
a rod upon the cheek.” Clearly it is the humiliation 
of the Messiah—One born in Bethlehem—One be- 
longing to Judah, and who, though here born, was 
nevertheless from everlasting. He was divine as truly 
as He was human. We have evidently thus, in that 
verse, a group of the most weighty and blessed truths 
about Jesus Christ, which no wit of man could ever 
have anticipated, which God in His own absolutely 
perfect knowledge gives beforehand in all simplicity 
and fulness. This is what manifests the gravamen of 
Israel’s guilt; that He being what He is in His own 
person, as well as their Judge, should be smitten, and 
above all by them, with the rod upon the cheek. “ There- 
fore,” it is said in the third verse, “He will give them up.” 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. ros 


This is exactly what has followed. The srnitten J udge 
of Israel has abandoned Israel for a season, “until the 
time that she that travaileth hath brought forth.” In Rey. 
Xil. a woman destined to great glory is seen bringing forth. 
Great is the purpose of God for the last days. This is 
first presented ; then the dragon falls, and the struggle 
for the earth and about the earthly people goes on, when 
the Judge of Israel returns, and the ancient people once 
more resume their place, but thenceforth under their 
Messiah, here below. So here we learn of a return to 
Jewish purposes in the ways of God for the latter day. 
How far have we got in fact? Christ has appeared and 
been rejected by the Jews, whom He has given up. 
From the cross, not only are they given up nationally, but 
God has been calling out from among them a certain 
portion to be united with the Gentiles who believe as 
the body of Christ on high. These are they who are 
said to be added together in Acts ii—*added to the 
Church* daily such as should be saved.” But when the 
moment comes for the accomplishment of God’s future 
and everlasting purposes for Israel on earth, then, says 
He, “the remnant of his brethren [instead of being taken 
out as now to form part of His Church] shall return unto 
the children of Israel.” Now they lose all their Israelitish 
character to form the one new man; then they will go 
back again to the old plans and ways of God about His 
earthly people. Nothing can, to my mind, be plainer 
than the wonderful way in which all truth, old and new, 
harmonizes together. It is just the fruit and proof of 
having got hold of the truth, that it gives us additional 
means of seeing new beauty and order in that which, 


* Or, “together,” if the various reading be preferred to the 


received text. 


134 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


without this fresh knowledge, looks disjointed—an 
immense mass of materials that we have no means 
of rightly assorting. But the moment that God says 
to our souls on any part of His truth, “Let there be 
light,” then, indeed, we find all begins to change; and 
although there may be accessions of light, still God in 
His own glorious way shows us how blessedly the new 
fits into the old. Nor is any one thing so much a key- 
stone as that which seemingly has brought in confusion, 
disruption, and the apparent breach of His purposes. 
But, in point of fact, no purpose ever fails. There may 
be the need of waiting, and long for the longing heart 
seems the delay. Unbelief seems to have it all its own 
way; but faith alone is always right; and every word 
that God has spoken shall be accomplished, every 
purpose infallibly effected, and this by Christ’s death. 

Our Lord here discloses in principle an entirely new 
thing, beginning with the Jew who would feel it most. 
You will observe in the gospel of John how all is 
connected with His person. It is not a question of 
dispensation, but of Himself, and here in ascension. 
Indeed, there is nothing more important to understand, 
after we rest on His redemption, if we would go on to 
enter into Christianity. If you look at anything else, 
the persons connected with it are all comparatively 
insignificant ; but take away Christ out of Christianity, 
and what is left? Besides, will the Holy Ghost put 
His seal on any dishonour done to the Lord Jesus, or 
any omission of His person, any slight of His work, 
any forgetfulness of His glory ? 

Jesus, then, makes first known to Mary that He was 
about to ascend to the Father, and that, therefore, 
bodily homage was inconsistent with the manner in — 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 135 


which He would reveal Himself, as shown in this gos- 
pel. For John’s account, if you look comprehensively 
at his testimony and take a general retrospect, you will 
find to consist of two great parts. The first is the 
revelation of the person of the Son of God, and of His 
work; the next is the revelation of another person, 
equally divine, who, when Christ goes away, takes His 
place with the disciples here below. Evidently in this 
you have Christianity; for you have Christ Himself 
the object of faith, and the Holy Ghost the power for 
making good the glory of Christ in the Church as well 
as in the Christian. 

Of these it is particularly the Christian part which 
we have in the message Mary takes from the Lord to 
the disciples. “Go to my brethren.” Here we find 
the first distinct putting of the Christian in relation to 
Himself. “Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I 
ascend to my Father, and your Father; to my God, 
and your God.” Thus, besides placing us in relation- 
ship to Him (a fact itself of immense value), He 
assigns also their relationship to God. And this is not 
at all according to the ancient forms of blessing. It is 
not the revelation of His might as protecting His poor 
pugrims upon the earth. The Almighty God is no- 
where spoken of. Neither, again, is there His govern- 
mental way in the midst of Israel, where He was the 
Jehovah-God of that people. Here all is in relation to 
Christ, who is going above. Therefore, says he, “Go to 
my brethren, and say, I ascend unto my Father, and 
your Father; to my God, and your God.” How 
blessed! What the Father is to the Son, He is to the 
sons. What He, who was His Father, was as God to 
the blessed Man who had put away sin, such He is, and 


136 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


nothing less, to those whose sins have been put away. 
God was not only revealed fully in relation to Jesus 
as God and Father, but such He is now to us by His 
redemption and in resurrection. 

I do not speak now of any vague knowledge of God 
as fatherly in His ways. We know that when Israel 
shall be in great distress, Isaiah the prophet says for 
them, “Truly thou art our father, if Abraham ac- 
knowledge us not.” This language clearly is in no 
respect intended to describe their relationship, but to 
furnish comfort to them; just as one might say to a 
little ill-used orphan in the street, « My child, you have 
been treated ill indeed; henceforth let me be a father 
to you.” This does not, of course, mean, nor would it be 
understood to mean, in the strict sense, as when there 
follows a formal adoption into a family as son and heir. 
It was only nationally Israel could claim such a place, 
as we see in Exodus iv. &c.; but there is more than 
this here. For One had come down to earth who was 
Son, and knew the Father as none other could know 
Him. One had been here who was on earth, and in 
humanity, as perfectly the object of the Father’s de- 
light as when simply God in His presence. For never 
had He said a word, never felt an emotion, never had a 
thought passing through His breast, or a motive that 
actuated Him, which was not the perfect reflection of 
the goodness of God Himself. Jesus alone answered 
morally in mind, in nature, and in ways, to all that 
was in God; so that He looked down from heaven to 
find that One object ever for Him to delight in. There 
was not a creature in heaven that could detain His eyes 
and heart for an instant. He looked down upon this 
world in the midst of all its sins and iniquities, which 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 137 


were ever steaming pestilent vapour up to heaven, and 
occasionally drawing down blows of stern judgment on 
guilty man. But now, for the first time since the world 
began, there was not merely a catching, as it were, some 
distant gleam of His glory, and God delighting in an 
Enoch or a Noah, onward to that blessed One; but 
there He was Himself, so that heaven opens and God 
the Father sends down the Holy Ghost, and, mark, on 
Him as man; for how can it be otherwise? It was not 
a question of sending down the Holy Ghost on Him as 
God; as man He was anointed of the Holy Ghost. 
“Him hath God the Father sealed” —* the Son of man.” 
And this is what is so blessed, that God Himself had to 
look upon a man to find what for the first time met 
His every judgment and every feeling—all the moral 
mind of God—all the affections of God. Of course I 
speak now figuratively alone. 

And now over the Blessed One had passed an im- 
mense change. A new scene is found, and the heavens 
are veiled in blackness, and God Himself within that 
thickest darkness deals with Him. Jt was the very 
hour when man was permitted, led on by the instiga- 
tion of Satan, to rise up and overwhelm the rejected 
Messiah; and in the midst of that scene God breaks 
forth Baunast sin (charged on His holy person as an 
offering for it) in all His majesty and absolute abhor- 
rence of evil. The dread reckoning time was come. 
The divine judgment of all iniquity and indifference, of 
wrongs against man, and of rebellion against God, fell 
on the Holy One. Thus it was not simply man’s hour, 
nor was it only the power of darkness; but also and 
above all it was God’s hour, when His unsparing 
holiness broke on the head of the Sin-bearer, even His 


138 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


own Son, who gave Himself up, the responsible victim, 
the sacrifice, to bear the judgment of our sins on the 
tree. The consequence was, that all that God could 
feel, without a single mitigating circumstance to break 
the force, so to speak, of His wrath and indignation, 
spent itself on the Son of God; and therefore is this 
redemption through His blood absolutely perfect. God 
has not a single word to say more—not an act 
further needed to vindicate His character, that has not 
already fallen on the Lord Jesus Christ. Hence it is 
that the revelation of God’s nature, and of the Father’s 
love, has no reserve. The holy character of God has 
kept back nothing. All that He feels against sin has 
been expended on the Lord Jesus. The consequence is, 
that everything that is in Him, as Father and as God, 
now turns to be exclusively in our favour. For our evil 
having been so perfectly judged, it is a question now 
for God, not merely as Father, but as God, to show His 
perfect satisfaction in the redemption that the Lord 
Jesus has accomplished. 

Hence it is that our Lord Jesus speaks thus in the 
message to the disciples. They had known Him turn 
to His Father when there was not a single person that 
could sympathize with His sorrows, even while the 
Man of Sorrows in this world, and not yet atoning for 
sin. They had known how before day-break He was 
with His Father. They had known, too, how, when 
others slept, He was still before His Father. They had 
known that not a single burden which met His eye, 
not a single grief of men that passed before Him, but 
entered His heart here below, and led him ont towards 
His Father. (Matt. viii.) But another and deeper 
thing came out now—what God felt against our sins 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 139 


imputed to Him, not against Himself; for, on the con- 
trary, He never was more the object of God’s ineffable 
delight than at that very moment when He was bearing 
the judgment of our sins. Nevertheless, God’s cha- 
racter was concerned that it should be no make-believe 
suffering, but as real an endurance of divine judgment 
on His part who entered that place before God and in 
behalf of us, as before it was a real enjoyment of abso- 
lute communion with the Father through all His life. 

It may thus be seen how blessed is that which we 
have in the message by Mary. What He knew as Son 
of God, born into the world, He turns over, as it 
were, to us. It is not, of course, that we could have 
that which pertained to Him as a divine person. He is 
and was the only-begotten Son before all worlds, There 
clearly we could have no place along with Him, because 
in this He is to us simply an object of worship and 
loving service. But He, the Son before all worlds, 
was born Son of God. He was Son of God as man 
here below, and this among men it is the province 
of the evangelist Luke to trace. Alas! I, on the con- 
trary, was a child of wrath, and so were you. We 
were every one children of wrath naturally. He was 
in His human nature, as well as in His divine, Son of 
God. “That holy thing which shall be born of thee 
shall be called the Son of God.” 

With man as he is, there was no communion possible 
for God. On the contrary, there was an absolute con- 
trariety between Him and man in relation to God. 
His relationship was one of perfect delight to God 
the Father. Man, being a sinner, was in a condition 
of evil and wrath. But redemption delivers him that 
believes from all the evil and all the wrath. If it has 


140 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


not done this and more, how is it possible to trust the 
word of God? Where is the meaning of its constant 
and solemn warnings to faith? If it has thus testified 
to me of the cross, does my soul rest upon it? Am I 
satisfied on God’s authority that in His sight there is 
no evil left on me as a believer in Christ—that it is all 
blotted out and gone? I do not speak of it as a matter 
of experience. Of course, all who have a conscience feel 
their evil, and we feel it the more because we are 
believers. We must detest sin the more, the more we 
know His love. We should judge all sin precisely 
because we are not going to be judged for it: if we were 
judged, we must be lost for it. Thus, what Christ has 
done puts us who believe in the position of judging it 
now. The Christian is responsible to pass, so to speak, 
God’s sentence upon it now; in ourselves, of course, 
especially, but also when we come across it in those 
who bear the name of Christ with whom we are united 
as members of His one body. If evil be detestable 
anywhere, it is especially so in the child of God. Now 
this is precisely where we need the comfort of redemp- 
tion and the power of the Spirit. 

Accordingly we have to weigh what the Saviour here 
intimates. It is not merely remission of sins, nor is it 
only that we are born of God. There are a great many 
Christians who seem never to get beyond a certain 
measure of blessing, the least which consists with 
living to God at all. But they seem never to appre- 
hend the new relationships of the grace in which they 
stand. The basis and form of these relationships, both 
with God and Himself, we have seen in the previous 
message. “Tell my brethren, I ascend unto my Father, 
and your Father; to my God, and your God.” Thus I 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 14] 


can look up as one that Jesus is not ashamed to call 
His brother. I can look up and see His Father and 
mine, His God and mine, with the absolute certainty 
that I am thus brought to Himself in all the value and 
nearness of Jesus, and that the work He has finished 
and God has accepted is the moral ground of my salva- 
tion and blessing. To this work God, so to speak, is 
how in His grace to us doing justice. Is it too much 
to say decidedly that justice would not be done to that 
infinite work of the cross, unless He so accounted us 
according to the words of Jesus ? Indeed, this was no 
hard-wrung return; for it is what God Himself designed. 
He desired to have objects that should enter into His 
love; and more than this, to have these relationships, 
and none less established. He had beheld the Son a 
man on earth; and now He says, as it were, “TI must 
have sons; I must have souls, once sinners, made 
children to myself. I hada people once; and they, spite 
of untold goodness, were as wretched and shameful as 
sin could make any; but now I will form to myself, as a 
new people, a family not of the world, even while in it.” 

This is what God is now occupied with in His love 
through Christ the Lord—the freshly -accomplished 
work of the cross, and the resurrection of which it is 
the occasion. But these are the relationships in which 
those called are to stand. Jesus owns them as His 
brethren, and this after His death and resurrection. 
Why not His brethren when He was here below ? 
Why is it that rationalism, why is it that legal reli- 
gionism, opposed as they may seem, always make our 
relationship to be with Jesus here below? F or this 
simple reason, that, whether it be religionism or 
rationalism, they know not God, and judge not sin 


142 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


according to the truth. They talk much about both, 
no doubt; but we know there may be a great deal said 
without the reality; whereas all thoughts of God and 
of sin are totally short of the truth until I bow to 
God’s judgment of sin in the cross. Therefore it is 
that the only thing that makes it possible to have holy 
relationships with God according to His mind, is that 
foundation which is laid in the cross of Christ. 

See this in the case of that system known as Irving- 
ism, if I may refer to such a thing, and it may be 
wholesome in such days as these. It is not its frenzied 
movements, its false prophecies, its ecclesiastical idolatry, 
that ought to be so grievous to the child of God, though 
I need not say how pained one should be at all these 
things in those bearing the name of Jesus. But what 
is it that makes it so evil? Why, first and foremost, 
this—the dishonour done to the person of Christ in 
order to make out union and sympathy with us. We 
being sinful, and having actually sinned, it was sup- 
posed, in order to make Christ united to us, that Christ 
must take our humanity in the fallen peccable state in 
which it is in us. Such was Irving’s fundamental tenet ; 
and this, as it sacrificed Christ, so made redemption 
impossible. The direct consequence, apart from such 
ruinous heterodoxy, was the abandonment of God's 
judgment of sin on the cross as the basis of salvation. 
Incarnation takes the place of atonement. Jesus here 
below in this world was looked at as united with us, 
instead of seeing us united with Him in heaven, which 
alone is Christianity, consequent on the putting away 
of sin by His sacrifice. 

To confound incarnation with union is confusion, and 
a device of the enemy. Nor is it found merely in a 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 143 


system so extravagant as Irvingism; but in all sacer- 
dotalism, Puseyism, “ Ritualism,” or whatever persons 
may choose to call the system of earthly ordinances 
and priesthood, which is not confined to any one par- 
ticular section or country either, but spreads everywhere, 
and will, I doubt not, lead to the final catastrophe of 
Babylon. What, then, is the object of their regarding 
our union with Christ to be His incarnation ? Why is 
it that they should make His birth to be the great pivot 
which determines our relationship? For this simple 
reason, that, when Jesus was here below, He was under 
the law. He owned the temple, and went up to the 
feasts, and owned sacrifices, and priests, and people. 
Just so; those who uphold the systems I am speaking 
of want Christians, or the world at least, to own 
temples, sacrifices, feasts, fasts, priests, and people, in 
the present day. It is Judaism revived. They depart 
from the truth of Scripture, and go back to the begearly 
elements of the world, which prefigured Christ indeed, 
but are now nailed to the cross 3; yet do they imagine 
that this resuscitated round of figures and shadows is 
Christian worship, and that the state before the cross 
is the way in which the Christian is united with Christ. 

Scripture invariably founds our link with our glorified 
Head on His death, resurrection, and ascension. Thus, 
union with Christ is in no way a connection of flesh, 
but of spirit. “He that is joined to the Lord is one 
spirit.” Far from being a question of “one flesh,” this 
very Scripture puts it in contrast with anything of the 
sort. “One flesh” has got a very bad character in that 
chapter. In point of fact, the Lord’s association in 
flesh was with Israel, not with us. His incarnation 
had also the deepest significance and most weighty 


144 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


ends; but union, the union with Christ as the body of 
our head, is never represented as its fruit. If Christ 
had not taken flesh, doubtless there could have been no 
union; but Scripture teaches that our union follows 
redemption, and consists in our being members of His 
body as now exalted in heaven. 

Again, though as real a man as any other, He par- 
took of flesh and blood in a different condition from 
that of any other man. Undoubtedly, He partook of 
it by the miraculous interposition of the Holy Ghost, 
entirely apart from sin—*“ Tempted,” it is said, “in all 
points like as we are, yet without sin.” Not only 
were there no sins, but no s%x. There was no proclivity, 
no inclination, no striving with sin in Christ—all was 
good and holy. JI am thankful that the ordinary creeds 
of Christendom—such as the Athanasian, and so on— 
own this publicly, because, though they be only a 
human bulwark, the mass of men in these lands hear 
so far what is true. They confess that the immaculate 
humanity of the Lord Jesus Christ is of the substance 
and essence of all orthodox faith. 

This, then, was necessary in order to exhibit a perfect 
man and divine person, the Son of God, here below; 
but redemption was accomplished to bring us into His 
relationship, as far as this could be. Nothing less than 
this was proposed and done by redemption. For the 
righteousness of God, which, without the cross, must 
have taken vengeance on us, now righteously puts us, 
as far as possible, in the position of Christ before God. 
How good and wise is our God! How efficacious the 
death and resurrection of Christ, raising believers in 
title (mow enjoyed by the power of the Spirit) to His 
own position as Son of God and risen man! It is not, I~ 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 145 


repeat, that His place of Son, object of eternal worship 
to us, is forgotten, but He gives us to be sons as 
objects of delight and affection in that nearness of 
relation, as contrasted with being simply saints or mem- 
bers of a people with special earthly privileges. This is 
what our Lord Jesus first lays down. 


But there is more than this. The same day at even 
our Lord finds Himself in the midst of His people 
gathered together. And this brings me to the point I 
wish to speak of more particularly to night. The first 
word He utters is peace,—“ Peace be unto you.” Pre- 
cious word! It was not remission of sins simply, blessed 
as this may be, but “ Peace be unto you.” Peace is much 
more than sins forgiven; and “when he had so said, he 
shewed unto them his hands and his side.” He showed 
them that which was the sign and witness of the shed 
blood of His cross, by which He had made peace. 
“Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord.” 
But speaking to them again, He repeats the words, 
“Peace be unto you.” Only this second time, remark, 
it is not now so much personal as prefatory to their 
mission ; for He adds, “ As my Father sent me, even so 
send I you.” Thus the first words of peace would be 
for their own enjoyment, as I conceive. The second 
declaration comes as the introduction to their mission. 
It is this with which they are sent to others. It is there- 
fore repeated to them, that in the renewed strength of 
this peace they may go forth. As the Father sent Him, 
so the Son sends them; for He always speaks as the 
conscious Son of God in communion with the Father. 

But there is a notable sign appended. “When he 
had said this, he breathed on them, and said unto them, 

L 


146 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Receive ye the Holy Ghost.” Probably there are many 
in this place who are not ignorant of the correspondence 
that has been carried on but recently on this very pas- 
sage. It has clearly proved the conflict of opinion, even 
in leaders of the same religious system. Neverthe- 
less, many more now present will be surprised to learn 
the total uncertainty of professing Christian teachers, 
and that they only agree in being all far from the 
mark. You, who are accustomed to read the Scrip- 
tures in faith of God’s teaching by the Holy Ghost 
given to you, will hardly conjecture the aberrations of 
Christian men from the truth. We all know that in 
our day most flatter themselves that there has been a 
great advance in the knowledge of the things of God. 
What means, then, this inability to gather and give out 
with clearness the revealed mind of God in a matter of 
such moment as these words of our Saviour? How is 
it that, now eighteen centuries and more since, one hears 
no better than the crudities of the fathers or the guesses 
of their children ? 

There are two contradicting theories which claim 
to be received: one, that our Lord here establishes a 
kind of sacerdotal authority, by virtue of which those 
whom He then addressed and their successors were 
entitled, in His own name, to give remission of sins to 
every one who confessed his sins duly. I wish to put 
the view as fairly as possible. They all admit, of 
course, that there may be a failure in the conditions, 
and, after all, the remission come to nothing; but still, 
where there is uprightness on man’s part, they hold — 
that the Lord pledges His part through His servants — 
(that is to say, His absolution pronounced by virtue of — 
this commission through certain authorized channels 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 147 


to the end of time). “No,” says the opposite party, 
“nothing of the sort. There is miraculous action here 
supposed. If men now-a-days profess to absolve people 
from their sins, why not cleanse lepers and raise the 
dead? why not perform the other miracles which the 
Lord empowered the disciples to work?” Now does it 
not seem amazing that Christian men should broach 
theories so miserably short of the truth of God as both 
of these? The one seems to me Just as unsatisfactory 
as the other. Even the latter view, which emanates 
from the Evangelical party, really concedes what is 
worst in the former, while it falls into absurdity as well 
as evasion of the truth, by bringing the performance of 
miracles into a passage which alludes to nothing of the 
sort. For it is clear that the argument just spoken 
of assumes that, if men could cleanse lepers and raise 
the dead, they are competent to absolve sins. But I 
deny that it ever was the title of disciples to grant 
such absolution as is contended for. Thus, whether we 
take the Tractarian or the Evangelical theory, it is hard 
to say which is farthest from Scripture. 

Do I then insinuate that the passage has no deter- 
minate meaning? Far from me be such a thought. But 
that which gives a clue to the subject is the Lord’s 
resurrection as here presented. If men knew Christ 
better, and the power of His resurrection, they would 
understand that which is a fruit of it. Hence, ignorance 
of resurrection privileges leaves men, whether on one 
side of the quarrel or another, in gross darkness as to the 
truth which is here revealed. For let it be observed, 
that after our Lord sends the disciples out with peace, 
He breathed on them. I am not aware of any action in 
the Bible to which this can be supposed to refer but 

L 2 


148 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


one; and with this it stands in marked and instructive 
contrast. If we examine Genesis ii., a very striking 
difference on the Lord God’s part appears in forming 
man as compared with any other animal. When He 
made the various beasts, birds, reptiles, &c., each became, 
as it is said, “a living soul” by the simple fact that 
it had been duly organized. But in man’s case it was 
not so. Man was made out of the dust of the earth, as 
we know; but he did not become a living soul by being 
thus fashioned. There was an essential difference be- 
tween man and every other such being then created. 

It is not merely that all the rest of the animal king- 
dom were put under man here below, but he alone had 
his life direct from above. “The Lord God breathed into 
his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living 
soul.” No other animal became a living soul thus. 
Man and man alone enjoyed the breath of the Lord 
God. Such is the true source of the immortality of 
the soul; and this is the reason why man alone stands 
in direct moral responsibility to God, and must give 
account of the things done in the body to that God 
who thus gave his soul and spirit. In the case of a 
beast, though he has a spirit, it goes downward, not to 
God, because God never breathed so into it. The living 
principle of a beast, I mean, perishes, because it is a 
mere question of what is connected by God’s will with 
its material organization. Therefore an irrational ani- 
mal, when it dies, perishes; but in man’s case there is 
a soul and spirit, which abide distinct in origin from 
the body, having a far more intimate connection with 
God Himself. Accordingly, therefore, the soul partakes 
of an immortality which the mere body, alive here 
below in its own nature, does not possess. This was a 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 149 


question of the will of God, but that was a thing which 
indelibly and intrinsically belonged to the soul and 
spirit ; and therefore it is that the body of man will be 
raised up in the resurrection to be reunited to that soul 
and spirit, and so every one of us shall give account of 
himself to God. 

Now the Lord Jesus Christ stands before us, and in 
this gospel alone characteristically unites these two 
characters. He is man, and here He is the risen man ; 
but He is also the Lord God, even as Thomas imme- 
diately after says, “My Lord and my God.” He is 
One who, in His own person, united both divine nature 
and proper manhood, He stands the risen man, “the 
second man,” on the first day of the week, and as the 
quickening or life-giving spirit, He breathes into the 
disciples. That is, it is the Spirit of Christ Jesus risen 
from the dead. It is the Holy Ghost accompanying this 
resurrection life, and the power of it, which the Lord, 
as the Head of a new family, conferred upon the mem- - 
bers of it. They had believed on Him, and had life 
eternal. Now they had life more abundantly. 

Accordingly this is the all-important change that came 
in with the action of our Lord Jesus Christ. I can con- 
ceive persons reasoning upon this subject, and saying, 
“If people get eternal life, I do not see what great 
difference it makes that it should be risen Meter this 
life in resurrection with the Lord Jesus should so 

signally mark it.” Very possibly you do not; but 
allow me to tell you, that full victory differs from 
life struggling with death, life struggling under ordi- 
nances, life struggling with the evil that surrounds it, 
seeking after what is good, though failing, striving to 
avoid what is bad, and constantly drawn someliow or 


150 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


another into it. This is precisely the state of man 
where the delivering power was not. But it was closed 
for the believer, as far, at any rate, as showing the 
new place into which the believer is put by the death 
and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. The life 
that I receive now in the Lord Jesus is life not under 
the law—life not having to do with the earth or its 
ordinances. It is the life of One who has brought me 
into perfect peace with God. It is the life of One who 
has put me in possession of His own relationship with 
God. Accordingly, it is as giving this in its most con- 
densed form and its fullest power, that our Lord Jesus 
Christ thus breathes to show the new character of 
life, so to speak, that they had—that the life that they 
lived in the flesh was really by the faith of the Son 
Himself. “Not I, but Christ that liveth in me.” This, 
then, was given by the very fact that He thus breathed 
upon them. It was a partaking of Himself as He then 
stood—a participation in what He was, specially in the 
life that was in Him, after all questions were settled, and 
perfect deliverance was won by Him and given to them. © 

Hence it is that the apostle Paul, referring to this, 
says, “There is, therefore, now no condemnation to 
them that are in Christ Jesus.” Why? “For,” says 
he, “the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath 
made me free from the law of sin and death.” “The 
law of the Spirit of life,” says the apostle Paul. This 
is the very thing, as John tells us, that was here given. 
It was the Holy Ghost, but it was the Holy Ghost as 
the Spirit of life. It was not the Spirit of power simply 
working miracles, or any such energies—things which 
to men might appear to be far greater. Much less was 
it anything so wanton as men taking the place of God, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 151 


and professing to forgive sins on the earth: no apostle 
pretended to it ever. Nevertheless it is a real privilege, 
and as true now as on the day when Jesus rose from 
the dead. What the Holy Ghost then did was simply 
communicating life according to its resurrection power 
and character through Jesus Christ, the second man 
risen from the dead. 

This, then, I take to be the meaning of the expres- 
sion, “ Receive the Holy Ghost;” for the Spirit of God 
always accompanies the life that Christ gives. It is, 
no doubt, Christ who is the object of faith, and who is 
the giver of life; but He gives life by the operation of 
the Holy Spirit. Whether given during His lifetime 
or now, it was always the Spirit of life that accom- 
panied that life, and, consequently, this is put forth as 
the power of it. 

But He adds more, “ Whosesoever sins ye remit, 
they are remitted; and whosesoever sins ye retain, 
they are retained.” Some one will ask, “ Well, do you 
believe that?” Assuredly Ido; and more than this, I 
believe that you Christians have got the power, and are 
responsible to God to walk in it. But this is a high 
claim, some will think—this power of remitting sins and 
retaining sins. Without doubt it is so. But to whom 
did the Lord speak on that day? Not to the apostles 
only, but to the disciples. “Then the same day at 
evening, being the first day of the week, when the 
doors were shut where the disciples were assembled.” 
Surely if it had been some restricted prerogative con- 
fined to the body of apostles, some care would have 
been taken to make this appear. It is thus that even 
a sensible man acts. If there were a special communi- 
cation from the Queen to her cabinet ministers, it would 


152 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


not be made to the House of Commons, or to the 
House of Lords either. There would be no propriety 
in such a course. Whereas, on the contrary, if we 
Suppose a royal message were delivered to the House 
of Lords, or to the House of Commons, to whom would 
this be understood to be addressed? If meant for the 
whole house, it would be addressed accordingly. And 
so it is here. Our Lord was speaking to the disciples ; 
He was addressing the whole of them. The moment 
we take the word as it is written, we see clearly that 
what He said applies to all. Will any man say 
that the resurrection-life of the Lord Jesus Christ 
was only for the twelve? Shall I be told that the 
peace the Lord gave so solemnly and repeatedly was 
only for the apostles? Nothing of the sort (though, 
of course, the apostles shared it, and it must have had 
a most valued place in their souls). 

There was indeed special authority from the Lord to 
form assemblies confessing His name, and to rule them 
when formed, not to speak of powers which were per- 
sonal. There was a post of authority in laying the 
foundation ; there were acts initiatory and regulative, 
which Scripture assigns to the apostles. But it is so 
little the aim or the character of John’s gospel to dwell 
on what was official, that the very word “apostle” 
never occurs throughout its course. The spirit, form, 
and substance of it are devoted to what is intrinsic and 
essential, and what passes not away. More particularly, 
we shall have reason to gather in a moment, that this 
very portion is the express setting of Christianity on 
its proper basis, and stamps on it a very distinctive 
character before God and man. For various reasons, 
therefore, I am persuaded that we are not to look for 


| 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 153 


the accomplishment of these words in anything that 
was personal to the twelve, or to any others who should 
succeed them : still less are they to be construed of the 
function. of elders or presbyters, as if they were offici- 
ally entrusted with remitting and retaining sins, as is 
most deliberately assumed in the standards of certain 
religious bodies. The truth is that the Lord Jesus has 
the “disciples” as such before Him, and to them He 
imparts the Spirit; them He thereon charges with this 
great commission. 

Does the inspired history, then, do the epistles give 
no light how the apostles understood, and how we are 
to interpret, Christ’s words? Take, for instance, those 
converted on the day of Pentecost, and others whom the 
Lord added from time to time : by whom were their sins 
remitted? They were not satisfied with individually 
believing the gospel; they submitted their confession of 
the Lord’s name to those who were Christians before 
them. And a most important thing this is. Iam not 
entitled to set up to be a Christian on my gole opinion 
of myself, on my judgment of the faith I confess. I am 
bound to submit my pretensions to those who have 
been in Christ before me. Miraculous as may be the 
call of St. Paul, even he was not exempt from this; he 
was baptized by a certain disciple; he was subsequently 
received by others. This is full of comfort, and it is 
real presumption to shrink from or weaken it ; because 
the more really a man has faith, the more willing he is 
to let others examine it. Even the apostle Paul had to 
taste the bitterness of this at first, for some were in 
doubt of him. Surely if this most honoured of Christ’s 
servants had to bear with a little that was trying to him, 
it is not for any of us to count ourselves too sure con- 


154 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


fessors of His name to yield for a little our own im- 
portance, and, at the same time, to submit to that 
which is the Lord’s will, and of vast moment for the 
blessing of the Church of God. Think how the enemy 
might take advantage if you supposed it was a question 
of setting up to be a Christian on one’s own sole and 
independent warrant. It is good to be subject to one 
another, and this from the first, in the fear of God, 
who is wiser than men, and has laid down His will 
through these words of the Lord Jesus. 

This, if we accept the apostolic writings as a com- 
ment, 1s the manner and practical working of it. When 
one professes to turn to God in repentance and faith ; 
when he believes in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, it 
is not enough that he should rest upon that blessed Sa- — 
viour for the salvation of his soul. J must “confess with 
my mouth, as well as believe in my heart.” This confes- 
sion may and should, of course, go out as a testimony to 
the world ; but it belongs to those who are the confessors 
of His name to judge of it. I may admit something that 
is derogatory to Christ; I may overlook that which is 
injurious to my own soul, and offensively evil to others. 
Then comes in the all-important function of those in 
the faith before, to which scripture attaches no small 
weight, and regulates it for God’s glory, as we find the 
apostle Paul doing in Romans xv. I affirm, then, that 
the disciples, as the assembly of God, did warrant the 
remission of sins in certain cases, and did retain sins in 
others. Since they received heartily and simply, owning 
as the brethren of Jesus those that before then had been 
' wallowing, perhaps, in sin of every kind, and suddenly 
(it might be, in an hour) turned to God, was it not of 
exceeding moment that there should be a body in this 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. lab 


world constituted by the Lord, having distinct authority, 
as well as possessed of His own life, even the Spirit as 
the power of more abundant life in resurrection? and 
that they should endorse the confession of the true, while 
examining the pretensions of all who professed? It is 
not, of course, that this could possibly be injurious to a 
real child of God, but, on the contrary, be a great com- 
fort, and an additional joy to his heart—the welcome 
of others in owning him here below, as the angels, 
instead of man here, rejoice over the repentant in God’s 
presence. But it would be a serious check where there 
Was any reserve, or where anything evil lurked under- 
neath, or where a desire might appear to bring in 
things privily. 

We find that in this spirit, accordingly, the assembly 
of God did act. They remitted and they retained sins. 
I speak not now of the solemn case where a man was 
struck dead on the spot, but of instances in which 
there was a putting away of those that sinned, and 
their public restoration on their repentance. There 
was the other case also, in which a man who had been 
received, and had his sins thus publicly remitted, was 
put away as a wicked person. (1 Cor. v.) Thus the two 
epistles to the Corinthians illustrate both sides. “Suf- 
ficient to such a man is this punishment, which was 
inflicted of many. So that contrariwise ye ought rather 
to forgive him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such a 
one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. 
Wherefore I beseech you that ye would confirm your 
love toward him.” (2 Cor. ii. 6-8.) In these we have 
the cases of remitting sins on the one hand, and of 
retaining sins on the other; and I have no doubt that 
one of the reasons why Christians have failed to carry 


156 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


out their separate place in this world, and thus to 
walk in their own joy and delight, and as a rich means 
of blessing to others, is, that they have lost sight of this 
responsibility, treating it as either ministerial, or as a 
power long passed away. 

Alas! the cause is as obvious as it is humiliating. 
The Church has not kept its place of being a separate 
people, endowed with the love and glory of the Lord 
Jesus. They have taken in all the world in the judg- 
ment of charity; but no judgment of charity can avail 
unbelievers, nor is it in question for believers. Thus the 
great public landmarks of grace and holiness have been 
broken down; and, consequently, the very pretension 
to retain or remit sins, except for superstitious people 
as a sacerdotal act, is scouted with contempt, if not 
wholly ignored. 

I maintain, on the contrary, that the Lord’s words 
make it to be of the essence of the Christian congrega- 
tion in this world to stand forth as publicly owning what 
grace has done, by receiving those whose confession 
satisfies, and as publicly refusing what does not approve 
itself to their conscience. Let me, however, press with 
decision, that what we receive is not a certain amount 
of intelligence, It is not for me to make light of 
spiritual understanding any more than others. Un- 
questionably it has its place, season, and value; but of 
this we may be assured, that what Jesus breathed on 
the disciples was not merely intelligence, but His own 
resurrection-life. This, then, is what He would have us 
own; this is what we are bound to recongnize in those 
that come forward. “You hath he quickened together 
with him, having forgiven you all trespasses.” I do not 
mean thereby that we are to sanction what is sinful 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 157 


along with life in Christ. But we are bound to accept 
the sheep and lambs of Christ, and to be very tender 
in dealing with mistakes, the fruit of a wrong position 
and of bad teaching. Let us beware of playing into 
the enemies’ hands by even seeming to mix up the 
ground of reception with points of attainment in prac- 
tice or in doctrine. Hold fast the grand, simple, but 
infinite fact, that Jesus breathes the Spirit of His own 
resurrection-life on the disciples. We are to treat the 
feeblest as a part of the Christian assembly. But if 
we receive on the one hand, let us not fear to reject on 
the other, according as the confession may or may not 
be suitable to the name of Jesus. If a man really has 
the resurrection-life of Christ, look for holiness with 
a purged conscience; but also for another thing, that 
Christ should be the standard of all his judgments, as 
He is the source of all his blessings, and withal the 
object to be kept before his soul. And, therefore, the 
name of Jesus, which is the sole and sufficient passport 
to the simplest possessor of eternal life in Him, is the 
same name by which we can reject the loudest preten- 
sion that compromises His glory. Let the Lord Jesus 
be for us, as in truth He is, the perfect and only 
standard. If Christ is owned and honoured, it is well 
and safe and blessed. The attempt to unite Christ 
with sin is fatal. All thought of having Christ and 
playing fast and loose with His name be far from us! 
What can be more offensive to God ? Therefore, it is 
of all-importance that we should steadily hold Him 
before our eyes, and avoid the snare of building 
up the ecclesiastical plans and theories we have left 
behind. I believe that all ecclesiastical theory is false, 
when in any measure allowed to shroud the value of 


158 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Christ; and I utterly refuse to treat ecclesiastical mis- 
takes as calling for such dealing, as would be demanded 
were it a question of Christ dishonoured or positive 
known sin allowed. If there be so much as the conni- 
vance at the holding of what is not of Christ—if one 
bring not the doctrine of Christ, it is ruin. The man 
might appear to be as sound as an apostle on ecclesias- 
tical truth, and have every other New Testament 
doctrine at his finger-ends. But what is the value of 
anything where the name of Christ is put to shame? 
And where Christ is the object of the soul, though His 
confessor may be uninformed, Christ has breathed His 
life there, and our course is clear if we be subject to 
Christ. Let us welcome such a one to the heart in His 
name. It is the Church’s business to take all such up, 
and to foster them; for how are they to acquire more 
light, and where can they get the crooked joints adjusted, 
if it be not in God’s.Church? But if we hold aloof till 
they get all right, this is alike an impossibility on their 
part, and to forfeit our own place of help and duty. 
Methought that the Church of God was the pillar and 
ground of the truth, and that there only can the truth 
be truly learnt where it is lived in; and that those I 
have described, having received Christ, have Christ 
within and Christ without. Do J want or boast of 
more? Why, then, should there be the smallest hesi- 
tation ? 

The Lord enable His own to be thorough in removing 
difficulties, and hearty in welcoming souls where there 
is no question of ungodliness in faith or ways. I do 
not say where the doctrine of justification by faith 1s 
held. There is many a wickedness that consists with 
holding and preaching even that doctrine. These 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 159 


words of our Lord Jesus Christ are a standing rule, and 
we are responsible for acting on them. If we are met 
together in His name, let there be a plain unswerving 
expression of our place and privilege. Our action, our 
corporate action, should be as firm for the truth as our 
individual walk,—that we have and value Christ,—that 
along with Christ we are bound to remit sins, and, when- 
ever there is anything inconsistent with Christ, to retain 
sins. We disown the pretension of doing either as 
between God and man: the Church never claimed 
such a right ; the apostles never aspire to such an action. 
But Jesus clearly called the disciples to discharge the 
retention as well as the remission of sins; and this, 
as we have seen, was verified in the Christian assembly 
which exercised both, not as an eternal question between 
God and the soul, but administratively as a duty to 
Christ, of receiving the true or rejecting the false, of 
putting away or restoring before men. 


160 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Peeture OL. 


THE GIFT OF THE SPIRIT AND THE GIFTS. 


Acts ii. 33-38. 


THE time was now fully come. God had made Himself 
manifest. Israel ought to have confessed to-day Mes- 
siah to be Emmanuel, even God with us. And faith 
should have seen in Christ dead and risen how God is 
for us. But He was now about to assume a new 
character, and to take an immense step in advance, 
even God in us. This could not be without the 
shedding of the precious blood of Jesus. Where that 
blood was sprinkled, the Holy Ghost could come and 
dwell. And therefore they gathered together, according 
to the word of the Lord, expecting, as He had said to 
them, to be baptized of the Holy Ghost not many 
days hence. 

“When the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were 
all with one accord in one place.” God introduced this 
new thing in a manner suitable to His own wisdom. 
Suddenly there came a sound from above, for it was the 
Holy Ghost coming down from heaven, and God was 
pleased to vouchsafe an outward sign accompanying 
this unprecedented fact,—“a sound from heaven as of 
a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where 
they were sitting. And there appeared unto them 
cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each 
of them. And they were all filled with the Holy 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. — 161 


Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the 
Spirit gave them utterance.” It is true that the Holy 
Ghost had descended before, but this was to dwell in 
one man—the man Christ Jesus. In His case there 
was no preparatory work; but the very manner of the 
descent of the Spirit, as well as of that appearance 
which He chose to assume in descending on the Lord 
Jesus, attested the immense difference between Him, in 
whom was no sin, and us, however blest and delivered. 
But we are delivered Srom our sins and sin; and this 
mighty work of God’s grace is through the suffering 
unto death under judgment of Him who had no sin, 
and through the power of His resurrection, 

For Jesus the Holy Ghost appeared in the form 
of a dove—a beautiful expression of self-adaptation on 
the part of the Holy Ghost toward that man whom He 
could come to and abide in without blood. That well- 
known emblem of purity the Holy Ghost could adopt 
in thus coming down to be in the Son of man, But in 
man’s case—that is, the believers who were assembled 
in Jerusalem awaiting power from on high, as the Lord 
told them—the form was not as a dove, but tongues ; 
cloven tongues, and as of fire also, were the suited 
image. Cloven tongues, because God now would send 
forth a mighty and far-reaching testimony. Whatever 
the responsibility of Israel, whatever the witness to be 
borne in that land and to that people, God, who knew 
the end from the beginning, had His eye on, and even 
in this very fact looked to, the spread of the good 
tidings, and the going out to Gentile as much as to J ew. 
The tongues were “cloven;” but they were “as of fire” 
also. There had been the judgment of sin in the Cross, 
There was that in man which needed to be judged, and 

M 


162 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


which, in fact, was judged of God already in Christ as 
the offering for sin. Hence the tongue as of fire was 
the witness that (whatever might be the display of the 
power of the Holy Ghost, and however evidently in 
the fulness of grace) it was grace, here as everywhere 
else where sin is concerned, reigning through right- 
eousness by Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Hence, then, the Lord was accomplishing that for 
which He had been preparing the disciples. In the 
different tongues to which men of old had been doomed 
in the just displeasure of God, His mercy was now 
about to reach them. The wonderful works of God 
were thus to be proclaimed to every nation under 
heaven. This attracted universal attention. All kinds 
of speculation as to this, strange unheard-of phenomenon 
filled the ears and minds of men. But Peter explains 
how it was that which ought to be looked for according 
to the sure word of prophecy. He does not affirm that 
it was the fulfilment of Joel’s declaration in its full 
and precise force; but it was “that which was spoken,” 
and no other kind of thing. The fulfilment in any 
complete sense awaits another day. Nevertheless, it 
was not what ought to bear an evil name among men, 
but was rather to be weighed, accepted, and prized as 
of God. It was “that which was spoken by the pro- 
phet Joel; And it shall come to pass in the last days, 
saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh.” 
It was only the principle of the prophecy ; for, in point 
of fact, although there were these various tongues 
spoken, and although men were there from every 
nation under heaven, they were but Jews. Neverthe- 
less, the languages embracing Gentile tongues though 
the persons might be Jews, there was in this the inti- 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 163 


mation to any discerning eye of what God was going 
to carry out in due time. 

But there is a very important statement to be made 
at once,—made, indeed, according to God’s word, which 
we do well to heed-and never to give up. There was 
not one thing only, but a variety in the display of the 
Spiit’s power put forth on that day. We are not to 
limit what the Holy Ghost wrought to any one parti- 
cular part of His operations. First and foremost, there 
was the accomplishment of the promise of the Father. 
There was the great and infinite truth of the Holy 
Ghost Himself sent down from heaven. Next, there 
was the special assurance of our Lord accomplished in 
His baptizing them of the Holy Ghost, the effect of 
which was “one body.” They might and did not yet 
know what the one body involved ; indeed, I think I 
might be bold to say there was not so much as one believer 
who did. The doctrine of the body was as yet wholly 
unrevealed; it awaited another ministration anda suited 
servant of God, who speaks of himself as one born out 
of due time. In fact, it was not, and, one may say, 
could not be, duly, according to God’s wisdom, revealed 
until the Jew had rejected the testimony of His grace. 
Then when the Gentile was actually called or in pro- 
cess of being called, the one body formed out of Jew 
and Gentile, joined together by the Holy Ghost sent 
down from heaven, could be brought out consistently 
with the ways of God. Still, that which was the power 
of this one body, that person who alone was adequate 
to form, was actually then and there given: “Ye shall 
be baptized of the Holy Ghost [without drawing out 
the consequences of it] not many days hence,” 

Then, besides this, there were to be signs and won- 

M 2 


164 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


ders wrought according to the prophet, and they were 
wrought. Further, there was the impartation of various 
gifts from the Lord for His work here below. “When 
he ascended up on high, be gave gifts unto men’”— 
“some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some 
pastors and teachers.” This was clearly by the Holy 
Ghost, or, as it is written in 1 Cor. xi1, “The manifesta- 
tion of the Spirit was given to every man to profit 
withal.” 

All these distinct things, not in the least degree to be 
confounded one with another, were concurrently accom- 
plished on that day. Further, the Spirit of God was 
given as the indweller to each one that believed. This 
was clearly a consequence of the same great truth. 
Thus we have what was individual and what was cor- 
porate, what was universal and what was particular, 
all made good on this day of Pentecost, but, neverthe- 
less, each to be distinguished from the other. The 
epistles take up some one, some another part of this 
vast subject. We shall have a little more detail as to 
each on some future occasion; but what I wish particu- 
larly to dwell on to-night is the grand truth itself of 
the gift of the Holy Ghost, and this distinguished from 
any workings of His power by particular members. 
These gifts differ, but the gift itself-is and must be the 
same Holy Spirit. There are many and wide differences 
elsewhere, but there can be none here; and this is 
manifest when the truth is understood that we speak of 
a divine person, who comes down to dwell in each 
Christian and in the Church. It is evidently destruc- 
tive of the truth for one to speak of differences in Him. 
There may be a variety of forms and measures in which 
His power is displayed; there may be and are different — 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 165 


degrees in which the joy of His presence is entered 
into; but the fact remains, (and what can be more 
glorious and blessed than the fact ?) that, as to Himself, 
He dwells equally in every believer who rests now on 
finished redemption in Christ Jesus, 

Besides, there is also, as we know, the circumstance 
of His being not only in us, but with us. Accordingly, 
we find from the first and all through, that while the 
tongues of fire rested on each, there was also a rushing 
mighty wind which filled all the house. There was 
thus what may be called a double sign of the presence 
of the Spirit of God,—that which abode upon each 
person, but also that which in a general way filled the 
house where they were seated. Thus it is that we may 
see every now and then in this book of the Acts, 
without going farther, that the fact of the Holy Ghost 
being there, as well as the Holy Ghost being in each of 
them, is kept before the mind. For instance, when the 
house shook where they were, (chap. iv.) what had this 
to do with the particular fact that the Spirit of God 
was in this or in that person? The Holy Ghost was 
there, and He made His presence felt in their midst. 
So, again, when Ananias and Sapphira lied, who can 
say that it was to any one believer more than another ? 
It was “not to men,” indeed, we are told, but “unto 
God,” they had lied. But it was God present in the 
Church. It was God who had come down, who could 
now righteously, and according to His full grace, and 
the most blessed expression of that grace conceivable 
now for the earth, dwell even in those that not only 
had been sinners, but still had the deepest possible 
sense of what the natural evil was which they had 
inherited from Adam. But yet, in spite of all this, in 


166 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


' spite of what they had been, and in spite of what they 
felt they were still, apart from Christ, so blessed 
was the grace of God in the gift of Him, so rich the 
manner of His love in the death and resurrection of 
the Lord, that the Holy Ghost could righteously, and 
for the glory of the Father and the Son, come down 
and be in them here below. 

. Hence it is we find all through that the Spirit of 
God is spoken of thus, not only as One that really 
dwelt in each believer, but that was with them when 
gathered together, or when acting in the work here 
below. Thus we read of the Spirit (chap. viii.) saying to 
the evangelist Philip for instance, “Join thyself to that 
chariot.’ An angel of the Lord had previously told 
him the direction that he was to take. It was not, 
however, the angel, but the Spirit that spoke to him 
when it was a question of direct dealing with souls. 
The angel expressed merely the providence of God 
shaping his path for him: this, of course, still abides. 
We may not see angels or be conscious of their action, 
but it is just as true now as ever it was. And so with 
the Spirit of God. We may not hear Him as Philip 
did then ; but the fact is as certain now as on that day. 
According to the promise of Christ He works. He 
waits, of course, for a suited state, though it be a state 
of heart which He alone can bring about; but He 
works as truly now as ever. So we find, a little later 
on (chap. xii), the Spirit said, “Separate me Barnabas 
and Saul” to the work that He had called them. 
Thus we have most clearly the Spirit of God acting not 
merely z»—tor we are not told that it was im Saul or 
Barnabas-that He wrought; and indeed the impression, 
I think, that one would fairly gather from the chapter 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 167 


is that it was outwards. That is, it was a word about 
them, not so much a word ¢o them, still less anything 
working in them. We know, of course, that all these 
things are true in their season. The Holy Ghost really 
was in them, and was there before; but still, the Holy 
Ghost here displays Himself as a divine person who 
had come down, and was there giving effect to the work 
of grace and to the glory of the Lord. And so it is to 
be traced throughout the whole of the book, as we may 
readily see. So the Spirit of Jesus on another occasion 
directed Paul where to go. (chap. xvi.) I need not, 
however, multiply instances. 

But there is another point of immense importance 
which is often a perplexity to souls, and that is, the dif- 
ference of the manner in which the Holy Ghost was 
conferred. Unbelief, especially where it takes the form 
of superstitiously exalting man (as, indeed, it constantly 
has this character, unless it take the still baser form of 
distrusting and denying altogether what is of God), works 
actively on these materials. But whether unbelief goes 
out in the exaltation of man as such, or in indifference 
to God and open utter carelessness as to all that con- 
cerns the soul, in both ways it is apt to take advantage 
of the various modes in which the Spirit of God was 
conferred, to deny that you can have the Holy Ghost 
now as of old, or to claim credit for some specific of 
religious quackery, in which alone one may infallibly 
look for the gift of the Spirit. 

Now I shall for these reasons review the great occa- 
sions which the Holy Ghost records for our instruction, 
and hope to show, I trust plainly, to any man who is 
subject to the word of God, that there is nothing 
capricious in the manner in which the Holy Ghost was 


168 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


given, that there is nothing which gives the smallest 
importance to man as such, that there is nothing to 
weaken the confidence of the feeblest child of God, and 
that there is everything flowing from a full, or compara- 
tively full, acquaintance with the revealed mind of God 
to comfort and steady the soul, enhancing our sense of 
His grace and wisdom; for we shall have abundant 
proof of His holy considerateness in all possible cir- 
cumstances. What an evidence that simplicity in the 
things of God is the real secret of seeing things clearly! 
For simplicity is not occupied with our own things, or 
burdened by the thoughts of others, but has confidence 
in God, and knows that He has always before Himself 
His own grand design of bringing glory to Christ, who 
glorified the Father. 

On the first occasion, the day of Pentecost, we have 
much the largest, and, in a certain sense, the richest 
form of the giving of the Holy Ghost from above. 
Therefore we do well to take especial heed to God’s 
inspired account of it. We are informed by the high- 
est authority, that Jesus “being by the right hand 
of God exalted, and having received of the Father the 
promise of the Holy Ghost, hath shed forth this which 
ye now see and hear.” That is, there were palpable to- 
kens before them, and evidenced by them, of the accom- 
plishment of the promise of the Father. The promised 
Holy Ghost was not in itself a thing of sense, but, 
nevertheless, there was external power which accom- 
panied it. This is of great importance to distinguish, 
because otherwise men are in danger, in consequence 
of the absence of these outward signs, of overlooking 
and denying that incomparable gift which was always 
above its effects. Whatever the importance of these 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 169 © 


signs, they were but the accompanying voucher to man 
of the gift and presence of the Spirit as a new thing 
upon the earth. 

3ut further, we have considerable light as to this 
truth in the answer of Peter to the distressed enquirers 
at Jerusalem. In agony as to their state} finding them- 
selves so plainly arraigned by the apostle as guilty of 
rejecting and crucifying their own Messiah, and that 
too in the presence of a God who had exalted Him to 
His own right hand, the apostle says to them, “ Repent, 
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus 
Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive 
the gift of the Holy Ghost.” Attentively weigh the 
words. He does not call on them simply to believe. 
There is, I need not say, the wisdom of God in using 
here the call to repent rather than to believe. There is 
nothing in vain in Scripture. The converse we hear on 
another occasion, where the apostles Paul and Silas 
called on the alarmed jailor at Philippi to believe rather 
than to repent. 

Of course, my wish is not at all to produce the 
slightest perplexity in any soul, but, on the contrary, 
to remove it from the weak, who may see but do not 
understand this difference. It is not man that did or 
would have set down these words. God has written 
thus, and He is always to be trusted. We are not to 
suppose that it is a matter of indifference which is em- 
ployed. Freely is it allowed and insisted on that, with- 
out faith, there never can be real repentance Godward. 
There may be a spurious faith, as there may be a spurious 
repentance. Wherever there is the one by God’s power, 
there must needs be the other. But still, every one 
knows from experience (and we see the same thine in 


170 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


God’s own word-—the key to all we know and experience) 
that there are differences in the manner in which the soul 
feels and expresses itself before God. For in one the 
deep moral work in the conscience more predominates ; 
in another, peace and joy in believing would be more 
apparent. But still, there can be no real work in the 
conscience of spiritual value without faith, and there 
cannot be faith according to God without a genuine 
work of the Spirit in the conscience. If Peter calls on 
the Jews at Jerusalem to repent, so does Paul tell the 
men of Athens that God commands all men eyery- 
where to repent. On other occasions both Jews and 
Gentiles were invited and urged to believe. The truth 
is, both repented and both believed; but there is ever 
a meaning, and an important meaning, where one is 
pressed rather than the other. 

What was needed on this occasion—what was 
suitable according to God’s wisdom—vwas the hum- 
bling of these proud Jews. Hence repentance, as that 
which puts down flesh and treats man as good for 
nothing, is put forward. “ Repent,” says the apostle 
Peter, “and be baptized every one of you in the name 
of Jesus”—that very man whom you crucified and 
rejected. There is the only source of blessing for any: 
He is the sole hope for your souls. They were brought 
down and made willing. It was the day of His grace, 
if not yet of His power according to Psalm cx. Grace 
had touched their hearts; it made them receive and 
endorse God’s sentence against themselves. They could 
believe ill of themselves—the very last thing a man is 
willing to believe. They were really brought to that 
point that they were willing to believe themselves evil 
in the sight of God. He therefore presses this home. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 171 


He does not take pity on them because they were justly 
pricked in heart, but he calls, so to speak, for the 
entrance of that which would humble them still more 
before God. Peter could press it the more readily, 
because he knew in Jesus such ample grace. As he 
says himself, “Be baptized every one of you in the 
name of Jesus Christ.” The more grace is proclaimed, 
the more we can afford to urge, and the more other 
souls can afford to bear, a thorough-going sound repent- 
ance. And, indeed, we need to enforce it, not leaving 
it vaguely and saying, “People must repent if they 
believe.” This is not the way God does leave it. He 
causes them to feel their real state before Him. It is 
always a great blessing for any one, and if it be not 
charged home at an early day, let me say by the way, 
that a most humbling and painful process remains for 
the soul another day. For, instead of learning with 
simplicity what we are at the start of our career, 
instead of having as full a sense of our sin then as 
could be supposed compatible with so young a convert, 
there may be the need of proving it by a deep fall, by 
open sin, by flagrant departure from God, by a pain- 
ful return, after having wandered the farther from ° 
Him, because there was so little sense of sin at the be- 
ginning of our Christian confession. How many a soul 
has known this! Perhaps I ought to add, that there 
are none, it seems to me, in greater danger from this 
omission than those with whom we have most com- 
monly to do. The greater the sense of the Lord’s 
grace, 1f there be not also a commensurate sounding of 
the conscience before God, the greater the danger, and 
more particularly for the young. 

When in this case, then, the apostle exhorted them 


172 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


to repent and be baptized every one of them in the 
name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, you 
will remark what follows,—“and ye shall receive the 
gift of the Holy Ghost.” Surely when they repented, 
it was not without the Holy Ghost. When they re- 
ceived the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and found in 
Him remission, and were baptized thereon,—baptized in 
His name, which, of course, would be altogether worth- 
less in these souls now before the apostle unless they 
believed in His name,—it will not be doubted that the 
Holy Ghost must have given them repentance and faith 
in His name. Therefore it is evident that the reception 
of the Holy Ghost as here spoken of, has nothing what- 
ever to do with the bringing men to believe and to repent. 
It is a subsequent operation ; it is an additional separate 
blessing ; it is a privilege founded on faith already ac- 
tively working in the heart. So far is it from being 
true that a man receives the gift of the Holy Ghost the 
moment he believes, that it may be well doubted whe- 
ther there ever was such a case since the world began. 
I do not mean to deny that the gift of the Holy Ghost 
may be practically on the same oceasion, but never in 
the same moment: at least, I should like any one to 
produce me one proof from the word of God, or one 
instance from practical experience. I have never seen, 
nor ever heard of such a case, and (what is more) I 
believe that Scripture precludes the possibility of it. 
The reason is quite simple too. The gift of the Holy 
Ghost is grounded on the fact that we are sons by faith 
of Christ, believers resting on redemption in Him. 
Plainly, therefore, it supposes that the Spirit of God has 
regenerated us. We may find the importance of this 
remark in looking at some of the epistles on another 


| 
L 
' 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. VES 


occasion. Here I merely touch on the point, because 
it is very evidently involved in this very verse. Thus 
the gift of the Holy Ghost is not in order to repentance, 
nor to receiving Christ by faith. The truth is, that 
when the souls did repent, and when they were baptized 
in His name for the remission of sins, they received the 
gift of the Holy Ghost, as a subsequent privilege. 

Another thing I would just observe, and one quite as 
momentous to bear in mind as any other: “the gift of 
the Holy Ghost” never means the gifts. There are many 
who confound the gift with the gifts, They are never 
mixed together in the word of God; they in no way 
convey the same thought. There is even a different 
word—not in our language, but in that which the Holy 
_ Ghost employed. The two things are invariably dis- 
tinct. Both might of course be given on the very same 
occasion. A man might have the gift and enjoy the 
presence of the Spirit of God in his soul. He might 
also be empowered of the Spirit to carry out the gospel 
to the world, or be made a teacher or pastor in the 
Church. Still the gift of the Holy Spirit is another 
privilege altogether. It is the Holy Ghost Himself 
given, and not merely the power with which He invests 
a person for special purposes. There might be this too; 
but the gift of the Holy Ghost was that common 
blessing which was then and there conferred on every 
soul that repented and was baptized. 

This is followed up immediately after by the glad 
reception, or, at any rate, by the reception of the word ; 
for “gladly” is of doubtful authority. “They received 
his word.” This is certain; and it may have been with 
solemnity, as much as with joy, as the characteristic 
feeling ; and they were baptized in the name of their 


174 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


once despised Messiah. “And the same day there 
were added unto them about three thousand souls.” 
And these are found full of the grace and power of 
God, as described in the latter part of the chapter. 


Turning to the next great crisis, we have a wholly 
different scene. Stephen had borne his testimony, the 
result of which was utter rejection on the part of the 
Jews,—he full of the Holy Ghost, and they resisting 
Him. As their fathers did, so did they. Stephen sealed 
his testimony with his blood, and the persecution that 
broke out on him as its first victim scattered all the 
Church that was in Jerusalem except the apostles. The 
very men who had been called of the Lord to go out to 
all the world were the exceptions to the dispersion, and _ 
the only ones. So remarkably slow is man, even in the 
best estate, to enter into and carry out the purposes of 
God’s grace. But God would carry them out, even if 
it were from a painful cause propelling. If love, if the 
power of grace, if the sense of the need of souls and 
of the glory of Christ, did not rouse those that were 
commanded, God would take care that feebler vessels, 
yet filled with the mighty tidings of His grace, should 
shed the sweet savour in all directions; and so they 
“went everywhere preaching the word.” Among the 
rest, Philip, who had been appointed by the apostles, as 
well as chosen by the people, to take care of the daily 
distribution, now that this was summarily closed, gains 
a good degree, and goes about preaching the gospel. 
He visits the ancient rival of Jerusalem, even the city 
of Samaria. There the Jews, having entirely failed to 
establish the authority of the law, shrank into isolation, 
and had no dealings with Samaritans. They had not 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 175 


won their confidence, nor commended that form of 
knowledge and of the truth in the law which had been 
committed to their charge. But the gospel was now to 
prove its power where law had been unavailing; and 
Philip preaches Jesus with such simplicity and force, 
and was so blest of God in it, that the whole city was 
filled with joy. Even the most wicked man that was 
there, long versed in the ways and wiles of the devil, 
was impressed by the holy influence which, it is true, 
had not penetrated his conscience nor governed his 
-heart. But, at any rate, the current was too strong for 
him. Simon Magus bowed to the truth of the gospel, 
intellectually, at least, and was baptized with the rest. 
dut, note it well, there was no gift of the Holy Ghost 
as yet to any there. 

From such a fact we gather the clear distinction 
between the gift of the Holy Ghost and His working 
or operation, which enables a soul to repent and to 
believe the gospel. There is no question as to the mass 
of the Samaritan converts that they were real believers, 
though Simon was not. Nevertheless, the Holy Ghost 
“as yet was fallen upon none of them.” It is not merely 
that they had not spoken with tongues, nor that there 
were no wonders done, save by the evangelist himself 
(verses 6, 7,13). The Holy Ghost’s coming down is a 
totally different thing, though accompanied by these 
outward expressions of His power. They must never 
be mixed up together as if they were the same. The 
greatest wound that could be inflicted on the standing 
capital truth of the presence of the Holy Ghost would 
be received by confounding them; because, if this were 
so, we have in this case no Holy Ghost any longer pre- 
sent, inasmuch as we have no more such outward 


176 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


displays of power. It is evident, therefore, that it goes 
far indeed in unbelief to mingle together signs and 
tokens by the Spirit with the Holy Ghost Himself. I 
repeat, that it was not merely that the powers had not 
been given, but the Holy Ghost had not yet come on 
them. The Scripture affirms it, and so it is said here, 
“When the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard 
that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent 
unto them Peter and John: who, when they were come 
down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy 
Ghost: for as yet he was fallen upon none of them: 
_ only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.” 
— At once we meet with a notable difference which 
stands out in marked contrast with the day of Pente- 
cost. Then, when they repented and were baptized in 
the name of the Lord Jesus, the Holy Ghost came 
upon them. Here He had fallen upon none, though 
they had believed and had been baptized. How comes 
this? I am persuaded for a grave reason and worthy 
of God. Had there been the descent of the Holy 
Ghost upon these believers at Samaria at the preaching 
of Philip, such is human nature that I cannot doubt 
the ancient rivalry of Samaria would have still re- 
mained. Samaria would have lifted up her head once 
more, and the very grace of the gospel would have been 
a support to her religious pretensions. It was true, 
Jerusalem had enjoyed this new and singular blessing ; 
but had not Samaria it also? Thus Jerusalem and “that 
mountain” would have still reared their heads in oppo- 
sition to each other, and the effect that God intended to 
produce by the presence of the Holy Ghost would have 
been altogether frustrated. Instead of bringing about 
oneness in love, instead of maintaining not only one 


—_— —s ae, ae 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. RGF 


head, but one energy,—one head above, and one power ° 
below working in one body as an answer to the glory 
of Christ,—there would have been a new Samaritan 
institution as well as a new society at Jerusalem. God 
made this impossible—at least impossible to one who 
heeded His ways. There was no appearance even of a 
sanction given to independency—the most destructive 
principle possible to the truth of the Church of God on 
the earth. 

Accordingly, then, when the Church at Jerusalem, 
or, at least, when the apostles heard of it, (for the 
Church was now scattered abroad,) they sent down two 
of the chiefs, two that were pillars— Peter and John. 
They prayed; but there was even a closer intimation 
of what God intended by this delay in the cift of the 
Holy Ghost—there was the laying on of their hands ; 
and this imposition of hands was both an act ex- 
pressive of blessing from God through the apostles, 
and of identification, so to speak, with the work at 
Jerusalem. It was an attestation before the whole 
world that God would suffer no such thing as rivalry in 
His Church—that those who were the heads of the 
work in the one were quite as indispensable in the 
other. Thus, then, God shows, as it seems to me In 
this very fact, that although there is a difference in the 
manner of giving the blessing, still that very difference 
is due to God’s wisdom and care over our souls as 
really as in the gift itself. Of course, the gift of the 
Holy Ghost is the main part of the blessing, but then 
there is always the goodness and the wisdom of God 
in the smallest variation which His word puts before 
us. Thus, although we have here a very marked 
difference from the day of Pentecost, all contributes to 

N 


Li ieee THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


prove how God loves us, how the Lord takes care of the 
Church, how, even in the manner in which He gives 
this supreme blessing of the Spirit of God, He proceeds 
in such a mode as to show, if saints are wise to heed 
His ways and seek to understand the method of His 
‘ gifts, how He would arm us against our own nature. 


There is another thing that comes before us in the 
next case. (Acts x.) Here we have a third variety. 
The apostle Peter is at length summoned of God, who 
was pleased to vouchsafe a two-fold witness of His 
purpose. Cornelius, the Gentile centurion, while he 
fasted and prayed in Ceesarea, had an angelic visitor, 
who directed him to send for Simon Peter. As for the 
apostle himself, he fell into a trance the day after at 
Joppa, and saw thrice a vision about this great matter, 
that every word, as it were, should be established by 
three distinct witnesses. Peter, yet more encouraged 
by the Spirit (Acts x. 19-23), yields to the messengers 
of Cornelius, and goes. When he opens his mouth, he 
calls their attention to that which was exceedingly 
prominent in his own mind; for he had gone unwill- 
ingly at first—had even ventured, so to speak, to dis- 
pute with the Lord in the vision of the great sheet. 
He had never, he said, eaten anything that was common 
or unclean when the Lord commanded him to kill and 
eat. But he had received repeatedly the reproof, “ What 
God hath cleansed, that call not thou common ;” and at 
last he had profited by the lesson. “Of a truth I per- 
ceive that God is no respecter of persons: but in every 
nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness, 
is accepted with him.” 

In the first instance, then, it is plain that the call 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 179 


did not go out to a pagan idolater. Peter only 
speaks in this case of one that already feared God and 
wrought righteousness. This was the case with Cor- 
nelius. He was not an unconverted soul, but one who 
really feared God. He abounded in prayer and in 
almsgiving. Certainly self-righteous prayer or alms 
could not have commended him to God. Such things, 
when done as a means of rendering some atonement for 
the soul before God, are (we know) among the unholy 
resources of unbelief. But Cornelius was a God-fear- 
ing man—this really, and not in mere outward profession, 
He was regenerate, and God had signified his estate and 
his acknowledgment of his righteousness in the mes- 
sage of the angel, which it seems to me perfectly 
impossible to understand as meaning that he was 
merely an outward professor of the true God—the most 
hollow thing conceivable even in the sight of men, and 
always an abomination in God’s eyes. As I read the 
account afresh, I am bold to say his state was that 
which the Lord had wrought, and which He distinctly 
owns as pleasing to Himself. And it was wise of the 
Lord and most gracious, that, in going out to the 
Gentiles, He should begin with such an one as not even 
a Jew could deny to be godly. It was, beyond a doubt, 
infinite mercy which was about to save the evidently 
lost, the chief of sinners. But still, the point here was 
not awakening for the first time a soul from its death in 
sins, but rather setting one already awakened on a known 
ground of relationship with God and perfect liberty, so 
that none who feared God and His word could gainsay 
his title. In most cases the two things might coalesce ; 
but this was not the case with Cornelius, who in due 
time, with his household, hears the word from Peter, 
N 2 


180 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Observe, it was a word, too, that was not heard for the 
first time. “That word ye know,” says Peter, “which 
was published throughout all Judea.” Plainly, there- 
fore, this centurion had not only feared God, and 
prayed to Him before, but was aware of that which 
was preached throughout all Judea. How was it that 
it had not been received in its fulness and applied to his 
own soul? Just simply because he was one that feared 
God and trembled at His word. It was not the shape 
in which faith in God would work now, but it was right 
in its season. This reverence for God would make him 
slow to auticipate His ways. “If God had sent out 
his word for Israel,” he would say, “I know it is sure 
for them ; and blessed are the people that have such a 
God! But who and what am I?” For this very rea- 
son he waited till the word was sent to himself. This 
is just what the gospel does now. It is the proclama- 
tion of the word of God's grace to every creature ; but 
it was a new thing then. He was acquainted, of course, 
with the ancient Scriptures, and did not doubt the 
promises. There was no question about them as an 
abstract truth, or in their accomplishment by and in 
Christ for Israel. 

But now the word was sent to him, Cornelius a 
Gentile, by the authority of God through Peter. As 
we are told here, “ While Peter yet spake these words,” 
(more particularly, I suppose, “to him gave all the 
prophets witness, that through his name whosoever be- 
lieveth,” &c.) this truth was fastened on his soul. At 
least, this is direct testimony, and opens the door to 
any one according to all the prophets: “ Whosoever 
believeth in him shall receive remission of sins. While 
Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 181 


them which heard ‘the word.” What! Without bap- 
tism? without imposition of hands? without prayer 
for them? Yes, without any of these things, without 
more ado, at once, even while the very words are being 
preached by the apostle Peter, the Holy Ghost is given 
to them all. 

Here, then, is a new phase, altogether different, not 
merely from what was witnessed in Samaria, but even 
from what had been experienced in Jerusalem. There 
the Jew must be baptized, and only then he should 
receive the Holy Ghost. It was not enough that he 
should believe the gospel; he must be baptized in the 
name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, (baptized 
with water, of course,) “and ye shall receive the eift of 
the Holy Ghost.” At Samaria, not only had they been 
baptized with water, but there must be prayer and the 
laying on of the apostles’ hands, without which the 
Holy Ghost came on none there. Here, before baptism, 
and without apostolic imposition of hands, the Holy 
Ghost fell on all of them. How came this to pass ? 
The only wise and the only good God owned these 
Gentiles in deep grace. The moment was come to carry 
out His mind more fully, and the first display of His 
grace towards them was in this rich and singular 
process. It might not be so public an occasion as when 
three thousand souls were brought in. Still, what was 
seen then was the breaking down of Jews that had 
been hard and high-minded against Jesus of Nazareth. 
To that name they must bow, nay, they must be bap- 
tized in it; not otherwise could they receive the Spirit. 
The Samaritans, again, had their special lesson, to 
counteract their peculiar propensity, and to establish 
the grand principle of the Church or assembly, (not 


182 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


churches merely,) which God was forming on the earth. 
But here God would encourage and win the Gentiles 
that Peter himself had despised. For after the Lord 
had told him that he was to go and make disciples of 
all the Gentiles, he went not; after even the Church 
was driven to speak, he lingered. They were slow (may 
Isay?); they were staying behind the work of the Lord; 
they had little entered into His mighty grace, so far tran- 
scending the thoughts of His own children, but now 
manifested with little heart on man’s part, yet led on 
by God’s hand (for it was scarce more than this until 
Peter was actually brought to the spot). But when he 
preached at Czesarea, how God rebuked—though it 
might be in the fulness of mercy—the slowness of His 
servant! When the words fell from his lips, not even 
Jerusalem had ever seen such mercy, nor had Samaria 
witnessed anything lke it; for there had been, in 
God’s wisdom, a pause there, and an imposition of apos- 
tolic hands before the full blessing was imparted. 

But here was nothing of the sort. Here it was all of 
pure grace. Of course, there was an antecedent work 
of the Spirit in their souls, giving them repentance 
toward God and faith in Jesus. This is always neces- 
sary. But there was no outward act to be done by 
others and submitted to by themselves. Baptism fol- 
lowed as a privilege (as it really is) which could not be 
refused them. For the Jew, for the Samaritan, humili- 
ating elements were not absent. For the Gentile, on 
the other hand, there was sweet encouragement. God 
was winning them, and would stop the mouth of every 
gainsayer. He was giving, in the manner of the gift, 
the most magnificent proof that, if He went out to the 
most distant, He shows for that reason the more grace ;— 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 183 


no mercy so rich as that which sought and found the 
poor Gentiles. 

And mark it well, brethren, it is thus that we receive 
the Holy Ghost. We come under the Gentiles. We 
are not Jews; weare not Samaritans. Let others boast, 
if they will, of the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven: 
would that they did boast of what was done on the day 
of Pentecost, and among the Samaritans afterwards! No 
apostles were called to lay their hands on the Gentiles. 
Peter, not a whit behind the chiefest, and one of those 
who had laid his hands on the Samaritans, was there; 
but the fact of his presence at Caesarea made the grace 
of God the more conspicuous. He declared the as- 
tonishing news to all; buf there was no room for him 
to do anything more. It was no question of man’s 
preparatory action, either in laying on of hands, or 
even in baptizing. Nothing of the kind was done 
before the Spirit was given, although the apostle Peter 
was there to baptize and lay on hands if necessary. 
Circumstances, therefore, did not prevent, had this 
been God’s order. Man, so to speak, disappears in the 
overflowing grace of God. And how blessed that there 
it is we find our blessing and proper place before God! 
In this God has given us a full adequate answer to all 
the efforts of men, who insist on the necessity that we 
should have apostles when there are none. Unbelief 
despised the apostles when they were here; unbelief 
assumes their presence now to be indispensable, as the 
sole channel for the impartation of the Spirit, when 
the channel is nowhere to be found. How good of the 
Lord, that He should leave us in His own written word 
the proof that these men understand not what they say, 
nor whereof they affirm! Let others, if they will, 


184 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


put themselves back in what, no doubt, suits them— 
the place of Samaritans or Jews. Let them say they 
are Jews when they are not. But the Lord gives those 
who are content to own themselves mere sinners of the 
Gentiles His richest mercy. Would that those who 
are still cleaving to forms and ordinances, to channels 
of one human sort or another, might be brought down 
to their true place, that (willing to be, as they really are, 
nothing) they might be blest fully according to the 
heart of God! Thus it was that God then blessed ; 
and thus it is that He ever loves to bless. It becomes 
us, then, to make much of His grace. As the apostle 
said he magnified his office, so I think we should 
magnify the grace that deals thus divinely with mere 
outcast Gentiles as we naturally are. We may say 
much of Him who can thus afford to bless such as we 
are; for if such was His blessing then, the ground is 
not changed, and such it is still. I say not that there 
is the same kind of evidence, but that such is the 
revealed principle of God’s blessing the Gentiles. How 
is it, if you bow to the testimony of God going 
forth in the earth—how is it that according to Serip- 
ture not Jews, but Gentiles, received the Holy 
Ghost? It was through the preached word. Is it not 
now through the same medium—the word of His 
grace ? 

There may be, no doubt, a delay in some cases. You 
may find souls really touched of the Spirit of God—I 
do not mean merely their feelings, or any passing emo- 
tion, but a real work of grace in the heart and con- 
sclence—and yet the person may have no peace, no 
settled rest and liberty, in the Saviour. This is not un- 
common. Are we, therefore, to deny a work of God? Are 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 185 


we to ignore this part because there is not all we might 
and must desire? Are we to say that, if there be not 
full deliverance before God, there is nothing at all? 
This I leave to others; for myself I dare not think or 
say so. I entreat my brethren that none among them 
may yield to such unbelief. I hope that no one here 
will think it necessary to question the reality of God’s 
work in a soul, because it does not yet enter into the 
full and simple sense of all Christ has done for it. We 
may be sometimes in haste with souls, and may injure 
them deeply if we do not accredit God’s work, 

But there is another point of danger also. Let us not 
rest satisfied because a person is truly penitent, and 
looks to Christ, unless he be brought into liberty. This 
is equally unbelief, and a want of acquaintance with the 
word and grace of God. It is to stop short of the full 
presence and operation of God’s Spirit in the soul. We 
must call things by their right names. One may be 
but miserable through a sense of sin and anxieties which 
have not found their answer by God’s grace in redemp- 
tion. But still, when the heart yearns after Jesus, 
although by no means in peace of conscience and still 
less of heart, this we ought to call conversion, and to 
treat it as God’s own gracious work. But to settle down 
in such a state would be equally wrong—to suppose 
it enough because a soul turns from sin to God, because 
hating himself he also looks to Jesus. For it is more 
a grasping after Him than any positive peace in Him, 
and very far from the fulness of the blessing of the 
gospel. On the contrary, we ought to press, that there 
is much more in Jesus than merely what awakens the 
heart .and touches the conscience, however real the 
sense of sin may be, and desire after what is of God. 


186 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


We all, I believe, fail, if we do not insist that such an 
one is not yet in what Scripture recognizes as the true 
Christian state before God. If His word supposes His 
children to be fully at peace, ought we to be satistied 
with anything less? A renewed mind, but still under 
law, we ought never to recognize as the full result of 
the truth in Jesus, though bound to recognize it as true 
‘so far as it goes. But there is much more that God 
intends for His own—even such a place of blessing 
where doubts, fears, anxieties, all melt away in the sense 
of the perfect grace which has brought us nigh to Him- 
self without a sin or a question before Him. 

It is evident that, while there is conflict and inward 
trouble, the state of feeling is that which was found in 
the Old Testament saints. The only difference is, that 
they could not get beyond it. The time was not yet 
come. The Deliverer was not there. The deliverance 
had yet to be wrought. The blessed ground which 
makes it a matter of faith to receive peace through the 
grace of God was not laid before them, and God’s ways 
cannot be anticipated. We cannot run before Him. We 
may follow after Him, and should delight to see His 
goodness as it passes before us; but we cannot antici- 
pate God. But now salvation is come. Christ has been 
here, and died and rose; yet still quickened souls do 
not always apprehend the mighty results in a day. It 
may be, of course; and I do not doubt we have still 
cases such as the Philippian jailor referred to. The 
very same hour the man’s conscience was reached, there 
was a further work of God, which left himself and his 
house rejoicing. As miserable as he could be just before, 
in the same hour he was thoroughly happy by divine 
grace. So I do not in the least deny that this may now 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 187 


be in the course of an hour, though far from thinking 
that it is so common a thing as is supposed. 

Take the apostle as an instance. Surely he was con- 
verted, if ever a man was, on the road to Damascus, and 
in most extraordinary power too. Yet manifestly God 
did not bring him into full liberty all at once. He was 
for days and nights so exercised that he neither ate nor 
drank, but was blind; and all this was in keeping with 
his spiritual state. He had really seen Christ in glory, 
and this for his soul; but had he yet been brought into 
the peaceful enjoyment of all? I do not doubt that 
there was another and an immediate work, the fruit of 
the truth dealing with the inner man; still, until 
Ananias comes to him, when he was baptized, he was 
far from full rest and liberty. The Holy Ghost, as 
we know, filled him, and then, as it is ever, he 
enters consciously into the full blessing. This does 
not take away from the fulness of the gospel any more 
than from its freeness; but it leaves room for meeting 
the actual facts, and it accounts for a state in which we 
find souls, which, after all, can never be bent into a theory. 
There are stubborn facts which meet the eye every day, 
even without looking for them, if we are in earnest 
about souls. Take notice of them, no matter where, 
and you will learn that there is a real action of the 
Spirit of God with the soul, and that one may even go 
on in this condition for days, weeks, months, and years. 
It is not infrequently after this that the soul is brought 
into perfect liberty before God. Where one enters into 
liberty, there is, in my judgment, not life only, but the 
reception of the Holy Ghost. 

Another word I would just say before leaving this 
part of the subject. Wherever God does begin the 


188 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


work, He always finishes, though not all at once. That 
there is no person, therefore, who ever dies with the 
work incomplete, is my firm conviction, according to 
the word of God, and, of course, confirmed by all I 
have ever known in experience. That is, whenever God 
creates anew, He most surely gives them the Holy 
Ghost. I do not believe it is always at the first, 
because, in fact, Scripture plainly to my mind proves 
the contrary; but he whom God undertakes to bless 
now, will undoubtedly, sooner or later, be brought into 
the full simple enjoyment of peace with Himself. I 
am not speaking, you will observe, of intelligence. If 
this were the case, it would be indeed a most sorrowful 
reflection how few are to be found. We all know how 
miserable truly pious souls may be for years and years. 
But it has never been my lot to see one of those who 
was not made happy before the Lord took them to 
Himself; and, indeed, I have seen marvellous instances 
of the complete rolling away of all anxieties and ques- 
tions, which had clouded a life-time, even where there 
was life; and I do not doubt that others have seen 
as much, perhaps more. They have seen the grace of 
God at length remove all clouds from the soul. But do 
they associate this with its real cause? From what 
has been before’ me then, I conclude that, whenever a 
soul is quickened by the Spirit of God, or converted, 
which substantially means the same thing (only from 
another point of looking at the work of the Spirit), it 
will eventually have the gift of the Holy Ghost; but it 
may have to wait because of no present submission to 
God’s righteousness, 

We may observe that on the occasion at Caesarea 
baptism follows. The apostle Peter draws attention to 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 189 


the fact, that not only did the Holy Ghost fall on them 
as on the Jews at Pentecost, but the people spoke with 
tongues; there were the same undeniable tokens of 
that great gift. And this was of great importance, as 
it stopped the lips of the brethren of the circumcision 
who accompanied the apostle. When he heard them 
magnify God, “Then answered Peter, Can any man 
forbid water?” He knew perfectly well how the pre- 
judice of the Jewish brethren would work. It was a 
new thing too—that Gentiles should be baptized with 
water. “Can any man forbid water, that these should 
be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well 
as we ?” 

Observe another fact (which, indeed, Scripture abun- 
dantly proves elsewhere), that baptism was never meant 
to be the prerogative of an official in the Church. Peter 
was there. Had it been a question of superior dignity, 
surely an apostle could have baptized them. The plain, 
sunple inference of the language is, that the act was 
not his personally. He took care that they should be 
baptized; for he commanded them to be baptized; but 
it is nowhere said that he baptized them himself, So 
Paul was glad to record about his work at Corinth, 
thanking God that he had not baptized any, except a 
very few. Peter, I do not doubt, was here led of God, 
although, for a different reason, to abstain from baptiz- , 
ing. Had it been otherwise, how men would have 
seized on the circumstance? what endeavours to extract 
from it something to glorify man where God was work- 
ing for His own praise? But it was not so. Even the 
blessed apostle Paul was baptized by a simple disciple ; 
and surely, if there had been anything involved in the 
person that baptized, we might expect it peculiarly 


190 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


guarded, when an apostle was the subject. But Ananias, 
at God’s word, goes and says “ Brother Saul,” and bap- 
tizes him at once. There was no waiting for an official 
personage. Is it not a wonderful proof of men’s un- 
belief, that they should overlook and explain away a 
fact so patent and overwhelming? Do. moderns or 
ancients flatter themselves that they can improve on 
Scripture? Do they know, or can they impart the will 
of the Lord for His servants and the Church better 
than the inspired writers? There is no warrant from 
God for making ministers of the gospel the only per- 
sons competent to baptize. The greatest care is taken 
to prove the contrary; and this too when it was no 
question of necessity. There was no need of seeking 
one in high office for Cornelius: for an apostle was on 
the spot. Had due order, according to God, called for 
any such form as men have urged since, why was it 
omitted on so grave an occasion, which could not but 
be a precedent for all time to come to those who are 
ruled by apostolic example? As Paul, so the Gentile 
centurion and his household were baptized by those 
who, now-a-days, would be designated as laymen. 
Apostles and evangelists sometimes did baptize; but it 
was in no way regarded as an official rite: other 
brethren might and did baptize, even when the apostle 
was present. But this by the way. : 


There remains but one case more, as recorded in the 
Acts of the Apostles, on which I must say a few words 
for my present theme. “And it came to pass, that, 
while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having passed 


through the upper coasts came to Ephesus: and finding — 


certain disciples, he said unto them, Have ye received 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 191 


the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said unto 
him, We have not so much as heard whether there be 
any Holy Ghost. And he said unto them, Unto what 
then were ye baptized? And they said, Unto John’s 
baptism: Then said Paul, John verily baptized with 
the baptism of repentance, Saying unto the people, that 
they should believe on him which should come after 
him, that is, on Christ Jesus. When they heard this, 
they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. 
And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the 
Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with 
tongues, and prophesied.” (Acts xix. 1-6.) This is an 
instance not less remarkable than any we have examined, 
and quite clear in its import. The apostle, no doubt, 
perceived a certain want of ease in these “ disciples,” 
which induced him to enquire whether they had re- 
ceived the Holy Ghost since they believed. Then there 
is— certainly there was in the apostle’s mind—such a 
thing as receiving the Spirit after believing. He does 
not question the reality of their faith; he had reason 
to ask whether they had received the Holy Ghost since. 
And their answer is equally plain: “We have not so 
much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost.” 
They did not plead ignorance, as is sometimes ignorantly 
inferred, of the Spirit’s existence. The question was 
about believers receiving the Holy Spirit. This was an 
ancient promise; and John the Baptist (with whom 
they had connection more or less close) did not more 
surely testify of a Messiah quite imminent, yea, in the 
midst of Israel, than of His baptizing with the Holy 
Ghost, and not with water only, as he himself did. 
In fact, every reader of the Old Testament knew, not 
only of the existence of the Spirit, but of God’s gracious 


192 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


promise, that He should be poured out in the last days; 
and of all teachers John had most strongly pressed on 
his disciples that Messiah would be the instrument of 
this wondrous work and favour among men. But they 
did not somehow know that the promise was now in 
course of accomplishment, that believers among Jews, 
Samaritans, and Gentiles had already received the 
Spirit, through the hearing of faith, and not through 
works of law. 

The apostle proceeds to ask them unto what they 
had been baptized; which drew forth the reply, that 
they knew no more than John’s baptism. This elicited 
a weighty explanation: John had not gone farther than 
the baptism of repentance. He did insist on that self- 
judgment which the Spirit alone produces in souls that 
bow to God’s word, and which detects their moral ruin in 
His sight. The power which is founded on redemption, 
which cannot dwell in him who is a sinful man till the 


blood is shed and sprinkled as a groundwork, as it. 


were, for His own indwelling power, (which thereon 
links the ransomed and delivered soul with Him who 
has won the victory, and leads it victoriously too 
through an evil world,) was not yet bestowed. John 
could only tell the people that they should believe on 
Him who was coming after him—that is, on Christ. 
Paul preached a Saviour who had already come, and 
had effected redemption. “When they heard this, they 
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And 
when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy 
Ghost came on them, and they spake with tongues, and 
prophesied.” 

Here again the external signs were not lacking; but 
they are confounded with the gift of the Holy Ghost 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 193 


no more here than in any of the other instances. These 
disciples were baptized with Christian baptism: the 
baptism of repentance did not suffice for them. They 
were baptized unto His name who died and rose again. 
And thereon they received the Spirit, but even then 
not without the imposition of Paul’s hands. Thus, if 
God had put honour on Peter and John at Samaria, not 
less did He uphold the apostolate of Saul of Tarsus. 
And it is to be observed also, that as the two apostolic 
delegates had been thus owned, not in J erusalem, but 
in its religious rival Samaria, so Paul laid his hands 
not on Gentiles converted through his preaching, but 

on disciples already baptized with John’s baptism. 
There is nothing therefore in this to produce diffi- 
culty, or weaken the tenor of what I have already 
sought to expound with all simplicity from the word of 
God. The two instances where apostles, one or more, 
laid their hands on believers, in order that they might 
receive the Spirit, were exceptional and ancillary to 
the chief occasions where we hear of no such act done 
by the apostles. In one of these, the greater, instances 
(the dealing with the Jews at Pentecost), Scripture is 
entirely silent as to imposition of hands in any case ; 
and there assuredly was none to lay hands on those 
who first received the Holy Ghost that day, whether 
the apostles or the rest of the hundred and twenty: 
God reserved this gift that it should come direct from 
His own hand. In the other kindred case, we know 
for certain that hands were not laid on the believers 
before the Spirit was given them; and this is the 
more momentous to us, inasmuch as it was the case 
of Cornelius and his household, under which type, of 
course, we, as Gentiles, properly fall. The conclusion, | 
O 


194 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


therefore, is irresistible. Even if apostles did exist, 
they are not needed to lay hands on us, or any other 
(jentiles who believe, in order that we may receive the 
Holy Ghost. Not thus, according to His word, did God 
give His Spirit to the uncircumcision. Believing on 
Christ through their word, we have shared the blessing, 
even as our prototypes at Czesarea. 

The Lord be praised, not only for His Spirit, but for 
the written word, which makes manifest the folly of 
pretentious men, reprobate concerning the faith, who 
seek to alarm the timid and to embolden the super- 
stitious. May we hold fast, according to the faith of 
God’s elect, the acknowledging of the truth which is 
after godliness, in hope of eternal life, which God 
that cannot lie promised before the world began. 


Se Se 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 195 


Lecture PLL. 


RoMANS viii. 1-27. 


THERE are two main parts of the subject to-night which 
it is of great consequence for the children of God to 
distinguish, in order that either one or other should be 
rightly understood. One is to be in the Spirit. It isa 
condition that supposes a total change of being; it 
means, in contrast with nature or the flesh, a new state 
which souls enter now on the earth. Besides, there is 
the actual personal dwelling of the Holy Ghost in the 
‘believer. —This~chapter—most~clearly- insists on both 
truths ; and I shall endeavour a little to explain their 
difference, as well as the conclusion from them both for 
the blessing of the Christian to God’s own glory (and, 
of course, therefore by Christ Jesus), to which all tend. 

In order, however, rightly to enter into the first of 
these two truths, we must look a little at the general 
features of the epistle to the Romans. 

And, first of all, I would remark that the true key- 
note of the epistle is righteousness, chiefly and foremost 
the righteousness of God (i.e, His habit or quality 
revealed in the gospel and founded on redemption, in 
which God can be perfectly consistent with Himself in 
justifying the guilty who believe in Christ). Such divine 
righteousness, when we enquire how it is that God can 
thus justify us, is by Christ Jesus the Lord. It is in 
virtue of His blood, of His death; but not that only. 
It is there indeed most believers are apt to stop. We 

0 2 


196 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


may bless God that any sinners go so far. We may 
grieve for our brethren’s sake that they go not farther ; 
and this not merely for them, for their own lost enjoy- 
ment, more particularly in the matter of liberty, but 
because every defrauding of the soul of its proper 
blessing and full liberty before God is just so much 
detracted from the glory of Christ, and entails pro- 
portionate weakness in the service of Christ as well as 
in worship. We need not envy those who think this a 
light matter; nor should we in any way sympathize 
with those who count it the only desirable thing that a 
soul should just be saved from the wrath to come. It 
would be true if man’s salvation were God’s end; but 
God never proposes less than His own glory; and he 
who makes salvation the great question proves that he 
is more careful about himself or his fellows than ex-— 
ercised in what the Holy Spirit reveals about God and 
His Son. And, in point of fact, there is always a just 
retribution ; for there never was one since the world 
began that had power of enjoyment in the soul, or had 
pleasure in glorifying God, or was an overcomer of the 
world, or was simply and thoroughly a worshipper in 
the energy of the Holy Ghost, who stopped short where 
man is apt to stay, and where human theology habitually 
terminates. For theology consists of so many conclu- 
sions, is a system of inferences, and never faith. It 
draws deductions from certain principles that may be 
found in the word of God, and many of them true 
enough, no doubt; but the very thing that makes it to 
be theology hinders power, forfeits liberty, opposes the 
glory of God, and gives an undue place to man by mak- 
ing him the arranger of doctrine and head of a school. 
The consequence is, that the children of God are stunted 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 197 


in their growth, and the Holy Ghost is grieved at so 
much dishonour that is necessarily done to Himself, 
the only One that is entitled to guide fully and capable 
of blessing all that belong to Christ, to the glory of 
God the Father. 

Let me call attention first to the obvious facts of the 
case that meet one in looking at the epistle to the 
Romans. There is not a word said about the love of 
God, nor a word more about victory for the believer, 
until the whole question of righteousness is settled. 
This might not at first sight seem the readiest way to 
give the heart ease, and peace, and liberty; but it is 
God's way notwithstanding. First and foremost we 
have that word, always so unbending and withering to 
man, the “righteousness of God.” And why so? His 
righteousness keeps before man divine authority, will 
not let him forget His solemn title to judge; for there 
was no question of righteousness until sin came into 
the world. What was there for Him to judge till man 
had ruined himself, and creation dependent on him as 
its head? All previously was very good. Thus jude- 
ment was not the natural or normal relationship, so to 
speak, between God and man when man was innocent, 
and God was simply a blesser of man in every kind of 
created goodness. There man enjoyed, and the thanks 
of a creature altogether without sin rose up to God. 
But the scene was soon changed and spoiled; and the 
conscience which man acquired in the knowledge of 
good and evil, the knowledge of good that was lost, 
and of evil that was the bitter gain of sin which had 
overcome him, led man first to hide his own conscious 
nakedness, and then at the very sound of the presence 
of God to retreat from Him. The conscience of man, 


198 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


alas! banished him morally before ever the voice of 
God sentenced him judicially. Man felt he had no 
longer place in the presence of God. The fatal con- 
sequence was manifest from that day, though brought 
out gradually, as God was pleased, with increase of light. 
Sin necessitated judgment. 

Thus, evidently, if man was to be saved, he must 
be called, and this, moreover, to glory and _ virtue, 
as it is said in 2 Peter i. This is the character of 
God’s call. It is to what man had not. It was not 
simply a sustaining and using aright of what he had. 
He had lost his original tenure; yea, he had lost not 
only what was put under him in untainted excellence, 
but the One who was above him—God Himself (his own 
conscience bearing its sad and true witness), Accord- 
ingly God calls in His grace; but He calls him by 
glory; He calls to things unseen, and outside what was 
seen, at the same time acting by moral motives as a 
restraint upon the evil that had now entered and gained 
dominion over man’s heart. This, of course, is all 
brought out with incomparably more force and fitness 
in Christianity; but still we find the principle of it 
true from the moment that man fell. In due time, 
however, God gave promises, and these, it is needless 
to say, powerfully acted upon those who had faith. In 
due time also the law was given by Moses, and by that 
no small knowledge of sin where the conscience was 
exercised ; for it raised the question of man’s state—a 
thing that the promises did not touch. The promises 
' simply held out a good that God would surely give in 
His own time. Their characteristic point was, that they 
did not depend on man’s state, but on God’s gracious 
will and word. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 199 


Evidently, however, it would not be good for man, 
being a sinner, not to feel his real state. Accordingly, 
after the promises, but before their accomplishment, 
the law came in, acted as a probe, and brought out 
most plainly that man was altogether evil and guilty, 
and, finally, that he had neither the will nor the 
power to amend, however much he knew the evil of 
his ways. 

Last of all came Christ, who submitted to the law, 
and might have taken up the promises; for, indeed, He 
was the heir, as well as the faithful witness, the only 
One who ever made the law lovely as a moral instru- 
ment, and responded perfectly to that expression of 
God’s claim on man. He alone vindicated God, who 
had given the law, in all His ways here below; but 
had He, therefore, taken up the promises, and in con- 
nection with the law, it is very evident that not one 
could have shared the inheritance along with Himself. 

A new thing, therefore, appears in the cross of the 
Lord Jesus. He who had fulfilled the law, He who 
was the heir of the promises, takes the curse instead of 
the crown—takes the judgment of God instead of the 
kingdom of God. Then was done that most wondrous 
of all deeds—the outpouring of all that God felt and 
could express against sin on the person of Him who 
knew no sin; all that God could do in holy indignation 
against evil on the One that had done no evil, neither 
was guile found in His mouth. He who was His own 
Son, the object of His perfect delight and absolute 
eternal favour,—He was given up to unsparing judg- 
ment, God Himself dealing with Him as He never did 
with another, and never can with another again. The 
very glory of the person of the only-begotten Son, 


200 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


which gave Him power of endurance, made God’s wrath 
so much the more intolerable to be borne. The fact 
that He was God, and in the relation of Son to the 
Father—that, therefore, He both had the nature of 
God, and knew the love of the Father as none ever 
had or knew—added ineffable poignancy to the suffer- 
ings of the Saviour in that awful hour, But “it is 
finished ;” and thenceforward God’s righteousness begins 
to be gine promused merely, but) revealed. The subject 
may not be wholly traced out in the epistle to the 
Romans; but, at the least, a very important part is 
given there, especially that which is in view of man’s 
wants. In 2 Corinthians the Spirit looks at another 
part of God’s righteousness, which we are made in 
Christ. But the great point here is, that Jesus is 
glorified above in the glory of God. Not that this is 
absolutely omitted in Romans; for, as we all know, it 
is Just alluded to very briefly in chap. viii. inasmuch 
as the design of the epistle calls for fundamental truth, 
rather than the heavenly height to which divine right- 
eousness entitles. This would have interfered with the 
then currrent of the Spirit, which was to bring out life 
in Him risen from the dead, rather than to reveal the 
place of glory to which Christ is gone on high. But, 
beyond doubt, the most indispensable requisite for the 
display and foundation of God’s righteousness (as Serip- 
ture shows it, if looked at as a whole) is, that God 
should enter the scene of death, where Jesus lay the 
sacrifice for sin, having become responsible in perfect 
grace for us. Thereon He raises Christ up from the 
dead, and, finally, sets Him at His own right hand in 
the heavenly places. 

All this clearly was God’s righteousness because of 


ee 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 201 


the cross. It was what God owed to Jesus; it was a 
debt which He could not but pay, both as God and as 
Father; and this because Jesus was the man who 
had glorified Him to the uttermost, so as He never 
had been glorified before, yea, even about that very 
thing—sin—which was of all things the most hateful 
to God. He kept back nothing; He endured all things; 
He held not fast the show of His glory, but put it 
in abeyance. He committed even His very life into 
the hands of God. He put Himself thoroughly, so to 
speak, into the hands of God, enduring everything that 
was due to God for sin. The consequence is, that God, 
both as God and as the Father, raised up Him that was 
the Son but a man, by His own glory (as we are told 
in Romans vi.) But even this would not have been a 
sufficient estimate of what Christ had done and suffered: 
in God's eyes the cross deserved incomparably more. 
Undoubtedly He died there, bearing our sins in His own 
body. By the grace of God, He tasted death for every 
man. ‘This annulled Satan’s power, blotted out sin, 
brought infinite glory to God, who was indebted thereby 
to man, the Son of man. Hence, as it is said in John 
xlil., “if God be glorified in him, God shall glorify him 
in himself, and will straightway glorify him.” There- 
fore, instead of waiting for the administration of the 
fulness of times, instead of giving Him the whole earth 
and all the nations on it, God glorifies Christ in Himself 
at once and on high. There is no delay nor change 
as to any single thing of the earth. It was a question of 
God's righteousness, of His moral and heavenly glory; 
it was absolutely independent of all else. Neither 
the race nor the world have any part in procuring it. 
God takes Christ up, and puts Him on His own throne 


ae 4 
men 


202 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


in the heavens. Who but God ever thought of such a 
plan? There were, no doubt, inspired words in the 
Psalms and elsewhere, which, when God had thus done, 
derived a meaning from it, and showed the divine in- 
tention from of old; but still glorifying the Son of 
man in Himself is a form of expressing the glory that 
He put upon Jesus, for which you might search in vain 
the word of God, till He Himself declared it just before 
He went away. 

Nor was this portion, glorious as it is, enough for 
God. It was personal to Christ, and above all pre- 
cious. Still, His work bore on others, and the epistle 
to the Romans takes up this side of God’s righteous- 
ness (namely, the effect of His righteousness as regards 
believers rather than as regards the Son). He suffered 


—— 


on the cross, and He was exalted in heavenly glory; 
but what about the sinners He died for? Would God 
leave them in their sins? How would this be treating 
Jesus? What would be a due estimate of the work 
the Son of man had done for the lost He came to seek 
and save? Had He failed or conquered in that mighty 


enterprise? He suffered and died for them and their . 


sins: what is the result? This is answered in the 
epistle to the Romans, where we have the working out 
of this truth for sinful man: “The righteousness of 
God toward (or unto) all, and upon them all that 
believe.” 

From Romans iii., whence these words are taken, we 
learn that His righteousness meets sins completely. 
It is the “satisfaction,” as the old divines were wont to 
speak, that was rendered about sin. Not that I quite 
like the phrase or idea; but what we have there is 
clearly expiation or propitiation for the sins of men. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 203 


Romans ili. proves that Christ’s death or blood in no 
sense stops with meeting the measure of man’s wants. 
All now is according to the glory of God. Men “come 
short of the glory of God;” but if God brought in His 
salvation, it must be to make man capable of standing 
in His own presence on high, and not merely where he 
was before. This would be short of God’s aims. Re-— 
instating is not salvation. If salvation be wrought, it 
must be not merely to put man back into the state 
wherein he was before the fall, but to make him com- 
petent to stand in presence of the glory of God. 
Accordingly, this is shown in Romans iv. v. in a more 
advanced way; and by what means? The precious 
blood of the Lord Jesus Christ is not all; but He was 
“delivered,” as it is said, “for our offences, and was 
raised again for our justification.” Mark the connec- 
tion: “He was raised again for our justification.” 
Some take it as because we were justified, which appears 
to my mind far from sound doctrine. The effect of 
such a version or sense would be to make our justifi- 
cation, like Christ’s blood-shedding, a past thing, and 
independent of faith. It is never so treated in the 
word of God; and, indeed, the next words, which open 
chapter v., refute the thought. “Therefore,” says the 
apostle, “being justified by faith, we have peace with 
God,” &c. There could be no such “therefore,” if we had 
been justified when Christ rose. The work of redemp- 
tion was, no doubt, wrought when God raised Him; and 
Christ passed into that glorious condition of resurrection, 
showing the character of the justification which would 
be given to him who believes in Him. But the words 
immediately after prove that justification, in the very 
place where men would separate it from faith, is indis- 


204 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


solubly bound up with it. “Therefore, being justified 
by faith, we have peace with God.” 

There it is, be it remarked, that we have, for the first 
time in the epistle, the revelation of peace with God, 
and entrance into this grace wherein we stand, and 
exultation in the hope of God’s glory. In Romans we 
are never (as in Ephesians ii.) regarded as even now, 
in a certain sense, linked with the glory; but we are 
enabled here below to abound in hope of the glory to 
which we are looking onward. Also, in the midst of 
the tribulations which also turn to a matter of boast, 
we are said to have the love of God shed abroad in our 
hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given to us. Thus, 
again, the first mention of God’s love is after the right- 
eousness of God had been as fully explained as this 
epistle called for. 

That which I draw from this is, that God would give 
a deep, solemn sense of sin to those in whom He was 
working graciously. More than that, He would show 
them that after all He takes care of His own glory. 
I do not say that this would be the way to deal with a 
poor anxious soul; but, in point of fact, the Epistle to 
the Romans was not written to the anxious and trou- 
bled in conscience. Here it is not a question of winning 
unconverted people to God. In that case, nothing is 
more important than showing love, just as Jesus first 
does; and as He wins the attention, He then awakens 
the conscience before setting it perfectly at liberty, as 
we know, by the Holy Ghost, now that the work is 
done. But in dealing with believers, and more particu- 
larly where souls have entered into the blessedness of 
the gospel without any very deep work on the conscience, 
it is of all importance that the righteous side of God’s 


ee 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 205 


salvation should be maintained with all possible clear- 
ness, and that it should be distinctly understood that the 
gospel is “the power of God unto salvation,” because it 
is God’s righteousness. Such is the argument of the 
apostle in opening the discussion in Romans i. 

When we search into this a little farther, we find 
another question rise before us. In all this develop- 
ment of the first four chapters, and, indeed, as far as the 
middle of Romans v., the great point before the mind 
is, Sinners guilty, and God in His own way meeting 
them as they were—in their sins. But then there is 
another thing that far more troubles the soul that has 
been awakened and brought into peace, and that is, not 
his sims, but his sin, not what he has done and been 
guilty of, but his estate before God. For the most 
lamentable thing that he finds about himself is, that, 
after conversion and finding peace, he makes discoveries 
of his wretchedness and the inward evil of his nature 
which he could not have believed possible in a child of 
God—which no man ever anticipates until he proves it 
in his own person. The word of God may speak about 
it, but he passes it by and does not dwell on it; and, in 
point of fact, nobody does understand it until it becomes 
a matter of personal experience when the heart is really 
brought to God. 

There is precisely where the Christianity of the day, 
and, indeed, of many a past day for a long time, stops 
short of the revealed truth of God. It leaves persons, 
I may say, half-saved. It leaves persons with partial 
thoughts of Christ before their soul, but never with the 
proper, simple, clear understanding and consciousness 
that they are 7m Christ. I do not mean that the expres- 
sion “in Christ” is not used, but that people, when 


206 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


they read such language as, “There is therefore now no 
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,” for the 
most part understand nothing more than that Christ 
died and rose again for them, and that consequently 
they are cleared in the sight of God. But this is not 
the full meaning of the text. The difference is that, 
from the middle of chapter v. of the epistle to the 
Romans, a new question is raised by the Holy Spirit of 
God—man guilty, and the way in which guilt can be 
met and the soul can have peace about it. All this has 
been closed; and this is the proper doctrine of the 
epistle to the Romans. What follows directly after is 
rather a supplement to all, from chapter v. down to 
chapter vill. It is an added instruction of the Holy 
Ghost of the deepest possible moment for the soul that 
has already found Christ. The point that is handled 
here is, that not merely there is a Saviour, who died for 
my sins, and rose again for my justification, but my 
old nature has been judged and condemned in Christ's 
death. ‘As by one man sim entered into the world,” 
so it is not a question of what J did. Wherever sins 
are treated of, we get personal guilt; and it is to this 
that law applies, and to this that the judgment of God 
applies for things done in the body. 

But grace gives us another thing besides. If all my 
sins were blotted out and forgiven, I am in a state of 
things that is a misery to myself and a deep dishonour 
to God. How has this come to pass? It came in through 
one man—Adam; and as one man is the head of the 
evil, blessed be God, there is another man who as cer- 
tainly has brought righteousness to issue—yea, grace 
reigning through righteousness unto eternal life—as.the 
first man brought in sin and death. This is deliverance. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 207 


It is not sinners with the law, but Adam at one extre- 
mity and Christ at the other. But how does this affect 
you or me? No Jew could deny the effects for the race 
of Adam's position. He might boast about the law, 
but there was a world ruined before ever the law came 
in; and the law, instead of repairing the ruin, rather 
aud only fastened additional fetters on man, and gave 
more complete proof of the extent of the ruin. It could 
do no more. But now another man came, even Jesus. 
And how is Jesus spoken of here? As One who passed 
through death into resurrection-life. The consequence 
is, that from the middle of Romans y. the Holy Ghost 
begins to discuss a new question altogether,—not justi- 
fication by blood, but justification of life. mae 
And herein lies the great deficiency of theologians, 
There is no understanding, as far as I am aware, 
of “justification of life.” Manifestly this is not a 
question of what the Lord did. It is an estate or 
condition founded on redemption and displayed in 
His resurrection. Works, however good, do not meet 
the exigency. Christ did magnify God, as we have 
said, in everything; and this was absolutely neces- 
sary for God’s glory, as it is a part of our deep 
blessing, because we have indeed an entire Christ. 
Still, what Scripture brings out to meet the ques- 
tion of our state of sin as men is not what Jesus 
was when here below, but what He rose up into. 
Therefore, just as Adam only became head of a family 
when a sinner (z.e., when he had accomplished, as one 
may say, the work of sin), so the Lord Jesus. only 
becomes Head, the recognized and revealed Head, “a 
quickening Spirit,” when He enters into resurrection. 
Only when He laid down His life in death, He had 


—_<— 


208 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


finished the work that God gave Him to do. Then it 
was that the corn of wheat, which fell into the ground 
and died, now risen, would bring forth much fruit. 
This principle is applied in Romans vi. to the sin 
by which the believer was troubled. The main point of 
the chapter is not that we are risen, but alive, in Christ 


~risen, to God. The argument of the apostle does not go 


so far here as to regard the believer as risen with 
Christ, which is not the doctrine of Romans. In Colos- 
sians he is viewed as so risen, in Ephesians he is even 
seated in heavenly places in Christ; but in Romans 
the believer is never regarded as risen; he is simply 


dead to sin and alive unto God. What is here insisted 


on in regard to holiness of walk is that he should 
reckon himself “dead unto sin, but alive unto God.” 
But I cannot reckon myself dead if I am risen. This 
is evident. It would be a contradiction in terms; so 
that the necessity of the argument and the whole force 
of the epistle excludes this mistake ; and a very impor- 
tant point indeed it is and will be found in Scripture. 
But this does give the believer a very wondrous deliver- 
ance practically; and I am entitled to it from the 
first moment of my Christian career, when I own the 
Lord Jesus Christ and am baptized unto His name. 
What am I baptized unto? Unto His life—unto what 
He did? Not at all. I am baptized unto His death. 
I begin at once with the great and infinite act of divine 
grace in which He met me, and not merely my sins 
(for there I find His precious blood); but He does not 
say unto His blood, but unto His death, which is a larger 
expression and goes more deeply. This meets my con- 
dition as a sinner—as a man alive to sin; and J 
want to find death to it all; I want to find deliverance 


ee ae Se a 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 209 


out of it; and the only possible deliverance out of a 
state of sin is death. This is exactly what is wanted. 
It is not only that I am forgiven: this is all very 
blessed and most necessary as a beginning; but it 
is not what is called salvation, even if I look at the 
term as a purely personal matter. There is more than 
this ; for I want the application of His death and His 
life beyond it, as well as of His precious blood; and 


this is what I have in Christ. iia 


The glorious fact is, that I am entitled to account 
eae death as meeting my state with every root of 
evil; so that I have the comfort of knowing not only 
that by His blood I am forgiven, but that by Him risen 
Tam called and warranted to count myself dead to all 
indwelling sin, which otherwise would be an intolerable 
burden. Thus a double blessing is procured in the 
dead and risen Lord Jesus. There is remission of sins, 
but also plenary deliverance. Only he that has died 
is cleared from sin. The blood of Christ meets the 
sins; but I want the death of Christ in all its value 
for sin. This alone, therefore, supplies the answer to 
our wants; for He that was dead in atonement is 
risen into a new estate altogether, where no question 
of sin, or of anything requiring to be done or suffered 
on God’s part, ever appears again. The entire blessed- 
ness of Christ is for the believer, and, mark, from 
his baptism. Is it a something that a man grows up 
into which gives a certain kind of value to experience ? 
This would be all sadly liable to turn to self-applause, 
and, from the subtlety of the natural heart, would be 
the means of taking away from Christ on the plea of 
honouring the work of the Spirit of God within. Alas! 
this is precisely where (spite of God’s care in Scripture, 

Ie 


210 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


as in the facts of Christianity) so many Christians slip 
aside; and would you know why? For this simple 
reason: the world, the law, and the flesh go together. 
If I am simply a man living in the world, I need a law 
to keep me in order, a rule to deal with my nature— 
to reprove me here, and to strike me there. 

Accordingly, when God concerned Himself actually 
with His people Israel, a nation living in the world, 
He gave them His law, which acted as a curb or 
restraint, a kind of bit and bridle on their rebellious 
flesh. It had to be checked on the one hand; it had to 
be pushed on the other, so to speak. Thus it was that 
the law dealt with man’s flesh; and this is what the law 
would essay for Christians. But to go back to it now is 
just the denial of Christianity. I have not the slightest 
hesitation in pronouncing, that some good men who in 
grievous error would impose the law as a rule of life 
for the Christian mean very well by it (for they aim 
at being pious); but I am well satisfied that the whole 
principle is false, and that the law, instead of being 
a rule of life, is necessarily a rule of death to one who 
has sin in his nature. Far from being a delivering 
power, it can only condemn such; far from being a 
means of holiness, it is, in fact, and according to the 
apostle, the strength of sin. 

What I want first of all is deliverance. How is this 
deliverance to be found? By death. Our death? Am 
I to die? This would be destruction, not salvation; 
and we find it not thus in Scripture. Resting on 
His death, I can die daily; I can submit to the scorn 
of the world according to the measure of my faith, and 
expose myself to that which I know will bring separation 
and suffering from the world; and it is the glory of a 


EEE a, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 211 


Christian to go forward humbly but boldly withal, and 
at the same time entirely separate from the world, by 
a path which is strewed with all bitterness of trial. 
But what is it I must start with? It would become 
a matter of boasting, and reflect a certain degree of 
credit on myself, if I had to die to my evil nature 
gradually. But it is not so; and hence the importance 
of the truth set forth in Christian baptism. A man at 
the beginning of his profession of Christ confesses 
His death and resurrection. I am not going to discuss 
now any points that are disputed, but assume it to be 
an initiatory institution. Differences on the subject 
there are, no doubt, as all allow; but all should hold 
its initiatory character, as well as the truth which it 
sets forth objectively. What does it signify? That the 
Saviour confessed is not a living One, but dead and 
risen. “As many as are baptized unto Jesus Christ 
are baptized unto his death.” This is more than the 
sprinkling of His blood to me, true and precious as 
such a privilege undoubtedly is. 

Besides blood there is His death, which deals with my 
nature, and sets me free before God in Christ risen. The 
more simply I take it the better. There is nothing like 
simplicity in the things of God; and there is no faith so 
true as that which takes His word on His own authority, 
though we may as yet understand little. If God tells 
me, a Christian, that I am dead, am I to believe it or 
not? If, then, it is certainly true that I am dead, am 
I not to believe also the inferences which His word 
draws for me—that my judgment has fallen on Christ, 
and that He, risen, is the power and sample of my — 
deliverance, and that, as for man and the world, they 
have no claim on me, who now belong to Another, even 

Put 


212 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


to Him who is raised from the dead? What claim can 
there be longer on a man that is dead? Everybody 
knows that such an one is to be buried out of men’s 
sight. The law passes completely out of application 
to the dead. Not that the law ceases to retain its 
force; but it is for those alive under it. The law is 
all-important in its proper sphere; but its power and 
sphere consist in dealing with men alive in the world. 
Out of this I have emerged by Christ’s death and re- 
surrection ; so that I am no longer living in the world 
as to my proper Christian life. To flesh and world I 
have died; and this is what, in my baptism and pro- 
fession of the Lord Jesus, I began with. I was living 
as a natural man, but a dead and risen Christ has 
closed all this for me. It is not only that I believe in 
Christ, and know forgiveness by His precious blood; 
but I am entitled by God’s word also to know and say 
that I am dead in the death of Christ. One is as much 
a truth as the other. But the feeblest saint, practically 
mixed up with the world, feels the need of knowing 
that which stays divine judgment, and hence clasps 
that comfort to the heart in the hour of trial and 
sorrow. Why do they not equally accept the other 
truth? Because they do not like to face the full grace 
of God, nor the full responsibility of the Christian. 
The blood of the paschal lamb sprinkling the door- 
posts was known even in the land of bondage ; but the 
Red Sea separated from it manifestly that the people, 
now redeemed and outside, might be only for the Lord. 
Then it becomes imperative that the Christian’s walk 
be in the pure light of the grace of God. “ We are not 
under the law,” as Rom. vi. insists, “but under grace.” 
And this is a humble as well as holy walk, where flesh 


' a a 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 216 


counts for nothing; and there is not a word about the 
law, save indeed expressly exempting the believer com- 
pletely from its jurisdiction. It is not made for a 
righteous man, which of course a believer is. It has its 
force against the unrighteous ; its application is to the 
wicked living in the world. Against the evil of man, as 
such, the law bears its witness not in vain. They are 
living in the pride of the world, in the profanity or 
the self-righteousness of the flesh; and the law deals 
with such. That is, whether men give loose reins to 
low flesh, or religious pretensions to high flesh, the law 
deals with them all. But as for the Christian, he begins 
with death to his nature as alive in the world. I press 
again that this is the precise meaning (not of John’s, but) 
of Christian baptism unto death. The Christian finds 
his blessing in that which the natural heart finds so 
dreadful—in death; but it is in the death of Christ 
he is a dead man before God, as he was dead in sins. 
Such is the first Adam condition out of which the 
believer emerges by the faith of Christ, by whose death 
he too has died to all he previously lived in, and now 
enjoys as part of God’s grace toward him, to reckon 
himself “dead to sin, but alive to God through Jesus 
Christ our Lord.” 

Such is one of the privileges, with a grave responsi- 
bility attached to it, to which the Holy Ghost applies 
the death and resurrection of Christ. It is no longer a 
question, it will be observed, of our sins, or of God’s 
washing us from them in His grace by the blood of 
Christ. Sin, as such, the fleshly nature, is met in 
Christ’s death, who, risen, communicates a new life, a 
spiritual nature, in the power of His resurrection. That 
man is my Saviour, and that new nature is exactly what 


214 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


I fave got as part of the new creation; for “if any 
man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Old things 
have passed away, and behold all things have become 
new.” The second epistle to the Corinthians may carry 
the doctrine farther, as remarked before, because it 
treats of the glory of Christ, and not merely the 
application of God's righteousness, as a basis of salva- 
tion, which is the point of the epistle to the Romans. 
Next we come, in Rom. vii, to the question of the 
law; and though this be not the time to discuss that 
subject fully, I may just observe that we have here 
also alike thorough and divine clearance from this 
difficulty that we had in chapter vi. from sin. ‘ Where- 
fore,” he says, “my brethren, ye also are become dead 
to the law by the body of Christ.” And how is this? 
The body of Christ is very expressive; for nobody in 
his senses would use such a phrase as this to describe 
Christ’s life here below. Apply it to His death, and all 
is quite simple and consistent. “Ye are become dead 
to the law by the body of Christ, that ye should be 
married to another.” And in what condition? Even 
to Him who shed His blood for you? Not so; but 
“even to him who is raised from the dead, that we 
should bring forth fruit unto God. For when we were 
in the flesh;”—then we are there no longer. This is the 
point needed. But it will be found that, when those who 
insist on the law as the rule of life for the Christian 
refer to this expression of the apostle, they put quite a 
mistaken meaning on not being in the flesh, and only 
mean by it our old unconverted state. But it goes 
-farther. What experience does the Holy Ghost bring 
before us in the end of this chapter? It is a man 
wretched, but evidently converted. He has been given 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. YAS 


to turn to God. He abhors sin, yet he is always 
falling into it; he loves holiness, but ever comes short 
of it: in fact, he is every way miserable. He feels 
rightly as to all this, but no effort to do good or shun 
evil avails. The evil is present, and the good seems to 
elude his grasp: such is the experience of his heart. 
I am not speaking of his outward life, because this is 
not the question here, but a deeper thing. There may 
be no fall into open sin, but sin sadly works within. 
That which the apostle here transfers to himself in, 
application is the bitterness of a soul who thought he. 
had nothing but blessing, yet after all never realized 
himself to be so unhappy in his life. In his unre- 
generate days he might have tasted the unsatisfying 
pleasures of the world. Now he had turned his back on | 
the world and his face to God, yet never was there (he 
felt) so disconsolate a being. The misery increases till 
he bursts out into “O wretched man that I am! who 
shall deliver me?” when the darkness yields to a better 
and calmer light than ever. Thus it is the case of one 
who had seen Christ as the hope of his soul, who had 
been born of God, yet, nevertheless, had no sense of 
deliverance. God lets him feel his own inward evil till 
he looks quite out of himself to Christ as his Deliverer, 
not alone from guilt or wrath, but “from this body of 
death.” It is not sins, it is sin, which harasses him so 
much the more because his conscience is awakened. 
Being alive to what is due without adequately knowing 
grace or redemption, God or his own heart, he suffers 
severely till he knows the reality, nature, and extent 
of hberty in Christ. Accordingly, this is the very 
question the Holy Ghost sets Himself to answer in the 
Scripture I have just now read. And what is its purport? 


216 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


The first answer is, that God has already in His love 
brought in a full deliverance for my soul; by-and-by 
He will bring in an equally complete deliverance for 
my mortal body. Thus a real present deliverance of 
grace comes first, and this becomes the pledge of all 
that follows in glory. What is the nature, then, of the 
soul’s deliverance now? If I use the word “ partial” 
about what God gives now, it is only because there is 
the body as wel! as the soul. As far as the soul is con- 
cerned, the emancipation is perfect ; but it is perfect only 
for the inner man, if I may so say, not yet for the outer. 

Accordingly, the apostle brings this before us in the 
earlier verses of Rom. viii. “There is therefore now no 
condemnation,” because he looks to, rests, and is in, 
Christ alone. This is, in part, the answer to the soul’s 
confession of misery and cry for a deliverer. Awakened 
to feel that it is not merely pardon he wants, but 
deliverance from self, he finds that deliverance is in 
Another. He had thought that, having found pardon 
in Christ, he must deliver himself by the inward work- 
ing of the Spirit of God; but he learned, when most 
wanting Him, that the Spirit of God did not help him; 
‘he found, somehow or another, that the Spirit of God : 
was making him miserable with himself, The reason 
is manifest: because he had put himself under law 
in the spirit of his mind, and the Holy Spirit (just 
because He is the Spirit of God come down to glorify = 
Christ) will never give power, but will make a man 
prove his weakness, as long as he is trying to put law 
in the place of Christ. This is in no wise what the . 
Holy Ghost has come down to do. He came to earth 
from heaven to glorify the Lord, and not the law. 

\e The lack of deliverance was learnt in groans; thence 


e 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. ya hy 


he is driven to turn to the Deliverer; whereon he con- 
cludes, “there is therefore now no condemnation ”—not 
for them for whom Christ died, but—“to them that 
are an Christ Jesus.” We are now by grace set in 
Another, even Christ risen, in order to give us our 
status before God. Nothing can be more blessed. Some 
inay gather a feeble understanding of it even from a 
human illustration. Take the case of a man who is 
worthy, and whose honourable feelings, and whose re- 
sources (I speak after the manner of men,) are as great 
as his worthiness, and he makes a choice. Being a wise 
and worthy man, he selects wisely and worthily, and he 
is pleased to choose where others had not the heart to 
choose. He does choose where nobody else could afford 
to do so; but having chosen, what then? The person 
he has chosen, and who is married to him, acquires the 
status proper to her husband, and all the old antecedents, 
perplexities, and griefs completely disappear. Among 
men the wife gets the name of her husband: her own 
name is gone for ever, and a new one taken. We find 
it is thus with those who are in Christ Jesus. What is 
their place? Where He is. Jesus walking on earth—is 
this my status? As the heavenly and divine pattern 
He may be followed, but He “abideth alone:” if 
that had been all, I had been left out for ever. But 
Christ died, yea, rather, is risen again. Then He can 
give me of His Spirit. This is what Christ does. His 
death has met the evil doubly. The sins are gone, but 
the nature is also judged righteously. Therefore God 
can reveal the new nature He has given, and vouchsafe 
another position altogether. Christ risen is the sole Head 
of God’s family. I do not speak of His body but of the 
family ; for the epistle to the Romans, except in the 


218 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


figure used so practically in chapter xii, does not go 
beyond that. But here I have the family of God, and the 
condition, place, or standing of that family before Him, 
resulting from the death and resurrection of Christ. “ Be- 
hold I and the children that God hath given me.” Grace 
imparts Christ’s own status to the whole family. And 
what is the result for them? “No condemnation.” Christ 
had suffered for the Christian ; and, now that He is risen, 
the Christian is, as it were, part of the righteousness of 
God, as is indeed yet more strongly said in 2 Cor. vy. 
How could God demand justly a debt to be paid twice ? 
And now Christ has entered into this place where He 
could have others identified with His own blessedness 
before God. This, and nothing less, is its character— 
“no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.” 

And next the reason is given; for, says the apostle, 
“the law of the Spirit of life” Mark well that it is 
not simply because His blood was shed. This alone 
would not suffice. However efficacious for the con- 
sequences of the old estate, it would not give us the 
new standing before God. Without His precious blood 
I could not be brought into this new condition; but I 
want not only the blood that cleanses from the sins of 
my past life, but also complete clearance out of the old 
condition, and a holy, happy, settled place in the new 
creation. And what can do this? Himself dead and 
risen, Just as He is the One that perfectly meets the 
sins, and, more than this, that was judged for the sin; 
so He is the blessed ensample and power of the new 
estate in resurrection. He is the head and source of 
all the blessing. Accordingly, then, the apostle speaks 
of a “law of the Spirit of Jife.” Hence it was that, when 
Christ rose from the dead, having purchased with His 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 219 


blood the best and most intimate blessings, He breathed 
on the disciples: His own blessed person vouchsafed the 
sign of it. Judgment had fallen on Christ for us; sin 
was put away, death vanquished. None of these has 
anything to do with this new life in Christ. Not but 
that a believer may slip into sin, as he may also die; 
but he neither sins nor dies from having the new life, 
but rather he sins because he has indulged the old 
nature, and he dies because it pleases God that Jesus 
should not come yet, and accordingly He calls him to 
be with Himself above meanwhile. But the life that 
he gets from Jesus neither sins nor dies. It is a holy 
life. And therefore, in virtue of its source, it may be 
said, that “he who is born of God doth not commit 
sin.” So the Christian does not die, as far as the new 
nature is concerned, even having eternal life in Christ. 
But observe, all this deliverance is merely for the 
inner man; there still remains the need of the outer, 
Although reconciliation is complete as regards the soul, 
it is but partial as regards the rest of nature, and God 
will never be content with what is short of His own 
counsels. He means to deliver wholly, and He will 
deliver worthily of Himself, of the Holy Ghost, of Christ, 
and of His redemption. 

Further, the apostle proceeds to give the reason 
why the law of the Spirit of life in Christ has made 
the Christian free from the law of sin and death. For 
He says, “What the law could not do, in that it was 
weak through the flesh,” God has done. Observe how 
the law and flesh go naturally together. “What it could 
not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God 
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh.” 
He does not, of course, say, in sinful flesh; for this it 


220 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


was not, yet certainly in the likeness of it. That is, it 
was not at all in the circumstances of one who refused 
a place in a sin-stained world, but of one who was 
born of a woman—no doubt, supernaturally born so— 
who should only be in the likeness of sinful flesh, but 
most truly born, or else could not be in the nature of 
man. But He who was the Son of God nevertheless 
becomes as truly man as He was God from everlasting, 
and dies in the nature which He had assumed—dies 
for man, dies vindicating God for man’s sins; and more 
than that, not merely for his sins, but for his sin. I call 
your attention to it; for this is what was needed, and 
this is what is asserted here. God sent His own Son 
in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin. It is not 
merely that there was an accumulation of sins, but it is 
the nature which is in question here. I have and need 
forgiveness for my sins; but do you suppose I want 
God to forgive my bad nature? Why I do not forgive 
it myself. No; I want that nature to be condemned, 
and myself to be delivered. And this is exactly the 
character of the new estate which Jesus brings us into, 
and puts us in before God. It is perfect liberty, as 
far as regards the soul; not merely deliverance from 
what I have done, but from what I am. So that I am 
no longer as a Christian man having to do with the 
responsibility that attaches to mortal men, but am passed 
now into a new state, even while I am in the world. 
Before quitting things here below, I have acquired by 
grace a new relationship before God. And He that 
declares and brings out and illustrates this relation- 
ship is Jesus in His presence. Such is the believer's 
place through His redemption, and it belongs to every 
Christian, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. Ded 


The grave question is, Are we in it really and con- 
sciously? Who can doubt, from Scripture, that God 
really designs it for His own now? But faith was to 


enter in, and to make it good, looking at Christ. It is , 
mere self-deception, and serious misunderstanding of | 
the word of God, to suppose that a man can be at the | 
same time in the struggle of good and evil described in | 


the latter part of Rom. vii., and all the while enjoying 


the liberty of Rom. viii. Together they are quite 


inconsistent. Can a man be in bonds and free at the 
same time? They are equally a contradiction in terms : 
only man sees the absurdity of it in nature easier than 
in grace. No man can be at the same time wretched 
and happy. With one breath he cannot say, “ Wretched 
man, and “J thank God;” but he can well say, “I 
thank God” after he has been a “wretched man.” But 
it is the fruit of a false system, itself the fruit of unbe- 
lef, to assert that one can be made free from the law 
of sin and death while one is “carnal, sold under sin.” 
The law of the Spirit does not reign along with the law 
that, when one would do good, evil is present. One 
may know heaviness through manifold temptations 
with joy in the Holy Ghost; one may be at peace with 
God, yet suffering deep grief on account of what the 
world is, and what the people of God are. This gra- 
cious sorrow burdened our blessed Lord here below, 
and drew out His groans; and we may and ought to 
know the fellowship of His sufferings. All this I quite 
admit; but those were not the groans of one who lacked 
the peace of God. Unbroken communion is precisely 
what the Lord Jesus, in the days of His flesh, always 
possessed; as He said, “Peace I leave with you; my 
peace I give unto you.” Now we dwell in that peace 


A. 


pe THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


made by His blood, as it is brought out to us in the power 
of His resurrection. But then it is when we have left 
behind the exercises under law of Rom. vii. What I 
complain of is, that quickened souls, who really look 
to Christ, take up the law, and erroneously think it a 
duty to toil like a galley-slave at that oar of bitter 
bondage, when God calls them into the liberty of 
Christ. They have not died to law in their own souls. 
The death of Christ brings completely outside that 
condition; just as really as a man in prison for debt 
remains no longer under the power of the law when 
he dies. No doubt, as long as the man lives, the law 
applies to him; but death makes it impossible for the 
law to hold him fast; he is irrevocably gone beyond 
its reach. It is exactly so in the case of the Christian. 

Some speak as if it were all mysticism. No doubt, it 
is a figure of speech; but it is a most expressive state- 
ment of a blessed reality. Those who do not believe so 
in simplicity pay the penalty of their unbelief in the 
uncertainty and powerlessness which attend it. When- 
ever there is an exercised conscience in one who thus 
puts himself under the law as a rule of life, then he 
proves of necessity the bondage of the law, which is 
the strength of sin, not of holiness; and ends in defeat, 
not in victory. It is never thus that one finds strength; 
for this is the fruit of grace, and not of the law. Hence, 
when a soul is thus under law, the more the Spirit of 
God deals with his conscience, the more miserable he 
finds himself; and this is the reason why the most 
conscientious are often thus. Will any person dare to 
affirm that this is the ordering of God? Is it of Him 
that a believer should be godly and conscientious, and 
yet without peaceful enjoyment and rest in Christ? 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. go3 


The reason which accounts for so strange a state is, 
that such a man has not entered into the place of death 
to the law in which Christ would set him. 

Others, indeed, may venture to tell me that it is a false 
doctrine that Christ died for sin as well as my sins, 
and that I am dead to sin as well as forgiven my sins. 
I have heard such charges among those who ought to 
have known better. But death to sin in Christ’s death 
seeins to me a vital truth of Christianity. He that 
would shut me up to forgiveness through Christ’s blood, 
who allows no more in the work of Jesus than that He 
died for my sins, who denies that He has given me 
besides this death to sin, has not realized the positive 
side of Christianity. It is a great mercy from God 
to know the complete blotting out of all my evil works 
and guilt; but this alone is comparatively negative. 
Hence so many children of God try to gather a positive 
ground of righteousness from what Jesus did day by 
day in His walk on earth. Now, there is the positive 
side as well as the negative: only it is forward in resur- 
rection, not under law on the other side of the cross. 

And the Christian will learn that he needs all that 
God has given him. He will learn that he needs this 
precious truth too. To be dead to sin is a very sub- 
stantial part of the Christian’s blessing; and any man 
who does not know it omits a capital doctrine of the 
positive side of Christianity, which is revealed from 
Rom. v. 12 to Rom. viii. Of course, I say nothing of 
Colossians or Ephesians, which epistles one must never 
expect to be understood by those who stand on legal 
ground. I limit myself to that which the Christian 
wants as the liberty, if not the foundation, of his soul. 
Be it remarked, that there is not a word about over- 


224 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


coming till we have entered here—not a word of 
“being more than conquerors” till we come to this. 
There is neither the groaning nor the joy of the Holy 
Ghost, the intimate working of God in his soul, till he 
has got solidly founded on the precious footing where 
the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ 
puts him. May God keep His people from abandoning 
that which He has brought out for their deliverance and 
for practical victory! Scripture is plain enough: the 
difficulty, as ever, hes elsewhere. The heart shrinks 
from that which puts sentence of death on nature in 
all its forms. 

Are the days evil? So much the more do we need 
to hold fast. Let me, in speaking of this subject, press 
it on those around me to look at 2 Peter and Jude— 
two portions of the word of God specially in view of 
a day of declension, of increasing wickedness, and even 
apostacy; and what do you find there? The saints 
given up to decay as if it must be? Not at all. It is 
in these epistles above all others that we are exhorted 
to growth and progress in the truth of God. Such are 
the resources of grace for a day of deepening darkness. 

As to the point in hand, may we treat as of the 
enemy, no matter what the form or pretension, every- 
thing that would blot out so precious and, after all, so 
simple and fundamental a truth bound up with our 
very baptism! What a warning, that men should be so 
beguiled as to treat this as some strange doctrine ! 

, How, then, may one describe this new condition in 
Peete the Lord Jesus puts the Christian? According 
to the New Testament, there are not two, but three con- 
ditions in which a man may be. I press this, because 

it is connected with the faith as well as with practice, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 225 


Tt is not true that a man must be a natural if not 
a spiritual man. These are not the only alternatives. 
We find a third and intermediate class between a 
natural and a spiritual man. The former is clearly 
one who has unremoved sins, who is simply a child 
of Adam, without anything whatever above fallen 
humanity. When God’s grace converts such an one, 
a new nature is imparted, and, on the footing of 
redemption, he is brought to God. But every man who 
is thus reconciled to God is not necessarily a spiritual 
man, There is more than one cause that may hinder 
a believer from being what Scripture calls spiritual. 
The spiritual are those who, as the apostle Paul says, 
are “not in the flesh, but in the Spirit.” 

Again, the Corinthian saints (however grave their 
faults) were not by the apostle said to be natural men. 
He lays down that “the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God.” He does not say so about 
the saints. But he does tell them that they are chil- 
dren; that, instead of their being full-grown, instead of 
his being able to speak to them of God’s deep things, 
he is obliged to feed them with milk suitable to their 
estate. And what were they then? “Carnal men.” 
Hence men are natural, carnal, or spiritual. This is a 
very humbling truth. I can understand men not liking 
it; and why? Because they fear that they may not be 
accounted spiritual, if believers may indeed be carnal 
without being natural men. Such persons prick up 
their ears on hearing any action of God’s Spirit dis- 
tinct from the new birth. They shrink back from the 
sound of His distinctively Christian operations, as if the 
assertion of so bright privileges were to deprive them 
of something they have not, instead of making them 

Q | 


226 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


feel the lack of what they should have. It is evident 
that, whether carnal or spiritual, I ought, on the con- 
trary, if there be anything wrong or lacking, to own 
my state. Is not this the way to have the wrong 
rectified, and the deficiency supplied of God? 

Now, there are various causes that hinder the 
believer's spirituality. The first is, where he has never 
passed in the consciousness of his soul into the thorough 
sense of nothing but evil in the flesh, and the faith 
that it has been all fully judged in the death of Christ. 
Without this in substance, is 1t possible for one to be 
truly spiritual? I doubt it gravely, though admitting 
freely how much a deep sense of Christ’s love may 
effect in one who has not learnt this. But then there 
is another hindrance which may operate—not the law, 
but fleshly wisdom. There may be such a value given 
to man’s thoughts, such a lowering influence con- 
sequently exercised over the spirit by heed to the 
philosophy of the world in one shape or another, that 
one can only in such a state be carnal. The spiritual 
manifest what God has made them to be in the Second 
Man, and desire not to cultivate but to mortify what 
belongs to the first. Instead of pampering flesh up, or 
admiring it, such an one treats it, on the contrary, as a 
dead thing. The consequence is, that this does not fail 
to give him power over every such snare. 

One danger—that to which Satan continually incites 
the children of God—is to take all the comfort they can 
in Christ, while at the same time holding fast all they 
wish of the world’s ease. It is evident that the heart 
and conscience of a healthy believer must repel such 
ways and thoughts, as the very world does too; for if a 
Christian is observed in any place where he ought not 


. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 227 


to be, others will express (what one ought to have felt 
without such a hint) their surprise that a confessor of 
Christ should be there. Is it not most humbling for 
a Christian to startle the world after this fashion ? 
allowing himself such a license as men generally feel 
to be unbecoming the Master’s name? The world is 
sensitive as to consistency. They may tempt the Chris- 
tian to share their pursuits and pleasures; they may 
insist on the great importance that the Christian should 
help to set the world right and show a good example, 
entering into its assemblies, and taking part in its 
senates, sitting on the judicial bench, and exercising 
authority in every conceivable sphere. And, no doubt, 
it is uncommonly pleasant to the flesh to be in dignity 
and power; but is not this precisely what Christ 
formally, as well as in spirit and His own example, 
interdicted? These things the Gentiles do and value; 
but Christ died and rose to take us out of this present 
evil age. His grace makes us happy in our little lot, 
and content with whatever estate God may have appor- 
tioned us. It is a most bright and blessed thing in such 
a world as this to see a soul that so values Christ, and 
so rejoices in the place that God has given him in Him, 
as to yearn after nothing but His will and glory. 

On the other hand, as long as a man is labouring 
under the law, he is always weak by reason of the flesh. 
He may make resolves, but he does not keep them; he 
may ever so much strive, but there is no power to 
attain. He is incessantly wrestling, but he is obliged 
to confess at the end of each day that the things he 
would he does not, and the things he would not he 
does. Thus he is always repenting and sinning, sinning 
and repenting, Such is the invariable condition of a 

Q 2 


228 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


man under law. But can intelligent men affirm that 
this is the condition of a Christian? I do not mean to 
deny that the state of many a Christian resembles this ; 
but it is wholly irregular, and contrary to what Scrip- 
ture supposes in every Christian. When I urge that it 
is not a Christian condition, I do not insinuate that it 
is a state in which no Christian may be found, but only 
that it is at issue with that which our God gives to us 
__and looks for in us. A child of. God may be in a state 
which does not answer to the grace shown him. If I 
take the epistles with simplicity, it is impossible to 
avoid seeing that God intends me, by the working of 
the Holy Ghost through the word, so to lay hold of 
the place which He has given me as to enter into stable 
peace and real joy of heart. This is of the highest 
possible moment for practical testimony; and God 
would have me, as being a vessel of the Holy Ghost, to 
testify continually of Christ in this wretched world. 
This is the main reason why His grace has so blessed 
us, and would have us to know and enjoy it all. 

That of which I have spoken is what is meant by 
being “in the Spirit;” and this depends on, and is 
proved by, the fact that the Spirit of God dwells in 
us. It is not the Spirit acting on the soul to produce 
faith, but dwelling in the believer. “Ye are not in the 
flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God 
dwell in you. Now, if any man have not the Spirit of 
Christ, he is none of his.” This is the characteristic 
of the Christian. Without His Spirit, one is not stamped 
{ with His essential character. The Holy Ghost, not 
mere flesh, distinguished Christ from His conception, 
as He was sealed by Him in due time, and acted always 
and only in the Spirit. So the Christian, as he lives in 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 229 


the Spirit, is now called to walk in the Spirit. It is 
no question of not being lost—this is not the force of 
the expression—but of being distinctively Christ’s here 
below. “And if Christ be in you, the body is dead 
because a sin; but the Spirit is life because of right- 
eousness.” When a man is converted, but troubled 
under law, he has no sense of such a place, and no 
power to count the body dead. The Spirit is a convincer 
of sin, not strength to glorify God in peace while he is 
thus. But when he gives all up to God’s sentence on the 
flesh, finding his all in Christ, the Spirit does strengthen 
him inwardly. Thus he is not only freed, but can use 
his liberty in practical power also. 
There is yet more. “But if the Spirit of him that 
raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that 
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken 
your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in 
you.” This is full deliverance even for the body, and 
the complete answer to the question raised in the 
distress of Rom. vii. 24. Thus the Holy Ghost, who 
witnesses of redemption, does not only give me now 
my status in Christ dead and risen before God, but is 
the divine pledge, as I look at Christ, that this mortal 
body shall be instinct with that life which I now enjoy. 
in my soul; for i look not on Christ simply as God’s 
Son, but see Him raised in righteousness, and by the 
Father's glory. I say that in grace He came down and 
died; in righteousness He is raised up and seated at 
the right hand of God; and the righteous award for 
the infinite work He wrought in grace overflows, so 
that God frees us who were once slaves of sin and 
Satan, but now believers in Him, according to the 
liberty of Christ—first, for the soul now; next, for the 


230 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


body when Christ comes to wake us up; and the Spirit 
is the seal of the one, and the earnest of the other. 

~. Is Christ my portion? It is Christ who determines 
the display of justification. It is really as perfect as 
Christ before God. What a measure is Christ Himself 
before God! Therefore it is that we are said to be made 
the “righteousness of God” in Him. Grounded on this, 
the Holy Ghost comes down to dwell in me now, (not 
merely to act in me,) anticipating the bright day of 
glory, and meanwhile just so far empowering me as I 
treat the old nature as dead, and make Christ my all. 

This, then, is the full answer to the cry for a deliverer, 
The soul is emancipated first; the body shall be quick- 
ened later. Meanwhile, the Holy Ghost takes His 
blessed place not only as to the soul, but also as to the 
body. When the believer is raised up by-and-by, it 
will not be without the Holy Ghost; the Son quickens, 
but by the Spirit, who takes His part in every atom 
of blessing that body or soul receives. How sweet, 
how glorious, a thing it is to have the Spirit of God, 
who thus identifies Himself with every part of the 
blessing! How should we, therefore, feel at grieving 
“the Holy Spirit of God, whereby we are sealed unto 
the day of redemption?” But this is not all. No doubt 
the Spirit of God has not yet raised up our mortal — 
bodies; notwithstanding He works in us now, and sus- 
tains in our hearts the cry, “Abba, Father.” This is 
the first and suited action of the Holy Ghost when 
deliverance is entered into by the believer. It is neces- 
sarily Godward, and as the Spirit of sonship or adoption. 
Thereby the soul rejoices not in the blessing merely, 
but in the source whence it came, and accordingly 
“ Abba, Father,” is the word. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. Pee: 


Nor is it thus only that the same indwelling Spirit 
works in us; and how? He gives the certainty that 
we shall be delivered shortly; nay, more than that, He 
groans within us “with groanings which cannot be 
uttered.” There is perfect sympathy with all the state 
in which we are now. The groans of the Spirit of 
God are not in any wise because I am not delivered, 
but just because I am. It is true that I am only ¥ 
delivered in part, not completely. Thus, if I groan in 
the Spirit, I groan because, being set free in my soul, I 
feel the contrariety of my outward man, as well as of 
all things around me, and my heart is looking onward 
to the day when creation itself shall be delivered from 
the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory 
of the sons of God. I have got the liberty of God’s 
grace now, and I shall have the liberty, even for the 
mortal body, of God’s glory by-and-by. And thus, 
then, we have this blessed place of the Spirit of God, 
as will be observed, as a personal Spirit distinct from 
the new nature; but at the same time the Holy Ghost 
gives His name, so to speak, to the condition in which 
I am now put, as a delivered soul, as a Christian, by 
virtue of the death and resurrection of Christ; and so 
I am in the Spirit, and the Spirit dwells in me. 

It will not, in this sketch, be expected that I should 
enter into all the applications and practical uses of so 
ereat atruth. But I have desired particularly to discuss 
the point that is commonly least understood—that is, the 
Spirit as a condition in which we are now. I presume 
most here are more familiar with the truth of the Spirit 
of God dwelling in us; but.the other truth is also of 
the highest interest and importance for the Christian. 


bo 
Oo 
bo 


THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Heeture PUI. 


“ Baptized into one body.” —1 Cor. xii. 


I PROPOSE to treat now of some of the mighty effects 
of the presence of the Holy Ghost. One of these is 
here designated as His baptism, by which He forms a 
new and united body, the body of Christ upon earth. 
Not only is this an exclusively New Testament truth, 
but, even within the New Testament, the revelation of 
it to us was confided to one apostle. No man ean find 
it, save in the writings of the apostle Paul. I do not 
mean, of course, that there was no such thing as the 
Church of God, the body of Christ, before that apostle 
was raised up of God to make known this great truth. I 
do say, that while the mystery of Christ and the Church 
was revealed ¢o God’s holy apostles and prophets in the 
Spirit, it was revealed not by them all, but by one. 
This is a plain matter of fact. None of the New Tes- 
tament writers, but Paul speak of the Church as Christ’s 
body. 

Now there was a remarkable fitness in the history of 
Paul, as brought before us in the sacred writings, for 
the work which God confided to him, as far as its reve- 
lation to us was concerned. He had been an enemy so 
long as the testimony even of Christ Himself glorified 
on high was confined to the Jewish people. He was 
the witness of the martyrdom of Stephen; he was the 
active emissary of the Jews in persecuting all—men 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. woe 


and women—not merely in Jerusalem, but pursuing 
them from city to city in their sad and, at the same 
time, blessed flight (for God honoured it to win fresh 
souls to Christ). He, in the fulness of the hatred he 
bore to the name of Jesus, had received, as we all 
know, letters from the highest religious authorities of 
that day, in order to prosecute their destruction the 
more energetically and, withal, piously. In the midst 
of this, when God was changing the form that His ways 
took upon earth, so that the tide of blessing was no 
longer flowing towards Jerusalem, but from it, when all 
that then constituted true glory (for indeed all was of ° 
grace in Jerusalem) was trampled down or dispersed, 
the Spirit of God points, as it were, outside, seeks and 
blesses the old enemies of Jerusalem, not only works 
among the Samaritans, (and we know what their 
jealousy was of Jerusalem,) but even a stranger from a 
distant land is sought by the Lord, who is met in 
nothing but grace, spite of the grossest ignorance of 
that which God had just accomplished in Jesus, and 
sent on his way rejoicing,—not up to Jerusalem, but 
returning to his distant home from it. 

It was at this juncture that it pleased God to dea 
with Saul of Tarsus on his road to Damascus; for he 
too was going from Jerusalem, full of persecuting fury 
against the confessors of Jesus, dark as night to the 
true grace of God; he, on the mission of sorrow, shame, 
and death, such as the world could give; he, with his 
commission such as Satan alone, borrowing God’s name, 
could instil energy to carry out; he, nevertheless, with 
a good conscience as a man inthe midst of all this blind- 
ness to the truth,—he is struck down suddenly with 
a light brighter than the sun at noon, but withal, even 


234 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


in that which blinds him naturally, was enabled to see 
supernaturally the Lord of glory, to hear the voice of 
his Lord, to know himself called, not as a saint only, 
but as an apostle too, not merely to taste the grace of 
which he was to be so remarkable a witness, but to 
minister with the Lord’s authority, not for that day 
only, but for all times, not for one land, but for every 
country under heaven. That blessed man was given, in 
the very words that converted his soul, the germ of that 
great truth on which I hope to speak a little now. He 
learnt, to his amazement, from One that he could not 
doubt to be the Lord, both that He was Jesus—won- 
drous knowledge to burst upon his soul !—but that this 
glorified Lord, who was Jesus of Nazareth that had 
been crucified, identified Himself with the objects of 
his unrelenting persecution: “I am Jesus whom thou 
persecutest.” The work was done—not all at once, as 
far as regards the enjoyment of the soul, but surely, as 
communicated in substance to one thus strangely con- 
verted. The first and last that had ever been arrested by 
a revelation of Jesus, which revealed also in principle 


the Church of God, was precisely the suited one to 


develop this and enforce it practically, as well as in his 
writings, to lay the foundations of the Church of God, 
to insist upon its heavenly character as Christ’s body, 
and to do battle for God’s glory in it. This became 
his life; to this God henceforth called him by Jesus 
Christ our Lord. 

It was Paul who at once, after he was converted, began 
to preach the Lord Jesus, not only as the Christ, but as 
the Son of God (Acts ix.)—another great point of his 
writings. I do not say that this is so characteristically, 
or at any rate so exclusively, his as the body of Christ; 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 235 


but I remark it to show the largeness in the ways of 
God displayed by the blessed apostle. Although the 
Church of God rather attaches to Christ viewed as the 
exalted man, yet still He who is the man exalted in 
heaven is the Son; and (if I may be allowed such an 
expression reverently) God does use the utmost care to 
enforce the relationship of Christ to Himself, as well as 
that in which He stands to us in His place as man at 
His own right hand. He accordingly was not led by 
the Spirit of God merely to insist on what others had 
done before. He did not merely draw attention to His 
being made Lord and Christ, as Peter did; he did not 
speak of Him as God’s servant (zaida), for such is the 
true meaning of the term that is improperly translated 
“Son” in Acts iii, and iv. There was no preaching 
as yet of Christ as the Son. As to Acts viii. 37, in 
which the Ethiopian eunuch is supposed to confess 
that Jesus is the Son, every person moderately ac- 
quainted with these matters knows it to be spurious. 
But Paul, instead of limiting his teaching to Christ as 
the man exalted above, preaches at once in the syna- 
goeue that Jesus was the Son (vids) of God. This I 
conceive to be well worthy of note, as admirably ex- 
emplifying the largeness of heart wherever Christ, and 
Christ seen above, is the object of the soul. One is 
free, then, to think of all His glory; one delights in it; 
there is no hesitation in accepting the truth of God, 
and the importance of the truth is realized by the soul. 

If I look upon Him merely on earth, progress is 
incomparably slower. We find this in the case of: the 
other apostles even. How easily they mistook, how 
slowly they received, how they had to be led on step 
by step! In the apostle Paul, no doubt, the truth was 


236 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


allowed to settle down through conscience; for even he 
must have it thus. No man otherwise can have it, or 
make it really his own in his soul; and this because 
we are not merely men—we are sinners. The apostle 
Paul himself, a man walking with as good a conscience 
as any man ever had since the world began,—even he 
must learn the worthlessness of flesh, and must learn 
it for and in himself. He must learn it by Christ, but 
he learnt it in his own heart: still, thus learnt, the 
result is always bright. That which we are not told 
had been said to him the Holy Ghost enables him to 
seize. I say not how it was; for certainly the Lord 
Jesus had said nothing about it in what passed, as far 
as we know; but he was given of God to know it. 
God does not direct our attention particularly to Son- 
ship in what passed between Christ and Saul. Still, 
the fact is, that the two grand truths of Christ’s glory, 
as Son and as the heavenly Head, became thenceforth 
his testimony. It is not merely that He is Messiah on 
earth: this was now no longer to be insisted on; the 
Lord Himself had put an end to the preaching of it 
even before He left the world. (Matt. xvi. 20; and 
especially Luke ix. 20-22.) Then came a new thing. 
After Jesus went up to heaven, He was made Lord 
and Christ. ‘His being Lord is the very simplest 
acknowledgment, the lowest form of the recognition 
of Christ, that he who confesses Him can make, 
because it is simply the assertion of His authority; and 
it is clear that authority, although most true, is after 
all the lowest side of the truth in Christ. It does not 
bring out His grace; it does not display His infinite 
glory. It is what He was made, not what He was and 
is in Himself. It is not, therefore, what is proper 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. Zor 


and intrinsic, what is personal and eternal, but a place 
that was given Him, which He assumed, which He was 
exalted into. The apostle Peter and the others, as 
we saw, preach this. Then Stephen sees Him after 
another sort. Thus, though it were by the full power 
of the Spirit of God working on earth, still even 
so there was gradual advance, and the discovery in 
his own person how totally rejected is the truth of 
God as to the exalted Lord and Christ. He bears his 
witness that He was the Son of man standing at the 
right hand of God. That is, just as upon earth the 
testimony to the Christ-head, so to speak, of Jesus 
gave place to His being the rejected Son of man, so 
the exalted Lordship of Christ, being Lord and Christ, 
gives place to His being the Son of man in glory. 
Finally, Paul not only at once enters on the truth that 
had been known before, but in the germ of it, at least, 
learns the great mystery, that Christ and the saints he 
was persecuting were one; yet, instead of being shut 
up in the narrowness to which we know our little 
hearts are so liable, he, on the contrary, immediately 
preaches Him to be the Son of God. 

Now, i do think that this is a most blessed fact to 
bear in mind, more particularly in its moral bearing 
upon our own souls, as showing how, when things are 
viewed aright, when Christ Himself is viewed in heavenly 
light by the teaching of God’s own Spirit, the fulness 
of the glory of His person is seen in what is beyond. 
For His being the Son of God, if it less connect itself 
with us in particular, is after all in itself a higher truth 
than any glory He could have even as exalted in 
any way whatsoever at the right hand of God. Not 
that one would too curiously compare or set one 


238 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


thing against the other: there is no reason for this; 
but we would assert and maintain the whole truth of 
Christ’s glory. And I am persuaded we shall find 
that all power to apprehend, enjoy, apply, and walk 
in all the rest of the truth, depends on the measure 
in which the truth of His personal glory is felt and 
owned by our souls. Just as Christ Himself becomes 
exalted before us, so all else, even things most distant, 
as it were, the very skirts of His glory, will be found 
to be enlarged and brightened according to that which 
we see here. So, on the other hand, all attenuating, en- 
feebling, corrupting, and destroying of the truth of God 
will be found to be traceable to men’s low and still 
lowering views of Christ Himself. It is well that all this 
should be seen and -appreciated. We shall find the 
bearing of this in what is coming before us presently. 

For what is the Church? Is it not the body of Christ ? 
It is the answer produced on earth by the Holy 
Ghost to the glory of that exalted man and head at 
the right hand of God. Hence it is that you cannot 
separate these two. Now, the greater part of the chil- 
dren of God have been entirely unexercised as to this | 
place of glory into which Christ has entered. The 
consequence is that the Church is unknown. They have 
ignored His place before God. It is denied; the value 
of it is unknown; the singular glory and blessedness 
of a man, exalted as He is in heaven, is just as feebly 
felt as the misery of man now, were he the greatest of 
philosophers, poets, statesmen or conquerors, sentenced, 
doomed, outcast from God on the earth. Even the 
children of God look on present things as compara- 
tively a scene to enjoy, as that of which we must make 
the best. Consequently, the very truth of God, and the 


OFrvTRE HOLY SPIRIT, : 239 


mercy of God, are used to contribute as much as pos- 
sible to what may be called earthly ease and joy. 
What is only a vain search after pleasure is modified, no 
doubt, in the Christian’s case: spiritual thoughts are 
there. But, still, how few saints comparatively look 
always on this world as a judged and condemned scene! 
It had been before God in manifold operations, and in 
testimonies continually, until all was proved. Then 
came the Son, the man Christ Jesus. It was, alas! the 
great struggle, so to speak, between God the Father, 
who had thus given His Son, and the world, led on 
by the power of Satan. But God was not ashamed, 
and would not shrink from what (we may say) was to 
Himself the infinite trial of giving Him up, of allow- 
ing every indignity and wrong to be done to the One 
He loved above all; and the Son of God Himself spared 
Himself no sorrow, no shame, no evil that man could 
put upon Him. But indeed it was for this He came, 
and for this it was needful in the ways of God that the 
world should prove its evil as it had never done before; 
and so it did. Thus all the evil came out that God 
might deal with it at one blow; that He might deal 
with it in a blow of judgment—not on the world, but 
on His Son; that He might deal with it, therefore, in 
absolute grace as far as this sinful world was concerned. 
Thereon all was changed, and instead of its being 
man turned out of a goodly garden of delight, adrift in 
what became a desert and godless world, man now, 
in the person of Jesus, enters heaven itself, and sits 
down on the throne of God and glory. 

But the moment God accomplished this, for which 
He was waiting, then, and not before, there could be 
the formation of a body on the earth; for there must 


240 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


first be an adequate head; and there was but one per- 
son that was adequate to be the head, and that blessed 
One could not be head till He was man as well as God, 
and, more than that, till sin had been judged, and grace 
in consequence could have its full way. And, therefore, 
we see how blessedly all truth centres in Christ, and 
in His cross, and in that place into which He has 
gone at the right hand of God. Besides, there was 
another thing necessary; there was a suitable competent 
power needed on the earth. And what power could 
this be? The same that had always wrought in order 
to effectuate anything from God. It was the Holy 
Ghost; but acting now in a new way, conformably to 
that in which God had displayed Himself. He had 
shown Himself in the Son of God, and He would not 
retire from it. 

There was but one person even in the Godhead that 
could, as an object and image, display God: it was 
the Son. It was always so. He who had revealed 
God, even passingly, was the Son. He might as an 
angel, so to speak, appear, as in the case of Abraham; 
still, it was always the Son. But if ever there was a 
power that wrought, whether in a good man or a bad 
man, He that wrought divine things by and in man on 
the earth was invariably the Spirit of God. Hence 
the Spirit of God takes His place in this new work of 
God. The Son had entered as man into the glory which 
He had before as God. He had gone up into the very 
presence of God, and carried manhood, as it were, in 
His own person to His throne; so that there was the 
wondrous sight of all in heaven subjected to a man. 
Then it was evident what God had in His heart from 
what God was manifesting above. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 241 


But who, I must ask once more, could worthily 
tell this here below? Who could be a due witness 
of this heavenly glory? He that knew it perfectly ; 
He that alone was able and willing to glorify Christ, 
and was wont to give man to do, learn, or enjoy 
whatever God had before Him for man. It was the 
Holy Ghost; and He accordingly comes down. And 
this is the fruit of His coming—He forms one body on 
earth, not so many bodies. There is no such thought 
in Scripture. Is there such a notion in the mind of 
any child of God here? Does He recognize Christian | 
bodies on the earth? What can be more false? I do 
not mean intellectually so alone. As Christians, we 
would not waste time or breath on the mere wanderings 
of the human mind. But I do say that a wrong to 
Jesus, a wrong to this most blessed manner in which 
God is glorifying His Son by the Holy Ghost sent 
down from heaven, is surely one which ought to act on 
the conscience, and shock the heart of one to whom 
God has made known the glory of Christ by the Holy 
Ghost. Am I, then, in the current of the working of 
God’s Spirit? or am IT, on the contrary, traversing God’s 
prime object in sending down the Holy Ghost, and 
exalting Christ at the right hand of God? 

Thus it becomes a question entirely above all ecclesias- 
tical controversy. God forbid that the children of God 
should occupy themselves with such trifles or worse ! 
But I do say, that if we know Him, if we delight in 
Him, if we walk no more after the flesh, if, indeed, God 
has revealed His Son in and to us as He is now risen 
and glorified, it becomes us to inquire whether we are 
obedient to the heavenly vision, as the apostle was in 
his great measure—we in our little one—whether we are 

R 


242 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


imitators of him as he was of Christ. Does not God 
call all His children to be instruments of divine grace 
for His purpose of glorifying the Lord Jesus? This 
must always begin with oneself: just as with the 
apostle Paul, the truth sunk deeply into his own soul 
before the mighty work opened out all around him. 
But whether it be in ourselves (which, of course, is 
the first true effect of the revelation of Christ to us), 
or also in the desire to be helpers of the joy of others, 
as servants of God’s will in magnifying the grace of 
Christ, it does become us to search and see whether we 
can answer with a pure conscience. 

Now, what Paul was given to see, and what he has 
brought out fully in the chapter from which I have read 
a verse, is, that the Holy Ghost is now come down to 
work on earth in the Church—not merely in the saints 
individually (though surely this also). But there is here 
below that which God calls His Church, the body of 
Christ, and here identified with Christ. So true is this, 
that the Spirit does not disdain to call the whole (that is, 
Christ and the Church) Christ Himself: thus thoroughly 
do the saints form a part of His glory. And this comes 
out in a very interesting manner,—hunniliating indeed 
to us, but a wondrous proof of the God with whom we 
have to do. It was the folly, and vanity, and workings 
of other evil among the Corinthian saints, which formed 
the occasion for the Spirit to instruct us thus largely 
about the Church, the body of Christ. Their painful 
disorder called forth the application of God’s mind and 
will,—their vain-glory too, that loved to display what- 
ever of power they had. And there was power; for it 
was no question of weakness. Many suppose that the 
great reason why there is or may be disorder in the 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 243 


Church of God is because of weakness; but weakness 
never ought thus to work. Disorder has nothing to do 
with weakness. In fact, some of those who have caused 
the greatest disorder in the Church have betrayed not 
so much weakness as strong flesh. There is always 
insubjection to Christ, and very often the same vanity 
that was displayed in the Corinthian saints. No one 
can fairly impute it to lack of power there. It was the 
abuse of power, the ostentatious desire of showing what 
they possessed—in few words, the severance of the 
power of the Spirit from the glorifying of Christ. Dis- 
order is the natural result. It matters not whether it 
be little or more power, nor what the qualities possessed 
may be; if severed from Christ, it is fatal,—fatal to His 
glory, fatal to the blessing of saints and other souls,— 
most of all, fatal to him who is so misled of Satan. 
This was precisely what was at work in Corinth at that 
time. How ought we not to bless God for the use to 
which He has turned it in His mercy! 

I can say but few words, compared with the demands 
of my subject to-night. Let me just call attention to 
some of the leading points of the chapter as they occur. 
“T would not have you to be ignorant concerning these 
spiritual things”—these manifestations. “Ye know that 
ye were Gentiles carried away unto these dumb idols, 
even as ye were led. Wherefore I give you to under- 
stand that no man speaking by the Spirit of God 
calleth Jesus accursed.” No-such man calls Jesus 
“Anathema;” no one puts Him under the curse (but 
on the cross). God, we know, did it, when He died for 
our sins ; but no man calls Jesus Himself accursed by 
the Spirit of God. Nor can one say that Jesus is 
Lord, but through the Holy Ghost. 

R 2 


244 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Thus, there are two powers at issue in view of God 
and man. There is the spirit that works in the chil- 
dren of disobedience; there is the Holy Ghost that 
works in the children of God. In the one case there is 
the expression of the rising up of man against Jesus; 
in the other there is the subjection of believers to the 
Lord (for this is the great point pressed here—Jesus as 
Lord). The reason was because these Corinthians were 
practically making the Lord’s Supper their own supper, 
and the assembly their own theatre of display, as if 
the word went out from them, instead of coming to 
them, claiming their obedience to God. In fact, the 
lordship of Jesus needs only to be urged when souls 
are in a proud or negligent condition. The saint that 
enjoys Christ needs no such pressure, would have 
none other lord, and delights in His grace. Of course, 
it is always due by every soul; but evidently the 
assertion of it is most needful where insubordination 
prevails, and flesh endeavours to exalt itself against 
His will, as indeed was the case at Corinth. Therefore 
the apostle starts with this grave fact, that the Church 
of God is where the Holy Ghost maintains Jesus as. 
Lord. This is the prefatory principle, meeting the 
Corinthians exactly in their need, as the Spirit of God 
must do, if one may so say. God deals, if at all, 
morally; nothing else would be worthy of Him or good 
for us. God deals morally, though He would carry our 
hearts into the enjoyment of Himself, where all thought 
of our ways may be dropped: yet is there nothing, 
after all, which acts so powerfully on our ways to form 
them according to His nature. 

The next thing noticed is that “There are diver- 
sities of gifts, but the same Spirit ;” and again, “There 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 245 


are differences of administration, but the same Lord; 
and there are diversities of operations, but it is the 
same God which worketh all in all.” It is clear that 
these three verses are of deep importance for our 
practical understanding of that which the Lord lays 
down. The simplest elements are here; yet the Church 
has practically forgotten them. They are the smallest 
requirements that He could accept of, the only recog- 
nizable character of God’s assembly, viewed in its work- 
ing day by day. 

First of these, then, “diversities of gifts” are spoken. 
of. Wherever anything assumes to answer to His 
Church on earth, there must be free room, not only 
for gifts, but for diversities of gifts, in the same con- 
gregation. Where the gifts are practically shut out, 
and the congregation really look to one or more in- 
dividuals only, no matter how gifted, the ground is 
proved by the first touch of God’s word to be not of 
Himself. There are diversities of gifts, but the same 
Spirit (not minister). I do not mean by this that there 
should be an effort to give the semblance of many gifts 
at work. The Church of God is a real body; and 
now we must add that its state is distressingly anom- 
alous; but seeking appearances, which would always 
have been unseemly, is now especially to be deprecated. 
It is His assembly: we must take care what we do or 
seek there. He formed it here for the Lord’s glory 
through the Holy Spirit, who is sovereign, and will 
surely maintain the rights of Christ. Be the manifes- 
tation great or small, it is the fruit of His own work- 
ing; but assuredly there are diversities of gifts. In 
fact, especially as the assembly now is, there might be 
few—perhaps none in a particular place, or only one or 


246 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


two might manifest gifts to edification ; elsewhere there 
might be many. The great point is that the door be 
open for all He gives. : 

I repeat that “there are diversities of gifts, but the 
same Spirit.” Whatever denies this practically, or 
in principle, is not God’s Church, and has no claim 
therefore on my allegiance or yours. Yea, I am bound 
to disown its pretensions. Ought I to sanction or to 
abjure a departure from the Lord’s will in these grave 
matters of the Holy Ghost? Ought I not to treat a 
congregation of real Christians as a human association, 
if they fling overboard, e.g., such a word as this? It is 
no question merely about the constituents, but of that 
which regulates their action. If human rules, different 
from Scripture, and even opposed, govern, is it not 
mans Church? What has a Christian to do with any 
but God’s Church? Who licensed man to meddle? 
Who called him to regulate it? To make the Church 
was a great work even for God Himself. It needed 
the Son to go to heaven after redemption was wrought, 
and the Holy Ghost to come down to the earth for the 
purpose. ~The world He made by His word for the 
first Adam, though in ultimate purpose, no doubt, for 
Christ, when He shall be displayed as King in His 
glory. But even God Himself did not (and I think we 
may say with reverence, could not) make the Church 
until He had the Second Man its glorified Head above, 
and the Holy Ghost sent down to form the body below. 
Death and resurrection alone could be an adequate 
basis; the risen ascended Lord Jesus alone the suited 
head. Thus God’s Church on earth is not a govern- 
mental provision of religion for a nation, nor a society 
framed to hold and carry out the plans and peculiar 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 247 


views of the best of men. It is the body which the 
Holy Ghost has formed here below for Christ, whom in 
its very first principle it confesses as Lord. But the 
manner of the practical working is in diversities of 
gifts, though the same Spirit. — 

Next, as we are told, “there are differences of ad- 
ministration, but the same Lord.” That is, the Lord 
employs one for one thing, and another for another ; 
but it is He who acts in this. The Spirit of God does 
not take here the place of Lord; and I doubt very 
much indeed that this is a true way of looking at the 
Spirit of God. Is it correct to speak of the rule of the 
Spirit? J admit most entirely the power, and working, 
and sovereignty of the Spirit; and I suppose that this 
last is what is meant by sound men when they speak of 
His rule. Still there is a danger of shpping out of 
those forms of sound words which Scripture supplies— 
not the letter, but the truth and principle of God's 
word. I am not contending about shadows, but about 
realities; and I am sure we shall find the words of 
Scripture most aptly express the truths of Scripture. 
Hence, when we slip away from words, we are in 
danger of weakening the truth itself. Again, there has 
been a tendency more than once in the Church of God 
to set up the Holy Ghost, as it were, in the place of 
the Lord. The effect of this is, that it takes us out of 
the place of subjection to the Lord as He is above. 
Now, inasmuch as the Holy Ghost works in and by 
man, this, more or less, tends to put man in the place 
of Christ Himself. Whereas, if we hold to that 
which Scripture says and teaches, it is plain that the 
Holy Ghost Himself, in the working of the Church, 
takes not so much the place of Head and Lord as of 


248 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Servant, caring for all and glorifying Christ, though He 
be divine. As the Son here below took the place of 
Servant of the Father for the divine purposes, so the 
Holy Ghost, although He be in His own person God, 
and therefore supreme, nevertheless deigns, for the 
carrying out of God’s counsels, meanwhile to subject 
Himself to the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus it is that He 
stamps the servant character, as it were, on the saint 
who is really animated by Him and led by Him to the 
glory of Christ. That is, the Spirit constitutes him, in 
relation to the Lord Jesus, a servant, even though his 
function may be ruling the Church of God, To do so 
is not pride, but just the true place of a servant who is 
called to rule; he cannot faithfully give up that will of 
his Master, nor need there be a particle of self in thus 
ruling. Where self or man is the disposer, what value, 
authority, or power can there be? But if a man be 
called to rule in any way, let the sphere be little or 
great, he is as much a servant, nay, he is only a real 
servant, if he carry out that which the Lord has given 
him to do. There is no assertion of self here, but of 
Christ Himself, in thus serving Him, whatever his 
place or gift. There are differences of administration, 
but the same Lord, even as there is the same Spirit and 
diversities of gifts. 

Again, “there are diversities of operations,” he adds; 
“but it is the same God which worketh all in all.” 
The Church is not a place where man has the smallest 
title, or where there is any room for his will. If God 
is working there, it is man’s place to retire, that God 
may really work according to His own will. What a 
character this gives the Church of God! And I just pause 
for a moment to press this upon those present, not on 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 249 


those to whom it may be altogether an untried thing in — 
experience, or even comparatively new. I would ask 
the brethren and sisters here before me, Are these the 
truths that really fill our hearts? When we enter, say, 
on each Lord’s day, when we come together on any 
occasion for edification or worship, do we meet as God’s 
assembly, looking to the Spirit, the Lord God Himself? 
Thus I press that it is either God’s assembly or nothing. 
I am aware there are those who think it presumptuous 
to call themselves God’s assembly. Pray, what would 
you have them to be called? Would you like it to be 
‘man's assembly,” or no assembly at all? Would you 
like to break up all responsibility of the saints of God 
on the earth? Could you bear calmly that Jesus should 
have no glory by you, however poorly reflected it may 
be?—that He should have no return of our hearts to 
His grace; that the Holy Ghost should be thwarted, 
hindered, supplanted, now that He is pleased to have 
come down to glorify Christ in the saints? Yea, after 
He has once more aroused the children of God, and 
they have come out from their places of hiding and 
slumbering, refusing to be diverted any longer from 
going forth to meet the Bridegroom? and if they go forth, 
must they not give themselves up to do His will? and 
how do it better than in that which is dear to Him? 
There is an object incomparably dearer to Him than 
all that engrosses men around. What can all worlds 
be to Him, compared with the love which He bears to 
His bride, the Church, which is His body here below? 
Will this lower His glory in our eyes? will this en- 
feeble our desire to obey, because we realize in our- 
selves that our place is to do His will, subject to that 
which lies upon us for glorifying Christ? Far from us 
be such a thought. : 


250 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Let me just put it thus. Take, for instance, a wife. 
Supposing she has a wife’s feelings, loving and right 
thoughts of her husband, and he is one that is not 
only a husband in name, but worthy of all her love. 
I need not say how any such comparison fails, when 
we think of Christ and the Church. But, still, they 
resemble enough to raise the question, whether near- 
ness of relationship weakens love for an altogether 
worthy object? To ask such a question is to have it 
answered at once. How grievous that such delusions 
should be tolerated for a moment by children of God! 

It is a lie of Satan, that to know God as our Father 
in Christ is to weaken our obedience ; so is it to deny 
the title of Christ’s members, wherever they may be. 
Is it not plain, that to recognize them as His draws 
out mutual love, and gives perseverance and confidence 
in seeking to serve them? Deny their place of relation- 
ship, and with what different feelings you must deal 
with them! On what ground would you ask them 
to abandon the ways and the systems of man? Why, 
save on this basis, would you urge the blessedness of 
meeting only in Christ’s name on earth, before we go 
to heaven, as part of that which God has called His 
Church? How utterly repulsive to the christian, that 
the world which is stained with the blood-guiltiness of 
Christ's cross should presume to meddle with the body 
and bride of Christ! How nauseous to sink into a 
voluntary society, a sect framed and governed according 
to rules of man’s device! If this be so, it is the 
plain responsibility of every child of God to cleave 
only to what God has done and revealed, not doubting 
the power and willingness of the Spirit to make him 
faithful. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 251 


But there is another truth, too, connected with this. 
I have already shown, on a former occasion, the real 
and abiding presence of God’s Spirit on earth. Con- 
sequently it is no question of forming a new Church, 
still less a make-shift. It is our place to recognize 
what the Spirit has formed and never abandons. It is 
our calling to act in faith on God’s word about it, 
clearing ourselves from what it condemns, and seeking 
to be true to what God Himself has given. Only two 
or three in a place might have faith so to feel and act 
(for the ruin is very great); but were it only two or. 
three even in a great city like this, met together in the 
name of the Lord Jesus, even they should allow nothing 
inconsistent with “diversities of gifts,” “diversities of 
administration,” and “diversities of operations,” instead 
of setting up all, so to speak, on the same ground of 
human equality or the distinctions of self-devised order. 
God’s truth and will can never lose their authority over 
His people by change of circumstances. Clericalism 
and religious radicalism are equally and altogether 
opposed to Scripture and the action of the Holy Ghost. 
They are different and opposite forms of man’s will. 
The Church is a divine institution, where God’s disposal 
must be supreme; and this the Holy Ghost alone can 
_ make good according to the written word. All else is 
only man; and it matters little whether it be man the 
leveller or man the exalter of his fellows,—either is 
only man. Who but God has any real claim to deal 
with His Church? If it be only “our church” or 
“your church,” we or you, I grant, may lawfully alter 
or amend, narrow or widen it, as we think proper. 

But were there only two or three saints who, because 
of the word and Spirit of God, because of the injured 


252 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


rights of the Lord Jesus, came out from that which has so 
long departed from the Scriptures about God’s assembly, 
and set at nought the Holy Ghost, I am bound to own 
them as on the true ground of God’s Church. Lowliness 
becomes them as well as deep thankfulness; shame 
that they too should have joined in the general shght 
put on God's word and Spirit, desire for the blessing of 
all saints according to God’s will, and a holy fear lest 
their own weakness or negligence should bring dis- 
repute on their testimony. I do not mean, nor do I say, 
that such are the Church of God; but I do call them, 
thus walking together, His Church. Were they the 
only two or three saints in the whole world that were 
so met according to the word, they would be the only 
thing of that nature here below. Thus it is not the 
simple fact of being members of Christ’s body that 
constitutes the Church. No doubt this is the personal 
title, and all Christians are members of Him, and this 
constitutes their responsibility to abandon everything 
that falsifies their relationship in conduct, position, and 
objects ; but what constitutes God’s Church here below 
is not that the individuals composing it are members of 
Christ—though that, of course, is essential—but that 
they assemble and walk together according to the word 
of God, the Holy Ghost being allowed His own place 
of sovereign action for the glory of the Lord Jesus. It 
is only a circumstance whether they be two or three, or 
as many hundreds, thousands, or millions. The number 
of those who gather is a wholly subordinate point. 
Again, though real members of Christ are contem- 
plated, this alone does not at all suffice. Thus there 
might be ever so many saints associated; but if they 
arranged themselves or their meetings as they saw fit, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 253 


apart from Scripture, received such or such according 
to their wisdom, carried out their discipline, owned 
this doctrine and not that, what would this be? A 
more or less excellent, prudent, energetic society of 
Christians. Yet not merely all these things, but any 
of them, being opposed to the word of God and the 
place of the Holy Ghost acting in the Church—still 
more, all of them united—would destroy the pretension 
to be God’s Church. They would have no real claim 
on God’s children outside of them. Not the smallest 
recognition is due corporately, though they would still 
be individually objects of love as Christians. None 
ought to deny their proper place and _ relationship, 
which is indeed the true ground of appeal to their 
consciences. The Church viewed as on earth is the 
assembly of saints, where God acts by the Holy Spirit 
sent down from heaven; it is His assembly, and not 
merely an assembly of saints. Of course, an assembly 
of saints is so far well; but if only this, it can never 
aspire with truth to the place of God’s Church. It is 
not theirs but His presence by the Holy Ghost which 
constitutes them His Church. How precious that 
there should be on earth saints built together for God’s 
habitation in the Spirit ! 

But as with Christ the Son in the days of His flesh, 
so now the Holy Ghost is not allowed His place. 
What a thought to utter! and yet, is it not true and 
certain that the state of Christendom now warrants 
the use of such words as “not allowed His place”? 
Can you say that God has the full freedom of acting 
according to His own word? The responsibility of this 
has been left to man; and how has he discharged it? 
It is truly wonderful that just as God allowed man to - 


254 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


do what he pleased with Christ, so He allows man to 
show despite to the Spirit of grace, for the present 
thwarting and defeating His glory in the Church. 
Both the one and the other were committed to the 
responsibility of man. We know the day is coming 
when the Church shall disappear from the world to 
join its Head, and enter into its destined seat of glory 
along with Christ. Before the world, too, we shall shine 
in due season. 

But what I press as the point of solemn consequence 
for God's people to feel now is this, how far they have 
received into their soul, and how far they are really 
carrying out the truth of God as regards His Church. 
If you say you have no particular care about it, and 
it is enough for you to think of your soul’s salvation, 
I must ask you, Where is your heart for Christ and 
those who are Christ’s, and for His glory in them? 
What a grovelling and selfish place for a Christian to 
put himself in! It is, I admit, a natural result of the 
teaching that prevails, which ignores the one body and 
one Spirit for our own salvation and that of others. 
And it bears with itself its retributive sting; for those 
who accept such a scheme never seem to attain even 
that selfish end; they are doomed to continual uncer- 
tainty as to their personal acceptance with God, and 
find a relief in worldliness from their lack of settled 
peace. What a contrast with God’s way, who saves 
with a perfect salvation, that we may be free for all 


His objects, for His glory in Christ and the Church 


above all! Believer, has God saved you to leave you 
apart from His own purposes, and without a care for the 
glory of Christ? If God has shown you such infinite 
mercy, does not His word, does not your heart under 


cd 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 255 


the Spirit’s leading, point to your owning and serving 
Christ, learning and doing the will of God about that 
which is so dear to Christ as the Church? I beseech 
you to consider the matter. 

But in this chapter (1 Cor. xii.) there is far more 
than I have noticed. The apostle speaks of the mani- 
festation of the Spirit in various forms. It is given to 
every man, not for himself, but to profit withal. “To 
one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to an- 
other the word. of knowledge by the same Spirit; to 
another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts 
of healing by the same Spirit; to another the working 
of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning 
of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to an- 
other the interpretation of tongues.” Thus the chapter 
embraces those yifts that went out as a sign to the 
world. They were in the Church, in the various mem- 
bers of the body of Christ; but, still, it was not the 
profit of the Church only: there was an outward mark 
to men also. Take, for instance, the tongues. What a 
witness of the considerate grace of God! What a wit- 
ness of the love that no longer confined itself to the 
chosen nation, but would meet men now in grace where 
they had been placed already by His judgment after 
the flood! The wonderful works of God in redemption 
are proclaimed by the Spirit to every nation under hea- 
ven in their familiar tongues. But we have more than 
this. ‘All these,” it is added,“ worketh that one and 
the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as 
he will.” Thus carefully is maintained the sovereign 
action of the Holy Ghost. Whatever may be the place 
of servant which He is pleased now to assume, still He 
is sovereign, acting as He will; He is divine, He is 


256 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


God. “For as the body is one, and hath many mem- 
bers, and all the members of that one body, being 
many, are one body: so also is Christ.” Have you 
been brought to God? Have you believed in your 
heart, and confessed with your mouth, that God has 
raised Jesus from the dead? Then you are His to 
magnify who is your Saviour and Lord. Own Him 
only as the Lord; own the Holy Ghost as the one that 
is actively working in the saints, in God’s assembly 
here below. This I admit, that the Spirit of God, 
freely acting in grace, does not confine Himself to the 
assembly as such; He may act in, and does act by, 
members of Christ (and even others betimes), though 
they themselves may not be faithful, nor in the place 
where God would have them be. Hence I do not deny 
for a moment that the Holy Ghost works in both na- 
tionalism and dissent, and not in Protestantism only, 
but in Popery and the Eastern systems of Christendom. 
But he who values and understands Scripture must 
see that all this conflict of Christian societies proves 
total departure from God’s word as to His Church. 
Thus national Protestantism is not only an invention 
of man, but comparatively modern. Nothing of the sort 
existed for at least fifteen centuries after the Church was 
formed. But go on. Let us look not merely at national 
bodies, but where it is attempted to gather saints, on 
the basis of (let us suppose) a large measure of truth: 
Is this God’s Church? Does the Church select par- 
ticular doctrines? Does it choose its own ministers in 
the word? When the Church takes such a place, it 
quits subjection to the Lord in principle. It is the wife 
attempting to play the husband, instead of obeying 
him. Nothing can be simpler, if we hold fast what 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. ~ 257 


God Himself has laid down. The Church does not 
confer mission, does not teach; but I admit entirely 
that 1t is bound to judge, and not only in matters of 
moral evil, but also in doctrine, intolerant of all which 
overthrows the holiness or the truth of God, and 
especially careful of Christ’s glory. But this is very 
different from commissioning a clergy, or defining 
articles of faith. Looking at the Church in Scripture, 
' I see it charged with the obligation of maintaining the 
truth, the pillar and ground of it here below. I do not 
look abroad into the world to find the truth; I know 
that the truth is found nowhere except in the Church. 
I am speaking of the Church ordered under apostolic 
care as it was. Its responsibility is not lost by its 
disorder. 

Now indeed there is a state of things that painfully 
contrasts with what is presented in the word of God. 
We see a number of bodies which call themselves this 
kind of church and that. What is a child of God to 
do who desires to be humble yet faithful to God? 
Judge where you are by the word of God, judge by it 
what you are doing and what you are sanctioning by 
your assent or even presence. Have you given up the 
fellowship of saints on earth? Do you hide behind the 
plea that you have nothing to do with others—that all 
your duty is to walk well yourself? Then you abandon 
the ground of God’s Church wholly. Be honest. Search 
and see, whether you find yourself outside the bearing 
of the Scriptures that treat of God’s assembly in its 
practical working, or whether they tally with what 
you are doing. Is not the Holy Ghost so fettered by 
arrangements of men that the diversities of gifts, were 
they ever so many and real, have no room to display 

s 


258 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


themselves? Is not the Spirit grieved by the counter- 
action? Is not the Lord practically displaced by the 
Church (no matter of what sort) presuming to appoint 
overseers, and even ministers of the word, instead of 
His servants going forth on His own warrant, and 
trading with His goods? Somehow or other you have 
got outside that which answers to the written word; 
you are off the ground of God’s Church on earth. 

On the other hand, if faith emboldens you to be with 
only two or three, where there is the joy of knowing 
that the word really applies and directs, instead of pro- 
nouncing condemnation, how blessed it 1s and proves! 
For them that honour God, He will honour in due 
time. Meanwhile divine light shines on the path every 
time you meet together. It may show how feeble you 
are, and how you fall short; still it is the right place 
and aim; it is where God wills you to be, and gra- 
ciously cares for you, supplies need, sends helps by 
the way, gives now this servant, now that; for “all 
things are yours,” and your soul profits by the truth, 
and advances in the ways of God. If there be evil 
here or there, it is detected and judged (the Holy 
Ghost working through the word to that end). Then 
how sweet to know that we are doing in deed and in 
truth the will of God! He that does it shall abide 
for ever. How happy the heart and conscience that 
thus has the certainty of subjection to the Lord Jesus 
through the dreary way! 

Now, this was what the apostle desired for the 
Corinthians. They had practically got the whole 
machinery into disorder, but he does not deny that 
it was God’s assembly. There may be brought in any 
imaginable evil under the sun. Am I to turn my back 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 259 


upon the assembly of God because of things unworthy, 
which I might hear of in one or another? Surely 
this is not the path of the Lord, who tells us how evils 
are to be judged and corrected. What we have to do, 
then, is to apply the word intelligently, and deal with 
each source of scandal as it may arise. Of course, in- 
difference as to the will of the Lord is evil, no less 
than the evils I feel in others; but it is as unscriptural 
to go out at once because of another’s sin, as to 
wink at it or help it on. God’s assembly is and must 
be intolerant of evil, because He is confessed to be 
there; but I must seek to arouse conscience, and to 
act in obedience even as to this. In the Church (not 
rushing out of it hastily) I can count upon God 
working in and by His saints; and therefore, no matter 
what evil Satan may foist in, false doctrine, or im- 
morality of the most flagrant kind, we are neither to 
be overmuch surprised nor to refuse our aid to the 
Church, whose business is to do the Lord’s will about 
all. I am to look to Him, and call upon Him, and 
count upon Him, and with my brethren too, that all 
our consciences may be in activity—men, women, and 
children—and we may have grace to cast out that which 
is offensive to God’s glory, if nothing less can remedy 
the mischief. 

Thus, it is not the fact of weakness, nor even the 
entrance of positive sin, no matter of what sort it may 
be, which should lead us to separate, however great the 
shame and sorrow to the heart. It is the refusal to deal 
with the unclean thing; it is the practical rejection of 
the Spirit of God, rising up by the word and rebuking 
the evil, which is so fatal. It is where the plain self- 
will of man prevails and is sanctioned, preferring ease, 

s 2 


260 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


quiet, and the appearance of unity, though all that 
makes unity precious be gone; for what have we to do 
with unity, if it be not formed and sustained according 
to the will of God? If it be not that which the Holy 
Ghost puts His seal upon, if it be not for the mainten- 
ance of the glory of the Lord Jesus, it is a horror and a 
sin, and has no claim on my allegiance. And therefore 
nothing can be simpler, after all, than the application of 
these principles, though unbelief loudly cries that there 
is no hope, and that we are delivered to do these abomi- 
nations. There are difficulties found in the path of 
Christ ; but faith overcomes. We know that the Church 
is composed of men who, though in the Spirit, have 
nevertheless the flesh in them. Consequently there are 
seeds of evil which Satan will endeavour to cause to 
germinate, and shed their effects around, as banefully 
and antagonistically for the glory of God as he can. 
With the Lord in our midst, we are not to be alarmed 
at anything : still less are we to flee from that which is 
a post of honour and blessing, as truly as of difficulty 
and danger. Let us gird up our loins, and look to 
Him whose the Church is, and whose is all power and 
might. He will manifest His gracious power on our 
behalf, and deal with what is hateful to Himself. 

But what if subtle evil, especially against Christ 
(for this is Satan’s aim), gain the upper hand in the 
assembly,—what if remedy or judgment be refused,— 
what if, for any reason of its own, the Church reject as 
uncalled for, unlawful, and presumptuous, the attempt 
to call attention to the sentence which God’s word 
pronounces on what is certainly opposed to His glory, 
and destructive of truth and holiness? Evidently there 
we find ourselves, if it be so, on slippery ground. But 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 261 


if the evil, flagrant as well as certain, be hid and kept 
up, not judged, and that which took the place of 
God’s assembly shuts itself up in deliberate self-will 
and rejection of the calls of the Holy Ghost to judge 
what is contrary to Christ, then we must go out in the 
Lord’s name, sorrowfully, it may well be, and with 
deep shame, and with feelings that ought indeed to 
leave us a heart wounded and bleeding and broken 
before such grievous evil, but at the same time with 
no hesitation of spirit, if we see without doubt the 
signs and tokens of the very same evils which broke 
better hearts than ours before us. I vannot but repeat 
that solemnly, in the strength of the Lord, we are to 
turn our backs upon that which is so much the viler 
a pretender, because, having had the light of God 
anew, it deliberately refused to act on it; because, 
having had the grace of God afresh brought out, it 
is become obstinately deaf to His word, and turns His 
mercy into licentiousness against Him. May the 
Lord deliver us from such ways, and make us always 
sensitive to His glory and revealed will; but, at the 
same time, first of all, ready to think ourselves mis- 
taken, and unwilling to believe that His assembly 
could basely betray His honour thus, never acting 
in an individual case, still less with an assembly, 
until we are forced to know the sad and humbling 
certainty that the saint or the assembly is utterly 
faithless to Christ. Haste either to put away indivi- 
duals, or to judge that which has been owned as an 
assembly of God, is the last thing that ought to cha- 
racterize the child of God. Slow and painful should 
be such a discovery to us, which we cannot refuse, 
because God, as it were, lays it on our consciences, 


262 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


and then we may not close our eyes or decline to act 
firmly. This, I trust, may help some to notice the 
working of God’s Spirit, not only as revealed in the 
word, but as He would have it truthfully applied to 
deal practically with present duties and difficulties. 
And now a few words just to call attention to the 
ereat truth contained in verse 13, which was read, that 
“we, being many, are one body.” The Scriptures go 
farther, and say, “By one Spirit are we all baptized 
into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether 
we bond or free.” Who can doubt that every child of 
God now, every one that is called by God’s grace since — 
the cross, is brought into the membership of this body ? 
Not one Christian is left out. I do not say that all 
saints enter at once; but that there is not a single 
Christian who is not, sooner or later, baptized by the 
Holy Ghost; and if baptized by the Holy Ghost, unto 
what end? Not to be split into individualities. This 
was the state of saints in Israel of old, but is the very 
thing the Holy Ghost is sent to take one out of. I do 
not, of course, lose my blessing as an individual under 
Christianity—the very reverse; but, besides, there is a 
ground which God has given us corporately here below. 
I belong to the one body, the Church. I am baptized 
into that one body by the Holy Ghost sent down from 
heaven. This is as much a matter of faith as that I am 
a child of God. But if I am a member of the one 
body, am I acting as such? Do I believe that it holds 
good now? Does it not depend on the unfailing presence 
of the Holy Ghost? If it be real now, is it not incum- 
bent on me to walk accordingly? And how? Search and 
see by the word of God; try your ways; and I have 
no doubt what will be the result to him who does so 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 263 


honestly—I do not mean in human frankness, but in 
godly sincerity, and with that single eye which seeks 
not its own things, but the things of Jesus Christ. Is it 
possible that there should be any but one result for all 
the children of God who are guided by His word and 
Spirit? There is no defect in Scripture, no failure in 
the Holy Ghost. 

T am aware that many will suppose that this is a 
bold insinuation, but I dare say nothing less or other- 
wise. I should feel in doing so that I was slighting 
the word of God, or practically denying the power of 
the Holy Ghost. It would be the unbelieving admis- 
sion that God’s revelation and present guidance are 
insufficient. This seems to me truly a bold insinua- 
tion, which for my part I utterly refuse. Is not God's 
Spirit in us greater than he that is in the world? I 
dare not allow that Scripture is the nose of wax which 
some papists and all infidels pretend. And I affirm 
that the Christian, though having the flesh in him, is 
not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, inasmuch as the 
Spirit of God dwells in him. Were we simple and 
subject to Scripture, the Holy Ghost could and would 
produce but one conviction. The only reason why 
Christians differ so widely is because unjudged flesh 
prevails against the Spirit. I mean nothing against 
other men; I say this against myself as surely, and, I 
trust, with as deep a meaning, as against anyone who 
allows the flesh to have its way. I feel that one can- 
not, ought not to, give up either the assurance of the 
Spirit’s presence, or the sufficiency of God's word, 
when wielded by the Holy Ghost. Is not the Holy 
Ghost here, to use mightily that word for the glory of 
Christ in the Christian and the Church, in proportion 


264 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


to faith? Therefore, what becomes the child of God is 
to put aside all the rubbish of tradition, and the dead 
weight of unbelief he knows, to quit that which he 
does or allows, or is in any way connected with, that 
contradicts Scripture, and makes it impossible for him 
thoroughly, and in all things, to carry out the word 
of God in the Spirit. 


The rest of the chapter, on which I need not en- 
large, teaches, first of all, that the body is not one 
member. The variety of the members indicates how 
necessary all are—a most important principle—the foot 
Just as much as the hand. Not, of course, that all are 
necessary for the same end, nor that all have the same 
place or function; nevertheless they are all needful, 
great and small. In the present weakness and dis- 
traction of the Church of God, the hand may be there 
and the foot may be here,—scattered instead of being 
gathered. Things are in a dislocated condition, as far 
as regards the outward manifestation of the body of 
Christ on the earth. Confusion and perplexity reign as 
the effects of this; but God is always faithful, and still 
works by the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, who 
is sufficient for all circumstances. The Church may be 
weak, and ministry may be no stronger; but is the 
Spirit of God weak? Thus it comes to be simply a 
question of our faith in the reality of the presence and 
the operation of the Holy Ghost. And He empowers 
and employs individuals as He wills for the glory of 
Christ, but normally as members of His body; and it 
is of great importance that there should be firmness in 
holding fast this truth, without forcing others beyond 
their faith. But what can be more lovely on earth than 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 265 


this hearty falling in with the various workings of the 
Spirit of God! He distributes a gift to one which 
characteristically differs from another's. There are not, 
and never were, two gifts exactly alike in the Church 
of God. Not more truly does each man differ from his 
neighbour; and, as we all know, there is something 
that is special to every man. The likeness may be 
strong, but there is that which stainps one man which 
nobody else has or ever had. It is exactly so in the 
Church; God needs this or that for the work He has 
given us to do. Flesh envies and is jealous; but how 
sweet where the Spirit of God gives us faith to recog- 
nize these varieties in the work of the Lord! On the 
other hand nature, wherever it is allowed, invariably 
obliterates. these divine traits; assimilates as much as 
possible by some grinding process, so to speak, and thus 
injures the fine lineaments and diverse workings of 
God’s Spirit. However, the details of the chapter must 
be passed over. I have only desired to present, as far 
as I could in brief, its leading thoughts. 


There is another Scripture to which I must advert 
before closing—Ephesians iv. There again the body of 
Christ is prominent, but in a strikingly different way ; 
because the apostle looks at His body, the Church, not 
as the scene of the Holy Ghost’s operation on earth 
(1 Cor. xii.), but as linked up with its Head in heaven. 
So far is Christ from being described there as the 
Head, though, of course, it was true, that the body on 
earth is itself called “Christ.” (Verse 12.) Instead of 
uniting in that way Christ and the Church, looking 
at all as a field where the Holy Ghost carries out 
the will of God, here it is another aspect. Christ 


’ 


266 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


Himself is ascended up on high, and the body of Christ, 
though of course as to fact here below, yet as to 
relationship is viewed as one with Christ above. If I 
look at Christ, therefore, I am at once connected with 
heaven; if I look at the Holy Ghost, I am connected 
with earth as the place where He Himself is at work 
for God’s glory in the Church. Hence this difference 
runs through these epistles. Both views are true and 
important. The one is not to be abandoned or neglected 
more than the other. I do not say that they act equally 
on the affections: surely this is not so; but they are 
both needful, both divine, and both revealed for our profit 
and blessing. Thus what we find as the prominent 
topic in Ephesians iv. is Christ the infallible source of 
supply to His body. He gave gifts to it—apostles, 
prophets, evangelists, pastors and teachers; but not a 
word about tongues, or healings—the signs, of which we 
have so copious an account in 1 Corinthians xii. xiv. 
In Ephesians all was directly the means of nourish- 
ment to the body, and viewed as flowing from the care 
of Christ for His own, rather than a testimony in God’s 
Church of power to the world. There the Spirit works 
mightily in what is called Christ; here Christ, as 
Head, personally loves and cares for His body. Hence, 
too, Christ is'as prominent in the one case, as the 
Holy Ghost is the great energy in the other, working 
as He will in these various manifestations that are 
given to each in the Church. Hence, accordingly, in 
Ephesians, the great object is “for the perfecting of the 
saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of 
the body of Christ.” 

The right and due manner, in which God intended 
these gifts should be displayed, is as members of Christ’s 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 267 


body. So in 1 Cor. xii., it is not independently of the 
Church of God, but as a member of the one body. It 
is true even of evangelizing, were it the apostle Paul 
himself, however miraculously the Lord had wrought 
in his call, as the Spirit did afterwards. When Saul 
and Barnabas went forth, it was as recommended by 
the Church to the grace of God. So they come back 
and tell the Church what God had wrought. It was in 
no way as having derived their commission from the 
church which is not competent to choose or send forth 
the Lord’s servant. This is of importance. We have 
only to compare it with the source, call, and character 
of ministry as seen in the present day, and the difference 
is as glaring as complete between ministry according 
to God, and when corrupted by man. I do not deny 
that there are servants of the Lord amongst ordinary 
official ministers; but, at the same time, there is that 
which always and systematically dishonours the Lord 
as the sole source of mission, as well as hinders the 
work; so that, far from being in regular order, you 
could hardly find anything more anomalous here below. 
There are, I believe, true and sincere servants of Christ 
among them; but then, in order to enjoy an official 
place at the present time in Christendom, you must 
submit to have your call from some church (so-called) ; 
that is, you must in effect be a party to the Lord’s 
disparagement, and honour the church in its place of 
usurpation, in order to get a ministerial commission. 
It is not a question of any one body: all agree in this 
guilty substitution of the church for the Lord. It 
matters not if it be the smallest branch of religionists : 
they are as stringent in their form of the error as the 
Pope of Rome is in his. It is all the same principle, 


268 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


from the Roman Catholic body down to the extra- 
vagant sect of Irvingites. There is not a single 
exception, so far as I know, not even the Society of 
Friends. Although in a certain way there is a recog- 
nition of the Holy Spirit, yet, as was noticed on a 
former occasion, there is no body more a stranger to 
revealed truth on this subject than that society. 

I wish to hurt nobody’s feelings, but to speak the 
truth. Nor am I aware of any “ Friend” now present : 
if there be one, I hope he will bear with me in what I 
must speak out as my testimony to the truth. Now I 
believe that the doctrine that every man in the world 
as such has the Spirit of God is as utterly destructive 
of the great truth that the Holy Ghost dwells in the 
Christian and in the house of God as anything can be. 
I know nothing worse—no, not even in Popery, be- 
cause Popery does after a fashion bring in the name 
of Christ. It may be only with a few drops of water; 
but still there is, even in their fanatical and intensely 
superstitious abuse of ceremonies, some sort of sense 
that man in nature outside the Church is lost, and 
that under the name of Christ alone can men be saved. 
So far there is that which redeems Popery itself 
from the slight put on objective truth found among 
the otherwise respectable persons alluded to. I have 
nothing to say against them individually, but I have 
everything to insist against their opposition to the 
true grace of God in redemption, and the gift of the 
Holy Ghost. Who can justly deny that this is a solemn 
charge if true? God forbid that anyone here should 
use for self-complacency the fact of returning to this 
great truth. On the contrary, it is our deep responsi- 
bility. Further, it is that which ought to make us 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 269 


truly ashamed, to think that we do not present it with 
such power to the hearts and -consciences of others 
as to overwhelm them with anxiety, lest they should 
be outside God’s own way. I admit that our want 
of spirituality and devotedness, our worldliness, and all 
other sorrowful elements, which, either individually or 
publicly, have been amongst us, are the greatest pos- 
sible hindrances; for all the power of Satan along with 
man could not overthrow us for a moment, if there 
were not want of faith or faithfulness unjudged in our- 
selves. This is the real danger we have to fear, and 
be ashamed of before our God. Let us only hold fast 
the blessed truth which God has given us to witness 
to, as well as to believe. Slanders from without are 
powerless, save with those who love what is evil. Let 
men say what they will, but let us not tremble for a 
moment so long as our eye is single, and our heart true 
to Christ Himself, and the Holy Ghost is confided in 
according to the word. 

But, as in Ephesians iv., another fact may be noticed 
before I have done. These gifts are till we all come to 
the measure of the stature of Christ’s fulness. It is pre- 
cisely here that much of the difference is seen between 
Ephesians iv. and 1 Corinthians xii. There is no such 
assurance in speaking about the signs. Thus I learn 
what ought, to an instructed eye, to account for the 
fact that signs no longer appear. The Lord never 
pledged Himself to continue healings, or tongues, or 
any such externals as were given to the early Church; 
but the moment you come to what is necessary to edifi- 
cation, to needful ministerial gifts of His grace for the 
calling in of fresh souls, on the guarding and watching 
over those that are called, I have divine authority for 


270 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


knowing that these are given “till we all come in the 
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of 
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the 
stature of the fulness of Christ.’ All that is for real 
good in present circumstances abides for the Church of 
God, even to the end. 

And now I close this part of the subject, feeling 
how scantily I have dipped into it; but that I have, at 
least, directed attention by God’s grace to that which 
will not fail those who have faith in Himself. May we 
cherish faith in His word, looking to please the Lord. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 244 


Hecture UN. 


‘An habitation of God through the Spirit.’””-—Epuers. ii. 


TuHoueu I have read this chapter of the epistle as a 
whole, my intention is to take up almost exclusively 
the last few words: the reason why will appear 
presently. The Holy Spirit views the Church, not 
merely as the body of Christ, but as the habitation of 
God. The body of Christ specially brings before us 
our communion with Himself as a head in heaven ; 
the habitation of God connects itself just as simply 
and clearly with the actual place of the Church now 
on the earth. This is not the only difference; but it 
is considerable, and important too. Nevertheless both 
agree in this, that there can be neither the body of 
Christ any more than the habitation of God, save 
through the Holy Ghost, and founded upon redemption. 
This is of great consequence doctrinally, but it is 
not less so practically. Collaterally also it decides, to 
any man who is really subject to God’s word, the 
limits of the Church—the time when its formation 
began. Thus the Church is consequent on redemption. 

There was no such thing as either the body of Christ 
or God’s habitation through the Spirit, till sin was 
judged in the cross, when the Holy Ghost was sent 
down from heaven to the earth to form it. To know 
this is an immense step for many a heart. There is not 
one in this room that has known this truth long; there 


Ole THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


are comparatively few of the children of God who 
admit it to be a truth at all; and so much the worse 
for them. It is not that the participation of the bless- 
ing is lost thereby; for not the relationship, but our 
enjoyment depends on our knowledge of it. And 
this 1s a very great mercy on God’s part. So far, it is 
with this as with other privileges that His grace con- 
fers. Many a soul really looks to Christ alone, and 
consequently has eternal life; but if you asked, “ Have 
you life everlasting ?” there might be no little hesitation 
there; and even those who are not conscious of this 
difficulty, have no adequate conception of the nature of 
eternal life. They would not question the words that 
Scripture makes use of; but what the character, nature, 
and consequences (now and by-and-by) of eternal life 
are, they are exceedingly ill-acquainted with. So it fares 
with the truth of the Church of God in either aspect 
—its union with Christ above, or its affording God’s 
dwelling-place by the Spirit below. Last night we 
looked a little at the former of these truths; to-night 
we shall search the Scriptures on the latter, though one 
cannot do more than direct the enquirer to those parts of 
God’s word which develop with divine certainty either 
great truth. I shall touch by the way on some of the 
practical consequences; for, certainly, we never do 
taste the blessing of any truth, any more than we 
honour God by it, until we are sufficiently awakened 
by the Holy Ghost to gather for our souls, and also to 
cultivate in our experience, ways, and worship, the 
fruits of that which God has made known to us. 

In reading the verses that have just been before us, 
it is obvious that the point to which the Holy Ghost 
has arrived in this epistle is the setting aside of the 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 21a 


Jewish system, and the bringing in of that which was 
entirely new on the earth. Being altogether unpre- 
cedented, God dealt in a wholly new way. He brought 
in Gentiles, who before this were, as He says, the 
uncircumeision in the flesh. Not only so; but having 
brought in those Gentiles, who, before they received 
the gospel, had been aliens and strangers, without hope 
and without God in the world, He put both them 
and those who now believe from Israel together in one 
new position before Himself. Why all this? Because 
redemption is now accomplished. Now, is it not strange 
that Christians should have any question as to this? 
Is it not an extraordinary fact (for it is a fact), that 
theory should be allowed to upset that which is the 
most evident and unquestionable teaching of God’s 
own word ? 

Our whole epistle, from beginning to end, con- 
templates Christians and Christians only. If I take 
some isolated word, I may, no doubt, apply it to Old 
Testament saints (for instance, the very word “saints Bt; 
but then I never find even such an expression alone. 
If we read of saints, all is set in a new connection. 
Thus it is said in the very beginning, “ Paul, an apostle 
of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the saints which 
are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus.” 
There was nothing of the kind in the Old Testament: 
we could not possibly hear of any faithful in Christ 
there. The language would have been wholly unin- 
telligible, and could not in anywise be conceived to be 
spoken in those times. Not that some were not faith- 
ful; not that there were not saints; but they could not 
be thus spoken of. They were waiting, according to 
promise and prophecy, for the Messiah. God’s Spirit 

<b 


274 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


had not failed to work in them, of course. Precious 
fruits too there were in their season; but not a single 
phrase, as far as I am aware, of this epistle could have 
been uttered at any moment of any one soul in the 
whole course of Old Testament times. What, then, 
must one think of men who apply every word of 
it to all times? Why simply that they do not at 
all understand its bearing. I do not in the least 
deny that they have reaped good from the Saviour, 
because they do see Himself; they have tasted grace in 
Him; they do see some sweet mercies that are shown 
the Christian. But assuredly the depth of present 
privileges and their peculiarity, as well as their force 
and heavenly character, are obscured, attenuated, and 
blunted to their souls by the vague haze which is 
thrown over the whole, by unduly extending to all 
saints what God has revealed distinctly and solely of 
the souls that are now brought into the knowledge of 
His grace since He manifested Himself in Christ, and 
the work of redemption was wrought. Hence I maintain 
that, as a whole, every thought, every sentence, con- 
templates exclusively the saints that have been called 
since Christ appeared in the world to die in atonement, 
and before He comes again to receive them to Himself. 

All this needs no argument, I suppose, to most here. 
It is a simple question of believing the word that opens 
the New Testament mystery, and of comparing the 
language with any part of the Old Testament, which, 
of course, is the part of Scripture alone capable of 
letting us know with unerring certainty the state, 
condition, and experiences of the Old Testament saints. 
My motive for alluding to this, which, after all, ought to 
be here, at least, a trite and familiar truth, is to remark, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 275 


that all attempts to fritter away the differences of the 
word and the ways of God have an enfeebling effect 
on our appreciation of that to which God is now calling 
His children. And there is no one mistake which has 
wrought greater mischief, as to the very truth which is 
now before us, than allowing these generalities to 
swamp the precision of God’s revelation. Men think 
that it. has been always the Church, for instance, that 
God has been dealing with in this world; that it now 
has a little more light, and a little more blessing (for 
differences cannot be denied); but that, nevertlieless, 
substantially it is the same system from beginning to 
end. This I wholly deny; but I entreat those who 
have not as yet duly considered the matter, not to re- 
ceive what I have said, but to examine it by the word 
of God; I entreat them to examine what they have 
hitherto held by the word of God; I entreat them to 
bring all their own thoughts, and the suggestions of 
others, on this great matter to the sole test that God 
acknowledges, the only means of light and truth pos- 
sible for any one. 

If we are willing thus to subject our thoughts touch- 
ing the Church, as God’s habitation by the Spirit here 
below, we learn, first of all, that the work of redemption 
“1s applied to souls after a wholly indiscriminate sort. 
That is, there is no question now whether a man be a 
Jew or a Gentile: if there had been this difference in 
the ground on which the Church is formed (whether 
in the aspect of the body of Christ on the one hand, 
or of (God’s dwelling-place on the other), in either 
case there is supposed for this new work the total 
subversion of that which God had sanctioned and set 
up in former days. Hence we find the language pro- 

T 2 


276 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


ceeds: “But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes 
were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ. For 
he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath 
broken down the middle wall of partition between us; 
having abolished in his flesh the enmity.” Thus vanishes 
the partition which subsisted in Old Testament times 
by God’s appointment, “even the law of command- 
ments contained in ordinances, for to make in himself 
of twain one new man.” That is, it is not merely 
blotting out our sins, nor simply ensuring heaven by- 
and-by; but forming here below a creation entirely 
unknown before. It is the communication of privileges 
unheard of and impossible, while God still dealt with 
His ancient people, and acted among them and governed 
them by a law as in Israel. “That he might [con- 
sequently we are told] reconcile both unto God in one 
body by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby: 
and came and preached peace to you which were afar 
off, and to them that were nigh. For through him we 
both have access by one Spirit unto the Father.” 

Here we come to the point which is more particu- 
larly before us to-night. ‘ Now therefore,’ it is said, 
“ve are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow- 
citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; 
and are built upon the foundation of the apostles and 
prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner 
stone.” Take notice that it is not a question of the 
Old Testament prophets here. The order in which 
the Holy Spirit wrote excludes this sense; for if the 
Ephesian saints were “built upon the foundation of 
the apostles and prophets,” what could be less natural 
than an allusion to the Old Testament prophets in 
such a case or fashion as this? “The apostles” are 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. bi 


put before “the prophets.” More than this, the 
construction of the phrase means a common class of 
persons who form a foundation for this building, that 
God was about to construct. And when was this 
foundation laid? Not just after man had sinned, not 
in the times of the elders, did God begin to execute 
this great work in the earth. Here we find, that late 
in the day, after four thousand years had passed, and 
Christ had come and died, then was the foundation 
laid (not the work, long in course, brought to a com- 
pletion) by the apostles and prophets. The common 
class, signified by one Greek article, forbids our think- 
ing of the Old Testament prophets that were past. 
The prophets were then present, and associated with 
the apostles in this work.* Both apostles and prophets, 
namely of the New Testament, were those that laid 
this new foundation, “in whom all the building,” says 
he, “fitly framed together, groweth unto a holy temple 
in the Lord.” Such is the ultimate result. This holy 
temple will be seen by-and-by: but note the last clause ; 
“In whom ye also are builded together for an habita- 
tion of God through the Spirit.” What I draw from 
it is, I conceive, a simple and sure inference—that 
' there is now, before the holy temple is grown to its 
full proportions, this work on earth displacing the 
system of Israel, a new building altogether, which 
really is God’s habitation in virtue of the Spirit’s 
presence. 

Thus, believers now, were they Gentiles in nature 
before they had received the gospel, are brought, with 
Jews who may now believe, into this dwelling-place of 
God, “in whom ye also”—addressing the Ephesians — 


* Compare Ephes. iii. 5. ‘It is now revealed” to both. 


278 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


“are builded together for an habitation of God.” The 
manner of it is declared to be “through” or “in the 
Spirit.” That is, the Spirit is just as necessary for 
the habitation of God, as for the body of Christ, into 
which we were last enquiring. Nevertheless, the habi- 
tation of God is, in some respects, not so exclusively a 
new thought as the body of Christ. We find, at least, 
more distinct types of the great truth of God’s dwell- 
ing among men on earth in the Old Testament Scrip- 
tures. But nothing whatever was revealed of the 
joining of Jew and Gentile in one body; still less that 
they together should compose the body of Christ. Of 
course we have the type of Adam’s marriage, or union, 
with Eve; but this discloses nothing of its components, 
tells us nothing of Jew and Gentile—a distinction not 
then hinted at—joining in one. The fact can only be 
used, and we know it was used by the Spirit of God, 
when the Church came to light, but nothing more. 

As to the habitation of God, we have, as is well 
known, no trace whatever of it in Genesis. There is 
not even a promise as yet. And this is the more 
striking, because if there is a book in the Old Testa- 
ment that is more than any other fertile in germs of 
divine truth, it,is the book of Genesis. All the other 
books put together, it is not too much perhaps to say, 
do not present so many views of that which God was 
about to work in due time; yet there is this remark- 
able exception : God’s habitation, God’s design to have 
a dwelling-place on earth, is never once alluded to. 
The reason is manifest. Though we see the beginning 
of sacrifices in Genesis, though burnt offerings are 
spoken of, though covenant dealings are often brought 
before us, there is yet no redemption. Redemption is 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 279 


also as remarkable an exception as God’s dwelling- 
place throughout this wonderful book. 

Then comes the second book of the law, not so re- 
markable for presenting in this manifold way the unfold- 
ings, so to speak, of the ways of God and the counsels 
that were afterwards to have effect given to them in 
Christ. But certainly the book of Exodus claims our 
special attention now; inasmuch as it presents us, in 
type, the very truth we are in quest of—first, indeed, 
redemption, and then God’s dwelling with men. We 
may add by the way, that although of course the law 
comes in too, within that law we find the renewed 
assurance of this very truth. ‘Thus the great truths 
which stand out in the book of Exodus are among the 
things revealed in Ephesians ii., and in similar order. 

The first part of Exodus is occupied in showing us 
the forlorn, miserable, debased condition of the people 
of God. Thanks be to God, it was not merely that 
they cried out of the depth of their ruin, but the Lord 
hearkened, and occupies Himself for their deliverance. 
Not content with sending messages of mercy, in due 
time He works, not first in judgment, though He did 
judge, but claiming His people for Himself. He sends 
Moses and Aaron, and, as signs following their mission, 
plagues, in which He chastises the pride of the world 
that kept His people in bondage. Finally comes before 
us the most remarkable type of redemption that the 
Old Testament affords, and this in both its parts—the 
blood of the Lamb with death and resurrection, the 
Passover and the Red Sea. Either one or other alone 
was inadequate to set forth redemption, which can only 
be rightly known when they are both received together. 
For if we look at the Passover, we find, after all, God 


280 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


still judging; and it must be so. God is armed with 
power, God is dealing in vengeance on that which was 
evil, but at the same time in His own admirable wisdom 
providing a righteous means of shelter for His people. 
Thus the most prominent truth that appears in the 
Passover is God in judgment, though with provision to 
spare His own. Substantially the same thing appears 
in one aspect of the gospel. One of the central thoughts 
in the gospel is, that God is righteous therein. (Rom. i. 
17.) It is not mere mercy. However precious this may 
be, it 1s quite a different thought from the righteousness 
of God, though there never could have been the found- 
ing or display of the righteousness of God without His 
mercy ; but His righteousness in justifying is the boast 
of the gospel. While the sinner is accounted righteous, 
it is not merely that God pardons and shows mercy, 
but is just in justifying. So it is with the Passover. 
God that night came down in judgment of man as well 
as of the gods of Egypt. He was marking His hatred of 
sin as He had never done before; and this, too, in quite 
as evident a manner in His dealings with Israel as with 
the Egyptians. No doubt there was death. That night, 
in every Egyptian house, the first-born lay dead, and 
the wail of sorrow declared all over the land what it 
was to despise the admonitions of the Lord; but in 
every dwelling of the Israelites the blood-stained 
doorposts as truly and still more blessedly declared 
that God is just, and at the same time the Justifier— 
spoke of a substitute indeed—of another’s blood; 
spoke, at least, in God’s ears of His death, who should 
become man, though most truly God; spoke of the 
Lamb of God, and the shedding of His blood. 
Nevertheless this was not all the blessing, even typi- 


, 
OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 281 


cally. The Paschal Lamb simply kept God outside, 
only stayed His judgment from falling on the persons 
of the Israelites themselves. Is this the full character 
of redemption—to shut God out from His own? It is 
the notion that too many have of redemption; but how 
far short it falls of redemption according to God! 
Most important as it unquestionably is, it is not the 
whole truth of the matter, but very far from it. And 
therefore it is we find that along with this God appends 
another type as its complement—namely, the Red Sea, 
where the flower of Egypt found a grave, and God gave 
the Israelites to pass through what seemed to be sure 
death to them, what in truth became in type life ever- 
lasting, and their best security. So it is precisely that 
the believer finds the death and resurrection of Christ. 
Then for the first time God deigns to speak of salvation 
in relation to His people. (Exodus xiv. 13, 30, xv. 2.) 
He never speaks of anything, however glorious, wrought 
previously as “salvation.” 

It may be remarked by the way, that it is a great 
injury to souls to speak of an immature and partial 
knowledge of God as salvation—knowledge, I mean, 
even of the love of Christ. Thus one often hears 
such talk as, “It is true, the man is not happy yet; 
he has no liberty of soul; but, at any rate, he is saved.” 
Scripture never sanctions such language. What it de- 
sienates as salvation is not that a soul is converted 
or quickened merely—is not that a soul has received 
of Christ that which makes it judge itself, and cry out 
to God, yet with a certain measure of hope. Scripture 
reserves “salvation” precisely, though not exclusively, 
for the being brought into conscious liberty, for the 
realization of the present deliverance through the gos- 


282 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


pel from every enemy by the power of God in Christ. 
And hence it is that we only hear of salvation when 
Israel comes to the Red Sea, and when there is, there- 
fore, the full and final quittance of the land of Egypt, 
and the total destruction of their proud foes. “To-day,” 
says Moses, “ye shall see the salvation of the Lord.” 
It was not the night of the Paschal feast; it was the 
day when they could look back on the Red Sea crossed 
for ever. For this reason, it is of the greatest import- 
ance that we should speak according to Scripture as- 
to this, not owning as salvation anything short of it. 
Otherwise we do not help God’s children, as we might, 
to a settled assurance of the mighty victory of Christ, 
the lack of which never fails to leave them in a sort 
of dead-and-alive state—an anxious and struggling 
condition instead of peace. It is very blessed, indeed, 
for a soul to be wrought in profoundly by the Spirit, 
and to find out what it is before God; but till it is 
broken down to rest with simplicity and confidence on 
the finished work of Christ, there is nothing that God 
calls “salvation” in the complete sense. 

After this mighty work—as far as the type is 
concerned, wrought then—-we find Israel for the first 
time singing. ,The song of Moses is heard on the other 
side of the Red Sea. Remark particularly the language 
of this song as bearing on our subject to-night: “I will 
sing unto the Lord; for he hath triumphed gloriously: 
the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. 
The Lord is my strength and my song, and is become 
my salvation: he is my God: I will prepare him an 
habitation.” How strikingly the truth comes out! The 
full type of resurrection, as well as death, is brought 
before us then; and then, first, we hear of salvation; 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 283 


and immediately ensuing on this (as far, of course, as 
the shadow of these things is concerned), the heart 
desires that God should have a habitation. How comes 
this? Are we to suppose for an instant that there was 
any quality or conduct in those who thus sung in the 
wilderness, which was more agreeable to God than 
what He had found in their fathers or other elders of 
the book of Genesis? The very reverse is true. Among 
these were some that God had put the most signal 
honour on—that had been chosen of God to be the 
depositaries of His secrets, not only exempted from a 
world-wide judgment, but in one instance at least 
taken up to heaven without death, as in another God 
came down to sup with His friend on the earth. Need 
I remind any how this last was made the object of 
promises, confirmed to his son, and repeated to his son’s 
son—promises that will not cease to roll their course of 
blessing till all the ages have closed in the eternal rest 
of God, when good and evil shall have each their lot 
for ever, according to the judgment of God as well as 
His grace ? 

Is it not, then, impossible to suppose it a question 
of persons? But for this very reason the wonders of 
redemption are brought into relief. Christ’s death, 
whether in type or in antitype, alone accounts for 1t; 
and I do not think it too much to say that redemption 
ought to account for it. I affirm that it is suitable, and 
not surprising after all, when we know what redemp- 
tion deserves, and who has wrought this redemption, 
and how it was wrought ; when we know that it needed 
the Son of God, and that He should come into this 
world as a man, not only to give up the enjoyment of 
all His own proper glory for a season, but that He 


284. THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


should enter in grace the circumstances of all man’s 
shame, and sorrow, and suffering; and yet, after all this, 
instead of emerging into a place of blessedness and 
glory, on the contrary, should go into a deeper depth, 
after man had done his very worst, after Satan could 
do no more. For then, after all the rest, was resolved 
a question that had to be settled between God and that 
Blessed One. And that question must have been of 
all others the hardest for God, and in itself the most 
trying of all things for the Son of God. For what can 
compare with that wondrous hour when sin had to be 
judged of God, and be dealt with in the strangest 
place in which it was possible for man to conceive it 
—imputed to the person of the Holy One of God, even 
the Son of God, by God Himself ? 

When one reflects on these things, who can wonder 
that God should see in redemption such infinite worth, 
and such a resting-place for Him, that the heaven of 
heavens should cease, so to speak, to contain Him; as 
though God Himself should say, “I must come down 
now. My Spirit must dwell where that precious blood 
is; He can no longer remain above!” It may have been 
the vilest spot in all creation; it may be that which too 
often lifted up its puny head in the fiercest, and, at the 
same time, most shameless rebellion. But no matter 
what the earth may be, and no matter what the people 
on the earth may have been proved against God, and 
against His Anointed, God could not, consistently with 
His estimate of what Christ has suffered, abide in 
heaven any longer, but must come and find His dwell- 
ing-place in this very earth, and among the members 
of that very race which had treated Him with such 
habitual contumely. To my mind this, and this alone, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 285 


accounts for the blessed truth of God’s having His 
dwelling among us on the earth, or even for the possi- 
bility of His having an habitation on earth. Redemp- 
tion accounts for the fact, and the Holy Ghost at once 
makes it good when redemption is effected. And so, 
therefore, we see in this very chapter when the type of 
redemption was fulfilled, that the typical habitation of 
God immediately becomes desired on the earth; when 
the true redemption, eternal redemption, was a fact, 
God comes down really to dwell, abiding for ever by 
His Spirit in the redeemed. Thus nothing can be con- 
ceived more harmonious than either the typical facts, 
on the one hand, or the real accomplishment of them, 
on the other, in the eternal redemption Christ has ac- 
quired for the Christian. 

But there is another thing, too, that should be 
noticed here. Not only have we now the people, 
through Moses, expressing their common desire for 
preparing God a habitation, but farther on we here 
find (and it is a remarkable fact too) that this is the 
first chapter in the Bible where God’s holiness is pre- 
sented. No one would suspect this; no one, I am 
convinced, could believe it until he had ascertained the 
fact for himself, that God should have waited all this 
time before giving a revelation of Himself in His holy 
character, in His dealings with men here below. There 
was, no doubt, an allusion to the thought of holiness, 
when He separated the sabbath day; and I mention 
this because it is the only passage which might appear 
exceptional. Thus, before there was any question of 
sin, God saw fit to enunciate in the sabbath day a 
pledge of that rest which “remaineth for the people of 
God.” So it comes in due season. But when dealing 


286 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


with man, and man was actually before Him on the 
earth, not one word about holiness is uttered until 
Exodus xv. 

A little lower down we read (in the 11th verse), 
“Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among all the gods, 
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises?” This, we shall 
see, connects itself with God’s habitation in the New 
Testament. I merely point you to the striking circum- 
stance, that the two things are for the first time pre- 
sented together, consequent on the accomplishment of 
the typical redemption. In point of fact, it is only when 
redemption has been accomplished, that man can bear 
the full revelation of the holiness of God. There may 
be a call to this or that before, but manifestly it was 
after all only of a fleshly order; it was but ceremonial 
dealing with the first Adam in one way or another. 
But the moment there is the type of redemption, in 
Jehovah accomplishing deliverance, then even the 
Israelites can speak without anxiety, and in their 
measure rejoice and praise His name. Of course, it is 
no more than an earthly deliverance as yet; but they 
sing of the holiness of God. 

Now, if we turn to the New Testament, we see, in 
the chapter from which I have already read, what 
answers to all this. Here we have redemption wrought. 
The Son of man gave His life a ransom for many; the 
effect of it is the bringing souls, even the most distant, 
nigh to God, and that in perfect peace—Christ Himaslé 
being the expression of it. “He ig our peace,” with 
which there can be nothing comparable, nothing—I 
will not say superior—but so much as approaching it. 
But it 1s exactly on this that we begin to hear of the 
habitation of God. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 287 


Nor is this truth confined to any one epistle. Take 
1 Corinthians iii. as an illustration. “We are labourers,’ 
says the apostle, “together with God: ye are God’s 
husbandry, ye are God’s building.” The apostle speaks 
of his own relation to it. He says: “According to the 
erace of God which is given unto me, as a wise master- 
builder, I have laid the foundation.” It is built on the 
foundation of the apostles and prophets. So here Paul 
takes this place, and accordingly, lower down in the 
chapter, appeals to them. “Know ye not,” he says, 
“that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of 
God dwelleth in you?” At once this is the ground of 
a strenuous call to holiness: “If any man defile the 
temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple 
of God is holy, which temple ye are.” That is, it is 
not merely a revelation of what the Church is to be 
by-and-by, but he is speaking of present facts. It 
seems to me that we should pay more attention to this 
than is usually done; for it is of the greatest conse- 
quence that believers should have a just apprehension 
that Christianity consists not merely of doctrines, but 
of facts; and that facts are the foundation of doctrine. 
There is a person, a real living man born, manifested 
in this world, who lived here, died here, and rose here, 
although He is now gone to heaven; and that person 
is not merely the means of making truth known, but is 
Himself the substance of the truth that He makes 
known. Abstract Christ from Christianity, and what 
remains? And now that He is gone, too, God makes 
Christianity good by another person, even the Holy 
Ghost that is come down, who, instead of supplanting 
Him that is gone on high, is now the power of our 
knowing Him. I can only know really and according 


288 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


to God Him who is gone by Him who is come. It is 
His presence that makes the temple of God. The 
Holy Ghost dwells in the saints on earth; as it is 
said, “ Ye are builded together for an habitation of God 
through the Spirit.” 

Now, I would ask my brethren before me this night, 
Have you sought to estimate the immense magnitude 
of such a fact as this? Is it this which fills your heart 
to overflowing, when you come together, say on the 
Lord’s day, or at any other time when the assembly of 
God is gathered, either for worshipping Him, or for 
edifying one another? Does the presence of the Holy 
Spirit comfort you as a matter of faith? Do you 
count on the Lord as really in the midst? or are you 
thinking only of those who compose that assembly, or 
such as open their lips in worship and edification of 
the saints? What would be thought of a visitor 
coming into some grand building, who merely occupied 
himself with the small accidents here or there? It is 
evident that the object of all would be lost upon him. 
But still more when we bear in mind that there is a 
living, divine person whom I am entitled to count on, 
and to know present in the assembly here below, who 
makes them to be God’s assembly, as nothing else does. 
It is not their faith simply; for this did not make the 
Old Testament saints to be God’s assembly. It is not 
life again; for certainly all saints from the first were 
born again, and yet, as we know, till Pentecost God’s 
assembly was not. The only thing that could thus 
cive the assembly of those who have faith, and there- 
fore life, the title of being God’s assembly, is the pre- 
sence of God Himself there; and He is there by the 
Holy Ghost. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 289 


Again, so paramount is this, that the fact of persons 
slipping in there who are not born of God does not 
destroy His assembly. It is sorrowful and humiliating ; 
but I am not to be alarmed, nor overmuch cast down 
by it. It ought to be a pain that we had so little 
discernment, and that persons were allowed to come 
into the assembly of God who never were born of 
God. But there is nothing that Satan would not dare, 
in order to defile and destroy the assembly of God. 
It is the nearest thing to God upon earth; it is that 
in which His Son’s glory is most of all concerned 
now; it is that body to which God commits His 
truth. From it God demands an answer to His 
moral glory and character here below; and if He has 
not given unfailing power of miracles, He has sent 
down His Spirit to dwell with us and be in us for 
ever— His own habitation in the Spirit. It is not, 
then, because of this or that quality He so blessed us, 
but through His present Spirit. 

Supposing there should be the sorrowful fact of those 
brought in who, having no life in their soul, in time 
depart from the Church. These are apt to turn out the 
greatest adversaries not only of it, but also of Christ 
Himself, the haters of His name, and deniers of His 
glory (such as, for instance, we find in Heb. vi.). They 
had shared astonishing powers, as we are told, yea, 
“were made partakers of the Holy Ghost.” This is a 
great difficulty to some; whereas, in point of fact, it is 
no mean help toward understanding the very truth that 
we are considering to-night. So far from its being an 
enigma, it seems to me to be that which falls in with 
the truth generally, and which gives us the key to facts 
that may occur at any time, as they have happened from 

U 


290 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


the beginning. Thus we find unquestionably that there 
are men who creep in unawares among the saints, and 
these men, when alienated, are so much the worse— 
twice dead, as the apostle Jude calls it—just because, 
having taken the place of confessors of the Lord Jesus, 
they have gone from Him, abandoned the truth with dis- 
dain, treated it with the utmost contempt, become, there- 
fore, infinitely fiercer zealots against the truth of God 
than they even were in its favour when they commenced. 
These men might have had any amount of outward pri- 
vileges; for there are external mercies of no mean value 
entirely short of eternal life. It is not said that any of 
these professors of Christ had ever been quickened of 
God. Eternal life is in no sense an external privilege. 
Nor is there such a thing in the Bible as a man, who 
had once partaken of eternal life, losing that fe. Those 
quickened of God do not afterwards fall back into 
death in that sense. It is very possible for a man, touched 
in feelings and persuaded in his judgment, to renounce 
the Christ he professed, and to walk no more with Him ; 
as we read of certain disciples stumbled by the Saviour’s 
teaching, so unsparing to the flesh and the world. Thus 
we only can understand these passages consistently with 
others. The professor, naturally dead, was now twice 
dead, as Jude says, having given up what he seemed to 
have, and gone back to earthly ordinances or to open 
sin, as the case might be, with even greater relish than 
before, and intenser hatred than he ever had for that 
which he thus openly abandoned. ‘These are the per- 
sons described in Hebrews vi. and x., and such depar- 
tures every now and then present themselves before the 
eyes of sorrowing Christians, as Scripture explains. 
Thus the flesh may go to the farthest extent in pro- 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 291 


fessing the truth, and may possess every conceivable 
external privilege and power it is possible to enjoy, and 
this even now more in Christian than in older times. 
Thus we know that in the Old Testament Saul had 
got among the prophets, and others were gifted with 
mighty powers by the Holy Ghost, who then, as ever, 
was the sole agent of divine energy, and might act by 
whom He would, and in what He would, for God’s 
glory. Now the grace of God opens the door, if possible, 
for readier abuse, if men dare to take advantage. It is 
quite possible also for the unconverted to deceive them- 
selves as well as the Church of Ged, and to rush in, 
assuming the profession of the name of Jesus, so much 
the more because with less conscience. The Holy Ghost 
now gives His personal seal, which is peculiar to him 
who has true faith and life everlasting in Christ. But 
while the Spirit is given as a seal, it would be an error 
to forget the outward powers He confers. In Heb. vi. the 
apostle does not speak of His sealing, any more than of 
quickening souls, nor of “the earnest” the believer has 
in Him of the coming inheritance of glory. There is 
the greatest guardedness of language in speaking of 
anything that ought to produce a real difficulty. Still, 
there is participation in the power of the Holy Ghost. 
This many unregenerate men may have had in the 
early days of Christianity. Can one wonder that such 
persons abandon the naine of Jesus, because of which 
alone these powers were conferred on them ? 

This again explains the present state of Christendom 
—the extension of the habitation of God to the unbe- 
heving and profane, who nevertheless bear outwardly 
the name of the Lord Jesus, and venture where God’s 
presence is made good by the Holy Ghost. No doubt, 

U 2 


292 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


where there was carelessness, outward privileges might 
be lightly used, as, for instance, baptizing unto the 
name of the Lord Jesus. All such like things could 
easily be carried out irregularly by men, so as to bring 
in multitudes of unconverted professors, as we know 
was soon the fact. Accordingly it was by some such 
broad-churchism, in manifold forms, which need not be 
entered on at present, that the house of God, although 
the Spirit dwelt there, was gradually corrupted in every 
direction, as an unhallowed ambition sought increase of 
sway, outside the intentions of God, and man, as ever, 
lost sight of his solemn responsibility, and turned the 
grace of God into licentiousness. 

Another thing I would just observe too, which is, I 
think, of importance for judging rightly on this subject. 
We have in Scripture, not only the house of God, 
according to the divine idea described in the close of 
Ephesians 11, but also its responsible connection with 
man’s labour in chapter il. of the first epistle to 
the Corinthians, to which I have alluded. There is, 
indeed, more than this; for we have a half-moral half- 
prophetic sketch of that which was working, in a 
measure, when the apostle wrote his last epistle (2 Tim. 
u.), to which I must briefly refer, because it bears so 
powerfully on present duty. The apostle calls on 
Timothy to study to show himself approved unto God, 
and tells him of the profane and vain babblings which 
he was to shun, but which, nevertheless, should in- » 
crease to more ungodliness. He speaks of persons who, 
concerning the truth, had erred, but comforts his too 
sensitive fellow-servant, who was clearly under pressure 
from the dangers and difficulties of the time, by this 
consolation: ‘Nevertheless the foundation of God 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 293 


standeth firm, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them 
that are his. And, Let every one that nameth the name 
of the Lord depart from iniquity.” But this is followed 
by a very animated figure of what was then in existence, 
and afterwards to be verified yet more literally. “ But 
in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and 
of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to 
honour, and some to dishonour. If a man therefore 
purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto 
honour, sanctified, and meet for the master’s use, and 
prepared unto every good work.” Here we have evi- 
dently a most graphic description of what was then in 
rapid progress, though going on every day yet more 
and more. This great-house condition has arrived at the 
present time; it was but the anticipation of full-blown 
Christendom. That is, we have a vast building in these 
lands, where vessels of honour, as well as of dishonour, 
are found. 

What, then, is a Christian todo? Is he to aban- 
don the great house? Certainly not. A man cannot 
go outside the great house without ceasing to be a 
Christian ; for that is precisely the condition into which 
the profession of Christ's name has got. Therefore it 
can never be a question in any way of giving up the 
profession of the Lord’s name: what we have to do 
is to separate from all that is contrary to His will, 
never to relinquish the profession of His name. ‘The 
profession of Christ is in itself the only stand revealed 
that is good and complete below. Up to it no pro- 
fession can attain. It is, assuredly, also due to Him, as 
it is the blessing of the saint to render it, no less than 
His salvation. For who shall be saved but he that 
calls on the name of the Lord? And so all through, 


294. THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


from the first acquaintance with Him, calling on the 
name of the Lord, professing His name, is clearly just 
as much a joy asa duty. In no case, therefore, can it 
be right to abandon the house which is characterized 
by the profession of the Lord’s name. But in that 
great house there are vessels of honour, as well as 
ot dishonour. What am I to do? I am commanded 
to purge myself from the vessels of dishonour. Such is 
the meaning of the text, such the clear intention of 
the Holy Ghost when it is said, “If a man therefore 
purge himself from these” (z.¢., from the vessels of dis- 
honour). This a man does when he ceases from any 
evil fellowship that he knows to be judged by the word 
of God, from all companionship with that which, by 
God’s standing written testimony, is proved to be 
opposed to His will. 

If a man therefore finds himself involved in sub- 
jection to an unscripturally formed ministry, for in- 
stance, or, again, in any prostitution of an institution 
of the Lord (say the Lord’s supper), let him have done 
with it at once. The Lord does not warrant His ser- 
vant’s sanction of what is contrary to truth and holiness. 
Why should I, as a Christian, endorse any ministry 
which is not of God? Why should I be a party by 
my presence to a desecration of the Lord’s Supper into 
a sacrament made a means of grace for the world, for 
anybody, for everyone? He that possesses but little 
knowledge of God’s word about either, knows per- 
fectly well that they cannot be defended by Scripture, 
and that they frustrate the Lord’s will in these grave 
matters. Am I then to abandon the Lord’s Supper? 
Am I henceforth to do without the ministry of the 
word? Certainly neither one nor other, if wise and 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 295 


obedient. What one has to abandon is the abuse of 
these things. I am to have done with that which, as 
being without Scripture, is clearly to the dishonour of 
God. I do not give up Christian ministry, therefore ; 

I do not give up the Lord’s Supper; but I judge accord- 
ing to the word of God, as far as enabled by His grace, 
abot is His will in these respects. The same prin- 
ciple applies to every other. Do you think of worship, 
for instance? I must search the Scriptures to judge 
what is Christian worship according to God’s word for 
us now, as a Jew used to do from the Old Testament. 
Am I not bound so to do? Am I not to follow His 
will ? 

As to the question before us—What is it that God 
would have His saints feel as to their position on earth ? 
That they are nothing less than His assembly. Here, 
therefore, we have at once an invaluable test for dis- 
covering whether that to which we hold day by day as 
His Church in this world, in the midst of so many 
conflicting claims, really for our consciences meets His 
will, It is not enough for me, nor should it satisfy 
any, the feeblest, of the children of God, that those 
composing it should be Christians; still less ts it a 
question of arranging Christians in various classes of 
doctrine as offering the best guarantee for peace. What 
presumption! Who called me to arrange the saints of 
God? Who warranted you to order the house of God ? 
Who gave any man title to put those here and these 
there? The character and testimony of the Church of 
God is destroyed by any such arrangement. Supposing 
one could have every soul in communion holding pre- 
cisely my views or yours on every topic, I should regard 
it as a very great calamity for the Church of God. 


296 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


What measure could be thought of surer to blot out 
the truth that we are God’s assembly? What more 
calculated to produce a false estimate of the state of 
the saints than all thus banded together with identical 
views, all crammed with just the same thoughts, satis- 
fied with one another, and contemptuous to those out- 
side who did not hold similar sentiments? I am 
supposing now every notion correct, and the things 
done to be according to the mind of God. To my 
mind such a picture in no way answers eine to 
Scripture, or to the love of Christ. 

Brethren, let me be plain-spoken. The Church of 
God is not a citadel for the strong only, nor a niche 
for the wise and intelligent iene it is not a front 
bench for those who have arrived At a certain maturity 
of holiness any more than of knowledge. He would have 
me always contemplate all saints (save those in sin or 
evil doctrine). So far from thinking the eclectic school 
according to the Lord’s mind, to my view it utterly dis- 
locates and spoils the truth God has disinterred about 
His Church. What I find there is the body of Christ, 
and doubtless the various members in their place. There 
are feet as well as hands. The feeble have their use as 
well as the strong, and all as God is pleased to give 
and order. As the large-hearted apostle teaches, the un- 
comely parts, instead of being left outside, are treated, 
being in danger of scorn, with more abundant honour. 
Such is the way of our God, such His express word : 
Have we learnt to bow? Those that are strong are 
expected to bear the infirmities of the weak, ete of 
pleasing themselves. Religious rationalism might think 
it best to have only the strong , only those of the same 
mind, only such as had attained a certain given point 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 297 


of truth; but is it Christ? The Church of God should 
be before our hearts, as it is according to His word. 
The moment we seek to model, or even to desire in our 
heart anything different from what is given us by Him, 
there is fatal insubjection stamped on the thought, and 
confusion must be the result wherever that theory is 
yielded to and carried out. And therefore, brethren, I 
am persuaded it is the will of God concerning us, espe- 
cially in the present broken state of the Church, that 
he who is most strengthened in divine wisdom seek 
most especially to cherish the ignorant and the feeble 
who have attained ever so little—that he seek to walk 
towards all saints according to Christ’s love to the 
Church. Assuredly Christ cherishes, not merely the 
more worthy and honourable members of His body, 
but the Church as a whole, cherishes most of all, if 
there be any difference, those that need His love most. 
Are we in this to have communion with Him or not? 

Just in the same way, as to His habitation in the 
Spirit, God contemplates in this His whole Church— 
contemplates every one that names the name of the 
Lord. Here, of course, in Ephesians i1., those that bear 
His name truly have part in it; but do any one of 
those that name a false Christ? Not in the least 
degree, save for judgment. In the present state of 
Christendom there are vessels of dishonour. Am I to 
bind myself up with them? I am forbidden by the 
Holy Ghost. “If a man purge himself. from these.” 
Communion with any vessels to dishonour is wrong. I 
am called to separate myself from all such, if I cannot 
get them separated from that which bears the name of 
the Lord. Otherwise I am a party to the mystery of 
lawlessness ; for the continuance of a Christian in 


298 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


fellowship with known evil is as good as saying that 
Christ holds communion with Belial. Sometimes it is 
allowance of doctrinal or practical evil; sometimes 
it is an indifference which ignores the presence of the 
Holy Ghost, or hinders His operations in that which 
bears the name of the Lord here below. But no matter 
what may be the particular forms of allowed evil, which 
there is no means of judging, a man is to purge himself 
from these. There stands the plain and positive duty. 
You are not presumptuous; you are assuming no im- 
proper authority; you are only obedient thus. It is not 
a question of setting up to be somebody, but of obeying 
God. It is incumbent on every man that names the 
name of the Lord to depart from iniquity. And instead 
of leaving the occasion undetermined, instead of throw- 
ing a Christian on his own mind or heart to judge what 
he must separate from, here is the explicit demand of 
the Lord that he must purge himself from vessels of 
dishonour, whatever and wherever they may he. If 
people bearing the Lord’s name (and so His name in 
their persons) committed themselves to sin, they were 
vessels to dishonour, and the Christian is bound to 
stand clear and undefiled. It is the prescribed course 
in a corrupt state of Christendom, as surely as other 
Scriptures deal with individuals as objects of discipline 
for the assembly. Value for peace or unity was not to 
override the character of Christ, which must not be com- 
promised on any account. The saint cannot abdicate his 
responsibility. The first of duties is what we owe to 
Christ’s name. We can never sanction or wink at evil. 
Nor is it, let me say, a question only of flagrant 
wrongs. The Church, being God’s habitation, is intolerant 
of all that is unfit for His presence, though we have 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 299 


need of patience too; and who is so patient as God? 
But He will be sanctified in all that come near Him, 
among whom He dwells: everything contrary to His 
word must be judged. Supposing there be only, as men 
say, a little evil, am I to bind up His name and presence, 
not to speak of myself, with even a small evil? Be 
it far from us. Not that it is called for, of course, to 
separate for every fault; but we are never to partake 
in what is contrary to God, but always by God's 
erace to keep ourselves pure. At the same time, the 
manner in which this is done must be determined by 
the word of God. For instance, not every censurable 
brother, but those guilty of wickedness (1 Cor. v.), are 
to be put away from the Church; but in no case is a 
Christian bound to go along with that which he knows 
to be offensive to God. Again, we have to judge our- 
selves, lest we should be hasty in imputing evil. Slow- 
ness to suspect, to act, and speak in such circumstances 
God looks for from His children. Alas! how ready 
we are, because of the evil of which one is conscious 
within, to think of it in others. 

On the other hand, our comfort as well as spring of 
responsibility is, that God dwells in us as His habi- 
tation by the Spirit. We can and ought to count upon 
it, assured that He will aid us, hear us, appear for us ; 
and therefore, whatever be the difficulty, whatever the 
sorrow, whatever the shame, let this be our confidence 
—God dwells in the assembly, His temple. It might 
be in a very low state; it might be only (as things are 
really) represented in a given place, by two or three 
individuals. Nay, a soul might be obliged to stand 
alone; or there might be no sense of the truth sufficient 
even to produce this result. But I adhere as to a fixed 


300 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


and fundamental Christian axiom, that there is no pos- 
sible circumstance in which a member of Christ is 
obliged to have fellowship with that which is opposed 
to God’s- will. Patient remonstrance and adequate 
waiting may be called for; but never allowance of evil. 
It is not the amount of evil (as remarked already) 
which destroys the quality of God’s temple, but the 
deliberate sanction of known evil, though it may take 
no stronger outward form than mere indifference. This 
does destroy its character: else it would suppose God 
Himself indifferent, who dwells there. When that 
which bears the name of His house commits itself to 
binding up His name with the evil it allows, all is over 
with it. Then it becomes a simple though sorrowful 
question (not without urgent appeals to the conscience 
of those who stay) of leaving that which has ceased to 
be in any sense a true representation of God. What 
claim can it longer have on the faith of His child to 
abide there ? 

This is evidently of the last importance. It makes 
the Church question to be one of judging according to 
God’s word by His presence. Profession and prejudice, 
tradition or human will, are equally out of place. It 
becomes a manifestly serious step to own or to disown 
an assembly as His. He who does so lightly or falsely 
trifles with or abuses the name of God. How different 
this from an ecclesiastical strife! Instead of a man’s 
judging according to what he thinks ought to be in the 
Church, instead of his own feelings or mind about it, 
God is the criterion. How right and holy this is! Of 
course, His word is the standard, and His Spirit is the 
power. Thus nothing can be simpler, but at the same 
time nothing more certain, than that, where there is 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 301 


simple faith, God will appear, hear the cry, and come 
to the rescue. He will make the path manifest. 

Another thing may be observed. The Church, of 
course, may make mistakes. Measures taken in dis- 
cipline may be hasty, slow, or erroneous. In fact, it is 
with the habitation of God in the Spirit collectively, 
as with the Christian individually. If the saints are, 
so the saint is, the temple of God. Now, nobody in his 
wits could maintain that a Christian is exempted from 
evil or mistake, because the Holy Ghost dwells in him. 
It is exactly the same principle with the assembly; as 
to it the same kind of liability exists. It may be so 
far in practice guarded against, humanly speaking, in 
proportion to the men of God who are there. This or 
that man might easily err; but it would be difficult to 
think that in the midst of an assembly not one so 

looked to the Lord as to gather His mind. Yet it is 
_ possible; and particularly, where the commanding influ- 
ence of one or more weakens the dependence of the 
assembly on God. It is evident that a wrong principle, 
a false position, or even mere precipitancy, might expose 
an assembly of God to act amiss. Therefore there is 
nothing so important, no matter what servant or ser- 
vants of God may help, as to bear in mind that the one 
safeguard is, that God is there. He may be pleased to 
correct the wisest of His servants on the earth by a 
very feeble child. 

Hence we must hold to it resolutely and watchfully, 
that the Church is not the assembly even of a Paul, 
still less of you or of me; it is God’s assembly. Con- 
sequently, in a case of discipline, for instance, it would 
be destructive of that assembly, if the measures taken 
were to be settled for it definitely by any of His 


302 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


servants. Every person who knows either God’s word 
about the Church, or its wants and difficulties practi- 
cally, must acknowledge the immense value of the help 
of those He has given to guide and rule. There is as 
truly rule as there is teaching; and the Church would 
forsake its own mercies if it despised the help of either. 
Doubtless some have large spiritual capacity, and great 
experience in souls; and these are able, as a general 
rule, to judge rightly about such things much more 
than those less gifted and versed. Nevertheless, God 
is jealous, and room must be left for His own free 
action in His own assembly till the last moment. Where 
there 1s no room to revise whatever individuals may 
Judge, where there is no power left to the Spirit to set 
aside, by the feeblest member of Christ there, the judg- 
ment of the best of guides, I no more dare call that 
assembly God’s than any other society of believers 
under the sun. 

Therefore it is not a question simply of sound 
doctrine, or precious saints, or great gifts. What I am 
insisting on is yet graver. I admit all these in their 
place; but the fundamental truth to apprehend and 
hold fast always, and under all circumstances, is, that 
the Church is God’s own even now; and God, because 
He is there, will maintain His sovereign action. He 
can shed fresh light. He may correct the most expe- 
rienced, where unduly leaned on, by whom He pleases. 
There must always be this open kept; for God will not 
permit that we should glory in the flesh; nay, more, 
He will not permit that we should glory in the gifts 
He Himself gives us. He will convince us, however 
thankful we may be for all the fruits of His goodness, 
however we may bless Him for all He has given us, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 303 


that the Church is God’s, that He loves to be owned, 
and that will make His presence felt in the assembly 
that has faith i Him. 

Faith loves to see and know Jesus in the midst; 
and this in the darkest day, if there were but two or 
three gathered unto His name. And with Him thus 
looked to, will the Spirit fail to guide? I do not 
believe it; yet I allow freely that either confidence 
in a leader or jealousy of a leader, or any other fleshly 
working, or the haste of unbelief whether lax or self- 
righteous, may practically sever the assembly from the 
mind of Christ in any given case. Hence the assembly, 
as the individual, must be ever open to the Spirit’s 
correction through the written word: if it should err 
in fact, humiliation also is due before the injured 
Lord. 

Time forbids my touching more Scriptures now; 
indeed, I feel strongly how imperfectly the subject has 
been treated. Still, I have desired to point out some 
practical results, as well as the truth that we are God’s 
habitation through the Spirit. If the Lord be pleased 
to use these hints to stir up His own to examine His 
word about it for themselves, they will see with surprise 
how largely His testimony hangs on this truth. 


304 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


HLeeture X. 


REVELATION 1. 4, 5, xix. 10. 


THESE two portions of the Revelation have been read 
that we may be enabled to contrast the aspect of truth 
given us by the Holy Ghost in the last book of the 
New Testament with the testimony of the epistles. Our 
course now, therefore, must be somewhat discursive. 
For instead of confining myself to a particular Scrip- 
ture, I shall endeavour to put together in a somewhat 
comprehensive view a number of passages scattered over 
the epistles, chiefly St. Paul’s, which we have looked at 
either not at all or for other purposes. Having taken a 
rapid survey of these scattered lights, I shall endeavour 
to put into juxta-position with them that which is 
furnished in the Revelation on the subject. 


The Holy Ghost is always presented, whatever Scrip- 
ture may treat of Him, according to His own object in 
each book where the reference occurs. This remark 
applies to one topic no more than another that may be 
in hand; but as it is true of other doctrines, so of the 
Holy Ghost. Thus we have seen, in the epistle to the 
Romans, that righteousness is the subject, and especially 
the righteousness of God. Hence, till this has been 
thoroughly cleared, there is not one word about the 
Holy Ghost at all. It is only in chapter v. where the 
first allusion is found, as indeed also the first statement 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 305 


of God’s love along with it, as already noticed. “The 
love of God,” says the apostle, “is shed abroad in our 
hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.” 
Thus the whole question of our sins, and God’s judg- 
ment of them, of sin and deliverance from it, has been 
fully met before the Spirit of God is Himself introduced. 
It was not well to open the work which goes on in the 
heart until God had been thus shown amply vindicated 
in the redemption and resurrection of Christ. But it is 
in chapter viii. (that is, when we have had not merely 
our sins, but sin, fully discussed) that the apostle 
launches into an ample doctrinal exposition—the doc- 
trine of the Spirit, viewed both as a condition and also 
as an indwelling person. 

But I do no more than allude to this now, as it 
has been already before us. Let me recall the fact, 
that all is viewed on the side of righteousness, and this 
practically, after all is clear about the righteousness of 
God. “The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus 
hath made me free from the law of sin and death. For 
what the law could not do, in that it was weak through 
the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of 
sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: 
that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in 
us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.” 
This is the only possible way now, or indeed at any 
time, in which the righteousness of the law could be 
fulfilled in the saint. It is in walking after the Spirit. 
The believer is first set free as in Christ before God. 
There must be liberty as well as life; and founded on 
this righteousness, the moral scope and purpose of the 
law is fulfilled in the believer. It is not exactly by the 
believer ; still less is it fulfilled for the believer, which 

».4 


306 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


is as baseless as it deserves a harsher name. It is 
fulfilled 72 us, and is thus a more intrinsic thing than 
if simply by us. Love, as we are told elsewhere, is the 
fulfilling of the law; and this the Holy Ghost works 
in us as possessed of a new nature, and now able to 
treat the old man as judged in the cross. The new 
nature is then drawn out in loving God and man; and 
thus the righteousness of the law (in vain sought under 
law) is fulfilled in us who waik after the Spirit. It is 
the display of what is according to God’s moral nature, 
which is thus accomplished in the exercise of the new 
man by the power of the Holy Ghost. 

This illustrates how thoroughly the Holy Spirit, and 
the character of His operation in the believer, is deter- 
mined by the scope of the epistle. Having laid down, 
first, man’s ruin as needing the gospel, and God’s right- 
eousness as revealed in it, the apostle now turns to the 
answer of practical righteousness in the children of God; 
and the Holy Ghost takes His place in reference to 
both. When righteousness is cleared, the love of God 
can be freely spoken of as shed abroad in our, hearts; 
and, further, the Spirit is shown to be a power that 
displaces not only sin, but law as an external test, 
which can in no way enable such as we are to work 
inward and practical righteousness. 


In the first epistle to the Corinthians we have the 
Holy Ghost after another sort altogether, and with 
remarkable fulness. What gave rise to this was car- 
nality at work in almost every possible form except 
legalism. They were too loose to like the law; but 
their carnality was beyond all power of the law to 
remedy: law can only condemn the carnal. Christ 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 307 


alone can meet such evil, or any other; but Christ also 
made good by the power of the Spirit. Hence we find 
in this epistle the wisdom of man, first, judged by the 
cross (chap. i.); and, next, supplanted by the communi- 
cations of God’s Spirit. These communications which 
he takes up in chapter ii. are shown to be revealed by 
the Spirit, and set forth in words which the Holy Ghost 
gave, as He alone is for man the power of receiving 
them. Thus the Holy Ghost gave the truth, and the 
words, and the capacity to bow and understand. The 
Holy Ghost, in point of fact, has to do with everything 
as to the truth of God, which is only rightly seen in 
Christ Himself. Clearly, then, the Corinthians, who 
were wishing to bring in some wisdom from the world 
in the hope of making the gospel more palatable, were 
thus completely at fault, and, in fact, in opposition to 
the mind of God. 

Then, again, the next chapter (ii1.) shows, though I 
need not dwell on much of it, how the Holy Ghost is 
viewed as having constituted believers God’s temple. 
This is urged as a standing fact, as well as the conse- 
quent seriousness of meddling with God’s sanctuary, 
and bringing in either mere trash, or positive clefilement 
and destructive evil. “If any man deiile the temple 
of God, him shall God destroy.” But even supposing 
a man did not defile the temple of God in the strongest 
sense, if he brought in what was worthless, all his 
labour should come to nothing, and be burned. He 
himself might be saved, but it would be as one who 
passed through the fire. This is, of course, figurative, 
but a most instructive figure, intimating the application 
of God’s judgment to the work, though the man him- 
self might escape. 

x 2 


308 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


The next, and very solemn use that is made of this 
gift of the Spirit, is as regards the believer's body. It is 
not now that together Christians constitute the temple 
of God, but that each one’s body is His temple. This 
is a capital truth of Christianity; for the Corinthians 
fell into that error which has been perpetuated in 
our own day, that, if we be only right in heart, it 
matters not about the body—that we must not be too 
particular as to outward things, among which comes, 
of course, the body as the outward instrument of the 
man. ‘'o such it seemed an unspiritual thought to be 
occupied with the body: why not insist on the inner 
man? Let the soul be right, and the rest may be safely 
left. Not at all, says the apostle Paul; the Holy Ghost 
is pleased to dwell in the man, and makes, not the soul, 
but the body, His temple. If the body is consecrated 
to the Lord, if it is separated by the power of the Holy 
Ghost, the soul must surely be all right. But there 
might be excuses made, so as to leave the body free for 
self-indulgence and downright wickedness while high- 
flown sentiments filled the spirit of a man. This, it is 
evident, is hateful to God. “Ye are bought with a 
price: therefore glorify God in your body.” (1 Cor. vi.) 

After this (chap. xii.), not to notice every passage, the 
Holy Ghost is described in the Church, first, operating 
in the way of gifts, His manifestation given to each, 
on which enough, perhaps, has been said to excuse my 
not delaying now. Again, chap. xiv. regulates the exer- 
cise of these gifts in the assembly of the saints, in 
God's assembly. Thus is established the important 
principle, that the possession of power of the Holy 
Ghost exempts none from the Lord’s authority by His 
word. Yea, it is the Holy Ghost who applies that word 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 309 


to deal with Christian conscience in the use that is 
made of His power. In vain does a man plead that 
he has a word from God, and that it must be spoken. 
Not so, save in due season, and in the proper place. 
A word may be ever so truly from the Lord, but He 
holds to His own order in His own house. Nor does 
the Spirit of God set aside in the smallest degree per- 
sonal responsibility in the exercise of gifts. The word, 
aud the word alone—not the Spirit—is the standard. 
(Compare 2 Tim.iii.) And this, I need not say, is an 
invaluable truth; for the tendency of men who really 
believe in the action of the Spirit of God 1s more or 
less to subject the word to the Spirit, instead of own- 
ing what is made so plain in Scripture, that the Holy 
Ghost subjects His own manifestations to the authority 
of the word of the Lord—the word that He has Him- 
self inspired. 

Next, in the second of Corinthians, when God had 
wrought powerfully to awaken and recover the souls of 
the saints, we have a passage of great weight connected 
with our theme. The apostle expressly consoles the 
saints who had been cast down. He himself had expe- 
rienced a fearful persecution, but had been brought 
out of it Next, he tells them, that “all the promises 
of God in him [Christ] are yea, and in him Amen, unto 
the glory of God by us.” They had been, some of 
them, reproaching him for not having kept his purpose. 
Did this, at best vacillation, seem like an apostle? If 
any man’s word ought to be trusted, surely an apostle’s 
ought; but Paul had not come as he had promised. 
The change of purpose as to his visiting them was thus 
turned artfully against his authority. At any rate, he 
answers, if I have not kept my purpose, God keeps His 


310 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


in the gospel. “All the promises of God in him [Christ] 
are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by 
us. Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, 
and hath anointed us, is God; who hath also sealed us, 
and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.” This 
is precisely what takes place in the dealings of God 
with the soul; and all is here presented in a remarkably 
full and orderly manner. The believer is established 
by God in Christ, which, of course, supposes that he is 
quickened with the life of Christ. I do not mean that 
this establishment in Christ is only quickening, but 
that, when a soul is thus established, he must needs 
have been quickened. This is the strongest way of put- 
ting the blessing; for Christ gives force and fulness to 
that which is inherited of previously existing privilege. 
Then, again, he is said to be “anointed ;” for the Holy 
Ghost is the power of his knowing all things according 
to God. “Ye have an unction from the Holy One,” as 
we read even of the babes in 1 John ii. So, imme- 
diately after his establishment in Christ, anointing is 
mentioned—the Spirit’s opening of the believer's eyes, 
and giving him power to see and take in things with a 
new and divine capacity. Moreover, the Spirit seals the 
believer on the ground of accomplished redemption, 
and becomes to him the earnest of the future inheri- 
tance. “Who hath sealed us, and given us the earnest 
of the Spirit in our hearts.” 


Let us now turn to another Scripture, where the 
same double thought occurs—the epistle to the Ephe- 
sians; for the brief remarks I shall make on this subject 
may suffice for both. In Ephesians i. 12-14 it is written, 
“that we should be to the praise of his glory, who first 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 311 


trusted in Christ.” “We”* means from among the Jews, 
who anticipate the nation in being brought to rest our 
hopes on Christ the Lord. “In whom ye [the Ephesians] 
also, after ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your 
salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were 
sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the 
earnest of our inheritance,” &c. - You will observe that 
the apostle treats of the Holy Spirit in two special 
points of view, and in relation to the two main subjects 
he had been and is setting forth in the chapter. One 
is the call of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ; the other is the inheritance. The Holy Ghost 
deals with us in relation to both. Relatively to the 
call of God He seals the believer; and relatively to His 
inheritance He is the earnest in our hearts. In the one 
case He is the power of conscious separation unto God 
on the ground of that which is now complete. And 
therefore, you will observe, that in this very verse it is 
said, “After ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of 
your salvation.” It is only consequent on this, that the 
Holy Ghost deigns to take such place in the believer. 
He seals the person of him who rests on redemption ; 
and He becomes the earnest of the inheritance of glory, 
which we shall share along with Christ. 

On this subject there are often difficulties in the 


* “We, apostles and Jews, that had this privilege first to trust in 
Christ.” (T. Goodwin, in Joc.) ‘In whom you also,’ you Ephesians, 
you Gentiles’—you also.” “Here is A WORK OF THE Hoty Guost 
DISTINCT FROM FAITH: ‘after you believed, you were sealed.’’? The 
capitals here are Dr. G.’s, who repeatedly insists on their distinctness, 
and controverts Piscator and Calvin, who held the common confusion. 
He draws truly from misretoavrec, “after that ye believed,” that 
the faith was not contemporaneous with but antecedent to the sealing 
of the Spirit. So Ellicott. Alford is not clear. 


6 Be THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


minds of true children of God. My only object and 
desire, in saying a few words now on it, is to contribute 
one’s mite of help, with a view to removing, I trust, 
some of the difficulty, and, I must add, somewhat of 
prejudice, that darkens the subject. That there should 
be some difficulty in comprehending such a theme as 
this ought not to surprise any who know how the 
world has encroached on the domain of the saints. I 
was thankful, the other day, in glancing over an old 
Puritan writer, to note, that even he admitted its dis- 
tinctness from faith (and certainly Puritanism is not the 
quarter to which I should look for intelligence in the 
doctrine of the Holy Ghost). But still, just because it 
was little expected, it may have been the more pleasant 
to find a theologian lifted up above the too common 
legal traditions of his party. It was the homage that 
a godly mind paid to the plain and precious truth of 
God. Be it remembered too, that this good and able 
man, a couple of hundred years ago, wrote at a critical 
period, when the moral side of the law was asserted 
with more keenness than perhaps at any other time. 
Legalism ordinarily is the great hindrance in the way 
of understanding the Holy Ghost. It is legalism in 
some shape or another which causes difficulties. The 
Holy Ghost is the power of holiness to the believer, as 
law was the strength of sin to men under it. The law 
dealt with flesh. The Holy Ghost now dwells where 
the new nature is. 

In quickening, the Spirit of God finds a soul that 
has no life whatever towards God. There is nothing 
but fallen nature before He imparts the new creature 
by faith of Christ. The soul is connected by faith of 
the word with Christ; there is a spiritual nature com- 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 813 


municated which it never had before. “That which is 
born of the Spirit is spirit,” as flesh comes from flesh. 
But the sealing of the Spirit supposes a holy thing 
already there, whether one looks at Christ, or the saints 
as in Christ. Of course, there is no sealing of the old 
nature. The Holy Ghost seals that new nature, or 
rather the quickened person. But is there not more? I 
believe that in our case there is another thought. It is 
not only that there must be something good and holy 
to seal, and that it would be monstrous and absurd to 
suppose the Holy Ghost sealing the old nature or the 
flesh; quickening supposes an absence of life, but 
sealing further implies that there is something to seal 
which is according to God. For even a new nature is 
not enough; because the saints had a new nature all 
through the Old Testament times (though not revealed 
then), yet we never hear of their being sealed of the 
Spirit. But now more is implied. The sealing of the 
Spirit does not come simply on quickening, though it 
always supposes it, but follows the reception of “ the 
gospel of our salvation.” “In whom after that ye heard 
the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in 
whom also after that ye believed,” &. I do not lay 
any particular stress on the word “after” here, but am 
willing to take it, as some contend, for “having be- 
lieved.” Still, it comes precisely to the same effect in 
the end. Most decidedly, in my opinion, it assumes 
that the saints had already believed, and that the seal- 
ing was a subsequent action of the Holy Ghost on 
their souls. In short, men are not sealed as unbelievers, 
which would be the most miserable thing if possible. 
They are sealed as believers, as they were quickened 
when dead in sins. 


314 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


The question of the time elapsing between believing 
and sealing is of slight consequence, but the distinet- 
ness of the two things is of great moment. Let there 
be but a minute; still, they are distinct, and the sealing 
follows faith. The unbeliever needs to be quickened, 
the believer to be sealed. Far from allowing it to be a 
doubtful point or an open question, to my mind Scrip- 
ture is positive and uniform, that the sealing of the 
Spirit invariably follows faith, and is in no case the same 
thing, or even in the same moment, as faith. I hold 
that whoever does not see it confounds the action of 
the Spirit of God in quickening or giving to believe 
with that which is altogether of another nature. The 
danger tov is, that people are thus exposed constantly to 
confound the condition of saints in the Old Testament 
times with Christianity. Undoubtedly the Holy Ghost 
dealt with souls of old; undoubtedly they were quick- 
ened, and believed. Were they sealed? Had they the 
earnest of the Spirit in their hearts? Neither. 

This brings us now to the reason of the difference. 
It was not because they were unbelievers, or without 
quickening; for their faith is certain, and to be born 
anew is indispensable for God’s kingdom. But the 
gospel of salvation was not yet a known published 
ground of blessing for the soul in its relation to God. 
That is, the condition of old was always one simply of 
expectancy; there was as yet no enjoyed communion 
with God in peace and deliverance. Christianity has 
brought in all this and more. Christ is come, and has 
accomplished redemption; and the Holy Ghost, now 
sent down from heaven, brings us not merely the pro- 
mise—for this of itself is never Christianity—but the 
promises verified in the highest degree in Christ Him- 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 315 


self. Wherever it is simply promise presented to an 
unconverted soul, the gospel of salvation is not yet 
understood. I admit, of course, that there are promises 
where the soul has found Christ. Some things are 
future, and, of course, in that sense they are not ful- 
filled (for instance, the resurrection of the body and 
the display of glory). But I maintain that Scripture 
attributes the greatest possible importance to the fact of 
(not bare promise now, but) accomplishment in Christ ; 
and that this is precisely, therefore, what 1s now preached 
(not promised) in the gospel. It is not a mere hope of 
Christ, which is exactly where those under law always 
find themselves. They are constantly yearning to be 
saved, for an interest in Christ, and so on. This was 
all right in the Old Testament, and no person was 
entitled to go beyond it. The Messiah was not come, 
nor the work done: hence it would have been senti- 
ment to have believed more, and not the truth of God; 
not reality, but imagination. It is not according to 
God’s present testimony to set forth promise only ; in- 
deed, there is no such thing as a “promise of forgive- 
ness” now. Forgiveness is an actual fact; while eternal 
life is a present possession, but future also. Salvation, 
in a most true sense, is the believer’s portion (Eph. i1.), 
and so complete that the believer is said to be risen 
with Christ, and seated in heavenly places with Him. 
Viewed as far as Christ, it is as perfect as it ever can 
be, although our bodies must be changed into the like- 
ness of His body by-and-by. In this sense salvation 
is only at hand, not yet come. | 
Accordingly, the Spirit of God takes a new relation or 
mode of action in reference to this development of the 
ways of God, and the impartation of the full blessing. 


316 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


As far as the soul is concerned, salvation is already 
perfect, and the Holy Ghost (in dealing with the soul 
now) bears the message of this, and seals the person of 
him who believes the gospel. The sealing supposes not 
only a new birth, which was true of old, but, beside 
this, it is based on redemption complete, and supposes 
the work of Christ known. Even we do not seal a 
thing until it is done. Nobody would think of sealing a 
letter till it was written. Thus it always supposes that 
the ground, on which an object that is sealed already 
stands, is finished and firm. Hence the act of sealing, 
which is applied by the Holy Ghost, clearly indicates 
the completeness of what is in question. 

As the Holy Ghost seals to the believer the salvation 
which the gospel announces (which is, in fact, the way 
in which the call of God now displays itself in Christ), 
the other side has its place. There is that which has 
not yet come; and the Holy Ghost even there is not 
a promiser, but an earnest. He is an earnest, not of 
Christ’s salvation, any more than of God’s love, but of 
the inheritance. The Christian has God’s love as com- 
plete towards him as he ever can have it. I have such a 
salvation for my soul that even God Himself could not 
make it.more perfect; but I have not yet the inheri- 
tance; and the Holy Ghost, instead of merely holding 
out a promise now, gives me to taste it—gives me 
to enter into the anticipation, joy, and blessing of it 
even while I am in this world. Therefore, He seems 
to me to be called the earnest of it. 

This may suffice for the text in the Ephesians; but I 
must go back for a moment to the Galatians, though it 
may seem to savour of disorder. “ Received ye the Spirit 
by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith 2” 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 317 


They knew well, though beguiled by Judaisers, that 
law works never led to ministering the Holy Spirit to 
them, any more than to working miracles among them. 
(Chap. iii.) This, however, does not for all minds decide 
that they are distinct. I shall refer to another and 
later expression in chapter iv., which is very explicit. 
When His people were under law, “God sent forth his 
Gti nh, to redeem them that were under law, that 
we might receive sonship. And because ye [Galatians, 
who were not under law] are sons, God [when redemp- 
~tion was accomplished] hath sent forth the Spirit of 
his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.” Thus 
it is the Holy Ghost giving us the consciousness of the 
relationship already ours by faith in Christ. (Gal. 111. 26.) 
They were sons already—* Because ye are sons.” But 
then they might not have the known enjoyment of this 
relation; for this “God hath sent forth the Spirit of 
his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.” The 
meaning and force is thus as plain as possible. Under 
the law the believer, although a child, never had the 
consciousness of a child. He was ostensibly and in his 
experience in the condition of a servant, though lord of 
all, as the apostle elaborately explains. The reason of 
this was because, for the first time, he was under law. 
He was like a minor, under guardians and stewards till 
the period fixed by the father. He was held in bondage 
under the principles of the world, and the law scourged 
him, and made him feel how naughty he was, and what 
rebelliousness there is in human nature. All this was 
going on during the legal system. But now is come a 
wholly different state of things, as the apostle shows 
here. 

So the epistle to the Romans taught us that grand 


318 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


truth of Christianity as to the flesh, that I am entitled, 
nay bound, to regard it as dead. I am never called 
to die to it. This is natural, pietistic, mystic, but 
not at all the truth revealed in Christ. I am never 
called to die to the flesh. Dying, of course, to nature 
and the world is practically spoken of—dying daily. 
But 1t is another thought altogether, and is a question 
of exposure to trial and death for Christ continually. 
But as to the flesh, I am entitled by grace to say that I 
have died already; and I am called on to reckon myself 
henceforth and always dead. Mysticism is an effort to 
become dead in oneself, and sounds well; but grace 
gives me the title of Christ to believe in the power of 
His death for me, and of my death in Him; so that I 
may, without presumption, reckon myself dead unto 
sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus. 

The epistle to the Romans gave us this teaching in 
connection with righteousness; but here, what is teat 
is in contrast with the legal system of restraints which 
served to deal with those under age. “Redemption has 
brought us by faith of Christ into the place of sons, 
and we have the Spirit of God’s Son given to us as the 
power whereby we cry, Abba, Father. Such is the 
connection of the Holy Ghost with the doctrine of this 
epistle. The object of the enemy there was to draw 
away believers from the liberty with which they had 
been made free in Christ, and from that blessed re- 
lationship of sons before their God and Father, back 
again under ordinances of the law, in one shape or 
another. The Holy Ghost is the great delivering power 
given to us, founded upon redemption by and in Christ, 

But a few words more on the presentation of the 
Holy Ghost in the Ephesians before we pass on. We 


i 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 319 


need not enlarge on all the allusions to the Holy Ghost; 
for there is not a chapter that does not furnish one or 
more. In the testimony of chapter 1. and chapter 11. the 
Holy Ghost is viewed as the power of access to the 
Father for both Jew and Gentile that believe now: at the 
close we are told of Him also as the constitutive power 
of the habitation of God. It is not the habitation of God 
——jn-an external manner like Israel. No visible cloud of 
glory marks His presence in the Church; but there is 
the utmost reality in the fact that the Holy Ghost 
dwells there. In chapter ii. the Holy Ghost is not only 
a revealing power, as in chapter 1, for our intelligence, 
but also an inward energy for deepening the spiritual 
communion of the Christian, and strengthening his 
inner man. according to those riches that are in Christ. 
In chapter iv. the doctrine of the Spirit of God is 
largely developed in relation to the body, as well as to 
individual gifts. Above all, in the latter part of the 
chapter we have Him alluded to as the active power 
and personal measure of holiness in walk. It is not 
merely doing this or that which can suit the new man, 
but not grieving this divine person, by whom we were 
sealed unto the day of redemption. It is not enough 
that we have the truth of the old man judged, and the 
new man given; but there is the Holy Spirit of God, 
whom we are on no account to grieve. Chapter vy. 
furnishes another and a very interesting allusion to the 
Holy Spirit. We are called upon there not to yield to 
carnal excitement, but to be filled with the Spirit, and, 
in connection with. this, “speaking to each other in 
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and 
making melody in your hearts to the Lord.” 
And here I will allow myself to make some remarks 


320 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


which, I think, may be helpful to souls often charged 
with the inconsistency of using hymn-books, whilst 
they object to forms of prayer. There is no such 
thing in the New Testament as a body of praise metri- 
cally prepared for Christian use. There is no provision 
of psalms, or hymns, or spiritual songs, written by 
inspiration for the Christian; there is very abundantly 
tor the Jew. Do you wonder at this? It seems to me 
simple, suitable, and full of interest. The Jew needed 
such praises made for him; the Church does not; for 
the Christian and the Church, having the Holy Ghost, 
as the Jew had not, has within a full spring for 
making melody in his heart. This seems to me the 
reason why there is no external supply provided for 
Christians. To the Church, having the ever-present 
and indwelling Holy Ghost, belongs the well of living 
water; nay, each individual Christian has it, and so far, 
naturally and normally, breaks out into psalms, and 
hymns, and spiritual songs. Thus, what to some is an 
evidence of the need of human forms, or to others a 
ground for falling back on the psalms of David, is 
really the most striking proof, in the simplest possible 
way, of the actual blessedness of the Church of God 
and of the Christian, if they had only faith to use their 
goodly heritage’ Those who are under all the dolorous 
experience of the law, and cannot therefore enter into 
proper Christian worship, may, no doubt, require to be 
provided and stimulated with the Jewish store of the 
psalms, which, if they only understood, suppose a 
wholly different experience as well as relationship. 
There is no spring of joy in themselves; they want a 
provision for them outside. But just because we have 
Christ, and, besides, the Holy Ghost as a divine power 


a ee ee ee. 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. oak 


for enjoying our Saviour, with our God and Father, it 
would be to lower the Church’s place to make for our 
singing a provision of psalms, and hymns, and spiritual 
songs in the word of God. Holy Scripture deals with 
the Christian as grown up to man’s estate, and sup- 
poses the Church, unless beguiled by deceivers, to be 
standing in full liberty before God, in intelligence of 
His mind, and confidence of His love, entering into the 
riches of His grace and of His glory in Christ; and 
this because the Holy Ghost is in the Christian and in 
the Church. The consequence is, that such conscious 
blessedness naturally—not to say necessarily—finds its 
expression, as is said here, not merely in praise, but 
“speaking to each other in psalms, and hymns, and 
spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your 
hearts to the Lord.” 

Again, I do not the least doubt that these psalms, 
and hymns, and spiritual songs here spoken of were 
Christian compositions—not indeed extemporaneous, 
any more than Davidical, but their own suited ex- 
pressions of various praise. They were the fruit of 
the Spirit of God working in the early believers, 
causing them to express their own proper joy to God, 
instead of casting them on an inspired provision, 
which does not enter into their distinctive privileges 
and joy, but in all directly belongs to others who are © 
as yet to come. Does not this, then, fully meet those 
persons who urge captious difficulties, and say, “After 
all, you have a hymn-book, and we must have forms” ? 
It seems to me so. The expressions here really inti- 
mate that there were known metrical compositions 
of these kinds; that there was a due and character- 
istic expression of praise and thanksgiving, as well as 

a 


Oe THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


of the different spiritual experiences of the Christian. 
These varieties seem meant by “psalms, and hymns, 
and spiritual songs.” They have each their own proper 
character, and no one can take up a Christian book of 
praise to God without finding one and the other and 
all of these things. But, I repeat, these compositions 
are left room for. among Christians, instead of being 
provided ready by God’s inspiration outside themselves; 
indeed, this is one of the peculiarities of the Holy 
Ghost’s action in the New Testament. He has come 
down to be in us. He is not merely One who writes 
for us and teaches us: there is this kind of testimony. 
You will find, particularly in the Apocalypse, and occa- 
sionally elsewhere, even the prophetic character ,of 
revelation still, as “The Spirit speaketh in the latter 
times,” &c. Thus we do not lose in the New Testa- 
ment the predictive element which abounds in the 
older Scriptures, any more than the narrative. There 
is in the epistles special instruction on Christian 
standing and conduct, ministry, &c. Besides, the Holy 
Ghost leads the believer in joy and praise. He does 
not give up His function in furnishing authoritative 
injunctions or visions of the future; but neither is in 
any way the characteristic dealing of the Holy Ghost 
with the Christian or the Church. The praise of chil- 
dren, the expression of common as well as of indi- 
vidual joy in the Lord, cannot but go forth from the 
heart now, as well as from the lips, to the praise of 
God, and this, too, in a rhythmical form. 

The only other allusion to the Spirit of God which 
remains to be noticed now in the Ephesians occurs in, 
the last chapter, where prayer is called for in the Spirit: 
“Praying always with all prayer and supplication in 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. SLO 


the Spirit.” Never does the New Testament speak of 
prayer “¢o,” but “in” the Holy Ghost. It is not that 
the Spirit is not worthy of worship and prayer; it is 
not that He is not God, equally with the Father and 
with the Son; but He has been pleased, since redemp- 
tion, to take a place in us which precludes His being 
made the definite object of prayer while thus dwelling 
with us. Prayer to God includes the Spirit with the 
Father and the Son. Therefore, where Christian sub- 
jects are revealed, it is invariably praying “in the 
Spirit,” and not to Him. Praying to the Spirit would 
be unconsciously not to believe in the Holy Ghost as 
dwelling in the Church and in the believer; as it is 
the expression of want of faith in one of the great dis- 
tinctive Christian privileges, always known among those 
who confound the Church’s estate with the Jewish 
position. 

Without touching on the minute passages in the 
Philippians, which speak of the Spirit in point of 
character rather than as an indwelling person (that is, 
as the source of fellowship, and the character of worship 
as contrasted with what was special), let us observe 
the remarkable omission of the Spirit of God in the 
doctrine of the Colossians. It has been often noticed; 
but I refer to it in passing. This epistle as strikingly 
brings out the new life or nature, as the kindred one to 
the Ephesians makes much of the Holy Ghost. Of 
course both features are connected with the peculiar 
strain of their respective epistles. 

In 1 Thessalonians the Holy Ghost is introduced 
with remarkable strength and simplicity, and this from 
their conversion throughout their whole career. (i. 5, 
iv. 8, v. 19.) The texts need no extended remarks, save 

ae 


324 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


perhaps the last, which is sometimes misunderstood : 
“Quench not the Spirit.” It is totally different from 
grieving of the Spirit, against which we are warned in 
Ephes. v. Grieving Him is clearly a personal question; 
whereas quenching Him is just as emphatically with 
regard to others, and mainly, I suppose, in public action, 
or, at least, in the use of their gifts. I am not to hinder 
another, nor to raise difficulties as to the manifestation 
of the Holy Ghost in any brother. It may be a great 
work, or a very little one. This is not at all the ques- 
tion; but—lIs it of the Spirit? Respect for the presence 
and operation of the Holy Ghost in all the variety of 
His action in the Church would keep the greatest from 
quenching the Spirit in the least. God certainly does 


___not despise the day of small things. 


In. both epistles to Timothy we hear of the Holy 
Ghost \repeatedly. I have referred to the prophetic 
episode in the first epistle; but the introduction of the 
matter in 2 Tim. i. 7 is deeply interesting also. “God,” 
says the apostle, “hath not given us the spirit of fear; 
but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind.” (See 
also ver. 14.) It is not hard to see why the Holy Ghost 
is so spoken of in this place. Timothy shrank from the 
difficulties of Christian warfare—from that sorrow and 
trial into which the service of Christ, more particularly 
among the assemblies, necessarily brings him who seeks 
to be faithful. Hence the apostle reminds him of the 
gift which had been given him through the imposition 
of his own hands, and adds that the Spirit, who is given 
to us Christians, is not the spirit of cowardice, but of 
power, love, and discreetness (cw¢povicpod), There are 
thus two things—the gift given him by the imposition of 
the apostle’s hands, and, besides, the general character 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. , 325 


of the Spirit given to the saints. Clearly this was 
for the purpose of stirring up the trembling man of 
God. Why should he be surcharged with grief at 
difficulties, dangers, disappointments, or even the defec- 
tion of those who had once laboured with the apostle 
himself, but were now turned against him? _ 

In Titus we have a rich passage—not about a gift to 
a beloved servant, but the common place of blessing 
into which Christianity brings a soul (111. 4): “After that 
the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man 
appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have 
done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the 
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy 
Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus 
Christ our Saviour; that being justified by his grace, 
we should be made heirs according to the hope of 
eternal life.” Here we have not only the washing of 
regeneration, which is common, in my judgment, to all 
saints at all times, but that form and fulness of it which 
now pertains to the Christian. It is “the washing of 
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which 
he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our 
Saviour.’ This appears to be distinctly the full power 
of the blessing which characterizes the Christian. Re- 
generation simply is universal; but the shedding of the 
Holy Ghost thus richly is what awaited the accom- 
plishment of redemption. Therefore, this is said to 
be “shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our 
Saviour.” Thus the passage very strikingly shows both 
what always is and must be true, and what only became 
possible according to God’s wise ways when the hin- 
drance was removed, flesh was judged, and the Holy 
Ghost could be shed thus abundantly through Jesus 
Christ our Saviour. 


326 . THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


There are various references in the epistle to the 
Hebrews; but I need only notice two expressions for 
a moment—“the Spirit of grace,’ and “the eternal 
Spirit.” They are both to be applied to the Holy 
Ghost, and stand in evident contrast with Jewish 
things: the “Spirit of grace” in contrast with law, 
and the “eternal Spirit” with temporary dealings as of 
old. ; 

Next, we come to a passage in 1 Peter 1, of much 
interest to the believer: “Of which salvation the pro- 
phets have enquired and searched diligently, who pro- 
phesied of the grace which should come unto you: 
searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of 
Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified 
beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that 
should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not 
unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the 
things, which are now reported unto you by them that 
have preached the gospel unto you with (é&) the Holy 
Ghost sent down from heaven.” Now, this passage 
demands and will repay the most careful consideration. 
First, we have the clear statement of the working of 
the Spirit of Christ in the prophets of old; but what 
He was in them was a spirit of prophecy; that is, He 
gave them to bear witness to what was coming. He 
gave their souls to bear witness to the sufferings that 
belonged to Christ, and the glories after these. How 
much they understood, and how far they could enjoy, are 
other questions; but He set both before them. We 
find all this in the Psalms and prophets generally, and 
in Isaiah, Micah, Daniel, and Zechariah, with especial 
clearness. But, again, we find much more: “Unto 
whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 327 


unto us they did minister the things, which are now 
reported unto you by them that have preached the 
gospel unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down from 
heaven.” Thus, now that the gospel is sent out, because 
Christ has come and the great work of redemption is 
accomplished, the Holy Ghost takes quite a new place— 
“gent down from heaven,” you will mark, which is not 
said about the working of the Spirit of Christ before. 
Evidently the mission of the Holy Ghost sent from 
heaven is contradistinguished from the Old Testament 
operations, however blessed, of the Spirit of Christ. 
It is the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven who is 
the power of the believer's entering into that which 
is now reported in the gospel. Besides, there remains 
the accomplishment of the prophecy at another epoch, 
when the kingdom shall be (not preached, but) set up 
in power and glory here below. 

Accordingly there are three things in all: first, the 
Holy Ghost predicting; next, the present enjoyment of 
soul-salvation proclaimed by the gospel in the power of 
the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; and, thirdly, 
the revelation of grace at the appearing of Christ, which 
will be the fulfilment of the prophecies. That is, there 
is a mighty work accomplished, and, no doubt, prophecy 
touches on that work, though it goes far beyond what 
prophecy has revealed. Finally, the full accomplish- 
ment of prophecy awaits the appearing of the Lord in 
glory. Between the two—after Christ came to suffer, 
but before He appears in glory—the Holy Ghost is 
sent down from heaven; and we enjoy in faith by His 
power what the gospel announces in Christ. We shall 
find the importance of this by-and-by, when we look 
at the Revelation; but these preliminary remarks may 


328 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


serve to bring out the contrast with what we shall find 
there. 

On 2 Peter I need not dwell, as the chief allusion is 
simply to the Old Testament prophets, who spoke 
under the influence of the Holy Ghost. 

1 John might claim a particular hearing, as we have 
there very full instruction as to the gift of the Holy 
Ghost to us, whereby we have God dwelling in us, and 
ourselves dwelling in God. But as this again would 
detain us from that which is proposed for this evening, 
I only refer to it by the way. 


At length we come to the Revelation, where the first 
words in which the Spirit of God is announced place 
the subject on entirely novel gronnd—novel at least in 
the New Testament. Here it is outside not only 
usual phraseology but spirit to speak of “the seven 
Spirits ;” so much so that some ancients as well as 
moderns have denied the reference to the Holy Ghost, 
and applied the phrase to the seven presence-angels. 
(Rev. viii. 2.) Ido not myself doubt that the allusion 
is to the sevenfold spiritual power of which we hear in 
Isaiah xi. But the style is unprecedented in the New 
Testament. The connection differs here, of course, as 
applying to a transitional time of judgment on men, 
while the Jewish prophet was showing how the fulness 
of the Holy Ghost was to rest on the Messiah. 

Thus the Apocalypse is not at all occupied in its 
prophetic visions with the ordinary objects of the New 
Testament. This is evidently the key to the change of 
the style. Hence the Revelation—about to treat not 
of the display of grace, but of God’s government—is 
pregnant with allusions to the Old Testament. No 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 329 


person is capable of understanding the book who has 
not the ways of God of old before his mind’s eye. But 
bearing in mind its constant allusion to the law and 
the prophets, while at the same time it connects New 
Testament elements with this, leading up into the 
eternal state after a sort far beyond the Old Testament, 
one may follow its communications somewhat more 
intelligently. 

Hence, though saying “grace be unto you, and peace,” 
God Himself is spoken of after another manner than 
we have found before. It is “from him which is, and 
which was, and which is to come.” He speaks as 
Jehovah. It is a translation, if one may so say, of the 
Hebrew “Jehovah” into the New Testament language. 
As God is thus brought before us, so is His Spirit— 
“the seven Spirits which are before his throne.” Any 
one familiar with the New Testament must be so much 
the more struck by such an expression. Do we not 
always hear of the Spirit—yea, “one Spirit”? Is not 
this the emphatic teaching of the apostle Paul? Is not 
this the ground and formative power of the one body 
of Christ, that one Spirit dwells in every disciple of 
Christ, knitting together and incorporating into one all 
the various members? Surely so. Here, in the very 
terms of the salutation, we hear of the “seven Spirits;” 
and more than this, “the seven Spirits which are before 
his throne.” It is another order of ideas, wholly different 
from what we find in the epistles. He is “the Holy 
Ghost sent down from heaven” elsewhere; He dwells 
in the believer; He distributes and operates in the 
Church. Here it is the seven Spirits that are before 
God’s throne. How comes this? We are entering on 
a scene of government and judicial dealings. We are 


330 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


closing the heavenly parenthesis of grace where God 
made the wondrous display of the mystery, hid from 
ages and generations in the glory of Christ on high, 
and of the Christian and Church united to Him there. 
Even in the preface of the seven churches and of Christ 
in relation to them, judgment is the point, and the 
Holy Ghost is viewed according to the governmental 
character that the book as a whole unfolds to us. God 
Himself is thus presented judging, and about to govern 
directly, instead of providentially. It is the book con- 
sequently where every system, and man as such, must 
be judged. The churches are judged in the first place ; 
the world is next judged; then the quick (at Christ’s 
appearing, and before His earthly reign closes), and in 
the last place the dead are judged. Throughout it is 
judgment. 

Consistently with this the Holy Ghost is viewed ac- 
cording to an earthly and judicial character, resuming 
an Old Testament aspect, but with a depth character- 
istic of the final and complete revelation of God. The 
prophet speaks of “the seven Spirits;” it is the full but 
varied perfection of the Holy Ghost acting according 
to the developed ways of God Himself in government, 
and therefore designated as being before His throne. 


In the addresses to the churches, there is a remark- 


ably coincident manner of speaking even to them: 
“What the Spirit saith to the churches.” It is not the 
working of the Spirit of God im the saint or the 
Church. It is not the habitation of God in the Spirit. 
But even He, in addressing them here, takes rather the 
place of warning and of expostulation as One outside. 
Christ Himself does the same. He is not here as the 
head of the Church communicating nourishment and 


Eee —EeEEEeEeEEeeEeeEeEeEeEeEeEEEee ee 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 301 


cherishing His body. He is seen walking in priestly 
robe—more than a priest, but as a priest too; not 
indeed interceding or bearing up the believer, but, on 
- the contrary, searching with His eyes as a flame of fire, 
and dealing with that which was contrary to the mind 
of God. This is clearly the revelation that we have even 
of our Lord Himself in the things seen. Consequently 
He Himself is described as the Son of man—an extra- 
ordinary designation relatively to the Church; and why 
so? Why is He seen as Son of man here? He is going 
to take the kingdom. Meanwhile judgment is given to 
Him because He is the Son of man. (John v.) Thus 
the Lord has taken the place of a judge, even though 
the subject be the churches themselves. Every kind 
of judgment is in His hands. “Alas! who shall live 
when God doeth this?” Hence we find that the best 
of these churches—the first of them at least—is 
threatened with the removal of its candlestick if it 
repented not (and did it repent?); while the last of 
them, although called to repent, is threatened positively 
with being spued out of our Lord’s mouth. Thus, as for 
the churches, there was utter and hopeless rejection. 
Then ensues a vast change; and (whatever may be 
judged) redeemed ones—no longer on the earth—are 
glorified in heaven; and the Lord is seen above as a 
Lamb that had been slain (a rejected Christ) in the 
presence of God and on His throne. There, again, is 
seen once more the Spirit, but still as seven Spirits, 
symbolized by seven lamps or torches of fire (still 
judicial); as also in the next chapter there is power and 
activity in the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all 
the earth—not any longer a question of preaching the 
gospel with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. 


Jon THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


The Church is not in view any more than the gospel, 
but a mission into all the earth, where He is a Spirit, 
not of grace, but of government, dealing actively with 
the earth universally. The churches, too, are no longer 
heard of; they are here not even objects of testimony 
for the Spirit of God. Henceforth God is occupied 
with other and earthly plans, the heavenly joint-heirs 


being seen on high with Christ. The Spirit of God, | 


then, acts in view of all the earth. 
This of itself sufficiently indicates the great pecu- 


liarity of the Holy Spirit’s action at this Apocalyptic — 


period. The largest portion of the book treats of the 
transitional interval after the churches have disappeared 
from the scene, and before the Lord Jesus comes from 
heaven with His glorified saints in judgment of the 
earth. I believe that this is in brief a true account, 
as far as it goes, of the main subject-matter of the 
Apocalypse. The churches are gone, and are no more 
heard of after chapter iii. (save’in the exhortations at the 
end). Then we hear, as remarked, of the seven horns 
and eyes representing the seven Spirits of God sent 
forth into all the earth. The term of long patience 
ceases, and divine judgments run their course. It is 
not that there are not saints called and witnessing; nor, 
of course, could there be saints without the quickening 
power of God’s Spirit acting by the word as of old. 
But what is the character of the action of the Holy 
Spirit in and by these saints who follow the Church on 
earth? What is the nature of His communications to 
their souls?’ What is the experience that He forms 
within, or the walk that He leads to without? The 
answer in the words of the Apocalypse itself is, that 
the Spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Jesus: (for 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, 333 


such is what I suppose the order really ought to be, 
though, being reciprocal, the grammar admits equally 
of either). It is a question here entirely of contextual 
propriety, whether you take first the one member or 
the other. 

Now, this at once lets us into the total difference in 
the relation of the Spirit of God towards these saints, 
as compared with His aspect toward the Church and 
the Christian. The Holy Ghost, as a present and cha- 
racteristic fact, dwells in the believer as a spirit of 
communion. What I learn in Christ, I enjoy as mine. 
It is all my portion and delight. There is not a single 
revelation that God makes of His Son that I am not 
entitled to take as the comfort of my heart. The 
Christian has a direct interest in all His glory. He 
may see that which only presents Him as an object of 
worship for the soul, as the Son of the Father; but, 
still, nothing more delights him, because, as born of 
God, and having the Holy Ghost setting the heart free, 
it is the joy of the believer to have One above himself, 
whatever His love—One before whom he can fall down 
and worship. We know, alas! how John proved his 
own weakness here (the abuse of what in itself would 
be perfectly right to a divine object); but the glory of 
the angel for a little while dimmed the homage of his 
heart, and divided it: so bright was this revealing 
personage, that the prophet was going to worship him. 
But the believer (whose heart knows the Son of God, 
knows His grace, delights itself in His glory as the 
Holy Ghost brings before him Jesus) is a willing wor- 
shipper, as of the Father, so of the Son. 

In all other things where Christ is not simply thus as 
the Son, the eternal One, and divine Person, the object 


334 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


of worship, we have One who is both above us, and 
in deep and ungrudging love is pleased to share His 
relationship with us. In fact, all that He had given 
Him, He gives to us; all that He has wrought, He has 
caused to contribute to our infinite blessing. In all 
this, you observe, it is the Holy Spirit of God who takes 
of the things of Christ, and shows them unto us. He 
is glorifying Christ, but it is by showing His things 
to us. He makes our hearts run over with the joy of 
Christ that we possess. 

This is not the case in the Apocalypse. Look at the 
saints in chapter vi. which is the first place where any 
on earth are brought before us in the prophetic part as 
a matter of fact. They desire the Lord’s judgment of 
their adversaries. They are wistfully longing after 
some good they have not got. This is the case even in 
Solomon’s Song, not what pertains to the Church or 
the Christian’s relationship, as I shall show presently 
in speaking of the book of the Revelation. But the posi- 
tion of saints on earth, after the Church has disappeared, 
is such that the Holy Ghost 1s only the Spirit of pro- | 
phecy. The sole testimony that He renders to Jesus 
is as a prophetical spirit which casts them on the 
future—on what they are to receive by Jesus when He 
appears. It is not so with the Christian; and this is 
a fact which may suggest much as to differing prin- 
ciples in the display of God and the blessing of the 
saint. Two things are wanted to set one in real blessed- 
ness as a present thing. I want a satisfying object for 
my affections, and I must possess that object; I want 
a stimulus for my expectations, being still in the body, 
and surrounded by objects that Satan uses as means to 
draw one away from God. Now, it is essential for me, 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 335 


that as I have Christ for my heart, so I should yet have 
Him to wait for in the other sense of my hope. We 
want these two things, that seem to be contradictory 
but in reality are the essential constituents of full 
blessing for the saint and for the Church. If there be 
not a satisfying object before my heart, what exercise 
or rest can there be for its affections? But the Chris- 
tian has Christ. And therefore it is that the Holy Ghost 
does seal him, gives him this unction, gives him to 
know what he has, and is his power of enjoying Christ 
and what Christ has given him. But then the same 
Holy Ghost leads me to look for Christ. This we shall 
find in the Revelation too—for us, not for those who 
are to succeed the Church. It is only with the Bride 
that the Spirit says, “Come.” It is only in dealing 
with her that He prompts her cry, and joins in saying, 
“Come.” And He says “Come,” because He who loves 
us best, and is truly loved by our hearts, has told us 
that He is coming. Then the Spirit, who honours His 
word, instils this desire, and makes us long for Him. 
But then He is One who loves as none other could 
love—who has spent Himself in His love, that I am 
waiting for. Therefore I have, while I have not; I 
have all the blessedness, consequently, of possession by 
faith, and yet have all the stimulus of hope that makes 
me look out of the present scene, only to be perfectly 
satisfied when He has me and I have Him in the 
heavenly glory where He is gone. 

This is precisely what meets the heart in Christianity. 
Christ has come down to the world, and loves me where 
IT am. He loved me in the midst of my folly, and in 
spite of my sins. At the same time He is my hope; 
and I shall be like Him and be with Him where He is. 


336 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


And this is what is found in Christianity, and nowhere 
else. It could not be before Christ came, because the 
object was not come nor fully revealed. It cannot be 
after Christ has come again. At His coming there will 
be full and everlasting blessing, and all sorrow and 
difficulty shall vanish away. Then the path for saints 
on the earth will be an easy one. But now there is 
the opposition of the Spirit of God to Satan’s power. 
Therefore there is every possible element to hinder 
and try the child of God. But there is the blessedness 
of faith and hope. The Holy Ghost is the spring of all 
power. He, since redemption, takes His place in the 
believer and in the Church. How blessed is the portion 
of the Church of God! 

But manifestly, when the Church goes on high, 
there will be no longer any kindred state. The 
Spirit of God will quicken souls, as He did before He 
was sent down from heaven and formed the Church. 
That is, there will be the same elementary and eternal 
work of the Holy Spirit as long as there are souls here 
below, and a God to know vitally. Besides, the Holy 
Spirit, working appropriately, will throw them upon the 
future. This is not wonderful; because it is simply 
the order then before God. Thus the contrast is plain. 
The heavenly saints just before will have been taken 
out of the world: here are these souls which are being 
prepared for the millennial earth. It is a-strictly tran- 
sitional period; but the form of the Spirit’s action and 
testimony is to direct hearts to the future that is about 
to be revealed. The spirit of prophecy is the testi- 
mony of Jesus. Thus it is not the opening out of the 
fulness of redemption. It is not the power which gives 
the soul the consciousness of drawing “within the 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 337 


veil,” where there is “an anchor of the soul both sure 
and steadfast.” Nothing of our peace and joy appears: 
saints have this now in Jesus. But the emphatic form 
intimates that the Holy Ghost will direct them to look 
to Him for the future. They will have to wait. Other 
souls must also suffer like them. (Rev. vi. 11.) Accord- 
ingly we find some such words as these, “ How long, 
O Lord?” They look for One who is to come; and 
nothing but the mighty power of God can give them 
to believe this: such will then be the deceit of un- 
righteousness. 

It is not for man to dispute with God; and it is 
not for a believer to question the word of God. All 
our wisdom is in exercising at once simple faith in the 
Scriptures, which has a sedative effect on the soul in 
presence of all questions, difficulties, and doubts of 
mind about these matters. If God has revealed the 
future, He has revealed it for us to know. So far is it 
from being true that the Christian has enough to do in 
occupying himself exclusively with his own blessings, 
on the contrary, you rob the Christian of part of his 
peculiar inheritance if you induce him to quit this 
vantage-ground. Not only has he faith’s possession 
now, and hope’s anticipation, but he stands here put on 
an eminence whence he can survey the future, looking 
right into eternity itself. What can be larger, what 
more blessed, than the place of a Christian? Oh, how 
little we enter into, and know, and enjoy our proper 
blessing in Christ! The Apocalyptic saints will have not 
this, but a prophetic testimony from the Spirit of Jesus. 


There is no need for me to say more now on this 
subject. Let me simply recall your attention to the 
Z 


338 THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE 


closing words, as proving more fully what has been 
already asserted —that the Holy Ghost, after the pro- 
phecy terminates, is shown to us at the close in unison 
with the hope of the Bride, which means the Church 
of God, and nothing else. The attempt to apply the 
Bride in the Revelation to Jerusalem seems to me a 
delusion. “The Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And 
let him that heareth say, Come.” Here we have 
clearly the Spirit guiding the Church, viewed in her 
own bridal anticipation of Jesus. The place where it 
occurs wakes the call all the more striking; because, 
after having gone through the whole course of God's 
dealings with man up to the very end, after even the 
final judgment before the great white throne, after 
fully describing the new heavens and the new earth, it 
might have detracted somewhat from the Christian's 
own proper joy to have been so much occupied with 
prophecy. Indeed, such study always depresses, where 
there is not a counterpoise of heavenly hope. I am 
persuaded prophecy, when alone, tends to produce an 
earthly effect on the Christian’s soul, and leads one to 
fritter away the spiritual energy which is intended for 
Christ and the Church, and for souls in their need 
and danger, if the mind be let go after merely detailed 
objects of earthly judgment and curious knowledge. Of 
course, this is positively injurious for the saint of God, 
just in proportion to the measure of its exclusion of 
Christ and heavenly things. 

Mark how the Holy Ghost has here provided against 
this peril in relation to the Church. We may go 
through all these prophetic visions which John wrote 
for us, and we may see in them a complete picture of the 
future, which unites the scattered lights of the rest of 


OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 339 


Scripture into a focus in the Apocalypse. After it is all 
done, the main thing that He sets Himself to do is, as 
it were, to establish us in looking completely out of the 
earthly scenes for our own proper object—Christ. And 
this seems to me all the more impressive if not surprising, 
because it is in a book so eminently prophetical. This 
final call, however, at once lifts us out of the lower 
region of prophecy into that which suits the renewed 
heart in its truest affections for its right and heavenly 
attraction—Christ on high and coming again. 

The Lord give us to enjoy with an ever deepening 
relish the marvellous light which God’s word affords us 
as to the Holy Spirit who deigns to be in us (though 
solely for Christ’s sake), and this because of His estimate 
both of Christ Himself and of that redemption which 
is our immoveable foundation before God. May we 
not merely learn more about the Spirit, but, guided of 
Him, have our hearts strengthened, enjoying by Him in 
Christ our Lord all that God has been pleased to reveal 
to us in His precious word. 


Se ‘eet Som ie 
Beek (oid hay atic gla gre ebsiook nt au. Melcher ob 
Beige MER ea haalto Biaporey iemtanee aaa 

Bi kaiabap oath oii ai mongish ota ii 
eae Be ast evel fecen “pfttaientc oe heady HR | 
Rey Oh wey anht Oe ig oe wane l) Ht no tea GARE 
Bi. Wavatnediog ahh ettiin dovpelen, Seika lene voostqumyy “ 
Rh sunk Hedy tiih: delat: ‘od eek aby adherent oie 
Bee ary hae nae ns Fbasiabg iil chet Oa 
ae ea peeing nul Pate gee Mita Biol t OT RE gel 
Bee. ei ahaa trope ear dagie finan a 
a Gato dd) ahihe at oF mc ibe caters. bik ae. 

PS chi Mitritesteid © Peeseatind: ksh bois usta eee oie 
| fi Me -iotibve: FN, thyiiaiag dest 4G, Suit af: ‘ie As baal 
fe 6 OF me died eae 4 hie file © 
re ‘ iy, WORE hud. ote “wih FG : i 
Beets MEME tdci eepio: hoe a iene | 
we . td, us ieee eli aieagaat ci dead ne iii tae ie feet’ 

Bases cea wg Paya las dia semnbinicls oo 
Ky i ci) ue ra ER: Mi = ae mst, i ys x ye eae: 
Liban a Paka ene eet aR As a Sat we 


f * 4 \e 7 e* ra 

z bes est tae po le 5 Pe ee f a rm sh) ria pes *y otagtd a aes ile am 
merge 4 5) ; i? ue : 7 ’ oy ees i 
trae a tad ke guest or ALS oR a Wiig er 

i ; ; ae i) ae ; ria a yo eal ar 
aa ig la ala so Ss PLN, ee lua 2 


Aly Z i i owl aP ts ie een ce io 

‘ ‘ ets ear! bee 

. A iv ser a ' miveuls | Cee ow ay} v7! Md “RD re ais “4 «i aay 1 
5 i \ . "4 , vd a, 


ae UE. Nig de HR tess Be ie ; 
Rr Ws nth ity AE Abert oe RN ARG Oe, Cae 
eae ts i) Ba hi a hath Vasa ey bate a WASH DC. iis Saree 
eae Pmt Uy LM it. St ai. ae a te ea ae ns 
: a, . . Bg A uty i arts a vay We , Rt net (ee 


F Ps 2 yi ae res atid ie a Ae Bb cae . 
ag Seanad hake cour ii 
fin) 1.3, ae hada Pant eee 


yp cr 4 
Rs hated oan 
ates a rs dice ae A 
of SOO Oe Sepak ae 1s)» a 
. yt Y Sh Aas : ; BAP a } my, : 

‘ va A oe. * Ae Hsp, 
Ae roe Dy 


APPENDIX. 


——-}—- 


Havine freely alluded to the doctrine of the inward light 
held by the Friends as derogatory to the revealed truth of 
the Holy Ghost, I am almost bound to add briefly some of 
the grounds on which a severe censure has been passed on 
this their fundamental peculiarity. It will be evident to 
the intelligent reader of G. Fox, W. Penn, I. Pennington, 
Sewel, and other so-called Quakers, that they call the same 
principle right reason, grace, the Spirit, the word of God, 
Christ within, and God in us. Confounding all these and more 
with that conscience, or knowledge of good and evil, which 
is the universal property of man since the fall, they thus 
extend to all, without exception, what Scripture says of 
Christians only. Mosheim’s account is just and calm; and 
I shall quote no more than is incontrovertible. He had 
remarked that, though apparently novel, Quakerism was 
really but a modification of the mysticism of the second 
century, which had never died out of Christendom, fragments 
of which were floating about in books, tracts, and men’s 
conversation when Fox wandered about moodily, laying 
claim to-divine inspiration. What he expressed confusedly 
was systematised by his successors, especially Penn, Barclay, 
Keith, and Fisher. ‘Their chief dogma then, on which 
depend all the rest, is that famous and very ancient burden 
of the mystics, that there lies hid in the minds of all men 
a certain part of reason and the divine nature, a spark of 
that wisdom which is in God Himself. Since this is over- 
whelmed with the weight of the body and the darkness 
of the flesh which surrounds us, whoever desires happiness 


342 APPENDIX. 


and eternal salvation must, by retiring from external things 
into self, by contemplation and by enfeebling the sensual 
force, draw it out, kindle, and inflame it. He who does so 
will feel an admirable light to dawn on him, and a heavenly 
voice to burst forth from the inmost recesses of his mind,—a 
conductor into all divine truth, and the surest pledge of our 
union with the Supreme Being. This treasure, natural to 
the human race, they call by various names, most frequently 
‘divine light,’ sometimes a ‘ray of eternal wisdom,’ at 
others ‘the heavenly Sophia,’ the dress of whom (married 
to a mortal) some of these writers set forth magniloquently. 
The terms more familiar to us are ‘the internal word’ and 
‘Christ within;’ for since they hold with the ancient 
mystics and Origen that Christ is the very reason and wisdom 
of God, and they will have all men to be endowed with a 
portion of the divine wisdom, they necessarily conclude that 
Christ or the word of God is, dwells, and speaks in all men.* 

‘All their singular and marvellous views flow from this 
parent principle. For since Christ is m all mankind, it 
follows,—(1.) That all religion consists in calling off the mind 
from outward objects, in weakening the power of the senses, 
in a complete introversion, and the most attentive reception 
of all that Christ, in the heart or the inner life, commands 
and dictates.—(2.) That the external word, that is, Holy 
Scripture, neither determines nor leads man to salvation ; for 
letters and words, being void of life, have no adequate 
power to enlighten and unite man’s mind to God. ‘The only 
advantage of reading Scripture is in rousing and stimulating 
the mind to hear the inner word, and to attend the school of 
Christ, who teaches within. In other words, they regard 
the Bible as a dumb master, which by signs points out and 


* But the modern Quakers, as appears from the latest writings of 
Martin and others, do not know the real sentiment of their ancestors, 
and perpetually confound that innate light with the Holy Spirit’s 
light operating in the minds of the pious. 


APPENDIX. 343 


discovers that living master who dwells in the mind.— 
(3.) That those destitute of the written word, as Polytheists, 
Jews, Mahometans, savage tribes, want, it is true, a certain 
small help toward attaining salvation, but not the way and 
doctrine of salvation; for if they attend to their inner 
monitor, who is never silent when the man is silent, they 
will learn abundantly from him all that is needful to be 
known and done.—(4.) That the kingdom of Jesus Christ is 
of vast extent, and embraces the entire human race; for 
all carry Christ within them, and thereby, though utterly 
barbarous and in total ignorance of Christianity, they may 
become wise and happy both here and hereafter. Those who 
live virtuously, and restrain their lusts and passions, whether 
Jews, Mahometans, or Polytheists, shall be united to God, 
both here and eternally, by Christ that lies hidden within,” 
&e. (Moshemii Institt. H. E. Saec. xvii. sect. 11. pars Li. CAVE 
§ vil. vill.) 


Take the following extracts from early Friends. 

Fox: “And as I was walking by the steeple-house side, 
in the town of Mansfield, the Lord said unto me, That which 
people do trample upon must be thy food. And as the Lord 
spake, he opened it to me, how that people and professors did 
trample upon the life, even the life of Christ was trampled 
upon; and they fed upon words, and fed one another with 
words; but trampled upon the life; and trampled under foot 
the blood of the Son of God (which blood was my life); and 
they lived in their airy notions, talking of him. It seemed 
strange to me at the first, that I should feed on that which 
the high professors trampled upon; but the Lord opened it 
to me clearly by his eternal Spirit and power. 

‘Then came people from far and near to see me; and I 
was fearful of being drawn out by them; yet I was made to 
speak and open things to them. There was one Brown, who 
had great prophecies and sights upon his death-bed of me. 


344 APPENDIX. 


And he spake openly of what I should be made instrumental 
by the Lord to bring forth. And of others he spake that 
they should come to nothing: which was fulfilled in some 
that there were something in shew. And when this man was 
buried, a great work of the Lord fell upon me, to the admi- 
ration of many who thought I had been dead. And many 
came to see me for about fourteen days’ time; for I was very 
much altered in countenance and person, as if my body had 
been new-moulded or changed. And while I was in that 
condition I had a sense of discerning given me by the Lord, 
through which I saw plainly that when many people talked 
of God and of Christ, &c., the serpent spake in them. But 
this was hard to be borne. Yet the work of the Lord went 
on in some, and my sorrows and troubles began to wear off, 
and tears of joy dropped from me, so that I could have wept 
night and day with tears of joy to the Lord in humility and 
brokenness of heart. And I saw into that which was without 
end, and things which cannot be uttered, and of the greatness 
and infiniteness of the love of God, which cannot be exprest 
by words. For I had been brought through the very ocean 
of darkness and death, and through the power and over the 
power of Satan, by the eternal, glorious power of Christ; 
even through that darkness was I brought which covered 
over all the word, and which chained down all, and shut 
up all in the death. And the same eternal power of God, 
which brought me through these things, was that which 
afterwards shook the nations, priests, professors, and people. 
Then could I say I had been in spiritual Babylon, Sodom, 
Egypt, and the grave; but by the eternal power of God I 
was come out of it, and was brought over it, and the power 
of it, into the power of Christ. And I saw the harvest 
white, and the seed of God lying thick in the ground as eyer 
did wheat, that was sown outwardly; and none to gather it. 
And for this I mourned with tears. And a report went abroad 
of me, that I was a young man that had a discerning spirit. 


APPENDIX. 345 


Whereupon many came to me from far and near—professors, 
priests, and people; and the Lord’s power brake forth. And 
I had great openings and prophecies, and spake unto them of 
the things of God. .... 

‘¢ And they were discoursing of the blood of Christ. And 
as they were discoursing of it, I saw through the immediate 
opening of the invisible Spirit, the blood of Christ. And I 
eried out among them, and said, ‘ Do ye not see the blood of 
Christ ? See it in your hearts, to sprinkle your hearts and 
consciences from dead works to serve the living God. For 
I saw it, the blood of the New Covenant, how it came into 
the heart.’ This startled the professor, who would have the 
blood only without them, and not in them. .... 

<< Now was I come up in Spirit through the flaming sword 
into the paradise of God. All things were new; and all the 
ereation gave another smell unto me than before, beyond 
what words can utter. I knew nothing but pureness, and 
innocency, and righteousness, being renewed up into the 
image of God by Christ Jesus; so that, I say, I was come up 
to the state of Adam, which he was in before he fell. The 
creation was opened to me; and it was shewed me how all 
things had their names given them according to their nature 
and virtue. And I was at a stand in my mind whether I 
should practise physic for the good of mankind, seeing the 
nature and virtues of the creatures were so opened to me by 
the Lord. But I was immediately taken up in Spirit to see 
into another or more stedfast state than Adam’s in innocency, 
even into a state in Christ Jesus that should never fall. And 
the Lord shewed me that such as were faithful to him in the 
power and light of Christ should come up into that state in 
which Adam was before he fell: in which the admirable 
works of the creation, and the virtues thereof, may be known, 
through the openings of that divine word of wisdom and 
power by which they were made. .... 

‘‘And on a certain time, as I was walking in the fields, 


346 APPENDIX. 


the Lord said unto me, ‘Thy name is written in the Lamb’s 
book of life, which was before the foundation of the world.’ 
And as the Lord spake it, I believed, and saw it in the new 
birth. Then, sometime after, the Lord commanded me to go 
abroad into the world..... And I was to turn them to 
the grace of God, and to the truth in the heart, which came 
by Jesus... 2. For I saw that Christ had died for all men, _ 
and was a propitiation for all; and had enlightened all men 
and women with his divine and saving light; and that none 
could be a true believer but who believed in it. I saw that 
the grace of God, which brings salvation, had appeared to all 
men, and that the manifestation of the Spirit of God was 
given to every man to profit withal. These things I did not 
see by the help of man, nor by the letter (though they are 
written in the letter); but I saw them in the light of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and by his immediate Spirit and power, 
as did the holy men of God, by whom the holy Scriptures 
were written. Yet I had no slight esteem of the holy 
Scriptures; but they were very precious to me. For I was 
in that Spirit by which they were given forth; and what 
the Lord opened in me, I afterwards found was acceptable 
ta them jars’ wi: 

‘Therefore I exhorted the people to come off from all 
these things, and directed them to the Spirit and grace of 
God in themselves, and to the light of Jesus in their own 
hearts, that they might come to know Christ, their free 
Teacher, to bring them salvation, and to open the Scriptures 
to them.” 

‘‘ Whosoever witnesseth Christ within, they witness the 
end of imputation, they witness the thing itself, and they 
possess their sanctification, and such come to know faith 
and loye. And such as may have all the Scriptures, and 
preach of justification and sanctification without them, and 
not within them, be as the Jews, be as the witches and 
reprobates.” 


APPENDIX. 347 


Penn: ‘The same Christ, Word-God, who has lighted 
all men, is by sin grieved and burdened, and bears the 
iniquities of such as so sin and reject his benefits. But as 
any hear his knocks, and let him into their hearts, he first 
wounds, and then heals; afterwards he atones, mediates, and 
reinstates man in the holy image he has fallen from by sin.”’ 
Again: ‘All the disadvantages the Protestant is under in 
this is that of his greater modesty, and that he submits 
his belief to be tried, while the other refuses under the pre- 
tence of unaccountable infallibility. To that authority reason 
demurs; right reason, I mean; the reason of the first nine 
verses of the first of St. John; for so Tertullian, and some 
other ancient as well as modern critics, give us the word 
Logos; and the divine reason is, one and all, the lamp of 
God which lights our candle, and enlightens our darkness, 
and is the measure and test of our knowledge.” 

‘‘T have chosen to speak in the language of the Scripture, 
_ which is that of the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of truth and 
wisdom, that wanted no art or direction of man to speak by, 
and express itself fitly to, man’s understanding. But yet 
that blessed principle, the Eternal Word, I begun with to 
you, and which is that light, spirit, grace, and truth, | have 
exhorted you to in all its holy appearances or manifestations 
in yourselves, by which all things were at first made, and 
man enlightened to salvation, is 

Pythagoras’s great light and salt of ages; 

Anaxagoras’s divine mind ; 

Socrates’s good spirit ; 

Timaeus’s unbegotten principle and author of all light ; 

Hieron’s God in man ; 

Plato’s eternal, ineffable, and perfect principle of truth ; 

Zeno’s Maker and Father of all; and 

Plotin’s root of the soul: who as they thus styled the 
Eternal Word; so for the appearance of it in man they 
wanted not very significant words: 


348 APPENDIX. 


‘A domestic God or God within,’ say Hieron, Pythagoras, 
Epictetus, and Seneca. 

‘Genius, angel, or guide,’ say Socrates and Timaeus. 

‘The light and Spirit of God,’ says Plato. 

‘The divine principle in man,’ says Plotin. 

‘The divine power and reason, the infallible, immortal 
law in the minds of men,’ says Philo; and 

‘The law and living rule of the mind, the interior guide 
of the soul, and everlasting foundation of the soul,’ says 
Plutarch.”’ 


‘The condemnation or justification of persons is not from 
the imputation of another’s righteousness, but the actual 
performance and keeping of God’s righteous statutes or 
commandments; otherwise God should forget to be equal. 
Therefore, how wickedly unequal are those who, not from 
Scripture evidences, but their own dark conjectures and in- 
terpretations of obscure passages, would frame a doctrine so 
manifestly inconsistent with God’s most pure and equal 
nature, making him to condemn the righteous to death, and 
Justify the wicked to life from the imputation of another’s 
righteousness—a most unequal way indeed!” 


‘“‘The way to justification and sonship is through the 
obedience of the Spirit’s leadings; that is, manifesting the 
holy fruits thereof by an innocent life and conversation.” 


‘“‘The Trinity of distinct and separate Persons in the 
unity of essence may be refuted from Scripture, and also 
from right reason.’’ 


‘“‘Tf each Person be God, and that God subsists in three 
Persons, then in each Person there are three Persons or Gods, 
and from three they will increase to nine, and so on ad 
enfinitum.” 

“The vulgar doctrine of satisfaction, being dependent on 
the second Person of the Trinity, is refuted from Scripture 
and right reason.” 


APPENDIX, 349 


‘‘The same light and life which afterwards clothed itself 
with that outward body.” 

‘‘Though we believe that the eternal power, light, and 
life,. which inhabited that holy Person who was born at 
Bethlehem was and is chiefly and eminently the Saviour, 
yet we reverently confess the holy manhood was instru- 
mentally a Saviour, as prepared and chosen for the work 
that Christ, the Word-God, had then to do in it.” 


Barctay: ‘It will not from thence follow that these 
divine revelations are to be subjected to the examination 
either of the outward testimony of Scripture, or of the 
human or natural reason of man, as to a more noble and 
certain rule and touchstone.” 

‘‘We may not call them [the Scriptures] the principal 
fountain of all truth and knowledge, nor yet the first 
adequate rule of faith and manners, because the principal 
fountain of truth must be the truth itself; 7. ¢., that whose 
authority and certainty depends not upon another.” Again: 
‘*God hath committed and gives unto every man a measure 
of light of his own Son—a measure of grace, or a measure 
of the Spirit. This, as it is received, and not resisted, 
works the salvation of all, even of those who are ignorant 
of the death and sufferings of Christ.”’ 

‘Though we affirm that Christ dwells in us, yet not im- 
mediately, but mediately, as he is in that seed which is in 
us; whereas he, to wit, the Eternal Word, which was with 
God and was God, dwelt immediately in that holy man.” 

‘‘From this large description [John vi.] of the origin, 
nature, and effects of this body, flesh, and blood of Christ, 
it is apparent that it is spiritual, and to be understood of a 
spiritual body, and not of that body or temple of Jesus 
Christ which was born of the Virgin Mary, and in which 
he walked, lived, and suffered in the land of Judea, because 
that it is said that it came down from heaven, yea, that it 


350 APPENDIX. 


is he that came down from heaven. .... That this body 
and spiritual flesh and blood of Christ is to be understood 
of that divine and heavenly seed, before spoken of by us, 
appears both by the nature and the fruits of it... .. So, 
then, as there was the outward visible body and temple of 
Jesus Christ, which took its origin from the Virgin Mary, 
so there is also the spiritual body of Christ, by and through 
which he that was the Word in the beginning with God, 
and was and is God, did reveal himself to the sons of men 
in all ages, and whereby men in all ages come to be made 
partakers of eternal life, and to have communion and fellow- 
ship with God and Christ... .. For as Jesus Christ, in 
obedience to the will of the Father, did by the eternal 
Spirit offer up that body for a propitiation for the remission 
of sins, and finished his testimony upon earth thereby, is a 
most perfect example of patience, resignation, and holiness, 
that all might be made partakers of the fruit of that sacrifice : 
so hath he likewise poured forth into the hearts of all men 
a measure of that divine light and seed wherewith he is 
clothed; that thereby, reaching unto the consciences of all, 
he may raise them up out of death and darkness by his life 
and light; and they thereby may be made partakers of his 
body, and there-through come to have fellowship with the 
.Father and with the Son.” 


Prennineton: §* How came the Scriptures to declare of 
Christ? Was it not from the Spirit? And is not that same 
light still with the Spirit, by which the Scriptures were 
given forth? And can he not give it forth without the 
letter, where he seeth need of it, and vouchsafeth so to do ? 
Why may not men now by the light of the Spirit come to 
know that Christ is come, dead, and risen, as well as these | 
things were known and believed before the Scriptures were 
written ?”’ 

‘“‘ But we believe the Spirit to be a touchstone beyond the 


APPENDIX. 351 


Scriptures, and to be that which giveth ability to try and 
discern, not only words, but spirits.” 

“The light is near all mankind, to discover to them and 
help them against the darkness. ..... The knowledge of 
those, and belief of those who own the light, is owned by 
God’s Spirit (in this our day) for the true believing in the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and for that knowledge which is life eter- 
nal; and the knowing and believing on him, as men account 
it, according to their apprehension of the letter, without this, 
is reckoned with God for ignorance and unbelief.” 

Answering the question, ‘‘ Whether the writings of any 
now be of equal weight with the Scriptures?” he says, 
‘Yea, the immediate word of the Lord, spoken and declared 
this day by any man to whom it pleaseth the Lord to commit 
the same, is of no less authority, nor more to be slighted 
now, than it was in his servants in the days past, by whom 
the Scriptures were given forth.” 

‘¢T will grant a great deal to the letter and ministration 
outward, but I must attribute more to the inward, or else 
God’s light, and the holy experience he hath given me, will 
condemn me.” Again, ‘The Holy Spirit of God and the 
Scriptures are not always joined together; for some in the 
dark corners of the earth may be visited by the Spirit, and 
receive the Spirit, who never heard of the Scriptures.”’ 

‘‘The Scriptures give testimony concerning the one thing 
necessary to salvation; but the thing itself, Christ himself, 
the seed itself, is not contained in the Scriptures, but re- 
vealed in the shinings of the true light, and so received or 
rejected inwardly in the heart.’’* 


* For most of the quotations from Pennington I am indebted to 
“The British Friend” of this month and year (November, 1867) ; 
and he who extracts them subscribes himself “a believer in our first 
principles,’ and commends strongly these and other such statements 
of an author who, he allows, was “ by no means the most extreme in 
his views, or the most trenchant in his expressions.”’ 


th a io hide ue Pepi tk 6) apis " 
Baa vp Fees eh ie el aah Shading beste ong 
Oe hase mn ae Ngai 4. sieht Bay ene alai Pats a 
Bet Resa Cirah Wt) ois aye he SARER nt Settee aot? gh ak 
Raye ¢3 US Rr a tent ak AR. Lineage itm: witha A ie 
Pee a) tid’ ees pitied fed urs? st et eae while es ‘s Puy 
PRG igen hit cat thneed op ophedaranet abl wel ‘fide Saale Pe 
or ook. ria Sian fo aikivartod ‘Sten svipioatih hy 
CRNA enna we URL ae, BO eye ue 1 honest lib 
sue ete tak dive hau ae na) oe Pt att heh abhi posi 
Pie hse seat waht ited eee <gmckesasp wal), yiteiwiel 
hi bts “i Petey ate bend ods Miiw, cilydin: Brg ‘ea is 
bread ahy Gsattl siiialeneie Ac. cache te pis od Sileseygeld eth 
pe danitee 4H Pr w terres 4th) RAK: ROA ai tteuls wy were te af ' 
Mos buiks wd chs Peet Kok pertadthing week ee Dea ge ils 
ee f abe wit Lats, baa: 2m eee ut, hey ede ¢ 
LEAS Eo | Raa, OE i uaa m 
ce ty % as pains hat es oa + ian a. tee: ak ey 
sy RE 40 ia Rie ums Oa Beh ea Ress cr ye Bree is ae 
iv Nearest: una ids od sate AHI eit jad tris igh imiok 


“yl a ce ae i * 
RAL Ras Toho S38 7 ae law N, Zine Cle 4 ‘ rid fait 


ees 
aA 


AE as he RUSS RET 3 TEE Pn a Pied ee kee is ty EER ara 
H Ganss yee tt Mahe ‘ih Sanscbie Sp eR oy oan Alsibe ssh 3 et eR 
Sa Hea aire Hon a3 ay jabtrighit Dee Oye, Leap ee, 
Peta atti pit sO asisty Syhienck vane? ya): aehe Bice : 
A si synth? + feat ae tind best! ap beptgeat a 
heh 7 rig (high ad TS iv bites a teat Eat ialwiish 


: ee 43) rity A'S eng Ree ath Pagebt ef ye teens ee a id + 
ws ee oy ea uinaaa ee i a whey usr 


‘ 


i iM ete Hope eu? Rit oe pn SiN: Hint) lie ia sits mh id iy at 

Witte ehh igre ely ay ae ‘Rid; ind deta, habe rn, 
VANS aS ad tied wc Viloweth tienda 6 cht i Seay 
Ci Bhatt se eae bape cia’ it «sla treatennmee Sie ioe a ass 
Passel! ie" Oy ‘tae tor eee, abl: ae apatietel itis sa f 3 


He eee eta a A a 


a3 f ‘ ‘ dn ‘3 ‘a purr 
J aG ¥ Ae * b ce: ) Lap - is ° a ha, 7 t ‘ 
EOINEE Cie eect. el, a 
A Pe a, as, io. R 
MA Oh an ioe oe bias A ta 
, 
| 


. iy { q Pi ‘ rn? ee af 
Us sal Oa 
Ay 


BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 


LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE STUDY OF THE 
EPISTLES OF PAUL THE APOSTLE. 


Price 7s. 6d. 
LECTURES INTRODUCTORY TO THE STUDY OF 


THE GOSPELS. 
Price 7s. 6d. 


LECTURES ON FUNDAMENTAL TRUTHS CONNECTED 
WITH THE CHURCH OF GOD. 


Price 3s. 


LECTURES ON THE SECOND COMING AND KINGDOM 
OF THE LORD JESUS CHRIST. 


Price 4s, 


LECTURES ON THE NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE OF 
THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


Price 6s. 


THE REVELATION OF JOHN, 


EDITED IN GREEK WITH A NEW ENGLISH VERSION, AND A STATEMENT OF THE 
CHIEF AUTHORITIES AND VARIOUS READINGS, 


Price 4s. 6d. 


THE SAME, WITH LECTURES ON THE BOOK. 
Morocco, gilt edges, 20s. 


Date Due 


re 


= 


Re? oxy’ 
er, 


a TO 


019 1585 


