m\ 


PRINC/JTOJSL.K  J 

PiVISIO' 

No.  Case,  --- 


No.  Shell;  ___i_.-^5?t^:-_..- 
No.  Book ^io,-,,^<^^--:^ 


35^7£)5 


LECTURES 


ON 


THE     EPISTLE     OF     PAUL     THE     APOSTLE 


TO 


THE  PHILIPPIANS, 


WITH 


A  NEW    TRANSLATION. 


/ 
BY  WILLIAM  KELLY. 


LONDON: 
G.  MORRISH,  24,  WARWICK  LANE, 

PATERNOSTER  ROW,  E.G. 
GLASGOW :  R.  L.  ALLAN,  76,  SAUCHIEHALL  STREET. 


THE  EPISTLE  OF  PAUL  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS. 


I.  Paul  and  Timothy,  bondmen  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  all  the 
saints  in  Christ  Jesus  that  are  at  Pliilippi  with  bishops  and 
deacons.  ^  Grace  to  you,  and  peace  from  God  our  Father 
and  [the]  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

3 1  thank  my  God  upon  my  whole  remembrance  of  you, 
*  always  in  my  every  supplication  for  you  all  making  the  sup- 
plication with  joy  ^  for  your  fellowsMp  with  the  gospel  from 
the  first  day  until  now,  ^  being  confident  of  tliis  very  tiling, 
that  he  who  began  in  you  a  good  work  will  complete  [it] 
until  [the]  day  of  Jesus  Clirist ;  '  even  as  it  is  righteous 
for  me  to  tliink  this  of  you  all,  because  ye  have  me  in  your 
heart ;  and  both  in  my  bonds,  and  in  the  defence  and  con- 
firmation of  the  gospel,  ye  are  all  fellow-partakers  of  my 
grace.  ^  For  God  is  my  witness,  how  I  long  after  you  aE 
in  [the]  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  ®  And  this  I  pray,  that 
your  love  may  abound  yet  more  and  more  in  full  knowledge 
and  all  intelligence,  '"  that  ye  may  approve  the  things  that 
are  excellent;*  that  ye  may  be  pure  and  without  ofi'ence 
against  [the]  day  of  Christ,  "  being  filled  with  the  fruit  of 
righteousness  that  [is]  by  Jesus  Christ  unto  God's  praise 
and  glory. 

"  But  I  wish  you  to  know,  brethren,  that  my  afiFairs  have 
turned  out  rather  for  furtherance  of  the  gospel,  "  so  that 
my  bonds  have  been  manifest  in  Christ  in  the  whole  of  the 
praetorium  and  to  all  the  rest ;  '*  and  that  the  most  of  the 
bretliren  in  [the]  Lord,  being  confident  by  my  bonds,  more 
abundantly  dare  to  speak  the  word  fearlessly.  "  Some, 
indeed,  also  for  envy  and  strife,  but  some  also  for  goodwill, 

*  Or,  "prove  the  things  that  differ.'* 


IV  PHILIPPIANS. 

preach  the  Christ;  ^^ these,  indeed,  out  of  love,  knowing 
that  I  am  set  for  defence  of  the  gospel ;  ^'  but  these  out  of 
contention  announce  the  Christ,  not  purely,  thinking  to 
stir  up  tribulation  for  my  bonds.  *«  Wliat  then  ?  Notwith- 
standing, every  way,  whether  in  pretence  or  in  truth,  Christ 
is  announced,  and  in  this  I  rejoice,  yea,  and  I  will  rejoice; 
*^  for  I  know  that  this  will  turn  to  me  for  salvation  through 
your  supphcation  and  [the]  supply  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus 
Christ,  2°  according  to  my  earnest  expectation  and  hope, 
that  in  nothing  I  shall  be  ashamed ;  but  in  all  boldness,  as 
always  now  also,  Clirist  shall  be  magnified  in  my  body, 
whether  by  life  or  by  death.  21  Por  to  me  to  live  [is]  Christ, 
and  to  die  gain ;  ^^  but  if  to  live  in  flesh,  this  to  me  [is] 
worth  while ;  and  what  I  shall  choose  I  know  not.  ^^  But 
I  am  perplexed  by  the  two,  having  the  desire  for  departing 
and  being  with  Christ,  for  it  is  very  far  better ;  ^*  but  re- 
maining in  the  flesh  is  more  necessary  on  your  account ; 
25  and  having  tliis  confidence,  I  know  that  I  shall  remain 
and  abide  with  you  all  for  your  furtherance  and  joy  of 
faith  ;  ^s  that  your  boast  may  abound  in  Christ  Jesus  in  me 
through  my  presence  again  with  you.  ^zOnly  conduct 
yourselves  worthily  of  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  that,  whether 
coming  and  seeing  you  or  absent,  I  may  hear  of  your  con- 
cerns, that  ye  stand  in  one  spirit,  with  one  soul  striving 
together  with  the  faith  of  the  gospel ;  2*  and  not  frightened 
in  anything  by  the  adversaries,  which  is  to  them  a  shewing 
forth  of  destruction,  but  to  you  of  salvation,  and  this  from 
God;  28 because  to  you  has  been  given  on  behalf  of  Christ, 
not  only  the  believing  on  him,  but  also  the  suffering  for 
him ;  8»  having  the  same  conflict  as  ye  saw  in  me  and  now 
hear  of  in  me. 

II.  If  therefore  [there  be]  any  comfort  in  Christ,  if  any 
consolation  of  love,  if  any  feUowsliip  of  [the]  Spuit,  if  any 
bowels  and  compassions,  *  fulfil  my  joy,  that  ye  may  mind 
the  same  thing,  having  the  same  love,  joined  in  soul,  mind- 
ing the  one  thing:  ' nothing  in  strifefulness,  or  vainglory, 
but  in  lowly-mindedness  esteeming  one  another  more  excel- 


CHAPTER  11.  ▼ 

lent  tlian  themselves ;  *  regarding  each  not  his  own  things, 
but  each  also  those  of  others.  ^For  let  tliis  mind  be  in 
you  wliich  [was]  also  in  Christ  Jesus;  ^who,  being*  in 
God's  form,  thought  it  not  an  object  of  rapine  to  be  on  an 
equahty  with  God ;  ^  but  emptied  liimself,  taking  a  bond- 
man's form,  being  come  in  men's  likeness  ;  ^  and  being 
found  in  figure  as  a  man,  humbled  himself,  becoming 
obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  ^  Where- 
fore also  God  liiglily  exalted  him,  and  gave  liim  the  name 
that  [is]  above  every  name,  ^^  that  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
every  knee  should  bow,  of  heavenly  and  eartUy  and  infernal 
[beings],  "  and  every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  [is] 
Lord,  unto  God  [the]  Father's  glory. 

*2  So  that,  my  beloved,  as  ye  have  always  obeyed,  not  aa 
in  my  presence  only,  but  now  much  more  in  my  absence, 
with  fear  and  trembUng  work  out  your  own  salvation ;  ^^  for 
it  is  God  that  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  work  for 
his  good  pleasure.  i*Do  all  things  without  murmuringg 
and  reasonings ;  ^^  that  ye  may  be  blameless  and  sincere, 
irreproachable  children  of  God  amidst  a  crooked  and  per- 
verted generation,  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lightsf  in  [the] 
world,  "  holding  forth  [the]  word  of  life,  for  a  boast  to  me 
in  Christ's  day,  that  not  in  vain  I  ran  nor  in  vain  laboured. 
i^But  if  also  I  am  poured  out  upon  the  sacrifice  and 
ministration  of  your  faith,  I  rejoice,  and  rejoice  with  you 
all;  ^*and  in  the  same  thing  do  ye  rejoice,  and  rejoice 
with  me.  **  But  I  hope  in  [the]  Lord  Jesus  soon  to  send 
Timothy  to  you,  that  I  also  may  be  cheered  knowing  about 
you.  20  For  I  have  none  like-minded  who  will  have  a 
genuine  care  about  you ;  ^i  for  they  all  seek  their  own 
things,  not  those  of  Jesus  Cluist.  "  But  the  proof  of  him 
ye  know,  that,  as  a  child  a  father,  with  me  he  served  in  the 
gospel.  2^  Him  therefore  I  hope  to  send  as  soon  as  I  shall 
see  my  concerns.  ^*  But  I  trust  in  [the]  Lord  that  I  also 
myself'  shall  come  soon,    ^sg^t  I  thought  it  necessary 

*  Or,  "subsisting." 
t  Or,  "light-bearers." 


VI  PHILIPPIANS. 

to  send  unto  you  Epaphroditus,  my  brother  and  fellow- 
labourer  and  fellow- soldier,  but  your  messenger  and  mini- 
Bter  to  my  wants ;  ^^  since  he  was  longing  after  you  all  and 
uneasy,  because  ye  heard  that  he  was  sick.  ^7  Por  indeed 
he  was  sick  near  to  death ;  but  God  pitied  liim,  and  not 
h\m  only,  but  me  also,  that  I  should  not  have  sorrow  upon 
Borrow.  2*  The  more  dihgently  therefore  I  sent  him,  that 
seeing  liim  again  ye  may  rejoice  and  I  be  the  less  sorrowful. 
29 Receive  liim  therefore  in  [the]  Lord  with  all  joy,  and 
hold  such  in  honour ;  ^^  because  for  the  work  of  Christ  he 
was  nigh  even  to  death,  endangermg  liis  life  that  he  might 
fill  up  the  remainder  of  your  ministrations  toward  me. 

Ill,  For  the  rest,  my  brethren,  rejoice  in  [the]  Lord. 
To  waite  these  things  to  you  [is]  not  irksome  to  me,  but 
safe  for  you.  ^  See  to  dogs,  see  to  the  evil  workers,  see  to  the 
concision  ;  '  for  we  are  the  circumcision  that  worship  God 
in  Spii'it  and  boast  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  trust  in 
flesh.  •'Though  I  have  a  trusting  even  in  flesh;  if  any 
other  seem  to  trust  in  flesh,  I  more :  *  in  circumcision  of 
eight  days,  of  [the]  race  of  Israel,  of  [the]  tribe  of  Ben- 
jamin, a  Hebrew  of  Hebrews,  according  to  law  a  Pharisee, 
*  according  to  zeal  persecutmg  the  church,  according  to 
righteousness  that  [is]  in  law*  blameless.  '  But  what  things 
were  gain  to  me,  these  I  have  counted  loss  on  account  of 
Christ.  *  But  moreover  also  I  comit  all  tilings  to  be  loss 
on  account  of  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus  my  Lord,  on  whose  account  I  lost  all  tlungs  and 
count  them  to  be  refuse  that  I  may  win  Christ,  ^  and  be 
found  in  liim,  not  havmg  my  righteousness  that  [is]  of 
law,  but  that  [wliich  is]  by  faith  of  Clirist,  the  righteousness 
of  God  on  faith ;  ^^  to  know  him,  and  the  power  of  his 
resurrection  and  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings,  being  con- 
formed to  his  death,  "  if  by  any  means  I  may  arrive  at 
the  resurrection  that  [is]  from  [the]  dead.  '^  Not  that  I 
already  received  [it]  or  am  ah'eady  perfected ;  but  I  pursue 
if  I  may  also  lay  hold,  for  that  also  I  have  been  laid  hold 
*  Or,  "  according  to  legal  righteousness." 


CHAPTER  IV.  VU 

of  by  Christ.  "  Brethren,  I  do  not  reckon  myself  to  have 
laid  hold  ;  "  but  one  tiling — forgetting  the  tilings  behind, 
and  stretching  out  to  the  tilings  before,  I  pursue  goalward 
unto  the  prize  of  the  calling  on  high  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus.  ^^As  many  therefore  as  [are]  perfect,  let  us  mind 
this.  And  if  in  anything  ye  are  differently  minded,  this 
also  will  God  reveal  to  you.  ^^  Nevertheless  unto  what  we 
have  attained,  walk  by  the  same  [,  mind  the  same].  "Be 
joint-imitators  of  me,  bretliren,  and  mark  those  so  walking 
as  ye  have  us  for  a  pattern.  "  For  many  walk,  of  whom  I 
often  told  you,  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping,  the  enemies 
of  the  cross  of  Clirist,  '^  whose  end  [is]  destruction,  whose 
God  [is]  the  belly,  and  they  glory  in  their  shame,  who 
mind  the  things  of  earth,  ^o  p^j.  our  commonwealth*  has 
its  being  in  [the]  heavens,  from  whence  also  we  await  [as] 
Saviour  [the]  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  2'  who  shall  transform  our 
body  of  humiliation,  conformed  to  his  body  of  glory  accord- 
ing to  the  working  of  his  abOity  also  to  subject  all  tilings 
to  him.  IV.  So  that,  my  bretliren  beloved  and  longed  for, 
my  joy  and  crown,  so  stand  in  [the]  Lord,  beloved, 

^Evodia  I  exliort,  and  Syntyche  I  exliort,  to  mind  the 
same  thing  in  [the]  Lord;  ^yea,  I  beseech  thee  also, 
genuine  yokefellow,  help  them,  seeing  that  they  shared  my 
conflicts  in  the  gospel,  with  Clement  also,  and  the  rest 
of  my  fellow-labourers,  whose  names  are  in  [the]  book 
of  life. 

*  Rejoice  in  [the]  Lord  always  :  again  I  will  say,  rejoice. 
*  Let  your  mildness  be  known  to  all  men.  The  Lord  [is] 
near.  ^Be  anxious  about  nothing,  but  in  everything  by 
prayer  and  suppHcation  with  thanksgiving  let  your  re- 
quests be  made  known  unto  God.  ^  And  the  peace  of  God, 
that  surpasseth  every  understanding,  shall  keep  your  hearts 
and  your  thoughts  in  Christ  Jesus.  ®  For  the  rest,  brethren, 
whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  noble,  whatsoever 
just,  whatsoever  pure,  whatsoever  lovely,  whatsoever  of 
good  report,  if  there  [is]  any  virtue,  and  if  any  praise, 
*  Or,  "conversation." 


Tin  PHILIPPIANS. 

these  things  consider.  ^  Those  tilings  which  ye  also  learned, 
and  received,  and  heard,  and  saw  in  me,  do ;  and  the  God 
of  peace  shall  be  with  you. 

»<*But  I  rejoiced  in  [the]  Lord  greatly  that  now  at  length 
ye  flourished  again  in  thinking  for  my  interest,  wliile  yet 
also  ye  did  tliink  but  had  no  opportunity.  "  Not  that  I 
speak  in  regard  to  want ;  for  I  learned  in  the  circumstances  in 
which  I  am  to  find  competence.  '^  I  know  also  to  be  abased, 
I  know  also  to  abound.  In  everjrthing  and  in  all  tilings  I 
am  initiated  both  to  be  filled  and  to  hunger,  both  to  abound 
and  to  be  in  want.  "  In  all  tilings  I  am  strong  in  him  that 
empowereth  me.  "Nevertheless  ye  did  well  in  sharing 
with  my  tribulation.  *^  But  ye  also,  O  Pliihppians,  know 
that  in  the  beginning  of  the  gospel,  when  I  came  out  of 
Macedonia,  no  assembly  communicated  with  me  for  an 
account  of  giving  and  receiving,  unless  ye  alone  ;  *^  for  even 
in  Thessalonica  both  once  and  twice  ye  sent  for  my  need. 
"  Not  that  I  am  seeking  the  gift,  but  I  am  seeking  the  fruit 
that  aboundeth  unto  your  accoimt.  '^  But  I  have  all  thinga 
and  abound ;  I  am  fuU,  having  received  from  Epaphroditua 
the  things  from  you,  an  odour  of  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice 
acceptable,  well-pleasing  to  God.  ^^  But  my  God  will  fully 
Bupply  all  your  need  according  to  liis  riches  in  glory  in 
Christ  Jesus,  ^o  Now  to  our  God  and  Father  [be]  the  glory 
unto  the  ages  of  the  ages.  Amen. 

2»  Salute  every  saint  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  brethren  that 
[are]  with  me  salute  you.  22  j^  the  saints  salute  you,  but 
especially  those  of  the  household  of  Csesar.  ^s  xhe  grace 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  [be]  with  your  spirit.  Amen. 


NOTES 


ON  THE 


EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS. 


CHAPTER  I. 


Let  us  seek,  with  the  blessing  of  God,  to  develope  a 
little  the  special  features  of  this  epistle  on  which  we 
now  enter.  For  the  Letter  understanding  of  what 
comes  before  us,  we  may  also  compare  its  character  with 
that  of  others.  Some  of  its  features  may  be  gathered 
from  the  very  first  verse.  The  apostle  introduces 
himself  in  the  simplest  possible  manner:  "  Paul  and 
Timotheus,  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  all  the 
saints  in  Christ  Jesas  which  are  at  Pliilippi,  with  the 
bishops  and  deacons;  grace  be  unto  you  and  peace 
from  God  our  Father  and  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Elsewhere,  even  if  he  presents  himself  as  a  servant,  he 
does  not  fail  also  to  add  his  apostolic  title,  or  some 
other  distinction  by  which  God  had  separated  him  from 
the  rest  of  his  brethren.  But  here  it  is  not  so.  He  is 
led  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  present  himself  upon  the 
broadest  ground  to  the  children  of  God  in  Philippi; 

B 


Z  PHILIPPIANS. 

on  this  he  could  fully  associate  Timotheus  with  himself. 
Thus  we  may  gather  from  the  very  start  of  the  epistle 
that  we  are  not  to  look  for  the  wonderful  unfoldings 
of  Christian  and  Church  truth,  such  as  we  have  in 
Romans,  Corinthians,  or  Ephesians,  where  the  apostle- 
ship  of  St.  Paul  is  most  carefully  stated. 

"  Paul,  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  called  to  be  an 
apostle."  (Rom.  i.)  He  was  not  an  apostle  by  birth, 
but  by  the  call  of  God.  He  adds  further,  that  they 
were  saints  by  the  very  same  divine  call  whereby  he 
was  an  apostle — "  called  to  be  saints,"  both  through 
the  sovereign  grace  of  God.  There  was  nothing  in 
either  that  could  have  been  an  inherent  claim  upon 
God.  There  was  deadly  sin  in  both ;  but  the  grace  of 
God  that  had  called  them  to  be  saints,  had  called  him 
to  be  not  a  saint  only,  but  an  apostle.  As  such,  he 
addresses  them  in  the  full  consciousness  of  the  place  that 
Christ  had  given  him  and  them,  unfolding  the  truth 
from  the  very  first  foundations  on  which  the  gospel 
rests,  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  ruin  of  man.  Hence 
in  that  epistle  you  have  something  that  more  ap- 
proaches to  a  doctrinal  treatise  than  in  any  other 
portion  of  the  New  Testament.  God  took  care  that 
no  apostle  ever  visited  Rome,  till  there  were  many- 
saints  already  there,  and  then  He  wrote  by  the  Apostle 
Paul.  The  proud  imperial  city  cannot  boast  of  an 
apostolic  foundation;  yet,  spite  of  that,  man  has  put 
in  the  claim  and  pressed  it  with  fire  and  sword.  Paul, 
however,  wrote  in  the  fulness  of  his  own  apostleship 


CHAPTER  I.  3 

and  brings  out  the  truth  of  God  to  them  most  care- 
fully, so  that  the  very  ignorance  of  the  Roman  saints 
was  the  occasion  for  the  Holy  Ghost  to  give  us  the 
most  elaborate  statement  of  christian  truth  which  the 
word  of  God  contains.  By  christian  truth,  I  mean 
the  individual  instruction  which  the  soul  wants  in 
order  to  the  consciousness  of  its  solid  standing  before 
God  and  the  duties  which  flow  from  it.  There  the 
apostle  writes  expressly  as  an  apostle.  It  could  not 
be  understood  as  a  human  composition.  There  must 
be  the  authority  of  God,  claimed  by  the  apostle ;  and 
while  he  strengthens  them  in  their  position  of  saints, 
by  the  very  same  he  makes  room  for  that  develop- 
ment of  christian  truth,  for  which  the  epistle  is 
remarkable. 

In  the  Corinthians  he  addresses  them,  not  merely  as 
saints,  as  individual  Christians,  but  as  an  assembly; 
and  there  also  he  asserts  his  apostleship.  Does  not 
this  serve  to  illustrate  the  truth  that  there  is  not  a 
word  inserted  or  omitted  in  Scripture,  but  what  is  full 
of  instruction  for  our  souls  if  we  are  willing  to  be  in- 
structed ?  To  the  Corinthians  he  does  not  add  as  in 
Romans,  ''  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,"  but  simply, 
"  called  to  be  an  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  through  the 
will  of  God."  There  he  carefully  puts  Sosthenes  upon 
his  own  proper  ground,  as  a  brother,  while  he  distin- 
guishes his  own  apostleship.  The  reason  is  obvious. 
The  Corinthians  were  in  a  turbulent  state,  going  so  far  as 
even  to  gainsay  the  apostleship  of  Paul.  But  God  never 


4  PHILIPPIANS. 

lowers  what  He  has  given,  because  men  do  not  like  it. 
It  was  a  part,  not  more  of  God's  grace  to  Paul,  than 
of  his  humble  obedience  before  God,  to  act  and  speak 
as  an  apostle ;  if  he  had  not,  he  would  have  failed  in 
his  duty;  he  would  not  have  done  that  which  was 
essential  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  the 
saints.  Every  thing  is  in  its  proper  place.  So  if  the 
Corinthians  were  questioning  what  God  had  wrought 
in  and  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  and  the  place  He  had 
given  him  in  His  wisdom,  the  apostle  asserts  it  with 
dignity ;  or  rather,  the  Holy  Ghost  represents  him  only 
as  an  apostle  to  them,  speaks  of  others  but  not  as  apos- 
tles, and  addresses  the  Corinthians  as  "  the  Church  of 
God  which  is  at  Corinth,  to  them  that  are  sanctified  in 
Christ  Jesus,  called  to  be  saints,  with  all  that  in  every 
place  call  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord, 
both  theirs  and  ours."  None  but  one  who  knew  what 
God  is  to  His  saints,  and  Ipw  He  holds  to  the  power 
of  His  own  grace,  would  have  contemplated  those 
at  Corinth  in  such  sort  as  this ;  none  but  a  heart 
that  understood  God's  love  to  His  own,  and,  alas  !  to 
■what  lengths  they  may  be  drawn  aside  where  the  flesh 
gains  advantage — none  but  one  admirably,  divinely 
acquainted  with  his  own  heart  and  with  God — could 
ever  have  addressed  them  in  the  language  with  which 
that  epistle  opens.  But  it  was  God  who  was  writing 
through  His  apostle.  And  as  the  conduct  of  the 
Church  on  earth  is  the  thesis  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  He  shows  us  there  the  principle  of  putting 


CHAPTER  I.  5 

away  and  of  receiving  again,  the  administration  of  the 
Lord's  supper,  and  its  moral  meaning;  the  working  of 
the  various  gifts  in  the  Church,  &c.  All  these  things, 
as  being  the  functions  of  the  Church,  or  of  members 
of  the  Church,  are  found  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Corin- 
thians. But  even  in  the  exercise  of  gifts,  it  is  gifts  in 
the  assembly.  Therefore,  there  is  no  reference  to  evan- 
gelizing in  1  Cor.  xii.,  xiv.,  because  the  evangelist's  gift 
does  not,  of  course,  find  its  exercise  within  the  Church. 
He  goes,  properly  speaking,  outside  the  Church,  in 
order  to  exercise  that  gift.  You  have  prophets,  teach- 
ers, &c.  All  these  were  gifts  of  a  still  higher  order 
and  regularly  exercised  in  the  assembly  of  God. 

Here  also  we  shall  see  how  appropriately  the  preface 
falls  in  with  the  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost  throughout: 
"  Paul  and  Timotheus,  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ,  to 
all  the  saints  in  Christ  Jesus  which  are  at  Philippi, 
with  the  bishops  and  deacons;  grace  be  unto  you,  and 
peace  from  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Now  this  is  the  only  church  where  we  have  the  "bishops 
and  deacons"  addressed  as  well  as  the  saints.  The 
reason  may  have  been  that  it  was,  more  or  less,  a  tran- 
sition state.  We  have  three  things  in  the  Church  of 
the  New  Testament.  The  first  is — apostles,  acting  in 
the  full  power  of  their  gift  and  office.  Then,  besides 
deacons,  bishops  or  elders  (for  these  two  mean  the  same 
officials,  only  called  by  a  different  name),  apostolically 
appointed  to  the  charge  which  the  Lord  had  given 
them;  the  bishops  having  to  do  with  that  which  is 


6  PHILIPPIANS. 

internal,  the  deacons  with  that  which  is  external,  but 
both  of  them  local  offices,  while  the  apostle  had  his 
authority  from  the  Lord  everywhere.  The  Holy  Ghost 
shows  us  thus  the  full  regimen  in  the  churches:  that  is 
to  say,  the  apostles  acting  in  their  high  place,  who  were 
called  to  establish  the  foundations  of  the  Church  practi- 
cally, and  to  govern  it  upon  a  large  scale  throughout 
the  whole  breadth  of  the  Church  of  God  upon  earth; 
and  beside  them,  these  local  guides,  the  bishops  and 
deacons. 

Thirdly.  The  apostle  was  now  separated  from  the 
Church,  and  hence  no  longer  able  to  watch  over  the 
saints  personally.  He  writes  accordingly  to  those  who 
had  no  longer  his  apostolic  care,  not  only  where  they 
had  not,  but,  in  this  case,  where  they  had  bishops  and 
deacons.  Yet  in  the  latest  epistles,  where  the  apostle  is 
filled  with  the  sense  of  his  speedy  departure,  there  is 
not  the  slightest  allusion  to  any  provision  for  perpetu- 
ating these  officers — not  even  when  writing  confiden- 
tially to  one  whom  he  had  called  on  to  ordain  elders  in 
Crete,  nor  to  another  invested  with  a  charge  at  Ephesus. 

Thus,  this  epistle  brings  us  to  a  sort  of  transition. 
It  supposes  the  assembly  in  ecclesiastical  order.  But 
the  apostle's  absence  in  person  seems  to  be  intended  of 
God  to  prepare  the  Church  for  the  absence  of  apostles 
entirely.  Thus  God  graciously  gave  the  Church  a  kind 
of  preparation  for  their  removal  from  the  scene.  Prac- 
tically, even  while  Paul  was  on  the  earth,  he  was  shut 
out  from  them,  and  gone  from  the  scene,   as  far  as 


CHAPTER  I.  7 

regarded  apostolic  vigilance.  The  time  was  coming 
when  there  would  be  no  longer  apostolically  appointed 
bishops  and  deacons.  The  Spirit  of  God  was,  it  wonld 
appear,  thereby  accustoming  the  Church  to  find  in  God 
the  only  stable  means  of  support  when  apostles  would 
be  no  longer  within  reach  of  those  who  used  to  look  to 
them  and  to  claim  their  wisdom  in  their  difficulties. 
But  though  the  apostle  was  not  there,  they  had  the 
"  bishops  and  deacons,"  not  a  bishop  and  several  dea- 
cons, and  still  less  bishops  and  presbyters  (or,  priests) 
and  deacons,  but  several  of  the  higher  spiritual  guides 
as  well  as  of  the  lower.  In  those  days  a  bishopric  was 
not  a  great  worldly  prize,  but  a  serious  spiritual  care, 
which,  however  excellent  an  employment,  was  no  object 
of  ambition  or  means  of  lucre.  "  If  any  man  desire  the 
office  of  a  bishop,  he  desireth  a  good  work ;"  but  it 
called  for  such  self-denial,  such  constant  trial  by  night 
and  day,  deeper  even  in  the  Church  than  from  the  world 
without,  that  it  was  by  no  means  a  thing  for  the  best 
qualified  in  the  Spirit  to  rush  into,  but  to  take  up  with 
the  utmost  gravity,  as  that  to  which  he  was  called  of 
God.  For  this  among  other  reasons  the  Church  never 
pretended  to  choose  or  constitute  a  bishop.  It  was  in- 
variably by  apostolic  authority.  One  or  more  apostles 
acted  in  this — not  necessarily  Paul  only  or  the  twelve. 
It  might  be  a  Barnabas;  at  least  we  find  in  certain 
cases  Paul  and  Barnabas  acting  together  in  choosing 
elders  or  bishops.  But  this  may  show  what  a  delicate 
task  it  was.     The  Lord  never  gives  it  to  any  person 


8  PHILIPPIANS, 

except  an  apostle  or  an  apostolic  man  (that  is,  a  man 
sent  out  by  an  apostle  to  do  that  work  for  him,  such  as 
Titus  and  perhaps  Timothy).  But  there  the  scripture 
account  closes;  and  while  we  have  provision  for  the 
Church  going  on,  and  the  certainty  of  gifts  supplied  to 
the  end,  there  is  no  means  laid  down  for  perpetuating 
the  appointment  of  elders  and  bishops. 

Was  there,  then,  forgetfulness  of  ordinary  need  on  the 
apostle's,  nay,  on  God's  part  ?  For  this  is  really  what 
the  matter  comes  to ;  and  he  who  supposes  that  anything 
of  the  kind  was  omitted  in  Scripture  thus  carelessly,  in 
effect  impeaches  the  faithful  wisdom  of  God.  Who 
wrote  Scripture  ?  Either  you  resort  to  the  wretched 
notion  that  God  was  indifferent  and  the  apostles  forgot ; 
or,  acknowledging  that  Scripture  flows  from  the  highest 
source,  you  have  no  escape  from  the  conclusion  that 
God  was  intentionally  silent  as  to  the  future  supply  of 
elders  or  bishops.  But  the  God  who  knew  and  ordered 
everything  from  the  beginning  forgot  nothing ;  on  the 
contrary.  He  expressly,  in  His  own  wisdom,  left  no 
means,  in  the  foreseen  ruin  of  Christendom,  for  con- 
tinuing the  appointment  of  elders  and  deacons.  Was 
it  not  then  desirable,  if  not  necessary,  for  churches  to 
have  such  ?  Surely,  if  we  reason  thus,  apostles  were 
as  loudly  called  for  as  the  lower  officials.  The  fact  is 
most  evident  that  the  same  God  who  has  seen  fit  to 
withhold  a  continuous  line  of  apostles,  has  not  been 
pleased  to  give  the  means  for  a  scriptural  continuance 
of  bishops  and  deacons.     How  is  it  then  that  we  have 


CHAPTER  I.  9l 

no  such  officers  now  ?  Most  simiDle  is  the  answer. 
Because  we  have  no  apostles  to  appoint  them.  Will 
you  tell  me  if  anybody  else  has  got  them  ?  Let  us  at 
least  be  willing  to  acknowledge  our  real  lack  in  this 
respect :  it  is  our  duty  to  God,  because  it  is  the  truth ; 
and  the  owning  it  keeps  one  from  much  presumption. 
For  in  general  Christendom  is  doing,  without  apostles, 
what  is  only  lawful  to  be  done  by  or  with  them.  The 
appointment  of  elders  and  deacons  goes  upon  the  notion 
that  there  is  an  adequate  power  still  resident  in  men  or 
the  Church.  But  the  only  scriptural  ordaining  power 
is  an  apostle  acting  directly  or  indirectly.  Titus  or 
Timothy  could  not  go  and  ordain  elders  except  as  and 
where  authorized  by  the  apostles.  Hence  when  Titus 
had  done  this  work,  he  was  to  comeback  to  the  apostle. 
He  was  not  in  anywise  one  who  had  invested  in  him  a 
certain  fund  to  apply  at  all  times  where  and  how  he 
pleased.  Scripture  represents  that  he  was  acting  under 
apostolic  guidance.  But  after  the  apostles  were  gone, 
not  a  word  about  the  power  acting  through  these  or 
other  delegates  of  the  apostle.  God  forbid  that  we 
should  pretend  either  to  make  an  apostle  or  to  make 
light  of  his  absence  !  It  is  more  humble  to  say,  We 
are  thankful  to  use  what  God  has  given  and  whatever 
God  may  continue  to  give,  without  pretending  to  more. 
Is  there  not  faith,  and  lowliness,  and  obedience  in  the 
position  that  acknowledges  the  present  want  in  the 
Church,  and  that  simply  acts  according  to  the  power 
that  remains,  which  is  all-sufficient  for  every  need  and 


10  PHILIPPIANS. 

danger  ?  The  true  way  to  glorify  God  is  not  to  assume 
an  apostolic  authority  that  we  do  not  possess,  but  to 
act  confiding  in  the  power  and  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  who  does  remain.  It  was  distinctly  the  Lord 
Himself,  who,  working  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  acted  upon 
all  the  saints,  and  who  put  each  of  them  in  that  parti- 
cular place  in  the  body  that  He  saw  fit.  It  is  not  a 
question  of  our  drawing  inferences  from  a  man's  gifts 
that  he  is  an  apostle.  To  be  an  apostle  required  the 
express,  personal  call  of  the  Lord  in  a  remarkable  way ; 
and  without  this  there  never  was  adequate  ordaining 
power,  personally  or  by  deputy. 

As  this  may  help  to  meet  a  question  that  often  arises 
in  the  minds  of  Christians,  and  suggested  by  a  verse 
such  as  we  have  before  us,  I  have  thought  it  well  to 
meet  the  difficulty,  trusting  to  the  word  and  Spirit 
of  God. 

The  apostle,  then,  introduces  himself  and  Timothy 
as  "  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ  to  all  the  saints  in 
Christ  Jesus."  It  is  not  exactly  "  to  the  Church,"  as 
in  writing  to  the  Corinthians  or  the  Thessalonians,  but 
to  "  all  the  saints."  We  may  gather  from  this  that  he 
is  about  to  speak  of  what  is  individual  rather  than  of 
what  belonged  to  them  as  a  public  assembly ;  but  it  is 
not,  as  in  Romans,  on  the  basis  of  redemption.  He 
was  going  to  enlarge  on  their  walk  with  God,  saluting 
them  as  usual  with  the  words,  "  grace  be  unto  you, 
and  peace  from  God  our  Father  and  from  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ." 


CHAPTER  I.  11 

Before  he  opens  the  epistle,  the  apostle  breaks  forth 
in  thanksgiving  to  God.  "  I  thank  my  God,"  an  ex- 
pression often  used  in  this  epistle.  It  also  is  individual, 
knowing  now  the  God  in  whom  he  trusted,  besides 
being  the  expression  of  affection  and  of  nearness.  First, 
says  the  apostle,  "  I  thank  my  God  upon  my  whole  re- 
membrance of  you"  (for  such  is  the  true  force),  ''always 
in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you  all,  making  request 
with  joy."  This  leads  me  to  make  the  observation, 
that  nearness  to  God  is  always  accompanied  by  the 
heart  overflowing  with  the  joy  which  His  realized  pre- 
sence necessarily  produces,  as  well  as  by  a  spirit  of 
intercession  for  the  objects  of  God's  love  on  earth. 
There  may  be  at  the  same  time  the  deepest  exercise  of 
spirit,  and  not  without  the  keenest  pain ;  because  in  the 
presence  of  God  every  sin,  sorrow,  and  shame,  is  more 
truly  and  fully  felt.  What  God  is,  is  known,  and 
therefore  perfect  peace;  what  man  is,  and  therefore  the 
failure  is  realized  and  the  dishonour  brought  on  Christ 
is  entered  into  by  the  Spirit.  But  here  joy  is  the  pre- 
valent and  abiding  feeling,  the  great  characteristic  effect 
of  the  presence  of  God  imprinted  on  the  soul,  where 
the  conscience  is  void  of  offence  toward  God  and  man. 

Not  that  even  Paul  could  thus  speak  of  every  assembly, 
or  every  saint  of  God — far  from  it.  His  whole  remem- 
brance of  the  Philippian  saints  opened  the  sluices  of 
thanksgiving  to  God.  Yet,  from  the  beginning,  there 
was  need  of  prayer ;  and  he  was  continually  supplicating 
for  them  all,  and  this  with  joy,  "  for  your  fellowship  in 


12  PHILIPPIANS. 

the  gospel  from  the  first  day  until  now."  What  a 
wonderful  thing  that  a  man,  though  he  were  the  great 
apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  could  so  feel,  and  that 
there  were  here  below  saints  of  whom  he  could  so 
write !  Alas  !  in  these  selfish  days  w^e  little  know 
what  we  have  lost,  and  whence  we  are  fallen.  He 
never  prayed  for  these  Philippians  but  with  joy,  and 
yet  he  was  constantly  bearing  them  before  God.  Had 
the  apostle  been  here,  could  he  have  thought  so  of  us  ? 
Yet,  wonderful  as  it  was,  it  was  the  simple  truth ;  and 
it  is  wholesome  for  our  souls  to  judge  ourselves  by  such 
a  standard. 

Another  feature  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  is, 
that  the  practical  condition  of  the  soul  is  here  deve- 
loped more  fully  than  anywhere  else ;  and  this  not  so 
much  doctrinally  as  in  action  and  experience.  The 
apostle  lays  bare  his  own  motives  as  well  as  walk;  and 
even  Christ's  also.  Hence  it  is  peculiarly  in  this 
epistle  that  we  find  displayed  the  exercise  of  individual 
christian  life.  Here  we  have  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  acting  in  the  soul  of  the  believer,  enabling  him 
to  realize  Christ  in  the  heart  and  path  here  below. 
But  what  gave  rise  to  this  character  of  instruction  ? 
"What  circumstances  brought  it  out  ?  The  absence  of  the 
apostle  from  the  Philippians,  and  from  his  ordinary  mini- 
stry, while  he  was  imprisoned  at  Rome.  It  was  not,  as  at 
Corinth,  that  his  absence  brought  out  their  ostentatious 
vanity,  and  party  spirit,  and  worldly  laxity,  and  cjuar- 
rellings.     It  led  the  Philippians  to  feel  the  necessity  of 


CHAPTER  I.  IS 

living  increasingly  with,  and  for,  and  to  Christ.  There 
was  nothing  for  it  but  each  one  looking,  and  helping  his 
brother  to  look,  to  the  Lord  Himself.  This  being  the 
effect  produced,  the  apostle  was  full  of  joy  in  thinking 
of  them.  He  had  been  several  years  away,  and  exter- 
nally in  the  most  dismal  circumstances  himself;  but  his 
joy  was  not  dimmed  one  whit.  On  the  contrary,  there 
is  not  another  epistle  so  full  of  actually  tasted  happi- 
ness ;  and  yet  there  never  was  an  epistle  written  when  all 
on  earth  seemed  more  clouded  and  filled  with  sorrow.  So 
thoroughly  is  Christ  the  one  circumstance  that  rules  all 
others  to  the  believer.  When  moving  about  and  seeing 
both  the  devotedness  of  the  saints,  and  sinners  every- 
where brought  to  God,  one  can  understand  the  apostle's 
continual  joy  and  praise.  But  think  of  him  in  prison 
for  years,  chained  between  two  soldiers,  debarred  from 
the  work  that  he  loved,  and  others  taking  advantage  of 
his  absence  to  grieve  him,  preaching  the  very  gospel 
out  of  contention  and  strife;  and  yet  his  heart  was  so 
running  over  with  joy  that  he  was  filling  others  with  it! 
Such  is  the  character  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians. 
If  there  be  a  witness  of  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
working  through  human  affections,  through  the  heart 
of  a  saint  on  earth,  in  the  midst  of  all  weakness  and 
trial,  it  is  found  here.  It  is  not  the  picture  of  a  man 
down  under  trying  circumstances,  for  under  them  he 
never  is,  but  consciously  more  than  conqueror.  Not 
that  he  never  knew  what  it  was  to  be  cast  down.  He 
who  wrote  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  fully 


14  PHILIPPIAN-g. 

experienced  all  that  whicli  God  in  His  grace  made  to 
be  a  kind  of  moral  preparation  for  bringing  ont  the 
comfort  that  was  needed  by  the  saints  then  and  at  all 
times.  But  this  epistle  shows  ns  that  there  is  not  a 
single  symptom  of  weariness  any  more  than  of  pertur- 
bation of  spirit.  You  could  not  tell  from  it  that  there 
was  any  flesh  at  all,  though  he  was  one  who  fully  took 
the  flesh  into  account  elsewhere,  as  in  Romans  and 
Corinthians,  where  you  have  a  fearful  picture  of  what 
may  be  the  condition  of  the  Christian  and  of  the  Church. 
Not  only  in  Philippians  is  there  no  trace  of  this,  but 
neither  is  there  the  dwelling  upon  our  privileges  and 
blessings,  as  in  Ephesians  i.  What  we  have  is  the 
enjoyed  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  lifts  a  man 
day  by  day  above  the  earth,  even  when  he  is  walking 
upon  it;  and  this  by  making  Christ  everything  to  the 
soul,  so  that  the  trials  are  but  occasions  of  deeper  en- 
joyment, let  them  be  ever  so  many  and  grave.  This  is 
what  we  specially  want  as  Christians  in  order  to  glorify 
God;  and  this  is  what  the  Holy  Ghost  urges  on  us 
when  we  have  entered  into  our  proper  christian  birth- 
right, individually,  as  in  Romans,  and  our  membership 
of  the  Church,  as  in  Corinthians,  and  our  blessing  in 
heavenly  places  in  Christ  as  in  Ephesians.  Then  comes 
the  question,  How  am  I  enjoying  and  carrying  out 
these  wondrous  privileges,  as  a  saint  of  God  upon 
earth?  To  suppose  that  this  is  a  hard  question,  and 
gendering  bondage,  would  be  to  impeach  the  perfect 
goodness  of  God,  as  well  as  to  fall  into  a  snare  of  the 


CHAPTER  I.  15 

devil.  What  God  desires  is  that  we  should  be  blest 
yet  more  than  we  are.  He  would  thus  make  us  more 
happy.  The  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  is  one  to  fill 
the  heart  with  joy,  if  there  be  an  eye  for  Christ,  He 
thanks  his  God  for  them  for  their  "  fellowship  with  the 
gospel  from  the  first  day  until  now."  What  going  out 
of  heart,  and  sustained  vigour !  It  is  not  now  "  the 
fellowship  of  His  Son,"  as  in  1  Corinthians,  which  indeed 
would  be  true  of  a  Christian  under  any  circumstances. 
So  that,  if  Satan  had  contrived  to  turn  a  saint  again  to 
folly  and  sin,  the  Holy  Ghost  could  remind  him  that 
God  is  faithful  by  w^hom  he  was  called  unto  the  fellow- 
ship of  His  Son.  And  can  He  have  fellowship  with 
unfruitful  works  of  darkness?  This  is  the  reason  why 
we  should  cry  to  God  that,  if  He  have  called  any  to  the 
fellow^ship  of  His  Son,  He  would  not  allow  the  enemy  to 
drag  them  into  the  dirt,  but  rouse  their  conscience  to 
their  grievous  inconsistency. 

But  there  is  more.  Here  it  is  their  fellowship 
with  the  gospel,  not  merely  as  a  blessed  message 
they  had  received  themselves,  but  in  its  progress,  con- 
flicts, dangers,  difficulties,  &c.  It  does  not  necessarily 
mean  preaching  it,  but,  what  was  as  good,  or  in  itself 
even  better — their  hearts  thoroughly  in  and  with  it. 
Need  I  hesitate  to  say  that  whatever  may  be  the 
honour  put  upon  those  called  to  spread  the  gospel,  to 
have  a  heart  in  "unison  with  the  gospel  is  a  portion 
superior  to  any  services  as  such?  Most  simply  and 
heartily  were  the  Philippians'  affections  thus  bound  up 


16  PHILIPPIANS. 

with  the  gospel :  they  identified  themselves  first  and 
last  with  its  career.  This  was  really  fellowship  with 
God  in  the  spread  of  His  own  glad  tidings  through 
the  world.  The  apostle  valued  such  hearts  especially. 
Nothing  less  than  the  sustaining  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  had  so  wrought  in  these  dear  Philippians. 

The  way  in  which  the  gospel  had  reached  them  we  hear 
in  Acts  xvi.  It  began  with  Paul  in  prison,  when  his  feet 
were  in  the  stocks,  yet  withal,  in  the  midst  of  shame 
and  pain,  he  and  his  companion  singing  praises  to  God 
at  midnight !  And  here  we  have  him,  if  alone,  again 
a  prisoner,  and  the  praises  of  God  are  again  heard — un- 
wontedly  in  the  great  city  of  Rome.  The  Philippians 
were  far  away;  hut  he  could  hear  them,  as  it  were  none 
the  less,  singing  praises  to  God,  even  as  he  was  singing 
praises  to  God  for  them.  It  was  the  same  blessed  fel- 
lowship with  the  gospel  that  had  characterized  not  him 
only,  but  them  too,  from  the  very  first  day  until  now. 

But  he  goes  further,  and  says,  "  Being  confident  of 
this  very  thing,  that  he  which  hath  begun  a  good  work 
in  you,  will  complete  it  against  the  day  of  Jesus 
Christ."  Remark  the  ground  of  his  confidence.  In 
Corinthians  it  is  because  God  was  faithful.  In  Gala- 
tians,  where  there  was  a  still  more  serious  trial,  the 
apostle  says  he  was  in  doubt  of  them,  till  he  thinks  of 
the  Lord;  and  then  he  has  his  heart  lit  up  with  a 
comforting  hope  that  they  were  Christians  after  all. 
People  that  were  practically  slighting  (little  as  they 
thought  or  intended  it,  yet  virtually  slighting)  Christ 


CHAPTER  I.  17 

for  worldly  elements — he  could  hardly  understand  how 
such  could  be  Christians.  To  turn  from  a  crucified 
and  risen  Christ  to  the  rites  of  an  earthly  religion  is 
worse  than  bare  earthliness,  destructive  as  this  is. 
Here  it  is  another  thing.  His  confidence  is  grounded 
not  merely  on  what  God  is  in  character  and  counsel, 
but  on  what  he  saw  of  Christ,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  in 
them.  Thinking  of  what  they  had  been  and  were  then, 
could  he  hesitate  to  recognize  the  evident  handiwork  of 
God  through  His  Son  ?  He  saw  such  an  unequivocal 
enjoyment  of  Christ,  and  such  an  identification  of 
interests  with  Him  upon  earth,  that  his  confidence  was 
not  only  in  a  general  way  that  he  would  see  them  with 
Christ  by  and  by,  but  in  the  solidity  of  the  work  of 
God  in  them  all  the  way  through.  He  who  had  begun 
in  them  a  good  work,  he  was  sure,  would  complete  it 
unto  (or,  against)  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  (Ver.  6.) 

"  Even  as  it  is  meet"  (or,  "just")  "for  me  to  think  thus 
of  you  all,  because  ye  have  me  in  your  heart."  (Ver.  7.) 
Such  is  the  version  given  in  the  margin,  which  here  pre- 
sents the  right  force  of  the  verse.  It  was  due  to  them, 
he  means,  not  merely  because  he  loved  them,  but  he  felt 
and  had  proof  that  they  had  him  in  their  hearts.  A 
blessed  bond  for  hearts  at  all  times,  is  the  name  of 
Christ  and  His  gospel.  How  continually,  too,  one 
finds  the  state  of  the  saints  accurately  measured,  and 
set  in  evidence  by  the  state  of  their  affections  toward 
any  one  that  is  identified  with  the  work  of  God  on  the 
earth  !     There  will  be  the  strongest  possible  attempt  of 


18  PHILTPPIANS. 

Satan  to  bring  in  alienation  of  feeling  and  a  turning 
of  the  saints  against  all  such,  whether  absent  or  pre- 
sent. It  was  so  in  the  days  of  the  Apostle  Paul:  those 
who  were  simply  cleaving  to  the  Lord  clave  to  him 
also.  It  was  the  very  reverse  of  a  mere  fleshly  feeling, 
which  was  sought  by  his  adversaries,  who,  flattering 
others,  were  flattered  in  turn.  Paul  was  perfectly  sen- 
sible that  the  more  abundantly  he  loved,  the  less  he 
was  loved,  and  what  a  handle  this  gave  to  Satan  to 
turn  away  the  saints  from  the  truth.  False  teachers 
and  men  who  may  be  really  converted,  but  whose  flesh 
is  little  judged,  and  whose  worldliness  is  great,  always 
seek  to  win  persons  as  a  party  round  themselves,  by 
sparing  the  flesh  and  humouring  the  natural  character, 
so  as  at  last  to  have  their  own  way  without  question. 
(2  Cor.  xi.  19,  20.)  The  apostle's  object  was  to  win  to 
Christ.  But  faithfulness  called  him  often  to  tread  on 
what  was  painful  to  one  and  another.  As  long  as  love 
flowed  freely  and  Christ  was  looked  to,  it  was  well ;  but 
when  mortified  feeling  wrought,  because  they  did  not 
mortify  their  members  on  the  earth,  the  tendency  was 
constantly  toward  making  parties,  divisions,  offences,  the 
forerunners  of  yet  worse  evil.  But  if  the  apostle  was 
one  who  scorned  such  a  thought  as  gathering  a  party 
round  himself,  these  saints  had  him  in  their  hearts. 

He  valued  this  love.  How  was  it  shown  ?  "  Inasmuch 
as  both  in  my  bonds,  and  in  the  defence  and  confirma- 
tion of  the  gospel,  ye  are  all  partakers  of  my  grace." 
They  were  casting  themselves,  heart  and  soul,  into  the 


CHAPTER  I.  19 

activities  and  sufferings  of  the  grace  of  God  in  the 
apostle.  Did  his  bonds  malie  them  ashamed  or  sus- 
picious ?  To  have  a  friend  in  gaol  never  was  of  good 
report.  Did  they  begin  to  say  in  themselves,  he  must 
have  been  doing  something  wrong  because  he  was  a 
prisoner?  On  the  contrary,  seeing  that  the  Apostle 
Paul  had  come  into  the  deepest  suffering,  they  looked 
upon  it  as  the  highest  honour.  If  he  had  gone  up  to 
Jerusalem,  it  was  not  to  spare  himself;  and  though 
this  visit  may  have  been  a  mistake,  certainly  it  was  one 
of  which  no  person  ought  to  speak  lightly.  It  was  a 
thorough  self-sacrifice  every  step  of  the  way.  The 
apostle,  though  he  was  now,  as  a  consequence,  a  prisoner 
in  Rome,  never  yields  to  a  spirit  of  regret,  still  less  of 
repining,  but  regards  all  in  the  good  hand  of  God  as 
furthering  the  cause  of  Christ.  Did  not,  for  example, 
his  own  bonds  turn  to  the  praise  of  God?  There  he 
was  perfectly  happy,  perhaps  never  so  happy  as  thus 
bound.  The  Philippian  saints  understood  what  it  was 
to  draw  from  the  divine  spring;  and  consequently  their 
hearts  were  with  him  in  joy  as  well  as  sympathy.  Did 
it  weaken  the  apostle's  love  for  them  personally  ?  "  God 
is  my  record  how  greatly  I  long  after  you  all  in  the 
bowels  of  Jesus  Christ."  (Ver.  8.)  Happiness  as  the 
Lord's  prisoner  dulled  none  of  his  warmest  feelings  of 
love  toward  them. 

But  besides  all  this,  his  love  for  them  made  him 
intensely  solicitous  about  their  real  wants,  and  he 
turns  to  the  Lord  for  them  accordingly.     "  And  this  I 


20  PHILIPPIAN8. 

pray,  tliat  your  love  may  abound  yet  more  and  more,  in 
knowledge  and  all  judgment."  (Ver.  9.)  He  wished  that 
they  should  love  (not  less,  but)  with  a  fuller  knowledge 
and  an  exercised  intelligence.  Love,  or  charity,  is  the 
basis,  else  there  would  be  no  building  up:  this  being 
laid  and  abounding,  full  knowledge,  instead  of  puffing 
up,  guides  and  guards.  The  more  the  intelligence  is, 
if  it  be  real  and  spiritual,  the  greater  the  desire  to 
grow  in  it.  Those  who  do  not  see  anything  in  Scripture 
as  an  object  for  constant  search,  and  grow^th,  and  desire 
after  more,  are  those,  it  is  to  be  feared,  who  see  scarce 
anything  in  it  that  is  divine.  Directly  it  is  discerned 
that  there  is  infinite  light  in  it,  desire  to  know  more 
and  more  is  a  necessary  consequence.  But  it  is  for 
practice.  And  this  Epistle  shows  us  spiritual  progress 
in  the  apostle  and  in  the  saints  more  fully  than  any 
other,  while  it  is  the  Epistle  that  shows  us  the  strongest 
desire  after  going  on.  This  is  what  we  know  from  expe- 
rience. Whenever  we  begin  to  be  satisfied  with  what 
we  have  got>  there  is  an  end  of  progress ;  but  when  we 
make  a  little  real  advance,  we  want  to  make  more. 
Such  was  the  case  with  these  saints,  who  are  prayed  for 
therefore,  "  That  ye  may  approve  things  that  are  ex- 
cellent," &c.  They  needed  to  grow  in  intelligence,  in 
order  that  they  might  be  able  to  judge  of  things, 
and  so  lay  hold  of  what  was  more  excellent. 

"  That  ye  may  be  sincere  and  without  offence  till 
the  day  of  Christ."  (Ver.  10.)  Wonderful  thought !  The 
apostle  actually  prays  for  these  believers  as  if  he  con- 


CHAPTER  I.  21 

ceived  it  possil)le  that,  growing  n  love  and  intelligence, 
they  might  walk  the  path  of  faith  till  the  day  of 
Christ  without  a  single  false  step:  Paul's  marvel, 
perhaps,  would  have  been  that  we  should  count 
it  wonderful.  Alas !  we  know  we  fail  day  by  day 
because  we  are  unspiritual.  Why  do  we  let  out  a  vain 
word  or  show  a  wrong  feeling  ?  Because  we  are  not 
realizing  the  presence  and  the  grace  of  God.  No  pro- 
gress in  the  things  of  God  will  ever  keep  a  person — 
nothing  but  actual  nearness  to  Him  and  dependence  on 
Him.  What  is  a  Christian,  and  what  the  condition 
and  experience  which  Scripture  recognizes  for  him  here 
below  ?  He  is  by  grace  brought,  in  virtue  of  Christ's 
blood,  into  the  presence  of  God ;  who  has  a  power  within 
him,  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  a  power  without  him  to  lean 
upon,  even  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  this  uninter- 
ruptedly and  always.  Such  is  the  theory :  but  what  is 
the  practice?  As  far  as  it  is  realised,  the  path  is 
without  a  single  stumble.  And  let  us  remember  that 
such  is  the  only  sanctioned  path  for  all  saints.  It  be- 
longs not  of  right  to  some  advanced  souls.  It  is  what 
every  Christian  has  to  desire.  We  can,  therefore, 
readily  understand  how  souls,  hearing  such  thoughts  as 
these,  should  embrace  the  idea  of  a  state  of  perfection. 
But  though  the  scheme  is  erroneous  and  utterly  short 
of  our  true  standard  in  the  second  Man,  the  last  Adam, 
a  Christian  ought  never  contentedly  to  settle  down  in 
the  thought  that  he  must  fail  and  sin  day  by  day. 
What  is  this  but  calm  acquiescence  with  dishonouring 


22  PHILIPPIANS. 

Christ  ?  If  we  do  fail,  let  us,  at  least,  always  say,  It 
was  our  own  fault,  our  own  unwatchfulness,  through 
not  making  use  of  the  grace  and  strength  we  have  in 
Christ.  The  treasure  there  is  open  for  us,  and  we 
have  only  to  draw  upon  it,  and  the  effect  is  a  staid, 
calm,  spiritual  progress,  the  flesh  judged,  the  heart 
overflowing  with  happiness  in  Christ,  the  path  without 
a  stumble  till  the  day  of  Christ. 

More  than  this,  let  it  be  remarked,  he  prays  that 
they  might  be  filled  with  the  fruit  of  righteousness, 
not  merely  such  and  such  righteous  acts  in  detail,  but 
the  blessed  product  of  righteousness  by  Jesus  Christ 
unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God.  (Ver.  11.)  There 
is  no  thought  of,  nor  room  for,  imposing  the  law  here, 
which  is  rather  shut  out  from  being  the  proper  standard 
for  the  Christian.  There  is  another,  who  is  both  our 
new  object  and  our  rule,  even  Christ  Himself,  the  image 
of  God,  the  life  and  power  of  fruit-bearing  for  the  be- 
liever.   What  a  rule  for  our  practical,  every-day  walk ! 

From  the  introduction,  which  bears  ample  witness  of 
the  apostle's  love  in  the  Spirit  to  the  Philippian  saints* 
of  his  confidence  in  them  and  his  earnest  desire  for  them' 
we  enter  on  the  first  great  topic  on  which  he  writes — 
his  own  condition  at  Rome.  He  felt  that  it  was  need- 
ful to  lay  it  before  them  in  the  light  of  the  Lord,  not 
merely  because  of  their  afl'ectionate  solicitude,  not  only 
again  because  of  evil  workers,  who  would  gladly  make 
it  a  handle  against  himself  and  his  ministry ;  but  chiefly 


CHAPTER  I.  23 

with  the  holy  and  loving  end  of  turning  it  to  their 
profit  and  even  their  establishment  in  the  truth  and 
diligence  in  the  work  and  singleness  of  purpose  in 
cleaving  to  the  Lord. 

Indeed  the  apostle  had  every  ground  to  expect  a 
blessing  through  that  which  Satan  was  perverting  to 
injure  souls.  It  had  already  issued  in  good  fruit  as 
regarded  the  work  of  the  gospel ;  and  he  looks  for  just 
as  good  fruit  as  to  all  that  concerned  himself  either  in 
the  present  or  in  the  future,  whether  by  life  or  by 
death.  Such  is  the  confidence  and  joy  of  faith.  It 
overcomes  the  world ;  it  realizes  Christ's  victory  over 
the  enemy.  What  can  man,  what  can  Satan,  do  with 
one  who  is  careful  about  nothing,  but  in  everything 
gives  thanks?  What  can  either  avail  to  disconcert  one 
whose  comfort  is  in  God  and  who  interprets  all  circum- 
stances by  His  love,  with  unshaken  reliance  on  His 
wisdom  and  goodness? 

Such  an  one  was  the  apostle,  who  now  proceeds  to 
turn  for  the  salvation  of  the  saints  at  Philippi,  so  ten- 
derly loved,  what  the  malice  of  Satan  and  of  his  instru- 
ments would  be  sure  to  catch  at  greedily  as  a  means  of 
alarming  some  and  stumbling  others,  as  if  God,  too, 
cared  not  for  His  Church  or  His  servant.  It  is  ex- 
perience we  have  unfolded  rather  than  doctrine ;  it  is 
the  rich,  and  mellow,  and  mature  fruit  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  apostle's  own  heart  as  he  expounds  to  them  the 
facts  of  his  own  daily  life  according  to  God.  What  a 
privilege  to  hear !  and  how  sweet  to  know  that  it  was 


24  PHILIPPIANS. 

not  written  merely,  nor  so  much,  to  inform  ns  of  him  as 
to  conform  the  saints  practically  to  Christ  thereby! 
Blessedly  as  the  lesson  was  learnt  in  the  bonds  that  lay 
upon  St.  Paul,  for  our  sakes,  no  doubt,  it  has  been 
written.  Therefore  was  the  apostle  inspired.  Inspiration, 
however,  does  not  exclude  the  heart's  holy  feelings. 
. "  But  I  wish  you  to  know,  brethren,  that  my  condition 
(literally,  what  concerns  me)  has  turned  out  rather  (i.e., 
rather  than  otherwise)  unto  the  furtherance  of  the 
gospel ;  so  thatmy  bonds  have  become  manifest  in  Christ 
in  the  whole  pretorium  and  to  all  the  rest."  (Ver.  12, 13.) 
The  devil  had  hoped  to  merge  the  apostle  in  the  com- 
mon crowd  of  criminals;  but  God,  ever  watchful  for 
good,  made  it  plain  that  His  servant  was  a  prisoner 
for  no  moral  offence,  but  because  of  Christ.  Thus  the 
enemy's  cunning  device  had  ended  in  a  testimony  for 
the  Saviour,  and  the  gospel  penetrated  where  before  it 
was  wholly  unknown.  His  bonds  were  manifestly  in 
Christ's  cause.  The  grace  of  Christ  was  made  known, 
and  His  servant  was  vindicated. 

But  this  was  not  all.  For  as  the  apostle  tells  them 
further,  "  Most  of  the  brethren  in  the  Lord,  having 
confidence  in  my  bonds,  dare  more  abundantly  to  speak 
the  word  without  fear."  (Ver.  14.)  Here  was  another 
step  in  the  blessing,  and  of  rich  promise  too.  How 
unexpected  of  the  enemy !  He,  however,  was  on  the 
alert,  and  if  he  could  not  silence  the  tongues  that  bore 
their  testimony  to  the  Saviour,  would  not  fail  to  bring 
in  mixed  motives  and  tempt  some  to  an  unhallowed 


CHAPTER  I.  25 

spirit  and  aim,  even  in  a  work  so  holy.  It  was  not  un- 
discerned  of  the  apostle;  neither  did  it  disturb  in  the 
least  his  triumphant  assurance  that  all  things  were 
working  together  for  good,  not  only  to  them  that  love 
God  but  to  the  advance  of  the  glad  tidings  of  His  grace ; 
so  that  this  too  he  does  not  hide  in  sorrow  or  shame 
but  cheerfully  explains.  "  Some  indeed  also  on  account 
of  envy  and  strife,  but  some  also  on  account  of  good- 
will, preach  the  Christ ;  these  indeed  out  of  love,  know- 
ing that  I  am  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel ;  but 
those  out  of  contention,  proclaim  the  Christ,  not 
purely,  supposing  to  stir  up  tribulation  for  my  bonds." 
(Ver.  15—17). 

The  truth  is  that  the  apostle  was  then  and  there  in 
the  happiest  enjoyment  of  that  truth,  which,  not  so  long 
before,  he  had  held  before  the  saints  at  Rome.  He  was 
glorying  in  tribulations  by  the  way,  as  well  as  in  the 
hope  of  God's  glory  at  the  end ;  and  not  only  so,  but 
glorying  in  (roc?  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (Rom.  v. 
1,  2,  11.)  His  bonds  but  proved  how  entirely  the 
liberty  of  grace  is  independent  of  all  that  man  or  Satan 
can  rage  against  him  who  stands  fast  in  it  and  has 
Him  before  his  heart  by  whom  alone  it  came  and  could 
be  given.  There  was  no  blindness  to  the  feelings  of 
some  whose  zeal  in  no  way  concealed  their  malevolent 
desires;  but  nothing  weakened  the  spring  of  his  joy  in 
God  nor  his  thankful  perception  that,  whatever  man 
meant,  the  testimony  of  grace  was  going  out  widely  and 
energetically,  and  Christ  was  held  up  and  exalted  more 


26  PHILIPPIANS. 

and  more.  For  it  was  no  question  liere  of  doctrine ; 
there  is  no  ground  to  think  that  even  the  contentious  men 
did  not  preach  soundly.  It  was  the  good  God  intended 
that  occupied  Paul's  thoughts,  whatever  might  be  in 
theirs.  Hence  he  breaks  forth  in  that  blessed  expres- 
sion of  an  unselfish,  full  heart,  "  What  then  ?  Not- 
withstanding in  every  way,  whether  in  pretext  or  in 
truth,  Christ  is  proclaimed,  and  in  this  I  rejoice,  yea 
and  will  rejoice."  (Ver.  18.)  How  happy  is  the  simpli- 
city, how  deep  the  wisdom  of  faith,  which  thus  sees  in 
everything,  even  where  flesh  intrudes  into  the  Lord's 
work,  the  defeat  of  Satan  !  What  a  present  blessing  to 
his  soul  who,  thus  delivered  from  self-confidence  on  the 
one  hand  and  from  anxiety  on  the  other,  sees  the  sure, 
steady,  onward  working  of  God  for  the  glory  of  Christ, 
even  as  by  and  by  when  Christ  is  displayed  in  His 
kingdom,  all  will  be  ordered  to  the  glory  of  God  the 
Father !  (Chap,  ii.)  Hence  in  the  consciousness  of  the 
progress  of  gospel  testimony  and  his  own  blessing 
through  all  that  to  which  his  imprisonment  had  given 
occasion,  the  apostle  can  say,  "  I  know  that  this  will 
turn  to  my  salvation  through  your  supplication  and  the 
supply  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ;  according  to  my 
earnest  expectation,  and  hope  that  in  nothing  I  shall  be 
ashamed,  but,  in  all  boldness,  as  always,  now  also  Christ 
shall  be  magnified  in  my  body,  whether  by  life  or  by 
death."  (Ver.  19,  20.)  Imprisoned,  he  could  not  separate 
himself  from  the  mighty  conflict  which  was  on  foot  in 
the  world ;  he  knew  victory  assured,  however  hotly  the 


CHAPTER  I.  27 

enemy  might  contest.  Salvation  here  means  the  final 
defeat  of  the  enemy,  and  so  it  is  throughout  our  epistle, 
never  a  past  thing  as  in  Ephesians  ii.  and  2  Timothy  i.  9, 
but  always  future,  as  in  chapters  ii.,  iii.,  manifestly.  In 
Philippians,  as  in  Hebrews,  &c.,  it  is  the  full  deliverance 
at  the  close.  Both  views  are  true,  and  each  has  its 
own  importance. 

We  have  seen  the  expectation  and  hope  of  the  apostle 
that  in  nothing  he  should  be  ashamed  but  in  all  bold- 
ness, as  always,  now  also  Christ  should  be  magnified  in 
his  body  whether  by  life  or  by  death.  His  eye  was 
thus  on  Christ,  not  for  the  beginning  and  the  end  only, 
but  all  the  way.  In  the  next  verse,  21,  he  proceeds  to 
vindicate  the  confidence  of  his  heart.  For,  says  he, 
"  to  me  to  live  is  Christ  and  to  die  is  gain."  To  be 
spiritually -minded,  the  apostle  tells  us  elsewhere,  is  life 
and  peace.  Here  speaking  of  his  own  daily  practice  he 
shows  he  had  but  one  aim,  motive,  object  and  business 
— Christ.  And  this  was  said,  not  at  the  start  of  his 
career,  in  the  overwhelming  sense  of  the  Saviour's  grace 
to  His  proud  and  self-righteous  persecutor,  but  after 
long  years  of  unequalled  toil,  peril,  affliction  without 
and  sorrows  within  the  Church.  **  To  me  to  live  is 
Christ."  No  doubt,  the  principle  was  true  frem  the 
beginning  of  his  eventful  life  as  a  Christian.  Still  as 
little  do  I  doubt  that  it  was  emphatically  and  more 
than  ever  verified  at  the  very  time  he  was  writing,  a 
prisoner  in  the  imperial  city. 

It  is  remarkable  to  what  debates  and  diflScuIties  the 


38  PHILIPPIANS. 

verse  has  given  occasion,  thougli  the  language  is  plain, 
the  construction  unambiguous,  and  the  sense  as  weighty 
as  it  is  clear.  "  Interpreters  (says  a  famous  man)  have 
hitherto,  in  my  opinion,  given  a  wrong  rendering  and 
exposition  to  this  passage  ;  for  they  make  this  dis- 
tinction, that  Christ  was  life  to  Paul  and  death  was 
gain."  Certainly  this  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  who  gave  the  apostle  to  say  that  to  him  to  live 
(i.e.,  here  below)  is  Christ  and  to  die  gain.  That 
Christ  was  his  life  is  most  true,  and  the  doctrine  of 
Galatians  and  Colossians  in  passages  full  of  beauty  and 
interest,  (See  Gal.  ii..  Col.  iii.)  But  here  it  is  no 
question  of  doctrine,  standing,  or  life  in  Christ.  The 
whole  matter  is  the  character  of  his  living  day  by  day, 
and  this  he  declares  is  "  Christ,"  even  as  the  ceasing  to 
live  or  to  die,  he  says,  would  be  "  gain."  And  what 
does  this  writer  substitute?  "  I,  on  the  other  hand, 
make  Christ  the  subject  of  discourse  in  both  clauses,  so 
that  He  is  declared  to  be  gain  to  him  both  in  life  and 
in  death ;  for  it  is  customary  with  the  Greeks  to  leave 
the  word  tt/jo?  to  be  understood.  Besides  that  this 
meaning  is  less  forced,  it  also  corresponds  better  with 
the  foregoing  statement,  and  contains  more  complete 
doctrine.  He  declares  that  it  is  indifferent  to  him 
whether  he  lives  or  dies,  because,  having  Christ,  he 
reckons  both  to  be  gain."  So  Calvin,  followed  by  Beza, 
who  adds  that  "  Christ"  is  the  subject  of  both  mem- 
bers and  "  gain"  the  predicate,  and  that  the  ellipse  of 
Kaid  is  not  only  tolerable  but  an  Atticism !    The  reader 


CHAPTER  I.  29 

may  rest  assured  that  a  more  vicious  and  violent 
rendering  has  rarely  been  offered.  The  truth  is  that 
"  to  live"  is  the  subject,  "  Christ"  the  predicate  of  the 
first  proposition,  "  to  die"  is  the  subject,  "  gain"  the 
predicate  of  the  second,  as  in  the  authorised  version.* 
The  real  force  is  lost  by  this  strange  dislocation  of  the 
French  reformers,  and  the  true  connection  is  broken. 

"  For  me  to  live  is  Christ  and  to  die  gain;  but  if  to 
live  in  flesh  [is  before  me],  this  to  me  is  worth  while; 
and  what  I  shall  choose,  I  know  not,  but  I  am  pressed 
by  the  two,  having  the  desire  for  departing  and  being 
with  Christ,  for  it  is  very  far  better,  but  to  continue  in 
the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you.  And  having  con- 
fidence of  this,  I  know  that  I  shall  remain  and  continue 
with  you  all  for  your  progress  and  joy  in  your  faith, 
that  your  boast  may  abound  in  Christ  Jesus  through  me 
by  my  presence  again  with  you."  (Ver.  21 — 26.)  Thus 
the  apostle  compares  his  continuance  in  life  with 
dying ;  the  former  were  to  him  worth  while,  and 
what  to  choose  he  could  not  say.  Thus  there  was 
perplexity  from  the  two  things ;  for  he  certainly 
had  the  desire  to  slip  all  that  anchored  him  here  and 
to  be  with  Christ ;  whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  he  felt 
that  his  abiding  here  would  be  more  necessary  on  ac- 
count of  the  saints.  This  is  no  sooner  fairly  before 
him  than  all  is  clear.    There  is  no  more  pressure  from 

*  So  tho  Vulgate  rendering,  ("  Mini  enim  vivere  Christus  est,  et 
mori  lucrum,")  is  correct,  whereas  that  of  Beza  is  as  false  as  his 
comment  ("  Mihi  enim  est  Christus  et  in  vita  et  in  morte  lucrum"). 


30  PHILIPPIANS. 

two  sides.  He  is  confident;  he  knows  he  will  remain 
and  stay  with  them  all  for  their  progress  and  joy  in 
their  faith.  How  sweet  and  disinterested  is  the  love 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  to  the  heart  that  is  centred 
on  Christ!  Their  spiritual  interest  turns  the  scale, 
whatever  his  personal  desire. 

Sure  I  am  that  we  have  most  of  us  lost  much  by 
failing  to  realise  that  to  us  too  this  path  is  open,  and 
that  it  is  the  will  of  our  God  concerning  us.  Too  little 
are  any  of  us  conscious  of  the  weakening,  darkening, 
deadening  effect  on  our  spiritual  experience  of  allowing 
any  object  or  desire  but  Christ.  How  often,  for  in- 
stance, it  seems  to  be  taken  for  granted  that  a  biief 
season  after  conversion  is  not  only  the  due  time  for  first 
love,  but  the  only  time  when  it  is  to  be  expected  !  In 
what  bright  contrast  with  all  such  thoughts  stands  the 
record  we  have  read  of  the  blessed  apostle's  experience ! 
Was  it  not  meant  for  the  Philippians?  Is  it  not 
also  for  us?  God  never  intimates  in  His  word  that 
the  saint  must  droop  after  conversion ;  that  love,  zeal, 
simplicity  of  faith  must  become  increasingly  poorer  and 
weaker.  There  are  dangers  no  doubt;  but  early  days 
have  theirs  as  well  as  later;  and  much  passes  muster  at 
first  through  lack  of  spirituality.  Where  there  is  full 
purpose  of  heart  in  cleaving  to  the  Lord,  He  gives,  on 
the  contrary,  a  deepening  acquaintance  wdth  Himself. 
It  is  not,  To  me  to  live  is  for  the  gospel  or  even  the 
Church,  but,  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christy  To  have  Him 
as  the  one-absorbing,  governing  motive  of  the  life,  day 


CHAPTER  I.  31 

by  day,  is  the  strength,  as  well  as  test,  of  all  that  is  of 
God;  it  gives,  as  nothing  else  can  give,  everything  its 
divine  place  and  proportion.  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ" 
seems  to  me  much  more  than  to  say,  "  To  die  is  gain." 
For  this  is  true  of  many  a  saint's  experience,  who  could 
hardly  say  that.  Yet  there  is  not  a  clause  more 
characteristic;  it  is  the  very  pith  of  our  epistle. 
Christian  experience  is  the  point.  In  Philippians,  above 
all  others,  it  is  the  development  of  the  great  problem, 
how  we  are  to  live  Christ.  As  for  Paul,  it  was  the  one 
thing  he  did;  and  so  death,  which  naturally  threatens 
the  loss  of  this  and  that  and  all  things,  he,  on  the 
contrary,  realized  to  be  gain.  This  is  the  truth,  and 
he  enjoyed  it. 

For  years  the  apostle,  a  prisoner,  had  death  before 
him  as  a  not  improbable  contingency.  Yet  assuredly 
his  eye  is  only  the  brighter,  his  strength  not  abated,  but 
grown,  his  exercised  acquaintance  with  God,  His  will 
and  ways,  larger  than  ever.  Hence,  instead  of  his 
thinking  it  was  a  question  for  the  emperor  to  determine, 
he  sees,  feels,  and  speaks  as  if  God  had  put  it  all  into 
his  own  hands :  just  as  in  another  chapter  he  says,  "  I 
can  do  all  things  through  Christ  (or  Him)  who 
strengthens  me."  Here  you  have  him  sitting  in  judg- 
ment on  the  point  whether  he  is  to  live  or  die.  He 
drops  Ciesar  altogether  and  views  it  as  if  God  were 
asking  His  servant  whether  he  was  going  to  live  or 
die?  His  answer  is  that  it  would  be  much  better  for 
himself  to  die,  but  that  for  the  sake  of  the  Church  it 


32  PHILIPPIANS. 

would  be  expedient  for  him  to  live  somewhat  longer. 
Thus  the  decision  of  the  question  is  eminently  Christ- 
like, against  his  own  strong  desire,  because  his  eye  was 
single  and  he  sacrificed  self  for  the  good  of  the  Church. 
Accordingly  he  concludes,  with  wonderful  faith  and  un- 
selfishness, that  he  is  going  to  live.  "  I  am  in  a  strait 
between  the  two,  having  the  desire  for  departing  and 
being  with  Christ,  which  is  very  far  better :  nevertheless 
to  continue  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you."  In- 
asmuch as  in  his  heart  Christ  thus  predominated,  who 
certainly  was  not  balancing  questions  about  His  own 
gain,  but  other  people's  good ;  so  Paul,  therefore, 
thinks  of  and  in  His  mind  and  says,  "  Having  this 
confidence,  I  know  that  I  shall  abide  and  continue  with 
you  all  for  your  furtherance  and  joy  of  faith :  that  your 
boast  may  be  more  abundant  in  Jesus  Christ  through 
me  by  my  presence  with  you  again."  I  do  not  know  a 
more  astonishing  and  instructive  proof  of  the  power  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  in  giving  a  man  fellowship  practi- 
cally with  God.  The  flesh  being  broken  and  judged  in 
him,  he  could  enter  into  the  mind  and  feelings  of 
God,  and  Christ's  heart  about  the  Church.  Was  it 
really  desirable  for  the  Church  that  Paul  should  abide? 
Then,  without  hesitation  and  without  fleshly  feeling,  he 
can  say,  Paul  will  abide.  Thus  he  settles  the  matter 
and  speaks  calmly  and  confidently  of  seeing  them  again. 
Yet  is  it  a  man  in  prison,  exposed  to  the  most  reckless 
of  Roman  emperors,  who  thinks,  decides,  says  all  this ! 
At  the  same  time  he  adds,  "  Only  let  your  conver- 


CHAPTER  I.  33 

sation  be  as  it  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ;  that 
whether  I  come  and  see  you,  or  else  be  absent,  I  may 
hear  of  your  affairs,  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one  spirit, 
with  one  mind,  striving  together  for  (or  rather  with) 
the  faith  of  the  gospel."  His  heart's  desire,  when  he 
came  and  saw  them  again,  was  to  see  them  all  unitedly 
happy,  and  not  only  this  flowing  in  of  Christ,  but  such 
a  flowing  out  of  Him  that  their  hearts  should  be  free 
to  spread  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel  everywhere. 

Next,  he  wished  to  hear  that  they  were  frightened 
in  nothing  by  the  adversaries,  which  is  to  them  a  proof 
of  destruction,  but  "  of  your  salvation,  and  this  from 
God,  because  unto  you  it  is  given,  in  the  behalf  of 
Christ,  not  only  to  believe  on  him,  but  also  to  suffer 
for  his  sake."  From  this  Scripture  it  is  evidently  of 
great  moment  spiritually  that  we  should  keep  up  in 
our  souls  good  courage  in  face  of  the  foe  and  confidence 
in  God,  not  only  for  our  own  sake  but  for  others. 
There  is  no  testimony  more  gracious,  nor  more  solemn 
to  our  adversaries.  But  how  blessed  to  know  that 
the  day  comes  when,  if  we  are  walking  with  God,  every 
opposer,  no  matter  how  proud,  will  disappear;  when  all 
the  malice,  and  wiles,  and  power  that  can  be  brought 
to  put  the  saints  down  will  only  elicit  the  power  of 
God  in  their  favour!  Faith  knows  all  the  power  of 
God  is  its  own  before  that  day  comes.  It  is  of  the 
greatest  importance  that  we  should  cherish  calm,  and 
lowly,  and  patient  confidence  in  God,  and  that  the  heart 
should  rest  in  His  love ;  but  this  can  never  be,  unless 

D 


34  PHILIPPIANS. 

there  be  present  subjection  to  Christ  and  enjoyment  of 
what  He  is  towards  our  souls.  To  their  adversaries  this 
boldness  was  a  demonstration  of  perdition,  as  well  as  of 
their  own  final  triumph  over  all  that  Satan  could  aim 
at  their  hurt.  God  intended  this  ;  because  it  was 
given  them  in  behalf  of  Christ,  not  only  to  believe  on 
Him,  but  also  to  suffer  for  His  sake.  Paul,  who  was 
suffering  for  Christ's  sake  at  that  very  moment,  was 
thoroughly  happy  in  it,  and  commends  the  place  to 
them.  It  was  a  good  gift  of  grace:  he  could  say,  "  The 
lines  are  fallen  unto  me  in  pleasant  places,"  though  he 
was  a  prisoner.  They  had  the  same  conflict  as  they 
saw  in  him  when  a  prisoner  at  Philippi  and  now  heard 
of  in  Rome.  May  our  own  souls  prize  this  blessed 
place,  if  the  Lord  vouchsafe  it  in  any  measure  to  us  1 


>>©4c 


CHAPTER  II. 

We  saw,  in  chapter  i.,  how  refreshing  to  the  apostle 
was  the  state  of  the  Philippians,  looked  at  as  a  whole; 
for,  undoubtedly,  there  was  that  which  needed  correc- 
tion in  particular  cases.  Still  their  practical  condition, 
and  more  especially  as  shown  in  the  fellowship  of  the 
gospel,  drew  out  powerfully  his  affections  to  them,  as 
indeed   their   own   were   drawn   out.     Now  this  very 


CHAPTER  IT.  35 

fellowship  bore  witness  to  the  healthful  and  fervent 
state  of  their  souls  towards  the  Lord,  His  workmen 
and  His  work.  For  fellowship  with  the  gospel  is  a 
great  deal  more  than  merely  helping  on  the  conversion 
of  souls.  Babes  that  are  just  born  to  God,  souls  that 
have  made  ever  so  little  progress  in  the  truth,  are  ca- 
pable of  feeling  strong  sympathy  with  the  calling  in 
of  the  lost,  with  the  glad  tidings  flowing  out  to  souls, 
with  the  joy  of  newly  quickened  and  pardoned  souls 
brought  to  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  But  there  was 
much  more  implied  in  the  Philippians'  "  fellowship  with 
the  gospel."  It  is  plain  that  the  bent  and  strength  of 
their  whole  life  was  that  of  persons  who  thoroughly 
identified  themselves  with  its  conflicts  and  sorrows  as 
well  as  its  joys.  There  was  nothing  in  them  so  to 
arrest  and  occupy  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  they  could 
not  be  in  the  very  same  current  with  Himself,  in  the 
magnifying  of  Christ  and  the  blessing  of  souls. 

And  thus  it  was  that  they  were  privileged  to  have 
fellowship  with  the  apostle  himself.  "  If  there  be 
therefore  any  consolation  in  Christ,  if  any  comfort  of 
love,  if  any  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  if  any  bowels  and 
mercies,  fulfil  ye  my  joy,  that  ye  be  like-minded,  having  ; 
the  same  love,  being  of  one  accord,  of  one  mind."  All  I 
these  things  had  been  in  action,  and  the  apostle  viewed 
each  little  offering  to  him,  while  he  was  in  prison  for 
the  gospel's  sake,  in  the  light  of  Christ's  holy,  spiritual 
affections  which  had  dictated  it.  In  the  case  of  the 
Philippians,  it  would  appear  that  it  was  not  merely  the 


36  PHILIPPIANS. 

way  in  which  the  grace  of  God  values  the  service  of 
the  saints.  He  interpreted  it,  not  according  to  the 
thoughts  of  the  saints,  but  according  to  His  own,  see- 
ing, therefore,  far  deeper  value  in  it  than  the  human 
spirit  had  which  had  been  led  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
the  service. 

Take,  for  instance,  Mary  in  the  gospels,  and  the 
way  in  w^hich  the  blessed  Saviour  viewed  her  act  of 
devotedness  in  spending  upon  His  person  the  box  of' 
precious  ointment  which  she  had  reserved  for  that  time. 
Where  there  is  singleness  of  eye,  there  is  One  guiding 
the  saints  though  they  may  not  know  it  distinctly. 
There  is  no  ground  to  suppose  Mary  distinctly  appre- 
hended that  she  was  anointing  the  Lord  for  His  burial ; 
but  His  divine  grace  gave  it  that  value.  The  love  that 
was  in  her  heart  felt  instinctively  that  some  awful 
danger  threatened  Him ;  that  a  heavy  dark  cloud  was 
gathering  over  Him,  which  others  feebly,  if  at  all,  en- 
tered into.  In  truths  God  was  in  this  intuition  of 
divine  affection.  But  you  may  see  something,  perhaps, 
analogous  in  the  providential  care  which  God  by  times 
exercises;  and  there  is  «ven  more  than  providence  in 
the  care  of  a  christian  parent  with  a  child.  There  is  a 
feeling  of  undefined  but  real  uneasiness — the  Spirit  of 
God  giving  a  certain  consciousness  of  peril — and  this 
often  calls  forth  the  affection  of  the  parents  to  the 
child  in  such  sort  as  to  avert  the  imminent  danger  or 
alleviate  the  suffering  in  the  highest  degree.  In  a  still 
higher  sense  this  was  true  in  the  dealings  of    God 


CHAPTER  II.  "  37 

with  Mary.  Alas !  little  indeed  were  tlie  disciples  in 
the  secret,  though  they  ought  to  have  known  what  was 
impending  more  than  any  others,  had  it  been  a  question 
of  familiar  intercourse  and  knowledge.  Certainly  they 
had  larger  opportunities  than  ever  Mary  enjoyed ;  but 
it  is  far  from  being  such  knowledge  that  gives  the 
deepest  insight — far  from  being  earthly  circumstances 
that  account  for  the  insight  of  love.  There  is  a  cause 
which  lies  deeper  still — the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
acting  in  a  simple,  upright,  loving  heart,  that  feels 
intensely  for  the  object  of  its  reverence,  for  Christ 
Himself.  If  our  eye  is  to  our  Lord,  we  may  be  sure 
that  He  will  work  with  and  in  us  as  well  as  for  us. 
He  will  not  fail  to  give  us  the  opportunity  for  serving 
Him  in  the  most  fitting  manner  and  at  the  right  mo- 
ment. Mary  had  this  box  we  know  not  how  long;  but 
there  was  One  who  loved  Mary,  and  who  wished  to 
vouchsafe  her  the  desired  privilege  of  showing  her  love 
to  His  Son.  He  it  was  who  led  Mary  (despised  as 
indifferent  by  her  believing  but  bustling  sister)  at  this 
very  time  to  bring  out  her  love.  Thus,  besides  ordinary 
intelligent  guidance,  there  may  be  guidance  under  the 
skilful  hands  of  Him  who  cares  for  us,  and  now  acts 
yet  more  intimately  by  His  Spirit  dwelling  in  us. 

In  the  case  of  the  Philippians  there  was  the  con- 
scious fellowship  of  the  Spirit;  there  was  remarkable 
devotedness  and  spirituality  among  tliem,  so  that  God 
could  put  particular  honour  upon  them.  In  this  respect 
they  are  in  striking  contrast  not  only  with  the  Gala- 


38  PHILIPPIANS. 

tians  but  the  Corinthians  also.  Not  but  these  too  were 
born  of  God ;  there  was  no  difference  in  this.  We  are 
expressly  told  the  Corinthians  were  called  into  the 
fellowship  of  the  Son  of  God ;  such  they  were  as  truly 
as  the  Philippians  were.  It  is  of  them  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  says,  "  God  is  faithful  by  whom  ye  were  called 
unto  the  fellowship  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 
But  there  was  a  mighty  difference  here.  There  was 
not  the  same  fellowship  with  the  gospel  among  the 
Corinthians,  and  therefore  it  may  be  that  the  apostle 
desires  that  they  might  have  "  the  communion  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  (2  Cor.  xiii.  14.)  Assuredly  till  then  it 
had  been  enjoyed  by  them  scantily.  (Comp.  1  Cor.  iii., 
iv.,  &c.)  But  in  looking  at  the  Philippians  he  could 
say,  "  If  there  be  therefore  any  consolation  [or  rather 
encouragement]  in  Christ,  if  any  comfort  of  love,  if 
any  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,"  &c.  There  was  all  this 
practical  display  of  Christ  so  fully  at  work  among 
them  ;  such  tenderness  in  their  spirit,  such  entering 
into  the  mind  of  God  touching  the  mighty  conflict  in 
which  the  apostle  was  engaged,  that  they  identified 
themselves  heart  and  soul  with  the  apostle.  He  says^ 
therefore.  If  there  be  all  this  (which  he  doubted  nov 
but  assumed),  "  fulfil  ye  my  joy  that  ye  be  likeminded. 
having  the  same  love,  being  of  one  accord,  of  one  mind.'* 
Here  was  their  failure :  they  were  not  sufficiently  of  ont 
mind;  nor  were  they  cherishing,  as  they  should,  the 
same  love.  Hence  there  was  a  measure  of  dissension 
among  them  at  this  time.     True,  it  may  seem  to  have 


CHAPTER  II.  oy 

been  about  tbe  work  of  the  Lord,  in  which  they  were 
truly  zealous.  Sorrowful  as  this  was  in  itself,  still  this 
was  not  so  low  and  unworthy  as  mere  squabbling  with 
one  another,  such  as  we  hear  of  among  the  Corinthians. 
Not  that  it  was  to  be  treated  lightly,  but  even  the  very 
failure  and  the  cause  of  it  proved  that  they  were  in  a 
more  spiritual  state  than  the  Corinthians. 

In  the  same  way  you  may  find  among  the  children  of 
God  now  that  which  answers  to  the  trial  of  an  Abraham 
or  of  a  Lot.  Just  Lot,  dwelling  among  the  wicked  in  the 
cities  of  the  plain,  was  vexed  from  day  to  day  with  their 
unrighteous  and  ungodly  deeds.  What  unbridled 
wickedness  filled  the  scene  which  first  attracted  his  too 
covetous  eyes  !  Strange  that  a  saint  could  find  his 
home  there  for  a  season  !  Abraham  failed,  no  doubt; 
but  what  a  contrast  even  between  the  failure  of  an 
Abraham  and  of  a  Lot !  When  the  latter,  through 
unwatchfulness,  fell  into  a  sin  which  led  the  way  to 
worse,  it  was  not  only  a  painful  blot,  but  the  conse- 
quences of  it  remained  for  ages  to  be  adversaries  to  the 
people  of  God.  Out  of  the  miserable  circumstances 
which  closed  his  life,  we  see  a  shameful  result  and  a 
constant  afQiction.  Indeed  the  Israel  of  God  will  prove 
it  yet  in  the  latter  days.  On  the  other  hand,  Abraham 
had  his  trials  and  failures,  and  surely  the  Lord  did 
notice  and  rebuke  them  in  His  righteous  government. 
But  though  this  shows  that  there  is  nothing  worthy  of 
God  in  man,  that  no  good  thing  dwells  in  the  natural 
man  even  of  a  saint,  that  the  flesh  is  fleshly,  let  it  be 


40  PHILIPPIAN8. 

in  whom  it  may;  yet,  for  all  that,  the  character  of 
Abraham's  very  slips  and  unfaithfulness  tells  us  that 
he  was  in  a  spiritual  condition  wholly  different  from  his 
nephew  Lot. 

Just  so  it  was,  in  measure,  with  the  Corinthians 
and  the  Philippians.  In  the  latter  there  was  a  want  of 
unity,  of  judgment,  and  mind,  but  they  were  filled  with 
fervour  of  Spirit;  they  were  carried  out  in  earnest 
wishes  for  the  gospel  and  the  good  of  God's  people. 
Thus,  even  where  you  find  the  service  of  the  Lord  the 
prominent  thought,  there  is  always  room  for  the  flesh 
to  act.  There  is  nothing  like  having  Christ  Himself 
for  our  object.  This  was  what  Paul  knew  and  lived 
in,  and  wished  them  to  know  better.  Service  brings 
in  room  for  the  human  mind  and  feelings  and  energy. 
We  are  in  danger  of  being  occupied  unduly  with  that 
which  we  do  or  what  we  suffer.  Behind  it  lurks  also 
the  danger  of  comparison,  and  so  of  envy,  self-seeking, 
and  strife.  How  blessedly  the  apostle  in  chapter  i.  laid 
before  them  his  feeling  in  presence  of  a  far  deeper,  wider, 
and  more  painful  experience,  we  have  seen  already.  It 
appears  there  was  something  of  this  kind  at  work  among 
the  Philippians.  Accordingly  he  here  intimates  to  them 
that  there  was  something  necessary  to  complete  his  joy. 
He  would  see  them  of  the  same  mind,  and  this  by  hav- 
ing not  the  same  notions  but  the  same  love,  with  union 
of  soul  minding  one  thing.  His  owa  spiiit  was  enjoy- 
ing Christ  increasingly.  The  earth,  and  man  upon  it, 
was  a  very  little  thing  before  his  eyes ;  the  thoughts  of 


CHAPTER  IT.  41 

heaven  were  everything  to  him,  so  that  he  could  say, 
*'  To  me  to  live  is  Christ."  This  made  his  heart  sensitive 
on  their  account,  hecause  there  was  something  short  of 
Christ,  some  objects  besides  Hira  in  thera.  He  desires 
fulness  of  joy  in  them.  The  Spirit  of  God  gives  hearts, 
purified  by  faith,  a  common  object,  even  Christ.  What 
he  had  known  in  them  made  him  the  more  alive  to  that 
which  was  defective  in  these  saints.  He  therefore  makes 
a  great  deal  of  what  he  might  have  withheld  if  writing 
to  others.  In  an  assembly  where  there  was  much  that 
dishonoured  God,  it  would  be  useless  to  notice  every 
detail.  Wisdom  would  apply  the  grace  of  Christ  to 
the  overwhelming  evils  that  met  one's  eye:  lesser  things 
would  remain  to  be  disposed  of  afterwards  by  the  same 
power.  But  in  writing  to  saints  in  a  comparatively 
good  state,  even  a  little  speck  assumes  importance  in 
the  mind  of  the  Spirit.  There  was  something  they 
might  do  or  remedy  to  fill  the  cup  of  the  apostle's  joy. 
How  gladly  he  would  hear  that  they  shone  in  unity  of 
spirit !  He  owned  and  felt  their  love :  would  that  they 
cultivated  the  same  mutually  !  How  could  they  be  more 
likeminded  ?  If  the  mind  were  set  upon  one  thing, 
they  would  all  have  the  same  mind.  God  has  one 
object  for  His  saints  and  that  object  is  Christ.  With 
Paul  every  aim,  every  duty  was  subordinate  to  Him; 
as  it  is  said  in  the  next  chapter,  "  this  one  thing 
I  do:"  so  here  he  wished  to  produce  this  one,  common 
mind  in  the  Philippian  saints. 

He  then  touches  on  that  which  they  had  to  watch 


42  PHILIPPIANS. 

against.  "  Let  nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vain- 
glory." It  is  humbling,  but  too  true,  that  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  grossest  evil  outside  works  even  among  the 
saints  of  God.  The  traces  might  be  so  faint  that  none 
but  an  apostle's  eye  could  perceive  them.  But  God 
enabled  His  servant  to  discern  in  them  what  was  not  of 
Christ.  Hence  he  sets  before  them  the  dangers  alike 
of  opposing  one  another  and  of  exalting  self,  strife, 
and  vain-glory.  Oh !  how  apt  they  are  to  creep  in 
and  sully  the  service  of  God !  The  chapter  before 
bad  shown  some  elsewhere  taking  advantage  of  the 
apostle's  bonds  to  preach  Christ  of  envy  and  strife. 
And  there  he  had  triumphed  by  faith  and  could  rejoice 
that,  any  how,  Christ  was  preached.  Now  he  warns 
the  beloved  Philippians  against  something  similar  in 
their  midst.  The  principle  was  there,  and  he  does  not 
fail  to  lay  it  upon  their  heart. 

How  is  the  spirit  of  opposition  and  self-exaltation  to 
be  overcome?  "  In  lowliness  of  mind  let  each  esteem 
other  better  than  themselves."  What  a  blessed 
thought !  and  how  evidently  divine !  How  could  strife 
or  vain-glory  exist  along  with  it  ?  When  one  thinks 
of  self,  God  would  have  one  to  feel  our  own  amazing 
shortcomings.  To  have  such  sweet  and  heavenly  privi- 
leges in  Christ,  to  be  loved  by  Him,  and  yet  to  make 
such  paltry  returns  as  even  our  hearts  know  to  be 
altogether  unworthy  of  Him,  is  our  bitter  experience  as 
to  ourselves.  Whereas  when  we  look  at  another,  we 
can  readily  feel  not  only  how  blessedly  Christ  is  for 


CHAPTER  II.  43 

him,  and  how  faithful  is  His  goodness,  but  love  leads  us 
to  cover  failings,  to  see  and  keep  before  us  that  which 
is  lovely  and  of  good  report  in  the  saints — if  there  be  any 
virtue  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  to  think  on  these  things. 
This  appears  to  lie  at  the  root  of  the  exhortation,  and 
it  is  evident  that  it  thus  becomes  a  simple  and  happy 
duty.  "  In  lowliness  of  mind  let  each  esteem  other 
better  than  themselves."  In  short,  it  is  made  good,  on 
the  one  hand,  by  the  consciousness  of  our  own  blessing 
through  grace  in  presence  of  our  miserable  answer  to  it 
in  heart  and  way ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  thank- 
ful discernment  of  another  beheld  as  the  object  of  the 
Lord's  tender  love  and  all  its  fruits,  without  the 
thought  of  drawbacks.  Of  their  evil  the  Lord  would 
not  have  us  to  think,  but  of  what  Christ  is  to  and  in 
them.  For  here  there  is  no  question  of  discipline,  but 
of  the  ordinary,  happy  state  of  God's  children.  Certainly 
the  Philippian  assembly  consisted  of  men  who  were 
full  of  simple-hearted  earnestness  in  pushing  out  the 
frontiers  of  Christ's  kingdom  and  whose  hearts  were 
rejoicing  in  Him.  But  toward  one  another  there  was 
the  need  of  greater  tenderness. 

Besides,  if  one,  more  than  others,  was  abused  every- 
where, it  was  St.  Paul.  He  was  pre-eminently  treated 
as  the  off-scouring  of  all  things.  All  Asia  was  turned 
away  from  him.  Where  was  there  a  man  to  identify 
himself  with  his  cause?  Evidently  this  was  the  result 
of  a  faithful,  self-denying,  holy  course  in  the  gospel, 
which  from  time  to  time  offended  hundreds  even  of  the 


44  PHILTrPTA-N'S. 

children  of  God.  He  could  not  but  touch  the  worldli- 
ness  of  one,  the  flesh  of  another.  Above  all,  he  roused  the 
judaizers  on  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  all  schismatics, 
heretics,  &c.  All  this  makes  a  man  dreaded  and  dis- 
liked ;  and  none  ever  knew  more  of  this  bitter  trial 
than  the  Apostle  Paul.  Bat  in  the  case  of  the 
Philippians  there  was  the  contrary  effect.  Their  hearts 
clave  to  him  so  much  the  more  in  the  hour  of  his  im- 
prisonment at  Kome,  when  there  was  this  far  sorer 
sorrow  of  an  amazing  alienation  on  the  part  of  many 
who  had  been  blessed  through  his  means.  This  faith- 
ful love  of  the  Philippians  could  not  but  rejoice  the 
apostle's  heart.  It  is  one  thing  to  indulge  a  fleshly  de- 
pendence upon  an  instrument  of  God,  quite  another  to 
have  the  same  interests  with  him,  so  as  to  be  knit 
more  closely  than  ever  in  the  time  of  sorrow.  This 
was  fellowship  indeed,  as  far  as  it  went;  and  it  did  go 
far,  but  not  so  far  as  the  apostle  desired  for  them.  He 
thought  of  their  things,  not  of  his  merely  ;  and  ac- 
cordingly, he  now  gives  them  another  word  :  "  Look 
not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also 
on  the  things  of  others."  If  they  loved  him  so  much, 
why  not  love  each  other  more  than  they  did  ?  Why  so 
occupied  with  their  own  thoughts? 

This  egotism  was  another  fertile  source  of  evil:  We 
all  know  that  we  are  apt  to  value  qualities  which  we 
possess  ourselves  and  to  slight  those  of  others.  This  is 
unjudged  nature,  for,  where  there  is  power  of  love,  it 
Tvorks  in  a  direction  quite  the  contrary.     There  would 


CHAPTER  II.  45 

be  the  consciousness  of  how  weak  and  unworthy  we 
are,  and  the  little  use  we  make  of  what  God  gives 
us ;  there  would  be  the  valuing  what  we  see  in  another, 
that  we  have  not  got  ourselves.  How  good  for  the 
Church  to  have  all  this  and  far  more  ! 

There  he  brings  in  what  is  the  great  secret  of  deliver- 
ance from  all  these  strivings  of  potsherd  nature — "  the 
mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus."  ( Ver.  5.)  In  this  chapter 
you  will  observe  it  is  Christ  as  He  was ;  in  the  next  it 
is  Christ  as  He  is.  Here  it  is  Christ  coming  down, 
though  of  course  He  is  thereon  exalted.  The  point 
pressed  is  that  we  should  look  at  the  mind  of  Christ  that 
was  displayed  in  Him  while  here  below.  In  chapter  iii.  it 
is  not  so  much  the  mind  or  moral  purpose  that  was  in 
Him,  as  it  is  His  person  as  an  object,  a  glorious  attrac- 
tive object  now  in  heaven,  the  prize  for  which  he  was 
running,  Christ  Himself  above,  the  kernel  of  all  his 
joy.  Here  (chap,  ii.)  it  is  the  unselfish  mind  of  love 
that  seeks  nothing  of  its  own,  but  the  good  of  others 
at  all  costs :  this  is  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ. 

The  apostle  proceeds  to  enforce  lowliness  in  love,  by 
setting  the  way  of  the  Lord  Himself  before  their  eyes. 
This  is  the  true  "  rule  of  life"  for  the  believer  since 
His  manifestation ;  not  even  all  the  written  word  alone, 
but  that  word  seen  livingly  in  Christ,  who  is  made  a 
spring  of  power  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  his  soul  that  is 
occupied  with  Him.  "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you  which 
was  also  in  Christ  Jesus:  who  being  in  the  form  of 
God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  [on  equality] 


46  PHILIPPIANS. 

"with  God ;  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation  [emptied 
himself  "  &c.  (Ver.  5—7.) 

What  an  illustrious  testimony  to  the  true,  proper, 
intrinsic  deity  of  Christ !  It  is  all  the  stronger,  be- 
cause, like  many  more,  it  is  indirect.  Who  but  a 
person  consciously  God  in  the  highest  eense  could 
adopt,  not  merely  the  unhesitating  assumption  of  such 
language  as  "  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am,"  or  "  I  and 
my  Father  are  one,"  but  the  no  less  real,  though  hidden, 
claim  to  Godhead  which  lies  under  the  very  words  which 
unbelief  so  eagerly  seizes  against  Him  ?  Where  would 
be  the  sense  of  any  other  man  (and  man  He  surely  was 
and  is)  saying,  "  My  Father  is  greater  than  I  ?"  A 
strange  piece  of  information  in  the  mouth  (I  will  not 
say  of  a  Socrates  or  a  Bacon  merely,  but)  of  a  Moses 
or  a  Daniel,  a  Peter  or  a  Paul;  but  in  Him,  how  suit- 
able and  even-needful,  yet  only  so  because  He  was  truly 
God  and  equal  with  the  Father,  as  He  was  man,  the 
sent  One,  and  so  the  Father  was  greater  than  He ! 
Take  again  that  striking  declaration  in  John  xvii.  3, 
"  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee  the 
only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent." 
Of  course  He  was  man.  He  deigned  to  be  born  of 
woman :  else  unbelief  would  have  no  ground  of  argu- 
ment on  that  score.  But  what  mere  man  ever  dared, 
save  the  vilest  impostor,  calmly  to  class  himself  with 
God,  yea,  to  speak  of  the  knowledge  of  the  only  true 
God,  and  of  him,  as  life  everlasting  ?  So,  again,  the 
scripture  before  us.    Nothing  can  be  conceived  more  con- 


CHAPTER  II.  47 

clusively  to  prove  His  own  supremely  divine  glory,  than 
the  simple  statement  of  the  text.  Gabriel,  yea,  the 
archangel  Michael,  has  no  higher  dignity  than  that  of 
heing  God's  servant,  in  the  sphere  assigned  to  each. 
The  Son  of  God  alone  had  to  empty  Himself,  talcing 
the  form  of  a  servant,  being  born  in  the  likeness  of 
men.  All  others  were,  at  best,  God's  servants,  and 
nothing  could  increase  that  dignity  for  them  or  lift 
them  above  it.  Of  Christ  alone  it  was  true,  that  He 
took  a  bondservant's  form ;  and  of  Him  alone  could  it 
be  true,  because  He  was  in  the  form  of  God.  In  this 
nature  He  subsisted  originally,  as  truly  as  He  received 
a  bondman's;  both  were  real,  equally  real;  the  one  in- 
trinsic, the  other  that  which  He  condescended  to  assume 
in  infinite  grace. 

Nor  was  this  all.  When  "  found  in  fashion  as  a  man, 
he  humbled  himself  and  became  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross."  (Ver.  8.)  This  is  another 
distinct  step  in  His  descent  of  grace  to  glorify  God. 
First,  it  was  humiliation  for  Him  to  become  a  ser- 
vant and  a  man ;  next,  being  man,  He  humbled 
Himself  as  far  as  death  in  His  obedience  (the 
blessed  converse  of  Adam's  disobedience  unto  death). 
And  that  death  w^as  the  extreme  of  human  shame, 
besides  its  atoning  character.  Yet  must  we  carefully 
bear  in  mind  that  it  would  be  as  impossible  for  a 
divine  person  to  cease  to  be  God,  as  for  a  man  to  be- 
come a  divine  person.  But  it  was  the  joy  and  triumph 
of  divine  grace  that  He  who  was  God,  equally  with  the 


48  PHILIPPIANS. 

Father,  when  about  to  become  a  man,  did  not  carry 
down  the  glory  and  power  of  the  Godhead  to  confound 
man  before  Him,  but  rather  emptied  Himself:  contrari- 
wise perfection  morally  was  seen  in  this.  Thus  He 
was  thoroughly  the  dependant  man,  not  once  falling 
into  self-reliance,  but  under  all  circumstances,  and  in 
the  face  of  the  utmost  difficulties,  the  very  fullest 
pattern  and  exhibition  of  One  who  waited  upon  God, 
who  set  the  Lord  always  before  Him,  who  never 
acted  from  Himself,  but  whose  meat  and  drink  it  was 
to  do  the  will  of  His  Father  in  heaven ;  in  a  word,  He 
became  a  perfect  servant.    This  is  what  we  have  here. 

Christ  is  said  to  have  been  in  the  form  of  God ;  that  is, 
it  was  not  in  mere  appearance,  but  it  had  that  form,  and 
not  a  creature's.  The  form  of  God  means  that  He  had 
His  and  no  other  form.  He  was  then  in  that  nature 
of  being,  and  nothing  else;  He  had  no  creature  being 
whatever;  He  was  simply  and  solely  God  the  Son.  He, 
subsisting  in  this  condition,  did  not  think  it  a  robbery  to 
be  equal  with  God.  He  was  God ;  yet,  in  the  place  of 
jnan  which  He  truly  entered,  He  had,  as  was  meet,  the 
willingness  to  be  nothing.  He  made  Himself  of  no 
reputation.  How  admirable !  How  magnifying  to  God ! 
He  put  in  abeyance  all  His  glory.  It  was  not  even  in 
angelic  majesty  that  He  deigned  to  become  a  servant, 
but  in  the  likeness  of  men.  Here  we  have  the  form  of 
a  servant  as  well  as  the  form  of  God,  but  that  does  not 
in  anywise  mean  that  He  was  not  really  both.  In  truth 
as  He  was  very  God,  so  He  became  the  veriest  servant 


CHAPTER  II.  49 

that  God  or  man  ever  saw.  But  we  may  go  yet  farther. 
"  And  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled 
himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death 
of  the  cross."  Mark  that.  There  are  two  great  stages 
in  the  advent  and  humiliation  of  the  Son  of  God.  The 
first  is  in  respect  of  His  divine  nature  or  proper  deity : 
He  emptied  Himself.  He  would  not  act  on  a  ground 
which  exempted  Him  from  human  obedience,  when  He 
takes  the  place  of  servant  here  below.  Indeed,  we  may 
Bay  that  He  would  act  upon  what  God  the  Father  was 
to  Him,  not  upon  what  He  the  Son  was  to  the  Father. 
On  the  one  hand,  though  He  were  a  Son,  He  learned 
obedience  through  the  things  that  He  suffered.  On 
the  other,  if  He  had  not  been  a  divine  person — the  Son 
no  doubt — He  would  not  have  been  the  perfect  man  that 
He  was.  But  He  walks  on  through  unheard-of  shame, 
sorrow,  and  suffering,  as  One  that  sought  only  the  will 
and  glory  of  His  Father  in  everything.  He  would 
choose  nothing,  not  even  in  saving  sinners  or  receiving 
a  soul.  (John  vi.)  He  would  act  in  nothing  apart  from 
the  Father.  He  would  have  only  those  whom  the 
Father  draws.  Whom  the  Father  gives  Him,  who- 
ever come  to  Him,  He  welcomes  them :  He  will  in  no 
wise  cast  any  out,  be  they  ever  so  bad.  What  a  proof 
that  He  is  thoroughly  the  servant,  when  He,  the 
Saviour,  absolutely  puts  aside  all  choice  of  those  He 
will  save  !  When  acting  as  Lord  with  His  apostles, 
He  tells  us  that  He  chose;  but  in  the  question  of  sal- 
vation He  virtually  says.  Here  I  am,  a  Saviour;  and 

E 


50  PHILIPPIANS. 

whoever  is  drawn  to  me  by  the  Father,  that  is  enough 
for  me :  whoever  comes,  I  will  save.  No  matter  who 
or  what  it  was,  you  have  in  the  Lord  Jesus  this  perfect 
subjection  and  self-abnegation,  and  this  too  in  the  only 
person  that  never  had  a  will  to  sin,  whose  will  cared 
not  for  its  own  way  in  anything.  He  was  the  only 
man  that  never  used  His  own  will ;  His  will  as  man  was 
unreservedly  in  subjection  to  God.  But  we  find  another 
thing:  if  He  emptied  Himself  of  His  deity,  when  He  took 
the  form  of  a  servant,  when  He  does  become  a  man,  He 
humbles  Himself  and  becomes  obedient  as  far  as  death. 

This  is  important  because  it  shows,  among  other 
things,  this  also,  that  death  was  not  the  natural  por- 
tion of  our  Lord  as  man,  but  that  to  which,  when  found 
in  fashion  as  a  man,  He  humbled  Himself  and  became 
obedient.  There  was  no  death  for  Him  merely  as  man, 
for  death  was  the  wages  of  sin,  not  of  man  as  such 
without  sin,  still  less  of  the  Holy  One  of  God.  How 
could  He  come  under  death  ?  In  this  was  the  contrast 
between  Him  and  the  first  Adam.  The  first  Adam 
became  disobedient  unto  death ;  Christ  on  the  contrary 
obeyed  unto  death.  No  other  was  competent  so  to  lay 
down  His  life.  Sinners  had  none  to  give:  life  was  due  to 
God,  and  they  had  no  title  to  offer  it.  It  would  have  been 
sin  to  have  pretended  to  it.  But  in  Christ  all  is  reversed. 
His  death  in  a  world  of  sin  is  His  glory — not  only 
perfect  grace,  but  the  vindication  of  God  in  all  His  cha- 
racter. "  I  have  power,"  He  says,  "  to  lay  it  down,  and 
I  have  power  to  take  it  again."     In  the  laying  down  of 


CHAPTER  II.  51 

His  life  He  was  accomplishing  the  glory  of  God.  "  Now 
is  the  Son  of  man  glorified  and  God  is  glorified  in  Him." 
So  that  while  God  was  pleased  with  and  exalted  in 
every  step  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  life,  yet  the 
deepest  moral  glory  of  God  shines  out  in  His  death. 
Never  was  nor  could  be  such  obedience  before  or  in  any 
other.  He  "  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross." 

In  this  chapter  it  is  not  a  question  of  putting  away 
sin.  It  is  ignorance  of  the  mind  of  God  to  confine  the 
death  of  Christ,  even  to  that  astonishing  part  of  it, 
while  fully  admitting  that  there  is  not,  nor  ever  will  be, 
anything  to  compare  with  it.  But  the  death  of  Christ, 
for  instance,  takes  in  the  reconciliation  of  all  things,  as 
well  as  the  bringing  us  who  believe  unto  God ;  for  now 
that  the  world  is  fallen  under  vanity,  without  that 
death  there  could  not  be  the  righteous  gathering  up 
again  out  of  the  ruin  that  which  is  manifestly  marred 
and  spoilt  by  the  power  of  Satan.  Again,  where  without 
it  was  the  perfect  display  of  what  God  is?  Where  else 
the  utmost  extent  of  Christ's  suffering  and  humiliation, 
and  obedience  in  them?  The  truth,  love,  holiness,  wis- 
dom, and  majesty  of  God  were  all  to  the  fullest  degree 
vindicated  in  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There 
is  not  a  single  feature  of  God  but  what,  though  it  ex- 
presses itself  elsewhere  in  Christ,  finds  its  richest  and 
most  complete  answer  in  His  death.  Here  it  is  the 
perfect  servant,  who  would  not  stop  short  at  any  one 
thing,  and  this  not  merely  in  the  truest  love  to  us,  but 


52  PEILIPPIANS. 

absolutely  for  the  glory  of  God.  It  is  in  this  point  of 
view  that  His  death  is  referred  to  here ;  and  the  Spirit 
of  God  adds,  (Ver.  9,  10,)  "  Wherefore  God  also  hath 
highly  exalted  him  and  given  him  a  name  which  is 
above  every  name,  that  at  [in  virtue  of]  the  name  of 
Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  heavenly,  and  earthly, 
and  infernal  [ones]." 

It  is  not  merely  a  question  of  saints  or  of  Israel, 
but  "  every  knee  shall  bow,"  &c.  This  takes  in  angels 
and  saints,  and  even  those  that  are  for  ever  under  the 
judgment  of  God ;  for  to  "  under  the  earth"  attaches 
the  worst  possible  sense.  Thus  the  infernal  beings, 
the  lost,  come  in  here;  the  verse  includes  those  that 
have  rejected  salvation,  no  less  than  those  who  confess 
the  Saviour.  It  is  the  universal  subjection  of  all  to 
Christ.  Jesus  has  won  the  title  even  as  man.  If  un- 
believers despised  Him  as  man,  as  Son  of  man  He  will 
judge  them.  As  man  they  must  bow  to  Him.  The 
lowly  name  that  was  His  as  Nazarene  on  the  earth 
must  be  honoured  everywhere:  God's  glory  is  concerned 
in  it.  In  the  name  of  Jesus,  or  in  virtue  of  His  name, 
"  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  confess  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  Lord^  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father." 
(Ver.  11.) 

It  is  not,  again,  a  question  of  His  being  Son  (which  of 
course  He  was  from  all  eternity),  but  Lord  also.  We 
know  that  the  spirit  of  this  is  true  for  the  believer  now. 
Every  soul  that  is  now  born  of  God  bows  his  knee  in 
virtue  of  the  name  of  Jesus  and  to  Jesus.     The  Chris- 


CH4PTER  II.  53 

tian  now  confesses  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that  Jesns  Christ 
is  Lord ;  but  this  homage  will  be  made  good  to  an  in- 
comparably larger  extent  by  and  by.  But  then  it  will  be 
too  late  for  salvation.  It  is  now  received  by  faith,  which 
finds  blessedness  and  eternal  life  in  the  knowledge  of 
God  and  of  Jesus  Christ,  whom  He  has  sent.  Neither 
is  there  any  man  that  confesses  Him  to  be  the  Lord  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  but  a  saved  person.  But  there  will  be 
more  than  this  by  and  by.  When  the  day  of  grace  is 
past  and  God  is  not  merely  gathering  out  an  elect  body, 
the  Church,  but  putting  down  all  opposing  authority, 
then  the  name  of  Jesus  will  be  throughout  the  universe 
owned  even  by  those  who  do  it  by  compulsion,  and 
who  by  that  very  acknowledgment  confess  their  own 
eternal  misery.  In  Ephesians  i.  10  we  are  told  of  God's 
purpose  for  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times  to 
"  gather  together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ,  both  which 
are  in  heaven  and  which  are  on  earth."  There  is  not  a 
word,  it  has  often  been  remarked,  about  things  under 
the  earth,  because  there  it  is  not  a  question  of  univer- 
sal compulsory  acknowledgment  of  Christ  even  by  the 
devils  and  the  lost,  but  very  simply  of  all  things 
being  put  under  the  headship  of  Christ.  Neither  lost 
men  nor  devils  will  ever  stand  in  any  such  relation  to 
Christ.  He  will  surely  judge  them  both.  In  Ephesians 
it  is  Christ  viewed  as  the  head  of  the  whole  creation  of 
God,  all  things  heavenly  and  earthly  being  summed  up 
under  His  administration.  Besides  that.  He  is  the  head 
of  the  Church,  which  consequently  shares  His  place  of 


54  PHILIPPIANS. 

exaltation  over  all  things  heavenly  and  earthly,  as  being 
the  bride  of  the  true  and  last  Adam.  "  He  has  made 
Him  to  be  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church,  which 
is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him  that  fiUeth  all  in  all." 
Christ  fills  all  in  all ;  but  the  Church  is  that  which  fills 
up  the  mystic,  glorified  man,  just  as  Eve  was  necessary 
to  the  completeness  of  God's  thoughts  as  to  the  first 
Adam.  The  Church  is  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  This 
mystery  is  great  and  largely  treated  in  Ephesians ;  but 
it  is  not  the  subject  of  our  epistle,  where  the  aim  is 
practical,  enforced  from  One  who  came  down  from  in- 
finite glory  and  made  Himself  nothing,  and  who  now  is 
exalted  and  made  Lord  of  all,  so  that  every  creature 
must  bow.  This  is  put  before  the  Philippians  as  the 
most  powerful  of  motives  and  weightiest  of  examples 
for  self-abnegation,  in  love,  to  God's  glory. 

As  a  whole,  we  have  seen  that  the  state  of  the  Philip- 
pian  saints  was  good  and  healthy.  It  was  not  with 
them  as  with  the  Galatians,  over  whose  speedy  lapse 
into  error — and  what  error  it  was  ! — the  apostle  had  to 
marvel  and  mourn.  And  as  in  doctrine,  so  in  practice, 
what  a  change  for  the  worse  !  Their  love,  once  exces- 
sive one  might  say,  was  turned  into  bitterness  and  con- 
tempt, as  the  sweetest  thing  in  nature,  if  soured, 
becomes  the  sourest  of  all.  "  Ye  know  how  through 
infirmity  of  the  flesh  I  preached  the  gospel  unto  you  at 
the  first.  And  my  temptation  which  was  in  my  flesh 
ye  despised  not,  nor  rejected;  but  received  me  as  an 
angel  of  God,  even  as  Christ  Jesus.     Where  is  then 


CHAPTER  II.  55 

the  blessedness  ye  spake  of?  for  I  bear  you  record, 
that,  if  it  had  been  possible,  ye  would  have  plucked  out 
your  own  eyes,  and  have  given  them  to  me.  Am  I 
therefore  become  your  enemy  because  I  tell  you  the 
truth?  They  zealously  affect  you,  but  not  well;  yea, 
they  would  exclude  you  that  ye  might  affect  them." 
(Gal.  iv.  13—17.)  "But,"  adds  the  apostle,  with 
cutting  severity,  "  it  is  good  to  be  zealously  affected 
always  in  a  good  thing,  and  not  only  when  I  am  present 
with  you.'''' 

What  a  refreshing  contrast  was  the  condition  of  the 
Philippians  !  It  was  not  only  that  their  love  was  true 
and  fervent,  proving  their  fellowship  with  the  gospel 
and  their  hearty  sympathy  with  those  engaged  in  its 
labours  and  sufferings,  but  their  faithfulness  shone 
out  yet  more  when  the  apostle  was  not  in  their  midst. 
"  Wherefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  have  always  obeyed, 
not  as  in  my  presence  only,  but  now  much  more  in  my 
absence  ..."  What  reserve  in  his  tone  to  the  one,  and 
what  opening  of  affections,  heartily  expressed,  to  the 
other !  And  no  wonder.  In  Galatia,  Christ  was  shaded 
under  nature;  religion  it  might  be,  but  unsubject  to 
God,  ay,  and  unloving  too,  spite  of  vain  talk  about  love. 
In  Philippi  Christ  was  increasingly  the  object;  love  was 
in  true  and  wholesome  exercise ;  and  obedience  grew 
firmly,  because  liberty  and  responsibility  were  happily 
realized,  even  the  more  in  the  absence  of  the  apostle 
and  without  his  immediate  help. 

Accordingly  he  exhorts  them  thus :  "  Work  out  your 


56  PHILIPPIANS. 

own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  for  it  is  God 
who  worketh  in  you  both  the  willing  and  the  working 
of  [according  to]  his  good  pleasure."  In  Ephesians  ii. 
the  saints  are  viewed  as  seated  together  in  heavenly- 
places  in  Christ:  they  are  regarded  here  as  working 
out  their  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling.  How 
can  we  put  these  two  things  together  ?  With  perfect 
ease,  if  we  are  simply  subject  to  the  word  of  God.  If 
you  try  to  make  out  that  there  is  only  one  meaning  of 
salvation  in  the  New  Testament,  you  are  in  a  difficulty 
indeed,  and  you  will  find  that  there  is  no  possibility  of 
making  the  passages  square.  In  fact,  nothing  is  more 
certain  and  easy  to  ascertain,  than  that  salvation  in  the 
New  Testament  is  more  frequently  spoken  of  as  a  pro- 
cess incomplete  as  yet,  a  thing  not  finished,  than  as  a 
completed  end.  It  is  not,  then,  a  question  of  taking 
away  something,  but  of  getting  a  further  idea.  Take 
Eomans  xiii.  11,  12,  for  instance.  There  we  find  sal- 
vation spoken  of  as  not  yet  arrived.  "  Now  is  our 
salvation  nearer  than  when  we  believed."  From  the 
context  we  find  that  it  is  connected  with  "  the  day" 
being  at  hand ;  so  that  the  salvation  spoken  of  there 
is  evidently  a  thing  that  we  have  not  actually  got,  no 
doubt,  coming  nearer  and  nearer  every  day,  but  only 
ours  in  fact  when  the  day  is  come.  "  The  night  is  far 
spent,  and  the  day  is  at  hand."  Salvation  here,  there- 
fore, is  manifestly  future.  In  the  First  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians  (chap,  i.,  v.,  ix.,  x.)  the  same  thing  appears, 
though   it   be   not   so   marked   in   expression.     Take 


CHAPTER  II.  57 

Hebrews  again  as  a  very  plain  instance.  It  is  said 
there  (chap.  vii.  25)  that  Jesus  is  *'  able  to  save  them 
to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him."  The 
passage  plainly  is  limited  to  believers.  It  is  a  saving 
of  those  that  are  in  living  relationship  to  God.  Christ 
is  looked  at  as  a  Priest,  and  He  is  a  Priest  only  for 
God's  people — believers.  It  would,  therefore,  be  an 
illegitimate  use  of  the  verse  to  apply  it  to  the  salvation 
of  sinners  as  such.  Again,  in  chapter  ix.,  "  As  it  is 
appointed  unto  men  once  to  die,  but  after  this  the  judg- 
ment; so  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of 
many ;  and  unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he  ap- 
pear the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation." 
There  cannot  be  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  that  there  the 
Spirit  speaks  of  salvation  (salvation  of  bodies,  and  not 
merely  of  souls)  as  a  thing  only  effectuated  when 
Christ  in  person  appears  to  us,  when  He  receives  us  to 
Himself  in  and  to  His  own  glory.  But  without  going 
through  all  similar  statements  in  other  epistles,  let  me 
refer  to  the  First  Epistle  of  Peter.  It  appears  to  me  that, 
with  the  exception  of  a  single  phrase  in  1  Peter  i.  9, 
salvation  is  always  regarded  as  a  thing  not  yet  accom- 
plished, and  only  indeed  accomplished  in  the  redemption 
of  the  body.  That  one  phrase  is — "  Receiving  the  end 
of  your  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  [your]  souls." 
Now  soul-salvation  will  not  be  more  complete  for  be- 
lievers after  Christ  comes  than  now  when  they  believe 
and  are  being  carried  through  the  wilderness ;  it  is  an 
already  enjoyed  blessing  as  regards  the  resting-place  of 


58  PHILIPPIANS. 

faith.  But,  with  that  exception,  salvation  in  Peter  ap- 
plies to  the  deliverance  that  crowns  the  close  of  all  the 
difficulties  we  may  encounter  in  the  passage  through  the 
desert-world,  as  well  as  to  the  present  guardian  care  of 
our  God  who  brings  us  safely  through.  It  is  a  salva- 
tion only  completed  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus.  (See 
chap.  i.  5 ;  ii.  2,  "  grow  unto  salvation "  in  the  critical 
text;  and  iv.  18.) 

This,  too,  I  believe  to  be  the  meaning  of  "  salvation" 
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians;  and  that  it  is  so  will 
appear  still  more  clearly  when  we  come  to  chapter  iii., 
where  our  Lord  is  spoken  of  as  a  "  Saviour,"  even  when 
He  comes  to  transform  the  body.  "Our  conversation 
is  in  heaven ;  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour, 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  change,"  &c.  The 
real  meaning  is.  We  look  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as 
Saviour,  who  shall  change  our  body  of  humiliation, 
that  it  should  be  conformed  to  His  body  of  glory. 
There  is  the  character  of  the  salvation :  it  is  a  question 
not  of  the  soul  merely,  but  of  our  bodies.  If  we  accept 
this  thought  as  a  true  one  and  as  the  real  scope  of 
salvation  throughout  the  context,  interpreting  the  lan- 
guage here  by  the  general  object  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  in  view,  the  meaning  of  our  verse  12  becomes 
plain:  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling."  It  is  as  if  the  apostle  said  /  am  no  longer 
with  you  to  warn,  exhort,  and  stir  you  up  when  your 
courage  is  flagging — you  are  now  thrown  entirely  upon 
God.     You  have  got  the  ordinary  helps  of  bishops  and 


CHAPTER  II.  59 

deacons,  but  there  is  no  present  apostolic  care  to  look 
to.  No  doubt  the  apostle's  absence  was  an  immense 
loss.  But  God  is  able  to  turn  any  loss  into  gain,  and 
this  was  the  gain  for  them  that  they  were  more  con- 
sciously in  dependence  on  the  resources  of  God  Him- 
self. When  the  apostle  was  there,  they  could  go  to 
him  with  whatever  question  arose:  they  might  seek 
counsel  direct  from  him.  Now  his  departure  leads 
them  to  wait  upon  God  Himself  for  guidance.  The 
effect  on  the  spiritual  would  be  to  make  them  feel  the 
need  of  being  more  prayerful,  and  more  circumspect 
than  ever.  "  As  ye  have  always  obeyed,  not  as  in  my 
presence  only^  but  now  much  more  in  my  absence,  work 
out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  I 
am  not  there  to  watch  over  you  and  to  give  you  my 
counsel  and  help  in  difficulties,  and  emergencies,  and 
dangers.  You  have  to  do  with  a  mighty,  subtle,  active 
foe.  Hence  you  have  not  to  look  to  th«  hills,  but  to 
God,  and  to  work  out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling.  "  For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you 
both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  If 
the  apostle  was  not  there,  but  in  prison  far  away,  God, 
he  says,  is  there.  It  is  God  who  worketh  in  you.  That 
would  give  solemnity  of  feeling,  but  it  would  also  in- 
fuse confidence.  There  would  be  fear  and  trembling 
in  their  hearts,  feeling  that  it  is  a  bitter,  painful  thing 
to  compromise  God  in  any  way  by  want  of  jealous  self- 
judgment  in  their  walk — fear  and  trembling  because  of 
the  seriousness  of  the  conflict.     They  had  to  do  with 


60  PHILIPPIANS. 

Satan  in  his  efforts  against  them.  Bat  on  the  other 
hand  God  was  with  them,  working  in  them.  It  was 
not  the  idea  of  anxiety  and  dread  lest  they  should 
break  down  and  be  lost,  but  because  of  the  struggle  in 
which  they  were  engaged  with  the  enemy,  without  the 
presence  of  an  apostle  to  render  them  his  invaluable 
succour. 

But  now  he  turns  to  those  things  in  which  they 
might  be  to  blame  and  certainly  had  to  be  on  their 
guard.  "  Do  all  things  without  murmurings  and  dis- 
putings  [or  reasonings] :  that  ye  may  he  blameless  and 
harmless  [simple,  or,  sincere],  irreproachable  children 
of  God,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  genera- 
tion, among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world." 
He  calls  them  to  that  which  would  be  manifestly  a 
blameless  walk  and  spirit  in  the  eyes  of  the  crooked 
and  perverse  round  about  them.  But  besides  this,  he 
looks  for  that  w^hich  would  direct  in  them,  and  show 
men  clearly  the  way  to  be  delivered  from  their  wretched- 
ness and  sin ;  lights  in  the  world,  "  holding  forth  the 
word  of  life;"  and  this  with  the  motive  to  their  affec- 
tions, *'  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ  that  I 
have  not  run  in  vain  nor  laboured  in  vain." 

But  now  he  puts  another  consideration  before  them. 
What  if  he,  Paul,  should  be  called  to  die  in  the  career 
of  the  gospel  ?  Up  to  this  point  he  had  been  commu- 
nicating his  mind  and  feelings  to  them  with  the  thought 
that  he  was  going  to  live:  he  had  stated  his  own  convic- 
tion that  God  meant  him  to  continue  a  little  longer  here 


CHAPTER  II.  61 

below  for  the  good  of  tlie  Church.  But  he  suggests  the 
supposition  of  his  death.  Granting  that  he  might  suffer 
unto  death,  what  then  ?  "  But  if  also  I  be  poured  out 
upon  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  your  faith,  I  joy,  and 
rejoice  with  you  all."  To  him  it  was  the  very  reverse 
of  a  pain  or  trouble,  the  thought  of  being  thus  a  liba- 
tion upon  what  he  sweetly  calls  the  sacrifice  and  service 
of  their  faith.  Nay,  more,  he  calls  on  them  to  share 
his  feelings.  "  For  the  same  cause  also  do  ye  joy  and 
rejoice  with  me."  Thus  the  apostle  triumphs,  turning 
not  only  his  imprisonment  into  a  question  of  joy,  but 
also  the  anticipation,  were  it  God's  will,  of  his  laying 
down  his  life  in  the  work.  He  is  even  congratulating 
them  upon  the  joyful  news.  How  mighty  and  unselfish 
is  the  power  of  faith !  He  calls  upon  them  that  there 
should  be  this  perfect  reciprocity  of  joy  through  faith, 
that  they  might  take  it  as  a  personal  honour,  and  feel 
a  common  interest  in  his  joy,  as  much  as  if  it  were  for 
themselves.  This  is  just  what  love  does  produce.  As 
the  apostle  identified  himself  with  them,  so  they,  in 
their  measure,  would  identify  themselves  with  him. 
May  the  Lord  grant  us  to  know  it  better  through 
His  grace. 

"  But  I  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to  send  Timotheus 
shortly  unto  you,  that  I  also  may  be  of  ^ood  comfort, 
when  I  know  your  state."  What  a  beautiful  sample 
the  same  self-denying  love  which  the  apostle  had  pointed 
out  in  Christ  and  was  seeking  to  form  in  the  hearts  of  the 
Philippians !      "We  know  what  Timothy  was  to  the 


62  PHILIPPIANS. 

apostle,  but  though  to  lose  him,  especially  then,  might 
be  the  greatest  privation  to  himself,  still  he  says,  "  I 
trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to  send  Timotheus  shortly  unto 
you."  Divine  love  thinks  of  the  good  of  others;  and 
this  grace  had  wrought  in  the  apostle.  It  was  to  fur- 
ther nothing  of  his  own.  He  desired  to  know  their 
state  that  his  own  heart  might  be  comforted.  Is  not 
this  the  mind  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus?  The 
imprisoned  apostle  sent  Timotheus  from  himself  to 
them  in  the  hope  of  getting  good  tidings  of  these  saints 
that  were  so  dear  to  his  heart.  "  For  I  have  no  man 
likeminded,  who  will  naturally  care  for  your  state" — no 
one  with  such  genuine  affection  and  care,  not  merely  for 
me,  but  for  you.  "  For  all  seek  their  own,  not  the  things 
that  are  Jesus  Christ's.  But  ye  know  the  proof  of  him, 
that,  as  a  son  the  father,  he  hath  served  with  me  in 
the  gospel."  There  was  at  once  what  was  the  common 
bond.  The  love  of  Christ  filled  both  and  made  them 
both  serve.  They  were  doing  the  same  thing.  There 
was  mutual  confidence  for  the  same  reason  ;  for  Christ 
and  stumblingblocks  are  incompatible.  "  Him  there- 
fore I  hope  to  send  presently,  so  soon  as  I  shall  see 
how  it  will  go  with  me.  But  I  trust  in  the  Lord  that 
I  also  myself  shall  come  shortly." 

What  then  does  he  add  ?  He  could  not  come  as  yet 
himself;  he  was  delaying  Timothy  till  the  result  of  his 
trial  should  be  known,  that  the  Philippians  might  have 
the  latest  intelligence  about  that  which  he  was  sure 
would  be  near  to  their  hearts.     But  would  he  leave 


CHAPTER  II.  63 

them  without  a  word  meanwhile  ?  Far  from  it.  He 
says,  "  Yet  I  supposed  it  necessary  to  send  to  you 
Epaphroditus,  my  brother,  and  companion  in  labour." 
We  see  how  love  delights  to  share  all  things  with 
others.  He  chooses  terms  which  would  link  Epaphro- 
ditus with  himself — "  my  brother,  and  companion  in 
labour,  and  fellow-soldier."  There  was  everything  that 
could  clothe  him  with  honour  and  endear  him  to  the 
saints,  "  but  your  messenger  and  he  that  ministered  to 
my  wants."  He  had  all  these  insignia  of  honour  in  the 
cause  of  Christ.  Nothing  can  be  sweeter  than  this  un- 
folding of  affection ;  but  it  could  only  be,  because  the 
state  of  the  Philippians  had  been  thoroughly  sound 
with  God.  We  see  nothing  of  this  when  he  writes  to  the 
Galatians  or  Corinthians.  So  far  from  being  sound  in 
state,  they  were  not  even  sound  in  the  faith.  The 
Galatians,  we  know,  were  letting  slip  justification:  the 
consequence  is,  there  is  not  an  Epistle  so  reserved  and 
distant,  as  we  may  see  in  the  marked  absence  of  perso- 
nal salutation.  He  wrote  to  them  as  a  duty,  as  an 
urgent  service  springing  from  his  love  that  desired 
their  deliverance;  but  he  had  no  kind  of  liberty  in 
letting  out  his  affections  in  the  way  we  find  here.  God 
Himself  led  him  to  act  thus  differently. 

"  For  he  longed  after  you  all,  and  was  full  of  heavi- 
ness, because  that  ye  had  heard  that  he  had  been  sick. 
For  indeed  he  was  sick,  nigh  unto  death;  but  God  had 
mercy  on  him ;  and  not  on  him  only,  but  on  me  also, 
lest  I  should  have  sorrow  upon  sorrow."      I  cannot 


64  PHILIPPIANS. 

conceive  a  more  admirable  picture  of  divine  affections 
flowing  out  without  hindrance  to  these  saints.  He 
descants  upon  what  Timothy  was  to  him,  whom  he 
hoped  to  send  to  them,  and  now  upon  Epaphroditus  who 
had  come  from  them  as  their  messenger.  His  heart 
glows,  and  he  opens  out  all  his  feelings  about  this 
link  between  himself  and  them.  "  He  longed  after  you 
all  and  was  full  of  heaviness,"  not  because  he  was  sick 
himself  or  was  nigh  unto  death,  but  "  because  that  ye 
had  heard  that  he  had  been  sick."  Such  was  the 
heart  of  Epaphroditus ;  such  Paul's  to  see  and  record  it. 
Both  were  desirous  that  they  should  be  relieved,  by 
knowing  how  the  Lord  had  shown  Himself  on  their 
behalf.  *'  But  God  had  mercy  on  him,  and  not  on  him 
only,  but  on  me  also,  lest  I  should  have  sorrow  upon 
sorrow."  See  how  the  apostle  loves  to  trace  the  good- 
ness of  God,  not  merely  towards  the  person  who  was 
the  immediate  object  of  God's  dealings,  but  towards 
himself  also.  Scripture  nowhere  intimates  such  a  thing 
in  the  mind  of  God  as  looking  coldly  upon  the  sickness 
or  death  of  His  children.  Too  often  this  is  the  case 
with  us,  as  if  it  did  not  much  matter,  or  it  were  a  point 
of  spirituality  to  be  like  a  stone.  There  is  such  a 
thing  as  the  Spirit  of  God  identifying  Himself  with 
human  affections,  as  well  as  with  divine  ones.  We  find 
divine 'affections  in  chapter  i.,  and  human  affections 
here  in  chapter  ii.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  been  pleased, 
not  only  to  bring  down  divine  affections,  so  to  speak, 
and  put  them  into  us ;  but  also  to  animate  the  human 


CHAPTER  II.  G5 

affections  of  the  saints.  Christ  Himself  had  them  in 
His  heart,  for  He  was  truly  man.  And  now  the  Spirit 
of  God  gives  another  and  higher  value  to  these  affections 
in  the  saints  of  God.  This  is  as  plain  as  it  is  important. 
The  Holy  Ghost  mingles  Himself,  so  to  speak,  with  all. 
"  I  sent  him  therefore  the  more  carefully,  that,  when  ye 
see  him  again,  ye  may  rejoice,  and  that  I  may  be  the 
less  sorrowful."  The  apostle  does  not  say,  And  that  I 
may  rejoice  too.  There  is  no  unreality,  nothing  but 
transparent  truthfulness  here,  as  well  as  the  most 
blessed  love.  It  is  "  that  ye  may  rejoice,  and  that  I 
may  be  the  less  sorrowful."  He  did  feel  the  pang  of 
parting  with  Epaphroditus,  but  he  could  rejoice  that 
such  a  help  went  to  them,  because  they  would  rejoice, 
and  he  himself  would  be  the  less  sorrowful.  It  was  his 
loss;  but  assuredly  it  would  be  their  gain. 

"  Keceive  him  therefore  in  the  Lord  with  all  gladness, 
and  hold  such  in  reputation."  Remark  how  careful  he 
is  to  commend  his  fellow-labourer  to  the  esteem  of  the 
saints.  Epaphroditus  does  not  seem  to  have  been  a  man 
of  much  outward  mark.  But  men  highly  gifted  ought 
to  be  tenacious  on  behalf  of  those  of  lesser  gift.  Cer- 
tainly in  the  case  of  the  apostle,  instead  of  being  jealous 
as  to  others,  there  is  the  greatest  desire  to  keep  up  their 
value  in  the  eyes  of  the  saints.  "  Hold  such  in  repu- 
tation." Others  might  have  feared  for  Epaphroditus 
or  others  like  him,  lest  they  might  be  puffed  up.  "  Re- 
ceive him,"  he  says,  "  with  all  gladness,  and  hold  such 
in  reputation ;  because  for  the  work  of  Christ  he  was 


66  PHILIPPIAN8. 

nigh  Tinto  death,  not  regarding  his  life,  to  supply  your 
lack  of  service  toward  me."  We  do  not  find  any  great 
account  of  what  he  had  done  in  preaching  or  teaching; 
but  there  was  the  earnest,  unselfish  service  of  love  in 
this  blessed  man  of  God,  and  that  was  enough  for  the 
Apostle  Paul  and  ought  to  be  also  for  God's  children. 

The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  be  thus  quick  to  discern 
and  thus  hearty  in  our  appreciation  of  what  is  of 
Christ  in  others,  whoever  they  may  be,  cultivating  not 
so  much  keenness  of  eye  for  that  which  is  painful  and 
inconsistent  in  the  saints,  as  steady  desire  for  whatever 
brings  Christ  before  the  soul,  whatever  gives  the  ring 
of  the  true  metal,  whatever  bears  the  stamp  of  the 
Spirit  of  God. 


3>®<« 


CHAPTER  III. 

The  apostle  had  touched  on  various  sources  of  joy  to 
himself  and  the  saints  he  was  addressing.  It  was  with 
joy  he  made  supplication  for  them  all.  (Chap.  i.  4.)  It 
was  with  joy,  and  ever  new  joy,  that  he  beheld  his  very 
bonds  giving  a  fresh  impulse  to  the  preaching  of  Christ. 
(Chap.  i.  18.)  So  too  he  is  assured  of  his  continuance 
with  them  all  for  their  progress  and  joj  of  faith,  that 
their  boasting  might  abound  in  Christ  through  him. 
(Chap.  i.  25.)  Next,  he  called  on  them  to  fulfil  his 
joy  (chap.  ii.  2),  not  merely  by  the  proof  of  their  love 
to  him,  but  by  cultivating  unity  of  mind  and  mutual 
love  according  to  Christ,  who,  though  the  highest, 
made  Himself  the  lowest  in  grace,  and  is  now  exalted 
to  the  pinnacle  of  glory.  "  Yea,  and  if  I  be  offered 
(or,  poured  forth)  on  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  your 
faith,  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  you  all.  For  the  same 
cause  also  do  ye  joy  and  rejoice  with  me."  (Chap. 
ii.  17,  18.)  So,  again,  the  apostle  sends  away  his 
companion  and  solace,  Epaphroditus,  when  recovered, 
to  the  Philippians,  who  were  uneasy  at  the  tidings  of 
his  dangerous  sickness,  "  that  when  ye  see  him  again, 
ye  may  rejoice,  and  that  I  may  be  less  sorrowful." 
(Chap.  ii.  28.) 


68  PHILIPPIANS. 

But  there  is  a  joy  independent  of  all  passing  circum- 
stances, and  deeper  than  all  others  because  it  is  nearer 
to,  yea,  it  is  the  one  spring  of  all  joy:  it  is  to  this 
the  apostle  now  calls  them.  "  Finally  [or,  for  the 
rest],  my  brethren,  rejoice  in  the  Lord.^''  It  is  of  the 
deepest  moment  that  we,  that  all  saints,  should  heed 
the  call.  It  is  due  to  Him,  in  whom  we  are  exhorted 
to  rejoice,  that  we  should  bear  a  true  testimony  in  this 
respect.  I  say  not  a  testimony  worthy  of  Him,  for 
none  is,  save  that  which  God  the  Father  has  borne  and 
bears,  and  that  which  the  Holy  Ghost  renders  in  word 
and  deed.  Still,  great  as  our  shortcoming  is,  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  in  us  to  give  us  a  divine  appreciation  of  the 
Lord.  May  we  not  then  dishonour  Him  by  gloomy 
thoughts,  by  unbelieving  feelings,  by  ways  that  betoken 
fear,  doubt,  dissatisfaction,  yearning  after  creature 
pleasure  in  one  form  or  another ;  but  may  we  be  enabled 
by  faith,  heartily,  simply,  alone  or  with  others,  in  public 
and  in  private,  to  "  rejoice  in  the  Lord." 

It  was  thus  with  Paul  and  Silas  when  the  foundation 
of  the  assembly  at  Philippi  was  laid  at  midnight  in  the 
prison,  and  the  jailor  and  his  house  were  gathered 
among  the  first-fruits.  (Acts  xvi.  25 — 34.)  Long 
labours  had  intervened,  many  years  of  reproach  and 
suffering.  The  heart  of  the  apostle  fresh  as  ever? 
though  a  prisoner  at  Rome,  calls  on  the  saints  to  "rejoice 
in  the  Lord."  So  he  had  taught  when  with  them;  so 
he  had  already  urged  in  this  letter,  though  now  he 
presses  it  with  greater  distinctness  as  to  its  ground  and 


CHAPTEK  III.  69 

spring.  "  To  write  the  same  things  to  you,  to  me 
indeed  is  not  grievous,  but  for  you  it  is  safe."  It  was 
no  trouble  to  him,  for  he  loved  them  too  well  to  mind  it. 
It  was  safe  for  them,  for  Satan  threatened  otherwise. 
Joy  in  the  Lord  is  the  truest  safeguard  against  the 
religious  snares  of  the  enemy.  Where  the  truth  is 
known,  the  grand  thing  is  to  have  the  affections  kept 
on  the  right  object,  and  withal  in  happy  liberty.  This 
is  secured  by  rejoicing  in  the  Lord,  which  supposes  the 
heart  at  rest  in  His  grace,  and  Himself  known  and 
beloved,  the  most  attractive  and  precious  object  before 
us.  Put  Him  at  a  distance,  wrap  Him  in  clouds  and 
darkness,  think  of  Him  mainly  as  the  inflexible  Judge 
about  to  be  revealed  in  flaming  fire  taking  vengeance, 
mix  all  this  up  with  your  own  associations  and  relation- 
ships to  Him,  and  with  your  experience;  and  is  it  any 
wonder  that,  under  such  conditions,  peace  is  unknown, 
and  eternal  life  a  question  unsolved  and  insoluble  till 
the  day  of  death  or  judgment  ?  In  such  a  state 
"rejoice  in  the  Lord"  has  no  tangible  place,  no 
practical  application,  not  even  a  distinct  meaning;  and 
the  soul  is  exposed,  but  for  divine  mercy  which  by 
other  means  may  hinder  all,  to  sink  lower  and  lower 
into  the  dregs  and  deceits  of  Judaizers. 

Hence,  says  the  apostle,  "  beware  of  dogs,  beware 
of  evil  workers,  beware  of  the  concision."  (Ver.  2.) 
There  is  not  only  a  warning  to  take  heed,  but  accu- 
mulated and  bitter  scorn  of  these  high-minded  men. 
For,  rejecting  grace  and  not  submitting  to  the  righte- 


70  PHILIPPIANS. 

ousness  of  God,  they  were  restlessly  prowling  about, 
themselves  unclean,  whatever  their  pretensions;  their 
work  mischievous,  their  boasted  privileges  not  only  null 
but  despicable  in  the  extreme.  There  were  "  the  dogs" 
now,  not  Gentiles  even,  still  less  Christians,  as  such,  but 
the  Judaizers.  Evil  workmen  were  they,  and  not  the 
circumcision,  which  they  affected  literally  or  in  principle 
— they  were  but "  the  concision."  "  For  we^  the  apostle 
says  with  emphasis,  "  are  the  circumcision  (whatever 
we  might  have  been  in  the  flesh,  Jews  or  Gentiles — it 
mattered  not),  who  worship  God  in  the  Spirit,  [or, 
according  to  the  best  MSS.,  '  who  worship  by  God's 
Spirit'],  and  boast  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  trust  not  in 
flesh."  (Ver.  3.) 

It  is  a  mistake  to  imagine  that  these  adversaries  of 
God's  work  advocated  a  return  to  mere  Judaism.  Such 
there  were  elsewhere,  as  in  Hebrews,  but  they  are 
treated  as  apostates.  The  class  here  in  view  consists 
rather  of  persons  who  professed  Christianity,  but  sought 
to  blend  the  law  along  with  it,  a  system  of  evil  which, 
far  from  being  rare,  is  the  commonest  thing  now-a- 
days.  Do  you  not  hear  of  a  fresh  recourse  to  the  cross, 
and  fresh  sprinkling  of  the  blood  to  restore  the  soul?  Are 
there  not  souls  who  take  the  place  of  God's  children  and 
Church,  and  yet  confess  themselves  miserable  sinners, 
crying  for  mercy;  sheep  of  His  pasture,  yet  tied  and 
bound  with  the  chain  of  their  sins  ?  Does  not  this 
return  to  Jewish  experience,  under  tutors  and  governors, 
ignore  Christianity  and  annul  redemption  and  the  Spirit 


CHAPTER  III.  .  71 

of  adoption  ?  Are  there  not  notions  still  of  holy  places 
and  holy  castes,  holy  feast-days  and  fast-days,  and  ad- 
ministration of  sacraments  among  those  baptized  into 
Christ's  death  ?  The  word  of  God  is  read,  Christ  is 
more  or  less  preached,  but  these  unqnestionable  Jewish 
elements  are  mingled  with  what  is  Christian.  Hence 
human  forms  of  prayer,  ordinances,  &c.,  take  the  place 
of  God's  Spirit  as  the  power  of  worship ;  law-fulfilling 
(though  by  Christ)  is  openly  boasted  as  the  door 
into  heaven,  and  our  only  title  of  righteousness;  and 
thus  to  be  risen  with  Christ,  to  be  not  in  flesh  but 
in  Spirit,  is  supposed  to  be  a  fanatical  dream,  instead 
of  the  only  condition  which  the  Holy  Ghost  now  re- 
cognizes as  properly  Christian. 

Next,  in  verses  4 — 6,  the  apostle  briefly  exposes  the 
entire  baselessness  of  their  claims  in  comparison  of  his 
own,  if  flesh  availed  in  divine  things.  "  Though  / 
[again  speaking  emphatically]  have  trust  in  flesh  also; 
if  another  think  to  trust  in  flesh,  I  more:  in  circum- 
cision of  eight  days,  of  the  race  of  Israel,  a  Hebrew 
of  Hebrews;  as  to  the  law,  a  Pharisee;  as  to  zeal,  per- 
secuting the  Church;  as  to  righteousness  that  is  in  the 
law,  blameless."  Thus,  on  grounds  of  the  best  earthly 
stock,  due  honour  to  ancient  and  divine  ordinances,  a 
high  rank  acquired  in  the  school  of  tradition,  an  utter 
repudiation  and  hatred  of  new  light  in  religion,  and  a 
life  blameless  according  to  the  law,  who  could  stand  as 
firmly  as  Paul  ?  *'  But,"  adds  he,  "  what  things  were 
gain  to  me,  these  I  counted  loss  on  account  of  Christ. 


72  PHILIPPIANS. 

But  SO  then  I  also  count  all  things  to  be  loss  on  account 
of  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my 
Lord,  on  account  of  whom  I  suffered  the  loss  of  all, 
and  count  them  to  be  dung  [refuse],  that  I  may  win 
Christ  and  be  found  in  him,  not  having  my  righteous- 
ness, which  [is]  of  law,  but  that  which  is  by  faith  of 
Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  on  my  faith ; 
to  know  him,  and  the  power  of  his  resurrection,  and 
the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings,  being  conformed  to  his 
death,  if  by  any  means  I  may  arrive  at  the  resurrection 
which  is  from  out  of  the  dead."  (Ver.  7 — 11.) 

What  was  it,  then,  which  had  wrought  so  deep,  so 
permanent,  and,  as  we  know  from  Acts  ix.,  so  sudden 
a  change  ?  What  poured  contempt  on  every  natural,  on 
every  religious  advantage  from  his  birth  up  to  the  day 
when,  with  credentials  from  the  high  priest,  he  neared 
Damascus  ?  It  was  the  heavenly  vision  which  arrested 
him  on  the  way ;  it  was  Christ  seen  in  glory,  yet  one 
with  those  whom  his  infatuated  zeal  was  persecuting  to 
prison  and  death.  "  I  am  Jesus,  whom  thou  perse- 
cutest."  Sure  that  He  whose  light  shone  on  him 
brighter  than  the  noonday  sun  was  no  other  than  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel,  the  astonished  Saul  of  Tarsus 
learns  from  His  own  mouth  that  He  was  the  Crucified, 
whose  disciples  he  would  have  up  to  this  conscientiously 
exterminated.  No  wonder,  then,  that  the  converted, 
delivered  Israelite,  obedient  to  the  heavenly  vision, 
judges  all  things  by  this  new  and  divine  light.  A  new 
creature  in  Christ,  for  him  old  things  had  passed  away, 


CHAPTER  III.  73 

all  things  were  become  new;  all  things  were  of  that 
God  who  reconciled  to  Himself  by  Jesus  Christ.  Hence 
the  things  that  were  to  him  gains,  he  counted  loss 
on  account  of  Christ;  yea,  all  things  to  be  loss  on 
account  of  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge,  as  he  says 
with  such  affection, "  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord,"  on  whose 
account  he  not  only  suffered  the  loss  of  all  at  first,  but 
now  to  the  last  continued  to  count  them  refuse  that  he 
might  gain  Christ  (or,  have  Him  for  gain).  What 
was  his  boasted  righteousness  now  ?  His  one  thought 
was  to  be  found  in  Christ,  not  having  any  such  righte- 
ousness of  his  own,  which  must  be  legal,  but  that 
which  is  by  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is 
of  God  grounded  on  faith;  to  know  Christ  and  the 
power  of  His  resurrection  (not  even  Christ  on  this  side 
the  grave),  and  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings.  His 
eye  was  on  Christ  above,  and  if  he  added  aught  of 
Christ  here,  it  was  not  in  His  deeds  of  power,  nor  His 
recognition  of  the  ancient  sheepfold,  but  in  the  moral 
glory  of  His  sufferings.  It  was  in  that  which  proved 
the  total  alienation  of  man  from  God  in  his  good  things, 
not  in  his  bad  alone;  in  his  religion,  and  not  merely 
in  his  lusts  and  passions.  His  own  experience  was  the 
witness  of  it.  His  confidence  in  the  tradition  of  the 
elders,  in  Israel,  in  the  law  even,  was  ruin  and  rebellion 
to  God  as  He  now  reveals  Himself  in  Him  who  died 
and  rose  and  ascended.  Nothing,  consequently,  has 
the  trust  of  his  soul  or  value  in  his  eyes,  but  Christ; 
and  even  if  he  could  have  anything  else  that  looked 


74  PHILIPPIANS. 

good,  he  would  know  none  but  Christ,  and  have  nothing 
but  Christ  the  sufferer,  risen  and  in  heaven,  as  his 
portion.  Hence  conformity  to  His  death  was  now  a 
jewel  to  be  won,  rather  than  an  evil  to  be  shunned. 
Let  the  path  be  ever  so  dangerous,  come  what  might, 
all  would  be  welcome,  "  if  by  any  means  I  may  arrive 
at  the  resurrection  from  out  of  the  dead."  (Ver.  1].)* 
This  last  is  not  an  expression  of  fear  of  failure,  but 
of  a  heart  which  so  prized  the  blessing  of  being 
thus  with  Christ  as  to  mind  no  suffering  that  might 
intervene. 

Whatever  the  pathway  might  be,  the  apostle  inti- 
mated, as  we  have  seen,  that  he  must  be  there.     Such 

*  It  is  surprising  that  such  critics  as  Griesbach  and  Matthaei 
should  have  edited  a  mere  blunder  like  the  received  text;  for 
€|  avda-Taaiv  roiv  veKpwv  seems  to  me  hardly  sense,  even  if  Greek. 
It  is  certain  that  the  apostle  did  not  mean  that  which  is  common 
and  inevitable  to  the  dead  (i.  e.,  all  as  a  class) ;  which  is  the  sense  of 
rSiv  vcKpuv.  A  special  privilege  he  meant,  which  is  precisely  what 
the  vulgar  reading  does  not  suggest  nor  even  bear.  But  the  fact 
is  that  the  Alexandrian,  Vatican,  Sinai,  Palimpsest  of  Paris, 
Clermont,  and  St.  Germain  uncials,  with  at  least  ten  cursive 
manuscripts,  read  r^v  4k  (instead  of  rwv),  and  so  the  Itala, 
Vulgate,  Syriac,  Arabic,  and  the  early  Greek  and  Latin  fathers. 
The  received  text  has  no  support  more  ancient  than  two  uncials  of 
the  ni7ith  century,  though  most  cursives  are  in  its  favour;  it 
probably,  as  1  conceive,  grew  out  of  tuv  ck,  the  reading  of  Codd., 
Aug.,  and  Boern.  This,  being  clearly  wrong,  may  have  been  cor- 
rected by  scribes  into  rav,  omitting  eK,  instead  of  t^v  e/c,  the  true 
reading  beyond  all  doubt.  C.  A.  Bode,  in  his  Psedocritica  Millio. 
Bengeliana,  mistakes  the  matter.  For  it  is  not  a  question,  as  he 
imagines  (Vol.  ii.,  p.  290),  between  e/c  v.  and  tV  e/c  p.,  but 
between  ruv  and  ri]v  e/c.  And  it  is  plain  on  his  own  showing  that 
the  Oriental  versions  confirm  the  latter  against  the  former. 


CHAPTER  III.'  75 

was  the  value  of  the  resurrection  of  the  just  in  his 
eyes.  Like  the  Israelite  in  Psalm  Ixxxiv.  on  his  way 
to  Jerusalem,  the  ways  were  in  his  heart.  He  loved 
the  way  of  Jesus,  of  His  sufferings,  of  the  cross,  and 
not  merely  the  glory  at  the  end.  *'  Not  as  though  I 
had  already  attained  [literally,  received,  i.e.,  the  prize], 
or  am  already  perfected."  It  was  not  a  question  merely 
of  the  soul's  happiness.  "  I  would  to  God,"  he  had 
said  to  king  Agrippa,  "  that  not  only  thou,  but  also  all 
that  hear  me  this  day,  were  both  almost  and  altogether 
such  as  I  am,  except  these  bonds."  Who  of  all  men 
was  so  happy  as  St.  Paul  ?  Yet  he  warns  us  against 
supposing  that  he  had  yet  obtained  what  he  desired. 
There  is  no  such  thing  as  getting  the  prize  till  we  are  in 
the  resurrection  from  amongst  the  dead.  But  he  adds, 
"  I  follow  after  [or  pursue],  if  also  I  may  lay  hold,  for 
that  also  I  am  laid  hold  on  by  Christ."  (Ver.  12.)  He 
keeps  his  eye  fixed  upon  Christ  all  the  way  through  as 
well  as  at  last.  This  was  the  strength  of  his  triumph- 
ing over  all  the  difficulties  that  lay  between.  No 
present  experience,  no  actual  joy  detains  his  heart  from 
God's  end.  The  apostle  wanted  to  gain  possession  of 
Christ  by  and  by ;  but  also  Christ  had  possession  of 
himself  already. 

"  Brethren,  /  count  not  myself  to  have  laid  hold 
[whatever  others  might  dream] ;  but  one  thing,  forget- 
ting the  things  behind,  and  stretching  out  to  the  things 

before,  I  pursue "  (Ver.  13.)    The  apostle  does  not 

mean  that  one  ought  to  overlook,  or  that  he  did  over- 


76  PHILIPPTANS. 

look  his  past  sins  and  failure.  On  the  contrary,  it  is 
most  evil  to  forget  what  Christ  has  suffered  for  our 
sakes,  and  also  the  manifold  ways  wherein  we  have  dis- 
honoured God.  This  will  not  at  all  interfere  w^ith 
settled  peace — rather  the  reverse.  A  man  can  rejoice 
so  much  the  more  in  the  Lord  if  he  fully  judge  his 
failure.  It  is  the  tendency  of  a  conscience  not 
thoroughly  happy  to  desire  to  escape  from  thinking  of 
anything  in  which  we  have  consciously  turned  aside  to 
the  grief  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  a  right  thing  to 
search  ourselves  through  and  through,  it  is  right  to 
ask  God  to  search  and  try  us,  and  to  lead  us  in  the  way 
everlasting.  Confidence  in  grace,  so  far  from  weaken- 
ing the  sense  of  our  own  shortcomings  or  covering  over 
our  failure,  is  the  very  spring  that  enables  us  to  see  and 
deal  with  the  reality  of  things  in  the  presence  of  God. 
Thus  the  apostle  speaks  of  "  forgetting  the  things 
behind,"  not  with  reference  to  his  failure,  but  rather  to 
his  points  of  progress,  the  steps  or  stages  in  which  he 
had  made  advance  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  In- 
stead of  dwelling  upon  any  attainment,  as  if  it  were 
something  to  be  thought  of  (like  the  Pharisee  com- 
paring himself  with  his  neighbour),  here  we  have  this 
blessed  man  forgetting  all  that  might  have  fed  self- 
complacency  or  been  creditable  to  himself.  His  back 
■was  on  the  ground  traversed.  "  Stretching  out  to  the 
things  before,  I  pursue  toward  the  goal  for  the  prize  of 
the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Ver.  14.) 
This  can  only  be  in  the  resurrection  state.      Till  then 


CHAPTER  III.  77 

he  was  content  to  run.     This  was  his  one  business.     It 
was  to  live  Christ,  because  Christ  was  his  object. 

But  now  follows  another  thing  which  we  need  to  bear 
in  mind.  We  find  different  conditions  and  not  at  all 
the  same  degree  of  progress  made  by  the  children  of 
God.  What  then  is  the  grand  principle  to  guide  us  ? 
Let  us  suppose  a  company  of  believers  gathered  to- 
gether, all  of  the  same  mind,  every  one  of  them  brought 
tip  to  think  exactly  alike,  from  baptism  with  water  to 
the  coming  and  kingdom  of  Christ,  their  minds  made  up 
and  consenting  even  about  points  of  detail.  Would  this 
satisfy  the  heart  ?  Would  it  give  a  just  witness  to  the 
ways  of  God  towards  His  children  ?  I  dare  not  think  so. 
It  is  sweet  where  God  brings  souls  by  exercise  of  spiritual 
judgment  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
feel  alike.  But  where  sameness  is  the  result  of  dinning 
one  doctrine  into  people's  heads,  and  by  rules  and  regu- 
lations which  squeeze  minds  into  monotony,  can  any- 
thing be  more  miserable  ?  The  apostle  lays  down  the 
only  divine  rule  for  dealing  with  these  cases.  We  have 
to  do  with  a  state  of  things,  where  there  exist  all 
varieties  of  attainments.  In  heaven  we  shall  know  as 
we  are  known ;  but  the  question  is  how  to  bear  our- 
selves about  these  things  here.  It  is  a  natural  desire 
that  all  should  grow  and  rise  to  a  certain  height  of  the 
stature  of  Christ.  But  are  we  not  apt  to  confound  the 
point  desired  with  our  own  idea  of  it  ?  to  desire  that 
people  should  have  our  mind  ?  This  we  have  to  guard 
against;  and  the  true  corrective  is  given  here. 


78  PHILIPPIANS. 

"As  many,  therefore,  as  be  perfect,  let  us  be  thus 
minded."  (Ver.  15.)  He  speaksof  himself  and  others  also, 
as  being  "  perfect ;"  but  there  is  no  contradiction  of  what 
went  before.  When  he  had,  in  verse  12,  disclaimed  as 
yet  the  reception  of  the  prize  and  being  perfected,  he 
meant  that  he  was  not  yet  out  of  the  conflict  in  a  resur- 
rection condition.  But  when  he  here  exhorts  "  as 
many  as  be  perfect,"  he  means  those  who  are  of  full 
age  in  the  faith,  thoroughly  grounded  in  the  christian 
position,  entering  into  it  by  faith  and  spiritual  intelli- 
gence. It  means  a  Christian  who  is  not  a  babe,  but 
full  grown;  not,  of  course,  a  Christian  who  has  tho- 
roughly finished  his  course,  for  this  is  in  resurrection, 
but  one  who  has  become  a  man  in  Christ.  We  shall 
not  have  grown  up  into  the  full  likeness  of  Christ  till 
He  comes  and  transforms  us  like  to  His  glory.  But 
there  is  such  a  thing  even  here  as  growing  into  the  full 
knowledge  of  the  mind  of  God,  and  it  is  through  having 
got  Christ  in  glory  before  us  now  the  personal  object  of 
our  souls.  But  suppose  there  are  others  among  the 
children  of  God  still  in  difficulty  and  doubt,  what  then  ? 
Are  we  to  make  them  adopt  our  feelings  and  judg- 
ments about  things  ?  Certainly  not.  It  would  be  a 
positive  loss,  unless  it  were  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  leading  the  saints  into  a  fuller  apprehen- 
sion of  Christ. 

The  reference  here  is  not  to  such  matters  of  faith  or 
practice  as  preclude  difference.  We  ought  not  to  have 
a  hesitation  where  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  concerned. 


CHAPTER  III.  79 

There  can  be  no  question  about  sin.  It  is  taken  for 
granted  in  the  Bible  that  no  difference  of  mind  could  be 
tolerated  where  Christ  is  at  stake.  All  saints  instinc- 
tively see  the  enormity  of  bringing  in  moral  evil  to  the 
table  of  the  Lord.  The  Holy  Ghost  counts  upon  our 
resenting  affronts  to  God.  Allegiance  to  Him  com- 
mands the  conscience  and  rouses  the  heart  of  every 
saint  of  God  if  properly  stated.  These  things  God 
reckons  upon.  Nor  is  it  only  the  wise  and  intelligent 
who  are  able  to  judge  things  of  the  sort,  but  the  babes 
also.  The  only  cases  that  ought  to  be  brought  before 
the  Church  as  such  are  those  which  every  believer  is 
able  to  judge.  It  is  quite  a  mistake  to  drag  habitually 
everything  before  the  assembly  ;  but  where  things 
come  out  of  an  evidently  immoral  or  of  an  heretical  cha- 
racter, there  any  saint  rejects  the  poison,  one  as  much 
as  another.  It  is  not  the  babes  who  have  difficulties 
or  who  give  trouble,  as  a  general  rule.  How  often 
clever,  intelligent  people  do  the  mischief,  while  the 
simple-minded  would  feel  the  evil  of  such  things  at  once ! 
Here  on  the  contrary  the  matters  spoken  of  are  such  as 
some  saints  might  feel,  and  not  others.  There  might 
be  practical  or  doctrinal  questions,  as  the  particular 
manner  in  which  children  ought  to  be  brought  up,  or 
the  style  of  living,  furniture  or  house.  There  one  must 
be  content  to  point  out  the  holy  principles  of  God,  not 
to  assume  hastily  that  our  own  measure  is  such  that  w« 
ought  to  attempt  to  make  every  other  adjust  his  chil- 
dren or  house  by  it.     God  is  jealous  that  He  should 


80  PHILIPPIANS. 

have  the  forming  of  His  saints.  A  good  example  is 
precious  and  we  cannot  be  too  careful  as  to  the  ways  we 
allow.  But  having  said  this,  it  is  for  the  children  of  God 
to  examine  themselves  conscientiously  by  His  word. 
In  such  things  we  must  be  patient  and  look  for  the 
action  of  God  by  His  own  truth  on  the  souls  of  His 
saints. 

We  may  suggest  what  we  can  of  the  truth  of  God  to 
influence  the  heart;  but  there  is  no  rule  absolute  to  be 
laid  down  by  any  on  points  like  these.  One  has  often 
known  persons  who  began  strongly  with  a  certain  idea 
which  governed  them,  and  with  which  they  zealously 
sought  to  go\!ern  others.  How  long  does  it  stand?  In 
the  very  thing  on  which  they  have  prided  themselves, 
they  are  apt  to  break  down.  It  is  Christ  whom  God 
makes  the  standard  of  everything.  All  else  fails.  Why 
push  so  strongly  and  in  haste?  "  If  in  anything  ye  be 
otherwise  minded,  God  shall  reveal  even  this  unto  you.'* 
There  is  no  need  then  to  be  anxious.  "  Nevertheless 
whereto  we  have  attained,  walk  by  the  same."  (Ver.  16.) 
So  far  as  we  are  occupied  with  Christ  together  and  see 
His  mind  or  will,  it  is  of  great  importance  that  we 
should  walk  together. 

But  the  apostle  goes  farther  ;  he  refers  to  his 
own  example  and  points  out  as  a  beacon  the  walk 
of  some,  once  owned  as  brethren.  Need  I  say  that  it 
was  no  fleshly  thing  in  the  apostle  thus  to  speak  of 
himself?  As  a  mere  man,  a  person  would  be  ashamed  to 
talk  about  himself;  it  would  be  but  a  piece  of  vanity. 


CHAPTER  III.  81 

The  apostle  was  so  completely  raised  above  the  thoughts 
of  men,  he  so  thoroughly  realized  the  power  of  God  in 
Christ,  that  it  just  illustrated  the  energy  of  the  Spirit 
in  him.  He  was  led  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  speak  thus. 
He  calls  upon  them  therefore  to  be  imitators  together  of 
him,  and  to  mark  those  that  walk  so  as  ye  have  us  for  an 
example.  (Ver.  17.)  "  For  many  walk  of  whom  I  have 
told  you  often  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping  that  they 
are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ;  whose  end  is 
destruction,  whose  god  is  the  belly  and  glory  in  their 
shame,  who  mind  earthly  things."  (Ver.  18, 19.)  We  are 
not  even  told  whether  these  men  had  been  put  away  from 
the  Church  of  God.  They  are  characterized  as  enemies  of 
the  cross  of  Christ  and  yet  they  may  not  have  been  for- 
mally without.  If  so,  what  a  deplorable  state  of  things 
before  the  eyes  of  the  apostle !  persons  probably  not 
guilty  of  such  flagrant  wickedness  as  to  require  ex- 
cision ;  and  yet  the  source  of  the  deepest  sorrow  to  the 
apostle.  They  were  going  on  carelessly,  indifferently. 
How  awful  to  view  some  within  perhaps  with  less  hope 
than  others  put  away  for  flagrant  sin  !  We  all  know 
how  truly  this  is  verified  in  the  present  state  of  Christen- 
dom. How  many  bear  the  name  of  Christ  who  by  their 
ways  show  there  is  not  the  slightest  breath  of  divine 
life  in  them  !  Professing  to  know  God,  in  works  they 
deny  Him. 

This  drew  out  the  tears  of  the  apostle  even  in  the 
midst  of  his  joy ;  but  he  turns  it  to  practical  profit,  call- 
ing on  the  saints  to  take  heed.     Let  us  watch  against  the 

G 


82  PHILIPPIANS. 

beginnings  of  self-indulgence  or  allowing  earthliuess. 
**  For  our  conversation  (citizenship)  is  in  heaven,"  our 
real  association  is  with  Him  who  is  there.  Whatever 
we  might  have  been  as  citizens  of  the  earth,  it  is  at  an 
end  now  and  for  ever.  We  belong  to  Christ  on  high.  It 
is  not  merely  that  we  are  going  there,  but  we  belong  to 
heaven  now.  Our  commonwealth,  our  citizenship  is 
there,  and  therefore  from  thence  also  "  we  look  for  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  Saviour."  He  has  decided  to  have 
us  in  entire  fellowship  with  the  home  to  which  w^e  per- 
tain, because  it  is  His.  He  is  coming  from  heaven,  and, 
when  He  does,  "  he  will  change  our  body  of  humiliation 
so  as  to  be  conformed  to  the  body  of  His  glory  accord- 
ing to  the  working  whereby  He  is  able  also  to  subdue 
all  things  to  Himself."  Then  we  shall  be  manifested 
what  we  now  are  in  call,  life,  and  desire.  We  are  now 
heavenly  and  then  we  shall  be  declared  and  proved  to 
be  so.  We  belong  to  heaven  even  while  we  are  upon 
the  earth :  then  it  will  be  made  plain  that  we  had  no 
real  link  with  the  earth,  but  with  Christ  above. 

The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  seek  to  bring  this  into 
everything  with  which  we  have  to  do,  into  the  heart, 
the  home,  and  the  whole  life.  He  has  made  us  His 
friends,  and  may  we  be  enabled,  with  a  purged  con- 
science and  with  a  heart  rejoicing  in  Himself,  to  look 
onward  to  that  blessed  moment  when  we  shall  prove 
Him  true  to  all  the  hopes  He  has  given  us. 


CHAPTER  ly. 

The  main  truth  which  was  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle 
and  which  the  Lord  was  using  him  to  lay  upon  the 
hearts  of  the  Philippian  saints  was  now  clearly  ex- 
pressed and  enforced.  The  rest  of  the  epistle,  this  last 
chapter,  consists  rather  in  the  connected  exhortations 
and  practical  use  to  which  it  was  turned  for  present 
profit.  Indeed  it  may  have  been  noticed  that,  through- 
out, this  epistle  is  eminently  practical.  Every  whit  of 
it  has  an  immediate  and  important  bearing  upon  the 
communion  and  walk  of  the  saint  of  God.  Of  course 
in  a  general  way  there  is  no  truth  which  is  not  meant 
to  deal  with  the  heart  and  walk  in  some  way  or  another; 
yet  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  this  epistle  is  re- 
markable for  nothing  more  than  for  its  being  the  per- 
sonal experience  of  the  apostle  himself  seeking  to  raise 
the  experience  of  the  saints  at  Philippi  to  the  same 
measure,  yea,  according  to  the  standard  of  Christ  Him- 
self. Accordingly,  having  shown  us  Christ  fully, 
both  as  an  example  here  below  and  as  a  motive  in 
heaven  (the  earthly  example  being  specially  given  in 
chapter  ii.,  and  the  heavenly  motive  in  chapter  iii.), 
now  comes  the  practical  object  to  which  it  is  applied. 

"  Therefore,"  says  he,  "my  brethren, dearly  beloved  and 
longed  for,  my  joy  and  crown,  so  stand  fast  in  the  Lord, 
my  dearly  beloved."     It  is  evident  that  the  spiritual 


84  PHILIPPIANS. 

affections  of  the  apostle  were  deeply  moved.  Brotherly 
love  was  flowing  out  powerfully,  and  not  the  less  be- 
cause he  had  been  occupied  with  Christ,  with  the  deep 
feeling  of  what  Christ  had  been  and  is,  and  with  the 
joyous  anticipation  of  that  which  the  saints  are  des- 
tined to  be  when  they  see  Him  coming  from  heaven 
in  the  fulness  of  His  grace  and  power,  changing  even 
their  very  bodies  of  humiliation  that  they  may  be 
fashioned  like  unto  His  glorious  body.  Salvation  being 
only  then  and  there  complete,  he  bids  them  "  to  stand 
fast  in  the  Lord,  my  dearly  beloved."  And  so  much 
the  more  because  it  would  appear  that  there  were  some 
among  them  who  were  at  variance  one  with  another. 
Things  were  working  there  which  separated  in  the  way 
of  affection,  or  at  least,  in  the  service  of  the  Lord,  those 
who  had  been  engaged  in  it  from  earliest  days.  And 
this  may  be  found  where  there  is  nothing  at  work  of  a 
scandalous  character,  because  the  very  ardour  and  zeal 
of  the  servant  of  God  may  easily  carry  him,  if  there  be 
not  adequate  occupation  with  Christ,  into  danger; 
even  service  ensnares  and  imperils  where  it  becomes  an 
object  instead  of  Christ.  It  would  appear  that  such 
was  the  case  with  some  active  saints  at  Philippi,  "  I 
beseech  Euodia,  and  I  beseech  Syntyche  that  they  be  of 
the  same  mind  in  the  Lord :  yea,  I  entreat  thee  also 
true  yoke-fellow,  help  them  [i.  e.,  these  women  just 
named],  seeing  that  they  contended  with  me  in  the 
gospel,  with  Clement  also  and  the  rest  of  my  fellow- 
labourers  whose  names  are  in  the  book  of  life." 


CHAPTER  IV.  85 

Now,  it  is  plain  tliat  there  are  two  things  which  the 
apostle  here  presses.     First  is  the  great  importance  of 
having  the  same  mind  not  only  in  the  Lord  but  also  in 
the  work  of  the  Lord.     The  danger  is  of  having  some 
aim  or  way  of  our  own  in  that  holy  occupation.     The 
Lord  is  assuredly  jealous  over  those  whom  He  employs 
and  He  works  continually  to  preserve  each  servant  in 
the  immediate  sense  of  his  own  responsibility  to  Him- 
self.    No  one  need  fear  that  this  would  interfere  with 
mutual  respect  or  hinder  the  outflow  of  divine  affection 
linking  together  the  various  servants  of   God.     Man 
would  think  so  because  he  must  judge  from  his  own 
selfish  heart.     It  is  the  flesh  that  seeks  its  own  things; 
while  the   Spirit  of  Christ,  whatever  may  be  its  holy 
judgment  of  evil,  is  never  selfish.     It  is  the  grossest 
mistake  to  suppose  that  where  the  heart  is  brought  to 
estimate  all  things  according  to  God,  you  bring  in  an 
element  of  division  between  brethren;  not  this,  but  the 
indulgence  of  flesh  opens  the  door  to  strife  and  schism. 
Supposing  a  child  of  God  who  has  gone  astray,  \vhat  is 
it  that  separates  him  from  his  brethren  ?     Nothing  but 
the  evil  that  has  been  indulged  in.     The  Holy  Ghost 
acts  in  the  man's  soul;  now   he  feels,  confesses,  and 
separates   from  that  which  is   fleshly.      At  once  the 
balance  is  restored  and  you  are  more  united  in  love 
with  that  erring   soul  than,   perhaps,  you   ever   were 
before.     Up  to  that  time  there  may  have  been  much 
which  hindered  fellowship.     The  irritability  of  spirit, 
the  censoriousness,  the  vanity,  the  self-coniidence  broke 


86  PHILIPPIANS. 

out  too  often  in  the  very  service  and  worship  of  God — 
all  this  had  previously  produced  many  an  anxious  feel- 
ing for  spiritual  minds,  and  this  just  because  there  was 
real  love  to  his  soul.  The  consequence  was  so  far 
that  which  separated,  not  in  outward  walk,  but  in  fellow- 
ship of  heart;  whereas  the  moment  there  was  the 
genuine  action  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God — sin  having 
actually,  perhaps,  broken  out  because  of  nature  not 
being  judged  and  the  separation  having  become  com- 
plete— the  moment  the  evil  is  dealt  with  even  in  the 
man's  spirit,  and  he  owns  frankly  that  he  has  sinned 
against  the  Lord,  your  heart  is  knit  to  him  and 
you  have  a  confidence  in  him  which  may  never  have 
existed  before.  The  notion  is  false,  therefore,  that 
serious  judgment  of  evil  is  what  divides  between  bre- 
thren. On  the  contrary,  it  is  evil  (not  separation  from 
it)  which  sows  discord  or  makes  separation  necessary 
among  brethren.  Gracious  separation  from  evil  knits 
the  heart  of  those  who  are  true  with  the  Lord.  It  is 
holiness  in  fact.  Apart  from  sin  there  is  the  enjoy- 
ment of  God  Himself  and  of  His  good  and  acceptable 
will.  In  this  world  holiness  implies  the  judgment  of 
evil  and  separation  from  it  in  heart  and  practice,  as  far 
as  we  are  concerned.  The  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  that  which  gathers  the  children  of  God  on  the 
ground  that  all  their  evil  has  been  judged  there  and 
separated  from  them  for  ever  by  His  death.  No  matter 
how  you  look  at  it,  in  every  case  it  is  evil  that  divides, 
and  it  is  the  judgment  of  evil  that  unites,  hearts  in  an  evil 


CHAPTER  IV.  87 

world  according  to  God.  Any  unity  of  the  children  of 
God  would  be  a  positive  sin  against  Him  if  it  were  not 
founded  upon  separation  from  evil.  Having  referred  to 
the  broad  and  fundamental  principle  of  separation  from 
evil,  which  will  be  foand  to  be  eminently  practical,  we 
may  turn  now  to  see  its  application  to  the  matter 
1/  before  us. 

At  Philippi  there  rose  before  the  apostle's  heart 
godly  persons  there  at  work;  but  work  is  not  always 
Christ  and  may  be  division.  The  tendency  is  not  un- 
common to  disparage  what  another  is  found  doing,  and 
to  exalt  ourselves  in  what  we  may  know  to  be  our  own 
line  of  things.  This  tends  to  break  up  happy  fellow- 
ship of  heart,  and,  where  there  is  anything  of  a  spiritual 
atmosphere,  these  things  are  deeply  felt.  Among  the 
Corinthians  this  was  but  a  small  thing  compared  with 
the  grosser  evils  that  were  active  in  their  midst ;  but  at 
Philippi  where  the  state  was  comparatively  healthy  and 
blessed,  where  also  the  spirit  of  obedience  reigned  as  we 
know,  the  lack  of  harmony  from  whatever  cause  it  may 
have  sprung  becomes  of  importance,  and  the  variance 
therefore  of  these  two  sisters  is  pressed  home  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  but  not  before  ample  comfort  had  been 
ministered,  which  would  encourage  their  hearts  to  look 
to  Christ.  How  tender,  and  withal  how  personal,  is 
the  appeal  to  each  of  these  christian  women !  "  I  ex- 
hort Euodia  and  I  exhort  Syntyche  that  they  be  of 
the  same  mind  in  the  Lord."  He  begins  with  the 
Lord,  not  with  the  service,  though  the  variance  may 


88  PHIL1PPIAN8. 

have  grown  up  in  its  course.  He  calls  on  them  one  by 
one  (for  one  might  hear  if  not  the  other)  to  be  of  the 
same  mind  in  the  Lord.  Depend  upon  it  that,  where 
the  Lord  occupies  us,  differences  soon  dwindle.  Having 
each  the  eye  fixed  upon  the  Lord,  there  is  found  a  com- 
mon object  of  attraction,  and  thus  the  enemy's  hope  of 
producing  alienation  is  defeated  at  once. 

He  adds  a  request  also  to  his  true  yoke-fellow.  I  sup- 
pose the  reference  is  to  Epaphroditus,  of  whom  he  had 
spoken  with  ardent  affection  in  chapter  ii.  "  Yoke"  in 
Scripture  is  a  badge  of  union  or  of  subjection,  as  the 
case  may  be,  in  service.  Thus,  in  2  Corinthians  vi.,  the 
believer  is  told  not  to  be  unequally  yoked  with  unbe- 
lievers. Many  narrow  that  scripture  to  the  natural 
relationship  of  marriage.  But  though  the  marriage 
tie  between  believers  and  unbelievers  is  evidently  not 
according  to  God,  yet  I  doubt  that  there  is  any  par- 
ticular allusion  to  it  in  that  scripture.  The  object 
there  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is  to  take  up  the  commixture 
of  the  believer  with  the  unbeliever  in  the  service  and 
worship  of  God.  The  apostle  brings  forward  the  tem- 
ple of  God  as  well  as  individual  matters,  and  shows 
that  we  are  not  to  have  fellowship  corporately  any  more 
than  individually  with  unbelievers.  I  only  refer  to  it 
now  because  it  is  often  put  aside  from  the  consciences 
of  the  children  of  God  through  the  mistaken  habit  of 
referring  it  to  marriage;  whereas,  it  is  plain  on  the 
face  of  it  that  the  direction  the  Holy  Gnost  gives 
would  not  strictly  apply  to  marriage.     Bad  as  it  is  for 


CHAPTER  IV.  89 

a  believer  to  marry  an  unbeliever,  God  does  not  even 
then  say,  Come  out  from  the  relationship;  leave  your 
wife;  part  from  your  husband.  Apply  it  to  its  legiti- 
mate object  (viz.,  fellowship  with  unbelievers  in  the 
things  of  God),  and  then  you  have  a  maxim  of  deep 
and  urgent  importance.  I  am  not  to  unite  with  the 
world  in  any  one  thing  that  concerns  the  service  and 
worship  of  God.  This  is  the  true  meaning  of  being 
unequally  ?/o/je<^.  "  Come  out  and  be  separate"  is  then  the 
special  word  that  applies  to  any  such  unholy  alliance. 

This  makes  all  plain,  when  men  ask  if  we  are  not  to  do 
anything  for  the  world  ?  If  there  is  sorrow  and  want, 
am  I  not  to  help  sufferers  ?  Surely  if  there  be  a  pecu- 
liar duty  to  the  household  of  faith,  I  am  also  bound  to 
do  good  unto  all  men;  but  there  is  no  yoking  together 
with  others  outside  Christ  in  this,  and  no  communion. 
The  worldly  man  gives  because  he  is  generous,  or  feels 
for  the  need  of  the  person,  or  is  expected  to  give.  The 
child  of  God  does  it  because  it  is  the  will  of  God.  The 
one  acts  on  the  ground  of  nature,  the  other  in  faith. 
Even  in  the  most  ordinary  necessary  acts,  as  eating  and 
drinking,  I  may  and  ought  to  do  it  all  to  God's  glory. 
Supposing  a  man  drowning,  or  a  house  on  fire,  there  is 
a  claim  of  course  on  any  man ;  but  to  use  the  help  that 
a  servant  of  God  might  render  on  such  occasions,  as  a 
reason  for  joining  the  world  with  the  saint  in  the  ser- 
vice of  God,  is  to  deceive  or  be  deceived — it  may  be,  will- 
ingly. I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  to  put  an 
unbeliever  on  the  ground  of  joining  in  prayers  and 


90  PHILIPPIANS. 

hymns  and  taking  the  Lord's  Supper,  to  sanction  his 
joining  with  you  in  such  services,  is  as  far  as  you  can  to 
damage  if  not  destroy  his  soul.  No  believer  would  act 
thus  without  an  object  other  than  Christ.  What  the 
Holy  Ghost  seeks  for  the  unregenerate  soul  is  to  con- 
vince him  of  his  ruin ;  but,  if  yoked  with  you  in  God's 
work  or  temple,  you  are  cheating  him  (or  he  you)  into  a 
false  ground.  You  thus  far  treat  him  as  an  acceptable 
worshipper  and  make  him  think  that  he  is  doing  God's 
service  as  truly,  though  perhaps  not  so  well,  as  your- 
self. This  is  as  contrary  to  holiness  as  to  love,  equally 
opposed  to  God's  glory  and  man's  good. 

Were  these  godly  energetic  women  now  apart  in 
spirit  ?  He  not  only  exhorts  each  separately,  but  asks 
Epaphroditus  as  I  suppose,  the  true  yoke-fellow  of  the 
apostle,  to  help  them.  For  these  women  had  shared 
the  apostle's  sufferings  in  the  gospel  when  it  entered 
Philippi.  It  is  not,  ^'•And  entreat  thee,"  as  in  the 
English  version  or  the  commonly  received  text ;  nor  is 
it,  *'  Yea  and,"  &c.  The  best  authorities  omit  "  and" 
altogether,  which  was  a  corruption  of  "  yea."  For  the 
apostle  is  continuing  in  verse  3  the  same  thought  as  in 
verse  2,  and  is  urging  his  dear  and  true  yoke-fellow 
at  Philippi  to  succour  those  previously  named  women 
(not  others,  as  the  ordinary  rendering  might  convey), 
"  the  which"  (amj/e?)  or  "  since  they"  contended  with  him 
in  the  gospel.  It  is  not  said  that  they  preached;  there 
is  no  reference  to  public  service  here.  There  is  a  great 
difference  between  preaching  the  gospel  and  sharing 


CHAPTER  IV.  91 

the  contentions  of  the  gospel.  Even  a  man  might 
have  laboured  diligently  and  never  have  preached  in 
his  life;  and  there  might  be  some  striving  every  day 
in  the  gospel  as  diligently,  or  more  so  even,  than  those 
who  preached  it  every  day.  There  is  beautiful  choice 
in  the  language  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  all  ought  to 
know  that  the  New  Testament  puts  the  christian 
•woman  in  the  place  of  exceeding  blessedness,  removing 
every  thought  that  would  give  her  an  inferior  place 
in  Christ,  but  it  puts  her  also  at  the  same  time 
in  the  back  ground,  wherever  it  is  a  case  of  public 
action.  Here  officially,  so  to  speak,  the  man  is  called 
to  be  uncovered,  the  woman  to  be  veiled.  She  is  thus 
as  it  were  put  behind  the  man,  whereas,  when  you 
speak  of  our  privileges  in  Christ,  there  is  neither 
male  nor  female.  It  is  of  importance  to  see  where 
there  is  no  difference  and  where  there  is.  The  First 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  is  most  plain  that  the  head  of 
the  woman  is  the  man,  and  as  Christ  is  the  glory 
of  the  man,  so  the  man  is  the  glory  of  the  woman. 
We  find  there  the  administrative  difference  between 
the  man  and  the  woman.  When  you  come  to  the 
heavenly  privileges  we  have  in  Christ,  all  these  dis- 
tinctions disappear.  There  is  no  public  action  that  I 
know  in  the  world  or  in  the  Church  allotted  to  the 
christian  woman.  As  to  private  dealing  with  souls,  the 
case  is  different.  In  their  father's  house,  the  four 
daughters  of  Philip  may  have  prophesied.  They  were 
evidently  highly  gifted  women ;  for  it  is  not  said  of 


9^  PHILIPPIANS. 

them  that  they  laboured  in  the  gospel,  but  that  they 
prophesied — one  of  the  highest  forms  of  gift  from 
Christ.  At  the  same  time  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  tells 
us  that  a  woman  might  and  did  prophesy  as  a  fact, 
instructs  us  that  it  is  forbidden  to  a  woman  to  speak  in 
the  Church  where  prophesying  properly  had  its  course. 
But  there  a  woman  was  forbidden  to  speak,  not  even 
allowed  to  ask  a  question,  much  less  to  give  an  answer. 
Yet  as  to  the  private  scene,  at  home,  even  with  an 
Apollos,  a  woman  might  fitly  act:  that  is,  if  she  acted 
under  and  with  her  husband.  Priscilla  might  be  of 
more  spiritual  weight  than  Aquila;  but  this  very  thing 
would  lead  her  to  be  the  more  careful  to  take  an  unob- 
trusive lowly  place.  The  yoke-fellow  of  the  apostle 
seems  to  have  been  somewhat  timid  of  helping  these 
women.  The  apostle,  accordingly,  entreats  him  also  as 
he  had  exhorted  him.  "  Help  those  women  in  that 
they  contended  with  me  in  the  gospel."  They  were 
not  putting  themselves  forward  in  an  unseemly  public 
sort;  but  they  had  shared  the  early  trials  of  the  gospel 
with  St.  Paul.  At  Corinth  the  women  assumed  much 
and  the  apostle  manifests  his  sense  of  it  by  the  re- 
proachful demand,  if  the  word  of  God  came  out  from 
them,  or  if  it  came  to  them  only.  (1  Cor.  xiv.  36.) 
Thus,  and  not  only  thus,  had  they  quite  slipped  aside 
from  that  which  prevailed  in  the  churches  of  the  saints. 
No  doubt  they  reasoned  that,  if  women  had  gifts,  why 
should  they  not  exercise  them  and  exercise  them  in  all 
places  ?     But  He  who  gives  the  gift  is  alone  entitled  tQ 


CHAPTER  IV.  93 

say  when,  how,  and  by  whom  it  is  to  be  exercised. 
At  Philippi  where  there  was  an  obedient  spirit,  there 
might  have  been  too  great  rekictance  to  meddle  with 
these  otherwise  estimable  women  who  were  estranged 
from  each  other.  The  apostle  bids  Epaphroditus  to  ren- 
der his  help.  "  Help  them  who  are  such  as  contended 
with  me  in  the  gospel."  He  gives  them  special  praise. 
They  strove  for  and  with  him  in  the  work.  He  joins 
himself  with  those  persons  whom  his  yokefellow  may 
have  been  rather  afraid  of.  He  joins  them  also  with 
Clement  and  other  fellow-labourers.  What  tenderness 
in  touching  the  case  !  He  encourages  the  fellowship  in 
the  service  of  the  gospel  not  only  with  faithful  men,  but 
with  women  whose  faithfulness  was  not  forgotten,  be- 
cause there  were  painful  hindrances  just  now. 

But  now,  leaving  the  question  of  variance  among  them, 
he  returns  to  his  topic  of  exceeding  joy.  He  had  been 
encouraging  one  who  had  his  sympathy  and  confidence 
to  help  these  women.  He  now  calls  on  all  to  rejoice  in 
the  Lord  alway.  If  he  touched  on  these  sorrows,  let 
them  not  suppose  that  he  wanted  to  damp  their  joy:  on 
the  contrary,  "  rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway,  and  again  I 
say  rejoice."  This,  let  me  repeat,  is  an  important  thing 
practically.  It  is  a  total  mistake  when  we  allow  diffi- 
culties or  differences  among  the  saints  of  God  to  hinder 
our  perfect  delight  in  the  Lord.  Do  we  desire  the 
glory  of  Christ  among  those  who  are  His  ?  I  must 
always  maintain  that  glory  in  my  own  soul  if  I  am  to 
be  a  witness  to   Christ  among  others.     Is  the  Lord's 


94  PHILIPPIANS. 

love  affected  or  at  least  enfeebled  bj  these  passing  cir- 
cumstances ?  Is  His  glory  less  bright  because  some 
shades  of  self  have  betrayed  themselves  over  the  brow 
of  His  saints  ?  Surely  not.  Thus  he  turns  to  the 
key-note  of  the  epistle,  that  joy  in  the  Lord  of  which 
he  had  been  speaking  as  his  own  portion  now,  and  by 
and  by  in  chapters  i.,  ii.,  and  that  to  which  they  were 
called  in  chapter  iii.  and  again  in  chapter  iv.  Is  it  not 
a  sorrow  to  think  where  Christians  have  got  to  in  this 
respect — how  this  answer  of  heart  to  Christ  has  faded 
away  from  the  hearts  of  so  many ;  how  even  the  as- 
sembling together  to  remember  Christ  in  His  supper 
does  not  always  awaken  fulness  of  joy  but  often  an 
uneasy  feeling  and  most  painful  shrinking  back  from 
His  table  as  if  it  concealed  some  hidden  danger,  some 
lion  in  the  way,  instead  of  Jesus  my  Saviour  and  Lord, 
who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me  ?  What  humi- 
liation of  spirit  ought  to  be  ours  as  we  think  of  all 
that  thus  dishonours  the  name  of  Christ.  But  does 
God  intend  that  even  this  should  hinder  our  joy  ?  In 
no  wise.  Let  the  ruined  state  of  God's  people  be  in 
Israel  or  in  the  Church,  those  who  felt  it  most  in- 
variably enjoyed  the  greatest  nearness  to  Himself  and 
most  of  all  entered  into  His  own  joy,  while  at  the  same 
time  they  mourned  the  more  over  the  short-comings  of 
those  bearing  His  name.  The  two  things  go  together. 
Show  me  hearts  which,  though  godly,  are  not  happy; 
hearts  over-occupied  with  the  circumstances  of  the 
Church,  constantly  talking  about  the  evil  and  low  con- 


CHAPTER  IV.  95 

dition  here  and  there;  and  you  will  never  shew  me 
souls  that  deeply  enjoy  the  Lord  and  His  grace; 
whereas  in  the  person  who  really  enjoys  the  Lord  and 
has  the  consciousness  of  what  Christ  and  the  Church  of 
God  are  in  Christ  and  should  be  in  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  now,  who  therefore  best  estimates  what  Christen- 
dom has  become,  there  will  be  the  two  things  harmo- 
nized— the  heart  resting  upon  Christ,  dwelling  in  His 
love;  while,  at  the  same  time,  man's  weakness  and 
Satan's  malice  in  ruining  all  can  be  rightly  judged. 
These  two  things  we  have  to  cultivate. 

"  Let  your  moderation  [mildness]  be  known  to  all  men. 
The  Lord  is  at  hand.  Be  careful  [anxious]  about  no- 
thing; but  in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with 
thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made  known  to  God." 
(Ver.  5,  6.)  To  prayer  is  added  thanksgiving,  because 
the  Lord  is  entitled  to  it.  The  heart  should  not  forget 
what  a  God  we  are  making  our  requests  to.  In  the 
confidence  of  this  let  us  thank  Him,  even  when  we  are 
spreading  our  wants  before  Him.  But  he  had  said  be- 
fore this,  "  Let  your  moderation  be  known  unto  all 
men."  Supposing  there  is  somebody  who  has  seen  us  a 
little  off  our  balance  in  standing  upon  our  rights,  real  or 
imaginary,  something  which  contradicted  the  gentleness 
of  Christ,  ought  we  not  to  feel  humbled,  and  take  an 
early  opportunity  to  wipe  off  what  may  have  given  a 
false  impression  to  that  man's  soul  ?  God  would  have 
our  readiness  to  yield,  not  resist,  known,  and  this  not 
sometimes  or  to  some  persons,  but  to  all  men.     By 


96  PHILIPPIANS. 

moderation  the  apostle  means  that  spirit  of  meekness 
■which  can  only  be  where  the  will  is  not  allowed  to 
work  actively  for  that  which  we  may  desire.  And  what 
a  reason  why  we  need  not  be  anxious  to  assert  a  claim, 
even  when  we  are  right !  "  The  Lord  is  at  hand." 
Where  there  is  the  happy  feeling  in  the  soul  that  one 
is  doing  that  which  pleases  God,  there  is  generally  the 
readiness  of  trust  in  the  Lord  that  puts  aside  anxiety 
and  leaves  all  in  His  hands.    Besides,  He  is  coming  soon. 

He  will  bring  out  everything  that  is  according  to 
Himself.  He  will  bless  every  desire  wherever  there 
may  have  been  a  true  testimony  for  Himself.  He  will 
give  effect  to  it  in  that  day.  "  The  Lord  is  at  hand." 
He  is  not  come  yet,  but  you  can  go  to  Him  now  and 
lay  all  your  requests  before  Him,  assured  that  He  is 
near,  that  He  is  coming.  And  what  is  the  result? 
"  The  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding 
shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus." 
(Ver.  7.)  When  the  heart  commits  to  God  all  that 
would  be  a  burden  to  it,  the  consequence  is  that  His 
peace,  the  peace  in  which  He  moves  and  lives,  guards  us 
from  the  entrance  of  all  that  would  harass.  The 
sources  of  care  are  cast  into  the  Lord's  lap  and  the 
peace  of  God  Himself,  which  surpasses  every  under- 
standing, becomes  our  protection. 

Wherever  we  have  grace  to  spread  before  God  what 
would  have  tried  us  (had  we  thought  of  it  and  kept  it 
before  our  spirits),  there  is  infallibly  His  own  peace  as 
the  answer  of  God  to  it.    The  affections  are  at  rest  and 


CHAPTER  IV.  97 

the  working  of  the  mind  that  would  otherwise  fore- 
cast evil.  Hence  all  is  calmed  down  by  the  peace 
of  God  Himself. 

Peace  is  viewed  in  more  ways  than  one  in  Scripture. 
The  peace  of  God  here  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  purg- 
ing of  conscience.  It  is  a  question  of  keeping  heart  and 
mind.  Where  conscience  is  yet  burdened,  there  is  but 
one  way  of  finding  peace.  '*  Being  justified  by  faith,  we 
have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 
Sins  were  there;  and  how  was  the  moral  nature  and 
majesty  of  God  to  be  vindicated  about  sin  ?  Far  from 
God,  in  all  our  ways  at  war  with  God,  how  could  we 
have  peace  with  Him?  The  only  door,  through  which 
we,  poor  enemies,  pass  out  of  such  a  condition  into 
peace  with  God,  is  by  believing  the  testimony  He  has 
given  of  His  Son.  But  this  is  "  peace  with  God,"  not 
"  the  peace  of  God."  If  I  endeavour  to  get  comfort 
for  my  conscience  by  spreading  out  my  need  before 
God,  there  is  never  full  rest  of  conscience.  The  only 
means  entitled  to  give  rest  to  the  sin-stricken  is  faith  in 
God's  assurance  that  sins  are  blotted  out  by  the  blood, 
and  sin  has  been  perfectly  judged  in  the  cross  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  "  By  him  all  that  believe  are  justified." 
If  one's  own  state  mingles  for  a  single  moment  with 
this,  it  is  a  delusion  on  such  a  ground  to  reckon  upon 
peace  with  God.  But  if  I  believe  on  Christ  and  what 
He  has  done,  I  can  boldly  say  that  Christ  deserved  that 
even  my  sins  should  be  forgiven.     Therefore  I  can  add, 

H 


98  PHILIPPIANS. 

"  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God."  The 
value  is  not  in  the  faith,  but  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
You  cannot  get  the  blessing  without  believing,  but  it  is 
an  answer  to  the  worth  of  Christ  in  God's  sight. 

But,  besides  this  settled  peace  which  we  have  through 
the  work  of  Christ,  there  is  the  practical  peace  of  God, 
which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  remission  of  sins 
(though  assuming  it  as  a  settled  thing  for  a  founda- 
tion), but  of  the  circumstances  through  which  the 
believer  passes  day  by  day.  Paul  was  in  prison,  when 
he  wrote  to  the  Philippians,  unable  to  build  up  the 
churches  or  to  labour  in  the  gospel.  He  might  have 
been  cast  down  in  spirit;  but  he  never  was  more  happy 
in  his  life.  How  is  this  ?  Because,  instead  of  being 
anxious  and  troubled  about  the  danger  of  the  Church 
and  the  afflictions  of  individuals,  about  souls  that  were 
perishing,  he  looked  at  them  in  connection  with  God, 
instead  of  looking  at  them  as  connected  with  himself. 
If  God  was  in  peace  about  these  things,  why  should  not 
he  too  be?  Thus  the  simple  resource  of  spreading  out  all 
before  God  and  casting  it  off  himself  into  the  bosom  of 
his  Father  had  for  its  effect  that  God's  peace  kept  his 
heart  and  mind.  Nor  was  it  special  to  the  apostle.  He 
puts  it  before  the  saints  as  that  which  ought  to  be 
equally  their  portion.  It  is  evident  there  is  no  room 
left  for  anxiety.  God  would  not  have  His  children  bur- 
dened or  troubled  about  circumstances.  Till  the  Lord 
come,  this  is  the  blessed  source  of  relief.  God  is  here 
working  and  His  peace  keeps  our  hearts  and  minds 


CHAPTER  IV.  99 

through  Christ  Jesus,  where  we  give  Him  His  honour 
and  our  trust. 

But  even  this  is  not  all,  for  there  are  other  things 
which  claim  or  test  us  besi(ics  anxieties  and  cares. 
There  is  our  ordinary  christian  life:  what  can  strengthen 
us  in  it?  Here  is  the  word,  the  apostolic  counsel  (ver. 
8),  "  Finally,  brethren,  whatsoever  things  are  true." 
There  may  not  be  many  bright  spots,  but  there  are 
some ;  am  I  not  to  think  of  them  ?  This  is  what  I 
am  called  upon  to  do — to  be  quick  of  discernment, 
seeing  not  what  is  bad  but  what  is  good.  I  may  have 
to  judge  what  is  evil,  but  what  God  looks  for  is  that 
the  spirit  should  be  occupied  with  the  good.  "  What- 
soever things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest 
[rather,  venerable,  or  noble],  whatsoever  things  are 
just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are 
lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report:  if  there 
be  any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these 
things."  Our  consciences  can  answer  whether  these  are 
the  things  we  are  most  apt  to  think  about.  If  we  are 
swift  tt)  hear  not  of  these  things  but  all  that  is  painful, 
while  slow  to  hear  whatever  is  of  God,  the  consequence 
is,  instead  of  having  the  God  of  peace  as  our  com- 
panion, we  have  ourselves  and  others  hindered  by  evil 
thoughts  and  communications.  For  that  which  the 
soul  wants  is  only  what  is  good.  We  are  not  exhorted 
to  be  learned  in  the  iniquity  of  world  or  church,  but 
**  wise  unto  that  which  is  good  and  simple  concerning 
evil."     God  has  given  those  whom  He  qualifies  to  judge 


100  PHILIPPIANS. 

evil, — spiritual  men  who  can  take  it  up  as  a  duty  to 
Him,  and  with  sorrow  and  love  towards  those  con- 
cerned; but  these  God  employs,  among  other  purposes, 
for  the  sake  of  keeping  His  saints  in  general  out  of 
the  need  of  such  tasks.  It  is  happy  that  we  are  not 
all  called  upon  to  search  and  pry  into  evil,  seeing 
and  hearing  its  details ;  but  that,  while  the  Lord  may 
graciously  interfere  to  guard  us  from  being  mistaken, 
our  proper  wisdom  is  growing  in  what  is  according  to 
God.  Why,  ordinarily,  should  a  simple  child  of  God 
occupy  himself,  for  instance,  with  a  bad  book  or  a 
false  teacher  ?  It  is  enough  for  us  if  we  have  good 
ground  to  know  that  a  thing  is  mischievous,  and  all  we 
have  then  to  do  is  to  avoid  it.  If,  on  the  contrary,  I 
know  of  something  good,  it  has  a  claim  on  love  and 
respect;  it  is  not  only  for  myself  but  for  others.  We 
are  never  right  if  we  shut  up  our  hearts  from  the 
sympathy  of  Christ  with  the  members  of  His  body  or 
the  workings  of  His  Spirit  here  below.  If  there  were 
even  a  poor  Roman  Catholic  priest,  who  knew  and 
brought  out  the  truth  of  God  more  plainly  than  others, 
let  us  not  say,  "  can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Naza- 
reth ?"  but,  come  and  see  if  any  thing  come  with 
adequate  evidence  of  having  God's  stamp  upon  it.  Let 
us  not  limit  Him  who  is  above  all  circumstances ;  even 
if  there  be  that  which  is  most  distressing,  let  us  thank 
God  that  His  gracious  power  refuses  to  be  bound  by  any 
limits  of  man.  It  is  of  great  importance  that  we  should 
have  largeness  of  heart  to  think  of  all  that  is  good, 
wherever  it  may  be. 


CHAPTER  IV.  101 

"  Those  things  which  ye  bo^-h  learned,  and  received, 
and  heard,  and  saw  in  me,  do."  (Ver.  9.)  If  ever  there 
was  a  man  with  a  large  heart,  it  was  the  Apostle  Paul. 
And  yet  no  servant  of  God  had  a  deeper  view  of  evil, 
and  a  more  intense  abhorrence  of  it.  Here  the  Spirit 
directs  them  by  what  they  had  seen  in  his  own  spirit  and 
ways.  It  is  not  matter  of  doctrine  but  his  practical 
life.  This  goes  farther  than  supplanting  anxiety  by  the 
safeguard  of  God's  own  peace ;  it  is  the  practical  power 
of  positive  good.  What  is  the  effect  upon  the  heart  ? 
"  The  God  of  peace  shall  be  with  you."  "  The  God  of 
peace"  is  far  more  than  even  "  the  peace  of  God."  It 
is  Himself  the  source;  it  is  the  enjoyment  of  His  own 
blessed  presence  in  this  way.  There  is  relief  in  having 
the  "  peace  of  God"  as  the  guard  of  our  hearts  and  minds ; 
there  is,  power  in  having  "  the  God  of  peace"  with  us. 
Want  we  anything  ?  Impossible.  "  But  I  rejoiced  in 
the  Lord  greatly  that  now  at  the  last  your  care  of  me 
flourished  again ;  wherein  ye  were  also  careful,  but  ye 
lacked  opportunity."  They  had  shown  love  to  the 
Apostle  Paul  at  a  previous  time,  as  we  find  afterwards 
(ver.  15)  where  he  contrasts  "  the  beginning  of  the 
gospel"  with  "  at  the  last." 

The  Philippians  had  been  favoured  of  God  and  had 
shown  their  love  to  the  apostle  in  their  early  days.  He 
had  not  forgotten  it.  It  would  appear  that  he  rarely 
received  from  the  saints  of  God,  perhaps  because  he 
met  with  but  few  even  among  them  that  could  have 
been  trusted.  It  would  have  wrought  evil  by  reason 
h2 


i02  PHILIPPIANS. 

of  their  want  of  spiritual  feeling.  They  might  have 
thought  something  of  it,  or  the  gospel  might  have 
suffered  in  their  minds  or  with  others  through  it. 
But  the  Philippians  were  sufficiently  simple  and  spiri- 
tual; and  we  know  what  delicate  feelings  the  power  of 
the  Spirit  can  produce.  They,  accordingly,  had  the 
privilege  of  ministering  to  his  wants.  This  the  apostle 
alludes  to,  and  with  exceeding  sweetness  of  feeling  on 
his  part.  He  felt  that  the  word,  "  at  the  last,"  might 
be  construed  into  a  kind  of  reproach,  as  if  they  had 
forgotten  him  for  a  long  time.  He  hastens  to  add 
therefore,  "  wherein  ye  were  also  careful,  but  ye  lacked 
opportunity."  (Ver.  10.)  On  the  other  hand,  he  guards 
them  against  supposing  he  wanted  more  from  them. 
"  Not  that  I  speak  in  respect  of  want."  (Yer.  11.)  In  the 
corrupt  heart  of  man,  the  very  expression  of  gratitude 
may  be  an  oblique  hint  that  further  favours  would  not 
be  amiss.  The  apostle  cuts  off  all  thought  of  this  by 
the  words,  "  I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am, 
therewith  to  be  content."  This  is  not  indigenous  to 
human  nature.  Even  Paul  may  not  always  have  known 
it :  he  had  ledrnt  it.  "  I  know  both  how  to  be  abased  and 
I  know  how  to  abound."  (Ver.  12.)  His  experience  had 
known  betimes  what  it  was  to  be  in  absolute  want,  as 
he  knew  what  it  was  to  have  want  of  nothing. 
"  Everywhere  and  in  all  things  I  am  instructed,  both 
to  be  full  and  to  be  hungry,  both  to  abound  and  to 
suffer.  I  can  do  all  things  through  him  [the  true 
reading]  who  strengtheneth  me."     A  wonderful  thing 


CHAPTER  IV.  103 

for  a  man  in  prison  to  say,  one  who  apparently  was  in 
most  abject  circumstances,  and  in  no  small  danger — 
unable  to  do  anything,  men  would  say.  But  faith 
speaks  according  to  God,  and  the  man  who  can  do 
nothing  in  the  judgment  of  his  fellows,  is  the  very  one 
who  could  say  he  had  strength  for  all  things  in  Him 
that  strengthened  him.  (Ver.  13.) 

When  the  world  comes  into  collision  with  a  Christian, 
when  it  criminates,  robs,  and  imprisons  him,  when  the 
Christian  is  evidently  as  happy  as  before,  and  speaks  of 
his  riches  as  much  as  before,  the  world  cannot  but  feel 
it  has  come  into  contact  with  a  power  that  is  entirely 
above  its  own.  Whenever  it  is  not  so,  we  have  failed. 
What  the  world  should  find  in  us  under  all  circum- 
stances, is  the  expression  of  Christ  and  His  strength. 
It  is  not  merely  when  the  trial  comes  that  we  should 
go  to  the  Lord  and  spread  out  our  failure  before  Him ; 
we  ought  to  be  with  Him  before  it.  If  we  wait  for 
the  trial,  we  shall  not  stand.  In  our  Lord's  case  you 
will  find  that  where  there  was  victory  in  the  power  of 
faith,  our  Lord  went  through  the  suffering  before  it 
came.  He  went  through  it  with  God,  yet  no  one  felt  trial 
as  He.  This  therefore  does  not  make  the  suffering  less 
but  the  contrary.  Take  the  garden  of  Gethsemane  as 
an  instance.  What  saint  but  our  Lord  ever  sweated 
drops  of  blood  in  the  prospect  of  death  ?  Hence  others 
may  have  entered  into  it  in  some  little  degree ;  and  the 
measure  has  always  been  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  giving  them  to  feel  what  is  contrary  to   God  in 


104  PHILIPPIANS. 

this  world :  for  in  this  world  whoever  loves  most  suffers 
most.  But  here  was  one  who  had  suffered  much,  who 
knew  rejection  as  few  men  ever  knew  it,  who  had  found 
the  world's  enmity  as  it  is  the  lot  of  not  many  to 
prove.  And  yet  this  man,  under  these  circumstances, 
says  he  has  strength  for  all  things  through  Him 
who  strengthened  him.  Be  assured  that  a  blessed 
strengthener  is  near  every  one  who  leans  upon  Him. 
Paul  does  not  speak  here  of  apostolic  privilege,  but  as 
a  saint,  a  ground  on  which  he  can  link  himself  with  us, 
that  we  may  learn  to  walk  in  the  same  path  which  he 
was  treading  himself.  Having  freely  owned  their  love 
(in  verses  14 — 16),  having  shown  that  it  was  because 
he  desired  fruit  that  might  abound  to  their  account  in 
verse  17,  he  closes  all  with  this:  "I  have  all  and 
abound:  I  am  full,  having  received  of  Epaphroditus 
the  things  which  were  sent  from  you,  an  odour  of  a 
sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleasing  to  God." 
(Ver.  18.)  And  marvellous  to  say,  he  is  a  giver  himself. 
At  any  rate  he  counts  upon  One  who  would  give 
everything  that  was  needed  in  full  supply.  "  But  my 
God  shall  supply  all  your  need,  according  to  His  riches 
in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  (Ver.  19.) 

What  language  from  a  man  who  had  been  just  in 
want,  and  whose  want  had  been  supplied  by  these 
saints !  Now  he  turns  round  and  says,  "  My  God  shall 
supply  all  your  need.'^  The  God  whose  love  and  care 
and  resources  he  had  proved  through  all  his  christian 
career — "  my  Godj'  he  says,  "  shall  supply  all  your  need 


CHAPTER  IV.  105 

according  to  his  riches  in  glory  ty  Christ  Jesns."  He 
is  supplying  the  saints  now  according  to  all  the  wealth 
of  His  resources  even  in  glory  in  Christ.  There  the 
shadow  of  a  want  will  be  unknown ;  but  God  is  acting 
according  to  the  same  riches  now.  Therefore  the  apostle 
breaks  forth  in  praise  to  God  forthwith.  "  Now  unto 
God  and  our  Father  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever,  Amen." 
(Ver.  20.)  There  is  a  notable  change  in  the  phraseology. 
He  says  first,  "  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need," 
and  afterwards,  "  our  God  and  Father."  When  it  is  a 
question  of  experimental  knowledge  and  confidence,  he 
could  not  say  "  our  God,"  because  they  might  not  have 
the  same  measure  of  acquaintance  with  His  love  as  he 
had  who  had  proved  and  learnt  so  profoundly  and  va- 
riedly what  God  is.  But  when  he  ascribes  unto  the 
ages  of  ages  glory  to  God  the  Father,  he  cannot  but 
join  them  fully  with  himself.  "  Now  unto  our  God  and 
Father  be  glory,"  &c.  His  heart  goes  out  to  all  believers. 
"  Salute  every  saint  in  Christ  Jesus."  (Ver.  21.)  What 
a  joy  for  those  in  Philippi  to  hear  of  brethren  in  unex- 
pected quarters  !  The  apostle  had  gone  to  Rome  to  be 
tried  before  Caesar.  Now,  it  appears,  there  were  those 
of  the  imperial  household  who  sent  special  salutation 
through  the  apostle  to  the  Philippians.  "  The  brethren 
which  are  with  me  greet  you.  All  the  saints  salute  you, 
chiefly  they  that  are  of  Csesar's  household."  (Ver.  21,  22.) 
The  heart  gets  wonderful  relief  in  seeing  the  things 
that  are  lovely  and  of  good  report,  and  calculated  to 
give  our  hearts  confidence  in  the  darkest  day.     What- 


106  PHILIPPIANS. 

ever  tlie  great  trial  of  the  present  time  (and  never  were 
there  subtler  snares  or  more  imminent  danger),  there 
is  no  less  grace  in  God,  no  less  blessing  to  man  in  view 
of  all.  Let  us  not  forget  the  word,  "  Rejoice  in  the 
Lord  always;  again  I  will  say,  rejoice."  (Ver.  4.)  This 
epistle  was  not  written  as  looiiing  back  upon  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  but  for  a  time  when  the  apostle  was  cut  off 
from  helping  the  churches,  and  when  the  saints  were 
warned  that  they  must  work  out  their  own  salvation 
with  fear  and  trembling.  But  the  trial  is  yet  sharper 
for  the  spirit,  if  not  bodily,  for  those  who  would  walk 
with  the  Lord  now.  Let  us  not  doubt  His  love,  but 
be  sure  that  God  is  above  all  circumstances.  If  God 
has  cast  our  lot  in  these  days,  let  us  not  doubt  His 
goodness,  but  know  that  we  may  have  as  deep  and 
even  deeper  joy  because  the  joy  is  less  in  saints,  less  in 
circumstances,  and  more  exclusively  in  Christ.  It  was 
sin  that  hindered  the  Church's  blessedness  in  these  ways 
and  others;  but  since  we  have  been  called  when  and 
where  we  are  now,  may  we  eschew  the  unbelieving  wish  to 
exchange  this  time  for  any  other.  It  is  a  question  very 
simply  of  faith  in  God.  He  loves  us  and  He  cares  for 
us.  May  our  hearts  answer  to  the  perfections  of  His 
grace.  While  feeling  the  sorrow  of  the  saints,  of  the 
gospel,  of  the  Church  more  deeply,  as  all  affects  the  glory 
of  God,  let  us  leave  room  in  our  hearts  to  count  upon  a 
known,  tried  God,  who  ever  will  be  God,  superior  to  all 
difficulties,  foes,  snares,  and  sorrows.  "  The  grace  of  the 
Lord  Jesu€. Christ  be  with  your  spirit.  Amen."  (Ver.  23.) 

FINIS. 


Date  Due 

'''■'   ^  ^ 

<J    :>      '. . . 

JtB"/i^ 

W<ii^-    "^ 

'' 

f) 

a 


— — ^ 

SOLD  BV  * 

J.    TUXLEY, 

Book  &  Tract  Depot; 

Guernsey. 


BS2705 .K29 

Lectures  on  the  Epistle  of  Paul  the 


Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  00064  7141 


