BS 

2775 
.M982 
1894 


I 


BS  2775  .M982  1894 
Murray,  Andrew,  1828-1917 
Let  us  draw  nigh 


ITW, 


LET   US   DRAW    NIGH. 


The  Blessed  Life  Series. 


By 
Rev.  F.  B.  MEYER,  B.  A., 

and 

Rev.  ANDREW  MURRAY. 

Comprising  eight  of  these  famous 
authors'  best  known  works,  in  an 
entirely  new  and  very  beautiful 
binding,  and  greatly  reduced  in 
price. 

J8mo,  decorated  cloth,  each,  30 
cents. 


i.   The  Shepherd  Psalm:  A  Devotional  Exposition  of 
the  Twenty-third  Psalm. 

2.  Christian  Living. 

"  Full  of  rich,  ripe  thought  and  strength  and  encouragement 
for  the  Christian  heart."— Christian  Work. 

3.  The  Present  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life. 

"Mr.  Meyer  writes  fluently  and  forcibly  of  the  deep  things 
of  God,  and  fosters  spiritual  hunger  while  he  feeds  it."—  The 
N.  V.  Observer. 

4.  The  Future  Tenses  of  the  Blessed  Life. 

"Full  of  tender  comfort  and  helpful  suggestions." — The 
Interior. 

By  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A. 

5.  Humility:  The  Beauty  of  Holiness. 

6.  Be  Perfect.   A  Message  from  the  Father  in  Heaven  to 

His  Children  on  Earth.     Meditations  for  a  Month. 

\   Let  Us  Draw  Nigh!    The  Way  to  a  Life  Abiding 
Continually  in  the  Secret  of  God's  Presence. 

8.  Why  Do  You  Not  Believe?    Words  of  Instruction 
and  Encouragement  for  all  Seeking  the  Lord. 

By  Rev.  Andrew  Murray. 


Let   Us    Draw   Nigh ! 

The  Way  to  a  Life  Abiding  Continually  in  the 
Secret  of  God's  Presence 

MEDITATIONS    ON    HEBREWS    X  :  I9-25 


bv        y 

Rev.  Andrew  Murray 

Author  of  "Abide in  Christ,"  "Like  Christ," 
"With  Christ,"  etc. 


AUTHOR'S     EDITION 


tMm 

fg 

tta£a 

<i 

p3©? 

<V,\'lTA-eTLU>(-,S 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

Chicago       :       New  York       :       Toronto 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


PREFACE. 


The  twelve  chapters  that  form  this  little  book 
are  part  of  a  larger  work  that  has  just  been 
published.1  They  are  issued  separately  in  the 
hope  that  they  may  bring  the  tidings  that  the 
Father  would  indeed  have  us  live  our  life  in 
His  Presence,  and  that  Christ  is  able  to  bring 
and  keep  us  there,  to  some  whom  the  larger 
work  may  not  reach. 

The  passage  of  which  these  chapters  are  the 
exposition  (chap.  x.  19-25)  constitutes  the  very 
centre  of  the  Epistle.  It  contains  a  summary  of 
what  had  been  taught  in  its  first  or  doctrinal 
part,  and  indicates  at  the  same   time  the  chief 

1  TJie  Holiest  of  All :  The  Presence  of  God,  the  Sphere 
of  Christ's  Ministry  in  Heaven,  and  our  Life  and  Service  on 
Earth.  A  Devotional  Exposition  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  (130  chapters). 


6  PREFACE 

thoughts  which  are  to  be  enforced  in  the  second 
half.  "Within  the  compass  of  a  very  few  verses 
it  gathers  up  all  that  has  been  said  of  our 
Blessed  High  Priest  and  His  work,  all  that  can 
be  said  of  what  we  need  fully  to  enjoy  the  fruit 
of  that  work,  and  all  that  has  yet  to  be  said  in 
the  Epistle  of  the  influence  its  teaching  is  to 
exorcise  upon  us.  It  makes  all  centre  round 
tlw±  one  thought :  Let  us  draw  nigvh.  Let  us, 
in  the  power  of  Christ's  redemption,  enter  in 
and  dwell  in  the  Father's  presence. 

In  the  larger  book  I  have  endeavoured  to 
point  out  how  the  state  of  the  Hebrews  was 
just  what  we  find  in  the  churches  of  our  days. 
There  is  a  lack  of  steadfastness,  of  growth,  and 
of  power,  which  arises  from  our  not  knowing 
Jesus  aright.  I  have  there  tried  to  show,  as 
the  Epistle  led,  that  the  true  knowledge  of  the 
wonderful  and  blessed  truths  of  the  divinity 
and  humanity  of  our  Lord,  of  His  being  our 
Leader  and  Forerunner  in  the  path  of  obedience 
and  perfect  surrender  to  God's  will,  above  all, 
of  His  heavenly  Priesthood  in  the  power  of  an 
endless  life,  and  His  having  procured  us  perfect 
liberty  of  access   and  abode  in  God's  Presence 


PREFACE  7 

through  His  blood,  gives  a  strength  to  our  faith 
and  hope,  which  enables  us  in  very  deed  to 
obtain  the  promise  and  live  as  God  would  have 
us  do.  But  I  am  not  without  hope  that  even 
this  smaller  volume  may  urge  some  to  seek  and 
discover  what  the  treasure  is  the  Epistle  con- 
tains, and  help  them  to  enter  into  the  personal 
possession  of  that  complete  salvation  our  great 
High  Priest  waits  and  is  able  to  bestow. 

That  the  teaching  of  God's  Holy  Spirit  may 
be  the  portion  of  all  my  readers,  is  my  earnest 
prayer. 

ANDREW  MURRAY. 

25th  September,  1894. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP. 

I.   THE  ENTRANCE  INTO  THE  HOLIEST 

II.  BOLDNESS   THROUGH   THE   BLOOD       . 

III.  THE  NEW  AND   LIVING  WAY 

IV.  A  GREAT   PRIEST   OVER   THE  HOUSE  OF  GOD 
V.  WITH  A  TRUE  HEART 

VI.   THE  FULNESS   OF  FAITH        .  . 

VII.    OUR  HEARTS   SPRINKLED       .  . 

VIII.    OUR    BODY  WASHED 
IX.    LET   US   DRAW   NEAR 
X.    LET    US    HOLD     FAST    THE    CONFESSION    OF 

OUR  HOPE 
XI.    LET   US  PROVOKE   UNTO  LOVE 
XII.    LET    US    NOT     FORSAKE     THE     ASSEMBLING 
TOGETHER  . 

CONCLUSION  .... 


PAOB 

13 
19 

25 
32 
39 
45 
51 
57 
63 

69 
75 

81 
87 


Hebrews  x.  19-25 

19  Having  therefore  boldness   to  enter  into  the  Holy 

Place  by  the  blood  of  Jesus, 

20  By  the  way  which  He  dedicated  for  us,  a  new  and 

living  way,  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  His 
flesh  ; 

21  And  having  a  Great  Priest  over  the  house  of  God  ; 

22  Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart  in  fulness  of 

faith,  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil 
conscience,  and  our  body  washed  with  pure  water  : 

23  Let  us  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope  that  it 

waver  not ;  for  He  is  faithful  that  promised  : 

24  And  let  us  consider  one  another  to  provoke  unto 

love  and  good  works  ; 

25  Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together, 

as  the  custom  of  some  is,  but  exhorting  one 
another  ;  and  so  much  the  more,  as  ye  see  the  day 
drawing  nigh. 


11 


It  may  help  us  the  bettei  to  master  the  rich 
contents  of  this  central  passage,  containing  a 
summary  of  the  whole  Epistle,  if  we  here  give 
the  chief  thoughts  it  contains. 

I.  The  four  great  Blessings  of  the  new  life : 

1.  The  Holiest  opened  up. 

2.  Boldness  in  the  Blood. 

3.  A  New  and  Living  Way. 

4.  The  Great  High  Priest. 

II.  The  four  chief  Marks  of  the  true  believer; 

1.  A  True  Heart. 

2.  Fulness  of  Faith. 

3.  A  Heart  sprinkled  from  an  Evil  Conscience. 

4.  The  Body  washed  with  Clean  Water. 

III.  The  four  great  Duties  to  which  the  opened  Sanctuary 
calls : 

1.  Let  us  draw  nigh  (in  the  fulness  of  faith). 

2.  Let  us  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our  hope. 

3.  Let  us  consider  one  another  to  provoke  unto 

love. 

4.  Let  us  not  forsake  the  assembling  of  our- 

selves together. 


12 


LE  T  US  DP  A  W  NIGH  1 3 


Zbe  Bntrance  into  tbe  fboliest. 

X.— 19.    Having  therefore,    brethren,   boldness  to 
enter  into  the  Holy  Place; 
22.  Let  us  draw  near. 

1.  Holiest. 

Enter  into  the  Holiest.  With  these  words 
the  second  half  of  the  Epistle  begins.  Hitherto 
the  teaching  has  been  mainly  doctrinal.  The 
glory  of  Christ's  person  and  priesthood;  of  the 
heavenly  sanctuary  which  He,  through  His  own 
blood,  has  opened  and  cleansed  and  taken  pos- 
session of  for  us ;  of  the  way  of  obedience  and 
self-sacrifice  which  led  Him  up  to  the  throne; 
has  been  unfolded.  Now  comes  the  practical 
part,  and  our  duty  to  appropriate  the  great  salva- 
tion that  has  been  provided  is  summed  up  in  the 
one  thought :  Having  boldness  to  enter  into 
the  Holiest ;  let  us  draw  near.  Access  to  God's 
presence  and  fellowship,  the  right  and  the  power 
to  make  that  our  abiding  dwelling-place,  to  live 


14  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

our  life  there,  has  been  provided  in  Christ :  let 
us  draw  near,  here  let  us  abide.  God  does  in 
very  deed  mean  that  every  child  of  His  should 
always  dicell  in  His  presence. 

Enter  into  the  Holiest.  It  is  a  call  to  the 
Hebrews  to  come  out  of  that  life  of  unbelief  and 
sloth,  that  leads  to  a  departing  from  the  living 
God,  and  to  enter  into  the  promised  land,  the 
rest  of  God,  a  life  in  His  fellowship  and  favour. 
It  is  a  call  to  all  lukewarm,  half-hearted  Chris- 
tians, no  longer  to  remain  in  the  outer  court  of 
the  tabernacle,  content  with  the  hope  that  their 
sins  are  pardoned.  Nor  even  to  be  satisfied  with 
having  entered  the  Holy  Place,  and  there  doing 
the  service  of  the  tabernacle,  while  the  veil  still 
hinders  the  full  fellowship  with  the  living  God 
and  His  love.  It  calls  to  enter  in  through  the 
rent  veil,  into  the  place  into  which  the  blood 
has  been  brought,  and  where  the  High  Priest 
lives,  there  to  live  and  walk  and  work,  always 
in  the  presence  of  the  Father.  It  is  a  call 
to  all  doubting,  thirsting  believers,  who  long 
for  a  better  life  than  they  have  yet  known, 
to  cast  aside  their  doubts,  and  to  believe  that 
this  is  what  Christ  has  indeed  done  and  brought 
within  the  reach  of  each  one  of  us :  He  has 
opened  the  way  into  the  Holiest !  This  is  the 
salvation  which  He  has  accomplished,  and  which 


LET  US  DRAW  NIGH  15 

He  lives  to  apply  in  each  of  us>  so  that  we 
shall  indeed  dwell  in  the  full  light  of  God's 
countenance. 

Enter  into  the  Holiest.  This  is,  in  one  short 
word,  the  fruit  of  Christ's  work,  the  chief  lesson 
of  the  Epistle,  the  one  great  need  of  our 
Christian  life,  the  complete  and  perfect  salvation 
God  in  Christ  gives  us  to  enjoy. 

Enter  into  the  Holiest.  What  Holiest  %  To 
the  reader  who  has  gone  with  us  through  the 
Epistle  thus  far,  it  is  hardly  needful  to  say,  No 
other  than  that  very  same  into  which  Christ, 
when  He  had  rent  the  veil  in  His  death,  entered 
through  His  own  blood,  to  appear  before  the 
face  of  God  for  us.  It  is  the  Holiest,  in  which 
God  dwelt,  in  which  the  priests,  and  even  the 
high  priest,  might  not  dwell,  into  which  Jesus 
entered  for  us,  in  which  ice  now  are  to  dwell. 
That  Holiest  of  All  is  the  heavenly  place ;  but 
not  heaven,  as  it  is  ordinarily  understood,  as  a 
locality,  distinct  and  separate  from  this  earth. 
The  heaven  of  God  is  not  limited  in  space  in 
the  same  way  as  a  place  on  earth.  There  is  a 
heaven  above  us,  the  place  of  God's  special 
manifestation.  But  there  is  also  a  spiritual 
heaven,  as  omnipresent  as  God  Himself.  Where 
God  is,  is  heaven ;  the  heaven  of  His  presence 
includes  this  earth  too.     The  Holiest  into  which 


16  LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 

Christ  entered,  and  into  which  He  opened  the 
way  for  us,  is  the,  to  nature,  inaccessible  light 
of  God's  holy  presence  and  love,  full  union  and 
communion  with  Him.  Into  that  Holiest  the 
soul  can  enter  by  the  faith  that  makes  us  one 
with  Christ.  There  it  can  abide  continually, 
because  Jesus,  as  we  saw  in  chap,  vii.,  abideth 
continually.  The  Holy  Spirit,  who  first  signified 
that  the  way  of  the  Holiest  was  not  yet  open ; 
through  whom  Jesus  shed  the  blood  that  opened 
the  way ;  who,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  witnessed 
in  the  heart  of  the  disciples,  that  it  was  now 
indeed  open ;  waits  to  signify  to  us  what  it  means 
to  enter  in,  and  to  bring  us  in.  He  lifts  the 
soul  up  into  the  Holiest ;  He  brings  the  Holiest 
down  into  the  soul.  In  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  we  can  now  dwell  in  the  nearness  and 
presence  of  God. 

Enter  into  the  Holiest.  Oh,  the  glory  of  the 
message.  For  fifteen  centuries  Israel  had  a 
sanctuary  with  a  Holiest  of  All,  into  which, 
under  pain  of  death,  no  one  might  enter.  Its 
one  witness  .was :  man  cannot  dwell  in  God's 
presence,  cannot  abide  in  His  fellowship.  And 
now,  how  changed  is  all !  As  then  the  warning 
sounded:  No  admittance!  enter  not/  so  now 
the  call  goes  forth :  Enter  in  /  the  veil  is 
rent;   the  Holiest  is  open;   God  waits  to  wel- 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  1 7 

come  you  to  His  bosom.  Henceforth  you  are 
to  live  with  Him.  This  is  the  message  of 
the  Epistle :  Child !  thy  Father  longs  for  thee 
to  enter,  to  dwell,  and  to  go  out  no  more  for 
ever. 

Oh,  the  blessedness  of  a  life  in  the  Holiest ! 
Here  the  Father's  face  is  seen  and  His  love 
tasted.  Here  His  holiness  is  revealed,  and  the 
soul  made  partaker  of  it.  Here  the  sacrifice  of 
love  and  worship  and  adoration,  the  incense  of 
prayer  and  supplication,  is  offered  in  power. 
Here  the  soul,  in  God's  Presence,  grows  into 
more  complete  oneness  with  Christ,  and  into 
more  entire  conformity  to  His  likeness.  Here, 
in  union  with  Christ  in  His  unceasing  inter- 
cession, we  are  emboldened  to  take  our  place  as 
intercessors,  who  can  have  power  with  God  and 
prevail.  Here  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  is 
known  as  an  ever-streaming,  overflowing  river, 
from  under  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb. 
Here  the  soul  mounts  up  as  on  eagles'  wings,  the 
strength  is  renewed,  and  the  blessing  and  the 
power  and  the  love  are  imparted  with  which  God's 
priests  can  go  out  to  bless  a  dying  world.  Here 
each  day  we  may  experience  the  fresh  anointing 
with  which  we  go  out  to  be  the  bearers  and  the 
witnesses  and  the  channels  of  God's  salvation  to 
men,  the  living  instruments  through  whom  our 
2 


1 8  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

Blessed    King   works   out   His   will   and  final 
triumph. 

0  Jesus !  our  great  High  Priest,  let  this  be 
our  life ! 

1.  "One  thing  have  /  desired  of  the  Lord,  that  will  I  seek  after ; 
that  I  may  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  my  life, 
to  behold  the  beauty  of  the  Lord,  and  to  enquire  in  His  temple." 
Here  this  prayer  is  fulfilled. 

2.  "Did  not  Jesus  say,  '  I  am  the  door  of  the  sheepfold  '  ?  What 
to  us  is  the  sheepfold,  dear  children  ?  It  is  the  heart  of  the  Father, 
whereunto  Christ  is  the  gate  that  is  called  Beautiful.  0  children, 
how  sweetly  and  how  gladly  has  He  opened  that  door  into  the 
Father's  heart,  into  the  treasure-chamber  of  God!  And  there 
within  He  unfolds  to  us  the  hidden  riches,  the  nearness  and  the 
sweetness  of  companic.iship  with  Himself." — TAULER. 

3.  We  have  read  of  a  man's  father  or  friends  purchasing  and 
furnishing  a  house  for  a  birthday  or  a  wedding  gift.  They  bring 
him  there,  and,  handing  the  keys,  say  to  him  :  "  This  is  now  your 
home."  Child  of  God !  the  father  opens  unto  thee  the  Holiest  of 
All,  and  says  :  " Let  this  now  be  thy  home."    What  shall  our  answer 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  19 


IL 

JBoloness  in  tbe  JBlood  of  Sesus. 

X.— 19.   Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness   to 
enter  into  the  Holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus ; 
22.  Let  us  draw  near. 

Enter  into  the  Holiest.  This  word  brought  us 
the  message  of  the  Epistle.  Christ  has  in  very 
deed  opened  the  Holiest  of  All  for  us  to  enter 
in  and  to  dwell  there.  The  Father  would  have 
His  children  with  Him  in  His  holy  home  of 
love  and  fellowship,  abiding  continually  all 
the  time.  The  Epistle  seeks  to  gather  all  in. 
Having  boldness  to  enter,  let  us  draw  near ! 

It  may  be  that  some,  as  in  the  study  of  the 
Epistle  the  wondrous  mystery  of  the  way  into 
the  Holiest  now  opened  was  revealed  to  them, 
have  entered  in ;  they  have  said  in  faith,  Lord 
my  God,  I  come.  Henceforth  I  would  live  in 
Thy  secret  place,  in  the  Holiest  of  All.  And 
yet  they  fear.  They  are  not  sure  whether  the 
great  High  Priest  has  indeed  taken  them  in. 
They  know  not  for  certain  whether  they  will  b«3 


20  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

faithful,  always  abiding  within  the  veil.  They 
have  not  yet  grasped  what  it  means — having 
boldness  to  enter  in. 

And  there  may  be  others,  who  have  with 
longing,  wistful  hearts  heard  the  call  to  enter 
in,  and  yet  have  not  the  courage  to  do  so.  The 
thought  that  a  sinful  worm  can  every  day  and 
all  the  day  dwell  in  the  Holiest  of  All  is 
altogether  too  high.  The  consciousness  of 
feebleness  and  failure  is  so  strong,  the  sense  of 
personal  unfaithfulness  so  keen,  the  experience 
of  the  power  of  the  world  and  circumstances,  of 
the  weakness  of  the  flesh  and  its  efforts,  so 
fresh,  that  for  them  there  is  no  hope  of  such  a 
life.  Others  may  rejoice  in  it,  they  must  even 
be  content  without  it.  And  yet  the  heart  is  not 
content. 

To  both  such,  those  who  have  entered  but 
still  are  full  of  fears,  and  those  who  in  fear  do 
not  enter,  the  Holy  Spirit  speaks — To-day,  if 
you  shall  hear  His  voice,  harden  not  your 
hearts.  Having  boldness  in  the  blood  of  Jesus 
to  enter  into  the  Holiest,  let  us  draw  nigh. 
The  boldness  with  which  we  are  to  enter  is  not, 
rirst  of  all,  a  conscious  feeling  of  confidence ;  it 
is  the  objective  God-given  rigbt  and  liberty  of 
entrance  of  which  the  blood  assures  us.  The 
measure    of    our    boldness    is    the    worth    God 


LET  US  DRA  VV  NIGH  21 

attaches  to  the  blood  of  Jesus.  As  our  heart 
reposes  its  confidence  on  that  in  simple  faith, 
the  feeling  of  confidence  and  joy  on  our  part 
will  come  too,  and  our  entrance  will  be  amid 
songs  of  praise  and  gladness. 

Boldness  in  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Everything 
depends  upon  our  apprehension  of  what  that 
means.  If  the  blood  be  to  us  what  it  is  to  God, 
the  boldness  which  God  means  it  to  give  will 
fill  our  hearts.  As  we  saw  in  chap,  ix.,  what 
the  blood  has  effected  in  rending  the  veil  and 
cleansing  the  heavens,  and  giving  Jesus,  the 
Son  of  Man,  access  to  God,  will  be  the  measure 
of  what  it  will  effect  within  us,  making  our 
heart  God's  sanctuary,  and  fitting  us  for  perfect 
fellowship  with  the  Holy  One.  The  more  we 
honour  the  blood  in  its  infinite  worth,  the  more 
will  it  prove  its  mighty  energy  and  efficacy, 
opening  heaven  to  us  and  in  us,  giving  us,  in 
divine  power,  the  real  living  experience  of  what 
the  entrance  into  the  Holiest  is. 

The  blood  of  Jesus.  The  life  is  the  blood. 
As  the  value  of  this  life,  so  the.  value  of  the 
blood.  In  Christ  there  was  the  life  of  God; 
infinite  as  God  is  the  worth  and  the  power  of 
that  blood.  In  Christ  there  was  the  life  of 
man  in  its  perfection;  in  His  humility,  and 
obedience  to  the  Father,  and  self-sacrifice,  that 


22  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

which  made  Him  unspeakably  well  pleasing  to 
the  Father.  That  blood  of  Jesus,  God  and 
man,  poured  out  in  a  death  that  was  a  perfect 
fulfilment  of  God's  will,  and  a  perfect  victory 
over  all  the  temptations  of  sin  and  self,  effected 
an  everlasting  atonement  for  sin,  and  put  it  for 
ever  out  of  the  way,  destroying  death  and  him 
that  had  the  power  of  it.  Therefore  it  was, 
that  in  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant 
Jesus  was  raised  from  the  dead;  that  in  His 
own  blood,  as  our  Head  and  Surety,  He  entered 
heaven ;  and  that  that  blood  is  now  for  ever  in 
heaven,  in  the  same  place  of  honour  as  God.  the 
Judge  of  all,  and  Jesus  the  Mediator  (xii.  24). 
It  is  this  blood,  now  in  heaven  before  God  for 
us,  that  is  our  boldness  to  enter  in,  even  into 
the  very  Holiest  of  All. 

Beloved  Christian !  The  blood  of  Jesus ! 
The  blood  of  the  Lamb !  0  think  what  it 
means.  God  gave  it  for  your  redemption.  God 
accepted  it  when  His  Son  entered  heaven  and 
presented  it  on  your  behalf.  God  has  it  for 
ever  in  His  sight  as  the  fruit,  the  infinitely 
well-pleasing  proof,  of  His  Son's  obedience  unto 
death.  God  points  you  to  it,  and  asks  you  to 
believe  in  the  divine  satisfaction  it  gives  to 
Him,  in  its  omnipotent  energy,  in  its  everlast- 
ing  sufficiency.       Oh,    will    you    not   this   day 


LET  US  DRAW  NIGH  23 

believe  that  that  blood  gives  you,  sinful  and 
feeble  as  you  are,  liberty,  confidence,  boldness 
to  draw  nigh,  to  enter  the  very  Holiest  ?  Yes, 
believe  it,  that  the  blood,  and  the  blood  alone, 
but  the  blood  most  surely,  brings  you  into  the  very 
presence,  into  the  living  and  abiding  fellowship, 
of  the  everlasting  God.  And  let  your  response  to 
God's  message  concerning  the  blood,  and  the 
boldness  it  gives  you,  be  nothing  less  than  this, 
that  this  very  moment  you  go  with  the  utmost 
confidence,  and  take  your  place  in  the  most 
intimate  fellowship  with  God.  And  if  your 
heart  condemn  you,  or  coldness  or  unbelief 
appear  to  make  a  real  entrance  impossible,  rest 
not  till  you  believe  and  prove  to  the  full  the 
power  of  the  blood  in  very  deed  to  bring  you 
nigh.  Having  boldness  by  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
let  us  draw  near  I 

1.  Which  is  now  greater  in  your  sight:  your  sin  or  the  blood 
of  Jesus?  There  can  be  but  one  answer.  Then  draw  nigh,  and 
enter  in,  into  the  Holiest  of  All.  As  your  sin  has  hitherto  kept 
you  bach,  let  the  blood  now  bring  you  nigh.  And  the  blood  will 
give  you  the  boldness  and  the  power  to  abide. 

2.  "  One  drop  of  that  blood,  coming  out  of  the  Holiest  on 
the  soul,  perfects  the  conscience,  makes  that  there  is  no  more 
conscience  of  sin,  and  enables  us  to  Hue  in  the  fellowship  of  God 
and  His  Son.  Such  a  soul,  sprinkled  with  the  blood,  is  able  to 
enjoy  the  heavenly  treasures,  and  to  accomplish  the  heavenly 
service  of  the  living  God." 

3.  And  that  blood,  such  is  its  heavenly  cleansing  power,  can 
keep  the  soul  clean.  "  If  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the 
tight,"  if  we  live  in  the  Holiest,  in  the  light  of  His  countenance. 


24  LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 


"we  have  fellowship  one  with  another,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ,  His  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin, "  so  that  no  sin  touch 
us,  whereby  we  lose  the  fellowship  with  the  Father. 

4.  Understand  how  the  Father's  heart  longs  that  His  children 
draw  near  to  Him  boldly.  He  gave  the  blood  of  His  Son  to  secure 
it.  Let  us  honour  God,  and  honour  the  blood,  by  entering  the 
Holiest  with  great  boldness. 

6  So  near,  so  very  near  to  God, 
More  near  /  cannot  be, 
For   in  the  person  of  His  Son 
I  am  as  near  as  He. 


LET  US  DRAW  NIGH  25 


III 

Ebe  mew  anfc  Xfvtng  Has. 

X.— 19.  Having  therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to 
enter  into  the  Holy  Place  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by 
the  way  which  He  dedicated  for  us,  a  new  and  living 
way,  through  the  veil,  that  is  to  say,  His  flesh ; 

22.  Let  us  draw  near. 

The  Holiest  of  All  is  opened  for  us  to  enter  in 
and  appear  before  God,  to  dwell  and  to  serve  in 
His  very  presence.  The  blood  of  the  one  Sacri- 
fice for  ever,  taken  into  heaven  to  cleanse  away 
all  sin  for  ever,  is  our  title  and  our  boldness  to 
enter  in.  Now  comes  the  question,  What  is  the 
way  that  leads  up  and  through,  the  opened  gate, 
and  in  which  we  have  to  walk  if  we  are  to 
enter  in  1  This  way,  the  only  way,  the  one  in- 
fallible way,  is  a  new  and  living  way,  which 
Jesus  dedicated  for  us,  through  the  veil,  that 
is  to  say,  His  flesh.  The  boldness  we  have 
through  the  blood  is  the  right  or  liberty  of  access 
Jesus  won  for  us,  when  we  regard  His  death  as 
that  of  our  Substitute,  who  did  what  we  can 


26  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

never  do — made  redemption  of  transgressions, 
and  put  away  sin  for  ever.  The  new  and  living 
way,  through  the  rent  veil,  that  is,  His  flesh, 
has  reference  to  His  death,  regarded  as  that  of 
our  Leader  and  Forerunner,  who  opened  up  a 
path  to  God,  in  which  He  first  walked  Himself, 
and  then  draws  us  to  follow  Him.  The  death 
of  Jesus  was  not  only  the  dedication  or  inaugura 
tion  of  the  new  sanctuary  and  of  the  new  cove- 
nant, but  also  of  the  new  way  into  the  holy 
presence  and  fellowship  of  God.  Whoever  in 
faith  accepts  of  the  blood  He  shed  as  His  bold- 
ness of  entrance,  must  accept,  too,  of  the  way 
He  opened  up  as  that  in  which  he  walks. 

And  what  was  that  way  ?  The  way  through 
the  veil,  that  is,  His  flesh.  The  veil  is  the 
flesh.  The  veil  that  separated  man  from  God 
was  the  flesh,  human  nature  under  the  power  of 
sin.  Christ  came  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh, 
and  dwelt  with  us  here  outside  the  veil.  The 
Word  was  made  flesh.  He  also  Himself  in  like 
manner  partook  of  flesh  and  Wood.  In  the  days 
of  His  flesh,  He  was  tempted  like  as  we  are ; 
He  offered  prayer  and  supplication  with  strong 
crying  and  tears.  He  learned  obedience  even 
to  the  death.  Our  will  is  our  life.  He  gave 
up  His  own  will  to  the  death  to  seek  God's  will 
alone.     Through  the  rent  veil  of  His  flesh,  His 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  27 

will,  His  life,  as  yielded  up  to  God  in  death,  He 
entered  into  the  Holiest.  Being  made  in  like- 
ness of  men,  He  humbled  Himself,  becoming 
obedient  even  unto  death.  Wherefore  also  God 
highly  exalted  Him.  Through  the  rent  veil  He 
rose  to  the  throne  of  God.  And  this  is  the  way 
He  dedicated  for  us.  In  the  death  to  our  own 
will  we  live  to  God  and  His  will.  The  very 
path  in  which,  as  our  Substitute,  He  accom- 
plished redemption,  is  the  path  which  He  opened 
for  us  to  walk  in,  the  path  of  obedience  to  the 
will  of  God.  "  Christ  suffered  for  you,  leaving 
you  an  example  that  ye  should  follow  His  steps." 
Christ  our  High  Priest  is  as  literally  and  fully 
Leader  and  Forerunner  as  He  is  Substitute  and 
Redeemer. 

His  way  is  our  way.  As  little  as  He  could 
open  and  enter  the  Holiest  for  us,  except  in  His 
path  of  suffering  and  obedience  and  self-sacrifice, 
as  little  can  we  enter  in  unless  we  walk  in  the 
same  path.  Jesus  said  as  much  of  His  disciples 
as  of  Himself :  Excejrf  a  corn  of  wheat  fall  into 
the  ground,  and  die,  it  abideth  alone.  He  that 
hateth  his  life  in  this  world  shall  heep  it  unto 
life  eternal.  Paul's  law  of  life  is  the  law  of  life 
for  every  believer :  Bearing  about  in  the  body  the 
dying  of  Jesus,  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus  may  be 
manifested   in   our   body.      The   way   into   the 


28  LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 

Holiest  is  the  way  of  the  rent  veil,  the  way 
of  sacrifice  and  of  death.  There  is  no  way  for 
our  putting  away  sin  from  us  but  the  way  of 
Jesus;  whoever  accepts  His  finished  work  ac- 
cepts what  constitutes  its  spirit  and  its  power ; 
it  is  for  every  man  as  for  the  Master — to  put 
away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  self.  Christ's  death 
was  something  entirely  new,  and  so  too  His 
resurrection  life,  a  life  out  of  death  such  as 
never  had  been  known.  This  new  death  and 
new  life  constitute  the  new  and  living  way,  in 
which  we  are  to  walk— a  new  way  of  living  in 
which  we  draw  nigh  to  God. 

Even  as  when  Christ  spoke  of  taking  His  flesh 
as  daily  food,  so  here,  where  the  Holy  Spirit 
speaks  of  taking  the  rent  veil  of  His  flesh  as 
our  daily  life,  many  say :  This  is  a  hard  saying ; 
who  can  hear  it  ?  Who  then  can  be  saved  ?  To 
those  who  are  willing  and  obedient  and  believe, 
all  things  are  possible,  because  it  is  a  new  and 
living  way.  A  new  way.  The  word  means 
ever  fresh,  a  way  that  never  decays  or  waxes 
old  (viii.  13),  but  always  retains  its  first  perfection 
and  freshness.  It  is  the  way  which  Jesus  opened 
up,  when  He  took  away  the  first,  that  He  might 
establish  the  second  (x.  9),  and  showed  how 
not  burnt  sacrifices,  but  the  sacrifice  of  our  own 
will,  to  do  God's  will,  is  what  delights  God.     A 


LET  US  DRA IV  NIGH  29 

living  way.  A  way  always  needs  a  living  man 
to  move  upon  it ;  it  does  not  impart  either  life 
or  strength.  This  way,  the  way  of  obedience 
and  suffering  and  self-sacrifice  and  death,  how- 
ever hard  it  appears,  and  to  nature  utterly  im- 
possible, is  a  living  tray.  It  not  only  opens  a 
track,  but  supplies  the  strength  to  carry  the 
traveller  along.  It  acts  in  the  power  of  the 
endless  life,  in  which  Christ  was  made  a  High 
Priest.  We  saw  how  the  Holy  Spirit  watches 
over  the  way  into  the  Holiest,  and  how  He,  as 
the  eternal  Spirit,  enabled  Christ,  in  opening 
the  way,  to  offer  Himself  without  spot  unto 
God;  it  is  He  whose  mighty  energy  pervades 
this  way,  and  inspires  it  with  life  divine.  As 
we  are  made  partakers  of  Christ,  as  we  come  to 
God  through  Him,  His  life,  the  law  of  the  Spirit 
of  life  in  Christ  Jesus,  takes  possession  of  us, 
and  in  His  strength  we  follow  in  the  footsteps 
of  Christ  Jesus.  The  way  into  the  Holiest  is 
the  living  way  of  perfect  conformity  to  Jesus, 
wrought  in  us  by  His  Spirit. 

The  new  and  living  way  through  the  rent 
veil  into  the  Holiest.  We  now  know  what  it 
is :  it  is  the  way  of  death.  Yes,  the  way  of 
death  is  the  way  of  life.  The  only  way  to  be 
set  free  from  our  fallen  nature,  with  the  curse 
and  power  of  sin  resting  on  it,  is  to  die  to  it. 


30  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

Jesus  denied  Himself,  would  do  nothing  to  please 
that  nature  He  had  taken,  sinless  though  it  was 
in  Him.  He  denied  it ;  He  died  to  it.  He 
gave  up  His  own  will  to  seek  nothing  but  the 
will  of  God.  This  was  to  Him  the  path  of  life. 
And  this  is  to  us  the  living  way.  Accept  God's 
will  in  every  providence.  Obey  God's  will  in 
every  command  of  nature  as  His  word.  Seek 
God's  perfect  will  in  every  leading  of  His  Spirit. 
Say,  I  am  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God.  And 
let  God's  will  be  the  one  aim  of  thy  life.  It 
will  be  to  us  as  it  was  to  Him,  though  it  lead 
through  death — the  path  to  God  and  to  life.  As 
we  know  Him  in  the  power  of  His  resurrection, 
He  leads  us  into  the  conformity  to  His  death. 
He  does  it  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  So 
His  death  and  His  life,  the  new  death  and  the 
new  life  of  deliverance  from  sin,  and  fellowship 
with  God,  which  He  inaugurated,  His  death  to 
His  own  will,  and  His  abiding  in  God's  will,  work 
in  us,  and  we  are  borne  along  on  the  will  of  God, 
as  He  was,  to  where  He  is.  Having  therefore 
boldness  to  enter  in  by  the  new  and  living 
way,  let  us  draw  nigh. 

1.  When  first  a  believer  avails  himself  of  the  boldness  he  has 
in  the  blood,  and  enters  into  the  Holiest,  he  does  not  understand 
all  that  is  meant  by  the  new  and  living  way.  ft  is  enough  if  his 
heart  is  right,  and  he  is  ready  to  deny  himself  and  take  up  his 
cross.    In  due  time  it  will  be  revealed  what  the  full  fellowship  i$ 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  31 


with  His  Lord  in  the   way  He  opened  up,   of  obedience  unto 
death. 

2.  The  new  and  living  way  is  not  only  the  way  for  once  entering 
in,  but  the  way  for  a  daily  walk,  entering  ever  deeper  into  God's 
love  and  will. 

3.  The  way  of  life  is  the  way  of  death.  This  fallen  life,  this 
self,  is  so  sinful  and  so  strong,  there  is  no  way  of  deliverance  but 
by  death.  But,  praise  God  I  the  way  of  death  is  the  way  of  life ;  in 
the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection  and  indwelling  we  dare  to  walk 
in  it. 

4.  Let  each  who  longs  to  dwell  in  the  secret  of  God's  presence 
all  the  day,  now,  at  once,  and  once  for  all,  accept  and  enter  on 
the  new  and  living  way  :  Jesus,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  mill  keep  and 

ead  you  in  it 


3*  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 


IV. 
a  (Sreat  fl>rfest  over  tbe  Ibouae  of  <5ob. 

X— 21.  And  having  a  great  Priest  over  the  house 
of  God ;  let  us  draw  near. 

We  said  before  that  in  the  symbols  of  the 
Mosaic  worship  there  were  specially  four  things 
that,  as  types  of  the  mystery  of  the  coming 
redemption,  demand  attention.  These  are — the 
Sanctuary,  the  Blood,  the  Way  into  the  Holiest, 
the  Priest.  The  first  three,  all  heavenly  things, 
we  have  had ;  we  now  come  to  the  fourth,  the 
chief  and  the  best  of  all — a  living  Person,  Jesus, 
a  great  High  Priest  over  the  House  of  God.  The 
knowledge  of  what  He  has  won  for  me,  the 
entrance  into  the  Holiest ;  of  the  work  He  did 
to  win  it,  the  shedding  of  His  blood ;  of  the 
way  in  which  I  am  to  enter  into  the  enjoyment 
of  it  all — all  this  is  very  precious.  But  there 
is  something  better  still:  it  is  this,  that  the 
living,  loving  Son  of  God  is  there  personally  to 
receive  me,  and  make  me  partaker  of  all  the 


LE  T  US  DKA IV  NIGH  33 

blessedness  that  God  has  for  me.  This  is  the 
chief  point :  we  have  such  a  High  Priest,  who 
sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  in 
the  heavens.  Wherefore,  brethren,  having  a 
great  Priest  over  the  house  of  God,  let  us 
draw  near. 

And  what  is  now  the  work  we  need  Jesus  to 
do  for  us?  Has  it  not  all  been  done1?  The 
Holiest  is  opened.  Boldness  through  the  blood 
has  been  secured.  The  living  way  has  been 
dedicated  to  carry  us  in.  What  more  is  there 
that  Jesus  has  to  do  for  us  ?  Nothing  more ;  it 
has  all  been  finished,  once  and  for  ever.  And 
why  is  it  then  we  are  pointed  to  Him  as  the  great 
Priest  over  the  house  of  God?  It  is  because, 
above  all,  we  need  Himself,  the  living  Jesus,  to 
make  that  work  all  life  and  truth  in  us,  yea, 
Himself  to  be  its  life  and  truth  in  us.  And 
what  is  it  we  may  expect  of  Him  ?  What  we 
need,  and  what  we  must  look  to  Him  for  is  this, 
so  to  work  in  us  that  the  work  He  has  done  for 
us  may  be  made  real  icithin  us,  as  a  personal 
experience  of  the  power  of  an  endless  life  in 
which  He  was  constituted  Priest.  Because  He 
liveth  ever,  we  read,  He  is  able  to  save  com- 
pletely. Salvation  is  a  subjective,  experimental 
thing — manifest  in  the  peace  and  holiness  of 
heart  He  gives.     We,  our  life,  our  inner  man, 

3 


34  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

our  heart,  our  will  and  affections,  are  to  be 
delivered  from  the  power  of  sin,  and  to  taste 
and  enjoy  the  putting  away  of  sin  as  blessed 
experience.  In  our  very  heart  we  are  to  find 
and  feel  the  power  of  His  redemption.  As 
deep  and  strong  as  sin  proved  itself,  in  its  actual 
power  and  its  mastery  within  us,  is  Jesus  to 
prove  the  triumph  of  redeeming  grace. 

His  one  work  as  Priest  over  the  house  of  God 
is,  to  bring  us  into  it,  and  enable  us  to  live  there. 
He  does  this  by  bringing  God  and  the  soul  into 
actual  harmony,  sympathy,  and  fellowship  with 
each  other.  We  saw  in  chap.  viii.  how,  as  Minister 
of  the  sanctuary,  He  does  all  that  is  to  be  done 
in  heaven  with  God ;  how,  as  Mediator  of  the 
new  covenant,  He  does  all  that  is  to  be  done 
here  on  earth,  in  our  heart ;  the  one  as  effectu 
ally  as  the  other.  The  two  offices  are  united 
in  the  one  great  Priest ;  in  each  act  of  His  He 
unites  both  functions,  to  the  soul  that  knows 
what  to  expect,  and  trusts  Him,  for  it.  Every 
movement  of  Jesus  on  our  behalf  in  the  presence 
of  God  can  have  its  corresponding  movement  in 
the  heart  of  man. 

And  how  is  this  effected?— In  virtue  of  His 
union  with  us,  and  our  union  with  Him.  Jesus 
is  the  Second  Adam  ;  the  new  Head  of  the  race. 
He  is  it  in  virtue  of  His  real  humanity,  having 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  35 

in  it  the  power  of  true  divinity  that  filleth  all. 
Just  as  Adam  was  our  forerunner  into  death, 
and  we  have  all  the  power  of  his  sin  and  death 
working  in  us  and  drawing  us  on,  so  we  have 
Jesus  as  our  Forerunner  into  God's  presence, 
with  all  the  power  of  His  death  and  His  resur- 
rection-life working  in  us,  and  drawing  and 
lifting  us  with  divine  energy  into  the  Father's 
presence.  God  Las  no  delight  in  a  fellowship 
with  anything  but  the  image  of  His  Beloved 
3on.  There  can  be  no  true  worship  or 
drawing  nigh  to  God  except  as  we  are  like- 
minded  to  Christ,  and  come  with  His  pirit  and 
disposition  in  us.  And  this  is  now  His  work,  as 
High  Priest  bringing  us  nigh  to  God,  that  He 
breathes  His  own  disposition  in  us,  and  we 
draw  near  to  God,  in  living  union  with  Him. 
Yes,  Jesus,  with  His  divine,  His  heavenly  life, 
in  the  power  of  the  throne  on  which  He  is 
seated,  has  entered  into  the  deepest  ground  of 
our  being,  where  Adam,  where  sin,  do  their 
work,  and  is  there,  unceasingly  carrying  out  His 
work  of  lifting  us  heavenward  into  God's 
presence,  and  of  making  God's  heavenly  presence 
here  on  earth  our  portion. 

And  why  is  it  we  enjoy  this  so  little  %  And 
what  is  needed  that  we  come  to  its  full  enjoy- 
ment?   And  how  can  Jesus  truly  be  to  us  a 


36  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

great  High  Priest,  giving  us  our  actual  life  in 
the  Holiest  of  All  %  One  great  reason  of  failure 
is  what  the  Epistle  so  insists  on  :  our  ignorance 
of  the  spiritual  perfection-truth  it  seeks  to  teach, 
and  specially  of  what  the  Holy  Spirit  witnesseth 
of  the  way  into  the  Holiest.  And  what  we 
need  is  just  this,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  Himself, 
that  Jesus  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  be  waited  on,  and 
accepted,  and  trusted  to  do  the  work  in  power. 
Do  keep  a  firm  hold  of  this  truth,  that  when 
our  great  High  Priest  once  for  all  entered  the 
Holiest,  and  sat  down  on  the  throne,  it  was  the 
Holy  Ghost  sent  down  in  His  power  into  the 
hearts  of  His  disciples,  through  wliom  the  heavenly 
High  Priest  became  a  present  and  an  indwelling 
Saviour,  bringing  down  with  Him  into  their 
hearts  the  presence  and  the  love  of  God.  That 
pentecostal  gift,  in  the  power  of  the  glorified 
Christ,  is  the  one  indispensable  channel  of  the 
power  of  Jesus'  priesthood.  Nothing  but  the 
fulness  of  the  Spirit  in  daily  life,  making  Jesus 
present  within  us,  abiding  continually,  can  keep 
us  in  the  presence  of  God  as  full  experience. 
Jesus  is  no  outward  High  Priest,  who  can  save 
us  as  from  a  distance.  No,  as  the  Second  Adam, 
He  is  to  us  nowhere,  if  He  is  not  in  us.  The 
one  reason  why  the  truth  of  His  Heavenly 
Priesthood  is  so  often  powerless,  is  because  we 


LET  US  DKA  IV  NIGH  37 

look  upon  it  as  an  external,  distant  tiling,  a 
work  going  on  in  heaven  above  ns.  The  one 
cure  for  this  evil  is  to  know  that  our  great 
Priest  over  the  house  of  God  is  the  glorified 
Jesus,  who  in  the  Holy  Spirit  is  present  in  us, 
and  makes  His  presence  and  power  in  heaven 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  as  real  within  us  here 
as  it  is  above  us  there. 

He  is  Priest  over  the  house  of  God,  the  place 
where  God  dwells.  We  are  His  house  too. 
And  as  surely  as  Jesus  ministers  in  the  sanctuary 
above,  He  moment  by  moment  ministers  in  the 
sanctuary  within.  "Wherefore,  brethren,  having, 
— not  only  in  gift,  not  only  in  the  possession  of 
right  and  thought,  but  in  our  hearts,  in  our 
inmost  being, — having-  a  great  Priest  over  the 
house  of  God,  let  us  draw  near.  Let  Jesus 
Himself  on  the  throne,  in  His  power  and  love, 
be  the  one  desire,  and  hope,  and  joy  of  our 
hearts,  He  will  maintain  His  work  in  us 
as  wonderfully  as  He  has  accomplished  it 
for  us. 

7.  Having  a  great  Priest !  You  know  a  great  deal  of  Jesus, 
but  do  you  know  this,  that  His  chief,  His  all-comprehensiue  work, 
is  to  bring  you  near,  oh,  so  near,  to  God  ?  Has  He  done  this  for 
you  ?    If  not,  ask  Him,  trust  Him  for  it. 

2.  It  is  Jesus  Himself  I  want.  Himself  alone  can  satisfy 
me.  It  is  in  the  holy  faith  of  Jesus,  the  compassionate 
sympathiser,  in  the  holy  love  of  Jesus,  who  calls  us  brethren, 
that  we  can  draw  near  to  God.    It  is  in  a  heart  given  up,  with 


35  LET  US  DRA  W  NlGH 


its  trust  and  love  and  devotion,  to  Jesus,  that  the  presence  of 
God  will  be  felt. 

3.  We  have  such  a  High  Priest !  Yes,  say,  I  have  Him ; 
in  all  His  power  and  love  He  is  mine ;  and  yield  to  Him  to  do 
His  work.  He  abideth  continually  :  therefore  we  can  abide  con- 
tinually too  in  the  blessed  life,  in  the  secret  of  God's  presence 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  39 


V. 

•QGUtb  a  Grue  Ibcart 

X.— 22.  Let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart. 

We  have  been  looking  at  the  four  great  blessings 
of  the  new  worship  by  which  God  encourages  us 
to  draw  near  to  Him.  We  shall  now  see  what 
the  four  chief  things  are  that  God  seeks  for  in  us 
as  we  come  to  Him.  Of  these  the  first  is,  a  true 
heart. 

In  man's  nature  the  heart  is  the  central  power. 
As  the  heart  is,  so  is  the  man.  The  desire  and 
the  choice,  the  love  and  the  hatred  of  the  heart 
prove  what  a  man  is  already,  and  decide  what 
he  is  to  become.  Just  as  we  judge  of  a  man's 
physical  character,  his  size  and  strength  and  age 
and  habits,  by  his  outward  appearance,  so  the 
heart  gives  the  real  inward  man  his  character ; 
and  "  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart  "  is  what  God 
looks  to.  God  has  in  Christ  given  us  access  to 
the  secret  place  of  His  duelling,  to  the  inner 
sanctuary  of   \Y\*   pre  t  m^-  and   His  heart;    no 


40  LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH 

wonder  that  the  first  thing  He  asks,  as  He  calls 
us  unto  Him,  is  the  heart — a  true  heart ;  our 
inmost  being  must  in  truth  be  yielded  to  Him, 
true  to  Him. 

True  religion  is  a  thing  of  the  heart,  an  inward 
life.  It  is  only  as  the  desire  of  the  heart  is 
fixed  upon  God,  the  whole  heart  seeking  for  God, 
giving  its  love  and  finding  its  joy  in  God,  that  a 
man  can  draw  near  to  God.  The  heart  of  man 
was  expressly  planned  and  created  and  endowed 
with  all  its  powers,  that  it  might  be  capable  of 
receiving  and  enjoying  God  and  His  love.  A 
man  can  have  no  more  of  religion,  or  holiness, 
or  love,  or  salvation,  or  of  God,  than  he  has  in 
his  heart.  As  much  as  a  man  has  of  the  inward 
heart  religion,  so  much  has  he  of  salvation,  and 
no  more.  As  far  as  Christ  through  His  Spirit  is 
within  the  heart,  making  the  thoughts  and  will 
likeminded  with  Himself,  so  far  can  a  man's 
worship  and  service  be  acceptable  to  God.  The 
Kingdom  of  God  consists  entirely  in  the  state  of 
the  heart.  Therefore  God  can  ask  for  nothing 
else  and  nothing  less  than  the  heart — than  a 
true  heart. 

What  the  word  true  means  we  see  from  the 
use  of  it  made  previously  (viii.  2  and  ix.  24), 
the  true  tabernacle,  and,  the  Holy  Place,  which 
are  figures  of  the  true.     The  first  tabernacle  was 


LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH  41 

only  a  figure  and  a  shadow  of  the  true.  There 
was,  indeed,  a  religious  service,  and  worship, 
but  it  had  no  real  abiding  power ;  it  could  not 
make  the  worshipper  perfect.  The  very  image, 
the  substance  and  reality,  of  the  heavenly  things 
themselves,  were  only  brought  by  Christ.  And 
God  now  asks  that,  to  correspond  with  the  true 
sanctuary,  there  shall  be  a  true  heart.  The  old 
covenant,  with  its  tabernacle  and  its  worship, 
which  was  but  a  shadow,  could  not  put  the 
heart  of  Israel  right.  In  the  new  covenant 
God's  first  promise  is,  /  will  write  my  law  in  the 
heart :  a  neio  heart  will  I  give  thee.  As  He  has 
given  His  Son,  full  of  grace  and  truth,  in  the 
power  of  an  endless  life,  to  work  all  in  us  as  the 
Mediator  of  a  new  covenant,  to  write  His  law  in 
our  hearts,  He  calls  us  to  draw  nigh  with  a  true 
heart. 

God  asks  for  the  heart.  Alas,  how  many 
Christians  serve  Him  still  with  the  service  of  the 
old  covenant !  There  are  seasons  for  Bible-read- 
ing and  praying  and  church-going.  But  when 
one  notices  how  speedily  and  naturally  and 
happily,  as  soon  as  it  is  freed  from  restraint,  the 
heart  turns  to  worldly  things,  one  feels  how 
little  there  is  of  the  heart  in  it :  it  is  not  the 
worship  of  a  true  heart,  of  the  whole  heart.  The 
heart,  with  its  life  and  love  and  joy,  has  not  yet 


42  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

found  in  God  its  highest  good.  Eeligion  is 
much  more  a  thing  of  the  head  and  its  activities, 
of  imagination  and  conception  and  wishes,  which 
are  but  the  old  figures  and  shadows  over  again, 
than  of  the  heart  and  its  life  ;  much  more  a  thing 
of  the  human  will  and  its  power,  than  of  that 
Spirit  which  God  gives  within  us.  The  Spirit 
of  Jesus  makes  every  word  of  confession  of  sin, 
or  of  surrender  to  God's  will,  every  act  of  trust 
in  His  grace,  a  living  reality,  the  true  expression 
of  our  inmost  being.  This  constitutes  the  true 
heart. 

The  invitation  comes  :  Let  us  draw  near  with 
a  true  heart.  Let  no  one  hold  back  for  fear, 
"my  heart  is  not  true."  There  is  no  way  for 
obtaining  the  true  heart,  but  by  acting  it.  God 
has  given  you,  as  His  child,  a  new  heart — a 
wonderful  gift,  if  you  but  knew  it.  Through 
ignorance  or  unbelief  or  disobedience  it  has 
grown  feeble  and  withered ;  its  beating  can, 
nevertheless,  still  be  felt.  The  Epistle,  with  its 
solemn  warnings  and  its  blessed  teaching,  has 
come  to  bring  arousing  and  healing.  Even  as 
Christ  said  to  the  man  with  the  withered  hand, 
Stand  forth,  He  calls  to  you  from  His  throne  in 
heaven,  Eke,  and  come  and  enter  in  with  a  true 
heart.  As  you  hesitate,  and  look  within  to  feel 
and  to  find  out  if  the  heart  is  true,  and  in  vain 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  43 

seek  to  do  what  is  needed  to  make  it  true,  He 
calls  again,  Stretch,  forth  thy  hand.  When  He 
spake  that  to  him  of  the  withered  arm,  whom 
He  had  called  to  rise  up  and  stand  before  Him, 
the  man  felt  the  power  of  Jesus'  eye  and  voice, 
and  he  stretched  it  forth.  Do  thou,  likewise, 
stretch  forth,  lift  up,  reach  out  that  withered 
heitrt  of  thine,  that  has  so  been  cherishing  its 
own  impotence, — stretch  forth,  and  it  will  be 
made  whole.  In  the  very  act  of  obeying  the 
call  to  enter  in,  it  will  prove  itself  a  true  heart 
— a  heart  ready  to  obey  and  to  trust  its  blessed 
Lord,  a  heart  ready  to  give  up  all,  and  find  its 
life  in  the  secret  of  His  presence.  Yes,  Jesus, 
th*i  great  Priest  over  the  house  of  God,  the 
Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  with  the  new 
heart  secured  thee,  calls,  Draw  nigh  with  a 
true  heart. 

During  these  last  years  God  has  been  rousing 
His  people  to  the  pursuit  of  holiness,  that  is,  to 
seek  the  entrance  into  the  Holiest,  a  life  in  full 
fellowship  with  Himself,  the  Holy  One.  In 
the  teaching  which  He  has  been  using  to  this 
end,  two  words  have  been  very  much  in  the 
foreground — Consecration  and  Faith.  These 
are  just  what  are  here  put  first — a  true  heart  and 
the  fulness  of  faith.  The  true  heart  is  nothing 
but  true  consecration,   the  spirit  that  longs  to 


44  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

live  wholly  for  God,  that  gladly  gives  up  every- 
thing that  it  may  live  wholly  for  Him,  and  that 
above  all  yields  up  itself,  as  the  key  of  the  inner 
life,  into  His  keeping  and  rule.  True  religion 
is  an  inward  life,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  true  heart  does  indeed  enter  into 
the  true  sanctuary,  the  blessed  secret  of  God's 
presence,  to  abide  there  all  the  life  through. 
Let  us  enter  in  into  the  inner  sanctuary  of  God's 
love,  and  the  Spirit  will  enter  into  the  inner 
sanctuary  of  our  love,  into  our  heart.  Let  us 
draw  nigh  with  a  true  heart — longing,  ready, 
utterly  given  up  to  desire — and  receive  the 
blessing. 

1.  If  you  look  at  your  own  constitution,  you  see  how  the  head 
and  the  heart  are  the  two  great  centres  of  life  and  action. 
Much  thought  and  study  make  the  head  weary.  Strong  emotion 
or  excitement  affects  the  heart.  It  is  the  heart  God  asks— the 
power  of  desire  and  affection  and  will.  The  head  and  the  heart 
are  in  partnership.  God  tells  us  that  the  heart  must  rule  and 
lead,  that  it  is  the  heart  He  wants.  Our  religion  has  been  too 
much  that  of  the  head— hearing  and  reading  and  thinking.  Let 
us  beware  of  allowing  these  to  lead  us  astray.  Let  them  stand 
aside  at  times.  Let  us  give  the  heart  time  to  assert  its  supremacy. 
Let  us  draw  nigh  with  a  true  heart. 

2.  A  true  heart— true  in  what  it  says  that  it  thinks  of  itself ; 
true  in  what  it  says  that  it  believes  of  God ;  true  in  what  it 
professes  to  take  from  God  and  to  give  to  Him. 

3.  It  is  the  heart  God  wants  to  dwell  in.  It  is  in  the  state  of 
the  heart  God  wants  to  prove  His  power  to  bless.  It  is  in  the 
heart  the  love  and  the  joy  of  God  are  to  be  known.  Let  U8  draw 
near  with  a  irus  heart. 


LET  LS  DRA  IV  NIGH  45 


VL 

Zbc  Quinces  of  3fatt& 

X.— 22.  Let  us  draw  near,  in  fulness  of  faith. 

This  translation,  the  fulness  of  faith,  is  not  only 
more  correct  than  that  of  "  full  assurance  of  faith," 
but  much  more  significant.  Full  assurance  of 
faith  refers  only  to  the  strength  and  confidence 
with  which  we  believe.  The  truth  we  accept 
may  be  very  limited  and  defective,  and  our 
assurance  of  it  may  be  more  an  undoubting 
conviction  of  the  mind  than  the  living  appre- 
hension of  the  heart.  In  both  respects  the 
fulness  of  faith  expresses  what  we  need, — a 
faith  that  includes  objectively  all  that  God 
offers  it  in  its  fulness,  and  subjectively  all  the 
powers  of  our  heart  and  life  in  their  fulness. 
Let  us  draw  near,  in  fulness  of  faith. 

Here,  if  anywhere,  there  is  indeed  need  of 
fulness  of  faith,  that  we  may  take  in  all  the 
fulness  of  the  provision  God  has  made,  and  of 
the  promises  that  are  waiting  for  us  to  inherit. 


46  LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH 

The  message  comes  to  a  sinful  man  that  he  maj 
have  his  continual  abode  in  the  Most  Holy; 
that,  more  real  and  near  than  with  his  nearest 
earthly  friend,  he  may  live  in  unbroken  fellow- 
ship with  the  Most  High  God.  He  is  assured 
that  the  blood  of  Christ  can  cleanse  his  con- 
science in  such  power  that  he  can  draw  nigh  to 
God  with  a  perfect  conscience  and  with  undoubt- 
ing  confidence,  and  can  ask  and  expect  to  live 
always  in  the  unclouded  light  of  God's  face. 
He  receives  the  assurance  that  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  coming  from  out  of  the  Holiest, 
can  enable  him  to  walk  exactly  in  the  same  path 
in  which  Christ  walked  on  His  way  to  God,  and 
make  that  way  to  him  a  new  and  living  way, 
with  nothing  of  decay  or  weariness  in  his  pro- 
gress. This  is  the  fulness  of  faith  we  are  called 
to.  But,  above  all,  to  look  to  Jesus  in  all  the 
glory  in  which  He  has  been  revealed  in  the 
Epistle,  as  God  and  Man,  as  Leader  and  Fore- 
runner, as  Melchisedek,  as  the  Minister  of  the 
sanctuary  and  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant — 
in  one  word,  as  our  great  Priest  over  the  house 
of  God.  And,  looking  to  Him,  to  claim  that  He 
shall  do  for  us  this  one  thing,  to  bring  us  nigh, 
and  even  on  earth  give  us  to  dwell  without  a 
break  in  the  presence  of  the  Father. 

Faith  ever  deals  with  impossibilities.     Its  only 


LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH  47 

rule  or  measure  is  what  God  has  said  to  be 
possible  to  Him.  When  we  look  at  our  lives 
and  their  failures,  at  our  sinfulness  and  weakness, 
at  those  around  us,  the  thought  will  come  up  — 
Is  it  for  me  %  Dare  I  expect  it  %  Is  it  not  weary- 
ing myself  in  vain  to  think  of  it  or  to  seek  for 
it?  Soul!  the  God  who  redeemed  thee,  when 
an  enemy,  with  the  blood  of  His  Son— what 
thinkest  thou?  would  He  not  be  willing  thus  to 
take  thee  to  His  heart  1  He  who  raised  Jesus 
when  He  had  died  under  the  curse  of  thy  sins, 
from  the  death  of  the  grave  to  the  throne  of  His 
glory,  would  He  not  be  able  to  take  thee  too,  and 
give  thee  a  place  within  the  veil  %  Do  believe 
it.  He  longs  to  do  it ;  He  is  able  to  do  it.  His 
home  and  His  heart  have  room  for  thee  even 
now.     Let  us  draw  near  in  fulness  of  faith. 

In  fulness  of  faith.  The  word  has  also  refer- 
ence to  that  full  measure  of  faith  which  is  found 
when  the  whole  heart  is  filled  and  possessed  by 
it.  We  have  very  little  idea  of  how  the  weak- 
ness of  our  faith  is  owing  to  its  being  more  a 
confident  persuasion  of  the  mind  with  regard  to 
the  truth  of  what  God  says,  than  the  living 
apprehension  and  possession  of  the  eternal 
spiritual  realities  of  the  truth  with  the  heart 
The  Holy  Spirit  asks  us  first  for  a  true  heart, 
and  then  at  once,  as  its  first  exercise,  for  fulness 


43  LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 

of  faith.  There  is  a  faith  of  insight,  a  faith  of 
desire,  a  faith  of  trust  in  the  truth  of  the  worilj 
and  a  faith  of  personal  acceptance.  There  is  a 
faith  of  love  that  embraces,  and  a  faith  of  will 
that  holds  fast,  and  a  faith  of  sacrifice  that 
gives  up  everything,  and  a  faith  of  despair  that- 
abandons  all  hope  in  self,  and  a  faith  of  rest  that 
waits  on  God  alone.  This  is  all  included  in  the 
faith  of  the  true  heart,  the  fulness  of  faith,  in 
which  the  whole  being  surrenders  and  lets  go 
all,  and  yields  itself  to  God  to  do  His  work. 
In  fulness  of  faith  let  us  draw  near. 

In  fulness  of  faith,  not  of  thought.  What 
God  is  about  to  do  to  you  is  supernatural,  above 
what  you  can  think.  It  is  a  love  that  passes 
hnoidedge  that  is  going  to  take  possession.  God 
is  the  incomprehensible,  the  hidden  One.  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  the  secret,  incomprehensible 
working  and  presence  of  God.  Do  not  seek  to 
understand  everything.  Draw  nigh — it  never 
says  with  a  clear  head,  but  with  a  true  heart. 
Rest  upon  God  to  do  for  you  far  more  than  yon 
understand  in  fulness  of  faith. 

In  fulness  of  faith,  and  not  in  fulness  of  feel- 
ing. When  you  come,  and,  gazing  into  the  opened 
Holiest  of  All,  hear  the  voice  of  Him  that  dwells 
between  the  cherubim  call  you  to  come  in ;  and 
as  you  gaze — long,  indeed — to  enter  and  to  dwell 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  49 

there,  the  word  comes  again,  Draw  near  with  a 
true  heart  1  Your  answer  is,  Yes,  Lord ;  with 
my  whole  heart — with  that  new  heart  Thou  Thy- 
self hast  given  me.  You  make  the  surrender  of 
yourself,  to  live  only  and  always  in  His  presence 
and  for  His  service.  The  voice  speaks  again : 
Let  it  be  To-day — Now,  in  fulness  of  faith. 
You  have  accepted  what  He  offers.  You  have 
given  what  He  asks.  You  believe  that  He 
accepts  the  surrender.  You  believe  that  the 
great  Priest  over  the  house  takes  possession  of 
your  inner  life,  and  brings  you  before  God.  And 
yet  you  wonder  you  feel  so  little  changed.  You 
feel  just  like  the  old  self  you  were.  Now  is  the 
time  to  listen  to  the  voice — In  fulness  of  faith, 
not  of  feeling  !  Look  to  God,  who  is  able  to  do 
above  what  we  ask  or  think.  Trust  His  power. 
Look  to  Jesus  on  the  throne,  living  there  to 
bring  you  in.  Claim  the  Spirit  of  the  exalted 
One  as  His  pentecostal  gift.  Eemember  these 
are  all  divine,  spiritual  mysteries  of  grace,  to  be 
revealed  in  you.  Apart  from  feeling,  without 
feeling,  in  fulness  of  faith,  in  bare,  naked  faith 
that  honours  God,  enter  in.  Eeckon  yourself  to 
be  indeed  alive  to  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  taken  in 
into  His  presence,  His  love,  His  very  heart. 

1.  Be  followers  of  those  who,  through  faith  and  longsuffering, 
inherited  the  promises.    Faith  accepts  and  rejoices  in  the  gift; 

4 


50  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 


tongsuffering  waits  for  the  full  enjoyment ;  and  so  faith  in  due 
time  inherits,  and  the  promise  becomes  an  experience.  By  faith 
at  once  take  your  place  in  the  Holiest ;  wait  on  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
your  inner  life  to  reueal  it  in  the  power  of  God ;  your  High  Priest 
will  see  to  your  inheriting  the  blessing. 

2.  In  the  fulness  of  the  whole  heart  to  accept  the  whole  ful- 
ness of  God's  salvation — this  is  what  God  asks. 

3.  As  in  heaven,  so  on  earth.  The  more  I  look  at  the  fulness 
of  grace  in  Christ,  the  more  the  fulness  of  faith  will  grow  in  me. 
Of  His  fulness  have  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace. 

4.  A  whole  chapter  is  to  be  devoted  to  the  exhibiting  of  what 
this  fulness  of  faith  implies.  Let  us  go  on  to  study  it  with  the  one 
object  for  which  it  is  given — our  entering  in'o  that  life  in  the  will 
and  love  of  God  which  Jesus  has  secured  for  ua. 


LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH  51 


vn. 

©ur  Ibearts  5pr'nftle&. 

X.— 22.  Let  us  draw  near  .  .  .  our  hearts  sprinkled 
from  an  evil  conscience. 

In  verse  19  we  had  boldness  through  the  blood 
of  Jesus,  as  one  of  the  four  precious  things 
prepared  for  us  by  God.  It  is  that  actual 
liberty  or  right  which  the  blood  of  Jesus  gives, 
apart  from  any  use  we  make  of  it.  Along  with 
the  opened  sanctuary,  and  the  living  way,  and 
the  great  Priest,  the  blood  and  our  boldness  in 
it  is  a  heavenly  reality  waiting  our  faith  and 
acceptance.  Here  the  blood  is  mentioned  a 
second  time,  and  our  being  sprinkled  with  it 
as  one  of  the  things  God  asks  of  us.  It  is  in 
the  personal  application  and  experience  of  the 
power  of  the  blood  we  are  to  draw  nigh.  The 
sense  of  the  cleansing  of  the  heart  in  the 
blood  may  be,  must  be,  an  unbroken  conscious- 
ness; so  shall  we  abide  continually  in  God's 
presence.  This  second  mention  of  the  blood 
is  in  accord  with  what  we  had  in  chap.  ix.  of 


52  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

its  twofold  sprinkling.  First,  Christ  entered 
with  it  into  heaven,  to  cleanse  the  heavenly 
things,  and  fulfil  the  type  of  the  sprinkling  on 
the  mercy-seat.  It  proved  its  power  with  God 
in  putting  away  sins.  And  then  we  read  of  its 
cleansing  our  conscience.  The  blood  which  has 
had  its  mighty  operation  in  heaven  itself  has 
as  mighty  power  in  our  hearts.  It  makes  us 
partakers  of  a  divine  and  eternal  cleansing.  In 
heaven  the  power  of  the  blood  is  proved  to  be 
infinite  and  immeasurable,  never  -  ceasing  and 
eternal,  giving  boldness  to  enter  even  as  Christ 
did.  As  the  soul  learns  to  believe  and  rejoice 
in  this  heavenly  power  of  the  blood,  it  will 
claim  and  receive  the  very  same  power  in  the 
heart;  Jesus  washes  us  in  His  blood,  with  a 
washing  that  is  not  at  times  or  intervals,  but, 
in  the  power  of  the  endless  life,  a  continuous 
experience,  and  we  know  by  faith  what  it  is  to 
have,  in  a  heavenly  reality,  a  heart  sprinkled 
from  an  evil  conscience.  We  walk  as  those 
whose  garments  have  been  washed  and  made 
white.  And  grace  is  given,  even  for  the  life  on 
earth,  to  keep  our  garments  undefiled  (Eev. 
iii.  4). 

There  will  ever  be  harmony  between  a  home 
and  those  who  dwell  in  it,  between  an  environ- 
ment and  the  life  that  is  sustained  by  it.     There 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  53 

must  be  harmony  between  the  Holiest  of  All 
and  the  soul  that  is  to  enter  in.  That  harmony 
begins  with,  and  has  its  everlasting  security  in, 
the  blood  of  sprinkling.  The  ever-living  and 
never-ceasing  energy  of  the  blood,  ever  speaking 
better  things  than  the  blood  of  Abel,  and  keeping 
heaven  open  for  me,  has  a  like  effect  on  my 
heart.  The  blood  has  put  away  the  thought  of 
sin  from  God ;  He  remembers  it  no  more  for 
ever.  The  blood  puts  away  the  thought  of  sin 
in  me  too,  taking  away  the  evil  conscience  that 
condemns  me.  The  better  things  which  the 
blood  speaks  in  heaven,  it  speaks  in  my  heart 
too;  it  lifts  me  into  that  heavenly  sphere,  that 
new  state  of  life  and  intercourse  with  God,  in 
which  an  end  has  been  made  of  sin,  and  the 
soul  is  taken  in  to  the  full  and  perfect  enjoy- 
ment of  the  love  of  God. 

The  action  of  the  blood  in  heaven  is  un- 
ceasing— never  a  moment  but  the  blood  is  the 
delight  of  the  Father  and  the  song  of  the 
ransomed.  Draw  nigh  when  thou  wilt,  the 
blood  is  there,  abiding  continually;  not  a 
moment's  interval.  And  even  so  will  it  be  in 
the  soul  that  enters  in.  The  difficulty  that 
staggers  the  faith  of  many  lies  just  here ;  they 
cannot  understand  how  one  who  has  to  live 
amid    the    cares    and    engagements    and    com- 


54  LE  T  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

panionships  of  his  daily  life  can  every  moment 
maintain  a  heart  sprinkled  from  an  evil  con- 
science. They  do  not  know  that,  if  once,  with 
a  heart  sprinkled,  they  enter  in,  they  are  in 
an  inner  sanctuary,  where  everything  acts  in 
the  power  of  the  upper  world,  in  the  power  of 
an  endless  life.  They  breathe  the  inspiring, 
invigorating  air  of  the  Holiest  of  All ;  they 
breathe  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  enjoy  the  power 
of  the  resurrection  life.  The  Minister  of  the 
heavenly  sanctuary  is  also  the  Mediator  of  the 
new  covenant  in  our  hearts.  All  He  does  in 
heaven  He  does  each  moment  on  earth  in  our 
heart,  if  faith  will  trust  Him,  for  the  blood  of 
sprinkling  is  the  blood  of  the  covenant.  .  The 
abiding  continually  is  possible  and  sure,  because 
He  who  is  our  High  Priest  abides  continually. 

And  what  may  be  the  reason  that  so  few 
Christians  can  testify  of  the  joy  and  the  power 
of  a  heart  at  all  times  sprinkled  from  an 
evil  conscience1?  The  answer  is,  That  in  the 
apprehension  of  this,  as  of  every  other  truth, 
there  are  stages  according  to  the  measure  of 
faith  and  faithfulness.  See  it  in  Israel.  There 
you  have  three  stages.  The  Israelite  who 
entered  the  outer  court  saw  the  altar  and  the 
blood  sprinkled  there,  and  received  such  assur- 
ance of  pardon  as  that   could   give  him.     The 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  55 

priest  who  was  admitted  to  the  Holy  Place  not 
only  saw  the  blood  sprinkled  on  the  brazen 
altar,  he  had  it  sprinkled  upon  himself,  and 
might  see  it  sprinkled  on  the  golden  altar  in 
the  Holy  Place.  His  contact  with  the  blood 
was  closer,  and  he  was  admitted  to  a  nearer 
access.  The  access  of  the  High  Priest  was  still 
more  complete ;  he  might,  with  the  blood  for  the 
mercy-seat,  once  a  year  enter  within  the  veil. 
Even  so  there  are  outer-court  Christians,  who 
trust  in  Christ  who  died  on  Calvary,  but  know 
very  little  of  His  heavenly  life,  or  near  access 
to  God,  or  service  for  others.  Beyond  these 
there  are  Christians  who  know  that  they  are 
called  to  be  priests,  and  to  live  in  the  service  of 
God  and  their  fellow -men.  They  know  more 
of  the  power  of  the  blood  as  setting  apart  for 
service;  but  yet  their  life  is  still  without  the 
veil.  But  then  come  those  who  know  what 
Christ's  entering  with  His  blood  implies  and 
procures,  and  who  experience  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  applies  the  blood  in  such  power,  that  it 
indeed  brings  to  the  life  in  the  inner  sanctuary, 
in  the  full  and  abiding  joy  of  God's  presence.1 

1  "  The  blood  contains  life  (John  vi.  53).  The  blood 
not  only  removes  death  (judicial  and  spiritual),  but  it 
gives  and  preserves  life  (judicial  and  spiritual).  It 
quicken?.      We    are   not   only    to  be    sprinkled    with  it 


56  LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 

Let  us  draw  near,  with  a  true  heart,  in 
fulness  of  faith,  having-  our  hearts  sprinkled 
from  an  evil  conscience.  Oh,  let  us  not  bring 
reproach  upon  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  by  not 
believing  in  its  power  to  give  us  perfect  access 
to  God.  Let  us  listen  and  hear  them  sing 
without  ceasing  the  praise  of  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb  in  heaven ;  as  we  trust  and  honour  and 
reioice  in  it,  we  shall  enter  the  heaven  of  God's 
presence. 

1.  "  Wherein  is  the  blood  of  Jesus  better  than  the  blood  of 
goats  and  bulls,  if  it  cannot  free  us  from  the  spirit  of  bondage 
and  the  euil  conscience,  if  it  cannot  giue  us  a  full  glad  confidence 
before  God  ?  What  Jesus  hath  perfected,  we  can  experience  and 
enjoy  as  perfect  in  our  heart  and  conscience.  You  dishonour 
your  Saviour  when  you  do  not  seek  to  experience  that  He  has 
perfected  you  as  touching  the  conscience,  and  when  you  do  not 
Hue  with  a  heart  entirely  cleansed  from  the  evi'  conscience." — 
STEINHQFtH. 

2.  A  true  heart  —  a  heart  sprinkled :  you  see  everything 
depends  upon  the  heart.  God  can  do  nothing  for  us  from 
without,  only  by  what  He  can  put  into  the  heart.  Of  all  that 
Jesus  is  and  does  as  High  Priest  in  heaven  I  cannot  have  the  least 
experience,  but  as  it  is  revealed  in  the  heart.  The  whole  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  in  the  heart.  Let  us  draw  nigh  with  a  true 
heart,  a  sprinkled  heart,  our  inmost  being  under  the  heavenly 
power  of  the  blood,  entirely  and  unceasingly. 

outwardly,  but  we  are  to  receive  it  inwardly,  to  drink  it. 
As  with  the  water,  so  with  the  blood.  They  are  for  inward 
as  well  as  outward  application." — H.  Bonar.  And  because 
the  twofold  application  is  essentially  one,  the  sprinkling  is 
in  a  power  that  purifies  and  quickens  the  whole  inner  life. 


LET  US  DRAW  NIGH  57 


VIIT. 

©ur  JBoDg  Wasbek 

X.— 22.  Let  us  draw  near  .  .  .  our  body  washed 
with  pure  water. 

Man  belongs  to  two  worlds,  the  visible  and  the 
invisible.  In  his  constitution,  the  material  and 
the  spiritual,  body  and  soul,  are  wonderfully 
united.  In  the  fall  both  came  under  the  power 
of  sin  and  death;  in  redemption  deliverance 
has  been  provided  for  both.  It  is  not  only  in 
the  interior  life  of  the  soul,  but  in  that  of  the 
body  too,  that  the  power  of  redemption  can  be 
manifested. 

In  the  Old  Testament  worship,  the  external 
was  the  more  prominent.  It  consisted  mostly 
in  carnal  ordinances,  imposed  until  a  time  of 
reformation.  They  taught  a  measure  of  truth, 
they  exercised  a  certain  influence  on  the  heart, 
but  they  could  not  make  the  worshipper  perfect. 
It  was  only  with  the  New  Testament  that  the 
religion  of  the  inner  life,  the  worship  of  God 
in  spirit  and  truth,  was  revealed.     And  yet  we 


58  LET  US  DRAW  A1GH 

need  to  be  on  the  watch  lest  the  pursuit  of  the 
inner  life  lead  us  to  neglect  the  external.  It  is 
in  the  body,  as  much  as  in  the  spirit,  that  the 
saving  power  of  Christ  Jesus  must  be  felt.  It 
was  with  this  view  that  our  Lord  adopted  one 
of  the  Jewish  washings,  and  instituted  the 
baptism  with  water.  He  that  believed  with 
the  heart,  came  with  the  body  to  be  baptized. 
It  was  a  token  that  the  whole  exterior  physical 
life,  with  all  its  functions  and  powers,  was  to 
be  His  too.  It  was  in  this  connection  John 
wrote:  There  are  three  who  bear  witness,  the 
Spirit  and  the  water  and  the  blood.  The  same 
Spirit  who  applies  the  blood  in  power  to  the 
heart,  takes  possession  and  mastery  of  the  body 
washed  with  water.  And  where  in  Scripture 
the  word  and  water  are  joined  together  (Eph. 
v.  26  ;  John  xiii.  10,  xv.  3),  it  is  because  the 
word  is  the  external  manifestation  of  what  must 
rule  our  whole  outer  life  too. 

It  is  in  this,  connection  the  two  expressions 
are  used  here :  Our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an 
evil  conscience,  our  body  washed  with  pure 
water.  The  thought  was  suggested  to  our 
author  by  the  service  of  the  tabernacle.  In  the 
court  there  were  only  two  things  to  be  seen — 
the  brazen  altar  and  the  laver.  At  the  one,  the 
priest  received  and  sprinkled  the  blood ;  at  the 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  59 

other,  lie  found  the  water  in  which  he  washed, 
ere  he  entered  the  Holy  Place.  At  the  installa- 
tion of  the  priests  in  their  office,  they  were  first 
washed  and  then  sprinkled  with  blood  (Ex. 
xxix.  4,  20).  On  the  great  day  of  atonement, 
the  high  priest,  too,  had  first  to  wash  ere  he 
entered  into  the  Holiest  with  the  blood  (Lev. 
xvi.  4).  And  so  the  lesson  comes  to  us  that  if 
we  draw  near  with  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil 
conscience,  we  must  also  have  the  body  washed 
with  pure  water.  The  liberty  of  access,  the 
cleansing  the  blood  gives,  can  only  be  enjoyed 
in  a  life  of  which  every  action  is  cleansed  by 
the  word.  Not  only  in  the  heart  and  the 
disposition,  but  in  the  body  and  the  outer  visible 
life,  everything  must  be  clean.  Who  shall 
ascend  into  the  hill  of  the  Lord  ?  or  icho  shall 
stand  in  His  Holy  Place  ?  He  that  hath  clean 
lu'nds,  and  a  pure  heart.  A  heart  sprinkled 
with  the  blood,  a  body  washed  with  pure  water 
from  eA^ery  stain,  —  these  God  hath  joined 
together;  let  no  man  separate  them.  There 
have  been  some  who  have  sought  very  earnestly 
to  enter  into  the  Holiest  of  All  and  have  failed. 
The  reason  was  that  they  had  not  clean  hands, 
they  were  not  ready  to  have  everything  that 
is  not  perfectly  holy,  discovered  and  put  away. 
Cleanse  your  hands,  ye  sinners,  and  purify  your 


60  LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH 

hearts,  ye  double-minded — is  a  word  that  always 
holds.  The  blood  of  Christ  has  unspeakable 
and  everlasting  power  for  the  soul  that,  with  a 
true  heart,  is  ready  to  put  away  every  sin. 
Where  this  is  not  the  case,  and  the  body  is  not 
washed  with  pure  water,  the  perfect  conscience 
which  the  blood  gives  cannot  be  enjoyed. 

Our  body  washed  with  pure  water.  It  is 
not  only  in  spirit,  but  with  the  body  too,  we 
enter  into  the  Holiest  of  All.  It  is  on  us  here, 
where  we  are  in  the  body,  that  the  presence  of 
God  descends.  Our  whole  life  in  the  flesh  is 
to  be  in  that  presence ;  the  body  is  very  speci- 
ally the  temple,  and  in  charge  of  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  in  the  body  the  Father  is  to  be  glorified. 
Our  whole  being,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  is,  in 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  holy  sacrifice 
upon  the  altar,  a  living  sacrifice  for  service 
before  God.  With  the  body,  too,  we  live  and 
walk  in  the  Holiest.  Our  eating  and  drinking, 
our  sleeping,  our  clothing,  our  labour  and  re- 
laxation,— all  these  things  have  more  influence 
on  our  spiritual  life  than  we  know.  They  often 
interrupt  and  break  the  fellowship  we  seek  to 
maintain.  The  heart  and  the  body  are  in- 
separably joined ;  a  heart  sprinkled  from  an 
evil  conscience  needs  a  body  washed  with  pure 
water. 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  61 

When  He  cometh  into  the  world,  He  saith,  A 
body  didst  thou  prepare  for  Me.  This  word  of 
Christ  must  be  adopted  by  each  of  His  followers. 
Nothing  will  help  us  to  live  in  this  world,  and 
keep  ourselves  unspotted,  but  the  Spirit  that 
was  in  Christ,  that  looked  upon  His  body  as 
prepared  by  God  for  His  service ;  that  looks 
upon  our  body  as  prepared  by  Him  too,  that 
we  might  offer  it  to  Him.  Like  Christ,  we  too 
have  a  body,  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells. 
Like  Christ,  we  too  must  yield  our  body,  with 
every  member,  every  power,  every  action,  to 
fulfil  His  will,  to  be  offered  up  to  Him,  to 
glorify  Him.  Like  Christ,  we  must  prove  in  our 
body  that  we  are  holy  to  the  Lord. 

The  blood  that  is  sprinkled  on  thy  heart 
came  from  the  body  of  Jesus,  prepared  by  God, 
and,  in  His  whole  life,  even  to  His  one  offering, 
given  up  to  God.  The  object  of  that  blood 
sprinkling  is  that  thy  body,  of  which  the  heart 
sprinkled  with  the  blood  is  the  life,  should,  like 
His,  be  wholly  given  up  to  God,  should  be  in 
all  thy  walk  a  body  washed  with  pure  water. 
Oh,  seek  to  take  in  this  blessed  truth,  and  to 
accept  it  fully.  The  heart  sprinkled  with  the 
blood  points  to  the  divine  side  of  redemption, 
the  body  washed  with  pure  water,  to  the  human 
side.      Let  faith  in  the  divine   cleansing  and 


62  LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 

obedience  to  the  call  for  us  to  cleanse  ourselves 
be  closely  linked  together.  God's  work  and 
thy  work  will  be  truly  one.  The  heart  sprinkled 
from  the  evil  conscience  will  then  become  an 
unbroken  experience,  and  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,  the  ever-living  motive  and  power  for  a 
life  in  the  body,  like  Christ's,  a  sacrifice  holy 
and  acceptable  to  God. 

1.  I  am  deeply  persuaded  that  in  the  self-pleasing  which  we 
allow  in  gratifying  the  claims  of  the  body,  we  shall  find  one  of 
the  most  frequent  causes  of  the  gradual  decline  of  our  fellow- 
ship with  God.  Do  remember,  it  was  through  the  body  that  Satan 
conquered  in  Paradise  ;  it  was  in  the  body  he  tempted  Christ  and 
had  to  be  resisted.  It  was  in  suffering  of  the  body,  as  when 
He  hungered,  that  Christ  was  perfected.  It  is  only  when  the  law 
of  self-denial  is  strictly  applied  to  the  body,  that  we  can  dwell 
in  the  Holiest. 

2.  He  was  tempted  in  all  points,  like  as  we  are— in  His  body 
very  specially,  and  is  able  to  succour  us.  Let  the  committal  of 
our  body  into  the  keeping  and  the  rule  of  Jesus  be  very  definite 
and  entire. 

3.  "If  Miranda  was  to  run  a  race  for  her  life,  she  would  submit 
to  a  diet  that  was  proper  for  it.  As  the  race  which  is  set  before 
her  is  a  race  for  holiness  and  heavenly  affection,  so  her  everyday 
diet  has  only  this  one  end  — to  make  her  body  fitter  for  this 
spiritual  life." 


LET  US  DRA IV  NIGH  63 


IX. 

Xet  us  5)raw  1Reat» 

X— 22.  "Wherefore,  brethren,  let  us  draw  near. 

We  have  studied  the  four  great  blessings  of 
the  new  worship,  as  the  motives  and  encourage- 
ments for  us  to  draw  nigh.  They  are — the 
Holiest  opened  up,  Boldness  through  the  blood, 
the  Neio  and,  living  icay,  and  the  Great  Priest 
over  the  house  of  God.  And  we  have  considered 
the  four  great  marks  of  the  true  worshipper — 
A  true  heart,  Fulness  of  faith,  The  heart 
sprinJded,  and  The  body  cleansed.  We  now 
come  to  the  four  injunctions  which  come  to  us 
out  of  the  opened  sanctuary — and  specially  to 
the  first — Let  us  draw  near.  Both  in  speaking 
of  the  entering  in  of  Christ,  and  the  power  of 
His  blood  in  chap,  ix.,  and  in  the  exposition  of 
our  context,  we  have  had  abundant  occasion  to 
point  out  what  is  meant  by  this  entering  in,  and 
what  is  needed  for  it.  And  yet  it  may  be  well 
to  gather  up  all  we  have  said,  and  in  the  very 


64  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

simplest  way  possible,  once  again,  by  the  grace 
of  God,  to  throw  open  the  door,  and  to  help 
each  honest-hearted  child  of  God  to  enter  in, 
and  take  his  place  for  life,  in  the  home  the 
Father  has  prepared  for  him. 

And  first  of  all  I  would  say :  Believe  that  a 
life  in  the  Holiest  of  All,  a  life  of  continual 
abiding  in  God's  presence,  is  most  certainly  your 
duty  and  within  your  power.  As  long  as  this 
appears  a  vague  uncertainty,  the  study  of  our 
Epistle  must  be  in  vain.  Its  whole  teaching 
has  been  to  prove  that  the  wonderful  priesthood 
of  Christ,  in  which  He  does  everything  in  the 
power  of  an  endless  life,  and  is  therefore  able 
to  save  completely ;  that  His  having  opened  a 
way  through  the  rent  veil  into  the  Holiest,  and 
entered  in  with  His  blood ;  that  His  sitting  on 
the  throne  in  heavenly  power,  as  Minister  of 
the  sanctuary  and  Mediator  of  the  covenant; 
that  all  this  means  nothing  if  it  does  not 
mean — the  Holiest  is  open  for  us.  We  may, 
we  must,  and  we  can  live  there.  What  is 
the  meaning  of  this  summing  up  of  all, 
Wherefore,  brethren,  having  boldness  to  enter- 
let  ns  draw  near,  if  a  real  entrance  into  and 
abode  in  the  Holiest  is  not  for  us  ?  No,  beloved 
Christian,  do  believe,  it  can  be.  Say :  God 
really  means  me  to  enter  and  dwell,  and  spend 


LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH  65 

my  whole  life,  in  the  conscious  enjoyment  of  His 
immediate  presence.  Let  no  thought  of  thy 
weakness  and  unfaithfulness  hold  thee  back. 
Begin  to  look  at  God,  who  has  set  the  door  open 
and  calls  thee  in ;  at  the  blood  that  has  prevailed 
over  sin  and  death,  and  given  thee  a  boldness 
that  nothing  can  hinder ;  at  Christ  the  almighty 
and  most  loving  High  Priest,  who  is  to  bring 
thee  in  and  keep  thee  in;  and  believe:  Yes, 
such  a  life  is  meant  for  me ;  it  is  possible ;  it  is 
my  duty ;  God  calls  me  to  it ;  and  say  then, 
whether  thy  heart  would  not  desire  and  long  to 
enter  into  this  blessed  rest,  the  home  of  God's 
love. 

The  second  step  is  the  surrender  to  Christ,  by 
Him  to  be  brought  into  this  life  of  abiding 
fellowship  with  God.  This  surrender  implies 
an  entire  giving  up  of  the  life  of  nature  and  of 
self;  an  entire  separation  from  the  world  and 
its  spirit ;  an  entire  death  to  my  own  will,  and 
acceptance  of  God's  will  to  command  my  life, 
in  all  things,  down  to  the  very  least.  To  some 
this  surrender  comes  as  the  being  convicted  of 
a  number  of  things  which  they  thought  harm- 
less, and  which  they  now  see  to  have  been  in 
the  will  of  the  flesh  and  of  man.  To  others  it 
comes  as  a  call  to  part  with  some  single  doubt- 
ful thing,  or  some  sin  against  which  they  have 
5 


66  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

hopelessly  struggled.  The  surrender  of  all 
becomes  only  possible  when  the  soul  sees  how 
truly  and  entirely  Jesus,  the  Mediator  of  the 
new  covenant,  has  undertaken  for  all,  and 
engages  to  put  His  own  delight  in  God's  law 
into  the  heart,  to  give  the  will  and  the  strength 
to  live  in  all  God's  will.  That  faith  gives  the 
courage  to  place  oneself  before  Christ  and  to  say 
— Lord,  here  am  I,  ready  to  be  led  by  Thee  in 
the  new  and  living  way  of  death  to  my  will, 
and  a  life  in  God's  will  alone :  I  give  up  all  to 
Thee. 

Then  comes,  accompanying  this  surrender, 
the  faith  that  Jesus  does  now  accept  and  under- 
take for  all.  The  more  general  faith  in  His 
power,  which  led  to  the  surrender,  becomes  a 
personal  appropriation.  I  know  that  I  cannot 
lift  or  force  myself  into  the  Holiest.  I  trust 
Jesus,  as  my  almighty  and  ever-living  Priest  on 
the  throne,  even  now,  at  this  moment,  to  take 
me  in  within  the  veil,  to  take  charge  of  me 
there,  and  enable  me  to  walk  up  and  down  before 
the  face  of  the  living  God,  and  serve  Him. 
However  high  and  impossible  such  a  life  appears, 
I  cannot  doubt  but  that  He  who  with  His  blood 
opened  the  Holiest  for  me  will  take  me  in; 
and  that  He  who  sits  on  the  throne  as  my  great 
High  Priest  is  able  and  faithful  to  keep  me  in 


Ll.  T  US  DRA  IV  NIGH  67 

God's  presence.  Apart  from  any  feeling  or 
experience  of  a  change,  I  believe  He  takes  me  in, 
and  I  say :  Thank  God,  I  am  in  the  Holiest. 
Let  us  draw  near  in  fulness  of  faith. 

And  then  follows,  the  life  of  faith  in  fit* 
Holiest,  holding  fast  my  confidence  and  the 
glorying  of  hope  firm  to  the  end.  I  believe 
Jesus  takes  me  in  to  the  fulfilment  and  the 
experience  of  all  the  new  covenant  blessings, 
and  makes  me  inherit  all  the  promises.  I  look 
to  Him  day  by  day  to  seal  my  faith  with  the 
Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven  in  my  heart. 
The  disciples,  when  their  Lord  ascended  the 
throne,  kept  waiting,  praising,  praying,  till  the 
Spirit  came  as  the  witness  and  the  revealer 
within  their  hearts  of  the  glory  of  Jesus  at  the 
right  hand  of  God.  It  was  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost  that  they  truly  entered  within  the 
veil,  to  which  the  Forerunner  had  drawn  their 
longing  hearts.  They  entered  upon  a  state  of 
life  in  which  they  were  dead  to  their  own  will, 
and  alive  to  God's  will ;  in  which  Christ  dwelling 
in  their  hearts  by  the  Holy  Spirit  kept  them  in 
the  presence  and  love  of  God.  In  this  state  of 
life  we  too  can  be  kept.  As  sure  as  Christ 
Jesus  is  wholly  ours,  each  one  of  us  is  called  to 
live  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  pentecostal 
blessing.     The  soul  that  gives  itself  over  to  a 


68  LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH 

life  within  the  veil,  in  full  surrender  and  in 
simple  faith,  can  count  upon  this  most  surely, 
that,  in  the  power  of  the  eternal,  the  pentecostal 
Spirit  in  the  heart,  faith  will  become  experience, 
and  the  joy  unspeakable  be  its  abiding  portion. 
Wherefore,  brethren,  let  us  draw  near  1 

1.  Having  boldness  to  enter  in  is  the  summary  of  the 
doctrinal  teaching  of  the  first  half  of  the  Epistle ;  let  us  draw 
nigh,  the  summary  of  the  life  and  practice  which  the  second 
half  expounds. 

2.  The  faith  that  appropriates  the  blessing :  Jesus  now  takes 
me  in  and  gives  me  my  place  and  my  life  in  the  Father's  presence; 
is  but  a  beginning.  Faith  must  now  count  upon  the  Holy  Spirit, 
in  His  pentecostal  power,  bringing  down  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
to  us,  to  make  it  a  personal  experience.  Until  this  comes,  faith 
must  in  patience  wait  till  it  obtains  the  promise,  in  accordance 
with  the  teaching  we  have :  "  Cast  not  away  therefore  your 
boldness.  For  ye  have  need  of  patience,  that,  having  done  the 
m  II  of  God,  ye  may  receive  the  promise." 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  69 


Zbc  Confession  of  onr  1bope. 

X.— 23.  Let  us  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope 
that  it  waver  not ;  for  He  is  faithful  that  promised. 

The  three  chief  words  of  this  injunction  we 
have  had  before — Hold  fast,  Confession,  Hope* 
If  we  hold  fast  the  glorying  of  our  hope  firm  to 
the  end.  Give  diligence  to  the  fulness  of  hope. 
Christ  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession.  Let 
us  hold  fast  our  confession.  A  better  hope,  by 
which  we  draw  nigh  to  God.  We  have  now 
been  brought  to  see  what  Christian  perfection 
is,  in  that  perfect  life  in  God's  presence  to  which 
Jesus  brings  us  in :  here,  more  than  ever,  we 
shall  need  to  hold  fast  our  hope. 

Faith  and  hope  ever  go  together.  "Faith 
is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for."  Faith 
accepts  the  promise  in  its  divine  reality,  hope 
goes  forward  to  examine  and  picture  and  rejoice 
in  the  treasures  which  faith  has  accepted.  And 
so  here,  on  the  words,  Let  us  draw  near  in 
fulness  of  faith,  there  follows  immediately,  Let 


70  LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH 

us  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope.  Life 
in  the  Holiest,  in  the  nearness  of  God,  must  be 
characterised  by  an  infinite  hopefulness. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  see  the  reason  of  this. 
Entering  into  the  Holiest  is  only  the  beginning 
of  the  true  Christian  life.  As  we  tarry  there, 
God  can  begin  to  do  His  work  of  grace  in 
power.  There  the  holiness  of  God  can  over- 
shadow us,  and  can  be  assimilated  into  our  life 
and  character.  There  we  can  learn  to  worship 
in  that  true  humility  and  meekness  and 
resignation  to  God's  will,  which  does  not  come 
at  once,  but  in  -which  we  may  grow  up  even  as 
Jesus  did.  There  we  have  to  learn  the  holy 
art  of  intercession,  so  as  to  pray  the  prayer  that 
prevails.  There  we  wait  to  receive  in  larger 
measure,  in  ever  fresh  communications,  that 
fulness  of  the  Spirit  which  comes  and  is  main- 
tained only  by  close  and  living  contact  with 
Jesus  on  the  throne.  The  entrance  into  the 
Holiest  is  only  a  beginning.  It  is  to  be  a  life 
in  which  we  every  hour  receive  everything  from 
God,  in  which  God's  working  is  to  be  all  in  all. 
Here,  if  anywhere,  we  have  need  of  an  infinite 
hopefulness.  After  we  have  entered  in,  we 
shall  very  probably  not  find  what  we  expected. 
The  light  and  the  joy  and  the  power  may  not 
come  at  once.     Within  the  veil  it  is  still,  nay 


LE  T  US  DRA  W  NIGH  7 1 

rather,  it  is  eminently,  a  life  of  faith,  not  looking 
to  ourselves,  but  to  God,  and  hoping  in  Him. 
Faith  will  still  be  tried,  will  perhaps  most  be 
tried,  when  God  wants  most  to  bless.  Hope  is 
the  daughter  of  faith,  the  messenger  it  sends 
out  to  see  what  is  to  come :  it  is  hope  that 
becomes  the  strength  and  support  of  faith. 
Here,  in  the  Holiest,  let  us  above  all  hold  fast 
our  confidence  and  the  glorying  of  our  hope 
firm  unto  the  end.  Let  us  rejoice  in  hope  of 
the  glory  of  God,  as  it  will  most  surely  be 
revealed  in  our  souls. 

Let  us  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope. 
Men  always  speak  out  of  the  abundance  of  the 
heart  of  that  which  they  hope  for.  We,  too, 
must  confess  and  give  expression  to  our  hope. 
The  confession  strengthens  the  hope ;  what  we 
utter  becomes  clearer  and  more  real  to  us.  It 
glorifies  God.  It  helps  and  encourages  those 
around  us.  It  makes  God,  and  men,  and  our- 
selves, see  that  we  are  committed  to  it.  Let 
us  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope,  that  it 
waver  not.  Let  the  better  hope  by  which  we 
draw  nigh  to  God,  by  which  we  enter  within 
the  veil,  be  the  one  tiling  we  hold  fast  and 
confess  with  a  confidence  that  never  wavers. 
Let  the  blessed  hope  of  being  kept  day  by  day 
in  God's  lo\e,  the  hope  of  a  continual  abiding 


72  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

in  Jesus  and  where  He  is,  in  the  light  of  God, 
be  our  anchor  within  the  veil. 

For  He  is  faithful  that  promised.  Study 
the  references  on  the  word  "promise"  in  this 
Epistle,  and  see  what  a  large  place  they  take  in 
God's  dealings  with  His  people,  and  learn  how 
much  your  life  depends  on  your  relation  to  thi 
promises.  Connect  the  promises,  as  is  here 
done,  with  the  promiser;  connect  the  promise] 
with  His  unchanging  faithfulness  as  God,  and 
your  hope  will  become  a  glorying  in  God,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Faithful  is  He  that 
promised :  that  word  lies  at  the  root  of  the  life 
within  the  veil.  Just  as  it  is  God  who  speaks 
in  Christ,  who  sent  Him,  who  appointed  Him 
Priest,  who  perfected  Him,  so  it  is  God  to 
whom  Christ  brings  us  into  the  Holiest  for 
Him  now  to  work  directly  and  continually  in  us 
that  life  in  which,  as  His  redeemed  creatures, 
we  are  to  live.  This  is  the  blessedness  of  being 
brought  into  the  Holiest:  Christ  has  brought 
us  to  God.  And  we  are  now  in  the  right 
place  and  spirit  for  honouring  Him  as  God — 
that  is,  for  allowing  Him  to  work  freely, 
immediately,  unceasingly  in  us  such  a  life  as 
He  wrought  in  Christ.  He  is  faithful  that 
promised.  God  is  going  to  fulfil  His  promises 
of  life  and  love,  of  blessing  and  fruitfulness,  in 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  73 

a  way  we  have  no  conception  of.  Let  us  hold 
fast  the  confession  of  our  hope,  for  He  is  faith- 
ful that  promised. 

My  reader,  thou  hast  heard  the  call,  Let  us 
draw  near  in  fulness  of  faith.  And  hast 
obeyed?  And  hast  believed  that  Jesus  takes 
thee  into  a  life  of  abiding  in  God's  presence? 
And  art,  even  amid  the  absence  of  feeling  or 
experience,  even  amid  the  doubts  and  fears  that 
threaten  to  press  in,  holding  fast  the  confession 
of  thy  hope? — Listen,  look  up — He  is  faithful 
that  promised!  Let  this  be  thy  rock.  Say 
continually — 0  my  soul,  hope  thou  in  God,  for  I 
shall  yet  praise  Him.  Thou  art  my  hope,  0  God/ 
I  will  hope  continually,  and  praise  Thee  yet 
more  and  more.  This  is  the  blessing  of  the 
inner  sanctuary,  that  thou  hast  found  thy  true 
place  at  God's  feet,  there  to  wait  in  absolute 
dependence  and  helplessness  on  His  working. 
Look  up  in  the  boldness  the  blood  gives  thee. 
Look  up  with  a  true  heart,  in  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  dwells  and  works.  Look  up  with  a  heart 
sprinkled  by  thy  blessed  High  Priest  with  the 
blood — and  hope,  yes  hope  in  God,  to  do  His 
divine  work  in  thy  soul.  Let  Him  be  to  thee 
more  than  ever  the  God  of  hope.  Claim  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  His  word :  The  God 
of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believinj, 


74  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

that  ye  may  abound  in  hope,  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  The  infinite  faithful  God,  as  the 
God  of  our  hope,  filling  us  with  joy  and  peace 
in  believing,  and  we  learning  to  abound  in  hope 
through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  Be  this 
our  life  in  the  secret  of  God's  presence ! 

1.  Fulness  of  faith  and  fulness  of  hope  are  two  dispositions 
that  mark  the  true  heart.  It  is  because  we  are  to  have  nothing 
in  ourselues,  and  God  is  to  be  alt  and  to  do  all,  that  our  whole 
attitude  is  to  be  looking  up  to  Him,  expecting  and  receiving  what 
He  is  to  do. 

2.  That  ye  may  abound  in  hope,  through  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  See  how  the  life  in  the  Holiest  depends  entirely 
upon  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelling  within  us.  For  this  life  we  need  to 
be  filled  with  the  Spirit,  to  haue  the  immediate,  continual 
moving  of  the  Spirit.  Not  a  moment  can  we  dwell  in  the  Holiest 
but  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Not  a  moment  but  we  can  dwe'l  in  the 
Holiest  by  the  Holy  Spirit.    Let  us  abound  in  this  hope,  through 

he  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  75 


XL 

Xet  us  provoke  unto  Xove* 

X.— 24.  And  let  us  consider  one  another,  to  pro- 
voke unto  love  and  good  works. 

We  have  had  the  fulness  of  faith  in  which  we  are 
to  draw  nigh,  and  the  confession  of  hope  we  are 
to  hold  fast ;  now  follows  the  third  of  the  sister 
graces :  Let  us  consider  one  another — let  us 
prove  our  love  and  care  for  each  other  in  the 
effort — to  provoke  unto  love  and  good  works. 
These  three  thoughts  form  the  subdivisions  of 
the  practical  part  of  the  Epistle.  Chap.  xi.  may 
well  be  headed,  The  fulness  of  faith;  chap.  xii. 
1-14,  The  patience  of  hope;  and  chap,  xiii., 
Love  and  good  works. 

And  let  us  consider  one  another.  He  that 
enters  into  the  Holiest  enters  into  the  home  of 
eternal  love ;  the  air  he  breathes  there  is  love ; 
the  highest  blessing  he  can  receive  there  is  a 
heart  in  which  the  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad 
in  power  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  which  is  on 
the  path  to  be  made  perfect  in  love.     That  thou 


76  LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 

may  est  hiow  hoto  thou  ouglitest  to  behave  thyself 
in  the  house  of  God — remember  this,  Faith  and 
hope  shall  pass  aicay,  but  love  abideth  ever.  The 
chief  of  these  is  love. 

Let  us  consider  one  another.  TV  hen  first  we 
seek  the  entrance  into  the  Holiest,  ;';he  thought 
is  mostly  of  ourselves.  And  whei  we  have 
entered  in  in  faith,  it  is. as  if  it  is  al1  we  can  do 
to  stand  before  God,  and  wait  on  H'm  for  what 
He  has  promised  to  do  for  us.  Bt  t  it  is  not 
long  before  we  perceive  that  the  Holi  >st  and  the 
Lamb  are  not  for  us  alone ;  that  there  are  others 
within  with  whom  it  is  blessed  to  h.*1.  re  fellow- 
ship in  praising  God ;  that  there  are  seme  with- 
out who  need  our  help  to  be  brought  in.  It  is 
into  the  love  of  God  that  we  have  had  access 
given  us ;  that  love  enters  our  hearts ;  and  we 
see  ourselves  called  to  live  like  Christ  in  entire 
devotion  to  those  around  us. 

Let  us  consider  one  another.  All  the  redeemed 
form  one  body.  Each  one  is  dependent  on  the 
other,  each  one  is  for  the  welfare  of  the  other. 
Let  us  beware  of  the  self-deception  that  thinks 
it  possible  to  enter  the  Holiest,  into  the  nearest 
intercourse  with  God,  in  the  spirit  of  selfishness. 
It  cannot  be.  The  new  and  living  way  Jesus 
opened  up  is  the  way  of  self-sacrificing  love. 
The  entrance  into  the  Holiest  is  given  to  us  aa 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  77 

priests,  there  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  and  the 
love  of  Christ,  and  to  go  out  and  bring  God's 
blessing  to  others. 

Let  us  consider  one  another.  The  same  Spirit 
that  said,  Consider  Christ  Jesus — take  time,  and 
give  attention  to  know  J  Jim  well — says  to  us, 
Consider  one  another  —  take  time,  and  give 
nttention  to  know  the  needs  of  your  brethren 
it  round  you.  How  many  are  there  whose  circum- 
stances are  so  unfavourable,  whose  knowledge  is 
go  limited,  whose  whole  life  is  so  hopeless,  that 
1  here  is  but  little  prospect  of  their  ever  attaining 
1  lie  better  life.  For  them  there  is  but  one  thing 
l,o  be  done  :  We  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the 
infirmities  of  the  loealc,  and  not  to  please  ourselves. 
Each  one  who  begins  to  see  what  the  blessedness 
is  of  a  life  in  the  full  surrender  to  Christ,  should 
offer  himself  to  Christ,  to  be  made  His  messenger 
to  the  feeble  and  the  weary. 

Consider  one  another,  to  provoke  unto  love 
and  good  works. — Love  and  good  works  :  These 
are  to  be  the  aim  of  the  Church  in  the  exercise 
of  its  fellowship.  Everything  that  can  hinder 
love  is  to  be  sacrificed  and  set  aside.  Everything 
that  can  promote,  and  prove,  and  provoke  others 
to,  love  is  to  be  studied  and  performed.  And 
with  love  good  works  too.  The  Church  has 
been  redeemed  by  Christ,  to  prove  to  the  world 


78  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 

what  power  He  has  to  cleanse  from  sin,  to 
conquer  evil,  to  restore  to  holiness  and  to  good- 
ness. Let  us  consider  one  another,  in  every 
possible  way,  to  provoke,  to  stir  up,  to  help  to 
love  and  good  works. 

The  chief  thought  is  this  :  Life  in  the  Holiest 
must  be  a  life  of  love.  As  earnest  as  the  in- 
junction, Let  us  draw  nigh  in  fulness  of  faith, 
Let  us  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our  hope,  is 
this,  Let  us  consider  one  another  to  provoke  unto 
love  and  good  works.  God  is  love.  And  all  Ho 
has  done  for  us  in  His  Son,  as  revealed  in  this 
Epistle,  is  love.  And  Christ  is  love.  And  there 
can  be  no  real  access  to  God  as  a  union  with 
Him  in  His  holy  will,  no  real  communion  with 
Him,  but  in  the  Spirit  of  love.  Our  entering 
into  the  Holiest  is  mere  imagination,  if  we  do 
not  yield  ourselves  to  the  love  of  God  in  Christ, 
to  be  filled  and  used  for  the  welfare  and  joy  of 
our  fellow-men. 

0  Christian !  study  what  love  is.  Study  it 
in  the  word,  in  Christ,  in  God.  As  thou  seest 
Him  to  be  an  ever- flowing  fountain  of  all  good- 
ness, who  has  His  very  being  and  glory  in  this, 
that  He  lives  in  all  that  exists,  and  communicates 
to  all  His  own  blessedness  and  perfection  as  far 
as  they  are  capable  of  it,  thou  wilt  learn  to 
acknowledge  that  he  that  loveth   not  hath  uu 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  79 

known  God.  And  thou  wilt  learn,  too,  to  admit 
more  deeply  and  truly  than  ever  before,  that  no 
effort  of  thy  will  can  bring  forth  love ;  it  must 
be  given  thee  from  above.  This  will  become  to 
thee  one  of  the  chief  joys  and  beauties  of  the 
Holiest  of  All,  that  there  thou  canst  wait  on  tht? 
God  of  love  to  fill  thee  with  His  love.  God 
hath  the  power  to  shed  abroad  His  love  in  our 
hearts,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  given  unto  us.  He 
has  promised  to  give  Christ  so  dwelling  in  our 
heart  by  faith,  that  we  shall  be  rooted  and 
grounded  in  love,  and  know  and  have  in  us 
something  of  a  love  that  passeth  knowledge. 
The  very  atmosphere  of  the  Holiest  is  love. 
Just  as  I  breathe  in  the  air  in  which  I  live,  so 
the  soul  that  abides  in  the  presence  of  God 
breathes  the  air  of  the  upper  world.  The 
promise  held  out  to  us,  and  the  hour  of  its  fulfil- 
ment, will  come,  when  the  love  of  God  will  be 
perfected  in  us,  and  we  are  made  perfect  in  love. 
Nowhere  can  this  be  but  in  the  Holiest ;  but 
there  most  surely.  Let  us  draw  nigh  in  the 
fulness  of  faith,  and  consider  one  another. 
While  we  are  only  thinking  of  others  to  bring 
God's  love  to  them,  we  shall  find  God  thinking 
of  us,  and  filling  us  with  it. 

What  a  difference  it  would  make  in  the  world 
if  every  believer  were  to  give  himself  with  his 


80  LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 

whole  heart  to  live  for  his  fellow-men  !  What  a 
difference  to  his  own  life,  as  he  yielded  himself 
to  God's  saving  love  in  its  striving  for  souls ! 
What  a  difference  to  all  our  Christian  agencies, 
suffering  for  want  of  devoted,  whole-hearted 
helpers  !  What  a  difference  to  our  churches,  as 
they  rose  to  know  what  they  have  been  gathered 
for  !  What  a  difference  to  thousands  of  lost  ones, 
who  would  learn  with  wonder  what  love  there  is 
in  God's  children,  what  power  and  blessing  in 
that  love  !     Let'us  consider  one  another. 

1.  It  is  the  very  essence,  the  beauty,  and  the  glory  of  the  salva- 
tion of  Christ,  that  it  is  for  all.  He  that  truly  recedes  it,  as  the 
Holy  Spirit  gives  it,  receives  it  as  a  salvation  for  all,  and  feels 
himself  impelled  to  communicate  it  to  others.  The  baptism  of  fire 
is  a  baptism  of  redeeming  love,  but  that  not  as  a  mere  emotion, 
but  a  power  at  once  to  consider  and  to  care  for  others. 

2.  How  im/  ossible  to  love  others  and  give  all  for  them  in  our 
strength  !  This  is  one  of  the  real  gifts  to  be  waited  for  in  the 
Holiest  of  All,  to  be  received  in  the  power  of  the  pentecostal  Spirit 

the  love  of  God  so  shed  abroad  in  the  heart,  that  we  spontanea 
■uoly,  unceasingly,  Joyfully  love,  because  it  is  our  very  nature. 


LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH  81 


XII. 
XLbe  Resembling  ftogetber. 

-<£.— 25.  Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves 
together,  as  the  custom  of  some  is,  but  exhorting  one 
another;  and  so  much  the  more,  as  ye  see  the  day 
drawing  nigh. 

The  inward  and  the  outward  must  ever  go 
together.  As  there  is  in  every  man  a  hidden 
inner  life  of  the  soul,  along  with  the  outer  life 
of  the  body,  so  too  in  the  Church  of  Christ. 
All  its  members  are  one  body ;  the  inward 
unity  must  be  proved  in  active  exercise,  it  must 
be  seen  in  the  assembling  together.  The 
assembling  of  His  saints  has  its  ground  in  a 
divine  appointment  as  well  as  in  the  very  nature 
of  things ;  all  who  have  entered  into  the  Holiest 
to  meet  their  God  must  turn  to  the  meeting  of 
His  people.  The  tabernacle  of  old  was  the  tent 
of  meeting ;  to  meet  God  and  to  meet  our 
fellow-men  are  equally  needful.  Among  the 
Hebrews  it  was  already  the  custom  with  some 
to  forsake  the  assembling  together ;  it  was  one 
6 


82  LET  US  S?RA  W  NIGH 

of  the  dangerous  symptoms  of  backsliding. 
They  are  reminded,  not  only  of  the  personal 
duty  of  each  to  be  faithful,  but  also  to  care  for 
others,  and  to  exhort  one  another.  For  the 
exercise  and  strengthening  of  the  faith  and 
hope  and  love,  to  which  we  have  just  been 
urged ;  for  the  full  development  of  the  life  in 
the  Holiest  of  All ;  for  the  helping  and  comfort* 
ing  of  all  who  are  feeble  ;  for  the  cultivation  of 
the  fellowship  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Word — the 
assembling  of  ourselves  together  has  unspeakable 
value.  Let  us  listen  to  the  exhortation,  in 
connection  with  our  entrance  into  the  Holiest : 
Not  forsaking  the  assembling"  of  ourselves  to- 
g-ether, as  the  custom  of  some  is. 

If  we  would  rightly  apprehend  the  import  of 
this  word,  let  us  not  forget  the  link  to  its 
context.  Our  section  has  been  teaching  us  what 
life  in  the  Holiest  is  to  be.  As  those  who  have 
drawn  near  to  God,  we  are  to  draw  near  to  our 
fellow-men.  Meeting  God  is  a  thing  of  infinite 
blessedness  and  peace  and  power.  Meeting  our 
fellow-men  is  often  accompanied  with  so  much 
of  weakness,  distraction,  and  failure,  that  some 
have  thought  it  indeed  better  to  forsake  the 
assembling  together.  Let  us  see  how  life  in  the 
Holiest  of  All  points  to  both  the  duty  and  the 
power  of  our  assemblies. 


LET  US  DRAW  NIGH  83 

It  suggests  the  duty.  The  Holiest  of  All  is 
the  home  of  eternal  love.  It  is  love  dwells 
there.  It  is  love  that  came  forth  from  there 
to  seek  me  and  bring  me  in.  It  is  into  the 
everlasting  love  I  have  been  welcomed  and  taken 
in.  It  is  love  that  has  been  shed  abroad  in  my 
heart.  My  entrance  in  was  only  in  the  path  of 
self-sacrifice;  my  abiding  there  can  only  be  as 
one  dead  to  self  and  filled  with  love.  And  love 
seeketh  not  its  own;  it  gives  itself  away,  and 
only  lives  to  make  others  partakers  of  its 
happiness.  And  it  loves  the  assembly  of  God's 
people,  not  only  for  what  it  needs  and  hopes 
to  receive,  but  for  the  communion  of  saints,  and 
the  help  it  can  give  in  helping  and  encouraging 
others. 

It  not  only  does  this,  but  obeys  the  added 
injunction — Exhorting  one  another.  It  seeks 
to  watch  over  those  who  are  in  danger  of 
becoming  unfaithful.  It  cares  for  those  who 
have  grown  careless  in  their  neglect.  True  love 
is  quick  of  invention ;  it  devises  means  for 
making  smaller  or  nearer  or  more  attractive 
assemblies  for  those  who  have  become  estranged. 
It  counts  nothing  too  humble  or  too  difficult,  if 
it  may  but  win  back  to  the  gathering  of  God's 
3hildj*en  those  who  may  there  be  blessed  and 
saved.     It  lives  in  the  Holiest  of  God's  love;  it 


84  LET  US  DRA  IV  NIGH 

gives  itself  up  to  the  one  work  of  winning  othera 
to  know  that  love. 

The  life  in  the  Holiest  is  thus  not  only  the 
motive,  but  the  power  for  doing  the  work  aright. 
Yes,  it  is  as  those  who  profess  to  have  entered 
the  Holiest  of  All  truly  draw  near  to  God, 
and  prove  the  power  of  fellowship  with  Him, 
that  they  will  have  power  in  prayer  and  speech 
and  service  among  their  fellow-Christians.  The 
Holiest  of  All  is  the  place  for  daily  worship  and 
consecration  and  intercession ;  even  a  little  band 
in  the  assembly  will  have  power  to  make  the 
divine  presence  felt.  The  worship  in  the  place 
of  prayer  may  become  so  linked  to  the  secret 
worship  of  the  Holiest  of  All,  that  its  blessing 
may  come  to  others  who  have  never  known  of  it. 
God  is  willing  so  to  bless  the  fellowship  of  His 
redeemed,  that  the  assembly  shall  be  crowned 
with  a  fuller  sense  of  His  love  and  presence, 
than  ever  can  be  found  in  the  solitary  approach 
to  Him.  Wherefore,  brethren,  having  boldness 
to  enter  into  the  Holiest,  let  us  draw  near ;  not 
forsaking-  the  assembly  of  ourselves  together, 
but  exhorting  one  another. 

And  so  much  the  more  as  ye  see  the  day 
approaching.  The  writer  has  doubtless  in  view 
the  then  approaching  day  of  judgment  on  Jeru- 
salem.    We  know  not  in  how  far  the  perspective 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  85 

of  prophecy  was  clearly  revealed,  and  that  day 
was  connected  with  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
Himself.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  know  that  the 
fear  of  an  approaching  day  of  judgment  was  the 
motive  to  which  appeal  is  made ;  and  that  not 
only  to  move  the  indifferent,  but  specially  to 
urge  the  earnest  to  exhort  others.  Christians 
need  to  be  reminded  of  the  terrible  doom 
hanging  over  the  world,  and  of  all  the  solemn 
eternal  realities  connected  with  our  Lord's 
coming  in  their  bearing  upon  our  daily  life.  So 
will  our  efforts  for  helping  and  saving  others  all 
be  under  the  power  of  the  thought  of  how  short 
the  time  is,  how  terrible  the  fate  of  those  who 
perish,  and  how  urgent  the  call  for  everyone 
who  knows  redeeming  love  to  do  its  work  with 
all  his  might.  In  the  Holiest  of  All  we  hear 
the  voice  of  warning,  and  come  out  to  save  ere 
it  be  too  late. 


1.  Note  the  intensely  practical  character  of  the  gospel.  Our 
section  (19-25)  is  only  one  sentence.  It  begins  with  spiritual, 
heavenly  mysteries  ;  it  ends  in  the  plainest  rules  for  our  conduct 
to  our  fellow-men.  Let  us  be  sure  that  the  deeper  we  enter  into 
the  perfection-teaching  of  chap,  uii.-x.,  the  fitter  we  shall  be  to 
be  a  blessing  in  the  world. 

?.  When  Christ  spoke  His  farewell  discourse  to  His  disciples, 
one  of  the  things  He  pressed  most  urgently  was  that  they  should 
hue  one  another.  He  loues  all  His  redeemed  ones,  however  feeble 
or  perverse  they  be,  so  intently,  that  He  tells  us  that  we  cannot 
prove  our  real  love  to  Him  in  any  other  way  than  by  loving  them , 
the  proof  of  a  real   entrance   into   the  Holiest  of  All  is  the 


86  LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH 


humility  and  gentleness  and  self-sacrifice  with  which  we  speak 
and  think  and  prove  our  care  of  one  another. 

3.  Study  carefully  the  connection  between  these  last  twelve 
meditations  aid  se°  to  get  a  clear  hold  of  the  unity  of  thought  in 
thir  port  on,  the  living  centre  of  the  EpisUe. 


LE  T  US  DKA  W  NIGH  87 


CONCLUSION. 

There  are  some  of  God's  children  who  have  read 
this  book,  to  whom  the  teaching  it  contains  may 
appear  new  or  strange,  and  who,  for  this  reason, 
may  not  fully  have  taken  in  the  one  lesson  from 
God's  word  it  has  sought  to  bring.  There  may 
be  others  who  have  accepted  the  teaching,  and 
admit  its  truth,  and  yet  by  reason  of  unbelief 
or  lack  of  whole-heartedness,  have  not  entered 
into  the  blessed  life  to  which  this  portion  of 
God's  word  has  opened  the  gate  so  wide.  For 
the  sake  of  such  I  feel  urged  once  again  to  give 
a  simple  summary  of  the  truth  the  word  has 
taught  us,  to  trace  with  them  the  steps  of  the 
Christian  life  as  it  has  marked  them  out,  and 
to  beseech  them  to  see  at  what  point  it  is  they 
have  failed.  Do  believe,  my  dear  brother,  that 
it  is  in  very  deed  the  will  of  God  that  you  should 
enter  into  the  Holiest,  and  live  there.  Rest  not 
till,  step  by  step,  you  have  at  every  point 
yielded  yourself  to  God's  command :  you  may 
trust   Him   to   make   all   the  salvation  He  has 


LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 


prepared  in  Christ,  your  own  blessed  possession 
and  experience. 

1.  The  Holiest  is  opened  now.  Full  access 
into  God's  presence  is  secured  to  us.  A  con- 
tinuous and  unbroken  experience  of  God's 
presence  every  day  is  a  possibility,  is  a 
certainty.  We  are  called  to  enter  in  and  live 
there  with  Jesus.  This  is  the  consummation  of 
His  work  as -High  Priest,  to  bring  us  in,  and 
keep  us  there.  Nothing  in  heaven,  or  earth,  or 
hell,  can  prevent  you  entering  in  and  abiding 
here  continually  and  for  ever,  if  you  are  willing. 

Do  not  satisfy  yourself  with  the  thought  thai; 
there  are  many  Christians  who  have  never 
entered  in.  Look  up  to  the  Father  calling  you 
in.  Humble  yourself  under  the  thought:  My 
Father  has  prepared  this  home  for  me.  His  love 
longs  to  have  me  live  with  Him  all  the  day. 
I  have  refused  to  believe  that  it  can  be,  and, 
instead  of  His  immediate  nearness  and  continual 
fellowship,  live  at  a  distance.  Oh,  do  count 
it  a  settled  thing :  the  Holiest  is  opened  for 
us  to  enter  in  and  dwell  with  Jesus,  and 
say  to  God  that  you  will  not  rest  till  it  is  your 
experience. 

2.  We  have  boldness  through  the  blood- 
Is  not  this  what  has  kept  you  back  ?  You  have 
never  taken  time  to  study,  to  believe,  to  realise 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  89 

the  infinite  worth  and  power  of  the  blood  of 
the  Son  of  God.  It  conquered  sin,  and  death, 
and  hell.  It  opened  heaven  to  Jesus  our 
Surety.  It  will  most  surely  bring  you  in ;  it 
will  remove  all  the  fear  and  doubt  your  sin  and 
impotence  can  cause;  it  will  enable  you  with 
the  utmost  confidence  and  boldness  to  draw 
nigh  and  claim  admittance.  See  to  it,  0  child 
of  God,  that  you  honour  the  blood,  that  you 
glory  in  its  power ;  it  can  bring  you  in. 

3.  A  new  and  living-  way  has  been  dedicated 
for  us.  Are  you  willing  to  enter  upon  this 
way.  To  the  flesh  it  appears  hard  and  impos- 
sible. It  is  the  way  in  which  Christ  walked ; 
the  way  of  self-sacrifice ;  the  way  of  entire 
surrender  to  God's  will;  the  way  of  death  to 
self  and  the  world  ;  of  being  humbled  and  made 
obedient  unto  death.  You  surely  would  not 
wish  or  expect  to  enter  heaven  in  any  other 
way  than  Christ  did,  in  any  other  way  than 
the  will  of  God.  Give  up  at  once  the  half- 
hearted religion  that  fears  an  entire  consecration 
to  the  most  blessed  will  of  God :  give  yourself 
at  once  wholly  to  it ;  choose  and  enter  even  now 
upon  the  new  way. 

It  is  a  living  way.  The  Holy  Spirit  lives  and 
moves  in  it,  and  bears  all  who  walk  in  it.  Give 
up  yourself  to  the  Blessed  Jesus  to  follow  Him 


90  LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 

in  it :  in  His  strength  it  will  be  to  you  the  high- 
way of  peace  and  holiness. 

4.  We  have  Jesus  as  our  Priest  over  the 
House  of  God.  Have  you  not  learnt  from  the 
Epistle  that  the  one  work  of  Jesus  as  our  High 
Priest  is  to  bring  us  nigh  to  God?  So  nigh 
that  in  actual  life  and  experience  we  can  know 
and  enjoy  His  nearness  all  the  day?  Is  He 
not  Priest  over  the  House  of  God,  the  Father's 
Home,  just  to  bring  us  in  and  watch  over  us 
there,  and  by  His  dwelling  in  us,  to  make  us 
one  with  Himself,  living  our  life  in  the  immedi- 
ate presence  of  the  Father? 

Oh,  beloved,  will  you  not  begin  to  trust 
Jesus  for  this,  His  heart's  desire,  and  yield 
yourself  to  enter  in  ? 

5.  God  asks  a  true  heart.  And  that  you 
have.  He  has  given  you  a  new  heart.  And 
the  new  heart  is  a  true  heart.  Believe  it,  and 
act  upon  it.  Believe  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
within  you  to  act  it  out :  come  at  once  and  say 
that  with  your  whole  heart,  with  a  true  heart, 
you  desire  to  enter  in.  Look  not  at  sin  within, 
or  at  feelings :  come  in  the  faith  of  what  God 
has  said,  of  the  new  nature  He  has  given  you, 
and  enter  with  a  true  heart.  Choose,  resolve, 
will,  to  say  to  Jesus  that  you  cannot  longer 
stand   without;    that    you    are   ready,  in    the 


LET  US  DRAW  NIGH  91 

boldness  the  precious  blood  gives,  to  draw  nigh 
and  abide  with  Him. 

6.  God  calls  you  to  come  in  fulness  of  faith. 
And  God  never  asks  for  faith,  without  giving  a 
sure  ground  and  abundant  reason  for  it.  And 
if  you  will  but  look  up  to  Him,  and  what  He 
has  done  in  giving  His  Son  to  be  your  High 
Priest,  and  the  blood  of  His  Son  to  be  your 
confidence;  in  opening  the  Holiest  for  you ;  in 
giving  the  Holy  Spirit  to  lead  you  in  the  living 
way  of  union  with  Jesus — surely  you  cannot 
doubt  or  fear.  No,  at  once  begin  and  say : 
Whatever  may  appear  dark  or  difficult,  of  this 
I  am  confident :  my  weakness  cannot  hinder 
me :  I  trust  God,  I  trust  Jesus,  I  trust  the 
Blood,  I  trust  the  Holy  Spirit :  I  shall  surely 
enter  in. 

7.  Let  the  heart  be  sprinkled  with  the  blood. 
We  have  seen  the  boldness  the  blood  gives;  we 
have  heard  the  call  to  come  with  the  true  heart. 
Let  the  two  be  inseparably  united.  The  blood 
is  the  sign  that  Jesus  gave  Himself  wholly,  His 
very  life :  let  the  true  heart  give  itself  wholly 
to  trust  and  yield  to  the  blood.  The  power  of 
the  blood  is,  it  opened  heaven  and  dwells  there 
for  ever:  be  sure,  thine  heart,  sprinkled  with 
the  blood,  rises  into  the  heaven  of  God's  love. 
Begin  now  and  sing  daily  the  song :  "  To  Him 


92  LET  US  BRA  W  NIGH 

that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in 
His  blood."  The  power  of  the  blood,  if  thou 
wilt  give  thy  whole  heart  up  to  it,  will  bring 
heaven  and  its  joy,  the  joy  of  God's  presence, 
down  into  thee. 

8.  Let  the  body  be  washed  with,  pure  water. 
Surely,  in  sight  of  all  the  wonderful  privilege 
just  set  before  us,  there  needs  no  further  plead- 
ing to  make  you  willing  to  put  away  every  sin, 
every  habit,  every  indulgence  of  the  body,  that 
interferes  with  full  and  abiding  communion 
with  God.  Think  ever  of  what  Christ  is  doing 
—  keeping  the  heart,  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  sprinkled  with  His  blood  in  its 
heavenly  sanctifying  power — and  let  that  urge 
you  to  put  away  and  cleanse  yourself  from 
everything,  the  greatest  or  the  least,  that  could 
hinder  you  dwelling  in  the  Holiest.  Wait  on 
God  in  prayer  till  His  presence  be  the  power 
that  rules  the  whole  being. 

9.  Let  us  draw  near.  That  is,  let  us  enter 
in,  and  appear  before  God.  Yes,  let  each  one 
of  us,  with  his  whole  heart,  with  his  whole  life 
and  walk,  draw  near,  and  abide  in  the  blessed 
nearness  of  God. 

This  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  gospel. 
This  is  what  Christ  can  give,  because  He  is  able 
to  save  completely.     This,  alas !  is  what  many 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  93 

Christians  do  not  possess,  do  not  even  seek,  do 
not  even  know  of.  •  My  reader  !  I  beseech  you, 
be  not  content  with  anything  less  than  this — 
a  life  every  moment  in  the  presence  of  God, 
through  the  mighty  keeping  power  of  Jesus. 
His  one  work  is  to  bring  us  near  to  God :  yield 
yourself  to  Him  for  it.  He  will  do  it.  Let  us 
draw  near. 

10.  Let  us  hold  fast  the  confession  of  our 
hope,  Lift  up  your  heart  above  all  fears,  and 
doubts,  and  evil  forebodings  of  unbelief  as 
to  failure,  and  hope  against  hope.  Abound  in 
hope.  Confess  your  hope.  Speak  it  out  to 
God  and  your  fellow  -  believer,  that  you  have 
set  your  hope  upon  God  for  a  life  of  ever- 
increasing  nearness  of  fellowship  with  Him. 
Hold  fast  the  confession  of  the  hope  firm  to  the 
end,  with  the  one  thought :  He  is  faithful  that 
promised.  Live  through  any  failure  or  dis- 
appointment that  may  come  in  the  hope  of 
what  God  will  do,  and  you  will  find  that  hope 
maketh  not  ashamed.  A  life  in  the  Holiest  of 
All  is  your  heritage. 

11.  Let  us  live  in  love.  The  Holiest  of  All 
is  the  home  of  God's  love.  The  new  and  living 
way  is  the  way  of  death  to  self  and  self-will. 
The  Great  Priest  over  the  House  of  God,  Jesus, 
can  bring  you  nigh   in  no  other  way  than  by 


94  LET  US  DRAW  NIGH 

entering  into  you,  becoming  your  life,  animating 
you  with  His  Spirit  and  disposition.  Believe  in 
Him  for  this.  And  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God's 
love,  born  of  that  love,  filled  with  it,  its 
messenger  and  dispenser.  Yield  yourself  to  the 
love  of  Christ,  who  pleased  not  Himself :  walk 
in  love  as  He  loved  us.  Give  yourself  to  a  life 
of  love,  considering  one  another,  provoking  to 
love  and  good  works.  In  the  power  of  Jesus, 
abiding  continually  in  the  life  of  love,  in  the 
love  and  presence  of  God,  is  possible. 

12.  Let  us  maintain  the  communion  of  the 
saints.  Let  love  manifest  itself  as  a  unity  of 
the  body,  a  binding  together  of  the  members 
in  external  fellowship  and  intercourse.  Let  us 
remember  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  not  given  to 
us  in  isolation  and  separation  from  each  other. 
As  we  live  in  the  Holiest  of  All,  we  shall  learn 
how  closely  we  are  one  with  each  member  of 
Christ;  how  our  own  life  in  God's  love  de- 
pends upon  our  relation  to  our  brethren;  how 
their  life  and  growth  must  be  our  care,  and 
will  be  our  reward.  A  life  in  the  Holiest  of 
God's  presence  will  be  a  life  of  love  and  labour, 
of  power  and  blessing. 

Ueloved  reader,  have  you  in  very  deed 
accepted  the  teaching  of  God's  word,  that  the 
Father  calls  you  to  dwell  in  the  Holiest  of  all? 


LET  US  DRA  W  NIGH  95 

Have  you  entered  in?  If  not,  I  pray  you,  in 
the  name  of  our  great  High  Priest,  who  waits 
to  bring  you  in,  rest  not  till  you  have  drawn 
nigh,  and  found  your  abiding  place  in  th^  „c-ret 
of  God's  presence. 


DATE  DUE 

.  — -f& 

■mn^hn^nr'^'^ 

m<  9  fr"^ 

.JAM  1  0 

GAYLORD 

PRINTED  IN  U.S.A. 

