NYPL  RESEARCH  LIBRARIES


3  3433  082412


'  1*


v.^


-J


Charles  H.  Spurgeon,  the  World's  Greatest  Divine.


LIFE


OF


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon

THE  WORLD'S   GREAT   PREACHER.


BY


RUSSEIvIv    H.    CON  WELL,

\

AUTHOR   OF

LIFE  OF  EX-PRESIDENT  GARFIELD,  HON.  JAMES  G.    BLAINE     BAYARD
TAYLOR,  ACRES  OF  DIAMONDS,   Etc.,  Etc.

"  We  love  Christ  better  than  sect  and  truth  better  than  party."" — Spurgeon.


ILT.USTRATED.


p:dgewood  publishing  go.
1892.


THE  NEW  YORK

PUBLIC  LIBRARY

543723  A

Ai;  rOR,   LENCX  AND

Tli-DEN  FOUNDATIONS

R              1931               L

Copyright,  1892,  by  M.  CoGHLAN.


PUBLISHER'S  PREFACE.


In  publishing  the  life  of  the  late  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon,  the  publishers  feel  a  peculiar  pleasure  and  be-
lieve themselves  especially  fortunate  in  having  secured  the
Rev.  Russell  H.  Conwell,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.,  pastor  at
The  Temple,  of  Philadelphia,  to  prepare  the  work.  There
are  many  reasons  why  the  popular  preacher,  who  might
justly  be  called  the  Spurgeon  of  America,  should  in  this
way  pay  a  loving  tribute  to  the  memory  of  his  great  English
ecclesiastical  brother,  and  why  such  a  book  must  have  an
absorbing  interest  for  all  readers.  Foremost  among  these
might  be  considered  his  personal  acquaintance  with  the
great  divine  of  gigantic  efforts  and  wonderful  achieve-
ments, and  the  deep  study  he  has  ever  given  to  his  popular
brother  preacher's  life  and  the  measure  of  its  successes.

As  a  fellow-preacher  of  the  Gospel,  he  knew  better  than
any  layman  how  to  interpret  the  hidden  springs  of  success
to  count  the  cost  of  Herculean  efforts  made,  and  better
understand  the  great  man's  life-work  in  all  its  thousands
of  minute  details  which  he,  as  an  intimate  personal  frien  d
had  the  opportunity  to  observe.

Like  Spurgeon,  he  has  the  power  to  earn  and  raise  large
sums  of  money,  but  he  devotes  every  dollar  beyond  a
reasonable  living  expense  to  the  cause  he  has  so  much  at
heart.  His  remarkable  line  of  work,  also,  in  many  ways
corresponds  with  that  of  Spurgeon.


PUBLISHER'S  PREFACE.

The  similarity  in  the  work  of  the  English  Spurgeon  and
the  American  Conwell  has  ofteji  been  commented  upon  by
press  and  people.  Spurgeon  made,  and  Conwell  is  making,
acomplete  sacrifice  of  talents,  time  and  health  to  the  one  aim
in  life — the  salvation  of  souls.  Each  commenced  life  a
poor  boy,  and  had  an  early  life  fraught  with  discourage-
ments and  temptations.

The  author's  grand  work  for  the  Grace  Baptist  Church*
of  Philadelphia,  has  justly  distinguished  him  as  the  great-
est preacher  of  his  denomination  in  this  country.  He  was
a  student  at  Yale  College,  and  graduated  in  the  Law  De-
partment of  Albany  University  and  was  admitted  to  the
New  York  bar  in  1865.  His  health  not  permitting  the  prac-
tice of  law,  he  began  as  traveling  correspondent  of  the
Boston  Traveler  and  the  New  York  Tribune,  during  which
time  his  constant  companion  and  warmest  friend  was
Bayard  Taylor,  with  whom  he  traveled  all  over  the  world,
and  obtained  distinction  as  a  journalist.

In  addition  to  the  pastorate  of  a  church  which  has  one
of  the  most  remarkable  houses  of  worship  in  the  world,
open  every  hour  of  every  day  and  night  in  the  year,  and  is
never  untenanted,  Dr.  Conwell  is  the  head  of  Temple  Col-
lege, connected  with  the  church  fostered  by  him,  which  is
for  the  free  education  of  working-men  and  women  in  the
classic  collegiate  branches,  with  fourteen  professors,  a
preparatory  department  that  sends  pupils  to  Yale,  Har-
vard and  Amherst,  and  giving  itself  degrees  equal  to  those
of  Princeton.  He  is  the  head  of  the  Samaritan  Hospital,
also  an  outgrowth  of  his  personal  effort  and  example,  which
is  doing  incalculable  good  in  Philadelphia.

In  addition  to  his  church  work.  Dr.  Conwell  lectures  all
over  the  United  States,  to  large  and  delighted  audiences.

He  is  also  a  prolific  author.  The  most  important  of  his
works   are  a  "Life  of  Garfield,"   which  he   wrote   at  the


PUBLISHER'S  PREFACE.

ft

home  of  the  martyred  President,  in  Mentor  ;  "  Why  and
How  the  Chinese  Immigrate,"  the  material  for  which  he
gathered  in  the  Chinese  Empire  ;  "  Life  of  Hon.  James  G.
Blaine,"  **  Life  of  Bayard  Taylor,"  and  "Acres  of  Dia-
monds," each  of  which  has  been  appreciatively  read  by
thousands  of  readers  in  this  and  other  countries.

Russell  H.  Conwell  has  what  his  associate  pastor  has
been  pleased  to  call  "sanctified  common-sense,"  coupled
with  an  excellent  education  and  training  in  writing  for  the
people.  He  writes  in  an  easy,  flowing  style.  We  think  it
will  be  readily  recognized  that  with  his  exceptional  abili-
ties as  an  author,  his  wonderful  popularity  as  a  lecturer,
and  his  great  work  as  a  minister  of  the  Gospel,  he  is  pre-
eminently qualified  to  write  the  true  romance  of  the  life  of
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.

The  Publishers.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

PAGE

Publisher's  Preface, v

CHAPTER  I.
Childhood's  Home,  .    .    .  ' 17

CHAPTER  11.
Early  Education, 42

CHAPTER  Iir.
Beginning  of  Miracles, 68

CHAPTER  IV.

Early  Religious  Experiences, .       SS

CHAPTER  V.
The  History  of  His  Church, 116

CHAPTER  VI.
His  Preaching, 150

CHAPTER  VH.
Wonderful  Healing, 172

CHAPTER  Vni.
Building  for  the  Lord, ^95


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.
CHAPTER  IX.

PAGE

Mrs.  Spurgeon  and  Her  Work, 222

CHAPTER  X.
The  Book  Fund, 273

CHAPTER  XL
Lovely  Westwood,      ...    :    . ...     309

CHAPTER   Xn.
God  Heard  Him, 345

CHAPTER  Xin.
The  Pastors'  College, 370

CHAPTER  XIV.
The  Orphanage, 406

CHAPTER  XV.
The  Old  Ladies'  Home, 437

CHAPTER  XVL
Powerful  Reenforcements, 444

CHAPTER  XVn.
In  Combat, 457

CHAPTER  XVIII.
The  Poet, 478

CHAPTER   XIX.
The  Death  of  the  Righteous, 485


i\  I  u-


Russell  H.  Conwell,

Pastor  'Grace  Baptist  Church,  Philadelphia.


\


The  Temple,  Broad  and  Berks  Sts.,  Philadelphia.

The  First  Meeting-House  and  the  Present  Temple  of  the  Grace  Baptist  Church,  of  Philadel-
phia.   Russell  H.  Conwell,  Founder  and  Pastor.


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.


PAGE


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon, Frontispiece

Mrs.  Charles  H.  Spurgeon, iv

Rev.  Russell  H.  Conwell, ix

The  Temple,  Broad  and  Berks  Streets,  Philadelfhl\,  xi

Birthplace  of  Spurgeon, 29

James  Spurgeon, 45

Spurgeon  at  Nineteen, 81

The  Cottage  in  Which  Mr.  Spurgeon  Preached  His

First  Sermon, 99

The  Unjust  Sentence, 125

'' Good  Sister,  Put  out  Your  Tongue," 133

A  Practical  Preacher, 145

Preaching  to  the  Lowly, 169

London  Residence  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,      197

Surrey  Music  Hall, 207

Interior  View,  Metropolitan  Tabernacle, 217

A  Glimpse  Into  the  Early  Home, 229

Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  Pastor,  245

A  Sickbed  Prayer, 347

An  Unexpected  Donation, 355

Suddenly  Convicted  of  Sin,     ..." 367

The  Pastors'  College, .  375

Boys'  Home,  Stockwell  Orphanage, 409

School-Room,  Stockwell  Orphanage, .  423


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

Play  Grounds,  Stockwell  Orphanage, '  433

If  the  Cap  Fits  You,  Wear  It,      495

Burn  a   Candle  at  Both  Ends,  and  It  Will  Soon  be

Gone,      499

Hunchback  Sees  not  His  Own  Hump, 504

It  is  Hard  for  an  Empty  Sack  to  Stand  Upright,    .    .  507

A  Handsaw  is  a  (iooD  Thing,  but  not  to  Shave  with,  522

Don't  Cut  Off  Your  Nose  to  Spite  Your  Face,  .  .  .  527
He  Has  a   Hole   Under  His  Nose,  and  His    Money

Runs  Into  It,    ... 530

Mr.  Spurgeon  jn  His  Pulpit, 537


JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  PICTURES.


PAGE


Mr.  Spurgeon  as  John  Ploughman, 493

If  the  Cap  Fits,  Wear  it, 495

Never  Burn  a  Candle  at  Both  Ends, 499

Hunchback  Sees  not  His  own  Hump, 504

It  is  Hard  for  an  Empty  Sack  to  Stand  Upright,    ....  507

Ttie  Old  Man  and  His  Donkey, 514

A  Horn  Blower,  but  not  a  Hunter, 518

Don't  Shave  with  a  Handsaw, 522

Don't  Cut  off  your  Nose  to  Spite  your  Face, 527

The  Hole  Under  the  Nose, 530

Fast  Day  Service  (A  Sermon), 536

The  Bible,  ''  566

Proving  God,  '^  591


Mrs.  C.  H.    Spurgeon.


PS8i


■^      iiytf


CHAPTER  I.
childhood's  home.

Spurgeon,  speaking  himself,  of  one  of  the  roman-
tic incidents  in  his  remarkable  life,  said  "  to  me  it
was  a  wonderful  thing  and  I  no  more  understood  at
that  time  how  it  came  to  pass,  than  1  understand  to-
day, why  the  Lord  should  be  so  gracious  to  me."

The  whole  history  of  this  remarkable  man,  through
all  the  various  scenes  of  his  eventful  experiences,
certainly  presents  one  of  the  most  miraculous  records
to  be  found  in  modern  or  ancient -times,  and  yet  his
manner  has  been  so  quiet  and  his  mode  of  life  so
modest  that  many  of  our  most  intelligent  readers
are  wholly  unconscious  of  the  fascinating  character  of
his  interesting  story.

Many  writers,  whose  wisdom  in  other  respects
seem  to  be  unquestionable,  declare  that  the  day  of
miracles  has  passed  ;  but  taking  another  view  of  the
same  thought,  we  can  but  come  to  the  deliberate
conclusion  that  the  day  of  miracles  is  by  no  means
passed,  but  that  they  are  of  daily  occurrence  and  that
they  fail  to  make  the  startling  impression  they  for-
merly did,  because  of  their  great  frequency.

But  the  life  of  Spurgeon  contains  so  much  that  is

3  1/


1 8  CHARLES  II.  SPURGEON.  .

Strange,  unusual,  wonderful,  and  even  truly  miracu-
lous, that  it  will  require  most  careful  statement  and
most  conservative  reasoning  to  convince  the  reader
that  the  record  is  literally  true.

To  separate  such  a  story  from  the  superstitions
which  are  naturally  thrown  about  it  by  the  ignorant
and  from  the  criticisms  which  are  thrown  over  it  by
the  fastidious  scholastics  is  a  most  difficult  under-
taking. It  makes  one  tremble  to  look  into  the
conflicting  mass  of  material,  with  the  purpose  of
arranging  the  events  so  as  to  make  a  continued  and
reasonable  history.

His  life  has  never  been  written  as  a  consecutive
story,  except  in  the  most  condensed  form  ;  and  then
many  of  those  who  have  undertaken  to  set  forth  his
history  have  omitted  or  glossed  over  the  most  start-
ling things  connected  with  his  experiences.

To  tell  the  truth  fearlessly,  to  meet  the  criticisms
of  those  who  are  ready  to  accuse  the  writer  of
superstition,  and  to  make  the  world  see  that  the
most  romantic  things  are  in  real  life  and  that  mir-
acles are  not  confined  to  the  days  long  since  buried
in  tradition,  requires  some  little  hardihood  and  a
Spurgeon's  determination  to  **  tell  the  truth  and
shame  the  devil."

Any  life  has  in  its  very  inception  a  miracle  far
beyond  the  scrutiny  of  the  most  microscopic  philoso-
phy and  in  its  unaccountability  baffles  even  the
most  searching  imagination.  A  human  life  is  in  it-
self a  divine  miracle,  filling  the  thoughtful   student


CHILDHOOD'S  HOME.  j.g

with  awe,  and  compelling  him  to  bow  in  reverence
before  that  mysterious  power  which  though  inscru-
table, must  nevertheless  be  distinctly  recognized.

Spurgeon's  life  is  a  continued  series  of  remarkable
events,  even  when  considered  in  the  most  prosaic
manner.

His  parentage,  his  birthplace,  his  country,  his  re-
lation to  his  time,  his  marvelous  success  under  most
adverse  circumstances  combine  a  variety  of  causes
and  consequences  beyond  the  logical  arrangement
of  the  most  analytical  mind.  Every  life  has  its  ro-
mance, every  life  its  mysterious  impulses,  every  life
its  strange  events,  every  life  its  unaccountable  results.
But  here  is  a  life  which  is  romantic  beyond  prece-
dent in  the  walks  of  life  where  we  find  it.  The  great-
est preacher  of  the  world,  made  so  by  causes
unusual  and  strange,  is  lifted  to  his  lofty  position  by
miraculous  events  for  which  there  is  no  reasonable
accounting  in  accordance  with  anything  that  is  called
the  law  of  nature.

In  any  biography  we  need  to  take  into  account
the  effect  of  hereditary  traits,  of  the  moulding  char-
acter of  scenery,  association,  and  climate  ;  but  these  in
the  life  of  Spurgeon  do  not  account  for  all  the  mys-
terious results  which  we  find  in  the  work  of  his  life.
There  are  strange  turning  points  in  his  history,  the
causes  of  which  are  beyond  our  understanding,  and
which  he  himself,  often  declared  "  real  miracles  be-
yond hope  of  explanation."

His  life  is  a  romance,  which  if,  instead  of  being


20  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

real,  was  produced  in  a  work  of  fiction,  would  be  re-
garded as  an  altogether  improbable  story.

Mr.  Spurgeon  and  his  friends  have  always  felt
that  it  would  be  dangerous  to  attempt  to  assert
the  unexplainable  side  of  his  success  or  present  it
fully  to  the  public,  lest  it  should  brino-  hinderinor  de-
traction,  criticism,  and  unbelief  In  connection  with  his
great  work  of  preaching  the  gospel.  Yet  in  the  old
days  such  manifestations  of  the  miraculous  un-
known were  regarded  as  confirmations  of  the  gos-
pel, and  paraded  as  the  best  evidence  of  the  fact  that
the  speaker  was  endowed  by  the  unusual  power  of
God.  Why  then  should  they  not  be  presented  now?
For  "God  still  moves  in  a  mysterious  way,His  wonders
to  perform."  Looking  at  his  life  from  the  point  of
view  which  we  now  occupy  since  his  death,  and
looking  back  upon  the  crowded  audiences,  the  masses
of  people  in  the  public  squares,  the  ragged  throngs
on  the  quays;  upon  the  Orphanage,  College,  Hos-
pitals, Schools,  and  Chapels,  the  world-wide  benev-
olences,  the  missionary  enterprises,  the  thousands
of  public  and  private  ministrations,  Mr.  Spurgeon
seems  like  a  giant  of  intellect  and  superhuman  in
his  industry.

But  we  will  begin  with  his  life  at  his  humble  home
and  trace  it  through  the  varying  scenes  where  it  was
touched  with  the  modifying  circumstances  of  his
surroundings,  and  thus  be  better  jlble,  step  by  step,
to  ascend  to  the  position  which  he  held  when  he
died.     No  man  can  comprehend  Spurgeon  without


JO

w
o


c

JO

o

o

2


.^


33"   ^


*3  f


"liij  I

■h


(


%


MM
'fp.

■■A    ^tei


/'


CHILDHOOD'S  HOME.  2X

taklnof  that  method  \\\  examinuio-  his  Hfe.  It  is  a
record  which  is  as  inspiring  as  it  is  wonderful,  which
is  as  lovely  as  it  is  marvelous.  Not  that  we  believe
Mr.  Spurgeon  to  be  a  saint,  or  an  angel  from  heaven
sent  unto  earth  by  a  definite  and  special  dispensation,
for  he  had  his  human  faults  and  committed  his  errors
as  other  men  have  done.  His  mistakes  and  short-
comings rather  serve  to  make  more  prominent  and
distinct  the  remarkable  achievements  of  his  career.
He  seems  more  like  one  of  the  minor  prophets, —
human  yet  often  inspired.

How  it  makes  one  ache  to  be  able  to  present  the
story  clearly,  concisely,  and  yet  comprehensively  for
the  instruction  of  thousands  who  have  heard  of  Mr.
Spurgeon,  but  who  know  but  little  about  the  facts  of
his  inner  life.  Could  his  story  be  told  with  the  pen
of  a  Macaulay,  or  with  the  talented  friendship  of  a
Boswell,  it  would  necessarily  take  its  place  in  the
standard  literature  of  the  English-speaking  people.
But  whether  told  with  eloquent  terms  and  vivid  de-
scriptions, or  in  rude  and  blundering  phraseology,
it  certainly  ought  to  be  told,  and  the  more  often  it  is
related  and  the  greater  the  variety  of  ways  in  which
it  is  presented  the  better  for  the  generations  that  are
to  be.

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  was  born  at  Kelvedon,
county  of  Essex,  June  19th,  1834.  His  father  at  that
time  was  engaged  in  business  at  Kelvedon,  the  pur-
suit of  which  does  not  seem  to  have  been  very
lucrative.  His  parents  were  in  humble  circumstances,


24


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.


his  mother  during  these  years  frequently  in  ill
health.  His  father  and  his  grandfather  were  both
successful  preachers  of  the  Gospel,  but  both  of  them
received  an  early  education  in  practical  business
through  the  first  part  of  their  lives.  His  father  did
not  enter  the  ministry  until  his  life  was  nearly  half
finished.  But  his  father  was  poor,  and  his  grand-
father had  a  comfortable  living  and  sufficient  prop-
erty to  keep  him  altogether  above  want.

And  in  the  story  of  the  Hfe  of  Charles  H.  Spur-
geon  we  need  to  understand  quite  fully  the  circum-
stances in  connection  with  the  history  of  his  parents,
their  traits,  customs,  and  home^  that  we  may  ascer-
tain the  influence  these  things  had  upon  the  young
boy's  nature.  But  it  cannot  truthfully  be  said  that
Charles  came  from  a  family  of  great  men.  For
though  his  ancestry  for  several  generations  were
known  among  their  neighbors  as  pious  persons  of
excellent  character,  yet  they  were  never  regarded  by
their  contemporaries  as  possessing  any  remarkable
genius  or  special  claim  for  the  niche  in  which  the
world  places  its  great  individuals.  All  the  more
the  wonder  is  it  that  he  should  accomplish  w^hat  he
did  accomplish  and  all  the  more  prominent  become
the  sincrular  events  which  led  to  this  remarkable
promotion.

Charles  was  especially  '*  his  grandfather  s  boy."
For,  as  early  as  he  could  recollect,  he  was  sent  from
the  home  of  his  parents  to  that  of  his  grandfather
and  grandmother,  at  Stambourne  in  Essex,  near  the


CHILDHOOD'S  HOME.  25

borders  of  Sussex,  and  there,  through  the  most
formative  years  of  his  childhood,  was  trained  by  these
most  excellent  people.  His  grandfather  was  a  most
instructive  preacher,  who  for  fifty- four  years  oc-
cupied the  same  pastorate  and  lived  in  the  same
house.

What  a  misfortune  it  often  is  for  a  child  to  be
trained  by  his  grandparents  !  For  some  reason  they
are  usually  more  Indulgent,  more  lax  in  every  kind
bf  discipline,  and  see  in  their  grandchild  a  prodigy
when  no  one  else  dreams  of  such  a  thine.  His
grandparents  were  not  an  exception  to  this  general
rule,  but  he  had  a  most  excellent  aunt,  living  also  at
his  grandfather's  house,  named  "  Aunt  Ann/'  to
whose  care  he  was  largely  committed,  and  who
seems  to  have  been  a  most  talented  woman,  both  in
moral  character  and  in  the  wisdom  of  her  daily  com-
mon sense.

His  grandfather's  house  was  considered  a  mansion
lor  that  day.  It  was  very  large  and  situated  In
most  lovely  natural  surroundings.  His  grand-
father was  a  staid,  scholarly  gentleman,  rather
quaint  but  scrupulously  neat  in  his  attire  ;  courteous
in  his  demeanor,  kindly  in  all  his  Intercourse  with
his  equals  or  Inferiors ;  a  noble  specimen  of  the  old
English  country  gentleman.  It  Is  said  that  he  wore
the  old-fashioned  breeches,  buckled  shoes,  and  silk
stockings;  adhering  with  rigid  formality  to  the  attire
of  the  generation  before  him.  He  was  born  at  Hal-
stead  in 'Essex,  September  29th,  1776.    He  followed


26  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

business  occupations  until  he  was  twenty-six  years
of  age,  when  he  determined  to  enter  the  ministry.
Taking  then  two  years  of  study  at  an  Academy,  he
entered  upon  the  work  of  preaching  to  a  very  weak,
poor,  and  small  congregation,  at  Clare  in  Sussex.
That  church  grew  to  be  a  healthy,  spreading,  and
prosperous  pastorate  in  the  four  years  he  remained
there.  He  belonged  to  the  Independent  or  Con-
gregational Church  connection,  and  is  said  to  have
never  preached  in  any  places  outside  of  Clare  and
Stambourne  ;  yet  he  was  widely  known  as  a  genuine
Christian  and  a  faithful  friend,  and  the  sight  of  his
frilled  shirt,  long  vest,  and  dress  cravat  always
brought  caps  from  the  heads  of  the  reverent
rustics.  He  loved  children  and  delighted  in  the
company  of  young  people,  having  his  pockets  filled
with  confections  for  the  one  and  his  mouth  filled
with  words  of  cheer  for  the  other.

Mrs.  Spurgeon,  the  grandfather's  helpmeet,  was
a  fine,  industrious  woman,  who  made  it  her  conscien-
tious duty  to  be  a  sincere  and  persevering  helpmeet
to  her  husband.  She  was  quiet  in  her  manners  and
retiring  in  her  disposition,  yet  found  her  way  into
the  most  useful  works  of  charity,  and  often  occupied
positions  of  honor  on  the  boards  and  committees  of
benevolent  enterprises.  She  was  one  of  those  lovely
old  ladies  who  win  the  affection  of  every  one,  who
seem  to  be  able  to  go  through  this  world  accomplish-
ing a  great  deal  in  silence  and  without  friction.

She  and  her  dauo-hter  "  Aunt  Ann  "  cared  for  the


CHILDHOOD'S  HOME.  20

great  house,  with  its  large  hallway,  its  cozy  bed-
rooms, its  long-  sitting-room,  library  and  dairy  and
enormous  dark  closets,  with  a  neatness  that  was
surprising  and  with  a  regularity  that  was  like  clock
work.

It  was  in  this  old  manse,  standing  adjacent  to  the
one-story  meeting-house,  that  Charles  spent  the
early  and  most  important  years  of  his  boyhood.

Although  its  external  appearance  is  somewhat
imposing  and  was  evidently  a  well-lighted  and  com-
fortable home  when  it  was  constructed;  many  portions
of  it,  at  the  time  Charles  went  there  to  live,  were
like  a  prison,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  windows  had
been  walled  up  to  avoid  the  taxes  which  the  govern-
ment placed  upon  windows.  Mr.  Spurgeon  has
often  durinof  his  life  referred  to  the  absurd  custom
which  they  had  in  his  boyhood  days  of  taxing  the
sunlight  and  assessing  an  individual  in  proportion  to
the  number  of  windows  which  he  enjoyed  in  his
home.  So  this  old  house  had  a  great  many  rooms
in  it  which  were  perpetually  dark,  into  which  the  boy
only  peered  with  fright,  and  which  to  his  boyhood's
imagination  were  probably  peopled  with  hobgoblins,
ghosts,  spirits,  and  an  occasional  fairy.  In  the  hall
of  the  house,  which  seems  to  have  led  from  the  wide
front  doors  all  the  way  through  to  the  back  yard,
there  was  a  large  fireplace,  about  which  Charles
often  played  through  his  years  of  childhood.  Over  the
fireplace  in  the  wide  hallway  there  was  a  large,  old-
fashioned  painting  of  David  contending  with  Goliath


30


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.


which  was -far  more  indelibly  painted  upon  the  .mind
of  the  boy  than  it  was  upon  the  fading  canvas.

It  was  at  this  fireplace  that  he  sat  many  a  night
poring  over  some  simple  story  written  in  the  dullest
manner,  trustinor  to  the  flickerino-  Hoht  from  the
hearth  rather  than  to  the  tallow  candle  and  its
accompanying  labor  with  the  snuffers.

Dear  old  fireplace  !  Who  that  hath  enjoyed  the
luxury  of  lying  flat  upon  the  floor  and  gazing  into
its  brilliant  embers  can  cease  to  call  down  blessings
on  its  sweet  associations.  Inspiring  old  hearth!
Around  which  the  faces  of  loved  ones  gathered
in  youth,  and  about  which  they  never  will  cease  to
gather  while  memory  retains  its  control.  Lovely
hearth  of  an  affectionate  household !  What
paintings  artists  have  seen  in  its  rising  flames,
what  armies  young  conquerors  have  seen  in
conflict  in  the  battle  of  its  cracklinor  fagots,  what
sweet  and  inexpressible  lines  of  pathos  the  poets
have  seen  written  in  the  coals  or  heard  sung  in  the
hum  of  its  rising  gases.  Dear,  old-fashioned  fire-
place !  Who  was  the  vandal  that  banished  such  a
boon,  such  a  scene  of  comfort,  such  a  source  of
inspiration  from  the  civilized  world  ?

Charles  never  for^^ot  the  lessons  inculcated  bv
that  inspired  teacher,  the  brilliant  fireplace.  Again
and  again  in  his  speeches,  addresses,  sermons,  and
editorials,  sparks  from  that  old  fireplace  appear  with
vivid  distinctness  and  reveal,  unconsciously  to  the
writer,  the  source  of  his  beautiful  thoughts.


CHILDHOOD'S  HOME,  3  I

It  was  on  that  hearth-stone  that  he  made  the  little
sleighs,  struggled  with  toy  wagons,  rude  and  rough
and  uncouth  and  laughable;  but  which,  to  his  childish
mind,  were  marvel?  of  mechanical  achievement.  It
was  there  that  he  cut  patterns  in  that  rough  brown
paper  which  was  preserved  for  that  purpose  by  his
economical  grandmother  from  the  wrappings  brought
from  the  store.  It  was  there  that  he  drew  with
charcoal  strano-e  caricatures  of  the  individuals  he
had  met.  It  was  there  that  he  listened  to  the  folk
lore  of  the  neighborhood,  from  which  was  always
carefully  and  conscientiously  culled  anything  which
was  injurious  in  its  influence  upon  a  childish  mind.
There  he  saw  his  sfrandfather  and  orrandmother  nio^ht
after  night  through  the  rolling  years,  sitting  with
the  great  Bible  opened  on  their  laps  and  poring  over
its  pages  with  a  fascination  never  found  in  any  other
volume.  It  was  there  that  he  learned  to  revere  the
taste  and  affectionate  kindness  of  his  dear  "Aunt
Ann,"  who  was  continually  approaching  the  hearth  to
brush  up  the  ashes  or  arrange  the  fire.

Then  there  was  the  laro^e  sittinof-room,  into  which
quests  were  ushered  on  state  occasions.  The  maof.
nificent  apartment,  to  his  youthful  eyes,  where
persons  were  greeted  with  such  forms  as  to  make
him  feel  in  the  presence  of  the  Queen.

There  also  was  the  dininof-room  with  its  old  well-
worn  table,  its  chairs  which  had  come  down  through
more  than  one  generation,  the  little  cupboard  in
which    W9.S   so    neatly    sorted  all    those    wonderful


S2  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

treasures  of  tarts  and  cakes  and  sweet-meats  so
enticing  to  the  taste  of  every  boy.  Doughnuts  and
cookies  made  specially  for  him  by  the  dear  old
grandmother  and  often  moulded  into  rough  images
of  hares  or  elephants.  How  often  he  clambered
upon  the  chair  and  sometimes  upon  books  placed  in
the  chair,  that  he  might  be  able  to  gaze  In  upon
those  stately  dishes  which  were  only  brought  forth
on  occasions  of  unusual  festivity.  Next  to  the  upper
shelf  were  kept  the  bright  snuffers,  and  how  proudly
he  set  down  that  day  in  the  red-letter  calendar  of
his  life, when  he  was  able,  for  the  first  time,  to  reach
to  that  shelf  and  take  down  the  snuffers.

Then  there  was  the  bed-chamber  with  its  hieh-
posted  bed  for  the  elder  people  and  its  low,  square
trundle  bed  for  the  boy.

There  in  the  upper  story  of  the  old  manse  was
that  dark  room  into  which  once  the  brilliant  lig^ht  of
day  was  allowed  to  come,  but  upon  which  the  horrid
tax-master  had  drawn  his  permanent  curtain.  In  it
were  deposited  a  large  number  of  old  dieological
musty  volumes  never  of  interest  to  any  save  to  those
who  wrote  them.  Yet  among  this  rubbish  of  useless,
dusty  books  the  boy  did  find,  so  early  that  he  could
not  remember  when,  the  Pilgrim  s  Frog^^ess,  with  Its
grotesque  illustrations  of  Pilgrim's  journey  on  his
way  to  heaven.  There  also  he  found  a  story  of  the
martyrs  and  especially  the  history  of  Bishop  Bonner,
whose  cruelty  sent  so  many  to  the  stake,  and  whose
own  end  gave  the  childish   reader  great  satisfaction


CHILDHOOD'S  HOME.  3;^

because  of  its  poetic  justice.  It  was  only  on  an
exceedingly  bright  day,  when  the  inner  door  allowed
some  reflected  liofht  to  enter  from  another  room,  that
the  boy  would  venture  into  its  dusty  precincts.

But  no  closet,  no  dark  room,  no  apartment  what-
ever of  the  great  homestead  was  intentionally  shut
out  from  the  Investigation  of  the  boy  by  his  indulgent
grandparents.  Nothing  was  too  good  for  him.  No
house  too  large.  No  closet  too  secret,  to  be  closed
from  his  prying  mind.

What  an  influence  this  dear  old  home,  with  its
quaint,  queer  associations  had  upon  the  character  or
disposition  of  the  boy,  of  course  no  philosopher  can
say.  It  is  easy  to  surmisingly  attribute  a  flash  of
genius  to  some  particular  circumstance,  event,  or
scene  in  the  history  of  a  great  man,  but  it  is  utterly
impossible  to  connect  with  certainty  the  cause  and
effect  in  such  relations.

Charles'  own  mother  attributed  to  the  associations
exterior  to  the  old  manse  more  credit  for  the
moulding  influences  which  affected  his  early  years
than  she  did  to  anything  within,  except  the  teaching
and  kindness  of  the  grandparents  and  aunt.  But
all  of  these  associations  must  have  been  parts  of  the
mental  and  moral  discipline  which  Providence  used
to  make  the  man.

Stambourne  was  not  a  village,  but  a  mere  collec-
tion in  more  or  less  close   proximity  of  little  farms,
and  indulged  only  In  a  blacksmith  shop  and  a  small
store  in  a  dwelling-house,  for  its  professional  and
3


34  CHARLES  H.  SF  URGE  ON.

business  life.  The  roads  crossed  near  the  old
meeting-house,  and  the  yards  of  the  dwellings  were
inclosed  with  hedges,  and  often  sweetly  shaded  with
ancient  limes  and  strangely-trimmed  yews.

The  school-house  where  Charles  began  to  receive
his  education  is  said  to  have  been  a  part  of  a  dwell-
ing-house, held  in  a  room  with  a  rickety  tioor,  having
one  window  sadly  out  of  plumb,  where  the  plaster
was  falling  from  the  walls,  and  where  the  rain  seems
to  have  come  in  during-  unusual  thunder-storms.

In  none  of  these  early  years  in  school  or  at  home
did  he  exhibit  those  precocious  qualities  which  are
often  erroneously  attributed  to  the  opening  years  of
o^reat  men.  Some  writers  have  claimed  that  Charles
showed  those  startling  evidences  of  genius  in  the
first  years  of  his  school  life.  But  one  of  the  teach-
ers has  left  upon  record  the  statement,  shown  in  her
reports,  that  he  was  rather  dull,  slow  but  persist-
ent, doing  thoroughly  whatever  he  had  in  hand.

He  was  a  very  awkward  boy,  short,  thick,  with  a
very  heavy  head  of  hair,  eyes  not  especially  brilliant,
nose  short,  and  mouth  large.  No  one  esteemed  him
to  be  a  handsome  child,  and  it  is  said  that  both  in
form  and  feature  he  greatly  changed  during  the
days  of  his  boyhood.

His  school  study  was  characterized  by  nothing  of
especial  interest  to  others,  except  the  fact  that  he
showed  an  unusual  inclination  to  make  close  and
comprehensive  inquiries  concerning  any  subject  pre-
sented, either  in  books  or  in  conversational  discussion.


CHILDHOOD'S  HOME.  :»:;

He  always  desired  to  know  "  the  why  and  the  where-
fore," and  not  being  especially  brilliant,  it  was  some-
times quite  difficult  to  make  him  comprehend  the
lenorth  and  breadth  of  the  answer  for  which  his
questions  called.  But  he  was  a  good-natured,  kind-
hearted,  open-handed  boy,  always  willing  to  divide
with  his  schoolmates  any  sweets  with  which  he  had
been  favored,  ever  alert  to  assist  any  school-boy  who
was  behind  in  his  lessons,  seeking  eagerly  to  run
upon  errands  for  the  teacher,  and,  withal,  remarkably

truthful.

The  statement    which   some    seemingly    cautious

biographers  have  made  concerning  his  unusual  pre-
cociousness  in  childhood  appear  to  have  been
founded  upon  his  after  life  or  upon  local  tradi-
tions. It  seems  to  be  very  clear,  however,  that
in  truth  he  gave  no  special  promise  in  his  early
school-days  of  the  greatness  which  afterward  crowned
his  life.

Stambourne  Is  situated  at  the  very  headwaters  of
the  Colne  River,  and  the  spring  which  furnishes  the
source  of  that  river  is  situated  not  far  from  the  old
parsonage  where  Charles  spent  his  youthful  days.
As  a  boy  he  often  waded  In  the  brook,  which  played
such  fantastic  tricks  about  his  feet,  and  laughingly
chattered  to  the  mosses,  ferns,  and  evergreens  which
laced  the  banks.  There  he  eagerly  sought  the  shin-
ing pebbles,  which  his  imagination  often  magnified
into  diamonds  and  inestimable  crems,  or  watched
alonof  Its   banks   for    the  lizard   and  dwarf-fish  for


36  CHARLES  H.  SPUKGEON,

which  he  had  a  strong  passion.  That  brook  and  two
others  which  united  with  it  a  short  distance  below
the  manse,  were  to  him  an  inspiration  lasting  to  the
very  latest  day  of  his  life.  There  were  books  in
these  runnino"  brooks  which  he  alone  could  read.
There  were  voices  in  these  falling  waters  which  he
alone  could  understand.  There  was  a  benion  in-
fluence  in  their  shadows  which  prophesied  to  him  the
future.  There  was  a  refreshing  in  their  coolness
which  was  peculiarly  gratifying  to  a  child  of  his  im-
aginative temperament.  He  loved  the  sparkling
waters.  Ao-ain  and  aoain  has  he  used  them  as  illus-
trative  of  gospel  truth,  and  the  glittering  brooks  of
Stambourne  rippled,  sang,  and  flashed  through  much
that  he  said,  and  throuQ-h  vastlv  more  that  he  thought.
The  far-spreading  trees  which  bowed  over  the  banks,
with  benedictions  of  holy  peace,  the  weeds,  and
brush,  and  underorowth,  wath  the  rocks  and  stones
on  which  he  often  stood,  all  these,  o-lorified  bv  sacred
memory,  were  inseparably  connected  with  the  living-
waters  of  the  river  of  Life.  They  seemed  to  lose
none  of  tlieir  charms  for  him  through  the  varied
experience  of  a  w^orking  life.

That  his  mother  Was  rioht  in  attributincr  so  much
to  the  influence  of  the  rural  scenerv  surrounding
Charles'  young  days  is  apparent  to  the  student  of
his  writings  as  w^ell  as  to  his  personal  friends,  be-
cause of  the  unmistakable  suggestions  of  waving
fields  of  irrain,  of  fruit-laden  arbors,  of  bloomino-  trel-
Uses,  of  outstretching   trees,  of  hills    and   dales,  oi


CHILDHOOD'S  HOM£:,  ^y

pastures,  of  verdantly  arched  highways^  of  mist-
covered  meadows,  of  clear  sunshine,  of  simple,
homely  talk,  of  frank,  pleasant  manners,  of  hardy  toil,
of  broad  common  sense,  which  continually  shone
forth  in  his  conversation  and  in  his  public  addresses.

The  country  boy  is  the  favored  boy.  Alas,  for  the
child  of  the  city.  Alas,  for  him  whose  early  years
are  spent  in  the  city's  prison  of  brick  and  mort^ir,
stone  sidewalks,  harsh  pavements,  smoky  skies,
ceaseless  din,  unnatural  cries,  tainted  atmosphere,
and  heated  rooms.  If  the  early  associations  of  child-
hood do  make  or  unmake  genius,  then  it  is  interest-
ing to  note  that  the  majority  of  the  great  men  and
women  of  all  the  civilized  ages  have  passed  the
early  years  in  rural  surroundings,  in  country  homes,
or  amid  scenes  like  that  of  the  "  Cotter  s  Saturday
Night!'  Whatever  else  may  be  attributed  to  the  in-
fluence of  natural  scenery  and  rural  lite,  it  may  be
safely  assumed  that  the  strong  physique  which  car-
ried Spurgeon  through  so  many  years  of  the  most
arduous  labor,  was  due,  at  least  in  part,  to  the  fresh
air,  and  out-door  exercises,  simple  garb,  and  rustic
manners  of  that  farmino-  hamlet  of  Stambourne,  in
Essex.

His  childhood  does  not  show  any  peculiar  traits  in
connection  with  his  boyish  sports.  Like  any  other
boy  he  greatly  enjoyed  his  rocking-horse,  which
stood  in  the  hall  in  the  old  parsonage,  and  to  which
he  often  referred  in  after  years  when  speaking  to
children.      Like   every  other   English   boy   he  was


^8  CHARLES  H.  SF  URGE  ON.

greatly  excited  by  all  out-door  sports,  and  was  won-
derlully  lascinated  with  the  fox  chase.  Once  a  year
he  was  permitted  to  stand  by  the  roadside  and  see
the  fox-hunters  pass.  That  was  a  day  long  to  be
remembered,  and  was  of  greater  interest  to  him
then  than  some  of  those  transactions  were  to  him
afterward,  which  shook  the  foundations  of  the
na,tions.     He  was  a  homely,  natural  boy.

His  grandfather  seems  to  have  had  the  same  dif-
ficulty in  keeping  the  boy  quiet  at  seasons  of  devo-
tion which  other  orrandfathers  have  had  with  other

<_>

boys,  and  especially  arduous  the  task  on  those  Puri-
tanical Sabbath  days  when  it  seemed  to  be  so  sac-
rilegious for  a  child  to  indulge  in  any  worldly
amusement.  It  appears  that  Charles  was  often
placed  in  the  room  with  his  grandfather,  while  the
women  of  the  household  were  absent  or  were  en-
gaged in  some  special  labor,  in  order  that  he  might
be  kept  from  mischief.  Those  were  hours  of  hard-
ship fully  as  painful  to  him  as  they  have  been  to
many  other  boys.

In  after  years  he  often  facetiously  referred  to  the
Evangelical  Magazine,  which  was  always  put  into
his  hands  by  his  grandfather,  with  the  hope  that  the
two  pictures,  one  of  the  celebrated  minister  and  one
of  some  mission  station,  might  serve  to  keep  him  in
peaceful  meditation.  His  grandmother  or  his  aunt
very  frequently  informed  him  with  great  solemnity
that  if  at  such  times  he  did  not  keep  very  quiet,  he
might  so  disturb  his  grandfather  that  the  old  gentle-


CHILDHOOD'S  HOME.  39

man  would  be  unable  to  preach,  and  consequendy
famishing  souls  would  die  for  die  need  of  gospel
food.  Those  were  solemn  hours  in  die  history  of
the  child,  when  sitting  there  with  his  grandfather  in
the  shadowy  room  in  silence  so  chillingly  wi^rd,  and
fearing  to  speak  or  move  his  little  foot  lest  his
grandfather  and  God  should  see  him  and  be  dis-
pleased. Yet  about  this  feeling  there  seems  to  be
no  singular  feature  such  as  would  in  any  way  ac-
count for  the  after  extraordinary  results  of  his
reliofious  life.

Some  of  the  social  events,  however,  connected
with  his  home  at  Stambourne  must  have  made  a
very  deep  impression  upon  his  thoughts  and  conse-
quently upon  his  character.  His  dear  old  grand-
mother one  Sabbath  mornino-  remarked  to  her
husband  that  she  did  not  feel  able  to  attend  services,
and  so  would  remain  at  home  and  read  her  Bible
there,  while  he  was  preaching  the  gospel  in  the
Chapel.  She  seated  herself  In  that  old  arm-chair
not  far  from  that  dear  old  fireplace  and  spreading
the  Bible  out  upon  her  lap,  adjusted  her  spectacles
and  began  Its  devoted  perusal.  They  left  her  sitting
there  and  went  across  the  yard  into  the  old  church.
But  when  they  returned  after  the  service,  walking
Into  the  house  without  premonition  of  harm,  they
found  the  sweet  old  Christian  woman  with  her  head
bowed  upon  her  breast,  her  spectacles  lying  across
the  Bible  and  her  finger  pointing  to  the  words  **  the


40  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

hand  of  God  hath  touched  me.''  She  was  dead  !
Her  spirit  had  ascended  to  her  long-expected  home.
Mr.  Spurgeon  has  frequently,  too,  referred  to  his
boyish  experiences  in  three  places  which  w^ere  ever
especially  dear  to  his  memory.  One  being  the
Sunday-school  room,  in  which  he  says  "  his  Sabbath-
school  companions  frequently  kicked  up  the  dust  and
sometimes  kicked  the  teachers."  It  was  there  that
he  learned  Watt's  Catechism,  and  heard  the  homely
stories  related  as  illustrations  of  Bible  truth  in  a
manner  peculiar  to  the  humble  people  of  that  day,
but  wonderfully    expressive   and    correct   in    their


exegesis.


Another  place  was  the  old  tombstone  in  the
churchyard  near  his  home,  which  was  placed  over
the  grave  like  a  reversed  box,  bottom  upward.  It
was  made  of  marble  and  one 'side  was  loose,  so  that
he  could  easily  remove  it  and,  crawling  into  the  box
over  the  grave,  replace  the  slab  at  the  side,  thus
hiding  himself  securely  beyond  discovery.  Often  he
lay  there  in  hiding  and  thought  on  many  childish  air
castles;  and  sometimes  remained  there  past  his
dinner  hour,  even  when  he  had  distinctly  heard  the
call.  He  says  that  he  often  lay  there  facetiously
holdinof  his  breath  while  the  household  searched  the
churchyard,  and  while  some  of  them,  frequently
standing  directly  above  his  head,  searched  vainly
for  the  truant.  Another  place  dear  to  his  child-
ish heart  was  the  horsing-block,  which  also  was
constructed  in  the  form  of  a  box,  although  made  of


CHILDHOOD'S  HOME,  *  ^I

wood,  and  much  larger  diaa  die  tombstone.  One
side  of  this  horsino^-block,  used  also  as  a  hitchine-
post,  was  partially  open,  and  into  it  the  farmers
pressed  the  falling  leaves  which  were  swept  up  from
the  neatly-kept  highway.  Those  lime-tree  leaves
were  crisp,  dry,  and  warm,  and  made  a  most  com-
fortable nest  into  which  the  boy  crawled  clandestinely.

There,  secure  from  observation,  warmly  ensconced
in  a  luxurious  bed,  richer  to  the  boy  than  the  couches
of  palaces  are  to  the  man,  he  would  lie  and  repeat
his  lessons,  which  Mrs.  Burleigh,  the  day-school
teacher  had  assigned  him,  or  sanor  over  and  over  a
verse  of  Scripture  which  he  was  expected  to  repeat
at  the  next  Sunday's  prayers.

But  he  was  like  a  wild  bird  in  that  retreat,  and  on
the  approach  of  any  footstep,  became  quickly  silent,
and  even  became  an  unwillincr  or  willino-  listener  to
neighborhood  gossip,  carried  on  by  persons  seated
on  the  horsing-block,  or  leaning  ap'ainst  it,  while
they  stopped  for  conversation.


CHAPTER  ll.

EARLY  EDICATION;

The  study  of  any  successful  man's  biography,
whatever  his  profession,  business  or  trade,  is  helpful
to  every  other  man  in  any  other  station.  For  the
same  great  causes  which  carry  a  man  to  success  in  one
part  of  our  civilization  are  necessary  to  the  accom-
plishment of  great  purposes  in  any  other  position.
The  fact  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  preacher,  need
not  make  his  life  any  less  useful  in  the  most  practical
sense,  to  the  farmer,  the  mechanic,  the  merchant  or
the  lawyer.  There  is,  however,  one  discouraging-
feature  in  using  the  life  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  the
purposes  of  imitation,  in  the  fact  to  which  refer-
ence has  already  been  made,  viz.:  that  some  of  the
events  which  led  to  his  promotion  are  beyond  ex-
planation, and  remain  in  the  realm  of  the  miraculous.
No  study  nor  reasoning,  no  contemplation  of  facts
seems  to  clear  up  the  wonderful  mystery.

Let  us  nevertheless  devote  a  short  time  to  the
study  of  the  natural  causes  and  influences  which
may  not  be  considered  mysterious  and  which  will  be
very  helpful  to  every  reader  who  desires  to  make
the  most  possible  of  his  life.
42


EARLY  EDUCATION.  43

Many  of  the  most  truslvvorthy  biographers  ascribe
a  large  share  of  all  human  success  to  the  influence
of  early  education  ;  others  make  equally  prominent
the  inheritance  of  hereditary  traits  carrying  with
them  the  force  of  o;-enius.

Some  writers  upon  Mr.  Spurgeon's  career,  like
that  most  excellent  Christian,  Rev.  James  J.  Ellis,
ascribed  much  to  his  family  and  ancestry.  This  is
quite  natural  to  an  Englishman,  trained  under  a
hereditary  monarchy.

The  evano^elist  Georo[-e  C.  Needham  and  also  Mr,
Stevenson,  Mr.  Spurgeon's  most  excellent  biog-
raphers, lay  considerable  stress  upon  his  inherited
mental  characteristics.  But  to  an  American,  taught
by  American  literature  and  '.vith  a  life-long  asso-
ciation with  a  leveling  democracy,  these  kindly
efforts  to  give  great  credit  to  the  long  line  of  good
men  which  preceded  him  appear  to  be  rather
strange  and  often  quite  absurd.  Some  men  are
born  oreat,  but  families  are  not.  To  be  a  crreat
man's  son  gives  no  patent  on  human  greatness.
More  often  we  find  that  the  great  man  was  the  son
of  a  poor  man,  and  often  a  descendent  of  the  igno-
rant or  of  the  very  commonplace.  Families  like  the
Peels  in  England  and  the  Adams  of  America  are
exceedino-lv  rare,  and  as  a  usual  thinor  there  is  no
hope  of  genius  nor  is  great  intellectual  force  expected
in  the  second  generation  of  any  great  man.

It  is  said  that  Mr.  Spurgeon's  ancestors  were
amonor    the    religious    reformers   of    Holland,    who


44  CHARLES  //.  SPURGE  ON,

under  the  fearkil  scourtre  of  the  Duke  of  Alva,
suffered  such  privation  as  to  induce  them  to  fly  from
their  native  land  and  find  domicile  in  Enofland.  That
they  were  good  men  and  noble  Christians  among
those  who  thus  left  their  native  land  in  the  time  of
its  trial  there  is  no  question,  and  no  one  can  doubt
but  that  the  ancestors  of  Mr,  Spurgeon  are  all  they
are  represented  to  be,  and  specially  noteworthy  is
the  fact  that  two  hundrea  and  more  years  ago  they
were  imprisoned  for  daring  to  worship  God  accord-
Ins:  to  the  dictates  of  their  own  conscience.  But  no
one  seems  to  claim  for  them  any  special  genius,  and
in  fact  had  they  possessed  it,  or  the  marvelous  acute-
ness  which  is  sometimes  hinted  at,  the  forefathers
would  have  remained  in  Holland  and  fouorht  out  the
battle  of  Christian  freedom  there.

They  were  evidently  plain  people  of  the  peasent
classes  who  saw  no  opportunity  of  being  useful  to
their  native  country  and  consequently  acted  wisely
when  they  sought  a  new  home  in  a  free  land.  Cer-
tainly the  Spurgeon  families  of  Essex  and  Sussex
which  in  these  after  days  have  been  locally  very  in-
fluential and  especially  noble  in  their  Christian
character,  have  not  taken  great  interest  in  the  history
of  their  ancestors,  and  appear  to  know  but  little  con-
cerninor  their  achievments.

Through  the  three  or  four  generations  with  whom
the  reading  public  is  now  somewhat  familiar,  the
Spurgeon  families  have  been  characterized  for  their
plain  common  sense,  sturdy  industry,  and  stubborn


James  SraRGEON.


ii  KE'A  V'.:  K      j
3LiC  LlBBi^T  j

i

mix.  /Cifil«AT:OK/  V


EARL  Y  ED  UCA  TJON.  ^y

adherance  to  certain  Christian  doctrines,  and  to  have
led  a  quiet,  homely  life.

Neither  his  grandfather  James  Spurgeon  at  Stam-
bourne,  nor  his  father  John  Spurgeon  of  Cold-
chesterandLondc  ,were  ever  especially  distinguished
for  their  educr.ti  .lal  attainments.  They  were  scholars
of  the  old  Congre^  lonal  school,  who  read  carefully
a  few  standard  I^ooks,  who  'hought  deeply,  but  whose
readinof  war  not  extensive.

While  It  is  'jruc  tha':  almost  any  man  with  the
most  ordinary  Dowei-s  may  be  able  to  preach  a
classical  sermon  and  adorn  it  with  quotations  from
Cicero,  Demosthenes,  Augustine,  and  Luther,  and
while  It  Is  also  true  that  it  requires  both  genius  and
most  extensive  learning  to  speak  simply  and  clearly
in  plain  English,  yet  his  father  and  his  grandfather
exhibited  those  qualities  as  a  result  of  a  peculiar  in-
herited character,  rather  than  that  of  extensive
education.  They  were  not  copyists.  They  were
distinguished  for  their  odd  originality.  They  were
often  humorous  and  witty,  presenting  truth  occa-
sionally in  a  grotesque  dress  which  could  never  be
forgotten,  and  which  more  often  accomplished  the
ends  for  which  tliey  spoke  than  the  most  polished
essay  could  have  done.

There  are  blunders  which  are  victories,  and  there
are  truly  great  orators  whose  language  is  ungram-
atical  and  unrhetorical.

The  Spurgeon  family  has  remained  quite  closely
identified  with   the    country  villages   in    which    its


48  CHARLES  //.  SPURGEON.

earliest  English  ancestry  took  up  its  abode.  They
have  not  been  a  migratory  people,  have  sought  no
ambitious  station,  but  have  been  specially  remark-
able for  clean  Christianity,  and. the  English  disposi-
tion to  be  solid,  earnest,  anci  Godly.  Yet  in  this
they  are  not  to  be  distinguished  above  a  thousand
other  families  like  them  who  have  resided  and  still
reside  in  the  country  towns  of  dear  old  England.

It  seems  therefore  quite  unreasonable  to  say  that
the  attainments  and  victories  of  Charles  were  due
to  any  unusual  prominence  in  the  life  or  nature  ot
his  family  inheritence.  He  illustrates  the  great  les-
son which  England  is  now  speedily  learning,  that
statesmanship  or  piety  are  not  to  be  sought  espe-
cially in  descent,  but  rather  in  the  individuals  whom
Providence  raises  up  for  the  furtherence  of  its  great
designs.  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  has  said:  "The
boast  of  pedigree  is  common  but  silly."  FamiUes
as  famihes,  have  no  right  to  the  landed  domain,  to
palaces,  to  the  castles,  to  the  offices,  or  to  the
throne.

These  positions  must  soon  be  filled  only  by  per-
sons of  especial  fitness  and  unusual  mental  activity
who  depend  for  their  infiuence  not  upon  their
descent,  but  upon  their  personal   ability.

Of  course  none  but  an  extreme  hobbyist  could
leave  out  of  account,  the  force  of  ancestral  exam-
ples, such  as  were  presented  in  the  life  of  grandfather
James  Spurgeon.  And  specially  influential  upon  his
disposition  must  have  beea  the  influence  oi  Charles'


EARLY  EDUCATION.  4q

grandmother,  his  Aunt  Ann,  and  of  his  own  sweet
spiriced  Christian  mother.

His  father  is  said  to  have  remarked,  that  as  the
parentof  seventeen  children,  **  1  have  frequently  worn
a  shabby  coat  when  I  might  have  possessed  a  good
one,  had  I  cared  less  for  my  children's  education."
but  the  touchinor  sacrifices  made  bv  his  father
seemed  to  have  been  excelled  by  the  self-abnega-
tion and  devotion  of  his  noble  mother.

Mrs.  Jackson,  the  sister  of  Charles,  wrote  of  their
father  eight  years  before  he  died,  saying  •  *'  in  pre-
vious biographies  very  little  is  recorded  of  this  ven-
erable man  of  God,  who  has  now  attained  the  ripe
age  of  four-score  years.  He  has  always  been  an
embodiment  of  homeliness,  and  from  the  earliest  rec-
ollections of  his  children,  he  imparted  a  charm  to  the
home  life  of  his  family.  His  sons  and  daughters
were  never  so  happy  as  when  he  gathered  them
-  around  him  for  recreation,  instruction,  and  devotion.
They  hailed  his  return  from  business  and  from  re-
ligious services  with  delight,  for  they  knew  he  would
not  fail  to  delight  them  by  relating  in  his  own  capti-
vatinof  manner  the  incidents  which  had  come  under
his  observation  during  the  day.  Thus  *  pleasant
evenings'  were  wisely  provided  at  home,  and  the
temptations  which  characterize  and  endanger  *  modern
society '  were  avoided.  Those  early  days  of  happy
family  life  are  remembered  with  devout  gratitude."

But  a  well  known  incident  related  by  Charles*
father,  opens  a  window  into  the  domestic  inner  life  of
4


so


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.


the  family,  through  which  we  catch  glimpses  of  a  region
presided  over  by  one  of  God's  most  saintly  charac-
ters. In  conversation  with  Dr.  Ford,  concerning  the
domestic  life  of  Charles'  early  years,  John  Spurgeon
said :  "  I  had  been  from  home  a  good  deal,  trying  to
build  up  weak  congregations,  and  felt  that  I  was  ne-
oflectincr  the  religious  trainincr  of  my  own  children
while  I  toiled  for  the  cjood  of  others.  I  returned
home  with  these  feelings.  I  opened  the  door,  and
was  surprised  to  find  none  of  the  children  about  the
hall.  Going  quietly  up  the  stairs,  I  heard  my  wife's
voice.  She  was  engaged  in  prayer  with  the  children.
I  heard  her  pray  for  them  ,  one  by  one,  by  name.
She  came  to  Charles  and  specially  prayed  for  him,
for  he  was  of  a  high  spirit  and  daring  temper..  I
listened  until  she  had  ended  her  prayer,  and  I  felt
and  said,  '  Lord,  I  will  go  on  with  Thy  work  ;  the
children  will  be  cared  for.'  "

But  reserving  for  the  next  chapter  observations
connected  with  Charles'  earlv  moral  and  reliorious
education,  let  us  examine  somewhat  closely  the
methods  by  which  he  obtained  such  wide,  and  varied,
and  useful  information.  It  has  often  been  said
that  Spurgeon  never  had  a  collecre  educaiton.  While
that  is  technically  true,  it  is  far  from  true  in  reality.
He  had  a  college  education.  Yea.  \\v.  had  a  univer-
sity  education.  He  was  one  of  th-e  learned  men
most  prominent  in  these  closing  years  of  the  nine-
teenth century.  But  the  fact  that  a  person  In  Spur-
Qfeon's  circumstances  could  secure   such   extensive


E^RL  y  ED  re  A  TION.


51


Information  and  obtain  that  neccessary  discipline  of
mind  to  compete  with  the  rushing  forces  of  civiHza-
tion  in  this  age  of  the  world,  without  actually  attend-
ing the  college  or  the  university  is  a  very  important
fact.  It  is  not  unreasonable  to  infer  that  he  would  have
failed  as  a  great  preacher  and  organizer,  if  he  had
taken  a  course  in  the  college  or  university.

The  stubborn  fact  that  he  did  reach  the  highest
possible  position  in  his  profession,  without  a  college
training,  must  be  squarely  met  by  all  advocates  of
modern  systems  of  public  instruction.  It  makes
clear  to  the  student  that  our  methods  of  instruction
and  our  systems  of  school  discipline  are  at  least,  not
a  necessity  for  the  attainment  of  the  highest  educa-
tion.

Something  is  rotten  in  the  states  of  Denmark,
England,  and  the  United  States,  when  it  is  possible
for  boys  and  girls  without  money,  without  fame,
without  special  hereditary  influence,  to  reach  the
noblest  positions  in  the  world's  activities,  without  the
aid  of  the  great  endowed,  institutions  which  receive
such  continued  encomiums.  That  schools  and  col-
leges, universities  and  scientific  institutions  are  of
great  value  goes  without  the  saying.  But  that  they
might  be  of  much  more  value  than  they  are  is  also
certain.  For  they  should  combine  if  possible  in
their  course  of  instruction  the  same  influences  and
discipline  which  comes  to  a  poor  boy  working  his  own
way  upward  through  thousands  of  difficulties  and
under  the  most  discouraorinor  circumstances.


52  CHARLES  II.  SPURGE  ON,

Lincoln  would  not  have  been  the  saviour  of  his
nation  and  Spurgeon  would  not  have  been  the  Elijah
ot  his  acre  had  they  received  the  usual  college  educa-
tion.  Such  a  course  would  nave  chancred  the  circum-
stances  and  put  them  in  an  entirely  different  relation
to  the  events  which  moulded  them  into  the  charac-
ters the  world  so  much  needed.

Here,  then,  is  the  fact.  It  is  a  stubborn  thing.  It
demands  the  very  careful  and  persistent  attention  of
our  great  educators.  While  a  college  diploma  ought
to  be  always  a  badge  of  greatness,  and  ever  accom-
pany the  history  of  the  most  effective  Intellects,  yet
it  Is  a  startllnor  fact  that  for  some  reason  it  is  not
practically  the  certain  bado^e  of  honor  which  It  should
be.

Why  should  Charles'  own  younger  brodier,  James,
with  his  more  extended  opportunities  and  his  espe-
cially thorough  college  traming  hold  so  humble  a
place  In  the  world's  estimation,  while  Charles,
securing  his  education  by  entirely  different  methods,
Is  a  household  word  to  the  farthest  reach  of  the
civilized  world?  The  question  does  arise  whether
It  would  not  have  been  far  better  for  even  James,  If
he  had  entered  at  once  on  his  life  work  when  he  was
sixteen  years  of  age  and  trusted  to  different  methods
for  the  helpful  instruction  he  would  need  in  his  pro-
fession. We  cannot  answer  this,  but  we  say  that
the  consideration  of  a  life  like  that  of  Charles  H.
Spurgeon  will  some  day  revolutionize  all  our  methods
of  Instruction  and  make  them  far  less  weirdly  theo-


EA  RL  V  ED  UCA  TION.  5  3

retrlcal.  It  will  bri'nof  us  all  down  to  matters  more
practical,  more  in  accordance  w  ith  common  sense
and  with  our  daily  common  needs.  Be  it  known
now  that  a  poor  boy  even  in  aristocratic  England
mav  secure  a  colleo^e  educat  on  without  attending
Cambridge  or  Oxford.  An  untitled  rustic  may
acquire  all  that  discipline  <^i  mind  and  stability  of
character  which  the  best  insututions  of  the  world  can
give,  and  secure  them  e^  en  amid  the  homeliest  sur-
roundings or  in  the  most  distant  country  village.

Charles  H.  Spurgeon's  figure  will  ever  stand  in
the  minds  of  tens  of  thousands  of  young  men  in
rustic  life,  combined  with  a  most  eloquent  gesture,
pointing  forward  to  the  highest  positions  in  the  world,
and  speaking  with  distinct  tone,  saying,*'  there  is  hope
for  the  humblest  man,"  Nothing  the  college  gives
is  impossible  to  the  industrious,  to  the  honesty
although  he  may  have  no  opportunity  to  sit  under
the  traininor  of  grifted  minds  in  the  halls  of  the  distin-
o-uished  centres  of  learninor.  His  name  will  ever  be
the  sign  of  hope  and  an  encouraging  inspiration
showing  the  way  to  magnificent  possibilities  from  the
humblest  home  in  the  most  sparsely  settled  rural
districts.

Universities  are  not  to  be  despised,  but  on  the
contrary  to  be  faithfully  encouraged.  But,  thank
God!  Charles  H.  Spurgeon  did  not  go  to  college.
The  world  needed  one  such  an  example  to  break
the  crust  of  a  depressing  school  artistocracy.

His  mental  training,  of  course,  began  at  his  grand-


54  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON,

father's  house  in  Stambourne  and  we  are  told  that
his  letters  were  taught  him  by  his  Aunt  Ann.  She  •
loved  to  relate  in  after  years  many  little  anecdotes
illustrative  of  his  "  great  mind  "  as  a  boy.  But  an
examination  of  them  does  not  show  any  special  pre-
cociousness.  They  are  like  all  those  incidents
which  are  so  carefully  preserved  by  mothers,  grand-
mothers, and  indulgent  aunts  about  their  first-born
son,  first  grandson,  or  favorite  nephew.

His  grandfather  also  occasionally  assisted  In
teaching  him  to  read.  But  the  impress  of  his
grandfather's  noble  character  seems  to  have  been
the  most  Important  branch  of  his  early  learning.

.  **  Example  draws  where  precept  fails,

And  sometimes  are  more  read  than  tales."

Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  that  "  Example  is  the  school
of  mankind,  and  many  will  learn  at  no  other.
Examples  preach  to  the  eye  and  leave  a  deeper
impress  than  counsel  addressed  to  the  ear.  Children
like  pictures  better  than  letter  press,  so  do  men
prefer  example  to  precept."

And  when  speaking  directly  of  his  grandfather's
influential  example  he  also  said:

*'  When  alittlechild,!  livedsome  years  In  my  grand-
father's house.  In  his  crarden  there  was  a  fine  old
hedge  of  yew  of  considerable  length,  which  was
clipped  and  trimmed  till  it  made  quite  a  wall  of
verdure.  Behind  It  was  a  wide  grass  walk  which
looked  out  upon  the  fields,  and  afforded  a  quiet  out-


EAKLY  ED  UCA  HON.  ^  t

look.  The  grass  was  kept  mown,  so  as  to  make
pleasant  walking.  Here  ever  since  the  old  puritanic
chapel  was  built,  godly  divines  had  walked,  and
prayed  and  meditated.  My  grandfather  was  wont
to  use  it  as  his  study.  Up  and  down  he  would  walk
when  preparing  his  sermons,  and  always  on  Sabbath
days,  when  it  was  fair,  he  had  half  an  hour  there
before  preaching.  To  me  it  seemed  a  perfect  para-
dise, and  being  forbidden  to  stay  there  when
grandfather  was  meditating,  I  viewed  it  with  no
small  deo-ree  of  awe.  I  love  to  think  of  the  crreen
and  quiet  walk  at  this  mom.ent,  and  could  wish  for
just  such  a  study.  But  I  was  once  shocked,  and
even  horrified,  by  hearing  a  farming  man  remark
concerning  this  sanctum  sanctorum,  ^  It  'ud  grow
a  many  'taturs  if  it  wor  ploughed  up.'  What  cared
he  for  holy  memories  ?  What  were  meditation  and
contemplation  to  him  ?  Is  it  not  the  chief  end  of
man  to  grow^  potatoes,  and  to  eat  them  ?  Such  on
a  larger  scale  would  be  an  unconverted  man's  esti-
mate  of  joys  so  elevated  and  refined  as  those  of
heaven,  could  he  by  any  possibility  be  permitted  to
gaze  upon  them."

To  the  day-school,  taught  by  Mrs.  Burleigh,  at
Stambourne,  reference  has  already  been  made.  It
appears  that  he  learned  so  little,  or  was  altogether
so  inattentive  or  mischievous  that  the  school  never
made  any  very  deep  impression  upon  his  memory.
It  is  clear  that  at  that  early  day  in  his  history,  before
he  was  eight  years  old,  he  was  not  to  be  specially


56  CHARLES  II.  SPURCEO.V.

distlnorulshed  from  many  other  bovs  living  in  his
social  position  and  circumstances.  But  in  his  grand-
father's family  he  necessarily  saw  more  of  books
than  other  boys  in  the  neighborhood  would  see,  and
heard  a  great  deal  more  of  literary  matters  and  in-
tellectual discussion  than  would  fall  to  the  lot  of  a
farmer's  son.  He  learned  slowly  but  remembered
long.  A  lesson  once  thoroughly  comprehended  was
indelible.

He  left  his  grandfather's  manse  and  returned  to
his  father's  house  at  Coldchester,  where  his  father
kept  a  shop,  when  he  was  seven  or  eight  years  of
age,  and  there  found  an  opportunity  for  excellent
school  traininor.  But  in  that  school  there  were  some
scholars  who  excelled  him,  and  it  is  said  that  he  him-
self did  not  consider  it  any  special  disgrace  to  be  at
the  foot  of  the  class,  provided  that  it  brought  him  in
the  winter  season  nearer  the  stove.

But  the  clearness  with  which  these  events  at  that
time  in  his  life  impressed  themselves  upon  his
memory  is  wonderfully  shown  in  the  account  which
when  an  elderly  man  he  gave  of  a  little  incident
while  at  school,  in  his  'John  Ploughman's  Talks,"  he
assailed  debt  with  peculiar  bitterness  and  said :

''  When  I  was  a  very  small  boy,  in  pinafores,  and
went  to  a  woman's  school,  it  so  happened  that  I
wanted  a  stick  of  slate  pencil,  and  had  no  money  to
buy  it  with.  I  was  afraid  of  beinof  scolded  for  losino-
my  pencils  so  often,  for  I  was  a  real  careless  little
fellow,  and   so  did   not  dare  to  ask  at  home ;  what


EARL  Y  EDUCA  TION.


S7


then  was  John  to  do  ?  There  was  a  Httle  shop  in
the  place,  where  nuts,  and  tops,  and  cakes,  and  balls
were  sold,  by  old  Mrs.  Dearson,  and  sometimes  1  had
seen  boys  and  girls  get  trusted  by  the  old  lady.  1
argued  with  myself  that  Christmas  was  coming,  and
that  somebody  or  other  would  be  sure  to  give  me  a
penny  then,  and  perhaps  even  a  whole  silver  six-
pence. I  would  therefore  go  into  debt  for  a  stick  ot
slate  pencil,  and  be  sure  to  pay  for  it  at  Christmas.
I  did  not  feel  easy  about  it,  but  still  I  screwed  my
courage  up  and  went  into  the  shop.  One  farthing
was  the  amount,  and  as  I  had  never  owed  anything
before,  and  my  credit  was  good,  the  pencil  was
handed  over  by  the  kind  dame,  and  /  was  in  debt.
It  did  not  please  me  much,  and  1  felt  as  if  I  had
done  wrono^  but  I  little  knew  how  soon  I  should
smart  for  it.  How  my  father  came  to  hear  of  this
little  piece  of  business,  I  never  knew,  but  some  little
bird  or  other  whistled  it  to  him,  and  he  was  very  soon
down  upon  me  m  right  earnest.  God  bless  him  for
it;  he  was  a  sensible  man,  and  none  of  your  chil-
dren-spoilers ;  he  did  not  intend  to  bring  up  his
children  to  speculate  and  play  at  what  big  rogues
call  financiering,  and  therefore  he  knocked  my  getting
into  debt  into  the  head  at  once,  and  no  mistake.  He
gave  me  a  very  powerful  lecture  upon  getting  into
debt,  and  how  like  it  was  to  stealing,  and  upon  the
way  in  which  people  were  ruined  by  it ;  and  how  a
boy  who  would  owe  a  farthing,  might  one  day  owe
a  hundred  pounds,  and  get  into  prison,  and  bring


58


CH  IRLES  II.  SPCRGEOX.


his  family  to  dis^^race.  It  was  a  lecture  indeed;  I
think  1  can  hear  it  now,  and  can  feel  my  ears  ting-
lino-  at  the  recollection  of  it.  Then  I  was  marched  off
to  the  shop  like  a  deserter  marched  into  barrack,
crying  bitterly  all  down  the  street,  and  feeling  dread-
fully ashamed  because  I  thought  everybody  knew  I
was  in  debt.  The  farthing  was  paid  amid  many  solemn
warnings,  and  the  poor  debtor  was  free,  like  a  bird
let  out  of  a  caee.  How  sweet  it  felt  to  be  out  of
debt.  How  did  my  little  heart  declare  and  vow  that
nothing  should  ever  tempt  me  into  debt  again.  It
was  a  fine  lesson,  and  I  have  never  forgotten  it.  If
all  boys  were  inoculated  with  the  same  doctrine  when
they  were  young,  it  would  be  as  good  as  a  fortune  to
them,  and  save  them  wao^on-loads  of  trouble  in  after
life.  God  bless  my  father,  say  I,  and  send  a  breed  of
such  fathers  into  old  EnMand,  to  save  her  from  beinof
eaten  up  with  villainy,  for  what  with  companies,  and
schemes,  and  paper  money,  the  nation  is  getting  to
be  as  rotten  as  touchwood.

"  Ever  since  that  early  sickening,  I  have  hated  debt
as  Luther  hated  die  Pope,  and  if  I  say  some  fierce
things  about  it,  you  must  not  wonder.  To  keep  debt,
dirt,  and  the  devil  out  of  my  cottacre  has  been  mv
greatest  wish  ever  since  I  set  up  housekeeping  ;  and
akhoueh  the  last  of  the  three  has  sometimes  <^otten  in
by  the  door  or  window,  for  the  old  serpent  will  wrig-
ele  throuorh  the  smallest  crack,  vet,  thanks  to  a  orood
wife,  hard  work,  honesty,  and  scrubbing  brushes,  the
other  two  have  not  crossed  the  threshold.   Debt  is  so


EARLY  ED  OCA  T/t  .V.  5  9

degrading  that  if  I  owed  a  man  a  penny,  I  would  walk
twenty  miles  in  the  depth  of  winter,  to  pay  him,  sooner
than  feel  that  I  was  under  an  oblio;ation.  I  should
be  as  comfortable  with  peas  in  my  shoes,  or  a
hedgehog  in  my  bed,  or  a  snake  up  my  back  as  with
bills  hanging  over  my  head  at  the  grocer's,  and
baker's,  and  the  tailor's.  Poverty  is  hard,  but  debt
is  horrible  ;  a  man  might  as  well  have  a  smoky
house  and  a  scoldinof  wife,  which  are  said  to  be
the  two  worst  evils  of  our  life.  We  may  be  poor  yet
respectable,  which  John  Ploughman  and  wife  hope
they  are,  and  will  be;  but  a  man  in  debt  cannot  even
respect  himself,  and  he  is  sure  to  be  talked  about
by  his  neighbors,  and  that  talk  will  not  be  much  to  his
credit.  Some  persons  appear  to  like  to  be  owing
money;  but  I  would  as  soon  be  a  cat  up  a  chimney
with  the  fire  alight,  or  a  fox  with  the  hounds  at  my
heels,  or  a  hedgehog  on  a  pitchfork,  or  a  mouse
under  an  owl's  claws.  An  honest  man  thinks  a
purse  full  of  other  people's  money  to  be  worse  than
an  empty  one;  he  cannot  bear  to  eat  other  people's
cheese,  wear  other  people's  shirts,  and  walk  about  in
other  people's  shoes  ;  neither  will  he  be  easy  while
his  wife  is  decked  out  in  the  milliner's  bonnets,  and
wears  the  draper's  flannels.  The  jackdaw  in  the
peacock's  feathers  was  soon  plucked,  and  borrowers
will  surely  come  to  poverty — a  poverty  of  the  bitter-
est sort,  because  there  is  shame  in  it."

From    1 841    to    1844  he   attended  that   excellent
school  at  Coldchester  taught  by  a  conscientious  and


6o  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  OX.

able  instructor  who  interested  himself  greatly  in  his
students,  yet  until  near  the  middle  of  1844,  when  he
made-  a  summer  visit  to  his  ori*andfather  at  Stam-
bourne,  there  was  nothing  specially  remarkable
noted  either  by  his  parents  or  his  teacher.

But  the  event  of  that  summer,  of  which  an  ex-
tended account  will  be  made  in  the  next  chapter  and
which  partakes  so  strongly  of  the  miraculous,  appears
to  have  made  an  entire  chancre  in  his  mental  consti-
tution  and  in  his  ambitions.  It  is  possible  that  we
know  very  much  more  concerning  his  life  from  that
special  period  on,  because  his  family  and  friends
began  at  that  point  to  expect  greater  things  of  him,
and  consequently  did  notice  more  closely  his  charac-
teristics and  doinofs.

In  1844  when  he  was  ten  years  of  age  he  had  pro-
gressed favorably  in  writing,  reading,  arithmetic,  and
spelling.  He  had  also  begun  the  study  of  the  Greek
orrammar  and  Latin  o^rammar  and  received  some
lessons  in  philosophy.  But  he  never  became  in
school  an  expert  scholar  in  the  ancient  languages,
although  he  afterward  grave  considerable  attention
to  New  Testament  Greek  and  Hebrew  at  such  odd
times  as  he  Could  secure,  in  order  that  he  miorht
ofain  a  better  understandinQ^  of  the  oriorinal  lanQfuatres
in  which  the  Bible  was  written.

In  1846  he  received  a  prize  in  an  examination  and
competition  in  the  school,  although  he  was  several
times  defeated  in  the  same  attempt.  His  classmates
say  that  he  was  characterized  at  that  time  by  unusual


EARL  Y  ED  C\  A  TION.  6 1

practical  observation  among  common  things.  He
saw  what  no  other  boy  appeared  to  notice.  Vakiable
instruction  was  gained  from  the  wayside,  from  the
household  scenes,  from  the  fields  of  grain,
from  the  most  ordinary  circumstances  in  the
annals  of  the  country  people.  Things  dead  to
others  were  alive  to  him.  Inanimate  bodies  were
instinct  with  life.  The  trees  had  their  messages,  the
rocks  their  lessons,  and  the  lurking  wild  beasts  their
proverbs.  He  would  have  obtained  a  thorough  use-
ful education  at  that  time  had  he  lived  in  a
desert.  The  most  helpful  education  often  is  found
in  the  examination  of  every-day  events,  and  in  the
close  scrunity  of  the  most  ordinary  things.

In  1849  ^"^is  father  by  great  sacrifices  secured  him
a  place  in  New  Market  under  care  of  Mr.  Swindell,
who  was  then  a  noted  instructor  and  especially
devoted  to  the  preparation  of  young  men  for  college.

He  was  obliged  to  live  in  a  most  meagre  way  and
was  acutely  conscious  of  the  sacrifice  his  father  and
mother  were  makino-  to  secure  him  an  education.
Hence  he  worked  with  a  devotion  and  persistency
born  more  of  the  heart  than  of  intellectual  ambition.

His  father,  as  we  have  seen,  had  but  little  time  to
devote  to  the  personal  care  or  instruction  of  his
children  because  he  was  in  the  shop  in  the  day  and
preached  evenings  in  some  chapel  or  mission,  and
regularly  on  Sunday  as  the  pastor  at  Tollesbury.
But  the  father  improved  every  opportunity  to  secure
any  interesting  and  good  book  for  the  use  of  his


62  CHARLES  //.  SPURGE  ON-.

children,  and  In  tliat  way  often  placed  In  Charles'
hands  very  valuable  helps  in  securing  a  comprehen-
sive education.  When  his  father  gave  up  business
altogether  and  accepted  the  call  of  the  Congrega-
tional Church  at  Cranbrooke,  Kent,  he  made  use  of
his  added  income  to  secure  several  instructive
periodicals  for  the  use  of  his  sons,  Charles  and
James.  His  fatherly  generosity  was  returned  to  him
a  hundred-fold  throucrh  the  indirect  influence  of
Charles,  when  his  popularity  began  in  London,  for
the  church  at  Fetter  Lane  having  heard  of  tlie  son,
sent  a  unanimous  call  to  the  father  to  come  and  be
their  teacher  In  London,  where  he  remained  until  he
died  In  1876,  In  a  prosperous  and  affectionate  pas-
torate.

It  is,  however, often  rem.arked  that  Mrs.  Spurgeon,
Charles'  mother,  was  as  truly  and  effectively  a  pastor
In  the  Church  and  conofreQ^ation  as  her  husband,  al-
though  slie  was  a  very  quiet  o]d  lady,  yet  she  was
so  continuously  enorao^ed  in  trood  deeds  that  the  sum
of  them  brouorht  to  her  Qrreat  affection  and  to  lier
husband  no  small  honor.  It  was  a  special  comfort
and  delli^fht  to  Charles  tlius  to  have  his  father
and  mother  near  him,  to  which  cam^  an  added  sat-
isfaction when  his  brother  fames  was  also  settled  In
London  as  his  assistant  pastor.

No  comprehensive  view  can  be  obtained  of  the
education  of  Charles  H.  Spurgeon  witliout  carefully
allowing  a  large  space  for  the  silent  influence  of  tlie
example  which  such  a  mother  and  such  a  father  con-


EARL  y  EFl XA  TIOX.  5j

tiniially  presented  for  many  years  after  he  had  actu-
ally become  a  preacher  himself.

Many  of  the  public  charities,  profitable  deeds  and
kindness,  as  well  as  the  great  institutions  which  will
through  the  coming  generations  bear  his  name,  owe
their  origin,  unquestionably,  to  the  instruction  by
precept  and  example  which  he  received  from  his
parents,  independent  of  any  institution  of  learn-
ing- ...

His  school-life  necessarily  held  a  prominent  place

in  his  early  career  and  was  always  so  connected  with
his  religious  training  that  even  on  days  of  examin-
ation when  he  had  an  oration  or  essay  his  subjects
were  generally  upon  some  questions  relating  to  the
Church  or  upon  the  subject  of  missions.

He  has  driven  us  himself  a  verv  clear  account  of
the   causes   which  led   him  to  abandon  the  idea  of    ,
entering  college.     It  will  be  most  interesting  if  given
in  his  own  words:

"Soon  after  I  had  begun,  in  1852,  to  preach  the
Word  in  Waterbeach,  I  was  strongly  advised  by  my
father  and  others  to  enter  Stepney,  now  Regent's
Park  College,  to  prepare  more  fully  for  the  ministry.
Knowino-  that  learnincris  never  an  incumbrance  and
is  often  a  great  means  of  usefulness,  I  felt  inclined
to  avail  mvself  of  the  opportunity  of  attaining  it,  al-
though I  believed  that  I  might  be  useful  without  a
college  training,  I  consented  to  the  opinion  of  friends
that  I  should  be  more  useful  with  it.  Dr.  Angus,
the  tutor  of  the  college,  visited  Cambridge,  where  I


64  CHARLES  H.  SPUR G EON,

then  resided,  and  it  was  arranged  that  we  should
meet  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Macmillan,  the  pubhsher.
Thinking"  and  praying  over  the  matter,  I  entered  the
house  at  exactly  the  time  appointed,  and  was  shown
into  a  room,  where  I  waited  patiently  for  a  couple
of  hours,  feeling  too  nmch  impressed  with  my  own
insiornificance  and  the  greatness  of  the  tutor  from
London  to  venture  to  ring  the  bell  and  inquire  the
cause  of  the  unreasonably  long  delay."

**At  last  patience  having  had  her  perfect  work,  the
bell  was  set  in  motion,  and  on  the  arrival  of  the  ser-
vant, the  waiting  young  man  of  eighteen  was  in-
formed that  the  doctor  had  tarried  in  another  room,
and  could  stop  no  longer,  so  had  gone  off  by  train,
to  London.  The  stupid  girl  had  given  no  informa-
tion to  the  family  that  any  one  called  and  had  been
shown  into  the  drawing-room,  consequently  the
meeting  never  came  about,  although  designed  by
both  parties.  I  was  not  a  little  disappointed  at  the
moment;  but  have  a  thousand  times  since  thanked
the  Lord  very  heartily  for  the  strange  providence
which  forced  my  steps  into  another  and  far  better
path.

"  Still  holdlnor  the  idea  of  enterinor  the  Colleoiate
Institution,  I  thouQ^ht  of  writinof  and  makinor  an  im-
mediate  application  ;  but  that  was  not  to  be.  That
afternoon  having  to  preach  at  a  village  station,
I  walked  in  a  meditatinor  frame  of  mind  over  Mid-
summer  Common,  to  the  little  wooden  bridge  which
leads  to  Chesterton,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Common,


EARLY  EDUCATION.  65

I  was  Startled  by  what  seemed  to  be  a  loud  voice,
but  which  mav  have  been  a  sinoular  illusion  ;  what-
ever  it  was,  ttie  impression  it  made  on  my  mind  was
most  vivid  ;  I  seemed  very  distinctly  to  hear  the
word^.  '  Seekest  thou  great  things  for  thyself,  seek
them  not.'  .  This  led  me  to  look  at  my  position  from
a  different  point  of  view,  and  to  challenge  my  motives
and  intentions.  I  remembered  my  poor  but  loving  peo-
ple to  whom  1  had  ministered,  and  the  souls  which  had
been  given  me  in  my  humble  charge  ;  and  although
at  that  time  I  anticipated  obscurity  and  poverty  as
the  result  of  the  resolve,  yet  1  did  there  and  then  re-
nounce the  offer  of  colle^riate  instruction,  determining
to  abide,  for  a  season,  at  least,  with  my  people,  and
to  remain  preaching  the  Word  so  long  as  I  had
strength  to  do  it.  Had  it  not  been  for  those  words,
I  had  not  been  where  I  am  now.  Althoueh  the
ephod  is  no  longer  worn  by  ministering  priest,  the
Lord  guides  His  people  by  His  wisdom,  and  orders
all  their  paths  in  love  ;  and  in  times  of  perplexity,
by  ways  mysterious  and  remarkable.  He  says  to
them,  '  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it.'  "

A  little  later  he  vvrote,  "  I  have  all  along  had  an
aversion  to  colleore,  and  nothinir  but  a  feelinof  that
I  must  not  consult  myself,  but  Jesus,  could  have
made  me  think  of  it."

"  I  am  more  and  more  oflad  that  I  never  went  to
college.     God  sends  such  sunshine  on  my  path,  such
smiles  of  grace,  that   I  cannot  regret  if  I  have  for-
feited all  my  prospects  for  it.     I  am  conscious  I  held
5    -


(35  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

back  from  the  love  of  God  and  His  cause  ;  and  I  had
rather  be  poor  in  His  service  than  rich  in  my  own."

If  at  the  time  when  he  abandoned  the  idea  of  y^oingr
to  college,  he  had  surrendered  his  intention  to  secure
all  the  education  those  do  obtain  who  go  to  college,
then  the  position  of  those  simple  people  who  assume
that  it  is  just  as  well  to  preach  without  an  education,
would  be  clearly  established.  But  the  fact  remains
that  he  was  none  the  less  determined  to  have  all  the
instruction  possible  and  necessary  to  equip  him  for
his  great  life-work  ;  and  that  he  devoted  himself  to  it
most  assiduously  in  all  his  spare  hours.  Hundreds  of
young  men  have  entered  the  ministry  thinking  they
were  copying  Spurgeon's  example  by  refusing  to
attend  an  institution  of  learning,  or  pursue  at  home
a  systematic  course  of  study,  wholly  forgetting  all
that  other  side  of  his  history  wherein  he  secured  his
advanced  instruction,  but  under  specially  unfavor-
able circumstances.

Perhaps  the  conditions  ought  not  to  be  considered
unfavorable  after  all,  when  w^e  remember  that  the
very  difficulties  he  so  bravely  encountered  only  added
greatly  to  his  mental  power  and  furnished  him  with
the  especially  superior  weapons  in  the  great  diffi-
culties of  his  after  experience.  It  is  never  best  to
secure  an  educadon  easily;  and  scholars  ought
always  to  pursue  those  studies  which  are  the  most
difficult  to  them.  For  the  discipline  of  mind  and  the
enlargement  of  mental  power  is  of  far  more  conse-
quence than  the  collection  of  facts.


EARL  V  ED  UCA  TION.  ^y

Mr.  Edward  Leading,  who  for  a  time  was  Mr.
Spurgeon's  tutor,  declared  that  Charles  could  have
received  the  University  degree  on  examination  at
any  time  after  reaching  manhood,  had  he  chosen  to
make  the  application.  The  college  degree  is  a  label
which  is  often  displaced,  but  which  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's
case  would  have  reflected  more  honor  upon  the
institution  than  it  could  upon  him.


CHAPTER  III.


BEGINNING  OF  MIRACLES.


These  are  miraculous  things,  who  can  hear  them  ?
Strong  meat  is  here  given  which  only  the  believer
or  the  most  careful  student  can  digest.  Please
keep  out  of  these  sacred  precincts  every  one  who
will  not  enter  them  with  reverence,  or  with  a  con-
scientious determination  to  weigh  carefully  the  facts
and  deduce  reasonably  the  simple  truth.  It  is  a
earden  of  roses  to  affectionate  friends  and  a  field
ripe  for  the  harvest  to  the  trusting  believer,  but  a
dangerous  bog  to  the  skeptic.  Yet  a  skeptical  spirit
is  by  no  means  a  crime,  provided  it  be  attended  by
an  investigating  disposition.  It  is  a  curious  thing
that  we  often  find  men  of  great  genius  spending
years  of  time  investigating  the  origin  of  the  universe
and  the  first  causes  of  "  modes  of  motion  "  In  the
development  of  animal  life,  who  would  regard  It  as
foolishness  to  spend  even  a  day  In  looklno-  for  the
first  causes  of  o-reat  moral  and  religious  reforms.

Yet  the  origin  of  important  social  and  religious
changes  and  wonderful  advances  In  civilization,  are
often  traceable  to  a  point  as  Infinitely  small  and  In-
scrutable as  that  which  the  mind  ever  reaches,
which  seeks  for  the  origin  of  life.
63


BEGIXNIXG  OF  MIRACLES.  69

It  requires  just  as  scientific  and  careful  methods
to  trace  the  genesis  of  impulses  or  ideas  as  it  does
to  find  the  first  Uving  celule  in  protoplasmac  ex-
istence.

The  mysterious  influences  which  were  brought  to
bear  in  such  unusual  ways  upon  the  character  and
work  of  Charles  H.  Spurgeon,  deserve  the  closest
scrutiny  of  the  deepest  thinkers  of  the  age.  If  they
could  be  better  understood  than  they  are,  they
would  make  great  changes  in  our  systems  of  educa-
tion, in  our  researches  for  the  philosophy  of  history,
and  in  nearly  every  relation  of  social  and  religious
life.

We  do  not  expect  to  explain  these  things,  but  we
are  trying  to  so  present  them  as  to  win  the  attention  of
greater  minds  to  this  important  matter.  Can  the  mys-
teries be  cleared  up  without  attributing  the  causes  di-
rectly to  miraculously  Divine  interposition  ?  Let  us
consider, first,  the  celebrated^Knill's  Prophecy."  That
is  placed  here  before  the  other  marvelous  incidents
In  Mr.  Spurgeon's  story  simply  because  It  occurred
earliest  In  his  history.  We  will  give  two  accounts
of  the  prophecy,  for,  like  the  New  Testament  records
of  the  Saviour's  life,  they  agree  In  all  essentials,  yet
present  the  facts  from  different  points  of  view.  In
Mr.  C.  M.  Berrlll's  life  of  Rev.  Richard  Knill,  Is
found  the  following  account,  which  Is  copied  ver-
batim :

"  During  his  residence  at  Wotton-under-Edge,  he
visited  the  Rev.  James  Spurgeon,  the  minister  of  an


jQ  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON,

ancient  chapel  at  Stambourne,  Essex  ;  on  walking
in  the  garden  with  his  host's  grandson,  then  about
ten  years  old,  he  felt,  he  afterward  said,  a  prayer-
ful concern  for  the  intelligent  and  inquiring  boy,  sat
with  him  under  a  yew  tree,  put  his  hands  on  his
head,  and  prayed  for  him  ;  telling  him  at  the  close
that  he  believed  '  he  would  love  Jesus  Christ,  and
preach  His  gospel  in  the  largest  chapel  in  the  world.'
When  this  curious  prediction  obtained  something
like  fulfillment  in  the  young  preacher  of  the  Sur-
rey Music  Hall,  both  parties  in  a  short  correspond-
ence, referred  to  the  old  orarden  incident  with  feelinors
akin  to  wonder.  Who  can  trace  the  subtlety  of  such
sueL^estions  on  the  tenor  of  one's  life?  All  will  at
least  be  able  to  appreciate  the  aspiration  prompted
by  these  occurences — O  Lord  God  omnipotent!
Thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory.
Help  me  as  Thy  servant,  to  go  on  laboring  and  re-
joicing. These  are  tokens  of  Thy  favor  too  great  to
be  left  unrecorded.  What  would  thousands  of  gold
and,  silver  be,  compared  to  the  conversion  of  souls
and  the  calling  out  of  preachers  ?"

We  will  now  turn  studiously  to  the  other  account,
given  in  writing  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself.  He
said:  "  When  I  was  a  very  small  boy,  I  was  staying
at  my  grandfather's,  where  I  had  aforetime  spent  my
earliest  days;  and,  as  the  manner  was,  I  read  the
Scriptures  at  family  prayer.  Once  upon  a  time,
when  reading  the  passage  In  the  Book  of  Revela-
tion, which  mentions  the  bottomless  pit,  I  paused  and


begi\n:ng  of  miracles.  ^j


/


said,  'Grandpa,  what  can  this  mean?'  The  answer
was  kind,  but  unsatistaclory :  '  Pooh,  pooh,  child,  go
on.'  The  child  intended,  however,  to  have  an  ex-
planation, and  therefore  selected  the  same  chapter
morning  after  morning,  Sunday  included,  and  al-
ways halted  at  the  same  verse  to  repeat  the  inquiry.
At  length  the  venerable  patriarch  capitulated  at
discretion,  by  saying:  'Well,  dear,  what  is  it  that
puzzles  you  ?'  Now  the  child  had  often  seen  baskets
with  very  Irail  bottoms,  which  in  course  of  wear  be-
came bottomless,  and  allowed  the  fruit  placed  there-
in to  fall  upon  the  ground.  Here  then  was  the
puzzle;  if  the  pit  aforesaid  had  no  bottom,  where
would  all  the  people  fall  who  dropped  out  at  its
lower  end? — a  puzzle  which  rather  starth  d  tlie  pro-
priety of  family  worship,  and  had  to  be  laid  aside  for
explanation  at  a  more  convenient  season.  Ques-
tions of  the  like  simple  and  natural  character  would
frequently  break  up  into  paragraphs  at  tlie  lamily
Bible-reading,  and  had  there  not  -been  a  world
of  love  and  license  allowed  to  the  inquisitive  reader,
he  would  have  soon  been  deposed  from  his  office.
As  it  was,  the  Scriptures  w^ere  not  very  badly  ren-
dered, and  were  probably  quite  as  interesting  as  if
they  had  not  been  interspersed  with  original  and
curious  inquiries.

"  On  one  of  these  occasions,  Mr.  Knill,  whose  name
is  a  household  w^ord,  whose  memory  is  precious  to
thousands  at  home  and  abroad,  stayed  at  the  minister's
house  on  Friday,  in   readiness  to  preach  at  Stam-


J 2  CHARLES  n.  SPUKGEON.


bourne  for  the  London  Missionary  Society  on  the
following  Sunday.  He  never  looked  in  a  young  face
without  yearning  to  impart  some  spiritual  gift.  He
was  all  love,  kindness,  earnestness,  and  warmth,  and
coveted  the  souls  ot  men  as  misers  desire  the  eold
their  hearts  pine  for.  He  heard  the  boy  read  and
commended  ;  a  little  judicious  praise  is  the  sure  way
to  a  young  heart.  An  agreement  was  made  with
the  lad  that  on  the  next  morning,  Saturday,  he
should  show  Mr.  Knill  over  the  garden,  and  take
him  for  a  walk  before  breakfast;  a  task  so  Hatterlnor
to  juvenile  self-importance  was  sure  to  be  readily
entered  upon.  There  was  a  tap  at  the  door,  and
the  child  was  soon  out  of  bed  and  in  the  c^arden
with  his  new  friend,  who  won  his  heart  in  no  time  by
pleasing  stories  and  kind  words,  and  giving  him  a
chance  to  communicate  in  return.  The  talk  was  all
about  Jesus,  and  the  pleasantness  of  loving  Him.
Nor  was  it  mere  talk  ;  there  was  pleading  too.  Into
the  great  yew  arbor,  cut  Into  the  shape  of  a  sugar  loaf,
both  went,  and  the  soul-winner  knelt  down ;  with  his
arms  around  the  youthful  neck,  he  poured  out  vehe-
ment intercession  for  the  salvation  of  the  lad.  The
next  morning  witnessed  the  same  instruction  and  sup-
plication, and  the  next  also,  while  all  day  long  the  pair
were  never  far  apart,  and  never  out  of  each  other's
thoughts.  Tlie  mission  sermons  were  preached  in
the  old  Puritan  meetinof-house,  and  the  man  of  God
was  called  to  go  to  the  next  halting  place  in  his
tour  as  deputation  for  the  Society.     But  he  did  not


BEGJNNIXG  OF  MIRACLES.


73


leave  until  he  had  uttered  a  most  remarkable  pro-
phecy. After  even  more  earnest  prayer  with  his
little  protege,  he  appeared  to  have  a  burden  on  his
mind,  and  lie  could  not  tro  till  he  had  eased  himself
of  it.  In  after  years  he  was  heard  to  say  that  he  felt
a  singular  interest  in  me,  and  an  earnest  expectation
for  which  he  could  not  account.  Calling  the  family
together,  he  took  me  on  his  knee,  and  I  distinctly
remember  his  saying,  '  I  do  not  know  how  it  is,  but
/  feel  a  solemn  presentiment  that  this  chitd  will
preach  the  gospel  to  tho2csands,  and  God  will  bless
him  to  many  souls.  So  sure  am  I  of  this  that  when
my  little  man  preaches  in  Rowland  Hill's  chapel,  as
he  will  do  one  day,  I  should  like  him  to  promise  me
that  he  will  give  out  the  hymn  commencing, —

"  '  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way,
iiis  wonders  to  perform/  "

"This  promise  was  of  course  made,  and  was
followed  by  another,  namely,  that  at  his  express
desire  I  would  learn  the  hymn  in  question  and  think
of  what  he  had  said."

"  The  prophetic  declaration  w^as  fulfilled.  When
I  had  the  pleasure  of  preaching  the  Word  of  Life
in  Surrey  Chapel,  and  also  when  I  preached  in
Mr.  Hill's  first  pulpit  at  Wotten-under-Edge,  the
hymn  was  sung  in  both  places.  Did  the  w-ords  of
Mr.  Knill  help  to  bring  about  their  own  fulfillment?
I  think  so.  I  believed  them,  and  looked  forward  to
the  time  when  I  should   preach  the  Word.     I   lelt


74  CHARLES  //.  SPURGEON.

very  powerfully  that  no  unconverted  person  might
dare  to  enter  the  ministry.  This  made  me  the  more
intent  on  seeking  salvation,  and  more  hopeful  of  it;
and  when  by  grace  I  was  enabled  to  cast  myself  on
the  Saviour's  love,  it  was  not  long  before  my  mouth
began  to  speak  of  His  redemption.  How  came
that  sober-minded  minister  to  speak  thus  to  and  of
one  into  whose  future  God  alone  could  see?  How
came  it  that  he  lived  to  rejoice  with  his  younger
brother  in  the  truth  of  all  he  had  spoken  ?  The
answer  is  plain.  But  mark  one  particular  lesson  ;
would  to  God  that  we  were  all  as  wise  as  Richard
Knill  in  habitually  sowing  beside  all  waters.  Mr.
KnlU  might  very  naturally  have  left  the  minister's
little  grandson  on  the  plea  that  he  had  other  duties
of  more  Importance  than  praying  with  children  ;  and
yet  who  shall  say  that  he  did  not  effect  as  much  by
that  simple  act  of  humble  ministry  as  by  dozens  of
sermons  addressed  to  crowded  audiences  ?  To  me
his  tenderness  In  conslderinir  the  little  one  was
fraught  with  everlasting  consequences,  and  I  must
ever  feel  that  his  time  was  well  laid  out."

It  will  be  noticed  that  there  is  no  necessary  dis-
crepancy between  these  two  accounts,  although  Mr.
Knill  remembered  having  said  "  that  the  boy  would
love  Jesus  Christ  and  preach  His  gospel  in  the
largest  chapel  In  the  world,"  while  Mr.  Spurgeon's
account  of  the  same  incident  declares  :  "  I  distinctly
remember  his  saying,  "  I  do  not  know  how  it  is,  but
I  feel  a  solemn  presentiment  that  this  child  will  preach


B  EG  I NN  NG  OF  MIRACLES.  y^

the.  gospel  to  thousands,  and  God  will  bless  him  to
many  souls.  So  sure  am  I  of  this  that  when  my
little  son  preaches  in  Rowland  Hill's  chapel,  as  he
will  do  one  day,  I  should  like  him  to  promise  me
that  he  will  give  out  the  hymn  commencing  :


"  'God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way,
His  wonders  to  perform.'  "


Mr.  Spurgeon  seems  to  have  given  the  general
import  of  a  lengthy  conversation,  while  Mr.  Knill
presents  the  exact  words  of  a  part  of  his  prophecy.
There  is  no  question  probably  in  any  candid  mind
but  that  this  scene  at  the  arbor  and  this  wonderful
prophecy  are  matters  of  fact.  Assuming  then  that
no  discussion  can  arise  concernino-  the  general  accu-
racy  of  these  reports,  we  have  presented  to  us  the
question:  How  did  Mr.  Knill  then  know  tliat
Charles  would  preach  in  *'  the  largest  chapel  in  the
world?"

It  might  be  said  by  those  who  believe  only  in  the
consecutive  course  of  nature's  cause  and  effect  tliat
Mr.  Knill  may  have  been  unusually  wise,  and  that
he  judged  the  future  by  the  past  or  that  he  only  sur-
mised what  would  be  probable  from  what  he  had
known  in  his  own  experience  of  the  history  of  other
boys.  Or  it  may  be  assumed  by  the  more  skeptical
that  it  was  altogether  a  wild  guess,  such  as  any  per-
son mioht  make  and  would  foro-et  if  it  was  left  un-
fulfilled.  If  this  had  been  the  only  strange  incident
of  the  kind  in  the  life  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  or  even  had


76  CHARLES  H.  SPUAGEO.V.

it  been  the  most  mysterious  incident  connected  with
his  strange  history,  it  might  more  readily  be  passed
by  as  a  mere  coincidence — where  a  shrewd  guess
was  accidentally  as  true  as  prophecy.

But  other  incidents  to  which  reference  is  yet  to
be  made,  present  such  cumulative  evidence  that
there  was  working  at  this  very  time  a  mysterious
spirit  beyond  human  scrutiny,  that  very  few  people
who  believe  in  a  spiritual  agency,  doubt  but  that
Mr.  Knill  was  in  this  a  veritable  prophet.  The
relio^ious  world  will  believe  that  he  was  criven
a  supernatural  foresight,  and  that  a  gleam  of  divine
light  opened  to  him  the  future  of  this  servant  of  the
livinor  God.

Neither  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  or  the  New
Testament,  nor  the  strange  foretelling  of  subsequent
events  on  the  part  of  great  and  saintly  Christian
men  since*  that  day,  can  be  reduced  to  any  system
or  adjusted  to  any  known  law  of  the  natural  or  spirit-
ual world.

That  under  a  certain  inspiration  and  condition
human  beinofs  do  in  a  measure  foresee  cominor  events
is  well  established,  and  needs  no  confirmation  in  this
place.  In  fact,  a  close  consideration  of  the  subject
leads  one  to  the  conclusion  that,  in  a  crreater  or  less
degree,  every  person  has  a  certain  amount  of  lore-
siirht  and  that  such  a  foresiofht  is  not  altoo^ether  the
result  of  previous  experience.

Premonitions  are  among  the  most  common  things
in  daily  life,  and  their  fulfillment  does  not  especially


BEGINNING  OF  MIRACLES.


7


surprise  any  one.  To  be  a  divine  prophet  after  the
manner  ot  Isaiah  or  Agabus  appears  to  be  only  this
that  they  were  given  a  higher  degree  of  foresight  or
what  is  called  "  exalted  spiritual  vision."  But  after
all  discussion  is  passed,  the  whole  matter  assumes
again  the  form  of  a  belief,  and  persons  will  accept
or  reject  it  as  a  matter  of  faith,  and  be  influenced  but
little  by  the  argument.

So  many  persons  who  have  not  the  gift  of  pro-
phecy judge  other  people  by  themselves,  and  deny
that  power  to  every  other  person  ;  yet  it  is  easily
seen  by  the  candid  mind  that  it  is  not  positive  proof
that  the  gift  of  prophecy  is  not  held  by  any  person,
because  another  lacks  the  same  gift.

The  days  of  prophecy  are  not  passed,  neither  is
the  period  of  miracles  closed  ;  yet,  because  the  sub-
ject is  not  understood  and  is  necessarily  in  the
domain  of  the  mysterious,  many  deceivers  have
waxed  bold  and  surrounded  the  thought  with  so
many  shams  and  falsehoods  as  to  cause  good  people
to  greatly  mistrust  even  the  most  clearly  established
facts.  But  it  is  the  part  of  men  of  sense  to  allow  no
prejudice  to  sweep  them  to  absurd  extremes,  or
compel  them  to  take  the  foolish  position  that  be-
cause so  many  men  falsify  no  man  tells  the  truth.

There  under  those  closely  trimmed  yews,  in  the
shady  arbor  of  Stambourne,  God  revealed  Mimself,
and,  for  a  purpose  higher  than  that  which  man  can
fully  comprehend,  impressed  his  servant's  mind  with
the  events  which  must  necessarily  come  to  pass.    -It


^8  CH IRLES  H.  SPURGEON.

was  irrevocably  fixed  that  the  boy  would  grow  to
become  a  man  and  preach  in  the  largest  chapel  in
the  world.  Listeners  to  such  incidents  from  the
mouth  of  men  whose  life,  and  whose  words  have
ever  been  noted  for  truth  and  calm  good  sense
should  attend  reverently  when  the  same  persons  re-
late even  miraculous  thinors.  But  we  are  all  of  us
far  too  much  inclined  to  recyard  such  statements  as
wholly  or  partially  illusionary,  and  so  dismiss  them
with  but  slight  thought,  and  make  no  account  of
them  whatever  in  summing  up  the  causes  or  results
of  a  human  life.  Science  digs  deep,  but  it  has  not
vet  thrust  its  shovel  low  enoucrh  to  unsettle  the
foundation  of  things,  nor  has  any  philosopher  been
able  to  present  by  the  law  of  material  things  a  com-
prehensive, conclusive  reason  for  the  most  ordinary
events.

We  are  strangers  after  all,  and  in  a  strano^e  world.
We  surmise  but  do  not  know.  Simple  belief  is
finally  the  sum  of  all  the  results  which  the  most  ana-
lytical mind  secures.  We  believe  Mr.  Knill's  pro-
phecy was  supernatural  ;  so  do  the  many  hundred
thousands  of  living  men  who  knew  Mr.  Spurgeon.
Then  it  reasonably  follows  that  while  many  doubters
will  not  accept  the  conclusions  we  draw  as  infallibly
proven,  yet  we  do  believe  Charles  was  then  selected
of  God  as  a  special  aposde  to  do  a  definite  religious
work.

We  will  look  back  again  to  the  experience  related
in  the  last  chapter  concerning  Mr.  Spurgeon's  decis-


BEGINNING  OF  MIRACLES.  yg

Ion  to  go  on  with  his  preaching,  without  a  college
education.  In  that  it  will  be  seen  that  he  stated,
"  That  afternoon  having  to  preach  at  a  village
station,  I  walked  slowly  in  a  meditating  frame  of
mind,  over  Midsummer  Common,  to  the  little  wooden
bridge  which  leads  to  Chesterton,  and  in  the  midst
of  the  Common  I  was  startled  by  what  seemed  to
me  to  be  a  loud  voice,  but  which  may  have  been  a
singular  illusion;  whatever  it  was,  the  impression
it  made  on  my  mind  was  most  vivid  ;  I  seemed  very
distinctly  to  hear  the  words,  '  Seekest  thou  great
things  for  thyself,  seek  them  not  !'  This  led  me  to
look  at  my  position  from  a  different  point  of  view,
and  to  challenge  my  motives  and  intentions."

This  experience  reminds  one  very  strongly  of  the
"Genius"  of  Plato.  He  is  said  by  the  classical  his-
torian to  have  heard  a  voice  suoraestinor  to  him
which  way  he  should  go,  and  the  Ideas  it  would  be
wise  to  adopt.

Many  persons  have  trusted  the  record  and  de-
clared their  belief  that  Plato  did  actually  hear  some
voice  which  was  superhuman,  or  which,  if  not,  was
an  impression  beyond  the  understanding  of  natural
philosophers.  But  the  greater  number  of  classical
scholars  have  assumed  at  once,  without  Investi-
gation, that  Plato's  Genius  was  an  Imaginary
creature,  and  that  the  voice  w^as  only  heard  "echo-
ing in  his  soul."  Yet  it  is  clearly  Impossible  to
prove  the  negative  In  this  case  and  place  beyond
controversy  or  doubt   the  theory  that  Plato  could


gQ  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

not  have  heard  any  communication  save  that  of  the
voice  of  some  living-  man.  But  many  superstitious
people  have  drawn  their  own  extreme  conclusions,
and  some  of  them  by  their  vt:ry  absurdity,  have
driven  minds  away  from  that  careful  Investigation
which  it  is  at  least  reasonable  to  orive  to  a  matter  of
this  kind.

That  the  Apostle  Paul  heard  a  voice  when  on  his
way  to  Damascus  has  sometimes  been  denied  by
most  profound  theologians,  and  the  whole  scene  ex-
plained as  being  an  inner  impression,  made  out-
wardly from  the  soul,  rather  than  inwardly  from  any
external  shining  light.  Such  Is  the  Interpretation
put  upon  the  voice  heard  at  Christ's  Baptism,  and
heard  when  the  Greeks  in  the  Temple  said  "it
thundered."

But  that  theory  explains  nothing.  It  is  no  less
supernatural  or  wonderful  even  if  that  Interpretation
were  correct.  But  the  millions  of  Christians  who
take  the  Bible  to  be  the  spiritual  word  of  God  and
an  infallible  euide  to  heaven,  believe  that  Paul  heard
a  real  voice,  and  they  believe  it  was  the  voice  of
Jesus  the  Christ.

Auofustine  heard  stranore  voices.  Luther  heard
supernatural  voices.  But  their  historians  and  phi-
losophers have  never  come  to  any  clear  decision
whether  the  voices  they  heard  were  imaginary  or
real.

Thousands  of  other  Christians  have  related  how,
at  their  conversion  or  at  other  times,  messai^es  have


Spurgeon  at  the  Age  of  Nineteen.


utmti^mmmv  — i  ^«'iM»d»*i


:e  sew  yofk


I


BEGINNING  OF  MIRACLES.  83

come  to  them  which  seemed  to  be  spoken  in  tones  of
a  human  voice,  and  which  turned  the  whole  current  of
their  Hves  into  a  channel  toward  which  no  previous
application  of  the  "law  of  association  of  ideas"
would  lead  them.  We  would  teach  no  superstition,
nor  advocate  the  trustworthiness  of  strange  impulses
nor  approve  of  the  hallucinations  which  come  to
minds  often  more  or  less  unbalanced.  But  with
calmness  and  conservatism,  and  yet  with  firmness  in
the  right  as  God  gives  us  to  see  the  right,  let  us
frankly  face  this  question,  Did  Mr.  Spurgeon  hear
a  voice,  or  did  he  not?

The  great  profit  to  be  obtained  in  the  study  6f
such  a  matter  is  that  it  prevents  thoughtful  minds
from  sweeping  into  that  materialistic  condition
which  leads  them  to  trust  more  to  the  sectarian
bigotry  of  some  modern  scientists  than  to  the
eternal  truth  of  revelation,  or  the  judgment  of  good
common  sense.

On  the  other  hand,  examination  will  tend  to  pre-
vent the  acceptance  of  wild  and  reckless  conclusions
concerning  such  matters,  and  offset  the  foolish  "  inspi-
rations" which  have  led  astray  so  many  weak  Chris-
tians in  these  later  years.

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  unquestionably  a  man  of  strict
integrity,  he  would  not  intentionally  misrepresent
the  slightest  circumstance  in  connection  with  any
event,  and  the  logical  conclusion  to  which  he  came
concerning  the  voice  he  heard  at  Midsummer  Com-
mon, is  one  of  great  importance  to  the  Christian  world.
6


§4  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

He  said  "  which  may  have  been  a  singular  illusion.'*
He  does  not  venture  to  assert  the  supernatural.
He  might  be  mistaken  as  to  the  origin  of  the  voice,
But  the  same  impression  was  received  by  his  mind,
which  human  lanoruaofe  makes  throuorh  vibration
in  the  ear.  It  would  require  in  order  to  truth-
fully deny  that  any  real  voice  was  heard,  that
the  person  denying  it  should  have  infinite  knowl-
edge. For  he  who  says  that  such  a  thing  could  not
occur,  thereby  claims  to  be  acquainted  with  all  the
laws  of  nature,  and  above  nature,  and  that  he  is  so
fully  able  to  measure  their  powers  and  possible  com-
binations as  to  mathematically  figure  out  of  all  the  in-
finite possibilities  the  impossibility  of  such  an  event.

Any  person  could  declare  that  he  did  not  believe
it,  and  might  be  truthful  in  his  statement.  But  he
who  asserts  that  such  a  thing  is  actually  impossible
assumes  a  divinity  of  knowledge  which  is  sublimely
absurd.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  so  many  voices  are
said  to  have  been  heard  by  those  who  are  wholly  un-
trustworthy in  other  matters  and  so  many  of  them
have  been  used  to  prop  up  so  many  of  the  most  silly
superstitions  that  it  is  reasonably  difficult  for  the
superficial  thinker  to  decide  that  any  real  voice  of
this  kind  is  ever  heard  in  modern  years.

The  sanctified  common  sense  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  is
beautifully  shown  in  his  expression,  given  in  his  ac-
count, that  the  loud  voice  "  may  have  been  a  singular
illusion."  Such  illusions  are  not  rare  and  certainly
are  to  be  most  carefully  investigated    before  being


BEGINNING  OF  MIRACLES.  g^

accepted  as  established  truth.  But  it  is  certain  that
Mr.  Spurgeon  evidently  believed  that  it  was  the
voice  of  God.  At  all  events,  he  allowed  it  to  guide
him  to  the  most  important  decision  of  his  life  and
ever  after  kept  the  saying  of  that  voice  vividly
before  his  mind  to  determine  his  actions  in  situations
of  great  difficulty.

As  Henry  Ward  Beecher  said  of  Abraham  Lin-
coln's belief  in  signs,  "  even  if  it  was  an  illusion,  it  was
still  thevoice  of  God."  What  difference  does  itmake
if  the  right  impression  is  made  upon  the  mind,
whether  it  be  the  result  of  a  trumpet  blast,  or  of  a
still  small  voice  whispering  In  the  soul  ?  God  is  not
confined  to  any  particular  agency  In  making  .His
chosen  communications  ;  and  however  weak  may  be
our  speculations  concerning  the  channel  through
which  God  conveys  His  divine  will,  it  is  perhaps
enouo^h  for  us  to  know  that  He  does  communicate
with  His  own  in  some  way,  and  Impresses  upon  them
His  will  In  a  manner  akin  to  that  which  He  used
with  the  saints  of  old.

Impressions  of  great  variety  are  continually  being
made  upon  the  wicked,  going  into  deeper  wrong,
which  to  the  Christian  are  clearly  warnings  from
a  great  and  good  spirit,  which  would  turn  them
back  from  their  evil  ways,  before  their  souls
are  utterly  lost.  And  in  the  same  way,  spiritual
voices,  though  perhaps  using  no  mechanical  instru-
ment for  expression,  are  continually  encouraging  the
soul  which  is  struggling  after  the  truth,  and  are  help-


S6  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

ing  upward  by  mysterious  suggestions  the  servant
of  God  who  would  know  more  of  Christ  and  be
better  fitted  to  perform  His  will.

If  we  were  to  surrender  this  position,  we  would
suffer  complete  defeat  as  defenders  of  the  Christian
principles  that  God  still  saves  and  impels  by  His
Holy  Spirit.

We  declare  unhesitatingly  our  unshaken  belief  In
the  fact  that  the  voice  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  heard  at
that  time  was  the  voice  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.
We  also  declare,  that  it  must  have  been  the  same
Divine  agency  which  afterward  followed  him  from
that  point  on,  and  in  the  most  miraculous  ways
answered  his  prayers  and  furthered  his  efforts  for
the  salvation  of  men.

Only  a  few  of  the  uncounted  number  of  singular
events  in  his  history  are  probably  known  to  any
writer.  And  if  they  all  could  be  known,  it  would  be
impossible  to  write  the  books  which  should  contain
their  narration.  We  will  gather  here  as  many  as
we  feel  are  perfectly  trustworthy,  being  sadly  con-
scious, however,  of  the  fact  that  any  collection  of  the
Providential  visitations  of  God  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  and
his  work  will  be  a  hint  to  the  great  aggregation  of
unwritten  events.  We  believe  in  the  miraculous
agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit  In  connection  with  the
conversion  of  every  soul  which  he  saw  turn  from  the
world  unto  God.  No  known  natural  law  accounts
for  the  revolution  in  disposition  and  the  change  In  re-
lation to  God  and  Godly  things,  which  comes  to  the


BEGINNING  OF  MIRACLES.  8/

heart  that   surrenders   itself  to   a   belief  in   Jesus
the  Christ.

Accompanying  this  religious  work  he  found,  as
many  other  servants  of  Christ  have  found,  that  there
are  ever  at  work  mysterious,  unaccountable,  provi-
dential causes  leading  to  the  definite  result.  Our
religious  libraries  are  filled  with  books  giving  ac-
counts of  marvelous  answers  to  prayer,  of  the  most
strange  turning^  about  in  the  lives  of  bad  men,  of
the  building  of  churches,  the  beginnings  of  missions,
of  power  in  revivals,  healing  of  diseases  and  the
hundred  other  transformations  of  human  character  or
human  circumstances.  All  of  these  help  to  confirm
the  idea  that  Mr.  Spurgeon's  life  was  one  specially
led  by  a  supernatural  spirit.  Yet  so  interwoven
with  this  record  are  the  natural  results  of  the  well-
understood  human  agencies  that  no  one  may  hope
to  draw  a  clear  line  of  division  and  say  this  was
supernatural,  and  that  was  natural.

How  difficult  then  is  the  task  of  the  historian,
working  in  human  limitations,  lacking  the  infallibility
of  divine  inspiration.  The  writer  can  at  the  best,
only  touch  upon  the  facts  here  and  there,  catching
but  occasional  glimpses  of  the  plan  which  Mr.
Spurgeon  lived  out,  the  main  features  of  which  are
hidden  with  God.  Only  when  the  books  are  opened
beyond  this  present  existence,  can  there  be  pre-
sented a  true  record  of  all  the  supernatural  Influences
which  worked  with  the  natural  ones  in  the  making
up  of  his  romantic  career.


CHAPTER  IV.

EARLY    RELIGIOUS    EXPERIENCES.

We  must  tread  again  the  border-land  of  the  known
and  the  unknown,  as  we  try  to  present  a  truthful
narration  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  earHest  reHgious  Hfe.
It  was  as  remarkable  and  startling  as  many  of  the
other  things  in  his  strange  career.  Yet  it  may  be
that  we  ought  not  to  regard  his  religious  experiences
as  bemnninof  at  the  time  when  he  thouo-ht  he  was
converted ;  for  he  was  a  child  of  religious  parents
and  was  ever  under  the  influence  of  Biblical
teachings,  from  the  day  he  began  to  learn  any-
thing.

The  Church  and  Sabbath-school  were  as  familiar
to  him  as  was  his  grandfather's  sitting-room.  The
Bible  was  a  book  which  was  kept  in  mind  by  con-
tinual quotation  and  by  daily  reading,  both  morning
and  evening.  Thus  he  lived  through  all  his  early
years  in  the  atmosphere  of  a  religious  and  holy
home-life.  A  hatred  of  evil  and  a  love  for  the  good
were  Inculcated  by  teachers  and  friends,  both  In
precept  and  example,  until  It  must  have  been  a  kind
of  second  nature  to  him  to  be  religious  in  an  ex-
ternal  sense.

He  has  told  us  how  the  Pilgrirns  Progress  and
88


EARLY  RELIGIOUS  EXPERIENCES.  89

the  Lives  of  the  Martyrs  were  among  the  first
books  that  he  ever  read,  and  the  impression  they
made  upon  his  thoughts  and  feeHngs  never  disap-
peared.

He  Hved  in  the  Church  as  some  boys  do  on  the
streets,  he  was  as  much  at  home  with  the  Sunday-
school  classes  and  books  as  some  boys  are  with
the  billiard-rooms  and  dram-shops.  If  careful  and
conscientious  training  could  ever  be  of  advantage
to  a  child,  he  could  not  fail  to  have  been  a  good
boy.

While  he  does  not  appear  to  have  been  preco-
ciously intellectual,  he  does  appear  to  have  been
precociously  religious.

His  grandfather  never  wearied  of  telling  the  inci-
dents connected  with  Charles' evangelistic  tendencies,
and  with  great  delight  used  to  relate  how  the  boy
once  went  into  an  ale-house  on  an  errand,  and  hav-
ing found  there,  drinking  and  carousing,  a  member
of  the  church,  indignantly  rebuked  him  by  exclaiming,
*'  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah  !"  Then,  too,  he  in-
herited that  deep  emotional  nature,  that  large  phil-
anthropic spirit,  which  would  lead  him  to  most  ten-
derly sympathize  with  sorrow  and  pain,  and  would
arouse  him  to  lion  ferocity  to  witness  cruelty  or
injustice.  He  was  an  upright  youth  and  no  hint  of
anything  immoral,  no  suggestion  of  vice  comes  to
us  concerninor  him,  in  all  the  traditions  connected
with  his  early  years.

His  forceful  utterances  from  the  pulpit  were  never


go  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON,

afterward  weakened  by  the  remembrance  of
wrongs  committed  in  his  youth.  He  was  never
compelled  to  meet  in  his  pastoral  duties  or  works
of  mercy  the  bitter  insinuations  which  surround  the
preacher  whose  previous  life  is  a  matter  of  sorrow  or
shame.

Men  often  proclaim,  and  with  an  appearance  of
pride,  that  they  have  descended  to  the  lowest  experi-
ences of  vice  and  debauchery,  and  that  they  have
been  lifted  from  the  horrible  pit  and  the  miry  clay
by  the  especial  and  miraculous  interference  of  God
in  their  behalf.  Many  such  testimonies  seem  to  state
the  truth  ;  but  it  would  appear  as  though  the  man
who  had  never  tasted  evil  nor  committed  an  act  of
which  he  had  reason  to  be  ashamed,  should  praise
God  with  the  loudest  voice  or  with  the  most  sincere
emotion.  For  the  stain  and  scars  of  a  life  once  evil
are  never  erased  beyond  recognition.

A  wasted  life  or  wasted  half  a  life !  How  sad  it
must  be  to  reflect  upon  it  continually^  and  to  think  how
much  more  good  might  have  been  done,  had  relig-
ious life  began  in  childhood,  instead  of  opening  in
volcanic  eruptions  or  in  purifying  thunder-storms.

The  startling  conversions  and  thrilling  experiences
of  which  we  hear,  perhaps  none  too  much,  are  after
all  not  so  much  the  subject  of  praise  or  congratula-
tion as  to  have  led  an  entire  life  under  the  influence
and  in  the  service  of  the  Saviour.  Yet  Mr.  Spur-
geon,  notwithstanding  his  moral  uprightness  of  char-
acter, had  the  same  struora-le  with  Satan,  and  the  sanie


EARL  V  RELIGIO  US  EXPERIENCES,  9 1

turmoil  of  spirit  which  has  characterized  a  large  por-
tion of  the  religious  conversions  recorded  in  the
books.  He  has  told  us  about  it  himself  and  in  lan-
guage so  plain  and  interesting  that  we  will  give  his

statement  here  in  his  own  words,  and  for  conveni-  .

k

ence,  combine  two  different  accounts.  He  was
converted  at  New  Market,  near  Cambridge,  England,
when  he  was  between  fifteen  and  sixteen  years  of
age,  and  while  he  was  attending  school.

He  said :  "  I  can  remember  the  time  when  my
sins  first  stared  me  in  the  face.  I  thought  myself  to
be  most  accursed  of  all  men.  I  had  not  committed
any  very  great  open  transgressions  against  God  ;  but
I  recollected  that  I  had  been  well  trained  and  tutored,
and  I  thought  my  sins  were  thus  greater  than  other
people's.  I  cried  to  God  to  have  mercy,  but  I  feared
that  He  would  not  pardon  me.  Month  after  month
I  cried  to  God,  but  He  did  not  hear  me,  and  I  knew
not  what  it  was  to  be  saved.  Sometimes  I  was  so
weary  of  the  world  that  I  desired  to  die  ;  but  then  I
recollected  that  there  was  a  worse  world  after  this,
and  that  it  would  be  an  ill  matter  to  rush  be-
fore my  Maker  unprepared.  At  times  I  wickedly
thought  God  a  most  heartless  tyrant,  because  He  did
not  answer  my  prayer  ;  and  then  at  others  I  thought,
'  I  deserve  His  displeasure  ;  if  He  sends  me  to  hell.
He  will  be  just.'  But  I  remember  the  hour  when  I
stepped  into  a  place  of  worship,  and  saw  a  tall  thin
man  in  the  pulpit;  I  have  never  seen  him  from  that
day,  and   probably  never  shall   until   we  meet   in


92  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

heaven.  He  opened  the  Bible  and  read  in  a  feeble
voice,  'Look  unto  me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends
of  the  earth ;  for  I  am  God,  and  beside  me  there  is
none  else.'  Ah  !  thought  I,  I  am  one  of  the  ends  of
the  earth ;  and  then  turning  around,  and  fixing  his  gaze
on  me,  as  if  he  knew  me,  the  minister  said :  '  Look,
look,  look  ! '  Why,  I  thought  I  had  a  great  deal  to
do,  but  I  found  it  was  only  to  look.  I  thought  I  had
a  garment  to  spin  out  for  myself;  but  I  found  that
if  I  looked,  Christ  would  give  me  a  garment.  Look,
sinner ;  that  is  the  way  to  be  saved.  Look  unto
Him,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth,  and  be  saved."  *  *  *
"  I  will  tell  you  how  I,  myself,  was  brought  to  the
knowledge  of  this  truth.  It  may  happen  the  telling
of  that  will  bring  some  one  else  to  Christ.  It  pleased
God  in  my  childhood  to  convince  me  of  sin.  I  lived  a
miserable  creature,  finding  no  hope,  no  comfort,
thinking  that  surely  God  would  never  save  me.  At
last  the  worst  came  to  worst — I  was  miserable ;  I
could  scarcely  do  anything.  My  heart  was  broken
in  pieces.  Six  months  did  I  pray,  prayed  agoniz-
ingly with  all  my  heart,  and  never  had  an  answer.
I  resolved  that  in  the  town  where  I  lived  I  would
visit  every  place  of  worship  in  order  to  find  out  the
way  of  salvation.  I  felt  I  was  willing  to  do  anything
and  be  anything,  if  God  would  only  forgive  me.  I
set  off  determined  to  visit  the  chapels,  and  I  went
to  all  the  places  of  worship  ;  and  though  I  dearly
venerate  the  men  who  occupy  those  pulpits  now,
and  did  so   then,  I  am  bound  to   say  that  I  never


EARLY  RELIGIOUS  EXPERIENCES.  93

heard  them  once  fully  preach  the  gospel.  I  mean
by  that,  they  preached  truth,  great  truths,  many
good  truths  that  were  fitting  to  many  of  their  con-
gregation who  were  spiritually-minded  people  ;  but
what  I  wanted  to  know  was.  How  can  I  get  my  sins
forgiven.  And  they  never  once  told  me  that.  I
wanted  to  know  how  a  poor  sinner,  under  the  sense
of  sin,  might  find  peace  with  God  ;  and  when  I  went
I  heard  a  sermon  on,  '  Be  not  deceived.  God  is
not  mocked,'  which  cut  me  up  worse,  but  did  not
say  how  I  might  escape.  I  went  again  another  day,
and  the  text  was  something  about  the  glories  of  the
righteous ;  nothing  for  poor  me.  I  was  something
like  a  dog  under  the  table,  not  allowed  to  eat  of  the
children's  food.  I  went  time  after  time,  and  I  can
honestly  say,  I  don't  know  that  I  ever  went  without
prayer  to  God,  and  I  am  sure  there  was  not  a  more
attentive  listener  in  all  the  place  than  myself,  for  I
panted  and  longed  to  understand  how  I  might  be
saved.

"  At  last  one  day — it  snowed  so  much  that  I  could
not  go  to  the  place  to  which  I  had  determined  to  go,
and  I  was  obliged  to  stop  on  the  road,  and  it  was  a
blessed  stop  for  me — I  found  rather  an  obscure
street,  and  turned  down  a  court,  and  there  was  a  lit-
tle chapel.  I  wanted  to  go  somewhere,  but  I  did  not
know  this  place.  It  was  the  primitive  Methodists'
chapel.  I  had  heard  of  these  people  from  many,
and  how  they  sang  so  loudly  that  they  made  peo-
ple's heads  ache  ;  but  that  did  not  matter.    I  wanted


94  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

to  know  how  I  might  be  saved,  and  if  they  made  my
head  ache  ever  so  hard  I  did  not  care.  So  sitting
down,  the  service  went  on,  but  no  preacher  came.
At  last  a  very  thin  looking  man,  Rev.  Robert  Eaglen,
came  into  the  pulpit  and  opened  his  Bible  and  read
these  words :  *  Look  unto  me  and  be  ye  saved,  all
ye  ends  of  the  earth.'  Just  setting  his  eyes  upon  me,
as  if  he  knew  me  all  by  heart,  he  said :  '  Young  man
you  are  in  trouble.'  Well,  I  was,  sure  enough.
Said  he,  *you  will  never  get  out  of  it  unless  you  look
to  Christ.'  And  then  lifting  up  his  hands  he  cried
out,  as  I  think  only  a  Primitive  Methodist  could  do,
*Look,  look,  look.'  *  It  is  only  look,'  said  he.  I  saw
at  once  the  way  of  salvation.  Oh!  how  I  did  leap
for  joy  on  that  moment.  I  know  not  what  else  he
said.  I  did  not  take  much  notice  of  that — I  was  so
possessed  with  that  one  thought.  Like  as  when  the
brazen  serpent  was  lifted  up,  they  only  looked  and
were  healed.  I  had  been  waiting  to  do  fifty  things,
but  when  I  heard  this  word,  '  look,'  what  a  charming
word  it  seemed  to  me.  Oh!  I  looked  until  I  could
almost  have  looked  my  eyes  away,  and  in  heaven
I  will  look  on  still  in  my  joy  unutterable.

"  I  now  think  I  am  bound  never  to  preach  a  ser-
mon without  preaching  to  sinners.  I  do  think  that
a  minister  who  can  preach  a  sermon  without  ad-
dressing sinners  does  not  know  how  to  preach."

The  chancre  of  heart  and  faith  which  this  incident
marks  was  so  great,  notwithstanding  his  previous
unimpeachable  character,  that  all  his  friends  and  ac-


EARL  Y  RELIGIO  US  EXPERIENCES.  9^

quaintances  who  had  not  heard  of  his  conversion,
recognized  the  great  transformation.  Life  took  upon
itself  a  new  robe.  His  entire  ambition  concentrated
in  the  thought  of  doing  good.  He  had  decided  to
be  a  Christian  teacher,  and  felt  that  he  could  not
possibly  keep  back  the  message,  even  should  he
bring  all  his  naturally  stubborn  disposition  to  bear
upon  the  repression.  An  irresistible  desire  to  pro-
claim the  new  gospel  he  had  found  impelled  him  on
with  such  speed  that  he  had  no  opportunity  to  even
look  back.  The  very  next  day  found  him  visiting
the  poor  and  talking  to  his  classmates  concerning
their  religious  life,  and  heard  him  declare  to  his
teacher,  '^  it  is  all  settled,  I  must  preach  the  gospel
of  Christ."  Yet  he  was  by  disposition  very  timid,
had  always  trembled  at  the  sound  of  his  own  voice
in  public  declamation,  and  up  to  that  period  had
shown  a  discouraging  disposition  to  stutter  and
choke  when  suddenly  called  upon  to  answer  a
question  or  make  a  remark  in  a  public  assembly.
But  nearly  all  that  timidity  disappeared  before  his
very  first  experience  as  a  preacher.

It  is  a  matter  of  no  little  surprise  to  many  early
friends  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  that  he  should  have  de-
parted from  the  faith  of  his  fathers'  and  instead  of
uniting  with  the  Congregational  body,  should  enter
into  the  fellowship  of  a  Baptist  Church.  It  is  said
that  his  decision  to  enter  the  Baptist  Church  was
caused  entirely  by  his  own    independent   conscien-


^6  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON,

tious  convictions  concerning  the  principles  of  the
Church  and  the  form  of  baptism.  He  read  his  Bible
with  orreat  care,  and  insisted  with  crreat  enthusiasm
on  literally  complying,  as  far  as  possible,  with  the
actual  example  of  the  Saviour.  He  had  been  drawn
into  association  with  some  students  connected  with
the  Baptist  Church  at  Isleham  and  so  had  occasion-
ally attended  worship  in  that  church.  When  he  de-
cided that  it  was  his  duty  to  unite  with  that  denom-
ination he  pleaded  most  strenuously  with  his  father
and  mother  and  grandfather  for  their  consent.  They
were,  in.  no  sense,  bigoted  sectarians,  and  when  they
found  his  heart  so  strongly  fixed  upon  that  Church,
they  withdrew  their  first  objections  and  bid  him
heartily  "  God  speed."

He  was  baptized  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Cantlow,  of
Isleham  Baptist  Church,  May  3d,  1851,  celebrating
at  the  same  time  as  he  often  afterward  claimed,  the
birthday  of  his  mother.  The  Isleham  pastor  was
one  of  the  old  vigorously  protestant  Baptist  teachers
who  insisted  most  persistently  in  declaring  the  prin-
ciple that  "  every  person  shall  have  the  right  and
ought  to  exercise  it,  to  worship  God  according  to  the
dictates  of  his  own  enliorhtened  conscience."

The  remark  of  his  mother  concerning  his  baptism
and  his  reply  has  been  running  through  the  news-
papers for  a  great  many  years,  wherein  she  said,  "  I
have  often  prayed  the  Lord  that  you  might  be  con-
verted, but  never    asked  Him  that  you  might  be  a


BARLY  RELIGIOUS  EXPERIENCES.  gy

Baptist."  To  which  Charles  repHed  that  God  had
answered  her  prayer  with  His  usual  bounty,  and  had
"  ofiven  her  more  than  she  had  asked."

Connected  with  the  church  at  Isleham  was  a  young
schoolmate  who  was  also  closely  connected  with  the
"  lay  preachers'  association  "of  the  Baptist  Church  in
Cambrido^e.  Throuorh  him  Charles  was  introduced
to  the  pastor  and  some  of  the  deacons  of  the  Cam-
bridge Church.  He  joined  that  church  soon  after
his  baptism,  either  by  letter  from  the  Isleham  Church
or  upon  a  letter  of  commendation  from  the  Rev.
Mr.  Cantlow.  His  purpose  in  uniting  with  the
church  at  Cambridge  seems  to  have  been  specially
to  identify  himself  with  the  "  lay  preachers'  associa-
tion," which  was  an  organization  of  young  men  who
devoted  their  Sabbaths  largely  to  missionary  and  per-
sonal Christian  work.  There  he  found  most  con-
genial companionship  and  very  agreeable  religious
employment,  entering  Into  it  with  all  his  heart  and
soul  and  winning  the  hearts  of  many  of  the  poor  and
the  sinful.  It  was  In  connection  with  this  associa-
tion that  he  preached  his  first  sermon.  It  was
entirely  an  Impromptu  address,  about  which  he  had
but  a  few  minutes  to  think  In  advance.  He  entered
the  pulpit  a  boy,  dressed  In  a  round  jacket  and  a
broad  turned-down  collar.  Perhaps  it  will  add  to
the  Interest  If  we  would  give  In  his  own  language
the  manner  In  which  the  address  was  thrust  upon
him.

"  I  had  been  asked  to  walk  out  to  the  village  of
7


q8  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

Taversham,  about  four  miles  from  Cambridge,  where
I  then  Hved,  to  accompany  a  young  man  whom  I
supposed  to  be  the  preacher  for  the  evening,  and  on
the  way  I  said  to  him  that  I  trusted  God  would  bless
him  In  his  labors.  '  Oh !  dear,'  said  he,  '  I  never
preached  In  my  life  ;  I  never  thought  of  doing  such
a  thing.  I  was  asked  to  walk  with  you  and  I  sin-
cerely hope  God  will  bless  you  in  your  preaching.'
*  Nay,'  said  I,  '  but  I  never  preached,  and  I  don't
know  that  I  could  do  anydiing  of  the  sort.'  We
walked  together  until  we  came  almost  to  the  place,
mv  inmost  soul  belnor  all  In  a  tremble  as  to  what
would  happen.  When  we  found  the  congregation
assembled,  and  no  one  else  there  to  speak  of  Jesus,
although  I  was  only  sixteen  years  of  age,  I  found
that  was  I  expected  to  preach,  so  I  did  preach."

The  sermon  is  said  by  some  of  those  who  heard  it,
to  have  been  most  truly  amusing,  because  it  was  so
serious,  practical,  and  earnest,  and  given  by  a  mere
boy,  amid  such  dignified  surroundings.  He  was  in
earnest  to  the  verge  of  fanaticism,  and  soon  lost  all
consciousness  of  self,  and  all  embarrassment  on  ac-
count  of  his  age,  and  threw  himself  Into  the  deliv-
ery of  the  message  with  an  abandon  which  to  the
preacher  is  the  keenest,  richest  joy.  Some  of  his
hearers  afterward  compared  his  youthful  appearance
and  his  unaccountable  wisdom  to  the  scene  of  Christ
among  the  doctors,  while  skeptical  or  envious  ones,
said  ''  the  boy  Is  wildly  bold."  He  was  wholly,  un-
reservedly in  earnest,  and  that  covered  a  multitude


a
o

H
H
>
O

W


w


C/2
Id

'o
n
o
z

>
n

w

o

I— I


to

H

W

o

2


543723  A


EARL  V  REL IGIO  US  EXPERIENCES.  \  q  i

of  faults,  and  forced  to  defeat  all  of  his  theological
and  literary  critics.

His  first  practical  Christian  work,  was,  as  a  mat-
ter of  course,  very  largely  among  the  humble  peo-
ple, and  his  first  experience  was  connected  with
the  leadership  of  small  prayer-meetings.  Some  of
these  meetings  did  not  number  more  than,  as  he
said,  *'  he  could  count  on  his  hands,"  and  were  often
held  in  the  kitchen  or  sitting-room  of  some  humble
dwelling.  But  he  was  young,  vigorous,  and  enthu-
siastic and  often  walked  ten  miles  to  attend  a
short  evening  service.  He  removed  his  school  re-
lations from  New  Market  to  Cambridge,  where  his
father  had  employed  a  tutor,  and,  with  his  comrades
of  the  Lay  Preachers'  Association,  took  up  the  most
systematic  course  of  house  visiting,  ascertaining  who
were  Christians,  and  exhorting  most  earnestly  those
who  were  not.  The  boys  connected  with  that  so-
ciety became  very  well  known  in  the  course  of  a  very
few  months,  and  Charles  was  recognized  by  them  all
as  a  leader.  He  was  often  compared  with  Peter  by
his  companions  because  of  his  impulsiveness  and  his
strong  inclination  to  chastise  himself  for  any  neglect
or  seeming  sin.

He  arose  early  with  the  sun,  studied  his  lessons
hard  until  the  hour  for  school,  he  then  remained  in
school  until  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  for  one
year  attended  some  kind  of  religious  service  almost
every  evening  in  the  week,  and  preached  the  gospel
on  Sunday.     His  pulpit  in  the  week  was  sometimes


102  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

a  chair,  at  other  times  a  barrel,  while  frequently  he
stood  in  the  open  road  and  occasionally  he  found
his  way  into  the  pulpits  of  the  smaller  churches.  He
taught  a  Sunday-school  class,  which  soon  grew  out
of  all  proportion  with  the  rest  of  the  school,  but  he
reduced  It  by  urging  the  scholars  to  .go  out  and  be-
come evangelists,  in  the  distribution  of  tracts,  caring
for  the  poor,  .and  praying  for  the  sick.

There  were  two  young  men  connected  with  the
Lay  Preachers'  Association  who  were  far  more  elo-
quent than  he,  but  there  was  a  conspicuous  lack  in
their  character  of  that  impulsive  power,  that  in-
fluence over  the  action  of  others,  that  ability  to  or-
ofanize  them  into  effective  work  which  was  then  and
has  been  his  chief  characteristic  ever  since  that  day.

He  often  volunteered  to  assist  the  children  of  the
village  in  their  studies  at  home,  frequently  making
their  acquaintance  on  the  street  or  at  school,  and
thus  found  his  way  into  the  families  as  a  Christian
evangelist,  to  the  great  delight  of  the  parents  and
to  the  profit  of  the  children.

Religious  work  became  with  him  a  positive  pas-
sion, inspiring  all  his  thought  and  the  object  of  his
entire  ambition.  He  was  bright,  active,  and  at  times
very  witty.  His.  fun  was  exuberant,  natural,  and
contagious.  He  was  often  seen  runnino-  races  with
the  children,  rolling  the  hoop  for  their  amusement,
and  performing  feats  In  youthful  athletics  to  the  sur-
prise and  admiration  of  the  boys  whose  souls  he
desired  to  win  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,


EARL  V  RELIGIOUS  EXPERIENCES.


103


He  studied  his  Bible  constantly,  and  was  often
overheard  repeating  chapters  of  it  by  heart,  that  he
might  so  fasten  them  upon  his  memory  as  to  make
them  indelible  there.

It  appears  that  from  the  very  first  he  was  so  posi-
tively in  earnest  in  the  work  himself  that  he  took
little  time  to  listen  to  the  preaching  of  others.  This
may  in  a  measure  account  for  his  singular  originality,
and  may  have  aided  him  greatly  in  reaching  the
eminence  on  which  he  stood  at  the  time  of  his  death.
If  he  had  been  less  anxious  to  enoraore  at  once  in
some  practical  work,  and  had  spent  more  time  lis-
tening to  the  preachers  of  that  day,  he  would  have
been  inclined  to  copy  their  forms  of  expressions,
their  gestures,  intonations,  or  dress.

But  all  his  life  he  was  so  perpetually  busy  about
something  in  which  his  own  personality  was  needed
that  he  rarely  ever  had  time  to  listen  to  a  sermon  or
address  by  any  other  person.

He  read  sermons,  lectures,  and  books  by  the  hun-
dred, and  thus  secured  the  best  ideas  of  his  time  on
theological  matters.  But  he  copied  no  one,  and
carved  for  himself  such  an  Independent  place  as
an  orator  and  teacher  that  even  his  blunders  and
extravagances  added  greatly  to  his  attractiveness
and  power.  He  had  no  Oxford  airs,  no  aristocratic
affectations,  and  was  often  mentioned  by  those  who
spoke  of  him  as  one  who  was  "  different  from  every
other  man  on  earth."

In  this  way  he  adjusted  himself  to  all  the  circum-


I04


CHARLES  II.  SPURGE  ON.


Stances  in  which  he  was  placed  and  went  directly
toward  the  object  he  had  in  view.  His  language
and  his  entire  appearance  were  the  products  of  his
own  age  and  time,  and  were  adjustable  to  the  variety
of  his  present  needs.  He  lived  in  his  own  time  and
for  his  own  generation,  and  consequently  was  es-
pecially fitted  for  the  personal  and  public  Christian
work  which  he  was  so  anxious  to  perform.

There  are  practical  machinists,  there  are  theoret-
ical machinists,  there  are  theoretical  farmers,  and
there  are  practical  farmers,  even  so  there  are  theo-
retical ministers  and  practical  ministers.  As  the
practical  farmer  and  mechanic  make  all  the  money,
while  the  theorists  spend  it  all,  just  so  the  practical
preacher  wins  all  the  souls,  while  the  theorist  drives
them  away.

He  loved  greatly  to  attend  Sabbath-School  con-
ventions and  anniversaries,  and  while  making  no
pretensions  to  oratory  was  always  called  upon  to
speak  whenever  he  was  present.  He  was  simple  as
a  child,  consequently  the  children  delighted  to  hear
him.  His  fund  of  anecdotes,  traditions,  stories,  and
illustrations  were  positively  inexhaustible.  Every
anecdote  or  description  which  he  read  in  a  periodical
or  a  book  seems  to  have  remained  with  him  subject
to  instant  call.

But  he  was  colloquial  and  often  awkward.  He  did
not  hesitate  to  use  expressive  local  phrases  which
would  be  regarded  by  the  polished  scholars  as  par-
taking altogether   too   largely  of  slang.     But   he


EARL  Y  RELIC  10 US  EXPERIENCES.  105

scrupled  not  to  use  any  sort  of  effective  weapon  in
his  contest  with  evil,  and  hastened  to  throw  to  the
sinkine  sinner  a  window-frame  or  a  cabin  table  in
the  absence  of  handy  life  preservers.  The  effect  of
his  teaching  was  immediately  felt  in  the  entire  vicinity,
to  such  an  extent  that  he  was  called  for  on  every  side
to  pray  with  the  sick  and  counsel  the  dying,  although
he  was  but  a  mere  boy  in  years  or  experience.

In  the  year  1851,  which  was  the  first  year  of  his
preaching  experience,  he  was  invited  to  deliver  an
address  in  the  church  at  Waterbeach,  not  far  from
Cambridge,  and  is  said  to  have  had  less  than  a  dozen
at  his  initial  service.  But  the  Waterbeach  Baptist
Church  was  composed  of  very  poor  people  and  paid  a
salary  of  but  J 100  per  year  to  the  really  distinguished
men  who  had  presided  over  its  religious  services.
The  church  was  small,  built  of  composite,  plastered
outside  and  in,  with  rude  benches  and  a  very  high
pulpit.  The  best  description  we  have  been  able  to
obtain  of  the  old  church,  which  has  since  been  de-
stroyed by  fire,  reports  it  to  have  been  a  barren  and
sterile  place  except  when  filled  with  the  devoted
Christians,  to  many  of  whom  it  was  a  veritable
Mecca.  The  old  ladies  who  heard  him  preach  his
first  sermon  regarded  him  as  a  ^'  dear  good  boy,'*
but  would  not  have  dreamed  of  accepting  him  as
their  pastor  until  he  began  to  make  his  influence
felt  in  their  homes  and  among  their  children.

He  was  always  diligently  at  wgrk,  They  often
asked  him  if  he  ever  slept,


Io6  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

He  had  no  thought,  however,  of  beginning  a  pas-
torate at  Waterbeach  during  the  first  two  or  three
months  of  his  active  work  in  that  neighborhood  as
an  evangehstjbut  the  thought  at  first  absurd  soon  be-
came possible,  then  arose  to  the  probable,  and  finally
was  a  certainty.  The  churchunanimouslycalledhimto
be  their  pastor,  when  he  was  about  nineteen  years  of
age,  and  probably  the  youngest  ordained  preacher
of  any  denomination  in  England.  He  accepted  the
position  after  a  great  deal  of  hesitation  and  many
hours  spent  by  himself  in  prayer.

It  was  then  that  he  was  compelled  to  come  to  the
important  decision  to  which  we  have  referred  in  a
previous  chapter,  concerning  the  pursuit  of  his  edu-
cation through  a  collecre  course.  He  felt  that  he
belonged  to  the  Lord.  His  body,  his  soul,  his  tal-
ents, and  his  time.  He  believed  that  the  Lord  could
use  him  without  an  education,  if  his  Heavenly  Father
was  so  inclined  ;  and  he  cut  himself  off  from  educa-
tional opportunities  and  entered  directly  into  the
work  of  saving  souls,  assured  that  in  some  w^ay  the
Lord  would  make  up  for  the  deficiency.

Many  persons  regarded  him  as  a  fanatic,  and  tried
their  best  to  discouraije  him  bv  callinof  his  attention
to  the  fact  that  he  was  so  young.  Some  even  wrote
to  his  father,  saying  that  it  was  a  shame  to  allow  a
bright  boy  like  that  to  throw  himself  away  in  such  a
foolish  manner.  But  he  was  ready  to  go  through  fire
and  water,  and  had  determined  to  sacrifice  every-
thing and  anything  in  the  cause  he  had  espoused.


EARL  V  REL IGIO  US  EXPERIENCES.  i  qj

Yet  he  entered  upon  it  with  the  most  dehberate
thought,  with  most  i)road  common  sense,  and  com-
bined with  these  such  skill  and  tact  in  the  management
of  others,  and  in  the  declaration  of  truth,  as  to  establish
himself  quickly  with  the  oldest  and  most  conserva-
tive of  his  hearers.  The  fire  in  his  soul  which  many
feared  would  become  a  hard  master  he  ever  kept
within  proper  bounds  and  compelled  it  to  be  a  good
servant.

Unstinted  praise  was  heard  on  every  side  and  the
extremest  flattery  was  spoken  unblushingly  to  his
face.  It  is  a  marvel  that  the  boy  was  not  completely
destroyed  by  egotism.  But  he  had  the  natural  tact
to  consult  with  old  men,  and  to  follow  their  advice
rather  than  to  give  heed  to  flatterers,  who  would
have  led  him  so  sadly  to  overestimate  his  forces.

Many  say  that  during  his  youth  he  did  at  times
exhibit  considerable  self-importance,  and  there  are
those  who  seem  to  recogrnize  that  trait,  though
largely  in  abeyance,  in  the  entire  history  of  the
man.

Mr.  Spurgeon  has  also  left  an  account  of  his  first
pastorate,  in  which  he  said :  "  Well  I  remember  be-
ginning to  preach  in  a  little  thatched  chapel,  and  my
first  concern  was,  would  God  save  any  souls  through
me  ?  They  called  me  a  ragged  headed  boy ;  I  think
I  was — I  know  I  wore  a  jacket.  I  preached  and
I  was  troubled  in  my  heart  because  I  thought,  *  This
gospel  has  savedme,  but  then  somebody  else  preached
it ;    will    it   save  anybody    if   I  preach  it  ?'    Some


jo8  CHARLES  //.  SPURGE  ON.

Sundays  went  over,  and  I  used  to  say  to  one  of  the
deacons,  '  Have  you  heard  of  anybody  finding  the
Lord  ?'  My  good  old  friend  said,  '  I  am  sure  there
has  been,  I  am  quite  sure  about  it.'  *  Oh  !'  I  said,  '  I
want  to  know  it,  I  want  to  see  it.'  And  one  Sunday
afternoon  he  said,  '  There  is  a  woman  who  hves  over
at  so-and-so  who  found  the  Lord  three  or  four  Sun-
days ago  through  your  preaching.'  I  said,  '  Drive
me  over  there,  Lmust  go  directly,'  and  the  first
thing  on  Monday  morning  I  was  driving  down  to  see
my  first  convert.  Many  fathers  recollect  their  first
child  ;  mothers  recollect  their  first  baby — no  child
like  it,  you  never  had  another  like  it  since.  I
have  had  a  great  many  spiritual  children  born  of  the
preaching  of  the  word,  but  I  do  think  that  woman
was  the  best  of  the  lot.  At  least,  she  did  not  live
long  enough  for  me  to  find  many  faults  in  her.
After  a  year  or  two  of  faithful  witness-bearing  she
wenthometo  lead  the  way  for  a  goodly  number  since.
I  have  had  nothing  else  to  preach  but  Christ  cruci-
fied. How  many  souls  there  are  in  heaven  who
have  found  their  way  there  through  that  preaching  ;
how  many  there  are  still  on  the  earth,  serving  the
Master,  it  is  not  for  me  to  tell ;  but  whatever  there
has  been  of  success  has  been  through  the  preaching
of  Christ  in  the  sinners'  stead."

A  glimpse  of  the  domestic  side  of  his  life  is
afforded  us  in  a  humorous  off-hand  line  he  sent  about
this  time  to  his  sister,  which  Mr,  Bliss  has  given  to
the  public ; —


EARL  V  RELIGIOUS  EXPERIENCES.  jog

"  Cambridge,  Thursday.
"To  Miss  Carolina  Louisa  Spurgeon  : —

"  Your  name  is  so  long  that  it  will  almost  reach
across  the  paper.  We  have  one  young  gentleman
in  our  school,  whose  name  is  Edward  Ralph  William

Baxter  T .     The  boys   tease    him    about    his

long  name,    but  he   is  a  very  good  boy,  and  that
makes  his  name  a  o^ood  one.

"  Everybody's  name  is  pretty  if  they  are  good
people.

"  The  Duke  of  Tuscany  has  had  a  little  son.  The
little  fellow  was  taken  to  the  Catholic  cathedral,  and
had  some  water  put  on  his  face,  and  then  they
named  him — you  must  get  Eliza  to  read  it —  '  Gio-
vanni Nepomuceno  Maria  Annunziata  Giuseppe
Giovanbattista  Ferdinando  Baldassere  Luigi  Gon-
zaofa  Pietro  Allesandro  Zanobi  Antonio.'

"A  pretty  long  name  to  go  to  bed  and  get  up  with.
It  will  be  a  long  while  before  he  will  be  able  to  say
it  all  the  way  through.

*'  If  any  one  is  called  by  the  name  of  Christian,
that  is  better  than  all  these  great  words.  It  is  the
best  name  in  the  world,  except  the  name  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ.

"My  best  love  to  you.  I  hope  you  will  enjoy
yourself  and  try  to  make  others  happy  too,  for  then
you  are  sure  to  be  happy  yourself.  Whereas,  if  you
only  look  out  to  please  yourself,  you  will  make
others   uncomfortable,  and  will   not  make  yourself


no  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEOISr.

happy.  However,  you  know  that,  and  I  need  not
tell  you  of  it.     A  happy   Christmas  to  you.

"Your  loving  brother,

"  Charles."

Mr.  Spurgeon's  personal  letters  have  always  been
distinguished  for  their  simplicity  and  originality  of
style.  He  had  no  time,  even  if  he  had  the  inclina-
tion, to  study  the  copy-books  for  fashionable  letter-
writing.  He  lost  no  time,  but  wrote  concisely  and
directly  what  he  meant,  omitting  generally  the  orna-
mental and  the  flourish.     In  this  was  the  orreat  orain

o  o

to  him  found  in  the  omission  of  a  classical  education  in
the  schools.  No  one  would  ever  accuse  him  of
plagiarism  who  understood  his  style  or  knew  his
habits.

Imitators  never  succeed.  Even  painters  who  en-
deavor to  copy  Raphael  or  Rubens  fail  as  copyists,
and  bring  shame  to  themselves  as  artists,  and  the
literary  man  or  public  speaker  who  endeavors  to
copy  any  minister  is  doing  a  most  conspicuously
foolish  thing.

When  Beecher  died,  a  host  of  little  Beechers
arose,  claiming  to  be  a  second  Beecher.  They  were
all  very  little  Beechers.  Successors  to  John  B.
Gough,  to  John  Wesley,  to  Martin  Luther,  have
often  been  foolishly  advertised,  but  their  lack  ot
genius  and  learning  was  in  every  case  as  notorious
as  was  the  success  of  the  persons  they  attempted  to
imitate.


EARL  V  RELIGIOUS  EXPERIENCES.  \  \  \

Probably  no  profession  in  the  world  contains  as
many  imitators  as  that  of  the  ministry.  One  man's
success  immediately  brings  about  him  a  school  of
prophets,  who  regard  him  as  a  superior  model,  and
follow  him  in  the  closest  details ;  but  every  such
follower  is  a  dismal  failure.  The  curse  of  the  pul-
pit, if  there  be  any  one  curse  more  deleterious  than
another,  is  this  weak  tendency  to  imitate  some  suc-
cessful man.  The  fear  of  beinof  oriorinal  and  the
timidity  with  which  they  meet  criticism  after  having
stated  something  different  from  the  declarations  of
other  people,  keep  men  and  women  from  doing
their  duty,  and  suppresses  the  sublime  natural  power
found  in  all  our  pulpits.  Let  every  man  remain  him-
self. If  in  being  individual,  he  blunders  and  flound-
ers like  a  porpoise,  or  brays  like  a  donkey,  he  will
attract  more  respectful  attention  in  that  manner
which  is  natural  than  with  all  the  most  refined  sen-
tences stolen  from  classical  models.

If  God  had  intended  or  desired  that  men  should
be  all  alike,  He  would  have  so  constructed  them,  and
would  have  surrounded  each  with  the  same  influences.
But  He  made  no  two  men  alike,  and  they  best
answer  the  ends  of  their  being  by  keeping  to  the  in-
dividuality and  originality  which  God  impresses
upon  their  natures.

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.
No  other  person.  His  expressions  were  so  original
that  his  declarations  are  recognized  anywhere.
There  was    no    danger    of   his   being    confounded


112  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON,

with  Cardinal  Manning,  Joseph  Parker,  or  Henry
Ward  Beecher.  These  excellent  preachers  excelled
him  in  some  things,  but  he  was  their  peer  in  origin-
ality. He  was  nature's  nobleman,  and  nature  had
her  perfect  work.

When  our  schools  and  colleges  can  so  adjust
themselves  to  the  needs  of  the  age  as  to  give  to
each  student  an  open  field  for  his  individual  genius,
then  shall  we  have  a  perfect  system  of  education.
Until  then,  many  of  our  schools  and  theological  insti-
tutions will  serve  in  a  measure  to  destroy  much  of
the  effectiveness  of  many  persons  who  by  nature
are  brilliant  or  gigantic.

We  see,  too,  that  his  theological  training  in  actual
personal  Christian  work  among  all  classes  of  people
in  all  the  different  o^rades  of  reliofious  teachinof  was
a  far  better  discipline  for  the  real  battle  of  his  life
than  could  have  been  the  same  number  of  months
given  him  even  in  the  halls  of  Cambridge  or  the  Uni-
versity of  Leipsic.  Not  that  these  great  Institutions
are  to  be  despised,  but  that  if  one  must  choose
between  the  practical  experience  and  impractical
theory,  reason  always  dictates  that  a  person  should
take  the  practice.

Mr.  Spurgeon's  pastorate  at  Waterbeach  lasted
only  a  few  months.  But  it  was  a  most  valuable
school,  without  which  he  could  not  have  hoped  to
succeed  in  London.  His  youth  and  impetuosity
made  him  a  remarkable  curiosity,  and  drew  to  the  old
church  an  immense  audience,  requiring  on  his  partj


EARL  V  RELIGIOUS  EXPERIENCES.  \  \  3

great  variety  of  illustrations  and  appeal  In  order  to
win  the  souls  of  the  different  classes  represented.
His  sincerity  won  for  him  the  positive  love  of  the
church  membership,  and  no  matter  what  he  might
state  or  do,  they  were  as  blind  to  his  faults  as  any
lover  can  be.

He  had  been  a  pastor  but  a  few  months  when
there  was  held  a  Sunday-school  convention  at  Cam-
bridge, where  he  was  especially  invited  to  give  a
short  address.  But  he  was  so  busy  in  his  own
pastorate,  and  so  anxious  concerning  some  of  the
local  enterprises  connected  with  the  church  that  he
ofave  the  address  but  little  thought.

When  his  turn  came  to  speak  he  felt  that  he  had
but  little  to  say,  and  was  wise  enough  to  say  that
little  In  a  few  words  and  sit  down.  Here  again  we
see,  that,  If  he  had  taken  more  time  and  had  more
carefully  prepared  a  cultured  address,  he  would
have  failed  to  accomplish  the  great  good  which  fol-
lowed these  few  remarks.  Not  that  any  person  can
ever  be  excused  from  doino-  his  best.  Should  a
minister  of  the  Gospel  spend  his  time  In  amusement
or  laziness,  then  his  impromptu  remarks  would  be
stale  and  disgraceful.  But  if  his  time  is  fully  occu-
pied with  earnest  practical  Christian  work,  then  in
every  case  he  can  depend  safely  upon  the  promise
of  the  Saviour,  that  It  shall  be  given  him  what  he
shall  say.

The  best  speeches,  like  the  most  noted  specimens

of  oratory,  are  always  Inspired  by  the  circumstances
8


JJ4  CHARLES  H.  SPUR  GEO y.

present,  and  are  panoplied  Minervas  leaping  fordi
from  sudden  and  inspiring  emotions  awakened  by  a
desire  to  do  good.  The  hard  worker,  whose  life  is
crowded  with  varied  experiences  in  the  severe  con-
flicts with  sin,  is  always  a  full  man  and  usually  ready
to  speak  effectively  on  the  shortest  notice.  His
daily  experience  supplies  him  with  themes  and  his
actual  practice  makes  him  an  authority  on  the  sub-
ject.

What  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  to  the  Sunday-school
scholars  who  were  present  at  the  assembly,  or  what
advice  he  o^ave  to  the  teachers  he  did  not  himself  re-
member  in  after  years,  and  every  other  person
seems  to  have  foro^otten.  But  one  listener  was
present  who  did  fiot  forget  the  boy,  and  who  re-
membered especially  his  originality  and  independent
way.  That  listener  was  the  instrumentality  which
Providence  used  to  take  Charles  to  London,  for  a
few  weeks  later  he  met  one  of  the  deacons  of  the
church  in  London,  of  which  Charles  afterward  be-
came the  pastor,  and  in  conversation  with  the  deacon,
mentioned  this  precocious  young  man,  stating  that  he
was  greatly  Impressed  with  his  spiritual  power  and
his  excellent  common  sense.  That  conversation,
though  for  a  time  forgotten  by  both  of  them,  was
afterward  recalled  by  the  deacon  and  led  to  the  in-
vitation of  which  we  will  speak  further,  In  the  next
chapter.

It  was  during  his  first  pastorate,  at  Waterbeach,
when  his  name  had  been  spread  abroad  far  and  wide


BAkL  V  RRLIGTOtJS  EXPERIENCES.


lis


as  the  "boy  preacher,"  and  while  the  aged  shook
their  heads  and  the  ungodly  made  sport,  that  he
wrote  a  long  and  affectionate  letter  to  his  mother,
the  character  of  which  may  well  be  judged  from  the
following-  extract :

"lam  more  and  more  o^lad  that  I  never  went  to

o

college.  God  sends  such  sunshine  on  my  path,  such
smiles  of  grace,  that  I  cannot  regret  if  have  forfeited
all  my  prospects  for  it.  I  am  conscious  I  held  back
from  love  and  His  cause,  and  I  had  rather  be  poor
in  His  service  than  rich  In  my  own.

I  have  all  that  heart  can  wish  for  ;  yea,  God  giveth
more  than  my  desires.  My  congregation  is  as
ofreatandlovinor  as  ever.  Durinor  all  the  time  that  1
have  been  at  Waterbeach  I  have  had  a  different  house
for  my  home  every  day.  Fifty-two  families  have
thus  taken  me  in ;  and  I  have  still  six  other  invita-
tions not  yet  accepted.  Talk  about  the  people  not
caring  for  me  because  they  give  me  so  little !  I  dare
tell  anybody  under  heaven  "  tis  false  !  They  do  all
they  can  1"


CHAPTER  V.

*      THE    HISTORY  OP^  HIS  CHURCH.

The  planting  of  a  church  is  like  the  planting  of  a
seed  which  is  almost  certain  to  grow  into  a  tree,
spreading  its  branches  in  beauty  and  beneficence  at
home  and  sending  the  fruit  into  every  portion  of  the
earth.

How  incredulous  the  forefathers  would  have  been
had  any  prophet  informed  them  that  the  New  Park
Street  Baptist  Church  would  become  so  influential  lor
good  and  so  widely  known.

It  had  its  origin  far  back  in  the  days  of  persecu-
tion, when  men  paid  for  their  opinions  with  property,
pain,  shame,  and  often  death.

The  founders  of  that  Church  over  which  Mr.
Spurgeon  eventually  became  the  pastor  were  brave
men  who  feared  not  the  stake  and  who  had  often
seen  fires  burnlnor  their  co-reliofionists.  It  will  be  In-
teresting  and  highly  helpful  in  the  study  of  Mr.
Spurgeon's  life  to  trace  the  history  of  this. organiza-
tion, in  order  that  we  may  better  understand  the
circumstances  into  which  he  was  drawn  when  he
went  to  London.

Mr.  Spurgeon  has  himself  furnished  a  complete
and  accurate  history  of  the  Tabernacle  and  the
ii6


THE  BIS  TOR  Y  OF  HIS  C  HURCH.  I  j  j

Church,  but  he  wrote  at  the  time  when  many  of  the
individuals  were  still  living  who  welcomed  him  to
London,  and  wrote  when  also  conscious  that  the  sons
and  grandsons  of  those  who  had  acted  a  part  in  the
history  of  that  Church  would  read  his  book.  No
one  writes  without  great  restraint,  under  such  cir-
cumstances, and  while  he  need  never  state  an  untruth,
yet  all  the  truth  is  not  to  be  spoken  at  all  times.

One  could  heartily  wish  in  the  preparation  of  a
story  like  this  that  some  accurate  records  of  the
thoughts  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  might  somewhere
be  found.  But  no  such  private  diary  seems  to  ex-
ist. The  unwritten  history  of  the  Church,  especially
in  the  early  days  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  ministry,  would
furnish  most  interesting  reading.  The  best,  however,
that  can  be  done  now  is  to  gather  up  all  the  material
he  has  left  behind  him  into  a  connected  and  useful
history.

Friends  often  forsook  him,  to  which  he  indirectly
refers.  Enterprises  promising  well  were  often  de-
stroyed by  some  unkind  act  or  by  the  foolishness  of
the  managers.  Expected  gifts  of  money  did  not
come  at  the  time  appointed,  and  some  revivals  did
not  furnish  the  harvest  which  was  expected  of
them.

But,  on  the  other  side,  he  often  received  more  than
he  expected  in  money,  or  friendship,  and  in  every
kind  of  success.

Such  seems  also  to  have  been  very  largely  the
history  of  the  pastorate  which  preceded  his  time.


Il8  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

It  was  ever  the  unexpected  which  was  happening,
and  we  may  go  further  and  say  that  such  is  the  usual
history  of  every  Church,  and  human  oversight  is  not
able  to  arranofe  for  the  events  which  are  almost  cer-
tain  to  surprise  both  pastor  and  people,  and  yet
without  which  there  is  no  possible  success  in  the
work.

The  successful  church  organization  is  the  one
which  works  on  endeavoring  to  be  guided  by  the
Divine  hand,  and  which  regards  nothing  either  en-
coura^inof  or  discouraorinor  as  at  variance  with  the
general  Divine  plan  they  may  not  then  understand.
The  power  which  brought  light  out  of  the  darkness
brings  harmony  out  of  discord,  and  beauty  out  of
wretchedness,  also  exhibits  its  characteristics  in  the
conduct  of  the  spiritual  Church.  That  same  power
can  often  reverse  the  processes  and  send  night  or
discord,  and  often  does  so  in  the  spiritual  history  of
mankind  for  reasons  of  good,  unaccountable  to  us.
Hence  a  glance  at  the  condensed  history  of  that
Church  as  given  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  shows  us  a  con-
tinued, but  irregular  series  of  advances  and  retreats.
It  will  be  well  for  the  student  of  his  life  to  read  a
portion  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  statement  concerning  the
history  of  the  Church,  before  studying  further  his
personal  connection  with  it.

In  his  history  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Mr.
Spurgeon  said :

"  When  modest  ministers  submit  their  sermons  to
the  press  they  usually  place  upon  the  title-page  the


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS  CHURCH.  j  ig

words,  '  Printed  by  request.'  We  might  with  em-
phatic truthfulness  have  pleaded  this  apology  for  the
present  narrative,  for,  times  without  number,  friends
from  all  parts  of  the  world  have  said :  '  Have  you
no  book  which  will  tell  us  all  about  your  work?
Could  you  not  give  us  some  printed  summary  of  the
Tabernacle  history?'  Here  it  is,  dear  friends,  and
we  hope  it  will  satisfy  your  curiosity  and  deepen
your  kindly  interest."

"  Dr.  Stoughton  tells  us  :  'By  the  Parliamentary
ordinance  of  April,  1645,  forbidding  any  person  to
preach  who  was  not  an  ordained  minister  in  the
Presbyterian  or  some  other  reformed  Church,  all
Baptist  ministers  became  exposed  to  molestation,
they  being  accounted  a  sect,  and  not  a  Church.  A
few  months  after  the  date  of  this  law,  the  Baptists
being  pledged  to  a  public  controversy  in  London
with  Edmund  Calam3^  the  Lord  Mayor  interfered  to
prevent  the  disputation — a  circumstance  which
seems  to  show  that,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Baptists
were  becoming  a  formidable  body  in  London,  and,
on  the  other  hand,  that  their  fellow-citizens  were
highly  exasperated  against  them.'  Or,  say  rather,
that  the  Lord  Mayor's  views  not  being  those  of  the
Baptists,  he  feared  the  sturdy  arguments  which
would  be  brought  to  bear  upon  his  friends,  and  con-
cluded that  the  wisest  course  he  could  take  was  to
prevent  the  truth  being  heard.  No  Lord  Mayor,  or
evpp  Kinor,  has  any  right  to  forbid  free  public  speech,
and  when  in  past  ages  an  official   has   done  so,  it  is


120  CHARLES  11.    SPURGEON.

no  evidence  that  his  fellow-citizens  were  of  the  same
mind :  Jack-in-office  is  often  peculiarly  anxious  that
the  consciences  of  others  should  not  be  injured  by
hearing  views  different  from  his  own."

"  From  some  one  of  the  many  Baptist  assemblies
which  met  in  the  borough  of  Southwark,  the  Taber-
nacle  Church  took  its  rise.  Crosby  says:  'This
people  had  formerly  belonged  to  one  of  the  most
ancient  congregations  of  the  Baptists  in  London,
but  separated  from  them,  in  the  year  1652,  for  some
practices  which  they  judged  disorderly,  and  kept
together  from  that  time  as  a  distinct  body.'  They
appeared  to  have  met  in  private  houses,  or  in  such
other  buildings  as  were  opened  to  them.  Their  first
pastor  was  William  Rider,  whom  Crosby  mentions
as  a  sufferer  for  conscience'  sake,  but  he  is  alto-
gether unable  to  give  any  further  particulars  of  his
life,  except  that  he  published  a  small  tract  in  vindica-
tion of  the  practice  of  laying  on  of  hands  on  the
baptized  believers.  The  people  were  few  in  num-
ber, but  had  the  reputation  of  being  men  of  solid
judgment,  deep  knowledge,  and  religious  stability,
and  many  of  them  were  also  in  easy  circumstances
as  to  worldly  goods.  Oliver  Cromwell  was  just  at
that  time  in  the  ascendant,  and  Blake's  cannon  were
sweeping  the  Dutch  from  the  seas ;  but  the  Presby-
terian establishment  ruled  with  a  heavy  hand,  and
Baptists  were  under  a  cloud.  In  the  followinor  year
Cromwell  was   made  Protector,  the   old  Parliament


THE  HISTORY  OF  JUS  CHURCH.  121

was  sent  about  its  business,  and  England  enjoyed  a
measure  of  liberty  of  conscience."

"  How  long  William  Rider  exercised  the  minis-
terial office  we  are  unable  to  tell,  but  our  next
record  bears  date  1668,  when  we  are  informed  that,
*  the  pastor  having  been  dead  for  some  time,  they
unanimously  chose  Mr.  Benjamin  Keach  to  be  their
elder  or  pastor.'  Accordingly  he  was  solemnly  or-
dained with  prayer  and  the  laying  on  of  hands  in
the  year  1668,  being  in  the  twenty-eighth  year  of
his  age.  Keach  was  one  of  the  most  notable  of  the
pastors  of  our  Church.  He  was  continually  en-
gaged in  preaching  in  the  towns  of  Buckinghamshire,
making  Winslow  his  headquarters  ;  and  so  well  did
the  good  cause  flourish  under  his  zealous  labors,  and
those  of  others  that  the  Government  quartered
dragoons  in  the  district  in  order  to  put  down  unlaw-
ful meetings  and  stamp  out  dissent.  The  amount
of  sufTering  which  this  involved,  the  readers  of  the
story  of  the  Covenanting  times  in  Scotland  can
readily  imagine.  A  rough  soldiery  handle  with  little
tenderness  those  whom  they  consider  to  be  miser-
able fanatics.  When  the  favorite  court  poet  was
lampooning  these  poor  people  and  ridiculing  their
claims  to  be  guided  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  common
soldiers  of  the  Cavalier  order  were  not  likely  to  be
much  under  restraint  in  their  behavior  to  them."

"  Havinor  written  a  book  called  The  Child's  In-
sti'uctor,  in  which  he  avowed  that  children  are  born
in  sin,  and  in   need  of  redemption  by  Jesus  Christ,


122  CHARLES  II.  SPURGE  ON.

he  was  publicly  tried  and  convicted.  The  merciful  (?)
judge  pronounced  upon  the  culprit  the  following
sentence : —

"'Benjamin  Keach,  you  are  here  convicted  for
writing,  printing,  and  publishing  a  seditious  and
schismatical  book,  for  which  the  court's  judgment  is
this,  and  the  court  doth  award :  That  you  shall  go
to  jail  for  a  fortnight  without  bail  or  mainprize  ;  and
the  next  Saturday  to  stand  trial  upon  the  pillory  at
Aylesbury  in  the  open  market,  from  eleven  o'clock
till  one,  with  a  paper  upon  your  head  with  the  in-
scription :  For  writing,  printing,  and  publishing  a
schismatical  book,  entitled  The  Child's  Instructor  ;  or,
a  New  and  Easy  Primer,  And  the  next  Thursday
to  stand,  in  the  same  manner  and  for  the  same  time,
in  the  market  at  Winslow  ;  and  then  your  book  shall
be  openly  burnt  before  your  face  by  the  common
hangman,  in  disgrace  of  you  and  your  doctrine.
And  you  shall  forfeit  to  the  King's  majesty  the  sum
of  twenty  pounds,  and  shall  remain  in  jail  until  you
find  sureties  for  your  good  behavior,  and  for  your
appearance  at  the  next  assizes;  then  to  renounce
your  doctrines,  and  make  such  public  submission  as
shall  be  enjoined  you.     Take  him  away,  keeper!'

"  Keach  simply  replied,  '  I  hope  I  shall  never  re-
nounce the  truths  which  I  have  written  in  that
book.'

"The  attempts  made  to  obtain  a  pardon  or  a
relaxation  of  this  severe  sentence  were  ineffectual ;


H

X
R

"Z

c

H

w
:^

1-1

w
n


TitE  HISTORY  OF  His  CHURClf.  12^

and  the  sheriff  took  care  that  everything  should  be
punctually  performed.

'*  When  he  was  brought  to  the  pillory  at  Aylesbury,
several  of  his  religious  friends  and  acquaintances
accompanied  him  ;  and  when  they  bemoaned  his
hard  case  and  the  Injustice  of  his  sufferings,  he  said,
with  a  cheerful  countenance,  '  The  cross  is  the  way
to  the  crown.'  His  head  and  hands  were  no
sooner  placed  in  the  pillory,  but  he  began  to  address
himself  to  the  spectators,  to  this  effect:  *  Good  peo-
ple, I  am  not  ashamed  to  stand  here  this  day  with
this  paper  on  my  head !  My  Lord  Jesus  was  not
ashamed  to  suffer  on  the  cross  for  me ;  and  it  is  for
His  cause  that  I  am  made  a  gazing-stock.  Take
notice,  it  is  not  for  any  wickedness  than  I  stand
here  ;  but  for  writing  and  publishing  those  truths
which  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  hath  revealed  in  the
Holy  Scriptures.'

*'  Very  sweetly  did  Mr.  Keach  preach  the  great
fundamental  truths  of  the  Gospel,  and  glorify  the
name  and  work  of  Jesus.  His  Gospel's  Mine
Opened,  and  other  works  rich  in  savor,  show  that
he  was  no  mere  stickler  for  a  point  of  ceremony,  but
one  who  loved  the  whole  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and
felt  its  power.  The  doctrine  of  the  Second  Advent
evidently  had  great  charms  for  him,  but  not  so  as
to  crowd  out  Christ  crucified.  He  was  very  solid  in  his
preaching,  and  his  whole  conduct  and  behavior  be-
tokened a  man  deeply  in  earnest  for  the  cause  of
God.     In  addressing  the  ungodly  he  was  intensely


J  25  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON,

direct,  solemn,  and  impressive,  not  flinching-  to  de-
clare the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  nor  veiling  the  Ireeness
of  Divine  grace.  He  was  a  voluminous  writer,
having  written  in  all  forty-three  works — eighteen
practical,  sixteen  polemical,  and  nine  poetical.  Some
of  them  were  very  popular,  having  reached  the
twenty-second  edition."

"  Mr.  Keach  was  of  a  very  weak  constitution,
being  often  afflicted  with  illness,  and  once  to  such  a
degree  that  he  was  given  over  by  the  physicians ;
and  several  of  the  ministers  and  his  relations  had
taken  their  leave  of  him  as  a  dying  man  and  past  all
hope  of  recovery ;  but  the  Rev.  Mr.  Hanserd
KnoUys,  seeing  his  friend  and  brother  in  the  gospel
so  near  expiring,  betook  himself  to  prayer,  and  in  a
very  extraordinary  manner  begged  that  God  would
spare  him,  and  add  unto  his  days  the  time  He
granted  to  His  servant  Hezekiah.  As  soon  as  he  had
ended  his  prayer,  he  said,  '  Brother  Keach,  I  shall  be
in  heaven  before  you,'  and  quickly  after  left  him.  So
remarkable  was  the  answer  of  God  to  this  good
man's  prayer  that  we  cannot  omit  it ;  though  it  may
be  discredited  by  some,  there  were  some  who  could
bear  incontestable  testimony  to  the  fact.  Mr.  Keach
recovered  from  that  illness,  and  lived  just  fifteen
years  afterward ;  and  then  it  pleased  God  to  visit
him  with  that  short  sickness  which  put  an  end
to  his  days.  *  He  fell  on  sleep'  July  i6th,  1704,
in  the  sixty-fourth  year  of  his  age,  and  was  buried
at  the  Baptists'  burying-ground,  in  the  Park,  South-


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS  CHURCH.  12/

wark.  It  was  not  a  little  singular  that  in  after  years
the  church  over  which  he  so  ably  presided  should
pitch  its  tent  so  near  the  place  where  his  bones  were
laid,  and  New  Park  Street  should  appear  in  her
annals  as  a  well-beloved  name."

"•  When  Mr.  Keach  was  upon  his  death-bed  he  sent
for  his  son-in-law,  Benjamin  Stinton,  and  solemnly
charged  him.  to  care  for  the  Church  which  he  was
about  to  leave,  and  especially  urged  him  to  accept
the  pastoral  office,  should  it  be  offered  him  by  the
brethren.  Mr.  Stinton  had  already  for  some  years
helped  his  father-in-law  in  many  ways,  and  therefore
he  was  no  new  and  untried  man.  It  is  no  small
blessing  Vv^hen  a  church  can  find  her  pastors  in  her
own  midst;  the  rule  is  to  look  abroad,  but  perhaps
if  our  home  gifts  were  more  encouraged  the  Holy
Spirit  would  cause  our  teachers  to  come  forth  more
frequently  from  among  our  own  brethren.  Still,  we
cannot  forget  the  proverb  about  a  prophet  in  his
own  country.  When  the  Church  gave  Mr.  Stinton
a  pressing  invitation,  he  delayed  awhile,  and  gave
himself  space  for  serious  consideration  ;  but  at
length,  remembering  the  dying  words  of  his  father-
in-law,  and  feeling  himself  directed  by  the  Spirit  of
God,  he  gave  himself  up  to  the  ministry,  which  he
faithfully  discharged  for  fourteen  years — namely,
from  1704  to  1 71 8.'*

"  Spending  himself  in  various  works  of  usefulness,
Mr.  Stinton  worked  on  till  the  nth  of  February,
1 718,  when  a  sudden  close  was  put  to  his  labors  and


I2§  CHARLES  H.  SrURGEOM.

his  life.  He  was  taken  suddenly  ill,  and  saying  to
his  wife,  '  I  am  going,'  he  laid  himself  down  upon  the
bed,  and  expired  in  the  forty-third  year  of  his  life.
He  smiled  on  death,  for  the  Lord  smiled  on  him.
He  was  buried  near  his  predecessor,  in  the  Park,
Southwark."

"  In  the  beginning  of  the  year  1719,  the  Church  at
Horsleydown  invited  John  Gill  to  preach,  with  a
view  to  the  pastorate  ;  but  there  was  a  determined
opposition  to  him  in  about  one-half  of  the  church.
The  matter  was  referred  to  the  club  of  ministers
meeting  at  the  Hanover  Coffee-house,  and  they  gave
the  absurd  advice  that  the  two  parties  should  each
hear  their  own  man  turn  about  till  they  could  agree.
Common  sense  came  to  the  rescue,  and  this  sort  of
relii^ious  duel  never  came  off.  The  friends  with  far
greater  wisdom,  divided.  John  Gill's  friends  secured
the  old  meeting-house  for  the  term  of  forty  years,
and  he  was  ordained  March  22d,  1720."

"  Little  did  the  friends  dream  what  sort  of  a  man
they  had  thus  chosen  to  be  their  teacher ;  but  had
they  known  it  they  would  have  rejoiced  that  a  man
of  such  vast  erudition,  such  indefatigable  industry,
such  sound  judgment,  and  such  sterling  honesty  had
come  among  them.  He  was  to  be  more  mighty
with  his  pen  than  Keach,  and  to  make  a  deeper  Im-
pression upon  his  age,  though  perhaps  with  the
tongue  he  was  less  powerful  than  his  eminent
predecessor.  Early  in  his  ministry  he  had  to  take
up  tlie  cudgels  for  Baptist  views  against  a  Pa^dobap-


THE  IIISTOR  V  OF  HIS  CHURCH.  |  29

tist  preacher  of  Rowel,  near  Kettering,  and  he  did
so  in  a  manner  worthy  of  that  eulogium  which  Top-
lady  passed  upon  him  in  reference  to  other  contro-
versies, when  he  compared  him  to  Marlborough,  and
declared  that  he  never  fought  a  battle  without  win-
ning  it."

'*  Mr.  Gill,  being  settled  in  London,  became  more
intimately  acquainted  with  that  worthy  minister  of  the
gospel,  Mr.  John  Skepp,  pastor  of  the  Baptist  Church
at  Cripplegate.  This  gentleman,  though  he  had  not
a  liberal  education,  yet,  after  he  came  into  the  min-
istry, through  great  diligence  acquired  a  larger
acquaintance  with  the  Hebrew  tongue.  As  Mr.  Gill
had  previously  taken  great  delight  in  the  Hebrew,
his  conversation  with  this  worthy  minister  rekindled
a  flame  of  fervent  desire  to  obtain  a  more  extensive
knowledge  of  it,  and  especially  of  Rabbinical  learn-
ing. Mr.  Skepp  dying  a  year  or  two  after,  Mr.  Gill
purchased  most  of  his  Hebrew  works,  the  Baptist
Fund  making  him  a  grant  of  eighty-seven  dollars  for
this  purpose.  Having  obtained  the  books,  he  went
to  work  with  orreat  eacrerness,  readino-  the  Taro^ums
and  ancient  commentaries,  and  in  acourse  of  between
twenty  and  thirty  years'  acquaintance  with  these
writings  he  collected  a  large  number  of  learned
observations.  Having  also,  in  this  time,  gone
through  certain  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  and
almost  the  whole  of  the  New  Testament,  by  way
of  exposition,  in  the  course  of  his  ministry,  he  put  all
the  expository,  critical,  and  illustrative  parts  together
9


130  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

and  In  the  year  1745  issued  proposals  for  publishing
his  Exposition  of  the  whole  New  Testament,  In  three
volumes  folio.  The  work  meetlnof  due  encouraofe-
ment,  It  was  put  to  press  the  same  year,  and  was
finished,  the  first  volume  in  1 746,  the  second  in  1 747,
and  the  third  in  1748.  Toward  the  close  of  the
publication  of  this  work,  in  1748,  Mr.  Gill  received  a
diploma  from  Marischal  College,  Aberdeen,  creating
him  Doctor  in  Divinity  on  account  of  his  knowledge
of  the  Scriptures,  of  the  Oriental  language,  and  of
Jewish  antiquities.  When  his  deacons  in  London
congratulated  him  on  the  respect  which  had  been
shown  him  he  thanked  them,  pleasantly  adding,  "  I
neither  thought  It,  norboucjht  it,  nor  souo^ht  it.'  "

"  The  ministry  of  Mr.  Gill  being  acceptable  not
only  to  his  own  people  but  to  many  persons  of  dif-
ferent denominations,  several  gentlemen  proposed
among  themselves  to  set  up  a  week-day  lecture,
that  they  might  have  an  opportunity  of  hearing  him.
Accordingly  they  formed  themselves  into  a  society,
and  agreed  to  have  a  lecture  on  Wednesday  even-
ings, in  Great  Eastcheap,  and  set  on  foot  a  subscrip-
tion to  support  it.  Upon  their  invitation  Mr.  Gill
undertook  the  lectureship.  He  opened  it  the  year
1729  with  a  discourse  or  two  on  Psalm  Ixxi,  16:
*  I  will  oro  In  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God  :  I  will
make  mention  of  Thy  righteousness,  even  of  Thine
only.'  Through  divine  grace  he  was  enabled  to
abide  by  this  resolution  to  the  edification  of  many,
preaching  in  Great  Eastcheap  for  more  than  twenty-


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS  CHURCH.  131

six  years,  and  only  relinquished  die  lectures  when
the  infirmities  of  years  were  telling  upon  him,  and
he  felt  a  great  desire  to  give  all  his  time  to  the  com-
pletion of  his  great  expository  works."

"  As  a  pastor  he  presided  over  the  flock  with
dignity  and  affection.  In  the  course  of  his  ministry
he  had  some  weak,  some  unworthy,  and  some  very
wicked  persons  to  deal  with.  To  the  feeble  of  the
flock  he  was  an  affectionate  friend  and  father.  He
readily  bore  with  their  weaknesses,  failings,  and  in-
firmities, and  particularly  when  he  saw  they  were
sincerely  on  the  Lord's  side.  A  godly  w^oman  visited
him  one  day,  in  great  trouble,  about  the  singing  ;
for  the  clerk,  in  about  three  years,  had  introduced
two  new  tunes.  Not  that  he  was  a  famous  singer,
or  able  to  conduct  a  great  variety  of  song,  but  he
did  his  best.  The  young  people  were  pleased  with
the  new  tunes ;  but  the  good  w^oman  could  not  bear
the  innovation.  The  Doctor,  after  patiently  listen-
Incr,  asked  her  whether  she  understood  sinmnof  ?
'No,'  she  said.  'What  !  can't  you  sing?'  No,  she
was  no  sinorer,  nor  her  ao^ed  father  before  her.  And
though  they  had  had  about  a  hundred  years  between
them  to  learn  the  Old  Hundredth  tune,  they  could
not  sing  it,  nor  any  other  tune.  The  Doctor  did  not
hurt  her  feelings  by  telling  her  that  people  who
did  not  understand  slno-Inp-  were  the  last  who  should
complain  ;  but  he  meekly  said  :  '  Sister,  what  tunes
should  you  like  us  to  sing?'  'Why,  sir,' she  re-
plied,   *I    would  ver}^  much   like   David's    tunes.*


132  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

*  Well,'  said  he,  '  If  you  will  get  David's  tunes
for  us,  we  can  then  try  to  sing  them.'  Such  weak
good  people  maybe  found  among  all  denominations
of  Christians."

"All  the  stories  told  of  Dr.  Gill  are  somewhat  o-rim.
He  could  not  come  down  to  the  level  of  men  and
women  of  the  common  order  so  far  as  to  be  jocose  ;
and  when  he  attempted  to  do  so  he  looked  like
Hercules  with  the  distaff,  or  Goliath  threadino-  a
needle.  When  he  verged  upon  the  humorous  the
jokes  were  ponderous  and  overwhelming,  burying  his
adversary  as  well  as  crushing  him.  It  is  said  that  a
garrulous  dame  once  called  upon  him  to  find  fault
with  the  excessive  length  of  his  white  bands.  '  Well,
well/  said  the  Doctor,  '  what  do  you  think  is  the
ricrht  lenofth?  Take  them  and  make  them  as  lono-
or  as  short  as  you  like.'  The  lady  expressed  her
delight ;  she  was  sure  that  her  dear  pastor  would
grant  her  request,  and  therefore  she  had  brought
her  scissors  with  her,  and  would  do  the  trimming-  at
once.  Accordingly,  snip,  snip,  and  the  thing  was
done,  and  the  bibs  returned.  *  Now,'  said  the  Doc-
tor, '  my  good  sister,  you  must  do  me  a  good  turn
also.'  *  Yes,  that  I  will.  Doctor.  What  can  it  be  ?'
'  Well,  you  have  something  about  you  which  is  a
deal  too  long,  and  causes  me  no  end  of  trouble,  and
I  should  like  to  see  it  shorter.'  *  Indeed,  dear  sir,  I
will  not  hesitate,'  said  the  dame;  'what  is  it?
Here  are  the  scissors,  use  them  as  you  please.'
'  Come  then,'  said  the  pastor,  '  good  sister,  put  out


c

o
o
c

cr
</)


H
C


c

c
c


THE  msTORY  OF  HIS  CHURCH.


135


your  tongue  !'  We  have  often  pictured  him  sitting-
in  the  old  chair,  which  is  preserved  in  our  vestry,
and  thus  quietly  rebuking  the  gossip."

"  The  comparative  asperity  of  his  manner  was
probably  the  result  of  his  secluded  habits,  and  also  of
that  sturdy  firmness  of  mind,  which  in  other  direc-
tions revealed  itself  so  admirably.  When  he  was
once  warned  that  the  publication  of  a  certain  book
would  lose  him  many  supporters  and  reduce  his
income,  he  did  not  hesitate  for  a  moment,  but  re-
plied :  '  Do  not  tell  me  of  losing.  I  value  nothing  in
comparison  with  gospel  truth.  I  am  not  afraid  to
be  poor!'  "

*'  The  mighty  commentator  having  been  followed
to  his  grave  by  his  attached  Church  and  a  great
company  of  ministers  and  Christian  people,  among
whom  he  had  been  regarded  as  a  great  man  and  a
prince  in  Israel,  his  Church  began  to  look  around
for  a  successor.  This  time,  as  in  the  case  of  Dr.
Gill,  there  was  trouble  in  store,  for  there  was  divi-
sion of  opinion.  Some  no  doubt,  as  true  Gillites
looked  only  for  a  solid  divine,  sound  in  doctrine,
who  would  supply  the  older  saints  with  spiritual
food ;  while  another  party  had  an  eye  to  the  growth
of  the  Church  and  10  the  securing  to  the  flock  the
younger  members  of  their  families.  They  were
agreed  that  they  would  write  to  Bristol  for  a  pro-
bationer, and  Mr.  John  Rippon  was  sent  to  them.
He  was  a  youth  of  some  twenty  summers,  of  a  viva-
cious   temperment,    quick    and    bold.       The    older


136  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

members  judged  him  to  be  too  young  and  too
flighty  ;  they  even  accused  him  of  having  gone  up  the
pulpit  stairs  two  steps  at  a  time  on  some  occasions
when  he  was  hurried — a  c^rave  offense  for  which
the  condemnation  could  hardly  be  too  severe.  He
was  only  a  young  man  and  came  from  an  academy,
and  this  alone  was  enouofh  to  make  the  sounder  and
older  members  afraid  of  him.  He  preached  for  a
lengthened  time  on  probation,  and  finally  some  forty
persons  withdrew  because  they  could  not  agree
with  the  enthusiastic  vote  by  which  the  majority  of
the  people  elected  him."

"John  Rippon  modestly  expressed  his  wonder
that  even  more  had  not  been  dissatisfied,  and  his
surprise  that  so  large  a  number  were  agreed  to  call
him  to  the  pastorate.  In  the  spirit  of  forbearance  and
brotherly  love  he  proposed  that,  as  these  friends  were
secedinor  for  conscience'  sake,  and  intended  to  form
themselves  into  another  Church,  they  should  be  lov-
ingly dismissed  with  prayer  and  God-speed,  and  that
as  a  token  of  fraternal  love  they  should  be  assisted
to  build  a  meeting-house  for  their  own  conscience,
and  the  sum  of  fifteen  hundred  dollars  should  be
voted  to  them  when  their  Church  was  formed  and
their  meeting-house  erected.  The  promise  was  re-
deemed, and  Mr.  Rippon  took  part  In  the  ordination
services  of  the  first  minister.  This  was  well  done.
Such  a  course  was  sure  to  secure  the  blessing  of
God.  The  church  In  Dean  Street  thus  became
another    offshoot   from^   the   j)arent   stem,  and   with


l^HE  HISTOR  Y  OF  HIS  CHURCH.


^17


varying    conditions    it    remains 'to  this    day  as  the
church  in  Trinity  Street,  Borough.

"  He  will  be  best  known  as  having  prepared  the
first  really  good  selection  of  hymns  for  dissenting  con-
gregations. Although  a  Baptist  collection,  it  was
extensively  used  with  Dr.  Watts's  among  both  classes
of  Cono^re^ationalists.  This  work  was  an  estate  to
its  author,  and  he  is  said  to  have  been  more  than
sufficiently  eager  to  push  its  sale.  One  thing  we
know,  his  presents  of  nicely  bound  copies  must  have
been  pretty  frequent,  for  we  have  seen  several
greatly  prized  by  their  aged  owners,  who  have
shown  them  to  us,  with  the  remark,  'The  dear  old
Doctor  gave  me  that  himself.'  "

"  The  happy  eccentricity  of  the  Doctor  s  character
may  be  illustrated  by  a  little  incident  in  connection
with  royalty.  He  was  deputed  to  read  an  address
from  the  Dissenters  to  Georo^e  III,  cono-ratulatinor
him  upon  recovery  from  sickness.  The  Doctor  read
on  with  his  usual  clear  utterance  till,  comino-  to  a
passage  in  which  there  was  special  reference  to  the
goodness  of  God,  he  paused  and  said  :  *  Please  your
Majesty,  we  will  read  that  again,'  and  then  pro-
ceeded with  his  usual  cool  dignity  to  repeat  the  sen-
tence with  emphasis.  No  other  man  in  the  deputa-
tion would  have  thoueht  of  doino-  such  a  thino-,  but
from  Rippon  it  came  so  naturally  that  no  one  cen-
sured him,  or  if  they  did  it  would  have  had  no  effect
upon  him."

"There  are  still  some   in  the  Church  who  cherish


138  CHARLES  H.  SPUROEOl^.

his  memory  with  affectionate  and  well-deserved
reverence ;  and  there  are  thousands  in  Heaven  who
were  led  first  to  love  the  Saviour  by  his  earnest  ex-
hortations. He  quarried  fresh  stones,  and  built  up
the  Church.  He  molded  its  thoughts  and  directed
its  enerories.  Without  beinor  orreat  he  was  exceed-
ingly  useful,  and  the  period  in  which  he  was  one  of
the  judges  of  our  Israel  was  one  of  great,  prosper-
ity in  spiritual  things.  It  was  a  good  sixty-three
years,  and  with  the  previous  pastorate  of  Dr.  Gill,
enabled  the  Church  to  say  that  during  one  hundred
and  seventeen  years  they  had  been  presided  over
by  two  ministers  only.  Those  who  are  given  to
change  were  not  numerous  in  the  community.  Short
pastorates  are  good  when  ministers  are  feeble,  but
it  is  a  ofreat  blessinof  when  the  saints  are  so  edified
that  all  are  content,  and  the  ministry  is  so  owned  of
God  that  vacancies  are  filled  up  even  before  they
are  felt :  in  such  a  case  change  would  wantonly  im-
peril the  hope  of  continued  prosperity,  and  would
therefore  be  criminal."  •

*'The  next  pastor  of  our  Church  was  Mr. — now
Doctor — Joseph  Angus,  a  gentleman  whose  career
since  he  left  us  to  become  secretary  of  the  Baptist
Missionary  Society,  and  afterward  the  tutor  of
Stepney  Academy,  now  Regent's  Park  College,  has
rendered  his  name  most  honorable  amon^f  livinof
Baptists.  He  is  one  of  the  foremost  classical
scholars,  and  is  a  member  of  the  committee  for
producing  a  revised  version  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.


THE  HISTOR  Y  OF  HIS  CHURCH.  13^

He  is  the  author  of  those  standard  books,  The
Bible  Handbook,  The  Handbook  of  the  English
Tongue,  and  Handbook  of  English  Literature!'

"  Mr.  James  Smith  succeeded  Dr.  Angus,  and
after  a  useful  pastorate  of  eight  years  resigned  on
account  of  ill  health.  In  October,  1849,  he  wrote:
*  For  a  considerable  time  I  have  felt  an  oppression
on  my  chest,  and  orreat  difficulty  in  breathinor.  Last
week  I  consulted  a  doctor  upon  it,  and  he  advised
me  to  leave  London  as  soon  as  I  could,  and  get  into
the  country,  as  my  lungs  required  a  purer  air.  I  am
seekinof  wisdom  from  God:  I  cannot  doubt  but  He
will  guide  me.'  "

*' In  February,  1850,  he  said:  *I  have  written  my
resignation  of  office,  and  laid  it  before  the  deacons.
It  is  a  serious  and  important  step  which  I  have
taken.  I  trust  I  have  taken  it  in  a  proper  spirit,  and
from  a  right  motive.  My  mind  is  now  calm  and
peaceful,  the  agitation  from  which  I  have  long  been
suffering  is  at  an  end,  and  I  feel  as  if  I  could  now
leave  the  matter  with  the  Lord."

"  *  When  my  resignation  was  accepted,  the  Church
passed  a  very  kind  and  affectionate  resolution  re-
gretting that  I  felt  it  necessary  to  take  such  a  step ;
but  as  I  had  rested  it  pretty  much  on  the  state  of
my  health,  they  did  not  feel  that  they  could  refuse
to  accede  to  my  wishes.  I  cannot  say  that  I  have
labored  in  vain  here,  for  many  souls  have  been  con-
verted, some  backsliders  have  been  restored,  and
between  four  hundred  and  five   hundred  members


140


CHARLES  //.  SPURGEOM.


have  been  added  to  the  Church  during  my  pastorate
of  eight  years.  Many  of  my  poor  people  deeply
feel  the  step  which  I  have  felt  it  my  duty  to  take,
and  I  have  received  very  affectionate  letters  from
several  of  them.  May  they  soon  be  favored  with  a
pastor  more  suitable  and  efficient  than  I  have
been.'  "

"  Mr.  Smith  built  up  in  Cheltenham  the  strong
working  Church  now  meeting  in  Cambray  Chapel,
which  was  erected  by  his  exertions.  When  he  was
lying  upon  his  dying  bed  the  Church  at  the  Taber-
nacle sent  him  a  heartily  affectionate  letter,  and
gratefully  reminded  him  of  all  the  blessings  which
the  Lord  had  bestowed  upon  many  souls  by  his
means.  To  this  we  received  a  delightful  answer,
assuring  us  that  our  words  had  greatly  cheered  him.
He  died  in  1861,  and  an  account  of  an  interview
with  him  may  interest  the  reader  if  we  include  it  in
our  pages.  *  I  saw  this  week  the  former  pastor  of
this  Church,  Mr.  James  Smith,  of  Cheltenham.
About  a  year  ago  he  was  struck  with  paralysis,  and
one-half  of  his  body  is  dead.  But  yet  I  have  seldom
seen  a  more  cheerful  man  in  the  full  hey-day  of
strength.  I  had  been  told  that  he  was  the  subject
of  very  fearful  conflicts  at  times  ;  so  after  I  had
shaken  hands  with  him,  I  said:  *  Friend  Smith,  I
hear  you  have  many  doubts  and  fears  !'  '  Who  told
you  that?'  he  said,  '  for  I  have  none.'  '  Never  have
any  ?  Why  I  understood  you  had  many  conflicts.'
'  Yes,'  he  said,  '  I  have  many  conHicts,  but  I  have  no


THE  HIS  A  ORY  OF  HIS  CHURCH.  j^j

doubts  ;  I  have  many  wars  within,  but  I  have  no
fears.  Who  could  have  told  you  that?  I  hope  I
have  not  led  any  one  to  think  that.  It  is  a  hard  battle,
but  the  victory  is  sure.'  Then  he  said  in  his  own
way,  T  am  just  like  a  packet  that  is  all  ready  to  go
by  train,  packed,  corded,  labelled,  paid  for,  and  on
the  platform,  waiting  for  the  express  to  come  by  and
lake  me  to  crlorv.  I  wish  I  could  hear  the  whistle
now.

"In  July,  1851,  the  Church  Invited  the  Rev.  Wil-
liam Walters,  of  Preston,  to  become  the  pastor,  but
as  he  understood  the  deacons  to  intimate  to  him
that  his  ministry  was  not  acceptable,  he  tendered
his  resignation,  and  although  requested  to  remain,
he  judged  it  more  advisable  to  remove  to  Halifax  in
June,  1853,  thus  closing  a  ministry  of  two  years.
These  changes  sadly  diminished  the  Church  and
marred  its  union.  The  clouds  gathered  heavily,
and  no  sunlight  appeared."

Mr.  Spurgeon's  record  is  necessarily  very  much
condensed,  and  very  wisely  omits  the  most  interest-
ing incidents  concerning  the  history  of  individuals
connected  with  the  Church  and  showing  their  self-
sacrifices.  Some  of  these  Incidents  which  occurred
during  Mr.  Spurgeon's  early  years  In  the  pastorate
of  the  Tabernacle  have  been  recorded  by  others  and
frequently  related  In  public  by  persons  acquainted
with  the   circumstances.

One  of  the  most  helpful  workers  in  the  building
of  the  Tabernacle  and  who  secured  very  large  sub-


142  "  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

scriptlons  from  his  friends  to  pay  the  debt  when  the
building  was  dedicated,  was  found  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,
years  before,  on  a  wretched  bed  in  poverty,  afflicted
with  what  was  considered  to  be  a  fatal  disease.  Mr.
Spurgeon  received  an  anonymous  letter  calling  his
attention  to  this  sad  case,  and  while,  as  a  rule,  he  did
not  read  such  letters,  or  follow  their  advice,   in  that
case  he  made  the  suggested  visit  upon  the  poor  and
afflicted  young  man.     The  young  man  recovered  his
health  soon  after  and  was   secured  employment  by
the  influence  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  he  proved  to  be
one  of  the  best  business  men  in  that  part  of  London.
At  another  time  he  received  a  large  accession  to
the   membership  from  another  denomination  owino^
to   a  bitter  quarrel  which  raged    in  the  Church  to
which  they  had  belonged.     Mr.  Spurgeon  kept  them
waiting  for  some  weeks,  making  them  frequently  a
subject   for   prayer,  before   he   would    consent  that
they  should  be  received  by  the  Church ;  he  having
had  a  very  strong    suspicion  that  they  were  joining
his    Church    more   out  of  spite   than  because  they
loved  the  Lord  ;  yet  it  proved  to  be  one  of  the  great-
est blessings  that  ever  came  to  the  enterprise.     For
amoncr    the    number   were    some  of  the   sincerest,
noblest  Christian    characters  and   some  of  the  most
generous  givers  in  the  latter  years  of  his  life.

An  old  fish  woman  frequently  visited  his  home,
after  his  marriacre,  with  whom  Mr.  Spurcreon  con-
versed  upon  the  matter  of  her  soul's  salvation.  She
answered  him  abruptly,  and  with  great  rudeness  de-


THE  HISTORY  OF  HIS  CHURCH.  143

clared  that  she  had  no  interest  in  any  of  those  things,
as  rehgion  "  was  made  for  fine  people,  or  for  those
who  had  no  money  to  lose."  That  same  fish  woman
before  her  death,  insisted  on  sendinof  her  dauohter
to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Sabbath-school,  where  she  was
converted  and  where  she  joined  the  Church.  That
fish  woman's  son-in-law  was  a  very  inflnential
member  of  this  Church,  a  strong  supporter  of  the
college,  and  is  often  referred  to  by  the  students  who
leave  the  college  as  one  of  their  dearest  friends  and
one  in  whom  they  put  the  most  Implicit  confidence
whenever  his  advice  is  given.

A  boatman  on  the  Thames,  whose  boat  sprung
a  leak  throuo^h  some  accident,  received  a  sueeestlon
from  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  caulking  it  without  great
expense.  One  friend  says  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  not
only  paid  for  the  material  but  went  to  the  boat  with
a  caulklnof  knife  and  showed  the  boatman  how  to  do
the  work.  That  boatman's  brother  was  afterward
a  member  of  the  House  of  Commons  and  for
months  regularly  worshiped  at  the  Tabernacle.

One  woman  with  a  little  child  in  her  arms
wandered  into  the  meeting  In  1856  and  the  baby
cried  so  as  to  disturb  the  people,  and  she  was  kindly
invited  into  one  of  the  vestry-rooms  by  the  officer  of
the  Church.  Mrs.  Spurgeon  and  a  committee  of
ladles  were  at  the  time  in  the  vestry,  attending  to
some  Church  matters.  They  entered  into  conver-
sation with  the  woman  and  especially  noticing  the
baby  and  assisted  in  quieting  its  cries.


144  CHARLES  H.  SF  URGE  ON.

The  woman's  report  to  her  uncle  of  Mrs.  Spur-
geon's  kindness  brought  him  to  the  Church  as  a
curious  visitor,  which  resulted  in  his  uniting  with  the
Church  and  becominof  one  of  the  most  efficient  mis-
sionaries  sent  out  for  the  local  missions.

One  woman  made  Mrs.  Spurgeon  a  present  of
some  fancy  cooking,  and  a  letter  which  she  wrote  in
acknowledgment  of  the  kindness  was  received  by
the  family  after  the  hand  which  had  made  the  cook-
ies was  cold  in  death.  The  family  at  once  sent  for
Mr.  Spurgeon  to  attend  the  funeral,  and  there  he
had  conversation  with  the  husband,  who  became  a
member  of  his  Church  and  was  afterward  a  very
effective  minister  in  Germany,  where  he  preached  the
gospel  for  ten  years.

When  the  Tabernacle  was  being  constructed,  Mr,
Spurgeon  and  some  of  the  officers  of  the  Church
held  prayer-meetings  as  they  knelt  in  the  midst  ot
the  accumulating  material  which  was  not  yet  in  place.
A  young  man  standing  by  altogether  unnoticed  by
them,  made  inquiries  of  a  police  officer  concerning
what  was  being  done,  and  afterward  related  the  in-
cident to  friends  in  New  York.  It  was  directly  or
indirectly  from  these  New  York  friends  that  Mr.
Spurgeon  received  quite  a  large  gift  in  connection
with  the  establishment  of  the  Orphanage.  We  have
never  been  able  to  trace  the  history  of  the  young
man  who  witnessed  their  prayer,  but  have  often
heard  the  fact  referred  to  in  Eno^land.

Mr.  Spurgeon,  one  day  in  1858,  sent  an  old  Bible


THE  History  OF  HIS  CHURCH.  \^y

to  be  rebound.  It  was  either  a  keepsake  in  the  family
or  else  it  was  a  volume  made  valuable  because  it  was
antique.  The  binding  was  delayed  for  several
weeks  because  the  binder  had  broken  his  arm.  Mr.
Spurgeon  called  at  last  for  the  book,  and,  finding  it
not  finished  at  the  second  visit,  asked  that  he
might  take  it  away  to  some  other  place.  It  was
then  for  the  first  time  that  he  ascertained  the  real
reason  why  the  book  had  not  been  bound  before,
and  when  he  returned  to  his  study  he  wrote  a  letter
of  condolence  to  the  binder,  and  told  him  to  keep
the  book  until  he  was  able  to  bind  it.  That  book-
binder's son  is  one  of  the  most  eloquent  graduates
of  Spurgeon's  college,  now  having  a  Church  in  the
United  States.

One  man  who  had  been  addicted  largely  to  drink,
who  had  reformed  under  Mr.  Spurgeon's  personal
solicitation,  afterward  became  quite  wealthy  and  in-
sisted on  presenting  Mr.  Spurgeon  with  a  horse  and
carriage.  When  the  gift  was  declined,  he  turned
the  money  into  the  treasury  of  the  Orphanage.

An  insane  man  entered  one  of  their  social  meet-
ings at  the  Church  and  created  a  great  disturbance,
one  evening  in  1857.  Public  officers  were  called  in,
and  he  was  removed  and  continued  calling  out  that
the  Lord  had  impressed  upon  him  the  necessity  of
killing  all  the  people  in  the  Church.  A  little  later  an
advertisement  appeared  in  a  newspaper  asking  for
information  concerning  an  insane  person  whose  de-
scription seemed  to  show  him  to  be  the  same  man
10


1^3  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

who  had  so  greatly  disturbed  the  religious  meetings,
and  who  had  been  declared  to  be  insane  by  the
authorities.  A  young  man  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Sun-
day-school called  his  attention  to  the  advertisement,
and  he  answered  it,  tellinof  the  friend  who  advertised
where  to  procure  the  information  from  the  public
authorities.  The  man  afterward  entirely  recovered,
went  to  Australia,  where  he  prospered  in  business,
and  where  his  sister  died,  leavino"  in  her  trunk  the
letter  from  Mr.  Spurgeon.  When  the  gentleman
found  that  letter  amono;  the  effects  of  his  much-be-
loved  sister,  he  was  greatly  moved  by  it,  and  es-
pecially, as  he  had  frequently  heard  of  Mr.  Spurgeon
and  but  a  few  days  before  had  listened  to  a  sermon
by  one  of  the  students  from  the  College.  He  wrote
to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  expressing  his  great  gratitude  for
the  kindness  he  had  done  him  by  showing  his  friends
where  he  could  be  found,  and  inclosed  a  check  for
^loo  to  be  used  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  or  devoted
to  any  beneficence  he  might  think  best.  His  name
appears  twice  afterward  in  the  list  of  donors  toward
the  work  of  the  Tabernacle,  but  how  much  he  con-
tributed cannot  be  now  well  ascertained..

But  his  experience  was  not  all  of  this  fruitful
character,  for,  like  all  other  public  men,  he  attracted
to  him  a  great  many  swindlers  and  beggars,  who
were  only  anxious  to  get  from  his  large  heartedness
and  open-handedness  all  they  could  and  then  to  leave
him  to  reflect  in  sadness  upon  the  depraved  charac-
ter of  human  nature.


THE  IIISTOR  V  OF  HIS  CHURCH  j^g

One  man  in  1861  visited  him,  who  claimed  to  be
from  America,  whose  tongue  was  so  smooth,  and
whose  manners  were  so  gentlemanly  that  he  entirely
deceived  Mr.  Spurgeon.  The  villain  prayed  most
touchingly,  exhorted  with  success,  and  was  fre-
quently sent  out  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  mission
stations,  there  to  assist  in  public  and  personal
Christian  work  among  the  lower  classes.  Mr.
Spurgeon  recommended  him  without  fear  to  the
business  men  connected  with  his  congregation,
and  by  means  of  these  recommendations  he  secured
quite  large  sums  in  subscriptions  toward  the
Church  work,  which  he  used  entirely  for  his  own
benefit.  He  forged  Mr.  Spurgeon's  signature,  and
even  passed  counterfeit  money.  He  left  Mr.  Spur-
geon much  wiser,  but  very  much  poorer.

Thus,  like  a  pendulum,  swinging  to  and  fro,  Mr.
Spurgeon's  experience  swept  from  the  sad  to  the
gay,  from  the  sorrowful  to  the  joyful ;  or  from  loss  to
gain,  in  such  unexpected  and  unforeseen  ways.


CHAPTER  VI.

HIS    PREACHINGc

What  is  the  highest  joy  ?  We  heard  that  ques-
tion asked  once  in  a  travelers'  camp  on  the  Tigris
River,  and  the  whole  evening  was  most  excitedly  de-
voted to  the  question.  No  two  persons  agreed
upon  that  situation  or  that  experience  which  would
bring  to  a  person  in  this  life  the  highest  joy.

Some  said  it  was  at  the  marriage  altar ;  some
said  it  was  in  the  accomplishment  of  a  life-long  am-
bition ;  others  said  it  was  in  the  peace  of  a  contented
life  ;  a  few  said  it  was  to  be  found  in  traveling ;
while  others  mentioned  books,  good  company,
wealth,  fame,  and  intoxication.  But  the  conditions
of  life  which  seemed  to  receive  the  most  unanimous
assent  of  the  company  as  containing  in  them  attri-
butes of  the  supremest  joy  were  those  of  the  Greek
racer,  who  at  the  moment  of  victory  reaches
forth  and  touches  the  goal,  or  he,  who  amidst  the
awful  excitement  of  heated  battle,  unconscious  of
dano^er  and  foro-etful  of  self,  succeeds  in  seizin^r  the
flag  of  the  enemy,  and  waves  his  own  In  triumph
over  the  captured  battlements.
150


HIS  PREACHING.


151


On  such  a  question  men  might  well  disagree,  for
it  is  with  men's  pleasures  as  with  their  judgments
and  watches,

"  None  go  just  alike,
Yet  each  believes  his  own."

The  lawyer  finds  untold  satisfaction  In  a  success-
ful verdict,  the  sailor  in  a  safe  harbor,  the  mechanic
in  the  triumph  of  a  useful  invention,  the  author  in
the  praise  of  his  books,  the  musician  in  the  plaudits
of  his  listeners,  statesmen  in  a  majority  of  votes,  and
the  warrior  in  the  hour  of  victory.  But  none  of
these  appear  to  touch  the  heights  of  bliss  or  the
depths  of  happiness  which  come  to  the  orator
speaking  for  God,  when  "thousands  hang  upon  his
words,  and  characters  are  chancred  under  his  influ-
ence.  Can  there  be  on  this  wide  earth  any  other
inspiration  like  It?  It  combines  all  the  gratifications
of  achievement,  all  the  bliss  of  satisfied  affec-
tion, all  the  triumph  of  a  soldier;  all  the  ex-
altation of  spirit  of  the  religious  devotee.  In
speaking  for  God,  with  the  angels  of  heaven  listen-
ing, when  one  finds  that  the  Spirit  Inspires  and  hearts
are  changed,  he  Is  at  the  very  point  of  the  noblest
victory,  as  life  is  better  than  meat,  as  purity  of  heart
Is  more  lovable  than  wickedness,  as  happiness  Is
more  beautiful  than  misery,  as  love  Is  more  exalted
than  hate,  and  as  foriretfulness  of  self  in  the  wel-
fare  of  others  is  a  sublimer  feeling  than  Is  personal
gratification,  so  is  the  delivery  of  the  good
tidings  of  peace,    the    deeds    which    save    life    are


1^2  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

grander,  nobler  and  more  inspiring  than  those  which
destroy.

The  disciple  of  Christ  whose  soul  is  filled  with
spiritual  enthusiasm,  and  who  sees  that  the  multitude
accepts  his  message  as  the  truth,  really  occupies  a
position  of  the  highest  joy.  He  rises  above
himself,  seems  to  become  ethereal,  heavenly,
eternal.  He  feels  as  thoucrh  he  held  con-
verse  with  the  anorels,  and  as  thouo^h  the
powers  of  God  were  his  own.  If  he  is  ill,  he  forgets
it ;  if  in  pain,  he  becomes  unconscious  of  it ;  if
awkward,  he  cares  not  for  it ;  lost  in  his  theme,  con-
scious only  of  the  battle  and  the  nearness  of  triumph,
bone,  muscle,  and  nerves  become  only  myriad
centres  of  exquisite  sensations,  sublime  and  thrill-
ing, until  language  Is  entirely  inadaquate  to  express
the  feelings.  Men  struggle  to  describe  such  sen-
sations in  their  cooler  moments  but  utterly  fail  to
convey  an  Idea  to  one  who  has  never  experienced
that  highest  joy.

Mr.  Spurgeon's  life  must  have  been  a  very  happy
life  when  we  remember  how  many  thousand  ser-
mon, he  delivered  to  laro^e  audiences  who  hune
spell-bound  upon  his  words,  as  upon  the  oracle  of
a  god.  Who  turned  away  from  his  declarations
new  men  and  women  to  lead  a  life  of  holiness,
purity,  and  truth,  instead  of  one  of  vice  and  crime.

He  who  writes  sermons  in  the  coolness  and  quiet-
ness of  his  study,  and  then  presents  the  clean  and
perfect  manuscript  at  the   Church  service,  or  who


HIS  PREACHING.  iq^

reads  with  manufactured  emotion  the  sentences  he
has  written  by  the  calm  of  his  fireside,  is  never  so
effective  nor  so  happy  in  his  deUvery  of  the  gospel
to  the  people  as  he  who  sweeps  spontaneously  into
the  highest  happiness  that  men  ever  reach.  The
sunset  hues  were  never  painted,  nor  were  the  Chris-
tian orator's  joys  ever  described.  Mr.  Spurgeon  was
a  true  Christian  orator,  and  often  fouofht  his  battles
on  a  different  plan  of  campaign  from  those  which
other  leaders  adopted,  but  he  won  the  victory.

Oratory  should  always  be  decided  by  its  effects,
and  the  supreme  pleasure  of  public  speaking  can
only  be  truly  enjoyed  by  him  who  succeeds.

Mr.  Spurgeon,  as  we  have  said,  was  Dften  rude,
and  affected  none  of  the  ways  of  the  schools  of
oratory  extant  in  his  day,  but  he  could  so  speak  as
to  cause  the  hearts  of  those  who  heard  him  to  rise
or  sink,  to  fill  many  eyes  with  tears,  to  pull  down
the  stubborn  sinners'  heads,  and  to  send  forth  to  the
noblest  deeds  of  self-sacrifice  a  host  of  effective
workers,  who  when  they  first  came  under  the  spell
of  his  speech  were  cruel  to  man,  and  rebellious
against  God.  He  was  a  well-directed  thunder-bolt,
whose  course  to  the  spectator  seemed  zig-zag  and
erratic,  yet  who  always  cleft  the  rock  at  the  selected
mark.  Judging  by  the  results,  he  was  one  of  the
greatesc  orators  that  ever  lived,  not  exceeded  by
Luther,  Wesley,  or  Webster.

The  enormous  moral  results  of  his  public  teach-
ing lead  us  to  the  almost  unavoidable  conclusion  that


154


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.


he  had  behind  his  words  an  Inspiration  beyond  that
which  Is  given  to  the  ordinary  man.  It  is  true  that
he  began  his  pastorate  in  London  at  a  time  in  hfe
when  his  boyish  appearance  would  make  attendance
upon  the  service  a  noveky.  It  Is  also  true  that  his
complete  confidence  In  himself,  which  was  born  of  a
confidence  In  God,  caused  him  to  speak  as  one  hav-
ing authority,  adding  greatly  to  the  singularity  of
his  position.  Many  came  to  scoff,  but  remained  to
pray,  many  sought  entrance  for  the  purpose  of
criticizing,  but  went  away  to  praise.  Some  who  were
sent  into  his  audience  for  the  purpose  of  manufac-
turing especially  satirical  cartoons,  went  away  to
represent  truthfully.  In  picture  and  writing,  the  re-
markable scenes  they  witnessed.

Yet  persecution  helped  him  greatly.  Those  who
would  not  hear  him,  reg^arded  him  with  orreat  aver-
slon,  and  thought  that  his  peculiarities  were  almost
sacrilegious.  He  was  for  a  time  most  mercilessly
assailed  by  Christians  belonging  to  other  Churches,
and  most  grossly  laughed  at  by  the  lower  pub-
lications of  London.  But  nothing  builds  up  a
Church  like  persecution.  Often  in  history  has
some  most  egregious  error  and  insanely  fantastic
creed  been  established  by  continuous  opposition
and  hate,  beyond  the  power  of  governments
to  overthrow  it.  Some  evanorelists  understand
this  power,  and  scruple  not  to  use  it,  awaken-
ing against  themselves  criticism,  persecution,  and
discussion,   that   there   may  be  excitement  and  the


HIS  PREACHING.


155


consequent  crowd  of  hearers.  Some  men  who
have  accompHshed  a  great  deal  of  good  make  it
their  habit  to  begin  a  series  of  rehgious  meetings  by
such  extreme  criticisms  of  Christians  as  to  attract
large  crowds  of  spectators  from  among  those  classes
who  love  to  hear  Church  members  berated.  Then
the  speakers  turn  upon  these  listeners,  and  with  all
their  forces  teach  them  the  way  and  convict  them  of


transo^ression.


Mr,  Spurgeon  adopted  none  of  these  mechanical
methods,  but  his  very  vehemence  and  startling  suc-
cess awakened  most  bitter  jealousies,  and  aroused  a
spirit  of  persecution  which  in  the  Middle  Ages  w^ould
have  burned  him  at  the  stake.  His  sermons  were
often  misquoted  and  his  deeds  misrepresented,  and
he  himself  personally  caricatured  in  most  repulsive
forms.  He  appeared  in  some  of  the  periodicals  as
a  monkey,  as  a  fly-trap,  as  a  serpent,  as  a  pig,  and
once  as  Satan  himself.  But  all  these  advertised  him
largely,  and  proved  ultimately  to  be  of  great  good
to  the  cause.  His  friends  loved  him  more  sincerely,
and  rallied  around  him  with  orreater  determination.
The  converted  scoffers,  revilers,  and  persecutors  be-
came naturally  most  daring  workers  in  defense  of  the
cause  they  had  before  despised.

Persons  souo^ht  Christ  at  almost  everv  service,
and  It  would  have  caused  great  surprise  if  a  week
had  passed  at  any  one  time  without  a  number  ot
conversions.

In  the  preparation  of  his  sermons,  Mn  Spurgeon


jr5  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

seems  to  have  practiced  most  thoroughly  the  system
of  reasoninor  from  the  known  to  the  unknown.  The
attractiveness  of  his  sermons  and  speeches  is  found
very  largely  in  the  fact  that  his  illustrations  and
subjects  were  intimately  connected  with  every-day
events,  and  were  well  known  in  the  experience  of
his  hearers.  He  did  not  borrow  very  largely
from  the  ancient  classics,  or  from  some  scie'ntific
theory  with  which  his  hearers  were  unacquainted,
but  made  his  meaninof  clear  with  illuminatinof  ficrures
from  the  homely  experiences  of  farmers,  mechanics,
tradesmen,  clerks,  and  officials.  His  sermons  were
talks,  not  declamations.  He  spoke  to  men  in  masses
as  he  would  speak  to  them  in  personal  conversation.
He  did  not  often  hitch  his  wagon  to  a  star,  but  we
do  often  find  the  most  homely  steed  of  daily  experi-
ence running  between  the  shafts.  Y\^\'s,  JoJin  Plough-
man  Talks,  exhibited  the  more  rude  and  homely
side  of  his  illustrative  power,  and  also  serve  to  ac-
count for  his  orenius  in  describino-  and  holdinof  the
attention  of  the  country  people.  He  did  not  pur-
chase an  article  in  the  market  without  associatinor
the  event  of  his  humble  experience  there  with  some
gospel  truth.  Every  child  that  hugged  his  knees
and  every  working  man  who  doffed  his  hat  taught
Mr.  Spurgeon  more  than  he  taught  them.  Men
were  books  to  him,  and  events  Avere  God's  volumes
of  illustrations.  While  in  a  street  bus  or  a  hansom,
he  continually  read  in  the  shops  which  he  passed,  or
in  the  throng  through  which  he  drove,  the  prophecies,


HIS  PREACHING.  x^j

needs,  and  exertions  of  a  new  dispensation.  The
chilly  fog,  the  black  smoking  chimneys,  the  slow-
rolllnof  Thames,  and  the  winter  sleet  were  volumes
to  him,  closely  read  and  most  carefully  digested.  If
a  man  entered  the  Church  service  covered  with
sleet,  or  chilled  with  fog,  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  be
sure  to  use  that  condition  as  an  Illustration  of  the
position  of  the  sinner  or  the  backsliding  Christian.  If
the  morning  sun  broke  suddenly  through  the  dark
clouds,  brightening  the  windows  of  the  chapel,  he
would  Instantly  turn  that  good  omen  into  a  never-to-
be-forgotten  Illustration  of  the  nearness  of  God's
presence.  If  he  knocked  a  glass  of  water  off  the
table,  or  was  obliged  to  limp  into  his  pulpit,  he  found
in  these  circumstances  the  most  piercing  Illustration
of  truth  and  used  them  In  his  most  powerful  appli-
cation of  Scripture  teaching  to  the  lives  of  his
hearers.  Even  his  finofer-nalls  were  found  to  con-
tain  an  illuminating  power  which  astonished  those
who  heard  him  as  he  made  the  application  to  his
thoucrhts.

He  was  one  who  not  only  found  books  in  running
brooks,  sermons  In  stones,  but  one  who  also  found
good  In  everything,  when  applied  to  his  profession.
The  daily  paper  with  its  regular  record  of  births,
deaths,  marriages,  accidents,  crimes,  and  markets
was  to  him  a  whole  volume  from  which  he  could
select  the  most  wonderful  and  helpful  Illustrative  in-
cidents. He  lived  among  men,  he  sympathized  with
them.     He  felt  as  they  feel,  and  he  talked  as  they


158  CHARLES  H.  SPUR  GEO  J\t.

talk,  thus  connecting  the  most  orcHnary  affairs  of
every-day  work  with  some  gospel  truth  in  a  way
which  made  it  impossible  for  them  to  pursue  their
usual  vocation  and  forget  what  he  had  said.

The  regular  worshiper  at  Spurgeon's  Tabernacle,
if  she  were  a  woman,  would  be  reminded  of  his  ex-
hortations by  almost  every  instrument  she  afterward
used  in  the  kitchen,  and  by  nearly  every  dish  or
preparation  she  set  upon  the  table.  One  old  lady
while  living  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  actually  named'
the  dishes  used  upon  the  table  after  some  of  the
sermons,  lectures,  or  talks  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  so  that
the  teapot  suggested  one  phase  of  election,  and  the
soup-dish  brought  to  mind  a  sermon  on  God's  sov-
ereignty. He  put  a  halo  upon  common  things,
making  home  life  and  shop  life  more  interesting  and
deliofhtful  because  of  the  associations  into  which  he
drew  the  tools  and  articles  there  in  constant  use.
The  farmer  puts  on  his  frock  and  calls  to  mind  Mr.
Spurgeon's  illustration  of  Elijah  and  Elisha,  he  puts
his  hand  to  the  plow,  and  cannot  forget  Mr.  Spur-
ofeon's  rino^inof  exhortation  not  to  look  back.  The
sailor  reefing  the  sails  in  expectation  of  a  coming
blow,  reads  in  every  knot  which  he  ties,  and  every
fold  which  he  crathers  about  the  beam  some  section
of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermons  or  lectures.  The  cab-
man names  his  horse  and  vehicle  in  honor  of  some
illustration  associated  with  them,  which  he  has  heard
in  the  metropolitan  pulpit.  The  school-boy  takes
down  his  hat  from  the  peg,  and  smiling,  quotes  from


HIS  PREACHING,  1 50

Mr.  Spurgeon,  ''  this  hat  fits  me  and  I  will  put  it  on."
The  school-girl  carefully  erases  the  pencil  marks  on
the  margin  of  the  well-thumbed  book,  sayine  to  her
playmate,  "  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  the  other  day  that
'  children  are  like  school-books,  what  they  write  in
the  margin  is  theirs,  what  is  printed  in  the  text  is
God's.'  "  A  girl  in  the  Sunday-school  tears  her  dress
and  is  almost  superstitiously  anxious  about  it,  be-
cause of  the  association  with  some  incident  Mr.
Spurgeon  has  given,  wherein  the  rent  garment  of
repentant  sinners  is  mentioned  in  the  Bible.

The  rocker  squeaks  in  an  old  man's  chair,  and  he
tells  his  visitors  that  it  reminds  him  of  what  he
heard  Mr.  Spurgeon  say  the  last  time  he  was  at
Church,  as  he  compared  bigotry  to  a  rocking-chair,
saying  that  ''  the  older  the  chair,  the  greater  the
squeak."  The  banker,  counting  his  money  at  the
close  of  the  day's  exchanges,  throws  out  a  well-worn
sovereign,  and  says  Mr.  Spurgeon  tells  us  to  beware
of  liorht  sovereiorns.  Then  he  ofoes  home  from  his
bank  meditating  upon  the  wonderful  aptness  of  the
illustration,  applies  its  teaching  to  his  life.  He  de-
termines to  do  his  full  duty  and  slight  nothing,  and
anything  which  he  does  at  all  he  has  resolved  to  do
well.  The  emigrant  in  Australia  constructs  his  rude
cabin  upon  his  newly-cleared  farm^  and  tells  his
family  at  the  dinner-table  that  he  is  going  to  do
what  Mr.  Spurgeon  advises  his  theological  students
to  do,  namely:  to  "Go  around  the  stumps  and  let
them  rot."     The  young  man  far  from  home  in  Can-


l6o  CHARLES  II.  SPURGEON.

ada  or  in  the  United  States,  who  at  home  was  a
frequent  Hstener  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  never  forgets  the
illustration  the  great  preacher  used  when  speaking
of  the  prodigal  son,  wherein  he  said :  '*  England's
prodigals  wander  all  over  the  world,  but,  thank  God  !
many  of  them  are  not  feeding  swine."  An  old  crip-
ple, well-known  to  the  writer,  who  has  for  many
years  regularly  read  Mr,  Spurgeon's  sermons,  sits
month  after  month  by  the  same  window,  unable  to
leave  the  room,  and  frequently  speaks  to  the  house-
keeper, saying :  "Please  brush  the  dust  from  this
glass,  for  Mr.  Spurgeon  says:  'Specks  which  seem
to  be  on  the  soul  are  often  in  the  orlass.'"

Mr.  Spurgeon  had  a  natural  treasure  in  the  most
wonderful  voice.  He  could  speak  so  loud  and  clear
that  it  has  been  confidently  asserted  that  at  least
twelve  thousand  people  have  heard  it  at  one  time  in
the  open  air.  Although  his  voice  was  so  loud,  it
also  was  very  sympathetic,  and  easily  modulated  to
the  expression  of  all  the  varied  shades  of  meaning
to  which  he  would  give  utterance.  His  voice  would
sometimes  rise  to  a  trumpet  blast,  and  in  the  next
few  sentences  sink  to  the  cooine  of  a  dove,  there
was  something  in  the  very  tone,  which,  like  White-
field's,  was  "  felt  to  be  holy,"  and  conveyed  an  in-
spiration or  elevation  of  thought  entirely  distant
from  the  sense.

He  was  not  a  musician,  and  his  ideas  of  musical
culture  were  considered  by  many  to  be  very  inar-
tistic.    But   his    voice    itself  contained    a    fund    of


HIS  PRF.ACHING.  l5j

music,  and  was  capable  of  many  more  musical  ex-
pressions than  could  be  found  in  the  rise  and  fall  or
variety  of  a  church  organ.  His  voice  was  said  to  be
as  clear  in  its  head  tones  as  that  of  a  soprano  singer,
but  at  will  became  like  that  of  a  lion  in  the  moun-
tain. Yet  he  seldom  combined  all  its  powers  in  any
one  address,  and  it  was  only  to  the  habitual  listeners
that  these  marvelous  vocal  powers  were  fully  ap-
preciated or  even  known.

He  was  not  an  elocutionist.  He  accomplished
naturally  all  for  which  the  academician  strived  to
attain  by  art.  Few  voices  are  capable  of  expressing
the  great  variety  of  ideas  and  feelings  which
characterized  Mr.  Spurgeon's.  The  elocutionist
Is  required  to  cover  the  hidden  defects  as  much  as
to  develop  the  many  prominent  merits  of  the  human
voice.

Mr.  Spurgeon's  voice  could  not  be  Improved.  It
is  Interesting  to  compare  the  doctrinal  statements
of  prominent  theologians  at  different  periods  In
their  lives  and  see  how  In  nearly  every  case  they
have  been  gradually  but  surely  molded  Into  widely
differing  expressions,  their  essential  beliefs  under-
going a  gradual  and  sometimes  a  very  remarkable
change.  When  their  first  sermons  are  placed
alongside  of  the  last,  they  are  found  to  be  far  from
each  other  In  all  that  makes  up  a  doctrinal  creed.
But  it  is  a  most  slno-ular  thinor  in  the-  life  of  Mr.
Spurgeon  that  the  fundamental  principles  of  the
doctrines  which  he  espoused  In  his  early  boyhood
II


1 52  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

were  adhered  to  with  such  consistency  and  persist-
ency through  his  entire  hfe.  The  denomination
itself  passed  through  many  modifications  and  changes
during  his  ministerial  experiences,  and  often  swung
like  a  pendulum  from  one  point  to  another,  leaving
him  ever  standing  at  the  same  middle  point  of  van-
tage. The  comparison  of  the  sermons  last  published
with  those  which  appeared  in  1856  and  1858,  show
no  change  whatever  in  the  doctrines,  and  no
material  change  in  the  form  of  presentation
of  the  doctrines,  save  to  make  them  more
distinct,  and  express  a  firmer  adherence  to
their  principles.  It  is  a  matter  so  remarkable
that  it  amounts  to  a  wonder  that  through  a  life  in
which  he  delivered  so  many  thousand  sermons,  he
should  have  maintained  such  consistency  with  him-
self, his  denomination  and  doctrines.  He  was
strongly  Calvinistic,  and  believed  with  positive  as-
surance in  the  perseverance  of  the  saints  and  in  the
eternal  punishment  of  the  wicked.  His  creed  car-
ried his  whole  mind  with  It.  There  was  no  mental
reservation  about  It.  He  declared  what  he  sincerely
believed,  and  believed  to  the  full  all  that  he  declared.
The  critics  are  few  who  have  ever  had  the  hardi-
hood to  assert  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  Inconsistent
with  himself.  He  felt  sure  that  all  the  world  was
Included  In  the  condemnation,  and  that  there  was  no
escape  but  to  believe  In  Jesus  the  Christ,  and  that
the  Saviour  could  only  be  found  through  that  sincere
repentance   whose    fruitage    was    naturally    good


HIS  PREACHING.  1 6^

works.  He  believed  that  the  world  was  lost,  and
he  taught  that  there  was  no  other  Saviour  to  redeem
it  but  the  one  who  died  on  Calvary.  That  thought
permeates  all  that  he  writes,  and  is  especially  prom-
inent in  all  that  he  speaks.  It  is  his  waking  thought,
and  seems  even  to  fill  his  dreams.  Salvation  !  sal-
vation !  was  his  cry  under  all  circumstances,  and  he
would  not  be  silent.  He  was  able  to  reconcile  in
his  own  mind,  and  teach  in  the  most  wonderful  way
the  free  will  of  man  and  God's  sovereignty.  That
is  the  most  difficult  problem  with  which  the  theolo-
gian has  ever  had  to  deal.  Most  minds  simply  dis-
miss the  question  as  beyond  the  possibility  of
solution,  and  content  themselves  with  the  thought
that  in  some  future  time  it  may  be  explained  by
means  which  are  not  now  at  hand.  He  also  stood
on  that  line  of  the  orolden  mean  with  reference  to
his  denominational  doctrines  and  was  most  consist-
ent in  the  reconciliation  of  the  two  somewhat  con-
trary statements  of  belief  contained  in  the  practice
and  declaration  of  principles  recognized  everywhere
by  the  Baptist  denomination.

Henry  VIII  established  the  principle  that  the
English  Church  had  the  right  to  declare  its  independ-
ence of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.  Independent
Churches  of  Encrland  went  further  with  the  doctrine
and  declared  that  they  had  a  right  to  be  Independ-
ent of  every  other  Church,  and  of  the  Church  of
England  itself.     It  was  a  pfinciple  which  had  long


164  CHARLES  H.    SPURGEON.

before  been  asserted  and  maintained  by  the  Baptist
Churches  on  the  Continent.

The  distinouishing  feature  of  the  Baptist  denomi-
nation when  placed  historically  in  contrast  with
others  of  the  independent  or  Non-conformist
Churches,  was  in  their  adherence  to  the  principle
that  Christians  in  practice  should  follow  the  example
of  Jesus  Christ  as  closely  as  was  practically  possi-
ble in  all  the  ordinances,  and  in  daily  behavior.
Hence  their  insistence  upon  baptism  by  immersion,
and  upon  the  presence  of  disciples  only  at  the
Lord's  table.  These  doctrines  they  have  ever  held
up  most  prominently  and  have  adhered  to  them  in
teaching  throughout  the  entire  history  of  the  Baptist
Church.  But  these  principles  have  been  scarcely
more  strongly  asserted  than  has  the  other  principle,
set  up  as  a  counterpart,  that  every  person  shall  have
the  right  and  ought  to  exercise  it,  to  worship  God
according  to  the  dictates  of  his  own  conscience.
Thus  setting  up  not  only  the  Independence  of  each
individual  Church,  but  the  independence  of  each
Individual  conscience.  In  the  teaching  of  these
principles,  which  sometimes  seem  to  be  in  opposi-
tion, Mr.  Spurgeon  was  perfectly  consistent.  He
taught  clearly  and  distincdy  what  he  believed  to  be
the  truth  as  asserted  In  the  Scriptures,  and  taught
by  the  Baptist  denomination,  with  reference  to  the
necessity  of  belief  In  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  accept-
ance of  Him  as  a  Saviour  and  example.  But  he
never  crossed  the  line  from  teaching  to  the  applica-


Ills  PREACHING.  I^e

tion  of  force  or  the  use  of  persecution  to  compel
other  people  to  believe  as  he  believed,  or  to  practice
as  he  practiced.  He  placed  himself  in  that  consist-
ent position  where  the  extremists  on  either  hand
were  ever  bound  to  return  to  his  place.  He  could
thus  live  in  the  close  fellowship  with  other  denomi-
nations and  unite  with  them  in  carrying  on  Christian
work  and  sincerely  maintain  a  close  spiritual  com-
munion with  them  all.

He  believed  in  his  Church  heartily  and  advocated
it  thoroughly.  He  also  believed  in  the  full  liberty
of  the  human  conscience  and  could  intermingle
most  freely  and  lovingly  with  any  other  class  of
Christians,  who  he  was  sure  were  living  up  to  the
dictates  of  their  own  consciences  enlightened  by  the
Word  of  God.  Men  were  to  be  persuaded,  not
driven.  All  men  are  fallible ;  and  consequently  he
himself  would  not  consider  himself  to  be  infallible.

He  had  a  broad  charity  for  denominational  differ-
ences, and  maintained  a  most  intimate  friendship
with  persons  of  other  creeds,  and  with  high  officials
in  the  Church  of  England  itself  "  Like  priest,  like
people."  The  members  of  his  Church  were  very
like  him  in  their  stronor  adherence  to  their  denomi-
national  belief,  but  were  also  very  liberal,  fraternal,
generous,  and  kind-hearted  toward  the  members  of
any  other  Christian  Church.

But  articles  of  faith  and  matters  of  creed  were
always  held  in  strict  subordination  to  the  noble
theme  of  salvation  through  belief  in  the  Lord  Jesus


1 66  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

Christ.  Christ  was  all  and  in  all.  He  was  a  great
Spirit  and  a  part  of  the  God-head.  It  was  not  ex-
ternal form,  but  internal  faith  which  settled  the
question  'of  each  believers  salvation.  In  that  he
stood  on  a  common  platform  with  nearly  every
other  Christian  denomination.

If  his  position  were  once  granted  that  every  man
should  have  the  right  to  worship  God  according  to
the  dictates  of  his  own  conscience,  then  would  all
denominations  unite  in  one  o^reat  Church  and  move
on  together  against  the  common  enemy  of  God  and
men.

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  in  no  sense  a  sensational
preacher  unless  it  consisted  in  the  sensation  which
the  variety  of  illustrations  and  exceeding  boldness
aroused  in  his  audience.  He  never  condescended  to
the  use  of  any  sensational  methods  for  the  purpose
of  drawing  a  congregation  or  in  the  accomplishment
of  any  other  worldly  purpose.  If  he  used  unusual
topics  or  made  strong  speeches  it  was  not  because  of
any  thought  in  his  mind  of  personal  gain  to  himself.
His  whole  soul  was  wrapped  up  in  the  delivery  of
the  Gospel  message,  and  wherever  he  saw  an  op-
portunity to  advance  it  he  did  not  hesitate  to  use
any  weapon  that  was  reasonably  at  hand.  He  once
declared  that  when  in  the  field  if  he  could  not  get  a
sword  he  would  take  a  fence-rail.

The  divine  word  is  everything.  The  means  were
only  secondary.  He  never  hesitated  to  refer  to
himself,  and  thought  it  as  great  a  sacrilege  to  be


HIS  PREACHING.  i6j

over-modest  as  It  was  to  be  over-bold.  Mock-
modesty  had  no  place  In  his  make-up.  He  had  no
fear  of  criticism  when  he  felt  that  he  was  speaking
under  the  inspiration  of  God,  and  threw  away  entirely
all  hesitancy  born  of  the  fear  of  people.  He  spoke
what  he  meant  and  if  he  had  occasion  to  use  the
personal  pronoun  I,  he  used  it  over  and  over  and
over  again.  He  did  not  care  whether  people  noticed
it  and  attributed  it  to  egotism  or  to  his  carelessness
of  self.  Some  people  are  so  modest  that  they  never
let  their  rieht  hand  know  what  their  left  hand  doeth,
and  are  frequently  so  modest  about  it  that  often
even  the  left  hand  never  knows  of  their  making  an
offering.  So  there  are  people  who,  in  their  giving,
desire  to  trumpet  it  before  them,  as  they  did  In  the
day  of  Christ's  rebuke,  and  never  give  unless  they
can  write  their  name  upon  the  gift  in  prominent
letters  of  gold.  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  his  disciples
have  stood  In  the  middle  ground  between  these  two
extremes,  never  boasting  of  what  they  o^ave  or  did
and  never  ashamed  to  let  any  one  see  either  their
deeds  or  their  creeds,  and  he  preached  as  Bayard
lived,  without  fear  and  without  reproach.

Another  special  feature  of  his  ministry  was  In  the
adjustment  of  himself  to  the  needs  of  his  hearers
or  to  the  time  at  which  he  addressed  them.  He
was  all  things  unto  all  men  that  he  might  win  some.
There  was  a  natural  disposition  to  adaptation  which
is  seldom  found  in  any  person  occupying  so  promi-
nent a  position.     His  spirit  was  so  sensitive  to  the


1 68  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  CN.

feelings  and  needs  of  odiers  diat  he  would,  without
being  conscious  of  it,  think  as  they  thought  and  feel
as  they  felt ;  discovering  by  an  unerring  instinct  the
right  current  of  thought  and  the  antidote  to  their
pains,  as  the  wild  beast  when  poisoned  exercises
that  marvelous  power  to  find  an  antidote,  and  as  the
chameleon  changes  Its  color  without  effort  when
associated  with  the  changing  shades  of  nature.  So
he,  without  disturbing  his  principles  or  In  any  way
changing  his  religious  nature,  assimilated  himself  to
the  society  in  which  he  was  placed  in  the  most  re-
markable manner.  He  could  talk  interestingly  to  a
ploughman  and  once  won  the  highest  favor  from  an
audience  composed  entirely  of  hawkers  or  street
peddlers.  He  seemed  to  be  able  to  enter  fully  into
their  sympathies,  disappointments,  successes,  and
anxieties,  and  he  found,  while  speaking,  that  even
their  language,  which  is  local  and  peculiar,  flowed
spontaneously  from  his  lips.

It  is  Indeed  a  marvel  to  the  student  to  observe
how  in  his  John  Ploughmajt  s  Talks,  and  In  his
letters  to  persons  of  other  trades  and  occupations
he  was  able  to  speak  In  their  own  terms  with  the
very  nicest  and  most  accurate  appreciation  of  the
meanlne  of  common  and  sometimes  rude  localisms.
In  England  there  are  four  or  five  distinct  dialects,
and  but  for  a  third  and  more  creneral  lano-uaofe  the
citizens  of  one  locality  would  be  entirely  unable  to
communicate  with  those  of  another.  Yet  It  is  said
that  Mr  Spurgeon,  when  visiting  any  one  of  these


>

n


O
H

a

o

r


His  PREACHING.  lyi

localities,  where  their  language  so  greatly  differed
from  that  of  London,  was  able  to  speak  so  natur-
ally in  their  own  local  tongue  as  to  mislead  many  of
his  audience  as  to  the  place  of  his  birth  or  residence.
Each  locality  which  he  visited  claimed  him  as  their
own,  as  almost  every  auditor  in  his  great  congre-
gation felt  that  each  sermon  Mr.  Spurgeon  delivered
was  intended  especially  for  him.  It  seemed  impos-
sible tor  any  person,  even  with  the  closest  study
and  the  highest  natural  genius,  to  accomplish  by  any
plan  such  almost  miraculous  results.  In  this,  as  in
many  other  things  connected  with  his  history,  we
come  to  the  deliberate  conclusion  there  was  some
power  or  influence  above  him  which  moved  upon
him  and  enabled  him  to  accomplish  these  otherwise:
L  .ct'jcuun table  results.


CHAPTER  VII.

WONDERFUL    HEALING.

Much  has  been  written  by  those  who  are  wise
and  much  has  been  said  by  those  who  are  foohsh
with  reference  to  the  power  of  Chrisdan  faith  in  the
heahng  of  the  sick.  SiUiness  weakened  and  diluted
has  grappled  with  this  important  subject  as  a  jelly-
fish might  grapple  with  a  shark.  It  is  a  topic  which
seems  to  furnish  to  the  foolish  and  erratic  a  most  at-
tractive fund  of  speculation  and  misrepresentation.
Extremists  and  charlatans  have  monopolized  this
subject  until  the  world  refuses  to  believe  even  that
which  they  themselves  see.  Men,  women,  and  chil-
dren are  cured  by  the  exercise  of  Christian  faith.
But  whether  it  be  directlv  miraculous  or  the  result
of  natural  law  is  a  question  not  yet  decided.  In  fact,
it  has  not  been  completely  settled  whether  or  not
natural  law  is  entirely  a  series  of  miracles  or  every
miracle  is  itself  in  accordance  with  natural  law.  This
subject  is  deserving  of  respectful  attention,  and  of
very  close  investigation,  and  the  investigator  must
travel  along  the  tributary  line  of  the  wonderful  and
the  natural  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  lose  his  footing;
keeping  ever  consistent  with  nature.  Prayers  for
the  sick  are  answered,  and  many  persons  do  recover
172


WONDERFUL  HEALING.  I^^

directly  in  consequence  of  such  petitions.  That  is
made  clear  by  unquestioned  evidence.  But  it  is
still  a  debatable  matter  as  to  the  means  which
Divine  power  uses  in  the  accomplishment  of  such
desired  ends.  With  reference  to  the  healing  of  the
sick  by  prayer  or  by  the  laying  on  of  hands,  Mr.
Spurgeon  ever  maintained  a  very  careful  reserve.

It  was  difficult  to  secure  from  him  a  direct  ex-
pression of  his  convictions  in  this  matter.

The  writer  once,  when  a  correspondent  for  a
prominent  American  newspaper,  asked  him  the
direct  question,  whether  he  believed  all  persons
could  be  healed  by  the  use  of  sincere  prayer  by
persons  who  believed  in  Christ  and  whose  lives
were  righteous.  He  announced  that  his  experience
in  the  matter  had  been  quite  extended,  but  that  he
needed  to  look  very  much  further  before  he  would
be  able  to  answer  such  a  question  without  reserva-
tion. Yet,  no  man  probably,  in  England  or  in
America,  in  this  century,  has  ever  healed  so  many
people  as  did  Mr.  Spurgeon,  although  he  was  not
himself  a  physician  and  never  wrote  prescriptions.
He  felt  that  there  was  unexplainable  mystery  about
the  whole  matter.  Yet,  he  asserted  that  there  was
some  power  connected  with  prayer  which  ougl^t  to
be  used  when  persons  were  in  pain  and  could
be  relieved  by  it.

He  once  gathered  a  number  of  volumes  on  the
subject  of  healing  the  sick  in  answer  to  prayer,  and
studied  the  matter  with  raust  persistent  carefulness


174


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.


with  the  hope  that  the  mystery  might  be  discovered.
But  no  research  into  the  matter  cleared  the  ques-
tion from  many  comphcations  and  doubts,  He  often
prayed  for  the  recovery  of  the  sick,  who,  instead  of
becoming  at  once  convalescent,  became  immediately
worse  and  soon  died.  Such  experiences  would  have
discouraged  him  entirely  in  the  theory  that  there
was  any  use  in  prayer,  had  it  not  been  for  the  won-
derfully direct  recovery  of  other  people,  under  cir-
cumstances which  showed  that  there  was  no  other
possible  solution  to  the  mystery  but  in  saying  tliat
the  prayer  had  a  definite  and  miraculous  influence.

That  the  mind  has  a  strong  and  powerful  influ-
ence over  the  body  is  confirmed  by  the  most  ordi-
nary experiences,  and  all  persons  recognize  that  fact
intuitively,  if  they  do  not  reason  about  it.  That
the  body  also  exercises  great  influence  over  the
mind  is  just  as  apparent  to  any  everyday  observer.
Ordinary  common  sense  teaches  these  fundamental
truths.  But  to  state  how  far  this  influence  extends
in  all  directions,  or  to  draw  up  a  law  distinctly  say-
ing, Thus  far  does  it  go  and  no  further,  requires  an
almost  Divine  insight  such  as  science  has  not  yet
reached.

The  physician  who  can  fully  understand  the  use
and  influence  of  the  mind  to  assist  him  in  the  admin-
istration of  medicine  has  not  yet  been  in  practice.
He  may  take  advantage  of  it  in  a  small  way,  but  to
reduce  it  to  a  science  is  something  no  person  has  yet
accomplished.     Consequently  this  vast  unexplained


WONDERFUL  HEALING.  lyt

field  In  the  experiences  and  needs  of  men  Is  often
entered  by  the  untrustworthy,  who  see  only  phan-
toms, weird  ghosts,  and  who  go  out  with  the  most
extravagant  stories  of  the  most  Inconsistent  things.
As  a  matter  of  fact  no  man  can  assert  with  a
positive  assurance  of  truth  In  any  case  of  recovery
what  was  certainly  the  most  Influential  agency  In  the
matter.  The  whole  testimony  Is  Indirect  and  cir-
cumstantial. If  the  person  recovers  without  the  use
of  the  physician's  prescription  he  Immediately  as-
serts that  the  remedy  was  entirely  In  his  mind  or  spirit;
when  It  may  possibly  have  been  connected  with
something  that  he  ate,  breathed,  or  drank,  which
was  In  the  nature  of  a  prescription,  although  not
ordered  by  a  physician.  If  a  person  returns  speed-
ily to  health  while  taking  certain  doses  ordered  by
the  doctor,  he  gives  the  credit  for  his  recovery  en-
tirely to  the  skill  of  the  doctor  and  the  power  of  the
drugs,  and  yet  he  could  not  assert  beyond  the  pos-
sibility of  contradiction  but  that  he  would  have
recovered  as  soon  and  perhaps  sooner  If  he  had  not
taken  any  medicine  at  all.

The  medical  profession  have  made  most  surprising
and  gratifying  advances  in  these  recent  years  in
everything  pertaining  to  surgery, and  In  the  prepara-
tion of  medicines ;  but  they  are  all  still  very  far
from  the  explanation  for  which  the  world  is  calling,
which  shall  give  the  reasons  for  prevailing  disease
and  show  clearly  to  the  common  mind  the  processes
required  for  recovery.     "  Heal  the  mind  and  heal


176


CHARLES  II.  SPURGE  ON.


the  body"  is  the  cry  of  some  very  enthusiastic  scien-
tists. "Heal  the  body  and  heal  the  mind"  is  the
answering  cry  of  a  still  larger  class  of  practitioners.
A  still  smaller  class  say,  "  Appeal  unto  the  great
Spirit,  which  is  overall,  and  can  see  and  understand
all,  and  if  we  win  its  favorable  attention  and  assist-
ance, recovery  is  absolutely  certain."  Yet  in  this
latter  case,  as  in  the  others,  the  processes  by  which
a  disease  is  defeated  are  almost  entirely  out  of  sight,
and  surmisings  seem  to  be  fruitless.  The  astrono-
mer can  arrange  a  hypothesis  to  which  he  will  adjust
many  of  the  facts  connected  with  the  heavenly
bodies,  and  will  assert  with  some  degree  of  proba-
bility that  this  hypothesis  furnishes  the  only  reason-
able explanation  for  many  of  the  discoveries  made
by  the  telescope  and  by  the  hammer  of  the  geolo-


gist.


But  no  hypothesis  seems  yet  to  be  stated  which
will  make  consistent  the  thousands  of  crathered  facts
connected  with  the  healinof  of  disease.  The  school
of  medicine  which  is  to  triumph  in  the  art  of  healing
has  not  yet  been  established.  May  the  Lord  hasten
its  coming,  and  send  His  disciples  about  with  the
power  of  Jesus  Christ  to  heal  all  manner  of  diseases  ;
that  the  lame  may  walk  and  the  blind  recover  their
sio^ht.

"According  to  your  faith  shall  it  be  unto  you"
has  often  been  exemplified  in  die  matter  of  sickness.
That  a  person  who  is  thoroughly  convinced  he  is
going  to  die  is  difficult  to  heal  all  physicians  assert.


WONDERFUL  HEALING.


^77


That  a  patient  who  fully  believes  he  is  going  to
recover  is  a  much  easier  subject  in  medical  practice
is  also  a  universal  testimony  of  medical  men,  and
this  latter  proposition  may  serve  to  account  some-
what naturally  for  many  of  the  incidents  connected
widi  Mr.  Spurgeon's  visitations  among  the  sick.

Thousands  did  believe  that  his  prayer  would  heal
them.  He  prayed  with  them,  they  recovered.  Such
an  experience  to  the  ordinary  mind  would  be  convinc-
ing beyond  any  possible  doubt  that  Mr.  Spurgeon's
prayers  had  behind  them  a  Divinely  healing  power.
Some  have  said  that  his  prayers  were  of  such  a
nature,  and  that  he  himself  had  such  complete  faith
in  them  being  answered,  that  they  thoroughly  con-
vinced the  pain-stricken  listener  that  an  answer  was
certain,  and  they  would  surely  recover.  Fully  as-
sured of  their  recovery,  their  way  to  perfect  health
would  seem  to  be  naturally  opened.

Yet  that  transfers  the  question  but  a  little  to  one
side,  and  credits  supernatural  power  with  having
changed  their  minds.  If  a  skilled  physician,  with  all
his  training,  talent,  and  means  could  not  change  the
mind  of  the  patient,  it  is  at  least  a  wonderful  thing
that  any  other  person  without  that  skill  or  the  use  of
any  means  should  give  such  remarkable  faith.
Anyhow  the  whole  matter  is  open  to  investigation,
and  any  keen  student  with  a  thoroughly  disciplined,
analytical  mind  will  not  find  it  an  easy  field  of
study.

We  will  give  some  of  the  incidents  which  have

12


1^8  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

been  related  to  us,  and  others  which  we  have  seen
in  print,  all  of  which  we  believe  to  be  literally  true ;
and  leave  them  to  the  meditation  or  examination  of
such  persons  as  desire  to  study  deeper  into  the
philosophy  of  faith,  or  the  molecular  origin  of  disease.
Perhaps  back  of  the  physical  bacteria  there  may
yet  be  found  a  spiritual  bacteria  requiring-  an
Omnipotent  mind  to  give  explanation  of  the  infinite
in  the  orimn  of  Life  or  Death.

As  the  tremblino;  of  a  leaf  affects  the  motion  of
the  earth,  and  through  that  disturbs  the  sun  and  the
most  distant  stars  of  the  universe,  so  any  expression
of  life  must  affect  all  other  life  ;  and  reach  away  and
away  beyond  the  highest  imagination  into  the  realms
to  the  Divine,  and  perhaps  to  the  throne  of  God  itself.
All  telephones  lead  to  the  central  office.  All  life
reaches  back  to  God.

There  are  now  living  and  worshiping  in  the  Met-
ropolitan Tabernacle  hundreds  of  people  who  ascribe
the  extension  of  their  life  to  the  effect  of  Mr.  Spur-
geon's  personal  prayers.  They  have  been  sick  with
disease  and  nigh  unto  death,  he  has  appeared,
kneeled  by  their  beds,  and  prayed  for  their  recovery.
Immediately  the  tide  of  health  returned,  the  fevered
pulse  became  calm,  the  temperature  was  reduced,
and  all  the  activities  of  nature  resumed  their  nor-
mal functions  within  a  short  and  unexpected  period.
If  a  meetinor  were  to  be  called  of  all  those  who  at-
tribute  their  recovery  to  the  prayer  of  Mr.  Spur-
geon,    it    would  furnish  one   of  the  most  deserved


WONDERFUL  HEALING.  j^g

tributes    to    his    memory    that    could    be    possibly
made.

His  ministry  in  London  began  with  some  of  these
most  remarkable  incidents,  which  so  confirmed  the
truths  he  uttered  from  the  pulpit  as  to  make  per-
sons believe  in  him  because  of  his  very  works'  sake.
Stories  were  very  current  during  the  first  year  of
his  ministry  at  New^  Park  Street  Chapel  of  the  mar-
velous results  which  had  attended  his  pastoral
visitations  upon  the  sick.  One  man  in  1855  arose
from  his  bed  of  fever  the  same  day  in  which  the
physician  had  declared  his  case  to  be  very  critical,
and  appeared  at  the  meeting  in  the  evening,  to  the
astonishment  of  all  his  acquaintances,  saying  :  "  Mr.
Spurgeon  prayed  with  me  this  morning,  I  have  been
divinely  healed."  Another,  in  the  same  season,  ap-
peared one  Sunday,  walking  decidedly  and  firmly
down  the  aisle  to  a  front  seat,  who  for  years  before
had  always  limped  into  the  service.  He  was  often
heard  to  murmur  and  once  to  shout,  ''Glory  to
God  !"  as  he  was  giving  praise  to  his  Divine  Master
for  having  used  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  his  miraculous
recovery.  It  was  a  case  of  partial  paralysis,  which
physicians  now  say  is  due  largely  to  a  failure  of
some  portion  of  the  brain  to  perform  its  natural
duties.  In  any  case,  it  is  a  nervous  disease,  and
can  only  be  healed  by  the  restoration  of  the  nervous
forces  or  in  those  avenues  connected  with  the  brain
or  in  the  brain  itself.  One  gentleman  connected
with   an  institution  of  learning  in  London  explained


I  go  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

this  matter  satisfactorily  to  himself  by  saying  that
some  unusual  mental  excitement  had  aroused  the
dormant  brain  into  normal  action,  and  had  restored
the  nerves ;  and  consequently  had  given  'the  man
renewed  power  to  use  his  right  side,  which  had  been
stricken  in  the  paralytic  stroke  of  five  years  before.
That  he  was  healed  no  one  questioned  ;  the  crutch
he  gave  away,  thoroughly  believing  he  would  never
have  occasion  again  to  use  it,  and  declaring  confi-
dently that  he  was  to  live  to  be  seventy-eight  years
of  age.  Whether  he  did  live  out  the  days  as  he  so
confidently  expected   is  not  known  to  the  writer.

One  man  who  had  been  unable  to  leave  the  house
for  many  years,  afBicted  with  a  form  of  rheumatism
somewhat  akin  to  that  common  disease,  the  gout,
insisted  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  should  come  and  pray
for  his  recovery,  but  Mr.  Spurgeon,  while  accepting
the  invitation  to  attend  and  pray,  said  that  for  him-
self he  could  not  have  a  complete  faith  in  the  power

of  his  prayer  to  restore  such  a  case.  Notwithstand-
ing Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  unbelief  in  the  effects  of

his  petitions,  the  man  asserted  his  perfect  confi-
dence. Mr.  Spurgeon  knelt  with  him  and  prayed.
At  the  close  of  his  prayer  the  man  asserted  very
strongly  that  he  felt  very  different  and  very  much
better.  He  urged  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  return  and  pray
with  him  the  next  morning,  which  the  preacher  very
cheerfully  did.  The  old  gentleman  met  him  at  the
door  and  welcomed  him  with  a  hearty  laugh,  say-
ing "  The   Lord   is   performing   His  promises  and


WONDERFUL  HEALING.  l8l

has  answered  your  prayer."  He  was  not  entirely
well,  but  he  had  so  far  recovered  as  to  be  able  to
walk  about  the  house,  and  a  few  weeks  thereafter
did  resume  the  care  of  a  business  which  required
no  great  amount  of  physical  exercise.  He  was  for
several  years  afterward  a  regular  attendant  at  the
chapel,  and  neither  storm  nor  cold  hindered  him
from  reaching  his  accustomed  place.

Another  person,  who  was  a  visitor  in  London  from
Wales,  who  had  been  sadly  afflicted  mentally  in
consequence  of  some  physical  defect  or  disease,
pleaded  most  piteously  with  his  family  to  send  for
Mr.  Spurgeon,  that  he  might  pray  at  his  bedside.
They  considered  it  the  foolish  raving  of  an  insane
mind.  But  at  last  they  consented  to  ask  Mr.
Spurgeon  to  visit  him.  Mr.  Spurgeon's  prayer  that
day  had  a  most  soothing  effect  upon  the  poor  lun-
atic and  appeared  partially  to  restore  his  mental
balance.  The  family  were  so  surprised  and  de-
lighted at  the  effect  of  the  petition  that,  while  they
accredited  it  entirely  to  natural  causes,  they  inter-
ceded most  earnestly  for  Mr.  Spurgeon's  return.
He  came  to  the  house  the  same  night,  after  the
evening  service,  and  remained  for  some  time,  pray-
ing with  all  his  heart  for  the  recovery  of  the  patient,
in  which  the  poor  invalid  most  piteously  joined.  Mr.
Spurgeon,  himself,  stated  afterward  that  while  he
prayed  with  all  his  heart  and  tried  to  believe  that  the
patient  would  recover,  yet  he  could  not  convince
himself  that  his  visit  had  been  of  any  other  use  but


1 82  CHARLES  II.  SPURGE  ON.

simply  to  appease  the  feelings  of  the  nurses,  who
were  disturbed  by  the  poor  man's  cries.  Yet  in  the
night  after  the  prayers  were  offered,  the  sick  man
awoke  with  a  start  and  a  cry  which  frightened  his
nurses.  But  he  was  found  to  be  entirely  in  his
right  mind.  He  declared  he  had  dreamed  of  meet-
ing the  Saviour,  and  that  the  Saviour  had  assured
him  that  the  devils  were  cast  out.  A  few  days  after
he  was  able  to  go  out  of  the  house,  and  shortly
afterward  removed  to  Canada,  where  he  has  been  a
successful  business  man,  havinof  been  carried  to  his
grave  in  1882.

An  incident  is  recalled  of  a  child  who  was  very
sick  with  a  contagious  disease  which  was  declared
fatal  by  the  doctor.  Mr.  Spurgeon  visited  the  home
at  the  request  of  the  family,  knelt  with  them  in  a
circle  around  the  bed,  and  offered  up  a  prayer  for
the  child's  salvation  and  added  a  petition  for  her
recovery,  if  it  should  be  in  accordance  with  the
will  of  God.  The  father  and  mother  both  followed
in  prayer,  and  when  they  arose  from  their  knees  the
child,  just  then  becoming  conscious,  asked  for  water
and  said  :  "  I  feel  very  much  better."  From  that
point  In  the  child's  sickness  there  was  no  break  in
her  continual  recovery.  She  afterward  stated  to
her  mother  that  during  the  prayer  she  felt  a  "  strange
sensation  ru.nning  all  over  lier,  as  though  the  fever
began  to  decline  at  her  head  and  gradually  passed
off  at  her  feet."

A  boy  who  had  worked  In  a  printing-office  as  an


WONDERFUL  HEALING.  1 83

apprentice,  met  with  a  sad  accident  wherein  his  arm
was  broken  twice ;  once  below  the  elbow,  and
another  bad  fracture  in  the  bone  near  the  shoulder.
His  father  had  heard  of  others  who  had  stated  that
they  had  recovered  from  disease  through  the  power
of  prayer,  and  sent  for  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  come  and
pray  for  the  healing  of  his  arm.  The  physician,  who
had  heard  of  the  request,  said  "  the  boy  will  recover
the  use  of  his  arm  without  prayer,  and  if  you  intend
to  pray  for  anything,  you  had  better  pray  that  the
upper-arm  will  not  be  deformed."  The  physician
declared  that  he  knew  nothino-  in  the  school  of  sur-
gery  that  would  prevent  the  deformation,  because
the  break  was  of  such  a  singular  and  complicated
nature.  When  the  deacon  of  the  Church  who  ac-
companied Mr.  Spurgeon  asked  him  if  he  thought
It  was  possible  for  prayer  to  heal  a  case  like  that,
Mr.  Spurgeon  answered,  with  a  smile:  "All  things
are  possible  with  God,  but,"  said  he,  "  I  cannot  feel
that  it  Is  very  probable.  Yet  It  is  our  duty  to  pray
for  the  things  we  desire,  even  though  they  seem
impossible."  Mr.  Spurgeon  talked  with  the  boy
concernino^  Christ  and  his  soul's  salvation,  until  he
was  sure  that  the  boy  understood  what  it  was  to  be
a  Christian,  and  was  satisfied  that  he  Intended  to  ac-
cept the  great  gift,  then  he  asked  him  to  kneel  in
prayer.  Mr.  Spurgeon  there  prayed  for  exactly  the
thing  that  the  physician  had  told  them  he  would
need  to  ask  for.  He  appeared  to  be  very  much  in
earnGst,  and  while  in  prayer  was  strongly  impressed


1 34  CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.

himself  that  In  some  way  the  prayer  was  to  be  lit-
erally answered.  The  next  day  the  boy  fell  upon
the  stairs  and  fractured  the  bones  again,  making
the  wound  apparently  more  dangerous  than  before.
He  was  then  carried  to  a  hospital  where  a  some-
what celebrated  French  physician  was  for  the  time
visiting,  and  under  his  care  the  bones  were  so  reset
as  to  assume  their  natural  position.

In  1861  it  is  said  that  this  belief  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's
healing  power  became  among  some  classes  a  posi-
tive superstition,  and  he  was  obliged  to  overcome
the  very  false  and  extravagant  impressions  which
were  eoine  out  concerninof  it  by  mentionino-  the
matter  from  the  pulpit,  and  rebuking  the  theories  of
the  extremely  enthusiastic.  He  felt  that  it  was  be-
coming too  much  like  the  shrines  of  Catholic  Europe,
from  which  came  the  stories  of  such  marvelous
cures,  many  of  which  were  unqestionably  true.  The
power  of  faith  does  not  seem  to  be  in  fact  limited  to
any  sect  or  Church.  That  fact  adds  another  ele-
ment to  the  mystery  of  the  complicated  problem.

For  twenty-five  years  it  has  been  one  of  the  most
frequent  things  at  the  Tabernacle  to  hear  mentioned
in  public  the  request  of  some  person,  who  was  sick,
for  the  prayers  of  the  Church  that  God  might  send
a  speedy  recovery.  The  very  fact  that  the  number
of  such  applications  increase  year  by  year,  is  in  it-
self satisfactory  evidence  that  the  people  who  were
prayed  for    at  first  must  have    believed    that    the


WONDERFUL  HEALING,  igq

prayers  of  the  Church  were  answered,  and  adver-
tised the  fact  among  their  friends.

Thousands  of  cases  Hke  those  we  have  related
might  be  gathered,  and  a  great  number  of  them  have
been  collected,  showing  the  wonderful  agency  of
some  Divine  power  exercised  in  answer  to  prayer.

While  no  other  Church,  perhaps,  in  the  world  had
the  opportunity  to  test  the  matter  so  thoroughly  as
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  of  London,  yet  it  is
true  of  many  other  Churches  in  England  and  America
that  the  prayer  of  faith  does  save  the  sick.  We
may  speculate  about  it  as  best  we  may,  and  differ-
ent  individuals  may  view  It  in  different  lights,  in  ac-
cordance with  the  standpoint  they  take,  yet,  that  it
Is  positively  effective,  and  accomxplishes  the  greatest
cures,  It  Is  impossible  to  deny,  because  this  thing  is
not  done  In  a  corner,  but  is  everywhere  confirmed
In  the  Churches  by  the  evidence  of  those  who  have
heard  and  who  have  seen.  If  any  matter  could  ever
be  established  in  law  or  in  experience  by  cumula-
tive testimony,  this  much  Is  certain,  that  prayers  are
answered  In  the  expulsion  of  disease.

If  we  talk  from  Philadelphia  to  Boston  through  a
telephone  and  recognize  the  voice  of  our  acquaint-
ances, we  know  that  we  are  heard,  but  we  are  ut-
terly unable  to  explain  to  any  inquiring  child  just
what  electricity  Is.  To  tell  a  person  that  it  Is  a
mode  of  motion,  akin  to  llcrht,  does  not  remove  the
mystery  or  explain  the  agency.  In  the  same  way
we  ask  of  God  to  be  healed  of  a  sad  disease,   with


1 86  CHARLES  IL  SPURGEON  .

which  human  physicians  are  unable  to  contend,  and
after  being  restored  by  unaccountable  processes,  we
draw  the  breath  of  health,  we  are  sure  that  we  have
been  healed,  although  we  cannot  understand  the
laws  which  controlled  the  means.

Mr.  Spurgeon,  like  the  Master  whom  he  so  faith-
fully served,  went  about  teaching  and  healing  the
sick.  He  never  took  any  credit  to  himself  for  the
healing  power  which  he  exercised  ;  and  hundreds  of
persons  were  physically  benefited  by  his  visits,  of
whom  he  never  afterward  directly  heard.  He  re-
garded himself,  as  every  pastor  should,  as  the  mere
agent  of  Divine  power,  and  spoke  of  himself,  in  two
instances,  as  unworthy  of  possessing  the  gift  of
healing.

The  Christian  world  will  account  for  these  thinors
in  one  way  and  the  sceptical  world  in  another  way,
but  the  facts  will  ever  remain,  that  for  some  reason,
either  supernatural  or  natural,  these  people  did  re-
cover their  health,  and  are  indebted  to  Mr.  Spur-
geon or  to  his  influence  with  a  higher  power,  for  the
comfort  of  body  and  peace  of  mind  which  they  now
enjoy.

Next  to  the  supreme  joy  of  facing  thousands  of
people,  anxious  to  hear  the  Gospel,  and  forgetting
one's  self  in  its  earnest  delivery,  comes  the  pleasure
ofbeinoran  instrument  or  messenger  of  the  orreat
force  lying  beyond  our  ken,  to  bring  breath  to  the
asthmatic,  calmness  to  the  palpitating  heart,  perfect
peace  to  tlie  tingling  nerves,  strength  to  the   totter-


WONDERFUL  HEALING.  1 87

Ing  Steps,  a  flush  to  pallid  cheeks,  a  flash  to  dull
eyes,  a  smile  to  trembling  lips,  hope  to  discouraged
friends,  and  long  years  of  useful  life  to  the  expiring
invalid.  Oh  !  what  a  life  was  that !  What  an  ines-
timable privilege  to  occupy  a  position  like  his.

There  can  be  no  situation  on  earth  so  much  to  be
charitably  envied  as  that  which  is  occupied  by  such
a  messenger  of  God.  ''  How  beautiful  upon  the
mountains  are  the  feet  of  them  that  brincr  crood
tidings,  good  tiding  of  peace."

Some  idea  of  the  spirit  with  which  the  young
preacher  entered  upon  his  work  may  be  gained
from  the  following  letters,  wdiich  explain  themselves.

"No.  60  Park  Street,  Cambridge,  Jan.  27,  1854.
"To  James  Low,  Esq.,
"  My  dear  Sir: —

"  I  cannot  help  feeling  Intense  gratification  at  the
unanimity  of  the  church  at  New  Park  street  in  rela-
tion to  their  Invitation  to  me.  Had  I  been  uncom-
fortable In  my  present  situation,  I  should  have  felt
unmixed  pleasure  at  the  prospect  Providence  seems
to  open  up  before  me  ;  but  having  devoted  and  lov-
ing people,  I  feel  I  know  not  how.

"  One  thing  I  know,  namely,  that  I  must  soon  be
severed  from  them  by  necessity,  for  they  do  not
raise  sufflcient  to  maintain  me  In  comfort.  Had
they  done  so  I  should  have  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  any
request  to  leave  them,  at  least  for  the  present.  But
now  my  Heavenly  Father  drives  me  forth  from  this


1 88  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

little  Garden  of  Eden,  and  while  I  see  that  I  must  eo
out,  I  leave  it  with  reluctance,  and  tremble  to  tread
the  unknown  land  before  me.

"  When  I  first  ventured  to  preach  at  Waterbeach,  I
only  accepted  an  invitation  for  three  months,  on  the
condition  that  if  in  that  time  I  should  see  good
reason  for  leaving,  or  they  on  their  part  should  wish
for  it,  I  should  be  at  liberty  to  cease  supplying,  or
they  should  have  the  same  power  to  request  me  to
do  so  before  the  expiration  of  the  time.

''  With  regard  to  a  six  months'  invitation  from  you,
I  have  no  objection  to  the  length  of  time,  but  rather
approve  of  the  prudence  of  the  Church  in  wishing  to
have  one  so  young  as  myself  on  an  extended  period
of  probation,  but  I  write  after  well  weighing  the  mat-
ter, when  I  say  positively  that  I  cannot — I  dare
not — accept  an  unqualified  invitation  for  so  long  a
time.  My  objection  is  not  to  the  length  of  time  of
probation,  but  it  ill  becomes  a  youth  to  promise  to
preach  to  a  London  congregation  so  long,  until  he
knows  them  and  they  know  him.  I  would  engage
to  supply  for  three  months  of  that  time,  and  then,
should  the  conorreofation  fail,  or  the  church  disao-ree,
I  would  reserve  to  myself  liberty,  without  breach  of
engagement,  to  retire  ;  and  you  would  on  your  part
have  the  riorht  to  dismiss  me  without  seeminor  to
treat  me  ill.  Should  I  see  no  reason  for  so  doing,
and  the  church  still  retain  their  wish  for  me,  I  can
remain  the  other  three  months,  either  with  or  with-
out the  formality  of  a  further  invitation;  but  even


WOhDERFUL  HEALING.  ig^

durlnor  the  second  three  months  I  should  not  like  to
regard  myself  as  a  fixture,  in  case  of  ill  success,  but
would  only  be  a  supply,  liable  to  a  fortnight's  dis-
charore  or  resionation.

*'  Perhaps  this  is  not  business-like — I  do  not  know  ;
but  this  is  the  course  I  should  prefer,  if  it  should  be
agreeable  to  the  church.  Enthusiasm  and  popular-
ity are  often  the  crackling  of  thorns,  and  expire.  I
do  not  wish  to  be  a  hindrance,  if  I  cannot  be  a
help.

"With  recrard  to  cominof  at  once,  I  think  I  must  not.
My  own  deacons  just  hinted  that  I  ought  to  finish
the  quarter  here;  though  by  ought,  they  mean  simply
— pray  to  do  so  if  you  can.  This  would  be  too  long
a  delay.  I  wish  to  help  them  until  they  can  get  sup-
plies, which  is  only  to  be  done  with  great  difficulty ;
and  as  I  have  given  you  four  Sabbaths,  I  hope  you
will  allow  me  to  give  them  four  in  return.  I  would
give  them  the  first  and  second  Sabbaths  in  Feb-
ruary, and  two  more  in  a  month  or  six  weeks'  time.
I  owe  them  much  for  their  kindness,  although  they
insist  that  the  debt  lies  on  their  side.  Some  of
them  hope,  and  almost  pray,  that  you  may  be  tired
in  three  months,-  so  that  I  may  again  be  sent  back
to  them.

''Thus,  my  dear  sir,  I  have  honestly  poured  out  my
heart  to  you.  You  are  too  kind.  You  will  excuse
me  if  I  err,  for  I  wish  to  do  right  to  you,  to  my  peo-
ple, and  to  all,  as  being  not  my  own,  but  bought
with  a  price.


I  go  CHARLES  n.  SPURGE  ON.

"  I  respect  the  honesty  and  boldness  of  the  small
minority,  and  only  wonder  that  the  number  was  not
greater.  I  pray  God  that  if  He  does  not  see  fit  that
I  should  remain  with  you,  the  majority  may  be  quite
as  much  the  other  way  at  the  end  of  six  months,  so
that  I  may  never  divide  you  into  parties.

"  Pecuniary  matters  I  am  well  satisfied  with.  And
now  one  thing  is  due  to  every  minister,  and  I  pray
you  to  remind  the  church  of  it,  namely,  that  in  pri-
vate, as  well  as  public,  they  must  all  wrestle  in
prayer  to  God  that  I  may  be  sustained  in  the  great
work.

"  I  am,  with  the  best  wishes  for  your  health,  and  the
greatest  respect,

''  Yours  truly,

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon."

"75  Dover  Road,  Borough,  April  28th,  1854.

'*Tothe  Baptist  Church  of  Christ,  worshiping  in
New  Park  Street  Chapel,  Southwark.

"  Dearly  beloved  in  Christ  Jesus  :      *

"I  have  received  your  unanimous  invitation  as
contained  in  a  resolution  passed  by  you  on  the  19th
instant,  desiring  me  to  accept  the  pastorate  among
you.  No  lengthened  reply  is  required  ;  there  is  but
one  answer  to  so  lovinor  and  cordial  an  invitation.
I  ACCEPT  IT.  I  have  not  been  perplexed  as  to  what
my  reply  shall  be,  for  many  things  constrain  me
thus  to  answer.


WONDERFUL  HEALING.  jqI

"I  sought  not  to  come  to  you,  for  I  was  the  min-
ister of  an  obscure  but  affectionate  people  ;  I  never
soHcited  advancement.  The  first  note  of  invitation
from  your  deacons  came  to  me  quite  unlooked  for,
and  I  trembled  at  the  idea  of  preaching  in  London.
I  could  not  understand  how  it  came  about,  and  even
now  I  am  filled  with  astonishment  at  the  w^ondrous
Providence.  I  would  wish  to  give  myself  into  the
hands  of  our  covenant  God,  whose  wisdom  directs
all  things.  He  shall  choose  for  me  ;  and  so  far  as  I
can  judge  this  is  His  choice.

"  I  felt  it  to  be  a  high  honor  to  be  the  pastor  of  a
people  who  can  mention  glorious  names  as  my  pre-
decessors ;  and  I  entreat  of  vou  to  remember  me  in
prayer,  that  I  may  realize  the  solemn  responsibility  of
my  trust.  Remember  my  youth  and  my  inexperience ;
pray  that  these  may  not  hinder  my  usefulness.  I
trust  also  that  the  remembrance  of  these  may  lead
you  to  forgive  the  mistakes  I  may  make,  or  un-
guarded words  I  may  utter.

"  Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Most  High !  He
has  called  me  to  this  office,  He  will  support  me  in  it;
otherwise  how  should  a  child,  a  youth,  have  the  pre-
sumption thus  to  attempt  a  work  which  filled  the
heart  and  hands  of  Jesus  ?  Your  kindness  to  me
has  been  very  great  and  my  heart  is  knit  unto  you.
I  fear  not  your  steadfastness,  I  fear  my  own.  The
gospel,  I  believe,  enables  me  to  venture  great  things,
and  by  faith  I  venture  this.     I  ask  your  co-operation


ig2  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON,

in  every  good  work,  In  visiting  the  sick,  in  bringing
in  inquirers,  and  in  mutual  edification.

"Oh  !  that  I  may  be  of  no  injury  to  you,  but  a
lasting  benefit !  I  have  no  more  to  say,  only  this :
that  If  I  have  expressed  myself  in  these  few  words
in  a  manner  unbecoming  my  youth  and  inexperience,
you  will  not  impute  it  to  arrogance,  but  forgive  my
mistake.

"And  now,  commending  you  to  our  covenant-
keeping  God,  the  triune  Jehovah,  I  am  yours  to
serve  in  the  gospel.

'^  C.  H.  Spurgeon."

A  gentleman  belonging  to  another  denomination
visited  the  chapel  during  Mr.  Spurgeon's  early  min-
istry, and  wrote  the  following  quite  interesting  de-
scription of  the  appearance  of  the  young  preacher  :

"  His  voice  is  clear  and  musical ;  his  language
plain  ;  his  style  flowing,  but  terse  ;  his  manner  sound
and  suitable  ;  his  tone  and  spirit  cordial  ;  his  re-
marks always  pithy  and  pungent,  sometimes  familiar
and  colloquial,  yet  never  light  or  coarse,  much  less
profane.  Judging  from  a  single  sermon,  we  sup-
posed that  he  would  become  a  plain,  faithful,  forci-
ble, and  affectionate  preacher  of  the  gospel  In  the
form  called  Calvlnlstic  ;  and  our  judgment  was  the
more  favorable  because,  while  there  was  a  solidity
beyond  his  years,  we  detect  little  of  the  wild  lux-
uriance naturally  characteristic  of  very  young
preachers."


WONDERFUL  HEALING.  1 03

A  correspondent,  writing  in  1857,  shows  the
preacher  from  another  standpoint.  In  his  letters  he
said :

"  He  is  of  medium  height,  at  present  quite  stout,
has  a  round  and  beardless  face,  not  a  high  fore-
head,  dark  hair,  parted  in  the  centre  of  the  head.
His  appearance  in  the  pulpit  may  be  said  to  be  in-
teresting rather  than  commanding.  He  betrays  his
youth,  and  still  wears  a  boyish  countenance.  His
figure  is  awkward — his  manners  are  plain — his  face
(except  when  illumined  by  a  smile)  is  admitted  to  be
heavy.  His  voice  seems  to  be  the  only  personal
instrument  he  possesses,  by  which  he  is  enabled  to
acquire  such  a  marvelous  power  over  the  hearts  and
minds  of  his  hearers.  His  voice  is  powerful,  rich
melodious,  and  under  perfect  control.  Twelve
thousand  have  distinctly  heard  every  sentence  he
uttered  in  the  open  air,  and  this  powerful  instru-
ment carried  his  burnino^  words  to  an  audience  of
twenty  thousand  gathered  in  the  Crystal  Palace."

Still  another  writer  of  that  year  is  quoted  by  Mr.
Needham,  in  his  life  of  Spurgeon,  who  said:  "As
soon  as  he  commences  to  speak,  tones  of  richest
melody  are  heard.  A  voice,  full,  sweet,  and  musi-
cal falls  on  every  ear,  and  awakens  agreeable  emo-
tions in  every  soul  in  which  there  is  a  sympathy  for
sounds.  That  most  excellent  of  voices  is  under
perfect  control,  and  can  whisper  or  thunder  at  the
wish  of  its  possessor.  Then  there  is  poetry  in  every
feature,  and  every  movement,  as  well  as  music  in
13


194  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

the  voice.  The  countenance  speaks,  the  entire
form  sympathizes.  The  action  is  in  complete  unison
with  the  sentiments,  and  the  eye  Hstens  scarcely
less  than  the  ear  to  the  sweetly  flowing  oratory.  To
the  influence  of  his  powerful  voice  he  adds  that  of
a  manner  characterized  by  great  freedom  and  fear-
lessness, intensely  earnest  and  strikingly  natural.
When  to  these  we  add  the  influence  of  thrillingr  de-
scription,  touching  anecdote,  sparkling  wit,  startling
episodes,  striking  similes,  all  used  to  illustrate  and
enforce  the  deep,  earnest  home  truths  of  the  Bible,
we  surely  have  a  combination  of  elements  which
must  make  up  a  preacher  of  wonderful  attraction
and  marvelous  power."


CHAPTER  VIII.

BUILDING    FOR    THE    LORD.

It  would  require  as  many  volumes  as  we  have  al-
lowed pages  to  give  all  the  varied  incidents  of  Mr.
Spurgeon's  remarkable  life  which  would  be  of  In-
terest to  some  classes  of  readers ;  but  in  no  division
of  his  great  work  was  there  shown  more  distinctly
the  unaccountable  power  of  faith  than  in  the  en-
largement of  the  New  Park  Street  Chapel  and  in
the  building  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.

The  difference  between  building  a  Church  and  es-
tablishing a  secular  business  is  so  widely  divergent
that  the  methods  adopted  in  the  one  seem  never  to
be  applicable  to  the  other.  Yet,  after  all,  the  busi-
ness principles  which  should  conduct  to  success  a
laree  rtianufacturingf  concern  or  a  commercial  enter-
prise  are  necessarily  blended  with  that  faith  in  the
unseen  which  makes  Christian  enterprises  suc-
cessful.

They  who  build  a  church  enter  into  contracts  and
assume  obligations,  **  seeing  the  Invisible ;"  for  it  is
a  rare  thing  In  the  history  of  church  building  for
such  enterprises  to  be  started  with  the  capital  all  in
the  bank.  The  builders  are  obliged  to  assume  that
miraculous  agencies  will  work,  with  them  in  their

195


Iq5  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

undertaking,  and  accomplish  in  church  building  what
would  never  be  expected  In  ordinary  affairs  of  busi-
ness. They  believe  that  somewhere  in  the  world
is  the  orold  and  the  silver  belonelnor  to  the  Lord,
which  will  be  pushed  forward,  by  mysterious  agen-
cies, into  their  hands,  for  the  uses  of  the  religious
undertakinof.

Hospitals,  schools,  colleges,  mission  houses,
chapels,  and  churches  can  be  counted  by  the  score
which  beofan  entlrelv  In  the  faith  of  some  Individual
who  had  far  less  money  than  enthusiasm  for  the
good  of  his  kind.

There  seems,  however,  to  be  a  limit  beyond  which
faith  in  God  becomes  presumption,  and  the  presump-
tuous sin  brlnofs  its  reward  In  failure  and  disofrace.
Just  where  the  line  Is  between  a  sublime  faith  and
reckless  presumption  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  mat-
ters to  decide,  and  differs  with  every  possible  oc-
casion.

It  seems,  however,  clearly  true  that  wherever  a
careful  man  or  woman  of  calm  judgment,  and  ac-
quainted with  business  ways,  sees  the  necessity  for
a  great  Christian  charity  or  the  construction  of  a
church,  there  Is  always  somewhere  the  means  with
which  to  carry  on  the  work  or  to  rear  the  structure.
The  demand  Is  always  accompanied  with  a  supply,
just  as  in,  the  body,  there  is  no  appetite  without  the
existence  somewhere  of  the  means  to  satisfy  it.  It
Is  one  of  the  best  evidences  of  a  future  state  of
spiritual  existence  that  man  everywhere   has  a  de-


o

z

D
O
t^

?3
M

5

w

o
w

o


c!

O

w
o

55


:;„i


BUILDING  FOR   THE  LORD.  199

sire  or  an  appetite  for  eternal  life,  and,  reasoning  by
analogy,  there  is  no  just  ground  for  supposing  that
such  a  universal  and  strong  natural  appetite  will  be
left  unsatisfied.

So  when  a  community  is  sinking  into  sin  and
crime,  or  when  fearful  diseases  rage,  there  is  some-
where a  means  of  reform  and  an  antidote  provided
by  nature's  God  which  the  faithful  servant  of  the
Lord  is  almost  certain  to  find.  In  exceptionable
cases,  benevolent  individuals  have  established  alone
great  charities,  and  have  supplied  the  capital  from
their  extensive  possessions.  But  usually  such
undertakings  have  been  begun  by  some  person,  hav-
ing himself  but  little  money,  and  yet  endowed
with  orreat  faith,  and  the  waitinor  benefactors  have
reinforced  or  sustained  the  movement  with  their
gifts  of  money  or  property.

Some  churches  have  such  a  worldly  fear  of  debt
as  to  practically  declare  by  resolution  and  action
that  they  will  only  trust  In  the  Lord  when  they  have
the  m.oney  in  their  pockets.  While  others,  as
wrongfully  extreme,  without  measuring  the  need,
run  recklessly  into  debt  and  greatly  harm  the  cause
•which  they  desire  to  sustain.

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  one  of  those  men  who  was
especially  endowed  with  broad  common  sense,
havlnof  a  much  larger  decree  of  faith  in  the  per-
sonal  care  of  God  than  many  of  his  acquaintances ;
yet  always  most  carefully  conservative,  weighing
well  the  consequences  and  considering  closely   the


2QQ  CHARLES  II.  SPURGEON.

probabilities,  g"uided  by  the    unerring   finger  of  the
providence  of  God.

If  a  door  opened  he  entered  in.  If  one  debt  was
unexpectedly  paid,  it  did  not  encourage  him  to  con-
tract another  until  he  saw  the  need  which  was
equal  to  the  first,  and  he  gathered  up  the  fragments
with  most  scrupulous  care  after  every  undertaking,
that  nothino^  should  be  lost.

The  New  Park  Street  Chapel  was  crowded  to
the  door  from  the  very  opening  of  his  pastorate,
and  the  multitudes  who  could  not  secure  admission,
so  persistently  pressing  at  the  portals,  awakened  in
his  mind  great  anxiety  to  reach  the  multitudes  who
so  apparently  desired  to  hear  of  the  Saviour.  An
over-flow  service  was  suororested  and  tried,  but  the
people  came  to  hear  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  not  to  at-
tend an  ordinary  service,  and  consequently  they  re-
turned to  their  homes  or  went  to  w-orse  places,
while  he  was  preaching  to  the  few,  comparatively,
who  secured  a  seat  or  standinof  room  inside.

As  this  crowded  condition  was  so  evidently  per-
manent, young  Spurgeon  suggested  to  the  deacons,
at  one  of  their  meetings,  that  it  might  be  necessary
very  soon  to  enlarge  the  Chapel  so  as  to  occupy  the
entire  lot.  But  that  first  proposition  was  received
by  them  as  a  visionary  scheme,  having  no  founda-
tion in  reason.  He  asked  some  of  the  members  of
the  Church  to  pray  over  the  matter,  but  they  con-
sidered the  matter  altogether  beyond  the  reach  of
prayer.     The     Church    was    composed  largely    of


BUILDIXG  FOR   THE  LORD.  20t

elderly  people  who  stood  by  die  old  place  because
of  its  associations.  Many  of  them  were  satisfied
and  others  poor  and  had  no  ambition  or  desire  to
enter  into  a  new  enterprise  of  this  kind.  They  had
not  faith  enough  in  it  even  to  ask  God  for  direction.
Many  of  them  were  in  love  with  the  old  place,  and
had  that  natural  conservative  feeling  that  they  would
not  be  at  home  in  the  new  Church.  They  could  not
endure  the  thought  of  having  the  pews  they  had  oc-
cupied so  long  change  in  their  relation  to  the  pulpit,
or  have  the  walls  or  windows  architecturally  re-
modeled, lest  It  should  make  the  place  seem  to  them
less  home-like  and  sacred.

The  proposition  to  enlarge  was  one  of  the  most
dangerous  experiments  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  ever
tried  In  his  Church  life.  In  all  his  subsequent  pro-
positions of  the  kind  he  always  found  a  very  strong
party  of  friends  so  attached  to  him  that  they  would
have  undertaken  anything  he  suggested,  however
absurd  it  might  appear  to  be  to  them.  But  in  this
case  It  was  very  different.  The  old  deacons  boasted
of  their  forty  years  in  Christian  experience  and  of
the  great  variety  of  their  past  Church  work,  and
very  naturally  claimed  the  right  of  the  aged  to  curb
the  ardor  of  the  young.  He  was  but  a  boy,  only
twenty-one  years  of  age  ;  they  were  men  who  had
grown  gray  in  practical  service.

But  the  preacher  brought  to  bear  upon  the  Church
the  demands  of  people  outside  of  its  circle  who
claimed  that  they  desired   to  hear  the   Gospel  and


202  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

that  the  Church  of  Christ  was  under  sacred  obhga-
tions  to  furnish  it  to  those  who  so  much  needed  it.
This  had  a  growing  influence  upon  the  membership,
and,  although  beginning  in  a  very  smaH  way,  grad-
ually increased  in  volume  with  a  pride  in  their  young
pastor  until  quite  a  strong  party  in  the  Church  were
in  favor  of  the  enlargement.  One  day  Mr.  Spur-
geon  arose  in  the  pulpit,  after  having  spent  a  large
portion  of  the  previous  night  in  prayer,  and  declared
to  the  congregation  that  the  Chapel  was  to  be
enlarged.  He  spoke  of  it  with  the  decision  of  one
who  has  already,  in  faith,  seen  the  thing  done.  He
unhesitatingly  represented  it  to  be  the  will  of  the
Lord  "  that  these  walls  are  to  be  extended.  God
hath  said  it,  no  man  can  hinder  it."

His  audacity  won  friends,  his  faith  aroused  confi-
dence, and  his  evident  willingness  to  sacrifice  with
them  to  any  extent  in  order  that  the  Church
might  be  enlarged  soon  brought  over  to  his  position
almost  the  entire  Church.

There  were  several,  however,  who  regarded  the
matter  as  so  preposterous  that  they  refused  to  have
anything  to  do  with  It,  and  left  the  Church  which
they  believed  would  soon  be  overwhelmed  in  debt.
A  good  sister,  who  had  always  been  regarded  as
one  of  the  pillars  of  the  Church,  having  been  a  lib-
eral giver  and  a  devoted  Christian,  arose  in  the
midst  of  one  of  the  most  enthusiastic  meetlncrs  and
quoted  the  saying  of  the  Saviour,  which  urged  the
people  to  sit  down  and  count  the  cost,  lest  they


BUILDING  FOR  THE  LORD.  203

should  not  be  able  to  finish,  and  she  urged  the
brethren  not  to  undertake  to  destroy  this  present
Church  until  they  had  the  means  with  which  to  build
another.

A  young  man  who  had  but  little  to  give  at  the
time,  but  afterward  became  a  very  generous  donor,
surprised  the  meeting  by  taking  an  opposite  and  ex-
treme position,  and  declaring  most  excitedly  that
the  enlargement  of  the  Chapel  would  be  only  a
waste  of  time,  as  a  very  much  larger  place  would
then  be  greatly  needed  after  the  enlargement  as
it  was  before.

When  the  Church  was  at  last,  led  up  where  it
voted  to  enter  Into  the  cnanges  which  Mr.  Spur-
geon  desired,  there  was  not  a  shilling  on  hand  to-
ward the  enterprise.  To  undertake  so  expensive  a
matter  without  capital  would  appear  to  a  careful
business  man  to  be  very  reckless,  if  there  was  not
to  be  taken  Into  consideration  in  connection  with
such  a  movement  the  fact  that  the  providences  of
God  are  always  to  be  counted  as  partners.

The  time  was  set  for  the  remodellnof  to  beg-In  and
Exeter  Hall  was  eno^ao-ed  In  which  to  hold  the  ser-
vices  during  the  enlargement,  before  the  subscrip-
tions or  orlfts  were  sufficient  even  for  the  removal  of
the  furniture.  But  the  money  came  as  It  was  needed
and  paid  the  debts  as  they  became  due.  Like
the  manna  in  the  wilderness,  there  was  a  supply  for
each  day,  but  none  left  for  the  morrow.  Often
when  the  accounts  were  settled  and  the  workmen
13


204


CHARLES  //.  SPIRGEON.


paid,  there  was  left  In  the  treasury  of  the  Church
less  than  five  dollars,  and  at  two  different  times  only
one  shilling.  Yet  at  no  time  did  the  work  cease,  or
was  it  hindered  for  lack  of  funds.  They  were
obliged  to  enter  into  contracts,  which  of  course
would  place  them  under  great  obligations,  provided
no  money  should  come  in  before  the  stipulations
were  due,  yet  no  obligations  did  mature  without
there  being  money  on  hand  to  pay.  It  w^as  the
needed  discipline  for  the  Church — a  most  valuable
instruction,  fitting  them  for  the  greater  work  they
had  still  before  them.  It  tauorht  faith  in  God.
Possibly  none  of  them  could  have  been  persuaded
in  reason  to  have  undertaken  the  greater  work
w^hich  followed  a  few  years  later  had  they  not  been
so  remarkably  sustained  by  God's  providence  in  this,
the  lesser  undertaking.

\  The  walls  were  torn  out,  enlarged  foundations
put  In,  and  the  structure  carried  upward  day  by  day
to  the  surprise  of  the  unbelieving,  but  to  the  great
deliorht  of  those  eno^ao^ed  therein.

In  the  meantime  enormous  crow^ds,  numbering
more  than  the  enlarged  Chapel  w^ould  hold  by  four
or  five  times,  were  regularly  In  attendance  upon  the
preaching  in  Exeter  Hall.  The  external  walls  of  the
enlarged  building  w^ere  not  firmly  in  place  before  it
was  clear  to  the  larger  part  of  the  Church  that  they
had  undertaken  altogether  too  small  things  for  God.
When  they  returned  to  the  refitted  structure  there
was  an  apparent  sense  of  disappointment  on  the


BUILDING  FOR  THE  LORD.


205


part  of  the  congregation,  because  their  inability  to
accommodate  the  anxious  inquirers  at  the  door  was
far  greater  than  it  had  been  before  they  "  length-
ened their  cords."

At  the  close  of  the  first  service,  after  Mr.  Spur-
geon's  very  powerful  sermon,  which  was  a  sublime
expression  of  the  congregation's  thanksgiving,  it  was
heard  on  every  side  among  the  people  as  they
passed  out,  "  this  Chapel  is  too  small  after  all,  we
must  beo[-in  anew  and  construct  a  tabernacle."

On  Mr.  Spurgeon's  twenty-first  birthday  he  re-
ceived a  small  gift  accompanied  by  a  letter,  saying,
"I  would  much  enjoy  the  thought  of  being  the  •
first  contributor  toward  the  purchase  of  a  hall,  or  the
bulldlnor  of  a  tabernacle  which  should  accommodate
as  many  hundreds  as  our  Chapel  now  holds  scores."

A  gentleman  now  living  in  America,  who  was  at
that  time  a  regular  worshiper  at  Mr.  Spurgeon's
Chapel,  says  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  told  him  after  an
official  meetinof,  that  he  reofarded  that  communica-
tlon  as  the  voice  of  God,  and  that  a  larger  bulldlnor
was  then  more  certain  than  had  been  the  remodel-
ing a  few  months  before.  His  faith  was  positive,
there  was  no  weakness  nor  doubt  in  it.  He  was  as
sure  of  a  new  and  larofer  buildlno-  then  as  he  was
after  he  saw  its  capstone  laid.  It  was  a  confidence
in  the  unseen  that  partakes  of  the  miraculous,  and  is
as  unaccountable  as  are  many  other  events  in  his
strange  history.

He  began  at  once  himself  to  lay  aside  for  the  new


2o6  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

enterprise  and  quietly  dropped  a  hint  in  the  ears  of
his  closest  friends,  who  quietly  spread  the  thought
through  the  Church,  until  nearly  all  participated  in
his  own  unshaken  faith.  He  seemed  to  be  in-
spired and  we  may  as  well  state  the  whole  fact,  and
say,  he  was  inspp^ed.

He  looked  back  upon  the  undertaking  in  connec-
tion with  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  after  its  com-
pletion with  a  fluttering  of  heart  and  with  trembling,
often  saying  that  it  impressed  him  as  having  been
an  almost  reckless  presumption  to  have  supposed
such  a  thing  possible.  But  never  during  the  raising
of  the  money  or  the  construction  of  the  building  did
he  have  any  such  impressions  or  even  a  suggestion
of  doubt  or  hesitation.  When  the  occasion  for  his
faith  had  passed,  he  sank  back  again  into  ordinary
things,  and  the  great  enterprise  appeared  to  him  as
it  had  appeared  to  the  unbelieving  before.  Even
his  father  often  remarked,  "  if  he  had  not  succeeded,
what  an  awful  failure  it  would  have  been."

In  October,  1856,  the  enlarged  Chapel  had  proved
itself  so  entirely  inadequate  for  the  pressing  crowds
who  were  determined  to  hear  Mr.  Spurgeon  preach,
that  the  Church  decided  to  engage  the  Royal  Surrey
Gardens,  Music  Hall.  Even  his  most  sanguine
friends  thought  that  a  hall  seating  so  many  thou-
sands would  certainly  be  fully  adequate  for  the
needs  of  the  time.  But,  alas !  the  number  of  ex-
cited attendants  increased  in  greater  proportion
than  the  enlarged  accommodations.


c;


<
G

I— I

n


r


\ff\nr


BUILDING  FOR  THE  LORD.  209

The  first  night  they  held  service  in  the  Music
Hall,  the  building-  was  packed  in  every  portion,
every  inch  of  standing  room  being  taken  long  before
the  service  began.  In  the  midst  of  the  delivery  of
the  sermon  some  evil  disposed  persons,  who  came
to  the  hall  for  the  purpose  of  raising  a  disturbance
and  interrupting  the  services,  raised  a  cry  of  "  Fire  !
fire  !"  It  was  a  most  murderous  deed.  The  multi-
tude became  at  once  fearfully  excited  and  pressed
toward  the  doors,  running  over  one  another,  and
making  a  most  appalling  scene  of  havoc  and  death.
Although  Mr.  Spurgeon  from  the  desk  retained  his
presence  of  mind,  and  loudly  called  upon  the  multi-
tude to  be  calm,  yet  the  uproar  was  so  great,  and
the  excitement  was  so  intense  that  it  was  impossible
for  him  to  retain  control  of  the  assembly.  Several
were  killed  in  the  hall  and  a  vast  number  injured
to  a  greater  or  less  degree.  He  attempted  to  go  on
with  the  service,  after  the  police  had  removed  the
wounded,  dying,  and  dead,  but  the  excitement  could
not  be  easily  allayed,  and  so,  with  a  few  words  of
advice,  frank  and  earnest,  he  dismissed  the  service.
An  event  so  inauspicious  at  the  opening  of  the  Music
Hall  and  so  unexpected  to  Mr.  Spurgeon,  as  he
reasoned  upon  the  strange  providence  of  God,  had
a  most  distressing  effect  upon  his  spirit,  bringing
upon  him  a  fever  from  which  he  did  not  fully  re-
cover for  several  months.

But  he  soon  afterward  learned,  In  company    with

the  other  members  of  his  Church,  that   this  sad  ac-
14


210  CHARLES  H.    SPUR G EON.

cident,  althoueH  much  to  be  recrretted  and  awakeninor
deep  sympadiies,  yet  did  Indirectly  exercise  an  enor-
mous influence  in  securing  the  great  MetropoHtan
Tabernacle.  The  demand  for  a  safer  place,  and
one  exclusively  devoted  to  preaching  was  greatly
increased  by  this  accident ;  while  the  persecutions  of
the  opposing  press  and  of  other  Christian  denom-
inations, who  used  this  accident  to  decry  his  preach-
ing, only  deepened  the  determination  of  his  friends
to  stand  by  him  and  do  the  greatest  thing  pos-
sible.   •

He  was  greatly  sustained  In  the  proposition  to
construct  a  larger  house  by  a  great  number  of  peo-
ple whom  he  had  visited  during  the  previous'  epi-
demic of  the  awful  Asiatic  cholera.  Some  of  them
felt  that  they  owed  their  very  life  to  the  prayers  or
kindness  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  others  had  learned
during  that  scourge  to  greatly  admire  his  character
and  love  him  as  a  friend,  who  eagerly  sought  a  kind
of  martyrdom  in  his  service,  either  In  the  matter  of
giving  or  In  boldly  offering  themselves  for  his  de-
fense.

It  will  be  interestinor  to  the  reader  to  see  Mr.
Spurgeon's  own  account  of  the  cholera  scourge  and
the  wonderful  manner  in  which  he  was  sustained  In
his  self-sacrlficinor  labors  in  connection  with  It.  It  is
a  remarkable  fact  that  during  any  season  of  the
Asiatic  cholera,  those  who  are  entirely  fearless
and  associate  with  it  in  the  ofreatest  recklessness
seldom  take  the  disease.


BUILDING  FOR  THE  LORD.  21 1

Mr.  Spurgeon's  faith  in  the  protection  of  an  over-
rLiHng-  Providence  was  so  great  that  it  scarcely
seemed  to  him  possible  that  he  could  take  the  dis-
ease. He  resembled  Caesar  and  Napoleon  then  in
his  unshaken  confidence  in  his  own  destiny.
We  quote  here  his  account  of  the  matter  :
"In  the  year  1854,  when  I  had  scarcely  been  in
London  twelve  months,  the  neighborhood  in  which
I  labored  was  visited  by  Asiatic  cholera,  and  my  con-
gregation suffered  from  its  inroads.  Family  after
family  summoned  me  to  the  bedside  of  the  smitten,
and  almost  every  day  I  was  called  to  visit  the  grave.
I  gave  myself  up  with  youthful  ardor  to  the  visita-
tion of  the  sick,  and  was  sent  for  from  all  corners
of  the  district  by  persons  of  all  ranks  and  religions.
I  became  weary  in  body  and  sick  at  heart.  My
friends  seemed  falling  one  by  one,  and  I  felt  or  fan-
cied that  I  was  sickeningf  like  those  around  me.
A  little  more  work  and  weeping  would  have  laid  me
low  among  the  rest.  I  felt  that  my  burden  was
heavier  than  I  could  bear,  and  I  was  ready  to  sink
under  it.  As  God  would  have  it,  I  was  returning
mournfully  home  from  a  funeral,  when  my  curiosity
led  me  to  read  a  paper  which  was  wafered  up  in  a
shoemaker's  window  in  the  Dover  Road.  It  did  not
look  like  a  trade  announcement,  nor  was  it,  for  it
bore  in  a  orood  bold  handwritinof  these  words  :  '  Be-
cause  thou  hast  made  the  Lord,  which  is  my  refuge,
even  the  Most  High,  thy  habitation,  there  shall  no
evil  befall  thee,  neither  shall  any  plague  come   nigh


212  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

thy  dwelling.'  The  effect  on  my  heart  was  imme-
diate. Faith  appropriated  the  passage  as  her  own.
I  felt  secured,  refreshed,  girt  with  immortality.  I
went  on  with  my  visitation  of  the  dying  in  a  calm  and
peaceful  spirit ;  I  felt  no  fear  of  evil,  and  I  suffered
no  harm.  The  Providence  which  moved  the  trades-
man to  place  those  verses  in  his  window  I  gratefully
acknowledge,  and,  in  the  remembrance  of  its  mar-
velous power,  I  adore  the  Lord  my  God."

These  sincere  friends,  won  by  such  personal  acts
of  self-sacrifice,  formed  a  very  strong  party  and  be-
lieved that  anything  was  possible  which  Mr.  Spur-
geon  would  undertake.  Hence  he  found  that  the
very  first  proposition  for  the  construction  of  a  church
large  enough  to  hold  fully  5,000  people  found  many
supporters.  It  does  not  appear  that  there  was  any
opposition  at  all  on  the  part  of  the  membership  of
his  Church.  But  the  idea  was  taken  up  with
great  enthusiasm.  There  were  of  course  many  in-
fluential people  in  the  community  who  ridiculed  the
undertakmg  as  completely  preposterous,  and  who
discouraged  responsible  contractors  who  had
thought  to  seek  for  the  job  of  constructing  the
building.  Even  the  workmen  were  approached  by
very  busy  individuals,  who,  under  the  plea  of  per-
sonal interest  for  the  workmen's  welfare,  advised
them  not  to  enorao-e  with  the  contractors  or  work
for  the  Church,  because  they  would  be  very  likely
to  lose  their  wa^res.

But  while  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  laid  aside,  because


BUILDING  FOR   THE  LORD.  21  3

of  the  nervous  strain  connected  with  the  awful
catastrophy  in  the  Surrey  Garden  Music  Hall,  he
had  an  excellent  opportunity  to  meditate  upon  the
whole  matter  and  to  pray  over  it  frequently.  He
decided  that  he  was  sent  of  God  to  carry  on  the
building  enterprise,  and  as  soon  as  health  permitted
he  entered  at  once  upon  a  personal  canvass  in  favor
of  the  object.  He  went  over  the  country,  and  from
city  to  city,  and  village  to  village,  preaching  twice
every  day,  and  taking  collections  for  the  new  Tab-
ernacle, giving  half  the  proceeds  of  each  collection  to
the  local  Church  where  the  money  was  given.
Night  and  day  he  toiled  on,  receiving  oftentimes  only
a  shillinof  and  at  other  times  several  dollars.  The
fund,  at  first  so  small,  crept  steadily  upward  into  the
thousands.  As  soon  as  persons  of  means  became
convinced  that  the  building  was  an  assured  fact,
then  they  came  in  with  larger  donations,  and  the
building  fund  grew  with  most  encouraging  rapidity.

For  two  years  his  hours  of  sleep  were  confined  to
the  time  between  midnight  and  sunrise,  and  often
this  was  encroached  upon  by  special  work  or  by
wakeful  seasons  of  anxious  meditation.

But  on  the  i6th  of  August,  1859,  he  had  the
great  joy  to  see  the  corner-stone  laid,  by  Sir  Samuel
Morton  Peto,  on  a  lot  which  the  Church  had  pur-
chased at  Newington  Butts.  It  was  very  far  from
being  an  aristocratic  neighborhood,  and  was  located
amonof  factories  and  the  humblest  dwellinofs  of
London  mechanics.


214  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

There  was  some  difference  of  opinion  in  reference
to  the  location,  but  the  arguments  of  one  of  its  advo-
cates settled  the  question  when  he  declared  that  it
made  no  differenee  in  what  part  of  London  they
placed  the  Chapel,  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  sure  to  fill  it
to  overflowlnof.

At  the  beginning  of  the  construction,  while  the
materials  were  piled  promiscuously  around,  Mr.
Spurgeon  called  a  meeting  for  prayer,  and  with  a
number  of  his  friends  and  Church  officials  went  there,
and  kneeling  among  the  timber  and  stone,  he
prayed  that  none  of  the  workmen  engaged  upon  the
construction  might  be  killed  or  Injured.  And  it  has
been  often  published  that  during  the  entire  work,  in
which  so  many  men  were  engaged  and  in  danger-
ous situations,  there  was  not  a  workman  injured
directly  or  Indirectly,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained.

The  entire  cost  was  to  have  been  $110,000,  but
the  changes  and  improvements  made  in  the  plans
before  it  was  completed  carried  the  cost  up  to
$155,000.

The  original  plan  also  shows  the  Intention  to  have
been  to  seat  4,200  people,  but  the  necessities  cre-
ated by  the  crowding,  compelled  them  to  occupy
every  possible  space  with  a  seat  of  some  kind,  and
the  actual  seating  capacity  was  increased  to  nearly
5'5oo.

The  completed  building  Is  146  feet  long  and  81
feet  wide,  having  two  sfallerles,  as  has  before  been
seen  in  the  quotation  from  Mr,  Spurgeon's  account,


BUILDING  FOR  THE  LORD.  215

The  methods  frequently  adopted  by  Mr.  Spur-
geon's  congregation  for  the  raising  of  money  for
their  buildinof  fund  varied  somewhat  from  that  which
liad  been  used  by  other  Churches  in  England,  and
brought  down  upon  them  no  little  criticism.  Church
fairs,  bazaars,  and  entertainments  have  a  very  bad
name  In  many  Churches,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself
has  often  spoken  very  decidedly  concerning  the
deleterious  Influence  they  often  exerted.  But  he
learned  by  the  force  of  providential  necessity  that
after  all,  for  the  worship  of  God,  it  is  not  so  much
whether  it  be  at  Gerlzim,  or  Jerusalem,  or  after  the
manners  of  one  country  or  another ;  but  rather  in
the  spirit  in  which  the  service  is  conducted.  He
found  by  experience  that  even  a  bazaar,  or  a
Church  fair  may  become  a  spiritual  service  rendered
unto  the  Lord,  even  as  a  Sabbath  service  may  be
made  sacrilegious,  or  the  humblest  deed  made  sacred
by  the  purpose  or  spirit  which  inspires  it.  He  saw
very  clearly  that  social  entertainments  held  in  the
residences  of  Christian  people,  having  a  double  pur-
pose of  raising  money  for  the  Church  and  becoming
more  socially  acquainted,  would  also  serve  the  Lord
more  effectively  than  many  of  the  forms  of  Church
themselves.

The  fairs  might  bring  together  in  close  compan-
ionship a  large  number  of  people,  a  portion  of  whom
were  active  Christians,  filled  with  the  missionary
spirit.  These  if  rightly  inspired  would  act  as  a
leaven  In  the  whole  lump,  and  turn  many  sinners


2i6  CHARLES  11.  SPURGE  ON  .

from  the  error  of  their  ways,  by  their  social  Chris-
tian example.  Even  persons  who  were  prejudiced
against  the  Church,  and  who  were  never  seen  inside
the  sacred  walls,  might  attend  one  of  these  humbler
gatherings,  and  there  make  the  personal  acquaint-
ance of  Christians  whose  influence  over  them  would
truly  be  eternal.

The  advice  of  St.  Paul  with  reference  to  marriage
was  most  excellently  applied  to  this  series  of
Church  entertainments,  which  were  frequently  held
for  the  purpose  of  adding  to  the  fund  for  the  con-
struction of  the  Tabernacle,  viz.  :  "  Be  not  unequally
yoked  together  with  unbelievers  ;"  in  other  words,
be  very  sure  not  to  associate  with  worldly  people
under  circumstances  where  they  will  drag  you  down.
If  you  are  so  unequally  yoked  together  with  an  un-
believer that  he  has  more  power  to  pull  you  under
than  you  have  to  lift  him  out,  then  you  may  be  both
foolish  and  wicked.

But  in  these  social  oratherino-s  there  was   a  crreat

o  o  o

predominence  of  the  religious  idea,  because  of  the
purpose  for  which  they  were  held,  and  because  of
the  prayerful  spirit  which  controlled  the  words  and
actions  of  the  Christians  em^^acred  therein.

In  i860  a  monster  bazaar  was  held  with  the
avowed  purpose  of  raising  sufficient  funds  to  pay
for  the  entire  debt  on  the  Tabernacle  which  was  so
soon  to  be  finished,  and  the  receipts  exceeded  even
the  expectations  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself.

This  result  was  due  very  largely  to  the  manner  in


H
W
»
I— t

o
;«

<!

1—4

M

W

H

93

O

►T3

o

>

>
w
w
?s
a:
>
n
r
w


i  V":


\  i.-y^SS***"-****'


s««*«^'-


BUILDING  FOR   THE  LORD.  2IQ

which  it  was  conducted  and   the  consecrated  wor-
shipful spirit  which  appeared  in  all  that  was  done.

Every  gift  made  to  the  bazaar  was  received  with
thankso^ivinof  to  God,  and  as  an  offerincr  to  His  ser-
vice.  Everything  was  excluded  from  the  proceed-
ings which  could  work  harm  in  a  moral  or  religious
point  of  view.  The  committees  engaged  in  the
undertaking,  which  often  included  a  large  number  of
ladies  and  gentlemen  who  were  not  members  of  any
Church,  frequently  met  for  prayer,  that  they  might  be
guided  by  the  hand  of  God.  Nearly  every  person
enoacred  in  it  felt  that  it  was  in  a  reliofious  service
and  that  the  honor  of  the  cause  of  God  had  been
placed  in  his  hands.

In  the  series  of  reliofious  revival  meetino^s  which
followed  the  opening  of  the  Tabernacle,  it  .was
again  and  again  heard  from  the  lips  of  repentent
seekers  after  God,  "  I  cared  nothing  for  religion
until  that  brother  spoke  to  me  concerning  my  soul's
salvation  while  engaged  in  the  bazaar."  The  fair
was  in  itself  a  ofreat  revival  of  reliction,  although  the
work  was  not  publicly  conducted  as  a  Church  ser-
vice. No  special  prayer-meetings  were  held  aside
from  those  of  the  different  committees.  Yet  these
days  furnished  well-improved  opportunities  for  per-
sonal conversation  with  persons  who  were  not
Christians,  but  whose  o^ift  toward  the  cause  had  ere-
ated  within  them  a  favorable  interest  in  the  oreneral
subject.  Such  a  gathering  might  have  been  a  posi-
tive curse  to  the  Church, and  might  have  hindered  the


220  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

payment  of  the  debt,  if  it  had  been  conducted  in  the
worldly  spirit  which  characterizes  many  such  gather-
ings in  other  places,  where  the  committees  seemed
to  think  of  nothing  but  foolish  display,  senseless
■  sport,  or  the  squeezing  out  of  their  visitors  as  much
money  as  possible.  Where  the  idea  Is  only  to
make  money,  even  though  it  be  for  a  Church,  it
usually  results  in  far  greater  damage  than  good.
But  where  the  whole  matter  becomes,  as  it  was  in
this  case,  an  enthusiastic  service  in  the  name  of  the
Saviour,  and  where  the  salvation  of  others
was  always  kept  most  prominently  In  mind,  while
the  gathering  of  money  was  made  secondary  ;  such
meetings  of  the  people  become  a  spiritual  blessing
and  a  Qrreat  financial  ofaln.

A  sincere  desire  to  serve  Christ,  combined  with
the  usual  degree  of  hard  English  common  sense,
can  be  trusted  to  manao^e  a  Church  bazaar  so  as  to
add  greatly  to  the  prosperity  of  the  Saviour's  king-
dom. Mr.  Spurgeon's  people  became  well  satisfied
of  that.  And  they  have  since  used  it  in  connection
with  the  scores  of  chapels  they  have  bullt^  with  al-
most unvarying  success.  The  overshadowing  and
the  Indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  God  can  only  account
for  the  continued  success  of  their  undertaking,  and
for  the  manner  In  which  many  things  usually  dele-
terious became  positively  helpful.

It  Is  said  that  the  committee  who  cleared  away
the  tables  after  the  bazaar  was  closed  were  heard
singing  most  heartily  a  hymn  of  praise  to  God.


BUILDING  FOR  THE  LORD.  221

The  bazaar  had  given  an  opportunity  to  thou-
sands of  poor  people  to  give  their  mite,  and  each
Oliver  followed  his  effort  with  affection,  feelinor  ever
afterward  that  he  had  a  personal  share  in  the  Taber-
nacle.

As  the  mother  loves  the  child  for  whom  she  makes
the  greatest  sacrifices,  so  those  Church  members
always  love  their  Church  home  the  most  who  have
given  toward  it  with  the  greatest  generosity.  The
blessing  of  God  which  follows  a  cheerful  giver  is
always  shown  in  his  greatly  increased  pleasure  in
attending  the  Church  services  and  in  his  enjoyment
of  the  Church's  prosperity.

The  subscriptions  which  followed  the  bazaar  car-
ried the  sum  up  to  nearly  two  thousand  dollars
above  that  which  was  needed  to  clear  the  Taber-
nacle from  debt,  and  in  May,  1861,  when  it  was
opened,  they  had  paid  all  their  bills  and  had  a  bal-
ance In  the  treasury.

Well  might  such  a  people  sing  '^  Praise  God  from
whom  all  blessings  flow."


CHAPTER  IX.

MRS.     SPURGEON    AND    HER    WORK.

God  saw  that  it  was  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone,
and  hence  made  a  help  that  was  meet  for  him.  It
is  no  easier  to  account  for  love  than  it  is  for  taste.
Like  the  dove  which  shines  with  all  the  reflected
hues  of  heaven,  it  lights  upon  the  most  unseemly
objects,  and  often  without  forethought  or  consid-
eration, seeks  apparently  only  a  resting-place  and  a
home.

With  all  our  boasted  free-will  and  pride  of  inde-
pendence, how  little  we  know  of  our  future  and
how  little  we  have  to  do  with  the  moulding  of  the
circumstances  of  life,  is  well  demonstrated  in  the
stranore  revolutions  which  love  makes  in  human  life.

o

If  one  could  have  looked  down  upon  these  two
persons  in  1850,  seeing  Susanna,  an  industrious,
bright  school-girl,  in  the  great  city,  associating  with
city  people,  with  city  ideas  and  city  culture ;  and
Charles,  a  rude  rustic  at  New  Market,  clumsy,  awk-
ward, and  expressing  by  thought  and  gesture  all  the
uncouth  side  of  country  life,  they  would  have  said
that  it  was  impossible  for  them  to   have  found  in

each    other's    disposition    or    tastes    that    unity    of
222


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  223

thought  which  Is  a  necessity  to  the  most  complete
domestic  Hfe.  Yet  five  years  later,  .these  two  lives
were  so  mero^ed  into  each  other  as  to  make  a  most
beautiful  scene  of  affection  in  their  home  life,  and  so
as  to  express  their  affection  for  each  other  in  a  har-
mony that  was  positively  sublime.

Home  is  always  the  word  which  is  nearest  to  the
word  heaven.  The  domestic  love  which  makes
home  what  it  is,  is  the  only  sentiment  on  earth
which  makes  heaven  intelligible.

Miss  Susanna  Thomson's  father  was  an  attendant,
or  a  member,  of  the  New  Park  Street  Church  at  the
time  it  extended  the  call  to  Charles  to  become  its
pastor,  but  it  is  said  that  he  was  discouraged  with
the  condition  of  the  church,  like  many  other  mem-
bers, and  his  family  had,  in  a  great  measure,  lost
their  interest  In  Its  meetings.  He  was  a  merchant,
in  prosperous  circumstances,  and  consequently  gave
his  family  all  the  comforts  and  many  of  the  luxuries
of  some  aristocratic  circles.

His  daughter,  Su-sanna,  was  of  a  quiet,  sweet
disposition,  most  earnestly  devoted  to  Christian
work  and  to  silent  deeds  of  charity.  When  her
father  mentioned  In  the  family  circle  the  fact  that  a
young  man  from  Essex  was  to  preach  the  next  Sun-
day in  the  Park  Street  pulpit,  she  paid  but  little
heed  to  the  announcement,  and  It  Is  said  that  she
could  not  be  persuaded  to  attend  the  first  service.

Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  description  of  his  dress,
manners  and  feelings  at  the  time  he  entered  London


224  CHARLES  IT.  SPURGEON.

for  the  first  time,  will  show  that  he  was  at  that  time
in  no  sense  a  person  who  would  be  naturally  at-
tractive in  the  eyes  of  the  ladies.  He  had  none  of
the  sweet  airs,  and  could  not  afford  the  fashionable
dress,  such  as  the  beaux  of  the  great  metropolis
affected.  His  expressions,  both  of  countenance  and
speech,  partook  largely  of  his  native  fields.  He  did
not  know  how  to  hold  his  hands,  and  made  vain
efforts  to  hide  his  feet.  He  states  that  in  the  board-
ing-house where  he  stopped  the  night  before  he
preached  for  the  first  time  in  London,  the  boarders
entertained  him  with  marvellous  stories  of  the  learn-
ing, culture  and  critical  disposition  of  the  London
people,  and  greatly  frightened  him  by  comparing
him,  by  inference,  with  the  celebrated  preachers  and
learned  theologfians  that  London  delio^hted  to  honor.
He  was  so  conscious  of  his  own  awkwardness  and
inability  to  fill  so  Important  a  place  as  that  at  the
New  Park  Street  chapel,  that  he  says  he  lay  awake
the  entire  previous  night,  and  entered  the  church  in
the  morning  feeling  very  weary  and  trembling  with
apprehension.  But  he  succeeded,  through  earnest
prayer,  and  through  the  kind  encouragement  of  the
friends  who  attended  the  service,  in  getting  through
the  day  so  acceptably  as  to  win  considerable  sincere
praise  and  feel  a  sense  of  encouragement  in  his  heart.
When  he  appeared  in  the  pulpit  on  his  second
visit  to  the  city,  he  was  greeted  with  many  kindly
smiles  and  encouraging  nods,  and  the  state  of  things
had  greatly  changed  in  his  favor.


MRS.  SPUR G EON  AND  HER   WORK.  2 25

The  few  members  of  the  church  who  had  heard
him  on  his  first  visit,  had  taken  especial  pains  to
canvass  the  entire  neighborhood,  and  bring  to  the
service  every  friend  over  whom  they  had  any  per-
sonal influence.  In  this  effort  Susanna  was  induced
to  join,  and  made  it  her  Christian  duty  to  secure  the
attendance  of  her  own  acquaintances.  Their  pride
in  their  church  led  the  people  to  try  to  fill  the  house,
in  order  that  the  place  might  appear  less  dreary  and
more  inviting  to  the  stranger  who  was  to  fill  the  pulpit.

A  friend,  who  remembers  well  that  day,  says  that
Susanna  said  :  'Tt  would  be  a  shame  to  have  a  man
come  so  far  and  find  the  church  so  poorly  attended."
How  little  could  that  girl,  in  the  simplicity  of  her
Christian  work  and  life,  foresee  how  great  was  to  be
the  effect  upon  her  own  happiness  and  usefulness
of  that  Christian  labor.

In  this  century,  when  every  girl's  life  is  to  herself
an  enigma,  because  it  depends  so  largely  upon  cir-
cumstances entirely  beyond  her  control,  how  obscure
her  future  must  appear  !  To  the  young  man,  who
can  entertain  reasonable  ambitions  and  make  prob-
able prophecies  concerning  his  future  in  business
life,  there  is  a  measure  of  certainty  which  adds  much
to  its  attractiveness  and  much  of  enjoyment  to  his
youthful  studies.  But  a  woman's  life  is  far  more
uncertain,  because  it  depends  in  so  great  a  degree
upon  the  appearance,  habits  and  position  of  some
man  of  whom,  in  her  girlhood,  she  may  know  nothing
whatever.
15


226  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  OAT.

Such  must  have  been  the  condition  of  Susanna
when  she  saw,  for  the  first  time,  this  young  man
standing  in  the  pulpit.  That  he  would  ever  be  any-
thing more  to  her  than  a  mere  acquaintance,  or  pos-
sibly pastor  and  teacher,  could  never  have  entered
her  thoughts  at  that  time,  unless  they  wandered  into
the  most  extravagant  imamnations.  Their  lives
were  so  different.     They  were  so  far  apart.

*'  Man's  love  is  of  himself  a  thing  apart,
'Tis  woman's  whole  existence."

With  Charles  that  day,  his  mind  must  have  been
entirely  enveloped  in  the  awful  undertaking  he  had
in  hand,  and  cares  which  can  scarcely  be  appre-
ciated by  any  other  person,  must  have  kept  his
heart  beating  very  fast  and  his  brain  crowded  with
conflictinor   anxieties.      He   could    have  cared  little

o

for  the  ladies  that  day,  and  could  have  given  them
but  slight  attention.  His  mind  was  overwhelmed
with  care.

What  she  thought  has,  of  course,  been  hidden  in
the  silent  bowers  of  a  Christian  woman's  modest  re-
serve. A  Providence  which  neither  could  have  fore-
seen, but  which  both  most  reverently  respected,  had
brought  them  that  day  into  an  association  which  was
to  furnish,  in  this  life,  a  sweetest  foretaste  of  Para-
dise, and  begin  an  acquaintance  which  should  not
cease  through  all  the  rolling  ages  of  a  happy  eternity.

While  the  precincts  of  the  heart's  love  and  the
sacred  realms  of  dome'stic  affection  are  rightly  re^
garded  as  holy  ground,  upon  which  the  unwelcome


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  22/

Stranger  cannot  tread,  yet  in  the  study  of  a  great
man's  biography  there  is  no  more  important  event
in  his  history  than  such  a  circumstance  as  this.

Many  a  man  with  a  briUiant  mind,  with  capital
and  social  position,  has  been  destroyed  by  an  unfort-
unate marriage.  Many  others  without  capital  or
social  position,  or  any  especial  gift  of  genius,  have
been  lifted  into  prominence,  wealth  and  fame,  through
the  valuable  support  which  they  received  in  the
potent  aid  of  a  brilliant  and  faithful  wife.  The  cases
are  indeed  very  rare  where  a  man  of  genius  has
made  his  mark  upon  his  time  "or  upon  subsequent
history,  who  was  not  strengthened,  encouraged  and
supported  by  a  persevering  woman.

In  some  cases  the  husband  is  merely  a  figurehead,
sensitively  responsive  to  a  power  behind  the  throne,
which  dwells  altogether  with  his  wife.  But  view  it
in  any  light  we  choose,  and  endeavor  by  every  pos-
sible excuse  to  belittle  the  influence  of  the  wife,  yet
in  every  married  man's  history  it  works  a  very  im-
portant factor  in  all  that  he  accomplishes.

With  a  nature  like  that  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's,  with
many  defects  to  repair  and  a  lack  of  general  educa-
tion to  be  supplied,  a  cultivated  and  persevering
wife  might  be  considered  an  unquestioned  necessity.
It  seems  now  to  have  been  a  part  of  the  great
Divine  plan  to  have  brought  these  two  persons  into
intimate  association,  that  the  wife  might  supply  all
that  was  lacking  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  outfit  for  the
great  work  he  was  to  do.


228  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

To  the  spectator,  he  had  sacrificed  much  in  giving
up  his  college  education  for  the  purpose  of  carrying
on  the  Lord's  work  at  Waterbeach.  But  in  the  at-
tendance of  Susanna  upon  the  service  in  London,
we  find  a  hand  in  the  providential  events  completely
making  up  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  there,  all  that  he  had
lost  in  his  Christian  resolution.

Intimate  friends  may  have  overestimated  the  love-
liness of  her  mental  character,  and  the  writers  who
have  mentioned  her  may  have  highly  colored  their
representations,  yet  there  can  remain  no  doubt  upon
the  most  conservative  mind,  but  that  she  was  as
remarkable  a  woman  as  he  was  a  man.

It  will  readily  be  seen  that  the  responsibility  which
he  had  assumed  as  a  boy,  in  connection  with  one  of
the  oldest  and  most  aristocratic  Baptist  churches  in
London,  would  soon  have  discouraged  him  alto-
gether, had  there  not  entered  into  his  life  this  unut-
terable affection  and  its  consequent  ambition  to
make  a  great  man  of  himself.

Man  is  so  constituted  mentally,  that  he  never
reaches  his  highest  attainments  and  never  orives
reins  to  the  noblest  ambitions,  until  he  is  aroused  to
the  highest  motives  by  a  true  and  positive  affection
for  some  sweet- minded  woman.  There  are  ambitions
in  connection  with  the  desire  for  money,  with  the
hope  of  fame,  and  with  the  inspiration  of  a  patriotic
heart,  but  none  of  them  will  push  a  man  on  to
such  greatness  of  thought  or  heights  of  effort  as
a  manly  love,    which    influences   all    his  hopes,  all


o

r


z

H
O

H

w

>

r


o


il  5rW  YORK      j


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  25 1

his    thoughts,    and    every    attribute     of  his     moral
character.

After  they  had  met  and  found  in  each  other  the
companion  which  God  had  intended  for  them,  Mr.
Spurgeon  would  then  be  determined  to  go  on  with
his  pastoral  work  in  London,  and  no  discouragement
whatever  would  be  allowed  to  interfere  with  his  in-
tention there  to  remain.

To  those  biographers  who  have  not  considered
how  great  a  feature  of  his  life  his  marriage  must
have  been,  the  question  has  often  been  asked :
"Why  was  not  such  a  boy,  with  his  attainments,  a
failure  in  such  untoward  surroundings? "  The  answer
is  partially  found  here.  His  love  for  true  woman-
hood would  lead  him  to  sacrifice  everything  else  but
that,  in  order  to  succeed.  Her  eyes  would  inspire,
and  her  advice  confirm  him  under  all  circumstances,
and  lead  him  to  the  most  reckless  daring  in  anything
that  would  be  likely  to  please  her.  In  a  true  love,
such  as  was  theirs,  there  could  scarcely  be  any
higher  service  of  God  than  to  be  affectionately  loyal
to  a  God-riven  wife.  Her  home  was  in  London.
She  would  dislike  greatly  to  leave  it.  His  home
must  be  where  she  was.  Consequently  we  find  a
combination  in  this  of  all  kinds  of  circumstances
and  motives,  to  determine  his  action  in  reference  to
the  upbuilding  of  his  new  interests  in  London.

It  is  easy  to  see  how  much  more  carefully  he
would  select  his  language,  and  how  many  more
hours  he  would  give  to  the  study  of  his  sermons,


232  CHARLES  If.  SPURGE  ON.

how  much  more  cautious  he  would  be  in  his  care  of
the  church,  and  how  much  more  courteous  he  would
be  in  his  intercourse  with  the  members  of  the  church,
with  the  feelincTs  of  a  domestic  love  confirminor  his
most  sincere  devotion  to  the  service  of  God.

The  man  who  could  not  be  eloquent  under  these
circumstances,  would  be  exceedingly  dull  under  any
other.  He  who  would  not  be  fervent  in  spirit  and
diligent  in  business  serving  the  Lord,  with  a  provi-
dential combination,  such  as  surrounded  him  then,
would  be  a  most  disgraceful  failure  under  many  or-
dinary circumstances.

True  worship,  sincere  patriotism  and  domestic
love  filled  his  heart  with  great  ambitions  and  sustained
him  throuofh  the  hours  of  most  arduous  w^ork.
''Victory  or  death"  would  be  as  truly  his  cry  there,
as  it  has  been  the  motto  of  warriors  in  the  midst  of
uncertain  battle.  He  had  secured  a  teacher  who
was  much  more  than  a  teacher,  as  she  supplied  also
motive  and  inspiration.

On  the  8th  day  of  January,  1856,  at  mid-day,
Charles  and  Susanna  were  united  in  marriage.

That  his  wife  must  have  been  an  unusually  beloved
young  woman  in  the  church,  is  evident  from  the  fact
that  we  find  the  marriage  awakened  no  jealousy  on
the  part  of  others,  and  did  not  stir  the  gossips  of  the
neighborhood  into  prognostications  of  evil.  ''  God
bless  them  both,"  was  the  sincere  benediction  of
young  and  old,  of  rich  and  poor,  throughout  their
entire  acquaintance,


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  233

Well  might  Charles  then,  on  his  knees  before  God,
give  most  heartfelt  thanksgiving  for  the  blessings
he  had  received,  and  pledge  himself,  with  all  his
stubborn  nature,  to  an  entire  lifetime  devoted  to  the
self-sacrificing  service  of  the  Saviour  who  had  so
favored  him.

From  their  very  first  acquaintance,  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Spurgeon  were  a  perpetual  strength  to  each  other.
She  could  curb  the  uncouth  eccentricities  and  correct
his  mistakes  in  language  or  history,  and  she  hesitated
not  in  the  most  affectionate  manner  to  apply  her  criti-
cisms where  she  saw  they  would  do  her  husband  good.

He  urged  her  to  take  the  place  of  a  public  critic
and  notice  his  errors  that  he  might  the  more  readily
correct  them,  and  as  she  was  a  lady  of  excellent
good  sense  and  of  quite  extensive  reading,  she  was
a  far  safer  critic  than  any  man  he  could  have  selected.

Had  he  married  a  silly  woman,  who  would  have
regarded  him  as  the  perfection  of  sainthood,  or  a
devotee  of  fashion,  who  would  have  discouraged  him
with  her  corrections,  he  could  never  have  attained
the  eminence  which  he  reached.  Had  he  allied  him-
self with  a  wife  who  was  less  pious  and  sincere,  or
who  would  not  have  maintained  her  hold  upon  the
affections  and  esteem  of  his  congregation,  she  w^ould
have  served  to  injure  his  reputation  and  undermine
many  of  the  spiritual  buildings  he  was  able  to
construct.

But  she  worked  with  him,  prayed  with  him,  be-
lieved in  him,   and    most  affectionately  loved  him


234  CHARLES.   II.  SPURGEON.

through  those  many  years  of  his  work.  The  thought
of  her,  even  when  he  was  absent  from  home,  was
to  him  a  subtle  rest  of  spirit.  He  could  travel. many
days  and  preach  several  times  a  day,  finding  a  rest
in  the  thought  that  at  home  she  was  hourly  praying
for  him,  and  was  awaiting  him  with  a  welcome  he
could  anticipate  with  a  sense  of  divine  peace.

Once  when  absent  in  Yorkshire,  ten  years  after
their  marriage,  he  wrote  to  her  this  characteristic
letter  in  poetry  :

Over  the  space  that  parts  us,  my  wife,

I'll  cast  me  a  bridge  of  song,
Our  hearts  shall  meet,  O  joy  of  my  life,

On  its  arch  unseen,  but  strong.

*****         ^t

The  wooer  his  new  love's  name  may  wear

Engraved  on  a  precious  stone ;
But  in  my  heart  thine  image  I  wear,

That  heart  has  long  been  thine  own.

The  glowing  colors  on  surface  laid,

Wash  out  in  a  shower  of  rain  ;
Thou  need'st  not  be  of  rivers  afraid,

For  my  love  is  dyed  ingrain.

And  as  every  drop  of  Garda's  lake

Is  tinged  with  sapphire's  blue,
So  all  the  powers  of  my  mind  partake

Of  joy  at  the  thought  of  you.

The  glittering  dewdrops  of  dawning  love

Exhale  as  the  day  grows  old,
And  fondness,  taking  the  wings  of  a  dove,

Is  gone  like  a  tale  of  old.

But  mine  for  thee,  from  the  chambers  of  joy,

With  strength  came  forth  as  the  sun.
Nor  life  nor  death  shall  its  force  destroy,

Forever  its  course  shall  run.


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  235

All  earth-born  love  must  sleep  in  the  grave,

To  its  native  dust  return  ;
What  God  hath  kindled  shall  death  out-brave,

And  in  heaven  itself  shall  burn.

Beyond  and  above  the  wedlock  tie

Our  union  to  Christ  we  feel ;
Uniting  bonds  which  were  made  on  high,

Shall  hold  us  when  earth  shall  reel.

Though  He  who  chose  us  all  worlds  before,

Must  reign  in  our  hearts  alone,
We  fondly  believe  that  we  shall  adore

Together  before  His  throne.

When  his  assailants  spoke  of  him  with  sad  false-
hoods, and  when  friends  forsook  or  betrayed,  there
was  always  one  who  stood  like  a  shield  between
him  and  the  arrows  of  wickedness,  quenching  their
fiery  darts  most  easily  with  the  shield  of  domestic
love.

Wherever  in  his  busy  life  he  could  not  go,  she
was  there  to  supply  the  lack.  Whenever  there  was
a  book  needed,  she  was  first  to  diligently  search  for
it.  Economical,  neat,  careful,  conservative  and
quiet  in  all  her  relations  to  the  public,  she  supplied
to  him  so  much  of  nerve,  instruction  and  vigor  as  to
make  him  what  his  brother  often  claimed  he  was,
"two  men,  instead  of  one."

'*  How  do  you  manage  to  do  two  men's  work  in
a  single  day?"  was  the  question  asked  of  him  by
the  great  traveler.  Dr.  Livingstone,

"You  have  forgotten  that  there  are  two  of  us,"
said  Mr.  Spurgeon,  "and  the  one  you  see  the  least
of,  often  does  the  most  w^ork."


236  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

Stray  gleams  of  the  glory  which  filled  his  home
are  sometimes  caught  in  a  study  of  his  sermons,
and  especially  in  many  of  his  comments  upon  Script-
ure. Heaven  is  ever  to  him  a  Christian's  affec-
tionate home.

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  had  but  two  homes  in
London  after  their  marriage.  The  first  was  in
Nightingale  Lane  in  the  city,  where  they  occupied
a  small  house,  to  which  was  attached  a  small  but
fruitful  garden.  There  they  lived  for  nearly  twenty-
five  years.  The  very  thought  of  it  fills  the  reader
with  a  reverent  sensation.  It  was  there  that  their
twin  sons,  Charles  and  Thomas,  were  born  ;  it  was
there  that  pain  and  sickness  often  came  ;  it  was  there
that  the  trials  and  cares  of  life  were  often  discussed  ;
it  was  there  that  sermons  were  thouo^ht  out  and
frequently  rehearsed  before  their  delivery  ;  but  it
was  also  there  that  was  always  found  a  cheerful
trust  in  God,  unshaken  love  for  each  other,  and  a
domestic  peace,  such  as  only  the  most  perfect  of
English  homes  enjoy.

Mrs.  Spurgeon,  herself,  in  speaking  of  their
"  moving-day "  from  that  first  home  in  London,
afterwards  wrote  :  ''What  a  stirring  up  of  one's
quiet  nest  this  removal  Is  !  and  how  tenderly  one
yearns  to  look  on  familiar  objects  from  which  we
are  to  be  parted  forever  !  The  heart  yearns  over  a
place  endeared  by  an  intimate  acquaintance  of
twenty-three  years,  and  full  of  happy  or  solemn  asso-
ciations.    Each  nook  and  corner,  both  of  house  and


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  2^7

garden,  abounds  with  sweet  or  sorrowful  memories,
and  the  remembrance  of  manifold  mercies  clings
like  a  rich  tapestry  to  the  walls  of  the  desolate
rooms.  On  this  spot  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  century
of  blissful  wedded  life  has  been  passed,  and  though
both  husband  and  wife  have  been  called  to  suffer
severe  physical  pain  and  months  of  weakness  within
its  boundary,  our  house  has  been  far  oftener  'a
Bethel*  to  us  than  a  'bochin.'  The  very  walls  might
cry  out  against  us  as  ungrateful  did  we  not  silence
them  by  our  ceaseless  thanksgiving  ;  for  the  Lord  has
here  loaded  us  with  benefits  and  consecrated  every
inch  of  space  with  tokens  of  His  great  loving  kind-
ness. The  sun  of  His  goodness  has  photographed
every  portion  of  our  dear  homes  upon  our  hearts,  and
thouofh  other  liorhts  and  shadows  must  be  reflected
there  in  coming  days,  they  can  never  obliterate  the
sweet  images  w^hich  grateful  memory  will  jealously
preserve.  Tender  remembrances  will  render  indel-
ible the  pictures  of  the  sick-chamber,  which  so  many
times  has  almost  been  '  the  gate  of  heaven  '  to  our
spirit  ;  the  little  room,  tenderly  fitted  up  by  a  hus-
band's careful  love,  and  so  often  the  scene  of  a
scarcely-hoped-for  convalescence  ;  the  study,  sacred
to  the  pastor's  earnest  work,  and  silent  witness  of
wrestlings  and  communings  knowm  only  to  God  and
his  own  soul  ;  the  library,  where  the  shelves  gladly
suffered  a  constant  spoliation  and  renewal  for  the
blessed  work  of  the  Book-F'und.


238  CHARLES  //.  SPUKGEON.

"  It's  hard  to  leave  all  these  sympathetic  surround-
ings and  dwell  in  the  house  of  a  stranger  ;  but  we
believe  we  have  seen  the  cloudy  pillar  move,  and
heard  our  Leader's  voice  bidding  us  '  go  forward,'
so,  in  trustful  obedience,  we  strike  our  tent,  and
prepare  to  depart  to  the  '  place  of  which  he  has  told
us.'  And  our  new  home  maybe  to  us  a  'Tabor'  if
our  Lord  will  but  dwell  with  us  there  !  On  our  first
view  of  it  w^e  were  strongly  reminded  of  Bunyan's
description  of  the  'delectable  mountains,' and  every
subsequent  visit  deepens  that  impression.  '  A  pleas-
ant prospect  071  every  side'  said  he,  ^  these  mountains
are  ImmanueV s  land ;  they  are  within  sight  of  His
city  ;  the  sheep  also  are  His,  and  He  laid  down  His
life  for  the^n!

' '  The  shepherds  show  the  pilgrims  the  gates  of
the  Celestial  City  '  if  they  had  the  skill  to  look
through  their  prospective  glass!  It  may  be  that  the
Lord,  our  Shepherd,  has  called  us  to  the  top  of  this
hill  to  show  us  *  something  like  the  gate,  and  some  of
the  glory  of  the  place,  beforehand,  that  our  hearts
may  be  set  a-longing  for  the  bliss  of  our  eternal
home.  '  O  Lord,  if  thy  spirit  go  not  with  us,  carry
us  not  up  hence  !'  "

The  following  inscription,  written  by  Mr.  Spur-
geon,  was  left  in  the  house  :

"  Farewell,  fair  room,  I  leave  thee  to  a  friend  ;
Peace  dwell  with  him  and  all  his  kin.
May  angels  evermore  the  house  defend,
Their  Lord  hath  often  been  within."


AIRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  239

With  such  a  home  no  external  conflict  could  be
too  severe  and  no  persecutions  be  unendurable.  As
the  hearthstone  of  home  ofleams  with  a  brighter  and
more  cheerful  ray  when  storms  sweep  without  and
rattle  on  the  pane,  so  the  presence  of  such  a  wife  as
Mrs.  Spurgeon  proved  to  be,  makes  the  dwelling  a
paradise  amid  the  weeds  and  briery  deserts  of  a
wicked  w^orld.

He  could  take  home  the  basest  calumnies  and  the
most  spiteful  caricatures  and  there  courageously
iaugh  at  their  weakness  most  heartily.

*•  Man  may  trouble  and  distress  me,
'Twill  but  drive  me  to  thy  breast;
Life  with  trials  hard  may  press  me,
Home  will  bring  me  sweeter  rest."

As  the  afflictions  of  life  and  the  persecutions  of
our  fellow-men  make  heaven  dearer  and  fit  us  for
its  supreme  enjoyment,  so  in  this  life,  although  it
may  be  upon  a  smaller  scale,  the  hard  work  and  the
cares  ot  a  man  are  at  his  home  transmuted  into  the
most  precious  joys,  by  the  wife's  sweet  welcome
which  he  receives  at  his  door.

When  through  his  wife's  management  and  the
liberality  of  kind  friends  and  the  unexpected  rise  in
the  value  of  his  house,  he  was  able  to  move  from
the  smaller  home  into  the  larofe  and  beautiful  villa
at  Westwood,  widi  its  lawn,  shade  trees,  flower  gar-
dens and  fountains,  there  was  a  strong  feeling  of
regret  and  sadness  on  the  part  of  them  both  as  they
stepped  forth  for  the  last  time  from  their  early  home.


240  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

Mr.  Spurgeon  always  regarded  the  old  house  as
a  dear  friend,  and  often  expressed  his  thankfulness
that  he  was  able  to  leave  it  in  the  hands  of  a  dear
acquaintance.

Although  Mr.  Spurgeon  ever  appeared  to  be  a
hearty,  robust  man,  of  unusual  health,  yet  he  was
frequently  compelled  to  take  to  his  bed  through  ill-
ness, and  there  received  the  kind  ministrations  of  his
patient,  affectionate  wife.  But  a  far  greater  trial  to
him  than  his  own  frequent  sickness,  was  the  grad-
ually increasing  infirmities  which  afflicted  his  wife
throuo-h  the  latter  half  of  their  married  life.  For  a
few  years  she  was  wholly  an  invalid,  and  became  the
subject  of  his  most  earnest  prayers  and  most  affec-
tionate care.  Her  pitiful  imprisonment  by  disease
made  her  much  dearer  to  him,  as  such  an  experience
always  affects  the  heart  of  any  noble  man.  He  could
find  no  words  to  express  his  admiration  for  her
benevolent  Christian  character,  and  w^as  continually
dissatisfied  with  himself  that  he  was  not  able  in  some
form  or  another  to  do  more  for  the  relief  of  her
distress.

Day  after  day,  and  week  after  week,  she  sat  in
that  easy  chair,  hoping  against  hope  that  she  might
be  able  to  go  forth  once  more  to  the  active  duties  of
the  church,  or  at  least  to  care  for  the  domestic  duties
of  the  home.  But  years  came  and  went,  and  she
was  still  there.  Her  spirit  yearned  to  be  of  more
use  to  mankind,  and  she  prayed  the  Lord  to  permit
her  to   share  in   some    direction   in  her   husband's


MRS.  SPURGRON  AND  HER   WORK.  24-1

labors  for  the  salvation  of  the  souls  of  men.  In
answer  to  that  prayer,  she  was  directed  to  the  estab-
lishment of  that  important  enterprise,  called  the
Book-Fund.

By  that  undertaking,  she  secured  gifts  of  money
and  books  from  Christian  donors,  which  she  used  in
supplying  the  scant  libraries  of  poor  preachers  in
the  country  places.

Her  own  record  of  that  undertakino-  furnishes  a
somewhat  comprehensive  idea  of  the  work,  and  at
the  same  time  gives  a  more  excellent  estimate  of
her  own  character  than  anything  any  stranger  could
write.  Hence  we  turn  to  what  she  has  herself
written,  and  present  here  such  portions  of  It  as  will
crive  the  reader  a  full  Insio^ht  into  her  life  as  an  in-
valid,  and  also  into  the  marvellous  results  of  the
work  she  undertook.

Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  1886,  in  an  introduction  to  a
book  containing  a  record  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book-
Fund,  very  tenderly  said :

"  I  gratefully  adore  the  goodness  of  our  Heavenly
Father,  in  directing  my  beloved  wife  to  a  work  which
has  been  to  her  fruitful  In  unutterable  happiness.
That  it  has  cost  her  m.ore  pain  than  it  would  be  fit-
tino-  to  reveal,  Is  most  true  ;  but  that  It  has  brouo-ht
her  boundless  joy,  Is  equally  certain.  Our  gracious
Lord  ministered  to  His  suffering  child.  In  the  most
effectual  manner,  when  He  graciously  led  her  to
minister  to  the  necessides  of  His  service.  By  this
means,  He  called  her  away  from  her  personal  o-rief,
16


242  CHARLES  H.  SPUKGEON.

gave  tone  and  concentration  to  her  life,  led  her  to
continual  dealinos  with  Himself,  and  raised  her
nearer  the  centre  of  that  region  where  other  than
earthly  joys  and  sorrows  reigned  supreme.  Let
every  believer  accept  this  as  the*  inference  of  expe-
rience, that  for  most  human  maladies  the  best  relief
and  antidote  will  be  found  In  self-sacrificing  work
for  the  Lord  Jesus.

"If  I  said  a  word  in  praise  of  the  worker  herself,
my  preface  would  not  be  acceptable  to  the  author  of
these  reports,  and  therefore  I  must  content  myself
with  expressing  my  conviction  that  the  work  Is  sadly
needed,  has  been  exceedingly  useful,  and  is  still
urgently  called  for.  How  can  many  of  our  ministers
buy  books  ?  How  can  those  In  the  villages  get  them
at  all?  What  must  their  ministries  become  if  their
minds  are  starved  ?  Is  It  not  a  duty  to  relieve  the
famine  which  Is  raging  In  many  a  manse?  Is  It  not
a  prudential  measure,  worthy  of  the  attention  of  all
who  wish  to  see  the  masses  influenced  by  religion,
that  the  preachers  who  occupy  our  pulpits  should  be
kept  well  furnished  with  material  for  thought  ?

*'  By  the  Book-Fund,  not  less  than  twelve  thousand
ministers  of  all  denominations  have  been  supplied
with  at  least  a  few  fresh  books.  Sometimes  men
have  been  aided  In  somewhat  unusual  studies  for
which  they  had  special  predilection.  Not  long  ago
I  had  to  become  an  adviser  to  the  Fund,  as  to  a
grammar,  etc.,  for  the  study  of  Syriac,  for  the  use
of  one  who  had  a  call  In  that  direction.     The  Fund


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  2J\l

does  not  profess  to  grant  works  other  than  those
needed  for  the  special  work  of  the  ministry,  but  even
this  gives  a  wide  range,  especially  in  the  case  of
*  missionaries.  I  think  great  discretion  has  been  used
in  the  distribution  of  the  bounty.  I  am  sure  it  has
been  blended  with  the  utmost  sympathy  and  Chris-
tian love."

From  that  record  we  will  try  to  collect  those  In-
teresting facts  which  are  german  to  this  history,  and
quote,  as  far  as  possible,  from  her  own  words.  When
asked  how  the  Book-Fund  began,  she  said  :

'*It  was  in  the  summer  of  1875  that  my  dear  hus-
band completed  and  published  the  first  volume  of
his  '  Lectures  to  my  Students.'  Reading  one  of  the
proof  copies,  I  became  so  enamored  with  the  book,
that  when  the  dear  author  asked,  *  Well,  how  do  you
like  it  ?'  I  answered  with  a  full  heart,  '  I  wish  I  could
place  it  in  the  hands  of  every  minister  in  England.'
'Then  why  not  do  so?  How  much  will  you  give?'
said  my  very  practical  spouse.  I  must  confess  I  was
unprepared  for  such  a  challenge.  I  was  ready
enough  to  desire  the  distribution  of  the  prec'o.js
book,  but  to  assist  in  it,  or  help  to  pay  for  it,  had
not  occurred  to  me  ;  but  '  John  Ploughman  '  drives
a  straight  furrow  to  one's  heart,  and  knows  how  to
turn  over  the  thick  clods  of  selfishness  which  lie
there  choking  up  the  useful  growths  ;  and  very  soon
his  words  set  me  thinking  how  much  I  could  spare
from  housekeeping,  or  personal  matters,  to  start  this
new  scheme.    I  knew  it  would  necessitate  a  pressure


244


CHARLES  II.  SPURGEON.


somewhere,  for  money  was  not  plentiful  just  then  ;
but  to  see  dear  John's  face  beam  so  radiantly  at  the
idea  of  my  scattering  his  books  far  and  wide,  was
worth  any  effort ;  and  love,  even  more  than  obedience,
constrained  me  to  carry  out  the  suddenly  formed
plan.  Then  came  the  wonderful  part  ;  I  found  the
money  ready  and  waiting !  Upstairs,  in  a  little
drawer,  were  some  carefully  hoarded  crown-pieces,
which,  owing  to  some  foolish  fancy,  I  had  been
gathering  for  years,  whenever  chance  threw  one  in
my  way  ;  these  I  now  counted  out,  and  found  they
made  a  sum  exactly  sufficient  to  pay  for  one  hun-
dred copies  of  the  work  !  If  a  twinge  of  regret  at
parting  from  my  cherished,  but  unwieldy,  favorites
passed  over  me,  it  was  gone  in  an  instant,  and  then
they  were  given  freely  and  thankfully  to  the  Lord,
and  in  that  moment,  though  I  knew  it  not,  '  The
Book-Fund'  was  inaugurated.

"All  last  winter,  in  the  sunniest  corner  of  the
south  window  of  our  especial  sanctum,  there  stood
a  common  garden  flower-pot  containing  a  little
plant  which  we  deemed  a  marvel  of  grace  and  beauty.
We  had  sown  some  lemon  pips  the  preceding  autumn
with  a  lively  hope  that  one  or  more  of  them  might
possess  the  wonderful  life-germ,  and  we  were  well
rewarded  for  our  confidence.  In  due  time  a  frail
little  stem  and  two  of  the  tiniest  leaves  that  ever
coaxed  their  way  through  the  dark  mould  made  their
appearance,  and  from  that  moment  it  was  watched,
and  watered,  and  tended  with  assiduous  care.     So


w

H
pi

C

•a
o
f

t-H

>

•z

>

w

M

>
w

p

?!

(/!

o
w
o

>

to
H
O


JBBArvT  I


-  ->'-v.Ar/>«!:^;s:ttnM*«««*4HMM*>«*M


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   l]^ORK.  24/

frail  at  first,  and  delicate,  that  a  drop  of  dew  would
have  overwhelmed  it,  it  nevertheless  soon  gained
courage,  the  tender  stem  strengthened,  one  by  one
other  and  larger  leaves  unfolded  themselves,  and  the
little  plant  stood  perfect  and  complete.  It  was  a
very  little  thing ;  but  it  gave  great  pleasure  ;  and
though  some  of  the  younger  members  of  the  house-
hold would  occasionally  ask,  with  just  a  suspicion  of
sarcasm  in  their  tone,  '  If  there  were  any  lemons
yet?'  we  cherished  our  little  plant  even  more  lov-
ingly, and  thanked  God  who,  with  infinite  tenderness
towards  His  suffering  children,  often  deepens  and
intensifies  their  enjoyment  of  daily  mercies,  throwing
a  special  charm  around  their  common  comforts,  and
causing  a  leaf,  a  flower,  or  the  song  of  a  bird,  to
whisper  sweet  'comfortable  thoughts'  in  their
hearts.

"  But  this  winter  our  Heavenly  Father  has  given
us  a  better  plant  to  care  for.  The  little  tree  of  the
'  Book-Fund '  sprang  from  as  small  a  beginning  as
the  lemon  plant  itself,  and  we  fondly  hope  it  is  as
surely  a  creation  of  the  Lord's  hand.  Great  was  the
lovingkindness  which  brought  this  plant  into  our
sick-chamber,  and  gave  us  the  loving  commission  to
'dress  and  keep  it.'  With  what  joy  we  received  the
charge,  and  how  happy  the  work  made  us,  words
fail  to  tell ;  but  since  the  little  tree  has  grown  rapidly
under  the  sunshine  of  the  Lord's  blessing,  we
thought  our  friends  would  be  interested  to  know
how  much  and  what  manner  of  fruit  it  bears.


248  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

"  At  first  we  intended  only  to  distribute  one  hun-
dred copies  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  *  Lectures  to  my
Students,'  but  we  received  so  many  kind  donations
from  friends  who  sympathized  with  our  wishes,  that
we  soon  became  ambitious,  and,  without  discontinu-
ing the  distribution  of  '  Lectures,'  we  longed  to  sup-
ply needy  ministers  with  the  precious  volumes  of
'The  Treasury  of  David,'  'Sermons,'  etc.  This  we
have  been  enabled  to  do,  and  the  work  goes  on  daily.
Without  any  solicitation,  friends  have  sent  in  ^182,
aod  though  our  dear  Mr.  Editor  thinks  they  might
not  like  their  names  to  be  published,  yet  if  he  should
one  day  change  his  mind,  they  are  all  ready  for  him,
faithfully  registered,  and  would  look  very  nice  in  his
Sword  and  T7^owel.  We  keep  also  a  strict  debtor
and  creditor  account,  in  which  said  dear  Mr.  Editor
takes  great  interest,  being  quite  as  delighted  as  our-
selves when  any  increase  to  the  fund  is  announced.
Better  still,  the  Lord's  '  book  of  remembrance '  is
open,  and  therein  assuredly  the  names  of  all  those
who  aid  his  toilingf  servants  will  be  recorded.  We
are  still  prepared  to  give  the  *  Lectures '  to  all  min-
isters who  apply  direct  to  us.  Up  to  this  date  we
have  sent  out  five  hundred  and  fifty  '  Lectures,'  each
one  with  an  earnest  prayer  for  God's  blessing,  and
we  -have  had  many  delightful  proofs  that  this  has
been  bestowed.

**  Perhaps,  in  closing  this  short  statement,  my
dear  Mr.  Editor  would  graciously  accord  me  the
privilege  of  laying  aside  for  a  moment  that  formal


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  249

and   perplexing    '  we/   and  allow   me   to  say  how
deeply  I  am  personally  indebted  to  the  dear  friends
who  have  furnished  me  with  the  means  of  making
odiers  happy.  For  me  there  has  been  a  dciible  bless-
ing.    I  have  been  bodi  recipient  and  donor,  and  in
such  a  case  as  this  it  Is  hard  to  say  which  is  the
'  more    blessed.'      My    days    have    been    made    in-
describably bright  and  happy  by  die  delightful  duties
connected  widi  the  work  and  Its  little  arrangements,
and  so  many  loving  messages  have  come  to  me  in
letters,  such  kind  words,  such  hearty  good  wishes,
such  earnest,  fervent  prayers  have  surrounded  me,
that  I  seem  to  be  living  in  an  atmosphere  of  bless-
ing and  love,  and  can  truly  say  with  the   Psalmist,
'  My  cup  runneth  over.'      So,  with  a  heart  full  of
gratitude  to  God,  and  deep  thankfulness  to  my  dear
friends,   I   bid  them  for  the  present  a  loving  fare-
well."

''My  '  Few  Words '  in  the  February  number  of
The  Sword  and  Trowel  were  received  with  so
much  tender  sympathy  and  consideration,  that  I  feel
encouraged  to  present  you  with  another  slight
sketch  of  the  work  which  the  Lord's  love  and  your
kindness  have  made  so  prosperous.  I  then  told
you  from  how  small  a  matter  the  fund  rose,  and
how  pitifully  and  graciously  the  Lord  dealt  with  me
in  giving  me  so  blessed  a  work  to  do  for  Him  when
all  other  service  was  impossible.  Now  I  have  the
same  song  to  sing,  but  the  notes  are  higher  and
more  assured,  and  the  accompanying  chords  deeper


250  CHARLES  If.   SPURGE  on:

and  fuller  ;  for  the  '  little  on('  has  become  a  thou-
sand/ and  the  mercy  which  was  so  great  before  has
grown  exceedingly,  until  my  heart  echoes  the  poet's
words  :

*  For  if  thy  work  on  earth  be  sweet,
What  must  thy  glory  be  ?'

I  have  very  much  to  tell  you,  and  I  shall  do  it  in  the
best  way  I  can  ;  but  as  all  my  friends  know  that  my
pen  is  'unaccustomed  to  public  speaking,'  I  think
I  may  crave  special  Indulgence  for  all  failures  and
shortcomings.

''We  will  discuss  money  matters  first,  because  I
want  you  to  sing  '  Laus  Deo'  with  me.  John
Ploughman  says  that  '  Spend,  and  God  will  send,  is
the  motto  of  a  spendthrift.'  Now,  I  must  not  dis-
pute this,  for  dear  John  Is  always  right,  and,  more-
over, knows  all  about  everything,  but  I  may  say  I
consider  it  singularly  inappropriate  to  the  spend-
thrift, and  should  like  it  handed  over  to  me  at  once
and  forever  for  my  Book-Fund  ;  for  again  and
again  has  It  been  proved  most  blessedly  true  in  my
experience.  I  have  'spent'  ungrudgingly,  feeling
sure  that  the  Lord  would  '  send  '  after  the  same
fashion,  and  Indeed  he  has  done  so,  even  '  exceed-
ing abundantly  above  what  I  could  ask  or  even
think.'  I  have  received  now  upwards  of  ^500,  and
the  glory  of  this  Is  that  it  Is  all  spent,  and  more
keeps  coming  !  I  never  tell  you,  dear  friends,  when
my  store  is  slender,  but  I  am  sure  the  Lord  does,
and  opens  your  hearts  to  give  just  when  it  is  most


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  25  I

needed  ;  for  never  since  I  first  began  the  work  have
I  had  to  refuse  an  application  for  want  of  funds.  I
must  tell  you,  too,  that  this  ^500  represents  quite
^700  or  ^800  in  books  ;  for  Mr.  Spurgeon's  good
publishers  let  me  purchase  on  such  liberal  terms
that  by  their  delightful  magic  my  sovereigns  turn
into  thirty  and  sometimes  forty  shillings  each !
This,  also,  is  of  the  Lord,  and  I  bless  Him  for  it.  I
often  look  with  intense  pleasure  on  the  long  list  of
subscribers'  names  spread  out  before  the  Lord,  and
before  him  only ;  for  your  kind  deeds,  my  dear
friends,  are  unpublished  to  the  world,  but  are,  per-
haps, for  this  reason  all  the  more  precious  in  His
sight,  who  '  seeth  not  as  man  seeth.'  It  is,  indeed,
pleasant  to  look  down  the  long  columns  and  note
how  many  strangers  have  become  dear  friends,  and
former  friends  have  Qrrown  dearer  throuo^h  this
loving  link  of  sympathy  for  Christ's  servants  be-
tween us."

"But  it  is  time  I  gave  you  some  details  of  the
work  accomplished.  The  number  of  books  given
up  to  this  moment  is  3,058,  and  the  persons  receiv-
ing them  have  been  pastors  of  all  denominations.
But  ah  !  dear  friends,  when  I  look  at  the  list  of
names,  I  see  the  only  shadow  of  sadness  that  ever
rests  upon  my  Book-Fund.  It  is  the  grief  of  know-
ing that  there  exists  a  terrible  necessity  for  this  ser-
vice of  love  ;  that  without  this  help  (little  enough,
indeed,  compared  with  their  wants)  the  poor  pastors
to  whom    it    has    been    sent    must   have  gone  on


252  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

famishing  for  lack  of  mental  food,  their  incomes  being
so  wretchedly  small  that  they  scarcely  know  how  to
'provide  things  honest'  for  themselves  and  their
families,  while  money  for  the  purchase  of  books  is
absolutely  unattainable."

**It  is  most  touchino-  to  hear  some  tell  with  elo-
quence  the  effect  the  gift  produced  upon  them.  One
is  '  not  ashamed  to  say '  he  received  his  parcel  with
'tears  of  joy,'  wife  and  children  standing  around
and  rejoicing  with  him.  Another,  as  soon  as  the
wrappings  fall  from  the  precious  volumes,  praises
God  aloud  and  sings  the  Doxology  with  all  his
might ;  while  a  third,  when  his  eyes  light  on  the
long-coveted  'Treasury  of  David,'  'rushes  from  the
room '  that  he  may  go  alone  and  '  pour  out  his  full
heart  before  his  God.'

"  Now  this  is  very  beautiful  and  admirable,  but  is
there  not  also  something  most  sorrowfully  suggestive
to  the  church  of  God?  Surely  these  'servants  of
Christ,'  these  'ambassadors  for  God,'  ought  to  have
received  better  treatment  at  our  hands  than  to  have
been  left  pining  so  long  without  the  aids  which  are
vitally  necessary  to  them  in  their  sacred  calling.
Books  are  as  truly  a  minister's  needful  tools  as  the
plane,  and  the  hammer,  and  the  saw,  are  the  neces-
sary adjuncts  of  a  carpenter's  bench.  We  pity  a
poor  mechanic  whom  accident  has  deprived  of  his
working  gear,  we  straightway  get  up  a  subscription
to  restore  it,  and  certainly  never  expect  a  stroke  of
work  from  him  while  It  is  lacking  ;  why,  I  wonder,


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  253

do  we  not  bring-  the  same  common-sense  help  to  our
poor  ministers,  and  furnish  them  Hberally  with  the
means  of  procuring  the  essentially  important  books  ?
Is  it  not  pitiful  to  think  of  their  strueeline  on  from
year  to  year  on  ^  lOO,  ^80,  ^60,  and  some  (I  am
ashamed  to  write  it)  on  less  than  ^50  per  annum  ?
Many  have  large  families,  many  more  sick  wives,
some,  alas  !  have  both  ;  they  have  heavy  doctors'
bills  to  pay,  their  children's  education  to  provide  for,
are  obliged  to  keep  up  a  respectable  appearance,  or
their  hearers  would  be  scandalized  ;  and  how  they
manage  to  do  all  this  and  yet  keep  out  of  debt  (as,
to  their  honor  and  credit  be  it  said,  the  majority  of
them  do)  only  they  and  their  ever-faithful  God  can
know  !  I  never  hear  a  word  of  complaint  from  them,
only  sometimes  a  pathetic  line  or  two,  like  this :
'After  upwards  of  sixteen  years'  service  in  the
Master's  vineyard,  I  am  sorry  to  say  that,  with  a
small  salary,  and  a  wife  and  five  daughters  to  pro-
vide for,  my  library  is  exceedingly  small,  and  I  am
not  in  a  position  to  increase  its  size  by  purchasing
books.'  Or  again,  like  this:  'My  salary  is  small
(^60),  and  if  I  did  not  get  some  little  help  from
some  benevolent  societies,  I  should  have  very  great
difficulty  in  keeping  the  wolf  from  the  door.'  Are
these  men  to  be  kept  in  poverty  so  deep  that  they
positively  cannot  afford  the  price  of  a  new  book
without  letting  their  little  ones  go  barefoot?  'The
laborer  is  worthy  of  his  hire  ;'  but  these  poor  labor-
,ers    in    the  gospel  field   get    a    pittance    which    is


254  CHARLES  11.  SPURGOEN.

unworthy  both  of  the  workmen  and  the  work,  and  if
their  people  (who  ought  to  help  them  more)  either
cannot  or  will  not  do  so,  we  at  least,  dear  friends,
will  do  all  in  our  power  to  encourage  their  weary
hearts  and  refresh  their  drooping  spirits.  This  is  a
digression,  I  dare  say,  from  my  authorized  subject ;
but  I  was  obliged  to  say  w'hat  I  have  said,  because
my  heart  was  hot  within  me,  and  I  so  earnestly  want
to  do  these  poor  brethren  good  service.  Now  I  re-
turn to  the  details  of  my  work."

''  I  have  been  doinof  a  brave  business  in  Wales
through  the  magnificent  generosity  of  a  stranger,
whom  now  \ve  count  a  friend.  This  gentleman  first
introduced  himself  to  us  by  sending  ^loo  to  Mr.
Spurgeon,  ^50  of  which  w^as  for  my  Book-Fund.  I
was  greatly  gratified  at  receiving  so  large  a  sum  all
at  one  time,  and  set  about  '  spending '  it  as  quickly
as  possible,  and  here  you  will  see  how  grandly  true
my  '  motto  '  proved  ;  for  about  six  months  after  the
first  gift,  the  same  kind  friend  called  at  our  house
one  evening,  and  to  our  sincere  admiration  and  as-
tonishment, announced  his  intention  of  giving  a  copy
of  '  Lectures  to  my  Students '  to  every  Calvinistic
Methodist  minister,  preacher,  and  student  in  North
Wales  (of  w^hom  there  are  five  hundred)  if  I  would
undertake  the  '  trouble '  of  sending  them.  Trouble  !  !
The  w^ord  was  inadmissible  !  With  intense  joy  and
deep  gratitude  to  God  I  received  the  charge,  and
another  £^0  to  meet  expenses  !  This  was  on  the
1 8th  of  March,  1876.     Since  then,   to  this  day,  the


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  255

work  there  has  flourished ;  for  as  soon  as  four
hundred  copies  had  been  given  in  the  northern  part,
1  received  authority  from  the  same  noble  donor  to
continue,  at  his  expense,  the  distribution  throughout
South  Wales  also.  The  books  are  very  eagerly  ac-
cepted by  our  Welsh  brethren,  and  on  May  i6th,  the
Quarterly  Association  sent  copies  in  Welsh  and
English  of  a  resolution  passed  at  their  meeting  at
Ruthin,  of  '  Cordial  thanks  to  the  kind  brother,  who-
ever he  may  be,  to  whose  liberality  we  are  indebted,
etc.,  etc.,  and  grateful  acknowledgments  to  Mrs.
Spurgeon,  for  her  kindness  in  forwarding  the  books.'
Nor  does  the  matter  rest  here  ;  other  ministers  be-
sides Calvinistic  Methodists  coveted  the  precious
volume,  and  wrote  to  me  asking  why  they  should  be
left  out  ?  I  have  supplied  all  who  have  written,  and
at  this  present  moment  I  have  promised  copies  to  all
the  Wesleyan  ministers  of  South  Wales,  and  when
they  are  satisfied,  I  doubt  not  their  northern  brethren
will  request  the  same  favor.  These  copies,  of  course,
are  provided  by  my  Book-Fund,  our  friend's  gift  be-
ing confined  to  his  own  denomination  ;  but  you  see,
dear  friends,  I  never  can  be  the  least  troubled  at  a
large  expenditure,  because  I  have  the  firmest  possi-
ble faith  in  my  motto,  'Spend,  and  God  will  send.'

"  Some  weeks  since,  a  gentleman  sent  me  a
splendid  lot  of  second-hand  books,  so  well  selected
and  suitable,  that  they  have  proved  most  valuable
in  makmg  up  parcels;  but  usually  I  would  prefer
that  help  did  not  come  to  me  in  that  shape  ;  for  I


256  CHARLES  IL  SPURGEON.

find,  as  a  rule,  that  Mr.  Spurgeon's  works  are  more
eagerly  sought  after,  and  more  joyfully  welcomed
than  any  others.  '  His  words  are  like  the  dew-drops
of  heaven  to  my  soul,'  writes  one  pastor  ;  and  to
most  '  The  Treasury  of  David '  seems  to  have  been
a  possession  long  coveted  and  ardently  desired.

*' Am  I  not  happy  to  have  been  able  to  send  fordi
seven  hundred  volumes  of  this  veritable  '  Treasure  '  ?
I  have  given  also  a  goodly  number  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's
lesser  works.  This  arises  from  the  fact  that  many
evangelists,  colporteurs,  and  lay  preachers  apply  to
me  for  books  ;  and,  aldiough  my  fund  is  chiefly  for
the  aid  and  comfort  of  poor  pastors,  I  find  this  other
class  so  sorely  needing  encouragement  and  help,
that  I  cannot  pass  them  by.  Denied  the  blessing  of
a  solid  education  in  their  youthful  days,  they  find  It
difficult  to  pick  up  knowledge  in  middle  life,  and
when  called  upon  to  conduct  cottage-meetings  or
open-air  services,  they  painfully  feel  the  strain  on
their  mental  powers.  To  such  the  '  Morning  and
Evenino-  Readino-s'  are  an  inestimable  boon  ;  for,
open  the  book  where  they  will,  they  may  find  sermons
in  embryo  in  every  page,  and  nuggets  of  thought
only  waiting  to  be  picked  up  and  appropriated.

''  Next  to  '  The  Treasury  of  David,'  the  *  Sermons'
of  our  very  dear  Editor  (Mr.  Spurgeon)  are  the  ob-
jects of  desire  on  the  part  of  those  who  know  their
worth,  and  happy  is  he  who  has  the  set  complete  !
I  have  helped  very  many  to  attain  their  wishes  in
this  matter  when  they  have  already  pos.^essed  many


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  257

volumes  ;  others  have  to  be  content  for  the  present
with  three,  four,  six,  or  eight  volumes,  as  the  case
may  be.  I  cannot  speak  of  the  blessing  these  Ser-
mons carry  with  them  wherever  they  go  ;  God  owns
and  blesses  them  so  mightily  that  eternity  alone  will
reveal  their  power  and  value.

*' And  now,  dear  friends,  though  I  have  by  no
means  exhausted  my  information,  I  think  I  have  told
you  all  I  can  remember  of  special  interest.  What
do  you  think  of  your  work  ?  It  is  yours  as  much  as
mine  ;  for  without  your  kind  and  loving  aid  I  could
not  carry  it  on  to  so  large  an  extent.  Does  it  satisfy
and  please  you  ?  To  me,  as  you  know,  it  brings
unalloyed  joy  and  comfort,  and  to  the  Lord's  poor
servants  it  carries  new  life,  and  light,  and  vigor  ;  but
I  want  most  of  all  that  it  should  promote  God' s  glory,
and  have  for  its  chief  aim  and  object  the  uplifting  of
His  holy  name.  Do,  dear  fellow-workers,  pray  very
earnestly  that  a  rich  blessing  may  rest  upon  every
book  sent  out,  so  that  first  the  minister,  then  his
church,  and  next  of  all  the  unsaved  in  the  congre-
gation, may  be  the  better,  and  the  Lord  may  receive
'  the  thanksgiving  of  many.'

*'  I  cannot  close  my  letter  without  reference  to  my

little  lemon  plant ;  for  its  history  interested  many,

and  it  will  ever  be  tenderly  associated  in  my  mind

with  my  God-given  work.     It  has  thriven  in  its  way

as  gracefully  and  grandly  as  the  Book-Fund,  and  is

now  an   ambitious,   healthy   young  tree,  preparing

itself,  I  hope,  for  future  fruit-bearing.    I  have  always
^7


25^  CHARLES  II.  SPURGE  ON.

cherished  the  fanciful  idea  that  each  leaf  must  rep-
resent ;f  lOO  ;  so  now  you  can  count  them,  and  smile
at  the  magnificent  future  I  anticipate  for  my  Book-
Fund.  Twentv-one,  are  there  not  ?  That  must
mean  £2, 100,  and  plenty  of  strength  to  grow  more  !
Well,  it  seems  a  great  deal  of  money,  certainly  ;
but  what  a  trifle  it  must  be  to  the  God  who  made  all
the  silver  and  the  gold  !  Ah  !  I  believe  that  some  day,

"  When  grace  has  made  me  meci
His  lovely  face  to  see,"

the  subscription  list  of  the  Book-Fund  will  record
its  thousands  of  pounds  ;  the  once  tiny  plant  will  be
a  tree  bearing  fruit  to  perfection,  and  the  dear  old
motto,  ''Spend,  and  God  will  send,"  will  be  found
true  and  unfailing  to  the  end."

Again  in  January,  1877,  she  wrote  as  follows  :
''  '  A  record  of  combat  with  sin,  and  labor  for  the
Lord.'  These  words  on  the  cover  of  our  magazine
startled  me  the  other  day  as  I  sat  thinking  over  my
work,  and  what  I  should  say  about  it.  I  felt  almost
ashamed  of  my  audacity  in  presuming  to  ask  a
place  again  amidst  its  pages,  seeing  that  I  am  not
strong  enough  to  bear  a  'sword,'  and  my  'trowel'
is  such  a  very  little  one  that  it  can  only  hope  to
gather  enough  mortar  to  supply  some  few  of  the
laborers  who  build  up  the  living  stones.  But  I  re-
membered with  exceeding  comfort  that,  when  the  wall
of  Jerusalem  was  repaired,  in  Nehemiah's  time,  the
work  of  the  daughters  of  Shallum  was  as  faithfully
recorded  as  the  labor  of  the  princes  and  the  priests.


MRS.  STURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  259

"So  I  take  courage  to  tell  again  of  the  Lord's
great  goodness  to  me,  and  how  marvellously  He
has  continued  to  help  and  bless  the  Book-Fund.  As
certainly  as  if  He  had  stretched  forth  His  hand  from
the  heavens  and  given  me  a  written  commission  for
the  service,  so  surely  do  I  know  that  this  work  came
to  me  through  His  indulgent  love,  and  from  the  first
moment  of  its  existence  to  the  present.  He  has
guided,  and  supported,  and  blessed  it,  and  every
atom  of  the  glory  shall  be  His.  He  sent  me  the
needful  funds  to  carry  it  on,  by  moving  the  hearts  of
His  people  to  help  me  ;  for  not  one  penny  of  the
^926  received  from  August  i  ith  of  last  year  till  now
was  solicited  except  from  Him.  And  He  has  heard
and  answered  the  prayer  that  a  great  blessing  might
follow  the  books  into  the  homes  of  His  dear  servants,
comforting  their  hearts  and  refreshing  their  spirits,
as  well  as  aiding  them  in  their  preparation  for  the
pulpit.  I  have  two  great  heaps  of  letters  from  them,
so  heavy  that  I  lift  them  with  difficulty  ;  and  if  all  the
joy  and  gratitude  to  God  therein  expressed  could  be
written  out,  it  would  fill  some  volumes.  Knowing
how  deeply  interested  in  these  letters  the  readers  of
The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  have  hitherto  been,  I
propose  in  this  paper  to  give  a  series  of  extracts
from  them,  a  set  of  word-pictures  as  it  were,  which
I  shall  call  a  glimpse  at  some  English  interiors.

Years  ago,  when  I  had  the  felicity  of  sharing  my
dear  husband's  annual  holiday,  one  of  our  chief
pleasures  consisted  in  visiting  the  picture  gallery  of


260  CHARLES  JI.  SPURGE  OX.

e-very  continental  town  we  entered.  There  '  walking
circumspectly '  over  the  shining,  treacherous  floors,
we  spent  many  happy  hours,  and  enjoyed  to  the  full
the  works  of  the  grand  old  masters ;  but  I  am  not
ashamed  to  confess  that  I  at  least  used  to   linorer

o

longer  and  more  lovingly  over  a  '  Dutch  Interior,'
by  Teniers  or  Ostade,  than  I  cared  to  do  over  .any
'  Madonna  and  Child '  that  Raphael  or  Rubens  ever
painted.  These  latter  never  stirred  any  devotional
feelings  within  my  soul,  and  failing  this,  they  ceased
to  interest,  and  even  grew  tiresome  by  constant
repetition.  But  it  was  charming  to  be  absorbed  in
the  'little  beautiful  works,'  as  an  authority  on  paint-
ing calls  them,  w^hich  the  Dutch  masters  loved  to
draw  with  such  wonderful  and  tender  minuteness  of
detail.  The  interior  of  a  fisherman's  hut,  with  its
quaint  wooden  cradle,  and  its  basket  of  freshly-
caught  fish,  would,  on  close  inspection,  reveal  un-
suspected objects  of  interest,  and  the  picturesque
farm  kitchens,  with  their  glittering  array  of  bright
pans,  their  wealth  of  delf  ware,  their  chubby  children,
and  their  comely  Vrows,  were  so  homelike,  and  so
natural,  that  the  more  one  gazed  at  them  the  more
vividly  real  they  became,  and  it  was  an  easy  task  to
weave  a  tale  of  family  joy  or  sorrow  around  each
glowing  canvas.

"But  now  I  want  to  show  my  friends,  by  pen  in
lieu  of  pencil,  some  scenes  in  English  home-life  w^here
the  tale  of  gladness  or  of  suffering  is  even  more
plainly  pictured,  and  needs  no  effort  of  the  imagina-


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK'.  26 1

tion  to  unfold  it.  A  hasty  glance  into  a  parlor,  at
the  moment  when  a  ^\ix.  from  the  Book-Fund  has
arrived  ;  a  peep  into  the  study  where  the  four  portly
volumes  of  'The  Treasury  of  David'  have  just  en-
riched the  scanty  store  of  books  ;  a  glimpse  of  a
figure  with  bowed  head  and  clasped  hands,  pouring
out  a  heart  full  of  gratitude  before  his  God — these,
and  such  as  these,  tell  their  own  story,  and  as  we
pass  from  one  picture  to  another,  will  only  need  a
word  or  two  from  me  to  introduce  them.  I  could
show  some  where  tearful  faces  gather,  and  a  little
coffin  occupies  the  foreground  ;  but  these  are  veiled
and  my  hand  dares  not  withdraw  the  covering.

"The  first  'Interior'  which  I  point  out  to  you  is
shininor  ^qth  the  brightness  of  domestic  love.  The
little  room  may  be  poorly  furnished,  and  the  book-
shelves, I  know,  are  sadly  bare  (how  can  they  be
otherwise,  when  the  minister's  income  has  the  very
uncomfortable  habit  of  oscillating  between  ^40  and
£60  a  year?)  ;  but  you  can  see  with  what  intense
delight  that  kind  and  happy  wife  is  assisting  to  un-
pack the  treasure  of  new  books  which  will  cheer  her
husband's  heart,  and  make  him  feel  a  richer  man  for
some  time  to  come.

*'  Now  we  come  to  a  small  but  choice  picture.
The  minister  sits  in  his  study  (a  cosy  one),  and  we
rejoice  to  see  his  shelves  moderately  stocked  with
books  ;  he  has  just  had  the  pleasure  of  adding
'*  The  Treasury  of  David,"  and  Watson's  "  Body  of


262  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

Divinity"    to  his  store;   he  is  writing  rapidly,  and
this  is  what  he  says  :

*  This  evening  I  have  received  the  four  much-desired  volumes.  Heartily
I  thank  you,  and  unfeignedly  bless  the  Lord,  joining  in  the  prayer  so  kindly
recorded  in  Vol.  I.  that  the  precious  contents  may  avail  me.  Here  is  a  mine
of  gold — I  hope  to  dig  up  nuggets  for  my  people.  How  the  cream  of  the
gospel  stands  thickly  on  this  unadulterated  milk !  Prayer  and  meditation  shall
churn  it  into  butter;  nay,  shall  I  not  give  them  butter  and  honey  till  they  all
know  how  to  refuse  the  evil  flesh-pots  of  Egypt,  and  choose  the  good  things  of
the  land  where  David  dwelt,  where  milk  and  honey  flow  ?  Your  noble  efforts
for  ministers  will  be  a  blessing  to  both  mind  and  body.  It  is  rather  trying  to
the  nerves  to  be  clearing  the  ground  with  a  borrowed  axe,  carving  wood  with
one's  fingers,  and  working  at  the  pump  when  the  sucker  is  dry.  But  now,
through  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  loving  work,  poor  men  whose  thoughts  stand  still  for
want  of  gear-oil  will  have  heart  and  mind  set  spinning  like  the  '  Chariots  of
Amminadibl"  '

There  is  one  difficulty  I  experience  in  arranging
this  little  gallery  of  home  scenes^  which  arises  from  the
loving  gratitude  of  the  sketchers  themselves.  Some
of  the  most  interesting  and  touching  letters  I  receive
contain  so  many  gentle  and  gracious  personalities,
that  I  am  obliged  to  conceal  them  from  public  view,
and  for  this  reason  many  a  bright  picture  enshrined
in  the  privacy  of  my  '  sanctum  '  can  never  leave  it  to
touch  other  hearts  as  it  has  touched  mine.  I  hope,
however,  that  those  I  am  able  to  present  to  my  friends
will  interest  them  greatly,  and  next  in  order  I  place
one  which  has  two  aspects — winter  and  summer ;
for,  thanks  to  the  kindness  of  dear  friends,  I  was
able,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  make  the  sun  shine  on
the  hitherto  cheerless  prospect.  Would  to  God
I  could  do  more,  not  only  for  this  'good  wife,'  but
for  the  many  others  who  I  know  have  terrible  reason


JilRS.  SPURGEON  AXD  HER   WORK.  26^

to  be  '  afraid  of  the  snow  for  their  households/
Just  think  of  the  dear  httle  children  patiently  lying
in  bed  while  their  scanty  clothing  was  being  washed  !

''Although  I  have  scores  more  of  such  letters,  I
am  afraid  I  must  close  my  collection  here,  lest  I  tire
my  reader's  patience,  and  trespass  too  far  on  my
Editor's  precious  pages.  It  has  been  a  joy  inex-
pressible to  minister,  even  in  the  least  degree,  to
the  crying  needs  of  the  pastors  who  have  sought  the
aid  of  the  Book-Fund  ;  but  I  cannot  forget  that
there  are  hundreds  still  unsupplied,  and  if  the  Lprd
permit  and  spare  me,  I  hope  to  do  more  this  year
than  was  accomplished  in  the  past.  I  depend  wholly
on  the  Lord  to  move  the  hearts  of  His  people  to
help  me,  and  I  know  He  'will  not  fail  me,'  nor  'for-
sake the  work  of  His  own  hands.'  4,967  volumes
have  been  distributed,  701  ministers  have  received
grants  of  books,  and  as  I  am  corresponding  secretary,
as  well  as  treasurer,  manager,  etc.,  my  friends  can
imagine  I  have  had  full  employment.  The  only  part
of  the  work  delegated  to  another  is  the  packing  of
the  parcels,  and  this  service  is  always  performed  as
a  'labor  of  love'  by  the  willing  hands  of  the  dear
friend  to  whose  devoted  affection  I  already  owe
so  much.  Who  should  be  my  'director  in  chief  and
my  'referee'  in  all  perplexities  but  my  dear  Editor?
To  him  I  run  in  search  of  counsel,  comfort,  or  wise
advice,  and  need  I  say  I  always  find  it  ?

"  For  many  weeks  past  I  have  had  a  great  desire
in  my  heart  to  write  out  the  gracious  details  of  the


264  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

Lord's  dealinors  with  the  Book-Fund  during  the
present  year  ;  but  almost  constant  pain  has  fettered
both  head  and  hand,  and  rendered  the  fulfilment  of
the  heart's  wish  well  nigh  impossible.  But  even  the
'school  of  affliction '  has  its  'holidays,'  true  holy-
days  these,  and  as  the  '  good  Master '  has  granted
me  one  such  to-day,  I  will  consecrate  it  to  His  honor
and  glory  by  telling  what  great  things  He  hath  done
for  me  and  my  work  since  I  wrote  last.  The  com-
mencement of  the  new  year  was  marked  by  an  offer
of  six  volumes  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit
to  every  minister  who  had  formerly  been  a  student
of  the  Pastors'  College  ;  and  so  enthusiastically  was
it  responded  to,  that  in  three  months'  time  164  of
our  own  old  students  had  received  980  volumes  !  I
had  intended  this  effort  to  be  an  extra  one,  and  to
extend  over  the  entire  year  ;  but  the  Lord  had  more
work  for  me  to  do  than  I  knew  of,  so  He  would
allow  of  no  lingering,  but  graciously  gave  me
strength  to  accomplish  easily  what  at  first  sight
seemed  a  formidable  task.  Durinor  this  time  the
usual  work  of  the  Book-Fund  was  not  neglected,  but
applications  were  cheerfully  responded  to.

"For  a  short  time  during  the  months  just  flown  by,
it  seemed  as  if  the  Lord  were  trying  my  faith  by
sending  me  more  *  needs  '  than  '  supplies ,'  but  I  am
almost  ashamed  to  speak  of  fears  which  then  pos-
sessed me.  Now  I  see  that  the  Lord  only  brought
a  cloud  over  the  sun  to  veil  its  brio-htness,  lest  the
heat  of  labor  should  overpower  His  weak  child,  and


MRS.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  265

cause  her  to  faint  under  the  burden  of  the  day.  So,
blessed  be  His  name,  He  '  leads  on  softly  '  as  *  we
are  able  to  bear  it.'  Turning  over  the  pages  of  my
'  day-book,'  I  cannot  but  rejoice  to  know  that  already
nearly  3,000  volumes  have  been  distributed  since
the  beginning  of  this  year  ;  and  though  this  number
falls  wofully  short  of  supplying  the  need  which  ex-
ists, yet  I  thank  God  and  take  courage.

*'  The  Book-Fund  is  the  joy  of  my  life,  and  ever
since  the  Lord  gave  the  sweet  service  into  my  weak
and  unworthy  hands  He  has  led  me  by  green  past-
ures and  beside  still  waters,  and  crowned  me  with
lovinof  kindness  and  tender  mercies.

"The  Book-Fund  has  received  this  year  some
splendid  additions,  as  gifts,  to  its  stores  of  works  by
other  authors,  and  I  have  rejoiced  greatly  to  have  at
my  disposal  such  standard  volumes  of  divinity  as  the
works  of  Haldane,  Dr.  Hodge,  and  others.  But  the
fact  becomes  more  and  more  evident  to  me  every
day,  that  unless  already  possessed  of  '  The  Treasury
of  David,'  our  pastors  look  upon  no  other  volumes
as  my  gift  with  complete  satisfaction,  and  that  in  ap-
plying to  me  for  books,  they  fix  their  heart's  desire
upon  'The  Treasury,*  or  the  'Sermons,'  as  the
summwn  bonum  of  their  happiness.  And  I  think  this
is  very  natural  .and  very  proper,  so  long  as  the
management  of  the  Book-Fund  rests  entirely  in  these
feeble  hands  ;  but  I  trust  that  some  day,  when  all
the  churches  awaken  to  a  sense  of  the  urgent  need
there  is  that  'the  poor  minister's  bookshelf  should


266  CHARLES  H.  SPUR G EON.

have  plenty  of  books  upon  it,  many  a  noble  volume,
both  ancient  and  modern,  will  take  its  place  beside
'The  Treasury  of  David.'

"As  to  old  books,  which  sometimes  come  to  me
troublously  fast,  I  am  obliged  to  smuggle  them  in
with  the  coveted  works  of  my  dear  husband,  and  but
a  very  faint  echo  of  any  welcome  they  receive  ever
reaches  my  ear.  I  really  fear  that  some  people  think
that  anything  in  the  shape  of  a  book  will  ^do  for  a
minister,  or  they  would  scarcely  send  such  things  as
'Advice  to  Wives  and  Mothers,'  'Essays  on  Mar-
riage,' or  'Letters  to  a  Son,'  as  aids  to  pulpit
preparation  !

"  On  lookinor  over  the  list  of  contributors  for  the

o

last  year,  I  find  a  falling-away  of  some  old  friends,
which  somewhat  grrieves  me,  for  the  work  is  more
deeply  needed  than  ever.

"Tell  the  dear  friends  who  read  The  Sword  and
the  Troivel  that  '  my  mouth  is  filled  with  laughter,
and  my  tongue  with  singing '  at  the  remembrance  of
the  gracious  love  which  continues  to  give  support,
and  sustenance,  ^nd  success  to  me  in  my  beloved
work.  I  am  impatient  to  speak  of  His  mercy,  and
feel  constrained  now  to  call  on  all  who  love  the  Lord
to  rejoice  in  my  joy,  and  to  aid  me  in  magnifying
His  dear  name.  It  is  only  two  years  since  this
sweet  service  was  gently  and  graciously  laid  on  my
heart  and  hands,  and  yet  during  that  time  the  Lord
has  enabled  me,  though  compassed  with  infirmity,  to
send    forth,    like    seed   corn,    many  thousands  of


MRS.  SPURGE  ON  AND  HER   WORK.  267

volumes  to  aid  the  toiling  laborers  in  the  gospel
field.  More  than  ^2,000  have  been  received  and
expended  ;  the  money  coming  '  fresh  from  the  mint
of  heaven/  for  God  has  sent  it  all  ;  as  the  dear
friends  through  whom  it  reaches  me  must  very  well
know,  seeing  that  I  never  ask  them  for  their  loving
gifts.  Just  as  the  olive  trees  in  Zechariah's  vision
constantly  and  silently  yielded  their  rich  streams  to
feed  the  lights  of  the  golden  candlestick,  even  so,
as  divinely  and  mysteriously,  does  the  Lord  send  me
the  means  to  provide  '  oil,  beaten  oil,  for  the  lamps
of  the  sanctuary.'

"Ah  !  dear  Mr.  Editor,  sound  the  notes  of  praise
for  me  !  I  want  God's  people  to  know  how  very
good  He  is  to  unworthy  me,  that  they  may  take
comfort  and  courage  from  my  experience  of  His
tenderness  and  love.  I  would  I  had  Miriam's  tim-
brel in  my  hand  to-day  to  '  sing  unto  the  Lord '
withal,  and  lead  out  others  to  sing  also  ;  but.  as  that
cannot  be,  I  pray  you,  lift  up  your  voice  for  me,  and
'praise  the  Lord  before  all  the  people.'

"The  famine  Is  sore  In  the  land — not  a  famine  of
bread,  nor  a  thirst  for  water,  but  a  deeply-felt  and
widespread  need  of  mental  food,  by  those  under-
shepherds  who  have  to  '  feed  the  flock  of  God  *  ;
and  I  had  hoped  that  all  the  friends  who  had  so  gen-
erously aided  me  at  the  commencement  of  my  work
would  have  '  continued  with  me.'  To  the  many  who
have  done  so,  I  tender  my  most  heartfelt  thanks.
'Gpd  bless  you,'  dear  friends,  and  return  into  your


268  CHARLES  II.  SPURGE  OX.

own  bosoms  some  of  the  joy,  and  gladness,  and
gratitude  with  which  you  have  filled  mine.  New
friends,  too,  are  cordially  welcomed  to  co-operation
in  the  blessed  work,  and  every  gift  that  comes  for
the  Book-fund  is  offered  to  the  Lord  as  a  sacrifice  of
thanksgiving.  I  am  just  now  rejoicing  over  the  fact
that  the  Lord  has  inclined  the  heart  of  a  dear  friend,
to  whom  I  am  already  greatly  indebted,  to  give  me
a  large  donation  for  the  purpose  of  supplying  all  the
Presbyterian  ministers  in  Argyleshire  with  'The
Treasury  of  David,'  and  I  have  another  sum  of
money  given  by  one  who  is  a  great  sufferer,  set
apart  for  the  distribution  of  the  same  precious
volumes  in  Ireland.  For  the  next  few  months,
dear  friends,  you  may  know  that  the  'Work  of
the  Book-Fund '  will  be  in  the  full  swincr  of
business  ;  and  I  pray  you  to  remember  that  you
can  truly  and  tenderly  help  me  by  asking  the
Lord  to  set  the  seal  of  His  blessing  on  every  book
sent  out.

"  Does  any  one  care  to  know  that  my  lovely  lemon
tree  is  in  vigorous  health  and  perfect  beauty  ?  I
have  not  dared  to  count  its  leaves  lately,  because  I
feel  it  has  far  outstripped  the  proportions  with
which  my  fancy  fettered  it ;  yet  I  never  look  upon
it  or  think  about  it  without  blessing  God  for
making  it  grow  so  wonderfully  in  my  sick-room
that  winter,  where  it  heralded  and  illustrated,  helped
forward,  and  finally  became  the  emblem  of  the
Book-Fund."


MRS.  SPURGE  ON  AXD  HER   WORK.  269

In  1877,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  again  wrote  :
*'  In  giving  an  'account  of  her  stewardship'  during
the  past  twelve  months,   the  writer  is   actuated  by
an  intense  desire  that  every  word  she   writes  may
reveal   the  infinite  tenderness  and    love  which  the
Lord  has  displayed  towards  her.     She  wishes  above
all  things  to  call  attention,   not  to  her  own  doings,
but  to  God's  dealings  with  her  ;  and  she  earnestly
prays  that  no  word  of  hers  may  in  the  least  obscure
the  lovely  radiance  of  that  mercy  and  grace  of  which
the  following  pages  are  a  record.    If  any  heart  shall
be  filled  with  holy  admiration  and  praise,  at  the  won-
derful condescension  of  the  Lord  to  one  of  the  least
of  His  children,  in  giving  her  this  work  to  do,  and
strengthening  her  to  perform  it ;  if  any  feeble  faith
shall  find  fresh  life  and  power  in  the  consideration
of  His  unfailing  faithfulness  to  one  of  the  poor  de-
pendants on  His   bounty  ;  if  any  honor  and  glory
shall  be  gotten  to  the  Lord  through  this  little  report,
her  'labor  will  not  have  been  in  vain  m  the  Lord.'

"The  Great*  Master  could  not  have  chosen  a
*  weaker  vessel '  by  which  to  convey  the  treasure  of
knowledge  to  His  servants  ;  nor  could  he  have  se-
lected to  minister  to  the  wants  of  His  toilingf  mes-
sengers  one  more  needing  the  ministry  of  love  on
her  own  account;  but  it  is  sometimes  His  good
pleasure  by  His  choice  of  servants  to  manifest  His
strength  and  wisdom,  making  the  very  feebleness
and  foolishness  of  His  chosen  instruments  to  redound
to  the  greater  glory  of  His  sacred   name.      '  Make


270  CHARLES  IT.  SPURGEON.

known  His  deeds  among  the  people,  talk  ye  all  of
His  wondrous  works,'  sings  David ;  and  truly,  if
David's  God  will  help  His  child  to  tell  in  fitting
words  the  story  of  His  great  mercy  and  love  to  her,
the  lips  of  some  of  His  saints  shall  be  set  singing
fresh  psalms  of  praise.

"  Into  this  dear  home  of  mine,  as  any  one  may
easily  imagine,  the  tide  of  periodical  literature  flows
pretty  freely.  Dailies,  weeklies,  monthlies,  quarter-
Ues — papers  and  pamphlets  of  all  sorts  and  descrip-
tions, pour  in  like  a  flood,  and  for  a  season  overwhelm
the  pastor's  study  table.  From  thence,  at  ebb-tide,
they  drift  lazily  into  my  sanctum,  and,  cast  up  upon
my  coast,  they  yield  me  pleasant  spoils  of  amuse-
ment and  information.  From  their  pages  I  have
lately  gathered,  with  some  surprise  and  much
pleasure,  the  knowledge  that  a  very  large  number
of  God's  people  are  seeking  to  accomplish,  by  indi-
vidual effort,  those  works  of  benevolence  and  Chris-
tian love  which  in  days  gone  by  w^ere  attempted  only
by  fully  constituted  agencies,  and  societies  wdth  vast
resources.  A  special  form  of  need  seems  to  strike
some  particular  iieart  with  pity,  and  forthwith  the
hand  is  stretched  forth  to  relieve  it,  not  with  fitful  or
capricious  charity,  but  with  a  wise  tenderness  and
determined  constancy  which  lead  at  last  to  an  en-
tire consecration  to  the  chosen  service.  Some  of
the  religious  periodicals  above  alluded  to  contain
lonor  lists  of  such  'works  of  faith  and  labors  of
love,'  and  in  many  I  note  that,  while  they  confide  in


AfJ^S.  SPURGEON  AND  HER   WORK.  27 1

a  human  head  for  management,  they  lean  wholly  on
the  hand  of  the  Lord  for  maintenance.  A  fellow-
feeling  for  these  workers  prompts  me  to  watch  their
course  with  loving  interest,  and  often  leads  me  to
breathe  a  prayer  for  their  prosperity  and  success.
I  know  that  the  world's  great  need  necessitates
the  church's  orcranized  efforts  on  the  largest  scale,
and  therefore  I  bid  '  God  speed '  widi  all  my  heart
to  the  grand  societies  which  are  the  glory  of  our
land ;  but  yet  I  turn  to  the  solitary  sower  of
the  seed,  or  to  the  lonely  gatherer-out  of  stones,
with  the  most  vivid  and  lovingf  sense  of  kin-
ship  and  communion,  because  our  experiences  so
well  aeree.

^'  My  own  work,  so  feeble  and  insignificant  in  com-
parison with  that  of  others,  can  claim  but  the  most
modest  mention  amonor  the  numberless  schemes
for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  man  to  which
reference  has  been  made,  and  yet  I  may  assert  that
its  origin  is  as  divine,  its  object  as  beneficent,  its
support  as  certain,  and  its  success  as  assured  as  the
most  glorious  of  them  all.  Though  but  a  rill  among
the  rivers,  it  sprang  from  the  same*heavenly  source
as  the  greatest  of  them  ;  though  as  yet  only  a  sap-
ling among  the  trees  of  wood,  it  '  giveth  goodly
boughs '  and  grateful  shade  in  its  measure  ;  and
though  it  be  but  one  note  in  the  never-ceasing  song
of  '  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  peace  on  earth,  and
good-will  to  man,'  it  will  one  day  help  to  swell  the
shout  of  rapture  which  shall  rise  when  the  '  glory  of


272  CHARLES  //.  SPURGEON.

the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover
the  sea.'

''  Hoping  that  this  little  book  may  fall  Into  the
hands  of  some  who  have  hitherto  been  strangers  to
my  work,  I  propose  to  give  full  information  concern-
ing it,  and,  yielding  to  that  habit  which  I  suppose  is
inherent  in  us  all,  of  trying  to  imitate  those  we  love
most,  I  shall  'divide  my  discourse  into  four  heads,'
beginning  with  the  origin."


CHAPTER  X.

THE    BOOK-FUND. — ITS    ORIGIN.

''The  'Fund  became  a  fact'  in  the  most  natural
manner  possible  to  all  outward  seeming ;  for,  as  the
kind  writer  of  the  first  report  says,  '  the  casual
pleasantries  of  a  summer's  day  suggested  the  dis-
tribution of  books  to  poor  ministers ;'  but  faith
traces  the  true  rise  and  spring  of  this  'brook  by
the  way '  to  a  higher  source,  and  humbly  dares  to
ascribe  the  origin  of  the  Book-Fund  to  the  kind
hand  of  the  loving  Father  Himself,  who  is  revealed
to  us  as  the  'God  of  all  comfort.'  No  loving  rela-
tive, however  earnestly  bent  on  discovering  a  fresh
source  of  alleviation  for  constant  pain,  or  a  compen
sating  joy  for  a  life  of  comparative  seclusion,  would
for  a  moment  have  imagined  that  the  desired  solace
would  have  been  found  in  this  most  blessed  work.
'  God,  that  comforteth  those  that  are  cast  down,  com-
forted us,'  after  His  own  peculiar  manner,  by  putting
a  delightful  work  into  our  feeble  charge.  Tenderly,
too,  and  gradually,  as  His  poor  weak  child  was  able
to  bear  it,  did  the  Lord  '  lead  on  softly,'  until  '  He
brought  her  out  into  a  wealthy  place  and  established

her  goings.'

i8  273


2/4  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON,

"An  intense  desire  took  possession  of  me,  after
reading  my  dear  husband's  'Lectures  to  his  Students,'
to  place  a  copy  in  the  hands  of  every  minister  in
England,  and  consulting  with  the  dear  author  on  the
matter,  he  approved  my  wish,  and  we  decided  to
devote  a  few  pounds  to  the  partial  gratification  of  it.
Before  the  distribution  of  the  copies  thus  purchased
was  completed,  friends  heard  of  and  appreciated  the
scheme,  and  sent  gifts,  some  of  one  hundred,  some
of  fifty  volumes,  some  of  money,  to  help  In  the
work,  so  that  very  quietly  and  silently,  but  most
surely,  as  the  months  rolled  on,  it  came  to  be  a
matter  of  established  fact  that  a  Book-Fund  existed
and  prospered.

*'  One  day,  in  my  husband's  study,  the  four  comely
volumes  of  '  The  Treasury  of  David '  caught  my
eye,  and  the  question  instantly  sprang  to  my  lips,
'Why  could  I  not  send  these  also  to  poor  ministers  ?
Only  think  what  a  boon  they  would  be  !'  Conjugal
love  feared  the  task  would  be  too  heavy,  and  the
responsibility  of  such  a  work  too  burdensome  for
the  often  weary  one  ;  but  the  Lord  knew  better,  for
He  fostered  the  desire  till  it  became  too  strong  to
be  repressed,  and  then  He  graciously  gave  the
power  and  means  to  fulfil  it.  Blessed  be  His  name,
I  feel  that  it  cannot  be  presumption  to  believe  that
this  sacred  charge  was  given  me  from  the  Lord
Himself,  because  the  fact  has  been  abundantly
proved,  both  by  my  own  weakness  and  the  manifes-
tation of  His  gracious  strength.


THE  BO  OK- FUND.  275

"It  is  not  the  first  time  He  has  'given  power  to
the  faint,'  or  chosen  a  'thing  of  nought'  to  do
Him  service,  and  I  rejoice  with  exceeding  joy  over
my  work,  because  it  is  His  from  beginning  to  end  ;
all  the  good,  and  the  grace,  and  the  glory  are  His,
His  wholly  and  only  !  He  has  reminded  His  stew-
ards of  a  need  w^hich  they  are  far  too  apt  to  over-
look, and  He  has  supplied  for  many  of  His  minis-
ters a  necessity  which  they  had  scarcely  the  courage
to  mention.  Preachers  without  books  are  as  the
Israelites  when  required  by  Pharaoh  to  make  bricks
without  straw;  but  hundreds  of  such  poor  op-
pressed workers  are  toiling  on  from  year  to  year,
without  sympathy  from  any  one.  Some  little  help
was  needed  for  these  servants  of  the  Lord  to  give
them  *  a  litde  reviving,'  and  that  aid  has  come  by
an  unlooked-for  hand.  It  was  unlikely  that  one  who
is  neither  bookworm  nor  theologian  should  be  raised
up  to  supply  poor  preachers  with  books  ;  and  yet  so
it  has  been,  and  the  matter  is  from  the  Lord.

ITS    OBJECT.

''The  Book-Fund  aims  at  furnishing  the  bare  book-
shelves of  poor  pastors  of  every  Christian  denomi-
nation with  standard  works  of  theology  by  various
authors  ;  books  full  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Jesus
Christ,  the  study  of  which  shall  enrich  their  minds,
comfort  their  hearts,  quicken  their  spiritual  life,  and
thereby  enable  them  to  preach  with  greater  power
and  earnestness  '  all   the  words  of  this  life.'     How


2/6  CHARLES  h.  SPURGE  ON.

deeply  needed  this  service  of  love  has  long  been,
what  an  urgent  and  painful  necessity  it  has  become,
is  fully  proved  by  the  intense  eagerness  shown  on
every  hand  to  obtain  the  proffered  boon.  The  writer
could  point  to  many  a  faithful  servant  of  the  Lord,
who,  tolling  on  in  secret  poverty  for  years,  has  not
even  seen  a  new  book  (except  in  the  shop  win-
dows), till  a  grant  from  the  Book-Fund  filled  his
heart  with  joy  and  his  lips  w^ith  thanksgiving.
'These  books  have  brightened  my  hope  and  quick-
ened my  faith,'  writes  one  such  pastor.  'I  will
not  trouble  you  with  my  difficulties  for  want  of  a
commentary  to  stimulate  and  guide  my  poor
thought,  they  are  too  sad  to  tell,  but  they  have
helped  me  to  appreciate  your  gifts.'  Those  whose
resources  enable  them  to  enjoy,  without  stint,  the
luxury  of  a  'new  book,'  can  scarcely  realize  the
longing  and  craving  which  gnaws  at  the  heart  of
a  poor  minister  when  he  sees — beyond  his  reach —
the  help  and  refreshment  he  so  sorely  needs.  His
brain  is  weary  with  producing  unaided  thoughts ;
his  mental  powers  are  flagging  for  want  of  stimulus
and  encouragement;  his  spirit  is  burdened  with  the
pressure  of  cares,  which  stern  poverty  brings  upon
him ;  and  yet,  though  a  few  sterling,  solid  books
would  be  a  specific  for  much  of  this  misery,  the
purchase  of  such  blessed  potions  is  as  impossible
to  him  as  would  be  the  acquisition  of  the  '  Elixir  of
Life  '  itself !  Many  a  one  has  told  me  that  the  books
sent  seemed  to   'put  new  life'  into  him,  and  it  is


-      THE  BOOK-FUND.  2//

not  difficult  to  read  In  those  three  words  a  sad  and
sorrowful  story  of  mental  falntness  and  famine.
**  'Read  good  suggestive  books/  says  the  President
of  the  Pastors'  College,  In  his  '  Lectures  to  Stu-
dents,' 'and  get  your  minds  aroused  by  them.  If
men  wish  to  get  water  out  of  a  pump  which  has  not
been  lately  used,  they  first  pour  water  down,  and
then  the  pump  works.  Reach  down  one  of  the  Puri-
tans, and  thoroughly  study  the  work,  and  speedily
you  will  find  yourself,  like  a  bird  on  the  wing,
mentally  active  and  full  of  motion.'  But  what  if
there  is  no  water  at  hand  to  coax  the  up-springing
of  the  living  stream  ?  or,  rather,  what  if  the  book-
shelves are  bare,  and  no  Puritans  can  be  reached
down  ?  This  is  a  question  which  the  Book-Fund
seeks  to  answer  in  the  only  satisfactory  manner,  by
placing  as  a  free  gift  in  the  hands  of  poor  pastors
that  nourishment,  for  their  brains  which  is  as  abso-
lutely necessary  to  mental  vigor  as  food  for  their
bodies  is  essential  to  physical  existence.  'Ten
thousand  thanks,'  said  a  dear  brother,  writing
lately,  '  for  sending  the  books  when  you  did.  Their
coming  brought  deliverance  and  salvation  to  my
'  mind.  I  was  in  an  agony  of  spirit — at  my  wits'  end
for  a  text.  I  opened  one  and  found,  "The  Lord
liveth,  and  blessed  be  my  rock."  This  was  just
what  I  wanted  ;  it  took  hold  of  me,  and  the  Lord
helped  me  to  take  hold  of  it.'  *I  have  very  little
to  spend  In  books,'  says  another.  'My  salary  is
only   ^60  per   annum,  so    that   when  a  new   book


278  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEOK.

comes  it  is  like  bread  to  the  hungry.  I  do  not  say
this  to  make  you  think  I  am  a  martyr — if  so,  I  am  a
very  happy  one,  for  I  have  chosen  wilHngly  Christ's
service,  and  my  very  wants  are  a  means  of  grace  to
me/  Again,  another  pastor  writes :  *I  cannot
tell  you  how  much  the  receipt  of  these  useful  and
suggestive  volumes  cheered  me.  The  sight  of  a
refreshing  spring  never  more  gladdened  a  weary
traveler.'

*'  No  one  who  knows  anything  of  the  position  and
means  of  our  country  pastors  can  doubt  that  the
'object'  of  this  Fund  meets,  and,  as  far  as  it  is  able,
alleviates  a  sadly  overlooked  evil.  After  more  than
two  years'  daily  correspondence  with  ministers  all
over  the  land,  the  writer  feels  that  she  speaks  with
sad  and  serious  certainty  on  the  matter,  and  she  is
grieved  to  know  that  everywhere  the  want  is  felt,
and  the  same  cry  is  heard.  '  Oh,  for  some  books  to
help  me  in  my  pulpit  preparation  ! '  says  one  ;  '  I
have  to  preach  before  the  same  people  three,  per-
haps four  times  a  week,  and  though  the  Lord  has
promised  that  my  "  branch  shall  not  wither,"  it  some-
times gets  very  dry.'  '  I  know  we  should  depend
upon  the  Spirit's  aid,'  says  another,  '  and  so  I  do  ;
but  if  I  could  read  some  of  the  burning  thoughts
which  are  recorded  by  God's  earthly  seraphs,  my  lips,
too,  might  glow  with  holy  rapture,  and  give  forth
"goodly  words."  *  *  I  never  dare  now  to  think  of  a
new  book,'  writes  a  third,  '  two  or  three  times  I  have
begun  to  save  a  little  money  towards  the  purchase


THE  BO  OK- FUND.  279

of  a  long-coveted  work,  but  every  time  it  has  gone
for  something  else  ;  Johnny,  and  little  Harry,  and
Walter,  must  have  boots ;  or  mother  is  ill ;  or  the
girls'  frocks  are  getting  shabby  ;  and  so  the  precious
volumes  are  still  unattainable/  And  yet  a  fourth
most  touchingly  says  :  'When  I  witness  the  self-
denial,  and  hard  unremitting  labor  to  which  my  wife
so  cheerfully  submits  herself  to  keep  our  household
moving  comfortably  in  the  sphere  God  has  given,  I
cannot  with  any  pleasure  add  to  her  difficulty  by
purchasing  the  books  I  often  covet,  though  this
doubtless  hinders  the  freshness  and  variety  of  my
ministry.'

*'  Dear  Christian  friends,  these  are  no  fancy  pict-
ures which  I  am  painting,  these  are  no  silly  tales  of
fiction,  told  for  the  purpose  of  exciting  emotions  as
worthless  as  they  are  weak  ;  but  I  write  of  living,
suffering  realities  of  flesh  and  blood — our  brethren
in  Christ,  and  men,  moreover,  who  claim  and  bear
the  title  of  the  '  King's  ambassadors  ' — and  I  ask,
*  Ought  they  to  be  thus  treated  ?  '  I  want  you  to
ponder  for  a  moment  the  sad  fact  that  throughout
the  length  and  breadth  of  this  dear  England  of  ours
there  are  hundreds  of  Christ's  ministers  so  poor
that  they  can  scarcely  find  proper  food  and  clothing
for  themselves,  their  wives  and  their  little  ones,  out
of  the  miserable  pittance  which  is  called  their
'  salary  ! '  Books,  which  ought  to  be  *  common
things  '  with  them — littering  their  rooms  in  '  most
admired  disorder,'  crowding  each  nook  and  corner


28o  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEOX.

with  mute  but  matchless  companionship — are,
through  their  poverty,  unattainable  luxuries,  vainly-
coveted  blessings,  the  very  thought  of  which  must
be  laid  aside,  lest  the  longing  should  lead  to  repining,
and  the  desire  deepen  into  distress.  Such  things
ought  not  to  be,  but  unhappily  they  are,  and  till  the
churches  of  Christ  shall  awaken  to  a  sense  of  their
responsibility  in  this  matter,  and  their  moral  obliga-
tion to  provide  their  ministers  with  mental  food,  I
will  rejoice  that  my  Book-Fund  does,  at  least,  lighten
a  little  of  the  darkness,  and  relieve  somewhat  the
pressure  of  the  famine.

ITS  SUSTENANCE.
'*  The  silver  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."

"The  Book-Fund  has  been  nourished  and  fed  from
the  King's  Treasury,  and  I  must  '  make  my  boast  in
the  Lord '  that  all  needful  supplies  for  the  carrying
on  of  the  work  have  plainly  borne  the  stamp  of
heaven's  owm  mint.  I  say  this  because  I  have  never
asked  help  of  any  one  but  Him,  never  solicited  a
donation  from  any  creature,  yet  money  has  always
been  forthcoming,  and  the  supplies  have  constantly
been  in  due  proportion  to  the  needs.  Once  only
during  the  year  did  the  Lord  try  my  faith  by  allowing
the  grants  of  books  to  outnumber  the  gifts  of  money,
and  then  it  was  only  for  a  *  small  moment '  that  a
fear  overshadowed  me.  The  dark  cloud  very  speedily
passed  away,  and  fresh  supplies  made  me  more  than
ever  satisfied  with  the  resolution  I  had  formed  to


THE  BO  OK- FUND.  28 1

draw  only  on  the  unlimited  resources  of  my  heavenly
Treasurer.  None  of  the  friends  whose  hearts  have
*  devised  liberal  things '  on  behalf  of  my  work  will
reproach  me  with  ingratitude  towards  them  when  I
lay  my  first  loving  thanks  at  His  feet ;  they  will
rather  join  me  in  praising  Him  for  so  sweetly
inclining  their  hearts  to  help  His  needy  ones,  and
will  joyfully  say,  '  O  Lord,  of  Thine  own  have  we
given  Thee  ! '

"  I  recall  with  very  glad  satisfaction  the  first  dona-
tion which  reached  me,  '  for  sending  books  to  minis-
ters.' It  came  anonymously,  and  was  but  five
shillings'  worth  of  stamps,  yet  it  was  very  precious,
and  proved  like  a  revelation  to  me,  for  it  opened  up
a  vista  of  possible  usefulness  and  exceeding  bright-
ness. The  mustard  seed  of  my  faith  grew  forthwith
into  a  '  great '  tree,  and  sweet  birds  of  hope  and
expectation  sat  singing  in  its  branches.  '  You'll
see,'  I  said  to  my  boys,  'the  Lord  will  send  me
hundreds  of  pounds  for  this  work.'  For  many  a
day  afterwards  mother's  'hundreds  of  pounds'  be-
came a  *  household  word '  of  good-humored  merri-
ment and  badinage.  And  now  '  the  Lord  has  made
me  to  laugh,'  for  the  hundreds  have  grown  into
thousands ;  He  has  done  '  exceeding  abundantly
above  what  I  could  ask  or  even  think '  ;  and  faith,
with  such  a  God  to  believe  in  and  depend  upon,
ought  surely  to  'smile  at  impossibilities,  and  say,  'it
shall  be  done.'


282  CHARLES.   IL  SPURGEON.

''After  praising  Him  'from  whom  all  blessings
flow,'  my  loving  thanks  are  due  to  the  friends  who,
by  their  generous  gifts,  have  co-operated  with  me  in
this  blessed  work.  Money  has  come  to  me  from  all
quarters,  and  always  with  congratulations  and  good
wishes.  Many  dear  personal  friends  have  liberally
aided  me  ;  some  of  my  dear  husband's  constant  and
devoted  helpers  have  been  pleased  when  sending
him  a  cheque,  to  make  it  a  little  larger  for  the  Book-
Fund  ;  while  quite  a  number  of  strangers  (though
s-trangers  no  longer),  whose  names  were  previously
unknown  to  me,  have  sent  very  considerable  dona-
tions to  my  beloved  work.  God  bless  them  all !
And  if  only  a  tithe  of  the  happiness  their  gifts  have
secured  to  me  and  my  poor  pastors  be  returned  into
their  own  hearts,  their  cups  will  be  full  to  overflowing,
and  their  joy  will  abound.  Oh,  how  sw^eet  some  of
these  sums  of  money  have  been  to  me !  Real
'  God-sends  '  I  may  truly  call  them  ;  for  the  gold  has
seemed  to  lose  its  earthly  dross  when  consecrated
to  Him,  and  has  often  shed  a  light  as  from  heaven's
own  '  golden  streets  '  upon  my  pathway  !  Coming
sometimes  in  seasons  of  great  pain  and  suffering,
these  gifts  have  been  like  precious  anodynes  to
soothe  my  weary  spirit,  and  hush  my  restless
thought ;  for  they  plainly  showed  the  Lord  had  not
'  forgotten  to  be  gracious.'  They  have  almost
charmed  away  my  sorrow  by  teaching  me  to  plan  for
others'  joy,  and  ofttlmes  they  have  been  truly  'means
of  grace  '  to  me,  leading  to  blessed  commerce  with


THE  BOOKFVXD.  283

heaven,  by  supplying  frequent  occasions  of  prayer
and  praise.    Surely,  after  so  much  mercy  past,  if  I  did
not  bless  His  name,  '  the  very  stones  would  cry  out.'
'*  The    twelve   hundred   and    eighty  odd   pounds
which  stand   recorded  for  this  year  in  the  balance-
sheet  do  not  include  all  the  moneys  which   I  have
received  from  the  Lord   through  the  hands  of  His
loving  people.     Herein  lies  a  secret,  very  precious,
and  hitherto  very  safely  guarded,  but  now  to  be  re-
vealed for  the  honor  of  God  and  the  good  of  His
needy  ministers.     The  thought  will  naturally  occur
to  any  one    who  has   read   this   far,   that   such   an
intimate  acquaintance  as  I  have  made  with  the  sor-
rows and  trials  of  poor  pastors  must  have  many  a
time  caused  me  a  sad  heartache,  unless  means  were
at  hand  to  relieve  their  earthly  wants  and  woes  as
well  as  their  mental  necessities  ;    and  here  another
note  of  praise  to  the  Lord  must  be  sounded  on  a
very  tender  string  ;  for  in  His  goodness  and  loving-
kindness  He  has   provided  pecuniary  help  for  ex-
ceptional cases  of  extreme  poverty  and  urgent  need.
Without  this,  I  think  sometimes  I  should  have  felt
crushed  beneath  the  burden  which  my  knowledge
of  many  pressing  needs  has  laid  upon  me.  The  tried
ministers  never  complain  ;  I  do  not  remember  having
ever  read  a  solitary  sentence  which  could  be  con-
strued into  a  murmur  ;  but  sometimes  a  chance  word
on  my  part  leads  them  to  confide  in  me,  and  then  the
sad  fact  is  revealed,  that  other  shelves  beside  the
bookshelf  are  in  pitiful  need  of  replenishing.


284  CHARLES  IL  SPURGE  OX.

*'At  the  commencement  of  1877,  a  generous  friend
placed  at  my  disposal  a  sum  of  money,  and  thus
founded  a  private

pastors'  aid  society,

from  which  I  could  draw  such  sums  as  occasion  re-
quired and  prudence  directed.  This  money  has  been
further  supplemented  by  gifts  from  my  dear  husband
and  others  ;  and  though  not  attaining  any  vast  pro-
portions, it  has  sufficed  to  solace  many  a  suffering
one,  and  has  lifted  very  heavy  burdens  from  care-
laden  hearts.  Full  details  of  this  little  branch  of  my
Book-Fund  are  withheld  from  motives  of  delicacy
and  tenderness  to  the  dear  brethren  whose  poverty,
though  honorable,  is  as  jealously  concealed  as  if  it
were  a  hidden  treasure  ;  but  could  I  dare  to  tell  of
the  sickness  and  sorrow,  the  straits  and  the  struggles
which  have  come  to  my  knowledge  during  this  year,
many  of  my  readers  would  think  I  was  romancing,
and  that  such  a  state  of  things  could  not  exist  in  this
Christian  land.  But  alas  !  dear  friends,  the  evil  Is
deep  and  wide-spread,  very  real,  and  very  saddening,
and  I  would  that  those  of  God's  people,  to  whom  He
has  given  liberally  of  the  '  precious  things  of  the
earth  beneath,'  would  bestow  some  of  their  over-
flowing wealth  upon  their  poorer  brethren.  I  could
promise  them  that  from  '  golden  grains  '  thus  sown
they  should  reap  a  hundredfold  harvest  of  blessing
and  sweet  content.


THE  BO  OK- FUND.  285

ITS    SUCCESS.

** Judged  by  the  benefits  and  blessings  the  Book-
Fund  has  conferred,  its  success  will  be  best  told  by
extracts  from  letters  received  in  acknowledgment  of
gifts  ;  and  as  it  has  become  entirely  unsectarian  in
its  operation  it  will,  perhaps,  be  interesting  and
pleasant  to  introduce  some  '  kind  words '  from
ministers  of  different  denominations  who  have  joy-
fully accepted  this  service  of  love.  It  has  been  no
easy  matter  to  restrain  my  hand  in  making  these
selections  from  the  many  hundreds  of  letters  I  pos-
sess ;  I  have  felt  a  veritable  embarras  de  richesses,
and  most  unwillingly  have  omitted  many  a  passage
brimful  of  joy  and  gladness,  lest  I  should  weary  my
readers  ;  but  when  they  have  perused  with  delight
these  thankful,  loving  words,  they  may  rest  assured
the  '  half  has  not  been  told  '  them.  Having  cofn-
menced  the  year  by  offering  six  volumes  of  Mr.
Spurgeon's  'Sermons'  to  all  ministers  formerly
students  of  the  Pastors'  College,  first  speech  is  ac-
corded to  one  of  their  number : —

"My  dear  Mrs.  Spurgeon  : — I  feel  deeply  grateful  to  you  for  the  six  volumes
of  sermons  which  reached  me  this  morning.  When  1  opened  the  parcel,  I
experienced  such  a  rush  of  emotion  as  made  me  kneel  down  instantly  and
thank  God  for  His  goodness  to  me,  as  well  as  to  pray  for  His  blessing  to  de-
scend upon  you.  Many  times  when  a  few  brethren  have  met  together  at  my
house,  or  I  have  gone  to  theirs,  have  we  mentioned  your  work  in  our  prayers,
and  the  best  expression  of  my  gratitude,  I  feel,  will  be  in  the  fervency  and
faith  of  my  petitions.  I  trust  you  will  accept  my  thanks,  though  they  were  so
imperfectly  conveyed.     My  heart  glows,  but  my  pen  fails.

''  The  extract  next  subjoined  is  also  from  an  old
student,  but  it    claims    special  notice   because  the


2S6  CHARLES  //.  SPUKGECN.

writer  Is  laboring  in  a  far  distant  land,  and  a  gift  of
books  to  him  is  truly  '  as  cold  water  to  a  thirsty
soul/  It  is  not  often  that  the  opportunity  is  afforded
of  ministerinor  to  the  necessities  of  brethren  in  for-
eign  lands,  on  account  of  the  heavy  expense  of
transit ;  but  when  friends  are  found  to  take  charge
of  a  parcel,  we  have  the  rare  pleasure  of  receiving
in  due  time  such  an  answer  as  this  : —

'*  Dear  Mrs.  Spurgeon  : — I  have  to  acknowledge,with  gratitude  and  pleasure,
the  receipt  of  six  volumes  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  *  Sermons,'  which  you  so  kindly
forwarded  by  Mr.  ,  of  this  village.  May  the  Lord  reward  you  a  thous-
andfold  for  this  great,  and  I   might    almost   say,  unexpected  kindness  to  a

stranger  in  a  strange  land When  settling  here,  rather  more  than

three  years  ago,  I  often  found  an  American  volume  of  the  *  Sermons,'  well
worn,  and  highly  appreciated ;  and  I  assure  you  they  made  me  feel  more  at
home  than  otherwise  I  should  have  done  in  this  rugged  country.  One  old
man,  nearly  ninety,  whom  I  buried  a  few  months  since,  had  a  volume  of  that
kind,  and  he  had  read  it,  perhaps,  hundreds  of  times,  until  it  was  almost  worn
to  pieces.  It  was  nearly  his  sole  companion  for  several  years  before  his
death,  and  none  can  tell  how  much  he  was  cheered  and  comforted  by  reading
it.  You  can  scarcely  imagine  the  joy  I  felt  in  receiving  the  sermons  fresh
from  England;  but  this  you  may  rest  assured  of — both  yourself  and  your  dear
husband  were  prayed  for  that  night  with  more  than  usual  fervor  and  feeling,
and  special  thanks  were  given  to  Him  *  from  whom  all  blessings  flow.'

'*  If  space  permitted,  I  could  give  extracts  of  letters
from  France,  Sweden,  Nova  Scotia,  Nebraska,  Cape
of  Good  Hope,  Spain,  Sydney,  Adelaide,  Bengal,
Jamaica,  Barbadoes,  and  many  other  '*  strange
lands,"  which  would  delight  and  interest  my  read-
ers ;  but  I  must  content  myself  and  them  with  the
following  much-prized  communications  from  Church
of  England  missionaries,  one  on  leave  of  absence
for  a  while  from  India,  the  other  just  starting  to  his


THE  BOOK-FUND.  28/

work  at  Palameotta  (S.  India).  The  first-mentioned
writes  thus : —

"  Many,  many  thanks  for  the  four  volumes  of  *  The  Treasury  of  David ' ;  I
prize  them  much.  I  doubt  not  that,  if  not  already,  these  volumes  will  soon
become  standard  works  on  the  Psalms.  Every  one  knew  and  felt  that  there
must  be  *  a  feast  of  fat  things '  for  mind  and  soul  in  the  Psalms ;  but  Mr.
Spurgeon  has  dished  them  up  in  a  way  so  superior  to  what  anybody  else  has
ever  done,  that  both  mind  and  soul  receive  much  more  from  his  '  Treasury  '
than  from  any  other  work.     I  am  thankful  to  find  the  books  in  the  libraries  of

Church  of  England  clergymen  at  D and   K ,  with  less  dust  on

them  than  Browne  *  On  the  Articles,'  or  theological  works  akin  to  Den's
*  Theology,'  etc.     The  day  of  Christ  will  reveal  the  great  good  the  Lord  has

been  doing  through  Mr.  Spurgeon's  instrumentality.     When  a  student  at

College,  I  used  to  visit  some  of  the  Irish  courts  around  the  neighborhood.  In
one  of  these  dens  of  villainy  and  iniquity  there  lived  a  man  who  was  my  terror,
and  who  more  than  once  sent  me  flying  out  of  the  court,  pushing  me  by  laying
his  hand  to  the  back  of  my  neck.  My  heart  sank  every  time  I  entered  the
place  if  I  met  this  man.  He  was  all  that  is  wicked  and  iniquitous.  One
day,  to  my  surprise,  instead  of  cursing  me,  he  asked  me  to  his  filthy,  dark
room.  I  entered  it  with  fear,  not  knowing  what  was  in  store  for  me ;  but,
thank  God,  it  was  to  tell  me  that  he  had  found  Jesus,  and  had  resolved  in  His
strength  to  follow  Him.  The  message  of  love,  and  mercy,  and  peace,  had
been  conveyed  to  this  man's  heart  by  the  lips  of  your  good  husband.  He
heard  Mr.  Spurgeon  preach  in  some  public  place  or  other,  and  there  Jesus  met
him  and  called  him.  From  that  day  till  his  death  he  lived  the  life  of  a  Chris-
tian, and  died  glorifying  the  depths  of  Jesus'  love.  I  do  not  think  you  can
have  ever  heard  of  this  case ;  and  there  must  be  many  unknown  to  you  \n^o
on  the  great  day  will  welcome  your  dear  husband  as  the  one  who  was  the
means  of  leading  them  to  the  feet  of  Christ.

"  Dear  Madam  : — The  books  arrived  safely  on  Saturday  night.  May  God
bless  you  for  your  kindness  and  liberality  to  a  perfect  stranger.  I  have  long
been  under  deep  obligation  to  your  honored  husband,  since  it  was  through
reading  a  passage  in  one  of  his  books  in  South  India,  that  I  was  first  awakened
out  of  a  sinner's  natural  self-complacency  to  cry,  *  What  must  I  do  to  be
saved  ?  *  And  twice  during  the  last  two  years  have  I  been  greatly  cheered
and  strengthened  by  two  sermons  that  I  had  the  pleasure  of  hearing  him  de-
liver in  Islington.  Though  we  may  never  meet  on  earth,  though  we  may
differ  on  minor  points,  ever  shall  my  prayers  ascend  to  God  for  you  both,  and
we  shall  assuredly  meet  where  partings  are  unknown.


288  CHARLES  H.  SPURLrEON.

*'I  may  just  say  here  that  many  missionaries  of
different  denominations  have,  on  leaving  England,
applied  to  me  for  '  The  Treasury '  to  carry  with
them  to  their  distant  stations  (Damascus,  Madrid,
China,  the  Punjaub,  Ceylon,  Delhi,  Lagos,  and  Tim-
buctoo  recur  to  my  mind  at  this  moment,  but  there  are
many  more),  and  it  has  given  peculiar  satisfaction
to  grant  the  requests  of  these  dear  brethren,  and  to
receive  from  them  assurances  of  the  great  comfort
and  refreshment  they  have  derived  from  the  perusal
of  the  precious  volumes  when  toiling  far  from  home,
friends  and  country.

"About  the  middle  of  the  year  an  unexpected
and  most  delightful  impetus  was  given  to  the  Book-
Fund  by  a  very  kind  and  generous  friend,  who  de-
sired that  all  the  ministers  in  Argyleshire  should
possess  'The  Treasury  of  David,'  and  entrusted  the
writer  with  funds  to  carry  out  his  wishes.  How
heartily  the  good  divines  of  Scotland  welcomed  and
appreciated  this  gift,  it  would  take  too  long  to  tell.

"  Returning  to  home-work,  I  give  a  letter  from  a
Congregational  pastor,  which  could  be  supplemented
by  hundreds,  for  my  Book-Fund  has  had  the  privi-
lege of  ministering  to  very  many  in  the  Independent
denomination.

"  Dear  Madam  : — The  four  volumes  of  '  The  Treasury  of  David '  arrived
safely.  This  thoughtful  and  most  generous  gift  has  filled  my  heart  with  rea^
delight.  Perhaps  the  infrequency  of  such  a  windfall  will  account  for  a  little
of  the  pleasure,  but  I  cannot  help  tracing  much  of  it  to  the  kind  manner  in
which  you  have  presented  the  gift,  and  to  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  books  them-
selves.    I  am  a  prey  to  the  hunger  usual  among  my  brethren  for  the  only  kind


THE  BO  OK- FUND.  289

of  communion  open  to  many  of  us  with  the  richest  and  noblest  minds  that  hare
served  the  Saviour.  The  possession  of  your  honored  hiisband's  beautiful  and
valuable  volumes  makes  me  feel  sensibly  richer,  and  I  am  sure  I  shall  frequently
turn  to  them,  both  for  private  profit,  and  the  enrichment  of  my  ministry.

"  Being  fearful  of  over-taxing  the  patience  of  my
readers,  I  must  pass  without  notice  the  epistles  re-
ceived from  Evangelists  and  Home  Missionaries,
some  of  which  would  certainly  vie  in  interest  and
pathos  with  any  that  have  been  already  given.  I,
therefore,  introduce  but  one  other  letter,  making  it
do  duty  as  the  representative  of  kind  and  appre-
ciative words  from  the  many  divisions  of  Methodism
— Wesleyan,  Primitive,  and  so  forth.  It  is  from  the
pen  of  a  Bible  Christian  minister,  and  it  tells  the
same  'old  story'  of  deep  need  of  books,  and  utter
inability  to  procure  them.

"  Dear  Madam : — Your  very  valuable  and  welcome  present  came  duly  to
hand,  and  positively  made  my  heart  leap  for  joy,  and  outflow  with  a  thousand
blessings  upon  the  kind  donors.  I  can  never  express  in  words  the  deep  feel-
ings of  gratitude  I  am  the  subject  of,  for  your  great  kindness  in  thus  shedding
sunshine  upon  the  difficult  pathway  of  one  who  is  trying,  amid  all  his  unworthi-
ness,  to  serve  his  generation  faithfully,  and  to  do  the  work  assigned  him  by  the
Master ;  but  what  I  cannot  put  into  language,  I  can  breathe  in  heart  at  the
heavenly  throne— that  Jehovah's  benedictions  in  ever-increasing  richness  may
fall  upon  you  and  your  honored  husband,  until  taken  to  the  eternal  home.  The
*  Psalms  '  have  always  been  my  favorite  resort  for  meditation  and  exposition,
and  I  should  long  ago  have  purchased  *  The  Treasury  of  David '  had  I  been
able ;  but  a  salary  of  ^^80  a  year  allows  only  a  very  small  margin  for  books,
and  though  my  mind  often  craved  for  them,  the  luxury  was  not  enjoyed.

*' As  no  record  of  my  work  could  be  considered
quite  complete  without  some  reference  to  the  beauti-
ful plant  which  has  always  been  associated  with  it,  I
am  happy  to  say  that  the  lemon  tree  is   in   a  most
19


290  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

prosperous  condition.  Meeting  the  gardener  the
other  day,  he  observed,  'Your  lemon  tree  is  brought
up  to  the  house,  ma'am,  it  is  making  a  great  deal  of
new  wood,'  and  the  Book-Fund  seems  to  follow  suit
with  its  old  friend  ;  for  buds  and  blossoms  of  unex-
pected promise  are  asserting  their  existence  and
vitality.  This  Christmastide  has  brought  me  a  num-
ber of  letters  from  Christian  ladies,  who  are  anxious
to  aid  the  families  of  poor  pastors,  by  suitable  gifts
of  clothing ;  and  I  have  had  the  intense  satisfaction
of  submitting  to  their  loving  care  and  consideration
the  names  of  twenty-five  ministers,  all  of  whom,  I
believe,  have  been  made  happier,  and  undeniably
warmer,  by  the  reception  of  seasonable  garments
for  themselves  and  their  little  ones.  And  yet  an-
other new  branch  of  my  work  bears  promise  of  much
good  fruit  to  poor  pastors  ;  for  through  the  kindness
of  two  thoughtful  hearts,  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel
is  to  be  sent  regularly  during  the  present  year  to
sixty  ministers  who  could  not  afford  to  purchase  it
for  themselves.  The  prospect  of  this  indulgence
has  greatly  cheered  many  hearts.  *  I  have  not  been
able  to  take  in  a  religious  periodical  for  five  years,'
said  one  to  whom  I  made  the  offer,  '  the  monthly
visit  of  the  magazine  will  indeed  be  a  great  boon.'
"What  other  work  the  Lord  may  have  in  store
for  me,  or  how  far  He  intends  graciously  to  extend
that  which  at  present  fills  my  hands,  or  whether  per-
chance He  may  think  fit  to  call  me  away  from  it
altogether,  I  know  not ;  but  this  one  thing  is  certain  :


THE  BOOK-FUND.  291

*  There  hath  not  failed  one  word  of  all  His
good  promise '  from  the  beginning  until  now  ;  and
for  the  future  I  am  persuaded  that  the  '  Book-Fund
and  its  Work '  will  live  and  thrive  vigorously  in  its
own  'little  corner'  of  God's  vineyard,  where  the
sunshine  of  His  blessing  shall  ever  rest  lovingly
upon  it,  causing  it  to  bring  forth  much  fruit  to  His
glory.

''And  now,  the  'report'  is  a  'tale  that  is  told';
but  I  pray  that  its  record  of  God's  infinite  tenderness
and  love  may  not  leave  a  merely  transient  impres-
sion on  any  heart.  Poor  as  my  words  are,  and  des-
titute of  all  literary  ability,  their  very  poverty  and
deficiency  should  be  as  foils  to  the  bright  deeds  of
mercy  and  grace  which  they  endeavor  to  set  forth.
Dear  friends  who  have  helped  me,  the  work  is  yours
as  much  as  it  is  mine,  and  I  hope  my  little  report
will  tell  you  that  I  am  deeply  grateful  to  you  for
trusting  me  with  some  of  your  substance,  and  that
it  may  also  make  you  partakers  in  my  joy — the  joy
of  helping  the  ministers  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
For  the  present  I  bid  you  a  loving  and  grateful
farewell.

"  *  Another  year — or  part — to  serve  Thee,  Lord ;
To  sleep,  to  rise,  and  always  leave  to  Thee
The  precious  seed  my  feeble  hands  have  sown.
To  make  it  spring  and  grow  is  Thine  alone ;
This  takes  all  anxious  care  away  from  me.
I  trust  Thee,  Lord,  to  cause  Thy  seed  to  yield
Full  golden  sheaves  to  deck  Thy  harvest  field.'  "

Again,  in  1879,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  wrote  concerning
her  annual  report,  saying  :


292  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

''  With  much  diffidence  this  little  book  is  laid  be-
fore you.  It  has  cost  me  considerable  effort  and
thought,  yet  it  but  feebly  represents  the  progress
and  prosperity  of  my  work,  and  very  unworthily
records  the  faithfulness  and  love  of  our  gracious
God.  I  have  earnestly  tried  to  do  my  best ;  but
the  preparation  of  an  annual  report  is  the  only  duty
connected  with  the  Book-Fund  which  I  find  burden-
some ;  and  were  it  not  that  I  hope  the  work  will  bear
the  precious  fruit  of  'glory  to  God,'  I  could  not
have  attempted  it.  Last  year  there  was  no  ques-
tion about  the  matter,  for  extreme  ill-health  and
weakness  had  brought  me  very  low ;  but  during  the
last  few  months  the  Lord  has  dealt  so  gently  with
me,  and  given  me  such  happy  cessation  of  suffering,
that  I  want  to  devote  the  first  efforts  of  partially-
renewed  strength  to  the  humble  and  grateful  fulfil-
ment of  this  duty.  The  report  for  1878  was  written
by  a  kind  friend  who  willingly  and  ably  supplied  my
lack  of  service,  and  my  hearty  thanks  are  now
rendered  to  him  for  assistance  given  in  a  time  of
much  sorrow  and  need.  Very  soon  after  this  good
friend  had  accomplished  his  task,  I  began  to  wonder
how  the  present  year  would  be  provided  for :  the
months  roll  by  so  quickly,  that  no  sooner  is  one  rec-
ord given  than  it  seems  time  to  think  about  another.
Musing  one  day  on  this  matter,  a  *  happy  thought'
suggested  itself — that,  as  often  as  opportunity  pre-
sented, I  should  gather  material  for  future  use  by
jotting  down,  somewhat  in  diary-form,  any  subject  of


THE  BOOK'FUND,  293

interest  or  thanksgiving  pertaining  to  my  work,  anc
so  present  to  my  friends  a  report,  perhaps  novel  in
character,  but  less  difficult  for  me  thus  to  produce,
and,  I  hope,  not  more  unpleasant  to  them  to  peruse.

**  In  the  following  pages,  therefore,  I  have  en-
deavored to  give  frequent  details  of  the  special
service  which  the  Lord  has  entrusted  to  my  care,
noting  down  any  particularly  interesting  incident,  re-
cording some  memorable  mercies,  and  preserving
much  pleasant  correspondence.

*'  Here  and  there  the  reader  will  find,  intermingled
with  bona  fide  book-work,  a  few  domestic  and  more
private  experiences,  which  would  insinuate  them-
selves into  the  little  history,  and  which,  seeing  that
the  dear  home-life  and  the  Book-Fund  are  so  ten-
derly 'joined  together '  by  the  Lord's  good  pleasure,
I  had  not  the  heart  or  the  wish  to  'put  asunder.'

**  Imperfectly  as  I  have  worked  out  the  idea  which
in  the  first  instance  possessed  me,  I  yet  hope  the
perusal  of  this  little  book  will  interest  my  friends
still  further  in  the  work  they,  by  their  kindly  gifts,
are  sharing  with  me.  If  in  any  degrefe  it  helps
them  more  clearly  to  perceive  that  in  this  sweet
ministry  I  am  acting  for  them,  being  truly  and  gladly
their  'servant  for  Christ's  sake';  that  the  joy,  and
delight,  and  reward  are  not  all  for  me  only,  but
are  shared  by  them  most  fully,  while  all  the  '  glory '
is  given  to  our  faithful  God  :  then  my  difficult  task
will  not  have  been  undertaken  in  vain,  nor  shall  I
regret   that    I  tried  to  put  on  record  some  of  the


294  CHARLES- H,  SPURGEOK.

'  goodness  and  mercy  which  followed  me  '  during
the  year  eighteen  hundred  and  seventy-nine.

"It  is  the  joy  of  my  life  thus  to  serve  the  ser-
vants of  my  Master,  and  the  daily  blessings  and
tender  providences  which  surround  my  work  are
more  precious  to  me  than  words  can  express.
'  Some  of  the  subjects  of  my  thankfulness  may
seem  small  and  inconsiderable  to  others,  but  to
me  they  are  of  constant  interest  and  importance;'
my  retired  life  shuts  out  the  usual  pleasures  of
social  intercourse,  but  opens  wide  a  world  of  glad
delight  in  thus  '  ministering  to  the  necessities  of  the
saints.'  I  have  scores  of  friends  with  whose  circum-
stances I  am  intimately  acquainted,  yet  whose  faces
I  have  never  looked  upon.  I  hope  to  know  and
greet  them  on  the  'other  shore';  and,  meanwhile,
their  love  and  prayers  are  a  sweet  reward  for  such
pleasant  service  as  the  Lord  enables  me  to  render  to
them.  In  these  pages  will  be  found  some  of  the  ex-
pressive outpourings  of  grateful  hearts,  and  though
the  letters  here  given  form  but  a  small  portion  of  the
great  mass  of  affectionate  correspondence  connected
with  the  Fund,  they  will  serve  to  reveal  some  of  the
daily  comfort  and  encouragement  I  receive  through
this  channel.  Ah  !  if  by  his  grace  we  can  but  win
from  our  Master  the  approving  words,  '  Ye  did  it
unto  me,'  the  joy  of  service  is  only  a  little  lower
than  the  supreme  felicity  of  heaven.

"A  curious  little  Incident  happened  lately  during
a   time  of  prolonged   sickness.      At   the    close  of  a


THE  BO  OK- FUND.  2gS

very  dark  and  gloomy  day  I  lay  resting  on  my  couch
as  the  deeper  night  drew  on,  and  though  all  was
bright  within  my  cosy  little  room,  some  of  the  external
darkness  seemed  to  have  entered  into  my  soul,  and
obscured  its  spiritual  vision.  Vainly  I  tried  to  see
the  hand  which  I  knew  held  mine,  and  guided  my
fog-enveloped  feet  along  a  steep  and  slippery  path
of  suffering.  In  sorrow  of  heart  I  asked,  'Why
does  my  Lord  thus  deal  with  His  child?  Why  does
He  so  often  send  sharp  and  bitter  pain  to  visit  me  ?
Why  does  He  permit  lingering  weakness  to  hinder
the  sweet  service  I  long  to  render  to  his  poor
servants  ? '  These  fretful  questions  were  quickly
answered,  and  though  in  a  strange  language,  no
interpreter  was  needed,  save  the  conscious  whisper
of  my  own  heart.  For  a  while  silence  reigned  in  the
little  room,  broken  only  by  the  crackling  of  the  oak
log  burning  on  the  hearth.  Suddenly  I  heard  a
sweet  soft  sound,  a  little,  clear,  musical  note,  like
the  tender  trill  of  a  robin,  beneath  my  window.
'  What  can  that  be  ? '  I  said  to  my  companion,  who
was  dozing  in  the  firelight ;  '  surely  no  bird  can  be
singing  out  there  at  this  time  of  the  year  and  night ! '
We  listened,  and  again  heard  the  faint  plaintive
notes,  so  sweet,  so  melodious,  yet  mysterious  enough
to  provoke  for  a  moment  our  undisguised  wonder.
Presently  my  friend  exclaimed,  'It  comes  from  the
log  on  the  fire  1 '  and  we  soon  ascertained  that  her
surprised  assertion  was  correct.  The  fire  was  letting
loose  the  imprisoned  music  from  the  old  oak's  inmost


2g6  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  OX.

heart !  Perchance  he  had  garnered  up  this  song
in  the  days  when  all  went  well  with  him,  when  birds
twittered  merrily  on  his  branches,  and  the  soft  sun-
light flecked  his  tender  leaves  with  gold  ;  but  he  had
grown  old  since  then,  and  hardened  ;  ring  after  ring
of  knotty  growth  had  sealed  up  the  long-forgotten
melody,  until  the  fierce  tongues  of  the  flames  came
to  consume  his  callousness,  and  the  vehement  heat
of  the  fire  wrung  from  him  at  once  a  song  and  a
sacrifice.  Ah,  thought  I,  when  the  fire  of  affliction
draws  songs  of  praise  from  us,  then,  indeed,  are  we
purified,  and  our  God  is  glorified  !  Perhaps  some
of  us  are  like  this  old  oak  log — cold,  hard,  and  in-
sensible ;  we  should  give  forth  no  melodious  sounds
were  it  not  for  the  fire,  which  kindles  round  us,  and
releases  tender  notes  of  trust  in  Him,  and  cheerful
compliance  with  His  will !  *As  I  mused,  the  fire
burned,'  and  my  soul  found  sweet  comfort  in  the
parable  so  strangely  set  forth  before  me.  Singing
in  the  fire.  Yes  !  God  helping  us,  if  that  is  the  only
way  to  get  harmony  out, of  these  hard,  apathetic
hearts,  let  the  furnace  be  heated  seven  times  hotter
than  before."

This  incident  Mr.  Spurgeon,  in  1881,  made
musical  in  a  song,  using  as  a  foundation  some  verses
sent  Mrs.  Spurgeon  by  a  friend.     Here  it  is  :

At  the  close  of  a  dark  and  cloudy  day,

As  the  deeper  night  grew  on,
On  my  languishing  couch  I  wearily  lay,

My  joy  for  the  moment  gone.


THE  nOOk'-FUKD.  297

Within  my  room  all  was  cosy  and  bright,

Yet  a  shadow  of  night  had  crept
Over  my  soul,  and  had  hid  from  my  sight

The  hand  in  which  mine  was  kept.

Depressed  and  saddened,  I  labored  in  vain

To  gaze  on  my  loving  Lord,
Oh,  when  will  his  presence  return  again,

And  light  on  my  spirit  be  poured  ?

Whence  comes  it  my  Lord  so  bitterly  chides,

And  sends  me  such  grievous  pain  ?
The  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars  He  hides,

And  clouds  return  after  the  rain.

He  heard  :  and  an  answer  was  strangely  given,

A  still  small  voice  from  the  throne ;
No  seraphim  brought  the  message  from  heaven.

Yet  it  came  from  the  Lord  alone.

A  while  in  my  room  reigns  a  silence  deep ;

The  only  sounds  in  mine  ear
Arise  from  the  flames  which  crackle  and  leap.

And  flash  forth  a  flickering  cheer.

When  we  suddenly  heard  a  strange,  sweet  song,

Like  the  robin's  tender  trill,
A  whisper,  a  sonnet,  the  flames  among ;

It  caused  our  hearts  to  thrill.

"  Can  a  bird  be  singing  this  gloomy  night  ?  "

In  startled  surprise,  we  say.
"  Whence  comes  such  an  anthem  of  calm  delight

As  from  harps  that  are  far  away  ?  "

In  silent  wonder  we  listen  again,

Till  my  friend  in  a  whisper  said,
"  'Tis  yon  old  oak  log  sings  that  soft,  weird  strain

From  amidst  its  fiery  bed."

*Twas  so ;  and,  as  once  the  Lord  spoke  out

From  the  bush  which  burned  with  flame.
So  now  to  our  spirits,  beyond  a  doult.

His  voice  from  the  oak  log  came.


29S  CHARLES  IL  SPUR€EON.

From  the  heart  of  the  oak  fire  had  loosed  the  bands

Of  music  imprisoned  of  yore,
When  the  trees  of  the  field  had  clapp'd  their  hands

And  cried  out  the  Lord  before.

When  its  branches  waved  'neath  the  heaven's  blue

Through  the  livelong  summer  day,
Full  many  a  bird  to  their  shadow  flew

With  its  carol  glad  and  gay.

The  song  of  the  thrush  and  the  hum  of  the  bee,

And  the  music  of  evening  bells,
All  sank  in  the  soul  of  the  old  oak-tree;

And  now  the  sweet  tale  it  tells.

The  hardened  growth  of  full  many  a  ring

Fettered  fast  the  imprisoned  lays,
Till  these  flames  of  fire  their  freedom  bring,

And  they  dance  in  the  joyous  blaze.

The  fire  which  consumes  has  lent  it  a  tongue,

And  the  oak  log  sings  as  it  dies ;
It  yieldeth  its  all  while  its  heart  is  wrung —

'Tis  a  song  and  a  sacrifice.

•3«-  -x-  *  *

And  thus  was  a  message  most  sweetly  brought

By  the  old  oak  log  to  me ;
It  raised  me  aloft  from  each  gloomy  tliought,

And  from  sorrow  it  set  me  free.

•  ' V'  If  trial  and  pain  be  as  flames  to  my  heart,

To  fetch  forth  its  latent  praise,
With  joy  I  accept  the  sufferer's  part.
And  would  choose  it  all  my  days.

**  When  our  two  colored  brethren,  Messrs.  John-
son and  Richardson,  were  on  the  eve  of  departure
for  missionary  work  in  Africa,  they  came  with  their
wives  to  our  dear  home  to  bid  us  farewell.  A  very
pleasant   and  memorable  time  we  spent  together,


The  BOOK-FUND.  299

their  pastor  encouraging  them  in  the  work  to  which
they  had  devoted  their  Hves,  and  their  love  and  sym-
pathy overflowing  to  him  and  to  me  (then  very  sick),
in  return.  At  the  request  of  my  dear  husband  they
sang  to  me  some  of  the  strange,  sweet  songs  of
their  captivity,  for  they  had  once  been  slaves ;  and
all  who  heard  these  plaintive  melodies  sung  in  the
Tabernacle  at  their  farewell  meetings  will  agree  with
me  that  sweeter,  yet  sadder  melodies  could  scarcely
:be  imagined.  My  heart  was  especially  attracted  by
a  peculiar  air,  to  which  they  sang  as  a  refrain  these
most  curious  words  :

*  Keep  inching  along,  keep  inching  along
Like  a  poor  inch  worm — •
Jesus  Christ  '11  come  bye-and-bye.'  ■

'*It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  weird  pathos
with  which  they  invested  these  few  sentences,  and
my  interest  was  so  aroused  that  I  asked  if  some
special  history  attached  to  this  strange  song.  Then
they  told  me  how  in  the  sorrowful  days  of  their
bondage  they  would  stealthily  gather  together,  night
after  night,  in  one  of  the  low  miserable  huts  they
called  their  home,  and  sitting  crouched  on  the  floor,
hand  clasped  in  hand,  in  darkness  and  terror,  they
w^oiild  pray  with  one  another,  and  in  muft^ed  tones
would  whisper  this  very  song.  Sing  it  aloud  they
dared  not,"  for  fear  of  their  master,  who  would  have
exacted  full  payment  by  stripes  for  such  an  assertion
of  nature's  rights  ;  but  rocking  to  and  fro  in  time  to
the  wailing  melody,  they  found  a   'fearful  pleasure'


3CX)  CHARLES  //.  SPURGOEN.

in  the  disobedience  which  brought  spiritual  comfort
to  their  oppressed  souls.

"The  glorious  hope  of  future  deliverance  excited
and  enraptured  their  hearts.  *  Sometimes,'  they
said,  '  one  of  our  number  would  forget  the  caution
and  silence  so  essential  to  our  safety  ;  and  a  voice
would  ring  out  in  the  darkness,  jubilant  and  clear,
"Jesus  Christ  '11  come  bye-and-bye."  '  Then  all
would  sit  trembling  after  such  an  outburst,  lest  they
should  be  discovered  by  the  shout  of  anticipated
triumph,  and  angels  might  have  wept  for  the  poor,
down-trodden  souls,  and  have  longed  to  bring  the
sweet  chariot,  '  coming  for  to  carry  them  home.'

"  'Will  you  sing  to  me  in  whispers  as  you  sang
then  ? '  I  asked,  and  they  very  sweetly  complied
with  my  wish,  though,  blessed  be  God,  their  sur-
roundings were  now  so  happy  that  they  could  give
but  a  faint  copy  of  the  terrible  reality.  I  shall  never
forget  that  pitiful  hushing  of  their  voices.  There
was  not  a  dry  eye  in  the  little  company  when  the
song  was  ended  ;  but  we  wiped  our  tears  away,
soon  remembering  that  the  cause  for  sorrovy  no
longer  existed.  The  '  poor  inch  worms '  are  now
free,  noble,  educated  men  and  women  ;  they  can
sing,  and  pray,  and  preach  as  loudly  and  as  long
as  they  please,  and  are  bound  for  the  land  of  their
fathers,  with  the  intention  of  exercising  these  privi-
leges to  the  full,  and  making  known  the  gospel  of  the
grace  of  God  to  their  kindred  according  to  the  flesh.
The  Lord  go  forth  with  them  and  prosper  them.


THE  BOOK-FUND.  3OI

**  The  echoes  of  that  singular  song  have  Hngered
with  me  ever  since,  and  many  a  time  have  they  com-
forted my  heart.  Day  by  day  the  work  of  the  Book-
Fund  has  'kept  inching  along,'  and  though  prevent-
ed by  my  weakness  from  taking  giant  strides,  how
gracious  is  the  Lord  to  allow  His  unworthy  child  to
creep  even  inch  by  inch  along  the  pleasant  road  of
service  for  Him  !  I  should  like  to  send  forth  fifty
parcels  weekly — I  should  like  each  parcel  to  be  a
complete  library  of  theological  lore,  so  that  very
soon  not  a  true  minister  in  the  land  should  faint  and
fail  for  lack  of  knowledge  ;  but  as  my  highest  aims
cannot  be  fulfilled,  I  will  thankfully  and  joyfully  do
what  I  can,  and  with  the  Lord's  blessing  resting  on
the  books  sent  out  in  His  name,  my  ten  to  twenty
packages  a  week  will  not  fail  to  accomplish  his  good
purpose.  Thus  cheerfully,  gladly,  I  '  keep  inching
along,'  and  for  me  as  surely  as  for  the  greatest  saint
on  earth — 'Jesus  Christ  '11  come  bye-and-bye.'

April,  1879. — ^^  the  time  of  the  Annual  Confer-
ence of  the  Pastors'  College  the  Book-Fund  usually
prepares  a  little  present  for  the  three  hundred  pas-
tors who  then  assemble.  This  is  meant  to  be  both
a  memorial  of  a  happy  gathering,  and  a  pledge  of
continued  interest  in  their  welfare.  This  year,  after
due  consideration,  I  have  decided  to  give  Miss
Havergal's  '  Royal '  books  (two  to  each  pastor)  as  a
choice  and  dainty  morsel  for  their  spiritual  refresh-
ment and  quickening.  No  commendation  is  needed
to  insure  a  hearty  welcome  to  a  work  by  this  devoted


3o:


CHARLES  IL  SPURGE  ON.


lady.  Miss  Havergal's  pen  is  guided  by  a  hand
fast  clasped  in  that  of  her  Master,  and  therefore
her  simple  words  thrill  to  the  inmost  depths  of  the
soul,  and  touch  many  a  hidden  spring  of  tender,
deep,  religious  feeling.  I  anticipate  not  only  the
pleasure  with  which  our  'old  students '  will  receive
these  delightful  little  books  at  my  hands,  but  the
abundant  blessing  they  may  bring  to  their  hearts
and  homes.  Through  the  kindness  of  Messrs.  Nis-
bet,  the  publishers,  I  have  been  able  to  purchase  a
thousand  copies,  and  having  made  it  a  matter  of
special  prayer  that  not  one  of  these  precious  seeds
should  be  unfruitful,  I  shall  hopefully  and  patiently
await  the  result.

*'To  ministers  who  are  not  quite  so  necessitous  as
those  for  whom  the  Book-Fund  was  specially
founded,  yet  who  can  ill  spare  the  published  price
of  '  The  Treasury  of  David,'  or  the  'Sermons,'  I
offer  these  books  at  a  somewhat  reduced  rate,  and  I
have  much  satisfaction  in  knowing  that  the  privilege
is  warmly  appreciated.  Some  letters  which  I  have  are
fair  samples  of  the  spirit  in  which  the  favor  is  sought
and  the  warm  gratitude  evoked  by  its  accordance.

"October,  1879. — Committed  to  the  faithful  keep-
ing of  his  father's  God,  our  precious  son  sails  to-day
for  his  second  visit  to  Australia.  The  cold  and  damp
of  our  Enorlish  winter  made  us  fear  for  his  some-
what  delicate  constitution,  and  if  it  be  the  Lord's
will,  the  more  genial  climate  of  the  colonies  may.
develop    strength    and    power    to    prosecute  that


THIS  rxQOK-FUND..     .  305

which,  we  trust,  will  be  his  life-work — -to  preach  to
poor  sinners  the  *  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.'
Give  the  winds  and  the  waves  charg^e  concerninor
him,  O  Lord  !  Let  them  waft  him  safely  to  his  de-
sired haven,  and  then  do  Thou  guide  him  all  his
journey  through,  till  both  he  and  all  who  hold  him
dear  shall  meet  to  part  no  more  !

*'I  am  glad  to  say  that  the  Book-Fund  is  not  alto-
gether unrepresented  In  the  cargo  which  the  good
ship  carries,  though  if  I  had  possessed  the  means  it
should  have  been  much  heavier  ;  for  in  Australia,  as
in  other  distant  lands,  books  are  vastly  more  expen-
sive than  in  England,  and  more  difficult  to  procure.
The  book-hunger  of  our  most  needy  ministers  at
home  may  be  as  keen  and  absorbing  as  the  appetite
of  a  colonial  pastor  ;  but  the  former  has  many  more
chances  of  ultimately  appeasing  it,  while  hope,
gives  him  strength  to  endure  and  to  wait.  In  the
bush,  or  in  outlying  districts,  where  there  may  be
little  intellectual  life,  a  man  must  depend,  very
largely  on  his  bookshelves  for  friendship  and  com-
munion, and  when  these  fail  him,  or  prove  uncon-
genial, he  is  very  sincerely  to  be  pitied,  and  ought_
to  be  helped.  I  should  often  send  books  to  the
colonies  if  the  Fund  could  bear  the  heavy  expense
of  freiehtaee  ;  but  awaitinof  the  kind  services  of
friends  to  take  charge  of  the  parcels  is  so  slow  a
method  of  transit,  that  practically  my  grants  are-
few  and  far  between.  To  the  abundant  affection
which  the  generous  people  on  the  other  side  of  the .


304


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.


world  showed  our  dear  son  on  his  first  visit  they
added  this  kindness,  that  they  have  once  and  again
helped,  not  only  his  father's  many  'works  of  faith
and  labors  of  love,'  but  his  mother's  Book-Fund;
and  now  that  he  goes  to  seek  once  more  health  in
their  beautiful  country,  she  would  like  him  to  carry  a
great  blessing  back  to  them.  Father  and  mother
both  ferv^ently  pray  that  his  life  there  may  be  a  de-
voted and  consecrated  one,  and  that  '  power  from
on  high'  may  be  given  him  to  win  many  jewels  for
the  Master's  crown."

In  October,  1879,  she  wrote:  "As  part  of  the
proceeds  of  his  last  lecture  in  London,  I  have  the
pleasure  of  receiving  to-day  £2^  as  the  generous
and  graceful  gift  of  Mr.  John  B.  Gough  to  the  Book-
Fund.  Such  a  gift  from  such  a  man  is  precious  and
noteworthy,  but  not  unusual,  as  I  believe  it  is  the
constant  habit  of  Mr.  Gough  to  bestow  blessings  as
well  as  to  recommend  them.  Long  as  his  name  has
been  honored  in  our  household,  and  his  special  work
admired  and  appreciated,  it  was  not  till  his  recent
visit  to  England  that  we  had  the  happiness  of  his
personal  acquaintance.  Now  he  has  been  twice  to
see  us,  and  a  friendship  has  been  contracted  between
us  which,  though  interrupted  by  absence  from  each
other  on  earth,  will  find  its  true  fruition  and  best
enjoyment  in  heaven.  The  hours  we  spent  in  his
company  have  left  frequent  memories  not  only  of
pleasant  mirth  at  the  droll  tales  so  inimitably  told,
but  also  of  sacred  joy  in  sweet  and  goodly  words


THE  BOOK-FUND.


305


which  '  ministered  grace  unto  the  hearers.*  Cannot
my  friends  imagine  that  it  was  a  rare  treat  to  Hsten
to  the  converse  of  John  Ploughman  and  John
Gough  ?

"  No  '  pen  of  a  ready  writer '  was  there  to  record
the  good  things  they  said,  or  to  immortalize  the
brilliant  '  table  talk  '  which  graced  each  repast ;  but
the  sweet  communion  which  knit  our  hearts  tocrether

o

will  never  be  forgotten  by  us,  and  so  deep  a  flood
of  enjoyment  came  In  upon  my  usually  quiet  life
that  day,  that  it  will  forever  ripple  pleasantly  upon
the  shores  of  memory.  To  our  very  dear  friends,
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gough  in  their  far-away  home  In  the
West,  I  send  loving  greeting;  and  for  this  ^25,
which  means  so  much  joy  and  comfort  for  the  Lord's
poor  servants,  I  give  the  warmest  thanks  of  a  grate-
ful heart."

In  March,  1883,  she  gives  this  touching  state-
ment :

"Out  of  the  terrible  tempest  of  sorrow  which

lately  swept  over  the  homes  of  some  of  our  friends,

and  broueht  death  and  desolation  to  their  house-

holds,    there  came  drifting  to   our  shores  a  little

storm-tossed  barque,  driven  by  the  contrary  winds

of    this    great   adversity,    to    seek   shelter    in    our

'haven    under    the   hill.'     Such    a    charming   little

child !     A  fair  pearl   of  humanity  washed  from  its

bed  by  the  troubled  tides  of  life's  ocean — a  tender

white  dovelet  tossed  from  its  nest  by  a  rude  blast  of

affliction, — a    '  little   soul    that    stands    expectant,
20


306  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

listening  at  the  gate  of  life/ — a  sweet  wee  mither-
less  bairn,  whose  needs  claim  the  shelter  of  warm
hearts  and  the  loving  service  of  womanly  hands.
We  give  a  fond  welcome  to  the  sweet  stranger,
taking  him  to  our  hearts  to  love,  and  to  be  loved,
and  have  found  a  singular  joy  in  renewing  in  some
measure  the  experience  of  days  long  past,  but  not
forgotten.

''  It  is  twenty-seven  years  since  *  our  own  '  babies'
dimpled  hands  stroked  our  cheek,  or  their  pretty
voices  made  unaccustomed  music  in  the  house  ;  but
the  cry  of  this  little  one  awakens  the  long-sleeping
echoes,  and  his  tiny  fingers  stray  among  our  heart-
strings, touching  again  and  again  one  of  the  old
chords  of  purest  and  deepest  melody.  Watch-
ing his  winsome  ways,  and  noting  the  daily  un-
foldings  of  his  exceedingly  sweet  and  gentle
disposition,  I  ask  myself,  '  What  shall  this  darling
teach  us,  now  that  the  Lord  Christ  hath  set  him  in
our  midst?'  I  do  not  think  we  have  been  disputing
who  amongst  us  should  be  greatest  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven,  but  the  Master's  words  imply  that  hu-
mility is  not  the  only  grace  illustrated  in  the  daily
example  of  His  little  ones.  '  Verily,  I  say  unto
you,  whosoever  shall  not  receive  the  kingdom  of
God  as  a  little  child,  shall  in  no  wise  enter  therein.'
So  I  set  myself  to  know  what  special  message  to
my  soul  lay  hidden  in  that  sunshiny  face,  or  per-
chance, what  well-merited  rebuke  to  my  unchildlike
spirit  might  lurk  amid  the  charms  of  his  lovely  and


THE  BOOK-FUND.  ^Q'J

confiding  nature.  And  I  find  that  baby  has  been  a
'living  epistle  '  of  faith  before  my  eyes,  an  uncon-
scious exponent  of  the  blessedness  of  simple
dependence  upon  God,  so  that  I  think  I  understand
more  of  its  sweetness  and  power  than  I  ever  did
before.  For  there  is  perfect  faith  and  trust  in
baby's  heart  ;  absolute  reliance  upon  those  who
love  him  ;  unquestioning  confidence  in  their  ability
and  tenderness.  The  tottering  steps  grow  steady,
and  are  ventured  without  fear,  when  his  small  hand
is  closely  clasped  in  mine  ;  he  leans  all  his  weight
of  babyhood  on  my  arms,  without  the  shadow  of  a
suspicion  that  they  could  fail  him  :  every  promise
that  I  give  is  echoed  in  sweet  babblings  from  '  lips
that  know  no  word  of  doubting';  and,  oh,  with  what
glee  and  rapture  does  he  throw  aside  his  toys  and
stretch  out  his  pretty  hands  when  I  call  him  to  my
side  !  Thus  am  I  taught  not  to  fear  or  falter  while
my  hand  is  held  by  a  'stronger  than  I';  thus
do  I  see  the  happiness  of  leaning  hard  on  love
which  is  omnipotent,  and  the  wisdom  of  unhesitating
faith  In  gracious  words  of  peace  and  pardon  ;  thus
too,  I  think  I  can  perceive,  faintly  shadowed  forth,
the  joy  with  which  I  hope  to  obey  the  loving  call  to
be  '  forever  with  the  Lord.'  The  very  caresses  I
give  to  baby  are  often  strangely  mingled  with
spiritual  longings,  and  many  a  loving  play  with  him
ends  in  a  prayer  that  I  may  '  become  like  this  little
child.'  Is  it  any  marvel,  that  with  this  sweet  un-
witting teacher  on  my  knee,  I  see  earthly  things


308  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

Still  made  after  heavenly  patterns,  and  rejoice  that
'  out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings  God  hath
perfected  praise  '  ?

''  Dear,  bright-eyed,  glad  and  trustful  baby  !  Your
little  mission  here  has  been  a  sacred  one  ;  your  pres-
ence has  brought  a  blessing  with  it !  Your  confi-
dence in  us  has  quickened  our  faith  in  God,  and  our
love  to  you  has  given  us  fresh  glimpses  of  our
Father's  infinite  tenderness  !

''Ever  through  your  future  life,  dear  child,  may
these  precious  graces  of  faith  and  love  adorn  your
soul ;  ever  may  it  be  true  of  you,  as  it  is  at  this  mo-
ment, that —

"  '  Of  such  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.*  "


\    I


CHAPTER  XI.

LOVELY    WESTWOOD.

What  a  satisfaction  It  is  to  know  that  during  the
last  twelve  years  of  his  life,  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  his
wife  were  able  to  enjoy  such  a  delightful  residence
as  that  which  they  secured  at  Westwood.

In  August  of  1880  they  moved  to  Beulah  Hill,  a
suburb  of  London,  and  into  a  residence  which  Mr.
Spurgeon  had  been  enabled  to  purchase  through
the  rise  in  value  of  his  old  home  at  Nightingale
Lane,  and  which  he  called  ''Westwood."  This
beautiful  country  home,  with  its  thirty  acres  of  lawn,
gardens,  fields  and  woodland,  came  to  Mr.  Spurgeon
as  a  result  of  some  sensible  advice  given  to  him  by
one  of  his  deacons  nearly  twenty-five  years  before.
The  house  In  Nightingale  Lane  had  been  for  sale
for  some  time  when  Mr.  Spurgeon  moved  into  it.
The  owner  offered  to  sell  it  to  him  on  very  easy
terms,  but  he  discarded  the  Idea  entirely  of  owning
any  property  himself  until  the  deacons  very  de-
cidedly assured  him  that  it  would  be  a  sin  not  to
provide   for  his  own,    saying,    "He   that  provideth

not  for  his  own,  and  especially  for  them  of  his  own

30Q


3IO  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON:

household,  has  denied   the  faith,  and  Is  worse  than
an  infidel."     So  he  purchased  the  residence.

Having-  a  great  horror  of  debt,  and  from  the  first
receiving  a  reasonable  income,  he  was  able  very
soon  to  pay  for  the  home,  and  enjoy  it  free  of  en-
cumbrance. But  the  house  was  situated  in  that
portion  of  London  which  was  growing  very  fast,
especially  in  business  enterprises,  and  as  they
crowded  around  his  little  homestead  they  shut  out
the  light,  but  increased  the  value  of  his  possessions.

At  last,  In  1880,  a  growing  fear  that  the  locality
was  unhealthy,  both  for  Mrs.  Spurgeon  and  himself,
led  him  to  consider  the  possibility  of  moving  to
some  other  locality.  An  unexpected  offer  of  a  high
price  for  the  old  homestead,  combined  with  espe-
cially favorable  opportunities  to  purchase  the  lands
and  house  at  Westwood,  led  him  to  believe  that
the  hand  of  Providence  was  directing  him  for  his
wife's  sake  to  a  healthier  and  more  beautiful
locality.

Westwood  has  often  been  described  by  those  who
have  visited  it ;  and  The  Philadelphia  Press,  as  late
as  1892,  gave  us  a  bit  of  description  worth  inserting
here  :

"  He  (Mr.  Spurgeon)  was  a  man  of  taste,  even
of  artistic  and  luxurious  taste  in  some  particulars.
Many  a  millionaire  might  well  have  envied  him  his
home.  This  was  at  Westwood,  on  what  is  known
as  Beulah  Hill,  in  Sydenham,  which  is  one  of
London's  fairest  suburbs.     Here  he  had  a  large  and


LOVELY  WES  TWO  OD.  3 1 1

handsome  mansion,  situated  In  a  spacious  park ;
so  that,  ahhough  within  a  few  minutes'  ride  of  the
teeming  streets  of  London,  it  was  as  rural  and  as
secluded  as  though  in  the  heart  of  a  wilderness.
Passing  the  lodge  gates,  the  visitor  found  himself
amid  an  expanse  of  well-kept  lawns,  diversified  with
shrubbery  and  groves.

**  A  small  lake  was  near  the  house,  and  elsewhere
was  a  fountain  containing  many  goldfish,  of  which
pets  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  exceedingly  fond.  Bees
were  another  of  his  fads,  and  a  dozen  or  more  hives
were  always  humming  and  buzzing  in  the  garden.
There  was  a  profusion  of  flowers  also,  mostly  pinks
and  other  familiar  varieties.  These  were  not  grown
for  the  bees,  nor  yet  because  Mr.  Spurgeon  him-
self was  particularly  fond  of  them,  but  to  supply
the  floral  mission  of  his  church,  for  distribution
among  the  sick  and  poor  of  the  city.

*' There  were  arbors  and  shaded  seats  in  plenty
about  the  grounds,  and  there  were  also  plenty  of
open  sunny  spots.  Of  these  latter  Mr.  Spurgeon
was  most  fond.  He  had  a  waterproof  mattress,
which  he  would  place  on  the  sunniest  spot  he  could
find,  and  on  which  he  would  lie  for  hours,  simply
basking  in  the  rays  of  the  .  sun.  This  was  the
greatest  physical  luxury  in  the  world  to  him,  and
his  fondness  for  Mentone  and  the  Riviera  was  '  be-
cause there  was  so  much  sunshine  there.'

"  Even  indoors  he  souorht  to  have  as  much  sun-
light   as  possible.     His   mansion  was   planned  and


312  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

built  with  that  end  In  view.  No  trees  were  allowed
to  shade  it,  and  the  windows  were  as  large  as  pos~
sible.  Perhaps  the  most  interesting  room  was  the
library,  the  walls  of  which  were  lined  with  crowded
bookshelves.  Here  were  forty  volumes  of  Mr.
Spurgeon's  own  printed  sermons,  in  English,  and
dozens  of  other  volumes  of  his  works  translated
into  other  tongues.

''Here  were  several  volumes  of  collected  tracts
and  pamphlets,  written  by  others  about  him,  and
arranged  chronologically.  The  earliest  were  nearly
all  abusive,  many  of  them  actually  scandalous  in
tone.  The  latter  were  as  generally  eulogistic,  and
the  gradual  transition  from  the  one  extreme  to  the
other  presented  a  most  interesting  study.  Some
large  scrapbooks  contained  copies  of  all  the  carica-
tures of  the  preacher  published  since  he  was  in  the
ministry.  There  were  thousands  of  them,  of  all
possible  shades  of  artistic  merit,  and  of  all  imagi-
nable spirits,  from  good-natured  humor  to  sheer
malevolence.

Other  volumes  contained  thousands  of  clippings
from  newspapers  about  Mr.  Spurgeon,  presenting
the  same  variety  of  tone.  In  all  these  Mr.  Spurgeon
took  a  philosophic  interest.  Praise  did  not  tickle
him,  nor  abuse  annoy  hin.  And  on  the  whole  his
observations  led  him  to  regard  the  world  with  in-
creasing kindliness  of  spirit.

However,  the  best  way  to  look  In  upon  domestic
scenes  at  Beulah  Hill  is  to  take  the  unique  description


L  O  VEL  Y  IVES  TWO  OD.  3 1 3

which  Mrs.  Spurgeon  has  herself  given  of  their
home  experiences,  under  greatly  varying  circum-
stances. To  read  the  extracts  from  her  letters
concerning  their  home  life,  and  relating  to  her  work  at
Westwood,  is  like  passing  by  the  windows  of  a  home,
with  the  invitation  from  the  occupants  to  look  in  at
each  opening  as  we  pass,  and  catch  what  glimpses
we  may  of  the  arrangement  and  beauty  within.

Mrs.  Spurgeon  continued  her  work  with  the  Book-
Fund  with  greater  earnestness  at  Westwood,  and
there  Mr.  Spurgeon  arranged  his  library,  received
his  friends,  and  attended  to  his  manifold  corres-
pondence. It  was  a  charming  ten  years  of  domestic
life.  He  was  frequently  called  from  it  on  missions
in  preaching  the  gospel,  and  sometimes  was  com-
pelled to  endure  a  prolonged  absence  at  Mentone,  in
southern  France,  to  which  place  the  physician  im-
peratively sent  him.

Mrs.  Spurgeon  usually  remained  at  Westwood
during  his  absence  and  cared  for  the  correspondence
and  managed  the  household,  experiencing  that  loneli-
ness, those  fears,  those  anxieties,  which  come  to
every  affectionate  wife  during  the  prolonged  absence
of  her  husband,  especially  if  he  be  absent  because
of  illness.

The  glimpses  into  that  home  which  we  have
gathered  from  her  writings,  not  only  show  how  they
lived  in  comfort,  peace  and  heavenly  harmony,  but
also  give  us  many  hints  as  to  their  thoughts,  feelings,
perplexities  and  domestic  arrangements.


3T4  CHAkLES  ll.  SPURCEON.

December  2,  1880,  she  wrote  :  ''Those  dear  friends
who  have  been  interested  in  my  work  from  the  com-
mencement will  not  think  the  record  of  the  year  is
complete  without  a  word  about  the  lemon  tree.  From
the  time  when  in  a  little  pot,  in  my  sick-chamber,  two
tiny  leaves,  no  bigger  than  a  pin's  head,  emerged
from  the  black  earth  and  were  tenderly  covered  by
a  medicine  glass,  to  the  present  day  when  it  stands
in  fair  proportions,  and  boasts  a  height  of  seven  feet
or  more,  it  has  been  closely  identified  with  the
Book-Fund,  and  in  some  mysterious  manner  believed
to  be  an  emblem  of*  my  work.  Friends  used  to
cherish  the  pretty  fancy,  and  send  their  gifts  as  '  a
few  drops  of  water  for  the  lemon  plant,'  or  'another
leaf  for  your  tree  '  ;  but  though  that  pleasant  fashion
liQG  fallen  into  disuse,  there  are  many  who  constantly
remember  my  favorite,  and  will  be  delighted  to  hear
that  its  removal  to  '  Westwood '  has  greatly  con-
tributed to  its  health  and  beauty.  I  do  not,  however,
intend  now  to  enlarge  upon  its  charms,  but  rather  to
use  an  unpleasant  peculiarity  it  has,  in  order  to
'point  a  moral  and  adorn  a  tale'  I  have  to  tell.

"Attentively  considering  it  the  other  day,  I  saw
with  some  surprise  that  it  bore  a  few  very  sharp
thorns.  'Ah!'  I  said,  'dear  emblem  tree,  are  you
so  true  to  your  mystical  character  as  all  that  ?  '  For,
dear  friends,  Book-Fund  woHc  is  not  all  composed
of  pleasant  fruit  and  flowers  ;  there  are  some  thorns
concealed  here  and  there  which  wound  the  hand
which   inadvertently  touches    them.     Sometimes,   I


LOVELY  WESTWOOD.  31$

receive  an  answer  to  the  necessary  inquiries  I  have
to  make,  which  hurts  me  sorely,  and  makes  me
wince.  '  Permit  me  to  say  I  have  no  wish  to  be
considered  a  pauper,'  wrote  an  angry  man  a  day  or
two  since,  because  I  asked  him  kindly  whether  he
came  within  the  limits  of  my  work,  and  possessed  an
income  under  ;^i  50  per  annum.

**  Ever  since  the  '  Master'  gave  me  this  charge  to
keep.  He  knows  I  have  tried  to  minister  in  gentle,
kindly  fashion  to  His  servants  ;  but  occasionally  the
spirit  of  my  service  is  overlooked  by  them,  and  my
gifts  are  either  claimed  as  a  right  or  disdained  as  a
charity.  *  Few  and  far  between  '  are  these  ugly
thorns  on  my  flourishing,  beautiful  tree  ;  tender  and
loving  acknowledgments  of  my  work  are  the  rule,
and  when  an  exception  comes  I  can  well  afford  to
forgive  and  forget  it.  Were  it  not  that  a  chronicler
is  required  to  be  faithful,  and  give  fairly  both  sides
of  the  history  he  is  writing,  I  should  have  left  unre-
corded this  painful  part  of  a  most  pleasant  and
blessed  service.  The  flowers  of  Paradise  will  doubt-
less be  thornless,  but  here  on  earth  one  cannot  gather
many  roses  without  pricking  one's  fingers,  nor  have
a  splendid  lemon  tree  without  seeing  and  bewailing
its  sharp  spikes,  nor  possess  any  unmingled  good
but  God's  love.

"  But,  apropos  of  skylarks'  songs,  I  must  tell  you,
dear  reader,  what  happened  the  other  day,  and  how
beautifully  a  sweet  singer's  confidence  was  rewarded,
when  fearlessly  leaving  her  earthly  treasures  in  our


3l6  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

Father's  keeping  (Matt,  vi.,  26),  she  mounted
upward  to  pay  her  full  debt  of  daily  orisons  at
'  Heaven's  Gate.'  You  may  find,  perhaps,  some
'  linked  sweetness  '  between  the  little  story  and  our
present  subject,  or  even,  failing  that  desired  end,  may
not  be  displeased  with  me  for  introducing  the  homely
incident  to  your  notice.

"We  were  making  a  tour  of  the  garden  and
pastures,  admiring  the  beauty  of  the  young  year's
fresh  life — notingr  with  tender  interest  all  the  charm-
ing  details  of  newly-awakened  responsibility  in  every
living  thing — marking  the  sweet,  impatient  growth
of  leaves  still  rumpled  and  creased  from  their  recent
unfoldings,  and  rejoicing  in  the  whispered  promise
of  golden  days  to  come  which  trembled  on  every
scented  breath  of  the  perfumed  air.

''  Down  in  the  Dale  field  we  came  across  a  sky-
lark's nest,  built  in  the  long  grass,  a  lovely  little  soft-
lined  cup  of  cosiness,  with  three  pretty  brown  eggs
in  it.  The  sweet  songstress  had  flown  at  the  ap-
proach of  human  footsteps,  and  thus  revealed  the
secret  place  of  her  wee  home  to  inquisitive  but
kindly  eyes.  We  looked  with  profound  admiration
on  her  happy  work,  and  then  quietly  retraced  our
steps,  having  loving  sympathy  for  the  poor  little
fluttering  heart  which  might  perchance  fear  the  de-
spoiling of  its  treasures.  A  day  or  two  afterwards
the  visit  was  repeated  ;  but  imagine  our  consternation
when,  on  opening  the  gate  of  the  field,  we  saw  that
the   cows   had   been   let  into    that   pasture  !     How


LOVELY  WESTWOOD.  31/

would  the  great,  clumsy,  sweet-breath' d  creatures
treat  the  little  home  In  the  grass  ?  Would  it  not  be
crushed  and  trampled  by  their  unheeding  feet  ?  We

.  had  placed  an  upright  stick  near  the  nest  to  show  its
position,  and  very  doubtfully  we  made  our  way  across
the  field,  fearing  to  find  ruin  and  desolation  where
we  had  left  peace  and  prosperity.

''When  we  reached  the  spot,  our  surprise  and
delight  were  great  to  find  the  home  intact,  and  the
wee  birds  safely  hatched  ;  for  though  the  cows  had
munched  the  grass  close  down  to  the  ground  all
round  the  nest,  not  a  hoof  had  touched  the  little
inmates.     So,  there  they  were,  three  cunning  mites,

*  with  stubby  bodies,  and  big  downy  heads,  cowering
close  together  in  instinctive  fear  of  the  human  pres-
ence which  overshadowed  them.  The  cows  grazed
quietly  by,  and  overhead  the  pretty  mother  trilled
forth  her  delicious  carol  In  the  morning  sunshine,
pouring  out  her  heart's  gratitude  and  gladness  In
libations  of  song !  And  there,  till  the  little  birds
were  feathered  and  flown,  the  cows  were  every  day
pastured,  yet  never  a  hurt  came  to  the  wee  nest  in
the  grass  !  Who  watched  over  the  mother  In  her
peril  as  she  sat  upon  the  eggs  ?  Who  guarded  the
nestlings  in  their  hourly  danger  when  the  slight
protection  of  her  tender  body  was  removed  ?  Who
shielded  the  tiny  birds  from  the  tread  of  the  great
beasts'  feet?  Did  Daphne  know  that  the  nursery
on  the  ground-floor  must  be  cared  for  and  respected  ?
Or  did  Strawberry's    mother-instinct   tell  her  that


3l8  CHiRLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

little  living  hearts  beat  as  truly  in  that  wool-lined  cup
as  in  the  sweet  hay-crib  where  her  own  darling  was
lying  ?  I  cannot  tell — the  matter  is  too  deep  for
me  ;  but  the  lark  knew  all  about  it,  and  it  may  be
that,  could  our  ears  have  been  opened  to  understand
the  language  of  her  hymn  of  praise,  as  she  rose
higher  and  higher  in  the  calm  blue  sky,  we  might
have  caught,  here  and  there  amidst  the  joyous  notes,
some  such  words  as  these :

Not  one,

Not  one  of  them,

Is  forgotten
In  the  sight  of  God.
Not  one.

Not  one  of  them.

Shall  fall  to  the  ground
Without  your  Father.
Fear  ye  not,  therefore,
Are  not  ye

Of  much  more  value
Than  they?

Did  she  not  do  well  thus  to  sing  and  trust?  Oh,
sighing  and  doubting  reader,  cast  away  your  fears,
and  follow  her  fair  example ;  you  shall  not  only  joy-
fully leave  your  earthly  cares  with  your  heavenly
Father,  but  you  shall  get  nearer  to  God's  throne
than  you  have  ever  been  before  !  "

In  June,  1884,  she  said  :

''From  the  breezy  heights  of  Beulah  Hill  we
command  a  lovely  and  uninterrupted  view,  not  of  the
fair  earth  merely,  but  of  the  fairer  firmament  above
it ;  our  windows  are  observatories  whence  many  a
longing,  loving  glance  is  cast  heavenwards,  and  one


L  O  V 'EL  Y  WESTWO  OD.  319

of  the  chief  pleasures  pf  restful  or  contemplative
hours  is  found  in  silently  watching  the  ever-changing
aspect  of  the  sky,  and  noting  the  manifold  glories
of  that  wonderful  cloud-land  which  divides  our
earthly  home  from  the  promised  inheritance  on  high.
I  never  tire  of  gazing  on  the  beautiful  mysteries  of
the  clouds.  I  love  to  watch  the  grand  and  solemn
rolling  of  black  and  rugged  masses,  when  storms
are  abroad,  and  the  wind  is  marshalling  them  to  a
dread  convention  of  brooding  tempests  ;  and  equally
well  I  love  to  see  them  when,  in  summer  days,  the
cloudlets  float  like  flakes  of  driven  snow  across  the
deep  blue  ether,  and  lose  themselves  at  the  feet  of
mountains  that  rival  the  Alpine  peaks  in  beauty  and
sublimity.  Sometimes  the  watcher  will  see  a  cloud
of  such  celestial  beauty  that  to  his  enamored  fancy
it  looks

*  As  though  an  angel,  in  his  upward  flight,
Had  left  his  mantle  floating  in  mid-air.'

Or  anon,  with  pensive  pleasure,  he  may  mark

*  Clouds  on  the  western  side
Grow  grey  and  greyer,  hiding  the  warm  sun.'

But  under  all  aspects  they  are  enchanting  and  sug-
gestive ;  their  very  movements  are  restful  to  my
spirit ;  they  always  speak  to  me  of  the  Lord's  great
power  and  love,  and  many  a  time  have  burdens  of
care  been  lifted  from  my  heart,  and  carried  away,  by
these  celestial  chariots,  '  as  far  as  the  east  is  from
the  west.'


320  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

''This  Is  rather  a  lengthy  preface  to  the  relation
of  an  Incident  which  was  remarkable  for  its  brevity ;
but  I  have  been  betrayed  Into  such  rambling  by  the
fascination  of  the  subject,  and  the  fact  that  it  was
w^hilst  engaged  In  my  favorite  recreation  that  the
following  pleasant  portent  presented  itself  to  my
admiring  eyes.

*'  We  were  standing  at  the  window,  my  dear  hus-
band and  I,  noting  the  splendid  effects  of  the  sunset
upon  a  bank  of  fleecy  clouds  which  skirted  the
horizon,  when  all  at  once  we  noticed  an  unusual  ob-
ject In  the  sky,  and  perceived  that  a  winged  creature
of  uncommon  size  was  sailing  slowly  and  wearily
towards  us  from  the  southwest.  As  it  drew  nearer,
we  could  see  that  It  was  a  large  sea-bird  of  some
kind,  and  with  the  greatest  possible  interest  we
watched  the  stranger's  flight,  till,  In  passing  over  our
house,  he  was  hidden  from  view.  The  sight  stirred
my  heart  strangely.  '  That  must  be  our  darling's
harbinger,'  I  said,  '  bringing  us  a  message  from  our
home-coming  boy.'  'Your  "  Sea-gull  "  will  be  with
you  soon,'  Its  brief  presence  seemed  to  say  ;  '  the
waves  are  bearing  him  swiftly  home,  and  the  God
who  guided  me  here  will  bring  him  safely  to  your
embrace.'  Surely  It  was  a  happy  omen  ;  It  com-
forted me  to  think  that  the  Hand  that

'  Wings  an  angel,  guides  a  sparrow,'

had  directed  this  sea-bird's  course,  and  bidden  the
beat  of  his  heavy  pinions  speak  a  language  of  love


LOVELY  WESTIVOOD  32 1

to  my  longing  heart.  But,  please  God,  my  '*  Sea-
gull," when  he  comes,  will  not  pass  away  as  quickly
as  did  this  herald  from  the  ocean.  He  will  fold  his
white  wings  for  a  little  while,  and  nestle  by  his
mother's  side,  and  gladden  her  life  with  his  sweet
presence,  and  bless  and  be  blessed  in  his  own  dear
home.

*'  Blow  softly,  O  propitious  gales, — and  ye  rolling
billows,  bear  securely  on  your  mighty  shoulders
the  good  ship  which  carries  this  beloved  son  across
the  world  of  waters.  Let  there  be  no  '  sorrow  on
the  sea '  to  this  dear  voyager,  O  Lord  ;  but  do
Thou  give  the  winds  and  waves  a  charge  concerning
him,  to  bring  him  safely  to  his  desired  haven  ;  and
may  every  ocean  breeze  waft  the  sweet  message  to
Westwood,  *  I  am  coming — I  am  coming  home  !'

"  About  10  p.  m.,  my  darling  son  was  in  my  arms,
and  the  sweet  and  long-anticipated  joy  of  seeing
his  dear  face,  and  hearing  his  loving  words,  and  re-
joicing in  his  welcome  presence,  was  granted  to  his
waiting  and  expectant  parents  ;  and  I  really  think
that  the  pain  of  five  years'  absence  was  almost
annihilated  by  the  pleasure  of  the  first  fond  "kiss!
'  Mother's  Sea-gull '  has  returned  again,  the  Lord
has  brought  home  His  banished,  and  while  our
mouths  are  filled  with  laughter,  and  our  tongues
with  singing,  every  word  we  speak  seems  tender
with  gratitude,  every  blissful  moment  of  reunion
bears  up  to  God  a  tribute  of  thanksgiving  for  so

great  and  choice  a  mercy.
21


322  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

"My  'Diary'  may  not  record  all  the  details  of
this  rapturous  meeting,  for  a  Book-Fund  report
should  not  be  altogether  an  autobiography  ;  but  it
cannot  be  quite  silent  on  the  subject  which  has
brought  me  such  exceeding  gladness,  nor  can  it  re-
fuse to  score  some  notes  of  praise,  while  the  joybells
are  ringing  so  merrily  in  my  heart.  Sixteen  thousand
miles  to  come  home  to  see  father  and  mother !
Weary  work  these  long  journeys  are,  and  '  Sea-
gull's' wings  .grow  very  tired  ;  but  goodness  and
mercy  have  followed  him  all  the  way,  and  the  love,
and  light,  and  welcome  of  home  more  than  make  up
for  it  all.

''  There  does  not  seem  to  be  space  in  this  month's
pages  for  anything  but  the  joy  of  this  merciful
home-coming.  So  much  am  I  in  love  with  '  Son
Tom,'  that,  like  David  Copperfield,  to  whose  en-
raptured senses  *  the  sun  shone  Dora,  and  the  birds
sang  Dora,  the  south  wind  blew  Dora,  and  the  wild
flowers  in  the  hedges  were  all  Dora's  to  a  bud,  '  the
charm  of  this  long-absent  son's  presence  sheds  a
new  and  special  brightness  over  life  and  its  many
blessings.

'*  *  My  Sea-bird '  has  flown.  My  son's  bright  visit
is  ended.  Laden  with  loving  gifts,  satisfied  with
favor,  crowned  with  success  in  his  enterprise,  and
followed  by  the  fervent  prayers  of  all  who  know  and
love  him,  he  has  gone  to  the  land  of  his  adoption,
and  if  the  Lord  will  spare  his  life,  we  look  forward
to  a  grand  future  of  usefulness  for  him  in  Auckland.


L  O  VEL  V  WES  TWO  OD.  323

■   --tr

I  am  *  sorrowful,  yet  alway  rejoicing/  He  Is  so
precious  that  to  lose  him  must  needs  be  a  bitterness,
yet  because  he  Is  so  precious,  the  sorrow  is  almost
turned  into  joy.  '  Therefore  also  I  have  lent  him  to
the  Lord  ;  as  long  as  he  liveth  he  shall  be  lent  to
the  Lord.'

*'  Happy  mother  !  whose  two  beloved  sons  count
it  their  highest  honor  to  'spend  and  be  spent '  in
the  service  of  their  father's  God  ! "

In  opening  her  annual  report  of  the  Book-Fund
for  1885,  she  said  :

'' My  dear  reader  : — Will  you  pay  me  an  early
visit  on  this  first  morning  of  the  New  Year,  and
taking  the  most  comfortable  chair  to  be  found  In  my
cosy  sitting-room,  sit  by  the  side  of  the  blazing  wood
fire,  while  I  proceed  with  the  business  of  the  day —
opening  and  answering  the  goodly  pile  of  letters
which  are  awaiting  my  attention  ?  It  may  Interest
all  who  love  the  Book-Fund  work  to  know  exactly
what  I  have  to  do,  and  how  I  do  it ;  so  on  this
auspicious  morning  I  will  take  my  friends  Into  full
confidence,  and  let  them  peep  into  every  letter  as  I
open  it ;  sharing  with  me  the  pleasure  or  pain,  the
content  or  the  anxiety,  to  which  the  correspondence
may  give  rise.  Before  us  lies  a  day's  work  we
shall  not  get  through  till  sundown  ;  are  you  willing
and  able,  dear  friend,  to  spend  such  a  busy  day
with  me  ?

''A  tiny  square  box,  addressed  to  me  In  my  son  -
Charles'    handwriting,   first    claims    my    notice.     I


324  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON,

wonder  what  it  can  contain,  and  on  opening  it,  I  find,
to  my  great  surprise  and  pleasure,  a  pretty  little
sovereign  purse,  with  one  of  those  satisfactory  coins
inside,  and  a  morsel  of  paper  with  a  memorandum
to  the  following  effect :  'A  New  Year's  gift  to  dear
Grandmamma's  Book-Fund,  from  Susie  and  Dora/
It  is  a  new  and  very  amusing  experience  to  have
my  son's  little  ones  helping  in  my  life-work  !  True,
the  wee  mites  do  not  know  much  about  it  at  present ;
in  the  blissful  ignorance  of  childhood,  such  tender,
sheltered  blossoms  are  all  unaware  that  out  in  the
world  cold  winds  are  blowing,  and  biting  frosts  are
reigning  ;  let  them  enjoy  the  warmth,  and  gladness,
and  couleur  de  rose,  as  long  as  possible.  But  at  least
this  New  Year's  gift  promises  well  for  future  train-
ing and  bringing  up  in  the  way  they  should  go,  and
— who  can  tell  ? — in  days  to  come  they  may  take  up
'Grandma's'  work  when  she  is  at  rest,  and  carry  it
on  more  extensively,  and  not  less  lovingly,  than  she
has  done  !  '  Grandmamma  ! '  Ah,  me  !  How  the
days  are  going  by  !  It  seems  but  as  yesterday  that
the  father  of  these  two  little  maidens  was  my  own
bonnie  baby,  laughing,  ay,  and  weeping  too,  in  what
I  then  thought  a  most  wonderful  and  exceptional
fashion  ;  yet  so  many  years  have  flown  away,  and
he  has  traveled  so  far  on  life's  journey,  that  now  his
babies  crow  and  cry  even  as  he  once  did,  and  make
sweet  childish  music  in  his  house,  and  call  me
*  Grandmamma ' !


L  O  VEL  V  WES  TWO  GL\  325

*  Growing  older !
"With  a  sigh  we  say  it,
That  the  early  freshness  of  the  dawn,
Rosy-tinted,  rich  in  thoughts  and  fancies,
Seemeth  farther  at  each  birthday  morn.

*  Growing  older !
Joyously  we  say  it,
Reaching  onward  to  immortal  youth.
And  the  fount  of  bliss  that  never  endeth,
Promised  us  by  Him  who  is  the  Truth.'

"  It  will  not  do,  however,  to  grow  prosy  over  my
venerable  position,  as  a  maternal  ancestor.  I  must
'wear  my  honors  meekly/  I  must  persuade  the  rose-
buds to  lie  lovingly  by  the  side  of  the  '  sear  and
yellow  leaf,'  and  teach  the  dimpled  fingers  to  smooth
away  the  wrinkles  and  the  coming  crow's-feet,  and
be  as  wise  and  tender  a  grandmother  as  the  Lord
would  have  me  be.  So  a  letter  is  written  to  the
dear  son  whose  love  for  his  mother  is  one  of  the
joys  of  her  life,  thanking  him  for  the  sweet  re-
membrance on  behalf  of  his  wee  maidens,  and  in-
voking God's  rich  blessings  on  him  and  his  ;  and
thus  ends  the  examination  and  reply  to  our  first  New
Year's  missive.

''  But  there  lies  on  my  table,  awaiting  completion,
a  letter  to  that  other  darling  son,  who  at  this  moment
is  on  the  mighty  waters,  sailing  away  from  mother
and  from  home,  to  go  and  serve  his  God  and  his
people  in  the  distant  colonies.  Before  I  open  an-
other epistle,  this  one  must  be  finished  ;  it  is  to  meet
him  at  Naples,  where  his  ship  touches,  and  must
carry  a  word  of  comfort  and  of  lingering  farewell,


326  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

and  assure  him  once  aeain  of  mother's  fervent
prayers  for  his  safety.  It  is  with  a  great  yearning
over  him  in  my  heart,  and  eyes  that  grow  dim  with
tears  as  the  pen  runs  on,  that  I  fill  up  the  last  pages
of  my  love-letter  to  my  absent  boy,  and  sealing  it
with  a  sigh,  which  is,  in  reality,  a  prayer,  I  drop  it
into  the  post-basket,  and  then  turn  to  engage  reso-
lutely in  the  business  of  the  day."

In  1886,  she  made  this  memorandum  :  "When  the
master  of  the  house — the  '  houseband  ' — Is  away,  we
lonely  ones  at  '  Westwood'  realize  In  an  especial  man-
ner our  complete  dependence  on  the  Lord  for  safe-
guard and  protection  both  night  and  day.  We  know
that  the  tender  committal  of  home  and  its  inmates  to
the  Father's  care,  when  the  farewells  are  said,  is  always
renewed  and  repeated  by  our  absent  one  ;  and  at  our
own  evening  worship  the  prayer  that  He  will  '  hide
us  in  the  shadow  of  His  hand'  while  we  sleep,  and
guard  us  from  all  evil,  is  never  likely  to  be  forgotten
or  omitted.

"  But,  notwithstanding  this  actual  appeal  to  the
Preserver  of  men,  and  a  conscious  belief  in  His  love
and  power,  I  had  lately  acquired  a  foolish  habit  of
lying  awake  in  the  night-watches,  with  ear  intent  to
catch  the  faintest  sound,  heart  ready  to  beat  wildly
if  but  a  window-sash  shook  in  its  frame,  and  every
nerve  on  the  alert  to  assert  itself  in  throes  of  pain-
ful alarm  at  the  least   indication    of    any   unusual

»

movement.


LOVELY  WESTWOOD,  327

"What  If  Punchie's  fierce  bark  were  to  ring
through  the  house  in  the  darkness,  or  the  sharp  peal
of  the  alarum  should  give  sudden  warning  of  the
approach  of  danger  ?  What  if  evil  men  should  try
to  'break  through  and  steal,'  or  a  spark  unwittingly-
dropped,  and  smouldering  long,  should  at  last  burst
into  flame,  and  quickly  enwrap  us  in  a  fiery  and  fatal
embrace?  To  tolerate  such  imaginings  was  to  be
tortured  by  them,  and  I  suffered  greatly,  till  some
nights  ago  the  dear  Lord  ended  all  this  for  me,  and
sent  so  blessed  a  ray  of  enlightenment  into  my  '  dark
place,'  that  at  once  I  laid  my  head  down  on  the  pil-
low quite  comforted.  My  painful  care  for  the  house
and  Its  inmates  was  all  gone,  because  he  cared  for
them ;  my  watchlngs  were  over,  because  He  watched  ;
my  fears  were  all  allayed,  because  faith  in  Him  was
triumphant  and  complete !

*'  And  It  came  about  somewhat  on  this  wise  :  The

two  texts '  What  time  I  am  afraid,  I  will  trust

in  Thee,'  and  ^I  will  trust,  and   not  be  afraid'

had  been  much  on  my  mind  during  my  weari-
some nights  ;  but  they  had  evidently  not  then
found  entrance  Into  my  heart.  I  had  thought  of
them  without  fully  realizing  their  depth  of  blessed
meaning ;  they  had  lain  on  the  outside  of  my  soul
as  fair  lilies  lie  on  the  surface  of  a  pool  ;  but  now  I
was  to  discover  that  they  were  fast  anchored  by
strong  roots  In  the  exceeding  great  and  precious
promises  of  my  God.


328  CHARLES.   It.  SPURGEOK.

**In  a  moment  there  dawned  upon  me  the  possi-
bility and  blessedness  of  being  absolutely  without
fear  because  I  trusted  in  Him.  '  What  time  I  am
afraid.'  'Yes,'  said  I,  '  that  is  just  now,  dear  Lord,
when  the  creaking  of  a  piece  of  furniture  startles
me,  and  the  very  thought  of  the  bark  of  a  dog
strikes  terror  into  my  heart'  *I  will  trust  in  thee.'
As  I  said  it,  deliverance  came.  '  Do  I  really  trust  in
God  ?'  I  asked  of  myself ;  and  I  could  steadfastly
reply,  '  Yes,  blessed  be  His  Name  !  I  do  trust  Him  ;
and  I  know  He  can  keep  us  in  perfect  safety ;  more-
over, I  am  assured  that  He  never  fails  those  who  put
their  trust  in  Him.'  There  came  a  pause,  the  light
had  broken  in,  and  I  was  wondering  at  the  fast-
fleeing  shadows.  *  Now  surely,  my  heart,  thou  canst
go  on  with  the  other  text,  and  boldly  say,  *'  I  will
trust,  and  not  be  afraid."  What  sort  of  trust  dost
thou  call  this  that  wakens,  and  listens,  and  imagines
all  sorts  of  evil  instead  of  calmly  sleeping  and  rest-
ing in  the  sheltering  arms  of  the  Blessed  One  ?  If
thou  dost  honestly  trust  Him,  thou  shouldest  cer-
tainly not  be  afraid  ;  for  thy  faith  should  deal  a
death-blow  to  all  thy  fears.'  And  it  did,  dear  reader  ;
then  and  there  I  gave  up  all  my  nervous  appre-
hensions. I  surrendered  myself  and  all  my  belong-
ings to  the  Father's  keeping,  and  I  have  had  no
more  gloomy  fancies,  or  midnight  watchings.  I  have
laid  me  down  in  peace  and  slept,  because  He  only
has  made  me  to  dwell  in  safety  ;  or  if  any  wakeful
hours  have  come,  my  mouth  has  praised  Him  with


L  O  VEL  Y  WEST  WO  OD.  329

joyful  lips,  while  I  remembered  Him  on  my  bed,  and
meditated  on  Him  in  the  night-watches.

''Why  do  I  tell  such  a  simple  Httle  tale  of  per-
sonal and  private  experience  ?  Well,  just  because
it  was  a  real  and  blessed  fact  to  me,  and  I  think
that  the  relation  of  such  instances  of  God's  tender
care  and  love,  in  even  the  minor  matters  of  daily
life,  not  only  helps  some  of  His  timid  and  distressed
ones  to  cast  their  burdens  on  the  Lord,  but  it  is
also  graciously  accepted  by  Him  as  a  grain  of  sweet
incense  laid  on  the  golden  altar  to  His  praise  and
glory  by  His  grateful  child.

"  If  any  courageous  and  lion-hearted  people  fail
to  understand  my  terrors,  there  are  others  who,
having  groaned  under  the  pressure  of  like  irrational
disquietude,  will  sympathize  with  me  in  my  past
bondage,  rejoice  in  my  emancipation,  and  take  heart
of  grace  themselves  to  seek  from  the  Lord  by
simple  faith  as  complete  and  perfect  a  deliverance
as  His  mercy  has  accorded  to  me.

*'  There  are  many  seasons  in  a  Christian's  life
when  he  is  *  afraid '  with  much  more  need  and
reason  than  I  could  urge  for  my  nervous  alarms  ;
but  there  never  can  be  a  day,  or  an  hour,  or  a  mo-
ment, when  he  may  not  '  trust '  his  God  absolutely,
perfectly,  totally  ;  and,  as  surely  as  he  does  that,  so
surely  will  faith  overcome  fear — trust  will  lift  him
over  the  trial,  confidence  in  God  will  end  the  con-
flict. Not  to  the  night-watchers  only,  but  to  those
who,  day  and  night,  find  fears  and  foes  to  fight  with,


330  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

do    I    lovingly  commend    my   two    '  Songs    in   the
Night,'  to  be  sung  in  any  time,  and  to  any  tune —

*  What  time  I  am  afraid,  I  will  trust  in  Thee.*
*  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid.'

**A  very  pretty  and  suggestive  picture  is  this
week  to  be  seen  from  the  windows  of  my  sitting-
room.  To  the  uninitiated  observer  there  might
appear  to  be  nothing  more  extraordinary  than  a
dense  mass  of  shrubbery,  overhung  with  a  canopy
of  trees,  and  exhibiting  in  one  corner  a  profusion  of
white  flowers  of  unusually  large  size  ;  but  I  will  tell
the  little  story,  and  try  to  enlist  your  interest.  This
clump  of  evergreens  has  been  allowed  to  luxuriate
in  unchecked  growth  during  many  years,  and  there
is  in  consequence  such  an  increase  in  their  size  and
height  that  they  are  more  like  trees  than  shrubs,
displaying  a  density  and  superabundance  of  foliage
which  is  lovely,  but  undesirable  in  their  position.
Down  in  the  heart  of  this  miniature  wood  or  forest,
a  small  Syringa  bush  had  its  home,  and  disliking  the
darkness  and  lowliness  of  its  dwelling-place,  it  took
heart  of  grace,  and  for  five  years  it  has  been  en-
deavoring to  gain  access  to  the  light,  patiently  push-
ing its  way  upward,  growing  through  the  laurels,
and  hollies,  and  briers,  slowly  ascending  in  spite  of
every  obstacle,  till  now,  in  all  the  glory  of  eighteen
or  twenty  feet  of  height,  it  overtops  the  surrounding
trees,  joyfully  hangs  out  its  snow-white  garlands  of
perfumed  blossoms,    asserts    its  right  to  the  lofty


LOVELY  WESTWOOD.  33 1

place  It  has  attained,  and  seems  to  be  making  up  in
excessive  beauty  and  luxuriance  for  the  long  years
of  repression  and  cruel  hindrance  it  has  suffered
while  struggling  to  reach  this  climax  of  growth.

*'*  Are  those  white  roses? '  say  our  friends  when
their  attention  Is  called  to  the  mass  of  blossom  tow-
ering above  the  great  arbutus  trees.  'No,  not
roses,'  we  exclaim,  'but  something  quite  as  well
worth  looking  at '  ;  and  then  the  aspiring  Syringa  is
duly  admired  and  applauded,  while  its  heavy
bunches  of  flowers  nod  and  quiver,  giving  forth  their
fragrance  to  every  gentle  breeze  that  stirs  them,  as
joyful  evidence  of  fulfilled  desire  and  complete  sat-
isfaction.

''Pretty,  impetuous,  ardent,  living  thing,  I  love  to
think  how  it  persevered  in  its  efforts  to  escape  from
the  surrounding  pressure  and  darkness,  how
patiently  it  forced  Its  way  through  the  fretting  ob-
stacles which  barred  its  progress  to  the  light ;  and
it  does  my  heart  good  to  go  and  look  at  it,  as  now,
revelling  in  the  free  and  open  air  of  heaven,  and
the  blessed  light  of  the  sun,  it  blooms  In  unexam-
pled beauty,  and  showers  down  Its  sparkling  white
petals  in  a  very  abandonment  of  joy.

"What  does  the  Syringa  say  to  me  as  I  stand  far
below  it,  gazing  with  pride  and  pleasure  on  Its  love-
liness?

"  I  think  I  hear  a  whisper  from  each  little  twig
and  spray,  '  Learn  from  us  to  be  brave  and  patient,
think  no  waiting  too  wearisome  to  win  a  blessing,


332  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

no  toil  too  great  to  obtain  a  triumph;  ever  turn
from  the  darkness,  and  seek  the  light,  though  hin-
drances throng  around  you,  and  rankling  cares,  like
thorns,  would  fain  obstruct  your  progress  ;  believe
wholly  in  God,  and  trust  in  Him  to  bring  you  through
all    difficulties    into    the  sunshine  of  His  love  and
favor  in  His  own  good  time.     The  days  were  very
dark  with  us  down  there  when    we  were  growing,
and  sometimes  we  almost  despaired  of  obtaining
deliverance  ;  yet  inch  by  inch  we  advanced,  the  living
sap    within  us  enforcing  our  upward  growth ;  and
ever  and  anon,  when   the  wind    swayed  the  thick
branches  of  the  trees  above  us,  we  had  such  bright
glimpses   of  blue   sky  and  golden  beams  that  the
darkness  became  even  more  distasteful,  and  the  im-
prisonment more  intolerable,  while  our  inward  long-
ing for  the  light  lent  us  faith  and  courage  to  struggle
bravely  on  !     And  see  to  what  strength  and  beauty
our  Creator  has  brought  us  ! '

'*  Dear  fellow-Christians,  the  Syringa  has  a  word
for  us  all.  '  Go  thou  and  do  likewise,'  it  says.
By  the  power  of  Christ's  life  within  you,  you  can
rise  above  all  your  trials,  and  difficulties,  and  hin-
drances ;  you  can  get  up  above  the  darkness  of  any
unhappy  surroundings,  and  walk  in  the  light  of
God's  countenance.  Be  not  content  to  dwell  in  the
depths  where  the  galling,  grieving  contact  of  doubts
and  fears  will  well-nigh  choke  your  spiritual  life,  but,
asking  God  '  that  He  would  grant  you,  according  to
the  riches  of  His  glory,    to    be   strengthened   with


L  O  VEL  V  WES  TWO  OD.  333

might  by  His  spirit  in  the  inner  man,'  seek  to  'grow
up  into  Him  in  all  things,'  'forgetting  those  things
which  are  behind,  and  reaching  forth  unto  those
things  which  are  before,'  and  glorifying  His  dear
name  by  bearing,  not  merely  the  fine  flowers  of  pro-
fession, but  the  blessed  fruit  of  a  holy,  consistent,  gra-
cious life.  Sweet  Syringa,  now  I  leave  you,  pondering,
as  I  go,  the  apostle's  words,  which  you  have  so  well
illustrated  —  '  Whereunto  I  also  labor,  striving
according  to  His  working,  which  worketh  in  me
mightily.

*'  I  think  it  must  have  been  through  the  attention
we  bestowed  upon  the  Syringa,  and  the  inquiries  we
made  concerning  it,  that  our  eyes  were  first  opened
to  the  lolly  of  our  mistaken  forbearance  in  allowing
the  unrestrained  growth  of  the  trees  and  shrubs  in
the  garden.  For  it  was  not  that  clump  of  evergreens
only,  of  which  I  have  spoken  in  the  former  para-
graph, that  had  escaped  the  pruning-knife ;  but
everywhere  the  plantations  had  grown  at  their  own
sweet  will,  and  developed  an  enormous  amount  of
life  and  vigor  during  the  five  years  of  our  residence
at  'Westwood.'  When  we  came  to  look  closely
around,  we  found  that  these  charming  neighbors
had  completely  surrounded  and  shut  us  in,  and  that
the  splendid  view  we  had  at  first  enjoyed  and  prized
was  now  entirely  hidden  from  us.

"We  awoke  to  the  fact  as  from  a  dream.  Where
were  the  distant,  but  beautifully  distinct  Surrey
hills  ?     Where  was  the  lovely  stretch  of  landscape  ?


334  CHARLES  II.  SPURGE  ON.

Where  the  ever-varying  play  of  light  and  shade  on
all  the  nearer  fields  and  meadows,  and  the  changeful
beauty  of  the  far-off  Downs  and  open  country?
They  were  all  there  truly,  but  we  could  not  see
them,  they  were  effectually  concealed  from  our  eyes  ;
and  we  went  from  window  to  window,  vainly  en-
deavoring to  discover  any  opening  in  the  leafy
screen,  through  which  w^e  might  once  again  gaze
upon  that  glorious  prospect  which  had  hitherto  so
fascinated  and  delighted  us.  In  the  garden  itself  it
was  much  the  same.  There  were  some  charmino-
nooks  and  corners  where  we  had  aforetime  stood
enraptured,  watching  the  effect  of  every  mood  and
variation  of  the  atmosphere  on  the  landscape  ;  but
these  were  now  choked  up  by  a  dense  mass  of  foli-
age, and  tall  trees  waved  their  luxuriant  branches  in
joyous  defiance  of  the  prying  eyes  which  would  fain
look  beyond  them.

''From  the  windows  of  the  pastor's  study  there
had  been  most  lovely  peeps  at  the  distant  hills  ;
Caterham,  and  Wallington,  and  Banstead,  and  Ep-
som Downs  were  all  spread  before  the  spectator  as
in  a  panorama  ;  on  a  sunny  summer's  day  quivering
in  a  golden  haze,  or  at  night  putting  on  a  strange,
solemn  beauty,  as  one  by  one  the  lights  in  far-away
villao^es  and  houses  twinkled  like  stars  come  down
to  visit  earth.  Now  one  could  see  '  nothing  but
leaves  '  ;  green  and  beautiful,  it  is  true,  but  none  the
less  embarrassing  and  mischievous,  since  they  not
only  excluded  some  of  the  necessary  light  and  air


L  O  VEL  Y  WES  TWO  OD.  335

from    the   house,  but   did   us  the  great   wrong   of
concealing  the  loveliest  of  our  lovely  pictures.

** '  How  could  you  have  permitted  this  invasion  of
our  once  cherished  privilege  ? '  some  reader  asks.
Well,  the  trees  worked  subtly,  you  see  ;  they  grew
leaf  by  leaf,  twig  by  twig,  so  noiselessly,  so  gradually,
that  we  took  no  note  of  their  encroachments  till  the
thick  barrier  was  formed,  and  our  glorious  view  was
hidden  ;  and  I  must  confess,  also,  that  the  master  of
'Westwood/  though  a  decided  Liberal  in  politics,
leans  terribly  to  Conservatism  in  his  own  garden,
and  deems  it  almost  a  sacrilege  to  use  knife  or  axe
on  any  of  the  precious  living  things  that  have  taken
root  in  this  favored  and  fortunate  spot.

'*  So,  even  when  we  became  aware  of  our  enclosed
condition,  no  small  amount  of  coaxing  and  persuasion
was  required  to  induce  him  to  allow  the  first  gap  to
be  made  in  the  green  barrier  ;  and  I  verily  think  that
the  passage  of  the  saw  through  those  tree-trunks,  and
the  down-crashing  of  the  severed  branches,  brought
for  the  moment  positive  physical  pain  to  his  tender,
sensitive  heart.

*'But,  oh!  when  the  sacrifice  was  once  accom-
plished, and  an  exquisite  gem  of  a  picture  was
revealed  through  a  frame-work  of  verdure,  with  what
exclamations  of  delight  did  he  welcome  the  beautiful
result,  and  with  what  readiness  did  he  admit  the
necessity  for  like  painful  but  decisive  measures
throughout  our  small  domain  !  This  first  grand  and
successful  venture  of  mine,  this  onslaught  against


336  CHARLES  H.  SPUKGEON.

the  aggressive  vegetable  kingdom,  was  made  on  the
dear  pastor's  birthday,  and  such  a  victory  did  I
achieve,  so  charmed  was  he  with  the  conqueror's
spoils,  that  he  thenceforth  began  to  wage  war  on  his
own  account,  and  became  almost  as  enthusiastic  for
the  subjugation  of  our  persevering  obstructionists  as
I  had  schooled  myself  to  be.  Since  that  day,  de-
cidedly Liberal,  not  to  say  Radical,  views  obtain  on
the  'open  space '  question  in  our  garden.  Notable
improvements  are  everywhere  visible,  pleasing  pros-
pects meet  one  at  every  turn  ;  some  of  the  trees  that
remain  are  taught  to  lend  themselves  to  frame-
making  in  the  most  charming  manner,  and  through
these  lovely  loop-holes  we  look  across  miles  of  hill
and  dale,  while  the  larger  part  of  our  battlements  of
living  green  has  been  sufficiently  demolished  to
throw  open  again  the  magnificent  view  which  makes
our  Hill  of  Beulah  into  a  true  '  Delectable  Moun-
tain.'

''  For  some  time  past,  I  have  been  debating  in  my
mind  whether  or  not  I  should  give  to  my  readers
the  particulars  of  a  pleasant  circumstance,  which  has
lately  enlivened  my  quiet  life  with  its  interesting
details.  To-day  has  decided  the  question,  for  a
donation  of  ^5  to  the  Book-Fund,  the  '  First-fruits
of  the  fishing-smack,  ''Susie  Spurgeon,"  '  supplies  the
link  to  my  dear  work,  which  seemed  needful  to  justify
the  relation  of  the  story.

"To  begin  at  the  beginning — among  the  large
fleet  of  vessels  which   regularly  leave  the  port  of


L O  VEL  V  WESTWOOD.


337


Grimsby  for  the  fishing-grounds  in  the  North  Sea,
there  has  long  been  one  which  bears  my  husband's
honored  name,  and  from  time  to  time  we  have
rejoiced  to  hear  tidings  of  its  voyagings  and  welfare,
while  mutual  tokens  of  interest  and  good-will  have
passed  between  the  owner  of  the  ship  and  the  owner
of  the  name.  The  'Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon '  has
done  noble  work,  too  ;  for  not  long  ago  it  towed  a
wreck  into  port !  The  disabled  schooner  was  a
foreigner,  and  when  the  crew  of  the  '  C.  H.  S/  saw
her  flying  signals  of  distress,  they  boarded  her,  and
found  her  full  of  water  ;  but  they  bravely  agreed  to
tow  her  into  Grimsby  !  This  took  them  three  days
and  nights.  During  this  time,  the  second  and  third
hands  had  to  remain  on  board  the  water-logged
vessel,,  at  the  risk  of  her  going  to  pieces  any
moment,  and  sinking  under  them  !  The  good  friend
who  gave  me  these  details  feelingly  adds,  '  I  like  to
thinkof  the  "C.  H.  S."  doinor- this  !  It  is  so  suo^orestive  !
How  many  wrecked  and  storm-tossed  souls  has  the
pastor,  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  been  the  means  of  bringing
into  the  haven  of  rest !  How  has  he  toiled  to  win
them  to  the  only  place  of  safety  ! '

*'  In  this  last  summer,  there  was  another  vessel
built  for  the  same  owner,  and  it  was  decided  to  call
her  the  '  Susie  Spurgeon,'  to  my  intense  gratification
and  delight.  While  she  was  building,  Mr.  E.  greatly
desired  that  I  should  be  the  first  to  see  the  'burgee,*
a  large  flag  with  the  ship's  name  in  ;  so  it  was  sent
up  for  my  inspection,  and,  on  unpacking  it,  I  found

22


338  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON,

to  my  great  surprise  a  huge  'color/  eight  yards  long,
and  two  and  a-half  yards  wide,  with  the  smack's
name,  '  Susie  Spurgeon,'  in  great  letters  a  foot  long,
marvellously  fashioned,  and  inlaid  in  the  bunting.  It
was  too  large  to  go  up  anywhere  but  in  the  largest
room  in  the  house,  and  there,  though  it  wound  itself
gracefully  round  the  book-cases,  and  dropped  in
voluminous  folds  from  the  curtain-rods,  it  looked  as
if  it  pined  for  the  bright  blue  sea,  and  felt  out  of
place  in  a  parson's  library  !  As  it  hung  there  day
after  day,  waiting  till  the  ship  was  fitted,  a  strong
desire  took  possession  of  me  to  use  it  In  some  way
to  show  my  appreciation  of  the  honor  done  me.  But
how  should  I  set  about  this  ?  I  lay  awake  at  night,
pondering  by  what  means  I  could  make  it  my  mes-
senger to  carry  a  word  to  captain  and  crew,  of  good
cheer  and  good  wishes,  and  give  a  little  evidence  of
my  interest  in  my  ship  !  At  last  a  '  happy  thought '
visited  me,  and  I  caught  it,  and  cherished  it  with
much  care  !  It  occurred  to  me  that  it  would  be  a
dellehtful  task  to  work  some  few  words  on  the  flae,
which  should  not  only  embody  my  best  desires  for
the  brave  men  who  would  serve  under  it,  but  should
also  set  always  before  them  the  only  way  of  safe
sailing  over  the  stormy  sea  of  life,  something  which
shouH  not  only  attract  the  eye,  but  find  an  entrance
Into  the  heart  !  So  far,  so  good  ;  but  how  to  bring
my  '  happy  thought '  to  a  happier  interpretation  was
another  embarrassment.  What  should  the  few  words
be?    How^  I  puzzled  over  that  question  !  How  many


L  O  VEL  V  IVES  TWO  OD.  339

things  my  mind  suggested  and  then  *  declined  with
thanks,'  I  cannot  tell  you.  Then,  one  wakeful  night,
some  rhymes  popped  into  my  head,  and  I  cried  '  Eu-
reka ! '  But  I  have  no  gift  for  rhyming,  and  it  took
me  an  inconveniently  long  time  to  arrange  my  un-
disciplined numbers  into  the  following  lines  :

This  flag  shall  bear

On  high  my  prayer,
While  playful  winds  enwreathe  it ;

God  save  the  crew.

Good  men  and  true,
Who  worship  God  beneath  it !

*'  Now,  I  must  confess  I  thought  this  rather  good,
and  was  a  little  bit  proud  of  it,  after  all  the  trouble  I
had  expended  on  it ;  but  my  dear  husband,  being  an
editor,  is  also  a  critic,  and  rather  hard  on  'poets,'  as
a  good  many  people  know  to  their  cost ;  and  so,  when
I,  with  meekness  and  fear,  showed  him  this  produc-
tion, he  smiled,  and  shook  his  dear  head,  and  said  it
was  '  very  nice,  but  it  would  not  do/  The  rhymes
of  the  third  and  sixth  lines  he  could  not  pass — I  must
try  again.     I  did  so,  with  this  result :

This  flag  shall  bear

Aloft  my  prayer,
As  it  floats  in  the  heavenly  blue  j

God  bless  the  *  S.  S.'

Give  good  success,
And  save  every  one  of  the  crew !

''This  time  I  was  not  surprised  when  I  found  my
dear  Mentor  could  not  give  his  unqualified  approval ;
but  I  had  done  my  best,  and  could  do  no  better,  so


340  CHARLES  IF.  SPURGE  ON

he  tenderly  undertook  to  revise  the  lines,  and  put
them   into   proper  shape  for  me,  and  from  his  un
fettered  pen  they  flowed  forth  thus  :

This  flag  shall  bear

Aloft  my  prayer,
That  good  success  attend  you  ;

God  save  each  one,

Through  Christ  His  Son,
And  from  all  ill  defend  you.

*'  Hurrah !  This  was  just  what  I  wanted,  good
wishes  and  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  com-
bined !  Thanks  to  the  dear  writer,  and  blessings  on
his  words  !

*'  The  lemon  tree  must  have  a  word  of  remem-
brance in  this  closing  record  of  my  work.  How  it
has  grown  !  And  what  a  sturdy,  healthy  tree  it  Is  !
Yet  it  has  never  borne  fruit,  and  in  this  respect  has
greatly  disappointed  me,  though  it  is  foolish  to  be
impatient  at  Nature's  dignified  deliberation.  If  it
had  been  grafted,  the  fruit  would  have  been  forced  ;
now  it  awaits  the  time  of  perfection  as  God  ordered
it,  and  as  it  was  arranged  when  He  pronounced  all
to  be  '  very  good.'  So  it  stands  in  the  greenhouse,
flourishing,  and  extending  its  branches  year  by  year,
and  I  still  hold  it  in  tender  estimation  as  the  emblem
of  my  Book-Fund,  blessing  the  Lord  that  He  has
allowed  the  spiritual  work  to  outstrip  the  leisure  of
Nature,  and  come  into  full  fruit-bearing  so  soon  and
so  happily,  to  feed  and  refresh  His  fainting  servants.
It  is  to  me  a  tree  of  tender  memories,  for  not  only
has  Its  simple  story  won  Sympathy  and  help  for  my


L  O  VEL  Y  WE  ST  WO  OD.  34 1

Fund,  and  interested  friends  in  my  work,  but,  when-
ever I  look  at  it,  I  seem  to  see  again  the  sick-cham-
ber which  was  my  pleasant  prison  in  Nightingale
Lane  ;  the  couch  where  I  lay  suffering  so  many
months  and  years  ;  the  sunlit  window  where  the
little  flower-pot  was  placed,  and  where  the  '  pip '
grew  slowly  into  a  feeble  plant ;  then,  looking  round
upon  myself  and  my  present  circumstances,  I  am
amazed  at  the  gracious  contrast  which  the  Lord's
loving  hand  has  wrought.  'Can  that  fine  tree,  of
eight  feet  six  inches  high,  be  the  same  tiny  thing
that  began  its  frail  life  under  such  unusual  condi-
tions ?  '  *  Can  I,  with  this  unexpected  measure  of
health  and  activity,  be  the  same  person  who  then
seemed  to  be  passing  quickly  through  the  Valley  of
the  Shadow  of  Death  ? '  'Tis  even  so.  Then  do
you  wonder  that  often,  as  I  stand  gazing  upon  this
lemon  tree,  happy  tears  of  thankfulness  for  God's
great  tenderness  to  me  should  gently  blot  out  the
details  of  that  past  experience ;  and  then  that  they
should  magnify  the  beauty  and  brightness  of  the
present  blessings  ?

''The  Lord  has  made  my  time  of  loneliness  to  be
a  season-  of  such  intensely  busy  labor,  that  the  days
have  not  been  long  enough  to  enable  me  to  finish
all  my  work  ;  and  there  has  not  been  a  crevice  of
time  into  which  a  dreary,  cheerless  feeling  could
intrude  itself.  Then  the  news  from  Mentone  has
been  so  encouraging  and  hopeful,  that  were  it  only
for  that  mercy,  I  ought  to  sing  the  Old  Year  out


342  CHARLES  IT.  SPURGEON.

with  a  'Jubilate/  There  came  this  sweet  message
to  me  this  morning,  and  it  will  not  be  difficult  for
my  readers  to  imagine  that  it  has  made  music  in  my
heart  all  the  day  : —

*  From  sunny  lands  my  spirit  flies  to  thee,

And  doth  salute  thee  in  the  chilly  day :
Long  hast  thou  been  a  summer's  sun  to  me,

Fain  would  I  chase  thy  every  cloud  away.
Though  dark  thy  skies,  I  would  thy  light  increase

By  one  short  message  which  my  pen  can  tell,
It  brings  thy  love  some  little  light  of  peace

To  know  that  with  thy  husband — All  is  well.'

**  Perhaps  I  ought  not  to  give  my  'love-letters '  in
the  Book-Fund  Report,  but  this  one  came  on  a  post
card,  and  by  this  fact  proclaimed  itself  pro  bono
publico  ;  besides  which,  my  few  previous- home  con-
fidences have  been  so  tenderly  welcomed  and  cher-
ished, that  I  could  not  refrain  from  sharing  with  my
readers  on  this  last  day  of  the  Old  Year  the  '  little
bit  of  sunshine '  which  has  gilded  every  hour  of  it
for  me.  Oh,  blessed  wedded  love,  that  has  grown
brighter  and  clearer  after  shining  on  for  thirty  happy
years  !  Thanks  be  to  God  for  a  love  that  '  Fonder
grows  with  age,  and  charms,  and  charms  forever.'

"Very  soon,  if  the  Lord  will,  there  will  be  again
the  joy  of  the  home-coming,  when  the  happiness  of
reunion  will  efface  all  the  heartache  of  separation,
and  the  two  lives  which,  like  mountain  streams
parted  for  a  while  by  some  ponderous  impediment,
having  passed  it,  meet  again  with  tumultuous  cur-
rent, shall  flow  on  once  more  in  deep  and  abound-
ing bliss.     Then  all  the  routine  of  the  dear  happy


L  O  VEL  V  WESTWO OD.  343

home-life  will  begin  afresh,  and  the  days,  so  full  of
work  and  service,  will  fly  swifdy  on  their  busy
rounds,  and  the  sweet  Saturday  nights — my  Sab-
baths— will  again  crown  the  week's  labor  with
blessing  and  holy  peace.

''Seeing  that  we  began  this  year  with  a  long  ac-
count of  the  doings  and  the  duties  of  its  first  twelve
hours,  I  might  have  asked  my  dear  readers  to  'assist'
in  the  same  way  at  its  close  ;  for  the  letters  of  to-day
have  been,  to  the  full,  as  many  and  as  Interesting  as
those  we  opened  on  January  i,  1885.  Do  they
not  say  that,  in  a  well-concerted  piece  of  music,  the
final  note  should  correspond  to  that  on  which  the  air
commences?  Even  so,  in  composing  this  unpre-
tending little  tune  of  mine,  I  ought  doubtless  to
have  tried  to  harmonize  it  rightly,  and  have  played
the  'finale'  on  the  same  chords  as  the  opening
'  aria.'     But  I  spare  you  and  myself.

"The  hand  that  holds  this  pen  is  very  weary ;
and  the  brain,  which  tries  to  think  the  thoughts  that
guide  it,  is  jaded  and  overstrained.  Soon  the  mid-
night chimes  will  be  ringing,  and  '  each  breeze  that
rises  from  the  earth  be  loaded  with  a  song  of
heaven.'  It  is  meet  and  wise  to  say  adieu  now,
softly  and  tenderly,  to  those  who  have  for  so  many
years  been  partakers  with  me  of  the  joy  of  this
sweet  service,  and  then  to  go  alone  before  the  Lord,
and  bless  Him  for  the  Immeasurable  love  and  good-
ness which  have  ensured  so  blessed  an  ending  to  a
year  of  blessing.


344  CHARLES  II.  SPURGE  ON,

'*'0h!  tired  heart-
God  knows !
Not  you  nor  I,

Who  reach  our  hands  for  gifts
That  wise  love  must  deny —
We  blunder,  where  we  fain  would  do  our  best —
Until  a- weary,  then  we  cry,  *  Do  Thou  the  rest ';
And  in  His  hands  the  tangled  skein  we  place
Of  our  poor  blind  weaving  with  a  shamed  face —
All  trust  of  ours  He  sacredly  will  keep ;
So,  tired  heart —
God  knows !
Go  thou  to  work  or  sleep.'  "


CHAPTER  XIL


GOD     HEARD    HIM.


The  prayer  of  the  righteous  availeth  much.  God
heareth  him  In  Heaven,  his  dwelling  place  ;  God
answers  him  without  hesitation.  It  would  seem  im-
possible for  any  reasonable  being  to  study  carefully
the  life  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  as  a  prayerful  Christian
and  not  come  to  the  deliberate  conclusion  that  God
does  hear  and  directly  answer  prayer.  We  have
referred  to  it  before  in  speaking  of  the  wonderful
cures  which  follewed  his  prayers  ;  but  here  again,
we  are  obliged  to  enter  into  the  realm  of  the  mira-
culous and  hear  and  tell  of  wonderful  things  fof
which  no  natural  law  gives  an  adequate  explanation.

Hard,  solid,  undeniable  facts  remain  still  facts,
and  command  the  respect  and  faith  of  sensible  men
though  they  may  be  often  partially  hidden  by  the
surging  waves  of  theory  which  dash  and  break
around  them.

*'  God  cannot  answer  prayer  "  says  the  unbeliever,
and  yet  here  are  these  facts  established  beyond  any
opportunity  of  reasonable  contradiction.

**  The  Lord  will  not  change  his  natural  laws  to
accommodate  any  single  human  being,"  has  often

345


^  ^5  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEOJSr,

been  asserted  by  the  theologians  who  claim  to
believe  in  the  teachings  of  Scripture.  They
strongly  assert  that  the  day  is  past  when  God  will
perform  miracles  at  the  request  of  any  of  his
children  ;  yet  here  was  a  Godly  man  whose  character
was  above  reproach,  whose  sincerity  is  unquest-
ioned and  who  moved  among  a  cloud  of  witnesses,
whose  petitions  to  God  were  in  hundreds  of  myster-
ious ways  directly  answered.

The  serious  investigator  will  find  his  life  experi-
ence a  very  fascinating  field  of  research  and  the
humble  believer  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  will  find  en-
couragement in  the  exercise  of  faith  and  in  the  com-
mand to  pray.  A  study  of  his  methods  and  the
record  of  its  results  must  be  of  great  practical  use
to  every  Christian  man  and  woman  who  would  imi-
tate his  character  or  who  desires  the  same  return
for  their  petitions.  His  prayer  for  himself  was  an-
swered many  thousand  times  from  the  day  when  he
first  asked  God  for  the  forgiveness  of  his  sins  to  the
last  day  when  he  asked  that  the  sustaining  support
of  the  everlasting  arms  might  be  underneath  him.

He  was  continually  testifying  of  the  wonderful
goodness  of  God  in  granting  to  him  the  things  for
which  he  asked.  That  he  petitioned  for  many
things  which  he  did  not  receive  is  also  certain  and
while  it  complicates  the  problem  somewhat  it  does
not  overthrow  the  testimony  in  cases  where  God  did
send  to  him  the  needed  blessing.

He  had  a  most  charming  habit  of  going  to    God


o

w
o

>

W


^R^T  i


»i»-«r-J«**^**^


GOD  HEARD  HIM.  ^^g

in  prayer  in  the  midst  of  any  perplexity  and  asking
the  Lord  to  give  him  a  calmness  of  spirit.  He
often  testified  that  after  such  a  petition  his  anxie-
ties seemed  to  pass  away.  He  laid  them  all  upon
the  Lord  and  he  could  enter  upon  his  work  encour-
aged and  in  a  most  peaceful  disposition.  Some-
times when  worry  came  to  him  as  it  comes  to  nearly
every  human  being  he  would  bethink  himself  to  his
Great  Helper  and  turn  aside  to  seek  a  quiet
opportunity  to  ask  the  Lord  to  relieve  him  of  his
anxiety.

He  testified  in  1889  that  never  in  his  life  had  he
worried  about  anything  beyond  the  time  when  he
could  secure  the  opportunity  to  turn  aside  to  prayer.
When  he  was  in  most  fearful  pain  and  suffering
w^ith  those  rheumatic  twinges  which  drew  him  into
positive  contortion  he  could  turn  away  in  sincere
prayer  and  become  so  lost  in  worship  as  to  feel  no
longer  conscious  of  torture.  He  found  that  he
could  receive  such  inspiration  from  the  mysterious
spirit  of  God  as  enabled  him  to  pass  many  happy
hours  while  afflicted  by  one  of  the  most  terrible
diseases  which  ever  comes  to  a  person  with  sensi-
tive nerves.

At  the  Mildmay  Conference  in  1890  Mr.  Spur-
geon  said:  ''After  a  period  of  continued  pain,  with
little  sleep,  I  sat  up,  as  best  I  could,  one  morning
in  my  bed  in  an  agony  of  pain,  and  I  cried  to  the
Lord  for  deliverance.  I  believed  fully  that  he  could
deliver  me  then  and  there,  and  I    pleaded    my  son-


350  CHARLES  IL   SPURGE  ON.

ship  and  his  Fatherhood.  I  went  to  the  length  of
pleading  that  he  was  my  Father,  and  I  said,  '  if  it
were  my  child  that  suffered  so,  I  would  not  let  them
suffer  any  longer  if  I  could  help  him.  Thou  can'st
help  me  and  by  thy  Fatherly  love  I  plead  with  thee
to  give  me  rest.  '  I  felt  that  I  could  add,  *Neverthe-
less,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt. '  But  I  did  the
first  thing  first.  I  pleaded  with  my  Father,  and
went  first  where  Christ  went  first,  saying,  *  My
Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me. '
I  shall  never  forget  my  success  in  my  appeal.  In
real  earnest  I  believed  God  to  be  my  Father,  threw
myself  upon  him,  and  within  a  few  moments  I  drop-
ped back  upon  the  pillow,  the  pain  subsided,  and
very  soon  I  slept  most  peacefully.  "

Often  amid  the  bustle  of  many  duties  and  cares,
through  a  day  of  severely  hard  work,  he  would
hurry  to  the  chapel  to  lead  the  evening  meeting.
He  naturally  entered  the  building  with  his  heart
beating  fast,  his  body  very  weary  and  his  brain
greatly  disturbed  in  the  conflict  of  thoughts,  and
the  anxieties  to  do  his  duty  in  so  many  discon-
nected relations  of  life.  He  could  then  kneel  in
prayer  for  a  moment  alone  and  place  himself  in
such  harmony  with  the  Eternal  Peace  or  receive
such  unction  from  on  High  as  would  make  it  pos-
sible for  him  to  begin  the  meeting  as  fresh  in  body
and  as  calm  in  spirit  as  though  he  had  been  resting
upon  his  couch  through  the  day.

All  this  may  In  a  measure   be    accounted    for   by


GOD  HEARD  HIM.  ^qi

the  unbeliever  upon  the  pnncip'al  that  it  was  the  ef-
fect of  his  own  mind  upon  his  body  and  that  such  a
power  is  unquestionably  given  to  any  one  whether
he  prays  or  not.  Mr.  Spurgeon  stoutly  asserted
that  such  was  not  the  case  with  him  at  other  times
and  persons  not  in  the  habit  of  prayer  do  not  find
•  themselves  exercising  this  great  privilege.

'*  The  Peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  under-
standing" really  comes  only  to  them  who  make
known  their  request  unto  God  by  supplication  with
thanksgiving.  But  whatever  may  be  thought  of  the
reflex  mental  influence  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  case  It  is
certain  that  no  human  argument  can  reason  away
the  facts  which  we  are  now  about  to  state.

He  prayed  that  God  would  keep  him  safe  on  his
journies  and  many  a  time  during  his  history  he
came  into  the  presence  of  great  danger,  amidst
most  serious  accidents  and  yet  escaped  without
great  injury;  and  often  went  free  wholly,  because
he  had  such  confidence  in  God  that  lost  not  his
presence  of  mind.  But  in  other  cases  nothing  on
his  part  could,  humanly  speaking,  have  prevented
his  death  had  there  not  been  a  combination  of  provi-
dential circumstances  for  his  protection  which  were
beyond  human  control.

We  have  spoken  already  of  his  preservation  in
accordence  with  his  prayer,  through  the  colera  and
other  contagious  diseases,  and  of  the  wonderful
way  in  which  he  was  guided  step  by  step  from  the
rustic  condition  of  an  ''  Essex  bumpkin,"  to  the  posi-


352


CHARLES  H.   SPUR G EON.


tlon  of  a  cultivated  scholar,   and  the  most  revered
character  perhaps  in  England.

The  experience  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  as  in-
valids is  often  quoted  as  a  proof  that  his  prayers
were  not  answered,  and  these  facts  have  led  many
to  fear  that  the  other  cases  where  his  prayers  seem
to  be  answered,  were  simply  mysterious  coincidences.
We  do  not  hope  to  explain  why  one  prayer  was
answered  and  another  was  rejected,  except  by  say-
inof  that  the  will  of  God  was  otherwise  for  the  orood
of  those  who  prayed.  But  we  can  only  present  the
incidents  which  illustrate  the  power  of  prayer  in  his
case  and  leave  them  to  the  meditation  of  Christian
readers.

There  were  several  different  occasions  on  which
Mr.  Spurgeon  was  so  anxious  for  a  definite  result
in  the  service  of  God  that  he  spent  the  entire  night
in  prayer.  In  three  such  cases  he  has  told  us  he
received  the  answer  in  full  to  his  petition.  In  the
establishment  of  the  Orphanage,  he  prayed  that  the
Lord  would  influence  some  person  having  the
means  to  come  forward  and  supply  any  necessities
of  the  case.  The  prayer  was  answered  without  any
personal  interference  of  his  own  and  without  the
person  who  was  most  influenced  in  the  case  know-
ing that  he  had  spent  the  night  in  prayer.

In  three  other  instances  in  connection  with  the
same  work  when  their  money  had  given  out  and  so
far  as  he  could  see  the  Orphans  would  be  left  with-
in twenty-four  hours  in  suffering  need  of  food,  there


GOD   HEARD  HIM,  ^^3

by  himself  or  with  his  deacons  he  prayed  and  the
answer  came  in  each  case  from  altogether  unforseen
and  unexpected  quarters.

Mr.  Spurgeon  had  been  praying  one  night  that
the  Lord  would  send  gifts  with  which  to  supply  the
necessities  of  the  Orphanage  and  a  stranger  in  Lon-
don was  at  the  same  time  walking  its  foggy  streets.
He  had  never  seen  Mr.  Spurgeon  nor  read  any  of
his  sermons,  but  he  had  heard  his  name  mentioned.
The  impression  upon  that  stranger's  mind  that  same
night  was  so  great  as  to  cause  him  to  visit  Mr.
Spurgeon  and  make  him  a  gift  toward  his  church
work.  He  had  found  it  impossible  to  break  aw^ay
from  the  facinating  call.  He  rang  Mr.  Spurgeon's
door-bell  and  Insisted  upon  seeing  Mr.  Spurgeon
and  giving  him  a  large  sum  of  money.  He  refused
at  that  time  even  to  leave  his  name  with  Mr.  Spur-
geon, simply  saying  that  he  ''lived  many  miles
away.  "  Afterward  he  sent  another  princely  gift
saying  that  the  pleasure  he  had  received  from  the
other  donation  had  made  it  one  of  the  best  Invest-
ments of  his  life.

When  the  great  Tabernacle  was  begun  Mr.
Spurgeon  prayed,  as  we  have  already  seen,  that  no
workman  might  be  injured  during  its  construction.
The  prayer  was  so  distinctly  answered  there  that  In
the  construction  of  a  large  business  house  near
Ludgate  Circus  he  was  especially  requested  by  the
owners  to  come  and  offer  the  same  prayer  in  con-
nection with  their  enterprise.  There  were  many
23


354  CHARLES  H.  STURGEON.

old  buildings  to  be  pulled  down  and  some  very
large  ones  to  be  constructed,  yet  in  this  case,  as  in
the  former  no  persons  were  injured  and  the  build-
ings were  completed,  to  use  the  owners  expression,
''with  songs  of  grateful  joy."

These  cases  where  his  prayer  was  offered  in  one
place  and  answered  by  some  mysterious  impression
being  made  upon  minds  in  another  place  with
whom  there  was  no  natural  means  of  communica-
tion were  multiplied  into  the  thousands.  The  his-
tory of  all  the  great  revivals  at  the  Tabernacle  pre-
sented numerous  illustrations  of  this  fact.  Mr.
Spurgeon,  prayed  and  while  he  was  praying  or  im-
mediately thereafter,  some  person  at  a  distance,
felt  it  his  duty  to  serve  God  in  just  the  way,  or  by
giving  just  the  amount  for  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  had
asked.

He  did  not  tempt  the  Lord  by  asking  foolish
things  or  by  requesting  God  to  do  anything  which
was  not  for  the  furtherance  of  his  divine  kingdon  in
the  earth.  Even  the  prayers  he  offered  up  for  him-
self were  always  confined  to  the  thought  that  if  he
was  himself  favored  of  God  he  would  only  be  a
more  useful  Instrument  in  the  Lord's  hands.

It  would  take  many  volumes  to  contain  the  most
condensed  record  of  the  instances  where  the  prayers
were  so  directly  replied  to  as  to  startle  those  who
witnessed  them  and  to  fill  those  who  believed  in
prayer  with  most  enthusiastic  thanksgiving.

By  far  the  most  mysterious    incidents  connected


GOD  HEARD  HIM.  357

with  his  prayerful  Influence  with  the  Almighty  are
shown  In  the  conversion  of  Individuals  during  the
many  years  of  his  successful  ministry.  His  prayers
for  the  reformation  and  conversion  of  those  who
were  not  Christians  who  attended  his  service  were
so  continually  and  manifestly  answered  and  were  a
a  matter  of  such  public  observation  and  discussion
that  It  Is  unnecessary  to  follow  them.  They  belong
to  the  common  experience  of  spiritual  churches  In
other  places  and  those  who  have  worked  In  evange-
listic or  actual  church  enterprises  will  recognize
at  once  the  power  which  was  exercised  by  him  as
he  prayed  for  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  But
we  come  to  more  remarkable  things  when  we  find
that  Mr.  Spurgeon's  prayers  for  the  conversion  of
people  living  at  a  distance  who  had  never  heard  of
him  and  knew  nothing  whatever  of  his  meetings  or
church,  were  directly  answered  at  the  very  time  in
places  far  distant.

A  remarkable  case  was  mentioned  In  i  887  when
Mr.  Spurgeon  at  the  request  of  friends  made  a
special  prayer  In  public  for  the  conversion  of  a  son
and  husband  who  were  absent  in  Australia.  The
friends  who  mentioned  the  matter  to  Mr.  Spurgeon
were  new  acquaintances  to  him,  had  but  a  few  days
before  moved  into  London.  They  had  never  by  word
or  by  letter  mentioned  Mr.  Spurgeon  or  his  work  to
their  friend  in  Australia.  He  declares  now  that  he
has  never  read  anything  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  does
not  remember  that  he  had  ever  heard  his  name  men-


258  CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON,

tloned,  although  It  was  barely  possible  that  he
might  have  seen  the  name  In  some  of  the  news-
papers. But  on  the  'very  day  and  at  the  very  hour
when  Mr.  Spurgeon  engaged  In  a  most  fervent
prayer,  this  man  was  at  work  upon  a  building  In
Melbourne.  He  stopped  while  earring  a  timber
from  one  portion  of  the  building  to  another  and
said  he  was  unable  to  go  further,  so  quickly  and
deeply  was  he  Impressed  with  a  sense  of  his  respon-
sibility to  God  and  of  his  lost  condition  of  soul.
He  had  not  attended  church  during  his  stay  In
Australia,  and  w^as  not  a  regular  attendant  at  any
church  or  chapel  before  he  left  England.  The  tears
came  to  his  eyes,  his  hands  trembled,  and  he  felt
that  he  was  forsaken  of  God  because  he  had  led
such  an  unrlorhteous  life.  He  was  In  no  sense  .a
criminal  or  Immoral  man,  but  this  religious  Impres-
sion w^as  so  deep  upon  him  that  he  went  to  the  low-
est story  of  the  building,  notified  the  superintendent
that  he  must  go  to  his  boading  house.  He  went
there  and  fell  upon  his  knees  and  prayed  for  God's
forgiveness  and  there  received,  as  he  afterwards
testified,  the  ''Light  of  Grace  which  reconciled  him
with  his  God."  That  same  night  before  going  to
bed,  he  wrote  home  to  his  people  in  London,  telling
them  how  he  had,  without  the  advice  or  guidance  of
any  human  being,  been  led  to  seek  the  Christ.

In  another  case,  a  mother  came  to  Mr.  Spurgeon
in  January  1872  and  stated  to  him  that  her  son  had
enlisted  In  the  French  Army,  and  that  she  was  very


GOD  HEARD   HIM.


359


much  afraid  that  in  such  surroundings  he  would  be
influenced  by  the  bad  comany  and  be  altogether
lost  to  Christian  principles  and  perhaps  to  his
family.

Mr.  Spurgeon  promised  to  pray  for  him  but  the
mother  would  not  let  him  go  unless  he  would  kneel
right  then  and  there  and  pray  with  her  for  her  son's
welfare.  She  has  since  stated  that  it  was  at  half-
past  four  in  the  afternoon  that  the  prayer  was  of-
fered; and  he  afterwards  said  that  at  precisely  that
hour  he  was  standing  in  the  camp  and  that  a
strange  impression  ran  through  his  body  filling  him
with  a  sense  of  dismay  and  terror  as  though  in  the
presence  of  actual  death.  The  Army  was  not  en-
gaged in  any  conflict  and  there  was  no  apparent
evidence  of  any  near  engagement.  His  emotions
were  so  great  that  his  face  turned  pale,  which  called
the  attention  of  his  comrades,  who  commented  with
excitement  upon  his  fainting  concfition.  He  went
to  his  tent  and  there  alone  called  upon  God  for
forgiveness  and  help.  By  the  very  next  mail  which
left  the  camp,  he  wrote  to  his  mother  stating  the
circumstance  and  asking  her  to  pray  for  him  and  at
the  same  time  strangely  suggesting  that  he  wished
she  would  write  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  ask  him  to
pray  for  him.

There  is  related  still  another  case.  In  Septem-
ber, 1878,  Mr.  Spurgeon  attended  the  prayer-meet-
ing at  12  o'clock  which  was  held  by  a  number  of
business    men   every    day.     One   of  the  business


360  CHARLES  H.    SPURGEOJV:

men  personally  unacquainted  with  Mr.  Spurgeon
arose  in  that  meeting  and  stated  that  it  was  his  be-
lief if  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  pray  for  the  conversion
of  a  brother  then  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  that  it
might  be  accomplished  that  very  day.  Mr.  Spurg-
eon impulsively  arose  and  said,  ''  I  accept  that  chal-
lenge, let  us  call  on  God."  That  afternoon  the
brother  in  Edinburgh  was  greatly  disturbed  in
mind  throuohout  all  the  business  hours  which  re-
mained  of  the  day,  and  went  home  to  his  family
saying  to  them,  he  felt  as  though  he  had  led  and
wasted  his  life,  and  that  he  knew  not  w^hat  to  do  to
reform,  he  was  p^oincr  to  write  at  once  to  Mr.
Spurgeon,  in  London.  He  had  no  acquaintance
with  Mr.  Spurgeon  except  such  as  came  through
the  newspapers  and  yet  he  wrote  to  him  a  long  and
urgent  appeal  that  he  would  show  him  the  way  of
salvation.

At  still  another  time  one  of  the  sons  of  a  deacon
of  the  New  Park  Street  Church,  whose  life  had  been
a  cause  for  worry  to  his  parents  because  of  his  in-
clination to  unbelief  and  wildness,  had  purchased  a
ticket  to  come  to  America  intendinof  to  leave  Eno--
land  without  permitting  his  parents  to  know  his  pur-
pose. The  deacon  knew  nothing  whatever  of  his
son's  intentions,  but  he  went  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  and
requested  him  to  go  into  one  of  the  ante-rooms  of
the  church  that  they  might  there  unite  together  in
prayer  for  his  son.  Mr.  Spurgeon  being  in  haste  .
at  first  refused  and  hurriedly  started  off  on    another


GOD   HEARD   HIM.  361

errand  but  he  had  not  gone  far  before  he  abruptly
turned  directly  about  and  calling  after  the  deacon
went  into  the  ante-room  to  pray.  There  both  of
them  offered  up  their  petitions  with  great  earnest-
ness for  the  salvation  of  the  soul  of  the  son.  The
son  was  at  that  time  on  the  wharf  In  Liverpool  look-
ing at  the  steamer  which  he  Intended  to  take  for
America.  He  said  afterwards  In  his  testimony  in
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  as  related  to  us  that  a
chill  seized  his  heart  and  affected  his  whole  body,
that  his  mind  become  greatly  excited  and  a  sense
of  the  sin  he  was  committing  in  running  away  from
home  and  leaving  such  affectionate  parents  made
him  to  loathe  himself  and  he  wished  he  might  die.
He  could  not  arouse  sufficient  courage  to  step
aboard  the  steamer  and  it  sailed  away  without  him.
He  walked  up  and  down  the  streets  and  after  going
to  his  hotel  paced  the  room  in  positive  misery.  The
temptation  to  take  his  own  life  was  so  strong  that
he  went  out  of  the  hotel  to  a  gunsmith's  with  a  view
of  purchasing  a  pistol  with  which  to  shoot  himself.
The  gunsmith's  shop  was  closed  and  he  returned  to
his  room  and  paced  to  and  fro  until  the  thought
that  he  ought  to  pray  came  to  him  so  Impulsively
that  he  knelt  by  his  bedside  and  prayed.  He  pour-
ed out  his  soul  in  prayer  and  remained  in  that  pos-
ture of  prayer  until  the  daylight  came.  During  the
next  day  he  was  still  very  unhappy  but  he  was  able
to  surrender  himself  entirely  to  the  influence  of
God's  spirit  and  with  a  happiness    he    was    unable


362  CHARLES  H.  SFURGEON.

afterwards  to  describe,  he  returned  his  ticket  to  the
steamer  office  and  with  the  money  they  repaid  him
purchased  his  ticket  back  to  London  and  to  his
surprised  parents.

In  1887  Mr.  Spurgeon  visited  Yorkshire  at  the
dedication  of  a  small  chapel  and  there  met  with  a
gentleman  of  culture  and  means,  who  was  not  a
Christian  but  who  was  attracted  to  the  chapel  by  the
fact  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  to  be  there.  Mr  Spur-
geon, as  was  his  frequent  costom,  asked  the  gentle-
man If  he  was  a  Christian,  to  which  he  replied  dis-
tinctly, ''  No."  Mr.  Spurgeon  then  asked  him  if  he
did  not  wish  to  be  one,  to  which  he  replied  empha-
tically, ''No.'*  Then  Mr.  Spurgeon  said,  ''God  will
ask  you  that  question  and  I  shall  pray  to  Him  to-
night that  He  do  it  at  once."  That  night  Mr.
Spurgeon  was  late  at  a  railway  station  when  this
man  came  to  his  mind.  He  then,  while  walking
upon,  the  platform  offered  up  repeated  prayers  that
God  would  call  that  gentleman  to  himself,  and  use
him  for  great  Christian  good.  Near  the  same  hour,
if  not  precisely  at  the  same  time,  that  gentleman
was  in  animated  conversation  with  some  friends  at
an  inn,  he  had  been  joking  concerning  the  chapel
dedication  and  seemed  to  regard  it  as  a  subject  of
great  sport  that  he  should  have  been  found  in  a
place  of  worship.  He  had  described  to  his  friends
the  absurd  appearance  of  one  of  his  acquaintances
who  saw  him  come  in  and  take  a  seat  In  the  chapel.
He   broke  off  the    conversation    in  the    middle  of  a


GOD  HEARD  HIM.  ^63

sentence    and  with   every   appearance  of  great  em-
barrassment arose    and  asked  to  be  excused,  hurry-
ing at  once  to  his  home  ;  and  there,  that  night  read
the  Bible  earnestly  and  prayed  for  himself  sincerely,
and  would  not  retire  to  rest  until  he  felt  the  evident
presence  of  God  in  answer  to  his  prayer.     He  him-
self gave  a  history  of  the   affair   and   said  he  never
could  account  in  any  way  for  the  very  sudden  turn
in  all  his  sentiments  and  thoughts.     He,   however,
believed  that  it  was  a  stroke  of  providence  instantly
set  upon  him  in  answer  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  prayer.
Another  instance  was  related  in  a  Sunday-school
gathering    at    Cambridge  in   1884  wherein  it  was
stated  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  been  requested  by  a
father  to  pray  for  the  conversion  of  his  little  girl,
then    about   twelve   years  of  age.     Mr.  Spurgeon
made  a  note  of  the  request  upon  a  newspaper  he
had    in  his  hand   at  the    time   but  laid  the  paper
aside  and  forgot   about    the    request    for   several
weeks.     One  day  the  paper  was  taken  out  from  the
library  by   a  servant  and  providentially  laid  upon
the  window  sill  where  Mr.  Spurgeon  found  it  while
he  was  waitino-  for  a  friend  to  call.     He  there  found
the  memorandum  he  had  made  and  turned  away  to
his  libarary  and  knelt  by  his  own  chair  and  prayed
for  the  conversion   of  the  child.     He  felt  so  sincer-
ly  that  his  prayer  was  to  be  answered  that  he  con-
tinued in  prayer  much  longer  than  usual  and  was
aroused  from  it  by  a  ring  at  the  door.    Supposing,  of
course,  that  it  was  a  friend  he  had  invited,  he  went


364  CHARLES  II.   SPURGE  ON.

directly  to  the  door  himself  and  what  was  his  sur-
prise to  be  met  directly  by  the  young  girl  for  whom
he  had  been  praying  and  whose  very  first  request
was  **Mr.  Spurgeon,  I  have  come  to  ask  you  to  tell
me  how  to  be  a  Christian".  She  has  since  stated
that  she  was  passing  the  house  at  the  time,  with  no
previous  thought  of  any  serious  nature  concerning
her  Christian  experience,  but  that  she  found  it  utterly
impossible  to  pass  the  gate  without  turning  in.
The  impulse  was  so  great  upon  her  to  ring  the
door  bell  that  she  had  actually  pulled  It  before  she
had  made  up  her  mind  what  to  say  to  Mr.  Spurg*
eon.  She  has  since  been  one  of  the  loveliest  and
most  effective  of  the  Sunday-school  teachers  In  the
Tabernacle.

Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  son  was  converted  in  the
same  way,  in  direct  answer  to  his  prayers  when
away  from  home.  A  stranger  felt  it  to  be  his  duty
to  show  the  young  man  the  way  of  righteousness
and  that  Impression  to  speak  for  Christ  came  to  him
with  singular  distinctness  at  the  very  hour  when
Mr.  Spurgeon  was  praying  the  Lord  that  his  son
might  be  redeemed.

At  a  prayer  meeting  held  In  the  Tabernacle  a
few  years  since  which  has  always  been  remembered
by  the  participants  as  one  of  unusual  solemnity,
Mr.  Spurgeon  requested  members  of  the  church  to
pray  especially  for  the  conversion  of  some  distant
friend.  There  were  several  hundred  people  pres-
ent at  the  time  and  many  of  them  acted    upon    Mr.


GOD  HEARD   HIM.  365

Spurgeon's  suggestion  and  during  a  season  of
silent  prayer  asked  directly  for  the  salvation  of  defi-
nite persons  of  their  personal  acquaintance  who
could  not  at  the  time  have  known  that  they  were
being  remembered  in  prayer.  Four  week  later  at
a  church  meeting  one  of  the  Christians  stated  how
his  prayer  had  been  most  wonderfully  answered
that  night  and  heartily  thanked  Mr.  Spurgeon  for
having  joined  with  him  in  such  a  request.  That
statement  introduced  the  whole  question  again  and
it  is  said  that  over  fifty  different  persons  testified
that  night  that  their  prayers  had  been  directly  an-
swered. In  some  cases  while  they  were  praying  the
friends  for  whom  they  petitioned  the  Lord  had  sur-
rendered themselves  to  Christ's  service,  and  in  no
less  than  ten  cases  the  converted  persons  were
there  present  that  night  in  the  meeting.

For  over  twenty-five  years  these  singular  an-
swers to  prayers  had  been  an  almost  daily  experi-
ence in  the  work  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.
Men  know  it,  they  see  it,  and  yet  it  passes  without
the  study  or  without  the  notice  which  would  attach
to  almost  any  other  incident  thus  repeating  itself
through  such  a  series  of  years.  The  hopelessness
of  finding  any  explanation  of  it  in  nature's  laws
may  have  prevented  the  examination  of  the  topic
and  the  very  frequency  of  the  experiences  there  and
in  other  places  may  serve  to  take  it  out  of  the  list
of  the  miraculous.
•    Mr.  Spurgeon  often  stated  that  the  day  of  mir-


^66  CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.

acles  was  passed  and  seems  to  have  regarded  these
incidents  as  commonplace.  But  there  such  facts
stand,  testified  to  by  many  thousand  of  credible
people,  and  their  results  having  a  present  and  ever-  .
lasting  effect  upon  the  history  of  England  itself.
Prayers  were  offered  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  supported
by  the  petitions  of  his  people,  and  drunkards  re-
formed, thieves  ceased  to  steal,  the  vile  forsook
their  vices,  the  dishonest  turned  to  righteousness,
the  ungodly  called  upon  the  Lord,  scoffers  believed
in  Jesus  Christ,  the  useless  became  useful,  and  in-
jurious became  helpful,  society  was  cleaner,  streets
were  safer,  the  laws  were  better  administered,
homes  were  sweeter  and  happier,  the  nation  more
prosperous  and  commerce  itself  becomes  more
stable.  What  a  factor  this  has  been  in  the  life  of
England.

Mr.  Needham  in  his  book  also  gives  an  instance
of  a  remarkable  answer  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  prayer.
''  On  another  occasion  Dr.  Brock  and  Mr.  Spur-
geon were  dining  together  at  the  mansion  of  a
beloved  friend  in  Regent's  Park  when  the  Orphanage
building  was  in  progress,  and  money  was  wanted
which  was  not  in  hand.  Mr.  Spurgeon  suffering
from  feeble  health,  still  expressed  his  strong  faith
in  God  that  the  money  would  come  to  hand  in  due
time.  Just  as  the  dinner  was  ended,  the  servant
entered  the  room  with  a  telegram  from  his  private
secretary  announcing  that  an  unknown  donor  had
sent  ^5,000   for  the    Orphanage.     Dr.    Brock   im-


-J,    •■     V.

/I  w         *


-       1  f  x  ■  ■>


»-.<ovs>*=s»'r«  •t-'iac-^.-


GOD   HEARD   JI/M.  36 j

mediately  arose  and   poured   fordi  his  utterances  ot

gratitude  in  the  most  joyful   manner,    and  they  all

united    in    prayer   on    their  knees    to  magnify   the

Lord.

What  a  blessine  to    London    and  to  the    world  it

was  to    have   such  a  saintly,  praying   man   live  and

teach  there  for  forty-seven  years. "    He  furnished  an

avenue     of     communication      between     earth     and

heaven,    between    the    material   and    the    spiritual,

through    which  has    flowed  the  vigorous   influences

which    have  blessed  the    world    beyond    estimation

and    made    heaven    itself  the  brighter.     O,    Thou

mighty  Ruler   of  the    universe,    send  to  this    world

many  more  such  earnest  men  of  prayer  !
24


CHAPTER  XIII.

THE    pastors'    college.

It  Is  divine  to  create  ;  it  is  heroic  to  stand  alone ;
and  that  man  best  exempHfies  the  divine  and  heroic
who  single-handed  begins  an  enterprise  for  the  good
of  his  fellow-man.  There  are  usually  found  plenty
of  people  who  are  willing  to  spread  a  cause  already
under  way,  and  the  whole  world  will  run  tumultu-
ously  after  a  great  success.  As  at  the  beginning  of
creation  we  find  God,  so  at  the  beginning  of  any
great  enterprise  in  the  earth  we  find  the  godly  man
or  woman.

Mr.  Spurgeon  began  many  things  which  he  in-
tended should  be  a  biessino-  to  mankind,  and  for
that  characteristic  he  deserves  the  everlasting  praise
of  humanity.  Any  person  who  goes  through  life
laying  foundation  stones  for  new  sources  of  delight
or  benefit  will  be  remembered  lono-  after  he  lias
passed  from  the  stage  of  action  ;  for  these  fountains
which  he  releases  from  tlie  rocky  mountain  side  will
flow  on  in  c^aseles'=;  rivers.

The  Pa'^tors'  College  is  a  pf^culiar  instifuti'^n,  dif-
fering from  nnvthing  else  of  its  kinrl,  and  \'et  one
greatly  needed  for  the  furtherance  of  tlie  Kino-dom
of  the  Lord.  Many  measures  connected  with  the
370


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.  17 1

practical  theological  training  of  men  for  Christian
work  have  received  the  attention  of  ereat  minds  and
have  been  discussed  for  many  years,  yet  we  seem  as
far  from  agreement  at  present  concerning  the  proper
solution  of  the  question  as  we  were  a  hundred
years  ago.

Just  what  training  is  necessary,  and  just  what  is
to  be  considered  a  call  of  God  is  one  of  those  im-
portant matters  to  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave  his
attention,  and  to  which  many  other  men  of  equal
ability  ought  to  give  their  attention.  As  the  Gospel
is  intended  to  change  the  heart  and  not  to  specially
discipline  the  mind,  and  as  it  is  a  question  of  moral
influence  and  not  of  scientific  erudition,  the  preacher
or  teacheF  could  make  use  of  any  event  or  influence
which  would  produce  the  desired  change,  whether
or  not  it  be  in  accordance  with  theory  or  prece-
dent.

As  there  are  many  different  classes  of  people  to
be  instructed  in  the  way  of  righteousness,  belonging
to  all  grades  of  moral  and  intellectual  culture,  so  it
would  seem  that  there  is  needed  for  their  instruction
a  class  of  people  especially  adapted  to  each  order
of  the  hearers.  A  man  may  be  educated  altogethe  r
too  much  to  accomplish  a  great  work  among  a  c(  r-
tain  class  of  people  ;  another  may  be  far  too  i^c  no-
rant  to  be  of  any  value  among  the  scholars  wl  ose
minds  he  would  influence  and  whose  hearts  he
would  touch.  One  person's  experience  may  es-
pecially fit  him  for  labors  among  a  definite   class    m


3/2  en  A  ALES  n.  SP  L  'K  CE  ON.

society  which  would  at  the  same  time  unfit  him  for
t^ie  accomphshment  of  any  good  in  any  other  ciabs
in  society.  The  poor  are  to  be  saved,  as  weU  as
the  rich  ;  the  ignorant  need  the  Gospel  as  much  as
the  wise  ;  and  the  truths  of  Scripture  are  far  better
inculcated  by  persons  who  are  in  touch  with  the
people  they  address.

Mr.  Spurgeon  evidently  founded  the  Pastors'
College  upon  the  idea  that  Odd  calls  men  to  the
ministry,  and  consequently  selects  them  from  many
different  grades  of  society.  It  was  not  in  his  idea  to
found  an  institution  to  educate  them  out  of  the  very
position  into  which  God  called  them.  But  rather  to
supply  them  with  better  means  for  working  in  their
own  grade  and  in  their  own  place.

He  prayed  much  for  an  opportunity  to  do
good  in  the  name  of  his  Master,  and  in  re-
sponse to  his  petition  the  door  was  opened  for  the
establishment  of  this  theolo^rlcal  school.  It  has  ac-
complished  great  things  indeed  in  Itself,  but  will  ac-
complish far  more  in  the  number  of  other  institu-
tions like  it  because  of  the  great  demand.

Seeing  that  an  Intelligent  devout  coal  miner  could
preach  with  the  most  effective  Illustrations  to  coal
miners  out  of  his  own  experience  ;  seeino-  that  a
sailor  could  preach  to  sailors;  and  a  teacher  to
teachers,  he  used  his  excellent  common  sense  in
assistinor  such  representatives  of  the  people  to  do
more  efficiently  the  work  to  which  the  Lord  had
apparently  called  them.       He  did  not  accept   the


THE  PASTORS'   COLLEGE  373

testimony  of  every  emotional  or  deluded  Individual
as  evidence  that  God  had  called  him  to  be  a
minister,  but  he  only  accepted  that  inward  con-
viction as  a  part  of  the  evidence  widi  which  to  judo-e
a  man's  htness  for  the  Lord's  work.  He  certainly
required  on  the  part  of  his  students  that  they  should
have  sincere  piety  and  should  feel  convinced  beyond
contradiction  that  they  must  preach  the  Gospel.
But  he  also  had  the  sancdfied  sense  to  see  that  If
God  did  call  a  man  to  preach  the  Gospel  He  would
also  call  men  to  hear  him.

When  He  sent  Philip  into  the  desert  of  Gaza  He
had  already  provided  the  hearer,  the  Ethiopian,  to
whom  Philip  was  to  preach.

Men  are  called  to  preach  the  Gospel  if  other  men
are  called  to  hear  them  preach  it — that  Is,  If  they
preach  the  true  and  simple  Gospel  presented  by
Jesus  of  Nazareth.  The  students  who  have  at-
tended the  Colleee  thus  far  have  been  selected  from
almost  all  different  trades  that  could  be  found.
They  have  been  required  to  show  their  ability  to
preach  and  their  power  to  convert  the  souls  of  men
before  they  were  accepted  as  students  at  the  College.
Hence,  the  education  they  received  was  given  as  a
result  of  God's  call  and  rot  as  a  preparation  for  His
call.  The  inception  of  the  Idea  of  opening  a  school
and  the  proQrress  of  the  work  until  he  had  an  excel-
lent buildinor  well  fitted  to  the  needs  of  students  en-
o-aored  in  the  study  of  the  Bible,  all  came  naturally
in  one  sense,  and  miraculously  in  another  sense.


374  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

For  Mr.  Spurgeon  simply  "  did  die  next  diing  "  and
trusttid  in  the  Lord  that  when  one  thing  was  well
done  he  would  be  led  to  another.  He  was  so  led  ;
and  the  vast  eood  which  the  (graduates  of  his  school
are  now  doine  all  over  the  civilized  world  is  one  of
the  wonders  of  this  time.  America  has  almost
equal  reason  with  England  to  send  up  her  thanks-
crlvlnor  to  God  for  the  ereat  man  who  had  the
couraofe  and  the  divine  wisdom  to  bes^In  an  enter-
prise  of  such  great  Importance.

Mr.  Spurgeon  has  told  in  a  most  concise  manner
the  history  of  the  College,  and  his  own  words  carry
better  authority  and  clearer  Ideas  than  anything
which  others  could  write.      In  1870  he  said:

"  The  College  was  the  first  Important  Institution
commenced  by  the  pastor,  and  It  still  remains  his
first-born  and  best  beloved.  To  train  ministers  of
the  Gospel  is  a  most  excellent  work,  and  when
the  Holy  Spirit  blesses  the  effort,  the  result  is  of  the
utmost  Importance  both  to  the  Church  and  to  the
world."

"The  Pastors'  College,  commenced  In  1856,  has
now  entered  on  its  fourteenth  year,  and  during  this
long  period  has  unceasingly  been  remembered  of
the  God  of  heaven,  to  w^hom  all  eneaeed  in  it  offer
reverent  thanksgiving.  When  It  was  commenced,  I
had  not  a  remote  Idea  of  whereunto  it  would  erow.
There  weresprlnglncruparound  me.  as  my  own  spirit-
ual children,  many  earnest  young  men  who  felt  an
irresisuble  impulse  to  preach  the   Gospel,  and  yet


H
O
!«
c«*

O

o
f
r
w
o
w


iOKi


THE  PASTORS'   COLLEGE.  377

with  half  an  eye  it  could  be  seen  that  their  want  of
education  would  be  a  sad  hindrance  to  them.  It
was  not  in  my  heart  to  bid  them  cease  their  preach-
ing, and  had  1  done  so,  they  would  in  all  probability
have  ignored  my  recommendation.  As  it  seemed
that  preach  they  would,  though  their  attainments
were  very  slender,  no  other  course  was  open  but  to
give  them  an  opportunity  to  educate  themselves  for
the  work."

"  1  he  Holy  Spirit  had  very  evidently  set  His  seal
upon  the  work  of  one  of  them,  Mr.  T.  W.  Medhurst,
now  of  Landport,  by  conversions  wrought  under  his
open-air  addresses ;  it  seemed  therefore  to  be  a
plain  matter  of  duty  to  instruct  this  youthful  Apollos
still  further  that  he  might  be  fitted  for  wider  use-
fulness. No  college  at  that  time  appeared  to  me  to
be  suitable  for  the  class  of  men  that  the  providence
and  grace  of  God  drew  around  me.  They  were
mostly  poor,  and  most  of  the  colleges  involved
necessarily  a  considerable  ouday  to  the  student;  for
even  where  the  education  was  free,  books,  clothes,
and  other  incidental  expenses  required  a  consider-
able sum  per  annum.  Moreover,  it  must  be  frankly
admitted  that  my  views  of  the  Gospel  and  of  the
mode  of  training  preachers  were  and  *are  somewhat
peculiar.  I  may  have  been  uncharitable  in  my
judgment,  but  I  thought  the  Calvinism  of  the  theol-
oev  usuallv  taueht  to  be  verv  doubtful  and  the  fervor
of  the  generality  of  the  students  to  be  far  behind  their
literary  attainments.     It  seemed  to  me  that  preach-


378  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

ers  of  the  grand  old  trudis  of  die  Gospel,  ministers
suitable  for  the  masses,  were  most  likely  to  be  found
in  an  institution  where  preaching  and  divinity  would
be  the  main  objects,  and  not  degrees  and  other  in-
sio^nia  of  human  learnino^."

"  I  felt  that,  without  interfering  with  the  laudable
objects  of  other  colleges,  I  could  do  good  in  my  own
way.  These  and  other  considerations  led  me  to  take
a  few  tried  young  men,  and  to  put  them  under  some
able  minister,  that  he  might  train  them  in  the  Scrip-
tures, and  in  other  knowledge  helpful  to  the  under-
standing and  proclamation  of  the  truth.  This  step
appeared  plain  ;  but  how  the  work  was  to  be  con-
ducted and  supported  was  the  question — a  question,
be  it  added,  solved  almost  before  it  occurred."

"Two  friends,  Mr.  Winsor  and  Mr.  W.  Olney,
both  deacons  of  the  Church,  promised  aid,  which,
with  what  I  could  give  myself,  enabled  me  to  take
one  student,  and  I  set  about  to  find  a  tutor.  In  Mr.
George  Rogers,  then  the  pastor  of  the  Independent
Church,  Albany  Road,  Camberwell,  God  sent  us  the
very  best  man.  He  had  been  preparing  for  such
work,  and  was  anxiously  waiting  for  it.  This  orentle-
man  who  has  remained  during  all  this  period  our
principal  tutor,  Is  a  man  of  Puritanic  stamp,  deeply
learned,  orthodox  In  doctrine,  judicious,  wltt)^
devout,  earnest,  liberal  in  spirit,  and  withal  juvenile
In  heart  to  an  extent  most  remarkable  In  one  of  his
years.  My  connection  with  him  has  been  one  of
uninterrupted  comfort  and  delight.     The  most  sin-


THE  PASTORS'   COLLEGE  oyg

cere  affection  exists  between  us  ;  we  are  of  one
mind  and  one  heart ;  and,  what  is  equally  important,
he  has  in  every  case  secured  not  merely  the  respect,
but  the  filial  love  of  every  student.  Into  this  beloved
minister's  house  the  first  students  were  introduced,
and  for  a  considerable  period  they  were  domiciled
as  members  of  his  family."

*' Encouraged  by  the  readiness  with  which  the
young  men  found  spheres  of  labor,  and  by  their
singular  success  in  soul-winning,  I  enlarged  the
number  ;  but  the  whole  means  of  sustaining  them
came  from  my  own  purse.  The  large  sale  o£  my
sermons  in  America,  together  with  my  dear  -wife's
economy,  enabled  me  to  spend  from  £tco  (about
$3,000)  to  ;/^8oo  (  about  $4,000  )  in  a  year  in  my
own  favorite  work  ;  but  on  a  sudden,  owing  to  my
denunciations  of  the  then  existing  slavery  In  the
States,  my  entire  resources  from  that  *  brook
Cherlth  '  were  dried  up."

"  I  paid  as  large  sums  as  I  could  from  my  own
Income,  and  resolved  to  spend  all  I  had,  and  then
take  the  cessation  of  my  means  as  a  voice  from  the
Lord  to  stay  the  effort,  as  I  am  firmly  persuaded
that  we  ought  under  no  pretense  to  go  Into  debt.
On  one  occasion  I  proposed  the  sale  of  my  horse
and  carriage,  although  these  were  almost  absolute
necessaries  to  me  on  account  of  continual  journeys
In  preaching  the  Word.  This  my  friend  Mr.  Rogers
would  not  hear  of,  and  actually  offered  to  be  the
loser  rather  than  this  should  be  done.     Then  It  was


380


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.


that  I  told  my  difficulties  to  my  people,  and  the
Weekly  Offering"  commenced  ;  but  the  incomings
from  that  source  were  so  meagre  as  to  be  hardly
worth  calculating  upon.  I  \\as  brought  to  the  last
pound,  when  a  letter  came  from  a  banker  in  the
city,  informing  me  that  a  lady,  whose  name  I  have
never  been  able  to  discover,  had  deposited  a  sum  of
;/^203  (about  ^i,ooo)  to  be  used  for  the  education
of  young  men  for  the  ministry.  How  did  my  heart
leap  for  joy  !  I  threw  myself  then  and  henceforth
upon  the  bounteous  care  of  the  Lord,  whom  I
desired  with  my  whole  heart  toglorify  by  this  effort."
"Some  weeks  after,  another  ;^ioo  (about  ^500)
came  In,  from  the  same  bank,  as  I  was  informed
from  another  hand.  Soon  after  Mr.  Phillips,  a
beloved  deacon  of  the  Church  at  the  Tabernacle,
began  to  provide  an  annual  supper  for  the  friends  of
the  College,  at  which  considerable  sums  have  from
year  to  year  been  given.  A  dinner  v/as  also  given
by  my  liberal  publishers,  Messrs.  Passmore  and
Alabaster,  to  celebrate  the  publishing  of  my  five-
hundredth  weekly  sermon,  at  which  ^500  (about
^2,500)  were  raised  and  presented  to  the  funds.
The  College  grew  every  month  and  the  number  of
students  rapidly  advanced  from  one  to  forty.  Friends
known  and  unknown,  from  far  and  near,  were
moved  to  give  little  or  much  to  my  work,  and  so
the  funds  increased  as  the  need  enlarged.-  Then
another  earnest  d:iacon  of  the  Church,  Mr.  Murrell,
espoused  as  his  especial  work  tlie  Vv^cekly  offering,'"'


77/^'  PASWA'S'   COLLEGE.  ?^i


o


and  by  the  unanimous  voice  of  the  Church  under  my
care,  the  College  was  adopted  as  its  own  child.
Since  that  hour  the  weekly  offering  has  been  a
steady  sourse  of  income,  till  in  the  year  1869  tl.c
amount  reached  exacdy  ^1,869  (about  $9,345)."

'*  There  have  been  during  this  period  times  of
great  trial  of  my  faith ;  but  after  a  season  of  strait-
ness,  never  amounting  to  absolute  want,  the  Lord
has  always  interposed  and  sent  me  large  sums  (on
one  occasion  ;^i,ooo  (about  $5,000),  from  unknown
donors.  When  the  Orphanage  was  thrust  upon
me,  it  did  appear  likely  that  this  second  work  would
drain  the  resources  of  the  first,  and  it  is  very  ap-
parent that  it  does  attract  to  itself  some  of  the  vis-
ible sources  of  supply  ;  but  my  faith  is  firm  that  the
Lord  can  as  readily  keep  both  works  in  action  as
one.  My  own  present  inability  to  do  so  much,  by
way  of  preaching  abroad,  occasions  naturally  the
failure  of  another  great  source  of  income;  and  as
my  increasing  labors  at  home  will  in  all  probability
diminish  that  stream  in  perpetuity,  there  is  another
trial  of  faith.  Yet,  if  the  Lord  wills  the  work  to  be
continued,  He  will  send  His  servant  a  due  portion
of  the  gold  and  silver  which  are  all  His  own;  and
therefore  as  I  wait  upon  Him  in  pra\'er,  the  all-
sufficient  Provider  will  supply  all  my  needs.  Nearly
;^5,ooo  (about  $25,000)  is  annually  required  for  the
Colleee,  and  the  same  sum  is  needed  for  the  Or-
phanage  ;  but  God  will  move  His  people  to  liberality,
and  we  shall  see  greater  things  than  these."


3 82  CHARLES  II.  SPURGE  ON.

*'  While  speaking-  of  pecuniary  matters,  It  may  be
well  to  add  that,  as  many  of  the  young  men  trained
In  the  College  have  raised  new  congregations  and
gathered  fresh  churches,  another  need  has  arisen —
namely,  money  for  building  chapels.  It  is  ever  so
in  Christ's  work ;  one  link  draws  on  another,  one  ef-^
fort  makes  another  needed.  Forchapel-bullding,  the
College  funds  could  do  but  little,  though  they  have
freely  been  used  to  support  men  while  they  are  col-
lectlnor  cono^reoratlons  ;  but  the  Lord  found  for  me
one  of  His  stewards,  who,  on  the  condition  that  his
name  remains  unknown,  has  hitherto,  as  the  Lord
has  prospered  him,  supplied  very  princely  amounts
for  the  erection  of  places  of  worship,  of  which  more
than  forty  have  been  built,  or  so  greatly  renovated
and  enlarged  as  to  be  virtually  new  structures.
Truly  may  It  be  said,  '  What  hath  God  wrought !'  "

*'  Pecuniary  needs,  however,  have  made  up  but  a
small  part  of  our  cares.  Many  have  been  my  per-
sonal exercises  In  selecting  the  men.  Candidates
have  always  been  plentiful,  and  the  choice  has  been
wide ;  but  it  is  a  serious  responsibility  to  reject  any,
and  yet  more  to  accept  them  for  training.  When
mistakes  have  been  made,  a  second  burden  has  been
laid  upon  m^  in  the  dismissal  of  those  who  appeared
to  be  unfit.  Even  with  the  most  careful  manage-
ment, and  all  the  assistance  of  tutors  and  friends,  no
human  foresight  can  secure  that  in  every  case  a  man
shall  be  what  we  believed  and  hop^d.  A  brother
may  be-  exceedingly  useful  as  an  occasional  preacher;


THE  PASTORS'   COLLEGE.  383

he  may  distinguish  liimself  as  a  diligent  student ;  he
may  succeed  at  first  in  the  ministry  ;  and  yet,  when
trials  of  temper  and  character  occur  in  the  pastor-
ate, he  may  be  found  wanting."

"  We  have  had  comparatively  few  causes  for  re-
gret of  this  sort,  but  there  have  been  some  such,
and  these  pierce  us  with  many  sorrows.  I  devoutly
bless  God  that  He  has  sent  to  the  Colleo^e  some  of
the  holiest,  soundest,  and  most  self-denying  preach-
ers I  know,  and  I  pray  that  He  may  continue  to  do
so  ;  but  it  would  be  more  than  a  miracle  If  all  should
excel.  While  thus  speaking  of  trials  connected
with  the  men  themselves,  it  is  due  to  our  gracious
God  to -bear  testimony  that  these  have  been  com-
paratively light,  and  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared
wath  the  great  joy  which  we  experience  In  seeing
no  less  than  two  hundred  and  seven  brethren  still
servlnor  the  Lord  accordlni^f  to  their  measure  of  s^Ift,
and  all,  it  Is  believed,  earnestly  contending  for  tl:e
faith  once  delivered  unto  the  saints  ;  nor  Is  the  joy
less  in  remembering  that  eleven  have  sweetly  fallen
asleep  after  having  fought  a  good  fight.  At  this
hour  some  of  our  most  flourishing  Baptist  Churches
are  presided  over  by  pastors  trained  in  our  College,
and  as  years  shall  add  ripeness  of  experience  and
stabilitv  of  character,  others  will  be  found  to  stand  in
the  front  rank  of  the  Lord's  host."

"  The  young  brethren  are  boarded  generally  In
twos  and  tlirees,  in  the  houses  of  our  friends  around
the  Tabernacle,  for  which  the  College  pays  a  mod-


^8  4  CIIARLLS  n.  SrURCLOX.

erate  weekly  amount.  The  plan  of  separate
lodging  we  believe  to  be  far  preferable  to  having  all
under  one  roof;  lor,  by  the  latter  mode,  men  are
isolated  from  general  family  habits,  and  are  too  apt
to  fall  into  superabundant  levity.  The  circum-
stances of  the  families  who  entertain  our  young
friends  are  generally  sudi  that  they  are  not  elevated
above  the  social  position  which  in  all  probability
they  will  have  to  occupy  in  future  years,  but  are
kept  in  connection  with  the  struggles  and  condi-
tions of  every- day  life."

"  Devotional  habits  arecultivatedto  theutmost.and
the  students  are  urored  to  do  as  much  evangelistic
work  as  they  can.  The  severe  pressure  put  upon
them  to  make  the  short  term  as  useful  as  possible,
leaves  small  leisure  for  such  efforts,  but  this  is  in
most  instances  faithfully  economized.  Although  our
usual  period  is  twj  years,  whenever  it  is  thought
right  the  term  of  study  is  lengthened  to  three  or
four  years  ;  indeed,  there  is  no  fixed  rule,  all  arrange-
ments being  ordered  by  the  circumstances  and
attainments  of  each  individual.

**As  before  hinted,  our  numbers  have  greatly
grown,  and  now  range  from  eighty  to  one  hundred.
Very  promising  nien,  who  are  suddenly  thrown  in
our  way,  are  received  at  any  time,  and  others  who
are  selected  from  the  main  body  of  applicants  come
in  at  the  commencement  of  terms.  The  church  at
the  Tabernacle  continues  to  furnish  a  large  quota  of
men,  and  as  these  have  usually  been  educated  for


THE  PASTORS'   COLLEGE.  -^c^^

two  or  more  years  in  our  Evening  Classes,  they  are
more  advanced  and  better  able  to  profit  by  our
two  years  of  study.  We  have  no  difficulty  in  find-
ing spheres  for  men  who  are  ready  and  fitted  for
them.  There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  supply
of  trained  ministers  is  in  advance  of  the  demand.
Even  on  the  lowest  orround  of  consideration,  there  is
yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed  ;  and  w^hen
men  break  up  fresh  soil,  as  ours  are  encouraged  to  do,
the  field  is  the  world,  and  the  prayer  for  more  laborers
is  daily  more  urgent.  If  the  Lord  would  but  send  us
funds  commensurate,  there  are  hundreds  of  neicrhbor-
hoods  needing  the  pure  Gospel,  which  we  could  by  His
erace  chan^fe  from  deserts  Into  orardens.  How  far
this  is  a  call  upon  the  reader  let  him  judge  as  in  the
sight  of  God.  Shall  there  be  the  gifts  and  graces
of  the  Spirit  given  to  the  Church,  and  shall  there  not
also  be  sufficient  bestowed  of  the  earthly  treasure?
How  much  owest  thou  unto  my  Lord.'*

"The  College  was  for  some  little  time  aided  by
the  zealous  services  of  Mr.  W.  Cubitt,  of  Thrapstone,
who  died  among  us,  enjoying  our  highest  esteem.
Mr.  Gracey,  the  classical  tutor,  a  most  able  brother,
is  one  of  ourselves,  and  was  in  former  years  a
student,  though  from  possessing  a  solid  education,
he  needed  little  instruction  from  us  except  In  theol-
ogy. In  him  we  have  one  of  the  most  efficient  tutors
living,  a  man  fitted  for  any  post  requiring  thorough
scholarship  and  aptness  In  communicating  knowl-
edge. Mr.  Fergusson,  In  the  English  elementary
25


^86  CHARLES  //.  sruRGEo:^,

classes,  does  the  first  work  upon  the  rough  stones  of
the  quarry,  and  we  have  heard  from  the  men  whom
he  has  taught  In  the  Evening  Classes,  speeches  and
addresses  which  would  have  adorned  any  assembly,
proving  to  demonstration  his  ability  to  cope  with
the  difficulties  of  uncultured  and  icj-norant  minds.
Mr.  Johnson,  who  zealously  aids  in  the  evening,  is
also  a  brother  precisely  suited  to  the  post  which  he
occupies."

"These  Evening  Classes  afford  an  opportunity  to
Christian  men  engaged  during  the  day  to  obtain  an
education  for  nothinof  durinor  their  leisure  time,  and
very  many  avail  themselves  of  the  privilege.  Nor
must  I  forget  to  mention  Mr.  Selway,  who  takes  the
department  of  physical  science,  and  by  his  interest-
ing experiments  and  lucid  descriptions,  gives  to  his
listeners  an  introduction  of  those  departments  of
knowledge  w-hlch  most  abound  with  Illustrations.
Last,  but  far  from  least,  I  adore  the  goodness  of  God
which  sent  me  so  dear  and  efficient  a  fellow-helper  as
my  brother  In  the  flesh  and  In  the  Lord,  J.  A.  Spur-
geon.  His  w^ork  has  greatly  relieved  me  of  anxlet}',
and  his  superior  educational  qualifications  have
tended  to  raise  the  tone  of  the  Instruction  given."

"  As  to  the  quality  of  the  preachers  whom  \ve
have  been  enabled  to  send  forth,  Ave  need  no  more
impartial  witness  than  the  good  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,
who  was  kind  enou!::^h  to  express  himself  publicly  in
Elnsbur^^  Chapel,  April  4th,  1870,  in  the  following
generous  terms:"


THE  PASTORS'   COLLEGE.  387

"'  It  was  an  utter  fallacy  to  suppose  that  the  peo-
ple of  England  would  ever  be  brought  to  a  sense  of
order  and  discipline  by  the  repetition  of  miserable
services,  by  bits  of  wax  candle,  by  rags  of  Popery,
and  by  gymnastics  in  the  chancel :  nothing  was
adapted  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  people  but  the
Gospel  message  brought  home  to  their  hearts,  and
he  knew  of  none  who  had  done  better  service  in  this
evangelistic  work  than  the  pupils  trained  in  Mr.
Spurgeon's  College.  They  had  a  singular  faculty
for  addressing  the  population,  and  going  to  the  very
heart  of  the  people.'  "

"Those  who  measure  effort  by  result  will  be  grati-
fied to  learn  that  during  the  last  five  years  our  sta-
tistics show  that  the  Churches  under  the  care  of  our
young  pastors  have  received  a  clear  increase  of  ten
thousand  members.  How  much  of  Divine  power
and  grace  this  reveals,  eternity  alone  can  disclose.
Had  we  reckoned  in  earlier  years,  we  should  have  seen
equal  proportionate  success  ;  and  it  is  no  small  mat-
ter for  congratulation  that  the  stricter  examination
of  results  which  we  have  carried  out  of  late  mani-
fests such  a  satisfactory  total.

"  Each  year  the  brethren  educated  at  the  Pastors'
College  are  invited  to  meet  in  the  conference  in  the
Tabernacle,  and  they  are  generously  entertained  by
our  friends.  The  week  is  spent  in  holy  fellowship,
prayer,  and  intercourse.  By  this  means  men  in
remote  villao-es,  laborino- under  discouraoinof  circum-
stances  and  ready  to  sink  from  loneliness  of  spirit,


388  CITARIES  H.  SPURGE  OX.

are  encourao-f'cl  and  strenothened  :  Indeed,  all  the
men  confess  that  a  stimulus  Is  thus  olven  which  no
other  means  could  confer."  The  conference  of  1870
was  regarded  by  all  as  a  visitation  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  and  the  brethren  returned  to  their  labor  full
of  zeal  and  hope.

"All  things  considered,  gratitude  and  hope  are
supreme  in  connection  with  the  Pastors'  College  ;
and  with  praise  of  God  and  thanks  to  a  thousand
friends,  the  president  and  his  helpers  gird  up  the
loins  of  their  minds  for  vet  more  abundant  labors  In
the  future.  To  every  land  we  hope  yet  to  send
forth  the  Gospel  In  its  fi  llness  and  purity.  We
pray  the  Lord  to  raise  up  missionaries  among  our
students,  and  make  everv  one  a  winner  of  souls.
Brethren,  remember  this  work  In  your  prayers,  and
in  your  allotment  of  the  Lord's  portion  of  your  sub-
stance."

In  his  report  for  1881,  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave  an
excellent  resume  of  the  work,  and  it  is  still  of  great
interest.     He  said  :

"  On  inquiring  the  otherdayfor  the  secretar}'of  one
of  our  largest  societies,  I  was  informed  that  he  had
eone  to  the  seaside  for  a  month,  in  order  that  he
might  have  quiet  to  prepare  the  report.  I  do  not
wonder  at  this  If  he  has  aforetime  written  many
descriptions  of  the  same  work,  for  every  year  in-
creases the  difficulty  unless  a  man  is  prepared  to
say  the  same  thln^^  over  and  over  again.  Very  few
can,  like   Paganini,  perform   so   admirably  on    one


THE  PASTORS'   COLLLGE,  389

string  that  everybody  is  charmed  with  the  melody.
The  task  erows  still  harder  when  the  year  has  been
peaceful  and  successful.  It  has  been  truly  said,
•  Happy  is  the  nation  which  has  no  history,'  because
it  has  been  free  from  changes,  wars,  convulsions,
and  revolutions;  but  I  may  remark,  on  the  other
hand,  unhappy  is  the  historian  who  has  to  produce  a
record  of  a  certain  length  concerning  a  period  which
has  been  innocent  of  strikini^  events — makinor  bricks
without  straw  is  nothing  to  it."

*'  The  Pastors'  College  has  of  late  maintained  the
even  tenor  of  its  wav,knowinoflittle  of  external  attack
and  nothine  of  internal  strife.  Reofular  in  its  work
and  fixed  in  its  purpose,  its  movement  has  been
calm  and  strong.  Hence  there  are  no  thrilling
incidents,  painful  circumstances,  or  striking  occur-
rences with  which  to  fill  my  page  and  thrill  my
reader's  soul.  Gj'utitude  writ  large  is  about  the
only  material  at  hand  out  of  which  to  fashion  my
report.  '  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul ! '  is  my  one
song,  and  I  feel  as  if  I  could  repeat  it  a  thousand
tunes.

"The  College  started  with  a  definite  doctrinal
basis.  I  never  affected  to  leave  great  questions  as
moot  points  to  be  discussed  in  the  hall,  and  believed
or  not  believed,  as  might  be  the  fashion  of  the  hour.
The  creed  of  the  College  is  well  known,  and  we
invite  none  to  enter  who  do  not  accept  it.  The
doctrines  ot  grace,  coupled  with  a  firm  belief  in
human  responsibility,  are  held  with  intense  convic-


390  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

tlon,  and  those  who  do  not  receive  them  would  not
find  themselves  at  home  within  our  walls  The
Lord  has  sent  us  tutors  who  are  lovers  of  sound
doctrine,  and  zealous  for  the  truth.  No  uncertain
sound  has  been  given  forth  at  any  time,  and  we
v/ould  sooner  close  the  house  than  have  it  so."

'*  Heresy  in  colleges  means  false  doctrine  through-
out the  churches  ;  to  defile  the  fountain  is  to  pollute
the  streams.  Hesitancy  which  might  be  tolerated
in  an  ordinary  minister  would  utterly  disqualify  a
teacher  of  teachers.  The  experiment  of  Doddridge
ought  to  satisfy  all  godly  men  that  colleges  without
dogmatic  evangelical  teaching  are  more  likely  to  be
seminaries  of  Socinianism  than  schools  of  the
prophets.  Old  Puritanic  theology  has  been  heartily
accepted  by  those  received  into  our  College,  and  on
leaving  it,  they  have  almost  with  one  consent  re-
mained faithful  to  that  which  they  have  received.
The  men  are  before  the  public  in  every  part  of  the
country  and  their  testimony  well  known."

"This  institution  has  now  reached  its  twenty-fifth
year,  and  its  object,  spirit,  and  manner  of  work
remain  the  same.  It  was  intended  from  the  first  to
receive  young  men  w^hohad  been  preaching  for  a  suf-
ficient time  to  test  their  abilities  and  their  call  to  the
work  of  the  ministry,  and  such  young  men  have  been
forthcoming  every  year  in  growing  numbers.  Some
bodies  of  Christians  have  to  lament  that  their  minis-
try is  not  adequately  supplied  :  I  know  of  one  por-
tion of  the  Church  which  is  sending  up  to  Heaven


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.  39 1

bitter  lamentalions  because  as  the  fathers  depart  to
their  rest,  there  is  scanty  hope  that  their  places  will
be  filled;  but  among  the  Baptists  the  candidates  for
the  ministry  are,  if  possible,  too  plentiful.  This  is  a
new  state  of  things,  and  is  to  be  interpreted  as  indi-
cating growth  and  zeal.  Certainly  the  applicants
are  not  tempted  by  rich  livings,  or  even  by  the
prospect  of  competent  support ;  or,  if  they  are,  I
take  abundant  pains  to  set  before  them  the  assured
truth  that  they  will  find  our  ministry  to  be  a  warfare
abounding  in  lonof  marches  and  stern  battles  ;  but
equally  noted  for  meagre  rations.  Still  they  come,
and  it  needs  a  very  hard  heart  to  repel  them,  and  to
refuse  to  eager  brethren  the  drill  and  equipment
which  they  covet  so  earnestly.  If  it  were  wise  to
increase  the  number  of  students,  another  hundred
of  suitable  men  could  at  once  be  added  to  those
who  are  already  under  tuition."

"  From  the  commencement  our  main  object  was
to  help  men  who  from  lack  of  funds  could  not  ob-
tain an  education  for  themselves.  These  have  been
supplied  not  only  with  tuition  and  books,  gratis,  but
with  board  and  lodgrine,  and  in  some  cases  with
clothes  and  pocket  money.  Some  very  successful
brethren  needed  everything,  and  if  they  had  been
required  to  pay,  they  must  have  remained  illiterate
preachers  to  this  day.  Still,  year  by  year,  the  num-
ber of  men  who  are  ready  to  support  themselves  in
whole  or  in  part  has  increased,  and  I  believe  that  it
is  inareasini^  and  will  increase.      As  a  colle^re  we


3Q2  CHARLES  il.  SPURGE  ON,

have  had  to  struggle  with  a  repute  based  upcn
falsehood  and  created  by  jealousy  ;  but  this  has  not
injured  us  to  any  great  extent;  for  men  come  to  us
from  America,  Australia,  and  the  Cape,  and  appli-
cations have  frequently  been  made  from  foreign
countries.  German  students  have  attended  our
classes  during  their  own  vacations,  and  members  of
other  colleges  are  usually  to  be  seen  at  our  lectures.
The  institution  never  deserved  to  be  charged  with
giving  a  mere  apology  for  an  education  ;  and  if  ever
that  reproach  could  have  been  justly  cast  upon  us,
it  is  utterly  undeserved  now  that  the  time  of  study
has  become  more  extended,  and  a  fuller  course  of
training  has  thus  become  possible."

"  Scholarship  for  its  own  sake  was  never  sought
and  never  will  be  within  the  Pastors'  College  ;  but
to  help  men  to  become  efficient  preachers  has  been
and  ever  will  be  the  sole  aim  of  all  those  concerned
in  its  management.  I  shall  not,  in  order  to  increase
our  prestige,  refuse  poor  men,  or  zealous  young
Christians  whose  early  education  has  been  neglected.
Pride  would  suo^orest  that  we  take  '  a  better  class  ot
men  ;'  but  experience  shows  that  they  are  not  bet-
ter, that  eminently  useful  men  spring  from  all  ranks,
that  diamonds  may  be  found  in  the  rough,  and  that
some  who  need  most  pains  in  the  polishing,  reward
our  labor  a  thousand  fold.  My  friends  will  still  stand
by  me  in  my  desire  to  aid  the  needy  but  pious
brother,  and  we  shall  rejoice  together  as  we  con-
tlnnallv  seethe  plonj^hrnm.  t^^e  fisherman,    and   tVie


THE  PASTORS'   COLLEGE.  393

mi!chanic  taught  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly,
and  enabled  through  divine  grace  to  proclaim  in
the  language  of  the  people  the  salvation  of  our
God."

"  During  the  past  year  about  one  hundred  and
twenty  men  have  been  with  us ;  but  as  some  have
come  and  others  have  gone,  the  average  number  in
actual  residence  has  averaofed  one  hundred.  Of
these  a  few  have  been  with  us  three  years,  and  more
have  entered  upon  the  third  year.  The  rule  Is  that
a  man's  usual  period  terminates  at  the  end  of  two
years,  and  his  remaining  longer  depends  upon  the
judgment  formed  of  him.  Certain  men  will  never
get  beyond  an  English  education,  and  to  detain
them  from  their  work  is  to  repress  their  ardor  with-
out bestowing  a  compensatory  advantage.  In  other
cases,  the  longer  the  period  of  study  the  better.
Probably  the  third  year  is  to  many  a  student  more
useful  than  the  other  two,  and  he  goes  forth  to  his
life-work  more  thoroughly  prepared.  I  could  not
lengthen  the  course  in  former  days,  when  churches
tempted  the  brethren  away  before  the  proper  time,
as  they  too  often  did.  They  told  these  raw  youths
that  It  was  a  pity  to  delay,  that  if  they  left  their
studies  souls  mi^jht  be  saved,  and  I  know  not  what
besides  ;  and  some  were  Induced  to  run  away,  as
Rowland  Hill  would  have  said,  before  they  had
pulled  their  boots  on.  If  I  constrained  them  to  re-
main, the  eood  deacons  of  the  eaofer  churches
teliounrht  me  a  sort  of  harsh  jailor,  who  locked  up  his


394  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

prisoners  and  would  not  give  them  up  at  the  en-
treaty of  their  friends.  One  wrote  and  bade  me
loose  the  brother,  for  the  Lord  had  need  of  him,  and
I  would  have  let  the  young  man  go  if  I  had  thought
that  he  was  one  of  the  donkeys  to  whom  the  passage
referred.  That  a  number  of  brethren  may  have  en-
tered upon  their  ministry  prematurely  was  no  fault
of  mine,  but  of  those  who  tempted  them  to  quit  their
classes  too  soon.  However,  there  have  been
periods  in  which  there  is  a  lull  in  the  demand  of  the
churches  for  ministers,  and  then  we  have  been  able
to  retain  the  men  for  a  lono^er  season.  Such  a  time
is  passing  over  us  just  now,  and  I  do  not  regret  it,
for  I  am  persuaded  it  is  good  to  give  the  brethren  a
longer  space  for  preparatory  study."

"I  have  been  very  ill  through  the  greater  part  of
the  past  year,  and  have  therefore  been  unable  to
give  so  much  personal  service  to  the  College  as  I
have  usually  done."

"This  has  been  a  sore  trial  to  me,  but  it  has  been
much  alleviated  by  my  beloved  brother,  J.  A.  Spur-
geon,  the  vice  president,  who  has  looked  after  every-
thing with  great  care  ;  and  I  have  also  been  greatly
comforted  by  the  knowledge  that  the  tutors  are  as
deeply  concerned  about  the  holy  service  as  ever  I
can  be.  It  has  been  my  joy  to  learn  that  the  Col-
lege was  never  in  a  better  state  in  all  respects  than
now,  and  that  the  men  under  training  give  promise
of  becoming  useful  preachers.  I  have  had  very
litde  weeding  work  to  do  on  my  coming  back  to  my


THE  PASTCRS'   COLLEGE,  3^5"

place,  and  those  whom  I  have  removed  were  not
chargeable  with  any  fault,  but  their  capacity  was
questioned  by  the  tutors.  All  through  the  year  this
painful  operation  has  to  be  carried  on,  and  it  always
causes  me  much  grief ;  but  it  is  a  necessary  part  of
my  official  duty  as  president."

"  Youno"  men  who  come  to  us  loaded  with  testi-
monials  are  occasionally  found  after  a  while  to  be
lacking  in  application  or  in  spiritual  power ;  and
after  due  admonishment  and  trial  they  have  to  be
sent  back  to  the  place  from  whence  they  came.
Others  are  as  eood  as  ^^old,  but  their  heads  ache,
and  their  health  fails  under  hard- study,  or  from  lack
of  mental  capacity  they  cannot  master  the  subjects
placed  before  them.  These  must  be  kindly  but
firmly  set  aside  ;  but  L  always  dread  the  task.  This
thinning-out  process  is  done  with  conscientiousness,
under  the  guidance  of  the  tutors  ;  but  this  year  there
has  been  little  need  of  it,  and  I  have  rejoiced  in  the
fact,  since  frequent  depression  of  spirit  has  made  it
undesirable  to  have  much  trying  work  to  do.  I  am
glad  to  say  that  very  rarely  have  I  had  to  deal  with
a  case  of  moral  failure.  Bad  young  men  have  crept
in  among  us,  and  no  men  are  perfect;  but  I  have
great  comfort  in  seeing  the  earnest  and  prayerful
spirit  which  has  prevailed  among  the  brotherhood."

"Foremost  among  our  aims  is  the  promotion  of
a  vigorous  spiritual  life  among  those  who  are  pre-
paring to  be  under-shepherds  of  Christ's  flock.  By
frequent  meetings  for  prayer,  and  by  other  means,


396  LH..KLES  //.  SPUaGEON,

we  labor  to  maintain  a  high  tone  of  spirituaHty.  I
have  endeavored  in  my  lectures  and  addresses  to
stir  up  the  holy  fire  ;  for  well  I  know  that  if  the
lieavenly  fiame  burns  low,  nothing  else  will  avail.
'1  he  earnest  action  of  the  College  Missionary  Society
has  been  a  source  of  great  joy  to  me  ;  for  above  all
things  I  desire  to  see  many  students  devoting  them-
selves to  foreign  work.  The  Temperance  Society
also  does  a  good  work,  and  tends  to  keep  alive
amonor  the  men  a  burnino^  hatred  of  England's  direst
curse."

"  We  need  the  daily  prayer  of  God's  people  that
much  grace  may  be  with  all  concerned  in  this  im-
portant business  ;  for  what  can  we  do  without  the
Holy  Spirit ?  How  few  ever  pray  for  students!
If  ministers  do  not  come  up  to  the  desired  standaid,
may  not  the  members  of  the  churches  rebuke  them-
selves for  having  restrained  prayer  on  their  ac-
count? When  does  a  Christian  worker  more  need
prayer  than  in  his  early  days,  when  his  character  is
forming  and  his  heart  is  tenderly  susceptible  both
of  good  and  evil  influences?  I  would  beseech  all
who  have  power  with  God  to  remember  our  col-
leges in  their  intercessions.  The  solemn  interests
involved  in  the  condition  of  these  schools  of  the
prophets  compel  me  to  entreat,  even  unto  tears,  that
the  hopeful  youth  of  our  ministry  may  not  be  for-
gotten in  the  supplications  of  the  saints.  For  us
also,  who  have  the  responsible  duty  of  guiding  the
minds    of   these    young    men,  much  prayer  is  re-


THE  PASTORS'   COLLEGE.  397

quested,  that  we  may  have  wisdom,  love,  gentle-
ness, firmness,  and  abounding  spiritual  power.  It
is  not  every  man  who  can  usefully  influence  students,
nor  can  the  same  men  have  equal  power  at  all  times.
The  Divine  Spirit  is  needed,  and  He  Is  given  to
them  that  ask  for  His  sacred  teaching."

*' In  Great  Britain  three  hundred  and  fifty-five
former  students  are  preaching  the  Word,  some  in
the  more  prominent  pulpits  of  the  denomination,
and  others  In  positions  where  their  patience  and
self-denial  are  severely  tested  by  the  present  de-
pression In  trade,  and  the  consequent  Inability  of
rural  cont^reeatlons  to  furnish  them  with  adequate
support.  The  College  has  reason  to  rejoice  not
only  In  the  success  of  her  most  honored  sons,  but
in  the  faithfulness  and  perseverance  of  the  rank  and
file,  whose  services,  although  they  are  little  noticed
on  earth,  will  receive  the  '  well  done '  of  the
Lord."

"This  institution  Is  not  alone  a  Colleo^e,  but  a
Home  and  Foreign  Missionarv  Societv.  Our  three
evangelists  have  traversed  the  land  with  great  dili-
g-ence,  and  the  Lord  has  set  His  seal  to  their  work."

*' It  Is  my  greatest  pleasure  to  aid  In  commencing
new  churches.  The  oftener  brethren  can  create
their  own  spheres  the  more  glad  shall  I  be.  It  Is
not  needful  to  repeat  the  details  of  former  reports;
but  many  churches  have  been  founded  through  the
College,  and  there  are  more  to  follow.  I  announced
at  tlie  beginning  of  this  enterprise   that  It  was  not


393  CHARLES  If.  SPURGEON.

alcne  for  the  education  of  ministers,  but  for  thegen-
eral  spread  of  the  Gospel  ;  and  this  has  been  ad-
hered to,  a  part  of  the  income  being  always  ex-
pended in  that  direction."

The  buildincjs  now  known  as  the  Pastors'  College
were  begun  in  1873  ;  the  foundation  corner-stone
being  laid  in  October  of  that  year.  Mr.  Spurgeon
was  led  to  the  enterprise  for  the  construction  of  a
special  building  for  the  accommodation  of  students
by  a  gift  of  five  thouse.nd  dollars  which  was  pre-
sented to  him  in  the  previous  May.  During  the
construction  of  the  building  he  received  a  elft  of
five  thousand  more  with  fifteen  hundred  dollars  from
the  students.  Afterward  a  gentleman  died,  leaving
him  a  bequest  of  twenty-five  thousand  dollars  in  his
will.  The  students  themselves  entered  with  zeal
into  the  work  of  raisino-  monev  for  the  buildino^  and
although  they  were  themselves  universally  poor
they  did  have  Influence  enough  with  others  to  raise
twelve  thousand  five  hundred  dollars.

The  completed  buildings  cost  seventy-five  thou-
sand dollars,  the  debt  for  which  was  entirely  paid  "
within  a  few  months  after  Its  completion.  Fifteen
thousand  dollars  toward  the  payment  was  given  by
a  lady  as  a  memorial  to  her  husband,  and  ten  thou-
sand dollars  w-as  left  to  the  College  by  the  will  of  a
stranger  who  had  regularly  read  Mr.  Spurgeon's
sermons.

The  statisdcs  of  the  College  as  late  as  1889,  show
that  the  students  who  had  graduated  had  established


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE,  ^gg

over  eighty  churches  in  and  about  London,  and  in
all  over  two  hundred  churches  in  the  world.  Some
in  the  most  distant  countries  and  a  few  on  the
islands  of  the  sea.  They  had  baptized  over  forty
thousand  people,  and  the  increase  of  their  churches
had  been  over  thirty-nine  thousand.  In  America
they  have  instituted  fourteen  different  churches  and
proved  themselves  most  efficient  evangelists  among
all  classes  of  people.  They  are  men  who  not  only
preach  and  teach,  but  positively  work,  imitating  very
closely  the  example  of  Mr.  Spurgeon.  He  was  al-
ways engaged  in  some  profitable  labor,  excepting
only  the  hours  positively  necessary  to  physical  and
mental  rest.

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  orraduates  of  the
Pastors'  College  up  to  1891,  giving  first  those  who
are  at  present  preaching  in  America :

Former  students  now  in  the  United  States  and
Canada:

Auvache,  F.  W.  Dunn,  H.

Avery,  I.  F.  Fairbrother,  A.

Ball,  G'.  W.  Forth,  Joseph

Biss,  W.  A.  Foster  James  F.

Blaikie,  P.  H.  Gibb,  Austin

Brown,  A.  F.  Gilkes,  W.

Games,  W.  Gregory,  C.  W.

Childs,  H.  W.  Harrison,  R.  M.,  D.  D.

Clark,  John  Holmes   R.

Clatworthy,  W.  Hughes,  R.

Cocks,  H.  Irving,  J.  J.

Coker,  J.  Johnson,  T.  L.

Cook,  C.  A.  Kemp,  G.  H.

Cooper,  A.  McArthur,  A

Cother,  W.  J.  McKinney,  W.

Dann,  Frank  Mayo,  W.  L.


400


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  OX-


Noble,  Mark
Ostler,  W.
Peirins,  W.
Pri chard,  W.  E.
Read,  Albert
Richardson,  C.  H,
Shadick,  R.  A.
Silke,W.  G.
Smith,  C.  Wilson


Smith,  Napo'eon
Stote,  Amos  H.
Trapp,  G.  II.
Ward,  \.  J.
Willis,  \\.  W.
With  am,  A.  A.
Wotton,  W.  T.
Yeatman.  R.


Former  students  now  In  England  and  the  Colo<
nies,  or  in  Missionary  Stations :


Adams,  H,  F.
Adams,  W.
Adamson,  T.
Almy,  J.  T.
Anderson,  J.  G.
Archer.  H.  D,
Ashton,  E.
Askew,  J.
Aubrey,  J.
Aust,  F.  J.
Ayers,  R.  W.
Bailey,  G.  T.
Baily,  R.
B  iker,  S.  J.
Banfie  d,  J.  H.
Bane  1,  H.  E.
Barton,  J.
Baste r,  W\
Bateman,  F.  R.
Bateman,  John
Batts,  H.  j.
Batts,  H.  J.
Bax,  A,
Beecliff,  R.  J.
Bennett,  J.  L.
Berry,  E.  W.
Billington,  A.
Bird,  A.
Blackaby,  F.  E.
Blackie,  H.  G.
Blaikie,  J.
Blake,  J.
Blamire,  T.
Blewett.  E.
Blocksidge,  W.  W.
Bloom,  W.  K.
Bloy,  C.


Bonser,  W.

Bool,  H.

Boulshrr,  G.

Bowler,  G.  B.

Boyall,  C.

Bradford,  H.

Bradford,  J.

Breewood,  T.

Brett,  J.  E.

Bridge,  A.

Bridge,  I.

Brigg.  B.

Briggs,  J.

Broad,  W.  H.

Brown,  A.  G.

Brown,  H.  Rvlands

Brown,].  A,'M.  R.  U„  S,

Bruce,  I).

Bruce,  J.  S.

Bryan,  W.  C.

Piudgen,  A.

Bunning,  W.  C.

Burnham,  J,

Burt,  H.  iM.

Cameron,  T.  D.

Campbell,  J.  O'Neill

Campbell,  J.  W.

Carlile,  J.  C.

Carr,  G.  H,

Carter,  E.  A.

Carter,  F.  C.

Carver,  T.  A<

Case,  H.  B.

Chadwick,  J,

Chambers,  A.  C.

Chambers,  Clarence

Cbanner,  H.


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.


401


Chapman,  C.
Chapman,  D.  C.
Chettleborough,  R.  E.
Chinnery,  D.

Churcher,  T.  G.,  M.  D.,  M.  R.  C.  S.
Clark,  C.  J.
Clark,  Henry
Clark,  James  A.
Clark,  Joseph
Clark,  W.
Clarke,  A.  J.
Clow,  W.  G.
Cockerton,  F.  M.
Cole,  C.
Cole,  E.  S.
Cotley,  J.  W.
Collins,  John
Compton,  E.
Coombs,  W.
Cooper,  J.  R.-
Corbet, A.  F.
Cottam,  J.
Cotton,  A.  F.
Cox,  G.  D.
Cox,  J.  M.
Crabb,  S.
Crouch,  C.  D.
Crouch,  J.
Cuff,  W.
Cumming,  M.
Curry,  T.  B.
Curtis,  A.
Curtis,  G.
Curwood,  A.  W.
Dallaston,  C.
Dalton,  J.  J.
Dann,  C.  A.
Dann,  G.  J.
Davidson,  A.  K.
Davidson,  G.  W.
Davies,  G.
Davies,  James  W.
Davis,  H.
Davis,  J.
Davis,  VV.  A.
Day,  A.
Deal,  C.
Deane,  J.  J.
Dewdney,  A.
Doubleday,  J.
Dovi^en,  Z.  T.,  F.  R.  G.  S.
Do  waning,  J.

26


Driver,  H.  H.
Duncan,  G.,  D.  D.
Dunington,  H.
Dunster.  F.  W.
Dupee,  J.
Durbin,  F.
Dyer,  E.
Dyer,  H.  J.
Dyke,  S.  A.
Easter,  J.
Edgerton,  W.  F.
Edgley,  G.  T.
Edwards,  E.  H.
Edwards,  E.  J.
Edwards,  T.  L.
Ellis,  E.  H.
Ellis,  J.  J.
Emerson,  C.  E.
Ennals,  G.  T.
Ensoll,  R.
Evans,  George  D.
Everett,  A.  G.
Ewens,  W.
Ewing,  J.  W.,  B.  A
Fairey,  S.
Fellowes,  C.  A.
Feltham,  F.  J.
Field,  H.  C.
Field,  John
Field,  J.  B.
Field,  T.  B.
Finch.  R.  R.
Fisk,  E.  E.
Flatt,  F.  J.
Fletcher,  H.  A.
Forth,  Jacob  C.
Foskett,  L.  R.
Foster,  W.  R.
Fowler,  C.  J.
Freeman,  G.
Fullerton,  W.  Y.
Gathercole,  T.  G.
Genders,  J.  W.
George,  E.
Gibson,  Jesse
Gibson,  J.  G.
Gillard,  W.
Gilmore,  J.  D.
Glendening,  R.  E.
Glover,  J.
Goacher,  W.
Good,  C.  E.  L.


402


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.


Goodchild,  G.
Gooding,  C.  D.
Gordon,  C.  L.
Gordon,  S.  C.
Gower,  H.  F.
Gracey,  D.
Graham,  Arthur
Graham.  R.  H.  C.
Grant,  James
Grant,  J.  H.
Green,  John
Greenwood,  T.
Greer,  A.

Hackney,  W.,  M.  A.
Hadler,  E.  S.
Hadler,  John  R.
Hagen,  T.
Hailstone,  W.  G.
Haines,  W.  W.
Hall,  A.
Hamilton,  E.  L.
Hancocks,  T.
Harmer,  A.  A.
Harrald,  J.  W.

Harrington,  T.

Harris,  G.  H.

Han-is,  W.  J.

Harrison,  J.  S.

Hart,  Josiah

Harvey,  F.

Haste,  A.  G.

Hay,  D.  H.

Hayman,  J.  J.

Hearson,  G.

Heath,  N.

Harries,  R.

Hewitt,  C.

Hewlett,  A.

Hewson,  J.  C.

Hibberd,  F.

Higgins,  W.

Higlett,  W.

Hiley,  D.  J.

Hillman,  J.

Hobbs,  W.

Hobby,  E.  A.

Hockey,  J.  S.

Hogbin,  F.  A.

Hollinshead,  J.

Honour,  D.

Hook,  G.  H.

Hopper,  A.  W.


Home,  J.
Hudgell,  P.  A.
Huntly,  A.  H.
Huntley,  G.  A.  J.
Hyde,  A.
Ince,  E.  G.
Ingram,  C.  A.
Ingrem,  C.
Isaac,  E.

Jackmann,  G.  H.  F.
Jackson,  F.  A.
Jackson,  John
James,  F.
Jasper,  J.  E.
Jeffrey,  R.  F.
Johns.  A.  E.
Johnson,  A.
Johnson,  A.  E.
Johnson,  T.
Jones,  Samuel
Jones,  Sydney  J.
Jones,  W.  Corden

Jones-Miller,  N.  T.
Joseph,  C.
Judd,  T.  A.
Julyan,  W.

Juniper,  W.  J.

Kemp,  F.  G.

Kemp,  J.

Kendon,  J.  J.

Keys,  J.  L.

Kidncr,  H.

Kilby,  H.

King,  A.  H.

Kitchener,  J.

Knee,  H.

Knell,  A.

Knight,  G.  J.

Knight,  J.  J.

Knight,  W.  H.

Laing,  D.  W.

Lambourne,  W.  T.

Lang,  W.  L.,  F.  R.  G.  S.

Lardner,  T.

Last,  E.

Latham,  A.  W.

Latimer,  R.  S.

Lauderdale,  E.

Layzell,  R.

I^ennie,  R.

Lester.  A.

Levinsohn,  I.


THE  PASTORS'   COLLEGE.


403


Lewis,  R.  T.
Linnecar,  G.  W.
Llewellyn,  W,  S.
Loinaz,  D.
Longhurst,  T.  J.
Lyne,  S.
Lynn,  W.  E.
M'Allister,  S.
McAus'ane,  J.
McCaig,  A.,  B.  A
McCullough,  R.
McDoug  II,  A.
Mackenzie,  W.  L.
Macmillan,  D.
M'Nab,  J.
Mace,  D.
Mackey,  H.  O.
Macoun,  T.
Malins,  G.  H.
Mann,  W,
Maplesden,  R.
Marchant,  F.  G
Markham,  J.
Marshall,  B.
Marshall,  G.
Marshall,  R.
Martin,  H.  J.
Martin,  J,  E.
Martin,  W.  A.
Mason,  E.
Mateer,  J.  T.
Maycock,  T.
Mayers,  W.  J.
Maynard,  W,
Medhurst,  T.  W.
Mesquitta,  R.
Middleton,  R.  J.
Milledge,  H.
Miller,  G.  A.
Miils,  A.
Minifie,  W.  C.
Mitchell,  W,  S.
Monk,  G.
Moore,  H.
Morgan,  A.  R.
Morley,  E.
Morris,  J.  S.
Morris,  M.
Morrison,  R.  B.
Moyle,  J.  E.
Murphy,  J.  M.
Myles,  W.  G.


Neale,  E.  S.
Near,  L
Needham,  S.
Ney,  J.

Nichols,  W.  B.
0!dring,G.  W.
Osborne,  E.
Osborne,  W.
Padley,  C.  J.  A.  N.
Page,  W.
Page,  W.  H.  J. .
Palmer,  J.
Palmer,  L.

Papengouth,  C.  A.  V.
Papengouth,  N.
Parker,  A.
Parker,  A.  J.
Parker,  E.  J.
Passmore,  H.  R.
Patrick,  N.  H.
Payne,  A.  J.
Peach,  H.  T.
Pearce,  C.
Pearson   E.  B.
Peden  R.J.
Perry,  T.
Pettman,  W.
Phillips,  A.
Phillips,  H.  A.
Phillips,  H.  R.
Philpot,  T.
Pidgeon,  A.
Piggot,  A.
Pilling,  S.
Plumbridge,  J.  H.
Pope,  G.  W.
Porter,  J.
Potter,  F.
Potter,  J.  G.
Poulton,  J.  S.
Preece,  H.  J.
Price,  W.  F.
Pring,  G.
Priter,  A.
Prosser,  W.  H.
Pullen,  E.  R.
Pullen,  H.  H.
Pursey,  R.
Rankine,  J.
Rawlings,  T.  E.
Raymond,  J.
Reid,  Andrew  J.


404


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.


Rice,  W.  E.
Richards,  E.
Richards,  W.
Richardson,  G.  B.
Robert,  G.  W.
Roberts,  E.
Robinson,  W.  W.
Roger,  J.  L.
Rootham,  J.  N.
Rudge,  C.
Rumsey,  G.  H.
Russell,  D.
Russell,  F.
Ruthven,  W.
Samuel,  G.
Santos,  J.  M.  G.  dos
Savi  le,  A.  S.
Sawday,  C.  B.
Scamell,  T.  W.
Scilley,  J.
Scott,  R.
Seaman,  W.
Sexton,  W.
Sharp,  D.
Shearer,  J.  F.
Short,  A.  G.
Simmonds,  H.  W.
Simmonds,  G.
Skelly,  W.      .
Skingle,  S.
Slack,  C.  A.
Slater,  W.
Smale,  J.
Smathers,  R.
Smith,  Albert
Smith,  B.
Smith,  Frank  M.
Smith,  G.  K.
Smith,  Henry
Smith,  H.  Samuel
Smith,  James
Smith,  James
Smith,  James
Smith,  J.  Manton
Smith,  T.  H.
Smith,  W.
Smith,  W.  H.
Sole,  R.  T.
Soper,  J.  A.
Soper,  W.  T.
Spanswick,  J.
Spanton,  E.


Speed,  R.
Spufford,  H.  T.
Spurgeon,  C.
Spurgeon,  R.
Spurgeon,  T.
Stalberg,  I.  O
Stanley,  C.
Stanley,  G.
Stanley,  J.
Starling,  C.
Stead,  W.  F.
Steedman,  L.  S.
Steward,  F.  J.
Stockley,  T.  I.
Stone,  C.  E.
Stone,  H.  E.
Stubbs,  J.
Styles,  W.  J.
Sullivan,  W.
Sumner,  W.
Swift,  J.  T.
Tait,  D.
Tansley,  J.
Taylor,  H.  W.
Taylor,  W.  J.
Tessier,  A.
Testro,  C.
Thomas,  J.  W.
Thomason,  T.  W.
Thompson,  F.
Thompson,  J.  L.
Thorn,  W.
Tomkins,  W.  J.
Townsend,  C.  W.
Tranter,  F,  D.
Tredray,  W.  H.
Trotman,  H.
Trueman,  H.
Tuck,  F.
Turner,  G.
Turner,  Joshua  J.
Tydeman,  E.  A,
Usher,  W.,  M.  D.
Vanstone,  W.  J.  N.
Vaughan,  C.  W.
Vaughan,  E.
Waddell,  T.  F.
Wamwright,  G.
Walker,  G.
Walker,  W.
Walker,  W.
Wallace,  R.


THE   PASTORS'    COLLEGE-


405


Walter,  E.  E.
Walton,  J.  E.
Ward,  I.  A.
Warren,  J.  B.
Warren,  J.  F.  M.
Watson,  I.
Webb,  G.  A.
Weeks,  J.  H.
Welch,  A.  W.
Welch,  E.  J.
Wells,  W.  E.
Welton,  C.
West,  F.  G.
Westlake,  F.  T.  B.
Whale,  W.
Wheatley,  T.
Whetnall,  M.  H.
White,  E.
White,  Frank  H.
White,  G.  W.
White,  W.
White,  W.  J.
Whiteside,  T.


Whittet,  G.
Whittle,  T.
Wicks,  W.  A.
Wiggins,  W.
Wigstone,  J.  P.
Wilkins,  Joseph
Wilkinson,  John
Williams,  G.  C.
Williams,  J.  G.
Williams,  S.  T.
Williams,  W.
Williamson,  R.
Williamson,  R.  J.
Wills,  R.  E.
Wilson,  John
Wilson,  J.  A.
Winsor,  H.
Wintle,  W.  J.
Wood,  A.  W.
Wood,  Harry
Wright,  G.
Young,  James
Young,  Joseph


CHAPTER  XIV.

THE   ORPHANAGE.

The  Orphanage  connected  with  the  work  of  the
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  is  one  of  those  institutions
which  presents  most  beautifully  the  tenderest  and
loveliest  side  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  character.  His  love
for  children  was  only  exceeded  by  their  love  for
him.  It  was  one  of  the  prominent  features  of  his
character  which  won  for  him  so  much  of  the  success
in  his  early  ministry.  The  children  admired  him
greatly.  The  hearts  of  the  mothers  and  fathers
always  followed  the  love  of  their  children,  and,  in
fact,  the  man  who  can  make  himself  attractive  to
the  pure,  sweet  minds  of  childhood  will  also  be  ne-
cessarily interesting  and  helpful  to  those  of  older
minds.  Men  are  truly  "  but  children  of  a  larger
growth."  Mr.  Spurgeon's  childish  simplicity,  which
was  a  wonderful  feature  of  his  noble  life,  convinced
every  person  who  knew  him  or  heard  of  him  that  he
was  positively  sincere.  And  this  aided  him  in  reach-
inof  their  hearts  and  shielded  him  from  the  attacks
of  those  who  would  malign  him.

"  Innocent  as  a  child,"  said  Mr.  Gladstone,  con-
cerning him,  and  indeed  few  children  of  middle
growth  could  be  said  to  be  as  innocent  as  he.  Evil
406  •     ^


THE  ORPHANAGE.  407

thoughts    found  no  place  in    his    disposition    and
deceit  had  no  part  in  his  magnificent  make-up.

Yet  he  mingled  continually  with  the  lower  classes
in  their  poverty  and  in  their  home  life,  being  called
to  visit  them  in  all  conditions  of  want  and  distress.
He  saw  the  children  bare-headed  and  bare-footed,
often  crying  with  cold,  more  often  besmeared  with
dirt,  sometimes  crippled  as  a  result  of  lack  of  pa-
rental care,  and  his  heart  went  fordi  in  prayer  to  God
for  some  method  of  relief.  He  had  a  great  ad-
miration for  George  Mliller,  whose  magnificent
work  of  faith  has  greatly  surprised  the  unbelieving
world,  and  often  said  all  that  he  could  to  encourage
people  to  assist  Mr.  Miiller  in  his  special  work  for
the  orphans  of  London.

Mr.  Spurgeon  always  entertained  the  idea  that
there  mieht  be  arranged  some  o^rand  institution
which  would  not  only  provide  for  the  parentless
children  but  also  for  those  little  ones  whose  parents
were  unable  or  unwilling  to  provide  for  them  the
necessities  of  life  ;  yet  he  never  saw  the  way  in
which  to  engage  personally  in  such  an  undertaking
until  it  was  thrust  upon  him  unexpectedly.

While  writinof  an  article  for  his  maofazine.  The
Sword  and  The  Trowel,  in  1866,  he  incidentally
mentioned  the  great  need  there  was  of  some  insti-
tution or  work  for  the  care  of  neglected  orphans.
The  result  of  that  little  article  has  been  surprisingly
romantic.  A  lady  who  had  been  the  wife  of  a
clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England  and  was  left  a


408  CHARLES  IT.  SPURGE  ON.

widow  with  considerable  means,  had  been  but  a  few
months  before  received  into  the  Baptist  Church  on
the  profession  of  her  faith  In  Its  principles.  She
read  Mr.  Spurgeon's  reference  to  the  needs  of  the
children,  and,  being  especially  Impressed  at  the  time
with  a  strong  desire  to  be  of  some  special  use  in  the
Master's  work,  she  thought  at  once  of  establishing
the  Orphanage  herself.  For  a  few  days  she  prayed
over  the  matter,  and  the  Impression  deepening  upon
her,  she  at  last  decided  to  write  to  Mr.  Spurgeon
and  offsr  him  a  sum  of  money  for  an  Orphanage  if
he  would  establish  It  and  superintend  it  himself.
Consequently  a  letter  was  received  by  him  from  her
containing  the  astounding  offer  of  $100,000  for  an
Orphanage,  and  to  be  paid  at  once.

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  so  very  busy  in  other  matters
connected  with  his  rello^Ious  work  that  he  felt  he
could  not  give  the  proper  attention  to  such  a  work,
but  Mrs.  Hillyard,  who  gave  the  money,  insisted
that  he  should  take  charge  of  the  matter,  until  he
reluctantly  consented.  In  fact,  he  regarded  her  per-
severing insistence  as  the  direct  call  of  God.  After
consultation  with  his  friends,  a  small  meeting  was
called  and  a  board  of  trustees  elected  to  take  charge
of  the  money  and  provide  for  the  building  of  an
Orphanage.  Very  soon  after  they  purchased  the
eround  at  Stockwell  on  which  the  different  homes
for  the  orphans  have  since  been  constructed.  It  Is  es-
pecially interesting  in  this  connection  to  know  what


Boys'  Home,  Stockwell  Orthanage.


THE  ORPHANAGE,


All


Mr,  Spurgeon  said  himself  in  his  diary  with  refer-
ence to  the  Orphanage.

In  the  following  June  after  he  had  received  the
gift  of  ^100,000,  he  said  :

*'The  Lord  is  beginning  to  appear  to  us  in  the
matter  of  the  Orphanage;  but  as  yet  He  has  not
opened  the  windows  of  heaven  as  we  desire  and
expect.  We  wait  in  prayer  and  faith.  We  need  no
less  than  ^10,000  to  erect  the  buildings,  and  it  will
come  ;  for  the  Lord  will  answer  the  prayer  of  faith."

And  in  July,  1867,  he  wrote. — ''We  have  been
waiting  upon  the  Lord  in  faith  and  prayer  concern-
ing our  Orphanage  ;  but  He  is  pleased  at  present
to  try  us.  As  we  have  no  object  in  view  but  the
glory  of  God  by  the  instruction  of  fatherless  boys  in
the  ways  of  the  Lord,  having  a  special  view  to  their
soul's  salvation,  we  had  hoped  that  many  of  the
Lord's  people  would  at  once  have  seen  the  useful-
ness and  practical  character  of  the  enterprise,  and
have  sent  us  substantial  aid  immediately.  The
Lord's  way,  however,  is  the  best,  and  we  rejoice  in
it,  let  it  be  what  it  may.  If  the  work  is  to  be  one  of
time  and  long  effort,  so  let  it  be,  if  thereby  God's
name  is  mao^nlfied.

"  We  have  enea^ed  a  sister  to  receive  the  first
four  orphans  into  her  own  hired  house  until  the
orphanages  are  ready.  Our  beloved  friend,  the
original  donor,  has  given  her  plate  to  be  sold  for
this  object,  and  in  so  doing,  has  set  an  example  to
all  the   believers   who    have   surplus    silver  which


412  CHARLES  IT.  SPURGE  ON.

ought  to  be  put  to  better  use  than  lying  wrapped  up
in  a  box."

And  in  August,  1867,  he  wrote. — ''Let  the  facts
which  with  deep  gratitude  we  record  this  month,
strengthen  the  faith  of  beHevers.  In  answer  to  many
fervent  prayers,  the  Lord  has  moved  His  people  to
send  in  during  last  month,  in  different  amounts,
toward  the  general  fund  of  the  Orphanage,  the  sum
of  ;^i,o75  (about  $5,375)  for  which  we  give  thanks
unto  the  name  of  the  Lord.  More  especially  do  we
see  the  gracious  hand  of  God  in  the  following  in-
cidents: — A  lady  (Mrs.  Tyson),  who  has  often
aided  us  in  the  work  of  the  College,  having  been
spared  to  see  the  twenty-fifth  anniversary  of  her
marriage-day,  her  beloved  husband  presented  her
with  /500  (about  $2,500)  as  a  token  of  his  ever-
growing love  for  her.  Our  sister  has  called  upon
us  and  dedicated  the  ^500  to  the  building  of  one
of  the  houses,  to  be  called  The  Silver  Wedding
House.  The  Lord  had,  however,  another  sub-
stantial gift  in  store  to  encourage  us  in  our  work  :
for  a  day  or  two  ago,  a  brother  believer  in  the
Lord  called  upon  us  on  certain  business,  and
when  he  retired,  he  left  in  a  sealed  envelope  the  sum
of  ;^6oo  (about  $3,000),  which  is  to  be  expended  in
erectine  another  house.  This  donation  was  as  little
expected  as  the  first,  except  that  our  faith  expects
that  all  our  needs  will  be  supplied  in  the  Lord's  own
way.  The  next,  day  when  preaching  in  the  open  air,
an  unknown  sister  put  an  envelope  into  my  hand


THE  ORPHANAGE,  413

enclosing-  ^200  (about  $1,000)  for  the  College  and
another  ^^20  for  the  Orphanage.  What  has  God
wrouofht ! "

A  number  of  workmen  who  had  been  employed
during  the  construction  of  the  Metropolitan  Taber-
nacle combined  toofether  and  ao^reed  to  grive  their
labor  for  the  building  of  one  of  the  Orphanage
houses.

Mr.  Spurgeon  had  the  good  sense  to  see  that
it  was  not  desirable  to  crowd  a  ei'eat  number  of
children  of  all  classes  and  attainments  into  one  laro^e
building.  He  saw  that  children  of  that  age  required
most  of  all  a  home  training  and  home  care,  hence  he
insisted  upon  the  erection,  if  possible,  of  a  large
number  of  small  houses  so  that  only  a  few  children
would  be  received  in  each.

The  corner-stones  for  three  of  the  houses,  which
were  named  "The  Silver  Wedding  House,"  "The
Merchants'  House,"  and  "The  Workingmen's
House,"  were  all  laid  on  the  9th  of  August,  1867.
They  celebrated  the  occasion  by  a  large  gathering
and  public  addresses,  at  which  $25,000  was  contri-
buted. Eleven  thousand  dollars  was  soon  afterward
sent  in  directly  in  consequence  of  the  public  meeting
at  the  laying  of  the  corner-stones.  The  trustees  then
determined  to  erect  as  soon  as  possible  eight  different
houses,  but  they  were  somewhat  discouraged  when
they  came  to  estimate  the  annual  cost  of  maintaining
them,  finding  it  to  be  at  least  $15,000.  Yet  Mr.
Spurgeon  would  only  answer  every  question  con-


414  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON'.

cerning  it  with  the  very  simple  remark,  '*  It  will
come."  The  ways  In  which  the  money  was  contri-
buted for  building  the  other  houses  brings  promi-
nent aeain  to  the  foreQ^round  the  most  miraculous
powers  which  accompanied  him  In  his  charitable  and
philanthropic  undertakings.

In  the  month  of  January,  1868,  a  gentleman
handed  him  unostentatiously  a  package  of  $5,000
toward  the  Orphanage,  giving  no  name  or  address
with  it.  In  March,  of  the  same  year,  another,  or
the  same  unknown  person,  sent  him  a  munlficient
gift  of  $io,ooo,  and  ever  remained  concealed.  Many
persons  connected  with  the  Tabernacle  and  the
College  had  opposed  the  Institution  of  the  Orphan-
age upon  the  plea  that  it  would  be  likely  to  impov-
erish the  other  ereat  interests  which  the  Church  had
at  stake  ;  but  with  nearly  every  one  of  these  great
gifts  toward  the  Orphanage  came  either  a  check  for
the  other  work  of  the  Tabernacle  or  a  letter  saying
that  the  gifts  toward  the  Orphanage  should  In  no
wise  interfere  with  the  regular  offerlncrs  toward  the
Tabernacle  or  the  College.

One  friend,  writing  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  mentioned
this  very  thought  and  said:  'T  have  this  day
dropped  In  your  letter-box  an  envelope  containing
$2,000;  $1,000  for  the  College  and  $1,000  to  build
the  Orphanage.  The  Institution  of  the  Orphanage
inclined  me  to  contribute  toward  the  College.  lam
a  stranger  to  you  but  not  to  your  printed  ser-
mons,"


THE  ORPHANAGE.  ^\^

Two  houses  for  the  Orphanage  were  constructed
by  a  general  collection  taken  among  the  Baptist
Churches  of  England  and  are  named  "The  Testi-
monial Houses."  On  Mr.  Spurgeon's  birthday,  the
19th  of  June,  1868,  the  Sunday-School  of  the  Metro-
politan Tabernacle  laid  the  foundation  stones  for
two  houses  of  the  Orphanage  and  soon  after  com-
pleted the  entire  payment  for  them.

The  young  men  who  had  graduated  from  the
College  combined  to  raise  the  capital  for  another
house.  It  Is  curious  to  note  how  similarly  Provi-
dence deals  with  such  enterprises,  and  how  often
Mr.  Spurgeon  found  the  Orphanage  with  Its  bills  all
paid,  but  little  or  no  money  in  the  treasury.

In  the  conduct  of  Geo.  Miiller's  great  work  of
faith  for  the  orphans,  as  has  been  found  In  a  thou-
sand other  Christian  enterprises,  the  Lord  never  left
him  in  disgraceful  debt,  nor  did  he  ever  leave  him
with  sufficient  funds  on  hand  to  relieve  him  of  a
needed  sense  of  dependence  on  Divine  power.

In  December,  1873,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  concern-
ing the  Orphanage,  saying,  "To  our  surprise,  the
report  of  the  secretary  was,  'AH  bills  paid, but  only
£c)  ($15)  i^  hand.'  Prayer  went  to  work  at
once,  and  results  follow.  Will  the  reader,  however,
picture  himself  with  more  than  two  hundred  and
twenty  boys  to  feed,  and  only  ($15)  In  hand.
He  may  say,  *  The  Lord  will  provide,*  but  would  he
feel  the  force  of  this  If  he  were  In  our  straits.'*

But  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  continually  being  asked


4l6  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON,

why  he  did  not  Institute  a  girls'  Orphanage,  as  there
were  just  as  many  of  these  poor  creatures  without
a  home  as  there  were  of  the  boys  ;  but  it  was  not
until  1879  that  he  saw  his  way  clear  to  establish  such
an  institution.  Many  a  poor  mother's  heart  throbbed
with  increasing  joy  when  she  heard  that  it  had  been
decided  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  care  of  the  orphan
girls  as  well  as  of  the  boys.

Of  the  institution  of  this  Orphanage  Mrs.  Spur-
geon most  sweetly  wrote,  in  1880:

"June  22. — My  dear  little  book,  you  must  faith-
fully bear  the  record  of  the  Lord's  great  mercy  to
me  and  mine  this  day  !  With  the  loving  shouts  of
the  people  still  ringing  In  my  ears — the  warm  grip
of  many  fingers  yet  pressing  on  my  hands — and  my
heart  still  throbbinof  with  the  unwonted  excitement
of  appearing  In  the  midst  of  a  crowded  gathering
— I  turn  to  you  now  in  the  quietude  and  rest  of
home  to  intrust  to  your  pages  a  grateful  memorial
of  a  happy  day  !

*'The  '  Girls' Orphanage '  has  been  Inaugurated
amidst  great  rejoicing,  the  Lord  inclining  His  peo-
ple's hearts  to  give  liberally  to  the  work,  so  that  Its
*  stones  were  laid  in  fair  colors  '  of  faith  and  hope,
and  my  beloved  sees  this  new  'labor  of  love  '  abund-
antly prospering  In  his  hands.  Blessed  be  the  Lord
who  thus  elveth  to  His  servant  the  'desire  of  his
heart,'  fulfilling  '  all  his  petitions.'  The  people  gath-
ered round  with  crlad  hearts  and  beamlnor  faces,  and
many  a  prayer  ascended  from  loving  lips  that  the


THE  ORPHANAGE.  .^j

dear  children,  who  should  be  housed,  and  taught,  and
cared  for  In  the  new  homes,  might  all  grow  up  there
In  the  fear  and  love  of  God,  and  be  a  blessing  in
their  day  and  generation.

*'  The  band  of  thirty  little  girls  marching  along  in
front  of  the  boys  ('  place  aux  dames !')  attracted
much  attention,  and  touched  all  hearts ;  some  of
them  are  such  wee  mites,  and  they  look  very  pretty
and  tender,  when  compared  with  the  hosts  of  sturdy
boys,  who  come  tramping  by  In  such  overwhelming
numbers  that  one  wonders  If  there  be  any  end  to
them  !  Few  can  look  unmoved  on  such  masses  of
orphan  children  ;  for  In  spite  of  their  merry  faces,
their  bright  ways,  and  their  happy  laughter,  the  pain-
ful fact  will  force  Itself  upon  the  mind  of  the  ob-
server that  every  one  of  these  little  ones  Is  taken
from  a  desolate  home,  where  the  saddest  of  all  earth's
bereavements  has  been  suffered  ;  for  the  children  are

*  fatherless,'  and  the  wife  Is  a  *  widow/     There  was

*  April  weather '  on  many  a  face  to-day ;  I  saw  the
tears  stealing  down  cheeks  on  which  approving
smiles  were  struggling  for  the  mastery  ;  but  the  sun-
shine gained  the  victory,  and  the  pitying  drops  were
quickly  wiped  away,  for  the  happy  condition  and
appearance  of  the  children  led  all  to  forget  the
sorrow  which  broueht  them  there,  In  Intense  thank-
fulness  for  their  present  joy  and  future  prospects.

"If  ever  the  strano^e  tide  of  'Godfather'  were
permissible,  I  think  It  would  be  In  the  case  of  Mr.
Spurgeon  toward  his  boys  and  girls  at  Stockwell;

2/


^j3  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.

for  God  has  made  him,  as  It  were,  In  His  stead,  a
*  father  of  the  fatherless,  and  a  judge  of  the  widow  !'
The  Lord  bless  him  on  his  birthday,  and  on  every
other  day,  and  give  him  many  more  years  in  which
to  be  a  blessing  to  the  Church,  the  College,  the
Orphanage,  and  the  world !"

Mr.  Spurgeon's  birthdays  were  especially  ob-
served by  the  congregation  at  the  Tabernacle  and  by
all  his  friends  as  a  day  on  which  to  make  special
offerings  for  the  philanthropic  works  which  were
under  his  oversight.  The  Orphanage  was  especially
remembered  each  year.

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  always  fortunate  In  securing
competent  persons  of  excellent  judgment  to  super-
intend his  enterprises,  and  Mr.  Bornan  J.  Chatsworth
who  was  formerly  associate  pastor  with  Newman
Hall,  accepted  the  superlntendency  of  the  Orphanage
and  conducted  It  with  wonderful  skill  and  Christian
affection.  The  Orphanage  has  required  large  sums
for  its  buildings,  its  Improvement  and  maintenance
which  would  have  appeared  Impossible  to  secure
when  the  enterprise  was  begun.  Yet  it  may  be
safely  said  that  the  institution  of  that  charity  has
brought  to  the  other  enterprises  of  the  Tabernacle
more  than  double  of  the  amounts  which  it  otherwise
would  have  received.

"There  is  that  which  wlthholdeth^  which  tendeth
to  poverty"  said  a  wiser  than  any  modern  writer;
and  how  strikingly  true  this  has  been  proven  to  be
in  the  undertakings  of  the  Churches  to-day  in  the


THE  ORPHANAGE.


419


noble  work  of  the  Lord.  There  are  many  philan-
thropic people  in  every  land  who  desire  very  much
to  invest  their  money  where  it  will  perpetually  do
good,  but  their  business  training-  has  taught  them
that  they  cannot  safely  entrust  their  funds  to  the
management  of  timid  people,  or  to  irresponsible
organizations.

Hence  as  soon  as  it  was  made  clear  to  the  prac-
tical business  men  of  England  that  Mr.  Spurgeon
possessed  the  necessary  qualifications  of  making  the
best  possible  use  of  funds  entrusted  to  his  care,  he
did  not  lack  for  generous  contributions,  and  the
charities  he  prayed  for  were  always  fully  supplied.

No  question  of  creed  or  race  was  asked  of  an  or-
phan, neither  was  it  necessary  for  the  single  parent
or  friend  to  canvass  any  board  of  trustees,  in  order
to  secure  a  vote  for  the  admission  of  the  children
to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  care.  The  whole  matter  was
conducted  as  a  friendly  kindness,  and  although
thousands  of  applications  had  been  rejected  for  lack
of  room,  yet  those  who  were  received  were  not
compelled  to  pass  through  any  ordeal  of  a  "circum-
locution office  "  to  reach  the  hearing  or  kindness  of
the  Orphanage  trustees.

The  cost  per  annum  for  maintaining  the  Orphan-
age has  been  about  ^25,000,  including  food  and
clothing.

Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  has  stated  that  '*  No  widow
ever  goes  away  lamenting  over  time,  labor,  and
money  spent  in  vain.     The  worst  that  can  happen


420  CHARLES  H.  SPURGEOJV.

IS  to  be  refused  because  there  Is  no  room,  or  her
case  Is  not  so  bad  as  that  of  others ;  not  a  shilling
will  have  been  spent  In  purchasing  votes,  no  time
lost  In  canvassing,  no  cringing  to  obtain  patronage.
Her  case  Is  judged  on  Its  merits,  and  the  most  ne-
cessltlous  wins  the  day.  We  have  now  so  many  ap-
plications and  so  few  vacancies  that  women  with
two  or  three  children  are  advised  not  to  apply,  for
while  there  are  others  with  five,  six,  or  seven  chil-
dren depending  on  them  they  cannot  hope  to  help
themselves."

The  orphans  themselves  after  leaving  the  Institu-
tion have  often  contributed  directly  or  through  their
friends  considerable  sums  toward  Its  maintenance.
Several  of  them  are  already  most  acceptably  teach-
ing the  Gospel  and  one  is  a  superintendent  of
another  Orphanage.

Twice  there  have  been  held  a  bazaar  for  the  pur-
pose of  raising  money  for  the  Orphanage  which  was
successful  both  In  securing  funds  and  In  carrying
on  personal  religious  work  as  was  done  in  the  case
of  the  first  bazaar  held  for  the  construction  of  the
Tabernacle.

Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  Ideas  concerning  the  work
of  the  Orphanages  will  be  more  Interesting  to  the
reader  than  anvthincj  else  we  miorht  oflve,  and  we
quote  what  he  said  about  them  at  a  time  when  they
were  not  placed  on  the  stable  basis  where  they  now
so  securely  rest.

Ten  years  ago  he  said :


THE   ORPHANAGE.  42 1

"When  we  remember  how  this  gracious  work  be-
gan by  the  consecrated  thought  of  a  holy  woman,
and  then  grew  into  an  actual  gift  from  her  hand,  and
further  developed,  by  the  large  help  of  others,  into
houses  and  schools,  infirmary  and  dining-hall,  and
all  manner  of  provision  for  destitute  children,  we
feel  bound  to  cry,  '  What  hath  God  wrought ! '  Our
God  has  supplied  all  our  need  according  to  His
riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus.  The  story  of  the
Stockwell  Orphanage  will  be  worth  telling  in  heaven
when  the  angels  shall  learn  from  the  Church  the
manifold  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  Lord.  In-
cidents which  could  not  be  published  on  earth  will
be  made  known  in  the  heavenly  city,  where  every
secret  thing  shall  be  revealed.  How  every  need  has
been  supplied  before  it  has  become  a  want ;  how
guidance  has  been  given  before  questions  have  be-
come anxieties  ;  how  friends  have  been  raised  up  in
unbroken  succession,  and  how  the  One  Great  Friend
has  been  ever  present,  no  single  pen  can  ever
record.

*'To  care  for  the  fatherless  has  been  a  work  of
joyful  faith  all  along,  and  in  waiting  upon  God  for
supplies  we  have  experienced  great  delight.  The
way  of  faith  in  God  is  the  best  possible.  We  could
not  have  carried  on  the  work  by  a  method  more
pleasant,  more  certain,  more  enduring.  If  we  had
depended  upon  annual  subscribers  we  should  have
had  to  hunt  them  up  and  pay  heavy  poundage,  or
perhaps  fail  to  keep  up  the  roll ;  if  we  had  advertised


422


CHARLES  H.    SPURGEON,


continually  for  funds  our  outlay  might  have  brought
in  a  scanty  return  ;  but  dependence  upon  God  has
been  attended  with  no  such  hazards.  We  have  done
our  best  as  men  of  business  to  keep  the  Orphanage
before  the  public,  but  we  have  desired  in  all  things
to  exercise  faith  as  servants  of  God.  Whatever
weakness  we  have  personally  to  confess  and  deplore,
there  is  no  weakness  in  the  plan  of  faith  in  God.
Our  experience  compels  us  to  declare  that  He  is  the
living  God  ;  the  God  that  heareth  prayer  ;  the  God
who  will  never  permit  those  who  trust  in  Him  to  be
confounded.  The  business  world  has  passed  through
trying  times  during  the  last  few  years,  but  the
Orphanage  has  not  been  tried  ;  men  of  great  enter-
prise have  failed,  but  the  home  of  the  fatherless
has  not  failed  ;  for  this  enterprise  is  in  the  divine
hand,  and  an  eye  watches  over  it  which  neither
slumbers  nor  sleeps.

''  Let  the  people  of  God  be  encouraged  by  the
fact  of  the  existence  and  prosperity  of  the  Stockwell
Orphanage.  Miracles  have  come  X.o  an  end,  but
God  goes  on  to  work  great  wonders:  the  rod  of
Moses  is  laid  aside,  but  the  rod  and  staff  of  the
Great  Shepherd  still  compass  us.

"  The  operations  of  the  institution  reveal  to  the
managers  the  wide-spread  necessity  which  exists.
The  cry  of  the  orphan  comes  from  every  part  of
our  beloved  land,  and  the  plea  of  the  widow  for
Christian  sympathy  and  help  is  restricted  to  no  one
class  of  the  community.     Faces  once  radiant  with


w

o
K
O

o

o
o

m

H

o
n

f

O

>
>

o


THE    ORPHANAGE.  a 2c

smiles  are  saddened  with  grief,  for  the  dark  shadow
which  death  casts  falls  everywhere.  How  true  are
the  lines  of  the  poet : —

"  '  There  is  no  fireside,  howsoe'er  defended,
But  has  one  vacant  chair.'

*'Itis  a  constant  joy  to  the  presider.t  and  the
committee  that  they  are  able  to  mitigate  to  such  a
large  extent  the  misery  and  need  which  are  brought
under  their  notice  ;  and  it  must  be  an  equal  joy  to
the  subscribers  to  know  that  their  loving  contribu-
tions furnish  the  sinews  for  this  holy  war.

''As  our  Sunday-school  is  affiliated  to  the  Sunday-
school  Union,  we  allow  the  boys  who  desire  to  do  so
to  sit  for  examination.  Of  the  candidates  who  were
successful  at  the  last  examination,  three  gained
prizes,  twelve  first-class  certificates,  and  thirty-eight
second-class  certificates.

"  During  the  year  the  boys  took  part  In  the  Crys-
tal Palace  Musical  Festivals,  arranged  by  the  Band
of  Hope  Union  and  the  Tonic  Sol-fa  Association.

''  In  order  to  make  the  character  and  claims  of  the
institution  more  widely  known,  the  head  master  and
the  secretary  have  held  meetings  In  London  and
the  provinces,  and  the  success  which  has  crowned
their  efforts  Is  of  a  very  gratifying  character.  The
boys  who  accompany  them  to  sing  and  to  recite  fur-
nish a  powerful  appeal  by  their  appearance  and
conduct,  and  commend  the  institution  to  which  they
owe  so  much.  The  local  papers  speak  in  terms  of
the  highest  praise  of  their  services,  and  thus  a  most


426


'CHARLES  H.    SPURGEON.


effective  advertisement  is  secured  without  any  cost
to  the  Institution.  So  far  as  the  boys  are  concerned,
these  trips  have  an  educational  value,  for  they  get
to  know  a  great  deal  of  the  products  and  industries
of  different  parts  of  the  country,  besides  securing
the  advantage  of  being  brought  into  contact  with
Christian  families  where  they  reside  during  their  visit.

"  The  amount  realized  during  the  year,  after  de-
fraying all  expenses,  is  $3,320,  and  our  thanks  are
hereby  tendered  to  all  who  assisted  in  any  way  to
secure  such  a  splendid  result.

''The  committee  record  with  thankfulness  that
there  has  been  no  lack  of  funds  contributed  for  the
efficient  maintenance  of  the  institution.  Friends
prefer  to  give  donations  rather  than  pledge  them-
selves to  send  annual  subscriptions,  and  the  benevo-
lence thus  manifested  is  purely  spontaneous.  The
admirable  custom  of  making  shirts  for  the  boys  is
still  continued  by  the  young  ladies  of  an  educational
establishment,  who  send  in  a  supply  of  two  hundred
shirts  every  year.  Their  efforts  are  supplemented
by  several  working  associations,  but  the  supply  is
not  yet  equal  to  the  demand,  and  we  cordially  invite
the  co-operation  of  others,  to  whom  we  shall  be  glad
to  send  samples  and  patterns.

"The  work  of  carinor  for  the  widow  and  the
fatherless  is  specially  mentioned  by  the  Holy  Spirit
as  one  of  the  most  acceptable  modes  of  giving  out-
ward expression  to  pure  religion  and  undefiled  be-
fore God  and  the  Father,  and  therefore  the  Lord's


THE    ORPHANAGE.  ^27

people  will  not  question  that  they  should  help  in
carrying  it  out.  Will  it  need  much  pleading?  If  so,
we  cannot  use  it,  as  we  shrink  from  marrmg  the
willinorhood  which  is  the  charm   of  such   a   service.

o

The  work  Is  carried  on  in  dependence  upon  God,
and  as  His  blessing  evidently  rests  upon  It,  we  are
confident  the  means  will  be  forthcoming  as  the  need
arises.  While  commendinof  the  work  to  our  Heav-
enly  Father  in  prayer,  we  deem  it  right  to  lay  before
the  stewards  of  His  bounty  the  necessities  and
claims  of  the  institution.

"The  year  1880  will  be  a  memorable  one  in  the
history  of  the  institution,  and  we  record  with  grati-
tude the  fact  that  the  foundation-stones  of  the  first
four  houses  for  the  Girls'  Orphanage  were  laid  on
the  twenty-second  of  June,  when  the  president's
birthday  was  celebrated.  It  was  a  joy  to  all  present
that  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  able  to  lay  the  memorial
stone  of  '  The  Sermon  House,  the  gift  of  C.  H,
Spurgeon  and  his  esteemed  publishers,  Messrs.
Passmore  and  Alabaster.'  The  memorial  stone  of
another  house,  the  gift  of  Mr.  W.  R.  Rickett,  and
called  '  The  Limes,  In  tender  memory  of  five  be-
loved children,'  was  laid  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  who
made  a  touchino- allusion  to  the  sad  event  thus  com-
memorated.  Mrs.  Samuel  Barrow  laid  the  memorial
stone  of  the  house  called  'The  Olives,'  the  amount
for  its  erection  having  been  given  and  collected  by
her  beloved  husband.  The  trustees  of  the  institu-
tion having  subscribed  the  funds  for  the  erection  of


428  CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.

a  house,  the  treasurer,  Mr.  William  Higgs,  laid,  in
their  name,  the  memorial  stone  which  bears  the  in-
scription, *  Erected  by  the  Trustees  of  the  Orphanage
to  express  their  joy  in  this  service  of  love.'

''  At  the  present  moment  the  buildings  of  the
Orphanage  form  a  great  square,  enclosing  a  fine
space  for  air  and  exercise.  Visitors  generally  ex-
press great  surprise  at  the  beauty  and  openness  of
the  whole  establishment.  Much  remains  to  be  done
before  the  institution  is  completely  accommodated  ;
there  is  needed  an  infirmary  for  the  girls,  and  till
that  is  built  one  of  the  houses  will  have  to  be  used
for  that  purpose,  thus  occupying  the  space  which
would  otherwise  be  filled  by  thirty  or  forty  children  :
this  should  be  attended  to  at  an  early  date.  Baths
and  wash-houses  will  be  urgently  required  for  the
girls,  and  we  propose  to  make  them  sufficiently
commodious  for  the  a-Irls  to  do  the  washino^  for  the
entire  community  of  five  hundred  children,  thus  in-
structing them  in  household  duties  and  saving  a
considerable  expense.  We  would  not  spend  a  six-
pence needlessly.  No  money  has  been  wasted  in
lavish  ornament  or  In  hideous  ugliness.  The  build-
ings are  not  a  workhouse  or  a  county  jail,  but  a
pleasant  residence  for  those  children  of  whom  God
declares  himself  to  be  the  Father.  The  additional
buildings  which  we  contemplate  are  not  for  luxury,
but  for  necessary  uses  ;  and  as  we  endeavor  to  lay
out  money  with  judicious  economy,  we  feel  sure  that
we  shall  be  trusted  in  the  future  as  in  the  past.


THE   ORPHANAGE.  ^29

*' Are  there  not  friends  waiting  to  take  a  share  in
the  Stockwell  Orphanage  Building  ?  They  cannot
better  commemorate  personal  blessings,  nor  can
they  find  a  more  suitable  memorial  for  departed
friends.  No  storied  urn  or  animated  bust  can  half
so  well  record  the  memory  of  beloved  ones  as  a
stone  in  an  Orphan  House.  Most  of  the  buildings
are  already  appropriated  as  memorials  in  some  form
or  other,  and  only  a  few  more  will  be  needed.  Very
soon  all  building  operations  will  be  complete,  and
those  who  have  lost  the  opportunity  of  becoming
shareholders  in  the  Home  of  Mercy  may  regret
their  delay.  At  any  rate,  none  who  place  a  stone
in  the  walls  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  will  ever
lament  that  they  did  this  deed  of  love  to  the  little
ones  for  whom  Jesus  cares.  Honored  names  are
with  us  already  engraven  upon  the  stones  of  this
great  Hostelry  of  the  All-merciful ;  and  many  others
are  co-workers  whose  record  is  on  high,  though  un-
known among  men.  Who  will  be  the  next  to  join
us  in  this  happy  labor  ?

''  When  the  whole  of  the  buildings  are  complete,
the  institution  will  afford  accommodation  for  five
hundred  children,  and  prove  a  memorial  of  Christian
generosity  and  of  the   loving-kindness  of  the  Lord.

''In  our  address  at  the  presentation  of  the  late
testimonial,  we  disclaimed  all  personal  credit  for  the
existence  of  any  one  of  the  enterprises  over  which
we  preside,  because  each  one  of  them  has  been
forced  upon  us.     T  could  not    help    undertaking


.^Q  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

them,'  was  our  honest  and  just  confession.  This  is
literally  true,  and  another  illustration  of  this  fact  is
now  to  come  before  the  Christian  public.  Several  of
us  have  long  cherished  the  idea  that  the  time  would
come  in  which  we  should  have  an  Orphanage  for
girls  as  well  as  for  boys.  It  would  be  hard  to  con-
ceive why  this  should  not  be.  It  seems  ungallant,
not  to  say  unrighteous,  to  provide  for  children  of
one  sex  only,  for  are  not  all  needy  little  ones  dear
to  Christ,  with  whom  there  is  neither  male  nor  female?
We  do  not  like  to  do  such  things  by  halves,  and  it
is  but  half  doing  the  thing  to  leave  the  girls  out  in
the  cold.  We  have  all  along  wished  to  launch  out
in  the  new  direction,  but  we  had  quite  enough  on
hand  for  the  time  being,  and  were  obliged  to  wait.
The  matter  has  been  thought  of,  and  talked  about,
and  more  than  half  promised,  but  nothing  has  come
of  it  till  this  present,  and  now,  as  we  believe  at  the
exact  moment,  the  hour  has  struck,  and  the  voice  of
God  in  providence  says,  'Go  forward.'

''The  fund  for  the  Girls'  Orphanage  has  com-
menced, and  there  are  about  a  dozen  names  upon
the  roll  at  the  moment  of  our  writing.  The  work
will  be  carreid  on  with  vigor  as  the  Lord  shall  be
pleased  to  send  the  means,  but  it  will  not  be  unduly
pushed  upon  any  one  so  as  to  be  regarded  as  a  new
burden,  for  we  want  none  but  cheerful  helpers,  who
will  count  it  a  privilege  to  have  a  share  in  the  good
work.  We  shall  employ  no  collector  to  make  a  per-
centage by  dunning  the  unwilling,  and  shall  make  no


THE    ORPHANAGE.  ^^I

private  appeals  to  individuals.  There  Is  the  case:
if  it  be  a  good  one  and  you  are  able  to  lielp  it,
please  do  so  ;  but  if  you  have  no  wish  in  that  direc-
tion, our  Lord's  work  does  not  require  us  to  go  a-
begging  like  a  pauper,  and  we  do  not  intend  to
do  so.

*' We  have  never  been  in  debt  yet,  nor  have  we
even  borrowed  money  for  a  time,  but  we  have  al-
ways been  able  to  pay  as  we  have  gone  on.  Our
prayer  is  that  we  may  never  have  to  come  down  to
a  lower  platform  and  commence  borrowing.

"  It  has  often  happened  that  we  have  been  unable
to  assist  widows  in  necessitous  circumstances  with
large  families,  because  there  did  not  happen  to  be  a
boy  of  the  special  age  required  by  the  rules  of  our
Boys'  Orphanage.  There  were  several  girls,  but
then  we  could  not  take  girls,  and  however  deserv-
ing the  case,  we  have  been  unable  to  render  any
assistance  to  very  deserving  widows,  simply  because
their  children  were  not  boys.  This  is  one  reason
why  we  need  a  Girls'  Orphanage.

''Everywhere  also  there  is  an  outcry  about  the
scarcity  of  good  servants,  honest  servants.  Industri-
ous servants,  well-trained  servants.  We  know
where  to  find  the  sisters  who  will  try  to  produce
such  workers  out  of  the  little  ones  who  will  come
under  their  care.

"We  have  succeeded,  by  God's  grace  and  the  dili-
gent care  of  our  masters  and  matrons  In  training
the    lads   so  that   they   have   become   valuable  to


^^2  CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.

business  men :  why  should  not  the  same  divme  help
direct  us  with  the  lasses,  so  that  domestics  and  gov-
ernesses should  go  forth  from  us,  as  well  as  clerks
and  artisans  ?  We  believe  that  there  are  many
friends  who  will  take  a  special  interest  in  the  girls,
and  that  there  are  some  whose  trades  would  more
readily  enable  them  to  give  articles  suitable  for  girls
than  those  which  are  useful  to  boys.

"  Here  is  a  grand  opportunity  for  Christian
people  with  means  to  take  their  places  among  the
first  founders  of  this  new  institution,  and  if  they
judge  that  such  a  work  will  be  good  and  useful,  we
hope  that  they  will  without  fail,  and  w^ithout  delay,
come  to  our  assistance  in  this  fresh  branch  of
service.  We  cannot  afford  to  lose  a  single  penny
from  the  funds  for  the  boys,  but  this  work  for  the
girls  must  be  something  extra  and  above.  You
helped  Willie  and  Tommy  ;  will  you  not  help  Mary
and  Maggie  ?

'Tt  Is  very  needful  to  add  that  foolish  persons
often  say,  Mr.  Spurgeon  can  get  plenty  of  money,
and  needs  no  help.  If  all  were  to  talk  in  this  fashion,
where  would  our  many  works  drift  to  ?  Mr.  Spur-
geon does  get  large  sums,  but  not  a  penny  more
than  the  various  works  require,  and  he  gets  it
because  God  moves  His  people  to  give  it,  as  he
hopes,  good  reader.  He  may  move  you.  We  have
no  personal  end  to  serve,  we  do  not,  directly  or
indirectly,  gain  a  single  penny  by  the  Orphanage,
College,  or  any  other  society  over  which  we  preside;


I

o

o
c
z

c

en

H

o
n

^

w
r
r

O

50


>


THE    ORPHANAGE.  ^,r

neither  have  we  any  wealthy  persons  around  us  who
are  at  a  loss  to  dispose  of  their  property ;  but  our
hard-working  church  keeps  continually  consecrating
its  offerings,  and  our  friends  far  and  near  think  upon
us.  Our  treasury  is  the  bounty  of  God,  our  motto
is  :  The  Lord  will  provide.  Past  mercy  forbids  a
doubt  as  to  the  future,  and  so  in  the  name  of  God
we  set  up  our  banners.

'*  The  girls'  part  is  not  yet  fully  complete,  but  it
soon  will  be  so,  and  then  we  must  take  in  the  girls.
Now  it  occurs  to  me  to  let  my  friends  know  the  in-
creased need  which  has  arisen,  and  will  arise  from
the  doublinof  of  the  number  of  children.  The  in-
come  must  by  some  means  be  doubled.  My  trust  is
in  the  Lord  alone,  for  whose  sake  I  bear  this  burden.
I  believe  that  He  has  led  me  all  along  in  the  erection
and  carrying  on  of  this  enterprise,  and  I  am  also
well  assured  that  His  own  hand  pointed  to  the  present
extension,  and  supplied  the  means  for  making  it.  I
therefore  rest  in  the  providence  of  God  alone.  But
the  food  for  the  children  will  not  drop  as  manna  from
heaven,  it  will  be  sent  in  a  way  which  is  more  bene-
ficial, for  the  graces  of  His  children  will  be  displayed
in  the  liberality  which  will  supply  the  needs  of  the
orphans.  God  will  neither  feed  the  children  by
angels  nor  by  ravens,  but  by  the  loving  gifts  of  His
people.  It  is  needful,  therefore,  that  I  tell  my  friends
of  our  need,  and  I  do  hereby  tell  them.  The  institu-
tion will  need,  in  rougrh  fiofures,  about  one  thousand

dollars  a  week.
28


43^


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON,


''  This  is  a  large  sum,  and  when  I  think  of  it  I  am
appalled  if  Satan  suggests  the  question:  'What  if
the  money  does  not  come  in  ?  '  But  it  is  nothing  to
the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth  to  feed  five  hundred
little  ones.  He  has  kept  two  hundred  and  fifty  boys
for  these  years,  and  He  can  do  the  like  for  the  same
number  of  girls.  Only  let  not  His  stewards  say
that  there  is  no  need  at  Stockwell,  for  there  is  great
and  crying  need  that  all  my  friends  should  Inquire
whether  they  may  not  wisely  render  me  much  more
aid  than  they  have  done.  The  buildings  are  not  all
finished  yet,  nor  the  roads  made,  but  this  will  soon
be  accomplished,  and  then  the  institution  will  be  in
full  operation,  and  its  requirements  will  be  great.
I  have  written  these  lines  with  a  measure  of  re-
luctance ;  and  I  hope  it  is  not  in  unbelief,  but  as  a
reasonable   service,    that   I    have    thus    stated   the


case.


j>


CHAPTER  XV.


THE  OLD  ladies'  HOME.


The  institution  of  that  excellent  charity  in  connec-
tion with  the  new  Park  street  church  and  the  Metro-
politian  Tabernacle,  which  provides  for  the  care  of
the  Christian  women  of  the  church,  when  they  were
too  old  to  care  for  themselves,  maybe  placed  almost
wholly  to  the  credit  of  Dr.  Rippon,  a  previous  pas-
tor of  the  church.  It  is  of  that  sort  of  charity  which
would  naturally  appeal  to  the  tenderest  side  of
human  nature,  and  is  one  which  many  large  churches
would  do  well  to  copy.  It  provides  all  the  comforts
of  a  Christian  home  without  expense  to  the  inmates,
and  at  present  has  a  very  commodious  house  con-
structed near  to  the  Tabernacle  and  within  sight  of
the  London  Railroad  Station  of  the  ''Elephant  and
the  Castle.  "

Mr.  Spurgeon  gives  a  very  Interesting  account  of
the  beginning  of  this  enterprise  In  his  history  of  the
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  and  as  he  appealed  for  as-
sistance, to  which  there  was  a  liberal  response,  Mr.
Spurgeon  said:

*'Dr.  Rippon  once  said  he  had  some  of  the  best
people  in  His  Majesty's  dominion  In  his  church,  and

437


438  CHARLES  H.  SPUR G EON.

he  used  to  add  with  a  nod,  '  and  some  of  the  worst. '
Some  of  the  latter  class  seem  to  have  got  into  office
at  one  time,  for  they  were  evidently  a  hindrance
rather  than  a  help  to  the  good  man,  though  from  his
independent  way  of  doing  things  the  hindrance  did
not  much  affect  him.

**As  well  as  we  can  remember,  the  story  of  his
founding  the  almshouses  and  schools  in  1803,  it  runs
as  follows:  The  doctor  urged  upon  the  deacons  the
necessity  of  such  institutions;  they  do  not  see  the
urgency  thereof;  he  pleads  again,  but  like  the  deaf
adder,  they  are  not  to  be  charmed,  charm  he  ever  so
wisely.  'The  expense  will  be  enormous,  and  the
money  cannot  be  raised,  '  this  was  the  unnecessary
croak  of  the  prudent  officers.  At  length  the  pastor
says,  '  The  money  can  be  raised,  and  shall  be.  Why,
if  I  don't  go  out  next  Monday,  and  collect  ^500
($2,500)  before  the  evening  meeting,  I'll  drop  the
proposal;  but  while  I  am  sure  the  people  will  take
up  the  matter  heartily,  I  will  not  be  held  back  by
you. '  Disputes  in  this  case  were  urged  in  very
plain  language,  but  with  no  degree  of  bitterness,  for
the  parties  knew  each  other,  and  had  too  much
mutual  respect  to  make  their  relationship  in  the
church  depend  upon  a  point  of  difference.  All  were
agreed  to  put  the  Doctor  to  a  test,  and  challenged
him  to  produce  the  ^500  ($2,500)  next  Monday,  or
cease  to  importune  about  almshouses.  The  worthy
slow-coaches  were  up  to  time  on  the  appointed  even-
ing, and  the  Doctor  soon  arrived.      '  Well,  brethren,  '


TtlE   OLD   LADIES'    HOME.  .^g

said  he,  '  I  have  succeeded  in  collecting  ^300
($1,500, )  that  is  most  encouraging,  is  it  not  ? '  '  But,'
said  two  or  three  of  them  at  once,  in  a  hurry,  '  You
said  you  would  get  ^500  ($2,500)  or  drop  the  mat-
ter, and  we  mean  for  you  to  keep  your  word. '  '  By
all  means,'  said  he,  'and  I  mean  to  keep  my  word,
too,  there  is  ;^8oo  ($4,000)  which  the  friends  gave
me  almost  without  asking,  and  the  rest  is  nearly  all
promised.'  The  prudent  officials  were  taken  aback,
but  recovering  themselves,  they  expressed  their
great  pleasure,  and  would  be  ready  to  meet  the  pas-
tor at  any  time  and  arrange  for  the  expending  of
funds.  *  No,  no,  my  brethren,'  said  the  Doctor,  T
shall  not  need  your  services.  You  have  opposed
me  all  along,  and  now  I  have  done  the  work  without
you,  you  want  to  have  your  say  in  it  to  hinder  me  still,
but  neither  you  nor  any  other  deacons  shall  plague  a
minister  about  this  business.  So,  brethren,  you  can
attend  to  something  else.'  Accordingly,  the  old
trust  deed  of  the  almshouses  had  a  clause  to  the
effect  that  the  pastor  shall  elect  the  pensioners,  'no
deacon  interfering'  The  present  pastor  had  great
pleasure  in  inducing  the  Charity  Commissioners  to
expunge  this  clause,  and  give  the  pastor  and  dea-
cons, unitedly,  the  power  to  select  the  objects  of
charity.

'•The  original  endowments,  after  payment  of  re-
pairs, do  not  suffice  w^holly  to  provide  for  six  inmates',
and  there  are  now  seventeen  ;  the  support  of  the  re-
maining eleven   involves  a  heavy  draught  upon  the


440


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.


communion  fund  of  our  church,  which  is  already
fully  weighed  down  with  poor  members.  We  greatly
need  at  least  ;^5000  ($25,000)  to  endow  the  alms-
houses, and  place  the  institution  upon  a  proper  foot-
ing. Already  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  Thomas  Olney  and
Thomas  Greenwood  have  contributed  ^200  ($1,000)
each  towards  the  fund,  and  we  earnestly  trust  that
either  by  donations  or  legacies,  the  rest  of  the  ^5,000
($25,000)  will  be  forthcoming.  This  would  only
provide  five  shillings ($1.25)  per  week  for  each  poor
woman,  which  is  little  enough.  If  more  could  be
raised  it  would  be  so  much  the  better  for  the  pen-
sioners. The  pastors  are  anxious  to  see  this  matter
put  into  proper  order  ;  they  confess  that  the  respon-
sibility of  having  increased  the  number  of  rooms
and  alms-women  rests  mainly  on  them,  and  there-
fore they  feel  that  their  work  is  not  done  till  at  least
five  shillings  per  week  shall  have  been  provided  for
their  poor  sisters  ;  if  it  could  be  double  that  amount
they  would  be  glad.  We  wish  to  leave  the  Taber-
nacle in  good  working  order  when  our  work  is
done  ;  but  the  present  burden  might  prove  far  too
heavy  for  our  successors  ;  indeed,  they  ought  not  to
be  saddled  with  it.  In  future  years  the  church  may
find  itself  barely  able  to  support  its  own  expenses,
and  we  do  not  think  that  we  are  justified  in  leaving
it  the  legacy  of  so  heavy  a  charge.  Our  present
anxiety  is  to  get  the  ship  tight  and  trim,  and  this  is
one  of  the  matters  which  is  not  in  a  satisfactory  con-
dition.     Brethren,   let  us  set  it  straight.      Our  aged


THE   OLD  LADIES'   HOME.  ^I

sisters  are  worthy  of  all  that  we  can  do  for  them,
and  their  grateful  faces  often  make  our  hearts  glad.
We  should  like  to  see  more  alms-rooms,  and  we
hope  some  one  will  build  and  endow  a  row  for  aged
men.  We  have  had  a  hint  that  this  project  Is  tak-
ing shape  in  the  mind  of  a  generous  friend ;  we
hope  he  will  carry  it  out  in  his  own  lifetime,  rather
than  wait  and  have  it  done  by  a  legacy."

Mr.  Spurgeon  took  a  personal  interest  in  the  af-
fairs of  the  Home  and  frequently  contributed  largely
for  its  support.  He  was  the  power  behind  the
throne  in  the  management  and  supplies,  as  he  was
in  almost  every  other  enterprise  taken  by  the
church.  No  one  ever  knew  how  many  bills  Mr.
Spurgeon  paid  in  connection  with  the  Home  for  he
was  continually  settling  sm.all  accounts  for  gas,
heating,  groceries,  clothing,  errands,  and  ^mall
comforts.  Although  he  has  enjoyed  the  inestim-
able privilege  of  giving  at  times  quite  large  sums
such  as  that  at  his  silver  wedding  w^hen,  being  pre-
sented with  ^25,000,  he  gave  the  whole  of  it  over
as  an  endowment  to  the  Home,  yet  what  he  gave
in  large  sums  did  not  approach  the  aggregate  of
what  he  contributed  in  a  continuous  stream  of  small
gifts  which  he  was  ever  granting  to  a  great  variety
of  charities.

There  was  a  wisdom  In  this  matter  of  expendi-
ture which  accomplished  a  double  purpose;  it  not
only  provided  for  the  sustenance  of  the  noble  chari-
ties    but    it    also     prevented  any  quarrels   arising


442


CHARLES   //.    SPURGE  ON:


among  the  officials  concerning  the  payment  of  dis-
puted bills  and  relieved  the  object  of  charity  from
the  unpleasantness  of  any  public  discussion.

Some  newspapers  accused  him  of  hoarding  large
sums  of  money  and  he  frequently  was  compelled  to
deny  the  assertion  which  was  made  that  he  was  a
very  rich  man.  There  was  some  reason  behind  the
surmises  in  reference  to  his  wealth,  from  the  fact
that  it  was  well  known  that  he  had  a  very  large  in-
come, and  it  was  not  equally  well  known  to  what
purpose  he  applied  his  funds.

Yet,  he  conscientiously  regarded  his  salary  and
the  gifts  which  he  personally  received  as  a  sacred
trust  given  him  of  the  Lord,  all  of  which  was  to  be
devoted  to  Christ's  cause  and  only  a  reasonable  por-
tion of  it  used  economically  in  the  support  of  his
family  and  the  payment  for  his  home.  Hence  if  the
occupants  of  the  Old  Ladies'  Home  were  seen  to
be  in  need  of  anything  he  did  not  wait  for  any  vote
of  the  board  or  action  of  the  church,  but  simply
went  himself  and  purchased  what  he  saw  in  his  fre-
quent visits  was  really  needed.  He  paid  almost  in-
numberable  bills  in  various  directions  which  no  one
knew  he  had  settled,  unless  perchance  his  wife
should  find  the  bundle  of  receipted  bills  in  his
pocket  or  lying  upon  his  desk.  It  thus  sometimes
happened  that  the  same  bill  was  paid  twice,  where
the  officers  of  the  church  did  not  know  that  Mr.
Spurgeon  had  settled  the  account;  and  the  fact  of  his
generosity  thus  becoming  unexpectedly  known  led
in  several  important  cases  to  quite   large  donations


THE    OLD  LADIES'    HOME.  .  .^

toward  his  work  from  friends,  who  otherwise  would
not  have  understood  the  necessities.

The  Home  includes  two  school  rooms  and  a  class
room,  which  are  occupied  every  week-day  by  about
four  hundred  children  under  the  tutelage  of  a  head
master.  There  are  seventeen  rooms  occupied  by
the  old  ladies,  but  only  those  who  are  over  sixty
years  of  age  and  destitute,  are  received.


CHAPTER  XVI.

POWERFUL    REINFORCEMENTS.

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  w^ise  enough  to  set  a  high
value  upon  printed  matter.  In  the  very  earliest
days  of  his  ministry  some  of  his  sermons  w^ere
placed  in  print  with  his  consent  and  encouragement,
and  he  often  wrote  small  articles  for  periodicals
during  the  first  five  years  of  his  pastorate  in  London.

The  assistance  which  he  has  received  from  peri-
odicals of  his  own  and  those  published  by  other
people  will  account  in  an  a  great  measure  for  the
success  of  his  many  undertakings.  Some  excellent
judges  regard  the  printing  press  as  Mr.  Spurgeon's
stronorhold  in  the  evanorelization  of  the  multitudes
he  has  reached.  Certainly  through  his  printed
sermons  he  has  reached  a  larger  audience  by  a  hun-
dred fold  than  those  who  sat  under  the  sound  of  his
voice.  It  appears  reasonable  to  state  that  Mr.
Squrgeon's  influence  would  have  been  very  little
compared  to  that  which  it  did  reach  if  he  had  not
availed  himself  of  this  very  powerful  reinforcement
in  the  establishment  of  public  opinion.

He  issued  a  sufficient  number  of  printed  sermons
before  his  death  to  fill  forty  volumes.  Certainly
444


POWERFUL   REINFORCEMENTS.  ^^^

Blucher's  reinforcements  at  Waterloo  were  not
more  necessary  to  Wellington  than  has  been  the
Sword  and  Trowel  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  religious
campaign.

Colonol  Grant,  United  States  Consel  at  Man-
chester, England  wrote  in  1890  concerning  Mr.  Spur-
geon  as  follows: —

''  He  has  fought  his  way  to  a  commander  s  place  in
the  religious  world,  and  holds  it  with  no  abatement
of  faithfulness,  although  the  work  of  years  is  leav-
ing weak  spots  in  his  body.  There's  life  in  the  old
guard  yet,  however  and  he  stands  squarely  to  his
work  on  the  outpost,  no  matter  how  the  storms
may  gather  about  him.  His  energy,  his  heroism
under  bodily  pain,  his  sweet  toil,  all  combine  to
make  him  stand  out  in  the  clear  light  as  an  evangel
of  the  Lord  worthy  of  the  cross  and  crown.  What
a  great  loving  heart  he  has  :  How^  his  sympathies
encircle  the  whole  ^vorld :  As  one  of  God's
workers,  he  has  no  superior  among  men."

As  the  qualifications  of  a  great  General  require
that  he  shall  be  a  diplomatist  and  a  tactician,  as  well
as  a  brave  leader,  so  Mr.  Spurgeon  exhibited  his
great  generalship  as  much  in  his  power  to  mass  the
different  religious  forces  under  his  control  and  over-
see the  entire  campaign  as  In  those  personal  charges
upon  the  forces  of  evil,  as  the  leader  of  his  own  great
church.

Too  much  will  not  be  stated  when  we  say  that  in
all  probability  every  one    of  the    great   enterprises


^1^5  CHARLES  n.   SPURGEON.

which  the  church  has  undertaken  and  every  charity
which  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  espoused,  either  had  its
origin  in  some  article  in  the  Sword  and  Trozvel
or  was  chiefly  indebted  to  that  pubHcation  for  a  con-
tinued support.

That  magazine  was  begun  on  the  first  of  January
1865  ^^d  up  to  the  time  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  death
was  edited  by  him,  not  only  with  the  contribution  of
articles,  but  by  a  personal  oversight  of  everything
printed  therein.  There  were  periods  during  the
publication  when  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  laid  aside  by
sickness,  when  others  were  called  in  to  do  his  work.
But  that  magazine  was  the  last  to  be  laid  aside  when
pain  afflicted  him.  He  seemed  to  understand  that
upon  its  regular  appearance  depended  the  success
of  all  the  christian  work  over  which  Providence  had
made  him  the  superintendent.

The  circulation  of  the  magazine  reached  in  1892,
fifteen  thousand  subscribers  at  the  high  price  of
about  6  cents  per  copy.  It  began  of  course  in  a
modest  and  small  way  and  appealed  directly  to  the
local  spirit  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  It  put
forth  no  flaring  advertisements  and  found  its  read-
ers among  personal  friends  of  the  editor  or  among
the  personal  acquaintances  of  his  hearers.

But,  when  Mrs.  Spurgeon  began  to  use  the  in-
come of  her  Book  Fund  to  supply  the  sermons  to
missionaries  for  free  distribution  in  the  homes  and
for  the  supply  of  all  the  light  house  keepers  of  Eng-
land, Australia  and  India,  of  course,  the  circulation


POWERFUL    REINFORCEMENTS.


'A7


leaped  at  once  into  most  respectable  proportions.
Within  ten  years  of  the  time  when  the  first  number
was  issued  it  had  found  its  way  into  nearly  all  the
religious  reading  rooms  of  the  English  speaking
world,  was  purchased  for  the  large  libraries,  and
found  a  ready  sale  on  all  the  prominent  news-stands
of  the  railroad  companies.

The  circumstances  gave  it  a  position  of  honor
among  the  other  magazines  of  the  world,  which
added  great  force  to  Mr.  Spurgeon's  evangelistic
powers.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  Orphan-
age was  due  to  an  article  which  Mrs.  Hillyard  read
in  that  Magazine.  It  is  also  stated  that  the  first  gift
for  the  building  of  the  Pastors'  College  and  the  first
donation  towards  the  Girls'  Orphanage  came  di-
rectly in  response  to  an  editorial  article  in  the
Sword  and  Trozvel.

It  advertised  itself  in  most  legitimate  ways  and
also  presented  in  the  most  effective  manner  all  the
needs  of  the  church  and  its  various  mission  stations.
It  was  each  month  a  personal  letter  from  Mr.
Spurgeon;  he  had  not  been  educated  by  Universi-
ties out  of  that  peculiar  personality  which  made
nearly  all  his  communications  seem  like  familiar
conversations  with  a  personal  friend.  He  was  not
afraid  to  speak  directly  of  himself  and  hesitated  not
to  give  his  own  opinion  upon  any  matter  which
came  under  his  attention.  He  seemed  to  be  so  art-
lessly unconscious  of  egotism  and  so  regardless  of
criticism  that  he  freely  spoke  of  himself,  his  circum-


443  CHARLES  H.   SPUR G EON.

Stances,  his  wishes  and  his  experiences  without  a
trace  of  embarassment.

The  publication  of  that  magazine  would  in  itself
have  been  a  great  achievement  for  the  cause  of
Christ  had  it  stood  entirely  alone  with  no  connection
with  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  But  each  of
these  great  institutions  were  a  necessity  to  the  other.

The  Tabernacle  could  not  have  been  what  it  be-
came had  it  not  been  for  the  *'  Sword  a7id  Troiuer^
and  the  Magazine  could  not  have  reached  the
dignified  position  it  held  had  it  not  been  for  the
large  congregations  in  the  Tabernacle.  His  audi-
ence of  fifty-five  hundred  in  the  Tabernacle  was  only
one  tenth  the  size  of  the  audience  he  reached
through  the  Magazine,  for  the  best  estimates  which
have  been  given  concerning  its  circulation  show  that
it  is  largely  taken  in  families  where  a  single  copy
furnished  a  whole  household  with    reading    matter.

Like  the  volumes  of  his  sermons  it  went  into  the
humblest  homes  and  the  finest  palaces;  into  the
office  and  the  workshop,  into  the  hospital  and  the
sick  room;  into  the  poor-house  and  the  great  libra-
ries; into  the  hands  of  the  school  children  and  the
aged  professors;  under  the  eye  of  vigorous  man-
hood, and  before  the  spectacles  of  ripe  old  age.

The  Magazine  had  an  immense  advantage  over
his  spoken  words  in  preserving  in  a  permanent
form  the  exhortations  and  advice  which  Mr.  Spurg-
eon  so  freely  gave.  If  a  person  was  touched  by
any  article  they  could  take  up  the    Magazine    again


POWERFUL    REINFORCEMENTS.  aaq

and  re-read  it  scrutlnizlngly  or  prayerfully,  as  often
as  they  chose.  That  many  of  his  articles  were  fre-
quently re-read  most  effectively  is  shown  by  the
continued  testimony  coming  incessantly  through  all
the  years  from  generous  givers  toward  his  work,
and  from  persons  testifying  concerning  their  con-
version of  their  renewed  power  in  Christian  under-
takings.

The  Magazine  made  the  Metropolitan  Taber-
nacle known  all  over  the  English  speaking  coun-
tries and  answered  a  better  purpose  in  making  each
reader  feel  personally  acquainted  with  Mr.  Spurg-
eon  himself  It  had  a  marvelous  reflex  influence
upon  the  attendance  at  the  Tabernacle  in  London
and  upon  every  department  of  its  local  work.  Per-
sons in  America  would  read  some  interesting  item
m  thG  Swo7^d  and  T7^owe/ connected  with  the  mis-
sionary w^ork  or  the  church  service  of  the  Taber-
nacle and  w^ould,  under  the  inspiration  of  the  ar-
ticle, write  to  their  acquaintances  in  London  and
urge  them  to  attend  Mr.  Spurgeon's  preaching  ser-
vices. In  the  great  metropolis  there  were  thous-
ands of  people  who  for  years  had  lived  near  the
Tabernacle  and  had  not  heard  mention  made  of
its  preacher  or  its  work  until  some  friend  in  ^
America,  Australia  or  India  wrote  them  concerning
it.  **  A  prophet  is  not  without  honor  save  in  his  own
country  and  among  his  own  kin."

It  is  safe  to  state   that  one-third  of  the  present

membership  of  the  Tabernacle  consists  of  persons
29


.-P>  CHARLES  11.    SPURGEON.

who  were  advised  to  attend  Mr.  Spurgeon's  service
by  their  acquaintances  living  outside  of  Londoa.
The  potent  influence  which  the  Magazine  exerted
upon  all  the  local  interests  of  his  church  could  be
partially  measured  by  the  continual  statement  of
visitors  at  the  Tabernacle,  saying,  *T  have  come  to-
day to  bring  friends  from  out  of  the  city,  who  de-
sired very  much  to  hear  Mr.  Spurgeon.  "  The  dea-
cons and  ushers  in  the  church  were  constantly  ap-
pealed to  by  persons  crowding  the  doors  who  reit-
erated the  same  request  as  though  thousands  had
learned  it  together  by  heart.  'T  do  not  care  so
much  for  a  seat  for  myself  as  I  do  for  friends  who
are  here  from  a  great  distance.  "

The  exalted  opinion  w^hich  strangers  entertained
of  Mr.  Spurgeon  who  had  made  his  acquaintance
through  his  Magazine  and  sermons,  increased  the
respect  for  him  among  his  neighbors.  He  exhibited
a  striking  instance  of  the  necessity  that  a  Bishop
should  be  in  good  report  ''among  those  that  are
without.  "

The  amount  of  gifts  received  in  small  offerings  by
mail  from  distant  places  presented  to  Mr.  Spurgeon
for  his  Christian  work  has  been  estimated  by  a  per-
sonal friend  of  the  writer,  w^ho  was  also  an  honored
acquaintance  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  at  the  annual  aver-
ao^e  of  sixteen  thousand  dollars.

The  hold  w^hich  Mr.  Spurgeon  secured  upon  his
hearers  could  scarcely  have  been  so  permanent  and
so  effective  had  it  not  been  reinforced  and  persist-


rOlVERFUL    REIXFORCEMENTS.  40

ently  sustained  by  the  publication  of  this  periodical.
There  are  lessons  to  be  learned  from  this  In  the
conduct  of  church  work  and  In  arousing  spiritual
life  which  are  not  fully  appreciated  yet  by  the
churches  of  England  or  those  of  other  lands.

The  difficulty  in  applying  the  excellent  teachings
of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  useful  example  will  be  found  in
the  natural  tendency  of  persons  and  churches  to
imitate  him  under  widely  different  circumstances
from  those  which  surrounded  his  life.  Hence  they
must  fail.  No  imitator  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  can  ever
reasonably  hope  to  succeed.  His  circumstances,
his  physique,  his  education,  his  training,  will  never
be  repeated  in  the  entire  history  of  the  rolling
years  ;  yet  a  general  application  can  be  made  of
the  lessons  which  his  example  furnishes  which  must
be  very  useful  to  the  individual  churches  and  very
inspiring  to  the  cause  of  Christianity.  It  is  not
enough  to  preach  the  gospel  by  word  of  mouth.
Christ  indeed  wrote  nothing  which  remains  for  our  *
Instruction,  but  the  Apostles  trained  in  his  own
school  and  following  out  implicitly  his  divine  direc-
tion, not  only  disputed  in  the  schools  and  officiated
in  the  Synagogues,  but  wrote  down  in  order  that
we  might  have  the  books  of  the  New  Testament
without  which  our  preaching  would  be  vain.  The
Gospel  may  be  preached  to  the  eye  as  fully  as  to
the  ear  and  he  who  uses  but  one  method  is  like  he
who  sculls  in  competition  with  a  fully  accoutred
oarsman.     True    orators    and   great    editors    are


452  CHARLES  II.   SPUR G EON.

brothers,  giants  both,    together  they  can  save  the
.  world.     In  fractrlcidal  combat  they  can  ruin  It.

Mr.  Spurgeon  brought  both  forces  Into  a  most
compatible  alliance.  In  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's
notices  appearing  in  the  Szvord  and  Trowel  as
an  introduction  to  another  volume  for  a  new  year
he  gives  a  most  excellent  insight  into  the  purpose
and  manao^ement  of  the  Magazine.

o  o

"■  Kind  Readers. — Throughout  another  year  you
have  sustained  the  magazine;  and  as  very  many  of
you  have  expressed  your  satisfaction,  and  few,  if
any,  have  favored  me  with  a  complaint,  I  feel  en-
couraged to  believe  that  you  have  been  pleased
with  my  monthly  numbers.  It  was  once  observed  in
my  hearing  by  a  friend  who  wished  to  account  for
my  fulfilment  of  numerous  duties,  that  as  for  the
magazine,  it  was  a  merely  nominal  thing  to  be  the
editor,  for  few  editors  ever  saw  their  magazines  till
they  were  In  print.  However  this  may  be  as  a
rule,  it  does  not  contain  a  spark  of  truth  in  my
case,  for  I  have  personally  superintended  every
page,  and  I  do  not  think  a  single  line  of  the  mag-
azine has  passed  through  the  press  without  having
been  read  by  me.  Whether  I  succeed  or  not,  I
certainly  do  not  delegate  my  task  to  others.  If  I
had  more  leisure  I  am  sure  I  could  do  better,  and
it  Is  with  unfeigned  satisfaction  that  I  find  my  sub-
scribers contented  with  what  I  can  procure  for
them."

"The   Sword  and  Trowel  has    been   the    happy


POWERFUL    REINFORCEMENTS.  453

means  of  uniting"  In  gracious  service  a  band  of  gra-
cious givers  and  workers,  who  now  for  these  seven-
teen years  have  joined  to  aid  the  institutions  which,
though  they  locally  surround  the  Tabernacle,  are
really  the  off-spring  of  a  congregation  which  is
found  scattered  throughout  all  lands.  By  means
of  this  warm-hearted  brotherhood  the  Pastors'  Col-
lege has  been  sustained  from  year  to  year,  until
some  six  hundred  ministers  have  been  educated  in
it,  the  most  of  whom  are  still  faithfully  preaching
the  old-fashioned  gospel  In  which  they  have  been
trained.  In  connection  with  this  enterprise  three
brethern  have  been  supported  as  evangelists  and
their  Itinerant  labors  bave  been  signally  successful.
Testimonies  that  churches  have  been  aroused  and
sinners  converted  by  their  means,  have  been  plenti-
fully sent  In,  and  these  pages  have  been  increased
In  interest  thereby.  Hundreds  of  thousands  have
heard  the  gospel  through  this  instrumentality."

"The  Stockwell  Orphanage  originated  through  an
article  in  this  magazine,  and  from  time  to  time  its
support  has  been  mainly  supplied  by  Its  readers.
During  the  past  year  the  houses  for  the  girl's  side
'have  been  completed  and  partly  furnished;  and  at
the  present  time  the  first  detachment  of  little  ones
has  entered  into  occupation.  More  remains  to  be
done  by  way  of  furniture  for  other  houses,  and  the
further  contracts  for  the  Infirmary,  baths,  and  out-
buildings have  to  be  met;  but  it  is  a  great  comfort
to  have  seen  the  project  so  far  in  progress,    and   to


454


CHARLES  JL    SPURGE  ON.


feel  assured  that  all  that  is  yet  required  will  be  forth-
coming in  its  season.  The  bazaar  which  is  so  soon
to  be  held  will,  w^e  hope,  secure  the  amount  needed
to  bring  the  enterprise  up  to  the  next  stage,  and
then  w^e  may  lay  our  plan  for  the  final  outlay  on  the
chapel  of  the  Orphanage,  and  a  few  other  neces-
saries. All  that  has  been  done  has  been  accom-
plished without  personal  solicitation,  or  the  allot-
ment of  votes,  or  the  dissemination  of  heart-rend-
ing appeals:  it  has  sufficed  to  lay  the  case  before
the  Lord  in  prayer,  and  then  to  mention  it  to  His
people  in  plain  and  earnest  terms,  and  the  funds
have  come  in  with  marvellous  regularity,  the  larger
amounts  having  been  timed  to  meet  the  hour  of  need
as  exactly  as  if  the  whole  went  by  clock  work.  The
hand  of  the  Lord  is  in  this  thing,  and  to  Him  be
glory.  That  this  institution  has  brought  honor  to
God  is  plain  enough,  for  many  a  time  those  who
would  have  abused  our  ministry  have  admitted  that
a  good  work  has  been  wrought,  and  have  had  no
heart  to  revile.  There  is  something  about  orphan
work  which  wins  the  sympathy  of  the  most  careless,
and  none  can  tell  till  the  last  great  day  how  many
have  been  by  this  means  led  to  think  well  of  the  gos-
pel, and  next  to  hear  it  and  experience  its  power."
"The  Colportage  Association  has  held  on  its  most
useful  course.  It  has  been  sustained  with  difficulty,
for  somehow  it  does  not  chime  in  with  the  tastes  and
views  of  large  donors,  but  its  influence  for  good  is
second  to  no    existing   agency.     Where    there  are


FOWERFUL   REINFORCEMENTS.  455

not  enough  dissenters  to  support  a  minister,  or
where  ministers  are  unable  to  cover  large  and  scat-
tered districts,  the  colporteur  makes  his  way  with
his  pack,  and  speaks  a  word  for  Jesus  at  every  door,
either  by  personal  conversation  or  by  leaving  a
tract.  Besides  this,  he  preaches  by  the  roadside  or
in  village  chapels,  gets  up  temperance  meetings,
visits  the  sick,  and  above  all  sells  good  books.  This
society,  and  several  other  useful  works,  report  them-
selves In  these  pages,  and  enlist  good  friends  there-

by."

"  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book  Fund  quietly  pursues  Its
beneficent  course.  It  is  putting  sound  theology
just  now  upon  the  shelves  of  many  a  poor  curate
and  ill-paid  minister,  and  this  It  does  so  largely  that
it  would  be  a  miracle  of  a  strange  sort  if  It  did  not
greatly  affect  the  ministry  of  the  day.  That  the
sermons  distributed  and  the  ''Treasury  of  David"
furnish  material  for  preachers  Is  saying  very  little:
that  they  have  evangelized  the  tone  of  many  has
been  confessed  in  numerous  instances,  and  is  true
of  far  more.

''  Brethren  and  sisters,  you  have  aided  me  so  far  In
a  benevolent  enterprise  of  no  small  dimensions,  and
I  hope  I  have  in  no  degree  lost  your  loving  confi-
dence. Continue,  then,  to  bear  me  up  In  your
prayers,  and  to  sustain  me  by  your  contributions.
More  can  be  done,  and  more  should  be  done.
Every  living  work  Is  capable  of  growth;  every  work
which  has  God's  blessing  upon  It  Is  under  necessity


4-6  •        CHARLES  H.    SPURGEON.

to  advance.  Our  watchword  still  \'^fo7'ivard.  Pos-
sibly we  cry  forward  more  often  than  pleases  those
who  lag  behind.  Some  time  ago  I  asked  for  men
and  means  to  send  evangelists  to  India;  one  man
only  offered,  and  that  one  man  was  sent.  Up  till
now  I  have  had  sufficient  money,  and  I  believe  that
when  more  men  offer  I  shall  have  larger  funds;  but
here  is  room  for  prayerful  uplooking  to  the  Lord.
Brethren,  pray  for  us.  I  would  fain  live  to  the  ut-
most of  my  own  life,  and  I  would  draw  out  from  all
my  brethren  more  and  more  for  God's  glory  by  the
propagation  of  the  gospel,  the  alleviation  of  suffering,
and  the  arousing  of  the  Church.  Thanks  to  all  help-
ers, and  a  thousand  blessings. ''


CHAPTER  XVII.


IN  COMBAT.


It  may  be  important  as  a  matter  of  history  al-
thouofh  it  is  less  ao^reeable  to  the  oreneral  reader  to
give  some  account  of  the  controversies  into  which
Mr.  Spurgeon  at  times  was  drawn.  We  have  be-
fore stated  that  he  had  strong  friends  and  bitter
enemies.  No  man  could  have  been  more  deeply
and  sincerely  loved  by  promiscuous  congregations  of
people  than  was  Mr.  Spurgeon.  Some  of  them
even  asserted  that  their  affection  for  him  was
stronger  than  their  affection  for  their  own  families.
He  was  a  tower  of  defence  to  his  friends  and  no
persecuted  person  went  to  him  for  protection  who
did  not  at  once  secure  all  that  his  genius  and
generosity  could  give.  The  admiration  of  his
acquaintances  which  amounted  almost  to  worship
naturally  aw^oke  in  the  jealous  bosoms  of  ordinary
human  beings  a  counterpart  spirit  of  envy  and
criticism.

The  people  well  knew  that  it  would  please  Mr.
Spurgeon  far  more  than  any  personal  gift  if
they  would  remember  the  poor,  the  sick,  the  lame,
the  blind  and  the  aged,  as  an  indication  of  their  re-

457


45  cS  CHARLES  //.    SPURGE  ON.

spect  for  him.  It  Is  a  magnificent  thing  to  contem-
plate In  the  Hfe  of  any  person  when  the  love  of  his
friends  for  him  manifests  Itself  In  deeds  of  Christian
charity  and  the  promotion  of  salvation.

A  very  excellent  Idea  of  the  esteem  In  which  he
was  held  by  those  who  had  been  acquainted  w^Ith
him  through  his  ministry  Is  shown  In  an  address
which  was  presented  to  him  beautifully  embossed
on  the  occasion  of  his  fiftieth  birthday.

The  twenty-five  thousand  dollars  which  was  pre-
sented to  him  on  that  Fiftieth  Anniversary  with  the
assurance  that  he  could  do  with  It  as  he  chose.  He
refused  to  accept  it  for  himself  and  appropriated  It
to  the  various  charities  of  the  church.  The  accum-
lated  power  of  ten  thousand  deeds  of  kindness
necessarily  exalted  him  In  the  minds  of  his  friends
and  lifted  him  to  such  an  eminence  that  he  was  a
most  prominent  mark  for  the  arrows  of  the  Infidel,
the  atheist  and  the  unsuccessful.  Even  that  Fiftieth
Anniversary,  while  It  multiplied  his  friends,  also
brought  upon  him  severe  contests  with  the  enlmies
of  the  good  and  the  true.  The  address  which  was
presented  to  him  on  that  occasion  we  give  In  full
that  It  may  be  preserved  as  an  Important  matter  of
history.

''To  THE  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  Pastor  of  the  Met-
ropolitan Tabernacle: —

**  With  an  united  voice  of  thanksgiving  to  our
ever-blessed  God  on  your  behalf;  with  a  cordial  ac-
knowledgment of  the  good  services  you  have  rend-


hV  COMBAT.  .p^

459

ered  to  the  universal  Church  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  and  with  a  profound  sense  of  the  high  char-
acter and  wide  reputation  you  have  established
among  your  fellow-Christians,  we  beg  to  offer  you
our  sincere  congratulations  on  this  the  fiftieth  anni
versary  of  your  birthday.

''  Accept  our  assurance  that  no  language  but  the
language  of  personal  affection  could  fitly  express  the
esteem  In  which  you  are  held  by  ourselves  and  by
the  numerous  constituency  we  represent.  Were  it
possible  for  the  lips  of  all  those  who  love  you  as  a
brother,  and  those  who  revere  you  as  a  father  In
Christ,  to  sound  In  your  ears  the  sentiments  of  their
hearts,  the  music  of  their  chorus  at  this  glad  hour
would  be  like  the  noise  of  many  waters.

**  Gathered  together,  as  we  now  are,  in  this
sacred  edifice — sacred  not  by  reason  of  any  super-
stitious ceremony  at  the  opening,  but  by  the  soul-
saving  miracles  of  grace  subsequently  wrought  be-
neath its  roof — It  becomes  us  to  greet  you  first  as
Pastor  of  this  Ancient  Church.  More  than  thirty
of  those  fifty  years  you  chronicle  to-day  have  been
spent  in  our  midst.  As  our  Minister  you  are  known
to  the  utmost  ends  of  the  earth.  Richly  endowed
by  the  Spirit  of  God  with  wisdom  and  discretion,
your  conduct  as  our  Ruling  Elder  has  silenced  con-
tention and  promoted  harmony.  The  three  hun-
dred souls  you  found  in  fellowship  at  New  Park
Street  Chapel  have  multiplied  to  a  fellowship  of
nearly  six  thousand  in  this  Tabernacle.     And  under


460  CHARLES   //.    SPURGEON.

your  watchful  oversight   the    family   group  has  in-
creased without  any  breach  of  order.

'*  You  came  among  us  In  the  freshness  of  your
youth.  At  that  flowering  age  when  boys  of  good
promise  are  wont  to  change  their  curriculum  from
school  to  college,  you  had  already  developed  into
manliness,  and  there  was  ripe  fruit  as  well  as  pleas-
ant foliage  on  your  branches.  The  groundwork  of
your  education  appeared  to  be  so  solid,  and  the
maturity  of  your  character  so  thoroughly  reliable,
that  you  were  unanimously  elected  by  venerable
members  of  the  Church  of  Christ  to  preside  over
their  councils.  The  fair  prospect  of  your  spring-
time has  not  suffered  from  any  blight.  Your  natural
abilities  never  betrayed  you  into  indolent  habits.
The  talents  you  possessed  gave  stimulus  to  your
diligence.  A  little  prosperity  did  not  elate  you,  or
a  measure  of  success  prompt  the  desire  to  settle
down  in  some  quiet  resting-place.  You  spread
your  sails  to  catch  the  breeze.  The  ascendency  you
began  to  acquire  over  the  popular  mind,  instead  of
making  you  vain-glorious,  filled  you  with  awe,
and  increased  the  rigour  of  that  discipline  you  have
always  exercised  over  yourself.  These  were  happy
auguries  of  your  good  speed.  Not  that  the  utmost
vigilance  on  your  part  could  have  sufficed  to  up-
hold you  amidst  the  vast  and  accumulating  responsi-
bilities that  have  devolved  on  you  as  the  sphere  of
your  ministry  widened.  He  who  ruleth  in  the
heavens    has    screened   you    in    times  of  peril,  and


IxY  COMBAT.  ^51

piloted  you  through  shoals  and  quicksands,  through
straits  and  rapids.  His  grace  and  His  goodness,
His  promises  and  His  providence  have  never  failed
you.  From  the  hour  when  you  first  committed  your
soul,  your  circumstances,  and  destinies  to  the  keep-
ing of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  have  never  feared
such  a  disaster.

•  **To  your  unwavering  faith  in  His  guardian  care
we  venture  to  attribute  the  coolness  of  your
head  and  the  courage  of  your  heart  in  all  the
great  adventures  of  your  life.  Some  of  us  have
been  with  you  from  the  beginning  of  your  charge.
According  to  a  law  as  legibly  written  as  any  law  of
nature,  the  Scripture  has  said,  ''Instead  of  the
fathers,  shall  be  the  children."  Hence,  in  not  a
few  instances,  you  must  miss  the  sires  while  you
meet  the  sons.  The  retrospect  of  your  career,  to
those  who  have  followed  it  throughout,  appears  like
one  unbroken  series  of  successes;  but  as  our  men-
ory  retraces  the  steps  you  have  taken,  we  can
testify  to  the  exhaustive  labours  in  which  you  have
blithely  engaged,  the  constant  self-denial  you  have
cheerfully  exercised,  and  the  restless  anxieties  that
have  kept  you  and  your  comrades  Incessantly  call-
ing on  the  name  of  the  Lord.  By  such  an  experi-
ence you  have  enlarged  the  field  of  evangelical  en-
terprise in  the  various  institutions  of  the  Church.
And  it  has  been  your  happiness  not  only  to  see  the
growth  of  those  institutions  beyond  the  most  san-
guine hopes  you  cherished  when  planting  them,  but


462  CHARLES  H.    SPUKGEON.

to  have  received  the  grateful  thanks  of  those  who
derived  unspeakable  benefit  in  partaking  of  their
fruits.

''  Such  gratitude  demands  our  notice,  though
only  in  the  lowest  degree.  Your  skilful  general-
ship has  laid  ten  thousand  happy  donors  to  your
chanties  under  lasting  obligations  to  you  for  provid-
ing outlets  for  their  benevolence.  It  has  pleased
the  Lord  to  make  whatever  you  do  to  prosper.
You  have  been  the  faithful  steward  and  the  kindly
executor  of  hundreds  and  thousands  of  pious  indi-
viduals, whose  fond  design  has  been  to  lay  up
treasure  for  themselves  in  heaven  by  paying  into
the  exchequer  on  earth  of  their  substance  for  the
widow  and  the  fatherless  in  their  distress,  for  the
poor,  and  those  who  have  no  helper.  Let  the
acknowledgments  of  subscribers  to  the  various
purses  you  hold  in  your  hands,  as  well  as  those
of  recipients,  cheer  you  as  you  enter  on  a  fresh
decade  of  the  days  of  the  years  of  your  earthly
pilgrimage.

"  An  occasion  like  this  is  so  solemn,  and  an  ad-*
dress  like  the  present  is  so  serious,  that  w^e  may
well  search  the  sacred  volume  for  suitable  words.
We  feel  sure  that  brethern  in  all  parts  of  the  earth
pray  for  you.  And  we  are  equally  certain  that  the
churches  which  are  in  Christ  throughout  the  world
glorify  God  in  you.  The  Lord  preserve  and  keep
you  to  the  end.  To  this  hour  you  have  maintained
an  unsullied  reputation  among  men.     Erring  as  we


IN  COMBAT,


463


all  are  before  God,  it  Is  our  sincere  conviction  that
if  such  a  thing  were  possible,  a  second  edition  of
your  life,  revised  by  yourself,  could  hardly  be  an
amendment.

*'You  braved  much  calumny  on  the  outset  of
your  career,  and  you  have  outlived  it.  The  secular-
ists, who  once  denounced,  now  salute  you.  Where
you  theology  has  failed  to  convert  them  your  philan-
thropy has  sufficed  to  enchant  them.  You  are  lifted
in  public  esteem  above  suspicion,  as  a  true  man —
no  traitor  or  time-server.  Your  kindness  to  every-
body has  made  everybody  kind  to  you.  You  have
illustrated  the  force  and  the  fulness  of  a  divine  pro-
verb which  has  puzzled  many  a  philosopher:
"When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord  he  maketh
even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him."

'*  If,  dear  sir,  you  give  us  full  credit  for  the  intense
sympathy  we  have  felt  when  sickness  and  sorrow
have  weekened  your  strength  In  the  way,  you  will
not  deny  us  the  gratification  of  alluding  to  the
private  and  domestic  joys  that  pour  down  like
sunbeams  on  youp  face  and  gladden  your  Ju-
bilee.

**Your  beloved  and  estimable  wife,  whose  life
long  trembled  in  the  balance,  has  been  restored  to
health.  Had  she  been  less  heroic  and  more  exact-
ing in  her  protracted  illness,  you  must  have  been
more  reserved  and  less  generous  in  the  consecration
of  your  time  and  thought  to  the  good  works  you
were  doing.     In  the  stillness  of  enforced  retirement.


.^4  CHARLES  II.   SPURGE  ON.

her  Inventive  genius  discovered  new  channels  of
Lisefuhiess.  Her  '  Book  Fund  '  is  beyond  all  praise.
Her  delicate  mission  has  been  so  appreciated,
that  throughout  the  British  Isles,  and  in  foreign
lands,  her  name  has  become  linked  with  your  own
at  every  station  where  an  ambassador  of  Christ
publishes  the  glad  tidings  of  the  Gospel.

**  Your  father  and  mother,  walking  before  God  in
quiet  unpretentious  piety,  have  both  been  spared  to
see  their  first-born  son  in  the  median  of  a  career
that  has  made  their  once  obscure  patronymic  famous
throuofhout  the  world.

''Your  worthy  brother  and  trusty  yoke-fellow  in
the  pastorate  is  still  by  your  side  rendering  good
service,  for  which  his  fine  business  tact,  and  his
manly  but  modest  desire  to  second  all  your  motions
to  go  forward,  eminently  qualify  him.

"  Your  two  sons  have  both  devoted  themselves
to  the  ministry  ;  and  each  of  them  in  his  own  sphere
of  labour  has  found  proof  that  he  was  divinely
anointed  to  his  pastorate.

*'  To  yourself,  however,  we  turn  as  a  central  figure,
recognised  from  afar  by  tens  of  thousands  of  people,
to  whom  your  name  is  an  emblem  of  purity  and
power,  and  by  whom  you  are  accounted  second  to
none  among  living  Preachers,  and  your  sermons  are
appreciated  as  a  faithful  exposition  of  the  Gospel  of
God,  instinct  with  the  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
and  therefore  quickening  in  their  influence  on  the
conscience  and  the  hearts  of  men.


IN  COMBAT.  '  465

**  On  your  head  we  now  devoutly  invoke  those
blessings  which  we  believe  the  Almighty  is  abund-
antly willing  to  bestow.

"  May  your  steps  in  the  future  be  ordered  of  the
Lord  as  they  have  been  in  the  past.  May  a  gener-
ation yet  unborn  witness  that  your  old  age  is  luxuri-
ant and  fruitful  as  your  youth.  May  your  life  on
earth  wind  up  like  the  holy  Psalter  that  you  so  much
love.  Be  It  yours  to  anchor  at  last  in  David's  Psalm
of  Praise,  prolific  as  it  was  of  other  .Psalms,  into
which  no  groan  or  sigh  could  intrude.  So  may  you
rest  in  the  Lord  with  a  vision  of  the  everlastinof
Kingom  dawning  on  your  eyes,  and  Hallelujah  after
Hallelujah  resounding  in  your  ears."

Throughout  all  the  years  after  his  name  had  be-
come so  prominent  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to
espouse  any  cause  without  becoming  its  principal
champion.  He  was  so  much  better  known  than
any  other  man  and  his  example  had  so  much  more
force  that  he  was  at  once  selected  from  among  the
entire  ranks  as  the  chief  object  in  the  battle.  Mr.
Spurgeon's  disposition  shows  that  balance  of  ability
and  judgment  which  is  rare  to  find  among  persons
even  in  his  profession.  His  heart  was  large,  his  af-
fections very  strong  and  his  sympathies  most  ten-
der; and  yet  when  aroused  to  conflict  he  could
strike  almost  fiercely  and  hurled  a  free  lance  with  a
strong  hand.

He  spoke  decidedly  and  bluntly,  he  called  evils
by  their  right  names  and  was  unsparing  In  his  blt-
30


.56  CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.

ter  denunciation  of  deceit,  hypocricy  and  sin.  It
made  no  difference  to  him  to  what  class  in  society
his  opponents  might  belong  nor  how  aristocratic
may  have  been  their  familiy's  coat  of  aims.  If
they  were  found  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemies  of
Christ  thev  must  surrender  or  o-Ive  most  valiant
battle.

From  the  beginning  of  his  pastorate  in  London
he  was  called  upon  often  to  espouse  some  forlorn
hope  or  to  stand  prominently  forth  as  the  defender
of  some  cherished  doctrine  and  while  he  made  many
enemies  in  these  contests  he  also  increased  the
number  of  his  supporters.  He  held  himself  strenu-
ously to  the  Baptist  doctrines  of  the  separation  of
Church  and  State  and  was  necessarily  set  in  oppo-
sition to  the  established  Church  of  Eno-land.

During  the  early  years  of  his  pastorate  the  digni-
taries of  the  established  Church  did  not  deign  to
notice  the  ''Essex  bumpkin,"  otherwise  than  to
make  slurring  reference  to  him  in  private  conversa-
tion. But  when  the  common  people  heard  him  so
gladly  and  thousands  waited  upon  his  ministrations
until  the  public  press  was  compelled  as  a  matter  ol
ordinary  news  to  report  the  proceedings  at  his
gatherings,  these  dignified  occupants  of  a  political
office  found  that  they  must  enter  into  the  conflict
for  the  defence  of  their  cherished  faith.

Some  of  them  conducted  most  honorable  warfare
and  the  greater  portion  of  them  respected  Mr.
Spurgeon  for  his  plain  advocacy  of  his  conscientious


IN  COMBAT.


A^7


principles,  but  occasionally  there  were  found  men
who  used  their  clerical  positions  to  say  contempti-
bly false  things  concerning  iiim  and  to  sadly  mis-
represent his  doctrines  and  his  practices.

The  replies  he  made  to  them  contained  some  of
the  sharpest  thrusts  from  his  intellectual  sword  and
some  of  the  hottest  shot  from  his  doctrinal  battery
that  are  to  be  found  in  any  literature.  But  he  did
not  confine  his  assaults  to  the  members  or  doctrines
of  other  denominations.  Whenever  he  found  a
traitor  in  the  camp  or  a  spy  in  the  fortress,  he
pounced  upon  him  with  a  vigor  and  alertness  that
often  astonished  his  most  intimate  acquaintances.
It  is  a  surprising  thing  in  his  history  that  in  all  these
assaults  upon  the  different  forms  of  evil  and  the
persons  who  represented  them,  that  he  never  had
occasion  to  retrace  his  steps  and  seems  never  to
have  met  with  defeat.  In  some  cases  his  compan-
ions felt  for  a  time  that  he  ought  to  apologize  for
the  hot  chain  shot  which  he  sent  into  the  enemy's
country,  but  the  subsequent  experience  confirmed
the  wisdom  of  his  utterances  and  often  led  his  oppo-
nents to  an  apology.  He  stood  forth  for  the  doc-
trines of  his  denomination  with  a  strength  and  per-
severance which  w^ould  be  noble  in  the  advocate  of
any  denomination  or  creed,  and  could  not  overlook
errors  in  Christian  faith  or  principles  even  among
his  dearest  friends.  His  sectarian  feelino"s  were
alwys  subordinate  to  his  Christian  charity,  but  he
was,  nevertheless,  that  which  every  disciple  of  Christ


^^S  CHARLES  H.    SPURGEON.

should  be,  an  open  defendant  of  the  principles  which
as  a  Christian  he  had  espoused.

He  serves  his  denomination  best  who  serves
Christ  most,  and  It  may  be  stated  with  approxima-
tion to  the  truth  that  he  serves  Christ  best  who
serves  his  denomination  most.

He  would  not  remain  in  voluntary  association
with  any  assembly  of  churches  where  the  principles
in  which  he  believed  were  not  closely  and  conscien-
tiously adhered  to.  If  preachers  or  churches  advo-
cated or  practiced  the  principles  which  were  at.  vari-
ance with  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  Christianity
as  he  understood  them  he  insisted  without  fear  or
favor  in  withdrawing  from  their  fellowship  unless
they  changed  their  teaching  and  conduct.  A  most
excellent  idea  of  this  feature  of  his  character  may
be  trained  from  one  of  the  later  controversies  in
w^hich  he  en^jao-ed  which  became  known  to  the  re-
ligious  world  as  the  "  Down-Grade  "  controversy.
In  the  articles  which  he  wrote  upon  it  before  his
withdrawal  from  the  Baptist  Union,  and  before
uniting  with  the  Surrey  and  Middlesex  Baptist
Associations  we  see  this  side  of  his  character  most
strongly  exhibited.  One  of  the  articles  will  give
the  reader  a  more  accurate  and  comprehensive  view
ol  this  side  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  life  than  anything
that  could  otherwise  be  written  concerning  him.

The  Baptist  Union  was  composed  of  Baptists
and  Congregationalists  and  was  a  very  free  and
liberal  organization  which  did  not  attempt    to    hold


IN  COMBAT.  460

any  person  very  strictly  to  doctrine  or  creed.  Yet
many  of  the  strongest  preachers  in  the  Baptist  de-
nomination in  and  about  London  were  members  of
that  Association.  In  the  membership  there  were
also  a  number  of  pastors  who  taught  in  their  pul-
pits some  of  the  modern  ideas  of  science — so  called
—  and  who  advocated  the  theories  of  the  higher
criticism  and  a  more  liberal  and  loose  construction
of  the  old  Testament  records.  Upon  this  subject
Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote: —

''  No  lover  of  the  gospel  can  conceal  from  him-
self the  fact  that  the  days  are  evil.  We  are  willing
to  make  a  large  discount  from  our  apprehensions
on  the  score  of  natural  timidity,  the  caution  of  age,
and  the  weakness  produced  by  pain;  but  yet  our
solemn  conviction  is  that  thinors  are  much  worse  in
many  churches  than  they  seem  to  be,  and  are  rap-
idly tending  downward.  Read  those  newspapers
which  represent  the  Broad  School  of  Dissent,  and
ask  yourself.  How  much  further  could  they  go  ?
What  doctrine  remains  to  be  abandoned  ?  What
other  truth  to  be  the  object  of  contempt  ?  A  new
religion  has  been  initiated,  which  is  no  more
Christianity  than  chalk  is  cheese,  and  this  religion,
being  destitute  of  moral  honesty,  palms  itself  off  as
the  old  faith  with  slight  improvements,  and  on  this
plea  usurps  pulpits  which  were  erected  for  gospel
preaching.  The  Atonement  is  scouted,  the  inspira-
tion of  Scripture  is  derided,  the  Holy  Ghost  is  de-
graded into  an  influence,  the  punishment    of  sin    is


470  CHARLES  II.    SPURGE  ON.

turned  into  fiction,  and  the  Resurrcxtlon  Into  a
myth,  and  yet  these  enemies  of  our  faith  expect  us
to  call  them  brethern,  and  maintain  a  confederacy
with  them  !

''At  the  back  of  doctrinal  falsehood  comes  a
natural  decline  of  spiritual  life,  evidenced  by  a  taste
for  questionable  amusements,  and  a  weariness  of
devotional  meetings.  At  a  certain  meeting  of  min-
isters and  church-officers,  one  after  another  doubted
the  value  of  prayer-meetings;  all  confessed  that
they  had  a  very  small  attendance,  and  several  ac-
knowledged  without  the  slightest  compunction  that
they  had  quite  given  them  up.  What  means  this  ?
Are  churches  in  a  right  condition  when  they  have
only  one  meeting  for  prayer  in  a  week,  and  that  a
mere  skeleton  ?  Churches  here  are  which  have
prayer-meetings  several  times  on  the  Lord's  day,
and  very  frequently  during  the  week,  yet  feel  their
need  of  more  prayer;  but  what  can  be  said  of  those
who  very  seldom  practice  united  supplication  ?  Are
there  few  conversions  ?  Do  the  congregations
dwindle  ?  Who  wonders  that  this  is  the  case  when
the  spirit  of  prayer  has  departed  ?

"■  As  for  questionable  amusements,  time  was  when
a  Non-comformlst  minister  who  was  known  to  at-
tend the  play-house  would  soon  have  found  him-
self without  a  church.  And  justly  so;  for  no  man
can  long  possess  the  confidence,  even  of  the  most
worldly,  who  is  known  to  be  a  haunter  of  theatres.
Yet,  at  the  present  time,  it  is  a  matter  of  notoriety


IN  COMBAT.  4^1

that  preachers  of  no  mean  repute  defend  the  play-
house, and  do  so  because  they  have  been  seen
there.  Is  It  any  wonder  that  church  members  for-
get their  vows  of  consecration,  and  run  with  the
unholy  in  the  ways  of  frivolity,  when  they  hear  that
persons  are  tolerated  in  the  pastorate  who  do  the
same?  We  doubt  not  that,  for  writing  these  lines,
we  shall  incur  the  charge  of  prudery  and  bigotry,
and  this  will  but  prove  how  low  are  the  tone  and
spirit  of  the  churches  in  many  places.  The  fact  Is,
that  many  would  like  to  unite  church  and  stage,
cards  and  prayer,  dancing  and  sacraments.  If  we
are  powerless  to  stem  this  torrent,  we  can.  at  least
warn  men  of  its  existence,  and  entreat  them  to
keep  out  of  it.  When  the  old  faith  is  gone,  and
enthusiasm  for  the  gospel  is  extinct,  it  is  no  won-
der that  people  seek  something  else  In  the  way  of
delight.  Lacking  bread,  they  feed  on  ashes;  re-
jecting the  way  of  the  Lord,  they  run  greedily  in  the
path  of  folly.

An  eminent  minister,  who  is  well  versed  In  the
records  of  Nonconformity,  remarked  to  us  the  other
day  that  he  feared  history  was  about  to  repeat  itself
among  Dissenters.  In  days  gone  by,  they  aimed  at
being  thought  respectable,  judicious,  moderate,  and
learned,  and,  in  consequence,  they  abandoned  the
Puritanic  teaching  with  which  they  started,  and
toned  down  their  doctrines.  The  spiritual  life  which
had.  been  the  Impelling  cause  of  their  dissent  de-
clined almost  to  death's  door,  and  the  very  existence


.•J  2  CHARLES  //.    SPURGE  ON.

of  evangelical  Nonconformity  was  threatened.  Then
came  the  outburst  of  living  godliness  under  White-
field  and  Wesley,  and  with  it  new  life  fur  Dissent,
and  Increased  influence  in  every  direction.

Alas  !  many  are  returning  to  the  poisoned  cups
which  druo-o-ed  that  declininof  oreneration,  wdien  it
surrendered  itself  to  Unitarian  lethargy.  Too  many
ministers  are  toying  with  the  deadly  cobra  of
''  another  gospel,"  in  the  form  of  "modern  thought."
As  a  consequence,  their  congregations  are  thinning,
the  more  spiritual  of  their  members  join  the
*' Brethren,"  or  some  other  company  cf."  believers
unattached;"  v/hile  the  more  wealthy,  and  show-lov-
ing, with  some  of  the  unquestionable  devoutness,
go  off  to  the  Church  of  England.

Let  us  not  hide  from  ourselves  the  fact  that  the
Episcopal  Church  is  awake,  and  Is  full  of  zeal  and
force.  Dissenting  as  we  do  most  intensely  from
her  ritualism,  and  especially  abhorring  her  establish-
ment by  the  State,  we  cannot  but  perceive  that  she
grows,  and  grows,  among  other  reasons,  because
spiritual  life  Is  waning  among  certain  dissenters.
Where  the  gospel  is  fully  and  powerfully  preached,
with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven,  our
churches  not  only  hold  their  own,  but  win  converts;
but  when  that  which  constitutes  their  strength  is
gone — we  mean  when  the  gospel  is  concealed,  and
the  life  of  prayer  is  slighted — the  whole  thing  be-
comes a  mere  form  and  tiction.  For  this  thmg  our
heart  is  sore  grieved.     Dissent  for   mere    dissent's


LV  COMBAT.  .y-.

sake  would  be  the  bitter  fruit  of  a  wilful  mind.
Dissent  as  mere  political  partisanship  is  a  degrada-
tion and  travesty  of  religion.  Dissent  for  truth's
sake,  carried  out  by  force  of  the  life  within,  is  noble,
praiseworthy,  and  fraught  with  the  highest  benefits
to  the  race  Are  we  to  have  the  genuine  living
thing,  or  are  we  to  have  that  corruption  of  the  best,
from  which  the  worst  is  produced  ?  Conformity,  or
nonconformity,  per  se,  is  nothing;  but  a  new  creature
is  everything,  and  the  truth  upon  which  alone  that
new  creature  can  live  is  worth  dying  a  thousand
deaths  to  conserve.  It  is  not  the  shell  that  is  so
precious,  but  the  kernel  which  it  contains;  when  the
kernel  is  gone,  what  is  there  left  that  is  worth  a
thought  ?  Our  nonconformity  is  beyond  measure
precious  as  a  vital  spiritual  force,  but  only  while  it
remains  such  will  it  justify  its  own  existence.

"The  case  is  mournful.  Certain  ministers  are
making  infidels.  Avowed  atheists  are  not  a  tenth
as  dangerous  as  those  preachers  who  scatter  doubt
and  stab  at  faith.  A  plain  man  told  us  the  other
day  that  two  ministers  had  derided  him  because  he
thought  we  should  pray  for  rain.  A  gracious
woman  bemoaned  in  my  presence  that  a  precious
promise  in  Isaiah,  which  had  comforted  her,  had
been  declared  by  her  minister  to  be  uninspired.  It
is  a  common  thinor  to  hear  workinor-men  excuse  their

o  o

wickedness  by  the  statement  that  there  is  no  hell,
the  parson  says  so.  But  we  need  not  prolong
our  mention  of  painful  facts.     Germany   was  made


474


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.


unbelieving-  by  her  preachers,  and  England  is  fol-
lowing in  her  track.  Attendance  at  places  of  wor-
ship Is  declining,  and  reverence  for  holy  things  is
vanishing;  and  we  solemnly  believe  this  to  be  large-
ly attributable  to  the  scepticism  which  has  flashed
from  the  pulpit  and  spread  among  the  people.  Pos-
sibly the  men  who  uttered  the  doubt  never  intended
it  to  go  so  far;  but  none  the  less  they  have  done  the
ill,  and  cannot  undo  It.  Their  own  observation
ought  to  teach  them  better.  Have  these  advanced
thinkers  filled  their  own  chapels  ?  Have  they,  after
all,  prospered  through  discarding  the  old  methods  ?
Possibly,  In  a  few  cases  genius  and  tact  have  car-
ried these  gentry  over  the  destructive  results  of
their  ministry;  but  in  many  cases  their  pretty  new
theology  has  scattered  their  congregations.  In
meetinor-houses  holdino^  a  thousand,  or  twelve  hun-
dred,  or  fifteen  hundred,  places  once  packed  to  the
celling  with  ardent  hearers,  how  small  are  the  num-
bers now  !  We  could  mention  Instances,  but  we
forbear.  The  places  which  the  gospel  filled  the  new
nonsense  has  emptied,  and  will  keep  empty.

''This  fact  will  have  little  Influence  with  "the  cul-
tured ;"  for,  as  a  rule,  they  have  cultivated  a  fine
development  of  conceit.  'Yes,'  said  one,  whose
pews  held  only  here  and  there  a  worshiper,  '  it  will
always  be  found  that  In  proportion  as  the  preacher's
mind  enlaro-es,  his  coni^regfation  diminishes.'
These  destroyers  of  our  church  appear  to  be  as  con-
tent with  their  work  as  monkeys  with  their  mischief


IN  COMBAT,  475

That  which  their  fathers  would  have  lamented  they
rejoice  in  ;  the  alienation  of  the  poor  and  simple-
minded  from  their  ministry  they  accept  as  a  compli-
ment, and  the  grief  of  the  spiritually-minded  they  re-
gard as  an  evidence  of  their  power.  Truly,  unless
the  Lord  had  kept  his  own,  we  would  long  before
this  have  seen  our  Zion  ploughed  as  a  field.

"The  other  day  we  were  asked  to  mention  the
name  of  some  person  who  might  be  a  suitable  pastor
for  a  vacant  church,  and  the  deacon  who  wrote  said:
'  Let  him  be  a  converted  man,  and  let  him  be  one
who  believes  what  he  preaches;  for  there  are  those
around  us  who  give  us  the  idea  that  they  have
neither  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter.'  This  remark
is  more  commonly  made  than  we  like  to  remember,
and  there  is,  alas  !  too  much  need  for  it.  A  stu-
dent from  a  certain  college  preached  to  a  congrega-
tion we  sometimes  visit  such  a  sermon  that  the  dea-
con said  to  him  in  the  vestry;  '  Sir,  do  you  believe
in  the  Holy  Ghost?  '  The  youth  replied:  '  I  sup-
pose I  do.'  To  which  the  deacon  answered:  '  I
suppose  you  do  not,  or  you  would  not  have  insulted
us  with  such  false  doctrine.  A  little  plain  speak-
ing would  do  a  world  of  good  just  now.  These
gentlemen  desire  to  be  let  alone.  They  want  no
noise  raised.  Of  course  thieves  hate  watch-doofs,
and  love  darkness.  It  is  time  that  somebody
should  spring  his  rattle,  and  call  attention  to  the
way  in  which  God  is  being  robbed  of  his  glor)*,  and
man  of  his  hope.


4^6  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

*'  It  now  becomes  a  serious  question  how  far  those
who  abide  by  the  faith  once  deHvered  to  the  saints
should  fraternize  with  those  who  have  turned  aside
to  another  gospel.  Christian  love  has  its  claims,
and  divisions  are  to  be  shunned  as  grievous  evns;
but  how  far  are  we  justified  in  being  in  confederacy
with  those  who  are  departing  from  the  truth  ?  It  is
a  difficult  question  to  answer  so  as  to  keen  the  bal-
ance of  the  duties.  For  the  present  it  behoves  be-
livers  to  be  cautious,  lest  they  lend  their  support
and  countenance  to  the  betrayers  of  the  Lord.  It
is  one  thing  to  overleap  all  boundaries  of  denomi-
national restriction  for  the  truth's  sake;  this  we
hope  all  godly  men  will  do  more.  It  is  quite
another  policy  which  would  urge  us  to  subordinate
the  maintenance  of  truth  to  denominational  pros-
perity and  unity.  Numbers  of  easy-minded  people
wink  at  error  so  long-  as  it  is  committed  bv  a  clever
man  and  a  good-natured  brother,  who. has  so  many
fine  points  about  him.  Let  each  believer  judge  for
himself;  but,  for  our  part,  we  have  put  on  a  few
fresh  bolts  to  our  door,  and  we  have  given  orders
to  keep  the  chain  up;  for,  under  color  of  begging
the  friendship  of  the  servant,  there  are  those  about
who  aim  at  robbing  the  Master.

We  fear  it  is  hopeless  ever  to  form  a  society
which  can  keep  out  men  base  enough  to  profess  one
thing  and  believe  another;  but  It  might  be  possible
to  make  an  informal  alliance  amono-  all  who  hold
the    Christianity    of  their   fathers.     Little  as    they


TN  COMBAT.  ^yy

might  be  able  to  do,  they  could  at  least  protest,
and  as"  far  as  possible  free  themselves  of  that  com-
plicity which  will  be  involved  in  a  conspiracy  of  sil-
ence. If  for  a  while  the  evano^elicals  are  doomed
to  go  down,  let  them  die  fighting,  and  in  the  full  as-
surance that  their  gospel  will  have  a  resurrection
when  the  inventions  of  "modern  thouorht"  shall  be
burned  up  with  fire  unquenchable.''

The  characteristics  exhibited  in  that  controversy,
the  history  of  which  the  world  will  soon  care  little
about,  displays  his  fearlessness  and  shows  how  de-
lighted the  oppressed,  the  injured,  or  the  fearful
would  be  to  secure  such  a  champion  for  themselves
for  their  cause.


CHPATER  XVIII.

THE    POET.

Mr.  Spurgeon  was  a  man,  as  we  have  seen,  who
most  sincerely  beHeved  in  the  use  of  printers'  ink,
and  he  used  it  in  many  different  forms,  where  it
would  catch  the  eye  or  strike  the  heart.

He  organized  the  Colportage  Association,  for  the
express  purpose  of  distributing  books,  tracts  and
sermons  ;  and  these  missionaries  going  from  house
to  house  in  prescribed  districts  of  London,  selling
books  if  they  could  and  giving  them  away  if  they
could  not  make  a  sale;  added  greatly  to  the  in-
fluence of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  church.

A  book  or  a  leaflet  would  reach  into  homes  or
shops  where  the  spoken  word  could  not  go  and
touch  the  hearts  of  persons  who  never  attended
church.

In  one  of  his  sermons  referring  to  the  annual  re-
port upon  the  work  of  the  Colportage  Association,
he  gave  his  opinion  of  the  value  of  printed  matter
in  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel.

Mr.  Spurgeon  most  pertinently  said: — "The
printing-press  is  the  mio^htiest  agency  on  earth  for
478


THE   POET.  ^yg

good  or  evil.  The  position  of  a  minister  of  religion
standing  in  his  pulpit  is  a  responsible  position,  but
it  does  not  appear  so  responsible  a  position  as  that
of  the  editor  and  the  publisher.  Men  die,  but  the
literary  influences  they  project,  go  on  forever*  I  be-
lieve that  God  has  made  the  printing-press  to  be  a
o^reat  accent  in  the  world's  correction  and  evanoe-
lizatlon,  and  that  the  great  final  battle  of  the  world  will
be  fought,  not  with  guns  and  swords,  but  with  types
and  presses,  a  gospellized  and  purified  literature  tri-
umphing over  and  tramping  under  foot  and  crushing
out  a  corrupt  literature.  God  speed  the  cylinders  of
an  honest,  intelligent,  aggressive.  Christian  print-
ing-press."

Many  of  the  leaflets  used  by  the  Colportage  As-
sociation contained  the  gospel  message  in  verse,
written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon.  Often  in  his  sermons,
but  more  frequently  in  his  writings  he  introduced
original  poetry,  some  of  which  is  positively  beauti-
ful, but  the  greater  portion  of  which  was  intended
directly  to  teach  the  most  practical  thought.

If  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  given  his  attention  to  the
composition  of  poetry,  he  might  not  have  reached  a
position  of  one  of  the  standard  poets,  but  he  would
have  produced  poems  that  vrould  have  lived  on  in
the  pages  of  standard  literature;  but  he  was  too  in-
tensely in  earnest  and  in  too  much  of  a  hurry  to
save  souls  to  stop  long  enough  to  permit  his  muse
to  lead  him  Into  the  fairy  realms  of  poetic  Imagina-
tion.    Yet  he  fully  appreciated  the  value  of  figures,


480  CHARLES  J  I.    SPURGEON.

pictures,  similes  and  poetic  illumination  and  express-
ed his  admiration  of  them  in  the  following-  most  re-
markable  manner,  '^  The  worlds  of  nature  and  of
providence  are  full  of  parallels  to  things  moral  and
spiritual,  and  serve  as  pictures  to  make  the  written
book  of  inspiration  more  clear  to  the  children  of
God.  The  Bible  itself  abounds  in  metaphors,  types
and  symbols;  It  is  a  great  picture-book;  there  is
scarcely  a  poetical  figure  which  may  not  be  found
in  the  law  and  the  prophets,  or  in  the  words  of
Jesus  and  His  apostles.  The  preacher  is  bidden  to
speak  the  oracles  of  God,  and  consequently  he
should  imitate  their  illustrative  method,  and  abound
in  emblems  and  parables.  A  sermon  which  is  full
of  'Tikes  "  is  full  of  windows  to  enlighten  the  mind
and  hands  to  hold  it  captive.  Discourses  decked
with  similes  will  not  only  give  pleasure  to  the
children,  but  persons  of  riper  years  will  be  charmed
and  instructed  thereby.  "

His  arrangements  of  the  Psalms  in  rhyme
and  his  composition  of  the  hymns  which  were  pub-
lished in  the  hymn  book  used  in  the  Metropolitan
Tabernacle,  showed  too  clearly  a  direct  and  earnest
purpose  to  admit  of  much  poetical  ornament.

He  simply  used  the  poetical  forms  of  expressions
simply  because  his  knowledge  of  human  nature
convinced  him  that  it  was  the  best  form  to  attract
the  eye,  yet  it  Is  clear  to  every  reader  of  his  liter-
ary productions  that  he  had  a  natural  genius  for  the
expression  of  his   ideas   in  the  truest    poetry.      He


THE  POET.  ^gj

loved  the  standard  English  poems  and  In  his  quota-
tions generally  selected  the  most  sublime  or  the
most  touching  portions  of  other  production,  yet  his
own  compositions  were  like  iron  spears  adorned
with  ribbons  intended  more  for  use  than  for  aesthe-
tic purposes,  and  his  poetry  was  of  great  use  In  the
salvation  of  many  thousand  people.  Verses  from
his  hymns  and  songs  found  their  way  Into  all  classes
of  society,  and  many  of  them  in  the  form  of  prov-
erbs have  become  a  part  of  the  common  language
of  the  Working  people  of  London.  When  he  was
but  eighteen  years  of  age  he  exhibited  no  little
poetic  taste  which  seemed  afterwards  to  be  consid-
erably marred  by  the  fierce  conflicts  in  which  he  was
compelled,  as  a  popular  preacher,  to  engage.

Probably  nothing  has  appeared  in  print  out  of  his
many  hymns  and  poems,  which  was  more  sweetly
devout  than  his  composition  written  at  eighteen,
entitled  '^Immanuel."  We  will  give  the  poem  en-
tire.

IMMAMUEIv.

When  once  I  mourned  a  load  of  sin  ;
When  conscience  felt  a  wound  within  ,
When  all  my  works  were  thrown  away  ;
When  on  my  knees  I  knelt  to  pray,

Then,  blissful  hour,  remembered  well,

I  learned  Thy  love,  Immanuel.

When  storms  of  sorrow  toss  my  soul ;

When  waves  of  care  around  me  roll ;

When  comforts  sink,  when  joys  shall  flee  ;

When  hopeless  griefs  shall  gape  for  me,

One  word  the  tempest's  rage  shall  quell —
That  word,  Thy  name,  Immanuel.

31


482  CHARLES  II.    SPUR (7 EON.

When  for  the  truth  I  suffer  shame  ;

When  foes  pour  scandal  on  my  name  ;

When  cruel  taunts  and  jeers  abound  ;

When  "Bulls  of  Bashan  "  gird  me  round,
Secure  within  Thy  tower  I'll  dwell —
That  tower,  thy  grace,  Immanuel.

When  hell  enraged  lifts  up  her  roar  ;

When  Satan  stops  my  path  before  ;

When  fiends  rejoice  and  wait  my  end  ;

When  legioned  hosts  their  arrows  send,
Fear  not  my  soul,  but  hurl  at  hell,
Thy  battle  cry,  Immanuel.

When  down  the  hill  of  life  I  go  ;

When  o'er  my  feet  death's  waters  flow  ;

When  in  the  deep'ning  flood  I  sink  ;

When  friends  stand  weeping  on  the  brink,
I'll  mingle  with  my  last  farewell
Thy  lovely  name,  Immanuel.

When  tears  are  banished  from  mine  eye  ;

When  fairer  worlds  than  these  are  nigh  ;

When  heaven  shall  fill  my  ravished  sight ;

When  I  shall  bathe  in  sweet  delight.
One  joy  all  joys  shall  far  excel,
To  see  Thy  face,  Immanuel.


The  hymn  which  has  been  most  extensively  used
in  the  hymn  books  published  by  other  churches  and
other  denominations,  was  hastily  written  on  one
Saturday  afternoon  and  used  the  next  day  at  the
celebration  of  the  Lord's  supper.  It  was  entitled
"Jesus'  Presence  Delightful,"  and  although  familiar
to  many  of  our  readers,  yet  It  does  not  always  ap-
pear complete  In  the  hymn  books  and  hence  we  will
print  it  here.


THE   POET.  ^3^

JESUS'  PRESKNCE  DEIvIGHTFUIv.

Amidst  us  our  Beloved  stands,
And  bids  us  view  His  pierced  hands  ;
Points  to  His  wounded  feet  and  side, —
Blest  emblems  of  the  Crucified  !

What  food  luxurious  loads  the  board
When  at  His  table  sits  the  Lord  !
The  wine  how  rich,  the  bread  how  sweet,
When  Jesus  deigns  the  guests  to  meet !

If  now,  with  eyes  defiled  and  dim.
We  see  the  signs,  but  see  not  Him,
Oh  may  His  love  the  scales  displace,
And  bid  us  see  Him  face  to  face  !

Our  former  transports  we  recount
When  with  Him  in  the  holy  mount ;
These  cause  our  souls  to  thirst  anew.
His  marred  but  lovely  face  to  view.

Thou  glorious  Bridegroom  of  our  hearts,
Thy  present  smile  a  heaven  imparts  ;
Oh  lift  the  veil,  if  veil  there  be,
Let  every  saint  Thy  beauties  see.

In  his  own  hymn  book  appears  a  composition
from  his  pen,  which  Is  so  strikingly  appropriate  for
the  services  of  his  church  after  he  had  been  taken
up  Into  the  "shining-,"  that  we  can  not  forbear  to
quote  it.

Lord,  Thy  church,  without  a  pastor,

Cries  to  Thee  in  her  distress.
Hear  us,  gracious  Lord  and  Master,

And  with  heavenly  guidiance  bless.

Walking  midst  Thy  lamps  all  golden,

Thou  preservest  still  the  light ;
Stars  in  thy  right  hand  are  holden,

Stars  to  cheer  Thy  church's  night.


484


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.

Find  us  lyord  the  man  appointed
Pastor  of  this  flock  to  be,

One  with  holy  oil  anointed,
Meet  for  us  and  dear  to  Thee.

Send  a  man,  O  King  of  Zion,
Made  according  to  Thine  heart,

Meek  as  lamb,  and  bold  as  lion,
Wise  to  act  a  shepherd's  part.

Grant  us  now  thy  heavenly  leading.
Over  every  heart  preside,

Now  in  answer  to  our  pleading,
All  our  consultations  guide.


CHAPTER  XIX.

THE  DEATH    OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS.

Mr.  Spurgeon  died  at  Mentone  in  Soudiern  France
on  the  31st  day  of  January,  1892;  but  he  had  been
greviously  afflicted  with  a  serious  disease  for  several
years  and  was  especially  an  invalid  for  a  number  of
months  before  his  demise.  He  inherited  the  ten-
dency to  the  gout  which,  with  a  complication  of
other  diseases  seemingly  not  clearly  understood  by
the  physicians,  carried  him  steadily  down  and  finally
took  him  away  from  his  labors.  Most  of  the  time
for  a  year  preceding  his  death  he  was  absent  from
his  pulpit.  It  had  often  been  prophesied  that  when
he  died  the  many  enterprises  for  which  he  furnished
the  motive  power  would 'cease  to  shed  their  bles-
sings over  mankind.  Forty-five  years  before  his
death  some  of  his  congregation  were  troubled  lest
if  they  should  enter  into  any  of  his  proposed  plans
he  might  suddenly  die  and  leave  the  work  unfinished.
'^  What  if  Mr.  Spurgeon  should  die  ?  "  w^as  the  con-
tinual question  and  hidden  insinuation  on  the  part
of  many  faithless  ones  who  tried  to  discourage  the
church  in  its  noble  work.  He  himself  was  led  by
these  frequent  warnings  to  carefully  arrange  for  the

485


^86  CHARLES  H.    SPURGEON.

sustentatlon  of  the  church  chanties  in  case  of  his
death.  A  few  friends  combined  together  at  one
time  for  the  purpose  of  relieving  him  of  any  anxiety
and  collected  twenty-five  thousand  dollars,  the  in-
come of  which  was  to  be  used  in  supporting  the
College  and  Orphanage  and  Home  and  the  princi-
pal to  be  paid  in  should  Mr.  Spurgeon  die.

He  had  the  good  sense  to  recognize  the  fact  that
he  was  an  important  factor  in  the  spread  of  the  gos-
pel, and  endeavored  as  far  as  possible  to  provide
against  any  cessation  of  the  Christian  work  in  case
the  Lord  should  call  him  hence.  He  believed  very
thoroughly  in  the  doctrines  that  the  Lord  would
care  for  his  own,  and  often  said  that  ''there  Is  none
so  important  to  the  Lord's  Avork  that  the  Lord  could
not  replace  him  by  another  more  efficient.  "  It
seems  to  us  as  though  he  presented  a  very  unique
character  and  possessed  a  genius  which  is  rare  to
find,  and  while  the  work  may  still  progress  it  must
necessarily  assume  a  different  phase,  unless  the  Lord
perform  another  miracle  by  creating  another  man
his  counterpart.

At  the  time  of  his  death  there  were  in  circulation
thirty-seven  volumes  of  sermons  printed  in  every
civilized  language,  which  he  had  delivered  in  the
thirty-eight  years  of  his  ministry.  His  large  Com-
mentary upon  the  Psalms  entitled  "The  Treasury
of  David  "  became  a  standard  work  of  theology
long  before  his  death,  and  found  its  way  into  the
homes  and  studies  of  nearly  all  preachers  in  England


THE   DEATH  OF   THE   RIGHTEOUS.  ^g/

and  America.  These  are  published  in  seven  vol-
umes and  contain  the  cream  of  twenty  years  of  his
work.  He  published  a  number  of  books  upon
religious  subjects,  three  of  which  were  entitled  "  The
Interpreter,"  ''  Morning  by  Morning"  and  ''Even-
ing by  Evening;"  but  a  great  number  of  smaller  works
and  uncounted  pamphlets.  His  Orphanage  then
contained  five  hundred  boys  and  girls  and  was  con-
ducted at  a  cost  of  fifty  thousand  dollars  a  year.

The  Pastors'  College  had  reached  its  highest  de-
gree of  usefulness  and  was  crowded  with  an  able
body  of  young  and  enterprising  ministers,  There
were  at  that  time  connected  with  the  church  eigh-
teen missions  where  the  Gospel  was  preached  and
there  were  a  great  number  of  societies  In  the  church
organized  to  send  the  Gospel  to  the  heathen,  sup-
port teachers  among  the  poor  of  London,  maintain
Gospel  wagons  for  the  distribution  of  tracts  and  the
preaching  of  the  Word,  flower  missions,  and  several
aid  societies.

His  brother  the  Rev.  James  A.  Spurgeon,  was
the  associate  pastor,  having  held  the  office  continu-
ously from  1868,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  his
brother  and  the  great  edification  of  the  church.

His  two  sons,  Charles  and  Thomas,  were  remark-
ably successful  preachers  of  the  gospel  and  he  had
the  satisfaction  of  knowing  in  his  last  days  that  he
would  leave  behind  him  worthy  sons,  capable  of  do-
ing a  work  nearly  If  not  quite  equal  to  his,  only  in
different  directions.


488


CHARLES  II.    SPURGE  ON.


The  membership  of  his  church  at  that  tniie  was
5,334,  benig  the  largest  independent  church  in  the
world.  The  membership  was  composed  of  very
active  Christians  each  of  whom  had  been  personally
trained  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  to  engage  con-
scientiously in  some  practical  enterprise  for  the
furtherance  of  the  gospel.  The  world  has  never
seen  assembled  under  one  roof  such  a  great  num-
ber of  vigorous  workers  or  a  people  so  deeply  in-
terested In  the  welfare  of  their  fellow  men.  Their
great  grief  at  his  death,  which  was  as  sincere  as  it
could  have  been  had  each  of  them  lost  an  own
father,  naturally  led  the  world  to  feel  that  they  de-
pended largely  upon  him  for  direction  and  inspira-
tion. But  biographers  are  apt  to  forget  while  they
sing  the  praises  of  the  subject  of  their  sketches,  that
the  honors  which  were  given  to  him  are  very  fre-
quently In  a  strong  measure  due  to  others  who  as-
sisted him.  Not  Mr.  Spurgeon  himself  could  have
succeeded  with  some  churches.  There  was  a  provi-
dential oversight  in  bringing  the  man  and  the  peo-
ple together.  In  his  marvellous  success  and  dis-
tinoruished  commendations  there  is  mlno-led  the  bl-
ography  of  a  great  many  humbler  individuals  who
stood  by  him  with  a  heroism  that  was  wonderful,
and  with  a  devoutness  that  was  touchingly  sacred.
His  words  were  accepted  with  authority,  many  of
his  mistakes  overlooked,  many  of  the  most  munifi-
cent gifts  presented,  because,  of  the  beautiful  and
loving  character  of  the  congregation  over  which    he


THE   DEATH  OF   THE   RIGH2E0US.  ^3^

presided.  Who  shall  say  that  In  that  great  day
when  the  books  shall  be  opened  there  will  not  be
found  in  the  throng  many  an  humble,  unnoticed
person  receiving  from  Christ  an  equal  commenda-
tion with  the  blessing  which  descends  upon  Mr.
Spurgeon.  He  stood  forth  as  a  representative  of  a
noble  people,  and  all  honors  done  to  him  are  di-
rectly or  indirectly  a  tribute  of  praise  to  them.

They  gave  in  their  poverty  freely.  They  econo-
mized valuable  time  to  visit  the  sick;  they  were  reg-
ular attendants  upon  the  church  services,  they  con-
tinuously prayed  for  the  welfare  of  their  pastor.
One  of  the  deacons  expressed  the  sentiment  of  the
church  most  clearly  when  he  said  to  a  visitor,  ''  We
would  any  of  us  die  for  Mr.  Spurgeon.  "  Children
vied  with  each  other  in  earnest  competition  to  help
him;  and  aged  women  worked  far  Into  the  night  for
the  good  of  some  poor  souls,  thinking  all  the  while
it  would  please  Christ  and  Mr.  Spurgeon.

His  College  was  composed  in  a  large  measure  of
young  men  who  at  great  sacrifice  of  earthly  ambi-
tions and  hopes  had  laid  themselves  on  the  altar,
and  who  endured  privation  Mr.  Spurgeon  never
saw.  There  were  missionary  ladles  connected  with
the  church  who  worked  among  the  ignorant  poor
and  the  vicious  with  a  self  abnegation  and  painful
persistency  which  he  often  felt  he  could  not  have
endured.

The  meetings  of  the  church  were  characterized  by
that  depth  of  feeling  and  holy  conscrecratlon  which


490  CHARLES  II.   SPURGEON.

threw  a  powerful  influence  upon  the  heart  of  every
person  who  visited  them  whether  Mr.  Spurgeon
was  present  or  not.  Certainly  great  changes  must
be  expected  to  follow  the  death  of  such  a  giant;  and
for  a  time  after  his  departure  from  this  world  many
felt  paralyzed  and  a  few  became  hopeless;  but  the
great  cause  of  Christianity  moved  rapidly  on.  It
will  not  stay.  The  converted  Sunday-school
children  grow  up  into  active  Christian  men  and
women  scattering  over  the  world  and  sowing  the
seeds  of  a  true  faith,  while  the  ministers  and  orphans
disperse  into  various  countries  preaching  the  same
gospel  and  leading  thousands  to  love  the  same
Christ.

When  his  dear  old  mother  died  in  1883,  he
startled  a  number  of  his  friends  shortly  after  the
funeral  by  saying  *'I  feel  that  I  will  follow  her  soon,
I  will  set  my  house  in  order."  From  that  time  on
the  disease  crept  closer  and  closer  to  the  springs  of
life  and  pressed  upon  him  more  and  more  convinc-
ingly the  thought  that  soon  ''he  should  go  hence."
When  he  went  to  Mentone  for  the  last  time  he  dic-
tated two  letters  and  one  of  them  directed  to  a
friend  in  America  says,  "lam  laid  aside,  perhaps
forever,  this  world  may  have  no  more  use  for    me."

It  was  a  sad  but  a  sweet  privilege  to  Mrs.  Spurg-
eon that  she  was  sufficiently  strong  to  be  at  his
bedside  during  his  last  sickness,  and  to  lean  over
him  at  the  time  when  he  breathed  his  last.  One  of
the    last    messages  which    he    sent    out  from  his


THE   DEATH   OE    TEIE   RIGHTEOUS.


491


**home  In  the  sun-shine  "  at  Mentone  was  a  tender
o^reetinor  to  his  much-loved  church.  The  funeral
services  at  Mentone  were  held  In  the  Scotch
church,  being  simple  and  Informal,  yet  made  his-
torical by  the  receipt  of  so  many  messages  from  the
noted  men  of  many  countries.  The  Prince  of
Wales  and  Mr.  Gladstone  being  among  their  num-
ber.

But  his  death  was  one  of  the  saddest  events  In
this  century.  It  was  felt  to  the  furthermost  ends  of
the  earth.  Rulers,  statesmen  and  those  whose
names  are  great  In  literature,  expressed  their  feel-
ings most  decidedly  In  prompt  and  sincere  com-
munications sent  to  the  church  and  to  Mrs.  Spurg-
eon.  The  news  was  telegraphed  all  over  the  world
that  "  Spurgeon  Is  dead."  It  sent  a  shadow  Into
ten  thousand  homes;  It  caused  many  hard  working
ministers  to  pause  and  wonder  at  the  providence  of
God  that  he  should  not  have  lived  beyond  fifty-
seven  years.  It  furnished  themes  for  great  preach-
ers, and  subjects  for  noble  poets.  It  was  used  as
an  Illustration  In  various  ways  of  Christian  heroism
In  thousands  of  Sunday-schools.  Many  men  and
women  wrote  books  and  pamphlets  concerning  his
life,  while  all  over  the  earth  wherever  the  English
and  American  flao^  were  recognized,  tears  fell  and
impassioned  prayers  were  offered  up  for  the  com-
fort of  his  noble  wife  the  encouragement  of  his  sons,
and  the  consolation  of  his  deeply  afflicted  church.

The  funeral  services  at  the  Tabernacle  In  London


492  CHARLES  II.    SPURGEON.

were  attended  by  an  assembly  of  the  most  afflicted
people  probably  ever  gathered  under  a  single  roof;
the  services  were  plain  as  would  become  the  friends
and  the  wishes  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  but  there  was  a
spirit  of  prayer  and  a  degree  of  solemn  hope  which
made  the  occasion  startlingly  impressive.  They
carried  him  to  the  Q^rave  while  whole  communities
and  even  nations  mourned  the  loss  of  a  friend.

This  humble  country  boy  taken  up  by  the
providence  of  God  and  carried  on  by  strange  provi-
dences, without  title,  money  or  political  position,
reached  the  very  pinnacle  of  earthly  fame.  He
ascended  to  that  position  by  means  of  good  deeds
and  grand  thoughts.  It  is  not  necessary  for  a  poor
boy  even  in  a  land  of  aristocratic  titles  to  resort  to
dishonesty  to  become  great  even  the  eyes  of  men.
Surely  the  steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered  by  the
Lord.


MR.  SPURGEON  AS  JOHN  PLOUGHMAN.

For  sound  sense  and  a  plain  and  practical  way  of
putting  things,  Mr.  Spurgeon's  equal  has  never
lived,  unless  it  was  the  immortal  John  Bunyan.  In
fact,  the  writings  of  the  two,  in  point  of  native
strength  and  rugged  force,  strikingly  resemble  each
other.  While  Mr.  Spurgeon's  culture  and  superior
advantages  placed  him  in  the  front  and  entitled  him
to  the  higher  literary  recognition,  he  was  at  the
same  time  a  profound  student  of  the  lower  strata  of
society,  and  was  never  more  at  home  himself  than
when  in  the  home-spun  dress  and  slouch  hat  of
honest  "  John  Ploughman  "  he  spoke  in  the  familiar
tongue  of  the  simple  yeomanry.  "John  Ploughman's
Tales  "  and  "  John  Ploughman's  Pictures  "  are  a  pro-
verbial philosophy  and  practical  wisdom  on  the
every-day  walks  and  ways  of  mankind  that  are
worth  as  much  to  the  world,  perhaps,  as  the
sermons  he  has  preached  from  the  great  London
Tabernacle.  Such  books  as  these  will  live  longer
and  be  more  universally  read  and  appreciated  by
the  masses  of  humanity  than  the  grandest  and  most
eloquent  sermons  given  to  the  world  by  her  most
gifted  orators.  We  like  to  look  at  Mr.  Spurgeon  in
this  attitude  of  the  practical,  humble.  Christian  man,
"  getting    down  off    his  perch "    of  exalted   fame,

493


494  CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.

where  an  admirino^  world  deliuhts  to  behold  and
honor  him,  to  walk  and  talk  with  his  fellows  in  the
dust  that  he  may  lift  them  up.  We  think  his  great-
ness consists  largely  in  his  ability  to  do  this,  and  he
has  done  so  with  such  a  grace,  good  nature,  and
brotherly  way  that  the  most  illiterate  man  is  re-
lieved of  embarrassment  at  his  presence,  and  takes
him  in  *'  as  one  of  his  own  set " — into  his  heart,  into
his  home,  and  into  his  life — tells  him  everything,
and,  in  return,  receives  wholesome  advice  and  per-
manent benefit.

A  life  of  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  be  incomplete
without  a  liberal  quotation  from  "John  Ploughman,"
and  we  are  sure  the  reader  will  not  only  pardon  the
digression,  but  be  most  pleasantly  entertained,  often
heartily  amused,  and  on  the  whole,  richly  rewarded,
by  a  review  of  the  following  selections.


JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  PICTURES.


IF  THE  CAP  FITS,  WEAR  IT.


IF  THE  CAP  FITS  YOU,  WEAR  IT.


Friendly  Readers,

Last  time  I  made  a  book  I  trod  on  some  people's
corns  and  bunions,  and  they  wrote  me  angry  letters,
asking,  "  Did  you  mean    me  ?"     This  time,  to  save

495


496  ^P  ^-^^-^  CAP  Firs,    WEAR  IT.

them  the  expense  of  a  hah-penny  card,  I  will  begin
my  book  by  saying —

Whether  I  please  or  whether  I  tease,

I'll  give  you  my  honest  mind;
If  the   cap  should   fit,  pray  wear  it  a  bit,

If  not,  you   can  leave  it  behind.

No  offense  is  meant ;  but  if  anything  in  these  pages
should  come  home  to  a  man,  let  him  not  send  it  next
door,  but  get  a  coop  for  his  own  chickens.  What  is
the  use  of  reading  or  hearing  for  other  people  ?
We  do  not  eat  and  drink  for  them  :  why  should  we
lend  them  our  ears  and  not  our  mouths  ?  Please
then,  good  friend,  if  you  find  a  hoe  on  these  premises
weed  your  own  garden  with  it.

I  was  speaking  with  Will  Shepherd  the  other  day
about  our  master's  old  donkey,  and  I  said  :  "  He  is
so  old  and  stubborn,  he  really  is  not  worth  his  keep."
"  No,"  said  Will,  ''  and  worse  still,  he  is  so  vicious
that  I  feel  sure  he'll  do  somebody  a  mischief  one  of
these  days."  You  know  they  say  that  walls  have
ears  ;  we  were  talking  rather  loud,  but  we  did  not
know  that  there  were  ears  to  haystacks.  We  stared,
I  tell  you,  when  we  saw  Joe  Scroggs  come  from  be-
hind the  stack,  looking  as  red  as  a  turkey-cock,  and
raving  like  mad.  He  burst  out  swearing  at  Will
and  me,  like  a  cat  spitting  at  a  dog.  His  monkey
was  up  and  no  mistake.  He'd  let  us  know  that  he
was  as  good  a  man  as  either  of  us,  or  the  two  put
together,  for  the  matter  of  that.  Talking  about  him
in  that  way  ;  he'd  do — I  don't  know  what.     I  told


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.  497

old  Joe  we  had  never  thought  of  him,  nor  said  a  word
about  him,  and  he  might  just  as  well  save  his  breath
to  cool  his  porridge,  for  nobody  meant  him  any
harm.  This  only  made  him  call  me  a  liar,  and  roar  the
louder.  My  friend  Will  was  walking  away,  holding
his  sides,  but  when  he  saw  that  Scroggs  was  still  in
a  fume,  he  laughed  outright,  and  turned  round  on  him
and  said,  "  Why,  Joe,  we  were  talking  about  master's
old  donkey,  and  not  about  you ;  but,  upon  my
word,  I  shall  never  see  that  donkey  again  with-
out thinking  of  Joe  Scroggs."  Joe  puffed  and
blowed,  but  perhaps  he  thought  it  an  awkward
job,  for  he  backed  out  of  it,  and  Will  and  I  went
offto  our  work  in  rather  a  merry  cue,  for  old  Joe
had  blundered  on  the  truth  about  himself  for  once
in  his  life.

The  aforesaid  Will  Shepherd  has  somtimes  come
down  rather  heavy  upon  me  in  his  remarks,  but  it
has  done  me  good.  It  is  partly  through  his  home
thrusts  that  I  have  come  to  write  this  new  book,  for
he  thought  I  was  idle  ;  perhaps  I  am,  and  perhaps  I
am  not.  Will  forgets  that  I  have  other  fish  to  fry
and  tails  to  butter  ;  and  he  does  not  recollect  that  a
ploughman's  mind  wants  to  lie  fallow  a  little,  and
can't  give  a  crop  every  year.  It  Is  hard  to  make
rope  when  your  hemp  Is  all  used  up,  or  pancakes
without  batter,  or  rook  pie  without  the  birds  ;  and  so
I  found  it  hard  to  write  more  when  I  had  said  just
about  all  I  knew.     Giving  much  to  the  poor  doth

increase  a  man's  store, but  It  is  not  the  same  with  wrlt-
32


49^  ^^^  THE  CAP  FITS,  WEAR  IT.

ing ;  at  least,  I  am  such  a  poor  scribe  that  I  don't
find  it  come  because  I  pull.  \i  your  thoughts  only
flow  by  drops,  you  can't  pour  them  out  in  bucket-
fuls.

However,  Will  has  ferreted  me  out,  and  I  am
obliged  to  him  so  far.  I  told  him  the  other  day,
what  the  winkle  said  to  the  pin  :  *'  Thank  you  for
drawing  me  out,  but  you  are  rather  sharp  about  it."
Still,  Master  Will  is  not  far  from  the  mark :  after
three  hundred  thousand  people  had  bought  my  book
it  certainly  was  time  to  write  another  ;  so  though  I
am  not  a  hatter,  I  will  again  turn  cap-maker  and
those  who  have  heads  may  try  on  my  wares ;  those
who  have  none  won't  touch  them.

So,  friends,
I  am,

Yours,  rough  and  ready,

John  Ploughman.


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.


499


BURN  A  CANDLE  AT  BOTH  ENDS,  AND  IT  WILL

SOON  BE  GONE.


BURN    A    CANDLE   AT   BOTH    ENDS,  AND    IT   WILL   SOON   BE   GONE.

Well  may  he  scratch  his  head  who  burns  his*  can-
dle at  both  ends  ;  but,  do  what  he  may,  his  light  will
soon  be  gone,  and  he  will  be  all  in  the  dark.  Young
Jack  Careless  squandered  his  property,  and  now  he
is  without  a  shoe  to  his  foot.  His  w^as  a  case  of
"  easy  come,  easy  go :  soon  gotten,  soon  spent."
He  that  earns  an  estate  will  keep  it  better  than  he
that  inherits  it.  As  the  Scotchman  savs,  "  He  that
gets  gear  before  he  gets  wit  is  but   a   short   time


500  NEVER  BURN  A  CANDLE  AT  BOTH  ENDS.

master  of  it,"  and  so  it  was  with  Jack.  His  money
burnt  holes  in  his  pocket.  He  could  not  get  rid  of
it  fast  enough  himself,  and  so  he  got  a  pretty  set  to
help  him,  which  they  did  by  helping  themselves.
His  fortune  went  like  a  pound  of  meat  in  a  kennel
of  hounds.  He  was  everybody's  friend,  and  now  he
is  everybody's  fool.

He  came  in  to  old  Alderman  Greedy's  money,  for
he  was  his  nephew ;  but,  as  the  old  saying  is,  the
fork  followed  the  rake,  the  spender  was  heir  to  the
hoarder.  God  has  been  very  merciful  to  some  of  us
in  never  letting  money  come  rolling  in  upon  us,  for
most  men  are  carried  off  their  legs  if  they  meet  with
a  great  wave  of  fortune.  Many  of  us  would  have
been  bioj^o^er  sinners  if  we  had  been  trusted  with
larger  purses.  Poor  Jack  had  plenty  of  pence,  but
little  sense.  Money  is  easier  made  than  made  use
of.  What  is  hard  to  gather  is  easy  to  scatter.  The
old  gentleman  had  lined  his  nest  well,  but  Jack  made
the  feathers  fly  like  flakes  of  snow  in  winter-time.
He  got  rid  of  his  money  by  shovelfuls  and  then  by
cartloads.  After  spending  the  interest,  he  began
swallowing  the  capital,  and  so  killed  the  goose  that
laid  the  golden  eggs.  He  squandered  his  silver
and  gold,  in  ways  which  must  never  be  told.  *It
would  not  ofo  fast  enouofh,  and  so  he  bouorht  race-
horses  to  run  away  with  it.  He  got  into  the  hands
of  blacklegs,  and  fell  into  company  of  which  we  shall
say  but  little  ;  only  when  such  madams  smile,  men's
purses    weep :    these  are   a  well  without  a  bottom,


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.  5OI

and  the  more  a  fool  throws  In,  the  more  he  may.
The  greatest  beauty  often  causes  the  greatest  ruin.
Play,  women,  and  wine  are  enough  to  make  a  prince
a  pauper.

Always  taking  out  and  never  putting  back  soon
empties  the  biggest  sack,  and  so  Jack  found  It ;  but
he  took  no  notice  till  his  last  shilling  bade  him  good-
bye, and  then  he  said  he  had  been  robbed :  like  silly
Tom  who  put  his  finger  in  the  fire  and  said  It  was
his  bad  luck.

His  money  once  flashed  like  dew  in  the  sun ;
When  bills  become  due,  of  cash  he  had  none.

"  Drink  and  let  drink  "  was  his  motto  ;  every  day
was  a  holiday  and  every  holiday  was  a  feast.  The
best  of  wines  and  the  dearest  of  dainties  suited  his
tooth,  for  he  meant  to  lead  a  pig's  life,  which  they
say  is  short  and  sweet.  Truly,  he  went  the  whole
hog.  The  old  saying  is,  ''  a  glutton  young,  a  beggar
old,"  and  he  seemed  set  upon  proving  it  true.  A
fat  kitchen  makes  a  lean  will  ;  but  he  can  make  his
will  on  his  fino^er-nall,  and  leave  room  for  a  dozen
codicils.  In  fact,  he  will  never  want  a  will  at  all,  for
he  will  leave  nothinof  behind  him  but  old  scores.  Of
all  his  estate  there  is  not  enough  left  to  bury  him
with.  What  he  threw  away  in  his  prosperity  would
have  kept  a  coat  on  his  back  and  a  dumpling  in  his
pot  to  his  life's  end  ;  but  he  never  looked  beyond
his  nose,  and  could  not  see  to  the  end  of  that.  He
laughed  at  prudence,  and  now  prudence  frowns  at


502  NEVER  BURh^  A  CANDLE  AT  BOTH  ENDS.

him.  Punishment  is  lame,  but  it  comes  at  last.  He
pays  the  cost  of  his  folly  in  body  and  in  soul,  in  purse
and  in  person,  and  yet  he  is  still  a  fool,  and  would
dance  to  the  same  tune  ao-ain  if  he  had  another
chance.  His  light  purse  brings  him  a  heavy  heart,
but  he  couldn't  have  his  cake  and  eat  it  too.  As  he
that  is  drunk  at  night  is  dry  in  the  morning,  so  he
that  lavished  money  when  he  had  it  feels  the  want
of  it  all  the  more  when  it  is  gone.  His  old  friends
have  quite  dropped  him ;  they  have  squeezed  the
orange,  and  now  they  throw  away  the  peel.  As  well
look  for  milk  from  a  pigeon  as  help  from  a  fellow
who  loved  you  for  your  beer.  Pot  friends  will  let
you  go  to  pot,  and  kick  you  when  you  are  down.

Jack  has  worse  wants  that  the  want  of  money,  for
his  character  is  gone,  and  he  is  like  a  rotten  nut,
not  worth  the  cracking :  the  neighbors  say  he  is  a
ne'er-do-well,  not  worth  calling  out  of  a  cabbage
garden.  Nobody  will  employ  him,  for  he  would  not
earn  his  salt,  and  so  he  goes  from  pillar  to  post,  and
has  not  a  place  to  lay  his  head  in.  A  good  name  is
better  than  a  girdle  of  gold,  and  when  that  is  gone,
what  has  a  man  left  ?

What  has  he  left  ?  Nothing  upon  earth !  Yet
the  prodigal  son  has  still  a  Father  in  heaven.  Let
him  arise  and  go  to  Him,  ragged  as  he  is.  He  may
smell  of  the  swine-trough,  and  yet  he  may  run
straight  home,  and  he  shall  not  find  the  door  locked.
The  great  Father  will  joyfully  meet  him,  and  kiss
him,  and  cleanse  him,  and   clothe  him,  and  give  him


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.  503

to  begin  a  new  and  better  life.  Wiien  a  sinner  is  at
his  worst  he  is  not  too  bad  for  the  Saviour,  if  he  will
but  turn  from  his  wickedness  and  cry  unto  God  for
mercy.  It's  a  long  lane  that  has  no  turning,  but  the
best  of  all  turns  is  to  turn  unto  the  Lord  with  all
your  heart.  This  the  great  Father  will  help  the  peni-
tent prodigal  to  do.  If  the  candle  has  been  burned
all  away,  the  Sun  in  the  heavens  is  still  alight.  Look,
poor  profligate  :  look  to  Jesus,  and  live.  His  salva-
tion Is  without  money  and  without  price.  Though
you  may  not  have  a  penny  to  bless  yourself  with,
the  Lord  Jesus  will  bless  you  freely.  The  depths
of  your  misery  are  not  so  deep  as  the  depths  of
God's  mercy.  If  you  are  faithful  and  just  in  con-
fessing the  sins  you  would  have  forgiven,  God  will
be  faithful  and  just  in  forgiving  the  sins  which  you
confess.

But,  pray,  do  not  go  on  another  day  as  you  are,
for  this  very  day  may  be  your  last.  If  you  will  not
heed  a  plain  word  from  John  Ploughman,  which  he
means  for  your  good,  yet  recollect  this  old-fashioned
rhyme,  which  was  copied  from  a  grave-stone  :

The  loss  of  gold  is  great,

The  loss  of  health  is  more,
But  the  loss  of  Christ  is  such  a  loss

As  no  man  can  restore.


504


0^^E  HUNCHBACK  LAUGHS  AT  ANOTHER.


HUNCHBACK  SEES  NOT   HIS   OWN   HUMP,  BUT  HE

SEES  HIS  NEIGHBOR'S.


HUNCHBACK    SEES    NOT    HIS    OWN    HUMP,   BUT    HE   SEES    HIS    NEICHBOR'S.

,  He  points  at  the  man  in  front  of  him,  but  he  is  a
TOod  deal  more  of  a  e^iv  himself  He  should  not
laugh  at  the  crooked  until  he  is  straight  himself,  and
not  then.  I  hate  to  hear  a  raven  croak  at  a  crow
for  beinor  black.  A  blind  man  should  not  blame  a
brother  for  squinting,  and  he  who  has  lost  his  legs
should  not  sneer  at  the  lame.  Yet  so  it  is,  the  rot-
tenest  bough  cracks  first,  and  he  who  should  be  the
last  to  speak  is  the  first  to  rail.     Bespattered  hogs


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.  505

bespatter  others,  and  he  who  is  full  of  fault  finds
fault.  They  are  most  apt  to  speak  ill  of  others  who
do  most  ill  themselves.

''  We're  very  keen  our  neighbor's  hump  to  see.
We're  blind  to  that  upon  our  back  alone ;
E'en  though  the  lump  far  greater  be,
It  still  remains  to  us  unknown."

It  does  US  much  hurt  to  judge  our  neighbors,  be-
cause it  flatters  our  conceit,  and  our  pride  grows
quite  fast  enough  without  feeding.  We  accuse
others  to  excuse  ourselves.  We  are  such  fools  as
to  dream  that  we  are  better  because  others  are
worse,  and  we  talk  as  if  we  could  get  up  by  pulling
others  down.  What  is  the  good  of  spying  holes
in  people's  coats  when  we  can't  mend  them  ?
Talk  of  my  debts  if  you  mean  to  pay  them ;  if  not,
keep  your  red  rag  behind  your  ivory  ridge.  A
friend's  faults  should  not  be  advertised,  and  even  a
stranger's  should  not  be  published.  He  who  brays
at  an  ass  is  an  ass  himself,  and  he  who  makes  a  fool
of  another,  is  a  fool  himself.  Don't  get  into  the
habit  of  laughing  at  people,  for  the  old  saying  is,
"  Hanging's  stretching,  and  mocking's  catching."

Some  must  have  their  joke  whoever  they  poke ;
For  the  sake  of  fun  mischief  is  done,
And  to  air  their  wit  full  many  they  hit.

Jesting  is  too  apt  to  turn  into  jeering,  and  what
was  meant  to  tickle  makes  a  wound.  It  is  a  pity
when  my  mirth  is  another  man's  misery.     Before  a


5  06  ON^  HUNCHBA  CK  LA  UGHS  A  T  A  NO  THEk.

man  cracks  a  joke  he  should  consider  how  he  would
like  it  himself,  lor  many  who  give  rough  blows  have
very  thin  skins.  Give  only  what  you  would  be  will-
ing to  take :  some  men  throw  salt  on  others,  but
they  smart  if  a  pinch  of  it  falls  on  their  own  raw
places.  When  they  get  a  Roland  for  their  Oliver,
or  a  tit  for  their  tat,  they  don't  like  it ;  yet  nothing
is  more  just.     Biters  deserve  to  be  bitten.

We  may  chide  a  friend,  and  so  prove  our  friend-
ship, but  it  must  be  done  very  daintily,  or  we  may
lose  our  friend  for  our  pains.  Before  we  rebuke  an-
other we  must  consider,  and  take  heed  that  we  are
not  guilty  of  the  same  thing,  for  he  who  cleanses  a
blot  with  inky  fingers  makes  it  worse.  To  despise
others  is  a  worse  fault  than  any  we  are  likely  to  see  in
them,  and  to  make  merry  over  their  weaknesses  shows
our  own  weakness  and  our  own  malice  too.  Wit
should  be  a  shield  for  defense,  and  not  a  sword  for
offense.  A  mocking  word  cuts  worse  than  a  scythe,
and  the  wound  is  harder  to  heal.  A  blow  is  much
sooner  forgotten  than  a  jeer.  Mocking  is  shocking.
Our  minister  says  ''  to  laugh  at  infirmity  or  deform-
ity is  an  enormity."  He  is  a  man  who  ought  to
know  a  thing  or  two,  and  he  puts  a  matter  as  pat  as
butter.

*'  Who  ridicules  his  neighbor's  frailty
Scoffs  at  his  own  in  more  or  less  degree :
Much  wiser  he  who  others'  lets  alone,
And  tries  his  hardest  to  correct  his  own."


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.


507


IT  IS  HARD  FOR   AN  EMPTY   SACK  TO   STAND  UP-
RIGHT.


IT    IS   HARD    FOR    AN    EMPTY   SACK    To    STAND   UPRIGHT,


Sam  may  try  a  fine  while  before  he  will  make  one
of  his  empty  sacks  stand  upright.  If  he  were  not
half  daft  he  would  have  left  off  that  job  before  he
began  it,  and  not  have  been  an  Irishman  either.  He
will  come  to  his  wit's  end  before  he  sets  the  sack
on  its  end.  The  old  proverb,  printed  at  the  top,
was  made  by  a  man  who  had  burnt  his  fingers  with
debtors,  and  it  just  means  that  when  folks  have  no
money  and  are  over  head  and  ears  in  debt,  as  often


•508


EMPTY  SACKS.


as  not  they  leave  off  being  upright,  and  tumble  over
one  way  or  another.  He  that  has  but  four  and
spends  five  will  soon  need  no  purse,  but  he  will
most  likely  begin  to  use  his  wits  to  keep  himself
afloat,  and  take  to  all  sorts  of  dodges  to  manage  it.
Nine  times  out  of  ten  they  begin  by  making
promises  to  pay  on  a  certain  day,  when  it  is  certain
they  have  nothing  to  pay  with.  They  are  as  bold  at
fixing  the  time  as  if  they  had  my  lord's  income  :  the
day  comes  around  as  sure  as  Christmas,  and  then
they  haven't  a  penny-piece  in  the  world,  and  so  they
make  all  sorts  of  excuses  and  begin  to  promise  again.
Those  who  are  quick  to  promise  are  generally  slow
to  perform.  They  promise  mountains  and  perform
mole-hills.  He  who  gives  you  fair  words  and  noth-
ing more  feeds  you  with  an  empty  spoon,  and
hungry  creditors  soon  grow  tired  of  that  game.
Promises  don't  fill  the  belly.  Promising  men  are  not
great  favorites  if  they  are  not  performing  men.
When  such  a  fellow  is  called  a  liar  he  thinks  he  is
hardly  done  by ;  and  yet  he  is  so,  as  sure  as  eggs
are  eggs,  and  there  is  no  denying  it,  as  the  boy  said
when  the  gardener  caught  him  up  the  cherry  tree.
People  don't  think  much  of  a  man's  piety  when  his
promises  are  like  pie-crust,  made  to  be  broken  :  they
generally  turn  crusty  themselves  and  give  him  a  bit

of  their  mind.     Like  old  Tusser,  who  saidof  such  an
one:

"  His  promise  to  trust  to  is  as  slippery  as  ice,
His  credit  niuch  like  to  the  chance  of  the  dice."


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.  509

Creditors  have  better  memories  than  debtors,  and
when  they  have  been  taken  in  more  than  once  they
think  it  is  time  that  the  fox  went  to  the  furrier,  and
they  had  their  share  of  his  skin.  Waiting  for  your
money  does  not  sweeten  a  man's  temper,  and  a  few
lies  on  the  top  of  it  turn  the  milk  of  human  kindness
into  sour  stuff.  Here  is  an  old-fashioned  saying
which  a  bad  payer  may  put  in  his  pipe,  and  smoke
or  not,  as  he  likes :

"  He  that  promiseth  till  no  man  will  trust  him,
He  that  lieth  till  no  man  will  believe  him,
He  that  borroweth  till  no  man  will  lend  him,
Let  him  go  where  no  man  knoweth  him."

Hungry  dogs  will  eat  dirty  puddings,  and  people
who  are  hard  up  very  often  do  dirty  actions.
Blessed  be  God,  there  is  some  cloth  still  made
which  will  not  shrink  in  the  wettinof,  and  some
honesty  which  holds  on  under  misfortune ;  but  too
often  debt  is  the  worst  kind  of  poverty,  because  it
breeds  deceit.  Men  do  not  like  to  face  their  cir-
cumstances, and  so  they  turn  their  backs  on  the
truth.  They  try  all  sorts  of  schemes  to  get  out  of
their  difficulties,  and  like  the  Banbury  tinker,  they
make  three  holes  in  the  sauce-pan  to  mend  one.
They  are  like  Pedley,  who  burnt  a  penny  candle  in
looking  for  a  farthing.  They  borrow  of  Peter*  to
pay  Paul,  and  then  Peter  is  let  In  for  it.  To  avoid  a
brook  they  leap  into  a  river,  for  they  borrow  at  ruin-
ous   interest    to    pay  off  those  who   squeeze  them


1 1  o  ^^^  TY  SA  CKS.

tight.  By  ordering  goods  which  they  cannot  pay
for,  and  selHng  them  for  whatever  they  can  get,  they
may  put  off  one  evil  day,  but  they  only  bring  on  an-
other. One  trick  needs  another  trick  to  back  it  up,
and  thus  they  go  on  over  shoes  and  then  over  boots.
Hoping  that  something  will  turn  up,  they  go  on
raking  for  the  moon  in  a  ditch,  and  all  the  luck  that
comes  to  them  is  like  Johnny  Toy's,  who  lost  a  shil-
ling and  found  a  two-penny  loaf.  Any  short  cut
tempts  them  out  of  the  high  road  of  honesty,  and
they  find  after  awhile  that  they  have  gone  miles  out
of  their  way.  At  last  people  fight  shy  of  them,  and
say  that  they  are  as  honest  as  a  cat  when  the  meat
is  out  of  reach,  and  they  murmur  that  plain  dealing
is  dead,  and  died  without  issue.  Who  wonders  ?
People  who  are  bitten  once  are  in  no  hurry  to  put
their  fino^ers  into  the  same  mouth  ap^ain.  You  don't
trust  a  horse's  heel  after  it  has  kicked  you,  nor  lean
on  a  staff  which  has  once  broken.  Too  much  cun-
nino;-  overdoes  its  work,  and  in  the  lonof  run  there  is
no  craft  which  is  so  wise  as  simple  honesty.

I  would  not  be  hard  on  a  poor  fellow,  nor  pour
water  on  a  drowned  mouse :  if  through  misfortune
the  man  can't  pay,  why  he  can't  pay,  and  let  him  say
so,  and  then  do  the  honest  thing  with  what  little  he
has,  and  kind  hearts  will  feel  for  him.  A  wise  man
does  at  first  what  a  fool  does  at  last.  The  worst  of
it  is,  that  debtors  will  hold  on  long  after  it  is  honest
to  do  so,  and  they  try  to  persuade  themselves  that


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.  q  1 1

their  ship  will  come  home,  or  their  cats  will  grow  into
cows.  It  is  hard  to  sail  over  the  sea  in  an  eee-shell.
and  it  is  not  much  easier  to  pay  your  way  when
your  capital  is  all  gone.  Out  of  nothing  comes
nothing,  and  you  may  turn  your  nothing  over  a
long  time  before  it  will  grow  into  a  ten-pound  note.
The  way  to  Babylon  will  never  bring  you  to  Jerusa-
lem, and  borrowing  and  diving  deeper  into  debt
will  never  get  a  man  out  of  difficulties.

But  the  world  is  a  ladder  for  some  to  go  up  and
some  to  go  down,  but  there  is  no  need  to  lose  your
character  because  you  lose  your  money.  Some
people  jump  out  the  frying-pan  into  the  fire ;  for
fear  of  being  paupers  they  become  rogues.  You  find
them  slippery  customers ;  you  can't  bind  them  to
anything  ;  you  think  you  have  got  them,  but  you
can't  hold  them  any  longer  than  you  can  keep  a  cat
in  a  wheelbarrow.  They  can  jump  over  nine  hedges,
and  nine  more  after  that.  They  always  deceive
you,  and  then  plead  the  badness  of  the  times,  or  the
sickness  of  their  family.  You  cannot  help  them,
for  there's  no  telling  where  they  are.  It  is  always
best  to  let  them  come  to  the  end  of  their  tether,  for
when  they  are  cleaned  out  of  their  old  rubbish  they
may  perhaps  begin  in  a  better  fashion.  You  can-
not get  out  of  a  sack  what  is  not  in  it,  and  when  a
man's  purse  is  as  bare  as  the  back  of  your  hand,  the
longer  you  patch  him  up  the  barer  he  will  become,
like    Bill  Bones,  who  cut  up  his  coat  to  patch  his


5  1 2  EMPTY  SA CKS.

waiscoat,  and  then  used  his  trousers  to  mend  his
coat,  and  at  last  had  to  he  in  bed  for  the  want  of  a
rao^  to  cover  him.

Let  the  poor,  unfortunate  tradesman  hold  to  his
honesty  as  he  would  to  his  life.  The  straight  road
is  the  shortest  cut.  Better  break  stones  on  the  road
than  break  the  law  of  God.  Faith  in  God  should
save  a  Christian  man  from  anything  like  a  dirty  action ;
let  him  not  even  think  of  playing  a  trick,  for  you
cannot  touch  pitch  without  being  defiled  therewith.
Christ  and  a  crust  is  riches,  but  a  broken  character
is  the  worst  of  bankruptcy.  All  is  not  lost  while
uprightness  remains  ;  but  still  it  is  hard  to  make  an
empty  sack  stand  upright.

There  are  other  ways  of  using  the  old  saying.  It
is  hard  for  a  hypocrite  to  keep  up  his  profession.
Empty  sacks  can't  stand  upright  in  a  Church  any
better  than  in  a  granary.  Prating  does  not  make
saints,  or  there  would  be  plenty  of  them.  Some
talkatives  have  not  religion  enough  to  flavor  soup
for  a  sick  grasshopper,  and  they  have  to  be  mighty
cunning  to  keep  the  game  going.  Long  prayers
and  loud  professions  only  deceive  the  simple,  and
those  who  see  further  than  the  surface  soon  spy  out
the  wolf  under  the  sheepskin.

All  hope  of  salvation  by  our  own  good  works  is
a  foolish  attempt  to  make  an  empty  sack  stand  up-
right. We  are  undeserving,  ill-serving,  hell-de-
servinor  sinners  at  the  best.  The  law  of  God  must
be  kept  without  a  single   failure  if  we  hope  to  be


CHAkLES  H.  SPURGE  ON-.  tj^

accepted  by  it ;  but  there  Is  not  one  among  us  who
has  Hved  a  day  without  sin.  No,  we  are  a  lot  of
empty  sacks,  and  unless  the  merits  of  Christ  are
put  into  us  to  fill  us  up,  we  cannot  stand  in  the  sight
of  God.  The  law  condemns  us  already,  and  to
hope  for  salvation  by  it  is  to  run  to  the  gallows  to
prolong  our  lives.  There  is  a  full  Christ  for  empty
sinners,  but  those  who  hope  to  fill  themselves  will
find  their  hopes  fail  them.

33


514  THE  OLD  MAN  AND  HIS  DONKEY.

HE    WHO    WOULD    PLEASE    ALL    WILL    LOSE    HIS
DONKEY  AND  BE  LAUGHED  AT  FOR  HIS  PAINS.

Here's  a  queer  picture,  and  this  is  the  story  which
goes  with  it ;  you  shall  have  it  just  as  I  found  it  in  an
old  book.  "  An  old  man  and  his  young  son  were
drivinor  an  ass  before  them  to  the  next  market  to
sell.  *  Why  have  you  no  more  wit,'  says  one  man
upon  the  way,  '  than  you  and  your  son  to  trudge  it
afoot,  and  let  the  ass  go  Hght  ?'  So  the  old  man
set  his  son  upon  the  ass,  and  footed  it  himself.
'Why,  sirrah,'  says  another  after  this,  to  the  boy,  'ye
lazy  rogue,  you,  must  you  ride,  and  let  your  old  father
go  afoot?'  The  old  man  upon  this  took  down  his
son,  and  got  up  himself.  '  Do  you  see,'  says  a  third,
*  how  the  lazy  old  knave  rides  himself,  and  the  poor
young  fellow  has  much  ado  to  creep  after  him  T  The
father,  upon  this,  took  up  his  son  behind  him.  The
next  they  met  asked  the  old  man  whether  the  ass
were  his  own  or  no?  He  said, 'Yes.'  'Troth,
there's  little  sign  on't,'  says  the  other,  'by  yourload-
ing  him  thus.'  '  Well,'  says  the  old  man  to  himself,
'  and  what  am  I  to  do  now  ?  for  I  am  laughed  at,  if
either  the  ass  be  empty,  or  if  one  of  us  rides,  or
both  ;'  and  so  he  came  to  the  conclusion  to  bind  the
ass's  legs  together  with  a  cord,  and  they  tried  to
carry  him  to  market  with  a  pole  upon  their  shoulders
betwixt  them.  This  was  sport  to  everybody  that
saw  it,  inasmuch  that  the  old  man  in  great  wrath
threw  down  the  ass  into  a  river,  and  so  went  his  way


CltARLE^  H.  SPURGRON:  515

home  again.  The  good  man,  In  fine,  was  willing  to
please  everybody  but  had  the  ill  fortune  to  please
nobody,  and  lost  his  ass  into  the  bargain."

He  who  will  not  go  to  bed  till  he  pleases  every-
body will  have  to  sit  up  a  great  many  nights.  Many
men,  many  minds  ;  many  women,  many  whims  ;  and
so  if  we  please  one  we  are  sure  to  set  another
grumbling.  We  had  better  wait  till  they  are  all  of
one  mind  before  we  mind  them,  or  we  shall  be  like
the  man  who  hunted  many  hares  at  once  and  caught
none.  Besides,  the  fancies  of  men  alter,  and  folly
is  never  long  pleased  with  the  same  thing,  but
changes  its  palate,  and  grows  sick  of  what  it  doted
on.  Will  Shepherd  says  he  once  tried  to  serve  two
masters,  but  says  he,  "  I  soon  had  enough  of  it,  and
I  declared  that,  if  I  was  pardoned  this  once,  the  next
time  they  caught  me  at  it  they  might  pickle  me  in
salt  and  souse  me  in  boiling  vinegar."

**  He  who  would  general  favor  win
And  not  himself  offend,
To-day  the  task  he  may  begin,
He'll  never,  never  end."

If  we  dance  to  every  fiddle  we  shall  soon  be  lame  In
both  legs.  Good  nature  may  be  a  great  misfortune
if  we  do  not  mix  prudence  with  it.

He  that  all  men  would  please
Shall  never  find  ease.

It  is  right  to  be  obliging,  but  we  are  not  obliged  to  be
every  man's  lackey.     Put  your  hand  quickly  to  your


5i6  THE  OLD  MAN  AND  HIS  DONKEY.

hat,  for  that  is  courtesy  ;  but  don't  bow  your  head  at
every  man's  bidding,  for  that  is  slavery.  He  who
hopes  to  please  all  should  first  fit  the  moon  with  a
suit  of  clothes,  or  fill  a  bottomless  barrel  with
buckets  with  their  hoops  off.  To  live  upon  the
praise  of  others  is  to  feed  on  the  air ;  for  what  is
praise  but  the  breath  of  men's  nostrils  ?  That's
poor  stuff  to  make  a  dinner  of.  To  set  traps  for
claps,  and  to  faint  if  you  don't  get  them,  is  a  childish
thing ;  and  to  change  your  coat  to  please  new  com-
pany is  as  mean  as  dirt.  Change  for  the  better  as
often  as  you  like,  but  mind  it  is  better  before  you
change.  Tom  of  Bedlam  never  did  a  madder  thing
than  he  who  tried  to  please  a  thousand  masters  at
once ;  one  is  quite  enough.  If  a  man  pleases  God
he  may  let  the  world  wag  its  own  way,  and  frown  or
flatter,  as  the  maggot  bites.  What  is  there,  after  all,
to  fricrhten  a  man  in  a  fool's  orrin  or  in  the  frown  of
a  poor  mortal  like  yourself?  If  it  mattered  at  all
what  the  world  says  of  us^  it  would  be  some  comfort
that  when  a  good  man  is  buried  people  say,  "  He
was  not  a  bad  fellow  after  all."  When  the  cow  is
dead  we  hear  how  much  milk  she  gave.  When  the
man  is  gone  to  heaven  folks  know  their  loss,  and
wonder  how  it  was  they  did  not  treat  him  better.

The  way  of  pleasing  men  is  hard,  but  blessed  are
they  who  please  God.  He  is  not  a  free  man  who  is
afraid  to  think  for  himself,  for  if  his  thoughts  are  in
bonds  the  man  is  not  free.  A  man  of  God  is  a
manly  man.     A  true  man  does  what  he  thinks  to  be


CHARLES  H,  SPURGEON.  517

right,  whether  the  pigs  grunt  or  the  dogs  howl.  Are
you  afraid  to  follow  out  your  conscience  because
Tom,  Jack,  and  Harry  or  Mary  Ann  and  Betsy
would  laugh  at  you  ?  Then  you  are  not  the  seventy-
fifth  cousin  to  John  Ploughman,  who  goes  on  his  way
whistling  merrily,  though  many  find  fault  with  him-
self and  his  plough,  and  his  horses,  and  his  harness,
and  his  boots,  and  his  coat,  and  his  waistcoat,  and
his  hat,  and  his  head,  and  every  hair  on  it.  John
says  it  amuses  them  and  doesn't  hurt  him  ;  but  de-
pend on  it  you  will  never  catch  John  or  his  boys
carrying  the  donkey.


5  1 8  A  HORN-BL O  WER,  BUT  NOT  A  HUNTER.

ALL  ARE  NOT  HUNTERS  THAT  BLOW  THE  HORN.

He  does  not  look  much  like  a  hunter  !  Nimrod
would  never  own  him.  But  how  he  blows  !  Good-
ness, gracious,  what  a  row !  as  the  linnet  said  when
he  heard  a  donkey  singing  his  evening  hymn.  There's
more  goes  to  ploughing  than  knowing  how  to  whistle,
and  hunting  is  not  all  tally-ho  and  horn  blowing.
Appearances  are  deceitful.  Outward  show  Is  not
everything.  All  are  not  butchers  that  carry  a  steel
and  all  are  not  bishops  that  wear  aprons.  You  must
not  buy  goods  by  the  label ;  for  I  have  heard  that  the
finer  the  trade-mark  the  worse  the  article.  Never
have  we  seen  more  horn  or  less  hunter  than  in  our
picture.  Blow  away,  my  hearty,  till  your  toes  look
out  of  your  boots ;  there's  no  fear  of-  you  killing
either  fox  or  staof !

Now,  the  more  people  blow,  the  more  they  may,
but  he  is  a  fool  who  believes  all  they  say.  As  a  rule,
the  smallest  boy  carries  the  biggest  fiddle,  and  he
who  makes  most  boast  has  least  roast.  He  who  has
least  wisdom  has  most  vanity.  John  Lackland  is
wonderfully  fond  of  being  called  Esquire,  and  there's
none  so  pleased  at  being  dubbed  a  doctor  as  the
man  who  least  deserves  it.  Many  a  D.D.  is  fiddle-
dee-dee.  I  have  heard  say,  "  Always  talk  big  and
somebody  will  think  you  great,"  but  my  old  friend
Will  Shepherd  says,  "  Save  your  wind  for  running
up  a  hill,  and  don't  give  us  big  words  off  a  weak
stomach.     Look,"    said   he    once  to  me,    "  There's


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.  519

Solomon  Braggs  holding  up  his  head  like  a  hen
drinking  water,  but  there's  nothing  in  it.  With  him
it's  much  din  and  little  done."


"  Of  all  speculations  the  market  holds  forth,
The  best  that  I  know  for  a  lover  of  pelf,
Were  to  buy  up  this  Braggs  at  the  price  he  is  worth,
And  sell  him — at  that  which  he  sets  on  himself."


Before  honor  is  humility,  but  a  prating  fool  shall
fall,  and  when  he  falls  very  few  will  be  in  a  hurry  to
pick  him  up.

A  long  tongue  generally  goes  with  a  short  hand.
We  are  most  of  us  better  at  saying  than  doing.  We
can  all  tattle  away  from  the  battle,  but  many  fly  when
the  fight  is  nigh.  Some  are  all  sound  and  fury,  and
when  they  have  bragged  their  brag  all  is  over,  and
amen.  The  fat  Dutchman  was  the  wisest  pilot  in
Flushing,  only  he  never  went  to  sea ;  and  the  Irish
man  was  the  finest  rider  in  Connaught,  only  he
would  never  trust  himself  on  a  horse,  because,  as  he
said,  "  he  generally  fell  off  before  he  got  on."  A
bachelor's  wife  is  always  well  managed,  and  old
maids  always  bring  up  their  children  in  prime  style.
We  think  we  can  do  what  we  are  not  called  to,  and
if  by  chance  the  thing  falls  to  our  lot  we  do  worse
than  those  we  blamed.  Hence  it  is  wise  to  be  slow
in  foretelling  what  we  will  do,  for —


"  Thus  saith  the  proverb  of  the  wise,
*  Who  boastest  least  tells  fewest  lies,*  **


^20  ^  HORN-BLOWER,  BUT  NOT  A  HUNTER.

There  Is  another  old  rhyme  which  is  as  full  of  reason
as  a  pod  is  full  of  peas —

"  Little  money  is  soonest  spended;
Fewest  words  are  soonest  mended."

Of  course,  every  potter  praises  his  own  pot,  and
we  can  all  toot  a  little  on  our  own  trumpet,  but
some  blow  as  if  nobody  ever  had  a  horn  but  them-
selves. ''After  me  the  flood,"  says  the  mighty  big
man,  and  whether  it  be  so  or  no  we  have  floods
enouofh  while  he  lives.  I  mean  floods  of  words,
words,  words,  enough  to  drown  all  your  senses.  Oh !
that  the  man  had  a  mouth  big  enough  to  say  all  he
has  to  say  at  one  go,  and  have  done  with  it ;  but
then  one  had  need  get  to  the  other  end  of  the  world
till  his  talk  had  run  itself  dry.  Oh  !  for  a  quiet  hay-
loft, or  a  saw-pit,  or  a  dungeon,  where  the  sound  of
the  jawbone  would  no  more  be  heard.  They  say  a
brain  is  worth  little  if  you  have  not  a  tongue ;  but
what  is  a  toncrue  worth  without  a  brain  ?  Bellowlnof
is  all  very  well,  but  the  cow  for  me  is  that  which  fills
the  pail.  A  braying  ass  eats  little  hay,  and  that's  a
saving  in  fodder ;  but  a  barking  dog  catches  no
game,  and  that's  a  loss  to  the  owner.  Noise  is  no
profit,  and  talk  hinders  work.

When  a  man's  song  is  In  his  praise,  let  the  hymn
be  a  short  metre,  and  let  the  tune  be  in  the  minor
key.  He  who  talks  forever  about  himself  has  a
foolish  subject,  and  Is  likely  to  worry  and  weary  all
around  him.     Good  wine  needs  no  bush,  and  a  man


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.  52 1

who  can  do  well  seldom  boasts  about  it.  The
emptiest  tub  makes  the  loudest  noise.  Those  who
give  themselves  out  to  be  fine  shots  kill  very  few
birds,  and  many  a  crack  ploughman  does  a  shorter
day's  work  than  plain  John,  though  he  is  nothing  off
the  common  ;  and  so  on  the  whole  it  is  pretty  clear
that  the  best  huntsmen  are  not  those  who  are  for
everlastingly  blowing  the  horn.


522


DON' T  SHA  VE   WITH  A  HANDS  A  W.


A  HANDSAW  IS  A  GOOD  THING  BUT  NOT  TO  SHAVE

WITH.


A   HANDSAW    IS    A   GOOD    THING   BUT    NOT   TO    SHAVE  WITH.


Our  friend  will  cut  more  than  he  will  eat,  and
shave  off  something  more  than  hair,  and  then  he  will
blame  the  saw.  His  brains  don't  lie  in  his  beard,
nor  yet  in  the  skull  above  it,  or  he  would  see  that
his  saw  would  only  make  sores.  There's  sense  in
chot)sing  your  tools,  for  a  pig's  tail  will  never  make
a  good  arrow,  nor  will  his  ear  make  a  silk  purse.
You  can't  catch  rabbits  with  drums,  nor  pigeons
witii  plums.     A  good  thing  is  not  good  out  of  its


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.  523

place.  It  is  much  the  same  with  lads  and  girls  ;  you
can't  put  all  the  boys  to  one  trade,  nor  send  all
girls  to  the  same  service.  One  chap  will  make  a
London  clerk,  and  another  will  do  better  to  plough,
and  sow,  and  reap,  and  mow,  and  be  a  farmer  boy.
It's  no  use  forcing  them;  a  snail  will  never  run  a
race,  nor  a  mouse  drive  a  wagon.

"  Send  a  boy  to  the  well  against  his  will.
The  pitcher  will  break  and  the  water  spill."

With  unwillinof  hounds  it  is  hard  to  hunt  hares.  To
go  against  nature  and  inclination  is  to  row  against
wind  and  tide.  They  say  you  may  praise  a  fool  till  you
make  him  useful ;  I  don't  know  so  much  about  that,
but  I  do  know  that  if  I  get  a  bad  knife  I  generally
cut  my  finger,  and  a  blunt  axe  is  more  trouble  than
profit.  No,  let  me  shave  with  a  razor  if  I  shave  at
all,  and  do  my  work  with  the  best  tools  I  can  get.

Never  set  a  man  to  work  he  is  not  fit  for,  for  he
will  never  do  it  well.  They  say  that  if  pigs  fiy  they
always  go  with  their  tails  forward,  and  awkward
workmen  are  much  the  same.  Nobody  expects
cows  to  catch  crows,  or  hens  wear  hats.  There's
reason  in  roastinof  ees^s,  and  there  should  be  reason
in  choosing  servants.  Don't  put  a  round  peg  into  a
square  hole,  nor  wind  up  your  watch  with  a  cork-
screw, nor  set  a  tender-hearted  man  to  whip  wife-
beaters,  nor  a  bear  to  be  a  relieving-of^cer,  nor  a
publican  to  judge  of  the  licensing  laws.  Get  the
right  ma.n  in  the  right  place,  and  then  all  goes  as


5  24  D  ON'  I  SHA  VE   WITH  A  HANDS  A  W.

smooth  as  skates  on  ice ;  but  the  wrong  man  puts
all  awry,  as  the  sow  did  when  she  folded  the  linen.

It  is  a  temptation  to  many  to  trust  them  with
money:  don't  put  them  to  take  care  of  it  if  you  ever
wish  to  see  it  a^rain.  Never  set  a  cat  to  watch
cream,  nor  a  pig  to  gather  peaches,  for  if  the  cream
and  the  peaches  go  a-missing  you  will  have  yourself
to  thank  for  it.  It  is  a  sin  to  put  people  where  they
are  likely  to  sin.  If  you  believe  the  old  saying,  that
when  you  set  a  beggar  on  horseback  he  will  ride  to
the  devil,  don't  let  him  have  a  horse  of  yours.

If  you  want  a  thing  well  done  do  it  yourself,  and
pick  your  tools.  It  is  true  that  a  man  must  row
with  such  oars  as  he  has,  but  he  should  not  use  the
boat-hook  for  a  paddle.  Take  not  the  tongs  to
poke  the  fire  nor  the  poker  to  put  on  the  coals.  A
newspaper  on  Sunday  Is  as  much  out  of  place  as  a
warming-pan  on  the  first  of  August,  or  a  fan  on  a
snowy  day :  the  Bible  suits  the  Sabbath  a  deal  bet-
ter.

He  who  tries  to  make  money  by  betting  uses  a
wrong  tool,  and  is  sure  to  cut  his  fingers.  As  well
hope  to  grow  golden  pippins  on  the  bottom  of  the
sea  as  to  make  gain  among  gamblers  if  you  are  an
honest  man.  Hard  work  and  thrifty  habits  are  the
riofht  razor,  gfamblino-  is  a  handsaw.

Some  things  want  doing  gently,  and  telling  a  man
of  his  faults  is  one  of  them.  You  would  not  fetch  a
hatchet  to  break  open  an  ^^'g,  nor  kill  a  fly  on  your
boy's  forehead  with  a  sledge-hammer,  and  so  you


CtlARLES  H.  SPURCEOlsr.  525

must  not  try  to  mend  your  neighbor's  little  fault  by
blowing  him  up  sky-high.  Never  fire  off  a  musket
to  kill  a  midge,  and  don't  raise  a  hue  and  cry
about  the  half  of  nothing.

Do  not  throw  away  a  saw  because  it  is  not  a
razor,  for  it  will  serve  your  turn  another  day,  and
cut  your  ham-bone  if  it  won't  shave  off  your  stubble.
A  whet-stone  though  it  may  not  cut,  may  sharpen
a  knife  that  will.  A  match  gives  little  light  itself,
but  it  may  light  a  candle  to  brighten  up  the  room.
Use  each  thing  and  each  man  according  to  common
sense  and  you  will  be  uncommonly  sensible.  You
don't  milk  horses  nor  ride  cows,  and  by  the  same
rule  you  must  make  of  every  man  what  he  is  meant
for,  and  the  farm  will  be  as  right  as  a  trivet.

Everything  has  its  use,  but  no  one  thing  is  good
for  all  purposes.  The  baby  said,  "  The  cat  crew  and
the  cock  rocked  the  cradle,"  but  old  folks  knew  bet-
ter :  the  cat  is  best  at  mousing  and  the  cock  at
rousing.  That's  for  that,  as  salt  is  for  herrings,  and
sugar  for  gooseberries,  and  Nan  for  Nicholas.  Don't
choose  your  tools  by  their  looks,  for  that's  best  which
does  best.  A  silver  trowel  lays  very  few  bricks.  You
cannot  curry  a  horse  with  a  tortoise-shell  comb,  or
fell  oaks  with  a  pen-knife,  or  open  oysters  with  a
gold  tooth-pick.  Fine  is  not  so  good  as  fit  when  it
is  to  be  done.  A  good  workman  will  get  on  pretty
well  with  a  poor  tool,  and  a  brave  soldier  never  lacks
a  weapon :  still  the  best  is  good  enough  for  me,  and
John  Ploughman  does  not  care  to  use  a  clumsy  tool


5  26  DON' T  SHA  VE  WITH  A  HANDS  A  U^.

because  It  looks  pretty.  Better  ride  on  an  ass  that
carries  you  than  on  a  steed  which  throws  you :  it  is
far  better  to  work  with  an  old-fashioned  spade  which
suits  your  hand  than  with  a  new-fangled  invention
you  don't  understand.

In  trying  to  do  good  to  your  fellow-men  the  gos-
pel is  out  of  sight  the  best  instrument  to  work  with.
The  new  doctrine  which  they  call  *'  modern  thought "
is  nothing  better  than  a  hand-saw,  and  It  won't  work
a  bit.  This  fine  new  nothing  of  a  gospel  would  not
save  a  mouse,  nor  move  the  soul  of  a  tom-tit ;  but
the  glorious  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  suited  to  man's
need,  and  by  God's  grace  does  its  work  famously.
Let  every  preacher  and.  teacher  keep  to  it,  for  they
will  never  find  a  better.  Try  to  win  men  with  Its
loving  words  and  precious  promises,  and  there's  no
fear  of  labor  In  vain.  Some  praise  the  balm  of
Gilead,  or  man's  mortality ;  many  try  the  Roman
salve,  or  the  oil  of  Babylon  ;  and  others  use  a  cun-
ning ointment  mixed  by  learned  philosophers ;  but
for  their  own  soul's  wounds,  and  for  the  hurts  of
others,  John  Ploughman  knows  but  one  cure,  and
that  is  given  gratis  by  the  good  Physician  to  all  who
ask  for  It.  A  humble  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  will  soon
bring  you  this  sovereign  remedy.  Use  no  other,
for  no  other  is  of  use.


CHARLES  ff.  SPURGE  ON.


52;


DON'T  CUT  OFF  YOUR  NOSE  TO  SPITE  YOUR  FACE.


don't  cut  off  your  nose  to  spite  your  face.

Aneer  is  a  short  madness.  The  less  we  do  when
we  go  mad  the  better  for  everybody,  and  the  less
we  go  mad  the  better  for  ourselves.  He  is  far
o-one  who  hurts  himself  to  wreak  his  veno^eance
on  others.  The  old  saying  is  "  Don't  cut  off  your
head  because  it  aches,"  and  another  says  "  Set  not
your  house  on  fire  to  spite  the  moon."  If  things  go
awry,  it  is  a  poor  way  of  mending  to  make  them
worse,  as  the  man  did  who  took  to  drinking  because
he  could  not  marry  the  girl  he  liked.     He  must  be


528  DON'T  CUT  OFF  YOUR  NOSE,

a  fool  who  cuts  off  his  nose  to  spite  his  face,  and  yet
this  is  what  Dick  did  when  he  had  vexed  his  old  mas-
ter, and  because  he  was  chid  must  needs  give  up
his  place,  throw  himself  out  of  work,  and  starve  his
wife  and  family.  Jane  had  been  idle,  and  she  knew
it,  but  sooner  than  let  her  mistress  speak  to  her,  she
gave  warning,  and  lost  as  good  a  service  as  a  maid
could  wish  for.  Old  Griggs  was  wrong,  and  could
not  deny  it,  and  yet  because  the  parson's  sermon
fitted  him  rather  close,  he  took  the  sulks  and  vowed
he  would  never  hear  the  good  man  again.  It  was
his  own  loss,  but  he  wouldn't  listen  to  reason,  but
was  as  willful  as  a  pig.

Do  nothing  when  you  are  out  of  temper,  and  then
you  will  have  the  less  to  undo.  Let  a  hasty  man's  pas-
sion be  a  warning  to  you  ;  if  he  scalds  you,  take  heed
that  you  do  not  let  your  own  pot  boil  over.  Many
a  man  has  g^iven  himself  a  box  on  the  ear  in  his
blind  rage,  ay,  and  ended  his  own  life  out  of  spite.  He
who  cannot  curb  his  temper  carries  gunpowder  in
his  bosom,  and  he  is  neither  safe  for  himself  nor  his
neighbors.  When  passion  comes  in  at  the  door,
what  little  sense  there  is  in- doors  flies  out  at  the
window.  By-and-by  a  hasty  man  cools  and  comes
to  himself,  like  MacGibbon's  gruel  when  he  put  it
out  of  the  window,  but  if  his  nose  is  off  in  the  mean-
time, who  is  to  put  it  on  again  ?  He  will  only  be
sorry  once  and  that  will  be  all  the  rest  of  his  life.
Aneer  does  a  man  more  hurt  than  that  which  made
him  angry.     It  opens  his  mouth  and  shuts  his  eyes,


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.


529


and  fires  his  heart,  and  drowns  his  sense,  and
makes  his  wisdom  folly.  Old  Tompkins  told  me
that  he  was  sorry  that  he  lost  his  temper,  and  I
could  not  help  thinking  that  the  pity  was  that  he
ever  found  it  again,  for  it  was  like  an  old  shoe
with  the  sole  gone  and  the  upper  leathers  worn
out,  only  fit  for  a  dunghill.  A  hot  tempered  man
would  be  all  the  better  for  a  new  heart  and  a  riorht
spirit  Anger  is  a  fire  which  cooks  no  victuals,  and
comforts  no  household  :  it  cuts  and  curses  and  kills,
and  no  one  knows  what  it  may  lead  to  ;  therefore,
good  reader,  don't  let  it  lodge  in  your  bosom,  and
if  it  ever  comes  there,  pass  the  vagrant  on  to  the
next  parish.

Gently,  gently,  little  po.,
Why  so  hasty  to  be  hot  ?
Over  you  will  surely  boil,
And  I  know  not  what  you'll  spo

The  old  gent  In  our  picture  has  a  fine  nose  of  his

own,  and  though  he  will  be  a  fool  to  cut  it  off,  he

would  be  wiser  to  cut  off  the  supplies  which  have

made  it  such  a  size.     That  glass  and  jug  on  the

table    are  the   paint-pots    that  he   colors    his  nose

with,  and   everybody  knows,  whether  he  knows  it

or  knows  it  not,  that  his  nose  is  the   outward  and

visible  sign  of  a  good  deal  of  inward  and  spirituous

drink,  and  the  sooner  he  drops  his  drops  the  better.

So  here  we  will  cut  off,  notour  nose,  but  the  present

subject.

34


530


THE  HOLE  UNDER   THE  NOSE.


HE  HAS  A  HOLE  UNDER  HIS  NOSE  AND  HIS  MONEY

RUNS  INTO  IT.


HB  HAS    A   HOLE   UNDER    HIS    NOSE   AND    HIS    MONEY    RUNS   INTO   IT.


This  is  the  man  who  Is  always  dry,  because  he
takes  so  much  heavy  wet.  He  Is  a  loose  fellow  who
Is  fond  of  getting  tight.  He  Is  no  sooner  up  than  his
nose  Is  in  the  cup,  and  his  money  begins  to  run
down  the  hole  which  is  just  under  his  nose.  He  is
not  a  blacksmith,  but  he  has  a  spark  In  his  throat,
and  all  the  publican's  barrels  can't  put  it  out.  If  a
pot  of  beer  Is  a  yard  of  land,  he  must  have  swal-
lowed more  acres  than  a  ploughman  could  get  over


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.  53  I

for  many  a  day,  and  still  he  goes  on  swallowing  until
he  takes  to  wallowing.  All  goes  down  Gutter  Lane.
Like  the  snipe,  he  lives  by  suction.  If  you  ask  him
how  he  Is,  he  says  he  would  be  quite  right  if  he  could
moisten  his  mouth.  His  purse  is  a  bottle,  his  bank
is  the  publican's  till,  and  his  casket  is  a  cask :  pewter
is  his  precious  metal,  and  his  pearl*  is  in  a  mixture
of  gin  and  beer.  The  dew  of  his  youth  comes  from
Ben  Nevis,  and  the  comfort  of  his  soul  is  cordial
gin.  He  is  a  walking  barrel,  a  living  dram-pipe,  a
moving  swill-tub.  They  say  "loth  to  drink  and  loth
to  leave  off,"  but  he  never  needs  persuading  to
begin,  and  as  to  ending — that  is  out  of  the  question
while  he  can  borrow  two-pence..  This  is  the  gentle-
man who  sincrs —

o

He  that  buys  land  buys  many  stones,  ^

He  that  buys  meat  buys  many  bones,

He  that  buys  eggs  buys  many  shells.

He  that  buys  good  ale  buys  nothing  else.

He  will  never  be  hanofed  for  leavinof  his  drink  be-
hind  him.  He  drinks  in  season  and  out  of  season  ;
in  summer  because  he  is  hot,  and  in  winter  because
he  is  cold.  A  drop  of  beer  never  comes  too  soon,
and  he  would  get  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night  for
more,  only  he  goes  to  bed  too  tipsy.  He  has  heard
that  if  you  get  wet-footed  a  glass  of  whisky  in  your
boots  will  keep  you  from  catching  cold,  and  he  argues
that  the  bestway  toget  one  glass  of  the  spirit  into  each


*  Purl.


532  THE  HOLE  UNDER   THE  NOSE.

boot  Is  to  put  two  doses  where  it  will  run  into  your
lees.  He  Is  never  loner  without  an  excuse  for  another
pot,  or  If  perchance  he  does  not  make  one,  another
lushlngton  helps  him.

Some  drink  when  friends  step  in,
And  some  when  they  step  out ;
Some  drink  because  they're  thin,
And  some  because  they're  stout.

Some  drink  because  'tis  wet.
And  some  because  'tis  dry;
Some  drink  another  glass
To  wet  the  other  eye.

Water  Is  this  gentleman's  abhorrence,  whether
used  Inside  or  out,  but  most  of  all  he  dreads  It  taken
Inwardly,  except  with  spirits,  and  then  the  less  the
better.  He  says  that  the  pump  would  kill  him,  but
he  never  gives  It  a  chance.  He  laps  his  liquor,  and
licks  his  chaps,  but  he  will  never  die  through  the
badness  of  the  water  from  the  well.  It  is  a  pity  that
he  does    not    run   the    risk.     Drinklnor    cold  water

o

neither  makes  a  man  sick,  nor  In  debt,  nor  his  wife
a  widow,  but  this  mighty  fine  ale  of  his  will  do  all
this  for  him,  make  him  worse  than  a  beast  while  he
lives,  and  wash  him  away  to  his  grave  before  his
time.  The  old  Scotchman  said,  ''  Death  and  drink-
draining  are  near  neighbors,"  and  he  spoke  the  truth.
They  say  that  drunkenness  makes  some  men  fools,
some  beasts,  and  some  devils,  but  according  to  my
mind  It  makes  all  men  fools  whatever  else  It  does.
Yet  when  a  man  Is  as  drunk  as  a  rat  he  sets  up  to


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.  533

be  a  judge,  and  mocks  at  sober  people.  Certain
neighbors  of  mine  laugh  at  me  for  being  a  teeto-
taller, and  I  mio^ht  well  laug^h  at  them  for  beinof
drunk,  only  I  feel  more  inclined  to  cry  that  they
should  be  such  fools.  Oh  !  that  we  could  get  them
sober,  and  then  perhaps  we  might  make  men
of  them.  You  cannot  do  much  with  these  fellows,
unless  you  can  enlist  them  in  the  Coldstream
o^uards.

He  that  any  good  would  win
At  his  mouth  must  first  begin.

As  long  as  drink  drowns  conscience  and  reason,  you
miofht  as  well  talk  to  the  hoo^s.  The  rascals  will
promise  fair  and  take  the  pledge,  and  then  take  their
coats  to  pledge  to  get  more  beer.  We  smile  at  a
tipsy  man,  for  he  is  a  ridiculous  creature,  but  when
we  see  how  he  is  ruined  body  and  soul  it  is  no  jok-
ing matter.  How  solemn  is  the  truth  that  ''No  drunk-
ard shall  inherit  eternal  life."

There's  nothing  too  bad  for  a  man  to  say  or  do
when  he  is  half-seas  over.  It  is  a  pity  that  any  decent
body  should  go  near  such  a  common  sewer.  If  he
does  not  fall  into  the  worst  of  crimes  it  certainly  is
not  his  fault,  for  he  has  made  himself  ready  for  any-
thing the  devil  likes  to  put  into  his  mind.  He  does
least  hurt  when  he  begins  to  be  top-heavy,  and  to
reel  about :  then  he  becomes  a  blind  man  with  good
eyes  in  his  head,  and  a  cripple  with  legs  on.  He  sees
two  moons,  and  two  doors  to  the  public-house,  and
tries  to  find  his  way  through  both  the  doors  at  once.


534  ^^-^^^  HOLE  UNDER  THE  NOSE.

Over  he  goes,  and  there  he  must  He  unless  some-
body will  wheel  him  home  in  a  barrow  or  carry  him
to  the  police-station.

Solomon  says  the  glutton  and  the  drunkard  shall
come  to  poverty,  and  that  the  drinker  does  in  no
time.  He  gets  more  and  more  down  at  the  heel,
and  as  his  nose  gets  redder  and  his  body  is  more
swollen  he  o^ets  to  be  more  of  a  shack  and  more  of
a  shark.  His  trade  is  gone,  and  his  credit  has  run
out,  but  he  still  manages  to  get  his  beer.  He  treats
an  old  friend  to  a  pot,  and  then  finds  that  he  has
left  his  purse  at  home,  and  of  course  the  old  friend
must  pay  the  shot.  He  borrows  till  no  one  will
lend  him  a  orroat,  unless  It  is  to  oret  off  lendlncr  a
shillinor.  Shame  has  lonof  since  left  him,  thouorh  all
who  knew  him  are  ashamed  of  him.  His  talk  runs
like  the  tap,  and  is  full  of  stale  dregs  ;  he  is  very  kind
over  his  beer,  and  swears  he  loves  you,  and  would
like  to  drink  your  health,  and  love  you  again.  Poor
sot,  much  good  will  his  blessing  do  to  any  one
who  gets  It ;  his  poor  wife  and  family  have  had  too
much  of  it  already,  and  quake  at  the  very  sound  of
his  voice.

Now,  If  we  try  to  do  anything  lo  shut  up  a  booz-
ing-house,  or  shorten  the  hour  for  guzzling,  we  are
called  all  sorts  of  bad  names,  and  the  wind-up  of  It  all
is — "What!  Rob  a  poor  man  of  his  beer?"  The
fact  Is  that  they  rob  the  poor  man  by  his  beer.  The
ale-jug  robs  the  cupboard  and  the  table,  starves
the  wife  and  strips  the  children  ;   It  is  a  great  thief.


/


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON.  535

housebreaker,  and  heartbreaker,  and  the  best
possible  thing  Is  to  break  It  to  pieces,  or  keep
It  on  the  shelf  bottom  upwards.  In  a  newspaper
which  was  lent  me  the  other  day  I  saw  some
verses  by  John  Barleycorn,  Jr.,  and  as  they
tickled  my  fancy  I  copied  them  out,  and  here  they
are.

What !  rob  a  poor  man  of  his  beer,

And  give  him  good  victuals  instead !
Your  heart's  very  hard,  sir,  I  fear,

Or  at  least  you  are  soft  in  the  head

What !  rob  a  poor  man  of  his  mug,

And  give  him  a  house  of  his  ow^n  ;
With  kitchen  and  parlor  so  snug !

'Tis  enough  to  draw  tears  from  a  stone.

What !  rob  a  poor  man  of  his  glass,

And  teach  him  to  read  and  to  virite !
What !  save  him  from  being  an  ass !

'Tis  nothing  but  malice  and  spite.

What  rob  a  poor  man  of  his  ale.

And  prevent  him  from  beating  his  vsrife,

From  beinglocked  up  in  a  jail,
With  penal  employment  for  life  !

What !  rob  a  poor  man  of  his  beer,
And  keep  him  from  starving  his  child !

It  makes  me  feel  avi^fully  queer,

And  I'll  thank  you  to  draw  it  more  mild.

Having  given  you  a  song,  I  now  hand  you  a  hand-
bill to  stick  up  in  the  "  Rose  and  Crown  "  window,
if  the  landlord  wants  an  advertisement.  It  was  many
years  ago,  but  It  Is  quite  as  good  as  new.  Any  beer-
seller  may  print  It  who  thinks  It  likely  to  help  his
trade.


FAST-DAY  SERVICE,


HELD   AT   THE


Crystal  Palace,  Sydenham^

On  Wednesday,  October  7,  1857,  by  the

Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon.

Being  the   Day  appointed  by  Proclamation  for  a  Solemn  Fast,  Humiliation

and  Prayer  before  Almighty  God  :  in  order  to  obtain  Pardon  of  our

vSins,  and  for  imploring  His  Blessing  and  Assistance  on  our

Arms  for  the  Restoration  of  Tranquility  in  India.


BRIEF    INVOCATION.

OGOD,  the  God  of  heaven  and  of  earth,  we  do  this
day  pay  Thee  reverence,  and  meekly  bow  our
heads  in  adoration  before  Thine  awful  throne.  We  are
the  creatures  of  Thine  hand;  Thou  hast  made  us,
and  not  we  ourselves.  It  is  but  just  and  right  that
we  should  pay  unto  Thee  our  adoration.  O  God  !
we  are  met  too^ether  in  a  vast  cono-reeation  for  a
purpose  which  demands  all  the  power  of  piety,  and
all  the  strength  of  prayer.  Send  down  Thy  Spirit
upon  Thy  servant,  that  he,  whilst  trembling  in  weak-
ness, may  be  made  strong  to  preach  Thy  Word,  to
lead  forth  this  people  in  holy  prayer,  and  to  help
them  in  that  humiliation  for  which  this  day  is  set
apart.     Come,  O  God,  we  beseech  Thee;  bow  our

536


Mr.  Spurgeon  in  his  Pulpit.


CHARLES   H.    SPURGE  ON.  539

hearts  before  Thee ;  instead  of  sackcloth  and  ashes
give  us  true  repentance,  and  hearts  meekly  rever-
ent;  instead  of  the  outward  guise,  to  which  some
pay  their  only  homage,  give  us  the  inward  spirit ;
and  may  we  really  pray,  really  humiliate  ourselves,
and  really  tremble  before  the  Most  High  God.
Sanctify  this  service ;  make  it  useful  unto  us  and
honorable  to  Thyself.  And  O  Thou  dread  Supreme,
unto  Thee  shall  be  the  glory  and  the  honor,  world
without  end.     Amen.

Let  us  now  praise  God  by  singing  the  first  hymn.
I  shall  read  it  through ;  and  then,  perhaps,  you  will
be  kind  enouoh  to  sinor  it  throuorh.

o  o  o

Before  Jehovah's  awful  throne,

Ye  nations  bow  with  sacred  joy  ;
Know  that  the  Lord  is  God  alone ;

He  can  create  and  he  destroy.

His  sovereign  power,  without  our  aid,

Made  us  of  clay  and  form'd  us  men  ;
And  when  like  wand' ring  sheep  we  stray'd

He  brought  us  to  his  fold  again.

We  are  his  people,  we  his  care,

Our  souls  and  all  our  mortal  frame  ;
What  lasting  honors  shall  we  rear.

Almighty  Maker,  to  thy  name  ?

"We'll  crowd  thy  gates  with  thankful  songs.

High  as  the  heav'ns  our  voices  raise  ;
And  earth  with  her  ten  thousand  tongues

Shall  fill  thy  courts  with  sounding  praise.

Wide  as  the  world  is  thy  command  ;

Vast  as  eternity  thy  love ;
Firm  as  a  rock  thy  truth  must  stand.

When  rolling  years  shall  cease  to  move.


540


FAST-DAY  SERVICE.


EXPOSITION.
Daniel  ix.   1-19.

''  In  the  first  year  of  Darius  the  son  of  Ahasuerus,
of  the  seed  of  the  Medes,  which  was  made  king-
over  the  realm  of  the  Chaldeans  ;
•  "  In  the  first  year  of  his  reign  I  Daniel  understood
by  books  the  number  of  the  years,  whereof  the  word
of  the  Lord  came  to  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  that  he
would  accomplish  seventy  years  in  the  desolation  of
Jerusalem.

"  And  I  set  my  face  unto  the  Lord  God,  to  seek
by  prayer  and  supplications,  with  fasting,  and  sack-
cloth, and  ashes :

"And  I  prayed  unto  the  Lord  my  God,  and  made
my  confession,  and  said,  O  Lord,  the  great  and
dreadful  God,  keeping  the  covenant  and  mercy  to
them  that  love  him,  and  to  them  that  keep  his  com-
mandments ;

"  We  have  sinned,  and  have  committed  iniquity,
and  have  done  wickedly,  and  have  rebelled,  even  by
departing  from  thy  precepts  and  from  thy  judg.
ments :

"Neither  have  we  hearkened  unto  thy  servants
the  prophets,  which  spake  in  thy  name  to  our  kings,
our  princes,  and  our  fathers,  and  to  all  the  people
of  the  land.

"O  Lord,  righteousness  belongeth  unto  thee,  but
unto  us  confusion  of  faces,  as  at  this  day;  to  the
men  of  Judah,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,
and  unto  all  Israel,  that  are  near,  and  that  are  far


CHARLES  H.   SPURGEON.  54 1

off,  through  all  the  countries  whither  thou  hast  driven
them,  because  of  their  trespass  that  they  have  tres-
passed against  thee.

"  O  Lord,  to  us  belongeth  confusion  of  face,  to
our  kings,  to  our  princes,  and  to  our  fathers,  because
we  have  sinned  ao^ainst  thee.

''  To  the  Lord  our  God  belong  mercies  and  for-
givenesses, though  we  have  rebelled  against  him."

There  is  the  first  bright  star  which  shines  in  the
midst  of  the  darkness  of  our  sins.  God  is  merciful.
He  is  just — as  just  as  if  he  were  not  merciful.  He
is  merciful — as  merciful  as  if  he  were  not  just,  and
in  very  deed  more  merciful  than  if  he  were  too  len-
ient; instead  of  blending  a  wise  severity  of  Justice
with  a  gracious  clemency  of  long-suffering.  My
brethren,  we  should  rejoice  that  we  have  not  this  day
to  address  the  gods  of  the  heathens.  You  have  not
to-day  to  bow  down  before  the  thundering  Jove ;
you  need  not  come  before  implacable  deities,  who
delight  in  the  blood  of  their  creatures,  or  rather,  of
the  creatures  whom  it  is  pretended  that  they  have
made.  Our  God  delights  in  mercy,  and  in  the  de-
liverance of  Britain  from  its  ills.  God  will  be  as
much  pleased  as  Britain ;  yea,  when  Britain  shall
have  forgotten  it,  and  only  the  pages  of  history  shall
record  his  mercies,  God  will  still  remember  what  he
did  for  us  in  this  day  of  our  straits  and  our  difficul-
ties. As  to  the  hope  that  he  will  help  us,  it  is  a  cer-
tainty.    There    is    no   fear   that   when  we  unite  in


542  FAST-DAY  SERVICE.

prayer  God  will  refuse  to  hear.  It  Is  as  sure  as  that
there  is  a  God,  that  God  will  hear  us  ;  and  If  we  ask
him  aright,  the  day  shall  come  when  the  world  shall
see  what  Britain's  God  has  done,  and  how  he  has
heard  her  cry,  and  answered  the  voice  of  her  suppli-
cations.

"  Neither  have  we  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord
our  God,  to  walk  In  his  laws,  which  he  set  before  us
by  his  servants  the  prophets.

"  Yea,  all  Israel  have  transgressed  thy  law,  even
by  departing,  that  they  might  not  obey  thy  voice ;
therefore,  the  curse  is  poured  upon  us,  and  the  oath
that  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  the  servant  of
God,  because  we  have  sinned  against  him.

''And  he  hath  confirmed  his  words,  which  He
spake  against  us,  and  against  our  judges  that  judged
us,  by  bringing  upon  us  a  great  evil :  for  under  the
whole  heaven  hath  not  been  done  as  hath  been  done
upon  Jerusalem.

"As  It  is  written  In  the  law  of  Moses,  all  this  evil
Is  come  upon  us  :  yet  made  we  not  our  prayer  before
the  Lord  our  God,  that  we  might  turn  from  our
iniquities,  and  understand  thy  truth.

"  Therefore  hath  the  Lord  watched  upon  the  evil,
and  brought  it  upon  us:  for  the  Lord  our  God  is
righteous  in  all  his  works  which  he  doeth :  for  we
obeyed  not  his  voice.

"And  now,  O  Lord  our  God,  that  hast  brought
thy  people  forth  out  of  the  land   of  Egypt  with  a


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.  543

mighty  hand,  and  hast  gotten  thee    renown,  as  at
this  day ;  we  have  sinned,  we  have  done  wickedly."

The  prophet,  in  his  prayer,  pleads  what  God  has
done  for  them,  as  the  reason  why  he  should  make
bare  his  arm  ;  he  tefls  how  God  delivered  Israel  out
of  Egypt ;  and  he  therefore  prays  that  God  would
deliver  them  from  their  present  trouble.  And,  my
brethren,  not  Israel  itself  could  boast  a  nobler  his-
tory than  we,  measuring  it  by  God's  bounties.  We
have  not  yet  forgotten  an  armada  scattered  before
the  breath  of  heaven,  scattered  upon  the  angry  deep
as  a  trophy  of  what  God  can  do  to  protect  his
favored  isle.  We  have  not  yet  forgotten  a  Fifth  of
November,  wherein  God  discovered  divers  plots
that  were  formed  ao^ainst  our  relio^ion  and  our
commonwealth.  We  have  not  yet  lost  the  old  men,
whose  tales  of  victories  in  wars  are  still  a  frequent
story.  We  remember  how  God  swept  before  our
armies  the  man  who  thoug^ht  to  make  the  world  his
dominion,  who  designed  to  cast  his  shoe  over  Britain,
and  make  it  a  dependency  of  his  kingdom.  God
wrought  for  us ;  he  wrought  with  us  ;  and  he  will
continue  to  do  so.  He  hath  not  left  his  people,  and
he  will  not  leave  us,  but  he  will  be  with  us  even  to
the  end.  Cradle  of  Liberty!  Refuge  of  distress!
Storms  may  rage  around  thee,  but  not  upon  thee,
nor  shall  all  the  wrath  and  fury  of  men  destroy  thee,
for  God  hath  pitched  his  tabernacle  in  thy  midst,  and
his  saints  are  the  salt  in  the  midst  of  thee.


5  44  FA  S  T-DA  Y  SER  VICE.

"  O  Lord,  according  to  all  thy  righteousness,  I
beseech  thee,  let  thine  anger  and  thy  fury  be  turned
away  from  thy  city  Jerusalem,  thy  holy  mountain  :
because  for  our  sins,  and  for  the  iniquities  of  our
fathers,  Jerusalem  and  thy  people  are  become  a
reproach  to  all  that  are  about  us.

"Now,  therefore,  O  our  God,  hear  the  prayer  of
thy  servant,  and  his  supplications,  and  cause  thy  face
to  shine  upon  thy  sanctuary  that  is  desolate,  for  the
Lord's  sake.

''O  my  God,  incline  thine  ear,  and  hear  ;  open  thine
eyes,  and  behold  our  desolations,  and  the  city  which
is  called  by  thy  name  :  for  we  do  not  present  our  sup-
plications before  thee  for  our  righteousness,  but  for
thy  great  mercies.

"  O  Lord,  hear  ;  O  Lord,  forgive  ;  O  Lord  hearken
and  do  ;  defer  not,  for  thine  own  sake,  O  my  God :
for  thy  city  and  thy  people  are  called  by  thy
name."

And  now  for  a  few  moments  let  us  endeavor  to
pray :

^      ^  PRAYER.

"  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,"  we  will  be
brief,  but  we  will  be  earnest  if  Thou  wilt  help  us.
We  have  a  case  to  spread  before  Thee  this  day.
We  will  tell  our  story,  and  we  will  pray  that  Thou
wouldst  foro^ive  the  weakness  of  the  words  In  which
it  shall  be  delivered,  and  hear  us,  for  Jesus'  sake.
O  Father,  Thou  hast  smitten  this  our  land,  not  in
itself,  but  in  one  of  Its  dependencies.      Thou  hast


CHARLES  H.   SPURGEON.  545

allowed  a  mutinous  spirit  to  break  out  in  our  armies,
and  Thou  hast  suffered  men  who  know  not  Thee,
who  fear  neither  God  nor  man,  to  do  deeds  for
which  earth  may  well  blush,  and  for  which  w^e,  as
men,  desire  to  cover  our  faces  before  Thee.  O  Lord
God,  Thou  couldst  not  bear  the  sin  of  Sodom ;  we
are  sure  Thou  canst  not  endure  the  sin  which  has
been  committed  in  India.  Thou  didst  rain  hell  out
of  heaven  upon  the  cities  of  the  plain.  The  cities
of  India  are  not  less  vile  then  they,  for  they  have
committed  lust  and  cruelty,  and  have  much  sinned
against  the  Lord.  Remember  this,  O  God  of
Heaven.

But,  O  Lord  our  God,  we  are  not  here  to  be  the
accusers  of  our  fellow-men.  We  are  here  to  pray
that  Thou  w^ouldst  remove  the  scourofe  which  this
great  wickedness  has  brought  upon  us.  Look  down
from  heaven,  O  God,  and  behold  this  day  the
slaughtered  thousands  of  our  countrymen.  Behold
the  wives,  the  daughters  of  Britain  violated,  defiled  !
Behold  her  sons,  cut  in  pieces  and  tormented  in  a
manner  w^hich  earth  hath  not  beheld  before.  O
God,  free  us,  we  beseech  Thee,  from  this  awful
scouro-e  !  Give  streno-th  to  our  soldiers  to  execute
upon  the  criminals  the  sentence  which  justice  dic-
tates ;  and  then,  by  Thy  strong  arm,  and  by  Thy
terrible  might,  do  Thou  prevent  a  repetition  of  so
fearful  an  outrage.

We  pray  Thee,  remember  this  day  the  widow  and

the  fatherless  children  ;  think  Thou  of  those  who  are
35


5 46  FAST- DA  V  S£A'  VICE.

this  day  distressed  even  to  the  uttermost.  Guide
the  hearts  of  this  great  multitude,  that  they  may
hberally  give,  and  this  day  bestow  of  their  substance
to  their  poor,  destitute  brethren.  Remember  espe-
cially our  soldiers  now  fighting  in  that  land.  God
shield  them  !  Be  Thou  a  covert  from  the  heat !
Wilt  Thou  be  pleased  to  mitigate  all  the  rigors  of
the  climate  for  them !  Lead  them  on  to  battle ;
cheer  their  hearts ;  bid  them  remember  that  they
are  not  warriors  merely,  but  executioners ;  and  may
they  go  with  steady  tramp  to  the  battle,  believing
that  God  wills  it  that  they  should  utterly  destroy  the
enemy  who  have  not  only  defied  Britain,  but  thus
defiled  themselves  amonost  men.

But,  O  Lord,  it  is  ours  this  day  to  humble  our-
selves before  Thee.  We  are  a  sinful  nation ;  w^e
confess  the  sins  of  our  governors  and  our  own  par-
ticular Iniquities.  For  all  our  rebellions  and  trans-
gressions, O  God,  have  mercy  upon  us!  We  plead
the  blood  of  Jesus.  Help  every  one  of  us  to  repent
of  sin,  to  fly  to  Christ  for  refuge,  and  grant  that
each  of  us  may  thus  hide  ourselves  in  the  rock,  till
the  calamity  be  overpast,  knowing  that  God  w^U
not  desert  them  that  put  their  trust  In  Jesus.  Thy
servant  Is  overwhelmed  this  day  ;  his  heart  Is  melted
like  wax  In  the  midst  of  him  ;  he  knoweth  not  how
to  pray.  Yet,  Lord,  If  Thou  canst  hear  a  groaning
heart  which  cannot  utter  Itself  In  words,  Thou  hear-
est  his  strong  Impassioned  cry,  In  which  the  people
join.     Lord,  save  us!     Lord,  arise  and   bless   us;


CHARLES  H.    SPURGEON.  547

and  let  the  might  of  Thine  arm  and  the  majesty  of
Thy  strength  be  now  revealed  in  the  midst  of  this
land,  and  throuo^hout  those  countries  which  are  in
our  dominion,  God  save  the  Oueen  !  A  thousand
blessings  on  her  much-beloved  head !  God  pre-
serve our  country  !  May  every  movement  that  pro-
motes liberty  and  progress  be  accelerated,  and  may
everything  be  done  in  our  midst  which  can  shield
us  from  the  discontent  of  the  masses,  and  can  pro-
tect the  masses  from  the  oppression  of  the  few.
Bless  England,  O  our  God.  "Shine,  mighty  God,
on  Britain  shine,"  and  make  her  still  glorious  Brit-
ain!  "beautiful  for  situation,  the  joy  of  the  whole
earth.''  Lord,  accept  our  confessions ;  hear  bur
prayers,  and  answer  us  by  Thy  Holy  Spirit !  Help
Thy  servant  to  preach  to  us,  and  all  the  glory  shall
be  unto  Thee,  O  Father,  to  Thee,  O  Son,  and  Thee,  O
Holy  Spirit;  world  without  end.     Amen  and  amen.

Let  us  now  sing  the  second  hymn.  It  Is  made  up
of  verses  selected  from  different  Psalms,  which  I
thought  to  be  appropriate  to  the  occasion  :

Our  God,  our  help  in  ages  past,

Our  hope  for  years  to  come.
Our  shelter  from  the  stormy  blast,

And  our  eternal  home,

Under  the  shadow  of  thy  throne

Thy  saints  have  dwelt  secure;
Sufficient  is  thine  arm  alone,

And  our  defence  is  sure.

Our  foes  insult  us,  but  our  hope
In  thy  compassion  lies ;


54^  FAST-DAY  SERVICE.

This  thought  shall  bear  our  spirits  up.
That  God  will  not  despise.

In  vain  the  sons  of  Satan  boast

Of  armies  in  array ;
When  God  has  first  despised  their  host,

They  fall  an  easy  prey.

Our  God,  our  help  in  ages  past,

Our  hope  for  years  to  come ;
Be  thou  our  guard  while  troubles  last,

And  our  eternal  home.

Hoping  to  receive  help  from  God's  Holy  Spirit,  I
shall  now  proceed  to  address  you  from  a  part  of  the
9th  verse  of  the  6th  chapter  of  Micah  :

SERMON.

"  Hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed  It." —
Micah  vi.  9.  This  world  is  not  the  place  of  punish-
ment for  sin  ;  not  the  place  ;  it  may  sometimes  be  a
place,  but  not  usually.  It  Is  very  customary  among
religious  people  to  talk  of  every  accident  which
happens  to  men  In  the  Indulgence  of  sin  as  if  It  were
a  judgment.  The  upsetting  of  a  boat  upon  a  river
on  a  Sunday  Is  assuredly  understood  to  be  a  judg-
ment for  the  sin  of  Sabbath-breakinof.  In  the  acci-
dental  fall  of  a  house,  in  which  persons  were  engaged
In  any  unlawful  occupation,  the  Inference  Is  at  once
drawn  that  the  house  fell  because  they  were  wicked.
Now,  however  some  religionists  may  hope  to  impress
the  people  by  such  childish  stories  as  those,  I,  for
one,  forswear  them  all.  I  believe  what  my  Master
says  Is  true,  when  he  declared,  concerning  the  men


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.  549

Upon  whom  the  tower  of  Siloam  fell,  that  they  were
not  sinners  above  all  the  sinners  that  were  upon  the
face  of  the  earth.  They  were  sinners,  there  is  no
doubt  about  it;  but  the  falling  of  the  w^all  was  not
'  occasioned  by  their  sin,  nor  was  their  premature
death  the  consequence  of  their  excessive  wicked-
ness. Let  me,  how^ever,  guard  this  declaration,  for
there  are  many  who  carry  this  doctrine  to  an
extreme.  Because  God  does  not  usually  visit  each
particular  offence  in  this  life  upon  the  transgressor,
men  are  apt  to  deny  altogether  the  doctrine  of  judg-
ments. But  here  they  are  mistaken.  I  feel  per-
suaded that  there  are  such  things  as  national  judg-
ments, national  chastisements  for  national  sins —
great  blows  from  the  rod  of  God  which  every  wise
man  must  acknowledge  to  be,  either  a  punishment
of  sin  committed,  or  a  monition  to  warn  us  to  a
sense  of  the  consequences  of  sins,  leading  us  by
God's  grace  to  humiliate  ourselves  and  repent  of
our  sin.

O  my  friends,  what  a  rod  is  that  which  has  just
fallen  upon  our  country!  My  poor  words  will  fall
infinitely  short  of  the  fearful  tale  of  misery  and  woe
which  must  be  told  before  you  can  know  how
smartly  God  hath  smitten,  and  how  sternly  he  hath
chidden  us.  We  have  to-day  to  mourn  over  revolted
subjects,  for  to-day  a*part  of  our  fellow-countrymen
are  in  open  arms  against  our  government.  That  of
itself,  were  a  heavy  blow.  Happily  the  government
of  this  land  is  so  constituted  that  we  know  little  of


550  FAST-DAY   SERVICE.

revolutions  except  by  name  ;  but  the  horrors  of  an-
archy, the  terrors  of  a  government  shaken  to  its
foundations,  are  so  great,  that  should  I  preach  alone
upon  that  subject,  you  might  hear  the  rod  and  cry
aloud  beneath  its  strokes.  But  this  is  as  but  the  let-
tine  forth  of  water.  A  flood  succeedeth.  The  men
that  have  revolted  were  our  subjects,  and  I  challenge
all  the  world  to  deny  what  I  am  about  to  say :  they
were  our  subjects  rightly.  Whatever  the  inhabitants
of  India  might  be  (and  undoubtedly  that  people  have
grave  faults  to  find  with  us),  the  Sepoys  had  volun-
tarily given  themselves  up  to  our  dominion,  they  had
themselves  taken  oaths  of  fealty  to  Her  Majesty,
and  their  officers,  and  they  have  no  cause  to  mur-
mur if  thev  are  made  to  endure  the  sentence  uttered
by  a  government  of  which  they  were  the  sworn  and
willing  supporters.  They  were  always  petted,  al-
ways dandled  upon  the  knee  of  favoritism.  Their
revolt  is  not  the  revolt  of  a  nation.  If  India  had  re-
volted, history  might  perhaps  have  taught  us  that
she  had  patriots  in  her  midst,  who  were  delivering
her  from  a  tyrannical  nation  ;  but  in  the  present
case,  it  is  only  men  who  are  impelled  by  a  lust  and
ambition  for  empire  who  have  risen  against  us.  And,
ah!  my  friends,  what  crimes  have  they  committed!
Not  to-day  shall  I  detail  their  acts  of  debauchery,
bloodshed,  and  worse  than  bestiality — this  tongue
will  not  venture  to  utter  what  they  have  dared  to  do.
Ye  would  rise  from  your  seats  and  hiss  me  from  the
pulpit  which   I  now  occupy  if  I   should  but  dare  t:Q


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.  55  I

hint  at  the  crimes  which  have  been  done  of  them,
not  in  secret,  but  in  the  very  streets  of  their  cities.
And,  again,  equally  as  painful,  we  have  now  rebels
to  be  executed.  I  look  upon  every  gallows  as  a
fearful  chastisement.  I  regard  every  gibbet  as  being
a  dreadful  visitation  upon  our  land;  and  I  think  that
whenever  the  arm  of  the  ruler  is  outstretched  for
the  punishment  of  death,  it  must  always  be  looked
upon  by  the  country  as  a  serious  affliction  to  it.
Just  as  the  father  thinks  it  a  high  affliction  to
chastise  his  child,  so  should  a  country  ever  esteem
it  to  be  a  visitation  when  they  have  to  punish,  es-
pecially with  the  punishment  of  death.  Now,  these
men  must  be  punished ;  both  heaven  and  earth  de-
mand it.  I  am  no  soldier:  I  love  not  w^ar ;  I  do  not
believe  that  this  is  a  war  at  all,  in  the  proper  sense
of  the  term.  We  are  not  fiohtinor  with  enemies  ;
our  troops  are  going  forth  against  revolted  subjects
— against  men  who,  by  tlieir  crimes,  by  their  mur-
der, and  by  other  unmentionable  sins,  have  incurred
the  punishment  of  death  ;  and  as  the  arrest  of  a
murderer  by  authority  of  the  law^  is  not  w^ar,  so  the
arrest  of  Indian  Sepoys  and  their  utter  destruction
is  not  war — it  is  what  earth  demands,  and  what  I
believe  God  sanctions.  But  it  is  a  horrible  necessity.
It  is  a  dreadtul  thing  to  think  of  taking  away  the
lives  of  our  fellow-subjects  ;  w^e  must  look  upon  it
as  being  an  affliction :  and,  to-day,  amongst  the
other  evils  that  we  bemoan,  we  must  bemoan  this
—that  the  sword  must  be  taken  out  of  its  sheath,


-  K  ^  FAST- DA  1 '  SER I ^ICE.

to  cut  off  our  fellow-subjects  by  the  thousands.
The  rod,  the  ;W,  the  rod  hath  Indeed  fallen  heavily  ;
no  mortal  tonorue  can  tell  the  anoruish  it  hath  caused,
nor  perhaps  can  we  yet  dream  where  its  ill  effects
shall  end.

Remember,  however,  the  words  of  my  text.  It  is
a  rod  ;  but  it  is  an  appointed  .rod.  Every  deed  that
has  been  done  against  us  has  been  appointed  by
God.  God  is  most  fully  to  be  cleared  from  the  sin
of  it,  but  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  he  has  overruled
and  permitted  it.  The  rod  was  ordained  of  God.
I,  myself,  see  God  everywhere.  I  believe  that  "  the
foreknown  station  of  a  rush  by  the  river  is  as  fixed
as  the  station  of  a  king,  and  the  chaff  from  the
hand  of  the  winnower  as  steered  as  the  stars  in  their
courses."  And  I  see  God  in  this  war.  The  wheels
of  providence  may  revolve  in  a  mysterious  manner,
but  I  am  certain  that  wisdom  is  the  axle  upon  which
they  revolve,  so  that  at  last  it  shall  be  seen  that  God,
who  ordained  the  rod,  only  permitted  It  that  greater
o^ood  mieht  follow,  and  that  his  name  mlcrht  be  ex-
alted  through  the  earth.  The  sin  is  man's  own  deed,
but  the  afflictions  that  we  suffer  throuo^h  it  God  hath
ordained.  Let  us  bow  before  it,  and  let  us  now
hearken  to  the  exhortation  of  the  text — "  Hear  ye
the  rod,  and  him  that  appointed  it."

I  shall  have  your  attention  whilst  as  briefly  as  I
can  I  endeavor  to  have  you  hear  this  rod  of  God.

First,  let  me  remark,  It  would  have  been  as  well
if  w^e  had   heard    this  rod   before  It  fell    upon  us.


•     CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON,  553

God's  rod  by  the  wise  man  may  be  heard  before  It
smiteth.  He  that  understa  ndethGod's  moral  gov-
ernment knows  that  sin  carries  punishment  in  its
bowels.  A  wise  man  believing-  revelation,  could
have  prophesied  that  God  would  visit  us.  The  sins
of  the  o-overnment  of  India  have  been  black  and
deep.  He  who  has  heard  the  shrieks  of  tormented
natives,  who  has  heard  the  well-provoked  cursing
of  dethroned  princes,  might  have  prophesied  that  it
would  not  be  long  before  God  would  unsheath  his
sword  to  avenge  the  oppressed.  With  regard  to
India  itself,  I  am  no  apologist  for  our  dominion  there  ;
with  regard  to  the  Sepoys,  they  are  our  voluntary
subjects,  they  deserve  the  utmost  rigor  of  the  law.
From  their  own  oath  they  were  our  subjects  ;  and  if
they  have  revolted  let  them  suffer  the  punishment
of  their  choosing.  But  had  it  been  the  Indian  nation
that  had  revolted,  I  would  have  prayed  God  that
they  might  have  been  brought  under  British  rule
again,  for  the  sake  of  civilization,  but  I  would  not
have  preached  a  crusade  against  them,  lest  haply
we  should  have  been  smiting  patriots  who  were  but
delivering  an  oppressed  country.  My  brethren,  I
say  it  would  have  been  as  well  if  the  rod  had  been
heard  before  it  fell.  If  in  the  midst  of  sin  the  Indian
government  had  paused,  and  endeavored  to  undo
the  evil.  It  would  have  been  well  for  them.  If
instead  of  following  the  policy  of  creed  they  had
followed  the  policy  of  right,  they  might  have  looked
for  divine  support.     They  never  ought  to  have  toler-


554  FA  ST- DA  Y  SER  VICE.

ated  the  religion  of  the  Hindoos  at  all.  I  believe
myself  (for  it  in  no  way  infringes  the  law  of  right)
entitled  to  my  religion  ;  but  if  my  religion  consisted
in  bestiality,  infanticide,  and  murder  I  should  have
no  right  to  my  religion,  unless  I  were  prepared  to
be  hanged  for  it.  Now,  the  religion  of  the  Hindoos
is  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  mass  of  the  rankest
filth  that  ever  imagination  could  have  conceived.
The  gods  they  worship  are  not  entitled  to  the  least
atom  of  respect.  Had  they  given  a  decent  character
to  their  demons,  we  might  have  tolerated  their  idol-
atry ;  but  when  their  worship  necessitates  everything
that  is  evil,  not  religion,  but  morality  must  put  it
down.  I  do  not  believe  that  in  this  land  there  ever
ought  to  have  been  any  toleration  for  the  Agape-
mone.  A  place  of  lust  and  abomination,  where  sin
is  committed  before  which  God's  sun  might  blush,
never  ought  to  be  tolerated.  Any  religion  that  does
not  infringe  upon  morality  is  beyond  the  force  of
leorislature.  But  when  once  relimous  teachers  teach
•immorality,  and  when  once  the  religion  compels  men
to  sin,  down  with  it ;  no  toleration  to  it.  It  is  impos-
sible that  there  should  be  any  quarter  shown  to  vice,
even  thouo^h  embellished  with  the  name  of  relia-Ion.
If  it  be  any  man's  religion  to  blow  my  brains  out,  I
shall  not  tolerate  it.  If  it  be  any  man's  religion  to
meet  me  as  the  thugs  do,  and  garrote  me,  and
murder  me,  I  shall  not  tolerate  this  thugism.  If  it
be  a  man's  religion  to  commit  bestial  acts  in  public,  I
for  one  would   touch  his  conscience,  but  believing


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.


555


that  he  has  none,  I  would  touch  him  somewhere  else.
Such  a  religion  as  the  religion  of  the  Hindoos,  the
Indian  government  were  bound,  as  in  the  sight  of
God,  to  put  down  with  all  the  strength  of  their
hand.  But  they  have  allowed  it,  in  some  cases  they
have  even  aided  and  abetted  their  filthy  deeds  ;  and
now  God  visits  them ;  and  I  repeat,  it  would  have
been  well,  if  they  had  heard  the  rod  before  it  fell ;
they  might  perhaps  have  avoided  all  this  evil,  and
certainly  they  w^ould  have  avoided  the  remorse  which
some  of  them  must  feel  in  having  brought  it  upon
themselves.

But  it  has  fallen,  the  rod  has  smitten  ;  the  scourge
has  plowed  deep  furrows  on  India's  back.  What
then  ?  "  Hear  ye  the  rod,"  that  has  fallen.  Now,  it
is  an  opinion  published  by  authority — and  who  am  I
that  I  should  dispute  the  great  authorities  of  Eng-
land ? — that  one  part  of  the  reason  for  this  dread-
ful visitation  is  the  sin  of  the  people  of  England
themselves.  We  are  exhorted  this  day  to  humble
ourselves  for  sin.  Granting^  me  that  as  beingf  a
truth — and  mark,  I  am  not  the  originator  of  it ;  It  Is
in  the  Proclamation — who  am  I,  that  I  should  dispute
such  a  high  authority  as  th-at  ?  It  Is  our  sin  that  has
brought  it  on  us,  so  they  say — what  then  are  our
sins  ?  Now,  I  will  be  honest  with  you — as  honest
as  I  can,  and  I  will  try  and  tell  you.  What  are  the
most  glaring  sins  which,  If  it  be  true  that  God  Is
now  punishing  us,  are  the  most  likely  to  have
brought  this  visitation  upon  us  ?


556  FAST-DAY  SER  VICE.

There  are  sins  in  the  community  that  never
ought  to  have  been  allowed.  Oh,  Britain,  weep  for
deeds  which  thy  governors  have  not  yet  strength  of
mind  to  stop.  We  have  long  been  allowing  the  in-
famous nuisances  of  Hollywell  street ;  bless  God
they  are  pretty  well  done  for !  But  now  what  do
I  see  every  night?  If  I  return  from  preaching  in
the  country,  in  the  Haymarketand  in  Regent  street,
what  stares  me  before  my  eyes  ?  If  there  be  a
crime  for  which  God  will  visit  England,  it  is  the  sin  of
allowing  infamy  to  walk  before  our  eyes  thus  pub-
licly. I  do  not  know  whose  fault  it  is — some  say  it
is  the  fault  of  the  police ;  it  is  somebody's  fault  that
I  do  not  know,  and  against  that  somebody  I  do  now
most  solemnly  protest.  It  is  a  most  fearful  thing
that  those  who  are  honest  and  moral  cannot  walk  in
the  streets  without  being  insulted  by  sin  in  the  robes
of  the  harlot.  My  voice  perhaps  this  day  may  reach
some  who  have  power  to  repeat  this  protest  power-
fully and  successfully.  I  see  before  me  gentlemen
who  are  the  representatives  of  the  press,  I  believe
they  will  do  their  duty  in  that  matter;  and  if  they
will  sting  as  some  of  them  can  sting,  right  sharply,
they  perhaps  may  be  able  to  sting  a  little  virtue  into
some  of  our  Governors,  and  that  will  be  a  good
thing.  But  I  do  protest  that  this  has  been  one  of
the  causes  why  God  has  visited  us,  if  indeed  our
sins  have  brought  this  evil  upon  us,  as  I  verily  be-
lieve. Look  ye  too,  men  and  brethren,  at  some  of
those  amusements  of  yours,  in  which  ye  are  wont  to


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.  t^t^j

indulge.  God  forbid  I  should  deny  you  those  of
your  amusements  which  are  innocent,  but  I  must
maintain  that  they  should  always  be  moral ;  when
we  know  that  lords  and  ladies  of  the  land  have  sat
in  playhouses  and  listened  to  plays  that  were  a  long
way  from  decent,  it  is  time  that  some  voice  should
be  lifted  up  against  them.  These  are  glaring  sins.
I  am  not  raking  now  for  private  faults  ;  we  have  had
these  things  before  our  eyes,  and  there  have  been
some  that  have  dared  to  protest  against  them  long
ago.  I  say,  these  sins  of  the  community,  in  part,
have  brought  the  rod  upon  us.

But,  my  friends,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  our
class  sins  are  the  most  grievous.  Behold  this  day
the  sins  of  the  rich.  How  are  the  poor  oppressed  ?
How  are  tlie  needy  downtrodden  ?  In  many  a  place
the  average  wage  of  men  is  far  below  their  value  to
their  masters.  In  this  age  there  is  many  a  great
man  who  looks  upon  his  fellows  as  only  stepping-
stones  to  wealth.  He  builds  a  factory  as  he  would
make  a  cauldron.  He  is  about  to  make  a  brew  for
his  own  wealth.  "  Pitch  him  in  ;  he  is  only  a  poor
clerk,  he  can  live  on  a  hundred  a  year.  Put  him  in  !
There  is  a  poor  time-keeper  ;  he  has  a  large  family ;
it  does  not  matter;  a  man  can  be  had  for  less.  In
with  him  !  Here  are  the  tens,  the  luindreds  and  the
thousands  that  must  do  the  work.  Put  them  in  !
Heap  the  fire;  boil  the  cauldron;  stir  them  up;
never  mind  their  cries.  The  hire  of  the  laborers
kept  back  may  go  up  to  heaven  !     It  does  not  mat-


^58  PAST-DAY  SEkVICK.

ter,  the  millions  of  gold  are  safe.  The  law  of  de-
mand and  supply  is  with  us,  who  is  he  that  would
interfere  ?  Who  shall  dare  to  prevent  the  grinding
of  the  faces  of  the  poor?  Cotton-lords  and  great
masters  ought  to  have  power  to  do  what  they  like
with  the  people,  ought  they  not  ? "  Ah !  but  ye
great  men  of  the  earth,  there  is  a  God,  and  that  God
has  said  he  executeth  righteousness  and  judgment
for  all  that  are  oppressed,  and  yet  the  sempstress  in
her  garret,  and  yet  the  tailor  in  his  den,  and  yet  the
artisan  in  his  crowded  factory,  and  yet  the  servants
who  earn  your  wealth,  who  have  to  groan  under
your  oppression,  shall  get  the  ear  of  God,  and  he
will  visit  you.  "  Hear  ye  the  rod."  It  is  for  this
the  rod  falleth  on  you.

Mark,  again,  the  sins  of  merchants.  Was  there
ever  an  ao-e  when  the  merchants  of  Eno^land  had
more  fallen  from  their  integrity  ?  The  mass  of  them,
I  believe,  are  honest  to  the  core,  but  I  do  not  know
who  amonof  them  are  so.  We  can  trust  none  in
these  times.  Ye  heap  up  your  companies,  and  ye
delude  your  myriads  ;  ye  gather  the  money  of  fools  ;
ye  scatter  it  to  the  winds  of  heaven,  and  when  the
poor  call  upon  you  ye  tell  them  that  it  is  gone:  but
where  ?  ■  Oh,  England,  thou  wast  once  true,  upright,
honest ;  men  could  not  rightly  call  thee  then  "  Per-
fidious Albion  ;  "  but  now,  oh,  Britain,  alas,  for  thee  !
Unless  thou  dost  recover  thyself,  who  can  trust
thee  ?     God  will  visit  the  nation  for  this,  and  it  shall


CHARLES  H.    SPURGEON.  559

be  seen  that  this  alone  is  one  of  the  thinors  which
God  would  have  us  hear  when  we  hear  the  rod.

There  are  many  of  you  that  are  poor.  I  saw  you
smile  when  I  spoke  to  the  rich ;  I  will  have  at  you
also.  If  we  are  to  humble  ourselves  this  day  as  a
nation,  ye  have  cause  also  to  humble.  Ah,  my  God,
what  multitudes  there  are  of  men  who  deserve  but
little  of  their  employers,  for  they  are  eye-servers,
men-pleasers,  and  do  not  with  singleness  of  heart
serve  the  Lord.  Were  men  better  Workmen,  their
masters  w^ould  be  better.  There  are  hundreds  of
you  that  are  here  to-day  w^io  are  the  best  hands  in
all  the  world  to  prop  up  walls  when  you  ought  to  be
busy  at  your  own  work — who  when  your  time  is
bought  and  paid  for  steal  it  for  something  else.
And,  how  many  there  are  in  what  are  called  the
lower  ranks — and  God  foro^ive  the  man  that  invented
that  word,  for  we  are  none  of  us  lower  than  the
other  before  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth — how  many
are  there  that  do  not  know  what  it  is  to  look  up  to
God,  and  say,  "  Though  he  has  made  me  a  servant,
I  wall  discharge  my  duty,  and  I  will  serve  my  master
and  serve  my  God  with  all  my  might."  Many  are
the  sins  of  the  poor.  Humble  yourselves  with  the
rich,  bow  your  heads  and  weep  for  your  iniquities;
for  these  things  God  doth  visit  us,  and  ye  should
hear  the  rod.

It  is  impossible  for  me  to-day  to  enter  into  all  the
sins  of  illiberality,  of  deceit,  of  bigotry,  of  lascivious-
ness,  of  carnality,  of  pride,  of  covetousness,  and  of


560  FAST-DAY  SERVICE.

laziness  which  Infest  this  land.  I  have  tried  to  Indi-
cate some  of  the  chief  sins,  and  I  pray  God  humble
us  all  for  them.

And  now  "  Hear  ye  the  rod."  Oh,  church  of  God,
the  rod  has  fallen,  and  the  church  ought  to  hear  it.
I  am  afraid  that  It  Is  the  church  that  has  been  the
greatest  sinner.  Do  I  mean  by  "  the  chiirch  "  that
established  by  law?  No,  I  mean  the  Christian
Church  as  a  body.  We,  I  believe,  have  been  remiss
in  our  duty  ;  for  many  and  many  a  year  pulpits  never
condescended  to  men  of  low  estate.  Our  ministers
were  great  and  haughty ;  they  understood  the  polish
of  rhetoric ;  they  had  all  the  grandeur  of  logic ;  to
the  people  they  were  blind  guides  and  dumb  dogs,
for  the  people  knew  not  what  they  said,  neither  did
they  regard  them ;  the  churches  themselves  slum-
bered ;  they  wrapped  themselves  in  a  shroud  of
orthodoxy,  and  they  slept  right  on,  and  whilst  Satan
w'as  devouring  the  world  and  taking  his  prey  the
church  sat  still,  and  said,  "Who  is  my  neighbor?"
and  did  not  arouse  herself  to  serve  her  God.  I  do
hope  that  we  have  already  seen  the  beginning  of  a
revival.  The  last  year  has  seen  more  preaching
than  any  year  since  the  days  of  the  apostles.  We
are  stlrrlncr  In  Raorored  Schools,  and  in  various  efforts
for  doing  good ;  but  still  the  church  is  only  half
awake;  I  fear  she  still  slumbers.  Oh,  Church  of
God,  awake  !  awake  !  awake  !  for  verily  the  rod  has
fallen  for  thy  sake.  "  Hear  thou  the  rod,  and  him
that  hath  appointed  it."


CHARLES  H.  SPURGE  ON.  56 1

III.  We  have  had  many  rods,  friends  ;  we  have
had  many  great  afflictions,  and  we  did  bear  them  for
a  time ;  and  now  I  close  my  sermon  by  saying,
"  Hear  ye  the  rod,"  when  the  rod  shall  again  be  still.
We  trust  that  in  a  little  while  our  soldiers  will  carve
us  out  peace  and  victory  with  their  triumphant
swords  ;  we  trust  that,  perhaps  this  very  day,  a  great
fight  is  being  fought,  and  a  great  victory  being  won.
I  seem  to  hear  to-day  the  shout  of  the  triumphant
warrior ;  I  think  I  hear  the  trump  of  victory  even
now.  The  hour  of  prayer  is  often  the  hour  of  de-
liverance. At  any  rate  we  hope  that  ere  long  this
black  cloud  will  be  overblown,  and  then  I  fear  you
will  all  forget  it.  You  will  pray  to-day ;  will  you
pray  when  victory  comes  ?  You  will  buy  some  fire-
works, will  you  not?  That  is  how  you  will  thank
God !  You  had  a  victory  over  a  potent  enemy,  and
peace  was  established.  Your  votive  offerings  con-
sisted of  rockets  and  illuminations — orrand  offerinors
to  the  Dread  Supreme  !  If  a  heathen  were  here,  he
w^ould  say,  "  Their  God  Is  the  God  of  humiliation,
not  the  God  of  victory ;  their  God  Is  a  God  of
trouble,  certainly  not  the  God  of  blessings,  for  they
forget  him  when  they  receive  deliverance."  I  re-
member when  last  time  the  cholera  swept  through
your  streets  ye  hurried  to  your  churches,  and  ye
prayed ;  terror  sat  upon  your  countenances  and
many  of  you  cried  aloud  for  deliverance.  It  came.
What  did  you  do?  Alas!  for  your  piety.  It  was
as  the  morning  cloud,  and  as  tlie  early  dew  it  passed

36


562  ^AS  T-DA  V  SEA'  VICE.

away.  It  will  be  so  again.  It  is  but  as  the  lashing
of  the  water ;  it  is  smitten,  but  it  soon  recovers  itself,
and  all  marks  are  effaced.  It  is  so  with  this  land ;  I
fear  it  is  so  with  each  of  us  to  a  desfree.  How  often
have  you  and  I  been  laid  upon  our  beds  with  cholera,
or  with  fever,  or  with  some  other  disease  which
threatened  to  take  us  away  !  We  prayed  ;  we  sent
for  the  minister;  we  devoted  ourselves  to  God;  we
vowed  if  he  would  spare  us  we  would  live  better.
Here  thou  art,  my  hearer,  just  what  thou  wast  before
thy  sickness.  Thou  hast  forgotten  thy  vow ;  but
God  hath  not  forgotten  it.  Thy  resolutions  were
filed  in  heaven,  and  in  the  day  of  judgment  God
shall  take  them  forth  and  say,  "  Here  is  one  solemn
covenant  broken  ;  here  is  another  vow  forgotten,
another  resolution  made  in  sickness  broken  after
recovery ! "

I  do  think  that  to-day  will  be  a  most  solemn  mock-
ery if  our  humiliation  ends  to-day.  With  some  of
you  it  will  not  even  begin  to-day,  and  therefore  it
will  not  end,  for  it  is  not  begun.  But  the  mass  who
will  pray  to-day,  will  they  pray  in  a  week  ?  Not
they ;  they  will  go  their  way,  to  heap  again  the
fagots  of  their  sins  upon  the  pile  of  vengeance,  and
still  stand  by  and  weep,  because  the  fire  is  burning,
the  fire  which  they  themselves  have  kindled.  Oh  !
my  hearers,  permit  me  to  charge  home  to  your
hearts  ;  and  would  God  that  he  would  make  the
charge  of  my  language  against  your  consciences  as
heavy  as  the  charge  of  British  soldiery  against  the


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.  t^^-i^

enemy.  How  many  of  you  have  been  awakened,
convinced  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment !
How  many  times  have  you  vowed  you  would  repent !
How-  many  times  have  you  declared  that  you  did
hear  the  rod,  and  that  you  would  turn  to  God  !  And
yet  you  have  been  liars  to  the  Almighty ;  you  have
defrauded  the  Most  High  ;  and  whilst  the  bill  is  due,
it  still  stands  dishonored.  Tremble !  God  may
smite  thee  yet ;  and  if  to-day  you  are  despisers  of
Christ,  remember,  you  have  no  guarantee  that  you
will  be  in  this  world  another  hour.  You  may  before
this  sun  has  set  stand  before  your  Maker's  bar.
What  then  ?  What  then  ?  What  then  ?  To  perish
forever  is  no  llofht  matter  ;  to  be  cast  into  the  flames
of  hell  is  no  little  consideration.  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,
turn  ye;  why  will  ye  die,  Oh  house  of  Israel!
Repent !  "  The  times  of  your  ignorance  God  winked
at,  but  now  commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to
repent !  And  remember  that  when  he  gives  repent-
ance in  faith,  he  has  appended  the  blessing  to  them.
"  Jesus  Christ  of  the  seed  of  David  "  was  nailed  to  a
cross  ;  He  died  that  we  might  not  die,  and  to  every
believer  Heaven's  gate  is  open,  to  every  penitent  the
path  to  Paradise  is  free.  Sinner  !  dost  thou  believe ;
If  so,  Christ  hath  blotted  out  thy  sins.  Be  happy !
So!  doth  thou  repent?  Thou  art  safe.  God  has
helped  thee  to  repent,  and  in  as  much  as  he  hath
done  that  he  hath  proved  that  he  loves  thee.

Oh  !  if  I  miorht  but  have  some  souls  won  to  Christ
to-day,  what  would  I  give  ?     What  is  all  this  great


rg.  FAST-DAY  SERVICE.

Catherine  to  me  ?  It  is  an  extra  labor,  that  is  all.
For  this  I  do  not  labor.  God  is  my  witness,  I  sought
you  not;  never  once  have  I  said  a  thing  to  court  a
smile  from  any  man.  When  God  first  sent  me  to
the  ministry  he  bade  me  fear  no  man,  and  I  have  not
yet  met  the  man  to  whom  I  have  feared  to  tell  of
God's  truth.  Nor  you  have  I  sought  to  please,  nor
you  have  I  sought  to  gather  here.  I  would  preach
the  gospel  ;  may  God  give  me  some  souls  as  my
reward !  And  if  but  one  poor  sinner  shall  look  to
Jesus,  clap  your  wings,  ye  angels !  enough  is  done,
for  God  is  honored.

I  have  done  my  sermon,  but  I  want  to  make  an
appeal  to  you  to  give  liberally.

Lives  there  a  man  in  England  who  will  this  day
refuse  his  help  to  those  of  his  countrymen  who  have
suffered  ?  No,  there  does  not  live  such  a  man —
not  such  a  Briton.  Is  there  a  miserable  miscreant
without  a  heart,  who  will,  when  God  has  given  him
enough,  shut  up  his  bowels  of  compassion  against
those  whose  sons  and  daugrhters  have  been  mur-
dered,  and  who  themselves  have  escaped  as  by  the
skin  of  their  teeth  ?  No,  I  will  not  slander  you  by
such  a  supposition.  I  cannot  think  that  I  have  such
a  monster  here.  When  the  box  shall  pass  around,  give
— give  as  you  can  afford ;  if  it  be  a  penny,  let  the
workingman  give.  You  that  are  rich  must  not  give
pence,  however.  Many  a  man  has  said,  ''  There  is
my  mite."  He  was  worth  a  hundred  thousand
pounds,  and  it  was  not  a  mite  at  all.     If  he  had  given


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.  5^5

a  thousand  it  would  only  have  been  a  mite  to  him.
Give  as  ye  can  afford  it.  May  God  be  pleased  to
grant  a  liberal  spirit.

The  followinof  chorus  was  then  sunof:

Glory,  honor,  praise,  and  power,
Be  unto  the  Lamb  forever;
Jesus  Christ  is  our  Redeemer,

Hallehijah,  Amen.

After  which,  the  benediction  having  been  pronounced
the  service  terminated.

There  were  upwards  of  twenty-four  thousand
persons  present  at  this  service  ;  and  the  amount
collected  towards  the  Indian  Relief  Fund  amounted
to  nearly  ^500,  of  which  ^25  was  given  by  Miss
Nightingale.  The  Crystal  Palace  Company  con-
tributed ^200  in  addition — making  a  total  of  nearly
^700.

"  To  God  Be  All  the  Glory."


THE  BIBLE.

A    SERMON     DELIVERED    ON     MARCH      1 8,      1 855,     BY

C.    H.    SPURGEON.

"  I  have  written  to  him  the  great  things  of  My  law,  but  they  were  counted
as  a  strange  thing." — Hosea  viii.  12.

'THIS  is  God's  complaint  against  Ephraim.  It  is
-*-  no  mean  proof  of  his  goodness  that  he  stoops
to  rebuke  his  erring  creatures;  it  is  a  great  argu-
ment of  his  gracious  disposition  that  he  bows  his
head  to  notice  terrestrial  affairs.  He  micrht,  if  he
pleased,  wrap  himself  with  night  as  with  a  garment ;
he  might  put  the  stars  around  his  wrist  for  brace-
lets, and  bind  the  suns  around  his  brow  for  a  coro-
net ;  he  might  dwell  alone,  far,  far  above  this  world,
up  in  the  seventh  heaven,  and  look  down  with  calm
and  silent  indifference  upon  all  the  doings  of  his
creatures ;  he  might  do  as  the  heathens  supposed
their  Jove  did,  sit  in  perpetual  silence,  sometimes
nodding  his  awful  head  to  make  the  Fates  move  as
he  pleased,  but  never  taking  thought  of  the  little
things  of  earth,  disposing  of  them  as  beneath  his
notice,  enorossed  within  his  own  beinor  swallowed
up  within  himself,  living  alone  and  retired  ;  and  I,  as
one  of  his  creatures,  might  stand  by  night  upon  a
mountain  top,  and  look  upon  the  silent  stars  and
say,  '*  Ye  are  the  eyes  of  God,  but  ye  look  not  down
566


CHARLkS  H.    SPURGE  ON.  S^7

on  me  ;  your  light  is  the  gilt  of  his  omnipotence,  but
your  rays  are  not  smiles  of  love  to  me.  God,  the
mighty  Creator,  has  forgotten  me ;  I  am  a  despica-
ble drop  in  the  ocean  of  creation,  a  sere  leaf  in  the
forest  of  beings,  an  atom  in  the  mountain  of  exist-
ence. He  knows  me  not ;  I  am  alone,  alone,  alone."
But  it  is  not  so,  beloved.  Our  God  is  of -another
order.  He  notices  every  one  of  us.  There  is  not
a  sparrow  or  a  worm  but  is  found  in  his  decrees.
There  is  not  a  person  upon  whom  his  eye  is  not
fixed.  Our  most  secret  acts  are  known  to  him.
Whatsoever  we  do  or  bear  or  suffer,  the  eye  of  God
still  rests  upon  us,  and  we  are  beneath  his  smile —
for  we  are  his  people  ;  or  beneath  his  frown — for  we
have  erred  from  him.

Oh,  how  ten-thousand-fold  merciful  is  God,  that
looking  down  upon  the  race  of  man,  he  does  not
smite  it  out  of  existence.  We  see  from  our  text
that  God  looks  upon  man,  for  he  says  of  Ephraim,
"  I  have  written  to  him  the  great  things  of  My  law,
but  they  were  counted  as  a  strange  thing."  But  see
how  when  he  observes  the  sin  of  man,  he  does  not
dash  him  away  and  spurn  him  with  his  foot ;  he  does
not  shake  him  by  the  neck  over  the  gulf  of  hell,
until  his  brain  doth  reel,  and  then  drop  him  forever,
but  rather  he  comes  down  from  heaven  to  plead  with
his  creatures;  he  argues  with  them;  he  puts  him-
self, as  it  were,  upon  a  level  with  the  sinner,  states
his  grievances,  and  pleads  his  claim.  O  Ephraim,
I  have  written  unto  thee  the  great  things  of  My  law,


^6S  THE   BIBLE.

but  they  have  been  unto  thee  as  a  strange  thing !  1
come  here  to-night  in  God's  stead,  my  friends,  to
plead  with  you  as  God's  ambassador,  to  charge  many
ot  you  with  a  sin  ;  to  lay  it  to  your  hearts  by  the
power  of  the  Spirit,  so  that  you  may  be  convinced
of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  a  judgment  to  come.
The  crime  I  charge  you  with  is  the  sin  of  the  text.
God  has  written  to  you  the  great  things  of  his  law,
but  they  have  been  unto  you  as  a  strange  thing.  It
is  concerning  this  blessed  book,  the  Bible,  that  I
mean  to  speak  to-night.  Here  lies  my  text, — this
Word  of  God.  Here  is  the  theme  of  my  discourse
— a  theme  which  demands  more  eloquence  than  I
possess ;  a  subject  upon  which  a  thousand  orators
might  speak  at  once  ;  a  mighty,  vast,  incomprehen-
sive  theme,  which  might  engross  all  eloquence
throughout  eternity,  and  still  it  would  remain  unex-
hausted.

Concerning  the  Bible  I  have  three  things  to  say
to-night,  and  they  are  all  in  my  text ;  first,  its  author,
"/  have  written  ;  "  secondly,  its  subjects, — the  great
things  of  God's  law  ;  and  thirdly,  its  common  treat-
ment,— it  has  been  accounted  by  most  men  a  strange
thinor.

I.  First,  then,  concerning  this  book,  who  is  the
author  ?  The  text  says  that  it  is  God.  "/  have  writ-
ten to  him  the  great  things  of  My  law."  Here  lies
my  Bible — who  wrote  it?  I  open  it,  and  I  find  it
consists  of  a  series  of  tracts.  The  first  five  tracts
were  written  by  a  man  called  Moses.     I  turn  on  and


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.


509


I  find  others.     Sometimes   I   see    David  is  the  pen-
man, at  other  times  Solomon.      Hear  I   read  Micah,
then  Amos,   then   Hosea.     As  I  turn  further  on,  to
the  more  luminous  pages  of  the  New  Testament,  I
see   Matthew,   Mark,   Luke  and  John,  Paul,  Peter,
James,  and  others  ;  but  when  I  shut  up  the  book,  I
ask  myself,  who  is  the  author  of  it?      Do  these  men
jointly  claim   the  authorship  ?     Are  they  the  com-
positors of  this  massive  volume  ?     Do  they,  between
themselves,   divide  the   honor  ?     Our  holy  religion
answers,  "  No  !  "'    This  volume  is  the  writing  of  the
living    God;    each   letter  was    penned  with  an  Al-
mighty finger  ;  each   word   in  it  dropped   from  the
Everlasting  lips  ;   each  sentence  was  dictated  by  the
Holy  Spirit.     Albeit  that  Moses  was  employed  to
write   his    histories  with   his   fiery  pen,  God  guided
that  pen.     It  may  be  that  David  touched  his  harp
and   let  sweet  psalms  of  melody  drop  from  his  fin-
gers,   but    God  moved    his   hands   over  the  living
strings  of  his  golden  harp.     It  may  be  that  Solomon
sanof  canticles   of  love,  or  o^ave  forth  words   of  con-
summate  wisdom,  but  God  directed  his  lips,  and  made
the  preacher  eloquent.     If  I  follow  the  thundering
Nahum  when  his  horses  plough  the  waters,  or  Hab-
akkuk  when  he  sees  the  tents  of  Cushan  in  afflic-
tion ;  if  I  read  Malachi,  when   the   earth  is  burning
like  an  oven  ;  if  I  turn  to  the  smooth  page  of  John,
who   tells   of  love,  or  the  rugged,  fiery  chapters  of
Peter,  who  speaks  of  the  fire  devouring  God's  ene-
mies ;  if  I  turn  to  Jude,  who  launches  forth  anathe-


e^5  ^-^^   BIBLE,

mas  upon  the  foes  of  God, — everywhere  I  find  God
speaking  ;  it  is  God's  voice,  not  man's ;  the  words
are  God's  w^ords,  the  words  of  the  Eternal,  the  In-
visible, the  Almighty,  the  Jehovah  of  this  earth.
This  Bible  is  God's  Bible  ;  and  when  I  see  it  I  seem
to  hear  a  voice  springing  up  from  it,  saying,  ''  I  am
the  book  of  God :  man,  read  me.  I  am  God's  writ-
ing :  open  my  leaf,  for  I  was  penned  by  God :  read
it,  for  he  is  my  author,  and  you  will  see  him  visible
and  manifest  everywhere."  *' I  have  written  to  him
the  great  things  of  My  law."

How  do  you  know  that  God  wrote  the  book  ?
That  is  just  what  I  shall  not  try  to  prove  to  you.  I
could,  if  I  pleased,  to  a  demonstration,  for  there  are
arguments  enoucrh,  there  are  reasons  enouo^h,  did  I
care  to  occupy  your  time  to-night  in  bringing  them
before  you  ;  but  I  shall  do  no  such  thing.  I  might
tell  you,  if  I  pleased,  that  the  grandeur  of  the  style  is
above  that  of  any  mortal  writing,  and  that  all  the
poets  who  have  ever  existed  could  not,  with  all  their
works  united,  give  us  such  sublime  poetry  and  such
mighty  language  as  is  to  be  found  in  the  Scriptures.
I  might  insist  upon  it  that  the  subjects  of  which  it
treats  are  beyond  the  human  intellect;  that  man
could  never  have  invented  the  orrand  doctrines  of  a
Trinity  in  the  Godhead  ;  man  could  not  have  told
us  anything  of  the  creation  of  the  universe ;  he
could  never  have  been  the  author  of  the  majestic
idea  of  Providence,  that  all  things  are  ordered
according  to  the  will  of  one  great  Supreme  Being,


CHARLES  tf.   SPURGEO]^.  t^JX

and  work  together  for  good.  I  might  enlarge  upon
its  honesty,  since  it  tells  the  faults  of  its  writers  ;  its
unity,  since  it  never  belies  itself;  its  master  sim-
plicity, that  he, who  runs  may  read  it;  and  I  might
mention  a  hundred  more  things,  which  would  all
prove  to  a  demonstration  that  the  book  is  of  God.
But  I  come  not  here  to  prove  it.  I  am  a  Christian
minister,  and  you  are  Christians,  or  profess  to  be
so  ;  and  there  is  never  any  necessity  for  Christian
ministers  to  make  a  point  of  bringing  forth  infidel
arguments  in  order  to  answer  them.  It  is  the
greatest  folly  in  the  world.  Infidels,  poor  creatures,
do  not  know  their  own  arguments  till  we  tell  them,
and  then  they  glean  their  blunted  shafts  to  shoot
them  at  the  shield  of  truth  again.  It  is  folly  to  bring
forward  these  firebrands  of  hell,  even  if  we  are  well
prepared  to  quench  them.  Let  men  of  the  world
learn  error  of  themselves ;  do  not  let  us  be  propa-
gators of  their  falsehoods.  True,  there  are  some
preachers  who  are  short  of  stock,  and  want  them  to
fill  up  !  But  God^s  own  chosen  men  need  not  do
that;  they  are  taught  of  God,  and  God  supplies
them  with  matter,  with  language,  and  with  power.
There  may  be  some  one  here  to-night  who  has  come
without  faith,  a  man  of  reason,  a  free-thinker.  With
him  I  have  no  argument  at  all.  I  profess  not  to
stand  here  as  a  controversialist,  but  as  a  preacher  of
things  that  I  know  and  feel.  But  I  too  have  been
like  him.  There  was  an  evil  hour  when  once  I
slipped    the  anchor  of  my  faith  ;  I   cut  the  cable  of


572


THE  BIBLE.


my  belief;  I  no  longer  moored  myself  hard  by  die
coasts  of  reveladon  ;  1  allowed  my  vessel  to  drift
before  the  wind ;  I  said  to  Reason,  "  Be  thou  my
captain  ;  "  I  said  to  my  own  brain,  "  Be  thou  my  rud-
der ; "  and  I  started  on  my  mad  voyage.  Thank
God  it  is  all  over  now ;  but  I  will  tell  you  its  brief
history.  It  was  one  hurried  sailing  over  the  tem-
pestuous ocean  of  free-thought.  I  went  on,  and  as
I  went  the  skies  began  to  darken ;  but  to  make  up
for  that  deficiency,  the  waters  were  brilliant  with
coruscations  of  brilliancy.  I  saw  sparks  flying  up-
wards that  pleased  me,  and  I  thought,  *'  If  this  be
free-thought,  it  is  a  happy  thing.*'  My  thoughts
seemed  gems,  and  I  scattered  stars  with  both  my
hands.  But  anon,  instead  of  these  coruscations  of
glory,  I  saw  grim  fiends,  fierce  and  horrible,  start  up
from  the  waters,  and  as  I  dashed  on  they  gnashed
their  teeth  and  grinned  upon  me  ;  they  seized  the
prow  of  my  ship,  and  dragged  me  on,  while  I,  in
part,  gloried  at  the  rapidity  of  my  motion,  but  yet
shuddered  at  the  terrific  rate  with  which  I  passed
the  old  landmarks  of  my  faith.  As  I  hurried  forward
with  an  awful  speed,  I  began  to  doubt  m.y  very  ex-
istence ;  I  doubted  if  there  were  a  world,  I  doubted
if  there  were  such  a  thing  as  myself.  I  went  to  the
very  verge  of  the  dreary  realms  of  unbelief.  I  went
to  the  very  bottom  of  the  sea  of  infidelity.  I  doubted
everything.  But  here  the  Devil  foiled  himself ;  for
the  very  extravagance  of  the  doubt  proved  its  absurd-
ity.    Just  when  I  saw  the  bottom  of  that  sea,  there


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.  5^3

came  a  voice,  which  said,  "And  can  this  doubt  be
true  ?  "  At  this  very  thought  I  awoke.  I  started
from  that  death-dream,  which  God  knows  miorht  have
damned  my  soul  and  ruined  this  my  body,  if  I  had
not  awoke.  When  I  arose  Faith  took  the  helm  ;
from  that  moment  1  doubted  not.  Faith  steered
me  back  ;  Faith  cried,  "  Away,  away  !  "  I  cast  my
anchor  on  Calvary  ;  lifted  my  eye  to  God,  and  here
I  am,  alive  and  out  of  hell.  Therefore  I  speak  what
I  do  know.  I  have  sailed  that  perilous  voyage  ;  I
have  come  safe  to  land.  Ask  me  ae^in  to  be  an
infidel !  No  ;  I  have  tried  it ;  it  was  sweet  at  first,
but  bitter  afterwards.  Now,  lashed  to  God's  gospel
more  firmly  than  ever,  standing  as  on  a  rock  of
adamant,  I  defy  the  arguments  of  Hell  to  move  me,
for  "  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  per-
suaded that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have
committed  unto  Him."  But  I  shall  neither  plead
nor  argue  this  night.  You  profess  to  be  Christian
men,  or  else  you  would  not  be  here.  Your  profes-
sions may  be  lies  ;  what  you  say  you  are  may  be  the
very  contrary  to  what  you  really  are  ;  but  still  I
suppose  you  all  admit  that  this  is  the  Word  of  God.
A  thought  or  two  then  upon  it.  'T  have  written  to
him  the  great  things  of  My  law."

First,  my  friends,  stand  over  this  volume  and  ad-
mire its  authority.  This  is  no  common  book.  It  is
not  the  sayings  of  the  sages  of  Greece  ;  here  are  not
tlie  utterances  of  philosophers  of  past  ages.  If  these
words  were  written  by  man,  we  might  reject  them  ;


574  THE   BIBLE.

but  oh,  let  me  think  the  solemn  thought — that  this
book  is  God's  handwriting,  that  these  words  are
God's.  Let  me  look  at  its  date :  it  is  dated  from
the  hills  ot  heaven.  Let  me  look  at  its  letters  :  they
flash  glory  on  my  eye.  Let  me  read  the  chapters  :
they  are  big  with  meaning  and  mysteries  unknown.
Let  me  turn  over  the  prophecies  :  they  are  pregrlant
with  unthougrht-of  wonders.  Oh,  Book  of  books !
And  wast  thou  written  by  my  God  ?  Then  will  I
bow  before  thee.  Thou  Book  of  vast  authority,  thou
art  a  proclamation  from  the  Emperor  of  Heaven  :
far  be  it  from  me  to  exercise  my  reason  in  contra-
dicting thee.  Reason  !  thy  place  is  to  stand  and  find
out  what  this  volume  means,  not  to  tell  what  this
book  ought  to  say.  Come  thou,  my  reason,  my  in-
tellect, sit  thou  down  and  listen,  for  these  words  are
the  words  of  God.  I  do  not  know  how  to  enlarcre
on  this  thought.  Oh,  if  you  could  ever  remember
that  this  Bible  was  actually  and  really  written  by
God  !  Oh,  if  ye  had  been  let  into  the  secret  cham-
bers of  heaven,  if  ye  had  beheld  God  grasping  His
pen  and  writing  down  these  letters,  then  surely  ye
would  respect  them.  But  they  are  just  as  much
God's  handwriting  as  if  you  had  seen  God  write
them.  This  Bible  is  a  book  of  authority  ;  it  is  an
authorized  book,  for  God  has  written  it.  Oh,  trem-
ble, tremble,  lest  any  of  you  despise  it !  Mark  its
audiority,  for  it  is  the  Word  of  God.

Then,  since  God  wrote  it,  mark  its  truthfubiess .  If
I  had  written  it,  there  would  be  worms  of  critics  who


CHARLES  H.   SPURGEON.  575

would  at  once  swarm  on  it,  and  would  cover  It  with
their  evil  spawn ;  had  I  written  it,  there  would  be
men  who  would  pull  it  to  pieces  at  once,  and  perhaps
quite  right  too.  But  this  is  the  Word  of  God.
Come,  search,  ye  critics,  an'd  find  a  flaw;  examine  it
from  its  Genesis  to  its  Revelation,  and  find  an  error.
This  is  a  vein  of  pure  gold,  unalloyed  by  quartz  or
any  earthy  substance.  This  is  a  star  without  a
speck  ;  a  sun  without  a  blot ;  a  light  without  dark-
ness ;  a  moon  without  its  paleness ;  a  glory  without
a  dimness.  O  Bible  !  it  cannot  be  said  of  any  other
book,  that  it  is  perfect  and  pure  ;  but  of  thee  we  can
declare  all  wisdom  Is  gathered  up  In  thee,  without  a
particle  of  folly.  This  is  the  judge  that  ends  the
strife  where  wit  and  reason  fail.  This  is  the  book
untainted  by  any  error,  but  is  pure,  unalloyed,  per-
fect truth.  Why  ?  Because  God  wrote  it.  Ah !
charge  God  with  error  if  ye  please ;  tell  Him  that
His  book  Is  not  what  it  ouorht  to  be.      I  have  heard

o

men,  with  prudish  and  mock  modesty,  who  would
like  to  alter  the  Bible  ;  and  (I  almost  blush  to  say  it)
I  have  heard  ministers  alter  God's  Bible,  because
they  were  afraid  of  it.  Have  you  never  heard  a
man  say,  ''  He  that  believeth  ^nd  Is  baptized,  shall
be  saved  ;  but  he  that  believeth  not," — What  does
the  Bible  say  ? — "  shall  be  damned!'  But  that  does
not  happen  to  be  polite  enough,  so  they  say  ''shall
be  condemned^  Gentlemen,  pull  the  velvet  out  of
your  mouths  ;  speak  God's  Word  ;  we  want  none  of
your  alterations.     I  have  heard  men  in  prayer,  in-


^^5  THE   BIBLE.

Stead  of  saying,  "  Make  your  calling  and  election
sure,"  say,  ''  Make  your  calling  and  salvation  sure."
Pity  they  were  not  born  when  God  lived,  far, — far
back,  that  they  might  have  taught  God  how  to  write.
Oh,  impudence  beyond  all  bounds  !  Oh,  full-blown
self-conceit !  To  attempt  to  dictate  to  the  All-wise,
— to  teach  the  Omniscient  and  Instruct  the  Eternal  !
Stranore  that  there  should'  be  men  so  vile  as  to  use
the  penknife  of  Jeholakim,  to  cut  passages  of  the
Word  because  they  are  unpalatable.  Oh,  ye  who
dislike  certain  portions  of  the  Holy  Writ,  rest
assured  that  your  taste  Is  corrupt,  and  that  God  will
not  stay  for  your  little  opinion.  Your  dislike  Is  the
very  reason  why  God  wrote  it,  because  you  ought
not  to  be  suited ;  you  have  no  right  to  be  pleased.
God  wrote  what  you  do  not  like  ;  He  wrote  the
truth.  Oh,  let  us  bend  in  reverence  before  It,  for
God  inspired  it.  It  is  pure  truth.  Here  from  this
fountain  gushes  aqua  vitce, — "  the  water  of  life,"  with-
out a  single  particle  of  earth  ;  here  from  this  sun
there  cometh  forth  rays  of  radiance,  without  the
mixture  of  darkness.  Blessed  Bible,  thou  art  all
truth  !

Yet  once  more,  before  we  leave  this  point  let  us
stop  and  consider  the  merciftd  nature  of  God  in  hav-
ing written  us  a  Bible  at  all.  Ah,  He  might  have
left  us  without  it,  to  grope  our  dark  way,  as  blind
men  seek  the  wall  ;  He  miorht  have  suffered  us  to
wander  on  with  the  star  of  reason  as  our  only  guide.
I  recollect  a  story  of  Mr.  Hume,  who  so  constantly


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON:  S77

affirmed  that  the  light  of  reason  Is  abundantly  suffi-
cient. Being  at  a  good  minister's  house  one  even-
ing, he  had  been  discussing  the  question,  and  de-
claring his  firm  belief  in  the  sufficiency  of  the  light
of  nature.  On  leaving,  the  minister  offered  to  hold
him  a  candle,  to  light  him  down  the  steps.  He  said,
"  No,  the  light  of  nature  would  be  enough  ;  the  moon
would  do.''  It  so  happened  that  the  moon  was  cov-
ered with  a  cloud,  and  he  fell  down  the  steps.  "  Ah,"
said  the  minister,  ''  you  had  better  have  had  a  little
light  from  above,  after  all,  Mr.  Hume."  So,  suppos-
ing the  light  of  nature  to  be  sufficient,  we  had  better
have  a  little  light  from  above  too,  and  then  we  shall
be  sure  to  be  right.  Better  have  two  lights  than  only
one.  The  lio^ht  of  creation  is  a  brio-ht  lieht.  God
may  be  seen  in  the  stars  ;  His  name  is  written  in
gilt  letters  on  the  brow  of  night ;  you  may  discover
His  glory  in  the  ocean  waves,  yea,  in  the  trees  of
the  field.  But  it  is  better  to  read  it  in  two  books
than  in  one.  You  will  find  it  here  more  clearly  re-
vealed, for  He  has  written  this  book  Himself,  and
He  has  given  you  the  key  to  understand  it,  if  you
have  the  Holy  Spirit.  Ah,  beloved,  let  us  thank
God  for  this  Bible ;  let  us  love  it ;  let  us  count  it
more  precious  than  much  fine  gold.

But  let  me  say  one  thing  before  I  pass  on  to  the
second  point :  If  this  be  the  Word  of  God,  what
will  become  of  some  of  you  who  have  not  read  it  for
the  last  month  ?  "  Month,  sir  !  I  have  not  read  it
for  this  year."  Ay,  there  are  some  of  you  who  have
Z7


r^S  THE    BTBLE.

not  read  It  at  all.  Most  people  treat  the  Bible  very
politely.  They  have  a  small  pocket  volume,  neatly
bound  ;  they  put  a  white  pocket-handkerchief  around
it,  and  carry  it  to  their  places  of  worship  ;  when  they
get  home  they  lay  it  up  in  a  drawer  till  next  Sunday
morning ;  then  it  comes  out  again  for  a  little  bit  of
a  treat  and  goes  to  chapel  ;  that  is  all  the  poor
Bible  gets  in  the  way  of  an  airing.  That  is  your
style  of  entertaining  this  heavenly  messenger.  There
is  dust  enough  on  some  of  your  Bibles  to  write  "  dam-
nation "  with  your  fingers.  There  are  some  of  you
Avho  have  not  turned  over  your  Bibles  for  a  long,
long,  long  while,  and  what  think  you  ?  I  tell  you
blunt  words,  but  true  words.  What  will  God  say  at
last?  When  you  shall  come  before  Him,  He  shall
say  :  "  Did  you  read  My  Bible  ?  "  "  No."  "  I  wrote
you  a  letter  of  mercy;  did  you  read  it?"  "No."
"  Rebel !  I  have  sent  thee  a  letter  inviting  thee  to
Me  ;  didst  thou  ever  read  it  ?  "  "  Lord,  I  never
broke  the  seal;  I  kept  it  shut  up."  "Wretch!"
says  God,  "then  thou  deservest  hell,  if  I  sent  thee  a
loving  epistle  and  thou  wouldst  not  even  break  the
seal ;  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  "  Oh,  let  it  not  be
so  with  you  !  Be  Bible  readers  ;  be  Bible  searchers.
II.  Our  second  point  is,  the  subjects  on  which  the
Bible  treats.  The  words  of  the  text  are  tliese :  "  I
have  written  to  him  the  great  things  of  My  law."
The  Bible  treats  of  great  things,  and  of  great  things
only.  There  is  nothing  in  this  Bible  which  is  unim-
portant.    Every  verse  in  it  has  a  solemn  meaning,


CHARLES  H.    SPUkGEON.  5^9

and  if  we  have  not  found  it  out  yet,  we  hope  yet  to
do  it.  You  have  seen  mummies  wrapped  round  and
round  with  folds  of  Hnen.  Well,  God's  Bible  is
like  that ;  it  is  a  vast  roll  of  white  linen,  woven  in
the  loom  of  truth.  So  you  will  have  to  continue
unwinding  it,  roll  after  roll,  before  you  get  the  real
meaning  of  it  from  the  very  depth  ;  and  when  you
have  found,  as  you  think,  a  part  of  the  meaning,  you
will  still  need  to  keep  on  unwinding,  unwinding,  and
all  eternity  you  will  be  unwinding  the  words  of  this
wondrous  volume.  Yet  there  is  nothing  in  the
Bible  but  great  things.  Let  me  divide,  so  as  to  be
more  brief.  First,  all  things  in  this  Bible  are  great ;
but,  secondly,  some  things  are  the  greatest  of  all.
All  things  in  the  Bible  are  great.  Some  people
think  it  does  not  matter  what  doctrines  you  believe  ;
that  it  is  immaterial  what  church  you  attend  ;  that
all  denominations  are  alike.  Well,  I  dislike  Mrs.
Bigotry  above  almost  all  people  in  the  world,  and  I
never  give  her  any  compliment  or  praise.  But
there  is  another  woman  I  hate  equally  as  much,  and
that  is  Mrs.  Latitudinarianism,  a  well-known  char-
acter, who  has  made  the  discovery  that  all  of  us  are
alike.  Now,  I  believe  that  a  man  may  be  saved  in
any  church.  Some  have  been  saved  in  the  Church
of  Rome, — a  few  blessed  men,  whose  names  I  could
mention  here.  I  know,  blessed  be  God !  that  mul-
titudes are  saved  in  the  Church  of  England  :  she  has
a  host  of  pious,  praying  men  in  her  midst.  I  think
that  all    sections  of    Protestant  Christians  have   a


5§0  THE  BIBLE.

remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace,  and  they
had  need  to  have,  some  of  them,  a  Httle  salt,  for
otherwise  they  would  go  to  corruption.  But  when
I  say  that,  do  you  imagine  that  I  think  them  all  on
a  level  ?  Are  they  all  alike  truthful  ?  One  sect
says  infant  baptism  is  right ;  another  says  it  is  wrong;
yet  you  say  they  are  both  right.  I  cannot  see  that.
One  teaches  we  are  saved  by  free  grace ;  another
says  that  w^  are  not,  but  are  saved  by  freewill ;  and
yet  you  believe  they  are  both  right.  I  do  not
understand  that.  One  says  that  God  loves  His
people,  and  never  leaves  off  loving  them  ;  another
says  that  He  did  not  love  His  people  before  they
loved  Him;  that  He  often  loves  them,  and  then
ceases  to  love  them,  and  turns  them  away.  They
may  be  both  right  in  the  main  ;  but  can  they  be  both
right  when  one  says  "  Yes,"  and  the  other  says
"No."  I  must  have  a  pair  of  spectacles  to  enable
me  to  look  backwards  and  forwards  at  the  same
time  before  I  can  see  that.  It  cannot  be,  sirs,  that
they  are  both  right.  But  some  say  they  differ  upon
non-essentials.  This  text  says  :  "  I  have  written  to
him  the  great  things  of  My  law."  There  is  nothing
in  God's  Bible  which  is  not  great.  Did  ever  any  of
you  sit  down  to  see  which  was  the  purest  religion  ?
"  Oh,"  say  you,  "  we  never  took  the  trouble.  We
went  just  where  our  father  and  mother  went."
Ah,  that  is  a  profound  reason  indeed  !  You  went
where  your  father  and  mother  did.  I  thought  you
were  sensible  people  ;  I  didn't  think  you  went  where


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.  58 1

Other  people  pulled  you,  but  went  of  your  own  selves.
I  love  my  parents  above  all  that  breathe,  and  the
very  thought  that  they  believe  a  thing  to  be  true
helps  me  to  think  it  is  correct ;  but  I  have  not  fol-
lowed them.  I  belong  to  a  different  denomination,
and  I  thank  God  I  do.  I  can  receive  them  as  Chris-
tian brethren  and  sisters  ;  but  I  never  thought  that
because  they  happened  to  be  one  thing  I  was  to  be
the  same.  No  such  thing.  God  gave  me  brains,
and  I  will  use  them  ;  and  if  you  have  any  intellect,
use  it  too.  Never  say  it  doesn't  matter.  It  does
matter.  Whatever  God  has  put  here  is  of  eminent
importance  :  He  would  not  have  written  a  thing  that
was  indifferent.  Whatever  is  here  is  of  some  value  ;
therefore,  search  all  questions  ;  try  all  by  the  Word
of  God,  I  am  not  afraid  to  have  what  I  preach
tried  by  this  book.  Only  give  me  a  fair  field  and
no  favor  and  this  book  ;  if  I  say  anything  contrary
to  it,  I  will  withdraw  it  the  next  Sabbath-day.  By
this  I  stand,  by  this  I  fall.  Search  and  see  ;  but
don't  say,  "  It  does  not  matter."  If  God  says  a  thing,
it  must  always  be  of  importance.

But  while  all  things  in  God's  word  are  important,
all  are  not  equally  impoi^tant.  There  are  certain  fun-
damental and  vital  truths  which  must  be  believed,  or
otherwise  no  man  would  be  saved.  If  you  want  to
know  what  you  must  believe  if  ye  would  be  saved,
you  will  find  the  great  things  of  God's  law  between
these  two  covers ;  they  are  all  contained  here.  As
a  sort  of  digest  or  summary  of  the  great  things  of


582  THE   BIBLE.

the  law,  I  remember  an  old  friend  of  mine  once  say-
ing :  ''  Ah,  you  preach  the  three  R's,  and  God  will  al-
ways bless  you  !  "  I  said  :  "  What  are  the  three
R's?"  And  he  answered  :  "Ruin,  Redemption, and
Regeneration."  They  contain  the  sum  andsubstance
of  divinity.  R  for  ruin.  We  were  all  ruined  in  the
fall ;  we  were  all  lost  when  Adam  sinned,  and  we  are
all  ruined  by  our  own  transgressions ;  we  are  all
ruined  by  our  own  evil  hearts  and  our  own  wicked
wills;  and  we  all  shall  be  ruined  unless  grace  saves
us.  Then  there  is  a  second  R  for  redemption.  We
are  ransomed  by  the  blood  of  Christ, — a  Lamb  with-
out blemish  and  without  spot ;  we  are  rescued  by  his
power ;  we  are  ransomed  by  his  merits ;  we  are  re-
deemed by  his  strength.  Then  there  is  R  for  re-
generation. If  we  would  be  pardoned,  we  must  also
be  regenerated  ;  for  no  man  can  partake  of  redemp-
tion unless  he  is  reo^enerate.  Let  him  be  as  aood
as  he  pleases,  let  him  serve  God,  as  he  im-
agines, as  much  as  he  likes  ;  unless  he  is  regenerate,
and  has  a  new  heart,  a  new  birth,  he  will  still  be  in
the  first  R, — that  is,  ruin.  These  things  contain  an
epitome  of  the  gospel.  I  believe  there  is  a  better
epitome  in  'the  five  points  of  Calvinism :  Election
according  to  the  foreknowledcje  of  God  ;  the  natural
depravity  and  sinfulness  of  man  ;  particular  re-
demption by  the  blood  of  Christ ;  effectual  calling
by  the  power  of  the  Spirit ;  and  ultimate  persever-
ance by  the  efforts  of  God's  might.  I  think  all  those
need   to  be   believed   in   order   to   salvation  ;  but  I


CHARLES  H.    SPURGEON.  583

should  not  like  to  write  a  creed  like  the  Athanasian,
beginning  with  **  Whosoever  shall  be  saved,  before
all  things  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  hold  the
Catholic  faith,  which  faith  is  this," — when  I  got  so
far  I  should  stop,  because  I  should  not  know  what  to
write.  I  hold  the  Catholic  faith  of  the  Bible,  the
whole  Bible,  and  nothing  but  the  Bible.  It  is  not  for
me  to  draw  up  creeds ;  but  I  ask  you  to  search  the
Scriptures,  for  this  is  the  word  of  life.

God  says  :  "  I  have  written  to  him  the  great  things
of  My  law."  Do  you  doubt  their  greatness  ?  Do
ye  think  they  are  not  worth  your  attention  ?  reflect
a  moment,  man  !    Where  art  thou  standing  now  ?

"  Lo,  on  a  narrow  neck  of  land,
'Twixt  two  unbounded  seas  I  stand ;
An  inch  of  time,  a  moment's  space,
May  lodge  me  in  yon  heavenly  place,
Or  shut  me  up  in  hell."

I  recollect  standing  on  a  sea-shore  once,  upon  a
narrow  neck  of  land,  thoughtless  that  the  tide  might
come  up.  The  tide  kept  continually  washing  up  on
either  side,  and,  rapt  in  thought,  I  still  stood  there,
until  at  last  there  was  the  greatest  difficulty  in  get-
ting on  shore.  The  waves  had  washed  between  me
and  the  shore.  You  and  I  stand  each  day  on  a  nar-
row neck,  and  there  is  one  wave  coming  up  there.
See,  how  near  it  is  to  your  foot !  And  lo  !  another
follows  at  every  tick  of  the  clock.  "  Our  hearts,
like  muflied  drums,  are  beatinor  funeral  marches  to
the  grave.''     We  are  always  tending  downwards  to


5-84  THE   BIBLE.

the  orrave  each  moment  that  we  Hve.  This  book
tells  me  that  if  I  am  converted,  when  I  die  there  is
a  heaven  of  joy  and  love  to  receive  me  ;  it  tells  me
that  angels'  pinions  shall  be  stretched,  and  I,  borne
by  strong  cherubic  wings,  shall  out-soar  the  lightning,
and  mount  beyond  the  stars,  up  to  the  throne  of
God,  to  dwell  for  ever

"  Far  from  a  world  of  grief  and  sin,
With  God  eternally  shut  in."

Oh,  it  makes  the  hot  tears  start  from  my  eyes !  It
makes  my  heart  too  big  for  this  my  body,  and  my
brain  whirls  at  the  thouorht  of

o

"  Jerusalem,  my  happy  home,
Name  ever  dear  to  me."

Oh,  that  sweet  scene  beyond  the  clouds, — sweet
fields  arrayed  in  living  green,  and  rivers  of  delight !
Are  not  these  great  things?  But  then,  poor  unre-
generate  soul,  the  Bible  says,  if  thou  art  lost,  thou
art  lost  for  ever  ;  it  tells  thee,  that  if  thou  diest  with-
out Christ,  without  God,  there  is  no  hope  for  thee  ;
that  there  is  a  place  without  a  gleam  of  hope,  where
thou  shalt  read  in  burning  letters,  "Ye  knew  your
duty,  but  ye  did  it  not ;  "  it  tells  you  that  ye  shall  be
driven  from  His  presence  with  a  "  Depart,  ye  cursed."
Are  not  these  e^'eat  things  ?  Yes,  sirs,  as  heaven  is
desirable,  as  hell  is  terrible,  as  time  is  short,  as  eter-
nity is  infinite,  as  the  soul  is  precious,  as  pain  is  to
be   shunned,  as  heaven  is  to  be  sought,  as  God  is


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.  585

eternal,  and  as  His  words  are  sure,  these  are  great
things,  things  ye  ought  to  hsten  to.

III.  Our  last  point  is  the  ti^eatnient  which  the  holy
Bible  receives  hi  this  wo7^ld.  It  is  accounted  a  strange
thing.  What  does  that  mean, — the  Bible  accounted
a  strange  thing  ?  In  the  first  place  it  means  that  it
is  very  strange  to  some  people,  because  they  never
read  it.  I  remember  readinor  on  one  occasion  the
sacred  story  of  David  and  Goliath,  and  there  was  a
person  present,  positively  grown  up  to  years  of
maturity,  w^ho  said  to  me,  ''Dear  me!  what  an- inter-
esting story  ;  what  book  is  that  in  ?  "  And  I  recol-
lect a  person  once  coming  to  me  in  private.  I  spoke
to  her  about  her  soul ;  she  told  me  how  deeply  she
felt,  how  she  had  a  desire  to  serve  God,  but  she
found  another  law  in  her  members.  I  turned  to  a
passage  in  Romans,  and  read  to  her,  "  The  good  that
I  would,  I  do  not ;  and  the  evil  w^hich  I  would  not,
that  I  do  !  "  She  said,  "  Is  that  in  the  Bible  ?  I  did
not  know  it."  I  did  not  blame  her  because  she  had
no  interest  in  the  Bible  till  then  ;  but  I  did  won-
der that  there  could  be  found  persons  who  knew
nothing  about  such  a  passage.  Ah !  you  know
more  about  your  ledgers  than  your  Bible  ;  you  know
more  about  your  day-books  than  what  God  has  writ-
ten. Many  of  you  will  read  a  novel  from  beginning
to  end,  and  what  have  you  got?  A  mouthful  of
froth  when  you  have  done.  But  you  cannot  read  the
Bible:  that  solid,  lasting,  substantial,  and  satisfying
food  goes  uneaten,  locked  up  in  the  cupboard  of


586  THE   BIBLE.

neglect ;  while  anything  that  man  writes,  a  catch  of
the  day,  is  greedily  devoured.  "  I  have  written  unto
him  the  great  things  of  My  law,  but  they  were
counted  as  a  strange  thing."  Ye  have  never  read
it.  1  bring  the  broad  charge  against  you.  Perhaps
ye  say  I  ought  not  to  charge  you  with  any  such
thing.  I  always  think  it  better  to  have  a  worse
opinion  of  you  than  too  good  an  one.  I  charge  you
with  this :  you  do  not  read  your  Bible.  Some  of
you  never  have  read  it  through.  I  know  I  speak
what  your  heart  must  say  is  honest  truth.  You  are
not  Bible-readers.  You  say  you  have  the  Bible  in
your  houses:  do  I  think  you  are  such  heathens  as
not  to  have  a  Bible  ?  But  when  did  you  read  it  last  ?
How  do  you  know  that  your  spectacles,  which  you
have  lost,  have  not  been  there  for  the  last  three
years  ?  Many  people  have  not  turned  over  its  pages
for  a  long  time,  and  God  might  say  unto  them,  *' I
have  written  unto  you  the  great  things  of  My  law,
but  they  have  been  accounted  unto  you  a  strange
thinor."

Others  there  be  who  read  the  Bible,  but  when
they  read  it,  tJiey  say  it  is  so  horribly  dry.  That
young  man  over  there  says  it  is  a  "bore ; "  that  Is
the  word  he  uses.  He  says,  "  My  mother  said  to
me,  'When  you  go  up  to  town,  read  a  chapter  every
day.'  Well,  I  thought  I  would  please  her,  and  I
said  I  would.  I  am  sure  I  wish  I  had  not.  I  did  not
read  a  chapter  yesterday  or  the  day  before.  We
were  so   busy.     I  could  not  help  it."     You  do  not


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.  587

love  the  Bible,  do  you  ?  "  No ;  there  Is  nothing  in  It
which  is  interesting."  Ah!  I  thouo^ht  so.  But  a
little  while  ago  /  could  not  see  anything  in  it.  Do
you  know  why  ?  Blind  men  cannot  see,  can  they  ?
But  when  the  Spirit  touches  the  scales  of  the  eyes
they  fall  off,  and  when  he  puts  eye-salve  on,  then  the
Bible  becomes  precious.  I  remember  a  minister
who  went  to  see  an  old  lady,  and  he  thought  he
would  give  her  some  precious  promises  out  of  the
Word  of  God.  Turning  to  one,  he  saw  written  in
the  margin,  "  P.,"  and  he  asked,  "  What  does  this
mean  ?  "  "  That  means  precious,  sir."  Further
down  he  saw  "  T.  and  P.,"  and  he  asked  what  the
letters  meant.  "  That,"  she  said,  "  means  tried  and
proved,  for  I  have  tried  and  proved  It."  If  you  have
tried  God's  Word  and  proved  It ;  If  It  Is  precious  to
your  souls,  then  you  are  Christians;  but  those  per-
sons who  despise  the  Bible  have  "  neither  part  nor  lot
in  the  matter."  If  it  Is  dry  to  you,  you  will  be  dry
at  last  in  hell.  If  you  do  not  esteem  It  as  better
than  your  necessary  food,  there  Is  no  hope  for  you.
for  you  lack  the  greatest  evidence  of  your  Chris-
tianity.

Alas  !  alas !  the  worse  case  is  to  come.  There
are  some  people  who  hate  the  Bible,  as  well  as  despise
it.  Is  there  such  an  one  stepped  in  here?  Some
of  you  said,  "  Let  us  go  and  hear  what  the  young
preacher  has  to  say  to  us."  This  is  what  he  hath  to
say  to  you  :  "  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and
perish."     This  is  what  he  hath  to  say  to  you  ;  "  The


cSS  ^^^   BIBLE.

wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  that  forget
God."  And  this,  again,  he  has  to  say  to  you  :  "  Be-
hold there  shall  come  in  the  last  days  mockers  like
yourselves,  walking  after  your  own  lusts."  But
more :  he  tells  you  to-night  that  if  you  are  saved,
you  must  find  salvation  here.  Therefore  despise
not  the  Bible,  but  search  it,  read  it,  and  come  unto
it.  Rest  thee  well  assured,  O  scorner,  that  thy
laughs  cannot  alter  truth,  thy  jests  cannot  avert
thine  inevitable  doom.  Though  in  thy  hardihood
thou  shouldst  make  a  league  with  death,  and  sign  a
covenant  with  hell,  yet  swift  justice  shall  overtake
thee,  and  stronof  venoreance  strike  thee  low.  In  vain
dost  thou  jeer  and  mock,  for  eternal  verities  are
mightier  than  thy  sophistries ;  nor  can  thy  smart
saying  alter  the  divine  truth  of  a  single  word  of  this
volume  of  revelation.  Oh !  why  dost  thou  quarrel
with  thy  best  friend  and  ill  treat  thy  only  refuge  ?
There  yet  remains  hope  even  for  the  scorner — hope
In  a  Saviour's  veins ;  hope  in  the  Father's  mercy ;
hope  in  the  Holy  Spirit's  omnipotent  agency.

I  have  done  when  I  have  said  one  word.  My
friend  the  philosopher  says  it  may  be  very  well  for
me  to  urge  people  to  read  the  Bible  ;  but  he  thinks
there  are  a  great  many  sciences  far  more  interesting
and  useful  than  theology.  Extremely  obliged  to  yo2t
f 07^  your  opinion,  sir.  What  science  do  you  mean?
The  science  of  dissecting  beetles  and  arranging
butterflies  ?  "  No,"  you  say,  "  certainly  not."  The
science,  then,  of  arranging  stones  and  telling  us  of


CHARLES  H.   3P URGE  ON:  589

the  Strata  of  the  earth  ?  "  No,  not  exactly  that."
Which  science,  then  ?  *'  Oh,  all  sciences,"  say  you,
"  are  better  than  the  science  of  the  Bible."  Ah,  sir,
that  is  your  opinion ;  and  it  is  because  you  are  far
from  God  that  you  say  so.  But  the  science  of  Jesus
Christ  is  the  most  excellent  of  sciences.  Let  no
one  turn  away  from  the  Bible  because  it  is  not  a
book  of  learning  and  wisdom.  It  is.  Would  ye
know  astronomy  ?  It  is  here :  it  tells  you  of  the
Sun  of  Righteousness  and  the  Star  of  Bethlehem.
Would  ye  know  botany  ?  It  is  here :  it  tells  you
of  the  plant  of  renown — the  Lily  of  the  Valley  and
the  Rose  of  Sharon.  Would  ye  know  geology  and
mineralogy  ?  You  shall  learn  it  here  :  for  you  may
read  of  the  Rock  of  Ages  and  the  White  Stone  with
a  name  graven  thereon,  which  no  man  knoweth,
saving  he  that  receiveth  it.  Would  ye  study  his-
tory ?  Here  is  the  most  ancient  of  all  the  records
of  the  history  of  the  human  race.  Whate'er  your
science  is,  come  and  bend  o'er  this  book ;  your
science  is  here.  Come  and  drink  out  of  this  fair
fount  of  knowledge  and  wisdom,  and  ye  shall  find
yourselves  made  wise  unto  salvation.  Wise  and
foolish,  babes  and  men,  gray-headed  sires,  youths  and
maidens — I  speak  to  you,  I  plead  with  you,  I  beg  of
you  respect  your  Bibles  and  search  them  out,  for  in
them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life,  and  these  are
they  which  testify  of  Christ.

I  have  done.     Let  us  go  home  and  practise  what
we   have  heard.     I  have   heard  of  a  woman,  who,


590  THE  BIBLE.

when  she  was  asked  what  she  remembered  of  the
minister's  sermon,  said,  "  I  don't  recollect  anything
of  it.  It  was  about  short  weights  and  bad  measures,
and  I  didn't  recollect  anything  but  to  go  home  and
burn  the  bushel."  So  if  you  will  remember  to  go
home  and  burn  the  bushel,  if  you  will  recollect  to
go  home  and  read  your  Bibles,  I  shall  have  said
enough.  And  may  God,  in  His  infinite  mercy,  when
you  read  your  Bibles,  pour  into  your  soul  the  illu-
minating rays  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  by  the
agency  of  the  ever-adorable  Spirit ;  then  you  will
read  to  your  profit  and  to  your  soul's  salvation.
We  may  say  of  the  Bible : —

"  God's  cabinet  of  revealed  counsel  'tis,
W^here  weal  and  woe  are  ordei^ed  so
That  every  man  may  know  which  shall  be  his,
Unless  his  own  mistake  false  application  make.

"  It  is  the  index  to  eternity.
He  cannot  miss  of  endless  bliss.
That  takes  this  chart  to  steer  by;
.  Nor  can  he  be  mistook,  that  speaketh  by  this  book.

"  It  is  the  book  of  God.     What  if  I  should
Say,  God  of  books,  let  him  that  looks
Angry  at  that  expression,  as  too  bold.
His  thoughts  in  silence  smother  till  he  find  such  another."


PROVING  GOD.

"  Prove  me  now." — Malachi  iii.  lo.

A  CCORDING  to  the  laws  of  our  country,  no  man
'^^  can  be  condemned  until  his  guilt  is  proved.  It
were  well  if  we  all  carried  out  the  same  justice
toward  God  which  we  expect  from  our  fellow-men  ;
but  how  frequently  w^ill  men  condemn  the  acts  of
their  God  as  being  hard  and  unkind !  They  do  not
say  so — they  dare  not ;  they  scarcely  avow  that  they
think  so  ;  but  there  is  a  kind  of  lurkinor  imaeination
hardly  amounting  to  a  deliberate  thought,  which
leads  them  to  fear  that  God  has  fororotten  to  be  o^ra-
cious,  and  will  be  mindful  of  them  no  more.  Let
us,  never,  my  friends,  think  hardly  of  our  God,  till
we  can  prove  anything  against  him.  He  says  to  all
his  unbelievine  children  who  are  doubtful  of  his
o^oodness  and  his  ofi*ace,  "  Prove  me  now.  Hast
thou  aught  against  me  ?  Canst  thou  prove  aught
that  will  be  dishonorable  to  me  ?  Wherein  have  I
ever  broken  my  promise  ?  In  what  have  I  ever
failed  to  fulfil  my  word?  Ah,  thou  canst  not  say
that.  Prove  me  now,  if  thou  hast  aught  against  me
— if  thou  canst  say  anything  against  my  honor — if
thou  hast  hitherto  not  received  answers  to  prayer  and
blessings  according  to  promise.  Set  me  not  down
as  false,  I  beseech  thee,  until   thou   hast  so  proved

591


eo2  PROVING  GOD.

me."      '  Prove  me  now,"  says  the   Lord  to  all  his
saints.

Moreover,  not  only  is  it  unjust  to  think  ill  of  any
one  until  we  can  prove  something  against  him,  but  it
is  extremely  unwise  to  be  always  suspicious  of  our  fel-
low-creatures. Though  there  is  much  folly  in  being
over-credulous,  I  question  if  there  is  not  far  more  in
being  over-suspicious.  He  who  believes  every  man,
will  soon  be  bitten  ;  but  he  who  suspects  every  man,
will  not  only  be  bitten,  but  devoured.  He  who  lives
in  perpetual  distrust  of  his  fellow-creatures  cannot
be  happy ;  he  has  defrauded  himself  of  peace  and
happiness,  and  assumed  a  position  in  which  he  can-
not enjoy  the  sweets  of  friendship  or  affection.  I
would  rather  be  too  credulous  towards  my  fellow-
creatures  than  too  suspicious.  I  had  rather  they
should  impose  upon  me  by  making  me  believe  them
better  than  they  are,  than  that  I  should  impose  upon
them  by  thinking  them  worse  than  they  are.  It  is
better  to  be  cheated  sometimes  ourselves  than  that
we  should  cheat  others  ;  and  it  is  cheating  others  to
suspect  those  on  whose  characters  there  resteth  no
suspicion.  We  acknowledge  such  morality  among
men,  but  we  act  not  so  towards  God  ;  we  believe  any
liar  soonei  than  we  believe  him.  When  we  are  in
trial  and  trouble  we  will  believe  the  devil,  when  he
says  God  will  forsake  us.  The  devil,  who  has  been
a  liar  from  the  beginning,  we  will  credit ;  but  if  our
God  promises  anything,  we  say,  "  Surely  this  is  too
good  to  be  true,"  and  we  doubt  the  fulfilment  be-


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.


593


cause  it  is  not  brought  to  pass  exactly  at  the  time
and  in  the  way  we  anticipate.  Let  us  never  harbor
such  suspicions  of  our  God.  If  we  say  in  our  haste,
"All  men  are  liars,"  let  us  preserve  this  one  truth,
"  God  cannot  lie."  His  counsel  is  immutable,  and
he  hath  confirmed  it  by  an  oath,  that  "  we  might  have
strong  consolation,  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay
hold  of  the  hope  set  before  us  "  in  Christ  Jesus ;  let
not  our  faith  then  dally  with  a  fear;  let  us  rather
seek  grace,  that  we  may  confidently  believe  and  as-
suredly rely  on  the  words  which  the  lips  of  God  do
speak.  "  Prove  me  now,  if  any  of  you  are  suspi-
cious of  my  word."  If  you  think  my  grace  is  not
sweet,  "  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  If
you  think  that  I  am  not  a  rock,  and  that  my  work  Is
not  perfect,  come  now,  tread  upon  the  rock,  and  see
if  it  be  not  firm  ;  build  on  the  rock,  and  see  if  it  be
not  solid.  If  thou  thinkest  mine  arm  shortened  that
I  cannot  save,  come,  ask,  and  I  will  stretch  it  out  to
defend  thee.  If  thou  thinkest  that  mine  ear  is
heavy  that  I  cannot  hear,  come,  try  It ;  call  upon  me,
and  I  will  answer  thee.  If  thou  art  suspicious,  make
proof  of  my  promises  ;  so  shall  thy  suspicions  be  re-
moved. But,  oh,  doubt  me  not,  until  thou  hast
found  me  unworthy  of  trust:  "  Prove  me  now.'*

In  these  words  I  find  a  fact  couched,  a  challenge
given,  a  time  mentioned,  and  an  argument  suggested.
Such  are  the  four  points  I  propose  this  morning  to
consider.

I.  First,  then,  we  have  the  fact,  that  God  allows
3S


CQ4  PROVING   GOD.

himself  to  be  proved — ''  Prove  me  now."  In  medi-
tating on  this  subject  it  has  occurred  to  me  that  all
the  works  of  creation  are  proofs  of  God  ;  they
evidence  his  eternal  power  and  godhead.  But  inas-
much as  he  is  not  only  the  creator,  but  the  sustainer
of  them  all,  they  make  continual  proof  of  him,  his
goodness,  his  faithfulness,  and  his  care.  Methinks,
when  God  launched  the  sun  from  his  hand  and  sent
him  on  his  course,  he  said,  "  Prove  me  now  ;  "  see,
O  sun,  if  I  do  not  uphold  thee  till  thou  hast  done
thy  work,  and  finished  thy  career ;  rejoice  thou
mayest,  "  as  a  strong  man  to  run  a  race,"  but  while
thou  fulfillest  thy  circuits,  and  nothing  is  hid  from  thy
heat,  thou  shalt  prove  my  glory  and  shed  light  upon
my  handiwork.  When  the  Almighty  whirled  the
earth  in  space,  methinks  he  said,  ''  Prove  me  now,"
O  earth  ;  see  if  I  do  not  perpetuate  thy  seasons,  and
give  thee  "  seed-time  and  harvest,  cold  and  heat,
summer  and  winter,  day  and  night,"  refreshing  thee
with  incessant  providence.  And  to  each  creature  he
made,  I  can  almost  think  the  Almighty  said,  "  Prove
me  now."  Tiny  gnat,  thou  art  about  to  dance  in  the
sunshine  ;  thou  shalt  prove  my  goodness.  Huge
leviathan,  thou  shalt  stir  up  the  deep,  and  make  it
frothy  ;  go  forth,  and  prove  my  power.  Ye  creatures,
whom  I  have  endowed  with  various  instincts,  wait  on
me  ;  I  will  give  you  your  meat  in  due  season.  And
you,  ye  mighty  thunders  and  ye  swift  lightnings,  go,
teach  the  world  reverence,  and  show  forth  my  om-
nipotence.    Thus,  I  think,  all  God's  creatures  are


CHARLES  H.   SPURGEON.  595

not  meiely  proofs  of  his  existence,  but  proofs  of  his
manifold  wisdom,  his  loving-kindness,  and  his  grace.
The  meanest  and  the  mightiest  of  his  created  works,
each  and  all,  in  some  degree,  prove  his  love,  and
teach  us  how  marvelous  is  his  nature  ;  but  he  has
given  to  man  this  high  prerogative  above  all  the
works  of  his  hands,  that  he  alone  should  make  de-
signed and  intelligent  proof.  They  do  but  prove  him
unintentionally.  The  things  of  earth  prove  God,  yet
they  have  no  intention  of  so  doing.  The  beasts
praise  God  ;  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  low  forth
his  honor,  and  the  very  lions  roar  his  praise  ;  yet
they  do  it  not  with  intent,  and  judgment,  and  will  ;
and  although  the  sun  proveth  the  majesty  and  the
might  of  his  Master,  yet  the  sun  hath  neither  mind
nor  thought,  and  it  is  not  his  intention  to  glorify  God.
But  the  saint  doth  it  intentionally.

It  is  a  great  fact,  beloved,  that  God  will  have  all
his  children  proofs  of  the  various  attributes  of  his
nature.  I  do  not  think  any  one  of  the  children  of
God  proves  all  of  God,  but  that  they  are  all  proving
different  parts  of  his  one  grand  character,  so  that  when
the  whole  history  of  providence  shall  be  written,  and
the  lives  of  all  the  saints  shall  be  recorded,  the  title
of  the  book  will  be,  "  Proofs  of  God."  There  will  be
one  compendious  proof,  that  he  is  God,  and  changeth
not ;  that  with  him  there  "  is  no  variableness,  neither
shadow  of  turnino^."  You  will  remember  how  one
saint  peculiarly  proved  the  longsuffering  of  God,  in
that  he  was  permitted  to  pursue  his  career  to  the


59^  PROVING   GOD.

Utmost  verge  of  destruction ;  while  he  hung  on  the
cross,  the  patience  that  had  borne  with  him  so  long,
brouofht  salvation  to  him  at  last.  He  was  "  in  the
article  of  death,"  falling  into  the  pit,  when  sovereign
grace  broke  the  fall,  everlasting  arms  caught  the
soul,  and  Jesus  himself  conducted  him  to  paradise.
Then  again,  you  will  remember  another  saint  who
plunged  into  a  thousand  sins,  and  indulged  in  the
foulest  lust,  but  she  was  brought  to  Christ ;  out  of
her  did  he  cast  seven  evil  spirits,  and  Mary  Magda-
lene was  made  to  prove  the  richness  of  our  Saviour's
pardoning  grace,  as  well  as  the  sweetness  of  a
pardoned  sinner's  gratitude.  It  Is  a  fact  that  the
Lord  is  ready  to  forgive,  and  this  woman  is  a  great
proof  of  it.  There  was  Job,  who  was  tortured  with
ulcers  and  made  to  scrape  himself  wuth  a  potsherd  ;
he  proved  the  Lord,  that  '*  he  is  very  pitiful  and  of
tender  mercy;  "  from  him  we  get  evidence  that  God
is  able  to  sustain  us  amidst  unparalleled  sufferings.
Let  me  note  how  Solomon  proved  the  bounty  of  God.
When  he  asked  wisdom  and  knowledge,  the  Lord
not  only  granted  his  request,  but  added  riches  and
wealth  and  honor  to  his  store;  and  how  did  Solomon
magnify  this  proof  of  divine  bounty  as  he  translates
the  experience  of  his  dream  Into  the  counsel  of  his
proverbs  ?  While  he  advises  us  to  get  wisdom,  he  as-
sures us  that,  "length  of  days  Is  In  her  right  hand,
and  In  her  left  hand  riches  and  honor.''  And  then,  once
^  more,  how  great  a  proof  of  God's  special  providence
in  maintaining  in  this  world  "a  remnant  according  to


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.  597

the  election  of  grace,"  do  we  derive  from  the  history
of  EHjah.  There  sat  the  venerable  seer,  beneath  a
juniper  tree,  in  the  lone  desert, — a  great  but  grievous
man, — an  honored  but  a  dejected  prophet  of  the
Most  High.  Do  you  mark  him  as  he  comes  to
Horeb,  takes  up  his  lodging  in  a  cave,  and  complains
in  the  awful  solitude  of  his  soul,"  I,  even  I  only,  am  left,
and  they  seek  my  life  to  take  it  away  ?  "  Oh,  had  his
fears  been  realized,  what  a  blank  would  earth  have  been
without  a  saint !  But  Elijah  proved  from  the  mouth
of  God  the  impossibility.  He  learned  for  our  sakes,
as  well  as  his  own,  what  a  reservation  God  has  made
in  seasons  of  direst  persecution.  It  is  proved  that
there  shall  ever  be  still  a  church  in  the  world  while
earth's  old  pillars  stand.

Nor  need  we  suppose  that  the  testimony  of  the
witnesses  is  closed.  Each  of  God's  saints  is  sent
into  the  world  to  prove  some  part  of  the  divine  char-
acter. Perhaps  I  may  be  one  of  those  who  shall
live  in  the  valley  of  ease,  having  much  rest,  and  hear-
ing sweet  birds  of  promise  singing  in  my  ears.  The
air  is  calm  and  balmy,  the  sheep  are  feeding  round
about  me,  and  all  is  still  and  quiet.  Well,  then,  I
shall  prove  the  love  of  God  in  sweet  communings.
Or,  perhaps,  I  may  be  called  to  stand  where  the
thunder  clouds  brew,  where  the  lightnings  play,  and
tempestuous  winds  are  howling  on  the  mountain  top.
Well,  then,  I  am  born  to  prove  the  power  and
majesty  of  our  God ;  amid  dangers  he  will  inspire
me  with  courage  ;  amid  toils  he  will  make  me  strong.


59S  PROVING   GOD.

Perhaps  it  shall  be  mine  to  preserve  an  unblemished
character,  and  so  prove  the  power  of  sanctifying
grace  in  not  being  allowed  to  backslide  from  my  pro-
fessed dedication  to  God.  I  shall  then  be  a  proof
of  the  omnipotent  power  of  grace,  which  alone  can
save  from  the  power  as  well  as  the  guilt  of  sin.  The
divers  cases  of  all  the  Lord's  family  are  intended  to
illustrate  different  parts  of  his  ways ;  and  in  heaven
I  do  think  one  part  of  our  blest  employ  will  be  to
read  the  great  book  of  the  experience  of  all  the
saints,  and  gather  from  that  book  the  whole  of  the
divine  character  as  having  been  proved  and  illus-
trated. Each  Christian  man  Is  a  manifestation  and
display  of  some  position  or  other  of  God  ;  a  differ-
ent part  may  belong  to  each  of  us,  but  when  the
whole  shall  be  combined,  when  all  the  rays  of  evi-
dence shall  be  brought,  as  it  were,  into  one  great
sun,  and  shine  forth  with  meridian  splendor,  we  shall
see  in  Christian  experience  a  beautiful  revelation  of
our  God.

Let  us  remember,  then,  as  an  important  fact,  that
God  intends  us  to  live  in  this  world  to  prove  him,
and  let  us  seek  to  do  so,  always  endeavoring  as  much
as  we  can  to  be  finding  out  and  proving  the  attri-
butes of  God.  Remember,  we  have  all  the  promises
to  prove  in  our  lifetime ;  and  it  shall  be  found  in  the
last  great  day  that  every  one  of  them  has  been  ful-
filled. As  the  promises  are  read  through  now,  it
may  be  asked,  "  Who  is  a  proof  of  such  a  promise  ?  "
Feradventure  the  question  relates  to  some  promise


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.  599

of  almost  universal  application,  and  millions  of  saints
wilLrise  and  say,  "I  prove  the  truth  of  that."  Or
there  may  be  a  promise  in  the  Bible  that  it  will  sel-
dom fall  to  the  lot  of  one  of  God's  children  to  prove  :
it  is  so  peculiar,  and  few  shall  have  been  able  thor-
oughly to  understand  it.  But  mark,  there  will  be
some  witnesses  to  attest  it,  and  all  the  promises
shall  be  fulfilled  in  the  united  experience  of  the
church.  Such,  then,  the  fact — God  allows  his  chil-
dren to  prove  him.

II.  And  now,  secondly,  we  have  here  a  challenge
gfiven  to  us — "  Prove  me  now."  "  You  who  have
doubted  me,  prove  me.  You  who  mistrust  me,  prove
me.  You  who  tremble  at  the  enemy,  prove  me.
You  who  are  afraid  you  cannot  accomplish  your
work,  believe  my  promise,  and  come  and  prove
me.

Now,  I  must  explain  this  challenge  to  you,  as  to
the  way  in  which  It  has  to  be  carried  out.  There
are  different  sorts  of  promises  given  in  God's  word,
which  have  to  be  proved  in  different  ways.  In  the
Bible  there  are  three  kinds  of  promise.  In  the  first
class  I  will  place  the  conditional  promises,  such  as
are  intended  for  certain  characters,  given  alone  to
them,  and  them  only  on  certain  conditions.  There
is  a  second  class,  referring  exclusively  to  the  future,
the  fulfilment  of  which  does  not  relate  to  us  at  the
present  time.  While  there  Is  a  third  and  most  glo-
rious class,  called  absolute  promises,  which  have  no
conditions  whatever,  or  which  graciously  supply  the


5oO  PROVING   GOD.

requirements  that  the  conditional  promises  demand.
Now,  each  class  of  these  promises  must  be  proved
in  a  different  and  peculiar  way.  To  begin  with  con-
ditional promises :  we  cannot  prove  a  conditional
promise  in  the  same  way  as  an  absolute  one.  The
manner  of  proving  must  accord  with  the  character
of  the  promise  to  be  proved.  Let  me  mention,  for
example — ''Ask  and  ye  shall  receive."  Here  it  is
quite  obvious  that  I  must  ask  in  order  to  verify  the
promise.  I  have  a  condition  to  fulfil  in  order  to  ob-
tain a  benefit.  The  way  to  test  the  faithfulness  of
the  promiser,  and  the  truth  of  the  promise,  is  plainly
this — comply  with  the  stipulation.  Very  different  is
the  promise,  and  equally  different  the  proof,  when
God  says,  'T  will  put  my  spirit  within  you,  and  cause
you  to  walk  in  my  statutes."  Here  we  have  the
simple — will — of  the  Almighty.  Such  a  promise  is
to  be  proved  in  a  very  different  manner  from  the
fulfilment,  on  our  part,  of  a  condition  ;  but  of  this
more  anon.

In  order  to  prove  conditional  promises,  then.  It  Is
necessary  for  us  to  fulfil  the  condition  that  God  has
annexed  to  them.  He  says,  *'  Bring  ye  all  the  tithes
Into  the  storehouse,  that  there  may  be  meat  In  mine
house,  and  prove  me  now  herewith."  No  man  can
prove  God  with  reference  to  this  promise,  till  he  has
brought  all  the  tithes  into  the  storehouse  ;  for  it  Is
herewith  this  promise  has  to  be  proved.  Suppose
the  Lord  says,  "  Call  upon  me  In  the  time  of  trouble,
I  will  deliver  thee  and  thou  shalt  glorify  me;  "  the


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE  ON.  6oi

only  way  of  proving  him  Is  by  calling  upon  him  in
the  time  of  trouble.  We  may  stand  as  long  as  we
like  and  say,  "  God  will  fulfil  that  promise  ;  "  ay,
that  he  will,  but  we  must  fulfil  the  condition,  and  it
behooves  us  to  seek  orrace  of  him  to  enable  us  to  do
so;  for  we  cannot  prove  such  promises  unless  we
fulfil  the  conditions  appended  to  them.  There  are
many  very  sweet  conditional  promises  ;  one  of  them
helped  to  set  my  soul  at  rest;  it  was  this,  "Look
unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth."
The  condition  there  is,  "  Look  unto  me ;  "  but  ye
cannot  prove  It.  unless  you  do  look  unto  Christ.
Here  is  another,  "  He  that  calleth  on  the  name  of
the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  What  a  blessed  promise
that  is !  But  then  you  cannot  prove  the  promise
unless  you  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord.  So  that
whenever  we  see  a  promise  to  which  a  condition  is
attached,  if  we  wish  to  prove  it  in  our  own  experi-
ence, we  must  ask  of  God  to  give  us  grace  to  fulfil
the  condition.     That  Is  one  way  of  proving  God.

But  some  will  say.  do  not  these  conditions  restrict
the  liberality  and  graciousness  of  God's  promises?
Oh  no,  beloved  !  for  first  the  conditions  are  often  put
to  describe  the  persons  to  whom  the  promises  are
made.  Hence,  my  brother,  when  it  is  written,  "  He
forgetteth  not  the  cry  of  the  humble,''  the  promise
fits  thy  chastened  soul.  When  it  saith,  "  To  this
man  will  I  look,  even  to  him  that  is  of  a  poor  and
contrite  spirit,  and  trembleth  at  my  word,"  thou  canst
perceive,  as  it  were,  a  description  of  thine  own  state.


602  PROVING  GOD.

And  when  It  saith,  "  I  will  satisfy  her  poor  with  bread,"
ye  can  some  of  you  take  comfort  that  the  promise
finds  you  in  the  fit  condition  to  receive  the  blessing.
But  again,  if  the  condition  be,  not  a  state,  but  a  duty  ;
then,  let  it  be  prayer — he  gives  the  spirit  of  prayer;
let  it  be  faith — he  is  the  giver  of  faith  ;  let  it  be  meek-
ness— he  it  is  that  clothes  thee  with  meekness.  Thus
the  conditions  serve  to  commend  the  promises  to
God's  own  children,  and  to  show  the  bounty  of  him
who  oriveth  orrace  for  Q^race.

The  second  class  of  promises  I  will  mention  is
futui^e,  and  we  cannot  fully  prove  them  yet,  nor  do
we  always  wish  it.  Such  a  promise  as  this,  "  I  know
that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  at
the  latter  day  upon  the  earth;  and  though  after  my
skin  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I
see  God."  We  cannot  prove  this  yet,  for  Christ  has
not  appeared.  We  are  told,  and  we  know  there  is
laid  up  for  us  a  crown  of  righteousness  at  that  day ;
how  can  we  prove  that  ?  Depend  upon  it,  we  ought
to  prove  it,  for  we  are  commanded  to  prove  God,
and  we  must  prove  each  of  his  promises.  We  must
prove  it,  then,  by  patient  waiting  for  him.  I  must
say  in  myself,  "All  the  days  of  my  appointed  pilgrim-
age I  will  wait,  till  my  change  come ;  "  and  I  doubt
not  he  will  give  me  victory  in  death,  for  he  has
promised  that  he  will  make  us  sing  aloud  upon  our
beds,  and  will  cheer  us  when  we  are  passing  through
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  Christian,  prove
God's  promise  of  future  blessedness,  by  a  firm  belief


CHARLES  H.    SPURGE ©N,  603

in  it,  and  a  patient  waiting  for  it !  Does  Christ  say
he  will  come  ao^ain  "  a  second  time  without  sin  unto
salvation  ?  "  Prove  it  by  being  among  the  number
of  those  who  look  for  his  appearing,  who  patiently
wait  and  hope  for  his  advent.  Does  he  say,  that
when  we  die  we  shall  sleep  in  Jesus  ?  We  do  prove
this  when  we  feel  so  confident  of  sleeping  in  Jesus
that  we  are  prepared  to  depart  at  any  moment.  You
see  that  this  kind  of  promise  is  to  be  proved  in  a
different  way  from  the  conditional.

But  then  there  is  the  absolute  promise,  and  that
is  the  largest  and  best  promise  of  all,  for  if  they  were
all  conditional  promises,  and  the  conditions  rested
with  us  to  fulfil,  we  should  all  be  damned.  If  there
were  no  absolut.  promises,  there  would  not  be  a  soul
saved  ;  if  they  wt  'e  all  made  to  characters,  and  no
absolute  promise  were  made  that  the  characters
should  be  given,  we  should  perish,  notwithstanding
all  God's  promises.  If  he  had  simply  said,  "  He  that
believeth  shall  be  saved,"  we  should  all  be  lost,  for
we  could  not  believe  without  strength ;  but  when  he
says,  "  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,
therefore  with  loving-kindness  have  I  drawn  thee,"
there  is  an  absolute  promise  to  back  up  the  condition.
If  he  hath  told  us  that  if  we  repent  we  shall  be  saved,
there  is  the  promise  that  he  will  give  us  a  new  heart
— that  he  will  draw  us  to  himself  and  make  us  his
people.  Now,  the  absolute  promise  is  not  to  be
proved  by  doing  anything,  but  by  believing  in  it.
All  I  can  do  with  an  absolute  promise  is  to  believe.


604  PROVING  GOD.

If  1  were  to  try  to  fulfil  a  condition,  it  would  not  be
accepted  by  God,  because  no  condition  is  appended
to  that  kind  of  promise.  He  might  well  say  to  me,
"  If  thou  hast  fulfilled  the  condition  of  another  prom-
ise, thou  shalt  have  it;  "  but  stay,  I  have  put  no  con-
dition to  this.  I  have  said,  ''I  will  put  my  Spirit
within  them,  and  they  shall  walk  in  my  ways  ;  I  will
be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people."  There
is  a  promise  without  any  condition.  Although  the
child  of  God  may  have  sinned,  yet  the  promise  stands
eood,  that  he  shall  be  broucrht  to  know  his  error,  to
repent,  and  be  wholly  forgiven.  Such  a  promise  we
can  only  believe ;  we  cannot  fulfil  any  condition  re-
lating to  it.  We  must  take  it  to  God,  and  say.  Hast
thou  said  that  Christ  shall  "  see  of  the  travail  of  his
soul  ?  "  (Isa.  liii.  1 1.)  Lord,  we  believe  ;  let  him  see
of  the  travail  of  his  soul.  Dost  thou  say, ''  My  word
shall  not  return  unto  me  void?  "  Lord,  do  as  thou
hast  said.  Thou  hast  said  it ;  Lord,  do  it.  Has  he
said,  ''  Him  that  cometh  unto  me  I  will  in  no  wise
cast  out  ?  "  Then  go  and  say,  "  Lord,  I  come  now  ;
do  as  thou  hast  said."  On  an  absolute  promise,  I
can  tell  thee,  faith  gets  good  foothold.  Conditional
promises  often  cheer  the  soul :  but  it  Is  the  absolute
promise  which  is  the  rock  that  faith  delights  to  stand
upon.  It  is  the  firm,  unfailing — shall — which  asks
nothing,  but  which  Is  Irresistible,  just  as  it  was  said,
"  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light,"  by  his  own
omnipotent  fiat.

Now,  beloved  friends,  what  promise  has  been  laid


CHARLES  H.   SPURGEON,  605

this  day  to  your  hearts  ?  Many  of  you  have  got
one  that  God  gave  you  when  you  arose  from  your
beds.  What  is  thy  promise,  then  ?  Is  It  a  condi-
tional one  ? — Say,  "  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  fulfil  the
condition  ;  "  and  if  the  promise  be  applied  to  thy  soul
with  a  condition,  he  will  give  thee  the  condition  and
the  promise  both,  for  he  never  gives  by  halves.  Has
he  put  into  thy  soul,  "  Let  the  wicked  man  forsake
his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts?"
He  will  give  you  grace  to  forsake  your  ways  and  your
thoughts  too.  He  will  not  give  you  the  conditional
promise  without  in  due  time  giving  you  the  condition
too.  Is  it  laid  on  your  heart  ?  Well,,ask  of  him  that
ye  may  forsake  your  wicked  ways  and  your  unright-
eous thoughts,  and  return  to  God.  But  hast  thou  an
absolute  promise  laid  to  thy  soul  ?  Then  thou  art  a
happy  man.  Has  God  laid  to  thine  inmost  spirit
some  of  those  great  and  precious  promises,  such  as
this :  "  The  mountains  shall  depart  and  the  hills  be
removed,  but  my  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee,
neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  removed  ?  "
Pause  not  to  ask  for  conditions  ;  take  the  promise
just  as  it  is.  Go  on  thy  knees  and  say,  "Lord,  thou
hast  said  it."  Again,  hath  the  Lord  promised,  "  I  will
never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee ;  "  plead  it.  Or
art  thou  In  trouble — search  out  the  suitable  promise.
Thou  hast  said,  "  When  thou  passest  through  the
waters  I  will  be  with  thee,  and  through  the  rivers
they  shall  not  overflow  thee."  I  believe  thee.  Lord  !
I  am  tried ;  but  thou  hast  said  I  shall  have  no  trial


6'06  FROVING  GOD,

that  I  am  not  able  to  bear.  Lord,  give  me  all-suf-
ficient grace,  and  make  me  more  than  conqueror.
Go  and  prove  God.  Be  not  afraid  with  any  amaze-
ment. If  he  gives  a  promise,  he  gives  you  an  invita-
tion to  prove  it.  If  he  gives  you  a  single  word,  he
means  that  you  should  bring  it  to  him  and  tell  it  to
him  again  ;  for  you  know  he  has  said,  "  I  will  yet  for
this  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel,  to  do  it
for  them."  Do,  I  beseech  you,  put  the  Lord  In  mind
of  his  own  promises,  and  he  will  most  assuredly  ful-
fil them.  Here  is  a  challeno-e  to  all  the  redeemed
— "  Prove  me  now."

III.  In  the  third  place,  there  is  a  season  mentioned
— "  Prove  me  nozuT  Do  you  know  what  is  the  most
perilous  time  in  a  Christian's  life  ?  I  think  I  could
hit  upon  it  in  a  moment — "  now."  Many  persons —
I  might  well  nigh  say  all  Christians — are  ever  most
apprehensive  of  the  present  hour.  Suppose  they
are  In  trouble,  though  they  may  have  had  ten  times
worse  troubles  before,  they  forget  all  about  them,
and  now  is  the  most  critical  day  they  ever  knew.
Or,  if  they  are  at  ease,  they  say —

"  Far  more  the  treacherous  cahn  I  dread
Than  tempests  rolling  o'er  my  head  ;  "

and  they  think  no  position  in  life  more  dangerous
than  "  now."  The  lions  are  before  them — how  ^reat
their  danger !  And  when,  a  little  while  ago,  they
lost  their  roll  in  the  arbor  of  ease,  how  dreadful  it
was  then !     And    when    they   ^ot   to    the    slippery


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON,  ^0/

crround,  orolne  down  hill,  "  now  "  seemed  dielr  grreat-
est    danger.     When   they  get  a  little   further,  and
Apollyon    meets    them,    "  Here,"    they  say,  "  is  the
worst  trial  of  all."     Then  comes  the  valley  of  the
shadow  of  death,   and  they  say,  ''  Now  this  is  the
^  most  serious  period  of  my  life."     In  fact  it  is  right
that  we  should  feel  in  some  degree  that  "  now  "  is
just  the  time  we  ought  to  be  guarded ;  yesterdays
and   to-morrows  we   may  leave,  but   "  now "   is   the
time  we  must  be  watchful.     God  has  made  no  prom-
ises for  yesterdays  and  to-morrows  ;  he  only  makes
such  promises  as  he  applies  to  our  hearts  now.    God
never  lays  to-morrow's  promise  on  my  heart  to-day,
because  I  am  not  in  immediate  want  of  it ;  the  prom-
ises are  given  in  the  time,  in  the  place,  and  in  the
man7iej^  he  has  designed  and  intended  they  should
be  answered.     But  no  doubt  some  of  you  will  sym-
pathize with  me  when  I  say  that  "  now  "  is  just  the
time  when  the  Christian  thinks  he  can  trust  God  the
least.     "  Oh  !  "  says  he,  "  if  I  were  in  the  same  state
as  I  was  before,  I  should  be  happy.     I  do  believe  that
I  could  have  trusted  my  Master  better  then ;    but
just  now  I  cannot  lay  my  head  so  confidently  on  the
Saviour's  breast.     I  remember  when  I  was  sick  how
sweet  the  promises  were.     I  could  then  say —

" '  Sweet  to  lie  passive  in  his  hands,
And  know  no  will  but  his.'

But  now  I  am  altered.     Somehow  or  other  a  languor
has  come  over  me.     I  cannot  believe  that  I  am  a


6o8  PROVING   GOD.

Christian."  You  compare  yourself  with  some
brother,  and  feel  quite  sure  that  if  you  were  like
him  you  would  have  faith.  Go  and  speak  to  this
brother,  and  he  will  say,  "  If  I  were  like  you  I  should
be  better  off."  And  so  they  would  change  experi-
ences, each  failinof  to  trust  God  under  his  own  cir-
cumstances.  But  the  Lord  is  pleased  always  to  give
us  a  word  that  suits  the  particular  position  we  may
be  in  :  "  Prove  me  now."  To  alleoforize  a  moment.
There  is  a  ship  upon  the  sea.  It  is  the  ship  which
the  Lord  has  launched,  and  which  he  has  said  shall
come  to  its  desired  haven.  The  sea  is  smooth  ;  the
waves  ripple  gently,  and  bear  the  bark  steadily  along.
**  Prove  me  now,"  says  the  Lord.  The  mariner
stands  on  the  deck  and  says,  "  Lord,  I  thank  thee
that  thou  hast  eiven  me  such  smooth  sailinof  as  this  ;■
but  ah !  my  Master,  perhaps  this  very  ease  and
comfort  may  destroy  my  grace."  And  a  voice  says,
"  Prove  me  now,  and  see  if  I  cannot  keep  thee  amidst
the  storm."  Anon,  the  heavens  have  gathered
blackness,  the  winds  have  begun  to  bluster,  and  the
waves  lift  up  their  voice,  while  the  poor  ship  is
tossed  to  and  fro  on  the  yawning  deep.  Amid  the
screaming  of  the  tempest  and  the  howling  of  the
winds,  I  hear  a  voice  which  says,  *'  Prove  me  now."
See,  the  ship  is  on  the  rock.  She  has  been  dashed
upon  it;  she  has  been  broken  well  nigh  in  sunder,
and  the  mariner  sees  her  hold  fillinof  with  water,
while  all  his  pumps  cannot  keep  her  empty.  The
voice  still  cries,  "  Prove  me  now."     Alas  !  she  well


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.  609

nigh  sinks ;  another  wave  will  be  enough  to  swamp
her ;  it  seems  as  if  one  more  drop  would  submerge
her.  Still  the  voice  cries,  "  Prove  me  now."  And
the  mariner  does  prove  God,  and  he  is  delivered
safely  from  all  his  distresses.  "  They  reel  to  and
fro,"  and  "  stagger  like  a  drunken  man,  and  are  at
their  wits' end ; "  but  "j-*?  he  bringeth  them  unto
their  desired  haven."  Now  the  ship  is  scudding
merrily  along  before  the  wind,  and  lo !  she  cometh
to  the  verge  of  the  horizon.  The  mists  have  gath-
ered round  her;  strange  phantoms  dance  to  the
waves  of  night ;  a  lurid  light  flits  through  the  shades  ;
and  anon  the  darkness  comes  ao^ain.      Something

o  o

broods  about  the  ship  that  the  mariner  hath  never
seen  before^  The  water  is  black  beneath  his  vessel's
•prow  ;  the  air  hangs  damp  and  thick  above  him  ;  the
very  sweat  is  clammy  on  his  face.  Fresh  fear  has
got  hold  of  him  that  he  never  felt  before.  Just  then,
when  he  knows  not  what  to  do,  a  voice  cries,  "  Pr.ove
me  now ;  "  and  so  he  does  :  he  cries  unto  the  Lord
and  is  saved.

Ah,  dear  friends,  I  might  give  you  a  hundred  illus-
trations. I  think  this  old  Bible  speaks  to  me  to-day.
I  have  wielded  it  in  your  midst  as  God's  soldier.
This  sword  of  the  spirit  hath  been  thrust  into  many
of  your  hearts,  and  though  they  were  hard  as
adamant,  it  has  split  them  in  sunder.  Some  of  you
have  had  sturdy  spirits  broken  In  pieces  by  this  good
old  Jerusalem  blade.  Many  a  man  has  come  during
my  ministrations,  armed  to  his  very  teeth,  and  hav-
39


5io  PROVING   GOD.

ino-  on  a  coat  of  mail,  yet  hath  this  tried  weapon
cleft  him  in  twain,  and  pierced  to  the  dividing  asun-
der of  the  joints  and  marrow.  *'  Prove  me  now,"
says  God,  *'go  and  prove  me  before  blasphemers;
go  and  prove  me  before  reprobates,  before  the  vilest
of  the  vile,  and  the  filthiest  of  the  filthy;  go  and
prove  me  now."  Lift  up  that  life-giving  cross,  and
let  it  again  be  exhibited ;  into  the  regions  of  death,
go  and  proclaim  the  word  of  life ;  into  the  most
plague-smitten  parts  of  the  city,  go  and  carry  the
wavine  censer  of  the  incense  of  a  Saviour's  merits,
and  prove  now  whether  he  is  not  able  to  stay  the
plague  and  remove  the  disease.  But  what  does  God
say  to  the  church  ?  "  You  have  proved  me  afore-
time, you  have  attempted  great  things  ;  though  some
of  you  were  faint-hearted,  and  said,  \ve  should  not
have  ventured,  others  of  you  had  faith  and  proved
me.  I  say  again,  '  Prove  me  now.'  "  See  what  God
can  do,  just  when  a  cloud  is  falling  on  the  head  of
him  whom  God  has  raised  up  to  preach  to  you  ;  go
and  prove  him  now — see  if  he  will  not  pour  out  such
a  blessing  as  ye  had  not  even  dreamed  of — see  if  he
will  not  give  you  a  Pentecostal  blessing.  "  Prove
me  now."  Why  should  we  be  unbelieving?  Have
we  one  thinor  to  make  us  so  ?  We  are  weak  ;  what
of  that  ?  Are  we  not  strongest  in  our  God  when
we  are  weakest  in  ourselves  ?  We  are  fools,  it  is
said,  and  so  we  are,  we  know  it ;  but  he  maketh  fools
to  confound  the  wise.     We  are  base,  but  God  has


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.  6ll

chosen  the  base  things  of- the  world.  We  are  un-
learned,—

"  We  know  no  schoolman's  subtle  art,"

yet  we  glory  In  Infirmity  when  Christ's  power  doth
rest  upon  us.  Let  them  represent  us  as  worse  than
we  are  ;  let  them  give  us  the  most  odious  character
that  hath  ever  been  given  to  man,  we  will  bless  them,
and  wish  them  good.  What  though  the  weapon  be
a  stone,  or  even  the  jaw-bone  of  an  ass,  If  the  Lord
direct  It  ?  Do  you  not  know,  say  some,  what  wise
men  say  ?  Yes,  we  do,  but  we  can  read  their  oracles
backwards.  Their  words  are  the  offspring  of  their
wishes.  We  know  who  has  Instructed  them,  and  we
know  he  Is  a  liar  from  the  beginning.  O  fools,  and
slow  of  heart !  do  you  shrink  from  the  truth,  or  do
ye  shrink  from  obloquy  and  disgrace  ?  In  either
case  ye  have  not  the  love  to  your  Master  you  should
have.  If  ye  be  brave  men  and  true,  go  on  and  con-
quer. Fear  not,  ye  shall  win  the  day  yet ;  God's
Holy  Gospel  shall  yet  shake  the  earth  once  more.
The  banner  Is  lifted  up,  and  multitudes  are  flocking
to  it — the  Pharisees  have  taken  counsel  too^ether —
the  learned  stand  confounded — the  sages  are  baffled.
They  know  not  what  to  do.  The  little  one  God  has
made  great,  and  he  that  was  despised  Is  exalted.
Let  us  trust  him,  then.  He  will  be  with  us  even  to
the  end,  for  he  has  said,  "  Lo,  I  will  be  with  you
always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."

IV.  The  last  division  of  my  subject  Is  an  argu-
ment, and  I  have  trenched  on  that  already — "  Prove


5i2  PROVING  GOD.

me  now."  Why  should  we  prove  God  ?  Because,
beloved,  it  will  glorify  him  if  we  do.  Nothing  glor-
ifies God  more  than  proving  him.  When  a  poor
hungry  child  of  God,  without  a  crust  in  the  cup-
board, says,  "  Lord,  thou  hast  said  bread  shall  be
given  me,  and  water  shall  be  sure ;  I  will  prove
thee," — more  glory  is  given  to  God  by  that  simple
proof  of  him  than  by  the  hallelujahs  of  the  arch-
angels. When  some  poor  despairing  sinner,  who
has  been  fluttering  round  the  word,  in  hopes  that  he
may —

"  Light  on  some  sweet  promise  there.
Some  sure  defence  against  despair,"

when  such  a  one  giveth  credence  to  God's  promise,
in  the  very  teeth  of  evidence  against  him,  staggering
not  at  the  promise  through  unbelief,  then  he  glorifies
God.  If  thou  art  this  morning  in  thy  own  appre-
hension an  almost  damned  sinner,  and  thou  feelest
thyself  to  be  the  vilest  of  all,  if  thou  wilt  believe  this,
that  Christ  loves  thee,  and  that  Christ  came  to  save
thee,  sinner  as  thou  art,  thou  wilt  glorify  God  as
much  by  doing  that  as  thou  wilt  be  able  to  do,  when
thy  fingers  shall  sweep  across  the  strings  of  the
golden  harps  of  Paradise.  We  glorify  God  by  prov-
ing him.  Try  God.  This  Is  the  way  to  bring  out
the  glorious  points  of  the  Christian  character.  It  is
in  being  singularly  qualified  for  the  duties  of  our
holy  Christian  warfare,  in  being  singularly  courage-
ous, and  singularly  ready,  with  the  martyr-spirit,  to
peril  ourselves  for  his  service,  that  we  may  bring


CHARLES  H.   SPURGE  ON.  613

glory  to  God.  God  says,  "  Prove  me  now/'  Saint,
wilt  thou  rob  him  of  his  honor  ?  Wilt  thou  rob  him
of  his  honor?  Wilt  thou  not  do  that  which  shall
crown  him,  in  the  estimation  of  the  world,  with  many
more  crowns  ?  Oh,  prove  him,  for  by  so  doing  thou
wilt  glorify  his  name.

Prove  him  again,  for  thou  hast  proved  him  before.
Canst  thou  not  remember  that  thou  wast  brouo^ht
very  low,  and  yet  thou  canst  say,  "  This  poor  man
cried,  and  the  Lord  heard  him  and  saved  him  out  of
all  his  troubles."  What!  wilt  thou  not  prove  him
again  ?  Mindest  thou  not  the  goodness  thou  hast
proved  ?  When  thou  saidst,  "  My  feet  were  almost
gone,  my  steps  had  well  nigh  slipped,"  did  he  not
support  thee,  saying,  "  Nevertheless,  I  am  continually
with  thee  ;  thou  hast  holden  me  by  my  right  hand  ?  "
Has  thy  foot  slipped?  Canst  thou  not  thus  far
witness  to  his  mercy?  then  trust  in  it  to  hold  thee
up  still.  If  he  had  once  failed  thee,  I  should  not  ad-
vise thee  to  trust  him  again ;  but  since  thou  hast
never  found  him  fail  thee,  therefore,  I  say,  go  and
prove  him  once  more.

Again,  accept  this  challenge,  prove  God's  word,  as
he  has  called  thee  to  do,  and  how  much  blessing  it
will  give  to  thyself!  Beloved  brethren,  we  endure
ten  times  as  much  anxiety  in  this  world  as  we  need,
because  we  confide  not  in  divine  promise  half  as
much  as  we  miofht.  If  we  were  to  live  more  on
God's  promise,  and  less  on  creature  feelings,  we
should  be  happier  men  and  women,  all  of  us.     If  we


6i4  PROVING  GOD.

were  to  get  hold  of  a  promise,  and  say,  ''  There,  let
me  abide  by  this  ;  though  the  world  says  it  is  not
true,  I  will  believe  it."  Could  we  live  alway  in  faith
on  the  promises,  the  shafts  of  the  enemy  could  nev^er
reach  us.  Let  us  constantly,  then,  seek  to  prove
him.  How  much  good  Mr.  Muller  has  done  by
proving  God.  He  is  called  by  God  to  a  special
work.  What  does  he  do  ?  He  builds  an  asylum  and
trusts  to  God.  He  has  no  regular  income ;  but  he
says,  I  will  prove  to  the  world  that  God  hears  prayer.
So  he  lives  in  the  exercise  of  prayer  ;  and  though  he
may  at  times  be  brought  to  his  last  shilling,  yet  there
is  never  a  meal  that  his  children  sit  down  to  without
sufficient  bread.  Our  work  may  be  different  to  his  ;
but  let  us  seek,  whatever  our  work  is,  so  to  do  it,
that  when  any  one  reads  of  it  he  will  say,  he  tried
God  in  such  and  such  a  promise,  and  his  life  was  a
standing  proof  that  that  promise  did  not  fail.  What-
ever your  promise  is,  let  your  life  be  seen  to  be  the
working  out  of  the  problem  which  has  to  be  proved,
and  like  any  one  proposition  of  Euclid,  which  is
stated  at  the  beginning  and  proved  at  the  end,  so
may  we  find  a  text  put  at  the  beginning  of  our  lives
as  a  promise  to  be  fulfilled  and  seen  at  the  close,
demonstrated,  proved,  and  carried  out.

But,  dear  friends,  I  have  really  done.  Let  me  just
conclude  by  asking  those  here  who  have  been  brought
to  know  their  lost  and  ruined  state,  to  remember  this
promise,  "  Prove  me  now."  Thus  saith  my  God  unto
thee,  O  sinner,  "  He  that  calleth  on  the  name  oi  the


CHARLES  H.    SPURGEON.  615

Lord  shall  be  saved."  My  dear  hearer,  art  thou  lost
and  ruined  ?  Prove  God  now.  He  says,  "  Call  upon
me,  and  I  will  answer  thee ;"  come  now,  and  call
upon  him.  He  hath  said,  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ;  "
oh,  seek  him  now.  "  Knock,"  he  says,  "  and  it  shall
be  opened  unto  you  ; "  lift  up  the  knocker  of  heaven's
door  and  sound  it  with  all  thy  might ;  or,  suppose
thou  art  too  weak  to  knock,  let  the  knocker  fall  down
of  itself.  He  has  said,  "Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive ;
seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened
unto  you."  Go,  and  prove  the  promise  now.  Try
to  prove  it.  He  has  said,  "  Through  this  man  is
preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  by
him  all  that  believe  are  freely  justified."  Oh,  poor
soul,  prove  it.  Art  thou  a  poor,  sick,  and  wounded
sinner?  You  are  told  tha'  Jesus  Christ  is  able  and
willing  to  heal  your  v/ounds,  and  extract  the  poison
from  your  veins.  Prove  hii7%  prove  him,  poor  soul.
Thou  thinkest  thyself  to  be  a  lost  one  ;  therefore,  I
urge  thee  in  Christ's  name  to  prove  this  promise,  "I,
even  I,  am  he  that  blo^teth  out  thy  transgressions,
and  will  not  remember  chy  sins."  Take  this  to  him.
Say,  Thou  hast  said,  O  Lord,  that  "  this  is  a  faithful
saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I
am  chief."  O  God,  I  want  faith  to  trust  thy  word  ;
I  know  thou  dost  mean  what  thou  hast  said ;  thou
hast  said  this  morning  by  the  mouth  of  thy  minister,
"  Prove  me  now ;  "  Lord,  I  will  prove  thee  now,  this


6l6  PROVING   GOD.

very  day,  even  till  nightfall  if  thou  dost  not  answer
mc.     I  will  still  keep  fast  by  thy  promise —

"  Lo,  I  must  maintain  my  hold ;
'Tis  ihy  goodness  makes  me  bold  •
I  can  no  denial  take,
Since  I  plead  for  Jesus'  sake."

Go,  my  beloved,  and  ye  will  not  be  gone  long  be-
fore you  will  be  able  to  sing —

**  I*m  forgiven,  I'm  forgiven ;
I'm  a  miracle  of  grace."

Now,  do  not  stand  still  and  say,"  God  will  not  hear
such  an  one  as  I;  my  disease  is  too  bad  for  him  to  cure."
Go  and  see,  put  your  hand  on  the  hem  of  his  garment,
and  then,  if  the  blood  does  not  stanch,  go  and  tell
the  world  that  thou  hast  proved  God,  and  proved
him  wrong.  Go  and  tell  it,  if  thou  durst.  But  oh  !
thou  canst  not.  If  thou  dost  touch  the  hem  of  his
garment,  I  know  what  thou  wilt  say :  "  I  have  tasted
that  the  Lord  is  gracious.  He  said,  *  Trust  in  me,
and  I  will  deliver  thee.'  I  have  trusted  in  him,  and
he  has  delivered  me ;  '*  for  the  promise  will  always
have  its  fulfilment — "  Prove  me  now."  "  Prove  me
now,"  says  God.


:        :
i  1
;
