



School of Theology at Claremont 


NNN 


1001 1344662 















































The Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 





WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 























FROM ONE OL HIS’ LATEST PHOTOGRAPHS. 


LIFE, WORK 4% SERMONS 


DWIGHT L. MOODY 


THE 
GREAT EVANGELIST 


EDITED BY 
RICHARD B. COOK, D.D., 
Author Life of W. E. Gladstone, Life of Spurgeon, Story of Jesus, etc. 


: THREE BOOKS IN ONE VOLUME. 


BOOK I.—Biography of Mr. Moody, by the Editor. 
BOOK II.—Closing Scenes and Thoughts. y 
BOOK III.—Sermons and Addresses of Mr. Moody. 


BALTIMORE : 
R. H. WOODWARD COMPANY, 
1900. 


Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 2 


COPYRIGHT, 1900. 
R. H. WOODWARD COMPANY. 


DEDICATION. 


To the People of America, without regard to territorial 
limits, political opinions, or religious predilections, whose 
heart the subject of this sketch has won, whose ideal has 
been elevated by his labor and his teaching, whose life has 
been greatly influenced for good, for time and eternity, is this 


volume respectfully dedicated. 








A New York man wrote to an influential friend in Chicago 
to get a situation or clerkship for a young acquaintance whose 
father was president of a bank in the great Eastern city. -THe- 
Chicago man replied that out there they never asked who a ° 
man’s father was, for every man was his own daddy. 

This tendency to make light of one’s surroundings and ante-_ 
cedents is seen in another form in those who have no regard 
for the past, who know no history beyond yesterday, who live 
only in the present, who imagine that they have wholly made. 
themselves, and who dream. that the present generation only 
deserves credit for the glory of these closing years of the nine-. 
teenth century. 

The steps cannot all be traced in the making of a good and 
great man; it would be instructive and interesting if possible. 
It is beyond our reach to consider all the influences at work 
to make such a character as that of Dwight L. Moody, but we 
do not venture when we affirm that the civilization alone even 
of this wonderful age could not have produced him. He and 
the widely extended and permanent work he performed were 


the product mainly of Christianity, which he lived and labored 


tO promote. 


It is interesting to trace the course of the young man born 


in obscurity and of humble parentage to any exalted position 


6 PREFACE, 


in life, and there are many such. Our own country affords an 
opportunity beyond all others for the poor and friendless boy 
to become great by his own exertions, unaided by the favor 
of men, to lift himself from the lowliest position to the loftiest 
place and to the enjoyment of riches, power and honor. The 
biography of Dwight L. Moody furnishes a remarkable in- 
stance of a young man of no education, no position, no influ- 
ence, no wealth, no great friends, advancing step by step over 
every obstacle, until he becomes a great and successful worker, 
a masterful leader, a mighty preacher, a great mover of men, 
and speaking to vast audiences of people collected by his name 
and held by his wonderful power and rugged eloquence—proy- 
ing himself to be the Greatest Evangelist of the Nineteenth 
Century. 


CHAPTERS. 
it 


Il. 
LET. 
IV. 
V. 


VI 


WATE 
VIII. 


_ XIV. 


CONTENTS. 


WBOOK Als 
BIOGRAPHY. ‘ 
: ‘ PAGE 
Birenjand> Parentage yes a-ak ei cdaaitices hee oe eS 
In ‘Boston—GClerk—Conversion. /.............% ot 
Removes to Chica gos catia. cise sesh ici tate 29 
Begins to Wholly Devote Himself to the Work. 99 — 
The Great Fire in Chicago—Marriage......... 157 
Meets and Labors with Mr. Sankey........... 175 
Moedy and Sankey Go to Europe............: 210 
Work in England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales 
ASO TUBUTIALE A evn acter at asco song oan hed cont tP ape a 227 
Mr. Moody and Professor Drummond........ 260 
Meetings in the Grand Depot, Philadelphia.... 283 : 
Meetings in the Hippodrome, New York...... 204 
The Columbian Exposition— Mr. Sankey’s 
Songs—Mr. Moody’s Books......... pasta 306 
Permanent Work at Northfield.......... ata 325 
BOOKIE 
CLOSING SCENES AND THOUGHTS. 
At- Kansas City—Last Meetings—Last Ser- 
TPRYON EIS nes tithes, Conky Ore ORR GRO ROR ome RAO ean 338 
Sickness=—Death—Butial . . 22s): oh. su eels selene 349 © 


CONTENTS. 


XVI. Estimates of Work and Worth—Memorial 
Meetings. GY. 0... DS ihik. See ea ee ene aa 387 
XVII. Reminiscences—lIllustrative Anecdotes........ 414 
XVAIIT==Extracts from Discourses... s......0saeseneee 434 

BOOKVIEE 
SERMONS AND ADDRESSES. 

XIX: A ‘Christmas Sermons). os ee ee 455 

XX. Funeral: Sermon of Mr. Moody's Brother, 
Sainvel Gucsisiiticotuce oa eee ee 401 
X XI. Heaven and Its Inhabitants................... 470 
uns 2) reastres in Heavens. ifs 0. cee cee eee 486 
XXIII. Young Men Urged to Decide for God......... 502 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


ere OOUV Rance Satine ea nic cntenee ti ctaisteite s Frontispiece. 
PAGE- 
Mr. Moody at Morning Council, Camp Northfield. ..... 33 
Round Top, Northfield Fisk MES An Siac an hake te eS 43 
Me Moody’s*Home, Northfieldi ns lois d.0o564 Maske sh eeeeans 53 
Auditorium, Interior View, Northfield.................. 63 
Muctorium yNorthhel dase nick oe. Sara tec olla eee anes 73 
View of Connecticut River and Berkshire Hills.......... 83 
Manylandelnstitute; Balttmores sacs aac seascnsia teak 93 
Mise Moodyse Church, Northiveld’) ci, .ae seater eae III 
Bird’s-eye View of Library, Marquand, and Stone Hall, 
Niothitvel divas csgac str smetien us sige an aoetiqota cit aicnieamteeens 129 
Mis hoody: Out: DA Vvin Sy sje tensile enor. Gruls dele ooeees 147 
Mt. Vernon Place Methodist Church, Baltimore........ 165 © 
Y. M. C. A. Building, Baltimore...... ae hae 247 
Marquatd cally Northheldae ccc. acnne- A. 2 ae. tN oh 313 
Convention Hall, Kansas City, Mo......... SEA EM Bs 2p 379 


Convention Hall, Interior View, Kansas, City, Mo...... 445 





Testimony to the life and character of Mr. D. L. Moody from 
the distinguished ProFEessor HENRY DRUMMOND, author 
of “Natural Law in the Spiritual World” and of “The 
Greatest Thing in the World:” 


“IT got a treat last night. Moody sat up alone with me till 


1 o'clock telling me the story of his life. He told me the whole 


thing. A reporter might have made a fortune out of it.” 

“T hope you will see something of Moody when he is in your 
neighborhood in the early year. My admiration of him has 
increased a hundred-fold. I had no idea before of the moral 
size of the man, and I think very few know what he really is.” 

“Moody was the biggest man I ever saw.”—Life of Henry 
Drummond, by Dr. George Adam Smith, Professor of Free Church 


College, Glasgow. 





ay 


BOOK I. - 


Biography of D. L. Moody by the Editor, 


CHAPTERS L 


BIRTH AND PARENTAGE. 


Dwight Lyman Moody was born February 5, 1837, 


in Northfield, Mass., in a farmhouse on one of the hill- 
sides overlooking the beautiful Connecticut Valley. 


Northfield was first settled in 1673 by thirty English 
people form Northampton and three from Hadley, who 
were “straitened for room,” and who looked with 
longing eyes on the fertile meadows where “the grass. 


was very rank; if let alone it grew up to a man’s face.” 


Having obtained permission from the General Court 
of Massachusetts, they purchased the land from the 
Squakkeag Indians, who were very willing to sell. 
During the Indian war under King Philip the inhabi- 
tants were surprised by the Indians, many massacred 


and the rest forced for shelter to the stockade. When 
: s 


I4 LIFE OF MOODY. 


rescued they abandoned their ruined settlement. Some 
of the survivors and the heirs of those dead returned 
seven years after to rebuild their settlement, which was 
again in 1688 broken up by Indians hired by the Cana- 
dian French. The permanent settlement was effected 
in 1713. Mr. Moody was the most eminent man the 
town produced. 

Mr. Moody was-born of poor parents, who labored 
hard to secure. a bare living from the few acres of land 
which composed the farm. His father was a stone 
mason and a small farmer. He was broken down with 
reverses in business. When Dwight was four years old 
his father suddenly dropped dead. The widow was left 
with nine small children looking to her alone for sup- 
port. She was a woman of remarkable strength of 
character, and met the trying difficulties of the situation 


- with heroic fortitude. In the strength of the Lord she — 


rose to the duties before her and reared her children. 


During the long and bitterly cold winters the family | 


were so poor that the children were sometimes obliged 
to stay in bed until it was time to go to school in order 
to keep warm, for the supply of fuel was small and un- 
certain. She was urged to put her children into differ- 
ent homes on account of her extreme poverty, but pre- 
ferred to keep her little flock together, which she man- 
aged to do by tilling, by their help, the little garden 


LIFE OF MOODY. 15 


_ and doing what work she could do for her neighbors, 
Mr. Moody often has pathetically spoken of this 
period of his life. He says: atren 
“There is no subject in the Bible that takes stronger 
hold on me than that of the wandering sinner. It enters 
so deeply into my own life. It comes right into my 
very family. The first thing I remember is the death 
of my father. It was a lovely day in June when he fell 
suddenly dead. The shock made such an impression 
on me, young as I was, that I shall never forget it. I 
remember nothing about the funeral, but his death has 
made a lasting impression upon me. After my father’s 
death the creditors came and took everything. One 
calamity after another swept over the household. The 
next thing that I remember was that twins were added 
to the family and my mother was taken sick. And the 
next thing occurred in our family that impressed itself 
on my young mind was that my eldest brother, to whom 
my mother looked up to comfort her in her loneliness 
and in her great affliction, all at once left home and be- 
came a wanderer. He had been reading sonie of the 
trashy novels, and was seized with the belief that all he 
had to do to make his fortune was to go away, and 
away he went. I need not tell you how my mother 
mourned for her boy, how she longed and waited day 
by day and month by month for his return. Night after 


16 LIFE OF MOODY. 


night she watched and wept and prayed. How eagerly _ 
she looked for tidings of that boy! Many a time we 
were told to go to the postoffice to see if a letter had 
not come from him, but we had to bring back the words 
that’ increased the sorrow of her heart, ‘No letter yet, 
mother.’ Many a time I have waked up in the night 
and heard her pray, ‘Oh, God, bring back my boy!’ 
Often she would lift up her heart-to God in prayer for 
her lost son. When winter came, and some nights when 
the blast of winter came, and the high wind began to 
blow around the house, and the storm to. rage without, 
she would tremble at every gust, and would show in 
her troubled face her anxious thoughts and terrible 
fears, and would pray for the son who had treated her 
so unkindly, and would utter in piteous tones, ‘Oh, my 
dear boy; perhaps he is now on the ocean this fearful 
night. Oh, God, preserve him.’ We would huddle to- 
gether around the fire on an evening and ask her to tell 
_ us about our father, and she would talk for hours about 
him. But if the name of our eldest brother was by 
chance mentioned, then all would be hushed, for she 
never spoke of him except with tears. She would try 
to conceal them, but in vain. I used to think she loved 
him better than all of us put together, and I believe she 
did. When Thanksgiving Day would come she used to 
set a chair for him, thinking he would return home. Her 


‘LIFE OF MOODY. nL alee 


friends and neighbors gave him up, but mother had 
faith to,believe she would see him again. Her family 
grew up and her boys left home. When I got so I 
could write, I sent letters all over the country, but 
could find no trace of him. One day, while in Boston, 
the news reached me that he had returned. While in 
that city I remember how I used to look for him in 
every store—he had a mark on his face—but I never 
got any trace. One day, in the middle of summer, . 
while my mother was sitting at the home door, a 
stranger was seen coming towards the house, and when 
he came to the door he stopped. He came upon the 
_ east piazza and looked upon my mother through the 
window. My mother did not. start or rise; she didn’t 
know her boy. He stood there with folded arms and 
great beard flowing down his breast, his tears trickling - 
down his face. When my mother saw those tears she 
knew her boy and cried, ‘Oh, it’s my lost son!’ and en- 

treated him to come in. But he stood still. ‘No, 
mother,’ he said, ‘I will not come in until I hear that 

you have forgiven me.’ She rushed to the threshold, 

threw her arms around him, wept upon his shoulder as 

the prodigal’s father did, and breathed forgiveness. 

When I heard of it a thrill of joy shot through me.” 

In his boyhood Dwight attended the district school 
which was near his home. The paths of wisdom and 


18 LIFE OF MOODY. 


knowledge had very few attractions for him, and he 
firmly held to the sentiment of the old rhyme begin- 
ning “Multiplication is vexation.” The only thing in 
which he seemed to excel was mischief, being more 
fond of fun than of study, and the only strong element 
- in his character was his loving devotion to his mother, 
which held his wild impulses in check. He grew to be 
a strong, self-willed youth, and worked on the farm the 
most of the time. The little schooling Dwight re- 
ceived was not greatly enjoyed, and his distaste for 
school and study was greatly strengthened, because the 
teacher was a man of violent temper, which he made no 
effort to control, and who severely used a rattan on 
the boys’ backs upon the least provocation. In after 
years Mr. Moody told how a happy change took place 


in that school. He says: “After a while there was | . 


somebody who began to get up a movement in favor 
of controlling the school children by love. I remem- 
ber how we thought of the good time we should have 
that winter, when the rattan would be banished from 
school. We thought we would then have all the fun we 
wanted. I remember who the teacher was—a lady— 
and she opened the school with prayer. We hadn’t 
seen it so done before, and it impressed us, especially 
when she prayed that she might have grace and | 
strength to rule the school with love. The school went 


LIFE OF MOODY. oSphtoie 


on for several weeks, and we saw no rattan; but at last 
the rules were broken, and I think that I was the first 
boy to break them. She requested me to wait till after - 
school, when she would see me. I thought the rattan 
was coming out to be used at last, and I stretched my- 
self up in warlike attitude. But after school she sat_ 
down by me and told me how she loved me, and how 
she had prayed to be able to rule that school by love, 
and concluded by saying, ‘I want to ask you one favor. 
—-that is, if you love me, try and be a good boy;’ and I 
never gave her trouble again.” 

This school incident shows that Dwight was suscep- 
tible to kindness. Another story shows how tender 
his young heart was to good impressions. There was 


an old man in the place who was in the habit of giving 


every new boy who came to the town a new penny. 
One day the old man put his hand on Dwight’s head 
and said to him, “You have a Father in heaven, my 
boy.”” He never forgot the pressure of that hand. 
Moody’s acquirements made at school were very 
meager. He could read only in a stumbling fashion, 
and could probably master not much more than a 
simple problem in arithmetic requiring a knowledge 
merely of the first four rules. The rules of grammar 
had very little influence upon him, and his speech 
abounded in the idioms of the country district in which. 


20 LIFE OF MOODY. 


he lived. He had physical strength and muscles devel- 
oped by constant exercise at labor and play, and he 
had undaunted courage, but he was in appearance un- 
couth and awkward. 


ae 
rele 


LIFE OF MOODY, 3 21 


CHAPTER II. 


“IN BOSTON. 


When Dwight Moody became seventeen years of age 
he concluded that he had had enough of school and all © 


the education he needed, and that the time had come for 


him to go forth into the wide world to seek his fortune. 
Farming in Northfield among the rocks was hard and 
unprofitable. Having obtained his mother’s consent, 
he started off in search of employment. He first went 
to Clifton, where he had a brother a clerk ina store, but 
there being no opening, he went to Boston and lived at 
his uncle’s, Lemuel Holton, while looking for a situa- 


tion. He had two uncles in Boston, Lemuel and Sam- ° 


uel Holton. He hoped to get a place without their help. 
For a time he was unsuccessful in finding work, and 
endured the bitter experience of the homeless boy and 
of solitude in a great city, surrounded by multitudes of 
people. 

Of this period of his life and of his sad experience he 
thus speaks : “I went to the postoffice two or three times 


_ a day to see if there was a letter for me. I knew there 


was not, as there was but one maila day. I had not any 


22 LIFE OF MOODY. 


employment, and was very homesick, and so went con- 
stantly to the postoffice, thinking, perhaps, when the 
mail did come in, my letter had been mislaid. At last, 
however, I got a letter. It was from my youngest sis- 
ter—the first letter she ever wrote me. I opened it with 
a light heart, thinking there was some good news from 
home, but the burden of the whole letter was that she 
had heard there were pickpockets in, Boston, and 
warned me to take care of them. I thought I had better 
get some money in hand first, and then I might take 
care of pickpockets.” 

After a prolonged struggle, young Moody, just as s he 
was thinking of a tramp to New York, succeeded in 
securing a situation in the boot and shoe store of his 
uncle, Samuel Holton, his mother’s brother. At first 


his uncle had been unwilling to take him, because he ~ 


had visited Northfield and knew of Dwight’s wildness. 
_ He feared to have trouble with him on account of the 
boy’s wilful disposition. When Dwight went to him, 


however, he agreed to employ him, provided he would | 


agree to certain conditions—that he should be gov- 
erned by his uncle’s judgment in matters and not by 
his own, that he should heed his advice, and that he 
should attend regularly the Mount Vernon Church and 
Sunday-school. The boy chafed under these, to him, 
severe restrictions, but he was in no condition to rebel— 


LIFE OF MOODY. i aah es 


his money was exhausted, and he was reduced to sub- 
mission. Doubtless he came afterwards to see the ben- 
efits these trials were to him. But his trials were not 
over. His manners in the store, and methods of doing 
business, which were original, to say the least, were a 


shock to Boston customers and the cause of criticism 


from other clerks. He acted upon the notion that he 
must fight his way everywhere. But before long he 
was selling more goods than any of them. . While the 
other clerks were spending their time in chatting, he 
spent his spare time out of doors, in successful search 
of purchasers for his goods. 

Young Moody had attended the Unitarian Giirch 
at home, of which Rev. Oliver Everett was the pastor 
and of which his mother was a member, but in accord- 
ance with the wishes of his uncle he attended the 


preaching of the learned and eloquent Dr. E. N. Kirk, pas- 


tor of the Mount Vernon Congregationalist Church. His 
able sermons had their influence, but Moody’s devoted 
Sunday-school teacher, Mr. Edward Kimball, most in- 
fluenced him then and in his future life. 

He was converted under Mr. Kimball’s faithful 
labors and teachings and his tact to win the boy’s con-_ 
fidence. One day he came into the store where Dwight 
Moody was employed, and going behind the counter, 
placed his hand on the boy’s shoulder and talked about 


24 LIFE OF MOODY. 


his becoming a Christian. This decided it. Such in- 
terest touched young Moody’s heart, and he soon took 
a stand on the right side. But trial came again. Years 
‘afterwards Mr. Moody was able to return Mr. Kim- 
ball’s kindness by leading his old teacher’s son to 
Christ, when seventeen years of age, just his own age 
when young Kimball’s father befriended Moody. Soon 
after Mr. Kimball visited him Moody applied for mem- 
bership in the church. He continued for months to 
‘knock, in vain, at the door of the church for admission, 
because he failed to satisfy the too cautious officers of 
the church in his examinations as to doctrine. He could 
not answer the questions of the good deacons, but he 
trusted the Saviour and wanted to serve Him in every 
way in his power. They thought him very “unlikely 
ever to become a Christian of clear and decided views 
of Gospel truth, still less to fill any extended sphere of 
public usefulness.” It was one long half-year he 
waited before he was received into membership. How- 
ever, he showed his earnest zeal by beginning at once 
to speak in the religious meetings of the church, but so 
ungrammatical was his language, and so uncompli- 
mentary his remarks regarding certain hurtful prac- > 
tices indulged in by fashionable members of the church, 
that his remarks were offensive to some of the congre- 
gation, and he was asked to keep silence and to leave 





» a Se 


LIFE OF MOODY. , 25 


the speaking and praying to brethren who could do it 


more acceptably. One lady begged his uncle Lemuel 
to advise the young man to hold his peace until he was - 
wiser, but his uncle refused to put a straw in his way, 
but rather rejoiced. He did not heed this request to - 
stop speaking, but did wait for membership of the 
church; yet he felt restrained and unsuited to his Bos- 
ton surroundings, and longed for greater freedom of 
action and speech. Some years afterwards Dr. Kirk 
was in Chicago attending the meetings of the American 
Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, and 
lodged with and preached for Moody. On his return he | 
called upon Mr. Holton and said: “I told our people 
last night that we ought to be ashamed of ourselves. 
There is that young Moody, who we thought did not 


know enough to be in our church and Sunday-school, 
exerting a greater influence for Christ than any other 


man in the great Northwest.” It was this procrastina- 
tion that probably turned his thoughts and finally his 
steps towards the West. He had breathed the free 


mountain air of Northfield, and he longed for some- ° 


thing freer still. Finally, in May, 1855, Moody was 
received into the church. 

Dr. W. H. Daniels records the following: “The Rev. 
Dr. Savage of Chicago rélates an incident which oc- 
curred during Mr. Moody’s second visit to England, 


26 LIFE OF MOODY. 


when he took a good-natured revenge upon one of © 
those very deacons. 

“At one of his great meetings in Exeter Hall he 
espied his old friend sitting in a corner away back under 
the gallery. The good man, traveling for his health, 
had seen the notice of the meeting, and, partly out of 
curiosity to see what the man could do, he attended the 
service, taking a seat where he felt sure Moody would 
not see him. But just before closing the meeting Mr. ~ 
Moody exclaimed : 

“<T gee in the house an eminent Christian gentleman 
from Boston. Deacon Palmer, come right forward to 
the platform ; the people want to hear,from you.’ 

“The deacon shook his head, but Moody was inex- 
orable ; so there was nothing for him to do but to accept 
the situation and face the audience. He.commenced by — 
saying that he had known Mr. Moody in Boston in 
early life; had been, in fact, a member of the same 
church with him, and was very glad of his great suc- 
cess in the service of the Lord, when Moody suddenly 
burst out with the remark: 

“Yes, deacon, and you kept me out of that church 
for six months because you thought I did not know 
enough to join it.’ 

“The effect of such a speech under such circum- 
stances can be better imagined than described. But the 


LIFE OF MOODY. 27 


_ deacon was too old a speaker to be silenced by such a 
retort, though he found it difficult to be heard on ac- 
count of the laughter which followed it. The audience, 
he said, must agree with him that it was a great privi- 
lege to have received Mr. Moody into the church at all, 
even though with great misgivings and after long 
delay.” a 
Moody carried to the city those elements of success 


that characterized his early life at home. He had the - . 


rich inheritance of a vigorous constitution, boundless 

ambition and animal spirits and a will strong enough 
to break down all opposition and drive him on to suc- | 
cess. His native pride was all the time leading him to 
undertake things that were far beyond his strength and 
years. A bold push, aided by ready wit, carried him 
over many a difficulty before which wiser, but less cour- 
ageous, persons would hesitate and then despair. His 
mother used to say, “He used to think himself a man 


’ 


when he was only a boy.” The authority of a father. 
was wanting, and he soon came to feel himself his own 
master. Anything was easier than submission. 

Moody began early to feel his dependence on God, 
even before he went to Boston. Once, when he was — 
crawling under a heavy rail fence, it fell upon him and 
caught him so that he could not extricate himself. He 


struggled until he was almost exhausted, and then he — 


28 LIFE OF MOODY. 


cried for help ; but he was too far from any house to be 
heard; and no one was near. At last he got out in 
safety, and gives this account of his escape: 

“T tried and tried, and I couldn’t lift them awful heavy 
rails; then I hollered for help, but nobody came, and 
then I began to think I should have to die away up there 
on the mountain all alone. But I happened to think 
that, maybe, God would help me, and so I asked Him. 
And after that I could lift the rails just as easy !” 

Young Moody remained in Boston only five months 
after being received into the membership of the Mount 
Vernon Church. His brethren hoped that longer expe- 
rience would tone down his impetuous spirit and make 
him at length a quiet and orderly Christian, according 
to their own pattern. But Moody felt that Boston was 
no place for him and his ways and methods, and finally 
took his departure. 


LIFE OF MOODY. 29 


CHAPTER. FE. 
REMOVES TO CHICAGO. 


Having spent two years in Boston, young Moody, 
now nineteen years old, armed with some credentials 
_ from business men and Christians, struck out for the 
great city of the West—Chicago, Il. The date of this 
venture was 1856, and the boot and shoe business of 
that metropolis was at the time in a prosperous condi- 
tion. The motive which prompted this adventure on 
the part of young Moody is supposed by some to have 
been “ambition to gain a fortune.” But his subsequent 
course is proof enough of the presence within him also 
of far nobler motives. : | 
Having carried with him letters of recommendation - 
to a Mr. Wiswall, he was engaged as a salesman in his 
' boot and shoe store on Lake street—not without con- 
siderable misgivings on the part of his employer on 
account of his uncouth appearance and impetuous 
manners. These misgivings, however, soon gave place 
to admiration, and he stood in high favor with his em- 
“ployer and became.very popular with the rougher class 


30 ; LIFE OF MOODY. 


of customers on account of his bluff and hearty style. 
Certain “would-be-smart” rather unmanageable custom- 
ers were commonly turned over to him, and it is re- 
ported that it was a delight to him to handle them. 


Where it was a case of wit-tilting, he commonly came 


out with the best of it. A gentleman who was then a 
fellow-clerk in the same house says “Moody was a first- 
rate salesman. It was his particular pride to make his 
column foot up the largest of any on the book, not only 
in the way of sales, but also of profits. He took partic- 
ular delight in trading with notional or unreasonable 
people, especially when they made great show of smart- 
ness and cunning, and thought themselves extraordi- 
narily wise. Nothing was ever misrepresented in the 
_ sthallest particular, but when it came to a question of 


sharpness of wit between buyer and seller Moody gen- 


erally had the best of it.” 
When Mr. Wiswall added a jobbing department to 


his store Moody was promoted to a position in it. Its 


duties gave him scope both within and outside the 
store, and in this work he seemed to be in his element. 
In this sphere he had opportunity to beat up hotels, de- 
pots and all the other public places for customers, and 
having found persons who had come to town to make 
purchases in his line, his employer says “he used almost 
literally to ‘compel them to come in’ and buy.” 


LIFE OF MOODY. 3I 


Mr.. Wiswall bears also this testimony of him: “His 
ambition made him anxious to lay up money. His per- 
sonal habits were exact'and economical. As a sales- 
man he was just the same zealous and tireless worker 
that he afterwards became in religion.” Serving the 
double purpose of economy for themselves and secur- 
ity for the store, some of the clerks had their lodgings: ; 
in it, and for a standard amusement they made it an : 
arena of forensic discussion. The neighboring clerks, 
after the day’s work, used to come in, and thereupon an 
evening was spent sometimes in fiery debate. Among 
the questions debated were many upon politics, theol- 


" ogy and slavery, upon which last-named pune the 


whole nation was rapidly dividing. 
In theology, young Moody, although brought up to 


the opposite view, had become an ardent Calvinist, 


while young Wiswall was a Methodist. The subject of 
discussion in theology was chiefly “Foreordination 
versus Free-will.” And it is said that these two young: 
theologians in the shoe-store auditorium kept up the 
“Conflict of the Ages.” With how much of spiritual 
profit to themselves we cannot tell, but certainly with- 


‘out weariness to the larger part of their congregation, 
which were boot and shoe cases, with their contents. 


Respecting slavery, at that time a prolific theme of 
debate and division, young Moody, true to his Eastern 


32 iat LIFE OF MOODY. 


training, was an out-and-out abolitionist. On the con- 
trary, some of his fellow-salesmen were in sympathy 
with the Southern view, and advocated it with all their 
ability. Thus the waves of feeling in the shoe store in 
Lake street swelled and moved in unison with the tides 
of feeling in the nation at large. An element of living 
interest was added to these discussions on slavery by 
the presence of the colored porter, who had been a 
_ slave. 
The amusement question came in also for its share 
of notice in these Lake-street-store discussions. On 
this question young Moody was-a decided Puritan. - 
Theaters, balls, billiards, cards and all such pastimes 
he counted as enticements of the devil, and accordingly 
hated them. A graphic exhibition of his feelings and | 
character appears in the incident reported by one of © 
his fellow-clerks, who says “one night he came into the 
store after a religious meeting which he had attended, 
and finding a game of checkers going on, he instantly 
seized the board, dashed it to pieces, and before a word 
could be spoken dropped upon his knees and began to 
pray.’ 
“Mother Fletcher” of the early time, who, entering the 


, 


The incident reminds us of the Methodist 


room and finding the young men playing cards, seized 
them in an instant and threw them into the blazing 


= 
ge 
= 
° 
2) 
o 
ws 
> 
4H 
= 
o 
=<] 
a 
— 
Zz 
Q 
Q 
° 
eq 
Z 
Q 
= 
i 


‘G(TOUIGHLYON dNVO 








LIFE OF MOODY. : ea fs 


wood fire. In this respect, at least, the Armenian and 3 


the Calvinist were in hearty accord. 

It would be far from the truth, however, to conceive 
of young Moody as an ascetic. Disliking and oppos- 
ing as he did all devised and, to him, time-wasting 
amusements, he was fond of spontaneous blood-stir- 
ring frolic or a good-natured trial of strength. It is 
stated also that “he would plan and execute the most 
ingenious practical jokes, and laugh uproariously over 


their success, but, at the same time, holding himself 


ready to laugh no less heartily at the pranks which were 
played upon him.” We leave it to the casuist to deal 
with young Moody’s amusement views at his own 


sweet will. + baat 


At the beginning of this chapter we recognized the 


presence of other life-motives in young Moody than 


simply “ambition to make a fortune.” And in the dis- 


. tinctly church and missionary phase of his conduct the 


nobler, and main and final, motive in his young spirit 


_appears. On arriving in Chicago he united promptly 
with the Plymouth Congregational Church, Rev. J. E. 


Roy, pastor, and at once commenced his career as home 
missionary. He forthwith hired four pews in Plymouth 


- Church and endeavored to keep them filled with young 


men and boys whom he had invited during the week to 


attend Sunday services—a characteristic thing, surely. 


, 


36 — LIFE OF MOODY. 


He also opened his mouth in exhortation and prayer in 
the prayer-meetings of the church. But the pungency 


‘ 


and freedom with which he both spoke and prayed soon 
brought him into a like trouble in the West as in the 
East. Never having learned in the school of Talleyrand 
that “speech is merely used for concealing thoughts,” 
he, like Anthony, spoke right on. Sometimes he is said 
to have told the Lord right before the people things 
about them that they did not want to hear. The result 
(as it immediately affected Moody) was an admonttion 
‘to leave the public speaking and praying to those who 
‘could do it better, but to go on with the good work of 
filling his pews and bringing people to the meetings. 
In the meetings it was suggested that “he could serve 
the Lord best by silence.” 

This admonition is represented as being given on 
account of young Moody’s ungrammatical address. 
But it is evident that some of the thought was not ac- - 
cordant with their wishes—probably it was of a wakeful 
and disturbing nature.’ Certainly it seems that while he 

“mused the fire burned ; then spake he with his tongue.” 
His religious thought was “like a fire shut up in his 
bones.”’ And hence he was “irrepressible, and this irre- 
pressible young man was on his feet in every meeting.” 

“Mainly, perhaps, because one church could not offer 
scope for enough work for his energies, and partly, per- 





_ haps, on account of the spirit of repression.developed 


LIFE OF MOODY. 37 


at the little Plymouth Church, he began to frequent a | 
morning class-meeting in the First Methodist Church. 
In its Mission Band of young men who used to visit the 
hotels, saloons, etc., on Sunday morning, distributing 


__ tracts and inviting to Divine services, he found kindred 


spirits and congenial work. Then at an hour when there 
was no service in his own church the sturdy young Con- 
gregationalist presented the refreshing vision of giving 
out both verbal and printed invitations to the passers- 
by to attend the First Methodist Church. 

His success with the four pews had put the young 
worker on a line of effort at the time peculiarly adapted 
to him and in which he has ever excelled and remains 
famous. As a recruiting officer he was a phenomenon. _ 
Finding in his missionary explorations a little Sunday- : 
school in North Wells street, he offered to take a class 
in it. The superintendent told him that he had almost 
as many teachers as pupils, but offered him the privilege 
of teaching any new scholars he could himself bring 
into the school. The next Sunday he marched into the 
school with eighteen bareheaded, barefooted urchins, 
ragged and dirty, but having, as he said, “every one of 


.‘them a soul to be saved,” which was the chief interest 


to him. 


One morning while engaged in distributing tracts 


38 LIFE OF MOODY. 


and in missionary work among the sailors he was met 

-by another servant of Christ doing the same thing. This 

was Mr. J. B. Stillson, a Presbyterian elder from 

Rochester, N. Y., who was at the time building the Chi- 

cago Custom-house. It was in the spring of 1857 that 

the latter gentleman, impelled to do some kind of mis- 

. sionary work, began to visit the ships in the river on 

Sunday mornings, giving tracts and Testaments to the 

“sailors, and sometimes holding little meetings on deck | 
or at some street corner in the neighborhood of a sail- 

_ ors’ boarding-house. The stout, hearty-looking young 

Moody and his senior, Mr. Stillson, finding each other 

engaged in the same work, at once joined company, and 

having worked pleasantly together during the morning, 

the young man, feeling attracted by the fatherly ways | 
of his senior, begged the privilege of further work with 
him, saying that he wanted to do something for Christ, 
but did not very well know how. From that meeting 
commenced a friendship of great advantage and of 
_ continued pleasure to both these seekers after the souls 
of men. | 

' Thenceforth the two labored and prayed together 
among the shipping, in hospitals and in jails and in the 
homes of the poor and destitute. They helped to re- 
cruit during that summer twenty or more mission Sun- 
day-schools. 


LIFE OF MOODY. 39 


It was not long ere the young enthusiast projected a 
mission of his own. Having found’a deserted saloon ° 
near the North Side Market, he rented it for his.school 
on Sunday and for occasional services in the evenings 
of the week. Its location was almost in the very midst 
of two hundred- drinking and gambling dens. The. 
neighborhood literally swarmed with young barbarians 
and “street arabs’ —the kind of scholars that he wanted 
to reach. This man had read to purpose the “parable 
of the lost sheep,” had entered into the spirit of the 
Shepherd, had an instinct that his mission was to seek 
and save the lost. Without stopping to think of the 
hard or easy, the popularity or unpopularity, of the 
work, he began looking for lost sinners on “The Sands.” 

The region known in Chicago as “The Sands” was to 
that city what the Five Points are to New York, or Old — 
Ann street to Boston—a moral lazaretto. Its location 
is on the lake shore, north of the river. It was the aban- 
doned region to which the abandoned flocked and where 
it was proverbially dangerous for any decent person to 
walk after nightfall. 

Such was the field into which young Moody ventured 
to gather scholars for his Sunday-school—an uninvit- 
ing field enough for most of us, but to his spirit that de- 
‘lighted in the most difficult, that delighted in bringing 
the worst sinners to Christ, it was an inviting field: 


40 LIFE OF MOODY. 


Furthermore, conscious of his own defective education, 
he felt that here were people that he could, at least, 
teach and exhort without giving offense. These people 
would accept the statement that they were sinners and 
in danger of perdition. And thus freely and tenderly he 
plunged into the work of bringing these neglected souls 
to the knowledge of Christ and of His salvation. 

Young Moody had already been successful as a Sun- 
day-school scout, and evidently felt himself gifted for 
this work at least. As to knowledge of the Bible and 
teaching power, he measured himself low. Distrusting 
his knowledge of the Scriptures and of Sunday-school 
methods of teaching, he wisely sought the assistance of 
his best and wisest acquaintance. His reading of the 
Bible had been much as some people read fiction, poe- 
try, biography, travel and history, i. e., for consecutive 
pages and hours, but often he had to skip the harder 
words altogether, not being able to spell them intelli- 
gently out. Nevertheless he saw the Lord in His Word: 
and was intensely desirous that others should find Him 
there too. ‘He was eager to show Him to all who had 
never made His acquaintance, but how to do it he did 
not very well know.” 

The following incident related by his old friend, Mr. 
Reynolds, the Sunday-school worker, of Peoria, Ill, 
some years ago, is a picture of the Moody of the date at 


: LIFE OF MOODY. 4i 
which we have arrived in his career :’ “The first meeting 
I ever saw him at was in a little old shanty that had 
been abandoned by a saloon-keeper. Mr. Moody had 
got the place to hold a meeting in at night. I went 
there a little late, and the first thing I saw was a man 
standing up with a few tallow candles around him hold- 
ing a negro boy and trying to read to him the story of 
the prodigal son, and a great many of the words he | 
could not make out and had to skip. I thought, if the. 
Lord can ever use such an instrument as that for His 
honor and glory it will astonish me. After that meeting 


was over, Mr. Moody said to me, ‘Reynolds, I have got _ 


only one talent; I have no education, but I love the 


- Lord Jesus Christ, and I want to do something for Him, » 


and I want you to pray for me.’”’ Is not this picture 
enough to put delicate, stand-off scholarship to the _ 
blush of shame? 

Mr. Reynolds continues: “I have never ceased from 
that day to this, morning and night, to pray for this 
Christian soldier. I have watched him since then, have 
had counsel with him, and known him thoroughly, and 
for consistent walk and conversation I have never met 
a man to equal him. It astounds me when I look back 


and see what Moody was thirteen years ago, and then 


~ what he is, under God, today—shaking Scotland to its 


very center, and reaching now over to Ireland. The 


42 LIFE OF MOODY. 


last time I heard ftom him his injunction was, Pray 


for me every day ; Ley now that God will keep me 


_ humble’ ” 

It is impossible for the biographer to refrain from re- 
marking upon two palpable causes of Mr. Moody’s phe- 
nomenal success which this testimony: brings vividly to 
notice, namely, the fervent, persevering, prevailing 
prayer that continually ascended to the ear of God for 
him, and, second, the Christ-like conduct in the man 
which excited that prayer. 

When Mr. Moody started his Sndeneechoate in the 
vacated saloon on “The Sands” he was a poor man in 


purse, and as yet had not becomie possessed of rich co- - 
operative friends. So the schoolroom was not equipped © 


with any of the luxuries, nor even with what are es- 
teemed the essential agencies of maps, piano or organ, 
blackboard, object-lesson charts, picture-papers, lesson 
leaves, teachers’ journals, prizes, library, which charac- 


terize the best modern Sunday-school rooms. But he ~ 


was rich in the possession of those qualities of mind and 
heart which at length commanded all the things needful 
for the conduct of an efficient Sunday-school. 
Among the qualities for his important work in that, 
or in any region, was his possession of an intense, al- 
most mother-love, for children. It was one of the hap- 
' piest things in his life to be surrounded by a crowd of 





ROUND TOP, NORTHFIELD. 





LIFE OF MOODY. ’ 45 


_ boys and girls, romping with them as they romped, ex- | 


celling them in their own games, winning their confi- 
dence until they seemed to esteem him as the merriest, 
jolliest and biggest-boy of them all. It is a character- 
istic visibly seen in more than one great man of history, 
and it seems to have had its perfect development in him. 
Verily, of him it may be written, “He became all things 
to all the children, that he might gain the more.” 


The little neglected heathens whom he now proposed. 
to win had passed their lives hitherto in constant strug- 
gle, amid kicks and blows, starvation and drunkenness, 


and hence, naturally enough, were savage and suspic- 


ious to the last degree. And Mr. Moody knew that, 


like the Apostle, he must “catch them with guile.” We 


may here credit him with that craft of which his Great 


Exampler, in seeking to save, was not ashamed. The 


_ ordinary Sunday-school would not yet bean attraction 


for them. Tracts and Testaments they could not read. 


So, in knowledge of the children’s love for sweets, he 
invested enough of his small savings in maple sugar as 


promising the most and best results for the money, and 
loading up his jackets with this missionary sugar, his 
heart sweet with Christian love and purpose, he started 
to attack “The Sands.” 

The young “gutter snipes” naturally felt somewhat 


hostile to any fairly well-dressed person, and they would | 


iM , 


“ 


46 LIFE OF MOODY. 


look askance at him first and run away. But the sweet 
manner of the man, and his sweet missionary sugar, 


would invariably bring them back and win their confi- 
dence, and they were soon enthusiastic to attend his © 


school. It was the principle and tactics of the hot potato 
of Robert Raikes over again—an argument which the 
young barbarians could understand and appreciate. 


And it proved a help by which the young missionary 


made the acquaintance of every child within reach of 
his mission, and, through the children, he was made 
known to almost every man and woman on“The Sands.” 

The reader may imagine the scene of hundreds of 


these young ruffians brought together. What could be 


done with them then was a question that might well 
appall a heart of less faith and courage and resourceful- 
ness than that of Moody. But he was equal to the situ- 
ation, and, anticipating what the scene at first would be, 
he had a proper contempt for relative trifles. Knowing 


phe power of song and singing, he promptly installed ~ 


his musical friend, Mr, Trudeau, in the office of chor- 
ister. Mr. Stillson also was present “to make himself 
generally useful.” It has been humorously stated that 


“Moody was constitution, Stillson and Trudeau were 


by-laws. This was the entire organization. Each of the 
three was superintendent in such matters as forced 
themselves on his attention, all three being: worked to 


LIFE’ OF MOODY. 47 


their fullest capacity in quieting simultaneous fights and 
scuffles in different corners of the room, rescuing little 
boys from the clutches of big ones and keeping down 
the noise among this mob of children, who, between 
the prayers and hymns, would pull each other’s hair 
and black eachother’s eyes in a manner which left no 
doubt whatever of the distinctly Auge rite character 
of the school.” 

In such a situation the ordinary Sunday-school 
worker would have very soon fretted himself out of pa- ~ 
tience and out of the school, leaving it to fall to pieces. _ 
In the purpose of Mr. Moody this school was to be, and 
was already, a strictly, intensely religious institution. 
Its purpose was to help in saving these neglected little 
sinners, and certain that it would serve its object in 
their hearing the voice of prayer, of praise and of ex- 
hortation (provided the speaker could use his lungs 
above the din), the only opportunity for them to hear 
these, probably, these disorders gave Mr. ee no 
serious trouble. 

Furthermore, he had worked hard to bring these 
children together, and had coaxed them. He had 
promised the Lord to do his best for their salvation. He 
had also persuaded some of his friends to help him. He 
was committed to the enterprise, before God and an- 
gels, before men and women and before a good many ~ 


«48 


| 


LIFE OF MOODY. 


bad children ; therefore “if it took a superintendent for 


every boy and for every girl that school was foreor- 


dained to go on.” And it did. The old saloon-room 


very soon became filled to its utmost capacity, and the — 


ever-increasing numbers could not be accommodated 

by it; so, by the permission of Mayor Haines, the great 

hall over old North Market became its next quarters. 
This hall was used by others also for a very different 


|. purpose than that of Moody and his coworkers. On 


Saturday nights it was commonly used for. dancing, 
leaving it in a very dirty condition, with sawdust, wet 
earth, beer and tobacco juice to be cleaned out on Sun- 


day morning before it was in any way fit for the Sunday- ~ 


school session. Furthermore, it was devoid of anything 
like chairs or benches, so the assemblage had to stand 
or sit upon the bare floor when it first occupied these 
quarters. To look in upon this scene must have been a 
dramatic novelty. It is pictured for us in the words of 


‘Mr. John V. Farwell. 


Mr. Moody, who was equal to every emergency, had 
promptly constituted himself a finance committee, and 
had appealed to those whom he knew as possessed of 
money with a view to the absolutely necessary furnish- 


ing of the hall. Among those to whom he appealed was 


the above-named Christian gentleman, who was already 
a very successful business man in the city, and who had 


. 


LIFE OF MOODY. wy : 49 


generously engaged to supply the school with benches. 
After receiving this promise, Mr. Moody, who knew 
the Christian character of the man from meeting with 
him often in the Sunday-morning class in the Methodist 


church, determined to press him into service. Pursuing’ 


this object, he asked Mr. Farwell “what he was doing 
in personal work for Christ,” and finding that his time 
was not fully occupied, he invited him to come over and 


see his mission school. Accordingly, Mr. Farwell 


came, and this is his description of the scene: “The 
seats had not yet arrived. The school was leaning up’ 


against the walls and scattered over the floor in ever- 


varying forms, like the figures in the kaleidoscope, . 


jumping, turning somersaults, sparring, whistling, talk- | 


ing aloud, crying ‘Papers!’ “Black your boots! “Have. | 


a shine, mister!’ from which state of confusion they were 


Stillson, a song from Mr. Trudeau or a speech from Mr. | 


Moody, only to relapse again into clamor and uproar 
before the speaker or singer was fairly through.” 


That riotous, turbulent crowd seemed to be follow- 
ing the example of the Israelites, with a certain varia- | 
tion—“everyone was doing what was wrong in his own Ye 


eyes.” ‘ 
At the nick of time Mr. Moody called upon Mr. Far- 
well for a speech, which the latter, with emotions rather 


occasionally rescued by a Scripture reading from Mr. — 


50 - LIFE OF MOODY. 


_ vivid than pleasing to himself, gave in brief, lest he 


should weary the patience and fail to retain the interest 
of his wild auditors.. At the close of this address, Mr. 
Moody forthwith nominated Mr. Farwell for the posi- 
tion of superintendent of the North Market Mission 
School, and put it to the popular vote. Before the 
startled nominee could utter a demurrer the vote was 


‘carried viva voce, with a deafening “hurrah!” He was 
promptly installed, and continued to hold the position 


for six,years. In this gentleman Mr. Moody found a 


valuable coadjutor. Not only did he give of his means 


to make up its deficiencies, but his efficient work within 
enabled the young Moody to devote his energies with- 
out in the recruiting office his nature and powers were 


_so well adapted. 
Under the conduct and effort of these devoted men 
the Sunday-school at North Market in three months 


became two hundred strong, in six months three hun- 


_ dred, and within the year the average attendance be- 


came six hundred and fifty—at times it became a crowd 


of nearly a thousand, some being transient only. It 


was estimated that about two thousand children passed 
annually through the Sunday-school, having a revela- 
tion of Gospel Bane given to their previously blind 
souls. 


As the work went on the school tose up at times to 


ae At ‘ond eet 


LIFE OF MOODY. 51 


the number of twelve hundred and fifty, which elated 


young Moody, but whenever it fell beneath a thousand 


it depressed him. To keep upa Sunday-school like this 


in such a region was not a spontaneous self-working 
thing. Mr. Moody, together with Mr. Stillson, kept at 
it, canvassing for the children every night in the week, 


often until 11 o’clock. Their homes were visited, and, ~ 
in addition to the maple sugar, clothing and shoes were 
given to the needy, unclad children. Mr. Wiswall tes- 


tifies that he has often known Mr. Moody to bring in 


_ twenty children at a time and fit them with shoes, send- 


ing them away rejoicing. 
On Sunday mornings these recruiting officers would 
make a grand excursion through “The Sands” and other 


like regions, from which they returned bringing their _ 


spoils often in the shape of wild boys and girls which 
they had found. In some of these ventures the children 
were chased into alleys and up and down ladders into 
their sad homes, into cellars, over piles of lumber— 
anywhere, everywhere to make their acquaintance and 
the acquaintance of their dark-minded, hard-hearted 
and often discouraged parents, whom, as well as the 
children, he brought into the mission, and who, through 


_ its agency, entered the kingdom of heaven. Sometimes 
_ these sallies upon the enemy were attended with danger — 
to life. The Catholic father, acquainted with and re- 


1 


oN 
7 
* 
x 


7 
° 


52 : LIFE OF MOODY. 


senting the effect of Moody’s heretical sugar upon his 
young Papists, would, upon seeing him enter with his . 
face beaming, rush at him with a club, threatening, with 
oaths and curses, to break his head. On these occa- 


sions he would follow the counsels of his Teacher and 
Lord—“When they persecute you in one place, flee to * | 


another.” And Moody used in this experience to hu- 
morously speak of his legs as his best friends. But these 
retreats were not defeats. These legs which took him so 
effectively out of danger were always effective in bring- 
ing him back again, until by light skirmishing, instead 
of risking a pitched battle, he wearied out his adversary 
and won by the power of goodness and manifest inter- 
est in the welfare of him and his. And so he not only. 
overcame his enemies, but generally captured the chil- 


dren for his mission and won them to be his friends. . 


Well would it be if the soldiers of Christ realized that 
this enduring of the wrong bravely, and bravely doing 
good for evil, is the most effective sword which their 
Captain has placed in their hands. 

‘Among the many incidents of their Sunday-morning 
missionary excursions was one of the dangerous char- ~ 


_acter above referred to. The missionaries were visiting 


some Romanist families with a view to bringing their 
children into the Sunday-school, when a powerful man, 


who had sworn to kill Moody, suddenly, before he was 





MR. MOODY’S WHO 





NORTORDINRTIN 





LIFE OF MOODY. 55 


aware of the danger, sprang at him with a heavy club. 
It was soon a run ior life. “The Sands” were in an up- 
roar of excitement at the scene. Some of the Papists 
cheered on their nian, with a belief that if he could come 
up with the heretic it would soon all be over with him, 
while others who would dared not come to his rescue. 
Mr. Moody was sore pressed this time by the irate man, 
who really seemed determined to put an end to his life 


and so put an end to his heretical labors. But his swift- 


ness of foot carried the missionary beyond reach, and so 
he was saved. On the next Sunday he returned and 
kept on going until gentleness and patience disarmed 
his adversary, and he gave no further trouble. 

On one of his Saturday-evening explorations he en- 


tered a house, seeking for the children, with a view to 


their coming to Sunday-school next day, when he found 
that the men, who were all absent, had brought home 
for Sunday consumption a jug of whiskey. He gave the 
women a rousing temperance lecture, and persuaded 
them successfully to let him empty the whiskey into the 
street. Then, having poured out the intoxicating stuff 
into the street, he promised to return on Sunday after- 


noon for the children, whom they had consented to send — 


to his Sunday-school. . Early on Sunday afternoon he 
‘returned for this. purpose. But the men of the house, 


touched ina sensitive point, were irate and lying in wait 


56 LIFE OF MOODY. 


for him, thirsting for revenge. The situation was desper- 

ate. Before he was aware of it one of them had stepped 

between him and the door, and all were about to pounce 

_upon him when Moody in this wise arrested the pro- 
ceedings: 

“See here, now, my men, if you are going to whip me 
for spilling the eee you ms at least give me time 
to say my prayers.’ 

The proposal was so novel to them that they agreed 
to let him pray before they thrashed him. Evidently 
they thought it would add to their fun. Moody forth- 
with dropped on his knees and prayed. Such praying 
they had never heard, and they first became astonished, 
then interested, then softened. When he had finished 
his prayer they gathered around him, gave him their 
hands and declared that he was a good fellow. Ina few 
minutes Moody was triumphantly marching toward — 
North Market Hall with all the children of the house. 

It was through this heroic work that the attendance - 
at the school in “The Sands” was kept up and in- 
creased. At the same time the sick and destitute were 
visited and helped as they might need. This, of course, 
took money. But the young Moody, even if ever de- 
sirous of making a fortune, was never a money-keeper. 
His generous sympathies were ever heavier in the bal- 


ance than his desires to accumulate. He was ever, from 


Pigs 
- 
rah 


LIFE OF MOODY. : Beet, 


the hour of his conversion, “ambitious for work’’— 
soul-benefiting, Christ-glorifying work—and what he 
earned as a shoe salesman was not held back from the 


needs that met his eyes daily that it might accumulate. 


At the date we have reached, however, there were co- 
adjutors with Moody whose names are not without 
honer in heaven, and some of them are very properly 
not without honor on earth, either. Mr. Stillson is one 
of these. And another gentleman, not mentioned by 
name, used often to make the rounds of visitation with 
him to the sick and destitute, taking with him separate 
dollar notes, folded up for distribution, to the extent 


sometimes of $40 in a single night. This was practical, 


helpful Christianity. And it told upon the suffering 
people... 
If Mr. Moody canvassed in this manner for his schol- 
ars, he canvassed also for his teachers, impressing such 
into service as he felt qualified for it. At the time of 
which we are writing there was not as yet the Uniform 
International Lessons. Each teacher had in his hand 
for a text-book the Bible only. And it is said that Mr. 
Moody reflected that “no one could do much harm to 
the class gathered in North Market Sunday-School 


- with that book, and he was pretty sure to do some 


good.” 


The reflection appears to be just. In this school 


58 LIFE OF MOODY. 


there seems to have been devised and practiced a law 
of the “survival of the fittest’ which might have met 
the very ideal of a Darwin himself. If the scholars in a 
given class were not pleased with the teacher they had 
the privilege of being transferred to the class of their 
choice. Thus an unpopular teacher would find himself 
or herself without scholars and withdraw of their own 
accord. ; 

Ere long the North Market School became so famous 
in the city that there was no difficulty whatever in keep- 
ing up the number nor quality of teachers. The school 
presently became a wonder, and leading members of 
prominent churches volunteered to teach classes in it, 
and some wealthy persons who did not give themselves 
for its service gave of their fortunes to help the fortunes 
of the school. Every Sabbath the school was visited 
by people from all parts of the city, attracted by its 
growing fame as a curiosity of grace. Among these 
visitors were volunteers at need for their work, and 
teachers for all its seventy or eighty classes and for all 
its posts of work were never wanting. Varied as were 
the church relations and views of its teachers, so long 
as they taught the New Testament Moody was satisfied 
that little mischief and much good would accrue. Often, 
of course, a teacher had to be changed, but the scheme 
above seen worked smoothly and well. The unity of 


- 





LIFE OF MOODY. . 59 


the school was in its text-book, the New Testament; 
and its all-pervading object,the winning souls to Christ. 

The visible effect upon the cunning, wild young colts 
would soon demonstrate the fitness or unfitness of the 
teacher, and the teacher never had to be officially dis- 
missed or told that he could not teach. It is reported 
that a teacher who was a failure would in two or three 
Sundays find himself without a class and regretfully dis- 
appear for a more fortunate successor, for the children 
had the instinct of bees for finding out where the honey 
was, and upon application to and by permicyeG of the 
superintendent, go to another class. 

. This unusual liberty of the scholars was, of course, 
often abused, but, on the whole, it soon developed a 
school spirit and pride which made them feel that it was. 
their school, the teacher was their teacher, the super- 
intendent was their superintendent, and, above all, 
Moody was their Moody. And they not only submitted 
to his rule, but co-operated with him in the maintenance 
oforder. A rather untaught spontaneous illustration of 
this spirit and pride is seen in an incident where, upon 
one occasion, a new boy sat in the school, who, Quaker- 
like in action, though not in spirit and motive, kept on 
_ his hat. A boy, nicknamed “Indian,” a scholar, com- 


ing in, went up to him, instantly drew off the hat and 


hit the boy flat between the eyes, exclaiming, “T’ll learn 


60 LIFE OF MOODY. 


you to keep your hat on in this school.” The principle 

was steadily maintained under the administration of 

Moody and Farwell that the school is for the scholars. 
The rights of every child were maintained. 

So great was the love of the scholars for Moody that 
they often came to the school at the cost of abuse from 
their godless parents, who flogged them for coming to 
his “heretical school.” The following is one example 
in point: One of the larger boys came to Mr. Moody 
on a Sunday afternoon, seeming to be in great trouble 

and asking for confidential advice. His father was a 
' violent Romanist and a miserable drunkard besides— 
_kind enough to his family when sober, but almost cer- 
tain to be drunk on Sunday, and equally certain to give 
his son an unmerciful flogging on his return home from 
the North Market School. The boy, who had outgrown | 
his wild ways, and learned something of Christian duty, 
had endured this treatment for a long time rather than | 
run away from home and leave his poor mother and 
little sisters, whom he hoped some time to lead into the 
better way of life. On hearing the cause, Mr. Moody 
replied, “You must take advice of some One who is 
strong’—by which the boy understood that he should 
ask help of the Lord. This he did, and then going home, 
was met at the door by his father in a drunken rage, 
_ ready to give him the customary beating. The boy de- 


LIFE OF MOODY. . 61 


liberately taking off his coat, said, “Father, you have 
always been kind to me when you are not in liquor; it is 
not my father, but whiskey that beats me every Sunday ; 
so now I am going to fight the whiskey.” The drunken 
man, by no means cooled by such a response, fell upon 
him with fury, but in the struggle which followed whis- 
key was so thoroughly beaten that from that time the 
father left his son to go to the mission school in peace. 
The elder brother, also a Papist, took up the matter, 
and threatened to thrash Mr. Moody, whom he had 
never yet seen, having but recently returned to the city. 
after a long absence, but before a convenient opportu- 
nity arrived he was taken sick of a fever and lay for 
some time dangerously ill. During this illness some of 
the teachers of the North Market School came to watch © 
by his side, and Mr. Moody himself took his turn watch- 
ing by his side for a night or two, especially with a view 
to help the poor fellow’s soul. On learning who the 
warm-hearted stranger was all his anger passed away 
and the promised beating was referred to no more. 
This was one of the ways in which Mr. Moody won. 
Here is another of a different type of warfare, but in 
very different circumstances: There was a big fellow 


. who insisted upon bringing his street manners in the 


schoolroom despite all kinds of moral suasion. He was 
shameless and too big to be frightened into submission 


62 LIFE OF MOODY. 


or to any degree of order. He was endured with long, 
but grew worse instead of better, and even Moody and 
his coworkers began to fear that they had at last found 
a boy with whom nothing could be done. A great 

- many evil spirits had been cast out of that school, but 
this one seemed determined to stay. To turn a boy 
away as hopelessly bad would seem to them a humili- 
ating confession of failure; besides, they held it as con- 
trary to the Gospel to shut this young ruffian out from | 

_ the means of grace when he was in such manifest need. 
A solemn council was held on Sunday, but no one 
could devise or think of any new, untried and promising 
treatment for him. During the whole week the matter 

_ pressed heavily on Moody’s heart. The next Sunday 
the big fellow appeared more uproarious than ever be- 
fore; there was actual danger of his breaking up the | 
school. Mr. Moody, on this memorable day, decided to 
‘try the last remedy; so, carrying this into effect, he 
came suddenly upon the turbulent fellow in the middle _ 
of the crowded hall, seized him with both hands, and, 
fairly lifting him, bodily carried him into a little ante- 
room, locked the door and proceeded to apply the treat- 
ment recommended by Solomon. The culprit being; 
strong, active and savage as a wolf, this was no easy 
task, but Mr. Moody was endowed with all the powers 
which such a missionary stood in need of. The noise 


AUDITORIUM—INTERIOR VIEW, NORTHFIELD. 















‘* Ny ” 2 ’ 
" * <i 2 ry] ee SS! 
TEN ath ee Lag? bk biog Maps aaa 
doe eT : Cy, Lh as ot “A we 
, ; i ame Pay) ys (iat ne wt ae ee aah 7 
4 wy Lay oleae : a Pe i ae 
4 ( Pa : “at : 
: iy ae ae 
BN ito NP sy oe cael SPINS 
tas. Se he ae ae ne as 
Lie aa a Lae. ae 


acs a tae Yeo 5 <r 
yu i Cr as i rs 
alee oo ee Sd 





LIFE OF MOODY. 65 


of the treatment naturally awakened the most lively in- 
terest of the school, but by way of diversion Mr. Far- 
well started a song. Thus on the two sides of that 
bolted door two very different means of grace were in 
simultaneous operation. 
In due course Mr. Moody and his pupil emerged 
from the room of discipline, both greatly flushed and 
one completely subdued. Said Mr. Moody, “It was 
hard work, but I think we have saved him.” When Mr. 
Farwell, in later days, met this very boy, then grown to 


' manhood, at a noonday prayer-meeting, they recog- 


nized each other and heartily agreed that Moody was 
right in applying desperate remedies for desperate dis- 
eases. To the minds of his scholars Mr. Moody had by 
this act shown a new claim on their respect. Order thus 
enforced became sacred to all. After this his school 
was no more disturbed by such ruffans. 

Among the boys in the school was one who found his 


delight in sticking pins in the backs of the other boys. 


Discouraged as were others, Mr. Moody patted him 
kindly on the head and asked him to come again. After 
a short time the lad became a Christian, and then was 
anxious about his mother, whom Mr. Moody had been 


unable to influence. One night the lad threw his arms 
‘about her neck and told her how he had stopped swear- 


ing, and how he wanted her to love the Saviour. When 


66 LIFE OF MOODY. 


she passed his room she heard him praying, “Oh, God, 
convert my dear mother.” The next Sunday he led her 
into the Sunday-school and she became an earnest 
worker. 

The North Market Sunday-School had not enjoyed 
its prosperity of swelling numbers long before the ag- 
gression of Moody and his aides provoked the com- 
plaints of the city missionary. . This official had “‘dis- 
tricted the city into territories for the missionary work- 
ers and mission schools.” But Moody knew nothing 
of imaginary lines or fences ecclesiastical. To a like 
objection to his campaigns against the kingdom of 
darkness and for the salvation of the neglected people 
Wesley replied, “The world is my parish.” And these 
two were of kindred spirit. Nothing more natural, then, 
than that they should arouse kindred antagonism. The. 
activities of the North Market street officers were gath- 
ering in from all the vicinity many whom the city mis- | 
sionary thought should go to other nearer mission 
schools. But they were not “compelled to come in,” 
and they remained without. It is true also, and natural, 
that the fame of Moody’s school attracted some from 
what, to them, were less interesting schools. The city 
missionary believed that the high pressure of the North 
Market School would “blow it up,” but it did not. The 
work went steadily on and with gathered force. 


LIFE OF MOODY. ; 67 


Mr. Moody was accused of being guilty, of all sorts of 
vagaries—of following an impulse without waiting for 
judgment, frequently shooting off at a tangent from all 
recognized circles of propriety; but in spite of all this 
the school increased in vigor and in numbers, and, bet- 
ter still, it gradually improved in order and in true re- 
ligious life. Of its leader it may be truly said, as of 
Hezekiah, “And every work that he began in the service 
of the house of his God, and in the law and in the com- 
mandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart 
and prospered.” At this time in his career, as later, 
after his many triumphs, his motto was practically that 
of Paul: “Forgetting. the things that are behind, and 
reaching forth to those before, I press toward the mark 
of my high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” 

Among the methods for gathering the untaught chil- 
- dren into the Sunday-school were prizes for those who 
brought in the most new scholars. On one occasion 
the unique prize for this effort was the gift of a pet lamb, 
which was given to one of these young recruiting offi- 
cers, But the canvassing efforts of Moody and Stillson 
still went on. And varied and thrilling were the expe- 
riences of these men as they sought after the lost ones. 

On one of these exploring ventures the two men en- 
tered a sailors’ boarding-house that was haunted by a 
rough and quarrelsome crowd continually. They were 


68 LIFE OF MOODY. 


set upon and threatened with broken heads if they did 
not leave immediately, but gently replied that they 
meant no harm, and as a proof of their kind intentions 
offered to sing a song. Mr. Moody, it is said, could 
never sing a note, so the task fell entirely upon Mr. 
Stillson, and he immediately struck up: 


“Oh, how happy are they 
Who their Saviour obey, 
And have laid up their treasure above.” 

It goes without saying that it was a better song, and 
probably better singing, than they were accustomed to. 
And the crowd listened to it with evident enjoyment. 
_ When the hymn was finished Moody followed with 
prayer. And from that day they were privileged char- 
acters in that house, and were held in high respect by 
all the inmates. They captured the-children of the 
keeper of the den for the North Market Mission— 
every one of whom was afterwards brought to Christ. 

In their zeal to save the lost these devoted servants 
of Christ were not afraid to enter the saloons and liquor 
dens, and not always without rapid success as the crown 
of their brave effort. 

Going into one of these one Saturday night when the 
carousal was at its height, they asked’ permission to 
leave some religious papers for the men who were 
drinking at the little tables around the room. Having 


LIFE OF MOODY. ike 69 


_ done this by permission, they entered into conversation 


with the keeper of the place, and presently drew out’ 
from him the fact that his parents were religious people. 
Naturally the question quickly followed, “Do they 
know you are selling liquor?” The man seemed deeply 
affected and hesitated to reply. They gave him a kindly 
word and then bade him good-night. But before they 
had gone far one said to the other, “We have neglected 
our duty ; let us go back and pray with that man.” 
They immediately turned back, re-entered the saloon, 
begged the keeper’s pardon for having neglected to 
pray with him, and, kneeling there in the sawdust, 
Moody offered a prayer, of which Mr. Stillson said, “I 
never heard Moody pray like that before; it seemed as 
if the baptism of the Holy One was upon him.” Two 


; weeks afterward one of them met the man in the street, 


who informed him that he had given up the saloon busi- 
ness, had left off drinking, and would die in the poor- 


‘house rather than sell any more liquor. 


On the occasion of another visit to a saloon, Mr 
Moody had a very different experience. One of his 
friends had reported a family to him where there were 
several children who were “due” at the North Market 


School, but whose father was a notorious infidel rum- 
‘seller and would not let them come. The missionary at 


once called upon him, but as soon as he made known — 





70 ' LIFE OF MOODY. 


‘his errand he was obliged to “get out of that place very 

quickly” in order to save his head. But, just like him- 
self, Moody called again, only to be driven away with 
curses and blasphemies. Said the desperate rum-seller 
on one of these occasions, “I would rather my son 
should be a thief and my daughter a harlot than have 
you make fools and Christians of them over there at 
your Sunday-school.” But still Moody did not give up 
the case. 

One day, finding the man in a little better humor 
than usual, he asked him if he had ever read the New 
Testament, to which the infidel replied that he had not, 
and, on his part, inquired if Moody had ever read 
Paine’s “Age of Reason.” F inding that he had not done 
so, the man proposed to read the New Testament if he 


would head the “Age of Reason.” To this proposition 


Moody:at once agreed. Said Moody, “He had the best 
of the bargain, but it gave mea chance to call again and 
bring him the book.” After reading through that mass 
of infidel abominations, he called on the publican again 


to see how he got on with the New Testament, but. 


found him full of objections and hot for debate. 
“See here, young man,” said he, “you are inviting me 


and my family to go to meeting; now, you may have a_ 


meeting here if vou like.” 





LIFE OF MOODY. ‘ 71 


“What ! Will you let me preach here in your saloon?” 

Se Msg 

“And will you bring in your family and let me bring 
in the neighbors?” ~ 

“Yes. But mind, you are not to do all the talking. I 
and my friends will have something to say.” 

“All right. You shall have forty-five minutes and i 
will have fifteen.” 

The time for the meeting was then set. According to” 
contract Moody went to the saloon at the time ap- 
pointed, but found that the company had removed to a 
larger house in the neighborhood, where a great crowd 
of atheists, blasphemers and wild characters in great 
variety were waiting to “make mincemeat of the young 
missionary and use up the New Testament forever.” 

“You shall begin,” said Moody. 

Upon this they began to ask him questions. 

“No questions,” said he; “I haven’t come to argue 
with you, but to preach Christ to you. Go on ane say 
what you like, and then I will speak.” 

Then they began to talk among themselves, but it 


was not long before they quarreled over their own dif- . 


ferent unbeliefs, so that what began as a debate was in © 
danger of ending in a fight. | 
“Order! Your time is up,” said Moody. “I am in 


72 LIFE OF MOODY. 


the habit of beginning my addresses with prayer. Let 


us pray.” 


“Stop! Stop!” said one. “There’s no use of your 
praying. Besides, your Bible says there must be ‘two 
agreed’ if there is to be any praying, and you are all 
alone.” 

Without attempting to correct this false quotation, 
Moody replied that perhaps some one of them might 
feel like praying before he got through, and so he 
opened his heart to God. When he had finished, a little 
boy who had been converted in the mission school and 
had come with his friend to this strange meeting, began ~ 
to pray. His childish voice and simple faith at once 
attracted the closest attention. As he went on telling 
the Lord all about those wicked men, and begging Him 
to help them to believe in Jesus Christ, the Holy Ghost 
fell upon the assembly. A great solemnity came over 
those hard-hearted infidels and scoffers ; there was not 
a dry eye in the room. Pretty soon they began to be 
frightened: They rushed out, some by one door and 
some by the other, did not stop to hear a word of the 
sermon, but fled from the place as if it had been haunted. 
As a result of this meeting Moody captured all the old 
infidel’s children for his Sunday-school, and a little 


while after the man himself stood up in the noonday 





AUDITORIUM, NORTHFIELD. 





Lift OF MOODY: ; 75 


prayer-meeting and begged them to pray for his miser- 
able soul. 

Very unlike the mass of Christians, then, we see 
Moody heroically, earnestly, striking out in all ‘direc- 
tions for the salvation of men, of women and of the chil- 
dren. No danger was too great, it seemed, no task too 
difficult to undertake for God and for the great object 
that controlled him—taking no thought of the preju- 
dices or passions of those he met, but urging all to come 
to Christ and to attend the North Market Mission. 

It is not surprising that such a man in such a work 
should arouse antagonism on the part of the children 
of darkness, though all he did was in the truest friend- 
ship for them. Again and again this antagonism was 
violent and threatening. One old Romanist woman, 
whose children he was inviting to his Sunday-school, 
seized a butcher’s knife and rushed out to kill him. But 
he easily got away. . 

Three ruffians who had threatened him with a beat- 
ing came into his prayer-room one night, just after 
the meeting was over, when there was no one present 
but himself and a lad. Knowing well their purpose 
and errand, he invited them to sit down until he had 
gathered up the hymn-books and Testaments, and, at 
the same time, motioning the lad to leave. Unlike 
his first place of meeting, this place was lighted with: 


70 LIFE OF MOODY. 


gas, a single jet of which was burning. Towards this 
he made his way, picking up his books as he went 
along, and then, quick as a flash, he turned out the 
_ light, sprang over the benches in the darkness, and 
was off before his enemies suspected his design. 
With a view to bringing his religious work to a 
focus and devotional development, he had established 
week-night prayer-meetings in the old saloon. These 
‘prayer-meetings were peculiar in their being an as- 
semblage of people who wanted something of God, 
and who came together to get what they wanted by 
asking it of Him. The going through a set of exer- 
cises was to them a thing wholly unknown. They 
came together, a company of penitent sinners, not be- 
cause they ought to come, but because they wanted to 
come. To this rude place, seated with rough boards 
placed upon empty nail kegs, lighted with a few can- 
dles, and protected from violence by the police, came 
those children and older persons whose hearts the 
Gospel had reached, to inquire of Mr. Moody and his 
New Testament what they must do to be saved. There 
was, it is testified, a charming freshness about these 
meetings, which was just what might be. expected 
from the previous training of the school. These in- 
quirers believed in God, not as an “unknown and un- 


knowable Force,’ but as the Maker and Governor of 


LIFE OF MOODY. ‘7 


heaven and earth. They believed in Jesus Christ, not 
as ‘‘a reformed Jew,’’ but as the Son of God, who came 
into the world to save sinners, and though they might 
yet have no clear conception of the Holy Spirit, they 
were greatly under His influence, going about the 
work of repentance and prayer for themselves and for 
their friends with the same simple directness with 
which they would have entered, upon any other work. 
The best praying was that which brought the greatest 
blessing, no matter how rude and uncouth the lan- 
guage; the best exhorting, that which brought souls 
soonest to the Saviour. 

In this phase of his work, and in this place, Mr. 
Moody was brought face to face with the true office of 
the pastor. Here the sins and sorrows of immortal 
souls were laid openly and confidingly before him for 
sympathy and instruction, as confidingly as he laid 
them before God for pardon and comfort. According 
to his view or theory, the penitent.sinner might imme- 
diately become a Christian on the terms laid down by 
the Apostle—“Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
thou shalt be saved.” 

To his mind nothing could be easier than this, and 

‘to these poor people, uninstructed in the mysteries of 
systemati¢ theology, it appeared easy. They had 
never heard of the distinction between intellectual 


| 
| 


78 LIFE OF MOODY. 


faith, historic faith and saving faith, but they did as 
they were taught—reached out soiled hands to take 
Christ, and attended to the washing of the hands after- 
wards. To Mr. Moody this work of receiving and in- 
structing converts was a thing of inexpressible joy in 
the meetings—a joy which he carried with him daily 
- wherever he moved about. If no new cases appeared 
from week to week he became anxious as if something 
_ were going wrong. It is reported of him that he would 
scan his crowd of boys and girls, eagerly watching for 
signs of heavenward purpose and softening of heart, 
and when he found them he felt as if God owned his. 
work, and so was happy. 

. The thoughtful reader must surely by this time be 
somewhat inclined to wonder what was in this man. 
What was the treasure of knowledge that he held in - 
possession? Was he already widely read? At least, 
was he thoroughly read in the Bible? The answer to 
these questions is, No. At the time of which we are 
writing it is related that his very Bible reading was “at 
random’’—a reading here or there at a happening. 
But his work with inquirers was impressing him with 
a conscious deficiency, and with the need of such com- 
mand of the Word of God as-would qualify him to uti-: 
lize at the moment of an inquirer’s need the appropri- 


ate Scripture, The light and comfort he might give 


LIFE OF MOODY. 79 


from his own experience of grace were not enough for 
their service without some appropriate text of Holy 
Writ. oid 

Mr. Moody at this time possessed no Bible diction- 
ary, no concordance, no commentary, no “Lesson 
Helps” such as we now have. Mr. Stillson declares 
that during that time he did not know of his owning 
any book but a New Testament. He was a man of 
one book, and not yet “read” even in that. The one 
thing of that book, however, he had, and this was the 
thorough realization that through Jesus the Son of 
God, believing, he was a saved sinner, and that this 
was the only, but sure hope of everyone else, if they 
could be persuaded to believe in Jesus. This was the 


controlling motive of the man. This was the Holy 


Spirit power and energy within him, urging him day 
by day, and in the work of salvation of the lost night 
by night. A glance at his preparations for his work at 
this time is given us through his friend: “He would 
go over to Mr. Stillson’s lodging, some distance from 


his own, and together they would have a little season 


of prayer for God’s blessing upon the work they were 
about to do. Then they would go out to visit the sick, 


_search for new scholars, read the New Testament, ex- 


“hort, sing and pray as occasion offered, trusting to the 


Lord to give them words to speak.” 


80 LIFE. OF MOODY. 


Mr. Stillson was impressed that his young friend had 
a great career before him, and, feeling this, said one 
day to him: “Moody, if you want to draw wine out of 
a cask it is needful, first, to put some in. You are all 
the time talking, and you ought to begin to study.” 
Mr. Moody, feeling the force of this, assented. And 
Mr. Stillson marked out a course of reading as a facil- 
ity to this end. Among the books was Miiller’s “Life 
of Trust.” Mr. Stillson had purposed to be his pre- 
ceptor, but, through a sudden change in business, left 
the city and returned to his home in Rochester, N. Y., 
before his friend had fairly started upon the course. 
Perhaps Mr. Moody was not the loser in missing this | 
study, which might, at that time, have diverted the en- 
ergies within him into another channel. 

In following the footsteps of Mr. Moody at this 
point in his career we cannot fail to recognize the help- 
fulness of his coadjutor, Mr. Stillson, nor to pay the 
tribute of esteem and love which is his due. Nor can 
we fail to be struck with the Hand Unseen which 
brought them together on that first Sunday morning 
of their meeting. Holy Spirit led, the two kindred 
spirits met—engaged with a common purpose in the 
work of the “common salvation” of the lost. Nor can 
we fail of intense interest in the divine leading in this 


same work all the while they were together. What a 


LIKE OF MOODY. 81 


contrast they present in their friendship and in their 
intercourse and in their activities to the great masses 
of our self-seeking, carnal race! - . 

In the movings of these men together in their splen- 
did, Christ-imitating work it is reported that they neg- 
lected to visit no class but such as needed not palpably 
their attention. It was enough for them to know that 
the people were needing salvation, and that they could 
carry the God-given, God-blessed message thereof. 
The sick were visited and comforted, and they watched 
by the side of the dying. And God set the seal of suc- 
cess continually upon their work. His beloved mis- 
sion school went on with increasing power and inter- 
est. Nothing was left untried that promised to help 
to save these neglected people, and they, in turn, loved 
and trusted Mr. Moody for his patient and earnest 
work among them in the Saviour’s name. 

One of the notable things in the history of the North 
Market Sunday-School was a visit of President Lin- 
coln. Mr. Farwell, the superintendent, was all the time 
on the lookout for anything to keep up the interest and 
spirit of the school, and hearing that Mr. Lincoln was 
in the city, he purposed to secure his visit to one of 
its sessions. Calling at the hotel where he was stay- 
‘ing, Mr. Farwell secured from Mr. Lincoln the prom- 
ise that Mr. Lincoln would pay the school a visit on 


82 LIFE OF MOODY. 


the following Sunday. At the hour appointed a car- 
riage was sent to the house of a prominent citizen, who 
had made a dinner party for his distinguished guest. 
On being told that the carriage had come, the great 
_man left his half-finished dinner, and, taking a hearty 
leave of the elegant SOD started for the North 
Market Hall. 

As they drove along, Mr. Lincoln said that talking 
to Sunday-schools was not in his line, and requested 
that he should not be asked to make a speech. But, 
on his being introduced as President-elect of the 
United States of America, the enthusiasm of those 
wild embryo citizens broke out beyond all bounds, and, 
yielding to their rough persuasions, for the first and 
only time in his life, made a Sunday-school address.. He 
told them that they were in the right place and learn- 
ing the right things. What they learned out of the 
Bible would certainly be of use to them if they prac- 
_ticed it, and their chances to become honorable men 
» and women, he said, would very much depend upon 
the attention they gave to the lessons which were 
taught them in that Sunday-school. 

It is said that in all the address there was no word 
about religion, for not until he became overwhelmed 
with the cares of office and heartbroken with the hor- 
rors of war did he himself learn what religion is, and 








A VIEW OF CONNECTICUT RIVER AND BERKSHIRE HILLS FROM AUDITORIUM HALL, NORTHFIELD. 


NG acer hd ata 
¢ 3 - = 7a) : 


“ ‘ 
i 9 





LIFE OF MOODY. 2. ARS 


he was too honest to speak in that presence, or any 


other, on a subject he did not understand. When, a few 
months after, the call was made for an army of 75,000 
men, about sixty of the big boys who had listened to | 
him that day answered the President’s call. They had 
seen the man; his fatherly face and lofty form was still 
before them, and his calm, earnest words still echoed 
in their hearts. It was their President who was call- 
ing them, and they were quite ready to go. 

It seems to have been impossible to be with Moody 
without catching a measure of his faith and energy. 
They were a contagion. He was ever ready to go up 
or to go down—anywhere—-everywhere—to save—to 
bring the most degraded from the state of sin to the 
Saviour and to the state of His salvation. Not skillful, 
it is said, at this time in giving minute, detailed direc- 
tions, but a leader of men, of extraordinary ability to 
keep everybody around him hard at work. And they 
“brought forth much fruit.” a 

One of the most miserable families they met in their 
visitations was found one Sunday morning in an attic. 
The husband, just on the verge of delirium tremens, had 
become half idiotic from drink, and the wife and ‘chil- 
dren were half dead from starvation. The first thing 
to be done was to give them something to eat. Next, 
they held a temperance meeting, and persuaded the 


BOs 04 LIFE OF MOODY. 


man to sign the pledge, a copy of which they usually 
carried with them; and by way of impressing it upon 


his stupid senses, they made him kneel down and place ~ 


his hand upon the pledge, while they prayed to God to 
give him strength to keep it. The next Sunday the 
whole family, decently clad, came to the mission 
school. 

An evening or two afterwards, as they were passing 
by the same house, the man hailed them from the attic 
window and threw them down a piece of silver, saying, 
“T believe in that Sunday-school ; I want to take a little 
stock in it.” Six years after this incident, Mr. Stillson, 
being again in Chicago, wa’ saluted by a gentlemanly 
stranger, who proved to be none other than this man, 
now become a prosperous man of business, with a 
beautiful home of his own, and himself a leading mem- 
ber in a thriving church. 

Another desperate case found on “The Sands” is 
given us by Mr. Stillson. The boy was esteemed as a 
sort of chief of a gang of gutter-snipes, who, partly 
because they admired him, and partly because they 
were afraid of him, allowed him to be a perfect tyrant 
over them. It was a long time before they could get 
near enough to this young ruffian to speak to him, but 
he was at last caught with the missionary sugar, and 
invited to come to the mission school. It was a cold 


LIFE OF \MOODY. 87 


day in February, but the only garment he had was a 
man’s old overcoat, so ragged that it had to be stitched 
together around his body, giving him the appearance » 
of being sewed up in a great dirty bag. A big pair of 
shoes, and papers wrapped around his legs, completed 
his winter costume. In this outfit he made his ap- 
pearance one Sunday at the door of the North Market 
School. Moody, catching a sight of him, gave him his 
hand, pulled him in, and, marching with him the whole 
length of the room, gave him a place in a class with 
the same kindness and attention he would have shown 
to the best-dressed boy on the North Side. 

At sight of this waif, a stranger visiting the school 
was moved to tears. After the exercises were over he 
took him to his house and gave him a full suit of 
clothes belonging to his own son. The wild lad, thus 
civilized in appearance, continued to attend the school, 
and at length, one by one, brought all his followers 
‘with him. “That lad,’ said Mr. Stillson, “is now a, 
Christian gentleman, in receipt of a large salary, and 
superintendent of a Sunday-school in one of our large 
cities.” 

The “worst” as well as the “best” who came to the 
school or the little prayer-meeting found Mr. Moody 
holding the door open for them, and inviting them 
to enter the kingdom of heaven. Daughters of prosti- 


8&8 LIFE OF MOODY. 


tutes and keepers of brothels were among his multi- 
tude of scholars, and they begged him to take them 
away from the place in which they seemed destined to 
certain ruin, and in more than one instance he sent 
them to places of safety, in which they have become 
honored members of Christian families. No matter 
how repulsive the person might be, Moody was al- 
ways ready to help. He seemed to take the most in- 
terest in helping those who were the most wretched 
and needy—esteemed by many as beyond the reach of 
grace and salvation. 

The young converts, ever increasing and gathering 
around Mr. Moody, caught his soul-saving hunger 
and thirst, as seen already in the case of the pin-stick- 
ing boy when converted, who threw his arms around 
his mother, wanting her to love Jesus, and who 


prayed, “Oh, God, convert my dear mama.’ And like | 


him they exemplified the ancient prophecy, “A little 
child shall lead them.” Among these young converts 
was a little girl whose father owned a small vessel, with 
which he freighted lumber. Having given her own 
' young heart to the Saviour, she was anxious that her 
father should do the same, and tried hard to persuade 
him. But though very fond of his child, the man had 
no taste for religion. Taking her with him on a cer- 


tain voyage, the little girl tried in vain to establish a 


LIFE OF MOODY. 89 


prayer-meeting in the little cabin and to convert some 
of the crew. But on arriving at the lumber camp, this 
little missionary commenced a Sunday-school, as near- 
ly as possible like the North Market Mission. Not 
content with this, and hearing of another encampment 
of woodcutters similar to their own, she opened a sec- 
ond Sunday-school among them also. During the se- 
vere northern winter she presided personally over both 
these institutions, riding on horseback through the 
woods every Sabbath, after the manner of the early 
Methodist pioneers. 

It may be supposed that these two Sunday-schools 
of the woods were of a very simple character, since the 
little girl herself was the entire force of officers and 
teachers, and all the library and literature in their use 
was her own little copy of the New Testament. But 
let it not be forgotten that this book is itself a wonder- 
ful library—a very wonderful instrument in God-used 
hands. The picture to the mind of the spiritual con- 
noisseur of art is very beautiful and a scene of power. 
The results of these devoted labors are not put in tables 


‘or words to be given, but who can fail to imagine the 


tender interest with which those rough woodsmen sat 

at the feet of the child missionary, charmed by her 

Christian courage and cheered by her simple faith? 
When the lumber season was over the little vessel,. 


go LIFE OF MOODY. 


with her freight, started for Chicago. But during the 
voyage a terrible storm arose, disabling the vessel, and 
driving her rapidly toward a lee shore. The crew, be- 
ing completely exhausted, and expecting in a few min- 
utes to be drowned, begged the little girl to pray for 
them, which she did with the greatest composure. 
When she had told the good Lord all about them, and 
asked Him to take them out of their danger, if He 
thought best, and, above all things, to forgive their 
sins and make them ready for heaven, she began, in a 
clear, sweet voice to sing that little Sunday-school 
hymn— 


“We are joyously voyaging over the main, 
Bound for the evergreen shore.” 


With the song, new strength and hope seemed to 
come to the arms and hearts of the crew, and renew- 
ing their efforts to weather the point which threatened 
their destruction, and aided, perhaps, by some slight 
change in the wind or abatement of the storm, the little 
craft weathered the rocks of the headland close enough 
to toss a biscuit ashore, and then swung out safely on 
the open course for home. 

Another example of this missionary spirit appears in 

_a report by Rev. Dr. Savage, then the Western secre- 
tary of the Boston Tract Society, of a “Jubilee” meet-. 


LIFE OF~ MOODY. iy eS QI 


ing. He speaks of this meeting as being held in an old 
rookery opposite Market Hall on a certain Thanksgiv- 
ing night. The “old rookery” was none other than the 
ex-saloon, Moody’s first Mission School, and, at the 
time of his writing, his prayer-room. He describes it 
as a most forlorn and wretched place, dimly lighted, 
and with no fire, where thirty or forty children had as- 
sembled to hold a jubilee, every one of them bearing 
marks of poverty, if not of actual want. But what kind 
of a jubilee was this? The name and time together 
might naturally suggest a supper or festival; but this 
was altogether beyond the means of the company as- 
sembled. The fact is, Moody had appointed a kind of 
love-feast, at which everyone was to tell what he was 
most thankful for. One little fellow, who had no other 
relative in the world but a decrepit old grandfather, 
with whom he lived in the greatest poverty, had be- 
come a Christian some time before, and, like others of 
the children, was trying to do a little home missionary 
work on his own account. When his turn came to tell 
what he was most thankful for, he said: 

“There was that big fellow, ‘Butcher Kilroy,’ who 
acted so badly that. nobody would have him, and he © 


had to be turned out of.one class after another, till I 
was afraid he would be turned out of school. It took 


me a long time to get him to come, and I begged him 


92 LIFE OF MOODY. 


to stay. I used to pray to Jesus every day to give him 
a new heart, and I felt pretty sure He would if we 
didn’t turn him out. By and by, Butcher Kilroy began 
to want to be a Christian, and now he is converted, and 
that is what makes this Thanksgiving the happiest one 
in all my life.” 

Wherever an aggressive work against the kingdom 
of the devil has been carried on, history shows that he 
has resented it.. One of his prime agencies in this has 
always been some kind of religion that labels the true 
with the term “heresy” or “false.” And under this 
mask people of ill-character find a license for mischief, 
persuading themselves in a measure that what they do 
is justifiable, if not praiseworthy. “Whoso killeth you 
will think that he doeth God service.” Where this 
spirit to any degree exists in connection with an old 
and proud religion it is not surprising if the boys par- 
take of it from their elders, and if naturally lawless 
from lack of proper teaching and culture, they are 
likely to consider the mischief in which they delight 
-as a warrantable thing. It was so with the Roman 
Catholic boys in “The Sands,” the neglected region 
into which Moody had plunged, as a brave man may 
plunge into the water or the fire, with a view to saving 
endangered lives. These young “Faithfuls” thought 
it proper service to disturb his meetings and to break 


rae wear 


“vr 


seb 


ARE SOR aaa NI 


i 





MARYLAND INSTITUTH, BALTIMORE. 
HIS EVANGELISTIC SERVICES 


IN THIS BUILDING MR. MOODY CONDUCTED 
DURING HIS GREAT REVIVAL IN BALTIMORE 


MOST 











LIFE OF MOODY. ; 95 


the glass of the windows, threatening thus to break up, 
if possible, the meetings. 

To Moody the incidents of having to run for dear 
life from the club-armed heretic-slayer ; to be chased by | 
that “Faithful” daughter of the church, armed with the 
butcher-knife; to be threatened with a whipping: by 
men for having spilled their whiskey, or to be sought 
in his meeting-room by rowdies, who were displeased 


- with his earnest efforts to save, were trifles that did not 


move him; but the continuous mischief of the Romish 
juveniles seemed to call for remedy and prevention, 


and that in the interest of his work, and he determined 
to do it thoroughly—to strike at the root of the whole 


matter. Accordingly, he went to Bishop Duggan, the 
Romish prelate of Chicago, and laid his grievances be- 


- fore him. He told the bishop that he was trying to do 


good in a part of the city which everybody had neg- 


_ lected, and that it was a shame that the members of his 


church should break the windows of his schoolroom. 
The zeal and boldness of the young man surprised 
and delighted the bishop, who promised that the lambs 


of his flock should hereafter be duly restrained. 


Moody, thus encouraged, went on to say that he often — 


-came upon sick people who were Roman Catholics ; he 
should be very glad to pray with them and relieve their 


sufferings, but they were so perigous of him that 


96 LIFE OF MOODY. 


they would not allow him to come near them. Now, if 
the bishop would give him a good word to those peo- 
ple it would help him amazingly in his work of charity. 
Such a request from a heretical Protestant was prob- 
ably never made of a Romish bishop before. But he 
very kindly replied that he should be most happy to 
give the recommendation if Mr. Moody would only 
join the Catholic Church, telling him, at the same time, 
he seemed to be too good and valuable a man to be a 
heretic. 

mii am afraid that would hinder me in my work 
among the Protestants,” said Mr. Moody. 

“Not at all,” answered the bishop. 

“What! do you mean to say that I could go to the 
noonday prayer-meeting and pray with all kinds of 


Christian people—Baptists, Methodists, Presbyterians, 


-altogether—just as I do now?” 

“Oh, yes,” replied the bishop; “if it were necessary 
you might do that.” 

“So the Protestants and Catholics can pray together, 
can they?” 
Ves 

“Well, bishop, this is a very important matter, and 
ought to be attended to at once. .No man wants to 
belong to the true church more than I do. I wish you 
would pray for me right here, that God would show 





Pe 


LIFE OF MOODY. 97 


me His true Church, and help me to be a true member 
of it.” 3 

Of course the prelate could not refuse such a re- 
quest ; so they kneeled down together, and the bishop 
prayed very lovingly for the heretic, and when he had 


_ finished the heretic began to pray for the bishop. 


From that day to the day of Bishop Duggan’s death 
he and Mr. Moody were good friends. The bishop 
made no progress in converting him, it is true, but he 
stopped his wild young parishioners from breaking the 
mission-room windows, and if only Moody could have 
joined the Church of Rome there is no telling to what | . 
dignities he might have come. ) 

This incident was published in London, and a Rom- 
ish priest, who read it, called upon Mr. Moody, and 
actually labored with him for a long time, with the 
utmost zeal and earnestness, in the hope that he 
might be persuaded into the Church of Rome. 

aah we would only join the true church,” said the 
priest, “vou would be the greatest man in England.” 

But, as may easily and well be supposed, this kind 
of argument made no impression upon a man who is 
more honored in bringing thousands of lost sinners 


to Christ than he would be by a seat in the so-called 


“Chair of St. Peter” itself. 
According to Mr. Moody’s faith and ideas, it is of 


’ ar : 
ees rh 7 


estan, ‘$0 ote as bed is wABt tire goaseniea: Tt was 
never a part of his work to transfer Catholic sinners 
into Protestant sinners. All alike must be converted 4 “i 
to Christ Jesus and become children of God through _ 
‘faith in Christ Jesus and through the pepe eane 


ti power of the Holy Spirit. 


As will lee beresiters in the account of his work 





LIFE OF MOODY. . 99 


“CHAPTER V.. 


BEGINS TO WHOLLY DEVOTE HIMSELF TO THE 
WORK. 


The events related in the foregoing rehearsal are but 
a few samples of the experience and work of young 
Moody, but they are enough from the great volume of 
these experiences and successful efforts in connection 
with his mission to reveal the unique character and 
power of the man. / 

There was another, a second love, which did not lack 
devotion in that grand and great young heart. This — 
was the Young Men’s Christian Association. This in- 
stitution was organized in Chicago after the great re- 
vival of the years of 1857-58 and as the result of their 
influence. Its first important work was the establish- 
ing a noonday prayer-meeting, after the manner of the 
Fulton Street Praver-Meeting of New York city. Dur- 
ing the winter and spring this meeting was very. well 
attended, but after awhile the revival impetus waned 
and seemed to be lost. The attendance grew smaller 
‘and smaller, until the meetings seemed about to die. 
From the first: Mr. Moody had made himself conspic- 





100 LIFE OF MQODY. 


uous in these meetings by his blunt manners and bold 
attacks upon fashionable sins, such as tippling, the use 
of tobacco, theater-going, billiard-playing and other 
what he called “loaferish games.’’ He was very severe 
against professors of religion “who wish to enjoy as 
many of the pleasures of sin as possible, without spoil- 
ing their hopes of heaven—Christians who are so near- 
ly like the people of the world that, except on Sunday, 
it is very hard to tell the difference.” 

This outspoken sentiment involved him in disfavor 
on the part of a certain sensitive class, many of whom 
left off attending the noonday prayer-meetings on ac- 
count of this bold brother, in whose eyes sin was sin, 
wherever found, and who was so insensible to the dig- 
nities of wealth, fashion, station and age that no of- 
fender was safe from being held up on the point of his 


‘spear. The one thing that appears to all eyes in the 


character and life of Moody is that he never looked 
back, the quality essential, according to the King, to’ 
every man who “puts his hand to the plow.” These 
noonday gatherings for prayer sometimes declined so 
low as to comprise not more than two or three; on one 
occasion, when Moody, J. V. Farwell and B. F. Jacobs, 
his good friends, were all out of town, it is reported that 
only one, a devoted old Scotch woman, was present. 
The incident merits recital here. 








we 


—_ 


o>, 
Pal 
f 


‘LIFE OF MOODY. Tot 


The old lady, finding herself alone, waited for some 
time to see if others were not coming to join her, but 


finally, concluding that no one was coming, she went 


up to the stand of the leader, put on her spectacles, 
read a passage of Scripture, talked it over to herseli 


for the comfort of her old heart, and then offered 


prayer for the languishing meeting and for the out- 
pouring of the Holy Spirit upon it and upon the city. 


The prayer being ended, she sang a Psalm, and then | 


went comforted to her home, feeling that she had done 
her duty and saved the meeting from utter extinction 


and from missing a single session. The old lady re- 


lated her solitary experience, and sqgme of the members | 


of the prayer-meeting were deeply impressed by it. 
Mr. Moody at once set his hand to recruiting it, and 
very soon there was a large and regular attendance, 
and the meeting began to be marked by the presence 
of the Spirit of God. 

To the reader it must appear, we think, that, with 
the missionary activities previously described, and 
with this service in connection with the noonday 


prayer-meetings ofthe Y. M. C. A., the time and hands ~ 


of young Moody must have been fully occupied, but it 


- was not so; all this time he was discharging his duties. 


; ‘es 2 
as a shoe salesman. The work in “The Sands” and in 


ah) 


102 LIFE, OF MOODY. 


this connection was all done during the hours when 
business engagements could make-no claim upon him. 

As a salesman he has the testimony of his employ- 
ers, which may well be quotéd here, to show his dili- 
gence in business: ‘“The same tactics which he used 
$0 successfully in the Young Men’s Christian Associa- 
tion and in his Sunday-school worked equally well in 

the store. He was always on the lookout for buyers ; 
he was never idle. Other salesmen in his line com- 
plained that he captured their customers, and pushed 
himself forward regardless of established etiquette. 
But, for the life of him, he never could see why a coun- 
try merchant, with money in his pocket to be invested 
in boots and shoes, was not the rightful customer of 
the first man who could persuade him to buy, so he 
paid no more attention to the traditional courtesies, of 
business than he. did to denominational lines in re- 

ligion.” 

Nevertheless, his employers, during all his business 
life, testify to his rigid truthfulness and his earnest 
Christian character, though he was so ambitious of 
. Success as to be liable to frequent errors of judgment. 
Here is a sample of this testimony. , One of them says: 

“We regarded him as an excellent salesman, but a 
poor judge of credits. In one particular instance he 
sold goods amounting to over two hundred dollars to 





LIFE OF MOODY. 103 


+ 


a man whom we found rated as ‘doubtful’ in the mer- 

cantile directory, and therefore refused to send him the 

goods. But Moody at once came to the rescue of his 

customer, declaring him to be ‘as good as the Bank 

of England,’ and offered to be responsible for the bill. 

On this we senf the goods, and when the money was 

due, sure enough it was Moody who paid it.” : 
Another says: i 

“He never would sit down in the store to chat or 

read the paper,.as the other clerks did when there were 

~~ no customers, but as soon as he had served one buyer 

he was on the lookout for another; if none appeared, 
et + he would start off to the hotels or depots, or walk the 
} streets in search of one. He would sometimes stand 
on the sidewalk in front of his place of business, look- 

ing eagerly up and down for a man who had the ap- 
pearance of a merchant from the country, and some | 

of his fellow-clerks would laughingly say, “There is 

the spider again watching for a fly’ 6 Ms 

* It is not a matter of surprise that this business en- 
ergy had secured for young Moody increase of salary 
and percentage on his sales, and his habits, according » 
to his employers’ testimony, being “economical, he 
might have saved money if he had not spent so much 

on his mission.” This latter is the testimony of the 


Bs, ‘employer, who stated, “T have seen as many as twenty 





- with shoes.” 


I04 . LIFE’ OF MOODY. 


children come into the store at once to be fitted out 


The business neighbors of Mr. Moody regarded him 
as rather unsocial. When not closely occupied with - 


‘business, he was, as it appeared to them, preoccupied 


in manner and silent. He seemed to have an under- 
current of thought, evidently concerning his mission, 
into which, at every moment of leisure, he instinctively 
fell. But those who were interested with him in Chris- 
tian work, and his friends at the Young Men’s Chris- 
tian Association, reckoned him as the “soul of good 
fellowship.” : 

Two of these years of business in Chicago were 
spent with his friend, Mr. Wiswall, after which he as- 
sociated with Mr. C. N. Henderson, who had become 
acquainted with him at the mission and had taken great 
interest in his work. His occupation with this house 
was that of commercial traveler, in which function he 
made long excursions in the country. But it mattered 
not to what distance he might go, he was sure to be 
back home to be present at his mission work every 
Sunday. His traveling expenses, supplied by the 
house, provided for his return to Chicago but once a 
month, but he had a real friend in Colonel Hammond, 
who was then superintendent of the Chicago, Burling- 


ton & Quincey Railroad, who delighted to clear his 





LIFE OF MOODY. PTS 


brain of business and warm his tender heart by helping 
Moody in his Sunday-school on Sunday afternoons. 
This gentleman, esteeming the presence of Moody 
essential to the school’s success, gave his young friend 
a pass over the road to bring him home for three Sun- 
days out of the four. 

On the death of Mr. Henderson, Mr. Mare be- 
came connected at once with the house of Messrs. 
Buel, Hill & Granger, remaining with them about a 
year. The outside work seems to have been congenial 
both to the push and energy of the young man and to 
his love of scope for service to his Lord. That he gave 
a full measure of attention to business, and that with 
success, there is every proof, but that the founder of 
“the North Market Mission,” in face of all the clerical 
and other opposition which it provoked, and who, un-- ' 
der God, made it such a success, took every opportu- 
nity to seek the salvation of men, is.unquestioned. He 
was the man who sought ppporiamtcs-nscized them—. 
in a sense made them. 

In after years, when the great fame of Mr. Moody 
was established, one of his customers being asked: 

“When young Moody used to come to your store in 
his excursions to sell goods, did you perceive any indi- 
cations of anything remarkable in him?” replied: 

“Well, he sold the goods.” ; 


106 LIFE OF MOODY. 


But by degrees he became less and less a merchant, 
and so full of his religious work as to lose all interest 
in everything else. 

About the date at which we have arrived an incident 
occurred which proved, so to speak, the hinge on which 
the extraordinary energies of Mr. Moody finally 
swung. In relating | this incident he rehearses intro- 
ductorily, in brief, some things which we have already 
seen, but this introduction reveals the relater as meas- 
uring himself by his own lofty, ideal standard. He 
gives us the story of this incident, which we reproduce 
_ in his own words under the caption: 


“HOW I CAME TO GIVE UP BUSINESS. 


“The way God led me out of business: into Christian 
work is as follows: 

“T had never lost sight of Jesus Christ since the first 
time I met Him in the store at Boston. But for years 
I was only a nominal Christian, really believing that I 
could not work for God. No one had ever asked me 
to do anything. 

“When I went to Chicago I hired five pews in a 
church, and used to go out on the street and pick up 
young men and fill these pews. I never spoke to those 
young men about their souls; that was the work of 





LIFE OF MOODY. ; 107 


the elders, I thought. After working for some time 
like that, I started a mission Sabbath-school. I thought 
numbers were everything, and so I worked for num- 
bers. When the attendance ran below one thousand 
it troubled me, and when it ran to twelve or fifteen 
hundred I was elated. Still, none were converted; 
there was-no harvest. Then God opened my eyes. 

There was a class of your’g ladies in the school, who 
were without exception the most frivolous girls I ever 
met. One Sunday the teacher was ill, and I took that 
class. They laughed in my face, and I felt like opening 
that door and telling them all to get out and never 
come back. 

“That week the teacher of the class came into the 
store. where I worked. He was pale and looked 
very ill. 

“ ‘What is the trouble?’ I asked. 

“ T have had another hemorrhage of my lungs. The 
doctor says I cannot live on Lake Michigan, so Tam 
going to New York State. I suppose I am going home 
pte die.’ 

“Fe seemed greatly troubled, and when I asked him 
the reason, he replied: 

“Well, I have never led any of my class to Christ. 
~ T really believe I have done the girls more harm than 


’ 
good. 


108 | LIFE OF MOODY. 


“I had never heard anyone talk like that before, and 
it set me thinking. 
_ “After awhile I said: ‘Suppose you go and tell them 
how you feel. I will go with you in a carriage if you 
want to go.’ , 
: “He consented, and we started out together. It was 
one of the best jonrneys I ever had on earth. We went 
to the house of. one of the girls, called for her, and the 
teacher talked to her about her soul. There was no 
laughing then! Tears stood in her eyes before long. 
After he had explained the way of life, he suggested 
that we have a prayer. “He asked me to pray. True, 
I had never done such a thing in my life as to pray 
God to convert a young lady there and then. But we 
prayed, and God answered our prayer. 

“We went to other houses. He would go upstairs 


_ and be all out of breath, and he would tell the girls 


what he had come for. It wasn’t long before they 
broke down and sought salvation. When his strength 
gave out, I took him back to his lodgings. The next 
day we went out again. At the end of ten days he came 
to the store, with his face literally shining. 
““Mr. Moody,’ he said, ‘the last one of ay class has 
yielded herself to Christ.’ 
“T tell you we had a time of rejoicing. 
“He had to leave the next night, so I called his class 





LIFE OF .MOODY. : 109 


together that night for a prayer-meeting, and there God 
kindled a fire in my soul that has never gone out. The 


height of my ambition had been to be a successful mer- 


chant, and if I had known that meeting was going to 
take that ambition out of me I might not have gone. 
But how many times I have thanked God since for 
that meeting! 

“The dying teacher sat in the midst of his class an 
talked with them, and read the fourteenth chapter of 
John. We tried to sing— 


“ ‘Blest be the tie that binds,’ 


after which we knelt down to prayer. I was just ris- 
ing from my knees, when one of the class began to 
pray for her dying teacher. Another prayed, and an-— 
other, and before we rose the whole class had prayed. 
As I went out I said to myself: 

Oh; God, let me die rather than lose the blessing 
I have received tonight !’ | 

“The next evening I went to the depot to say good- 
bye to the teacher. Just before the train started one 
of the class came, and before long, without any fore- 
arrangement they were all there. What a meeting that 


- was! We tried to sing, but we broke down. The last 


we saw of that dying teacher he was standing on the 














iio LIFE OF MOODY. \ 


platform of the car, his finger pointing upward, telling 
that class to meet him in heaven. 

ey didn’t know what this was going to cost me. I 
was disqualified for business; it had become distasteful 
to me. I had got a taste of another world, and ¢ared 
no more for making money. For some days after the 
greatest struggle of my life took place. Should I give 
up business and give myself to Christian work, or 
should I not? I have never regretted my choice. Oh, 
the luxury of leading some one out of the darkness of 
this world into the glorious light and liberty of the 
Gospel Pee 

Mr. Moody’s state of mind at this point is that of 





: 


many another. He had become dead to the world of : 


business, and so impressed with the importance of 
seeking the souls of the lost that he could not decide 
_ otherwise than as he did. If ever man since the Apos- 
tles heard audibly the call of Jesus, was by the Holy 

Spirit called to absolute devotion to the sacred work of 
preaching the Gospel, Moody was manifestly among 
the number. And soon he obeyed this silent, Parent 
call. 

The severance of business connections with Messrs. 
Buel & Co. was his first severance from the engross- 


ments of business, to engross himself with the higher 





MR. MOODY’S CHURCH, NORTHFIELD. 


td & b ; 7 
AT apres 
Ce Eee oT we 


= i = 
v= i 
¥ shes Ba > ee 


ae 5 i 7 
ae t 7 





4 a a 


sa 
DO “i 


LIFE OF MOODY. 113 


interests of the kingdom of God—to devote himself 


wholly to the work of saving souls. 


The date of this devotion was the year 1860. He 
had been in Chicago four years, and was twenty-three 
years old. His work already was phenomenal. But of 
no man since the great Apostle of the Gentiles uttered 
the words expressive of his own aspiration could it 
more truly be said, “Forgetting the things that are be- 
hind, and reaching forth to those that are before, I 
press toward the mark,” etc. 

“Soon after he left our house, I met him one day on 
the street,” says Mr. Hill, “and said to him, “Mr. 
Moody, what are you doing?’ ” . | 

“ ‘T am at work for Jesus Christ,’ was the reply. 

“His answer shocked me a little at first, but on 
thinking it over I felt that it was a fair statement of the 
facts in the case. That was just what he was doing, 
and his work for the Lord was just as real and as vigor- 
ous as it had always been for his other employers.” | 

“He left our house,” says Mr. Hill, “under the most 
pleasant circumstances, having maintained his Chris- 
tian character unblemished, and we all bade him god- 
speed in the work to which we believe he was called.” 

Having bidden the last good-bye to a business life, 


“he said to his friend, B. F. Jacobs, himself famous 


among Sunday-school workers and speakers : 


114 LIFE OF MOODY. 


-“T have decided to give God all my time.” 

_ “But how are you going to live?” asked his friend. 

“God will provide for me, if He wishes me to keep 
on, and I shall keep on until I am obliged to stop,” was 
-Moody’s reply. 

The resolution was never broken. He kept on glo- 
riously, as we know, until the day of his triumphant, 
- glorious translation. And God did provide for him. 

It is averred that he was now the happiest man in 
Illinois, enjoying his freedom to work every day in 
the interests of his beloved mission, and in the inter- 
ests of his second love, the Young Men’s Christian 
Association. By economy, he had laid by out of his 
earnings, in spite of his benefactions to the needy, a 
small sum, part of which he invested, reserving out of 
it about one thousand dollars for the first year’s ex- 
penises. 

The Young Men’s Christian Association, having 
recognized his pre-eminent ability for the post, had ap- 
pointed him chairman of the visiting committee to the. 
sick and to strangers. With a view to facility in this : 
work, he bought for himself a pony, and scouring the 
city in every direction in the execution of this office, 
and in the interests of his mission, Moody and his 
pony were soon known and recognized in almost every 
part of it, especially in the regions of “The Sands,” the 











LIFE OF MOODY. 115 


Association rooms and the North Market Hall. An 
old’resident of the North Side declares that “in those 

_ days Moody would be seen chasing the wild sfall-fry 
up the streets'and down the alleys, and, after a Sunday 
morning’s search for new scholars, would emerge from 
some dirty lane or court, his pony literally covered 
with ragged urchins, followed by others of the same 
sort, holding on by the tail, catching by the stirrups, 
or clinging to each other’s rags, and these he would | 
march in grand procession. down to North Market — 
Sunday-School.” 

As the reader is able to enter into sympathy with the 
above picture, he may well give out his heart love to 
suchaman. Howit contrasts with the rider who wants 
all his horse to himself and every time! In young 
Moody we see the great loving heart, and yield him in 
return (so did the boys) an admiring love. We could 
wish that the light-writing had been used to immortal- | 

. ize a sample of these scenes, that our eyes might at will 


1 


feast upon it. 

The old source of income having been cut off, the 
thousand dollars were soon consumed on the mission, 
the Association and on the various works of charity 
that increased on the missionary’s hands. The rest of. 
his small fortune is said to have somehow “taken wings 
and flew away.” Before long he found himself shut 


z= 


116 LIFE OF MOODY. 


up to rely solely on the promise “Trust in the Lord and 
do good,” etc. It may have been well for him now 
that he had read Miiller’s “Life of Trust,” recom- 


-mended to him by his friend, Mr. Wiswall. 
The noonday prayer-meetings of the Young Men’s 


Christian Association having swelled to a large attend- 
ance, they now had to be held in a large back room in 


the Methodist church block. To economize expensés, 


as his money was all gone, to this place Mr. Moody 
had to remove his residence—that is, removed himself. 
At length, he was brought to the necessity of living on 
crackers and cheese, and to sleeping on the benches of 
the prayer-room. But he kept on with his work all the 


_same. He determined to fully test the question whether 
God would take care of him in his new work. At the 


same time he collected considerable sums of money 


for the poor and for various works of charity and re-’ 


ligion carried on by the Association, but he would not 
use a penny of it for himself, because not given for that 
special purpose. These privations very naturally put 
the faith of the young missionary to the test. A faith 
less than his would have broken down under trial and 


~ soon have returned to seek support in the general way. 


But if this confidence of his did at all waver at this hour, 
the Lord, who orders all things for His servants, was 
preparing an incident in the life of another of His ser- 





LIFE OF MOODY. \ T7 


vants to confirm his young servant’s trust in Him. This _ 
incident was a striking visible redemption of the prom- 
ise, “All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, be- 
lieving, ye shall receive.” . 

In the days, already referred to, when the noonday 
prayer-meetings of the Young Men’s Christian Asso- 
_ ciation were in a languishing condition, and ready, as 
it seemed, to die, a certain Mr. Field, from Wisconsin, 
came to Chicago to perfect a certain mechanical inven- 
tion. He was one of the recruits who rallied to its 
standard in that crisis of the battle, and being “full of 
faith and of the Holy Spirit,” he became at once a val- 
uable helper in the work of the Association, and also 
connected himself with the North Market School. 

For many years he had suffered from a disease in 
one of his legs; it had become stiff and crooked, and 
thus practically shorter than the other, obliging him 
to walk with a crutch or cane; byt the work of the mis- 
sion so absorbed him that, oblivious to or forgetting 
his lameness, he searched the highways and byways, 
after the fashion of his leader, until excessive use of 
the limb aggravated the disease, and he began to suf- 
fer great pain. Becoming alarmed, he on a Friday 
evening applied to a physician, who appointed an ex~ 
amination of the case on the following Monday. That 


appointment never had to be fulfilled. 





118 ; LIFE OF MOODY. 


It was noticed in the school on Sunday that Mr. — 
Field had come without his cane. At the close of the 
exercises he took Moody and Farwell to his room, 
bounding up the stairs two steps at a time, and told 
them his wonderful experience as follows: 

“You know how lame I have been, and that my leg 
had become so painful that I had decided to go to a 
doctor. Last night I crept out to the nearest bath- 
- room, and returned to bed in great distress; the idea 
seemed impressed upon me that the Lord could cure 
me as well as the doctor. I called to mind how He 
_ healed the man sick of paralysis, and I said to myself, 
‘T will ask Him to cure me in the same way.’ Commit- 
ting my case wholly to the Lord, I soon fell asleep, and 
in my sleep dreamed that I went to the surgeon, as he 
had appointed, and that he cut open my leg, performed 
some operation which I did not comprehend, and im- : 
mediately closed the wound again, not hurting me in ° 
the least or even leaving a scar. 

“My first thought on awaking in the morning was 
that all the pain was gone. The lame leg felt strangely 
well. Throwing off the bedclothes, I was astonished 
to find it straightened, so as to be of equal length with 
the other. Leaping from the bed, I found I could use 
it with freedom, and remembering my dream, I began 








LIFE OF MOODY. : T19 


to praise God for answering my prayer and working on 
me a miracle of healing. 

“While I thought upon this wonderful experience, 
I observed that the muscles of the leg were still 
shrunken as before. Then I said to myself, “There 
must be some mistake ; this cannot be God’s work, for 
when He does anything He does it thoroughly and 
well.’ But, presently, I remembered that it was not 
God’s plan to do for us what we can do for ourselves. 
Those muscles had withered and shrunk from disuse ; . 
by using them they would become full and strong like 
the others. Then all doubt departed, and I have called 
you to join me in praising God, who is able to save peo- 
ple in these days just as He did in the. days of His 
flesh.” 

“Since then,” says Mr. Farwell, in making this re- 
port, “Mr. Field has walked on two legs like any other 
man, and the shrunken muscles, by means of proper 
exercise, returned to their normal proportions.” 

To Mr. Moody, this sight of the hand of God broke 
like a vision of light. It was so evident that God did 
not forget His people—prayer was still a power, even 
in material things—in healing the bodies of His believ- 
ing children who served Him. The promises still hold 
good. And if the knees had begun to feel feeble, the 
hands to hang down, they were forthwith strengthened, 


- 


120 LIFE OF MOODY. 


and the hands were lifted up. In the strength and light 
of this vision he reached out his hand to grasp the hand 
of the Lord, and seemed to overleap all difficulties. He 
had stood the test. Presently, without a word from 
him, some of his friends began to wonder how he was 
living, and finding out the poverty of his bed and 
board, they insisted on supplying him with abundant 
comforts of life. It was Steins then that the Lord 
intended him to “keep on.’ 

We have from the pen of Mr. S. A. eam who was 
at this time, and for many after years, treasurer of the 


Young Men’s Christian Association of Chicago, the + 


following testimony of Moody’s attitude and influence 
in it: 

“Mr. Moody found in the Association a congenial 

field of labor. When he joined it had but few mem- 
"bers, and though it was called ‘The Young Men’s As- 
sociation,’ it was composed and managed almost en- 
tirely by middle-aged or elderly men. As a conse- 
- guence, its methods and policy were quiet and conser- 
vative. Moody’s advent among them was like a stiff 
northwest breeze. His zeal and devotion were the life 
and hope of the Association, but he shocked the nice 
sense of propriety of some of these gentlemen by car- 
rying its work among a class of people who had hith- 
erto been neglected, under the impression that its 


& { 


| EOS ORO ae ees i) 
, ‘ Si im ¥ o J 


“4 LIFE OF MOODY. ; I21 


proper line of effort was among the higher classes of 
young men. 

“Under Moody’s leadership, the Young Men's 
Christian Association became, like the North Market 
Mission, a free and popular institution, extending its 
influence to all classes of society, and bringing the cul- 
tured and wealthy to the assistance of the ignorant 
and the poor. 

“Mr. Moody was fertile in schemes and expedients 
for raising money for the Lord’s work, but of the many 


_ tens of thousands of dollars which he secured for the 


Association he received nothing whatever for himself. 
He always refused a salary, saying that it would em- 
barrass him, and limit his freedom to go at a mo- 
ment’s notice wherever the Lord might call him. I 
was treasurer of the Association from the time of his 
first connection with it, and I do not remember to have 
paid him a dollar either for his services or the inci- 
dental expenses of the work. Neither do I remember 
any appropriation being made for his assistance, 
though he often needed and always deserved it.” 

It will be noted that Mr. Kean is speaking from 
memory, the books of the Association, together with 


the building, having been burned in the great fire. 
Friends of Mr. Moody at the time of which we are 
. writing blamed him somewhat for this obliviousness 





, 122” LIFE OF MOODY. 


and neglect of his worldly, temporal interests, but he 
would say, in reply: 

“God is rich, and I am working’ fot Him.” 

As we have already seen, before he gave up busi- 
ness and visible, personal self-support, in all his work 
in “The Sands,” he must have been characterized, im- 
-pelled and drawn irresistibly along by this spirit. In 
his eyes, the continuous ingathering of sheaves for the 
heavenly garner must have been the peerless prize. 
He was soul-hungry, never satisfied with the number 
won, as long as there were yet those not won to Christ 
unsaved. It would be a mistake for anyone to suppose 
that Mr. Moody’s self-sacrifice involved him continu- 
ously, even at this time, in privation. At times, faith 
in this matter had its sore test, and the glory of depri- 
vation was sometimes his, but his Lord ‘saw fit to sup-. 
ply him comfortably, and often did so bountifully. 
Furthermore, the life of faith and trust became to him 
a rest and luxury. Being absolutely sure of his daily 
bread, he took “no anxious thought of the morrow.” 
All care for it was banished, so that he could serve the 
Lord without distraction, and he did so with a single 
eye and a complete heart. 

Mr. Moody became the acknowledged chief in the 
mission department of the Young Men’s Christian 
Association, and it was not long before the Associa-. 





LIFE OF MOODY. ia83 


tion began to make itself felt in all the mission work 
of the city. He devised a system by which every mis- 
sion school was visited by members, and make re- 
ports to the Association; also for bringing ‘each mis- 
sion under the care and patronage of some strong 
church and congregation. As may be readily seen, 
several benefits resulted from such a system. The 
feeble missions were encouraged and strengthened. — 
The churches and their home schools were aroused to 


anew activity ; and a great deal of lay talent was devel- 


oped which before had been unused, dormant and in- 
ert. Heretofore the religious work had been left 
mainly to clerical hands and as an almost exclusive 
function. But now the army of workers was increased 
and sent forth in the vineyard. © 

To the above-noted conception of the ministerial 
office Mr. Moody, as we have seen, had never sub- 
scribed, and in practice he was a notable, visible excep- 
tion. Seeing great fields untilled, unsown, unreaped, 


he spontaneously put in the plow, scattered the seed, 


thrust in the sickle, and reaped. In this work, as we 
have seen, the tenderest and most important spiritual 
work of the pastorate often fell into his hands. Evi- 
dently he ministered to the bodies and souls of more 


who needed these ministrations, even during his busi- 


+ am 
be 


124 LIFE OF MOODY. 


ness career, than any ordained clergyman of the time ~ 


in the city. 
Mr. Moody was regarded by some eminent divines 
of the time as a sort of intruder upon the rights and 
duties of the sacred office. The lay talent and skill 
developed in explaining the Scriptures and in exhorta- 
tion by some of the brethren appeared to these divines 
as “dangerously like preaching,” and if this were per- 
mitted to go on, who could tell how fong it might be 
before the Association would attempt to set up a new 
denomination? To these it appeared as if the Associa- 
tion was a superfluity, as the fifth wheel to a coach. _ 
On the other hand, the active mission workers of the 
Association felt that the church had fallen into ineffec- 
tive forms, and that to meet the needs of the poor and 
degraded, the outcasts who were considered utterly 
reprobate, new methods, aggressive effort must be 
used. They felt that the church as a whole was leaving 
a possibly successful work undone. The previous 
work of Mr. Moody and his coadjutors in “The Sands” 
was an ocular demonstration of these possibilities and 
an example of what lay effort when consecrated might 
further be used to effect. Their success in bringing 
numbers of the hopeless people into the kingdom 
caused a great deal of astonishment among the sedate 
people and stirred up the sluggard churches to a sense 


t 





LIFE OF MOODY. Ne Seb 


of their duty and their privilege; and becoming in in- 
fluence similar to the North Market Mission, the As- 
Sheiation became a blessing to all the evangelical 
churches of the city, and at length commanded the 
éonfidence and enlisted the co-operation of almost the 
entire Christian community. big 

Nor was this new life and activity by any means lim- - 
ited in its influence to the city nor to the State of II- 
linois. It was soon heard of and felt in other cities 
_ and in other States. An example of this influence in a 
distant city in a distant State came under the notice of 
the writer, and may serve as an example of its far- 
reaching power. 

In the city of Baton Rouge, La., the churches had, 
as it seemed, fossilized, exerting little influence over 
the young men of thetown. Their Sundays were spent 
in a thoroughly secular way; they were drifting, as it 
seemed, further and further away from the churches 
and from all fear of God. There was, however, in that 
city a lady of eminent piety, of sweet Christian spirit 
and sympathy—the wife of Colonel Boyd, who was at 
that time superintendent of the State University, lo- 
cated there. To this lady the situation was a source of 
deep concern, and she longed for some means prom- 
issory of spiritual influence over the prodigal young 
men. Having heard of the wonderful work done 





126 LIFE OF MOODY. 


through the Young Men’s Christian Association of 
Chicago, the thought occurred to her whether such an 
Association might not be the agency of promise for the 
young men of Baton Rouge. With this thought she 
corresponded with the secretary of the Chicago Asso- 
ciation, receiving from him with his reply copies of the 
Y. M. C. A. constitution and other printed matter that 
might be helpful in inciting to and organizing an insti- 
tution in her own town. Being of a retiring nature 
(although she was already the real moving spirit of the 
little Baptist Sunday-school which had been started), 
she began to cast around her to find a young man to 
whom she could commit the work as to a leader in its 
organization. The pastors of the Methodist and Pres- 
byterian Churches were, she thought, too much occu- 
pied with the work of their respective “churches: fur- 


_ thermore, she was not by any means assured that these 


ministers were not of kindred sentiments with those in 
Chicago who regarded the Association there as “the 
fifth wheel in a coach.” The then rector of the Epis- 


_ copal Church was certainly of this view, and the Rom- 


ish priest was, of course, a hopeless case in the matter. 
Furthermore, she felt that a young layman, in other 
ways qualified for the work, if such could be found, 
would be more likely to be in such touch with the 
youne men as would elicit their response. For such a 








LIFE OF MOODY. Se PSEZ7, 


person she looked and waited for some months. But 
finding no one, she prayed that a young man might be 
sent to the town to whom she might commit the work. 

About this time a young stranger came and engaged 
in business in the city of Baton Rouge; and very soon, 
being found to be a member of a Baptist Church in 


Sherman, Texas, he was invited by a youth who at- 


tended the little Baptist Sunday-School to attend its 


session. He went, and became a regular member of it. . 


After he had attended the school for a short time it 
happened that the superintendent, having to be away 
from home, asked him to take his place for the day, 


which he agreed to do. On the next Sunday the super- 
-intendent, having heard so satisfactorily of his substi- 


tute, absented himself on purpose, and during the week 
he came to confer with the substitute, with a view of 
dropping his mantle of office upon him. The stranger, 
under a sense of the value to Captain Amiss himself 
of his retaining and discharging the functions of his 
office, refused, but compromised the matter by offer- 


' ing to act as his assistant at every time of need and in 


any way to co-operate with him in the work. This 
seemed to suit very well, but very soon the assistant 
found himself regularly in charge of the office, and had 


to discharge its duties. 


Very soon, after one of the sessions of the Sunday- . 














1260 LIFE OF MOODY. 


school, the stranger, who used often, from the esteem 
in which he held her, to accompany Mrs. Boyd as far 
as he went her way, was questioned about the practica- 
bility of organizing and sustaining a Young Men’s 
Christian Association in Baton ‘Rouge. His answer 
was, “It can be organized ; the sustaining is, of course, 
another thing, which time alone can prove.” Then she 
made known her whole heart in the matter to him, and 


finding him in sympathy with it as a promising thing, 
‘she asked him if he “would take charge from this mo- 


ment of the work.” After a few moments’ pause he 
consented. Then, suddenly raising her cloak, she dis- — 
closed her arm full of correspondence and papers, 
which she dropped into his hand, saying: “There, 
then, I am done with it. The whole thing is committed 
to you.” He was somewhat taken aback, and re- 
sponded, “I will take the part you need to have done, 


’ 99 


but you must remain for the present “generalissimo. 


_ She agreed to be ready for any service in the interests 


of the project which she might be capable of. That 
very day the first steps were taken. 

The first man visited with a view to the work was 
Rev. Mr. Kean, pastor of the Methodist Church, a 
young man, and son of Bishop Kean of New Orleans. 
This minister pronounced himself heartily in favor of 
the institution, and the stranger, at his request, began 














BIRI’S-HYE VIEW OF LIBRARY, GYMNASIUM, MARQUAND STONE HALL, NORTHFIELD. 





Se A 


LIFE .OF MOODY. Ligue 


to confer with other young men who were members 


of the churches, and a meeting was promptly called to 


meet in Mr. Kean’s study at his church. There the 
charter members organized the “Young Men’s Chris- 
tion Association of Baton Rouge.” Large meetings 
in the churches- very soon followed; a room was 


. quickly secured, being given free of charge, in the Bon- 


ham Building. It was soon properly furnished with. 
seating, music, papers and magazines from all parts of 
the country and from Canada. It swelled rapidly in 
numbers, and its Sunday afternoon sessions were at- 
tended by audiences that packed the spacious room. 
In addition to Protestants, the Catholic young men of 
the town attended and evinced great interest in its ser- 
vices and privileges. The moral and spiritual effect of 
these services were seen further in due time. Religious 
interest in the churches revived, and when the time 
seemed ripe the extra .meetings in the evangelical 
churches were crowded with ingatherings. The Bap- 
tists in Baton Rouge at the date when the Associa- 
tion was organized had no house of worship, but out 


- of the revived state of religion they ere long built one 


and took a stand among the churches. 
It should be subjoined to this report that the new rec- 


tor of the Episcopal Church, Rev. Mr. Stuart, was in cor- 


dial sympathy with the Association and with the work 


132 LIFE ,OF MOODY. 


which he found going on. And upon anoccasion, meet- 
ing the person for whom Mrs. Boyd had prayed, said,’ 
“You have been owned of God in doing aworkof which 
anyone maybe glad and thankful. If he had used me in 
such a way I should feel in that way about it.’ The 
stranger himself soon after became a minister of the 
Gospel. As previously stated, this is given only as a 
sample of the way.in which the work of Mr. Moody in 
Chicago radiated and swelled in ever extending circles. 
The report of the Visitation Committee; of which 
Mr. Moody was chairman, gives the number of families 
visited the first year as 554; the amount of money be- 
stowed in charity to the needy as $2350. “Man's ex- 
tremity was God’s opportunity,” as is perpetually seen. 
At the invitation of Mr. Moody and his relief commit- 
tee many souls came into the kingdom of Christ who 
had for years stayed away from churches because they 
could not go in “respectable style,” and therefore had 
not cared to go at all. 
_ Truly it may be said that “the poor now had the 
Gospel preached unto them.” Sometimes, indeed, it 
was preached to them against their own wills. The re- 
sult of these efforts was that all the missions were thriv- 
ing, and the noonday prayer-meetings, though not al- 
ways now ofa select class, were generally forcible. The 
blessing of heaven was manifestly resting on the man 





oie thoes eee 


LIFE OF MOODY. : 133 


whose zeal and earnestness had aroused a similar 
spirit in the brotherhood of evangelical Christians, in- 
duced a higher sense of their duty and high privilege 
of service in Christ Jesus, and had put so many to work 
while the day lasts in His glorious salvation emprise. 


WORK WITH THE CHRISTIAN COMMISSION. 


It is a matter of devout gratitude to God that during 
the time of which we have been writing the forces of 
the Prince of Life had been awaked to earnestness and 
activity, and that they had been thus exercised in His 
high service, for Satan the Adversary, Apolyon the 
Destroyer, was also busy. An awful drama was being 
prepared for the delectation of hell. War, the carnival 
of death, burst with all its fury and horrors upon the 
nation. The destructive forces were legion. It is well 
that the army of salvation was ready, and that it was 
blessed with such a leader, under its invisible Captain, 
as Mr. Moody. Well has it been said that “No 


thoughtful person can study the history of the Sanitary 


and Christian Commissions without feeling sure that. 
while the devils were making a long pull, a strong pull 
and a pull altogether, Jesus Christ, the Captain of Sal- 
vation, had His forces also in the field. Christian men 


in camps and battles, Christian women in hospitals and 


134 LIFE OF MOODY. 


prisons, and good angels everywhere, were working 
with might and main together to save the souls and 
bodies of soldiers, gathering in the great harvest which 
death was constantly ripening. In the midst of the 
horrors of war God was working miracles of grace the 
like of which no other war history has ever seen. 
Every campaign was begun and ended with a revival.” 

The war breaking out in the year 1861, the President 
called for 75,000 volunteers. These were under way so 
quickly that little in the way of organized religious ef- 
fort could be done for them, but when the second call 
for 300,000 men was made and a camp of rendezvous: 
was appointed near the southern limits of Chicago Mr. 
Moody and his brethren saw at once and seized upon 
their opportunity. Before the men were on the ground 
at Camp Douglass the Christian Commission had been 
organized, and was already on the ground ready for 
work when the men arrived. The first tent pitched was 
a tent of prayer, and before the camps were fairly 
pitched a camp prayer-meeting was in progress. As 
other regiments arrived and formed camps in other, 
‘parts of the city they were promptly visited, supplied 
with reading matter, and public worship on the Lord’s 
Day and prayer-meetings during the week-days were 
established forthwith in their midst. 


To the soldiers who had been in the habit of attend- 





CLS onal) joke ed Biber en, 
hy ‘e ’ ne 2 eae Vas: 
“* ria ‘ v 
4 * . ‘ ‘ 


~S : 
re al 
r ; 


LIFE OF. MOODY. : 135 


ing churches and Sunday-schools at the homes which 
they had left, and who were so soon to be in the midst 
of danger, this must have been a refreshing thing and 
a joy. Many of them had left Christian homes, and 
must have.been gratefully surprised as on their arrival 
in camp they heard themselves saluted by name and 
immediately heard the name of the Saviour in the sweet 
songs they were accustomed to hear and to sing in 
those homes and in the old gatherings for worship. As 


the numbers gathered the workers increased in propor- 
tion to the need. At the call of Mr. Moody 150 min- 


isters and laymen promptly responded. Every even- 
ing eight or ten meetings were in progress in different 
camps, and an almost continual service, within reach of 
every regiment, was held on the sacred day. Over 
1500 of these services were held in and around Chicago 
by the Association during the war, and their conduct 
was mainly under the direction of the Devotional Com- 


mittee of the Young Men’s Christian Association, of. 


which Mr. Moody was chairman. , 

As to the activity of the leader, Mr. Jacobs says: 
“In these meetings Mr. Moody seemed almost ubiqui- 
tous. He would hasten from one camp and barrack to 


another, day and night week-days and Sundays, pray- 
‘ing, exhorting, conversing personally with the men 
about their souls and revelling in the abundant work 


136 LIFE OF MOODY. 


and swift success which the war had brought within 
_ his reach.” 

The chapel of the Young Men’s Christian Associa- 
‘tion at Camp Douglass was the first camp chapel in ex- 
" istence, being built in October, 1861, at a cost of $2300. 

Many of the soldiers who were converted were soon 
sent to the field in Kentucky, and desirous of having 
the means of grace continued among them, sent re- 
peated calls to the brethren at Chicago to establish 
meetings among them. In response to these calls Mr. 
Moody was sent to the army near Fort Donelson, be- | 
ing the first regular army delegate from Chicago. 
Other Associations having engaged in similar effort, 
- a convention was held in Norfolk, Va., on November 
16, 1861, at which convention the United States Chris- 
tian Commission was projected. Mr. George H. 
Stuart of Philadelphia was president. Mr. J. V. Far- 
well was made the chairman of Mr. Moody’s War 
Committee, and when the Christian Commission was 
organized he was placed on its managing board. 

Upon the news of the battle of Fort Donelson Mr. 
Moody, together with Rev. Robert Patterson and Mr. 
Jacobs, were sent as a special committee of relief. They 
were accompanied by a number of other brethren of 
Chicago eager to minister to the sick and wounded and 


dying. 





LIFE OF MOODY. tees 


As the relief committee were on their way on board 
the steamer Cairo a discussion took place as to how the 
work should best be done for the dying soldiers. Mr. 


, Moody, full of the idea of saving souls, urged that the 


very first business in every case was to find out 
whether the sick or dying man were a child of God. 
If so, then it was not necessary to spend much time on 
him, he being safe enough already. If not, he was to 
be pointed at once to the Saviour. Robert Collyer, the 
Unitarian, advocated attention to the physical wants 
as the first, the essential thing, and in his rejoinder to 
Dr. Patten, the Congregationalist, drew forth the ap- 
plause of the crowd by an exclamation looking toward 
death for their country as a passport to heaven, a doc- 
trine common among heathen, Mohammedans, Mor- 
mons, and. definitely taught, it is said, by Russian 
priests to Russian soldiers. 

It is proper to state here that the wide experience 
of the Christian Commission with thousands of brave 
men at the point of death proved that Mr. Moody was 
right, for there is no record of a soldier dying with 
heaven in sight, unless by faith he had first seen the ~ 


Saviour on the cross. No man, be he soldier or civil- 


jan, is redeemed by his own death. 


During the four terrible years of the war Mr. Moody 
toiled and traveled with tireless vigor and jubilant 


138 LIFE OF MOODY. 


faith. As the need was he was back and forth to Chi- 
cago, in the camps and in the various battlefields. And 
in camp and field Moody and his brethren saw God’s 
wonders. Having so many sinners to point to the 
Saviour and so little time to do it, they prayed to the 
Lord to do his “‘short work.” “So many men found the 
Saviour and died while they were praying for them 
that they came to have a strange familiarity with 
heaven. These souls seemed to be messengers be- 
tween them and God, carrying up continually the fresh 
and glowing record of the work they were doing in His 
name. And so simple and easy did it become for them 
to ‘ask and receive’ that they were rather surprised if 
the penitent for whose conversion they prayed was not 
blessed before they reached the Amen.” 

One of the commissioners gives the following inci- 
dent, which reveals another kind of answer to prayer: 
“A party of our men found themselves one night on 
the battlefield in charge of a great many wounded sol- 
diers, who, by reason of the sudden retreat of the army, 
were left wholly without shelter or supplies. Having 
done their best for the poor fellows, bringing them 
water from a distant brook and searching the haver- 
sacks of the dead for rations, they began to say’ to 
themselves and to one another, ‘These weak and 
wounded men must have food or they will die. The 








LIFE OF MOODY. ‘ 139 


army is out of reach, and there is no village for many 
miles, What are we to do?’ 

“ “Pray to God to send us. bread,’ said one. 

“That night, in the midst of the dead and dying, 
they held a little prayer-meeting, telling the Lord all 
about the case, and begging Him to send them bread 
immediately, though from whence it could come they 
had not the most remote idea. All night long they 
plied their work of mercy. With the first ray of dawn 
the sound of an approaching wagon fell upon their | 
ears, and presently through the mists of the morning 
appeared a great Dutch wagon filled to the very top 
with loaves of bread. 

“On asking the driver where he came from and who 
sent him he replied: ‘When I went to bed last night I 
knew that the army was gone, and I could not sleep for 
thinking of the poor fellows who always have to stay 
behind. Something seemed to say to me, “What will 
those poor fellows do for something to eat? It came to 
me so strong that I waked up my old wife and told her 
what was the matter. We had only a little baked bread 
in the house, and while my wife was making some more 
I took my team and went around to all my neighbors, 
making them get up and give me all the bread in their 
houses, telling them it was for the wounded soldiers on 
the battlefield. ‘When I got home my wagon was full. 


140 LIFE OF MOODY. 


My old wife piled her baking on the top, and I started 
off to bring the bread to the boys, feeling just as if the 
Lord Himself were sending me.’” 

During these years, in the midst of these tragic 
war scenes, the mercies of God swept over them in 
swift succession, visible even to the eye. And very 
naturally the workers for Him became stronger and 
stronger and more simple in faith, trust, hope and ex- 
pectation from Him. Mr. Moody, being now in the 
camp and now in Chicago, reported to the noonday 
prayer-meetings the various incidents of the work of 
the Christian Commission, keeping the people in touch 
with the work, and forming a bond of sympathy be- 
tween the people at home and the army in the field. 
The noonday prayer-meeting of the Association be- 
came also a center to which thousands of requests for 
prayer were sent from all parts of the country; and — 
many and striking and quick were the answers to these 
prayers reported. This meeting thus became the cen- 
ter and heart of the religious life of the whole 
Northwest. 

Nor were the Confederate prisoners overlooked in 
this work of the Christian Commission. Ten thousand 
of them were placed in custody at Camp Douglass, and 
Mr. Moody, like himself, succeeded in securing a pass 
in order to do religious work among them. An inci- 





¥, iP 


ar 


LIFE OF MOODY. eee: 


dent characteristic of the man appears in connection 
with this effort. He gave the pass to his friend, Mr. 
Hawley, secretary of the Y. M. C. A., with a view to 
his company and aid in the service, and himself took a 
can of kerosene oil to light up with, the time being 
evening, hoping thus, in the capacity of servant, to get 
both in. But it was abortive. The guard would not 
let two men in under one pass. In vain Mr. Moody 
exhibited his can of oil, declaring: that he was only 
going with the other gentleman to help ine meeting 
along. — 

The earnest discussion, however, was overheard by” 
the officer of the day, who, coming up to see what was 
the matter, recognized Mr. Moody, took him to head- 
quarters, vouched for his being all right, and obtained 
for him a pass to go in and hold meetings as often as. 
he liked. Very soon he joined Mr. Hawley in the 
prison, and having announced the purpose of their 
visit, the men were both surprised and pleased, and 
gathered around them while they read the Scriptures, 
exhorted and prayed with them. 

At this very first meeting the power of God was 
manifest ; a large number of prisoners were inquiring 
what they must do to be saved. Meetings were hence- 


forth regularly held among them afternoon and even- 


ing; multitudes-were soundly converted, and as it was 


142. . LIFE’ OF MOODY 


not thought advisable to organize them into a church, 
they organized them into a Young Men’s Christian As- 
sociation. Bibles, Testaments, religious books and 
papers were distributed among them. They were 
treated as brethren in Christ. And when the time came 
for exchange of prisoners they went to their homes re- 
joicing, not simply in their release, but also in their 


‘new-found freedom and peace in Christ Jesus. 


It is not necessary to repeat that Mr. Moody bore 
his honorable part also in the erection of Camp Doug- 
lass Chapel for the soldiers and in the establishment of 
a library and reading-room furnished by the Y. M. 
C. A. in a building erected by the Christian Commis- 
sion ; also in connection with the Employment Bureau, 
which aided thousands in securing employment during 
its first years. This was all in addition to his regular 
homework. 

Mr. Moody was present on the field immediately 
after the battles of Pittsburg Landing, Shiloh and Mur- 
freesboro, with the army at Cleveland and Chatta- 


nooga, and was one of the first to enter Richmond, 


where he ministered alike to friend and foe. 

For additional incidents of his work in the army 
see Anecdotes of Mr. Moody in future pages of this 
book. 


On the memorable occasion of the third anniversary 





ele weer he eS u ‘ rf, “ bad 
ee 1 Fa oa ‘ “ 


ee ‘ 
Bm: 


LIFE OF MOODY. 143 


of the Northwestern Branch of the Christian Commis- 
sion, which met in Crosby’s New Opera House, then 
thrown open to the public for the first time—April 23, 
1865—Mr. Moody -received such compliments as would 
have flattered a man who loved worldly glory. But he 
regarded compliments as temptations and snares. In 
evident aversion to them, he sometimes said, ‘‘Strike 
me rather than praise me!” Omnivorous for work of 
value in the sight of God and for the salvation of men, 
he was satisfied and happy in finding himself with 
plenty of it. 

The work of Mr. Moody on the Christian Commis- 
sion made him well known throughout the land, as he 
was previously well known in the city and surround- 
ings of Chicago. And in the midst of ministrations to 
the dying and those doomed to sudden death he was 
taught thoroughly God’s own simple method of salva- 
tion and the short, straight road to Christ and heaven. 
In this ministry he was unquestionably trained for the , 
future service with which the Lord honored him. 

Through all these labors in connection’ with the 
Christian Commission Mr. Moody had not neglected 
his dear North Market Mission. Indeed, it had re- 
mained his chief care. Its rapid increase in numbers 
during the first two years of the war had demanded in- 
creased room for its accommodation. For this purpose 


144 LIFE OF MOODY. 


- its leader collected about $20,000 and erected, in 1863 , 
a commodious chapel, with tower and spire. Its loca- 
tion was Illinois street, not very far from the old Mar- 
ket Hall. The school now numbered {000 scholars. 
_ Three hundred had given their’hearts to the Saviour, 
and the question was forced as to the disposition of 
them. At the first Mr. Moody had urged the converts 
to give their names to some orthodox pastor for mem- 
bership in the church and its service and privileges, re- 
taining their connection for service still in the mission. 
A committee of the Y. M. C. A. would introduce the 
applicant to the pastor of the church of their choice, of 
whatever evangelical denomination. But many of the 
converts having come from the darkness of heathen- - 
ism, had not only. no family affinity with any church, 
but no sense of attraction from any church, but only 
to the Mission itself. It seemed to Mr. Moody and 
others of his co-workers that the Lord was indicating 
the necessity of forming a church of their own number. 
Before the tears and fires of the war had softened 
and melted their hearts together the clergy in general 
of Chicago had stood aloof from Mr. Moody and 
looked unsympathetically—indeed, had to some extent 
opposed his work. And the churches themselves were 
not in a proper condition to receive and nurture those 
who had nothing to commend them to them but that 





. eis 5 ha % ; 


LIFE OF MOODY. : 145 


they were saved sinners So the plan of their uniting 
with these churches was only moderately successful. 


_ Furthermore, these people, neglected so long by the 


churches to utter hopeless, helpless degradation, nat- 
urally clung to their leader who had come down and 
taken them by the loving hand and led them out of 
their darkness into the light. A 
The conduct of Mr. Moody throughout his career 
reveals to us his regard for church organism and forms. 
He never underrated them, it seems, but wanted also to 
see in the churches a divine active energy for the salva- 
tion of the lost—a zeal to follow and glorify Christ, 
In having carefully sought the guidance of the Holy 
Spirit he decided to seek the organization of the 300 
converts of the North Market Mission into a church 
where they might enjoy all the ordinances of the Gos- 
pel. But with a view to its being a Christian com- 
munion without any denominational name, and with a 
view to starting it in touch with all the evangelical 
churches he called a council of ministers from these 
communions in the city. At the call a goodly number, 
representing all these denominations, were present. 
And prayer having been offered, Mr. Moody arose, 
stated the object of the meeting, and gave a vivid pic- 


‘ture of the Mission and of the work; and explaining | 





146 LIFE OF MOODY. 


the necessity for organizing the converts into an or- 
derly Christian church. | 
The report of the preliminary doings or attempt to 
organize this somewhat multiform council is somewhat 
amusing; but what might be expected from such an 
effort from our—unlike the New Testament—multi- 
form ecclesiasm. “First of all, Mr. Moody’s good 
friend, Dr. —, rector of the Episcopal Church, felt 





compelled to withdraw from the council, though ex- 
pressing his pleasure in the good work, which he could 
not officially recognize. Next, an excellent Presby- 
terian D.D. announced his sympathy with Mr. Moody 


in his Mission; but, of course, if he were to assist in or-_ 


ganizing a church it must be a Presbyterian Church. 
A Baptist brother labored under a similar difficulty, for 
the proposed pastor of this congregation had not gone 
down into the water or come up out of the water, hav- 


ing been sprinkled only with water by Dr. Kirk. A | 


Methodist pastor, a fast friend and fellow-worker with 
Mr. Moody, was sorry that these good people who 
showed so strong a desire to flee from the wrath to 


- come could not be organized into a Methodist Church, 


with class-meetings, love-feasts, quarterly meetings 
and camp-meetings, all of which seemed so well suited 
to their spiritual needs. But Mr. Moody could not be 
persuaded to join Conference; neither did he propose 








MR. MOODY OUT DRIVING. 





LIFE OF MOopy. en "149 


an itinerant ministry for his church, though he was so 
great a traveler himeslf. Besides there were still some 
points of Calvinism in his creed which the Methodist 
brother regretted ; therefore, he could not give him his 
hand officially, though as a friend and brother he sat 
the council through.” 

To the Congregationalists then alone it remained to’ 
organize “The Illinois Street Church.” And they did 
this, organizing it after their manner, but not with the 
name—Congregational Church—but simply an inde- 
pendent church that, according to Mr. Moody’s desire, 
bore the name “Christian” only. “Then they celebrated 
their first communion together with tears and songs of 


3? 


joy. 

The church has never been reckoned among Con- 
gregational churches as a member of their Conference, 
nor was Mr. Moody at the time ordained as a Congre- 
gational minister. Upon what they called “Baptist — 
Occasions” some neighboring ministers invited for the 
purpose used to officiate. On “Communion’ Occa- 
sions” Mr. Moody used to read appropriate Scriptures, 
and they partook of the broken bread and of the fruit of 
the vine in memory of our blessed Lord and Saviour. 
This church developed a Manual and Articles of Faith 
and Church Form and Government—the work of Mr, 
Moody and his co-operating brethren. 


150 LIFE OF ' MOODY. 


Under Mr. Moody’s ministrations the church in- 
creased rapidly in numbers, and appears to have been 
characterized by a fervid spirit. Its leader knew how 
to keep everybody at work like himself. In addition to 
the services of the Lord’s Day, the bell in the first 


church edifice, the gift of a friend in New York city, _ 


it is said, rang every night in the year for some reli- 
gious meeting. There were men’s meetings, young 
men’s meetings, boys’ meetings and testimony meet- 
ings, each with a distinct testimony of its own. Some- 
times in different parts of the chapel on Sunday and in 
private houses during the week there were three or 


four of these in progress at once. And it was the habit. 


of Mr. Moody to attend all these dividing the day or 
evening between them, and so establishing a wonder- 
ful unity in all the various sections of the work. The 
church itself was in a revival condition and fervid ac- 
tivity continuously. 

When it is remembered how active Mr. Moody was 
in the Young Men’s Christian Association work dur- 
ing all this time, it may well be wondered how he en- 
dured the strain. The following picture by his old 
friend, Colonel Hammond, is a photograph, so to 
speak, of the situation and of the man. He says: 

“Mr. Moody came to see me one Sunday after his 
morning service, seeming to be quite tired out. He 








LIFE OF MOODY. : 151 


‘threw himeslf into a chair and burst out with the fol- 
. lowing exclamations : 


“T am used up; can’t think or speak or do’anything 
else. There is my meeting at the church tonight. You 
must take it. I have absolutely nothing left in me.’ | 

“Knowing that Mr. Moody never asked help unless 
he needed it, I promised to take the service off his 
hands. When the time came I went down to Ilinois 
Street Church, and found the house quite full. I was 
about to commence the service when the door opened 
and in walked, or rather rushed, Mr. Moody, followed 
by a long procession of young men whom he had 
picked up in saloons and on street corners and brought 
with him on an errand which, to them, was evidently a 
new one. 

“Mounting the platform with a bound, he seized the 
hymn-book and commenced, and from beginning to 
end of that service I had nothing to do but keep out of 
the way. abe) 

“Tt happened that he had taken an hourortwoof rest, 
and then, having no care about the evening service on 
his mind, he took up his old, familiar work of bringing 
in recruits, at which time he was more than usually 
successful. As he led the way to the church some 
happy thought struck him, and between the street cor- 
ner and the church he had arranged a sermon which | 


“152 LIFE OF MOODY. 


was one of the most effective I have ever heard him 
preach.” 

Another picture illustrative of the man, and of some 
features at least of his pastoral work, is given us by Mr. 
Hitchcock, who for some time was a member of his 
household. On this occasion (New Year’s Day) he 
made 200 calls. The above-named gentleman says: 

“At an early hour the omnibus which was to take 
him and several of his leading men was at the door, and 
with a carefully prepared list of residences they began 
‘the day’s labor. The list included a very large propor- 
tion of families living in garrets and the upper stories 
of tenement-houses. On reaching a family belonging 
to his congregation he would spring out of the “bus, 
leap up the stairways, rush into the room and pay his 
respects as follows: 

“*VYou know me. I’m Moody. This . Deacon De © 
Golyer; this is Deacon Thane; this is Brother Hitch- 
cock. Are you well? Do you all come to church and 
Sunday-school? Have you all the coal you need for 
the winter? Let us pray.’ And down we would all go 
on our knees, while Mr. Moody offered fifteen or 
twenty words of earnest, tender, sympathetic suppli- 
cation that God would bless the man, his wife and each 
_ one of the children. 

“Then, springing to his feet, he would dash on his 





es 


He, 


Lo ee eer a AG 
as A fy veya " 
oer 


* 


\ LIFE OF MOODY. ; 153 


hat, dart through the doorway and down the stairs, 
throwing a hearty ‘good-bye’ behind him, leap into the 
‘bus, and off to the next place on the list, the entire ex- 
ercise lasting about a minute and a-half. 

“In this work he tired horses and men all out, and 
continued the work to a finish on foot. After which 
feat he returned in high spirits, with no sense of fatigue, 
to laugh at his exhausted companions for deserting 
him. The next year he would not take a carriage, 
but went through similar work on foot, reminding his 
friends that the previous New Year they had often felt 
obliged to leave the carriage before reaching the 
house, lest the sight of it should grieve or offend the 
poor whom they visited, to whom ‘it might seem a 
needless extravagance, and who might therefore give 
their pastor and his friends a less sincere and cordial 
welcome.’ If Mr. Moody was sincerely welcomed to 
the homes of his people, at his own modest home they 


- always received a like sincere and warm-hearted. wel- 


come; and hence, they went to him with the utmost 
confidence in their troubles and in their joys.” 

It may properly be mentioned here that Mr. Moody 
had found what in the Bible is called “a good thing,” 
conected with the finding of which there is the promise 
of “obtaining favor of the Lord.” In the year 1862 he 


had married Miss Emma C. Revell, sister of Fleming 


154 LIFE OF MOODY. 


H. Revell, the publisher, who proved a most sympa- 
thetic and valuable companion. Not alone was this 
lady the ideal wife for such a man as Mr. Moody in his 
home and heart, but in later years he testified that fis 
he had a specially hard case to deal with in an inquirer 
he would turn him over to her; and usually she soon 
brought him over to a decision for the Saviour.” It is 
said of her, further, that she was in the inquiry room 
- second only to Mr. Moody himself. She had from an 
early day in the work been one of the teachers in North 
Market Mission. 

In respect to the visits to the poor, as seen in the 
word picture of Mr. Hitchcock, or the reception of the 
poor of his church at his home, it would be a mistake 
to conceive that the church of Illinois Street was made 
up of the poor alone. Many of the well-to-do people 
commonly spoken of as “the best people” of the city 
were among its members, as we have already noticed 
that many of this class came as volunteers to teach in 
the North Market Mission. 

In closing this chapter we will give the reader two 
or three more details illustrative of the way in which 
Mr. Moody pursued his church work, reserving for 
another chapter his great work in connection with the 
Association. 

No one needs, perhaps, to be told that Mr. Moody 





LIFE OF MOODY. 7 155 
believed in the word “Come” of the Gospel! Out in the 
highways and byways we have seen him “compelling 
them to come in, that the feast might be furnished with 
guests.” And he believed in using him that heareth to 
say come. One who became afterward a member of 
the Band of Yokefellows which Mr. Moody used for 
years in distributing printed invitations to the service » 
and to Association meetings gives an account of how 
he was impressed into service. He says: 

“T was a stranger in Chicago. One Sunday morning 
I was standing at a street corner, not very far from Mr. 
Moody’s church, staring about, not knowing what to 
do with myself, nor which way to go. Mr. Moody, 
who was just then sending out the Yokefellows to 
their morning stations came up to me and said 
familiarly, ‘Here, take this pile of papers, stand at that 
corner, and give one to everybody that goes by.’ Glad 
to hear a friendly voice and to have something to do, I] 
took the papers and gave them out as directed; and. I 


_ have been a member of that band ever since.” 


Among those who engaged in this work of distribut-, 
ing invitations Mr. Moody reports a Swede, who : 
seemed so devoted to the Lord Jesus that he must do 
something for Him. “He could not speak or under- 


stand much English,” says Mr. Moody, “and how my 


preaching could do him much good I could not under- 


156 LIFE OF MOODY. 


stand ; but he wanted to serve; so I gave him a lot of 
papers with invitations to the meetings. And he would 
go and stand on the corners and hand one to every 
passer-by with a smile of benediction on his face. 
Sometimes the response to his gift would be an oath 
on the part of the receiver, but he did not know 
whether it was blessing or cursing. He would smile 
_ benignantly and go on with his work all the same.” 

As we have seen, the Illinois Street Church was no 
mean structure. And Mr. Moody took care to com- 
bine truth with art in the chapel. The walls were pro- 
fusely ornamented with texts, and even the gas burners 
above the pulpit were so arranged as to spell out in 
great letters of light the precious words, 


“CODs1S ALOVIESs 


It is stated that on one Sunday night in winter a_ 


poor, shivering fellow was passing the place, and see- 
ing the vestibule door open went in to shield himself 
from the cold. The inner door being ajar, and, being 
curious to see for once the inside of a place of worship, 
he looked cautiously in. The strange light above the 
pulpit at once attracted his notice, and the holy words 
were soon imprinted on his heart. He entered the meet- 
ing, gave himself to Christ, was soon happily converted 
and became a useful member of Mr. Moody’s church. 


tn 
ty 4 


si 


Rr et 


rs 


om 3 
Lie 2 


Le ta, tht hy 
ayaa 2 


LIFE. OF MOODY. 157 


CHAPTER V. 


THE GREAT. FIRE IN CHICAGO. 


On the 8th and 9th of October, 1871, a tidal wave ‘of 


' flame swept over Chicago, leaving but one house 
_ standing on an area one mile wide by four in length. 


On, this area had stood “The Illinois Street Church,” 


in connection with which Mr. Moody had spent so 
much effort and prayer: It was now but charred and 
smoked-black walls. The material house was all gone. 
The same fate had fallen upon his own beautiful home 
and upon the homes of nearly all his members, and they 
were homeless and scattered, and mainly, like all the 
rest who had inhabited that region, bereft of almost 
every material earthly possession. Thankful were 
those who had escaped with their lives and who con- 
tained within themselves a life which the fires could not 
have destroyed. 
An incident connected with the last meeting in the 


_ Illinois Street Church, and told by Mr. Moody himself, 


is apprepriate to mention here. As the reader may 
have already seen, Mr. Moody seemed to be dominated 

i i ; 
in all his efforts with the sinner by the necessity, of 


158 LIFE OF MOODY. 


his immediate surrender to Christ, and pressed upon 
him to do accordingly ; but upon this occasion, having 
no prescience of what was going to take place that 
memorable night, exhorted the people to go home and 
seriously “think upon the matter” which he had been 
urging. That night was the last opportunity with some 
of his hearers to make their peace with God; they lost 
their lives in the fearful holocaust. The effect upon 


Mr. Moody was a lesson never forgotten of the danger © 


in which human life is set-—that at any moment it may 
be called—and ever after to preach “Today, if ye will 
hear His voice!” “Now is the accepted time! Now 
is the day of salvation!’ Never after was it “tomorrow” 
in his persuasion of the sinner to commit himself to the 
Saviour. 

We referred above to the loss of a beautiful home 
by Mr. Moody. This home was the fruit of generosity. 
Unlike most of his brethren who minister in sacred 
things, he had never consented to receive a stipend, 
but had resigned himself to the support which God 
might see fit in His own way to send. His work was 
herculean, far beyond anything yet mentioned in the 
preceding pages of this book. Through his’ work on 
the Christian Commission, in connection with the 
Young Men’s Christian Association, and through con- 
vention work, he was already famous. But with his 





LIFE OF MOODY. 150 


young wife he had been content to dwell in an humble 
cottage. And though in connection with these vast 
sums of money had passed through his hands, person- 
ally he was sometimes in “straitened circumstances.” 


So “straitened” that upon one occasion he said to Mrs. | 
Moody, “Wife, I have no money and there are no sup- © 


plies in the house. It looks as if the Lord had had 
enough of ‘me in this work and was going to send me 
back into the shoe business.”” But by the next mail 
two checks, each for fifty dollars, came, one of these 
being for the work and the other for his domestic use. 
In reporting this Providence Mr. Moody says: “TI 
then said to my wife, ‘I see, then, the Lord intends me 


to keep on,’ and I promised then that I would keep on | 


until he told me to stop.” The life of Mr. Moody to 
his latest hour reveals how faithfully, by the grace of 
God, that promise was kept. 

One of the remarkable gifts which the Lord had 
sent his servant before the great fire was a new house 
to reside in free of rent and elegantly furnished from 
bottom to top by generous friends. In reporting this 
matter aprevious writer says: “Anold friend had erected 


a rowof elegant houses,and one of these he privately set 


‘apart for Mr. Moody, free of rent, on condition that his 


other friends would furnish it for him. The enterprise 


was undertaken with great spirit, and the house was 


160 LIFE OF MOODY. 


fitted up from basement to attic in thorough and com- 
fortable style ; soft carpets, handsome furniture and or- 
naments for hall and parlors, including life-size por- 
traits of Mr. Moody and his wife; a bookcase contain- 
ing a large and serviceable library; dining-room, bed- 
rooms and kitchen all in order; china, silver and linen 
for the table. All articles required for housekeeping 


were tastefully and lovingly arranged. This was all 


done as a perfect'and grand surprise. 

“Early on New Year’s morning Mr. Moody and his 
family were impressed and carried off in a coach, they 
knew not why or whither. The coach drew up and 
stopped before a fine-looking row, and'the family were 
conducted into a house, which, to their surprise, was 
full of acquaintances and friends. After the greetings 
were exchanged and Mr. Moody was wondering what 


it could all mean, the Rev. Dr. Patterson, on behalf of 3 


the company, presented him with a lease of the house 
and the free gift of all it contained as a token of love 
and respect for his simple and earnest Christian char- 
acter and of gratitude for his faithful labors, under 
_which they and their city had been so largely blessed. 

“It was more like a dream than a reality. It seemed 
too good to be true. Hand in hand, speechless with 
wonder and weeping for joy, Mr. Moody and his wife 
made the round of the beautiful rooms—so much finer 


io 


— 


LIFE OF MOODY. Soe TOn 


than they had ever hoped to possess; and when they 


had seen and admired them all he tried to thank his’ 


friends for their kindness. In broken sentences he 
told them how good the Lord had always been to him, 
and that he had not trusted Him in vain. 

“When that company broke up it was with the feel- 


ing that they had done all this under the, Lord’s own 


direction, who in this way had determined to honor 
His servant, who had forsaken all to follow Him.” 
This picture is to our mind almost as poetic as that 
scene when Lord Burleigh surprised his young bride 
after escorting her through the halls of Burleigh by 
telling her, “All of these are thine and mine.” Surely, 
too, it is possessed of some features of peculiar beauty 
in, the Christian love that gave it all. And we com- 
mend it to some poet—another Tennyson—to weave it 


into immortal verse. 


The curtain has been drawn and a glimpse into the 


cottage home life of the Moody family given us—a 
life, since the character of the family was carried with 
them, must still have obtained in the new home. Lhe 


‘writer says: “The cottage was generally full of vis- 


itors, both old friends and strangers, and all the poor 


people of the neighborhood soon learned the number 


on its door. The home, like its master, was full and 


running over with fun, sympathy and religion. Merz; 


Ap 


162, } LIFE OF MOODY. 
Moody would play practical jokes on his wife and his 
guests, laugh and jump and shout with the children, 
the happiest child of them all; and in the midst of the 
merriment some text of Scripture would flash upon 
him, or some subject for a sermon would present itself, 
and instantly he would say, ‘Get your Bibles,’ and in a 
trice would turn the whole household into a Bible 
Class": . 

“Tf a person who was unconverted would happen to 
come in, he would leave everything else and immedia- 
tely inquire about his soul, and if he could bring him 
at all under the influence of the Holy Spirit, almost 
before he knew it he would have him on his knees in. 
prayer.” 

Three children—two boys and a girl—were born to, 
Mr. Moody, but at the time of which we are writing 
there were but two, a boy and a girl. Paul, the young- 
est, was added to them several years later. 

An incident is told by Mr. Moody which at that date 
indicates something of the intensity of the life and feel- 
ing of the father in one of the children. One day he 
found his little boy with an elegantly illustrated Bible 
on his lap in the act of digging out the eyes of a picture 
of Judas Iscariot with a pair of scissors. On being 
asked why he was doing such mischief, the little fellow 
referred to the lesson read at prayers that morning, 





LIFE OF MOODY. 163 


which had been the betrayal of our Lord, and his in- 
dignation at the conduct of Judas had taken this form 
of expression. es 

From their earliest understanding Mrs. Moody was 
accustomed to pray with the children daily and to teach 
them that they belonged to the Lord Jesus. 

It may not be inapropos here to bring to the atten- 
tion another little picture seen years later at Northfield 
and reported by an eye-witness. She says: “I was 
present in the church at Northfield when Paul Moody, 
then about twelve or thirteen years old, was taken in 


as a member of the church. When any who might de-— 


sire to become members of the church were invited to 
arise the youth stood up as an applicant. He was the 
only one that day, but his father rose up and stood by 
the side of his son, putting his arm tenderly and pater- 
nally around him. And there they stood together, 
father and son, while the youth was received. To my 
eyes it was a beautiful picture.” . 

The same competent witness reports : “While I was 
in Chicago and at Northfield I saw a good deal of the 
home life of the Moodys, and it was in every respect the 


ideal.” 


The flames ate up all the merely material part of the ; 
beautiful home ‘of Mr. Moody in Chicago. But the 





+ 








al 


. 164 LIFE OF MOODY. 


lives of this loving family were spared, and their char- 
acter remained. 

Our imagination may conjure up for us a mental 
picture of that terrific conflagration, and of the terror 
of the fugitives from their burning homes, seeking 
places of safety for themselves and for their helpless 
children and friends—a scene which tried men’s souls. 
But in the midst of it all we shall see that Mr. Moody 
is himself. Having seen his family safe beyond the 
reach of the flames, and leaving them at the house of 
a friend, he at once began the work of administering 
relief to the needy, feeding the hungry and sheltering 
the homeless, who swarmed by thousands in the 
churches, public buildings and open lots of the city. 
The first and chief depository of supplies was in the 
relief department of the Young Men’s Christian Asso- 
ciation. Mr. Moody’s connection with this institution 
was of service in this dire emergency. And he dis- 


tributed necessaries with a bountiful hand. It was his 


special delight to give food and raiment to the hungry 
and half clad who came. 

_ It is not a matter of surprise that some unworthy 
persons took advantage of this generosity, and, hear- 
ing of some complaints of his distribution, he at once 
resigned the position to others and started for the East 
with the double object of holding revival meetings and 








MT, VERNON PLACE METHODIST CHURCH, BALTIMORE. WHERE MR. MOODY OFTEN PREACHED. 





LIFE OF MOODY. O71 


collecting funds for the erection of a poor barrack or 
shed in which he might again gather and re-establish 
his church and school. His first effort was in Brook- 
lyn, where he was cordially welcomed -by Dr. Cuyler 
and his people, and where, saying that he felt there was 
something divine about the atmosphere of their meet- 
ing-house, he was invited to engage in a revival effort. . 
This people gave him gladly their Sra and 
assistance. ; 
His next efforts were in Philadelphia, where during 
the day he tried to collect funds for rebuilding his 
ruined church and in the evenings he conducted re- 
ligious services. In this city the collecting progressed . 
slowly, until his old friend, Mr. Stuart, and Mr. Wana- 
maker, then of The Sunday-School Times, asked, “Mr. 
Moody, how much money do you want?” 
“If I had $1000 I could build a great box that would 
hold my Sunday-school,” was the reply. 
“You shall have $3000 at least,” said they; and they 
were as good as their word. 
It is not a surprise that these brethren should be so 
ready to place more money than he asked for in the 
hands of Mr. Moody. He was well known among them | 


' by-his North Mission work, by his work in connection 


with the Young Men’s Christian Association, on the 


Christian Commission and by his extraordinary ac- 


168 LIFE OF MOODY. 


tivity and influence in the great Sunday-school con-. 
ventions. They had abundant reasons for confidence 
both in the man and in his sagacity and judgment, and 
they knew that he “understood the times and circum- 
stances, and that he knew what Israel ought to do;’ 
and they acted accordingly. 

When Mr. Moody left for the East on the double 
mission in which at this time we find him engaged he 
left the interests of the region of his church in the 


~ hands of his efficient co-workers. These brethren hav- 


ing secured the use of a lot in the midst of the burned 
district not far from the ruins of their church, proposed 
to build a simple, rough structure in the cheapest man- 
ner. Its size, according to their decisions, was to be 
but a roof of forty by sixty feet, believing that such a 
roof would cover all the scattered people that could 
be gathered. But Mr. Moody, of correct vision, looked _ 
forward to the speedy rebuilding of the city, and in his 
frequent dispatches announcing the progress of his 
subscription list he continually urged them to build 


large. In consonance, therefore, with these admoni- 


tions, the New Tabernacle was built one hundred and 
nine feet in length and seventy-five feet in width, cov- 
ering the entire plot of ground they had secured. It 
was a simple enough building, being made of rough 
timbers and boards and lined with heavy paper to 





4 


LIFE OF MOODY. 169 


keep out the cold. It was a single story in height, with 
a flat’ roof of paper, gravel and tar, supported by lines 
of posts and beams like a great stable. But it har- 
monized so with the waste of ruins around it that the 
poor, desolate creatures living in erected hovels and 
holes under the sidewalk felt a strong attraction toward 
it, and were very much at home within its walls. . u 

The band of brethren left in charge by Mr. Moody 
were all of them without homes of their own, and some 
of them were without the ordinary comforts of life. 
Without money to give, they gave of the labor of their 
hands to help on the building of the Tabernacle; while 
the working people who were too poor to spare any 
time from their labor by day came at night and builded 
as best they knew. The work was pressed forward 
with the utmost haste, encouraged continually by the 
dispatches and remittances of the absent pastor; and 
when it was ready for dedication ke was sent for to 
come home and meet the remnant of his scorched and 
scattered flock. 

When the Tabernacle was finished there stood but 
few buildings in sight of it, save here and there a little 
shanty built on the sheltered side of a blackened wall ; 


and some of the brethren feared that from out this 
desolation no considerable number of people could be. 


gathered. But when the day of dedication came, to 


170 LIFE OF MOODY. 


their surprise and joy, crowds of children were seen 
picking their way among the ruins and along the rub- 
bish-blocked streets, coming from no one knew where, 
but drawn by the magical attraction of the promised 
re-union of their school. More than a thousand chil-. 
dren were present at this their first meeting, many of 
them accompanied by their parents. The great en- 
closure was completely filled. 

The Tabernacle was kept warm, and was open night 
and day as a shelter to any homeless wanderers who 
might choose to enter. Religious services in great 
number and variety were in almost continuous prog- 
ress, from early morning until late in the evening, by 
which many houseless wanderers were brought within 
the sympathy of this loving and zealous brotherhood 
and shown the way toa home in the heart of Christ and 
in the kingdom of heaven. The work of saving the 
bodies and souls of men, women and children went 
joyfully on. 

Thus a second time Mr. Moody’s church had be- 
come a Mission, and the Tabernacle came to be a 
greater wonder and blessing than the North Market 
Mission. “Man’s necessity” was again demonstrably 
“God’s opportunity.” The counsel of Mr. Moody to 
build large was also justified before all eyes. 

Mr. Moody had left his family with friends in the 





LIFE OF MOODY. 171 


East. When he returned to Chicago he took up his. 
lodgings in a little classroom, with one of his faithful 
Sunday-school teachers as cook, steward and man-of- 
all-work. He spent his mornings largely in searching 
out and relieving needy families of his former congre- 
gation. To him large quantities of clothing and pro- 
visions were sent for distribution. These were stored 
in the Tabernacle, making it the center of attraction to 
the hungry and destitute. Of this Mr. Moody was not | } 
slow to take advantage in trying to lead their hearts to | 
Christ. Here is a sample of his manner in this minis- 
try. He would say to some half-starved shivering man 
‘ who had come to ask assistance: 

“Here, take these clothes. Help yourself to these 
provisions—all you can carry—and promise me to 
thank God for them on your knees before you eat the 
flour and potatoes or put on the coat and trowsers.” 

Sometimes, noticing the manifest distress of one 
who had seen better days and was too proud to ask 
help, he would send a messenger after him’ as he went 
out from the meeting to inquire confidentially if there 
was anything he could do for him. 

But the constant thought and aim of Mr. Moody 
- through all this was the higher good—the saving of the 
sinner’s soul. .He would say, “What is the use of keep- 


172 LIFE OF MOODY. 


. ing these poor people’s, bodies a little longer out of the 


grave and not trying to keep their souls out of hell?” 

: Hundreds of people, attracted by the bright lights 
and warm fires of the Tabernacle, came in to warm 
themselves, and someone was always on the watch, 
ready to make both hunger and cold the occasion and 
opportunity for offering Christ and salvation, as well 
as food and shelter.’ A hungry man was always more 
than welcome at Mr. Moody’s little table in his class- 
room. And all can imagine what it would be to sit 
down with him and partake of these bounties. A bet- 
ter than the necessary material food—a better food 


than the necessary bread that perishes—would be also, 


served every time. \ 

It is reported that during his absence on his double 
mission in the East Mr. Moody had been gloriously 
baptized with the Holy Spirit. And the presence of 
such a man in such a congregation in such a situation 
as succeeded the great fire was one of the best benedic- 
tions that heaven could send them. Though, like them- 
selves, he had suffered the loss of his home and all the 
material things in it, he was full of hope and happiness. 
With him it was Paul’s experience and ministry over 
again in an intense degree: “Poor, but making many 
rich; having nothing, yet possessing all things.” 

During this ministry and time “wave after wave of 





LIFE OF MOODY. 173 


revival” are reported to have ‘‘swept the Tabernacle 
meetings. Crowds of people attending the almost con- 
stant service, weeping over their sins now, and now 
shouting over their pardon through Jesus Christ, who 
died for them. Men and women, cast down and hope- 
less, coming to Mr. Moody for comfort and advice, 
seemed to absorb a portion of his overflowing gladness, 
and went out to bear their sorrows and struggle 
through their toils with a stronger and more hopeful 
heart.” 
That the sorrows of these poor people were heavy 
enough and their toils severe enough may well be ad- 
mitted. How they endured the privations which the 
wave of consuming flame had left them is an enigma, 
except in the dispensation of God’s grace, which made 
their comforts in Christ Jesus abound in correspond- 
ence with the measure of their need, and in His send- 


‘ing them, in the midst of confusion, leaders; in the 


midst of desolation, pastors according to His own 
heart, who fed them with knowledge and discretion. 
By their distress He touched also the world’s heart of 
sympathy, and sent them food and raiment in season 
and in abundance. 
The fire had taken everything else, but it fad left 


them Christ and a provident Father in heaven who was 


mindful of the needs of his children. A happier com- 


174 LIFE OF MOODY. 


pany than Mr. Moody’s great Sunday-school, though 
they sat literally among ashes, could hardly be found, 
it is said, this side of heaven. In spite of all the 
troubles of the week, the Sabbath brought again the 
much-loved reunion, and with hearts all melted to- 


gether. 


LIFE OF MOODY. 175 


CHAPTER VI. 
MEETS AND LABORS WITH MR. SANKEY. 


Mr. Moody’s labors were already manifold and his. 
activities multiform, extending beyond his own imme- 
diate Mission and outside of the city into the wide - 
world. 

He took profound interest in the Young Men’s 
Christian Association in Chicago, as we have seen, 
and revised and remodeled it. The pressing need for 
a new building was made the subject of prayer, and. 
plan after plan for getting one discussed and aban- 
doned. Finally Mr. Moody was elected president of 
the Association, and the building committee, with Mr. 
Farwell as chairman, was at once appointed. It was 
proposed to raise about $100,000 for the purpose. The 
new hall was dedicated Sunday evening, September 29, 
1867. An immense concourse of people attended from 
all the city and from all the land. Mr. Farwell, the 
treasurer; Mr. George H. Stuart of Philadelphia, and 
Mr. Moody made addresses. Mr. Moody, near the 
close of the service, rose and said: “It was the gen- 
erous subscription of $30,000 by the chairman of our | 


176 LIFE OF MOODY. 


_ building committee which purchased this land and 
gave us a hope for all we see tonight. Now, by way of 
giving honor to whom honor is due, I propose that we 
name this building Farwell Hall. All in favor, say 
Aye!” 

The “Aye!” which greeted this proposal was such 
as to remind ‘Mr. Farwell of that other rousing “Aye!” 
by which he was once elected superintendent of the 
North Market School. So Farwell Hall was its name. 

Acting on his own advice, President Moody then 


’ 


called for “more money.” A handsome subscription 


was raised on the spot, sufficient to relieve the Associa- 


. . of. 
tion from all present embarrassment, and thus, in evi- 


dent favor with both God and man, it started on its new 
career. 

The humble clerk who twelve years before had 
started his little school in the deserted saloon with a 


score of ragged and dirty street arabs for his scholars — 


was put in the position of director entire of the meet- 
ings in Farwell Hall by the representative assembly 
from all the evangelical churches of the city, who had 
been called together to decide upon their direction, 
and he became at this date what has been called “The 
Apostle of the Young Men’s Christian Association.’ 
He had at his command the most complete appoint- 


LIFE OF MOODY. 177 


ment and outfit in this hall for city work which could 
be found in any part of the world. | 

Ifa small or vain man lifted to such a pinnacle would 
have been almost certain to have lost his head, to Mr. 
.Moody there was in all this no temptation to pride. 
To him it was simply a splendid opportunity for the sal-. - 
‘vation of men, and to make the most of it, therefore, . 
was his ceaseless ambition and toil. Uuder his man- | 
agement Farwell Hall became a people’s institution. 
Its meetings were attended’ by large numbers of 
strangers from all parts, and Moody himself became . 
the recognized leader in his particular line of work, 
his zeal being honored and his methods copied 
throughout the Northern States, and in Canada as well. 

The prayer-room of Farwell Hall contained 1000 
seats, and frequently every seat was occupied at the 
noonday prayer-meeting. On special occasions the 
numbers were such as to necessitate the use of the 
great hall for this service. A Strangers’ Meeting was © 
held on Monday evenings, at which Mr. Moody 
usually presided, when he talked and prayed with such 
freedom as few other men would have ventured to use. 
His first effort was to make strangers feel perfectly at 
home, in which he sticceeded to a wonderful degree. 
He greeted them with the heartiness of an old friend. 
He used to ask their names, “Where they came from?” - 


178 LIFE OF MOODY. 


“Where they lived?” “What business they were do- 
ing?’ “What church they attended?” giving them such 
information and counsel as he thought would be of 
‘practical value and service. 

Here is a sample of the free and familiar manner in 
which Mr. Moody would address the newcomers: 

“You, brother, over there by the first window, don’t 
you love the Lord?” 

“That red-haired man on the back seat, are you a 
Christian?” x < | 

The result was that the timid brothers would feel a 
license given them, and would arise and speak some- 
times to the edification, not of themselves alone, but 
also of the assembly. When they had spoken Moody 
would at once ask their names and residences, note it 
‘down in his book, and tell the new man that he was 
‘now “ to count himself one of the old members and to 
begin to help in looking up and_ entertaining 
strangers.” 

_ Sometimes he would walk up and down the aisles, 
looking into the faces of the congregation for signs of 
the working of the Holy Spirit on their hearts; and 
' when he noticed a person who seemed to be thoughtful 
or penitent he would go straight to his side and say, 
“Are you a Christian?” If the answer was at all doubt- 
ful he would say, “Do you want to be saved?” “Do 


AALS VE 


LIFE OF MOODY. 179 


/ you want to be saved now?” And before the half- 


penitent sinner had time to make objections he would 
have him on his knees in prayer, kneeling beside him, 
while the whole congregation were kneeling around 
him. The man thus publicly brought out as a seeker 
of religion would generally give himself to the Lord, 
being, as it were, pushed head foremost into the king- ° 
dom of heaven; though under a less impetuous leader 
he might for years have dragged along at a snail’s pace 
towards an entrance into the church.” 

Here we have also a glance at the preparation—the 
continuous conditioning of Mr. Moody for such ac- 
tivity as we have just noted: 

“Tt was his habit to spend three-quarters of an hour— 
from eleven to a quarter to twelve—in the closet alone 
with God, where he laid his personal wants before Him 
with the utmost plainness and confidence, asking with 
equal faith for blessings temporal and spiritual, and 


looking for immediate answers in both directions. 


From these communings with God he would come 
down to the sidewalk in front of the entrance to the 
hall, his face fairly shining with the love and zeal of his 
soul, and for the minutes before the meeting would try 
to turn into it as many as possible of the crowds which | 
at that hour were always passing by.” 

Here is a sample of the methods which he practiced 


180 LIFE OF MOODY. 


in inducing—'Compelling them to come in that the 
house might be filled” and they themselves blessed : 

“One day, laying his hand on the arm of a powerful 
man who was hurrying along, he brought him up thus: 

“Are you for Jesus?’ 

*“T am,’ was the reply. 

“Then go right up to the noon prayer-meeting.’ 

~“The man had fallen out of the habit of going to 

prayer-meetings. He told Mr. Moody that he ‘used 
to be a Baptist, but had not worked at it any for a good 
while.’ He tried to excuse himself, saying: 

““T cannot go up today.’ 


“Vou can,’ said Moody, reading his man in an in- | 


stant; and it was only by a pretense of anger and a 
display of force that the backslidden Baptist was able 
to shaké off the grip of his captor and get away.” 

By such effort the president of the Association often 
sent up a good many to the noon prayer-meeting who 
without it would have gone on their way. 

_ At the stroke of twelve Moody would rush up the 
steps two or three at a time and take his place near 
the platform. 

~ He uniformly gave the leadership of the noon meet- 
ing into other hands, but would watch closely its prog- 
ress, and generally before the meeting came to an end 
it was taken in his hands, especially if the prayers were 


-** a%en, 
fe kes 
~ id ‘ 


LIFE OF MOODY. CART 


7 


dull and long or if there were any tendency apparent 
to prosy debate. Many a slow-moving service he 
roused into vigor by some sharp admonition, and 
many a discourseful brother did he suddenly shut up 
calling for a verse of a hymn or by quoting a text of 
Scripture. se: oe 
His demand for brevity was inexorable. Three’ . 
- minutes was the allotted time of each. If a slow-going 
brother failed to notice the tinkling of the time bell 
he would sometimes jump up and ask a question, and 
catching the first word or two of the answer, would use 
it as a rudder and brittg up the meeting before the 
wind, starting it forthwith again on its proper course, 
leaving the bewildered brother out of sight behind. 
It was said by those who are curious in those matters 
that you could detect a Farwell Hall man in any meet- 
ing in the country by the amount of speaking and pray- 
ing he could cram in three minutes. 

The noonday prayer-meeting continued to receive . 
requests for prayer from all parts of ‘the country, and 
it received the manifest blessing and favor of God. 

But to mortal eyes what some have called the “Per- 
missive Providence” of God is very mysterious. The 
splendid hall which seemed to be serving its purpose 
so well very soon was destroyed by fire, involving con- 
siderable financial loss to the financial friends of the 


182 LIFE OF MOODY. 


Association, since it was but partially covered by in- 
surance. It was destroyed in January, 1868, having 
been in use only since its dedication in the previous 
September, 1867. 

At this date we may reflect that the first Farwell Hall 
was not quite good enough. It appears to have been 
in the designs of Providence that the Association 
should have a still better. And God had the men 
through whom the still better should be built. . 

Of the first hall Mr. Farwell said, “It should have 
been named for Mr. Moody, for without his faith and 
devotion it never would have been built.” , 

Both Mr. Moody and Mr. Farwell were pledged be- 
fore God and man to rebuild, and most of the original 
stockholders were of the same mind and rallied nobly 
to the Association’s rescue. The following year the 
second Farwell Hall was finished and dedicated with 
-another shout of joy and another song of praise. It 
was in all respects superior to the first. Its Christian 
library ere long equalled almost any in the older cities 
of the Union. 

In the rebuilding of the hall Mr. Moody’s acquaint- 
ance with all sorts and conditions of men, and now 
more especially with the rich, was of great service to 
him. Considerable sums of money were given him for 
this purpose by persons who cared little or nothing for 





LIFE OF MOODY. een Ie) 


religion, but who liked his youthful heartiness and ad- 
mired his boundless faith. 

It is reported that among the old, substantial citizens 
of Chicago were two wealthy men with whom he was 
on the best of terms. Both were quite the reverse of 
being religious, but Mr. Moody had come to be espe- 
cially interested in their salvation for some reason, per-' 
haps their generosity. One of these had the misfor- 
tune to be thrown from his carriage one day, and his 
head striking the curbstone, he received severe injuries. 
He was carried to a hotel near at hand, where Mr. 
Moody, on hearing of the accident, made haste to call 
upon him, making the wounded man very glad. Mr. 
Moody, taking a seat by his bedside, opened upon him 
as follows: 

.“T heard the other day that your old friend J 
was converted to God, and I said to myself, ‘Now, 








there’s some hope of , so I went right down to 
the noon meeting and had them pray for you. And 
now, don’t you see, the Lord has answered our prayers 
by tipping over your buggy and breaking your bones 
and laying you up here for a while in order to get you 
away from your business and ‘give you time to take 
care of your soul.” 

“That may be so,” replied the wounded man . 


£84. . LIFE OF MOODY. 


thoughtfully and kindly. The doctor coming in j1ust 
then, Mr. Moody took his leave. of 

Not long after, calling again, Mr. Moody offered to 
pray with his friend. The ‘offer being accepted, he 
kneeled down at his bedside and opened his heart: to 
the Lord, telling Him all about him, what a sinner he 
had been, and saying how much he wanted him to be 
saved. On rising from his knees the wounded man, with 
tears trickling through his fingers, with which he had 
covered his face, said to him, as soon as he could com- 
mand his voice: “Mr. Moody, I thank you. I have 
been prayed for and prayed af a great many times, 
but no one ever prayed with me until now.” 

The above visit was before the burning of the first 
Farwell Hall. A few days after the visit Mr. Moody 
called upon this gentleman again, and during this visit 
proposed that he should subscribe to the stock of the 
new hail. 





SSL 
my manager says it’s all right I will take some of the 


“That’s a matter of business,” satd Mr. 


stock.” Drawing out a check for a considerable 
amount, he said: “But you must take this for your- 
self.” Mr. Moody refused the money, saying he was in 
need of nothing; but his friend forced it upon him. 
“While I have been here in bed,” said he, “a ereat 
many charity agents have taken advantage of me to 








LIFE OF MOODY. 185 


come and beg for money. You have come, once and 
again, asking for nothing, but trying to save my soul. 


And now I am doing for you what I would not do for 


them. Take the money and use it for yourself and 
family.” Mr. Moody prophesied of this man, “We 
shall some day see Mr. 





leading the pognaay 
prayer-meeting in the new Farwell Hall.” 


The subsequent history of this gentleman has not 3 
come to us. But we respect very much his emotions _ 


and appreciation of Mr. Moody’s singleness of charac- 
ter and effort to save him, and hope that eternity will 
reveal in his interest that Mr. Moody’s “labor was not 
in vain in the Lord,” as it certainly cannot be in vain 
so far as the laborer is concerned. 

During the building of the new hall the Unitarians 
instituted one of a “liberal” (?) character themselves as 
a rival to the Y. M. C. A., but it ere long collapsed. 
The character of this institution was of course a reflec- 


tion of their own free (?) views. The occasion of it was - 


the intense orthodoxy of the Young Men’s Christian 
Association and its president. They were not slow to 
notice that the work of the latter was continuously 
adding to the membership of the evangelical churches 
and not to themselves. 

‘Mr. Moody conceived of the Association work as 
supplementary to-the work of the churches, and its 


186 LIFE OF MOODY. 


~ services were time-ordered accordingly, and all the 
evangelical clergy of the city were co-operators in its 
efforts. 

Mr. Moody’s disbursements for charity were noticed 
by the Unitarians to be also in favor of evangelizing 
the needy. Mr. Moody always sought with material 
help to add his effort to bring the recipient to Christ 
as the Divine Saviour. And when on the street or any- 
where the recipients of the Association bounties would 
seek to lavish upon its president their thanks and 
praises, Mr. Moody would say: “Don’t praise me; 
bruise me rather; but if you love me, love Christ for 
my sake.” “He was tender-hearted and full of sym- 
pathy for those in distress, but he managed the relief 
of the poor, not so much for the sake of comforting 
their bodies as with the hope of saving their souls. 
Everything was made to contribute to the work of 
bringing sinners to Christ.” 

Another characteristic incident is told of Mr. Moody 
which was not at all to the minds of his Unitarian 
friends: 
~ “On one occasion some of them had hired the great 
hall for a fair, and at a late hour in the evening the 
tables were cleared away for a dance. This use of a 
place dedicated to the work and worship of the Lord 
roused Mr. Moody’s conscience. He expostulated, 


>") 


LIFE OF MOODY. 187," 


but without producing any manifest impression; and 
finding them determined on this ‘desecration of the 
hall, he turned off the gas, leaving them in darkness 
to find their way out into the street as best they might, 
and, as may be supposed, in no very amiable frame of 
mind.” ; : 

We have seen Mr. Moody turn out the gas once be-: 
fore. We have also seen him smash up the checker- } 
board and give the players a lecture on waste of time 
in a world where life is the pivot of eternal destinies, 
and should be, as a consequence, earnest and real. 

To meet the needs of the treasury when the new hall 
was built Mr. Moody hit upon an ingenious experi- 
ment, which was characterized as the “Association ate 
its way out of its difficulties.” During its building Mr. 
Moody had raised $20,000 in donations and stock. 
Now, a sumptious banquet was given at the Tremont 
House, to which the ministers of the cities, the leading 
business men of their churches and the stockholders © 
of Farwell Hall were invited. After supper the report 
of the financial condition of the Association was ren- 
dered, and an appeal made, first to: the stockholders, to 
donate their stock to the Association, or to donate the 
interest due on it, and then to the other members of the 
company to subscribe money for the current expenses 
of the year. The enthusiasm was great. Large 


188 LIFE OF MOODY. 


amounts of stock were turned over, a considerable por- 

tion of the accrued interest subscribed, and the treas- 
ury largely replenished for the work of the coming 
year. The supper, which was free to the guests, was 
itself a donation secured by Mr. Moody’s appeal. 

In the new hall Mr. Moody customarily preached on 
Sunday evenings; but, although the sermon was 1 under- 
stood to be the same that he preached to his own con- 
gregation in “The Illinois Street Church,” many of his 
people followed to hear him. With a siagie exception, 
it was the largest Protestant congregation in Chicago. 
At the close of the service he would stand at the door 
greeting his friends, making the acquaintance of 
strangers and leading all he could to the prayer-room 
below, where a meeting for inquiry and conference was 
held for the purpose of following up and securing the 
results of the public services above. 

It may well be conceived that such an midcom 
fine music and the most fervent and forceful, if not the 
most eloquent, preacher in the whole: Northwest on 
the platform were a great attraction to those who were 
too poor to hire a seat in a church, or even to clothe 
themselves suitably. 

Sometimes lewd fellows of the baser sort came into 

the meetings and caused disturbances. On one of 
‘these occasions, there being no policeman at hand, the 








LIFE OF MOODY. 189 


preacher was constrained to draw upon his own treas- 
ury of muscular force, and almost before he was aware 
of it he had repeated upon the disturber of the meeting 
the treatment which before resulted so favorably at the 
North Market Mission. But, notwithstanding these 
‘trifles,’ all classes and conditions of men and women 
continued to receive invitations to his services. He 
was glad to take the risk of annoyance if the bad fel. 
lows would only come. 

It is reported that there was an “atmosphere of spirit: 
ual fervor” about Farwell Hall which was as evident as 
the atmosphere of reverence about Westminister Ab- 
bey or of antiquity and mystery about the Sphinx. It 
seemed to have a soul in sympathy with every godly 
work. 

State and national assemblies, anniversaries and con- 
ventions of various kinds were held in this hall. Ec- 
clesiastical councils of various denominations have met 
init. The great divines of England and America have 
preached in it. The matchless temperance orator, 
Gough, would not, it is said, speak anywhere else in 
the city. Massmeetings of various benevolent kinds 
commonly used it. Again and again Mr. Moody or- 
ganized revival campaigns in it, calling to his aid the 
best clerical talent in the city, and bringing together 


crowds of the most prayerful members of all the evar: 


190 ne LIFE OF MOODY. 


gelical churches. The watchword was union: Union 
with Christ first, and in Him union with one another. 
The Gospel pure and simple was mighty to the pulling 
down of the strongholds of Satan, especially the one 
called sectarian exclusiveness. God honored His 
Word greatly in those union revival services, one result 
of which was to bring about more perfect harmony 
among the various denominations in Chicago than was 
ever seen in any large city before. 

In the administration of the library, from which 
all unchristian works were excluded, Mr. Moody re- 
mained the leading spirit, even after he had resigned 
the presidency of the Association to Mr. Farwell, tak- 
ing the vice-presidency himself. The library suffered 
nothing by its strictly Christian character. 

Mr. Moody had come to be recognized as a man of 
the people. His judgment was taken as a kind of ther- 
mometer of the judgment of the masses of ordinary 
Christians. 

Mr. Moody, feeling his lack of wisdom, was all the 
time seeking instruction from God, and his simple faith - 
in the Scripture, “If any man lack wisdom let him ask 
of God, and it shall be given him,” was so greatly hon- 
ored that, in spite of his impetuous manner and his 
contempt of fashions and forms, he was listened to with 
great respect whenever he said, “I feel that God wants 


LIFE OF MOODY. 191 


us to do this.” He had also the grace to learn wisdom 
from his own mistakes. An acomplished Christian 
gentleman, one of his faithful helpers, says of him, 
“Moody is impetuous and all the time committing 
blunders, but he never makes the mistake twice.” An- 
other, who was for-many years intimate with him, says, 
respecting his ways of dealing with men: 

“He seems always to be carried along on a sea of in- 
spiration. He passes his life tossing on its waves, 
where he is as perfectly at home as the stormy petrel on 
the ocean.” But Mr. Moody did not set himself.up as 
an example for others to follow. A favorite saying 
with him was, “To every man his work.” 

Early in his missionary life Mr. Moody was called 
to speak also in small Sunday-school conventions. 
This was on account of his experience in reaching the 
masses of neglected children in the great city, and he 
could tell it with instruction, and sometimes to the 
amusement, of his audience. Willing to do anything: 
for his Master, he often filled in this way little niches 
in the programmes. But in 1861 he was thrust sud- 
denly into the front by the Providence of God, and in 
the emergency learned more fully how to use the 
power that had so long been growing and slumbering 
within him. 

Several distinguished speakers from Chicago were 


192' | LIFE OF MOODY. 


expected by the Committee of the Sunday-School 
Convention of Bureau county, Illinois, to address 
their convention. But when Mr. Moody arrived from 


another place where he had been he found that none 


of the “distinguished brethren from Chicago” were 
present, but only his friend, Mr. E. W. Hawley, the 
secretary of the Young Men’s Christian Association, 
with himself. Great things were expected of the Chi- 
cago brethren, and the whole of the afternoon of the 
great day of the meeting had been set apart for them. 
“Tf ever two poor fellows were frightened,” says Mr. 
Hawley, “it was Moody and I.” 

They arrived in the city of Princeton, where the con- 
vention was to be held, about two o’clock on a cold 
March morning—too early to sit up, too late to go to 
bed. Trembling under the weight of responsibility 
and shivering with cold, they took a room, not for 
sleep, but for prayer. During the rest of the night they 
sought God for power and guidance, and in the morn- 
ing they both felt the smile of heaven warming and 
gladdening their souls. The morning session passed 
in humdrum style, with fussy debates on trifling ques- 
tions, all of which led Moody and Hawley to see the 
importance of a more spiritual turn for the afternoon. 

In due time, happy in a sense of God’s presence, they 
started for the large church where they were to fill the 





LIFE OF MOODY. 193 


places of “the distinguished brethren from Chicago.” 
Close to the church was a public schoolroom, ee 
Mr. Moody engaged for the afternoon. 

“What do you want with that?” asked Mr. Hawley. 

“T want it for an inquiry meeting after we get 
through,” was the reply. 

The two men engaged, the one to pray while the 
other was speaking, as Moses prayed while Joshua and 
Israel fought. There was a great congregation who 
had come to hear the “distinguished speakers,” but the 
two young men trusted in God and went ahead. 

Mr. Hawley spoke first for about twenty minutes, 


and with good effect. Then came Mr. Moody’s turn. 


It is said that “he seemed like one inspired.” Before 


long he had the audience in tears. Picturing to them 


their need of Christ to help them as Sunday-school 
teachers, he showed them the awful sin of doing their 
work in a careless and worldly manner; and after an 
address of an hour or more which was like a wild’. 
mountain torrent, he called for those who wanted to 
find Christ now to meet him at once in the schoolroom 
next door. Numbers of anxious inquirers came to him 
there, about sixty of whom were blessed before leaving 
the place. 

Thus began a widespread revival in Bureau county, 
for the delegates carried the spirit of that wonderful 


194 LIFE OF MOODY. 


meeting home with them and gave their hearts and 


hands to the new work. 

But it was also the beginning of a new life for 
Mr. Moody. He had taken hold on power; and from 
that day he went everywhere in the strength of God, 
as we have seen him in preceding pages of this book. 

_At this date he was about twenty-two years of age. With 
perfect abandon he threw himself upon Christ and into 
his subject, and, carried on the tides of heavenly love 
and sympathy, he swept along towards the mercy seat, 
taking multitudes of penitent sinners with him and 
offering them to the Saviour in prayer as trophies of 
His.erace. —™ 

On one of his rounds of meetings in the State of 
Indiana he was riding with a quiet Christian brother, 
who in his wagon was taking him to his next appoint- 
ment, when they passed a little schoolhouse that was 
closed for the day. Telling his companion to stop at 
’ the dwelling nearest to it, he stood up in the wagon 
and hailed the house. A woman came to the door, 
and. Mr. Moody asked her if there were any religious 
meetings held in that schoolhouse. 

“No, indeed,” answered the woman, “we haven’t any 

meetings about here.” 

“Well,” said Mr. Moody, “tell all your neighbors 


; 
peep 


st wae, 2 
23 or q 


LIFE OF MOODY. : 195 


there will be prayer-meetings in that schoolhouse every 
night next week.” | 

At the next house they found the teacher of the 
school, and he told her the same thing, and bade her 
send the notice by all her scholars. 

As they rode his compaion seemed lost in amaze- 
ment. He knew that this strange man had a long list 
of appointments in advance and could not attend the 
meetings he was giving out. At length he said: 

“You are telling these people there are to be prayer- 
meetings in that schoolhouse every night next week. 
I should like to know who is to conduct them.” 

“You are,” said Moody. 

“T?” said the man in astonishment. “I never did 
such a thing in my life.” 

“Tt is time you had, then,” said Moody. “I have 
made the appointment, and you'll have to keep it.” 

The remark has been made in previous pages of 
Mr. Moody “thrusting men headforemost,” so to 
speak, “into the kingdom of heaven.” Here is an ex- 
ample of a man being thrust into its work. And the 
brother actually went and held the meetings, which 
filled the little schoolhouse to overflowing, and resulted 
in a great revival of religion throughout all that ne- 
glected region. 

_The organization in Illinois, part of whose work it: 


196 LIFE OF MOODY. 


had been for several years to hold an annual State 
Sunday Convention of Superintendents and Delegates. 
for a four or five days’ conference, was not getting 
along with the work as might be desired—the conven- 
tional gatherings being cold, formal and given to tech- 
nical discussion rather than upon, How to bring the 
children to a saving knowledge of Christ? How to 
save the parents through the children? How to call 
more laborers into Christ’s whitening harvest? How in 
prayer to get the firmest hold upon God? How to be- 
come sanctified through the truth? 
From 1858 to 1865 the annual conventions went on 
in this ineffective style. 
Mr. Moody, Mr. Jacobs and Major Whittle, who, 
from being so much together in the work of the Lord, 
were called the “Chicago Trio,” became deeply im- 
pressed with the need of more of the presence and 
power of the Holy Spirit. The meeting of 1865 being 
at hand, the Chicago brethren laid a plan for rescuing 
the convention from this old formality and making it 
a truly spiritual and godly assembly. 
Four days previous to the day of assembly, which 
was to take place that year in Springfield, Mr. Moody, 
“Mr. Jacobs and one or two other brethren started for 
the scene of action, reaching the place at about four 
o'clock on Saturday morning. For an hour or two 








LIFE OF MOODY. 197 


they walked the streets, talking of the ways and means 
by which the great. convention might, with God’s 
blessing, be turned into a revival. After breakfast Mr. 
Jacobs, feeling special liberty in that direction, sought 
out a Baptist church, climbed in at the window, fol- 
lowed by Mr. Moody and the rest, went into the pulpit, 
opened the Bible, read a portion of Scripture and com- 
menced to hold a little prayer-meeting ; when the pas- 
tor of the church, entering by the door, gave them. 
hearty welcome to his church and city. 

These brethren told him that they were the adyaitee 
guard of the Sunday-School Convention, and that they 
had come to hold revival meetings as a prebtde, to its 
exercises. 

This church and ahiers were gladly placed at their 
disposal. Meetings were held on the Sabbath which 
attracted such multitudes that many had to be turned 
away for want of room. In the Presbyterian Church 
the meeting led by Messrs. Moody and Jacobs on Sun- 
day afternoon resulted in the awakening of seventy per- 
sons, of all classes of people and ages, from a child of 
six to a gray-haired infidel of seventy years. 

These revival meetings continued throughout the 
sessions of the convention, and deeply influenced the 
convention itself, which is said to have been so full of 
the power of the Holy Spirit that wordy discussion and . 


198 LIFE OF MOODY. 


‘strife for honors were no more. There was thrilling re- 

consecration, and through the delegates carrying these 
characteristics with them, the fire spread throughout 
the whole State. 

The following year the convention was held in De- 
catur, where a report was rendered showing that 10,000 
conversions had taken place, traceable, most of them, 
to the baptism of power at the previous convention. 

Thus encouraged, it was determined to complete 


the canvass of the whole State with a view to organiz-— 


ing Sunday-schools in every neglected region. For 
this purpose $5000 was raised, and well-known breth- 
ren appointed to the work. 

The next year, the convention being held in Du 
Quoin, then a village of about 3000, about 3000 dele- 
gates poured in upon them. The meetings through- 


out the session of four days were held in an immense | 


barn usually used for storing hay, but happening at the 
time to be empty. The services were almost continu- 
ous from early morn until eleven and twelve o’clock 
at night. 

The convention met next year in Bloomington; was 
characterized by unparalleled enthusiasm. At this 
meeting Mr. Moody was elected president, and is said 
to have carried the great meeting along at the hightest 


rate of speed. No long prayers were tolerated, and 


\ 


LIFE OF MOODY. ; 199 


the meeting rolled on in an ever-increasing tide of 
power, reaching its climax in the moving address of . 
its president on the memorable night of its closing. 

Volunteers were at this meeting appointed to can- 
vass every county over again, and Mr. Moody and Mr. 
Reynolds of Peoria pledged themselves to hold county 
conventions through all the southern part of Illinois. 

The progress of these two brethren is reported as 
like a triumphal march, large numbers of people ac- 
companying them on horseback and in wagons, the in- 
terest of the meetings increasing as they went along. 
There were open-air meetings when no hall could be 
found with capacity for the people—canip-meetings, 
field-meetings, street preaching in the towns on their 
route from courthouse steps and other public places. 
In the county of Gallatin the number of conversions at 
these meetings is said to have reached 600. 

But the devil did not like this, and human selfish as- 
piration and ambition is a ready agent for his work. 
It is matter of devout gratitude to God that He con- 
tinuously overrules evil for good. “Even the wrath of 
men shall praise Him, the remainder of wrath will He 
restrain.” 

_The State Convention was held in that year, 1870, 


at Quincey, about 5000 delegates attending it. 


The success of Messrs. Moody,’ Reynolds, Jacobs - 


200 LIFE OF MOODY. 


and Whittle of Chicago, Lyng of Peoria and Gillett of 
Jacksonville had made them prominent, and had led 
naturally to their being placed on the most important 
committees. Professor Gillett, superintendent of the 
State Asylum for the Deaf and Dumb, had been placed 
in the chair in opposition to a local candidate, who was 
also a candidate for some political office, and his friends 
‘had conceived that the presidency of the Sunday- 
School Convention would materially aid the chances 
of his election. Oh, you politicians! | 

The gentleman in question was an excellent man, 
' but his friends, chagrined at their defeat, exhibited ill 
feeling as the convention’s work went on. There was 
also, well known to Mr. Moody, organized opposition 
to the strictly religious conduct of the convention, and 
~ when Mr. Moody took the stand to “open the question 
drawer”’—that is, to give off-hand answers to im- 
promptu questions on Sunday-school topics (an office 
in which he practically excelled), the question was 
asked him whether the “ring” that “controlled the 
State Sunday-School Convention had any limit to its 
power?” 

Mr. Moody saw the situation at a glance—a situa- 
tion that threatened rupture that might break up the 
convention and do irreparable damage to the cause he 


and his co-workers represented, A less ready and 


nh ee oot ee 
x ‘ : 


LIFE OF MOoopy. 201 


courageous man might have suffered the meeting to 
drift into confusion, but, without the least apparent 
anxiety, he replied to this remarkable question by giv- 
ing a full acount of “the ring” and the blessing of God, 
which had year by year attended their limited labors 


all over the State. Having done this, he closed his re- 


marks by tendering to the convention the resignation 
of every office held by himself and the brethren at 
whom the question was aimed. 

The scene that followed is peponted: as Mindescrbee 
ble.” Thousands of people were weeping. Brethren 
from every part of the State defended Mr. Moody and 
his friends. The opposition was hushed in silence and ° 
drowned in tears. A motion was made and carried by 
acclamation refusing to accept the resignation offered 
by Mr. Moody on behalf of himself and his friends. 
The facts connected with their work were their only 
and sufficient defense. . 

When the motion had passed Mr. Moody spoke a 
few words full of tenderness and emotion, and then 
said, “Let us pray.” 

In speaking of the scene which followed, Mr. Jacobs 
says: “Many people have told me they never heard 
anything like that prayer.” The whole audience was 
melted. Sobs and cries drowned the leader’s voice; 
and when he rose from his knees Philip Phillips, the 


202 LIFE OF MOODY. 


“Sweet Singer” of the Methodist Israel, struck up one 
of his tender and loving hymns, which was like oil on 
the troubled waters. 

At the close of the meeting one of the friends of the 


‘gentleman on whose behalf the regrettable division had 


been made spoke his feelings as follows: 

“We were sufficiently punished when Mr. Moody 
told us what he had been trying to. do for Christ and 
then offered to give up all his honors; but when he 
prayed for us our punishment was greater than we 
could bear.” 

The storm had passed. Love and harmony reigned 
again. The convention went forward to its close with 
its old-time vigor and success. 

Other States sought the services of the “Chicago 
ring,” and attempted to copy their plans. Among 
others, the Young Men’s Christian Association of Bos- 
ton invited Mr. Moody to attend a great Sunday-school 
convention meeting in Tremont Temple in that city to 
explain the Illinois method and to help them to put it 
in operation throughout the State of Massachusetts. 
Mr. Moody made a characteristic speech, setting forth 
his plan minutely and awaking a high degree of in- 
terest ; but when the motion was made to put the plan 
into operation without delay some cautious brethren 
arose and began to point out the difficulties in the way, 





LIFE OF MOODY, E 203 


especially emphasizing their view that the methods. - 


proposed would not be adapted to the East as they no 
doubt were in the West, and so cooling down the en- 
thusiasm of the meeting, they voted to postpone the 
whole subject. The convention then, having proved, 
as it seemed, a complete failure, was about to adjourn. 

But Mr. Moody on this occasion proved his genius 
in snatching victory from defeat, and whispered to the 
chairman, “Call another meeting for this evening; tell _ 
the people I will speak.” The meeting was accord- 
ingly called, and the hall was full again to hear the man 
whom by vote they had set aside during the day. 

In beginning his address Mr. Moody cautiously and . 
steadily commenced his work. Speaking of the “North 
Market Mission,” he gave them scenes and incidents, . 
in which ragged and dirty children of the street had 
become cultivated and honored Christian ladies and 
gentlemen; and at the moment when he judged his 
audience as sufficiently impressible he brought again 
the discarded plan of the morning. Throwing all his. 
power and energy into the subject, it soon became 
manifest that he was carrying the audience with him, 
and seizing the supreme moment, he opened the ques- 


_ tion as follows: 


“Brethren and friends, I am not much used to put- 
ting motions and bringing them back again after they 


204 - LIFE OF MOODY. 


have been voted down; but we must do something to . 
correct that wrong vote of this morning. Now every- 
body in the house who is not satisfied with that vote 
and wants to go to work at once and organize this 
“State after the Illinois pattern, let him stand up on his 
feet, hold up his right hand and say ‘Aye!’” ‘ 

As by a common impulse the entire congregation 
rose to their feet and answered “Aye!” in a shout so 
hearty that before the close of the year its echoes were 
heard all over the Old Bay State. 

A tribute to the influence of Mr. Moody and the es-: 
teem in which he was held is vividly seen in his election 
to the chairmanship of the State Christian Convention, 
held in Missouri not long after the close of the war. 
The city was divided during the war in its sympathy 
between North and South, and these feelimgs were not 
yet dead. Every prominent man, it is said, was a par- 
tisan, making every one of them unsatisfactory to the 
opposite side. But Mr. Moody’s Christian Commission 
record and his known breadth—the conviction that he 
had so much Christianity in him as to hide or glorify 
whatever opinions he might have—made him accepta- 
ble to all and suitable for the chair. 

The position of chairman of such a convention may 
readily be conceived as difficult. But Mr. Moody was 


equal to it, holding Union men, so to speak, in one 


ie 
t/a 


oP skee = 
! . 


LIFE OF MOODY. Ri 205° 


hand and ex-Confederates in the other, thus holding 
the balance and forming a tie between them which 
bound them together in a brotherhood. If any con- 
fusion threatened to arise he gracefully brought the 
convention up and around the danger point by a prayer | 
orahymn. And thus he managed this dangerous com- 
bination of fire and gunpowder without an explosion, 
an achievement of genius of which any Speaker of a 
House of Representatives might well be proud, and 
which would surely be mentioned in his memoirs as a 
triumph of genius, good nature and parliamentary skill. 

Year after year Mr. Moody went from Maine to 
Texas, from Montreal to San Francisco, from St. Paul 
to New Orleans, preaching and praying, rousing the 
Christian associations into activity and working in co- 
operation with pastors for revivals in the churches, 
coming home now and then to give a few weeks of 
earnest effort to his own congregation. And thus he 
had a continent for his field and college and hundreds 
of the best and greatest for his instructors and models, 
as well as the one Book which he had learned so well to 
use. It is credited to Mr. Moody in these efforts in con- 
nection with the Young Men’s Christian Association 


that he saved it from becoming a mere social body and. 
“made it an earnest, orthodox religious institution, 


breathing into it of his own spirit. 


206 LIFE OF MOODY. 


~ It was in this course of attending the conventions of © 
the Young Men’s Christian Associations: that Mr. 
-Moody came in contact with a man whose voice in 
sacred song was to charm the ear and the hearts of 
millions, and whose fame, united with his own, was to 
be known throughout the English-speaking world. 
The place and occasion of this meeting was the Inter- 
national Convention of the Young Meén’s Christian 
Association, held in Indianapolis. The year was 1871. 
The man was Mr. Ira David Sankey, a native of Edin- 
burgh, Pa., a man who will have a biography of his 
own. 

During the convention a prayer-meeting had been 
appointed for seven o’clock in the morning in the 
church adjoining the Academy of Music, where the 
convention was held. The meeting was led by Mr. 
Moody... When Mr. Sankey entered he found that the 
singing “dragged” and the meeting dragged like the 
singing. No sooner had Mr.Sankey entered than some- 
onewhoknewhis capacity (he had alreadyagood record 
both for piety, earnestness and song) invited him to 
lead the singing for the remainder of the metting. And 
very soon such a change came over it that what had 
begun with heaviness merged into and ended with de- 
light. At the close someone (and we should like to 





LIFE OF MOODY. 207 


know who that was) introduced him to Mr. Moody, 
whose first salutation was: 

“Where do you live?” 

“In New Castle, Pa.,” was the aa 

“Are you married?” 

eyes. 

“How many children have you?” 

-Onev? 

“T want you.” 

“What for?” 

~“To help me in my work in Chicago.” 

“T cannot leave my business,” said Mr. Sankey. 

“You must,’ said Mr. Moody. “I have been look- 
ing for you for the past eight years. You must give up 
your business and come to Chicago with me.” 

Mr. Sankey told Mr. Moody that he was a “govern- 
ment officer.” ; | 

“There is a higher government to serve,” said Mr. 
Moody. 

Mr. Sankey told Mr. Moody that he would think and 
pray over the matter and see what the Lord would 
direct. 

Mr. Sankey was at this time in a ha arenteble situations 
and it seemed no small matter at this time to him to 
break up his home, go to a strange city and unite his 
fortunes with a.man of whom he knew so little, but 


i 


¥ 


208 LIFE OF MOODY. 


~ whom he understood to be wholly given up to the work 
of the Lord and ready to go at a moment’s notice any- 
where in the world on a mission in His name. 

Before the close of the convention they held one 
meeting together in the open air in the streets of In- 
dianapolis. Mr. Moody preached and Mr. Sankey 
sang, and the good results seemed to be an indication 
_ that the Lord would be pleased to have them join com- 

pany and work together. 3 
Mr.Sankey talked the proposition of Mr. Moody over 
to his wife, to whom this cross seemed especially heavy. 
But at length, feeling that the invitation of Mr. Moody 
was a call from heaven, he determined to go to Chicago 
for a week at least and labor with him, hoping that the 
Lord would there more clearly indicate His will. 
| During this week they worked together in church, 
in Sunday-schools, in saloons, in drinking dens, speak- 
ing and singing as occasion served; and in all their 
various labors their souls were refreshed and good was 
done. Their spirits clave to each other in such Chris- 
tian love and fellowship that Mr. Sankey determined 
to break off all connection with the world of business 
and join his ardent brother, who, he felt, was specially 
appointed of God to labor among the masses of people 
not generally reached by the ordinary means of grace. 
This was about six months before the great fire 


Ey) ae eS 


LIFE OF MOODY. _ 209 


which overwne:med the whole of that portion of the 
city where Mr. Moody’s Mission had been located. 
The calamity so deranged Mr. Moody’s plans that, as 
we have seen, after -for a time administering relief to 
the stricken through the Young Men’s Christian As- 
sociation he went on a mission to the Eastern cities 
and collected funds for the Tabernacle. Mr. Moody 
and Mr. Sankey were before long at work again in the 
temporary building. While Mr. Moody was absent in _ 
England attending the Mildmay Conference Mr. San- 
key “held the fort” in Chicago. In time a new Taber- 
nacle to correspond with the revived city and answer 
better their needs took the place of the temporary 
structure. All of the buildings in which Mr. Moody 
has had a hand in erecting, except at the start, are sub- 
stantial in character and striking in artificial beauty. ~ 


210 ; _LIFE OF MOODY. 


CHAPTER, VII. 


MOODY AND SANKEY GO TO EUROPE. 


It was during the spring of 1872 that Mr. Sankey 
“held the fort” at the Tabernacle, and, as we have seen, 
Mr. Moody was absent in England at this time. This 
was his second visit to that country, the first being in 
the year 1867. The immediate occasion of his first visit 
was the condition of his wife’s health, and for which her 
physician had recommended a sea voyage and the 
change of scenery and thought which that historic isle 
promises to the visitor from these shores. 


There is an incident connected with this visit which 


is so characteristic of Mr. Moody that it is worth a re- 
cital here. 

Mr. Moody was not altogether unknown in Eng- 
land, even at the time of which we are writing. Eng- 
lish visitors had: become somewhat acquainted with his 
work in Chicago and on the United States Christian 
Commission, and when he was present in England these 
friends and brethren desired to extend to him as an 
American the hospitality of their country, and further- 


tS ae a 





vy 


J 


a Sen Ae 
Bei da” the 
a, ; 


Rasa Ty: 


LIFE OF MOODY. 2il 


more to give him an oportunity of becoming known to 
the religious public of Great Britain. 

The great annual meetings at Exeter Hall were going 
on at the time he was in London, and on these occa- 
sions it was customary to introduce an unknown 
speaker by assigning him the office of seconding a vote 
of thanks to the chairman of any one of the meetings: 
This office, then, they assigned to Mr. Moody. | 

The chairman of the meeting on that occasion hap- 
pened to be Lord Shaftsbury. The vote of thanks had 
been moved, and Mr. Moody was introduced to second 
it as “the Rev. Dwight L. Moody, our cousin from 
America.” 

In rising to address the audience, Mr. Moody said, 
in his own manner: | 

“The gentleman who has introduced me has made 
two mistakes: First, I am not the Reverend Mr. Moody 
at all, but plain Mr. Moody; and, second, I am not your 
cousin, but your brother, and engaged in the common 
Christian work of seeking, like you, to lead lost souls to 
Christ. : 

“And as for this motion for thanks, I do not see that 
we owe the chairman, although he is a noble lord, any 
thanks, any more than he owes itto us. So I think it’s 
even all round. . Our President Lincoln once presided 
at a meeting, and-when they wanted to give him a vote _ 


sees eae VORTAC e MaMaah bees int. Scie hy | | 
5 $ pas kd wes - * ee 


nan, et 


212 LIFE OF MOODY. 


of thanks, he got up and said: ‘You’ve tried to do your 
duty, and I’ve tried to do mine. If you are satisfied, I 
am. So wel’ll just call it square.’ ” 

This fresh, breezy prelude, it is said, delivered in Mr. 
Moody’s own natural manner, took the audience by 
storm, and from that moment to the last of his efforts 
among them he had the ear and hearts of the English 
people. 

Mr. Moody then went on, and gave the vast assem- 
bly a rousing address upon the mission work of saving 
the poor and the degraded and outcast, illustrating his 
theme by telling incidents of his own Chicago ex- 
perience. 

The second visit to England was in part to attend the 
Mildmay Conference, which was held at the Mildmay 
Park Church, of which Rey! Mr. Pennyfather was at - 
the time rector. He had stated before leaving that he 
was “going over to England to learn how to study the 
Bible, and to use it in preaching.” The incident which 
induced this desire is interesting enough also to have 
a place in these pages. We have seen upon what a 
hinge the complete devotion of Mr. Moody to the sa- 
cred work turned. We may now see that upon which 
turned his method of preaching and Bible reading; so 
that to the end of his life, from that point, he used so 
much God’s words instead of his own. 


oo 


LIFE OF MOODY. 213 


One Saturday, prior to this date, and while “the Illi- 
nois Street Church” was still standing, and as he was | 
about leaving home to spend Sunday at a distant. con- 
vention, he said to his wife: “I have received a letter 
from Harry Moorhouse, an Englishman, who calls him- 
self the ‘Boy Preatvher,’ saying he will be in Chicago 
today and will preach for me if I wish it. It is too late 
to get anyone else, and I suppose we must let him try 
it in the morning, but if he makes a failure, you must 
tell the deacons to find some one else for the evening, 
or let them hold a prayer-meeting.” 

When he returned next week, Mr. Moody anxiously - 
inquired what sort of a’preacher Harry Moorhouse had 
proved to be. “He is a wonderful preacher,” was the 
reply. “On Sunday morning he preached from the 
text, ‘God so loved the world that He gave His Only- 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should 
not perish, but have everlasting life.’ The people were 
so much interested that a crowd filled the church in the 
evening, when he took the same text again, and so 
wonderfully did he explain it that the deacons have 
asked him to preach every night this week.” 

That was a memorable week. Night after night Mr. 
Moorhouse preached to immense congregations, tak- 
ing the same text every time, until he made the love of 
God appear the central truth of the whole Bible. At the 


| Bol ie eae TERURATIE Sieg eit, AL aay ie ane Oe EO 
. i s io ‘ — : COO eter rere. agy - : man 
pe ett i* 


i . re : Ce 
A) M4 0 ® + «> Fn tpi 


ae oy 


214 LIFE OF MOODY. 


close of the seventh sermon from the same words, he 
said: “If I were to die tonight, and go up to heaven, 
and there meet Gabriel, who stands in the presence of 
God, and if I were to ask him how much God loves sin- 
ners, this is what I think he would say: ‘God so loved 
the world that He gave His Only-begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but 
have everlasting life.’.” 

When the Bier aes were over, Mr. Moorhouse said 
to Mr. Moody: 

“You are sailing on the wrong tack. If you will 
change your course, and learn to preach God’s words 
instead of your own, He will make you a great power 
for good.” 

These seven sermons from one text were, to Mr. 
Moody, as a revelation from heaven. The wonderful 
_ panorama of divine truth which he had seen unfolded — 
opened to him a new world. He began to see that “the 
Word of the Lord giveth light;” he began to under- 
stand something of comparing Scripture with Scrip- 
ture. From this time he began, as never before, to 
study the Gospel of the grace of God and to search for 
the hidden mysteries of His Word. The exhortation 
of Paul to Timothy came home to him with tremendous 
force: “TI charge thee, therefore, before God and the 
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the 





apes 


fre 


LIFE OF MOODY. aay e154, 


dead at His. appearing and kingdom, PREACH THE 
Worn.” 

The great question with Mr. Moody, however, now 
was, how to acquire such a knowledge of the Ward as 
should enable him to preach it. 


His friend, Rev. Dr. Patterson, advising him to com- 


mence a course of reading, had marked off for ‘him a_ 


course, but Mr. Moody was altogether too much occu- 


pied to pursue it, and the convenient season seemed to - 


get farther and farther off. 
But Mr. Moorhouse said, “You oa need one book 


for the study of the Bible.” 


Mr. Moody respdnded, “You must have studied a 
great many books to come by your knowledge of it.” 


“No,” was the reply. “Since I began to be an evan-~ 


gelist I have been a man of one book. If a text of 


Scripture troubles me, I ask another text to explain it, 


and if this will not answer, I carry it straight to the — 


Lord? 

To Mr. Moody here was a new scheme—every 
preacher his own theological seminary; his professors 
and teachers, the Apostles and prophets, with Christ 


and the Holy Spirit as head over all. He was so im- 


pressed with the power of this “man of one book” that . 


he asked Mr. Moorhouse to show them how to study - 


it as he had done. Accordingly, a meeting was ap- | 


\ 


© 


216 LIFE OF MOODY. 


pointed at Mr. Moody’s house, at which fifty or sixty 
persons were present, and there held the first “Bible 
Reading” of which there is any record in America. 
“Everyone, as directed, had brought a Bible. After 
prayer for the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, who 
had first inspired the Writings, that He might now in- 
spire their understanding, the “boy preacher’ led them 


on a voyage of discovery from Genesis to Revelation, 


tracing the promises, prophecy and history of Redemp- 


tion. On this theme they found the Word of God to 


be exceedingly rich and full; it was, indeed, the center 
around which all the Scriptures revolved; and so won- 
derfully did it become impressed on-their minds that it 


seemed to them like a new revelation. Text after text | 


was found and joined to the wonderful series, until they 
appeared like links of a long golden chain, holding a 
broken and ruined world together, and binding it fast 
to God’s mercy-seat. This was Mr. Moody’s first les- 
son in systematic theology.” 

“The visit of that great English preacher, Rev. Dr. 
Punshon, was another benediction to Mr. Moody. He 
preached for him in Farwell Hall several times. His 


great sermon on ‘Daniel in Babylon,’ wherein he gave 


such a vivid picture-of that fearless prince and prophet 
as made Mr. Moody realize that the Bible characters 
were actual men and women, and such as Abraham, 


LIFE OF MOODY. 217 


Moses, Daniel, etc., were what they were only by their 


“perfect faith in God. Realizing this, Mr. Moody put 


the greatest emphasis on faith as the central power in 
religion—faith in Jesus Christ—faith in the Christ of 
the Gospels. So completely did he give himself up to 
this great truth that he began to feel the force of the 
‘boy preacher’s’ prophecy, and to say to himself in his 
closet, ‘If I can only learn to believe as those men be- 
lieved, what is there to hinder God from laying some. 
great work on me?’” 

With these motives, then—with this desire for Bible 
knowledge—he was led to leave his pressing work at 
home, and made a voyage to England, where he might 
have the help of certain brethren, who had become 
mighty in the Scriptures, by becoming men of “one 
book.” And so, when questioned by some of his friends 
why he went to England, he replied: 

“T am going to England to study the Bible.” 

During his three months’ stay in England he seems. 
to have made use of his Bible knowledge as fast as he 
acquired it, for he preached about ninety sermons, be- 
sides attending many meetings for inquiry and prayer. 
But it seems that God was only sending him to school. 
No great success attended him. 

' After this it began to be his habit in the social meet- 


- ings to say, “Tell us your experience in Bible language.” . 


218 LIFE OF MOODY. 


When anyone expressed an opinion on any doctrine of 


religion, he would straightway inquire, “Have you 
God’s Word for it?” 

“Give anxious sinners Christ’s words,” he would say; 
“man’s words are good for nothing, but Christ’s words 
are spirit and life.” 

“Don’t you think God knows best how to interest 
people?” he would say. The Word of God came to be 
the entire plane of projection of his sermons and a good 
part of their solid substance. 

Rey. Dr. Roy, once Mr. Moody’s pastor at Plymouth 


Church, mentions a sermon upon “The Compassion of. 


Christ,’’ which he heard Mr. Moody preach, in which 


“he seemed like a man inspired, and under which the ~ 


great audience were moved like forests swept by the 


winds.” When it was over, the doctor inquired of him — 


how he had prepared such a sermon. He answered: “I 
got to thinking the other day about the compassion of 
Christ, so I took the Bible and began to read it over to 
find out what it said on that subject. I prayed over the 
texts as I went along, until the thought of His infinite 
compassion overpowered me, and I could only lie on 


the floor of my study, with my face in the open Bible, 


and cry like a little child.” 
When Mr. Moody returned from this second visit to 
England, he found Mr. Sankey, who, as we have seen, 





ipey dor oer Or |. ER ae aed 


ay ae anes 
: Se 


‘) . 
a. 


LIFE “OF , MOODY. 219 


was “holding the fort” at the Tabernacle, deeply im- 
pressed with the same spirit which had taken hold of 
him, and under the infltience of which his preaching 
became more strictly Biblical. Mr. Sankey had begun 
to search for hymns that clearly set forth the doctrines 
of the Word of Ged. And thus the Bible preaching was 
accompanied with Bible singing in a manner which-at 
once attracted the earnest attention of many devout 
persons in Chicago and the region round about. 

After his second visit to England, Mr. Moody seems 
to have contemplated returning to that country, and, 
having decided to go thither again, he said to Mr. 


‘Sankey: 


“You have often proposed that we should go out 
evangelizing together; now go with me to England.” 
_ At the time of this proposal Mr. Sankey was consid- 
ering a proposal from Mr. Phillips to join him in a tour! 
of “Evenings of Song’ on the Pacific coast, and it was 


a question which to accept. In asking a friend what | 


he advised in the matter, he was advised to the follow- 
ing purport: “Don’t go with Mr. Phillips. Two work- 
ers in the same line, and especially two singers, are 
certain not to agree. Go with Moody; then you can do 
your work, and he can do his, and there will be no occa- 
sion of conflict between you.” 

Moody and Sankey at length decided to go to Eng- 


220 ; LIFE OF MOODY. 


larid together. They agreed as aforetime to take no 
salaries in any form. They were to ask no collections. 
They were to engage in no business, but to devote 
themselves solely to the work of God, and to rely on 
Him for all things necessary as well for the body as the 
soul. Trusting wholly to the Lord to direct and sup- 
port them, they were to share together whatever God, 
by His Providence, should give them for the expenses 
of their journey and the reward of their labors. 

From the foregoing pages we have seen that Mr. 
Moody had taken hold of the Word of God—the Sword 
of the Spirit. He is going forth into the great white 
harvest, meeting the reaper, with sharp sickle in hand. 
He appoints the day to give the parting message and 
bid farewell to his church. But a trial of trust in God is 
at hand—a demonstration, too, of the. Providence of 
the Lord for His servant. 

The last day arrives—tonight he has to go, he and 
his family. No money! ’ 

He will not ask it of men; he can ask it only of God. 

A few hours before he and his family are to take the 
train a friend, Mr. Farewell, who knows nothing of his 
needs, bethinks him that Mr. Moody will want some 
money “after he reaches England.” He goes to say 
good-bye, and places five hundred dollars in his hand. 
Now he can go. 








LIFE OF MOODY. ‘ 221 


Mr. Moody and his family, accompanied by Mr. San- 
key, sailed from New York June 7, 1872, and ten days 
after landed in Liverpool. 

“Why do you go to England again so soon?” asked 
one of Mr. Moody’ s friends a short time previous to his, 
voyage in company with Mr. Sankey. 

“To win ten thousand souls to Christ,” he replied. ’ 

This was the hope in his heart as he started on his 
first expedition to Great Britain with Mr. Sankey. We 
may say that he had a prescience of his victories—vic- 
tories against Satan—which we at this writing can look 
back upon as realizations, but which he looked forward 
to in hope. If we attempted to look at the foundation 
of this hope, we think we should find it in Mr. Moody’s 
faith in God—in Christ, and in the powerful Sword of 
the Spirit that he had grasped and learned how to use. 

The beginnings, however, like the beginnings of 
many great things, were small. A good opportunity to 
“despise the day of small things,” or, on the other hand, 
seeing things in the light of God—to estimate every- 
thing by its ethical quality—an eternal quality. This 
latter is what Mr. Moody and his coadjutor did. 

Mr. Moody had been personally invited to England 
by three Englishmen—Rev. Mr. Pennyfather, rector of 
Mildmay Park Church, London; Mr. Cuthbert Bain- 


bridge, an eminent Wesleyan layman and extensive 


222 : LIFE OF MOODY. 


~ merchant in Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and by Mr. George 


Bennett of York, the secretary of the Young Men’s 
Christian Association in that town. On reaching and 
landing in Liverpool, he found that the two first-named 
of these three. had recently died. It had been Mr. 
Moody’s intention to accept the latter’s invitation first 
in order, and he promptly telegraphed to Mr. Bennett 
announcing his arrival and his readiness to commence 
meetings. The reply of Mr. Bennett was that every- 
thing seemed so cold and dead in York that it would 
need at least a month to prepare for the intended re- 


vival meeting, and the dispatch concluded by asking 


Mr. Moody to name a date at which he might be ex- 
pected. He immediately telegraphed back to Mr. Ben- 
nett, “I will be in York tonight.” He arrived at 10 


o'clock in a.city where he was known by no one save 


the secretary of the Association. 
Mr. Moody said that every man must make his own 


way, and that he was ready to go to work at once. Mr. 


Sankey, who had gone to Manchester, was telegraphed 
for, and the meetings opened immediately. Two Wes- 
leyan, a Baptist, and a Congregational church were 
rather reluctantly placed at their disposal for Sunday. 
The first meeting of that historic series of meetings 
that form an era in England, Scotland and Ireland was 


held on that Sunday morning in June in one of the small 





LIFE OF MOODY. 223 


rooms of the Young Men’s Christian Association build- 
ing, and eight persons only were present.. The other 
Sabbath services under their conduct were more en- 
couraging, but during the week which followed there 
seemed to be nobody to pray for them, nobody to work 
with them—the congregations were small, increasing 
in interest slowly. The preaching was chiefly to pro- 
fessors. Mr. Bennett said of these: “They needed al- 
most as much waking up as the famous ‘Seven Sleep- — 
ers’ themselves.” 
During the second week something in the nature of 
an awakening commenced among the congregation 
in one of the Wesleyan chapels. The inquiry meeting, 
which was a new thing to the people of York, gradually 


grew into favor. It was effectively used throughout 
the two years’ campaign of Moody and Sankey in 


England. |’ ; 

Mr. Moody’s expounding of the Scriptures at once 
attracted attention, awakening believers to an earnest 
study of the Word of God, and his admonitions to the 
audience to bring their Bibles to the meetings for use 
soon induced a large demand for a certain Bible with 
concordance and index. 

A great tribute to Mr. Moody as a preacher, and a 
devoutly to be desired result of preaching, is seen in the 


following: 


* 


224 LIFE OF MOoDy. 


“His expositions of Scripture were so plain that peo- 
ple who went to church with no particular impressions 
were often brought under the influence of the truth. 
Even while he was speaking, and without waiting for 
the personal instructions of the inquiry meeting, they 
would sometimes be enabled at once to take Christ as 
their Saviour; they would then go forth from the meet- 
| ings, happy in the Lord, to invite their acquaintances 
to the same line of faith and experience with them- 
selves.” 

The common people heard them gladly, but they 
were not encouraged in this by their spiritual guides, 
the clergy and ministers, for these received them coldly ; 
their methods appearing so novel to them. Caution 
might not cause us surprise, but the idea of Episcopal 
ordination was a factor in this attitude of the Episcopal 
clergy. The stay of Moody and Sankeyin York was one 
month, during which two hundred and fifty persons 
confessed to finding Christ, and many who were al- 
ready members of churches were brought into a higher 
spiritual life. Further influences in the spiritual in- 
terest of hearers and of the general community are left 
for their unveiling to the great day. Mr. Moody in- 
augurated a noonday prayer-meeting in the Young 
Men’s Christian Association rooms at York. 

When the subsequent success of the evangelist had 


LIFE OF MOODY. 225 


quieted all censorious voices and removed all doubts, 
it was a frequent inquiry in that city, “Will they ever 
come back again?” It was felt, when too late, that min- 
isterial conservatism and suspicion had most probably 
cheated the city of such a glorious revival as had 
crowned sympathetic co-operation with them on the 
part of the ministers in other cities. 

Mr. Moody closed his work in York with an all- day 
meeting, which, both from its novelty and its manifest. 
efficiency, attracted great attention, and was highly 
approved. The following was its order of exercises: 

1. Hour for Confession and Prayer. 

2. Hour for Praise. 

3. Promise Meeting (consisting of believers’ testi- 
monies to the fulfillment of promises in their own ex- 
periences). 

4. A Witness Meeting (a succession of public con- 
fessions of Christ by young converts). 

5. A Bible Lecture (by Mr. Moody). 

6. Communion (conducted by Mr. Oe and four 
ministers, who were present). 

This communion is reported as administered in the 
Presbyterian fashion. 

A striking incident of conversion in connection with 
Mr. Sankey’s singing is reported as taking place at 
York. His singing, accompanied by his harmonium, | 





226 LIFE, OF “MOODY. 


was novel and interesting to the people. Sometimes 
he would play and sing for the pleasure of the parties 
who entertained him, and as his quarters were located 
very close to the center of business, the people who 
heard would crowd to listen, which they did with de- 
light. One, a woman, so listened, and during the music 
and the song she was convicted of sin, asked and ob- 
tained an interview with the singer, and was led imme- 
diately to the Saviour. . tae 

The above incident is reported as the first, and one 
of the most striking, incidents of conversion among the 
many connected with Mr. Sankey’s singing. 

To find the ministry so indifferent or hostile to him 
was a sore trial to Mr. Moody, but he continued to hold 
his meetings in chapels instead of going to halls, never 
departing from his original purpose of co-operating 


with the regular and established forms of worship. Ul- 


timately this devotion was crowned with complete tri- 
umph, not only in the opening of churches and chapels 
of every order for his meetings in the chief cities of the 
United Kingdom, but also in the opening of the hearts 
of the ministers and elders to receive both his message 


and himself. 


Seale 





Fe 
a mah - 


LIFE OF MOODY. ey 


CHAPTER: VIII. 


THE WORK IN ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, IRELAND 
AND. WALES CONTINUED. 


The Perey ve went next by invitation to Sunder- 
land, a city of consideration on the eastern side of Eng- - 
land. Rev. Arthur Rees, an open-communion Baptist 
pastor of that city, having been present at some of the 
services in York, invited Mr. Moody to come and labor . 
with his own congregation at Bethesda Chapel. The 
meetings of the American evangelists commenced in 
this place Sunday, July 27. Mr. Rees is credited with 
no small courage in this invitation, considering the in- 
difference of the ministers of the city, but there seems 
to have been a good deal of religious life among his 
people. A gentleman, reporting the situation, says: , 

“Mr. Moody had one whole minister, three-fourths 
of another and nothing, or next to nothing, oe all the 
rest to help him in his meetings. No one in all the town, 
except Mr. Rees, gave them the least official notice, 
and it seemed likely, for want of the co-operation of in- 
fluential persons, that the movement would come to an 
end. ‘Wecan never go on in this way,’ said Mr. Moody. . 


x 


228 LIFE OF MOODY. 


bles 


‘It is easier fighting the devil than fighting the min- 

isters.’ | . 

Somewhat apologizing for this feeling, an American 
writer says: “It is no wonder they failed at first to rec- 

ognize in him a chosen prophet of the Lord. Besides, 

_ he came quite unheralded, except by the sharp criti- 
cisms which had preceded him from York and accounts 
of the revival there, which contained more reference to 
its strangeness than to its spiritual power. Mr. Moody 
was not a clergyman, nor even a minister. No holy 
hands had ever been laid upon him; his only consecra- 
tion to the holy office was the one which he had made 
himself. His blunt ways and evident want of culture 
offended those nice persons who had always associated 
religion with everything that was elegant and orderly.” 
From the first he drew large “congregations of curi- 


otis persons, who went to hear Moody and Sankey, just 


as they would have gone to hear an actor or a vocalist, 
and it was from among this careless crowd that the first 
trophies of grace were won. Still the work dragged 
heavily.” 

‘After they had been some time in Sunderland a dele- 
gation of the Young Men’s Christian Association of the 
city was sent to wait upon them at their lodgings, and 
this is the account which one of them gives of the inter- 
view: “They had already been a week in Sunderland, 


LIFE OF MOODY. | her 22G 


but, as yet, I had notseeneither of them. “Ah,’ thought I, 
‘what a lift heavenward shall I get from these hoiy men!’ 
We were shown into a back parlor by the servant, and 
very soon the two evangelists sauntered in in a style 
neither ecclesiastical nor dignified. Turning to me, 
Mr. Moody asked, in true Yankee fashion, ‘What was 
our business with him?’ He did not show us a seat;, 
he did not offer us his hand; altogether an auctioneer- 
like reception. ‘We represent the Young Men’s Chris- - 
tian Association, Mr. Moody, and have come to ask if 
you will give us an address in Victoria Hall on Sunday 
afternoon.’ 

“Preach for you? Oh, yes! I'll preach for you,’ re- 


plied Mr. Moody. 
“We don’t want you to ats for us; we want you 


to preach for Christ.’ 

“Oh, yes—yes! Allright! I’ll preach for you.’ 

“Our committee,’ continued I, ‘hope you will not: 
misunderstand the reason for their not joining you 
earlier in your work. It is not for want of sympathy, 
but because you came to us in a sectarian connection, 
and have allied yourself with Mr. Rees, and if we were 
to join you, on sectarian grounds, we should injure our 
institution, which has enemies enough already.’ 

“After explaining his position, and that his connec- _ 


‘ ; et ae) ae Rae aes Cy 
| ae coyacan pe 
Baar ty 5. LIFE OF MOODY. 
tion with Brother Rees and his congregation had no 
sectarian significance, he said: 
“ ‘T go where I can do the most good; that is what I 
am after.. And when we left he followed us out to the f 


gate, saying, ‘It is souls I want; it is souls I want.’ 
‘‘Alas! I had mistaken the man, and whether he spoke 
of souls or of anything else it is all the same to me now. 
ay ‘Well, Frank, what do you think of it?’ asked my 
companion, as we walked off from this strange inter- 
view. ‘ 
“<*Think! It is money; that’s what it is, James.’ 


“However, I went to the meeting, being careful to 


keep out of sight, but when Sankey began singing I 


felt it draw me, anda little more of it would have pulled 
me on to the platform. 

“That was not a good afternoon for Mr. Moody. His. 
eye blazed with mournful earnestness as it ranged the 
crowd, looking for anxious faces, and its strange light 
lives in my memory yet, while all my prejudices and 
misconceptions are dead and rotten. 

-“When I got to the Young Men’s Christian Associ- 
ation rooms at night I found the meeting all on fire. 
The young men were speaking with tongues and 
prophecying. What on earth did it all mean? Only 
that Moody had been addressing them that afternoon. 


LIFE OF MOODY. 231 


“What manner of man is this?’ thought I; but still I did 
not give him my hand. 

“Many of the clergy: were so opposed to the move- 
ment that they turned their backs upon our poor inno- 
cent Young Men’s Christian Association for the part 
we took in the work, but afterwards, when the flood- 
gates of Divine grace were opened, Sunderland was 
taken by storm. 

“T cannot describe Moody’s great meetings; I can 
only say that the people of Sunderland warmly sup-_ 
ported the movement, in spite of their spiritual advisers; 
that there was a tremendous work of grace, when meas- 
ured by its immediate effects, but far greater in its con- 
sequences after the evangelists had gone away. All 
honor to these two brother-soldiers of the Cross, who, 
like Jonathan and his armor-bearer, stormed this for- 
tress of British unbelief alone.” 

The Wesleyan ministers, detecting some flavor of 
Calvinism in Mr. Moody’s exhortations and instruc-. 
tions to inquirers, had, some of them, natural reason for 
hesitating to join the movement. But the president of 
the Wesleyan Conference, Rev. William Morley Pun- 
shon, LL. D., came down from London to attend a spe- 
cial service, and, having been well acquainted with Mr. 
Moody in Chicago, knowing him to be catholic in spirit 


and earnest, exhorted his brethren to give him their 


232 LIFE OF. MOODY. 


hands. This counsel was followed by some of them, | 


and their chapels were thrown open for the extra ser- 
~ vices. Still the work of winning the co-operation of the 
ministers went on slowly. The services seemed so dif- 
ferent to anything that had been seen in Sunderland 
that it is said that “some of the clergy felt quite certain 
that it must have come originally from the devil.” 

But Mr. Moody pressed the battle with such earnest- 
ness and courage that some of his friends began to feel 
alarmed; even Mr. Rees himself, losing heart for a time, 
began to criticise the methods, and in so doing issued 
a little tract on ‘Religious Dissipation: A Word of 
Caution for Times of Revival,” which he prefaced with 
the text: 

“Hast thou found honey? Eat so much as is suff- 
cient for thee, lest thou be filled therewith and vomit 
it (Prov. 25: 16).” 

One of the fly-sheets issued in criticism was called 
“Kindly Reflections Upon the Present Religious Move- 
ment.” It was divided into three sections: 

_1. “Good Results”—of which five were mentioned. 
2. “Questionable Procedures in the Movement”— 
of these were fifteen named. 

3.. “Probable Evil Results”—which were set forth 


in such vast and gloomy proportion as to make many a 


, 


ae 


ee 


LIFE OF MOODY. 233 


thoughtful Christian “rejoice with trembling,” even if 
they did not prevent his rejoicing at all. 
The main difficulty in the minds of all these critics 


_ seems to have beén the rapidity of conversion—the too 


rapid progress of the revival among all sorts of people 
—the freedom with which salvation was offered to who- 


soever would have it. To their minds the preacher: 


seemed to be “throwing about the Gospel promiscu- 


ously into the crowds,’ with the chance that some 


would be hit by it—with the hope that some would be 
saved—but with the certainty that a great many would 
trample it under their feet. But Mr. Moody was not 
troubled by these attacks so long as sinners came in 
flocks to his inquiry meetings, to find out what they 
_ must do to be saved. It was urged that Mr. Moody 
exercised too much pressure in not only trying to per- 
suade sinners to repentance, but also in his efforts to 


drive Christians to work. But the pressure was kept . 


up. The opponenits also said that “solo singing is not 
worship,” but Mr. Sankey kept on singing his solos, to 
the edification of those who had no compunctions of 
conscience concerning them. And Mr. Moody would 
not withhold a single word of what he knew to be the 
truth. To avoid all appearance of sectarianism, he re- 
moved the meetings to Victoria Hall, though on the 


Sabbath, and even’ during the week, extra and over- 


_ she 


234 LIFE OF MOODY. 


flow meetings were conducted in a few of the Non- 
conformist chapels. 

The stay of Moody and Sankey in Sunderland was 
one month, with not only immediate, but further re- 
sults after the Sunderlanders had heard of the great out- 
pouring of the Holy Spirit in connection with their 
labors in Newcastle, Edinburgh and Glasgow. They 
then began to say: “We have made a great mistake. 
We have cast away a blessing.” But delegations of 
young men from the North came down to hold more 
meetings among them, “and the whole city was moved; 
wave after wave of revival power swept over the 
churches, bringing more souls to the Saviour in this 
overflow revival than all those who had been converted 
under the labors of Moody and Sankey themselves.” 


The next field of effort for the two evangelists was — 


Newcastle. The special call, which Mr. Moody es- 
teemed as the call of God, was given by a pressing in- 
vitation from Rev. David Lowe, D.D., pastor of the 
John Knox Presbyterian Church. This minister had 
come to visit the meetings of Moody. and Sankey in 
Sunderland. He is said to have arrived at the door of 
the meeting place just as Mr. Moody was sending a 
large number of inquirers up into a separate room for 
religious conversation. Mr. Moody at once recognized 


the face, and saluted him thus: “Here, Brother Lowe, 





we are going to stay in Newcastle till we make an im- | 


LIFE OF MOODY. 235 


go in and talk to all these inquirers. There are so 


many you'll have to make them into a little congrega- 


tion and talk to them altogether.” Dr. Lowe, by his’ 


examination of the meetings, became thoroughly con- 


vinced that the movement was a genuine work of grace, 


and pressed Mr. Moody to come to him at Newcastle- — 
upon-Tyne as soon as he should finish his work in Sun- 
derland, the response to which invitation we have just 


noted. | 

On the way to Newcastle Mr. Moody called at Jar- 
row, where he spent a few days, and where, among the 
friends that greeted him, were Mr. Thomas Bainbridge 
(a brother of Mr. Moody’s old friend), and Mr. Richard 
Hoyle, a gentleman who divided his time about equally 
between his place of business and his large and flour- 
ishing mission at the Music Hall. 

Having arrived at Newcastle, Mr. Moody “set him- 
self down before Great Britain, with the deliberate de- 
termination of conquering its prejudices against him- 
self and breaking his way into the confidence of its 
people, in order to bring to them the message which 
he bore from God.” 

_“We have not done much in York and Sunderland,” 


he said, “because the ministers were opposed to us, but 


236 _ LIFE OF MOODY. 


pression, and live down the prejudices of good people 
who do not understand us.” 

During the first week five of the chapels were placed 
at the disposal of Mr. Moody, and the services alter- 
nated in them; but at length he settled himself at the 
Rye Hill Baptist Chapel, which was a very large edifice, 
- with a very small congregation. The audiences were 
not large at first, but in a fortnight they filled the great 
audience-room to overflowing, and multitudes had to 
be turned away. During the last few days that the 
meetings were held there the desire to attend the 
Moody and Sankey meetings became so intense that one 
of the brethren declared he was actually glad. when 
they went away, because the crowds who could not gain 
admission to their services were sometimes almost riot- 
ous from disappointment. te 

To Mr. Moody’s delight the ministers, one after an- 
other, joined hands with the evangelists. Said lez. <I 
am always glad to see a minister come to our meetings, 
for he always brings a large reinforcement with him.” 
Some of the clergy of the Established Episcopal Church 
also gave their sympathy to the movement, itself an 
evidence of the power that accompanied it, for “church- 
ism” is very obdurate and impervious to subjective 
truth. But long before the close of these remarkable 


services in Newcastle the outpouring of the Spirit of - 


LIFE OF MOODY. 237 


God upon the entire population of the place proved that 
the Lord honored his servant’s faith. 

The impression was so deep that it will enter into the 
history of the religious life of the present century. It | 
was so overwhelming and so far-reaching in its influ- 
ence that no thought can measure its breadth of bless- 
ing. Inthe towns and villages over the radius of fifteen | 
or twenty miles the revival flame was kindled. The 
committee who had charge of the meetings held a busi- . 
ness session every Friday morning, at which they were 
oppressed with delegations from surrounding places, 
asking that brethren might be sent by Mr. Moody to 
hold meetings with them. The assistants having mul- 
tiplied, hundreds of these meetings were held, and al- 
most invariably they were marked with wonderful 
power. ; 

An example of these appeals is seen in that of a min- 
ister from the hills of Northumberland. He did not 
ask them to send a minister, nor even a lay helper; but 
if they would only send some one.to tell the story of the 
work in Newcastle he felt sure that the Spirit of God 
would attend such a simple message. The committee 
promised that some one should be sent, and the minis- 
ter went home to publish the news far and wide that 
some one was to be sent to tell of the revival work go- 
ing on in Newcastle. When the day appointed for the 


Me bei tek tel) ee PR Ee 
na Ps 


238: LIFE OF MOODY. 


recital came, great crowds of people gathered to the ap- 
pointed place, making an immense congregation, but, 
by some delay or accident, the speaker did not come. 
There was nothing for it but for the minister to take 
the place and tell the story himself, though he had only 
paid one short visit to the place. But even this scanty 
information was so thrilling and effective that it made 
a deep impression, and a powerful work of grace im- 
mediately broke out, which swept through all that re- 
gion of country. 

The services were so attractive to Christians that Mr. 


Moody had to devise a means of accommodating the 


unconverted who wanted to come and whom he was 


so desirous to reach. He had class tickets, which. 


would admit the bearer to a certain class-meeting only. 
- Two notable meetings for merchants were held in the 
_ Assembly Hall, the fashionable place for balls, etc. 
Meetings for mechanics were held at the Tyne Theater; 
and since no building was large enough to hold all who 
came, three or four overflow meetings were usually in 
progress in such places as could be obtained for them. 

The first converts were from among the educated 
classes of society, the great majority being among those 
who had been trained in the Scriptures and had known 
them from childhood. It seemed as if God was honor- 
ing this as well as the burning words spoken by the 





LIFE OF MOODY. i288 


preacher. Afterward the work became more general 
and among all classes of people. 

It is not a matter of surprise that now, after the op- 
position from those who were of the household of faith, 
that now, in the hour of victory the hearts of both the 
preacher and the singer should be glad. Their spiritual 
condition seemed to rise with the rising revival tide, 
and the co-workers with them were conscious of grow- 


ing knowledge of the truth and of growth in grace. The 
preacher preached more heartily than ever, and the | 


singer sang the sacred songs daily with new joy and 
enthusiasm, Mr. Moody’s explanations of the Scrip- 


tures were greatly enjoyed. He poured the oil of joy - 
upon wounded, anxious hearts. In his conversations ° 


with the troubled he seemed again to possess the power 
he used to have on the battlefields, when there was such 
a strange, secret familiarity with heaven and heavenly 
things. To the sinner he would throw a text, so that 


‘he seemed to see it blazing as it came. Sudden conver- 


sions multiplied in such a manner as to perplex those 
who had been accustomed only to the gradual work in 
connection with the church methods. But, in answer 
to the questioning, Mr. Moody fell back upon the 
Scriptures, and showed that the sudden conversions 
were usual in the primitive days of Christianity, and no 


one could gainsay it. 


240 LIFE OF MOODY. 


- The committee of management adopted an admir- 


able system to have inquirers properly ministered to. 
The inquiry-rooms were as crowded as the churches, 
and the inquirers each received attention there, but the 
name and residence of each was taken down in record, 
that ministers and other experienced persons who were 
admitted by ticket for service in the inquiry-rooms 
might follow up and assure their receiving proper in- 
struction. 

Newcastle is a very busy town, so busy that it was 
difficult to sustain a noonday prayer-meeting with men; 
but it had been started in view of Mr. Moody’s coming 
by way of preparation, and the first room used for the 
purpose becoming overcrowded, it was removed to the 
Music Hall, and the room, which held a thousand, was 
usually filled. us 

In the afternoons Mr. Moody gave a series of those 
Bible readings for which he became so famous, and 
which other somewhat famous followers in his work, 
as well as those less known to fame, have attached to 
their revival work. These Bible readings of Mr. Moody 
were evidently in the line which he first saw with such 
delight and appreciation in Mr. Moorhouse when they 
met in Chicago, and which meeting has already been 
reported in preceding pages of this book. It has been 
said of them that “of all Mr. Moody’s services, those 


LIFE OF MOODY. 241 


Bible readings are most pleasantly and profitably re- 
membered.” . 

The method of dealing with inquirers is seen in the 
following example: 

A man of about middle age had risen-in the noon 
meeting, and trembling with emotion, had said: “I ama 
lost sinner, and want you to pray for me.” Coming to” 
Dr. Lowe afterwards, he said he felt his soul in fetters 
so that he could not come to Christ. 

“Come to Christ, fetters and all,” said the doctor. 

“Yes,” said the poor man, “but Satan is very hard on 
me. He seems to be throwing dust in my eyes.” — 

“Never mind your eyes, but come to Christ.” 

“T stick fast,” said the penitent; “I cannot get off.” 


At this point the doctor was somewhat at a loss what 
further to counsel, but after a few words of prayer, he 


opened the Bible at the fifth chapter of John, and said 
to the inquirer, “What you want is to believe in Christ, 
is it not?” | 
“Ves,” answered he; “I need to believe in Christ, but 
I cannot see how to do it.” } 
“Listen, now,” said the doctor, “while I read: 
“After this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus 
went up to Jerusalem.’ Do you believe that?) 
“Oh, yes; that is in the Bible; of course, I believe 


that.” 


242 LIFE OF MOODY. 


““Now, there is at Jerusalem, by the sheep-market, 
a pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda.’ 
Do you believe that pool was there?” 

“No doubt of it,” said the man. 

“In this lay a great multitude of impotent folk.’ Do 
you believe these impotent folk were really there?” 

“Certainly.” : 
_ “‘Blind, halt and withered.’ Do you believe they 
were blind, halt and withered?” — 

“Oh, yes.” 

“Well, do you not think you are very much like these 


folk lying there by the pool and waiting for the troub- 


ling of the waters?” 

“Yes,” said the poor man; “that seems to be very 
much my case.” 

“You are impotent?” 

“Yes; I cannot help myself a bit.” 

“You are blind?, You just now said the devil was 
throwing dust in your eyes.” 

rerrue,”’ 

“And you have had this infirmity as long as thirty 
and eight years, have you not?” 

YES) just about that,” he replied. 

“Now, hear what Jesus said: ‘And when Jesus saw 
him lying, and knew that he had now been a long time 
in that case, He said to him, Wilt thou be made 


yf 


LIFE OF MOODY. 243 


whole?’ Now, my friend, that is just what Christ is 
saying to you, “Wilt thou be made whole? ” 

Quick as lightning the truth flashed in upon the 
poor man’s mind. He sprang to his feet, shouting, “I 
am free! Where is Mr. Moody?” And away he rushed 


to find him, threw his arms about him, nearly carrying | 
him off his feet, seized both his hands, and shook them — 


joyfully, exclaiming, “I am free! I am free!” 
Afterwards in the meetings he gave this testimony: 
“Tamanew man. When used to be in any trouble, I 
used to drown my sorrow in drink, but now, if anything 
goes wrong with me, I go to my closet and pray.” 
One night, at the close of one of the meetings, two 


persons were left kneeling in prayer after all the rest — : 


had gone. One of these was a broken-hearted peni- 
tent, the other a Christian friend, who was trying to” 
help him to the Cross. The poor penitent felt like a 
drowning man, sinking, and dared not leave the place 
for fear he should lose his soul. Mr. Moody and three 
or four friends gathered around him in a circle in the 
dim hall, all the gas but a single burner being turned 
out. And there, in turn, they prayed, the poor man 
trembling like a condemned criminal, kneeling in the 
center of the circle. After they had prayed once round, 
no one dared to speak, but at length one of them com- 
menced to quote the promises of God’s Word. Text 


244 LIFE OF MOODY. 


after text he recited, until he came to this one: “I have 
no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but rather that 
he turn from the error of his way and live.” Then he 
asked the inquirer this question: “Will you yield to be 
saved?” “I will,” said the poor fellow, reaching out his 
hand in the dark, and giving his questioner a tremen- 
dous grip, who then took him in his arms and raised him 
gently to his feet, quoting at the same time these words: 
“And this is the will of Him who sent Me, that every- 
one that seeth the Son and believeth on Him may have 
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.” 

One Methodist brother, in speaking of the meetings, 
said: “We have had revivals before, and we were not 
much better for them. But this revival is substantial, 
for it is along the track of God’s own Word.” 

It is said that Mr. Moody dealt little in-law in New- 
castle; he felt that the people wanted to be saved; there- 
fore, he told them how. It did not seem necessary to 
threaten them, but rather to point out God’s desire to 
bless them. 

Dr. Lowe spoke of Mr. Moody: “I find him not at all 
devoted to himself, but wholly devoted to his work. He 
is modest; ready to take a hint from anyone; ready to 
let every man do his own work; and all the time full of 
anxiety to save somebody. I never knew a man whom 
I could splice on to as I can on to Mr. Moody.” 





is 
he a 


ae 
S 


LIFE OF MOODY. 245 


The last week of the meetings in Sunderland were 
held in the Brunswick Wesleyan Chapel, where “won- 
ders of grace were wrought.” Here the famous Jubilee 
Singers appeared and added to the services already 
overflowing with sweetness and joy a new charm by 
their simple, spiritual songs. Ministers of all denomi- 
nations vied with each other in helpfulness. A revela- 
tion of the power that was present is seen in the phe- 
nomenon of even the “Established” clergy feeling their 
hearts warm for this irregular brother from across the 
sea, and some of them not only attending the meetings, 
but going away and holding similar meetings for their 
own congregations. An instance of this is said to have 
been reported to his bishop by a clergyman, who was 
an exception to this sympathy, evidently with a view to 
bringing down the Episcopal cudgel on the offender’s 
head, but, greatly to his astonishment, he received in 
response to his accusation this laconic counsel: “Go 
thou and do likewise.” 

More than one minister of the Gospel, who found 
himself without a satisfactory experience, gave himself 
to Christ anew, and came into a joyful sense of pardon 
and acceptance. Professed Christians, who had been. 
members of churches for years, with only a kind of 
doctrinal faith in the Saviour, without any of the “com- 
fort of the Holy Spirit,” came into the light. In the 


246 LIFE OF MOODY. 


lowest stratum of humanity lost souls were searched 
for and found and brought up out of their degradation 
and wickedness into the high and holy fellowship of 
God’s own people. . 
If the reader has come into touch with the situation 
at Newcastle, which we have been sketching, he will 
feel that the occasion was ripe for such a gathering as 
might promise to communicate the revival far and 
wide in Great Britain. To use an image, it was like a 
-fervid altar fire, at.which brands might be lighted, to 
_ glow and burn wherever they might be scattered and 
light up sacred altar fires wherever they might locate. 
This was evidently the view of Mr. Moody and his co- 
adjutors. Before the great meetings closed, two all-day 
meetings were held, one of them a convention for Chris- 
tian workers, at which all the North of England was 


represented. About twelve hundred persons are re-" 


ported as present at this convention, most of whom 
were ministers and official members of churches. 
Among the exercises was a “‘Service of Praise,” led by 
Mr. Sankey. This was not, as might have been ex- 
pected, a service of songs of praise for an hour, but he 
laid before the congregation, in aptly-chosen passages 
of Scripture, the duty and privilege of praising God. 
Our friend, Mr. Moorhouse of the seven sermons on 
one text, and the monitor of Mr. Moody in respect to 





Y. M. C. A., BALTIMORE, WHERE MR. MOODY HAD HIS HEADQUARTERS 
DURING THM GREAT REVIVAL MEETING IN BALTIMORB. 





LIFE OF MOODY. _ 249 


the use of the Bible, was present, and spoke upon “Sep- 
aration.” The last hour was occupied by Mr. Moody 
himself in a “most delightful address on ‘Heaven.’ ” 

One of the results of the work of Messrs. Moody and 
Sankey in Newcastle was given by one of the brethren 
there, as follows: 

“Nothing is so remarkable in this revival as the utter 
demolishing of the old-fashioned prayer-meetings. En- 
ter solemn minister and solemn people, scattered six, . 
eight, ten, over a great area. Along, slow hymn. Long 
portion of the Word. Two elders pray two long pray- 
ers, in which they go from Jerusalem, and round about 
unto Illyricum, and a great deal further. 

“Now we have crammed meetings. All sit close to- 
gether. The singing is lively—new songs, new tunes. 
A few words from the minister give the keynote. Pray- 
ers are short. A few texts from the Word of God are 
frequently interspersed. Brief exhortations. * * * All 
this comes from our brethren from America. Why 
have we not found out how to conduct a prayer-meet- 
ing before? We in this country have been bound hand 

_and foot by traditions. In the far West of America, at 
Chicago, for instance, there were no traditions. The 
only people that had traditions there were the Indians. 
The brethren have thoroughly solved this question of 
prayer-meetings for us. We thank them.” 


250 LIFE OF MOODY. 


The influence of such a meeting as this revival in 
Newcastle was altogether beyond estimation on the 
shores of time. Eternity alone can reveal it in its grand 
totality. Some blessings were tangible and palpable 
enough to be mentioned. Christians were brought to 


higher ground—to a more real faith and devotion to | 


their Lord—to a better realization of their office for the 
outside and lost world of their fellow-men. Ministers 
were brought into fraternal relationship, and learned 
more than before to regard their. work as a common 
one for the common Lord. Hundreds were brought 
from nature’s darkness into the kingdom of God’s dear 
Son. The Sunday-schools were made to blossom as 
the rose. The Bible became a more interesting, more 
studied and more used book. It was a great, a glorious 
revival. Those gathered from distant places to its 
meetings caught the fervent fire, and carried it to their 
distant homes with them on their return, to kindle it 
there. The press, esteeming it the most interesting 
news of the day, freely reported it to the whole of the 
people of Great Britain, and reports of it were sent by 
letter and telegraph throughout the land, until it re- 
sounded on distant shores. 

It was evident that God was in the movement to smile 
upon and make it prosper, and that in his planting him- 
self in Newcastle, with a view to facing all England, Mr. 


LIFE OF MOODY. : 251 


Moody was a hero of faith in God, whose faith He had 
crowned with victory. Mr..Moody must have realized 
what at the start he had said to his old employer: ‘God 
is rich, and I am working for Him.” 

When the evangelists left the scene of their triumphs 
they engaged in like successful labors in the cities and 
towns of Carlisle, Bishop Auckland, Darlington, 
Shields, etc., after which, on Saturday, November 27, 
1873, about four months after landing in Liverpool, - 
they arrived in Edinburgh, Scotland. 

It need hardly be said that the land of Chalmers and 
Guthrie abounded in learned and eloquent preachers. 
The Scotch people were accustomed to able Biblical 
and theological discussions, even from the time of 
Knox and the Reformation. It has been said that they 


_ are a people accustomed to having the beaten oil of the 


sanctuary served up in vessels of a “correct form,” and 
that this was at the time of which we are writing the 
demand of their religious appetite. Mr. Moody was 
conscious of this taste, and felt the full difficulty of the 
situation when invited by Rev. John Kelman of Free 
St. John’s Church, Leith, to come-to Scotland, and by 
Rev. J. H. Wilson of Barclay Church, Edinburgh, to 
come to Edinburgh. But as these gentlemen had be- 
come interested, the first by a visit to Newcastle during 


the revival, which,having heard of, he went to examine, | 


252 LIFE OF MOODY. 


and the latter by hearing of the work in the North of 
England, were anxious and urgent for Mr. Moody to 
come, and as these were but examples of a devout class 
who longed and prayed for such a blessing upon Scot- 
land as God had given England through the American 
evangelists, Mr. Moody concluded that it was the call 
of God, and, strong in faith, decided to go. “What can 
_ sucha manas I do up there amongst those great Scotch 
divines?” he had said, as he measured himself. But, on 
the other hand, he felt sure that God was able with a 
worm to “thrash a mountain.” 

Daily prayer-meetings were commenced in view of 
the coming of the evangelists, in which the interest 
grew so rapidly as to necessitate the change from hall 
to hall to accommodate the numbers which attended, 
until the great Assembly Hall of Edinburgh itself had 
to be used. 

The opening services were held in the Music Hall 
on Saturday, November -23, the building being densely 
crowded to hear Mr. Moody “preach the Gospel and 
Mr. Sankey sing the Gospel,” as the quaint announce- 
ment had been made. But Mr. Moody, being rather ill, 
Rev. Mr. Wilson had to fill his place that day. Mr. San- 


key sang in an impressive manner. The next evening | 


something went wrong with Mr. Sankey’s organ, but 
both these meetings being wonderfully blessed, the 


LIFE OF MOODY. 253 


Scotch were reminded that the blessing was from a 
source above the evangelists themselves. They set it 
down as “of God, and not of men.” 
From the first no place in Edinburgh could be found 
large enough to hold the crowds that came to the meet- 
ings, and not only-were three or four of the largest halls 
and churches constantly in use, but, in order to get in, © 
the people had to come an hour or two before the time 
appointed for the services to commence. 
In regard to Mr. Moody, says Mr. Kelman: “One. 
of the things which impressed us was the voracity of 
his faith. We had been accustomed to go to the meet- 
ings, hoping God would bless us. But Mr. Moody al- 


_ ways said, ‘We know He will bless us,’ and so well was 


he assured that God delighted to give large things in 
answer to prayer that he was continually asking for 
blessings which were out of all proportion to our faith. 
But the blessings would come; sometimes so largely 
that we did not know what to do with them. We were 
often absolutely overwhelmed with the power and 
glory of God.” 

At one meeting; composed of sixty-six young men, 
who were inquiring what they must do to be saved, 
sixty of them were blessed before they left the place. 

’ It was noticeable that a great mass of the conver- 
sions were of those who had been taught the Word of 


254 LIFE OF MOODY. 


God. It seemed as though in those in whom it had 
been lying, like the dry bones in Ezekiel’s vision, it was 
brought together and breathed upon, and brought into 
life. Mr. Moody’s Bible teaching was intensely en- 
joyed. And multitudes of souls that, like ships lying 
outside the bar to be brought in by flood tide, were 
brought in as this man of God preached and prayed. 
The whole system of salvation seemed to rise before 
the consciences of these Bible-instructed persons. The 
Divine fire seemed to come down and set on fire what 
lay cold and dormant for so long on the altars of these 
hearts. 

The religious interest soon- spread throughout the 
city, so much so that Dr. Horatius Bonar declared his 
belief that “there was scarcely a Christian household in 
all Edinburgh in which there was not one or more per- 
- sons converted during the revival.” In these homes 
there was the deepest interest felt, not by parents for 
their children only, but also by masters and mistresses 
for their servants. In the inquiry meetings the com- 
mittee of management were careful to admit by ticket 
such persons only as by examination were regarded as 
qualified for the work of aiding the inquirer. 

The interest in Edinburgh soon spread to Leith, and 
to all the surrounding country, and on throughout 
the whole of Scotland; and the committee were pressed 


LIFE OF MOODY. . 255 


with requests to send workers from the meetings far 
and wide. 

It would be a surprising thing if Satan had been 
pleased with the work that was going on, or that he 
should remain inactive when there seemed reason for 
him to fear that he was going to be cast bodily out of 
the whole of Scotland. Accordingly, the opposition 
awoke, and, as usual in such situations, some who bore 
the name of Christ, and bore the title of His ministers, 
became instruments of the opposition. These began 
to find fault with Mr. Sankey’s “singing the Gospel” as 
unscriptural. 

To some of the Scotch people, his organ, with which 
he accompanied his singing, was “a kist fu’ o’ whistles.” 
Unaccustomed to the unwonted enthusiasm, they pro- 
tested that the conversions were “too quick;” that it 
needed time for conversion. They sent Mr. Moody 
anonymous letters, abusing the evangelists on account 
of the organ, the inquiry meetings, “singing the Gos- 
pel,” etc. A pamphlet was issued in which the revival 
was stigmatized by the following terms: ““Spasmodic 
convulsions,” “Man-made revivals,” “One-sided views 
of truth,’ “Superficial experience,” “Arminianism,” 
“Plymouthism,” “Galvanizing,” “Sensational shocks,” 
“Temporary bustle,” “Unscriptural inventions,” ‘The 
tinsel of a superficial religiousness,” etc. 


256 LIFE OF MOODY. 


It may not be a surprise that the conservative theo- 
logians of Scotland were put on the defensive, for this 
is what the language imports. They and their system 
were overwhelmed by it—drowned in the floods of the 
revival. “They were choking and struggling in this 
Gospel wave.” 

Mr. Moody went on with his work without answer- 
ing any of these reflections. But Dr. Horatius Bonar 
felt moved to reply, which he did in a tract reviewing 
the criticisms, and showing that this revival was like 
all others seen in the Scriptures, and from Pentecost 
down, throughout all Christian history. And, after 
quoting a list of the hard names about the revival then 
going on by a distinguished opponent, he administered 
this crushing rebuke: “Surely the vocabulary has been 
exhausted. We can hardly conceive of anything worse. 
All this is said by one brother against hundreds of 
brethren!” : 

But there was another mode of attack wherein the 
enemy reflected upon Mr. Moody. While the revival 
was sweeping on in its grandest flight, a letter was re- 
ceived from Chicago, claiming on authority to state that 
some time or other Mr. Moody had not held the respect 


'- of his brethren in America, and saying things to his - 


discredit. This, of course, alarmed his friends, but they 
took prompt and proper steps in the premises by send- 


7 “et ‘ AY athe 


LIFE OF MOODY. 257 


ing forthwith to-Chicago to make inquiry of reliable 
parties, to which inquiry there was sent a most satis- 
factory and full reply, signed by many people before a 


’ notary. 


The statement also somehow got abroad in Edin- 
burgh that Mr. Moody was not quite orthodox respect- 
ing the personality of the Holy Spirit. But Dr. Lowe 
answered this by his own statement, that when Mr. 
Moody was in Newcastle, upon one occasion when he 
gave a Bible reading on the Holy Spirit, being himself 
appointed to read the passages, Mr. Moody asked him 
to especially emphasize the personal pronouns, “He 
shall testify of Me,” “He shall lead you into all truth.” — | 
This settled the accusations of heresy. | 

The opposition, whether from the vision of its folly 
of being such a minority against the whole evangelical 
pulpit of Edinburgh, or whether by the Spirit of God 
tendering the heart, soon faded out. The converts were 
numbered by thousands. And long after the evange- 
lists had left for other fields the revival work went on. 
It was no unusual thing for persons to come ‘thirty or 
forty miles to attend the meetings, or to beg for some 
one to be sent to labor in the neighborhoods from which 
they came. . 
' The disposition of coriverts was the placing them 
under the pastor and church of their choice. If they 


258 LIFE OF MOODY. 


- were from bodies where the simple Gospel was not 
preached, they naturally desired to affiliate with a 
church where it was. 

An example of the power present in the meetings at 
Edinburgh is seen in the following: — 

There were a good many educated infidels in wealthy 
Edinburgh, who formed themselves into clubs for the 
purpose of preaching their unbelief, much in the same 
way that Christians unite in churches for the fellow- 
ship of faith. Among the notable cases of conversion 
was the chairman of one of these infidel clubs. He 
came to one of the meetings, not to ridicule it only, but 
in hopes of being able to break it up by raising a con- 
troversy with Mr. Moody. But, while attempting it, he 
would have been thrust out of the house if Mr. Moody 
had not interposed on his behalf. He remained for - 
_ some time after the meeting was dismissed, and Mr. 
Moody, seeing him, inquired if he wanted to become a 
Christian. He replied that he did not, and that he had 
a very poor opinion of Christians. 

“Would you like to have us pray for you?” asked Mr. 
Moody. 

“Oh, yes; I have no objection to you trying your 
hand on me; but I think you will find me a match for 
you.” 

Mr. Moody kneeled down by the scoffer’s side, 





LIFE OF MOODY. 250 


prayed for him earnestly and tenderly, and then left 
him, promising to pray for him still further at home. It 
was not long before he was brought under a deep con- 
viction of sin, resigned his presidency of the infidel club, 
and earnestly and faithfully sought the Saviour. 

At a subsequent meeting, out of thirty persons seek- 
ing the Lord, seventeen were members of this infidel 
club, one of them its chairman, the successor of him 
whose conversion we have above related, and who be- 
came a successful evangelist. 

During this revival in Edinburgh the whole of the 
population were talking about Moody and his preach- 
ing and Sankey and his singing. The newspapers were © 
filled with reports of their meetings. The London press 
began to take great notice of the movement, and before 
many weeks the news of this wonderful revival formed 
a part of the cable telegraph dispatches. 


¢ 


260 LIFE OF MOODY. 


CHAPTER, IX: 
MR. MOODY AND PROFESSOR DRUMMOND. 


Besides speaking repeatedly of Mr. Moody in his 
biography of Professor Drummond, Dr. Smith devotes 
a whole chapter to the work of Moody and Sankey in 
the United Kingdom, under the title of “The Great 
Mission—1873-1875.” In all those references to Mr. 
Moody Dr. Smith traces the co-operation of Professor 
Drummond with the two evangelists in their work. 
That he devotes so much space to the history of this 
remarkable work of grace through the labors of these 
two Americans is not simply because of the great im- 
portance of the work itself and its magnitude and far- 
_ reaching results, but because of the close relation of 
Henry Drummond to the work itself and the active in- 
terest he took in it and the labors he performed in 
connection with the “Mission,” as well as its lasting 
effects upon him and his course in after life and in help- 
ing to shape the character and direction of his life work. 
Among the many whom Mr. Moody attached to him- 
self by ties of the strongest nature Professor Drum- 
mond was perhaps the most brilliant of all the younger 
men—and the intellectual men whom Moody drew 
were many. 





LIFE OF MOODY. 261 


We dwell upon these meetings so fully because they 
really were the beginning of that great career in that 
particular line that terminated in Kansas City in 1899. 

Dr. Smith thus narrates the event of the coming of 
Moody and Sankey on their wonderful mission : 

“Towards the summer of 1873 two Americans landed 
at Liverpool with the purpose of holding religious 
meetings in the large cities of England. To quote. 
their bills, one of these preached and the other sang _ 
the Gospel. The singer was the younger of the two, 
thirty-four years of age, with a strong baritone voice, 
and he sang sitting at an American organ, upon which 
he accompanied himself. The one who preached was 
about thirty-seven, short, thickset, with a heavy jaw 
and a strong American accent. Their names were 
American, with the usual middle initial—Dwight L. 
Moody, the preacher, and Ira D. Sankey, the singer. 

“In their own country the men had already given 
proofs of power, and their personal record was un- 
stained. But they came to England with no fame and 
hardly any credentials. Their methods were strange 
and aggressive, the season of the year unsuitable, and 
in their attempt upon Liverpool they failed. They 
moved to York and found as little sympathy there. So 
they went to Newcastle and Sunderland, where at last 


_ after a few weeks large meetings were gathered and 


262 LIFE OF MOODY. 


thoroughly aroused. Many men and women—but es- 
pecially men—were convinced of sin and professed 
faith in Jesus Christ as their Saviour. The news 
spread across the country. 

“The Rey. John Kelman of Leith, who had heard of 
the work from his brother in Sunderland, visited the 
meetings both there and at Newcastle. By what Ife 
witnessed he was convinced of the real power of the 
movement, and at the close of a service at Walker he 
gave the evangelists an invitation to Scotland. About 
the same time similar proposals reached them from Mr. 
Hood Wilson of Edinburgh and from Dundee. Mr. 
Kelman strongly advised them to begin in Edinburgh, 
as from there the whole of Scotland could be most 
easily reached. To this Mr. Moody agreed, and Mr. 
Kelman returned to form a committee and prepare the 
way.” 

Dr. Smith adds as a note that “Mr. Kelman acted as 
secretary of the Edinburgh committee. Moody wrote 
to Drummond some years afterwards: “My love to 
Kelman. I never think of the work in Edinburgh 
without thinking of him,” and then resumes: 

“For the next six weeks there were daily gatherings 
for prayer, and on Sunday, the 23d of November, the 
Edinburgh Mission was opened with a very crowded 
meeting in Music Hall, at which Mr. Moody was too 





LIFE OF MOODY. 263 


ill to speak. The meeting on Monday was in the Bar- 
clay Church, and Mr. Sankey’s organ having been 
broken, he did not sing. With these inauspicious be- 
ginnings, the week-day meetings were at first but 
fairly large; only a few of the leading ministers were 
_ present. Many refused to intimate the Mission, and it 
was with difficulty that Mr. Sankey’s harmonium was - 
admitted even into some of the churches previously 
granted for meetings. Every week, however, the tide. 
rose, and by Christmas began to flow in volume. On 
” New Year's eve a crowded watch-meeting was attended | 
not only by many ministers, but by a still larger num- 
ber of the leading laymen of the town. Members of 
all the Protestant denominations professed themselves 
quickened. The prejudices of those who for years had 
resisted every attempt to introduce instrumental music 
with public worship were overcome, and they lustily 
sang with Mr. Sankey and his organ. The most re- 
spected leaders of religion spoke from the evangelists’ 
platforms, helped in the inquiry rooms and instructed 
the young converts.” 
Among these leaders referred to Dr. Smith names 
some well known on both sides of the Atlantic—Pro- 
- féessors Cairns, Calderwood, Blaikie; Drs. Horatio 


and Andrew Bonar, Dr. Lang, James Balbour, and a 


264 LIFE OF MOODY. 


number of lawyers, doctors and merchants gave their 
assistance, 3 | 
“On all sides the fire spread. Hundreds of con- 
verts were gathered from the careless and formal mem- 
bers of the church, as well as from among people who 
never went to church. In contrast to most congrega- 
tions, the number of men at the meetings equalled and 
sometimes exceeded that of the women. It was possi- 
ble to fill one church after another with young men, 
and to see in each a hundred rise to confess that they 
had been converted by God’s Word. And the work 
became a general subject of discussion, sometimes hos- 
tile, but always serious, among all classes of society. — 
“The secret of all this,” continues Dr. Smith, “lay 


open. The evangelists themselves were obviously men 


of sincerity and power. They made mistakes. Mr. 
Moody said some rash things, as a foreigner could not 
help doing, and many crude ones, as an uneducated 
man must. While some of his addresses were power- 
ful, others were very poor. But these faults soon sank 
from sight in the deep impression of a true zeal to win 
men for a better life and to pour fresh power into the 
routine of Christian work. Men felt themselves in 
presence of a Power towards whom their obligations 
and opportunities were not to be weakened by any de- 
. fect in its human instrument.” 


LIFE OF MOODY. 265 


How this good work went on and how the confi- 
dence of the people in Moody and Sankey and their 
methods increased Dr. Smith goes on to relate. The 
evangelists made more apparent their strength and 
sincerity. They were practical, sane, and became more 
so under the influence of the men who gathered around 
them. They suffered no fools. Every symptom of the: 
hysteria which often breaks out in such movements — 
was promptly suppressed. The preaching won the 
Scot heart by its expository character. Moody’s zeal 
for instruction accompanied his passion for proclaim- 
ing the Gospel. The Bible class was revived. His 
Gospel was that of the Incarnate Saviour, and its cen- 
ter the Atonement as man’s only hope. No preacher 
was more civic or more practical. He awakened in. 
Scotland echoes of Chalmers. He was loyal to the 
churches. He emphasized the education of the min- 


istry. He never sought for applause by criticism of 


the average clergyman. “But the chief features of the © 
movement were its prayerfulness and its ethical temper. 


’ Those who took most part in it knew how it lived by 


prayer, earnest, simple and direct.”. The theology was 
stiff—as some said, mechanical—but it was never ab- 
stract, thoroughly erpcHtal and busied with the 


actual life of man. 
The work spread all over Edinburgh and the vicin- 


266 LIFE OF MOODY. 


ity, and inquirers multiplied. Meetings were held 
which were addressed by elderly laymen of position 
and by ministers. Following the example of the Amer- 
ican evangelists, the emphasis of every pipes! was 

“very properly laid upon ‘decision for Christ. “= 7s0me 
of these speakers carried the matter too far. “A young 
man who had not heard Moody, but who was awak- 
ened and anxious, listened for several evenings to 
these speakers. He saw them whittle away one after 
another of the essentials of faith and call him to a re- 
ception of salvation in which there was neither con- 
science nor love nor any awe. In their extremity they 
likened the acceptance of Christ to the taking of a five- 
pound note offered you for nothing, or of a glass of 
water, or of an orange. The veil grew thinner and 
thinner between his eyes and the mystery which was 


beyond, till at last at the touch of one their grotesque _ 


parables it tore and—there was nothing behind. Re- 
ligion turned out to be a big confidence trick. In this 
feeling he attended a’meeting conducted by Mr. 
Moody himself. The crowd was enormous. The sight 
‘of 2000 men, all of them serious, most of them anxious, 
plunged him into real life again. The words of the 
hymns he heard were poor and the music little better, 
but the mystical power came back with them, and he 


found himself worshipping. Mr. Moody began to 


pet 


YS a >... 
et at mi: 
» d . 


LIFE OF MOODY. "207, 


speak with that Yankee accent in which, except when 
it is boasting of its country, you seldom fail to feel the 
edge of the real. There was an occasional exaggera* 
tion, but some humor fell and swept the address clear 
of every appearance of unreality. Mr. Moody spoke 
of the Word of Life, of the ghastly hunger of the soul 
without God, of conscience and of guilt; then, with’ 
passion and with tenderness of God’s love and of the 
Saviour Christ, who is among us today as surely as on . 
the shores of Galilee or by the Pool of Bethesda. Hun- 
dreds of men stood up in silent witness that they had 
found salvation, and the young man knew what they 
had found. He did not stay behind with them, but he 
went away feeling that God was in the meeting, very 
clear what Christ could save him from, and conscious 
that it was at the peril of his manhood if he refused to 
follow Him.” | 

All this is important to a proper estimate of the work 
of the evangelists, but who else could this young man 
be upon whose experience Dr. Smith dwells so 
minutely unless it be Henry Drumond himself. 

Henry Drummond followed Mr. Moody and his 
companion, Mr. Sankey, around as they labored in the 
cities of England and Ireland from April, 1874, to July, 
1875, and he labored with them, especially in London. 
He had been drawn to them from the first, and worked 


268 LIFE OF MOODY. 


at the start like other students in the inquiry room. In 
Edinburgh and Glasgow Drummond was at the right 
hand of Mr. Moody, assisting in the work in every 
possible way. It was not long before Mr. Drummond 
was making addresses at the meetings. The initial 
step is related thus : 

- “Often he was to be seen going home through the 
streets with a man in whose arm his own was linked. 
He wore round his shoulders, or rather his head, a tar- 
tan plaid, green and black, in which I always see him 
yet when I recall those days. The figure was extremely 
picturesque. The next stage was that of addressing 
meetings, which came about in this way: As the mar- 
-yelous work developed in Edinburgh the news, of 
course, flew in every direction, and requests came pour- 
ing in from all parts of the country for speakers to 
come and describe it. These were dealt with, in the 
first place, by the committee who had charge of Mr. 
Moody’s meetings ; but as the students of New College 
had gone into the movement nearly in a body, a few of 
us shaped ourselves into an informal committee to re- 
‘ceive the applications and send out deputations. Of 
course, the descriptions of what was going on in Edin- 

- burgh were combined with evangelistic addresses, and 
the flame of revival burst out in one place after an- 
other—north, south, east and west. This went on for 


i 


LIFE OF MOODY. | 269 


months, and Drummond was in the thick of it all the 
time. I still remember vividly some of his deputation 
work. The sympathy of young men had. been very 
visible in Edinburgh, but it was in Glasgow that the 
first very remarkable meeting for this class was held, 
and the feature to which reference has just been made. 
was conspicuously stamped on the movement. The. 
meeting is still remembered in Glasgow and in re-_ 
ligious circles throughout Scotland as ‘the hundred- 
and-one night.’ It took place in Ewing Place Congre- | 
gational Church, which was filled with young men. 
Mr. Moody did not speak at all, but Dr. Cairns and 
then the students. Dr. J. H. Wilson made the closing 
address. e 

“As the meeting proceeded the spiritual power was 
such as I have never experienced on any other occa- 
sion; and when Moody at the close ordered the front 
seats to be cleared and invited those who wished to be - 
prayed for to occupy the vacant pews, a hundred and - 
one came forward. As the evangelist pleaded and that 
solemn stream began to gather from every cotner of 
the church the sense of divine power became over- 
whelming, and I remember quite well turning round 
on the platform and hiding my face in my hands, un- 
able to look on the scene any more. Yet all was per- 
fectly quiet, and the hundred and one were men of 


270 LIFE OF MOODY. 


intelligence and character, who were not carried away 
with excitement, but moved by the force of conviction. 

“T do not remember anything remarkable in Henry’s 
speaking that night. The address that told most was 
that of Frank Gordon, whose speaking was charac- 
terized by a wonderful pathos and passion. When we 
six went back to the hotel we sat very late discuss- 
ing the remarkable scene we had just witnessed.” 

Among the questions one was raised whether it was 
usual to remember the date and incidents of one’s 
own conversion, and the six were equally divided as to 
it. Each of the party had a beautiful morocco-bound 
New Testament, inleaved as a memorial of this re- 
markable night, each book containing the mottoes and 
signatures of the six. These Testaments were sug- 
gested by Mr. Drummond, who presented them to the 
rest. “His own copy went with him through his sub- 
: laa evangelistic wanderings, and was worn to 
rags.” 

At another time Henry Drummond eid another stu- 
dent started to fill two engagements without deciding 
to which place either would go. It was talked over on 
the train, and finally decided by “tossing for it.” Drum- 
mond was to go to Elgin, and important events hung 
upon this decision. Such a blessing was poured out 
upon his labors there that he felt impelled to devote 


LIFE OF MOODY. 271 


himself absolutely te the work. He himself regarded 
this as one of the events that turned the course of his 
life and subsequent work. It was this success at Elgin 
that determined Mr. Moody to send Mr. Drummond 
to Sunderland, which was the first time Mr. Moody 
had sent him to continue the work among young men 
begun by Mr. Sankey and himself. With two other 
young men—all Scotsmen—Stewart and Ewing, 
Drummond went by urgent solicitation to Newcastle, 
South Shields, Bishop Auckland, Hartlepool, Morpeth — 
and Hecham. Sunderland was mightily aroused by 
the mission of these men. The work began among 
the middle classes and spread among the working-- 
men. All denominations united in the good work. A 
thousand persons in Sunderland alone professed con- 
version. 
In speaking of the work Mr. Drummond says, writ- 
ing from Sunderland April 24, 1874: “You see I am 
still here, and do not know when we are to get away.. 
Requests are pouring in on us from all quarters, and 
the work is just as deep as it could be. We have three 
meetings each night, one exclusively for young men. 
Generally there are about a hundred inquiries in all 
every night, and as most of these come to the light be- 
fore leaving, you may imagine the wonderful nature 
of the work going on around us. * RY Wietare 


272 LIFE OF MOODY. 


kept at it from morning till night. Schools, infirmaries 
and poorhouses, etc., have all to be addressed, and the 
work has got in among several public institutions. 
Yesterday we had an ‘all-day’ meeting for inquirers. 
The young men’s meetings have been a marvelous suc- 
cess, and have done an amount of good, which the 
countryside will feel the influemce of for generations.” 
Again: “The Sunderland work. would take a week 
even to sketch, and it seems to have reached all classes 
~and all ages. Among the schools it seems to have 
broken out with force, and we could spend another 
month among them with profit. On Sunday I had an 
enormous children’s meeting, and a hundred and fifty 
remained to an after meeting. In the evening we had 
the Victoria Hall crammed (with adults), and a very 
large number entered the inquiry room at the close. 
On Monday evening we had a farewell meeting with 
the young converts. There was a large churchful, and 
-_ it was one of the happiest meetings I ever saw. * * * 
- Upwards of three hundred names were given in at the 
young men’s meeting alone of young men who had 
professed to have been converted during the three 
weeks of meetings.” . 
Again: “On Monday we had another converts’ 
meeting—a large churchful. The Sunday evening 


meeting has become quite an institution in the town, 





LIFE OF MOODY. 273 


and is having an extraordinary influence on all classes. 
There are always three thousand or four thousand 
present, and we have always a large prayer-meeting.” 

Again: “I had got thus far when a long interrup- 
tion occurred. The gentleman with whom I am living 
cpened up to me his whole past history—a very che- 
quered one it has been—and I think our visit will be 
the means of doing him some good. I could not stop 
his yarn, as I saw something perhaps was to come of it. 
This is a specimen of the kind of private work which © 
we have to do in every house we stay at, with scarcely 
an exception.” 

“The Sunderland Mission,” writes Dr. Smith, his 
biographer, “made Drummond a man. He won from 
it not only the power of organizing and leading his 
fellow-men, but that insight into character, that knowl- 
edge of life on its lowest as on its highest levels, that 
power of interest in every individual he met which so 


brilliantly distinguished him and in later years made. . 


us who were his friends feel as if his experience and his 
sympathy were exhaustless.” 

“How Henry Drummond was drawn into this great 
movement,” says Dr. Smith, his biographer, “I have 
not been able to trace with exactness. Soon after he 
began his mission in Riego street he asked a fellow- 
student if he had heard of the two Americans 


274 LIFE OF , MOODY. 


who were evangelizing at Newcastle, and with the 
date of their arrival at Edinburgh the diary of 
his own work stops short, as if he had suddenly been 
carried off upon some larger stream. Two New Col- 
lege men who had attended one of the early gather- 
ings in Edinburgh and had stayed behind to see the 
novel inquiry meetings, then exciting much jealousy, 
were asked by Mr. Moody to assist and refused. When 
they returned to their lodgings they felt some shame 
at their inability to speak’of their Lord to anxious men 
who were seeking Him, and after prayer together they 
‘resolved to offer themselves for the work. To Drum- 
mond’s own mind this suspected feature of the move- 
ment has appeared its most promising element. Here 
was the very factor he had missed in the organization of 
the church, and for which only that month he had been 
pleading in his essay to the Theological Society. We 
can understand how his keen mind watched the move- 
ment, and in spite of this prejudice in its favor found 
at first not a little to repel him. He was curiously dif- 
ferent from the two men with whom he was to become 
so intimate a colleague—not in theology or in zeal to 
win his fellow-men for Christ, but in those other things 
that by the bitter irony of our life separate us from 
each other far more cruelly than ever the divisions of 
religion do. His accent, his style, his tastes, were at 


LIFE OF MOODY. 275 


the other pole from those of the evangelists. His 
speech was quiet and restrained. An excited preacher 
was always a wonder to him. He had a perilous sense 
of humor, and I don’t think he ever cared for large 
public meetings. Nor did the social possibilities of the 


movement attract him. At this time he had not the | 


civic conscience, but from the first he felt Mr. Moody’s 


sincerity and the practical wisdom of the new methods: 


The aim at the individual, the endeavor to rouse and 


secure him—this was what he had missed in ordinary 


church methods and now found. The inquiry meet- 
ings bridged the gap between preacher and hearer and 
brought them together, man to man, before God. On 
his side Mr. Moody was feeling the need of a young 
man to take charge of the meetings for young men, and 
it is a tribute to his insight that he chose one whose 
style and tastes were so different from his own.” 

The good work rapidly spread all over Scotland. 
The spring of 1874 was spent by Moody and Sankey. 
in Glasgow and other towns in the western section of 
Scotland. The results were like those in Edinburgh, 
but larger in every way. In Glasgow the Crystal 
Palace, a large glass building, was crowded night after 
night with five thousand people, and many turned ‘away 
from the doors; and it was nine times filled in six days. 


The main room of the church was turned into an in- 


276 LIFE OF MOODY. 


quiry room, and from fifty to two hundred inquirers 
were there every evening, wakeful and anxious, while 
Christians prayed with them. Those who had found 
the Saviour stood up to announce the fact. At the last 
meeting for converts—Monday being generally re- 
served fon their meeting—thirty-five hundred were 
present, and converts were cared for and visited after 
meetings were held. Visitors came from all parts of 
Scotland to Glasgow to attend these meetings, and by 
this means the goodness and the good work were car- 

ried to every part of the land. From these details it is 
? very evident that the revolution in methods of Chris- 
tian work in the Old World only followed the same 
changes wrought at hqme here but shortly before and 
by the same means. Ministers and people were quick- 
ened. Mr. McMurtrie wrote that he had “never known 
so happy a winter during the whole course of his min- 
istry,” and Dr. Cairns that “the revival had made very 
hopeful the whole future of the Bible class in Scot- 
land.” 

And the mission work went beyond the churches. 
Every Christian work and institution was helped. The 
Christian people went out for temperance work, for 
neglected homes and people, for children—caring for 
the temporal needs as well as the spiritual of men. 


Homes for young women and for orphans were 


: EIPE, OF . MOODY. 277 


founded. The Young Men’s Christian Association 
was put upon a firmer and broader basis, and its work 
defined as a helpmeet to the church and not its equal 
and rival. Mr. Moody secured very large subscrip- 
tions for the foundation or expansion of these associa- 
tions wherever he went. And finally all Christian de- 
nominations came to help the movement and all re- 
ceived great help from it. 

From Scotland Mr. Moody and Mr. Sankey went to 
Belfast, Ireland, where they labored for five weeks with 
the same wonderful success. Mr. Drummond. had 
spent his holidays fishing and evangelizing in Orkney 
and Shetland. When they were about to leave Belfast 
Mr. Drummond was sent for to continue their work. He 
went, and with his friend, James Stalker, addressed meet- 
ings there early in October. When Moody and Sankey 
went to Dublin Mr. Drummond moved on to London- 
derry, and alone carried on the work there. Instead 
of resuming his theological studies he resolved to. 
stand by the evangelists and continue the work.. 

In writing home he says: “Just a few lines from 
the seat of war to tell you how things are going on. 
The enemy is falling by hundreds. I think Derry beats 
any work I have been in by a great deal. The first 
meeting almost overwhelmed me. * * * TI have 
just telegraphed to Moody. I feel the responsibility of 


278 LIFE OF MOODY. 


the work here is very great. Being sent here by 
Moody and being the only worker, I have full swing 
of the entire work. It is far too much for me, and I 
am almost frightened when I think of it. 

“T suppose I am fairly engaged to follow Moody all 
winter and take his young men’s meetings. I cannot 
help thinking more and more every day that this is 
the work God has planned for me this session. Why 
I should have such a tremendous privilege is the only 
mystery to me. I do not believe there has ever been 
such an opportunity for work in the history of the 
church. Moody says if the young men’s meetings 
can be kept up in every town he believes there will be 
ten thousand young men converted before the winter 
is over. What a tremendous thought! * * * I feel I 
must go forward. The pointing of the finger has grown 
plainer and less unmistakable than ever. I feel as if. 
I dared not draw back. I wish you could see it, too.” 
There were many like him. 

Here, then, already appearing is the remarkable re- 
sult of the work of these two earnest Americans—all 
Christian England, high and low, ready to follow as 
they led. : 

At Dublin the meetings were held in the Exhibition 
Palace, in which ten thousand people were collected 


the first time. The number fell off for a while, and then 





LIFE OF MOODY. 279 


grew to greater dimensions. This increase in interest 
is ascribed to “the hearty co-operation for the first 
time in the history of the movement of the ‘Episco- 
palian clergy, while the daily press chronicled the 
meetings with a fullness never displayed elsewhere.” 
It was quite a usual thing to see several bishops of the 


Established Church present at one time. One Roman 


Catholic paper rebuked another for abusing the evan- 
gelists, and many Catholics attended the meetings. 
Unity among Christians was secured at last. People 
came to the convention appointed for December from 
all points of Ireland, and the railway companies sold 
special tickets to people attending the meetings. An 
“all-day” service was held which was attended by fif- 
teen thousand people and one thousand ministers, who 
had seats reserved for them. 

Henry Drummond led a meeting exclusively for 
young men in the Metropolitan Hall with increasing 


attendance in both places. He had been induced to 


come from Derry to help in the work at Dublin. For 
four weeks these young men’s meetings were kept up, 


with the result that about fifty professed conversion — 


nightly. Mr. Drummond followed the evangelists 
about from city to city holding his meetings for young 
men, and with great success and lasting results. 

At Manchester two thousand workers met Moody 


¢ 


, 280 | LIFE OF MOODY. 


and Sankey at eight o’clock in the morning in a heavy 
rain, This was their first Sunday there. They left for 
Sheffield after a stay of one month and began meetings 
there on New Year’s eve. From there they went to 
Birmingham, and on February 5 to Liverpool. Every- 
where the same great work was accomplished. 

“Enormous meetings from the very start, at first 
small, ultimately large, numbers of converts, the quick- 
ening of church life and a very widespread interest 
among the general population.” 


Henry Drummond writes: “I am once more ‘stalk- 


ing through the land,’ as Daniel’s band says. A tele- 
gram most unexpected yesterday at noon from Moody 
brought me off in a great hurry-scurry to Sheffield. 
I could not help it. ‘Come to Sheffield at three today. 
I have a great men’s meeting for you tonight.’ So the 
“message ran, and of course I had just to leave all and 
run, too. I suppose it was for the best, though I was 
real sorry to leave my little Manchester meeting. 
Moody has gone to Manchester.” 

“Birmingham, January 29, 1875.—A telegram from 
Moody this morning sent me off here post-haste. I 
have just tea’d with him, and I had a long talk over 
things. The work here has been far greater than any- 
where else—far, far greater. Of course, I do not know 


very much about it yet. I was quite prepared to leave 


LIFE OF MOODY. 281 


this morning, as | knew Moody’s ways, and I knew I 
must be in Birmingham before he left it, and that is 
tomorrow morning. * * * Moody is not at all the 
worse for this great work here, speaking to fifteen 
thousand ptople every night. These figures are not 
exaggerated. He is yery careful, and he says so him- 
self.” ; 


or on road to it. A telegram in the usual style from 


Moody settled the arrangement last night.” 


“Liverpool—Yesterday was a great day here. | 


Moody’s four services were splendid—hundreds of in- 
quirers. In the evening I had a theater full of over- 


- flows to look after. This morning there was a monster 


breakfast of gentlemen interested in the movement.” 
It was at that time that Mr. Moody told Mr. Drum- 
mond the story of his life. The results at Liverpool 
surpassed those at all other-places. At the close of the 


series of meetings held there a meeting for inquirers ' 
alone was arranged for, and not less than five thou- 


sand were admitted by ticket. 

On the 14th of March, Moody and Sankey began 
their meetings in the Agricultural Hall, London. The 
hall had a seating capacity of thirteen thousand, with 


standing room for two thousand more. ‘At the evening 


_ meeting for men the place was filled to its utmost ca- 


Again: “When you get this I will be in Liverpool 


\ 





' 282 | LIFE OF MOODY. 


pacity. Meetings were held in other large halls and 


opera-houses in various parts of London day and . 


night. Mr. Moody was greatly encouraged. The work 
was placed on a most extensive scale, such as the me- 
tropolis of the world required and the vast extent of 
the city and its great population demanded. Mr. Moody 
had trusted leaders under him and he was everywhere. 

‘Drummond writes: “The work is coming out 


grandly now, and I think the next two months will wit- 


ness wonderful results. It is deepening on every side 
and even ‘London’ is beginning to be moved. Moody 
says Sunday was the best day of his life.” 

This work in London continued until July 12. In 
giving his estimate of the work of the two American 
evangelists of twenty-five years ago, Dr. Smith says: 
“Everyone who shared in the movement or who read 
its history will admit without question ‘those beneficial 
effects which we have already noted upon the mem- 
bership and the ministry of all the churches. This 
Mission lifted thousands and tens of thousands of per- 
sons already trained in religion to a more clear and 
decided consciousness of their Christianity.” 





2 


LIFE OF MOODY. “Ns Bs 


CHAPTER X. 


MEETINGS IN THE GRAND DEPOT, PHILADEL- 
PHIA. 


It was on the 17th of June, 1873, that Moody and 
Sankey landed at Liverpool, entered upon their work 
in the British Isles, unfolding the banner of the cross 


and disarming prejudice and jealousy, and found their » 


way to all hearts and led multitudes to the Saviour. 
They left England, the people tearfully lamenting 
their departure, with the prayers of all Christian. 
people for their future success and welfare. They re- 
turned to America, and reached Northfield, Mass., Sep- 
tember, 1875. After a brief period of rest they began 
meetings at Northfield, not then what the magic touch 
of Moody has since made it. | 
It may be well to say here, while the English cam- 
paign is fresh in mind, that Moody and Sankey re- 
turned to Europe, after they had a very successful 
series of meetings in their own country, for another 
missionary tour. Dr. Smith says: “Early in 1882 
Messrs. Moody and Sankey began a new mission in 
Scotland, passed in the late summer into Wales and. 





Y 


284 . LIFE OF MOODY. 


the southwest of England, preached in Paris for the 
most of October, and returned for the winter to the 
cities they had already visited in England and Ireland, 
and to a number of others in addition. The mission 
was not so powerful as that of eight years before, but 
a good deal of real work was done.” 
To a friend Professor Drummond writes: “I wish 
you could spend a few days in the Moody work. * * * 
I expect Moody in my own parish.” Again: “Moody, 
too, has made me promise to ‘hitch on to him,’ as he 
calls it, for the summer. * * * I had Moody in my 
church last Sabbath—one of the most wonderful meet- 
ings I ever saw.” He resigned to engage in the work 
with Moody. ° 
He writes to another friend: “I was with Moody all Soe 
summer in Scotland, Wales and England.” And this, 
too, when he was writing and putting through the 
press one of those books of his that has made him 
become famous—‘Natural Law in the Spiritual 
- World.” Finally: “I am going to Liverpool hext 
week to work for a short time with Moody. Moody 
~ has asked me to go to America with him, but I do not 
think I shall be tempted.” 
After Mr. Moody had his little rest at Northfield— 
holding meetings for the spiritual good of the whole 
community—he and Mr. Sankey started out on their 


\LIFE OF MOODY. 285 


celebrated labors in the cities of their own land. They 
were now famous. Their great reputation abroad fol- 
lowed them home. All during their triumphal: prog- 
ress in the United Kingdom the people at home had 
watched them. Full reports of their wonderful meet- 
ings abroad were published daily in the papers at 
home, so when they reached the shores of America all 
with one accord welcomed them and longed to see and 
hear them. Their remarkable work abroad had also 


prepared the hearts of the people at home for a like 


work here, and everywhere they were sought for and 
welcomed with delight and greeted with immense 


- audiences. There was an earnest desire in Christian 


hearts for just such a blessing as had been experienced 


‘in England, and it came. 


Mr. Moody, aided by Mr. Sankey, began his work 
at Brooklyn. A choir of two hundred and fifty trained 
voices and under Mr. Sankey were ready. The meet- 
ings held in the great rink were opened October 24, 
1875, and from the first the interest was intense. The 
building was full, and thousands who sought failed to 
gain admission, so great was the desire of the people 
to attend the services. The results were large in the 
quickening of Christians and in the salvation of souls. 
~ On the 2tst of November, 1875, Moody and Sankey 


began their work in Philadelphia. The people of that, 


ae J 


4 


286 LIFE OF\ MOODY. 


city manifested the same enthusiasm exhibited else- 
where, and a most cordial welcome was extended to the 


. evangelists. Multitudes flocked to hear them, great 
spiritual ‘uplifting followed and great numbers pro- 


fessed conversion. 
From personal knowledge the writer can speak of the 
meetings in Philadelphia, of their great power, of the 


‘profound impression made upon the people who at- 
tended, of the wonderful preaching of Mr. Moody and 


singing of Mr.Sankey, of the immense throngs of peo- 
ple who filled the great building daily and nightly, of | 
church members quickened into spiritual life and ac- 
tivity, of ministers revived and changed in all their 
methods of work and preaching, of thousands who were 


reclaimed or converted, of churches refreshed, 
strengthened and increased—indeed, in one word, of 


the deep and widespread spiritual and eternal good 
done through efforts of Moody and Sankey, and of the 
masterful leadership of the head of the movement. 
When Moody and Sankey were holding their meet- 
ings in Philadelphia they were reaching far more than 
dwellers in that city. All the surrounding country in 
Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware and Maryland 
contributed to swell the multitudes that crowded into 


_ the depot. The trains and boats were often taxed to 


bring the people and return them to their homes. The 





LIFE OF MOODY. 287 


people came from towns situated thirty and even fifty 


miles from Philadelphia. The country people, too, at- 
tended in great numbers. Sometimes the people came 
from a distance singly or in small companies, but at 
times whole societies or schools or congregations ar- 
_ ranged to attend in a body. These latter came on spe- 


cial trains and had seats reserved for them. In this way ; 
the seed was scattered broadcast, and, what is better, 
the word blessed to many souls and. many churches — 


beyond the City of Brotherly Love. 
Mr. Moody came to Philadelphia at the general de- 
_ sire of the religious part of the community, and it may 
be said with equal truth that the interest and expec- 
tancy at his coming were general. 
A committee of fifteen ministers of the various de- 


nominations, of which Rev. Richard Newton of the - 


Episcopal Church was chairman and Rev. C. P. Masten 
of the Reformed Church, secretary, were appointed to 


arrange for the coming of the evangelists. A commit- 
tee of thirteen business men, of which Mr. George H. — 


Stuart of the Christian Commission, an old friend of 
Mr. Moody, was chairman, were appointed to conduct 
the business arrangements for the meetings. © 
Knowing that a spacious building would be needed 
for the meetings, these gentlemen secured the old 
freight depot on Thirteenth and Market streets, which 

















288 LIFE OF MOODY. 


was then vacant, and in which Mr. John Wanamaker 
afterwards established his great retail emporium, and 
forthwith, put a hundred men at work to fit it up for the 
meetings. 

There is a little story about President Scott leasing 
the building to the committee for the occasion, charg- 
ing simply one dollar, and laying the condition upon 
them to simply vacate it at need. It was humorously 
reported as a joke that Tom Scott was helping the 
cause of religion. But on reliable authority the part at- 
tributed to Mr. Scott is denied, and the credit seems 
due to Mr. Wanamaker, who, it seems, had already se- . 
_ cured the building in possession. 

The main part of the building was furnished capable 
‘of seating comfortably ten thousand persons. At the 
back of the platform for the speaker, rising tier on tier, 
was seating capacity for one thousand more. The 
_acoustics properties of the hall were very good. 

In addition to the parts already described were three 
large inquiry-rooms. A vestibule twenty feet wide 
ran around three sides of the building, and there were 
ten large doors from these opening on the streets. 
_ Overhead, for lighting by day, were several large sky- 
lights, and for lighting by night there were a thousand 
gas burners in reflectors and rings of parallel jets. 


Eleven thousand chairs were placed in the auditorium, 





LIFE _OF MOODY. 289 


and there were three hundred trained volunteer ushers 
to seat the people. A choir of six hundred trained 
voices were placed under the direction of Mr. Sankey, 
and three hundred Christian workers were selected and 
trained by the pastors for work with the 1 inquirers. 

The fitting up of the building for the occasion cost 
about twenty thousand dollars, but the people were in — 
such hearty sympathy with the movement and had so” 
much enthusiasm that the amount was contributed 
spontaneously. 

The first service was held on Sundae: November 21, 
1875, and the meetings continued until January Ze, 
1876. They were held at 8 A. M. and 4 P. M on Sun- 
days, and at 8 A. M. and "7.30 P. M. every day but 
Saturday throughout the week. There were some 
changes, notably at 12 M., to meet the convenience of 
persons who found that a convenient hour to attend, 
and there were also some extra services. : 

A correspondent of the time in his report, which: 
was early in the meetings, says: “As for the revival, I 
fear to be thought extravagant in reporting them sim- 


ply as they are. They are wonderful—far surpassing 


the hopes of the wildest enthusiast. The attendance 
is even beyond all expectation. The spiritual harmony 


of the churches is surprising. The spiritual effects on 


the individual must be shown, of course, in the after 


290 LIFE OF MOE 


life rather than by show of hands, not by puepnere on 
the barren rocks of an empty profession. 

“But it cannot be all curiosity when thousands go 
for hours before the time of service and wait for the 
opening of the doors. The order, the fervor, the fre- 
quent signs of feeling with which the hymns are sung, 
the anxious throngs which are seen streaming into the 
inquiry-rooms upon invitation, and, more than all, the 
crowds of inquirers that go to the neighboring churches 
for lack of room in the inquiry-rooms connected with 
the old depot, prove that it is not mere curiosity that 
holds them. 

“Tt is estimated that at least one hundred thousand 
people have attended during this first week, and prob- 
ably quite as many more have gone away unable to 
gain admittance. The people from all the neighboring 
towns and the country are flocking to the meetings. 

“Strong impressions are made by Moody and San- 
key. The magnetism of numbers and the concentra- 
- tion to a common end altogether will not account for 
it. But the secret seems to lie deeper than leaders, 
“magnetism and concentration. Moody and Sankey 
merely give the thing shape. The congregational sing- 
ing is more impressive than Mr. Sankey’s solos. Such 
a work as this was needed in our city to awake the peo- 
ple to a higher life.” 





atehan 


PO eos 


4 


'- = 
- 


4 


ECAR Ly Or he Se AREER Re 
ee ai ME ; a “oe. 
Arte ys ak x 

+ A id ss 


LIFE OF MOODY. 291 


Of the following Sunday the same reporter says: 
“On the second (Sunday) Mr. Moody preached the first 


. sermon for the impenitent, the previous week being . 


’ services in the interest of Christians. This effort for 


' the impenitent commenced with a massmeeting for 


women, and there were eleven or twelve thousand of. 


them shut in. The men who came were not allowed to . 


enter. The sight was beyond description. Such a 


_ gathering of women was never before seen in this 


country. Mr. Moody preached from John 3:7, his 
subject being ‘Regeneration.’ He frankly did not at- 
tempt to account for it, but showed its necessity. The 
sermon was full of beautiful imagery touching inci- 
dents, pathos and eloquence. Mr. Sankey sang ‘The 


- Ninety and Nine’ in a most touching manner. The 


multitudes wept, some of them knew not why. When 
Mr. Moody asked all who desired it to rise for prayer 
five hundred or more stood up, and when at the close 
of the service they were invited to go into the inquiry- 
rooms, they went streaming in. The ministers present 
helped them, and many went away, their faces shining 
with a sense of pardoned sin. 

“The evening meeting was for men only, and about 
ten thousand, mostly young men, were present. Mr. 
Moody preached to them on'the same subject as to the 


women, with more interest and power, if possible than 














* 


292 LIFE. OF MOODY. 


in the previous meeting. And when at nine o’clock the 
churches were open for inquirers the churches were 
filled with the young men with the same results. 

“As part of the movement a fathers’ meeting was 
held in the Tabernacle Presbyterian Church. There 
_ were many requests for prayer for children. 

“The 3 P. M. meetings for old people and for those 
from a distance are wonderful beyond expectation.” . 

Our reporter reflects on the semi-hostile press which 
reported the meetings in a “flippant style” at the time, 
and asks, ““What that doleful creature, the comical re- 
porter, could ever see in this grand movement in the 
interests of man to report flippantly, as to make light 
of, he was at a loss to discover.” 

“When the date for the closing of the meetings was 
announced the crowds became enormous.” Our re- 
porter gives his judgment that if the evangelists were to 
remain another month there is no doubt the interest in 
the meetings would continue. He adds: “If this is 


_. not success it is hard to say in what success consists. 


The depot meetings have been the greatest success in 
this generation—probably the grandest continuous 
religious assemblages ever seen anywhere.” 

On the 22d of January “A Christian convention was 
held to instruct ministers to more effectively reach the 


hearts and consciences of the people. Many ministers 











LIFE OF MOODY. 293 


were present. The conference extended (with inter- 
missions) from 10 A. M. to 10 P. M., considering va- 
rious subjects connected with the church-revival work, 
etc. Mr. Moody opened all the topics except ‘Church 
Music,’ which was opened by Mr. Sankey. Then he 


invited questions from the clergy, which came upon - 
him fast. It was one man against a hundred, but he : 


_ was never at fault. He always seemed to have the best 
of it. 


“Mr. Moody is simply an indomitable person. 


He came here from his great meeting in Brooklyn with- 
out a rest. He is wonderful in his endurance and re- 
sources. A finer bit of endurance was never seen here- 
abouts. Criticise him as we may, he deserves his re- 
pute, and is altogether an exception.” . 
- The History of Philadelphia records: “These great 
revival meetings of Moody and Sankey, when the 
membership of the churches was increased by many 
thousands of converts.” 
There was something awe-inspiring to see the vast 
audience in the old depot, but it was a sight to be re- 
membered just to look over that sea of chairs when the 
large room was vacant. 


oe ae 
Sng) Se Pe 


204 LIFE OF MOODY. 


CHAPTER’ XI. 
MEETINGS IN THE HIPPODROME, NEW YORK. 


On the 7th of February, 1876, Mr. Moody entered 


_ upon his work in the Hippodrome in New York city, 


continuing the services in this vast auditorium, with 
vast multitudes in’ attendance, intense interest and 


' growing enthusiasm from first to last, into the follow- 


ing April. Among the tangible results of the meetings 
were thousands of conversions to Christ and confes- 
sions of His name, and a fraternal union of denomina- 
tions in a common work. 

The reason for using this building was the convic- 
tion, fully justified by the results, that no other building 
in the great city would afford accommodation for the 
audiences that would assemble to hear the famous 
evangelists. It was a building of immense dimensions. 

The name Hippodrome is suggestive of the purpose 
for which this building was erected, and calls up to the 
mind the buildings for the chariot races and other ex- 


hibitions of horsemanship in the classic days of Rome, 


in certain cities of Greece and in Constantinople. It 


took its name from the design on the part of its builders 








Me abe 


LIFE OF MOODY. 205 


to employ it for somewhat similar purposes.. For the 
occasion we are about to notice in this chapter it comes 


into another and nobler use. It had been rented and 


admirably fitted up at great expense to accommodate 
the hearers of Messrs. Moody and Sankey and for their 
coadjutors in the great Gospel work. On account of 


the vastness of the building, and the expense in its fur- 
nishing and fitting for the meetings, there had been > 
considerable misgivings on the part of some, and they ; 


had opined that, these things considered, the project 
would prove a failure. When were there not prophets 
to foretell gloomy things.and failures that never came 


to pass? After this occasion, these prophets were not 


able to Bae with complacency and pleasure, “I told 
you so.’ 


The invitation of Messrs. Moody and Saale to New 


York was, of course, of a piece with invitations to other 
cities and fields of labor. They were known here also 


to fame by their work in the British Isles, and later in © 


their own country, notably also from the great meet- 


ings but recently held in the neighboring cities of Phil- 


adelphia and Brooklyn. * 

It has already appeared that Mr. Moody was himself 
fond of sacred song, and that he believed in singing the 
Gospel into the hearts that were open to it in that way. 
His prediction is that it will be done more and more in 


206 ; LIFE OF MOODY. 


the coming years. The friends of the evangelists in New 
York seem to have been in harmony with this sense of 
both the preacher and the singer. And hence Mr. San- 
key was, during the meetings in the Hippodrome, as- 
sisted by a choir of two hundred and fifty voices. The 
evangelists now (contrary to their first experiences) 
were cordially supported by the ministers of the vari- 
ous churches of the city. 

From the first, multitudes of people thronged the 
building, comprising all classes of the population. 
“People of culture and refinement, accustomed to 
hearing the most logical and polished preaching, 
seemed to wait upon Mr. Moody’s ministry with a 
strange and all-absorbing interest. The simple utter- 
ances of this man of God, pulsating with tearful tender- 
ness, and breathing a sublime faith in God and in the ~ 
power of the Gospel to save, seemingly charmed them 
more sweetly than the most fascinating and renowned 
preaching of the day. They seemed to forget the art- 
less, unstudied language, the sudden, abrupt transition, 
the infelicities of speech and manner, and thought only 
of the message so tenderly and faithfully preached in 
their hearing.” 

Bibles, long closed, were now reverently opened. 
The Word of God was enhanced in value in the esti- 


mate and conception of the people. The spirit of evan- 





a b> a¢ 
Lae 
a 

_ 
3 


LIFE OF MOODY. 207 


gelism was quickened, and developed new and efficient 
forms of activity. Gospel tents, like miniature Hip- 


_podromes, sprang up on every side.- The good work 


of evangelizing the masses was prosecuted with true 
zeal and fidelity. Denominational differences were for- 
gotten, and Christian people, long separated by church. 
barriers, came together, thinking less of mere formal 
creed and more of Christ. Prayerless souls were 
saved, inebriates were reformed, skeptics convinced, 
and God glorified in these memorable services in the 
Hippodrome. Mr. Moody’s skill and prudence in con- 


ducting the meeting, his simple, unaffected manner, his 


genial, cheerful spirit, his pathetic, powerful appeals, 


and his clear, forcible presentation of truth conspired 
to make this meeting one of the most prominent and 
remarkable in the history of evangelism. 

The whole proceedings were published by the New 
York Tribune from the stenographic reports of their - 
four reporters present for the purpose, owing to Mr. 
Moody’s rapidity of utterance—two hundred and thirty 
words per minute. Other great dailies were not slow 
to follow. Incidents of these meetings are of the kind 
which characterized the meetings already reported in- 
the preceding pages as taking place in other cities. And 
the methods of work were similar to those which had, 


‘ 


298 > LIFE OF MOODY.: 


under the blessing of God, proven so effective both at 
home and abroad. 

In his preaching Mr. Moody used the Bible very 
much, directing his hearers to the passages giving the 
truths he was seeking to impress, and telling of inci- 
dents of conversion and of salvation that had come 
within the range of his own experience and observa- 
tion. ‘These latter had become so numerous that he 
was full of them, and, like a vessel full to overflowing, 
they just poured over from him in telling recital. 

There are also a number of Prayer-Meeting Talks 
reported in brief for us, all of which reveal the sound 
sense, the intense earnestness and practical mind of the 
preacher. The methods of work were practically the 
same wherever Mr. Moody went. He had discovered 
methods which, like David with his sling and stones, 
he knew how to use, and which manifestly owned of 
God and made effective by Him, brought forth abund- 
ant fruit in every field where he was sent to labor. And 
he seems to have gone nowhere else. 

The feature with which the great meetings at the Hip- 
podrome drew to their close, was a feature that climaxed 
many of his other great meetings—a Revival Convention 
or Conference. It continued throughout two days, 29th 
and 30th of March, 1876. It was called by the Com- 
mittees of Conduct for services, with a view to more 


Wu 


EP TAD ti 1s id & ss co ~9 
a <4 > Pen 


LIFE OF MOODY. : 299 


efficiency among Christian workers in revival effort. 
Hence its title, “Revival Convention.” The topics of 
discussion were—Evangelistic Services, Conduct of Prayer 
Meetings, Inquiry Meetings, the Training of Converts 
and Lay Preachers, and the answering of questions on 
these and kindred subjects by Mr. Moody. 
The convention opened at to o’clock in the morning 


of the 29th, with the house full of people, including 


thirty-three hundred and fifty pastoral and lay dele- 


gates, representing nineteen States and three hundred 
and forty towns. And they formed a body impressive 
both by numbers, zeal and intelligence, all seemingly 
deeply interested in the subjects in hand. 

After singing, “Come, Thou Fount of Every Bless- 
ing,” prayer by Rev. Dr. William Ormiston, and read- 
ing of a passage of Scripture by Rev. Dr. Plumer of 
Columbia, S. C., Mr. Moody briefly addressed the con- 
vention on the subjects before it. Then he invited all 
in the hall to ask questions about the work, and from 
his position on the platform replied to them. Just as 
we have seen in the convention in Philadelphia, in the 
previous chapter, so it was at the Hippodrome; the 
questions poured in sometimes several at a time, but 


his answers were always prompt and direct, and gave 


great satisfaction’ The whole meeting was enthusias- - 


300 LIFE OF MOODY. 


tic, and was enthused with Mr. Moody’s inimitable 
spirit. 

Those who went to the convention in a somber and 
grave spirit, ready for the occasion, soon found it giv- 
ing way under Mr. Moody’s replies, and laughter and 
applause were frequent. Instead of heavy and labored 
2 discussion, there was an amount of life and earnestness 
and contagious zeal about it that would arouse the 
sleepiest member to a keen interest in the subject, and 
"yet the subjects lost none of their seriousness by this 
cheerful handling. 


The proceedings of the second morning of the con-_ 


vention began with the subject, “How Shall the Ser- 
vices of Song Be Conducted in the Lord’s Work?” 
This being the special work of Mr. Sankey for several 
years, he was called upon to give the results of his 
labors and experience. 

In opening his address, Mr. Sankey indicated his 
purpose to be brief and direct. He then divided his 
subject into four phases, as recognizing four different 
forms of the work: 

1. With the Church. 

2. With the Prayer-Meeting. 

3. With the Sunday-School. 


4. Evangelistic work. 


After thus dividing his subject, he expressed his. 


LIFE OF MOODy. RR? 


gladness that the office of sacred song was now in the 
churches, and throughout England and America highly 
appreciated. As an evidence of this, he stated that the 
“Gospel Hymns,” first published in England, had — 
reached five million copies (of the hymns and music). 
He stated also that to his knowledge it was already - 
translated into twenty languages, and the hymns were 
sung in India and Africa. : 

Mr. Sankey said he “would discharge and remove | 
the artistic quartet choir, and would have a Christian 
choir of all the Christians he could get to lead the con- 
gregation in the song of praise, in which every worship- | 
ful heart must join. He would also have this Chris- 
tian choir near the minister and facing the congrega- 
tion. If Christians, the church would not be ashamed 
of the congregation seeing their faces, and their deport- 
ment will be such as becomes the house of God. He 
would not allow a screen behind which the singers 
might drop like a jack in the box. (Laughter.) People 
who do not give attention to the Word of God when 
preached should ‘not lead the service of song in the 
house of God.” 

_ Healso pointed out the necessity of the organ being 
played but softly, just to keep the time for the singing, - 
but allowing the human voice the predominence. He 


“302 LIFE OF MOODY: 


didn’t care if the organ was not heard ten feet away, 
so long as it just does its work in timing the singers. © 

In regard to the singing in prayer-meetings, Mr. 
Sankey would have a Christian, who is a good singer, 


to lead, if one can be found in the church. Voluntary 
starters of a hymn so often break down or labor 


through a tune. Would have no operatic music any- 
where in the church of God. 

‘In the Sunday-school he counseled an organ, with 
singers around it, as children love the music. Would 
have them sing hymns that are on the subjects of the 
day, and would often have a few words said about the 

hymns. 

In evangelistic services Mr. Sankey counseled union 


of churches, with all the best singers in the congrega-- 


tions, forming a choir. He would desire that the meet- 
ings of these choirs be opened and closed with prayer, 
as making people feel as in the presence of God. And 
so he thought all religious services should open and 
close. 


Mr. Sankey also spoke of Mr. Spurgeon’s effective 


comments on the hymns, which resulted in everyone 
singing them at the top of his voice. And, finally, he 
recalled the reading of the hymn, “There Is a Fountain 
Filled with Blood,” when he was a boy in Philadelphia, 
while the sermon did not remain with him. The hymn 


= LEE OF“ MOODY. 303 


was read in his hearing by an old man of gray hairs, the 
tears streaming down his cheeks. . 
At the close of his address, Mr. Sankey gave five 


minutes, making up his allotted time, to answering 


questions. 

Two or three of these answers, for their point and 
humior, may be mentioned here. To the question, 
“Would you have the leader of a prayer-meeting ‘pitch’ 
the time?’ ” he replied: “Ifa singer, he could do it, but, 
of course, the man who leads is not always a singer. I 
think we should have a hard time if I should ask 
Brother Moody to lead the singing here today.” (Loud 
laughter.) UK 

Q. “If you had not got any singers who are Chris- 
tians, what would you do?” 

A. “I would commence evangelistic services at once 
and get some.” 

Q. “Would you recommend solo singing in the or- 
dinary church services?” 

A. “Not asa rule.” 

Here Mr. Moody broke in: “I would if I‘had Mr. 
Sankey.”” (Loud applause.) z 

Mr. Sankey was led here to speak of solo singing, as 
being fitting for the song which proclaimed the Gospel, 
and the people should listen. He quoted, “Let the 


“Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; 


304 LIFE OF MOODY. 


teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and 
hymns and spiritual songs; singing with grace in your 
hearts to the Lord,” as an index to this solo-singing 
of the Gospel. But in the hymn of praise everyone 
should join. 

On this second day of the convention there was a 
noon meeting, attended by five thousand persons. Re- 
quests for prayer were made at this meeting—several 
for opium-eaters of both sexes. 

Mr. Moody addressed the audience, saying that the 
only way to be delivered from guilt was to pray earn- 


estly and fervently to God for relief from sin. “It is only - 


by prayer that we can be cleansed from guilt and kept 


pure.” 
A feature of interest in the convention was the pres- 


ence of Rev. Dr. James Stevenson of Dublin, who was 


next introduced, and spoke at length of the work of. 


Messrs. Moody and Sankey in Ireland. He said the 
effects of their labor in that country were felt strongly 


today, and he did not think they would ever be forgot- 
ten. Two memorable things, he said, happened at their 
last meeting in Dublin. One was a convention of min- 
isters of all denominations, who had come from all parts 


of the island. It was a remarkable sight—one that Ire- 


land had never seen before. The union that was there 
formed continues today. The other memorable event 





“LIFE. or MOODY. 


persons ienaine Recs and Maurine to Hier con a os ; 
__version under Moody and Sankey. | 1 % 
_ The Hippodrome services were finally brought to a 

close by an evening meeting which crowded the build- 

ing to its utmost capacity. The exercises were equally - ie 

interesting with those that had preceded them. It. is” 
needless to say that Mr. Moody’s sermons and Mr. 

Sankey’s singing were above all the great ee of es 
the meetings as elsewhere. m5 Td 





306 LIFE OF MOODY. 


CEA PDE sbi: 


THE COLUMBIAN .EXPOSITION—MR. SANKEY’S 
SONGS—MR. MOODY’S BOOKS. 


Mr. Moody related that just as he was about to leave 
London the last time he was there he called upon a 
celebrated physician, who told him that his heart was 
weakening, and that he had to do less work, and to be 
more careful of himself, and he was returning home 
with the thought that he would not be able to work 
quite so hard. He was on the Atlantic ocean, on the 
steamer “‘Spree,” with his son and General Howard, 
_ when the announcement was made that the vessel was ee 
sinking, and they were there forty-eight hours ina 
helpless and dangerous condition. He says no one on 
earth knows what he passed through during those 
hours, as he thought that his work was finished, and 
that he would never be able again to have the privilege 
of preaching the Gospel. On that dark night, the night 
of the accident, he then and there made a vow that if 
God would spare his life, and bring him safely back to 
America, he would go back to Chicago, and during the 
World’s Fair preach the Gospel with all the power that i ae 





4 


Te ity, oe 
a 
. i” 


ae 


« ‘ 
LIFE OF MOODY. 307 


He would give him. God has enabled him to keep that 
vow. Inanswer to Mr. Moody’s prayer, as he and Gen- 


eral Howard and others firmly believed, help came un-_ 


expectedly, and the vessel was saved. It seemed as if 
he had been to the very gates of heaven during those 
forty-eight hours on the sinking ship, and that God 


had permitted him to come back to preach Christ at hi 


Chicago during the Columbian Exposition. 


Mr. Moody arrived in Chicago in May, 1893, fully | 


determined to inaugurate a series of meetings for the 
preaching of the Gospel during the proposed six 
months’ term of the*World’s Fair. He had just re- 
turned from one of the most extensive, laborious and 
exhausting evangelistic campaigns of his eventful life, 
of fourteen months’ duration in England, Scotland, 
Ireland and in the Orient. If he had detailed any plan 
of the proposed movement in Chicago, it was stored 
in the secret of his own mind. He had not committed 


himself to any published programme. As usual in his _ 


work, he had placed himself in the hands of God, ready 
to do His will whatever that might be. This enterprise, 
so unheard of, had been formed in Mr. Moody’s mind 
and purposed long before the World’s Fair had become 
a fact... He carried the matter with him during his long 


evangelistic journeys in Europe and his trip ‘to the 


Holy Land. He had then enlisted the help of represen- , 


' 


308 LIFE OF MOODY. 


tatives of Christian Europe for the work in Chicago for 
that time. The one thing concerning the proposed 
Gospel meetings which was positively settled in his 
mind was the conviction that it was the will of God that 
it should be inaugurated and carried on. He foresaw 
that the material glory of the great Fair would attract 
millions of people, out of every nation, and his heart 
longed and burned to seize the opportunity for the ex- 
tension of the kingdom of God by having the Gospel 
preached so the world-wide could be reached. It was 
another Pentecostal opportunity. There were tongues 
and people. It was reason enough for him to see the 
finger of God pointing in that direction, and not for a 
moment did he hesitate or stop to confer with flesh and 
blood. In conception and in execution it was there- 
fore “purely a work of faith and labor of love.” When 
the time had come Mr. Moody entered upon the work 
with the conviction of the Divine call, with the de- 
sire for the salvation of souls, and.as a man under seal 
of the most solemn vow, as we have learned from the 
reference to his memorable experience on his home- 
ward voyage from Europe given in a public address, 
and seen in the opening paragraphs of this chapter. 
The work developed one of the greatest and most 
fruitful efforts of his life. Throughout that campaign 
under the banner of his Lord, he moved as a great gen- 





“Sy ee »\ 


LIFE OF MOODY. "309 


eral. The work was sketched out on a vast scale. The 
helpers were called from far and near. The army was 
thoroughly organized, and the leader was both the 
moving spirit and director of every part of it. He vis- 
ited every post, received reports, gave counsel, and, 
keeping in touch with God, carried the work on beyond 
the bounds of his first hopes and conceptions. 

It is calculated that two million people heard the 
simple, pure Gospel directly through this effort, be- 
sides the effect it had of crowding the churches of the 
city. Such a counter-attraction did the Sunday ser- 
vices become that comparatively few attended the Fair 
on that day, until the management of the Fair, seeing 
that it did not pay, closed the gates on Sunday. Mr. 
Moody had hoped for this result from giving the people 
something better. 

For the meetings, theaters, opera-hourses, halls and 
tents, besides churches, were utilized. And for two 
Sundays Forepaugh’s circus tent was used, in which > 
Mr. Moody preached to some 25,000 people. A Gospel 
wagon was also used, called by Mr. Moody “the flying 
artillery of the evangelistic forces.” Mr. Moody him- 
self, on occasion, went out and preached from this 
wagon. Pressing the battle to the gate, several build- 
ings near the Fair grounds were occupied, and other 
temporary buildings erected, and every building used 


310 . LIFE OF MOODY. 


was crowded with people. An amusing incident is told 


of the manager of the above circus proposing to Mr. 
Moody, when he saw the great crowds that heard him, 
to pay all Mr. Moody’s expenses if he would travel with 


him and preach in the circus tent on Sundays. 


An incident of touching character is told in connec- 
tion with this tent service. There were about 150,000 
present, and Mr. Moody, seeing there was a stir about 
something, and discovering that it was caused by a 
child having lost its father, asked the people to send 
the little one up to the platform. Then, holding the 


child up before the audience, asked the father to come 


up and receive it. When the father came, he laid the 
child in his arms, saying, “This is what the Heavenly 


Father does with His Son Jesus Christ to us. Take 


Him as vou take this child.” He then_went on with 
the sermon. 


Thousands rose at invitation for prayer. Thousands 
would come forward seeking for a book on regenera- 


tion that was freely given away to the seeker. Thou- 


sands were manifestly converted to Christ. And the 


quickening of visiting and resident Christians was man- 
ifest to the joy of Mr. Moody’s and his .co-workers’ 
hearts. 

All classes of the resident population flocked to the 
meetings, and not infrequently, too, there was a pro- 





LIFE OF MOODY. 3il 


portion of go per cent. of visitors from various parts of 
the country and from abroad. On one occasion tickets | 
were requested for twelve Japanese gentlemen, who 
wanted to attend and sit together in the meetings. 

The Gospel was preached in several different lan- 
guages by preachers secured for the purpose. And 


nineteen nationalities were sometimes represented in 


a single meeting. 

When in London last the London Polytechnic Insti-_ 
tute had engaged to send about 1400 tourists over to 
Mr. Moody, that they might during their visit to the 
Fair have the benefit of his influence and service. These 
were sent in groups of about 100 per week. 


Mr. Moody’s Bible Institute was the center of the — 


great work, and there Mr. Moody, after the work of 
the day, would take refreshment and receive reports 
of the day’s results in the different meetings. This in- 


stitute, with Dr. Torrey at its head, supplied about 200 


_ of the workers. 

Mr. Moody, in this great campaign, was aided by 
something like a hundred of the ablest and most noted 
preachers of both this country and Europe. It is a 
pleasure to find his friend Mr. Moorhead there. So was' 
Mr. Varley. There was also Dr. Stoeckler, ex-court 
preacher from Berlin, who spoke for several weeks with 


eloquence and totiching pathos to the Germans in sev- . 


iT 


312) _ LIFE OF MOODY. 


eral places of gathering. Dr. McNeil of London was 
with him from the Peesinning to the end of the six 
months’ effort. 

It need hardly be said that sacred song was a promi- 
nent feature in all the work. Mr. Sankey and a large 
number of other famous singers, with large choirs, 
were present throughout. 

In view of the vast expense of carrying on this work, 
the reader may wonder how Mr. Moody dared to un- 
dertake it, and where the money came from. But it 
must be remembered that he had said, “God is rich, 
and Tam working for Him.” He was a man of faith in 
a great God. At times this faith was tested, but the 
money came. 

Dr. Torrey reports that on one occasion Mr. Moody 
had to be absent, and before he went he looked some- 
what anxious. Four thousand dollars were needed, 
and but one thousand dollars were in hand. The inner 
circle, ‘with Mr. Moody, prayed. Then, having risen 
from prayer, a letter was handed in containing an Eng- 


‘lish letter of credit for nearly one thousand dollars. 


Next a telegram from Dr. A. J. Gordon, announcing 


a contribution of six thousand dollars for the Chicago 


work from his friends in Northfield, and more to fol- 
low. It came up to ten thousand dollars. The workers 
did not finish the meal at which they were sitting at the 


4 se 0 oP hae on 


‘CIGIMHLUON “‘TIVH GNVONOUVN 








‘ 
LIFE OF MOODS: 315 


time of the telegrams. They Buchel back their hone 
and indulged themselves in thanksgiving. So it was. 
And contributors to Mr. Moody’s work were not. un- 
rewarded by a higher good. Here is one demonstra- 


tion: 


After the first service in the circus tent, a young man, 
son of a man who had given some thousands of dollars. 
to his work, came up to the platform, took Mr. Moody ~ 


by the hand, and said: “Mr. Moody, I have accepted 
the Lord Jesus as my Saviour.” 

The hymns used at Chicago were ie from the 
Moody and Sankey Hymn-Books, and known under 
the title of “Gospel Hymns,” and they comprise a se- 
lection of stich hymns as the evangelists conceived to 
be best for their purpose of “singing the Gospel” into 
the human heart. Their first edition was published in 
England during the first tour of Messrs. Moody and 
Sankey there. And the hymns being sung by Mr. 


Sankey, and the tunes taking the ear of the people, the - 


book soon became famous. It is reported that these 
tunes and hymns from this book could be heard every- 
where and were on almost everybody’s lips. They have 
added edition to edition and number to number. The 
circulation is vast, and wherever the English language 
is spoken, and the income from royalty upon them is, 
according to the words of President Weston, “equal 


316 LIFE OF MOODY. 


to a prince’s ransom, and far beyond.” An ex-mayor 
of Hartford, Conn., is reported to have given it as his 


judgment that the Gospel Hymns and tunes are readily 
_ the ripe song-fruit of the Reformation. And they may 


be called the “Lyre of the Reformation.” On finding 


that this revenue would be large, Mr. Moody and Mr. 


Sankey decided not to receive anything from it, and 
they appointed a committee to receive it, and to use it 
in the interest of Bible educational work. The “Gospel 
Hymn-Books,” having become so famous, it will be 
interesting to observe their beginnings. 

When Mr. Moody paid a visit to England in the 
spring of 1872, his yoke-fellow was naturally left to act 
as leader in the services in the Tabernacle. His leisure 


hours at this time were spent in gathering a number 


of spirited hymns that appeared to be adapted for evan- 
gelistic services, and in fitting a few of them with ap- 
propriate music. These were arranged into a “Musical 
Scrap Book,” and that was the only book, besides his 
Bible, that he took with him on the voyage of faith 


across the Atlantic. Among these sacred songs were 
. “There Shall Be Showers of Blessings,” P. P. Bliss’ 


“Hold the Fort,” “Jesus Loves Even Me,” .and “Free 


From the Law,” Mrs. Dr. Griswold’s “We’re Going 
Home Tomorrow,” Mrs. E. Codner’s “Lord, I Hear 


of Showers of Blessings,” Mrs. W. S. Ackerman’s 


ie 


oe ss naar b | ae i Puy? nas ore ate i nti Os ee Oe ee ae St 
é , os é - - ' n t 


Ste 


LIFE OF MOODY. 317 


“Nothing But Leaves,” Miss Anna ,Warner’s “One 
More Day’s Work for Jesus,” Kate Harlsey’s “I Love 
to Tell the Story,” Mrs. A. S. Hawks’ “I Need Thee 
Every Hour,’ Rev. W. W. Walford’s “Sweet Hour of 
Prayer,’ Mrs. Lydia Baxter’s “Take the Name of Je- 
sus With You,” Mrs. Emily S. Oakey’s “Sowing the 


Seed by the Daylight Fair,” Fanny J. Crosby’s “Safe 
in the Arms of Jesus” and “Pass Me Not, O Gentle 
Saviour,” Rev. Joseph H. Gilmore’s “He Leadeth 
Me,” and Rev. Dr. Lowrey’s “Shall We Gather at the . 


River.” 


Two other chief favorites afterwards added to his © 
selections were “Ninety and Nine” and “Jesus of Naz- 


areth Passeth By.” The first of these was written by 


Miss Eliza C. Clephane of Melrose, Scotland, in 1868,. 


and was printed a little while before her death in the 
“Daily Treasurer,” edited by Dr. Arnott. Six years 
elapsed before it came, providentially, to Mr. Sankey’s 


notice while he was in Scotland. It chanced that he 


bought, among other religious weeklies, a copy of the 
Christian Age of London, of the date of May 13, 1874, 


_ and found the “Ninety and Nine” reprinted as a poeti- 


cal waif. He was at once so impressed with its value 
for his mission of Gospel song that he composed or 
adapted an air for it, and sang it three days later in the 


Free Assembly Hall, Edinburgh. A letter of thanks 





a Geka 7H 
oe eee ee ed a a 


318 LIFE OF MOODY. 


from the sister of the poet, who was present at the 
meeting, gave him the facts of its authorship, and led 
to the receipt of one other precious hymn, “Beneath the 
Cross of Jesus,” which now appears as the forty-ninth 
in “Gospel Hymns.” Miss Campbell was the author 
of “Jesus of Nazareth Passeth By.” Her heart was 
deeply moved by a revival at Newark, N. J., in 1864, 
_and her imagination was fired by an address by R. G. 
Pardee on the reply to blind Bartemeus: “They told 
him that Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.’ The second 
stanza, which is given here, was omitted in the com- 


-mon version: 


“E’en children feel the potent spell, 
And haste their new-found joy to tell; 
In crowds they to the place repair, 
Where Christians daily bow in prayer. 
Hosannas mingle with the cry, 

‘Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.’ ” 


During the time Mr. Sankey was “holding the fort” 
at the Tabernacle, when Mr. Moody was in Europe, 
he was cheered and blessed repeatedly by evidences 
that the Divine seed he was sowing by means of singing 
was bearing fruit. One of these was told by himself 
to an audience in Dundee, Scotland, while he and Mr. 


Moody were conducting their meetings at that place. 





oo ae 


LIFE OF MOODY. 319 


Being seated at his organ on the platform, he arose 
when the time came to sing, and said: 


“T want to speak a word about singing, not only to 


the little folks, but to grown people. During the win- 


ter after the great Chicago fire, when the place was 
built up with little frame houses for the people to stay 


in, a mother sent for me one day to come and see her . 
little child, who was one of our Sabbath-school schol- — 
ars. I remembered her very. well, having seen her in 


the meetings very frequently, and was glad to go. She 


was lying in one of those poor little huts, everything 


having been burned in the fire. I ascertained that she 


was past all hope of recovery, and that they were wait- 


ing for the little one to pass away. “How is it with you 
today? I asked. With a beautiful smile on her face, 
she said: ‘It is all well with me today. 1 wish you 
would speak to my. father and mother.’ ‘But,’ said I, 
‘are you a Christian?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Wher did you become 
one? ‘Do you remember last Thursday, in the Tab- 
ernacle, when we had that little singing meeting, and 


you sang, “Jesus Loves Even Me?’”’’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Tt was 
last Thursday. I believed on the Lord Jesus Christ then 


and now I am going to be with Him today.’ That tes- 
timony from that little child, in that neglected quarter 
of Chicago, has done more to stimulate me and bring 


320 LIFE OF MOODY. 


me to this country than all that the papers or any per- 
‘son might say. I remember the joy I had in looking 


upon that beautiful face. She went up to heaven, and 
no doubt said she learned upon the earth that Jesus 
loved her from that little hymn. If you want to enjoy 
a blessing, go to the bedside of these bedridden and dy- 
ing ones, and sing to them of Jesus, for they cannot 
enjoy these meetings as you do. You will get a great 
blessing to your own souls.” 

Mr. Sankey met with other proofs of the blessing 
there is in his singing of sacred songs while he was 
abroad. 

An English journal gives an account of the last hours 


of a young girl, only ten years old, who had listened in 


delight to Mr. Sankey’s singing. “Oh, how I do love 
those dear hymns!” said she. “When I am gone, dear 
mother, will you ask the girls of our school to sing the 
hymn: | . 
“Ring the bells of heaven; there is joy today, 
For a soul returning from the wild; 


See, the Father meets him out upon the way, 
Welcoming his’ weary, wandering child.’ ” 


And the night before her happy death she said: “Dear 
father, dear mother, I hope to meet you in heaven! I 
am so happy, mother! You cannot think how cheerful 


and happy I feel.” Then: “Perhaps Jesus may send me 





TAFE OF S MOODY, i i. 321 


for my brothers and sisters. I hope He will send me to 
bring you, mother.” Only half an hour before her 
death she exclaimed: “Oh, mother, hear the bells of 
heaven; they are ringing so beautifully!” Closing her 
eyes for awhile, she presently cried again, “Hear the 
harps! They are most beautiful. Oh, I wish you could 


hear them!’ Shortly after, she again spoke: “Oh, 
‘mother! I see the Lord Jesus, and the angels, too! Oh, 
if you only could see them, too! He is sending one to - 


take me!” She had been counting the hours and min- 
utes since she had heard the mill-bell ring, longing so 
earnestly to depart, yet she expressed a hope that she 
might see her dear father, who was then absent at 
work at the mill, before she went. Finally, just five 
minutes or so before her expiring breath, she said: 
“Oh, mother, lift me up from the pillow—high, high 


up! Oh, I wish you could lift me right up into heaven!” 


And then, almost immediately after, seemingly con- 


scious that the parting moment was-at hand, she said: 


“Put me down again—down quick!” Then, brightly, 


joyously, gazing upwards, as at some vision of sur- 
passing beauty, she peacefully breathed her last, and 
her precious spirit was surrendered into the arms of the 
ministering angels sent to fetch her, and was forever 


with the Pew 


<} 


322 x LIFE OF MOODY. 


One who heard Mr. Sankey sing in Scotland thus 
wrote: : 

“Mr. Sankey sings with the conviction that souls are 
receiving Jesus between one note and the next. The 
stillness is overawing;’ some of ‘the lines are more 
spoken than sung. The hymns are equally used for 
awakening, none more than ‘Jesus of Nazareth Passeth 
By.’ When you-hear the ‘Ninety and Nine’ sung, you 
know of a truth that down in this corner, up in that gal- 
lery, behind that pillar which hides: the singer’s face 


from the listener, the hand of Jesus has been finding 


this and that and yonder lost one, to place them in His 
fold. A certain class of hearers come to the services 
solely to hear Mr. Sankey, and the song throws the 


‘Lord’s net around them. We asked Mr. Sankey one 


day what he was to sing. He said: ‘I’ll not know till I 
hear how Mr. Moody is closing.’ Again, we were driv- 
ing to the Canongate Parish Church one winter night, 
and Mr. Sankey said to the young minister who had 
come for him: ‘I’m thinking of singing “I’m So Glad” 
tonight.’ ‘Oh,’ said the young man, ‘please do rather 
sing “Jesus of Nazareth.” An old man told me today 
that he had been awakened by it the last night you 
were down. He said: “It just went through me like 
an electric shock.” A gentleman in Edinburgh was 


in distress of soul, and happened to linger in a pew after 


LIFE OF MOODY. ; 323 


the noon meeting. The choir had remained to prac- 
tice, and began, ‘Free from the Law, Oh, Happy Con- 
dition!’ Quickly the Spirit of God carried the truth 
home to the awakened conscience, and he was at rest 
in the finished work of Jesus. The wave of sacred song 
has spread over Ireland, and is now sweeping through 
England.” 


At an Spon service held in a large hall, hen 


the hymn, 


“Sowing the seed by the daylight fair,” 


was given out to be sung, Mr. Sankey arose, and spoke 
as follows: 

“Before we sing this hymn I will tell you one reason 
why we should sing these hymns. It is because God is 
blessing them to many a poor wanderer who comes to 
this building night after night. Last week a man, who 
had occupied a high position in life, came into this hall 


and sat down. While I was singing this hymn, he aes 


out his pass-book and wrote out these words: 


“Sowing the seed of a Gaceeng: pain, 
Sowing the seed of a maddened brain, 
Sowing the seed of a tarnished name, 

: Sowing the seed of eternal shame; 
Oh, what shall the harvest be?’ 


“Last night that man in the inquiry-room went on 


ry 


f 


324 ‘ LIFE OF MOODY. 


his knees and asked God to break the chain that had 
dragged him down from such a high position to the 
lowest of the low. He said he had resolved when he 
went out of that praise-meeting that he would cease to 
indulge in the intoxicating cup, but before he reached 
home he went into a saloon and’ broke his resolution. 
We prayed for him last night. He is now praying that 


God may break his chain. I want you to pray that this 


brand may be plucked from the burning, and that God 
may use these Gospel hymns to turn the hearts of sin- 
ful men.” 
' In addition to the several numbers and manifold edi- 
‘tions of the “Gospel Hymns and Sacred Songs” by 
Messrs. Moody and Sankey, Mr. Moody himself is the 
author of a number of books which have had a wide 
circulation, and doubtless done a great deal of good, 
besides increasing the revenues of the schools by the 
profits on them. Among them may be named, “The 
Second Coming of Christ,” “The Way and the Word,” 
“Secret Power the Secret of Success in Christian Life 
and Work,” and several volumes of sermons. He has 
proved himself an author of eminence. 

The long years of fraternal relationship and noble 
co-operation between these famous evangelists, in their 
common work for noble ends, and the wonderful suc- 
cess that crowned their united efforts, will be forever 
remarkable in the history of the Christian Church. 





LIFE OF MOODY. 325 


CHAPTER XIII 


PERMANENT WORK AT NORTHFIELD. 


In the use of the word permanent there is no con-~ 


trast meant to be suggested. There is a sense in which 
all of Mr. Moody’s work is lasting as eternity. At 
Northfield he planted his home and established a plant 
for good which, like the Chicago Institute and other 


_ established enterprises, will continue his work when 
-heis no more. It is local, tangible, apparent and wide- 


spreading in its influence. 
Mr. Moody selected Northfield as a place of resi- 
dence very naturally; there he was born, and there his 


aged mother lived, and he could be near her during 
those intervals of rest that he might take in his busy. 
life. 3 eet 

So he purchased at Northfield his present comfort- 
able but unpretentious residence, near the old Moody 
home. He entered his new home at once, and settled 
down to enjoy such leisure as he had before renewing 
his great work. 

It was not long before plans for permanent work | 


were laid. When Mr. Moody, returning from abroad, 


326 LIFE OF MOODY. 


went to Northfield to live, he saw, as he walked over 
_ the hills of his native place, in their homes on the moun- 
tain side, many bright and intelligent girls, the daugh- 
ters of the farmers who tilled the soil, among them his 
own brother’s children, who doubtless had ambitions 
above their farmer parents and beyond the routine and 
drudgery of farm life. 

He then conceived the idea of .a school for girls pos- 
sessed of moderate means, at which they might receive 
a careful training in the Bible and in ordinary English 
branches at a moderate expense. He thought of a 
school along the same lines as Mt. Holyoke Seminary, ° 
and Wellesley College, then just starting. 

The first portion of land towards the new enterprise, 
afterwards enlarged until it included two hundred and 
seventy acres, owned by the Northfield Seminary, was 
purchased in 1878 by Mr. Moody. ° Mr. H.N. F. Mar- 
shall of Boston was visiting Mr. Moody. He afterwards 
became intimately associated with the Northfield 
schools. Mr. Marshall, learning that sixteen acres of 
land opposite Mr. Moody’s house were for sale, con- 
ferred with Mr. Moody about it, and the two agreed 
that it was advisable to purchase it. They had just 


' reached this decision when the owner of the land was 


seen coming toward the house. He was invited in, and 


asked the price of the land. It was bought at his price, . 





LIFE OF MOODY. 327 


f 


-and the money paid down, and the papers were made 


out before the astonished owner could recover from his 
surprise. 

A writer has said: 

“The two hundred and seventy acres belonging to 


the Seminary show~good results from the time and ._ 
money expended on them. The hillside, once so deso- » ; 


late, is covered with soft, velvety turf. Well-built roads 
wind through the grounds between the different build- 
ings. Shade trees and groups of shrubbery have been 
set out, which are adding to the beauty of the place 
every year. The land also yields returns of practical 
value under the wise supervision of Mr. Moody’s 
brother, Mr. George Moody. Belonging to the school 

farm are six horses and fifty head of cattle. From ten 
to fourteen men are kept constantly employed. The 
products from the farm are milk, hay, apples, some 
pork and beef, rye and corn, all of which, except a few 


of the apples, are used by the farm or school.” 


In 1879 work was begun on the fine brick school- 
house. Meanwhile the upper story of the long wing 
adjoining Mr. Moody’s own house was fitted up for 
the accommodation of students, being divided into ten 
rooms. . He had hoped to start with eight pupils, but 
the school opened November 3, 1879, with twenty-five. 
And until the recitation hall in the new building was 


328 LIFE OF MOODY. 


ready for occupancy, which was in December, the stu- 
dents studied and recited at Mr. Moody’s home. 

The same year Mr. Moody selected and bought a 
suitable site for his school. There was a bare, sandy 
hillside near his mother’s home, too barren to be of 
much practical value, even for pasturage. This was 
the ground he purchased. The view from its slopes is 
described as one of the most beautiful to be seen in the 
Connecticut valley. The green hills of Vermont and 
New Hampshire are seen, as in the distance the be- 
holder looks up the river. From between them comes 
forth the waters of the Connecticut, making its mean- 
dering way through miles of fertile meadows, “which 
during summer are like a rare mosaic, with the vary- 
ing shades in the fields of waving grain.” 

“It was this same view that Mr. Moody gazed upon 
when a boy, and the air of the hillside was the same 
which gave him strength for the arduous labors of his 
busy life.” 

East Hall, the first dormitory, was erected in 1880, 
and at once filled with girls. Students multiplied as 
the years went on, and other needed buildings were . 
added. 

Bonar Hall, the second dormitory, was built a few 

years later. Marquand Hall was opened in 1885. Stone 
Hall was built between the two large boarding halls as 





LIFE OF MOODY. 329 


a second recitation hall, for the school had outgrown 
the original schoolhouse first erected. 

Other schools followed, until there are in possession 
of the school seven dormitories, the Talcott Library, 


the Skinner Gymnasium, Recitation Hall, and the new, 


Auditorium, the latter built by Mr. Moody in 1894 to: 
accommodate the great and increasing crowds that at- : 


tended the summer conferences. 

“The buildings all possess a high degree of artistic 
beauty. Mr. ee holds that an sug building in this 
age is a crime.’ | 


From the beginning of this ex enterprise Mr. 


Moody has ever kept in view three distinct ends. One 


was to give educational advantages to girls who had 


been deprived of them. In their education the Bible 
was to have precedence over every other text-book. 
This has been faithfully carried out, two recitations in 
the Bible a week being required from all the students 
in the four, five or six years’ course. 

The second was, Mr. Moody wished to train young 
women for practical Christian work. It was his plan 
also to use the buildings during the summer vacation 
for gatherings of men and women for the study of God’s 
Word. 

The price of board and tuition at the Seminary from 
the start has been $100 a year. All the work of the 








VN3SOy Br ._ LIFE OF MOODY. 


houses is done by the pupils. The low price of tuition 
only covers one-half the current expenses of the school. 
The other half is met by income from small endow- 
ment, by royalty from sales of Gospel Hymns and by 
contributions of friends of the school. Royalties are 
fluctuating and likely to decrease. ' 

A high standard is maintained both in scholarship 
and in character. The low price brought twice as 
many. applicants as could be accommodated. Selection 
had to be employed. Then the majority of pupils felt 
the lack of early advantages, and often came to North- 
field only by great sacrifice and self-denial, and hence 


they were earnest and studious beyond many found in 


other schools and colleges. 
The boys’ school—Mt. Hermon—was conducted in 


the same way. The distinguishing features of schools 


at Northfield are low price of tuition, the amount ,of 
time given to Bible study, the system of domestic work, 
and the courses recently opened in household science. 

The girls’ school number about four hundred, and 


the students are admitted from its preparatory course 


to Wellesley, Smith, or Vassar. Very few of them are 


able to go beyond Northfield. Many of the teachers 
are graduates of Wellesley; hence most graduates of 
Northfield who take higher courses go to Wellesley. 
The reputation of the school is so high that parents 





LIFE OF MOODY. 331 


able to pay very much more prefer Northfield for its 


infiuence on the lives of their children. 

The plan for training boys in elementary English 
. branches and the Bible was carried out at Northfield, 
as it had been before by Mr. Moody in Chicago, where 


it originated in connection with his mission work. ae 


plan was never abandoned. 
In 1880 a tract of land across the Connecticut river, 
four miles from the Seminary, in the town of Gill, was 


offered for sale, and, being deemed a suitable site, was — 


purchased for the boys’ school. ‘The land comprised 
two farms of one hundred and fifteen acres each, with 
_two farmhouses and barns. They had formerly been 
among the finest farms in the State, and situated on 


the height of land known as Grass Hill. This was se- — 


cured through the generosity of Mr. Hiram Camp. 
There was purchased afterwards more land for the 


boys’ school, making in all seven hundred ‘and fifty © 


acres. Tuition and board were put at one hundred dol- y 


lars, the same as in the girls’ school. It was arranged 


to have the work of the houses and farm done by the 
boys. For a few years there was but smail growth, and 


many problems to solve and experiments to make. For 


two years the school never numbered more than twenty- _ 


four boys, from eight to eighteen years. The boys lived 
in the farmhouses, and the small buildings were used 


\ 





332 LIFE OF MOODY. 


for schoolhouses. The boys first were grouped in fam- 
ilies of about twelve each, in charge of a lady. Manual 

labor for awhile had to predominate over intellectual, 
owing to youth and inexperience. Better results were 
obtained by admitting older boys, and the minimum 
age was fixed at sixteen. Five brick cottages were 
built in 1882. Four were used as dormitories, the mid- 
dle one for a kitchen, from which meals were carried 
to the others. The Mt. Hermon School was for boys. 
A three-story recitation hall, and a large dining hall 
called Crossley Hall, with rooms for nearly two hun- 
dred students, and Stillman Science Hall, were erected. | 
The Mt. Hermon Chapel was erected in 1898. 

Mt. Hermon aims to give a good education to boys 
who have been deprived of early advantages, and who | 
cannot afford to attend the more expensive schools, 
and to educate.those who have to earn their own liv-_ 
-ing, and grow up to feel the need of education too late. 
One prominent feature about Mt. Hermon is the in- 
dustrial system, which of itself tends to exclude unde- 
sirable students. The work of the laundry, in the 
‘dairy and on the farm is done by the boys. A head 
farmer has charge of the boys, and under him the boys 
of age and experience, who have charge of various de- 
partments. The boys who have already worked at 
some trade are encouraged to follow this trade as part 





‘ 


LIFE OF MOODY. 1339 


of their work. The school in this way gets advantage 
of their skilled labor. 

All of Mr. Moody’s educational plans center around 
the Bible, and the result is that many Northfield and 
Mt. Hermon students become engaged in homeand for- 
eign missions. When he began his work many scouted 


the idea that.an uneducated evangelist could teach the’ _ 


world anything about the methods of education. But 


as the schools grew, and the great and fine buildings . 


rose one after the other, all necessary to the work, and 
all filled with boys and girls, doubts were changed to 


faith and scoffs to wonder and praise. Mr. Moody’s 


_ work at Northfield may not be more prominent than 


his work as an evangelist, but the results of his labors 


as an educator are more concentrated and apparent. _ 

Though not a singer himself, Mr. Moody appre- 
ciates music, and in all his schools music is a special fea- 
ture in the course of construction. 


Mr. Moodyhas constantly met in hisworkthedemand 


for trained Christian workers to'serve as pastors’ assist- 
ants, to organize and maintain Sunday-schools, to visit 
the poor and sick and to carry on other forms of church 
work. To meet this demand he opened in 1888 the 


Bible Institute in Chicago near the church he founded» 


and which still bears his name. Another Bible Insti- 


tute was establishéd by Mr. Moody at Northfield, The. . 


1, LS 
<pre 3 ae) MAO eae 
eden 9 - rE; 

5 1 he 


{ 
4 





334 LIFE OF MOODY. 


large hotel, “The Northfield,” which was meant to ac- 
commodate the crowds that attend the summer meet- 
ings, stood empty in winter. Its empty rooms were put 
to use in 1890, when the Northfield Traininig School - 
was opened. . en 
Three distinct Bible conferences are held at North- 

field each summer. The largest and oldest conference 

is the one that comes last in the season, the General 
Conference beginning about the 1st of August and con- 
tinuing fifteen days, filling the Seminary building, 
large hotel and private boarding-houses to overflow- 
ing, and many persons are sheltered in tents on the 
campus. The most distinguished persons—clergymen 
and laymen, evangelists and Bible teachers—in this | 
Jand and in England, and indeed in all Christendom, 
are invited to take part and speak to.the people. At 
‘such seasons Mr. Moody gathered around him the 
most distinguished Christian educators and leaders of 
the world, and many of them. The late distinguished 
Prof. Henry Drummond gives us a charming view of 
Mr. Moody at work at his home at Northfield. 

_ By the invitation of many men of note Professor 


-Drummond came, in 1887, to visit America. The pres- 
idents of the great colleges and universities and repre- 
sentatives of literary societies, secular and religious, 


urged him to lecture for them, giving them each one, 


-LIFE OF MOODY. 793.335 


if not a course. Mr. Moody had urged him in 1885 to 
unite with him in meetings and the work associated 
with them, to labor together as they did in 1873-75. 


_ But Professor Drummond was then devoting himself 


especially to students. He wanted to use all his ener- 


gies towards extending to colleges in America the gra- 
cious benefits of the religious movement which began» 
among the students at Edinburgh. However, since | 
Mr. Moody had begun an educational work at North- . 


freld, Professor Drummond accepted his invitation to 


come there to attend the summer schools. He paused. 


in his round among the institutions of learning to be 


_ with his dear friend Moody and to again help him in 


his work. 
From Northfield, Mass., June 28, as recorded by Dr. 


Smith in his Life of Drummond, he writes: “Itisa . 
great chance, this conference—five hundred students | 


from over eighty different colleges.” 


Under date of July 1 he writes: “I am tearing away 


here at American speed. Already I have been asked 


to become principal of a college, ditto of another col-_ 


lege, to write for various papers, to lecture in half the 
States of the Union and otherwise to line my pockets 
with dollars. But I have refused all wiles, and am plod- 
ding along at Moody’s with lots to do and lots to enjoy. 
The hardest thing is the heat. Northfield is like Crieff 





~ 


330 LIFE OF MOODY. 


without the high mountains, but with a bigger river 


and more timber. It is very beautiful, and Moody is 
as grand as ever. To see him at home is a sight. He 


is simply a farmer, running messages, going for the 


cream and the beefsteak for dinner, and so on. Hun- 
dreds of students have now come, many in tents all 
over the place. Two are from Cambridge, England.” 

A conference for young women and young men is 
held in July under the charge of the Y. M. C. A and the 
Y.W.C. A. The attendance consists largely of stu- 


dents from the different colleges, and one important re- 


sult has been the Bible has been given a place almost as 
prominent as that of any other study in nearly all the 
leading colleges in America. Northfield is now known 
as a summer resort of unusual kind, and the Bible and 
Christian work is discussed, and all the time is spent 


to properly develop the mind and heart and to prepare 


students for work among their fellows. The new 
Auditorium, built in 1894, seats nearly three thousand. 
To bring the Northfield meetings within the reach of 
as many as possible Mr. Moody planned “Camp North- 
field”—in the grove of white birches back of the Sem- - 


inary, where on the hillside tents are erected and invi- 


tations sent to the Y. M. C. A. for members to camp 
out. The eastern part of Northfield has been wonder- 
fully developed in the last fifteen years. Now it is 











\ 
LIFE OF MOODY. 337 


East Northfield, and has its separate postoffice and 


stores, new streets, boarding-houses and summer — 
homes and everthing to make it an attractive and pleas- 


ant place for permanent residence or for temporary 
resort. 

Dwight L. Moody was the central power over all. 

The Northfield Seminary and the Northfield Train- . 
ing School for young women and the Mount Hermon 
School for young men with their many buildings and _ 
endowments and twelve hundred acres of land are es- 
timated to be worth one million two hundred and fifty 
‘thousand dollars. The Bible Institute for young men 
and women at Chicago with its buildings and endow- 
ments is valued at two hundred and fifty thousand dol- 
lars. The annual cost to maintain the work is 
one hundred and twenty-five thousand dollars. 
From this it is apparent what large sums of 
money Mr. Moody had to raise every year to build and 
equip and also to run these schools successfully. He 
was a great success as a business man. It is deter- 
mined to go on with this work under the lead of Mr. 
Moody’s family. And it is proposed to raise three mil- 
lion dollars for endowing these institutions as a Moody 
Memorial Fund. ee 


~~ 





| | x : BOOK It. 
Closing Scenes and Thoughts. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


. AT KANSAS CITY—LAST MEETINGS—LAST 
Ped SERMONS. 
by Mr. Moody arrived in Kansas City, Mo., November 
; II, 1899, and began meetings there Sunday, November 
12. On Saturday he went to Convention Hall, where 
his meetings were to be held, to inspect the building. 
He stood on the platform and tried his voice, which car- 
‘tied ‘to every part of the house. He was surprised to 
_ learn that the hall belonged to the people of the city 
and not to any person or corporation. When told that 
the inhabitants, old and young, parents and children, 
rich and poor, had contributed towards its erection and 
owned it, he said, with amazement: “That’s the sort of 
thing that annihilates anarchy. There is no such hall in 
this country, I thought, when I looked at its dimen- 
sions; but now that I know the sentiment and fellow- 
feeling that has been put into this hall, I know there is 
_ hot such a building in the world. There is a common 
interest here, and a vast lesson has been taught.” 
At another time Mr. Moody said: “This is the 


ee Fe Cet NO eee ee A le ee ». =a ope. 
© ees bee Pa ecunal | 


LIFE OF MOODY. 339 


largest hall 1 have ever spoken in in all America, and, 


without exception, I think it is the best.” 

“You will be surprised to know,” he continued, after 
a pause, “that what you have accomplished in Kansas 
City in the building of this Convention Hall is what I 


have been trying to do at Northfield with my schools 
for a long time. I have about twelve hundred pupils, 


boys and girls. I don’t take anyone except poor young 


people. I don’t want rich men’s sons:and daughters. | 


I try to get these pupils in the way of taking care of 
themselves. I want the pupil to make the effort. I 
want him to feel the need of money to get along. That’s 
one of the valuable sides of my school. It teaches 
young folks to help themselves. I raise one hundred 


and twenty thousand dollars a year to support the 


school. There’s the sociological side of the case—in- 
ducing rich men to take an interest in the poor young 


people, making them help the struggling young people 


along, bringing them closer to one another. . 

“Money is a hard thing to take care of,” he went on 
to say. “I take endowments for my school, but they 
area great worry. I don’t like them. A man gives me 
a quarter of a million dollars for my school as an en- 
dowment. I am expected to place it to draw fair in- 
terest. But I am afraid to invest it. I am afraid one of 


those sudden and unforeseen changes in values will come 


V 


~ 


340 , ; LIFE OF MOODY, 


about and the money be lost. Then I will be blamed. 
I'd rather the people would leave the school a certain 
amount every year. That would be far less disquieting 
to me.” 

There were, to begin with, two services on Sunday— 
afternoon and night—at both of which the crowds were 
so great that the doors had to be closed to keep out the 
people who wished to attend the preaching of Mr. 
Moody. Ministers of the city and from Kansas City, 
Kan., and from all the vicinity, together with the people 
generally of all classes and callings, were present— 
twenty-four thousand persons in all at both services 
who got into the hall. At this rate it was estimated Mr. 
Moody would preach to the entire population of nearly 
two hundred thousand during the meetings, which 
were to last over Sunday. There were five hundred 
and fifty voices in the choir, led by Professor Case of 
Chicago and accompanied with organ and cornet, and 
one hundred and twenty-five ushers seated the people. 


When Mr. Moody said, “Let us have silent prayer,” a 


hush settled gradually upon the vast audience until the 
silence was painful. A collection for the rent of the hall 
was then taken, Mr. Moody remarking, “Don’t give 
anything unless you do it cheerfully.” 

_ Hymn sheets had been distributed in every seat, and 
Mr. Moody was afraid of the noise they might make, 


LIFE OF MOODY. pil x 341 


so he asked in a moderate tone, “Will everybody who 
has a hymn sheet hold it up?” This was also to try the 
effect of his voice. Almost instantly the sheets went 
up above the heads all over the hall. Then Mr. Moody 


said, “Now shake them.” The sounds that these . 


flimsy sheets of paper made was indescribably musical. 


There is nothing to compare it with. One only can say’ 


it was a vast rustle. “All right,” said Mr. Moody, “you 


will now please sit on them.” This was the precaution . . 


he took against interruption. : 

Mr. Moody then addressed the vast audience before 
him. Hesaid: “Inafter years as you go by this build- 
ing I want you to remember this text which I am about 
to read to you. I pray that God will write it on every 
heart. It appeals to men and women of all sorts and 
conditions, to the priests and ministers and to the re- 
porters. My text is this: “Be not deceived; God is not 
mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he 


also reap.” The speaker began his sermon standing | 


upon the edge of the platform, with his hands clasped 
behind him. He stood perfectly straight, his head in- 
clined to his breast, and his eyes rolled upward and over 
the people. “The most real thing in the world is sin,” 
he said, and dropping his hands by his side, continued: 
“The river of sin is dark.” With these words he began 


his sermon upon’ “Sowing and Reaping.” One has | 


342 LIFE OF MOODY. 


said: “Throwing out his powerful, far-carrying voice 
made his passionate utterances felt to the remotest 
parts of that vast place. What the results of his speak- 
ing will be it is too soon to foretell. Yesterday was 
only the beginning, but at his first sermon he powerfully 
affected his audience. He began his conquest in the 
afternoon, and he looks for great ee before the 
eight days of his preaching are over.’ 

The evening service was marked with even greater 
success. 

On Thursday, November 16, it was announced that 
the meetings continued with unabated success—the 
interest and enthusiasm still growing. In the afternoon 
Mr. Moody preached to three thousand people, al- 
though the weather was threatening. Mr. Moody, who 


seemed in his usual health and strength, arose and said: 


“T want to read to you this afternoon six verses found 
in the second chapter of Titus. Grace is here shown in 
threefold aspect.” With this text and introductory 
Mr. Moody went on to preach upon grace. 
In this service Mr. Moody did not show any signs of 
exhaustion; nevertheless.the evening service of that 
same day was his last evangelistic meeting and then 
was preached his last sermon. 

Here follows an account of that LAST MEETING and 





LIFE OF MOODY. Kaas 


an abstract of that LAST SERMON from the Kansas City 
Journal of November 17, 1899: 


Big Convention Hall was almost filled last night, — 


ten thousand people being present. Mr. Moody shows | 


‘no signs of exhaustion, though he is naturally wearied 


after his exertions. 


After the opening hymn, “Abide With Me,” Mr, 


Moody took charge of the meeting and announced his 
text as found in fourteenth chapter of Luke. 

“T am going to talk about the parable of the mar- 
ie supper and the people who were asked to attend 

” he began, 

“Mr. Moody read the parable, how that stinee men had 
been asked to attend a wedding supper given by the 
king, and instead of accepting it at once and feeling 
glad for the honor the king bestowed upon them, ex- 


cused themselves, one on the ground that he had bought _ 
some land and must tend it, another that he had bought © 


a yoke of oxen and must try them, and the other that 
‘he had married a wife and could not come. Then he 
continued: 

“Those people were invited to attend a feast, not an 
execution, not a hospital nor a surgical operation, but 
a feast, a royal feast.. We common people, where there 


is no royalty, seldom get an invitation to attend a royal . 





fe. 


344 LIFE OF MOoODy. 


feast. But if we should, do you think we would refuse 
it as those men did? No, indeed. 

“Those three men began to make excuses. They 
didn’t have any decent excuse, so they made up one. 
They have been doing that ever since Adam. _ Adam 
made the flimsiest excuse ever made when he blamed 
his sin upon his wife. I pity those men who blame their 
wives for their shortcomings. One of these men had 
bought a piece of ground and had to see it. This was 
his excuse. He was doubtless a very polite man, and 
told the servant to tell his king that he knew of no man 
whose supper he would be more pleased to attend than 
his, but ‘business before pleasure every time, you know, 
and I must see to this piece of ground. I’d like to 
come, but really I don’t see how I can do it. I pray 
thee have me excused.’ The second man had bought a 
yoke of oxen and had to prove them. Now, do you 
think that man went out that night to see those oxen? 
Why didn’t he try them before he bought them? Do 
you think he took them out of the stall and worked 
them after dark? Not he. What he wanted to do was 
to make an excuse, and the thought of those oxen 
popped into his head, so he gave that. The third man 
made the most absurd excuse of any of them. He had 
married a wife and couldn’t come. Didn’t he know 


that the young bride would be only tog glad to go ta 





rae: © 
oh 


LIFE OF MOODY. 345 


the wedding feast? Didn’t he know that it would be 
just the place where young couples go and see how the 
others do it? Yes, in his sober moments he knew this, 
but he was all confused, and wanting an excuse, made 
the most absurd one he could. 

“Now, the excuses these men made seem foolish, and 
they are, but I challenge anyone in this great crowd to 
make a better one than those made by these three men. , 
Let me tell you some of the excuses you will make to | 
your consciences tonight for not accepting Christianity. 

_I hear excuses are the devil’s cradles in which he rocks 
men’s souls to sleep. Let me tell you some made here 
in Kansas City, Mo., not in Kansas City, Kans. Yes, 
right in this hall tonight. 

_ “The first excuse is the old Book. One fellow says 
this book contradicts itself. It isn’t true. I challenge 
any man to show me a single promise God has made to 
His people He has not kept. The people who know the 
Bible are not the people who revile it, but those who — 
never read it, who know nothing about it, are its de- 
nunciators. One man who claimed to know it and.that 
he had read it through I found once, but I didn’t believe 
he had ever read it through. He could quote but one 
passage in it, and that was the shortest verse in the 
whole Bible—‘Jesus wept.’ People are ready to give 


their opinion on a:new book only after they have read 


“ 


346 LIFE OF MOODY. 


it two or three times, but they give their opinion about y 
the Bible before they have read it—on hearsay only. 
“Another excuse is that I am not foreordained to be 
saved. If I am‘I shall be saved no matter what I do, 
so I don’t have to stand up here and profess before all 
these people. If God wants me saved He will save me. 
Now, you try that in temporal affairs. Just you sit in 
. your seats, and if God wants you to go home to your y 
family He will get you there, even if He has to carry 
you through the window head first and put you to bed. 
If He wants you to succeed in business He will see that 
you do so. You needn’t move a finger. That’s fine 
philosophy, isn’t it? ‘ 
“Others gave an excuse there were too many hypo- 
crites in the church; others, the life was too narrow, 3 7 
they wanted liberty; others, they couldn’t believe. 
“You are sincere,” Mr. Moody ey “and the main . 
reason is this—you won’t give up sin.’ ie 
After the meeting Mr. Moody went at once to his 
room, completely exhausted, and obliged to absent 
himself from the after-meeting across the street, where 
Rev. Mr. Wilcox of Grand Avenue M. E. Church 
succeeded him, assisted by Drs. Neel and Lowry. 
The number of people who went to the hall on Friday 
afternoon were greatly disappointed. : When it was an- 


nounced that he could not be present a groan of dis- 





LIFE OF MOODY. 347 


appointment was heard all over the house which 
showed plainly how much he was missed. Of the six 
thousand persons in the house about two thousand left 
after hearing the announcement. Dr. Hughes of the 
M. E. Church preached acceptably in Mr. Moody’s 
place, though the position he occupied was one of em- 
barrassment. At night, notwithstanding it was well 
known that Mr. Moody was too ill to be present, fully 
eleven thousand were crowded into the hall. It was 


_ due in a measure to Dr. Neel’s explanation of Mr. 


Moody’s absence that the large audience remained to 
hear the sermon by Rev. S. G. Niel of the Baptist 
Chapel Car. A Friday morning announcement read: 


“Evangelist Dwight L. Moody was suddenly compelled 
yesterday to give up his work in Kansas City and to 
return to his home in Northfield, Mass. While he has 
shown signs of weariness under severe strain of -un- 
usually arduous labors in connection with his advanc- 
ing years, for he is now past sixty-three years of age, 
he gave no special evidences of exhaustion, and his 
practical breakdown came as a surprise. Some of his 
more intimate friends here expressed the belief that 
the famous evangelist had done his last protracted re- 
vival work and would not tax his powers in the future.” 
~ But Mr. Moody himsélf said: “The cause of my 
present breaking down, if you want to call it that, is a 


348: LIFE OF MOODY. 


trouble of long standing. As long as I can eat and 
sleep well I believe I am all right, and under those con- 
ditions whenever any ailment attacks me I am able to 
live it down. But for the last week or ten days I have 
been doing neither. I could not sleep after I had re- 
tired, and when meal time came I had no appetite. As 
a consequence my system could not build up, and when 
the great strain of these meetings came on I was in no 
condition to bear up under them, and I went down.” 

It was announced that Mr. Moody’s place in the great 
meetings would be taken by Rev. Dr. R. A. Torrey, his 
lieutenant in Chicago. 


LIFE OF MOODY. 349 


CHAPTER XV. 
LAST SICKNESS—DEATH—BURIAL. 


The news that Mr. Moody had been stricken down’ 
with heart trouble November 16 while conducting re- 
ligious meetings at Kansas City, Mo., had been com- . 
pelled to give up his work there, and had next day 
started for Northfield, his home, filled the Christian 
world with great anxiety, which was only temporarily 
allayed by the cheerfulness of the journey, the safe 
arrival and the improvement that followed for awhile 
at home. 

Mr. Moody had probably addressed as large crowds 
of people during his short stay at Kansas City as he 
had ever faced. The meetings began on Sunday, No-: 
vember 12, in Convention Hall. The gatherings to 
hear him were immense, thousands of people filling the 
hall in the afternoon and evening of each day. The 
strain upon Mr. Moody must have been great. He 
preached his last sermon Thursday night, November 
16, when fully 15,000 persons listened to an earnest ap- 
_ peal that many pronounced as one of the greatest efforts 


350 LIFE OF MOODY. 


of his life. He was, stricken next morning at his hotel, 
but laughingly declared that he was all right, and that 
he would be able to preach that afternoon. He grew 
worse, gradually, however, and it was deemed best to 
start him for his home the next day, although the physi- 
cian stated Mr. Moody’s condition was not necessarily 
serious. 

Mr. Moody was desirous to continue his work at 
Kansas City, yet when he realized the seriousness of 
his illness he was willing to go to Northfield. The 
whole land watched eagerly the progress of his journey 
eastward on the special train provided for him, in the 


care of the physicians and some other friends, and was — 


greatly relieved when he reached home in safety. He 
was as weak as a child, but hopeful and bright. 

There was no special car to be had from the railway 
company, so the Baptist Publication Society’s elegant 
chapel car, ‘Messenger of Peace,” in charge of Mr. and 
Mrs. S. G. Niel, was put at the disposal of Mr. Moody, 
and in it he journeyed in comfort from Kansas City 
to St. Louis.” On his arrival home the family physician, 
- Dr. N. P. Wood, took charge of him. 

After he reached home everything was done to pro- 
long life. He steadily improved until the second week 
in December, when an unfavorable change took place. 


A bulletin was issued only the week before he died, é 





LIFE OF MOODY. 351 


announcing that he was very ill, but that a little im- 
provement was noticed. The week in which he died 
had not been without improvement and hope, until 
Friday, December 22. He showed symptoms of ex- 
treme nervousness, accompanied by swelling of the 
lower limbs. This condition caused his friends great 
fears, but it seemed at first to yield to treatment, and 


the family, relying on Mr. Moody’s remarkable consti- . 


tution, entertained strong hopes of his ultimate recov- 


ery, even up to the day before the end came; but their - 


hopes were before long suddenly dispelled. 
The sudden attack at Kansas City was owing to 
heart disease of somewhat long standing, latent but 


- real. There were not wanting evidences occasionally 


of coming trouble. He had been informed as long 
before as 1892 that he had heart disease. One of the 
greatest and most famous physicians, Sir Andrew 
Clark, had told him that he was suffering from organic 
disease of the heart, and warned him of his danger, 
but the warning passed unheeded. 

He made a brave fight for life, and all that tender 
care of loved ones could do and skillful treatment of 
physicians could effect was tried to save his valuable 
life in vain. Prayer was also made everywhere for his, 
recovery, and that he might be spared to his family 


and to his work, but it was the will of God that he 


\ 


\ 
352 . LIFE OF MOODY. 


should die, and God took him. He had finished the 
work given him to do. 

Friday morning the weakness eenetedana by Mr. 
Moody for some time continued, and at 8 o’clock he 
called his wife and children, and told them calmly that 
the end was not far off. The family remained close by 
the bedside all the forenoon. The patient was free 
from the pain that had racked him, which indicated 
that the struggle for life had ceased and that death 
had triumphed. He also talked with considerable 
ease. At about an hour of noon Mr. Moody asked to 
be assisted to sit up, and his son, William R. Moody, 
with the aid of the doctor, helped him out of bed and 
seated him in a chair. In a little while he asked to be 
again put into bed. The great physical strength of 
the great preacher was gone. As the noon hour ap- 
proached the anxious watchers noticed the approach 
of death. Several times his lips moved as if in prayer, 
but the articulation had become so feeble that the 
words could not be heard. Just as death came he 
awoke to consciousness as from slumber, and said 
with joyousness, his face lighted up and almost glori- 
fied: “TI see earth receding; heaven is opening; God is 
calling me.” A moment later—noon—he expired, Fri- 
_ day, December 22, 1899. 

His son-in-law, Rev. A. P. Fitt, says: “He was 





» 


ae 
. 2 
‘iL 


LIFE OF MOODY. 353 


perfectly conscious to the last, and showed the same 


-courage and faith, unselfishness and thought for his 


wife and children and his schools as always. His doc- 
tor says it was ‘a pure case of heart failure, due to ab- 
solute loss of bodily strength.’ In leaving us he gave 
unflinching testimony to the truths he taught.” His 
was a triumphant and glorious death. It seems likely 
that Mr. Moody perceived that approach of death’ be- _ 
fore his family. During the intervals of relief from 
pain he had during his illness he expressed great ex- 
pectations and hopes regarding his future work when 
restored to health, but gradually the truth dawned 
upon him that he could not get well, and it was then 
that, in accordance with his readiness ever to bow ta 
the Divine will, he murmured, “Thy will be done.” 

The incidents of Mr. Moody’s last night and day on 
earth are worthy a full record. Mrs. Moody, Mrs. 
Fitt, Rev. A. P. Fitt and Drs. Schofield and Wood 
were in almost constant attendance. The sick cham- 
ber was not deserted even for a moment through the 
long night. During the night the patient had fre- 
quent sinking spells. He was always kindness itself ta 
those about him. At 2 o’clock Dr. N. P. Wood, the 


family physician, who spent the night at his own 


‘home, was called by request of Mr. Moody. The pa- 


tient was perspiring, and he requested his son-in-law, 


354 LIFE OF MOODY. 


Rev. A. P. Fitt, who spent the first of the night with 


‘him, to call the physician that he might note the symp- 


toms. A hypodermic injection of strychnia was ad- 


_ ministered, which caused the heart to perform its duties 


more readily, and Mr. Moody then requested Mr. Fitt 
and Dr. Wood to retire and to leave him alone with 
his eldest son, William R. Moody, who spent the last 
half of the night with his father. 

When Lr. Wood reached the sickroom at 7.30 A. M, 
he found Mr. Moody in a semi-conscious state. When 
his patient recovered consciousness he said, with all 
his old strength of voice, vivacity, and even jocularity,. 
as if in surprise: 

“What’s the matter? What’s going on here?” 

“Father,” said one of his sons, “you have not been 
quite well,.and so we came here to be with you.” 

He went on chatting with them, giving but little 


evidence of suffering. Presently he directed his 


~ 


thoughts and conversation especially to his two song 
and son-in-law as they sat by his bedside. Ina clear} 
firm, but low voice, he thus addressed*them: 

“T have always been an ambitious man—not ambi- 
tious to lay up wealth, but to leave you work to do. 
You are going to continue the work of the schools at 
East Northfield, Mount Hermon and at the Chicago 
Bible Institute?” 


LIFE OF - MOODY. Bes 


They assured him that it would be done. 

Once the stillness of the chamber of death was 
broken by the heartbroken cry of Mrs. Fitt, his daugh- 
ter, who exclaimed, “Father, we cannot spare you!” 

} was the 


be) 


“T am not going to throw my life away, 
gentle reply. “If God has more work for me to do 
I’ll not die.” He comforted them all. . . 

John Bancroft Devins writes, in the New York Ob- 
server, as follows: 

Mr. Moody knew early on the morning of December — 
22 that he could not live; he passed away at noon. 
There were experiences in the last four hours that 
were not unexpected by those who knew the childlike 
faith of this man of God. He was natural, patient, 
thoughtful to the last. Knowing that the end was fast 
approaching, the only fear seemed that his hard breath- 
ing might disturb his loved ones. In the early morn- 
ing, coming out of a sinking spell, he said: 

“Tf this is death, there is no valley.. This is glorious. 
I have been within the gates and I saw the children, 
Dwight and Irene” (his two grandchildren who have 
died recently). His beautiful testimony : 

“Earth is receding. Heaven is approaching. God is 
calling me,” were among his last words, but those 
which were spoken last related more especially to his 
wife and children. In speaking of his death, he said 


356 LIFE OF MOODY. 


that he had been an ambitious man, not to make money, 
but to have work to do, and he added: 

“T think is is time that I made my will now. ~ Will, 
you may have the Mt. Hermon School to look after. 
Paul, you may have the seminary when you are fitted 


for it. Emma, you and Percy (her husband), take care 7 


of the Bible Institute in Chicago.” 

“What about mother?” asked one of the children. 

“Oh, she is like Eve; she is the mother of us all,” 
he replied, with his old-time smile. Then he placed his 
hand affectionately in that of the noble woman who has 
been in very truth a helpmeet for nearly forty years, and 
said: “You have been a good wife to me.” As the 
doctor saw him about to faint again, he went to his bed- 
side to give another hypodermic injection. 

“Is there anything gained by this?” asked Mr. 
Moody. 

“Nothing except to give you strength and relieve 
your suffering.” : ; ¢ 

“Then, I think we will stop, for it is only prolonging 
the suffering of those who are dear to me.” And with 
this consideration for his wife and children he passed 
away, or, to use his own words, spoken a few months 
ago, “He is gone up higher—that is all ; gone out of this 
old tenement into a house that is immortal, into a body 


LIFE OF MOODY. 357. 


that death cannot touch, that sin cannot taint, a body | 
. fashioned like unto His own glorious body.” 

This deathbed testimony is given at some length to 
explain the remarkable funeral which was held on 
Tuesday afternoon of last week. It was truly a Chris- 
tian burial service. The keynote was struck when. Dr. 
C.J.Schofield, the pastor of the Congregational Church 
in East Northfield, said, at the opening of the service: » 
“We are not here to mourn a defeat, but to celebrate 
a victory.” . 

Mr. Moody died as he lived, a victor. There was, in- 
deed, no martial music nor stately parade following a 
plumed hearse. In fact, there was neither hearse nor 
funeral music, nor tolling bells, nor crape, nor veils to 
hide faces suffused in tears. Tears there were in the 
eyes of everyone of the large congregation present. 
But there was no weeping, and the calmest faces in the 
church were those of the immediate family. The resig- 
nation manifested by Mrs. Moody was that of one. 
whose husband had entered into joys unspeakable, 
which await her also, and which she is to share with 
him. “I hope no one will speak of me as fatherless,” 
said the daughter in the morning to a friend. The 
clear voice of the elder son’s wife was heard in the Gos- 
- pel hymns manifesting sweet resignation. There was 
no suggestion-of the death of two children, the serious 


358 LIFE OF MOODY. 


- illness of her father and the death of her devoted father- 


in-law, all within a year. Thesons were as interested as . 


if they were attending a meeting led by their father. 
The entire family were wonderfully sustained. 

The day of the funeral was a perfect day—‘one of the 
‘Lord’s own days,” a visitor called it. The sun rose clear 
over the mountain at whose feet Northfield nestles. In 

the distance, on the foothills of the Green Mountains, 
patches of snow appeared. The morning was frosty, 
but in the afternoon, as the friends gathered for the 
service, the temperature had risen several degrees. 
Large parties from Boston, New York and other cities 
arrived soon after noon. A special train from Brattle- 
boro, Vt., brought many friends. There were many 
well-known clergymen and laymen present in addition 
to those taking part in the services. Besides Ira D. 
Sankey, Mr. Moody’s associate for nearly thirty years, 
who was accompanied by his wife, there were three of 
Mr. Moody’s singers in the audience—George C. 
Stebbins, D. R. Towner and F. H. Jacobs. 

‘Passing Mr. Moody’s house in the forenoon, a 
stranger would not have thought that death had been a 
recent visitor. No signs of mourning appeared. No 
crape was seen on the door. The window-blinds were 
all open. People entered the house as\if going to a 
reception. Inside, after the service, they sat in the 


- Sete 


LIFE OF MOODY. 359 


library and parlor chatting pleasantly. Their conversa- 
tion was mainly about Mr. Moody, recalling incidents 
in his eventful career, helpful words which he had 
spoken and deeds of kindness which he had done. 

On Tuesday, December 26, 1899, at 9 A. M., Dr. - 
Schofield and Dr. R. A. Torrey, the pastor of the Chi- 
cago Avenue Church and the superintendent of the 
Bible Institute in Chicago, conducted a service consist- 
ing of Scripture selections and a prayer at the Moody 
home. Only the family and relatives and a few intimate 
friends and associates of the deceased ‘were present. 
After the friends had viewed the body the family were 
left alone with their dead for awhile. Then the remains 


were placed in a casket of simple design, black-covered  ~ 


and opened at full length, and the casket was laid upon 
a bier. Then the body was carried to the church, a half 
mile distant, on a bier by thirty-two students from the 
Mt.. Hermon School. Then came the honorary’ pall- 
bearers by twos—Ira D. Sankey and George C. Steb- 


bins, R. C. Morse and D. W. McWilliams,Rev. W. e 


Erdman and Rev. George Needham. 

As the funeral cortege moved from the house, the 
dead evangelist’s eldest son, who stood on the lawn 
bareheaded, gave way to his grief, and leaned up — 
against a tree, while his frame shook with emotion. 

The body sas carried to the Congregational Church, 


360 LIFE OF MOODY. 


where it remained lying in state in front of the pulpit, 


- with the lid of the casket removed. For.several hours’ 


hundreds of people passed by and looked upon all that 
remained of D. L. Moody. They had come from near 
and from far, in public and private conveyances of 
every description, to pay the last tribute of respect to 
their leader and teacher and friend. It was a tribute 
paid by loving hearts. There were not less than 3000 
persons within and without the church during the ser- 
vices. Mr. Moody was clad in his accustomed dress, 
and looked like one in peaceful slumber. 

- At 2 o'clock the doors of the church were closed to 
- permit the final preparations for the public service. 
tae At 2.7 5 the family left the Moody residence and en- 
tered the church, where they took the seats reserved for 
them. . 

At 2.30 P. M. the public service began. At the right 
of the middle aisle sat the present head of the family, 
William Revell Moody. Next to him was his mother, 
then in order the daughter and son, Mrs. A. P. Fitt 
(Emma Moody) and Paul Moody; Mrs. W. R. Moody 
(Mary Whittle) and A. P. Fitt. Behind them sat other 
relatives, including Fleming H. Revell and Mrs. W. H. 
Holden, Mrs. Moody’s brother and sister; Isaiah, 
George and Edwin Moody; Mrs. C. M. Walker and 
Mrs. L. C. Washburn, brothers and sisters of Mr. 





LIFE OF MOODY. 361 | 


Moody, and their families; Mr. and Mrs. Ambert G. 
Moody and Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Walker. 

The galleries were filled with the general, public, 
while around the Moody family were clustered their 
relatives and friends and the male and female members 
of the various institutions at Northfield and Chicago 
founded by Mr. Moody—filling the church. These 
were but a fraction of the multitudes gathered by this 
one man around him in his lifetime. 

On the platform were seated many of the most dis- 


- tinguished men of the land, both ministers and laymen, 


among them President Henry G. Weston, D. D., LL. . 
D., Dr. A. C. Dixon, Rev. F. S. Hatch, Dr. S. H. Had- 
ley, Payson Hammond and Rev. D. A. Reed. 

Christmas greens festooned the galleries of the 
church, while on the coffin and about were appropriate © 
floral tributes from the trustees, faculties and students 
of the séveral institutions in Northfield and Chicago. 
At the head was a pillow, in which a crown had been | 
worked in white, with a purple ribbon, on which Mr. 
Moody’s words were seen, “God is calling me.” 

An open Bible with “Victory—I Corinthians, xv: 


55,57’ on the left side and “TI Timothy, iv: 7, 8” on the 


other rested at the foot. Palms, ferns, laurel, cut flow- 


~ ers and callas were placed about the pulpit. When the 


cover of the cloth-covered coffin was removed the face 


362 LIFE OF MOODY. 


and hands were plainly visible from every part of the 
church. As the sun was setting a single ray entered 'a 
blind and rested upon the coffin. Gradually it rose un- 
til it reached the face of the friend so dearly loved by a 
multitude of people. With evening coming on and 
with the shadows deepening in the room the effect of 
this stray sunbeam seemed like ‘a light sent from 
“within the gates.” 

Rev. Dr. C. I. Schofield, the pastor of Mr. Moody, 
had charge of the services, which began with the hymn 
“A Little While,” composed by Major Whittle and 
James McGranahan. A choir of 150 students led in the 
singing. The following is the first verse: 

“A little while!’ and He shall come; 

The hour draws on apace, 

The blessed hour, the glorious morn, 

When we shall see His face; ~ 

How light our trials then will seem! e 
How short our pilgrim way! 


Our life on earth a fitful dream, 
Dispelled by dawning day! 


CuHoRus. 
“Then come, Lord Jesus, quickly come, 
In glory and in light! 
Come, take thy longing children home, 
And end earth’s weary night.” 


After the hymn Dr. Schofield offered an invocation, 
Dr. Arthur T. Pierson read the Scripture lesson, 





LIFE OF MOODY. 363 


BM Cor,.ive te and Be George C. Needham Sheu 
“Immanuel’s Land” was sung by the Mt. Hermon 
quartet. . 

Dr. Schofield, in-his eulogy, said: 

“We know.” “We are always confident.” That 
is the Christian attitude towards the mystery of death. 
We are confident and willing rather to be absent 
from the body and to be at home with the Lord. 
And this is the Christian doctrine of death. We are 
miet, dear friends, not to mourn a defeat, but to cele- 
brate atriumph. He walked with God, and he was not, 
for God took him. There in the West, in the presence 
of great audiences of 12,000 of his fellow-men, God 
spoke to him to lay it all down and come ie Eté 
would have planned it so. 

This is not the place, nor am I the man, to present a 
study of the life and character of Dwight L. Moody. 
This will follow. But some things at least press to be 
said. Some things are so sure that no lapse of time, no 
quieter afterthought, can unsettle them. No one will 
ever question that we are today laying in the kindly 
bosom of the earth the mortal body of a great man. 

Whether we measure greatness by qualities of char- 
acter, by qualities of intellect or by things done alone, 
Dwiglit L. Moody must be accounted great. The basis 


of Mr. Moody’s character was sincerity, genuineness. : 


364 LIFE OF MOODY. 


He had an inveterate aversion to all forms of sham, un- 
reality and pretense. Most ofall did he detest religious 
pretense, cant. At this point he held high and stern 
opinions. But nowhere did he apply them so relent- 
lessly as in the sphere of his own life. In no morbid 
sense an introspective man, he was yet always testing 
his foundations at this point. Along with this funda- 
mental quality Mr. Moody cherished a great love of 
righteousness. His first question concerning any pro- 
posed action was, “Is it right?’ But these two quali- 
ties, necessarily at the bottom of all noble characters, 
were in him suffused and transfigured by divine grace. 
Sensitive beyond most men upon the point of righteous- 
ness, Mr. Moody never doubted the power of God’s 
grace to reconstruct the most defective character; and 
where he could see in any man a longing for this, his 
patience was inexhaustible. Besides all this, Mr. 
Moody was in a wonderful degree brave, magnanimous 
and unselfish. We are not here to extol Mr. Moody 
after the flesh. Doubtless, this unlettered New Eng- 
land country boy became what he was by the grace of 
God. But the law of the bestowal of the talents is clear : 
“To every man according to his several ability.” 

The secret of Dwight L. Moody’s power lay in five 
things: First, in a definite experience of Christ’s sav- 


ing grace. He had passed out of death into life, and he 


t% 





LIFE OF MOODY. 365 


knew it. The new birth was to him a subjective cer- 
tainty. The Spirit witnessed with his spirit that he was 
a son of God. That delivered him from lust of earthly 
things, fyom deference to the great. The humblest of 
Christians, he yet could conceive of nothing more ex- 
alted than divine sonship. Secondly, Mr. Moody be- 
lieved in the divine authority of the Scriptures. The 
Bible was to him the voice of God, and he made it re- 
sound as such in the consciences of men. Thirdly, he 
was baptized with the Holy Spirit, and knew that he 
was. It was to him as definite an experience as his con- 
version, and whet he preached he expected the Spirit 
to convert and convict men. Fourthly, he was a man 
of prayer. He believed in/a living and unfettered God. 
It never occurred to him that the Almighty had tied . 
His own hands by natural laws. He believed in the 
supernatural as available. The mountain about him 
was always filled with horses and chariots of fire. But 
fifthly, Mr. Moody believed in work, in ceaseless effort, 
in wise provision, in the power of organization, of pub- 
licity. Hé expected the supernatural to work but 
through the natural. He hitched his wagon to a star, 


but always kept his wheels ion the ground and the axles 


well oiled. 
I like to think of Dwight L. Moody in heaven. I like 


s 


306 LIFE OF MOODY. 


o think of him with his Lord and with Elijah, Daniel, 
Paul, Augustine, Luther, Wesley and Finney. 

Farewell for a little while, great heart! May a double 
portion of the spirit be granted to us all! 

President H. G. Weston of Crozer Theological 
Seminary followed Dr. Schofield. Dr. Weston said in 
part: 

I count as one of the ereatest blessings of my life 
my acquaintance with Mr. Moody, the influence he has 
had on me and the privilege of studying God’s methods 
in his life and work. We instinctively attribute the suc- 
cess of every man who is eminent in attaching and in- 
fluencing others to some special natural endowment, to 
education and training or to a peculiar magnetic per- 
sonality. Mr. Moody had none of these, yet no man 
has surpassed him in his power of attraction and influ- 


ence, both over masses of men and over individuals of 


sturdy character, of executive ability, of great re- 
sources, whom he fastened to himself with hooks of 
steel, making them not only his lifelong friends, but his 
‘constant partners in all his good works. This marvel- 
ots power wielded so many years and undiminished to 
the end we cannot explain by bestowment of any one 
peculiar, natural gift. He had none of them. What 
had he? 
He hadlife. Ido not mean the manner of living, but 








LIFE OF MOODY. 367 


what the Bible means by this word—what Christ 
means when He declares the purpose of His coming: 
“TI am come that they might have life, and might have 
it abundantly.” God gave him life, made him a par- 
taker of the divine nature, and from the moment he re- 
ceived it the development, growth and manifestation 
of that life became the whole object of his existence. 
To it he devoted every power of his being, and that de- 
votion kindled into intensest activity every latent en- 
ergy of his nature, and made him the complete, round- 
sided, full-orbed man of instinctive judgment and tact 
that he was, and gave him his wonderful mastery of 
man. 

Then he nourished and strengthened that life by de- 
votion to God’s Word. He prized it as the treasure 
by which his life could be enriched. He realized to the _ 
full Christ’s words: “Man shall not live by bread alone, 
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of 
God.” That word he hid in his heart, as the seed is 
hidden in the earth that it may swell and grow. He hid 
it there, ready for use on every occasion and in every 
emergency. It was sweeter to him than honey or the 
honeycomb. His mind and heart were given to the 


__ study of the Word of God. 


But his life, like that of Christ, was for others. He 
did not search the Bible to add to his knowledge, to 


(368° ‘LIFE OF MOODY. 


gratify curiosity, to form a system of theology, but to 
save men from sin. His first and dominant purpose 
was to have every man receive that life of which he had 
been made a partaker; to this his sermons were de- 
voted ; he counted everything but loss unless this were 
attained ; and then he coveted for all the means of de- 
veloping and utilizing that life. The sight of poor girls 
and boys deprived of the means of education would not 
let him rest until he had provided some method by 
which their lives should be enriched and made more in 


accordance with heaven’s designs in conferring on 
them spiritual life. He dotted this fair plain with 


houses that young men and young women should have 
the means of so enlarging their lives that they might be 
useful to their fellows. His work was in the line of 
Christ’s miracles, which never enriched the object with 
bounties of land or money or resources, but always. 
gave power to life, making the dead eye to see, touch- 
ing the dead tongue, the dead ear, the dead limb, and in 
His highest miracles speaking the dead to life. 

This likeness to Christ, this knowing the power of 
His resurrection and conformity to His death, was the 
reason that when he spoke every man gave him credit 
for the utmost sincerity. It was the reason that men 
listened to him and believed him, and were influenced 


by him in the mags and as individuals. They saw not 


LIFE OF MOODY. 369 


the man, but the truth he spoke. He had that wonder- 
ful egotism by which he could constantly speak of him- 


. self and yet never draw attention to himself. Men saw 


in all that he was. and did the truth as it was in Jesus. 

And so, because Mr. Moody could in his measure use 
those great words of Christ, “I am come that they 
might have life and that they might have it abun- 
dantly,”” because these words expressed his whole be- 
ing, | loved and honored and valued him, and because 
of what he was, and, therefore, of what he did, I say 
today I had rather be Mr. Moody dead, lying there in 
his coffin, than any living man on earth. 

Dr. Torrey of the Moody Bible Institute, Chicago, 
made an earnest address, calling upon those present 
and Mr. Moody’s friends everywhere to “go forward.” 
Tn his address he said: . 

It is oftentimes the first duty of a pastor to speak 
words of comfort to those whose hearts are aching with 
loneliness and breaking underneath the burden of their 
sorrow, but this is utterly unnecessary today. The God 
of all comfort hath already abundantly comforted them 
with a comfort wherewith in coming days they will be 
able to comfort others. I have spent hours within the 


last few days with those who are nearest to our departed 
’ friend, and the words that I have heard from them have 


been words of rest in God and of triumph. As one of 


370 LIFE OF MOODY, 


them has said: “God must be answering the prayers 
‘that are going up for us allwover the world, we are being 
so wonderfully sustained.” Another has said: “His 
last four glorious hours on earth have taken all the 
sting out of death.” And still another: “Be sure that 
every word today is a word of triumph.” 

Two thoughts has God laid upon my heart for this 
hour. The first is found in the words of Paul in I 
Corinthians, xv:10: “By the grace of God I am what 
Iam.” God has wonderfully magnified His:grace and 
love in D. L. Moody. God was magnified in his birth. 
The babe that was born sixty-two years ago on yonder 
hill with all the possibilities that were wrapped up in 
* him was God’s gift to the world. How much that gift 
meant to the world! How the world has been blessed 
and benefited by it we shall never know this side the 
coming of our Lord. God’s grace was magnified in his 
conversion. He was born in sin, as we all are, but God 
by His providence, by the power of His word, by the 
regenerating power of His Holy Spirit, made him a 
mighty man of God. How much the conversion of that 
boy in Boston forty-three years ago meant to the world 
no man can tell; but it was all God’s grace that did it. 
God’s love and grace were magnified again in the de- 
velopment of that character that has made him so loved 
- and honored in all lands today. He had a strength and 





LIFE OF MOODY. 371 


beauty of character possessed by the few sons of men; 
but it was all from God. To God alone was it due that he 
differed from other men. It was all from God. That 
character was God’s gift to a world that sorely needed 
men like him. God’s grace and love were magnified in 
his service. The great secret of his success was super- 
_ natural power given in answer to prayer. : 

The other thought is found in Joshua, 1: 2: “Moses, 
my servant, is dead; now, therefore, arise, go over this 
Jordan, thou and all this people, unto the land which I 
do give to them.” The death of Mr. Moody is a call to 
go forward. A call to his children, to his associates, 
to ministers of the Word everywhere, to the whole 
Church. “Our leader has fallen, let us give up the 
work,” some would say. Not for a minute. Listen to 
what God says: “Your leader is fallen, move forward. — 
Moses, my servant, is dead ; therefore arise, go in and 
possess the land. Be strong and of good courage; be 
not afraid. As I was with D. L. Moody, so I will be 
with thee. I will not fail thee nor forsake thee.” 

It is remarkable how unanimous all those who have 
been associated with Mr. Moody are upon this point. 
The great institutions that he has established at North- 
_ field, at Mt. Hermon, at Chicago and the work they 
represent must be pushed to the front as never before. 
Mr. Moody-himself said, when he felt the call of ; 


| 372 LIFE OF MOODY. 


death at Kansas City, “I know how much better it 
would be for me to go; but we are on the verge of a 
great revival like that of 1857, and I want to have a 
hand in it.” He will have a mighty hand in it. His 
death, with the triumphal scenes that surround it, are 
part of God’s way of answering the prayers that have 
been going on for so long in our land for a revival. 

The venerable Bishop W. F. Mallalieu, of the Meth- 
odist Episcopal Church, who had known Mr. Moody 
since 1875, said-that in Mr. Moody’s death one of the 
truest, bravest, purest and most influential men of the 
century had passed to his rest and his reward. The 
Bishop said : 

“Servant of God, well done; 
Thy glorious warfare’s past; 


The battle’s fought, the race is won, 
And thou art crowned at last:’* 


- I first met and became acquainted with him whose 
death we mourn in London in the summer of 1875. 


From that day, when he moved the masses of the | 


world’s metropolis, to the hour when he answered the 
call of God to come up higher, I have known him, es- 
teemed him and loved him. Surely we may now say, 
and the world will endorse this affirmation, that in his 
death one of the truest, bravest, purest and most influ- 


ential men of this wonderful nineteenth century has 


LIFE OF MOODY. 373 


passed to his rest and his reward. With feelings of un- 
speakable loss and desolation we gather about the cas- 
ket that contains all that was mortal of Dwight L. 
Moody. And yet a mighty uplift and inspiration must 
come to each one of us as we think of his character and 
his achievements, for he was 

“One who never turned his back, but marched breast forward; 

Never doubted clouds would break, 


Never dreamed, though right were worsted, wrong would 
triumph.” . j 


In bone and brawn and brain he was a typical New 
Englander; he was descended from the choicest New 
England stock ; he was born of a New England mother, 
and from his earliest life he breathed the free air of his 


native hills, and was carefully nurtured in the knowl-_ 4 


edge of God and the holy traditions and histories of the — 
glorious past. It was to be expected of him that he 
would become a Christian of pronounced characteris- 
tics, for he consecrated himself thoroughly, completely © 
and irrevocably to the service of God and humanity. 
The heart of no disciple of the Master ever beat with 
more genuine, sympathetic and utterly unselfish loy- 
alty than did the great, generous, loving heart of our 
_ translated friend. 

Because he held fast to the absolute truth of the 
Bible and unequivocally and intensely believed it to be 


374 LIFE OF MOODY. 


the inerrant Word of God; because he preached the 
Gospel rather than talked about the Gospel; because. 
he used his mother tongue, the terse, clear, ringing, 
straightforward Saxon; because he had the profound- 
est sense of brotherhood with all poor, unfortunate, and 
even outcast people ; because he was unaffectedly ten- 
der and patient with the weak and the sinful; because 
he hated evil as thoroughly as he loved goodness ; be- 
cause he knew right well how to lead penitent souls to 
the Saviour ; because he had the happy art of arousing 
Christian people to a vivid sense of their obligations, 
and inciting them to the performance of their duties ; 
because he had in his own soul a conscious, joyous ex- 
perience of personal salvation, the people flocked to-his 
services. They heard him gladly; they were led to 
Christ, and he came to be prized and honored by all 
denominations, so that today all Protestantism recog- - 
nizes the fact that he was God’s servant, an ambassador 
_of Christ, and indeed a chosen vessel to bear the name 
of Jesus to the nations. We shall not again behold his 
manly form animated with life, hear his thrilling voice, 
or be moved by his consecrated personality ; but if we 
are true and faithful to our Lord we shall see him in 
glory, for already he walks the streets of the heavenly 
_ city, he mingles in the song of the innumerable com- 
pany of white-robed saints, sees the King in His beauty 





LIFE OF. MOODY. 375 


and awaits our coming. May God grant that in due 
time we may meet him over yonder. 
The Rev. Dr. J. Wilbur Chapman of New York said 
that the whole scene seemed like a dream, not a reality, 
He had never seen Mr. Moody with his eyes closed be- 
fore. They were always open, and, it seemed to him, 
open not only to see where he could help others, but . 
where he could help him. One thing was natural—the 
- sunlight resting on the face of Mr. Moody. There was 
always a halo around him. The speaker had been 
helped into light as a college student by the evangelist’s 
sermon, “Sowing and Reaping.’ As a Christian, a 
pastor and an evangelist he had often been helped by 
him. As he sat at Mr. Moody’s feet every doubt and 
perplexity vanished. In the presence of the congre- 
gation before him he dedicated himself to better living 
and better preaching. He said: . 
When a student in college Mr. Moody found me. I 
had no object in Christ. He pointed me to the hope in 
God. He saw my heart and I saw his Saviour. When 
perplexities have arisen, from those lips ‘came the 
words, “Who are you doubting? If you believe in 
God’s Word, who are you doubting”? I was pastor, a 
preacher without much result. One day Mr. Moody 
~ came to me and, with one hand on my shoulder and the 
other on the open Book of God, he said: “Young man, 


376 LIFE OF MOODY. 


you had better get more of this into your life.” 
“If my own father,” he said in closing, “were lying 
where Mr. Moody is I could not feel a greater sense of 

loss.” 

The Rev. Dr. A. T. Pierson, a friend of long stand- 
ing, referred to the death of four prominent persons in 
the last few years—C. H. Spurgeon, in London; Adon- 
iram J. Gordon, in Boston; Catherine Booth, the 
mother of the Salvation Army, and George Muller, in . 
Bristol—and added that Mr. Moody’s death was a 
greater loss than that of any of the four mentioned, 
and that not one made the world-wide commotion in 
their departure that Dwight L. Moody has caused. Mr. 
Moody was a great man, he said, having the greatness 
of goodness. Everything that he touched succeeded. 
The speaker estimated that Mr. Moody had addressed 

- audiences aggregating 100,000,000 people during his — 
public life. His books have also gone into all the world. 
He has erected a score of building in Europe and Amer- 
_ ica, besides carrying on for twenty years his great edu- 
cational institutions. 

“That man, when he entered the church in 1856 in 
Boston, after ten months of probation, was told by his 
pastor that he was not a sound believer. That pastor, 
taking him aside, told him he had better keep still in 
prayer-meeting. The man the church held out at arm’s 





LIFE OF MOODY. 377 


length has become the preacher of preachers, the 
teacher of teachers, the evangelist of evangelists. It is 
a most humiliating lesson for the church of God. 
When, in 1858, he decided to give all his time, he 
gave the key to his future. I say everything D. L. 
Moody has touched has been a success. Do you know 
that with careful reckoning he has reached 100,000,000 
of people since he first became a Christian? You may 
take all the years of public service in this land and Great . 
Britain ; take into consideraton all the addresses he de- 
livered and all the audiences of his churches and it will 
reach 100,000,000. Take into consideration all the peo- 
ple his books have reached and the languages into 
which they have been translated ; look beyond his evan- 
gelistic work to the work of education, the schools, the 
Chicago Bible Institute and the Bible Institute here. 
Scores of people in the world owe their spiritual exis-_ 
tence to Dwight L. Moody as a means of their conse- 
cration., 
"I want to say a word of Mr. Moody’s entrance int 
heaven. When he entered into heaven there must 
have been an unusual commotion. I want to ask you 
today whether you can think of any other man of the 
last half century whose coming so many souls would 


“have welcomed at the gates of heaven. It was a tri- 


umphal entrance into glory. 


378 LIFE OF MOODY. 


No man who has been associated with him in Chris- 
tian work has not seen that there is but one way to live, 
and that way to live wholly for God. The thing that D. 
L. Moody stood for, and will stand for for centuries to 
come was his living only for God. He made mistakes, 
no doubt ; but if any of us is without sin in this respect 
we might raise a stone at him, but I am satisfied that 
the mistakes of D. L. Moody were the mistakes of a 
stream that overflowed its banks. It is a great deal bet- 
ter to be full and overflowing than to be empty and 
have nothing to overflow. 

Rev. Dr. H. M. Wharton of Baltimore, a icllow-evan: 
gelist, said, among other things: 

I would lay today the fairest flowers of our Southern 
land upon the bosom of our dear friend. No man did 
so much as he to bind together the sections of our great 
country, the different denominations of the Christian 
religion, the countries of the world. He belonged to 
all the world, and his loss is felt in every nation of the - 
globe. I know it is far better for him, and his triumphal 
entry into the beautiful city has made all heaven glad, 
but we shall miss him more and more as the days go by. 
This calm, sweet day is a fit token of his glorious depar- 
ture. When he went “inside the gates” they were left 
open, and the light streams through upon us all today. 
“He.was a burning and a shining light.” With unflag- 





PE CONVENTIONALLY KANSAS! CITY,“ MO., IN 


WHICH MR. MOODY HELD HIS LAST MHETING 





a ae ———— 








LIFE OF MOODY. 381 


ging zeal from first to last he wore his life out in his 
Master’s service, and the great, faithful, loving, tired 
heart ceased to beat. His light made every other life 
brighter, every other home happier. It has not gone 
out; it never will, but will shine on through the ages. 
His life was like the morning star, which goes not down | 
behind a dark horizon, but melts away in the opening 
day and into the brightness of the rising sun. We will 
now say good-bye, dear friend, but only until the 
morning. 
“T have three children, and the greatest desire of my 
life is that they may be saved,” said Mr. Moody in a 
sermon on “Heaven; that I may know that their 
names are written in the Book of Life. I may be taken 
from them early; I may leave them in this changing 
world without a father’s care; but I would rather have 
my children say that of me after I am dead and gone, 
or if they die before me, I would rather they would take _ 
that message to the Master—that ever since they can 
| remember I have tried to lead them to the Master, than 
to have a monument over me reaching to the:skies.” 
As Dr. Wharton sat down William Revell Moody 
rose and requested permission to add a word. This 
was the brief tribute of a loyal son to a loving father : 
Asason I want to say a few words of him as a father. 


We have heard from his pastor, his associates and 


S82 os ae LIFE OF MOODY. 


friends, and he was just as true a father. I don’t think 
he showed up in any way better than when, on one or 
two occasions, in dealing with us as children, with his 
impulsive nature, he spoke rather sharply. In every 
case he would come to us and say: “My children, my 
son, my daughter, I spoke quickly ; I did wrong ; I want 
you to forgive me.” That was D. L. Moody as a 
father. 
He was not yearning to go. He loved his work. 
Life was very attractive. It seems as though on that 
early morning when he had one foot upon the threshold 
it was given him for our sake to give us a word of com- 
fort. He said: “This is bliss; it is like a trance. If 
this is death it is beautiful.” And his face lightened up 
as he mentioned those whom he saw. ‘ ‘ 

We could not call him back; we tried to fora mo- 
“ment, but we could not. We thank God for his home 
life, for his true life, and we thank God that he was our 
father, and that he led each one of his children to know 
Jesus Christ. Father has crossed the bar; thank God 
he was homeward bound and went in under full head- 
way. 

Hon. John Wanamaker spoke very briefly some 


words of testimony to the memory of his intimate 


friend. He said: 
If I had any words to say it would be that the best 


LIFE OF MOODY. 383 


commentary on the Scriptures, the best pictures of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, were in our knowledge of the beauti- 
ful man who is sleeping in our presence today. For the 
first time I can understand better the kind of a man 
Paul was, and Nehemiah, and Oliver Cromwell. I 
think of Mr. Moody as a Stonewall Jackson of the : 
Church of God of this century. But the sweetest of all 
thoughts of him are his prayers and his kindnesses. It 
was as if we were all taken into his family and he had 
a familiarity with everyone and'we were his closest 
friends. te Rie is Wane ieee be ior a" 

It is not alone in Northfield these buildings will stand, 
but over a hundred million buildings that owe their 
standing to his efforts, Christian associations and 
churches that are erected for use both Sundays and 
week days. There is not any place in this country 
where you can go without seeing the work of this man 
of God. It seemed to make every man seem small, be- 
cause he lived so far above us, as we crept close to his 
feet. It is true of every one who sought to be like him. 

I can run back into the beginning of his manhood 
and there have the privilege of being close to him. I 
can call up personal friends that were at the head of 
railroads, that were distinguished in finance and busi- 


ness, and great as their successes were, I do not believe 


384 LIFE OF MOODY. 


that there is one of them who would not gladly have 
changed places with D. L. Moody. 

The Christian laborer I believe today looms up more 
luminous than any man who lived in the century. It 
seems as if it were a vision when the one who has passed 
away stood in Philadelphia last month, when on his way 
to Kansas City, and, with tears in his eyes, he said to me 
with a sigh: “If I could only hold one great city in the 
East before I die I think it might help other cities to do 
the same.” Still, trusting God, he turned his back on 
his home and family, and went a thousand miles carry- 
ing that burden, and it was too much for him. A great 
many of the people of the sixties are quitting work, and 
if anything is to be done for God it is time we consecrate 
ourselves to Him. 

Then the Mt. Hermon Quartet, whose singing was 
such a treat to Mr. Moody, sang “The Hope of the 
Coming of the Lord,” a new hymn by Major Whittle, 
to which his daughter, Mrs. Moody, wrote the music: 

“A lamp in the night, a song in time of sorrow, 

A great, glad hope, which faith can never borrow 


. To gild the passing day with the glory of the morrow, 
Is the hope of the coming of the Lord. 


CHORUS. 
“Blessed hope, blessed hope, 
Blessed hope of the coming of the Lord; 
How the aching heart it cheers, 





a ee 
= 4 


LIFE OF MOODY. 385 


How it glistens thro’ our tears, 
Blessed hope of the coming of the Lord. 


“A star in the sky, a beacon bright to guide us, 

An anchor sure, to hold when storms betide us, 

A refuge for the soul where in quiet we may hide us, 
Is the hope of the coming of the Lord. 


“A word from the One to all our hearts the dearest, 
A parting word to make Him, aye, the nearest, re 
Of all his precious words, the sweetest, brightest, clearest, 
Is the hope of the coming of the Lord.” 


The Observer says: 

_ After the public services the coffin was carried again 
by the Mt. Hermon students to Round Top, the Olivet 
of Northfield, just at the crown of the little hill, where 
many of the best meetings are held every year. Mr. 
Moody thought that the Lord might return while he 
was living, and he had been heard to say that there was 3 
no place on earth that he would prefer to be when that 
eventful hour dawned than on Round Top. His remark 
was recalled after his death, and no other place was 
even mentioned. At the grave those gathered sang, 
‘Jesus, Lover of My Soul,” Dr. Torrey offered prayer, 
and Dr. Scofield pronounced the benediction.. After 
the friends had withdrawn, the family gathered about 
the coffin, the cover was raised, and a last look was 
~ taken of the face of the husband and father. The cover 


was replaced, and the coffin, with its precious burden, 


386 LIFE OF MOODY. 


was lowered into the box, resting in the simple brick 
vault. From this resting place one may see his birth- 
place, a little more than a stone’s throw to the south; 
his own home for the last quarter of a century about 
as far to the west ; the seminary buildings, some of them 
a minute’s walk to the north; the last two buildings 
erected at Mt. Hermon, the chapel and Overtoun Hall, 
four miles distant, appear across the beautiful Connec- 
ticut river valley. To the north six miles, Hinsdale, in 
New Hampshire, is plainly seen, while the hills about 
Brattleboro stand out in bold relief. 
The Christian Herald adds: 

- Mr. Moody’s tomb is a vault of solid masonry, and 
had been lined with ivy preparatory to receiving the 
casket. It is at the summit of Round Top, and this 
spot, which the great evangelist in his lifetime had 
made a very center of Gospel activity and the focus of 
many summer conferences, will now more than ever 
be a Mecca—a shrine full of memories and attractions 
for Christian workers of all denominations throughout 
the whole world. 

“Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord: yea saith 
the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and 
their works do follow them.”’—Rev. 14: 13. 


3g 


LIFE OF MOODY. 387 


CHAPTER XVI. 


ESTIMATES OF WORK AND WORTH—MEMORIAL 
5 MEETINGS. . 


President Henry G. Weston, in the course of his address 
at the funeral of Mr. Moody, remarked that the influence of the 
great evangelist was “both over the masses of men and over 
individuals of sturdy character.” Among the latter drawn 
by Mr. Moody to himself was one of the great and good of 
the earth—the late Professor Henry Drummond. We have 
already-alluded to this and quoted him in relation to the sub- 
ject of this sketch, but we give additional testimony well worth 
recording. ; 

Professor Drummond said: “Whether estimated by the 
moral qualities which go to the making up of a personal char- 
acter or the extent to which he has impressed these upon com- 
munities of men on both sides of the Atlantic, there is, perhaps, 
no more truly great man living than D. L. Moody. By moral — 
influences in this connection I mean the influences which, 
with whatever doctrinal accompaniment, leads men to better 
lives and higher ideals. I have never heard Mr. Moody defend 
any particular church. I have never heard him quoted as a 
theologian. But I know of large numbers of men and women 
of all churches and creeds, of many countries and ranks, from 
the poorest to the richest, and from the most ignorant to the 
most wise, upon whom he has placed an ineffaceable moral 


work.” ; 
Hence the expressions of regret on account of the death of 


“Mr. Moody have come not-only from the people everywhere, 


but also from many of the most distinguished men in the Chris- 
tian church, and from many outside of the church; from the 


7 


388 LIFE OF MOODY. 


secular as well as from the religious press. One of the most 
remarkable features of this great rising of a people to pay 
tribute to the memory of the dead evangelist is the holding of 
memorial meetings all over the country. . 

The sorrow for Mr. Moody’s death has not been confined to 
any one denomination. Rarely has anyone passed away for 
whom every comment on his career, in press, pulpit and con- 


versation, is a eulogy. Even those who widely differed from . 


Mr. Moody in views of theology express the highest apprecia- 
tion of the valve of his services to his generation. On the 
day of Mr. Moody’s-death Dr. Lyman Abbott took occasion 
to express his warm regard for the departed evangelist, and 
Drs. Cuyler and Gregg, as well as others of equal prominence, 
have joined in these expressions. 

Dr. N. D. Hillis, at Plymouth Church, in his sermon Sun- 
day evening before Christmas, said: “Without the eloquence 
of Spurgeon, without the fine culture of Phillips Brooks, with- 
out the supreme genius of Mr. Beecher, Mr. Moody was a 
herald, a man sent forth from God who called the unchurched 
classes to repentance, who flamed forth on them the love of 
God in Christ. For nearly six years, it is said, Mr. Moody’s 
audiences averaged five thousand each afternoon and evening, 
a record that has never been surpassed in ali the history of 
evangelism. ‘Our bishops,’ said the London Telegraph, ‘have 
back of them a stated income, great cathedrals, a small army of 
paid helpers and musicians, but where our bishops have tens 
this man has reached hundreds.’ ” 

And these tributes have not come, as is observed, from home 
alone, but from abroad and from the whole Christian world. 
From both sides of the Atlantic has come the information 


that pulpit voices everywhere were lifted in one universal tes- 


timony in Mr. Moody’s praise and in great regret for the loss 
his death caused. 
Dr. H. Clay Trumbull, in the Sunday-School Times, writes: 
“Any man who has personally known Dwight L. Moody 
with any degree of intimacy owes it to the man and to the pub- 


LIFE OF MOODY. 380 © 


lic to add his word in testimony of what he was and what he 
did while the world is looking back upon his wonderful record 
with admiration and interest. Incidents in his busy career, as 
told by friends and fellow-workers, are of more value at such 
a time than any attempted careful estimate of his true place 
in his day and generation. The greatness and grandeur of the 
man will grow upon the world as he is looked back upon and , 
is more carefully studied in the elements of his power and in 
the manifest results of his lifework. Indeed, he has been thus 
growing in the world’s estimate for thirty-years and more. ° 

“Moody made his first impression on the general public in 
the East, and first showed his power there as a public religious 
leader in December, 1866, when he organized and led the first 
‘Christian Convention’ for Massachusetts and New England, 
which met in Tremont Temple, Boston. The idea of it grew 
out of the ‘Christian Commission, which had done such ser- 
vice in ministering to the men of the army and navy in the 
civil war. The purpose of the new plan was to unite Chris- 
tians of every sort in earnest work for the good of all. At 
Mr. Moody’s request I was present and had a part in that 
convention. 

“This was Moody’s first visit to Boston since he had left 
it for Chicago as a young clerk in a shoe store. He had mean-. 
time been active in Sunday-school work in Chicago and IIl- 
inois and for the Christian Commission among soldiers in 
camp and field. Boston is not easily led as a community, and 
it takes a leader to lead it. But Moody proved -himself com- 
petent to the undertaking. He knew whom to reach and how 
to use them, and he reached and used them accordingly. He 
had master minds there by the score, and he led them all. 

“For instance, Prof. Edwards A. Park, the theologian, was 
then in his prime at Andover. A convention of this sort was 
not what he would naturally have been drawn to; but Mr. - 

- Moody went out to Andover, looked him up and won him as 
‘a helper. I first realized Moody’s power on that occasion, as 
the two stood side by side on the Tremont Temple platform, 


* 


390 LIFE OF MOooDy. 


Professor Park was the embodiment of intellect, with pon- 
derous frame and massive brain, fitted and accustomed to 
teach impressively. All recognized his power. Moody, on the 
other hand, as yet little known, was slighter in figure and frame 
than the theologian, and was a manifestation of feeling rather 
than intellect. Yet Moody dwarfed Park in moral power as a 
leader as they stood together. It was head against heart, 
or head compared with heart, and, as always in such a com- 
parison, heart led. Professor Park realized this, as did the 
great assemblage. He evidently sought to fill the place that 
Moody, his leader, assigned him, and he did it. Boston never 
doubted Moody’s power after that incident.” ; 

Rey. Dr. W. E. Hatcher, in the Religious Herald, Richmond, 
Va., says: 

“The passing of Dwight L. Moody is a serious event in the 
Christian world. It withdraws from our evangelical forces 
their most conspicuous leader. Mr. Moody was a Christian 
commoner of the present generation, a true cosmopolitan, the 
founder of a new school of evangelism. Untrained in the 
schools, ke was yet the prince and counsellor in-the brother- 
hood of scholars. In his sphere he was simply incomparable. 
He stood for years as the central figure and almost the final 
authority in the evangelical movements of the day. He created 
a new literature, new music, new methods and a new order of 
preaching. Asa result of his inspiring influence thousands of 
ministers caught the evangelistic spirit and devoted themselves 
to the work of'the evangelist, and that, too, with gracious and 
far-reaching results. Nor is it less significant that in his wake 
there sprang a horde of spurious evangelists, who, dazzled by 
his achievements, stole his methods and sought to atone for 
their lack of attractiveness by a resort to invective, buffoonery 
and vulgarity, and in not a few cases rallied crowds and pub- 
lished reports that almost eclipsed him. The false apostles of 
Moody were many—a dismal counterfeit on the genuine article. 

“Moody was a magnet. It is not easy to understand how he 
attained unto such commanding power; but the fact is mani- 





LIFE OF MOODY. 3901 


fest. The best and the worst believed him. He was the match- 
less leveler. Nobles and peasants sat side by side on his plat- 
form, sang out of the same books and rejoiced in the same 
joyful hopes. All sects flocked to him, and each claimed him 
as its own. Even extremists and fanatics felt that there was a 
place in him for them, and, without impoverishing him, en- 
riched themselves by contact with him. He was a fountain of 
healing waters, and seemed to cure all manner of diseases. 
The most cultivated Christian laborers delighted to associate 
with him in his works. Business men believed him on sight, 
quit their offices at the busiest hours to hear him and gave him 
their money by the thousands. The stranded and lost felt the 
charm of his voice and plucked up hope for a new struggle as 
they heard him. Of course, superficial and vapid men said that 
if they had his environment of force they could achieve his 
results. It was the prattle of fools who could not appreciate 
the man. 

“No man ever preached to so many persons or put his im- 
press on so many communities or quickened so many godly 
ministers to more hopeful and effective service. He had vis- 
ited every Protestant country on the earth, preached in every 
leading city, and in his summer schools had taught an inter- 
national theological seminary. He was built for strength, and 
he worked up to the point of endurance all the time, and finally 
fell by overstrain of his powers. He was a peerless organizer; 
but he did this by his own splendid example of toil and sacri- 
fice. He never put burdens on others which he himself was 
not willing to bear. He sank out of sight his own comfort | 
and never took his eye off his main business. 

“With these few descriptive sentences I desire to unite some 
of my personal recollections of Moody, which will in some 
degree unveil the secrets of his majestic life. My first sight of 
Moody was interesting. While he was on his first ‘visit to 
- Baltimore I was invited by Dr. Kerfoot, then pastor of Eutaw 
‘Place Church, to assist him in revival services. On the night 
of my arrival Dr..Kerfoot told me that several ministers were 


392 LIFE OF MOODY. 


to see Moody privately the next morning, and that he had 
arranged for me to be in the company. This, of course, was a 
delightful surprise and privilege to me. There were about a 
dozen, possibly a few more, ministers present, having been as- 
sembled in a quiet room in the Y. M. C. A. Hall. Asking for 
silence, Mr. Moody said, in substance: ‘My brethren, I called 
you here because I need you. I find my strength small-in this 
city. My spirit is bound and I cannot rise. I brought you 
here to ask you to pray for me. Pray that I may have liberty 
and ‘do my work in Baltimore.’ By a common impulse, all 
sank to their knees, and for a time, of which not one took note, 
there was constant crying. One after another led, until each 
one had prayed aloud, some possibly more than once. It was 
a fervent and thrilling meeting, but I recall no prayer except 
that offered by Moody. That was burned into the very tissue 
of my being—a revelation of the most earnest man that I had 
ever touched—and, after the service ceased, I almost imagined 
that Moody had really been glorified. He shook Baltimore 
that winter. It has been said that much of Moody’s power 
was explained by the fact that he had so many good and ear- 
nest people to pray for him. It is said that his great work 
done on the other side of the ocean was clearly in answer to 


the agonizing cries of two good women in an-obscure town in 


Scotland, who, though they had never heard nor seen him, 
felt that he was the man to bring salvation to their people. 
He was sent to the place to recover his broken health, but 
God put him to work, and the fire kindled there spread all 
over the British Isles. : 

“A beautiful and affecting incident marked the beginning of 
Moody’s work at the time of his first visit to Richmond. When 
it was known that he was coming to the city quite severe criti- 
cisms were published‘against him on account of alleged utter- 
ances of his against the South during the war. He heard of 
these attacks before coming, and was disposed to cancel his 
engagement, but our committeee would not hear to it. He 
came and commenced his work on Sunday morning at nine 





LIFE OF MOODY. 393 


o’clock. He was evidently embarrassed, and spoke with con- 
straint and uneasiness. Just as the service was about to close 
he descended from his little elevated stand and walked to the 
front of the choir platiorm and made a speech. | ‘Friends of 
Richmond,’ he said, ‘you have been reading about me lately, 
and I fear you have not a good feeling for me. I do not think 
that I said the things against the South with which I am 
charged; but I am an awful fool and have said many foolish 
things in my day. IfI ever did say anything against the South 
I am sorry for it and ask you to forgive me.’ Instantly a ripple 
of applause commenced and swelled into a thundering roar. 
Moody bowed his head, tears were in his eyes, and he had the 
heart of Richmond. When he finished his work in Richmond 
some of the committee insisted that I make a farewell address 
to him, assuring him of our love and gratitude. I told him 
about the request during the last service. ‘Please don’t do it,’ 
he said. ‘I appreciate it all, but it makes me feel like a fool 
when folks get to hurrahing over me.’ My speech did not 
come to pass.”’ 

As a sample of the expressions that came from the secular 
press we quote from the New York Times: ‘Probably there is 
no man now living in the United States, unless very eminent in 
public station, whose death would affect the minds and the 
hearts of so great a multitude on both sides of the ocean as 
have felt the death of Mr. Moody. : 

“This is due not only to the peculiar nature of the activities 
in which he spent his exceedingly busy and energetic life, but 
to the rare character and gifts of the man. Although his early 
attempts to address his companions in the church were unsuc- 
cessful and awkward, he was unquestionably a public speaker 
of the sort that is born as well as made, and he passed his days 
in public speaking to audiences larger and more varied and 
more widespread over America and England than those that 
‘any other speaker has reached in his generation.” 

George Perry Morris, in a character sketch in the Review 


of Reviews for February, 1900, says of Mr. Moody: “No esti- 


304 LIFE OF MOODy. 


mate of Mr. Moody would be at all complete if it did not 
recognize the influence that he had in drawing Great Britain 
and the United States nearer together and in bringing nearer 
essential unity among Protestant Christians in the United 
States and Great Britain. His two tours through Great Brit- 
ain made the British feel that they owed something spiritually 
to an American. The many deputations from British univer- 
sities to the Northfield student gatherings have caused not a 
few young Britons to visit the United States, and thus they 
have become better acquainted with our political and educa- 
tional institutions, The many eminent English and Scotch 
clergymen—such men as Webb-Peploe, F. B. Meyer, G. Camp- 
bell Morgan and George Adam Smith—whom Mr.. Moody 
brought to this country to co-operate with him in his work in 
Chicago and Northfield, also have usually gone home more in- 
telligent and sympathetic friends of the United States. On the 
other hand, the many American clergymen, missionaries and 
college students who have sat at the feet of these foreign 
teachers or mingled with the foreign students have been made 
_ debtors to British folk in a way that they do not forget, now 
that Great Britain is enduring trouble,” 

Among the many Moody memorial meetings, a memorable 
one was held in the Cavalry Baptist Church, Wilmington, 
Del., R. B. Cook, D. D., pastor, January 22, 1900. Chief Jus- 
tice Love of Delaware presided, and President Henry G. Wes- 
ton, D. D., LL. D., who made the address, said in part: 

“My heart goes out tonight for the man who recently left 
us and whom I count myself highly honored in calling my 
friend. I count it one of the privileges of my life that I ever 
had the opportunity to know Mr. Moody. The highest knowl- 
edge of man is the knowledge ‘of God, and the next is the 
knowledge of man. We should study man. Mr. Moody was 
a man to be studied. And I have come tonight not to eulo- 
gize, but to speak to you about my friend who has gone 
from us. 

“Mr. Moody was a unique man. 





LIFE. OF MOODY. 395 


“In the first place, Mr. Moody was unique in the numbers of 
men that he addressed. 

“He was unique also in the retention of his power. 

“He was unique in transforming power. 

“He was unique in that nothing was ever brought against 
him. . 

“Knowing him so well and being so much with him, I might 
go on for hours with examples of his uniqueness. 

“T saw his wonderful management, his tact and his success, 
and wondered at the man. : 

“How came it all about? Whence his unique marvelous 
power over all classes of men? 


' “Mr. Moody was wonderful in bringing things to pass. This. 


is seen in the unique success of the schools and conferences 
at Northfield. 

“But how account for the power of Mr. Moody over the 
men of his generation—an influence which will ever live in the 
hearts and lives of the people? . 

“1. When he was converted he surrendered everything. to 
Christ. 

“9, He gave himself to the study of God’s word and Jesus. 

“3 Then there was that utter self-abnegation in him that was 
marvelous. 

“And so, when he came to die he died with the whole 
religious world for his memorial.” 


The congregation was large and representative, and among | 


those present and participating were Revs. Dr. Baker, Dr. 
McCurdy, Buddington, Snape and Salvage. 

To these the writer would add his own tribute. There have 
been a few men, like Paul, Gladstone and Spurgeon, who have 
been the property of the human race because they have lived 
for mankind. Dwight L. Moody belonged to this small class, 
and hence the story of his life and labors is, like Mr. Moody 
himself, the inheritance of the church, to be enumerated among 
the “All things are yours.” Some will seek to portray and pub- 


lish the history of that remarkable life and to trace in it those 


_ 396 LIFE OF MOODY. 


triumphs of divine grace that led him, like Paul, to consecrate 
his splendid powers unselfishly to humanity and Chrisitanity. 
Like a mighty Niagara that life, will flow on, not hindered by 
death, but only used for increasing good. 

And the more who write and the more who read about him 
the more will Christ be glorified in His servant and the more 
will the great institutions he founded become firmly established 
to grow and flourish, because thereby more generally brought 
to and laid upon the hearts of Christian people. 

In contributing his mite the author would acknowledge how 
he has been vastly benefited personally even by slight contact 
with the great evangelist. When Mr. Moody began his great 
meetings in the Grand Depot the writer was living in Phila- 
delphia, and during these meetings removed to ‘Wilmington, 
Del., to enter upon his pastorate there. His frequent attend- 
ance upon those meetings, even after his removal from the city 
in which they were held, had a blessed effect upon his work and 
preaching. His people went to Philadelphia to hear “Moody 
and Sankey” fresh from their European triumphs, and singly, 
in small companies, and once as a congregation, attended the 
meetings at the old depot and were aroused to spiritual ac: 
tivities. / 

More recently, when the two evangelists came to Wilming- 


ton to hold meetings, the writer realized a renewal of those 


impressions made upon him years before, and to him both 
preacher and singer, as he told them, possessed all their old- 
time power. 

But all this is meager praise when compared to the many 
great tributes that the whole Christian world is now laying at 
his feet. It may be truly said of his words and deeds, as of 
those of the Master whom he sought to follow so closely, “If 
they should be written every one I suppose that even the world 
itself could not contain the books that should -be written.” 

He is gone! As missionary, pastor, preacher, evangelist, 
author, educator, business man—Christian in all—he was 
great! Where shall one be found worthy to wear his mantle? 


LITE OF MOODY. 397 


A CHARACTERIZATION. 


BY REV. A. J. GORDON, D. D. 

[In the Congregationalist of Boston, August 3, 1893, the late 
Rev. A. J. Gordon, D. D., of the Clarendon Street Baptist 
Church, Boston, an intimate friend of Mr. Moody and associ- 
ated with him for many years in a multitude of Christian enter- 
prises, wrote an appreciation of him, a portion of which may — 
well be reprinted at this‘time.—EpirTors. ] 

Though Dwight L. Moody has been set apart by no council 
and has received no laying on of consecrating hands, he has yet 
exhibited such signs of an apostle that the whole Church of 
God has heard him gladly. How he began his Christian life 
and how he advanced step by step from the humblest to the 
highest Christian service is too well known to need rehearsing. 
Coming to Boston from his’ country home in Northfield to 
find employment, he was himself found by the Lord, and under 
the ministry of that gracious man of God, Dr. E. N. Kirk, he 
entered on his membership in the Christian Church. He was 
educated for the ministry by ministering in all ways and in all 
times to those needing help. We have heard him tell of his 
resolve, early made and persistently carried out, of allowing no 
day to pass without urging upon some soul the claims of Christ. 
Thus he learned to preach to the hundreds by preaching to the 
one. And no doubt much of the directness and point of his 
style is due to this habit of personal dealing with souls. In 
preaching it is easier to harangue a multitude than to hit a man. 
But he who knows how to do the latter has the highest qualifi- 
cation. for doing the’former. Personal preaching that has a 
“Thou art the man” at the point of every sermon neéds only to 
be multiplied by one hundred or one thousand to become pop- 


\ 


- 


308 LIFE OF MOODY. 


ular preaching of the best sort. This is the style of the eminent 
evangelist. He deals with the personal conscience in the plain- 
est and most pungent Saxon, so that the common people hear 
him gladly and the uncommon people do not fail to give him 
their ears. 

Yet his power does not lie altogether in his words, but quite 
as much in his administrative energy. Robert Hall was a 
preacher of transcendent genius, often producing an impres- 
sion upon his hearers quite unmatched in the history of pulpit 
oratory. Yet the results of his ministry were comparatively 
meager; he was a great preacher, but not a great doer. On the 
contrary, John Wesley, by no means Hall’s equal as a pulpit 
orator, because of his extraordinary executive gifts, moved a 
whole generation with a new religious impulse. In like man- 
ner, Spurgeon, by yoking a rare preaching talent with a not less 
remarkable working talent, and keeping the two constantly 
abreast, accomplished a ministry which for largeness of results 
andextent of influence has possibly no equal in recent centuries. 

Mr. Moody is not an ordained minister, but he is more for- 
tunate in being a preordained: worker, as well as a foreordained 
preacher. A genius.for bringing things to pass, a talent for 
organizing campaigns on a large scale, selecting co-workers 
with singular wisdom and placing them in the most advan- 
tageous positions—this is the notable thing which appears in 
the character and career of the evangelist. “The governor’ is 
the name which we constantly heard applied to the late pastor 
of the Metropolitan Tabernacle, as he moved about among his 
congregation in London a few years ago. The American evan- 
gelist easily wins for himself the title of “general’’ among his 
fellow-laborers in the Gospel. He manages the campaign, not 
imperiously, indeed, but with such Napoleonic command of the 
_ situation and such mastery of resources that all his colaborers 
rejoice to yield him the pre-eminence. 

We venture to say, indeed, that anyone who has been much 
at his headquarters will find here the greatest occasion for ad- 
miration. The number and extent of religious enterprises 


LIFE OF MOODY. 300 


which he can keep in hand at once, the thoroughness with 
which he can command every detail, the inspiration and cheer 
which he can put into a great army of workers gathered about 
him—this we have observed with a surprise that increases 
every year. 

And with all this there is another talent which we have 
learned to value more and more in public men—a grand talent 
for silence. It is a rare thing for one to be as effective in say- 
ing nothing as he is in speaking. When a friend of Von Moltke 
was asked the secret of that great general’s success in man- 
aging men, he replied, “He knew how to hold his tongue in 
seven different languages.” Blessed is the man who can re- 
frain his lips from speaking injudiciously, and his mouth that it 
utter no hasty word. In dealing with colaborers endowed 
with all sorts and sizes of tempers this is an indispensable re- 
quirement. To push on the work steadily meantime, giving 
offense to none and holding the forces in order and harmony, 
is a great achievement. It requires a wise silence as well as a 
positive utterance to do this successfully. 

A mightily energetic man is here and a singularly prudent 
man, one who generates great force by his preaching and his 
personality, but who knows at the same time how to prevent 
hot boxes on his train of religious enterprises by avoiding 
friction, which imprudent speech always genders. 


400 LIFE OF MOODY. 


MR. MOODY AT HOME. 


BY REV. C. I. SCOFIELD. 
[ Congregationalist.] 


Great as will be the universal sense of loss in the death of 
‘Dwight L. Moody, it is here in Northfield that he will be most 
acutely missed, most deeply mourned. It is not only that he 
was the founder of the noble institutions which remain to be 
his worthy monument and the pride of our village, nor even 
that his energy gathered here the great summer conventions 
which gave Northfield so wide a fame, but it is rather that his 
impressive personality filled and pervaded our Northfield life. 
Nowhere else was Mr. Moody so thoroughly understood as in 
Northfield. The elderly part of our people grew up with him, 
went to school with him, played and worked with him. They 
are full of reminiscences of his boyhood, and the testimony 
abounds that from his earliest years he was the same powerful 
spirit whom the world came to know as the greatest modern 
master of assemblies. “He was always a leader,” said Deacon 
Edward Barber, his sometime playmate and life-long personal 
friend. Mr. Moody was a hill-town New Englander to the 
backbone. Wherever he went and however he might be sur- 
rounded by the great of the earth; he never lost that self-poise 
and that wholesome common sense which are so characteristic 
of the old hill-town stock. He never saw a landscape so fair 
that it seemed .to him as lovely as Northfield. He was racy 
of the soil. \ 

It was amusing to see Mr. Moody in the act of what he 
called resting. After months of exhausting toil in, great meet- 
ings, he would return to Northfield to “rest.” And this was 
the manner of it: When at home he always rose at 5 in the 





LIFE OF MOODY. § 451 


morning, went to the kitchen for a cup of coffee, and then called 
for his buggy. By 6 he would be among the milkers at Mount 
Hermon, or in the kitchen where the breakfast of his students - 
was preparing. If any especial work was afoot, he was sure to 
look it over, master every detail of it and give shrewd, practi- 
cal suggestions. At 8 he was back in Northfield breakfasting 
with his family. For weeks together he would address the 
young ladies of the seminary at 9, then look over his huge mail, 
and finish the forenoon by driving again to Mount Hermon to 
speak to the boys at 11. 

What his labors were during the great conventions, how 
shrewd, tactful and masterful he was, everybody knows. We 
knew that he was wearing himself out, but he prpiled benign- 
antly at our warnings and went right on. 

Doubtless Dwight L. Moody was one of those ptimitive arid 
elemental men, built on so great a scale that of right the whole 
world owned him, but we of Northfield knew him as the world 
never did, and mourn him as the world never can, 

The Parsonage, East Northfield, 


402 LIFE OF MOODY, 


ALWAYS CHEERFUL AND KIND. © 


“Be good and you will be happy” was Moody’s motto. 


In a character sketch of the late Dwight L. Moody, contrib- 
uted to the New York World recently by Lavinia Hart, she 
said: ; 

There probably never was a man who accepted and prac- 
ticed and instilled religion with so much cheerfulness and 
heart sunshine as Mr. Moody. 

His life’s aim has been to “never lose an opportunity to make 
somebody happy,” and when opportunities did not offer he 
made them. 

For forty years Mr. Moody has been in the business of 
making people happy.” If he had expended the same amount 
of energy and ingenuity in any mercantile or professional line 

he would undoubtedly have accumulated a fortune. Instead, he 

is as poor today as when he started upon the career of an 
evangelist, except for the wealth of love and reverence and 
gratitude that rushes to him from thousands of hearts. 

Mr. Moody’s success has not been confined to America. In 
England he made a great stir, and the people of the London 
slums stopped and listened to this bright, fresh, hearty New 
Englander, who got down to their own level and extended a 
cordial, chubby hand in greeting, while he offered them a re- 
ligion, not of sackcloth and ashes, but of rejoicing and thanks- 
giving. 

Therein was the secret of Mr. Moody’s success. He rose to 
his pulpit—and it was any pulpit, regardless of place or denomi- 
nation—with a smile on his lips and in his eyes which gave 


LIFE OF MOODY. 403 


practical, living proof of what his religion had done for him. 
Creeds did not limit the scope of his work, for it is Mr. 
Moody’s contention that Christ recognized no creeds, but 
“preached the Gospel to all men.” 

Pews were never empty, and their occupants never went to 
sleep when Moody preached, and people who never went to 
church, who boast of a “religion of their own,” a “moral” re- 
ligion, based on “common sense” and “things tangible,” with 
a comfortable logic behind it, went to hear Moody preach and 
Sankey sing just to get inspiration from their cheerfulness and 
marvel at their faith. 

I spent a day at his home in East Northfield, Mass. There 
are few dry eyes to be found in the vicinity, except Mrs. 
Moody’s, whose fortitude and faith are a monument to the ex- 
ample of Mr. Moody’s practical every-day life. Mrs. Moody’s 
interest and help in her husband’s work have always been of 
great service to him. During the five weeks of his illness she 
has scarcely left his side; yet with all the mental and physical 
strain there are no traces of tears in her patient eyes. 

“T do not have time to weep,” she said soltly, for no one 
speaks above a whisper in the Moody home, “nor have I the 
inclination. I am confident he will recover, for he cannot yet 
be spared; there is so much work for him to do, and tears avail 
nothing, but faith avails much.” 

The very atmosphere of the Moody home bespeaks love 
and harmony. The house is a big white structure with green 
blinds, almost hidden by massive elms. There are dainty white 
chintz curtains at the windows, with fluted ruffles falling over 
boxes of bright flowers, and within there is something about 
the old-fashioned rockers and cushions and round tables and 
books and the cozy glow from open fires that makes one feel 
it is really a home. 

The view from Mr. Moody’s place is wonderfully good and 
-restful to eyes grown used to narrow streets and pavements 
and chimney pots. A wide valley slopes from his house to the 
Connecticut river,.and beyond are the Winchester hills, with 


404). LIFE OF MOODY. 


the Green mountains rising loftily behind them. Environment. 


may have much to do with the tenor of the lives of the people 
of Northfield, which is a sort of wholesale establishment for 
the turning out of practical Christians. “The West Point of 
Christian Work” Mr. Moody calls it, and the schools were de- 
signed not only to give to young men and women who could 
not otherwise afford it a good preparatory college education, 
but also a practical. Christian education. Life at the Northfield 
colleges was intended by Mr.. Moody not to unfit men for the 
humbler occupations or women for the homely duties of wives 
and mothers, but rather to fit them to. exalt these occupations. 
The college girl bred at Northfield is given an all-round educa- 
tion which embraces more than Greek and Latin and mathe- 


_ matics. She is taught to sew and sweep and cook, and she not 


only plans the best dinners for the least money, but proceeds to 
cook them and clear them away. Every girl at the Northfield 
College is compelled, whether rich or poor, to devote one hour 
a day to household duties, and they contend there is as much 
to learn about the proper cleansing of soiled cups and saucers 
as there is in the solving of mathematical problems, and that 
it is quite as important a factor in an all-round education. 

One of Moody’s favorite stories is about a converted miser 
to whom a neighbor in distress appealed for help. The miser 
decided to prove the genuineness of his conversion by giving 
hima ham. On his way to get it the tempter whispered, “Give 
him the smallest one you have.” A mental struggle ensued, 
and finally the miser took down the largest ham he had. “You 
are a fool,”’ the devil said, and the farmer replied, “If you don’t 
keep still I'll give him every ham in the smokehouse!” 

_ Mr. Moody believes in the efficacy of stories. 


“Men will listen to a story,” he says, “when they won’t listen 
to Scripture, and the moral of a story remains with them a long 
time, and often sets. them thinking along the lines they refuse 
to.consider in sermon form.” 


' Mr. Moody has been famous as a story-teller. He has never 


yee aes UFE, OF ‘MooDyY. 
y , 
egsadin ee "4 stop aad listen to a na and retaliates in 

kind, no matter where he was, at his favorite work in the gar-— s 

aes den or driving to the schools with some of its produce. It was 
~ on one of these latter occasions, when he stopped to tell a joke, fs ; 

_ that a camera snapped anda picture was ‘taken by Mr. Moody’ s if 

z. 3 yore 





406 LIFE OF MOODY. 


LETTER FROM DR. HOWARD A. KELLY, 


It will be of special interest to many to read what Dr. How- 
ard A. Kelly of Baltimore, one of the most celebrated surgeons 
of the world, has to say of Mr. Moody. Dr. Kelly was an inti- 
mate friend and associated with Mr. Moody in his work for 
many years: 

“Tam sorry I cannot show by my personal presence my pro- 
found sympathy with all those who will be gathered in our 
building on Sunday to pay a tribute of affection and respect to 
the memory of Mr. Moody. Iam, however, heartily with you 
in spirit. Our gathering, doubtless one of a large number be- 
ing held all over the land, fitly honors one of America’s great- 
est men—great from the standpoint of the world in that he eyi- 
dently held a marvelous power over men; greater, far greater 
from the Christian point of view, because he, more than any 
other man of our generation, was God’s own messenger to lead 
men to Christ. 

“T was fortunate in my association with Mr. Moody in being 
brought most closely in contact with him and his work at the 
very beginning and at the close of his career. His first great 
meetings were held in Brooklyn, as he told me this summer, 
and right after that he went to Philadelphia, where in the old 
railroad building, Thirteenth and Market streets, he held meet- 
ings at which no less than 12,000 persons were present: This 
vast assemblage has ever since been my measure of a large 
crowd. : 


THE WORK AND THE METHODS. 
“His wonderful work there, conducted with Sankey, was 


continued in Baltimore with Bliss, now about twenty years ago, 
when I was also present, and frequently attended the meetings 


LIFE OF MOODY. 407 


in Mount Vernon Place Church; went to Maryland prison 
meetings, where he addressed 600 convicts, and enjoyed the 
hospitality of the Y. M. C. A. in this building at luncheon. 

“From these beginnings the movement swept over our land 
and into England and Scotland like a tidal wave. After every 
meeting, both here and in Philadelphia, the inquiry-rooms were 
crowded, and Moody’s own personal efforts were enormous, as 
he dealt first with the crowds and then with individuals with 
consecrated zeal. 

“Some say that Moody improved in his methods as-he gained 
experience, but while I am sure he grew in wisdom from year 
to year, I feel equally sure that as he grew the needs of the 
work changed also, and that those he first adopted were the 
very best for the time. 


NORTHFIELD SCHOOL. 


“Coming to these last years of his work, we find the whole 
land stirred by his messages, and while the great mass-meet- 
ings still have their place, hundreds of evangelists are at work, 
and he concentrates the great effort of his life upon the build- 
ing up of Christians and sending them out in all directions as 
so many perpetual fixed centers, each in his own environment, 
working year in and year out to distribute the message. Vastly 
more important, therefore, in this day, in my eyes, is the work 
which he has been doing at Northfield. He first came to call 
men to Christ, and to tell them that there was no other name 
given under Heaven wherein they mustrbe saved. His last mes- 
sage was to call Christians to realize in their daily lives the 
meaning of the baptism of the Holy Ghost in its fullest sense. 

“Moody has sometimes been criticised as acting harshly or 
inconsiderately in conducting his meetings, but I never saw 


aught in him but such decision and force of character as are 
the outcome of a large experience and the necessary qualities 


of every good general. 


2 


408 ‘LIFE OF MOODY. 
é } 7 


IN HIS OWN HOME. | 


“Some of us who had the privilege of sitting often at his table 

in company with such men as Morgan, Meyer, Selwyn and 
others will recall the scene with special pleasure as he sat with 
his family and his guests and thoroughly enjoyed an hour of 
refreshment and relaxation in Christian conversation. I was 
not aware that there was anything unusual in the atmosphere 
of that little circle until one evening a man of evident refine- 
ment, a visitor from New York, showed by his floundering 
efforts to join the conversation and his evident repeated em- 
barrassments how entirely out of sympathy he was with every- 
one present. : 
_ “As he finally rose to go, I rose, too, to seek a chance to talk 
to him on the way to the hotel. Moody followed me to the 
door, holding back his son, who was about to go with us, urg- 
ing me to try to get hold of him, and saying, substantially and 
emphatically, ‘That man don’t know any more about relig- 
ion than a fish.’ 

“He was deeply afflicted this summer over the severe illness 
and the prospect of parting from a beloved granddaughter, 
who finally died, and now God has joined them after so short 
a separation. 


NOT A MAN TO RAVE OVER. 


“A healthy sign of Moody’s work was its impersonal cher- 
acter. People never raved over Moody, or felt that they could 
not get along when he went away. It was the power of the 
message in the hands of a consecrated servant, not the man. 

“Moody’s great strength lay in his faith in the Bible as the 
inspired Word of God from Genesis to Revelation; in his con- 
viction that salvation is to be gained through faith in our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and in no other way; in his unwavering faith in 


the power of prayer to move God and to produce results which 


could not be procured without it; in its experience of the new 
birth and the conscious indwelling of the Holy: Spirit. 


LIFE OF MOODY. 409 


“These simple fundamental articles of Christian faith consti- 
tute his message to every one of us whom he has left to con- 
tinue the great work God called him to do. In one or in an- 
other field of work, in His own way, in positions more or less 
conspicuous, God calls us to deliver to those about us these 
messages, and according as we keep them in their integrity, so 
will we be fruitful branches. of the divinely planted vine. As I 
realize the change that has come over the church since this 
great prophet was called to proclaim the Gospel, I thank God 
that I live in these days of great spiritual privilege, and in no 
other days.” 


410 LIFE OF MOODY. 


A FEW PERSONAL IMPRESSIONS. 


BY -Hs.A.) Be 
[ Congregatioualist.] 


The last time I saw Mr. Moody was when Campbell Morgan, 
under his auspices, was holding meetings in Boston in October. 
Calling upon the latter at the Hotel Bellevue, I was ushered, 
not only into his presence, but that of the evangelist himself, 
his wife and his staunch coadjutor in all good labors, Henry 
M. Moore. I remember the interest with which- Mr. Moody 
listened to Mr. Morgan’s account of what his London church 
is doing in the way of evangelistic services on Sunday evenings. 
The conversation then drifted into a general discussion touch- 
ing ways of winning the outsiders. It was plain that no sub- 
ject interested Mr. Moody so.profoundly as this. He was eager 
to learn about methods being employed here and there. I 
could see that tiie main reason why Mr. Moody feared the 
higher-criticism agitation was lest it should paralyze the spir- 
itual power of the churches. It seemed to him that the new 
views often made ministers and laymen unspiritual, and hety 


- would not hesitate, in private conversation, to point to i 


instances where that result could not be denied. Iam glad th 
my last impression of him, received during what must have 
been his final visit to Boston, was of his tremendous earnest- 
ness in the matter of saving souls. It seems now as if he must 
have realized, even then, that the time was short. 

Every great man is to be judged in part by the men who 
compose his circle of friends. In one sense Mr. Moody’s per- 
sonality was not a winsome one. He was often brusque, always 
decided in his manner, but this very straightforwardness and 
sincerity drew about him all types of men. Everyone knows 


LIFE OF MOODY. 411 


how Drummond loved him, and Stalker and George Adam 
Smith thought that no visit to this country was complete with- 
out a sojourn at Northfield. What a potent spell, too, he ex- 
ercised over other Britishers, like Meyer and Webb-Peploe, 
Macgregor, Morgan and Andrew Murray. When he wanted 
any of them at a Northfield conference he would not take No 
for an answer. Once, when Mr. Meyer was hard pressed with 
work at home, Mr. Moody deputed a man to pack his gripsack 
and cross the Atlantic by the next steamer in order to prevail 
upon Mr. Meyer to come hither at the time desired. The mis-. 
sion, it is needless to say, was successful. In selecting and 
securing earnest speakers, in attaching them to himself, as well. 
as in choosing lieutenants and subordinates for positions in his 
schools, and in carrying out his evangelistic and educational 
designs, Mr. Moody displayed his rare executive gifts. 

Think, too, of the men whose career he has shaped. Drum- 
mond always confessed that he owed to Mr. Moody his first 
impulse to the service of his fellows, and gained from him guid- 
ance and inspiration. Dr. Grenfell, doing splendid work on 
the coast of Labrador and among the fishermen in the North 
Sea, dates his consecration to this form of work to the sermon 
he heard in East London, years ago, from Mr. Moody. If the 
list could be made up of men serving Christ in important posi- 
tions today whom Mr. Moody started in their paths of minis- 
tration, it would be a long and impressive one. Add to it the 
countless numbers whom he has led from darkness into light, 
and who are still witnessing through their redeemed manhood 
and womanhood to his transforming touch upon their lives, 
and we may gain some idea of the extent and quality of the 
mourning for him in every great city and in numberless smaller 
places throughout our land—aye, and in London, Liverpool, 
Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dublin and scores of other English 
cities and towns, whither the news of his sudden death was 
flashed-last Friday afternoon. . 

‘Serious as he always seemed, earnest as he was, he had his 
sportive side, too. He got a great deal of fun out of life, for 


AT2 LIFE OF MOODY. 


he possessed that essential for obtaining fun, the discerning eye 
which sees ludicrous situations. Dr. George Adam Smith-told 
me, after visiting him last June, that he spent a whole evening 
with Mr. Moody, when the two did little but exchange good 
‘stories. Next morning they came down to breakfast and be- 
gan where they left off, and another string of amusing tales 
enlivene{ the company at the table. Then came family 
prayers, and Mr. Moody’s first words when he knelt were, 
“Lord, we tha~ Thee for the good times we have been hav- 
ing.” His humor used to crop out noticeably when he was 
raising money for good causes. He liked to turn, with a quiet 
chuckle, to this or that well-to-do layman, who might be sitting 
in the hall at Northfield, and say, “Jones, I have put you down 
for $100,” or, “Smith, I know you want to complete this sub- 


scription; there is only $50 lacking.’ His bright, sharp, brief _ 


comments on men and things were continually adding spice to 
his platform work. 

No man ever loved his family better. Many of us recall his 
devotion to his mother—dear Grandma Moody—who only a 
year or two ago passed away at a great age. His home was 
near hers, and no day was so busy as to cause him to miss a call 
upon her. And the bright-eyed, well-preserved, keen old lady 
and he must have had many a good time together. She said 
once, “I always thought D. L. would be one thing or the 
other,” and it was good that she lived to see that it was the 
“one thing” rather than “the other,” and the “one thing” with 
all his might and main. All these years his wife has been a 
strong support to him. Her calm and gracious manner and her 
unusual capacity for practical affairs have had no small part, 
perhaps, in the efficiency of his public service. It must have 
been a joy to him, too, that his children have followed in his 
footsteps in their love for the things of the kingdom. His old- 
est son, in late years, has been a great help to him. He now 
has charge of many of the interests dear to his father, and as 
editor of the Record of Christian Work he is ina position to rep- 
resent many of the Northfield and Chicago interests before the 





LIFE OF MOODY» 413 


1 


public. It was the little daughter ofthis son, by the way, who 
only last summer passed away after a painful illness, and then 
the evangelist’s great heart was bowed with sorrow. Years 
ago Mr. Moody said: “There are three great joys. The first 
is the joy of our own salvation, the second is the joy of bring- 
ing some one else to Christ. The greatest joy is that of seeing 
one’s children walking in the truth when one is in his old age.” 
How good is it that the evangelist himself experienced so 
richly this threefold joy. 

Many monuments to Mr. Moody will be proposed, and we 
believe this his host of friends here and in England will see to 
it that none of the interests which were dear to him shall now 


suffer or languish. But if we could know the deepest yearning - 
of his heart today, as from the heavenly world he looks down, 


upon the earth where he wrought his work, I believe it would 
be not for anything that would perpetuate his name, but for an 
awakening in the whole Church of Christ to its duty to sinful 
and needy humanity everywhere. It was this for which he 
toiled and prayed and pleaded while here, and the best monu- 
ment any Christian man or any Christian church can rear to 
this servant of God will be a vow to strive for the same spiritual 
power over the hearts of others. 





A MIND more simple in its character, a nature more single in 


its aims, a soul more devoted and sincere, a personality more 


honest and attractive—these have seldom, if ever, been seen 
combined. ‘His simplicity and earnestness, coupled with a 
magnificent executive capacity and a clear judgment of men, 
and inspired by a rare and tremendous energy of work, made 
him a master, and such a man as Carlyle might have made a 
hero of beside his Abbot Sampson of past and present. aS ees 
field Republican on Mr, Moody. 








eg r « veN ¥ 
7 4 4 . > ee Pula’ “Tow 4 
Py , ! Hel ote r ed er 


414. LIFE OF MOODY. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
REMINISCENCES—ILLUSTRATIVE ANECDOTES. 


“I REMEMBER WHEN Mr. SANKEY AND MYSELF WERE 
IN CHICAGO PREACHING. We had been five Sunday 
nights on the life of Christ. We had taken Him from 
the cradle, and on the fifth night we had just got Him 
up to where we have Him today. He was in the hands 
of Pilate, and Pilate didn’t know what to do with Him. 
I remember it distinctly, for I made one of the greatest 
mistakes that night I ever made. After I had nearly 
finished my sermon, I said, ‘I want you to take this 
home with you, and next Sunday night we will see what 
you will do with Him.’ Well, after awhile the meeting 
closed, and we had a second meeting. The people gath- 
ered in the room, and Mr. Sankey during the service 
sang a hymn, and as he got down to the verse, “The 


* Saviour calls, for refuge fly,’ I saw I had made a mis- 


take in telling the people that next week they could 
answer. I saw that it was wrong to put off answering 
the question. After the meeting closed I started to go 
home. They were ringing the fire alarm at that time, 
and it proved to be the death knell of our city. I didn’ 


‘i Se Dee oe heat 


aS ae 


of 


% WES 
fs 


LIFE OF MOODY. 415 


know what it meant, and so went home. That night 
the fire raged through the city, destroying everything 
in its path, and before the next morning the very hall 
where we had gathered was in ashes. People rushed 


through the streets crazed with fear, and some of those 


who were at the meeting were burned to death. Oh, 
what a mistake to put off the answer. May God for- 


give me if I should give them a week to decide that 
question. It is not safe to delay; answer it today. I 


seldom come off of this platform but what I hear of 
some one who is sick, and I do not know how far sick- 
ness or death may be from you. ‘Today the Saviour 
calls; for refuge fly.’ 


“THAT IS THE WAY MEN MAKE OUT THEIR PARDON— 
FOR GOOD BEHAVIOR—but the Gospel of Jesus Christ 
is offered to those that have not behaved well. It is 
offered to all that have sinned and are not worthy. All 
a man has got to prove now is that he is not worthy, 
and I will show him that Christ died for him. Christ 


died for us while we were yet in sin. While we were in ~ 


London, Mr. Spurgeon one day took Mr. Sankey and 
myself to his orphan asylum, and he was telling about 
them—that some of them had aunts and some cousins, 
and that every boy had some friend that took an inter- 
est in him, and came to see him and gave him a little 


’ 


416 LIFE OF MOODY. 


pocket money; and one day, he said, while he stood 
there a little boy came up to him and said, ‘Mr. Spur- 
geon, let me speak to you,’ and the boy sat down be- 
tween Mr. Spurgeon and the elder who was with the 
clergyman, and said: ‘Mr. Spurgeon, suppose your 
father and mother were dead, and you didn’t have any 
cousins, or aunts, or uncles, or friends to come to give 
you pocket money and give you presents, don’t you 
think you would feel bad—because that’s me.’ Said 
Mr. Spurgeon: ‘The minute he asked that I put my 
right hand down into my pocket and took out the 
money.’ Because that’s me! And so with the Gospel; 


"we must say to those who have sinned, the Gospel is 


offered 'to them. 


“LOoK AT THAT MAN GIDEON. He marshaled his 
army of thirty thousand men to give battle to the Phil- 
istines. God said: ‘Gideon, your army is too great. 
My people would be lifted up and they would take the 
glory upon themselves.’ God said to Gideon: ‘You 
just say to the men who are fearful and afraid, “Go 
”* And the Lord reduced the army twenty 
thousand, leaving only ten thousand men. But God 
said: ‘Gideon, you have got too many; if those ten 
thousand men get victory they will say, “Look what 


home. 


we have done.” Just take them down to the water, 





LIFE OF MOODY. 4l7 


and we will try them again. Those that drink it up one 
way and those that lap it up another, they shall be sep- 
arated.’ Then God took away all but three hundred. 
God said that was enough. ‘If I get a victory with 
those three hundred I will get the glory.’ I would 


rather have three hundred men in New York whose | 
hearts are right with God than a host who take upon 


themselves the glory which belongs to the Lord. 


“T have no doubt but that some here will say, “There | 


are so many obstacles in the way, I don’t believe we 
are going to succeed. You won’t succeed in New 
York; it is a very hard place, New York is.’ If God is 


with us we are going to succeed. If we take God out | 


of our plans we are going to fail, and we ought to fail. 
Is not the God of our fathers strong enough to take 
this city and shake it as a little child? There is not a 
skeptic in the city of New York but what the power of 
God can reach. 


“When we were in Philadelphia we almost failed for 


a few weeks. The crowds were so great that many of 
those who attended the meetings spent most of their 
time in watching the people. We could not get their 
eyes toward the cross for a long time. By and by, 
when the holidays came on, the numbers began to fall 
off, and it was the best thing for us. It was what we 
wanted, so that men could think of God. 


7. » AWP , apd a Hl aN ek DE a ame Lay rl” me 


SH lt 


418 _ LIFE OF MOODY. 


“WHEN WE WERE IN BELrast there was a man who 
"heard about leading souls to Christ. He began by 
talking to his wife, and to his servant, and to his chil- 
dren, and just as we were leaving Belfast they were 
very much interested, but not converted. He came 
down to Dublin—broke up his home, left his business 
and came to Dublin. One night he came to me very 
joyous, and he says, ‘My wife has been converted.’ A 
little while after he came and said, ‘My younger son 
has been converted,’ and a little while after he said, 
‘My oldest son has been converted.’ And now the 
whole family is in the ark. And he came over to Man- 
chester, and he came up to London, and now, perhaps, 
in all Belfast there is not one that works harder than 
_ that whole family. Look at this man’s success. He 
found his work was right there in his own household, 
and if the fathers and mothers and sisters and wives 
and brothers will try to bring the members of their 
families to Christ, and cry, ‘Oh, God, teach me what 
my work is,’ the Spirit of God will surely tell them 
what their work is, and then if they are ready to go 
and do it there will be thousands converted in this city 
in a few days. Oh, may the Spirit of the Lord come 
upon us tonight, and may every one of us be taught by 
the Holy Ghost what our work is, and may we be ready 
to do it. 


let 





LIFE OF MOODY. 419 


“T REMEMBER HEARING OF A PERSON THAT.WAS AL- 


WAYS TRYING TO DO SOME GREAT THING FOR ‘THE 


Lorp, and because he could not do a great thing he 
never did anything. There are a great many who 
would be willing to do great things if they could come 
up and have their names heralded through the press. 


I remember hearing of a man’s dream, in which he 


imagined that when he died he was taken by the angels: 


to a beautiful temple. After admiring it for a time, he 


discovered that one stone was missing. All finished — 


but just one little stone; that was left out. He said to 
the angel: ‘What is this stone left out for? The angel 
replied, ‘That was left out for you, but you wanted to 
do great things, and so there was no room left for you.’ 
He was startled and awoke, and resolved that he would 
become a worker for God, and that man always worked 
faithfully after that. 


“Worn I was aT Mr. SPURGEON’S HOUSE he showed 
me some pictures of his twin boys. . He had had them 
taken every year since they were born, and they were 
then seventeen. You look at the pictures from year to 
year, and there is not much difference between them, 
but in the seventeen years there is a great difference. So 
with you young converts; there is not much difference 
in you from year to year, but, as you grow in grace, in 








Fe Se 


420 . ‘LIFE OF MOopy. 


the course of seventeen years there will be a very great 
change. You want to grow from week to week, from 


month to month and from year to year steadily, so you 


will become stronger in the service of God. ‘God.is 
able to make all grace abound toward you.’ 


“IT IS THE GREATEST PLEASURE OF LIVING TO WIN 
SOULS TO CHRIST, and it is a pleasure that angels can’t 
enjoy. It is sometimes a wonder to me that God 
doesn’t take the work out from the church and give it 
to the angels. If the redeemed saints could come by 
the bar, I sometimes think they would rejoice in com- 
ing back here to have the privilege of leading one more 
soul to Christ. Isn’t it high time that the church got 
awake from its midnight slumber? It is time the work 
“was commenced, and when the Spirit of God revives 
it, shan’t we go and aa it? Are there not five thousand 
Christians in this hall, and ain’t there some one among 
them that can lead a soul to Christ within the next 
week? If we work, what a great army can be brought 
in, if we are only faithful. I want to say to the Chris- 
tians here that there is one rule I have followed that 
has helped me wonderfully. I made it a rule that I 
wouldn’t let a day pass without speaking to some one 
about their soul’s salvation, and if they didn’t hear the 
Gospel from the lips of others, there will be three hun- 


Eset eis 
eae te 


LIFE OF MOODY. 421 


dred and sixty-five in a year that shall hear the Gospel 
from my lips. There are five thousand Christians here 


tonight; can’t they say, ‘We won’t let a day pass with- 


out speaking a word to some one about the cause of 
Christ.’ 


“ABOUT FOUR YEARS AGO I GOT INTO A COLD STATE. 
It did not seem as if there was any unction resting upon - 
my ministry. For four long months God seemed to be 
just showing me myself. I found I was ambitious. I 


\ 
was not preaching for Christ; I was preaching for am- 
bition. I found everything in my heart that ought not 
to be there. For four months a wrestling went on 


within me, and I was a miserable man. But after four 
‘months the anointing came. It came upon me as I 


was walking in the streets of New York. Many atime 
I have thought of it since I have been here. At last I 
had returned to God again, and I was wretched no 


longer. I almost prayed in my joy, ‘Oh, stay Thy — 
hand.’ I thought this earthen vessel would break. He. . 


filled me so full of the Spirit. If I have not beer.a dif- 
ferent man since, I do not know myself. I think I 
have accomplished more in the last four years than in 


all the rest of my life. But, Oh, it was preceded by a. 
wrestling and a hard struggle! I think I had never got. 
out of this miserable selfishness. There was a time. 





422 LIFE OF MOODY. 


when I wanted to see my little vineyard blessed, and 


I could not get out of it; but I could work for the whole . 


world now. I would like to go round the world and 
tell the perishing millions of a Saviour’s love. 


“THERE WAS A LADY THAT CAME TO LIVERPOOL TO 
SEE US PRIVATELY; it was just before we were about to 
leave that city to go up to London to preach. With 
tears and sobs, she told a very pitiful story. It was 
this: She said she had a boy nineteen years of age who 
had left her. She showed me his photograph, and asked 
me to put it in my pocket. ‘You stand before many 

and large assemblies, Mr. Moody. My buy may be in 
~ London now. Oh, look at the audiences to whom you 
will preach; look earnestly. You may see my dear boy 
before you. If you do see him, tell him to come back 
to me. Oh, implore him to come to his sorrowing 
mother, to his deserted home. He may be in trouble; 
he may be suffering. Tell him, for his loving mother, 
that all is forgiven and forgotten, and he will find com- 
fort and peace at home.’ On the back of this photo- 
graph she had written his full name and address; she 
had noted his complexion, the color of his eyes and 
hair, why he had left home, and the cause of his so do- 
ing. “When you preach, Mr. Moody, look for my poor 
boy,’ were the parting words of that mother. That 


LIFE OF MOODY. 423 


young man may be in this hall tonight. If he is I want 
to tell him that his mother loves him still. I will read 
out his name, and if any of you ever hear of that young 
man, just tell him that his mother is waiting with a lov- 
ing heart and a tender embrace for him. His name is 


Arthur P. Oxley of Manchester, England. All who: 
have got children around you and about you, and can: 


feel the pangs that agitate the breasts of these families 
whose chief joys and delights are gone, lift up your 
hearts to God for this erring father and for this wan- 
dering boy. If they be anywhere yet on the face of the 
earth, pray to God that He will turn their hearts and 
_ bring them back. 


WHEN I was A younc Boy, before I was a Christian, I was 
in a field one day with a man who was hoeing. He was weep- 


ing, and he told me a strange story, which I have never for- 


‘gotten. When he leit home his mother gave him this text: 
“Seek first the kingdom of God.” But he paid no heed to it. 
He said when he got settled in life and his ambition to get 
money was gratified it would be time enough then to seek the 


kingdom of God. He went from one village to another, and — 


got nothing to do. When Sunday came he went into the vil- 
lage church, and,what was his great surprise to hear the min- 
ister give out the text, “Seek first the kingdom or God.”’ The 
text went down to the bottom of his heart. He thought that 
it was his mother’s prayer following him, and that someone 
must have written to that minister about him. He felt very un- 
comfortable, and when the meeting was over he could not get 
the sermon out of his mind. He went from that town, and at 
the end of a week went into another church and heard the min- 


He 


, en 


x 


ss 


+s r bel My, ease at. Ohare ine i pared WAY oo cing 


424 LIFE OF MOODY. 


ister give out the same text, “Seek first the kingdom of God.” 
He felt sure this time that it was the prayers of his mother, 
but he said calmly and deliberately: 

“No; I will first get wealthy.” 

He said he went on and did not go into a church for a few 
months, but the first place of worship he went into he heard a 
third minister preach from the same text. He tried to:stifle 
his feelings, to get the sermon out of his mind, and resolved 
that he would keep away from church altogether; and for a 
few years did keep out of God’s house. 

“My mother died,” said he, “and the text kept coming up in 
my mind, and I said, ‘I will try to: become a Christian.’” The - 
tears rolled down his cheeks as he continued, “I could not. 
No sermon ever touches me; my heart is as hard as that stone,” 


_ pointing to one in the field. 


I couldn’t understand what it was all about. It was fresh to 
me then. Soon after I went to Boston and was converted, and 
the first thought that came to me was about that man. When 
I got back I asked my mother, “Is Mr. L living in such 
a place?” 

“Didn’t I write to you about him?” she asked. “They have 
taken him to the insane asylum, and to everyone who goes there 

, he points with his finger up there and tells him to ‘Seek first 
the kingdom of God.’ ”’ 

There was that man with his eyes dull with the loss of 
reason, but the text had sunk into his soul—it had burned down 
deep. 

When I got home again my mother told me he was in her 
house, and I went to see him. I found him in a rocking-chair, 
with that vacant, idiotic look upon him. Whenever he saw 
me he pointed at me and said, “Young man, seek first the 
kingdom of God.” 





I CAN MYSELF GO BACK ALMOST TWENTY YEARS and remem- 
ber two holy women who used to come to my meetings. It 
was delightful to see them there. When I began to preach I 





LIFE OF MOODY. 425 


_ could tell by the expression of their faces that they were pray- 
ing for me. At the close of the Sabbath evening meetings they 
would say to me, “We have been praying for you.” I said, 
“Why don’t you pray for the people?” They answered, “You 
need the power.” “I need power?” I said to myself. “Why, 
I thought I had the power.” I had a large Sabbath-school 


and the largest congregation in Chicago. There were some - 


conversions at that time. I was, ina sense, satisfied, But right 
along these two godly women kept praying for me, and their 


earnest talk about “anointing for special service” set me- 


thinking. I asked them to come and talk with me, and we got 


down on our knees. They poured out their hearts that I might _ 


receive the anointing from the Holy Spirit, and there came a 
hunger into my soul. I did not know what it was. I began 
to cry as I never did before. The hunger increased. I really 
felt that I did not want to live any longer if I could not have 
this power for service. Then came the Chicago fire. I was 
burned out of house and home at two o’clock in the morning. 
This did not so much affect me. My heart was full of the 
yearning for divine power. I was to go ona special mission 
to raise funds for the homeless, but my heart was not in the 
work for begging. I could not appeal. I was crying all the 
time that God would fill me with His Spirit. Well, one day 
in the city of New York—ah, what a day! I cannot describe ibs 
I seldom refer to it; it is almost too sacred an experience to 


name. Paul had an experience of which he never spoke for’ 


fourteen years. I can only say that God revealed Himself to 
me, and I had such an experience of His love that I had to 
ask Him to stay His hand. I went to preaching again. . The 
sermons were not different; I did not present any new truths, 
and yet hundreds were converted. I would not now be placed 
back where I was before that blessed experience if you would 
give me all Glasgow—-it would be as the small dust of the 
‘balance. I tell you it is a sad-day when a convert goes into 
the church and that’s the last you hear of him. If, however, 
you want this power for some selfish end, as, for example, to 


> ee 


i 


426 LIFE OF MOODY. 


gratify your own ambition, you will not get it. ‘No flesh,” 
says God, “shall glory in my presence.” 


My SISTER TOLD ME HER LITTLE BOY said something 
naughty one morning, when his father said to him, “Sammy, 
go and ask your mother’s forgiveness.” “I won’t,” replied 
the child. “If you don’t ask your mother’s forgiveness I'll 
put you to bed.” It was early in the morning—before he 
went to business, and the boy didn’t think he would do it. He 
said “I won’t” again. They undressed him and put him to 
bed. The father came home at noon expecting to find his 
boy playing about the house. He didn’t see him about, and 
asked his wife where he was. “In bed still.” So he went up 
to the room, and sat down by the bed, and said: “Sammy, I 
want you to ask your mother’s forgiveness.” But the answer 
was “No.” The father coaxed and begged, but could not 
induce the child to ask forgiveness. The father went away, 


expecting certainly that when he came home at night the - 


child would have got all over it. At night, however, when he 
got home he found the little fellow still in bed. He had Jain 
there all day. He went to him and tried to get him to come 
to his mother, but it was no use. His mother went, and was 
equally unsuccessful. That father and mother could not sleep 
any that night. They expected every moment to hear the 
knock at their door by their little son. Now they wanted to 
forgive the boy. My sister told me it was just as if death had 
come into their home. She never passed through such a 
night. In the morning she went to him and said: “Now, 
Sammy, you are going to ask my forgiveness,” but the boy 


turned his face to the wall and wouldn’t speak. The father 


came home at noon and the boy was as stubborn as ever. It 
looked as though the child was going to conquer. It was for 
the good of the boy that they didn’t want to give him his own 
way. It is a great deal better for us to submit to God than 
have our own way. Our own way will lead us to ruin; God’s 
way leads to life everlasting. The father went off to his offiee, 


: LIFE OF MOODY. _ 427 


and that afternoon my sister went in to her son about four 
o’clock and began to reason with him, and after talking for 
some time she said: ‘Now, Sammy, say ‘mother.’ ” 
“Mother,” said the boy. “Now say ‘for.’” “For.” “Now 
just say ‘give.’” And the boy repeated “give.” “Me,” said 
the mother. “Me,” and the little fellow fairly leaped out of 
bed. “I have said it,” he cried; “take me down to papa so 


that I can say it to him.” Oh, sinner, go to Him and ask His 
forgiveness. This is repentance. It is coming in with a: 


broken heart and asking the King of Heaven to forgive you. 
Don’t say you can’t. It isa lie. Iti is your stubborn will. It 
is your stubborn heart. 


A GOOD MANY YEARS AGO I RESOLVED I wouldn’t let a day 
pass without talking to some one about their soul’s salvation. 
And it was in that school God qualified me to speak the gos- 
pel. If we are faithful over small things God will promote 
us. If God says “speak to that young man,” obey the word, 


and you will be given by and by plenty of souls. I went down 


past the corner’ of Clark and Lake streets one day, and, ful- 
filling my vow, on seeing a man leaning up against a lamp- 
post I went up to him and said: “Are you a Christian?” He 
damned me and cursed me, and said to mind my own busi- 
ness. He knew me, but I didn’t know him. He said to a 
friend of his that afternoon that he had never been so insulted 


in his life, and told him to say to me that I was damning the © 


cause I pretended to represent. Well, the friend came and 
delivered the message. “May be I am doing more hurt than 
good,” I said; “may be I’m mistaken, and God hasn’t shown 
me the right way.” That was the time I was sleeping and 
living in the Young Men’s Christian Association rooms, 
where I was then president, secretary, janitor and everything 
else. Well, one night after midnight I heard a knock at the 
door. And there on the step leading into the street stood this 
stranger I had made so mad at the lamp-post, and he said 
he wanted to talk to me about his soul’s salvation. He said: 


428 LIFE OF MOODY. 


“Do you remember the man you met about three months ago 
at a lamp-post, and how he cursed you? I have had no peace 
since that night; I couldn’t sleep. Oh, tell me what to do to 
be saved.’”’ And we just fell down on our knees and I prayed, 
and that day he went to the noon prayer-meeting and openly 
confessed the Saviour, and soon after went to the war a Chris- 
tian man. I do not know but he died on some Southern bat- 
tle-field or in a hospital, but I expect to see him in the king- 
dom of God. Oh, how often have I thanked God for that 
word to that dying sinner that He put into my mouth! 
| 
My LittLe WILLIE I once told to jump off a high table and 
I would catch him. But he looked down and said: “Papa, 
I’se afraid.” I again told him I’d catch him, and he looked 
down and said: ‘‘Papa, I’se afraid.’ You smile, but that’s 
just the way with the unbeliever. He looks down and dare 
not trust the Lord. You say that would be blind faith, but I _ 
say it wouldn’t. I told Willie to look at me and then jump, 
and he did it and was delighted. He wanted to jump again, 
and finally his faith became so great that ‘he would have 
jumped when I was eight or ten feet away and said, “Papa, 
I’se a-comin’.” I remember seeing a man in Mobile putting 
little boys on the fence posts, and they jumped into his arms 
with perfect confidence. But there was one large boy nine or 
ten year old who would not jump. I asked the man why it, 
was and he said the boy wasn’t his. Ah, that’s it!. The boy 
wasn’t his. He hadn’t learned to trust him. But the other 
boys knew him and could trust him. Oh, sinner, will you not 
learn Christ tonight and jump into the arms of a loving 
Saviour? He’ll keep you. Who will believe in the Lord Jesus 
Christ tonight? Who will come to Him and be saved? Will 
you not take God at His word? Oh, may He give you 
strength and faith tonight to trust Him as Job did! 


WHEN MY LITTLE GIRL WAS FOUR YEARS OLD, now she 
teased her mother to buy her a muff. At last she got her 





LIFE OF MOODY. 429 


one. I remember it was in the winter, and when I got home 
she said: “Papa, won’t you go out with me, I have got a 
new muff.” Well, I went out, and I said, the ground being 
covered with ice, “let me take your hand, Emma, the ground 
is very slippery, and you will fall.” “O, no,” she said, “I want 
to walk by myself, and put my hands in my muff, as other 
people do.” Well, she went along a little piece, when she 
slipped and fell. She got up again, and I again wanted to 
take hold of her hand, but she wouldn’t, and went along for a 
little, when down she went again. She got up a second time. 
and walked along. But by and by her feet went from under 
her once more, and away she went. Then she said: “Papa, 
just let me take hold of your little finger.” “Well,” said I, — 
““Emma, let me give you my whole hand.” But she wouldn't; 
she would have it her own way. And that is the way with a 
good many of us; we want to follow our own way, and God 
just lets us have it. By and by her feet went from under her 
again, and down she went. Then she asked me to give her 
my hand, and I slipped it over her wrist, and we went along 
all right. So we must accept grace fully, and it will keep us 
up. We must not take a little to lean on; we must take abun- 
dance. Let us take it abundantly, for there is plenty of it.: 


IN ONE CITY WE WENT TO a Sunday-school superintendent 
came to his minister and said: “I am not fit to gather sinners 
to life eternal; I cannot be superintendent any longer.” The: 
minister asked: ‘What is the reason?” and the man said: “I 
am not right with God.’ Then the minister advised him that 
the best thing instead of resigning was to get right with God. 
So he prayed with that teacher that the truth would shine 
upon him, and God lit up his soul with the word. Before I 
left that town the minister told me all doubt had fled from 
that superintendent’s mind, and he had gone earnestly to 
work and gathered, from the time of his conversion, over 
600 scholars into the Sunday-school of his church. The Lord 
can bless, of course, in spite of schools and teachers, but they 


’, 


{ 


7 


430 LIFE OF MOODY. 

are the channels of salvation. Bring your classes together, 
and pray to God to convert them. We have from 3000 to 
5000 teachers here. Suppose they said: “I will try to bring 
my children to Christ,” what a reformation we should have. 
Don’t say that that boy is too small, or that girl is too puny 
‘or insignificant. Everyone is valuable to the Lord. A teacher 
whom I found at our services when she ought to have been 
attending to her class, upon my asking why she was at our 


_ meeting, said: ‘Well, I have a very small class—only five 


little boys.” ‘‘What,” said I, “you have come here and 
neglected the little ones! Why, in that little towhead may be 
the seeds of a reformation. There may be a Luther, a White- 
field, a Wesley or a Bitnyan among them. You may be 
neglecting a chance for them the effects of which wil! follow 
them through life.” If you do not look to those things, teach- 
ers, some one will step into your vineyard and gather the 
riches which you would have. 

Look what that teacher did in Southern Illinois. She had: 
taught a little girl to love the Saviour, and the teacher said 
to her: “Can’t you get your father to come to the Sunday- 
school?” This father was a swearing, drinking man, and the 
love of God was not in his heart. But under the tuition of that 
.teacher the little girl went to her father and told him of 
Jesus’ love, and led him to that Sunday-school. What was the 
result? I heard before leaving for Europe that he had been 
instrumental in founding over 780 Sabbath-schools in South- 
ern Illinois. And what a privilege a teacher ‘hhas—a privilege 
of leading souls to Christ. Let every Sabbath-school teacher 
say: “By the help of God I will try to lead my scholars to 
Christ.” 


AN OLD MAN, A MINISTER, IN GLasGow, SCOTLAND, was. one 
of the most active in our meetings. When he would be preach- 
ing elsewhere he would drive up in a cab with his Bible in his 
hand. It made no difference what part of Glasgow he was | 

preaching in, he managed to attend nearly everyone of our ser- 


el a lt 





LIFE OF MOODY. 4351. 


vices. The old man would come in and tenderly speak to 

those assembled, and let one soul after another see the iight. 

His congregation was comparatively small when we got there, 

but, by his painstaking efforts to minister to those in search of 

the Word, when we left Glasgow his church could not hold 

the people who sought admission, and I do not know of any 

man who helped us like Dr. Andrew Bonar. He was always 

ready to give counsel to the weak and point the way out to. 
the soul seeking Christ. If we have not ministers enough, 

let those we have come forward, and their elders and deacons* 
will follow them. 


I HAVE GOT DISCOURAGED IN MY LIFE. Here in Chicago I 


: have been discouraged. I remember some years ago I was 


greatly cast down, and, sitting in my study gloomily, one of 
my Sunday-school teachers came in that Monday afternoon. 
He was in the best of spirits, and I was despondent; he was 
up on the mountain and I was down in the valley. We used 
to compare notes of what we did on the Sunday, and he asked 
me what I had preached about. I told him, and he said he had 
preached about Noah, and he asked me if I had ever studied 
up Noah’s character. Well, I had read about Noah, but not 
with any particular attention. After he had gone out I 
thought I would read up Noah. I took up my Bible, and 
after a little careful reading I began to think that Noah must 
have been a man of extraordinary courage. There he was 
for 150 years building his ark, without any sign of ever need- 
ing it but the word of the Lord, and he had not become dis- 
couraged. I closed my Bible and felt new strength. .I came 
down to the noonday prayer-meeting and was happy.. There 
‘I heard a man say he had just come up from somewhere in 
Southern Illinois, and had converted 100 people, and the man 
had not been a Christian very long. I wondered what Noah 
would have given if he could have got as much to encourage 
him as this man. Another man asked to be prayed for, and I 
wondered what Noah would have said to this. He labored 


De 


432 LIFE OF MOODY. 
; 


for 150 years and never heard a man asking to be prayed for. 
During all these years he labored and he never got discour- 
aged or disheartened, and I have often thought of this as a 
great lesson to the Christian worker. 


Look TOWARD YOUR SAVIOUR. He is offered free to all. I 
tlever preach upon the third chapter of John without telling an 
incident that occurred after the battles of Pittsburg Landing 
and Murfreesboro. I had been talking one night to the sol- 
 diers, and telling them to drink of the waters of life and they 
would never die. I was very tired, and when I went to bed I 
soon fell asleep. Soon after I had retired a soldier came and 
aroused me, and wished me to come to a man who was dying. 
I soon was at his bedside, and he said, “Chaplain’—he called’ 
me chaplain, although I was only a member of the Christian 
Commission—“Chaplain, I wish you would help me to die.” 
“My friend, I would willingly carry you unto the kingdom of 
God, but I cannot; Christ can only do that,’ and I preached 
Jesus to him. “But,” said the soldier, “He won’t help me; 
I’ve been fighting Him all my life. I had a praying mother, 
and I disregarded her prayers always; but I told her when I 
joined the army thai if I got through the war I would become 
a Christian. But I am dying now.” I looked at the man and 
saw he was dying, and thought how anxious that mother must 
have been and how happy it would make her if he could just 
get a sight of heaven. So I quoted promise after promise; but 
he could not see them, and I got nearly discouraged. . His con- 
dition seemed to grow darker and darker, and I didn’t know 
what to do. At last the thought occurred to me to read the 
story of Nicodemus, and I said, “My friend, Iam going to read 
you a story, and I want you to pay attention.” When I com- 
menced I noticed how eagerly he listened, how greedily he 
seemed to devour every word. It seemed as if he drank in 
every letter of the verses. When I got to the verse. “As Moses 
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of 
Man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth on Him should not 





LIFE OF MOODY. 433 


perish, but have everlasting life,” the dying man stopped me. 
“What is that?” he asked. “Is that true? I want you just to 
read that again,”’ and I read the two verses over carefully, and 
as I finished he rose in his bed and shut his eyes and said: 
“Bless God for that,” and the cloud that had rested on his face 
gave place to a look of gladness. ‘““Won’t you please read that 
again?” I did so, and as I finished he folded his arms across 


his breast and closed his eyes. When I read it the third time . 


I went on to the next verse, “For God so loved the world that 


he gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in ~ 


Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” I read on 
through the whole chapter, and when I got through he turned 
to me and said, “I understand it now; write to my mother and 
tell her I died trusting in Christ,’ and in a whispering voice 
repeated the fourteenth and fifteenth verses; and out of that 
hospital he arose and took his seat in the kingdom of God. 
There is enough in those verses to save everyone here, and all 
that you have to do is to look on Him and be saved. 


¥ 


434 LIFE OF MOODY. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
EXTRACTS FROM DISCOURSES. 


THE VIPERS OF LoNDON are different from those of New 
York, and, again, our own are unlike either of these. Covet- 
ousness, the inordinate greed for gain, has fastened on the 
hand of Chicago, along with many another Western city, and 
the sting will be worse and worse unless a remedy is found 
for us.. We talk with an appetite much too keen about getting 
gain and the chances for money-making. And yet this very 
trait, confessedly an evil, is an argument to our hand. There 


is a cry in commercial circles, loud and prolonged, for a revival — 


in business—all classes of business. In this country, during 
the past twenty years, I never heard anyone crying out against 
it. But if you talk about getting a revival in God’s business 
there is a class of people who at once shake their heads. They 
do not know about it; they are afraid it won’t work. A strange 
inconsistency! A thing is all right in their own concerns, but 
all wrong in God’s. The.two things are not different at all for 
the purposes of this comparison. God’s work, like man’s 
work, may have stages of activity; and the Christian, just as 
much as the merchant, should seek earnestly for a revival in 
trade. Oh, let us roll away this stone of unbelief and indif- 
ference and we will soon hear a voice from the place of the 
- stone crying, “Lazarus, comie forth.’ Let us only cry as ear- 
nestly and loud for a revival as our business men have done 
and are now doing and the powers and affections of our souls 
will spring up and bloom to eternal life. Our quickened souls 
and those of our friends will be made glad thereat and rejoice 
together in time and eternity. Should no right time come in 
God’s fields. when can the farmer have his harvest time? How 


LIFE OF MOODY. =) 2485 


active the farmers are in getting hands to help them through 
the rush. The right time does come periodically in the king- 
dom of heaven upon earth—a ripening time, when God calls’ 
His reapers to put in their sickles. 


WHEN IN GLASGOW 2 skeptic insisted that all my converts 
were women and old men verging on the grave. At the next 
meeting in that city there were present in the hall thirty-three 
hundred men, and of these twenty-seven hundred were young: 


men. The skeptic next insisted that not a wild or reckless or — 


drunken man came under God’s reviving influence. At the 
very next meeting a gambler, and a short time after the most 
notorious drunkard in town, experienced saving grace. And 
so let it be here. We want to see thieves, gamblers and harlots 
saved. Let us have faith, for according to our faith shall it 
be done to us, just as Martha saw Lazarus alive through trust 
in Jesus’ words. If we believe we are told we may order 
mountains to be removed and they will be cast into the sea. 
Oh, may God strike down our unbelief to the resurrection to 
life of even the vilest sinners in this city. 


A YOUNG MAN IN NEw York got up and thrilled the meeting 
with his experience. “I want to tell you,” he said, “that nine 
months ago a Christian came to my house and said he wanted 


me to become a Christian. He talked to me kindly and en- . 
_ couragingly, pointing out the error of my ways, and I became 


converted. I had been a hard drinker, but since that time I 
have not touched a drop of liquor. If anyone had asked who 
the most hopeless man in that town was they would have pointed 
to meY’ -Today this young man is the superintendent of a 
Sabbath-school. Eleven years ago when I went to Boston I 
had a cousin who wanted a little of my experience. I gave him 


all the help I could, and he became a Christian. He did not 


know how near death was to him. He wrote to his brother 
and said: “I am very anxious to get your soul to Jesus.” The 
letter somehow went to another city and lay from the 28th of 


436 LIFE OF MOODY. 


February to the 28th of March—just one month. He saw it 
was in his brother’s handwriting, tore it open and read the 
above words. It struck a chord in his heart and was the means 
of converting him. And this was the Christian who led this 
drunken young man to Christ. This young man had a neighbor 
who had drank for forty years, and he went to that neighbor 
and told him what God had done for him, and the result was 
another conversion.. I tell you these things to encourage you 
to believe that the drunkards and saloon-keepers can be saved. 
There is work for you to do, and by and by the harvest shall 
be gathered, and what a scene will be on the shore when we 
hear the Master on the throne shout, “Well done! Well done!” 


I REMEMBER IN PHILADELPHIA we wanted to see certain re- 
sults, and we called a meeting of mothers. There were from 
five to eight thousand mothers present, and each of them had 
a particular burden upon her heart. There was a mother who 
had a wayward daughter, another a reckless son, another a 
bad husband. We spoke to them confidently, and we bared 
our hearts to one another. They prayed for aid from the Lord 
and that grace might be shown to these sons and daughters 
and husbands, and the result was that our inquiry-rooms were 
soon filled with anxious and earnest inquirers. Let me tell you 
about a mother in Philadelphia. She had two wayward sons. 
They were wild, dissipated youths. They were to meet on a 
certain night and join in dissipation. The rendezvous was the 
corner of Market and Thirteenth streets, where our meetings 
were held. One of the young men entered the large meeting, 
and when it was over went to the young men’s meeting near at 
+hand, and was quickened, and there prayed that the Lord 
would save him. His mother had gone to the meeting that 
night, and, arriving too late, found the door closed. When 
that young man went home he found his mother praying for 
him, and the two mingled their prayers together. While they 
were praying together the other brother came from the other 
meeting and brought tidings of being converted, and at the 


LIFE OF MOODY. _ 437 


next meeting the three got up and told their experience, and 
I have never heard an audience so thrilled before or since. 


ANOTHER INCIDENT. A wayward boy in London whose 
mother was very anxious for his salvation said to her: “I am 
not going to be bothered with your prayers any longer. I will 
go to America and be rid of them.” “But, my boy,” she said, 
“God is on the sea and in America, and He hears my prayers” 
for you.” Well, he came to this country, and as they sailed= 
into the port of New York some of the sailors told him that 
Moody and Sankey were holding meetings in the Hippo- 
drome. The moment he landed he started for our place of 
mecting, and there he found Christ. He became a most ear- 
nest worker, and he wrote to his mother and told her that her 
prayers had been answered, that he had been saved and that he 
had found his mother’s God. Mothers and fathers! Lift up 
your hearts in prayer that there may be hundreds and thou- 
’ sands saved in this city. 


WHeEn I was 1n Lonpon there was one lady dressed in black 
up. in the gallery. All the rest were ministers. I wondered 
who that lady could be. At the close of the meeting I stepped 
up to her, and she asked me if I did not remember her. I did 
not, but she told me who she was, and her story came to my 
mind. When we were preaching in Dundee, Scotland, a _ 
mother came with her two sons, sixteen and seventeen years 
old. She said to me: “Will you talk to my boys?” I asked 
her if she would talk to the inquirers, and told her there were 
more inquirers than workers. She said she was not a good 
enough Christian—was not prepared enough. I told her I 
could not talk to her then. Next night she came to me and 
asked me again, and the following night she repeated her re- 
quest. Five hundred miles she journeyed to get God’s blessing 
for her boys. Would to God we had more mothers like her! 
She came to London, and the first night I was there I saw her 
in Agricultural Hall. She was accompanied by only one of 


438 LIFE OF MOODY. 


her boys—the other had died. Towards the close of the meet- 
ings I received this letter from her: 

“Dear Mr. Moody: For months I have never considered the 
day’s work ended unless you and your work had been specially 
prayed for. Now it appears before us more and more. What 
in our little measure we have found has no doubt been the 
happy experience of many others in London. My husband 
and I have sought as our greatest privilege to take uncon-_ 
verted friends, one by one, into Agricultural Hall, and I thank 
God that, with a single exception; those brought under the 
preaching from your lips have accepted Christ as their Saviour 
and are rejoicing in His love.” 

That lady was a lady of wealth and position. She lived a 
little way out of London; gave up her beautiful home and took 
_ lodgings near Agricultural Hall, so as to be useful in the in- 
quiry-room. When we went down to the Opera House she 
was there; when we went down to the East End there she was _ 
again, and when I left London she had the names of one hun- 
dred and fifty who had accepted Christ from her. Some have 
said that our work in London was a failure. Ask her if the 
work was a failure, and she will tell you. If we had a thousand 
such mothers in Chicago we would lift it. Go and bring your 
friends here to the meetings. Think of the privilege, my’ 
friends, of saving a soul. If we are going to work for good 
we must be up and about it. Men say, “I have not time.” 
Take it. Ten minutes every day for Christ will give you good 
wages. There is many a man who is working for you. Take 
them by the hand. Some of you with silver locks, I think I 
hear you saying, “I wish I was young, how I would rush into 
the battle.” Well, if you cannot be a fighter, you can pray 
and lead on the others. There are two kinds of old people in 
the world. One grows chilled and sour, and there are others 
who light up every meeting with their genial presence and 
cheer on the workers. Draw near, old age, and cheer on the 
others and take them by the hand and encourage them. There 
was a building on fire. The flames leaped around the stair- 








LIFE OF MOODY. . 439 


case, and from a three-story window a little child was seen who 
cried for help. The only way ta reach it was by a ladder. One 
was obtained, and a fireman ascended, but when he had almost 
reached the child the flames broke from a window and leaped 
around him. He faltered and seemed afraid to go further. 


Suddenly someone in the crowd shouted, “Give him a cheer,” 
and cheer after cheer went up. The fireman was nerved with 


new energy and rescued the child. Just so with our young 


men. Whenever you see them wavering cheer them on. If: 
you cannot work yourself give them cheers to nerve them on — 


in their glorious work. May the blessing of God fall upon us 
this afternoon, and let every man and woman be up and doing. 


I HEARD OF A YOUNG MAN who came to Chicago to sell his. 


father’s grain. His father was a minister somewhere down 
here. The boy arrived in Chicago and sold the grain, and 

when the time came for him to return home the boy did not 
come. The father and mother were up all night expecting to 


hear the sound of the wagon every minute, but they waited and _ 


waited, and still he did not come. The father became so uneasy 


that he went into the stable and saddled his horse and came to ° 


Chicago. When he reached here he found that his son had 
sold the grain, but had not been seen since the sale, and con- 
cluded that he was murdered. After making investigation, 


however, he found that the boy had gone into a gambling- . 


house and lost all his money. After they had taken all his 
money from him they told him to sell his horse and wagon 
and he would recover his money, which he did. He was like 
the poor man who came down from Jericho to Jerusalem and 
who fell among thieves, and after they had stripped him of 
everything cast him off. And a great many of you think as 
this young man thought. You think that rum-sellers and gam- 
blers are your best friends, when they will take from you your 
peace, your health, your soul, your money—everything you 
have, and then run away. Well, the father, after looking about 
for him fruitlessly, went home and told his wife what he had 














440 LIFE OF MOODY. 


learned, But he did not settle down, but just took his carpet- 
_ bag in his hand and went from one place to another, getting 
ministers to let him preach for them, and he always told the 
_ congregation that he had a boy dearer to him than life, and 
left his address with them, and urged them if ever they heard 
anything about his boy to let him know. At last, after going 
around a great deal, he got on his track and learned that he 
had gone to California. It was during the time of the gold 
excitement. He went home, but he did not write a letter to 
him. No; he just arranged his business affairs and started for 
- the Pacific coast to find his boy. This is but an illustration of 
what God has been doing for you. There has not been a day, 
an hour, a moment, but God has been searching for you. When 
the father got to San Francisco he got permission to preach, ” 
and he had a notice put in the papers in the hope that it might 
reach the mining district. He preached a sermon on the. Sun- 
day, and when he pronounced the benediction the audience 
went away. But he saw in a corner one who remained. He 
went up to him and found-it was his boy. He did not repri- 
mand him, he did not deliver judgment upon him, but put his 
loving arms around him, drew him to his bosom and took him 
back to his home. This is an illustration of what God wants to 
do to us, what He wants to do today. He offers us His love 
and His forgiveness. , 


THERE IS ONE PECULIARITY ABOUT A BACKSLIDER. You must 
get back to Him as you went away. It,is you who have gone 
away by turning, by leaving Him, not He by leaving you. And 
the way to get back to Him is to turn your face toward Him, 

-and He will receive you with joy and forgiveness. There will 
be joy in your heart, and there will be joy in heaven this after- 
noon if you return to Him. If you treated God as a personal 
friend there would not be a backslider. A rule I have had for 
years is to treat the Lord Jesus Christ as a personal friend. 
He is not a creed, a mere empty doctrine, but it is He Himselt 
we have. The moment we have received Christ we should re- 





LIFE OF MOODY. 441 


ceive Him as a friend. When I go away from home I bid my 
wife and children goodbye, I bid my friends and acquaintances 
goodbye, but I never héard of a poor backslider going down 


on his knees and saying, “I have been near You for ten years; 


Your service has become tedious and monotonous; I have 
come to bid You farewell; goodbye, Lord Jesus Christ.” I 


never heard of one doing this. I will tell you how they go | 


away; they just run away. Where are you, you backslider? 
Just look upon your condition during the past ten years. Have 


they been years of happiness? Have they been years of peace? 


Echo answers ten thousand times, “No!” Return to Him at 


once. Never mind what your past has been; He will give 


you salvation. 


In Lonpon, WHEN I was THERE IN 1867, I was told a story 
which made a very deep impression upon me. A young French 
nobleman came there to see a doctor, bringing letters from the 
French Emperor. The Emperor Napoleon HI had a great 
regard for this young man, and the doctor wanted to save him. 
He examined the young man, and saw there was something on 
his mind. “Have you lost any property? What is troubling 
you? You have something weighing on your mind?” said the 
doctor. “Oh, there is nothing particular.” “TI know better. 
Have you lost any relations?” asked the doctor. “No; none 
within the last three years.” “Have you lost any reputation in 


your country?” “No.” The doctor studied for a few minutes, 
and then said, ‘I must know what is on your mind; I must | 


know what is troubling you.” And the young man said, “My 
father was an infidel; my grandfather was an infidel, and I was 
brought up an infidel, and for the last three years these words 
have haunted me, ‘Eternity, and where shall it find me?” 
“Ah,” said the doctor, “you have come to the wrong phy- 
sician.” “Is there no hope for me?” cried the young man. pal 
walk about in the daytime; I-lie down at night, and it comes 
upon me continually; ‘Eternity, and where shall I spend it? 


Tell me is there any hope for me?” The doctor said, “Now, 


442 LIFE OF MOODY. 


just sit down and be quiet. A few years ago I was an infidel. 
I did not believe in God, and was in the same condition in 
which you are.” The doctor took dqwn his Bible and turned 


to the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah and read: “He was wounded 
- for our trangressions; He was bruised for our iniquities; the 


chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and with His stripes 
we are healed.” And he read on through this chapter. When 
he had finished the young man said: “Do you believe this, 
that He voluntarily left heaven, came down to this earth and 
suffered and died that we might be saved?” “Yes, I believe it. 
That brought me.out of infidelity, out of darkness into light.” 
And he preached Christ and His salvation, and told him of 
heaven, and then suggested that they get down on their 
knees and pray. And when I went there in 1867 a letter had 
been received from that young nobleman, who wrote to Dr. 
Whinston in London, telling him that question of “eternity, 
and where he should spend it” was settled and troubled him 
no more. My friends, this question of eternity, and where we 
are going to spend it forces itself upon everyone of us. We 
are staying here for a little day. Our life is but a fiber, and it 
will soon be snapped. I may be preaching my last sermon. 
Tonight may find me in eternity. By the grace of God say that 
you will spend it in heaven. All the hosts-of hell cannot hin- 
der you if you make up your mind to come to heaven, because 
if God says, “‘Let him come,” who can resist you? If that little 
child sitting yonder says it will enter heaven all the hosts of 
hell cannot keep it out. May God help you to spend your eter- 
nity in heaven, and may you say, “By the grace of God I 
accept Jesus as my Redeemer.” 
4 


‘As I WAS COMING OUT OF A DAILY PRAYER-MEETING 
in one of our large Western cities, a mother approached 
me and said, ‘I want to have you see my husband and 
invite him to come to Christ.’ I took out my memor- 


» 


<a 
. 


tse 


~ meto hold an argument with you. I have just one favor © 


LIFE OF MOODY. 443 


andum-book and entered his name. She says, ‘I want 
to have you go and see him.’ I knew by the name that 
he was a learned judge, and so said to her, ‘I can’t argue 
with him. He is a good deal older and wiser than Iam 
and it would be out of place. Then I am not much for 


infidel argument.’ ‘Well; Mr. Moody,’ she says, ‘that 
is not what he needs. He has enough of that. Just ask _ 
him to come to the Saviour.’ She urged me so hard - 


and so strong that I consented to go. I went up to the 
office where the judge was doing business, and I told 
him what I had come for. He laughed at me. ‘You 
are very foolish to come,’-he said, and he began to argue 
with me. I said, ‘I don’t think it will be profitable for 


I want to ask of you, and that is that when you are con- 
‘verted you will please let me know.’ ‘Yes,’ said he, ‘I 


will do that. When I am converted I will surely let you 
know,’ said with a good deal of sarcasm. I thought the 


prayers of that wife would be answered if mine were not. | 


A year and a half after I was in that same city, and a ser- 
vant came to my door and said, ‘There is a man in the 
drawing-room to see you.’ I found the judge there. He 
said, ‘I promised I would let you know when I was con- 
verted.’ I had heard it from other lips, but I wanted to 
hear it from his own. He said his wife had gone out to 
a meeting one night and he was at home all alone, and 


* A 


444 LIFE OF MOODY. 


while he was sitting there by the fire he thought, ‘Sup- 
pose my wife is right, and my children are right; sup- 
pose there is a heaven and a hell, and | shall be separ- 
ated from them.’ His first thought was, ‘I don’t be- 
lieve a word of it.’ The second thought that came to 
him was, ‘You believe in the God that created you, and 
that the God that created you is able to teach you. You 
believe that God can give you eternal life.’ ‘Yes, the 
God that created me can give me everlasting life. I was 
too proud to get down on my knees by the fire, but I 
cried out, “Oh, God, teach me.” And as I prayed, I do 
not understand it, but it began to get very dark, and my 


heart got very heavy. I was afraid to tell my wife when | 


she returned home, and I pretended to be asleep. She 
kneeled down beside that bed, and I knew she was pray- 
ing forme. I kept crying, “Oh, God, teach me.” I had 
soon to change my prayer, “Oh, God, save me; Oh, 
God, take away this burden.” But it grew darker and 
darker, and the load grew heavier and heavier. All the 
way to my office I kept praying, “Oh, God, take away this 
load.” I gave my clerks a holiday and closed my office 
- and locked the door. I fell down on my face; I cried in 
agony to my Lord, “Oh, Lord, for Christ’s sake, take 
away my guilt.” I don’t know howitwas, but it began at 
once to grow very light. I said, “I wonder if this is not 
what they call conversion. I think T will go at once and 

















CONVENTION HALL, KANSAS CITY, MO.—INTERIOR VIEW. 





LIFE OF MOODY. _ 447 


ask the minister if I am not converted.” The old judge 
said to me, ‘Mr. Moody, I have enjoyed life during the 
last three months more than all put together.’ The judge 
did not believe, the wife did, and God honored her faith 
and saved that man. And when he went up to Spring- 
field, Ill., the old judge stood up there and told those 
politicians what God, for Christ’s sake, had done for, 
him. And now let this text sink down deep into your 
hearts, ‘When He saw their faith.’ Let us lift up our . 
hearts to God in prayer that He may give us faith. 


“Now, MY FRIENDS, WE MUST NOT EXPECT TO DO 
GREAT THINGS. We must accept anything that comes 
to us. We must let the Lord use us as He sees fit. I 
remember once, while preaching at a meeting, of no- 
ticing in the congregation a lady who was a teacher of a 
class in a mission school. I knew that it was the time 
for the class to meet, and I wondered what she was there 
for. When I got home I said, ‘How did you happen to’ 

_ be at the meeting this afternoon? What did you do 
with all those little lambs? Haven’t you a class that 
meets today?’ ‘Yes,’ she said, ‘but I only have five little 
boys, and I did not think it would matter if I failed to 
teach them today.’ ‘Have you five little boys? ‘Yes.’ 

‘How do you know but aniong those little boys there 

may be a Knox, there may be a Wesley, or a Whitfield, 


448 LIFE OF MOODY. 


ora Bunyan? There may be one there who will go out 
and revolutionize the world.’ My friends, in that little 
boy, with his tattered clothes and uncombed hair, there 
may bea Martin Luther, if you would but bring him to 
Christ. If you have only five little children come to you, 
thank God and start with your work. I heard some 
time ago of a young lady that went from home to a 
boarding-school. Her parents were very wealthy, and 
sent her to the best school they could find. They were 
very desirous that their daughter should shine in the 
highest circle. of society, that she should become refined 
and educated. Among her associates at school was a 
lady who loved and worked for Christ. By constant 
labor she won this young girl’s heart, and pleaded with 
her to become a Christian. She succeeded, and the 
young lady became an earnest worker in the vineyard 
ofthe Lord. She had taught her the luxury of working 
for Christ. She labored with her schoolmates, and God 
used her in winning a number of young ladies in that 
school to Christ. I have known a great many ministers 
who desired to know how they could keep their congre- 
‘gation out of the world. I answer, Give them so much 
to do that they will not have time to cherish worldly in- 
fluences. This young lady of whom I was speaking 
came home, and her father and mother wanted her to 
shine in fashionable society. No, she said; she had got 


LIFE OF MOODY. ~ 449 


something far better than that. She went to the Sab- 
bath-school superintendent, and said to him, ‘Can you 
give me a class in the Sunday-school?” ‘He was sur- ; 
prised that this young lady should ask for that. He told 
her that he had no_class he could give her then. She 
went away with a resolve to do what she could outside 
of the school. One day, as she was walking up the street, 
she saw a little boy running out of a small shoemaker’s 
shop, and behind him was the angry old shoemaker, — 
chasing him with a wooden last in his hand. He had not 
run far until the last was thrown at him, and he was 
struck in the back. The boy stopped and began to cry. 
The spirit of the Lord touched that young lady’s heart, 
and she went to where the boy was. She stepped up 
to him and asked him if he was hurt. He told her it 
was none of her business. She went to work, then, to 
win that boy’s confidence. She asked him if he ever 
went to school. He said, ‘No.’ ‘Weli, why don’t you. 
zo to school?’ “Don’t want to.’ She asked him if he 
would not like to go to Sunday-school. ‘If you will 
come,’ she said, ‘I will tell you beautiful stories and read 
to you nice books.’ She coaxed and pleaded with him, 
and at last said that if he would consent to go she would 
meet him on the corner of the street which they should 
agree upon. Heat last consented, and on the next Sun- 
day, true to his promise, the boy waited for her at the © 


450. : LIFE OF MOODY. 


place designated. She took him by the hand and led 
him into the Sabbath-school. ‘Can you give me a place 
to teach this little boy?’ she asked of the superinten- 

_ dent. He looked at the boy, but they did not have any 
such looking little ones in the school. A place was 
found, however, and she sat down in the corner and 
tried to win that soul for Christ. Many would look up- 
on that with contempt, but she had got something to do 
forthe Master. The little boy had never heard anybody 
sing so sweetly before. When he went home he was 
’ asked where he had been. ‘Been among the angels,’ he 
rold his mother. He said then that he had been to the 
Protestant Sabbath-school, but his father and mother 
told him he must not go there any more, or he would . 
get a flogging. The next Sunday, however, he went, 
and when he came home he got the promised flogging. 
He went the second time and again got a flogging, and 
also a third time, with the same result. At last he said 
to his father, ‘I wish you would flog me before I go, and 
then I won’t have to think of it when I am there.’ The 
father said, ‘If you ever go to that Sabbath-school again 
‘J will kill you.’ It was the father’s habit to send his son 
out on the street to sell articles to the passers-by, and he 
told the boy that he might have the profits of what he 
sold every Saturday. The little fellow hastened to the 
young lady’s house and said to her, ‘Father said that he 


LIFE OF MOODY. ! . 451 


would give me every Saturday to myself, and if you will 

just teach me then I will come to your house every Sat- 

urday afternoon.’ I wonder how many young ladies 

there are that would give up their Saturday afternoons 

just to lead one poor boy into the kingdom of God! 

Every Saturday afternoon that little fellow was there at 

her house, and she endeavored to tell him the way to» 
Christ. She labored with him until at last the light of 

God’s spirit broke in upon his heart. One day, while . 
he was selling his wares at the railroad station, a train 
of cars approached unnoticed and passed over both his 
legs. A physician was summoned, and the first thing 
after he arrived the little sufferer looked up into his face 
and said, ‘Doctor, will I live to get home?’ ‘No,’ said 
the doctor, ‘you are dying.’ ‘Will you please tell my 
mother and father that I died a Christian? They bore 
home the boy’s corpse and with it the Jast message that 
he died a Christian. Oh, what a noble work was that 
young lady’s in saving that little wanderer! How pre- 
cious was the remembrance to her! When she goes to 
heaven she will not be a stranger there. He will take 
her by the hand and lead her to the throne of Christ. 
She did the work cheerfully. Oh, may God teach us 
what our work is that we may do it willingly for His 


glory! 


452 LIFE OF MOODY. 


“THERE WAS AN ENGLISHMAN IN CHICAGO THE WIN- 
TER BEFORE THE GREAT FIRE who was very much im- 
pressed with the sudden and great growth of the city. 
He went back to Manchester, where he told the people 
about the city only forty years old, with all its fine build- 
ings, its colleges and its churches. It was, he thought, 
a most wonderful city. However, no one seemed to 
take any interest in Chicago. ‘But,’ he says, ‘one day 
the news came flashing over the wires that Chicago was 
on fire. The moment the people heard about the great 
Chicago fire they became suddenly interested about 
Chicago. Then every man that he had tried to tell 
about Chicago became suddenly interested, and they 
could not hear teo much.’ The news then came flashing 
over the wires that half the city was burnt. ‘Well,’ he 
said, ‘there were men there who could not help but 
weep.’ At last came the news that 100,000 people were 
burned out of their houses and were in danger of star- 
_ vation unless immediate help were sent. Then these 
same men came forward and gave their thousands. It 
was the calamity of Chicago that brought out the love 
and pity of those men. In Chicago men went to bed on 
Sunday night millionaires, and by Monday morning all 
was swept away. But I did not see a man shed a tear 
over the loss of his property. At last the news came 
flashing over the wires again that help was coming— 


es 


LIFE OF MOODY. 453 


that a large delegation was coming from New York 
city that was bringing clothing and food and money— 
and I saw men weep like little children then. It was 
that which touched the heart of Chicago. I never loved 
America so much in my life. I loved the whole world. 
We could not help but love others, because they 


loved us. 


“A MAN SAID TO ME SOME TIME AGO, ‘Moody, have. 
you got the grace to go to the stake as a martyr?’ ‘No; 
what do I want to go to the stake for?’ Another person . 
said to me, ‘Moody, if God should take your son, have 
you grace to bear it?” I said, ‘What do I want grace _ 
for? I don’t want grace to bear that which has not been 
sent. If God should call upon me to part with my boy 
he would give me grace and strength to bear it. “What 
we want is grace for the present, to bear the trials and 
temptations for every day. “As thy day, so shall thy 
strength be.’ The woman who had lost her husband 
went to Elisha with a story that would move the heart 
of Elisha or anyone else. Her husband had died a 
bankrupt, and they would sell her boys into slavery. 
She came to Elisha and told her story. He asked 
her what she had. She replied a pot of oil. Elisha 
told her to go home, ‘borrow vessels not a few, take oil 
and pour into the empty vessels.” Men in these times 
would not believe this. They would say, ‘What, take a 
pot of oil and pour into all these vessels! What good 
will that do?’ Not so this. poor widow. She has faith, 
and doesas she is told by the prophet of God. She goes 


454 LIFE OF MOODY. 


to her neighbors and asks for vessels ; they can lend her 
afew. She takes all they have and goes on. She clears 
- out the next house, and the next, and the next. ‘Bor- 
row,’ says the prophet, and she goes on borrowing until 
her house is filled with vessels. ‘Now close the doors,’ 
she says to her sons. And she pours oil into the first 


vessel and fills it full, and the next, and the next in the . 


sameway. She pours it in, and pours it in, and the boys 
run and get more vessels, until the house is full of oil. 
Then she goes to Elisha and asks what she shall do. He 
tells her ‘go’ sell the oil and pay the debt. Now, Christ 
pays the debt and gives us enough to live on besides. 
He doesn’t merely pay our debt—He gives us enough 
to live on. He gives according to our need. ‘As thy day, 
so shall thy strength be.’ Rowland Hill tells a story of 
a rich man and of a poor man of his congregation. The 
rich man came to Mr. Hill with a sum of money which 
he wished to give to the poor man, and asked Mr. Hill 
to give it to him in the way he thought best, either all 
at once or in small amounts. Mr. Hill sent the poor 
mana Age -pound note, with the indorsement, ‘More to 
fol’cw.’ Now, which do you think did the most good? 
Every few months came the remittance, with the same 
message, ‘More to follow.’ Now, that is grace. ‘More 
to follow—yes, thank God, there’s more to follow. Oh, 
wondrous grace! May the grace of God reach every 
heart in this assemblage tonight is my earnest prayer. 


ai 


* . 


BOOK IIl. 
Sermons and Addresses. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
A CHRISTMAS SERMON. 


Luke ii, 10: ‘‘Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which 
shall be to all people.’’ 


It seems to me as if everyone ought to be lifted up—their 
hearts ought to be lit up with joy today. I suppose millions 
of people have read this second chapter of Luke, and many 
eyes have fallen upon this verse, “Behold, I bring you good 
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people; for unto you 
is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour, which is Christ 
the Lord,” and their hearts have been filled with peace and joy. 
I have often wondered what God could have given us in the 
place of Christ; what better gift He could have given us? Sup- 
pose He had given us the choice ourselves; what could we 
have selected better? How many of you have been wondering 
what you will give your children as presents! You have been 
puzzled what to give them that would suit them best, and you 
have listened to their conversations, to hear if you could catch 
what they would like. You have listened-to all their wants, 
and perhaps you’ve gone and bought these things, and have 
them hid away in your houses now, and tomorrow they will be 
brought out. God looked at us, and He found in every heart 
there was written want, want, and He saw what we wanted (and 
that was His own Son), and He gave us just what every one of 
us needs. Some one has said that if a man had chosen some- 
thing himself, from Adam all the way down, he could not have 
selected anything better than a Saviour. There is nothing that 
could be chosen in comparison to Him. God saw what we 
needed, and He never makes a mistake. It is just what every 


456 LIFE OF MOODY. 


man, woman and child in this city needs. Not a woman in this 
building can get into the kingdom of God without taking this 
gift. Therefore, it is good tidings when we read, “For unto 
you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour.” Heisa 
gift to everyone here. God gave Him up freely to us all, and all 
we've got to do is to take Him. 

You remember, during the war, we used to pray for peace. 
You could not go into a church but you heard the cry going 
up, “Peace, peace.” In every home where there was a family 
altar the prayer was “Peace.” That’s just what we all want. 
Now, these angels told the shepherds on the plains of Bethle- 
hem that they had brought peace: ‘Glory to God in the-high- 
est, and on earth peace, good-will toward men.” And how 
that ought to fill every soul with gladness. There is no true 
peace, true joy, till He comes into our hearts. We cannot have 
it unless He has entered our soul. We have in this text the 
announcement that this gift is ready for us; therefore it is good 
tidings. Every thirsty soul in this building will have peace if 
they will only take Him, because that is what He came to bring. 
When we had war in this country with England, and every- 
thing looked dark for the people of these shores, you remember 
how some commissioners sailed to see if they could not bring 
about a reconciliation. They had been absent six months— 
and you know we hadn’t any cable in those days, or fast steam- 
‘ers sailing every few days—and the people hearing no news 
from them, things began to look very dark. It looked as if 
they were not going to have a reconciliation, as if they were 
not going-to have peace, but a long war. You know the colo- 
nies were very weak, and they dreaded to have a continuance 
of the war. At last the news came that the vessels were off 
‘Sandy Hook, and the people were anxious for the commis- 
sioners to arrive, so that they could learn whether the war was 
ended. The news spread through the city that day that they 
were coming, but the day passed into the night} and it looked 
as if the vessels would not be able to reach port before morn- 
ing. So the people went to bed. But the vessels came up, and 


LIFE OF MOODY. 457 


these men had good-news, and the boats were lowered. The 
commissioners stepped into the boats, and the sailors, in the 
darkness, pulled for the shore. When they got within hearing 
distance they could not contain themselves, and cried, “ Peacess 
peace,” and the men took up the glad news and ran up one 


- street and down another shouting, ‘Peace, peace,” and men, 


women and children, too, came from their homes and took up 
the cry, and it echoed-through the city. The cannon were . 
booming, bells were ringing, and all New York was full of the 
joy of that peace. It was what the people wished. The war © 
was over, peace was brought, and the English army was with- 
drawn, and we had peace in this blessed land for nearly a cen- 
tury. If we have been at war with Him, here is reconciliation 
today. Yes, my friends, it is good-will to men. If you have 
been at enmity with Him, bear in mind that our enmity can 
cease today. We can be reconciled unto Himself, we can have 
peace for time and eternity, for “Behold, I bring you good tid- 
ings of great joy, which shall be to all people, for unto you is 
born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour.” 

If God does not want us reconciled to Himself, why did He 
send Christ? What did He leave Heaven for if He did not want 
to bring peace and reconciliation to men? He came for this 
purpose, and we, as His commissioners, ask you to be recon- 
ciled to Him. How sweet it is to be reconciled to God—to be 
at perfect peace with Him! You who have been at war with 
God all your lives, you who have been at war with your neigh- . 
bors, with your friends, with yourselves, will you not accept 
His peace now? What would be more acceptable to a man in 
prison than his liberty? I remember, while in England, I was 
told of a man who was to be hung at 8 o’clock upon a certain 
morning. The black flag was waving from the prison in the 
heart of the town where he was incarcerated. A great many 
of the ministers in the churches had for their subject this con- 
demned man. Everybody. was talking about the execution, 
and the whole town was excited. The black flag raised upon 
the prison told them that a man was to be launched into eter- 


458 LIFE OF MOODY. 


nity. Thousands were praying for him, a great many were 
weeping, for he was a man who had been very much liked by 
some. They had sent petitions to the Queen, but without any 
effect so far. Perhaps the gallows was erected inside the 
prison, as it is here, and the poor captive heard the carpenters 
at work, and as they struck blow upon blow it seemed to be 
upon his breast, for every nail driven in brought him nearer to 
his doom. Now the hour is approaching. The day preceding 
his execution passes into night, and darkness hangs over that 
prison. How dark it must have been in that cell that night! 
Next morning he knew he was to die upon the gallows. That 
night about midnight he heard the footfalls of the sheriff com- 
ing near his door. He knew the hour had not-yet arrived, and 
he began to tremble. “Is he coming before my time to take me 
out and execute me?” The door was unlocked, and the sheriff 
said to the condemned man, “I bring you good news—I bring 
you a pardon from the Queen.” What do you think would be - 
the feelings of that man? Wouldn’t he rejoice? My friends, 
the black flag of death may be waving over you, and hell re- 
joicing that you will soon be there, but Christ comes with a 
pardon today by which your sins are blotted out—by which all 
your iniquities are taken away, by which you will become as a 
child of God and be made meet for His kingdom. Is not this 
good news? If anyone here is living under sin, you are con- 
demned, but you can receive a pardon, for light has come into, 
the world. The Son of Man has come into the world, and you 
are offered a pardon as a Christmas gift. Will you take it? or 
will you send back an insulting message to God, saying that 
you don’t want Him as the Saviour of sinners; that you don’t 
_ feel any need of Him; that you’ve no room for Him? My 
friends, He has come with a gift by which everyone is liberated 
from sin if they will only accept it. 

Look at that prison in Jerusalem where Barabbas was con- 
fined. He had been tried and sentenced, and he was to die the 
death of the cross. He was a noted prisoner, and you know it 
was only the worst prisoners who died the death of the cross. 


LIFE OF MOODY. 459 


You can see him as the day drew near. The day was set, and 
the hour was rolling on when he was to meet death and judg- 
ment, and you can see the poor man trembling at the thought. 
Strange news reaches him. He hears that Christ, the Galilean 
prophet, is going to be executed with him, and He is to be put 
between two thieves—He, the Prince of Peace. Then a rumor 
comes to him that Pilate is going to liberate Christ or him- 
self, and he is going to let the people choose between them. - 
And if some one had gone and told him this he would have , 
said, “Why, of course, they will not choose Christ and allow 
me to be liberated. I have taken men’s lives all my days, while 
He has given men life; I’ve robbed men of all they have, while. 
He has only given them blessings; I’ve destroyed men’s peace 
all my life, while He has only given men joy and happiness, 
and, of course, they will liberate Him.” It might have been 
that he had a family living in Jerusalem, and in the morning ~ 
before his execution his wife and children came to bid him 
- farewell, and I’ve been told by executioners that the farewell 
between the family of the criminal and himself is one of the 
saddest things conceivable. Perhaps at a funeral you have 
seen a loving mother coming up and imprinting the last kiss 
upon the marble brow of her boy, and one member after an- 
other of the family comes and takes the last look. You know 
this is all very sad; but what is it to the grief of that heart- 
broken wife who bids farewell to her husband, who came into 
that cell in the Jerusalem prison, knowing that in a few hours ° 
“he was to die on the cross. You can see him kiss her for the 
last time, and bidding farewell to each of his children, and 
they go never to see him again. Poor Barabbas! How he 
must have trembled; how he must have been full of sorrow and 
gloom as he looked forward to the death he was to die, and 
_ thought of those he was leaving behind. By and by he hears a 
footfall upon the corridor. Nearer and nearer it comes. “Are 
they going to take me to execution now?” he asks himself. The 
bolts are pulled, the door is swung open, and the sheriff cries 
out, “Barabbas, you are free; go where you please!” I can see 


460 LIFE OF MOODY. 


that poor, condemned man looking at the officer. ‘What! 
What do you tell me! I am free? Do you mean to say that 
the’ people have chosen Jesus of Nazareth to be executed in. 
stead of me?” “Yes, they have, and you are free.” I can see 
him leaving that cell, and he goes down to his wife and chil- 
dren, and he draws that wife to his bosom. “I’ve got good 
news for you; I haven’t only got my life prolonged, but I’ve 
got my liberty. Christ has died in my stead.” That is the 
Gospel. Christ died for every sinner; as Paul says, “He died 
and gave Himself for me’—for each of us here. That’s the 
glorious Gospel of substitution. He died “for our transgres- 
sions, He was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of 
our peace was.upon Him, and with His stripes we are healed.” 
Will you walk out of this building today and say, “Christ is 
nothing to me; I see no beauty in Him; I see no reason why I 
should love Him?” God gave Him up for you. Not only was 


He given up for us and born in a manger and lived a life of | 


toil and hardship, but He died an ignominious death. Say, 
young lady, would you rather live the life of the world—would 
you rather life a life of pleasure; would you rather have your 
darling sin than God’s gift? Won’t you today accept and make 
your peace for time and eternity? and this will be a joyful day 
for you. 

Let me say here that I never knew one who accepted these 
glad tidings who was ever disappointed. Now, God does not 
offer us good tidings, and when we come to look, find it bad 
news. Very often we hear in the world something which we 
think is good news, but after a little we find out that it is very 
. bad, It is not so with the Gospel, 


LIFE OF MOODY. _ 461 


CHAPTER XX. 


FUNERAL SERMON OF MR. MOODY’S BROTHER, 
SAMUEL. ‘ 


John i, 41, 42: “He first findeth his own brother, * * * and he 
brought him to Jesus.” 


I am going this morning to take a leaf out of my 
own life in the past, that it may help some of those 
present who have brothers that are very dear to them, 
but who are not of Christ. Twenty-one years ago last 
March, in Boston, when God converted my soul, the 
very first thing that came into my mind was the un- 
saved state of my six brothers. Then and there I began 
to pray for them. I had never prayed for them before; 
and I began to cry to God that these six brothers and ~ 
two sisters might be led home to peace. And for the 
twenty-one years that has bee my prayer; that has 
been my cry to God. I remember the first time I went 

- home after my conversion. I thought I could tell them 
what God had done for me, I thought I had only to 
explain it to have them all see the light. How disap- 
pointed I was when I left home that first time, after re- 


= eee 


462 LIFE OF MOODY. 


maining for a few days, to find that they did not see it. 
I was not very experienced in pleading for souls then. 
Perhaps I did not go at it in the right way. But I kept 
on as best I could. And a few years after, when I was 
in this city—three years after I was in a store on Lake 
_street—a postman came one day and brought a letter 
that told me that my youngest brother was given up by 
the physician to die. On the day I got the letter he was 
dying. I went into the fifth story of that building, and 
if ever I prayed earnestly in my life I did then, that: my 
brother might be spared. He was the Benjamin of the 
family. He was born after my father died. I thought 
I could give him up then if only he was a Christian. 
But I had not any hope. The thought that my brother, 
who was very dear to me—dearer to me than my life, 
it seemed—should die thus in his sins was too much for 
me to stand, and I wrestled with God in prayer. It 
seemed God answered my prayer. The next letter 
sent, he was better. He had a run of typhoid fever 
that lasted forty-two days; and when he got off that 
bed, I felt in answer to prayer, the boy was dearer to 
_ me than ever before. But he was never well during 
sixteen or eighteen years. I remember fourteen years 
ago he came to me to this city. I have that dear boy 
in my heart now. I thought then my opportunity had 
surely come, and I could lead him to Christ. But he 


Ls 


LIFE OF MOODY. 5 AOS 


was taken sick again. 1 could not keep him here. ‘he 
doctor said he might live a number of years, but could 
not be cured. Naturally. very ambitious and proud- 
spirited, he did not want to go back home. But the 
doctor said it was the best I could do, and I took him 
back to Massachusetts. I took him home from Chicago’ 
to Northfield, all the way preaching Christ to him. 2 
But he took no interest in my speech. Everything I | 
said failed to influence him, although he seemed to love 
me very much. And for fourteen years I kept that dear 
boy on my heart. I just kept on praying for him. Year 
after year I went back to the old home just to spend a 
iew days with him that I might win him to Christ. He 
knew I wanted him to be a Christian, but it seemed 
he would not comply. He took no interest in the 
Bible, no interest in Christianity. He would talk poli- 
_ tics, he would talk of everything else, but you could 
not get him to talk of Christ or Christianity. I went 
back home a year ago with a heart just burdened for 
the salvation of my family. My heart burned to draw 
them to Christ. I went to preaching in that town. In: 
the last month, my heart going out to that dear boy, 
I asked all those present in the church willing to be- 
come Christians to rise, and he, my long-sought 
brother, rose for prayers. What a precious relief for my 


heart! He became an earnest Christian. He turned 


464 LIFE OF MOODY. 


‘ 


his face toward heaven that very night. He became 


an active Christian; and when they soon after decided’ 


to have a Young Men’s Christian Association for that 
town, the young men wanted a president, and they 
elected him for president. Oh, that was a blessed day 
for me when my brother, converted to God, after 
twenty years’ prayer, took charge of that little band. 
I heard him make his first speech, and that seemed the 


happiest day of my life. He was a young man of great 


talents; he was the star of the family—the most prom- 
ising one of the family. No one of us could have done 
as much for Christ had he gone to him in his earliest 


manhood. And he went to work. He took a leading 
part in religious meetings. He went and talked with | 


weak brothers and set them on their feet again. He 
searched for souls on both sides of the Connecticut 
River, in both sides of the valley. More conversions 
took place after I left than when I was there. Every 
Sunday afternoon he would go out into the country 
and take charge of meetings, and as I used to stand in 
the pulpit sometimes and look down on that young 
’ brother in his zealous work no one but God knows 
how I loved him and rejoiced with great joy. And 
when God took him he was in the midst of his work 
bringing others to Christ. Oh, I want to tell you my 
thoughts after I left you sudderily. The first thought 





LIFE OF MOODY. _ 465 


as I went toward my home, Oh, how deep the sorrow! 
The dear boy was gone forever, and in the first 
moments grief will have its way. That text in Scrip- 


ture, the expression that David used when he lost Jon- 


athan, kept coming into my mind: “I am very much 


distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan; very pleasant ° 
hast thou been unto me; thy love to me was wonder- » 


ful.” Yes, thy love to me was wonderful. For these 
twenty years I always knew he was going to meet me 
at the depot. I always found him waiting for me there. 
I never missed him. Sometimes I was three or four 
trains behind, but he was always watching and waiting 

forme. And that sadly beautiful hymn also kept com- 
ing into my mind: 


“We shall meet, but we shall miss him; 
There will be one vacant chair.” 


But over and above all these the voice from heaven 
at last made itself heard to my heart: “Thy brother 
shall rise again.” The cloud was lifted, and for about 
500 miles on my way to my home that verse rung in my 
ears. It seemed to echo and re-echo through all the 
journey: “Thy brother'shall rise again.” Oh, the 
precious Bible! It never seemed to me so precious as 
it did that day. My call to mourning was the deepest I 
have ever known, for next, perhaps, to my wife, my 


466 LIFE OF MOODY. 


two children and my aged mother, I loved none so 
dearly as this youngest brother. But that precious 
promise gives the heart cause to rejoice even in the 
sorrow of death. And again, in the fifteenth chapter of 
Corinthians, what divine sustaining words I took to 
my soul: 
- “But some men will say, how are the dead raised up? 
and with what body do they come? 

“Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, 
except it die. ) 

“And that which thou sowest thou sowest not that 


body that shall be, but bare grain; it may chance of 


wheat or of some other grain. 

“But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased Him, 
and to every seed his own body. 

So also is the resurrection of the-dead. It is sown 
in corruption; it is raised in incorruption. 

“Tt is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It is 
sown in weakness; it is raised in power.” 

Dishonor! Oh, as we laid him down in the cold 


grave—I thought, as we laid him away, of the worms 


~ that would come to his body, and of the dishonor. But 


with what power the Word of God came to my soul 
then in these words, “It is raised in glory.” We sowed 
it in weakness, but it shall be raised in power. It 


seemed there was victory even in that trying hour. It 


LIFE OF MOODY. 467 


was sown in corruption, but it shall be raised incorrup- 
tible. It was sown mortal, but it shall be raised im- 
mortal. It was sown a natural body; it shall be raised 
a spiritual body. And, as it had borne the image of the 
earthy, it shall also bear the image of the heavenly. 


I shall see that brother by and by; then shall he be’ 
glorified. Yes, my friends, I could even rejoice as T. 


read these blessed assurances of Scripture. The Word 


of God came to my soul as never before. Blessed _ 


Bible, how dark it would have been but for that blessed 
book. But by its beams all darkness was driven away. 


It seemed I could even thank God for the triumphant ~ 


_ death of my dear brother, and almost envied him. No, 
I would not have God call him back from heaven into 
this dark world. Yon happy home beyond the grave 
is far better. What joy.to tell of good deeds done. A 
minister down home told me that he did not know, a 
short time back, of a solitary young man in his neigh- 


borhood who would offer prayer, but now a numerous” 


and zealous band of praying Christians were the fruits 


of my brother’s life. And that text came forcibly to 


my mind: “Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord; 
even so saith the Spirit, and their works do follow 
them.’ There were these dear young Christian con- 


verts following him to his grave; his works did follow 


him. In the graveyard of the church that funeral day . 


468 LIFE OF MOODY. 


' I saw fifty of these young men, converted mostly in the 


past year. I shouted even there by the grave—I could 
not help it: “Oh. death, where is thy sting? Oh, 
grave, where is thy victory?” And I seemed to hear a 
voice as from the bosom of the Son of God: “Because 
I live, ye shall live also.” . 

And on my way back from Northfield to Chicago 
this has been my thought: If you, my dear Christian 


' friend, have a brother out of Christ, go bring him in. 


You will by and by have to stand by the open grave 
of some dear brother, and to be without Christ, how 
can you bear it? And so, my friends, let me urge upon - 
you, first of all, to go and find your own brother. If 
you have a brother out of Christ, go to him today, tell 
him how you love him, how you want him to be a 


_ Christian, how you are burdéned and weighed down 
for his salvation. And then go to your sister, to your 


cousin, to your friend. Oh, do you, each one of you, 
write to some absent friend today, beseeching that 
Christ may be accepted just now! I thank God from 
the bottom of my heart that my dear brother took a 


stand for Christ and went to work. I thank God that 


now his works do follow him. The young Christian 


men met immediately after he died. A hundred of 


them came together to choose someone to take his 
place. And how it rejoiced my heart that George 





LIFE OF MOODY. 2469 


Moody took the place of Samuel, and has set himself 
earnestly to the work. He said: “From now I will try. 
to follow more faithfully after Christ.” And when we 
met Wednesday night—it was Tuesday we laid him 
away—another brother was harnessed to the work in 
the place of the dear buried one. Oh, dear friend, if 


souls weigh-on our hearts let us go and bring them to. 


Jesus. Let us write to them beseeching letters if our 


lips cannot reach them. Let us not rest day or night. - 


Let us this morning go out and bring our friends to 
Christ. Let us commence with our own families; let us 
find our brothers. _ If our brothers have yielded, let us 
go to our friends. “If they are strangers to Christ, oh, 
go bring them now while you may. Exhort by word 
of mouth; exhort by fervent and repeated letters. Be- 
gin at once your mission, lest it be too late forever, and 
praise God for the dear privilege of bringing others to 
Him, 


, Tr * hee ave ‘se 4 We ah ae de le 
HW tae eey 5 ‘ : gt ie SA en): ah ert ee ee 


470 | LIFE OF MOODY. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


HEAVEN AND ITS INHABITANTS. 


Our subject this evening is heaven. We do not talk, 
as some do, of heaven as only the air, as only in this 
world and now. . 

Once I was on my way to a meeting with a friend, 
and he asked, as we were nearing the church, “Mr. 
Moody, what are you going to preach about?” “TI am 
going to preach about heaven,” I said. I noticed a 
sneer passing over his face, and I said, “What makes 
you look so?’ “Why, your subject of heaven. I was 
in hopes of hearing something practical. What’s the 
use of talking upon a subject that’s all speculation? 
It’s only wasting time on a subject about which you 
can only speculate.” My answer to that friend was, 
“If the Lord doesn’t want us to speak about heaven 
He would never have told us about such a place in the 
‘Scriptures, and, as Timothy says, ‘All the Scriptures 
are given by inspiration, and all parts are profitable.’ ” 
There is no part of the Word of God that is not profit- 
able, and I believe if men would read more carefully 
these Scriptures they would think more of heaven. If 





LIFE OF MOODY. 471 


we want to get men to fix their hearts and attention 
upon heaven we must get them to read more about it. 
Men who say that heaven is a speculation have not 
read their Bibles. There are three heavens spoken of 


in the Bible, and the one we are to talk about is the 
heaven of heavens, the mansions of the Lord, where the 
Redeemer and the angels dwell. In the blessed Bible» 


there are allusions scattered all through it. If I were 
to read to you all the passages upon heaven from Gen- 
esis to Revelation it would take me all night and to- 
morrow to do it. When I took some of the passages 
lately and showed them to a lady, “Why,” said she, “I 
didn’t think there was so much about heaven in the 
Bible.” 

If I were to go into a foreign land and spend my 


days there I would like to know all about it; I would 


like:to read all about it. I would want to know all 
about its climate, its inhabitants, their customs, their 


privileges, their government. I would find nothing © 


about that land that would not interest me. Suppose 
you all were going away to Africa, to Germany, to 
China, and were going to make one of those places 


your home, and suppose that I had just come from one’ 


of those countries, how eagerly you would listen to’ — 


what I had to say. I can imagine how the old, gray- 
haired men and the young men and the deaf would 


ie 


% ‘, i % : mf OP ee : i ot pee See ee 
A 4 4 nee! BY Re ee My mt yt v: 
. ¢ Cea yy ¥) ¥ : 

: , , x A 


472 LIFE OF MOODY. 


crowd around to learn something about it. But there 
is a country in which you are going to spend your 
whole future, and you are listless about what kind of.a 
country it is. My friends, where are you going to spend 
eternity? Your life here is very brief. Life is but an 
inch of time; it is but a span, but a fiber, which will 
“soon be snapped, and you will be ushered into eternity. 
Where are you going to spend it? If I were to ask 
you who were going to spend your eternity in heaven to 
stand up, nearly everyoneof youwould rise. There is not 
a man here, not one in Chicago, who has not some hope 
of reaching heaven. Now, if we are going to spend 
our future there, it becomes us to go to work and find 
out all about it. Heaven is a destination—it is a lo- 
cality. Some people say there is no heaven. Some 
‘men will tell you this earth is all the heaven we have. 
Queer kind of heaven this. Look at the poverty, the 
disease in the city; look at the men out of employment 
walking around our streets, and then say this is heaven. 
How low a man has got when he comes to think in 
this way. There is a land where the weary are at rest; 
there is a land where there is peace and joy—where no 
sorrow dwells, and as we think of it and speak about it 
‘* how sweet it looms up before us! 
I was bewildered soon after I got converted. A 
pantheist got hold of me, and just tried to draw me 


LIFE OF MOODY. . 473 


back to the world. Those men who try to get hold of a 
young convert are the worst of men. I don’t know a 
worse man than he who pulls young Christians down. 
_ He is nearer the borders of hell than any man I know. 
When this man knew I had found Jesus he just tried 
to pull me down. He tried to argue with me, and I did 
not know the Bible very well then, and he got the best _ 
of me. The only way to get the best of those atheists, 
pantheists or infidels is to have a good knowledge of 
the Bible. Well, this pantheist told me that God was 
everywhere—in the air, in the sun, in the moon, in the 
earth, in the stars—but he really meant nowhere. And 
thenexttime I wentto prayitseémed asif Iwas not pray- 
ing anywhere ortoanyone. Hiswordshadsown theseeds 
of doubt. We have ample proof in the Bible that there 
is such a place as heaven, and we have abundant man- 
ifestation that His influence from heaven is felt among 
us. He is not in person among us, only in spirit. The — 
sun is 95,000,000 miles from the earth, yet we feel its 
rays. In Second Chronicles we read: a bE My people 
which are called by My name shall humble themselves 
and pray and seek My face and turn from their wicked 
ways, then will I hear from heaven and will forgive 
their sin, and will heal their land.” Here is one refer- 
ence, and when it is read a great many people might 
ask, “How far is heaven away; can you tell us that?” 





474 ; *\LIFE, OF- MOODY. 


I don’t know how far it is away, but there is one thing 
T can tell you. He can hear prayer as soon as the words 
are uttered. There has not been a prayer said that He 
has not heard; not a tear shed that He has not seen. 
We don’t want to learn the distance. What we want to. 
know is that God is there, and Scripture tells us that. 
Turn to First Kings, and we read: “And hearken 
Thou to the supplication of Thy servant and of Thy 
people Israel when they shall pray toward this place, 
and hear Thou in heaven, Thy dwelling place, and 
when Thou hearest, forgive.” 

Now, it is clearly taught in the Word of God that 
the Father dwells there. It is His dwelling place, and 
in Acts we see that Jesus is there, too. “But he, being 
full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into 
heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing 
on the right hand of God,” and by the eye of faith we 
can see Him there tonight, too. And by faith we shall 
be brought into His presence, and we shall be satisfied 
when we gaze upon Him. Stephen, when he was sur- 
rounded by the howling multitude, saw the Son of 
- Man there, and when Jesus looked down upon earth 
and saw this first martyr in the midst of his persecutors 
He looked down and gave him a welcome. We’ll see 
Him by and by. It is not the jasper streets and golden 
gates that attract us to heaven. What are your golden 


LIFE OF MOODY. 475. 


palaces on earth; what is it that makes them so sweet? | 


It is the presence of some loving wife or fond children, 
Let them be taken away and the charm of your home 
is gone. And so it is Christ that is the charm of 
_ heaven to the Christian. Yes, we shall see Him there. 


How sweet the thought that we shall dwell with Him - 
forever, and shall see the nails in His hands and in - 
His feet which He received for us, Jesus the Saviour — 


will be there, and we shall see Him face to face. 
I heard a story not long since which went home to 
my heart. A mother was on the point of death, and the 


child was taken from her for fear that it would annoy 


her. It was crying continually to be taken to its 
mother, and teased the older people. The mother died, 
and the friends thought it was better to bury the 
mother without letting the child look upon her dead 
face. They thought the sight of the dead» mother 
would not do the child any good, and so they kept the 


child away. When the mother was buried and the lit- 


tle girl was taken back home, the first thing she did was 
to run into her mother’s’ sitting-room .and look all 
round it, then into the parlor, and from there to the 
bedroom, but no mother was there, and she went all 
over the house crying, “Mother, mother; where is my 
mamma?” but could not find her, and when told that her 


mamma was gone’she said to those who brought her 








eR ee Se 


470 LIFE OF MOODY. 


back:. “Take me away. I don’t want to stay here if 
if I cannot see my mother.’’ It wasn’t the home that 
made it so sweet to the child. It was the presence of 
the mother. 

And so it is not heaven that is alone attractive to us. 
It is the knowledge that Jesus, our Brother and our 
Lord, is there. No, it is not the jasper walls and the 
pearly gates that are going to make heaven attractive. 
It is being forever with the Lord. And the spirit of 
loved ones, whose bodies we have laid in the earth, will 
be there. We shall be in good company. When we 
reach that land we shall meet all the Christians who 


havegonebeforeus. Wearetoldin Matthew, too, thatwe — 
_ shall meet angels there: “Take heed lest ye despise not 


one of these little ones, for I say unto you that in heaven 
their angels do always behold the face of my Father 
which is in heaven.” Yes, the angels are there, and we 
shall see them when we get home. He is there, and 
where He is His disciples shall be, for He has said: 


“T go to prepare a place for you, that where | am 
‘there ye may be also.”’ I believe that when we die the 
spirit leaves the body and goes at once to the mansion 


above, and by and by the body will be resurrected and 
it shall see Jesus. Very often people come to me and 
say, “Mr. Moody, do you think we shall know each 


other in heaven?” Very often it is a mother who has 


LIFE OF MOODY. 477 


lost a dear child and who wishes to see it again. Some- 
times it is a child who has lost a mother, a father, and 
who wants to recognize them in heaven. There is just 
one verse in Scripture in answer to this, and that is, 
“We shall be satisfied.” It is all I want to know. My 
brother who went up there I shall see, because I will , 
be satisfied. We shall see all those we loved on earth |, 
up there, and if we loved them here we will love them 
ten thousand times more when we meet them there. 
In the tenth chapter of Luke we are told our names 
are written there if we are Christians. Christ just 
called His disciples up and paired them off and sent 
them out to preach the Gospel. Two of us—Mr. San- 
key and myself—going about and preaching the Gos- 
pel is nothing new. You will find them away back 
eighteen hundred years ago, going off two by two, to 
different towns and villages. They had gone out, and 
there had been great revivals in all the cities, towns 
and villages they had entered. Everwhere they had 
met with the greatest success. Even the very devils 
were subject to them. Disease had fled before. them. 
When they met a lame man they said to him, “You 
- don’t want to be lame any longer,” and he walked. 
When they met a blind man they but told him to open 
his. eyes, and behold, he could see. And they came to 


Christ and rejoiced over their great success, and He 


478 LIFE OF MOODY. 


just said to them, “I will give you something to re- 
joice over. Rejoice that your names are written in 
heaven.” Now there are a great many people who do 
not believe in such an assurance as this: “Rejoice be- 
‘cause your names are written in heaven.” How are 
you going to rejoice if your names are not written 
there? While speaking about this some time ago, a 
man told me we were preaching a very ridiculous doc- 
trine when we preached this doctrine of assurance. 
I ask you in all candor, what are you going to do with 
this assurance if we don’t preach it? It is stated that 
our names are written there, blotted out of the Book 


of Death and transferred to the Book of Life. In com- 


ing home from Europe I was traveling with a friend. 
We were journeying from London to Liverpool, and 
the question was put as to where we would stop. We 
said we would go to the Northwestern Hotel, at Lime 
street, as that was the hotel where Americans generally 
‘put up. When we got there the house was so full they 
could not let us in. Every room was taken. But my 
friend said, “I am going to stay here. I engaged a 
room ahead. I sent a telegram on a few days ago.” 
My friends, that is just what the Christians are doing— 
sending ‘their names in ahead. It is just what God 
wants you to do. They are sending a message up say- 


ing: “Lord Jesus, I want one of those mansions You 


LIFE OF MOODY. 479 


are preparing; Iwant to be there.” That’s what they’re 
doing. And every man and woman here who wants 
one, if you have not already got one, had better make 
up your mind and send your names on now. I would 
rather a thousand times have my name written in the 
Lamb’s book than have all the wealth of the world. 


A man may get station in this world; it will fade . 


away. He may get wealth, but it will prove a bauble. 
“What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world 
and lose his own soul?’ It is a solemn question, and 
let it go around the hall tonight. “Is my name written 
in the Book of Life?” I can imagine that man down 
there saying, “Yes; I belong to church; my name’s on 
‘the church’s books.” .It may be, but God keeps His 
books in a different fashion than that in which the 
church records on earth are kept. You may belong to 
a good many churches; you may be an elder or a dea- 
con, and be a bright light in your church, and yet you 
may not have your name written in the Book of Life. 
Judas was one of the twelve, and yet he hadn't his 
name written in the Book of Life. Satan was among 


the elect; he dwelt among the angels, and yet he was , 


cast from heaven. Is your name written in the Book-of 
Life? A man told me, while speaking upon this sub- 
ject, “That is all nonsense you are speaking.” And a 


great many men here are of the same opinion. But I 


480 LIFE OF MOODY. 


would like them to turn to Daniel, twelfth chapter, 
“And there shall be a time of trouble, such as never 
was since there was a nation, even to that same time, 
and at that time Thy people shall be delivered, every 
one that’shall be found written in the Book.” Every- 
one shall be delivered whose names shall be found writ- 
ten inthe Book. And we find Paul, in the letter which 
he wrote to the Philippians, addressing them as those 
“dear yokefellows, whose names were written in the 
Book of Life.” It is our privilege to know that our 
names are written in the Book of Life, and here is Paul 
sending greeting to his yokefellows, “whose names 
were written in the Book of Life.” Let us not be de- 
ceived in this. We see it too plainly throughout the 
Holy Word. In the chapter of Revelation which we 
~ have just read we have three different passages refer- 
ring to it, and in the twenty-first verse, almost the last 
words in the Scriptures, we read: ‘And there shall in 
nowise enter into it anything which defileth, neither 
whatsoever worketh abomination or maketh a lie; but 
-they which are written in the Lamb’s Book of Life.” 
My friends, you will never see that city unless your 
names are written in that Book of Life. It is a solemn 
truth. Let it go home to everyone, and sink into the 
hearts of all here tonight. Don’t build your hopes on a. 


LIFE ,OF MOODY... _ 481 


false foundation. Don’t build your hopes on an empty 
profession. Be sure your name is written there. 

The next thing after oun names are written there is 
to see that the names of the children God has given us 
are recorded there. Let the fathers and mothers as- 
sembled tonight hear this and take it to their hearts. 
See that your children’s names are recorded in the i 
Book of Life. If not, make it the business of your 
life, rather than to pile up wealth for them. Make it 
the one object of your existence to secure for them 
eternal life, rather than to pave the way to their death 
and ruin. I heard some years ago of a mother in an 
- Eastern city who was dying of consumption. Before 
her departure she asked her husband to bring the chil- 
dren to her, and the oldest one was brought to her bed- 
side, and she laid her hand on his head and gave him 
her dying message. The next one was brought and 
she gave him the same. And one after another came 3 
to her bedside until the little infant was brought in. 
She took it and pressed it to her bosom and kissed it, 
and the people in the room, fearing that she was wast- 
ing her strength, took the child away from her. Then 
she turned to the husband and said, “I charge you, sir, 
bring all those children home with you.” And so God 
charges us. The promise is to ourselves and to our 


children. 


482 LIFE OF MOODY. 


We can. have our names written there, and then, by 
the grace of God, we can call our children to us and 
know that their names are also recorded there today. 
That great roll is being called, and those bearing the 
names are summoned every day, every hour. ‘That 
great roll is being called tonight, and if your name 
were shouted could you answer with joy? You have 
heard of a soldier who fell in our war. While he lay 
dying he was heard to cry, “Here! here.” Some of his 
comrades went up to him, thinking he wanted water, 
but he said, “They are calling the roll of heaven, and I 
am answering,’ and in a faint voice he whispered 
“Here!” and passed away to heaven. If that roll was 
called tonight would you be ready to answer “Here!” 
IT am afraid not. Let us wake up. May every child of 
God wake up tonight. There is work-to do. Fathers 
and mothers, look to your children. If I could only 
speak to one class, I would preach to parents, and try. 
to show them the great responsibility that rests upon 
them—try to teach them how much more they should 
devote their lives to secure the immortal treasure of 
heaven for their children, than to spend their lives in 
scraping together worldly goods for them. Then you 
will hear with joy: “Come up hither!” 

I never talk about children and heaven without 


thinking of the story of the two fathers—one living in 


LIFE OF MOODY. 483 


the Western country, and the other living on the banks 
of the Mississippi river. The world calls him rich, but 
if he could call back his first-born son he would give up 
all his wealth. The boy was brought home one day ter- 
ribly injured and unconscious. When the doctor ex- 
amined him he turned to the father, who stood at the 
bedside, and said, “There is no hope.” “What!” ex: 
claimed the father, “is it possible my boy has got to 


die?” “There is no hope,” replied the doctor. “Will. ° 


he not come to?” asked the father. ‘He may resume 
consciousness, but he cannot live. He is dying and 
cannot recover.” “Try all your skill, doctor; I don’t 
want my boy to die without his knowing it. I want to 
tell him.” By and by the boy regained a glimmering 
of consciousness, and when he was told that his death 
was approaching, he said to his father, “Won’t you 
pray for my lost soul, father? You have never prayed 
for me.” The old man only wept. It was true. Dur- 
ing the seventeen years that God had given him his 
boy he had never spent an hour in prayer for his soul, 
but the object of his life had been to accumulate wealth 
for that first-born. Am I speaking to a prayerless 
father or mother tonight? Settle the question of your 
soul’s salvation and pray for the son or daughter God 
has given you. Thank God! that Father is indeed rich 


now. 


484 LIFE OF MOODY. 


But I have another father to tell of. A certain gen- 
tleman had been a member of the Presbyterian Church. 
His little boy was sick. When he went home his wife 
was troubled, and she said, “Our boy is dying. He has 
had a change for the worse. I wish you would go in 
and tell him.” The father went into the room and 
placed his hand on the brow of his dying boy, and 
could feel that the cold, damp sweat was gathering 
there; that the cold, icy hand of death was feeling for 
the chords of life. “Do you know, my boy, that you 
are dying?” asked the father. “Am I? Is this death? 
Do you really think Iam dying?” “Yes, my son; your 
end on earth is near.” “And will I be with Jesus to- — 
night, father?” “Yes, you will be with the Saviour.” 
“Father, don’t you weep, for when I get there I will go 
straight to Jesus and tell Him you have been trying all 
my life to lead me to Him.”’ God has given me two lit- 
tle children, and ever since I can remember I have di- 
rected them to Christ, and I would rather they carried 
this message to Jesus—that I had tried all my life ta 
lead them to Him—than have all the crowns of the 
earth; and I would rather lead them to Jesus than give 
them the wealth of the world. If you have got a child, 
go and point the way. Gather your children around 
you and show them the way to the kingdom of 


heaven. I challenge any man to speak of heaven with- 


LIFE OF MOODY. 


HY . out speaking of children. “For of such is the nel 


- of heaven.” Fathers and mothers and professed Chris- 
-tians ignore this sometimes. They go along them: 
selves and never try to get anyone to heaven with them. | 
Let us see to this at once, ane let us prey that there 


- 





486 LIFE OF MOODY. 


CHAPTER XXII. 


TREASURES IN HEAVEN. 


Matt. vi, 20; “But lay up for yourselves treasures in beaver 

Last night we were speaking of heaven and who were 
there. If we are living as God would have us live, we 
are laying up treasures in heaven. There are a great 
many people who forget that there are eleven com- 
mandments. They think there are only ten. The 
eleventh commandment is, “Lay up for yourselves 
treasures in heaven.”” How many of us remember— 
ah! how many people forget the words of the Lord now 
in His wonderful Sermon on the Mount: “Lay not up 
for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and 
rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and 
steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, 
where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where 


thieves do not break through nor steal.” How few 


people pay any heed to these. words! That’s why there 
are so many broken hearts; that’s why so many men 
and women are disappointed and going through the 
streets with shattered hopes; it’s because they have not 


LIFE OF MOODY. 487 


been laying up treasures in heaven. They pile up treas- 
ures on earth, and some calamity comes upon them and 
sweeps all away. The Chicago fire burned up a good 
many of these treasures. A great number of people put 
their treasures in banks which dissolve, and away they 
go. Some have put their treasures in railway shares, 
which have all disappeared like a vapor ; and that is why 
so many are broken-hearted today and in gréat distress, 
and do not know what is before them. If they had 
_ taken heed to the words of this text this thing would 

not have happened to them. “Lay up your treasures in 
heaven.” Instead of noticing this injunction, they have 
let their hearts go out to the things of the world. It © 
don’t take but, five minutes in conversation with a man 
to find out where his heart is. Wherever it is, there is 
his treasure. Go talk about a new play to a man who 
loves the theater, and see how his eye glistens. His 
heart is set upon pleasure—upon the world. And yet 
another class, whose heart is set on business. Go to 
one of them, and talk to him about some new specula- 
tion, and show him where he can make a few thousand 
dollars, and you will soon tell where his treasure lies. 
But talk about heaven and all interest is lost. I could 
not help that thought coming to me last night when I © 
saw before me some dozing—some almost asleep, as if 
they thought I was talking about a myth; and others 


488 LIFE OF MOODY. 


were sitting with eyes aglow and all attention when I 
mentioned heaven. Ah! they expected to go there, 
and were glad to hear about it. 

Some men think heaven too far away to lay up their 
treasures there. I was talking toa business man before 
the fire about laying up treasures in heaven, and he said, 
“T like to have my treasure where I can see it.” And 
that is the way with a great many people—they like to 
have their treasures here, so that they can see them. It 
is a great mistake. People go on accumulating what 
they must leave behind them. How many do not de- 
vote five minutes to anything else than money-making. 
It is money, money, money. And if they get it they are 
satisfied. You will see occasionally in the newspapers 
an account of a man dying who is worth so many mil- 
lions. It is a great mistake. He cannot take it with 
him. If it is in business, it ain’t his. If it is in banks, it 
ain’t his. If in real estate, he cannot take it. It ain’t 
his. : 

Now, ask yourselves tonight, ‘““Where is my treas- 
ure?” “Ts my heart set upon things down here?” If it 
is set upon wealth, it will by and by take to itself wings 
and fly away. Oh, think of this. If your heart is set 
upon pleasure, it will melt away; if your heart is set 
upon station, reputation, some tongue may blast it in a 


moment and it is gone. If your hopes and heart are 
. 


LIFE OF MOODY. 489 


set upon some loved wife or dear children, whom you 
_ have set up in your hearts as an idol in place of your 
God, death may come and snatch your.god from your 
life. It is wrong to set. up anything, however dear to 
us, in the place of our God. And so it is wrong “to lay 
up treasures for yourself upon earth. Now, are you 
heeding this commandment? Ask yourselves this as 
you are passing through the street tomorrow: “How 
many of the people of this city are obeying this com- 
mandment, ‘Lay up for yourselves treasures in 
heaven?’ ” 

Before the Chicago fire a minister came up to see his 
son. He found him completely absorbed in business. 
Before the fire everyone was mad about real estate. It 
was a mania with all. If one could buy a corner lot, no 
matter whether he went into debt or smothered it with 
mortgages, he was confident that in time when prices 
went up he would make his fortune. This minister 
came up, and when he saw his son he tried to talk about 
his soul, but it was no use. Real estate was all. He 
talked about real estate in the morning, in the after- 
noon and night. No use of trying to talk of heaven to 
“him. His heaven was real estate. The son had a boy 
in his store, but he being absent, the father was left to 
mind the business one day. When a customer came in 
and started upon the subject of real estate, it was not 


490 LIFE OF MOODY. 


long before the minister slipped off and was speaking 
to the customer about his soul, and telling him he would. 
rather have a corner lot in the New Jerusalem than all 
the corner lots in Chicago. And the people used to say 
that no real estate could be sold when the father was 
around. The trouble was that the son had real estate 
in his heart—that was his god; he lived to pile up 
earthly treasures, while his father lived like Abra- 
ham, a pilgrim and a stranger here, with a knowledge 
of his treasures in heaven. If we have anything in our 
hearts which we put up as our god, let us ask Him to 
come to us and take it away from us. When I went to 
California, just to try and get a few souls saved on the 
Pacific coast, I went into a school and asked: “Have 
you got some one who can write a plain hand?” “Yes.” 
Well, we got up the blackboard, and the lesson upon it 
proved to be the very text we have tonight: “Lay up 
for yourselves treasures in heaven.” And I said: “Sup-_ 
pose we write upon that board some of the earthly 
treasures? And we will begin with gold.’ The teacher 
readily put down gold, and they all comprehended it, 
for all had run to that country in the hope of finding it. 
“Well, we will put down ‘houses’ next, and then ‘land’ 


39) 


Next, we put down ‘fast horses.’” They all under- 
stood what fast horses were—they knew a great deal 


more about fast horses than they knew about the king- 


LIFE OF MOODY. 491 


dom of God. Some of them, I think, actually made 
fast horses serve as gods. “Next, we will put down 


M 


‘tobacco.’”” The teacher seemed to shrink at this. 
“Put it down,’ said I; “many a man thinks more of 
tobacco than he does of God. Well, then, we will put 
down ‘rum.’” He objected to this—didn’t like to put 
it down at all. “Down with it. Many a man will sell 
his reputation, will sell his home, his wife, children, 
everything he has. It is the god of some men.” Many 
here in Chicago will sell their present and their eternal 
welfare for it. “Put it down,” and down it went. ““Now,” 
said I, “we put down some of the heavenly treasures. 
Put down ‘Jesus’ to head the list; then ‘heaven,’ then 


999 


‘river of life,’ then ‘crown of glory,’”’ and went on till 
‘the column was filled, and then just drew a line be- 
tween them and showed the heavenly and the earthly 
things in contrast. My friends, they could not stand 
‘comparison. Ifa man just does that, he cannot but see 
the superiority of the heavenly over the earthly treas- 


ures. Well, it seems that the teacher was not a Chris- 


tian. He had gone to California on the usual hunt for 


gold, and when he saw the two columns he had placed 
side by side, the excellence of the one over the other 
was irresistible, and he was the first soul God gave me 
on the Pacific coast. He accepted Christ, and that man 


492 LIFE OF MOODY. 


came to the station when I was coming away, and 
blessed me for coming. 

If you do not lay up your treasures in heaven you 
will be sure to be disappointed. You cannot find a man 
who has devoted his life seeking the treasures of this 
life—not one in the wide, wide world—but who has 
‘been finally disappointed. Something arises to sweep 
all away, or the amount of joy which they expect to 
obtain from their riches falls short of their anticipations. 
If men center their affections on heaven they will have 
no disappointment ; all is joy and comfort from that 
source, and the whole current of their lives will be drift- 
ing toward heaven. I heard of a farmer who, when a 
friend of mine called upon him to give something for 
the Christian Commission during the war, promptly 
drew a check for $10,000. He asked the agent to have 
dinner with him, and after they had dined, the farmer 
took the man out on the veranda and pointed to the 
rich lands sweeping far away, farm after farm, laden 
with rich products. ‘Look over these lands,” said the 
farmer; ‘‘they are all mine.’ He took him to the pas- 
ture and showed the agent the choice stock, the fine 
horses he had, and then pointed to a town, and then to 
a great hall, and the house where he lived; he drew 
himself up, and his face lit up with pride as he said, 
“They are all mine. I came out West when a poor boy, 


LIFE OF MOODY. 493 


and I am worth all this, and I have earned all that you 
see.” When he got through, my friend asked him: 
“Well, how much have you got up yonder?” “Where?” 
replied the farmer, who evidently knew where my 
friend meant. “What have you got in heaven?” “Well,” 
said the farmer, “I haven’t anything there.” “What a 
mistake!” replied my friend, “you, a man of your dis- 
cretion, wisdom, business ability, and now drawing near 
to your grave, have made no provision for your future!” 
He hadn’t, and in a few weeks he died—a rich man 
here and a beggar in eternity. A man may be wise in 
the eyes of the world to pursue this course, but he is a 
fool in the sight of God. Wealth to most men proves 
nothing more or less than a great rock upon which 


their eternity is wrecked. Some Christians wonder 


how it is they don’t get on better—how it is that they 
don’t get on. It is because you have got your heart on 
things down here. When they look toward heaven 
they don’t have any love for the world. We are then 
living for another world. We are pilgrims and strang- 
ers upon the earth. It is easy to have love for God 
when we have our treasures there. The reason, then, 
why so many of us do not grow in knowledge and grace 
is because we have our treasures here, and not above. 
Henry Moorehouse was looking down the harbor of 
Liverpool one day, when he saw a vessel coming in the 


494 LIFE OF MOODY. 


harbor, and she was being towed up by atug.. The ves- 
sel was sunk in the water nearly to her edge, and he 
wondered it did not sink altogether. Upon inquiry he 
found that it was loaded with lumber and sprung aleak, © 
and that it was waterlogged. Another vessel came up, 
with her sails set, no tug assisting her, and she soon 
darted past the waterlogged vessel. And so it is with 
some Christians. They are waterlogged. They may 
belong to a church, and if they find anything in the 
church disagreeing with them they go away. They 
want the whole church to come out and look for them 
and tow them in. If the church don’t, they think they 
are not getting the attention due them. My friends, — 
they are waterlogged, and that’s what keeps them from 
rising in Christianity. 

I have known men who have gone up in balloons. 
They take bags of sand with them, and they have told 
me that when they want to rise higher they throw them 
out. There are a great many Christians who have got 
too many bags of sand, and to rise they want to throw 
some out. Look at the poor men here in the city—the 
‘ich Christians can relieve themselves by giving some 
of their bags of sand to them. A great many Chris- 
tians would feel much better if they relieved themselves. 
_ of their bags of sand. “He that giveth to the poor 
lendeth to the Lord,” and if you want to be rich in eter- 


LIFE OF MOODY. 495 


nity, just give to the poor cheerfully with your heart, 
and the Lord will bless not only you, but all connected 
with you. Was . 
Then there is rest in heaven. A great many people 
have got a false idea about the church. They have got 
an idea that the church is a place to rest in. Instead of 
thinking that it is a place of work, they turn it into a 
resting place. To get into a nicely-cushioned pew, and 
contribute to the charities, listen to the minister, and 
do their share to keep the church out of debt, is all. The 
idea of work for them—actual work in the church— 
never enters their mind. In Hebrews are the words: 
“There is a rest for the people of God.” We have got 
all eternity to rest in. Here is the place for work. We 
_ must work till Jesus comes. This is the place of toil ; 
eternity, of repose. “Blessed are they that die in the 
Lord, for their works shall follow them.” Let us do 
the work that God gives us today Don’t think that 
you have to rest in the world where God sent His Son, 
who toiled and suffered. A man who had worked suc- 
cessfully for the Lord complained that he didn’t have 
the success he used to, and one night he threw himself | 
on his bed, sick of life, and wanting to die. While in | 
_ this state of mind he dreamed that he was dead, and 
- that he had ascended to heaven, and as he was walking 
down the crystal pavement of Paradise he saw all at 


\ 


490 LIFE OF MOODY. 


once three friends in a chariot, and wheri the chariot 
came opposite to where he was, one of them stepped out 
and came to him. He noticed that his face was illumi- 
nated with a heavenly radiance, and he came to this 
man and took him to the battlements of heaven. “Look 
down,” said he; ‘what do you see?” “I see the dark 
_ world,” replied the dreamer. ‘‘Look down again, and 
tell me what you see.” “I see men walking blindfolded 
over bridges, and below them are bottomless pits,” was 
the dreamer’s reply. ‘‘Will you prepare to stay here, or 
7 go back to earth and tell those men of their danger— 
tell them of the bottomless pits over which they walk?” 
At this the man awoke from his sleep, and said he didn’t 
want to die any more. He just wanted to remain down 
here and warn his fellow-men from the dangers which 
surrounded them. ‘ -~ 
_ When we lead a soul to Christ we do not know what 
will turn up—what will be the result of it. It may be 
the means of saving a million souls. That one man 
may convert another man, and those two may convert 
a hundred, and that hundred may convert a thousand, 
and the current keeps widening and widening, deepen- 
ing and deepening, and as time rolls on the fruit will be 
multiplying which you have gathered for God. It is a- 
great privilege as well as duty, my friends, to work for 
God. 


‘) 


SE Se 


LIFE OF MOODY. 497 


I want to call your attention to the eleventh chapter | 
of Hebrews. After Paul mentions Jacob, and Isaac, 
and Enoch, he says: “They all died in faith, not having 
received the promises, but having seen them afar off, 
and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and 
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the 
earth.” Are the Christians here living like pilgrims 
and strangers, and by their faith do they show “that 
they seek another country?” Do they show by their | 
fruits and their deeds that they are pilgrims and strang- 
ers in the world? When I get into a man’s mind the 
beauties of that country beyond the grave, it looks as 
if his only thought was for it. We are to be pilgrims 
and strangers passing through this world on our way 
to a better land. The moment Abraham, by faith, got 
sight of that land he declared himself a pilgrim and a 
stranger. This earth had no charm for him then. Lot 
might go down to that city of Sodom or Gomorrah, ~ 
and that city might be burned up. We might fix our 
affections on this city. Chicago has been burned twice, 


and it will be burned again—this whole world shall pass 


away, with all its boasted riches and glory, and where 
shall we be then? If we build our hopes on this world 
we shall be disappointed ; it we build our hopes upon 


' that foundation whose builder and maker is God we 


shall not be disappointed. Matthew says to set our 


498 LIFE OF MOODY. 


affections on things above, and that “there shall be joy 
in heaven over one sinner that repenteth.” There are 
rumors of war in Europe, and if war were declared 
probably it would excite the whole civilized world. 
Trade would be affected, and relations of all kinds. I 
don’t know whether it would excite heaven at all. If 
the President of the United States issued a proclama- 
tion, I don’t know whether it would be noticed in 
heaven or not, but the papers would speak of it, the 
people would be excited, and great results might take 
place from it. If Queen Victoria died, telegrams would 
go all over the world, newspapers would speak of it, 
~ the whole world would be excited—I don’t know if it 
would be noticed in heaven at all. But if that little girl 
there should repent, there would be joy in heaven. Just 
think of it—think of a little girl or a little boy being the 
cause of joy in heaven. I don’t think the papers would 
record it—they would never notice it. There would be 
no paragraph in the morning telling the people that 
there had been jov in heaven over the repentance of a 
little girl in the meeting. “There is joy over one sinner 
that repenteth.” I have been wondering who it is that 
rejoiced in heaven when the shepherd brought back 
_ that lost sheep. There is joy in the presence of the an- — 
gels, but who else is it that rejoices? It may be that I 
am going a little too far, but I think that I have a right 


LIFE OF MOODY. ys 499 


to believe that the redeemed saints who have gone up 
from earth may be led to rejoice when they hear in 
heaven of the conversion of some living ones—dear 
friends—here. Perhaps while I am speaking some lov- 
ing mother may be looking over the battlements of 
heaven on her boy in the gallery yonder, and it may be 
that while she was on earth she prayed earnestly and 
constantly, and when she got there she pleaded at the 
throne for mercy to her son. It may be that as she is 
watching, some angel will swiftly carry the news to her 
of that boy’s conversion, and take his name there to be 
recorded in the Book of Life. Perhaps that mother ~ 
and the Lord Jesus Christ will rejoice over that son, or 
it may be some daughter. Perhaps it is some child who : 
is looking from that country down to her mother in this 
hall, and when the news of her acceptance of salvation 
reaches that little child, she will strike her golden harp 
and shout: “Mother, mother is coming!” While I was 
touching on this topic in Manchester, England, a man 
in the audience got up and shouted: “Oh, mother, I 
am coming!” The mother had been faithful but fruit- 
less in her efforts to convert that man while on earth, 
but her intercession there, and the influence of her 
prayers here, touched his heart, and he decided for 
eternity while I was speaking. In the Exposition - 
Building in Dublin, while I was speaking about heaven, * 


te 


500 LIFE OF MOODY. 


I said something to the effect that at this moment a 
mother is looking down from heaven expecting the sal- 
vation of her daughter tonight, and I pointed down to a. 
young lady in the audience! Next morning I received 
this letter : . 

“On Wednesday, when you were speaking of heaven 
you said, ‘It may be this moment there is a mother look- 
ing down from heaven praying for the salvation of her 
child who is here.’ You apparently looked at the very 
spot where my child was sitting. My heart said, ‘That 
is my child. That is her mother. Tears sprang to my 
eyes. I bowed my head and prayed: ‘Lord, direct that 
word and show the way to my darling child’s heart; 
Lord, save my child,’ I cried. I was then anxious till 
the close of the meeting, when I went to her; she was 
bathed in tears. She rose, put her arms round my neck 
and kissed me, and we proceeded to the inquiry-room. > 
When walking down to you she told me it was the same 
remark (about her mother looking down from heaven) 
that found the way to her heart, and asked me, ‘Papa, 
what can I do for Jesus?’ ” The letter was written by her 
father, a clergyman. 

Shall these sermons close without one soul deciding 
to make heaven his home? Will there be none to start 
for heaven tonight? No person, no father, no mother, 
no young man, that will repent and turn to God? Shall 


LIFE OF MOODY. 501 


we not pray that God will save every soul in this audi- 
ence? Would it be asking too much? Let the saved 
pray God to rescue every lost soul here, and may 
Christ the God hear us, and, hearing, save. 


502 : LIFE OF MOODY. 


CHAPTER JX MITT: 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD. 

1 Kings xviii, 21: ‘‘And Elijah came unto all the people and said, How 
long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow 
Him; but if Baal, then follow him. And the people answered him 
not a word.”’ 


We found in this portion of the Word of God that Elijah was 
calling the people of Israel back, or he was calling them to a 
decision as to whether they were for God or Baal, and a great 
many were halting between two opinions. A great many are 
talking—a great many are taking their stand for and a great 
many against Him. Now, what will you do? I will divide this 
‘audience into two portions—one against and one for Him. It 
“seems to me a practical question to ask an audience like this, 
“How long halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, 
follow Him; but if Baal, then follow him.” A man who is un- 
decided about any question of any magnitude never has any » 
comfort, never has any peace. Not only that, but we don’t like 
a man who cannot decide upon a question. I like men of de- 
cision, and firmly believe that more men are lost by indecision 
than by anything else. It is a question whether I am not talk- 
ing to many men who intend some day to settle this question. 
Probably everyone here intends to make Heaven his home, but 
Satan is trying to get you to put off the settlement of the ques- 
tion till it will be too late. If he can only get men to put off till 
the “tomorrow,” which never comes, he has accomplished all 
he wants. How many in this audience have promised some 
friend years ago that they would settle this question? Perhaps 
you said you would do so when you came of age. That time 


LIFE OF MOODY. 503 


has.gone with some of you, and it has not been settled. Some: 
have reached thirty, some forty, and others have reached fifty 
years, their eyes are growing dim, and they are hastening to- 
ward eternity, and this is not settled with them yet. Some of 
you have promised. dying brothers that you would meet them 
in that world; some have promised dying wives that you would 
see them in that land of light, and again others have given 
their word to dying children that you would meet them in 
Heaven. Years have rolled away, and still you have not de- 
cided. You have kept putting it off week by week and year by 
year. My friends, why not decide tonight? ‘“How long halt 


_ ye between two opinions?” If the Lord be God, serve Him; 


if not, turn your backs upon Him. It seems to me a question ~ 
every man can settle if he will. You like those grand old char- 
acters in the Bible who have made a decisive stand. Look at. 
Moses! The turning point in his life was when he decided to 
give up the gilded court of Pharaoh and cast his lot with God’s 
people. You will find that-every man who has left a record in 
the Bible has been a man of decision. What made Daniel 
great? It was because he was a man of decision. What saved . 
the prodigal? It was not his coming home. The turning point . 
was when he decided the question: “I will arise and go to my 
father.” It was the decision of the young man that saved him. 


Many a man has been lost because of indecision. Look at 


Felix, look at Agrippa. Felix said, “Go Thy way for this time; 
when I have a convenient season I will call for Thee.” See 
what Agrippa said: “Almost thou persuadest me to be a Chris- 
tian.” Look at Pilate—all lost; lost because of their indecision. 
His mind was thoroughly convinced that Jesus was the true 
Christ; he said, “I find no fault in Him,” but he did not haye 
the courage to take his stand for Him. Thousands have gone 
down to the caverns of death for want of courage. My friends, 
let us look this question in the face. If there is anything at all 
in the religion of Christ, give everything for it. If there is 
nothing in it—if it is a myth, if our mothers who have prayed 
over us have been deceived, if the praying people of the last 


504 LIFE OF MOODY. 


eighteen hundred years have ben deluded—let us find it out. 
The quicker the better. If there is nothing in the religion of 
Christ, let us throw it over and eat, drink and be merry, for to- 
morrow we die. If there is no devil to deceive us, no hell to 
receive us, if Christianity is a sham, let us come out like men 
and say so. I hope to live to see the time when there will be 
only two classes in this world—Christians and infidels—those 
who take their stand bravely for Him and those who take their 
stand against Him. This idea of men standing still and saying, 
“Well, I don’t know, but I think there must be something in it,” 
is absurd. If there is anything in it, there is everything in it. 
If the Bible of our mothers is not true, let.us burn it. Is there 
one in this audience who is willing to say and to do this? If it 
is a myth, why spend so much money in publishing it? Why 
send out millions of Bibles to the nations of the earth? Let us 
destroy it if it is false, and all those institutions giving the 
Gospel to the world. What is the use of all this waste of 
money? Let us burn the book and send up a shout over its 
ashes. “There is no God; there is no hell; there is no Heaven; 
there is no hereafter. When men die, they die like dogs in the 
street!” But, my friends, if it is true—if Heaven, if a hereafter, 
if the Bible is true, let us come out boldly, like men, for Christ. 


Let us take our stand, and not be ashamed of the Gospel of 


Jesus Christ. Why, it seems to me a question that ought to be 
settled in this nineteenth century easy enough, whether you are 
for or against Him or not. Why, if Baal be God, follow him; 
but if the Lord be God, follow Him. | If there is no truth in 
the religion of Jesus Christ; you may as well tear down all your 
churches, destroy your hospitals, your blind asylums. It’s a 
waste of money to build them.. Baalites don’t build blind asy- 
lums, don’t build hospitals, don’t build orphan asylums. 

If there had been no Christians in the world there would 
have been no charitable institutions. If it hadn’t been for 
Christianity you would have had no praying mothers. Is it 


true that their prayers have exercised a pernicious influence? — 


Is it true that a boy who hada praying father and mother, or a 


LIFE OF MOODY. 505. 


good teacher, is no better off than a boy who has been brought 
up amid blasphemy and infamy? Is it true? It must be either 
one way or the other. Did bad men write the Bible? Cer- 
tainly not, or they wouldn’t have consigned themselves to eter- 
nal perdition. The very fact that the Bible has lived and grown 
during these eighteen hundred years is a strong proof that it 
came from God. Men have tried to put it out of the world; 
they have tried to burn it out of the world, but they have failed. 
It has come down to us—down these eighteen hundred years, 
amid persecution, and now we are in a land where it is open.to 
all, and no man need be without one. What put it into the 
minds of those men who give money liberally to print and cir- 
culate this book? Bad men wouldn’t do this. This is a ques- 
tion that, it seems to me, could be decided tonight. If it is not 
good, then take your stand. If the Lord be God, follow Him; 
but if God be Baal, then foliow him. Some one asked Alexan- 
- der how he conquered the world, and he replied that he con- 
quered it by not delaying. If you want to conquer the devil 
-you must not delay—accept eternal life as a gift. 

Let us take the surroundings of this text. We are told that 
Elijah stood before Ahab and told him, because of the evil — 
deeds of Israel and the king, there would no rain come upon the 
land for three years and a half. After that Elijah went off to 
Brook Cherith, where he was fed by the ravens, after which he 
went to Zarephath, and there dwelt with a poor widow for 
months and months. Three years and a half rolled away, and 
not one drop of rain or dew had come from Heaven. Probably 
when Elijah told the king there would be no rain he laughed 
at him. The idea that he should have the key of Heaven! He 
scouted the very idea at first. But after a little it became a very 
serious matter. The brooks began to dry up, the cattle could 
not get water, the crops failed the first year, the next year they 
were worse, the third year they, were even a worse failure, and 

- the people began to flee out of his kingdom to get food, and yet 
‘they did not call upon Elijah’s God. They had four hundred 
and fifty prophets of Baal and four hundred prophets of the 


506 LIFE OF MOODY. 


groves, and yet all their prayers did not bring rain. Why did 
they not ask God for rain? Baal was not an answerer of prayer. 
The devil never answers prayer. If prayer has ever been an- 
swered it has been answered by the God of our fathers, by the 
God of our mothers. After Elijah had been gone three and a 
half years he returned and met Obadiah, the governor of the 
king’s house, and Ahab said: “You go down that way and I’ll 
go down this way, and see if we can’t discover water.” They 
hadn’t been separated long when Obadiah met Elijah and asked 
him to come to the king. The prophet told him to go and say 
to Ahab, “Elijah is here.” But Obadiah did not want to leave 
him. “If I lose sight of you this time, when the king knows 
you have stepped through my lands it may cost me my life. 
Don’t you know I’ve been a servant of the true God all the time, 
and I’ve had a hundred of the prophets of the Lord in a cave? 
If you don’t come I will lose my life.” Elijah told him te go — 
and bring Ahab, and instead of Elijah going to Ahab, Ahab 
comes to him. When the king came he said, “Art thou he that 
troubleth Israel?” That is the way with men; they bring down 
the wrath of God upon themselves, and then blame God’s peo- 
ple: A great many people are blaming God for these hard 
times. Look on the millions and millions af money spent for 
whiskey. Why, it is about time for famine to strike the land. 
If men had millions of money it wouldn’t be long before all 
the manhood would be struck out of them. Now, the people 
of Israel had gone over to Baal; they had forgotten the God 
that brought them out of Egypt, the God of Jacob and Abra- 
ham and of their fathers. “Now,” says Elijah, “let’s have this 
settled. Let some of your people make an offering to their god 
on Mount Carmel, and I will make an offering to my God, and 
the God that answers by fire will be the God.” The king agreed, 
vand the day arrives. You can see a great stir among the people 
that day; they are moving up to Mount Carmel. By and by 
Ahab comes up in his royal carriage, and those four hundred 
and fifty prophets of Baal and four hundred prophets of the 
groves made a great impression, Dresséd in priestly robes, 


| LIFE OF MOODY. 507 


~ they move solemnly up that mountain. The king has swept 
along in his charict, and perhaps passed by the poor priest Eli- 
jah, who comes slowly up, leaning upon his staff, his long, 
white hair streaming about his shoulders. People don’t be- 
lieve in sensations. ‘That was one of the greatest sensations of 
their age. What is going to happen? No doubt the whole 
nation had been talking about Elijah, and when he came to 
that mountain the crowd looked upon him as the man who held 
the key of Heaven. When he came up he addressed the chil- 
dren of Israel. Perhaps there were hundreds of thousands. 
“How long halt ye between two opinions? Ifthe Lord be God, 
follow Him; but if he be Baal, then follow him; and the people 
answered not a word.” These eight hundred and fifty proph- 
ets made a great impression upon them, and the king was 
afraid, too. These people are just like a great many now; they 
are afraid to go into the inquiry-room for what people will 
say. If they do go in, they get behind a post, so that they can’t 
be seen. They are afraid the people in the store will find it out 
and make fun of them. Moral courage is wanted by them, as it 
was wanted by those people. How many among us have not 
the moral courage to come out for the God of our mothers? - 
They know these black-hearted hypocrites around them are not 
‘to be believed. They know these men who scoff at their religion 
are not their friends, while their mothers will do everything for 
them. The truest friends we can have are those who believe in 
Christ. ““And the people answered not a word. Then said Eli- 
jah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of the 
Lord, but Baal’s prophets are four hundred and fifty men. Let 
them, therefore, give us two bullocks; and let them choose one — 
builock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, 
and put no fire under it; and I will dress the other bullock, and 
lay it on wood, and put no fire under it. And call ye on the 
_ name of your God, and I will call on the name of the Lord; and 
- the God that answereth by fire let him be God. And all the 
people answered and said, It is well spoken. “Yes, sir, that’s 
right. We'll stand by that decision.” They built an altar and 


' 





508 LIFE OF MOODY. 


laid their bullock on it, and began to cry to Baal, ‘““O Baal! O 
Baal! Baal! Baal!’ Noanswer. They cry louder and louder, 
but no answer comes. They pray from morning till noon, but 
not a sound. Elijah says, “Louder; you must pray louder. He 
must be on a journey. He must be asleep; he must be on a 
journey or asleep.’”’ They cry louder and louder. Some people 
say it don’t matter what a man believes so long as he is in earn- 
est. These men were terribly in earnest. No Methodists shout. 
as they did. They cry as loud as their voices will let them, but 
no answer. They take their knives and cut themselves in their 
earnestness. Look at those four hundred and fifty prophets of 
Baal, and four hundred prophets of the grove, all covered with 
blood as they cry out in their agony. They have no God. 
Young man, who is your master? Whom do you serve? If 
you are serving Baal, I tell you if ever you get into trouble he 
will not answer you. No answer came. Three o’clock came, 





the hour for the evening sacrifice, and Elijah prepared his ms 


altar. He would have nothing to do with the altar of Baal. He 
_ merely took twelve stones, representing the twelve tribes of 
Israel, and built his altar, and laid his bullock on. No doubt 
some skeptic said he had some firé concealed in his garment, 
for he digs a trench all around it to hold water. Then he tells 
them to bring four barrels of water, and empties them over his 
sacrifice. Four more barrels are brought and thrown on the 
bullock, making eight, and then four barrels more are added, 
making twelve in all. Then there lies that bullock, dripping 
with water, and Elijah comes forward. Every ear and eye is 
open. Those bleeding Baalites look at him. What is going to 
be the end of it? He comes forward, calm as a summer even- 
ing. He prays to the God of Isaac and Abraham—when, be- 
hold, look! look! down it comes—fire from the very throne 
of God and consumes the wood, and the stones, and the sacri- 
fice, and the people cry, ‘The Lord is God,” The question 
is decided. The God that answereth by fire is the God of man. 
My friends, who is your God now? The God who answers 
prayer, or have you no God? 


LIFE OF MOODY. 509 


I can imagine some of you saying, “If I had been on Mount 
Carmel and seen that, I would have believed it.” But I will tell 
you of a mount on which occurred another scene. That was a 
wonderful scene, but it does not compare with the scene on 
Calvary. Look there! God’s own beloved Son hanging be- 
tween two thieves and crying, “Father, forgive them, for they 
know not what they do.” Talk about wonderful things. This 
has been the wonder of ages. A man once gave me a book of 
wonderful things. I saw a good many wonders in it, but I did 
not see anything so wonderful in it as the story of the cross. 
My friends, see His expiring look; see what happened. The 
very rocks were rent; the walls of the temple were rent, and-all 
nature owned its God. . The sun veiled its face and darkness fell ~ 
over the earth when the Son of Man expired on Mount Cal- 
vary. Where can you find a more wonderful sight than this? 
Those Israelities lived on the other side of the cross; we lived on 
this side of it. Ifa man wants proof of His Gospel, look 
around this assembly. See men who thirty days ago were 
slaves, bound hand and foot to some hellish passion which was 
drawing them to hell. What a transformation there is. All 
things seem changed to them. Is not this the power of God? 
Said a young convert to me today: “It seems as if we were liv- ~ 
ing in the days of miracles, and the Son of God is coming down 

-and giving men complete victory over lusts and passion.” That 
is what the Son of God does for men, and yet, with all.the 
proofs before their eyes, men are undecided. 

What is it that keeps you from your decision? I wish I had 
time to tell you many of the reasons. Hundreds of thousands 
of men are thoroughly convinced, but they lack moral courage 
to come out and contess their sins. Others are being led cap- ’ 
tive by some sin. They have got some darling sin, and as long 
as they hold on to it there is no hope. A man, the other day, 
said he would like to become a Christian, but he had a bet upon 
the election, and he wanted that settled first. He did not think 
that he might die before that was decided. Eternity is drawing 

on. Suppose we die without God, without hope, without ever- 


510 LIFE OF MOODY. 


lasting life; it seems to me it would have been better never to 
have been born. My friends, I ask you, why not come out like 
men? Say, “Cost what it will, I will accept Jesus.” Now, have 
moral courage. Come. How many of you are thoroughly 
convinced in your minds that you ought to be Christians? 
Now, just ask yourselves the question, “What hinders me; 
what stands in my way?” I can imagine some of you looking 
behind you to see how the one sitting there looks. If he seems 
serious, you look serious; if he laughs, you will laugh, and 
come to the conclusion that you'll not accept Him. You think 
‘of your: companions, and you say you cannot stand their jeers. 
Is not that so? Come. Trample the world under your feet 
and take the Lord, cost what it will. Say, “by the grace of God 
I will serve Him from this hour.” Turn your backs upon hell, 
and set your faces toward Heaven, and it will be the best night 
of your lives. Have you ever seen a man who accepted Christ 
regret it? You cannot find a man who has changed masters and 
gone over to Christ who has regretted it. This is one of the 
strongest proofs of Christianity. Those who have never fol- 
lowed Him only regret it. I have seen hundreds dying, when 
in the army and when a missionary, and I never saw a man 
who died conscious but who regretted if-he had not lived a 
Christian life. My friends, if you accept Him tonight it will be 
the best hour of your life. Let this night be the best night of 
your lives. Let me bring this to your mind, if you are lost it 
will be because you do not decide. “How long halt ye between 
two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow Him; but if Baal, 
then follow him.” How many men in this assembly want to 
be on the Lord’s side? Those who want to take their stand 
on the side of the true God, rise. 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
CLAREMONT, CALIF. 


6886884 


ae) 

















BV 
3785 
C6 





Cook, Richard Briscoe, 1836-1916, eds 

Life, work, and sermons of Dwight L. Moody, 
the great evangelist, edited by R.B, perme 
Baltimore, Woodward o4., 1900. 

6l0p. plates. 190m, 


1. Moody, Dwight Lyman, 1837-1899. 


CCSC/e j 


338004 














