Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on Hbrary shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/| 



jj^ev. J,cv>>s ■D/tKin.cli&tm 



> 



f 



I 



u/\ 






^ 



! 



r 

I 



This book is entered as second-class matter at the Chi- 
cago Postoffice, and is mailable at the rate of one cent for 
four ounces. It weighs, including vrrapper, about six 
ounces, and for 2 cents postage can be mailed to any part of 
the United States, Mexico, or Canada, but the person so 
mailing it must mark on the wrapper the word ^^Maga- 



\ zine^ "or * * second-class matter. * ' 






I 






BY REV. F. B. MEYER 

"Few books of recent years are better adapted to instruct and 
help Christians than those of this author. He is a man ' mighty 
in the Scriptures,* *'— D. I*. Moody. 

THE CHRISTIAN LIFE SERIES 

8 vols., each, 50 cents; white cloth, each, 66 cents. 

Through Fire and Flood* 

The (Sorious Lord* 

Cadvary to Pentecost. 

Key ^ords of the Inner Life* 

The Future Tenses of the Blessed Life* 

The Present Tenses of the Blessed Life* 

Christian Living 

The She^ierd railm* 

OLD TESTAMENT HEROES 

Svols., i2nio. boxed, |8.oo; each, |i.oo. 

David: Shepherd^ Psalmist* King* 
Jeremiah: Friest and Propnet* 
Joshua^ and the Land of Promise* 
Abraham; or^ The Obedience of Faith* 
Elijah and the Secret of His Power* 
Israel: A Prince with God* 
loseph: Beloved— Hated— EsLalted* 
Mosest the Servant of God* 

THE EXPOSITORY SERIES 

4 vols., i2mo, boxed, $4.00; each, $x.oo. 

Christ in Isaiah* 

The Way into the Holiest* An Exposition of the 

Bpistle to the Hebrews. 

The Life and Light of Men* Expositions in John's 

Gospel 

Tried by Fire* Exposition of the first Epistle of Peter. 
The Shepherd Pbalm. Presentation edition. i2mo, 

boxed, $i.25!|^lt edges, $1.50. 

The Present Tenses and the Ftsture Tenses* 2 vols, 

i6mo. decorated cloth, boxed, $1.50. 

The Bells of Is; or. Voices of Human Need and Sorrow. 
Bchoes from my early pastorates. With portrait. i2mo, 
cloth, 75 cents. j 

Prayers for Heart and Home* Morning and Evening 1 

Devotions for a Month. 8vo, flexible cloth, 75 cents. . 

Lifht on LifeV Duties* i2mo, 50 cents. j 

The Secret of Guidance* i2mo, 50 cents. | 
The Psalms: Notes and Readings* i8mo, 60 cents. 
Envelope Series of Booklets* Packets i and 2» each 

containinsT twelve booklets, 20 cents per package. 

Choice Extracts from F. B. Meyer's writings (booklet). 

5 cents, or 35 cents per dozen; i6mo edition^ 15 cents each. 



V 



Light on Life's Duties 









\^ 



REV. Ff^B^*MEYER, M. A. 

Author of 

"Christian Life Series," "Old Testament 
Heroes,** Etc., Etc 






With Introductory Noticb 

By 
J. WILBUR CHAPMAN D.D. 



CHICAGO : 
Ths Biblq Institute Colportage Association, 

250 LaSalle Avenue. 
Eastern Depot : - . - East Northfield, Mass. 
Canada Depot : - - - 140 Yonge St., Toronto. 
Kew York D«pot; - - 112 Fifth Ave., New York. 



CONTENTS. 



3. 

5. 






1, ' 



1. The Chambers of The King 

2. The Lost Chord Found , . , 
The Secret of Victory Over Sin 
The First Step Into the Blessed Life 
With Christ in Separation . 

6. How TO Read Your Bible , . 

7. The Common Task 

8. Young Men, Don't Drift . . • 

9. Words of Help for Christian Girls • 
^^10. SsvsN Rules for Daily Living . • 



7 
20 

31 

45 

59 
72 

86 
99 

112 
121 



. '^ 1 4- 1 



Copyright^ jS0it by Fleming H, Revell Co. 






INTRODUCTORY. 

After a ministry of twelve years, and a ministry 
which God had been pleased in many ways to 
bless, I was sitting one day doing what a mer- 
chant would call " taking an account of stock. " 
I could not but praise the Lord for His goodness 
to me, but I found that I was without that 
which many others in whom I had most perfect 
confidence claimed to have received. There 
was a feeling of unrest and a longing for God 
which never can be put in words. The darkness 
seemed to increase as the days passed on. I felt 
that there must come some help to me from a 
source higher than man. 

When I was ready to hear and obey, God spoke 
to me. It was in a singular way. I was reading 
in a secular paper an extended account of the 
Northfield Conference, when my eye lighted on 
the name of the Rev. F. B. Meyer. One sen- 
tence of his I shall never forget: " If you are not. 
willing to for sake all for Christ, then are you simply 
willing to say, ^lam willing to be made willing * .^ * ' 
That was God's own message to my very soul, 
and Mr. Meyer brought it to me from Him. It 



INTRODUCTORY 



was the crisis of my life. From that day on I 
have read all that I could find coming from his 

pen. 

» 

I do not believe that there is a moie intensely 
spiritual, and, at the same time, so helpful and 
practical a writer in the world to-day as this man, 
whom I rejoice to call my friend. 

These meditations are sweet as honey in the 
honeycomb. They open up the- deep things of 
God, but in such a helpful way that any one may 
understand if he is only willing. 

I could wish my friends no greater blessing 
than that Mr. Meyer*s message might be to them 
all that it has been to me. 

J. Wilbur Chapman. 
Albany y N. K 



THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING. 



Christian experience may be compared to a 
suite of royal apartments, of which the first opens 
into the second, and that again into the third, 
and so on. It is of course true that believers 
enter on a possession of all so soon as they 
are born into the royal, divine household. But, 
as a matter of fact, certain truths stand out more 
clearly to them at different stages of their history, 
and thus their successive experiences may be 
compared to the chambers of a palace, through 
which they pass into the throne-room and 
presence-chamber of their King. 

And the King Himself is waiting at the thresh- 
old to act as a guide. The key is in His hand, 
which opens, and no man shuts; which shuts, and 
no man opens. Have you entered the first of 
those chambers ? If not. He waits to unlock the 
first door of all to you at this moment, and to 
lead you forward from stage to stage, till you 
have realized all that can be enjoyed by saintly 
hearts on this side the gates of pearl. Only 
be sure to follow where Jesus leads the way. 

7 



8 THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING 

^^ Draw fne^ we will run after Thee.^' (Sol. 
Song i: 4.) 

The First Chamber in the King's Holy Palace 
Is THE Chamber of New Birth 

In some cases it is preceded by a portico 
known as Conviction for Sin. But as the portico 
is not part of the house, and all do not pass 
through it, we need not stay further to* 
describe it. 

Over the door of this chamber are inscribed 
the words: " Except a man be born again ^ he 
can not enter. ^^ Qohn iii: 3, 5.) 

By nature we are destitute of life — dead in 
trespasses and sins. We need, therefore, 
first, not a new creed, but a new life. The 
prophet's staff is well enough where there is life; 
but it is useless on the face of a dead babe. The 
first requisite is Life. This is what the Holy 
Spirit gives us at the moment of conversion. 
He comes to us through some truth of the incor- 
ruptible Word of God, and implants the first 
spark of the new life; and we who were dead, 
live. Thus we enter the first room in our 
Father's palace, where the new-born babes are 
welcomed and nursed and fed. 

We may remember the day and place of our 
new birth, or we may be as ignorant of them as 



THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING Q 

of the circumstances of our natural birth. But 
what does it matter that a man can not recall his 
birthday, so long as he knows that he is alive ? 

As an outstretched hand has two sides — the 
upper, called the back; the under, called the palm 
— ^so there two sides and names for the act 
of entrance into the Chamber of New Birth. 
Angels, looking %t it from the heaven side, call 
it being born again. Men, looking at it from the 
earth side, call it trusting Jesus, " Thosq that 
believe in His name are born " ; " Those that 
receive Him have the right to become the sons of 
God'* (John i: 12-13). If you Q^re born again, 
you will trust. And if you are trusting Jesus, 
however many your doubts and fears, you are 
certainly born again, and have entered the 
palace. If you go no further, you will be saved, 
but you will miss untold blessedness. 

From the chamber of birth, where the new- 
born ones rejoice together, realizing for the first 
time the throbbing of the life of God, there is a 
door leading into a second chamber, which may 
be called 

The Chamber of Assurance. 

And over that door of entrance, where the King 
awaits us with beckoning hand, these words are 
engraved: " Beloved^ now are we the sons of God'^ 



lO THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING 

(i John lii: 2). In many cases, of course, as- 
surance follows immediately on conversion, as a 
father's kiss on his words of forgiveness to the 
penitent child. But it is also true that there 
are some souls, truly saved, who pass through 
weeks, months and sometimes years without ber 
ing sure of their standing in Jesus, or deriving 
any comfort from it. 

True assurance comes from the work of the 
Holy Spirit through the sacred Scriptures. Read 
the Word, looking for His teaching. Think ten 
times of Christ for every once of yourself. 
Dwell much on all references to His finished 
work. Understand that you are so truly one 
with Him, that you died in Him, lay with Him 
in the garden tomb, rose with Him, ascended 
with Him back to God, and have been already 
welcomed and accepted in the beloved (Eph. ii: 
5, 6). Remember that His Father is your 
Father; and that you are a son in the Son; and 
as you dwell in these truths, opening your heart 
to the Holy Spirit, He will pervade your soul 
with a blessed conviction that you have eternal "I 

life, and that you are a child, not because you 
feel it, but because God says so (John iii: 36; 
Rom. viii: 16). 

The door at the further end of this apartment 
leads into another chamber of the King. It is 
the door of consecration, leading into 



the chambers of thf king 1 1 

The Chamber of a Surrendered Will. 

Above the doorway stand the words: " From 
henceforth let no man trouble me: for I bear 
branded on my body the marks of Jesus; whose / 
amy and whom I serve '^ (Gal. vi: 17, R. V., and 
Acts xxvii: 23). Consecration is giving Jesus 
His own. We are His by right, because He 
bought us with His blood. But, alas! He has 
not had His money's worth! He paid for all, 
and He has had but a fragment of our energy, 
time anci earnings. By an act of consecration, 
let us ask Him to forgive the robbery of the past, 
and let us profess our desire to be henceforth 
utterly and only for Him; His slaves, His chat- 
tels, owning no master other than Himself. 

As soon as we say this. He will test our sin- 
cerity, as He did the young ruler's, by asking 
something of us. He will lay His finger on 
something within us which He wants us to alter, 
obeying some command, or abstaining from some 
indulgence. If we instantly give up our will and 
way to Him, we pass the narrow doorway into 
the Chamber of Surrender, which has a southern 
aspect, and is ever warm and radiant with His 
presence, because obedience is the condition of 
manifested love Qohn xiv: 23). 

This doorway is very narrow, and the entrance 
is only possible for those who will lay aside 



1 2 THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING 

weights as well as sins. A weight is an3rthing 
which, without being essentially wrong or hurt- 
ful to others, is yet a hindrance to ourselves. 
We may always know a weight by three signs: 
firsts we are uneasy about it; second^ we argue 
for it against our conscience; thirds we go about 
asking people's advice, whether we may not keep 
it without harm. All these things must be laid 
aside in the strength which Jesus waits to give. 
Ask Him to deal with them for you, that you 
may be set in joint in every good work to do His 
will (Heb. xiii: 21). 

At the further end of this apartment another 
door invites us to enter 

The Chamber of the Filling of the Spirit. 

And above the entrance glisten the words: 
''Be filled with the Spirit'' (Eph. v: • 18). 

We gladly admit that the Holy Spirit is liter- 
ally in the heart of every true believer (Rom. 
viii: 9); and that the whole work of grace in our 
souls is due to Him, from the first desire to be 
saved to the last prayer breathed on the thresh- 
old of heaven. But it is also true that a period 
comes in our education, when we become more 
alive to the necessity of the Holy Spirit, and 
seek for more of His all-pervading, heart-filling 
presence. 

Many of us have been startled to find that we 



THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING 1 3 

have been content with too little of the Holy 
. Spirit. There has been enough throne-water to 
cover the stones in the river-bed, but not to fill 
its channel. . Instead of occupying all, our gra- 
cious Guest has been confined to one or two back 
rooms of our hearts; as a poor housekeeper is 
sometimes put in to keep a mansion, dwelling in 
attic or cellar, while the suites of splendid apart- 
ments are consigned to dust-sheets and cobwebs, 
shuttered, dismantled and locked. 

Each Christian has the Holy Spirit; but each 
Christian needs more and more of Him, until the 
whole nature is filled. Nay, it would be truer to 
say, the Holy Spirit wants more and more of us. 
Let us ask our heavenly Father to give us of 
His Spirit in ever-enlarging measures; and as we 
ask, let us yield ourselves incessantly to His in- 
dwelling and inworking. Then let us believe 
that we are filled, not because we feel it, but be- 
cause we are sure that God is keeping His word 
with us: " Ye shall not see windy neither shall 
ye see rain\ yet that valley shall be filled with 
water J*^ 

It is true that the filling of the Spirit involves 
a separation, a giving up, a going apart, which is 
keenly bitter to the flesh. The filling of Pente- 
cost is a baptism of fire. But there is joy amid 
the flames as the bonds shrivel, and the limbs 
are free, and the Son of God walks beside. 



14 THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING 

But this chamber leads to another of exceed- 
ing blessedness, 

The Chamber of Abiding in Christ. 

Around the doorway a vine is sculptured, with 
trailing branches and pendent grapes; and, en- 
twined among the foliage, these words appear: 
" Abide in Me, and I in you *' (John xv: 4). The 
Holy Spirit never reveals Himself. Those who 
have most of His grace, "wist it not." His 
chosen work is to reveal the Lord. We are not 
conscious of the Spirit, but of Him who is the 
Alpha and Omega of our life. Christ's loveliness 
fills the soul where the Spirit is in full possession, 
as the odor of the ointment filled the house at 
Bethany. 

Our Lord is with us all the days; but often our 
eyes are holden, that we do not know Him; and 
if for a radiant moment we discern Him, He 
vanishes from our sight. There is an experience 
in which we do not only believe that He is near, 
but we perceive His presence by the instinct of 
the heart. He becomes a living, bright reality; 
sitting over our hearth, walking beside us through 
the crowded streets, sailing with us across the 
stormy lake, standing beside the graves that hold 
our dead, sharing our crosses and our burdens, 
turning the water of common joys into the wine 
of holy sacraments. 



1 



f 



THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING I $ 

Then the believer leans hard on the ever- 
present Lord, drawing on His fulness, appropri- 
ating His unsearchable riches, claiming for Him 
grace to turn every temptation into the means of 
increasing likeness to Himself, And if the branch 
abide constantly in the Vine, it can not help 
bearing fruit; nay, the difficulty would be to keep 
the fruit back. 

We have to do with the death and not with 
the life part of our experience (Rom. viii: 13). 
The oftener we sow ourselves in the clods of 
daily self-denial, falling into the furrows to die, 
the more fruit we bear. It is by always bearing 
about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, 
that the life of Jesus is made manifest in our 
mortal flesh. Prune off every bud on the old 
stock, and all the energy will pass up to the rare 
flowers and fruits grafted there by Heaven. 

But see the King beckons us forward to pass 
onwards into 

The Chamber of Victory Over Sin. 

Above the door are the words: " Whosoever 
abide th in Him sinneth not'' (i John iii: 6). 
Arpund the walls hang various instruments of 
war(Eph. vi: 13); and frescoes of the overcomers 
receiving the fair rewards which the King hath 
promised (Rev. ii, iii). We must be careful of 



1 6 THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING 

the order in which we put these things. Many 
seek victory over sin before yielding themselves 
entirely to God. But you can never enter this 
chamber where the palm branch waves unless 
you have passed through the chamber of conse- 
cration. 

Give yourself wholly up to Jesus, and He will 
keep you. Will you dare to say that He can 
hold the oceans in the hollow of His hand, and 
sustain the arch of heaven, and fill the sun with 
light for milleniums, but that He can not keep 
you from being overcome by sin, or filled with 
the impetuous rush of unholy passion } Can He 
not deliver His saints from the sword. His chil- 
dren from the power of the dog ? Is all power 
given Him in heaven and on earth, and must He 
stand paralyzed before the devils that possess 
you, unable to cast them out ? To ask such 
questions is to answer them. " / am persuaded 
He is able to keep.^' (2 Tim. i: 12; i John v: 1 1.) 

We may expect to be tempted till we die. 
We certainly shall carry about with us an evil 
nature, which would manifest itself, unless kept 
in check by the grace of God. But if we abide 
in Christ, and He abide in us, if we live under 
the power of the Holy Spirit, temptation will 
excite no fascination in us, but, on the contrary, 
horror ; the least stirring of our self-life will be 
instantly noticed, and met by the Name and 



THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING 1/ 

Blood and Spirit of Jesus ; the tides of His 
purity and life will flow so strongly over our 
being as to sweep away any black drops of ink 
oozing upward from the sands. 

You must, however, irrevocably shut the back 
door as well as the front door, against sin. You 
must not dally with it as possible in any form. 
You must see that you are shut up to saintliness 
by the purpose of God (Rom. viii : 29). You 
must definitely and forever elect the cross as the 
destiny of your self-life. And you will find that 
He will save you from all that you dare to trust 
Him with. " Every place that the sole of your 
foot shall tread upoUy that I have given unto 
thee,'' And His work within is most perfect 
when it is least apparent, and when the flesh is 
kept so utterly in abeyance that we begin to think 
it has been altogether extracted. 

Yet another door, at the far end of this cham- 
ber, summons us to advance to 

The Chamber of Heart Rest. 

The King Himself spoke its motto-text : " Take 
My yoke y and ye shall find rest unto your souls'* 
(Matt, xi: 29). Soft strains float on the air ; the 
peace of God stands sentry against intruding 
care. Of course the soul learnt something of 
rest at the very outset. But those words of the 



hi 



1 8 THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING 

Master indicate that there are at least two kinds 
of rest. And so the rest of forgiveness passes 
into the rest of surrender and satisfaction. 

We lay our worries and cares where once we 
only laid our sins. We lose the tumultuous 
fever and haste of earlier days. We become 
oblivious to praise on the one hand and censure 
on the other. Our soul is poised on God, satis- 
fied with God, seeks nothing outside God, 
regards all things from the standpoint of eternity 
and 'of God. The life loses the babble of its 
earlier course, and sweeps onward to the ocean 
from which it derived its being, with a stillness 
which bespeaks its depth, a serenity which fore- 
tells its destiny. The very face tells the tale of 
the sweet, still life within, which is attuned to 
the everlasting chime of the land where storms 
come not, nor conflict, nor alarm. 

Some say that the door at the end of this 
chamber leads into 

The Chamber of Fellowship in Christ's 

Sufferings. 

It may be so. All along the Christian's course 
there is a great and growing love for the world 
for which He died. But there are times when 
that love amounts almost to an agony of com- 
passion and desire; and there come sufferings 



I 



ei 



[ 



THE CHAMBERS OF THE KING 1 9 

caused by the thorn-crown, the sneer, the mock- 
ery, the cross, the spear, the baptism of blood 
and tears. All these fall to the lot of the fol- 
lowers of the King ; and perhaps they come 
most plentifully to the saintliest, the likest to the 
Lord. 

But certain it is that those who suffer thus are 
they who reign. Their sufferings are not for a 
moment to be compared to the glory revealed in 
their lives. And out of their bitter griefs, 
sweetened by the Cross, gush water-springs to 
refresh the weary heritage of God, like the 
waters of Exodus (Exod. xi : 25). 

Beyond all these, and separated from them by 
^ very slight interval, are the 

Mansions of the Father's House, 

into which the King will lead us presently, cham- 
ber after chamber of delight, stretch after stretch 
of golden glory, until these natures, which are 
but as an infant's, have developed to the measure 
of the stature of our full growth, unto the like- 
ness of the Son of God. 

O soul ! where have you got to ? Do not 
linger inside the first chamber, but press on and 
forward. If any door seems locked, knock, and 
it shall be opened unto you. Never consider 
that you have attained, or are already perfect, 
but follow on to apprehend all that for which 
Jesus Christ apprehended you. 



THE LOST CHORD FOUND. 

The story of the lost chord has been told in ex- 
quisite verse, and in stately music. We have all 
heard of the lady, who in the autumn twilight, 
which softly filled the room, laid her fingers on 
the open keys of a glorious organ. She knew 
not what she was playing, or what she was 
dreaming then; but she struck one chord of 
music, like the sound of a great amen. 

It flooded the crimson twilight, 
Like the close of an angel's psalm. 

And it lay on her fevered spirit 
With the touch of infinite calm; 

It quieted pain and sorrow, 

Like love overcoming strife; 
It seemed the harmonious echo 

From our discordant life. 

It linked all perplexed meanings 

Into one perfect peace. 
And trembled away into silence. 

As if it were loth to cease. 

Something called her away, and when she re- 
turned to the organ, she had lost that chord 
divine. Though she longed for it, and sought it, 
it was all in vain. It was a lost chord. 

39 



THE LOST CHORD FOUND 21 

Whenever I hear that story, it reminds me of 
the lost joy, the lost peace, the lost power, of 
which so many complain. At the beginning of 
their Christian life, near at hand, or right back in 
the past, it would seem as if they had struck the 
chord of a blessed and glorious life. As long as 
those notes lingered in their lives, they were like 
the days of heaven upon earth, but alas ! they 
died away soon into silence — and all their life is 
now filled with regret for the grace of days that 
are dead. 

Where is the blessedness I knew 

When first I saw the Lord ? 
Where is the soul-refreshing view 

Of Jesus and His Word ? 

What peaceful hours I then enjoyed ! 

How sweet their memory still ! 
But they have left an aching void 

The world can never fill. 

These words are written to help all such, and 
to give them again the sweet lost chord. Take 
heart ! you may again have all, and more than 
all, that you have ever lost. You have flung 
your precious stones into the deep; there has 
been a moment's splash, a tiny ripple, and they 
have sunk down and down, apparently beyond 
hope of recovery. Yet the hand of Christ will 
again place them on your palm. Only hence- 
forth, be wise enough to let Him keep them for 
you. 



22 THE LOST CHORD FOUND 

These are the steps back — steps that you may 
take at once : 

I. — Be Sure That God Will Give You a 

Hearty Welcome. 

He is not an angry Judge. He has not given 
you up or ceased to love you. He longs after you. 
His portrait is drawn by One who could not mis- 
lead us, who compares Him to the Father of a 
loved and prodigal boy, ever watching from His 
windows the road by which the truant went, 
eagerly longing for his return, and ready, if He 
should see him a great way off, to run to meet 
him, and clasp him, rags and filth and all, to His 
yearning heart. That is thy God, my friend. 
Listen to His words, broken by sighs, " How 
shall I give thee up, Ephraim ? how shall I de- 
liver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Ad- 
mah ? how shall I set thee as Zeboim f Mine 
heart is turned within Me, my compassions are 
kindled,'' Read the last chapter of the Book of 
Hosea, which may be well called the backsliders' 
gospel. Read the third chapter of Jeremiah, and 
let the plaintive pleadings to return soak into 
your spirit. Read the story of Peter's fall and 
restoration, and let your tears fall thick and fast 
on John xxi, as you learn how delicately the 
Lord forgave, and how generously He entrusted 
the backslider with His sheep and His lambs. Be 



THE LOST CHORD FOUND 23 

sure that though your repeated failures and sins 
have worn out every one else, they have not ex- 
hausted the infinite love of God. He tells us to 
forgive our offending brother unto four hundred 
and ninety times: how much oftener will He not 
forgive us ? According to the height of heaven 
above the earth, so great is His mercy. " Let the 
wicked forsake his way^ and the unrighteous man 
his thoughts^ and let him return unto the Lord^ 
and He will have mercy upon him, and to our 
Gody for He will abundantly pardon,'^ If you 
go back to God, you are sure of a hearty 
welcome. 

II. — Seek To Know and Confess Whatever 
Has Come Between God and You. 

You have lost the light of God's face, not be- 
cause He has arbitrarily withdrawn it, but be- 
cause your iniquities have come between you and 
your God; and your sins, like a cloud before 
the sun, have hid His face from you. Do 
not spend time by looking at them as a whole. 
Deal with them one by one. The Boer is a 
formidable foe to the British soldier because he 
is trained from boyhood to take a definite aim 
and bring down his mark, whilst our soldiers fire 
in volleys. In dealing with sin, we should imi- 
tate him in the definiteness and accuracy of his 
aim. 



24 THE LOST CHORD FOUND 

Ask God to search you and show you what 
wicked way is in you. Marshal all your life be- 
fore Him, as Joshua marshalled Israel, sift it 
through, tribe by tribe, family by family, house- 
hold by household, man by man, until at last you 
find the Achan who has robbed you of the blessed 
smile of God. Do not say: " Lord, I am a 
great sinner, I have done what I ought not, 
I have not done what I ought ;'* but say, 
" Lord, I have sinned in this, and this, and that, 
and the other." Call up each rebel sin, by its 
right name, to receive sentence of death. Your 
heart is choked with sins; empty it out, as you 
would empty a box, by handing out first the 
articles that lie on the surface. When you have 
removed them, you will see more underneath; 
hand them out also. When these are removed, 
you will probably see some more. Never rest till 
all are gone. Confession is just this process of 
telling God the unvarnished story — the sad, sad 
story — of each accursed sin; how it began: how 
you sinfully permitted it to grow: how you have 
loved and followed it to your bitter cost. 

IIL — Believe in God's Instant Forgiveness. 

How long does it take you to forgive your 
child when you are sure that it is really sorry 
and repentant.? Not a moment. Time is not 



i 



THE LOST CHORD FOUND 2$ 

considered in forgiveness. The estrangment of 
a lifetime, the wrong-doing of years may be for- 
given in the twinkling of an eye, in the time that 
a tear takes to form and fall. So is it with God. 
If we confess bur sins, He is faithful and just to 
forgive us. 

He does sometimes keep us waiting for an an- 
swer to other prayers, but He never keeps us 
waiting one single second for an answer to our 
prayer for forgiveness. It is hardly possible for 
the prodigal to stammer out the words: " Father, 
I have sinned,*' before the answer flashes upon 
him, " I have put away thy sin ; thou shalt fiot die. *' 
There is not a moment's interval between the 
humble and sad telling of the story of sin, and 
God's forgiveness. As soon as a penitent appears 
in the doorway of God's throne-room, the golden 
sceptre of His royal forgiveness is stretched out 
for him to touch. You may not feel forgiven. 
You may have no ecstasy of joy. But you are 
forgiven in the thoughts of God. The angels 
hear Him say: " Child, thy sins, which are 
many, are all forgiven thee; go in peace." If 
we confess, and as soon as we confess. He is 
faithful and just to forgive. He never says, 
" Go thy way, and return to-morrow, and I will see 
whether I can forgive." He hates the sin, and 
is only too glad to sweep it away. He loves the 
sinner, and is only too happy to receive him 



26 THE LOST CHORD FOUND 

again to His embrace. And He is able to do all 

this so quickly and so entirely, because Jesus 

Christ our Lord bare our sins in His own body 11 

on the tree. 

IV. — Give up the Cause of Past Failure. 

True repentance shows itself in eager care not 
to offend again. This care prompts the sinner 
to go back on his past life to discover how it was 
that he came to sin, and to avoid the cause. 

Is it a friendship ? Then he will cut the ten- 
der cord, though it were the thread of his life. 

Is it an amusement ? Then he will forever 
absent himself from that place, those scenes, and 
that companionship. 

Is it a profitable means of making money ? 
Then he will rather live on a crust than follow it 
a moment longer. 

Is it a study, a pursuit, a book ? Then he will 
rather lose hand, or foot, or eye, than miss the 
favor of God, which is life. 

Is it something that the Church permits ? 
Nevertheless, to him it shall be sin. 

If you can not walk on ice without slipping or 
falling, it is better not to go on at all. If you can 
not digest certain food, it is better not to put it into 
the mouth. It may seem impossible to extricate 
yourself from certain entanglements which have 



THE LOST CHORD FOUND 2/ 

woven themselves about you. Nevertheless, re- 
member Him who said, " Let My people go^ that 
they may serve Me,'' He cut the knot for them, 
and if you trust Him, He will cut it for you. Or 
if He do not cut it at a single blow, He will un- 
tie it by the patient workings of His Providence. 

V. — Take any Public Step That May be 

• Necessary. 

It is not enough to confess to God; you must 
also confess to » man, supposing that you have 
sinned against him. Leave your gift at the altar 
and go to be reconciled to thy brother. If you 
have done him a wrong, go and tell him so. If 
you have defrauded him, whether he knows or 
not, send him the amount you have taken or 
kept back, and add to it something to compen- 
sate him for his loss. Under the Levitical law 
it was enacted that the delinquent should restore 
that which he took violently away, or that about 
which he had dealt falsely, and should add one- 
fifth part thereto, and only then might he come 
with his trespass offering to the priest, and be 
forgiven. This principle holds good to-day. 
You will never be happy till you have made res- 
titution. Write the letter or make the call at 
once. And if the one whom you defrauded is no 
^ longer alive, then make the debt right with his 

heirs and representatives. You must roll away 



28 THE LOST CHORD FOUND 

this stone from the grave, or the dead joy can 
never arise, however loudly you may call it tc 
come forth. I do not believe in a repentance 
which is not noble enough to make amends foi 
the past, so far as they may lie within its reach. 

VI. — Give Your Whole Heart Once ane 
Forever to God. 
You may have done it before, but do it again. 
You may never have done it, then do it for the 
first time. Kneel down and give yourself, youi 
life, your interests, your all, to God. Lay the 
sacrifice on the altar. If you can not give, ther 
ask God to come and take. Tell Him that yoi 
wish to be only, always, all for Him. We mighl 
well hesitate to give the Glorious Lord such a hand- 
ful of withered leaves if He had not expressly askec 
us each to give Him our heart. It is very won- 
derful; but He would not make such a request il 
He did not really mean it. No doubt He car 
make something out of our poor nature: a ves- 
sel for His use; a weapon for His hand; a recep- 
tacle for His glory; a crown for His brow. 

VII. — Trust God to Keep You in All the 

Future, 

The old version of the Bible used to tell us 

that He was able to keep us from falling. The 

new version, giving a closer rendering of the 



THE LOST CHORD FOUND 29 

Greek, tells us that He is able to guard us from 
stumbling. So He can. So He will. But we 
must trust Him. Moment by moment we must 
look into His face and say, " Hold Thou me up, 
and I shall be safe; keep me as the apple of 
Thine eye; hide me under the shadow of Thy 
wings." He will never fail thee. He will never 
fail thee nor forsake thee. He will give His 
angels charge to keep thee in all thy ways. He 
will cover thee with His feathers, and under His 
wing thou shall trust. 

But you say, " I fail to look at the moment of 
temptation. " Then do this : Ask the Holy Spirit, 
whose office it is to bring all things to our remem- 
brance, to remind you to look off to Jesus when 
you are in danger. Entrust yourself each morn- 
ing into His hands. Look to Him to keep you 
looking. Trust in Him to keep you trusting. Do 
not look at your difficulties or weaknesses. Do 
not keep thinking that you will some day fall 
again. Go through life, whispering, saying, sing- 
ing a thousand times a day, ^^ Jesus saves me 
now.^' 

A friend once told me that she had been kept 
from backsliding thus: She always took time at 
night to consider quietly in the presence of God 
where she had lost ground during the day, and if 
she felt that she had done so, she never slept 
until she had asked to be forgiven and restored, 



_.«?_c 



30 THE LOST CHORD FOUND 

'Tis a good expedient, dear reader, for thee and 
me. Let us repair the little rift within the lute, 
lest by-and-by it spread and make our music 
mute, and slowly widening, silence all. 

If these directions are followed the lost chord 
will be no longer lost, nor shall we have to wait 
until God's great Angel sounds it, but it will ring 
again in our heart, and make sweet music in our 
life. 






THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN. 



The longer I live, and learn the experience of 
most Christian people, the more I long to help 
them and unfold glimpses of that Life of Peace, 
and Power, and Victory over sin, which our 
heavenly Father has made possible for us. There 
are blessed secrets in the Bible, hidden from the 
wise and prudent, but revealed to babes; things 
which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor the 
heart of man conceived, but which God reveals 
by His Spirit to them that love Him; and if these 
were once understood and accepted, they would 
wipe away many a tear, and shed sunshine on 
many a darkened pathway. 

The bitterest experience with most believers is 
the presence and power of Sin. They long to 
walk through this grimy world with pure hearts 
and stainless garments, but when they would do 
good, evil is present with them. They consent 
to God's law that it is good; they approve it; 
they even delight in it after the inward man; they 
endeavor to keep it; but, notwithstanding all, 
they seem as helpless to perform it as a man 
whose brain has been smitten with paralysis, to 

3X 



32 THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 

walk straight. What rivers of briny tears have 
fallen upon the open pages of the Penitents' 
Psalm (51st), shed by those who could repeat it 
every word from heart ! And what regiments of 
weary feet have trodden the Bridge of Sighs, if 
we may so call Romans vii, which sets forth, in 
vivid force, the experience of a man who ^as not 
learnt God's secret ! 

Surely our God must have provided for all this. 
It would not have been like Him to fill us with 
hatred to sin, and longings for holiness, if there 
were no escape from the tyranny of the one, and 
no possibility of attaining the other. It would 
be a small matter to save us from sinning on the 
other side of the pearly gate; we want to be 
saved from sinning now, and in this dark world. 
We want it for the sake of the world, that it 
may be attracted and convinced. We want it 
for our own peace, which can not be perfected 
whilst we groan under a worse than Egyptian 
bondage. We want it for the Glory of God, 
which would be then reflected from us, with un- 
dimming brightness, as sunshine from burnished 
metal. 

What, Then, Does the Word of God Lead 

us to Expect ? 

Before Abraham arose to walk through the 
land of Promise in its length and breadth, God 



f 

[ 

THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 33 

bade Him " lift up his eyes and look." And be- 
l fore we can enter into the enjoyment of our 

privileges in Jesus Christ, we must know what 
they are, in something of their length and 
breadth, and depth and height. 

I. — ^We must not Expect to be Free from 

Temptation. 

Our adversary, the devil, is always going about 
I .as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. 
He tempted our Lord, he will tempt us. He will 
entice us to do wrong by every avenue of sense, 
and will pour his evil suggestions through eye, 
and ear, and touch, and mouth, and mind. If he 
does not attack us himself, he can set on us any 
one of his myriad agents who will get behind us 
and step softly up to us and whisperingly suggest 
many grievous blasphemies which we shall think 
have proceeded from our own mind. 

But temptation is not sin. A man may ask me 
to share the spoils of a burglary, but no one can 
accuse me of receiving stolen property if I in- 
dignantly refuse, and keep my doors close shut 
against him. Our Lord was tempted in all points 
as we are, yet without sin. You might go through 
hell itself, teeming with all manner of awful sug- 
gestions, and yet not sin. God would not allow 
Satan to tempt us if temptation necessarily led 
to sin; but temptation does not do so. There is 



34 THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 

# 

no sin, so long as the will refuses to consent to 
the solicitation, or catch at the bait. 

Temptation may even be a blessing to a man 
when it reveals to him his weakness and drives 
him to the Almighty Saviour. Do not be sur- 
prised, then, dear child of God, if you are 
tempted at every step of your earthly journey, 
and almost beyond endurance. You will not be 
tempted beyond what you are able to bear, and 
with every temptation there will be a way of 
escape. 

II. — ^We Must not Expect to Lose our Sinful 

Nature. 

When we are born again, a new life, the life of 
God, is put into us by the Holy Spirit. But the 
old self-life, which is called in Scripture the 
FLESH, is not taken away. The two may co- 
exist in the same heart. " The flesh lusteth 
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the 
flesh.'' The presence of this old self-life within 
our heart may be detected by its risings, rufflings, 
chafings, and movings toward sin, when temp- 
tation calls to it from without. It may be as 
still as death before the increasing power of the 
new life, but it will still be present in the depths 
of our nature, as a Samson in the dark dungeons 
of Philistia; and there will be always a possibility 
and a fear of its strength growing again to our 
shame and hurt^ 



THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 35 

Do not ignore the presence of a sinful nature 
within you, with its tendencies and possibilities 
for sin. Many souls have been betrayed into 
negligence and unwatchfulness by the idea that 
the root of sin had been plucked from their 
hearts, and that therefore they could not sin 
again; and in the face of some sudden uprising of 
their old nature they have been filled with agony 
and shame, even if they have not dropped for a 
moment back into a sea of ink. " If we say that 
we have no sitty we deceive ourselves ^ and the 
truth is not in us, " 

There is a difference between Siny and sins. 
Sin is the root-principle of evil, the flesh, the 
old self-life, the bias and tendency to sin, which 
may be kept down by the grace of God, but 
whiph will remain in us, though in diminishing 
power, till we leave this world. Sins are the 
outcome of this; the manifestations in act of the 
sinful nature within. From these we may be daily 
saved, through the grace of Jesus (Matt, i: 21). 
To put the matter clearly, Sin is not dead in us, 
but we may be dead to Sin^ so that it shall not 
bear the deadly fruits of sins, 

III. — We Must not Expect To Be Free from 

Liability to Sin. 

What is sin } It is the " Yes ** of the will to temp- 
tation. It is very difficult to express the delicate 







" • « • * 

• • • « * 



36 THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 

workings of our hearts, but does not something 
like this happen to us when we are tempted ? A 
temptation is suddenly presented to us and makes 
a strong appeal. Immediately there may be a 
tremulous movement of the old nature, as the 
strings of a violin or piano vibrate in answer to 
any sounds that may be thrilling the air around. 
Some do not feel this tremulous response; others 
do, though I believe that it will get fainter and 
fainter as they treat it with continued neglect, so 
that at last, in the matured saint, it will become 
almost inaudible. This response indicates the 
presence of the evil nature within, which is in 
itself hateful in the sight of our Holy God, and 
should be bemoaned and confessed, and ever 
needs the presence of the Blood of Jesus to 
counteract and atone; but that tremulous move- 
ment has not as yet developed into an actual 
overt sin, for which we are responsible, and of 
which we need to repent. 

Sin is the act of the will, and is only possible 
when the will assents to some unholy influence. 
The tempter presenting his temptation through 
the senses and emotions, makes an appeal to the 
will, which is our real self. If that will instantly 
shudders, as chickens when the hawk is hovering 
in the sky above them, and cries, " How can I 
do this great wickedness, and sin against God ! *' 
and looks at once to Jesus, — there are so far as 



THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 37 

I can understand, no sins. If on the other hand 
the will begins to palter with temptation, to dally 
with it, and yield to it, then we have stepped out 
of the light into the dark, we have broken God's 
Law, splashed our white robes, and brought our- 
selves into condemnation. To this we are liable 
as long as we are in this world. We may live a 
godly, righteous, sober life for years, but if we 
look away from God for only a moment, our will 
may be suddenly mastered, as was Louis XVIII, 
by the mob that invaded his palace; and we may, 
like David, be hurried into a sin which will blast 
our peace and blacken our character for all com- 
ing time. 

Now what are the secrets of victory over sin ? 

I. — Remember that the Blood of Jesus is 
Ever at Work Cleansing You. 

It is sweet to notice the present tenses of Scrip- 
ture. He forgiveth, healeth, redeemeth, crown- 
eth, satisfieth, ex'Bcuteth judgment; but the 
sweetest of all is '* the Blood of Jesus cleanseth 
from all sin,'' It cleansed us when first we 
knelt at His cross. It will cleanse away the last 
remnant of sin as we cross the golden threshold. 
But it does cleanse us every hour; as the brook 
flows over the stones in its bed, till they glisten 
with lustrous beauty; and as the tear water, pour- 
ing constantly over the eye, keeps it bright and 



38 THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 

clean, in spite of all the smuts that darken the 
air. The possession of a sinful nature is an evil 
that ever needs an antidote. The risings and 
stirrings of that nature beneath the appeals of 
temptation ever need cleansing. The permission 
of things in our life, which we now count harm- 
less, but which we shall some day, amid increas- 
ing light, condemn and put away — all these need 
forgiveness. But for all these needs there is 
ample provision for us in the Blood of Jesus, 
which is always crying to God for us. Even 
when we do not plead it, or remember it, or 
realize our need of it, it fulfils for us and in us its 
unceasing ministry of blessing. 

2. — Reckon Yourself Dead to the Appeals 

OF Sin. 

Sin has no power over a dead man. Dress it 
in its most bewitching guise, yet it stirs him not. 
Tears and smiles and words and blows alike fail 
to awaken a response from that cold corpse. No 
appeal will stir it until it hears the voice of the 
Son of God. 

This is our position in respect to the appeals 
of sin. God looks on us as having been crucified 
with Christ, and being dead with Him. In Him 
we have passed out of the world of sin and death 
into the world of resurrection glory. This is our 
position in the mind of God; it is for us to take 



THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 39 

it up and make it real by faith. We may not 
feel any great difference, but we must believe 
that there is; we must act as if there were. Our 
children sometimes play at make-believe; we, too, 
are to make believe, and we shall soon come to 
feel as we believe. When, then, a temptation 
solicits you, say, " I am dead to thee. Spend 
not thine energies on one that is oblivious to thy 
spells and callous to thy charms. Thou hast no 
more power over me than over my Lord and 
Head." " Reckon ye also yourselves to be dead 
indeed unto sin^ but alive unto God through Jesus 
Christ our Lord,'' (Rom. vi: ii.) 

3, — ^Walk in the Spirit; Keep in with the 

Holy Ghost. 

The Holy Spirit is in the heart of every believer 
(Rom. viii: 9); but alas! too often He is shut up 
in some mere attic in the back of the house, 
whilst the world fills the rest. As long as it is 
so, there is one long weary story of defeat and 
unrest. But He is not content. Know ye not 
that the Spirit^ which He hath made to dwell in 
us, yearneth even unto jealous envy? Qas. iv: S, 
R. V.) Happy are they who yield to Him. 
Then He will fill them, as the tide fills the har- 
bor and lifts the barges off the banks of mud; He 
will dwell in them, shedding abroad the perfume 
of the love of Jesus; and will reveal the deep 
things of God. 



40 THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 

We can always tell when we are wrong with 
the Spirit of God; our conscience darkens in a 
moment when we have grieved Him. If we are | 

aware of such a darkness, we do well never to 
rest until, beneath His electric light, we have dis- 
covered the cause, and confessed it, and put it 
away. Besides this, if we live and walk in the 
Spirit, we shall find that He will work against 
the risings of our old nature, counteracting them 
as disinfecting power counteracts the germs of 
disease floating in an infected house, so that we . 
may do the things that we would. (Gal. v: 17, R, 
V.) This is one of the most precious words in 
the New Testament. If you have never tried it, 
I entreat you to begin to test it in daily experi- 
ence. " Walk in the Spirit,''' hour by hour, by 
watchful obedience to His slightest promptings, 
and you will find that ^^ you will not fulfil the lust 
of the flesh:' 

4. — ^As Soon as You Are Awar^ of Tempt- 
ation, Look Instantly to Jesus. 

Flee to Him quicker than a chicken runs be- 
neath the shelter of its mother's wing when the 
kestrel is in the air. In the morning, ere you 
leave your room, put yourself definitely into His 
hands, persuaded He is able to keep that which 
you commit unto Him. Go from your room with 
the assurance that He will cover you with His 




THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 4 1 

feathers, and under His wings shall you trust. 
And when the tempter comes, look instantly up 
and say, ^^ Jesus ^ I am trusting Thee to keep 
me:' 

This is what the Apostle Paul calls using the 
shield of Faith. The upward glance of faith 
puts Jesus as a Shield between the tempter and 
yourself. You may go through life, saying a 
hundred times a day, Jesus saves me^ and He will 
never let those that trust in Him be ashamed. 
" He is able to guard you even front stumbling. " 
(Jude 24, R. V.) You may be pressed with 
temptations from without, and may feel the 
workings of evil within, and yet your will look- 
ing earnestly to Jesus, shall remain steadfast, 
immovable, and unyielding. No weapon that 
is forged against you in the armory of hell shall 
prosper. 

5. — ^There is Something Better Even than 

This. 

It was first taught me by a grey-haired clergy- 
man, in the study of the Deanery, at South- 
ampton. Once, when tempted to feel great 
irritation, he told us that he looked up and 
claimed the patience and gentleness of Christ; 
and since then it had become the practice of his 
life to claim from Him the virtue of which he 
felt the deficiency in himself. In hours of un- 



42 iHE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 

rest, "Thy Peace, Lord.** In hours of irrita- 
tion, " Thy Patience, Lord." In hours of temp- 
tation, " Thy Purity, Lord.*' In hours of weak- * 

ness, " Thy Strength, Lord.** It was to me a 
message straight from the throne. Till then I 
had been content with ridding myself with bur- 
dens; now I began to. reach forth to positive 
blessing, making each temptation the Occasion 
for the new acquisition of gold-leaf. Try it, 
dear reader. 

When I have spoken thus in public, I have 
sometimes been met by the objection, " Ah, sir, 
it is quite true that the Lord will keep me if I 
look to Him, but I often forget to look in time.** 
This arises from one of three causes. Perhaps 
the heart and life have never been entirely sur^ 
rendered to Jesus. Constant defeat always indi- 
cates that there has been failure in consecration. 
You must not expect Christ to keep you unless 
you have given your heart and life entirely over 
to Him, so that He is king. Christ can not be 
keeper if He is not king. And He will not be 
king at all, unless He is king in all. Or perhaps 
there is a want of watchfulness. Christ will not 
keep us if we carelessly and wantonly put our- 
selves into the way of temptation. He will give 
His angels charge over us in every path of duty, 
but not to catch us every time we like to throw 
ourselves from the beetling height. Watch and 



THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 43 

pray that ye enter not into temptation. Or 
perhaps there is a lack of feeding on the Word of 
God, No one can live a life of Faith without 
seasons of prolonged wg.iting on God in the lov- 
ing study of the Bible and in prayer. The man 
who does not make time for private devotion in 
the early morning can not walk with God all 
day. And of the two things, the devout medi- 
tation on the Word is more important to soul- 
health than even prayer. It is more needful for 
you to hear God*s words than that God should 
hear yours, though the one will always lead to 
the other. Attend to these conditions, and it 
will become both easy and natural to trust Christ 
in the hour of trial. 

If, notwithstanding all these helps, you should 
be still betrayed into a sin, and overtaken by a 
fault, do not lose heart. If a sheep and a sow 
fall into a ditch, the sow wallows in it, the sheep 
bleats piteously until she is cleansed. Go at 
once to your compassionate Saviour; tell Him in 
the simplest words the story of your fall and sor- 
row; ask Him to wash you at once and restore 
your soul, and, whilst you are asking, believe 
that it is done. Then go to any one against or 
with whom you have sinned, and confess your 
faults one to an other. Thus the peace of God 
that passeth all understanding shall return to 



44 THE SECRET OF VICTORY OVER SIN 

roost in your heart, and to guard it like a sentry- 
angel in shining armor. 

And if you thus live, free from the power of 
sin, you will find that the Master will begin to 
use you as never before and to tell you His heart- 
secrets, and to open to you the royal magnifi* 
cence of a life hidden with Himself in God. 

May this be your happy lot, dear reader. 




« » » 



THE FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED 

LIFE. 



There is a Christian life, which, in comparison 
with that experienced by the majority of Christ- 
ians, is as summer to winter, or as the mature 
fruitfulness of a golden autumn to the struggling 
promise of a cold and late spring. It is such a 
life as Caleb might have lived in Hebron, the 
city of fellowship; or the Apostle John was living 
when he wrote his epistles. It may be fitly 
termed the Blessed Life. 

And the Blessedness of the Blessed Life lies in 
this: that we trust the Lord to do in us and for 
us what we could not do; and we find that He 
does not belie His word, but that, according to 
our faith, so it is done to us. The weary spirit, 
which has vainly sought to realize its ideal by its 
own strivings and efforts, now gives itself over to 
the strong and tender hands of the Lord Jesus; 
and He accepts the task, and at once begins to 
work in it to will and to do of His own good 
pleasure, delivering it from the tyranny of beset- 
ing sin, and fulfilling in it His own perfect ideal. 

45 



46 FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE 

This Blessed Life should be the normal life of 
every Christian; in work and rest; in the build- 
ing-up of the inner life, and in the working-out 
of the life-plan. It is God's thought not for a 
few, but for all His children. The youngest and 
weakest may lay claim to it, equally with the 
strongest and oldest. We should step into it at 
the moment of conversion, without wandering 
with blistered feet for forty years in the desert, 
or lying for thirty-eight years with disappointed 
hopes in the porch of the House of Mercy. 

But since many have long ago passed the mo- 
ment of conversion, without entering the Blessed 
Life, it may be well to show clearly what the 
first step must be, to take us within its golden 
circle. Better take it late than never. 

The first step into the Blessed Life is contained 
in the one word. 

Consecration. 

It is enforced by the significant exhortation of 
the Apostle: " Yield yourselves unto Gody as 
those that are alive from the dead, and your 
members as instruments of righteousness unto 
God.'' (Romans vi: 13.) 

It is not enough to give our time, or energy, or. 
money. Many will gladly give anything, rather 
than themselves. None of ^hese will be ac- 




FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE 47 

counted as a sufficient substitute by Him who 
gave, not only His possessions, but His very Self 
for us. As the Lord Jesus was all for us. He 
asks that we should be all for Him — body, soul 
and spirit; one reasonable service and gift. 

That Consecration is the stepping-stone to 
BlessednesSy is clearly established in the experi- 
ence of God's children. For instance, Frances 
Ridley Havergal has left us this record: " It was 
on Advent Sunday, December, 1873, that I first 
saw clearly the blessedness of true consecration. 
I saw it as a flash of electric light, and what you 
see you can never unsee. There must be full 
surrender before there can be full Blessedness, 
God admits you by the one into the other. First 
I was shown that the blood of Jesus Christ, His 
Son, cleaseth from all sin; and then it was made 
plain to me that He who had thus cleansed me, 
had power to keep me clean; so I utterly yielded 
myself to Him and utterly trusted Him to keep 
me.'' 

The seraphic Whitfield, the brothers Wesle)^ 
the great Welsh preacher Christmas Evans, the 
French pastor Oberlin, and many more, have 
given the same testimony. And in their mouths 
surely this truth may be regarded as established, 
that we must pass through Gilgal to the Land of 
Rest; and that the strait gate of Consecration 
alone leads, into the Blessed Life. 



48 FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE 

I. — ^The Ground of Consecration Is in the 
I Great Scripture Statement that We Are 
Christ's. 

There is a two-fold ground of proprietorship. 
We are His by Purchase. " Ye are not your own^ 
for ye are bought with a priced Step into that 
slave-market where men and women are waiting 
like chattels to be bought. Yonder comes a 
wealthy planter, who, after due examination, 
lays down his money for a number of men and 
women to stock his estate. From that moment, 
those persons are absolutely his property, as 
much so as his cattle or his sheep. All they pos- 
sess, all they may earn, is absolutely his. So, 
the Apostles reasoned, they were Christ's; and 
often they began their epistles by calling them- 
selves, " the slaves of Jesus Christ ^ Paul went 
so far as to say that he bore in his body the 
brand-marks of Jesus. And are not all Christ- 
ians Christ's, whether they own it and live up to 
it, or not, because He purchased them by His 
most precious blood ? 

We are His also by Deed of Gift. The Father 
has given to the Son all who shall come to Him. 
If ever you have come, or shall come, to Jesus 
Christ as your Saviour, you show that you have 
been included in that wonderful donation. " All 



FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE 49 

that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and 
him. that cometh to me I will in no wise cast 
out.'' Qohn vi: 37.) And is it likely that the 
Father gave only a part of us ? Nay, as utterly 
as He gave His Son for us, so hath He given us 
to His Son. And our Lord Jesus thinks much of 
that solemn transaction, though we, alas ! often 
live as if it had never taken place, and were free 
to live as we pleased. 

2. — ^The Act of Consecration Is to Recognize 
Christ's Ownership; and to Accept It; and 
to Say to Him, With the Whole Heart, 
" Lord, I Am Thine by Right, and I Wish 
Ta BE Thine by Choice/* 



Of old the mighty men of Israel were willing 
to swim the rivers at their flood, to come to Da- 
vid, their uncrowned but God-appointed King. 
And when they met him, they cried, " Thine are 
we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse." 
They were his because God had given them to 
him, but they could not rest content till they 
were his also by their glad choice. Why then 
should we not say the same to Jesus Christ.^ 
" Lord Jesus, I am Thine by right. Forgive me 
that I have lived so long as if I were my own. 
And now I gladly recognize that Thou hast a 
rightful claim on all I have and am, I want to 
live p.s Thine henceforth, and I dd solemnly at 



50 FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE 

this hour give myself to Thee. Thine in life and 
death. Thine absolutely and for ever.** 

Do not try to make a covenant with God, lest 
you should break it and be discouraged. But 
quietly fall into your right attitude as one who be- 
longs to Christ. Take as your motto the noble 
confession, " Whose I am and whom I serve,** 
Breathe the grand old simple lines: 

** Just as I am, — ^Thy love unknown 
Has broken every barrier down; 
Now to be Thine ^yea^ Thine alone ^ 
O Lamb of God, I come, ^^ 

3, — Consecration Is Not the Act of Our 
Feelings, But of Our Will. 

Do not try to feel anything. Do not try to 
make yourself fit or good or earnest enough for 
Christ. God is working in you to will, whether 
you feel it or not. He is giving you power, at 
this moment, to will and do His good pleasure. 
Believe this, and act upon it at once; and say, 
" Lord Jesus, I am willing to be Thine **; or, if 
you can not say as much as that, say, " Lord 
Jesus, I am willing to be made willing to be 
Thine for evermore.** 

Consecration is only possible when we give 
up our will about everything. As soon as we 
come to the point of giving ourselves to God, we 
are almost certain to become aware of the pres- 



FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE 5 I 

ence of one thing, if not of more, out of harmony 
with His will; and whilst we feel able to sur- 
render ourselves' in all other points, here we ex- 
ercise reserve. Every room and cupboard in the 
house, with the exception of this, thrown open 
to the new occupant. Every limb in the body, 
but one, submitted to the practised hand of the 
Good Physician. But that small reserve spoils 
the whole. To give ninety-nine parts and to 
withhold the hundredth undoes the whole trans- 
action. 

Jesus will have all or none. And He is wise. 
Who would live in a fever-stricken house, so long 
as one room was not exposed to disinfectants, air 
and sun ? Who would undertake a case so long 
as the patient refused to submit one part of his 
body to examination ? Who would become re- 
sponsible for a bankrupt so long as one ledger 
was kept back ? The reason that so many fail to 
attain the Blessed Life is that there is some one 
point in which they hold back from God, and con- 
cerning which they prefer to have their own way 
and will rather than His^ In this one thing they 
will not yield their will and accept God's; and 
this one little thing mars the whole, robs them of 
peace, and compels them to wander in the desert. 



f. 






r 






52 first step into the blessed life 

4. — If You Can Not Give All, Ask the Lord 
Jesus to TAKE All, and Especially That 
Which Seems so Hard to Give. 

Many have been helped by hearing it put thus: 
Tell them to give and they shake their heads de- 
spondently. They are like the little child who 
told her mother that she had been trying to give 
Jesus her heart, but it wouldn't go. But ask 
them if they are willing for Him to come into 
their hearts and take all, and they will joyfully as- 
sent. 

Tennyson says: " Our wills are ours to make 
them Thine.** But sometimes it seems impossi- 
ble to shape them out so as to match every cor- 
ner and angle of the will of God. What a re- 
lief it is at such a moment to hand the will over 
to Christ, telling Him that we are willing to be 
made willing to have His will in all things, and 
asking him to melt our stubborn waywardness, to 
fashion our wills upon His anvil, and to bring us 
into perfect accord with Himself ! 

5. — ^When We Are Willing That the Lord 
Jesus Should Take All, We Must Believe 
That He Does Take All. 

He does not wait for us to free ourselves from 
evil habits, or to make ourselves good, or to feel 
glad and happy. His one desire is that we 




FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE 53 

should put our will on His side in everything. 
When this is done, He instantly enters the sur- 
rendered heart and begins His blessed work of 
renovation and renewal. From the very moment 
of consecration, though it be done in much 

1 feebleness and with slender appreciation of its 

I meaning, the spirit may begin to say with em- 

phasis, " I am His ! I am His ! Glory to God, 

i I am His !*' Directly the gift is laid on the altar, 

f the fire falls on it. 

Sometimes there is a rush of holy feeling. It 
*was so with James Brainerd Taylor, who tells: " I 
felt that I needed something I did not possess. 
I desired it, not for my benefit only, but for that 
of the Church and the world. I lifted up my 
heart that the blessing might descend. At this 
juncture I was delightfully conscious of giving up 
all to God. I was enabled in my heart to say: 

* * Here, Lord, take me, take my whole soul, and 

seal me Thine now, and Thine for ever. If Thou 
wilt, Thou canst make me clean. ' Then there 

\ ensued such emotions as I never before experi- 

enced. All was calm and tranquil, and a heaven 
of love prevaded my soul. I had the witness of 
God*s love to me, and of mine to Him. Shortly 
after I was dissolved in tears of love and grati- 
tude to our blessed Lord, who came as King, and 

► took possession of my heart.'* 

It is very delightful when such emotions are 



54 FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE 

given to us; but we must not look for them, or 
depend on them. Our consecration may be ac- 
cepted, and may excite the liveliest joy in out 
Saviour's heart, though we are filled with no an- 
swering ecstasy. We may know that the great 
transaction is done, without any glad outburst of 
song. We may even have to exercise faith, 
against feeling, as we say, many scores of times 
each day, " I am His." But the absence of feel- 
ing proves nothing. We must pillow our heads 
on the conviction that Jesus took what we gave, 
at the moment of our giving it, and that He will 
keep that which was committed to Him, against 
that day. 

6. — It is Well to Make the Act of Consecra- 
tion A Definite One in Our Spiritual His- 
tory. 

George Whitfield did it in the ordination service : 
" I can call heaven and earth to witness that 
I when the bishop laid his hands upon me, I gave 

} myself up to be a martyr for Him who hung upon 

I the cross for me. Known unto Him are all the 

I future events and contingences. I have thrown 

myself blindfolded, and without reserve, into His 
Almighty hands. " 

Christmas Evans did it as he was climbing a 
lonely and mountainous road toward Cader Idris: 
" I was weary of a cold heart toward Christ, and 



FIRST STEP INTO THE l&LESSED LIFE 5 5 

\ began to pray, and soon felt the fetters loosen- 

ing. Tears flowed copiously, and I was constrained 
to cry out for the gracious visits of God. Thus I 

► resigned myself to Christ, body and soul, gifts and 

labors, all my life, every day and every hour 
that remained to me; and all my cares I com- 
mitted to Christ.** 

Stephen Grellet did in it the woods: "TTie 
woods are there of lofty and large pines, and my 
mind being inwardly retired before the Lord, He 
was pleased so to reveal His love to me, through 

L His blessed Son, my Saviour, that my fears were 

removed, my wounds healed, my mourning turned 
into joy; and He strengthened me to offer up 

i myself freely to Him and to His service, for my 

whole life." 

It matters little when and how we do it; 
whether by speech or in writing; whether alone 

fc|- or in company; but we must not be content with 

a general desire. We must come to a definite 
act, at a given moment of time, when we shall 

i gladly acknowledge and confess Christ's absolute 

ownership of all we are and have. 

7. — When the Act of Consecration is Once 
^ Truly Done, it Need not be Repeated. 

We may review with thankfulness. We may 

^ add some new codicils to it. We may learn 

how much more was involved in it than we ever 



56 FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE 

dreamed. We may find new departments of our 
being, constantly demanding to be included. But ^ 

we can not undo, and need never repeat it; and 
if we fall away from it, let us go at once to our 
merciful High-Priest, confessing our sin, and 
seeking forgiveness and restoration. 

8. — ^The Advantages Resulting From This 
Act can not be Enumerated Here. 

They pass all count. The first and best is the 
special filling by the Holy Ghost; and as He fills 
the heart. He drives before Him the evil things 
which had held possession there too long; just as 
mercury, poured into a glass of water, sinks to 
the bottom, expels the water, and takes its place. 
Directly we give ourselves to Christ, He seals us 
by His Spirit. Directly we present Him with a 
yielded nature. He begins to fill it with the Holy 
Ghost. Let us not try to feel that it is so; let 
us believe that it is so, and reckon on God's faith- 
fulness. Others will soon see a marked differ- 
ence in us, though we wist it not. 

9. — All That We Have to do Is to Maintain 
This Attitude of Full Surrender, by the 
Grace of the Holy Spirit, 

Remember that Jesus Christ offered Himself to 
God, through the Eternal Spirit; and He waits 
to do as much for you. Ask Him to maintain 



FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE $7 

you in this attitude, and to maintain thi^ attitude 
in you. Use regularly the means of meditation, 
private prayer, and Bible study. Seek forgive- 
ness for any failure, directly you are conscious of 
it; and ask to be restored. Practice the holy 
habit of the constant recollection of God. Do 
not be eager to work for God, but let God work 
through you. Accept everything that happens 
to you as being permitted, and therefore sent by 
the will of Him who loves you infinitely. There 
will roll in upon you wave on wave, tide on tide, 
ocean on ocean of an experience, fitly called the 

f Blessed Life, because it is full of the Happiness 

I of the ever-blessed God Himself. 

^ Dear reader, will you not take this step ? 

There will be no further difficulty about money, 
dress or amusements, or similar questions, which 
perplex some. Your heart will be filled and 
satisfied with the true riches. As the willing 
slave of Jesus Christ, you will only seek to do the 
will of your great and gentle Master. To spend 
every coin as He directs, to act as His steward, 
to dress so as to give Him pleasure, to spend the 
time only as He may approve, to do His will on 
earth, as it is in heaven; all this will come easy 
and delightful. 

You are perhaps far from this at present, but 
it is all within your reach. Do not be afraid of 
Christ. He wants to take nothing from you ex- 



58 FIRST STEP INTO THE BLESSED LIFE 

cept that which you would give up at once if you 
could see, as clearly as He does, the harm it is 
inflicting. He will ask of you nothing incon- 
sistent with the most perfect fitniess and tender- 
ness. He will give you grace enough to perform 
every duty He may demand. His yoke is easy; 
His burden is light. 

Blessed Spirit of God, by whom alone human 
words can be made to speak to the heart, deign 
to use these, to point many a longing soul to the 
First Step into the Blessed Life, for the exceed- 
ing Glory of the Lord Jesus, and for the sake of 
a dying world. 




r 



f 



WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION. 



The Bible rings with the cry for separation. 
Those words, Divide! Divide! so often heard in 
the EngHsh House of Commons, compelling 
every man to take a side, speak through its 
pages, from those earliest verses which tell how 
God divided the light from the darkness. 

This call came to Abraham, bidding him to 
get out from country and kindred and father's 
house; to Moses as the bugle note of the Exodus; 
to the tribe of Levi, mustering them at the gate 
of the camp; to the children of Israel, as they 
languished in Babylon, bidding them return to 
their fatherland; and along the resounding aisles 
of the New Testament Church, these words re- 
echoed: " Come out from among them^ and be ye 
separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean 
thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father 
unto you, ^^ " Come out of her, my people, that ye 
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her plagues'' (ii Cor. vi: 17, and Rev. 
xviii: 4). 



6o WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 



What Is that Separation to Which We Are 

Called ? 

There are many 6ounterfeits, against which 
we do well to be on our guard. 

// is not the separation of the monk. This has 
ever fascinated noble minds. For like-minded 
men to go off together to some sequestered vale, 
protected from the storms that sweep across the 
world; to build for themselves homes and tem- 
ples, and mingle their toils with holy meditation 
and prayer; welcoming the daybreak with matins, 
and greeting with vesper hymns the first couriers 
of the starry host; such was the dream that 
stirred the imagination of saintly hearts in the 
Middle Ages. And something like this filled the 
Mayflower with the Pilgrim Fathers, and peopled 
the Black Forest with colonies of Moravian set- 
tlers. 

Such separation, however attractive, can not 
be the separation of Christ. He solemnly prayed 
that we might not be taken out of the world; 
yea, He expressly sent us into the world. And 
what would become of it if we were all to with- 
draw from its life } Night without a star; a 
rock-bound coast without a lighthouse-beam 
raying out into the murky gloom; a vessel drift- 
ing on the rocks without a watch on deck; a 



WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 6 1 

carcass corrupting in midsummer without salt ! 
No, this can not be the separation to which we 
are called. 

It is not tne separation of the Pharisee, The 
Pharisees held that a man could be religious 
without being good. He might be full of extor- 
tion and excess, if only he washed the outside of 
cup and platter; full of dead men's bones, if only 
he appeared clean as a whitewashed sepulchre. 
In their judgment, therefore, impurity was not a 
matter of inward evil, but communicated by a 
touch. To be touched by a man who had not 
washed since eating would be sufficient to defile 
the stately Pharisee. 

Our Lord forever broke down these unright- 
eous distinctions. He taught not only by 
speech, but by action, that impurity is not com- 
municated by contact, but is nurtured in the 
heart, and bred in act and speech. He did not 
wash after His meals; He ate with publicans and 
sinners; He let a fallen woman weep at His feet; 
He touched the bleared eye of blindness, the 
tied tongue of dumbness, the polluted flesh of the 
leper. Repeatedly we are told that He stretched 
forth His hand and touched. 

And is not this what the world wants .^ It 
needs hand-help — the touch of the King. We 
shall never be able to help men by simply look- 
ing op them pr exhorting them; we must touch 



62 WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 

them. Those lily-white, delicate, jewelled 
hands which may turn this page must be yielded 
to Christ, that He may use them and work 
through them His miracles of mercy in our weary 
age. And such contact will not defile. Pitch • 
is a disinfectant; so far from defiling, it will 
tend to promote our love for purity, when we 
dare the contact in the name of Christ and for 
the welfare of a dying world. 

It is not the separation of the Stoic, The 
Puritans were not entirely free from this mistake. 
For them the world was a great howling wilder- 
ness; laughter and mirth, signs of an unregenerate 
soul; their scheme of life too narrow and severe 
to admit of those lighter and softer passages 
which relieve its strain and draw out the ten- 
derer sentiments of human hearts. 

Against this, Christ's life was a perpetual pro- 
test. He mingled with wedding guests, smiled 
at the children as they played in the market 
places and called to their fellows, directed the 
attention of the crowds to the beauties of the 
flowers and the habits of the birds, noticed the 
sunrise hues and evening tints, and lived as a 
man amongst them. However severe He might 
be to the formalists of His time. He had ever a 
warm heart toward what was natural and 
human. Let us not forget the command, 
♦* Thou shalt rejoice in every good thing which 



( 



i 




\ 



t. 



WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 63 

^Ae Lord thy God giveth thee^'' and let us culti- 
vate the habit of extracting joy and blessing 
from all the innocent and beautiful things around 
us. 

The Necessity of Answering this Question 

Is Really Urgent. 

It is a pressing question. Hundreds of young 
Christians are asking what they should do or 
avoid; and in so many cases, for want of a clear 
principle, begin to drift; the bloom passes off the 
basket of summer fruit, and when once gone, 
can never be replaced. It is a pertinent ques- 
tion, especially at those seasons of the year 
when the dark evenings afford such abundant 
opportunities for the dance, the ball, the theatre, 
and the opera. 

It is also a perplexing question, because good 
people are found on such opposite sides, and give 
answers, wide as the poles asunder, to the vari- 
ous questions with which they are plied. Some 
forbid the theatre, but allow the opera. Some 
have no objection to the children's pantomime, 
but are horrified at the proposal to see an ordi- 
nary play. Some would go to see Shaksperean 
plays, but would not go to others. Some dis- 
tinguish between a dance and a ball. 

What is the result ? Christian ministers fre- 



s 



64 WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 

quent theaters. Professing Christians give danc- 
ing-parties not far removed from balls. Funds 
for religious purposes are raised by private the- 
atricals. Our young people are perpetually 
loosening the restraints by which they are held, 
pressing outward the fences which divide them 
from the world, taking in new lengths of terri- 
tory. and fretting against restraint. 

Are there no self-acting principles, so that each 
individual soul may decide for itself these diffi- 
cult, doubtful, and perilous problems which are 
so incessantly cropping up in all lives, either in 
one form or another ? There are, and the fol- 
lowing are surely amongst them: and, like the 
spear of the seraph Ithuriel, these will indicate by 
a touch the evil that may lurk under innocent ap- 
pearances: 

(i) — Beware of anything which is inconsistent 
with your relationship to the Lord Jesus, What 
is that relationship } Of course we are dealing 
here with the case of those alone who are His, or 
who are desirous of being identified with Him, 
both here and hereafter. 

We are His servants; bought by His blood, 
sworn to loyal allegiance. Is it quite consis- 
tent, then, to be mingling with the amusements 
and gaieties of the world, which is of the same 
spirit to-day as when it cast Him out of its camp 
^nd crucified Him ? It has an ugly look about it 



WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 6$ 

when loyal soldiers fraternize in the carousals of 
rebels. 

We are His members; bone of His bone, flesh 
of His flesh, whom He nourishes and cherishes. 
Our Head is already passed through the grave on 
to resurrection-ground, where He is gathering 
around Him His own — His kindred. Is it not 
incongruous for the Head to be on one side of 
the grave and the members on the other } Is it 
not altogether unbecoming to pretend to be one 
with Him in His risen glory, whilst we are prac- 
tically as close as we dare in our contact with 
the world which He has left } 

We are His bride; He, the Heavenly Bride- 
groom, is one with us in a union which has no 
analogy save that of wedlock, where heart locks 
with heart. Is it consistent with fidelity to Him 
for us to dally with the world, whose hands were 
embued with His blood t What did the people 
of Scotland think of the familiarities of marriage 
between Mary Queen of Scots and Bothwell, the 
murderer of her first husband, Darnley } 

Surely the Cross, with outstretched arms, bars 
the bridge between us and the world; and we 
may cry with the Apostle, " Far be it from me to 
glory y save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christy 
through which the world has been crucified unto 
me, and I unto the world,'' 

Whenever, then, there is any doubt as to 



66 WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 

whether it be right to go to this place or that, 
bring the question beneath the light that streams 1 

from the Cross and from the Throne. Clear ^ 

your heart and mind of all selfish aims and i 

thoughts of what others may do or say. Let { 

your eye be single to discern the will of the Lord. ^ 

Ask what He would have you to do. Before 
long the difficulties will roll up as quickly and 
noiselesly as the mists which fill the mountain 
valleys before the touch of the summer sun. Your 
whole body will be full of light. You will even 
lose your taste for the things which once you 
loved. And in the new-found ecstacy of the 
Living Water, welling up in your heart, you will 
be prepared to leave behind the water-pot on 
which you had been relying as the source of your 
life. 

(2) — Beware of anything which the world 
itself would deem inconsistent. Though the world 
is not religious in our sense, yet it has a very 
keen appreciation of true Christianity, and a very 
high ideal of what Christians should be. And 
we may well arrest our steps when we are met 
with a surprised interrogation — "What! are you 
here } We didn't expect to see you!** The very 
fuss which is made over us when we step over 
the line may well make us pause and ask whether 
we have not done something to forfeit the smile 
and " Well done*' of Jesus, 



i 



WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 6/ 

(3) — Beware of anything which would injure 
some weaker conscience. This is one of the most 
important considerations in Christian living. 
" All things are lawful to me^ but all things are 
not expedient,'' And why are they not expedi- 
ent? It is inexpedient to do things which 
may be harmless enough in themselves, and 
which you may feel able to do with impunity, if 
in doing them you lead others to do them also, 
not because they feel at ease, but simply because 
they are emboldened by your example, regarding 
you as further advanced than themselves in the 
Christian life, and therefore a trustworthy guide. 
Estimate every action, not only as it is in itself, 
but as it is likely to be in its influence on others, 
lest you break down wholesome barriers, and 
place them in scenes of temptation which, how- 
ever harmless to yourself, are perilous in the 
extreme to them. We have no right to lead our 
young children up perilous passes, where we may 
clamber with clear head and nimble foot, but 
where their inexperienced steps may slide into 
the abyss. 

(4) — Beware of scenes and companionships which 
dull your spiritual life. Who is there that does 
not long for a life on fire t But how can we possi- 
bly look for such a thing if we are persistently ex- 
posing ourselves to influences which choke and 
repress it and damp it down ? There are some 



t 
68 WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 

scenes which seem incompatible with earnest 
prayer and Bible study ere we retire to rest ; 
which lower the inner temperature; which leave 
an ill-flavor in the mouth ; which poison the young 
life, as the noxious gas-fumes poison the life of 
flowers and plants. From all such scenes we do 
well to refrain our feet. ' 

(5) — Beware of any society in which you feel 
compelled to put a bushel over your testimony. 
We must shine as lights in the world. The most 
necessary condition in a lighthouse-lamp is its 
permanence. If it shines at one time and is hid- 
den at another, now flashing afar over the dark 
seething waves, and then standing sombre and 
obscure on the beetling cliff, of what use is it 1 
It is worse than useless. And if we are to be of 
any real use in this world, our testimony for 
Jesus must be maintained in season and out of 
season, in storm and sunshine, always and every- 
where. But if, before going into any scene or 
fellowship, you have to remind yourself that you 
must not touch on any of those subjects which 
are dearest to your soul, you may well fear lest 
you are trespassing on forbidden ground. Go 
nowhere that you can not take Jesus with you, 
and ask His blessing before going. " Do all to 
the glory of God, " 

All this will involve hard fighting, persecution 
and misunderstanding. It is thus, however, that 



WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 69 

we prove our lineage with the noble martyr-spirits 
of the past. See that young girl, in the days of 
Diocletian, beautiful and richly dressed, standing 
before the altar, with the judge on the one side, 
her lover on the other, her companions grouped 
around. If she will but throw a few grains of 
incense on the brazier, she shall be spared from 
cruel death and given back to love and friends 
and life. But not a grain is cast upon the ex- 
pectant flames, and she is ruthlessly led off to 
die for Him whom she loves better than all. Was 
she not consistent .? Would you not have done 
the same ? Then do the same now, and dare to 
be consistent to your lover, Christ. 

Sometimes we may be placed in such a posi- 
tion, that we have no alternative than to go into 
scenes which, for ourselves, we would not choose. 
For instance, when the worldly mother of a 
Christian girl insists on her accompanying her 
into society, where there is nothing positively sin- 
ful, but much that is light and thoughtless, it 
would evidently be her duty to go. You may ask 
to be excused, but if your plea is not allowed, 
you must go, unless conscience positively forbids, 
and Christ will go with you, keeping your heart. ' 

There Are many Compensations. 

This is the only safe course. The world is so 
attractive, and so appeals to our weaknesses, that 



*]0 WITH CHRIST IN SEPARATION 

if we once launch upon its waters, they will insen- 
sibly sweep us toward the rush of the whirlpool, 
and we shall go down into the deep, dark abyss. 

It is the only strong course. , He who would 
lift me must stand above me. Who did most for 
Sodom: Lot who went down into it and sat in 
the gate, or Abraham who got up early to the 
place where he stood before the Lord } The old 
heathen games were swept off the world, not be- 
cause the early Christians went to them, but be- 
cause they stopped away. The brutal sports of 
the last century fled away, not because the Meth- 
odists patronized them, but because they 
abstained from them. And the moral pests of 
modern society will never succumb until good 
people withdraw both their patronage and sup- 
port. 

This is the only blessed course, because God's 
promise of being a Father and of receiving us is 
entirely dependent on our complying with His 
conditions. It is when father and mother forsake 
that the Lord gathers us; when the synagogue 
casts us out, that Jesus finds us; when heart and 
flesh fail, that He is the strength of our heart and 
our portion forever. 

Dare to go outside the camp, at the risk of 
being counted singular and unfriendly! Let the 
world treat you as it did your Lord. Why should 
the servant be fawned on and flattered where the 



WITH CHRIST m SEPARATION ft 

Master was crucified as a felon ? Lie in His 
grave, and thus you shall know the joys of His 
Easter life, the sweetness of His love, and the 
closeness of His friendship, which will compen- 
sate for a thousand deaths. To know the King 
you must share His exile. 

Gather ye, gather ye, out to the lone Cave of 
AduUam, and around the standard of the exiled 
Prince; and when He comes again in triumph to 
be crowned with the diadem of universal empire 
ye shall appear in His train and by His side, con- 
fessed and acknowledged as those of whom He 
has no reason to be ashamed. 



,»n% 



HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE. 



The whole of Christian Living, in my opinion, 
hinges on the way in which Christian people read 
the Bible for themselves* All sermons and 
addresses, all Bible-readings and classes, all 
religious magazines and books, can never take 
the place of our own quiet study of God*s precious 
Word. We may measure our growth in grace by 
the growth of our love for private Bible study; 
and we may be sure that there is something seri- 
ously wrong, when we lose our appetite for the 
Bread of Life. Perhaps we have been eating too 
many sweets; or taking too little exercise; or 
breathing too briefly in the bracing air which 
sweeps over the uplands of Spiritual Communion 
with God. 

Happy are they who have learnt the blessed 
art of discovering for themselves the treasures of 
the Bible, which are hidden just a little below the 
surface, so as to test our real earnestness in find- 
ing them ! No specimens are so interesting as 
those which the naturalist has obtained by his 
own exertions, and each of which has a history. 

72 



HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 73^ 

No flowers are so fragrant as those which we dis- 
cover for ourselves, nestling in some woodland 
dell, remote from the eye and step of men. No 
pearls are so priceless as those which we have 
sought for ourselves in the calm clear depths of 
the ocean of Truth. Only those who know it can 
realize the joy that fills the spirit when one has 
made a great " find," in some hidden connection, 
some fresh reference, or some railway lines from 
verse to verse. 

There are a few simple rules which may help 
many more to acquire this holy art, and I ven- 
ture to note them down. May the Holy Spirit 
Himself own and use them ! 

I. — Make Time for Bible Study. 

. The Divine Teacher must havie fixed and unin- 
terrupted hours for meeting His scholars. His 
Word must have our freshest and brightest 
thoughts. We must give Him our best, and the 
first-fruits of our days. Hence, there is no time 
for Bible study like the early morning. We can 
not give such undivided attention to the holy 
thoughts that glisten like diamonds on its pages 
after we have opened our letters, glanced 
through the paper, and joined in the prattle of 
the breakfast table. The manna had to be 
gathered by the Israelites of old before the* dew 



74 HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 

was off and the sun was up; otherwise it melted. 

We ought, therefore, to aim at securing at } 

least half an hour before breakfast, for the 
leisurely and loving study of the Bible. To 
some this may seem a long time in comparison 
with what they now give. But it will soon seem 
all too short. The more you read the Bible, the 
more you will want to read it. It is an appetite 
which grows as it is fed. 

And you will be well repaid. The Bible sel- 
dom speaks, and certainly never its deepest, 
sweetest words, to those who always read it in a 
hurry. Nature can only tell her secrets to such 
as will sit still in her sacred temple till their eyes 
lose the glare of earthly glory, and their ears 
are attuned to her voice. And shall Revelation 
do what Nature can not ? Never, The man 
who shall win the blessedness of hearing her 
must watch daily at her gates and wait at the 
posts of her doors. There is no chance for a lad 
to grow, who only gets an occasional mouthful 
of food and always swallows that in a hurry ! 

Of course this season before breakfast is not 
possible for all. The invalid, the nurse with 
broken rest, the public servant, whose night 
is often turned into day — these stand alone, and 
the Lord Jesus can make it up to them, sitting 
with them at mid-day, if needs be, beside the 
well. In the case of such as can only snatch a 



HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 75 

few words of Scripture as they hasten to their work, 
there will be repeated the miracle of the manna. 
" He that gathered much had nothing over**; that 
is, all we get in our morning reading is not too 
much for the needs of the day; " and he that 
gathered little had no lack** ; that is, when, by 
force of circumstances, we are unable to do more 
than snatch up a hasty handful of manna, it will 
last us all through the day; the cruse of oil shall 
not waste, and the barrel of meal shall not fail. 

It would be impossible to name all who have 
traced their usefulness and power to this priceless 
habit. Sir Henry Havelock always spent the 
first two hours of each day alone with God; and 
if the encampment was struck at 6 a. m., he 
would rise at 4. Earl Cairns rose daily at 6 
o'clock to secure an hour and a half for the study 
of the Bible and for prayer, before conducting 
family worship at a quarter to eight — even when 
the late hours of the House of Commons left him 
not more than two hours for his night's rest. It is 
the practice of a beloved friend, who stands in 
the front rank of modern missionaries, to spend 
at least three hours each morning with his Bible; 
and he has said that he often puts aside pressing 
engagements that he may not only have time but 
be fresh for it. 

There is no doubt a difficulty in awakening 
and arising early enough to get time for our Bible 



I^^ HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 

before breakfast. But these difficulties present 
no barrier to those who must get away early 
,for daily business, or for the appointments of 
pleasure. If we mean to get up, we can get up. 
Of course we must prepare the way for early 
rising, by retiring early to obtain our needed rest, 
though it be at the cost of some cosy hours 
by the fireside in the winter's night. But with 
due forethought and fixed purpose the thing can 
surely de done. " All things are possible to him 
that believe th.'^ 

I never shall forget seeing Charles Studd, 
early one November morning, clothed in flan- 
nels to protect him from the cold, and rejoicing 
that the Lord had awaked him at 4 A. m. to study 
His commands. He told me then that it was his 
custom to trust the Lord to call him and enable 
him to rise. Might not we all do this } The 
weakest can do all things through Christ that 
strengtheneth. And though you have failed again 
and again when you have trusted your own reso- 
lutions, you can not fail when you are simply 
trusting him. " He wakeneth morning by morn^ 
ingy ^^ He took him by the right hand^ and 
lifted him up; and immediately his feet and 
ankle bones received strength.'^ 



* ■ . 



\ 



HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 



2. — Look Up for the Teaching of th 
Spirit. 

No one can so well explain the meanii 
words as he who wrote them. Tennysc 
best explain some of his deeper referenct 
Memoriam." If, then, you want to i 
Bible as you should, make much of t 
Ghost, who inspired it through holy m 
you open the book, lift up your hearts, i 
" Open Thou mine eyes, that I may behi 
drous things out of Thy law * * * 
Lord, for Thy servant heareth." 

It is marvelous what slender light coi 
ries cast on the inner meaning of Scrip' 
simple-hearted believer, depending on tl 
the Holy Ghost, will find things in tl 
which the wisest have mistaken or missE 
might St. John say of such, " Ye need not 
man should teach you; but the anointin^ 
ve have received, teacheth you of all 
What fire is to sympathetic ink, bringing 
orless fluid out black and clear, that the 
of the Holy Ghost is to passages in tl 
which had seemed meaningless and bare 

We can never know too much of thi 
ture which throws side-lights on the Bl 
which unfolds the customs of the people 



78 HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 

allusions, historical coincidences, geographical 
details. Geikie's Hours with the Bible; Kitto's 
Daily Illustrations, edited by Dr. Porter; Dr. 
Smith's Bible Dictionary ; books like these are 
invaluable. But we should study them at an- 
other time than in the sacred morning hour, which 
we give to the Holy Ghost alone. 

3. — Read the Bible Methodically. 

On the whole there is probably no better way 

than to read the Bible through once every year. 

There is a very good plan for doing this in the 

life of the sainted McCheyne, who drew it up for 

his people. Or it may be done by taking daily, 

in a Bagster's Bible, three columns of the Old 

Testament, two of the New Testament, and one 

of the Psalms. This system will more than do 

it. 

The next best plan to this is that adopted by 

Mr. Richardson's Bible Reading Union, which 
consists of tens of thousands of Christians in 
every part of the world, who read one chapter a 
day in regular rotation, and thus get through the 
Book in about three years.* 

It is wise to have a good copy of the Script- 
ures, strongly bound for wear and tear, of good 



* Daily Scripture Readings, by D. W. Whittle, a supplement of The 
Record of Christian IVork^ give a most excellent course, with notes. 
Fleming H. Revell Company, Chicago, Publishers. 






d 



HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 79 

clear print, and with as much space as possible 
for notes. * A book of which you can make a 
friend and inseparable companion. But it is above 
all things wise at first to select one with copious 
marginal references, so that it may be easy to 
turn to the parallel passages. For myself, this 
plan has invested my Bible reading with new in- 
terest. I love to have in front of me one of the 
Paragraph Bibles of the Religious Tract Society, 
which abound in well-chosen references, and a 
small pocket Bible in my hand, that I may easily 
turn to any reference I desire; and very often I 
get more blessing from the passages to which I 
refer, and those to which these lead, than from 
the one I may be reading. 

After a while, we shall begin to make refer- 
ences for ourselves; and then we nay us** acopy 
of the Revised Bible, that we may not only be 
able to read God's word in the most approved 
English rendering, which is an immense advan- 
tage, but that we may also be able to fill up the 
empty margins with the notes of parallel pas- 
sages. 

But whatever system is adopted, be sure to 
read the Bible through on some systefUy as you 
would any other book. No one would think of 



* Send stamped addressed envelope to publishers of this book for in- 
formation regarding description and prices of Bibles and books recom- 
mended in theS3 pages^ 



8o HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 

reading a letter, poem, or history, as many read 
God*s Word. What wonder that they are so ig- 
norant of its majestic prose, its exquisite lyric 
poetry, its massive arguments, its sublime im- 
agery, its spiritual beauty — qualities which com- 
bine to make it the King of Books, even though 
the halo of Inspiration did not shine like a crown 
about its brow! 

It is sometimes well to read a book at a sitting, 
devoting two or three hours to the sacred task. 
At other times, it is more profitable to take an 
epoch, or an episode, or a life, and compare all 
that is written of it in various parts of Scripture. 
At other times, again, it is well to follow the plan 
on which Mr. Moody has so often insisted, of 
taking one word or thought, as Faith, or Love, 
or Able, and tracing it, by help of a concordance, 
from end to end of the inspired volume. But in 
any case, let the whole Bible be your study; 
because " All Scripture is given by inspiration of 
Gody and is profitable ^ Even the rocky places 
shall gush with water springs. The most barren 
chapters shall blossom as the rose. " Out of the 
eater shall come forth meaty and szveetness out of 
the strong.'* 

Let us never forget that the Bible is one Book; 
the work of one Infinite Spirit, speaking through 
prophet and priest, shepherd and king, the old- 
world patriarch and the apostle who lived to see 



{ 



( 



i-i 



HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 8 1 

Jerusalem leveled to the ground. You may sub- 
ject its words to the most searching test, but you 
will find they will always bear the same meaning, 
and move in the same direction. Let the Bible 
be its own dictionary, its own interpreter, its own 
best commentary* It is like a vast buried city, 
in which every turn of the spade reveals some 
new marvel, whilst passages branch off in every 
direction, calling for exploration. 

4, — Read Your Bible with Your Pen in 

Hand. 

Writing of F. R. Havergal, her sister says, 
" She read her Bible at her study table by seven 
o'clock in the summer, and eight o'clock in winter. 
Sometimes, on bitterly cold mornings, I begged 
that she would read with her feet comfortably to 
the fire, and received the reply: *But then, 
Marie, I can't rule my lines neatly; just see what 
a find I've got ! ' If only one searches, there are 
such extraordinary things in the Bible ! She 
resolutely refrained from late hours and fritter- 
ing talks at night, in place of Bible searching and 
holy communings. Early rising and early study- 
ing were her rule through life." 

None, in my judgment, have learnt the secret 
of enjoying the Bible until they have commenced 
to mark it, neatly. Underlining and dating 
special verses, which have cast a light upon their 



82 HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 

path on special days. Drawing railway connec- 
tions, across the pages, between verses which 
repeat the same message, or ring with the same 
note. Jotting down new references, or the catch- 
words of helpful thoughts. All these methods 
find plenty of employment for the pen, and fix 
our treasures for us permanently. Our Bible 
then becomes the precious memento of by-gone 
hours, and records the history of our inner life. 

5. — Seek Eagerly Your Personal Profit. 

Do not read the Bible for others, for class or 
congregation, but for yourself. Bring all its rays 
to a focus on your own heart. Whilst you are 
reading, often ask that some verse or verses may 
start out from the printed page, as God's mes- 
sage to yourself. Never close the book until you 
feel that you are carrying away your portion of 
meat from that Hand which satisfieth the desire 
of every living thing. It is well, sometimes, to 
stop reading, and seriously ask, " What does the 
Holy Spirit mean me to learn by this ? What 
bearing should this have on my life } How can 
I work this into the fabric of my character ? ** 

Let not the Bible be to you simply as a his- 
tory, a treatise, or a poem, but as your Father's 
letter to yourself; in which there are some things 
which you will not understand till you come into 
the circumstances which require them; but which 



HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 83 

IS also full of present help. There is a great dif- 
ference between the way in which an absent 
child scans the parcel of newspapers, and that in 
which he devours the home letter, by which the 
beloved parent speaks. Both are interesting, 
but the one is general, the other is all to himself. 
Read the Bible, not as a newspaper, but as a 
home letter. 

6. — Above all, Turn from the Printed Page 

TO Prayer. 

If a cluster of heavenly fruit hangs within 
reach, gather it. If a promise lies upon the page 
as a blank check, cash it. If a prayer is 
recorded, appropriate it, and launch it as a 
feathered arrow from the bow of your desire. If 
an example of holiness gleams before you, ask 
God to do as much for you. If a truth is 
revealed in all its intrinsic splendor, entreat that 
its brilliance may ever irradiate the hemisphere 
of your life like a star. Entwine the climbing 
creepers of holy desire about the lattice work of 
Scripture. So shall you corne to say with the 

■ 

Psalmist, " Ohy how I love Thy laWy it is my medi- 
tation all the day!'' 

It is sometimes well to read over, on our knees. 
Psalm cxix, so full of devout love for the Bible. 
And if any should chide us for spending so much 
time upon the Old Testament, or the New, let us 



84 HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 

remind them of the words of Christ, " Man shall 
not live by bread alone^ but by every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God,'^ The Old 
Testament must be worth our study since it was 
our Saviour's Bible, deeply pondered and often 
quoted. And the New demands it, since it is sa 
full of what He said and did, not only in Hia 
earthly life, but through the medium of His holy 
apostles and prophets. 

Advantages of a Deep Knowledge of thu 

Bible. 

The advantages of a deep knowledge of th» 
Bible are more than can be numbered here. It 
is the Storehouse of the Promises. It is the 
Sword of the Spirit, before which temptation 
flees. It is the all-sufficient Equipment for 
Christian usefulness. It is the believer's Guide- 
book and Directory in all possible circumstances. 
Words fail to tell how glad, how strong, how use- 
ful shall be the daily life of those, who can say 
with the Prophet: " Thy words were founds and 
I did eat them; and Thy word was unto me the 
joy and rejoicing of my heart.'* 

Practice What You Learn. 

But there is one thing, which may be said last, 
because it is most important, and should linger 
in the memory and heart, though all the other 



HOW TO READ YOUR BIBLE 8$ 

exhortations of this chapter should pass away as 
a summer brook. It is this. It is useless to 
dream of making headway in the knowledge of 
Scripture unless we are prepared to practice each 
new and clearly-defined duty which looms out 
before our view. We are taught, not for our 
pleasure only, but that we may do. If we will 
turn each holy precept or command into instant 
obedience, through the dear grace of Jesus Christ 
our Lord, God will keep nothing back from us; 
He will open to us His deepest and sweetest 
thoughts. But so long as we refuse obedience to 
even the least command, we shall find that the 
light will fade from the page of Scripture, and the 
zest will die down quickly in our own hearts. 

'' ilbtd boofi of tbe law sball not depart 
out of tbB moutb; but tbou sbalt me&itatc 
tbetetn das an& ntgbtt tbat tbou masest 
ob6et\>c to &o accor&ing to all tbat fs writ*- 
ten tbetein: for tben tbou sbalt mafte tbg 
was prosperous, an& tben tbou sbalt ba\>e 

flOOD success /'--/^^A«^ i: 8. 



THE COMMON TASK. 



A young friend, richly gifted, but who is tied 
by inexorable necessity to an office stool, has 
complained to me that his life afforded no out- 
let for the adequate exercise of his powers, v 

His groan is a very common one. So many 
grumble about the monotony of life's dead-level, 
which the great majority of us have to traverse. 
The upland paths which give an ecstacy to tread 
m the bracing air and the expanding glory of the 
world are for the few. For most of us it is the 
trivial round, the common task. Each morning 
the bell calls to the same routine of common- 
place toil. Each hour brings the same pro- 
gramme of trifles. There seems no chance for 
doing anything hieroic, which will be worth hav- 
ing lived for, or will shed a light back on all past, 
and forward on all coming days. 

But there are two or three considerations, 
wjiich, if wrought into the heart, will tend to re- 
move much of this terrible depression. 

86 



THE COMMON TASK 87 



(i) — ^All Life Is Part of a Divine Plan. 

As a mother desires the best possible for her 
babes, bending over the cradle which each occu- 
pies in turn, so does God desire to do His best 
for us all. He hates nothing that He has made, 
but has a fair ideal for each, which He desires to 
accomplish in us with perfect love. But there is 
no way of transferring it to our actual experience, 
except by the touch of His Spirit within, and the 
education of our circumstances without. 

He has chosen the circumstances of our life, 
because they are the shortest path, if only we 
use them as we should, to reach the goal on 
which He has set His heart. He might have 
chosen some other country — China, India, Italy, 
or Mexico. He might have chosen some other 
age — that of the Flood, the Exodus, or of the 
early martyrs. He might have chosen some 
other lot — a royal court, a senate, a pulpit, or an 
author's desk. But since he chose this land, 
this age, and your lot (whatever it may be), we 
must believe that these presented the likeliest 
and swiftest way for realizing His purpose. 

If, my brother, you could have reached your 
truest manhood as an emperor or a reformer, as 
a millionaire or a martyr, you would have been 
born into one of those positions; but since you 



88 



THE COMMON TASK 



are only a servant, a bank clerk, or an ordinary 
business man, you will find right beside you the 
materials and possibilities of a great life. 

If, my sister, you could have attained to the 
loftiest development of your nature by being a 
mother, or a rich man's wife, or a queen, you 
would have found yourself placed there; but 
since your lot is that of a milliner's assistant, 
factory hand, or toiling mother, you must believe 
that, somewhere within your reach, if only you 
will search for them, you will discover the readi- 
est conditions of a noble and useful life. 

Who can wonder at the complaints of the aim- 
lessness, the vanity, the weariness of life ? Peo- 
ple either have no plan, or they have got a wrong 
one. " What's the fashion ?'* " What do others 
do.?" "What's the correct thing.?" How 
much better and wiser to believe that God has a 
perfect plan for each of us, and that He is un- 
folding it a bit at a time, by the events which He 
puts into our life each day ! 

Before Moses built the Tabernacle, he saw the 
whole pattern of it in prophetic vision. In some 
secluded spot on Sinai's heights it stood before 
him, woven out of sunbeams; and he descended 
to the mountain foot to repeat it in actual cur- 
tains, gold, and wood. God does not show us 
the whole plan of our life at a burst, but unfolds 
it to us bit by bit. Each day He gives us the 



H 



( 



9' 
V 



r 



T 




THE COMMON TASK 89 

\ opportunity of weaving a curtain, carving a peg, 
fashioning the metal. We know not what we 
do, but at the end of our Hfe the disjointed pieces 
will suddenly come together, and we%hall see 
the symmetry and beauty of the Divine thought. 
Then we shall be satisfied. In the meantime let 
us believe that God's love and wisdom are doing 
the very best for us. In the morning ask God to 
show you His plan for the day in the unfolding 
of its events, and to give you grace to do or bear 
all that He may have prepared. In the midst of 
the day's engagements, often look up and say, 
" Father, is this in the plan .?** At night, be still, 
and match your actual with God's ideal, confes- 
sing your sins and shortcomings, and asking that 
His will may be more perfectly done in you, even 
as in heaven. 

(2) — Every Life Affords Opportunities for 
Building up Noble Character. 

We are sent into this world to build up char- 
acters which will be blessed and useful in that 
great future for which we are being trained. 
There is a niche which only we can fill, a crown 
which only we can wear, music which only we 
can waken, service which only we can render. 
God knows what these are, and He is giving us 
opportunities to prepare for them. Life is our 
school-house. Its rooms may be bare, but they 



90 



THE COMMON TASK 



are littered with opportunities of becoming fit for 
our great inheritance. 

Knitting^ needles are cheap and common 
enough, but on them may be wrought the fairest 
designs in the richest wools. So the incidents 
of daily life may be commonplace in the extreme, 
but on them as the material foundation we may 
build the unseen but everlasting fabric of a noble 
and beautiful character. It does not so much 
matter what we do, but the way in which we do 
it matters greatly. What we do may or may not 
live; but the way in which we perform our com- 
mon tasks becomes an indestructible part of our 
character, for better or worse, and for even 

Suppose we meet the daily demands of life in 
a slovenly and careless spirit, caring only to es- 
cape blame, to earn our wage, or to preserve a 
decent average. Or suppose our one aim in life 
is to get money for our own enjoyment. Is it 
not clear that the meanness of the motive will 
react on the whole character behind it ? Will it 
not be certain and inevitable that the soul which 
is always bathed in such atmosphere, confronted 
with such ideals, will become slovenly, careless, 
mercenary, and selfish ? And when some great 
occasion arises it will call in vain for the high 
qualities of a noble nature. 

Suppose, on the other hand, that we do the 
little duties of life faithfully, punctually, thought- 



THE COMMON TASK 9 1 

fully, reverently — not for the praise of man, but 
for the " Well done " of Christ— not for the pay- 
ment we may receive, but because God has given 
us a little piece of work to do in His great 
world — not because we must, but because we 
choose — not as the slaves of circumstances, but 
as Christ's freed ones — then far down beneath 
the surge of common life the foundations of a 
character are laid, more beautiful and enduring 
than coral, which shall presently rear itself before 
the eyes of men and angels, and become an 
emerald islet, green with perennial beauty, and 
vocal with the songs of Paradise. 

We ought, therefore, to be very careful how 
we fulfil the comman tasks of daily life. We 
are making the character in which we have to 
spend eternity. We are either building into our- 
selves wood, hay, and stubble which will have to 
be burnt out at great cost; or the gold, silver, 
and precious stones, that shall be things of 
beauty and joy forever. 

(3) — ^The Great Doing of Little Things Will 

Make a Great Life. 

Let it be granted that you are a person of 
ordinary ability. It is as likely as not • that you 
will never be removed into a wider sphere than 
the obscure one in which you have been pining, 
like a wood-bird in its cage. Give up your use- 



92 TH£ COMMON TASK 

less regret, your querulous complaint, and begin 
to meet the call of trivial common-place, with 
tenderness to each person you encounter, with 
faith in God, as doing His best for you, with 
heroic courage and unswerving fidelity, with 
patience, thoroughness, submission. 

Go on acting thus, week in and week out, year 
by year, with no thought of human notice, deter- 
mined always to be at your best, eager only to 
pay out, without stint, the gold of a noble, unsel- 
fish heart. At the end of life, though you wist 
not that your face glistens, others will see you 
shining like the sun in your Heavenly Father's 
kingdom. It will be discovered that you have 
unwittingly lived a great life, and you will be 
greeted on the threshold of heaven with the 
" Well done " of your Lord. 

Some who are sighing for a great life are un- 
consciously living it in the eye of God's angels. 
Those who forego marriage that they may bring 
up and educate the younger children of their 
homes; those who deny themselves almost the 
necessaries of life to add some coals of comfort 
to the meagre fire at which the chill hands of age 
warm themselves; those who are not only them- 
selves pure amid temptation, but the centres of 
purity, shielding others; those who stand to their 
post of duty, though the fires, as they creep 
near, are scorching the skin and consuming the 



*• 



THE COMMON TASK 93 

heart; those who meet the incessant demand of 
monotonous tasks with gentleness, unselfishness, 
and the wealth of a strong, true heart — ^these 
though they know it not, are graduating for the 
front ranks of heaven's nobility. 

** Oh ! where is the sea ? " the fishes cried, 

As they swam the crystal clearness through: 
** WeVe heard from of old of the ocean's tide, 
And we long to look on the waters blue. 
The wise ones speak of the infinite sea. 
Oh I who can tell us if such there be ? '* 

The lark flew up in the morning bright, 
And sang and balanced on sunny wings; 

And this was its song: *' I see the light, 
I look o*er the world of beautiful things; 

But flying and singing everywhere. 

In vain I have searched to find the air.*' 

(4) — It Is A Greater Thing to do Little 
Things Well, than Those Which Seem 
More Important. 

They who daily handle matters which bulk 
largely before the eyes of their fellows are ex- 
pected to act from great motives, and to behave 
worthily of their great and important positions. 
The statesman is expected to be high-minded; the 
Christian lady to be virtuous; the minister to be 
earnest. There is no special credit to any of 
these for being what they profess, and are ex- 
pected to be. The current is with them. Their 
difficulty would be to face it. 



94 THE COMMON TASK 

But, surely, in God's sight, it is a much greater 
thing when the soul conquers adverse circum- 
stances, and rises superior to the drift of its asso- 
ciations. To be high-minded, wheii your com- 
panions are mean and degraded ; to be chaste, 
when ease and wealth beckon you to enter the 
gate of vice ; to be devout or zealous, when no 
one expects it ; to do small things from great 
motives— ^this is the loftiest attainment of the 
soul. 

It is a greater thing to do an unimportant 
thing from a great motive, for God, for truth, for 
others, than to do an important one ; greater to 
suffer patiently each day a thousand stings, than 
die once as a martyr at the stake. And there- 
fore an obscure life really offers more opportuni- 
ties for the nurture of the loftiest type of char- 
acter, just because it is less liable to be visited 
by those meaner considerations of notoriety, or 
applause, or money, which intrude themselves 
into more prominent positions, and scatter their 
deadly taint. 

(S) — Little Things Greatly Done Prepare 
FOR THE Right Doing of Great Things. 

We sometimes lay down the story book or the 
history with a groan. We have been reading of 
some sudden opportunity which came to a Grace 
Darling, reared in the obscurity of a fisherman's 



/Is 



J 



r 



THE COMMON TASK 95 

home, or to a Florence Nightingale, or a John 
Brown, living apart from the great world in the 
heart of the Adirondacks. 

" Oh," we say, " if only such a chance would 
dip down into my life, and lift me out of it ! 
Tm weary, weary of this dull level." 

Ah ! it is a common mistake. Men think that 
the occasion makes the hero ; whereas it only 
reveals him. 

The train must have been laid long before, and 
carefully, else the falling of a single spark would 
never blast the mighty rocks or shiver the frown- 
ing fortress-walls. There must be the fabric of 
strong and noble character, built up by patient 
continuance in well-doing, else the sudden 
appeal of the critical hour will knock vainly at 
the door of life, and the soul will crouch unan- 
swering and helpless within. 

If great opportunities were to come to most, 
we could make nothing of them. They would 
pass by us unnoticed or unimproved. They 
would go from us to those who had more nerve, 
or grit, or spiritual power than we. You can not, 
just because you will, speak a foreign language, 
or dash off a brilliant air upon the piano, or talk 
easily on the motive of one of Browning's poems. 
All these demand long and arduous study. That 
must be given first in the chamber ; and then, if 
a sudden summons comes for any of them, on 
the housetop of observation, you will be ready. 



96 THE CO'IMON TASK 

You can not be brave in a crisis if you are 
habitually a coward. You can not be generous 
with a fortune if you are a miser with a limited 
income. You can not be unselfish in some such 
accident which imperils life if you are always 
pressing for the one vacant seat in train or omni- 
bus, and elbowing your way to the front on every 
possible occasion. David must practise with 
sling and stone through long hours in the wilder- 
ness, or he will never bring down Goliath. 
Joseph must be pure in thought and strong in 
private self-discipline, or he will never resist the 
solicitations of the temptress. The Sunday 
School teacher must be regular, painstaking, 
faithful in the conduct of his class of little rag- 
ged boys, or he will never be promoted to serve 
his Master as a minister at home, or as a mis- 
sionary abroad. 

(6) — Our Behaviour in Little ThiI^gs Is the 
Truest Test of What We Are. 

If I were eager to secure a good employ^ for a 
responsible position, I should not attach much 
importance to the way in which the candidate 
acted on a set occasion, when he knew that he 
was being observed. Of course he would be on 
his best behaviour! But give me a private 
window so that I can watch him in his least con- 
sidered actions — how he behaves at home, how 



THE COMMCN TASK 97 

he treats his mother and sisters, how he fulfils 
the common duties of life. What he is then, he 
is really. 

But if this is man's way, may it not be God's ? 
There are great tasks to be fulfilled in eternity : 
angels to be judged ; cities to be ruled ; perhaps 
worlds to be evangelized. For these, suitable 
agents will be required : those who can rule, 
because they have served ; those who can com- 
mand, because they have obeyed '^ those who can 
save others, because they never saved them- 
selves. Perhaps, even now our Heavenly 
Father is engaged in seeking those among us who 
can fill these posts. And He is seeking them, 
not amongst such as are filling high positions in 
the eyes of men, but in the ranks of such as are 
treading the trivial round and fulfilling the com- 
mon task. 

From the nearest fixed star the inequalities of 
our earth, whether of Alp or molehill, are alike 
insignificant. We need to look at our positions 
from the standpoint of eternity, and prob- 
ably we shall be startled at the small differ- 
ences between the lots of men. The one 
thing for us all is to abide in our calling with 
God, to count ourselves as His fellow-workers, to 
do what we can in His Grace and for His glory, 
never excusing ourselves, never condoning failure 
or misdoing, never content unless, by the help of 



98 THE COMMON TASK 

the Blessed Spirit, we have wrought out His 
promptings and suggestions to the best of our 
power, whether in the gold of the extraordinary, 
or the bronze of the cheaper and more ordinary 
achievement. 

Of course there is no saving merit in what we 
do. Salvation is only by simple trust in our 
Saviour, Jesus. But when we are saved it gives 
new zest to Life to do all for Him, as Lord and 
Master; and to know that He is well pleased in 
the right doing of the most trivial duties of the 
home or daily business. 

" For what glory is ity ify when ye be buffeted 
for your faults y ye shall take it patiently? but if 
when ye do welly and suffer for ity ye take it pa- 
tientlyy this is acceptable with God.*' (i Peter 
ii: 20.) 

May each reader learn Dthis happy art, and go 
through life offering all to God, as the white- 
stoled priests in the Temple of old. Indeed, all 
believers have been made priests unto God; 
every sphere may be a Holy Temple; and every 
act done in the name of Jesus may be a spiritual 
sacrifice, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. 



Sw 



1 

i 



YOUNG MEN, DONT DRIFT ! 



Yes, it is the drifting that is most to be feared. 
Men don't become atheists and swindlers at a 
leap. For every one who resolutely sets his face 
against God, there are hundreds who drift from 
Him. 

An illustration occurred once in my own holi- 
day experiences which taught me to estimate fully 
the power of the tide to drift. We were staying 
on the coast of North Wales, and were desirous 
of visiting an island famous for its ruins and tra- 
ditions. Nothing seemed easier than to cross 
the narrow straits which lay between it and the 
beach on which we stood. But as soon as we 
had got beyond the jutting headland we found 
ourselves caught by a strong current, which per- 
sistently carried us out of our course, and would 
have drifted us, had we yielded to it, far down 
the coast. It took four of us four hours and a 
half of hard rowing to cross the straics which, 
with a flowing tide, we retraversed at night in 
about half an hour. 

Never since have I ignored the power of the 

99 



«» 






• t » a "* 



^ 



lOO YOUNG MEN, DON'T DRIFT 

current, so gentle, so imperceptible, so pleasant 
to yield to, so difficult to resist. And often have 
I been reminded of the episode when I have seen 
young men drifting before the currents of moral 
influence on the great ocean of life. 

Young men come up to our great centers of 
population from holy and blessed homes, where 
they have been born and bred. They are nice, 
amiable, well-meaning fellows, with no intention 
of going wrong, though perhaps with no vefy 
strong resolution to go right. The last words of 
advice from father or mother ring in their ears, 
urging them to keep up the good habits in which 
they have been trained since childhood, and they 
intend to conform to them. 

If they fall in with a strong religious influence, 
it is not at all unlikely that they will turn out 
well. But if they go into some establishment or 
house where there is a fast, gay set, where the 
Lord's day is unkept, where filthy allusions pol- 
lute the talk and gambling fills the leisure hours, 
after the first momentary shock is over they give 
themselves up to the strong prevailing current, 
and begin insensibly, but swiftly, to drift. It is 
not necessary at first that they should commit 
some flagrant sin; it is enough that tAey cease to 
resist the insidious influences around. 

Young men, is this a true picture of your con- 
dition? If so, heed the advice of an elder 



k » 



YOUNG MEN, DON*T DRIFT 1 01 

brother, who has himself passed through city 
life, and who gathers up all the advice which he 
has to give in the words — DorCt drift. 

Don't Drift Into a Loose Way of Keep- 
ing Sunday. 

When you are away from home, you do not 
know where to go, what church to attend, what 
minister to hear. If you enter a place of wor- 
ship, no one knows and perhaps no one welcomes 
you. You miss the familiar faces and voices of 
your childhood's earliest memories. You feel 
that your absence from that congregation, and 
indeed from any other, for the rest of the day 
would not be noticed, and so you stay away. 
Your pursuits may be quite innocent, and yet 
your absence from God's house, according to 
your olden pralctice, and without sufficient rea- 
son, is the first symptom of yielding to the swift 
current which urges you to drift. 

My advice is to go to the several places of 
worship in the near neighborhood of your resi- 
dence. Go once or twice to ascertain the char- 
acter of the ministry and of the work carried on, 
and then attach yourselves to the one you find 
most helpful. Make for the minister direct, tell 
him who you are, whence you have come, and 
your intention of settling down in his congrega- 
tion; and if he be a true man, he will be only 



102 YOUNG MEN, DON*T DRIFT 

too glad to welcome you. If he doesn't, I would 
advise you to betake yourself to some one who 
will. 

When you settle in a new place, be sure also 
to find out the nearest Young Men's Christian 
Association. Ask for the secretary, and he will 
introduce you to friends, and home, and many 
things young men want. 

Don't Drift Into Loose Companionships. 

A man is made or marred by his friends. As 
fish take on the mottling of the ground on which 
they lie, and as the butterflies resemble the 
flowers over which they hover, so do we become 
like those whom we choose for our companions. 
Don't drift into familiarity with any man till you 
are pretty sure of him, and have asked for God 
to show you his true character. 

Beware of the man who goes in for a lot of 
showy jewelry, and professes to be able to show 
you a thing or two about life. He perhaps knows 
a little too much, and wants to see life at your 
expense. And when you have ^pent your last 
shilling, and he is tired of you, he will cast you 
off without mercy. 

Beware of the man who talks slightingly of 
mother, father, home, or of women generally. 
Many men ridicule any allusion to the purity and 
tenderness of the home circle, and apparently 



YOUNG MEN, DON^T DRIFT IO3 

have no belief that woman can be other than the 
toy or victim of man — never his equal and con- 
fidante and friend. Beware of such men. The 
probability is that they have only lived to tempt 
the weaker sex whom they now traduce, and that 
their vices have necessarily excluded them from 
the society of the pure and virtuous. 

Beware of the man who professes himself too 
deeply versed in the science of the day to believe 
in the Bible, and who ridicules those who do. It 
is an easy thing to ask a question which might 
take days of teaching and investigation to an- 
"swer. Destructive criticism is child's play. Any 
fool can fire a cathedral which would take cen- 
turies in building; and any street-arab may 
smash a window which neither modern wealth 
nor art can reconstruct. True wisdom is not de- 
structive but constructive. A man has no more 
right to steal away or spoil your faith than he has 
to deprive you of your eyesight or rob you of 
your purse. And if he attempt it, he betrays a 
dangerous character, of which you do well to be- 
ware. 

Don't Drift into Extravagant Expenditure. 

Better live on oatmeal porridge and brown 
bread than spend more than you can afford or 
drift into debt. The pleasure of a day's outing 
or of an evening's gaiety has a nasty after-taste. 



104 YOUNG MEN, DON'T DRIFT 

when for weeks or months you have to avoid cer- 
tain people because you owe them money which 
you can not repay. 

It is a temptation for us all to imitate the peo- 
ple above us in the social scale, but it is a miser- 
able life to live, and very unsatisfactory, because 
we generally imitate their weaknesses and vices 
rather than their virtues. And yet it appears to 
afford much passing pleasure for the poor clerk to 
dress and speak with the airs of a young lord. 
One evening's conquest of the barmaids and bar- 
loafers must be a rare luxury! But this kind of 
thing can not be done without money. You can 
not throw much money away out of ten dollars per 
week. The result is that a young man sometimes 
spends in a single evening money enough to fill 
his heart with anxiety for many a weary day, and 
is perhaps tempted to take money which does not 
belong to him, in order to stay pressing demands, 
and in hope of the opportunity of repayment, 
which never comes. 

Don't Drift into Habits of Gambling. 

There is plenty of it all around us, and a man feels 
rather lonely when he refuses to join in. I felt so 
some time ago on board an ocean steamer, when 
I seemed to be nearly the only one that refused 
to join in a sweepstakes. The workshops and 
establishments are comparatively rare which are 



YOUNG MEN, DON*T DRIFT IO5 

not filled with the buzz of excitement on the eve 
of some great race. And there are places in 
most large towns, clubs and such like, where men 
have the opportunity of losing fortunes, if they 
only are fools enough. 

It is not chiefly the love of money that urges 
men to bet, but the excitement of the chance, 
which relieves the monotony of their otherwise 
aimless existence. We can form no concept on 
of the fascinations of this kind of life as we look 
on them from without; just as we can not realize 
the irresistible force of the whirlpool till we are 
being sucked into its gurgling vortex. But it is 
surely needless to fling ourselves into them to see 
what they are like. Once in, we shall probably 
find it impossible to get out. And we may get in 
almost imperceptibly. To deposit the first coin 
in a rafile or sweepstakes, to stake the first shill- 
ing on a horse, to lay a bet of a pair of gloves — 
these things may seem trifles, but they are a 
yielding to the outer rim of the whirlpool. Of 
course it is easy to break from them. But they 
may lead to other things, only removed from them 
by a single hair's-breadth, which will lead to 
others, and still others beyond. How much 
better to put the foot down and refuse the first ! 
You mean to refuse the second; but if you are 
going to refuse at all, it will be unspeakably 
easier to refuse at first than afterward. 



I06 YOUNG MEN, DON*T DRIFT 

Betting is a bad thing. It undoes society as 
the white ant the wooden houses of the tropics. 
Men who bet care for little else. Love and home 
are sacrificed to the companions of the betting 
ring. Business is neglected because they live in 
the feverish hope of coming in for a windfall, and 
of getting money without giving an equivalent of 
any sort. 

Don't Drift into Habits of Drinking. 

Nothing is easier than to do this. The tides 
of strong drink are running swiftly through our 
streets, and every corner saloon is a jetty from 
which men may enter the boats and launch out 
upon the current. A few may enter it and yet 
escape; but for an enormous number there is little 
hope of escape, when once fairly afloat on the 
fascinating but perilous waters. 

They say that smoking leads to drinking. If 
so, it would be well to avoid the first cigarette. 
Some of us have so many natural appetites to 
keep in order that we are thankful never to have 
awakened the habit of smoking, which seems a 
very masterful one, and terribly apt to become a 
tyrant. It would be foreign from my purpose to 
call smoking a sin. What right have I to add 
another to the ten commandments ? But it cer- 
tainly is to most people " a weight.'* In many 
cases it is the innocent little boy who, when 



'f 



YOUNG MEN, DON'T DRIFT IO7 

once in the house, opens the door to a gang of 
thieves. 

You are not specially a sinner, dear young fel- 
low, because you smoke. But is it wise to be- 
gin a habit for which you can not plead any good 
reason except that others do it, and which may 
lead you into drinking, bad companionships, and 
other things i 

But other things drift a man into drinking 
habits. Loafing about the streets in the even- 
ings; standing treat to companions, because you 
want to look large in their esteem, and with the 
certainty that you will have to drink what they 
provide in return; doing business over a wine 
bar; spending your evenings in places like music- 
halls, where drink passes round, and where the 
proprietor looks shyly on those who don*t 
patronize the buffet — all these are easy methods 
of drifting into drink. 

No man means to be a drunkard when he starts 
drinking. Those who are now in the agony of 
delirium were once as pure and true as you; but 
they were carried down an almost insensible 
gradient. Beware of their fate, and don't follow 
their earlier steps, lest you acquire a momentum 
you can not arrest, and go down to hell. There 
is no better safeguard to a young man in life 
than to take the pledge of total abstinence. He 
perhaps may not sign a pledge at a meeting, but 



I08 YOUNG MEN, DON*T DRIFT 

he can write one in his own chamber, and resolve, 
by God's help, never to touch this accursed foe 
of human hearts and happiness and homes. 

Don't Drift Into Habits of Impurity. 

In all of us there are appetites and desires which 
are beautiful and innocent enough when kept in 
their right place; but they are very reluctant to 
be kept there, and are ever chafing to ascend the 
throne of the being, and assume the mastership 
of the life. It is pleasant to allow them thus to 
ascend; but who shall depict the horrors of the 
wreckage of all that is bright and beautiful and 
happy in the life of the miserable victim who has 
yielded to their first suggestions ? 

Beware of drifting into secret sins, witnessed 
by no eye but God's. Beware of the society of 
those who are familiar with the ways of darkness 
and impurity. Beware of spectacles and pictures, 
of amusements and books, that excite the lower 
passions. Never go to a place to which you 
could not take your mother or sister. Never get 
familiar with a girl whom you could not introduce 
to the purest woman you know. Never treat a 
girl in another way than you would like a man to 
treat your own sister. 

It is not necessary to yield to temptation. Ab- 
stinence from strong drink and excessive animal 
food; plenty of gymnastics, cycling,- and muscular 



YOUNG MEN, DON*T DRIFT IO9 

exercise; hard mattrasses, cold bathing, early 
risiag, will answer many of the questions which 
so often perplex young men. And there is better 
than all — the power and purity of Jesus, which 
you may claim and use in all moments of need. 
One earnest, believing cry for help will bring 
Him near. And when He enters the soul, impur- 
ity can no more stand against His indwelling 
than straw before fire, or darkness before day. 

Don't Drift Into an Imprudent Marriage. 

It is well when a young man meets a good girl. 
I never object to an early engagement when the 
couple are well mated, though I would urge a 
deferred marriage, until the comforts of a home 
can be provided either by the love of friends or 
by the results of united savings. And no home 
is so sweet as that which has been chosen and 
furnished by the taste and self-denial of those 
who are to enter it. 

You ought not to choose your life-partner only 
from seeing her in evening dress or in company. 
All sweet faces do not tell a perfectly true story 
of the inner temper. You need a wife who 
knows something more than how to play one or 
two set pieces on the piano, or sing half a dozen 
songs. The girl who understands all the details 
of household management, who knows how all 
should be done though she may never have to do 



no YOUNG MEN, DON'T DRIFT 

it, who has been good to her parents and younger 
brothers and sisters, who dresses simply and 
neatly, who knows how to make a dollar do a 
dollar's work, who is deeply religious — ^that is the 
kind of woman who will make a good wife; and 
till God sends her to you, don't flirt or play with 
a girl's affections, or lead any to think you care 
for them when you don't. 

Don't Drift into a Mere Money-making 

Machine. 

Some seem to live for nothing else than to add 
a few more coins to their rising pile; and to do 
this, they sacrifice all that makes life sweet and 
noble and honorable. Have a lofty aim. Spend 
your life for the best results. Be more eager to 
get up than to get on. There is no harm in am- 
bition, when it is directed to doing the best you 
can to make the world better and those around 
you happier; but it is a detestable passion to seek 
money for money's sake. Your aim must be to 
seek first the things that make for righteousness 
and peace, for God's glory and man's good. Be 
faithful in these, in your small sphere, and it will 
be almost certain that you will be put in a posi- 
tion where you will have the chance of being 
faithful also in much. 



YOUNG MEN, DON'T DRIFT III 

You tell me that you can not resist the strong 
current on which you are already launched, and 
that you have already commenced to drift. But 
it is not too late. Send up a cry of distress to 
the Lord Jesus, asking Him to come on board 
your boat. He is stronger than the mightiest 
current. And then if you like to put it so, give 
Him the towing-line, that He may take it in His 
hand, and tow you up the strong stream to His 
own bright Home. 

There is no better policy, dear young brother, 
than to give your heart to Jesus. Take Him as 
your Saviour, Master, and Friend. Ask Him to 
live in your soul, making you pure and sweet and 
strong. Follow Him in His footsteps of self- 
sacrifice for the sake of others. Go to no place 
where you can not take Him also. Let His 
friends be yours, and see that yours are His. 
Ask Him to put you into that position where you 
can please and glorify Him best. Remember 
that prayer and waiting will untie the stoutest 
knots and ufiravel the greatest difficulties. 



i 



"^ 



WORDS OF HELP FOR CHRISTIAN GIRLS 



Dear Friends: — 

I have many things to say to you (suggested 
by the experiences of our own Church-Life and 
Bible-Classes), which I want you to think over 
quietly; so I will put them all into a letter, which 
you can keep and read again and again. And as 
you read it, try to think of me as an elder brother, 
who is eager to help you. 

In all this world, there is nothing fairer than 
the young life which God has given you, with its 
sunny laughter, its high spirits, its hopes and 
golden dreams, its wealth of pure affection. 
You can enrich the poorest home as no money 
could. You can lighten the hardest lot. You can 
cheer the roughest path, making the weary feet 
forget the sharp flints. You can find the blue 
flowers blooming amid Arctic snows. And by 
doing so, you may give and get untold blessings. 

I am glad that you have given your heart and 
life to the Lord Jesus. You will never regret 
that step, by which Jesus has become your 
Brother. Remember how He said, " Whoso-^ 

zxa 



HELP FOR CHRISTIAN GIRLS II 3 

ever shall do the will of Gody the same is * * 
* My sister,^' And no one knows better than 
He does, how much is meant by the tie between 
a strong and noble Brother and the sisters who 
shelter beneath His care. He grew up with sis- 
ters in that village home under the blue Syrian 
skies; and, as the shadows of death gathered 
round His path, He made much of the love of 
His adopted sisters in the home in Bethany. 

Words fail me to tell you all that the Lord 
Jesus will do for you. He will keep your hearts 
whiter than snow, removing each stain of sin by 
His own precious blood. He will put Himself 
as a shield between you and allmanner of hurt. 
He will make you His special charge^ He will 
quench your thirst from the brimmii^g^^'alice of 
His own love. In perplexity He will guide; in 
peril He will protect; in necessity He will supply 
all your need. He will give you — what all 
women long for — the sense of belonging to some 
one, good enough, wise enough, and strong 
enough, to trust without misgiving or fear. 

But I do hope you will be all for Him. This 
is the only path on which the sunbeams always 
play. There are many professing Christians 
who have just enough religion to make them 
miserable; and they might as well be without 
any. They take a good drink of the sweets of 
the world, and they try to quiet their conscience 



114 HELP FOR CHRISTIAN GIRLS 

by a pilgrimage to the living well. But though 
they rattle the chains, and let down their buckets, 
they never get one pure crystal drop for their 
poor parched lips, because they do not seek the 
Lord with all their hearts. And so, after a little 
while, they rush off again to the gilded pleasures 
of the world. Do not make their mistake. As 
Jesus gave all for you, so give all to Him; and 
He will give you back one-hundred fold. 

Directly you are right with Christ, other things 
will right themselves. 

Dress. 

Dress perplexes some, and takes up much 
time and thought. It is a difficult subject, and 
yet there are several clear rules to guide a 
Christain girl. 

Do not dress showily, or extravagantly, or be- 
yond your means. 

Do not dress in such a way as to call attention 
to any part of your figure, or to distort or alter it. 

Do not dress so that people shall notice your 
dress more than yourselves. 

There is no reason why the general style of 
your dress should not be like that of others. To 
be totally out of the fashion would make you 
needlessly singular, and attract as much atten- 
tion as if you were dressed in the height of fash- 
ion; and whatever makes others think of us, or 



HELP FOR CHRISTIAN GIRLS 11$ 

US think of ourselves, turns our thoughts away 
from Jesus, and from better things. I think 
that there is no higher art for a Christian girl 
than to dress simply, quietly, and tastefully; as 
one who is careful of the body which Christ has 
given, but who is mindful also of the Apostle's 
words: " Let the women adorn themselves in 
modest apparely with shame fastness mid sobriety. ^^ 

Ornaments. 

The use of ornaments is also a matter of great 
heart-questioning. It is not an essential matter, 
and it should be settled between yourselves and 
Christ. Where there are doubts, the little 
trinkets should be laid aside till the great Owner 
tells His servants what He would like them to do. 

It does seem strange that so much money 
should be locked up in articles of personal adorn- 
ment when the Lord's cause is suffering for want 
of help ! A Chinese Christian lady brought her 
jewels one morning to her husband, to build an 
Opium-refuge; and when he expressed surprise, 
she said, " I have taken Christ for my adornment, 
and surely that is enough for any Christian 
woman.'* 

Put on the Lord Jesus, dear sisters, and you 
will lose your taste for many things you now hold 
dear, as most girls would throw away glass jew* 



Il6 HELP FOR CHRISTIAN GIRLS 

elry, if offered real gems. " Whose adorning lei 
it not be the outward adorning of plaiting the 
hair, and of wearing of jewels of gold, or of put' 
ting on apparel; but let it be the incorruptible ap- 
parel of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the 
sight of God of great price. '^ The woman who 
loads herself with jewels confesses herself want- 
ing in the jewels of the heart; but she who has j 
got these, troubles little about the diamonds or 
pearls of earthly mines. 

Amusements. 

Amusements also exercise many. We must 
have rest and change in these busy eager times; 
but we must watch our leisure hours, lest they do 
us more harm than good. Some ways of spend- 
ing them simply increases the exhaustion of the 
jaded mind and tired body, rendering us unfit for \ 

quiet prayer or daily work. 

For these reasons, and for others, you must 
keep clear of the Theatre, the Concert Hall, and v 

the Dancing Saloon. You can not go to these '^^ 

places, and keep the fulness of the Spirit, or the \ 

love of Jesus. You can not go to them without | 

hearing or seeing things which should bring a 
blush to the face. You can not go to them with- 
out putting yourselves into the way of men with < 
whom you should bav^ no dealings whatever. 



HELP FOR CHRISTIAN GIRLS II 7 

The atmosphere of such places will blight the 
fairest life, as gas blights tender plants. You 
will soon cease to care for them if you live near 
Christ, just as people put out their fires when 
the summer sun is shining. Remember the duties 
and calls of home, the necessity for elder sisters 
to throw themselves into the amusements of 
younger children, the many social and educa- 
tional meetings held at Churches and Chapels, 
Y. W. C. A's. , and other institutions, and I am 
sure that you will find that there is no need for 
you to seek pleasure in things which leave a 
sting behind. 

Dancing. 

Dancing is a matter to be settled between you 
and Christ. 

I have often wondered how girls who have any 
self-respect can yield themselves, especially when 
attired in the flimsy costume of a ball-room, to 
the embrace of strange men; whose morals may 
be worse than doubtful. It does not seem fit 
that the body of a Christian, meant to be the 
temple of the Holy Ghost, should be whirled 
through the maze of a waltz by one whose linen 
may be spotless, but whose soul is dark with the 
ruin of some of your sisters, who, though fallen 
now, were once " white as the beautiful snow. ** 



I.I 8 HELP FOR CHRISTIAN GIRLS 

Young men are rather careful that the girls they 
love should not go to these promiscuous dances, 
and a straw will show the drift of the stream. 
No sensible man will choose his wife in a ball- 
room, nor a wise woman her husband. On the 
other hand, a young Christian girl told me the 
other day that, since she had given this up for 
Christ, He had filled her with unspeakable joy. 

Novels. 

Beware of novel-reading. Many a noble tree 
has been eaten through by minute insects, and 
many a promising character has been inwardly 
rotted by certain kinds of Novels and Novelettes, 
especially those issued in cheap weekly issues. 
Some young friends of mine, when once bitten 
by this fever, have done nothing else but read 
trashy and sentimental stories. They will rob 
themselves of food and sleep to read them. And 
then a great change takes place. They are so 
absorbed with the joys and sorrows of imaginary 
people that they overlook those of their immedi- 
ate circle. Their appetite is so cloyed by sweets 
that they have no interest in the Bread of Life. 
They talk to you as those who are living in a 
dreamland of unreality. 

I entreat you to guard against the insidious 
growth of this appetite. If you find it increasing on 



\ 



\ 



MELP t-OR CHRfStlAK GIRLS 1 10 

you, break it ofiF. Lay it aside in the strength of 
Christ, as the runner lays aside " every weight.'* 
If you must read stories, read only those by the 
best story-tellers. Remember that there are many 
books of travel, and history, and biography equal 
in interest to any fiction that was ever spun in 
the brain of man or woman. 

Purity. 

It is of the utmost importance to keep abso- 
lutely pure. All around you are impure books, 
and men, and works; ready to soil you, as smuts 
do the clean linen put out to dry in some poor 
court yard. 

You must guard against their first approach. 
Many a young girl has dated her ruin from her first 
smile at an indecent allusion. The other day I 
heard of a married woman who said, as a young 
girl entered the work-room for the first time: 
" Let her sit by me; I will soon shock her." 
Shame on her! say I. Alas! how much of this is 
going on everywhere. But, so long as you are 
pure, you will find that Christ-like chastity is an 
armor from which all these poisoned darts will 
glance aside. Depend upon it, a woman may 
pass unhurt through the foulest atmosphere, if 
only her heart is pure, and she is living in touch 
with Christ. And many a time she will be able 



I20 HELP FOR CHRISTIAN GIRLS 

to frown down some indecent and unseemly jest, 
or to screen some young life. 

Marriage. 

Every woman looks forward, as Ruth did, to 
be at rest in the home of her husband. Alas ! 
how terrible, in many cases, has been the pro- 
cess of disenchantment. The shores of time are 
strewn with the wrecks of women's loves and 
hopes; and all because they have forgotten that 
true human love must be grounded on the love 
and choice and will of God. Human love can 
not satisfy, apart from the love of God. 

Make Jesus your Counsellor about your future 
lot. 

And now, as I say farewell, please accept my 
sincerest wishes for your happiness in this world 
and the next. Be ready for the Bridegroom's 
coming, and see that the lamp of your love is 
well supplied with the precious oil of the Holy 
Ghost, that so you may be ready to go in at once 
to the marriage feast. 

Your sincere friend and brother, 

F. B. Meyer. 



SEVEN RULES FOR DAILY LIVING. 



These brief and simple words are intended for 
many earnest Christians who are dissatisfied with 
their present life, and long to enter that more 
blessed . state of rest and peace of which they 
catch occasional glimpses; as white-plumaged 
sea-birds flash for a moment, far away over the 
breakers, and then are lost to sight. 

Now out of my own experience I would sug- 
gest these Seven Rules to my fellow-Christians: 

I. Make a Definite Consecration of Your- 
i SELVES TO God. 

^ Dr* Doddridge has left in his diary a very 

beautiful form of self -consecration. With most 

\ it would be sufficient to write out Miss HavergaPs 

|( hymn, and to sign their names at the foot. 

jl 

i Take my life and let it be 

' Consecrated, Lord, to Thee. 

Take my hands and let them move 
At the impulse of Thy love. 

Take my feet and let them be 
Swift and beautiful for Thee. 

xai 



122 SEVEN RULES FOR DAILY LIVING 

Take my voice and let me sing 
Always — only — for my King. 

Take my lips and let them be 
Filled with messages from Thee. 

Take my silver and my gold, 
Not a mite would I withhold. 

Take my moments and my days, 
Let them flow in endless praise. 

Take my intellect and use 

Every power as Thou shalt choose. 

Take my will and make it Thine, 
It shall be no longer mine. 

Take my heart, it is Thine own, 
It shall be Thy royal throne. 

Take my love, my God, I pour 
At Thy feet its treasure store. 

Take myself, and I will be 
Ever, only, all for Thee. 

But in any case it is well to write down some 
record of the act,, to keep for future reference. 

Of course when we have really given ourselves 
once, we can not give ourselves a second time. 
We may renew the consecration vows, we may 
review the deed of gift, we may insert any new 
clauses we like; and if we have gone astray, we 
may ask the Lord to forgive the foul wrong and 
robbery which we have done Him, and to restore 
our souls into the position from which we have 
fallen. Oh, how sweet the promise, " He re- 
storeth my soul! ** Dear Christian reader, seek 



) 



SEVEN RULES FOR DAILY LIVING 1 23 

some quiet spot, some still hour, and yield your- 
self to God. 

II. Tell God that You Are Willing to be 
Made Willing about All. 

A lady was once in great difficulties about cer- 
tain things which she felt eager to keep under her 
own control. Her friend, wishful to press her 
into the better life of consecration, placed before 
her a blank sheet of paper, and pressed her to 
write her name at the foot, and then to lay it be- 
fore God in prayer. She did so, and at once 
entered this blessed life. 

Are you willing to do this ? Are you prepared 
to sign your name to a blank sheet of paper and 
then hand it over to God, for Him to fill in as He 
please ? If not, ask Him to make you willing 
and able to do this and all things else. You 
never will be happy until you let the Lord Jesus 
keep the house of your nature, closely scrutiniz- 
ing every visitor and admitting only His friends. 
He must reign. He must have all or none. He 
must have the key of every closet, of every cup- 
board, and of every room. Do not try to make 
t them fit for Him. Simply give Him the key. He 

\ will cleanse and renovate and make beautiful- 

\ ■ 



124 SEVEN RULES FOR DAILY LIVING 

III. Reckon on Christ to do His Part Per- 
fectly. 

Directly you give, He takes. Directly you 
open the door, He enters. Directly you roll 
back the floodgates, He pours in a glorious tide 
of fulness; fulness of wealth, of power, of joy. 
The clay has only to be plastic to the hand of a 
Palissy. The marble has only to be pliant to the 
chisel of a Michael Angelo. The organ has only 
to be responsive to the slightest touch of a Han- 
del. The student has only to follow the least 
hint of a Faraday or a Whewell. And there 
will be no failure in results. Oh, to be equally 
susceptible to the molding influences of Christ ! 
We shall not fail in realizing the highest ideal of 
which we are capable, if only we will let Him do 
His work unhindered. 

IV. Confess Sin Instantly. 

If you allow acid to drop and remain on your 
steel fenders, it will corrode them; and if you al- 
low sin to remain on your hearts unconfessed, it 
will eat out all peace and rest. 

Do not wait for the evening to come, or until 
you can get alone, but there in the midst of the 
crowd, in the very rush of life, with the foot- 
prints of sin still fresh, lift up your heart to your 



* 



f 



i; 



\ 



SEVEN RULES FOR DAILY LIVING 1 25 

merciful and ever-present Saviour, and say," Lord 
Jesus, wash me now from that sin, in thy prec- 
ious blood, and I shall be whiter than snow." 
The blood of Jesus is ever at work, cleansing us 
from unconscious sin; but it is our part to apply 
for it to cleanse from conscious and known sins 
so soon as we are aware of their presence in our 
lives. 

V. Hand over to Christ every Temptation 

AND Care. 

When you feel temptation approaching you, 
as a bird by some quick instinct is aware that the 
hawk is hovering near, then instantly lift your 
heart to Christ for deliverance. He can not re- 
buff or fail you. " He will gather you under His 
feathers^ and under His wings shall you trust. *^ 
And when any petty annoyance or heavier worry 
threatens to mar your peace, in the flash of a 
moment, hand it over to Jesus, saying, " Lord, 
I am oppressed; undertake this for me.'* 

" Ah ! " you sigh, " I wish indeed I could live 
like this, but in the moment of need I forget to 
look. ■' Then do this: trust in Christ to keep you 
trusting. Look to Him so to abide in you as to 
keep you abiding. In the early morning entrust 
to Him the keeping of your soul, and then as 
hour succeeds to hour expect Him to keep that 
which you have committed unto Him, 



126 SEVEN RULES FOR DAILY LIVING 






VI. Keep In Touch with Christ. 

Avoid the spirit of fault-finding, criticism, un- 
charitableness, and anything inconsistent with \ 

His perfect love. Go where He is most likely to 
be found, either where two or three of His chil- 
dren are gathered, or where the lost sheep is 
straying. Ask Him to wake you morning by 
morning for communion and Bible-study. Make 
other time in the day, especially in the still hour 
of the evening twilight, between the work of the 
day and the avocations of the evening, when you 
shall get alone with Him, telling Him all things, 
and reviewing the past under the gentle light 
which streams from His eyes. 

VII. Expect the Holy Ghost to Work in. 

With, and For You. 

When a man is right with God, God will freely 
use him. There will rise up within him im- 
pulses, inspirations, strong strivings, strange re- 
solves. These must be tested by Scripture and 
prayer, and if evidently of God they must be 
obeyed. 

But there is this perennial source of comfort: 
God's commands are enablings. He will never 
give us a work to do without showing exactly 
bow and when to do it, and without giving us the 



SEVEN RULES FOR DAILY LIVING 1 27 

precise strength and wisdom we need. Do not 
dread to enter this life because you fear that God 
will ask you to do something you can not do. 
He will never do that. If He lays aught on your 
heart, He will do so irresistibly; and as you pray 
about it, the impression will continue to grow, so 
that presently, as you look up to know what He 
wills you to say or do, the way will suddenly 
open, and you will probably have said the word, 
or done the deed, almost unconsciously. 

There may be failures in this Hfe, but they will 
! arise on the human side, not the Divine. Well 

will it be if we can instantly discover the cause 
of failure, and confess it, and seek restoration to 
the old peace and joy. After all, the sheep does 
not keep the shepherd. The shepherd keeps the 
sheep, and feeds it, and leads it, and make it to 
lie down. What then may we not expect from 
our Good Shepherd ? and who can paint the ver- 
dure of the green pastures, or the crystal beauty 
of those unfailing springs, to which He will lead 
the docile and trustful spirit ? 

Be that spirit thine, dear reader, and mine. 



V 

,1 






