LIGHT   FEOM   OLD   TIMES; 

OB, 

PROTESTANT  FACTS  AND  MEN. 


JOHN  WTTCUFFE 


(Frontispiece). 


LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES; 


OR, 


Jfatis  snfr 


WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  FOR  OUR    OWN  DA  YS. 


BY  THE  LATE  BISHOP 

JOHN    CHARLES    RYLE,    D.D., 

AUTHOR  OF 
"  EXPOSITORY  THOUGHTS  ON  THE  GOSPELS,"  "  KNOTS  UNTIED,"  ETC.,  ETC. 


"  If  the  trumpet  give  an  uncertain  sound,  who  shall  prepare  himself  ta 
the  battle?"— 1    Cor.  xiv.  8. 


LONDON : 

CHAS.     J.     THYNNE, 
Wpcliffe  Rouse, 

6,  GREAT    QUEEN  STREET,  LINCOLN'S   INN,  W.C. 
1903. 


BX 

5197- 


,902- 


2o  2. 


/».?/  Edition,  i8go 
Second  Edition,  June,  1898 
Third  (Coronation)  Edition,  June, 
Fourth  Edition,  December,  1902 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE  volume  now  in  the  reader's  hands  requires  a  few  words 
of  prefatory  explanation.  It  is  partly  historical,  and  partly 
biographical.  It  is  about  facts  and  men. 

Under  the  historical  head  the  reader  will  find  some 
account  of  the  three  most  remarkable  events  in  the  history 
of  the  Reformed  Church  of  England.  The  first*  of  these 
events  is  the  ferocious  attempt  which  was  made  by 
Queen  Mary,  of  unhappy  memory,  to  destroy  the  work  of 
religious  Reformation  which  was  begun  in  the  reign  of 
Edward  the  Sixth. — The  second  event  is  the  blind  and 
abortive  effort  of  Archbishop  Laud  to  unprotestantize  the 
Church  of  England,  which  resulted  in  his  own  execution, 
and  well-nigh  ruined  the  Church  and  the  monarchy  for 
ever. — The  third  event  is  the  daring  attack  on  English 
Protestantism,  which  was  made  by  James  the  Second, 
when  he  prosecuted  the  Seven  Bishops,  and,  under  the 
specious  name  of  toleration,  endeavoured  to  re-establish 
the  power  of  the  Bishop  of  Rome  in  the  land.  These 
three  events  ought  to  be  familiar  to  every  Englishman. 
In  the  second,  tenth,  and  last  papers  in  this  volume  I 


Vi  INTRODUCTION. 

have  tried  to  supply  some  condensed  information  about 
them.  We  live  in  an  age  when  they  cannot  be  known 
too  well,  and  ought  to  be  continually  kept  before  the 
public  eye. 

Under  the  biographical  head  the  reader  will  find  in 
this  volume  some  account  of  the  lives  and  opinions  of 
eleven  remarkable  men.  At  the  head  of  the  eleven  I  have 
placed  John  Wycliffe,  the  morning-star  of  the  Reforma 
tion.  He  lived  before  the  invention  of  printing,  and 
consequently  is  far  less  known  than  he  ought  to  be.  But 
I  believe  that  English  Christianity  owes  him  a  great  debt 
which  has  never  been  fully  paid.  Among  the  eleven 
I  have  placed  Archbishop  Laud.  He  is  a  man  who  did 
such  indelible  harm  to  the  Church  of  England,  and  yet 
is  so  generally  overvalued  and  misunderstood,  that  I  have 
felt  it  a  plain  duty  to  place  him  before  my  readers  in  his 
true  colours.  I  believe  the  wounds  he  inflicted  on  our 
Church  will  never  be  healed.  Of  the  remaining  nine,  six 
were  Reformers,  who  were  burned  alive  in  Queen  Mary's 
days,  because  they  would  not  abjure  their  Protestant 
principles,  and  believe  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass.  Three 
of  the  nine  were  Puritan  divines,  who  lived  in  the  17th 
century,  and  made  a  deep  mark  in  their  day  and  genera 
tion.  One  common  remark  applies  both  to  Reformers 
and  Puritans.  They  are  far  less  known  and  understood 
in  these  latter  times  than  they  ought  to  be. 

Of  course  I  have  chosen  the  six  Reformers  as  subject! 
of  biographies,  deliberately,  purposely,  and  with  special 
reasons.  What  those  reasons  are  I  will  proceed  to 
explain. 

(1)  I  hold,  then,  first  of  all,  that  the  lives,  deaths, 


INTRODUCTION.  Vii 

and  opinions  of  the  leading  English  Keformers  demand 
special  investigation  in  the  present  day.  The  Church  of 
England,  as  it  now  is,  was  in  great  measure  the  work  of 
their  hands..  To  them,  with  a  few  trifling  exceptions,  we 
owe  our  present  Articles,  Liturgy,  and  Homilies.  That 
great  ecclesiastical  machinery,  whose  centre  is  at  Lambeth 
Palace  and  whose  influence  is  more  or  less  felt  through 
out  the  world  wherever  the  British  flag  waves,  was 
purified,  remoulded,  and  recast  in  its  present  form  by 
their  instrumentality.  Can  any  one  doubt  that  it  is  of 
the  utmost  importance  to  ascertain  what  they  thought 
and  did,  and  in  defence  of  what  opinions  they  lived  and 
died  ? — Surely  common  sense  points  out  that  if  we  want 
to  know  who  is  a  true  "  Churchman,"  we  should  find  out 
what  manner  of  men  the  first  Churchmen  were !  The 
natural  way  to  ascertain  what  views  of  religion  are 
"  Church  views,"  is  to  inquire  what  kind  of  views  were 
held  by  our  Church  Reformers  in  the  sixteenth  century 
In  matters  of  doctrine  are  we  of  one  mind  with 
Cranmer,  Ridley,  Hooper,  and  Latimer?  If  not,  our 
"Churchmanship"  is  of  a  somewhat  peculiar  and  equivocal 
kind. 

Holding  these  opinions,  I  have  endeavoured  to  produce 
a  correct  sketch  of  six  of  the  leading  champions  of 
the  English  Reformation.  Those  whom  I  have  chosen, 
undoubtedly,  with  the  exception  of  Ridley,  were  not 
equal  to  Cranmer  in  point  of  learning.  In  popular  talent, 
however,  and  general  influence  with  their  countrymen, 
they  were  probably  second  to  none.  I  venture  the  con 
jecture  that  the  middle  classes  and  lower  orders  of 
Englishmen  in  the  sixteenth  century  were  more  familiar 


rill  INTRODUCTION. 

with  the  names  of  two  of  them,  viz.,  Bishop  Hooper  and 
Bishop  Latimer,  than  of  any  of  the  Eeformers.  None,  I 
suspect,  made  such  a  deep  impression  on  the  minds  of 
their  generation,  none  were  so  often  talked  of  round 
English  firesides,  as  the  two  whose  lives  are  fully  given  in 
this  volume.  None,  I  am  firmly  persuaded,  so  thoroughly 
deserve  to  be  had  in  honour.  They  were  men  of  whom 
the  Church  of  England  may  well  be  proud.  She  may 
reckon  among  her  sons  some  perhaps  who  were  their 
equals  ;  but  none,  I  am  sure,  who  were  their  superiors. 
For  abounding  usefulness  in  life  and  noble  courage  in 
death,  Hooper  and  Latimer  have  never  been  surpassed. 

Certain  modern  Churchmen,  I  am  well  aware,  have 
tried  hard  to  depreciate  the  value  of  the  English 
Reformation,  and  to  vilify  the  character  of  the  English 
Reformers.  One  writer  in  particular,  who  occupied  no 
mean  position  among  the  champions  of  the  extreme 
Ritualistic  or  Catholic  School,  did  not  scruple  to  put  in 
print  the  following  extraordinary  sentences  : — 

"Robespierre,  Dan  ton,  Marat,  St.  Just,  Couthon,  and 
the  like,  merit  quite  as  much  admiration  and  respect  as 
Cranmer,  Ridley,  Latimer,  Hooper,  and  the  others,  who 
happened  to  have  the  ill  luck  to  be  worsted  in  a  struggle 
wherein  they  meant  to  serve  their  adversaries  as  they 
were  served  themselves." — 

"  It  has  been  brought  as  a  serious  charge  against  men 
of  my  school,  that  we  should  have  been  safe  under  Queen 
Mary.  But  we  should  have  been  burnt  for  refusing  a  new 
and  immoral  creed,  if  that  young  tiger-cub  Edward  VI. 
had  lived,  and  Cranmer  had  not  been  arrested  in  his 
kicked  career  by  Divine  vengeance.  Of  the  depth  of 


INTRODUCTION.  ix 

infamy  into  which  this  wretched  man  descended,  as  thft 
unscrupulous  tool  of  the  tyrant  Henry  and  his  minion, 
Thomas  Cromwell,  I  have  no  leisure  to  speak  now." — 

"If  history  were  honestly  written,  Latimer  would  change 
places  with  Bonnar,  and  appear  in  true  colours  as  the 
coarse,  profane,  unscrupulous,  persecuting  bully  which  the 
other  prelate  is  usually  called,  and  with  the  special  brand 
of  cowardice  besides,  of  which  no  man  can  accuse 
Bonnar." — 

"  Latimer  was  a  coward." — 

"  Latimer  was  perjured  and  unscrupulous." — 

"Latimer's  coarseness  and  profanity  are  not  left  to 
conjecture,  nor  to  the  bias  of  partisans.  He  has  given 
ample  proof  of  them  under  his  own  hand  in  his  still 
extant  sermons." — 

(See  "  Innovations : "  a  Lecture  by  Dr.  Littledale,  priest 
of  the  Church  of  England.  Delivered  at  Liverpool,  April 
23,  1868.  Pages  15,  16,  17,  44,  45.) 

Violent  language  like  this  injures  nobody  but  the  man 
who  uses  it.  It  utterly  defeats  its  own  object.  It  proves 
far  too  much,  if  it  proves  anything  at  all.  How  any 
set  of  men  so  bad  as  the  Eeformers  are  painted  by  the 
writer  I  have  just  quoted,  could  have  obtained  the  influence 
they  undoubtedly  obtained,  and  swayed  public  opinion  as 
they  undoubtedly  swayed  it,  is  "  a  little  difficulty  "  which 
he  did  not  think  fit  to  explain.  If  our  ancestors  allowed 
the  Eeformation  to  be  carried  on  by  men  of  such  wretched 
characters  as  he  attributes  to  the  English  Eeformers, 
the  Englishmen  of  that  day  must  have  been  idiots 
and  fools.  It  is  clear  as  daylight  to  my  mind,  even  if 
there  were  no  historical  evidence  on  the  subject,  that 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

the  generation  which  really  knew  Cranmer,  Ridley, 
Latimer,  and  Hooper,  thought  far  more  highly  of  them 
than  Dr.  Littledale  did.  If  they  had  been  the  bad, 
worthless  men  that  he  represents  them,  they  would  never 
have  left  such  a  deep  mark  on  the  religious  character  of 
England  as  they  certainly  did. 

But,  after  all,  what  historical  proof  did  Dr.  Littledale 
give  that  his  low  estimate  of  the  English  Reformers  is 
correct  ?  I  answer  unhesitatingly,  "  None  that  will  satisfy 
any  impartial  judge  of  evidence."  The  testimony  of  a 
contemporary  historian,  the  well-known  John  Fox,  the 
Martyrologist,  stands  in  the  way;  and  how  did  he  get  over 
it  ?  He  simply  abused  him,  or  in  plain  English  called  him 
a  liar.  He  said  that  he  was  "a  mendacious  partisan."  He 
styled  the  "  Acts  and  Monuments  of  Fox  "  "  a  magazine 
of  lying  bigotry :  a  book  which  no  educated  man  now 
living,  possessed  of  any  self-respect  or  honesty,  does 
otherwise  than  repudiate  with  contempt  and  aversion." 
(See  Lecture  on  "  Innovations,"  already  quoted.) 

Attacks  on  Fox  such  as  these  are  very  ancient  things. 
From  the  day  that  the  good  old  "  Book  of  Martyrs  "  first 
appeared,  it  has  been  assailed  and  abused  more  violently 
by  the  advocates  of  Popery  than  any  uninspired  book  that 
ever  was  printed.  Dr.  Littledale  was  only  walking  in 
the  steps  of  Harpsfield,  Parsons,  Laud,  Heylin,  Dr.  John 
Milner  (the  Roman  Catholic),  and  others.  The  objections 
of  these  writers  will  be  found  fully  examined  in  the  pre 
face  to  Canon  Townsend's  edition  of  Fox.  That  preface 
is  a  document  which  is  far  too  little  known.  It  deserves 
an  attentive  perusal. 

My  own  opinion  of  Fox's  great  work  differs  widely  from 


INTRODUCTION.  xi 

that  of  Dr.  Littledale.  That  he  never  erred  I  do  not 
pretend  to  say.  He  was  no  more  infallible  than  the  Pope. 
But  that  he  is  generally  accurate  in  his  statement  of  facts, 
and  generally  trustworthy  in  his  estimate  of  character,  I 
am  thoroughly  persuaded.  In  this  opinion  the  following 
extracts,  from  the  prospectus  or  preface  of  Canon 
Townsend's  edition  of  Fox's  "Acts  and  Monuments," 
will  prove  that  I  do  not  stand  alone : — 

"  The  three  Archbishops  of  Canterbury  of  Fox's  own 
day  bore  the  strongest  testimony  to  his  integrity 
Archbishop  Parker,  in  the  Canons  of  1571,  ordered  all 
bishops  and  other  dignitaries  to  have  in  their  hall  or 
public  dining  room  the  Bible  and  Fox's  great  work. 
Archbishop  Grindall  was  Fox's  main  assistant  in  the 
compilation ;  and  Archbishop  Whitgif t  speaks  of  Fox  as 
'that  worthy  man  who  hath  deserved  so  well  of  the 
Church  of  England.' 

"  Leaving  his  own  times,  we  come  to  Fuller,  the  Church 
historian,  who  says  of  Fox :  '  His  industry  hath  starved 
the  endeavours  of  such  as  shall  succeed  him,  leaving 
nothing  for  their  pains  to  feed  upon.  For  what  can  the 
man  do  that  cometh  after  the  king.' — Strype  styles  him 
'  A  most  painstaking  searcher  into  records  and  archives  ; 
and  one  who,  as  he  hath  been  found  most  diligent,  so 
most  strictly  true  and  faithful.' — And  Bishop  Burnet  adds, 
'Having  compared  Fox's  book  with  the  records,  I  have 
never  been  able  to  discover  any  errors  or  prevarications 
in  them,  but  the  utmost  fidelity  and  exactness.' 

"Coming  down  to  our  own  times,  we  find  every  compe 
tent  judge  agreeing,  both  as  to  the  great  value  of  Fox's 
collection,  and  as  to  its  entire  faithfulness.  Foremost 


Xll  INTRODUCTION. 

among  these  is  the  late  Prebendary  Soames,  himself  an 
historian  of  no  mean  rank,  who  says, '  The  first  portion  of 
this  important  work,  which  is  principally  an  historical 
exposure  of  the  Papacy,  was  originally  printed  in  Latin 
on  the  Continent,  whither  the  author  had  fled  from  the 
Marian  prosecution.  Having  arrived  at  home  soon  after 
Elizabeth's  accession,  Fox  was  encouraged  by  various 
members  of  the  hierarchy  to  crown  his  former  labours,  by 
adding  to  them  copious  accounts  of  those  who  had 
perished  as  religious  delinquents  under  the  late  Queen. 
Every  facility  was  afforded  to  him  for  the  completion  of 
this  task  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner ;  and  he  shows 
himself  fully  worthy  of  the  confidence  reposed  in  him. 
Invariable  accuracy  is  not  to  be  expected  in  any  historical 
work  of  such  extent ;  but  it  may  be  truly  said  of  England's 
venerable  Martyrologist,  that  his  relations  are  more  than 
ordinarily  worthy  of  reliance.  His  principal  object  being, 
indeed,  to  leave  behind  him  a  mass  of  authentic  informa 
tion  relating  to  those  miserable  times  which  it  had  been 
his  lot  to  witness,  he  printed  a  vast  mass  of  original 
letters,  records  of  judicial  processes,  and  other  documentary 
evidence.  The  result  of  this  judicious  policy  was  a  work 
which  has  highly  gratified  the  friends  of  Protestantism, 
and  successfully  defied  its  enemies.  Numerous  attacks 
have  been  levelled  at  the  honest  chronicles  of  Home's 
intolerance,  but  they  have  ever  fallen  harmless  from  the 
assailant's  hand.' 

"  The  late  Dr.  Wordsworth  (Master  of  Trinity  College, 
Cambridge)  says,  '  I  am  not  ignorant  of  what  has  been 
said  by  Milner,  and  by  his  predecessors,  Harpsfield, 
Parsons,  and  others.  But  neither  his  writings  nor  theirs 


INTRODUCTION.  xiii 

have  proved,  and  it  never  will  be  proved,  that  John  Fox 
is  not  one  of  the  most  faithful  and  authentic  of  all 
historians.  We  know  too  much  of  the  strength  of  Fox's 
book,  and  of  the  weakness  of  those  of  his  adversaries,  to 
be  further  moved  by  Dr.  John  Milner's  censures  than  to 
charge  them  with  falsehood.  All  the  many  researches 
and  discoveries  of  later  times,  in  regard  to  historical 
documents,  have  only  contributed  to  place  the  general 
fidelity  and  truth  of  Fox's  narrative  on  a  rock  which 
cannot  be  shaken.' 

"Dr.  Jenkyns  (the  Editor  of  Archbishop  Cranmer's 
Remains)  says,  '  I  had  occasion  to  compare  several  of  the 
papers  printed  by  Fox  with  the  original  documents,  and 
I  had  good  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  Martyrologist's 
fidelity  and  accuracy.' 

"  Mr.  Froude,  who  has  carefully  gone  over  the  whole 
Tudor  period,  in  his  history  of  the  times,  adds,  '  I  trust 
Fox  when  he  produces  documentary  evidence,  because 
I  have  invariably  found  his  documents  accurate.' 

"  Dr.  Southey  wrote,  '  I  have  always  intended  to  write 
the  life  of  John  Fox  for  the  Quarterly  Review,  wherein 
I  might  render  due  honour  to  a  man  for  whom  I  have  a 
great  veneration.' 

"  Archbishop  Howley  wrote,  '  I  am  glad  you  intend  to 
republish  the  great  work  of  the  Martyrology,  and  willingly 
consent  to  its  being  dedicated  to  myself.' " 

After  all,  the  "  animus  "  of  most  modern  attacks  on  the 
English  Eeformers  is  too  transparently  clear  to  be 
mistaken.  The  writers  who  make  them  appear  to  dislike 
Protestantism  most  cordially,  and  to  want  the  Church  of 
England  to  be  Romanized  once  more.  The  writings  and 


xiv  INTRODUCTION. 

opinions  of  the  Reformers  stand  sadly  in  their  way!  How 
can  they  possibly  get  over  this  barrier  ?  They  try  to  damage 
their  character,  and  so  to  impair  the  value  of  their 
testimony.  I  predict  that  they  will  not  succeed.  I  believe 
that,  like  the  viper  biting  the  file,  they  are  only  labouring 
in  vain  and  hurting  themselves.  I  am  not  afraid  of  the 
result  of  any  amount  of  examination  that  can  be  applied 
to  such  men  as  Hooper  and  Latimer.  Let  men  turn  on 
them  all  the  light  they  please,  so  long  as  it  is  fairly  and 
honestly  turned  on.  They  will  stand  any  properly 
conducted  investigation.  They  will  come  out  unscathed 
from  the  ordeal  of  any  just  inquiry.  In  a  word,  their 
names  will  live  and  be  honoured  when  their  assailants 
are  clean  forgotten. 

(2)  With  regard  to  the  Puritans,  of  whom  I  have 
brought  forward  three  specimens  in  this  volume,  I  believe 
that  they  deserve  almost  as  much  attention  in  the  present 
day  as  the  Eeformers.  I  want  to  promote  acquaintance 
with  them  in  the  minds  of  all  students  of  English  Church 
History.  Never,  I  believe,  were  men  so  little  understood 
and  so  absurdly  maligned  as  the  Puritans.  On  no  subject 
perhaps  are  English  Churchmen  so  much  in  the  dark,  and 
require  such  thorough  enlightening.  If  the  biographies 
of  Ward,  Baxter,  and  Gurnall  only  help  to  make  my 
readers  understand  what  "  a  Puritan  "  really  was,  I  shall 
feel  I  have  done  the  cause  of  truth  some  service. 

The  common  impression  of  most  English  Churchmen 
about  the  Puritans  is,  that  they  were  ignorant,  fanatical 
dissenters,  who  troubled  England  in  the  seventeenth 
century, — that  they  hated  the  Monarchical  form  of 
government,  and  cut  off  Charles  the  First's  head, — that 


INTRODUCTION.  TV 

they  hated  the  Church  of  England,  and  caused  its 
destruction, — and  that  they  were  unlearned  enthusiasts 
who  despised  knowledge  and  study,  and  regarded  all  forms 
of  worship  as  Popery.  There  are  some  ecclesiastical  orators 
of  high  rank  and  brilliant  reputation,  who  are  never 
weary  of  flinging  the  epithet  "Puritanical"  at  Evangelical 
Churchmen,  as  the  hardest  word  of  scorn  that  they  can 
employ.  Let  no  Churchman's  heart  fail  when  he  hears 
himself  stigmatised  as  "  a  Puritan."  The  man  who  tells 
the  world  that  there  is  any  disgrace  in  being  "  a  Puritan  " 
is  only  exposing  his  own  ignorance  of  plain  facts,  or 
shamefully  presuming  on  that  wide-spread  ignorance  of 
English  Church  history  which  marks  the  nineteenth 
century.  The  Puritans  were  not  faultless,  I  freely  admit. 
They  said,  did,  and  wrote  many  things  which  cannot  be 
commended.  Some  of  them,  no  doubt,  were  violent, 
fierce,  narrow-minded  sectarians.  Yet,  even  then,  great 
allowance  ought  to  be  made  for  the  trying  circumstances 
in  which  they  are  placed,  and  the  incessant  irritating 
persecution  to  which  they  were  exposed.  It  is  written, 
that  "oppression  maketh  a  wise  man  mad  "  (Eccles.  vii.  7). 
With  all  their  faults,  the  leaders  of  the  party  were  great 
and  good  men.  With  all  their  defects,  the  Puritans,  as  a 
body,  were  not  the  men  that  certain  writers  and  orators 
in  the  present  day  are  fond  of  representing  them  to  have 
been. 

(a)  The  Puritans  were  not  enemies  to  the  monarchy, 
It  is  simply  false  to  say  that  they  were.  The  great 
majority  of  them  protested  strongly  against  the  execution 
of  Charles  I.,  and  were  active  agents  in  bringing  back 
Charles  II.  to  England,  and  placing  the  crown  on  hia 


TVi  INTRODUCTION. 

head  after  Oliver  Cromwell's  death.  The  base  ingrati 
tude  with  which  they  were  afterwards  treated  in  1662, 
by  the  very  monarch  whom  they  helped  to  restore,  is  one 
of  the  most  shameful  pages  in  the  history  of  the  Stuarts. 

(&)  The  Puritans  were  not  enemies  to  the  Church  of 
England.  They  would  gladly  have  seen  her  government 
and  ceremonial  improved,  and  more  liberty  allowed  to 
her  ministers  in  the  conduct  of  public  worship.  And 
they  were  quite  right !  But  the  bulk  of  them  were 
originally  ordained  by  Bishops,  and  had  no  special  objec 
tion  either  to  Episcopacy  or  a  Liturgy.  Baxter,  one  of 
their  leaders,  expressly  testifies,  that  a  very  few  conces 
sions  in  1662  would  have  retained  in  the  Church  of 
England  sixteen  hundred  out  of  the  two  thousand  who 
were  driven  out  by  the  Act  of  Uniformity  on  St. 
Bartholomew's  Day ! 

(c)  The  Puritans  were  not  unlearned  and  ignorant  men. 
The  great  majority  of  them  were  Oxford  and  Cambridge 
graduates,  many  of  them  Fellows  of  Colleges,  some  of 
them  Heads  and  Principals  of  the  best  Houses  in  the 
two  Universities.  In  knowledge  of  Hebrew,  Greek,  and 
Latin, — in  power  as  preachers,  expositors,  writers,  and 
critics, — the  Puritans  in  their  day  were  second  to  none. 
Their  works  still  speak  for  them  on  the  shelves  of  every 
well-furnished  theological  library.  Those  who  hold  them 
up  to  scorn  in  the  present  day,  as  shallow,  illiterate  men, 
are  only  exhibiting  their  own  lamentable  shallowness, 
their  own  ignorance  of  historical  facts,  and  the  extremely 
superficial  character  of  their  own  reading. 

The  Puritans,  as  a  body,  have  done  more  to  elevate 
the  national  character  than  any  class  of  Englishmen  that 


INTBODUCTION.  xvii 

ever  lived.  Mighty  at  the  council  board,  and  no  less 
mighty  in  the  battle-field, — feared  abroad  throughout 
Europe,  and  invincible  at  home  while  united, — great 
with  their  pens,  and  great  with  their  swords, — they  were 
a  generation  of  men  who  have  never  received  from  their 
countrymen  the  honour  that  they  deserve.  The  body  of 
which  Milton,  Selden,  Blake,  Cromwell,  Owen,  Manton, 
Baxter,  and  Charnock  were  members,  is  a  body  of  which 
no  well-informed  Englishman  should  ever  speak  with 
disrespect.  Lord  Macaulay,  no  mean  authority  in  matters 
of  history,  might  well  say,  in  his  essay  on  Milton,  "  We 
do  not  hesitate  to  pronounce  the  Puritans  a  brave,  a 
wise,  an  honest,  and  an  useful  body."  Unhappily,  when 
they  passed  away,  they  were  followed  by  a  generation  of 
profligates,  triflers,  and  sceptics,  and  their  reputations  have 
suffered  accordingly,  in  passing  through  prejudiced  hands. 
But,  judged  with  "righteous  judgment,"  they  will  be 
found  men  "of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy."  The  more 
they  are  really  known,  the  more  they  will  be  esteemed. 

For  myself,  I  can  only  say,  that  the  very  reason  why 
many  in  this  day  dislike  the  Puritans  is  the  very  reason 
why  I  love  them,  and  delight  to  do  honour  to  their 
names.  They  deserve  honour,  in  my  opinion,  on  account 
of  their  bold  and  out-spoken  Protestantism.  They  deserve 
honour  on  account  of  their  clear,  sharply-cut,  distinct 
Evangelicalism.  I  want  to  see  their  writings  more  widely 
read,  and  their  conduct  more  fairly  judged  and  duly 
appreciated  by  English  Churchmen.  If  a  perusal  of  the 
three  biographies  I  have  compiled  helps  to  make  them 
better  known  and  better  understood,  I  shall  feel  that  this 

Volume  has  not  been  issued  in  vain. 

I 


XV111  INTRODUCTION. 

For  the  length  of  the  attempt  I  have  made  in  this 
introduction  to  defend  the  Keformers  and  Puritans,  I  have 
no  apology  to  make.  I  have  defended  them  because  they 
have  numerous  enemies  and  few  friends  in  this  day,  and 
many  Englishmen  seem  to  know  nothing  about  them. 
In  fact,  the  tide  of  unreasoning  prejudice  runs  strongly 
against  them,  and  for  many  years  it  has  been  the  fashion 
to  vilify  them  in  the  pulpit,  on  the  platform,  and  in  the 
press.  As  long  as  I  live,  I  hope  I  shall  never  be 
ashamed  to  stand  up  for  them,  and  to  vindicate  theii 
claim  to  respect.  They  were  only  human,  and  of  course 
they  had  their  faults  and  infirmities.  But  the  men  of 
this  age,  who  are  fond  of  abusing  them,  are  often  grossly 
ignorant  of  the  writings  of  those  whom  they  abuse,  and 
"  know  not  what  they  say  nor  whereof  they  affirm." 

The  English  Reformers,  in  particular,  appear  to  me  to 
deserve  far  better  treatment  than  they  receive  in  these 
latter  days.  I  have  already  said  that  people  seem  to 
forget  that  to  these  very  Eeformers  of  Edward  the  Sixth's 
and  Elizabeth's  reigns  we  owe  the  Articles  and  Prayer- 
book,  which  are  the  glory  of  the  Church  of  England,  and 
which  most  Churchmen  delight  to  honour.  But,  un 
happily,  this  is  not  all  People  forget  that  these  same 
Reformers  are  the  genuine  prototypes  and  predecessors  of 
a  "  school  of  thought "  which,  however  lightly  esteemed 
by  some,  is  certainly  not  the  least  useful  and  influential 
within  the  pale  of  the  Establishment, — I  mean  the  Evan' 
gelical  School.  This,  however,  is  a  point  which  I  shall 
take  occasion  to  handle  at  some  length. 

I  begin  by  saying  that  of  all  the  schools,  sections,  or 
parties  into  which  the  Church  of  England  is  unhappily 


| 


INTRODUCTION.  XIX 

divided,  there  is  none  which  is  so  thoroughly  misunder 
stood,  and  so  frequently  misrepresented,  as  that  which  is 
commonly  called  "  Evangelical." 

There  is  no  school  which,  from  the  days  of  Archbishop 
Laud  to  the  present  time,  has  had  to  endure  such  hard 
usage,  such  unfair  treatment,  and  such  petty  persecution, 
as  the  Evangelical  school.  That  its  distinctive  opinions 
have  long  been  regarded  with  scorn  and  contempt  by 
many  English  people,  is  such  a  notorious  fact,  that  I  need 
hardly  stop  to  prove  it.  But  I  will  mention  a  few  facts. 

It  is  matter  of  history  that  in  the  year  1662,  nearly 
2000  clergymen  were  driven  out  of  the  Church  of 
England  by  the  unhappy  Act  of  Uniformity.  Many  of 
them  were  the  ablest  preachers,  and  the  most  learned, 
holy  ministers  of  the  time.  Such  were  Owen,  Manton, 
Baxter,  Bates,  Calamy,  Philip  Henry,  Poole,  Brooks,  and 
Watson.  Not  -a  few  of  them  might  have  been  kept 
within  our  pale  by  some  reasonable  concessions.  But 
the  ruling  party  showed  no  desire  to  keep  them :  they 
were  all  of  them  Evangelical  men !  We  reap  the  conse 
quence  of  their  expulsion  at  this  day.  It  laid  the  foun 
dation  of  English  Nonconformity. 

It  is  certain  that,  in  the  middle  of  last  century,  the 
maintenance  of  Evangelical  opinions  was  the  true  cause 
why  Daniel  Eowlands,  the  great  Welsh  preacher,  George 
Whitefield,  John  and  Charles  Wesley,  and  many  others, 
were  practically  driven  out  of  the  Church  of  England. 
Their  lives  were  blameless.  They  were  faithful  to  the 
Liturgy  and  Prayer-Book.  But  they  were  Evangelical ; 
and  therefore  the  Church  shut  her  doors  on  them,  and 
obliged  them  to  work  outside  1  The  result  is  to  be  seen 


JtX  INTBODUOTION. 

ia  the  hundreds  of  Methodist  chapels  all  over  the  land, 
and  in  the  undeniable  strength  of  Nonconformity  in 
Wales. 

It  is  equally  certain  that,  during  the  same  century, 
Evangelical  clergymen  like  Romaine,  Venn,  Grimshaw, 
and  Berridge,  retained  their  position  in  our  communion 
with  much  difficulty,  were  regarded  with  coldness  and 
distrust  by  ecclesiastical  rulers,  and  were  treated  as  little 
better  than  "  tolerated  heretics."  Romaine  was  dismissed 
from  the  morning  preachership  at  St.  George's,  Hanover 
Square,  because  his  sermons  filled  and  overcrowded  the 
Church !  Berridge  would  have  been  expelled  from 
Everton  by  the  Bishop  of  Ely,  if  the  elder  Pitt  had  not 
interfered  in  his  behalf.  Grimshaw,  of  Haworth,  was  on 
the  brink  of  secession  in  consequence  of  the  harsh  treat 
ment  of  the  Archbishop  of  York,  and  narrowly  escaped. 

Even  at  this  day  Evangelical  Churchmen  are  continu 
ally  told  "  that  they  are  unlearned  and  ignorant  men, — 
that  they  do  not  interpret  the  formularies  honestly  and 
naturally, — that  they  are  more  like  Dissenters  than 
Churchmen, — that  they  are  narrow  Calvinists, — that  they 
despise  the  Sacraments,  and  are  Zwinglians, — that  they 
do  not  understand  catholic  views  and  corporate  privileges, 
— that  they  are  not,  in  a  word,  true  Churchmen,  and  are 
out  of  their  proper  place ! "  All  this,  and  much  more 
similar  language,  Evangelical  Churchmen  have  long  had 
to  bear.  But,  after  all,  there  remains  one  great  fact 
which  can  never  be  denied.  If  agreement  with  the 
English  Reformers  is  to  be  the  measure  of  true  Church- 
manship,  there  are  no  truer  Churchmen  than  those  who 
are  called  Evangelical !  Their  title  is  one  which  cannot 


INTRODUCTION.  Xxi 

be  overthrown.  If  they  are  wrong,  the  Eeformers  were 
wrong.  You  cannot  condemn  and  unchurch  the  "Evan 
gelicals"  without  condemning  and  unchurching  the 
Eeformers  at  the  same  time. 

In  saying  these  things,  I  ask  my  readers  not  to  mis 
understand  me.  I  willingly  admit  that  there  are  other 
honest  "  schools  of  thought "  within  our  pale  besides  the 
Evangelical,  and  I  disclaim  all  sympathy  with  those  who 
would  exclude  them.  From  the  time  of  Charles  I.  there 
have  always  been  High,  and  Broad,  as  well  as  Low 
Churchmen,  and  probably  there  always  will  be  till  the 
Lord  conies.  The  inherent  imperfectioa  of  language,  and 
the  consequent  impossibility  of  making  all  men  put  the 
same  meaning  on  words,  are  the  explanation  of  this  con 
dition  of  things.  There  have  been  at  one  and  the  same 
time  within  our  camp,  for  250  years  and  more,  divines 
like  Davenant  and  Andrews  and  Whichcote  in  the  seven 
teenth  century,  and  Bishops  like  Sumner  and  Whately 
and  Blomfield  in  our  own  day.  I  have  not  the  slightest 
desire  to  narrow  our  limits,  to  unchurch  and  ostracise  any 
of  the  men  I  have  named,  or  to  confine  honest  and  loyal 
Churchmanship  to  any  one  of  the  three  schools  I  have  just 
mentioned.  I  do  not  pretend  to  claim  any  exclusive 
possession  of  learning,  zeal,  or  devoutness  for  any  of  them. 
But  when  people  tell  me  that  "  Evangelicals  "  are  "  not 
true  Churchmen,"  I  reply  unhesitatingly  that  the  charge 
is  not  true,  and  shows  gross  and  culpable  ignorance,  to 
say  the  least,  in  those  who  make  it. 

I  maintain  firmly  that  the  distinctive  views  of  those 
who  are  called  Evangelical  Churchmen  are  neither  more 
nor  less  than  the  views  of  the  Eeformers !  He  who 


xxil  INTRODUCTION. 

would  drive  out  of  the  Church  of  England  all  Evangelicals, 
would  drive  out  Bidley,  Latimer,  Hooper,  Bradford,  Jewell, 
and  all  their  companions.  The  leading  opinions  of  the 
two  bodies,  after  an  interval  of  three  centuries,  are  one 
and  the  same.  Whether  those  opinions  are  sound  or 
unsound,  scriptural  or  unscriptural,  is  not  the  point 
on  which  I  insist  at  present.  All  I  assert  is,  that  the 
doctrinal  views  of  the  two  parties  are  identical.  He  that 
says  Evangelical  Churchmen  are  not  sound  Churchmen, 
is  in  the  same  breath  condemning  the  very  men  who 
reformed  the  Church  of  England,  and  placed  it  on  its 
present  basis !  There  is  no  escape  from  this  conclusion. 
The  views  of  the  two  parties  are  in  complete  harmony, 
and  they  stand  or  fall  together.  A  few  instances  will 
show  what  I  mean. 

(1)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  hold  and  teach  that 
the  Bible  is  the  only  rule  of  faith  and  practice  ?     Do 
they  maintain  that  it  is  able  alone  to  make  a  man  wise 
unto  salvation,  and  that  even  the  Creeds  are  only  to  be 
received  and  believed  because  they  may  be  proved  by 
most  certain  warrant  of  Holy  Scripture  ?      So  did  the 
Reformers ! 

(2)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  hold  and  teach  that 
we   are    accounted    righteous   before   God  only  for   the 
merit  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  faith,  and  not  for  our 
own  works  and  deservings  ?     Do  they  maintain  that  in 
the  matter  of  our  justification,  our   own   goodness   and 
holiness   have    nothing   whatever   to   do  ?      So   did  the 
Reformers ! 

(3)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  hold  and  teach  that 
good    works,    which    follow    after    justification,    spring 


INTRODUCTION,  XXlii 

necessarily  out  of  a  true  and  lively  faith  ?  Do  they 
maintain  that  a  living  faith  may  be  as  evidently  discerned 
by  the  good  works  which  spring  from  it,  as  a  tree  is  dis 
cerned  by  its  fruit ;  and  that,  consequently,  the  man  in. 
whom  no  good  works  and  holiness  can  be  seen,  is  not 
yet  a  believer  and  not  a  converted  man  ?  So  did  the 
Eeformers ! 

(4)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  hold  and  teach  that 
Christ's   Sacraments   do    not    convey  and    confer    grace, 
" ex  opere  operate"  and  that  they  only  do  good  to  those 
who  rightly,  worthily,  and  with  faith  receive  them  ?     Do 
they  maintain  that  a  man  may  be  duly  baptized  with 
water  in  his  infancy,  and  yet  give  plain  proof  by  his  life, 
when  he  has  come  to  man's  estate,  that  he  has  not  the 
grace   of  the   Holy   Ghost   in   his  heart  ?     So   did  the 
Reformers ! 

(5)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  hold  and  teach  that 
there  is  no  corporal  presence  of  Christ's  natural  flesh  and 
blood  in  the  consecrated  elements  of  bread  and  wine  in 
the  Lord's  Supper  ?     Do  they  maintain  that  the  body  of 
Christ  is  given,  taken,  and  eaten  at  the  Lord's  Supper 
only  after  a  heavenly  and  spiritual  manner,  and  that  the 
only  real  presence  of  Christ  in  that  Sacrament  is  in  the 
hearts  of  believing  communicants  ?     So  did  the  Eeformers ' 

(6)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  hold  and  teach  that 
the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  Sacrament,  and  not  a  sacrifice, 
and  that  in  it  there  is  no  sacrifice,  excepting  that  of 
praise    and    thanksgiving  ?     Do    they   maintain    that   a 
clergyman  is  only  a  minister  of  God's  Word,  and  not  a 
sacrificing  priest  ?     Do  they  maintain  that  the  sacrifice 
}f  the  Mass,  which  many  seem  anxious  to  reintroduce 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

into  the  Church  of  England,  is  one  of  the  cardinal  errori 
of  the  Church  of  Eome  ?     So  did  the  Eeformers  ! 

(7)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  object  strongly  to  the 
Lord's  Table  being  called  an  altar,  and  maintain  firmly 
that  this  is  an  improper  name,  and  that  when  there  is  no 
sacrifice  and  no  sacrificing  priest,  there  can  be  no  altar  ? 
So  did  the  Eeformers ! 

(8)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  thoroughly  disapprove 
of  lighted  candles  during  the  day  on  Communion  tables, 
and  object  to  crucifixes,  processions,  incense-burning,  gaudy 
sacrificial  vestments,  superstitious  gestures  and  postures  at 
the  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  a  close  imita 
tion  of  Eomish  ceremonial  ?     So  did  the  Eeformers ! 

(9)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  hold  and  teach  that 
the  practice  of  habitual  private  Confession  to  a  minister 
>s  nowhere  taught  or  recommended  in  Scripture  ?     Do 
they  maintain  that  it  is  a  practice  to  be  strongly  depre 
cated  and  avoided,  having  been  proved  by  history  to  lead 
to  most  immoral  and  soul-ruining  consequences  ?     So  did 
the  Eeformers ! 

(10)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  hold  and  teach  that 
Episcopacy  is  not  absolutely  necessary  to  the  being  of  a 
Church,  however  useful  and  desirable  for  its  well-'beingt 
when   properly   administered  ?     Do   they  maintain  that 
we  have  no  right  to  unchurch  non-episcopal  churches, 
and  to  hand  them  over  to  the  uncovenanted  mercies  of 
God  1     So  did  the  Eeformers  ! 

(11)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  hold  and  teach  that 
the  Church  of  Eome  has  erred,  not  only  in  ceremonies, 
but  also  in  matters  of  faith  ?     Do  they  maintain  that 
separation  from  the  Church  of  Eome  was  a  positive  duty 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

three  centuries  ago,  and  that  no  one  ought  to  think  of 
reunion  with  her  in  this  day  until  Eome  has  renounced 
her  errors,  and  been  reconciled  to  Christ  ?  So  did  the 
Reformers ! 

(12)  Do  Evangelical  Churchmen  hold  and  teach  that 
repentance,  faith,  holiness  of  heart  and  life,  justification, 
conversion,  union  with  Christ,  and  the  indwelling  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  are  the  primary  and  principal  things  in 
religion  ?  Do  they  maintain  that  Church-membership, 
reception  of  Christ's  sacraments,  and  attendance  on  ordin 
ances,  however  important  and  valuable  in  their  due  place, 
are  by  comparison  things  of  secondary  importance  ?  So 
did  the  Eeformers ! 

I  commend  these  twelve  points  to  the  calm  considera 
tion  of  all  my  readers.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  say  that 
no  man  is  a  sound  Churchman  unless  he  holds  exactly 
all  distinctive  Evangelical  views  about  them.  But  I  do 
say  that  they  are  precisely  the  kind  of  points  about  which 
Evangelical  Churchmen  are  continually  taunted,  sneered 
at,  ridiculed,  and  held  up  to  scorn,  as  "  unsound  Church 
men,  Low  Churchmen,  Puritans,  half-Dissenters,"  and  the 
like.  Yet  on  these  very  points  they  are  entirely  in 
harmony  with  the  men  who  first  reformed  the  Church  of 
England,  the  Edwardian  and  Elizabethan  Eeformers !  If 
those  who  dislike  Evangelical  views,  and  look  coldly  on 
all  who  hold  them,  would  undertake  to  prove  that  the 
distinctive  opinions  of  the  Evangelical  School  are  a  mere 
modern  invention,  and  unknown  to  the  Eeformers,  I  could 
understand  their  position.  But  until  they  do  this,  I 
shall  firmly  maintain  that  the  treatment  which  Evan 
gelical  Churchmen  too  often  receive  in  these  latter  days 


XXVi  INTRODUCTION. 

is  neither  fair,  nor  reasonable,  nor  wise.  They  Lave  a 
right  to  demand  juster  balances  and  more  "righteous 
judgment."  Whatever  good  there  may  be  in  other  schools 
of  thought,  it  is  certain  that  no  men  can  show  a  better 
title  to  be  called  "  Successors  of  the  Reformers  "  than  the 
members  of  the  Evangelical  School. 

In  reply  to  these  things,  I  am  aware  that  many  regard 
the  divines  of  the  Caroline  age  and  the  Eestoration  as 
better  and  truer  representatives  of  the  Church  of  England 
than  the  Reformers.  They  coolly  tell  us  that  the  true 
doctrinal  standard  of  Churchmanship  is  that  of  1662, 
when  the  Act  of  Uniformity  was  passed,  and  the  Puritans 
rejected  from  our  pale.  This  is  simply  untrue.  It  is  an 
ignorant  assertion,  which  will  not  bear  investigation  for  a 
moment.  The  Thirty-nine  Articles  are  the  only  doctrinal 
standard  which  the  Church  of  England  recognises,  and  to 
which  she  requires  all  her  clergy  to  declare  solemnly  their 
assent.  Nor  is  this  all.  She  requires  every  clergyman 
who  is  appointed  to  a  living,  to  "read  publicly  and 
openly,  to  his  congregation,  the  whole  of  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles,  and  after  reading  to  declare  his  assent  to  them." 
Now  these  very  Articles  were  drawn  up  by  the  Edwardian 
and  Elizabethan  Reformers,  and  finally  settled  in  their 
present  shape  in  1571.  From  that  time  to  this,  a  period 
of  over  300  years,  they  have  never  been  altered  !  The 
revisers  of  the  Liturgy,  in  1662,  thought  it  prudent  to 
leave  the  Articles  untouched !  In  the  face  of  these  facts, 
it  is  rather  too  much  to  tell  us  that  the  doctrine  of  the 
divines  of  1662  is  the  true  doctrinal  standard  of  the 
Church  of  England.  It  is  nothing  of  the  kind.  The 
true  standard  is  that  of  the  Reformers.  To  that 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV11 

standard  Evangelical  Churchmen  appeal  with  confidence, 
and  defy  any  one  to  show  that  their  views  are  not  fully 
in  agreement  with  it.  If  the  Eeformers  were  sound  and 
loyal  Churchmen,  so  also  are  the  members  of  the  Evan 
gelical  body. 

I  will  close  this  paper  with  one  bold  assertion.  I 
commend  it  to  the  attention  of  all  who  want  to  know 
the  real  claim  of  the  Evangelical  School  to  respect.  I 
assert,  then,  that  as  Evangelical  Churchmen  have  no 
cause  to  be  ashamed  of  their  distinctive  doctrinal  views, 
so  also  they  have  no  cause  to  be  ashamed  of  their  dis 
tinctive  plans  of  Church  work.  Which  of  these  plans  has 
not  been  borrowed  by  "other  "  schools  of  thought  "  in  the 
last  thirty-five  years,  and  too  often  borrowed  without  the 
slightest  acknowledgment  ? — Who  first  employed  laymen 
in  Christ's  work,  in  the  face  of  a  torrent  of  obloquy  ?  The 
Evangelical  body ! — Who  first  called  women  forward,  and 
gave  them  an  office  and  position  among  Church  workers, 
though  not  a  uniform  ?  The  Evangelical  body ! — Who 
first  revived  a  due  reverence  for  the  Lord's  Supper,  and 
first  crowded  communion  rails  with  devout  communicants  ? 
The  Evangelical  body  !  It  would  be  hard  to  name  any 
Church  at  this  day,  where  there  are  so  many  regular 
communicants,  as  there  were  at  Grimshaw's  Church  at 
Haworth,  a  hundred  years  ago,  or  at  St.  John's,  Bedford 
Row,  within  the  present  century. — Who  first  introduced 
hearty  and  congregational  singing  ?  The  Evangelical 
body  !  Charles  Wesley,  and  Toplady,  and  John  Newton 
composed  hymns  which  myriads  sang,  long  before  the 
compilers  of  "  Hymns  Ancient  and  Modern  "  were  born. 
* — Who  first  commenced  special  short  services  for  the 


XXV111  INTRODUCTION. 

working  classes  ?  The  Evangelical  body !  Exeter  Hall 
was  opened  on  Sunday  evenings  before  Westminster 
Abbey  or  St.  Paul's. — Who  first  attempted  what  are  now 
called  "  mission "  services  ?  The  Evangelical  body ! 
Thirty-five  years  ago  they  had  preaching  for  six  nights  in 
succession  at  Birmingham,  Ipswich,  and  Islington  parish 
Churches. — Who  first  tried  prayer-meetings  and  short 
services  in  unconsecrated  places,  and  were  denounced  aa 
fanatical  and  disorderly  for  holding  them  ?  The  Evan 
gelical  body ! — Do  I  ask  these  questions  in  a  taunting, 
boastful  spirit  ?  God  forbid  I  should  do  so.  I  think  I 
know  and  see  the  many  weaknesses  and  defects  of  the 
Evangelical  body  as  clearly  as  any  one,  and  am  always 
ready  to  acknowledge  them.  As  a  Bishop,  I  hold  out 
my  hand  to  every  loyal  Churchman,  and  am  ready  to 
welcome  him  and  work  with  him,  to  whatever  "school1 
he  may  belong.  I  honour  a  zealous,  honest,  loyal, 
working  Churchman  whenever  I  see  him,  though  he  may 
not  work  exactly  on  what  I  think  the  best  lines.  All  I 
say  is,  that  Evangelical  Churchmen  have  no  more  cause 
to  be  ashamed  of  their  plans  of  working,  than  they  have 
of  their  doctrinal  views.  Their  modes  of  working,  as 
well  as  their  principles,  will  bear  any  amount  of  fair 
investigation. 

I  know  well  that  the  body  for  which  I  have  tried  to 
plead  in  these  pages  is  only  a  small  minority  among  the 
clergy  of  the  Church  of  England.  Yes !  Evangelical 
clergymen  are  a  minority  in  every  Diocese,  in  every 
Convocation,  in  every  Diocesan  Conference,  in  every 
Congress ;  and  they  must  not  be  surprised  to  find  it  so. 
But  I  charge  them,  and  especially  the  younger  men,  to 


INTKODUCTION.  XXIX 

remember  that  majorities  possess  no  more  monopoly  of 
truth  and  wisdom  to-day  than  they  did  in  the  days  of 
Athanasius.  I  beseech  them,  for  the  sake  of  Christ  and 
their  country,  to  stand  firm,  to  stand  together,  never  to 
compromise,  and  never  to  sacrifice  a  single  vital  principle 
under  the  vain  pretence  of  obtaining  unity  and  peace. 
Like  gold,  peace  and  unity  may  be  bought  too  dear. 
Why  should  they  be  afraid,  and  faint-hearted,  and  weak- 
kneed,  and  give  way  by  little  and  little  ?  The  Lord  God 
of  Kidley  and  Latimer  and  Jewell  is  not  dead  but  alive. 
The  laity  will  stand  by  them  if  they  are  bold,  decided, 
and  true  to  the  principles  of  the  Keformation.  So  long 
as  the  Articles  and  Prayer-Book  remain  unaltered, 
Evangelical  Churchmen  cannot  justly,  honestly,  and 
legally  be  expelled  from  the  Church  of  England. 

What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  "  Watch  ye,  stand  fast  in 
the  faith,  quit 'you  like  men,  be  strong.  Let  all  your 
things  be  done  with  charity  "  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13,  14). 

My  own  sentence  is  clear  and  distinct.  If  we  cannot 
maintain  the  Established  Church  of  England  without 
giving  up  Protestantism  and  admitting  Romanism,  we 
had  better  have  no  Establishment  at  all. 

Time  will  show,  in  a  few  years,  who  is  right.  But  if 
the  Established  Church  of  England  tolerates  and  sanctions 
the  Romish  Mass  and  the  Confessional  among  her  clergy, 
it  is  my  firm  conviction  that  the  people  of  this  country 
will  not  long  tolerate  the  Established  Church  of  England. 

I  now  send  forth  this  volume  with  an  earnest  prayer 
that  God  may  be  pleased  to  use  it  for  His  own  glory 
and  for  the  good  of  souls. 

J.  C.  LIVERPOOL. 

November  1890. 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION  FOR  OUR  OWN  DAYS 
JOHN  WYCLIFFE      . 

WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED]  . 
JOHN  ROGERS :  MARTYR     . 

JOHN  HOOPER  :   BISHOP  AND  MARTYR  . 

ROWLAND  TAYLOR:  MARTYR          .  . 

HUGH  LATIMER  :  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR  , 

JOHN  BRADFORD  :  MARTYR  .  . 

NICHOLAS  RIDLEY  :  BISHOP  AND  MARTYK 

SAMUEL  WARD         .  .  .  . 

ARCHBISHOP  LAUD  .  . 

RICHARD  BAXTER   .  .  .  . 

WILLIAM  GURNALL  .  .  • 

JAMK8  II.  AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS  • 


FAOS 
V 

1 
15 

56 
67 
117 
133 
183 
209 
234 
258 
303 
343 
410 


ILLUSTKATIONS. 


JOHN  WYCLIFFE  ......  Frontispiece. 

ABCHBISHOP  CBAKMEB    .....  Face  page    39 

BURNING   OF  JOHN    ROGERS          .                .               .                .  „          „          65 

„           „     BISHOP  HOOPER     .                .               .                .  „          „          97 

EDWARD    VI.                             .                 .                 .                 ,                 •  n           ,,        177 

PLACE  OF  EXECUTION,  SMITHFIELD       .            .            •  »       n      193 

MABTYB'S  MEMORIAL,  OXFORD   .           .           .           .  „       „     225 

THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS  BEING  TAKEN  TO  THE  TOWEB    .  „               445 


LIGHT   FEOM   OLD   TIMES. 


JOHN  WYCLIF. 

IT  is  an  old  and  true  saying,  that  nations  sometimes 
know  little  about  some  of  their  greatest  benefactors.  If 
there  ever  was  a  man  to  whom  this  saying  applies,  it  is 
John  Wyclif,  the  forerunner  and  first  beginner  of  the 
Protestant  Eeformation  in  this  country.  To  Wyclif 
England  owes  an  enormous  debt :  yet  "Wyclif  is  a  man 
of  whom  most  Englishmen  know  little  or  nothing. 

In  drawing  up  a  few  pages  about  this  great  and  good 
man,  the  words  of  the  Apostle  St.  Peter  rise  up  before 
my  mind.  He  says,  "  I  think  it  meet  to  stir  you  up  by 
putting  you  in  remembrance"  (2  Pet.  i.  13  This  is 
exactly  what  I  want  to  do  in  this  paper.  I  wish  to  stir 
up  my  readers,  and  try  to  make  them  remember  and 
never  forget  the  man  who  has  been  justly  called  "  The 
Morning  Star  of  the  English  Keformation." 

I.  First  and  foremost,  I  shall  ask  you  to  remember  the 
religious  condition  of  England  in  the  age  when  Wyclif 
lived. 

I  shall  make  no  apology  for  dwelling  briefly  on  thifl 

* 


2  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

point.  A  right  understanding  of  it  lies  at  the  very  root 
of  my  whole  subject.  Without  this  it  is  impossible  to 
form  a  correct  estimate  of  the  man  about  whom  I  am 
writing ;  of  the  enormous  difficulties  he  had  to  contend 
with ;  and  of  the  greatness  of  the  work  which  he  did. 

John  Wyclif  was  born  in  the  north  of  Yorkshire,  on 
the  banks  of  the  Tees,  about  the  year  1324,  in  the  reign 
of  Edward  II.,  and  died  in  1384,  in  the  reign  of  Richard 
II.,  more  than  five  hundred  years  ago.  So  you  will 
remember  that  he  was  born  at  least  a  hundred  years  before 
the  invention  of  printing,  and  died  about  a  hundred  years 
before  the  great  German  Reformer,  Martin  Luther,  was 
born.  These  two  facts  alone  should  never  be  forgotten. 

The  three  centuries  immediately  preceding  our  English 
Reformation,  in  the  middle  of  which  Wyclif  lived,  were 
probably  the  darkest  period  in  the  history  of  English 
Christianity.  It  was  a  period  when  the  Church  of  this 
land  was  thoroughly,  entirely,  and  completely  Roman 
Catholic — when  the  Bishop  of  Rome  was  the  spiritual 
head  of  the  Church — when  Romanism  reigned  supreme 
from  the  Isle  of  Wight  to  Berwick-on-Tweed,  and  from 
the  Land's  End  to  the  North  Foreland,  and  ministers  and 
people  were  all  alike  Papists.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to 
say  that  for  these  three  centuries  before  the  Reformation, 
Christianity  in  England  seems  to  have  been  buried  under 
a  mass  of  ignorance,  superstition,  priestcraft,  and 
immorality.  The  likeness  between  the  religion  of  this 
period  and  that  of  the  apostolic  age  was  so  small,  that  if 
St.  Paul  had  risen  from  the  dead  he  would  hardly  have 
called  it  Christianity  at  all ! 

Such  were  the  days  when  Wyclif  lived.  Such  were  the 
difficulties  which  he  had  to  encounter.  I  charge  my  readers 


JOHN  WYCLIF.  3 

not  to  forget  them.  The  man  who  could  do  the  work  he 
did,  and  leave  the  mark  that  he  left  on  his  generation, 
must  have  been  no  common  man.  I  go  further :  he  must 
have  been  a  servant  of  Christ,  of  rare  grace  and  gifts, 
and  singularly  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  say  he  ia 
a  man  worthy  of  all  honour,  and  we  do  well  to  keep  him 
in  remembrance. 

II.  Let  me  now  turn  from  Wyclif's  time  to  Wyclifs 
work. 

That  Wyclif  did  a  great  work  in  a  very  dark  day — 
that  he  made  a  deep  impression  on  his  generation — that 
he  was  felt  jind  acknowledged  to  be  "  a  power "  in 
England  both  by  Church  and  Parliament,  for  some 
twenty-five  years,  is  simple  matter  of  history  which  no 
well-read  person  can  deny. 

But  there  is  much  obscurity  about  his  early  life. 
We  know  nothing  of  his  first  schools  and  schoolmasters, 
and  can  only  guess  that  he  may  have  picked  up  the 
first  rudiments  of  his  education  at  Eggleston  Priory, 
on  the  Tees.  But  we  do  know  that  he  went  to  Oxford 
between  1335  and  1340,  and  profited  so  much  by  the 
instruction  he  got  there  that  he  obtained  a  very  high 
reputation  as  one  of  the  most  learned  men  of  his  day. 
He  was  made  Master  of  Balliol  in  1361,  and  was  after 
wards  connected  with  Queen's,  Merton,  and  Canterbury 
Hall.  From  that  date  for  about  twenty  years,  when  he 
retired  to  Lutterworth,  Oxford  seems  to  have  been  his 
head-quarters,  though  he  evidently  was  often  in  London. 
Lecturing,  preaching,  writing  both  for  learned  and 
unlearned,  arguing,  controversy,  appear  to  have  been  the 
diet  of  his  life.  But  we  have  no  minute  and  systematic 


4  LIGHT  FROM  OLD 

account  of  his  life  from  tlie  pen  of  any  contemporary 
biographer.  How  he  first  obtained  his  sound  theological 
views — whether  he  learned  anything  from  Archbishop 
Brad wardin,  who  preceded  him — whether  he  was  intimate 
with  Fitzralph  of  Armagh,  Chancellor  of  Oxford,  or  the 
famous  Grostete,  Bishop  of  Lincoln — who,  in  short,  were 
his  helpers  and  fellow-labourers,  or  whether  he  had  none 
and  stood  alone — on  all  these  points  we  know  little  or 
nothing.  It  is  useless,  however,  to  complain,  as  there 
was  no  printing  in  Wyclif's  day,  and  few  could  read  or 
write.  I  shall  not  waste  time  in  guessing,  but  shall 
content  myself  with  mentioning  four  facts  which  are 
beyond  controversy,  and  pointing  out  four  reasons  why 
Wyclif's  name  should  always  be  honoured  in  England. 

(a)  For  one  thing,  we  should  gratefully  remember  that 
Wyclif  was  one  of  the  first  Englishmen  wJw  maintained  the 
sufficiency  and  supremacy  of  Holy  Scripture  as  the  only 
rule  of  faith  and  practice.  The  proof  of  this  is  to  be 
seen  so  continually  in  his  writings,  that  I  shall  not 
attempt  to  supply  quotations.  The  Bible  comes  to  the 
front  in  all  his  remains. 

The  importance  of  this  great  principle  can  never  be 
overrated.  It  lies  at  the  very  foundation  of  Protestant 
Christianity.  It  is  the  back-bone  of  the  Articles  of  the 
Church  of  England  and  of  every  sound  Church  in 
Christendom.  The  true  Christian  was  intended  by  Christ 
to  prove  all  things  by  the  Word  of  God,  all  churches,  all 
ministers,  all  teaching,  all  preaching,  all  doctrines,  all 
sermons,  all  writings,  all  opinions,  all  practices.  These 
are  his  marching  orders.  Prove  all  by  the  Word  of 
God ;  measure  all  by  the  measure  of  the  Bible ;  compare 
all  with  the  standard  of  the  Bible;  weigh  all  in  the 


JOHN  WYCLIF.  5 

balances  of  the  Bible ;  examine  all  by  the  light  of  the 
Bible ;  test  all  in  the  crucible  of  the  Bible.  That  which 
can  abide  the  fire  of  the  Bible,  receive,  hold,  believe,  and 
obey.  That  which  cannot  abide  the  fire  of  the  Bible, 
reject,  refuse,  repudiate,  and  cast  away.  This  is  the 
standard  which  Wyclif  raised  in  England.  This  is  the 
flag  which  he  nailed  to  the  mast.  May  it  never  be 
lowered ! 

All  this  sounds  so  familiar  to  our  ears  that  we  do  not 
realize  its  value.  Five  hundred  years  ago,  the  man  who 
took  up  this  ground  was  a  bold  man,  and  stood  alone. 
Let  us  never  forget  that  one  of  the  first  to  set  down  his 
foot  upon  this  principle  was  John  Wycli£ 

(6)  For  another  thing,  let  us  gratefully  remember  that 
Wyclif  was  one  of  the  first  Englishmen  who  attacked  and 
denounced  the  errors  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  The  sacrifice 
of  the  Mass  and  Transubstantiation,  the  ignorance  and 
immorality  of  the  priesthood,  the  tyranny  of  the  See  of 
Rome,  the  uselessness  of  trusting  to  other  mediators  than 
Christ,  the  dangerous  tendency  of  the  confessional, — all 
these  and  other  kindred  doctrines  will  be  found  unspar 
ingly  exposed  in  his  writings.  On  all  these  points  he 
was  a  thorough  Protestant  Reformer,  a  century  and  a 
half  before  the  Reformation. 

Well  would  it  be  for  England  if  men  saw  this  subject 
in  the  present  day  as  clearly  as  Wyclif  did.  Unhappily,, 
nowadays,  the  edge  of  the  old  British  feeling  about 
Protestantism  seems  blunted  and  dull.  Some  profess  to 
be  tired  of  all  religious  controversy,  and  are  ready  to 
sacrifice  God's  truth  for  the  sake  of  peace.  Some  look 
on  Romanism  as  simply  one  among  many  English  forms 
of  religion,  and  neither  worse  nor  better  than  others. 


I  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES, 

Some  try  to  persuade  us  that  Komanism  is  changed,  and 
is  not  nearly  so  bad  as  it  used  to  be.  Some  boldly  point 
to  the  faults  of  Protestants,  and  loudly  cry  that 
Romanists  are  quite  as  good  as  ourselves.  Some  think 
it  fine  and  liberal  to  maintain  that  we  have  no  right  to 
think  any  one  wrong  who  is  in  earnest  about  his  creed. 
And  yet  the  two  great  historical  facts,  (a)  that  ignorance, 
immorality,  and  superstition  reigned  supreme  in  England 
400  years  ago  under  Popery;  (b)  that  the  Reformation 
was  the  greatest  blessing  God  ever  gave  to  this  land, — 
both  these  are  facts  which  no  one  but  a  Papist  ever 
thought  of  disputing  fifty  years  ago  !  In  the  present 
day,  alas,  it  is  convenient  and  fashionable  to  forget 
them !  In  short,  at  the  rate  we  are  going,  I  shall  not 
be  surprised  if  it  is  soon  proposed  to  repeal  the  Act  of 
Settlement,  and  to  allow  the  Crown  of  England  to  be 
worn  by  a  Papist. 

If  we  are  to  put  the  clock  back,  and  get  behind  the 
Reformation,  as  some  coolly  propose,  I  trust  we  shall  not 
stop  at  Henry  VIII.,  or  VII.,  or  VI.,  but  go  back  to 
consult  Wyclif. 

(c)  For  another  thing,  let  us  gratefully  remember  that 
Wyclif  was  one  of  the  first,  if  not  the  very  first,  English' 
men  who  revived  tJie  apostolic  ordinance  of  preaching.  The 
"  poor  priests,"  as  they  were  called,  whom  he  sent  about 
the  country  to  teach,  were  one  of  the  greatest  benefits 
which  he  conferred  on  his  generation.  They  sowed  the 
seed  of  thoughts  among  the  people  which  were  never 
entirely  forgotten,  and,  I  believe,  paved  the  way  for  the 
Reformation. 

If  Wyclif  had  never  done  anything  but  this  for 
England,  I  believe  that  this  alone  would  entitle  him  to 


JOHN  WYCLIF.  .._  7 

our  deep  thankfulness.  I  maintain  firmly  that  the  first, 
foremost,  and  principal  work  of  the  minister  is  to  be  a 
preacher  of  God's  Word. 

I  say  this,  emphatically,  because  of  the  time  in  which 
we  live,  and  the  peculiar  dangers  of  the  Christian  warfare 
in  our  own  land.  I  believe  that  the  pretended  "  sacer 
dotalism"  of  ministers  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  most 
mischievous  errors  which  has  ever  plagued  Christendom. 
Partly  from  an  ignorant  hankering  after  the  priesthood 
of  the  Mosaic  Dispensation,  which  passed  away  when 
Christ  died ;  partly  from  the  love  of  power  and  dignity, 
which  is  natural  to  ministers,  as  much  as  to  other  men ; 
partly  from  the  preference  of  unconverted  worshippers 
for  a  supposed  priest  and  mediator  whom  they  can  see, 
rather  than  one  in  heaven  whom  they  cannot  see ; 
partly  from  the  general  ignorance  of  mankind  before  the 
Bible  was  printed  and  circulated ;  partly  from  one  cause 
and  partly  from  another,  there  has  been  an  incessant 
tendency  throughout  the  last  eighteen  centuries  to  exalt 
ministers  to  an  unscriptural  position,  and  to  regard  them 
as  priests  and  mediators  between  God  and  man,  rather 
than  as  preachers  of  God's  Word. 

I  charge  my  readers  to  remember  this.  Stand  fast  on 
old  principles.  Do  not  forsake  the  old  paths.  Let 
nothing  tempt  you  to  believe  that  multiplication  of  forms 
and  ceremonies,  constant  reading  of  liturgical  services,  or 
frequent  communions,  will  ever  do  so  much  good  to  souls 
as  the  powerful,  fiery,  fervent  preaching  of  God's  Word. 
Daily  services  without  sermons  may  gratify  and  edify  a 
few  handfuls  of  believers,  but  they  will  never  reach, 
draw,  attract,  or  arrest  the  great  mass  of  mankind.  If 
men  want  to  do  good  to  the  multitude,  if  they  want  to 


I 

reach  their  hearts  and  consciences,  they  must  walk  in  the 
steps  of  Wyclif,  Latimer,  Luther,  Chrysostom,  and  St. 
Paul.  They  must  attack  them  through  their  ears  ;  they 
must  blow  the  trumpet  of  the  everlasting  Gospel  loud 
and  long ;  they  must  preach  the  Word. 

(d)  Last  in  order,  but  first  in  importance,  let  us  ever 
gratefully  remember  that  Wyclif  was  the  first  Englishman 
who  translated  the  Bible  into  the  English  language,  and 
thus  enabled  it  to  be  understood  by  the  people. 

The  difficulty  of  this  work  was  probably  something  of 
which  we  can  form  no  conception  at  this  day.  There  were 
probably  few,  very  few,  that  could  help  the  translator  in 
any  way.  There  was  no  printing,  and  the  whole  book 
had  to  be  laboriously  written  in  manuscript,  and  by 
written  manuscript  alone  could  copies  be  multiplied.  To 
inspect  the  machinery  and  apparatus  of  our  blessed  Bible 
Society  in  Blackfriars,  and  then  to  think  of  the  stupendous 
toil  which  Wyclif  must  have  gone  through,  is  enough  to 
take  one's  breath  away.  But  with  God's  help  nothing  is 
impossible.  The  work  was  done,  and  hundreds  of  copies 
were  circulated.  In  spite  of  every  effort  to  suppress  the 
book,  and  the  destruction  of  it  by  time,  fire,  and  unfavour 
able  hands,  no  less  than  170  complete  copies  were  found 
extant  when  it  was  reprinted  at  Oxford  some  40  years 
ago,  and  no  doubt  many  more  are  in  existence. 

The  good  that  was  done  by  the  translation  of  the  Bible 
will  probably  never  be  known  till  the  last  day,  and  I  shall 
not  attempt  to  form  any  conjecture  about  it.  But  I  shall 
never  hesitate  to  assert  that  if  there  is  any  one  fact  more 
incontrovertibly  proved  than  another  it  is  this,  that  the 
possession  by  a  people  of  the  Bible  in  their  own  language 
is  the  greatest  possible  national  blessing. 


JOHN  WYCLIP.  9 

Five  hundred  years  have  passed  away  since  the  first 
translator  of  the  English  Bible  was  laid  in  his  grave.  I 
ask  any  one  this  day  to  look  at  the  map  of  the  world  and 
see  what  a  tale  it  tells  about  the  value  of  a  free  and 
widely  circulated  Bible. 

Which  are  the  countries  where  the  greatest  amount  of 
ignorance,  superstition,  immorality,  and  tyranny  is  to  be 
found  at  this  very  moment  ?  The  countries  in  which  the 
Bible  is  a  forbidden  or  neglected  book — such  countries  as 
Italy  and  Spain,  and  the  South  American  States.  Which 
are  the  countries  where  liberty,  and  public  and  private 
morality  have  attained  the  highest  pitch  ?  The  countries 
where  the  Bible  is  free  to  all,  like  England,  Scotland,  and 
the  United  States.  Yes !  when  you  know  how  a  nation 
deals  with  the  Bible,  you  may  generally  know  what  a  nation 
is.  O  that  the  rulers  of  some  nations  did  but  know  that 
a  free  Bible  is  the  grand  secret  of  national  prosperity,  and 
that  the  surest  way  to  make  subjects  orderly  and  obedient 
is  to  allow  a  free  passage  to  the  living  waters  of  God's 
Word !  0  that  the  people  of  some  countries  did  but 
see  that  a  free  Bible  is  the  beginning  of  all  real  freedom, 
and  that  the  first  liberty  they  should  seek  after  is  liberty 
for  the  apostles  and  prophets — liberty  to  have  a  Bible  in 
every  house,  and  a  Bible  in  every  hand !  Well  said 
Bishop  Hooper,  "  God  in  heaven  and  king  on  earth  have 
no  greater  friend  than  the  Bible."  It  is  a  striking  fact, 
that  when  British  Sovereigns  are  crowned,  they  are  publicly 
presented  with  the  Bible,  and  told,  "  This  book  is  the  most 
valuable  thing  the  world  affords." 

This  is  the  book  on  which  the  well-being  of  nations  has 
always  hinged,  and  with  which  the  best  interests  of  every 
nation  in  Christendom  at  this  moment  are  inseparably 


10  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES, 

bound  up.  Just  in  proportion  as  the  Bible  is  honoured  or 
not,  light  or  darkness,  morality  or  immorality,  true  religion 
or  superstition,  liberty  or  despotism,  good  laws  or  bad,  will 
be  found  in  a  land.  Come  with  me  and  open  the  pages  of 
history,  and  you  will  read  the  proof  of  these  assertions  in 
time  past.  Head  it  in  the  history  of  Israel  under  the  kings. 
How  great  was  the  wickedness  that  then  prevailed!  But 
who  can  wonder  ?  The  law  of  the  Lord  had  been  completely 
lost  sight  of,  and  was  found  in  the  days  of  Josiah  in  a 
corner  of  the  temple. — Eead  it  in  the  history  of  the  Jews 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  time.  How  awful  the  picture 
of  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  and  their  religion !  But  who 
can  wonder  ?  The  Scripture  was  "  made  void  "  by  man's 
traditions. — Eead  it  in  the  history  of  the  Church  of  Christ 
in  the  Middle  Ages.  What  can  be  worse  than  the  accounts 
we  have  of  ignorance  and  superstition  ?  But  who  can 
wonder  ?  The  times  might  well  be  dark,  when  men  had 
not  the  light  of  the  Bible. 

The  plain  truth  13  this,  the  Bible  is  the  parent  of  free 
thought  and  mental  activity.  It  is  a  curious  fact,  that 
the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  House  and  the  British 
Times  offices  are  almost  side  by  side ! 

Which  are  the  Churches  on  earth  which  are  producing 
the  greatest  effect  on  mankind  ?  The  Churches  in  which 
the  Bible  is  exalted.  Which  are  the  parishes  in  England 
and  Scotland  where  religion  and  morality  have  the  strongest 
hold  ?  The  parishes  in  which  the  Bible  is  most  circulated 
and  read.  Who  are  the  ministers  in  England  who  have 
the  most  real  influence  over  the  minds  of  the  people  ? 
Not  those  who  are  ever  crying  "  Church !  Church  ! "  but 
those  who  are  faithfully  preaching  the  Word.  A  Church 
which  does  not  honour  the  Bible  is  as  useless  as  a 


JOHN  WYCLIT.  1 1 

body  without  life,  or  a  steam  engine  without  fire.  A 
minister  who  does  not  honour  the  Bible  is  as  useless 
as  a  soldier  without  arms,  a  builder  without  tools,  a  pilot 
without  compass,  or  a  messenger  without  tidings.  It  is 
cheap  and  easy  work  for  Koman  Catholics,  Neologians, 
and  friends  of  secular  education,  to  sneer  at  those 
who  love  the  Bible;  but  the  Komanist,  the  Neologian, 
and  the  friends  of  mere  secular  education,  have  never  yet 
shown  us  one  New  Zealand,  one  Tinnevelly,  one  Sierra 
Leone,  as  the  fruit  of  their  principles.  They  only  can 
do  that  who  honour  the  Bible.  These  are  the  works  oi 
the  Word,  and  the  proofs  of  its  power. 

This  is  the  book  to  which  the  civilized  world  is  in 
debted  for  many  of  its  best  and  most  praiseworthy 
institutions.  Few  probably  are  aware  how  many  are  the 
good  things  that  men  have  adopted  for  the  public  benefit, 
of  which  the  origin  may  be  clearly  traced  up  to  the  Bible. 
It  has  left  lasting  marks  wherever  it  has  been  received. 
From  the  Bible  are  drawn  many  of  the  best  laws  by 
which  society  is  kept  in  order.  From  the  Bible  has  been 
obtained  the  standard  of  morality  about  truth,  honesty, 
and  the  relations  of  man  and  wife,  which  prevails  among 
Christian  nations,  and  which — however  feebly  respected 
in  many  cases — makes  so  great  a  difference  between 
Christians  and  heathen.  To  the  Bible  we  are  indebted 
for  that  most  merciful  provision  for  the  poor  man,  the 
Sabbath  day.  To  the  influence  of  the  Bible  we  owe 
nearly  every  humane  and  charitable  institution  in  exist 
ence.  The  sick,  the  poor,  the  aged,  the  orphan,  the 
lunatic,  the  idiot,  the  blind,  were  seldom  or  never  thought 
of  before  the  Bible  leavened  the  world.  You  may  search 
in  vain  for  any  record  of  institutions  for  their  aid  in  the 


12  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

histories  of  Athens  or  of  Borne.  Alas,  many  sneer  at 
the  Bible,  and  say  the  world  would  get  on  well  enough 
without  it,  who  little  think  how  great  are  their  own 
obligations  to  the  Bible.  Little  does  the  infidel  think, 
as  he  lies  sick  in  some  of  our  great  hospitals,  that  he  owes 
all  his  present  comforts  to  the  very  Book  he  affects  to 
despise.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  Bible,  he  might  have 
died  in  misery,  uncared  for,  unnoticed;  and  alone.  Verily, 
the  world  we  live  in  is  fearfully  unconscious  of  its  debts. 
The  last  day  alone,  I  believe,  will  tell  the  full  amount  of 
benefit  conferred  upon  it  by  the  Bible.  This  is  the  book 
which  John  Wyclif  was  the  first  to  translate,  and  give  to 
Englishmen  in  their  own  mother  tongue.  I  repeat,  that 
if  he  had  done  nothing  else  he  would  deserve  to  be 
gratefully  remembered  by  every  English  Christian,  every 
English  patriot,  and  every  English  Churchman. 

Such  are  the  four  leading  reasons  for  which  the  memory 
of  John  Wyclif  ought  to  be  had  in  honour. 

I  do  not  tell  you  that  this  great  man  had  no  weak 
points,  and  held  no  disputable  opinions,  and  was  sound 
on  every  theological  doctrine.  I  say  nothing  of  the  kind. 
He  lived  in  a  twilight  age,  and  had  to  work  out  many  a 
problem  in  divinity  without  the  slightest  help  from  man. 
He  wrote  much,  and  wrote  perhaps  hastily ;  and  I  do  not 
pretend  to  endorse  all  that  he  wrote.  Like  Luther  and 
Cranmer,  at  the  beginning  he  was  not  clear  on  all  points. 
But  when  I  consider  his  solitary,  isolated,  difficult  position, 
I  only  wonder  that  he  was  as  free  from  error  as  he  was. 
One  fact  far  outweighs  all  his  alleged  defects.  That  fact 
is  that  he  was  the  first  translator  of  the  Bible  into  the 
English  tongue.  How  he  escaped  without  a  violent  death, 
and  finally  died  quietly  in  his  bed  at  Lutterworth,  is  9 


JOHN  WYCLIF.  13 

miracle  indeed.  But  it  is  evident  to  my  mind  that  God 
protected  him  in  a  miraculous  way.  "  The  earth  helped 
the  woman."  It  was  God  who  raised  up  John  of  Gaunt 
and  the  Princess  of  Wales  to  favour  him.  It  was  God 
who  sent  the  earthquake  which  broke  up  a  London 
Synod,  when  it  was  about  to  condemn  him.  It  was  God 
who  inclined  the  University  of  Oxford  to  give  him 
support 

The  Council  of  Constance  had  not  yet  set  the  example 
of  burning  heretics.  The  Council  of  Trent  had  not  yet 
crystallised  and  formulated  all  Popish  doctrine.  But  above 
all,  I  see  the  hand  of  God  over  "Wyclif — the  hand  of  Him 
who  said,  "When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  he 
makes  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him."  Yes !  the 
hand  over  Wyclif  was  the  crucified  hand  of  Him  who 
said  to  the  apostles,  "  I  am  with  you  always ; "  the  hand 
of  Him  who  said  to  Paul  at  Corinth,  "  Speak,  and  hold 
not  thy  peace  ;  I  am  with  thee.  No  man  shall  set  on  thee 
to  hurt  thee."  He  was  immortal  till  his  work  was  done. 

Let  me  now  bring  this  paper  to  a  conclusion  by 
pointing  out  some  practical  conclusions  to  which  the 
whole  subject  ought  to  lead  us. 

(1)  Let  us  then  resolve  to  rally  round  Wyclif 's  first 
principles,  and  grasp  them  more  firmly  than  we  have 
done    of    late    years.      The    supremacy  and    sufficiency 
of    Scripture,  the    absolute  necessity   of    watching   and 
resisting  the    dangerous  pretensions   of  the   Church   of 
Borne,  the  immense  importance  of  preaching  God's  Word, 
— these  are  a  basis  on  which  all  Protestant  Englishmen 
ought  to  unite,  and  work  heartily. 

(2)  Let  us  learn  the  astonishing  power  and  influence 


14  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

which  one  man  possesses  if  he  conies  forward  boldly 
for  Christ,  and  has  the  courage  of  his  opinions.  One 
Moses,  one  Elijah,  one  John  the  Baptist,  one  Paul  at 
Corinth,  one  Savonarola  at  Florence,  one  Luther  in 
Germany,  one  Zwingle,  one  Wesley,  one  Whitefield,  one 
Romaine  in  London,  set  thousands  thinking  and  shook 
a  sleeping  world.  We  want  more  boldness  among  the 
friends  of  truth.  There  is  far  too  much  tendency  to 
sit  still,  and  wait  for  committees,  and  number  our  ad 
herents.  We  want  more  men  who  are  not  afraid  to 
stand  alone,  as  Wyclif  did. 

(3)  Finally,  let  us  not  forget  that  the  Lord  God  of 
John  Wyclif  is  not  dead  but  alive.  Men  change. 
Something  new  is  the  cry  of  the  day.  Freer  handling 
of  Scripture !  Broader  and  looser  theology !  This  is 
what  many  long  to  see.  But  we  want  nothing  better 
than  the  old  Gospel,  if  we  wish  to  do  good.  Jesus 
Christ  never  changes.  At  the  end  of  five  hundred  years 
He  is  still  the  same.  He  did  not  fail  the  Eector  of 
Lutterworth,  and  He  will  not  fail  us  if  we  walk  in 
His  steps. 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS 
BURNED? 

THERE  are  certain  facts  in  history  which  the  world  tries 
hard  to  forget  and  ignore.  These  facts  get  in  the  way  of 
some  of  the  world's  favourite  theories,  and  are  highly 
inconvenient.  The  consequence  is  that  the  world  shuts 
its  eyes  against  them.  They  are  either  cut  dead  as  vulgar 
intruders,  or  passed  by  as  tiresome  bores.  Little  by  little 
they  sink  out  of  sight  of  the  students  of  history,  like 
ships  in  a  distant  horizon,  or  are  left  behind  like  a  luggage 
train  in  a  siding.  Of  such  facts  the  subject  of  this  paper 
is  a  vivid  example: — "The  Burning  of  our  English 
Reformers ;  and  the  Reason  why  they  were  Burned." 

It  is  fashionable  in  some  quarters  to  deny  that  there  is 
any  such  thing  as  certainty  about  religious  truth,  or  any 
opinions  for  which  it  is  worth  while  to  be  burned.  Yet, 
300  years  ago,  there  were  men  who  were  certain  they  had 
found  out  truth,  and  were  content  to  die  for  their  opinions. 
— It  is  fashionable  in  other  quarters  to  leave  out  all  the 
unpleasant  things  in  history,  and  to  paint  everything  with  a 


16  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

rose-coloured  hue.  A  very  popular  history  of  our  English 
Queens  hardly  mentions  the  martyrdoms  of  Queen  Mary's 
days !  Yet  Mary  was  not  called  "  Bloody  Mary  "  without 
reason,  and  scores  of  Protestants  were  burned  in  her 
reign. — Last,  but  not  least,  it  is  thought  very  bad  taste  in 
many  quarters  to  say  anything  which  throws  discredit  on 
the  Church  of  Rome.  Yet  it  is  as  certain  that  the 
Romish  Church  burned  our  English  Reformers  as  it  is 
that  William  the  Conqueror  won  the  battle  of  Hastings- 
These  difficulties  meet  me  face  to  face  as  I  walk  up  to 
the  subject  which  I  wish  to  unfold  in  this  paper.  I  know 
their  magnitude,  and  I  cannot  evade  them.  I  only  ask  my 
readers  to  give  me  a  patient  and  indulgent  hearing. 

After  all,  I  have  great  confidence  in  the  honesty  of 
Englishmen's  minds.  Truth  is  truth,  however  long  it 
may  be  neglected.  Facts  are  facts,  however  long  they 
may  lie  buried.  I  only  want  to  dig  up  some  old  facts 
which  the  sands  of  time  have  covered  over,  to  bring  to 

O 

the  light  of  day  some  old  English  monuments  which  have 
been  long  neglected,  to  unstop  some  old  wells  which  the 
prince  of  this  world  has  been  diligently  filling  with  earth. 
I  ask  my  readers  to  give  me  their  attention  for  a  few 
minutes,  and  I  trust  to  be  able  to  show  them  that  it  is 
good  to  examine  the  question,  "  Why  were  our  Reformers 
burned  ? * 

L  The  broad  facts  of  the  martyrdom  of  our  Reformers 
are  a  story  well  known  and  soon  told.  But  it  may  be 
useful  to  give  a  brief  outline  of  these  facts,  in  order  to 
supply  a  framework  to  our  subject. 

Edward  VI.,  "that  incomparable  young  prince,"  as 
Bishop  Burnet  justly  calls  him,  died  on  the  6th  July,  1553.. 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?      17 

Never,  perhaps,  did  any  royal  personage  in  this  land  die 
more  truly  lamented,  or  leave  behind  him  a  fairer 
reputation.  Never,  perhaps,  to  man's  poor  fallibla 
judgment,  did  the  cause  of  God's  truth  in  England  receive 
a  heavier  blow.  His  last  prayer  before  death  ought  not 
to  be  forgotten, — "  O  Lord  God,  defend  this  realm  from 
papistry,  and  maintain  Thy  true  religion."  It  was  a 
prayer,  I  believe,  not  offered  in  vain. 

After  a  foolish  and  deplorable  effort  to  obtain  the  crown 
for  Lady  Jane  Grey,  Edward  was  succeeded  by  his  eldest 
sister,  Mary,  daughter  of  Henry  VIII.  and  his  first  Queen, 
Catherine  of  Aragon,  and  best  known  in  English  history 
by  the  ill-omened  name  of  "  Bloody  Mary."  Mary  had 
been  brought  up  from  her  infancy  as  a  rigid  adherent  of 
the  Romish  Church.  She  was,  in  fact,  a  very  Papist  of 
Papists,  conscientious,  zealous,  bigoted,  and  narrow-minded 
in  the  extreme.-  She  began  at  once  to  pull  down  her 
brother's  work  in  every  possible  way,  and  to  restore  Popery 
in  its  worst  and  most  offensive  forms.  Step  by  step  she 
and  her  councillors  marched  back  to  Rome,  trampling 
down  one  by  one  every  obstacle,  and  as  thorough  as 
Lord  Strafford  in  going  straight  forward  to  their  mark. 
The  Mass  was  restored;  the  English  service  was  taken 
away;  the  works  of  Luther,  Zwingle,  Calvin,  Tyndale, 
Bucer,  Latimcr,  Hooper,  and  Cranmer  were  proscribed. 
Cardinal  Pole  was  invited  to  England.  The  foreign 
Protestants  resident  in  England  were  banished.  The 
leading  divines  of  the  Protestant  Church  of  England  were 
deprived  of  their  offices,  and,  while  some  escaped  to  the 
Continent,  many  were  put  in  prison.  The  old  statutes 
against  heresy  were  once  more  brought  forward,  primed 
and  loaded.  And  thus  by  the  beginning  of  1555  the 

B 


18  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

stage  was  cleared,  and  that  bloody  tragedy,  in  which 
Bishops  Bonner  and  Gardiner  played  so  prominent  a  part, 
was  ready  to  begin. 

For,  unhappily  for  the  credit  of  human  nature,  Mary's 
advisers  were  not  content  with  depriving  and  imprisoning 
the  leading  English  Reformers.  It  was  resolved  to  make 
them  abjure  their  principles,  or  to  put  them  to  death.  One 
by  one  they  were  called  before  special  Commissions,  ex 
amined  about  their  religious  opinions,  and  called  upon  to 
recant,  on  pain  of  death  if  they  refused.  No  third  course, 
no  alternative  was  left  to  them.  They  were  either  to  give 
up  Protestantism  and  receive  Popery,  or  else  they  were  to 
be  burned  alive.  Refusing  to  recant,  they  were  one  by 
one  handed  over  to  the  secular  power,  publicly  brought 
out  and  chained  to  stakes,  publicly  surrounded  with 
faggots,  and  publicly  sent  out  of  the  world  by  that  most 
cruel  and  painful  of  deaths, — the  death  by  fire.  All  these 
are  broad  facts  which  all  the  apologists  of  Rome  can 
never  gainsay  or  deny. 

It  is  a  broad  fact  that  during  the  four  last  years  of 
Queen  Mary's  reign  no  less  than  288  persons  were  burnt 
at  the  stake  for  their  adhesion  to  the  Protestant  faith. 

In  1555  there  were  burnt  71 

„  155G  „  89 

„  1557  ,,  88 

,  1558  40 


288* 


*  These  numbers  are  given  by  Soamcs,  in  his  history  of  the 
Reformation  (vol.  iv.  p.  587),  and  are  taken  from  Strype.  Other 
historians  give  higher  numbers. 


WHY   WERE   OUR  REFORMERS   BURNED?  19 

fndeed,  the  faggots  never  ceased  to  blaze  whilst  Mary  was 
alive,  and  five  martyrs  were  burnt  in  Canterbury  only  a 
week  before  her  death.  Out  of  these  288  sufferers,  be  it 
remembered,  one  was  an  archbishop,  four  were  bishops, 
twenty-one  were  clergymen,  fifty-five  were  women,  and 
four  were  children. 

It  is  a  broad  fact  that  these  288  sufferers  were  not  put 
to  death  for  any  offence  against  property  or  person.  They 
were  not  rebels  against  the  Queen's  authority,  caught 
red-handed  in  arms.  They  were  not  thieves,  or  murderers, 
or  drunkards,  or  unbelievers,  or  men  and  women  of 
immoral  lives.  On  the  contrary,  they  were,  with  barely 
an  exception,  some  of  the  holiest,  purest,  and  best 
Christians  in  England,  and  several  of  them  the  most 
learned  men  of  their  day. 

I  might  say  much  about  the  gross  injustice  and 
unfairness  with 'which  they  were  treated  at  their  various 
examinations.  Their  trials,  if  indeed  they  can  be  called 
trials,  were  a  mere  mockery  of  justice. — I  might  say  much 
about  the  abominable  cruelty  with  which  most  of  them 
were  treated,  both  in  prison  and  at  the  stake.  But  you 
must  read  Fox's  Martyrs  on  these  points. — I  make  no 
comment  on  the  stupid  impolicy  of  the  whole  persecution. 
Never  did  Rome  do  herself  such  irreparable  damage  as 
she  did  in  Mary's  reign.  Even  unlearned  people,  who 
could  not  argue  much,  saw  clearly  that  a  Church  which 
committed  such  horrible  bloodshed  could  hardly  be  the 
one  true  Church  of  Christ !  *  But  I  have  no  time  for  all 


*  A  lady  in  high  position  told  Bonner  in  a  letter,  after  Philpot's 
death,  that  his  cruelty  had  lost  the  hearts  of  20;000  Papists  in  twelvo 
monthjL 


20  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

this.  I  must  conclude  this  general  sketch  of  this  part 
of  my  subject  with  two  short  remarks. 

For  one  thing,  I  ask  my  readers  never  to  forget  that  for 
the  burning  of  our  Reformers  the  Church  of  Rome  is  wholly 
and  entirely  responsible.  The  attempt  to  transfer  the 
responsibility  from  the  Church  to  the  secular  power  is  a 
miserable  and  dishonest  subterfuge.  The  men  of  Judah 
did  not  slay  Samson;  but  they  delivered  him  bound  into 
the  hands  of  the  Philistines !  The  Church  of  Rome  did 
not  slay  the  Reformers;  but  she  condemned  them,  and 
the  secular  power  executed  the  condemnation !  The 
precise  measure  of  responsibility  which  ought  to  be  meted 
out  to  each  of  Rome's  agents  in  the  matter  is  a  point  that 
I  do  not  care  to  settle.  Miss  Strickland,  in  her  "  Lives  of 
the  Queens  of  England,"  has  tried  in  vain  to  shift  the 
blame  from  unhappy  Mary.  With  all  the  zeal  of  a  woman, 
she  has  laboured  hard  to  whitewash  her  character.  The 
reader  of  her  biography  will  find  little  about  martyrdoms. 
But  it  will  not  do.  Mr.  Froude's  volume  tells  a  very 
different  tale.  The  Queen,  and  her  Council,  and  the 
Parliament,  and  the  Popish  Bishops,  and  Cardinal  Pole, 
must  be  content  to  share  the  responsibility  among  them. 
One  thing  alone  is  very  certain.  They  will  never  succeed 
in  shifting  the  responsibility  off  the  shoulders  of  the 
Church  of  Rome.  Like  the  Jews  and  Pontius  Pilate, 
when  our  Lord  was  crucified,  all  parties  must  bear  the 
blame.  THE  BLOOD  is  upon  them  all 

For  another  thing,  I  wish  my  readers  to  remember  that 
the  burning  of  the  Marian  martyrs  is  an  act  that  the  Church 
of  Rome  has  never  repudiated,  apologized  for,  or  repented 
of,  down  to  the  present  day.  There  stands  the  huge  blot 
in  her  escutcheon ;  and  there  stands  the  huge  fact  side  by 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?      2i 

side,  that  she  has  never  made  any  attempt  to  wipe  it  away. 
Never  has  she  repented  of  her  treatment  of  the  Vaudois 
and  the  Albigenses; — never  has  she  repented  of  the 
wholesale  murders  of  the  Spanish  Inquisition ; — never  has 
she  repented  of  the  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew ; — never 
has  she  repented  of  the  burning  of  the  English  Reformers. 
"We  should  make  a  note  of  that  fact,  and  let  it  sink  down 
into  our  minds.  Rome  never  changes.  Rome  will  never 
admit  that  she  has  made  mistakes.  She  burned  our 
English  Reformers  300  years  ago.  She  tried  hard  to 
stamp  out  by  violence  the  Protestantism  which  she  could 
not  prevent  spreading  by  arguments.  If  Rome  had  only 
the  power,  I  am  not  sure  that  she  would  not  attempt  to 
play  the  whole  game  over  again, 

II.  The  question  may  now  arise  in  our  minds,  Who 
were  the  leading  English  Reformers  that  were  burned  \ 
What  were  their  names,  and  what  were  the  circumstances 
attending  their  deaths  ?  These  are  questions  which  may 
very  properly  be  asked,  and  questions  to  which  I  proceed 
at  once  to  give  an  answer. 

In  this  part  of  my  paper  I  am  very  sensible  that  I  shall 
seem  to  many  to  go  over  old  ground.  But  I  am  bold  to 
say  that  it  is  ground  which  ought  often  to  be  gone  over. 
I,  for  one,  want  the  names  of  our  martyred  Reformers 
to  be  "Household  Words"  in  every  Protestant  family 
throughout  the  land.  I  shall,  therefore,  make  no  apology 
for  giving  the  names  of  the  nine  principal  English  martyrs 
in  the  chronological  order  of  their  deaths,  and  for  supplying 
you  with  a  few  facts  about  each  of  them.  Never,  I 
believe,  since  Christ  left  the  world,  did  Christian  men  ever 
meet  a  cruel  death  with  such  glorious  faith,  and  hope,  and 


22  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

patience,  as  tlicse  Marian  martyrs.  Never  did  dying  men 
leave  behind  them  such  a  rich  store  of  noble  sayings, 
sayings  which  deserve  to  be  written  in  golden  letters  in 
our  histories,  and  handed  down  to  our  children's  children. 

(1)  The  first  leading  English  Reformer  who  broke  the 
ice  and  crossed  the  river,  as  a  martyr  in  Mary's  reign,  was 
John  Rogers,  a.  London  Minister,  Vicar  of  St.  Sepulchre's, 
and  Prebendary  and  Reader  of  Divinity  at  St.  Paul's. 
He  was  burned  in  Smithfield  on  Monday,  the  4th  ol 
February,  1555.  Rogers  was  born  at  Deritend,  in  the 
parish  of  .Aston,  near  Birmingham.  He  was  a  man  who, 
in  one  respect,  had  done  more  for  the  cause  of  Protestantism 
than  any  of  his  fellow-sufferers.  In  saying  this  I  refer  to 
the  fact  that  he  had  assisted  Tyndale  and  Coverdale  in 
bringing  out  a  most  important  version  of  the  English 
Bible,  a  version  commonly  known  as  Matthews'  Bible. 
Indeed,  he  was  condemned  as  "Rogers,  alias  Matthews." 
This  circumstance,  in  all  human  probability,  made  him  a 
marked  man,  and  was  one  cause  why  he  was  the  first  who 
was  brought  to  the  stake. 

Rogers'  examination  before  Gardiner  gives  us  the  idea 
of  his  being  a  bold,  thorough  Protestant,  who  had  fully 
made  up  his  mind  on  all  points  of  the  Romish  controversy, 
and  was  able  to  give  a  reason  for  his  opinions.  At  any 
rate,  he  seems  to  have  silenced  and  abashed  his  examiners 
even  more  than  most  of  the  martyrs  did.  But  arguments, 
of  course,  went  for  nothing.  "  Woe  to  the  conquered ! " 
If  he  had  the  word,  his  enemies  had  the  sword.* 


*  Rogers'  prophetical  words  in  prison,  addressed  to  Day,  printer  of 
Pox's  "Acts  and  Monuments,"  are  well  worth  quoting:  "Thou  shalt 
live  to  see  the  .".Iteration  of  thia  religion,  and  the  Gospel  freely  preached 


WHY   WERE   OUR  REFORMERS   BURNED?  23 

On  the  morning  of  his  martyrdom  he  was  roused 
hastily  in  his  cell  in  Newgate,  and  hardly  allowed  time  to 
dress  himself.  He  was  then  led  forth  to  Smithfield  on 
foot,  within  sight  of  the  Church  of  St.  Sepulchre,  where 
he  had  preached,  and  through  the  streets  of  the  parish 
where  he  had  done  the  work  of  a  pastor.  By  the  wayside 
stood  his  Avife  and  ten  children  (one  a  baby)  whom  the 
diabolical  cruelty  of  Bishop  Bonner  had  flatly  refused  him 
leave  to  see  in  prison.  He  just  saw  them,  but  was  hardly 
allowed  to  stop,  and  then  walked  on  calmly  to  the  stake, 
repeating  the  51st  Psalm.  An  immense  crowd  lined  the 
street,  and  filled  every  available  spot  in  Smithfield.  Up 
to  that  day  men  could  not  tell  how  English  Reformers 
would  behave  in  the  face  of  death,  and  could  hardly 
believe  that  Prebendaries  and  Dignitaries  would  actually 
give  their  bodies  to  be  burned  for  their  religion.  But 
when  they  saw  John  Rogers,  the  first  martyr,  walking 
steadily  and  unflinchingly  into  a  fiery  grave,  the  enthu 
siasm  of  the  crowd  knew  no  bounds.  They  rent  the  air 
with  thunders  of  applause.  Even  Noailles,  the  French 
Ambassador,  wrote  home  a  description  of  the  scene,  and 
said  that  Rogers  went  to  death  "  as  if  he  was  walking 
to  his  wedding."  By  God's  great  mercy  he  died  with 
comparative  ease.  And  so  the  first  Marian  martyr  passed 
away. 

(2)  The  second  leading  Reformer  who  died  for  Christ's 
truth  in  Mary's  reign  was  John  Hooper,  Bishop  of 


again.  Therefore,  have  me  commended  to  my  brethren,  as  well  in  exile 
as  here,  and  bid  them  be  circumspect  in  displacing,  the  Papists  and 
putting  good  ministers  into  Churches,  or  else  their  end  will  be  worse 
than  ours." — Fox,  iii.  p.  309, 


24  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Gloucester.     He  was  burned  at  Gloucester  on  Friday,  the 
9th  of  February,  1555. 

Hooper  was  a  Somersetshire  man  by  birth.  In  many 
respects  he  was,  perhaps,  the  noblest  martyr  of  them  all. 
Of  all  Edward  the  Sixth's  bishops,  none  has  left  behind 
him  a  higher  reputation  for  personal  holiness,  and  diligent 
preaching  and  working  in  his  diocese.  None,  judging 
from  his  literary  remains,  had  clearer  and  more  Scriptural 
views  on  all  points  in  theology.  Some  might  say  that 
Edward  the  Sixth's  Bishop  of  Gloucester  was  too 
Calvinistic ;  but  he  was  not  more  so  than  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles.  Hooper  was  a  far-sighted  man,  and  saw  the 
danger  of  leaving  nest-eggs  for  Romanism  in  the  Church 
of  England.  In  his  famous  dispute  with  Cranmer  and 
the  other  bishops  about  wearing  Romish  vestments  at  his 
consecration,  it  has  been,  I  know,  the  fashion  to  condemn 
him  as  too  stiff  and  unbending.  I  say  boldly  that  the 
subsequent  history  of  our  Church  makes  it  doubtful 
whether  we  ought  not  to  reverse  our  verdict.  The  plain 
truth  is,  that  in  principle  Hooper  was  right,  and  his 
opponents  were  wrong. 

A  man  like  Hooper,  firm,  stern,  not  naturally  genial, 
unbending  and  unsparing  in  his  denunciation  of  sin,  was 
sure  to  have  many  enemies.  He  was  one  of  the  first 
marked  for  destruction  as  soon  as  Popery  was  restored. 
He  was  summoned  to  London  at  a  very  early  stage  of  the 
Marian  persecution,  and,  after  lingering  eighteen  months 
in  prison,  and  going  through  the  form  of  examination  by 
Bonner,  Gardiner,  Tunstall,  and  Day,  was  degraded  from 
his  office,  and  sentenced  to  be  burned  as  a  heretic. 

At  first  it  was  fully  expected  that  he  would  suffer  in 
Smithfield  with  Rogers.  This  plan,  for  some  unknown 


WHY   WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?  26 

reason,  was  given  up,  and  to  his  great  satisfaction  Hooper 
was  sent  down  to  Gloucester,  and  burnt  in  his  own  diocese, 
and  in  sight  of  his  own  cathedral.  On  his  arrival  there, 
he  was  received  with  every  sign  of  sorrow  and  respect  by 
a  vast  multitude,  who  went  out  on  the  Cirencester  Roa<l 
to  meet  him,  and  was  lodged  for  the  night  in  the  house  of 
a  Mr.  Ingram,  which  is  still  standing,  and  probably  not 
much  altered.  There  Sir  Anthony  Kingston,  whom  the 
good  Bishop  had  been  the  means  of  converting  from  a 
sinful  life,  entreated  him,  with  many  tears,  to  spare  himself, 
and  urged  him  to  remember  that  "  Life  was  sweet,  and 
death  was  bitter."  To  this  the  noble  martyr  returned 
this  memorable  reply,  that  "  Eternal  life  was  more  sweet, 
and  eternal  death  was  more  bitter." 

On  the  morning  of  his  martyrdom  he  was  led  forth, 
walking,  to  the  place  of  execution,  where  an  immense 
crowd  awaited  him.  It  was  market-day;  and  it  was 
reckoned  that  nearly  7000  people  were  present.  The 
stake  was  planted  directly  in  front  of  the  western  gate  of 
the  Cathedral-close,  and  within  100  yards  of  the  deanery 
and  the  east  front  of  the  Cathedral.  The  exact  spot  is 
marked  now  by  a  beautiful  memorial  at  the  east  end  of 
the  churchyard  of  St.  Mary-de-Lode.  The  window  over 
the  gate,  where  Popish  friars  watched  the  Bishop's  dying 
agonies,  stands  unaltered  to  this  day. 

When  Hooper  arrived  at  this  spot,  he  was  allowed  to 
pray,  though  strictly  forbidden  to  speak  to  the  people. 
And  there  he  knelt  down,  and  prayed  a  prayer  which  has 
been  preserved  and  recorded  by  Fox,  and  is  of  exquisitely 
touching  character.  Even  then  a  box  was  put  before  him 
containing  a  full  pardon,  if  he  would  only  recant.  His 
only  answer  was,  "Away  with  it;  if  you  love  my  soul, 


26  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

away  with  it ! "  He  was  then  fastened  to  the  stake  bj 
an  iron  round  his  waist,  and  fought  his  last  fight  with 
the  king  of  terrors.  Of  all  the  martyrs,  none  perhaps, 
except  Ridley,  suffered  more  than  Hooper  did.  Three 
times  the  faggots  had  to  be  lighted,  because  they  would 
not  burn  properly.  Three  quarters  of  an  hour  the  noble 
sufferer  endured  the  mortal  agony,  as  Fox  says,  "  neither 
moving  backward,  forward,  nor  to  any  side,"  but  only 
praying,  "Lord  Jesus,  have  mercy  on  me;  Lord  Jesus, 
receive  my  spirit;"  and  beating  his  breast  with  one 
hand  till  it  was  burned  to  a  stump.  And  so  the  good 
Bishop  of  Gloucester  passed  away. 

(3)  The  third  leading  Reformer  who  suffered  in  Mary's 
reign  was  Roivland  Taylor,  Rector  of  Hadleigh,  in 
Suffolk.  He  was  burned  on  Aldham  Common,  close  to  his 
own  parish,  the  same  day  that  Hooper  died  at  Glouceste^ 
on  Friday,  the  9th  February,  1555. 

Rowland  Taylor  is  one  of  whom  we  know  little,  except 
that  he  was  a  great  friend  of  Cranmer,  and  a  doctor  of 
divinity  and  canon  law.  But  that  he  was  a  man  of  high 
standing  among  the  Reformers  is  evident,  from  his  being 
ranked  by  his  enemies  with  Hooper,  Rogers,  and  Bradford; 
and  that  he  was  an  exceedingly  able  and  ready  divine  is 
clear  from  his  examination,  recorded  by  Fox.  Indeed, 
there  is  hardly  any  of  the  sufferers  about  whom  the  old 
Marty rologist  has  gathered  together  so  many  touching 
and  striking  things.  One  might  think  he  was  a  personal 
friend. 

Striking  was  the  reply  which  he  made  to  his  friends  at 
Hadleigh,  who  urged  him  to  flee,  as  he  might  have  done, 
when  he  was  first  summoned  to  appear  in  London  before 
Gardiner:— 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?  27 

"  What  will  yc  have  mo  to  do  ?  I  am  old,  and  have  already 
lived  too  long  to  see  these  terrible  and  most  wicked  days.  Ply 
you,  and  do  as  your  conscience  leadeth  you.  I  am  fully  determined, 
with  God's  grace,  to  go  to  this  Bishop,  and  tell  him  to  his  beard 
that  he  doth  naught.  I  believe  before  God  that  I  shall  never  be 
able  to  do  for  my  God  such  good  service  as  I  may  do  now." — Fox's 
"Acts  and  Monuments,"  vol.  iii.  p.  138. 

Striking  were  the  replies  which  he  made  to  Gardiner 
and  his  other  examiners.  None  spoke  more  pithily, 
weightily,  and  powerfully  than  did  this  Suffolk  incumbent. 

Striking  and  deeply  affecting  was  his  last  testament  and 
legacy  of  advice  to  his  wife,  his  family,  and  parishioners, 
though  far  too  long  to  be  inserted  here,  excepting  the  last 
sentence : — 

"  For  God's  sake  beware  of  Popery :  for  though  it  appear  to 
have  in  it  unity,  yet  the  same  is  vanity  and  Antichristiauity,  and 
not  in  Christ's  faith  and  verity." — Fox's  "  Acts  and  Monuments," 
vol.  iii.  p.  144, 

He  was  sent  down  from  London  to  Hadleigh,  to  his 
great  delight,  to  be  burned  before  the  eyes  of  his  parish 
ioners.  When  he  got  within  two  miles  of  Hadleigh,  the 
Sheriff  of  Suffolk  asked  him  how  he  felt.  "God  be 
praised,  Master  Sheriff,"  was  his  reply,  "  never  better. 
For  now  I  am  almost  at  home.  I  lack  but  just  two  stiles 
to  go  over,  and  I  am  even  at  my  Father's  house." 

As  he  rode  through  the  streets  of  the  little  town  of 
Hadleigh,  he  found  them  lined  with  crowds  of  his 
parishioners,  who  had  heard  of  his  approach,  and  came 
out  of  their  houses  to  greet  him  with  many  tears  and 
lamentations.  To  them  he  only  made  one  constant 
address,  "  I  have  preached  to  you  God's  Word  and  truth, 
and  am  come  this  day  to  seal  it  with  my  blood." 


28  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

On  coming  to  Aldham  Common,  where  he  was  to 
suffer,  they  told  him  where  he  was.  Then  said  he, — 
"  Thank  God,  I  am  even  at  home." 

When  he  was  stripped  to  his  shirt  and  ready  for  the 
stake,  he  said,  with  a  loud  voice, — "  Good  people,  I  have 
taught  you  nothing  but  God's  Holy  Word,  and  those 
lessons  that  I  have  taken  out  of  the  Bible;  and  I  am 
come  hither  to  seal  it  with  my  blood."  He  would  probably 
have  said  more,  but,  like  all  the  other  martyrs,  he  was 
strictly  forbidden  to  speak,  and  even  now  was  struck 
violently  on  the  head  for  saying  these  few  words.  He 
then  knelt  down  and  prayed,  a  poor  woman  of  the  parish 
insisting,  in  spite  of  every  effort  to  prevent  her,  in  kneel 
ing  down  with  him.  After  this,  he  was  chained  to  the 
stake,  and  repeating  the  51st  Psalm,  and  crying  to  God, 
"  Merciful  Father,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  receive  my  soul 
into  Thy  hands,"  stood  quietly  amidst  the  flames  without 
crying  or  moving,  till  one  of  the  guards  dashed  out  his 
brains  with  a  halberd.  And  so  this  good  old  Suffolk 
incumbent  passed  away. 

(4)  The  fourth  leading  Reformer  who  suffered  in  Mary's 
reign  was  Robert  Ferrar,  Bishop  of  St.  David's,  in  Wales. 
He  was  burned  at  Carmarthen  on  Friday,  the  30th  March, 
1555.  Little  is  known  of  this  good  man  beyond  the  fact 
that  he  was  born  at  Halifax,  and  was  the  last  Prior  of 
Nostel,  in  Yorkshire,  an  office  which  he  surrendered  in 
1540.  He  was  also  Chaplain  to  Archbishop  Cranmer  and 
to  the  Protector  Somerset,  and  to  this  influence  he  owed 
his  elevation  to  the  Episcopal  bench.  He  was  first 
imprisoned  for  various  trivial  and  ridiculous  charges  on 
temporal  matters,  in  the  latter  days  of  Edward  the  Sixth, 
after  the  fall  of  the  Protector  Somerset,  and  afterwards 


WHY"  WEEE  OUR  REFORMERS  RURNED  V  29 

was  brought  before  Gardiner,  with  Hooper,  Rogers,  and 
Bradford,  on  the  far  more  serious  matter  of  his  doctrine. 
The  articles  exhibited  against  him  clearly  show  that  in  all 
questions  of  faith  he  was  of  one  mind  with  his  fellow- 
martyrs.  Like  Hooper  and  Taylor,  he  was  condemned  to 
be  burned  in  the  place  where  he  was  best  known,  and  was 
sent  down  from  London  to  Carmarthen.  What  happened 
there  at  his  execution  is  related  very  briefly  by  Fox, 
partly,  no  doubt,  because  of  the  great  distance  of 
Carmarthen  from  London  in  those  pre-railways  days; 
partly,  perhaps,  because  most  of  those  who  saw  Ferrar 
burned  could  speak  nothing  but  Welsh.  One  single  fact 
is  recorded  which  shows  the  good  Bishop's  courage  and 
constancy  in  a  striking  light.  He  had  told  a  friend  before 
the  day  of  execution  that  if  he  saw  him  once  stir  in  the 
fire  from  the  pain  of  his  burning,  he  need  not  believe  the 
doctrines  he  had  taught.  When  the  awful  time  came,  he 
did  not  forget  his  promise,  and,  by  God's  grace,  he  kept  it 
well.  He  stood  in  the  flames  holding  out  his  hands  till 
they  were  burned  to  stumps,  until  a  bystander  in  mercy 
struck  him  on  the  head,  and  put  an  end  to  his  sufferings. 
And  so  the  Welsh  Bishop  passed  away. 

(5)  The  fifth  leading  Reformer  who  suffered  in  Mary's 
reign  was  John  Bradford,  Prebendary  of  St.  Paul's,  and 
Chaplain  to  Bishop  Ridley.  He  was  burned  in  Smithfield 
on  Monday,  July  the  1st,  1555,  at  the  early  age  ot 
thirty-five.  Few  of  the  English  martyrs,  perhaps,  are 
cotter  known  than  Bradford,  and  none  certainly  deserve 
better  their  reputation.  Strype  calls  Bradford,  Cranmer, 
Ridley,  and  Latimer,  the  "four  prime  pillars"  of  the 
Reformed  Church  of  England.  He  was  by  birth  a 
Manchester  man,  and  to  the  end  of  his  life  retained  a 


30  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

strong  interest  in  the  district  with  which  he  was  connected, 
At  an  early  age  his  high  talents  commended  him  to  the 
notice  of  men  in  high  quarters,  and  he  was  appointed  one 
of  the  six  royal  chaplains  who  were  sent  about  England  to 
preach  up  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation.  Bradford's 
commission  was  to  preach  in  Lancashire  and  Cheshire,  and 
he  seems  to  have  performed  his  duty  with  singular  ability 
and  success.  He  preached  constantly  in  Manchester, 
Liverpool,  Bolton,  Bury,  Wigan,  Ashton,  Stockport, 
Prestwich,  Middleton,  and  Chester,  with  great  benefit  to 
the  cause  of  Protestantism,  and  with  great  effect  on  men's 
souls.  The  consequence  was  what  might  have  been 
expected.  Within  a  month  of  Queen  Mary's  accession 
Bradford  was  in  prison,  and  never  left  it  until  he  was 
burned.  His  youth,  his  holiness,  and  his  extraordinary 
reputation  as  a  preacher,  made  him  an  object  of  great 
interest  during  his  imprisonment,  and  immense  efforts 
were  made  to  pervert  him  from  the  Protestant  faith.  All 
these  efforts,  however,  were  in  vain.  As  he  lived,  so  he 
died* 

On  the  day  of  his  execution  he  was  led  out  from 
Newgate  to  Smithfield  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
amid  such  a  crowd  of  people  as  was  never  seen  either 
before  or  after.  A  Mrs.  Honeywood,  who  lived  to  the  age 
of  ninety-six,  and  died  about  1620,  remembered  going  to 
see  him  burned,  and  her  shoes  being  trodden  off  by  the 


*  Bradford  seems  to  have  had  a  very  strong  feeling  about  the  causes 
for  which  God  permitted  the  Marian  persecution.  Writing  to  his 
mother  from  prison,  he  says:  "Ye  all  know  there  never  was  more 
knowledge  of  God,  and  less  godly  living  and  true  serving  of  God. — 
God,  therefore,  is  now  come,  and  because  He  will  not  damn  us  with  th? 
world  He  punisheth  us." — Fox,  iii.  p.  255, 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED  ?  31 

crowd.  Indeed,  when  he  came  to  the  stake  the  Sheriffs 
of  London  were  so  alarmed  at  the  press  that  they 
would  not  allow  him  and  his  fellow-sufferer,  Leaf,  to  pray 
as  long  as  they  wished.  "  Arise,"  they  said, "  and  make  an 
end ;  for  the  press  of  the  people  is  great." 

"  At  that  word,"  says  Fox,  "  they  both  stood  up  upon 
their  feet,  and  then  Master  Bradford  took  a  faggot  in  his 
hands  and  kissed  it,  and  so  likewise  the  stake."  When  he 
came  to  the  stake  he  held  up  his  hands,  and,  looking  up 
to  heaven,  said,  "  O  England,  England,  repent  thee  of  thy 
sins !  Beware  of  idolatry ;  beware  of  false  Antichrists ! 
Take  heed  they  do  not  deceive  you ! "  After  that  he 
turned  to  the  young  man  Leaf,  who  suffered  with  him,  and 
said,  "  Be  of  good  comfort,  brother ;  for  we  shall  have  a 
merry  supper  with  the  Lord  this  night."  After  that  he 
spoke  no  more  that  man  could  hear,  excepting  that  he 
embraced  the  reeds,  and  said,  "Strait  is  the  gate,  and 
narrow  is  the  way,  that  leadeth  to  eternal  life,  and  few 
there  be  that  find  it."  "  He  embraced  the  flames,"  says 
Fuller,  "as  a  fresh  gale  of  wind  in  a  hot  summer  day." 
And  so,  in  the  prime  of  life,  he  passed  away. 

(6,  7)  The  sixth  and  seventh  leading  Reformers  who 
suffered  in  Mary's  reign  were  two  whose  names  are 
familiar  to  every  Englishman, — Nicholas  Ridley,  Bishop  of 
London,  and  Hugh  Latimcr,  once  Bishop  of  Worcester. 
They  were  both  burned  at  Oxford,  back  to  back,  at  one 
stake,  on  the  16th  of  October,  1555.  Ridley  was  born  at 
Willimoudswike,  in  Northumberland,  on  the  borders. 
Latimer  was  born  at  Thurcaston,  in  Leicestershire. ,  The 
history  of  these  two  great  English  Protestants  is  so  well 
known  to  most  people  that  I  need  not  say  much  about  it. 
Next  to  Cranmer,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  no  twq 


32  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

:nen  did  so  much  to  bring  about  the  establishment  of  the 
principles  of  the  Reformation  in  England.  Latimer,  as  an 
extraordinary  popular  preacher,  and  Ridley,  as  a  learned 
man  and  an  admirable  manager  of  the  Metropolitan  diocese 
of  London,  have  left  behind  them  reputations  which  never 
have  been  surpassed.  As  a  matter  of  course,  they  were 
among  the  first  that  Bonner  and  Gardiner  struck  at  when 
Mary  came  to  the  throne,  and  were  persecuted  with 
relentless  severity  until  their  deaths. 

How  they  were  examined  again  and  again  by  Com 
missioners  about  the  great  points  in  controversy  between 
Protestants  and  Rome, — how  they  were  shamefully  baited, 
teased,  and  tortured  by  every  kind  of  unfair  and  un 
reasonable  dealing, — how  they  gallantly  fought  a  good 
fight  to  the  end,  and  never  gave  way  for  a  moment  to 
their  adversaries, — all  these  are  matters  with  which  I 
need  not  trouble  my  readers.  Are  they  not  all  fairly 
chronicled  in  the  pages  of  good  old  Fox  ?  I  will  only 
mention  a  few  circumstances  connected  with  their 
deaths. 

On  the  day  of  their  martyrdom  they  were  brought 
separately  to  the  place  of  execution,  which  was  at  the  end 
of  Broad  Street,  Oxford,  close  to  Balliol  College.  Ridley 
arrived  on  the  ground  first,  and  seeing  Latimer  come 
afterwards,  ran  to  him  and  kissed  him,  saying,  "  Be  of  good 
heart,  brother;  for  God  will  either  assuage  the  fury  of  the 
flames,  or  else  strengthen  us  to  abide  it."  They  then 
prayed  earnestly,  and  talked  with  one  another,  though  no 
one  could  hear  what  they  said.  After  this  they  had  to 
listen  to  a  sermon  by  a  wretched  renegade  divine  named 
Smith,  and,  being  forbidden  to  make  any  answer,  were 
commanded  to  make  ready  for  death. 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?      33 

Ridley's  last  words  before  the  fire  was  lighted  were 
these, — "Heavenly  Father,  I  give  Thee  most  hearty 
thanks  that  Thou  hast  called  me  to  a  profession  of  Thee 
even  unto  death.  I  beseech  Thee,  Lord  God,  have  mercy 
on  this  realm  of  England,  and  deliver  the  same  from  all 
her  enemies."  Latimer's  last  words  were  like  the  blast  of 
a  trumpet,  which  rings  even  to  this  day, — "Be  of  good 
comfort,  Master  Ridley,  and  play  the  man ;  we  shall  this 
day,  by  God's  grace,  light  such  a  candle  in  England  as  I 
trust  shall  never  be  put  out." 

When  the  flames  began  to  rise,  Ridley  cried  out  with  a 
loud  voice  in  Latin,  "  Into  thy  hands,  O  Lord,  I  commend 
my  spirit:  Lord,  receive  my  spirit,"  and  afterwards 
repeated  these  last  words  in  English.  Latimer  cried  as 
vehemently  on  the  other  side  of  the  stake,  "Father  of 
heaven,  receive  my  soul." 

Latimer  soon  died.  An  old  man,  above  eighty  years  of 
age,  it  took  but  little  to  set  his  spirit  free  from  its  earthly 
tenement.  Ridley  suffered  long  and  painfully,  from  the 
bad  management  of  the  fire  by  those  who  attended  the 
execution.  At  length,  however,  the  flames  reached  a  vital 
part  of  him,  and  he  fell  at  Latimer's  feet,  and  was  at  rest. 
And  so  the  two  great  Protestant  bishops  passed  away. 
"  They  were  lovely  and  beautiful  in  their  lives,  and  in 
death  they  were  not  divided." 

(8)  The  eighth  leading  English  Reformer  who  suffered 
in  Mary's  reign  was  John  Philpot,  Archdeacon  of 
Winchester.  He  was  burned  in  Smithfield  on  Wednesday, 
December  the  18th,  1555.  Philpot  is  one  of  the  martyrs 
of  whom  we  know  little  comparatively,  except  that  he  was 
born  at  Compton,  in  Hampshire,  was  of  good  family,  and 
connected,  and  had  a  Very  high  reputation  for 
G 


84  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

learning.  The  mere  fact  that  at  the  beginning  of 
Mary's  reign  he  was  one  of  the  leading  champions  of 
Protestantism  in  the  mock  discussions  which  were  held 
in  Convocation,  is  sufficient  to  show  that  he  was  no 
common  man.  The  relentless  virulence  with  which  he 
was  persecuted  by  Gardiner  is  easily  accounted  for,  when 
we  remember  that  Gardiner,  when  he  was  deposed  from 
his  See  in  Edward  VI.'s  time,  was  Bishop  of  Winchester, 
and  would  naturally  regard  his  successor,  Bishop  Ponet, 
and  all  his  officials,  with  intense  hatred.  A  Popish 
bishop  was  not  likely  to  spare  a  Protestant  archdeacon, 
i  The  thirteen  examinations  of  Philpot  before  the  Popish 
bishops  are  given  by  Fox  at  great  length,  and  fill  no  less 
than  one  hundred  and  forty  pages  of  one  of  the  Parker 
Society  volumes.  The  length  to  which  they  were  pro 
tracted  shows  plainly  how  anxious  his  judges  were  to 
turn  him  from  his  principles.  The  skill  with  which  the 
Archdeacon  maintained  his  ground,  alone  and  unaided, 
gives  a  most  favourable  impression  of  his  learning,  no  less 
than  of  his  courage  and  patience. 

The  night  before  his  execution  he  received  a  message, 
while  at  supper  in  Newgate,  to  the  effect  that  he  was  to 
be  burned  next  day.  He  answered  at  once,  "  I  am  ready : 
God  grant  me  strength  and  a  joyful  resurrection."  He 
then  went  into  his  bed  room,  and  thanked  God  that  he 
was  counted  worthy  to  suffer  for  His  truth. 

The  next  morning,  at  eight  o'clock,  the  Sheriffs  called 
for  him,  and  conducted  him  to  Smithfield.  The  road  was 
foul  and  muddy,  as  it  was  the  depth  of  winter,  and  the 
officers  took  him  up  in  their  arms  to  carry  him  to  the 
stake.  Then  he  said,  merrily,  alluding  to  what  he  had 
probably  gecii  at  Rome,  when  travelling  in  his  early  days, 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?  35 

"  What,  will  you  make  me  a  Pope  ?  I  am  content  to  go 
to  my  journey's  end  on  foot." 

When  he  came  into  Smithfield,  he  kneeled  down  and 
said,  "I  will  pay  my  vows  in  thee,  O  Smithfield."  He 
then  kissed  the  stake  and  said,  "  Shall  I  disdain  to  suffer 
at  this  stake,  seeing  my  Redeemer  did  not  refuse  to  suffer 
a  most  vile  death  on  the  cross  for  me  ? "  After  that,  he 
meekly  repeated  the  106th,  107th,  and  108th  Psalms; 
and  being  chained  to  the  stake,  died  very  quietly.  And 
so  the  good  Archdeacon  passed  away. 

(9)  The  ninth  and  last  leading  Reformer  who  suffered 
in  Mary's  reign  was  Thomas  Cranmer,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury.  He  was  burned  at  Oxford,  on  the  21st 
of  March,  1556.  Cranmer  was  born  at  Aslacton,  in 
Nottinghamshire.  There  is  no  name  among  the  English 
martyrs  so  well  known  in  history  as  his.  There  is  none 
certainly  in  the  list  of  our  Reformers  to  whom  the  Church 
of  England,  on  the  whole,  is  so  much  indebted.  He  was 
only  a  mortal  man,  and  had  his  weaknesses  and  infirmities, 
it  must  be  admitted ;  but  still,  he  was  a  great  man,  and  a 
good  man. 

Cranmer,  we  must  always  remember,  was  brought 
prominently  forward  at  a  comparatively  early  period 
in  the  English  Reformation,  and  was  made  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury  at  a  time  when  his  views  of  religion 
were  confessedly  half-formed  and  imperfect.  Whenever 
quotations  from  Cranmer's  writings  are  brought  forward 
by  the  advocates  of  semi-Romanism  in  the  Church  of 
England,  you  should  always  ask  carefully  to  what  period 
of  his  life  those  quotations  belong.  In  forming  your 
estimate  of  Cranmer,  do  not  forget  his  antecedents.  He 
was  a  man  who  had  the  honesty  to  grope  l^is  way  into 


36  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

fuller  light,  and  to  cast  aside  his  early  opinions  and 
confess  that  he  had  changed  his  mind  on  many  subjects. 
How  few  men  have  the  courage  to  do  this ! 

Cranmer  maintained  an  unblemished  reputation 
throughout  the  reigns  of  Henry  VIII.  and  Edward  VI., 
although  frequently  placed  in  most  delicate  and  difficult 
positions.  Not  a  single  man  can  be  named  in  those  days 
who  passed  through  so  much  dirt,  and  yet  came  out  of  it 
so  thoroughly  undefiled. 

Cranmer,  beyond  all  doubt,  laid  the  foundation  of  our 
present  Prayer-book  and  Articles.  Though  not  perhapa 
a  brilliant  man,  he  was  a  learned  one,  and  a  lover  of 
learned  men,  and  one  who  was  always  trying  to  improve 
everything  around  him.  When  I  consider  the  immense 
difficulties  he  had  to  contend  with,  I  often  wonder  that 
he  accomplished  what  he  did.  Nothing,  in  fact,  but  his 
steady  perseverance  would  have  laid  the  foundation  of 
our  Formularies. 

I  say  all  these  things  in  order  to  break  the  force  of 
the  great  and  undeniable  fact  that  he  was  the  only 
English  Reformer  who  for  a  time  showed  the  white 
feather,  and  for  a  time  shrank  from  dying  for  the  truth ! 
I  admit  that  he  fell  sadly.  I  do  not  pretend  to  extenuate 
his  fall.  It  stands  forth  as  an  everlasting  proof  that 
the  best  of  men  are  only  men  at  the  best.  I  only  want 
my  readers  to  remember  that  if  Cranmer  failed  as  no 
other  Reformer  in  England  failed,  he  also  had  done  what 
certainly  no  other  Reformer  had  done. 

From  the  moment  that  Mary  came  to  the  English 
throne,  Cranmer  was  marked  for  destruction.  It  is 
probable  that  there  was  no  English  divine  whom  the 
unhappy  Queen  regarded  with  such  rancour  and  hatred. 


WHY  WERE  OUR   REFORMERS  BURNED?  37 

She  never  forgot  that  her  mother's  divorce  was  brought 
about  by  Cranmer's  advice,  and  she  never  rested  till  he 
was  burned. 

Cranmer  was  imprisoned  and  examined  just  like  Ridley 
and  Latimer.  Like  them,  he  stood  his  ground  firmly 
before  the  Commissioners.  Like  them,  he  had  clearly 
the  best  of  the  argument  in  all  points  that  were  dis 
puted.  But,  like  them,  of  course,  he  was  pronounced 
guilty  of  heresy,  condemned,  deposed,  and  sentenced  to 
be  burned. 

And  now  comes  the  painful  fact  that  in  the  last  month 
of  Cranrner's  life  his  courage  failed  him,  and  he  was 
persuaded  to  sign  a  recantation  of  his  Protestant  opinions. 
Flattered  and  cajoled  by  subtle  kindness,  frightened  at 
the  prospect  of  so  dreadful  a  death  as  burning,  tempted 
and  led  away  by  the  devil,  Thomas  Cranmer  fell,  and  put 
his  hand  to  a  paper,  in  which  he  repudiated  and  renounced 
the  principles  of  the  Reformation,  for  which  he  had 
laboured  so  long. 

Great  was  the  sorrow  of  all  true  Protestants  on  hearing 
these  tidings !  Great  was  the  triumphing  and  exultation 
of  all  Papists!  Had  they  stopped  here  and  set  their 
noble  victim  at  liberty,  the  name  of  Cranmer  would  pro 
bably  have  sunk  and  never  risen  again.  But  the  Romish 
party,  as  God  would  have  it,  outwitted  themselves.  With 
fiendish  cruelty  they  resolved  to  burn  Cranmer,  even  after 
he  had  recanted.  This,  by  God's  providence,  was  just  the 
turning  point  for  Cranmer's  reputation.  Through  the 
abounding  grace  of  God  he  repented  of  his  fall,  and 
found  mercy.  Through  the  same  abounding  grace  he 
resolved  to  die  in  the  faith  of  the  Reformation.  And  at 
last,  through  abounding  grace,  he  witnessed  such  a  bold 


38  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

confession  in  St.  Mary's,  Oxford,  that  he  confounded  his 
enemies,  filled  his  friends  with  thankfulness  and  praise, 
and  left  the  world  a  triumphant  martyr  for  Christ's  truth. 

I  need  hardly  remind  you  how,  on  the  21st  March,  the 
unhappy  Archhishop  was  brought  out,  like  Samson  in  the 
hands  of  the  Philistines,  to  make  sport  for  his  enemies,  and 
to  be  a  gazingstock  to  the  world  in  St.  Mary's  Church,  at 
Oxford.  I  need  hardly  remind  you  how,  after  Dr.  Cole's 
sermon  he  was  invited  to  declare  his  faith,  and  was 
fully  expected  to  acknowledge  publicly  his  alteration  of 
religion,  and  his  adhesion  to  the  Church  of  Rome.  I 
need  hardly  remind  you  how,  with  intense  mental 
suffering,  the  Archbishop  addressed  the  assembly  at  great 
length,  and  at  the  close  suddenly  astounded  his  enemies 
by  renouncing  all  his  former  recantations,  declaring  the 
Pope  to  be  Antichrist,  and  rejecting  the  Popish  doctrine 
of  the  Real  Presence.  Such  a  sight  was  certainly  never 
seen  by  mortal  eyes  since  the  world  began ! 

But  then  came  the  time  of  Cranmer's  triumph.  With 
a  light  heart,  and  a  clear  conscience,  he  cheerfully  allowed 
himself  to  be  hurried  to  the  stake  amidst  the  frenzied 
outcries  of  his  disappointed  enemies.  Boldly  and 
undauntedly  he  stood  up  at  the  stake  while  the  flames 
curled  around  him,  steadily  holding  out  his  right  hand  in 
the  fire,  and  saying,  with  reference  to  his  having  signed  a 
recantation,  "This  unworthy  right  hand,"  and  steadily 
holding  up  his  left  hand  towards  heaven.*  Of  all  the 


*  Soamcs  is  my  authority  for  this  statement  about  Cranmer's  left 
band.  I  can  find  it  nowhere  else.  He  also  mentions,  what  other 
historians  record,  that  when  the  fire  had  burned  down  to  ashes, 
Cranmer's  heart  was  found  unconsumed  and  uninjured. — SoameJ 
"History  of  the  Reformation,"  voL  iv.  p.  544. 


ARCHBISHOP    CIUNJIEH. 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?  39 

martyrs,  sti'ange  to  say,  none  at  the  last  moment  showed 
more  physical  courage  than  Cranmer  did.  Nothing,  in 
short,  in  all  his  life  became  him  so  well  as  the  manner  of 
his  leaving  it.  Greatly  he  had  sinned,  but  greatly  he 
had  repented.  Like  Peter  he  fell,  but  like  Peter  he 
rose  again.  And  so  passed  away  the  first  Protestant 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury. 

I  will  not  trust  myself  to  make  any  comment  on  these 
painful  and  interesting  histories.  I  have  not  time.  I 
only  wish  my  readers  to  believe  that  the  half  of  these 
men's  stories  have  not  been  told  them,  and  that  the  stones 
of  scores  of  men  and  women  less  distinguished  by  position 
might  easily  be  added  to  them,  quite  as  painful  and  quite 
as  interesting.*  But  I  will  say  boldly,  that  the  men 
who  were  burned  in  this  way  were  not  men  whose 
memories  ought  to  be  lightly  passed  over,  or  whose 
opinions  ought  'to  be  lightly  esteemed.  Opinions  for 
which  "an  army  of  martyrs"  died  ought  not  to  be 
dismissed  with  scorn.  To  their  faithfulness  we  owe  the 
existence  of  the  Keformed  Church  of  England.  Her 
foundations  were  cemented  with  their  blood.  To  their 
courage  we  owe,  in  a  great  measure,  our  English  liberty. 
They  taught  the  land  that  it  was  worth  while  to  die  for 
free  thought.  Happy  is  the  land  which  has  had  such 
citizens !  Happy  is  the  Church  which  has  had  such 


*  The  following  martyrdoms  are  recommended  to  the  special  notice  of 
all  who  possess  Fox's  Book  of  Martyrs  :  Laurence  Saunders,  burned  at 
Coventry  ;  William  Hunter,  at  Brentwood ;  Rawlins  White,  at  Cardiff ; 
George  Marsh,  at  Chester  ;  Thomas  Hawkes,  at  Coggeshall ;  John  Bland, 
at  Canterbury ;  Alice  Driver,  at  Ipswich ;  Rose  Allen,  at  Colchester ; 
Joan  Waste,  at  Derby ;  Richard  Woodman,  at  Lewes ;  Agnes  Prest,  at 
Exeter ;  Julius  Palmer,  at  Newbury ;  John  Noyes,  at  Laxfield,  in  Suffolk. 


40  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Reformers !  Honour  be  to  those  who  at  Smithfield, 
Oxford,  Gloucester,  Carmarthen,  and  Hadleigh  have  raised 
stones  of  remembrance  and  memorials  to  the  martyrs  ! 

III.  But  I  pass  on  to  a  point  which  I  hold  to  be  one 
of  cardinal  importance  in  the  present  day.  The  point 
I  refer  to  is  the  special  reason  why  our  Reformers 
were  burned.  Great  indeed  would  be  our  mistake  if 
we  supposed  that  they  suffered  for  the  vague  charge 
of  refusing  submission  to  the  Pope,  or  desiring  to 
maintain  the  independence  of  the  Church  of  England. 
Nothing  of  the  kind!  The  principal  reason  why  they 
were  burned  was  because  they  refused  one  of  the  peculiar 
doctrines  of  the  Romish  Church.  On  that  doctrine,  in 
almost  every  case,  hinged  their  life  or  death.  If  they  ad 
mitted  it,  they  might  live ;  if  they  refused  it,  they  must  die. 

The  doctrine  in  question  was  the  real  presence  of  the 
body  and  blood  of  Christ  in  the  consecrated  elements  of 
bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  Did  they,  or  did  they 
not  believe  that  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  were  really, 
that  is,  corporally,  literally,  locally,  and  materially,  present 
under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine  after  the  words  of 
consecration  were  pronounced  ?  Did  they  or  did  they  not 
believe  that  the  real  body  of  Christ,  which  was  born  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  was  present  on  the  so-called  altar  so  soon  as 
the  mystical  words  had  passed  the  lips  of  the  priest  ?  Did 
they  or  did  they  not  ?  That  was  the  simple  question.  If 
they  did  not  believe  and  admit  it,  they  were  burned.* 


*  "The  Mass  was  one  of  the  principal  causes  why  so  much  turmoil 
was  made  in  the  Church,  with  the  bloodshed  of  so  many  godly  men."— 
Fox1*  Preface  to  vol.  iii.  qf  "  Acta  and  Monuments," 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?  41 

There  is  a  wonderful  and  striking  unity  in  the  stories 
of  our  martyrs  on  this  subject.  Some  of  them,  no  doubt, 
were  attacked  about  the  marriage  of  priests.  Some  of 
them  were  assaulted  about  the  nature  of  the  Catholic 
Church.  Some  of  them  were  assailed  on  other  points. 
But  all,  without  an  exception,  were  called  to  special 
account  about  the  real  presence,  and  in  every  case  their 
refusal  to  admit  the  doctrine  formed  one  principal  cause 
of  their  condemnation. 

(1)  Hear  what  Rogers  said  :— 

"  I  was  asked  whether  I  believed  in  the  sacrament  to  be  the 
very  body  and  blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ  that  was  born  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  and  hanged  on  the  cross,  really  and  substantially  ? 
I  answered,  'I  think  it  to  be  false.  I  cannot  understand  really 
and  substantially  to  signify  otherwise  than  corporally.  But 
corporally  Christ  is  only  in  heaven,  and  so  Christ  cannot  be 
corporally  in  your  sacrament.' " — Fox  in  loco,  vol.  iii.  p.  101, 
edition,  1684. 

And  therefore  he  was  condemned  and  burned. 

(2)  Hear  what  Bishop  Hooper  said : — 

"  Tunstall  asked  him  to  say, '  whether  he  believed  the  corporal 
presence  in  the  sacrament,'  and  Master  Hooper  said  plainly  '  that 
there  was  none  such,  neither  did  he  believe  any  such  thing.' 
Whereupon  they  bade  the  notaries  write  that  he  was  married  and 
would  not  go  from  his  wife,  and  that  he  believed  not  the  corporal 
presence  in  the  sacrament;  wherefore  he  was  worthy  to  be  deprived 
of  his  bishopric." — Fox  in  loco,  vol.  iii.  p.  123. 

And  so  he  was  condemned  and  burned. 


"The  sacrament  of  the  altar  was  the  main  touchstone  to  discover  the 
poor  Protestants.  This  point  of  the  real,  corporal  presence  of  Christ 
in  the  sacrament,  the  same  body  that  was  crucified,  was  the  compendious 
way  to  discover  those  of  the  opposite  opinion." — Fuller,  "Church 
History,"  vol.  iii.  p.  399,  Tegg's  edition. 


42  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIME3. 

(3)  Hear  what  Rowland  Taylor  said : — 

"  The  second  cause  why  I  was  condemned  as  a  heretic  was  that 
I  denied  transubstantiation,  and  concomitation,  two  juggling 
words  whereby  the  Papists  believe  that  Christ's  natural  body  is 
made  of  bread,  and  the  Godhead  by  and  by  to  be  joined  thereto, 
so  that  immediately  after  the  words  of  consecration,  there  is  no 
more  bread  and  wine  in  the  sacrament,  but  the  substance  only  of 
the  body  and  blood  of  Christ." 

"  Because  I  denied  the  aforesaid  Papistical  doctrine  (yea,  rather 
plain,  wicked  idolatry,  blasphemy,  and  heresy)  I  am  judged  a 
heretic." — Fox  in  loco,  vol.  iii.  p.  141. 

And  therefore  he  was  condemned  and  burned. 


(4)  Hear  what  was  done  with  Bishop  Ferrar.     He  was 
summoned  to  "  grant  the  natural  presence  of  Christ  in  the 
sacrament  under  the  form  of  bread  and  wine,"  and  because 
he  refused  to  subscribe  this  article  as  well  as  others,  he 
was  condemned.     And  in  the  sentence  of  condemnation  it 
is  finally  charged  against  him  that  he  maintained  that 
"the  sacrament  of  the  altar  ought  not  to  'be  ministered 
on  an  altar,  or  to  be  elevated,  or  to  be  adored  in  any 
way." — Fox  in   loco,  vol.  iii.  p.  178.     And   so  he  was 
burned. 

(5)  Hear  what  holy  John  Bradford  wrote  to  the  men  of 
Lancashire  and  Cheshire  when  he  was  in  prison : — 

"  The  chief  thing  which  I  am  condemned  for  as  an  heretic  is 
because  I  deny  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  (which  is  not  Christ's 
Supper,  but  a  plain  perversion  as  the  Papists  now  use  it)  to  be  a 
real,  natural,  and  corporal  presence  of  Christ's  body  and  blood 
under  the  forms  and  accidents  of  bread  and  wine :  that  is,  because 
I  deny  transubstantiation,  which  is  the  darling  of  the  devil,  and 
daughter  and  heir  to  Antichrist's  religion." — Fox  in  loco,  vol.  iii. 
p.  260. 

And  so  he  was  condemned  and  burned. 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?      43 

(6)  Hear  what  were  the  words  of  the  sentence  of 
condemnation  against  Bishop  Ridley : — 

"  The  said  Nicholas  Ridley  affirms,  maintains,  and  stubbornly 
defends  certain  opinions,  assertions,  and  heresies,  contrary  to  the 
Vf  ord  of  God  and  the  received  faith  of  the  Church,  as  in  denyfng 
the  true  and  natural  body  and  blood  of  Christ  to  be  in  the 
sacrament  of  the  altar,  and  secondarily,  in  affirming  the  substance 
of  bread  and  wine  to  remain  after  the  words  of  consecration." — 
Fox  in  loco,  vol.  iii.  p.  426. 

And  so  he  was  condemned  and  burned. 


(7)  Hear  the  articles  exhibited  against  Bishop  Latimer: — 

"That  thou  hast  openly  affirmed,  defended,  and  maintained 
that  the  true  and  natural  body  of  Christ  after  the  consecration  of 
the  priest,  is  not  really  present  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  and 
that  in  the  sacrament  of  the  altar  remaineth  still  the  substance 
of  bread  and  wine." 


And  to  this  article  the  good  old  man  replied :— - 

"  After  a  corporal  being,  which  the  Romish  Church  furnisheth, 
Christ's  body  and  blood  is  not  in  the  sacrament  under  the  forma 
of  bread  and  wine." — Fox  in  loco,  vol.  iii.  p.  426. 

And  so  he  was  condemned  and  burned. 


(8)  Hear  the  address  made  by  Bishop  Bonuer  to 
Archdeacon  Philpot : — 

"  You  have  offended  and  trespassed  against  the  sacrament  of 
the  altar,  denying  the  real  presence  of  Christ's  body  and  blood  to 
be  there,  affirming  also  material  bread  and  material  wine  to  bo  in 
the  sacrament,  and  not  the  eubstanco  of  the  body  and  blood  of 
Christ." — Pox  in  loco,  vol.  iii.  p.  495. 

And  because  the  good  man  stoutly  adhered  to  this  opinion 
he  was  condemned  and  burned. 


44  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

(9)  Hear,  lastly,  what  Cranmer  said  with  almost  his  last 
breath,  in  St.  Mary's  Church,  Oxford : — 

"  As  for  the  sacrament,  I  believe,  as  I  have  taught  in  my  book 
against  the  Bishop  of  Winchester,  the  which  my  book  teacheth  so 
true  a  doctrine,  that  it  shall  stand  at  the  last  day  before  the 
judgment  of  God  when  the  Papist's  doctrine  contrary  thereto 
shall  be  ashamed  to  show  her  face." — Fox  in  loco,  vol.  iii.  p.  562. 

If  any  one  wants  to  know  what  Cranmer  had  said  in 
this  book,  let  him  take  the  following  sentence  as  a 
specimen : — 

"  They  (the  Papists)  say  that  Christ  is  corporally  under  or  in 
the  form  of  bread  and  wine.  We  say  that  Christ  is  not  there, 
neither  corporally  nor  spiritually ;  but  in  them  that  worthily  eat 
and  drink  the  bread  and  wine  He  is  spiritually,  and  corporally  in 
heaven." — "  Cranmer  on  the  Lord's  Supper."  Parker  Society 
edition,  p.  54. 

And  so  he  was  burned. 

Now,  were  the  English  Reformers  right  in  being  so  stiff 
and  unbending  on  this  question  of  the  real  presence  ? 
Was  it  a  point  of  such  vital  importance  that  they  were 
justified  in  dying  before  they  would  receive  it?  These 
are  questions,  I  suspect,  which  are  very  puzzling  to  many 
unreflecting  minds.  Such  minds,  I  fear,  can  see  in  the 
whole  controversy  about  the  real  presence  nothing  but  a 
logomachy,  or  strife  of  words.  But  they  are  questions,  I 
am  bold  to  say,  on  which  no  well-instructed  Bible  reader 
can  hesitate  for  a  moment  in  giving  his  answer.  Such  an 
one  will  say  at  once  that  the  Romish  doctrine  of  the  real 
presence  strikes  at  the  very  root  of  the  Gospel,  and  is  the 
very  citadel  and  keep  of  Popery.  Men  may  not  see  this 
at  first,  but  it  is  a  point  that  ought  to  be  carefully 
remembered.  It  throws  a  clear  and  broad  light  on  the 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED  ?       45 

line  which    the    Reformers    took,   and    the    unflinching 
firmness  with  which  they  died. 

Whatever  men  please  to  think  or  say,  the  Romish 
doctrine  of  the  real  presence,  if  pursued  to  its  legitimate 
consequences,  obscures  every  leading  doctrine  of  the 
Gospel,  and  damages  and  interferes  with  the  whole 
system  of  Christ's  truth.  Grant  for  a  moment  that  the 
Lord's  Supper  is  a  sacrifice,  and  not  a  sacrament — grant 
that  every  time  the  words  of  consecration  are  used  the 
natural  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  present  on  the 
Communion  Table  under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine — 
grant  that  every  one  who  eats  that  consecrated  bread  and 
drinks  that  consecrated  wine  does  really  eat  and  drink 
the  natural  body  and  blood  of  Christ — grant  for  a  moment 
these  things,  and  then  see  what  momentous  consequences 
result  from  these  premises.  You  spoil  the  blessed  doctrine 
of  Christ's  finished  work  when  He  died  on  the  cross.  A 
sacrifice  that  needs  to  be  repeated  is  not  a  perfect  and 
complete  thing. — You  spoil  the  priestly  office  of  Christ. 
If  there  are  priests  that  can  offer  an  acceptable  sacrifice 
to  God  besides  Him,  the  great  High  Priest  is  robbed  of 
His  glory. — You  spoil  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of  the 
Christian  ministry.  You  exalt  sinful  men  into  the 
position  of  mediators  between  God  and  man.- — You  give 
to  the  sacramental  elements  of  bread  and  wine  an  honour 
and  veneration  they  were  never  meant  to  receive,  and 
produce  an  idolatry  to  be  abhorred  of  faithful  Christians. 
— Last,  but  not  least,  you  overthrow  the  true  doctrine  of 
Christ's  human  nature.  If  the  body  born  of  the  Virgin 
Mary  can  be  in  more  places  than  one  at  the  same  time,  it 
is  not  a  body  like  our  own,  and  Jesus  was  not  "the  second 
Adam  "  in  the  truth  of  our  nature,  I  cannot  doubt  for  a 


46  LIUI1T  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

moment  that  our  martyred  Reformers  saw  and  felt  theso 
things  even  more  clearly  than  we  do,  and,  seeing  and 
feeling  them,  chose  to  die  rather  than  admit  the  doctrine 
of  the  real  presence.  Feeling  them,  they  would  not  give 
Way  by  subjection  for  a  moment,  and  cheerfully  laid  down 
their  lives.  Let  this  fact  be  deeply  graven  in  our  minds. 
Wherever  the  English  language  is  spoken  on  the  face  of 
the  globe  this  fact  ought  to  be  clearly  understood  by  every 
Englishman  who  reads  history.  Rather  than  admit  the 
doctrine  of  the  real  presence  of  Christ's  natural  body  and 
blood  under  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine,  the  Reformers 
of  the  Church  of  England  were  content  to  be  burned. 

IV.  And  now  I  must  ask  the  special  attention  of  my 
readers  while  I  try  to  show  the  bearing  of  the  whole 
subject  on  our  own  position  and  on  our  own  times,  I 
must  ask  you  to  turn  from  the  dead  to  the  living  to  look 
away  from  England  in  1555  to  England  in  this  present 
enlightened  and  advanced  age,  and  to  consider  seriously 
the  light  which  the  burning  of  our  Reformers  throws  on 
the  Church  of  England  at  the  present  day. 

We  live  in  momentous  times.  The  ecclesiastical  horizon 
on  every  side  is  dark  and  lowering.  The  steady  rise  and 
progress  of  extreme  Ritualism  and  Ritualists  are  shaking 
the  Church  of  England  to  its  very  centre.  It  is  of  the 
very  first  importance  to  understand  clearly  what  it  all 
means.  A  right  diagnosis  of  disease  is  the  very  first 
element  of  successful  treatment.  The  ph}7sician  who  does 
not  see  what  is  the  matter  is  never  likely  to  work  any 
cures. 

Now,  I  say  there  can  be  no  greater  mistake  than  to 
guppose  that  the  great  controversy  of  our  times  is  a  m.er@ 


WHY  WERE   OUR   REFORMERS  BURNED?  47 

question  of  vestments  and  ornaments — of  chasubles  and 
copes — of  more  or  less  church  decorations — of  more  or  less 
candles  and  flowers — of  more  or  less  bowings  and  turnings 
and  crossings — of  more  or  less  gestures  and  postures— of 
more  or  less  show  and  form.  The  man  who  fancies  that 
the  whole  dispute  is  a  mere  aesthetic  one,  a  question  of 
taste,  like  one  of  fashion  and  millinery,  must  allow  me  to 
tell  him  that  he  is  under  a  complete  delusion.  He  may 
sit  on  the  shore,  like  the  Epicurean  philosopher,  smiling 
at  theological  storms,  and  flatter  himself  that  we  are  only 
squabbling  about  trifles ;  but  I  take  leave  to  tell  him  that 
his  philosophy  is  very  shallow,  and  his  knowledge  of  the 
controversy  of  the  day  very  superficial  indeed. 

The  things  I  have  spoken  of  are  trifles,  I  fully 
concede.  But  they  are  pernicious  trifles,  because  they 
are  the  outward  expression  of  an  inward  doctrine.  They 
are  the  skin  disease  which  is  the  symptom  of  an  unsound 
constitution.  They  are  the  plague  spot  which  tells  of 
internal  poison.  They  are  the  curling  smoke  which 
arises  from  a  hidden  volcano  of  mischief.  I,  for  one, 
would  never  make  any  stir  about  church  millinery,  or 
incense,  or  candles,  if  I  thought  they  meant  nothing 
beneath  the  surface.  But  I  believe  they  mean  a  great 
deal  of  error  and  false  doctrine,  and  therefore  I  publicly 
protest  against  them,  and  say  that  those  who  support 
them  are  to  be  blamed. 

I  give  it  as  my  deliberate  opinion  that  the  root  of  the 
whole  Ritualistic  system  is  the  dangerous  doctrine  of  the 
real  presence  of  Christ's  natural  body  and  blood  in  the 
Lord's  Supper  under  the  forms  of  the  consecrated  bread 
and  wine.  If  words  mean  anything,  this  real  presence 
\$  the  foundation  principle  of  Ritualism.  This  real 


4:8  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

presence  is  what  the  extreme  members  of  the  Ritualistic 
party  want  to  bring  back  into  the  Church  of  England. 
And  just  as  our  martyred  Reformers  went  to  the  stake 
rather  than  admit  the  real  presence,  so  I  hold  that  we 
should  make  any  sacrifice  and  contend  to  the  bitter  end, 
rather  than  allow  a  materialistic  doctrine  about  Christ's 
presence  in  the  Lord's  Supper  to  come  back  in  any 
shape  into  our  Communion. 

I  will  not  weary  my  readers  with  quotations  in  proof  of 
what  I  affirm.  They  have  heard  enough,  perhaps  too 
much,  of  them.  But  I  must  ask  permission  to  give  two 
short  extracts. 

Observe  what  Dr.  Pusey  says,  in  a  sermon  called  "  Will 
ye  also  go  away  ? "  (Parker's,  1867) : — • 

"  While  repudiating  any  materialistic  conceptions  of  the  mode 
of  the  presence  of  our  Lord  in  the  Holy  Eucharist,  such  as  I 
believe  is  condemned  in  the  term  'corporal  presence  of  our 
Lord's  flesh  and  blood,'  i.e.,  as  though  His  precious  body  and 
blood  were  present  in  any  gross  or  carnal  way,  and  not  rather 
aacramentally,  really,  spiritually  —  I  believe  that  in  the  Holy 
Eucharist  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  sacramentally, 
supernaturally,  ineflably,  but  verily  and  indeed  present,  '  under 
the  forms  of  bread  and  wine ; '  and  that '  where  His  body  is,  there 
is  Christ.' " 

Observe  what  Dr.  Littledale  says,  in  a  tract  called 
"  The  Real  Presence  " : — 

"I.  The  Christian  Church  teaches,  and  has  always  taught, 
that  in  the  Holy  Communion,  after  consecration,  the  body  and 
blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  'verily  and  indeed'  present 
on  the  altar  xinder  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine. 

"  H.  The  Church  also  teaches  that  this  presence  depends  on 
God's  will,  not  on  man's  belief,  and  therefore  that  bad  and  good 
people  receive  the  very  same  thing  in  communicating,  the  good 
<<>r  their  benefit,  the  bad  for  their  condemnation. 


WHY   WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?  49 

" III.  Farther,  that  as  Christ  is  both  God  and  Man,  and  as 
these  two  natures  are  for  ever  joined  in  His  one  person,  Ilia 
Godhead  must  be  wherever  His  body  is,  and  therefore  He  is  to  bo 
worshipped  in  His  sacrament. 

"IV.  The  body  and  blood  present  are  that  same  body  and 
blood  which  were  conceived  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  born  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  ascended  into 
heaven,  but  they  are  not  present  in  the  same  manner  as  they  were 
when  Christ  walked  on  earth.  He,  as  Man,  is  now  naturally  in 
heaven,  there  to  be  till  the  last  day,  yet  He  is  supernalurally ,  and 
just  as  truly,  present  in  the  Holy  Communion,  in  some  way  which 
we  cannot  explain,  but  only  believe." 


In  both  these  quotations,  we  may  observe,  there  is  an 
attempt  to  evade  the  charge  of  maintaining  a  "  gross  and 
carnal  presence."  The  attempt,  however,  is  not  successful^ 
It  is  a  very  curious  fact  that  the  Romish  controversialist 
Mr.  Harding,  Bishop  Jewell's  opponent,  said  just  as  much 

300  years  ago.     He  said : — 

f 

"  Christ's  body  is  present  not  after  a  corporal,  or  carnal,  or 
naturally  wise,  but  invisibly,  unspeakably,  miraculously,  super- 
natnrally,  spiritually,  Divinely,  and  in  a  manner  by  Him  known." 
• — "  Hoarding's  Reply  to  Jewell,"  p.  431.  Parker  Society  edit. 

In  both  cases  we  can  hardly  fail  to  observe  that  the 
very  expressions  which  our  martyrs  steadily  refused  is 
employed,  "present  under  the  forms  of  bread  and 
wine." 

It  is  clear,  to  my  mind,  that  if  Dr.  Pusey  and 
Dr.  Littledale  had  been  brought  before  Gardiner  and 
Bonner  three  hundred  years  ago,  they  would  have  left  the 
court  with  flying  colours,  and,  at  any  rate,  would  not  have 
been  burned  ? 

I  might  refer  my  readers  to  other  published  sermons  on 

D 


50  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

the  Lord's  Supper  by  men  of  high  position  in  our  Church, 
I  might  refer  them  to  several  Ritualistic  manuals  for  the 
use  of  Communicants.  I  might  refer  them  to  the  famous 
book  "Directorium  Anglicanum."  I  simply  give  it  as 
my  opinion  that  no  plain  man  in  his  senses  can  read 
the  writings  of  extreme  Ritualists  about  the  Lord's  Supper 
and  see  auy  real  distinction  between  the  doctrine  they  hold 
and  downright  Popery.  It  is  a  distinction  without  a 
difference,  and  one  that  any  jury  of  twelve  honest  men 
would  say  at  once  could  not  be  proved. 

I  turn  from  books  and  sermons  to  churches,  and  I  ask 
any  reflecting  mind  to  mark,  consider,  and  digest  what 
may  be  seen  in  any  thorough-going  Ritualistic  place  of 
worship.  I  ask  him  to  mark  the  superstitious  veneration 
and  idolatrous  honour  with  which  everything  within  the 
chancel,  and  around  and  upon  the  Lord's  table,  is 
regarded.  I  boldly  ask  any  jury  of  twelve  honest  and 
unprejudiced  men  to  look  at  that  chancel  and  communion 
table,  and  tell  me  what  they  think  all  this  means.  I  ask 
them  whether  the  whole  thing  does  not  savour  of  the 
Romish  doctrine  of  the  Real  Presence,  and  the  sacrifice 
of  the  Mass?  I  believe  that  if  Bonner  and  Gardiner 
had  seen  the  chancels  and  communion  tables  of  some  of 
the  churches  of  this  day,  they  would  have  lifted  up  their 
hands  and  rejoiced;  while  Ridley,  Bishop  of  London," 
and  Hooper,  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  would  have  turned 
away  with  righteous  indignation  and  said,  "  This 
communion  table  is  not  meant  for  the  Lord's  Supper  on 
the  Lord's  board,  but  for  counterfeiting  the  idolatrous 
Popish  Mass." 

I  do  not  for  a  moment  deny  the  zeal,  earnestness,  and 
pincerity  of  the  extreme  Ritualists,  though  as  much  might 


WHY  WERE  OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?       51 

be  said  for  the  Pharisees  or  the  Jesuits.  I  do  not  deny 
that  we  live  in  a  singularly  free  country,  and  that 
Englishmen,  now-a-days,  have  liberty  to  commit  any  folly 
short  of  "  felo-de-se."  But  I  do  deny  that  any  clergyman, 
however  zealous  and  earnest,  has  a  right  to  re-introduce 
Popery  into  the  Church  of  England.  And,  above  all,  I 
deny  that  he  has  any  right  to  maintain  the  very  principle 
of  the  Real  Presence,  for  opposing  which  the  Reformers  of 
his  Church  were  burned. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  extreme 
Ritualistic  school  about  the  Lord's  Supper  can  never  be 
reconciled  with  the  dying  opinions  of  our  martyred 
Reformers.  The  members  of  this  school  may  protest 
loudly  that  they  are  sound  churchmen,  but  they  certainly 
are  not  churchmen  of  the  same  opinions  as  the  Marian 
martyrs.  If  words  mean  anything,  Hooper,  and  Rogers, 
and  Ridley,  and  Bradford,  and  their  companions,  held  one 
view  of  the  Real  Presence,  and  the  ultra-Ritualists  hold 
quite  another.  If  they  were  right,  the  Ritualists  are 
wrong.  There  is  a  gulf  that  cannot  be  crossed  between 
the  two  parties.  There  is  a  thorough  difference  that 
cannot  be  reconciled  or  explained  away.  If  we  hold 
with  one  side,  we  cannot  possibly  hold  with  the  other. 
For  my  part,  I  say,  unhesitatingly,  that  I  have  more  faith 
in  Ridley,  and  Hooper,  and  Bradford,  than  I  have  in  all 
the  leaders  of  the  ultra-Ritualistic  party. 

But  what  are  we  going  to  do  ?  The  danger  is  very 
great,  far  greater,  I  fear,  than  most  people  suppose.  A 
conspiracy  has  been  long  at  work  for  unprotestantizing 
the  Church  of  England,  and  all  the  energies  of  Rome  are 
concentrated  on  this  little  island.  A  sapping  and  mining 
process  has  been  long  going  on  under  our  feet,  of  which 


52  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

we  ate  beginning  at  last  to  see  a  little.  We  shall  see  a 
good  deal  more  by  and  by.  At  the  rate  we  are  going, 
it  would  never  surprise  me  if  within  fifty  years  the  crown 
of  England  were  no  longer  on  a  Protestant  head,  and  Higl? 
Mass  were  once  more  celebrated  in  Westminster  Abbe} 
and  St.  Paul's.  The  danger,  in,  plain  words,  is  neither 
more  nor  less  than  that  of  our  Church  being  unprotes- 
tantized  and  going  back  to  Babylon  and  Egypt  We  are 
in  imminent  peril  of  re-union  with  Rome. 

Men  may  call  me  an  alarmist,  if  they  like,  for  using 
such  language.  But  I  reply,  there  is  a  cause.  The  upper 
classes  in  this  land  are  widely  infected  with  a  taste  for  a 
sensuous,  histrionic,  formal  religion. — The  lower  orders  are 
becoming  sadly  familiarized  with  all  the  ceremonialism 
which  is  the  stepping-stone  to  Popery. — The  middle 
classes  are  becoming  disgusted  with  the  Church  of 
England,  and  asking  what  is  the  use  of  it. — The 
intellectual  classes  are  finding  out  that  all  religions  are 
either  equally  good  or  equally  bad. — The  House  of 
Commons  will  do  nothing  unless  pressed  by  public  opinion. 
We  have  no  Pyms  or  Hampdens  there  now. — And  all  this 
time  Ritualism  grows  and  spreads.  The  ship  is  among 
breakers, — breakers  ahead  and  breakers  astern, — breakers 
on  the  right  hand  and  breakers  on  the  left.  Something 
needs  to  be  done,  if  we  are  to  escape  shipwreck. 

The  very  life  of  the  Church  of  England  is  at  stake,  and 
nothing  less.  Take  away  the  Gospel  from  a  Church  and 
that  Church  is  not  worth  preserving.  A  well  without 
water,  a  scabbard  without  a  sword,  a  steam-engine  without 
a  fire,  a  ship  without  compass  and  rudder,  a  watch  without 
a  mainspring,  a  stuffed  carcase  without  life, — all  these  are 
useless  things.  But  there  is  nothing  so  useless  as  a 


WHY   WERE  OUB  REFORMERS  BURNED?  53 

Church  without  the  Gospel.  And  this  is  the  very  question 
that  stares  us  in  the  face. — Is  the  Church  of  England  to 
retain  the  Gospel  or  not  ?  Without  it  in  vain  shall  we 
turn  to  our  archbishops  and  bishops,  in  vain  shall  we  glory 
in  our  cathedrals  and  parish  churches.  Ichabod  will  soon 
be  written  on  our  walls.  The  ark  of  God  will  not  be  with 
us.  Surely  something  ought  to  be  done. 

One  tiling,  however,  is  very  clear  to  my  mind.  We 
ought  not  lightly  to  forsake  the  Church  of  England.  No  ! 
so  long  as  her  Articles  and  Formularies  remain  unaltered, 
unrepealed,  and  unchanged,  so  long  we  ought  not  to  forsake 
her.  Cowardly  and  base  is  that  seaman  who  launches  the 
boat  and  forsakes  the  ship  so  long  as  there  is  a  chance  of 
saving  her.  Cowardly,  I  say,  is  that  Protestant  Churchman 
who  talks  of  seceding  because  things  on  board  our  Church 
are  at  present  out  of  order.  What  though  some  of  the 
crew  are  traitors,  and  some  are  asleep !  What  though  the 
old  ship  has  some  leaks,  and  her  rigging  has  given  way  in 
some  places !  Still  I  maintain  there  is  much  to  be  done. 
There  is  life  in  the  old  ship  yet.  The  great  Pilot  has  not 
yet  forsaken  her.  The  compass  of  the  Bible  is  still  on 
deck.  There  are  yet  left  on  board  some  faithful  and  able 
seamen.  So  long  as  the  Articles  and  Formularies  are  not 
Romanized,  let  us  stick  by  the  ship.  So  long  as  she  has 
Christ  and  the  Bible,  let  us  stand  by  her  to  the  last  plank, 
nail  our  colours  to  the  mast,  and  never  haul  them  down. 
Once  more,  I  say,  let  us  not  be  wheedled,  or  bullied,  or 
frightened,  or  cajoled,  or  provoked,  into  forsaking  the 
Church  of  England. 

In  the  name  of  the  Lord  let  us  set  up  our  banners.  If 
ever  we  would  meet  Ridley  and  Latimer  and  Hooper  in 
another  world  without  shame.,  let  us  "  contend  earnestly  " 


54  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

for  the  truths  which  they  died  to  preserve.  The  Church 
of  England  expects  every  Protestant  Churchman  to  do  his 
duty.  Let  us  not  talk  only,  but  act.  Let  us  not  act  only, 
but  pray.  "He  that  hath  no  sword,  let  him  sell  his 
garment  and  buy  one." 

There  is  a  voice  in  the  blood  of  the  martyrs.  What 
does  that  voice  say  ?  It  cries  aloud  from  Oxford,  Smith- 
field,  and  Gloucester, — "  Resist  to  the  death  the  Popisli 
doctrine  of  the  Real  Presence,  under  the  forms  of  the 
consecrated  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's  Supper ! " 


NOTE. — The  following  quotations  about  the  doctrine  of  the  "Real 
Presence  "  are  commended  to  the  special  attention  of  all  Churchmen  in 
the  present  day  :  — 

(1)  "Whereas  it  in  ordained  in  this  Office  for  the  Administration  of 
the  Lord's  Supper,   that  the  Communicants  should  receive  the  same 
kneeling  ;  (which  order  is  well  meant,  for  a  signification  of  our  humble 
and  gratefid  acknowledgment  of  the  benefits  of  Christ  therein  given  to 
all  worthy  Receivers,   and  for   the  avoiding  of  such  profanation  and 
disorder  in  the  Holy  Communion,  as  might  otherwise  ensue ;)  yet,  lest 
the  same  kneeling  should  by  any  persons,  either  out  of  ignorance  and 
infirmity,  or  out  of  malice  and  obstinacy,  be  misconstrued  and  depraved ; 
It  is  hereby  declared,  That  thereby  no  adoration  is  intended,  or  ought 
to  be  done,  either  unto  the  Sacramental  Bread  or  Wine  thereby  bodily 
received,  or  unto  any  corporal  presence  of  Christ's  natural  Flesh  and 
.Blood.     For  the  Sacramental  Bread  and  Wine  remain  still  in  their  very 
natural  substances,  and  therefore  may  not  be  adored ;   (for  that  were 
Idolatry,  to  be  abhorred  of  all  faithful  Christians ;)   and  the  natural 
Body  and  Blood  of  our  Saviour  Christ  are  in  Heaven,  and  not  here ;  it 
being  against  the  truth  of  Christ's  natural  Body  to  be  at  one  time  in 
more  places  than  one." — Rubric  at  the  end  of  the  Communion  Service 
in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer. 

(2)  "  As  concerning   the  form  of  doctrine   used  in  this  Church  of 
"England  in  the  Holy  Communion,  that  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ  be 
under  the  forms  of   bread  and  wine,  when-  you  shall  show  the  place 
where  this  form  of  words  is  expressed,  then  shall  you  purge  yourself 


WHY  WERE   OUR  REFORMERS  BURNED?  55 

from  that  which  in  the  meantime  I  take  to  be  a  plain  untruth." — 
"Cranmer's  Answer  to  Gardiner,"  pp.  52,  53,  Parker  edition. 

(3)  "  The  real  presence  of  Christ's  most  blessed  Body  and  Blood  is  not 
to  be  sought  for  in  the  sacrament,  but  in  the  worthy  receiver  of  the 
Bacrainent." — "Hooker's  Eccles.  PoL,"  b.  v.  p.  67. 

(4)  "  The  Church  of  England  has  wisely  forborne  to  use  the  term  of 
Real  Presence  in  all  the  books  set  forth  by  her  authority.     We  neither 
find  it  recommended  in  the  Liturgy,  nor  the  Articles,  nor  the  Homilies, 
nor  the  Church  Catechism,  nor  Nowell's  Catechism.     For  though  it  be 
once  in  the  Liturgy,  and  once  more  in  the  Articles  of  1552,  it  is 
mentioned  in  both  places  as  a  phrase  of  the  Papists,  and  rejected  for 
their  abuse  of  it.     So  that  if  any  Church  of  England  man  use  it,  he  does 
more  than  the  Church  directs  him  ;  if  any  reject  it,  he  has  the  Church's 
example  to  warrant  him." — "Dean  Aldrich's  Reply,"  p.  13,  1G84.     See 
"  Goode  on  Eucharist,"  p.  38. 


JOHN  ROGERS :   MARTYR 

JOHN  ROGERS,  who  was  burned  at  Sraithfield  in  1555,  is 
a  man  who  deserves  to  be  held  in  peculiar  honour  by  all 
English  Protestants,  for  one  simple  reason.  He  was  the 
first  of  that  noble  band  of  Christian  heroes  who  suffered 
martyrdom  for  God's  truth  in  Queen  Mary's  reign.  By 
his  courage  and  constancy  at  the  stake  he  supplied  a 
glorious  example  to  all  who  followed  him,  and  mightily 
helped  forward  the  English  Reformation.  Some  account 
of  this  good  man  can  hardly  fail  to  be  interesting  to  all 
loyal  Churchmen.  In  the  noble  army  of  English  martyrs 
he  was  eminently  a  standard-bearer. 

Rogers  was  born  about  the  year  1500  A.D.,  at  Deri  tend, 
a  hamlet  in  the  parish  of  Aston,  and  now  within  the 
present  borough  of  Birmingham.*  Little  or  nothing  is 


*  By  far  the  fullest  account  of  Rogers  will  be  found  in  a  biography 
of  him  published  by  Mr.  Chester,  an  American,  in  the  year  1861.  Two 
defects  unhappily  impair  the  value  of  this  book  very  much.  For  one 
thing,  the  author  goes  out  of  his  way  to  depreciate  such  men  as  Ridley 
and  Cranmer,  and  praises  Rogers  so  extravagantly,  that  he  overshoots 
his  mark  and  wearies  the  reader.  For  another  thing,  the  author  speaks 
far  too  harshly  of  John  Fox,  the  historian,  and  accuses  him  most  unfairly 
•of  underrating  Rogers.  This  charge,  I  must  plainly  say,  I  think  he  fails 
to  prove.  My  own  estimate  of  Rogers  has  always  been  extremely  high, 
and  it  has  been  based  on  the  testimony  of  Fox !  Barring  these  twa 
defects,  however,  Mr.  Chester's  book  is  very  useful  and  interesting. 


JOHN  ROGERS:    MARTYR.  57 

known  about  bis  father's  family,  rank,  or  position;  and 
just  as  little  about  bis  own  early  bistory,  and  tbe  first 
tbirty  years  of  his  life.  It  is  only  certain  that  be  was 
educated  at  Pembroke  Hall,  Cambridge,  and  took  his 
degree  as  B.A.  in  1525.  Pembroke  Hall,  we  should 
remember,  was  the  College  at  which  both  Ridley  and 
Bradford  were  members,  and  in  all  human  probability 
Rogers  was  a  contemporary  and  acquaintance  of  these 
good  men.  This  circumstance,  and  the  preaching  of 
Latimer,  which  began  to  make  a  stir  in  Cambridge  about 
the  same  time,  could  hardly  fail  to  exercise  considerable 
influence  on  the  mind  of  Rogers  at  a  later  period. 

At  Pembroke  Hall,  Rogers  seems  to  have  read  hard  and 
done  well.  Fox  merely  says,  in  one  edition  of  his  history, 
that  he  "profitably  travailed  in  good  learning:"  and  in 
another,  that  he  resided  long  at  Cambridge,  "  attentively 
and  diligently  'engaged  in  the  honourable  pursuit  of 
learning."  It  is  evident,  however,  that  he  established  a 
reputation  as  a  good  scholar  and  a  learned  man,  according 
to  the  standard  of  the  age.  This  is  abundantly  shown  by 
the  work  that  he  subsequently  did  in  translating  the 
Scriptures,  and  by  the  preferments  conferred  on  him  by 
Bishop  Ridley,  who  was  no  mean  judge  of  men.  The 
best  proof  of  his  character,  however,  as  a  scholar,  was  his 
selection  to  be  a  Junior  Canon  of  Cardinal's  College, 
better  known  as  Christ's  Church,  Oxford,  when  that  noble 
foundation  was  commenced  by  Cardinal  Wolsey.  Wolsey 
was  naturally  anxious  to  fill  his  new  College  with  the  best 
men  that  he  could  persuade  to  join  it  in  either  University, 
and  held  out  every  inducement  to  men  of  promise  to 
become  members.  The  mere  fact  that  he  selected  Rogers 
among  the  first  men  whom  he  made  Canons  is  a  clear 


58  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

proof  that  the  young  B.A.  of  Pembroke  Hall  had  the 
reputation  of  being  a  ripe  scholar. 

The  next  twenty-two  years  of  John  Rogers'  life  are  a 
period  of  his  history  which  is  involved  in  much  obscurity, 
chiefly  because  the  greater  part  of  the  time  was  spent  on 
the  Continent.  The  doings  and  sayings  of  a  man  who 
lives  among  foreigners  are  never  likely  to  be  so  accurately 
described  as  those  of  one  who  lives  under  the  eyes  of  his 
countrymen  and  friends.  Out  of  a  rather  tangled  skein, 
the  following  facts  are  probably  a  correct  account  of  his 
proceedings. 

Rogers  was  ordained  soon  after  his  appointment  to  the 
Canonry  which  he  held  in  Cardinal's  College,  Oxford,  but 
does  not  appear  to  have  held  any  cure  of  souls  until  the 
year  1532.  He  was  then  presented  to  the  living  of 
Trinity  the  Less,  in  the  city  of  London,  a  parish  united 
to  St.  Michael's,  Queenhithe,  after  the  Great  Fire,  and 
held  it  for  two  years,  resigning  in  1534.  After  this  he 
became  for  a  short  time  Chaplain  to  the  company  of 
English  residents  at  Antwerp,  and  was  absent  from 
England  for  about  thirteen  years.  It  was  at  this  period 
of  his  life  that  he  became  intimately  acquainted  with 
the  famous  William  Tyndale,  embraced  the  doctrines  of 
Protestantism,  and  became  a  fellow-labourer  with  him  in 
the  great  work  of  translating  the  Holy  Scriptures.  In 
1537,  not  long  after  Tyndale's  martyrdom,  Rogers  married 
a  lady  of  Antwerp,  named  Adriana  de  Weyden,  and 
shortly  afterwards  removed  to  Wittenberg,  in  Saxony, 
where  he  ministered  to  a  German  congregation  for,  at 
least,  ten  years.  It  is  highly  probable  that  this  move 
was  absolutely  necessary  to  escape  persecution,  and  that 
Rogers'  life  would  not  have  been  safe  if  he  had  remained 


JOHN  ROGERS:    MARTYR.  59 

in  Belgium.  The  mere  fact  that  he  was  a  friend  of  such 
a  man  as  Tyndale,  and  that,  although  a  priest,  he  had 
contracted  marriage,  would  make  him  a  marked  man. 
It  is  only  fair,  however,  to  say  that  these  are  only 
conjectures.  In  all  human  probability  these  quiet  ten 
,  years  at  Wittenberg  were  a  period  of  immense  benefit  to 
Rogers'  soul.  He  became  established  in  the  principles  of 
the  Reformation,  learned  to  know  his  own  heart,  grew  in 
faith  and  knowledge  and  holiness,  and  became  fitted  for 
the  heavy  work  he  had  afterwards  to  do,  and  the  fiery 
death  he  had  to  die. 

The  exact  amount  of  Rogers'  connection  with  the 
English  translation  of  the  Bible,  commonly  known  as 
"  Matthews'  Bible,"  is  a  point  that  will,  perhaps,  never  be 
thoroughly  cleared  up.  There  is  considerable  reason  to 
believe  that  he  had  far  more  to  do  with  the  translation 
than  most  people- are  aware,  and  that  he  deserves  to  take 
rank  with  Tyndale  and  Coverdale  as  one  of  its  authors. 
Certain  it  is  that  he  is  responsible  for  the  marginal  notes 
and  tables  of  "common  places"  which  accompanied  the 
version.  Equally  certain  is  it,  that  when  Rogers  was 
condemned  to  be  burned,  he  was  called  "Rogers,  alias 
Matthews ; "  while  the  title  page  of  the  famous  Bible  put 
forth  by  authority  in  the  time  of  Henry  VIII.  contains 
the  words,  "The  Old  and  New  Testaments,  truly  and 
freely  translated  into  English,  by  Thomas  Matthews." 
Whether  the  judge  who  condemned  Rogers  exaggerated 
his  share  in  the  work  of  translation,  in  order  to  justify  his 
condemnation,  it  is  of  course  impossible  to  say.  But,  on 
the  whole,  it  seems  most  probable  that  Rogers  may  fairly 
be  regarded  as  one  among  the  earliest  labourers  in  the 
great  work  of  translating  our  English  Bible.  The  sum  of 


60  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

the  whole  matter,  in  my  own  judgment,  is  this:  Tyi^lale 
has  received  the  credit  that  he  justly  deserves, — Coverdale 
rather  more  than  he  deserves, — and  Rogers  much  less. 

In  1547  Edward  VI.  succeeded  to  the  throne  of 
England,  and  Rogers,  not  long  after,  returned  to  his  own 
land.  As  might  be  reasonably  expected,  he  was  soon 
brought  forward  and  placed  in  a  prominent  position.  A 
man  of  his  gifts  and  graces  was  just  the  man  whom  the 
leaders  of  the  English  Reformation  were  only  too  glad  tc 
employ.  In  1550  he  became  Vicar  of  St.  Margaret 
Moyses  and  also  of  St.  Sepulchre,  both  parishes  in  the 
city  of  London.  In  1551  he  was  appointed  to  the 
Prebendal  stall  of  St.  Pancras,  in  the  Cathedral  of  St. 
Paul,  and  also  to  the  Rectory  of  Chigwell,  in  Essex.  In 
1553  he  was  made  Divinity  Lecturer  of  St.  Paul's.  It  is 
only  fair  to  Bishop  Ridley  to  state  that  Rogers  owns  to 
have  been  much  indebted  to  him  for  these  preferments, 
and  that  the  good  Bishop  of  London  does  not  appear  to 
have  forgotten  his  old  fellow-collegian.  In  fact  he  speaks 
of  Grindall,  Bradford,  and  Rogers  in  a  letter  addressed  to 
Sir  W.  Cecil,  as  "  men  so  necessary  to  be  abroad  in  the 
Commonwealth,  that  I  can  keep  none  of  them  in  my 
house."  This  language  shows  pretty  clearly  that  Rogers 
was  one  of  his  chaplains. 

The  death  of  Edward  VI.  in  1553,  and  the  accession  of 
Queen  Mary  to  the  throne,  cut  short  the  active  usefulness 
of  Rogers;  and  before  the  end  of  the  year  1553  he  was 
a  prisoner,  first  in  his  own  house,  and  afterwards  in 
Newgate,  where  he  was  finally  placed  in  January,  1554. 
Of  his  condition  in  prison  we  know  but  little,  except  that 
his  wife  was  not  allowed  to  see  him,  and  that  his 
treatment  seems  to  have  been  very  severe.  He  was 


JOHN   EOGERS:    MARTYR.  61 

brought  before  a  Commission,  presided  over  by  Bishop 
Gardiner,  in  January,  1555,  together  with  Hooper  ani 
Cardmaker,  as  an  obstinate  heretic,  partly  because  ho 
denied  the  doctrine  of  the  Keal  Presence,  and  partly 
because,  being  a  priest,  he  had  contracted  marriage. 

Of  his  conduct  during  his  imprisonment,  and  on  the 
day  when  he  was  burnt,  no  better  account  can  be  given 
than  that  which  John  Fox  supplies.  I  shall,  therefore, 
give  it  in  the  Martyrologist's  own  words : — 

"Amongst  other  words  and  sayings  which  may  seem 
prophetically  to  be  spoken  of  him,  this  also  may  be  added, 
and  is  notoriously  to  be  marked,  that  he  spake,  being  then 
in  prison,  to  the  printer  of  this  present  book,  John  Day, 
who  then  also  was  laid  up  for  like  cause  of  religion : 
'Thou,'  said  he,  'shalt  live  to  see  the  alteration  of  this 
religion,  and  the  Gospel  to  be  freely  preached  again ;  and, 
therefore,  have  me  commended  to  my  brethren,  as  well  in 
exile  as  others,  and  bid  them  be  circumspect  in  displacing 
the  Papists,  and  putting  good  ministers  into  churches,  or 
else  their  end  will  be  worse  than  ours.'  And  for  lack  of 
good  ministers  to  furnish  churches,  his  device  was  (Master 
Hooper  also  agreeing  to  the  same)  that  for  every  ten 
churches  some  one  good  and  learned  superintendent  should 
be  appointed,  which  should  have  under  him  faithful 
readers  such  as  might  well  be  got ;  so  that  Popish  priests 
should  clean  be  put  out,  and  the  bishop  once  a  year  to 
oversee  the  profiting  of  the  parishes.  And  if  the  minister 
did  not  his  duty,  as  well  in  profiting  himself  in  his  book, 
•>nd  bis  parishioners  in  good  instructions,  so  that  they  may 
Jbe  trained  by  little  and  little  to  give  a  reckoning  how  they 
do  profit,  then  he  to  be  expelled,  and  another  put  in  his 
place,  and  the  bishop  to  do  the  like  with  the  superinten- 


62  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

dent.  This  was  his  counsel  and  request:  showing, 
moreover,  and  protesting  in  his  commendations  to  his 
brethren  by  the  printer  aforesaid,  that  if  they  would  not 
so  do,  their  end,  he  said,  would  be  worse  than  theirs. 

"Over  and  besides  divers  things  touching  Master 
Rogers,  this  is  not  to  be  forgotten,  how  in  the  days  of 
King  Edward  VI.  there  was  a  controversy  among  the 
bishops  and  clergy,  for  wearing  of  priests'  caps  and  other 
attire  belonging  to  that  order.  Master  Rogers,  being  one 
of  that  number  which  never  went  otherwise  than  in  a 
round  cap,  during  all  the  time  of  King  Edward,  affirmed 
that  he  would  not  agree  to  that  decreement  of  uniformity, 
but  upon  this  condition :  that  if  they  would  needs  have 
such  a  uniformity  of  wearing  the  cap,  tippet,  etc.,  then  it 
should  also  be  decreed  withal,  that  the  Papist,  for  a 
difference  betwixt  them  and  others,  should  be  constrained 
to  wear  upon  their  sleeves  a  chalice  with  a  host  upon  it. 
Whereupon  if  they  would  consent,  he  would  agree  to  the 
other:  otherwise  he  would  not,  he  said,  consent  to  the 
setting  forth  of  the  same,  nor  even  wear  the  cap;  as 
indeed  he  never  did. 

"The  Sunday  before  he  suffered,  he  drank  to  Master 
ITooper,  being  then  underneath  him,  and  bade  them 
commend  him  unto  him,  and  tell  him,  '  There  was  never 
little  fellow  better  would  stick  to  a  man  than  he  would 
stick  to  him ; '  presupposing  they  should  both  be  burned 
together,  although  it  happened  otherwise,  for  Master 
Rogers  was  burnt  alone. 

"  Now  when  the  time  came  that  he,  being  delivered  to 
the  Sheriffs,  should  be  brought  out  of  Newgate  to 
Smithfield,  the  place  of  his  execution,  first  came  to  him 
Master  Woodroofe,  one  of  the  aforesaid  Sheriffs^  and 


JOHN  ROGERS:   MARTYR.  63 

calling  Master  Rogers  unto  him,  asked  him  if  he  would 
revoke  his  abominable  doctrine,  and  his  evil  opinion  of  the 
sacrament  of  the  altar.  Master  Rogers  answered  and 
said, '  That  which  I  have  preached  I  will  seal  with  my 
blood/  'Then,'  quoth  Master  Woodroofe,  'thou  art  a 
heretic.'  '  That  shall  be  known,'  quoth  Rogers, '  at  the 
day  of  judgment.'  'Well/  quoth  Master  Woodroofe,  'I 
will  never  pray  for  thee/  '  But  I  will  pray  for  you'  quoth 
Master  Rogers ;  and  so  was  brought  the  same  day,  which 
was  Monday,  the  4th  of  February,  by  the  Sheriffs  toward 
Smithfield,  saying  the  psalm  '  Miserere '  by  the  way,  all 
the  people  wonderfully  rejoicing  at  his  constancy,  with 
great  praises  and  thanks  to  God  for  the  same.  And 
there,  in  the  presence  of  Master  Rochester,  Comptroller 
of  the  Queen's  Household,  Sir  Richard  Southwell,  both 
the  Sheriffs,  and  a  wonderful  number  of  people,  the  fire 
was  put  unto  him ;  and  when  it  had  taken  hold  both  upon 
his  legs  and  shoulders,  he,  as  one  feeling  no  smart,  washed 
his  hands  in  the  flame,  as  though  it  had  been  in  cold  water. 
And,  after  lifting  up  his  hands  unto  heaven,  not  removing 
the  same  until  such  time  as  the  devouring  fire  had 
consumed  them,  most  mildly  this  happy  martyr  yielded 
up  his  spirit  into  the  hands  of  his  heavenly  Father. 
A  little  before  his  burning  at  the  stake,  his  pardon  was 
brought,  if  he  would  have  recanted,  but  he  utterly 
refused.  He  was  the  first  martyr  of  all  the  blessed  com 
pany  that  suffered  in  Queen  Mary's  time,  that  gave  the 
first  adventure  upon  the  fire.  His  wife  and  children 
being  eleven  in  number,  and  ten  able  to  go,  and  one 
sucking  on  her  breast,  met  him  by  the  way  as  he  went 
towards  Smithfield.  This  sorrowful  sight  of  his  own 
flesh  and  blood  could  nothing  move  him ;  but  that  ho 


64  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES, 

constantly  and  cheerfully  took  his  death,  with  Wonderful 
patience,  in  the  defence  and  quarrel  of  Christ's  Gospel." 

It  must  always  be  remembered  that  John  Rogers  was 
the  first  who  was  burned  in  Queen  Mary's  reign,  and  that 
before  he  died  at  the  stake  there  was  no  example  of  a 
Protestant  of  the  Reformed  Church  of  England  enduring 
death  rather  than  recant  his  opinions.  It  is  to  the 
eternal  credit  of  Rogers  that  he  was  the  first  to  break  the 
ice,  and  to  supply  proof  that  the  grace  of  God  was 
sufficient  to  sustain  a  believer  even  in  the  fire.  The  very 
day  that  he  was  burned,  Noailles,  the  French  Ambassador, 
wrote  to  Montmorency  the  following  words:  "This  day 
was  performed  the  confirmation  of  the  alliance  between 
the  Pope  and  this  kingdom,  by  a  public  and  solemn 
sacrifice  of  a  preaching  Doctor,  named  Rogers,  who  has 
been  burned  alive  for  being  a  Lutheran ;  but  he  died 
persisting  in  his  opinion.  At  this  conduct,  the  greatest 
part  of  the  people  took  such  pleasure,  that  they  were  not 
afraid  to  make  him  many  exclamations  to  strengthen  his 
courage.  Even  his  children  assisted  at  it,  comforting  him 
in  such  a  manner  that  it  seemed  as  if  he  had  been  led  to 
a  wedding." 

Like  Rowland  Taylor,  Rogers  left  behind  him  no 
literary  remains,  unless  we  accept  his  contribution  to  the 
famous  "Matthews'  Bible."  But  he  left  behind  him*  a 
name  which  ought  to  be  held  in  honour  by  all  Protestant 
Churchmen  as  long  as  the  world  stands. 


JOHN  ROGERS:    MARTYR.  65 


ot  ^ranslationsf,  horn  tht  Jftattlutos' 
GENESIS.     1T  Thefyrst  Chapter. 

"In  the  beginnyng*  God  created  heauen  and  erth. 
The  erth  was  voyde  and  emptye,  and  darcknesse  was  vpon 
the  depe,  &  the  spirits  of  God  •}•  moued  vpon  the  water. 

"Then  God  sayde:  Let  there  be  lyght:  &  there  was 
lyght.  And  God  sawe  the  lyght  that  it  was  good:  & 
deuyded  ye  lyght  from  the  darcknesse,  &  called  the  lyght 
the  daye,  &  the  darcknesse  the  nyght:  and  so  of  the 
euenying  and  mornyng  was  made  the  fyrst  daye." 

JOHN.    1T  Thefyrst  Chapter. 

"  In  the  beginnynge  was  the  worde,  &  the  worde  was 
with  God  :  and  the  worde  was  God.  The  same  was  in  the 
beginnynge  wyth  God.  All  thinges  were  made  by  it,  and 
wythout  it,  was  made  nothynge  that  was  made.  In  it 
was  lyfe,  &  the  lyfe  was  the  lyght  of  men,  &a*  the  lyght 
shyneth  in  ye  darcknes,  but  the  darcknes  comprehended 
it  not." 

* 

f)re0£ttt  JUttharizeb  ^Btwion. 
GENESIS  i.  1  —  5. 

"In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the 
earth.  And  the  earth  was  without  form  and  void  ;  and 


*  iiij.  Esd.  vi.  d.  Eccli.  xviij.  a.  Jereuiye  x.  b.  Hebr.  i.  c.  xi.  a.  Psa. 
ci.  d.  &  cxxxv.  a.  Esaye.  xliiij.  d, 

t  brethed  or  styred. 

a*  By  the  light  is  vnderstande  Christ  &  by  the  darcknes  vngodly  & 
vnbeleuinge  me  amog  whome  Chryst  came  &  they  receaued  him  not  as 
Ephe.  iiij.  d. 

E 


66  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  deep.     And  the  Spirit 
of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters. 

"And  God  said,  Let  there  be  light:  and  there  was 
light.  And  God  saw  the  light,  that  it  was  good :  and 
God  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness.  And  God 
called  the  light  Day,  and  the  darkness  He  called  Night 
And  the  evening  and  the  morning  were  the  first  day." 

JOHN  i.  1 — 5. 

"  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was 
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God.  The  same  was  in  the 
beginning  with  God.  All  things  were  made  by  Him ;  and 
without  Him  was  not  any  thing  made  that  was  made.  In 
Him  was  life;  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men.  And  the 
light  shineth  in  darkness;  and  the  darkness  comprehended 
it  not." 

It  may  be  interesting  to  some  readers  to  add  the  same 
passage  so  rendered  in  the  New  Revised  Version. 

"  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was 
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God.  The  same  was  in  the 
beginning  with  God.  All  things  were  made  by  Him; 
and  without  Him  was  not  anything  made  that  hath  been 
made.  In  Him  was  life ;  and  the  life  was  the  light  of 
men.  And  the  light  shineth  in  the  darkness;  and  the 
darkness  apprehended  it  not." 


JOHN  HOOPER :  BISHOP  AND   MARTYR. 

IN  a  day  of  religious  controversy,  no  one  is  so  useful  to 
his  generation  as  the  man  who  contributes  a  little  "  light." 
Amidst  the  din  and  strife  of  ecclesiastical  warfare,  amidst 
the  fog  and  dust  stirred  up  by  excited  disputants,  amidst 
assertions  and  counter-assertions,  a  thinking  man  will  often 
cry  with  the  dying  philosopher, — "  I  want  more  light : 
give  me  more  light."  He  that  can  make  two  ears  of  corn 
grow  where  only  one  grew  before,  has  been  rightly  called  a 
benefactor  to  mankind.  He  that  can  throw  a  few  rays  of 
fresh  light  on  the  theological  questions  of  the  day,  is 
surely  doing  a  service  to  the  Church  and  the  world. 

Thoughts  such  as  these  came  across  my  mind  when 
I  chose  the  subject  of  this  biographical  paper:  "John 
Hooper,  the  martyred  Bishop  of  Gloucester:  his  times, 
life,  death,  and  opinions."  I  chose  it  with  a  meaning. 
I  have  long  felt  that  the  lives  and  opinions  of  the 
English  Reformers  deserve  attentive  study  in  the  present 
day.  I  think  that  a  picture  of  John  Hooper  will  throw 
useful  light  on  points  of  deep  interest  in  our  times. 

We  live  in  days  when  the  Romish  Church  is  making 
gigantic  efforts  to  regain  her  losjb  power  in  England,  and 
thousands  of  English  people  are  helping  her.  None  are 
doing  the  work  of  Rome  so  thoroughly  as  that  singular 

67 


68  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

body  of  English  Churchmen,  the  extreme  Ritualists. 
Consciously  or  unconsciously,  they  are  paving  the  way  for 
her  advance,  and  laying  down  the  rails  for  her  trains. 
They  are  familiarizing  the  minds  of  thousands  with 
Romish  ceremonial, — its  millinery,  its  processions,  its 
gestures,  its  postures,  its  theatrical,  sensuous  style  of 
worship.  They  are  boldly  preaching  and  publishing 
downright  Romish  doctrine, — the  real  presence,  the 
priestly  character  of  the  ministry,  the  necessity  of 
auricular  confession  and  sacerdotal  absolution.  They  are 
loudly  proclaiming  their  desire  for  re-union  with  the 
Church  of  Rome.  In  short,  it  seems  as  if  the  battle  of 
the  Reformation  must  be  fought  over  again.  Now  before 
we  go  back  to  Rome,  let  us  thoroughly  understand  what 
English  Romanism  was.  Let  us  bring  in  the  light.  Let 
us  not  take  a  "  leap  in  the  dark." 

We  live  in  times  when  many  Churchmen  openly  sneer 
at  our  Reformation,  and  scoff  at  our  Reformers.  The 
martyrs,  whose  blood  was  the  seed  of  our  Church,  are 
abused  and  vilified,  and  declared  to  be  no  martyrs  at  all. 
Cranmer  is  called  "  a  cowardly  traitor,"  and  Latimer,  "  a 
coarse,  illiterate  bully!"  The  Reformation  is  said  to 
have  been  "  an  unmitigated  disaster,"  and  a  "  change  taken 
in  hand  by  a  conspiracy  of  adulterers,  murderers,  and 
thieves!"  (See  Church  Times,  of  March  14,  1867.)  Let 
us  study  one  of  our  leading  Reformers  to-day,  and  see 
what  the  man  was  like.  Let  us  pass  under  review  one 
who  was  a  friend  and  contemporary  of  Cranmer,  Ridley, 
and  Latimer,  and  a  leading  fellow-labourer  in  the  work  of 
the  Reformation.  Let  us  find  out  how  he  lived,  and  how 
he  preached,  and  what  he  thought,  and  how  he  died. 
Once  more  I  say,  let  us  bring  in  the  light. 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  69 

We  live  in  times  when  the  strangest  misrepresentations 
prevail  about  the  true  character  of  the  Church  of  England. 
Scores  of  people  all  over  the  country  are  not  ashamed  to 
denounce  the  very  name  of  Protestantism,  and  to  tell  people 
that  "Evangelical"  Churchmen  are  not  Churchmen  at 
all!  Forsooth,  they  are  Calvinists,  Puritans,  Dissenters, 
Methodists,  Fanatics,  and  the  like,  and  ought  to  leave  the 
Church  of  England  and  go  to  their  own  place !  Let  us 
bring  these  assertions  to  the  test  of  a  few  plain  facts. 

Let  us  examine  the  recorded  sentiments,  the  written 
opinions,  of  one  of  the  very  divines  to  whom  we  owe  our 
Articles  and  Prayer-book,  with  very  few  alterations.  Let 
us  hear  what  Bishop  Hooper  wrote,  and  thought,  and  taught. 
Let  us  not  hastily  concede  that  Ritualists  and  High 
Churchmen  are  the  true  representatives  of  the  Church  of 
England.  "  He  that  is  first  in  his  own  cause  seemeth  just, 
but  his  neighbour  that  cometh  after  searcheth  him." 
(Prov.  xviii.  17.)  Once  more,  I  say,  let  us  turn  on  the 
light. 

I.  I  will  begin  by  giving  some  account  of  Bishop 
Hoopers  times. — What  kind  of  times  were  they  in  a 
religious  point  of  view  ?  Out  of  the  pages  of  Fox, 
Strype,  Burnet,  Soames,  and  Blunt,  let  me  try  to  supply  a 
few  historical  gleanings. 

John  Hooper  was  born  in  1495  and  died  in  1555.  He 
first  saw  the  light  in  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Seventh,  and 
was  burned  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Mary.  He  lived 
through  the  whole  reigns  of  Henry  the  Eighth  and 
Edward  the  Sixth,  and  was  an  eyewitness  of  all  that 
took  place  under  the  government  of  those  two  kings. 
The  sixty  years  of  his  life  take  in  one  of  the  most 


70  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

eventful  periods  of  English  history.  It  would  bo 
impossible  to  exaggerate  the  difference  there  was 
between  England  in  1495  and  the  same  England  in  1555. 
In  a  religious  and  moral  view,  the  whole  country  was 
turned  upside  down.  When  Hooper  was  born,  the 
English  Reformation  had  not  begun,  and  the  Church  of 
Rome  ruled  England  undisturbed.  When  he  died,  the 
Reformation  had  struck  such  deep  root,  that  neither 
argument  nor  persecution  could  overthrow  it. 

What  were  the  leading  characteristics  of  English 
religion  before  the  Reformation  ?  In  what  state  did  the 
mighty  change  which  Hooper  witnessed,  and  helped 
forward,  find  our  forefathers?  In  one  word,  what  does 
England  owe  to  that  subversion  of  Popery  and  that 
introduction  of  Protestantism,  in  which  Hooper  was  a 
leading  instrument  ?  Let  me  try  to  supply  a  short 
answer  to  these  questions.  They  are  subjects,  I  am  sorry 
to  say,  on  which  most  people  seem  to  know  nothing  at 
all.  The  minds  of  the  vast  majority  of  my  countrymen 
appear  to  be  a  total  blank  about  the  history  of  three 
hundred  years  ago.  With  all  the  stir  made  about 
education,  the  ignorance  of  our  own  country's  history  is 
something  lamentable  and  appalling  and  depressing.  I 
never  can  believe  that  extreme  Ritualism  would  have 
obtained  so  many  adherents,  if  English  people  only  knew 
the  extent  of  our  debt  to  the  Protestant  Reformation. 
They  would  never  trifle,  and  tamper,  and  dabble  with 
Popery,  if  they  only  knew  what  Popery  was. 

(a)  Before  the  Reformation,  one  leading  feature  of 
English  religion  was  dense  ignorance.  There  was  among 
all  classes  a  conspicuous  absence  of  all  knowledge  of  true 
Christianity.  A  gross  darkness  overspread  the  land,  a 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  71 

darkness  that  might  be  felt  Not  one  in  a  hundred  could 
have  told  you  as  much  about  the  Gospel  of  Christ  as  we- 
could  now  learn  from  any  intelligent  Sunday  School 
child. 

We  need  not  wonder  at  this  ignorance.  The  people  had 
neither  schools  nor  Bibles.  Wickliffe's  New  Testament, 
the  only  translation  extant  till  Henry  the  Eighth's  Bible 
was  printed,  cost  £2  16s.  3d.  of  our  money.  The  prayers  of 
the  Church  were  in  Latin,  and  of  course  the  people  could 
not  understand  them.  Preaching  there  was  scarcely  any. 
Quarterly  sermons  indeed  were  prescribed  to  the  clergy, 
but  not  insisted  on.  Latimer  says  that  while  Mass  was 
never  to  be  left  unsaid  for  a  single  Sunday,  sermons  might 
be  omitted  for  twenty  Sundays,  and  nobody  was  blamed. 
After  all,  when  there  were  sermons,  they  were  utterly 
unprofitable:  and  latterly  to  be  a  preacher  was  to  be 
suspected  of  being  a  heretic. 

To  cap  all,  the  return  that  Hooper  got  from  the  diocese 
of  Gloucester,  when  he  was  first  appointed  Bishop  in 
1551,  will  give  a  pretty  clear  idea  of  the  ignorance  of 
Pre-Reformation  times.  Out  of  311  clergy  of  his  diocese, 
168  were  unable  to  repeat  the  Ten  Commandments;  31  of 
the  168  could  not  state  in  what  part  of  Scripture  they 
were  to  be  found;  40  could  not  tell  where  the  Lord's 
prayer  was  written ;  and  31  of  the  40  were  ignorant  who 
was  the  author  of  the  Lord's  prayer ! 

If  this  is  not  ignorance,  I  know  not  what  is.  If  such 
were  the  pastors,  what  must  the  people  have  been !  If 
this  was  the  degree  of  knowledge  among  the  parsons, 
what  must  it  have  been  among  the  people  ! 

(6)  But  this  is  not  all.  Before  the  Reformation,  another 
leading  feature  of  English  religion  was  superstition  of  the 


72  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

lowest  and  most  degrading  description.  Of  the  extent 
to  which  this  was  carried  few,  I  suspect,  have  the  smallest 
idea. 

Men  and  women  in  those  days  had  uneasy  conscience? 
sometimes,  and  wanted  relief.  They  had  sorrow  and 
sickness  and  death  to  pass  through,  just  like  ourselves. 
What  could  they  do  ?  Whither  could  they  turn  ?  There 
was  none  to  tell  them,  of  the  love  of  God  and  the  mediation 
of  Christ,  of  the  glad  tidings  of  free,  full,  and  complete 
salvation,  of  justification  by  faith,  of  grace,  and  faith,  and 
hope,  and  repentance.  They  could  only  turn  to  the 
priests,  who  knew  nothing  themselves  and  could  tell 
nothing  to  others.  "The  blind  led  the  blind,  and  both 
fell  into  the  ditch."  In  a  word,  the  religion  of  our 
ancestors,  before  Hooper's  time,  was  little  better  than  an 
organized  system  of  Virgin  Mary  worship,  saint  worship, 
image  worship,  relic  worship,  pilgrimages,  almsgivings, 
formalism,  ceremonialism,  processions,  prostrations,  bow 
ings,  crossings,  fastings,  confessions,  absolutions,  masses, 
penances,  and  blind  obedience  to  the  priests.  It  was  a 
grand  higgledy-piggledy  of  ignorance  and  idolatry,  and 
service  done  to  an  unknown  God  by  deputy.  The  only 
practical  result  was  that  the  priests  took  the  people's 
money,  and  undertook  to  ensure  their  salvation,  and  the 
people  flattered  themselves  that  the  more  they  gave 
to  the  priests,  the  more  sure  they  were  of  going  to 
heaven. 

The  catalogue  of  gross  and  ridiculous  impostures  which 
the  priests  practised  on  the  people  would  fill  a  volume, 
and  I  cannot  of  course  do  more  than  supply  a  few 
specimens. 

At  the  Abbey  of  Hales,  in  Gloucestershire,  a  vial  was 


JOHN  HOOPER  :  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  73 

shown  by  the  priests  to  those  who  offered  alms,  which  was 
said  to  contain  the  blood  of  Christ.  On  examination,  in 
King  Henry  the  Eighth's  time,  this  notable  vial  was  found 
to  contain  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  blood  of  a  duck, 
which  was  renewed  every  week. 

At  Bexley,  in  Kent,  a  crucifix  was  exhibited,  which 
received  peculiar  honour  and  large  offerings,  because  of  a 
continual  miracle  which  was  said  to  attend  its  exhibition. 
When  people  offered  copper,  the  face  of  the  figure  looked 
grave;  when  they  offered  silver,  it  relaxed  its  severity; 
when  they  offered  gold,  it  openly  smiled.  In  Henry  the 
Eighth's  time  this  famous  crucifix  was  examined,  and 
wires  were  found  within  it  by  which  the  priests  could  move 
the  face  of  the  image,  and  make  it  assume  any  expression 
that  they  pleased. 

At  Reading  Abbey,  in  Berkshire,  the  following  relics, 
among  many  others,  were  most  religiously  worshipped, — 
an  angel  with  one  wing, — the  spear-head  that  pierced  our 
Saviour's  side, — two  pieces  of  the  holy  cross, — St.  James' 
hand,  St.  Philip's  stole,  and  a  bone  of  Mary  Magdalene. 

At  Bury  St.  Edmund's,  in  Suffolk,  the  priests  exhibited 
the  coals  that  roasted  St.  Lawrence,  the  parings  of  St. 
Edmund's  toe-nails,  Thomas  a  Becket's  penknife  and 
boots,  and  as  many  pieces  of  our  Saviour's  cross  as  would 
have  made,  if  joined  together,  one  large  whole  cross. 

At  Maiden  Bradley  Priory,  in  Somersetshire,  the 
worshippers  were  privileged  to  see  the  Virgin  Mary's 
smock,  part  of  the  bread  used  at  the  original  Lord's 
Supper,  and  a  piece  of  the  stone  manger  in  which  our 
Lord  was  laid  at  Bethlehem. 

At  Bruton  Priory,  in  Somersetshire,  was  kept  a  girdle 
of  the  Virgin  Mary,  made  of  red  silk.  This  solemn  relic 


74  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

was  sent  as  a  special  favour  to  women  in  childbirth,  to 
insure  them  a  safe  delivery.  The  like  was  done  with  a 
white  girdle  of  Mary  Magdalene,  kept  at  Farley  Abbey, 
in  Wiltshire.  In  neither  case,  we  may  be  sure,  was  the 
relic  sent  without  a  pecuniary  consideration.* 

Records  like  these  are  so  silly  and  melancholy  that  one 
hardly  knows  whether  to  laugh  or  to  cry.  But  it  is 
positively  necessary  to  bring  them  forward,  in  order  that 
men  may  know  what  was  the  religion  of  our  forefathers 
before  the  Reformation.  Wonderful  as  these  things  may 
sound  in  our  ears,  we  must  never  forget  that  Englishmen 
in  those  times  knew  no  better.  A  famishing  man,  in 
sieges  and  blockades,  has  been  known  to  eat  mice  and  rats 
rather  than  die  of  hunger.  A  soul  famishing  for  lack  ot 
God's  Word  must  not  be  judged  too  harshly  if  it  struggles 
to  find  comfort  in  the  most  grovelling  superstition. 

(c)  One  thing  more  yet  remains  behind.  Before  the 
Reformation,  another  leading  feature  of  English  religion 
was  wide-spread  unkoliness  and  immorality.  The  lives 
of  the  clergy,  as  a  general  rule,  were  simply  scandalous, 
and  the  moral  tone  of  the  laity  was  naturally  at  the  lowest 
ebb.  Of  course  grapes  will  never  grow  on  thorns,  nor  figs 
on  thistles.  To  expect  the  huge  roots  of  ignorance  and 
superstition,  which  filled  our  land,  to  bear  any  but  corrupt 
fruit,  would  be  unreasonable  and  absurd.  But  a  more 
thoroughly  corrupt  set  than  the  English  clergy  were,  in 
the  palmy  days  of  undisturbed  Romanism,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  imagine. 

I  might  tell  you  of  the  habits  of  gluttony,  drunkenness, 


•  Strype  and  Burnet  are  my  authority  for  the  above  mentioned  facts. 


JOHN  HOOPER:   BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  75 

and  gambling,  for  which  the  parochial  priesthood  became 
unhappily  notorious. 

"  Too  often,"  says  Professor  J.  J.  Blunt,  in  his  excellent 
history  of  the  Reformation,  "they  were  persons  taken 
from  the  lowest  of  the  people,  with  all  the  gross  habits  of 
the  class  from  which  they  sprang, — loiterers  on  the  ale 
house  bench,  dicers,  scarce  able  to  read  by  rote  their 
paternoster,  often  unable  to  repeat  the  ten  commandments, 
— mass-priests,  who  could  just  read  their  breviaries,  and 
no  more, — men  often  dubbed  by  the  uncomplimentary 
names  of  Sir  John  Lack-Latin,  Sir  John  Mumble-Matins, 
or  babbling  and  blind  Sir  John.  In  fact,  the  carnal 
living,  fat  bellies,  and  general  secularity  of  ministers  of 
religion  were  proverbial  before  the  Reformation." 

I  might  tell  you  of  the  shameless  covetousness  which 
marked  the  Pre-Reformation  priesthood.  So  long  as  a 
man  gave  liberal  offerings  at  the  shrine  of  such  saints  as 
Thomas  a  Becket,  the  clergy  would  absolve  him  of  almost 
any  sin.  So  long  as  a  felon  or  malefactor  paid  the  monks 
well,  he  might  claim  sanctuary  within  the  precincts  of 
religious  houses,  after  any  crime,  and  hardly  any  law  could 
reach  him.  Yet  all  this  time  for  Lollards  and  Wickliffites 
there  was  no  mercy  at  all !  The  very  carvings  still  extant 
in  some  old  ecclesiastical  buildings  tell  a  story  in  stone 
and  wood,  which  speaks  volumes  to  this  day.  Friars  were 
often  represented  as  foxes  preaching,  with  the  neck  of  a 
stolen  goose  peeping  out  of  the  hood  behind, — as  wolvea 
giving  absolution,  with  a  sheep  muffled  up  in  their  cloaks, 
— as  apes  sitting  by  a  sick  man's  bed,  with  a  crucifix  in 
one  hand,  and  with  the  other  in  the  sufferer's  pocket. 
Things  must  indeed  have  been  at  a  low  ebb,  when  the  faulta 
of  ordained  ministers  were  so  publicly  held  up  to  scorn. 


76  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

But  the  blackest  spot  on  the  character  of  our  Pre- 
Reformation  clergy  in  England  is  one  of  which  it  is 
painful  to  speak.  I  mean  the  impurity  of  their  lives,  and 
their  horrible  contempt  of  the  seventh  commandment 
The  results  of  auricular  confession,  carried  on  by  men 
bound  by  their  vow  never  to  marry,  were  such  that  I  dare 
not  enter  into  them.  The  consequences  of  shutting  up 
herds  of  men  and  women,  in  the  prime  of  life,  in 
monasteries  and  nunneries,  were  such  that  I  will  not  defile 
my  readers'  minds  by  dwelling  upon  them.  Suffice  it  to 
say  that  the  discoveries  made  by  Henry  the  Eighth's 
Commissioners,  of  the  state  of  things  in  many  of  the 
so-called  "  religious  "  houses,  were  such  as  it  is  impossible 
to  describe.  Anything  less  "holy"  than  the  practice  of 
many  of  the  "  holy  "  men  and  women  in  these  professedly 
"  holy  "  retreats  from  sin  and  the  world,  the  imagination 
cannot  conceive  I  If  ever  there  was  a  plausible  theory 
weighed  in  the  balance  and  found  utterly  wanting,  it  is  the 
favourite  theory  that  celibacy  and  monasticism  promote 
holiness.  Romantic  young  men  and  sentimental  young 
ladies  may  mourn  over  the  ruins  of  such  Abbeys  as 
Battle,  and  Glastonbury,  and  Bolton,  and  Kirkstall,  and 
Furness,  and  Croyland,  and  Bury,  and  Tintern.  But  I 
venture  boldly  to  say  that  too  many  of  these  religious 
houses  were  sinks  of  iniquity,  and  that  too  often  monks 
and  nuns  were  the  scandal  of  Christianity. 

I  grant  freely  that  all  monasteries  and  nunneries  were  not 
equally  bad.  I  admit  that  there  were  some  religious  houses 
like  Godstow  Nunnery,  near  Oxford,  which  had  a  stainless 
reputation.  But  I  fear  that  these  were  bright  exceptions 
which  only  prove  the  truth  of  the  rule.  The  preamble 
of  the  Act  for  Dissolution  of  Religious  Houses,  founded 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTTK.  77 

on  the  report  of  Henry  the  Eighth's  Commissioners, 
contains  broad,  general  statements,  that  cannot  be  got 
over.  It  declares  "  that  manifest  sin,  vicious,  carnal,  and 
abominable  living  is  daily  used  and  committed  in  abbeys, 
priories,  and  other  religious  houses  of  monks,  canons,  and 
nuns,  and  that  albeit  many  continual  visitations  have  been 
had,  by  the  space  of  two  hundred  years  and  more,  for  an 
honest  and  charitable  reformation  of  such  unthrifty, 
carnal,  and  abominable  living,  yet  that  nevertheless  little 
or  none  amendment  was  hitherto  had,  but  that  theii 
vicious  living  shamefully  increased  and  augmented." 

After  all,  there  is  no  surer  receipt  for  promoting 
immorality  than  "  fulness  of  bread  and  abundance  of 
idleness."  (Ezek.  xvi.  49.)  Take  any  number  of  men 
and  women,  of  any  nation,  rank,  or  class, — bind  them  by 
a  vow  of  celibacy, — shut  them  up  in  houses  by  themselves, 
— give  them  plenty  to  eat  and  drink,  and  give  them 
nothing  to  do, — and  above  all,  give  them  no  Bible-reading, 
no  true  religion,  no  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  no  inspection, 
and  no  check  from  public  opinion ; — if  the  result  of  all 
this  be  not  abominable  and  abundant  breach  of  the 
seventh  commandment,  I  can  only  say  that  I  have  read 
human  nature  in  vain. 

I  make  no  apology  for  dwelling  on  these  things. 
Painful  and  humbling  as  the  picture  is,  it  is  one  that  in 
these  times  ought  to  be  carefully  looked  at,  and  not 
thrown  aside.  Before  we  join  in  the  vulgar  outcry 
which  some  modern  Churchmen  are  making  against  the 
Reformation,  I  want  English  people  to  understand  from 
what  the  Reformation  delivered  us.  Before  we  make  up 
our  minds  to  give  up  Protestantism  and  receive  back 
Popery  and  monasticism,  let  us  thoroughly  understand 


78  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

what  was  the  state  of  England  when  Popery  had  its  own 
way.  My  own  belief  is  that  never  was  a  change  so 
loudly  demanded  as  the  Reformation,  and  that  never  did 
men  do  such  good  service  to  England  as  Hooper  and  his 
fellow-labourers,  the  Reformers.  In  short,  unless  a  man 
can  disprove  the  plain  historical  facts  recorded  in  the 
pages  of  Fox,  Fuller,  Strype,  Burnet,  Soames,  and  Blunt, 
he  must  either  admit  that  the  Pre-Reformation  times  were 
bad  times,  or  be  content  to  be  regarded  as  a  lunatic.  To 
no  class  of  men  does  England  owe  such  a  debt  as  to  our 
Protestant  Reformers,  and  it  is  a  burning  shame  if  we 
are  ungrateful  and  refuse  to  pay  that  debt. 

Of  course  it  is  easy  and  cheap  work  to  pick  holes  in  the 
character  of  some  of  the  agents  whom  God  was  pleased 
to  use  at  the  Reformation.  No  doubt  Henry  the  Eighth 
— who  had  the  Bible  translated,  and  made  Cranmer  and 
Latimer  bishops,  and  suppressed  the  monasteries — was  a 
brutal  and  bad  man.  I  am  not  concerned  to  defend  him. 
But  God  has  often  done  good  work  with  very  bad  tools  ; 
and  the  grand  result  is  what  we  must  chiefly  look  at.  And, 
after  all,  bad  as  Henry  the  Eighth  was,  the  less  our 
Romanizing  friends  dwell  on  that  point  the  better.  His 
moral  character  at  any  rate  will  bear  a  favourable 
comparison  with  that  of  many  of  the  Popes.  At  any  rate 
he  was  a  married  man ! 

It  is  easy,  on  the  other  hand,  to  say  that  Hooper  and 
his  brother  Reformers  did  their  work  badly,  countenanced 
many  abuses,  left  many  things  imperfect  and  incomplete 
All  this  may  be  very  true.  But  in  common  fairness  men 
should  remember  the  numerous  difficulties  they  had  to 
contend  with,  and  the  mountains  of  rubbish  they  had  to 
shovel  away.  To  my  nnnd  the  wonder  is  not  so  much 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  79 

that  they  did  so  little,  but  rather  that  they  succeeded 
in  -doing  anything  at  all. 

After  all,  when  all  has  been  said,  and  every  objection 
raised,  there  remain  some  great  plain  facts  which  cannot 
well  be  got  over.  Let  men  say  what  they  will,  or  pick 
holes  where  they  may,  they  will  never  succeed  in 
disproving  these  facts.  To  the  Reformation  Englishmen 
owe  an  English  Bible,  and  liberty  for  every  man  to  read 
it. — To  the  Reformation  they  owe  the  knowledge  of  the 
way  of  peace  with  God,  and  of  the  right  of  every  sinner 
to  go  straight  to  Christ  by  faith,  without  bishop,  priest, 
or  minister  standing  in  his  way. — To  the  Reformation 
they  owe  a  Scriptural  standard  of  morality  and  holiness, 
such  as  our  ancestors  never  dreamed  of. — For  ever  let  us 
be  thankful  for  these  inestimable  mercies !  For  ever  let 
us  grasp  them  firmly,  and  refuse  to  let  them  go !  For  my 
part,  I  hold  that-  he  who  would  rob  us  of  these  privileges, 
and  draw  us  back  to  Pre-Reformation  ignorance,  super 
stition,  and  unholiness,  is  an  enemy  to  England,  and  ought 
to  be  firmly  opposed. 

II.  I  turn  from  Hooper's  times  to  Hooper  himself.  For 
dwelling  so  long  on  his  times  I  think  it  needless  to  make 
any  apology.  We  cannot  rightly  estimate  a  public  man, 
unless  we  know  the  times  -in  which  he  lived.  We  cannot 
duly  appreciate  an  English  Reformer,  unless  we  under 
stand  the  state  of  England  before  the  Reformation.  We 
have  seen  the  state  of  things  that  Hooper  and  his 
companions  had  to  deal  with.  Now  let  us  find  out 
something  about  Hooper  himself. 

John  Hooper  was  born  in  the  county  of  Somerset,  in 
the  year  1495j  in  the  reign  of  Henry  the  Seventh.  The 


80  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

pariah  in  which  he  was  born  is  not  known,  and  net  even  a 
tradition  has  survived  about  it.  In  this  respect  Hooper 
and  Rowland  Taylor  stand  alone  among  the  English 
martyrs.  The  birthplaces  of  Cranuier,  Ridley,  Latimer, 
Rogers,  Bradford,  Philpot,  and  Ferrar  have  all  been 
ascertained.  The  position  which  his  family  occupied  in 
the  county  is  alike  unknown.  There  is,  however,  good 
reason  for  believing  that  his  father  was  not  a  mere 
yeoman,  but  a  man  of  considerable  wealth. 

The  early  history  of  this  great  Reformer  is  wrapped  in 
much  obscurity.  He  entered  Merton  College,  Oxford,  in 
1514,  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  under  the  tuition  of  an 
uncle,  who  was  then  Fellow  of  that  College.  He  took  his 
degree  as  B.A.  in  1518,  at  the  age  of  twenty-three,  and 
never  afterwards  proceeded  to  a  higher  degree.  These 
are  literally  the  only  facts  that  have  been  discovered  about 
the  first  twenty-three  years  of  Hooper's  life.  From  1518 
to  1539, — a  period  of  no  less  than  twenty-one  years, — we 
are  again  left  almost  entirely  in  the  dark  about  Hooper's 
history.  There  can  be  little  doubt,  however,  that  it  was  a 
most  momentous  crisis  in  his  life,  and  gave  a  colour  and 
bias  to  the  whole  man  for  the  rest  of  his  days.  Tradition 
says,  that  after  taking  his  degree  at  Oxford,  he  became  a 
monk — first  at  the  Cistercian  Monastery  of  Old  Cleve, 
near  Watchet,  in  Somersetshire,  and  afterwards  in  another 
Cistercian  house  at  Gloucester.  Tradition  adds,  that  he 
became  wearied  and  disgusted  with  a  monastic  life,  and 
withdrew  from  it,  in  order  to  reside  at  Oxford ;  though  at 
what  precise  date  is  not  known.  It  is  some  corroboration 
of  these  traditions,  that  when  he  was  sentenced  to  death 
afterwards  by  Gardiner,  he  was  described  as  "  formerly  a 
monk  of  the  Monastery  of  Cleve,  of  the  Cistercian  order." 


HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  81 

Yet  it  must  be  admitted  that  there  is  a  conspicuous 
absence  in  his  literary  remains  of  any  reference  to  his 
experience  as  a  monk. 

One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  very  certain  about  Hooper  at 
this  stage  of  his  life.  It  was  during  these  twenty-one 
years,  between  1518  and  1539,  that  his  eyes  were  opened 
to  the  false  doctrines  and  unscriptural  practices  of  Popery, 
though  when  and  where  we  cannot  exactly  tell.  He  says 
himself,  in  a  letter  to  Bullinger,  the  Swiss  Reformer,  that 
"  when  he  was  a  courtier,  and  living  too  much  of  a  court 
life  in  the  palace  of  the  King,"  he  met  with  certain 
writings  of  Zwingle,  and  certain  commentaries  of  Bullinger 
on  St.  Paul's  Epistles,  and  that  to  the  study  of  these 
books  he  owed  his  deliverance  from  Papacy,  and  the 
conversion  of  his  soul.  This  deeply  interesting  letter  will 
be  found  in  the  "  Original  Letters  from  Zurich,"  published 
by  the  Parker  Society.  To  the  meaning,  however,  of  the 
allusion  to  "  a  court  life,"  and  "  the  palace  of  the  King," 
the  letter,  unfortunately,  supplies  no  clue. 

Another  fact  about  Hooper  at  this  period  of  his  history 
is  no  less  certain.  He  was  obliged  to  leave  Oxford  in  1539, 
when  the  semi-Popish  statute  of  the  Six  Articles,  which 
made  Latimer  resign  his  Bishopric,  was  put  in  operation. 
Fox,  the  Martyrologist,  distinctly  asserts  that  his  known 
attachment  to  the  principles  of  the  Reformation  attracted 
the  notice  of  the  Oxford  authorities,  and  specially  of 
Dr.  Smith,  the  Professor  of  Divinity.  The  consequence 
was,  that  he  was  compelled  to  retire  from  the  University, 
and  appears  to  have  never  resided  there  again. 

On  leaving  Oxford,  in  1539,  Hooper  became,  for  a  short 
time,  steward  and  chaplain  in  the  housbhold  of  Sir 
Thomas  Arundel.  Here  also  again  his  Protestant  principles 


82  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

got  him  into  trouble.  His  master  liked  him,  but  did  not 
like  his  opinions.  The  consequence  was,  that  he  sent  him 
to  Bishop  Gardiner  with  a  private  letter,  in  which  he 
requested  him  to  "  do  his  chaplain  some  good."  Gardiner, 
however,  after  four  or  five  days'  conference,  could  make 
nothing  of  the  sturdy  Eeformer,  and  utterly  failed  to 
shake  his  opinions.  The  end  of  the  matter  was,  says  Fox, 
"that  he  sent  Sir  Thomas  his  servant  again,  right  well 
commending  his  learning  and  wit,  but  bearing  in  his  heart 
a  grudge  against  Master  Hooper."  This  grudge,  unhappily, 
was  not  forgotten,  and  bore  bitter  fruit  after  many  days. 

The  connection  between  Hooper  and  Sir  Thomas  Arundel 
did  not  last  long  after  this.  The  Protestant  chaplain 
found  that  his  life  was  not  safe  in  England,  and,  like  many 
of  the  good  men  of  his  day,  withdrew  to  the  Continent. 
There  he  appears  to  have  lived  for  at  least  nine  years, — 
first  at  Strasburgh,  afterwards  at  Bale,  and  finally  at 
Zurich.  It  was  at  this  period  of  his  life,  no  doubt,  that 
he  became  established  in  those  clear,  distinct  views  of 
doctrinal  truth,  which  he  afterwards  so  nobly  maintained 
in  his  own  country.  At  this  period,  too,  he  formed 
friendships  with  Bullinger,  Bucer,  A.  Lasco,  and  other 
Continental  Reformers,  who  ever  afterwards  regarded  him 
with  deep  affection.  At  this  period,  too,  about  the  year 
1546,  he  married  a  noble  Burgundian  lady,  named  Anna 
de  Tzerclas,  who  seems  to  have  been  in  every  way  a 
helpmeet  for  him. 

In  1547  Henry  the  Eighth  die'd,  and  Edward  the  Sixth 
commenced  his  short  but  glorious  reign.  Soon  after  this 
Hooper  began  to  feel  it  his  bounden  duty  to  give  his  aid 
to  the  work  of  the  Protestant  Reformation  in  his  own 
country,  and,  after  taking  an  affectionate  leave  of  hig 


JOHN  HOOPEK:  BISHOP  AND  MAETTR.  83 

Zurich  friends,  set  out  on  his  return  to  England.  His 
parting  words  were  painfully  prophetic  and  deeply 
touching.  They  told  him  they  fully  expected  that  he 
would  rise  to  a  high  position  in  his  native  land ;  they 
hoped  he  would  not  forget  his  old  friends ;  they  begged 
him  to  write  to  them  sometimes.  In  reply,  Hooper 
assured  them  that  he  should  never  forget  their  many 
kindnesses ;  promised  to  write  to  them  from  time  to  time 
and  concluded  with  the  following  memorable  words:  "The 
last  news  of  all,  Master  Bullinger,  I  shall  not  be  able  to 
write.  For  there,  where  I  shall  take  most  pains,  there 
shall  ye  hear  of  me  to  be  burnt  to  ashes.  That  shall  be 
the  last  news,  which  I  shall  not  be  able  to  write  to  you. 
But  you  shall  hear  it  of  me." 

Hooper  arrived  in  London  in  May,  1549,  and  was  gladly 
received  by  the  friends  of  the  Reformation,  which,  in  the 
face  of  immense  difficulties,  Cranmer  and  Ridley  were 
slowly  pressing  forward.  He  came  like  a  welcome 
reinforcement  in  the  midst  of  an  arduous  campaign,  and 
mightily  strengthened  the  cause  of  Protestantism.  His 
reputation,  as  a  man  of  soundness,  learning,  and  power, 
had  evidently  gone  before  him.  He  was  very  soon 
appointed  chaplain  to  the  Protector,  the  Duke  of 
Somerset.  With  characteristic  zeal  he  devoted  himself 
at  once  to  the  work  of  teaching,  and  generally  preached 
twice  a  day,  and  this  with  such  marked  acceptance  that 
the  churches  could  not  contain  the  crowds  that  flocked  to 
hear  him.  Even  Dr.  Smith,  his  enemy,  confessed  that 
"  he  was  so  much  admired  by  the  people  that  they  held 
him  for  a  prophet :  nay,  they  looked  upon  him  as  a 
deity." 

Fox,   the   Martyrologist,  wTfio  evidently  knew  Hooper 


84  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

well,  bears  the  following  testimony  to  his  high  character 
at  this  time,  both  for  gifts  and  graces :  "  In  his  doctrine 
he  was  earnest,  in  tongue  eloquent,  in  the  Scriptures 
perfect,  in  pains  indefatigable.  His  life  was  so  pure  and 
good  that  no  breath  of  slander  could  fasten  any  fault  upon 
him.  He  was  of  body  strong,  his  health  whole  and  sound, 
his  wit  very  pregnant,  his  invincible  patience  able  to 
sustain  whatsoever  sinister  fortune  and  adversity  could  do. 
He  was  constant  of  judgment,  spare  of  diet,  sparer  of 
words,  and  sparest  of  time.  In  housekeeping  he  was  very 
liberal,  and  sometimes  more  free  than  his  living  would 
extend  unto.  Briefly,  of  all  those  virtues  and  qualities 
required  of  St.  Paul  in  a  good  Bishop,  in  his  Epistle 
to  Timothy,  I  know  not  one  that  was  lacking  in  Master 
Hooper." 

A  man  of  this  mould  and  stamp  was  rightly  esteemed 
the  very  man  to  make  a  Bishop  in  Edward  the  Sixth's 
days.  Within  a  year  of  his  landing  in  England  the 
prophecies  of  his  Zurich  friends  were  fulfilled.  After 
preaching  a  course  of  Lent  sermons  before  the  King,  in 
1550,  John  Hooper,  the  friend  of  Bui  linger,  the  exile  of 
Zurich,  the  most  popular  preacher  of  the  day,  was 
nominated  to  fill  the  vacant  Bishopric  of  Gloucester.  A 
wiser  choice  could  not  have  been  made.  Rarely,  too 
rarely,  in  the  annals  of  the  Church  of  England  has  there 
been  such  an  instance  of  the  right  man  being  put  in  the 
right  place. 

Hooper's  nomination,  however,  brought  him  into  a  most 
unhappy  collision  with  Cranmer  and  Ridley,  on  a  very 
awkward  subject  He  steadily  refused  to  take  the  oath 
which  had  been  taken  hitherto  by  Bishops  at  their 
consecration,  and  to  wear  the  episcopal  vestments  which 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  85 

had  hitherto  been  worn.  The  oath  he  objected  to  as 
flatly  unscriptural,  because  it  referred  to  the  saints  as 
well  as  God.  The  vestments  he  objected  to  as  remnants 
of  Popery,  which  ought  to  be  clean  put  away. 

A  controversy  arose  at  once  between  Hooper  and  his 
two  great  fellow-labourers,  which  delayed  his  consecration 
almost  a  whole  year,  and  did  immense  harm.  The  more 
trifling  and  unimportant  the  original  cause  of  dispute 
appeared  to  be,  the  more  heated  and  obstinate  the 
disputants  became.  In  vain  did  Ridley  confer  and  cor 
respond  with  his  recusant  brother.  In  vain  did  Edward 
the  Sixth  and  his  Privy  Council  write  to  Cranmer,  and 
offer  to  discharge  him  from  all  risk  of  penalties,  if  he 
would  "  let  pass  certain  rites  and  ceremonies  "  offensive  to 
the  Bishop-designate.  In  vain  did  foreign  Reformers 
write  long  letters,  and  entreat  both  parties  to  concede 
something  and  give  way.  The  contention  grew  so  sharp 
that  the  Privy  Council  became  weary  of  Hooper's 
obstinacy,  and  actually  committed  him  to  the  Fleet 
Prison  !  At  length  a  compromise  was  effected.  Hooper 
gave  way  on  some  points,  for  peace  sake.  He  consented 
to  wear  the  obnoxious  vestments  on  certain  public 
occasions, — at  his  consecration,  before  the  King,  and  in 
his  own  Cathedral.  The  objectionable  words  in  the 
Episcopal  Oath  were  struck  out  by  the  King's  own  hand. 
The  prison  gates  were  then  thrown  open,  and,  to  the  great 
joy  of  all  true  Protestants,  Hooper  was  consecrated  Bishop 
of  Gloucester  on  the  8th  of  March,  1551. 

This  miserable  controversy  between  Hooper  and  his  two 
great  opponents,  like  all  the  disputes  of  good  men,  is  a 
sorrowful  subject.  Of  course  it  need  not  surprise  us. 
The  best  of  men  are  only  men  at  their  best.  If  Paul  and 


£6  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Barnabas  quarrelled  until  they  parted  company,  and  Peter 
and  Paul  came  into  open  collision  at  Antioch,  we  must 
not  judge  our  English  Reformers  too  harshly,  if  they  did 
not  always  agree.  But  it  is  vain  to  deny  that  this  famous 
quarrel  did  great  harm  at  the  time,  and  sowed  seeds 
which  are  bearing  mischievous  fruit  down  to  this  very 
day. 

At  the  distance  of  more  than  three  hundred  years,  I 
freely  admit,  we  are  poor  judges  of  the  whole  case.  Both 
parties  undoubtedly  were  more  or  less  in  the  wrong,  and  the 
only  question  is  as  to  the  side  which  was  most  to  blame. 
The  general  verdict  of  mankind,  lam  quite  aware,  has  been 
against  Hooper.  To  this  verdict,  however,  I  must  honestly 
say,  I  cannot  altogether  subscribe.  It  is  my  deliberate 
conviction,  after  carefully  weighing  the  whole  affair,  that 
Hooper  was  most  likely  in  the  right,  and  Cranmer  and 
Ridley  were  most  likely  in  the  wrong. 

I  believe  the  plain  truth  to  be,  that  Hooper  wxs  much 
more  far-sighted  than  his  excellent  fellow-labourers.  He 
looked  further  ahead  than  they  did,  and  saw  the  possibility 
of  evils  arising  in  the  Church  of  England,  of  which  they 
in  their  charity  never  dreamed.  He  foresaw,  with  pro 
phetic  eye,  the  immense  peril  of  leaving  nest-eggs  for 
future  Romanism  within  our  pale.  He  foresaw  a  time 
when  the  Pope's  friends  would  take  advantage  of  the  least 
crevice  left  in  the  walls  of  our  Zion ;  and  he  would  fain 
have  had  every  crack  stopped  up.  He  would  not  have 
left  a  single  peg  on  which  Romanizing  Churchmen  could 
have  rehung  the  abominable  doctrine  of  the  Mass.  It  is 
my  decided  opinion  that  he  was  quite  right.  Events  have 
supplied  abundant  proof  that  his  conscientious  scruples 
were  well  founded.  I  believe,  if  Cranmer  and  Ridley  had 


JOHN   HOOPER:   BISHOP   AND  MARTYR.  81 

calmly  listened  to  his  objections,  and  seized  the  oppor* 
tunity  of  settling  the  whole  question  of  "  vestments  "  in  a 
thoroughly  Protestant  way,  it  would  have  been  a  blessing 
to  the  Church  of  England  !  In  a  word,  if  Hooper's  views 
had  been  allowed  to  prevail,  one  half  of  the  Ritualistic 
controversy  of  our  own  day  would  never  have  existed 
at  all* 

Once  delivered  from  this  miserable  controversy,  Hooper 
commenced  his  episcopal  duties  without  a  moment's  delay. 
Though  only  consecrated  on  the  8th  of  March,  1551, 
he  began  at  once  to  preach  throughout  the  diocese  of 
Gloucester  with  such  diligence  as  to  cause  fears  about  his 
health.  His  wife,  writing  to  Bullinger  in  the  month  of 
April,  says,  "  I  entreat  you  to  recommend  Master  Hooper 
to  be  more  moderate  in  his  labours.  He  preaches  four,  or 
at  least  three,  times  every  day,  and  I  am  afraid  lest  these 
over-abundant  exertions  should  cause  a  premature  decay." 
Of  all  the  Edwardian  Bishops,  none  seem  to  have  made 
such  full  proof  of  his  episcopal  ministry  as  he  did. 
Cranmer  was  naturally  absorbed  in  working  out  the  great 
scheme  of  Reformation,  of  which  he  was  the  principal 
architect.  Ridley,  from  his  position  in  London,  within 


*  It  is  a  pleasing  fact,  that  at  a  later  date  there  seems  to  have  been  a 
complete  reconciliation  between  Hooper  and  Ridley,  if  indeed  there  ever 
was  a  real  breach.  When  Ridley  was  in  prison,  in  Queen  Mary's  reign, 
he  wrote  as  follows  to  Hooper  :  ' '  My  dear  brother,  we  thoroughly  agree 
and  wholly  consent  together  in  those  things  which  are  the  grounds  and 
substantial  points  of  our  religion,  against  which  the  world  so  furiously 
rageth  in  these  days.  In  time  past,  by  certain  by -matters  and  circum 
stances  of  religion,  your  wisdom  and  my  simplicity  hath  a  little  jarred, 
each  of  us  following  the  abundance  of  his  own  sense  and  judgment. 
But  now  I  say,  be  you  assured,  that  with  my  whole  heart,  God  is  my 
witness,  I  love  you  in  fche  truth,  and  for  the  truth's  sake !  " 


88  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES, 

reach  of  the  Court  and  of  Lambeth  Palace,  was  necessarily 
often  drawn  aside  to  advise  the  King  and  the  Primate. 
For  really  working  a  diocese,  and  giving  a  splendid 
pattern  of  what  an  English  Protestant  Bishop  should  be, 
the  man  of  the  times  was  John  Hooper.  We  need  not 
wonder  that  the  Government  soon  gave  him  the  charge 
of  Worcester  as  well  as  the  diocese  of  Gloucester.  The 
willing  horse  is  always  worked,  and  the  more  a  man  does, 
the  more  he  is  always  asked  to  do. 

The  state  of  Hooper's  clergy  evidently  gave  him  great 
trouble.  We  have  already  seen  that  many  clergymen  in 
the  diocese  of  Gloucester  were  unable  to  repeat  the  Ten 
Commandments,  and  could  not  tell  who  was  the  author  of 
the  Lord's  prayer.  Moreover,  they  were  not  only  ignorant, 
but  generally  hostile  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation. 
However,  they  were  ready  to  conform  to  anything,  and 
subscribe  anything,  so  long  as  they  were  allowed  to  keep 
their  livings !  Hooper  therefore  drew  up  for  them  a  body 
of  fifty  Articles  of  an  admirable  character,  and  required 
every  incumbent  to  subscribe  them.  He  also  supplied 
them  with  a  set  of  excellent  injunctions  about  their  duties. 
Besides  this  he  appointed  some  of  the  better  sort  to  be 
superintendents  of  the  rest,  with  a  commission  to  watch 
over  their  brethren.  It  is  difficult  to  see  what  more  he 
could  have  done,  however  painful  and  unsatisfactory  the 
state  of  things  may  have  been.  The  best  Bishops,  with 
all  their  zeal,  cannot  give  grace,  or  change  clerical  hearts. 

The  state  of  the  laity  in  the  diocese  of  Gloucester  was 
just  as  unsatisfactory  as  that  of  the  clergy.  This,  of 
course,  was  only  natural.  "Like  pastors,  like  people." 
With  them  he  could  of  necessity  do  little,  except  reprovo 
immorality,  and  check  it,  when  possible  to  do  so.  Of  his 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  81 

firm  and  impartial  conduct  in  this  way,  a  remarkable 
example  is  given  by  John  ab  Ulmis,  in  one  of  the  Zurich 
letters.  He  says,  that  Sir  Anthony  Kingston,  a  man  of 
rank  in  Gloucestershire,  was  cited  by  the  Bishop  to  appear 
before  him  on  a  charge  of  adultery,  and  was  severely 
reprimanded.  He  replied  with  abusive  language,  and 
even  forgot  himself  so  far  as  to  use  violence  and  blows  in 
the  court.  But  Hooper  was  unmoved.  He  reported  the 
whole  case  to  the  Privy  Council  in  London,  and  the 
result  was  that  the  Gloucestershire  Knight  was  severely 
punished  for  his  contumacy,  and  fined  no  less  than  £500, 
a  very  large  sum  in  those  days. 

The  state  of  the  two  Cathedrals  of  Gloucester  and 
Worcester  appears  to  have  been  as  great  a  trial  to  Hooper 
as  the  state  of  the  parochial  clergy  and  laity.  Curiously 
enough,  even  300  years  ago,  Cathedral  bodies  seem  to 
have  been  anything  but  helps  to  the  Church  of  England. 
He  says,  in  a  letter  upon  this  subject  to  Sir  William  Cecil, 
the  King's  Secretary  of  State, — "Ah!  Mr.  Secretary,  if 
there  were  good  men  in  the  Cathedral  churches!  God 
should  then  have  much  more  honour  than  He  hath  now, 
the  King's  majesty  more  obedience,  and  the  poor  people 
more  knowledge.  But  the  realm  wanteth  light  in  the 
very  churches  where  of  right  it  ought  most  to  be."  He 
then  concludes  his  letter  with  these  touching  words : 
"  God  give  us  wisdom  and  strength  wisely  and  strongly  to 
serve  in  our  vocations.  There  is  none  eateth  their  bread 
in  the  sweat  of  their  face,  but  such  as  serve  in  public 
vocations.  Yours,  Mr.  Secretary,  is  wonderful,  but  mine 
passeth.  Now  I  perceive  private  labours  be  but  play, 
and  private  work  but  ease  and  quietness.  God  be  our 
help!" 


90  LIGHT  FBOM  OLD  TIMES, 

After  all,  the  best  account  of  Hooper's  discharge  of  his 
episcopal  duties  is  to  be  found  in  that  good  old  book  well 
known  by  the  title  of  "  Fox's  Martyrs."  Fox  was  evidently 
a  friend  and  admirer  of  Hooper,  and  writes  about  him 
with  a  very  loving  pen.  But  Fox  may  always  be 
depended  on  for  general  accuracy.  Bitterly  as  his  many 
enemies  have  tried  to  vilify  his  great  book,  they  have 
never  succeeded  in  disproving  his  facts.  They  may  have 
scratched  the  good  man's  face,  but  they  have  never  broken 
his  bones.  Froude,  a  thoroughly  disinterested  witness, 
has  voluntarily  declared  his  confidence  in  Fox's  trust 
worthiness.  Townsend,  in  a  lengthy  preface  to  his 
excellent  and  complete  edition  of  the  "Acts  and 
Monuments,"  has  answered  seriatim  the  attacks  of  Fox's 
enemies.  In  short,  we  may  rest  satisfied  that  those 
flippant  modern  writers  who  call  Fox  "  a  liar "  are  only 
exposing  their  own  ignorance,  or  their  hatred  of  genuine 
Protestantism.  Let  us  now  hear  how  Fox  describes 
Hooper's  ways  as  a  Bishop,  so  long  as  his  episcopate 
lasted.  He  says, — 

"  Master  Hooper,  after  all  these  tumults  and  vexations 
sustained  about  his  investing  and  princely  vestures,  at 
length  entering  into  his  diocese,  did  there  employ  his 
time,  which  the  Lord  lent  him  under  King  Edward's  reign, 
with  such  diligence  as  may  be  a  spectacle  to  all  Bishops 
which  shall  ever  hereafter  succeed  him,  not  only  in  that 
place,  but  in  whatsoever  diocese  through  the  whole  realm 
of  England.  So  careful  was  he  in  his  cure,  that  he  left 
neither  pains  untaken,  nor  ways  unsought,  how  to  train 
up  the  flock  of  Christ  in  the  true  Word  of  Salvation, 
continually  labouring  in  the  same.  Other  men  commonly 
are  wont,  for  lucre  or  promotion's  sake,  to  aspire  to 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  91 

bishoprics,  some  hunting  for  them,  and  some  purchasing 
or  buying  them,  as  men  used  to  purchase  lordships ;  and 
when  they  have  them,  are  loth  to  leave  them,  and 
thereupon  are  loth  to  commit  that  thing  by  worldly  laws 
whereby  to  lose  them. 

"  To  this  sort  of  men  Master  Hooper  was  clean  contrary; 
who  abhorred  nothing  more  than  gain,  labouring  always 
to  save  and  preserve  the  souls  of  his  flock.  Who,  being 
Bishop  of  two  dioceses,  so  ruled  and  guided  either  of 
them,  and  both  together,  as  though  he  had  in  charge  but 
one  family.  No  father  in  his  household,  no  gardener  in 
his  garden,  no  husbandman  in  his  vineyard,  was  more  or 
better  occupied  than  he  in  his  diocese  amongst  his  flock, 
going  about  his  towns  and  villages  in  teaching  and 
preaching  to  the  people  there. 

"  That  time  that  he  had  to  spare  from  preaching,  he 
bestowed  either  in  hearing  public  causes,  or  else  in  private 
study,  prayer,  and  visiting  of  schools.  With  his  continual 
doctrine  he  adjoined  due  and  discreet  correction,  not  so 
much  severe  to  any  as  to  them  which  for  abundance  of 
riches  and  wealthy  state  thought  they  might  do  what  they 
listed.  And  doubtless  he  spared  no  kind  of  people,  but 
was  indifferent  to  all  men,  as  well  rich  as  poor,  to  the 
great  shame  of  no  small  number  of  men  now-a-days. 
Whereas  many  we  see  so  addicted  to  the  pleasing  of  great 
and  rich  men,  that  in  the  meantime  they  have  no  regard 
to  the  meaner  sort  of  poor  people,  whom  Christ  hath 
bought  as  dearly  as  the  other. 

"But  now  again  we  will  return  our  talk  to  Master 
Hooper,  all  whose  life,  in  fine,  was  such,  that  to  the 
Church  and  all  Churchmen  it  might  be  a  light  and 
example,  to  the  rest,  a  perpetual  lesson  and  sermon. 


92  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Finally,  how  virtuous  and  good  a  Bishop  he  was,  ye  may 
conceive  and  know  evidently  by  this,  that,  even  as  he  was 
hated  of  none  but  of  them  which  were  evil,  so  yet  the 
worst  of  them  all  could  not  reprove  his  life  in  any 
one  jot. 

"  I  have  now  declared  his  usage  and  behaviour  abroad 
in  the  public  affairs  of  the  Church:  and  certainly  there 
appeared  in  him  at  home  no  less  example  of  a  worthy 
prelate's  life.  For  though  he  bestowed  and  converted 
the  most  part  of  his  care  upon  the  public  flock  and 
congregation  of  Christ,  for  the  which  also  he  spent  his 
blood ;  yet  nevertheless  there  lacked  no  provision  in  him 
to  bring  up  his  own  children  in  learning  and  good 
manners;  insomuch  that  ye  could  not  discern  whether 
he  deserved  more  praise  for  his  fatherly  usage  at  home, 
or  for  his  Bishop-like  doings  abroad.  For  everywhere  he 
kept  one  religion  in  one  uniform  doctrine  and  integrity. 
So  that  if  you  entered  into  the  Bishop's  palace,  you  would 
suppose  yourself  to  have  entered  into  some  church  or 
temple.  In  every  corner  thereof  there  was  some  smell  of 
virtue,  good  example,  honest  conversation,  and  reading  of 
holy  Scriptures.  There  was  not  to  be  seen  in  his  house 
any  courtly  rioting  or  idleness:  no  pomp  at  all,  no 
dishonest  word,  no  swearing  could  there  be  heard ! 

"As  for  the  revenues  of  both  his  Bishoprics,  although 
they  did  not  greatly  exceed,  as  the  matter  was  handled, 
yet  if  anything  surmounted  thereof,  he  pursed  nothing, 
but  bestowed  it  in  hospitality.  Twice  I  was,  as  I 
remember,  in  his  house  in  Worcester,  where,  in  his 
common  hall,  I  saw  a  table  spread  with  a  good  store  of 
meat,  and  beset  full  of  beggars  and  poor  folk.  And  I 
asking  his  servants  what  this  meant,  they  told  me  that 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  93 

every  day  their  lord  and  master's  manner  was  to  have 
customably  to  dinner  a  certain  number  of  the  poor  folk  of 
the  said  city,  by  course,  who  were  served  by  four  at  a 
mess,  with  whole  and  wholesome  meats.  And  when  they 
were  served  (being  before  examined  by  him  or  his  deputies, 
of  the  Lord's  prayer,  the  Articles  of  their  faith,  and  the 
Ten  Commandments),  then  he  himself  sat  down  to  dinner, 
and  not  before.* 

"  After  this  sort  and  manner  Master  Hooper  executed 
the  office  of  a  most  careful  and  vigilant  pastor,  by  the 
space  of  two  years  and  more,  so  long  as  the  state  of 
religion  in  King  Edward's  time  did  safely  flourish  and 
take  place.  And  would  God  that  all  other  Bishops 
would  use  the  like  diligence,  care,  and  observance  in  their 
function." 

III.  Hooper's,  most  useful  episcopal  labours  were  brought 
completely  to  an  end  by  Queen  Mary's  accession  to  the 
throne,  in  1553.  They  did  not  last,  we  may  observe,  longer 
than  two  years.  Perhaps  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that 
no  Bishop  of  the  Church  of  England  ever  did  so  much  for 
his  church  and  diocese  in  two  years,  and  left  so  deep  a 
mark  on  men's  minds  in  a  short  period  as  John  Hooper. 

Edward  the  Sixth  died  in  July,  1553;  and  as  soon  as 
his  Popish  sister  Mary  was  fairly  seated  on  her  throne, 
John  Hooper's  troubles  began.  The  sword  of  persecution 
having  been  once  unsheathed,  the  famous  Protestant 
Bishop  of  Gloucester  was  almost  the  first  person  who  was 
struck  at.  He  was  personally  obnoxious  both  to  Bonner 


tt  must  be  remembered  that  there  was  no  Poor  law  in  those  days. 


94  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

and  Gardiner,  with  both  of  whom  he  had  come  into 
collision.  He  was  renowned  all  over  England  as  one  of 
the  boldest  champions  of  the  Reformation,  and  most 
thorough  opponents  of  Popery.  His  friends  warned  him 
that  danger  was  impending,  but  he  calmly  replied, — 
"Once  I  did  flee  and  took  me  to  my  feet.  But  now, 
because  I  am  called  to  this  place  and  vocation,  I  am 
thoroughly  persuaded  to  tarry,  and  to  live  and  die  with 
my  sheep."  The  threatening  storm  soon  broke.  On  the 
29th  of  August  he  appeared  before  Queen  Mary's  Council, 
at  Richmond ;  and  on  the  1st  of  September  he  was  sent 
as  a  prisoner  to  the  Fleet  From  that  day  till  the  9th 
February,  1555, — a  period  of  more  than  seventeen  months, 
— he  was  kept  in  close  confinement.  On  that  day,  at  last, 
death  set  him  at  liberty,  and  the  noble  Protestant  prisoner 
was  free. 

The  history  of  these  sorrowful  seventeen  months  in 
Hooper's  life  would  occupy  far  more  space  than  I  have  at 
my  disposal.  Those  who  wish  to  know  the  particulars  of 
it  must  study  "  Fox's  Martyrs."  How  the  good  Bishop  of 
Gloucester  and  Worcester  was  cruelly  immured  in  a  filthy 
prison,  to  the  great  injury  of  his  health,  for  nearly  a  year 
and  a  half, — how  he  was  three  times  examined  before 
such  judges  as  Gardiner,  Bonner,  Day,  Heath,  and  their 
companions, — how  he  was  by  turns  insulted,  browbeaten, 
reviled,  entreated  and  begged  to  recant, — how  gallantly 
he  stood  firm  by  his  Protestant  principles,  and  refused 
to  give  up  a  hair's  breadth  of  Christ's  truth, — how  he 
was  finally  condemned  for  holding  the  right  of  priests  to 
marry,  and  for  denying  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation, 
— all  these  are  matters  which  are  fully  recorded  by  the 
old  Martyrologist.  But  they  are  far  too  long  to  describe 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  95 

In  a  biographical  paper  like  that  which  is  now  in  the 
reader's  hands. 

The  end  came  at  last.  On  Monday,  the  4th  of  February, 
1555,  Hooper  was  formally  degraded  by  Bishop  Bonner, 
in  the  chapel  of  Newgate  prison,  and  handed  over  to  the 
tender  mercies  of  the  secular  power.  In  the  evening  oi 
that  day,  to  his  great  delight,  he  was  informed  that  he 
was  to  be  sent  to  Gloucester,  and  to  be  publicly  burned 
in  his  own  cathedral  city.  On  Tuesday,  the  5th,  he 
commenced  his  journey  on  horse-back,  at  four  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  in  the  charge  of  six  guards.  On  the 
afternoon  of  Thursday,  the  7th  of  February,  he  arrived 
safe  at  Gloucester,  amidst  the  tears  and  lamentations  of 
a  great  crowd  of  people,  who  came  out  to  meet  him  on 
the  Cirencester  Road. 

At  Gloucester  he  was  lodged  in  the  house  of  one 
Ingram,  opposite  to  St.  Nicholas'  Church.  The  house  is 
still  standing,  and  to  all  appearance  not  much  altered. 
The  city  Sheriffs,  two  men  named  Jenkins  and  Bond, 
would  fain  have  put  him  in  the  Northgate  prison,  but  gave 
up  this  intention  at  the  earnest  intercession  of  the  guards 
who  had  brought  him  from  London.  One  day  only  was 
allowed  to  elapse  between  the  saintly  prisoner's  arrival 
and  his  execution.  The  greater  part  of  this  short  interval 
he  spent  in  prayer.  There  were,  however,  some  inter 
views,  of  no  small  interest,  of  which  Fox  has  preserved  a 
record. 

Sir  Anthony  Kingston,  whom  he  had  once  offended  by 
rebuking  his  sins,  came  to  see  him,  and  entreated  him, 
with  much  affection  and  many  tears,  to  consult  his  safety 
and  recant.  "  Consider,"  he  said,  "  that  life  is  sweet,  and 
death  is  bitter.  Life  hereafter  may  do  good."  To  thia 


96  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

the  noble  soldier  of  Christ  returned  the  ever  memorable 
answer :  '*  The  life  to  come  is  more  sweet,  and  the  death 
to  come  is  more  bitter."  Seeing  him  immovable,  Kingston 
left  him  with  bitter  tears,  telling  him,  "  I  thank  God  that 
ever  I  knew  you,  seeing  God  did  appoint  you  to  call  me  to 
be  His  child.  By  your  good  instruction,  when  I  was  before 
a  fornicator  and  adulterer,  God  hath  taught  me  to  detest 
and  forsake  the  same."  Hooper  afterwards  said  that 
this  interview  had  drawn  from  him  more  tears  than 
he  had  shed  throughout  the  seventeen  months  of  his 
imprisonment 

Last  of  all,  as  evening  drew  on,  the  Mayor,  Mr.  Loveday, 
the  Aldermen,  and  Sheriffs  of  Gloucester,  came  to  his 
lodging,  and  courteously  saluted  him.  To  them  he  spoke 
cheerfully,  thanking  them  for  their  kindness,  requesting 
that  there  might  be  a  quick  fire  at  his  burning,  and 
protesting  that  he  should  die  a  true,  obedient  subject  to 
the  Queen,  but  "  willing  to  give  up  his  life  rather  than 
consent  to  the  wicked  papistical  religion  of  the  Bishop  of 
Rome." 

These  interviews  got  over,  the  saintly  Bishop  began  to 
prepare  for  his  wrestle  with  the  last  enemy,  death.  He 
retired  to  bed  very  early,  saying  that  he  had  many  things 
to  remember,  and  slept  one  sleep  soundly.  The  rest  of 
the  night  he  spent  in  prayer.  After  he  got  up,  he  desired 
that  no  man  should  be  allowed  to  come  into  the  chamber, 
and  that  he  might  be  left  alone  till  the  hour  of  execution. 
What  his  meditations  and  reflections  were  at  that  awful 
crisis,  God  alone  knows.  Tradition  says  that  he  wrote  the 
following  piece  of  poetry  with  a  coal,  on  the  wall  of  his 
chamber  <— 


JOHN   HOOPER:   BISHOP  AND   MARTYR.  97 

"  Content  thyself  with  patience 

With  Christ  to  bear  the  cup  of  pain  : 
Who  can  and  will  thee  recompense 

A  thousand-fold,  with  joys  again. 
Let  nothing  cause  thy  heart  to  fail : 
Launch  out  thy)  boat,  hoist  up  the  sail, 

Put  from  the  shore ; 
And  be  thou  sure  thou  shalt  attain 
Unto  the  port,  that  shall  remain 
For  evermore. 

"  Fear  not  death,  pass  not  for  bands, 
Only  in  God  put  thy  whole  trust ; 
For  He  will  require  thy  blood  at  their  hands, 

And  thou  dost  know  that  once  die  thou  must, 
Only  for  that,  thy  life  if  thou  give, 
Death  is  no  death,  but  ever  for  to  live. 

Do  not  despair : 

Of  no  worldly  tyrant  be  thou  in  dread  ; 
Thy  compass,  which  is  God's  Word,  shall  thee  lead, 
And  the  wind  is  fair." 


These  lines  were  printed  in  1559,  in  a  volume  of 
miscellaneous  pieces  by  the  Reformers.  I  give  them  for. 
what  they  are  worth. 

The  closing  scene  of  Hooper's  life  had  now  come.  It 
is  so  beautifully  and  simply  described  by  John  Fox,  that  I 
think  it  best  to  give  it  in  its  entirety,  with  trifling  omis 
sions,  just  as  the  worthy  old  Martyrologist  wrote  it.  He 
says, — "  On  the  morning  of  Saturday,  the  9th  of  February, 
about  eight  of  the  clock,  came  Sir  John  Bridges,  Lord 
Chandos,  with  a  great  band  of  men,  Sir  Anthony  Kingston, 
Sir  Edmund  Bridges,  and  other  commissioners  appointed 
to  see  execution  done.  At  nine  of  the  clock,  Mr.  Hooper 
was  willed  to  prepare  himself  to  be  in  a  readiness,  for  the 
time  was  at  hand.  Immediately  he  was  brought  down 
from  his  chamber  by  the  Sheriffs,  who  were  accompanied 
with  bills  and  weapons.  When  he  saw  the  multitude  of 

Q 


98  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

weapons,  he  spake  to  the  Sheriffs  on  this  wise:  'Mr. 
Sheriffs/  said  he, '  I  am  no  traitor,  neither  needed  you  to 
have  made  such  a  business  to  bring  me  to  the  place  where 
I  must  suffer ;  for  if  ye  had  willed  me,  I  would  have  gone 
alone  to  the  stake,  and  have  troubled  none  of  you.' 
Afterward,  looking  upon  the  multitude  of  people  that 
were  assembled,  being  by  estimation  to  the  number  of 
7,000  (for  it  was  market-day,  and  many  also  came  to  see 
his  behaviour  towards  death),  he  spake  unto  those  that 
were  about  him,  saying, — 'Alas!  why  be  these  people 
assembled  and  come  together  ?  Peradventure  they  think 
to  hear  something  of  me  now,  as  they  have  in  times  past ; 
but,  alas  !  speech  is  prohibited  me.  Notwithstanding,  the 
cause  of  my  death  is  well  known  unto  them.  When  I 
was  appointed  here  to  be  their  pastor,  I  preached  unto 
them  true  and  sincere  doctrine,  and  that  out  of  the  Word 
of  God.  Because  I  will  not  now  account  the  same 
to  be  heresy  and  untruth,  this  kind  of  death  is  prepared 
for  me.' 

"  So  he  went  forward,  led  between  the  two  Sheriffs  (as 
it  were  a  lamb  to  the  place  of  slaughter),  in  a  gown  of  his 
host's,  his  hat  upon  his  head,  and  a  staff  in  his  hand,  to 
stay  himself  withal ;  for  the  grief  of  the  sciatica,  which 
he  had  taken  in  prison,  caused  him  somewhat  to  halt. 
All  the  way,  being  strictly  charged  not  to  speak,  he  could 
not  be  perceived  once  to  open  his  mouth  ;  but  beholding 
the  people  all  the  way,  which  mourned  bitterly  for  him, 
he  would  sometimes  lift  up  his  eyes  towards  heaven,  and 
looked  very  cheerfully  upon  such  as  he  knew ;  and  he  was 
never  known,  during  the  time  of  his  being  amongst  them, 
to  look  with  so  cheerful  and  ruddy  a  countenance  as  he 
did  at  that  present  When  he  came  to  the  place  appointed 


JOHN  HOOPER:    BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  99 

where  he  should  die,  smilingly  he  beheld  the  stake  and 
preparations  made  for  him,  which  was  near  unto  the  great 
elm-tree  over  against  the  college  of  priests,  where  he  was 
wont  to  preach.  The  place  round  about,  the  houses,  and 
the  boughs  of  the  trees,  were  replenished  with  people : 
and  in  the  chamber  over  the  college  gate  stood  the  priests 
of  the  college.*  Then  kneeled  he  down  (forasmuch  as  he 
could  not  be  suffered  to  speak  unto  the  people)  to  prayer, 
and  beckoned  six  or  seven  times  unto  one  whom  he  knew 
well,  to  hear  the  said  prayer,  to  make  report  thereof  in 
time  to  come  (pouring  tears  upon  his  shoulders  and  in  his 
bosom),  who  gave  attentive  ear  unto  the  same ;  the  which 
prayer  he  made  upon  the  whole  Creed,  wherein  he 
continued  the  space  of  half-an-hour.  Now,  after  he  was 
somewhat  entered  into  his  prayer,  a  box  was  brought  and 
laid  before  him  upon  a  stool,  with  his  pardon  (or  at  least 
wise,  it  was  feigned  to  be  his  pardon)  from  the  Queen,  if 
he  would  turn.  At  the  sight  whereof  he  cried, '  If  you 
love  my  soul,  away  with  it !  If  you  love  my  soul,  away 
with  it ! '  The  box  being  taken  away,  the  Lord  Chandos 
said, '  Seeing  there  is  no  remedy,  dispatch  him  quickly ! ' 
Master  Hooper  said,  'Good, my  lord :  I  trust  your  lordship 
will  give  me  leave  to  make  an  end  of  my  prayers.' 

"Then  said  the  Lord  Chandos  to  Sir  Edmund  Bridges' 
son,  which  gave  ear  before  to  Master  Hooper's  prayer,  at 
his  request :  '  Edmund,  take  heed  that  he  do  nothing  else 
but  pray ;  if  he  do,  tell  me,  and  I  shall  quickly  dispatch 
him.'  While  this  talk  was  going  on,  there  stepped  one  or 


*  This  gateway  and  the  window  are  still  standing  exactly  as  they 
were  when  Hooper  was  burned. 


100  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

two  uncalled,  which  heard  him  speak  these  words 
following : — 

" '  Lord,'  said  he, '  I  am  hell,  but  Thou  art  heaven  ;  I  am 
a  swill  and  sink  of  sin,  but  Thou  art  a  gracious  God  and  a 
merciful  Redeemer.  Have  mercy,  therefore,  upon  me, 
most  miserable  and  wretched  offender,  after  Thy  great 
merey,  and  according  to  Thine  inestimable  goodness. 
Thou  art  ascended  into  heaven;  receive  me,  hell,  to  be 
partaker  of  Thy  joys,  where  Thou  sittest  in  equal  glory 
with  Thy  Father.  For  well  knowest  Thou,  Lord,  where 
fore  I  am  come  hither  to  suffer,  and  why  the  wicked  do 
persecute  this  Thy  poor  servant:  not  for  my  sins  and 
transgressions  committed  against  Thee,  but  because  I  will 
not  allow  their  wicked  doings  to  the  contaminating  of  Thy 
blood,  and  to  the  denial  of  the  knowledge  of  Thy  truth, 
wherewith  it  did  please  Thee  by  Thy  Holy  Spirit  to 
instruct  me ;  the  which  with  as  much  diligence  as  a  poor 
wretch  might  (being  thereto  called),  I  have  set  forth  to 
Thy  glory.  And  well  seest  Thou,  my  Lord  and  God,  what 
terrible  pains  and  cruel  torments  be  prepared  for  Thy 
creature  ;  such,  Lord,  as  without  Thy  strength  none  is  able 
to  bear,  or  patiently  to  pass.  But  all  things  that  are 
impossible  with  man  are  possible  with  Thee.  Therefore, 
strengthen  me  of  Thy  goodness,  that  in  the  fire  I  break 
not  the  rules  of  patience;  or  else  assuage  the  terror  of 
the  pains,  as  shall  seem  most  to  Thy  glory.' 

"  As  soon  as  the  Mayor  had  espied  these  men  which 
made  report  of  the  former  words,  they  were  commanded 
away,  and  could  not  be  suffered  to  hear  any  more.  Prayer 
being  done,  he  prepared  himself  to  the  stake,  and  put  off 
his  host's  gown,  and  delivered  it  to  the  Sheriffs,  requiring 
them  to  see  it  restored  unto  the  owner,  and  put  off  the 


JOHN  HOOPER:    BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  101 

rest  of  his  gear,  unto  his  doublet  and  hose,  wherein  he 
would  have  been  burned.  But  the  Sheriffs  would  not 
permit  that  (such  was  their  greediness),*  unto  whose 
pleasures  (good  man)  he  very  obediently  submitted 
himself ;  and  his  doublet,  hose,  and  waistcoat  were  taken 
off.  Then,  being  in  his  shirt,  and  desiring  the  people  to 
say  the  Lord's  prayer  with  him,  and  to  pray  for  him,  (who 
performed  it  with  tears,  during  the  time  of  his  pains),  he 
Avent  up  to  the  stake.  Now,  when  he  was  at  the  stake, 
three  irons,  made  to  bind  him  to  the  stake,  were  brought : 
one  for  his  neck,  another  for  his  middle,  and  the  third  for 
his  legs.  But  he,  refusing  them,  said,  'Ye  have  no  need 
thus  to  trouble  yourselves,  for  I  doubt  not  but  God  will 
give  me  strength  sufficient  to  abide  the  extremity  of  the 
fire,  without  bands;  notwithstanding,  suspecting  the  frailty 
and  weakness  of  the  flesh,  but  having  assured  confidence 
in  God's  strength,  I  am  content  ye  do  as  ye  shall  think 
good.'  So  the  hoop  of  iron  prepared  for  his  middle  was 
brought,  and  when  they  offered  to  have  bound  his  neck 
and  legs  with  the  other  two  hoops  of  iron,  he  utterly 
refused  them,  and  would  have  none,  saying,  'I  am  well 
assured  I  shall  not  trouble  you.' 

"Thus,  being  ready,  he  looked  upon  the  people,  of 
whom  he  might  well  be  seen  (for  he  was  both  tall  and 
stood  also  on  an  high  stool),  and  beheld  round  about  him  * 
and  in  every  corner  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen  but 
weeping  and  sorrowful  people.  Then,  lifting  up  his  eyes 
and  hands  unto  heaven,  he  prayed  to  himself.  By  and  by, 
lie  that  was  appointed  to  make  the  fire  came  to  him,  and 


•  The  clothes  of  those  who  were  burned  seemed  to  have  been  the 
perquisite  of  the  Sheriffs. 


102  LIGHT  FBOM  OLD  TIMES. 

did  ask  his  forgiveness.  Of  whom  he  asked  why  he 
should  forgive  him;  saying,  that  he  knew  never  any 
offence  he  had  committed  against  him.  '  O  sir/  said  the 
man,  '  I  am  appointed  to  make  the  fire.'  '  Therein,'  said 
Mr.  Hooper,  '  thou  dost  nothing  offend  me :  God  forgive 
thee  thy  sins,  and  do  thine  office,  I  pray  thee.'  Then  the 
reeds  were  cast  up,  and  he  received  two  bundles  of  them 
in  his  own  hands,  embraced  them,  kissed  them,  and  put 
under  either  arm  one  of  them,  and  showed  with  his  hand 
how  the  rest  should  be  bestowed,  and  pointed  to  the  place 
where  any  did  lack. 

"  Anon  commandment  was  given  that  the  fire  should  be 
Bet  to,  and  so  it  was.  But  because  there  were  put  to  no 
fewer  green  faggots  than  two  horses  could  carry  upon  their 
backs,  it  kindled  not  by  and  by,  and  was  a  pretty  while 
also  before  it  took  the  reeds  upon  the  faggots.  At  length 
it  burned  about  him,  but  the  wind  having  full  strength  in 
that  place  (it  was  a  lowering  and  cold  morning),  it  blew 
the  flame  from  him,  so  that  he  was  in  a  manner  no  more 
but  touched  by  the  fire. 

"  Within  a  space  after,  a  few  dry  faggots  were  brought, 
and  a  new  fire  kindled  with  faggots  (for  there  were  no 
more  reeds),  and  that  burned  at  his  nether  parts,  but  had 
small  power  above,  because  of  the  wind,  saving  that  it  did 
burn  his  hair,  and  scorch  his  skin  a  little.  In  the  time  of 
which  fire,  even  as  at  the  first  flame,  he  prayed,  saying 
mildly,  and  not  very  loud  (but  as  one  without  pains), 
'O  Jesus,  the  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  upon  me,  and 
receive  my  soul!'  After  the  second  fire  was  spent,  he 
did  wipe  both  his  eyes  with  his  hands,  and  beholding  the 
people,  he  said  with  an  indifferent  loud  voice, '  For  God's 
love,  good  people,  let  me  have  more  fire ! '  And  all  this 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MAKITK.          103 

while  bis  nether  parts  did  burn,  for  the  faggots  were 
BO  feAV  that  the  flame  did  not  burn  strongly  at  his  upper 
parts. 

"  The  third  fire  was  kindled  within  a  while  after,  where 
was  more  extreme  than  the  other  two;  and  then  the 
bladders  of  gunpowder  brake,  which  did  him  small  good, 
they  were  so  placed,  and  the  wind  had  such  power.  In 
the  which  fire  he  prayed  with  somewhat  a  loud  voice, 
'  Lord  Jesus,  have  mercy  upon  me !  Lord  Jesus,  have 
mercy  upon  me  !  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit ! ''  And 
these  were  the  last  words  he  was  heard  to  utter.  But 
when  he  was  black  in  the  mouth,  and  his  tongue  swollen 
that  he  could  not  speak,  yet  his  lips  went  till  they  were 
shrunk  to  the  gums ;  and  he  knocked  his  breast  with  his 
hands  until  one  of  his  arms  fell  off,  and  then  knocked  still 
with  the  other,  what  time  the  fat,  water,  and  blood 
dropped  out  at  his  fingers'  ends,  until  by  renewing  of  the 
fire  his  strength  was  gone,  and  his  hand  did  cleave  fast  in 
knocking  to  the  iron  upon  his  breast.  So  immediately, 
bowing  forwards,  he  yielded  up  his  spirit. 

"  Thus  was  he  three  quarters  of  an  hour  or  more  in  the 
fire.  Even  as  a  lamb,  patiently  he  abode  the  extremity 
thereof,  neither  moving  forwards,  backwards,  or  to  any 
side ;  but  having  his  nether  parts  burned,  and  his  bowels 
fallen  out,  he  died  as  quietly  as  a  child  in  his  bed,  and  he 
now  reigneth  as  a  blessed  martyr  in  the  joys  of  heaven, 
prepared  for  the  faithful  in  Christ  before  the  foundations 
of  the  world,  for  whose  constancy  all  Christians  are  bound 
to  praise  God."  *  (Fox's  "  Acts  and  Monuments  "  in  loco.} 


*  The  stump  of  a  very  large  oaKen  post,  blackened  and  charred  with 
fire,  was  dug  up  a  few  years  ago  on  the  very  place  where  Hooper  was 


104  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

I  leave  the  story  of  the  martyr  of  Gloucester  at  thia 
point,  having  traced  his  life  from  his  cradle  to  his  fiery 
grave.  He  died  as  he  had  long  lived,  true  to  his  colours ; 
and  his  death  was  every  way  worthy  of  his  life. 

Something  I  might  say  about  the  hideous  cruelty  with 
which  he  and  his  fellow-sufferers  in  Mary's  reign  were  put 
to  death.  Nothing  can  excuse  it.  The  times,  no  doubt, 
were  rough  and  coarse.  Capital  punishment  was  fearfully 
common.  Killing  people  for  alleged  heresy  was  unhappily 
no  strange  thing.  But  these  are  poor  defences  of  a  huge 
crime.  The  blood  of  the  English  martyrs  is  an  indelible 
stain  on  the  Church  of  Rome.  It  was  a  judicial  murder 
that  can  never  be  explained  away. 

Something  I  might  say  about  the  glorious  patience  and 
courage  which  Hooper  exhibited  throughout  his  sufferings. 
As  long  as  the  world  lasts,  he  will  be  a  pattern  of  what 
Christ  can  do  for  His  people  in  the  hour  of  need.  Never 
may  we  forget  that  He  who  strengthened  Hooper  never 
changes.  He  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for 
ever." 

Something,  not  least,  I  might  say  about  the  extreme 
impolicy  of  the  Church  of  Rome  in  making  martyrs  of 
Hooper  and  his  companions.  Never,  I  believe,  did  Popery 
do  herself  such  damage  as  when  she  burnt  our  Reformers 
Their  blood  was  the  seed  of  the  Church.  The  good  that 


burned.  It  is  supposed  by  many  to  be  the  lower  end  of  the  stake  to 
which  the  martyr  was  chained  when  he  met  his  fiery  death.  Of  course 
no  positive  proof  can  be  given  that  this  supposition  is  correct ;  but  there 
is  no  improbability  or  impossibility  in  the  idea.  A  well-seasoned  charred 
piece  of  oak  timber  might  easily  last  undecayed  in  the  ground  for  three 
centuries.  I  saw  this  stump  with  my  own  eyes  under  a  glass  case,  in  a 
bouse  near  Gloucester,  where  it  was  carefully  preserved. 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYB.          105 

they  did  by  their  deaths  was  more  than  they  did  all  their 
lives.  Their  martyrdoms  made  thousands  think  who  were 
never  reached  by  their  sermons.  Myriads,  we  may  depend, 
came  to  the  conclusion,  that  a  Church  which  could  act  sa 
abominably  and  cruelly  as  Rome  did  could  never  be  the  one 
true  Church  of  God ;  and  that  a  cause  which  could  produce 
such  patient  and  unflinching  sufferers  must  surely  be  the 
cause  of  Christ  and  of  truth. 

But  I  pass  away  from  these  points,  however  interesting. 
I  only  hope  that  they  may  be  seeds  of  thought  which  may 
bear  fruit  in  men's  minds  after  many  daya 

IV.  The  last  point  which  I  wish  to  bring  under  the 
notice  of  rny  readers  is  one  which  I  feel  to  be  of  deep 
importance.  I  have  supplied  some  information  about 
Hooper's  life  and  death.  I  will  now  ask  my  readers  tc 
give  me  their  attention  a  little  longer,  while  I  say 
something  about  Hooper's  opinions.  I  have  shown  you 
how  he  lived  and  died,  let  me  now  show  you  exactly  what 
he  thought,  and  what  he  taught,  and  what  he  preached 
I  have  set  before  you  the  man,  let  me  now  set  before  you 
his  doctrine. 

If  I  left  my  readers  under  the  vague  impression  that 
Hooper  was  a  good  man  and  a  zealous  man  and  an 
earnest  man,  but  told  them  nothing  more,  I  should  think 
I  had  not  done  my  duty.  I  want  men  to  understand 
what  theological  views  the  martyred  Bishop  of  Gloucestei 
held.  I  want  men  to  see  clearly  what  kind  of  doctrine 
was  taught  by  the  English  Reformers.  What  kind  of 
things  did  Hooper  say,  and  preach,  and  publish,  and 
write?  What  kind  of  religion  was  a  Churchman's 
religion  at  the  Reformation  ? 


106  LIGHT  PROM  OLD  TIMES. 

The  answer  to  these  inquiries  is  happily  not  difficult  to 
find.  The  two  volumes  of  Hooper's  writings  published 
by  the  Parker  Society,  make  the  matter  plain  as  the  sun 
at  noon-day.  There  men  may  read  in  unmistakable 
language  the  theological  opinions  of  one  of  the  leading 
Bishops  of  the  time  of  the  Reformation.  From  two 
documents  in  these  two  volumes  I  will  select  fair 
specimens. 

The  first  document  I  will  quote  from  is  entitled 
"Articles  concerning  Christian  religion,  given  by  the 
reverend  father  in  Christ,  John  Hooper,  Bishop  of 
Gloucester,  unto  all  and  singular  deans,  parsons,  prebends, 
vicars,  curates,  and  other  ecclesiastical  ministers  within 
the  diocese  of  Gloucester,  to  be  had,  held,  and  retained  of 
them  for  unity  and  agreement,  as  well  for  the  doctrine  of 
God's  Word,  as  also  for  the  uniformity  of  the  ceremonies 
agreeing  with  God's  Word." 

A  more  authoritative  and  weighty  declaration  of 
Hooper's  opinions,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive.* 

The  First  Article  enjoins, "  that  none  of  the  above- 
named  clergy  do  teach  or  preach  any  manner  of  thing  to 
be  necessary  for  the  salvation  of  men,  other  than  that 
which  is  contained  in  the  Book  of  God's  Holy  Word, 
called  the  Old  and  New  Testament;  and  that  they 
beware  to  establish  and  confirm  any  manner  of  doctrine 
concerning  the  old  superstitious  and  papistical  doctrines, 
which  cannot  be  duly  and  justly  approved  by  the  authority 
of  God's  Word." 

The  Fourth  Article  enjoins,  "  that  they  and  every  one 


*  It  is  worth  noticing,   that  Ridley  published  many  of   the  same 
Articles  about  the  same  time,  for  the  clergy  of  the  Diocese  of  London. 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.          107 

of  them  do  diligently  teach  and  preach  that  the  Church 
of  God  is  the  congregation  of  the  faithful,  wherein  the 
Word  of  God  is  truly  preached,  and  the  Sacraments  justly 
administered,  according  to  the  institution  of  Christ,  and 
His  doctrine  taught  unto  us  by  His  Holy  Word;  and 
that  the  Church  of  God  is  not  by  God's  Word  taken  for 
the  multitude,  or  company  of  bishops,  priests,  and  such 
others ;  but  that  it  is  the  company  of  all  men  hearing 
God's  Word  and  obeying  the  same,  lest  any  man  should 
be  seduced,  believing  himself  to  be  bound  to  any  ordinary 
succession  of  bishops  and  priests,  but  only  to  the  Word 
of  God  and  the  right  use  of  the  Sacraments." 

The  Seventh  Article  enjoins,  "  that  they  and  every  one 
of  them  do  diligently  teach  and  preach  the  justification 
only  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  not  by  the  merit  of  any 
man's  good  works,  albeit  that  good  works  do  necessarily 
follow  justification,  which  before  justification  are  of  no 
value  or  estimation  before  God." 

In  the  Ninth  Article,  he  enjoins  them,  "that  the 
doctrine  of  purgatory,  pardons,  prayer  for  them  that  are 
departed  out  of  this  world,  the  veneration,  invocation,  and 
worshipping  of  saints  or  images,  is  contrary  and  injurious 
to  the  honour  of  Christ,  our  only  Mediator  and  Kedeemer, 
and  also  against  the  doctrine  of  the  first  and  second 
commandments  of  God." 

In  the  Tenth  Article,  he  enjoins,  "  that  in  the  Sacrament 
of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  there  is  no  transubstantia- 
tion  of  the  bread  and  wine  into  the  body  and  blood  of 
Christ,  or  any  manner  of  corporal  or  local  presence  of 
Christ,  in,  under,  or  with  the  bread  and  wine,  but 
spiritually,  by  faith." 

In  the  Eleventh  Article,  he  enjoins,  "  that  they  which 


108  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

do  unworthily  come  to  baptism  or  the  Supper  of  the 
Lord,  do  not  receive  the  virtue  and  true  effect  of  the 
same  Sacraments,  although  they  receive  the  natural  signs 
and  elements." 

In  the  Twenty-fourth  Article,  he  enjoins,  "  that  the 
Sacraments  are  not  of  any  force  by  virtue  or  strength  of 
any  internal  work  of  the  same,  which  of  superstition  is 
called  opus  opemtum,  but  only  by  the  virtue  and  means 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  working  in  the  hearts  of  the  doers 
and  receivers  by  faith." 

In  the  Forty-first  Article,  he  enjoins,  "that  none  of 
you  do  counterfeit  the  Popish  Mass,  by  blessing  the  Lord's 
board,  washing  your  hands  or  fingers  after  the  Gospel,  or 
receipt  of  the  Holy  Communion, — shifting  the  Book  from 
one  place  to  another,  laying  down  and  licking  the  chalice 
after  the  Communion,  showing  the  Sacrament  openly 
before  the  distribution  of  the  same,  or  making  any 
elevation  thereof, — ringing  of  the  sacring  bell,  or  setting 
any  light  on  the  Lord's  board." 

In  the  Forty-third  Article,  he  enjoins,  "Whereas  in 
divine  places  some  use  the  Lord's  board  after  the  form  of 
a  table,  and  some  of  an  altar,  whereby  disunion  is 
perceived  to  arise  among  the  unlearned,  therefore,  wishing 
a  godly  unity  to  be  observed  in  all  our  dioceses,  and  for 
that  the  form  of  a  table  may  move  more,  and  turn  the 
simple  from  the  old  superstitious  opinions  of  the  Popish 
Mass,  and  to  the  right  use  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  we 
exhort  you  to  erect  and  set  up  the  Lord's  board  after  the 
form  of  an  honest  table,  decently  covered,  in  such  place 
as  shall  be  thought  most  meet,  so  that  the  minister  and 
communicants  may  be  seen,  heard,  and  understood  of  all 
the  people  there  present,  and  that  you  do  take  down  and 


«faHN   HOOPER:   BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  109 

abolish  all  altars.  Further,  that  the  minister,  in  the  use 
of  the  Communion  and  prayers  thereof,  turn  his  face 
toward  the  people." 

Such  were  the  visitation  articles  and  injunctions  of  a 
Bishop  of  the  time  of  the  Reformation.  I  turn  away 
from  them  with  one  single  remark.  There  have  been 
many  dioceses  in  England  in  the  last  300  years  in  which 
it  might  have  done  great  good  if  the  injunctions  of  good 
Bishop  Hooper  had  been  distributed  among  the  clergy, 
and  urged  on  their  attention. 

The  only  other  document  that  I  shall  quote  from  is 
called  "A  Brief  and  Clear  Confession  of  the  Christian 
Faith."  It  deserves  special  attention,  because  it  was 
published  in  1550,  the  very  year  in  which  the  writer 
was  made  Bishop  of  Gloucester.  From  the  "  Confession 
of  Faith"  I  now  make  the  following  selections.  I 
make  them  with  considerable  difficulty.  The  whole 
Confession  is  so  good  that  it  is  hard  to  say  what  to  quote 
and  what  to  leave  behind.  I  only  ask  my  readers  to 
remember  that  the  sack  is  as  good  as  the  sample. 

In  the  Twenty-sixth  Article  of  the  Confession,  Hooper 
says,  "  I  do  believe  and  confess  that  Christ's  condemna 
tion  is  mine  absolution ;  that  His  crucifying  is  my 
deliverance ;  His  descending  into  hell  is  mine  ascending 
into  heaven ;  His  death  is  my  life ;  His  blood  is  my 
cleansing,  and  purging,  by  which  only  I  am  washed, 
purified,  and  cleansed  from  all  my  sins :  so  that  I  neither 
receive,  neither  believe  any  other  purgatory,  either  in  this 
world,  or  in  the  other,  whereby  I  may  be  purged,  but  only 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  by  which  all  are  purged  and 
made  clean  for  ever." 

In  the  Twenty-eighth  Article  of  the  Confession,  Hooper 


110  LIGHT  FFOM  OLD  TIMES. 

says,  "  I  believe  that  the  Holy  Supper  of  the  Lord  is  not 
a  sacrifice,  but  only  a  remembrance  and  commemoration 
of  this  holy  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ.  Therefore  it  ought 
not  to  be  worshipped  as  God,  neither  as  Christ  therein 
contained ;  who  must  be  worshipped  in  faith  only,  without 
all  corruptible  elements.  Likewise  I  believe  and  confess 
that  the  Popish  Mass  is  the  invention  and  ordinance  of 
man,  a  sacrifice  of  Antichrist,  and  a  forsaking  of  the 
sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  is  to  say,  of  His  death  and 
passion ;  and  that  it  is  a  stinking  and  infected  sepulchre, 
which  hideth  and  covereth  the  merit  of  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ,  —  and,  therefore,  ought  the  Mass  to  be 
abolished,  and  the  Holy  Supper  of  the  Lord  to  be  restored, 
and  set  in  his  perfection  again." 

In  the  Fifty-fourth  Article  of  the  Confession,  Hooper 
says,  "  I  believe  that  the  Word  of  God  is  of  a  far  greater 
authority  than  the  Church ;  the  which  Word  only  doth 
sufficiently  show  and  teach  us  all  those  things  that  in  any 
wise  concern  our  salvation,  both  what  we  ought  to  do  and 
what  to  leave  undone.  The  same  Word  of  God  is  the 
true  pattern  and  perfect  rule,  after  the  which  all  faithful 
people  ought  to  govern  and  order  their  lives,  without 
turning  either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left  hand, 
without  changing  anything  thereof,  without  putting  to  it, 
or  taking  from  it,  knowing  that  all  the  works  of  God  are 
perfect,  but  most  chiefly  His  Word." 

In  the  Sixty-fourth  Article  of  the  Confession,  Hooper 
says,  "  I  believe  that  in  the  holy  Sacrament  the  signs,  or 
badges,  are  not  changed  in  any  point,  but  the  same  do 
remain  wholly  in  their  nature ;  that  is  to  say,  the  bread 
is  not  changed  and  transubstantiated  (as  the  fond  Papists, 
and  false  doctors  do  teach,  deceiving  the  poor  people), 


JOHN  HOOPER:    BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  Ill 

into  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ,  neither  is  the  wine 
transubstantiated  into  His  blood ;  but  the  bread  remaineth 
still  bread,  and  the  wine  remaineth  still  wine,  every  one  in 
his  proper  and  first  nature." 

In  the  Sixty-fifth  Article  of  the  Confession,  Hooper 
says,  "  I  believe  that  all  this  Sacrament  consisteth  in  the 
use  thereof:  so  that  without  the  right  use  the  bread  and 
wine  in  nothing  differ  from  other  common  bread  and 
wine,  that  is  commonly  used : — and,  therefore,  I  do  not 
believe  that  the  body  of  Christ  can  be  contained,  hid,  or 
inclosed  in  the  bread,  under  the  bread,  or  with  the  bread ; 
— neither  the  blood  in  the  wine,  under  the  wine,  or  with 
the  wine.  But  I  believe  and  confess  the  very  body  of 
Christ  to  be  in  heaven,  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  (as 
before  we  have  said),  and  that  always  and  as  often  as  we 
use  this  bread  and  wine  according  to  the  ordinance  and 
institution  of  Christ,  we  do  verily  and  indeed  receive  His 
body  and  blood." 

In  the  Sixty-sixth  Article  of  the  Confession,  Hooper 
says,  "  I  believe  that  this  receiving  is  not  done  carnally  or 
bodily,  but  spiritually,  through  a  true  and  lively  faith ; — 
that  is  to  say,  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  not  given 
to  the  mouth  and  belly,  for  the  nourishing  of  the  body, 
but  unto  our  faith,  for  the  nourishing  of  the  spirit  and 
inward  man  unto  eternal  life.  And  for  that  cause  we 
have  no  need  that  Christ  should  come  from  heaven  to  us, 
but  that  we  should  ascend  unto  Him,  lifting  up  our  hearts 
through  a  lively  faith  on  high,  unto  the  right  hand  of  the 
Father,  where  Christ  sitteth,  from  whence  we  wait  for  our 
redemption ;  and  we  must  not  seek  for  Christ  in  these 
bodily  elements." 

I  drop  my  quotations  here.     I  have  given  enough  to 


112 


LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES, 


make  it  clear  what  kind  of  opinions  Hojper  held,  and 
•what  his  theological  views  were.  I  know  not  what  my 
readers  may  think  of  these  quotations.  But  I  will  tell 
you  what  impression  they  leave  on  my  mind. 

They  supply  plain  proof,  for  which  I  am  deeply  thankful, 
that  Protestant  and  Evangelical  Churchmen  are  not  men  of 
new-fangled  and  modern  opinions,  but  Churchmen  of  the 
stamp  of  the  Reformation,  Churchmen  whose  views  were 
held  by  an  eminent  Churchman  three  hundred  years  ago. 
Let  them  take  courage.  Let  them  not  be  moved  by  the 
sneers,  and  taunts,  and  hard  words  of  those  Churchmen 
who  do  not  agree  with  them.  They  may  boldly  reply 
that  theirs  are  the  old  paths,  and  that  they  are  the  true 
representatives  of  the  Church  of  England.  If  Evangelical 
Churchmen  are  wrong,  then  Hooper  was  wrong  too.  If 
Hooper  was  right,  then  they  are  right  But  as  for  a 
material  difference  between  their  views  and  those  of  the 
martyred  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  I  defy  any  one  to  show 
that  there  is  any  at  all. 

My  task  is  done.  I  have  brought  together  as  concisely 
as  possible  the  times,  life,  death,  and  opinions  of  one  of 
our  greatest  English  Reformers.  But  I  cannot  leave  off 
without  offering  two  practical  suggestions  to  all  into 
whose  hands  this  paper  may  fall.  I  address  them  to  each 
reader  personally  and  directly,  and  I  entreat  him  to 
ponder  well  what  I  say. 

(1)  For  one  thing,  I  charge  all  loyal  Churchmen  to 
resist  manfully  the  efforts  now  being  made  to  unprotes- 
tantize  England,  and  to  bring  her  once  more  into 
subjection  to  Popery.  Let  us  not  go  back  to  ignorance, 
superstition,  priestcraft,  and  immorality.  Our  forefathers 
tried  Popery  long  ago,  and  threw  it  off  with  disgust  and 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.         113 

indignation.  Let  us  not  put  the  clock  back  and  return 
to  Egypt.  Let  us  have  no  peace  with  Rome,  till  Rome 
abjures  her  errors  and  is  at  peace  with  Christ. 

Let  us  read  our  Bibles,  and  be  armed  with  Scriptural 
arguments.  A  Bible-reading  laity  is  a  nation's  surest 
defence  against  error.  I  have  no  fear  for  English  Protes 
tantism,  if  the  laity  will  only  do  their  duty. 

Let  us  read  history,  and  see  what  Rome  did  in  days 
gone  by.  Read  how  she  trampled  on  your  country's 
liberties,  plundered  your  forefather's  pockets,  and  kept  the 
whole  nation  ignorant  and  immoral.  Read  Fox,  and 
Strype,  and  Burnet,  and  Soames,  and  Blunt.  And  do 
not  forget  that  Rome  never  changes.  It  is  her  boast 
and  glory  that  she  is  always  the  same.  Only  give  her 
absolute  power  in  England,  and  she  would  soon  put  out 
the  eyes  of  our  country,  and  make  her  like  Samson,  a 
degraded  slave.  • 

Let  us  read  facts  standing  out  on  the  face  of  the  globe. 
What  has  made  Italy  what  she  is  ?  Popery. — What  has 
made  Mexico  and  the  South  American  States  what  they 
are  ?  Popery. — What  has  made  Spain  and  Portugal  what 
they  are  ?  Popery. — What  has  made  Ireland  what  she 
is  ?  Popery. — What  makes  Scotland,  the  United  States, 
and  our  own  beloved  England,  the  powerful,  prosperous 
countries  that  they  are  at  present,  and  I  pray  God  they 
may  long  continue  ?  I  answer  in  one  word,  Protestantism, 
— a  free  Bible  and  a  Protestant  ministry,  and  the  principles 
of  the  Reformation.  Let  us  think  twice  before  we  give 
ear  to  the  specious  arguments  of  liberalism  falsely  so 
called.  Let  us  think  twice  before  we  help  to  bring  back 
the  reign  of  Popery. 

(2)  For  another  thing,  I  charge  all  lojsd  churchmen,  and 

H 


114  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

all  who  love  pure  Evangelical  religion  to  stand  together 
in  these  days  of  division,  and  not  allow  crotchets  and 
scruples  to  keep  them  asunder.  Let  the  friend  of 
Liturgical  Revision  drop  his  favourite  panacea  for  a  little 
space,  and  put  his  shoulder  to  the  work  of  maintaining 
the  Gospel  in  the  Church  of  England.  Let  the  friend  of 
Revivals  not  think  it  misspent  time  to  give  his  aid  in 
opposing  Rome.  If  Popery  once  triumph,  there  will  be 
no  more  liberty  for  revivals.  We  cannot  afford  to  lose 
friends.  Our  ranks  are  already  very  thin.  The  Church 
of  England  demands  of  every  Protestant  and  Evangelical 
Churchman,  that  he  will  do  his  duty. 

Things  look  black  in  every  direction,  I  freely  admit. 
But  there  is  no  cause  to  despair.  The  day  is  not  lost. 
There  is  yet  time  to  win  a  battle.  Come  what  will,  let  us 
not  desert  our  position,  or  forsake  the  good  old  ship  yet. 
Let  us  not  please  our  enemies  by  spiking  our  guns,  and 
marching  out  of  our  fortress  without  a  battle.  Rather 
let  us  stand  to  our  guns,  like  good  Bishop  Hooper,  and  in 
God's  strength  show  a  bold  front  to  the  foe.  The  Church 
of  England  has  done  some  good  in  days  gone  by,  and  the 
Church  is  still  worth  preserving.  If  we  do  go  down  in  the 
struggle,  let  us  go  down  with  colours  flying.  But  let  us 
stand  firm,  like  the  gallant  sentinel  of  Pompeii;  let  no 
man  leave  his  post.  My  own  mind  is  fully  made  up.  I  say 
the  Church  of  England  had  better  perish  and  go  to  pieces 
than  forsake  John  Hooper's  principles  and  tolerate  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  and  auricular  confession. 


JOHN  HOOPER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  115 

NOTE. 
THE  FOLLOWING  LETTER  IS  WELL  WORTH  KEADIKO. 

"A  Letter  which  Master  Hooper  did  write  out  of  Prison  to  certain  oj 
his  Friends,  three  weeks  before  his  cruel  Burning  at  Gloucester. 

"The  grace  of  God  be  with  you.     Amen. 

"I  did  write  unto  you  of  late,  and  told  you  what  extremity  the 
Parliament  had  concluded  upon  concerning  religion,  suppressing  the 
truth,  and  setting  forth  the  untruth,  intending  to  cause  all  men  by 
extremity  to  forswear  themselves,  and  to  take  again  for  the  head  of  the 
Church  him  that  is  neither  head  nor  member  of  it,  but  a  very  enemy, 
as  the  Word  of  God  and  all  ancient  writers  do  record  :  and  for  lack  of 
law  and  authority,  they  will  use  force  and  extremity,  which  have  been 
the  arguments  to  defend  the  Pope  and  Popery  since  this  authority  first 
began  in  the  world.  But  now  is  the  time  of  trial,  to  see  whether  we 
fear  God  or  man.  It  was  an  easy  thing  to  hold  with  Christ  while  the 
Prince  and  world  held  with  Him  ;  but  now  the  world  hateth  Him,  it  is 
the  true  trial  who  be  His.  Wherefore,  in  the  name  and  in  the  virtue, 
strength,  and  power  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  prepare  yourselves  in  any  case 
to  adversity  and  constancy.  Let  us  not  run  away  when  it  is  most  time 
to  fight.  Remember,  none  shall  be  crowned  but  such  as  fight  manfully  ; 
and  he  tJiat  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved.  You  must  now  turn  all 
your  cogitations  from  the  peril  you  see,  and  mark  the  felicity  that 
followeth  the  peril, — either  victory  in  this  world  of  your  enemies,  or 
else  a  surrender  of  this  life  to  inherit  the  everlasting  kingdom.  Beware 
of  beholding  too  much  the  felicity  or  misery  of  this  world ;  for  the 
consideration  and  too  earnest  love  or  fear  of  either  of  them  draweth 
from  God.  Wherefore  think  with  yourselves,  as  touching  the  felicity  of 
the  world,  it  is  good  ;  but  yet  none  otherwise  than  it  standeth  with  the 
favour  of  God.  It  is  to  be  kept ;  but  yet  so  far  forth,  as  by  keeping  of 
It  we  lose  not  God.  It  is  good  abiding  and  tarrying  still  among  our 
friends  here ;  but  yet  so,  that  we  tarry  not  therewithal  in  God's 
displeasure,  and  hereafter  dwell  with  the  devils  in  fire  everlasting. 
There  is  nothing  under  God  but  may  be  kept,  so  that  God,  being  above 
all  things  we  have,  be  not  lost. 

"Of  adversity  judge  the  same.  Imprisonment  is  painful;  but  yet 
liberty  upon  evil  conditions  is  more  painful.  The  prisons  stiuk,  but  yet 
not  so  much  as  sweet  houses  where  the  fear  and  true  honour  of  God 
lacketh.  I  must  be  alone  and  solitary ;  it  is  better  so  to  be,  and  have 
God  with  me,  than  to  be  in  company  with  the  wicked.  Loss  of  goods 
is  great ;  but  loss  of  God's  grace  and  favour  is  greater.  ...  It  is  better 
$o  make  answer  before  the  pomp  and  uride  of  wicked  men  than  to  stand 


118  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

naked  in  the  sight  of  all  heaven  and  earth  before  the  just  God  at  the 
latter  day.  I  shall  die  by  the  hands  of  the  cruel  man :  he  is  blessed 
that  loseth  this  life,  full  of  mortal  miseries,  and  findeth  the  life  full  of 
eternal  joys.  It  is  pain  and  grief  to  depart  from  goods  and  friends  ;  but 
yet  not  so  much  as  to  depart  from  grace  and  heaven  itself.  Wherefore 
there  is  neither  felicity  nor  adversity  of  this  world  that  can  appear  to 
be  great,  if  it  be  weighed  with  the  joys  or  pains  of  the  world  to  come. 

"I  can  do  no  more  but  pray  for  you  ;  do  the  same  for  me,  for  God's 
sake.  For  my  part  (I  thank  the  heavenly  Father),  I  have  made  mine 
accounts,  and  appointed  myself  unto  the  will  of  the  heavenly  Father ; 
as  He  will,  so  I  will,  by  His  grace.  For  God's  sake,  as  soon  as  ye  can, 
send  my  poor  wife  and  children  some  letter  from  you ;  and  my  letter 
also,  which  I  sent  of  late  to  D.  As  it  was  told  me,  she  never  had  letter 
from  me,  sithence  the  coming  of  M.  S.  unto  her ;  the  more  to  blame  the 
messengers,  for  I  have  written  divers  times.  The  Lord  comfort  them, 
and  provide  for  them  ;  for  I  am  able  to  do  nothing  in  worldly  things. 
SShe  is  a  godly  and  wise  woman.  If  my  meaning  had  been  accomplished, 
she  should  have  had  necessary  things ;  but  what  I  meant  God  can 
perform,  to  whom  I  commend  both  her  and  you  all.  I  am  a  precious 
jewel  now,  and  daintily  kept,  never  so  daintily ;  for  neither  mine  own 
man,  nor  any  of  the  servants  of  the  house,  may  come  to  me,  but  my 
keeper  alone,— a  simple,  rude  man,  God  knoweth ;  but  I  am  nothing 
careful  thereof.  Fare  you  well.  The  21st  of  January,  1555. 

"Your  bounden, 

"JOHN  HOOPER." 


ROWLAND  TAYLOR:    MARTYR. 

ROWLAND  TAYLOE,  Rector  of  Hadleigh,  in  Suffolk,  one  of 
the  famous  Protestant  martyrs  in  Queen  Mary's  days,  is  a 
man  about  whom  the  Church  possesses  singularly  little 
information.  Excepting  the  facts  related  by  John  Fox  in 
the  "  Book  of  Martyrs,"  we  know  scarcely  anything  about 
him.  Enough,  however,  is  on  record  to  show  that  among 
the  noble  champions  of  Christ's  truth,  who  sealed  their 
faith  with  their  blood  at  the  time  of  the  English 
Reformation,  Rowland  Taylor  was  second  to  none. 

The  causes  of  this  absence  of  information  are  easily 
explained.  For  one  thing,  the  good  man  lived,  and 
laboured,  and  died,  in  a  small  country  town,  fifty  miles 
from  London.  Such  a  position  is  fatal  to  a  world-wide 
celebrity.  It  is  the  dwellers  in  large  cities,  and  the 
occupiers  of  metropolitan  pulpits,  whose  doings  are 
chronicled  by  admirers,  and  whose  lives  are  carefully 
handed  down  to  posterity.  For  another  thing,  he  wrote 
no  books,  either  expository,  or  controversial,  or  practical. 
Not  even  a  single  sermon  of  the  martyred  Rector  of 
Hadleigh  exists  in  print,  and  enables  him,  though  dead, 
to  speak.  When  he  died,  he  left  nothing  behind  him  to 
keep  his  memory  alive  in  libraries.  These  two  facts 

must  not  be  forgotten. 

m 


118  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

The  account  of  Taylor,  which  Fox  has  supplied,  is  so 
peculiarly  graphic  and  vivid,  that  one  might  almost 
suppose  that  the  Martyrologist  was  a  personal  friend  of 
the  martyr,  or  an  eye-witness  of  his  sufferings.  Of  this, 
however,  I  can  find  no  evidence.  Yet  it  is  worthy  of 
notice,  that  Fox,  after  Queen  Elizabeth  came  to  the 
throne,  resided  for  a  considerable  time  with  Parkhurst, 
Bishop  of  Norwich,  in  whose  diocese  Hadleigh  was  then 
situated.  He  also  seems  to  have  had  friends  and  acquain 
tances  at  Ipswich,  which  is  only  ten  miles  from  Hadleigh. 
It  is  therefore  highly  probable  that  he  had  frequent 
opportunities  of  visiting  Taylor's  parish,  and  very  likely 
received  much  information  from  people  who  were  actually 
present  when  the  noble  martyr  was  burned,  and  could 
supply  full  and  accurate  accounts  both  of  his  ministry 
and  hie  sufferings.  To  condense  and  modernize  Fox's 
narrative,  and  to  present  it  to  my  readers  in  a  convenient 
form,  is  the  simple  object  of  these  pages. 

Rowland  Taylor,  according  to  Strype,  was  born  at 
Rothbury,  in  Northumberland ;  the  same  county,  it  may 
be  remembered,  from  which  Bishop  Ridley  came.  The 
date  of  his  birth,  the  rank  or  position  of  his  family,  his 
early  history,  and  the  place  of  his  education,  are  all 
things  about  which  nothing  whatever  is  known.  We 
only  gather  from  various  sources,  that  in  due  time  he 
became  a  student  at  Cambridge,  and  there  imbibed  the 
principles  of  the  Protestant  Reformation.  Among  other 
means  by  which  he  was  influenced  at  this  important  crisis 
of  his  life,  the  sermons  of  Bishop  Latimer  are  especially 
named.  The  first  distinct  fact  in  his  life  that  we  know 
is  his  intimacy  with  Archbishop  Cranmer.  In  that  great 
man's  household  he  seems  to  have  occupied  some  office, 


ROWLAND  TAYLOR:  MARTYR.  119 

and  to  have  worked  with  him  in  carrying  forward  the 
mighty  building  of  the  English  Reformation.  How  long 
he  lived  with  Cranmer,  we  have,  unfortunately,  no  means 
of  rinding  out.  But  there  is  strong  internal  evidence  that 
he  was  so  long  and  so  intimately  connected  with  him,  that 
he  became  a  marked  man  among  the  English  Reformers. 
Upon  no  other  supposition  can  we  explain  the  peculiar 
enmity  with  which  he  was  sought  out  and  persecuted  to 
death  in  Queen  Mary's  reign.  The  old  parson  of  Hadleigh 
must  surely  have  obtained  an  honourable  reputation  in 
London,  in  the  days  of  Edward  VI. 

Hadleigh,  in  Suffolk,  was  the  first  and  only  piece  of 
preferment  which  we  know  of  Rowland  Taylor  holding.  To 
this  he  was  appointed  by  his  friend  Archbishop  Cranmer, 
but  at  what  date  we  have  no  means  of  ascertaining.  One 
thing  only  is  quite  certain :  as  soon  as  he  was  appointed 
to  Hadleigh,  he  resigned  all  his  offices  in  London,  and 
devoted  himself  entirely  to  the  work  of  his  parish. 

Hadleigh  is  a  small  town  on  the  south-west  border  of 
Suffolk,  containing,  at  this  time,  about  4,000  people. 
The  character  of  the  place  in  the  days  of  Edward  VI.,  and 
the  nature  of  Rowland  Taylor's  ministry,  are  so  well  and 
graphically  described  by  Fox  in  his  "Acts  and  Monuments," 
that  I  cannot  do  better  than  quote  his  words : — • 

"The  town  of  Hadleigh  was  one  of  the  first  that 
received  the  Word  of  God  in  all  England,  at  the 
preaching  of  Master  Thomas  Bilney,  by  whose  industry 
the  Gospel  of  Christ  had  such  gracious  success,  and  took 
such  root  there,  that  a  great  number  in  that  parish 
became  exceeding  well  learned  in  the  Holy  Scripture,  as 
well  women  as  men ;  so  that  a  man  might  have  found 
among  them  many  that  had  often  read  the  whole  Bible 


120  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

through,  and  that  could  have  said  a  great  part  of  St.  Paul's 
Epistles  by  heart,  and  very  well  and  readily  have  given  a 
godly  learned  sentence  in  any  matter  of  controversy. 

"  Their  children  and  servants  were  also  brought  up  and 
trained  diligently  in  the  right  knowledge  of  God's  Word, 
so  that  the  whole  town  seemed  rather  an  university  of 
the  learned,  than  a  town  of  cloth-making  or  labouring 
people ;  and  what  most  is  to  be  commended,  they  were 
for  the  most  part  followers  of  God's  Word  in  their  living. 

"In  this  town  of  Hadleigh,  Dr.  Taylor  was  a  good 
shepherd,  abiding  and  dwelling  among  his  sheep.  He 
gave  himself  wholly  to  the  study  of  Holy  Scripture, 
most  faithfully  endeavouring  himself  to  fulfil  that  charge 
which  the  Lord  gave  unto  Peter,  saying,  'Peter,  lovest 
thou  Me?  Feed  my  lambs;'  'Feed  my  sheep;'  'Feed 
my  sheep.'  This  love  of  Christ  so  wrought  in  him,  that 
no  Sunday  nor  holy  day  passed,  nor  other  time,  when  he 
might  get  the  people  together,  but  he  preached  to  them 
the  Word  of  God,  the  doctrine  of  their  salvation. 

"  Not  only  was  his  word  a  preaching  unto  them,  but  all 
his  life  and  conversation  was  an  example  of  unfeigned 
Christian  life  and  true  holiness.  He  was  void  of  all  pride, 
humble  and  meek  as  any  child ;  so  that  none  were  so  poor 
but  they  might  boldly,  as  unto  their  father,  resort  unto 
him.  Neither  was  his  lowliness  childish  or  fearful ;  but 
as  occasion,  time,  and  place  required,  he  would  be  stout 
in  rebuking  the  sinful  and  evil  doers :  so  that  none  was  so 
rich  but  he  would  tell  him  plainly  his  fault,  with  such 
earnest  and  grave  rebukes  as  became  a  good  curate  and 
pastor.  He  was  a  man  very  mild,  void  of  all  rancour, 
grudge,  or  evil  will,  ready  to  do  good  to  all  men,  readily 
forgiving  his  enemies,  and  never  sought  to  do  evil  to  any. 


ROWLAND  TAYLOR:  MARTYR.  121 

"  To  the  poor  that  were  blind,  sick,  lame,  bedridden,  or 
that  had  many  children,  he  was  a  very  father,  a  careful 
patron,  a  diligent  provider,  insomuch  that  he  caused  the 
parishioners  to  make  a  general  provision  for  them;  and  he 
himself  (beside  the  continual  relief  that  they  always 
found  at  his  house)  gave  an  honest  portion  yearly  to  the 
common  alms  box. 

"His  wife,  also,  was  an  honest,  discreet,  and  sober 
matron ;  and  his  children  well  nurtured,  brought  up  in 
the  fear  of  God  and  good  learning. 

"  To  conclude,  he  was  a  right  and  lively  image  or  pattern 
of  all  those  virtuous  qualities  described  by  St.  Paul  in  a 
true  bishop, — a  good  salt  of  the  earth,  savourly,  biting  the 
corrupt  manners  of  evil  men ;  a  light  in  God's  house  set 
upon  a  candlestick,  for  all  good  men  to  imitate  and 
follow." 

How  long  Taylor's  ministry  lasted  at  Hadleigh  w'e  do 
not  exactly  know.  -Fox  only  says  that  he  continued 
there  "  all  the  days  of  the  most  innocent  and  holy  King  of 
blessed  memory,  King  Edward  VI."  We  may,  however, 
safely  conclude  that  he  was  there  more  than  ten  years. 
When  he  was  put  in  prison  in  Queen  Mary's  days,  he  was 
the  father  of  nine  children ;  and  as  it  is  not  probable  that 
he  would  marry  until  he  left  Cranmer's  household  and  had 
a  home  of  his  own,  it  seems  likely  that  his  children  were 
all  born  at  Hadleigh.  All  this,  however,  is  only  matter 
of  conjecture.  Enough  for  us  to  know  that  he  was 
evidently  Rector  of  Hadleigh  long  enough  to  be  loved  and 
honoured  by  the  mass  of  his  parishioners. 

Rowland  Taylor's  quiet  days  at  Hadleigh  were  soon 
brought  to  an  end  when  Queen  Mary  came  to  the  throne. 
A  man  of  his  eminence  and  high  reputation  as  a  Protestant 


122  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

\vas  sure  to  be  marked  for  destruction  by  the  Popish 
party,  and  an  excuse  was  soon  found  for  putting  him  in 
prison. 

In  the  best  worked  parishes,  and  under  the  most 
faithful  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  there  will  always  be 
found  many  who  hate  vital  religion,  and  remain  hardened, 
impenitent,  and  unbelieving.  It  was  so  in  the  days  of 
the  Apostles.  It  is  so  at  the  present  time,  in  our  own 
parishes.  It  was  so  at  Hadleigh,  when  Rowland  Taylor 
was  Rector.  There  were  men  who  hated  him,  because  his 
doctrine  condemned  their  own  lives  and  opinions ;  and  as 
soon  as  they  had  an  opportunity  of  doing  him  an  injury, 
they  eagerly  seized  it.  Two  of  these  men,  named  Foster 
and  Clerke,  conspired  to  bring  the  worthy  Rector  into 
collision  with  the  higher  powers,  by  hiring  one  John 
Avreth,  Rector  of  Aldham,  to  come  to  Hadleigh  church 
and  -celebrate  the  Popish  Mass.  The  result  answered 
their  expectations.  Rowland  Taylor,  with  righteous 
indignation,  rushed  into  the  church  as  the  Mass  was 
about  to  begin,  and  protested  warmly  against  the  whole 
proceeding,  as  illegal  and  idolatrous.  Then  followed  an 
unseemly  altercation, — the  forcible  expulsion  of  the 
Rector  of  Hadleigh  from  his  own  church, — great  excite 
ment  among  the  faithful  parishioners, — throwing  of  stones 
into  the  church,  and  a  general  ferment  among  the  people. 
All  this  was  duly  reported  to  Stephen  Gardiner,  Bishop  of 
Winchester  and  Lord  Chancellor  of  England;  and  the 
upshot  of  the  affair,  as  the  malignants  had  foreseen,  was 
a  summons  from  Gardiner  to  Dr.  Taylor,  to  appear  before 
him  in  London  without  delay.  This  summons  the  gallant 
Reformer  promptly  obeyed,  and  left  Hadleigh,  never  to 
return  till  the  day  of  his  death, 


ROWLAND   TAYLOR:   MARTYR.  123 

When  the  summons  arrived,  Rowland  Taylor's  many 
friends  tried  in  vain  to  persuade  him  to  fly  to  the 
Continent  to  save  his  life,  as  many  other  faithful 
Protestants  had  done.  But  they  had  no  more  effect  on 
the  good  old  man  than  Paul's  friends  had  on  the  Apostle, 
when  they  entreated  him  not  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem. 
This  was  his  reply :  "  What  will  ye  have  me  to  do  ?  I  am 
now  old,  and  have  already  lived  too  long  to  see  these 
terrible  and  most  wicked  days.  Fly  you,  and  do  as  your 
conscience  leadeth  you.  I  am  fully  determined,  with 
God's  grace,  to  go  to  this  Bishop,  and  to  tell  him  to  his 
beard  that  he  doth  naught.  God  shall  well  hereafter  raise 
up  teachers  of  His  people,  which  shall  with  much  more 
diligence  and  fruit  teach  them  than  I  have  done.  For 
God  will  not  forsake  His  Church,  though  now  for  a  time 
He  trieth  and  correcteth  us,  and  not  without  just 
cause. 

"  As  for  me,  I  believe  before  God  I  shall  never  be  able 
to  do  God  so  good  a  service  as  I  may  do  now,  nor  shall  I 
ever  have  so  glorious  a  calling  as  I  have  now,  nor  so  great 
mercy  of  God  proffered  me,  as  is  now  at  this  present. 
For  what  Christian  man  would  not  gladly  die  against  the 
Pope  and  his  adherents  ?  I  know  that  the  Papacy  is  the 
kingdom  of  Antichrist,  altogether  full  of  falsehoods;  so 
that  all  their  doctrine  is  nothing  but  idolatry,  superstition, 
error,  hypocrisy,  and  lies. 

"  Wherefore  I  beseech  you  and  all  other  my  friends  to 
pray  for  me,  and  to  doubt  not  but  God  will  give  me 
strength  and  His  Holy  Spirit,  that  all  mine  adversaries 
shall  have  shame  of  their  doings." 

Armed  with  this  frame  of  mind,  Rowland  Taylor  went 
voluntarily  to  London,  and  most  manfully  kept  his  word. 


1 24  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

The  opening  of  his  first  interview  with  Gardiner  is  thus 
described  by  Fox : — 

"Now  when  Gardiner  saw  Dr.  Taylor,  according  to  his 
common  custom,  he  reviled  him,  calling  him  knave, 
traitor,  heretic,  with  many  other  villainous  reproaches. 
All  this  Dr.  Taylor  heard  patiently,  and  at  last  said, '  My 
lord,  I  am  neither  traitor  nor  heretic,  but  a  true  subject, 
and  a  faithful  Christian  man ;  and  I  am  come  according 
to  your  commandment,  to  know  what  is  the  cause  why 
your  lordship  hath  sent  for  me.' 

"  Then  said  the  Bishop, '  Art  thou  come  thus,  villain  ? 
How  darest  thou  look  me  in  the  face  for  shame  ?  Knowest 
thou  not  who  I  am  ? ' 

" '  Yea ! '  said  Dr.  Taylor, '  I  know  who  you  are :  you  are 
Dr.  Stephen  Gardiner,  Bishop  of  Winchester  and  Lord 
Chancellor,  and  yet  but  a  mortal  man.  If  I  should  be 
afraid  of  your  lordly  looks,  why  fear  you  not  God,  the 
Lord  of  us  all  ?  How  dare  you  for  shame  look  any 
Christian  man  in  the  face,  seeing  you  have  forsaken  the 
truth,  denied  our  Saviour  Christ  and  His  Word,  and  done 
contrary  to  your  oath-taking  ?  With  what  countenance 
will  you  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  and 
answer  to  your  oath  made  first  to  King  Henry  VIII.,  and 
afterward  unto  King  Edward  VL,  his  son  ? ' ' 

The  interview,  which  began  in  this  extraordinary 
manner,  terminated  as  might  have  been  expected.  After 
several  sharp  arguments  and  wrangles,  in  which  the 
Suffolk  Rector  showed  himself  more  than  a  match  for  the 
Bishop  of  Winchester,  Taylor  was  committed  to  the 
King's  Bench  prison.  On  hearing  his  committal,  he 
kneeled  down,  and  holding  up  both  his  hands,  said, 
"Good  Lord,  I  thank  Thee.  From  the  tyranny  of  the 


ROWLAND  TAYLOR:  MARTF.R.  125 

Bishop  of  Rome,  and  all  his  detestable  errors,  idolatries, 
and  abominations,  good  Lord,  deliver  us.  And  God  be 
praised  for  good  King  Edward." 

Rowland  Taylor  lay  in  prison  two  years,  and  spent 
most  of  his  time  in  prayer,  reading  the  Scriptures,  and 
writing.  He  had  also  opportunities  of  exhorting  and 
addressing  the  prisoners.  How  much  he  saw  of  the  other 
Reformers  who  were  in  prison  at  the  same  time,  is  not 
quite  clear.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  he  was  very  often 
in  company  of  the  famous  John  Bradford,  and  told  his 
friends  that  God  had  sent  him  to  a  prison,  where  he 
"  found  an  angel  of  God  to  comfort  him."  It  is  also 
highly  probable  that  he  had  occasional  interviews  with 
the  illustrious  Reformers,  Hooper,  Rogers,  Ferrar,  and 
Saunders,  who  all,  like  himself,  were  finally  burned  at 
the  stake. 

The  end  of  Rowland  Taylor's  weary  imprisonment  came 
at  last  On  the  22nd  of  January,  1555,  he  was  brought 
before  the  Lord  Chancellor,  Bishop  Gardiner,  and  other 
Commissioners,  and  subjected  to  a  lengthy  examination. 
To  go  into  the  details  of  all  that  was  said  on  this  occasion 
would  be  wearisome  and  unprofitable.  The  whole  affair 
was  conducted  with  the  same  gross  unfairness  and 
partiality  which  characterized  all  the  proceedings  against 
the  English  Reformers,  and  the  result,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  was  the  good  man's  condemnation.  To  use  his 
own  words,  in  a  letter  to  a  friend,  he  was  pronounced  a 
heretic  because  he  defended  the  marriage  of  priests,  and 
denied  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation.  Never  let  it 
be  forgotten  in  these  days,  that  the  denial  of  any  corporal 
presence  of  Christ's  Body  and  Blood  in  the  elements  of 
bread  and  wine  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  was  the  turning- 


126  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

point  which  decided  the  fate  of  our  martyred  Reformers. 
If  they  gave  way  on  that  point  they  might  have  lived. 
Because  they  would  not  admit  any  corporal  presence  they 
died.  These  things  are  recorded  for  our  learning. 

On  the  last  day  of  January,  1555,  Taylor,  together  with 
Bradford,  and  Saunders,  was  called  to  appear  before  the 
Bishops  of  Winchester,  Norwich,  London,  Salisbury,  and 
Durham.  They  were  all  three  charged  with  heresy,  and 
schism,  and  required  to  answer  determinately  whether 
they  would  submit  themselves  to  the  Bishop  of  Rome, 
and  abjure  their  errors.  On  their  refusal  they  were 
condemned  to  death.  "  For  this,"  says  Fox,  "  they  gave 
God  thanks,  and  stoutly  said  unto  the  Bishops,  'We 
doubt  not  but  God,  the  righteous  Judge,  will  require  our 
blood  at  your  hands,  and  the  proudest  of  you  all  shall 
repent  this  receiving  again  of  Antichrist,  and  your 
tyranny  that  ye  now  show  against  the  flock  of  Christ.' " 
On  the  evening  of  this  day,  Taylor  was  sent  to  the 
Compter  prison,  and  parted  from  his  brethren. 

On  the  4th  of  February,  Bonner,  Bishop  of  London,  came 
to  the  Compter  prison,  and  formally  degraded  Taylor  from 
the  office  of  priest,  with  many  absurd  ceremonies,  of 
which  Fox  supplies  a  ludicrous  description.  The  night 
after  his  degradation,  his  wife  and  his  son  Thomas  were 
permitted  to  visit  and  sup  with  him,  and  after  supper 
they  parted,  with  much  affection  and  many  tears.  The 
next  da}7,  the  fifth  of  February,  he  set  out  on  his  journey 
to  Hadleigh,  in  order  that  he  might  be  burned  in  the 
presence  of  his  parishioners.  The  circumstances  of  his 
departure  from  London  are  so  touchingly  described  by 
Fox,  that  I  think  it  best  to  let  the  old  historian  speak 
for  himself. 


ROWLAND  TAYLOR:  MARTYR.  127 

"  On  the  next  morrow  after  that  Dr.  Taylor  had  supped 
with  his  wife  in  the  Compter  prison,  which  was  the  5th 
day  of  February,  the  Sheriff  of  London,  with  his  officers 
came  to  the  Compter  by  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and 
so  brought  forth  Dr.  Taylor;  and  without  any  light  led 
him  to  the  Woolsack,  an  inn  without  Aldgate.  Dr.  Taylor's 
wife,  suspecting  that  her  husband  should  that  night  be 
carried  away,  watched  all  night  in  St.  Botolph's  Church 
porch,  beside  Aldgate,  having  with  her  two  children,  the 
one  named  Elizabeth,  of  thirteen  years  of  age,  whom, 
being  left  without  father  or  mother,  Dr.  Taylor  had 
brought  up  of  alms  from  three  years  old;  the  other 
named  Mary,  Dr.  Taylor's  own  daughter. 

"  Now  when  the  Sheriff  and  his  company  came  against 
St.  Botolph's  Church,  Elizabeth  cried,  saying,  '  0  my  dear 
father !  Mother,  mother :  here  is  my  father  led  away ! ' 
Then  cried  his  •  wife,  '  Rowland,  Rowland :  where  art 
thou  ? '  for  it  was  a  very  dark  morning,  that  the  one 
could  not  see  the  other.  Dr.  Taylor  answered,  'Dear 
wife,  I  am  here,'  and  stayed.  The  Sheriff's  men  would 
have  led  him  forth,  but  the  Sheriff  said, '  Stay  a  little, 
masters,  I  pray  you,  and  let  him  speak  to  his  wife ; '  and 
so  they  stayed. 

"  Then  came  she  to  him,  and  he  took  his  daughter 
Mary  in  his  arms,  and  he,  his  wife,  and  Klizabeth  kneeled 
down  and  said  the  Lord's  prayer.  At  which  sight  the 
Sheriff  wept  apace,  and  so  did  divers  others  of  the 
company.  After  they  had  prayed,  he  rose  up  and  kissed 
his  wife,  and  shook  her  by  the  hand,  and  said,  '  Farewell, 
my  dear  wife:  be  of  good  comfort,  for  I  am  quiet  in  my 
conscience.  God  shall  raise  up  a  father  for  my  children.' 
And  then  he  kissed  his  daughter  Mary,  and  said,  'God 


128  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

bless  thee,  and  make  thee  His  servant;'  and,  kissing 
Elizabeth,  he  said, '  God  bless  thee.  I  pray  you  all  stand 
strong  and  steadfast  to  Christ  and  His  Word,  and  keep  you 
from  idolatry.'  Then  said  his  wife, '  God  be  with  thee,  dear 
Rowland :  I  will,  with  God's  grace,  meet  thee  at  Hadleigh. 

"And  so  was  he  led  forth  to  the  Woolsack,  and  his 
wife  followed  him.  As  soon  as  they  came  to  the  Woolsack, 
he  was  put  into  a  chamber,  wherein  he  was  kept,  with 
four  yeomen  of  the  guard  and  the  Sheriff's  men. 
Dr.  Taylor,  as  soon  as  he  was  come  into  the  chamber,  fell 
down  on  his  knees,  and  gave  himself  wholly  to  prayer. 
The  Sheriff  then,  seeing  Dr.  Taylor's  wife  there,  would  in 
no  case  grant  her  to  speak  any  more  with  her  husband ; 
but  gently  desired  her  to  go  to  his  house,  and  take  it  as 
her  own,  and  promised  her  she  should  lack  nothing,  and 
sent  two  officers  to  conduct  her  thither.  Notwithstanding, 
she  desired  to  go  to  her  mother's,  whither  the  officers  led 
her,  and  charged  her  mother  to  keep  her  there  till  they 
came  again." 

Rowland  Taylor's  journey  from  London  to  Hadleigh  ia 
minutely  described  by  Fox.  He  travelled  on  horseback, 
according  to  the  custom  of  those  days,  and  stopped  at 
Brentwood,  Chelmsford,  and  Lavenham.  "  All  the  way  he 
was  joyful  and  merry,  as  one  that  accounted  himself  going 
to  a  most  pleasant  banquet  or  bridal."  But  we  must 
content  ourselves  with  the  account  of  the  closing  scene 
in  the  worthy  martyr's  history,  which  shall  be  given  in 
Fox's  own  words : — 

"On  the  9th  February,  1555  (the  same  day  that  Bishop 
Hooper  was  burnt  at  Gloucester),  the  Sheriff  and  his 
company  led  Dr.  Taylor  towards  Hadleigh ;  and  coming 
within  two  miles  of  Hadleigh,  he  desired  for  somewhat  to 


ROWLAND  TAYLOR:  MARTYR.  129 

light  off  his  horse ;  which  done,  he  leaped,  and  set  a  frisk, 
or  twain,  as  men  commonly  do  in  dancing.  '  Why,  master 
Doctor,'  quoth  the  Sheriff,  'how  do  you  now?'  He 
answered,  'Well,  God  be  praised,  good  master  Sheriff, 
never  better ;  for  now  I  know  I  am  almost  at  home.  I 
lack  not  past  two  stiles  to  go  over,  and  I  am  at  even  at 
my  Father's  house.  But,  master  Sheriff/  said  he,  '  shall 
we  not  go  through  Hadleigh  ? '  '  Yes/  said  the  Sheriff, 
'you  shall  go  through  Hadleigh.'  Then  said  he,  'O  good 
Lord,  I  thank  Thee !  I  shall  yet  once  ere  I  die,  see  my 
flock  whom  Thou,  Lord,  knowest  I  have  most  heartily 
loved  and  most  truly  taught.  Good  Lord,  bless  them,  and 
keep  them  steadfast  in  Thy  Word  and  truth.' 

"  When  they  were  now  come  to  Hadleigh,  and  came 
riding  over  the  bridge,  at  the  bridge  foot  waited  a  poor 
man  with  five  small  children,  who,  when  he  saw  Dr. 
Taylor,  he  and  -his  children  fell  down  upon  their  knees 
and  held  up  their  hands,  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and 
said, '  O  dear  father  and  good  shepherd,  Dr.  Taylor,  God 
help  and  succour  thee,  as  thou  hast  many  a  time  succoured 
me  and  my  poor  children.'  Such  witness  had  this  servant 
of  God  of  his  virtuous  and  charitable  alms-given  in  his 
lifetime ;  for  God  would  now  the  poor  should  testify  of 
his  good  deeds  to  his  singular  comfort,  to  the  example  of 
others,  and  confusion  of  his  persecutors  and  tyrannous 
adversaries.  For  the  Sheriff  and  others  that  led  him  to 
death  were  wonderfully  astonished  at  this,  and  the  Sheriff 
sore  rebuked  the  poor  man  for  so  crying.  The  streets  of 
Hadleigh  were  beset  on  both  sides  the  way  with  men  and 
women  of  the  town  and  country  who  waited  to  see  him ; 
whom,  when  they  beheld  so  led  to  death,  with  weeping 
eyes  and  lamentable  voices  they  cried,  saying  one  t<3 

i 


130  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

another, '  Ah,  good  Lord,  there  goeth  our  good  shepherd 
from  us,  that  so  faithfully  hath  taught  us,  so  fatherly  hath 
cared  for  us,  and  so  godly  hath  governed  us.  O  merciful 
God !  What  shall  we  poor  scattered  lambs  do  ?  What 
shall  come  of  this  most  wicked  world?  Good  Lord, 
strengthen  him  and  comfort  him.'  With  such  other  most 
lamentable  and  piteous  voices.  Wherefore  the  people 
were  sore  rebuked  by  the  Sheriff  and  the  catchpoles,  his 
men,  that  led  him.  And  Dr.  Taylor  evermore  said  to  the 
people,  I  have  preached  to  you  God's  Word  and  truth, 
and  am  come  this  day  to  seal  it  with  my  blood.' 

"  Coming  against  the  almshouses,  which  he  well  knew, 
he  cast  to  the  good  people  money  which  remained  of  that 
which  good  people  had  given  him  in  time  of  his  imprison 
ment.  As  for  his  living,  they  took  it  from  him  at  his  first 
going  to  prison,  so  that  he  was  sustained  all  the  time  of 
his  imprisonment  by  the  charitable  alms  of  good  people 
that  visited  him.  Therefore  the  money  that  now  remained 
he  put  in  a  glove  ready  for  the  same  purpose,  and,  as  is 
said,  gave  it  to  the  poor  almsmen  standing  at  their  door 
to  see  him.  And  coming  to  the  last  of  the  almshouses, 
and  not  seeing  the  poor  that  there  dwelt  ready  at  their 
doors  as  the  others  were,  he  asked,  '  Is  the  blind  man  and 
blind  woman  that  dwelt  here"  alive  ? '  It  was  answered, 
'  Yea,  they  are  within.'  Then  threw  he  glove  and  all  in 
at  the  window,  and  so  rode  forth. 

"At  the  last,  coming  to  Aldliam  Common,  the  plp^r 
assigned  where  he  should  suffer,  and  seeing  a  great 
multitude  of  people  gathered  thither,  he  asked,  '  What 
place  is  this,  and  what  meaneth  it  that  so  much  people 
are  gathered  hither  ? '  It  was  answered, '  It  is  Aldham 
,  the  place  where  you  must  suffer,  and  the  people 


ROWLAND  TAYLOR:  MARTYR.  131 

are  come  to  look  upon  you.'  Then  said  he,  '  Thanked  be 
God,  I  am  even  at  home ; '  and  so  alighted  from  his  horse, 
and  rent  the  hood  from  his  head. 

"  Now  was  his  head  knotted  ill-favouredly,  and  clipped 
much  as  a  man  would  clip  a  fool's  head ;  which  cost  the 
good  Bishop  Bonner  had  bestowed  upon  him  when  he 
degraded  him.  But  when  the  people  saw  his  reverend 
and  ancient  face,  with  a  long  white  beard,  they  burst  out 
with  weeping  tears,  and  cried,  saying,  'God  save  thee, 
good  Dr.  Taylor!  Jesus  Christ  strengthen  thee;  the 
Holy  Ghost  comfort  thee,'  with  such  other  like  godly 
wishes.  Then  would  he  have  spoken  to  the  people,  but 
the  yeomen  of  the  guard  were  so  busy  about  him,  that  as 
soon  as  he  opened  his  mouth,  one  or  other  thrust  a  tipstaff 
into  his  mouth,  and  would  in  no  wise  permit  him  to  speak. 

"  Dr.  Taylor,  perceiving  that  he  could  not  be  permitted 
to  speak,  sat  down,  and  seeing  one  named  Soyce,  he  called 
him,  and  said, '  Soyce,  I  pray  thee  come  and  pull  off  my 
boots,  and  take  them  for  thy  labour.  Thou  hast  long 
looked  for  them,  now  take  them.'  Then  rose  he  up, 
and  put  off  his  clothes  urito  his  shirt,  and  gave  them 
away;  which  done,  he  said  with  a  loud  voice,  'Good 
people,  I  have  taught  you  nothing  but  God's  Holy  Word, 
and  those  lessons  that  I  have  taken  out  of  God's  blessed 
Book, — the  Holy  Bible ;  and  I  am  come  hither  this  cay 
to  seal  it  with  my  blood.'  With  that  word,  a  certain 
yeoman  of  the  guard,  who  had  used  Dr.  Taylor  very 
cruelly  all  the  way,  gave  him  a  great  stroke  upon  the  head 
with  a  waster,  and  said,  'Is  that  the  keeping  of  thy 
promise,  thou  heretic  ? '  Then  he,  seeing  they  would  not 
permit  him  to  speak,  kneeled  down  and  prayed,  and  a 
poor  woman  that  was  among  the  people  atepped  in  ana 


132  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

prayed  with  him,  but  they  thrust  her  away,  and  threatened 
to  tread  her  down  with  horses;  notwithstanding,  she 
would  not  remove,  but  abode  and  prayed  with  him. 
When  he  had  prayed,  he  went  to  the  stake  and  kissed  it, 
and  set  himself  into  a  pitch-barrel,  which  they  had  set  for 
him  to  stand  in,  and  so  stood  with  his  back  upright 
against  the  stake,  with  his  hands  folded  together,  and  his 
eyes  toward  heaven,  and  so  he  continually  prayed." 

After  some  painful  delay,  and  some  miserable  insults 
from  the  Popish  helpers,  who  were  assisting,  the  fire  was 
lighted.  Then  says  Fox,  "Dr.  Taylor,  holding  up  both 
his  hands,  called  upon  God,  and  said, '  Merciful  Father  of 
heaven,  for  Jesus  Christ  my  Saviour's  sake,  receive  my 
soul  into  Thy  hands.'  So  stood  he  still,  without  either 
crying  or  moving,  until  one  struck  him  on  the  head  with  a 
halbert,  so  that  his  brains  fell  out,  and  the  dead  corpse 
fell  down  into  the  fire." 

Thus  died  one  of  the  best  and  bravest  of  the  English 
martyrs.  An  old  rude  stone  still  marks  the  spot  where 
he  was  burned,  in  the  midst  of  an  enclosed  field,  which 
once  formed  part  of  Aldham  Common.  It  bears  the 
following  quaint  but  pithy  inscription : — 

"  1555. 

"Dr.  Taylor,  in  defending  that 

which  was  good,  at  this 

place  left  his  blood." 

In  the  year  1819  another  and  more  pretentious 
monument  was  erected  on  the  same  spot,  with  a  long 
poetical  inscription  written  by  the  Rector  of  Hadleigh. 
But  the  martyr's  history  i&  still  remembered  in  the 


ROWLAND  TAYLOR:  MARTYR.  133 

without  the  aid  of  stones  and  monuments.  "  Being  dead, 
he  yet  speaketh." 

Taylor's  last  parting  wishes  to  his  wife  and  family  and 
parishioners  were  written  in  a  book  which  he  gave  his  son 
as  a  parting  legacy,  only  five  days  before  his  martyrdom. 
They  can  hardly  fail  to  interest  the  reader. 

"  I  say  to  my  wife  and  to  my  children,  The  Lord  gave 
you  unto  me,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  me  from  you  and 
you  from  me :  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord !  I 
believe  that  they  are  blessed  which  die  in  the  Lord.  God 
careth  for  sparrows,  and  for  the  hairs  of  our  heads.  I 
have  ever  found  Him  more  faithful  and  favourable  than  is 
any  father  or  husband.  Trust  ye,  therefore,  in  Him  by 
the  means  of  our  dear  Saviour  Christ's  merits.  Believe, 
love,  fear,  and  obey  Him:  pray  to  Him,  for  He  hath 
promised  to  help.  Count  me  not  dead,  for  I  shall  certainly 
live  and  never  die.  I  go  before,  and  you  shall  follow  after, 
to  our  long  home.  I  go  to  the  rest  of  my  children, — 
Susan,  George,  Ellen,  Robert,  and  Zachary.  I  have 
bequeathed  you  to  the  only  Omnipotent. 

"I  say  to  my  dear  friends  of  Hadleigh,  and  to  all 
others  which  have  heard  me  preach,  that  I  depart  hence 
with  a  quiet  conscience  as  touching  my  doctrine,  for  the 
which  I  pray  you  thank  God  with  me.  For  I  have,  after 
my  little  talent,  declared  to  others  those  lessons  that  I 
gathered  out  of  God's  Book,  the  blessed  Bible.  '  Therefore, 
if  I,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  should  preach  to  you  any 
other  Gospel  than  that  ye  have  received,'  God's  great 
curse  be  upon  that  preacher ! 

"  Beware,  for  God's  sake,  that  ye  deny  not  God,  neither 
decline  from  the  word  of  faith,  lest  God  decline  from  you, 
and  so  do  ye  everlastingly  perish.  For  God's  sake  beware 


134  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

of  Popery,  for  though  it  appear  to  have  in  it  unity,  yet 
the  same  is  vanity  and  anti-Christianity,  and  not  in 
Christ's  faith  and  verity, 

"  Beware  of  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  after 
such  a  light  opened  so  plainly  and  simply,  truly, 
thoroughly,  and  generally  to  all  England. 

"  The  Lord  grant  all  men  His  good  and  Holy  Spirit,  in 
crease  of  His  wisdom,  contemning  the  wicked  world,  hearty 
desire  to  be  with  God,  and  the  heavenly  company ;  through 
Jesus  Christ,  our  only  Mediator,  Advocate,  Righteousness, 
Life,  Sanctification,  and  Hope.  Amen.  Amen.  Pray.  Pray. 

"  Rowland  Taylor,  departing  hence  in  sure  hope,  with 
out  all  doubting  of  eternal  salvation.  I  thank  God,  my 
heavenly  Father,  through  Jesus  Christ,  my  certain 
Saviour.  Amen,  5th  of  February,  anno  1555. 

" '  The  Lord  is  my  Light  and  my  Salvation,  whom  then 
shall  I  fear  ?  God  is  He  that  justifieth :  who  is  he  that 
can  condemn?'  'In  Thee,  0  Lord,  have  I  trusted:  let 
me  never  be  confounded.' " 

Does  any  one  wish  to  know  whether  the  Church  of 
Rome  is  infallible  ?  Let  him  carefully  study  the  history 
of  such  martyrdoms  as  that  of  Rowland  Taylor.  Of  all 
the  stupid  and  suicidal  mistakes  that  the  Romish  Church 
ever  made,  none  was  greater  than  the  mistake  of  burning 
the  Reformers.  It  cemented  the  work  of  the  Reformation, 
and  made  Englishmen  Protestants  by  thousands.  When 
plain  Englishmen  saw  the  Church  of  Rome  so  cruelly 
wicked  and  Protestants  so  brave,  they  ceased  to  doubt  on 
which  side  was  the  truth.  May  the  memory  of  our 
martyred  Reformers  never  be  forgotten  in  England  until 
the  Lord  comes.! 


HUGH  LATIMEft :  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR. 

THE  name  of  Bishop  Latimer  is  well  known  to  all  readers 
of  English  Church  history.  There  are,  probably,  few  who 
have  not  read  that  more  than  three  hundred  years  ago  there 
was  such  a  Queen  of  England  as  "  Bloody  Mary," — and 
that  men  were  burnt  alive  in  her  reign  because  they 
would  not  give  up  Protestantism, — and  that  one  of  these 
men  was  Bishop  Latimer. 

But  English  Churchmen  ought  to  know  these  things 
better  in  the  present  day.  They  ought  to  become  thoroughly 
familiar  with  the  lives,  the  acts,  and  the  opinions  of  the 
leading  English  Reformers.  Their  names  ought  to  be 
something  better  than  hackneyed  ornaments  to  point  a 
platform  speech,  and  rhetorical  traps  to  elicit  an  Exeter 
Hall  cheer.  Their  principles  ought  no  longer  to  be  vague, 
hazy  shadows  "  looming  in  the  distance,"  but  something 
clear,  distinct,  and  well-defined  before  our  mind's  eyes. 
My  desire  is,  that  men  may  understand  that  the  best 
interests  of  this  country  are  bound  up  with  Protestantism. 
My  wish  is,  that  men  may  write  on  their  hearts  that  the 
well-being  of  England  depends  not  on  commerce,  or  clever 
politicians,  or  steam,  or  armies,  or  navies,  or  gold,  or  iron, 
or  coal,  or  corn,  but  on  the  maintenance  of  the  principles; 
of  the  English  Reformation. 

136 


136  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

The  times  we  live  in  call  loudly  for  the  diffusion  of 
knowledge  about  English  Church  history.  Opinions  are 
boldly  broached  now-a-days  of  so  startling  a  nature,  that 
they  make  a  man  rub  his  eyes,  and  say,  "  Where  am  I  ? " 
A  state  of  feeling  is  growing  up  among  us  about  Romanism 
and  Protestantism,  which,  to  say  the  least,  is  most  un 
healthy.  It  has  increased,  is  increasing,  and  ought  to 
be  diminished.  Nothing  is  so  likely  to  check  this  state 
of  feeling  as  the  production  of  a  few  plain  facts.  If  you 
want  to  convince  a  Scotchman,  they  say  you  must  give 
him  a  long  argument.  If  you  want  to  convince  an 
Englishman,  you  must  give  him  plain  facts.  Facts  are 
the  principal  commodity  I  have  brought  together  in  this 
biographical  paper.  If  any  one  expects  to  find  in  these 
pages  private  speculations,  or  oratorical  display,  I  am 
afraid  he  will  be  disappointed ;  but  if  any  one  likes  plain 
facts,  I  think  I  shall  be  able  to  supply  him  with  a  few. 

Does  any  reader  doubt  who  is  a  true  member  of  the 
Church  of  England  ?  Are  you  perplexed  by  the  rise  and 
progress  of  what  are  foolishly  called  "Church  views"? 
Come  with  me  to-day,  and  pay  a  visit  to  one  of  the 
Fathers  of  the  English  Church.  Let  us  put  into  the 
witness  box  one  of  the  most  honest  and  out-spoken 
bishops  of  the  days  of  the  English  Reformation.  Let  us 
examine  the  life  and  opinions  of  good  old  Latimer. 

Does  any  reader  doubt  what  is  the  true  character  of  the 
Church  of  Rome  ?  Are  you  bewildered  by  some  of  those 
plausible  gentlemen  who  tell  you  there  is  no  fundamental 
difference  between  the  Anglican  and  Romish  Churches  ? 
Are  you  puzzled  by  that  intense  yearning  after  so-called 
"  Catholic  "  principles,  which  distinguishes  some  misguided 
Churchmen,  and  which  exhibits  itself  in  "  Catholic " 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  137 

teaching,  "  Catholic  "  ceremonies,  "  Catholic  "  books  of 
devotion,  and  "Catholic"  architecture?  Come  with  me 
to-day,  and  turn  over  a  few  old  pages  in  English  history. 
Let  us  see  what  England  actually  was  when  Romish 
teachers  instructed  the  English  people,  and  had  things 
all  their  own  way.  Let  us  see  what  the  Church  of  Rome 
does  when  she  has  complete  power.  Let  us  see  how  she 
treats  the  friends  of  an  open  Bible,  of  private  judgment, 
and  of  justification  by  faith.  Let  us  see  how  the  Church 
of  Rome  dealt  with  Bishop  Latimer. 

L  In  examining  the  history  of  Bishop  Latimer,  the 
times  in  which  he  lived  demand  attentive  consideration. 
It  is  impossible  to  form  a  just  estimate  of  a  man's 
conduct  unless  we  know  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is 
placed,  and  the  difficulties  with  which  he  has  to  contend. 
No  one  is  aware,  of  the  whole  extent  of  our  obligations 
to  the  noble  band  of  English  Reformers,  who  is  not 
acquainted  with  the  actual  state  of  England  when  they 
began  their  work,  and  the  amazing  disadvantages  under 
which  that  work  was  carried  on. 

Latimer  was  born  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VII.  He  lived 
through  the  reigns  of  Henry  the  VIII.  and  Edward  VI., 
and  was  put  to  death  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Mary.  He 
began  life  at  a  period  when  Popery  bore  undisputed  sway 
in  this  country.  He  witnessed  the  beginning  of  the  breach 
between  Henry  VIII.  and  Rome,  and  the  establishment 
of  a  transition  state  of  religion  in  England.  He  lived  to 
see  the  full  development  of  Protestantism  under  Edward 
VI.,  and  the  compilation  of  a  LituBgy  and  Articles  very 
slightly  differing  from  those  we  have  at  this  day.  About 
each  of  these  three  periods  I  must  say  a  few  words. 


138  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

(a)  The  first  period  of  Latimer's  life,  when  Popery  was 
supreme  in  England,  was  a  period  of  utter  spiritual 
darkness.  The  depth  of  superstition  in  which  our  worthy 
forefathers  were  sunk  is  enough  to  make  one's  hair 
stand  on  end.  No  doubt  there  were  many  Lollards,  and 
followers  of  Wycliffe,  scattered  over  the  land,  who  held 
the  truth,  and  were  the  salt  of  the  nation.  But  the  fierce 
persecution  with  which  these  good  men  were  generally 
assailed  prevented  their  making  much  progress.  They 
barely  maintained  their  own  ground.  And  as  for  the  mass 
of  the  population,  gross  darkness  covered  their  minds. 

Most  of  the  priests  and  teachers  of  religion  were 
themselves  profoundly  ignorant  of  everything  they  ought 
to  have  known.  They  were  generally  ordained  without 
any  adequate  examination  as  to  learning  or  character. 
Many  of  them,  though  they  could  read  their  breviaries, 
knew  nothing  whatever  of  the  Bible.  Some,  according  to 
Strype,  the  historian,  were  scarcely  able  to  say  the  Lord's 
prayer,  and  not  a  few  were  unable  to  repeat  the  Ten 
Commandments  The  prayers  of  the  Church  were  in 
the  Latin  language,  which  hardly  anybody  understood. 
Preaching  there  was  scarcely  any,  and  what  there  was, 
was  grossly  unscriptural  and  unedifying. 

Huge  nests  of  ordained  men  were  dotted  over  the  face 
of  England,  in  the  shape  of  Abbeys  and  Monasteries. 
The  inhabitants  of  these  beautiful  buildings  were  seldom 
very  holy  and  self-denying,  and  were  often  men  of  most 
profligate  and  disreputable  lives.  Their  morals  were  just 
what  might  have  been  expected  from  u  fulness  of  bread 
and  abundance  of  idleness."  They  did  next  to  nothing 
for  the  advancement  of  learning.  They  did  nothing  for 
the  spread  of  true  religion.  Two  things  only  they  cared 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  139 

for,  and  those  two  were  to  fill  their  own  pockets,  and  to 
keep  up  their  own  power.  For  the. one  purpose  they 
persuaded  weak  and  dying  people  to  give  money  and  lands 
to  the  Church  under  the  specious  pretence  that  they 
would  in  this-  way  be  delivered  from  purgatory,  and  their 
faith  proved  by  their  good  works.  For  the  other  purpose 
they  claimed  to  hold  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
To  them  confession  of  sins  must  be  made.  Without  their 
absolution  and  extreme  unction,  no  man  could  be  saved, 
t  Without  their  Masses  no  soul  could  be  redeemed  from 
purgatory.  In  short,  they  were  practically  the  mediators 
between  Christ  and  man ;  and  to  injure  them  was  the 
highest  offence  and  sin.  Old  Fuller  tells  us  for  example, 
that  in  1489,  a  certain  Italian  got  an  immense  sum  of 
money  in  England,  by  "  having  power  from  the  Pope  to 
absolve  people  from  usury,  simony,  theft,  manslaughter, 
fornication,  and  adultery,  and  all  crimes  whatsoever,  except 
smiting  the  clergy  and  conspiring  against  the  Pope." 
(i.  532.  Tegg's  edition.)  Such  were  Romish  priests  in 
Latimer's  youth,  when  Popery  was  last  rampant  in 
England.  To  say  that  they  were  generally  ignorant, 
covetous,  sensual,  and  despotic  tyrants  over  the  souls  and 
bodies  of  men,  is  not  saying  one  jot  more  than  the  truth. 

When  priests  in  Latimer's  youth  were  men  of  this 
stamp,  we  shall  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  the  people 
were  utterly  ignorant  of  true  religion.  It  would  Lave 
been  miraculous  indeed  if  it  had  been  otherwise,  when 
they  had  neither  sound  preaching  to  hear,  nor  Bibles  to 
read.  A  New  Testament  could  not  be  bought  for  less 
than  £2  16s.  3d.,  and  the  buyer  was  in  danger  of  being 
considered  a  heretic  for  purchasing  it.  The  Christianity 
of  the  vast  majority  was  naturally  enough  a  mere  name 


140  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

and  form.  The  Sabbath  was  a  day  of  sport  and  pastime, 
and  not  a  day  of  solemn  worship.  Not  one  in  a  hundred 
perhaps  could  have  rightly  answered  the  question,  "  What 
shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ? "  or  given  the  slightest  account 
of  justification,  regeneration,  sanctification,  the  office  of 
Christ,  or  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  A  man's  only  idea  of 
the  way  to  heaven  generally  was,  to  do  as  the  priest  told 
him,  and  to  belong  to  "the  true  Church!"  Thus  the  blind 
led  the  blind,  and  all  wallowed  in  the  ditch  together. 

All  the  practical  religion  that  the  mass  of  the  laity 
possessed,  consisted  in  prayers  to  the  Virgin  Mary  and 
saints,  paying  the  priests  to  say  Masses,  pilgrimages  to 
holy  places,  and  adoration  of  images  and  relics.  The  list 
of  their  superstitious  practices  would  make  an  appalling 
catalogue.  They  hastened  to  the  church  for  holy  water 
before  a  thunderstorm.  They  resorted  to  St.  Rooke  in 
times  of  pestilence.  They  prayed  to  St.  Pernel  in  an 
ague.  Young  women,  desiring  to  be  married,  sought  the 
help  of  St.  Nicholas.  Wives,  weary  of  their  husbands, 
betook  themselves  to  St.  Uncumber.  One  hundred 
thousand  pilgrims  visited  the  tomb  of  St.  Thomas  a 
Becket,  at  Canterbury,  in  one  year  in  order  to  help  their 
souls  towards  heaven.  In  one  year  at  Canterbury 
Cathedral,  there  was  offered  at  Christ's  altar  £3  2s.  6d. ;  on 
the  Virgin  Mary's,  £63  5s.  6d.;  and  on  Thomas  a  Becket's, 
£832  12s.  3d.  The  images  worshipped  were  often  gross 
cheats  as  well  as  idols.  The  relics  worshipped  were  as 
monstrous  and  absurd  as  the  images.  As  to  the  bones  of 
saints,  there  were  whole  heaps  which  had  been  venerated 
for  years,  which  proved  at  length  to  be  bones  of  deer  and 
pigs.  These  are  dreadful  things  to  tell,  but  they  ought  to 
be  known.  All  these  things  the  Church  of  Borne  knew, 


HUGH  LATIMER:   BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  141 

connived  at,  sanctioned,  defended,  taught,  and  enforced  on 
her  members.  This  was  the  state  of  religion  in  England 
in  the  early  years  of  the  16th  century,  when  the 
English  Reformers  were  raised  up.  This  was  English 
Christianity  in  the  childhood  and  youth  of  Hugh  Latimer ! 

(6)  The  second  period  of  Latimer's  life,  during  which 
England  was  in  a  state  of  transition  between  Romanism 
and  Protestantism,  presents  many  curious  features. 

We  see,  on  the  one  hand,  a  reformation  of  religion  begun 
by  a  King  from  motives  which,  to  say  the  least,  were  not 
spiritual.  It  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that  a  sensual 
tyrant  like  Henry  VIII.  came  to  a  breach  with  the  Pope 
for  any  other  reason  than  that  the  Pope  crossed  his  will. 
We  see  his  pretended  scruples  about  his  marriage  with 
Catherine  of  Arragon  bringing  him  into  communication 
with  Cranmer  and  Latimer.  We  see  him,  at  one  time, 
so  far  guided  by -the  advice  of  these  good  men  that,  like 
Herod,  he  does  many  things  that  are  right,  and  likely 
to  advance  the  cause  of  the  Gospel.  He  makes  Cranmer 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and  shows  him  favour  to  the 
end  of  his  days.  He  allows  the  Bible  to  be  printed  in 
English  and  placed  in  churches.  He  commands  images 
to  be  broken,  and  puts  down  many  gross  superstitions. 
He  boldly  denies  the  doctrine  of  the  Pope's  supremacy. 
He  dissolves  the  monasteries,  and  puts  to  open  shame  the 
wickedness  of  their  inmates.  All  this  we  see  and  are 
thankful. — We  see  him,  at  another  time,  defending  Popish 
dogmas,  and  burning  men  who,  like  the  martyr  Lambert, 
denied  them.  We  see  him  putting  forth  the  famous  Six 
Articles,  which  re-asserted  transubstantiation,  private 
Masses,  clerical  celibacy,  vows  of  chastity,  auricular 
confession,  and  the  denial  of  the  cup  to  the  laity.  Worst 


142  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

of  all,  we  see  in  him  the  marks  of  a  proud,  self-willed, 
sensual  man  all  his  life  long,  and  an  utter  want  of  evidence 
that  his  heart  was  ever  right  in  the  sight  of  God.  The 
employment  of  a  man  who  was  guilty  of  such  inconsisten 
cies,  to  do  God's  work,  is  among  the  deep  things  of  God's 
providence.  We  cannot  understand  it.  We  must  wait. 

Turning,  on  the  other  hand,  from  Henry  VIII.  to  the 
first  English  Reformers,  we  see  in  them  strong  indications 
of  what  Fuller  calls  "  a  twilight  religion."  We  see  them 
putting  forth  books  in  Henry  VIII.'s  reign,  which,  though 
an  immense  improvement  and  advance  upon  Romish 
teaching,  still  contain  some  things  which  are  not  Scriptural. 
Such  were  "  The  Necessary  Erudition,"  and  the  "  Institution 
of  a  Christian  Man."  We  see  them,  however,  gradually 
growing  in  spiritual  knowledge,  perhaps  unawares  to 
themselves,  and  specially  as  to  the  error  of  tran substantia 
tion.  We  see  them  continually  checked  and  kept  back, 
partly  by  the  arbitrary  conduct  of  the  King,  partly  by  the 
immense  difficulty  of  working  side  by  side  with  a  Popish 
party  in  the  Church,  and  partly  by  the  great  ignorance  of 
the  parochial  clergy.  Nevertheless,  on  comparing  the  end 
of  Henry  VIII.'s  reign  with  the  beginning,  we  see  plain 
proof  that  much  ground  was  gained.  We  learn  to  admire 
the  overruling  power  of  God,  who  can  use  a  Henry  VIII. 
just  as  He  did  a  Nebuchadnezzar  or  Sennacherib,  for  the 
accomplishment  of  His  own  purposes.  And  last,  but  not 
least,  we  learn  to  admire  the  patient  perseverance  of  the 
Reformers.  Though  they  had  but  little  strength,  they 
used  it.  Though  they  had  but  a  small  door  open,  they 
entered  in  by  it.  Though  they  had  but  one  talent,  they 
laid  it  out  heartily  for  God,  and  did  not  bury  it  in  the 
ground.  Though  they  had  but  %  little  light,  they  lived 


HUGH  LATIMEE:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  143 

fully  up  to  it.  If  they  could  not  do  what  they  would, 
they  did  what  they  could,  and  were  blessed  in  their  deed. 
Such  was  the  second  period  of  Latimer's  life.  Never  let 
it  be  forgotten  that,  at  this  time,  the  foundations  of  the 
Church  of  England  were  excavated,  and  vast  heaps  of 
rubbish  removed  out  of  the  way  of  the  builders  who  were 
to  follow.  Viewed  in  this  light,  it  will  always  be  an 
interesting  period  to  the  student  of  Church  history. 

(c)  The  last  period  of  Latimer's  life,  which  comprises 
the  reign  of  Edward  VI.,  is,  in  many  respects  very 
different  from  the  two  periods  to  which  I  have  already 
adverted.  The  cause  of  English  Protestantism  made 
immense  progress  during  Edward's  short  but  remarkable 
tenure  of  power.  It  was  truly  said  of  him  by  Hooker, 
that  "  He  died  young,  but  lived  long,  if  life  be  action." 
Released  from  the  bondage  of  a  tyrannical  King's  inter 
ference,  Cranmer  and  his  friends  went  forward  in  the  work 
of  religious  reformation  with  rapid  strides.  Bonner  and 
Gardiner  were  no  longer  allowed  to  keep  them  back. 
Refusing  to  take  part  in  the  good  work,  these  two  Popish 
prelates  were  deposed  and  put  to  silence.  Faithful  men, 
like  Ridley  and  Hooper,  were  placed  on  the  episcopal 
bench.  An  immense  clearance  of  Popish  ceremonies  was 
effected.  A  Liturgy  was  compiled,  which  differed  very 
slightly  from  our  present  Prayer-book.  The  forty-two 
Articles  of  religion  were  drawn  up,  which  form  the  basis 
of  our  own  thirty-nine.  The  first  book  of  Homilies  was 
put  forth,  in  order  to  supply  the  want  of  preachers.  An 
accuracy  and  clearness  of  doctrinal  statement  was  arrived 
at,  which  had  hitherto  been  unknown.  Learned  foreigners, 
like  Bucer  and  Peter  Martyr,  were  invited  to  visit  England 
and  appointed  Kegius  Professors  of  Divinity  at  Qxforc] 


144  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

and  Cambridge.  How  much  further  the  Reformers  might 
have  carried  the  work  of  reformation,  if  they  had  had 
time,  it  is  useless  now  to  conjecture.  Judging  by  the 
changes  they  effected  in  a  very  few  years,  they  would 
probably  have  made  our  Church  as  nearly  perfect  as  a 
visible  Church  can  be,  if  they  had  not  been  stopped  by 
Edward's  premature  death. 

There  was,  however,  one  thing  which  the  Reformers 
of  Edward  the  Sixth's  reign  could  not  accomplish.  They 
could  not  change  the  hearts  of  the  parochial  clergy. 
Thousands  of  clergymen  continued  to  hold  office  in  the 
Church  of  England,  who  had  no  sympathy  with  the 
proceedings  of  Cranmer  and  his  party.  There  was  no 
getting  rid  of  these  worthies,  for  they  were  ready  to 
promise  anything,  sign  anything,  and  swear  anything,  in 
order  to  keep  their  livings.  But  while  they  yielded 
compliance  to  Cranmer's  injunctions  and  commands,  they 
were  graceless,  ignorant,  and  semi-Papists  at  heart  The 
questions  which  Bishop  Hooper  found  it  necessary  to  put 
to  the  dean,  prebendaries,  and  clergy  of  the  diocese  of 
Gloucester  on  his  first  visitation,  and  the  answers  which 
he  received,  furnish  us  with  a  sad  illustration  of  the  state 
of  English  clergymen  in  Edward  the  Sixth's  time.* 

Facts  such  as  these  are  painful  and  astounding;  but 
it  is  most  important  that  we  should  know  them. 
They  explain  at  once  the  ease  with  which  Bloody  Mary 
restored  Popery  when  she  came  to  the  throne.  Parochial 
clergymen  like  those  just  described  were  not  likely  to 
offer  any  resistance  to  her  wishes.  Facts  such  as  these 
throw  great  light  on  the  position  of  Cranmer  and  the 

*  &99  Hooper'*  life,  in  this  volume,  page  67, 


HUGH  LATiMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  145 

Reformers  of  Edward  the  Sixth's  days.  We  probably 
have  little  idea  of  the  immense  difficulties  both  within 
and  without  which  beset  them.  Above  all,  facts  such  as 
these  give  us  some  idea  of  the  condition  of  religion  in 
England  even  in  the  brightest  portion  of  Latimer's  times. 
If  things  like  these  were  to  be  seen  when  Latimer  was  an 
old  man,  what  must  have  been  seen  when  he  was  young ! 
If  ignorance  like  this  prevailed  under  Edward  VI.,  how 
thick  must  the  darkness  have  been  under  Henry  VIII. ! 

I  must  dwell  no  longer  on  the  subject  of  Latimer's 
times.  The  subject  has  been  already  exhausted  in 
Hooper's  biography,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  weary  my 
readers  by  a  dry  and  tedious  repetition  of  facts.  But 
I  firmly  believe  that  a  knowledge  of  these  facts  is 
absolutely  essential  to  a  right  understanding  of  the 
English  Reformation,  and  I  therefore  hope  that  the  few 
which  I  have  given  will  not  prove  useless. 

On  calm  consideration,  I  trust  my  readers  will  agree 
with  me,  that  it  is  the  height  of  absurdity  to  say,  as  some 
do  now-a-days,  that  this  country  has  been  a  loser  by 
getting  rid  of  Popery.  It  is  really  astonishing  to  hear 
the  nonsense  talked  "  about  merry  England  in  the  olden 
times,"  the  "  mediaeval  piety,"  the  "  ages  of  faith,"  and 
the  "  devout  habits  of  our  Catholic  forefathers." 

Walter  Scott's  fascinating  writings  and  Pugin's  beautiful 
architectural  designs,  have  lent  a  false  glare  to  Romanism 
in  England,  and  induced  many  to  doubt  whether  our 
Reformation  really  was  a  gain.  The  state  of  English 
society,  which  Scott  has  sometimes  made  so  interesting  by 
his  pen,  and  Pugin  by  his  pencil,  is  a  far  more  beautiful 
thing  in  poems  and  pictures  than  it  ever  was  in  honest 
reality.  Depend  upon  it,  "distance  lends  enchantment 

K 


146  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

to  the  view."  We  may  rest  satisfied  that  Netley,  and 
Glastonbury,  and  Bury,  and  Fountains,  and  Melrose,  and 
Bolton  Abbeys,  are  much  more  useful  now  in  ruins  than 
they  ever  were  in  Henry  the  Seventh's  days.  Few 
Englishmen  probably  have  the  least  idea  how  much  we 
have  gained  by  the  Reformation.  We  have  gained  light, 
knowledge,  morality,  and  religious  liberty.  Few  have 
any  clear  idea  of  the  fruits  which  grew  on  the  tree  of 
Popery  when  last  it  flourished  in  England.  Those  fruits 
were  ignorance,  superstition,  immorality,  and  priestly 
tyranny.  God  was  angered.  Souls  were  lost,  and  the 
devil  was  pleased. 

I  trust  again  my  readers  will  feel  with  me,  that  it  is 
most  unfair  to  suppose  that  the  acts  and  writings  of  the 
English  Reformers  under  Henry  VIIL  are  any  real 
criterion  of  their  matured  opinions.  It  is  as  unfair  as  it 
would  be  to  measure  the  character  of  a  grown-up  man  by 
his  sayings  and  doings  when  he  was  a  child. — Cranmer 
and  his  helpers  under  Henry  VIIL  were  in  a  state  of 
spiritual  childhood.  They  saw  many  points  in  religion 
through  a  glass  darkly.  It  was  not  till  the  reign  of 
Edward  VI.  that  they  put  away  childish  things.  We 
must  beware,  therefore,  lest  any  man  deceive  us  by 
artfully-chosen  quotations  drawn  from  works  published 
in  the  beginning  of  the  English  Reformation.  Judge 
the  Reformers,  if  you  will,  by  their  writings  in  the  reign 
of  Edward  VI.,  but  not  by  their  writings  in  the  reign  of 
Henry  VIIL 

I  trust,  lastly,  my  readers  will  agree  with  me,  that  it  is 
most  unreasonable  to  decry  the  early  English  Reformers, 
as  men  who  did  not  go  far  enough.  Such  charges  are 
easily  made,  but  those  who  make  them  seldom  consider 


HUGH  LATLMEB:   BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  147 

the  enormous  obstacles  the  Reformers  had  to  surmount, 
and  the  enormous  evils  they  had  to  remove.  It  is  nonsense 
to  suppose  they  had  nothing  more  to  do  than  to  pare  the 
moss  off  an  old  building,  and  whitewash  it  afresh.  They 
had  to  take  down  an  old  decayed  house,  and  re-build  it 
from  the  very  ground.  It  is  nonsense  to  criticise  their 
proceedings,  as  if  they  voyaged  over  a  smooth  sea,  with 
a  fair  wind,  and  a  clear  course.  On  the  contrary,  they 
had  to  pilot  the  ship  of  true  religion  through  a  narrow 
and  difficult  strait,  against  current,  wind,  and  tide.  Put 
all  their  difficulties  together, — the  arbitrary,  profligate 
character  of  Henry  VIII.,  and  the  tender  years  of 
Edward  VI., — the  general  ignorance  of  the  population — 
the  bitter  enmity  of  dispossessed  monks  and  friars — the 
open  opposition  of  many  of  the  Bishops,  and  the  secret 
indifference  of  a  vast  proportion  of  the  clergy, — put  all 
these  things  together,  and  weigh  them  well;  and  then  I 
think  you  will  not  lightly  regard  the  work  that  the  early 
Reformers  did.  For  my  own  part,  so  far  from  wondering 
that  they  did  so  little,  I  wonder  rather  that  they  did  so 
much.  I  marvel  at  their  firmness.  I  am  surprised  at  their 
success.  I  see  immense  results  produced  by  comparatively 
weak  instruments,  and  I  can  only  account  for  it  by  saying, 

that  "  God  was  with  them  of  a  truth." 

i 

II.  The  next  branch  of  my  subject  to  which  I  shall 
invite  the  attention  of  my  readers  is  the  story  of  Bishop 
Latimer's  life. 

Hugh  Latimer  was  born  about  the  year  1485,  at 
Thurcaston,  near  Mount  Sorrel,  in  the  county  of  Leicester. 
He  has  left  such  a  graphic  account  of  his  father  and 
family,  in  one  of  his  sermons  preached  before  Edward  VI., 


148  ItGHT  inOM  OLD  TIMES. 


that  I  must  in  justice  give  it  in  his  own  words.  He  says 
"My  father  was  a  yeoman,  and  had  no  lands  of  his  own. 
He  had  only  a  farm  of  three  or  four  pounds  a  year  at  the 
uttermost,  and  hereupon  he  tilled  so  much  as  kept  half  a 
dozen  men.  He  had  walk  for  one  hundred  sheep,  and  my 
mother  milked  thirty  kine.  He  was  able,  and  did  bring 
the  King  a  harness,  with  himself  and  his  horse,  when  he 
came  to  the  place  where  he  should  receive  the  King's 
wages.  I  can  remember  that  I  buckled  his  harness,  when 
he  went  to  Blackheath  Field.  He  kept  me  to  school,  or 
else  I  had  not  been  able  to  have  preached  before  the 
King's  majesty  now.  He  married  my  sisters  with  five 
pounds  apiece,  and  brought  them  up  in  godliness  and  the 
fear  of  God.  He  kept  hospitality  for  his  poor  neighbours, 
and  some  alms  he  gave  to  the  poor."  (Works,  i.  101. 
Parker's  Society  edition.)  Such  is  the  good  Bishop's 
homely  account  of  his  own  family.  It  is  only  fair  to 
observe  that  Latimer  is  one  among  the  thousand  examples 
on  record,  that  England,  with  all  its  faults,  is  a  country 
where  a  man  may  begin  very  low,  and  yet  live  to  rise 
very  high. 

Latimer  was  sent  to  Cambridge  at  the  age  of  fourteen, 
and  in  1509  was  elected  a  Fellow  of  Clare  Hall.  We 
know  very  little  of  his  early  history,  except  the  remarkable 
fact,  which  he  himself  has  told  us,  that  up  to  the  age  of 
thirty  he  was  a  most  violent  and  bigoted  Papist.  Just  as 
St.  Paul  was  not  ashamed  to  tell  men  that  at  one  time  he 
was  a  "  blasphemer,  and  a  persecutor,  and  injurious,"  so 
the  old  Protestant  Bishop  used  often  to  tell  how  he  too 
had  once  been  the  slave  of  Rome.  He  says  in  one  of  his 
sermons,  "I  was  as  obstinate  a  Papist  as  any  was  in 
England,  insomuch  that  when  I  should  be  made  bachelor 


HUGH  LATIMEE:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.         149 

of  divinity,  my  whole  oration  went  against  Philip 
Melancthon  and  his  opinions."  (Works,  i.  334.)  He  says 
in  another  sermon,  "All  the  Papists  think  themselves 
to  be  saved  by  the  law,  and  I  myself  was  of  that 
dangerous,  perilous,  and  damnable  opinion  till  I  was 
thirty  years  of  age.  So  long  had  I  walked  in  darkness 
and  the  shadow  of  death."  (i.  137.)  He  says  in  a  letter 
to  Sir  Edward  Baynton,  "  I  have  thought  in  times  past 
that  if  I  had  been  a  friar  and  in  a  cowl,  I  could  not  have 
been  damned  nor  afraid  of  death ;  and  by  reason  of  the 
same  I  have  been  minded  many  times  to  have  been  a 
friar,  namely,  when  I  was  sore  sick  or  diseased.  Now  I 
abhor  my  superstitious  foolishness."  (i.  332.) 

Latimer's  testimony  about  himself  is  confirmed  by 
others.  It  is  recorded  that  he  used  to  think  so  ill  of  the 
Reformers,  that  he  declared  the  last  times,  the  day  of 
judgment,  and  the  end  of  the  world  must  be  approaching. 
"  Impiety,"  he  said,  "  was  gaining  ground  apace,  and  what 
lengths  might  not  men  be  expected  to  run,  when  they 
began  to  question  even  the  infallibility  of  the  Pope  ? " 
Becon  mentions  that  when  Stafford,  the  divinity  lecturer, 
delivered  lectures  in  Cambridge,  on  the  Bible,  Latimer 
was  sure  to  be  present,  in  order  to  frighten  and  drive  away 
the  scholars.  In  fact  his  zeal  for  Popery  was  so  notorious, 
that  he  was  elected  to  the  office  of  cross-bearer  in  the 
religious  processions  of  the  University,  and  discharged  the 
duty  with  becoming  solemnity  for  seven  years.  Such  was 
the  clay  of  which  God  formed  a  precious  vessel  meet  for 
His  work !  Such  were  the  first  beginnings  of  one  of  tho 
best  and  most  useful  of  the  English  Reformers  1 

The  instrument  which  God  used  in  order  to  bring  this 
furious  Papist  to  a,  knowledge  of  Christ's,  truth,  was  a 


150  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

student  named  Bilney.  Bilney  was  a  contemporary  of 
Latimer's  at  Cambridge,  who  Lad  for  some  time  embraced 
the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation,  and  was  finally  burned 
as  a  martyr  at  Norwich.  He  perceived  that  Latimer  was 
a  sincere  and  honest  man,  and  kindly  thought  it  possible 
that  his  zeal  for  Popery  might  arise  from  lack  of 
knowledge.  He,  therefore,  went  boldly  to  him  after  his 
public  onslaught  on  Melancthon,  and  humbly  asked  to  be 
allowed  to  make  a  private  confession  of  his  own  faith. 
The  success  of  this  courageous  step  was  complete.  Old 
Latimer  tells  us,  "  I  learned  more  by  his  confession  than 
before  in  many  years.  From  that  time  forward  I  began 
to  smell  the  Word  of  God,  and  forsook  the  school  doctors 
and  such  fooleries."  (i.  335.)  Bilney  'a  conduct  on  this 
occasion  seems  to  have  been  most  praiseworthy.  It  ought 
to  encourage  every  one  to  try  to  do  good  to  his  neighbour. 
It  is  a  shining  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  proverb,  "  A  word 
spoken  in  season,  how  good  is  it ! " 

Hugh  Latimer  was  not  a  man  to  do  anything  by  halves. 
As  soon  as  he  ceased  to  be  a  zealous  Papist,  he  began  at 
once  to  be  a  zealous  Protestant,  and  gave  himself  up, 
body,  soul,  and  mind,  to  the  work  of  doing  good.  He 
visited,  in  Bilney's  company,  the  sick  and  prisoners.  He 
commenced  preaching  in  the  University  pulpits,  in  a  style 
hitherto  unknown  in  Cambridge,  and  soon  became  famous 
as  one  of  the  most  striking  and  powerful  preachers  of  the 
day.  He  stirred  up  hundreds  of  his  hearers  to  search  the 
Scriptures  and  inquire  after  the  way  of  salvation.  Becon, 
afterwards  chaplain  to  Cranmer,  and  Bradford,  afterwards 
chaplain  to  Ridley,  both  traced  their  conversion  to  his 
sermons.  Becon  has  left  us  a  remarkable  description  of 
the  effects  of  his  preaching.  He  says,  "  None,  except  the 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.         151 

stiff-necked  and  uncircumcised  in  heart,  went  away  from 
it  without  being  affected  with  high  detestation  of  sin,  and 
moved  unto  all  godliness  and  virtue."  (Becon's  Works, 
vol.  ii.  224.  Parker's  Society  edition.) 

The  consequences  of  this  faithful  discharge  of  ministerial 
duty  were  just  what  all  experience  might  lead  us  to  expect. 
There  arose  against  Latimer  a  storm  of  persecution. 
Swarms  of  friars  and  doctors  who  had  admired  him  when 
he  carried  the  cross  as  a  Papist,  rose  up  against  him  in  a 
body  when  he  preached  the  cross  like  St.  Paul.  The 
Bishop  of  Ely  forbade  his  preaching  any  more  in  the 
University  pulpits  at  Cambridge ;  and  had  he  not  obtained 
permission  from  Dr.  Barnes  to  preach  in  the  church  of  the 
Augustine  Friars,  which  was  exempt  from  episcopal 
jurisdiction,  he  might  have  "been  silenced  altogether.  But 
the  malice  of  his  enemies  did  not  stop  here.  Complaints 
were  laid  against  him  before  Cardinal  Wolsey,  and  he  had 
more  than  once  to  appear  before  him  and  Ton  stall,  Bishop 
of  London,  on  charges  of  heresy.  Indeed,  when  the 
circumstances  of  the  times  are  considered,  it  is  wonderful 
that  Latimer  did  not  at  this  period  of  his  life  share 
Bilney's  fate,  and  suffer  death  at  the  stake. 

But  the  Lord,  in  whose  hand  our  times  are,  had  more 
work  for  Latimer  to  do,  and  raised  up  for  him  unexpected 
friends  in  high  quarters.  His  decided  opinions  in  favour 
of  Henry  the  Eighth's  divorce  from  Catherine  of  Arragon 
brought  him  into  communication  with  Dr.  Butts,  the 
King's  physician,  and  ultimately  secured  to  him  the  favour 
and  patronage  of  the  King  himself.  In  the  year  1530  he 
was  made  one  of  the  royal  chaplains,  and  preached  before 
the  King  several  times.  In  the  year  1531  the  royal 
favour  procured  for  him  an  appointment  to  the  living  of 


152  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

West  Kington,  near  Chippenham,  in  "Wiltshire;  and,  in 
spite  of  his  friend  Dr.  Butts'  remonstrances,  he  at  once 
left  court,  and  went  to  reside  upon  his  cure. 

At  West  Kington  Latimer  was  just  the  same  man  that 
he  had  been  latterly  at  Cambridge,  and  found  the  devil 
just  as  busy  an  adversary  in  Wiltshire  as  he  had  found 
him  in  the  University.  In  pastoral  labours  he  was 
abundant.  In  preaching  he  was  instant  in  season  and  out 
of  season,  both  within  his  parish  and  without.  This  he 
had  full  authority  to  do,  by  virtue  of  a  general  license 
from  the  University  of  Cambridge.  But  the  more  he  did, 
the  more  angry  the  idle  Popish  clergy  round  West  Kington 
became,  and  the  more  they  laboured  to  stop  his  proceedings. 
So  true  is  it  that  human  nature  is  the  same  in  all  ages. 
There  is  generally  a  dog-in-the-manger  spirit  about  a 
graceless  minister.  He  neither  does  good  himself  nor 
likes  any  one  else  to  do  it  for  him.  This  was  the  case 
with  the  Pharisees :  they  "  took  away  the  key  of  know 
ledge:  they  entered  not  in  themselves,  and  them  that 
were  entering  in  they  hindered."  (Luke  ii.  52.)  And  as 
it  was  in  the  days  of  the  Pharisees,  so  it  was  in  the  days 
of  Latimer. 

On  one  occasion  the  Mayor  and  Magistrates  of  Bristol, 
who  were  very  friendly  to  him,  had  appointed  him  to 
preach  before  them  on  Easter  Day.  Public  notice  had 
been  given,  and  everybody  was  looking  forward  to  the 
sermon  with  pleasure,  for  Latimer  was  very  popular  in 
Bristol.  Suddenly  there  came  out  an  order  from  the 
Bishop  forbidding  any  one  to  preach  in  Bristol  without 
his  license.  The  clergy  of  the  place  waited  on  Latimer, 
and  informed  him  of  the  Bishop's  order,  and  then,  knowing 
well  that  he  had  no  such  license;  told  him  "  that  they  were 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  153 

extremely  sorry  they  were  deprived  of  the  pleasure  of 
hearing  an  excellent  discourse  from  him."  Their  hypo 
critical  compliments  and  regrets  were  unfortunately 
ill-timed.  Latimer  had  heard  the  whole  history  of  the 
affair.  And  he  knew  well  that  these  smooth-tongued 
gentlemen  were  the  very  persons  who  had  written  to  the 
Bishop  in  order  to  prevent  his  preaching. 

For  four  years,  while  vicar  of  West  Kington,  the  good 
man  was  subjected  to  a  constant  succession  of  petty 
worrying  attacks,  and  attempts  to  stop  him  from  doing 
good.  He  was  cited  to  London,  and  brought  before 
Archbishop  Warham,  and  detained  many  months  from 
home.  He  was  convened  before  Convocation,  and 
excommunicated  and  imprisoned  for  a  time.  But  the 
protecting  care  of  God  seems  to  have  been  always  round 
him.  His  enemies  appear  to  have  been  marvellously 
restrained  from  carrying  their  malice  to  extremities.  At 
length,  in  1535,  the  King  put  a  sudden  stop  to  their 
persecution  by  making  him  Bishop  of  Worcester.  That 
such  a  man  should  make  such  an  appointment  is 
certainly  very  wonderful.  Some  have  attributed  it  to 
the  influence  of  Lord  Cromwell;  some  to  that  of  the 
Queen  Anne  Boleyn  ;  some  to  that  of  Dr.  Butts ;  some  to 
that  of  Cranmer,  who  was  always  Latimer's  fast  friend. 
Such  speculations  are,  to  say  the  best,  useless.  "The 
King's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  as  the  rivers  of 
waters:  He  turneth  it  whithersoever  He  will."  (Prov. 
xxi.  1.)  When  God  intends  to  give  a  good  man  a  high 
office,  He  can  always  raise  up  a  Darius  to  convey  it  to  him. 

The  history  of  Latimer's  episcopate  is  short  and  simple, 
for  it  only  lasted  four  years.  He  was  the  same  man  in  a 
bishop's  palace  that  he  had  been  in  a  country  parsonage, 


154  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

or  a  Cambridge  pulpit  Promotion  did  not  spoil  him. 
The  mitre  did  not  prove  an  extinguisher  to  his  zeal  for  the 
Gospel  He  was  always  faithful — always  simple-minded 
— always  about  his  Father's  business — always  labouring  to 
do  good  to  souls.  Fox,  the  historian,  speaks  highly  of 
"  his  pains,  study,  readiness,  and  continual  carefulness  in 
teaching,  preaching,  exhorting,  visiting,  correcting,  and 
reforming,  either  as  his  ability  could  serve,  or  the  times 
would  bear."  But  he  adds,  "the  days  then  were  so 
dangerous  and  variable  that  he  could  not  in  all  things  do 
what  he  would.  Yet  what  he  might  do,  that  he  performed 
to  the  uttermost  of  his  strength,  so  that,  although  he 
could  not  utterly  extinguish  all  the  sparkling  relics  of  old 
superstition,  yet  he  so  wrought  that  though  they  could  not 
be  taken  away,  yet  they  should  be  used  with  as  little  hurt 
and  as  much  profit  as  might  be." 

In  1536  we  find  Bishop  Latimer  appointed  by 
Archbishop  Cranmer  to  preach  before  the  Convocation  of 
the  Clergy.  No  doubt  this  appointment  was  made 
advisedly.  Cranmer  knew  well  that  Latimer  was  just  the 
man  for  the  occasion.  The  sermons  he  preached  are  still 
extant,  and  fully  justified  the  Archbishop's  choice.  Two 
more  faithful  and  conscience-stirring  discourses  were 
probably  never  delivered  to  a  body  of  ordained  men. 
They  will  repay  an  attentive  perusal.  "Good  brethren 
and  fathers,"  he  said  in  one  place,  "  seeing  we  are  here 
assembled,  for  the  love  of  God  let  us  do  something  whereby 
we  may  be  known  to  be  the  children  of  light.  Let  us  do 
somewhat,  lest  we,  which  hitherto  have  been  judged 
children  of  the  world,  prove  even  still  to  be  so.  All  men 
call  us  prelates ;  then  seeing  we  be  in  council,  let  us  so 
order  ourselves  that  we  be  prelates  in  honour  and  dignity, 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.        155 

that  we  may  be  prelates  in  holiness,  benevolence,  diligence 
and  sincerity." 

u  Lift  up  your  heads,  brethren,  and  look  about  with  your 
eyes,  and  spy  what  things  are  to  be  reformed  in  the 
Church  of  England.  Is  it  so  hard,  so  great  a  matter,  for 
you  to  see  many  abuses  in  the  clergy,  and  many  in  the 
laity  ? " — He  then  mentions  several  glaring  abuses  by 
name :  the  state  of  the  Court  of  Arches  and  the  Bishop's 
Consistories — the  number  of  superstitious  ceremonies  and 
holidays — the  worship  of  images  and  visiting  of  relics  and 
saints — the  lying  miracles  and  the  sale  of  Masses, — and 
calls  upon  them  to  consider  and  amend  them.  He  winds 
up  all  by  a  solemn  warning  of  the  consequence  of  Bishops 
neglecting  notorious  abuses. — "  God  will  come,"  he  says. 
"  God  will  come :  He  will  not  tarry  long  away.  He  will 
come  upon  such  a  day  as  we  nothing  look  for  Him,  and  at 
such  an  hour  as  we  know  not.  He  will  come  and  cut  us 
in  pieces.  He  will  reward  us  as  He  doth  the  hypocrites. 
He  will  set  us  where  wailing  shall  be,  my  brethren — 
where  gnashing  of  teeth  shall  be,  my  brethren.  These  be 
the  delicate  dishes  prepared  for  the  world's  well-beloved 
children.  These  be  the  wafers  and  junkets  provided  for 
worldly  prelates:  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth." — "Ye 
see,  brethren,  what  sorrow  and  punishment  is  provided  for 
you  if  ye  be  worldlings.  If  you  will  not  then  be  vexed, 
be  not  the  children  of  the  world.  If  ye  will  not  be  the 
children  of  the  world,  be  not  stricken  with  the  love  of 
worldly  things ;  lean  not  upon  them.  If  ye  will  not 
die  eternally,  live  not  worldly.  Come,  go  to ;  leave  the 
love  of  your  profit:  study  for  the  glory  and  profit  of 
Christ ;  seek  in  your  consultations  such  things  as  pertain 
to  Christ,  and  bring  forth  at  last  somewhat  that  may 


156  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

please  Christ.  Feed  ye  tenderly,  with  all  diligence,  the 
flock  of  Christ.  Preach  truly  the  Word  of  God.  Love 
the  light,  walk  in  the  light,  and  so  be  ye  the  children  of 
light  while  ye  are  in  this  world,  that  ye  may  shine  in  the 
world  to  come,  bright  as  the  stars,  with  the  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost."  (Works,  vol.  i.  p.  50.)  Such  was  a 
sermon  before  Convocation  by  Latimer. 

In  1537  we  find  Bishop  Latimer  placed  on  the  Com 
mission  of  Divines  for  the  publication  of  a  book  to  set 
forth  the  truth  of  religion;  the  result  of  which  Commission 
was  "the  Institution  of  a  Christian  man."  The  same  year 
we  find  him  putting  forth  some  injunctions  to  the  prior  of 
Worcester  Convent,  a  monastic  house  not  yet  dissolved,  in 
which  among  other  things,  he  commands  the  prior  to  have 
a  whole  Bible  in  English  chained  in  the  church.  He 
orders  every  member  of  the  convent  to  get  himself  an 
English  New  Testament ;  he  directs  a  lecture  of  Scripture 
to  be  read  in  the  convent  every  day,  and  Scripture  to 
be  read  at  dinner  and  supper.  Shortly  afterwards  he 
published  injunctions  to  the  clergy  of  his  diocese,  in  which 
he  commands  every  one  of  them  to  provide  himself  with 
a  whole  Bible,  or  at  any  rate  with  a  New  Testament,  and 
every  day  to  read  over  and  study  one  chapter,  at  the  least. 
He  also  forbids  them  to  set  aside  preaching  for  any 
manner  of  observance,  ceremonies,  or  processions,  and 
enjoins  them  to  instruct  the  children  in  their  respective 
parishes.  All  these  little  facts  are  deeply  instructive. 
They  show  us  what  an  Augean  stable  an  English  diocese 
was  in  Henry  the  Eighth's  day,  and  what  enormous  diffi 
culties  a  reforming  Bishop  had  to  overcome. 

In  1538  we  find  Latimer  pleading  with  Lord  Cromwell, 
that  Great  Malvern  Abbey  might  not  be  entirely  sup- 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.        157 

pressed.  He  suggests  that  it  should  be  kept  up,  "  not  for 
monkery,"  which  he  says,  "  God  forbid,"  but  "  to  maintain 
teaching,  preaching,  study,  and  prayer;"  and  he  asks 
whether  it  would  not  be  good  policy  to  have  two  or  three 
of  the  old  monastic  houses  in  every  county  set  apart  for 
such  purposes.  This  was  a  very  wise  design,  and  shows 
great  foresight  of  the  country's  wants.  Had  it  been 
carried  into  effect,  Durham,  St.  Bees,  St.  Aidan's, 
Lampeter,  King's  College,  London,  and  the  London 
College  of  Divinity,  would  have  been  unnecessary.  The 
rapacity  of  Henry  the  Eighth's  courtiers,  who  had  an 
amazing  appetite  for  the  property  of  the  suppressed 
abbeys,  made  the  suggestion  useless. 

In  1539  Bishop  Latimer's  episcopate  was  brought  to  an 
end  by  the  enactment  of  the  Six  Articles  already  referred 
to,  in  which  some  of  the  leading  tenets  of  Romanism 
were  authoritatively  maintained.  He  strenuously  with 
stood  the  passing  of  this  Act,  in  opposition  to  the  King 
and  the  Parliament;  and  the  result  was  that  he  was 
compelled  to  resign  his  Bishopric.  It  is  related,  that  on 
the  day  when  this  happened,  when  he  came  back  from  the 
House  of  Lords  to  his  lodgings,  he  threw  off  his  robes,  and 
leaping  up,  declared  to  those  who  stood  about  him,  that 
he  found  himself  lighter  than  he  had  been  for  some  time. 

The  next  eight  years  of  Latimer's  life  appear  to  have 
passed  away  in  forced  silence  and  in  retirement.  We 
read  little  of  anything  that  he  did.  We  do  not  exactly 
know  where  he  spent  his  time,  and  whether  he  returned 
to  his  old  living  at  West  Kington  or  not.  The  probability 
is,  that  he  was  regarded  as  a  dangerous  and  suspected 
man,  and  had  much  difficulty  in  preserving  his  life.  The 
only  certain  fact  we  know  is,  that  he  was  at  length 


158  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIME& 

committed  to  prison  as  a  heretic,  and  spent  the  last  year 
of  Henry  the  Eighth's  reign  in  confinement  in  the  Tower. 

When  Edward  VI.  came  to  the  throne,  in  1547, 
Latimer  was  at  once  released  from  prison,  and  treated 
with  every  mark  of  respect.  His  old  Bishopric  of 
Worcester  was  offered  to  him,  and  the  House  of  Commons 
presented  an  address  to  the  Protector  Somerset,  earnestly 
requesting  that  he  might  be  reappointed.  Old  age  and 
increasing  infirmities  made  Latimer  decline  the  proffered 
dignity,  and  he  spent  the  next  six  years  of  his  life  without 
any  office,  but  certainly  not  as  an  idle  man.  His  chief 
residence  during  these  six  years  was  with  his  old  friend 
and  ally,  Archbishop  Cranmer,  under  the  hospitable  roof 
of  Lambeth  Palace.  While  here,  he  took  an  active  part 
in  all  the  measures  adopted  for  carrying  forward  the 
Protestant  Reformation.  He  assisted  Cranmer  in  com 
posing  the  first  book  of  Homilies,  and  was  also  one  of  the 
divines  appointed  to  reform  the  Ecclesiastical  Law,  a  work 
which  was  never  completed.  All  this  time  he  generally 
preached  twice  every  Sunday.  In  the  former  part  of 
Edward  the  Sixth's  reign,  he  preached  constantly  before 
the  King.  In  the  latter  part  he  went  to  and  fro  in  the 
midland  counties  of  England,  preaching  wherever  his 
services  seemed  to  be  most  wanted,  and  especially  in 
Lincolnshire.  This  was  perhaps  the  most  useful  period 
of  his  life.  No  one  of  the  Reformers  probably  sowed 
the  seeds  of  sound  Protestant  doctrine  so  widely  and 
effectually  among  the  middle  and  lower  classes  as  Latimer. 
The  late  Mr.  Southey  bears  testimony  to  this :  he  says, 
"  Latimer,  more  than  any  other  man,  promoted  the 
R-eformation  by  his  preaching." 

The  untimely  death  of  Edward  VI.  and  the  accession 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  159 

of  Queen  Mary  to  the  English  throne  in  1553,  put  an 
end  to  Latimer's  active  exertions  on  behalf  of  the  Gospel. 
Henceforward  he  was  called  to  glorify  Christ  by  suffering, 
and  not  by  doing.  The  story  of  his  sufferings,  and  the 
noble  courage  with  which  he  endured  them  is  admirably 
told  in  "  Fox's  Martyrs," — a  book  which  all  churchmen  in 
these  days  ought  to  study. 

As  soon  as  Queen  Mary  came  to  the  throne,  one  of  the 
first  acts  of  her  Government  was  the  apprehension  of  the 
leading  English  Reformers :  and  Latimer  was  among  the 
first  for  whom  a  warrant  was  issued.  The  Queen's 
messenger  found  him  doing  his  Master's  work  as  a 
preacher  in  Warwickshire,  but  quite  prepared  for  prison. 
He  had  received  notice  of  what  was  coming  six  hours 
before  the  messenger  arrived,  from  a  good  man  named 
Careless,  and  might  easily  have  escaped ;  but  he  refused 
to  avail  himself  of  the  opportunity.  He  said,  "I  go  as 
willingly  to  London  at  this  present,  being  called  by  my 
Prince  to  render  a  reckoning  of  my  doctrine,  as  ever  I 
went  to  any  place  in  the  world.  And  I  do  not  doubt  but 
that  God,  as  He  hath  made  me  worthy  to  preach  His 
Word  to  two  excellent  princes,  so  He  will  enable  me  to 
witness  the  same  unto  the  third."  In  this  spirit  he  rode 
cheerfully  up  to  London,  and  said,  as  he  passed  through 
Smithfield,  where  heretics  were  generally  burned,  "  Smith- 
field  has  long  groaned  for  me." 

Latimer  was  at  once  committed  to  the  Tower,  in 
company  with  Cranmer,  Ridley,  and  Bradford,  and  for 
want  of  room,  all  the  four  were  confined  in  one  chamber. 
There  these  four  martyrs,  to  use  old  Latimer's  words, 
"  did  together  read  over  the  New  Testament  with  great 
deliberation  and  painful  study,"  and  unanimously  agreed 


160  tiGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

that  transubstantiation  was  not  to  be  found  in  it.  From 
the  Tower  the  three  Bishops  were  removed  to  Oxford,  in 
1554;  and  there,  in  1555,  Latimer  and  Ridley  were  burnt 
alive  at  the  stake,  as  obstinate  heretics. 

The  old  Bishop's  behaviour  in  prison  was  answerable  to 
his  previous  life.  For  two  long  years  he  never  lost  his 
spirits,  and  his  faith  and  patience  never  failed  him. 
Much  of  his  time  was  spent  in  reading  the  Bible.  He 
says  himself,  "  I  read  the  New  Testament  over  seven  times 
while  I  was  in  prison."  Much  of  his  time  was  spent  in 
prayer.  Augustine  Bernher,  his  faithful  servant,  tells  us 
that  he  often  continued  kneeling  so  long  that  he  was  not 
able  to  get  up  from  his  knees  without  help.  Three  things 
he  used  especially  to  mention  in  his  prayers  at  this  time. 
One  was,  that  as  God  had  appointed  him  to  be  a 
preacher  and  professor  of  His  Word,  so  He  would  give 
him  grace  to  stand  to  His  doctrine  till  his  death.  Another 
was,  that  God  would  of  His  mercy  restore  the  Gospel  of 
Christ  to  the  realm  once  again ;  he  often  repeated  these 
two  words,  "once  again."  The  third  was,  that  God 
would  preserve  the  Princess  Elizabeth,  and  make  her  a 
comfort  to  England.  It  is  a  striking  fact,  that  all  these 
three  prayers  were  fully  granted. 

Latimer's  conduct  at  his  various  trials  and  examinations 
before  his  Popish  persecutors,  was  in  some  respects  wiser 
and  better  than  that  of  the  other  martyrs.  He  knew 
well  enough  that  his  death  was  determined  on,  and  he 
was  quite  right.  Gardiner,  the  Popish  Bishop  of 
Winchester,  had  said  openly,  that  "he  would  have  the 
axe  laid  at  the  root  of  the  tree:  the  Bishops  and  most 
powerful  preachers  ought  certainly  to  die."  Bonner,  the 
Popish  Bishop  of  London,  had  said,  "  God  do  so  to  Bonner, 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  161 

and  more  also,  if  one  of  the  heretics  escape  me."  Acting 
on  this  impression,  Latimer  told  Ridley  before  the  trial 
that  he  should  say  little. — "  They  talk  of  a  free  disputation," 
said  he,  "but  their  argument  will  be  as  it  was  with  their 
forefathers :  '  We  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he  ought  to 
die.'" — Acting  on  this  impression,  he  did  little  at  his 
various  trials  but  make  a  simple  profession  of  his  faith. 
He  refused  to  be  led  away  into  lengthy  discussions  about  the 
opinions  of  the  Fathers,  like  Cranmer  and  Eidley.  He  told 
his  judges  plainly,  that  "the  Fathers  might  be  deceived  in 
some  points ; "  and  that  he  only  "  believed  them  when  they 
said  true,  and  had  Scripture  with  them ! "  A  wiser  and 
truer  remark  about  the  Fathers  was  probably  never  made 

The  death  of  old  Latimer  is  so  beautifully  described  by 
Fox,  that  I  cannot  do  better  than  give  the  account  as 
nearly  as  possible  in  his  words.  I  certainly  shall  not  try 
to  spoil  it  by  any  additions  of  my  own,  though  I  must 
abridge  it  considerably. 

"  The  place  appointed  for  the  execution  (says  Fox)  was 
on  the  north  side  of  Oxford,  in  the  ditch  over  against 
Balliol  College.  For  fear  of  any  tumult  that  might 
arise  to  prevent  the  burning,  Lord  Williams  and  the 
householders  of  the  city  were  commanded  by  the 
Queen's  letter  to  be  assistant,  sufficiently  armed;  and 
when  all  things  were  in  readiness,  the  prisoners  were 
brought  forth  together,  on  the  16th  of  October,  1555. 

"  Ridley  came  first,  in  a  furred  black  gown,  such  as  he 
was  wont  to  wear  as  a  Bishop.  After  him  came  Latimer, 
in  a  poor  Bristol  frieze  frock,  all  worn,  with  his  buttoned 
cap  and  handkerchief  over  his  head,  and  a  long  new 
shroud  hanging  over  his  hose,  down  to  his  feet. 

"  Ridley,  looking  back,  saw  Latimer  coming  after,  to 

L 


162  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

whom  he  said,  '  Oh,  are  ye  there  ? '  '  Yea ! '  said  Master 
Latimer, '  as  fast  as  I  can  follow.'  At  length  they  came 
to  the  stake  one  after  the  other.  Ridley  first  entered  the 
place,  and  earnestly  holding  up  both  his  hands,  looked 
towards  heaven.  Shortly  after,  seeing  Latimer,  he  ran  to 
him,  embraced  and  kissed  him,  saying, '  Be  of  good  cheer, 
brother,  for  God  will  either  assuage  the  fury  of  the  flames, 
or  else  strengthen  us  to  abide  it.' 

"  With  that  he  went  to  the  stake,  kneeled  down  by  it, 
kissed  it,  and  prayed ;  and  behind  him  Latimer  kneeled, 
earnestly  calling  upon  God.  After  they  arose,  one  talked 
with  another  a  little  while,  but  what  they  said  Fox  could 
not  learn  of  any  man. 

"Then  they  were  compelled  to  listen  to  a  sermon 
preached  by  a  renegade  priest,  named  Smith,  upon  the 
text,  '  Though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  and  have  not 
charity,  I  am  nothing.'  They  attempted  to  answer  the 
false  statements  of  this  miserable  discourse,  but  were  not 
allowed.  Ridley  said,  '  Well,  then,  I  commit  our  cause  to 
Almighty  God,  who  shall  impartially  judge  alL'  Latimer 
added  his  own  verse :  '  Weil,  there  is  nothing  hid  but  it 
shall  be  made  manifest;'  and  said,  'He  could  answer 
Smith  well  enough,  if  he  might  be  suffered.' 

"They  were  commanded  after  this  to  make  ready 
immediately,  and  obeyed  with  all  meekness.  Ridley 
gave  his  clothes  and  such  things  as  he  had  about  him  to 
those  that  stood  by,  and  happy  was  he  that  could  get  any 
rag  of  him.  Latimer  gave  nothing,  but  quietly  suffered 
his  keeper  to  pull  off  his  hose  and  his  other  apparel,  which 
was  very  simple.  And  now  being  stripped  to  his  shroud 
he  seemed  as  comely  a  person  to  them  that  stood  by  as 
one  could  desire  to  see.  And  though  in  his  clothes  he 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR. 

appeared  a  withered,  crooked  old  man,  he  now  stood 
quite  upright. 

"  Then  the  smith  took  a  chain  of  iron  and  fastened  it 
about  both  Ridley's  and  Latimer's  middles  to  one  stake. 
As  he  was  knocking  in  a  staple,  Ridley  took  the  chain  in 
his  hands,  and  said  to  the  smith, '  Good  fellow,  knock  it 
in  hard,  for  flesh  will  have  its  course.'  A  bag  of 
gunpowder  was  tied  about  the  neck  of  each.  Faggots 
were  piled  around  them,  and  the  horrible  preparations 
were  completed. 

"Then  they  brought  a  faggot  kindled  with  fire,  and 
laid  it  down  at  Ridley's  feet,  to  whom  Latimer  then  spake 
in  this  manner:  'BE  OF  GOOD  COMFORT,  BROTHER 
RIDLEY,  AND  PLAY  THE  MAN ;  WE  SHALL  THIS 
DAY  LIGHT  SUCH  A  CANDLE,  BY  GOD'S  GRACE, 
IN  ENGLAND,  AS  I  TRUST  NEVER  SHALL  BE 
PUT  OUT.' 

"  And  so  the  fire  being  kindled,  when  Ridley  saw  the 
fire  flaming  up  towards  him,  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice, 
'Lord,  into  Thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit:  Lord 
receive  my  spirit!'  and  repeated  the  latter  part  often. 
Latimer,  crying  as  vehemently  on  the  other  side  of  the 
stake,  '  Father  of  heaven,  receive  my  soul ! '  received  the 
flame  as  if  embracing  it.  After  he  had  stroked  his  face 
with  his  hands,  and  as  it  were  bathed  them  a  little  in  the 
fire,  he  soon  died,  as  it  appeared,  with  very  little  pain." 

"And  thus  much,"  says  Fox, "  concerning  the  end  of  this 
old  blessed  servant  of  God,  Bishop  Latimer,  for  whose  labo 
rious  services,  fruitful  life,  and  constant  death,  the  whole 
realm  has  cause  to  give  great  thanks  to  Almighty  God." 

Latimer  lived  and  died  unmarried,  and  I  am  not  aware 
that  any  English  family  at  this  day  lays  claim  to  &ny 
connection  with  him.  But  he  left  behind  him  a  name  far 


164  LIGHT  FftOM  OLb 

better  than  that  of  sons  and  daughters,  a  name  which  will 
be  held  in  honour  by  all  true  English  Protestants,  so  long 
as  the  world  stands, 

"  Of  all  the  Marian  martyrs,"  says  Fuller,  "  Mr.  Philpot 
was  the  best-born  gentleman,  Bishop  Ridley  the  profoundest 
scholar,  Mr.  Bradford  the  holiest  and  devoutest  man, 
Archbishop  Cranmer  of  the  mildest  and  meekest  temper, 
Bishop  Hooper  of  the  sternest  and  austerest  nature,  Dr. 
Taylor  had  the  merriest  and  pleasantest  wit,  but  Mr. 
Latimer  had  the  plainest  and  simplest  heart." 

III.  I  turn  from  the  subject  of  Latimer's  life  to  his 
opinions.  I  have  given  a  brief  sketch  of  his  history, 
from  his  birth  to  his  death.  My  readers  will  easily  believe 
that  I  have  left  many  things  untold. 

I  might  dwell  on  the  good  man's  preaching.  Few, 
probably  have  ever  addressed  an  English  congregation 
with  more  effect  than  he  did.  No  doubt  his  sermons  now 
extant  would  not  suit  modern  taste.  They  contain  many 
quaint,  odd,  and  coarse  things.  They  are  very  familiar, 
rambling,  and  discursive,  and  often  full  of  gossiping  stories. 
But,  after  all,  we  are  poor  judges  in  these  days  of  what  a 
sermon  ought  to  be.  A  modern  sermon  is  too  often  a 
dull,  tame,  pointless,  religious  essay,  full  of  measured, 
round  sentences,  Johnsonian  English,  bald  platitudes, 
timid  statements,  and  elaborately  concocted  milk  and 
water.  It  is  a  leaden  sword,  without  either  point  or  edge : 
a  heavy  weapon,  and  little  likely  to  do  much  execution. 
But  if  a  combination  of  sound  Gospel  doctrine,  plain 
Saxon  language,  boldness,  liveliness,  directness,  and 
simplicity,  can  make  a  preacher,  few,  I  suspect,  have  ever 
Squalled  old  Latimer, 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.         1G5 

I  might  supply  many  proofs  of  his  courage  and 
faithfulness  as  a  minister.  He  did  not  shrink  from 
attacking  anybody's  sins,  even  if  they  were  the  sins  of  a 
King.  When  Henry  VIII.  checked  the  diffusion  of  the 
Bible,  Latimer  wrote  him  a  plain-spoken  letter,  long  before 
he  was  a  Bishop,  remonstrating  with  him  on  his  conduct. 
He  feared  God,  and  nothing  else  did  he  fear.  "Latimer, 
Latimer,"  he  exclaimed  at  the  beginning  of  one  of  his 
sermons,  "thou  art  going  to  speak  before  the  high  and 
mighty  King  Henry  VIII.,  who  is  able,  if  he  think  fit,  to 
take  thy  life  away.  Be  careful  what  thou  sayest.  But 
Latimer,  Latimer,  remember  also  thou  art  about  to  speak 
before  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  Take  heed 
that  thou  dost  not  displease  Him." 

I  might  speak  of  his  unworldliness.  He  gave  up  a 
rich  Bishopric,  and  retired  into  private  life,  for  conscience' 
sake,  without  a  murmur.  He  refused  that  same  Bishopric 
again,  because  he  felt  too  old  to  fulfil  his  duties,  when  he 
might  have  had  it  by  saying  "  Yes." — I  might  speak  of 
his  genuine  kindliness  of  heart.  He  was  always  the 
friend  of  the  poor  and  distressed.  Much  of  his  time, 
while  he  stayed  at  Lambeth,  was  occupied  in  examining 
into  the  cases  of  people  who  applied  to  him  for  help. — 
I  might  speak  of  his  diligence.  To  the  very  end  of  his 
life  he  used  to  rise  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and 
begin  reading  and  study.  All  this,  and  much  more,  I 
might  tell,  if  I  entered  into  more  particulars  in  this 
biography. 

I  trust,  however,  I  have  given  facts  enough  to  supply 
some  faint  idea  of  what  the  man  was.  I  trust  my  readers 
will  agree  with  me,  that  he  was  one  of  the  best  Bishops 
this  country  has  ever  had,  and  that  it  would  have  been 


1G6  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

well  for  the  Church  of  England  if  more  of  her  Bishops 
had  been  like  Bishop  Latimer. 

Let  us  never  forget,  as  we  think  over  the  history  of  his 
life,  that  he  is  a  glorious  instance  of  the  miracles  which 
the  grace  of  God  can  work.  The  Holy  Spirit  can  take 
a  bigoted,  fierce  Papist  and  make  him  a  faithful  Protestant. 
Where  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is,  nothing  is  impossible. 
Let  us  never  think  that  any  friend,  relative,  or  companion 
is  too  much  opposed  to  the  Gospel  to  become  a  true 
Christian.  Away  with  the  idea !  There  are  no  hopeless 
cases  under  the  Gospel.  Let  us  remember  Latimer,  and 
never  despair. 

From  all  these  topics,  however  interesting,  I  turn  to 
one  which  is  even  more  important  in  the  present  day. 
That  topic  is,  the  nature  of  Latimer's  theological  opinions. 
For  dwelling  on  this  topic  at  some  length  I  shall  make  no 
apology.  The  circumstances  of  the  times  we  live  in 
invest  the  subject  with  more  than  ordinary  importance. 

We  live  in  days  when  very  strange  statements  are  made 
in  some  quarters,  as  to  the  true  doctrines  of  the  Church 
of  England.  Semi-Popish  views  about  the  rule  of  faith, 
— about  justification, — about  regeneration, — about  the 
sacraments, — about  preaching,  are  continually  urged  upon 
the  attention  of  congregations,  while  the  advocates  and 
teachers  of  these  views  are  coolly  arrogating  to  themselves 
the  credit  of  being  the  only  sound  Churchmen. 

It  is  to  no  purpose  that  those  who  repudiate  these  semi- 
Popish  views  challenge  their  advocates  to  prove  them  b^ 
Scripture.  The  ready  answer  is  at  once  given, — that, 
whether  these  views  are  Scriptural  or  not,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  they  are  " Church  views"  It  is  to  no  purpose  that 
we  deny  these  views  are  to  be  found  in  the  Articles. 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.        167 

Liturgy,  and  Homilies  of  the  Church  of  England,  when 
honestly  and  consistently  interpreted.  We  are  quietly 
told  that  we  know  nothing  about  the  matter.  We  are 
stupid !  We  are  dense !  We  are  blind  !  We  are  ignorant ! 
We  do  not  understand  plain  English  !  They  are  the  true 
men !  Their  views  are  the  true  "  Church  views ; "  and  if 
we  disagree  with  them,  we  must  be  quite  wrong!  In 
short,  we  are  left  to  infer  that,  if  we  are  honest  and 
consistent,  we  ought  to  leave  our  dear  old  Church,  and  give 
it  up  to  the  extreme  Ritualists.  I  appeal  to  the  experience 
of  every  one  who  lives  with  his  eyes  open  and  marks  the 
signs  of  the  times.  My  readers  know  well  I  am  describing 
things  which  are  going  on  in  every  part  of  the  land. 

Now,  as  matters  have  come  to  this  pass,  let  us  see 
whether  we  cannot  throw  a  little  light  on  the  subject  by 
looking  back  300  years.  Let  us  inquire  what  were  the 
views  of  the  men  who  laid  the  foundations  of  the  Church 
of  England,  and  are  notoriously  the  fathers  of  the  Articles, 
Homilies,  and  Liturgy.  Let  us  put  old  Latimer  into  the 
witness-box  to-day,  and  see  what  his  opinions  were  upon 
the  points  in  dispute.  An  honoured  member  of  the 
Church  of  England,  at  the  period  when  the  doctrines  of 
the  Church  were  first  brought  into  shape  and  form, — a 
near  and  dear  friend  and  adviser  of  Archbishop  Cranmer, 
— an  assistant  in  the  composition  of  the  first  book  of 
Homilies, — a  Bishop  whose  orthodoxy  and  soundness  were 
never  called  in  question  for  a  moment  by  his  contemporaries, 
— if  any  man  knows  what  a  true  Churchman  ought  to 
hold,  Bishop  Latimer  must  surely  be  that  man.  If  his 
views  are  not  true  "  Church  "  views,  I  know  not  whose  are. 

I  ask  my  readers,  then,  to  bear  with  me  for  a  few 
minutes,  while  I  give  some  extracts  from  Latimer's  works. 


1  G  8  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

Quotations  from  old  writers,  I  am  well  aware,  are  very 
wearisome,  and  seldom  read.  But  I  want  to  inform  the 
minds  of  Englishmen  on  the  important  question  of  the. 
present  day,  Who  is,  and  who  is  not  a  true  Churchman  ? 

(1)  First  of  all,  What  did  Bishop  Latimer  think  about 
SCRIPTURE  ?  This  is  a  point  with  which  the  very  existence 
of  true  religion  is  bound  up.  Some  Churchmen  tell  us 
now-a-days,  notwithstanding  the  Sixth  Article,  that  the 
Bible  alone  is  not  the  rule  of  faith,  and  is  not  able  to 
make  a  man  wise  unto  salvation.  No !  it  must  be  the 
Bible  and  the  Fathers,  or  the  Bible  and  Catholic  tradition, 
or  the  Bible  and  the  Church,  or  the  Bible  explained  by 
the  Prayer-book,  or  the  Bible  explained  by  an  episcopally- 
ordained  man,  but  not  the  Bible  alone.  Now  let  us  hear 
Bishop  Latimer. 

He  says,  in  a  sermon  before  Edward  VI., "  I  will  tell  you 
what  a  Bishop  of  this  realm  once  said  to  me.  He  sent  for 
me  and  marvelled  that  I  would  not  consent  to  such 
traditions  as  were  set  out.  And  I  answered  him,  that  I 
would  be  ruled  by  God's  Book,  and  rather  than  depart  one 
jot  from  it  I  would  be  torn  by  wild  horses.  I  chanced  in 
our  communication  to  name  the  Lord's  Supper.  Tush ! 
saith  the  Bishop.  What  do  you  call  the  Lord's  Supper  ? 
What  new  term  is  this?  There  stood  by  him  one 
Dr.  Dubber.  He  dubbed  him  by-and-by,  and  said  that 
this  term  was  seldom  read  in  the  doctors.  And  I  made 
answer,  that  I  would  rather  follow  Paul  in  using  his  terms 
than  them,  though  they  had  all  the  doctors  on  their  side." 
(Works,  i.  121.) 

He  says  again,  in  his  conference  with  Ridley:  "A 
layman,  fearing  God,  is  much  more  fit  to  understand  holy 
Scripture  than  any  arrogant  or  proud  priest ;  yea,  than  the 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.         169 

Bishop  himself,  be  lie  ever  so  great  and  glistering  in  his 
pontificals.  But  what  is  to  be  said  of  the  Fathers  ?  How 
are  they  to  be  esteemed  ?  St.  Augustine  answereth,  giving 
this  rule, — that  we  should  not  therefore  think  it  true 
because  they  say  so,  do  they  never  so  much  exceed  in 
holiness  and  learning;  but  if  they  be  able  to  prove 
their  saying  by  canonical  Scripture,  or  by  good  probable 
reasons ;  meaning  that  to  be  a  probable  reason,  I  think, 
which  doth  orderly  follow  upon  a  right  collection  and 
gathering  out  of  the  holy  Scriptures. 

"Let  the  Papists  go  with  their  long  faith.  Be  you 
contented  with  the  short  faith  of  the  saints,  which  is 
revealed  to  us  in  the  Word  of  God  written.  Adieu  to  all 
Popish  fantasies.  Amen!  For  one  man  having  the 
Scripture,  and  good  reason  for  him,  is  more  to  be  esteemed 
himself  alone,  than  a  thousand  such  as  they,  either  gathered 
together,  or  succeeding  one  another.  The  Fathers  have 
both  herbs  and  weeds,  and  Papists  commonly  gather  the 
weeds,  and  leave  the  herbs."  (Ridley's  Works,  p.  114. 
Parker's  edition.) 

I  make  no  comment  on  these  passages, — they  speak  for 
themselves. 

(2)  In  the  next  place,  what  did  Bishop  Latimer  think 
about  justification  by  faith  ?  This  is  the  doctrine  which 
Luther  truly  called  the  criterion  of  a  standing  or  falling 
Church.  This  is  the  doctrine  which,  in  spite  of  the 
Eleventh  Article  of  our  Church,  many  are  now  trying  to 
obscure,  by  mingling  up  with  it  baptism,  the  Lord's 
Supper,  our  own  works,  and  I  know  not  what  besides. 
Now  let  us  hear  Bishop  Latimer. 

He  says,  in  a  sermon,  preached  at  Grimsthorpe,  Lincoln 
shire,  "Christ  reputcth  all  those  for  just,  holy  and 


170  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

acceptable  before  God,  which  believe  in  Him,  which  put 
their  trust,  hope,  and  confidence  in  Him.  By  His  passion 
which  He  suffered,  He  merited  that  as  many  as  believe  in 
Him  shall  be  as  well  justified  by  Him  as  though  they  had 
never  done  any  sin,  and  as  though  they  had  fulfilled  the 
law  to  the  uttermost.  For  we  without  Him  are  under  the 
curse  of  the  law.  The  law  condemneth  us.  The  law  is 
not  able  to  help  us.  And  yet  the  imperfection  is  not  in 
the  law,  but  in  us.  The  law  itself  is  holy  and  good,  but 
we  are  not  able  to  keep  it,  and  so  the  law  condemneth  us. 
But  Christ  with  His  death  hath  delivered  us  from  the 
curse  of  the  law.  He  hath  set  us  at  liberty,  and  promised 
that  when  we  believe  in  Him  we  shall  not  perish,  the  law 
shall  not  condemn  us.  Therefore  let  us  study  to  believe 
in  Christ.  Let  us  put  all  our  hope,  trust,  and  confidence 
only  in  Him.  Let  us  patch  Him  with  nothing,  for,  as 
I  told  you  before,  our  merits  are  not  able  to  deserve 
everlasting  life.  It  is  too  precious  a  thing  to  be  merited 
by  man.  It  is  His  doing  only.  God  hath  given  Him  to 
us  to  be  our  Deliverer,  and  to  give  us  everlasting  life." 
(ii.  125.) 

He  says  again,  in  another  sermon,  "  Learn  to  abhor  the 
most  detestable  and  dangerous  poison  of  the  Papists, 
which  go  about  to  thrust  Christ  out  of  His  office.  Learn, 
I  say,  to  leave  all  Papistry,  and  to  stick  only  to  the  Word 
of  God,  which  teacheth  that  Christ  is  not  only  a  judge  but 
a  justifier,  a  giver  of  salvation,  and  a  taker  away  of  sin. 
He  purchased  our  salvation  through  His  painful  death, 
and  we  receive  the  same  through  believing  in  Him,  as  St. 
Paul  teacheth  us,  saying,  Freely  ye  are  justified  through 
faith.  In  these  words  of  -St.  Paul,  all  merits  and  estimation 
of  works  are  excluded  and  clean  taken  away.  For  if  it 


HUGH  LATIMEE:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  171 

were  for  our  works'  sake,  then  it  were  not  freely,  but  St. 
Paul  saith  freely.  Whether  will  you  now  believe  St. 
Paul  or  the  Papists  ?  "  (ii.  147.) 

He  says  again,  in  another  sermon  :  "  Christ  only,  and  no 
man  else,  merited  remission,  justification,  and  eternal 
felicity,  for  as  many  as  will  believe  the  same.  '  They  that 
will  not  believe  it,  shall  not  have  it ;  for  it  is  no  more,  but 
believe  and  have."  (i.  421.) 

Once  more  I  say,  these  passages  require  no  comment  of 
mine.  They  speak  for  themselves. 

(3)  In  the  next  place,  what  did  Bishop  Latimer  think 
about  regeneration  ?  This,  as  you  are  all  aware,  is  the 
subject  of  one  of  the  great  controversies  of  the  day. 
Multitudes  of  Churchmen,  in  spite  of  the  Seventeenth 
Article,  and  the  Homily  for  Whit  Sunday,  maintain  that 
all  baptized  persons  are  necessarily  regenerate,  and  receive 
grace  and  the  Holy  Ghost  at  the  moment  they  are  baptized. 
In  a  word,  they  tell  us  that  every  man,  woman,  and  child, 
who  has  received  baptism,  has  also  received  regeneration, 
and  that  every  congregation  in  the  Church  of  England 
should  be  addressed  as  an  assembly  of  regenerated  persons. 
Now  let  us  hear  Bishop  Latimer. 

He  says,  in  a  sermon  preached  in  Lincolnshire,  "  There 
be  two  manner  of  men.  Some  there  be  that  be  not 
justified,  not  regenerate,  not  yet  in  the  state  of  salvation, 
that  is  to  say,  not  God's  servants.  They  lack  the  renovation, 
or  regeneration.  They  be  not  yet  come  to  Christ."  (ii.  7.) 
He  says,  in  a  sermon  preached  before  Edward  VI., "  Christ 
saith,  Except  a  man  be  born  from  above,  he  cannot  see  the 
kingdom  of  God.  He  must  have  a  regeneration.  And 
what  is  this  regeneration  ?  It  is  not  to  be  christened  in 
water,  as  those  firebrands  expound  it,  and  nothing  else. 


172  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

How  is  it  to  be  expounded,  then  ?  St.  Peter  showeth  that 
one  place  of  Scripture  declareth  another.  It  is  the 
circumstance  and  collection  of  places  that  maketh  Scripture 
plain.  We  be  born  again,  says  Peter,  and  how  ?  Not  by 
a  mortal  seed,  but  an  immortal.  What  is  the  immortal 
seed  ?  By  the  Word  of  the  living  God :  by  the  Word  of 
God  preached  and  opened.  Thus  cometh  in  our  new 
birth."  (i.  202.)  He  says,  in  another  Lincolnshire 
sermon,  "Preaching  is  God's  instrument,  whereby  He 
worketh  faith  in  our  hearts.  Our  Saviour  saith  to 
Nicodemus,  Except  a  man  be  born  anew,  he  cannot  see 
the  kingdom  of  God.  But  how  cometh  this  regeneration  ? 
By  hearing  and  believing  the  Word  of  God :  for  so  saith 
St.  Peter."  (i.  471.) 

Once  more  I  say,  these  passages  require  no  comment  of 
mine.  They  speak  for  themselves. 

(4)  In  the  next  place,  what  did  Bishop  Latimer  think 
about  the  Lord's  Supper1}  This,  I  need  hardly  say,  13 
a  subject  about  which  very  unprotestant  doctrine  is  often 
taught  in  the  present  day.  Some  around  us,  in  the  face 
of  the  Twenty-eighth  Article,  speak  of  this  sacrament  in 
such,  a  manner,  that  it  is  hard  to  see  the  difference  between 
their  doctrine  and  Popish  transubstantiation  or  the  sacrifice 
of  the  Mass.  Now  let  us  hear  Bishop  Latimer. 

He  says,  in  his  disputation  at  Oxford, "  In  the  sacrament 
there  is  none  other  presence  of  Christ  required  than  a 
spiritual  presence.  And  this  presence  is  sufficient  for  a 
Christian  man,  as  the  presence  by  which  we  abide  in 
Christ  and  Christ  in  us,  to  the  obtaining  of  eternal  life,  if 
we  persevere  in  the  true  Gospel.  And  this  same  presence 
may  be  called  a  real  presence,  because  to  the  faithful 
believer  there  is  the  real  and  spiritual  body  of  Christ." 


fatfGH  LAT1MEH:   BISHOP   AND  MA11TYR.  173 

(ii.  252.)  He  says,  in  the  same  disputation, "  Christ  spake 
never  a  word  of  sacrificing,  or  saying  of  Mass;  nor 
promised  the  hearers  any  reward  but  among  the  idolaters 
with  the  devil  and  his  angels,  except  they  repent  speedily. 
Therefore,  sacrificing  priests  should  now  cease  for  ever: 
for  now  all  men  ought  to  offer  their  own  bodies  a  quick 
sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  before  God.  The  Supper 
of  the  Lord  was  instituted  to  provoke  us  to  thanksgiving, 
and  to  stir  us  up  by  preaching  of  the  Gospel  to  remember 
His  death  till  He  cometh  again."  (ii.  256.)  He  says,  in 
his  last  examination,  "  There  is  a  change  in  the  bread  and 
wine,  and  such  a  change  as  no  power  but  the  omnipotency 
of  God  can  make,  in  that  that  which  before  was  bread 
should  now  have  the  dignity  to  exhibit  Christ's  body. 
And  yet  the  bread  is  still  bread,  and  the  wine  is  still 
wine.  For  the  change  is  not  in  the  nature  but  the 
dignity."  (ii.  286.)  He  says,  in  one  of  his  Lincolnshire 
sermons,  "Whosoever  eateth  the  mystical,  bread,  and 
drinketh  the  mystical  wine  worthily,  according  to  the 
ordinance  of  Christ,  he  receiveth  surely  the  very  body 
and  blood  of  Christ  spiritually,  as  it  shall  be  most  com 
fortable  to  his  soul.  He  eateth  with  the  mouth  of  his 
soul,  and  digesteth  with  the  stomach  of  his  soul,  the  body 
of  Christ.  And,  to  be  short,  whosoever  believeth  in 
Christ,  putteth  his  hope,  trust,  and  confidence  in  Him, 
he  eateth  and  drinketh  Him.  For  the  spiritual  eating 
is  the  right  eating  to  eternal  life,  not  the  corporal 
eating."  (i.  459.) 

Once  more  I  say,  I  make  no  comment  on  these  passages. 
They  speak  for  themselves. 

It  would  be  easy  to  multiply  quotations  of  this  kind 
to  an  endless  length,  if  it  were  necessary  or  desirable, 


174  LIGHT  FROM  AND  TIMES,  . 

There  is  hardly  a  controverted  subject  in  the  present  day 
on  which  I  could  not  give  some  plain,  Scriptural,  sensible, 
sound  opinion  of  Bishop  Latimer. 

Would  my  readers  like  to  know  what  he  thought  about 
the  ordinance  of  preaching  ?  Did  he  think  little  of  it,  as 
some  do  in  this  day,  and  regard  it  as  a  means  of  grace 
very  subordinate  to  sacraments  and  services  ?  No,  indeed 
he  did  not !  He  calls  it  "  the  office  of  salvation,  and  the 
office  of  regeneration." — He  says,  "  Take  away  preaching, 
and  take  away  salvation."  —  He  says,  "This  office  of 
preaching  is  the  only  ordinary  way  that  God  hath 
appointed  to  save  us  all.  Let  us  maintain  this,  for  I 
know  no  other."  —  He  declares  that,  "preaching  is  the 
thing  the  devil  wrestled  most  against.  It  has  been  all  his 
study  to  decry  this  office.  He  worketh  against  it  as  much 
as  he  can.  He  hath  made  unpreaching  prelates,  and 
stirred  them  up  by  heaps  to  persecute  this  office  in  the 
Mtle  of  heresy."  (i.  203, 155,  306,  349,  302.) 

Would  my  readers  like  to  hear  what  he  thought  about 
a  gorgeous  ceremonial  and  candles  in  Churches  ?  He 
says  plainly  that  these  things  come  from  the  devil. 
"  Where  the  devil  is  resident,  and  hath  his  plough  going, 
there  away  with  book  and  up  with  candles ;  away  with 
Bible  and  up  with  beads;  away  with  the  light  of  the 
Gospel  and  up  with  the  light  of  candles,  yea,  even  at 
noon-day.  Where  the  devil  is  resident,  that  he  may 
prevail,  up  with  all  superstition  and  idolatry,  censing, 
painting  of  images,  candles,  palms,  ashes,  holy  water,  and 
new  services  of  man's  inventing."  (i.  71.) 

Would  my  readers  like  to  know  what  he  thought  about 
the  foreign  reformers?  Did  he  lightly  esteem  them, 
as  some  do  now-a-days,  because  they  did  not  retain 


HUGH  LA.TIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  175 

episcopacy  ?  No,  indeed  he  did  not !  He  says,  "  I  heard 
say,  Melancthon,  that  great  clerk,  should  come  hither.  I 
would  wish  him,  and  such  as  he  is,  to  have  £200  a-year. 
The  King  would  never  want  it.  There  is  yet  among  us 
two  great  learned  men,  Peter  Martyr  and  Bernard  Ochin, 
which  have  a  hundred  marks  a-piece.  I  would  the  King 
Would  bestow  a  thousand  pounds  on  that  sort."  (i.  141.) 

Would  my  readers  like  to  know  what  he  thought  about 
unity  ?  Did  he  think,  as  some  do  now,  that  it  is  the  one 
thing  needful,  and  that  we  should  give  up  every  thing  in 
order  to  attain  it  ?  No,  indeed  !  He  says,  "  Unity  must 
be  according  to  God's  Holy  Word,  or  else  it  were  better 
war  than  peace.  We  ought  never  to  regard  unity  so  much 
that  we  forsake  God's  Word  for  her  sake."  (i.  487.) 

Would  my  readers  like  to  know  what  he  thought  about 
councils  and  convocations  ?  Did  he  regard  them  as  the 
grand  panacea  for  all  ecclesiastical  evils,  like  those  around 
us,  whose  cry  is,  "  Give  us  synodical  action,  or  we  die  "  ? 
He  says  to  Ridley,  "  Touching  councils  and  convocations,  I 
refer  you  to  your  own  experience  to  think  of  our  own 
country's  parliaments  and  convocations.  The  more  part 
in  my  time  did  bring  forth  the  Six  Articles.  Afterward 
the  more  part  did  repeal  the  same.  The  same  Articles 
are  now  again  restored.  Oh,  what  uncertainty  is  this ! " 
And  he  says,  in  another  place,  "  More  credence  is  to  be 
given  to  one  man  having  the  Holy  Word  of  God  for  him, 
than  to  ten  thousand  without  the  Word.  If  it  agrees 
with  God's  Word,  it  is  to  be  received.  If  it  agrees  not,  it 
is  not  to  be  received,  though  a  council  had  determined  it." 
(Ridley,  130 ;  Latim.  i.  288.) 

Would  my  readers  like  to  know  what  he  thought  of 
ihorougU-yoing  Protestant  preaching  ?  Did  he  think,  as 


176  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

some  do  now,  that  if  a  sermon  contains  a  good  deal  of 
truth,  a  little  false  doctrine  may  be  excused  and  allowed  ? 
No,  indeed  he  did  not !  He  says,  "  Many  preach  God's 
Word,  and  shall  preach  a  very  good  and  godly  sermon, 
but  at  the  last  they  will  have  a  blanched  almond,  one 
little  piece  of  Popery  patched  in  to  powder  their  matter 
with,  for  their  own  lucre  and  glory.  They  make  a 
mingling  of  the  way  of  God  and  man's  way,  a  mingle- 
mangle,  as  men  serve  pigs  in  my  country."  (i.  290.) 

I  will  not  multiply  these  extracts,  though  it  would  be 
easy  to  do  so.  Those  who  have  never  studied  the  works 
of  Latimer,  published  by  the  Parker  Society,  have  little 
idea  of  the  loss  they  have  sustained.  They  are  rich  to 
overflowing  with  pithy,  pointed  Protestant  truths.  I  will 
only  ask  my  readers  to  remember  well  those  words  I  have 
been  quoting,  and  when  they  were  spoken. 

These  words  were  not  spoken  last  year.  They  did  not 
fall  from  the  lips  of  modern  Evangelical  or  Low  Church 
clergymen.  They  were  not  spoken  by  the  ministers  of 
Park  Chapel,  Chelsea;  or  of  Portman  Chapel;  or  the 
Lock;  or  Belgrave  Chapel;  or  by  some  platform  orator 
at  Exeter  Hall.  No :  the  words  I  have  quoted  are  more 
than  300  years  old.  They  are  the  words  of  one  of  the 
best  Bishops  the  Church  of  England  ever  had.  They  are 
the  words  of  the  man  who  helped  to  compose  our  first 
book  of  Homilies.  They  are  the  words  of  the  friend  and 
adviser  of  Archbishop  Cranmer.  They  are  the  words  of 
one  whom  King  and  Parliament  delighted  to  honour. 

Why  was  the  speaker  of  these  words  not  cast  out  of 
the  Church  of  England  ?  Why  was  he  not  reprimanded  ? 
Why  was  he  not  reviled  as  a  man  of  low,  unchurchman- 
like  opinions?  Why  was  he  not  proceeded  against  and 


KING    EDWARD    VI. 


(face  p.  177). 


HjGH  LATIMEB:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.  177 

persecuted  for  his  views  ?  How  is  it  that  he  was  perse 
cuted  only  by  Papists,  but  always  honoured  by  Protestants? 
persecuted  by  Bonner,  Gardiner,  and  Bloody  Mary;  but 
honoured  by  Cranmer,  Ridley,  and  Edward  VI.  ? 

I  will  give  a  plain  answer  to  these  questions.  I  answer 
them  by  saying  that,  at  the  time  of  which  I  write,  no  man 
in  his  senses  doubted  thatLatimer's  opinions  were  the  real 
opinions  of  the  Church  of  England.  I  go  on  further  to 
affirm,  that  the  truest  and  best  members  of  the  Church 
of  England,  at  the  present  day,  are  those  whose  views  are 
most  in  harmony  with  those  of  good  Bishop  Latimer. 
And  I  say,  that  to  tell  men  who  love  the  Church  of 
England  with  deep  affection,  that  they  are  not  sound 
Churchmen,  merely  because  they  agree  with  Latimer,  and 
not  with  Laud,  is  to  bring  against  them  a  most  unfair 
and  unwarrantable  charge. 

And  now  let  'me  conclude  this  biography  of  Latimer 
with  two  practical  remarks. 

(a)  For  one  thing,  let  me  earnestly  exhort  my  readers, 
as  individuals,  never  to  be  ashamed  of  holding  what  are 
called  Evangelical  views  within  the  Church  of  England. 
Listen  not  to  those  supercilious  gentlemen,  on  the  one 
side,  who  would  have  you  believe  that  if  you  are  not  High 
Churchmen,  like  themselves,  you  are  no  Churchmen  at  all. 
Listen  not  to  those  exceedingly  kind  friends,  on  the  other 
side,  who  try  to  persuade  you  that  the  Established  Church 
maintains  Popish  doctrines,  and  ought  to  be  left  at  once. 
Both  these  are  ancient  tricks.  Against  both  these  tricks 
be  on  your  guard. 

Do  not  be  bullied  out  of  the  Church  of  England  by 
the  High  Churchman's  assertion,  that  you  are  only  a 
tolerated  party,  and  have  no  business  by  ius  sxd«H  -Ho 


178  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

doubt  you  live  in  a  communion  where  great  freedom  of 
opinion  is  allowed.  But  to  tell  men  of  Evangelical  views 
that  they  are  merely  tolerated,  is  a  downright  insult  to 
the  memory  of  the  Reformers.  Let  us  make  answer  to 
people  who  tell  us  so,  that  if  they  have  forgotten  Latimer 
and  three  hundred  years  ago,  we  have  not.  Let  us  say 
that  we  are  not  going  to  desert  the  Church  of  Latimer, 
in  order  to  please  men  who  wish  to  lord  it  over  God's 
heritage,  and  have  things  all  their  own  way.  Sure  I  am 
that  if  might  should  ever  prevail  over  right,  and  the 
friends  of  Latimer  should  be  thrust  out  of  the  Church  by 
force,  and  the  House  of  Commons  should  be  mad  enough 
to  sanction  it, — sure  am  I  that  the  men  thrust  out  would 
be  better  Churchmen  than  the  men  left  behind. 

And  do  not  be  wheedled  out  of  the  Church  by  the 
arguments  of  men  outside,  who  would  probably  be  glad  to 
be  in  it  if  they  only  saw  the  way.  When  the  fox,  in  an 
old  fable,  could  not  reach  the  grapes,  he  said  they  were 
sour.  When  the  fox,  in  another  fable,  lost  his  tail  in  a 
trap,  he  tried  to  persuade  his  friends  that  foxes  did  much 
better  without  tails,  and  advised  them  to  get  rid  of  their 
own.  Do  not  forget  the  moral  of  that  fable ;  do  not  be 
enticed  into  biting  off  your  own  tails.  Best  assured,  that 
with  all  its  faults  and  defects  the  Church  of  England  has 
very  high  privileges  to  offer  to  its  members.  Think  well 
about  these  privileges.  Do  not  be  always  poring  over  the 
defects.  Resolve  that  you  will  not  lightly  cast  these 
privileges  away. 

Above  all,  never,  never  forget  that  Evangelical  views 
are  not  only  theoretically  sound,  and  agreeable  to  the 
mind  of  the  Reformers,  but  that  they  are  also  of  vital 
Importance  to  the  very  existence  of  tl-a  Church,  of 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.         179 

England.  Never  has  our  beloved  Church  stood  so  low  in 
this  country  as  when  Evangelical  views  have  been  at  zero, 
and  almost  forgotten.  Never  has  she  stood  so  high  as 
when  the  views  of  Latimer  and  the  Reformers  have  been 
honestly  preached  and  carried  out.  So  far  from  being 
ashamed  of  Evangelical  opinions,  you  may  be  satisfied 
that  the  maintenance  of  them  is  rapidly  becoming  a 
matter  of  life  or  death  to  your  own  communion.  Take 
away  Latimer's  views,  and  I  firmly  believe  the  whole 
Establishment  would  collapse  before  the  pressure  from 
without,  and  come  to  the  ground. 

(6)  For  another  thing,  let  me  entreat  all  English  readers 
of  this  biography  to  beware  of  countenancing  any 
retrograde  movement  in  this  country  towards  the  Church 
of  Rome,  and  to  resist  such  movement  by  every  possible 
means,  from  whatever  quarter  it  may  come. 

I  am  sure  that  this  warning  is  one  which  the  times 
loudly  call  for.  The  Church  of  Rome  has  risen  up 
amongst  us  with  renewed  strength  in  the  last  few  years. 
She  does  not  disguise  her  hope  that  England,  the  lost 
planet,  will  soon  resume  her  orbit  in  the  so-called  Catholic 
system,  and  once  more  revolve  in  blind  obedience 'round 
the  centre  of  the  Vatican.  She  has  succeeded  in  blinding 
the  eyes  of  ignorant  persons  to  her  real  character.  She 
has  succeeded  in  securing  the  unexpected  aid  of  misguided 
men  within  our  own  Establishment.  A  hundred  little 
symptoms  around  us  tell  us  how  real  the  danger  is.  Laud 
and  the  nonjurors  are  cried  up,  while  Latimer  and  the 
Reformers  are  cried  down.  Historical  works  are  indus 
triously  circulated,  in  which  Bloody  Mary  is  praised,  and 
Protestant  Elizabeth  blamed.  A  morbid  tenderness 
towards  Romanists^  and  a  virulent  bitterness  towards 


180  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Dissenters  have  sprung  up  side  by  side.  An  unhealthy 
attention  is  paid  to  what  is  called  mediaeval  taste. 
Thousands  of  tracts  are  sown  broad-cast  over  the  land  in 
which  the  three  leading  phrases  to  be  seen  are  generally 
these  three  ominous  words,  "priest"  "catholic"  and 
"church"  The  use  of  the  rosary,  auricular  confession, 
prayers  for  the  dead,  and  the  "  Hail,  Mary,"  are  deliber 
ately  recommended  to  the  members  of  the  English 
Church.  Little  by  little,  I  fear,  the  edge  of  English 
feeling  about  Popery  is  becoming  blunt  and  dull.  Surely 
I  have  good  reason  to  tell  my  readers  to  beware  of  the 
Church  of  Rome. 

Remember  the  darkness  in  which  Rome  kept  England 
when  she  last  had  the  supreme  power.  Remember  the 
gross  ignorance  and  degrading  superstitions  which  pre 
vailed  in  Bishop  Latimer's  youth.  Think  not  for  a  moment 
that  these  are  ancient  things,  and  that  Rome  is  changed. 
The  holy  coat  of  Treves,  the  winking  picture  at  Rimini,  the 
mental  thraldom  in  which  the  Papal  States  have  been  kept, 
the  notorious  practices  which  go  on  in  the  Holy  City  to 
this  day,  are  all  witnesses  that  Rome,  when  she  has  the 
power,  is  not  changed  at  all.  Remember  this,  and  beware. 

Remember  the  horrible  persecutions  which  Rome 
carried  on  against  true  religion,  when  she  last  had 
uncontrolled  sway  in  this  country.  Remember  the 
atrocities  which  disgraced  the  days  of  Bloody  Mary,  and 
the  burning  of  Bishop  Latimer.  Think  not  for  a  moment 
that  Rome  is  altered.  The  persecution  of  Bible  readers 
in  Madeira,  and  the  imprisonment  of  the  Madiai,  are 
unmistakable  proofs  that,  after  three  hundred  years,  the 
old  persecuting  spirit  of  Rome  still  remains  is  strong  a* 
everk  Remember  this  also,  and  beware* 


HUGH  LATIMER:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.         181 

Shall  we,  in  the  face  of  such  facts  as  these,  return  to 
the  bondage  in  which  our  forefathers  were  kept  ?  Shall 
we  give  up  our  Bibles,  or  be  content  to  sue  for  sacerdotal 
license  to  read  them  ?  Shall  we  submit  ourselves  humbly 
to  Italian  priests  ?  Shall  we  go  back  to  confessional-boxes 
and  the  idolatrous  sacrifice  of  the  Mass.  God  forbid !  I 
say  for  one — God  forbid !  Let  the  dog  return  to  his  vomit. 
Let  the  sow  that  was  washed  return  to  her  wallowing  in 
the  mire.  Let  the  idiotic  prisoner  go  back  to  his  chains. 
But  God  forbid  that  Israel  should  return  to  Egypt !  God 
forbid  that  England  should  go  back  into  the  arms  of 
Rome !  God  forbid  that  old  Latimer's  candle  should  ever 
be  put  out ! 

Let  us  work,  every  one  of  us,  if  we  would  prevent  such 
a  miserable  consummation.  Let  us  work  hard  for  the 
extension  of  pure,  Scriptural,  and  Evangelical  religion  at 
home  and  abroad.  Let  us  labour  to  spread  it  among  the 
Jews,  among  the  Roman  Catholics,  among  the  heathen. 
Let  us  labour  not  least  to  preserve  and  maintain  it  by 
every  constitutional  means  in  our  own  Church. 

Let  us  cherish,  every  one  of  us,  if  we  would  prevent  the 
increase  of  Romanism, — a  brotherly  feeling  towards  all 
orthodox  Protestants,  by  whatever  name  they  may  bo 
called.  Away  with  the  old  rubbishy  opinion,  that  the 
Church  of  England  occupies  a  middle  position,  a  via 
media,  between  Dissent  and  Rome.  Cast  it  away,  for  it 
is  false.  We  might  as  well  talk  of  the  Isle  of  Wight 
being  midway  between  England  and  France.  Between  us 
and  Rome  there  is  a  gulf,  and  a  broad  and  deep  gulf  too. 
Between  us  and  orthodox  Protestant  Dissent  there  is  but 
a  thin  partition  wall.  Between  us  and  Rome  the 
differences  are  about  essential  doctrines  and  thinjrs 


182  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

absolutely  necessary  to  salvation  Between  us  and  Dissent 
the  division  is  about  things  indifferent,  things  in  which  a 
man  may  err,  and  yet  be  saved.  Rome  is  a  downright 
open  enemy,  attacking  the  very  foundation  of  our  religion. 
Dissent  ought  to  be  an  ally  and  friendly  power;  not 
wearing  our  uniform,  nor  yet,  as  we  think,  so  well  equipped 
as  we  are, — but  still  an  ally,  and  fighting  on  the  same 
side.  Let  not  this  hint  be  thrown  away!  Let  us  keep 
up  a  kind,  brotherly  feeling  towards  all  who  love  the 
same  Saviour,  believe  the  same  doctrines,  and  honour  the 
same  Bible  as  ourselves. 

Finally,  let  us  pray,  every  one  of  us,  if  we  would 
prevent  the  increase  of  Romanism, — let  us  pray  night  and 
day  that  God  may  preserve  this  country  from  Popery,  and 
not  deal  with  it  according  to  its  sins.  It  is  a  striking 
fact,  that  almost  the  last  prayer  of  good  King  Edward  VI., 
on  his  death-bed,  was  a  prayer  to  this  effect :  "  0  my  Lord 
God,  defend  this  realm  from  Papistry,  and  maintain  Thy 
true  religion."  There  was  a  prayer  in  the  Litany  of  our 
Prayer-book,  in  1549,  which  many  think  never  ought  to 
have  been  cast  out  of  it.  "  From  all  sedition,  and  privy 
conspiracy, — FKOM  THE  TYRANNY  OF  THE  BISHOP  OF 

ROME,  AND  ALL  HIS  DETESTABLE  ENORMITIES, — from  all 
false  doctrine  and  heresy, — from  hardness  of  heart,  and 
contempt  of  Thy  Word  and  commandments,  good  Lord, 
deliver  us ! "  To  that  prayer  may  we  ever  be  able  to  say 
heartily,  Amen,  and  Amen  1 


JOHN  BKADFOBD:  MABTYB. 

JOHN  BRADFORD,  the  famous  English  Reformer,  who  was 
burned  at  Smithfield  for  Christ's  truth,  in  Queen  Mary's 
days,  is  far  better  known  as  a  martyr  than  as  a  writer. 
The  splendour  of  his  death  has  eclipsed  the  work  of  his 
pen.  Few  perhaps  have  the  least  idea  what  a  rich 
treasure  of  English  theology  is  laid  up  in  his  literary 
remains. 

This  ought  not  so  to  be.  Among  the  many  goodly 
volumes  published  by  the  Parker  Society,  not  a  few,  I 
suspect,  sleep  quietly  on  library  shelves,  unopened  and 
uncut.  Like  ancient  weapons  of  war,  they  are  too 
ponderous  for  the  taste  of  our  day.  Like  guns  and  shells 
in  Woolwich  Arsenal,  they  are  regarded  as  stores  to  be 
»nly  used  in  special  times  of  need.  Yet  some  of  these 
volumes  will  richly  repay  an  attentive  perusal,  even  in 
the  nineteenth  century.  Latimer,  Hooper,  and  Jewell 
should  never  be  neglected.  Side-by-side  with  these 
three  men  I  am  disposed  to  rank  the  two  volumes  of 
Bradford's  Works  and  Remains,  from  which  I  propose  to 
make  some  selections  at  the  conclusion  of  this  paper. 

Some  account  of  Bradford's  life  and  death  will  prove  a 
suitable  preface  to  the  extracts  I  shall  give  from  his 

138 


184  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

writings.  It  is  to  many  an  old  story,  and  well  known ; 
yet  in  days  like  these  it  is  well  to  stir  up  men's  minds  by 
putting  them  in  remembrance  of  the  champions  of  the 
English  Reformation.  For  a  large  portion  of  the 
information  I  give,  I  am  indebted  to  a  biography  of 
Bradford,  written  by  the  Rev.  Aubrey  Townsend,  and 
prefixed  to  the  Parker  Society's  edition  of  Bradford's 
works. 

John  Bradford,  Prebendary  of  St.  Paul's  and  Chaplain 
to  Bishop  Ridley,  was  born  at  Blackley,  near  Manchester, 
about  the  year  1520,  and  educated  first  at  Manchester 
Grammar  School.  Fox  records  that  he  was  " '  brought  up 
in  virtue  and  good  learning  even  from  his  very  childhood 
and,  among  other  fruits  of  his  good  education,  he 
obtained  as  a  chief  gift  the  cunning  and  readiness  of 
writing,  which  knowledge  was  not  only  an  ornament  unto 
him,  but  also  an  help  to  the  necessary  sustentation  of  his 
living.'  Baines,  the  historian  of  the  county  of  Lancaster, 
also  observes  that  Bradford,  having  received  a  liberal 
education  at  the  free  grammar  school  in  Manchester, 
founded  by  Bishop  Oldham,  who  died  in  1519,  attained 
there  a  considerable  proficiency  in  Latin  and  arithmetic. 

*  To  this  early  period  of  his  life  Bradford,  writing  from 
prison  in  the  days  of  Mary,  feelingly  adverts : — 

" '  I  cannot  but  say  that  I  have  most  cause  to  thank  thee 
for  my  parents,  schoolmasters,  and  others,  under  whose 
tuition  thou  hast  put  me.  No  pen  is  able  to  write  the 
particular  benefits,  which  I  have  already  received  in  my 
infancy,  childhood,  youth,  middle  age,  and  always  hitherto. 
...  I  could  reckon  innumerable  behind  me,  and  but  few 
before  me,  so  much  made  of  and  cared  for  as  I  have  been 
hitherto.' 


JOHN  BRADFORD:  MARTYR.  185 

"  Fox  records  that  Bradford,  at  a  later  period, '  became 
servant  to  Sir  John  Harrington,  Knight,  of  Exton,  in 
Rutlandshire,  who,  in  the  great  affairs  of  Henry  the  Eighth, 
and  King  Edward  the  Sixth,  which  he  had  in  hand  when 
he  was  treasurer  of  the  King's  camps  and  buildings,  at 
divers  times,  in  Boulogne,  had  such  experience  of 
Bradford's  activity  in  writing,  of  his  expertness  in  the  art 
of  auditors,  and  also  of  his  faithful  trustiness,  that,  not 
only  in  those  affairs,  but  in  many  other  of  his  private 
business,  he  trusted  Bradford  in  such  sort,  that  above  all 
others  he  used  his  faithful  service.'  At  the  siege  of 
Montreuil  in  particular,  conducted  by  the  English  army 
under  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  in  the  year  1544,  Bradford 
discharged,  under  Sir  John  Harrington,  the  office  of 
paymaster. 

"  Three  years  later,  not  long  after  the  accession  of  Edward 
VI,  on  the  8th  April,  1547,  Bradford  entered  the  Inner 
Temple  as  a  student  of  common  law.  His  character  then 
underwent  a  complete  change.  Twenty-seven  years  later, 
Sampson,  his  friend  and  fellow-student  at  the  Temple,  and 
who,  it  has  been  said,  was  the  human  means,  under  a 
higher  power,  of  that  great  transformation,  writes,  in 
his  preface  to  Bradford's  works :  '  I  did  know  when, 
and  partly  how,  it  pleased  God,  by  effectual  calling, 
to  turn  his  heart  unto  the  true  knowledge  and  obedience 
of  the  most  holy  Gospel  of  Christ  our  Saviour;  of  which 
God  did  give  him  such  an  heavenly  hold  and  lively 
feeling,  that,  as  he  did  then  know  that  many  sins  were 
forgiven  him,  so  surely  he  declared  by  deeds  that  he 
"  loved  much."  For,  where  he  had  both  gifts  and  calling 
to  have  employed  himself  in  civil  and  worldly  affairs 
profitably,  such  was  his  love  of  Christ  and  zeal  to  the 


186  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

promoting  of  His  glorious  Gospel,  that  he  changed  not 
only  the  course  of  his  former  life,  as  the  woman  did 
(Luke  vii.),  but  even  his  former  study,  as  Paul  did  change 
his  former  profession  and  study. 

"  *  Touching  the  first,  after  that  God  touched  his  heart 
with  that  holy  and  effectual  calling,  he  sold  his  chains, 
rings,  brooches  and  jewels  of  gold,  which  before  he  used  to 
wear,  and  did  bestow  the  price  of  this  his  former  vanity  in 
-  the  necessary  relief  of  Christ's  poor  members,  which  he 
could  hear  of  or  find  lying  sick  or  pining  in  poverty. 
Touching  the  second,  he  so  declared  his  great  zeal  and  love 
to  promote  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  whose  goodness 
and  saving  health  he  had  tasted,  that,'  '  with  marvellous 
favour  to  further  the  kingdom  of  God  by  the  ministry  of 
His  Holy  Word,  he  gave  himself  wholly  to  the  study  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures.  The  which  his  purpose  to  accomplish 
the  better,  he  departed  from  the  Temple  at  London,  where 
the  temporal  law  is  studied,  and  went  to  the  University 
of  Cambridge,  to  learn,  by  God's  law,  how  to  further  the 
building  of  the  Lord's  temple.' 

"  An  incident  occurred,  while  he  was  in  London,  which 
occasioned  him  deep  anxiety.  He  '  heard  a  sermon  which 
that  notable  preacher,  Master  Latimer,  made  before  King 
Edward  the  Sixth,  in  which  he  did  earnestly  speak  of 
restitution  to  be  made  of  things  falsely  gotten.'  This 
'  did  so  strike  him  to  the  heart '  on  account  of  a  fraud, 
committed  by  his  master,  Sir  John  Harrington,  which 
'  was  to  the  deceiving  of  the  King,'  and  which  it  would 
seem  Bradford  had  concealed,  'that  he  could  never  be 
quiet  till  by  the  advice  of  the  same  Master  Latimer  a 
restitution  was  made.'  That  he  had  not  been  an  interested 
party  to  this  fraud  would  appear  from  his  words  to  Bishop 


JOHN  BRADFORD:  MARTYR.  187 

Gardiner,  January  30th,  1555  :  'My  lord,  I  set  my  foot  to 
his  foot,  whosoever  he  be,  that  can  come  forth,  and  justly 
vouch  to  my  face  that  ever  I  deceived  my  master :  and,  as 
you  are  chief  justice  by  office  in  England,  I  desire  justice 
upon  them  that  so  slander  me,  because  they  cannot 
prove  it.'  This  was  a  challenge,  which  he  could  scarcely 
have  ventured  to  make,  if  he  had  himself  defrauded 
the  government.  It  was  through  his  firmness,  in  fact, 
that  Sir  John  Harrington  was  compelled  to  make 
restitution  to  the  King  of  the  sums  falsely  obtained, 
in  the  two  successive  years,  1549  and  1550." 

In  the  year  1548  Bradford  became  a  student  at 
Cambridge,  first  at  Catharine  Hall,  and  afterwards  at 
Pembroke  Hall,  where  he  became  a  Fellow.  His  letter 
describing  his  Fellowship  is  curious  and  interesting.  " '  I 
am  now  a  Fellow  of  Pembroke  Hall,  of  the  which  I  nor 
any  other  for  'me  did  ever  make  any  suit ;  yea,  there  was 
a  contention  betwixt  the  Master  of  Catharine's  Hall 
(Sandys)  and  the  Bishop  of  Rochester,  who  is  Master  of 
Pembroke  Hall,  whether  should  have  me.  .  .  .  My  Fellow 
ship  here  is  worth  seven  pounds  a  year ;  for  I  have  allowed 
me  eighteen-pence  a  week,  and  as  good  as  thirty-three 
shillings  four  pence  a  year  in  money,  besides  my  chamber, 
launder,  barber,  &c. ;  and  I  am  bound  to  nothing  but  once 
or  twice  a  year  to  keep  a  problem.  Thus  you  see  what  a 
good  Lord  God  is  unto  me.' 

"  His  friend  Sampson  graphically  depicts  Bradford's  holy 
walk  with  God  at  this  period :  '  His  manner  was,  to  make 
to  himself  a  catalogue  of  all  the  grossest  and  most  enorme 
sins,  which  in  his  life  of  ignorance  he  had  committed ;  and 
to  lay  the  same  before  his  eyes  when  he  went  to  private 
prayer,  that  by  the  sight  and  remembrance  of  them  he 


188  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

might  be  stirred  up  to  offer  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  a 
contrite  heart,  seek  assurance  of  salvation  in  Christ  by 
faith,  thank  God  for  his  calling  from  the  ways  of 
wickedness,  and  pray  for  increase  of  grace  to  be  conducted 
in  holy  life  acceptable  and  pleasing  to  God.  Such  a 
continual  exercise  of  conscience  he  had  in  private  prayer, 
that  he  did  not  count  himself  to  have  prayed  to  his 
contentation,  unless  in  it  he  had  felt  inwardly  some 
smiting  of  heart  for  sin,  and  some  healing  of  that  wound 
by  faith,  feeling  the  saving  health  of  Christ,  with  some 
change  of  mind  into  the  detestation  of  sin,  and  love  of 
obeying  the  good  will  of  God.  .  .  .  Without  such  an  inward 
exercise  of  prayer  our  Bradford  did  not  pray  to  his  full 
contentation,  as  appeared  by  this :  he  used  in  the  morning 
to  go  to  the  common  prayer  in  the  college  where  he  was, 
and  after  that  he  used  to  make  some  prayer  with  his 
pupils  in  his  chamber :  but  not  content  with  this,  he  then 
repaired  to  his  own  secret  prayer  and  exercise  in  prayer 
by  himself,  as  one  that  had  not  yet  prayed  to  his  own 
mind ;  for  he  was  wont  to  say  to  his  familiars,  "  I  have 
prayed  with  my  pupils,  but  I  have  not  yet  prayed  with 
myself." 

" '  Another  of  his  exercises  was  this :  he  used  to  make 
unto  himself  an  ephemeris  or  a  journal,  in  which  he  used 
to  write  all  such  notable  things  as  either  he  did  see  or 
hear  each  day  that  passed.  But,  whatsoever  he  did  hear 
or  see,  he  did  so  pen  it  that  a  man  might  see  in  that  book 
the  signs  of  his  smitten  heart.  For,  if  he  did  see  or  hear 
any  good  in  any  man,  by  that  sight  he  found  and  noted 
the  want  thereof  in  himself,  and  added  a  short  prayer, 
craving  mercy  and  grace  to  amend.  If  he  did  hear  or  see 
any  plague  or  misery,  he  noted  it  as  a  thing  procured  by 


JOHN  BKADFOED:  MAKTYR.  189 

bis  own  sins,  and  still  added,  Domine  miserere  mei, "  Lord, 
have  mercy  upon  me."  He  used  in  the  same  book  to  note 
such  evil  thoughts  as  did  rise  in  him ;  as  of  envying  the 
good  of  other  men,  thoughts  of  untharikfulness,  of  not 
considering  God  in  his  works,  of  hardness  and  unsensible- 
ness  of  heart  when  he  did  see  other  moved  and  affected. 
And  thus  he  made  to  himself  and  of  himself  a  book  of 
daily  practices  of  repentance.' " 

At  Cambridge,  Bradford  became  intimate  with  Bucer, 
Sandys,  and  Ridley,  and  was  tutor  to  Whitgift,  afterwards 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  He  was  ordained  by  Ridley 
in  1550,  and  strongly  recommended  to  King  Edward 
the  Sixth,  on  account  of  his  high  talents  and  piety. 
Shortly  afterwards,  by  Ridley's  advice,  the  King 
appointed  him  to  be  one  of  the  six  royal  chaplains 
who  were  sent  about  England,  with  a  kind  of  roving 
commission,  to  -preach  up  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation. 
Bradford's  commission  was  to  preach  in  Lancashire  and 
Cheshire,  being  connected  with  those  counties;  and  he 
seems  to  have  performed  his  duty  with  singular  ability 
and  success.  He  preached  constantly  in  Manchester, 
Liverpool,  Bolton,  Bury,  Wigan,  Ashton,  Stockport, 
Middleton,  and  Chester,  with  great  benefit  to  the  cause 
of  Protestantism,  and  with  great  effect  on  men's  souls. 

"At  the  close  of  1552,  when  Bradford  was  at  Manchester, 
he  'treated  of  Noe's  flood,'  and  often  forewarned  the 
people  of  'those  plagues'  which  would  be  'brought  to 
pass.'  And  on  the  twenty-sixth  of  December,  St. 
Stephen's  Day, '  the  last  time  that  he  was  with  them,'  ha 
preached  a  remarkable  sermon  from  the  twenty-third 
chapter  of  St.  Matthew.  The  last  six  verses,  the  gospel 
for  the  day>  was  the  text>  no  doubt>  he  selected  on  that 


190  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

occasion, — a  passage  eminently  suggestive  of  that  solemn 
and  prophetic  warning  which  he  then  delivered.  Local 
tradition  even  yet  points  to  the  spot  in  Blackley,  where 
the  country  people  say  that  Bradford,  during  that  last  visit 
to  Manchester,  knelt  down  and  made  solemn  supplication 
to  Almighty  God.  His  request  at  the  throne  of  grace 
was,  that  the  everlasting  Gospel  might  be  preached  in 
Blackley,  to  the  end  of  time,  by  ministers  divinely  taught 
to  feed  the  flock  with  wisdom  and  knowledge.  The 
martyr's  prayer,  it  is  alleged,  has  been  answered  in  the 
continuance,  with  scarcely  an  exception,  of  faithful  men  in 
that  place. 

"  Sampson  informs  us,  that '  besides  often  preaching  in 
London  and  at  Paul's  Cross,  and  sundry  places  in  the 
country,  and  especially  in  Lancashire,  Bradford  preached 
before  King  Edward  the  Sixth,  in  the  Lent,  the  last  year 
of  his  reign,  upon  the  second  Psalm;  and  there  in  one 
sermon,  showing  the  tokens  of  God's  judgment  at  hand 
for  the  contempt  of  the  Gospel,  as  that  certain  gentlemen 
upon  the  Sabbath  Day  going  in  a  wherry  to  Paris  Garden, 
to  the  bear-baiting,  were  drowned,  and  that  a  dog  was  met 
at  Ludgate  carrying  a  piece  of  a  dead  child  in  his 
mouth,  he  with  a  mighty  and  prophetical  spirit  said,  "  I 
summon  you  all,  even  every  mother's  child  of  you,  to  the 
judgment  of  God,  for  it  is  at  hand : "  as  it  followed  shortly 
after  in  the  death  of  King  Edward.'  This  was,  perhaps, 
the  occasion  which  John  Knox  so  well  describes  in  his 
'Godly  Letter,'  1554:  'Master  Bradford  ...  spared  not 
the  proudest,  but  boldly  declared  that  God's  vengeance 
shortly  should  strike  those  that  then  were  in  authority, 
because  they  loathed  and  abhorred  the  true  Word  of  the 
God;  and  amongst  many  other  willed  th- 


JOHN  BRADFORD:  MARTYR.  191 

take  ensample  by  the  late  Duke  of  Somerset,  who  became 
so  cold  in  hearing  God's  Word,  that,  the  year  before  his 
last  apprehension,  he  would  go  to  visit  his  masons,  and 
would  not  dingy  himself  from  his  gallery  to  go  to  his  hall 
for  hearing  of  a  sermon.  "  God  punished  him,"  said  that 
godly  preacher,  "  and  that  suddenly :  and  shall  He  spare 
you  that  be  double  more  wicked  ?  No,  He  shall  not. 
Will  ye,  or  will  ye  not,  ye  shall  drink  the  cup  of  the 
Lord's  wrath.  Judicium  Domini,  judicium  Domini! 
The  judgment  of  the  Lord,  the  judgment  of  the  Lord!" 
lamentably  cried  he  with  a  lamentable  voice  and  weeping 
tears.' 

"Bishop  Ridley,  writing  from  prison  in  the  reign  of 
Mary,  speaking  of  Bradford,  Latimer,  Lever,  and  Knox, 
bears  the  strongest  testimony  to  the  boldness  and  faith 
fulness  with  which  they  addressed  the  courtiers  of 
Edward :  '  Their  tongues  were  so  sharp,  they  ripped  in 
so  deep  in  their  galled  backs,  to  have  purged  them,  no 
doubt,  of  that  filthy  matter  that  was  festered  in  their 
hearts  of  insatiable  covetousness,  of  filthy  carnality  and 
voluptuousness,  of  intolerable  ambition  and  pride,  of 
ungodly  loathsomeness  to  hear  poor  men's  causes  and  to 
hear  God's  Word,  that  these  men  of  all  other  these 
magistrates  then  could  never  abide.' 

"  Sampson  represents  forcibly  Bradford's  habits  in 
private  life : — 

" '  They  which  were  familiar  with  him  might  see  how  he, 
being  in  their  company,  used  to  fall  often  into  a  sudden 
and  deep  meditation,  in  which  he  would  sit  with  fixed 
countenance  and  spirit  moved,  yet  speaking  nothing  a 
good  space.  And  sometimes  in  this  silent  sitting  plenty 
of  tears  should  trickle  down  his  cheeks;  sometime  h-:. 


192  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

would  sit  in  it  and  come  out  of  it  with  a  smiling 
countenance.  Oftentimes  have  I  sitten  at  dinner  and 
supper  with  him,  in  the  house  of  that  godly  harbourer  of 
many  preachers  and  servants  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  I  mean 
Master  Elsyng,  when,  either  by  occasion  of  talk  had,  or 
some  view  of  God's  benefits  present,  or  some  inward 
cogitation  and  thought  of  his  own,  he  hath  fallen  into 
these  deep  cogitations:  and  he  would  tell  me  in  the  end 
such  discourses  of  them,  that  I  did  perceive  that  sometimes 
his  tears  trickled  out  of  his  eyes,  as  well  for  joy  as  for  sorrow. 
Neither  was  he  only  such  a  practiser  of  repentance  in 
himself,  but  a  continual  provoker  of  others  thereunto,  not 
only  in  public  preaching,  but  also  in  private  conference 
and  company.  For  in  all  companies  where  he  did  come 
he  would  freely  reprove  any  sin,  and  misbehaviour  which 
appeared  in  any  person,  especially  swearers,  filthy  talkers, 
and  Popish  praters.  Such  never  departed  out  of  his 
company  unreproved.  And  this  he  did  with  such  a  Divine 
grace  and  Christian  majesty,  that  ever  he  stopped  the 
mouths  of  the  gainsayers.  For  he  spoke  with  power  and 
yet  so  sweetly,  that  they  might  see  their  evil  to  be  evil 
and  hurtful  unto  them,  and  understand  that  it  was  good 
indeed  to  the  which  he  laboured  to  draw  them  in  God.' " 

The  consequences  of  Bradford's  zeal  for  the  principle  of 
the  Reformation,  as  soon  as  Edward  the  Sixth  died,  were 
precisely  what  might  have  been  expected.  Within  a 
month  of  Queen  Mary's  accession  he  was  put  into  prison, 
like  Cranmer,  Ridley,  Latimer,  and  Hooper,  and  never 
left  it  until  he  was  burned.  His  youth,  his  singulai 
holiness,  and  his  great  reputation  as  a  preacher,  made 
him  an  object  of  great  interest  during  his  imprisonment, 
immense  efforts  were  mad©  to  reason  him  out  of  his 


JOHN  BRADFORD:  MARTYR.  193 

Protestantism,  and  pervert  him  to  the  Romish  Church. 
All  these  efforts,  however,  were  in  vain.  As  he  lived,  so 
he  died. 

Sentence  of  condemnation  was  passed,  January  31, 
1555.  It  was  at  first  intended  to  deliver  him  forthwith 
to  the  Earl  of  Derby,  to  be  conveyed  into  Lancashire, 
and  there  to  be  burned  in  the  town  of  Manchester,  where 
he  was  born.  The  original  purpose  was  subsequently 
abandoned.  The  Romish  bishops,  whether  from  secret 
fear  of  Bradford's  friends  (for  Bradford  was  in  favour 
among  his  own  people),  or  from  some  more  secret 
confidence  of  overcoming  his  opinion,  retained  him  at 
London  for  some  months,  assailing  him  during  that  time 
with  frequent  conferences  and  embassies.  And  it  appears 
from  some  pages,  first  reprinted  in  the  former  volume  of 
his  works  from  his  Examinations,  that  the  Earl  of 
Derby  took  great  interest  in  his  case,  and  (it  was 
alleged)  obtained  from  the  Queen  the  concession,  that  he 
should  '  have  his  books,  and  time  enough  to  peruse  them.  ' 

On  the  day  of  Bradford's  execution  he  was  led  out  from 
Newgate  to  Smithfield  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning 
of  July  1,  1555,  amidst  such  a  crowd  of  people  as  was 
never  seen  either  before  or  after.  A  certain  Mrs. 
Honywood,  who  lived  to  the  age  of  ninety-six,  and  died 
about  1620,  often  told  her  friends  that  she  remembered 
going  to  see  him  burned,  and  her  shoes  being  trodden  off 
by  the  crowd,  so  that  she  had  to  walk  barefoot  to 
Ludgate  Hill. 

The  account  of  his  martyrdom,  as  described  by  Fox,  is 
so  touching  that  I  shall  give  it  in  the  Martyrologist's  own 
words.  In  the  afternoon  of  June  30th,  " '  Suddenly  the 
keeper's  wife  came  up,  as  one  half  aroazed,  and  seeming 


194  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

much  troubled,  being  almost  windless,  said,  "O  Master 
Bradford,  I  come  to  bring  you  heavy  news." — "  What  is 
that  ? "  said  he.  "  Marry,"  quoth  she, "  to-morrow  you  must 
be  burned,  and  your  chain  is  now  a-buying,  and  soon  you 
must  go  to  Newgate."  With  that  Master  Bradford  put  off 
his  cap,  and  lifting  up  his  eyes  to  heaven  said,  "  I  thank 
God  for  it ;  I  have  looked  for  the  same  a  long  time,  and 
therefore  it  cometh  not  now  to  me  suddenly,  but  as  a  thing 
waited  for  every  day  and  hour ;  the  Lord  make  me  worthy 
thereof: "  and  so,  thanking  her  for  her  gentleness,  departed 
up  into  his  chamber,  and  called  his  friend  with  him,  who 
when  he  came  thither,  he  went  secretly  himself  alone  a 
long  time,  and  prayed.  Which  done,  he  came  again  to 
him  that  was  in  his  chamber,  and  took  him  divers  writings 
and  papers,  and  showed  him  his  mind  in  those  things, 
what  he  would  have  done ;  and,  after  they  had  spent  the 
afternoon  till  night  in  many  and  sundry  such  things,  at 
last  came  to  him  half  a  dozen  of  his  friends  more,  with 
whom  all  the  evening  he  spent  the  time  in  prayer  and 
other  good  exercises,  so  wonderfully  that  it  was  marvellous 
to  hear  and  see  his  doings. 

*'  A  little  before  he  went  out  of  the  Compter,  he  made 
a  notable  prayer  of  his  farewell,  with  such  plenty  of  tears, 
and  abundant  spirit  of  prayer,  that  it  ravished  the  minds 
of  the  hearers.  Also  when  he  shifted  himself  with  a  clean 
shirt,  that  was  made  for  his  burning  (by  one  Master 
Walter  Marlar's  wife,  who  was  a  good  nurse  unto  him,  and 
his  very  good  friend),  he  made  such  a  prayer  of  the  wedding 
garment,  that  some  of  those  that  were  present  were  in 
such  great  admiration,  that  their  eyes  were  as  thoroughly 
occupied  in  looking  on  him,  as  their  ears  gave  place  to 
hear  his  prayer.  At  his  departing  out  of  the  chamber,  he 


JOHN  BRADFORD:  MARTYR.  195 

made  likewise  a  prayer,  and  gave  money  to  every  servant 
and  officer  of  the  house,  with  exhortation  to  them  to  fear 
and  serve  God,  continually  labouring  to  eschew  all  manner 
oi  evil.  That  done,  he  turned  him  to  the  wall,  and  prayed 
vehemently,  that  his  words  might  not  be  spoken  in  vain, 
but  that  the  Lord  would  work  the  same  in  them  effectually, 
for  his  Christ's  sake.  Then  being  beneath  in  the  court  all 
the  prisoners  cried  out  to  him,  and  bid  him  farewell,  as 
the  rest  of  the  house  had  done  before  with  weeping 
tears. 

"'The  time  they  carried  him  to  Newgate  was  about 
eleven  or  twelve  o'clock  in  the  night,  when  it  was  thought 
none  would  be  stirring  abroad ;  and  yet,  contrary  to  their 
expectation  in  that  behalf,  was  there  in  Cheapside,  and 
other  places  between  the  Compter  and  Newgate,  a  great 
multitude  of  people  that  came  to  see  him,  which  most 
gently  bade  him  farewell,  praying  for  him  with  most 
lamentable  and  pitiful  tears ;  and  he  again  as  gently  bade 
them  farewell,  praying  most  heartily  for  them  and  their 
welfare.  Now  whether  it  were  a  commandment  from  the 
Queen  and  her  council,  or  from  Bonner  and  his  adherents, 
or  whether  it  were  merely  devised  of  the  Lord  Mayor, 
Alderman,  and  Sheriffs  of  London,  or  no,  I  cannot  tell ; 
but  a  great  noise  there  was  overnight  about  the  city  by 
divers,  that  Bradford  should  be  burnt  the  next  day  in 
Smithfield,  by  four  of  the  clock  in  the  morning,  before  it 
should  be  greatly  known  to  any  .  . .  But . .  .  the  people 
prevented  the  device  suspected:  for  the  next  day,' 
Monday,  July  1, '  at  the  said  hour  of  four  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  there  was  in  Smithfield  such  a  multitude  of  men 
and  women,  that  many  being  in  admiration  thereof 
thought  it  was  not  possible  that  they  could  have  warning 


196  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

of  his  death,  being  so  great  a  number  in  so  sbort  a  time, 
unless  it  were  by  the  singular  providence  of  Almighty  God. 
" '  Well,  this  took  not  effect  as  the  people  thought ;  for 
that  morning  it  was  nine  o'clock  of  the  day  before  Master 
Bradford  was  brought  into  Smithfield ;  which,  in  going 
through  Newgate  thitherward,  spied  a  friend  of  his  whom 
he  loved,  standing  on  the  one  side  [of]  the  way  to  the 
keeper's  houseward,  unto  whom  he  reached  his  hand  over 
the  people,  and  plucked  him  to  him,  and  delivered  to  him 
from  his  head  his  velvet  night-cap,  and  also  his  hand 
kerchief,  with  other  things  besides.  .  .  .  After  a  little  secret 
talk  with  him,  and  each  of  them  parting  from  other, 
immediately  came  to  him  a  brother-in-law  of  his,  called 
Roger  Beswick,  which,  as  soon  as  he  had  taken  the  said 
Bradford  by  the  hand,  one  of  the  Sheriffs  of  London, 
called  Woodrofe,  came  with  his  staff,  and  brake  the  said 
Roger's  head,  that  the  blood  ran  about  his  shoulders; 
which  sight  Bradford  beholding  with  grief  bade  his 
brother  farewell,  willing  [him]  to  commend  him  to  his 
mother  and  the  rest  of  his  friends,  and  to  get  him  to  some 
surgeon  betimes :  and  so  they,  departing,  had  little  or  no 
talk  at  all  together.  Then  was  he  led  forth  to  Smithfield 
with  a  great  company  of  weaponed  men,  to  conduct  him 
thither,  as  the  like  was  not  seen  at  no  man's  burning :  for 
in  every  corner  of  Smithfield  there  were  some,  besides 
those  which  stood  about  the  stake.  Bradford  then,  being 
come  to  the  place,  fell  flat  to  the  ground,  secretly  making 
his  prayers  to  Almighty  God.'  And  he  'lying  prostrate 
on  the  one  side  of  the  stake,'  and  a  young  man,  an 
apprentice,  John  Leaf,  who  suffered  with  him  'on  the 
other  side,  they  lay  flat  on  their  faces,  praying  to 
themselves  the  space  of  a  minute  of  an  hour.  Then  one 


JOItN  BRADFORD:  MARTYR.  197 

of  the  Sheriffs  said  to  Master  Bradford,  "  Arise,  and  make 
an  end ;  for  the  press  of  the  people  is  great." 

"'At  that  word  they  both  stood  up  upon  their  feet;  and 
then  Master  Bradford  took  a  faggot  in  his  hand,  and  kissed 
it,  and  so  likewise  the  stake.  And,  when  he  had  so  done, 
he  desired  of  the  Sheriffs  that  his  servant  might  have  his 
raiment;  "for,"  said  he,  "I  have  nothing  else  to  give  him, 
and  besides  that  he  is  a  poor  man."  And  the  Sheriff  said 
he  should  have  it.  And  so  forthwith  Master  Bradford  did 
put  off  his  raiment,  and  went  to  the  stake;  and,  holding 
up  his  hands,  and  casting  his  countenance  up  to  heaven, 
he  said  thus,  "0  England,  England,  repent  thee  of  thy 
sins,  repent  thee  of  thy  sins.  Beware  of  idolatry, 
beware  of  false  antichrists :  take  heed  they  do  not 
deceive  you."  And,  as  he  was  speaking  these  words, 
the  Sheriff  bade  tie  his  hands,  if  he  would  not  be 
quiet.  "O  Master  Sheriff,"  said  Master  Bradford,  "I 
am  quiet:  God  forgive  you  this,  Master  Sheriff."  And 
one  of  the  officers  which  made  the  fire,  hearing 
Master  Bradford  so  speaking  to  the  Sheriff,  said,  "  If  you 
have  no  better  learning  than  that,  you  are  but  a  fool,  and 
were  best  to  hold  your  peace."  To  the  which  words 
Master  Bradford  gave  no  answer,  but  asked  all  the  world 
forgiveness,  and  forgave  all  the  world,  and  prayed  the 
people  to  pray  for  him,  and  turned  his  head  unto  the 
young  man  that  suffered  with  him,  and  said,  "  Be  of  good 
comfort,  brother ;  for  we  shall  have  a  merry  supper  with 
the  Lord  this  night ; "  and  so  spake  no  more  words  that 
any  man  did  hear,  but  embracing  the  reeds  said  thus: 
"  Strait  is  the  way,  and  narrow  is  the  gate,  that  leadeth  to 
eternal  salvation,  and  few  there  be  that  find  it."'" 

There  seems  to  have  been  something  peculiarly  beautiful 


198  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

and  attractive  in  Bradford's  character,  exceeding  that 
of  any  of  the  Reformers.  "Fuller  remarks:  'It  is  a 
demonstration  to  me  that  he  was  of  a  sweet  temper, 
because  Parsons,  who  will  hardly  afford  a  good  word 
to  a  Protestant,  saith  "  that  he  seemed  to  be  of  a  more 
soft  and  mild  nature  than  many  of  his  fellows."  Indeed 
he  was  a  most  holy  and  mortified  man,  who  secretly  in 
his  closet  would  so  weep  for  his  sins,  one  would  have 
thought  he  would  never  have  smiled  again;  and  then, 
appearing  in  public,  he  would  be  so  harmlessly  pleasant, 
one  would  think  he  had  never  wept  before.' 

"  The  familiar  story,  that,  on  seeing  evil-doers  taken  to 
the  place  of  execution,  he  was  wont  to  exclaim,  'But  for 
the  grace  of  God  there  goes  John  Bradford,'  is  a  universal 
tradition,  which  has  overcome  the  lapse  of  time.  And 
Yenning,  writing  in  1653,  desirous  to  show  that,  'by  the 
sight  of  others'  sins,  men  may  learn  to  bewail  their  own 
sinfulness  and  heart  of  corruption,'  instances  the  case  of 
Bradford,  who,  '  when  he  saw  any  drunk  or  heard  any 
swear,  &c.,  would  railingly  complain,  "  Lord,  I  have  a 
drunken  head ;  Lord,  I  have  a  swearing  heart." ' 

"  His  personal  appearance  and  daily  habits  are  graphically 
described  by  Fox.  'He  was,  of  person,  a  tall  man, 
slender,  spare  of  body,  somewhat  a  faint  sanguine  colour, 
with  an  auburn  beard.  He  slept  not  commonly  above 
four  hours  a  night ;  and  in  his  bed,  till  sleep  came,  his 
book  went  not  out  of  his  hand.  .  . .  His  painful  diligence, 
reading,  and  prayer,  I  might  almost  account  it  his  whole 
life.  He  did  not  eat  above  one  meal  a  day,  which  was 
but  very  little  when  he  took  it ;  and  his  continual  study 
was  upon  his  knees.  In  the  midst  of  dinner  he  used 
oftentimes  to  muse  with  himself,  having  his  hat  over  his 


JOHN  BRADFORD:  MARTYR.  199 

eyes,  from  whence  came  commonly  plenty  of  tears, 
dropping  on  his  trencher.  Very  gentle  he  was  to  man 
and  child.  .  .  .  His  chief  recreation  was,  in  no  gaming  or 
other  pastime,  but  only  in  honest  company  and  comely 
talk,  wherein  he  would  spend  a  little  leisure  after  dinner 
at  the  board,  and  so  to  prayer  and  his  book  again.  He 
counted  that  hour  not  well-spent,  wherein  he  did  not  some 
good,  either  with  his  pen,  study,  or  exhortation  to  others." 
Mr.  Townsend  concludes  his  excellent  biography  with 
the  following  passage,  which  is  so  true  and  good  that  I 
give  it  in  its  entirety.  "  He  may  be  said  to  have  lived 
a  long  life  in  a  short  space  of  time.  From  his  ordination 
as  deacon  to  the  hour  of  martyrdom  he  was  only 
permitted  to  exercise  the  ministerial  office  for  five 
years,  of  which  no  fewer  than  two  were  passed  in 
prison.  Until  the  great  day,  when  the  secrets  of  all 
hearts  shall  be  revealed,  it  cannot  be  fully  known  to 
what  extent  England  has  been  indebted  to  the  labours 
and  the  prayers  of  this  devouted  man.  '  Certainly  he 
was  neither  the  least  able  nor  the  least  learned'  of  the 
fathers  of  the  English  Church.  He  happily  combined 
judgment  with  '  learning,  elocution,  sweetness  of  temper, 
and  profound  devotion  toward  God  : . .  .  .  and  of  his  worth 
the  Papists  themselves  were  so  sensible,  that  they  took 
more  pains  to  bring  him  off  from  the  profession  of 
religion  than  any  other.'  Had  Edward  longer  occupied 
the  English  throne  Bradford  would  have  been  raised  to  the 
episcopal  bench.  He  obtained  from  the  great  Bishop  of 
souls  a  higher  promotion.  By  the  holiness  of  his  life  and 
the  testimony  of  his  writings  '  he  yet  speaketh.'  By  the 
flames  of  martyrdom  'Bradford  and  Latimer,  Cranmer 
and  Ridley,  four  prime  pillars  of  the  Reformed  Church  of 


200  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

England,'  have,  through  the  grace  of  God,  lighted  such  a 
candle  in  this  country  as  shall  never  be  extinguished." 

Bradford's  literary  remains  occupy  about  1100  pages, 
and  fill  two  8vo  volumes  of  the  Parker  Society's  series. 
They  consist  chiefly  of  Sermons,  short  treatises,  medita 
tions,  prayers,  declarations,  exhortations,  and  letters.  All 
are  good,  and  all  deserve  reading.  If  I  must  pick  out 
any  of  his  writings  as  specially  good,  I  would  name  his 
controversial  treatises,  entitled,  "  A  Confutation  of  a  few 
Romish  Doctrines,"  and  "The  Hurt  of  Hearing  Mass;" 
his  sermons  on  repentance  and  the  Lord's  Supper;  his 
treatises  against  the  fear  of  death  ;  and  his  Farewells  to 
London,  Cambridge,  Lancashire,  Cheshire,  etc.  Above  all, 
I  commend  his  100  letters  to  friends.  He  that  can  read 
any  of  the  above-mentioned  writings  without  feeling  his 
soul  stirred  within  him,  must  be  in  an  unsatisfactory 
condition.  To  my  mind,  there  is  not  only  Scriptural 
soundness  in  all  that  Bradford  writes,  but  a  peculiar  fire, 
unction,  warmth,  and  directness,  which  entitle  him  to  a 
very  high  rank  among  Christian  authors.  Had  he  lived 
longer  and  written  more,  one  fancies  it  would  have  been 
an  immense  blessing  to  the  Church. 

My  first  extract  shall  be  taken  from  Bradford's  "  Treatise 
against  the  Fear  of  Death."  (Vol.  I.,  page  342,  Parker 
Society's  edition.) 

"Some  man  will  say,  O  Sir,  if  I  were  certain  that  I 
should  depart  from  this  miserable  life  into  that  so  great 
felicity,  then  could  I  be  right  glad,  and  rejoice  as  you  will 
me,  and  bid  death  welcome.  But  I  am  a  sinner ;  I  have 
grievously  transgressed  and  broken  God's  will;  and 
therefore  I  am  afraid  I  shall  be  sent  into  eternal  woe, 
perdition,  and  misery. 


JOfitt   B&ADFORt):    MARTYR.  201 

"Here,  my  brother,  thou  dost  well  that  thou  dost 
acknowledge  thyself  a  sinner,  and  to  have  deserved 
eternal  death ;  for,  doubtless, '  if  we  say  we  have  no  sin, 
we  are  liars,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.'  A  child  of  a 
night's  birth  is  not  pure  in  God's  sight.  In  sin  were  we 
born,  and  'by  birth  (or  nature)  we  are  the  children  of 
wrath '  and  firebrands  of  hell :  therefore,  confess  ourselves 
to  be  sinners  we  needs  must ;  for  '  if  the  Lord  will  observe 
any  man's  iniquities,  none  shall  be  able  to  abide  it : '  yea, 
we  must  needs  all  cry, '  Enter  not  into  judgment,  0  Lord; 
for  in  Thy  sight  no  flesh  or  man  living  can  be  saved.'  In 
this  point,  therefore,  thou  hast  done  well  to  confess  thyself 
a  sinner. 

"But  now  when  thou  standest  in  doubt  of  pardon  of 
thy  sins,  and  thereby  art  afraid  of  damnation,  my  dear 
brother,  I  would  have  thee  answer  me  one  question, — 
that  is,  'Whether  thou  desirest  pardon  or  no;  whether 
thou  dost  repent  or  no;  whether  thou  dost  unfeignedly 
purpose,  if  thou  shouldest  live,  to  amend  thy  life  or  no  ? ' 
If  thou  dost,  even  before  God,  so  purpose,  so  desirest  His 
mercy,  then  hearken,  my  good  brother,  what  the  Lord 
saith  unto  thee : — 

"'I  am  He,  that  for  mine  own  sake  will  do  away  thine 
offences.'  '  If  thy  sins  be  as  red  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be 
made  as  white  as  snow ; '  for  '  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  a  sinner.'  'As  surely  as  I  live,  I  will  not  thy 
death ;  but  rather  that  thou  shouldest  live  and  be 
converted.'  I  '  have  so  loved  the  world,'  that  I  would  not 
spare  my  dearly  beloved  Son,  the  image  of  my  substance 
and  brightness  of  my  glory,  'by  whom  all  things  are 
made,'  by  whom  all  things  were  given ;  but  gave  Him  for 
thee,  not  only  to  be  man,  but  also  to  take  thy  nature,  and 


202  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

to  purge  it  from  mortality,  sin,  and  all  corruption,  and  to 
adorn  and  endue  it  with  immortality  and  eternal  glory, 
not  only  in  His  own  person,  but  also  in  thee  and  for  thee : 
whereof  now  by  faith  I  would  have  thee  certain,  as  in 
very  deed  thou  shalt  at  length  feel  and  fully  enjoy  for 
ever.  This  my  Son  I  have  given  to  the  death,  and 
that  a  most  shameful  death,  'even  of  the  cross/  for  thee 
'to  destroy  death,'  to  satisfy  my  justice  for  thy  sins; 
therefore  'believe,'  and  'according  to  thy  faith,  so  be  it 
unto  thee.1 

"  Hearken  what  my  Son  Himself  saith  to  thee  :  '  Come 
unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour,  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I 
will  refresh  you ;' '  I  came  not  into  the  world  to  damn  the 
world,  but  to  save  it.'  '  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous, 
but  sinners  to  repentance.'  'I  pray  not,'  saith  He,  'for 
these  mine  Apostles  only,  but  also  for  all  them  that  by 
their  preaching  shall  believe  in  Me.'  Now  what  prayed 
He  for  such  ?  '  Father/  saith  He, '  I  will  that  where  I  am 
they  may  also  be,  that  they  may  see  and  enjoy  the  glory 
I  have,  and  always  had  with  Thee.  Father,  save  them 
and  keep  them  in  Thy  truth.'  'Father/  saith  He,  'I 
sanctify  myself,  and  offer  up  myself  for  them.'  Lo,  thus 
thou  hearest  how  my  Son  prayeth  for  thee. 

*  Mark  now  what  my  Apostle  Paul  saith :  '  We  know/ 
saith  he, '  that  our  Saviour  Christ's  prayers  were  heard  ; ' 
also,  '  This  is  a  true  saying,  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners.'  Hearken  what  he  saith  to  the 
jailer, '  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt 
be  saved  ; '  for  He,  by  His  own  self,  hath  '  made  purgation 
for  our  sins.'  '  To  Him/  saith  Peter, '  bear  all  the  prophets 
witness,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  His  name  shall  receive 
remission  of  their  sins.'  'Believe/  man.  Pray,  'Lord, 


JOHN  BRADFORD:    MARTYR.  203 

help  mine  unbelief;'  'Lord,  increase  my  faith.'  'Ask,  and 
thou  shalt  have.'  Hearken  what  St.  John  saith  :  '  If  we 
confess  our  sins,  God  is  righteous  to  forgive  us  all  our 
iniquities ;  and  the  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall 
cleanse  us  from  all  our  sins ; '  for,  '  if  we  sin,  we  have  an 
Advocate,'  saith  he,  'with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous,  and  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins.'  Hearken 
what  Christ  is  called :  '  Call  His  name  Jesus,'  saith  the 
angel ;  '  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins : ' 
so  that  '  where  abundance  of  sin  is,  there  is  abundance 
of  grace.' 

"  Say,  therefore, '  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  my  charge  ? 
It  is  God  that  absolveth  me,  Who  then  shall  condemn  me  ? 
It  is  Christ  which  is  dead  for  my  sins,  yea,  which  is  risen 
for  my  righteousness,  and  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  the 
Father,  and  prayeth  for  me.'  Be  certain,  therefore,  and 
sure  of  pardon  of  thy  sins;  be  certain  and  sure  of 
everlasting  life.  Do  not  say  in  thy  heart,  '  Who  shall 
descend  into  the  deep?'  that  is,  doubt  not  of  pardon  of 
thy  sins,  for  that  is  to  fetch  up  Christ.  Neither  say  thou, 
'  Who  shall  ascend  up  into  heaven  ? '  that  is,  doubt  not  of 
eternal  bliss,  for  that  is  to  put  Christ  out  of  heaven.  But 
mark  what  the  Lord  saith  unto  thee,  '  The  Word  is  nigh 
thee,  even  in  thy  mouth  and  in  thy  heart ;  and  this  is  the 
word  of  faith  which  we  preach :  If  thou  confess  with  thy 
mouth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Lord,  and  believe  with  thy 
heart  that  God  raised  Him  up  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt 
be  safe.'  If  thou  '  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  died  and  rose 
again/  even  so  shalt  thou  be  assured,  saith  the  Lord 
God,  that  'dying  with  Christ,  I  will  bring  thee  again 
with  Him.' 

"  Thus,  dear  brother,  I  thought  good  to  write  to  thee,  in 


204  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

the  name  of  the  Lord,  that  thou,  fearing  death  for  nothing 
else  but  because  of  thy  sins,  mightest  be  assured  of 
pardon  of  them ;  and  so  embrace  death  as  a  dear  friend, 
and  insult  against  his  terror,  sting,  and  power;  saying, 
'  Death,  where  is  thy  sting  ?  Hell,  where  is  thy  victory  ? ' 
Nothing  in  all  the  world  so  displeaseth  the  Lord  as  to 
doubt  His  mercy.  In  the  mouth  of  two  or  three 
witnesses  we  should  be  content ;  therefore,  in  that  thou 
hast  heard  so  many  witnesses,  how  that  indeed  desiring 
mercy  with  the  Lord,  thou  art  not  sent  empty  away, 
give  credit  thereto,  and  say  with  the  good  Virgin  Mar}*, 
'  Behold  Thy  servant,  0  Lord ;  be  it  unto  me  according 
to  Thy  word.'" 

My  second  extract  shall  be  taken  from  Bradford's 
"  Farewell  to  Lancashire  and  Cheshire."  (Vol.  I.,  p.  449.) 

"When  I  consider  the  cause  of  my  condemnation,  I 
cannot  but  lament  that  I  do  no  more  rejoice  than  I  do,  for 
it  is  God's  verity  and  truth.  The  condemnation  is  not  a 
condemnation  of  Bradford  simply,  but  rather  a  condem 
nation  of  Christ  and  His  truth.  Bradford  is  nothing  else 
but  an  instrument,  in  whom  Christ  and  His  doctrine  are 
condemned;  and,  therefore,  my  dearly  beloved,  rejoice, 
rejoice,  and  give  thanks,  with  me,  and  for  me,  that  ever 
God  did  vouchsafe  so  great  a  benefit  to  our  country,  as  to 
choose  the  most  unworthy  (I  mean  myself)  to  be  one  in 
whom  it  would  please  Him  to  suffer  any  kind  of  affliction, 
much  more  this  violent  kind  of  death,  which  I  perceive  is 
prepared  for  me  with  you  for  His  sake.  All  glory  and 
praise  be  given  unto  God  our  Father  for  this  His  exceeding 
great  mercy  towards  me,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
Amen. 

"  But  perchance  you   will  say  unto  me, '  What  is  the 


JOHN  BRADFORD:    MARTYR.  205 

cause  for  the  which  you  are  condemned  ?  We  hear  say 
that  ye  deny  all  presence  of  Christ  in  His  holy  Supper, 
and  so  make  it  a  bare  sign  and  common  bread,  and 
nothing  else.'  My  dearly  beloved,  what  is  said  of  me,  and 
will  be,  I  cannot  tell.  It  is  told  me  that  Master  Pendleton 
is  gone  down  to  preach  to  you,  not  as  he  once  recanted 
(for  you  all  know  how  he  hath  preached  contrary  to  that 
he  was  wont  to  preach  afore  I  came  amongst  you),  but  to 
recant  that  which  he  hath  recanted.  How  he  will  speak 
of  me,  and  report  before  I  come,  when  I  come,  and  when 
I  am  burned,  I  much  pass  not ;  for  he  that  is  so  uncertain, 
and  will  speak  so  often  against  himself,  I  cannot  think  he 
will  speak  well  of  me,  except  it  make  for  his  purpose  and 
profit :  but  of  this  enough. 

"Indeed,  the  chief  thing  I  am  condemned  for  as  an 
heretic  is,  because  I  deny  the  sacrament  of  the  altar, 
which  is  not  Christ's  Supper,  but  a  plain  perverting  of  it 
(being  used,  as  the  Papists  now  use  it,  to  be  a  real,  natural, 
and  corporal  presence  of  Christ's  body  and  blood,  under 
the  forms  and  accidents  of  bread  and  wine) :  that  is, 
because  I  deny  transubstantiation,  which  is  the  darling  of 
the  devil,  and  daughter  and  heir  to  Antichrist's  religion, 
whereby  the  Mass  is  maintained,  Christ's  Supper  perverted, 
the  ministry  taken  away,  repentance  repelled,  and  all  true 
godliness  abandoned. 

"  In  the  Supper  of  our  Lord,  or  sacrament  of  Christ's 
body  and  blood,  I  confess  and  believe  that  there  is  a  true 
and  very  presence  of  whole  Christ,  God  and  Man,  to  the 
faith  of  the  receiver  (but  not  of  the  stander  by  or  looker 
on),  as  there  is  a  very  true  presence  of  bread  and  wine  to 
the  senses  of  him  that  is  partaker  thereof.  This  faith, 
this  doctrine,  which  cpnsenteth  with  the  Word  of  God, 


206  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

and  with  the  true  testimony  of  Christ's  Church,  which  the 
Popish  Church  doth  persecute,  will  I  not  forsake;  and 
therefore  am  I  condemned  as  an  heretic,  and  shall  bo 
burned. 

"But,  my  dearly  beloved,  this  truth  (which  I  have 
taught  and  you  have  received,  I  believed  and  do  believe, 
and  therein  give  my  life),  I  hope  in  God,  shall  never  be 
burned,  bound,  nor  overcome,  but  shall  triumph,  have 
victory,  and  be  at  liberty,  maugre  the  head  of  all  God's 
adversaries.  For  there  is  no  counsel  against  the  Lord,  nor 
no  device  of  man  can  be  able  to  defeat  the  verity  in  any 
other  than  in  such  as  be  '  children  of  unbelief,'  which 
have  no  '  love  to  the  truth,'  and,  therefore,  are  given  up  to 
believe  lies.  From  which  plague  the  Lord  of  mercies 
deliver  you  and  all  this  realm,  my  dear  hearts  in  the  Lord, 
I  humbly  beseech  His  mercy.  Amen." 

My  third  and  last  extract  shall  be  taken  from  a  letter 
written  by  Bradford  to  Francis  Russell,  Earl  of  Bedford, 
in  the  year  1551.  (Bradford's  Works,  Vol.  II.,  p.  79.) 

"  You  have  cause,  my  good  lord,  to  be  thankful.  For 
look  upon  your  vocation,  I  pray  you,  and  tell  me  how  many 
noblemen,  earls'  sons,  lords,  knights,  and  men  of  estimation 
hath  God  in  this  realm  of  England  dealt  thus  withal.  I 
daresay  you  think  not  you  have  deserved  this.  Only 
God's  mercy  in  Christ  hath  wrought  this  on  you,  as  He 
did  in  Jeremy's  time  on  Ebedmelech,  in  Ahab's  time  on 
Obadias,  in  Christ's  time  on  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  in  the 
Apostles'  time  on  Sergius  Paulus  and  the  Queen  Candace's 
chamberlain.  Only  now  be  thankful,  and  continue, 
continue,  continue,  my  good  lord,  continue  to  confess 
Christ.  Be  not  ashamed  of  Him  before  men,  for  then  will 
not  He  be  ashamed  of  you.  Now  will  He  try  you  :  stick 


JOHN  BRADFORD:  MARTYR.  207 

fast  unto  Him,  and  He  will  stick  fast  by  you  ;  He  will  be 
with  you  in  trouble  and  deliver  you.  But  then  you  must 
cry  unto  Him,  for  so  it  proceedeth :  '  He  cried  unto 
Me,  and  I  heard :  I  was  with  him  in  trouble.' 

"  Remember  Lot's  wife,  which  looked  back ;  remember 
Francis  Spira;  remember  that  'none  is  crowned,  except 
he  strive  lawfully.'  Remember  that  all  you  have  is  at 
Christ's  commandment.  Remember  He  lost  more  for  you 
than  you  can  lose  for  Him.  Remember  you  lose  not  that 
which  is  lost  for  His  sake,  for  you  shall  find  much  more 
here  and  elsewhere.  Remember  you  shall  die ;  and  when 
and  where  and  how  you  cannot  tell.  Remember  the  death 
of  sinners  is  most  terrible.  Remember  the  death  of  God's 
saints  is  precious  in  His  sight.  Remember  the  multitude 
goeth  the  wide  way  which  windeth  to  woe.  Remember 
the  strait  gate  which  leadeth  to  glory  hath  but  few 
travellers.  Remember  Christ  biddeth  you  strive  to  enter 
in  thereat.  Remember  he  that  trusteth  in  the  Lord  shall 
receive  strength  to  stand  against  all  the  assaults  of  his 
enemies. 

"  Be  certain  all  the  hairs  of  your  head  are  numbered. 
Be  certain  your  good  Father  hath  appointed  bounds,  on 
the  which  the  devil  dares  not  look.  Commit  yourself  to 
Him;  He  is,  hath  been,  and  will  be  your  keeper;  cast 
your  care  on  Him,  and  He  will  care  for  you.  Let  Christ 
be  your  scope  and  mark  to  prick  at;  let  Him  be  your 
pattern  to  work  by ;  let  Him  be  your  example  to  follow : 
give  Him  as  your  heart  so  your  hand,  as  your  mind  so 
your  tongue,  as  your  faith  so  your  feet;  and  let  His 
Word  be  your  candle  to  go  before  you  in  all  matters 
of  religion. 

"  Blessed  is  he  that  walketh  not  to  these  Popish  prayers, 


208  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

nor  standeth  at  them,  nor  sitteth  at  them.  Glorify  God 
both  in  soul  and  body.  He  that  gathereth  not  with  Christ 
scattereth  abroad.  Use  prayer ;  look  for  God's  help,  which 
is  at  hand  to  them  that  ask  and  hope  thereafter  assuredly. 
In  which  prayer  I  heartily  desire  your  lordship  to  remember 
us,  who  as  we  are  going  with  you  right  gladly,  God  be 
praised,  so  we  look  to  go  before  you,  hoping  that  you  will 
follow  us  if  God  so  will." 

Comment  upon  these  extracts,  I  think  my  readers  will 
agree,  is  needless.  They  speak  for  themselves.  Scores  of 
similar  passages  might  easily  be  selected,  if  space 
permitted.  But  enough  is  as  good  as  a  feast.  Enough, 
perhaps,  has  been  quoted  to  prove  that  Bradford's  literary 
remains  are  well  worth  reading. 

Let  us  thank  God  that  the  foundations  of  the  Reformed 
Church  of  England  were  laid  by  such  men  as  John 
Bradford.  Let  us  clearly  understand  what  kind  of  men 
our  martyred  Reformers  were,  what  kind  of  doctrines  they 
held,  and  what  kind  of  lives  they  lived.  Let  us  pray  that 
the  work  they  did  for  the  Church  of  England  may  never 
be  despised  or  underrated.  Above  all,  let  us  pray  that 
there  never  may  be  wanting  among  us  a  continual 
succession  of  English  clergy,  who  shall  keep  the  martyrs' 
candle  burning  brightly,  and  shall  hand  down  true 
Reformation  principles  to  our  children's  children. 


NICHOLAS    &IDLEY:    BISHOP    AND 
MARTYR 

HIS  LIFE,  TIMES,  AND  WRITINGS. 

NICHOLAS  RIDLEY,  Bishop  and  Martyr,  is  a  man  whose 
name  ought  to  be  a  household  word  among  all  true- 
hearted  English  Churchmen.  In  the  noble  army  of 
English  Reformers,  no  one  deserves  a  higher  place  than 
Ridley.  Together  with  Cranmer,  Latimer,  and  Hooper, 
he  occupies  the  first  rank  among  the  worthies  of  our 
blessed  Reformation,  and  in  point  of  real  merit  is  second 
to  none.  Ridley  was  born  about  the  year  1500,  at 
Willy montswick,  in  Northumberland,  not  far  from  the 
Scottish  border.  His  early  education  was  received  at  a 
school  at  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  and  in  the  year  1518  he 
was  removed  to  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.  Here  he 
soon  became  distinguished  as  a  student  of  uncommon 
diligence  and  ability,  and  rapidly  rose  to  a  prominent 
position  in  the  University.  He  became  Fellow  of 
Pembroke  in  1524,  Senior  Proctor  in  1533,  Chaplain 
to  the  University  and  Public  Orator  in  1534,  and  Master 
of  Pembroke  in  1540. 

The  beginnings  of  Ridley's  decided  Protestantism  are 

o 


2lO  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

wrapped  in  some  obscurity.  Like  Cranmer,  he  seems  to 
have  worked  his  way  gradually  into  the  full  light  of 
Scriptural  truth,  and  not  to  have  attained  full  maturity  of 
soundness  in  faith  at  once.  He  signed  the  decree  against 
the  Pope's  supremacy  in  1534.  In  1537  he  became 
Chaplain  to  Archbishop  Cranmer,  and  was  appointed  by 
him  to  the  Vicarage  of  Herne,  in  East  Kent,  in  1538. 
Here,  in  the  retirement  of  a  quiet  country  parsonage,  he 
first  read  the  famous  treatise  of  Ratram,  or  Bertram, 
about  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  was  led  by  it  to  search  the 
Scriptures,  and  examine  more  carefully  than  before  the 
writings  of  the  Fathers.  The  result  was,  that  he  began 
to  entertain  grave  doubts  of  the  truth  of  the  Romish 
doctrine  about  the  Lord's  Supper.  These  doubts  he 
communicated  to  his  friend  and  patron  the  Archbishop. 
The  final  event  was  the  conviction  of  both  Cranmer  and 
Ridley  that  the  received  tenet  of  transubstantiation  was 
unscriptural,  novel,  and  erroneous.  It  was  not,  however, 
till  the  year  1545  that  Ridley  completely  renounced  the 
doctrine  of  the  corporal  presence  of  Christ's  body  and 
blood  in  the  Sacrament.  About  that  time,  the  arguments 
and  sufferings  of  Frith,  Lambert,  and  others,  confirmed 
the  impressions  received  at  Herne,  and  he  unhesitatingly 
embraced  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord's  Supper  as  now  held 
in  the  Church  of  England,  and  never  swerved  from  it  till 
his  death. 

In  1540  Ridley  became  Chaplain  to  Henry  VIII.,  and 
then  rose  from  office  to  office  of  dignity  and  influence 
with  rapid  steps.  In  1541  he  was  made  Prebendary  of 
Canterbury,  and  in  1545  Prebendary  of  Westminster. 
In  1547  he  was  appointed  Vicar  of  Soham,  and  in  the 
same  year  was  nominated  Bishop  of  Rochester  by 


NICHOLAS  EIDLEY:  BISHOP  AND  MAKTYK.          211 

Henry  VIII.  In  1550  he  was  made  Bishop  of  London 
by  Edward  VI.,  and  in  1553  was  nominated  Bishop  of 
Durham.  This  last  change  of  position,  however,  never 
took  place.  The  lamented  death  of  the  young  King 
Edward  put  a  complete  stop  to  Ridley's  earthly  honours. 
In  1553  he  was  excepted  by  name  from  the  amnesty  by 
Bloody  Queen  Mary,  who  had  a  special  dislike  to  him, 
and  was  committed  to  the  Tower. 

The  circumstances  under  which  Ridley  came  into  direct 
collision  with  Queen  Mary  before  the  death  of  Edward 
the  Sixth  are  so  graphically  described  by  Fox  that  I  think 
it  best  to  give  them  in  the  Martyrologist's  own  words : — 

"About  the  eighth  of  September,  1552,  Dr.  Ridley, 
then  Bishop  of  London,  lying  at  his  house  at  Hadham  in 
Herts,  went  to  visit  the  Lady  Mary,  then  lying  at  Hunsden, 
two  miles  off,  and  was  gently  entertained  of  Sir  Thomas 
Wharton  and  other  her  officers,  till  it  was  almost  eleven 
of  the  clock,  about  which  time  the  said  Lady  Mary  came 
forth  into  her  chamber  of  presence,  and  then  the  said 
Bishop  there  saluted  her  Grace,  and  said  that  he  was  come 
to  do  this  duty  to  her  Grace.  Then  she  thanked  him  for 
his  pains,  and  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  talked  with  him 
very  pleasantly,  and  said  that  she  knew  him  in  the  court 
when  he  was  chaplain  to  her  father,  and  could  well 
remember  a  sermon  that  he  made  before  King  Henry  her 
father  at  the  marriage  of  my  Lady  Clinton  that  now  is  to 
Sir  Anthony  Browne,  &c.,  and  so  dismissed  him  to  dino 
with  her  officers.  After  the  dinner  was  done,  the  Bishop 
being  called  for  by  the  said  Lady  Mary,  resorted  again  to 
her  Grace,  between  whom  this  communication  was.  First 
the  Bishop  beginneth  in  manner  as  followeth.  '  Madam, 
I  came  not  only  to  do  my  duty  to  see  your  Grace,,  but  also 


LIGHT  FUOM  OLD  TIMES. 

to  offer  myself  to  preach  before  you  on  Sunday  next,  if  it 
will  please  you  to  hear  me.' 

"At  this  her  countenance  changed,  and  after  silence  for 
a  space,  she  answered  thus:  'My  Lord,  as  for  this  last 
matter,  I  pray  you  make  the  answer  to  it  yourself.' 

"  Ridley. — '  Madam,  considering  mine  office  and  calling, 
I  am  bound  to  make  your  Grace  this  offer  to  preach 
before  you.' 

"Mary. — '  Well,  I  pray  you,  make  the  answer,  as  I  have 
said,  to  this  matter  yourself,  for  you  know  the  answer  well 
enough  ;  but  if  there  be  no  remedy,  but  I  must  make  you 
answer,  this  shall  be  your  answer,  the  door  of  the  parish 
church  adjoining  shall  be  open  for  you,  if  you  come,  and 
ye  may  preach  if  you  list,  but  neither  I  nor  any  of  mine 
shall  hear  you.' 

"Ridley. — ' Madam,  I  trust  you  will  not  refuse  God's 
Word.' 

"  Mary. — '  I  cannot  tell  what  ye  call  God's  Word — that 
is  not  God's  Word  now,  that  was  God's  Word  in  my 
father's  days.' 

"  Ridley. — '  God's  Word  is  one  at  all  times,  but  hath 
been  better  understood  and  practised  in  some  ages  than 
in  other.' 

"  Mary. — '  You  durst  not  for  your  ears  have  avouched 
that  for  God's  Word  in  my  father's  days  that  now  you  do  ; 
and  as  for  your  new  books,  I  thank  God,  I  never  read  any 
of  them,  I  never  did  nor  ever  will  do.' 

"And  after  many  bitter  words  against  the  form  of 
religion  then  established,  and  against  the  government 
of  the  realm,  and  the  laws  made  in  the  young  years  of 
her  brother,  which  she  said  she  was  not  bound  to  obey  till 
her  brother  came  to  perfect  age,  and  then  she  said  she 


NICHOLAS  RIDLEY:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.          213 

would  obey  them ;  she  asked  the  Bishop  whether  he  were 
one  of  the  council  ?  He  answered,  '  No.'  '  You  might 
well  enough/  said  she, '  as  the  council  goeth  now-a-days.' 
And  so  she  concluded  with  these  words :  '  My  Lord,  for 
your  gentleness  to  come  and  see  me  I  thank  you,  but  for 
your  offering  to  preach  before  me  I  thank  you  never 
a  whit.' 

"  Then  the  said  Bishop  was  brought  by  Sir  Thomas 
Wharton  to  the  place  where  they  had  dined,  and  was 
desired  to  drink,  and  after  he  had  drunk,  he  paused 
awhile,  looking  very  sadly,  and  suddenly  brake  out  into 
these  words, — '  Surely  I  have  done  amiss.'  '  Why  so  ? ' 
quoth  Sir  Thomas  Wharton.  '  For  I  have  drunk,'  said  he, 
'  in  that  place  where  God's  Word  offered  hath  been  refused, 
whereas  if  I  had  remembered  my  duty,  I  ought  to  have 
departed  immediately,  and  to  have  shaken  off  the  dust  of 
my  shoes  for  a  testimony  against  this  house.'  These 
words  were  by  the  said  Bishop  spoken  with  such  a 
vehemency,  that  some  of  the  hearers  afterward  confessed 
their  hair  to  stand  upright  on  their  heads.  This  done, 
the  said  Bishop  departed,  and  so  returned  to  his  house." 

From  the  Tower  Ridley  was  sent  to  Oxford  in  1554,  to 
be  baited  and  insulted  in  a  mock  disputation;  and  finally, 
after  two  years'  imprisonment,  was  burned  at  Oxford  with 
old  Latimer,  on  October  16th,  1555.  Singularly  enough, 
he  seems  to  have  had  forebodings  of  the  kind  of  death  he 
would  die.  Humphrey,  in  his  "  Life  of  Jewel,"  records  the 
following  anecdote : — "  Ridley,  on  one  occasion,  being  tossed 
about  in  a  great  storm,  exhorted  his  terrified  companions 
with  these  words, '  Be  of  good  cheer,  and  bend  to  your  oars ; 
this  boat  carries  a  Bishop  who  is  not  to  be  drowned,  but 
burned.'" 


214  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

From  the  day  that  Ridley  became  a  Bishop,  he  appears 
to  have  been  wholly  absorbed  in  assisting  Archbishop 
Cranmer  to  establish  and  consolidate  the  Reformation  of 
the  Church  of  England.  For  this  huge  and  formidable 
work  he  was  peculiarly  well  fitted  by  his  acknowledged 
learning.  To  no  one,  perhaps,  of  the  Reformers  are  we 
more  indebted  for  our  admirable  Articles  and  Liturgy, 
than  to  Ridley.  Altered  and  somewhat  improved,  as  they 
undoubtedly  were  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  time,  we  must 
never  forget  that  in  their  rudimentary  form  they  first 
received  shape  and  consistency  from  the  Edwardian 
Reformers ;  and  that  of  the  Edwardian  Reformers,  no  one 
probably  did  a  greater  portion  of  the  work  than  Bishop 
Ridley.  In  fact,  the  importance  of  his  work  in  the 
English  Reformation  may  be  gathered  from  the  saying  of 
one  of  his  most  distinguished  adversaries:  "Latimer 
leaneth  to  Cranmer,  Cranmer  leaneth  to  Ridley,  and 
Ridley  leaneth  to  his  own  singular  wit."  No  one, 
certainly,  seems  to  have  had  more  influence  over  the 
mind  of  Edward  VI.  than  Ridley.  It  was  owing  to  his 
suggestion  that  the  noble-minded  young  King  founded  no 
less  than  sixteen  grammar  schools,  including  Christ's 
Hospital;  and  designed,  if  his  life  had  been  spared,  to 
erect  twelve  colleges  for  the  education  of  youths.  Besides 
this,  the  noble  institution  of  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital, 
in  Smithfield,  was  first  endowed  and  called  into  existence 
by  Ridley's  advice  to  the  King. 

The  account  given  by  Mr.  Christmas,  in  his  biography 
prefixed  to  Ridley's  works,  of  the  circumstances  under 
which  Edward  the  Sixth  founded  St.  Bartholomew's  Hos 
pital  is  so  interesting  that  I  shall  give  it  in  its  entirety : — 

"A  remarkable    instance  of    the   beneficial  effect   of 


NICHOLAS  RIDLEY:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.          215 

"Ridley's  counsels  is  to  be  seen  in  the  foundation  of  thres 
institutions  in  the  reign  of  Edward  VI.,  and  which  in 
point  of  date  may  be  called  the  first  fruits  of  the 
Reformation.  Both  in  the  council  chamber  and  the 
pulpit  did  this  eminent  prelate  resist  the  sacrilegious 
spirit  of  his  day;  and  though  the  young  King  was  but 
partially  able  to  resist  the  tide  of  corruption,  he  yet 
founded,  at  the  suggestion  of  Ridley,  no  less  than  sixteen 
grammar  schools,  and  designed,  had  his  life  been  spared, 
to  erect  twelve  colleges  for  the  education  of  youth. 
Shortly  before  his  death  he  sent  for  the  Bishop,  and 
thanking  him  for  a  sermon  in  which  he  strongly  pressed 
the  duty  of  providing  for  the  poverty  and  ignorance  of 
our  fellow-men,  added :  '  I  took  myself  to  be  especially 
touched  by  your  speech,  as  well  in  regard  of  the  abilities 
God  hath  given  me,  as  in  regard  of  the  example  which 
from  me  He  will  require ;  for  as  in  the  kingdom  I  am  next 
under  God,  so  must  I  most  nearly  approach  Him  in 
goodness  and  mercy;  for  as  our  miseries  stand  most  in 
need  of  aid  from  Him,  so  are  we  the  greatest  debtors — 
debtors  to  all  that  are  miserable,  and  shall  be  the  greatest 
accountants  of  our  dispensation  therein;  and  therefore, 
my  Lord,  as  you  have  given  me,  I  thank  you,  this  general 
exhortation,  so  direct  me  (I  pray  you)  by  what  particular 
actions  I  may  this  way  best  discharge  my  duty.'  The 
Bishop,  who  was  not  prepared  for  such  a  request,  begged 
time  to  consider,  and  to  consult  with  those  who  were  more 
conversant  with  the  condition  of  the  poor.  Having  taken 
the  advice  of  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Aldermen  of  London, 
he  shortly  returned  to  the  King,  representing  that  there 
appeared  to  be  three  different  classes  of  poor.  Some  were 
poor  by  impotency  of  nature,  as  young  fatherless  children, 


216  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

old  decrepit  persons,  idiots,  cripples,  and  such  like,  these 
required  to  be  educated  and  maintained;  for  them 
accordingly  the  King  gave  up  the  Grey  Friars'  Church, 
near  Newgate  Market,  now  called  Christ's  Hospital. 
Other  he  observed  were  poor  by  faculty,  as  wounded 
soldiers,  diseased  and  sick  persons  who  required  to  be 
cured  and  relieved,  for  their  use  the  King  gave  St. 
Bartholomew's,  near  Smithfield;  the  third  sort  were  poor 
by  idleness  or  unthriftiness,  as  vagabonds,  loiterers,  &c., 
who  should  be  chastised  and  reduced  to  good  order ;  for 
these  the  King  appointed  his  house  at  Bridewell,  the 
ancient  mansion  of  many  English  Kings." 

The  inner  life  and  habits  of  Ridley,  during  the  brief 
period  of  his  episcopate,  are  so  beautifully  described  by 
Fox  in  his  "  Acts  and  Monuments "  that  I  make  nc 
excuse  for  giving  the  passage  in  its  entirety : — 

"  In  his  calling  and  office  he  so  travelled  and  occupied 
himself  by  preaching  and  teaching  the  true  and  wholesome 
doctrine  of  Christ,  that  never  good  child  was  more 
singularly  loved  of  his  dear  parents  than  he  of  his  flock 
and  diocese.  Every  holiday  and  Sunday  he  preached  in 
some  one  place  or  other,  except  he  were  otherwise  letted 
by  weighty  affairs  and  business.  To  whose  sermons  the 
people  resorted,  swarming  about  him  like  bees,  and 
coveting  the  sweet  flowers  and  wholesome  juice  of  the 
fruitful  doctrine,  which  he  did  not  only  preach,  but 
showed  the  same  by  his  life,  as  a  glittering  lantern  to  the 
eyes  and  senses  of  the  blind,  in  such  pure  order  and 
chastity  of  life  (declining  from  evil  desires  and  con 
cupiscences),  that  even  his  very  enemies  could  not  reprove 
him  in  any  one  iota  thereof, 


NICHOLAS  RIDLEY:  BISHOP,  AND  MARTYR.       217 

"Besides  this,  he  was  passingly  well  learned.  His 
memory  was  great,  and  he  of  such  reading  withal,  that 
of  right  he  deserved  to  be  comparable  to  the  best  of  this 
our  age,  as  can  testify  as  well  divers  his  notable  works, 
pithy  sermons,  and  sundry  disputations  in  both  the 
Universities,  as  also  his  very  adversaries,  all  which  will 
say  no  less  themselves. 

"Besides  all  this,  he  was  wise  of  counsel,  deep  of  wit, 
and  very  politic  in  all  his  doings.  How  merciful  and 
careful  he  was  to  reduce  the  obstinate  Papists  from  their 
erroneous  opinions,  and  by  gentleness  to  win  them  to  the 
truth,  his  gentle  ordering  and  courteous  handling  of 
Doctor  Heath,  late  Archbishop  of  York,  being  prisoner 
with  him  in  King  Edward's  time  in  his  house  one  year, 
sufficiently  declareth.  In  fine,  he  was  such  a  prelate,  and 
in  all  points  so  good,  godly,  and  ghostly  a  man,  that 
England  may  justly  rue  the  loss  of  so  worthy  a  treasure. 
And  thus  hitherto  concerning  these  public  matters. 

"  Now  will  I  speak  something  further  particularly  of  his 
person  and  conditions.  He  was  a  man  right  comely  and 
well  proportioned  in  all  points,  both  in  complexion  and 
lineaments  of  the  body.  He  took  all  things  in  good  part, 
bearing  no  malice  nor  rancour  from  his  heart,  but 
straightways  forgetting  all  injuries  and  offences  done 
against  him.  He  was  very  kind  and  natural  to  his 
kinsfolk,  and  yet  not  bearing  with  them  anything  otherwise 
than  light  would  require,  giving  them  always  for  a  general 
rule  (yea,  to  his  own  brother  and  sister)  that  they  doing 
evil,  should  seek  or  look  for  nothing  at  his  hand,  but 
should  be  as  strangers  and  aliens  unto  him,  and  they  to  be 
his  brother  or  sister  which  used  honesty  and  a  godly  trade 
of  life. 


218  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

"  He,  using  all  kinds  of  ways  to  mortify  himself,  was 
given  to  much  prayer  and  contemplation;  for  duly  every 
morning,  so  soon  as  his  apparel  was  done  upon  him,  he 
went  forthwith  to  his  bed-chamber,  and  there  upon  his 
knees  prayed  the  space  of  half-an-hour,  which  being  done, 
immediately  he  went  to  his  study  (if  there  came  no  other 
business  to  interrupt  him),  where  he  continued  till  ten  of 
the  clock,  and  then  came  to  common  prayer,  daily  used  in 
his  house.  The  prayers  being  done  he  went  to  dinner, 
where  he  used  little  talk,  except  otherwise  occasion  by 
some  had  been  ministered,  and  then  it  was  sober,  discreet, 
and  wise,  and  sometimes  merry,  as  cause  required. 

"  The  dinner  done,  which  was  not  very  long,  he  used  to 
sit  an  hour  or  thereabouts  talking  or  playing  at  chess. 
That  done,  he  returned  to  his  study,  and  there  would 
continue,  except  suitors  or  business  abroad  were  occasion 
of  the  contrary,  until  five  of  the  clock  at  night,  and  then 
would  come  to  common  prayer,  as  in  the  forenoon,  which 
being  finished  he  went  to  supper,  behaving  himself  there 
as  at  his  dinner  before.  After  supper  recreating  himself 
in  playing  at  chess  the  space  of  an  hour,  he  would  then 
return  again  to  his  study ;  continuing  there  till  eleven  of 
the  clock  at  night,  which  was  his  common  hour  to  go  to 
bed,  then  saying  his  prayers  upon  his  knees,  as  in  the 
morning  when  he  rose.  Being  at  his  manor  of  Fulham,  as 
divers  times  he  used  to  be,  he  read  daily  a  lecture  to  his 
family  at  the  common  prayer,  beginning  at  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles,  an;l  so  going  throughout  all  the  Epistles  of 
St.  Paul,  giving  to  every  man  that  could  read  a  New 
Testament,  hiring  them  besides  with  money  to  learn  by 
heart  certain  principal  chapters,  but  especially  the 
thirteenth  chapter  of  the  Acts;  reading  also  unto  his 


NICHOLAS  RIDLEY:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.          219 

household  oftentimes  the  one  hundred  and  first  Psalm, 
being  marvellous  careful  over  his  family,  that  they  might 
be  a  spectacle  of  all  virtue  and  honesty  to  other.  To  be 
short,  he  was  as  godly  and  virtuous  himself,  so  nothing  but 
virtue  and  godliness  reigned  in  his  house,  feeding  them 
with  the  food  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 

"  Now  remaineth  a  word  or  two  to  be  declared  of  his 
gentle  nature  and  kindly  pity  in  the  usage  of  an  old 
woman  called  Mistress  Bonner,  mother  to  Doctor  Bonner, 
sometime  Bishop  of  London :  which  I  thought  good  to 
touch,  as  well  for  the  rare  clemency  of  Doctor  Ridley,  as 
the  unworthy  immanity  and  ungrateful  disposition  again 
of  Doctor  Bonner.  Bishop  Ridley,  being  at  his  manor  of 
Fulham,  always  sent  for  the  said  Mistress  Bonner,  dwelling 
in  an  house  adjoining  to  his  house,  to  dinner  and  supper, 
with  one  Mistress  Mungey,  Bonner's  sister,  saying,  'Go 
for  my  mother '  Bonner ; '  who  coming,  was  ever  placed  in 
the  chair  at  the  table's  end,  being  so  gently  entreated, 
welcomed,  and  taken,  as  though  he  had  been  born  of  her 
own  body,  being  never  displaced  of  her  seat,  although  the 
King's  council  had  been  present,  saying,  when  any  of  them 
were  there  (as  divers  times  they  were), '  By  your  lordships' 
favour,  this  place  of  right  and  custom  is  for  my  mother 
Bonner.'  But  how  well  he  was  recompensed  for  this  his 
singular  gentleness  and  pitiful  pity  after  at  the  hands  of 
the  said  Doctor  Bonner,  almost  the  least  child  that  goeth 
by  the  ground  can  declare.  For  who  afterward  was  more 
enemy  to  Ridley  than  Bonner  and  his  ?  Who  more  went 
about  to  seek  his  destruction  than  he,  recompensing  his 
gentleness  with  extreme  cruelty?  As  well  appeared  by 
the  strait  handling  of  Ridley's  own  natural  sister,  and 
George  Shipside,  her  husband,  from  time  to  time. 


220  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

The  gentleness  of  Ridley  did  suffer  Bonner's  mother, 
sister,  and  other  his  kindred,  not  only  quietly  to  enjoy  all 
that  which  they  had  of  Bonner,  but  also  entertained  them 
in  his  house,  showing  much  courtesy  and  friendship  daily 
unto  them.  On  the  other  side  Bishop  Bonner,  being 
restored  again,  would  not  suffer  the  brother  and  natural 
sister  of  Bishop  Ridley,  and  other  his  friends,  not  only 
not  to  enjoy  that  which  they  had  by  the  said  their 
brother  Bishop  Ridley,  but  also  currishly,  without  all  order 
of  law  or  honesty,  by  extort  power  wrested  from  them  all 
the  livings  they  had. 

"And  yet  being  not  therewith  satisfied,  he  sought  all 
the  means  he  could  to  work  the  death  of  the  aforesaid 
Shipside,  saying  that  he  would  make  twelve  godfathers  to 
go  upon  him ;  which  had  been  brought  to  pass  indeed,  at 
what  time  he  was  prisoner  at  Oxford,  had  not  God 
otherwise  wrought  his  deliverance  by  means  of  Doctor 
Heath,  Bishop  then  of  Worcester. 

"Whereby  all  good  indifferent  readers  notoriously  have 
to  understand,  what  great  diversity  was  in  the  disposition 
of  these  two  natures.  Whereof  as  the  one  excelled  in 
mercy  and  pity,  so  the  other  again  as  much  or  more 
excelled  in  churlish  ingratitude  and  despiteful  disdain. 
But  of  this  matter  enough." 

The  closing  scene  of  Ridley's  life,  his  famous  martyrdom, 
on  October  16th,  1555,  is  described  with  such  touching 
and  masterly  simplicity  by  Fox,  that  I  think  it  best  to  let 
my  readers  have  it  in  the  Martyrologist's  own  words : — 

"Upon  the  north  side  of  the  town  of  Oxford,  in  the 
ditch  over  against  Balliol  College,  the  place  of  execution 
was  appointed;  and  for  fear  of  any  tumult  that  might 
arise,  to  let  the  burning  of  them,  the  lord  Williams  was 


KtCHOLAS  RIDLEY:    BISHOP  ANI*  MARTYR.         22l 

commanded,  by  the  Queen's  letters,  and  the  householders 
of  the  city  to  be  there  assistant,  sufficiently  appointed. 
And  when  everything  was  in  a  readiness,  the  prisoners 
were  brought  forth  by  the  mayor  and  the  bailiffs. 

"  Master  Kidley  had  a  fair  black  gown  furred,  and  faced 
with  foins,  such  as  he  was  wont  to  wear,  being  Bishop,  and 
tippet  of  velvet  furred  likewise  about  his  neck,  a  velvet 
nightcap  upon  his  head,  and  a  corner  cap  upon  the  same, 
going  in  a  pair  of  slippers  to  the  stake,  and  going  between 
the  mayor  and  an  alderman. 

"  After  him  came  Master  Latimer,  in  a  poor  Bristol 
frieze  frock,  all  worn,  with  his  buttoned  cap,  and  a  kerchief 
on  his  head,  all  ready  to  the  fire,  a  new  long  shroud 
hanging  over  his  hose  down  to  the  feet.  All  this  at  the 
first  sight  stirred  men's  hearts  to  rue  upon  them,  beholding 
on  the  one  side  the  honour  they  sometime  had,  and  on  the 
other  the  calamity  whereunto  they  were  fallen. 

"Then  Master  Ridley,  looking  back,  espied  Master 
Latimer  coming  after,  unto  whom  he  said,  'Oh,  be  ye 
there  ? '  '  Yea,'  said  Master  Latimer,  '  I  have  after  you  as 
fast  as  I  can  follow.'  So  he  following  a  pretty  way  off,  at 
length  they  came  both  to  the  stake,  the  one  after  the  other; 
where  first  Dr.  Ridley  entering  the  place,  marvellous 
earnestly  holding  up  both  his  hands,  looked  towards 
heaven.  Then  shortly  after  espying  Master  Latimer,  with 
a  wondrous  cheerful  look  he  ran  to  him,  embraced  and 
kissed  him ;  and,  as  they  that  stood  near  reported, 
comforted  him,  saying,  '  Be  of  good  heart,  brother,  for  Qod 
will  either  assuage  the  fury  of  the  flame,  or  else  strengthen 
us  to  abide  it.' 

"  With  that  went  he  to  the  stake,  kneeled  down  by  it, 
kissed  it,  and  effectually  prayed ;  and  behind  him  Master 


222  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Latimer  kneeled,  as  earnestly  calling  upon  God  as  he 
After  they  arose  the  one  talked  with  the  other  a  little, 
while  they  which  were  appointed  to  see  the  execution 
removed  themselves  out  of  the  sun.  What  they  said  I 
can  learn  of  no  man. 

"After  a  sermon  by  a  renegade  preacher  named  Smith, 
which  they  were  not  allowed  to  answer,  they  were 
commanded  to  make  them  ready,  which  they  with  all 
meekness  obeyed.  Master  Ridley  took  his  gown  and  his 
tippet,  and  gave  it  to  his  brother-in-law  Master  Shipside, 
who  all  his  time  of  imprisonment,  although  he  might  not 
be  suffered  to  come  to  him,  lay  there  at  his  own  charges  to 
provide  him  necessaries,  which,  from  time  to  time,  he  sent 
by  the  sergeant  that  kept  him.  Some  other  of  his  apparel 
that  was  little  worth  he  gave  away;  other  the  bailiffs 
took. 

*He  gave  away  besides  divers  other  small  things  to 
gentlemen  standing  by,  and  divers  of  them  pitifully 
weeping.  As  to  Sir  Henry  Lea  he  gave  a  new  groat ;  and 
to  divers  of  my  lord  Williams'  gentlemen  some  napkins, 
some  nutmegs,  and  rases  of  ginger;  his  dial,  and  such 
other  things  as  he  had  about  him,  to  every  one  that  stood 
next  him.  Some  plucked  the  points  off  his  hose.  Happy 
was  he  that  might  get  any  rag  of  him. 

"  Master  Latimer  gave  nothing,  but  quietly  suffered  his 
keeper  to  pull  off  his  hose  and  his  other  array,  which  to 
look  unto  was  very  simple;  and  being  stripped  unto  his 
shroud,  he  seemed  as  comely  a  person  to  them  that  were 
there  present,  as  one  should  lightly  see ;  and  whereas  in 
his  clothes  he  appeared  a  withered  and  crooked  silly  old 
man,  he  now  stood  bolt  upright,  as  comely  a  father  as  one 
might  lightly  beKold. 


NICHOLAS  RIDLEY:    BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.         221 

"  Then  Master  Ridley,  standing  as  yet  in  his  truss,  said 
to  his  brother, '  It  were  best  for  me  to  go  in  my  truss  still.' 
'No,'  quoth  his  brother,  'it  will  put  you  to  more  pain; 
and  the  truss  will  do  a  poor  man  good.'  Whereunto 
Master  Ridley  said,  '  Be  it  so,  in  the  name  of  God ; '  and 
so  unlaced  himself.  Then,  being  in  his  shirt,  he  stood 
upon  the  aforesaid  stone,  and  held  up  his  hand  and  said, 
'  0  heavenly  Father,  I  give  unto  Thee  most  hearty  thanks, 
for  that  Thou  hast  called  me  to  be  a  professor  of  Thee, 
even  unto  death.  I  beseech  Thee,  Lord  God,  take  mercy 
upon  this  realm  of  England,  and  deliver  the  same  from  all 
her  enemies.' 

"  Then  the  smith  took  a  chain  of  iron,  and  brought  the 
same  about  both  Dr.  Ridley's  and  Master  Latimer's  middle : 
and  as  he  was  knocking  in  a  staple,  Dr.  Ridley  took  the 
chain  in  his  hand,  and  shaked  the  same,  for  it  did-  gird  in 
his  belly,  and  looking  aside  to  the  smith  said, '  Good  fellow, 
knock  it  in  hard,  for  the  flesh  will  have  his  course.'  Then 
his  brother  did  bring  him  gunpowder  in  a  bag,  and  would 
have  tied  the  same  about  his  neck.  Master  Ridley  asked 
what  it  was.  His  brother  said,  'Gunpowder.'  'Then,' 
said  he, '  I  will  take  it  to  be  sent  of  God ;  therefore  I  will 
receive  it  as  sent  of  Him.  And  have  you  any,'  said  he, 
'for  my  brother?'  meaning  Master  Latimer.  'Yea,  sir, 
that  I  have,'  quoth  his  brother.  '  Then  give  it  unto  him,' 
said  he,  'betime;  lest  ye  come  too  late.'  So  his  brother 
went,  and  carried  of  the  same  gunpowder  unto  Master 
Latimer. 

"  Then  they  brought  a  faggot,  kindled  with  fire,  and  laid 
the  same  down  at  Dr.  Ridley's  feet.  To  whom  Master 
Latimer  spake  in  this  manner :  '  BE  OF  GOOD 
COMFORT,  MASTER  RIDLEY,  AND  PLAY  THE 
MAN.  WE  SHALL  THIS  DAY  LIGHT  SUCH  A 


224  LIGHT   FROM   OLD   TIMES. 

CANDLE,  BY  GOD'S  GKACE,  IN  ENGLAND,  AS  1 
TRUST  SHALL  NEVER  BE  PUT  OUT.' 

"And  so  the  fire  being  given  unto  them,  when  Dr. 
Ridley  saw  the  fire  flaming  up  towards  him,  he  cried  willi 
a  wonderful  loud  voice,  'In  inanus  tuas,  Domine. 
commendo  spiritum  meum:  Domine,  recipe  spiritum 
meum.'  And  after  repeated  this  latter  part  often  in 
English, '  Lord,  Lord,  receive  my  spirit ; '  Master  Latimcr 
crying  as  vehemently  on  the  other  side,  'O  Father  of 
heaven,  receive  my  soul!'  who  received  the  flame,  as  it 
were  embracing  of  it. 

"  After  that  he  had  stroked  his  face  with  his  hand,  and 
as  it  were  bathed  them  a  little  in  the  fire,  he  soon  died 
(as  it  appeared),  with  very  little  pain  or  none.  And  thus 
much  concerning  the  end  of  this  old  and  blessed  servant 
of  God,  Master  Latimer,  for  whose  laborious  travails, 
fruitful  life,  and  constant  death,  the  whole  realm  hath 
cause  to  give  great  thanks  to  Almighty  God. 

"  But  Master  Ridley,  by  reason  of  the  evil  making  of 
the  fire  unto  him,  because  the  wooden  faggots  were  laid 
about  the  gorse,  and  overhigh  built,  the  fire  burned  first 
beneath,  being  kept  down  by  the  wood ;  which  when  he 
felt,  he  desired  them  for  Christ's  sake  to  let  the  fire  come 
unto  him.  Which  when  his  brother-in-law  heard,  but  not 
well  understood,  intending  to  rid  him  out  of  his  pain  (for 
the  which  cause  he  gave  attendance),  as  one  in  such  sorrow 
not  well  advised  what  he  did,  he  heaped  faggots  upon  him, 
so  that  he  clean  covered  him,  which  made  the  fire  more 
vehement  beneath,  that  it  burned  clean  all  his  nether  parts 
before  it  touched  the  upper;  and  that  made  him  leap  up 
and  down  under  the  faggots,  and  often  desire  them  to  let 
the  fire  come  unto  him,  saying,  'I  cannot  burn.'  Which 


THE    MABTYBS'    MEMOIilAL,    OXFOKD.  (face  p.  225). 


NICHOLAS  RIDLEY:  BlSHOP  AND   MARTYR.          225 

indeed  appeared  well ;  for  after  his  legs  were  consumed, 
by  reason  of  his  struggling  through  the  pain  (whereof  be 
had  no  release  but  only  his  contentation  in  God)  ho 
shewed  that  side  towards  us  clean,  shirt  and  all  untouched 
with  flame.  Yet  in  all  this  torment  he  forgot  not  to  call 
unto  God  still,  having  in  his  mouth," '  Lord,  have  mercy 
upon  me,'  intermingling  his  cry.  '  Let  the  fire  come  unto 
me,  I  cannot  burn.'  In  which  pangs  he  laboured  till  one 
of  the  standers  by  with  his  bill  pulled  off  the  faggots 
above,  and  where  he  saw  the  fire  flame  up,  he  wrested 
himself  unto  that  side.  And  when  the  flame  touched  the 
gunpowder,  he  was  seen  to  stir  no  more,  but  burned  on 
the  other  side,  falling  down  at  Master  Latimer's  fefcl; 
which,  some  said,  happened  by  reason  that  the  chain 
loosed ;  others  said,  that  he  fell  over  the  chain  by  reason 
of  the  poise  of  his  body,  and  the  weakness  of  the  nether 
limbs. 

"  Some  said,  that  before  he  was  like  to  fall  from  the 
stake,  he  desired  them  to  hold  him  to  it  with  their  bills. 
However  it  was,  surely  it  moved  hundreds  to  tears,  in 
beholding  the  horrible  sight ;  for  I  think  there  was  none, 
that  had  not  clean  exiled  all  humanity  and  mercy,  which 
would  not  have  lamented  to  behold  the  fury  of  the  fire 
so  to  rage  upon  their  bodies.  Signs  there  were  of  sorrow 
on  every  side.  Some  took  it  grievously  to  see  their 
deaths,  whose  lives  they  held  full  dear;  some  pitied  their 
persons,  that  thought  their  souls  had  no  need  thereof.  His 
brother  moved  many  men,  seeing  his  miserable  case,  seeing 
(I  say)  him  compelled  to  such  infelicity,  that  he  thought 
then  to  do  him  best  service  when  he  hastened  his  end. 
Some  cried  out  of  the  fortune,  to  see  his  endeavour  (who 
most  dearly  loved  him,  and  sought  his  release)  turn  to 


226  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

his  greater  vexation  and  increase  of  pain.  But 
considered  their  preferments  in  time  past,  the  places  of 
honour  that  they  some  time  occupied  in  this  Common 
wealth,  the  favour  they  were  in  with  their  princes,  and  the 
opinion  of  learning  they  had  in  the  University  where  they 
studied,  could  not  choose,  but  sorrow  with  tears,  to  see  so 
great  dignity,  honour,  and  estimation,  so  necessary  members 
some  time  accounted,  so  many  godly  virtues,  the  study  of 
so  many  years,  such  excellent  learning,  to  be  put  into  the 
fire,  and  consumed  in  one  moment.  Well :  dead  they  are; 
and  the  reward  of  this  world  they  have  already.  What 
reward  remaineth  for  them  in  heaven,  the  day  of  the 
Lord's  glory,  when  He  cometn  with  His  saints,  shall 
shortly,  I  trust,  declare." 

It  only  remains  now  to  give  some  account  of  Ridley's 
writings.  They  are  few  in  number,  and  occupy  only  one 
volume  of  the  Parker  Society's  series.  They  consist 
chiefly  of  short  treatises  against  transubstantiation  and 
image-worship ;  conferences  with.  Latimer  and  Bourne  ;  a 
disputation  held  in  1549,  about  the  sacrament ;  disputa 
tions  and  examination  at  Oxford,  held  shortly  before  his 
martyrdom ;  injunctions  to  the  diocese  of  London ;  and 
thirty-five  letters,  chiefly  written  during  his  imprisonments. 
Scanty  as  these  literary  remains  are  from  so  great  a  divine, 
they  are  worthy  of  his  pen,  and  make  us  wish  he  had 
written  more.  But,  doubtless,  the  worthy  Bishop  had 
little  time  for  writing.  To  work,  and  preach,  and  advise, 
and  witness,  and  suffer,  and  die  for  God's  truth,  was 
his  appointed  lot.  And  who  shall  dare  to  say  that  his 
short  life  and  glorious  death  have  not  done  more  for 
Christ's  truth  in  England  than  fifty  folio  volumes  o/ 
writings  ? 


NICHOLAS    &IDLEY:    BISHOP   AND    MARTYR          227 

I  venture  to  think  that  the  following  extracts  from 
.Ridley's  writings  will  be  found  interesting. 

(1)  My  first  extract  shall  be  taken  from  Eidley's 
Conference  with  Latimer  (Parker  Society's  edition,  p. 
145):— 

"In  Tynedale,  where  I  was  born,  not  far  from  the 
Scottish  borders,  I  have  known  my  countrymen  watch 
night  and  day  in  their  harness,  such  as  they  had,  that  is, 
in  their  jacks,  and  their  spears  in  their  hands  (you  call 
them  northern  gads),  especially  when  they  had  any  privy 
warning  of  the  coming  of  the  Scots.  And  so  doing, 
although  at  every  such  bickering  some  of  them  spent 
their  lives,  yet  by  such  means,  like  pretty  men,  they 
defended  their  country.  And  those  that  so  died,  I  think, 
that  before  God,  they  died  in  a  good  quarrel,  and  their 
offspring  and  progeny  all  the  country  loved  them  the 
better  for  their  fathers'  sake. 

"  And  in  the  quarrel  of  Christ  our  Saviour,  in  the 
defence  of  His  own  Divine  ordinances,  by  the  which  He 
giveth  unto  us  life  and  immortality,  yea,  in  the  quarrel 
of  faith  and  Christian  religion,  wherein  resteth  our  ever 
lasting  salvation,  shall  we  not  watch  ?  Shall  we  not  go 
always  armed,  ever  looking  when  our  adversary  (which, 
like  a  roaring  lion,  seeketh  whom  he  may  devour)  shall 
coine  upon  us  by  reason  of  our  slothfulness  ?  Yea,  and 
woe  be  unto  us,  if  he  can  oppress  us  at  unawares,  which 
undoubtedly  he  will  do,  if  he  find  us  sleeping.  Let  us 
awake  therefore ;  for  if  the  good  man  of  the  house  knew 
what  hour  the  thief  would  come,  he  would  surely  watch 
Bad  not  suffer  his  house  to  be  broken  up.  Let  us 
awake  therefore,  I  say,  and  let  us  not  suffer  our  house 
to  be  broken  up.  '  Eesist  the  devil,'  says  St.  James, '  and 


223  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

he  will  fly  from  you.'  Let  us  therefore  resist  him 
manfully,  and,  taking  the  cross  upon  our  shoulders, 
let  us  follow  our  Captain  Christ,  who  by  His  own 
blood  hath  dedicated  and  hallowed  the  way,  which 
leadeth  unto  the  Father,  that  is,  to  the  light  which 
no  man  can  attain — the  fountain  of  everlasting  joys. 
Let  us  follow,  I  say,  whither  He  calleth  and  allureth  us, 
that  after  these  afflictions,  which  last  but  for  a  moment 
whereby  He  trieth  our  faith,  as  gold  by  the  fire,  we  may 
everlastingly  reign  and  triumph  with  Him  in  the  glory  of 
the  Father,  and  that  through  the  same  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  with  the  Father  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  now  and  for  ever. 
Amen.  Amen." 

(2)  My  second  extract  shall  be  taken  from  Eidley's 
Injunctions  to  the  Diocese  of  London,  given  in  the  year 
1550.  (Parker's  Society's  edition,  p.  319): — 

"It  is  injoined,  that  no  minister  do  counterfeit  the 
Popish  Mass  in  kissing  the  Lord's  board ;  washing  his 
hands  or  fingers  after  the  Gospel,  or  on  the  receipt  of  the 
Holy  Communion ;  shifting  the  book  from  one  place  to 
another ;  laying  down  and  licking  the  chalice  after  the 
Communion ;  blessing  his  eyes  with  the  sudarie  thereof, 
or  paten,  or  crossing  his  head  with  the  same,  holding 
his  fore-fingers  and  thumbs  joined  together  toward  the 
temples  of  his  head,  after  the  receiving  of  the  Sacrament ; 
breathing  on  the  bread,  or  chalice ;  saying  the  Agnus 
before  the  Communion ;  shewing  the  Sacrament  openly 
before  the  distribution,  or  making  any  elevation  thereof: 
ringing  of  the  sacrying  bell,  or  setting  any  light  upon  thf 
Lord's  board.  And  finally,  that  the  minister,  in  the  timft 
of  the  Holy  Communion,  do  use  only  the  ceremonies  and 


NICHOLAS    RIDLEY:    BISHOP    AND    MARTYR.          229 

gestures  appointed  by  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  and 
none  other,  so  that  there  do  not  appear  in  them  any 
counterfeiting  of  the  Popish  Mass. 

"And  whereas  in  divers  places  some  use  the  Lord's 
board  after  the  form  of  a  table,  and  some  of  an  altar, 
whereby  dissention  is  perceived  to  arise  among  the 
unlearned ;  therefore,  wishing  a  godly  unity  to  be 
observed  in  all  our  diocese,  and  for  that  the  form  of  a 
table  may  more  move  and  turn  the  simple  from  the  old 
superstitious  opinions  of  the  Popish  Mass  and  to  the 
right  use  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  we  exhort  the  curates, 
churchwardens,  and  questmen,  here  present,  to  erect  and 
set  up  the  Lord's  board  after  the  form  of  an  honest  table 
decently  covered,  in  such  place  of  the  quire  or  chancel  as 
shall  be  thought  most  meet  by  their  discretion  and 
agreement,  so  that  the  ministers,  with  the  communicants, 
may  have  their  place  separated  from  the  rest  of  the 
people ;  and  to  take  down  and  abolish  all  other  by-altars 
or  tables." 

(3)  My  third  extract  shall  be  taken  from  Eidley's 
letter  to  Bishop  Hooper  when  they  were  both  in  prison, 
expecting  death.  It  is  a  remarkable  letter,  when  we 
remember  that  the  two  famous  Reformers  had  once 
differed  much  about  vestments.  (Parker  Society's 
edition,  p.  355)  :— 

"  My  dearly  beloved  brother  and  fellow-elder,  whom  I 
reverence  in  the  Lord,  pardon  me,  I  beseech  you,  that 
hitheito,  since  your  captivity  and  mine,  I  have  not  saluted 
you  by  my  letters :  whereas,  I  do  indeed  confess,  I  have 
received  from  you  (such  was  your  gentleness)  two  letters 
at  sundry  times,  but  yet  at  such  times  as  I  could  not 
be  suffered  to  write  unto  you  again ;  or  if  I  might  have 


230  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

written,  yet  was  I  greatly  in  doubt,  lest  my  letters  should 
not  safely  come  unto  your  hands.  But  now,  my  dear 
brother,  forasmuch  as  I  understand  by  your  works,  whick 
I  have  yet  but  superficially  seen,  that  we  thoroughly  agree 
and  wholly  consent  together  in  those  things  which  are  th* 
grounds  and  substantial  points  of  our  religion,  against 
the  which  the  world  so  furiously  rageth  in  these  our 
days,  howsoever  in  time  past  in  smaller  matters  and 
circumstances  of  religion,  your  wisdom  and  my  simplicity 
(I  confess)  have  in  some  points  varied:  now,  I  say,  be 
you  assured,  that  even  with  my  whole  heart  (God  is  my 
witness)  in  the  bowels  of  Christ,  I  love  you,  and  in  truth, 
for  the  truth's  sake  which  abideth  in  us,  and  (as  I  am 
persuaded)  shall  by  the  grace  of  God  abide  with  us  for 
evermore.  And  because  the  world,  as  I  perceive,  brother, 
ceaseth  not  to  play  his  pageant,  and  busily  conspirelh 
against  Christ  our  Saviour  with  all  possible  force  and 
power,  exalting  high  things  against  the  knowledge  of  God, 
let  us  join  hands  together  in  Christ;  and  if  we  cannot 
overthrow,  yet  to  our  power,  and  as  much  as  in  us  lieth, 
let  us  shake  those  things,  not  with  carnal,  but  with 
spiritual  weapons ;  and  withal,  brother,  let  us  prepare 
ourselves  to  the  day  of  our  dissolution;  whereby,  after 
the  short  time  of  this  bodily  affliction,  by  the  grace 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  shall  triumph  together  with 
Him  in  eternal  glory." 

(4)  My  last  extract  shall  be  taken  from  Ridley's 
farewell  letter  to  the  prisoners  for  Christ's  cause.  (Parker 
Society's  edition,  p.  425)  : — 

"  Why  should  we  Christians  fear  death  ?  Can  death 
deprive  us  of  Christ,  which  is  all  our  comfort,  our  joy, 
and  our  life  ?  Nay,  forsooth.  But  contrary,  death  shall 


NICHOLAS  RIDLEY:  BISHOP  AND  MARTYK.        231 

deliver  us  from  this  mortal  body,  which  loadeth  and 
beareth  down  the  spirit,  that  it  cannot  so  well  perceive 
heavenly  things,  in  the  which  so  long  as  we  dwell,  we 
are  absent  from  God. 

"Wherefore,  understanding  our  state  in  that  we  be 
Christians,  that  if  our  mortal  body,  which  is  our  earthly 
house,  were  destroyed,  we  have  a  building,  a  house  not 
made  with  hands,  but  everlasting  in  heaven,  etc.;  therefore 
we  are  of  good  cheer,  and  know  that  when  we  are  in  tho 
body,  we  are  absent  from  God ;  for  we  walk  by  faith,  and 
not  by  clear  sight.  Nevertheless  we  are  bold,  and  had 
rather  be  absent  from  the  body  and  present  with  God. 
Wherefore  we  strive,  whether  we  be  present  at  home  or 
absent  abroad,  that  we  may  always  please  Him. 

"  And  who  that  hath  true  faith  in  our  Saviour  Christ, 
whereby  he  knoweth  somewhat  truly  what  Christ  oui 
Saviour  is,  that  He  is  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  life,  light, 
the  wisdom  of  the  Father,  all  goodness,  all  righteousness, 
and  whatsoever  is  good  that  heart  can  desire,  yea,  infinite 
plenty  of  all  these,  above  that  man's  heart  can  either 
conceive  or  think  (for  in  Him  dwelleth  the  fulness  of  tho 
Godhead  corporally),  and  also  that  He  is  given  us  of  the 
Father,  'and  made  of  God  to  be  our  wisdom,  our 
righteousness,  our  holiness,  and  our  redemption;'  who 
(I  say)  is  he  that  believeth  this  indeed,  that  would  not 
gladly  be  with  his  Master  Christ  ?  Paul  for  this 
knowledge  coveted  to  have  been  loosed  from  the  body, 
and  to  have  been  with  Christ,  for  that  he  counted  it  much 
better  for  himself,  and  had  rather  to  be  loosed  than  to 
live.  Therefore  these  words  of  Christ  to  the  thief  on  the 
cross,  that  asked  of  Him  mercy,  were  full  of  comfort  and 
solace:  'This  day  thou  shalt  be  with  Me  in  paradise. 


232  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

To  die  in  the  defence  of  Christ's  Gospel,  it  is  our  bouuden 
duty  to  Christ,  and  also  to  our  neighbour.  To  Christ, 
'for  He  died  for  us,  and  rose  again,  that  He  might  be 
Lord  over  all.*  And  seeing  He  died  for  us,  '  we  also 
(saith  St.  John)  should  jeopard,  yea  give,  our  life  for  our 
brethren.'  And  this  kind  of  giving  and  losing  is  getting 
and  winning  indeed ;  for  he  that  giveth  or  loseth  his  life 
thus,  getteth  and  winneth  it  for  evermore.  'Blessed  are 
they,  therefore,  that  die  in  the  Lord ; '  and  if  they  die  in 
the  Lord's  cause,  they  are  most  happy  of  all. 

"  Let  us  not  then  fear  death,  which  can  do  us  no  harm, 
otherwise  than  for  a  moment  to  make  the  flesh  to  smart ; 
for  that  our  faith,  which  is  surely  fastened  and  fixed  unto 
the  Word  of  God,  telleth  us  that  we  shall  be  anon  after 
death  in  peace,  in  the  hands  of  God,  in  joy,  in  solace,  and 
that  from  death  we  shall  go  straight  unto  life.  For 
St.  John  saith,  '  He  that  liveth  and  believeth  in  Me  shall 
never  die.'  And  in  another  place,  '  He  shall  depart  from 
death  unto  life.'  And  therefore  this  death  of  the 
Christian  is  not  to  be  called  death,  but  rather  a  gate  or 
entrance  into  everlasting  life.  Therefore  Paul  calleth  it 
but  a  dissolution  and  resolution;  and  both  Peter  and 
Paul,  a  putting  off  of  this  tabernacle  or  dwell-house, 
meaning  thereby  the  mortal  body,  as  wherein  the  soul  or 
spirit  doth  dwell  here  in  this  world  for  a  small  time. 
Yea,  this  death  may  be  called,  to  the  Christian,  an  end 
of  all  miseries.  For  so  long  as  we  live  here,  'we  must 
pass  through  many  tribulations,  before  we  can  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.'  And  now,  after  that  death  has 
shot  his  bolt,  all  the  Christian  man's  enemies  have  done 
what  they  can,  and  after  that  they  have  no  more  to  do. 
What  could  hurt  or  harm  poor  '  Lazarus,  that  lay  at  the 


NICHOLAS  EIDLEY:   BISHOP  AND  MARTYR.          233 

rich  man's  gate '  ?  his  former  penury  and  poverty,  his 
miserable  beggary,  and  horrible  sores  and  sickness  ?  For 
so  soon  as  death  had  stricken  him  with  his  dart,  so  soon 
came  the  angels  and  carried  him  straight  up  into 
Abraham's  bosom.  What  lost  he  by  death,  who  from 
misery  and  pain  is  set  by  the  ministry  of  angels  in  a 
place  both  of  joy  and  solace  ? 

"  Farewell,  dear  brethren,  farewell !  and  let  us  comfort 
our  hearts  in  all  troubles,  and  in  death,  with  the  Word  of 
God  :  for  heaven  and  earth  shall  perish,  but  the  Word  of 
the  Lord  endureth  for  ever. 


SAMUEL    WARD. 

SAMUEL  WARD,  an  eminent  Suffolk  divine,  and  one  of 
the  most  famous  Puritans  of  the  seventeenth  century,  is  a 
man  whose  name  is  comparatively  unknown  to  most 
readers  of  English  theology.  This  is  easily  accounted  for. 
He  wrote  but  little,  and  what  he  wrote  has  never  been 
reprinted  till  very  lately.  The  works  of  Owen,  Baxter, 
Gurnal,  Charnock,  Goodwin,  Adams,  Brooks,  Watson, 
Greenhill,  Sibbes,  Jenkyn,  Manton,  Burroughs,  Bolton, 
and  others,  have  been  reprinted,  either  wholly  or  partially. 
Of  Samuel  Ward,  so  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  not  a  word 
had  been  reprinted  till  recently  for  more  than  two 
hundred  years. 

How  far  Samuel  Ward's  sermons  have  deserved  this 
neglect,  I  am  content  to  leave  to  the  judgment  of  all 
students  of  theology  into  whose  hands  his  sermons  may 
falL  But  I  venture  the  opinion,  that  it  reflects  little  credit 
on  the  discretion  of  republishers  of  old  divinity  that  such 
a  writer  as  Samuel  Ward  has  been  so  long  passed  over. 
His  case,  however,  does  not  stand  alone.  When  such 
works  as  those  of  Swinnock,  Arrowsmith  on  John  i., 
Gouge  on  Hebrews,  Airay  on  Philippians,  John  Rogers  on 
1  Peter,  Hardy  on  1  John,  Daniel  Rogers  on  Naaman  the 

234 


SAMUEL   WARD.  235 

Syrian  (to  say  nothing  of  some  of  the  best  works  of 
Manton  and  Brooks),  have  been  only  recently  thought 
worthy  of  republication,  we  must  not  be  surprised  at  the 
treatment  which  Ward  has  received. 

As  one  who  was  for  thirty-seven  years  a  Suffolk 
minister,  and  a  thorough  lover  of  Puritan  theology,  I 
desire  to  supply  some  information  about  Ward  in  thia 
biographical  paper.  I  should  have  been  especially  pleased 
if  it  had  been  in  my  power  to  write  a  complete  memoir  of 
the  man  and  his  ministry.  I  regret,  however,  to  be 
obliged  to  say  that  the  materials  from  which  any  account 
of  him  can  be  compiled  are  exceedingly  scanty,  and  the 
facts  known  about  him  are  comparatively  few.  Nor  yet, 
unhappily,  is  this  difficulty  the  only  one  with  which  I  have 
had  to  contend.  It  is  a  very  curious  circumstance,  that 
no  less  than  three  divines  named  "  S.  Ward  "  lived  in  the 
first  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  and  were  all 
members  of  Sydney  College,  Cambridge.  These  three 
were  Dr.  Samuel  Ward,  Master  of  Sydney  College,  who 
was  one  of  the  English  Commissioners  at  the  Synod  of 
Dort,  and  a  correspondent  of  Archbishop  Usher, — 
Seth  Ward,  who  was  successively  Bishop  of  Exeter  and 
Salisbury, — and  Samuel  Ward,  of  Ipswich,  whose  sermons 
have  been  lately  reprinted.  Of  these  three,  the  two 
"  Samuels  "  were  undoubtedly  the  most  remarkable  men : 
but  the  similarity  of  their  names  has  hitherto  involved 
their  biographies  in  much  confusion.  I  can  only  say  that 
I  have  done  my  best,  in  the  face  of  these  accumulated 
difficulties,  to  unravel  a  tangled  skein,  and  to  supply  the 
reader  with  accurate  information. 

The  story  of  Samuel  Ward's  life  is  soon  told.  He  was 
born  at  Haverhill,  in  Suffolk,  in  the  year  1577,  and  was 


236  LIGHT  FUOM  OLD  TIMES, 

eldest  son  of  the  Rev.  John  Ward,  Minister  of  the  Gospel 
in  that  town.  John  Ward,  the  father  of  Samuel  Ward, 
appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  considerable  eminence 
as  a  minister  and  preacher.  Fuller  (in  his  Worthies 
of  Suffolk)  says  that  the  three  sons  together  would 
not  make  up  the  abilities  of  their  father.  The  following 
inscription  on  his  tomb  in  Haverhill  Church  is  well  worth 
reading  :— 

JOHANNES  WARDB. 

Quo  si  quis  scivit  scitius, 
Aut  si  quis  docuit  doctius, 
At  rarus  vixit  sanctius, 
Et  nullus  tomrit  fortius. 

Son  of  thunder,  son  of  ye  dove, 
Full  of  hot  zeal,  full  of  true  love  ; 
In  preaching  truth,  in  living  right,— 
A  burning  lampe,  a  shining  light. 

LIGHT  HEBE.  STARS  HEREAFTER. 

John  Ward,  after  he  with  great  evidence 
and  power  of  ye  Spirite,  and  with  much  fruit, 

preached  ye  Gospel  at  Haverill  and  Bury  in 
Suff.  25  years,  was  heere  gathered  to  his  fathers. 

WATCH.  Susan,  his  widdowe,  married  Rogers,  that  WARDE. 

worthy  Pastor  of  Wethersfielde.     He  left  3  sonnes, 

Samuel,  Nathaniel,  John,  Preachers,  who  for 

them  and  theirs,  wish  no  greater  blessing 

than  that  they  may  continue  in  beleeving 

and  preaching  the  same  Gospel  till  ye  coming 

of    Christ.       Come,    Lord    Jesus,    come    quicklye. 

WATCH.  Death  is  our  entrance  into  life.  WARDE. 


Samuel  Ward,  the  subject  of  this  memoir  was  admitted 
a  scholar  of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  on  Lady 
Margaret's  foundation,  on  Lord  Burghley's  nomination, 
November  6th,  1594,  and  went  out  B.A.  of  that  house  in 


SAMUEL  WARD.  237 

1596.  He  was  appointed  one  of  the  first  Fellows  of 
Sydney  Sussex  College,  in  1599,  commenced  M.A.  1600, 
vacated  his  Fellowship  on  his  marriage  in  1604,  and 
proceeded  B.D.  in  1607. 

Nothing  is  known  of  Ward's  boyhood  and  youth.  His 
entrance  on  the  work  of  the  ministry,  the  name  of  the 
Bishop  by  whom  he  was  ordained,  the  date  of  his 
ordination,  the  place  where  he  first  began  to  do  Christ's 
work  as  a  preacher,  are  all  things  of  which  apparently 
there  is  no  record.  His  first  appearance  as  a  publid 
character  was  in  the  capacity  of  Lecturer  at  his  native 
town  of  Haverhill.  Of  his  success  at  Haverhill,  Samuel 
Clark  (in  his  "Lives  of  Eminent  Persons,"  p.  154,  edit. 
1683),  gives  the  following  interesting  example,  in  his  life 
of  Samuel  Fairclough,  a  famous  minister  of  Kedington,  in 
Suffolk:— 

"  God  was  pleased  to  begin  a  work  of  grace  in  the  heart 
of  Samuel  Fairclough  very  early  and  betimes,  by  awaken 
ing  his  conscience  by  the  terror  of  the  law,  and  by 
bestowing  a  sincere  repentance  upon  him  thereby,  and  by 
working  an  effectual  faith  in  him;  and  all  this  waa 
done  by  the  ministry  of  the  Word  preached  by  Mr. 
Samuel  Ward,  then  Lecturer  of  Haverhill.  Mr.  Ward 
had  answered  for  him  in  baptism,  and  had  always  a  hearty 
love  to  him.  Preaching  one  day  on  the  conversion  of 
Zaccheus,  and  discoursing  upon  his  fourfold  restitution  in 
cases  of  rapine  and  extortion,  Mr.  Ward  used  that  frequent 
expression,  that  no  man  can  expect  pardon  from  God  of 
the  wrong  done  to  another's  estate,  except  he  make  full 
restitution  to  the  wronged  person,  if  it  may  possibly  bj 
clone.  This  was  as  a  dart  directed  by  the  hand  of  God  to 
the  heart  of  young  Fairclough,  who,  together  with  one 


238  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES, 

John  Trigg,  afterwards  a  famous  physician  in  London 
had  the  very  week  before  robbed  the  orchard  of  one 
Goodman  Jude  of  that  town,  and  had  filled  their  pockets 
as  well  as  their  bellies  with  the  fruit  of  a  mellow  pear 
tree. 

"  At  and  after  sermon,  young  Fairclough  mourned  muck 
and  had  not  any  sleep  all  the  night  following ;  and,  rising 
on  the  Monday  morning,  he  went  to  his  companion  Trigg 
and  told  him  that  he  was  going  to  Goodman  Jude's,  to 
carry  him  twelve  pence  by  way  of  restitution  for  three 
pennyworth  of  pears  of  which  he  had  wronged  him. 
Trigg,  fearing  that  if  the  thing  were  confessed  to  Jude,  he 
would  acquaint  Robotham  their  master  therewith,  and 
that  corporal  correction  would  follow,  did  earnestly  strive 
to  divert  the  poor  child  from  his  purpose  of  restitution. 
But  Fairclough  replied  that  God  would  not  pardon  the  sin 
except  restitution  were  made.  To  which  Trigg  answered 
thus:  'Thou  talkest  like  a  fool,  Sam  ;  God  will  forgive  us 
ten  times  sooner  than  old  Jude  will  forgive  us  once.'  But 
our  Samuel  was  of  another  mind,  and  therefore  he  goes  on 
to  Jude's  house,  and  there  told  him  his  errand,  and  offered 
him  a  shilling,  which  Jude  refusing  (though  he  declared 
his  forgiveness  of  the  wrong),  the  youth's  wound  smarted 
so,  that  he  could  get  no  rest  till  he  went  to  his  spiritual 
father,  Mr.  Ward,  and  opened  to  him  the  whole  state  ol 
his  soul,  both  on  account  of  this  particular  sin  and  many 
others,  and  most  especially  the  sin  of  sins,  the  original 
sin  and  depravation  of  his  nature.  Mr.  Ward  received 
him  with  great  affection  and  tenderness,  and  proved  the 
good  Samaritan  to  him,  pouring  wine  and  oil  into  his 
wounds,  answering  all  his  questions,  satisfying  his  fears, 
and  preaching  Jesus  to  him  so  fully  and  effectually  that 


SAMtiEL  WARD.  239 

ho  became  a  true  and  sincere  convert,  and  dedicated  and 
devoted  himself  to  his  Saviour  and  Redeemer  all  the  days 
of  his  life  after."  * 

From  Haverhill,  Samuel  Ward  was  removed,  in  1603, 
at  the  early  age  of  twenty-six,  to  a  position  of  great 
importance  in  those  days.  He  was  appointed  by  tho 
Corporation  of  Ipswich  to  the  office  of  Town  Preacher  at 
Ipswich,  and  filled  the  pulpit  of  St.  Mary-le-Tower,  in 
that  town,  with  little  intermission,  for  about  thirty  years. 
Ipswich  and  Norwich,  it  must  be  remembered,  were 
places  of  far  more  importance  two  hundred  and  fifty 
years  ago  than  they  are  at  the  present  day.  They  were 
the  capital  towns  of  two  of  the  wealthiest  and  most 
thickly  peopled  counties  in  England.  Suffolk,  in 
particular,  was  a  county  in  which  the  Protestant  and 
Evangelical  principles  of  the  Reformation  had  taken 
particularly  deep  root.  Some  of  the  most  eminent 
Puritans  were  Suffolk  ministers.  To  be  chosen  Town 
Preacher  of  a  place  like  Ipswich  two  hundred  and  fifty 
years  ago  was  a  very  great  honour,  and  shows  the  high 
estimate  which  was  set  on  Samuel  Ward's  ministerial 
character,  even  when  he  was  so  young  as  twenty-six.  It 
deserves  to  be  remarked  that  Matthew  Lawrence  and 
Stephen  Marshall,  who  were  among  his  successors,  were 


*  I  think  it  right  to  remark  that  Clark,  in  all  probability,  has  erred 
in  his  dates  in  telling  this  story.  He  says  that  Fairclough  was  boi-n  in 
1594,  and  that  the  event  he  has  recorded  took  place  when  he  was 
thirteen  years  old.  Now,  in  1607  Ward  had  ceased  to  be  Lecturer  of 
Haverhill.  Whether  the  explanation  of  this  discrepancy  is  that 
Fairclough  was  born  before  159-1,  or  that  he  was  only  nine  years  old 
when  he  stole  the  pears,  or  that  Ward  was  visiting  at  Haverhill  in  1607 
and  preached  during  his  visit,  or  that  Fairclough  was  at  school  at 
Ipswich  and  not  Haverhill,  is  a  point  that  we  have  no  means  of  decidiu^ 


240  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

both  leading  men  atnong  the  divines  of  the  seventeenth 
century. 

The  influence  which  Ward  possessed  in  Ipswich  appears 
to  have  been  very  considerable.  Fuller  says,  "He  was 
preferred  Minister  in,  or  rather  of,  Ipswich,  having  a  care 
over,  and  a  love  from,  all  the  parishes  in  that  populous 
place.  Indeed,  he  had  a  magnetic  virtue  (as  if  he  had 
learned  it  from  the  loadstone,  in  whose  qualities  he  was  so 
knowing)  to  attract  people's  affections."*  The  history  of 
his  thirty  years'  ministry  in  the  town  of  Ipswich  would 
doubtless  prove  full  of  interesting  particulars,  if  we  could 
only  discover  them.  Unhappily,  I  can  only  supply  thii 
reader  with  the  following  dry  facts,  which  I  have  found  in 
an  antiquarian  publication  of  considerable  value,  entitled 
"  Wodderspoon's  Memorials  of  Ipswich."  They  are 
evidently  compiled  from  ancient  records,  and  throw  some 
useful  light  on  certain  points  of  Ward's  history. 

Wodderspoon  rays, — "In  the  year  1603,  on  All  Saints' 
Day,  a  man  of  considerable  eminence  was  elected  as 
Preacher,  Mr.  Samuel  Ward.  The  Corporation  appear 
to  have  treated  him  with  great  liberality,  appointing  an 
hundred  marks  as  his  stipend,  and  also  allowing  him 
£6  13s.  4d.  quarterly  in  addition,  for  house  rent. 

*The  Municipal  Authorities  (possibly  because  of 
Jfetaining  so  able  a  divine)  declare  very  minutely  the 
terms  of  Mr.  Ward's  engagement.  In  his  sickness  or 


*  I  suspect  that  Fuller's  remarks  about  the  loadstone  refer  to  a  book 
called  "  Magiietia  Reductorium  Theologium,"  which  is  sometimes 
attributed  to  Samuel  Ward  of  Ipswich.  But  it  is  more  than  doubtful 
whether  the  authorship  of  this  book  does  not  belong  tc  Dr.  Samuel 
Ward,  the  Principal  of  Sydney  College,  of  whom  mention  has  already 
been  maclo. 


SAMUEL  WARD.  241 

absence  he  is  to  provide  for  the  supply  of  a  minister  at 
the  usual  place  three  times  a  week,  '  as  usual  hath  been.' 
'  He  shall  not  be  absent  out  of  town  above  forty  days  in 
one  year,  without  leave;  and  if  he  shall  take  a  pastoral 
charge,  his  retainer  by  the  Corporation  is  to  be  void. 
The  pension  granted  to  him  is  not  to  be  charged  on  the 
Foundation  or  Hospital  Lands.' 

"In  the  seventh  year  of  James  I.,  the  Corporation 
purchased  a  house  for  the  Preacher,  or  rather  for 
Mr.  Ward.  This  house  was  bought  by  the  town 
contributing  £120,  and  the  rest  of  the  money  was  made 
up  by  free  contributions,  on  the  understanding  that,  when 
Mr.  Ward  ceased  to  be  Preacher,  the  building  was  to  be 
re-sold,  and  the  various  sums  collected  returned  to  those 
who  contributed,  as  well  as  the  money  advanced  by  the 
Corporation. 

"  In  the  eighth  year  of  James  I.,  the  Corporation 
increased  the  salary  of  Mr.  Ward  to  £90  per  annum, '  on 
account  of  the  charges  he  is  at  by  abiding  here.' 

"  In  the  fourteenth  year  of  James  I.,  Mr.  Samuel  Ward's 
pension  increased  from  £90  to  £100  yearly. 

"The  preaching  of  this  divine,  being  of  so  free  and 
puritanic  a  character,  did  not  long  escape  the  notice  of 
the  tale-bearers  of  the  Court ;  and  after  a  short  period, 
spent  in  negociation,  Mr.  Ward  was  restrained  from 
officiating  in  his  office.  In  1623,  August  6th,  a  record 
appears  in  the  town  books,  to  the  effect  that '  a  letter  from 
the  King,  to  inhibit  Mr.  Ward  from  preaching,  is  referred 
to  the  Council  of  the  town.' " 

About  the  remaining  portion  of  Ward's  life,  Wodder- 
spoon  supplies  no  information.  The  little  that  we  know 
about  it  is  gleaned  from  other  sources. 

Q 


242  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

It  is  clear,  from  Hackett's  life  of  the  Lord  Keeper 
Bishop  Williams  (p.  95,  ed.  1603),  that  though  prosecuted 
by  Bishop  Harsnet  for  nonconformity  in  1623,  Ward  was 
only  suspended  temporarily,  if  at  all,  from  his  office  as 
Preacher.  Brook  (in  his  "  Lives  of  the  Puritans,"  vol.  ii. 
p.  452),  following  Hackett,  says,  that  "  upon  his  prosecution 
in  the  Consistory  of  Norwich,  he  appealed  from  the  Bishop 
to  the  King,  who  committed  the  articles  exhibited  against 
him  to  the  examination  of  the  Lord  Keeper  Williams." 
The  Lord  Keeper  reported  that  Mr.  Ward  "was  not 
altogether  blameless,  but  a  man  easily  to  be  won  by  fair 
dealing;  and  persuaded  Bishop  Harsnet  to  take  his 
submission,  and  not  remove  him  from  Ipswich.  The  truth 
is,  the  Lord  Keeper  found  that  Mr.  Ward  possessed  so 
much  candour,  and  was  so  ready  to  promote  the  interests 
of  the  Church,  that  he  could  do  no  less  than  compound 
the  troubles  of  so  learned  and  industrious  a  divine.  He 
was  therefore  released  from  the  prosecution,  and  most 
probably  continued  for  some  time  without  molestation  in 
the  peaceable  exercise  of  his  ministry."  Brook  might 
here  have  added  a  fact,  recorded  by  Hackett,  that  Ward 
was  so  good  a  friend  to  the  Church  of  England,  that  he 
was  the  means  of  retaining  several  persons  who  were 
wavering  about  conformity,  within  the  pale  of  the 
Episcopal  communion. 

After  eleven  years  of  comparative  quiet,  Ward  was 
prosecuted  again  for  alleged  nonconformity,  at  the  instiga 
tion  of  Archbishop  Laud.  Prynne,  in  his  account  of  Laud's 
trial  (p.  361),  tells  us  that,  in  the  year  1635,  he  was 
impeached  in  the  High  Commission  Court  for  preaching 
against  bowing  at  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  against  tha 
"  Book  of  Sports,"  and  for  having  said  "  that  the  Church 


SAMUEL  WAKD.  243 

of  England  was  ready  to  ring  changes  in  religion,"  and 
"  that  the  Gospel  stood  on  tiptoe  ready  to  be  gone."  He 
was  found  guilty,  was  enjoined  to  make  a  public  recan 
tation  in  such  form  as  the  Court  should  appoint,  and 
condemned  in  costs  of  the  suit.  Upon  his  refusal  to 
recant,  he  was  committed  to  prison,  where  he  remained 
a  long  time. 

In  a  note  to  Brook's  account  of  this  disgraceful 
transaction,  which  he  appears  to  have  gathered  out  of 
"  Rushworth's  Collections  "  and  Wharton's  "  Troubles  of 
Laud,"  he  mentions  a  remarkable  fact  about  Ward  at  this 
juncture  of  his  life,  which  shows  the  high  esteem  in 
which  he  was  held  at  Ipswich.  It  appears  that  after  his 
suspension  the  Bishop  of  Norwich  would  have  allowed  his 
people  another  minister  in  his  place;  but  "they  would 
have  Mr.  Ward,  or  none ! " 

The  last  four  years  of  Ward's  life  are  a  subject  on  which 
I  find  it  very  difficult  to  discover  the  truth.  Brook  says 
that,  after  his  release  from  prison,  he  retired  to  Holland, 
and  became  a  colleague  of  William  Bridge,  the  famous 
Independent  minister  of  Yarmouth,  who  had  settled  at 
Rotterdam.  He  also  mentions  a  report  that  he  and 
Mr.  Bridge  renounced  their  Episcopal  ordination,  and 
were  re-ordained:  "Mr.  Bridge  ordaining  Mr.  Ward, 
and  Mr.  Ward  returning  the  compliment."  He  adds 
another  report,  that  Ward  was  unjustly  deposed  from  his 
pastoral  office  at  Rotterdam,  and  after  a  short  interval 
restored. 

I  venture  to  think  that  this  account  must  be  regarded 
with  some  suspicion.  At  any  rate,  I  doubt  whether  we 
are  in  possession  of  all  the  facts  in  the  transaction  which 


244  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

Brook  records.  That  Ward  retired  to  Holland  after  his 
release  from  prison  is  highly  probable.  It  was  a  step 
which  many  were  constrained  to  take  for  the  sake  of  peace 
and  liberty  of  conscience,  in  the  days  of  the  Stuarts. 
That  he  was  pastor  of  a  Church  at  Rotterdam,  in 
conjunction  with  Bridge, — that  differences  arose  between 
him  and  his  colleague, — that  he  was  temporarily  deposed 
from  his  office  and  afterward  restored, — are  things  which  I 
think  very  likely.  His  re-ordination  is  a  point  which  I 
think  questionable.  For  one  thing,  it  seems  to  me 
exceedingly  improbable  that  a  man  of  Ward's  age  and 
standing  would  first  be  re-ordained  by  Bridge,  who  was 
twenty-three  years  younger  than  himself,  and  afterward 
re-ordain  Bridge.  For  another  thing,  it  appears  very 
strange  that  a  man  who  had  renounced  his  Episcopal 
orders,  should  have  afterwards  received  an  honourable 
burial  in  the  aisle  of  an  Ipswich  church,  in  the  year  1639. 
.One  thing  only  is  clear.  Ward's  stay  at  Rotterdam  could 
not  have  been  very  lengthy.  He  was  not  committed  to 
prison  till  1635  and  was  buried  in  1639.  He  "lay  in 
prison  long,"  according  to  Prynne.  At  any  rate,  he  lay 
there  long  enough  to  write  a  Latin  work,  called,  "A 
Rapture,"  of  which  it  is-  expressly  stated  that  it  was 
composed  during  his  imprisonment  "  in  the  Gate  House." 
In  1638  we  find  him  buying  a  house  in  Ipswich.  It  is 
plain  at  this  rate  that  he  could  not  have  been  very  long 
in  Holland.  However,  the  whole  of  the  transactions  at 
Rotterdam,  so  fai  as  Ward  is  concerned,  are  involved  in 
some  obscurity.  Stories  against  eminent  Puritans  were 
easily  fabricated  and  greedily  swallowed  in  the  seventeenth 
century.  Brook's  assertion  that  Ward  died  in  Holland, 
about  1640,  is  so  entirely  destitute  of  foundation,  that  it 


SAMUEL   WARD.  245 

rather  damages  the  value  of  his  account  of  Ward's  latter 
days. 

Granting,  however,  that  after  his  release  from  prison 
Ward  retired  to  Holland,  there  seems  every  reason  to 
believe  that  he  returned  to  Ipswich  early  in  1638.  It 
appears  from  the  town  books  of  Ipswich  (according  to 
Wodderspoon),  that  in  April,  1638,  he  purchased  the 
house  provided  for  him  by  the  town  for  £140,  repaying 
the  contributors  the  sum  contributed  by  them.  He  died 
in  the  month  of  March,  1639,  aged  62 ;  and  was  buried 
in  St.  Mary-le-Toweri  Ipswich,  on  the  8th  of  that  month. 
A  certified  copy  of  the  entry  of  his  burial,  in  the  parish 
register,  is  in  my  possession.  On  a  stone  which  was  laid 
in  his  lifetime  in  the  middle  aisle  of  the  church,  the 
following  words  (according  to  Clarke's  History  of  Ipswich) 
are  still  extant : — 

"Watch,  Ward  !  yet  a  little  while, 
A ud  He  that  shall  come,  will  come." 

Under  this  stone  it  is  supposed  the  bones  of  the  good  old 
Puritan  preacher  were  laid ;  and  to  this  day  he  is  spoken 
of  by  those  who  know  his  name  in  Ipswich  as 
"Watch  Ward." 

It  only  remains  to  add,  that  Ward  married,  in  1604,  a 
widow  named  Deborah  Bolton,  of  Isleham,  in  Cambridge, 
and  had  by  her  a  family.*  It  is  an  interesting  fact, 
recorded  in  the  town  books  of  Ipswich,  that  after  his 
death,  as  a  mark  of  respect,  his  widow  and  his  eldest  son 
Samuel  were  allowed  for  their  lives  the  stipend  enjoyed 


*  For  this  fact,  and  the  facts  about  Ward's  degrees  at  Cambridge,  I 
am  indebted  to  a  well-informed  writer  in  "Notes  anil  Queries"  for 
October,  1861. 


246  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

by  their  father :  viz.,  £100  annually.  It  is  also  worthy  of 
remark,  that  he  had  two  brothers  who  were  ministers, 
John  and  Nathaniel.  John  Ward  lived  and  died  Rector 
of  St.  Clement's,  Ipswich ;  and  there  is  a  tablet  and  short 
inscription  about  him  in  that  church.  Nathaniel  Ward 
was  Minister  of  Standon,  Herts.,  went  to  America  in  1634, 
returned  to  England  in  1646,  and  died  at  Shenfield,  in 
Essex,  1653. 

There  is  an  excellent  portrait  of  Ward  still  extant  in 
Ipswich.  He  is  represented  with  an  open  book  in  hia 
right  hand,  a  ruff  round  his  neck,  a  peaked  beard  and 
moustaches.  On  one  side  is  a  coast  beacon  lighted; 
and  there  is  an  inscription, — 

"Watche  Ward.      ^Etatis  sme,  43.      1620." 

The  following  extract,  from  a  rare  volume  called  "  The 
Tombstone;  or,  a  notice  and  imperfect  monument  of  that 
worthy  man,  Mr.  John  Carter,  Pastor  of  Bramford  and 
Belstead,  in  Suffolk"  (1653),  will  probably  be  thought  to 
deserve  insertion,  as  an  incidental  evidence  of  the  high 
esteem  in  which  Ward  was  held  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Ipswich.  The  work  was  written  by  Mr.  Carter's  son ;  and 
the  extract  describes  what  occurred  at  his  father's  funeral. 
He  says  (at  pages  26,  27), "  In  the  afternoon,  February  4th, 
1634,  at  my  father's  interring,  there  was  a  great  confluence 
of  people  from  all  parts  thereabout,  ministers,  and  others 
taking  up  the  word  of  Joash,  King  of  Israel,  'O  my 
father!  my  father!  the  chariots  of  Israel  and  the 
horsemen  thereof!'  Old  Mr.  Samuel  Ward,  that  fatuous 
divine,  and  the  glory  of  Ipswich,  came  to  the  funeral, 
brought  a  mourning  gown  with  him,  and  offered  very 
respectfully  to  preach  the  funeral  sermon,  seeing  that  such 


SAMUEL  WARD.  247 

a  congregation  was  gathered  together,  and  upon  such  an 
occasion.  But  my  sister  and  I  durst  not  give  way  to  it ; 
for  our  father  had  often  charged  us  in  his  lifetime,  and 
upon  his  blessing,  that  no  service  should  be  at  his  burial. 
'  For/  said  he, '  it  will  give  occasion  to  speak  some  good 
things  of  me  that  I  deserve  not,  and  so  false  things  will 
be  uttered  in  this  pulpit.'  Mr.  Ward  rested  satisfied,  and 
did  forbear.  But  the  next  Friday,  at  Ipswich,  he  turned 
his  whole  lecture  into  a  funeral  sermon  for  my  father,  in 
which  he  did  lament  and  honour  him,  to  the  greal 
satisfaction  of  the  whole  auditory." 

I  have  now  brought  together  all  that  I  can  discover 
about  Samuel  Ward's  history.  I  heartily  regret  that  the 
whole  amount  is  so  small,  and  that  the  facts  recorded 
about  him  are  so  few.  But  we  must  not  forgot  that  the 
best  part  of  Ward's  life  was  spent  in  Suffolk,  and  that  he 
seldom  left  his  own  beloved  pulpit  in  St.  Mary-le-Tower, 
Ipswich.*  That  he  was  well  known  by  reputation  beyond 
the  borders  of  his  own  county,  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
His  selection  to  be  a  preacher  at  St.  Paul's  Cross,  in  1616, 
is  a  proof  of  this.  But  it  is  vain  to  suppose  that  the 
reputation  of  a  preacher,  however  eminent,  who  lives  and 
dies  in  a  provincial  town,  will  long  survive  him.  In  order 
to  become  the  subject  of  biographies,  and  have  the  facts 
of  his  life  continually  noted  down,  a  man  must  live  in  a 
metropolis.  This  was  not  Ward's  lot ;  and,  consequently* 
after  the  lapse  of  so  many  years,  we  seem  to  know  little 
about  him. 

It  only  remains  to  say  something  about  Ward's  sermons 


*  It  seems  that  he  expounded  half  the  Bible  during  his  ministry  in 
Ipswich.     See  his  preface  to  "The  Happiness  of  Practice," 


248  LlGHt  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

and  treatises,  which  have  been  lately,  for  the  first  time, 
reprinted,  and  made  accessible  to  the  modern  reader  of 
theology.*  It  must  be  distinctly  understood  that  these 
reprints  do  not  comprise  the  whole  of  Ward's  writings. 
Beside  these  sermons  and  treatises,  he  wrote,  in  conjunction 
with  Yates,  a  reply  to  Montague's  famous  book,  "  Appello 
Caesarem."  There  is  also  reason  to  think  that  he 
published  one  or  two  other  detached  sermons  beside  those 
which  are  now  reprinted.  I  think,  however,  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  the  nine  sermons  and  treatises  which 
have  been  lately  republished  by  Mr.  Nichol,  are  the  only 
works  of  Samuel  Ward  which  it  would  have  been  worth 
while  to  reprint,  and  in  all  probability  the  only  works 
which  he  would  have  wished  himself  to  be  reproduced. 

Of  the  merits  of  these  sermons,  the  reading  public  will 
now  be  able  to  form  an  opinion.  They  were  thought 
highly  of  in  time  past,  and  have  received  the  commenda 
tion  of  very  competent  judges.  Fuller  testifies  that  Ward 
"  had  a  sanctified  fancy,  dexterous  in  designing  expressive 
pictures,  representing  much  matter  in  a  little  model." 
Doddridge  says  that  Ward's  "  writings  are  worthy  to  be 
read  through.  His  language  is  generally  proper,  elegant, 
and  nervous.  His  thoughts  are  well  digested,  and  happily 
illustrated.  He  has  many  remarkable  veins  of  wit.  Many 
of  the  boldest  figures  of  speech  are  to  be  found  in  him, 
beyond  any  English  writer,  especially  apostrophes,  pro 
sopopoeias,  dialogisms,  and  allegories."  f  This  praise  may 


*  Ward's  sermons  are  to  be  found  in  Nichol's  valuable  series  of 
reprints  of  Puritan  divines,  at  the  end  of  the  third  volume  of  Adams' 
works. 

t  How  Doddridge  could  possibly  have  made  the  mistake  of  supposing 
that  Ward  died  at  the  age  of  28  is  perfectly  inexplicable  I 


SAMUEL  WARD,  249 

at  first  sight  seem  extravagant  I  shall,  however,  be 
disappointed  if  those  who  take  the  trouble  to  read  Ward's 
writings  do  not  think  it  well  deserved. 

It  is  only  fair  to  Samuel  Ward  to  remind  the  readers  of 
his  works,  that  at  least  three  of  the  nine  sermons  and 
treatises  now  reprinted  were  not  originally  composed 
with  a  view  to  publication.  The  sermons  entitled  "A 
Coal  from  the  Altar,"  "Balm  from  Gilead  to  Recover 
Conscience,"  and  "  Jethro's  Justice  of  the  Peace,"  would 
appear  to  have  been  carried  through  the  press  by  frienda 
and  relatives.  They  have  all  the  characteristics  of 
compositions  intended  for  ears  rather  than  for  eyes,  for 
hearers  rather  than  for  readers.  Yet  I  venture  to  say  that 
they  are  three  of  the  most  striking  examples  of  Ward's 
gifts  and  powers,  out  of  the  whole  nine.  The  peroration 
of  the  sermon  on  conscience,  in  particular,  appears  to  me 
one  of  the  most  powerful  and  effective  conclusions  to  a 
sermon  which  I  have  ever  read  in  the  English  language.* 

The  doctrine  of  Ward's  sermons  is  always  thoroughly 
Evangelical.  He  never  falls  into  the  extravagant  language 
about  repentance,  which  disfigures  the  writings  of  some  of 
the  Puritans.  He  never  wearies  us  with  the  long  supra- 
scriptural,  systematic  statements  of  theology,  which  darken 
the  pages  of  others.  He  is  always  to  the  point,  always 
about  the  main  things  in  Divinity,  and  generally  sticks  to 
his  text.  To  exalt  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  high  as 


*  The  engraved  title  pages  of  two  of  the  nine  sermons,  in  the  edition 
of  1636,  are  great  curiosities  in  their  way.  The  one  which  is  prefixed 
to  the  "Woe  to  Drunkards  "  is  intended  to  be  a  hit  at  the  degeneracy 
of  the  times  in  which  Ward  lived.  If  it  was  really  designed  by  Ward 
himself,  it  supplies  souio  foundation  for  the  rumour  that  he  had  a  geniut 
for  caricaturing. 


250  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

possible,  to  cast  down  man's  pride,  to  expose  the  sinfulnes* 
of  sin,  to  spread  out  broadly  and  fully  the  remedy  of  the 
Gospel,  to  awaken  the  unconverted  sinner  and  alarm  him, 
to  build  up  the  true  Christian  and  comfort  him, — these 
seem  to  have  been  objects  which  Ward  proposed  to 
himself  in  every  sermon.  And  was  he  not  right  ?  Well 
would  it  be  for  the  churches  if  we  had  more  preachers 
like  him ! 

The  style  of  Ward's  sermons  is  always  eminently  simple?. 
Singularly  rich  in  illustration, — bringing  every-day  life 
to  bear  continually  on  his  subject, — pressing  into  his 
Master's  service  the  whole  circle  of  human  learning, — 
borrowing  figures  and  similes  from  everything  in  creation, 
— not  afraid  to  use  familiar  language  such  as  all  could 
understand, — framing  his  sentences  in  such  a  way  that  an 
ignorant  man  could  easily  follow  him, — bold,  direct,  fiery, 
dramatic,  and  speaking  as  if  he  feared  none  but  God, — 
he  was  just  the  man  to  arrest  attention,  and  to  keep  it 
when  arrested,  to  set  men  thinking,  and  to  make  them 
anxious  to  hear  him  again.  Quaint  he  is,  undoubtedly,  in 
many  of  his  sayings.  But  he  preached  in  an  age  when 
all  were  quaint,  and  his  quaintness  probably  struck  no 
one  as  remarkable.  Faulty  in  taste  he  is,  no  doubt.  But 
there  never  was  the  popular  preacher  against  whom  the 
same  charge  was  not  laid.  His  faults,  however,  were  as 
nothing  compared  to  his  excellencies.  Once  more  I  say, 
well  would  it  be  for  the  churches  if  we  had  more 
preachers  like  him ! 

The  language  of  Ward's  sermons  ought  not  to  be 
passed  over  without  remark.  I  venture  to  say,  that  in 
few  writings  of  the  seventeenth  century  will  there  be 
found  so  many  curious,  old-fashioned,  and  forcible  words 


SAMUEL  WARD.  251 

as  in  Ward's  sermons.  Some  of  these  words  are  unhappily 
obsolete,  and  unintelligible  to  the  multitude,  to  the  grievous 
loss  of  English  literature. 

It  only  remains  to  give  a  few  extracts  from  Ward's 
sermons  which  may  give  some  idea  of  what  this  famous 
divine  was  as  a  preacher. 

The  first  extract  is  from  a  sermon  entitled  "  Christ  is 
all  in  all."— 

"All  let  Him  be  in  all  our  thoughts  and  speeches. 
How  happy  were  it  if  He  were  never  out  of  our  sight 
and  minds,  but  that  our  souls  were  directed  towards  Him, 
and  fixed  on  Him,  as  the  sunflower  towards  the  sun,  the 
iron  to  the  loadstone,  the  loadstone  to  the  polestar.  Hath 
He  not  for  that  purpose  resembled  Himself  to  all  familiar 
and  obvious  objects:*  to  the  light,  that  so  often  as  we 
open  our  eyes-  we  might  behold  Him ;  to  bread,  water, 
and  wine,  that  in  all  our  repasts  we  might  feed  on  Him ;  •{• 
to  the  door,  that  in  all  our  out  and  ingoing  we  might 
have  Him  in  remembrance  ?  How  happy  if  our  tongues 
would  ever  run  upon  that  name,  which  is  honey  in  the 
mouth,  melody  in  the  ear,  jubilee  in  the  heart.  Let  the 
mariner  prate  of  the  winds,  the  merchant  of  his  gain,  the 
husbandman  of  his  oxen.  J  Be  thou  a  Pythagorean  to 
all  the  world,  and  a  Peripatetian  to  Christ ;  mute  to  all 
vanities,  and  eloquent  only  to  Christ,  that  gave  man  his 
tongue  and  his  speech.  How  doth  Paul  delight  to  record 
it,  and  harp  upon  it  eleven  times  in  ten  verses,  which 
Chrysostom  §  first  took  notice  of.  (1  Cor.  i.  10.)  And 


*  Musculus  et  Brentius  in  Johannem.          f  Bernard. 
Nolanus.        §  In  Prsefat.  ad  Concionem  de  Christo  crucifixo, 


252  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

how  doth  worthy  Fox  grieve  to  foresee  and  foretell  thai 
which  we  hear  and  see  come  to  pass,  that  men's  discourses 
would  be  taken  up  about  trifles  and  nifles,  as  if  all  religion 
lay  in  the  flight  and  pursuit  of  one  circumstance  or 
opinion ;  how  heartily  doth  he  pray,  and  vehemently  wish 
that  men  would  leave  jangling  about  ceremonies,  and 
spend  their  talk  upon  Him  that  is  the  substance;  that 
learned  men  would  write  of  Christ,  unlearned  men  study 
of  Him,  preachers  make  Him  the  scope  and  subject  of  all 
their  preaching.*  And  what  else,  indeed,  is  our  office  but 
to  elevate,  not  a  piece  of  bread,  as  the  Romish  priests,  but 
Christ  in  our  doctrine;  to  travail  in  birth  till  He  be 
formed  in  a  people,  to  crucify  Him  in  their  eyes  by  lively 
preaching  His  death  and  passion.  The  old  emblem  of 
St.  Christopher  is  good,  representing  a  preacher  as  one 
wading  through  the  sea  of  this  world,  staying  on  the  staff 
of  faith,  and  lifting  up  Christ  aloft  to  be  seen  of  men. 
What  else  gained  John  the  name  of  the  Divine,  and  Paul 
of  a  wise  master  builder,  but  that  he  regarded  not,  as  the 
fashion  is  now-a-days,  to  have  his  reading,  memory,  and 
elocution,  but  Christ  known,  and  Him  crucified,  and  to 
build  the  Church  skilfully,  laying  the  foundation  upon 
this  Rock/}-  of  which,  if  we  hold  our  peace,  the  rocks 
themselves  will  cry.  This  being  the  sum  of  our  art  and 
task,  by  the  help  of  Christ,  to  preach  the  Gospel  of  Christ, 
to  the  praise  of  Christ,  without  whom  a  sermon  is  no 
sermon,  preaching  no  preaching.]: 

"The  sum  of  the  sum  of  all  is,  that  the  whole  duty 
of  all  men   is  to  give   themselves  wholly  to  Christ,  to 

•  Philip  Melancthon  in  Rhetor.  f  Lutheru*. 

J  Perkins  in  Prophetica. 


SAMUEL  WARD.  253 

sacrifice  not  a  leg,  or  an  arm,  or  any  other  piece,  but  soul, 
spirit,  and  body,  and  all  that  is  within  us ;  *  the  fat,  the 
inwards,  the  head  and  hoof,  and  all  as  a  holocaust  to  Him, 
dedicating,  devoting  ourselves  to  His  service  all  the  days 
and  hours  of  our  lives,  that  all  our  days  may  be  Lord's 
days.  To  whom,  when  we  have  so  done,  yet  must  we 
know  we  have  given  Him  so  much  less  than  His  due,  as 
we  worms  and  wretched  sinners  are  less  than  the  Son  of 
God,  who  knew  no  sin.  To  Him  therefore  let  us  live,  to 
Him  therefore  let  us  die.  So  let  us  live  to  Him  that  we 
may  die  in  Him,  and  breathe  out  our  souls  most  willingly 
into  His  hands,  with  the  like  affection  that  John  of 
Alexandria,  surnamed  the  Almoner,  for  his  bounty,  is 
reported  to  have  done,  who,  when  he  had  distributed  all 
he  had  to  the  poor,  and  made  even  with  his  revenues,  as 
his  fashion  was  yearly  to  do  in  his  best  health,  thanked 
God  he  had  now  nothing  left  but  his  Lord  and  Master 
Christ,  whom  he  longed  to  be  with,  and  would  now  with 
unlimed  and  unentangled  wings  fly  unto ;  or  as,  in  fewer 
words,  Peter  of  old  and  Lambert  of  later  times,  '  Nothing 
but  Christ,  nothing  but  Christ.' "  (Ward's  Sermons,  p.  10. 
Nichol's  edition.) 

The  second  extract  is  from  a  sermon  on  Conscience, 
entitled  "  Balm  from  Gilead."— 

"  Hearken,  0  consciences !  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord. 
I  call  you  to  record  this  day,  that  it  is  your  office  to 
preach  over  our  sermons  again,  or  else  all  our  sermons  and 
labours  are  lost.  You  are  the  cuds  of  the  soul,  to  chew 
over  again.  Against  your  reproofs,  and  against  your 
secret  and  faithful  admonitions,  what  exception  can  any 

*  Nazianzenus  de  Spiritu. 


254  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

take  ?  Your  balm  is  precious ;  your  sinkings  break  not 
the  head,  nor  bring  any  disgrace.  God  hath  given  you  a 
faculty  to  work  wonders  in  private  and  solitude.  Follow 
them  home,  therefore,  cry  aloud  in  their  ears  and  bosoms, 
and  apply  what  hath  now  and  at  other  times  been 
delivered. 

"Conscience,  if  the  house  and  owner  where  thou 
dwellest  be  a  son  of  peace,  let  thy  peace  and  thy  Master's 
peace  abide  and  rest  on  him ;  that  peace  which  the  world 
never  knows,  nor  can  give,  nor  take  away.  Be  thou 
propitious  and  benign,  speak  good  things,  cherish  the  least 
Bparks  and  smoke  of  grace;  if  tbou  findest  desire  in  truth, 
and  in  all  things,  bid  them  not  fear  and  doubt  of  their 
election  and  calling.  With  those  that  desire  to  walk 
honestly,  walk  thou  comfortably.  Handle  the  tender  and 
fearful  gently  and  sweetly ;  be  not  rough  and  rigorous  to 
them.  Bind  up  the  broken-hearted.  Say  unto  them, 
Why  art  thou  so  disquieted  and  sad  ?  When  thou  seest 
them  melancholy  for  losses  and  crosses,  say  unto  them 
in  cheer,  as  Elkanah  to  Hannah,  '  What  dost  thou  want  ? 
Am  not  I  a  thousand  friends,  wives,  and  children  unto 
thee  ? ' 

"  Clap  them  on  the  back,  hearten  them  in  well-doing, 
spur  them  on  to  walk  forward ;  yea,  wind  them  up  to  the 
highest  pitch  of  excellency,  and  then  applaud  them. 
Delight  in  the  excellent  of  the  earth. 

"  Be  a  light  to  the  blind  and  scrupulous. 

"  Be  a  goad  in  the  sides  of  the  dull  ones. 

"  Be  an  alarm  and  trumpet  of  judgment  to  the  sleepers 
and  dreamers. 

"  But  as  for  the  hypocrite,  gall  him  and  prick  him 
at  the  heart.  Let  him  well  know  that  thou  art  God's  spy 


SAMUEL  WARD.  255 

in  his  bosom,  a  secret  intelligencer,  and  wilt  be  faithful 
to  God. 

"  Bid  the  hypocrite  walk  '  in  all  things.' 

"  Bid  the  civil  add  piety  to  charity. 

"Bid  the  wavering,  inconstant,  and  licentious  'walk 
constantly.' 

"  Bid  the  lukewarm  and  common  Protestant  for  shame 
amend,  be  zealous,  and  '  walk  honestly.' 

"  But  with  the  sons  of  Belial,  the  profane  scorners,  walk 
frowardly  with  them,  haunt  and  molest  them,  give  them 
no  rest  till  they  repent,  be  the  gall  of  bitterness  unto 
them.  When  they  are  swilling  and  drinking,  serve  them 
as  Absalom's  servants  did  Amnon,  stab  him  at  the  heart 
Yet  remember,  so  long  as  there  is  any  hope,  that  thine 
office  is  to  be  a  pedagogue  to  Christ,  to  wound  and  kill, 
only  to  the  end.  they  may  live  in  Christ,  not  so  much  to 
gaster  and  affright  as  to  lead  to  Him ;  and,  to  that  purpose, 
to  be  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season,  that  they  may 
believe  and  repent. 

"  But  if  they  refuse  to  hear,  and  sin  against  thee,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  also,  then  shake  off  the  dust  of  thy  feet, 
and  either  fall  to  torment  them  before  their  time,  and 
drive  them  to  despair ;  or  if  thou  give  them  ease  here,  tell 
them  thou  wilt  fly  in  their  throat  at  the  day  of  hearing 
when  thou  shalt  and  must  speak,  and  they  shall  and 
must  hear. 

"  Conscience,  thou  hast  commission  to  go  into  princes' 
chambers  and  council  tables ;  be  a  faithful  man  of  their 
counsel.  Oh,  that  they  would  in  all  courts  of  Christendom 
set  policy  beneath  thee,  and  make  thee  president  of  their 
councils,  and  hear  thy  voice,  and  not  croaking  Jesuits, 
sycophants,  and  liars.  Thou  mayest  speak  to  them, 


256  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

subjects  must  pray  for  them,  and  be  subject,  for  thy  sake, 
to  honour  and  obey  them  in  the  Lord. 

"  Charge  the  courtiers  not  to  trust  in  uncertain  favours 
of  princes,  but  to  be  trusty  and  faithful,  as  Nehemiah, 
Daniel,  Joseph ;  whose  histories  pray  them  to  read,  imitate 
and  believe  above  Machiavelli's  oracles. 

"  Tell  the  foxes  and  politicians,  that  make  the  main  the 
by,  and  the  by  the  mam,  that  an  ill  conscience  hanged 
Ahithophel,  overthrew  Haman,  Shebna,  etc.  Tell  them  it 
is  the  best  policy,  and  Solomon's,  who  knew  the  best,  to 
get  and  keep  thy  favour ;  to  exalt  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
exalt  them,  be  a  shield  to  them,  and  make  them  as  bold  as 
the  lion  in  the  day  of  trouble,  not  fearing  the  envy  of  all 
the  beasts  of  the  forest,  no,  nor  the  roaring  of  the  lion,  in 
righteous  causes. 

"Conscience,  thou  art  the  judge  of  judges,  and  shalt  one 
day  judge  them ;  in  the  meanwhile,  if  they  fear  neither 
God  nor  man,  be  as  the  importunate  widow,  and  urge 
them  to  do  justice.  Oh,  that  thou  sattest  highest  in  all 
courts,  especially  in  such  courts  as  are  of  thy  jurisdiction, 
and  receive  their  denomination  from  thee.  Suffer  not 
thyself  to  be  exiled,  make  Felix  tremble,  discourse  of 
judgment  to  them. 

"To  the  just  judges,  bid  them  please  God  and  thee, 
and  fear  no  other  fear;  assure  them,  for  whatever  they  do 
of  partiality  or  popularity,  thou  wilt  leave  them  in  the 
lurch ;  but  what  upon  thy  suit  and  command,  thou  will 
bear  them  out  in  it,  and  be  their  exceeding  great  reward. 

"If  thou  meetest  in  those  courts  and  findest  any  such 
pleaders  as  are  of  thine  acquaintance  and  followers,  be 
their  fee  and  their  promoter.  Tell  them,  if  they  durst  trust 
thee,  and  leave  Sunday  works,  bribing  on  both  sides, 


SAMUEL  WARD. 

selling  of  silence,  pleading  in  ill  causes,  and  making  the 
law  a  nose  of  wax,  if  they  durst  plead  all  and  only 
rightful  causes,  thou  hast  riches  in  one  hand,  and  honour 
in  the  other,  to  bestow  on  them. 

"  As  for  the  tribe  of  Levi,  there  mayest  thou  be  a  little 
bolder,  as  being  men  of  God,  and  men  of  conscience  by 
profession.  Be  earnest  with  them  to  add  con  to  their 
science,  as  a  number  to  cyphers,  that  will  make  it  some 
thing  worth.  Desire  them  to  preach,  not  for  filthy  lucre  or 
vain  glory,  but  for  thy  sake :  wish  them  to  keep  thee  pure, 
and  in  thee  to  keep  the  mystery  of  faith;  assure  them 
thou  art  the  only  ship  and  cabinet  of  orthodoxal  faith,  of 
which,  if  they  make  shipwreck  by  laziness  and  covetousness, 
they  shall  be  given  over  to  Popery  and  Arminianism,  and 
lose  the  faith,  and  then  write  books  of  the  apostacy,  and 
intercession  of  faith,  and  a  good  conscience,  which  they 
never  were  acquainted  withal,  nor  some  drunkards  of  them 
ever  so  much  as  seemed  to  have."  (Ward's  Sermons,  p. 
109.  Nichol's  edition.) 

I  make  no  comment  on  the  extracts  I  have  given.  I 
think  they  speak  for  themselves.  No  doubt  tastes  and 
opinions  about  sermons  differ  widely.  But  it  is  my  own 
deliberate  judgment,  that  a  man  who  preaches  in  the  style 
of  Ward  will  never  lack  hearers. 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD  AND  HIS  TIMES. 

WILLIAM  LAUD,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  was  beheaded 
on  Tower  Hill,  London,  in  the  year  1645.  He  was  one  of 
five  Archbishops  in  historical  times  who  died  violent 
deaths.  Alphege  was  killed  by  the  Danes  in  1009,  in 
Ethelred's  reign.  Thomas  a  Becket  was  suddenly 
murdered  in  Canterbury  Cathedral,  in  the  reign  of 
Henry  II.  Simon  Sudbury  was  beheaded  by  Wat  Tyler, 
in  the  reign  of  Richard  II.  Cranmer  was  burned  by 
Papists  at  Oxford,  in  the  days  of  Queen  Mary.  Land 
alone  died  by  Protestant  hands,  in  Charles  the  First's 
time,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Long  Parliament. 

Now  what  have  we  got  to  do  with  Archbishop  Laud  in 
this  present  century  ?  Many,  I  venture  to  suspect,  are 
ready  to  ask  that  question.  Two  centuries  have  passed 
away  since  Laud  died.  Steam,  electricity,  railways,  free 
trade,  reform,  education,  science,  have  changed  everything 
in  England.  Why  rake  up  the  melancholy  story  of  a 
barbarous  deed  done  in  semi-barbarous  times  ?  What  is 
Laud  to  us,  or  we  to  Laud,  that  we  need  trouble  ourselves 
with  him  and  his  history  ? 

Questions  like  these,  I  make  bold  to  say,  are  rather 
^hort-sighted  and  inconsiderate.  History,  it  has  been 


AECHBISHOP  LAUD.  259 

wisely  said,  is  "  philosophy  teaching  by  examples,"  and  of 
no  history  is  that  saying  so  true  as  of  the  history  of  the 
Church.  History,  it  has  again  been  said,  "has  a  strange 
tendency  to  repeat  itself,"  and  a  close  study  of  the  history 
of  the  past  will  help  us  greatly  to  conjecture  what  will 
happen  in  the  future.  It  is  my  firm  belief  that  we  have 
a  great  deal  to  do  with  Laud,  and  that  a  knowledge  of 
Laud's  times  is  of  great  importance  in  the  present  day.  I 
will  go  further.  I  believe  that  the  history  of  Laud  throws 
broad  and  clear  light  on  the  present  position  of  the 
Church  of  England. 

I  must  begin  by  throwing  myself  on  the  kind 
indulgence  of  my  readers,  and  soliciting  a  large  measure 
of  patience  and  consideration.  My  subject  is  an  historical 
one.  Few  men,  except  Froude  and  Macaulay,  can  make 
history  anything  but  dry  and  dull.  When  king  Ahasuerus 
could  not  sleep,  the  chronicles,  or  history  of  his  own  times, 
were  read  to  him. — My  subject,  moreover,  is  peculiarly 
surrounded  with  difficulties.  Never  was  there  a  character 
so  differently  estimated  as  that  of  Laud.  According  to  some, 
he  was  a  Papist  and  a  monster  of  iniquity ;  according  to 
others,  he  was  a  blessed  martyr  and  an  angel  of  light.  Be 
tween  the  violent  abuse  of  Prynne,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
preposterous  admiration  of  Heylin,  Wharton,  Lawson,  and 
even  Le  Bas,  on  the  other,  it  is  extremely  hard  to  find  out  the 
truth.  In  short,  the  subject  is  a  tangled  skein,  and  at  this 
distance  of  time  it  is  difficult  to  unravel  it. — Nevertheless,  I 
shall  boldly  try  to  set  before  my  readers  "  the  thing  as  it  is." 
After  careful  investigation  my  own  mind  is  thoroughly 
made  up.  I  hold  that,  wittingly  or  unwittingly,  meaningly 
or  unmeaningly,  intentionally  or  unintentionally,  Laud  did 
jnore  harm  to  the  Church  of  England  than  any 


260  LIGHT  FEO'[  OLD  TIMES. 

that  ever  lived.     He  inflicted  a  wound  that  will  never  be 
healed  ;  he  worked  mischief  that  will  never  be  repaired. 

Laud  was  born  in  the  year  1573,  about  thirty-five  years 
after  the  beginning  of  the  Reformation,  in  the  middle  of 
Queen  Elizabeth's  reign,  and  came  forward  as  a  public 
man  about  the  time  of  James  the  First's  accession,  in  1603- 
I  ask  particular  attention  to  these  dates.  A  moment's 
reflection  will  show  that  he  appeared  on  the  stage  of 
English  Church  history  at  a  most  critical  period :  that  is 
to  say,  within  the  first  seventy-five  years  after  the 
commencement  of  the  glorious  English  Reformation. 

Seventy-five  years  only !  How  short  a  time  that  seems  ! 
Yet  how  many  events  of  deepest  interest  to  us  all  were 
crowded  into  that  period.  Within  those  seventy-five 
years  the  seed  of  Protestantism  was  first  sown  by  Henry 
the  Eighth,  though  I  fully  admit  from  low,  carnal,  and 
worldly  motives. — Then  came  the  short  but  glorious  reign 
of  Edward  the  Sixth,  when  the  tender  plant  grew  with 
hot-bed  rapidity  under  the  fostering  care  of  Cranmer, 
Ridley,  Latimer,  and  Hooper. — Then  came  the  bloody 
reign  of  Mary,  when  it  was  cut  down  to  the  very  ground 
by  the  ferocious  proceedings  of  Bonner  and  Gardiner. — 
Then  came  the  happy  reaction,  on  Elizabeth's  accession  to 
the  throne,  and  the  final  re-establishment  of  the  Church 
of  England  on  the  basis  which  it  now  occupies. 

But  even  Elizabethan  times,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  were  not 
times  of  unmixed  good  to  the  Church  of  England.  The 
truth  must  be  spoken  on  this  point.  In  our  thankfulness 
for  the  good  Elizabeth  did  we  are  rather  apt  to  overlook 
the  harm  which  was  done  in  her  reign.  Things  were  left 
undone  that  ought  to  have  been  done,  and  done  that  ought 
not  to  have  been  donek  Partly  from  the  Queen's 


AKCHBISHOt  LAUD.  261 

characteristic  Tudor  love  of  power,  and  jealousy  of  the 
Bishops,  and  partly  from  her  anxious  desire  to  conciliate 
and  win  over  the  Papists,  the  work  of  the  Reformation 
was  not  carried  forward  so  energetically  as  it  might  have 
been.  The  Zurich  letters,  published  by  the  Parker  Society, 
contain  many  hints  about  this.  If  Jewel  and  his  companions 
had  not  been  incessantly  thwarted  and  hampered  by  royal 
interference,  our  Church's  worship  and  organization  would 
probably  have  been  made  far  better  than  it  is.  If  Grindal 
had  not  been  snubbed  and  stopped  in  the  matter  of  the 
"  prophesyings,"  the  English  clergy  would  have  been  a  far 
better  body  than  they  were.  His  letter  to  the  Queen  on 
that  painful  occasion  deserves  unmixed  admiration.  Partly 
again,  from  the  universal  ignorance  of  toleration  which 
prevailed  among  all  parties,  conscientious  men  were 
often  persecuted  for  trifling  offences,  and  the  ground  was 
prepared  for  an  abundant  crop  of  dissent  in  after  times. 
Fuller,  the  historian,  records  some  curious  correspondence 
between  Cecil,  and  other  Privy  Councillors  and  Archbishop 
Whitgift,  on  this  subject.  I  am  sorry  to  appear  to 
depreciate  Elizabeth.  But  truth  is  truth,  and  ought  to 
be  known;  and  we  cannot  properly  understand  Laud, 
unless  we  understand  the  times  which  immediately 
preceded  him.* 

One  bright  point,  however,  should  never  be  forgotten  in 
estimating  the  reign  of  Elizabeth.  The  standard  of 
doctrine  in  the  Church  of  England  was  sound,  clear, 


*  The  reader  who  cares  to  look  into  this  subject  will  find  a  remarkable 
letter  to  Whitgift  in  favour  of  the  persecuted  Nonconformists,  dated 
1583,  and  signed  by  Burleigh,  Warwick,  Howard,  Hatton,  Shrewsbury, 
Leicester,  Croft,  Walsingham — eight  leading  privy  councillors.— See 
Fuller's  "Church  History,"  vol.  iii.  p.  37.  Tegg's  Edition. 


262  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

Scriptural,  and  unmistakable.  Rightly  or  wrongly, 
nothing  was  tolerated  in  pulpits  which  was  not  thoroughly 
Protestant,  and  thoroughly  agreeable  to  all  the  Thirty- 
nine  Articles.  A  clergyman  who  preached  up  the  real 
presence  of  Christ's  body  and  blood,  under  the  forms  01 
bread  and  wine  in  the  sacrament, — or  recommended  the 
practice  of  private  confession  to  a  priest, — or  advocated 
prayer  to  the  Virgin  Mary, — or  elevated  the  consecrated 
elements  over  his  head  in  the  Lord's  Supper  and  adored 
them, — or  taught  a  gross,  "opus  operatum"  view  of 
baptismal  regeneration, — or  publicly  denied  the  doctrine  of 
predestination,  or  imputed  righteousness,  or  justification 
by  faith, — or  reviled  the  memory  of  Cranmer,  Ridley,  and 
Latimer, — or  called  Edward  the  Sixth  "a  young  tiger-cub," 
— or  sneered  at  the  Articles  as  "  forty  stripes  save  one," — 
or  recommended  reunion  with  the  Church  of  Rome, — or 
hesitated  to  call  the  Pope  Antichrist, — such  a  man,  I  say 
boldly,  unless  he  had  been  a  very  insignificant  person, 
would  have  had  a  very  hard  time  of  it  in  the  days  of 
Good  Queen  Bess!  The  "powers  that  be"  would  have 
come  down  upon  him  like  a  thunderbolt.  These  were 
subjects  which  were  hardly  even  allowed  to  be  contro 
verted;  you  must  either  hold  strong  Protestant  views 
about  them,  or  hold  your  tongue.  In  short,  however 
faulty  and  deficient  in  many  things,  the  Church  of 
England  in  Queen  Elizabeth's  time  was  in  theory  down 
right  Protestant  and  Evangelical.  Weak,  by  reason  of 
her  infancy,  the  Church  may  have  been ;  defective  in 
many  points,  judged  by  our  light,  no  doubt  she  was; 
marred  and  damaged  by  stupid  intolerance  she  certainly 
was;  but  at  no  period  was  her  general  standard  of 
doctrine  so  Scriptural  and  so  Protestant  as  in  the  days  of 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  263 

Elizabeth.  Men  and  women  were  yet  alive  who  had  seen 
Rogers  and  Bradford  burned  in  Srnithfield, — who  had 
heard  old  Latimer  say  to  Ridley  at  the  stake,  "  Courage, 
we  shall  light  a  candle  which  shall  never  be  extinguished,", 
— who  had  watched  gallant  Hooper  patiently  agonizing  in 
the  fire  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour  under  the  shadow  of 
Gloucester  Cathedral.  Men  and  women  in  England  had 
not  yet  forgotten  these  things.  There  was  a  wide-spread 
feeling  that  Popery  was  a  false  religion,  and  Protestantism 
was  God's  truth ;  that  Popish  doctrine  in  every  shape  was 
to  be  held  in  abhorrence,  and  that  Reformation  doctrines 
ought  never  to  be  given  up.  All  classes  held  this,  with 
very  few  exceptions,  from  the  statesman  in  the  Council 
Chamber  down  to  the  apprentice-boy  in  the  shop.  In 
short,  the  days  of  Elizabeth,  with  all  their  faults,  were 
Protestant  days.  The  nation  was  professedly  a  Protestant 
nation,  and  gloried  in  the  name.  This  is  a  point  which 
ought  never  to  be  forgotten.  Well  would  it  have  been  for 
our  country  if  Elizabethan  Protestantism  had  been  as  real 
and  deep  as  it  seemed. 

Such  were  the  critical  times  in  which  William  Laud 
was  allowed  by  God  to  come  forward,  and  become  a  power 
in  England.  Such  was  the  state  of  things  which  he  found 
in  our  Church.  How  he  deliberately  set  himself  to  oppose 
the  current  theology  of  his  day, — how  he  "practised  and 
prospered  "  for  forty  years, — how  he  worked  night  and  day 
to  compass  his  ends,  as  "  thorough  "  as  Lord  Strafford  in 
driving  on  toward  his  mark,—  how  he  rallied  round  him  in 
an  Arminian  cave  of  Adullam  every  Churchman  who  waa 
discontented  with  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation, — how 
he  gradually  leavened  our  Church  with  a  distaste  for  true 
Protestantism,  and  a  dislike  for  what  he  was  pleased  to 


264  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

call  "Calvinism," — how,  even  after  ruining  Church  and 
State  by  his  policy,  he  left  behind  him  a  school  of 
Churchmen  which  has  done  immense  harm  to  our  Church, 
— all  these  are  historical  facts,  which  would  fill  a  volume 
if  fully  described.  In  a  paper  like  the  present  they  can 
only  be  briefly  pointed  out.  The  utmost  that  I  shall 
attempt  to  do  is  to  supply  a  bare  outline  of  Laud's  life, 
and  a  brief  estimate  of  his  character,  and  to  show  the 
policy  he  had  in  view,  the  manner  in  which  he  carried 
it  out,  and  the  consequences  to  which  it  led.  A  few 
practical  lessons  for  ourselves  will  then  form  a  fitting 
conclusion  to  the  whole. 

(a)  William  Laud  was  born  at  Reading  in  the  year 
1573,  and  was  the  son  of  respectable  parents  of  the  middle 
class.  He  received  his  early  education  at  the  Grammar 
School  of  his  native  town,  and  in  the  year  1589  entered 
St.  John's  College,  Oxford.  Little  is  known  of  his 
boyhood  and  youth,  except  that  he  was  physically  weak 
and  puny,  but  intellectually  vigorous,  and  a  young  man  of 
untiring  industry  and  application.  His  master  at  Reading 
School  was  so  convinced  from  observation  that  he  was  one 
of  those  boys  who  are  sure  to  rise  in  the  world,  that  he 
used  to  say,  "  When  you  are  a  great  little  man,  remember 
Reading  School." 

At  Oxford  he  gradually,  though  slowly,  made  himself 
known  and  felt.  In  1593  he  was  elected  Fellow  of  his 
College,  and  after  losing  two  years  from  illness  was  made 
Master  of  Arts  in  1598,  and  ordained  Deacon  by  Young, 
Bishop  of  Rochester,  in  1600,  and  Priest  in  1601. 

Of  his  ways  and  pursuits  during  the  first  ten  years  of* 
his  Oxford  life  very  little  is  known,  except  the  suspicious 
fact  that  Bu3keridge,  a  notoriously  unsound  divine,  was 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  265 

his  tutor.  It  is  evident  that  he  was  a  careful  observer  of 
the  times,  and  one  who  thought  for  himself.  Even  at  the 
period  of  his  ordination  he  had  already  taken  up  a 
theological  line  of  his  own.  Bishop  Young  is  said  to  have 
observed  that  his  studies  had  not  been  confined  to  the 
ordinary  system  of  Geneva,  but  that  his  divinity  was  built 
"  on  the  noble  foundation  of  the  fathers,  the  councils,  and 
the  ecclesiastical  historians."  Praise  like  this  is  suspicious. 
When  a  man  makes  an  idol  of  Fathers  and  councils,  and 
disparages  the  theology  of  the  Reformation,  we  may  be 
sure  there  is  a  screw  loose  in  his  theology.  Wood,  the 
author  of  "Athenae  Oxonienses,"  says  that,  even  in  his 
first  ten  years  at  Oxford,  he  was  esteemed  "  a  very  forward, 
confident,  and  zealous  man."  Put  together  Bishop  Young's 
and  Wood's  remarks,  and  you  have  the  first  ingredients  of 
a  very  dangerous  Churchman.  I  venture  the  conjecture, 
that  these  eleven  quiet  years  at  St.  John's,  Oxford,  were 
the  seed-time  of  all  the  mischief  that  Laud  ever  did,  and 
fixed  the  unhappy  bias  which  characterized  his  whole 
career. 

His  appointment  to  read  a  divinity  lecture  at  St.  John's 
in  1602  was  the  first  occasion  when  Laud  came  forward  as 
the  opponent  of  popular  Protestantism,  and  the  avowed 
advocate  of  a  new  style  of  theology.  The  precise  nature 
of  the  opinions  he  propounded  is  not  recorded,  but 
according  to  Heylin  it  was  something  like  "  the  perpetual 
visibility  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  derived  from  the 
Apostles  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  continued  in  that 
Church  until  the  Reformation."  What  it  was  that  he  said 
exactly  we  do  not  know ;  but  it  is  pretty  clear  that  he 
took  up  ground  about  the  Church  of  Rome  which  was 
quite  opposed  to  the  views  of  the  Homilies,  Jewel,  and 


266  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

the  Reformers,  and  most  distasteful  to  the  thorough 
Protestants  of  the  University.  The  immediate  result  was, 
that  the  lecturer  came  into  collision  with  no  less  a  person 
than  Dr.  George  Abbot,  then  Vice-Chancellor  of  Oxford, 
Head  of  University  College,  and  afterwards  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury, — a  man  of  great  ability  and  deservedly  high 
character.  The  after-consequences  were,  that  from  that 
day  forward  Abbot  regarded  Laud  as  a  dangerous  man, 
and  Laud  became  marked  and  known  as  a  very  lukewarm 
Protestant,  if  not  a  friend  of  Popery,  and  an  open  enemy 
to  the  pure  Gospel  of  Christ 

After  serving  the  office  of  Proctor  in  1603,  Laud  took 
his  degree  as  Bachelor  of  Divinity  in  1604.  The  proposi 
tions  he  undertook  to  defend  in  his  exercises  for  that 
degree,  supplied  additional  proof  of  his  theological 
tendencies,  and  increased  the  suspicion  with  which  he  was 
regarded.  According  to  his  biographers  he  maintained, 
first,  the  "necessity  of  baptism;"  and  secondly,  that 
"  there  could  be  no  true  Church  without  diocesan  Bishops.", 
The  precise  nature  of  his  statements,  again,  is  not  known  ; 
but  it  is  evident,  from  the  stir  which  the  exercises  made, 
that  they  were  thought  unscriptural  and  unsound  hitherto 
by  Protestant  Churchmen.  It  seems  most  probable  that, 
like  the  promoters  of  the  "Tracts  for  the  Times,"  he 
maintained  apostolical  succession  and  baptismal  regenera 
tion.  Whatever  it  was  that  he  said,  it  is  a  fact  that  he 
was  severely  attacked  by  Dr.  Holland,  rector  of  Exeter, 
who  was  at  that  time  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity.  As 
usual,  nothing  came  of  the  attack,  and  Laud  held  his 
ground.  Moral  evidence  of  a  man's  theological  unsoundness, 
and  legal  proof  of  it,  are  totally  different  things. 

After  damaging  himself  seriously,  in  1605,  by  counte- 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  267 

nancing  and  solemnizing  a  most  discreditable  marriage 
between  the  earl  of  Essex  and  Lady  Rich,  Laud  got  into 
another  theological  difficulty  at  Oxford  in  1606.  He 
delivered  a  sermon  in  St.  Mary's  of  such  a  Komish 
tendency,  that  he  was  called  in  question  for  it  by  Dr.  Airay 
provost  of  Queen's,  at  that  time  Vice-Chancellor.  Again 
we  are  left  in  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  the  sermon,  and 
again  we  only  know  that,  as  usual,  Laud  contrived  to 
escape  public  censure.  But,  like  many  others  in  a  similar 
position,  though  not  legally  condemned,  he  established  a 
strong  impression  in  many  minds  that  he  was  a  thoroughly 
unsound  divine,  and  deeply  tainted  with  Romanizing 
opinions.  Such,  in  short,  was  the  scandal  raised  by  this 
discourse,  that  the  famous  Joseph  Hall,  afterwards  Bishop 
of  Norwich,  took  occasion  to  address  a  remarkable  letter 
of  expostulation  to  the  preacher,  which,  as  an  indication 
of  the  estimate  then  made  of  Laud's  character,  deserves 
quoting  at  length.  He  says : — 

"  I  would  I  knew  where  to  find  you ;  then  I  could  tell 
how  to  take  direct  aim.  Whereas  now  I  must  pore  and 
conjecture.  To-day  you  are  in  the  tents  of  the  Romanists, 
to-morrow  in  ours,  the  next  day  between  both  and  against 
both.  Our  adversaries  think  you  ours.  We  think  you 
theirs.  Your  conscience  finds  you  with  both  arid  neither. 
I  flatter  you  not.  This,  of  course,  is  the  worst  of  all  tempers. 
Heat  and  cold  have  their  uses.  Lukewarmness  is  good  for 
nothing,  but  to  trouble  the  stomach.  Those  that  are 
spiritually  hot  find  acceptation.  Those  that  are  stark  cold 
have  lesser  reckoning.  The  mean  between  both  is  much 
worse,  as  it  comes  nearer  to  good  and  yet  attains  it  not. 
How  long  will  you  be  in  this  indifferency  ?  Resolve  one 
way,  and  know  at  last  what  you  do  hold,  what  you  should. 


268  LIGHT  FROM  i)LD  TIMES. 

Cast  off  either  your  wings  or  your  teeth ;  and,  casting  off 
this  bat-like  nature,  be  either  a  bird  or  a  beast.  To  die 
wavering  or  uncertain,  yourself  will  grant  fearful  If  you 
must  settle,  when  begin  you  ?  If  you  must  begin,  why 
not  now  ?  It  is  dangerous  deferring  that  whose  want  is 
deadly,  and  whose  opportunity  is  doubtful.  God  crieth 
with  Jehu, '  Who  is  on  my  side  ?  who  ? '  Look  at  last  out 
of  your  window  to  Him,  and  in  a  resolute  courage  cast 
down  the  Jezebel  that  hath  bewitched  you.  Is  there  any 
impediment  which  delay  will  abate  ?  Is  there  any  which 
a  just  answer  cannot  remove  ?  If  you  would  rather  waver, 
who  can  settle  you  ?  But  if  you  love  not  inconstancy,  tell 
us  why  you  stagger  ?  Be  plain,  or  else  you  will  never  be 
firm."  * 

In  1607,  in  the  thirty-fourth  year  of  his  age,  Laud 
began  at  last  to  climb  the  ladder  of  ecclesiastical  prefer 
ment.  A  man  of  his  stamp,  who  had  come  forward  as  an 
opponent  of  Protestant  and  Evangelical  theology,  was 
sure  not  to  lack  patrons.  Such  men  "  speak  of  the  world, 
and  the  world  heareth  them."  (1  John  iv.  5.)  In  fact 
from  this  date,  until  he  became  a  Bishop,  I  can  hardly  find 
three  years  in  which  Laud  did  not  obtain  some  piece  of 
preferment.  In  1607  he  was  made  Vicar  of  Stamford,  in 
Northamptonshire;  in  1608,  Rector  of  North  Kibworth, 
in  Leicestershire,  and  Chaplain  to  Neile,  Bishop  of 
Rochester;  in  1609,  Rector  of  West  Tilbury,  Essex;  in 
1610,  Rector  of  Cuckstone,  Kent,  and  then  of  Norton  in 
the  same  county;  in  1611,  President  of  St.  John's  College, 
Oxford,  and  Cbaplain  to  the  King;  in  1614,  Prebendary 
of  Buckden,  in  the  Diocese  of  Lincoln;  in  1615,  Archdeacon 

*  Hall's  "Letters :  "  Decade  III.  Epist.  5. 


ARCHBISHOP   LAUD.  269 

of  Huntingdon;  in  1616,  Dean  of  Gloucester;  in  1618, 
Rector  of  Ibstock  in  Leicestershire;  in  1620,  Canon  of 
Westminster;  and  in  1622,  Rector  of  Crick, in  Northamp 
tonshire.*  Such  a  number  of  successive  preferments 
probably  were  never  heaped  on  one  man  in  an  equal  spacei 
of  time !  How  many  of  them  he  held  at  once  I  am  unable 
to  ascertain.  What  he  did  at  his  various  livings,  whether 
he  resided  much,  whether  he  preached  much,  whether  he 
left  any  spiritual  marks  for  good,  are  all  points  about 
which  no  information  remains.  Except  the  fact,  that  in 
each  parish  he  always  assigned  an  annual  pension  to 
twelve  poor  persons,  laid  aside  one-fifth  of  his  income  for 
charitable  purposes,  put  the  glebe  house  in  repair,  and 
saw  that  the  church  was  supplied  with  becoming  furniture, 
I  can  find  nothing  recorded.  As  to  any  evangelistic  work, 
bearing  fruit  in  men's  souls,  in  Stamford,  North  Kibworth, 
West  Tilbury,  Cuckstone,  Norton,  Ibstock,  or  Crick,  we 
are  left  entirely  in  the  dark.  In  truth,  there  is  no  evidence 
that  work  of  this  kind  was  at  any  time  much  in  Laud's  line. 

Two  public  incidents  in  Laud's  life  during  the  thirteen 
years  between  1607  and  1620  deserve  special  notice.  One 
throws  strong  light  on  the  estimate  which  was  formed  of 
him  in  the  place  where  he  was  best  known, — the 
University  of  Oxford;  the  other  supplies  a  striking 
example  of  the  thorough  unbending  style  in  which  he 
drove  on  his  own  schemes  for  unprotestantizing  the 
Church  of  England,  and  thrust  them  down  men's  throats 
in  the  face  of  opposition. 

The  first  of  these  incidents  is  the  public  rebuke  which 


*  Laud  appears  to  have  taken  the  living  of  Crick  after  he  became 
Bishop  of  St.  David's.— See  his  "  Diary i" 


270  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

he  received  at  Oxford,  in  consequence  of  a  sermon  which 
he  preached  before  the  University  on  Shrove  Tuesday, 
1614.  This  sermon  contained  matter  so  offensive  to 
Protestant  Churchmen,  that  the  Vice-Chancellor,  Robert 
Abbot,  brother  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and 
afterwards  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  a  man  of  great  piety  and 
learning,  thought  fit  to  give  it  a  public  answer  the 
following  Easter  Sunday,  in  a  sermon  at  St.  Mary's. 

The  following  passage  from  Abbot's  sermon  is  highly 
important,  as  showing  what  Laud's  theological  opinions 
really  were : — 

"Some  men,"  said  Abbot  in  his  sermon,  "are  partly 
Romish  and  partly  English,  as  occasion  serves  them ;  so 
that  a  man  may  say  unto  them,  '  Art  thou  for  us  or  for 
our  adversaries  ? '  They  are  men  who  under  pretence  of 
truth,  and  preaching  against  the  Puritans,  strike  at  the' 
heart  and  root  of  the  faith  and  religion  now  established 
among  us.  This  preaching  against  the  Puritans  was  the 
practice  of  Parsons  and  Campian  the  Jesuits,  when  they 
came  into  England  to  seduce  young  students.  When 
many  of  them  were  afraid  to  lose  their  places,  if  they 
should  professedly  be  thus,  the  counsel  they  then  gave 
them  was,  that  they  should  speak  freely  against  the 
Puritans,  and  that  would  suffice.  These  men  cannot 
plead  that  they  are  only  accounted  Papists  because  they 
speak  against  the  Puritans,  but  because  they  speak 
nothing  against  the  Papists.  If  they  do  at  any  time 
speak  anything  against  the  Papists,  they  do  but  beat 
about  the  bush ;  and  that  but  softly,  for  fear  of  awakening 
and  disquieting  the  birds  that  are  in  it.  They  speak 
nothing  but  that  wherein  one  Papist  will  speak  against 
another,  or  against  equivocations  and  the  Pope's  temporal. 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  2*71 

W**"*"1""  *, 

authority,  and  the  like ;  and  perhaps  against  some  of  theii 
blasphemous  opinions.  But  on  the  points  of  free-will 
justification,  concupiscence  being  sin  after  baptism,  inherent 
righteousness,  and  certainty  of  salvation,  the  Papists 
beyond  the  sea  can  say  they  are  wholly  theirs,  and  the 
recusants  at  home  make  their  brags  of  them.  And  in  all 
things  they  keep  so  near  the  brink,  that  upon  any  occasion 
they  may  step  over  to  them." 

I  make  no  comment  on  this  passage :  it  speaks  for  itself. 
My  readers  will  probably  agree  with  me,  that  it  would 
have  been  well  if  Vice-Chancellors  of  Oxford  had  always 
spoken  as  plainly  and  faithfully  as  Robert  Abbot,  and  that 
Laud  is  not  the  only  person  who  has  required  such  public 
rebuke  to  be  given.  I  only  ask  then  to  mark  carefully  the 
charges  against  Laud  which  the  passage  contains.  It 
shows  clearly  and  unmistakably  what  was  the  Oxford 
estimate,  and  the  real  nature  of  Laud's  theology. 

The  other  incident  to  which  I  ask  attention  in  this 
period  of  Laud's  life  is  the  collision  which  took  place 
between  him  and  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  immediately 
after  his  appointment  to  the  Deanery  of  Gloucester,  in 
the  year  1616.  His  very  first  act,  on  taking  office  in  the 
Cathedral,  was  to  remove  the  communion  table  from  the 
place  where  it  had  long  stood,  in  the  midst  of  the  choir, 
to  the  wall  at  the  east  end,  where  he  ordered  it  to  stand 
altar-wise.  The  change  may  seem  a  trifling  one  to  many 
now,  accustomed,  as  we  have  been,  for  200  years,  to  see 
the  table  in  this  position ;  but  a  right  understanding  of 
the  old  position  of  the  table  throws  broad  light  on  the 
famous  expression,  "On  the  north  side."  The  change 
appeared  a  very  serious  matter  to  all  good  Protestants  in 
1616;  %s  tending  to  bring  back  the  Papal  notion  of  an 


272  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

altar,  and  to  encourage  the  idea  of  a  sacrifice,  and  a  priest, 
and  the  Mass,  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  people  of 
Gloucester  were  of  all  English  citizens  the  least  likely  to 
approve  the  slightest  appearance  of  a  leaning  towards 
Popery.  They  had  not  forgotten  good  Bishop  Hooper, 
and  the  doctrine  he  had  so  often  preached  about  the 
Lord's  Supper  before  his  martyrdom.  Miles  Smith,  the( 
Bishop  of  Gloucester,  a  holy  and  learned  man,  and  one  ofl 
the  leading  translators  of  the  Authorised  version  of  the 
Bible,  was  more  offended  by  the  change  than  any  one,  and 
declared,  if  it  was  carried  into  effect,  he  would  never  enter 
the  Cathedral  again.  But  none  of  these  things  moved 
Laud ;  in  spite  of  Bishop  and  people  the  table  was  moved. 
The  Dean  had  his  own  way.  The  Bishop  was  publicly  set 
at  nought,  and  never  entered  his  own  Cathedral  again, 
though  living  within  fifty  yards  of  it,  until  the  day  of  his 
death,  in  1624.  The  feelings  of  the  Protestant  people  of 
Gloucester  were  deeply  wounded.  It  is  a  striking  and 
significant  fact,  that  afterwards,  when  the  Commonwealth 
wars  began,  no  place  resisted  the  Cavaliers  and  fought  for 
Parliament  so  stubbornly  as  this  very  city  of  Gloucester  ! 

This  unhappy  transaction  requires  little  comment  from 
me.  Like  the  affair  of  Abbot's  sermon,  however,  it  gives 
another  insight  into  Laud's  character.  It  shows  him 
determined  to  carry  out  his  own  views  without  regard  to 
the  offence  they  might  give  to  the  feelings  of  Protestant 
Churchmen.  It  shows  him,  like  many  in  modern  times,) 
perfectly  indifferent  to  his  Bishop's  wishes  and  opinions! 
the  very  moment  they  ran  counter  to  his  own.  Here  is! 
the  very  man  who  preached  up  Apostolical  Succession  at 
Oxford,  flying  in  the  face  of  a  venerable  Bishop,  an<3J 
trampling  contemptuously  on  his  conscientious  scruples ' 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  273 

It  shows  him,  above  all,  beginning  his  official  duties  in  A 
public  position,  by  making  a  great  and  suspicious  stir 
about  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  attaching 
ar±  ominous  importance  to  the  precise  position  of  the 
Lord's  Table.  Need  I  remind  many  of  my  readers, 
that  the  first  step  of  the  whole  Tractarian  movement  was 
exactly  in  the  same  direction?  To  exalt  the  Lord's 
Supper  into  a  position  neither  warranted  by  the  Bible,  the 
Articles,  nor  the  Prayer-book,  and  to  invest  the  Lord's 
Table  and  all  around  it  with  a  superstitious  sanctity, 
these  were  among  the  first  lessons  taught  by  that  school 
of  which  so  many  scholars  have  passed  over  to  the  Church 
of  Rome.  "I  speak  as  to  wise  men;  judge  ye  what 
I  say."* 

In  1621,  after  five  years  at  Gloucester  Deanery,  Laud's 
ambition  was  -once  more  gratified,  and  his  power  of 
mischief  greatly  increased,  by  his  elevation  to  the  bench 
as  Bishop  of  St.  David's.  To  thrust  upon  the  bench,  once 
filled  by  Latimer  and  Jewel,  a  man  who  had  been  publicly 
opposed  by  three  Vice-Chancellors  and  a  Regius  Professor 
of  Divinity,  required  of  course  no  small  influence  and 
exertion.  Laud's  friends  were  found  equal  to  the  occasion. 
For  the  appointment,  he  was  mainly  indebted  to  the 


*  What  Laud  really  thought  about  the  Lord's  Table  may  be  seen  in  a 
very  painful  extract  from  a  speech  afterwards  delivered  by  him  in  the 
Star  Chamber,  on  the  occasion  of  the  prosecution  of  Prynne  in  1637. 
He  there  says,  "The  altar"  (a  word,  we  must  remember,  never  used 
in  the  Prayer-book),  "  the  altar  is  the  greatest  place  of  God's  residence 
upon  earth.  I  say  the  greatest,  yea,  greater  than  the  pulpit ;  for  there 
it  is,  '  This  is  my  body,'  but  in  the  pulpit  it  is,  '  This  is  my  word.'  And 
a  greater  reverence,  no  doubt,  is  due  to  the  body  than  to  the  word  of 
our  Lord;  and  so  to  the  throne  where  His  body  is  actually  present, 
than  to  the  seat  where  His  word  useth  to  be  proclaimed." 

S 


274  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Marquis  of  Buckingham,  and  to  Williams,  the  well-known 
Bishop  of  Lincoln.  King  James,  at  any  rate,  seems  to 
have  given  a  very  unwilling  consent  to  his  nomination. 
Partly,  no  doubt,  from  the  character  which  Laud  had 
notoriously  obtained  as  a  very  lukewarm  Protestant ; 
partly  from  the  open  distrust  with  which  Abbot, 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  regarded  him;  and  partly 
from  a  certain  shrewdness  in  discerning  unsound  doctrine, 
the  King  raised  serious  objections  to  Laud  being  made  a 
Bishop.  The  conversation  on  the  subject  between  his 
majesty  and  Bishop  Williams,  preserved  by  Hackett  in 
his  life  of  Williams,  is  a  very  curious  one,  and  shows 
plainly  that  the  British  Solomon  (as  people  called  James) 
was  not  quite  such  a  fool  as  he  was  often  thought  to  be. — 
" '  I  keep  Laud  back,'  said  the  king,  '  from  all  place  of 
rule  and  authority,  because  I  find  that  he  hath  a  restless 
spirit,  and  cannot  see  when  matters  are  well ;  but  loves 
to  toss  and  change,  and  bring  matters  to  a  pitch  of 
reformation  floating  in  his  own  brain,  which  may 
endanger  the  steadfastness  of  that  which  is  at  a  good  pass, 
God  be  praised.  I  speak  not  at  random :  he  hath  made 
himself  known  to  me  to  be  such  an  one.'  To  this 
Williams  could  only  reply  that  Laud  was  '  of  a  great  and 
tractable  wit,  and  would  presently  see  the  way  to  come 
out  of  his  error/  At  last,  wearied  out  by  Williams'  im 
portunity,  the  King  said, '  Is  there  no  way  but  you  must 
carry  it  ?  Then  take  him  to  you :  but  on  my  soul,  you 
will  repent  it;'  and  went  away  in  a  rage,  using  other 
words  of  fierce  and  ominous  import." — How  true  a  prophet 
the  King  was,  and  how  bitterly  Williams  afterwards 
smarted  under  Laud's  base  ingratitude,  are  notorious 
historical  facts.  But  this  was  the  way,  and  this  the 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  275 

ladder,  by  which  Laud  climbed  to  the  episcopal  bench  in 
1621,  in  the  forty-eighth  year  of  his  age.* 

We  have  now  reached  the  period  of  Laud's  life  when 
his  unhappy  influence  began  to  be  felt  most  powerfully  in 
every  department  of  Church  and  State.  For  the  next 
twenty  years  after  1621,  his  history  is  so  intermixed  with 
the  history  of  every  great  movement  in  our  country,  that 
to  go  fully  into  it  would  be  to  overload  my  subject,  and 
make  a  plain  biographical  paper  a  volume  of  history.  I 
cannot  pretend  to  do  anything  of  the  kind.  The  utmost 
I  shall  attempt  to  do  is  to  supply  the  leading  incidents 
of  his  story,  and  the  dates  at  which  they  occurred. 

In  1622  I  find  he  was  appointed  "Confessor"  to  the 
Duke  of  Buckingham.  In  1626  he  was  made  Bishop  of 
Bath  and  Wells,  and  Dean  of  the  Chapel  Royal.  In 
1628  he  became  Bishop  of  London.  In  1630  he  became 
Chancellor  of  Oxford.  In  1633  he  rose  to  be  Archbishop 
of  Canterbury  and  Chancellor  of  Dublin  University.  In 
1640  he  began  at  last  to  fall  from  his  high  estate,  and 
in  1641  he  was  committed  to  the  Tower. 

How  he  conducted  himself  throughout  these  last  twenty 
years  of  his  life, — how  he  plunged  into  politics  with  as 
much  energy  as  any  layman, — how  he  became  the  intimate 


*  Hackett'a  story  is  corroborated  by  one  told  by  Bishop  Burnet, 
"I  have  heard,"  saya  Bishop  Burnet,  "my  own  father  relate  it  from  the 
mouth  of  old  Sir  William  Armourer,  who  was  of  King  Jamea  the  First's 
;court,  being  bred  up  from  a  page,  that  his  Majesty,  as  Laud  (then  only 
Bishop  of  St.  David's)  walked  by,  but  at  some  distance,  took  Prince 
Charles  by  the  arm,  and  in  his  Scottish  dialect  said  to  him,  '  Son,  ken 
you  you  knave  Laud  ?  He  has  a  restless  head  :  he'll  ne'er  ha'  done  till 
he  has  lost  his  own  head  and  endangered  yours. '  "~~-Memor ials  o/ 
Princess  Sophia,  pp.  54,  55. 


276  LIGllT  FROM  OLD  TIM^S. 

friend  of  such  men  as  Buckingham,  Strafford,  Windebank, 
and  others  of  doubtful  character, — how  he  contrived  to  get 
the  reputation  of  having  a  hand  in  everything  that  went 
on  both  in  Church  and  State, — how  he  managed  to  make 
himself  the  most  unpopular  man  in  England,  from  the 
Isle  of  Wight  to  Berwick-on-Tweed,  and  from  the  Land's 
End  to  the  North  Foreland, — how  at  last  not  a  mistake 
could  be  made,  either  political  or  ecclesiastical,  without 
the  cry  being  raised,  "Is  not  the  hand  of  Laud  in  all 
this  ?  " — all  these  things  are  duly  recorded  in  the  historians 
of  the  times.  They  are  far  too  many,  and  would  occupy 
too  much  time  to  be  detailed  here. 

One  general  remark  applies  to  all  his  career  throughout 
these  twenty  years.  He  was  always  consistent,  always  the 
same,  always  in  mischief,  always  playing  the  same  game, 
always  driving  at  the  same  end,  always  advocating  the 
same  theological  principles,  for  which  he  had  made  himself 
notorious  at  Oxford.  In  1622,  before  he  had  been  a 
Bishop  a  year,  I  find  him  assisting  in  the  issue  of  six 
royal  injunctions  to  the  Clergy,  in  which,  among  other 
things,  it  is  ordered,  "  that  no  one,  under  the  degree  of  a 
Bishop  or  Dean,  shall  preach  on  such  deep  points  as 
predestination,  or  election,  or  the  universality,  efficacy, 
resistibility,  or  irresistibility  of  God's  grace." — In  1621  I 
find  him  procuring  the  suppression  of  an  admirable  associa 
tion  for  buying  up  presentations  and  appointing  good 
clergymen,  mainly  got  up  by  the  famous  Dr.  Gouge.  The 
association  was  broken  up,  and  the  money  subscribed  was 
confiscated. — In  1631  I  find  him  consecrating  the  Church 
of  St.  Catherine  Cree,  London,  with  such  superstitious 
ceremonies  and  idolatrous  veneration  of  the  Lord's  Table 
and  the  elements  of  bread  and  wine,  that  he  made  every 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  a  77 

one  suppose  he  longed  to  re-introduce  downright  Popery. — 
In  1632  I  find  him  prosecuting  Sherfield,  Recorder  of 
Salisbury,  for  breaking  a  painted  window  in  St.  Edmund's 
Church,  Salisbury,  which  the  vestry  had  ordered  to  be 
removed,  and  this  with  such  savage  severity  that  the 
unfortunate  man  was  fined  £1,000  by  the  Star  Chamber. — 
In  1633 1  find  him  first  offending  the  feelings  of  the  nation 
about  the  Sabbath  by  reviving  and  republishing  "The 
Book  of  Sports,"  and  then  ungratefully  trampling  on  the 
feelings  of  Williams,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  by  visiting  hia 
diocese  as  metropolitan,  and  opposing  his  known  opinion 
about  the  Lord's  Table. — In  1634  I  find  him  persecuting 
the  French  and  Walloon  congregations  in  London,  and 
pressing  the  Irish  Church  only  too  successfully  to  give  up 
its  admirable  Articles. — In  1636  I  find  him  preparing  and 
sending  down -to  Scotland  the  notorious  Scotch  liturgy,  in 
which  the  Real  Presence  is  as  plainly  taught  as  any 
Papist  could  wish,  and  setting  all  Scotland  in  a  flame  by 
attempting  to  introduce  it  in  public  worship. — In  1637  I 
find  him  forbidding  the  migration  to  America  of  a  large 
body  of  Puritans,  among  whom  was  the  famous  Oliver 
Cromwell,  and  compelling  some  of  the  very  men,  who 
afterwards  upset  Church  and  State,  to  remain  in  England 
against  their  will. — In  the  same  year  I  find  him 
prosecuting  Prynne,  Burton,  and  Bastwick,  for  publishing 
violent  writings,  and  actually  punishing  them  with  a  fine 
of  £5,000  each,  imprisonment  for  life,  and  the  hideous 
penalty  of  having  their  ears  cut  off. — In  1640  I  find  him 
transgressing  one  of  the  first  principles  of  our  constitution 
by  getting  canons  passed  in  Convocation  without  the 
consent  of  Parliament. — This  list  of  monstrous  follies 
might  easily  be  increased.  TO  enter  into  the  particulars 


278  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

of  them  is,  of  course,  impossible.  For  twenty  years  a 
petty  warfare  was  kept  up  by  him  and  his  allies  on  the 
Episcopal  bench  against  some  of  the  holiest  and  best' 
ministers  of  the  land.  The  catalogue  of  famous  men,  who, 
at  one  time  or  another,  during  Laud's  day  of  power,  were 
prosecuted,  silenced,  fined,  imprisoned,  or  driven  to  retire 
to  the  Continent,  is  a  melancholy  roll,  and  of  itself  speaks 
volumes.  John  Rogers,  Daniel  Rogers,  Thomas  Hooker, 
Dod,  Hildersham,  Ward,  Cotton,  Bridge,  Ames,  Sheppard, 
Burroughs,  Greenhill,  Calamy,  Whateley,  Wilkinson, 
Goodwin,  were  all  men  who  had  more  divinity  in  their 
little  fingers  than  Laud  had  in  his  whole  body.  Yet  every 
one  of  them  was  visited  with  Laud's  displeasure,  and,  in 
one  way  or  another,  disgracefully  treated.  In  short, 
the  public  came  to  the  conclusion  that  Laud  and  his 
companions  thought  Puritanism  a  greater  sin  than  open 
immorality,  and  trifling  acts  of  nonconformity  worse  than 
breaking  the  ten  commandments !  It  really  came  to  this, 
that  men  said  you  might  lie,  or  swear,  or  get  drunk,  and 
little  notice  would  be  taken ;  but  to  be  a  Puritan,  or  a 
Nonconformist,  was  to  commit  the  unpardonable  sin ! 

Never,  I  think,  did  mortal  man  labour  so  unceasingly 
to  advance  his  own  particular  theological  views  as  Laud, 
and  never  did  any  one  seem  so  blind  to  the  mischievous 
effects  of  his  proceedings.  Had  half  the  zeal  he  displayed 
in  snubbing  Calvinists,  persecuting  Puritans,  promoting 
Arminians,  and  making  advances  towards  Rome,  been 
shown  by  Grindal,  Whitgift,  and  Abbot,  in  propagating 
Evangelical  religion,  it  would  have  been  a  great  blessing 
to  the  Church  of  England.  Unhappily,  we  see  in  his 
case,  as  in  many  others,  how  much  "wiser  in  their 
generation"  the  children  of  this  world  are  than  the 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  279 

children  of  light.  Besides,  untiring  activity  is  far  more 
often  the  characteristic  of  the  friends  of  error  than  of  the 
friends  of  truth.  Pharisees,  Jesuits,  heresiarchs,  in  every 
'age,  will  compass  sea  and  land,  and  leave  no  stone 
'unturned,  to  accomplish  their  ends,  while  the  so-called 
Protestant  soldier  slumbers  and  sleeps.  It  was  so  in  the 
days  of  Laud;  I  fear  it  is  too  much  the  case  in  the 
present  day. 

The  end  came  at  last.  The  patience  of  the  English 
people  was  at  length  fairly  exhausted.  After  a  long  and 
unseemly  endeavour  to  govern  without  a  parliament,  that 
unhappy  monarch,  Charles  the  First,  was  obliged  to 
summon  the  famous  Long  Parliament  in  1640.  From 
the  very  first  meeting  of  the  House  of  Commons  the 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury's  doom  was  sealed.  Hollis, 
Pym,  Bering,-  and  their  companions,  attacked  Strafford 
and  Laud  without  delay,  and  gave  them  no  respite  till 
they  had  brought  them  to  the  scaffold.  The  virulence 
of  the  attack  made  upon  both  these  great  officials,  the 
singular  unanimity  with  which  the  proceedings  were 
carried  on,  the  strong  language  which  men  of  all  parties, 
even  quiet  people  like  Lord  Falkland,  used  in  speaking  of 
the  Church  of  England,  are  all  most  curious  facts,  and 
should  be  studied  in  "  Rush  worth's  Collections,"  May's 
"History  of  the  Long  Parliament,"  or  "Stoughton's 
Church  of  the  Civil  Wars."  They  all  help  to  show  the 
deep  dissatisfaction  Avhich  Laud's  policy  had  long  created 
in  the  mind  of  the  public,  and  the  intensity  of  the  dislike 
with  which  he  was  personally  regarded.  Englishmen  are 
notoriously  slow  to  move,  and  curiously  backward  to 
resist  constituted  authority.  When,  therefore,  Englishmen 
moved  with  such  tremendous  violence  as  the  House  of 


280  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Commons  moved  against  Laud,  it  is  impossible  not  to  feel 
that  a  very  strong  sense  of  long-standing  grievances 
must  have  existed. 

Laud  was  kept  a  prisoner  from  the  18th  December, 
1640,  to  the  10th  of  January,  1645,  and  the  greater  part 
of  that  time  he  was  confined  to  the  Tower.  The  articles 
laid  to  his  charge  were  fourteen  in  number.  In  substance 
they  were  as  follows  (I  copy  Le  Bas) : — 

1.  That  he  had  traitorously  endeavoured  to   subvert 

the  fundamental  laws  of  the  realm,  and  to 
persuade  the  King  that  he  might  levy  money 
without  the  consent  of  Parliament. 

2.  That  he   had   encouraged    sermons    and    publica 

tions  tending  to  the  establishment  of  arbitrary 
power. 

3.  That  he  had  interrupted  and  prevented  the  course 

of  justice  at  Westminster  Hall. 

4.  That  he  had  traitorously  and  corruptly  sold  justice, 

and  advised  the  King  to  sell  judicial  and  other 
offices. 

5.  That  he  had  surreptitiously  caused  a  book  of  canons 

to  be  published  without  lawful  authority,  and 
had  unlawfully  enforced  subscription  to  it. 

6.  That  he  had  assumed  a  Papal  and  tyrannical  power, 

both  in  ecclesiastical  and  temporal  matters. 

7.  That    he    had    laboured    to    subvert    God's    true 

religion,  and  to  introduce  Papal  superstition  and 
idolatry. 

8.  That   he   had   usurped   the   nomination   to   many 

ecclesiastical    benefice?,   and   promoted   persons 


ARCHBISHOP   LAUD.  281 

who  were  Popishly  affected,  or  otherwise  unsound 
in  doctrine  or  corrupt  in  manners. 

9.  That  he  had  committed  the  licensing  of  books  to 
chaplains  notoriously  disaffected  to  the  reformed 
religion. 

10.  That  he  had  endeavoured  to  reconcile  the  Church 

of  England  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  held 
intelligence  with  priests  and  the  Pope,  and  had 
permitted  a  Popish  hierarchy  to  be  established 
in  this  kingdom. 

11.  That  he  had  silenced  many  godly  ministers,  hin 

dered  the  preaching  of  God's  Word,  cherished 
profaneness  and  ignorance,  and  caused  many  of 
the  King's  subjects  to  forsake  the  country. 

12.  That  he  had  endeavoured  to  raise  discord  between 

the  Church  of  England  and  other  Reformed 
Churches,  and  had  oppressed  the  Dutch  and 
French  congregations  in  England. 

13.  That  he  had  laboured  to  introduce  innovations  in 

religion  and  government  into  the  kingdom  of 
Scotland,  and  to  stir  up  war  between  the  two 
countries. 

1 4.  That  to  preserve  himself  from  being  questioned  for 

these  traitorous  practices,  he  had  laboured  to 
divert  the  ancient  course  of  parliamentary  pro 
ceeding,  and  to  incense  the  King  against  all 
Parliaments. 

Such  were  the  charges  brought  against  the  unfortunate 
Archbishop,  and  upon   these,  with   the  addition  of   ten 


282  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

minor  articles,  he  was  finally  brought  to  trial  in  March, 
1644.  It  will  be  seen,  by  comparison  of  dates,  that  he 
lingered  in  prison  for  four  years.  It  must  have  been  a 
bitter  time  for  the  fallen  Prelate  !  The  execution  of  his 
friend  Strafford,  the  battles  of  the  civil  war,  the  King's 
ill-success,  and  the  imposition  of  a  fine  of  £20,000  on 
himself,  no  doubt  were  not  the  least  part  of  his  sorrows. 
At  one  time,  in  1643,  a  motion  was  actually  made  in  the 
House  of  Commons  that  Laud  should  be  transported, 
untried  and  unheard,  to  New  England,  in  America ;  and 
it  is  by  no  means  quite  clear  that  some  of  his  enemies 
would  not  have  been  glad  to  get  rid  of  him  in  this 
fashion.  But  the  motion  fell  to  the  ground,  and  at 
length,  in  the  autumn  of  1644,  he  was  finally  placed 
on  his  trial. 

Of  the  trial  itself  I  shall  say  but  little.  It  was  perhaps 
as  unfair  and  discreditable  to  English  history  as  any  State 
trial  that  figures  in  our  chronicles.  The  prosecution  was 
committed  to  Prynne,  who  was  the  virulent  and  bigoted 
personal  enemy  of  the  prisoner.  Laud's  own  private 
papers  and  diary  were  seized  and  relentlessly  used,  and 
he  had  to  defend  himself  under  immense  disadvantages. 
As  the  case  went  on,  the  evidence  on  many  points  was 
manifestly  insufficient,  and  would  never  have  satisfied  a 
really  fair  and  impartial  court.  Those  who  wish  to  read 
up  the  subject  should  study  Prynne's  own  narrative  of 
this  trial,  in  a  folio  called  "  Canterbury's  Doom."  But  it 
is  as  clear  as  daylight  that  Laud's  condemnation  was  a 
foregone  conclusion  with  his  judges.  In  spite  of  a  defence 
which  even  Prynne  admits  was  "  full,  gallant,  and  pithy," 
in  spite  of  a  conspicuous  absence  of  legal  proof  that  he 
had  committed  anything  worthy  of  death,  at  length,  after 


ABCHBISHOP   LAUD.  283 

great  delays,  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbuiy  was  found 
guilty  and  sentenced  to  die. 

Of  his  execution  at  Tower  Hill,  on  the  9th  of  January, 
1645, 1  shall  also  say  little.  The  only  favour  shown  him 
on  this  occasion  was,  that,  he  was  beheaded  and  not 
hanged.  His  demeanour  on  the  scaffold  was  courageous, 
dignified,  calm,  and  in  every  way  honourable  to  him. 
His  address  before  death  was  worthy  of  a  better  cause. 
In  fact,  you  may  say  of  him,  as  it  was  said  of  another, 
"Nothing  in  all  his  life  became  him  so  much  as  the 
leaving  of  it."  That  his  execution  was  as  much  a  judicial 
murder  as  that  of  Sir  Thomas  More  or  Cranmer,  I  feel  no 
doubt  at  all :  but  I  cannot  for  a  moment  admit  that  he 
deserves  to  be  called  a  "  martyr."  It  is  the  cause,  not 
the  amount  of  suffering,  which  makes  the  martyr.  That 
Laud  met  his  death  bravely  and  gallantly,  I  fully  admit : 
but  I  never  can  admit  that  he  had  done  nothing  to 
exasperate  men's  minds  against  him,  or  that  he  was 
wholly  innocent  of  everything  laid  to  his  charge,  or  that 
he  died  in  support  of  a  good  cause. 

We  have  now  traced  the  life  of  Laud  from  his  cradle  to 
his  grave.  It  only  remains  for  me  to  point  out  the  great 
and  instructive  lessons  which  his  life  appears  to  teach  us, 
and  the  broad  and  clear  light  which  it  throws  on  the 
position  of  the  Church  of  England  at  the  present  day 
But  before  I  do  this,  I  wish  to  say  a  few  words  on  three 
disputed  points.  These  points  are  Laud's  real  character, 
his  real  policy  and  aims,  and  the  real  consequences  of  his 
policy.  I  am  well  aware  that  this  is  debateable  ground. 
In  walking  over  it  I  cannot  expect  that  all  will  agree  with 
me.  But  I  give  my  opinion  freely,  and  men  must  take 
it  for  what  it  is  worth. 


234  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

(a)  His  real  character,  then :  What  was  it  ?  What  is 
the  estimate  that  we  ought  to  put  on  him  ?  The  answer, 
us  is  often  the  case,  lies  in  my  judgment  between  two 
extremes.  Laud  was  neither  so  good  nor  so  bad  a  man  as 
he  is  often  represented.  To  call  him  a  saint,  a  martyr,  an 
English  Cyprian,  on  one  side,  is  simply  ridiculous.  I  can 
discover  no  warrant  for  such  extravagant  praise.  To  paint 
him  as  a  monster  of  iniquity,  and  a  child  of  the  devil,  on 
the  other  side,  is  equally  absurd.  The  charge  falls  to  the 
ground  as  "  not  proven." — Let  us  give  him  his  due.  He 
was  not  an  immoral  or  a  covetous  man.  Few  archbishops 
seem  to  have  spent  so  little  on  themselves,  and  to  have 
given  so  largely  and  liberally  of  their  substance  to 
promote  learning  and  to  strengthen  the  material  part  of 
the  Church  of  England.  He  was  a  zealous  and  earnest 
Churchman.  No  one  can  deny  that  he  spent  himself  and 
was  spent  in  the  promotion  of  what  he  thought  sound 
"Church  Views,"  and  conscientiously  believed  he  was 
doing  right.  But  earnestness  alone,  if  not  rightly 
directed,  is  a  very  mischievous  thing.  Experience 
abundantly  proves  that,  in  every  age  of  the  Church, 
well-meaning  and  conscientious  men,  when  they  are 
narrow-minded,  short-sighted,  ignorant  of  human  nature, 
and  obstinate,  are  the  greatest  causes  of  trouble.  Never 
did  man  prove  it  so  thoroughly  as  Laud. 

He  was  not,  I  believe,  a  Jesuit  or  a  Papist.  His 
conference  with  Fisher,  and  his  successful  dealings  with 
Chillingworth,  completely  negative  that  supposition.  But 
to  call  him  a  sound  Protestant  Churchman  is  simply 
absurd.  He  never  disguised  his  dislike  to  thorough 
Protestant  theology,  and  laboured  all  his  life  to  discourage 
it.  The  mere  fact  that  he  was  twice  offered  a  cardinal's 


AfeCHBlSHOP  LAUD. 

hat  by  the  Pope,  after  he  became  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,  of  itself  speaks  volumes.  It  shows  the 
general  impression  that  he  made  on  the  minds  of 
foreigners. 

That  he  was  a  spiritually-minded  man,  and  really 
received  the  Gospel  of  God's  grace  into  his  heart,  is  a 
point  of  which  we  have  very  scanty  proofs.  This  is  a 
delicate  matter.  God  forbid  that  we  should  judge  him ! 
Yet  it  is  vain  to  deny  that  there  is  an  absence  of  any 
thing  like  thoroughly  Evangelical,  experimental  religion 
in  his  literary  remains.  There  is  a  painful  lack  of 
anything  really  calculated  to  do  good  to  hearts  and  souls. 
His  seven  sermons  are  poor  things,  and  not  worthy  to  be 
compared  even  with  the  discourses  of  men  of  his  own 
school,  like  Andrews.  His  private  "Diary"  contains 
much  superstition  and  weakness.  His  letters  are  not 
spiritual  or  striking.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  you 
will  find  more  good  divinity  in  ten  pages  of  such  men  as 
his  contemporaries,  Usher,  Davenant,  Hall,  and  Sibbes> 
than  in  all  the  works  of  Laud.  The  plain  truth  must  be 
spoken.  Laud  was  much  more  a  political  Churchman,  an 
ecclesiastical  Ahithophel,  a  zealous  champion  of  his  party, 
his  cause,  and  his  order,  than  a  minister  of  Christ,  a 
preacher  of  the  Gospel,  a  shepherd  of  souls.  For  the 
work  of  the  former  character  he  laid  himself  out  entirely, 
and  laboured  in  it  night  and  day.  For  the  work  of  the 
latter  character  he  had  no  vocation,  and  gave  himself  no 
time.  It  was  not  work  in  his  line.  What  he  really  was, 
and  what  he  really  felt  personally  in  his  heart  of  hearts, 
is  a  question  which  I  cannot  pretend  to  solve.  The  last 
day  alone  will  declare  it.  In  hope  and  charity  I  leave 
it  alone, 


286  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

(b)  Laud's  real  policy  next  demands  our  attention. 
What  was  it  ?  What  was  he  driving  at  all  his  life  ? 
What  did  he  want  to  do?  What  was  his  object  and 
aim  ?  I  do  not  believe,  with  some,  that  he  really  desired 
to  Romanize  the  Church  of  England,  or  meant  and' 
intended,  if  possible,  to  reunite  it  with  the  Church  of; 
Home.  I  think  those  who  say  this  go  too  far,  and  have 
no  sufficient  ground  for  their  assertions.  But  I  decidedly 
think,  that  what  he  did  labour  to  effect  was  just  as 
dangerous,  and  would  sooner  or  later  have  brought  back 
downright  Popery,  no  matter  what  Laud  meant  or 
intended.  I  believe  that  Laud's  grand  idea  was  to 
make  the  Church  of  England  less  Protestant,  less 
Calvinistic,  less  Evangelical,  than  it  was  when  he  found 
it.  I  believe  he  thought  that  our  excellent  Reformers  had 
gone  too  far — that  the  clock  ought  to  be  put  back  a  good 
deal.  I  believe  his  favourite  theory  was,  that  we  ought 
to  occupy  a  medium  position  between  the  Reformation  on 
the  one  side,  and  Rome  on  the  other,  and  that  we  might 
combine  the  ceremonialism  and  sacramentalism  of  St. 
Peter's  on  the  Tiber  with  the  freedom  from  corruption 
and  ecclesiastical  independence  of  St.  Paul's  on  the 
Thames.  He  did  not,  in  short,  want  to  go  back  to  the 
Vatican,  but  he  wanted  to  borrow  some  of  its  principles, 
and  plant  them  in  Lambeth  Palace.  I  see  in  these  ideas 
and  theories  a  key  to  all  his  policy.  His  one  aim  from' 
St.  John's,  Oxford,  till  he  was  sent  to  the  Tower,  was  not 
to  Romanize,  but  to  un-Protestautize  the  Church  of 
England.  Some  may  think  this  a  nice  and  too  refined  a 
distinction.  I  do  not  A  "  Romanizer  "  is  one  thing,  an 
K  un-Protestantizer  "  is  another. 

This  was  the  explanation  of  his  always  opposing  what 


A&CHBiSHOP  LAUD.  28? 

he  called  "  Calvinism."  He  would  fain  have  made  popular 
Protestant  theology  odious  by  painting  the  doctrines  of 
grace  as  inseparable  from  antinomianism  and  extreme 
views  of  election  and  reprobation.  He  knew  too  well 
that  nothing  so  damages  a  theological  cause  as  a  cleverly 
chosen  nickname. 

This  was  the  explanation  of  his  making  so  much  ado 
about  the  position  of  the  Lord's  Table.  It  was  not 
merely  to  preserve  the  Table  from  irreverent  and  profane 
uses,  but  to  exalt  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
and  make  a  slight  approach  to  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass. 

This  was  the  explanation  of  his  advocating  extravagant 
views  of  the  Episcopal  office,  as  if  it  were  essential  to  a 
Church.  It  helped  his  favourite  notion  that  the  Church 
of  England  occupied  a  middle  position  between  the 
Presbyterian  Church  of  Geneva  and  the  Church  of 
Rome, — an  idea,  by  the  way,  often  brought  forward 
now-a-days,  and  about  as  absurd  as  to  say  the  Isle  of 
Wight  occupies  a  middle  position  between  England 
and  France ! 

This  was  the  explanation  of  his  incessantly  persecuting 
and  teasing  lecturers,  and  discouraging  doctrinal  preaching 
all  over  the  land.  He  wished  to  make  people  think  that 
the  Sacraments,  and  not  the  preaching  of  God's  Word, 
were  the  principal  part  of  Christianity. 

This  was  the  explanation  of  his  introducing,  as  far  as 
possible,  such  histrionic  ceremonials  as  those  with  which 
he  astonished  London  at  the  consecration  of  St.  Catherine 
,Cree.  He  desired  to  show  the  public  that  Churchmen 
could  have  as  much  sensuous  and  showy  religion  as 
Papists ;  and  that,  if  we  did  not  have  the  Mass  itself,  the 
Communion  Service  of  the  Prayer-book  might  be  so, 


288  LIGHT  JRQ&  OLD  TIMSS. 

managed   and    manipulated   as    to    make    an    excellent 
imitation  of  it. 

This  was  the  explanation  of  his  discouraging  and 
checking  all  attacks  on  Popery,  whether  in  the  pulpit  or 
the  press,  and  obliging  whole  passages  in  many  good 
books  of  the  time  to  be  expurgated  and  suppressed.  He 
wished  to  lower  the  tone  of  the  country  about  the  nature 
of  Popery,  and  to  make  people  less  alive  to  its  enormous 
evils  and  less  awake  to  his  own  movements. 

This,  in  the  last  place,  but  not  least,  was  the  explanation 
of  his  constantly  promoting  and  bringing  forward  in  the 
Church  Arminian  and  semi-Protestant  divines  of  his  own 
school  of  theology.  Wren,  Montague,  and  Main  waring, 
are  specimens  of  the  kind  of  men  he  delighted  to 
honour.  He  never  threw  away  an  opportunity  of  this 
kind.  He  knew  the  importance  of  backing  your  friends, 
and  of  securing  all  the  good  things  of  place,  power,  and 
influence  for  your  own  party.  One  plan  was  always  kept 
in  view,  and  that  was  to  fill  up  the  Bench,  as  far  as  possible, 
with  High  Churchmen. 

Such,  I  believe  firmly,  is  the  true  account  of  Laud's 
Policy.  He  had  always  one  aim  before  him.  Of  that 
aim  he  never  lost  sight  for  a  day.  And  while  we  admire 
his  consistency,  his  persistency,  his  dogged  tenacity  of 
purpose,  we  must  never  forget  the  real  nature  of  his  aim. 
It  was  to  un-Protestantize  the  Church  of  England. 

(c)  One  more  question  demands  a  few  words.  What 
were  the  consequences  of  Laud's  policy  ?  I  shall  say  but 
little  on  this  point.  Some  people,  I  believe,  who  regard 
him  as  a  slandered  person,  and  venerate  him  as  the 
reviver  of  so-called  Catholic  principles,  would  tell  you 
that  he  did  a  great  deal  of  good.  From  such  I  take  leave 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  289 

to  differ  entirely.  I  hold  that  he  did  more  harm  to  the 
Reformed  Church  of  England  than  any  man  that  ever 
lived — more  than  Gardiner,  Bonner,  Cardinal  Pole,  and 
Queen  Mary,  all  put  together.  I  have  already  said  that 
he  probably  meant  well,  and  acted  conscientiously.  I 
quite  believe  that  he  thought  his  policy  was  doing  God 
and  the  Church  of  England  good  service.  But  the 
consequences  of  his  policy,  both  direct  and  indirect,  were 
disastrous,  mischievous,  and  evil  in  the  extreme.  Let  me 
show  you  what  they  were. 

One  direct  consequence  of  Laud's  policy  was  a 
wide-spread  decline  of  sound  Protestant  feeling  among 
the  clergy,  fromjwbich  our  Church  has  never  recovered. 
The  principles  and  opinions  of  a  forward,  pushing 
Archbishop  like  him,  who  practically  had  the  key  of  all 
patronage  in  his  pocket,  were  only  too  greedily  swallowed 
by  many.  A  school  of  divines  was  rapidly  gathered  and 
consolidated  within  our  pale,  which  has  weakened  our 
Church  most  seriously  from  that  period.  How  deep  and 
wide-spread  this  decline  was  may  be  gathered  from  the 
Memoirs  of  Panzani,  the  Romish  emissary  to  England  in 
Laud's  days,  where  he  gives  an  account  of  the  state  of 
things  in  this  country.  He  particularly  mentions  that 
Laud's  great  friend,  Bishop  Montague,  told  him  privately, 
in  1636,  that — "he  and  many  of  his  brethren  were 
prepared  to  conform  themselves  to  the  method  and 
discipline  of  the  Gallican  Church;" — "that  there  were 
only  three  Bishops  on  the  bench  that  could  be  counted 
violently  bent  against  the  Church  of  Rome :  viz.,  Morton, 
Davenant,  and  Hall ; " — and  "  as  for  the  aversion  to 
Popery  which  we  discover  in  our  sermons  and  printed 
books,"  said  Montague,  "  they  are  things  of  form,  chiefly 

T 


290  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

ito  humour  the  populace  and  not  to  be  much  regarded." 
Pretty  language  this  from  an  English  Bishop !  But  what 
an  idea  it  gives  us  of  the  rapid  spread  of  Laud's  theology! 

But  another  direct  consequence  of  Laud's  policy  was  of 
a  very  different  kind.  There  arose  throughout  the  land  a 
spirit  of  thorough  alienation  of  the  middle  classes  from 
the  Church  of  England.  The  mass  of  English  people 
gradually  began  to  dislike  a  religious  body  which  they 
saw  principally  occupied  in  persecuting  Puritanism, 
silencing  preachers,  checking  zeal,  exalting  forms,  deifying 
sacraments,  and  complimenting  Popery.  The  multitude 
seldom  draws  nice  distinctions.  It  measures  institutions 
chiefly  by  their  working  and  administration,  and  cares 
little  for  theories  and  great  principles.  Little  by  little 
men's  minds  throughout  the  country  began  to  connect 
episcopacy  with  tyranny,  the  liturgy  with  formality,  and 
the  Church  of  England  with  fines,  imprisonments,  and 
punishments.  Baxter's  autobiography  gives  a  vivid 
picture  of  the  universal  feeling  of  the  kind  which 
prevailed.  Hence,  when  the  Long  Parliament  assembled, 
'there  was  a  most  painful  unanimity  of  ill-feeling  towards 
the  poor  old  Church  of  England.  The  members  repre 
senting  all  the  counties  and  boroughs  in  England,  with 
few  exceptions,  were  found  thoroughly  dissatisfied  with  the 
Establishment ;  and  the  assailants,  both  in  number  and 
influence,  completely  swamped  and  overwhelmed  the 
defenders.  And  all  this  was  the  doing  of  Laud !  He 
had  disgusted  the  bulk  of  the  laity,  lost  the  middlo 
classes,  and  turned  the  Church's  friends  into  foes. 

The  last  and  worst  direct  consequence  of  Laud's  policy 
was  the  temporary  destruction  of  the  Church  of  England. 
An  ecclesiastical  revolution  took  place,  which  swelled  at 


AKCHBISHOP   LAUD.  291 

length  into  a  kind  of  reign  of  terror.  The  pent-up 
feelings  of  the  middle  classes,  once  let  loose,  broke  out 
into  a  hurricane,  before  which  everything  in  the  frame 
work  of  the  Church  of  England  was  clean  swept  away. 
Bishops,  and  deans,  and  clergy,  and  Liturgy,  were  all 
shovelled  off  the  stage  like  so  much  rubbish.  Good  things 
as  well  as  bad  were  involved  in  one  common  ruin.  A 
bloody  civil  war  broke  out.  Charles  I.  followed  Strafford 
and  Laud  to  the  scaffold.  Everything  in  Church  and 
State  was  turned  upside  down.  Order  at  last  was  only 
kept  by  the  iron  hand  of  a  military  dictator,  Oliver 
Cromwell.  The  crown  and  the  mitre  were  both  alike 
proscribed,  excommunicated,  and  rolled  in  the  dust.  And 
all  this  was  the  doing  of  Laud !  He  sowed  the  wind  and 
reaped  the  whirlwind. 

Such  were  the  direct  consequences  of  Laud's  policy. 
I  wish  they  had  been  all  the  harm  that  he  did.  But, 
unhappily,  there  were  other  indirect  consequences,  of 
which  we  feel  the  bad  effects  to  this  very  day.  The 
whole  balance  of  English  feeling  about  the  Church  of 
England  was  completely  disarranged  and  disturbed  by  his 
proceedings.  Equilibrium  has  never  been  recovered. 

A  pendulum  was  set  swinging  by  his  mischievous  folly, 
which  has  now  oscillated  violently  for  over  200  years.  First 
came  a  strong  reaction  in  favour  of  the  Church  when  the 
Stuarts  returned  to  the  throne  at  the  Kestoration,  having 
learned  nothing  and  forgotten  nothing.  Moderation  and 
tolerance,  you  will  remember,  were  then  thrown  to  the 
winds.  The  wretched  Act  of  Uniformity  was  passed,  by 
which  2,000  of  the  best  clergy  of  the  age  were  turned 
out  of  our  pale,  and  lost  to  our  ranks  for  ever. — Then 
came  a  long  and  dreary  time  of  exhaustion  and  stagnation, 


LIGHT  ffcOfo  Oti)  TIMES. 

a  time  during  which  the  Church  of  England,  like  a  torpid 
sloth,  existed  indeed,  and  hung  on  the  State  tree,  but 
scarcely  lived,  moved,  or  breathed. — Then  came,  after  a 
century,  the  revival  of  true  Protestant  religion  under 
the  auspices  of  those  glorious  clergymen  Wesley  and 
Whitefield ;  but  a  revival  which  our  Bishops  could  neither 
understand,  appreciate,  direct,  manage,  utilise,  encourage, 
or  retain. — Then  came  the  permanent  establishment  of 
Methodism  and  a  vast  increase  of  nonconformity. — Finally, 
we  see  in  our  own  days  the  spectacle  of  a  pure  Protestant 
Church  in  England  which  has  allowed  half  the  population 
to  stray  out  of  its  fold  and  slip  out  of  its  fingers,  and  is 
neither  liked,  nor  trusted,  nor  valued  by  the  great 
majority  of  dissentients !  And  what  was  the  first  cause 
of  all  this  ?  I  answer  again,  in  one  sentence,  the  fatal 
policy  of  Archbishop  Laud !  He  sowed  the  seed  of 
which  we  reap  the  consequences.  He  made  a  whole 
generation  of  Englishmen  hate  the  Church  of  England 
and  feel  no  confidence  in  her :  and  the  feeling  survives 

*  o 

and  lingers  down  to  the  present  day. 

It  only  remains  for  me  now  to  point  out  the  leading 
lessons  which  Laud's  history  ought  to  teach  us.  I  have 
done  my  best  to  show  you  the  man,  and  his  character,  and 
his  policy,  and  the  consequences  of  it.  On  each  of  these 
topics,  you  will  readily  believe,  much  more  might  be  said. 
But  I  am  obliged  to  skim  the  surface  of  things,  and 
leave  much  to  be  filled  up  by  my  readers.  If  I  can 
only  set  men  thinking  and  reading,  and  send  them  to  such 
hooks  as  Marsden's  "  History  of  the  Puritans,"  and 
Stoughton's  "  Ecclesiastical  History,"  I  shall,  even  in  this 
short  sketch,  have  not  laboured  in  vain.  Let  me  now  try 
to  make  some  practical  use  of  the  whole  subject. — 


ARCHBISHOP   LAUD.  293 

1.  The  first  lesson  that  I  draw  from  the  subject  is 
this.  Laud's  history  shows  us,  that  any  attempt  to 
un- Protestantize  tlie  Church  of  England  is  fraught 
with  peril  and  mischief  to  the  Establishment.  Any 
man — no  matter  how  high  his  rank — Archbishop,  Bishop, 
Dean,  or  Archdeacon ;  no  matter  how  high  his  character — 
earnest,  zealous,  conscientious,  learned,  devout,  charitable, 
and  self-denying; — any  man  who  tries  to  reintroduce 
Eomish  doctrines  and  Eomish  ceremonies  into  the  Church 
of  England,  is  an  enemy  to  the  Establishment,  and  is 
damaging  its  best  interests. 

I  am  no  more  infallible  than  the  Pope.  I  have  no 
access  to  peculiar  information  more  than  other  men. 
But  it  is  my  firm  and  decided  conviction,  that  the  bulk 
of  Churchmen  in  our  days  will  not  have  Eomanism  brought 
back  within  our  pale.  Some,  perhaps,  of  the  aristocracy 
and  the  nobility  may  approve  a  sensuous,  histrionic 
religion,  and  see  no  harm  in  a  nearer  approximation  to 
the  ways  of  Eome.  But  the  majority  of  the  middle 
classes,  and  the  most  intelligent  of  the  lower  orders,  will 
not  have  Eomanism  in  any  shape,  or  at  any  price ;  and  if 
you  try  to  thrust  it  down  their  throats,  they  will  just 
leave  the  Church  to  shift  for  itself,  and  walk  away. 
There  will  be  no  more  reign  of  terror,  or  ecclesiastical 
earthquakes.  There  will  be  no  repetition  of  State  trials. 
The  Lauds  and  Montagues  on  our  bench,  if  any,  will  not 
be  taken  to  Tower  Hill  and  beheaded.  But  the  middle 
classes  will  just  leave  bishops,  deans,  and  clergy  alone  in 
their  glory,  and  forsake  the  Establishment.  The  cry  will 
be  raised, — "  This  is  not  our  rest,  for  it  is  polluted  with 
Eomanism:  we  must  depart  hence.  To  your  tents, 
0  Israel:" 


294  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMEB. 

And  what  will  happen  then  ?  Why,  the  Church  will 
perish  for  want  of  Churchmen.  Generals,  and  colonels, 
and  band,  alone,  do  not  make  up  an  army ;  and  bishops, 
and  deans,  and  choristers,  and  clergy,  alone,  do  not  make 
up  a  Church.  Disestablishment  will  come  as  a  matter  of 
course.  The  Church  of  a  minority  will  not  be  long 
spared  on  this  side  of  St.  George's  Channel  any  more 
than  on  the  other.  The  tender  meriies  of  liberal 
statesmen  may  perhaps  leave  the  poor  old  Church,  her 
cathedrals,  and  parish  churches,  and  possibly  some  part  of 
her  endowments.  But  if  the  "multitude  of  people"  is 
the  glory  of  a  church  as  well  as  of  a  prince,  the  glory  of 
the  Church  of  England  will  have  passed  away  for  ever. 
"  Ichabod  "  will  be  written  over  empty  naves  and  choirs. 
The  Establishment  will  split  up,  or  become  one  of  the 
sects,  like  the  Scotch  Episcopal  Church,  and  the  page  of 
history  will  record  that  she  made  shipwreck  of  all  her 
greatness  by  the  suicidal  attempt  to  recede  from 
Protestantism  and  rein  trod  uce  Popery. 

No  J  If  I  know  anything  of  the  middle  classes  and 
intelligent  lower  orders,  they  wish  to  have  a  Protestant 
Establishment,  or  no  Establishment  at  all.  They  may 
not  be  hard  readers  or  deep  thinkers.  But  they  know 
what  Romanism  was  350  years  ago,  and  they  do  not  want 
it  back.  They  know  what  priestly  tyranny,  and  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  and  the  odious  confessional,  did 
before  the  Reformation.  They  have  an  innate,  instinctive, 
wholesome  dislike  of  the  slightest  symptom  of  any  return 
to  these  things.  They  cannot  draw  nice  distinctions ; 
they  are  apt  to  call  a  spade  a  spade,  and  to  give  things 
their  right  names.  And  if  they  see  any  attempt  to  imitate 
Romanism  in  our  churches,  and  to  counterfeit  Romish 


ARCHBISHOP  LA.UD.  295 

ceremonies,  their  suspicions  are  roused  at  once.  The 
clergyman  who  rouses  these  suspicions,  I  say  boldly, 
however  earnest,  conscientious,  well-meaning,  and  charitable, 
is  no  friend  to  the  Church  of  England,  and  is  doing 
immense  harm. 

2.  The  second  lesson  of  the  subject  is  this.  Laud's 
history  shows  us  what  harm  may  be  done  to  a  Church  by 
a  very  small  party.  Great  is  the  power  of  a  minority 
when  it  acts  together,  and  is  united.  Great  is  the  influence 
of  a  few  determined  men  when  they  combine  for  mischief, 
see  their  object  clearly,  and  endeavour  incessantly  and 
unscrupulously  to  carry  it  out.  Laud's  beginnings  at  St. 
John's,  Oxford,  were  very  small,  but  his  latter  end  greatly 
increased. 

This  is  a  point,  I  venture  to  say,  which  is  far  too  much 
overlooked.  Nothing  has  injured  the  Church  of  England 
so  much  in  the  last  thirty  years  as  the  habit  of  underrating 
and  despising  the  Tractarian  movement.  How  small  it 
seemed,  when  it  first  began  under  Newman,  Pusey,  Keble, 
and  Richard  Froude.  It  was  a  cloud  which  looked  no 
bigger  than  a  man's  hand !  To  what  portentous  propor 
tions,  comparatively,  it  has  now  grown.  A  black  thunder 
storm  seems  to  overspread  one  half  the  heavens. 

Well  do  I  remember  a  valued  Oxford  friend,  now  dead, 
calling  the  attention  of  Bishop  Sumner  (of  Chester)  and 
Chancellor  Eaikes  to  this  subject,  fifty  years  ago, 
in  a  private  conversation.  Well  do  I  remember  the 
quiet  smile  of  incredulity  with  which  those  venerable 
men  listened,  evidently  thinking  us  young,  short-sighted 
alarmists.  "  It  was  but  a  temporary  delusion ;  it  would 
soon  pass  away."  Nubecula  est ;  transilit.  I  thought, 
then,  that  they  did  not  rightly  estimate  the  extent  of 


296  LIGHT   FROM   OLD    TIMES. 

the  danger.  I  suspect  they  both  lived  to  change  their 
minds. 

Let  us,  then,  not  underrate  the  power  of  Eitualism 
because  its  adherents  seem  a  small  party,  and  the 
churches  where  they  play  at  Popery  are  comparatively 
few  in  number.  The  party  is  not  so  small  as  it  appears. 
It  has  many  sympathisers  throughout  the  country,  who 
only  wait  for  the  time  when  they  can  show  their  colours, 
and  at  the  first  shift  of  wind  will  put  to  sea.  It  must  not 
be  despised  because  it  is  small  Minorities  often  prove 
winners  in  the  long  run. 

No !  We  ought  to  remember  the  great  Duke  of 
Wellington's  maxim,  that  it  is  a  cardinal  mistake  in  war, 
and  a  cause  of  great  disasters,  to  undervalue  your  enemy. 
We  must  make  up  our  mind  that  the  Ritualistic  move 
ment  of  this  day  is  a  very  serious  affair,  and  that  it 
requires  the  utmost  exertions  of  sound  Churchmen  to 
prevent  it  ruining  the  Church  of  England.  When  we  can 
afford  to  despise  a  little  spark  in  a  powder  magazine,  a 
little  crack  in  a  sea-wall  embankment,  a  little  leak  in  a 
ship,  a  little  flaw  in  a  chain  cable,  a  few  traitors  in  the 
garrison  of  a  citadel,  then,  and  not  till  then,  it  will 
be  time  to  pooh-pooh  Ritualism,  because  its  avowed 
adherents,  like  Laud's  party  at  first,  seem  at  present 
comparatively  few. 

3.  The  last  lesson  I  draw  from  our  subject  is  this. 
Laud's  history  shows  us  the  immense  importance  of  the 
laity  taking  timely  interest  in  the  condition  of  the 
Church  of  England.  Nothing,  it  is  clear  to  me,  preserved 
the  Church  of  England  from  returning  bodily  to  Popery, 
two  hundred  years  ago,  but  the  active  interference  of  the 
laity.  I  do  not  say  it  would  have  happened  in  Laud's 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  297 

time.  I  do  not  think  he  ever  meant  the  Pope  at  Lambeth 
to  be  subject  to  the  Pope  at  the  Vatican.  But  I  do 
believe  that  another  twenty  years  of  unopposed, 
systematic,  persistent  un-Protestantizing  would  have 
"  educated  "  a  generation  of  semi-Papists,  and  paved  the 
way  for  downright  Popery.  From  this  we  were  not  pre 
served  by  the  bishops  and  clergy,  but  by  the  laity  taking 
up  the  matter  in  the  House  of  Commons.  I  grant  their 
remedies  were  violent,  and  their  surgery  coarse  and  savage. 
They  let  blood  profusely,  and  did  great  harm  in  some 
directions,  if  they  did  good  in  others.  But  one  thing 
I  always  maintain  was  done  by  Hollis,  Dering,  Pym, 
Hampden,  and  their  companions.  They  prevented  the 
nation  going  back  to  Babylon.  They  stamped  out  Popery 
for  the  time  in  the  Church  of  England.  Even  the  civil 
war  was  better  than  the  return  of  Popery. 

I  hope  the  laity  of  this  day  will  never  forget  this.  They 
are  the  real  hope  of  the  Church  of  England.  Our  future 
depends  greatly  on  their  conduct  and  line  of  action.  If 
they  sit  still  and  let  things  take  their  own  course,  I 
see  nothing  but  evil  before  us.  If  they  arise  in  their 
might,  like  their  forefathers,  and  demand  that  there 
shall  be  no  Romish  innovations,  no  un-Protestantizing 
practices  allowed  in  our  communion,  there  is  yet  ground 
for  hope.  It  is  not  too  late  to  win  a  battle.  Once  let  the 
laity  raise  the  old  cry, — "  Nolumus  leges  Anglice  mutari  ; 
We  will  have  a  Protestant  Establishment  or  none  at  all," 
— and  I  shall  not  despair  of  the  Church  of  England. 

One  thing,  in  conclusion,  is  very  clear.  Whatever  we 
miy  think  about  Laud,  the  Church  of  England  is  in  a 
very  critical  position.  Every  one  who  reflects  must  confess 
tins.  Her  rowers  have  brought  her  into  troubled  v;aters- 


298  LIGHT   FROM    OLD   TIMES. 

Rent  and  torn  by  conflicting  parties,  her  very  existence  is 
in  peril.  Never  was  there  a  Church  which  had  within 
her  pale  such  totally  opposite  schools  of  theology.  This 
^tate  of  things  cannot  last.  The  question  may  well  rise 
.n  many  minds,  "  What  shall  be  the  end  ?  We  cannot  g« 
on  as  we  are.  Will  the  sick  man  live,  or  will  he  die  ? " 

As  usual  in  such  cases,  advice  is  plentiful,  the  doctors  are 
many,  and  the  prescriptions  abound — some  homoeopathic 
and  some  allopathic.  Every  one  has  his  "  panacea  "  and 
his  "  Eirenicon."  "  Only  use  it,"  he  cries,  "  and  the  Church 
will  be  cured."  Wider  terms  of  communion,  relaxation  of 
creeds  and  articles,  liturgical  revision,  synodical  action, 
increase  of  the  Episcopate,  union  of  the  Western  Churches. 
— all  these  are  remedies  gravely  propounded  and  earnestly 
thrust  on  our  attention.  Each  has  its  advocates,  and  each 
is  warranted  to  cure.  I  have  not  the  slightest  faith  in 
any  of  these  healing  measures.  Two  or  three  of  them  are 
downright  mischievous.  The  best  of  them  is  not  the 
medicine  for  the  time.  I  regard  them  all  as  utterly  beside 
the  mark,  and  unable  to  touch  the  disease. 

My  own  mind  is  thoroughly  made  up.  I  know  of  only 
one  cure  and  remedy  for  the  ailments  of  our  beloved 
Church.  That  remedy  is  a  revival  among  us  of  thorough 
Protestant  principles  and  Protestant  theology,  —  the 
principles  of  the  glorious  Reformation,  the  theology  of 
Latimer,  and  Hooper,  and  Jewel.  Whether  God  will 
grant  us  such  a  revival  I  cannot  tell :  perhaps  our  days 
are  numbered.  Without  such  a  revival  I  have  little  hope 
for  the  future.  We  shall  only  fall  lower  and  lower,  and 
at  last  our  candlestick  will  be  removed,  like  that  of 
Ephesus.  Give  us  such  a  revival,  and  I  hope  everything. 
The  laity  would  rally  round  us  once  more, — the  Spirit 


ARCHBISHOP  LAUD.  299 

'of  God  would  be  poured  on  our  congregations.  God, 
even  the  Lord  God  of  our  fathers,  would  give  us  His 
blessing. 

I  said  the  laity  would  rally  round  us.  I  say  it 
advisedly.  At  present  a  large  number  of  the  best  of 
them  ride  at  single  anchor,  and  hold  by  the  Church  of 
England  with  a  very  loose  hand.  They  are  tired,  wearied, 
and  disgusted  with  the  undisturbed  growth  and  progress 
of  semi-Popery.  They  see  no  use  in  Protestant  Bishops 
and  Articles,  if  Romanism  is  allowed  to  sit  in  the  house 
of  God.  They  may  not  be  deep  theologians,  or  very 
conversant  with  Catholic  principles  and  primitive 
antiquity.  But  they  are  not  hard  to  satisfy.  They 
know  and  feel  what  does  them  good.  They  want  plain 
Protestant  worship,  and  plain  Protestant  preaching,  and  if 
they  cannot  have  these  in  the  Establishment  they  will 
soon  migrate  and  swarm  off  elsewhere.  The  bulk  of  our 
middle  classes  and  educated  lower  orders  in  the  Church 
do  not  want  chasubles,  copes,  dalmatics,  birettas,  banners, 
processions,  incense,  pastoral  staffs,  crucifixes,  incessant 
bowings,  turnings,  and  genuflections,  or  any  such  pernicious 
trumpery.  Such  things  are  mere  gaudy  toys,  which  may 
please  children,  and  satisfy  idle  young  men  and  women, 
and  the  whole  herd  of  the  ignorant,  the  weak-minded, 
and  the  superstitious.  But  they  do  not  meet  the  wants 
of  the  middle-aged,  the  hard-headed,  the  hard-working 
men  and  women  of  the  middle  and  lower  orders.  They 
want  food, — food  for  heart,  and  food  for  conscience ;  and 
if  they  do  not  find  it  in  the  Established  Church  of 
England,  they  will  walk  off  and  seek  it  elsewhere.  Give 
them  plain,  simple,  hearty  Bible  worship, — plain,  simple, 
ibearty  Bible  preaching, — give  them  the  old,  old  story  of 


300  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Christ  upon  the  cross,  the  real  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
felt  and  experienced  in  the  inner  man, — give  them  tho 
noble  lessons  of  repentance,  faith,  holiness, — give  them 
these,  and  they  will  never  forsake  the  Church  of  England.* 
I  repeat  it  emphatically.  A  return  to  downright 
Protestant  principles  and  Protestant  theology  is  the 
Church's  want  in  the  present  day.  It  is  the  only 
medicine  which  will  heal  the  Church's  disease. 

I  now  wind  up  my  paper  with  a  short  passage  from 
the  pen  of  a  great  man,  which  deserves  special  attei  tion, 
partly  because  of  his  name  and  character,  and  partly 
because  he  wrote  it  with  death  before  his  eyes.  The  man 
I  speak  of  is  Lord  William  Russell,  who  was  beheaded  in 
Lincoln's  Inn  Fields  on  a  false  charge  of  treason,  in  tho 
reign  of  James  the  Second,  1683.  The  book  I  find  it 
in  is  the  life  of  Lord  W.  Russell,  written  by  the  late 
Earl  Russell  in  1820.  The  paper  in  which  the  passage 
occurs  was  given  by  the  noble  sufferer  to  his  friends  only 
a  few  moments  before  his  execution.  He  says : — 

"I  did  believe,  and  do  still  believe,  that  Popery  is 
breaking  in  upon  this  nation,  and  that  those  who  advance 
it  will  stop  at  nothing  to  carry  on  their  designs.  ...  I  am 
heartily  sorry  that  so  many  Protestants  give  their  helping 
band  to  it.  But  I  hope  God  will  preserve  the  Protestant, 
religion  and  this  nation,  though  I  am  afraid  it  will  pass 
under  very  great  trials  and  very  great  sufferings." 

Solemn  words  these,  and  painfully  prophetic !  Well 
would  it  be  for  this  country,  in  the  nineteenth  century,  if 


*  "The  Times"  of  March  29,  1869,  says  most  truly,  "Ritualistic 
services  may  attract  curious  or  admiring  crowds,  but  they  neither  bring 
the  poor  to  church  nor  bring  religion  into  the  homes  of  the  poor," 


ARCflfclSHOP  LAUfc. 

English  Peers  and  English  Prelates,  English  Members  of 
Parliament  and  English  Clergymen,  saw  the  danger  of 
Popery  "breaking  in  upon  this  nation"  as  clearly  as 
did,  in  the  seventeenth  century,  the  dying  patriot, 
Lord  W.  Kussell. 


NOTB. — The  following  extracts  from  Mr.  Hallam's  "  Constitutional 
History  of  England  "  appear  to  me  to  deserve  particular  attention.  1 
think  so,  because  they  contain  the  deliberate  opinion  of  a  well-read 
layman,  of  no  extreme  theological  views,  and  of  one  who  has  justly 
obtained  a  world-wide  reputation  on  account  of  his  learning,  his  correct 
judgment,  and  his  impartiality  : — 

"Laud's  talents,  though  enabling  him  to  acquire  a  large  portion  of 
theological  learning,  seem  to  have  been  by  no  means  considerable. 
There  cannot  be  a  more  contemptible  work  than  this  Diary ;  and  his 
letters  to  Strafford  display  some  smartness,  but  no  great  capacity.  He 
managed,  indeed,  his  own  defence  when  impeached  with  some  ability ; 
but  on  such  occasions  ordinary  men  are  apt  to  put  forth  a  remarkable 
readiness  and  ability."  .  .  .  "Though  not  literally  destitute  of  religion, 
it  was  so  subordinate  to  worldly  interest,  and  so  blended  in  his  mind 
with  the  impure  alloy  of  temporal  pride,  that  he  became  an  intolerant 
persecutor  of  the  Puritan  clergy,  not  from  bigotry,  which  in  its  usual 
sense  he  never  displayed,  but  systematic  policy.  And  being  subject,  as 
his  friends  call  it,  to  some  infirmities  of  temper  —  that  is,  choleric, 
vindictive,  harsh,  and  even  cruel  to  a  great  degree — he  not  only  took  a 
prominent  share  in  the  severities  of  the  Star  Chamber,  but  perpetually 
lamented  that  he  was  restrained  from  going  further  lengths." — 
HALLAM'S  Constit.  Hist,  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  54. 

"All  the  innovations  of  the  school  of  Laud  were  so  many  approaches 
in  the  exterior  worship  of  the  Church  to  the  Roman  model.  Pictures 
were  set  up  or  repaired ;  the  Communion  Table  took  the  name  of  an 
altar ;  it  was  sometimes  made  of  stone ;  obeisances  were  made  to  it ; 
the  crucifix  was  sometimes  placed  upon  it ;  the  dress  of  the  officiating 
priests  became  more  gaudy ;  churches  were  consecrated  with  strange 
and  mystical  pageantry.  These  petty  superstitions,  which  would  of 
themselves  have  disgusted  a  nation  accustomed  to  despise  as  well  as 
abhor  the  pompous  rites  of  the  Catholics,  became  more  alarming  from 
the  evident  bias  of  some  leading  Churchmen  to  parts  of  the  Romish 
theology.  The  doctrine  of  a  real  presence,  distinguishable  only  by 


302  LIGHT   FROM    OLD    TIMES. 

vagueness  of  definition  from  that  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  was  generiUly 
held.  Montague,  Bishop  of  Chichester,  already  conspicuous  and  justly 
reckoned  the  chief  of  the  Romanizing  faction,  went  a  'jonsiderabJj 
length  towards  admitting  the  invocation  of  saints.  Pw.yers  for  the 
dead,  which  lead  at  once  to  the  tenet  of  purgatory,  were  vindicated  by 
many.  In  fact,  there  was  hardly  any  distinctive  opinion  of  the  Church 
of  Rome  which  had  not  its  abettors  among  the  Bishops,  or  those  who 
wrote  under  their  patronage."— 'Ibid.  p.  86,  edit.  1832. 


RICHARD    BAXTER. 

THERE  arc  subjects  about  which  it  is  well  to  look 
behind  us.  There  are  matters  in  which  a  knowledge  of 
the  past  may  teach  us  wisdom  for  the  present  and  the 
future.  The  history  of  religion  is  pre-eminently  such  a 
subject  and  matter.  Steam,  electricity,  railways,  and  gas, 
have  made  a  wonderful  difference  in  the  temporal  condition 
of  mankind  in  the  last  two  hundred  years.  But  all  this 
time  the  Bible  and  the  hearts  of  men  have  remained 
unaltered.  That  which  men  did  and  thought  in  religious 
matters  two  hundred  years  ago,  they  are  capable  of  doing 
and  thinking  again.  What  they  thought  and  did  in 
England  in  the  seventeenth  century  it  is  well  to  know. 
And  just  as  there  are  subjects  about  which  it  is  wise  to 
look  behind  us,  so  also  there  are  times  long  gone  by  which 
"deserve  our  special  attention.  There  are  times  when  the 
character  of  a  nation  receives  an  indelible  impression 
from  events  which  take  place  in  a  single  generation. 
There  have  been  times  when  the  dearest  privileges  of  a 
people  have  been  brought  to  the  birth,  and  called  into 
vigorous  existence,  through  the  desperate  agony  of  civil 
war  and  religious  strife.  Such,  I  take  leave  to  say,  were 
the  times  of  which  I  am  about  to  speak  in  this  biography. 

SOS 


304  LIGHT   *ROM   OLD   Ttit&B. 

To  no  times  are  Englishmen  so  deeply  indebted  for  their 
civil  and  religious  liberty  as  the  times  in  which  Baxter 
lived.  To  no  body  of  men  do  they  owe  such  an  unpaid 
debt  of  gratitude  as  they  do  to  that  noble  host  of  which 
Baxter  was  a  standard  bearer :  I  mean  the  Puritans. 
To  no  man  among  the  Puritans  are  the  lovers  of  religious 
freedom  under  such  large  obligations  as  they  are  to 
Richard  Baxter. 

I  am  fully  sensible  of  the  difficulties  which  surround 
the  subject.  It  is  a  subject  which  few  historians  handle 
fairly,  simply  because  they  do  not  understand  spiritual 
religion.  To  an  unconverted  man  the  religious  differences 
of  the  day  of  the  Puritans  must  necessarily  appear 
foolishness.  He  is  no  more  qualified  to  give  an  opinion 
about  them  than  a  blind  man  is  to  talk  of  pictures.  It  is 
a  subject  which  no  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England 
can  approach  without  laying  himself  open  to  mis 
representation.  He  will  be  suspected  of  disaffection  to 
his  own  Church  if  he  speaks  favourably  of  men  who 
opposed  Bishops.  But  it  is  a  subject  on  which  it  is  most 
important  for  Englishmen  to  have  'distinct  opinions,  and  I 
must  ask  for  it  a  patient  hearing.  If  I  can  correct  some 
false  impressions,  if  I  can  supply  a  few  great  principles  to 
guide  men  in  these  perilous  times,  I  feel  I  shall  have  done 
my  readers  an  essential  service.  And  if  I  fail  to  interest 
them  in  "  Baxter  and  his  Times,"  I  am  sure  the  fault  is 
not  in  the  subject,  but  in  me. 

The  times  in  which  Baxter  lived  comprehend  such  a 
vast  amount  of  interesting  matter,  that  I  must  of  necessity 
leave  many  points  in  their  history  entirely  untouched. 

My  meaning  will  be  plain  when  I  say  that  he  was  born 
in  1615,  and  died  in  1691.  Nearly  all  his  life  was  passed 


RICHARD  BAXTER.  305 

under  the  dynasty  of  a  house  which  reigned  over  England 
with  no  benefit  to  the  country  and  no  credit  to  itself: 
I  mean  the  Stuarts.  He  lived  through  the  reign  of 
James  I,  Charles  I.,  Charles  II.,  and  James  II.,  and  was 
buried  in  the  reign  of  William  III.  He  was  in  the  prime 
of  life  and  intellectual  vigour  all  through  the  days  of 
the  Commonwealth  and  the  civil  wars.  He  witnessed  the 
overthrow  of  the  Monarchy  and  the  Church  of  England, 
and  their  subsequent  re-establishment.  He  was  a 
contemporary  of  Cromwell,  of  Laud,  of  Strafford,  of 
Hampden,  of  Pym,  of  Monk,  of  Clarendon,  of  Milton,  of 
Hale,  of  Jeffreys,  of  Blake.  In  his  days  took  place  the 
public  execution  of  an  English  Monarch,  Charles  I. ;  of 
an  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Laud ;  and  of  a  Lord 
Lieutenant  of  Ireland,  Strafford.  Within  the  single 
period  of  his  life  are  to  be  found  the  plague,  the  fire  of 
London,  the  Westminster  Assembly,  the  Long  Parliament, 
the  Savoy  Conference,  and  the  rejection  of  two  thousand 
of  the  best  ministers  of  the  Church  of  England  by  the 
Act  of  Uniformity.  Such  were  the  eventful  times  in 
which  Baxter  lived.  I  cannot,  of  course,  pretend  to  enter 
fully  into  them.  Their  history  forms  a  huge  picture,  like 
the  moving  panorama  of  the  Mississippi,  which  it  is 
utterly  impossible  to  take  in  at  a  glance.  I  shall  simply 
try  to  fix  attention  on  a  few  of  the  leading  features  of  the 
picture,  and  I  shall  choose  those  points  which  appear  to 
me  most  likely  to  be  useful  in  the  present  day. 

(a)  One  remarkable  feature  in  the  history  of  Baxter's 
times  is  the  move  backward  from  the  principles  of  the 
Protestant  Reformation,  which  commenced  in  his  youth. 
Doctrines  and  practices  began  to  be  maintained,  both  by 
preachers  and  writers  in  the  Church  of  England,  which. 


306  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Latimer  and  Jewell  would  never  have  sanctioned.  Sound 
Evangelical  teaching  was  decried  and  run  down,  under 
the  specious  name  of  "Calvinism. "  Good  bishops,  like 
Davenant,  were  snubbed  and  reprimanded.  Bad  bishops, 
like  Montague  and  Wren,  were  patted  on  the  back  and 
encouraged.  Preaching  and  lecturing  were  depreciated, 
and  forms  and  ceremonies  were  exalted.  The  benefits  of 
Episcopacy  were  extravagantly  magnified.  Candlesticks 
and  crosses,  and  all  manner  of  Popish  ornaments,  were 
introduced  into  some  of  the  churches.  The  sanctity  of 
the  Lord's  Day  was  invaded  by  the  abominable  "  Book  of 
Sports,"  and  common  people  were  encouraged  to  spend 
Sunday  in  England  as  it  is  now  spent  in  France.  The 
communion  tables,  which  up  to  this  time  had  stood  in  the 
middle  of  the  chancel,  were  removed  to  the  east  end  of 
the  churches,  put  behind  rails,  and  profanely  called 
"  altars."  Against  all  these  sapping  and  mining  operations 
some,  no  doubt,  protested  loudly;  but  still  the  sappers 
and  miners  went  on. 

The  prime  agent  in  the  whole  movement  was  Archbishop 
Laud.  Whether  that  unhappy  man  really  intended  to 
re-unite  the  Church  of  England  with  the  Church  of  Homo 
is  a  question  which  will  probably  never  be  settled  till  the 
last  day.  One  thing  is  very  certain  ; — no  one  could  have 
played  the  game  of  Rome  more  thoroughly  than  he  did. 

Like  many  a  mischief-maker  before  and  since,  Laud 
pulled  the  house  in  which  he  lived  upon  his  own  head^ 
He  raised  a  storm  at  length,  before  which  the  Church,  the 
Throne,  and  the  bishops,  all  went  down  together,  and  in 
the  midst  of  which  he  himself  was  put  on  his  trial  and  lost 
his  life.  But  the  Church  of  England  received  an  injury 
in  Laud's  days  from  which  it  has  never  entirely  recovered. 


RICHARD   BAXTER.  307 

Since  his  time  there  never  has  been  wanting  a  succession) 
of  men  amongst  its  ministers  who  have  held  most  of 
Laud's  principles,  and  occasionally  have  boldly  walked  in 
his  steps.  So  true  are  the  words  of  Shakspeare,— 

"  The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them." 

> 
The  harm  that  Queen  Mary  did  to  the  Church  of  England; 

was  nothing  compared  to  the  harm  done  by  Laud. 

We  must  never  underrate  the  mischief  that  one  bold,1 
bad  man  can  do,  and  especially  in  matters  of  religion. 
The  seeds  of  error  are  like  thistle-down.  One  head  of  a 
thistle  scattered  by  the  wind  will  sow  a  whole  field.  One 
Tom  Paine  can  rear  up  infidels  all  over  the  world.  One 
Laud  can  leaven  generations  with  untold  mischief.  Never 
let  us  suppose  that  extreme  Ritualism  is  a  legitimate  child 
of  the  Church  of  England.  It  is  not  so.  It  was  scarcely 
heard  of  till  the  time  of  the  Stuarts.  Never  let  us 
suppose  that  Tractarianism,  or  Ritualism,  so  called,  is  a 
new  invention  of  these  latter  days.  It  is  not  so.  It  is  more 
than  200  years  old.  The  father  of  extreme  Ritualists  is 
Archbishop  Laud.  Let  us  remember  these  things,  and  we 
shall  have  learned  something  from  Baxter's  times. 

(6)  Another  remarkable  feature  in  the  history  of  Baxter's 
times  is  the  famous  civil  war  between  Charles  I.  and 
his  Parliament. 

All  war  is  an  evil — a  necessary  evil  sometimes — but 
still  an  evil ;  and  of  all  wars,  the  most  distressing  is  a 
civil  war.  It  is  a  kind  of  huge  family  quarrel.  It  is  a, 
struggle  in  which  victory  brings  no  glory,  because  the 
strife  has  been  the  strife  of  brethren.  Edge  Hill,  and 
Newbury,  and  Marston  Moor,  and  Naseby,  and  Worcester, 
9,re  names  which  call  up  none  but  painful  reflection?.. 


oU8  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

The  victors  in  each  battle  had  spilt  the  blood  of  theii 
own  countrymen,  and  lessened  the  general  strength  of  the 
nation. 

But  there  is  a  point  of  view  in  which  the  civil  war 
between  Charles  I.  and  his  Parliament  was  peculiarly 
distressing.  I  allude  to  the  striking  fact,  that  the  general 
irreligion  and  immorality  of  the  King's  party  did  more  to 
ruin  his  cause  than  all  the  armies  which  the  Parliament 
raised.  There  were  hundreds  and  thousands  of  steady, 
quiet  men,  who,  at  the  beginning  of  the  war,  were 
desirous  to  be  still,  and  help  neither  side.  But  when  they 
found  that  a  man  could  not  read  his  Bible  to  his 
dependents  and  have  prayer  in  his  family  without  being 
persecuted  as  a  Roundhead,  they  felt  obliged,  in  self- 
defence,  to  join  the  Parliamentary  forces.  In  plain  words, 
the  wickedness  and  profligacy  of  many  of  the  Cavaliers 
drove  godly  men  into  the  ranks  of  their  enemies.  That 
there  was  plenty  of  hypocrisy,  fanaticism,  and  enthusiasm 
on  the  Parliamentary  side,  I  make  no  question.  That 
there  were  some  good  men  among  the  Cavaliers,  such  as 
Lord  Falkland,  I  do  not  deny.  But,  after  every  allowance, 
I  have  no  doubt  there  was  far  more  true  religion  among 
those  who  fought  for  the  Parliament  than  among  those 
who  fought  for  the  King. 

The  result  of  the  civil  war,  under  these  peculiar 
circumstances,  never  need  surprise  any  one  who  knows 
human  nature.  The  drinking,  swearing,  roystering 
troopers,  who  were  led  by  Prince  Rupert,  and  Wilmot,  and 
Goring,  proved  no  match  for  the  praying,  psalm-singing, 
Bible-reading  men  whom  Cromwell,  and  Fairfax,  and 
Ireton,  and  Harrison,  and  Fleetwood,  and  Dcsborough, 
brought  into  the  field.  The  steadiest  men  will  in  the  lon# 


EICHABD  BAXTER.  309 

run  make  the  best  soldiers.  A  side  which  has  a  strong 
religious  principle  among  its  supporters  will  seldom  be  a 
losing  one.  "  Those  who  honour  God,  God  will  honour ; 
and  they  that  despise  Him  shall  be  lightly  esteemed." 

I  shall  dismiss  the  subject  of  the  civil  war  with  one 
general  remark  and  one  caution. 

My  general  remark  is,  that,  deeply  as  we  must  regret 
the  civil  war,  we  must  in  fairness  remember  that  we 
probably  owe  to  it  the  free  and  excellent  Constitution 
which  we  possess  in  this  country.  God  can  bring  good 
out  of  evil.  The  oscillations  of  England  between 
despotism  and  anarchy,  and  anarchy  and  despotism,  for 
many  years  after  the  breach  between  Charles  I.  and  the 
House  of  Commons,  were  certainly  tremendously  violent. 
Still  we  must  confess,  that  great  political  lessons  were 
probably  imprinted  on  the  English  mind  at  that  period,  of 
which  we  are  reaping  the  benefit  at  this  very  day. 
Monarchs  were-  taught  that,  like  planets  in  heaven,  they 
must  be  content  to  move  in  a  certain  orbit,  and  that  an 
enlightened  people  would  not  be  governed  and  taxed 
without  the  consent  of  an  unfettered  House  of  Commons. 
Nations  were  taught  that  it  is  a  far  easier  thing  to  pull 
to  pieces  than  to  build,  and  to  upset  an  ancient  monarchy 
than  to  find  a  government  which  shall  be  a  satisfactory 
substitute.  Many  of  the  foundations  of  our  choicest 
national  privileges,  I  make  no  doubt,  were  laid  in  the 
Commonwealth  times.  We  shall  do  well  to  remember 
this.  We  may  rest  satisfied  that  this  country  owes  an 
immense  debt  of  gratitude  to  Brooke,  and  Hampden,  and 
Eliot,  and  Whitelock,  and  Pym. 

The  caution  I  wish  to  give  respects  the  execution  of 
Charles  I.  We  shall  do  well  to  remember  that  the  great 


310  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

bulk  of  the  Puritans  were  entirely  guiltless  of  any 
participation  in  the  trial  and  death  of  the  King.  It  is  a 
vulgar  error  to  suppose,  as  many  do,  that  the  whole 
Parliamentary  party  are  accountable  for  that  wicked  and 
impolitic  act.  The  immense  majority  of  the  Presbyterians 
protested  loudly  against  it.  Baxter  tells  us  expressly  in 
his  autobiography,  that,  together  with  many  other 
ministers,  he  declared  his  abhorrence  of  it,  and  used  every 
exertion  to  prevent  it.  The  deed  was  the  doing  of 
Cromwell  and  his  immediate  adherents  in  the  army,  and 
it  is  at  their  door  that  the  whole  guilt  must  lie.  That  the 
great  body  of  the  Puritans  espoused  the  Parliamentary 
side  there  is  no  doubt.  But  as  to  any  abstract  dislike  to 
royalty,  or  assent  to  King  Charles's  death,  the  Puritans  are 
entirely  innocent.  Let  us  remember  this,  and  we  shall 
have  learned  something  from  the  history  of  Baxter's  times. 

(c)  The  next  feature  in  the  history  of  Baxter's  times,  to 
which  I  shall  venture  to  call  attention,  is  the  rise  and 
conduct  of  that  remarkable  man,  Oliver  Cromwell. 

There  are  few  men  on  whose  character  more  obloquy 
has  been  heaped  than  Oliver  Cromwell.  He  has  been 
painted  by  some  as  a  monster  of  wickedness  and  hypocrisy. 
Nothing  has  been  too  bad  to  say  of  him.  Such  an 
estimate  of  him  is  simply  ridiculous.  It  defeats  the  end 
of  those  who  form  it.  They  forget  that  it  is  no  compliment 
to  England  to  suppose  that  it  would  so  long  tolerate  the 
rule  of  such  a  monster.  The  man  who  could  raise  himself 
from  being  the  son  of  a  brewer  at  Huntingdon  to  be  the 
most  successful  general  of  his  age,  and  absolute  dictator  of 
this  country  for  many  years,  must,  on  the  very  face  of 
facts,  have  been  a  most  extraordinary  man. 

For  my  own  part  I  say  frankly,  that  I  think  we  ought 


RICHARD  BAXTER.  311 

to  consider  the  estimate  of  Cromwell,  which  Carlyle  and 
D'Aubigne'  have  formed,  to  be  a  near  approach  to  the 
truth.  I  own  I  cannot  go  the  lengths  of  the  latter  writer. 
I  dare  not  pronounce  positively  that  Cromwell  was  a 
sincere  Christian.  I  leave  the  question  in  suspense.  I 
hazard  no  opinion  about  it,  one  way  or  the  other,  because 
I  do  not  find  sufficient  materials  for  forming  an  opinion. 
If  I  were  to  look  at  his  private  letters  only,  I  should  not 
hesitate  to  call  him  a  converted  man.  But  when  I  look 
at  some  of  his  public  acts,  I  see  much  that  appears  to  me 
quite  inexplicable.  And  when  I  observe  how  doubtfully 
Baxter  and  other  good  men,  who  were  his  contemporaries, 
speak  of  him,  my  hesitancy  as  to  his  spirituality  is  much 
increased.  In  short,  I  turn  from  the  question  in  a  state  of 
doubt. 

That  Oliver  Cromwell  was  one  of  the  greatest  English 
men  that  ever  lived  I  feel  no  doubt  at  all.  No  man, 
perhaps,  ever  won  supreme  power  by  the  sword,  and  then 
used  that  power  with  such  moderation  as  he  did.  England 
was  probably  more  feared  and  respected  throughout 
Europe,  during  the  short  time  that  he  was  Protector,  than 
she  ever  was  before,  or  ever  has  been  since.  His  very 
name  carried  terror  with  it.  He  declared  that  he  would 
make  the  name  of  an  Englishman  as  great  as  ever  that  of 
a  Roman  had  been.  And  he  certainly  succeeded.  He 
made  it  publicly  known  that  he  would  not  allow  the 
Protestant  faith  to  be  insulted  in  any  part  of  the  world. 
And  he  kept  his  word.  When  the  Duke  of  Savoy  began 
to  persecute  the  Vaudois  in  his  days,  Cromwell  interfered 
at  once  on  their  behalf,  and  never  rested  till  the  Duke's 
,army  was  recalled  from  their  villages,  and  the  poor  people's 
goods  and  houses  restored.  When  certain  Protestants  at 


312  LIGHT  i-ROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Nismes,  in  France,  were  threatened  with  oppressive  usage 
by  the  French  government,  Cromwell  instructed  his 
ambassador  at  Paris  to  insist  peremptorily,  that  proceedings 
against  them  should  be  dropped,  and  in  the  event  of  a 
refusal,  to  leave  Paris  immediately.  In  fact,  it  was  said 
that  Cardinal  Mazarin,  the  French  Minister,  would  change 
countenance  when  Cromwell's  name  was  mentioned ;  and 
that  it  was  almost  proverbial  in  France,  that  the  Cardinal 
was  more  afraid  of  Cromwell  than  of  the  devil.  As  for 
the  Pope,  he  was  so  dreadfully  frightened  by  a  fleet  which 
Cromwell  sent  into  the  Mediterranean,  under  Blake,  to 
settle  some  matters  with  the  Duke  of  Tuscany,  that  he 
commanded  processions  to  be  made  in  Rome,  and  the  Host 
to  be  exposed  for  forty  hours,  in  order  to  avert  the 
judgments  of  God,  and  save  the  Church.  In  short,  the 
influence  of  English  Protestantism  was  never  so  powerfully 
felt  throughout  Europe  as  it  was  in  the  days  of 
Oliver  Cromwell. 

I  will  only  ask  my  readers  to  remember,  in  addition  to 
these  facts,  that  Cromwell's  government  was  remarkable 
for  its  toleration,  and  this,  too,  in  an  age  when  toleration 
was  very  little  understood, — that  his  private  life  was 
irreproachable, — and  that  he  enforced  a  standard  of 
morality  throughout  the  kingdom  which  was,  unhappily, 
unknown  in  the  days  of  the  Stuarts.  Let  us  remember 
all  these  things,  and  then  I  think  we  shall  not  lightly  give 
way  to  the  common  opinion  that  Cromwell  was  a  wicked 
and  hypocritical  man.  Let  us  rest  assured  that  his 
character  deserves  far  better  treatment  than  it  has 
generally  received  hitherto.  Let  us  regard  him  as  one 
who,  with  all  his  faults,  did  great  things  for  our  country. 
Let  not  those  faults  blind  our  eyes  to  the  real  greatness  of 


fctCHA&D  BAXTEtt.  313 

his  character.  Let  us  give  him  a  high  place  in  the  list  of 
great  men  before  our  mind's  eye.  Let  us  do  this,  and  we 
shall  have  learned  something  from  Baxter's  times. 

(d)  There  is  one  more  feature  in  the  history  of  Baxter's 
times  which  I  feel  it  impossible  to  pass  over.  I  allude  to 
the  suicidal  blindness  of  the  Church  of  England  under 
the  Stuarts. 

I  touch  on  this  subject  with  some  reluctance.  I  love 
the  Church  of  which  I  am  a  minister,  heartily  and 
sincerely.  But  I  have  never  found  out  that  my  Church 
lays  claim  to  infallibility,  and  I  am  bound  to  confess  that 
in  the  times  of  the  Stuarts  she  committed  some  tremendous 
mistakes.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  say  that  these  mistakes 
were  chargeable  upon  all  her  members.  Abbot,  and 
CarltoD,  and  Davenant,  and  Hall,  and  Prideaux,  and 
Usher,  and  Reynolds,  and  Wilkins,  were  bright  exceptions 
among  the  bishops,  both  as  to  doctrine  and  practice.  But, 
unhappily,  these  good  men  were  always  in  a  minority  in 
the  Church ;  and  the  manner  in  which  the  majority 
administered  the  affairs  of  the  Church  is  the  subject  to 
which  I  wish  to  call  attention.  We  ought  to  know 
something  about  the  subject,  because  it  serves  to  throw 
immense  light  on  the  history  of  our  unhappy  religious 
divisions  in  this  country.  We  ought  to  know  something 
of  it,  because  it  is  one  which  is  intimately  bound  up  with 
Baxter's  life. 

One  part  of  the  suicidal  blindness  of  the  Church  to 
which  I  have  referred,  was  its  long-continued  attempt  to 
compel  conformity,  and  prohibit  private  religious  exercises, 
by  pains  and  penalties.  A  regular  crusade  was  kept 
up  against  everybody  who  infringed  its  canons,  or  did 
anything  contrary  to  its  rubrics.  Hundreds  and  thousands 


314  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

of  men,  for  many  years,  were  summoned  before  magistrates, 
fined,  imprisoned,  and  often  ruined;  not  because  they 
had  offended  against  the  Gospel  or  the  Ten  Command 
ments,  not  because  they  had  made  an  open  attack  on  the 
Churches;  but  merely  because  they  had  transgressed 
some  petty  ecclesiastical  by-law,  more  honoured  in  the 
breach  than  in  the  observance ;  or  because  they  tried  by 
quiet,  private  meetings  to  obtain  some  spiritual  edification 
over  and  above  that  which  the  public  services  of  the 
Church  provided.  At  one  time  we  read  of  good  men 
having  their  ears  cut  off  and  their  noses  slit,  for  writing 
unfavourably  of  bishops!  This  was  the  fate  of  the 
father  of  Archbishop  Leighton!  At  another  time  we 
read  of  an  enactment  by  which  any  one  present  at  a 
meeting  of  five  or  more  persons,  where  there  was  any 
exercise  of  religion  in  other  manner  than  that  allowed  by 
the  Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England,  was  to  be  fined, 
or  imprisoned  for  three  months  for  the  first  offence,  six 
months  for  the  second  offence,  and  for  the  third, 
transported  for  seven  years!  Many  were  afraid  to  have 
family  prayer  if  more  than  four  acquaintances  were 
present !  Some  families  had  scruples  about  saying  grace 
if  five  strangers  were  at  table !  Such  was  the  state  of 
England  in  the  seventeenth  century  under  the  Stuarts. 

The  result  of  this  miserable  policy  was  just  exactly 
what  might  have  been  expected.  There  arose  a  spirit  of 
deep  discontent  on  the  part  of  the  persecuted.  There 
sprung  up  among  them  a  feeling  of  disaffection  to  the 
Church  in  which  they  had  been  baptized,  and  a  rooted 
conviction  that  a  system  must  necessarily  be  bad  in 
principle  which  could  bear  such  fruits.  Men  became  sick 
of  the  very  name  of  the  Liturgy,  when  it  was  bound  up 


EICHARD  BAXTEB.  315 

in  their  memories  with  a  fine  or  a  gaol.  Men  became 
weary  of  episcopacy,  when  they  found  that  bishops  were 
more  frequently  a  terror  to  good  works  than  to  evil  ones. 
The  words  of  Baxter,  in  a  striking  passage  on  this  subject 
in  his  autobiography,  are  very  remarkable:  "The  more 
the  bishops  thought  to  cure  schism  by  punishment,  the 
more  they  increased  the  opinion  that  they  were 
persecuting  enemies  of  godliness,  and  the  captains  of 
the  profane." 

And  who  that  knows  human  nature  can  wonder  at  such 
a  state  of  feeling  ?  The  mass  of  men  will  generally 
judge  an  institution  by  its  administration,  more  than  by 
its  abstract  excellencies.  When  plain  Englishmen  saw 
that  a  man  might  do  almost  anything  so  long  as  he  did 
not  break  an  ecclesiastical  canon ; — when  they  saw  that 
people  might  gamble,  and  swear,  and  get  drunk,  and  no 
one  made  them  afraid,  but  that  people  who  met  after 
service  to  sing  psalms  and  join  in  prayer  were  heavily 
punished; — when  they  saw  that  godless,  ignorant 
reprobate,  profligate  spendthrifts,  sat  under  their  own 
vines  and  fig-trees  in  peace,  so  long  as  they  conformed 
and  went  to  their  parish  churches,  but  that  humble,  holy, 
conscientious,  Bible-reading  persons,  who  sometimes  went 
out  of  their  parishes  to  church,  were  severely  fined; — 
when  they  found  that  Charles  the  Second  and  his  boon 
companions  were  free  to  waste  a  nation's  substance  in 
riotous  living,  while  the  saints  of  the  nation,  like  Baxter 
and  Jenkyn,  were  rotting  in  gaols; — I  say,  when  plain 
Englishmen  saw  these  things,  they  found  it  hard  to  love 
the  Church  which  did  them.  Yet  all  this  might  often 
have  been  seen  in  many  counties  of  England  under  the 
Stuarts.  If  this  was  not  suicidal  blindness  on  the  part  of 


316  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

the  Church  of  England,  I  know  not  what  -s.  It  was1 
helping  the  devil,  by  driving  good  men  out  of  her 
communion.  It  was  literally  bleeding  herself  to  death. 

The  crowning  piece  of  folly  which  the  majority  in  the 
Church  of  England  committed  under  the  Stuarts,  was 
procuring  the  Act  of  Uniformity  to  be  enacted  in  the 
year  1662.  This,  you  must  remember,  took  place  at  the 
beginning  of  Charles  the  Second's  reign,  and  shortly 
after  the  re-establishment  of  the  Monarchy  and  the 
Church. 

This  famous  act  imposed  terms  and  conditions  of 
holding  office  on  all  ministers  of  the  Church  of  England 
which  had  never  been  imposed  before,  from  the  time  of 
the  Reformation.  It  was  notoriously  so  framed  as  to  be 
offensive  to  the  consciences  of  the  Puritans,  and  to  drive 
them  out  of  the  Church.  For  this  purpose  it  was  entirely 
successful.  Within  a  year  no  less  than  2,000  clergymen 
resigned  their  livings  rather  than  accept  its  terms.  Many 
of  these  2,000  were  the  best,  the  ablest,  and  the  holiest 
ministers  of  the  day.  Many  a  man,  who  had  been 
regularly  ordained  by  bishops,  and  spent  twenty  or  thirty 
years  in  the  service  of  the  Church  without  molestation, 
was  suddenly  commanded  to  accept  new  conditions  of 
holding  preferment,  and  turned  out  to  starve  because  he 
refused.  Sixty  of  the  leading  parishes  in  London  were 
at  once  deprived  of  their  ministers,  and  their  congregations 
left  like  sheep  without  a  shepherd.  Taking  all  things 
into  consideration,  a  more  impolitic  and  disgraceful  deed 
never  disfigured  the  annals  of  a  Protestant  Church. 

It  was  a  disgraceful  deed,  because  it  was  a  flat  con 
tradiction  to  Charles  the  Second's  own  promise  at  Breda, 
before  he  came  back  from  exile.  He  was  brought  back 


EICHARD  BAXTER.  317 

on  the  distinct  understanding  that  the  Church  of  England 
should  be  re-established  on  such  a  broad  and  liberal  basis 
as  to  satisfy  the  conscientious  scruples  of  the  Puritans. 
Had  it  not  been  for  the  assistance  of  the  Puritans  he 
would  never  have  got  back  at  all.  And  yet  as  soon  as  the 
reins  of  power  were  fairly  in  the  King's  hands  his  promise 
was  deliberately  broken ! 

It  was  a  disgraceful  deed,  because  the  great  majority  of 
the  ejected  ministers  might  easily  have  been  retained  in 
the  Church  by  a  few  small  concessions.  They  had  no 
abstract  objection  to  episcopacy,  or  to  a  liturgy.  A  few 
alterations  in  the  prayers,  and  a  moderate  liberty  in  the 
conduct  of  Divine  worship,  according  to  Baxter's  calculation, 
would  have  satisfied  1,600  out  of  the  2,000.  But  the  ruling 
party  were  determined  not  to  make  a  single  concession. 
They  had  no  wish  to  keep  the  Puritans  in  the  Church. 
When  some  one  observed  to  Archbishop  Sheldon,  the  chief 
mover  in  the  business,  that  he  thought  many  of  the 
Puritans  would  conform,  and  accept  the  Act  of  Uniformity, 
the  Archbishop  replied, "  I  am  afraid  they  will."  To  show 
the  spirit  of  the  ruling  party  in  the  Church,  they  actually 
added  to  the  number  of  apocryphal  lessons  in  the  Prayer- 
book  calendar  at  this  time.  They  made  it  a  matter  of 
congratulation  among  themselves  that  they  had  thrust  out 
the  Puritans,  and  got  in  Bel  and  the  Dragon ! 

It  was  a  disgraceful  deed,  because  the  ejected  ministers 
were,  many  of  them,  men  of  such  ability  and  attainments, 
that  great  concessions  ought  to  have  been  made  in  order  to 
retain  them  in  the  Church.  Baxter,  Poole,  Manton,  Bates, 
Calamy,  Brooks,  Watson,  Charnock,  Caryl,  Howe,  Flavel, 
Bridge,  Jenkyn,  Owen,  Goodwin,  are  names  whose  praise  ia 
even  now  in  all  the  Churches.  The  men  who  turned  them 


318  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

out  were  not  to  be  compared  to  them.  The  names  of  the 
vast  majority  of  them  are  hardly  known.  But  they  had1 
power  on  their  side,  and  they  were  resolved  to  use  it. 

It  was  a  disgraceful  deed,  because  it  showed  the  worldl 
that  the  leaders  of  the  Church  of  England,  like  the 
Bourbons  in  modern  times,  had  learned  nothing  and 
forgotten  nothing  during  their  exile.  They  had  not 
forgotten  the  old  bad  ways  of  Laud,  which  had  brought 
such  misery  on  England.  They  had  not  learned  that 
conciliation  and  concession  are  the  most  becoming  graces 
in  the  rulers  of  a  Church,  and  that  persecution  in  the 
long  run  is  sure  to  be  a  losing  game. 

I  dare  not  dwell  longer  on  this  point.  I  might  easily 
bring  forward  more  illustrations  of  this  sad  feature  in 
Baxter's  times.  I  might  speak  of  the  infamous  Oxford 
Act,  in  1665,  which  forbade  the  unhappy  ejected  ministers 
to  live  within  five  miles  of  any  corporate  town,  or  of  any 
place  where  they  had  formerly  preached.  But  enough  has 
been  said  to  show  that  when  I  spoke  of  the  suicidal 
blindness  of  the  Church  of  England,  I  did  not  speak 
without  cause.  The  consequences  of  this  blindness  are 
manifest  to  any  one  who  knows  England.  The  divided 
state  of  Protestantism  in  this  country  is  of  itself  a  great 
fact,  which  speaks  volumes. 

Against  the  policy  of  the  ruling  party  in  the  Church  of 
England,  under  the  Stewarts,  I  always  shall  protest.  I  do 
not  feel  the  scruples  which  Baxter  and  his  ejected  brethren 
felt  about  the  Act  of  Uniformity.  Much  as  I  respect 
them,  I  think  them  wrong  and  misguided  in  their 
judgments.  But  I  think  that  Archbishop  Sheldon,  and 
the  men  who  refused  to  go  one  step  to  meet  them,  were 
far  more  wrong  and  far  more  misguided.  I  believe  they 


RICHARD   BAXTER.  319 

did  an  injury  to  the  cause  of  true  religion  in  England, 
which  will  probably  never  be  repaired,  by  sowing  the  seeds 
of  endless  divisions.  They  were  the  men  who  laid  the 
foundation  of  English  dissent.  I  believe  they  recklessly 
threw  away  a  golden  opportunity  of  doing  good.  They 
might  easily  have  made  my  own  beloved  Church  far  more 
effective  and  far  more  useful  than  she  ever  has  been  by 
wise  and  timely  concessions.  They  refused  to  do  this, 
and,  instead  of  a  healing  measure,  brought  forward  their 
unhappy  Act  of  Uniformity.  I  disavow  any  sympathy 
with  their  proceedings,  and  can  never  think  of  them 
without  the  deepest  regret. 

I  cannot  leave  the  subject  of  Baxter's  times  without 
offering  one  piece  of  counsel  to  my  readers.  I  advise  you, 
then,  not  to  believe  everything  you  may  happen  to  read 
on  the  subject  of  the  times  of  the  Stewarts.  There  are 
no  times,  perhaps,  about  which  prejudice  and  party-spirit 
have  so  warped  the  judgment  and  jaundiced  the  eye-sight 
of  historians.  If  any  one  wants  a  really  fair  and  impartial 
history  of  the  times,  I  strongly  advise  him  to  read  Marsden's 
"History  of  the  Puritans."  I  regard  these  two  volumes 
as  the  most  valuable  addition  which  has  been  made  to  our 
stock  of  religious  history  in  modern  times. 

I  now  turn  from  Baxter's  times  to  Baxter  himself. 
Without  some  knowledge  of  the  times,  we  can  hardly 
understand  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  man.  A 
few  plain  facts  about  the  man  will  be  more  likely 
than  anything  I  can  write  to  fasten  in  our  minds  the 
times. 

Richard  Baxter  was  the  son  of  a  small  landed  proprietor 
of  Eaton  Constantino,  in  Shropshire,  and  was  born,  19 


320  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

1615,  at  Rowton,  in  the  same  county,  where  Mr.  Adeney, 
his  mother's  father,  resided. 

He  seems  to  have  been  under  religious  impressions  from 
a  very  early  period  of  his  life,  and  for  this,  under  God,  he 
was  indebted  to  the  training  of  a  pious  father.  Shropshire 
was  a  very  dark,  ungodly  county  in  those  days.  The 
ministers  were  generally  ignorant,  graceless,  and  unable  to 
preach;  and  the  people,  as  might  be  expected,  were 
profligate,  and  despisers  of  them  that  were  good.  In 
Eaton  Constantine,  the  parishioners  spent  the  greater  part 
of  the  Lord's  Day  in  dancing  round  a  Maypole  near  old 
Mr.  Baxter's  door,  to  his  great  distress  and  annoyance. 
Yet  even  here  grace  triumphed  over  the  world  in  the  case 
of  his  son,  and  he  was  added  to  the  noble  host  of  those 
who  "  serve  the  Lord  from  their  youth." 

It  is  always  interesting  to  observe  the  names  of  religious 
books,  which  God  is  pleased  to  use  in  bringing  souls  to 
the  knowledge  of  Himself.  The  books  which  had  the 
most  effect  on  Baxter  were,  Bunny's  "  Resolution;"  Perkins 
"  On  Repentance,  on  Living  and  Dying  well,  and  on  the 
Government  of  the  Tongue ; "  Culverwell "  On  Faith  ; "  and 
Sibbs's  "Bruised  Reed."  Disease  and  the  prospect  of 
death  did  much  to  carry  on  the  spiritual  work  within  him. 
He  says  in  his  Autobiography,  "Weakness  and  pain 
helped  me  to  study  how  to  die.  That  set  me  on  studying 
how  to  live,  and  that  on  studying  the  doctrines  from  which 
I  must  fetch  my  motives  and  my  comforts." 

At  the  age  of  ( twenty-two  he  was  ordained  a  clergyman, 
by  Thornborough,  Bishop  of  Worcester.  He  had  never 
had  the  advantage  of  an  University  education.  A  free- 
school  at  Wroxeter,  and  a  private  tutor  at  Ludlow,  had 
done  something  for  him:  and  his  own  insatiable  love  of 


RICHARD  BAXTER.  321 

study  had  done  a  good  deal  more.  He,  probably,  entered 
the  ministry  far  better  furnished  with  theological  learning 
than  most  young  men  of  his  day.  He  certainly  entered  it 
with  qualifications  far  better  than  a  knowledge  of  Greek 
and  Hebrew.  He  entered  it  truly  moved  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  a  converted  man.  He  says  himself,  "  I  knew 
that  the  want  of  academical  honours  and  degrees  were 
like  to  make  me  contemptible  with  the  most.  But  yet, 
expecting  to  be  so  quickly  in  another  world,  the  great 
concernment  of  miserable  souls  did  prevail  with  me" 
against  all  impediments.  And  being  conscious  of  a  thirsty 
desire  of  men's  conscience  and  salvation,  I  resolved,  that 
if  one  or  two  souls  only  might  be  won  to  God,  it  would 
easily  recompense  all  the  dishonour  which,  for  want  of 
titles,  I  might  undergo  from  men." 

From  the  time  of  his  ordination  to  his  death,  Baxter's 
life  was  a  constant  series  of  strange  vicissitudes,  and 
intense  physical  and  mental  exertions.  Sometimes  in 
prosperity  and  sometimes  in  adversity, — sometimes  praised 
and  sometimes  persecuted, — at  one  period  catechising  in 
the  lanes  of  Kidderminster,  at  another  disputing  with 
bishops  in  the  Savoy  Conference, — one  year  writing  the 
"  Saint's  Rest,"  at  the  point  of  death,  in  a  quiet  country 
house,  another  year  a  marching  chaplain  to  a  regiment  in 
Cromwell's  army, — oneway  offered  a  bishopric  by  Charles 
II.,  another  cast  out  of  the  Church  by  the  Act  of  Unifor 
mity, — one  year  arguing  for  monarchy  with  Cromwell,  and 
telling  him  it  was  a  blessing,  another  tried  before  Jeffreys 
on  a  charge  of  seditious  writing, — one  time  living  quietly 
at  Acton  in  the  society  of  Judge  Hale,  at  another 
languishing  in  prison  under  some  atrocious  ecclesiastical 

persecution, — one    day  having  public   discussions   about 

x 


322  MGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES- 

infant  baptism,  with  Mr.  Tombes,  in  Bewdley  Church; 
another  holding  the  reading-desk  of  Amersham  Church 
from  morning  to  night  against  the  theological  arguments 
of  Antinomian  dragoons  in  the  gallery, — sometimes 
preaching  the  plainest  doctrines,  sometimes  handling  the 
most  abstruse  metaphysical  points, — sometimes  writing 
folios  for  the  learned,  sometimes  writing  broad-sheets  for 
the  poor, — never,  perhaps,  did  any  Christian  minister  fill 
so  many  various  positions ;  and  never,  certainly,  did  any 
one  come  out  of  them  all  with  such  an  unblemished 
reputation.  Always  suffering  under  incurable  disease,  and 
seldom  long  out  of  pain, — always  working  his  mind  to  the 
uttermost,  and  never  idle  for  a  day, — seemingly  over 
whelmed  with  business,  and  yet  never  refusing  new  work, 
— living  in  the  midst  of  the  most  exciting  scenes,  and 
yet  holding  daily  converse  with  God, — not  sufficiently  a 
partisan  to  satisfy  any  side,  and  yet  feared  and  courted  by 
all, — too  much  of  a  Royalist  to  please  the  Parliamentary 
party,  and  yet  too  much  connected  with  the  Parliament 
and  too  holy  to  be  popular  with  the  Cavaliers, — too  much 
of  an  Episcopalian  to  satisfy  the  violent  portion  of  the 
Puritan  body,  and  too  much  of  a  Puritan  to  be  trusted  by 
the  bishops, — never,  probably,  did  Christian  man  enjoy  so 
little  rest,  though  serving  God  with  a  pure  conscience,  as 
did  Richard  Baxter. 

In  1638  he  began  his  ministry,  by  preaching  in  the 
Upper  Church  at  Dudley.  There  he  continued  a  year. 
From  Dudley  he  removed  to  Bridgnorth.  There  he  con 
tinued  a  year  and  three-quarters.  From  Bridgnorth  he 
removed  to  Kidderminster.  From  thence,  after  two  years, 
ho  retired  to  Coventry,  at  the  beginning  of  the  Common 
wealth  troubles,  and  awaited  the  progress  of  the  civil  war. 


RICHARD  BAXTER.  &23 

From  Coventry,  after  the  battle  of  Naseby,  he  joined 
the  Parliamentary  army  in  the  capacity  of  Regimental 
Chaplain.  He  took  this  office  in  the  vain  hope  that  ho 
^might  do  some  good  among  the  soldiers,  and  counteract 
the  ambitious  designs  of  Cromwell  and  his  friends.  He 
was  obliged  by  illness  to  give  up  his  chaplaincy  in  1646, 
and  lingered  for  some  months  between  life  and  death  at 
the  hospitable  houses  of  Sir  John  Coke  of  Melbourne, 
in  Derbyshire,  and  Sir  Thomas  Rous  of  Rouslench,  in 
Worcestershire.  At  the  end  of  1646  he  returned  to  Kid 
derminster,  and  there  continued  labouring  indefatigably 
as  parish  Minister  for  fourteen  years.  In  1660  he  lefb 
Kidderminster  for  London,  and  took  an  active  part  in 
promoting  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.,  and  was  made 
one  of  the  King's  Chaplains.  In  London,  he  preached 
successively  at  St.  Dunstan's,  Black  Friars',  and  St.  Bride's. 
Shortly  after  this  he  was  offered  the  Bishopric  of  Here 
ford,  but  thought  fit  to  refuse  it.  In  1662  he  was  one  of 
the  2000  ministers  who  were  turned  out  of  the  Church 
by  the  Act  of  Uniformity.  Immediately  after  his  ejection 
he  married  a  wife  who  seems  to  have  been  every  way 
worthy  of  him,  and  who  was  spared  to  be  his  loving  and 
faithful  companion  for  nineteen  years.  Her  name  was 
Margaret  Charltou,  of  Apley  Castle,  in  Shropshire.  After 
this  he  lived  in  various  places  in  and  about  London, — at 
Acton,  Totteridge,  Bloomsbury,  and  at  last  in  Charterhouse 
Square.  The  disgraceful  treatment  of  his  enemies  made 
it  almost  impossible  for  him  to  have  any  certain  dwelling- 
(place.  Once,  at  this  period  of  his  life,  he  was  offered  a 
[Scotch  Bishopric,  or  the  Mastership  of  a  Scotch  University, 
'but  declined  both  offices.  With  few  exceptions,  the  last 
twenty-nine  years  of  his  life  were  embittered  by  repeated 


324  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

prosecutions,  fines,  imprisonment,  and  harassing  con 
troversies.  When  he  could  he  preached,  and  when  he 
could  not  preach  he  wrote  books;  but  something  he 
was  always  doing.  The  revolution  and  accession  of 
William  III.  brought  him  some  little  respite  from 
persecution,  and  death  at  last  removed  the  good  old  man 
to  that  place  "where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling 
and  the  weary  are  at  rest,"  in  the  year  1691,  and  the 
seventy-sixth  year  of  his  age. 

Such  is  a  brief  outline  of  the  life  of  one  of  the  most 
distinguished  Puritans  who  lived  under  the  Stewarts, 
and  one  of  the  most  devoted  ministers  of  the  Gospel 
this  country  has  ever  seen.  It  is  an  outline  which,  we 
may  readily  believe,  might  be  filled  up  to  an  indefinite 
length.  I  cannot,  of  course,  pretend  to  do  more  than 
direct  attention  to  a  few  leading  particulars.  If  I  do 
not  tell  more,  it  is  not  from  want  of  matter.  But  if  any 
one  wishes  to  know  why  Baxter's  name  stands  so  high  as 
it  does  in  the  list  of  English  worthies,  I  ask  him  to  give 
me  his  attention  for  a  few  minutes,  and  I  will  soon  show 
him  cause. 

For  one  thing,  Baxter  was  a  man  of  most  eminent 
personal  holiness.  Few  men  have  ever  lived  before  the 
eyes  of  the  world  for  fifty  or  sixty  years,  as  he  did,  and  left 
so  fair  and  unblemished  a  reputation.  Bitterly  and  cruelly 
as  many  hated  him,  they  could  find  no  fault  in  the  man, 
except  "concerning  the  law  of  his  God. "  He  seems  to 
have  been  holy  iii  all  the  relations  of  life,  and  in  all  the 
circumstances  in  which  man  can  be  placed :  holy  as  a  son, 
a  husband,  a  minister,  and  a  friend, — holy  in  prosperity 
and  in  adversity,  in  sickness  and  in  health,  in  youth  and 
in  old  age.  It  is  a  fine  saying  of  Orme,  in  his  admirable 


fclCHARD  BAXTEfi.  325 

life  of  him,  that  he  was,  in  the  highest  sense,  a  most 
"  unearthly "  man.  He  lived  with  God,  and  Christ,  and 
heaven,  and  death,  and  judgment,  and  eternity  continually 
before  his  eyes.  He  cared  nothing  for  the  good  things  of 
this  world:  a  bishopric,  with  all  its  emoluments  and 
honours,  had  no  charms  for  him.  He  cared  nothing  for 
the  enmity  of  the  world :  no  fear  of  man's  displeasure 
ever  turned  him  an  inch  out  of  his  way.  He  was 
singularly  independent  of  man's  praise  or  blame.  He 
could  be  bold  as  a  lion  in  the  presence  of  Cromwell  or 
Charles  II.,  and  his  bishops ;  and  yet  he  could  be  gentle 
as  a  lamb  with  poor  people  seeking  how  to  be  saved. 
He  could  be  zealous  as  a  Crusader  for  the  rights  of 
conscience,  and  yet  he  was  of  so  catholic  a  spirit  that  he 
loved  all  who  loved  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity.  "  Be  it  by 
Conformists  or  by  Nonconformists,"  he  would  say,  "I 
rejoice  that  Christ  is  preached."  He  was  a  truly  humble 
man.  To  one  who  wrote  to  him  expressing  admiration 
for  his  character,  he  replied,  "  You  admire  one  you  do  not 
know:  knowledge  would  cure  your  error."  So  fair  an 
epistle  of  Christ,  considering  the  anuzing  trials  of 
patience  he  had  to  go  through,  this  country  has  seldom 
seen  as  Richard  Baxter.  Let  us  remember  this  point 
in  Baxter's  character.  No  argument  has  such  lasting 
power  with  the  world  as  a  holy  and  consistent  life. 
Let  us  remember  that  this  holiness  was  attained  by  a 
man  of  like  passions  with  ourselves.  Let  Baxter  be  an 
encouragement  and  an  example.  Let  us  remember  the 
Lord  God  of  Baxter  is  not  changed. 

For  another  thing,  Baxter  was  one  of  the  most  powerful 
preachers  that  ever  addressed  an  English  congregation. 
He  seems  to  have  possessed  all  the  gifts  which  are  generally 


326  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

considered  to  make  a  perfect  "master  of  assemblies."  He 
had  an  amazing  fluency, — an  enormous  store  of  matter, — 
a  most  clear  and  lucid  style, — an  unlimited  command  of 
forcible  language,— a  pithy,  pointed,  emphatic  way  of 
presenting  truth, — a  singularly  moving  and  pathetic 
voice, — and  an  earnestness  of  manner  which  swept 
everything  before  it  like  a  torrent.  He  used  to  say,  "  It 
must  be  serious  preaching  which  will  make  men  serious 
in  hearing  and  obeying  it."  Two  well-known  lines  of 
his  show  you  the  man : — 

"  I'll  preach  as  though  I  ne'er  should  preach  again, 
And  as  a  dying  man  to  dying  men." 

Dr.  Bates,  a  contemporary,  says  of  him,  "He  had  a 
marvellous  felicity  and  copiousness  in  speaking.  There 
was  a  noble  negligence  in  his  style.  His  great  mind 
could  not  stoop  to  the  affected  eloquence  of  words.  He 
despised  flashy  oratory.  But  his  expressions  were  so  clear 
and  powerful,  so  convincing  to  the  understanding,  so 
entering  into  the  soul,  so  engaging  the  affections,  that 
those  were  as  deaf  as  an  adder  who  were  not  charmed  by 
so  wise  a  charmer." 

The  effects  that  his  preaching  produced  were  those 
which  such  preaching  always  has  produced,  and  always 
will.  As  it  was  under  the  pulpit  of  Latimer  and 
Whitfield,  so  it  was  under  the  pulpit  of  Baxter.  At 
Dudley  the  poor  nailers  would  not  only  crowd  the  church, 
but  even  hang  upon  the  windows  and  the  leads  without. 
At  Kidderminster  it  became  necessary  to  build  five  new 
galleries,  in  order  to  accommodate  the  congregation.  In 
London  the  crowds  who  attended  his  ministry  were  so 
large  that  it  was  sometimes  dangerous,  and  often 
impossible,  to  be  one  of  his  hearers. 


RICHARD  BAXTER.  327 

Once,  when  he  was  about,  to  preach  at  St.  Lawrence, 
Jewry,  he  sent  word  to  Mr.  Vines,  the  minister,  that  the 
Earl  of  Suffolk  and  Lord  Broghill  were  coming  in  a 
coach  with  him,  and  would  be  glad  to  have  seats.  But 
when  he  and  his  noble  companions  reached  the  door,  the 
crowd  had  so  little  respect  for  persons,  that  the  two  peers 
had  to  go  home  again  because  they  could  not  get  within 
hearing.  Mr.  Vines  himself  was  obliged  to  get  up  into 
the  pulpit,  and  sit  behind  the  preacher,  from  want  of  room ; 
and  Baxter  actually  preached  standing  between  Mr. 
Vines'  feet. 

On  another  occasion,  when  he  was   preaching  to   an 

enormous  crowd  in  St.  Dunstan's,  Fleet  Street,  he  made  a 

striking  use  of  an  incident  which  took  place  during  the 

sermon.     A  piece  of  brick  fell  down  in  the  steeple,  and 

an  alarm  was  raised  that  the  church,  an  old  and  rotten 

building,  was  falling.     Scarcely  was  the  alarm  allayed, 

when  a  bench,  on  which  some  people  were  standing,  broke 

with  their  weight,  and  the  confusion  was  worse  than  ever. 

Many  crowded  to  the  doors  to  get  out,  and  all  were  in  a 

state  of  panic.     One  old  woman  was  heard  loudly  asking 

God  forgiveness  for  having   come  to  the  church  at  all, 

and  promising,  if  she  only  got  out  safe,  never  to  come 

there  again.     In  the  midst  of  all  the  confusion  Baxter 

alone  was  calm  and  unmoved.      As  soon  as  order  was 

restored,  he  rose  and  said,  "  We  are  in  the  service  of  God 

to  prepare  ourselves  that  we  may  be  fearless  at  the  great 

noise  of  the  dissolving  world,  when  the  heavens  shall  pass 

away,  and  the  elements  melt  with  fervent  heat."     This 

was  Baxter  all  over.     This  was  the  kind  of  thing  he  had 

not  only  grace,  but  gifts  and  nerve,  to  do.     He  always 

spoke  like  one  who  saw  God,  and  felt  death  at  his  back. 


328  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Such  a  man  will  seldom  fail  to  preach  well.  Such  a  man 
will  seldom  be  in  want  of  hearers.  Such  a  man  deserves 
to  be  embalmed  in  the  memory  of  all  who  want  to  know 
what  God  can  do  for  a  child  of  Adam  by  His  Spirit. 
Such  a  man  deserves  to  be  praised. 

For  another  thing,  Baxter  was  one  of  the  most  successful 
pastors  of  a  parish  and  congregation  that  ever  lived. 
When  he  came  to  Kidderminster  he  found  it  a  dark, 
ignorant,  immoral,  irreligious  place,  containing,  perhaps, 
3,000  inhabitants.  When  he  left  it,  at  the  end  of  fourteen 
years,  he  had  completely  turned  the  parish  upside  down. 
"  The  place  before  his  coming,"  says  Dr.  Bates,  "  was  like 
a  piece  of  dry  and  barren  earth ;  but,  by  the  blessing  of 
heaven  upon  his  labour,  the  face  of  Paradise  appeared 
there.  The  bad  were  changed  to  good,  and  the  good  to 
better."  The  number  of  his  regular  communicants 
averaged  600.  "  Of  these,"  Baxter  tells  us,  "  there  were 
not  twelve  of  whom  I  had  not  good  hope  as  to  their 
sincerity."  The  Lord's  Day  was  thoroughly  reverenced 
and  observed.  It  was  said,  "  You  might  have  heard  an 
hundred  families  singing  psalms  and  repeating  sermons  as 
you  passed  through  the  streets."  When  he  came  there, 
there  was  about  one  family  in  a  street  which  worshipped 
God  at  home.  When  be  went  away,  there  were  some 
streets  in  which  there  was  not  more  than  one  family  on  a 
side  that  did  not  do  it ;  and  this  was  the  case  even  with 
inns  and  public  houses.  Even  of  the  irreligious  families,1 
there  were  very  few  which  had  not  some  converted 
relations.  "Some  of  the  poor  people  became  so  well 
versed  in  theology  that  they  understood  the  whole  body 
of  divinity,  and  were  able  to  judge  difficult  controversies. 
Some  were  so  able  in  prayer  that  few  ministers  could 


HTCSARb  BAXTEtt.  329 

match  them  in  order,  fulness,  apt  expressions,  holy  oratory 
and  fervour.  Best  of  all,  the  temper  of  their  minds  and 
the  innocency  of  their  lives  were  much  more  laudable 
even  than  their  gifts." 

The  grand  instrument  to  which  Baxter  used  to  attribute 
this  astounding  success,  was  his  system  of  household 
visitation  and  regular  private  conference  with  his 
parishioners.  No  doubt  this  did  immense  good,  and  the 
more  so  because  it  was  a  new  thing  in  those  days. 
Nevertheless,  there  is  no  denying  the  fact  that  the  most 
elaborate  parochial  machinery  of  modern  times  has  never 
produced  such  effects  as  those  you  have  just  heard  of  at 
Kidderminster.  And  the  true  account  of  this  I  believe 
to  be,  that  no  parish  has  ever  had  such  a  wonderful 
mainspring  in  the  middle  of  it  as  Baxter  was.  While 
some  divines  were  wrangling  about  the  divine  right  of 
Episcopacy  or  Presbytery,  or  splitting  hairs  about 
reprobation  and  free-will,  Baxter  was  always  visiting  from 
house  to  house,  and  beseeching  men,  for  Christ's  sake,  to 
be  reconciled  to  God  and  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come. 
While  others  were  entangling  themselves  in  politics,  and 
"  burying  their  dead  "  amidst  the  potsherds  of  the  earth, 
Baxter  was  living  a  crucified  life,  and  daily  preaching  the 
Gospel.  I  suspect  he  was  the  best  and  wisest  pastor  that 
an  English  parish  has  ever  had,  and  a  model  that  many  a 
modern  rector  or  vicar  would  do  well  to  follow.  Once 
more  I  say,  have  I  not  a  right  to  say  such  a  polished 
instrument  as  this  ought  not  to  be  allowed  to  rust  in 
oblivion  ?  Such  a  man  as  this  deserves  to  be  praised. 

For  another  thing,  Baxter  was  one  of  the  most  diligent 
theological  writers  the  world  has  ever  seen.  Few  havo 
the  slightest  idea  of  the  immense  number  of  works  ia 


330  LIGHT  FTIOM  OLD  TIMES. 

divinity  which  he  wrote  in  the  fifty  years  of  his  active  life. 
It  is  reckoned  that  they  would  fill  sixty  octavo  volumes, 
comprising  not  less  than  35,000  closely-printed  pages. 
These  works,  no  doubt,  are  not  all  of  equal  merit,  and 
many  of  them  probably  will  never  repay  perusal.  Like 
the  ships  from  Tarshish,  they  contain  not  only  gold,  and 
silver,  and  ivory,  but  also  a  large  quantity  of  apes  and 
peacocks.  Still,  after  every  deduction,  the  writings  of 
Baxter  generally  contain  a  great  mass  of  solid  truths,  and 
truths  often  handled  in  a  most  striking  and  masterly  way. 
Dr.  Barrow,  no  mean  judge,  says  "That  his  practical 
writings  were  never  mended,  and  his  controversial  ones 
seldom  confuted."  Bishop  Wilkins  declares  "That  he 
had  cultivated  every  subject  he  had  handled,  that  if  he 
had  lived  in  the  primitive  times  he  would  have  been  one 
of  the  Fathers  of  the  Church,  and  that  it  was  enough  for 
one  age  to  produce  such  a  man  as  Mr.  Baxter."  That 
great  and  good  man,  William  Wilberforce,  says,  "His 
practical  writings  are  a  treasury  of  Christian  wisdom;" 
and  he  adds,  "  I  must  beg  to  class  among  the  brightest 
ornaments  of  the  Church  of  England  this  great  man,  who 
was  so  shamefully  ejected  from  the  Church  in  1662." 

No  one  man  has  certainly  ever  written  three  such  books 
as  Baxter's  three  master-pieces,  "The  Saint's  Rest," 
"  The  Reformed  Pastor,"  and  "  The  Call  to  the  Uncon 
verted."  I  believe  they  have  been  made  blessings  to 
thousands  of  souls,  and  are  alone  sufficient  to  place  the 
author  in  the  foremost  rank  of  theological  writers.  Of 
"  The  Call  to  the  Unconverted,"  20,000  were  printed  in 
one  year.  Six  brothers  were  converted  at  one  time  by 
reading  it.  Eliot,  the  missionary,  thought  so  highly  of  it 
that  he  translated  it  into  the  Indian  language,  the  first 


RICHARD   BAXTER.  331 

book  after  the  Bible.  And  really,  when  we  consider  that 
all  Baxter's  writings  were  composed  in  the  midst  of 
intense  labour  and  fierce  persecution,  and  often  under  the 
pressure  of  heavy  bodily  disease,  the  wonder  is  not  only 
that  he  wrote  so  much,  but  that  so  much  of  what  he  wrote 
should  be  so  good.  Such  wonderful  diligence  and 
redemption  of  time  the  world  has  never  seen.  Once  more 
I  say,  have  I  not  a  right  to  say  such  a  man  deserves  to  be 
praised  ? 

For  another  thing,  Baxter  was  one  of  the  most  patient 
martyrs  for  conscience'  sake  that  England  has  ever  seen. 
Of  course  I  do  not  mean  that  he  was  called  upon  to  seal 
his  faith  with  his  blood,  as  our  Protestant  Reformers  were. 
But  there  is  such  a  thing  as  "  wearing  out  the  saints  of 
the  Most  High  "  by  persecutions  and  prisons,  as  well  as 
shedding  the  blood  of  the  saints.  There  is  a  "dying 
daily,"  which,  to  some  natures,  is  worse  even  than  dying 
at  the  stake.  If  anything  tries  faith  and  patience  I 
believe  it  to  be  the  constant  dropping  of  such  wearing 
persecution  as  Baxter  had  to  endure  for  nearly  the  last 
twenty-nine  years  of  his  life.  He  had  robbed  no  one. 
He  had  murdered  no  one.  He  had  injured  no  one.  He 
held  no  heresy.  He  believed  all  the  Articles  of  the 
Christian  faith.  And  yet  no  thief  or  felon  in  the  present 
day  was  ever  so  shamefully  treated  as  this  good  man.  To 
tell  you  how  often  he  was  summoned,  fined,  silenced, 
imprisoned,  driven  from  one  place  to  another,  would  be  an 
endless  task.  To  describe  all  the  hideous  perversions  of 
justice  to  which  he  was  subjected  would  be  both  painful 
and  unprofitable.  I  will  only  allow  myself  to  give  one 
instance,  and  that  shall  be  his  trial  before  Chief  Justice 
'Jeffreys. 


392  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Baxter  was  tried  before  Jeffreys  in  1685,  at  Westminster 
Hall,  on  a  charge  of  having  published  seditious  matter, 
reflecting  on  the  bishops,  in  a  paraphrase  on  the  New 
Testament,  which  he  had  recently  brought  out.  A  more 
unfounded  charge  could  not  have  been  made.  The  book 
is  still  extant,  and  any  one  will  see  at  a  glance  that  the 
alleged  seditious  passages  do  not  prove  the  case.  Fox,  in 
his  history  of  James  II.'s  reign,  tells  us  plainly  "  that  the 
real  motive  for  bringing  him  to  trial  was  the  desire  of 
punishing  an  eminent  dissenting  teacher,  whose  reputation 
was  high  among  his  sect,  and  who  was  supposed  to  favour 
the  political  opinions  of  the  Whigs." 

A  long  and  graphic  account  of  the  trial  was  drawn  up 
by  a  bystander,  and  it  gives  so  vivid  a  picture  of  the 
administration  of  justice  in  Baxter's  days  that  it  may  be 
useful  to  give  a  few  short  extracts  from  it. 

From  the  very  opening  of  the  trial  it  was  clear  which 
way  the  verdict  was  intended  to  go.  The  Lord  Chief 
Justice  of  England  behaved  as  if  he  were  counsel  for  the 
prosecution,  and  not  judge.  He  condescended  to  use 
abusive  language  towards  the  defendant,  such  as  was 
more  suited  to  Billingsgate  than  a  court  of  law.  One 
after  another  the  counsel  for  the  defence  were  browbeaten, 
silenced,  and  put  down,  or  else  iuterrupted  by  violent 
invectives  against  Baxter. 

At  one  time  the  Lord  Chief  Justice  exclaimed :  "  This 
is  an  old  rogue,  who  hath  poisoned  the  world  with  his 
Kidderminster  doctrine.  He  encouraged  all  the  women 
and  maids  to  bring  their  bodkins  and  thimbles  to  carry  on 
war  against  the  King  of  ever  blessed  memory.  An  old 
schismatical  knave !  A  hypocritical  villain  ! " 

By  and  by  he  called    Baxter  "an  old   blockhead,   an 


RICHARD  BAXTER.  333 

unthankful  villain,  a  conceited,  stubborn,  fanatical  dog. 
Hansr  bim ! "  be  said,  "  this  one  old  fellow  hath  cast  more 

O  ' 

reproaches  on  the  constitution  and  discipline  of  our 
Church  than  will  be  wiped  off  for  this  hundred  years. 
But  I'll  handle  him  for  it,  for  he  deserves  to  be  whipped 
through  the  city." 

Shortly  afterwards,  when  Baxter  began  to  say  a  few 
words  on  his  own  behalf,  Jeffreys  stopped  him,  crying  out, 
"  Richard,  Richard,  dost  thou  think  we'll  hear  thee  poison 
the  Court  ?  Richard,  thou  art  an  old  fellow,  an  old  knave  ; 
thou  hast  written  books  enough  to  load  a  cart,  every  one 
as  full  of  sedition,  I  might  say  treason,  as  an  egg  is  full  of 
meat.  Hadst  thou  been  whipped  out  of  thy  writing  trade 
forty  years  ago,  it  had  been  happy.  Thou  pretendest  to 
be  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel  of  peace,  and  thou  hast  one 
foot  in  the  grave :  it  is  time  for  thee  to  think  what  kind 
of  an  account  thou  intendest  to  give.  But  leave  thee  to 
thyself  and  I  see  thou  wilt  go  on  as  thou  hast  begun  • 
but,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  will  look  after  thee.  I  know 
thou  hast  a  mighty  party,  and  I  see  a  great  many  of  the 
brotherhood  in  corners,  waiting  to  see  what  will  become  of 
this  mighty  dove ;  but,  by  the  grace  of  God  Almighty,  I'll 
crush  you  all !  Come,  what  do  you  say  for  yourself,  you 
old  knave  ?  Come,  speak  up !  " 

All  this,  and  much  more  of  the  same  kind,  and  even 
worse,  went  on  at  Baxter's  trial.  The  extracts  I  have 
given  form  but  a  small  portion  of  the  whole  account. 

It  is  needless  to  Say,  that  in  such  a  court  as  this  Baxter 
was  at  once  found  guilty.  He  was  fined  five  hundred 
marks,  which  it  was  known  he  could  not  pay;  condemned 
to  lie  in  prison  till  he  paid  it,  and  bound  over  to  good 
behaviour  for  seven  years.  And  the  issue  of  the  matter 


334  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

was,  that  this  poor,  old,  diseased,  childless  widower,  of 
threescore  years  and  ten,  lay  for  two  years  in  Southwark 
gaol! 

It  is  needless,  I  hope,  to  remark  in  this  present 
century  that  such  a  trial  as  this  was  a  disgrace  to  the 
judicial  bench  of  England,  and  a  still  greater  disgrace  to 
those  persons  with  whom  the  information  originated, 
understood  commonly  to  have  been  Sherlock  and 
L'Estrange.  Thank  God !  I  trust  England,  at  any  rate, 
has  bid  a  long  farewell  to  such  trials  as  these,  whatever 
may  be  done  in  other  lands !  Wretched,  indeed,  is  that 
country  where  low,  sneaking  informers  are  encouraged ; — 
where  the  terrors  of  the  law  are  directed  more  against 
holiness,  and  Scriptural  religion,  and  freedom  of  thought, 
than  against  vice  and  immorality; — and  where  the  seat  of 
justice  is  used  for  the  advancement  of  political  purposes, 
or  the  gratification  of  petty  ecclesiastical  spite ! 

But  it  is  right  that  we  should  know  that  under  all  this 
foul  injustice  and  persecution,  Baxter's  grace  and  patience 
never  failed  him.  "  These  things,"  he  said,  in  Westminster 
Hall,  "  will  surely  be  understood  one  day,  what  fools  one 
sort  of  Protestants  are  made  to  prosecute  the  other."; 
When  he  was  reviled,  he  reviled  not  again.  He  returned 
blessing  for  cursing,  and  prayer  for  ill-usage.  Few  martyrs 
have  ever  glorified  God  so  much  in  their  one  day's  fire  as 
Richard  Baxter  did  for  twenty  years  under  the  ill-usage  of 
so-called  Protestants!  Once  more,  I  say,  have  I  not  a 
right  to  tell  you  such  a  man  as  this  deserves  to  be 
remembered  ?  Such  a  man  surely  deserves  to  be  praised. 

And  now  I  hope  I  have  proved  my  case.  I  trust  it  will 
be  allowed  that  there  are  men  who  lived  in  times  long 
gone  by  whose  character  it  is  useful  to  review,  and  that 


RICHARD  BAXTER.  333 

Baxter    is    undeniably    one   of    them :    a  real    man— a 
true  spiritual  hero. 

I  do  not  ask  men  to  regard  him  as  a  perfect  and 
faultless  being,  any  more  than  Cranmer,  or  Calvin,  or 
Knox,  or  Wesley.  I  do  not  at  all  defend  some  of  Baxter's 
doctrinal  statements.  He  tried  to  systematise  things 
which  cannot  be  systematised,  and  he  failed.  You  will 
not  find  such  a  clear,  full  gospel  in  his  writings  as  in  those 
of  Owen,  and  Bridge,  and  Traill.  I  do  not  think  he  was 
always  right  in  his  judgment.  I  regard  his  refusal  of  a 
bishopric  as  a  huge  mistake.  By  that  refusal  he  i-ejected 
a  glorious  opportunity  of  doing  good.  Had  Baxter  been 
on  the  episcopal  bench,  and  in  the  House  of  Lords,  I  do 
not  believe  the  Act  of  Uniformity  would  ever  have 
passed. 

But  in  a  world  like  this  we  must  take  true  Christians 
as  they  are,  and  be  thankful  for  what  they  are.  It  is  not 
given  to  mortal. man  to  be  faultless.  Take  Baxter  for  all 
together,  and  there  are  few  English  ministers  of  the 
Gospel  whose  names  deserve  to  stand  higher  than  his. 
Some  have  excelled  him  in  some  gifts,  and  some  in  others- 
But  it  is  seldom  that  so  many  gifts  are  to  be  found  united 
in  one  man  as  they  are  in  Baxter.  Eminent  personal 
holiness, — amazing  power  as  a  preacher, — unrivalled 
pastoral  skill, — indefatigable  diligence  as  a  writer, — 
meekness  and  patience  under  undeserved  persecution, — 
all  meet  together  in  the  character  of  this  one  man.  Let 
us  place  him  high  in  our  list  of  great  and  good  men.  Let 
us  give  him  the  honour  he  deserves.  It  is  no  small  thing 
to  be  the  fellow-countryman  of  Richard  Baxter. 

.  And  here  let  me  remark  that  few  bodies  of  men  are 
under  greater  obligation  to  Baxter  and  his  friends  than 


836  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES 

the  members    of   voluntary   religious    societies    in    the 
present  day. 

We  are  allowed  to  associate  together  upon  Evangelical 
principles  and  fo'-  religious  ends,  and  no  one  hinders  us. 
We  are  allowed  to  meet  in  large  numbers,  and  take  sweet 
counsel  with  one  another,  and  strengthen  one  another's 
hands  in  the  service  of  Christ,  and  no  one  interferes  to 
prevent  us.  We  are  allowed  to  assemble  for  devotional 
purposes,  to  read  the  Word  of  God,  and  stir  one  another 
up  to  perseverance  in  the  faith,  and  no  one  dares  to 
prohibit  us.  How  great  are  all  these  privileges!  How 
incalculable  the  benefit  of  union,  conference,  sympathy, 
and  encouragement  to  Christians  who  are  voyaging  over 
the  stormy  waters  of  this  evil  world,  and  trying  to  do 
good.  Blessed  is  the  labour  of  those  by  whose  care  and 
attention  these  societies  are  kept  together!  They  are 
sowing  precious  seed.  They  may  sow  with  much  toil  and 
discouragement,  but  they  may  be  sure  they  are  sowing 
seed  which  shall  yet  bear  fruit  after  many  days. 

But  never  let  us  forget  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for 
all  this  liberty  of  conference  and  association  which  we 
enjoy.  Never  let  us  forget  that  there  was  a  time  when 
informers  would  have  tracked  all  our  steps — when 
constables  and  soldiers  would  have  rudely  broken  up  our 
gatherings  at  Exeter  Hall,  and  when  our  proceedings 
would  have  entailed  upon  us  pains,  penalties,  fines,  and 
imprisonments.  Never  let  us  forget  that  the  happy  and 
profitable  freedom  which  we  enjoy  was  only  won  by  long- 
continued  and  intense  struggles,  by  the  blood  and 
sufferings  of  noble-minded  men,  of  whom  the  world  was 
not  worthy ;  and  never  forget  that  the  men  who  won  this 
freedom  for  us  were  those  much-abused  men — the  Puritans 


RICHARD  BAXTER.  337 

YeS !  we  all  owe  a  debt  to  the  Puritans,  which  I  trust  we 
shall  never  refuse  to  acknowledge.  We  live  in  days  when 
many  are  disposed  to  run  them  down.  As  we  travel 
through  life,  we  often  hear  them  derided  and  abused  as 
seditious,  rebellious  levellers  in  the  things  of  Caesar,  and 
ignorant,  fanatical,  hypocritical  enthusiasts  in  the  things 
of  God.  We  often  hear  some  conceited  stripling  fresh 
from  college,  puffed  up  with  new-fledged  views  of  what 
he  calls  "apostolical  succession,"  and  proud  of  a  little 
official  authority,  depreciating  and  sneering  at  the 
Puritans,  as  men  alike  destitute  of  learning  and  true 
religion,  while,  in  reality  he  is  scarcely  worthy  to  sit  at 
their  feet  and  carry  their  books.  To  all  such  calumnies 
and  false  statements,  I  trust  we  shall  never  give  heed. 

Let  us  settle  it  down  in  our  minds  that  for  sound 
doctrine,  spirituality,  and  learning  combined,  the  Puritans 
stand  at  the  head  of  English  divines.  With  all  their 
faults,  weaknesses,  and  defects,  they  alone  kept  the  lamp 
of  pure,  Evangelical  religion  burning  in  this  country  in 
the  times  of  the  Stuarts, — they  alone  prevented  Laud's 
Popish  inclinations  carrying  England  back  into  the  arms 
of  Rome.  It  was  they  who  fought  the  battle  of  religious 
freedom,  of  which  we  are  reaping  such  fruits.  It  was 
they  who  crushed  the  wretched  spirit  of  inquisitorial 
persecution  which  misguided  High  Churchmen  tried  to 
introduce  into  this  land.  Let  us  give  them  the  honour 
they  deserve.  Let  us  suffer  no  man  to  speak  lightly  of 
them  in  our  presence.  Let  us  remember  our  obligations 
to  them,  reverence  their  memory,  stand  up  boldly  for 
their  reputation,  and  never  be  afraid  to  plead  their  cause. 
It  is  the  cause  of  pure,  Evangelical  religion.  It  is  the 
cause  of  an  open  Bible  and  liberty  to  meet,  and  read,  and 


338  tiGHT  FROM  OtD  TIMES. 

pray  together.  It  is  the  cause  of  liberty  of  conscience. 
All  these  are  bound  up  with  Baxter  and  the  Puritans. 
Let  us  remember  this,  and  give  them  their  due. 

Baxter's  last  days  were  almost  as  remarkable  as  any 
in  his  life.  He  went  down  to  his  grave  as  calmly  and 
peacefully  as  the  setting  sun  in  summer.  His  death-bed 
was  a  glorious  death-bed  indeed. 

I  like  to  know  how  great  men  die.  I  am  not  satisfied 
with  knowing  that  men  are  great  Christians  in  the 
plenitude  of  riches  and  honour.  I  want  to  know 
whether  they  were  great  in  view  of  the  tomb.  I  do  not 
want  merely  to  know  how  men  meet  Kings  and  Bishops 
and  Parliaments;  I  want  to  know  how  they  meet  the 
king  of  terrors,  and  how  they  feel  in  the  prospect  of 
standing  before  the  King  of  kings.  I  suspect  that 
greatness  which  forsakes  a  man  at  last.  I  like  to  know 
how  great  men  die,  and  I  must  be  allowed  to  dwell  for  a 
few  moments  upon  Baxter's  death. 

Few  death-beds,  perhaps,  were  ever  more  truly  in 
structive  than  that  of  this  good  old  Puritan.  His  friend, 
Dr.  Bates,  has  given  a  full  description  of  it,  and  I  think  a 
few  facts  drawn  from  it  may  prove  a  suitable  conclusion 
to  this  biography. 

Baxter's  last  illness  found  him  quietly  living  in 
Charterhouse  Square,  close  to  the  meeting-house  of  his 
friend,  Dr.  Sylvester.  Here  for  the  four  years  preceding 
his  death,  he  was  allowed  to  enjoy  great  quietness.  The 
liberty  of  preaching  the  things  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  no  man  forbidding  him,  was  at  length  fully 
conceded.  "  Here,"  says  Dr.  Calamy,  "  he  used  to  preach 
with  great  freedom  about  another  world,  like  one  tbat 
had  been  there,  and  was  come  as  a  sort  of  express  to 


RICHARD  BAXTER.  339 

make  a  report  of  it."  The  storm  of  persecution  was 
at  length  over.  The  winds  and  waves  that  had  so  long 
Imrst  over  him  were  at  last  lulled.  The  saintly  old 
Puritan  was  mercifully  allowed  to  go  down  to  the  banks 
of  Jordan  in  a  great  calm. 

He  continued  to  preach  so  long,  notwithstanding  his 
wasted  body,  that  the  last  time  he  almost  died  in  the 
pulpit.  When  disease  compelled  him  to  give  over  his 
beloved  work,  and  take  to  his  dying  bed,  it  found  him  the 
same  man  that  he  had  been  for  fifty  years.  His  last 
hours  were  spent  in  preparing  others  and  himself  to  meet 
God.  He  said  to  the  friends  who  visited  him,  "You 
come  hither  to  learn  to  die.  I  am  not  the  only  person 
that  must  go  this  way.  Have  a  care  of  this  vain, 

I  deceitful  world,  and  the  lust  of  the  flesh.     Be  sure  you 

choose  God  for  your  portion,  heaven  for  your  home,  God's 
glory  for  your  end,  God's  Word  for  your  rule,  and  then  you 
need  never  fear  but  we  shall  meet  again  with  comfort." 

Never  was  penitent  sinner  more  humble,  and  never  was 
sincere  believer  more  calm  and  comfortable.  He  said, 
"  God  may  justly  condemn  me  for  the  best  duty  I  ever 
did ;  and  all  my  hopes  are  from  the  free  mercy  of  God  in 
Christ."  He  had  often  said  before,  "  I  can  more  readily 
believe  that  God  will  forgive  me,  than  I  can  forgive 

«  myself." 

_ 

After  a  slumber,  he  waked,  saying,  "  I  shall  rest  from 
my  labours."  A  minister  present  said,  "  And  your  works 
will  follow  you."  He  replied, "  No  works ;  I  will  leave  out 
works,  if  God  will  grant  me  the  other."  When  a  friend 
comforted  him  with  the  remembrance  of  the  good  many 
had  received  from  his  writings,  he  replied,  "  I  was  but  a 
pen  in  God's  hand,  and  what  praise  is  due  to  a  pen  ? " 


340  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  1TME3. 

When  extremity  of  pain  made  him  long  for  death,  he 
would  check  himself  and  say,  "It  is  not  fit  for  me  to 
prescribe :  when  Thou  wilt — what  Thou  wilt — how  Thou 
wilt ! "  Being  in  great  anguish,  he  said,  "  How  unsearch 
able  are  His  ways ! "  and  then  he  said  to  his  friends,  "  Do 
not  think  the  worse  of  religion  for  what  you  see  me 
suffer." 

Being  often  asked  by  his  friend  how  it  was  with  his 
inward  man,  he  replied,  "  I  have  a  well-grounded  assurance 
of  my  eternal  happiness,  and  great  peace  and  comfort 
within ;  but  it  is  my  trouble  that  I  cannot  triumphantly 
express  it,  by  reason  of  extreme  pain."  He  added,  "  Flesh 
must  perish,  and  we  must  feel  the  perishing ;  and  though 
my  judgment  submit,  sense  will  make  me  groan." 

Being  asked  by  a  nobleman  whether  he  had  great  joy 
from  his  believing  apprehension  of  the  invisible  state,  he 
replied,  "  What  else,  think  you,  Christianity  serves  for  ? " 
And  then  he  added,  "  that  the  consideration  of  the  Deity, 
in  His  glory  and  greatness,  was  too  high  for  our  thoughts  , 
but  the  consideration  of  the  Son  of  God  in  our  nature 
and  of  the  saints  in  heaven  whom  we  knew  and  loved,  did 
much  sweeten  and  familiarise  heaven  to  him."  The 
description  of  heaven  in  the  12th  chapter  of  Hebrews, 
beginning  with  the  "innumerable  company  of  angels," 
and  ending  with  "  Jesus  the  Mediator,  and  the  blood  of 
sprinkling,"  was  very  comfortable  to  him.  "That 
scripture,"  he  said,  "deserves  a  thousand  thousand 
thoughts  ! "  And  then  he  added,  "  Oh,  how  comfortable  is 
that  promise,  '  Eye  has  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 
hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive,  the 
things  God  hath  laid  up  for  them  that  love  Him  ! " 

At  another  time  he  said,  that  "  he  found  great  comfort 


RICHARD  BAXTER.  341 

and  sweetness  in  repeating  the  words  of  the  Lord's  Prayer, 
and  was  sorry  that  some  good  men  were  prejudiced  against 
the  use  of  it;  for  there  were  all  necessary  petitions  for 
soul  and  body  contained  in  it." 

He  gave  excellent  counsel  to  young  ministers  who 
visited  him  on  his  death-bed.  He  used  to  pray  earnestly 
"  that  God  would  bless  their  labours,  and  make  them  very 
successful  in  converting  many  souls  to  Christ."  He 
expressed  great  joy  in  the  hope  that  God  would  do  a  great 
deal  of  good  by  them,  and  that  they  would  be  of  moderate, 
peaceful  spirits. 

He  did  not  forget  the  world  he  was  leaving.  He 
frequently  prayed  "  that  God  would  be  merciful  to  this 
miserable,  distracted  world ;  and  that  he  would  preserve 
His  Church  and  interest  in  it." 

He  advised  his  friends  "  to  beware  of  self-conceitedness, 
as  a  sin  likely  to  ruin  this  nation."  Being  asked  at  the 
same  time  whether  he  had  altered  his  mind  in  controversial 
points,  he  replied,  "  Those  that  please  may  know  my  mind 
in  my  writings.  What  I  have  done  was  not  for  my  own 
reputation,  but  the  glory  of  God." 

The  day  before  he  died,  Dr.  Bates  visited  him ;  and  on 
his  saying  some  words  of  comfort,  he  replied,  "I  have 
pain :  there  is  no  arguing  against  sense ;  but  I  have  peace : 
I  have  peace ! "  Bates  told  him  he  was  going  to  his  long- 
desired  home.  He  answered,  "  I  believe :  I  believe."  He 
expressed  great  willingness  to  die.  During  his  sickness, 
when  the  question  was  asked  how  he  did,  his  reply  was, 
"  Almost  well ! "  or  else,  "  Better  than  I  deserve  to  be,  but 
not  so  well  as  I  hope  to  be."  His  last  words  were 
addressed  to  Dr.  Sylvester,  "  The  Lord  teach  you  how  to 
die!" 


342  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

On  Tuesday,  the  8th  of  December,  1691,  Baxter's 
warfare  was  accomplished ;  and  at  length  he  entered  what 
he  had  BO  beautifully  described, — "  the  saint's  everlasting 
rest." 

He  was  buried  at  Christchurch,  amidst  the  tears  of 
many  who  knew  his  worth,  if  the  world  and  the  Established 
Church  of  that  day  did  not.  The  funeral  was  that  kind 
of  funeral  which  is  above  all  in  real  honour :  "  devout  men 
carried  him  to  his  grave,  and  made  great  lamentation 
over  him." 

He  left  no  family,  but  he  left  behind  him  hundreds  of 
spiritual  sons  and  daughters.  He  left  works  which  are 
still  owned  by  God  in  every  part  of  the  world  to  the 
awakening  and  edification  of  immortal  souls.  Thousands, 
I  doubt  not,  will  stand  up  in  the  morning  of  the  resurrec 
tion,  and  thank  God  for  the  grace  and  gifts  bestowed  on 
the  old  Puritan  of  Shropshire.  He  left  a  name  which 
must  always  be  dear  to  every  lover  of  holiness,  and  every 
friend  of  religious  liberty.  No  Englishman,  perhaps,  ever 
exemplified  the  one,  or  promoted  the  other,  more  truly  and. 
really  than  did  Richard  Baxter. 

Let  me  conclude  by  quoting  the  last  paragraph  of 
Dr.  Bates'  funeral  sermon  on  the  occasion  of  Baxter's 
death:  "Blessed  be  the  gracious  God,  that  He  was 
pleased  to  prolong  the  life  of  His  servant,  so  useful  and 
beneficial  to  the  world,  to  a  full  age,  and  that  He  brought 
him  slowly  and  safely  to  heaven.  I  shall  conclude  this 
account  with  my  own  deliberate  wish :  May  I  live  the  short 
remainder  of  my  life  as  entirely  to  the  glory  of  God  as  he 
lived ;  and  when  I  shall  come  to  the  period  of  my  life,  may 
I  die  in  the  same  blessed  peace  wherein  he  died  ;  may  I  be 
with  him  in  the  kingdom  of  light  and  love  for  ever." 


WILLIAM    GUKNALL. 

WILLIAM  GURNALL,  Rector  of  Lavenham,  in  Suffolk,  and 
author  of  "  The  Christian  in  Complete  Armour,"  is  a  man 
about  whom  the  world  possesses  singularly  little  informa 
tion.  Perhaps  there  is  no  writer  who  has  left  a  name  so 
familiar  to  all  readers  of  Puritan  theology,  but  of  whose 
personal  history  so  little  is  known.  Except  the  three 
facts,  that  he  was  a  Puritan  divine  of  the  seventeenth 
century, — that  he  was  Minister  of  Lavenham, — and  that 
he  wrote  a  well-known  book  of  practical  divinity,  most 
persons  know  nothing  of  William  Gurnall. 

This  dearth  of  information  about  so  good  a  man  appears 
at  first  sight  extraordinary  and  unaccountable.  Born,  as 
he  was,  in  a  seaport  town  of  no  mean  importance, — the 
son  of  parents  who  held  a  prominent  position  in  the  town, 
— educated  at  Cambridge,  at  one  of  the  best  known 
colleges  of  the  day, — the  contemporary  of  leading  divines 
of  the  Commonwealth  times, — minister  of  the  largest 
church  in  West  Suffolk  for  the  uninterrupted  period  of 
thirty-five  years, — author  of  a  work  which,  from  its  first 
appearance,  was  eminently  popular. — Gurnall  is  a  man, 
we  naturally  feel,  of  whom  more  ought  to  be  known. 

How  is  it  then  that  more  is  not  known  ?     How  shall  we 

m 


344  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

account  for  the  absence  of  any  notice  of  him  in  the 
biographical  writings  of  his  day  ? 

I  believe  that  these  questions  admit  of  a  very  simple 
answer.  That  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the  line  of  conduct 
which  Gurnall  followed  in  the  year  1662,  on  the  passing 
of  the  unhappy  Act  of  Uniformity.  He  did  not  secede 
from  the  Church  of  England !  He  was  not  one  of  the 
famous  two  thousand  ministers  who  gave  up  their 
preferment  on  St.  Bartholomew's  Day,  and  became 
Nonconformists.  He  retained  his  position,  and  continued 
Rector  of  Lavenham.  Puritan  as  he  undoubtedly  was, 
both  in  doctrine  and  practice,  he  did  not  do  what  many  of 
his  brethren  did.  When  Baxter,  Manton,  Owen,  Goodwin, 
and  a  host  of  other  giants  in  theology,  seceded  from  the 
Church  of  England,  Gurnall  stood  fast,  and  refused  to 
move.  He  did  not  act  with  the  party  with  which  he  had 
generally  acted,  and  was  left  behind. 

The  result  of  this  line  of  conduct  can  easily  be  imagined. 
Whatever  opinions  we  may  hold  about  Gurnall's  conformity, 
we  must  all  allow  that  the  course  he  took  was  not  likely 
to  make  him  a  favourite  with  either  of  the  two  great 
religious  parties  into  which  England  at  that  time  was 
divided.  A  neutral  is  never  popular  in  a  season  of  strife 
and  controversy.  Both  sides  suspect  him.  Each  party  is 
offended  at  him  for  not  casting  his  weight  into  their  scale. 
This,  I  suspect,  was  precisely  Gurnall's  position.  He  was 
a  Puritan  in  doctrine,  and  yet  he  steadfastly  adhered  to 
the  Church  of  England.  He  was  a  minister  of  the 
Church  of  England,  and  yet  a  thorough  Puritan  both  in 
preaching  and  practice.  In  fact,  he  was  just  the  man  to 
be  disliked  and  slighted  by  both  sides. 

I    throw    out    the    conjecture    I    have    made    with 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  345 

considerable  diffidence.  It  is  undoubtedly  nothing  but  a 
conjecture.  But  I  look  at  the  broad  fact  that  the 
biographical  writers  who  have  handled  Gurnall's  age,  have 
chronicled  scores  of  names  of  far  less  weight  than  his,  and 
have  refused  to  say  a  word  about  the  author  of  "  The 
Christian  in  Complete  Armour."  Calamy,  Clarke,  Neal, 
and  Brooke  have  written  hundreds  of  pages  about  men 
for  whom  the  world  cares  nothing  now,  but  not  a  page 
about  Gurnall!  I  leave  it  to  others  to  offer  a  better 
explanation  6f  this  fact,  if  they  can.  I  must  be  allowed 
to  retain  my  own  settled  conviction,  that  we  should  know 
far  more  about  Gurnall  if  he  had  not  submitted  to  the 
Act  of  Uniformity  in  1662,  and  retained  the  pulpit  of 
Lavenham  parish  church. 

To  supply  a  correct  history  of  this  good  man  and  his 
times  is  the  object  of  the  biography  I  am  now  writing. 
Ever  since  I  read  "  The  Christian  in  Complete  Armour  "  I 
have  felt  that  the  author  of  such  a  book  was  a  man  whose 
life  ought  to  be  known.  From  the  day  that  I  was  trans 
planted  into  the  Eastern  Counties,  and  became  a  Suffolk 
incumbent,  I  have  made  it  my  business  to  study  the  lives 
of  eminent  Suffolk  divines.  None  of  them  all  appears 
to  deserve  excavation  from  undeserved  oblivion  so  much 
as  Gurnall. 

Almost  the  only  source  of  information  about  Gurnall 
which  we  now  possess  is  a  small  volume,  published  in 
1830,  by  a  writer  named  M'Keon,  entitled,  "An  Inquiry 
into  the  Birthplace,  Parentage,  Life,  and  Writings  of  the 
Rev.  William  Gurnall,  formerly  Rector  of  Lavenham,  in 
Suffolk,  and  author  of  'The  Christian  in  Complete 
Armour.'"  This  book  was  printed  and  published  for  the 
author  at  Woodbridge,  in  Suffolk,  and  not  in  London.  It 


346  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

is  owing  to  this  circumstance,  perhaps,  that  it  seems  to 
have  attracted  little  notice,  and  to  have  become  com 
paratively  unknown. 

Mr.  M'Keon  was  an  inhabitant  of  Lavenham,  and  likely 
to  procure  information  about  Gurnall,  if  any  one  could. 
He  was  undoubtedly  a  painstaking  man,  and  an  antiquarian 
of  considerable  research.  His  accuracy  and  correctness 
are  worthy  of  all  commendation.  There  is  hardly  a 
single  date  or  fact  in  his  book  which  I  have  not  taken  the 
trouble  to  verify  by  inquiry  and  investigation ;  and  there 
is  hardly  one,  I  feel  bound  to  say,  in  which  I  have  found 
him  wrong.  But  it  cannot  be  said  that  his  "  Inquiry  "  is 
written  in  a  popular  and  attractive  style.  In  accumulating 
facts  he  was  most  successful ;  in  arranging  and  exhibiting 
them  to  the  reading  public  I  certainly  think  he  failed. 

However,  whatever  may  be  the  faults  of  Mr.  M'Keon's 
book,  it  is  certainly  the  only  attempt  at  any  account  of 
Gurnall  which  has  hitherto  existed.  A  funeral  sermon,  to 
be  sure,  was  preached  by  Gurnall's  friend  and  neighbour, 
the  well-known  commentator  Burkitt ;  but  the  information 
it  contains  is  comparatively  very  small.  I  must  therefore 
frankly  avow  that  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  M'Keon's  work 
for  the  greater  part  of  the  facts  about  Gurnall  which  I 
have  brought  together  in  the  following  pages.  I  have 
tried  to  re-arrange  these  facts.  I  have  endeavoured  to 
present  them  to  the  reader  in  an  attractive  form,  by 
illustrating  them  with  some  cross  lights  from  the  history 
of  Gurnall's  times.  I  have  added  a  few  facts  which  Mr. 
M'Keon  was  probably  unable  to  obtain.  But  I  think  it 
only  fair  to  state  that  Mr.  M'Keon's  book  is  the  principal 
mine  from  which  the  biographical  account  of  Gurnall  now 
presented  to  the  reader  has  been  drawn.  If  I  have  added 


WILLIAM  GUKNALL.  34*7 

anything  of  interest  to  his  work,  it  is  almost  always  by 
following  up  clues  which  his  volume  indicated  or  put  into 
my  hand. 

William  Gurnall  was  born  at  Lynn,  in  the  county 
of  Norfolk,  in  the  year  1616,  and  was  baptized  at  St. 
Margaret's  church  in  that  town,  on  the  17th  of  November, 
1616.  His  father  and  mother  were  married  at  St. 
Margaret's  church  on  the  31st  of  December,  1615,  and 
the  subject  of  this  memoir  was  therefore  their  eldest  child.* 

It  has  often  been  observed  that  the  mothers  of  great 
men,  and  especially  of  great  divines,  have  been  remark 
able  for  strong  mind  and  force  of  intellect.  Mothers 
have  been  found,  as  a  general  rule,  to  influence  children's 
character  far  more  than  fathers.  How  far  this  was  true 
in  the  case  of  Gurnall  we  have,  unfortunately,  no  means 
of  judging.  We  only  know  that  his  mother's  maiden 
name  was  Catherine  Dressit,  and  that  in  all  probability 
she  was  a  native  of  Lynn. 

Gregory,  the  father  of  William  Gurnall,  appears  to  have 
been  one  of  the  principal  inhabitants  of  Lynn.  At  any 
rate  he  was  an  Alderman  of  his  native  town  in  the  year 
when  his  son  was  born,  and  was  Mayor  of  the  borough 
eight  years  afterwards,  in  1624.  Nothing  is  known  of  his 
calling  or  occupation.  The  fact  that  his  son  died  possessed 
of  certain  landed  property  at  Walpole,  a  country  parish 


.  *  Mr.  Hankinson,  once  Rector  of  St.  Margaret's,  Lynn,  informed  me 
that  the  name  "Gurnall,"  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge,  is  no  longer 
known  in  Lynn.  But  he  says  that  the  name  "Gurling"  is  not 
uncommon,  and  that  he  has  little  doubt  it  was  originally  "Gurnal." 
He  adds,  "I  find  an  entry  of  baptism  in  1799,  where  the  name  is 
'Gurnell  or  Gurling.'"  In  Suffolk,  the  names  of  "Girling"  and 
"  Grinling,"  as  I  happen  to  know  from  the  parish  register  of  Stradbroke, 
are  very  common. 


348  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

not  far  from  Lynn,  makes  it  highly  probable  that  Gregory 
Gurnall  was  a  landed  proprietor.  But  on  thia  point  again 
nothing  certain  is  known. 

Gurnall  had  the  misfortune  to  lose  his  father  when  he 
was  only  fifteen  years  old.  His  death  is  recorded  in  the 
register  of  St.  Margaret's,  Lynn,  as  having  taken  place  on 
the  14th  of  October,  1631.  He  was  buried  in  St. 
Margaret's  church,  and  a  tomb  was  erected  to  his  memory, 
with  a  curious  inscription.  This  tomb  is  no  longer  extant, 
as  the  spire  of  St.  Margaret's  church  was  blown  down  in 
a  violent  hurricane  in  the  year  1741,  and,  falling  on  the 
body  of  the  church,  destroyed  a  large  portion  of  the 
building.  Mackerell's  History  of  Lynn,  published  about 
four  years  before  the  hurricane,  records  the  inscription. 
If  epitaphs  were  worth  anything,  the  language  of  Gregory 
Gurnall's  epitaph  might  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that  he 
was  a  godly  man.  But  unhappily  it  is  too  well  known 
that  tombstones  are  not  always  to  be  trusted. 

How  long  Gurnall's  mother  survived  his  father  there  is 
no  evidence  to  show.  M'Keon  conjectures  that  she 
married  again.  It  is  certainly  a  curious  fact  that  Burkitt, 
the  commentator,  in  his  funeral  sermon  on  William 
Gurnall,  uses  the  following  language :  "  How  great  was 
that  tribute  of  veneration  and  respect  which  he  constantly 
paid  to  the  hoary  hairs  of  his  aged  parents ! "  Considering 
that  his  father  died  when  he  was  only  fifteen  years  old, 
these  words  can  hardly  be  supposed  to  apply  to  Gregory 
Gurnall.  Unless  therefore  the  word  "  parents  "  in  Burkitt's 
sermon  is  a  printer's  mistake  for  "  parent,"  it  seems  a  very 
probable  idea  that  Giirnall's  mother  married  again,  and 
that  he  had  a  kind  and  loving  step-father.  But  who  he 
was,  and  how  long  his  mother  lived,  we  do  not  know. 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  34$ 

The  first  fifteen  years  of  Gurnall's  life  appear  to  have 
been  spent  in  his  native  town  of  Lynn.  There  is,  at  any 
rate,  no  doubt  that  he  was  educated  at  the  Free  Grammar 
School  of  that  town  up  to  the  time  when  he  went  to 
Cambridge.  The  fact  is  recorded  in  the  books  of  the  school. 

The  first  fifteen  years  of  life  have  often  so  much  weight 
in  the  formation  of  a  man's  character,  that  it  would  be 
very  interesting  to  find  out  the  influences  under  which 
William  Gurnall  spent  his  early  years.  Unhappily  we 
possess  no  materials  for  doing  this.  Ambrose  Fish  was 
appointed  Master  of  Lynn  Grammar  School  in  1626,  in 
the  place  of  Mr.  Robinson,  deceased,  and  Robert 
Woodmansea  was  appointed  Master  in  1627.  But  we 
know  nothing  of  these  men,  I  can  only  point  out  two 
things  which  appear  to  me  deserving  of  attention. 

For  one  thing,  we  may  probably  trace  up  to  Lynn 
Gurnall's  Puritan  predilections  and  opinions.  Lynn  was 
one  of  the  chief  towns  of  the  most  thoroughly  Protestant 
district  in  England  in  the  seventeenth  century.  In  the 
days  ot  Queen  Mary  and  Elizabeth  the  inhabitants  of 
Norfolk  and  Suffolk  were  famous  for  their  deep  attach 
ment  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation.  In  the  days 
of  the  Stuarts  and  the  Commonwealth  they  were  no  less 
famous  for  their  steadfast  adherence  to  Puritan  principles. 
In  no  part  of  England  were  High  Church  opinions  so 
thoroughly  disliked  as  in  the  diocese  of  Norwich,  and  in 
no  diocese  were  the  minds  of  people  so  continually 
exasperated  by  vexatious  persecutions  of  Nonconformists.* 


*  Harsnet,  White,  Corbet,  Wren,  and  Montague  were  Bishops  of 
Norwich  between  1619  and  1641.  Three  of  them,  at  least,  viz., 
Harsnet,  Wren,  and  Montague,  were  notoriously  very  High  Churchmen, 
and  strongly  opposed  to  the  Puritans. 


350  LIGHT  J-ROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Brought  up  in  a  large  market  town  like  Lynn,  we  cannot 
doubt  that  the  religious  atmosphere  in  which  young 
Gurnall  moved  was  essentially  Puritan.  If,  as  it  seems 
not  unlikely,  from  a  comparison  of  dates,  the  famous 
John  Arrowsmith  and  Samuel  Fairclough  were  Ministers 
at  Lynn  during  Gurnall's  school  days,  we  get  an  additional 
ray  of  light  thrown  on  the  source  of  his  doctrinal  opinions. 
To  hear  men  like  Arrowsmith  and  Fairclough  preach 
every  Sunday,  and  perhaps  to  be  solemnly  catechised  or 
examined  by  Arrowsmith  on  stated  public  occasions,  were 
just  the  things  likely  to  produce  an  indelible  impression 
on  a  mind  like  Gurnall's.* 


*  John  Arrowsmith  was  born  at  Gateshead,  in  1602.  He  was 
educated  at  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  and  was  chosen  Fellow  of 
Katherine  Hall.  He  was  elected  one  of  the  University  Preachers,  was 
beneliced  at  Lynn,  and  was  afterwards  Preacher  at  St.  Margaret's, 
Ironmonger's  Lane,  London.  He  was  a  leading  member  of  the 
Westminster  Assembly,  and  had  a  principal  share  in  drawing  up  the 
Assembly's  Catechism.  He  was  elected  Master  of  St.  John's  College  in 
1644,  and  was  chosen  Vice-Chancellor  of  Cambridge  in  1647.  In  1651 
he  was  appointed  Regius  Professor  of  Divinity,  and  Rector  of  Somersham. 
He  was  chosen  Master  of  Trinity  College  in  1653,  died  in  1659,  and 
was  buried  in  Trinity  College  ChapeL  His  commentary  on  the  first 
seventeen  verses  of  the  first  chapter  of  St.  John's  Gospel,  entitled, 
"God-Man,"  gives  a  very  favourable  impression  of  his  ability. 

Samuel  Fairclough  was  born  at  Haverhill  in  1594,  and  was  educated 
at  Queen's  College,  Cambridge.  He  was  appointed  Lecturer  at  Lynn  by 
.the  Mayor  and  Aldermen  in  1619,  and  continued  there,  according  to 
Samuel  Clarke,  who  gives  a  long  and  most  interesting  account  of  him, 
"  for  some  time."  The  opposition  and  persecution  of  Harsnet,  Bishop 
of  Norwich,  obliged  him  to  resign  this  lecture.  He  was  afterwards 
Lecturer  at  Clare,  in  Suffolk,  and  was  then  appointed  Rector  of 
Keddington,  by  Sir  N.  Barnardiston.  He  resigned  this  living  in  1662, 
on  account  of  the  Act  of  Uniformity.  He  died  in  retirement  in  1677, 
aged  84.  Though  a  retiring  man,  and  not  known  by  any  writings,  he 
seems  to  have  been  a  man  of  singular  gifts  and  graces.  There  is  an 
interesting  tablet  in  Heveningham  Church,  erected  by  his  daughter, 
wife  of  Mr.  Jones,  Rector  of  Heveningham.  He  lived  at  Hcveningbara^ 
for  two  years,  but  died  at  Stowmarket. 


WILLIAM  GUKNALL.  351 

For  another  thing,  we  probably  owe  to  Gurnall's  early 
residence  at  Lynn  his  remarkable  familiarity  with  the 
sea,  sailors,  and  shipping.  I  was  once  puzzled  to  make 
out  the  reason  why  nautical  illustrations  so  frequently 
occur  in  his  writings.  It  did  not  surprise  me  to  find  an 
author  like  Gurnall,  who  delighted  in  illustrations,  pressing 
everything  in  town  and  country  into  his  service.  I  could 
understand  the  man  who  was  Rector  of  a  Suffolk  town  for 
thirty-five  years  drawing  comparisons  from  shops,  and 
farms,  and  streets,  and  fields,  and  horses,  and  cattle,  and 
corn,  and  grass,  and  flowers.  I  could  understand  the 
minister  who  lived  through  the  bloody  wars  of  the 
Commonwealth  times  using  abundant  imagery  from  the 
habits  of  soldiers,  and  from  the  battle-field.  But  I  never 
could  understand  Gurnall's  familiarity  with  the  sea  and 
shipping,  until  I  found  out  that  he  was  born  and  bred  in 
Lynn.  He  knew  well  what  a  sailor's  life  was.  He  had 
scon  the  quaint-looking  craft  which  carried  on  the  coasting 
trade  of  Lynn.  He  had  doubtless  talked  with  sailors  who 
could  tell  the  perils  of  "the  Wash,"  the  Lincolnshire 
coast,  the  Norfolk  Sands,  and  the  Voyage  to  the  Humber. 
Hence  came  his  nautical  illustrations  in  Lavenham  pulpit. 
How  true  it  is  that  all  knowledge  is  useful  to  a  minister 
of  Christ!  The  man  of  God  makes  everything  he  has 
seen  become  serviceable  to  his  Master's  cause. 

The  next  thing  that  we  know  about  Gurnall  is  his 
connection  with  Cambridge  as  a  pensioner  of  Emmanuel 
College.  It  appears  that  Lynn  Corporation  had  two 
Scholarships  at  Emmanuel  in  its  gift,  connected  with  the 
Grammar  School  of  the  town.  To  one  of  these  Gurnall 
was  presented  by  the  Corporation,  in  December,  1631,  not 
long  after  his  father's  death.  A  correspondent  of  M'Keon, 


352  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

at  Lynn,  says,  "I  find,  on  reference  to  the  Corporation 
books,  that  on  the  2nd  December,  1631,  William  Gurnall, 
son  of  Gregory  Gurnall,  Alderman  there,  lately  deceased, 
and  one  of  the  scholars  of  Lynn  School,  was  nominated 
to  one  of  the  Scholarships  in  Emmanuel  College, 
Cambridge,  called  Lynn  Scholarship,  or  Mr.  Titley's 
Scholarship;  and  that  on  the  llth  of  June,  1632,  the 
nomination,  dated  29th  March  then  last,  passed  the 
Corporation  seal." 

Of  Gurnall's  history  during  his  residence  at  Cambridge 
we  know  literally  nothing,  with  the  exception  of  the 
following  bald  facts.  The  College  books  record  that 
William  Gurnall,  pensioner,  of  Norfolk,  was  admitted 
March  29,  1632,  was  B.A.,  1635,  and  M.A.,  1639.  It  is 
certain  that  he  was  never  elected  a  Fellow  of  his  College, 
and  as  the  Lynn  Scholarship  was  only  tenable  for  seven 
years,  it  is  highly  probable  that  he  ceased  to  reside  at 
Cambridge  in  the  year  1639,  when  he  took  his  degree 
as  M.A.,  and  received  no  further  assistance  from  his 
Scholarship. 

It  would,  no  doubt,  be  highly  interesting,  if  we  knew 
something  of  Gurnall's  history  during  the  seven  years  of 
his  University  life.  The  character  of  a  young  man  is 
generally  moulded  for  life  during  the  period  between 
sixteen  and  twenty-three,  and  the  author  of  the  "Christian 
in  Complete  Armour,"  was  probably  no  exception  to  this 
rule.  Who  were  his  friends  and  companions  ?  Who  were 
his  tutors  and  lecturers  ?  Was  he  a  reading  man  ?  Whom 
did  he  walk  with,  and  talk  with  ?  What  great  preachers 
did  he  hear  in  the  University  pulpit?  What  were  his 
habits  and  ways  of  employing  his  time?  What  side  did 
he  espouse  in  the  mighty  controversies  of  the  day  ?  AH 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  353 

these  are  questions  which  it  would  be  very  pleasant  to 
have  answered.  The  answers  would  throw  great  light  on 
many  a  passage  in  his  after-life  and  writings.  But  the 
answers,  unhappily,  are  not  forthcoming.  The  only  light 
that  we  can  throw  on  Gurnall's  University  life  consists  of 
a  few  facts  about  his  College,  and  the  general  state  of 
England  between  1632  and  1639. 

The  College  to  which  Gurnall  belonged  was  always; 
famous  in  the  seventeenth  century  for  its  theological 
tendencies.  It  was  eminently  a  Puritan  College. 

Sir  Walter  Mildmay,  of  Chelmsford,  in  Essex,  was  the 
founder  of  Emmanuel  College,  and  even  from  its  very 
foundation  in  1585,  it  seems  to  have  been  notorious  for 
its  attachment  to  Puritan  principles.  Fuller,  in  his 
History  of  Cambridge,  relates  that  on  "Sir  "Walter 
Mildmay  coming  to  Court,  soon  after  he  had  founded  his 
College,  Queen  Elizabeth  said  to  him,  '  Sir  Walter,  I  hear 
you  have  erected  a  Puritan  foundation.'  'No,  madam,' 
saith  he,  'far  be  it  from  me  to  countenance  anything 
contrary  to  your  established  laws;  but  I  have  set  an 
acorn,  which,  when  it  becomes  an  oak,  God  alone  knows 
what  will  be  the  fruit  thereof.'  Sure  I  am  (adds  Fuller,1 
writing  about  1650)  at  this  day  it  hath  overshadowed  all 
the  University,  more  than  a  moiety  of  the  present  Masters 
of  Colleges  being  bred  therein." 

The  number  of  leading  divines  of  the  seventeenth 
century  who  were  educated  at  Emmanuel  College,  Cam 
bridge,  is  certainly  extraordinary.  Beside  Bishop  Hall 
and  Bishop  Bedell,  we  find  in  the  list  of  its  members  the 
names  of  Stephen  Marshall,  Jeremiah  Burroughs,  Thomas 
Sheppard,  Thomas  Hooker,  Ezekiel  Culverwell,  Ealph 
Cud  worth,  Samuel  Crooke,  John  Cotton,  John  Stoughton, 


354  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Anthony  Burgess,  Laurence  Chaderton,  John  Preston, 
Anthony  Tuckney,  Lazarus  Seaman,  Matthew  Poole, 
Samuel  Clarke,  Ralph  Yenning,  Thomas  Watson,  Stephen 
Charnoek,  William  Bridge,  Peter  Sterry,  Samuel  Cradock. 
Any  one  familiar  with  Puritan  divinity  will  see  at  a  glance 
that  this  catalogue  embraces  the  names  of  some  of  the 
most  eminent  Puritan  writers.  Some  of  them,  no  doubt, 
were  contemporaries  and  fellow-students  of  Gurnall 
himsel£ 

From  inquiries  which  I  have  made,  I  have  succeeded  in 
obtaining  some  information  about  Emmanuel  College 
between  the  years  1632  and  1639,  which  I  think  will  not 
be  devoid  of  interest  to  all  admirers  of  Gurnall.  At  any 
rate  it  will  show  who  were  at  Emmanuel  when  he  was 
there,  both  as  an  undergraduate  and  a  graduate,  and  with 
what  kind  of  minds  he  was  associated. 

The  Masters  at  Emmanuel  in  Gurnall's  time  were  (1) 
William  Sancroft,  uncle  of  the  Archbishop,  who  held  the 
office  from,  1628  to  1637;  and  (2)  Holdsworth,  who.  held 
the  office  from  1637  to  1645,  when  he  was  ejected  by  the 
Earl  of  Manchester.  He  was  a  zealous  advocate  of  the 
King,  and  attended  him  during  his  confinement  in  the  Isle 
of  Wight,  and  soon  after,  according  to  Neal,  died  of  grief. 

The  reason  why  Gurnall  was  never  elected  Fellow  of 
his  College  was  probably,  if  I  may  venture  a  conjecture, 
the  high  character  and  attainments  of  his  competitors. 
According  to  the  books  of  Emmanuel,  Ralph  Cudworth 
was  elected  Fellow  in  1639,  Worthington  (afterward 
Master  of  Jesus)  in  1641,  and  Sancroft  (afterward 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury)  in  1642. 

The  Fellows  of  Emmanuel  between  1632  and  1639 
were  the  following :— Walter  Foster,  Richard  Clarke,  John 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  355 

Ward,  Thomas  Ball,  Ezekiel  Wright,  Thomas  Hill, 
Nicholas  Hall,  William  Bridge,  Samuel  Bowles,  Henry 
Salmon,  David  Ensigne,  Anthony  Burgess,  Thomas  Holbeck, 
Thomas  Horton,  Malachi  Harris,  R.  Sorsby,  Benjamin 
Which  cot,  John  Henderson,  John  Almond,  R.  Weller, 
Peter  Sterry,  Laurence  Sarson,  John  Saddler,  Ralph 
Cud  worth. 

"All  the  Fellows,"  says  a  member  of  Emmanuel,  "appear 
to  have  been  tutors  in  their  day,  though  some  had  more 
pupils  than  others.  As  far  as  our  books  lead  us  to  infer, 
Hill,  Hall,  Burgess,  Holbeck,  Ensigne,  Salmon,  Whichcot, 
all  seem  to  have  been  most  popular  tutors  in  their  day. 
We  have  no  tutors'  books  which  tell  us  under  whom 
Gurnall  was  admitted." 

When  I  add  to  the  above  information  the  fact  that 
Horrox,  the  astronomer,  was  admitted  at  Emmanuel  in 
1632,  the  same  year  as  Gurnall,  and  that  Archbishop 
Sancroft,  the  famous  nonjuror,  was  admitted  in  1633,  I 
shall  have  exhausted  all  the  stock  of  information  that  I 
have  been  able  to  scrape  together  about  Gurnall's  College 
life  and  his  contemporaries. 

Seven  years  spent  at  a  College  like  Emmanuel  could 
not  fail  to  have  an  effect  on  Gurnall's  mind.  Brought  up 
from  his  boyhood  to  honour  and  reverence  the  Puritans  as 
the  excellent  of  the  earth,  at  Lynn, — trained  afterwards 
at  a  College  where  the  whole  atmosphere  was  peculiarly 
Puritan, — it  would  have  been  strange  indeed  if  Gurnall 
had  grown  up  without  decided  Puritan  opinions. 

The  state  of  England  during  the  seven  years  of 
Gurnall's  University  life  was  very  peculiar.  It  was  the 
crisis  of  the  troubled  period  between  the  Reformation 
and  the  Commonwealth  times.  The  suicidal  and  blind 


356  UG&T  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

misgovern ment  of  Charles  I.  was  rapidly  paving  the1  way 
for  the  destruction  of  the  throne.  The  undisguised  Romish 
tendencies  and  bitter  persecutions  of  Archbishop  Laud, 
and  his  fellow-workers,  were  doing  the  same  for  the  Church 
of  England.  From  one  end  of  the  country  to  the  other 
there  were  discontent,  murmuring,  controversy,  bitterness, 
and  party  spirit.  On  every  side  there  were  •ymptoms  of 
a  coming  break-up,  or  a  violent  conflict  both  in  Church 
and  State. 

Cambridge,  we  need  not  doubt,  had  its  full  share  of  all 
the  troubles  and  discomfort  of  this  stormy  period.  The 
following  passage  from  Fuller's  History  of  Cambridge 
records  things  which  happened  there  in  1632,  the  very 
year  that  Gurnall  entered  Emmanuel, — things  which,  no 
doubt,  he  saw  with  his  own  eyes  and  heard  with  his  own 
ears : — 

"  This  year,"  says  Fuller,  "  a  grave  divine,  preaching 
before  the  University  at  St.  Mary's,  had  this  passage  in  his 
sermon :  '  That  as  at  the  Olympian  games  he  was  counted 
the  conqueror  who  could  drive  his  chariot  wheels  nearest 
to  the  mark,  yet  so  as  not  to  hinder  his  running,  or  stick 
thereon,  so  he,  who  in  his  sermons  could  preach  near 
Popery,  and  yet  no  Popery,  there  was  your  man.'  And, 
indeed,  it  now  began  to  be  the  complaint  of  most  moderate 
men,  that  many  in  the  University,  both  in  school  and 
pulpit,  approached  the  opinion  of  the  Church  of  Rome 
more  than  ever  before. 

"Mr.  Bernard,  Lecturer  of  St.  Sepulchre's  in  London, 
preached  at  St.  Mary's  in  the  afternoon  of  May  6th,  his 
text,  1  Sam.  iv.  21 :  '  The  glory  is  departed  from  Israel,' 
etc.  In  handling  whereof  he  let  fall  some  passages  which 
gave  distaste  to  a  prevalent  party  in  the  University,  as  fu* 


WILLIAM   GUKNALL  35? 

saying:  (1)  That  God's  ordinances,  when  blended  and 
adultered  with  innovations  of  men,  cease  to  be  God's 
ordinances,  and  He  owueth  them  no  longer.  (2)  That  it  is 
impossible  any  should  be  saved,  living  and  dying  without 
repentance,  in  the  doctrine  of  Rome,  as  the  Tridentine 
Council  hath  decreed  it.  (3)  That  treason  is  not  limited 
to  the  blood  royal ;  but  that  he  is  a  traitor  against  a  nation 
that  depriveth  it  of  God's  ordinances.  (4)  That  some 
shamefully  symbolize  in  Pelagian  error  and  superstitious 
ceremonies  with  the  Church  of  Rome.  Let  us  pray  such 
to  their  conversion  or  to  their  destruction,  etc. 

"  Dr.  Cumber,  Vice-Chancellor,  gave  speedy  notice  hereof 
to  Dr.  Laud,  Bishop  of  London,  though  he  (so  quick  his 
University  intelligence)  had  information  thereof  before. 
Therefore  he  was  brought  into  the  High  Commission,  and  a 
recantation  tendered  to  him,  which  he  refused  to  subscribe, 
though  professing  his  sincere  sorrow  and  penitency,  in  his 
petition  and  letter  to  the  Bishop,  for  any  oversight  and 
unbecoming  expression  in  his  sermon.  Hereupon  he  was 
sent  back  to  the  new  prison,  where  he  died.  If  he  was 
miserably  abused  therein  by  his  keepers,  as  some  have 
reported,  to  the  shortening  of  his  life,  He  that  maketh 
inquisition  for  blood,  either  hath,  or  will  be,  a  revenger 
thereof." 

This  deplorable  affair  took  place,  let  us  remember,  in 
the  year  1632,  the  very  year  that  Gurnall  came  up  to 
reside  at  Emmanuel.  How  much  stir  it  would  excite 
among  the  undergraduates  of  a  thoroughly  Puritan  College 
we  can  easily  imagine.  All  who  know  anything  of  an 
English  University,  know  how  ready  undergraduates  are, 
as  a  body,  to  sympathize  with  the  persecuted  and  oppressed, 
and  to  side  with  the  minority. 


358  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

It  was  during  Gurnall's  residence  at  Cambridge  that 
Dr.  Ward,  one  of  the  representatives  of  the  Church  of 
England  at  the  Synod  of  Dort,  gave  the  following 
unsatisfactory  description  of  the  state  of  the  University, 
in  a  letter  to  Archbishop  Usher,  dated  1634.  He  says, 
"It  may  be  you  are  willing  to  hear  of  our  University 
affairs.  I  may  truly  say  I  never  knew  them  in  worse 
condition  since  I  was  a  member  thereof,  which  is  almost 
forty-six  years."  * 

It  was  during  Gurnall's  residence  at  Cambridge  that  the 
infamous  sentence  on  Prynne,  Bastwick,  and  Burton,  was 
passed  in  the  Court  of  Star  Chamber.  For  publishing 
certain  alleged  libels  on  the  Church  of  England  these 
unfortunate  men  were  condemned  to  stand  in  the  pillory, 
and  have  their  ears  publicly  cut  off.  The  sentence  was 
actually  carried  into  effect,  June  30,  1637,  in  Palace  Yard. 
Bastwick  was  a  physician,  who  had  been  educated  at 
Emmanuel  College.  We  can  easily  imagine  the  sensation 
which  his  punishment  would  create  within  the  walls  of  his 
old  College. 

It  was  during  Gurnall's  residence  at  Cambridge  that 
the  famous  disturbances  in  Scotland  arose,  out  of 
Archbishop  Laud's  attempt  to  introduce  the  notorious 
Scotch  Liturgy,  with  its  Popish  Communion  Office,  into 
the  Churches  of  Edinburgh.  The  well-known  riot  in 
St.  Giles'  Church,  when  a  stool  is  said  to  have  been 
thrown  at  the  Bishop  of  Edinburgh's  head,  by  a  zealous 
woman  called  Jenny  Geddes,  took  place  on  Sunday,  July 
23,  1637. 

It  was  during  Gurnall's  residence  at  Cambridge  that 

i  - 

*  Usher's  Correspondence,  No.  179, 


WILLIAM  GUBNALL.  359 

John  Hampden  began  the  unhappy  struggle  between  the! 
King  and  his  subjects  by  refusing  to  pay  ship-money. 
The  decision  of  the  Chief  Justice  was  given  against  him 
on  the  9th  of  June,  1637. 

I  mention  these  facts  and  dates  in  order  to  give  the' 
reader  some  idea  of  the  times  in  which  Gurnall  passed 
through  his  University  career.  We  cannot  doubt  that  his 
character  and  opinions  must  have  been  strongly  influenced 
by  them.  No  one  could  be  at  Cambridge  from  1632  to 
1639  without  seeing  and  hearing  things  which  would, 
leave  a  mark  on  his  memory  for  life,  and  without  coming 
across  a  stream  of  conflicting  opinions  which  he  would 
remember  to  his  dying  day.  No  doubt  Gurnall  became 
acquainted  with  some  of  the  best  specimens  of  the 
Puritan  divines.  No  doubt  also  he  saw  in  the  heart  of  a 
Puritan  College  enough  to  make  him  feel  that  all  Puritans 
were  not  perfect  men.  I  venture  the  conjecture  that  his 
after-life  at  every  step  was  greatly  influenced  by  the 
recollection  of  what  he  saw  at  Emmanuel,  Cambridge. 

The  five  years  of  Gurnall's  life  immediately  after  he 
left  Cambridge,  in  1639,  are  a  period  in  his  history  of 
which  nothing  whatever  seems  to  be  known.  I  must 
honestly  confess  that  I  can  throw  little  light  upon  it,  and 
can  only  offer  surmises  and  conjectures.  He  disappears 
from  our  notice  on  leaving  Emmanuel,  in  1639.  He  does 
not  appear  again  till  he  is  made  Rector  of  Lavenham,  in 
1644.  But  how,  and  where,  and  in  what  manner,  and  in 
what  official  capacity  he  spent  the  intervening  interval  of 
five  years  we  have  no  certain  record. 

It  would  be  difficult  to  name  five  years  of  English 
history  in  which  so  many  important  events  occurred,  as 


360  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

between  1639  and  1644.  Within  these  five  years  the' 
famous  Long  Parliament  commenced  its  sittings,  the 
no  less  famous  Westminster  Assembly  of  divines  was 
convened,  Lord  Strafford  was  beheaded,  Archbishop 
Laud  committed  to  prison,  and  the  Courts  of  High 
Commission  and  Star  Chamber  abolished.  Within  these 
five  years  the  civil  war  between  the  King  and  the 
Parliament  actually  broke  out,  the  standard  was  raised  at 
Nottingham,  the  battles  of  Edgehill,  Newbury,  and 
Marston  Moor  were  fought,  and  Hampden,  Pym,  and 
Lord  Falkland  were  all  laid  in  their  graves.  Last,  but 
not  least,  the  "Solemn  League  and  Covenant"  was 
subscribed  by  the  adherents  of  the  Parliament  side,  in 
which,  among  other  things,  they  pledged  themselves  to 
"  endeavour  the  extirpation  of  Popery  and  Prelacy :  that  is, 
Church  government  by  archbishops,  bishops,  their  chan 
cellors  and  commissaries,  deans  and  chapters,  archdeacons, 
and  all  other  ecclesiastical  officers  depending  on  that 
hierarchy." 

And  what  was  Gurnall  doing  all  these  five  years  ?  We 
cannot  tell.  Perhaps  he  was  staying  quietly  with  his 
friends  at  Lynn.  Perhaps  he  was  hearing  and  learning 
what  he  could  in  London.  Perhaps  he  was  turning  to 
account  his  University  education  by  acting  as  tutor  to 
some  noble  or  wealthy  family,  as  many  young  divines  did 
in  that  day.  These  are  idle  conjectures  after  all.  There 
are  only  two  facts  that  we  know  about  him.  One  is  that 
he  must  have  been  ordained  some  time  between  1639  and 
1644.  The  other  is  that  he  must  have  preached  at 
Sudbury  within  this  period.  This  last  point  is  made 
clear  by  his  own  words,  in  a  letter  addressed  to 
Sii'  Symond  D'Ewes,  in  which  he  speaks  of  the 


WILLIAM  GUKNALL,  361 

Sudbury  people  making  difficulties  about  his  removal 
to  Lavenham. 

The  subject  of  Gurnall's  entrance  into  the  ministry  is 
shrouded  in  complete  obscurity.  There  is  no  one  point 
in  his  personal  history  about  which  we  know  so  little. 
When  he  was  ordained,  where  he  was  ordained,  to  what 
cure  of  souls  he  was  ordained,  by  whom  he  was  ordained, 
whether  he  was  first  ordained  by  Episcopal  or  by 
Presbyterian  ordination,  are  things  about  which  we  are 
entirely  in  the  dark.  After  a  good  deal  of  troublesome 
research  and  investigation  into  the  subject,  I  must 
honestly  confess  that  I  can  find  out  nothing  about  it. 
I  have  only  discovered,  by  the  kindness  of  the  present 
Bishop  of  Norwich  and  the  late  Bishop  of  Ely,  that  his 
name  does  not  appear  in  the  ordination  registers  of 
Norwich  and  Ely  between  1639  and  1644,  It  is,  of 
course,  possible  that  he  was  ordained  by  the  bishop  of 
some  other  diocese,  though  even  then  it  is  certain  that  he 
was  only  ordained  deacon.  But  it  is  far  more  probable 
that  he  entered  the  ministry  without  receiving  Episcopal 
orders  at  all.  Most  likely  he  was  set  apart  for  the  work 
as  a  Presbyterian  Minister,  by  "the  laying  on  of  the  hands 
of  the  Presbytery." 

I  am  not  disposed  to  waste  the  reader's  time  by  entering 
into  any  discussion  of  the  comparative  merits  of  Episcopal 
and  Presbyterian  orders,  though,  of  course,  I  have  my 
own  opinions  as  a  conscientious  Episcopalian.  I  only 
venture  the  remark,  that  we  have  no  right  to  infer 
anything  as  to  Gurnall's  opinions  about  Episcopacy,  from 
his  want  of  Episcopal  orders.  We  must  remember  the 
peculiar  times  in  which  he  entered  the  ministry.  There 
vwas  probably  no  alternative  left  to  him.  lie  must  either 


362  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

have  been  ordained  by  Presbyterian  ordination,  or  not 
have  been  ordained  at  all. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  the  times  when  Gurnall  entered 
the  ministry  were  times  of  disorder  and  confusion.  It 
was  a  period  of  transition.  Everything  that  had  been 
settled  and  established  in  Church  and  State  was  being 
pulled  to  pieces.  They  were  strange  times,  and  strange 
things  happened  in  them.  We  may  well  expect  to  find 
that  there  were  all  sorts  of  irregularities  and  diversities 
of  practice  about  ordination. 

Bishop  Hall,  in  his  famous  account  of  himself,  called 
"His  Hard  Measure,"  makes  the  following  statement, 
which  deserves  the  more  notice  because  he  was  Bishop  of 
Norwich,  and  Lavenham  was  then  in  his  diocese.  He 
says,  "After  the  Covenant  was  appointed  to  be  taken 
(September  26,  1643),  and  was  generally  swallowed  of 
both  clergy  and  laity,  my  power  of  ordination  was  with 
some  violence  restrained.  For  when  I  was  going  on  in 
my  wonted  course,  which  no  law  or  ordinance  had 
inhibited,  certain  forward  volunteers  in  the  city,  banding 
together,  stirred  up  the  mayor,  and  aldermen,  and  sheriffs 
(of  Norwich),  to  call  me  to  an  account  for  an  open 
violation  of  their  Covenant. 

"  To  this  purpose,  divers  of  them  came  to  my  gate  at 
a  very  unseasonable  time,  and  knocking  very  vehemently, 
required  to  speak  with  the  Bishop.  Messages  were  sent 
to  them  to  know  their  business ;  nothing  would  satisfy 
them  but  the  Bishop's  presence.  At  last  I  came  down  to 
them,  and  demanded  what  the  matter  was ;  they  would 
have  the  gate  opened,  and  then  they  would  tell  me.  I 
answered  that  I  would  know  them  better  first;  if  they 
had  anything  to  say  to  me  J  was  ready  to  hear  them*. 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  363 

They  told  me  they  had  a  writing  for  me  from  the  Mayor 
and  some  other  of  their  magistrates.  The  paper  contained 
both  a  challenge  of  me  for  breaking  the  Covenant,  in 
ordaining  ministers,  and  withal  required  me  to  give  in 
the  names  of  those  which  were  ordained  by  me  both  then 
and  formerly  since  the  Covenant.  My  answer  was  that 
the  Mayor  was  much  abused  by  those  who  had  misinformed 
him  and  drawn  that  paper  from  him;  that  I  would  the 
next  day  give  a  full  answer  to  the  writing.  They  moved 
that  my  answer  might  be  my  personal  appearance  at  the 
guildhall.  I  asked  them  when  they  ever  heard  of  a 
Bishop  of  Norwich  appearing  before  a  Mayor.  I  knew 
mine  own  place,  and  would  take  that  way  of  answer 
which  I  thought  fit,  and  so  dismissed  them,  who  had 
given  out  that  day,  that  had  they  known  before  of  mine 
ordaining,  they  would  have  pulled  me  and  those  whom  I 
ordained  out  of  the  chapel  by  the  ears."  (Hall's  Works, 
vol.  i.,  p.  54.  P.  Hall's  Edition.) 

Let  us  add  to  this  curious  testimony  the  following 
passage  from  Neal,  the  well-known  historian  of  the 
Puritans.  He  '  says,  "  From  the  time  of  taking  the 
Covenant  (September  28,  1643),  we  may  date  the  entire 
dissolution  of  the  hierarchy,  though  it  was  not  as  yet 
abolished  by  an  ordinance  of  Parliament.  There  were 
no  ecclesiastical  courts,  no  visitations,  no  wearing  the 
habits,  no  regard  paid  to  the  canons  or  ceremonies,  or 
even  to  the  Common  Prayer."  He  says  immediately 
afterwards :  "  Upon  the  sitting  of  the  Assembly  of 
Divines  all  church  worship  went  through  their  hands. 
The  parishes  elected  their  ministers.  The  Assembly 
examined  and  approved  of  them,  and  the  Parliament, 
('confirmed  them  in  their  benefices  without  any  regard  to 


364  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

the  Archbishop  or  his  vicar.  Thus  the  Earl  of  Manchester 
filled  the  vacant  pulpits  in  the  associated  counties." 
(Neal's  History,  vol.  iii.  pp.  79,  80.  Toulmin's  Edition.) 

After  reading  these  passages  we  may  well  understand 
why  there  is  no  record  of  Gurnall's  ordination  as  Deacon 
in  the  Registers  of  Norwich  or  Ely.  He  began  his 
ministry  in  the  diocese  of  Norwich,  and  was  an  inhabitant 
of  one  of  the  most  thoroughly  Puritan  districts  of  the 
seven  "associated  counties."  Whether  he  desired 
Episcopal  Ordination  or  not  we  do  not  know,  though 
his  subsequent  ordination  by  Bishop  Reynolds,  at  a  later 
period  of  his  ministry,  ought  not  to  be  forgotten.  But  it 
is  highly  probable  that  at  the  time  when  he  entered 
the  ministry  he  could  not  have  received  Episcopal 
Ordination  even  if  he  had  wished  it. 

The  matter,  after  all,  is  not  one  of  primary  importance. 
The  Divine  right  of  Episcopacy,  to  the  exclusion  of  all 
other  forms  of  Church  government,  and  the  absolute 
necessity  of  Episcopal  Ordination  to  make  a  right 
minister  of  Christ,  are  positions  that  cannot  be  estab 
lished  from  Scripture.  The  23rd  Article  of  the  Church 
of  England  has  exhibited  a  wise  moderation  in  handling 
the  whole  question.  It  says:  "It  is  not  lawful  for  any 
man  to  take  upon  him  the  office  of  public  preaching,  or 
ministering  the  Sacrament  in  the  congregation,  before  he 
be  lawfully  called  and  sent  to  execute  the  same."  But 
the  Article  cautiously  avoids  defining  too  closely  what  are 
valid  orders.  It  goes  on:  "Those  we  ought  to  judge 
lawfully  called  and  sent,  which  be  chosen  and  called  to 
the  work  by  men  who  have  public  authority  given  unto 
them  in  the  congregation  to  call  and  send  ministers  into 
the  Lord's  vineyard,"  This,  we  need  not  doubt,  wag 


WILLIAM  GURtfALt.  365 


Gurnall's  position.  Episcopal  Ordination  he  probably 
did  not  receive  on  entering  the  ministry,  and  most  likely 
could  not  have  obtained  it.  But  that  he  was  "  lawfully 
called  r.nd  sent  into  the  Lord's  vineyard"  we  need  not 
doubt,  though  in  all  probability  it  was  only  "  by  laying  on 
of  the  hands  of  the  Presbytery." 

We  now  come  to  the  most  important  event  in  Gurnall's 
life,  and  the  one  which  fixed  him  down  in  one  spot  for  the 
remaining  thirty-five  years  of  his  life.  That  event  was 
his  appointment  to  be  Minister  of  the  parish  of  Lavenham, 
in  Suffolk.  Tbis,  it  appears,  happened  about  the  month 
of  December,  16  44,  when  he  was  twenty-eight  years  old. 

The  manner  of  Gurnall's  appointment  was  somewhat 
singular,  and  curiously  illustrative  of  the  strange  and 
troublesome  times  in  which  it  took  place.  Sir  Symond 
D'Ewes,  the  famous  antiquary,  was  patron  of  the  living  of 
Lavenham,  and  chief  proprietor  in  the  parish.  It  appears 
that  he  gave  the  living  to  Gurnall  at  the  request  of  the 
parishioners,  and  the  appointment  was  ratified  by  order  of 
the  House  of  Commons. 

The  order  of  'the  House  of  Commons  is  so  peculiar  a 
document,  that  I  venture  to  transcribe  it  whole  and  entire, 
as  M'Keon  gives  it,  from  an  extract  from  the  Journals 
of  the  House,  furnished  to  him  by  the  Clerk  of  the 
Journals. 

«16°-  Decemlris,  1644,  20  Car.  1. 
Lavenham  \  WHEREAS  the  Church  of  Lavenham,  in  the 
Rectory,  j  county  of  Suffolk,  lately  became  void  by 
the  decease  of  Ambrose  Coppinger,  Doctor  of  Divinity, 
and  that  Sir  Symond  D'Ewes,  patron  of  the  said  Church, 
hath  conferred  the  advowson  of  the  same  upon  William 
Gurnall,  Master  of  Arts,  a  learned,  godly,  and  orthodox 


366  tIGST  FIJOM  OtD 

divine :  It  is  ordered  by  the  House  of  Commons  that  the 
said  William  Qurnall  shall  be,  and  continue,  Rector  and 
Incumbent  of  the  same  Church  during  the  term  of  his 
natural  life,  and  shall  have,  receive,  and  enjoy  all  such 
tithes,  as  other  Rectors  and  Incumbents  of  same  Church 
before  him  have  had,  received,  and  enjoyed.  Provided 
always  that  the  same  William  Gurnall  do  pay  upon  his 
avoidance  all  such  first  fruits  and  tithes  unto  his  Majesty, 
as  by  the  laws  of  this  realm  are,  and  shall  be  due  from 
time  to  time."  (Vol.  iii.  p.  725.)* 

A  careful  reader  can  hardly  fail  to  notice  some  amusing 
points  in  this  document.  The  right  of  Sir  Symond 
D'Ewes  to  present  is  stated  and  allowed,  and  yet  the 
presentation  must  be  ratified  by  the  order  of  the  House  of 
Commons !  Gurnall's  qualifications  are  broadly  stated. 
The  House  declares  him  to  be  "learned,  godly,  and 
orthodox ! "  The  King's  name  is  carefully  brought  in 
(though  the  Parliament  was  at  open  war  with  him),  and 
provision  is  inserted  for  the  payment  of  first  fruits  to  his 
Majesty !  The  name,  office,  and  authority  of  the  Bishop 
of  Norwich,  in  whose  diocese  Lavenham  was,  are  as 
utterly  ignored  as  if  they  had  never  existed !  Truly  we 
may  say  that  Qurnall  lived  in  strange  times ! 

What  chain  of  providential  circumstances  led  Gurnall 
to  a  town  in  the  south-west  corner  of  Suffolk,  after  leaving 
Cambridge,  we  do  not  know.  Why  the  good  man  should 
turn  up  at  Sudbury  and  Lavenham,  five  years  after 
leaving  Emmanuel,  is  a  point  which  must  be  left  to 
conjecture.  We  know  nothing  certain  about  it.  It  is, 


*  The  same  record  of  Gurnall's  presentation,  word  for  word,  is  to  be 
found  in  the  Norwich  Register  of  Institutions,  No.  24,  1638— 164& 


WILLIAM  GUBNALL.  3£  7 

however,  not  unworthy  of  notice,  that  there  was  a  certain 
James  Gurnall  living  at  Lavenham  in  1644,  who  had  a 
daughter  baptized  there  on  the  4th  of  September  in  that 
year.  It  is  by  no  means  improbable,  as  M'Keon  suggests, 
that  this  James  Gurnall  was  a  relative  of  the  Gurnalls  of 
Lynn,  and  that  the  relationship  was  the  cause  of  William 
Gurnall  visiting  Lavenham,  and  becoming  known  in  the 
neighbourhood.  It  is  also  worthy  of  notice  that  Henry 
Coppinger,  who  died  Hector  of  Lavenham  in  1622,  and 
was  father  of  Gtfrnall's  predecessor,  Ambrose  Coppinger, 
was  connected  by  marriage  with  Gurnall's  native  piace-> 
Lynn.  It  is  stated  on  a  monument  erected  to  his  memory 
in  Lavenham  Church,  that  he  married  Ann,  daughter  of 
Henry  Fisher,  of  Lynn,  in  Norfolk.  Lynn  was  not  so 
large  a  place  that  the  families  of  Gurnall  and  Mr.  Coppinger 
would  not  be  acquainted  with  one  another,  and  this  may 
have  been  another  cause  of  his  settling  in  Lavenham 
These  are,  of  course,  only  conjectures,  but  I  think  them 
worth  mentioning,  and  they  must  be  taken  for  what  they 
are  worth. 

How  Gurnall  became  acquainted  with  Sir  Symond 
D'Ewes,  and  whether  he  was  appointed  by  him  to  the 
Rectory  of  Lavenham  on  public  or  private  grounds,  we 
have  no  means  of  ascertaining.  A  statement,  quoted  by 
M'Keon  from  a  manuscript  in  Herald's  College,  by 
Mr.  Appleton,  about  Suffolk,  is  manifestly  a  mistake.  He 
says  Sir  Symond  D'Ewes  "  freely  and  very  willingly  gave 
the  Rectory  of  Lavenham  unto  Mr.  William  Gurnall,  now 
Incumbent  there,  although  to  him  then  unknown,  at  the 
request  of  the  parish,  which  hath  been  much  for  the 
benefit  of  the  town  in  many  ways."  Appleton  was  clearly 
misinformed  here.  There  is  a  correspondence  extant  in 


368  tIGIlt   FROM    OtD 

the  Harleian  MSS.  between  Gurnall  and  Sir  Symond 
D'Ewes,  of  which  the  first  letter  is  dated  March, 
1644.  Beside  this,  Sir  Symond  was  elected  M.P.  for 
Sudbury  in  1640,  and  resided  in  the  parish  of  Lavenham, 
so  that  he  could  hardly  fail  to  know  something  about 
Gurnall. 

The  correspondence  between  Gurnall  and  Sir  Symond 
D'Ewes,  to  which  reference  has  been  made,  is  a  curiosity 
in  its  way.  It  consists  of  eight  Latin  letters,  composed 
in  the  most  approved  classical  style,  and  affording  evidence 
that  Gurnall  was  a  tolerably  good  Latin  scholar.  Judged 
by  the  standard  of  modern  times  the  matter  of  these 
letters  is  not  much  to  be  admired.  There  is  a  tone  of 
obsequiousness  and  flattery  about  them  which  to  our  eyes 
seems  very  unworthy  of  a  Christian,  and  very  unlike  what 
we  should  have  expected  from  a  Puritan.  But  it  is  only 
fair  to  remember  the  fashion  of  Gurnall's  age.  Dedications 
and  letters  to  public  men  in  the  seventeenth  century  are 
often  stuffed  with  high-flown  language  and  hyperbolic 
compliments.  It  was  as  common  to  write  in  such  a  strain 
as  it  is  for  us  to  sign  ourselves  "  your  obedient  servant." 
The  words  meant  nothing,  and  were  only  used  because  it 
was  the  custom  to  use  them.  If  Gurnall  had  not  written 
his  Latin  letters  to  Sir  Symond  D'Ewes  in  a  very  verbose, 
extravagant,  and  complimentary  style,  he  would  probably 
have  been  set  down  as  an  illiterate  and  unpolished 
man. 

Some  account  of  the  contents  of  these  eight  letters  will 
perhaps  be  found  interesting.  They  throw  a  little  light, 
at  any  rate,  on  Gurnall's  presentation  to  Lavenham ;  and 
if  we  knew  the  meaning  of  the  allusions  which  they 
contain,  we  should  understand  a  good  deal  better  than  we 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  369 

do  now  the  history  of  his  settlement  in  the  place  with 
which  his  name  is  inseparably  connected.* 

The  first  letter  is  dated  Lavenham,  March  26,  1644.  It 
is  a  petition  on  behalf  of  a  man  who  had  been  wounded 
in  the  service  of  the  State  and  appears  to  have  been 
bearer  of  the  letter.  It  contains  some  general  remarks  on 
the  discredit  thrown  upon  religion  when  wounded  soldiers 
are  neglected,  and  on  the  duty  of  providing  them  with 
comfortable  maintenance.  Beside  this,  there  is  nothing 
worth  notice. 

The  second  letter  is  dated  July  24, 1644.  It  is  endorsed 
*'  to  the  Right  Worthy  Sir  Symond  D'Ewes,  at  his  lodgings 
in  Margaret's,  Westminster."  The  place  from  which  it  is 
written  is  not  stated.  In  this  letter  for  the  first  time  the 
subject  of  Gurnall's  appointment  to  Lavenham  is  men 
tioned.  There  seems  to  have  been  some  difficulty  about 
the  matter,  which  at  this  distance  of  time  we  cannot,  of 
course,  explain.  The  letter  was  evidently  written  while 
the  difficulty  was  pending.  It  contains  the  following 
passage,  which  I  give  in  M'Keon's  translation  in  its 
entirety  :— 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  breathing  nothing  but  love, 
and  should  immediately  have  answered  it,  had  I  not  been 
called  into  Norfolk  on  public  business.  On  my  return  I 
promised  myself  some  certain  grounds  for  a  reply.  But 
alas !  the  knot  which  I  left  to  be  untied  I  found  still  more 
perplexed  and  involved,  so  that  I  appeared,  like  the  ship 
of  St.  Paul,  to  have  '  fallen  into  a  place  where  two  seas 
met.'  While  my  mind  is  fixed  on  Laveuham, 


*  As  a  general  rule,  I  have  given  the  letters  as  translated  by  M'Keon, 
In  a  few  instances  I  have  attempted  to  mend  his  translation. 

2A 


370  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES 

threatens  a  storm  at  Sudbury,  which  accuses  me  of  being 
lured  by  a  golden  bait  But  were  I  to  refuse  this 
Providence  held  out  to  me  by  your  hands,  I  might,  not 
unjustly,  appear  disobedient  to  God,  and  ungrateful  to  you 
who  offer  it  to  me.  In  such  a  storm  a  skilful  pilot  (I  mean 
Solomon)  suggested  to  me, '  in  the  multitude  of  counsellors 
there  is  safety.'  Most  willingly,  therefore,  did  I  submit 
the  hearing  and  determining  the  whole  cause  to  certan 
ministers  in  my  neighbourhood.  If  I  must  die,  I  coul 
wish  it  should  be  in  the  hands  of  the  most  skilful 
physicians ;  if  I  mus*  err,  I  should  wish  it  to  be  among 
men  most  famous  for  their  learning  and  piety.  In  a  short 
time  I  hope  to  finish  this  whole  business,  and  then  I  will 
write  again  to  your  honour." 

This  is  a  curious  letter.  One  would  like  to  know  what 
was  the  knotty  point  which  Gurnall  could  not  untie,  and 
who  were  the  "certain  ministers"  whom  he  consulted 
One  thing,  at  any  rate,  it  helps  to  confirm.  It  seems  to 
indicate  that  Gurnall  was  a  minister  at  Sudbury  before  h<- 
was  Rector  of  Lavenham.  Yet  it  is  a  singular  fact,  that 
at  the  present  time  no  inhabitant  of  Sudbury,  to  whom  I 
have  applied,  seems  to  know  anything  about  Gurnall's 
connection  with  the  town. 

The  third  letter  is  dated  Sudbury,  September  1,  1644*. 
At  the  time  when  it  was  written  it  was  evidently  a  settled 
thing,  that  Gurnall  should  have  the  living  of  Lavenham, 
though  the  appointment  was  not  yet  completed.  Amidst 
a  quantity  of  verbose  and  fulsome  compliments,  which 
can  only  be  excused  by  the  customs  of  GurnaH's  day,  the 
following  paragraphs  are  worth  quoting : — 

"I  firmly  believe,  most  worshipful,  that  the  only 
happiness  which  you  hope  or  wish  for  in  this  filthy  world 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  371 

is  that  of  doing  good.  In  this  humble  and  grateful 
disposition,  therefore,  you  may  triumph  that  the  numerous 
population  of  Lztvenham  now  enjoy  under  your  shadow 
the  Gospel."— 

"If  God  should  bless  my  slender  labours,  whatever 
they  may  be,  as  many  as  may  be  imbued  with  Divine 
light,  or  cherished  with  its  dew,  will  be  a  solace,  and  even 
a  crown  to  you,  under  whose  shield  I  fight.  Happy 
indeed,  still  more  and  more,  might  we  have  had  the 
English  nation,  which  we  now  see  so  universally  torn  by 
civil  wars,  if  with  the  same  care  with  which  you  have 
laboured,  all  our  patrons  had  striven  in  the  propagation 
of  the  Gospel.  But,  alas,  many  make  market  of  the  souls 
of  others  while  they  peril  their  own !  This  will  redound 
to  your  great  honour.  Not  less  do  you  strive  to  give  than 
others  to  sell  the  priesthood." 

The  postscript  to  this  letter  is  curious.  Gurnall  says, 
"  One  thing  at  the  end  of  your  letter  I  had  almost  forgot. 
You  therein  just  mention  the  Bishop.  My  doubts  increase 
as  to  the  propriety  of  going  to  him,  particularly  since  the 
opinions  both  "of  the  clergy  and  of  the  people  have  become 
known  to  me." 

The  fourth  letter  is  dated  Lavenham,  October  26,  1644. 
It  is  a  complimentary  letter  written  on  the  occasion  of 
Sir  Symond  D'Ewes  giving  Gurnall  a  copy  of  some 
antiquarian  work  he  had  lately  published.  It  contains 
no  allusion  to  the  subject  of  the  living  of  Lavenham,  and 
there  is  nothing  in  it  worth  quoting. 

The  fifth  letter  is  dated  Lavenham,  November  21, 16 44-, 
and  is  one  of  the  most  important  of  the  whole  series.  I 
shall  therefore  give  it  entire. 

"Right  worshipful  Sir, — At  length  my  frail  bark,  after 


372  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

a  difficult  navigation,  has  safely  reached  the  port  of 
Lavenham.  Nothing  now  remains  for  me  but  to  return 
my  thanks  to  you,  under  whoso  shadow  I  enjoy  this 
happiness,  and  with  sound  principles  to  imbue,  and  with 
paternal  care  to  instruct,  the  numerous  people  which  you 
have  committed  to  me,  particularly  in  times  like  these, 
fermenting  with  many  errors,  when,  like  Rome  of  old, 
who  borrowed  gods  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  we  also 
borrow  errors  which  have  already  been  buried,  and  yet 
after  burial  again  revive.  My  only  solace  in  this  world 
will  now  be  to  preserve,  by  earnest  and  continued  prayer, 
this  my  congregation,  pure  and  unspotted  amongst  so 
many  corruptions. 

"  By  your  letter  to  Henry  Coppinger,  I  find  that  certain 
of  the  Sudbury  people,  in  your  hearing,  have  said  that 
some  new  agreement  had  been  entered  into  between  us. 
I  wonder  from  whence  this  fable  has  taken  its  origin. 
I  do  not  admit  one  atom  of  it.  It  is  nothing  new  for  the 
sweetest  wine  of  love  sometimes  to  degenerate  into 
vinegar.  I  hope,  however,  in  a  short  time  that  my 
Sudbury  friends  will  be  restored  to  their  former  serenity, 
although  like  the  troubled  sea  they  are  now  in  a  state  of 
considerable  agitation.  With  respect  to  the  Bishop,  I 
hope  he  will  find  some  other  way  of  instituting  me,  or 
else  your  most  honourable  House  will  do  it.  And  all  the 
inhabitants  of  Lavenham  most  humbly  congratulate  you, 
right  worshipful,  for  that  in  this  affair  you  have  left  no 
stone  unturned.  We  also  earnestly  desire  that  the  matter 
may,  if  possible,  be  completed  within  these  six  months, 
which  are  now  fast  wearing  away.  I  would  willingly  go 
to  London  in  order  that  whatever  remains  to  be  done 
may  receive  the  finishing1  stroke.  May  the  great  and 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  5  "7  3 

good  God  pour  His  blessing  on  thee  and  thine,  and  may 
He  continue  to  be  thy  sun  and  shield.  So  prays  most 
earnestly  your  very  humble  servant  in  Christ,  WILLIAM 
GURNALL." 

The  matter  referred  to  in  the  letter  can,  of  course,  only 
be  explained  by  conjecture.  It  certainly  seems  to  indicate 
that  Gurnall  was  once  a  popular  minister  at  Sudbury, 
and  that  his  removal  to  the  Rectory  of  Lavenham  was 
not  approved  by  the  Sudbury  people.  The  sir  months 
mentioned  most  probably  mean  the  six  months  im 
mediately  following  the  last  Rector's  death.  The  precise 
date  of  the  death  of  Coppinger,  Gurnall's  predecessor, 
is  not  known. 

The  sixth  letter  is  dated  Lavenham,  January  6th,  1645. 
It  is  clear  from  its  contents,  that  whatever  may  have 
been  the  difficulties  which  stood  in  the  way  of  his 
appointment  to  Lavenham,  they  were  now  all  overcome, 
and  he  was  finally  settled  in  possession  of  the  living. 
He  says,  "Honoured  Sir,  most  opportunely  have  I 
received  the  order  of  your  honourable  House.  By  your 
care  and  exertion  alone  has  it  been  obtained ;  and  all 
your  favours  toward  me  have,  by  this  fresh  proof  of 
your  kindness,  been  brought  to  a  completion — this  last 
having  given  perfection  to  the  rest.  What  is  a  presentation 
without  orders  ?  What  are  orders  without  institution  ? 
Successfully,  however,  have  you  finished  all  these  things } 
so  that  my  thanks  are  due  to  you,  not  only  as  patron, 
but  as  ordainer  and  institutor,  for  under  your  auspices 
all  these  things  have  been  performed.  I  well  know  how 
much  of  your  time  is  occupied  by  public  business,  while 
the  arduous  affairs  of  the  nation  are  under  consideration, 
and  also  with  what  indefatigable  labour  you  pursue  more 


374  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

severe  studies.  The  weight  therefore  of  this  your  favour, 
is  so  much  the  more  increased,  when  we  see  that  among 
matters  of  greater  importance  you  still  find  leisure  to, 
attend  to  these  our  affairs,  trifling  indeed  in  comparison, 
but  such  as  would,  I  believe,  from  our  want  of  skill,  have 
been  a  complete  snare  to  us,  had  we  not  been  speedily 
delivered  from  them  by  your  prudence." 

About  the  matters  referred  to  in  this  letter,  we  know 
nothing  more  than  what  Gurnall  tells  us.  His  expressions 
certainly  seem  to  imply  that  he  owed  his  ordination,  by 
whatever  hands  he  was  ordained,  to  the  interest  of 
Sir  Symond  D'Ewes. 

The  seventh  letter  is  dated  Lavenham,  March  20, 
1647.  It  contains  nothing  worth  quoting,  and  is  entirely 
occupied  with  lamentations  over  the  troublous  times 
which  the  nation  was  passing  through,  and  words  of 
devout  encouragement  to  Sir  Symond  D'Ewes,  whose 
position  in  Parliament  was  probably  not  a  very  easy  one 
at  this  period. 

The  eighth  and  last  letter  is  dated  October  30,  1648, 
and  was  evidently  written  in  reply  to  an  order  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  calling  on  Gurnall  to  preach  before 
the  House.  He  says,  among  other  things,  "Your  letter 
reached  me  yesterday  as  I  was  descending  from  the  pulpit, 
thoroughly  fatigued ;  and  to-day,  having  finished  one 
sermon,  I  am  preparing  another  for  to-morrow.  You 
will  therefore,  I  trust,  readily  pardon  both  the  brevity  and 
unpolished  style  of  my  answer.  As  to  the  affair  mentioned 
in  your  letter  to  me,  that  I  have  been,  by  an  order  of  the 
House,  appointed  to  preach  before  you  on  the  29th  of 
November  next,  it  is  a  burden  much  too  weighty  for  my 
shoulders,  particularly  at  this  time,  when  so  many 


WILLIAM  GURNALL  375 

infirmities  oppress  me,  that  I  can  scarcely,  without  danger 
to  my  health,  remain  a  short  time  in  the  open  air.  Much 
less,  therefore,  could  I  undertake  so  long  a  journey  in  so 
winterly  a  season.  I  am  persuaded  that  the  gentlemen 
who  have  proposed  this  know  not  the  shattered  state  of 
my  body,  and  have  scarcely  considered  the  distance  of  the 
place.  Most  humbly  and  earnestly,  therefore,  I  entreat 
that,  by  your  persuasion,  which  I  know  to  be  unparalleled, 
and  in  that  honourable  House  most  weighty,  this  burden 
may  be  laid  on  other  shoulders ;  for,  under  it,  in  my 
infirm  state  of  health,  I  must  of  necessity  sink." 

This  letter  is  interesting  on  more  than  one  account.  It 
shows  the  high  esteem  in  which  Gurnall  was  held  as  a 
preacher.  None  but  the  most  eminent  and  gifted  divines 
of  the  day  were  summoned  to  preach  before  the  House  of 
Commons.  It  also  shows  the  weak  state  of  health  in 
which  Gurnall  was  at  a  comparatively  early  period  of  his 
ministry  at  Lavenham.  To  this  state  of  health  we  may 
perhaps  attribute  the  retired  life  which  he  seems  to  have 
lived,  and  the  comparatively  small  information  which  we 
possess  about  him. 

Having  now  brought  Gurnall  to  the  place  -where  he 
lived  and  exercised  his  ministry  for  no  less  than  thirty- 
five  years,  some  information  about  Lavenham  will  probably 
be  interesting  to  most  readers. 

Lavenham  is  a  small  town  in  the  south-west  corner  of 
Suffolk,  lying  in  a  rural  parish  of  about  2,800  acres,  and 
containing  at  this  time  about  1,800  people.  In  Gurnall's 
time  it  was  in  the  diocese  of  Norwich.  It  is  now  in  the 
diocese  of  Ely.  It  had  once  a  market ;  and  before  the 
invention  of  the  steam  -  engine,  was  famous  for  the 


376  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

manufacture  of  blue  cloth  and  serge,  for  the  better  regula 
tion  of  which  three  guilds,  or  companies,  of  St.  Peter's, 
Holy  Trinity,  and  Corpus  Christi,  were  established.  Its 
manufactures  have  now  dwindled  down  into  one  silk-mill, 
and  its  market  is  no  longer  held.  The  market-place,  with 
an  ancient  cross  in  the  centre,  exists  still.  The  De  Veres, 
Earls  of  Oxford,  were  once  the  principal  proprietors  of 
Lavenham,  and  had  a  large  park  here,  comprising  nearly 
half  the  parish.  In  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  Edward,  then 
Earl  of  Oxford,  sold  his  property  at  Lavenham,  together 
with  the  advowson  of  the  living,  to  Paul  D'Ewes,  Esq., 
father  of  Sir  Symond  D'Ewes,  the  patron  of  William 
Gurnall,  and  to  this  sale,  therefore,  the  good  man's 
connection  with  Lavenham  must  be  traced. 

The  living  to  which  Gurnall  was  appointed  was,  no 
doubt,  a  very  valuable  one.  At  this  day  the  tithes  are 
commuted  at  £850  a  year,  and  there  are  140  acres  ct 
glebe  attached  to  the  Rectory.  Allowing  for  the  difference 
in  the  value  of  money  two  hundred  years  ago,  the  Rector 
of  Lavenham  must  have  been  comparatively  very  well  off. 
It  is,  however,  a  curious  fact,  recorded  by  Fuller  in  his 
"Church  History,"  that  in  the  year  1577  the  living  of 
Lavenham  had  a  narrow  escape  of  being  reduced  to  half 
its  value,  and  was  only  saved  by  the  firmness  of  the 
Rector.  The  whole  transaction  is  worth  reading,  as 
illustrating  the  disorders  and  irregularities  in  ecclesiastical 
matters  which  great  laymen  too  often  attempted  to  per 
petrate  in  the  sixteenth  century,  and  too  often  with  success. 

Fuller  says,  "In  the  year  1622,  Henry  Coppinger, 
formerly  Fellow  of  St.  John's  College  in  Cambridge, 
Prebendary  of  York,  once  Chaplain  to  Ambrose,  Earl  of 
Warwick  (whose  funeral  sermon  he  preached),  made 


WILLIAM  GUBNALL.  371 

Master  of  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge,  by  his  Majesty's 
mandates,  though  afterwards  resigning  his  right  at  the 
Queen's  request  (shall  I  call  it?),  to  prevent  trouble, 
ended  his  religious  life.  He  was  the  sixth  son  of  Henry 
Coppinger,  Esq.,  of  Buxhall,  in  Suffolk,  by  Agnes,  daughter 
of  Sir  Thomas  Jermyn.  His  father,  on  his  death-bed, 
asking  him  what  course  of  life  he  would  embrace,  he 
answered  he  intended  to  be  a  divine.  '  I  like  it  well,'  said 
the  old  gentleman,  'otherwise  what  shall  I  say  to  Martin 
Luther  when  I  shall  see  him  in  heaven,  and  he  knows 
that  God  gave  me  eleven  sons,  and  I  made  not  one  of 
them  a  minister  ? '  An  expression  proportionable  enough 
to  Luther's  judgment,  who  maintained,  some  hours  before 
his  death,  that  the  saints  in  heaven  shall  knowingly 
converse  one  with  another. 

"  Lavenham  living  fell  void,  which  both  deserved  a  good 
minister,  being  a  rich  parsonage,  and  needed  one,  it  being 
more  than  suspected  that  Dr.  Reynolds,  late  Incumbent, 
who  ran  away  to  Rome,  had  left  some  superstitious  leaven 
behind  him.  The  Earl  of  Oxford  being  patron,  presents 
Mr.  Coppinger  to  it,  but  adding  withal,  that  he  would  pay 
no  tithes  of  his  park,  being  almost  half  the  land  of  the 
parish.  Coppinger  desired  to  resign  it  again  to  his 
lordship,  rather  than  by  such  sinful  gratitude  to  betray  the 
rights  of  the  Church.  '  Well ! '  said  the  Earl, '  if  you  be  of 
that  mind,  then  take  the  tithes;  I  scorn  that  my  estate 
should  swell  with  Church  goods.'  However,  it  afterwards 
cost  Mr.  Coppinger  sixteen  hundred  pounds  in  keeping  his 
questioned,  and  recovering  his  detained  right,  in  suit  with 
the  agent  for  the  next  minor  Earl  of  Oxford  and  others ; 
all  which  he  left  to  his  church's  quiet  possession,  being 
zealous  in.  God's  cause,  but  remiss  in  his  own. 


378  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

"  He  lived  forty  and  five  years  the  painful  parson  at 
Lavenham,  in  which  market-town  there  are  about  nine 
hundred  communicants,  among  whom,  all  this  time,  no 
difference  did  arise  which  he  did  not  compound.  He  had 
a  bountiful  hand  and  plentiful  purse  (his  paternal 
inheritance  by  death  of  elder  brothers,  and  other  trans 
actions  descending  upon  him),  bequeathing  twenty  pounds 
in  money,  and  ten  pounds  per  annum,  to  the  poor  of  the 
parish;  in  the  chancel  whereof  he  lieth  buried  under  a 
fine  monument,  dying  on  St.  Thomas'  day,  in  the  threescore 
and  twelfth  year  of  his  age." 

The  lawsuit  referred  to  by  Fuller  seems,  at  any  rate, 
not  to  have  prevented  Henry  Coppinger  being  succeeded 
by  his  son  Ambrose  as  Rector  of  Laveuham,  at  whose 
death  Gurnall  was  appointed  to  the  living.  The  Henry 
Coppinger  referred  to  by  Gurnall  in  one  of  his  letters  to 
Sir  Symond  D'Ewes,  was,  no  doubt,  a  member  of  the  family 
of  Gurnall's  predecessor,  and  a  descendant  of  the  Rector 
whose  firmness  preserved  half  the  tithes  of  Lavenham 
from  the  Earl  of  Oxford's  shameful  attempt  to  deprive 
the  living  of  them. 

The  parish  Church  of  Lavenham,  in  which  Gurnali 
preached  for  thirty-five  years,  must  naturally  possess  much 
interest  in  the  eyes  of  all  true  admirers  of  his  works 
The  pulpit  in  which  the  good  man  preached  the  substance 
of  "  The  Christian  in  Complete  Armour  "  no  longer  exists. 
But  the  fabric  of  the  church  is,  in  all  probability,  exactly 
what  it  was  two  hundred  years  ago. 

Lavenham  Church  is  one  of  the  finest  and  handsomest 
ecclesiastical  buildings  in  the  county  of  Suffolk.  "It 
stands  at  the  west  end  of  the  town,  and  was  erected  on 
the  site  of  the  ancient  fabric,  in  the  loth  and  early  part 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  379 

of  the  16th  centuries,  chiefly  at  the  cost  of  the  Earl  of 
Oxford,  and  the  wealthy  family  of  Spring,  whose  arms  are 
to  be  seen  in  many  parts  of  the  building.  It  is  in  the 
'ater  style  of  decorated  English  architecture,  and  is 
constructed  of  freestone,  curiously  ornamented  with  flint, 
a  material  commonly  used  in  Suffolk  churches,  from  the 
scarcity  of  stone.  It  is  156  feet  long  and  68  broad.  The 
tower,  which  is  of  singular  beauty,  is  141  feet  high  and 
42  in  diameter,  and  contains  an  excellent  peal  of  eight 
bells,  of  which  the  tenor  weighs  23  cwt.,  and  was  cast  in 
1625.  In  the  interior  the  roof  is  richly  carved,  and  two 
pows,  formerly  belonging  to  the  Earls  of  Oxford  and  the 
Springs,  though  now  somewhat  decayed,  are  highly  finished 
specimens  of  Gothic  work,  in  the  elaborate  style  of  Henry 
VII.'s  Chapel  at  Westminster.  In  the  windows  are 
considerable  remains  of  ancient  stained  glass,  and  the 
porch  is  of  highly  ornamental  architecture,  adorned  with 
armorial  bearings."  The  above  account  is  principally 
extracted  from  White's  "History  of  Suffolk,"  and  I  have 
no  reason  to  doubt  the  accuracy  of  the  details  it  contains 
At  the  present  day  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Lavenham 
is  a  far  less  important  place  than  it  was  two  hundred 
years  ago.  The  county  in  which  it  is  situated  no  longer 
occupies  the  position  it  once  occupied  among  the  counties 
of  England.  Without  mines  or  manufactures,  or  large 
seaport  towns,  the  eastern  counties  have  stood  still  in 
material  prosperity,  while  the  rest  of  England  has  moved 
on.  The  village  towns,  with  which  Suffolk  is  rather 
thickly  dotted,  are  almost  all  in  a  decaying  or  stationary 
condition.  The  old  glory  of  such  places  as  Eye, 
Framlingham,  Bungay,  Orford,  South  wold,  Dunwicb, 
Aldeburgh,  Haclleigh,  Bildeston,  Needham,  Strad broke, 


380  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

and  Debenham,  has  clean  passed  away.  Lavenham  has 
shared  the  fate  of  these  places.  It  is  now  nothing  more 
than  a  quiet  village  in  an  agricultural  district,  remark 
able  only  for  its  beautiful  church  and  its  numerous  old 
charitable  institutions. 

The  thirty-five  years  during  which  Gurnall  lived  at 
Lavenham,  and  filled  the  pulpit  of  the  old  parish  church, 
were  years  full  of  stirring  incidents  in  English  history, 
The  final  overthrow  of  the  King's  party  in  the  Common 
wealth  wars,  the  beheading  of  Charles  I.,  the  establishment 
of  the  Protectorate,  the  death  of  Oliver  Cromwell,  the 
restoration  of  the  Stuarts  to  the  throne,  the  "passing  of 
the  Act  of  Uniformity,  the  ejection  of  two  thousand 
ministers  of  the  Church  of  England  which  followed  that 
Act,  and  the  intolerant  persecution  of  all  Nonconformists 
which  disgraced  this  country  for  many  years  after  the  Act 
was  passed,  are  events  with  which  every  student  of 
English  history  is  familiar.  What  Gurnall  thought  cf 
most  of  these  we  have  no  means  of  knowing.  What  part 
he  took,  if  any,  and  how  he  acted  amidst  the  political  and 
ecclesiastical  convulsions  which  distracted  the  country  we 
cannot  say.  His  health  in  all  probability  prevented  him 
from  frequently  leaving  his  own  home,  or  doing  much 
outside  his  own  parish.  Be  the  cause  what  it  may,  I 
am  obliged  to  confess  that  the  facts  on  record  about 
the  last  thirty-five  years  of  his  life  are  exceedingly  few. 

It  is  certainly  somewhat  remarkable  that  during  the 
period  of  Gurnall's  ministry  at  Lavenham,  that  is  between 
1644  and  1679,  some  of  the  best  and  holiest  Puritan 
divines  were  at  one  time  or  another  living  within  twenty 
miles  of  Gurnall's  home  at  Lavenham.  I  will  give  their 
names. 


WILLIAM   GURNALL.  381 

The  famous  John  Owen,  whose  name  is  familiar  to  every 
reader  of  pure  English  theology,  began  his  ministry  at 
Fordham  and  Coggeshall  in  Essex,  and  only  left  the  latter 
place  when  Cromwell  made  him  Dean  of  Christ  Church, 
and  Vice-Chancellor  of  Oxford,  in  1650,  six  years  after 
Gurnall  became  Rector  of  Lavenham. 

Stephen  Marshall,  one  of  the  most  celebrated  divines  in 
the  Westminster  Assembly,  and  a  prominent  character  in 
the  Commonwealth  times,  was  Minister  of  Wethersfield 
'and  Finchingfield,  in  Essex,  shortly  before  Gurnall  came  to 
Lavenham,  and  spent  the  last  two  years  of  his  life  at 
Ipswich,  where  he  died  in  1655. 

Matthew  Newcomen,  another  eminent  member  of  the 
Westminster  Assembly,  and  an  assistant  of  Arrowsmith 
and  Tuckney  in  drawing  up  the  well-known  Assembly's 
Catechism,  was  Vicar  of  Dedham  in  Essex,  after  the 
famous  John  Rogers  was  ejected  in  1629,  until  the  time 
of  his  own  ejection  by  the  Act  of  Uniformity,  in  1662. 

Thomas  Young,  another  distinguished  member  of  the 
Westminster  Assembly,  and  Milton's  tutor,  was  Vicar  of 
Stowmarket,  in  Suffolk,  for  the  thirty  years  before  1643, 
when  he  became  Pastor  of  a  Church  in  Duke's  Place, 
London.  Afterwards,  being  ejected  in  1650,  he  retired  to 
Stowmarket,  and  died  there  in  1655.  He  was  one  of  the 
five  authors  of  the  famous  controversial  work,  called 
"  Smectymnuus,"  which  made  a  great  stir  in  the  first  half 
of  the  17th  century.  It  was  so  called  from  the  initial  letters 
of  the  names  of  its  five  writers :  viz.,  Stephen  Marshall, 
Edmund  Calamy,  Thomas  Young,  Matthew  Newcomen,  and 
William  Spurstow.  Of  these  five  men,  let  us  remember,  no 
less  than  three  died  within  a  few  hours'  reach  of  Gurnall. 
It  would  be  easy  to  add  other  great  names  to  this  list, 


382  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

such  as  those  of  Daniel  Rogers,  who  died  at  Wcthenfield 
in  1652;  Blackerby,  who  died  at  Great  Thurlow  in  1648; 
Fairclough,  who  was  ejected  from  Kedington  in  1662, 
and  was  succeeded  by  Tillotson ;  and  Owen  Stockton,  who 
was  ejected  from  St.  Andrew's,  Colchester,  in  1662.  Beside 
these  good  men,  there  were  some  who  are  less  well  known, 
such  as  William  Sparrow  of  Halstead  in  Essex,  John 
Fairfax  of  Barking  in  Suffolk,  Matthias  Candler  of 
Coddenham  in  Suffolk,  Samuel  Spring  of  Greeting  St. 
Mary  in  Suffolk,  Stephen  Scanderet  of  Haverhill  in 
Suffolk,  Tobias  Leg  of  Hemingstone  in  Suffolk,  Brunning 
and  Stonham  of  Ipswich,  Storer  of  Stowmarket, — all  of 
whom  were  eminent  Puritan  ministers,  and  were  ejected 
in  1662.  Their  histories  will  be  found  in  Calamy's 
"Nonconformists'  Memorial."  All  these  men,  I  repeat, 
lived  within  twenty  miles  of  Gurnall,  and  must  have  come 
in  contact  with  him  occasionally. 

It  would  be  deeply  interesting  if  we  knew  whether 
Gurnall  had  much  communication  with  these  good  men. 
My  own  private  impression  is  that  he  had  not.  Ill-health, 
in  all  probability,  kept  him  much  at  home.  But  I  suspect 
this  was  not  all.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  Gurnall  was 
a  man  of  retiring  and  cautious  temperament,  and  naturally 
disinclined  to  go  much  into  society.  Above  all,  I  am 
strongly  inclined  to  think  that  he  liked  the  Episcopal 
Church  and  the  Prayer-book  better  than  many  of  his 
neighbours  did,  and  naturally  withdrew  from  close  intimacy 
with  them.  All  these,  however,  are  only  conjectures,  and  I 
shall  therefore  pass  on  to  the  only  remaining  facts  that 
remain  to  be  told  about  Gurnall's  history. 

In  the  year  1645,  the  year  following  his  appointment  to 
Lavenham,  Gurnall  was  married  to  Sarah  Mott,  daughter 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  383 

of  the  Rev.  Thomas  Mott,  Vicar  of  Stoke-by-Nayland. 
By  this  lady,  who  survived  him  some  years,  he  had  ten 
children,  eight  of  whom  were  living  at  his  death. 

In  the  year  1662,  when  no  less  than  two  thousand 
ministers  were  ejected  from  the  Church  of  England  by 
the  Act  of  Uniformity,  Guru  all  signed  the  declaration 
required  by  the  Act,  on  August  20th,  was  ordained  Priest  by 
the  Bishop  of  Norwich,  the  well-known  Bishop  Reynolds, 
on  August  21st,  and  went  through  the  forms  of  Episcopal 
institution  to  Lavenham  on  the  presentation  of  Thomas 
Bowes,  of  Bromley  Hall,  in  Essex,  a  connection  of  the 
D'Ewes  family,  on  August  22nd.  The  close  proximity  of 
these  three  dates  is  very  remarkable !  The  result  was, 
that  while  many  of  his  Puritan  brethren  resigned  their 
preferments,  he  retained  his  position  as  Rector  of 
Lavenham  until  his  death. 

This  part  of  Gurnall's  history  undoubtedly  demands  some 
consideration.  At  first  sight  undeniably  there  is  something 
curious  about  it.  That  a  minister  of  at  least  eighteen 
years'  standing  should  submit  to  receive  priest's  orders  at 
a  bishop's  hands, — that  a  preacher  of  notoriously  Puritan 
sentiments  should  sit  still  and  retain  his  connection  with  the 
Church  of  England,  while  nearly  all  his  Puritan  brethren 
around  him  seceded,  —  in  all  this  there  is  something 
strange.  That  it  really  was  so  is  as  certain  as  possible. 
A  fac-simile  of  his  subscription,  which  I  have  obtained 
from  the  Registry  of  Norwich,  places  the  matter  be3Ton<' 
doubt.  It  is  a  doubly  interesting  document,  as  containing 
the  only  specimen  I  know  of  Gurnall's  hand-writing.* 

*  By  the  kindness  of  the  Bishop  of  Norwich,    I  have  been  enaW<f1 
to  verify  all  the  three  remarkable  dates  above  tfiven  from  the 
at  Norwich. 


384  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

That  Gurnall's  conformity  brought  on  him  great  obloquy 
and  reproach  we  may  well  suppose.  A  libellous  attack  * 
on  him  was  published  in  the  year  1665,  quoted  by  Bishop 
Kennett,  which  contains  the  following  passage.  "  Neither 
is  Mr.  Gurnall  alone  in  these  horrible  defilements,  hateful 
to  the  Word  of  God  and  His  saints,  but  is  compassed 
about  with  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  even  in  the  same  county 
where  himself  liveth,  men  of  the  same  order  of  anti- 
Christian  priesthood  and  brethren  in  the  same  iniquity 
with  himself." 

That  he  brought  on  himself  much  private  sorrow  and 
discomfort  by  his  conformity  we  may  easily  believe.  His 
own  wife's  father,  Mr.  Mott,  of  Stoke-by-Nayland,  was 
one  of  the  two  thousand  who  went  out  of  the  Church  of 
England  for  conscience'  sake.  Above  all,  the  value  of  his 
living  at  Lavenham,  and  the  large  size  of  the  family 
dependent  on  him,  would  be  sure  to  cause  men  to  cast 
suspicion  on  what  he  did,  and  to  question  the  sincerity  of 
his  motives. 

But,  after  all,  the  point  remains  to  be  considered, 
Did  Gurnall  do  anything  inconsistent  with  his  character 
as  a  minister  of  Christ  ?  Was  there  anything  abstractedly 


*  The  title  of  this  libellous  attack  is  so  curious  that  I  give  it  entire. 
"  Covenant  Renouncers  Desperate  Apostates,  opened  in  two  letters, 
written  by  a  Christian  friend  to  Mr.  W.  Gurnall,  of  Lavenham,  Suffolk, 
•which  may  indefinitely  serve  as  an  admonition  to  all  such  Presbyterian 
ministers  or  others,  who  have  forced  their  conscience,  not  only  to  leap 
over,  but  to  renounce  their  solemn  covenant  obligation  to  endeavour  a 
reformation  according  to  God's  Word,  and  the  extirpation  of  all 
prelatical  superstitions,  and  contrary  thereunto  conform  to  those 
superstitious  vanities  against  which  they  had  BO  solemnly  sworn. 
Printed  in  Anti-turn-coat  Street,  and  sold  at  the  sign  of  Truth's 
Delight,  ri.ht  opposite  to  Backsliding  Alley.  4to,  1665." 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  385 

wrong  in  his  conformity  ?  Was  there  anything  in  the 
antecedents  of  his  history  to  make  it  base  or  dishonourable 
to  retain  his  post  at  Lavenham,  to  subscribe  the  declaration 
of  the  Act  of  Uniformity,  to  assent  to  the  liturgy,  and  to 
submit  to  receive  priest's  orders  at  Bishop  Reynolds' 
hands  ?  On  these  points  I  have  something  to  say. 

I  shall  clear  the  way  by  saying  that  I  thoroughly 
disapprove  the  Act  of  Uniformity,  although  personally  I 
feel  no  difficulty  about  its  requirements.  To  show  my 
own  feeling  about  it,  I  need  only  refer  my  readers  to  a 
long  passage  in  my  biography  of  Baxter  in  this  volume, 
in  which  the  Act  of  Uniformity  is  plainly  condemned. 

But  while  I  protest  against  the  Act  of  Uniformity  as 
an  unjust,  unwise,  impolitic,  unstatesmanlike,  and  hard 
measure,  I  do  not  for  a  moment  admit  that  no  good  man 
could  possibly  submit  to  its  requirements.  On  the  con 
trary,  I  can  quite  understand  that  many  holy  and  faithful 
ministers  would  do  as  Gurnall  did,  and  act  as  he  acted. 
They  would  argue  that  we  cannot  have  everything  to  our 
mind  in  this  world  below — that  the  way  of  patience  is 
better  than  the"  way  of  secession — that  there  is  nothing 
abstractedly  wrong  in  forms  of  prayer — that  it  is  better 
to  put  up  with  some  things  we  do  not  like  in  a  Church, 
than  to  throw  away  opportunities  of  usefulness — that 
it  was  better  to  accept  the  Prayer-book  with  all  its 
blemishes,  and  have  liberty  to  preach  the  Gospel,  than  to 
refuse  the  Prayer-book  and  be  silenced  altogether — that 
so  long  as  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  were  sound  and  un 
injured,  they  could  not  be  compelled  to  preach  unsound 
doctrine — and  that  so  long  as  they  were  allowed  to  preach 
sound  doctrine,  they  ought  not  to  refuse  the  opportunity, 
but  to  preach,  and  stand  by  their  flocks.  All  this  I  can 


386  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

conceive  a  good  man  saying  to  himself.  Whether  Gurnall 
reasoned  in  this  manner  I  cannot  pretend  to  say.  But  I 
think  he  might  have  done  so. 

The  plain  truth  is,  that  before  any  one  condemns 
Gurnall  for  submitting  to  the  Act  of  Uniformity,  he 
ought  in  common  justice  to  remember  the  times  and 
circumstances  in  which  Gurnall  first  entered  the  ministry. 
He  became  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  at  a  period  in 
English  history  when  it  was  impossible  to  obtain 
Episcopal  ordination,  and  the  use  of  the  Prayer-book 
was  almost  forbidden.  I  have  no  doubt  he  was  quite 
right  in  accepting  the  position  of  things  which  he  found 
around  him.  The  imposition  of  Episcopal  hands  is  not 
absolutely  necessary  to  make  a  valid  ordination.  The  use 
of  the  Church  of  England  liturgy  is  not  essential  to  the 
being  of  a  Church.  At  the  time  when  Gurnall  entered 
the  ministry  he  could  neither  have  Episcopacy  nor  the 
Prayer-book,  and  he  entered  the  ministry  without  them. 
Let  others  say  what  they  will,  I  do  not  think  he  was 
wrong.  It  is  better  to  have  the  Gospel  preached  without 
Bishops  and  Prayer-books,  than  not  to  have  any  preaching 
at  all. 

But,  after  all,  there  is  not  the  slightest  proof  that  Gurnall 
had  any  conscientious  objection  either  to  Episcopacy  or 
the  liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England.  For  anything 
we  can  discover,  he  had  never  committed  himself  to  any 
such  condemnation  of  them  as  to  make  it  inconsistent  to 
approve  and  adopt  them.  What  right,  then,  have  we  to 
find  fault  with  him  because  he  submitted  to  the  require 
ments  of  the  Act  of  1662  ?  He  was  ordained  priest  by 
Bishop  Reynolds,  because  he  could  not  be  an  Incumbent 
jn  the  diocese  'without  priest's  orders.  But  who  skill  say 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  387 

that  he  would  not  gladly  have  received  Episcopal  orders 
twenty  years  before,  if  it  had  been  possible  to  obtain 
them  ?  He  declared  his  assent  and  consent  to  all  things 
contained  in  the  Prayer-book.  But  who  shall  say  that  he 
would  not  have  done  the  same  at  any  period  in  his 
life  ?  He  had  never  been  a  member  of  the  Westminster 
Assembly,  like  many  of  the  two  thousand  ejected  divines. 
He  had  never  been  mixed  up  in  their  public  proceedings, 
discussions,  and  controversies  like  Owen,  Newcomen, 
Baxter,  and  many  more.  He  had  been  a  quiet,  retired 
preacher  in  a  country  parish,  and  there  is  really  no  proof 
whatever  that  his  retention  of  his  position  at  Lavenham 
was  inconsistent  with  anything  in  his  previous  life. 

One  more  circumstance  ought  not  to  be  forgotten  in 
forming  our  estimate  of  Gurnall's  conduct  at  this  crisis  of 
his  life.  The  Bishop  in  whose  diocese  he  was  living,  and 
at  whose  hands  he  accepted  re-ordination,  was  Bishop 
Reynolds,  himself  a  Puritan  in  doctrine,  and  notoriously 
the  most  mild  and  lenient  man  on  the  Episcopal  bench  in 
dealing  with  scrupulous  clergymen.  We  cannot  doubt 
that  such  a  man  as  Reynolds  would  use  every  effort  to 
meet  Gurnall's  scruples,  if  he  had  any.  We  cannot  doubt 
that  he  would  strain  every  nerve  to  retain  as  many  of  the 
clergy  as  possible  within  the  pale  of  the  Church,  and  to 
prevent  secessions.  I  confess  to  a  strong  suspicion  that 
this  circumstance  weighed  much  in  Gurnall's  mind.  Few 
men  can  do  more  by  kindness,  and  less  by  harshness,  in 
dealing  with  men,  than  bishops.  If  Gurnall  ever  had 
any  doubts  about  remaining  in  the  Church  of  England,  in 
1662, 1  think  it  very  likely  that  his  good  Bishop's  character 
turned  the  scale.  In  short,  I  venture  the  guess,  that  ho 
1-ave  gone  out  of  Lavenhara  Rectory,  and 


388  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

his  father-in-law,  Mr.  Mott,  in  secession,  if  the  occupier 
of  Norwich  palace  had  been  any  other  bishop  than 
Reynolds.* 

I  leave  the  subject  of  Gurnall's  conduct  in  1662  with 
the  reader.  It  is  one  on  which  different  men  will  have 
different  opinions,  according  to  the  standpoint  which  they 
occupy.  Some  in  the  present  day  would  have  thought 
more  highly  of  Gurnall  if  he  had  refused  to  submit  to  the 
Act  of  Uniformity,  and  had  gone  out  with  the  famous 
two  thousand.  I,  and  many  others  perhaps,  think  more 
highly  of  him  because  he  held  his  ground  and  did  not 
secede.  Which  of  us  is  right  will  never,  probably,  be 
settled  in  this  world.  I  only  desire  to  record  my  own 
opinion,  that  Gurnall  was  probably  just  as  courageous, 
conscientious  and  high-principled  in  deciding  to  stay  in, 
as  hundreds  of  his  two  thousand  ejected  brethren  were  in 
deciding  to  go  out.  In  movements  like  that  of  1662,  the 
seceding  party  has  not  always  a  monopoly  of  grace  and 
courage.  There  were  many  cases,  I  have  no  doubt,  in 
which  it  showed  more  courage  to  submit  to  the  Act  of 
Uniformity  than  to  refuse  submission,  and  in  which  it  cost 


*  Reynolds  was  made  Bishop  of  Norwich  by  Charles  II.,  in  1GG1. 
He  was  a  thorough  Puritan  and  a  prominent  member  of  the  famous 
Westminster  Assembly  of  divines.  When  the  Bishopric  of  Norwich 
was  offered  to  him,  the  Bishopric  of  Hereford  at  the  same  time  was 
offered  to  Baxter,  the  Bishopric  of  Lichfield  to  Calamy,  the  Deanery  of 
Kochester  to  Manton,  and  the  Deanery  of  Coventry  to  Bates.  All 
these  eminent  Puritan  divines  refused  preferment  when  Reynolds 
accepted  it.  Their  refusal,  I  venture  to  think,  was  the  greatest  mis 
fortune  that  ever  befell  the  Church  of  England,  and  the  most  singular 
instance  of  mistaken  judgment  on  record  in  Church  history.  If 
Reynolds,  Baxter,  and  Calamy  had  all  been  bishops,  and  sat  in  tha 
House  of  Lords,  and  Manton  and  Bates  had  been  deans,  I  doubt  if  the 
Act  of  Uniformity,  in  its  present  shape,  could  ever  have  been  passed. 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  389 

a  man  far  more  to  hold  his  living  than  to  throw  it  up.     1 
should  not  wonder  if  Gurnall's  was  one. 

About   Gurnall's  life  after  the  year   1662   we  know 
literally  nothing  at  all.     We  may  well  suppose  that  his 
latter  years  were  saddened  by  the  events  of  the  year  1662. 
Human  nature  would  not  be  what  it  is,  if  his  retention  of 
his  position,  and  subscription  to  the  Act  of  Uniformity, 
did   not   create   some   estrangement   of  feeling  between 
himself  and  his  seceding  brethren.     But  we  really  have  no 
right  to  speak  decidedly  on  the  matter.    There  are  floating 
traditions  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Lavenham   that  he 
never  was  the  same  man  as  a  minister  after  1662,  that  Le 
had  been  before;  that  there  was  no  power  or  blessing 
attending  his  ministry  from  that  time  forward.     But  I 
must  plainly  say,  that  I  cannot  discover  any  foundation 
for  these  traditions.    I  regard  them  as  nothing  better  than 
lying  stories.    Such  stories  are  often  current  about  eminent 
servants  of  Christ.      His  refusal  to  give  up  his  post  at 
Lavenham,  when  many  other  ministers  seceded,  would,  no 
doubt,  give  great  annoyance  to  the  bitterest  and   most 
extreme  Nonconformists  in  that  part  of  Suffolk,  since  it 
would  weaken  their  hands  and  strengthen  the  Church  of 
England.       I   should   therefore   expect,  as   a  matter   of 
course,  that  all  manner  of  false  reports  would  be  current 
about  him.     Lies  are  Satan's  chief  weapons  against  God's 
saints. 

Gurnall  died,  October  12th,  1679,  and  was  buried  at 
Lavenham,  in  the  sixty-third  year  of  his  age.  There  is 
internal  evidence,  we  have  already  seen,  in  his  letters  and 
elsewhere,  that  he  was  always  a  man  of  weak  health.  But 
we  know  not  whether  he  died  suddenly  or  of  a  lingering 


390  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

illness.  The  fact,  however,  that  he  made  his  will  the  day 
before  he  died  would  rather  point  to  the  conclusion  that 
he  had  been  ill  some  time. 

M'Keon,  to  whose  biography  of  Qurnall  I  have  so 
frequently  referred,  has  procured  a  copy  of  Qurnall's  will, 
which  I  here  subjoin,  as  it  may  interest  many  readers. —  ' 

"In  the  name  of  God,  Amen.  The  Eleventh  day  of 
October,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  One  Thousand  Six 
Hundred  and  Seventy-nine,  I,  William  Gurnall  of  Laven- 
ham,  in  the  county  of  Suffolk,  clerk,  weak  of  body,  but, 
thanks  be  to  God,  of  sound  mind  and  memory,  resigning 
up  my  soul  in  the  first  place  into  the  hands  of  God,  my 
Lord,  Redeemer,  and  Saviour,  and  yielding  my  body  to  the 
earth,  to  be  buried  at  the  discretion  of  my  executrix,  as 
concerning  that  worldly  estate  which  it  has  pleased  God 
to  bestow  upon  me,  do  make  and  ordain,  this,  my  last  will 
and  testament  asfolloweth : — That  is  to  say,  I  give  and  decree 
all  my  free  land  and  tenements,  with  all  their  appurten 
ances  whatsoever,  lying  and  being  in  Walpole  or  elsewhere, 
in  Monkland,  in  the  county  of  Norfolk,  unto  Sarah,  my 
well-beloved  wife  and  her  heirs,  to  hold  to  her,  the  said 
Parah,  to  her  own  proper  use,  for,  and  during  the  time  of 
her  natural  life,  and  after  her  decease  to  some  one  of  my 
children,  as  she  shall  declare  in,  and  by  her  last  will  and 
testament.  And  I  do  give  and  decree  also  all  my  goods 
and  chattels,  debts,  and  personal  estate  whatsoever,  unto 
the  said  Sarah,  my  well-beloved  wife,  as  well  for  her 
own  comfortable  subsistence  and  maintenance,  and  the 
better  to  enable  her  for  the  bringing  up  of  my  younger 
children,  as  also  in  trust  and  confidence  that  she  will 
preserve  and  dispose  of  the  residue  and  surplusage  thereof 
amongst  my  children,  respecting  the  circumstances  of 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  391 

those  of  them  which  are  not  yet  provided  for,  in  such 
manner,  and  in  such  proportion  as  in  her  discretion  she 
shall  think  most  meet  and  fit ;  only  I  decree,  if  my  son  John 
shall  be  a  scholar,  that  she  will  give  my  books  to  him.  And 
I  do  hereby  nominate,  constitute,  and  appoint  the  said 
Sarah,  my  well-beloved  wife,  to  be  sole  executrix  of  this 
my  will,  which  I  have  caused  to  be  written  and  have 
thereunto  set  my  hand  and  seal,  the  day  of  grace  aforesaid.  - 
Subscribed,  sealed,  published,  and  declared  by  the  said 
William  Gurnall,  to  be  his  last  will  and  testament,  in  the 
presence  of  us,  Thomas  Mott,  Bezaleel  Peachie,  John 
Pinchbeck." 

The  first  of  these  three  witnesses  was  most  probably 
the  father  or  brother  of  Mrs.  Gurnall.  She  was  daughter 
of  Thomas  Mott.  The  second  was  evidently  the  husband 
of  his  third  daughter,  Catherine.  The  third  was  perhaps 
the  lawyer  who  drew  up  the  will.  The  books  mentioned 
in  the  will  are  probably  the  very  books  which  Gurnall's 
son,  John,  afterwards  left  by  his  will,  in  1699,  to  his 
brother  Joseph,  and  his  nephew  Leonard  Shaftoe  of 
Newcastle.  The  English  books  were  left  to  Joseph  Gurnall, 
and  the  "  rest  of  the  books  and  manuscripts  "  to  Leonard 
Shaftoe.  They  are  now  probably  scattered  to  the  four 
winds,  and  dispersed,  if  not  destroyed.  The  end  to  which 
good  men's  libraries  finally  come  is  a  melancholy  subject. 
Few  things  are  so  much  loved  by  some,  and  despised  and 
neglected  by  others  as  books, and  specially  theological  books. 

The  precise  spot  in  which  Gurnall  was  buried  is  not 
known.  We  cannot  tell  whether  his  bones  are  lying  in 
the  Church  or  in  the  churchyard.  No  tombstone  or 
monumental  slab  marks  the  place  of  his  interment. 
Nothing,  from  some  cause  or  other,  seems  to  have  been 


392  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

erected  to  his  memory.  "  The  only  sepulchral  notice  to  be 
found  of  him,"  says  M'Keon,  "  is  on  a  black  marble  slab 
in  the  chancel,  which  has  this  inscription : — 

" '  Here  lieth  the  body  of  Mary,  late  wife  of  Mr.  Henry' 
Boughton,  of  this  parish,  and  daughter  of  the  late  Reverend 
Mr.  Samuel  Beachcroft,  Hector  of  Semer,  and  grand 
daughter  of  the  late  Reverend  Mr.  William  Gurnall,  who 
was  Rector  of  this  parish  thirty-five  years.  She  died  the 
14th  of  October,  1741,  aged  78  years.' " 

Under  this  slab  in  the  chancel  is  a  vault,  which  M'Keon 
conjectured  is  Gurnall's  resting-place,  from  the  fact  of 
Mrs.  Boughton  having  been  buried  here  instead  of  being 
buried  with  the  Boughton  family  in  the  family  vault,  near 
the  great  south  door.  However,  it  is  only  a  conjecture. 

A  funeral  sermon  was  preached  in  Lavenham  Church, 
in  commemoration  of  Gurnall,  shortly  after  his  funeral,  by 
the  well-known  commentator  on  the  New  Testament, 
Burkitt,  who  was  at  that  time  Rector  of  Milden,  near 
Lavenham.  It  is  still  extant,  and  bears  the  following  title  : 
"  The  people's  zeal  provoked  to  an  holy  emulation  by  the 
pious  and  instructive  example  of  their  dead  Minister;  as 
a  seasonable  memento  to  the  parishioners  of  Lavenham  in 
Suffolk." 

Burkitt's  sermon  was  on  Heb.  xiii.  7 :  "  Remember 
them  that  have  the  rule  over  you,"  etc.  It  was  both 
preached  and  published  "  by  request,"  and  is  prefaced  by 
an  epistle  dedicatory  "  to  my  honoured  friend,  Mrs.  Sarah 
Gurnall,  the  sorrowful  relict  of  Mr.  William  Gurnall,  late 
of  Lavenham,  deceased,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  sorrowing 
inhabitants  of  that  town."  It  is  a  respectable  composition, 
though  somewhat  quaint,  and  rather  flowery  and  high- 
flown  in  style.  But  it  is  but  fair  to  Burkitt  to  remember 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  393 

that  he  was  comparatively  young  when  he  preached  it, 
being  only  twenty-nine  years  old.  A  few  extracts  from  it 
will  probably  be  found  interesting.  I  shall  select  those 
parts  only  which  refer  to  Gurnall. 

Burkitt's  epistle  dedicatory  concludes  with  the  following 
passage : — "  To  inform  and  convince  you  how  highly 
accountable  you  are  to  Almighty  God,  both  for  the  long 
enjoyment  of  his  ministry,  and  also  for  the  happy  advantage 
of  his  example,  is  the  honest  design  of  the  following 
sermon ;  and  also  to  let  this  censorious  age  (in  which  some 
persons  are  so  overgrown  with  the  anti-episcopal  jaundice, 
that  their  eye  can  see  nothing  in  a  Conformist  but  what  is 
discoloured  and  of  a  different  tincture),  understand  and 
know  that  you  had  a  Conformist  for  your  minister,  who 
rendered  solid  religion  amiable,  by  a  conversation  in  all 
things  worthy  of  it;  who  did  by  a  regular  piety,  a  strict 
sobriety,  a  catholic  and  diffusive  charity,  render  religion 
venerable  to  the  world ;  one  whose  whole  time,  strength, 
and  parts,  were  piously  devoted  to  God  and  His  sacred 
service. 

"  Moses,  I  observe,  was  in  one  particular  privileged  by 
God  above  all  other  holy  persons.  Their  souls  (in  common 
with  his)  at  death  have  angels  for  their  convoy  towards 
the  mansions  of  bliss  and  glory :  but  he  had  an  angel  for 
his  sexton,  who  buried  his  body  in  an  unknown  place,  lest 
the  Israelites  should  superstitiously  idolize  and  adore  it. 
There  would  be  no  fear  at  all  of  any  such  offensive 
adoration  on  your  part,  were  I  able  (as  indeed  I  am  not) 
to  draw  to  the  life  the  fair  effigies  of  your  absent  minister, 
who  was,  like  Moses,  faithful  in  all  God's  house  whilst  he 
lived,  and  not  unlike  him  at  his  death :  his  meek  soul 
gliding  from  him  in  a  fine,  imperceptible  vehicle;  and  he 


394  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

dying  as  the  modern  Jews  by  tradition  tell  us  Moses 
did,  ad  nutum  Dei,  et  osculo  oris  ejus, — at  God's  bed:, 
and  as  it  were  with  a  kiss  of  God's  mouth.  It  was  no 
more  betwixt  God  and  them  but  this, — Go  up  and  die. 

"  To  conclude,  then,  may  all  your  practices  appear  to 
the  world  in  a  faithful  compliance  with  what  was  truly 
imitable  and  praise-worthy  in  him.  May  the  living 
example  of  your  dead  minister  be  exemplified  in  the  lives 
of  you  his  people.  May  you  daily  dress  by  his  glass,  and 
walk  in  his  pious  and  devout  footsteps.  May  you  all  meet 
him  with  astonishing  joy,  and  behold  him  also  with 
unutterable  delight  and  comfort,  in  the  day  of  your  great 
audit :  this  is,  and  ever  shall  be,  the  hearty  and  affectionate 
supplication  of  your  sympathising  friend  and  servant, 

"  WILLIAM  BURKITT." 

"Milden,  Dec.  10,  1679." 

The  sermon  contains  the  following  sentences  which  are 
worth  transcribing :  "  How  lovely  was  that  copy  of  religion 
which  he  set  before  you  in  his  daily  conversation!  So 
forcible  was  the  majesty  of  that  holiness  that  shined  forth 
in  him,  that  it  did  extort  a  veneration  from  its  most 
violent  opposers ;  and  so  convictive  also  that  it  pierced 
the  very  consciences  of  his  enemies,  and  constrained  them 
whom  prejudice  only  had  made  his  foes,  tacitly  to 
acknowledge  that  God  was  in  him  of  a  truth."  (p.  9, 
Baynes'  reprint,  1829.) 

Again:  "He  being  dead,  yet  speaketh:  yea,  dead  as 
well  as  living,  he  is  still  your  preacher,  his  shroud  and 
coffin  are  his  pulpit — his  grave  and  tombstone  are  his 
temple,  and  he  still  preaches  to  you  though  he  lies  in 
silence  before  you  and  utters  never  a  word ;  I  mean  by  his 
pious  and  most  instructive  example  left  among  you,  and  by 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  395 

that  fair  character  and  good  report  which  he  hath  so 
deservedly  obtained  with  you."  (pp.  10,  11.) 

Again :  "  I  am  sure  it  did  not  a  little  conduce  to  the 
support  of  your  dying  Minister's  spirit,  when  he  had  death 
before  him  in  immediate  prospect,  to  hope  upon  good 
grounds  that  he  (as  a  spiritual  father)  should  leave  many 
children  behind  him,  to  carry  on  the  work  of  Christ  in 
the  world,  when  his  head  should  be  laid  among  the 
clods."  (p.  17.) 

The  last  five  pages  of  the  sermon  are  so  entirely 
occupied  with  Gum  all's  character,  that  I  think  it  best  to 
give  them  unabridged : 

"  I  infer  from  hence,  in  the  last  place,  how  signal  your 
obligations  are  to  Almighty  God  for  the  long  enjoyment 
of  that  exemplary  pattern  of  all  true  piety  and  virtue 
(your  deceased  Minister,  I  mean),  whom  (for  your  sins,  I 
fear)  He  hath  lately  taken  from  you.  Show  now  your 
obedience  to  God,  your  respects  to  him,  your  kindness 
and  charity  to  your  own  souls,  by  a  zealous  and  faithful 
care  to  transcribe  impartially  in  your  own  lives  whatever 
was  truly  imitable  in  your  Minister's.  And  not  to  carry 
you  beyond  the  confines  of  the  text,  let  me  earnestly 
bespeak  your  Christian  compliance  with  a  double  duty 
here  enjoined. 

"  I.     To  follow  his  faith. 

"  II.     To  imitate  his  exemplary  conversation. 

"I.  Follow  his  faith,  and  that  in  a  double  respect, 
in  the  soundness  of  his  faith,  and  in  the  steadfastness  of 
his  faith. 

"  1.  Follow  him  in  the  soundness  of  his  faith.  The 
faith  which  he  perseveringly  professed,  and  taught,  was 
that  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness ;  that  faith 


396  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

which  owns  God  for  its  immediate  Author  and  the 
Scripture  for  its  infallible  rule,  the  faith  that  was  once 
delivered  to  the  saints,  which  is  not  the  result  of  fancy 
and  imagination,  but  the  product  of  an  eternal  counsel, 
which  was  confirmed  by  the  miracles  and  sealed  with  the 
blood  of  a  Saviour.  In  a  word,  that  faith  which  he  so 
zealously  taught  had  sure  footing  in  the  Holy  Scriptures. 
Whenever  he  propounded  any  truth  which  required  not 
only  the  assent  of  your  understandings,  but  also  the 
obedience  and  adoration  of  your  faith,  he  constantly 
showed  you  the  Canon  of  the  Scriptures  for  its  con 
firmation.  If  any  then  (which  God  forbid)  should 
appear  after  him  in  this  place,  and  attempt  the 
proselyting  of  you  to  another  Gospel,  or  to  any  new 
doctrine  of  faith  foreign  to  the  Scriptures,  should  he 
pretend  to  the  authority  of  a  commissioned  angel  from 
heaven,  let  him  be  held  accursed. 

"  2.  Follow  him  in  the  steadfastness  of  his  faith.  The 
same  rule  of  faith  which  he  laid  before  you  at  his  first 
coming  amongst  you,  he  lived  and  preached  by  till  the 
day  of  his  death.  And  this  I  take  the  greater  liberty  to 
assert,  because  some  persons  have  not  blushed  to  tell  the 
world  publicly  that  since  his  conformity  to  the  discipline 
of  the  Church  he  had  apostatized  and  revolted  from  that 
faith  which  he  had  formerly  professed  and  taught.  But 
be  ye  all  assured,  that,  as  to  the  great  fundamentals  of 
faith  and  religion,  he  was  ever  the  same,  and  what  he 
taught  you  to  his  last  breath,  I  doubt  not  but  he  stood 
ready  to  confirm  and  seal  with  his  blood,  even  in  the 
fiercest  flames  of  martyrdom,  if  God  had  called  him  to 
that  fiery  trial. 

"II.     Imitate  his  Christian  conversation.     My  meaning 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  397 

is,  exemplify  those  Evangelical  graces  and  Christian 
virtues  in  your  lives,  which  did  so  oriently  shine  forth  in 
his.  To  propound  a  few : — 

"  1.  His  eminent  humility.  This  was  the  garment 
which  covered  all  his  excellent  accomplishments,  although 
indeed  their  beauty  was  rendered  more  conspicuous  and 
amiable  by  casting  this  veil  over  it.  O  what  mean 
thoughts  had  he  of  himself!  and  was  not  only  content^ 
but  desirous  also,  that  others  should  have  so  too :  no  man 
ever  expressed  so  low  a  value  of  his  worth  and  merits  as 
himself  did.  Everything  in  others  that  was  good  he 
admired  as  excellent,  whilst  the  same  or  better  in  himself 
he  thought  not  unworthily  contemned :  his  eyes  were  full 
of  his  own  deficiencies  and  others'  perfections. 

"  In  a  word,  he  was  a  lovely  valley,  sweetly  planted, 
well  watered,  richly  fruitful:  imitate  him  then  herein, 
and  by  a  holy  emulation  study  to  excel  him  in  this 
adorning  grace ;  and  for  your  help  herein  recollect  what 
you  heard  from  him  in  his  elaborate  discourses  among  you 
upon  Phil.  ii.  5 :  '  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also 
in  Christ  Jesus,' — this  humble  mind. 

"2.  His  extensive  love.  This  grace  did  variously 
exert  itself. 

"  (1)  His  love  to  God.  He  loved  Him  exceedingly 
whom  he  could  not  love  excessively,  having  such  high  and 
raised  apprehensions  of  his  Maker's  excellencies,  as  caused 
him  to  judge  his  prime  and  best  affections  unworthy  to 
be  placed  on  so  Divine  an  object. 

"  (2)  His  love  to  the  holy  Jesus.  This  was  such  a 
seraphic  and  Divine  fire  in  his  soul,  as  did  marvellously 
consume  his  love  to  the  world  and  all  sublunary  comforts,. 
You  are  witnesses,  and  all  that  knew  him,  in  how  eminent 


398  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

a  measure  and  degree  the  world  was  crucified  unto  him, 
and  he  unto  the  world  by  the  cross  of  Christ. 

"  (3)  His  love  to  souls.  This  was  it,  no  doubt,  that 
made  him  so  indefatigable  both  in  his  study  and  in  the 
pulpit ;  from  hence  it  was,  that  the  throne  of  grace,  his 
study,  the  pulpit,  and  his  sick  neighbours,  had  the  whole 
of  his  time  divided  amongst  them,  and  devoted  to  them. 

"  (4)  HIS  UNBOUNDED  LOVE  TO  ALL  CHRISTIANS  ;  though 
they  differed  in  their  sentiments  from  him.  He  loved 
Christians  for  their  Christianity,  and  did  adore  the  image 
of  his  Saviour  wherein  he  saw  it  in  any  of  his  members 
unhappily  persecuting  one  another  with  hard  names 
and  characters  of  reproach.  How  often  did  he  PUBLICLY 
DEPLORE  AND  BEWAIL,  that  the  greatest  measure  of  love 
that  is  found  at  this  day  amongst  the  professors  of  the 
cross,  was  not  true  Christian  love,  but  only  love  of  a 
party!  Follow  him,  then,  in  the  impartial  exercise  of 
this  grace,  and  for  your  help  therein  remember  what  he 
taught  you  from  Eph.  v.  2,  '  And  walk  in  love,  as  Christ 
also  hath  loved  us ; '  and  as  you  have  any  regard  for  the 
Author  of  your  profession,  take  heed  that  a  spirit  of 
division  (now)  crowd  not  in  among  you.  Your  unity  is 
your  strength  as  well  as  your  beauty ;  persist  therefore,  I 
beseech  you,  in  that  Christian  order  amongst  yourselves 
in  which  it  was  his  great  ambition  all  his  days  to  preserve 
and  keep  you.  Timely  oppose  the  crafty  design  of  the 
subtle  adversary  of  souls,  who  will  take  this  occasion  (if 
possible),  now  the  spiritual  parent  is  out  of  the  way,  to 
set  the  children  together  by  the  ears. 

"  3,  His  diffusive  charity.  His  alms  were  aaexuberant 
as  his  Jove ;  misery  and  want,  wherever  be  met  them,  di4 
gufftrifintly  endear  $eir  objects  to  him.  He  was;  nono  o| 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  399 

those  that  hide  their  faces  from  the  poor,  nor  of  the  number 
of  them  who  satisfy  their  consciences  with  a  single  exercise 
of  their  charity  once  a  year,  but  daily  were  the  emanations 
of  his  bounty.  Yet  although  he  cast  the  seeds  of  his 
charity  upon  all  sorts  of  ground,  he  sowed  them  thickest 
upon  God's  inclosure :  my  meaning  is,  he  did  good  unto 
all, '  but  especially  to  those  that  were  of  the  household  of 
faith.'  Make  him  herein,  and  his  example,  the  pattern  of 
your  daily  imitation;  for  the  world,  which  is  chained 
together  by  intermingled  love,  will  soon  shatter  and  fall  in 
pieces  if  charity  shall  once  fail  and  die;  and  for  your 
better  help  herein,  call  over  those  potent  arguments  for 
the  exercise  of  this  Evangelical  duty,  which  he  urged  upon 
you,  from  that  apostolical  injunction,  Heb.  xiii.  16, '  But 
to  do  good,  and  to  communicate,  forget  not,  for  with  such 
sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased.' 

"  4.  His  persevering  diligence  and  faithfulness  in  his 
place  and  station.  You  could  not  but  observe  that  his 
whole  disposal  of  himself  was  to  perpetual  industry  and 
service.  He  not  only  avoided  idleness,  but  seemed  to  have 
a  forcible  antipathy  against  it,  and  was  often  recommending 
it  to  you  with  great  concern  and  vigour  in  his  public 
advices,  to  be  always  furnished  with  somewhat  to  do ;  ui 
te  inveniat  semper  diabolus  occupatum :  that  the  devil 
may  never  find  thee  at  leisure  to  listen  to  his  temptations, 
as  St.  Hierom  adviseth.  The  idle  man's  brain  being,  in 
truth,  not  only  the  devil's  shop,  but  his  kingdom  too,  a 
model  of  and  an  appendage  unto  hell ;  a  place  (like  that) 
given  up  to  torture  and  mischief.  As  to  himself,  his 
chiefest  recreation  was  variety  of  work ;  for  beside  those 
portions  of  time  which  the  necessities  of  nature  and  of 
pjvil  life  extorted  from  biro,  there  was  not  a  minutQ  of 


400  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

the  day  which  he  left  vacant.  Now  to  stimulate  your 
2eal  to  a  pious  imitation  of  him  herein  also,  let  me 
admonish  you  to  ruminate  upon  those  accurate  sermons 
you  heard  from  him  upon  Matt.  xx.  6:  'Why  stand  ye 
here  all  the  day  idle  ? ' 

"  5.  His  tender  sympathy  with  the  afflicted  Church  of 
Christ.  Like  a  true  son  of  Zion,  he  could  not  rejoice  when 
his  mother  mourned,  he  daily  felt  as  much  by  sympathy 
as  he  did  by  sense;  and  no  wonder,  for  he  that  hath  a 
stock  going  in  the  Church's  ship,  cannot  but  lament  and 
quake  at  every  storm.  O  how  frequent  were  his  inquiries 
after  her,  how  fervent  were  his  prayers  for  her,  how  bowelly 
and  compassionate  were  his  mournings  over  her!  The 
deplorable  condition  of  the  Church  and  nation  lay 
exceeding  near  his  heart  both  living  and  dying;  he 
preferring  their  happiness  and  welfare  above  his  chief  joy. 
Now  in  order  to  your  attaining  the  same  Christ-like 
temper  with  him,  frequently  meditate  on  what  you  heard 
from  him  upon  Neh.  i.  4,  where  the  sympathising  prophet 
refuseth  to  drink  wine,  when  the  afflicted  Church  drank 
water. 

"  6.  And  lastly,  to  sum  up  all,  imitate  him  in  his  daily 
care  and  endeavour  to  live  religion  in  all  his  capacities. 
As  a  minister,  ye  are  witnesses,  and  God  ako,  how  faithfully, 
how  conscientiously  he  discharged  his  duty  towards  you. 
In  the  exercise  of  his  ministerial  function,  if  censure 
itself  be  able  to  tax  him  for  any  neglect,  it  must  be  in  not 
more  frequent  visiting  his  flock,  from  which  nothing  but  a 
weak  body  kept  him,  not  a  proud  or  unwilling  mind.  The 
obstruction  he  met  with  in  this  part  of  his  duty,  from  his 
tender  habit  of  body  (which  would  not  suffer  him  so 
frequently  to  perform  it  as  he  desired);  was  his  great  sorrow 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  401 

both  living  and  dying;  yet  having  this  to  comfort  him, 
that  the  frailty  of  his  body  was  his  affliction,  but  not  his 
sin.  Consider  him  in  his  next  relative  capacity,  as  a  child, 
how  dutiful  and  obsequious  !  O  how  great  was  that  tribute 
of  veneration  and  respect  which  he  so  constantly  paid  to 
the  hoary  hairs  of  his  aged  parents !  As  a  husband,  how 
tender  and  compassionate ;  as  a  parent,  how  indulgent  and 
affectionate ;  as  a  minister,  how  kind  and  munificent ! 
Thus  was  he  universally  good  in  all  stations,  and  lived 
religion  in  every  capacity.  And  if  you  desire  to  imitate  him 
herein  also,  as  becomes  you,  dress  your  souls  by  that  glass 
daily,  which  his  dying  hand  last  held  up  before  your  eyes : 
I  mean  by  heavenly  meditation,  make  those  useful  truths 
your  own,  which  you  last  heard  from  him  upon  Tit.  ii.  12, 
'  That,  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  we  should 
live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this  present  world.' 
Which  Christian  lesson,  if  it  shall  be  as  practically  learned 
by  you  as  it  was  faithfully  taught  by  him,  I  will  be  bold 
to  say  thus  much  in  the  singular  commendation  of  you 
his  people,  that  you  will  thereby  give  the  world  a  convictive 
instance  that  this  age  hath  virtues  as  stupendous  as  its 
vices ! 

"THE  CONCLUSION. — Thus  I  have  given  myself  the 
satisfaction  of  doing  my  duty  in  propounding  your 
Minister's  example  to  your  Christian  view.  Let  none 
censoriously  say  I  have  been  all  this  while  painting  the 
prophet's  sepulchre.  No,  but  describing  the  prophet 
himself,  and  with  this  single  and  sincere  intention,  that 
you  may  timely  know  you  have  had  a  prophet  of  the 
Lord  among  you ;  a  person  that  had  omnia  in  se 
sempitema  praater  corpusculum :  all  things  living  and 
lasting  to  eternity  except  his  body,  which  was  the  only 

20 


402  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

thing  he  had  subject  to  mortality,  and  besides  which 
nothing  of  him  doth  see  corruption.  It  will  be  below  the 
,  merit  of  his  person,  as  well  as  the  greatness  of  our  loss,  to 
celebrate  his  death  in  womanish  complaints,  or  indeed  by 
any  verbal  lamentations;  nor  can  anything  beseem  his 
memory  but  what  is  sacred  and  Divine,  as  his  writings 
are.  May  his  just  fame  from  them,  and  from  his  virtues, 
be  precious  to  all  succeeding  ages.  And  when  elegies 
committed  to  the  trust  of  marble  shall  be  as  illegible 
as  if  they  had  been  writ  in  water,  when  all  stately 
pyramids  shall  be  dissolved  in  dust,  and  all  the 
venerable  monuments  of  antiquity  be  devoured  by  the 
corroding  teeth  of  time,  then  let  this  short  character, 
describing  him  in  his  best  and  fullest  portraiture,  remain 
of  him:  viz.,  that  he  was  a  CHRISTIAN  IN  COMPLETE 
ARMOUR." 

Circumstances  at  Lavenham,  we  can  easily  see,  are 
referred  to  in  this  funeral  sermon,  of  which  we  know 
nothing  certain  now.  It  is  evident  that  Gurnall's 
troubles  during  the  latter  part  of  his  incumbency  were 
neither  few  nor  small.  His  conformity  in  1662  was 
probably  never  forgotten;  and  the  last  years  of  his  life 
were  probably  darkened  by  the  implacable  enmity  of 
some  of  his  parishioners.  That  Burkitt,  who  doubtless 
knew  more  of  Gurnall's  inner  life  than  any  one,  should 
have  given  the  world  no  biography  of  him,  is  much  to  Lu 
regretted.  He  could  have  done  it  well,  and  it  is  a  pity 
that  he  did  not  do  it. 

Gurnall's  widow  survived  her  husband  nineteen  years, 
and  seems  to  have  resided  at  Lavenham.  At  any 
rate,  she  was  buried  at  Lavenham  on  September  7, 
1698,  and  the  grant  of  administration  to  her  property 


WILLIAM  GUKNALL.  403' 

called     her    "  Sarah     Gurnall,    widow,    of    Lavenham, 
deceased." 

Gurnall  left  at  least  eight  children,  according  to  M'Keon, 
two  having  died  young : — 

1.  Sarah,  baptized  April  2,  1646,  married  to  Mr.  Mayor, 
of  Newcastle-on-Tyne. 

2.  Susannah,  baptized  April  4, 1650,  married  the  Rev. 
Samuel   Beachcroft,  of   Emmanuel   College,   Cambridge, 
Rector  of  Semer,  Suffolk. 

3.  Catherine,    the    date    of    whose    baptism    we    do 
not    know,    married    the    Rev.    Bezaleel    Peachie,    of 
Emmanuel    College,    Cambridge,    Vicar    of    Bures    St. 
Mary,  near  Sudbury,  who  was  one  of  the  witnesses  of 
Gurnall's  will. 

4.  Elizabeth,  baptized   April  25,    1655,  married    the 
Rev.  Philip  Richardson,  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge,  a 
clergyman  of  Ipswich. 

5.  Ann,  baptized  February  11,  1655,  continued  to  live 
with  her  mother  at  Lavenham  until  her  decease  in  1698, 
and  married  in  June,  1700,  Mr.  William  Manthorpe,  of 
Lowestoft. 

6.  Another  sister,  whose  name  is  not  known,  married  a 
Mr.  Shaftoe,  of  Newcastle-on-Tyne. 

7.  Thomas,  baptized  March  13,  1659,  settled  at  Little 
"VValdringfield,  and  was  buried  there  in  1723. 

8.  Joseph,  baptized  July  23,  1662,  was  an  attorney,  and 
according  to  M'Keon's  belief,  resided  at  Lavenham. 

9.  John,  baptized    December   24,   1664,  was  sent  to 
Christ's  College,  proceeded  B.A.  in  1685,  and  afterwards 
became  Curate  of  Brockley,  until  1698.     He  was  buried 
at  Lavenham  on  February  6, 1700. 


404  LIGftT  FROM  OLD 

10.  Leonard,  baptized  May  11,  1669,  is  one  of  whom 
nothing  is  known. 

I  can  find  no  trace  of  GurnalPs  descendants  in  the 
present  day.  There  is  no  one,  so  far  as  I  can  learn,  of  his 
name  at  Lavenham.  The  Rectory  House  in  which  he 
lived  is  no  longer  standing.  The  living  of  Lavenham  has 
passed  into  the  hands  of  Caius  College,  Cambridge: 
Everything  connected  with  the  good  man,  except  his 
book,  seems  to  have  passed  away.  By  it  alone,  "he 
being  dead  yet  speaketh." 

I  have  now  completely  exhausted  all  the  information  I 
can  supply  about  the  author  of  "The  Christian  in 
Complete  Armour,"  and  can  only  express  my  deep  regret 
that  I  can  tell  the  reader  nothing  more.  It  certainly  does 
seem  rather  tantalizing  that  a  writer  of  the  seventeenth 
century, — who  is  better  known  by  name  than  almost  any 
of  the  Puritans — who  lived  within  twenty  miles  of  such 
men  as  Owen,  Marshall,  Newcomen,  Young,  and  Stockton, 
— who  resided  for  thirty-five  years  in  a  town,  of  some  little 
importance  two  hundred  years  ago,  in  a  county  so  well 
known  at  that  time  as  Suffolk — that  such  a  man  should 
have  passed  away  and  so  very  little  be  known  about  him ! 
But  so  it  is.  Gurnall's  case,  perhaps,  does  not  stand  alone. 
Perhaps  the  last  day  will  prove  that  some  of  the  best 
and  holiest  men  that  ever  lived  are  hardly  known. 

Nothing  now  remains  for  me  to  do  except  to  say  a  few 
words  about  Gurnall's  literary  works,  which  have  been 
lately,  for  the  first  time,  brought  together  in  a  complete 
form.* 

*  I  refer  to  Blackie's  complete  edition  of  Gurnall's  works,  which  I  take 
the  opportunity  of  strongly  recommending  to  &11  buyers  of  theology. 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  405 

The  first  of  Gurnall's  works,  and  indeed  the  one  by 
which  he  is  commonly  known,  is  his  famous  book,  "  The 
Christian  in  Complete  Armour."  This  well-known  book 
consists,  like  many  of  the  theological  writings  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  of  sermons  or  lectures  delivered  by 
the  author  in  the  course  of  his  regular  ministry,  in  a 
consecutive  course,  on  Eph.  vi.  10 — 20. 

It  was  originally  published  in  three  small  quarto 
volumes,  and  in  three  portions,  at  three  different  times. 
The  first  volume,  containing  Eph.  vi.  10 — 13,  was  published 
in  1655.  This  volume  is  dedicated  to  "  the  Inhabitants  of 
Lavenham,  my  dearly  beloved  friends  and  neighbours;" 
and  the  dedication  contains  a  distinct  statement,  that  the 
book  consists  of  sermons  preached  at  Lavenham.  "  What 
I  present  you,"  says  Gurnall,  "  within  this  treatise,  is  a 
dish  from  your  own  table,  and  so  (I  hope)  will  go  down 
the  better.  You  cannot  despise  it,  though  the  fare  be 
mean,  except  you  will  blame  yourselves  who  chose  the 
cook."  There  is  a  date  at  the  end  of  the  dedication  which 
happily  serves  to  show  when  the  work  was  published.  It 
is  dated  January  1, 1655.  My  copy  is  the  second  edition. 

The  second  volume  of  the  course,  containing  Eph.  vi. 
1-4 — 16,  was  published  in  1658.  It  contains  a  dedication 
to  "Thomas  Darcy,  Esq.,  and  Mrs.  Sisilia  Darcy,  his 
religious  consort,"  at  Kentwell  Hall  in  Suffolk;  from 
which  it  appears  that  Mrs.  Darcy  was  daughter  of  Sir 
Symond  D'Ewes,  Gurnall's  patron.  The  dedication  is 
dated  Lavenham,  October,  1657.  My  copy  is  the  first 
edition. 

The  third  volume  of  the  work,  containing  Eph.  vi, 
17 — 20,  was  published  in  1662.  It  is  dedicated  to  Lady 
Mary  Vere;  Baroness  of  Tilbury ;  a  lady  well  known  in 


406  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

the  seventeenth  century,  and  daughter  of  William  Tracey, 
Esq.,  of  Toddington,  in  Gloucestershire.  The  dedication 
is  dated  August  28,  1661.  My  copy  is  the  first  edition. 

Comment,  or  recommendation,  is  perhaps  needless  in 
speaking  of  Gurnall's  great  work.  The  fact  that  a  sixth 
edition  was  published  in  the  year  the  author  died,  1679, 
is  enough  to  show  that  its  merits  were  early  recognised. 
The  high  reputation  it  has  always  borne  among  lovers  of 
sound  English  divinity  down  to  the  present  day,  is  another 
fact  which  ought  not  to  be  forgotten.  Other  theological 
works  of  the  seventeenth  century  were  famous  in  their 
day,  but  are  now  seldom  read.  "  The  Christian  in  Complete 
Armour  "  is  a  work  that  is  read  and  enjoyed  by  thousands 
up  to  this  time. 

One  grand  peculiarity  of  "  The  Christian  in  Complete 
Armour"  is  the  soundness  and  Scriptural  proportion  of 
its  doctrinal  statements.  There  is  nothing  extravagant 
and  overstretched  in  Gurnall's  exhibition  of  any  point, 
either  in  faith  or  practice.  Nothing  is  glaringly  over- 
coloured,  nothing  is  completely  thrown  into  the  shade.  In 
this  respect  it  is  eminently  like  Bunyan's  "Pilgrim's 
Progress,"  a  work  so  beautifully  proportioned  in  doctrine, 
that  Calvinists  and  Arminians,  Churchmen  and  Dissenters, 
are  all  alike  agreed  in  admiring  it. 

Another  striking  peculiarity  of  Gurnall's  book  is  its 
profusion  of  illustrations  and  comparisons.  You  can 
hardly  open  a  page  of  the  work  without  meeting  with 
some  vivid  image  or  picture  of  Divine  things,  which  lights 
up  the  whole  subject  under  consideration  like  a  sunbeam. 
I  am  not  prepared  to  say  that  in  this  respect  Gurnall 
surpasses  Brooks,  Watson,  or  Swinnock,  but  I  am  quite 
sure  that  he  deserves  to  be  classed  with  them.  Happy 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  407 

would  it  be  for  the  Church  if  this  gift  of  illustration  was 
more  common  and  more  cultivated  by  preachers!  The 
man  whose  sermons  are  best  remembered  is  the  man  who, 
like  his  Divine  Master,  "uses  similitudes."  "He  is  the 
eloquent  man,"  says  an  Oriental  proverb,  "  who  turns  his 
hearers'  ears  into  eyes,  and  makes  them  see  what  he 
speaks  of." 

One  more  beautiful  feature  in  Qurnall's  book  is  its 
richness  in  pithy,  pointed,  and  epigrammatical  sayings. 
Page  after  page  might  be  filled,  if  a  collection  were  made 
of  all  the  short,  golden  sentences  which  are  to  be  found  in 
"  The  Christian  in  Complete  Armour."  You  will  often 
find  in  a  line  and  a  half  some  great  truth,  put  so  concisely, 
and  yet  so  fully,  that  you  really  marvel  how  so  much 
thought  could  be  got  into  so  few  words. 

It  would  be  easy  to  heap  up  testimonies  to  the  value  o 
Gurnall's  "  Christian  in  Complete  Armour."  Baxter  and 
Flavel  both  thought  most  highly  of  the  book.  Toplady 
used  to  make  copious  extracts  from  it  in  his  common-place 
book.  John  Newton  said  that  if  he  was  confined  to  one 
book  beside  the  Bible,  he  dared  say  Gurnall's  "  Christian 
Armour  "  would  be  his  choice.  Cecil  spent  many  of  the 
last  days  of  his  life  in  reading  it,  and  repeatedly  expressed 
his  admiration  of  it.  But  I  have  said  enough  already  to 
weary  the  reader,  and  the  best  advice  I  can  give  him  is  to 
read  the  book  for  himself  in  the  beautiful  edition  in  which 
it  has  lately  been  brought  out  by  Messrs.  Blackie,  and  to 
judge  for  himself. 

Two  other  books,  and  two  only,  are  known  to  have  been 
published  by  Gurnall,  in  addition  to  his  great  work,  "  The 
Christian  in  Complete  Armour."  Both  of  these  are  single 
sermons  preached  on  special  occasions, 


408  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

One  of  these  sermons  is  called  "The  Magistrate's 
Portraiture  drawn  from  the  Word."  It  was  preached  at 
Stowmarket,  in  Suffolk,  upon  August  20,  1656,  "before 
the  election  of  Parliament  recurs  for  the  same  county," 
and  published  the  same  year.  The  subject  of  the  sermon 
is  Isaiah  i.  26.  It  is  an  excellent  sermon,  and  worthy  of 
the  author  in  every  way. 

The  other  sermon  is  called  "  The  Christian's  Labour  and 
Reward."  It  was  preached  at  Castle  Hedingham  in  Essex, 
on  January  10,  1671,  and  published  in  1672.  It  consists 
chiefly  of  a  discourse  preached  at  the  funeral  of  Lady  Mary 
Vere,  widow  of  Sir  Horace  Vere  of  Tilbury ;  the  lady  to 
whom  the  third  volume  of  "The  Christian  in  Complete  i 
Armour"  is  dedicated.  It  contains  a  dedication  to 
Elizabeth,  Countess  Dowager  of  Clare,  who  was  Lady 
Mary  Vere's  daughter.  It  is  a  good  sermon,  undoubtedly, 
but  would  have  been  better  if  it  had  been  more  compressed. 
However,  the  preachers  of  funeral  sermons  are  seldom 
allowed  much  time  for  their  preparation,  and  perhaps 
Gurnall  had  no  time  to  make  his  sermon  shorter. 

I  have  seen  it  asserted  that  Gurnall,  in  addition  to  the 
works  already  mentioned,  published  a  volume  of  sermons 
in  1660.  M'Keon  says  that  this  volume  is  mentioned  in 
Cooke's  "Preacher's  Assistant,"  published  in  1783,  and 
that  a  bookseller  in  London  told  him  that  he  had  himself 
seen  a  copy. 

In  reply  to  this  I  can  only  say  that  no  such  volume  of 
sermons  is  to  be  found  in  the  British  Museum,  nor  in  the 
Bodleian  Library  at  Oxford,  nor  in  the  Redcross  Street 
Library  in  London.  Neither  can  I  hear  of  any  living  man, 
whether  bookseller  or  collector  of  old  divinity,  who  ever 
saw  the  volume.  I  must  therefore  be  allowed  to  think 


WILLIAM  GURNALL.  409 

that  M'Kcon  made  a  mistake,  and  that  no  such  volume 
was  ever  published. 

I  now  conclude  this  lengthy  biography  by  expressing 
my  earnest  hope  that  Gurnall's  works  may  yet  find  many 
readers  as  well  as  purchasers.  It  is  indeed  to  be  desired 
that  solid,  Scriptural  theology,  like  that  contained  in  "  The 
Christian  in  Complete  Armour,"  should  be  valued  and 
studied  in  the  Church.  Books  in  which  Scripture  is 
reverently  regarded  as  the  only  rule  of  faith  and  practice, 
— books  in  which  Christ  and  the  Holy  Ghost  have  their 
rightful  office, — books  in  which  justification,  and  sanctifica- 
tion,  and  regeneration,  and  faith,  and  grace,  and  holiness 
are  clearly,  distinctly,  and  accurately  delineated,  and 
exhibited,  these  are  the  only  books  which  do  real  good. 
Few  things  need  reviving  more  than  a  taste  for  such  books 
as  these  among  readers. 

For  my  own  part,  I  can  only  say  that  I  read  everything 
I  can  get  hold  of  which  professes  to  throw  light  on  my 
Master's  business,  and  the  work  of  Christ  among  men. 
But  the  more  I  read,  the  less  I  admire  modern  theology. 
The  more  I  study  the  productions  of  the  new  schools  of 
theological  teachers,  the  more  I  marvel  that  men  and 
women  can  be  satisfied  with  such  writing.  There  is  a 
vagueness,  a  mistiness,  a  shallowness,  an  indistinctness,  a 
superficiality,  an  aimlessness,  a  hollowness  about  the 
literature  of  the  Catholic  or  broader  systems,  as  they  are 
called,  which,  to  my  mind,  stamps  their  origin  on  their 
face.  They  are  of  the  earth,  earthy.  I  find  more  of 
definite  soul-satisfying  thought  in  one  page  of  Gurnall 
than  in  five  pages  of  such  books  as  the  leaders  of  the 
so-called  "Catholic"  and  "Broad  Church  Schools"  put 
forth,  In  matters  of  theology  "  the  old  is  better." 


JAMES  IT.  AND  THE  SEVEN   BISHOPS. 

THE  reign  of  James  II.  is  a  period  of  English  history 
which  has  left  a  greater  mark  on  this  country  than  any 
period  since  the  Reformation.  It  is  a  period  to  which  we 
owe  our  civil  and  religious  liberties,  and  the  maintenance 
of  our  Protestantism,  and  as  such  it  deserves  the  attention 
of  every  true-hearted  Englishman.  I  propose  in  this 
paper  to  give  a  general  sketch  of  the  leading  events  in 
the  reign  of  James  II.,  and  a  more  particular  account  of 
the  famous  trial  of  the  Seven  Bishops.  If  the  whole 
subject  does  not  throw  broad,  clear  light  on  our  position 
and  duties  in  the  present  day,  I  am  greatly  mistaken. 

The  reign  of  James  II.  was  a  singularly  short  one.  It 
began  in  February,  1685,  and  ended  in  December,  3688. 
Short  as  his  reign  was,  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that 
it  contains  a  more  disgraceful  list  of  cruel,  stupid,  unjust, 
and  tyrannical  actions,  for  which  the  Sovereign  alone  can 
be  held  responsible,  than  the  reign  of  any  constitutional 
monarch  of  this  land,  with  the  single  exception  of  Bloody 
Mary.  It  is  a  reign,  in  fact,  in  our  English  annals 
without  one  redeeming  feature.  Not  one  grand  victory 
stirs  our  patriotic  feelings ;  not  one  first-class  statesman  or 
general,  and  hardly  a  bishop  beside  Ken  and  Pearson, 

rouses  our  admiration:  and x the  majestic  name  of  Sir 

«o 


JAMES  II.   AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  411 

Isaac  Newton  among  men  of  science  stands  almost  alone. 
There  were  few  giants  in  the  land.  It  was  an  era  of 
mediocrity ;  it  was  an  age  not  of  gold,  or  silver,  or  brass, 
or  iron,  but  of  lead.  We  turn  away  from  the  picture 
with  shame  and  disgust,  and  it  abides  in  our  memories  as 
a  picture  in  which  there  is  no  light  and  all  shade. 

The  chief  explanation  of  this  singularly  disgraceful 
reign  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  James  II.  was  a 
narrow-minded,  obstinate,  zealous,  thorough-going  member 
of  the  Church  of  Rome.  As  soon  as  he  ascended  the 
throne  he  surrounded  himself  with  priests  and  Popish 
advisers,  and  placed  confidence  in  none  but  Papists. 
Within  a  month  of  his  accession,  says  Evelyn  in  his 
diary,  "the  Romanists  were  swarming  at  Court  with 
greater  confidence  than  had  ever  been  seen  in  England 
since  the  Reformation."  *  At  his  coronation  he  refused  to 
receive  the  Sacrament  according  to  the  rites  of  the  Church 
of  England.  He  set  up  a  Popish  chapel  at  his  Court, 
and  attended  Mass.  He  strained  every  nerve  throughout 
his  reign  to  encourage  the  spread  of  Popery  and 
discourage  Protestantism.  He  procured  the  visit  of  a 
Popish  nuncio,  and  demeaned  himself  before  him  as  no 
English  sovereign  ever  did  since  the  days  of  King  John. 
He  told  Barillon,  the  French  Ambassador,  that  his  first 
object  was  to  obtain  for  the  Romanists  the  free  exercise 
of  their  religion,  and  then  at  last  to  give  them  absolute 
supremacy.-f-  All  this  was  done  in  a  country  which,  little 
more  than  a  century  before,  had  been  freed  from  Popery 
by  the  martyred  Reformers,  and  blessed  with  organized 

«  Knight,  "History  of  England,"  iv.  383. 

+  If  any  one  doubts  this,  I  refer  him  to  the  Histories  of  England, 
Hallani  iii.  73;  Kanke  iv.  216,  218,  219;  Stoughton  ii.  108, 


412  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

Protestantism  by  the  reign  of  Elizabeth.  Can  any  ono 
wonder  that  the  God  of  Providence  was  displeased,  and 
refused  to  show  the  light  of  His  countenance  on  the  land  ? 
James  II.'s  reign  was  an  unhappy  and  discreditable  time 
in  the  annals  of  England,  because  the  King  was  a 
thorough-going  Papist. 

The  second  explanation  of  the  disgraceful  character  of 
James  II.'s  times  is  to  be  found  in  the  low  moral  condition 
of  the  whole  nation  when  he  came  to  the  throne.  The 
misgovernment  of  James  I.  and  Charles  I.,  the  semi- 
Popish  proceedings  of  Archbishop  Laud,  the  fierce  civil 
war  of  the  Commonwealth,  the  iron  rule  of  Oliver 
Cromwell,  the  rebound  into  unbridled  licentiousness 
which  attended  the  Restoration  and  reign  of  Charles  II., 
the  miserably  unwise  and  unjust  Act  of  Uniformity,  the 
unceasing  persecution  of  true  religion,  under  the  pretence 
of  doing  God  service,  and  making  men  of  one  mind — all 
these  things  had  borne  their  natural  fruit.  The  England 
of  James  II. 's  time  was  morally  vile  and  rotten  to  the 
core.  The  Court  seems  to  have  thrown  aside  common 
decency,  and  to  have  regarded  adultery  and  fornication  as 
no  sin  at  all.  Evelyn's  description  of  what  he  saw  at 
Whitehall  the  very  week  that  Charles  II.  died  is  sad  and 
disgusting.  On  Sunday  evening,  the  1st  of  February, 
1685,  Evelyn,  it  seems,  was  at  Whitehall.  A  week  after 
he  recorded  his  impressions  of  the  scene  which  he  then 
witnessed :  "  I  can  never  forget  the  inexpressible  luxury 
and  profaneness,  and,  as  it  were,  total  forgetfulness  of  «od, 
it  being  Sunday  evening.  The  King  sitting  and  toying 
with  his  concubines,  Portsmouth,  Cleveland,  Mazarin,  etc. : 
a  French  boy  singing  love  songs  in  that  glorious  gallery ; 
whilst  above  twenty  of  the  great  courtiers  and  other 


JAMES  It  AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  413 

dissolute  persons  were  at  Basset  around  a  large  table,  a 
bank  of  at  least  two  thousand  in  gold  before  them."  On 
Monday  morning,  the  2nd  of  February,  the  King  was 
struck  with  apoplexy. 

Charles  Knight  (History  of  England)  truly  says : — 
"The  high  public  spirit,  the  true  sense  of  honour, 
which  had  characterized  the  nobles  and  gentry  of 
England  during  the  Civil  War,  was  lost  in  the  selfishness, 
the  meanness,  the  profligacy,  of  the  twenty-eight  years 
that  succeeded  the  Restoration.  Traitors  were  hatched  in 
the  sunshine  of  corruption.  The  basest  expediency  had 
been  the  governing  principle  of  statesmen  and  lawyers; 
the  most  abject  servility  had  been  the  leading  creed  of 
divines.  Loyalty  always  wore  the  livery  of  the  menial. 
Patriotism  was  ever  flaunting  the  badges  of  faction.  The 
bulk  of  the  people  were  unmoved  by  any  proud 
resentments  or  eager  hopes.  They  went  on  in  their 
course  of  industrious  occupation,  without  much  caring 
whether  they  were  under  an  absolute  or  a  constitutional 
government,  as  long  as  they  could  eat,  drink,  and  be 
merry.  They  had  got  rid  of  the  Puritan  severity ;  and  if 
decency  was  outraged  in  the  Court  and  laughed  at  on  the 
stage,  there  was  greater  license  for  popular  indulgences." 

The  leading  statesmen  were  too  often  utterly  untruthful, 
and  ready  to  take  bribes.  The  judges  were,  as  a  rule, 
mean,  corrupt,  ignorant  creatures  of  the  Court.  The 
Church  of  England,  which  ought  to  have  been  a  bulwark 
against  wickedness,  had  never  recovered  the  suicidal  loss 
of  its  life-blood  caused  by  the  Act  of  Uniformity  in  1662, 
and  was  a  weak,  timid,  servile  body.  The  bishops  and 
clergy,  with  a  few  brilliant  exceptions,  were  very  unlike 
the  Reformers,  and  always  unwilling  to  find  fault  with 


414  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

any  great  man,  or  to  dispute  the  Divine  right  of  kings  to 
do  as  they  pleased.  The  Dissenters  were  crushed  to  the 
earth  by  petty  intolerant  restrictions;  and,  between  fines, 
imprisonments  and  persecutions,  were  little  able  to  do 
anything  to  mend  the  times,  and  could  barely  keep  their 
heads  above  water. 

Last,  but  not  least,  we  must  not  forget  that  for  at  least 
a  hundred  years  England  had  been  incessantly  exposed  to 
the  untiring  machinations  of  the  Jesuits.  Ever  since  the 
accession  of  Elizabeth,  those  mischievous  agents  of  Popery 
had  been  compassing  sea  and  land  to  undo  the  work  ot 
the  Reformation,  and  to  bring  back  our  country  to  the 
thraldom  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  Disguised  in  every 
possible  way,  and  professing  anything  by  the  Pope's 
permission  and  dispensation,  in  order  to  accomplish  their 
end,  these  Jesuits  throughout  the  days  of  the  Stuarts 
were  incessantly  at  work.  To  set  Churchmen  against 
Dissenters,  Calvinists  against  Arminians,  sect  against  seci, 
party  against  party,  and  so  to  weaken  the  Protestant 
cause,  was  their  one  constant  employment.  How  much  ot' 
the  bitter  divisions  between  Churchmen  and  Noncon 
formists,  how  much  of  the  religious  strife  which  defiled 
the  early  part  of  the  seventeenth  century  is  owing  to  the 
Jesuits,  I  believe  the  last  day  alone  will  declare.  Those 
only  who  read  "Panzani's  Memoirs,"  or  Dean  Goode's 
"  Rome's  Tactics,"  can  have  any  idea  of  the  mischief  they 
did.  In  short,  if  there  ever  was  an  era  in  modern  history 
when  a  Popish  King  of  England  could  promote  Popery, 
and  do  deeds  of  astounding  cruelty  and  injustice  without 
let  or  hindrance,  that  era  was  the  reign  of  James  II. 
What  might  have  been  the  final  result,  with  such  a  king 
and  such  a  field  of  action,,  if  he  had  not  gone  too  fast 


JAMES  II.  AND  fHE  SEVEN  SISSOfS.  415 

and  overshot  his  mark,  is  impossible  to  say.  God  in  His 
infinite  goodness  had  mercy  on  England,  and  delivered  us 
from  his  wicked  designs.  But  the  things  that  he  did, 
while  he  reigned,*  and  the  singular  manner  in  which  he 
at  last  over-reached  himself  by  the  trial  of  the  Seven 
Bishops,  and  lost  his  throne,  ought  never  to  be  forgotten 
by  any  Englishman  who  is  a  true  Protestant  and  loves 
his  country. 

There  are  five  leading  events,  or  salient  points,  in  this 
reign,  which  are  specially  worth  remembering.  They 
follow  each  other  in  regular  order,  from  the  accession  of 
James  to  his  abdication.  One  common  aim  and  object 
underlaid  them  all ;  that  aim  was  to  pull  down  Protestant 
ism  and  to  plant  Popery  on  its  ruins. 

(1)  The  first  disgraceful  page  in  the  history  of  James 
II.'s  reign  is  his  savage  and  brutal  treatment  of  the. 
Nonconformists  and  Dissenters.  Our  great  historian, 
Macaulay,  says :  "  He  hated  the  Puritan  sect  with  a 
manifold  hatred,  theological  and  political,  hereditary  and 
personal.  He  regarded  them  as  the  foes  of  heaven  as 
well  as  the  foes  of  all  legitimate  authority  in  Church  and 
State."  -f  The  plain  truth  is,  that  James,  with  all  his 
natural  dulness  of  character,  had  sense  enough  to  know 
that  for  many  years  the  most  decided  and  zealous  advocates 
of  Protestantism  had  been  the  Nonconformists,  and  that 
when  Churchmen  under  Archbishop  Laud's  mischievous 
influence  had  become  lukewarm,  Nonconformists  had 


*  Those  who  wish  to  make  themselves  acquainted  with  the  reign  of 
James  II. ,  would  do  well  to  study  Burnet,  Hallam,  Macaulay,  Charles 
Knight,  Ranke,  and  Stoughton's  "History  of  the  Church  of  tha 
Restoration." 

t  Macaulay,  i.  494 


416  tlGHT  FfcOM  OLD 

been  the  most  inveterate  enemies  of  Popery.  Knowing 
this,  he  began  his  reign  by  attempting  to  crush  the 
Nonconformists  entirely.  If  his  predecessors  had  chastised 
them  with  rods,  he  tried  to  chastise  them  with  scorpions. 
If  he  could  not  convert  them,  he  would  silence  them  by 
prosecutions,  fines,  and  imprisonments,  and,  like  Pharaoh, 
"make  their  lives  grievous"  by  hard  measures.  He  argued, 
no  doubt,  that,  if  he  could  only  stop  the  mouths  of  the 
Nonconformists,  he  would  soon  make  short  work  of  the 
Church  of  England,  and  he  cunningly  began  with  the 
weaker  party.  In  both  cases,  happily,  he  reckoned  without 
his  host. 

To  describe  how  the  unhappy  Nonconformists  at  that 
period  were  summoned,  fined,  silenced,  driven  from  their 
homes,  and  allowed  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  their  foot, 
would  be  an  endless  task.  Two  pictures  will  suffice  to 
give  an  idea  of  the  treatment  to  which  they  were 
subjected.  One  picture  shall  be  taken  from  England,  and 
the  other  from  Scotland.  Each  picture  shows  things 
which  happened  with  the  King's  sanction  within  three 
months  after  he  came  to  the  throne. 

The  English  picture  is  the  so-called  trial  of  Baxter,  the 
famous  author  of  "The  Saint's  Rest,"  a  book  which  is 
deservedly  held  in  honour  down  to  this  day.  Baxter  was 
tried  at  Westminster  Hall  before  James'  detestable  tool, 
Chief  Justice  Jeffreys,  in  May,  1685.  He  was  charged 
with  having  published  seditious  matter  reflecting  on  the 
bishops,  in  his  "  Paraphrase  on  the  New  Testament."  A 
more  absurd  and  unfounded  accusation  could  not  have 
been  made.  The  book  is  still  extant,  and  any  one  will  see 
at  a  glance  that  there  was  no  ground  for  the  charge.  From 
the  very  opening  of  the  trial  it  was  clear  which  way  the 


JAMES  it  AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.          417 

verdict  was  intended  to  go.  The  Lord  Chief  Justice  of 
England  behaved  as  if  he  were  counsel  for  the  prosecution 
jind  not  judge.  He  used  abusive  language  towards  the 
defendant,  such  as  was  more  suited  to  Billingsgate  than  a 
court  of  law;  while  the  counsel  for  the  defence  were 
brow-beaten,  silenced,  and  put  down,  or  else  interrupted 
by  violent  invectives  against  their  client.  At  one  stage 
the  Lord  Chief  Justice  exclaimed :  "  This  is  an  old  rogue 
who  hath  poisoned  the  world  with  his  Kidderminster 
doctrines.  He  encouraged  all  the  women  and  maids  to 
bring  their  bodkins  and  thimbles  to  carry  on  war  against 
the  King  of  ever  blessed  memory.  An  old  schismatical 
knave  !  A  hypocritical  villain ! "  By  and  by  he  called 
Baxter  "an  old  blockhead,  an  unthankful  villain,  a 
conceited,  stubborn,  fanatical  dog."  u  Hang  him ! "  he 
Baid,  "this  one  old  fellow  hath  cast  more  reproaches  on 
the  constitution  and  discipline  of  our  Church  than  will  be 
wiped  off  for  a  hundred  years.  But  I'll  handle  him  for 
it;  for  he  deserves  to  be  whipped  through  the  city." 
Shortly  afterwards,  when  Baxter  began  to  say  a  few  words 
on  his  own  behalf,  Jeffreys  stopped  him,  crying  out: 
"  Richard,  Richard,  dost  thou  think  we'll  hear  thee  poison 
the  court  ?  Richard,  thou  art  an  old  fellow,  and  an  old 
knave;  thou  hast  written  books  enough  to  load  a  cart, 
every  one  as  full  of  sedition,  I  might  say  of  treason,  as  an 
egg  is  full  of  meat.  Hadst  thou  been  whipped  out  of  thy 
writing  trade  forty  years  ago,  it  had  been  happy."  It  is 
needless  to  say  in  such  a  court  as  this  Baxter  was  at  once 
found  guilty.  He  was  fined  five  hundred  marks,  which  it 
was  known  he  could  not  pay ;  condemned  to  lie  in  prison 
till  he  paid  it,  and  bound  over  to  good  behaviour  for  seven 

years.     And  the  issue  of  the  matter  was  that  the  holy 

2D 


418  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

author  of  "  The  Saint's  Rest,"  a  poor,  old,  diseased,  childless 
widower,  lay  for  two  years  in  South wark  gaoL 

The  Scotch  picture  of  the  Nonconformists'  sufferings 
under  James  IL  is  even  blacker  than  the  English  one.  I 
shall  take  it  substantially  from  Wodrow's  and  Macaulay's 
history.  In  the  very  same  month  that  Baxter  was  tried, 
two  women  named  Margaret  Maclachlan  and  Margaret 
Wilson,  the  former  an  aged  widow,  the  latter  a  girl  of 
eighteen,  suffered  death  for  their  religion  in  Wigtonshire, 
at  the  hands  of  James  IL's  myrmidons.  They  were  both 
godly  women,  innocent  of  any  crime  but  Nonconformity. 
They  were  offered  their  lives  if  they  would  abjure  the 
cause  of  the  insurgent  covenanters,  and  attend  the 
Episcopal  worship.  They  both  refused;  and  they  were 
sentenced  to  be  drowned.  They  were  carried  to  a  spot  on 
the  shore  of  the  Solway  Firth,  which  the  tide  overflowed 
twice  a  day,  and  were  fastened  to  stakes  fixed  in  the  sand 
between  high  and  low  water-mark.  The  elder  woman 
was  placed  nearest  to  the  advancing  water,  in  the  hopes 
that  her  last  agonies  might  terrify  the  younger  one  into 
submission.  The  sight  was  dreadful  But  the  courage  of 
the  young  survivor  did  not  fail.  She  saw  her  fellow- 
sufferer  drowned,  and  saw  the  sea  draw  nearer  and  nearer 
to  herself,  but  gave  no  signs  of  alarm.  She  prayed  and 
sang  verses  of  Psalms,  till  the  waves  choked  her  voice. 
When  she  had  tasted  the  bitterness  of  death,  she  was,  by 
cruel  mercy,  unbound  and  restored  to  life.  When  she 
'  came  to  herself,  pitying  friends  and  neighbours  implored 
her  to  yield.  "  Dear  Margaret,"  they  cried, "  only  say,  God 
save  the  King."  The  poor  girl,  true  to  her  theology, 
gasped  out,  "  May  God  save  him  if  it  be  God's  will."  Her 
friends  crowded  round  the  presiding  officer,  crying,  "  She 


JAMES  II.  AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  419 

has  said  it,  indeed,  sir,  she  has  said  it"  "  Will  she  take 
the  abjuration?"  he  sternly  demanded.  "Never,"  she 
exclaimed.  "  I  am  Christ's ;  let  me  go."  And  once  more 
bound  to  the  stake,  the  waters  of  the  Solway  closed  over 
her  for  the  last  time.  Her  epitaph  may  be  seen  to  this 
day  in  Wigton  churchyard. 

Such  were  the  dealings  of  James  with  Protestant 
Nonconformists  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign.  I  make 
no  comment  on  them.  These  two  examples  speak  for 
themselves ;  and  they  do  not  stand  alone.  The  story  of 
the  murder  of  John  Brown,  of  Priesthill,  by  Claverhouse, 
is  as  sad  as  that  of  Margaret  Wilson.  No  wonder  that  a 
deep  dislike  to  Episcopacy  is  rooted  down  in  the  hearts 
of  Scotch  people  to  this  very  day!  They  never  forget 
such  stories  as  Margaret  Wilson's.  Even  in  England 
I  wish  I  could  add  that  vile  prosecutions  like  that 
of  Baxter  had  called  forth  any  expression  of  disap 
proval  from  English  Churchmen.  But,  alas !  for  a  season, 
James  persecuted  and  prospered,  and  no  man  opposed 
him. 

(2)  The  second  black  page  in  the  history  of  James  II.'s 
reign  is  the  detestable  cruelty  with  which  he  punished 
those  English  counties  which  had  taken  any  part  in 
Monmouth's  rebellion,  in  the  autumn  of  1685.  Concerning 
that  miserable  rebellion  there  can,  of  course,  be  but  one 
opinion  among  sensible  men.  It  is  vain  to  deny  that 
the  brief  insurrection,  which  ended  with  the  battle  of 
Sedgemoor,  was  an  enormous  folly  as  well  as  a  crime.  We 
all  know  how  Monmouth,  its  unhappy  leader,  paid  for  it 
by  dying  on  the  scaffold.  But  it  is  equally  vain  to  deny 
that  the  bloodthirsty  ferocity  with  which  James  avenged 
himself  on  all  who  had  favoured  Monmouth's  cause,  or 


426  llGHT  FROM  OL1)  TIMES. 

taken  arms  in  his  support,  is  unparalleled  in  the  annals  of 
English  History. 

The  proceedings  of  that  military  monster,  Colonel  Kirke, 
immediately  after  the  defeat  and  dispersion  of  the  rebel 
army,  surpassed  anything  that  we  heard  of  in  the  Indian 
Mutiny.  At  Taunton  he  is  said  to  have  hanged  at  least 
a  hundred  so-called  rebels  within  a  week  after  the  battle 
of  Sedgemoor,  and  many  without  even  the  form  of  a  trial- 
Not  a  few  of  his  wretched  victims  were  quartered,  and 
their  heads  and  limbs  sent  to  be  hanged  in  chains  in  the 
neighbouring  villages.  "So  many  dead  bodies  were 
quartered,"  says  Macaulay  (i.  629),  "  that  the  executioner 
under  the  gallows  stood  ankle  deep  in  blood." 

But  even  the  diabolical  cruelties  of  Colonel  Kirke  were 
surpassed  by  the  execrable  sentences  of  Judge  Jeffreys, 
when  he  went  on  Circuit  to  the  Assizes  in  Hampshire, 
Dorsetshire,  and  Somersetshire,  two  months  after  the 
battle  of  Sedgemoor.  In  Dorsetshire  he  hanged  about 
seventy,  in  Somersetshire  no  less  than  two  hundred  and 
thirty-three.  The  number  of  those  transported  for  life 
was  841.  The  greater  part  of  these  were  poor  ignorant 
rustics,  many  of  them  men  of  blameless  private  character, 
who  had  taken  arms  under  the  idea  that  Protestantism 
was  at  stake ;  and  they  died  for  no  other  offence  than  that 
of  simply  following  Monmouth,  a  political  adventurer,  for 
a  few  short  weeks.  The  Assize  was  long  known  as  the 
bloody  Assize.  "In  Somersetshire,"  says  Macaulay,  "on 
the  green  of  every  large  village  which  had  furnished 
Monmouth  with  soldiers,  ironed  corpses  clattering  in  the 
wind,  or  human  heads  and  quarters  stuck  on  polei 
poisoned  the  air,  and  made  the  traveller  sick  with  horror 
In  many  parishes  the  peasantry  could  not  even  assemble* 


JAMES  II.  AND  THE  SEVEN   BISHOPS.  421 

in  God's  house  without  seeing  the  ghastly  face  of  some 
neighbour's  skull  grinning  at  them  on  the  porch."  In 
Hampshire,  Jeffreys  actually  sentenced  to  death  a  venerable 
old  lady  named  Lady  Lisle,  aged  above  seventy,  for  no 
other  crime  than  that  of  affording  temporary  shelter  to 
an  insurgent ;  and  nothing  but  the  indignant  remonstrance 
of  the  Winchester  clergy  prevented  her  being  burned  alive. 
Lord  Feversham,  the  conqueror  of  Sedgemoor,  and  Lord 
Clarendon,  the  King's  brother-in-law,  in  vain  interceded 
for  her.  Jeffreys  was  allowed  to  work  his  will,  and  she 
was  actually  beheaded  in  Winchester  market-placa 

For  all  this  abominable  cruelty,  James  II.  must  always 
be  held  responsible.  The  vile  agents  who  shed  this  blood 
were  his  tools,  and  he  had  only  to  speak  the  word  and  the 
work  of  death  would  have  ceased.  Hallam,  the  historian, 
expressly  says  (iii.  93)  that  the  King  was  the  author  of  all 
this  bloodshed,  and  that  Jeffreys  afterward  declared  "  he 
had  not  been  bloody  enough  for  his  employer."  But  the 
real  secret  of  the  King's  savage  and  detestable  conduct 
was  a  determination  to  put  down  Protestantism  by  a  reign 
of  terror,  and  deter  men  from  any  future  movement  in  its 
favour.  And,  after  all,  the  truth  must  be  spoken.  James 
was  a  bigoted  member  of  a  Church  which  for  ages  has 
been  too  often  "  drunken  with  the  blood  of  saints  and  the 
martyrs  of  Jesus."  He  only  walked  in  the  steps  of  the 
Duke  of  Alva  in  the  Netherlands;  in  the  steps  of 
Charles  IX.  at  the  massacre  of  St.  Bartholomew ;  in  the 
steps  of  the  Duke  of  Savoy  in  Piedmont,  until  Cromwell 
interfered  and  obliged  him  to  cease ;  and  in  the  steps  of 
the  hateful  Spanish  Inquisition.  One  thing  is  very 
certain  :  there  never  was  a  petty  insurrection  so  ruthlessly 
quenched  in  blood  as  Monmouth's  rebellion  was  quenched 


422  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

by  James  the  Papist.  Blood  makes  a  great  stain.  He 
found  to  his  cost  one  day  that  the  blood  shed  by  Kirke 
and  Jeffreys  with  his  sanction  had  cried  to  heaven,  and 
was  not  forgotten.  When  the  Prince  of  Orange  landed 
at  Torbay,  the  western  counties  joined  him  to  a  man,  and 
forsook  James. 

(3)  The  third  black  page  in  the  history  of  James  II.'s 
reign  was  his  daring  attempt  to  gag  the  pulpit,  and  stop 
the  mouths  of  all  who  preached  against  Popery. 

Preaching  in  every  age  of  the  Church  has  always  been 
God's  chief  instrument  for  setting  forward  religious  truth, 
and  checking  error.  Preaching  was  one  principal  agency 
by  which  the  great  work  of  the  Reformation  was  effected 
in  England.  The  Church  of  Rome  knows  that  full  well, 
and,  wherever  she  dares,  she  has  always  endeavoured  to 
exalt  ceremonials  and  to  depreciate  the  pulpit.  To  use 
old  Latimer's  quaint  words,  "  Whenever  the  devil  gets  into 
a  church,  his  plan  is  to  cry, '  Up  with  candles  and  down 
with  preaching.' "  Next  to  an  open  and  free  Bible,  the 
greatest  obstacle  to  the  progress  of  Popery  is  a  free  pulpit, 
and  the  public  exposition  of  God's  Word.  That  James  II., 
like  all  thorough-going  Papists,  knew  all  this,  we  cannot 
doubt  for  a  moment.  We  need  not,  therefore,  wonder  that 
in  1686  he  commenced  an  attack  on  the  English  pulpit. 
If  he  could  once  silence  that  mighty  organ,  he  hoped  to 
pave  the  way  for  the  advance  of  Popery.  "  He  took  on 
himself,"  says  Macaulay  (ii.  91) — 

"To  charge  the  clergy  of  the  Established  Church  to 
abstain  from  touching  on  controverted  points  of  doctrine 
in  their  discourses.  Thus,  while  sermons  in  defence  of 
the  Roman  Catholic  religion  were  preached  every  Sunday 
and  holiday  in  the  Royal  Chapel,  the  Church  of  the  State, 


JAMES  II.  AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  423 

the  Church  of  the  great   majority  of  the  nation,  was 
forbidden  to  explain  and  vindicate  her  own  principles." 

William  Sherlock,  Master  of  the  Temple,  was  the  first 
to  feel  the  royal  displeasure.  His  pension  was  stopped, 
and  he  was  severely  reprimanded.  John  Sharpe,  Dean  of 
Norwich,  and  Rector  of  St.  Giles',  gave  even  greater 
offence.  In  reply  to  an  appeal  from  a  parishioner,  he 
delivered  an  animated  discourse  against  the  pretensions 
of  the  Church  of  Rome.  Compton,  the  Bishop  of  London, 
was  immediately  ordered  to  suspend  him,  and  on  hia 
objecting  to  do  so,  he  was  himself  suspended  from  all 
spiritual  functions,  and  the  charge  of  his  diocese  was 
committed  to  two  time-serving  prelates  named  Spratt 
and  Crewe.  Compton  was  already  famous  for  his  dislike 
to  Popery.  When  James  came  to  the  throne  he  had 
boldly  declared  in  the  House  of  Lords  that  "the 
Constitution  was  in  danger."  We  can  well  understand 
that  James-  was  anxious  to  suppress  him.  (Ranke,  iv. 

277.) 

Singularly,  enough,  this  high-handed  proceeding  worked 
round  for  good.  For  the  first  time  since  his  accession  to 
the  throne,  James  received  a  distinct  check.  The  attacks 
on  Sherlock,  Sharpe,  and  Bishop  Compton,  roused  the 
spirit  of  the  whole  body  of  the  English  clergy.  To  preach 
against  the  errors  of  Popery  was  now  regarded  as  a  point 
of  honour  and  duty.  The  London  clergy  set  an  example 
which  was  bravely  followed  all  over  the  country.  The 
King's  prohibition  to  handle  controversial  subjects  was 
everywhere  disregarded.  It  was  impossible  to  punish  an 
offence  which  was  committed  every  Sunday  by  thousands 
of  divines  from  the  Isle  of  Wight  to  Berwick-upon-Tweed. 
and  from  the  Land's  End  to  the  North  Foreland. 


424  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

Moreover,  the  spirit  of  the  congregations  was  thoroughly 
roused.  There  were  old  men  living  in  London  whose 
grandfathers  had  heard  Latimer  preach,  and  had  seen 
John  Rogers  burnt  at  Smithfield.  There  were  others 
whose  parents  had  seen  Laud  beheaded  for  trying  to 
Romanize  the  Church,  and  prosecuting  Protestant 
Churchmen.  Such  men  as  these  were  thoroughly  stirred 
and  disgusted  by  James's  movement;  and  if  the  clergy 
had  been  silent  about  Popery,  they  would  have  resented 
their  silence  as  unfaithfulness  and  sin. 

The  printing-presses,  besides,  both  at  London,  Oxford, 
and  Cambridge,  poured  forth  a  constant  stream  of  anti- 
Popish  literature,  and  supplied  all  who  could  read  with 
ample  information  about  every  error  of  the  Church  of 
Rome.  Tillotson,  Stillingfleet,  Sherlock,  Patrick,  Tenison, 
Wake,  Fowler,  Clagett,  and  many  others  wrote  numerous 
treatises  of  all  kinds  to  expose  Popery,  which  exist  to  this 
day,  and  which  at  the  time  produced  an  immense  effect. 
Many  of  these  are  to  be  found  in  the  three  huge  folios 
called  "Gibson's  Preservative,"  and  Macaulay  estimates 
that  as  many  as  20,000  pages  of  them  are  to  be  found  in 
the  British  Museum. 

The  whole  affair  is  a  striking  instance  of  God's  power 
to  bring  good  out  of  evil.  The  very  step  by  which  this 
unhappy  Popish  monarch  thought  to  silence  his  strongest 
foe  proved  the  first  step  towards  his  own  ruin.  Up  to 
this  date  he  seemed  to  carry  everything  before  him. 
From  this  date  he  began  to  fall.  From  the  moment  he 
put  forth  his  hand  to  touch  the  ark,  to  interfere  with  the 
Word  of  God,  to  silence  its  preachers,  he  never  prospered, 
and  every  succeeding  step  in  his  reign  was  in  the 
downward  direction.  I^ike  Haman,  he  had  dared  to 


JAMES  II.   AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  425 

meddle  with  God's  peculiar  servants,  and  like  Haman  he 
fell,  never  to  rise  again. 

(4)  The  fourth  black  page  in  the  history  of  James  II.'s 
reign  is  his  tyrannical  invasion  of  the  rights  of  the  two 
great  Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge  in  1687. 

The  influence  of  these  two  venerable  bodies  in  England 
has  always  been  very  great,  and  I  trust  they  will  always 
be  so  governed  that  it  will  never  become  less.  But  it  is 
no  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  never  was  so  great  as 
towards  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Beside 
them  there  were  no  universities  or  colleges.  King's 
College,  London;  University  College,  Durham;  St.  Aidan's; 
Highbury;  St.  Bees,  and  Cuddesdon  did  not  exist.  Oxford 
and  Cambridge  stood  alone.  They  were  the  fountains  of 
all  the  learning  of  the  day,  and  the  training  school  of  all 
the  ablest  divines  and  lawyers,  poets  and  orators  of  the 
land.  Even  among  the  Puritans  it  would  be  hard  to  find 
any  man  of  ability  who  had  not  begun  his  career  and 
picked  up  his  first  knowledge  at  some  college  in  Oxford 
or  Cambridge.  In  short,  the  two  Universities  were  the 
intellectual  heart  of  England,  and  every  pulsation  of  that 
heart  was  felt  throughout  the  kingdom. 

All  this,  we  need  not  doubt,  even  the  dull  mind  of 
James  II.  clearly  perceived.  He  saw  that  he  had  little 
chance  of  Romanizing  England  until  he  could  get  hold  of 
the  two  Universities,  and  this  he  resolved  to  try.  He 
was  encouraged,  probably,  to  make  the  attempt  by  the 
notorious  loyalty  to  the  House  of  Stuart  which  Oxford 
and  Cambridge  had  always  exhibited.  Both  the 
Universities  had  suffered  heavily  for  their  attachment  to 
the  King's  side  during  the  unhappy  Commonwealth  wars, 
litany  a  Head  of  a  College  had  beep,  displaced  and  bis 


426  LIGHT  FfiOM  OLD  TIMES. 

position  filled  by  one  of  Cromwell's  Puritans.  Owen  had 
ruled  at  Christ  Church  and  Goodwin  at  Magdalen.  Many 
a  College  plate-chest  was  sadly  empty  compared  to  its 
state  in  olden  times,  having  given  up  its  silver  to  be 
melted  down  in  aid  of  Charles  I.,  and  to  buy  arms 
and  ammunition.  Ever  since  the  Reformation,  the 
two  Universities  had  exhibited  the  most  obsequious 
subserviency  to  the  Crown,  had  stoutly  maintained  the 
divine  right  of  kings,  and  had  often  approached  the 
throne  in  addresses  full  of  fulsome  adulation.  I  believe 
that  James  flattered  himself  that  they  would  go  on 
yielding  everything  to  his  will,  and  fondly  dreamed  that 
in  a  few  years  they  would  be  completely  under  the  Pope's 
command,  and  the  education  of  young  England  would  be 
in  the  hands  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  It  was  a  grand 
and  intoxicating  prospect.  But  he  reckoned  without  his 
host.  He  little  knew  the  spirit  that  was  yet  left  by  the 
Isis  and  the  Cam. 

James  opened  his  campaign  and  crossed  the  Rubicon 
by  attacking  the  University  of  Cambridge.  The  law  was 
clear  and  distinct,  that  no  person  should  be  admitted  to 
any  degree  without  taking  the  "  Oath  of  Supremacy,"  and 
another  oath  called  the  "Oath  of  Obedience."  Nevertheless, 
in  February,  1687,  a  royal  letter  was  sent  to  Cambridge 
directing  that  a  Benedictine  monk,  named  Alban  Francis, 
should  be  admitted  as  Master  of  Artg.  Between  reverence 
for  the  King  and  reverence  for  their  own  statutes,  the 
academical  officers  were  naturally  placed  in  a  most 
perplexing  position.  To  their  infinite  credit  they  took 
the  right  course,  and  steadily  refused  to  admit  the  King's 
nominee  unless  he  took  the  oaths.  The  result  was  that 
the  Vice-Chancellor  of  Cambridge  was  summoned  to 


JAMES  II.  AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  427 

appear  before  the  New  Court  of  High  Commission, 
presided  over  by  Jeffreys,  together  with  deputies 
appointed  by  the  Senate.  When  the  day  arrived, 
Dr.  Pechell,  the  Vice-Chancellor,  a  man  of  no  particular 
vigour  or  ability,  accompanied  by  eight  distinguished  men, 
of  whom  the  famous  Isaac  Newton  was  one,  appeared 
before  this  formidable  tribunal.  Their  case  was  as  clear 
as  daylight.  They  offered  to  prove  that  they  had  done 
nothing  contrary  to  law  and  practice,  and  had  only 
carried  out  the  plain  meaning  of  their  statutes.  But 
Jeffreys  would  hear  nothing.  He  treated  the  whole  party 
with  as  much  vulgar  insolence  as  if  they  were  felons  being 
tried  before  him  at  the  Old  Bailey,  and  they  were  thrust 
out  of  court  without  a  hearing.  They  were  soon  called  in 
and  informed  that  the  Commission  had  determined  to 
deprive  Pechell  of  the  Vice-Chancellorship,  and  to 
suspend  him  from  all  the  emoluments  to  which  he  was 
entitled  as  Master  of  a  College.  "As  for  you,"  said 
Jeffreys  to  Isaac  Newton  and  his  seven  companions,  with 
disgusting  levity,  "I  send  you  home  with  a  text  of 
Scripture,  'Go  your  way  and  sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse 
thing  come  upon  you.' " 

From  Cambridge  James  turned  to  Oxford.  Here,  it 
must  be  avowed,  he  began  his  operations  with  great 
advantages.  Popery  had  already  effected  a  lodgment  in 
the  citadel,  and  got  allies  in  the  heart  of  the  University. 
Already  a  Roman  Catholic  named  Massey  had  been  made 
Dean  of  Christ  Church  by  the  nomination  of  the  Crown, 
and  the  House  had  submitted.  Already  University 
College  was  little  better  than  a  Romish  seminary  by  the 
perversion  of  the  Master,  Obadiah  Walker,  to  Popery. 
Mass  was  daily  said  in  both  Colleges.  But  this  state  of 


428  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

things  had  caused  an  immense  amount  of  smouldering 
dissatisfaction  throughout  Oxford.  The  undergraduates 
hooted  Walker's  congregation,  and  chanted  satirical  ballads 
under  his  windows  without  the  interference  of  Proctors. 
The  burden  of  one  of  their  songs  has  been  preserved  to 
this  day,  and  you  might  have  heard  at  night  in  High 
Street,  near  the  fine  old  college,  such  words  as  these : — 

"  Here  old  Obadiah 
Sings  Ave  Maria." 

In  short,  any  careful  observer  might  have  foreseen  that 
Oxford  feeling  towards  the  King  was  undergoing  a  great 
change,  and  that  it  would  take  very  little  to  create  a 
blaze. 

Just  at  this  crisis  the  President  of  Magdalen  College 
died,  and  it  became  the  duty  of  the  Fellows,  according  to 
their  statutes,  to  elect  a  successor,  either  from  their  own 
society  or  from  New  College.  With  an  astounding  mixture 
of  folly  and  audacity,  the  King  actually  recommended  the 
Fellows  to  elect  to  the  vacant  place  a  man  named  Anthony 
Farmer,  a  person  of  infamous  moral  character,  utterly 
destitute  of  any  claim  to  govern  a  college ;  a  drunkard,  a 
Papist,  and  a  person  disqualified  by  the  statutes  of 
Waynflete,  as  he  was  neither  Fellow  of  New  College  nor 
of  Magdalen.  To  their  infinite  credit  the  Fellows  of 
Magdalen,  by  an  overwhelming  majority,  refused  to  elect 
the  King's  nominee,  resolved  to  face  his  displeasure,  and 
deliberately  chose  for  their  President  a  man  named  John 
Hough,  a  Fellow  of  eminent  virtue  and  prudence.  At 
once  they  were  treated  with  the  utmost  violence,  injustice, 
and  indignity.  The  King  insisted  on  their  accepting 
another  President  of  his  own  selection,  and  commande4 


JAMES  it.  AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.          429 

them  to  take  a  mean  creature  of  the  Court  named  Parker, 
Bishop  of  Oxford.  The  Fellows  firmly  refused,  saying 
they  had  lawfully  elected  Hough,  and  they  would  have  no 
other  President.  In  vain  they  were  threatened  and 
insulted,  first  by  the  King  himself,  and  then  by  a  Special 
Commission  sent  down  from  London.  They  stood  firm, 
and  would  not  give  way  one  inch.  The  Commission  finally 
pronounced  Hough  an  intruder,  dismissed  him  from  his 
presidency,  and  charged  the  Fellows  no  longer  to  recognise 
his  authority,  but  to  assist  at  the  admission  of  the  Bishop 
of  Oxford.  It  was  then  that  the  gallant  Hough  publicly 
addressed  the  following  remarkable  words  to  the  Com 
mission  :  "  My  Lords,  you  have  this  day  deprived  me  of 
my  freehold.  I  hereby  protest  against  all  your  proceedings 
as  illegal,  unjust,  and  null,  and  I  appeal  from  you  to  our 
sovereign  Lord  the  King  in  his  Courts  of  Justice."  But 
though  thus  driven  from  his  office  by  force,  Hough  was 
backed  by  the  general  feeling  of  the  whole  University,  and 
of  almost  every  one  connected  with  Magdalen.  At  the 
installation  of  his  successor  (Parker)  only  two  Fellows  out 
of  forty  attended  the  ceremony.  The  college  porter, 
Robert  Gardner,  threw  down  his  keys.  The  butler 
refused  to  scratch  Hough's  name  out  of  the  buttery  books. 
No  blacksmith  in  all  the  city  of  Oxford  could  be  found 
to  force  the  locks  of  the  President's  lodge,  and  the 
Commissioners  were  obliged  to  employ  their  own  servants 
to  break  open  the  doors  with  iron  bars. 

But  the  matter  did  not  end  here.  On  the  day  that 
Hough  was  expelled  from  his  Presidency  and  Parker 
installed,  the  Commissioners  invited  the  Vice-Chancellor  of 
1687  to  dine  with  them.  The  Vice-Chancellor  that  year 
was  Gilbert  Ironside,  "Warden  of  Wadham,  and  afterwards 


430  LIGHT  FfcOM  OLD  TIMES. 

Bishop  of  Hereford.  He  refused.  "My  taste,"  he  said, 
"  differs  from  that  of  Colonel  Kirke's.  I  cannot  eat  my 
meals  with  appetite  under  a  gallows."  The  Scholars  of 
Magdalen  refused  to  pull  off  their  caps  to  the  new  ruler  of 
Magdalen.  The  Demies  refused  to  perform  their  academical 
exercises  and  attend  lectures,  saying  that  they  were 
deprived  of  their  lawful  governor,  and  would  submit  to  no 
usurped  authority.  Attempts  were  made  to  bribe  them 
by  the  offer  of  some  of  the  lucrative  fellowships  declared 
vacant  But  one  undergraduate  after  another  refused, 
and  one  who  did  accept  was  turned  out  of  the  Hall  by  the 
rest.  The  expulsion  of  the  Fellows  was  followed  by  the 
expulsion  of  a  crowd  of  Demies.  A  few  weeks  after  this 
Parker  died,  some  said  of  mortification  and  a  broken 
heart.  He  was  buried  in  the  antechapel  of  Magdalen; 
but  no  stone  marks  his  grave.  Then  the  King's  whole 
plan  was  carried  into  effect.  The  College  was  turned  into 
a  Popish  seminary,  and  Bonaventura  Giffard,  a  Roman 
Catholic  Bishop,  was  made  President  In  one  day  twelve 
Papists  were  made  Fellows.  The  Roman  Catholic  service 
was  performed  in  the  chapel,  and  the  whole  work  of 
violence  and  spoliation  was  completed. 

Such  were  the  dealings  of  James  II.  with  Oxford  and 
Cambridge.  Their  gross  injustice  was  only  equalled  by 
their  gross  impolicy.  In  his  furious  zeal  for  Popery,  the 
King  completely  over-reached  himself.  He  alienated 
the  affections  of  the  two  most  powerful  educational 
institutions  in  the  land,  and  filled  the  hearts  of  thou 
sands  of  the  ablest  minds  in  England  with  a  deep 
sense  of  wrong.  And  when  the  end  came,  as  it  did 
within  eighteen  months,  he  found  that  no  places  deserted 
his  cause  so  readily  as  the  two  over  which  he  had  ridden 


JAMES  II.   AND  TEE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  431 

roughshod,  the  two  great  English  Universities  of  Oxford 
and  Cambridge. 

(5)  The  fifth  dark  page  in  the  history  of  James  II.'s 
reign  is  his  rash  attempt  to  trample  down  Hie  English 
nobility  and  gentry  in  the  counties,  and  substitute  for 
them  servile  creatures  of  his  own  who  would  help  forward 
his  designs. 

In  order  to  understand  this  move  of  the  misguided 
King,  it  must  be  remembered  that  he  wanted  to  get  a  new 
House  of  Commons,  a  House  which  would  do  his  bidding 
and  not  oppose  his  Romanizing  plans.  He  knew  enough 
of  England  to  be  aware  that  ever  since  the  days  of  Simon 
de  Montfort  every  intelligent  Englishman  has  attached 
great  importance  to  an  elected  Parliament.  He  had  not 
entirely  forgotten  the  iron  hand  of  the  Long  Parliament 
in  his  father's  days.  He  rightly  judged  that  he  would 
never  succeed  in  overthrowing  Protestantism  without  the 
sanction  of  a  House  of  Commons,  and  that  sanction  he 
resolved  to  try  to  obtain. 

"  Having  determined  to  pack  a  Parliament,"  says 
Macaulay,  "  James  set  himself  energetically  and  methodi 
cally  to  the  work.  A  proclamation  appeared  in  the 
Gazette "  (at  the  end  of  1687)  "announcing  that  the  King 
had  determined  to  revise  the  Commissions  of  Peace  and 
of  Lieutenancy,  and  to  retain  in  public  employment  only 
such  gentlemen  as  would  support  his  policy."  At  the 
same  time  a  Committee  of  Seven  Privy  Councillors  sat  at 
Whitehall,  including  Father  Petre,  an  ambitious  Jesuit, 
for  the  purpose  of  "  regulating,"  as  it  was  called,  all  the 
municipal  corporations  in  boroughs : — 

"The  persons  on  whom  James  principally  relied  for 
assistance  [continues  Macaulay],  were  the  Lord  Lieutenants, 


432  LIGHT  frROM  OLl) 

Every  Lord  Lieutenant  received  written  orders  directing 
him  to  go  down  immediately  into  his  county.  There  he 
was  to  summon  before  him  all  his  deputies,  and  all  the 
Justices  of  the  Peace,  and  to  put  to  them  a  set  of 
interrogatories  framed  for  the  purpose  of  finding  out  how 
they  would  act  at  a  general  election.  He  was  to  take 
down  their  answers  in  writing,  and  transmit  them  to  the 
Government  He  was  to  furnish  a  list  of  such  Romanists 
and  Protestant  Dissenters  as  were  best  qualified  for 
commissions  as  magistrates,  and  for  command  in  the 
militia.  He  was  also  to  examine  the  state  of  all  the 
boroughs  in  his  county,  and  to  make  such  reports  as 
might  be  needful  to  guide  the  London  board  of  regulators. 
And  it  was  intimated  to  each  Lord  Lieutenant  that  he 
must  perform  these  duties  himself,  and  not  delegate  them 
to  any  other  person." 

The  first  effect  of  these  audacious  and  unconstitutional 
orders  might  have  opened  the  eyes  of  any  king  of  common 
tense.  The  spirit  of  the  old  Barons  who  met  at 
Runnymede  proved  to  be  not  extinct.  Even  before  this 
time  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  had  stopped  at  the  door  of  the 
Popish  chapel  which  James  attended,  and  when  James 
remonstrated  and  said,  "  Your  Grace's  father  would  have 
gone  farther,"  had  boldly  replied,  "  Your  Majesty's  father 
would  not  have  gone  so  far."  But  now  it  became  clear 
that  many  other  peers  beside  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  were 
Protestant  to  the  backbone.  Half  the  Lord  Lieutenants 
in  England  flatly  refused  to  do  the  King's  dirty  work,  and 
to  stoop  to  the  odious  service  imposed  on  them.  They 
were  immediately  dismissed,  and  inferior  men,  of  more 
pliant  and  supple  consciences,  were  pitchforked  into  their 
places. 


JAMES  II.  AND  THE  SEVEN   BISHOPS.  433 

The  list  of  high-minded  noblemen  who  resisted  the 
King's  will  on  this  memorable  occasion  is  even  now  most 
remarkable,  and  deserves  to  be  had  in  remembrance. 
One  great  name  follows  another  in  grand  succession  in 
Macaulay's  pages,  until  one's  breath  is  almost  taken  away 
by  the  sight  of  the  King's  folly.  In  Essex,  the  Earl  of 
Oxford ;  in  Staffordshire,  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury ;  in 
Sussex,  the  Earl  of  Dorset;  in  Yorkshire,  the  Duke  of 
Somerset  in  the  East  Riding,  and  Lord  Fauconberg  in  the 
North  Riding;  in  Shropshire,  Lord  Newport;  in  Lancashire, 
the  Earl  of  Derby ;  in  Wiltshire,  the  Earl  of  Pembroke ; 
in  Leicestershire,  the  Earl  of  Rutland ;  in  Buckingham 
shire,  the  Earl  of  Bridgwater ;  in  Cumberland,  the  Earl  of 
Thanet ;  in  Warwickshire,  the  Earl  of  Northampton ;  in 
Oxfordshire,  the  Earl  of  Abingdon;  in  Derbyshire,  the  Earl 
of  Scarsdale ;  and  in  Hampshire,  the  Earl  of  Gainsborough 
— all  were  summarily  sent  to  the  rightabout;  and  for 
what?  Simply,  as  every  one  knew,  because  they  preferred 
a  good  conscience  to  Crown  favour,  principle  to  place, 
and  Protestantism  to  Popery.  The  gallant  words  of  the 
Earl  of  Oxford,  who  was  turned  out  in  Essex,  when  the 
King  demanded  an  explanation  of  his  refusal  to  obey, 
spoke  the  sentiments  of  all:  "Sir,  I  will  stand  by  your 
Majesty  against  all  enemies  to  the  last  drop  of  blood; 
but  this  is  a  matter  of  conscience,  and  I  cannot  comply." 

A  viler  piece  of  ingratitude  than  this  move  of  James 
can  hardly  be  conceived.  Most  of  the  noblemen  whom  he' 
dismissed  were  the  representatives  of  great  families  who, 
in  the  Commonwealth  wars,  made  immense  sacrifices  in 
his  father's  cause.  Some  of  them,  like  the  Earl  of  Derby, 
could  tell  of  fathers  and  grandfathers  who  had  died  for 

King  Charles.     Many  of   them  could  show  swords  and 

o  E 

ft   ia 


434  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

helmets  hanging  over  their  Elizabethan  fireplaces  which 
had  been  notched  and  dented  in  fighting  against  the 
Parliamentary  forces  at  Edgehill,  Marston  Moor,  and 
Naseby.  Not  a  few  of  them  could  point  to  ruined 
castles  and  halls,  to  parks  despoiled  of  their  timber, 
plate-chests  emptied  of  their  contents,  and  properties 
sadly  impoverished  in  the  days  when  Cavaliers  fought 
against  Roundheads.  And  now,  forsooth,  the  son  of  the 
martyred  Charles,  as  they  had  fondly  called  him,  turned 
round  upon  them,  trampled  on  their  feelings,  and  required 
them  to  lie  down,  and  let  him  walk  over  their  consciences. 
Can  we  wonder  that  they  keenly  resented  the  King's 
conduct !  At  one  fell  swoop  he  destroyed  the  affection  of 
half  the  leading  men  in  the  English  counties,  and  from 
being  his  friends  they  became  his  foes. 

In  fact,  the  ingratitude  of  the  King  was  now  only 
equalled  by  his  folly  and  impolicy.  No  sooner  was  his 
new  machinery  for  packing  a  subservient  Parliament  put 
in  motion,  than  it  broke  down  and  utterly  failed.  From 
every  corner  of  the  realm  there  came  the  tidings  of 
failure.  The  new  Lord  Lieutenants  could  do  nothing. 
The  Magistrates  and  candidates  for  Parliament  evaded 
inquiries,  and  refused  to  pledge  themselves  to  do  the 
King's  will.  Arguments,  promises,  and  threats  were  alike 
in  vain.  A  -deep-rooted  suspicion  had  got  into  men's 
minds  that  James  wanted  to  subvert  Protestantism,  and 
re-introduce  Popery,  and  they  would  not  give  way.  From 
Norfolk,-  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  reported  that  out  of 
seventy  leading  gentlemen  in  the  county  only  six  held 
out  any  hopes  of  supporting  the  Court.  In  Hertfordshire 
the  Squires  told  Lord  Rochester  that  they  would  send  no 
man  to  Parliament  who  would  vote  for  taking  away  the 


JAMES   II.   AND   THE   SEVEN   BISHOPS.  435 

safeguards  of  the  Protestant  religion.  The  gentry  of 
Bucks,  Shropshire,  and  Wiltshire  held  the  same  language. 
The  Magistrates  and  Deputy-Lieutenants  of  Cornwall  and 
Devonshire  told  Lord  Bath,  without  a  dissenting  voice, 
that  they  would  sacrifice  life  and  property  for  the  Crown, 
but  that  the  Protestant  religion  was  dearer  to  them  than 
either.  "  And,  Sir,"  said  Lord  Bath  to  the  King,  "  if  your 
Majesty  dismisses  them,  their  successors  would  give  the 
same  answer."  In  Lancashire,  a  very  Romish  county,  the 
new  Lord  Lieutenant  reported  that  one-third  of  the 
Magistrates  were  opposed  to  the  Court.  In  Hampshire 
the  whole  of  the  Magistrates,  excepting  five  or  six, 
declared  they  would  take  no  part  in  the  civil  or  military 
government  of  the  county  while  the  King  was  represented 
there  by  the  Duke  of  Berwick,  a  Papist. 

The  sum  of  the  whole  matter  is  this.  The  attack  of 
James  on  the  independence  of  the  county  gentry  and 
nobility  was  as  completely  a  failure  as  his  attack  on  the 
pulpit  and  the  Universities.  It  was  worse  than  this.  It 
sowed  the  seeds  of  disaffection  to  his  person  from  one  end 
of  England  to  the  other,  and  alienated  from  him 
thousands  of  leading  men,  who,  under  other  circumstances, 
would  perhaps  have  stood  by  him  to  the  last.  And  the 
result  was,  that  when  the  Prince  of  Orange  landed  at 
Torbay  a  year  afterwards,  he  found  friends  in  half  the 
counties  in  England.  By  the  over-ruling  providence  of 
God  and  his  own  judicial  blindness,  James  paved  the  way 
to  his  own  ruin.  "The  Thanes  fell  from  him."  The 
nobility,  one  after  another,  forsook  him,  and  he  was  left 
friendless  and  alone. 

|  come   now  to  the   closing    scene  in  King   James1 


436  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

disgraceful  reign,  the  prosecution  and  trial  of  the  Seven 
Bishops.  The  importance  of  that  event  is  so  great,  and 
the  consequences  which  resulted  from  it  were  so  immense, 
that  I  must  enter  somewhat  fully  into  its  details.  I  do  so 
the  more  willingly  because  attempts  are  sometimes  made 
now-a-days  to  misrepresent  this  trial,  to  place  the  motives 
of  the  bishops  in  a  wrong  light,  and  to  obscure  the  real 
issues  which  were  at  stake.  Some  men  will  do  anything 
in  these  times  to  mystify  the  public  mind,  to  pervert 
history,  and  to  whitewash  the  Church  of  Home.  But  I 
have  made  it  my  business  to  search  up  every  authority  I 
can  find  about  this  era.  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  what 
is  the  true  account  of  the  whole  affair.  And  I  shall  try 
to  set  before  my  readers  the  "  thing  as  it  is." 

The  origin  of  the  trial  of  the  Seven  Bishops  was  a 
proclamation  put  forth  by  James  II.,  on  the  27th  of  April, 
1688,  called  the  "Declaration  of  Indulgence."  It  was  a 
Declaration  which  differed  little  from  one  put  forth  in 
April,  1687.  But  it  was  followed  by  an  "Order  of  Council" 
that  it  was  to  be  read  on  two  successive  Sundays,  in 
Divine  Service,  by  all  the  officiating  ministers  in  all  the 
churches  and  chapels  of  the  kingdom.  In  London  the 
reading  was  to  take  place  on  the  20th  and  27th  of  May, 
and  in  other  parts  of  England  on  the  3rd  and  10th  of 
June.  The  bishops  were  directed  to  distribute  copies  of 
the  Declaration  throughout  their  respective  dioceses.  The 
substance  of  the  Declaration  was  short  and  simple.  It 
suspended  all  penal  laws  against  Nonconformists.  It 
authorized  both  Roman  Catholics  and  Protestant  Dissenters 
to  perform  their  worship  publicly.  It  forbade  the  King's 
subjects,  on  pain  of  his  displeasure,  to  molest  any  assembly. 
It  abrogated  all  those  Acts  of  Parliament  which  imposed 


JAMES  H.  AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  437 

any  religious  test  as  a  qualification  for  any  civil  or  military 
office.  To  us  who  live  in  the  present  century,  the 
Declaration  may  seem  very  reasonable  and  harmless.  To 
the  England  of  the  seventeenth  century  it  wore  a  very 
different  aspect !  Men  knew  the  hand  from  which  it 
came,  and  saw  the  latent  intention.  Under  the  specious 
plea  of  toleration  and  liberty,  the  object  of  the  Declaration 
was  to  advance  Popery  and  give  license  and  free  scope  to 
the  Church  of  Rome,  and  to  all  its  schemes  for  reconquering 
England. 

This  famous  Declaration,  we  can  see  at  a  glance,  placed 
the  bishops  and  clergy  in  a  most  awkward  position.  What 
were  they  to  do  ?  What  was  the  path  of  duty  ?  They 
were  thoroughly  pinned  on  the  horns  of  a  dilemma.  If 
they  refused  compliance  to  the  King's  wishes  they  would 
seem  intolerant,  illiberal,  and  unkind  to  the  Nonconformists, 
as  well  as  disloyal,  disrespectful,  and  disobedient  to  their 
sovereign.  If  they  yielded  to  the  King's  wishes,  and  read 
the  Declaration,  they  would  be  assisting  the  propagation 
of  Popery.  The  liberty  James  wanted  them  to  proclaim 
was  neither  more  nor  less  than  indulgence  to  the  Jesuits 
and  the  whole  Church  of  Rome.  In  short,  they  found 
themselves  between  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  and  could  not 
possibly  avoid  giving  offence.  Refusing  to  sanction  the 
Declaration,  they  would  certainly  displease  the  King  and 
perhaps  irritate  the  Dissenters.  Consenting  to  it,  they 
would  infallibly  help  the  Pope.  Never,  perhaps,  were 
English  bishops  and  clergy  placed  in  such  a  difficult  and 
perplexing  position ! 

God's  ways,  however,  are  not  as  man's  ways,  and  light 
often  arises  out  of  darkness  in  quarters  where  it  was  not 
expected.  At  this  critical  juncture  the  Nonconformists, 


438  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

to  their  eternal  honour,  came  forward  and  cut  the  knot, 
and  helped  the  bishops  to  a  right  decision.  The  shrewd 
sons  of  the  good  old  Puritans  saw  clearly  what  James 
meant.  They  saw  that  under  a  specious  pretence  of 
liberty,  he  wanted  a  fulcrum  for  a  lever  which  would  turn 
England  upside  down,  and  destroy  the  work  of  the 
Reformation.  Like  the  noble-minded  Roman  ambassador 
before  Pyrrhus,  who  was  shown  first  a  bag  of  gold,  and  then 
an  elephant,  they  refused  to  be  bribed  just  as  they  had 
formerly  refused  to  be  intimidated.  They  would  have 
none  of  the  Royal  indulgence,  if  it  could  only  be  purchased 
at  the  expense  of  the  nation's  Protestantism.  Baxter,  and 
Bates,  and  Howe,  and  the  great  bulk  of  the  London 
Nonconformists,  entreated  the  clergy  to  stand  firm,  and 
not  to  yield  one  inch  to  the  King.  Young  Defoe  said  to 
his  Nonconformist  brethren,  "  I  had  rather  the  Church  of 
England  should  pull  our  clothes  off  by  fines  and  forfeitures, 
than  the  Papists  should  fall  both  upon  the  Church  and 
the  Dissenters,  and  pull  our  skins  off  by  fire  and  faggot."  * 

Oliver  Heywood,  a  famous  Nonconformist  of  the  day, 
says  distinctly  in  his  account  of  the  times,  "  though  the 
Dissenters  had  liberty  promised,  we  knew  it  was  not  out 
of  love  to  us,  but  for  another  purpose.  We  heard  the 
King  had  said  he  was  forced  to  grant  liberty  at  present 
to  those  whom  his  soul  abhorred."  "f 

The  immediate  result  was  that  a  meeting  of  the  London 
clergy  was  held,  and  after  much  debate,  in  which  Tillotson, 
Sherlock,  Patrick,  and  Stillingfleet  took  part,  it  was 
decided  that  the  "  Order  in  Council "  should  not  be  obeyed. 
No  one  contributed  to  this  result  more  than  Dr.  Fowler, 

*  C.  Knight.     History,  iv.  419.  t  Hey  wood's  Works,  i.  287. 


JAMES  II.   AND  THE   SEVEN  BISHOPS.  439 

Vicar  of  St.  Giles,  Cripplegate,  a  well-known  Broad 
Churchman.  While  the  matter  yet  hung  in  the  balance, 
and  the  final  vote  seemed  doubtful,  he  rose  and  said :  "  I 
must  be  plain.  The  question  to  my  mind  is  so  simple, 
that  argument  can  throw  no  new  light  on  it,  and  can  only 
beget  heat.  Let  every  man  say  Yes  or  No.  But  I  cannot 
consent  to  be  bound  by  the  majority.  I  shall  be  sorry  to 
cause  a  breach  of  unity.  But  this  Declaration  I  cannot 
read."  This  bold  speech  turned  the  scale.  A  resolution 
by  which  all  present  pledged  themselves  not  to  read  the 
Declaration  was  drawn  up,  and  was  ultimately  signed  by 
eighty-five  incumbents  in  London. 

In  the  meantime  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  William 
Sancroft,  showed  himself  not  unequal  to  the  emergency. 
He  was  naturally  a  cautious,  quiet,  and  somewhat  timid 
man,  and  the  last  person  to  be  combative,  and  to  quarrel 
with  kings.  Nevertheless  he  came  out  nobly  and  well, 
and  rose  to  the  occasion.  As  soon  as  the  Order  in  Council 
appeared,  he  summoned  to  Lambeth  Palace  those  few 
bishops,  divines,  and  laymen  who  happened  to  be  in  London 
and  took  counsel  with  them.  It  was  resolved  to  resist  the 
King,  and  to  refuse  to  read  the  Declaration.  The  Primate 
then  wrote  to  all  the  bishops  on  the  English  bench,  on 
whom  he  could  depend,  and  urged  them  to  come  up  to 
London  at  once,  and  join  him  in  a  formal  protest  and 
petition.  But  time  was  short.  There  were  no  railways  in 
those  days.  Journeying  was  slow  work.  Eighteen  bishops, 
says  Burnet  ("  Own  Times,"  iii.  266),  agreed  with  Sancroft. 
""•Jut  with  the  utmost  exertion  only  six  bishops  could  get  to 
London  in  time  to  help  the  Primate.  These  six,  with  the 
Archbishop  at  their  head,  assembled  at  Lambeth  on  the 
3.8th  of  May,  only  two  days  before  the  fatal  Sunday,  when 


440  LIGHT  FEOM  OLD  TIMES. 

the  King's  Declaration  was  to  be  read  in  London,  and 
before  night  agreed  on  a  petition  or  protest  to  which  all 
affixed  their  names. 

The  names  of  the  six  bishops  who  signed  this  remarkable 
document,  beside  Sancroft,  deserve  to  be  known  and 
remembered.  They  were  as  follows  :  Lloyd  of  St.  Asaph, 
Turner  of  Ely,  Lake  of  Chichester,  Ken  of  Bath  and  Wells, 
White  of  Peterborough,  and  Sir  Jonathan  Trelawney  of 
Bristol.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that,  with  the  single  exception 
of  Ken,  the  author  of  "Morning  and  Evening  Hymns," 
not  one  of  the  seven  men  who  signed  the  petition  could 
be  called  a  remarkable  man  in  any  way.  Not  one,  beside 
Ken,  has  made  any  mark  in  the  theological  world,  or  lives 
as  a  writer  or  preacher.  Not  one  of  the  whole  seven  could 
be  named  in  the  same  breath  with  Parker,  or  Whitgift,  or 
Grindal,  or  Jewel,  or  Andrews,  or  Hall.  They  were 
probably  respectable,  worthy,  quiet,  old-fashioned  High 
Churchmen;  and  that  was  all.  But  God  loves  to  be 
glorified  by  using  weak  instruments.  Whatever  they 
were  in  other  respects,  they  were  of  one  mind  in  seeing 
the  danger  which  threatened  Protestantism,  and  in 
determination  to  stand  by  it  to  the  death.  It  was  not 
jealousy  of  Dissenters  but  dislike  to  Popery,  be  it 
remembered,  which  actuated  their  conduct  and  knit  them 
together.  (Ranke,  iv.  346.)  All  honour  be  to  them. 
They  have  supplied  an  unanswerable  proof  that  the  real, 
loyal,  honest,  old-fashioned  High  Churchmen  disliked 
Popery  as  much  as  any  school  in  the  Church. 

The  famous  petition  which  the  Seven  Bishops  drew  up 
and  signed  on  this  occasion  is  a  curious  document.  It  is 
short,  and  tame,  and  cautious,  and  somewhat  clumsily 
composed.  But  the  worthy  composers,  no  doubt,  were 


JAMES  It  AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  441 

pressed  for  time,  and  had  no  leisure  to  polish  their  sentences. 
Moreover,  we  know  that  they  acted  under  the  best  advice, 
and  were  careful  not  to  say  too  much  and  give  needless 
offence. 

"In  substance  (says  Macaulay)  nothing  could  be  more 
skilfully  framed.  All  disloyalty,  all  intolerance,  were 
reverently  disclaimed.  The  King  was  assured  that  the 
Church  was  still,  as  ever,  faithful  to  the  throne.  He  was 
also  assured  that  the  bishops,  in  proper  time  and  place, 
would,  as  Lords  of  Parliament  and  members  of  the  Upper 
House  of  Convocation,  show  they  were  by  no  means  wanting 
in  tenderness  for  the  conscientious  scruples  of  Dissenters. 
The  Parliament,  both  in  the  late  and  present  reign,  had 
pronounced  that  the  Sovereign  was  not  constitutionally 
competent  to  dispense  with  statutes  in  matters  ecclesiastical. 
The  Declaration  was  therefore  illegal,  and  the  Petitioners 
could  not  in  prudence,  honour,  or  conscience,  be  parties  to 
the  solemn  publication  of  an  illegal  Declaration  in  the 
House  of  God,  and  during  the  time  of  Divine  Service." 

Pointless  and  tame  as  the  Petition  may  seem  to  us,  we 
must  not  allow  ourselves  to  make  any  mistake  as  to  the 
latent  meaning  of  the  document  and  the  real  object  of  the 
bishops  in  refusing  to  obey  the  King.  We  must  do  them 
justice.  They  were  thoroughly  convinced  that  the 
Declaration  was  intended  to  help  Popery,  and  they  were 
determined  to  make  a  stand  and  resist  it.  They  had  no 
ill-feeling  towards  Dissenters,  and  no  desire  to  continue 
their  disabilities.  But  they  saw  clearly  that  the  whole 
cause  of  Protestantism  was  in  jeopardy,  and  that,  now  or 
never,  they  must  risk  everything  to  defend  it.  Every 
historian  of  any  worth  acknowledges  this,  and  it  is  vain  to 
try  to  take  any  other  view,  unless  we  are  prepared  to  write 


442  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

history  anew.  A  cloud  of  witnesses  agree  here.  There  is 
an  overwhelming  mass  of  evidence  to  prove  that  the  real 
reason  why  the  Seven  Bishops  resolved  to  oppose  the  King, 
was  their  determination  to  maintain  the  principles  of  the 
Reformation  and  to  oppose  any  further  movement  towards 
Rome.  In  one  word,  the  cause  for  which  they  boldly 
nailed  their  colours  to  the  mast  was  the  good  old  cause  of 
Protestantism  versus  Popery.  Every  one,  Churchman  or 
Dissenter,  knew  that  in  1688,  and  it  is  a  grievous  shame 
that  any  one  now  should  try  to  deny  it.  The  denial  can 
only  be  regarded  as  a  symptom  of  ignorance  or  dishonesty. 
It  was  quite  late  on  Friday  evening,  May  18,  when  this 
Petition  was  finished  and  signed,  and  on  Sunday  morning, 
the  20th  of  May,  the  Royal  Declaration  had  to  be  read  in 
all  the  churches  in  London.  There  was  therefore  no  time 
to  be  lost.  Armed  with  their  paper,  six  of  the  Seven 
Bishops  (Sancroft  being  forbidden  to  come  to  Court) 
proceeded  to  Whitehall  Palace,  and  had  an  interview  with 
James  II.,  at  10  o'clock  at  night.  The  King  took  the 
Petition,  and  read  it  with  mingled  anger  and  amazement. 
He  was  both  deeply  displeased  and  astonished,  and  showed 
it.  He  never  thought  that  English  bishops  would  oppose 
his  will.  "  I  did  not  expect  this,"  he  said ;  "  this  is  a 
standard  of  rebellion."  In  vain  Trelawney  fell  on  his 
knees,  saying,  "  No  Trelawney  can  be  a  rebel  Remember 
that  my  family  has  fought  for  the  Crown."  In  vain 
Turner  said,  "  We  rebel !  We  are  ready  to  die  at  your 
Majesty's  feet."  In  vain  Ken  said,  "I  hope  you  will 
grant  us  that  liberty  of  conscience  which  you  grant  to  all 
mankind."  It  was  all  to  no  purpose.  The  King  was 
thoroughly  angry.  "  You  are  trumpeters  of  sedition,"  he 
exclaimed.  "  Go  to  your  dioceses  and  see  that  I  am 


JAMES  II.   AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  443 

obeyed."  "  We  have  two  duties  to  perform,"  said  noble 
Ken,  "our  duty  to  God  and  our  duty  to  your  Majesty. 
We  honour  you :  but  we  fear  God."  The  interview  ended, 
and  the  bishops  retired  from  the  royal  presence,  Ken's  last 
words  being  "  God's  will  be  done." 

Before  the  sun  rose  on  Saturday  morning,  May  19,  the 
Bishops'  Petition  was  printed,  as  a  broadsheet,  and 
hawked  through  all  the  streets  of  London.  By  whom  this 
was  done  is  not  known  to  this  day :  but  the  printer  is  said 
to  have  made  a  thousand  pounds  by  it  in  a  few  hours. 
The  excitement  was  immense  throughout  the  metropolis, 
and  when  Sunday  came,  next  day,  the  churches  were 
thronged  with  expecting  crowds,  wondering  what  the 
clergy  would  do,  and  whether  they  would  read  the  King's 
Declaration.  They  were  not  left  long  in  doubt.  Out  of 
one  hundred  parish  Churches  in  the  city  and  liberties  of 
London,  there  were  only  four  in  which  the  Order  in 
Council  was  obeyed,  and  in  each  case,  as  soon  as  the  first 
words  of  the  Declaration  were  uttered,  the  congregation 
rose  as  one  man  and  left  the  Church.  At  Westminster 
Abbey  the  scene  was  long  remembered  by  the  boys  of 
Westminster  school.  As  soon  as  Bishop  Spratt,  who  was 
then  Dean,  a  mean,  servile  prelate,  began  to  read  the 
Declaration,  the  murmurs  and  noise  of  the  people 
crowding  out  completely  drowned  his  voice.  He  trembled 
so  that  men  saw  the  paper  shake  in  his  hand ;  and  long 
before  he  had  done  the  Abbey  was  deserted  by  all  but  the 
choristers  and  the  school.  Timothy  Hall,  an  infamous 
clergyman,  who  read  the  Declaration  at  St.  Matthew's, 
Friday  Street,  was  rewarded  by  the  King  with  the  vacant 
Bishopric  of  Oxford.  But  he  bought  his  mitre  very 
dear.  Not  one  Canon  of  Christ  Church  attended  his 


444  LIGHT  FBOM  OLD  TIMES. 

installation,  and  not  one  graduate  would  come  to  him  for 
ordination. 

A  fortnight  passed  away,  and  on  the  3rd  of  June  the 
example  of  the  London  clergy  was  nobly  followed  in  all 
parts  of  England.  The  Bishops  of  Norwich,  Gloucester, 
Salisbury,  Winchester,  and  Exeter,  who  were  unable  to 
reach  London  in  time  for  the  Lambeth  Conference,  had 
signed  copies  of  the  Petition,  and,  of  course,  refused  to 
order  obedience  to  the  Declaration.  The  Bishop  of 
Worcester  declined  to  distribute  it.  In  the  great  diocese 
of  Chester,  including  all  Lancashire,  only  three  clergymen 
read  it.  In  the  huge  diocese  of  Norwich,  the  stronghold 
of  Protestantism,  it  was  read  in  only  four  parishes  out  of 
twelve  hundred.  In  short,  it  became  evident  that  a  spirit 
was  awakened  throughout  the  land  which  the  Court  had 
never  expected,  and  that  though  the  bishops  and  clergy 
might  be  broken,  they  would  not  bend.  Whether  the 
King  could  break  them  remained  yet  to  be  proved.  On 
the  evening  of  the  8th  of  June,  all  the  Seven  Bishops,  in 
obedience  to  a  summons  from  the  King,  appeared  before 
him  in  Council  at  Whitehall.  They  went  provided  with 
the  best  legal  advice,  and  acted  carefully  upon  it  They 
calmly  refused  to  admit  anything  to  criminate  themselves, 
unless  forced  to  do  it  by  the  King's  express  command. 
They  were  questioned  and  interrogated  about  the  meaning 
of  words  in  their  Petition,  but  their  answers  were  so 
guarded  and  judicious  that  the  King  gained  nothing  by 
the  examination.  They  steadily  held  their  ground,  and 
would  neither  withdraw  their  Petition,  nor  confess  they 
had  done  wrong,  nor  recede  from  their  decision  about  the 
Declaration.  At  last  they  were  informed  that  they  would 
be  prosecuted  for  libel  in  the  Court  of  King's  Bench,  and 


THE   SEVEN   BISHOPS   BEING   TAKEN   TO   THE    TOWER.  (face  p.  445). 


JAMES  II.   AND  THE  SEVEN   BISHOPS.  445 

refusing,  by  their  lawyers'  advice,  to  enter  into  recogniz 
ances  for  their  appearance,  they  were  formally  committed 
to  the  Tower.  A  warrant  was  made  out,  and  a  boat  was 
ordered  to  take  them  down  the  river. 

Their  committal  to  the  Tower  was  the  means  of  calling 
out  an  enthusiastic  expression  of  feeling  in  London,  such 
as,  perhaps,  has  never  been  equalled  in  the  history  of  the 
metropolis.  It  was  known  from  an  early  hour  that  the 
bishops  were  before  the  Council,  and  an  anxious  crowd 
had  long  waited  round  Whitehall  to  see  what  the  result 
would  be.  But  when  the  Londoners  saw  the  seven  aged 
prelates  walking  out  of  the  palace  under  a  guard  of  soldiers, 
and  learned  that  they  were  going  to  prison  (practically)  in 
defence  of  English  Protestantism,  a  scene  of  excitement 
ensued  which  almost  baffles  description.  Hundreds 
crowded  round  them  as  they  proceeded  to  Whitehall  stairs, 
cheering  them  and  expressing  their  sympathy.  Many 
rushed  into  the  mud  and  water  up  to  their  waists,  blessing 
and  asking  their  blessing.  Scores  of  boats  on  the  river 
full  of  people  accompanied  them  down  to  the  Tower  with 
loud  demonstrations  of  feeling.  Even  the  very  soldiers  on 
guard  in  the  Tower  caught  the  infection  and  became  zealous 
admirers  of  their  prisoners.  And  when  Sir  E.  Hales,  the 
Popish  governor,  tried  to  check  them,  he  was  told  by  his 
subordinates  that  it  was  of  no  use,  for  his  men  "  were  all 
drinking  the  health  of  the  bishops." 

The  seven  prelates  were  kept  in  the  Tower  for  a  week. 
Throughout  that  time  the  enthusiastic  feeling  of  admiration 
for  them  flared  higher  and  higher,  and  increased  more  and 
more  every  day.  They  were  almost  idolized,  as  martyrs 
who  had  refused  to  truckle  to  a  Popish  tyrant,  like  Latimer 
and  Ridley  in  Mary's  days.  The  Church  of  England  at 


446  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

one  bound  rose  cent,  per  cent,  in  public  estimation. 
Episcopacy  was  never  so  popular  as  it  was  that  week. 
Crowds  of  people,  including  many  of  the  nobility,  went  to 
the  Tower  every  day  to  pay  their  respects  to  the  venerable 
prisoners.  Among  them  a  deputation  of  ten  leading 
Nonconformist  ministers  went  to  express  their  sympathy, 
and  when  the  King  sent  for  four  of  them  and  upbraided 
them,  they  boldly  replied  that  they  "  thought  it  a  solemn 
duty  to  forget  past  quarrels  and  stand  by  the  men 
who  stood  by  the  Protestant  cause."  Even  the  Scotch 
Presbyterians  were  warmed  and  stirred  in  favour  of  the 
bishops,  and  sent  messages  of  sympathy  and  encouragement. 
From  every  part  of  England  came  daily  words  of  kindness 
and  approbation.  As  for  the  men  of  Cornwall,  they  were 
so  moved  at  the  idea  of  their  countryman,  Trelawney, 
being  in  any  danger,  that  a  ballad  was  composed  to  suit 
the  occasion,  and  sung  over  the  county,  of  which  the  burden 
is  still  preserved.* 

And  shall  Trelawney  die  ?  and  shall  Trelawney  die  ? 

Then  twenty  thousand  Cornish  boys  shall  know  the  reason  why. 


*  The  following  is  said  to  have  been  the  ballad,  but  it  is  doubtful 
whether  any  part  except  the  chorus  is  as  old  as  1688  : — 

A  good  sword  and  a  trusty  hand, 

A  merry  heart  and  true  ; 

King  James'  men  shall  understand 

What  Cornish  men  can  do  ! 

And  have  they  fixed  the  where  and  when, 

And  shall  Trelawney  die  ? 

Then  twenty  thousand  Cornish  men 

Will  know  the  reason  why. 

Chorus. 

And  shall  they  scorn  Tre,  Pol,  and  Pen? 
And  shall  Trelawney  die  ? 
Here's  twenty  thousand  Cornish  men 
Will  know  the  reason  why. 


JAMES  II.   AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  447 

Even  the  miners  took  up  the  song  and  sung  it  with  a 
variation — 

Then  thirty  thousand  underground  shall  know  the  reason  why. 

A  king  of  more  common  sense  than  James  might  well 
have  been  staggered  by  the  astounding  popularity  of  the 
seven  episcopal  prisoners,  and  would  gladly  have  found  some 
pretext  for  dropping  further  proceedings.  But,  unhappily 
for  himself,  he  had  not  the  wisdom  to  recede,  and  "  drove 
on  furiously,"  like  Jehu,  and  drove  to  his  own  destruction. 
He  decided  to  go  on  with  the  prosecution.  On  the  15th  of 
June  the  Seven  Bishops  were  brought  from  the  Tower  to 
the  Court  of  King's  Bench,  and  ordered  to  plead  to  the 
information  laid  against  them.  Of  course  they  pleaded 
"  not  guilty."  That  day  fortnight,  the  29th  of  June,  was 
fixed  for  their  trial,  and  in  the  meantime  they  were  allowed 
to  be  at  liberty  on  their  own  recognizances.  It  was  well 
for  the  Crown  that  they  did  not  require  bail.  Twenty-one 
peers  of  the  highest  rank  were  ready  to  give  security, 
three  for  each  defendant,  and  one  of  the  richest  Dissenters 
in  the  City  had  begged,  as  a  special  favour,  that  he  might 
have  the  honour  of  being  bail  for  Bishop  Ken. 

On  leaving  the  court,  in  order  to  go  to  their  own 
lodgings,  the  bishops  received  almost  as  great  an  ovation 
as  when  they  were  sent  to  the  Tower.  The  bells  of  many 

Outspake  their  Captain,  brave  and  bold — 

A  merry  wight  was  he  : 

"  If  London  Tower  were  Michael's  Hold, 

We'll  set  Trelawney  free  ! 

We'll  cross  the  Tamar  land  to  land, 

The  Severn  is  no  stay, — 

All  side  by  side  and  hand  to  hand, 

And  who  shall  bid  us  nay  ?  " 

Chorus. 
And  shall  they  scorn,  &c. 


448  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES, 

churches  were  set  ringing,  and  many  of  the  lower  orders 
who  knew  nothing  of  the  forms  of  law  imagined  that  all 
was  over,  and  the  good  cause  had  triumphed.  But  whether 
ignorantly  or  intelligently,  such  a  crowd  assembled  round 
the  prelates  in  Palace  Yard,  that  they  found  it  difficult  to 
force  their  way  through  their  friends  and  admirers.  Nor 
could  it  be  said  for  a  moment  that  the  people  knew  not 
wherefore  they  were  come  together.  One  common  feeling 
actuated  the  whole  mass,  and  that  feeling  was  abhorrence 
of  Popery  and  zeal  for  Protestantism.  How  deep  that 
feeling  was  is  evidenced  by  a  simple  anecdote  supplied  by 
Macaulay. 

"  Cartwright,  Bishop  of  Chester,  a  timid  sycophant  of 
the  Court,  was  silly  and  curious  enough  to  mingle  with  the 
crowd  as  his  noble-minded  brethren  came  out  of  the  Court. 
Some  person  who  saw  his  episcopal  dress  supposed  he  was 
one  of  the  accused,  and  asked  and  received  his  blessing. 
A  bystander  cried  out,  '  Do  you  know  who  blessed  you  ? ' 
'  Surely,'  said  the  man, '  it  was  one  of  the  seven.'  '  No ! ' 
said  the  other,  '  it  was  the  Popish  Bishop  of  Chester.' 
At  once  the  enraged  Londoner  roared  out,  '  Popish  dog, 
take  your  blessing  back  again.'" 

At  last,  on  the  29th  of  June,  the  ever-memorable  trial 
of  the  Seven  Bishops  actually  came  off,  and  they  were 
arraigned  before  a  jury  of  their  countrymen  in  the  Court 
of  King's  Bench  at  Westminster.  Such  a  crowd  was 
probably  never  before  or  since  seen  in  a  court  of  law. 
Sixty  peers  according  to  Evelyn's  diary,  thirty-five  according 
to  Macaulay,  sat  near  the  four  judges  and  testified  their 
interest  in  the  cause.  Westminster  Hall,  Palace  Yard,  and 
all  the  streets  adjoining,  were  filled  with  a  multitude  of 
people  wound  up  to  the  highest  pitch  of  anxious  expectation. 


JAMES  II.   AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  449 

Into  all  the  details  of  that  well-fought  day  I  cannot  enter 
How  from  morning  till  sunset  the  legal  battle  went  on — 
how  the  Crown  witnesses  were  cross-examined  and  worried 
— how  triumphantly  Somers,  the  fourth  counsel  of  the 
bishops,  showed  that  the  alleged  libel  was  neither  false,  noi 
libellous,  nor  seditious — how  even  the  four  judges  were 
divided  in  opinion,  and  two  of  them  went  so  far  in  their 
charge  to  the  jury  as  to  admit  there  was  no  libel — how  the 
jury  retired  when  it  was  dark  to  consider  their  verdict,  and 
were  shut  up  all  night  with  the  servants  of  the  defendants 
sitting  on  the  stairs  to  watch  the  doors  and  prevent  roguery 
— how  at  length  all  the  twelve  jurymen  were  for  acquittal 
except  Arnold  the  King's  brewer,  and  even  he  gave  way 
when  the  biggest  of  the  twelve  said,  "  Look  at  me,  I  will 
stay  here  till  I  am  no  bigger  than  a  tobacco  pipe  before  I 
find  the  bishops  guilty" — how  at  six  in  the  morning  the 
jury  agreed,  and  at  ten  appeared  in  court,  and  by  the 
mouth  of  their  foreman,  Sir  Roger  Langley,  pronounced  the 
bishops  Not  Guilty — how  at  the  words  coming  out  of  his 
lips  Lord  Halifax  waved  his  hat,  and  at  least  ten  thousand 
persons  outside  the  court  raised  such  a  shout  that  the  roof 
of  old  Westminster  Hall  seemed  to  crack — how  the  people 
in  the  streets  caught  up  the  cheer  and  passed  it  on  all  over 
London — how  many  seemed  beside  themselves  with  joy, 
and  some  laughed  and  some  wept — how  guns  were  fired 
and  bells  rung,  and  horsemen  galloped  off  in  all  directions 
to  tell  the  news  of  a  victory  over  Popery — how  the  jury 
could  scarcely  get  out  of  the  Hall,  and  were  forced  to  shake 
hands  with  hundreds  crying  out  "  God  bless  you,  you  have 
saved  us  all  to-day  " — how  when  night  came  bonfires  were 
lighted  and  all  London  was  illuminated  and  huge  figures 

of  the  Pope  were  burnt  in  effigy — all,  all  these  things  are 

2  F 


450  LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES. 

BO  described  in  the  burning  words  of  Lord  Macaulay's 
pictorial  History  that  I  shall  not  attempt  to  depict  them. 
To  go  over  the  field  so  graphically  occupied  by  that  mighty 
"  master  of  sentences  "  would  be  as  foolish  as  to  gild  refined 
gold  or  paint  the  lily.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  great 
battle  of  Protestantism  against  Popery  was  fought  at  this 
trial,  that  a  great  victory  was  won,  and  that  to  the 
prosecution  and  acquittal  of  the  Seven  Bishops  James  II. 
owed  the  loss  of  his  Crown. 

For  we  must  never  forget  that  the  consequences  of  the 
trial  were  enormously  great,  and  that  results  flowed  from 
it  of  which  myriads  never  dreamed  when  they  shouted 
and  cheered  on  the  29th  of  June. — Within  twenty-four 
hours  of  the  trial  a  letter  left  England  for  Holland,  signed 
by  seven  leading  Englishmen,  inviting  the  Prince  of 
Orange  to  come  over  with  an  army  and  overthrow  the 
Stuart  dynasty.  The  hour  had  come  at  last,  and  the  man 
was  wanted. — Within  four  weeks  of  the  trial,  Archbishop 
Sancroft,  warmed  and  softened  by  the  events  of  May  and 
June,  drew  up  a  circular  letter  to  all  the  bishops  of  the 
Church  of  England,  which  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
letters  ever  penned  by  an  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  and 
has  never  received  the  attention  it  deserves.  In  this 
letter  he  solemnly  enjoined  the  bishops  and  clergy  "to 
have  a  tender  regard  to  our  brethren  the  Protestant 
Dissenters,  to  visit  them  at  their  homes,  to  receive  them 
kindly  at  their  own,  and  to  treat  them  fairly  whenever 
they  meet  them."  Above  all,  he  charged  them  "  to  take 
all  opportunities  of  assuring  the  Dissenters  that  the 
English  bishops  are  really  and  sincerely  irreconcilable 
enemies  to  the  errors,  superstitions,  idolatries,  and 
tyrannies  of  the  Church  of  Rome."  And,  lastly,  he 


JAMES  II.   AND  THE  SEVEN  BISHOPS.  451 

urged  them  "to  exhort  Dissenters  to  join  with  us  in 
fervent  prayer  to  the  God  of  peace  for  the  universal 
blessed  union  of  all  reformed  churches  both  at  home  and 
abroad."  A  wonderful  pastoral  that!  Well  would  it 
have  been  for  the  Church  of  England  if  Lambeth  had 
always  held  similar  language,  and  not  cooled  down  and 
forgotten  the  Tower.  But  it  was  one  of  the  first  results 
of  the  famous  trial. — Last,  but  not  least,  within  six. 
months  of  the  bishops'  acquittal  the  Great  Revolution 
took  place,  the  Popish  monarch  lost  his  Crown  and  left 
England,  and  William  and  Mary  were  placed  on  the 
English  throne.  But  before  they  were  formally  placed  on 
the  throne  the  famous  "Declaration  of  Rights"  was 
solemnly  drawn  up  and  signed  by  both  Houses  of 
Parliament.  And  what  was  the  very  first  sentence  of 
that  Declaration  ?  It  is  an  assertion  that  "  the  late  King 
James  did  endeavour  to  subvert  and  extirpate  the 
Protestant  religion — by  assuming  a  power  of  dispensing 
with  laws  and  by  committing  and  prosecuting  divers 
worthy  prelates."  And  what  was  the  last  sentence  of  the 
Declaration?  It  was  the  famous  Oath  of  Supremacy, 
containing  these  words: — "I  do  declare  that  no  foreign 
prince,  person,  prelate,  state,  or  potentate  hath,  or  ought 
to  have,  jurisdiction,  power,  superiority,  pre-eminence,  or 
authority,  ecclesiastical  or  spiritual,  within  this  realm.  So 
help  me  God."  Such  were  the  immediate  consequences 
of  the  trial  of  the  Seven  Bishops.  They  are  of 
unspeakable  importance.  They  stand  out  to  my  eyes 
in  the  landscape  of  English  history,  like  Tabor  in  Palestine, 
and  no  Englishman  ought  ever  to  forget  them.  To  the 
trial  of  the  Seven  Bishops  we  owe  our  second  deliverance 
from  Popery. 


LIGHT  FKOM  OLD  TIMES, 

It  remains  for  me  to  point  out  three  practical  lessons 
which  appear  to  flow  naturally  out  of  the  whole  subject. 

(a)  First  and  foremost,  the  reign  of  James  II.  ought 
to  teach  a  lesson  about  English  rulers  and  statesmen, 
whether  Whig  or  Tory.  That  lesson  is  the  duty  of  never 
allowing  the  Government  of  this  great  country  to  be 
placed  again  in  the  hands  of  a  Papist. 

If  this  lesson  does  not  stand  out  plainly  on  the  face  of 
history,  like  the  handwriting  at  Belshazzar's  feast,  I  am 
greatly  mistaken.  Unless  we  are  men  who  having  eyes 
see  not,  and  having  ears  hear  not,  let  us  beware  of  Popish 
rulers.  We  know  what  they  were  in  Queen  Mary's  days. 
We  tried  them  a  second  time  under  James  II.  If  we  love 
our  country,  let  us  never  try  them  again.  They  cannot 
possibly  be  honest,  conscientious  Papists  if  they  do  not 
labour  incessantly  to  subvert  English  Protestantism,  and 
turn  everything  upside  down.  I  yield  to  no  man  in 
abhorrence  of  intolerance  and  religious  persecution.  I 
have  not  the  slightest  desire  to  put  the  clock  back,  and 
to  revive  such  miserable  disabilities  as  those  of  the  Test 
and  Corporation  Acts.  I  asa  quite  content  with  the 
Constitution  as  it  is,  and  the  laws  which  forbid  the  crown 
of  England  to  be  placed  on  the  head  of  a  Papist.  But  I 
hope  we  shall  take  care  these  laws  are  never  repealed. 

Some  may  think  me  an  alarmist  for  saying  such  things. 
But  I  say  plainly  there  is  much  in  the  outlook  of  the  day  to 
make  a  thinking  man  uncomfortable.  I  dislike  the  influence 
which  certain  well-known  Roman  Catholic  divines  are 
gradually  getting  among  the  upper  classes.  I  dislike  the 
growing  disposition  to  make  an  idol  of  mere  "earnestness," 
to  forget  history,  and  to  suppose  that  Rome  has  changed, 
and  earnest  Papists  are  as  good  as  any  Protestant.  I  dislike 


JAMES  II.   AND  THE  SEVEN   BISHOPS.  453 

the  modern  principle,  unknown  to  the  good  old  Puritans, 
that  States  have  nothing  to  do  with  religion,  and  that  it 
matters  not  whether  the  sovereign  is  Protestant  or  Papist, 
Jew,  Turk,  Infidel,  or  Heretic.  I  see  these  things  floating 
in  the  air.  I  confess  they  make  me  uncomfortable.  I  am 
sure  we  have  need  to  stand  on  our  guard,  and  to  resolve 
that,  God  helping  us,  we  will  never  allow  the  Pope  to  rule 
England  again.  If  he  does,  we  may  depend  upon  it  we 
shall  have  no  more  blessing  from  God.  The  offended  God 
of  the  Bible  will  turn  away  His  face  from  us,  and  we  shaH 
bid  a  long  farewell  to  peace  at  home,  influence  abroad, 
comfort  in  our  families,  and  national  prosperity.  Once 
more  then,  I  say,  let  us  move  heaven  and  earth  before  we 
sanction  a  Popish  prime  minister  or  a  Popish  king.  On 
the  28th  January,  1689,  the  House  of  Commons  resolved 
unanimously  "that  it  hath  been  found  by  experience 
inconsistent  with  the  safety  and  welfare  of  this  Protestant 
kingdom  to  be  governed  by  a  Popish  prince."  (Hallam, 
iii.  129.)  I  pray  God  that  resolution  may  never  be 
forgotten,  and  never  be  cancelled  or  expunged. 

(V)  In  the  second  place,  the  reign  of  James  II.  ought  to 
teach  us  a  lesson  about  English  Bishops  and  Clergy. 
That  lesson  is  the  duty  of  never  forgetting  that  the 
true  strength  of  the  Established  Church  of  England  lies 
in  loyal  faithfulness  to  Protestant  principles  and  bold 
unflinching  opposition  to  the  Church  of  Rome. 

Never  was  the  Church  of  England  so  unpopular  as  in 
the  days  of  Laud,  and  never  so  popular  as  in  the  days  of 
the  Seven  Bishops.  Never  was  the  Church  so  hated  by 
Nonconformists  as  she  was  when  Laud  tampered  with 
Rome,  never  so  much  beloved  by  them  as  when  the  Seven 
Bishops  went  to  prison  rather  than  help  the  Pope.  Why 


454  .      LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

was  it  that  when  Laud  was  committed  to  the  Tower  few 
hands  were  held  up  in  his  favour,  and  few  said,  "  God 
bless  him  "  ?  There  is  only  one  answer,  men  did  not  trust 
him,  and  thought  him  half  a  Papist. — Why  was  it  that, 
when  Bancroft  and  his  companions  were  taken  to  the 
Tower  fifty  years  afterwards,  the  heart  of  London  was 
stirred,  and  the  whole  Metropolis  rose  up  to  do  them 
honour  ?  The  answer  again  is  simple.  Men  loved  them 
and  admired  them  because  they  stuck  to  Protestantism 
and  opposed  Rome. 

(c)  In  the  last  place,  the  reign  of  James  II.  ought  to 
teach  a  lesson  to  all  loyal  Churchmen.  That  lesson  is 
the  duty  of  using  every  reasonable  and  lawful  means  to 
.'resist  the  re-introduction  of  Romanism  into  the  Church  of 
England  by  the  means  of  extreme  Ritualism. 

It  is  useless  to  deny  that  the  times  demand  this,  and 
that  there  is  an  organized  conspiracy  among  us  for 
Romanizing  the  Established  Church  of  this  country. 
Bishops  see  it  and  lament  it  in  their  charges.  Statesmen 
see  it  and  make  no  secret  of  it  in  public  speeches.  Dis 
senters  see  it  and  point  the  finger  of  scorn.  Romanists 
see  it  and  rejoice.  Foreign  nations  see  it  and  lift  up  their 
hands  in  amazement.  Whether  this  disgraceful  apostasy 
is  to  prosper  and  succeed  or  not  remains  yet  to  be  proved. 
But  one  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  certain.  This  is  no  time  to 
sit  still,  fold  our  arms,  and  go  to  sleep.  The  Church  of 
England  expects  all  her  sons  to  do  their  duty,  and  much, 
under  God,  depends  on  the  action  of  the  laity. 

It  is  false  to  say,  as  some  of  the  advocates  of  extreme 
Ritualism  constantly  say,  that  those  who  oppose  them  want 
to  narrow  the  limits  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  to  make 
it  the  exclusive  Church  of  one  party.  I  for  one  indignantly 


JAMES  II.  AND  THE   SEVEN   BISHOPS.  455 

deny  the  charge.  I  have  always  allowed,  and  do  allow, 
that  our  Church  is  largely  comprehensive,  and  that  there 
is  room  for  honest  High,  honest  Low,  and  honest  Broad 
Churchmen  within  her  pale.  If  any  clergyman  likes  to 
preach  in  a  surplice,  or  has  the  Lord's  Supper  weekly,  or 
has  Saints'  day  services,  or  daily  matins  and  vespers,  I 
have  not  the  least  wish  to  interfere  with  him,  though  I 
cannot  see  with  his  eyes.  But  I  firmly  maintain  that  the 
comprehensiveness  of  the  Church  has  limits,  and  that 
those  limits  are  the  Thirty-Nine  Articles  and  the 
Prayer-book. 

Controversy  and  religious  strife,  no  doubt,  are  odious 
things;  but  there  are  times  when  they  are  a  positive 
necessity.  Unity  and  peace  are  very  delightful ;  but  they 
are  bought  too  dear  if  they  are  bought  at  the  expense  of 
truth.  There  is  a  vast  amount  of  maundering,  childish,  weak 
talk  now-a-days  in  some  quarters  about  unity  and  peace, 
which  I  cannot  reconcile  with  the  language  of  St.  Paul. 
It  is  a  pity,  no  doubt,  that  there  should  be  so  much 
controversy;  but  it  is  also  a  pity  that  human  nature 
should  be  so  bad  as  it  is,  and  that  the  devil  should  be 
loose  in  the  world.  It  was  a  pity  that  Arius  taught  error 
about  Christ's  person :  but  it  would  have  been  a  greater 
pity  if  Athanasius  had  not  opposed  him.  It  was  a  pity 
Tetzel  went  about  preaching  up  the  Pope's  indulgences : 
it  would  have  been  a  far  greater  pity  if  Luther  had  not 
withstood  him.  Controversy,  in  fact,  is  one  of  the 
conditions  under  which  truth  in  every  age  has  to  be 
defended  and  maintained,  and  it  is  nonsense  to  ignore  it. 

Of  one  thing  I  am  very  certain.  Whether  men  will  come 
forward  or  not  to  oppose  the  Komanizing  movement  of 
these  days,  if  the  Church  of  England  once  gives  formal  legal 


456  LIGHT  FROM  OLD  TIMES. 

sanction  to  the  revived  Popish  Mass  and  the  revived 
detestable  confessional,  the  people  of  this  land  will  soon  get 
rid  of  the  Established  Church  of  England.  True  to  the 
mighty  principles  of  the  Reformation,  our  Church  will  stand 
and  retain  its  hold  on  the  affections  of  the  country,  and 
no  weapon  formed  against  us  shall  prosper.  False  to  these 
principles,  and  re-admitting  Popery,  she  will  certainly  fall, 
and  no  amount  of  histrionic,  sensuous  ceremonial  will 
prevent  her  ruin.  Like  Ephesus,  which  left  her  first 
love, — like  Thyatira,  which  suffered  Jezebel  to  teach, — like 
Laodicea,  which  became  lukewarm, — her  candlestick  will  be 
taken  away.  The  glory  will  depart  from  her.  The  pillar 
of  cloud  and  fire  will  be  removed.  The  best  and  most  loyal 
of  her  children  will  forsake  her  in  disgust,  and,  like  an 
army  whose  soldiers  have  gone  away,  leaving  nothing 
behind  but  officers  and  band,  the  Church  will  perish, 
and  perish  deservedly,  for  want  of  Churchmen, 


INDEX. 


ARROWSMU  H  John,  350 
Article  XXIII.,  364 

BARTHOLOMEW'S,  ST.,  HOSPITAL 

and  Edward  VI.,  215 
BATH,  Lord,  and  James  II.,  435 
BAXTER,  Richard — His  times,  304  ; 
the  move  backward  from  the 
Reformation,  305 ;  the  Civil  War, 
307 ;  Oliver  Cromwell,  310 ; 
blindness  of  the  Church  of  Eng 
land,  313  ;  Act  of  Uniformity, 
316 ;  his  birth  and  parentage,  320; 
his  strange  vicissitudes,  321  ; 
ministry  at  Dudley,  322  ;  army 
chaplain,  323  ;  ministry  at  Kid 
derminster,  323 ;  eviction  from 
the  Church  of  England,  324; 
a  holy  and  humble  man,  324 ;  a 
powerful  preacher,  325 ;  a  suc 
cessful  pastor,  328 ;  a  most 
diligent  theological  writer,  330; 
"The  Call  to  the  Unconverted," 
330 ;  his  trial  before  Jeffreys, 
332  ;  what  we  owe  to  him,  336 ; 
his  last  illness,  338 ;  his  death, 
342 

BERTRAM,  Book  of, 
BIBLE,  The,  its  influence,  9 
BRADFORD,  John,  29 ;  denies  Iran- 
substantiation,  42 ;  his  birth,  184 ; 
a  student  at  the  Temple,  185 ; 
Latimer  sermon,  186;  student  at 
Cambridge,  187 ;  his  holy  life, 
1 88  ;  his  preaching,  190  ;  burned 
at  Smithfield,  193  ;  his  beautiful 
character,  198 ;  his  appearance 
and  daily  habits,  198;  his  writings, 
200 ;  treatise  against  the  fear  of 
death, 200;  farewell  to  Lancashire, 
204 ;  letter  to  Earl  of  Bedford,  206 


CAMBRIDGE  in  1632,  357 
CAMBRIDGE  University  and  James 

II.,  426 

CARTWRIGHT,  Bishop,  448 
"CATHOLIC"  PRINCIPLES,  136 
CHARLES  I.  and  his   Parliament, 

307  ;  irreligion  of  the  Royalists, 

308 

CHARLES  II.,  412 
"CHRISTIAN   IN   COMPLETE 

ARMOUR,  THE,"  405 
CHURCH  HISTORY,  259 
CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND  under  the 

Stuarts,  313 

"CHURCH  VIEWS,"  166,  284 
COMMONS,    House   of,    resolution 

regarding  a  Popish  Prince,  453 
COMMONWEALTH,  The,  309 
COMPTON,  Bishop  of  London,  423 
CONTROVERSY,  455 
COPPINGER,  Henry,  367 
"  COVENANT  RENOUNCERS,  384 
CRANMER,    Archbishop,   35  ;    his 

martyrdom,     38  ;      denies     the 

doctrine  of  Transubstantiation,  44 
CROMWELL,  Oliver— his  character, 

311 ;  his  rule,  311  j  his  toleration, 

312 

DECLARATION  OF  INDULGENCE  of 

James  II.,  436 
DECLARATION  OF  RIGHTS,  The, 

4Si 

DEFOE  and  James  II.,  438 
D'EwES,  Sir  Symond,  365 
DUTY  OF  RESISTING  RITUALISM, 

U2,  454 

EDWARD  VI.,  16 ;  his  prayer,  182 
ELIZABETHAN  TIMES,  260 


458 


INDEX. 


EMMANUEL  COLLEGE,  Cambridge, 
353  ;  its  MASTERS  AND  FELLOWS 
in  the  I7th  century,  354 

ENGLAND  UNDER  THE  STUARTS, 

305 

ENGLISH  bishops  and  clergy,  453 
ENGLISH  CHURCH  HISTORY,  im 
portance  of,  135 

EPISCOPAL  ordination,  361-365,386 
ERROR— its  seed  like  thistle-down, 

307 

EVANGELICAL  Principles,  xviii,  177 
EVELYN'S  diary,  411-412 

FAIRCLOUGH,  Samuel,  350 

FARMER,  Anthony,  428 

FERRAR,  Bishop,  28 ;  on  transub- 
stantiation,  42 

Fox's  BOOK  OF  MARTYRS,  vindi 
cation  of,  x 

FULLER'S  CHURCH  HISTORY,  376 

FULLER  on  the  Marian  martyrs,  164 

GEDDES,  Jenny,  358 

GURNALL,  William  —  M'Keon's 
biography  of  him,  346 ;  birth, 
347  ;  Lynn  and  Puritanism,  349 ; 
hi;  familiarity  with  the  sea,  351  ; 
at  Cambridge,  351  ;  appointed  to 
Lavenham,  365  ;  House  of  Com 
mons  order,  365  ;  his  Latin 
letters,  368 ;  marriage,  382  ;  in 
1662  does  not  secede,  385  ;  death, 
389  ;  Burkitt's  sermon,  392  ;  his 
family,  403  ;  "  The  Christian 
In  Complete  Armour,"  405 ; 
"  Magistrate's  Portraiture,"  408  ; 
"The  Christian's  Labour,"  408 

HALL,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  362 

HALLAM  on  Archbishop  Laud,  301 

HAMPDEN,  John,  359 

HENRY  VIII. — his  character,  141 

HEYWOOD,  Oliver,  and  James  II., 
438 

HIGH  CHURCHMEN,  440. 

HISTORICAL  LIGHT,  value  of,  67. 

HOOPER,  Bishop,  23 ;  on  the  Mass, 
41  ;  his  times,  69-79 ;  ignorance 
of  the  people,  70;  their  super 
stition,  72 ;  immorality  of  the 
a8e»  74  5  bis  birthplace,  79  ;  at 
Oxford,  So  ;  letter  to  Bullinger, 


81-83  J  chaplain  to  Sir  T. 
Arundel,  81  ;  lives  at  Strasburgh, 
Bale,  and  Zurich,  83  ;  his  mode 
of  living,  84 ;  made  Bishop  of 
Gloucester,  84 ;  Controversy 
about  vestments,  85  ;  far-sighted 
ness  of  Hooper,  86 ;  Ridley's 
letter  to  Hooper,  87  ;  a  hard 
working  bishop,  88  ;  the  state  of 
his  clergy,  88  ;  the  laity,  89  ; 
the  cathedrals,  89 ;  Foxe's 
opinion  of  Hooper,  90 ;  im 
prisoned  on  Mary's  accession, 
94 ;  in  prison,  94 ;  sent  to 
Gloucester  to  be  burned,  95 ; 
his  last  two  days,  95 ;  his 
martyrdom,  97  ;  his  prayer  at 
the  stake,  100 ;  his  painful  death, 
102  ;  his  patience  and  courage, 
104 ;  his  theological  views, 
articles  concerning  Christian 
religion,  106;  "Confession  of 
Faith,"  109  ;  general  reflections, 
1 12 ;  Hooper's  letter  from 
prison,  115 
HOUGH,  John,  428 

IDOLATRY  OF  ROME,  140 
INFALLIBILITY  of  the  Church  of 
Rome,  134 

JAMES  II. — general  sketch  of  his 
reign,  41 1 ;  low  moral  condition 
of  England,  412;  his  brutal  treat 
ment  of  Nonconformists,  415  ; 
Monmouth's  rebellion,  419  ;  gag 
ging  the  pulpit,  422 }  the  Univer 
sities,  425 ;  trampling  down  the 
English  nobility,  431  ;  packing 
Parliament,  432 ;  the  seven 
bishops,  435  ;  their  petition,  441 ; 
their  trial,  448  ;  its  results,  450  ; 
the  lessons  of  James  II. 's  reign, 

452 

JEFFREYS,  Chief  Justice,  332,  420 
JESUITS,  The,  414 
JEWEL,      Bishop — his     reply     to 

Harding,  49 

LAITY,  The— their  power,  297 
LATIMER,  Hugh,  31  ;  denies  tran- 
substantiation,    43  ;    his    times, 


INDEX. 


459 


137 ;  period  when  Popery  was 
supreme,  138  ;  transition  period, 
141  ;  Protestant  period,  143 ; 
his  birth,  147  ;  at  Cambridge, 
148 ;  converted  through  Bilney, 
150;  his  University  sermons, 
150 ;  patronised  by  Henry  VIII., 
151 ;  Rector  of  West  Kingston, 

152  ;  made  Bishop  of  Worcester, 

153  ;  his  labours  as  Bishop,  154  ; 
in  1539  resigns  Bishopric,  157 ; 
assists  in  composing  the  Homilies, 
158  ;  committed  to  the  Tower  by 
Mary,    159 ;  burned  at   Oxford, 
161  ;  his  immortal  words,  163  ; 
his  ;preaching,   164  ;  a  bold,  un 
worldly,  kind,  and  diligent  man, 
165 ;    his  theological   views   on 
Scripture,      168  ;     justification, 
169  ;    regeneration — the    Lord's 
Supper,    172;  preaching,    174; 
ceremonial,  174 

LAUD,  William,  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury — the  author's  esti 
mate  of  him;  259  ;  his  birth,  264 ; 
at  Oxford,  265  ;  his  views,  266  ; 
Bishop  Hall's  letter  to  him,  267  ; 
his  preferment,  268  ;  R.  Abbot's 
sermon,  270 ;  Dean  of  Gloucester, 
271  ;  removes  the  Communion 
Table.  271;  Bishop  of  St. 
David's,  273 ;  his  constant  aim 
and  object,  276 ;  "  The  Book  of 
Sports,"  277  ;  prosecutes  Prynne 
and  others,  277  ';  his  hostility  to 
the  Puritans,  278  ;  imprisonment, 
280  ;  trial,  282  ;  execution,  283  ; 
the  lessons  of  his  life,  284 ;  his 
character,  285  ;  his  policy,  286  ; 
its  consequences,  288  ;  Panzani's 
Memoirs,  289 ;  leading  lessons, 
293  ;  Hallam's  opinion  of  Laud 
— Laud  and  Bernard,  357 

LAVENHAM,  Town  of,  375 ;  the 
Church,  379 

LITTLEDALE,  Dr.,  on  the  Re 
formers,  ix,  48 

LONG  PARLIAMENT,  The,  360 

MACLACHLAN,  Margaret,  418 
MAGDALEN  COLLEGE,  Oxford,  and 

James  II.,  428 
MARSHALL,  Stephen,  381 


MARTYRS,  number  of,  i8;in  Queen 
Mary's  reign,  1 8 ;  their  blood  is 
seed  of  the  Church,  104 

MARY,  QUEEN,  17 

M'KEON's  Life  of  Gurnall,    346, 

39° 

MILDMAY,  Sir  Walter,  353 
MISSION  SERVICES,  xxviii 
MONASTERIES,  76 
MONMOUTH'S  REBELLION,  419 

NEAL'S  History  of  the  Puritans,  363 
NONCONFORMISTS,    James     II. 's 

treatment  of,  415 ;  their  action, 

438 
NORFOLK,  Duke  of,  and  James  II., 

432 
NUNNERIES,  76 

ORDINATION    in    Commonwealth 

Times,  362 
OWEN,  John,  381 
OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  and  James 

II.,  427 

PARLIAMENT  and  James  II.,  431 
PHILPOT,  Archdeacon  John,    33 ; 

denies  the  Mass,  43 
POPERY  AND  PROGRESS,   113;  in 

England,  138,  421,  452 
PREACHING,  422 
PRESBYTERIAN  ORDINATION,  361- 

365 

PROTESTANT  REVIVAL,  its  need, 
298 

PRYNNE'S  SENTENCE,  358 

PURITANS,  The,  xiv ;  their  efforts 
for  liberty,  304  ;  what  we  owe  to 
them,  336 ;  a  Puritan  college, 
353-359  ;  Puritan  ministers,  382 

PUSEY,  Dr.,  48 

"REAL  PRESENCE,"  The,  48,  51, 

54 

REFORMATION,  The,  scoffed  at, 
68 ;  its  characteristics,  70 ;  its 
benefits,  79 

REFORMERS,  Merits  of,  vii,  xviii ; 
why  they  were  burned,  15  ;  re 
fuse  to  believe  in  the  Mass,  40-46; 
difficulties  of,  144 ;  injustice  of 
decrying  their  work,  146 

REYNOLDS,  Bishop,  387 


460 


INDEX. 


RIDLEY,  Nicholas,  31  ;  denies  the 
Mass,  43  ;  early  life,  209  ;  Ber 
tram  on  the  Lord's  Supper,  210  ; 
Bishop  of  London,  211  ;  dispu 
tation  with  Queen  Mary,  212  ; 
his  work  on  the  Liturgy,  214 ; 
St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital,  214; 
his  inner  life,  216 ;  his  gentle 
nature,  219;  his  martyrdom, 
220  ;  conference  with  Latimer, 
227 ;  his  Injunctions,  228 ;  letter 
to  Bishop  Hooper,  229 ;  farewell 
letter,  230 

RITUALISM,  The  duty  of  opposing 
it,  454 

RITUALISTS,  The— their  aim  and 
objects,  47,  50,  68 ;  to  be  re 
sisted,  179,  296 

ROGERS,  John,  22 ;  on  the  Mass, 
41  ;  First  Marian  martyr,  56  ; 
birth  and  early  years,  57 ;  re 
sides  at  Antwerp  and  helps 
Tyndale  in  translation  of  the 
Bible,  58;  returns  to  England, 

60  ;  in  Newgate — his    doctrine, 

6 1  ;  execution,  63 

ROME,    Church     of— burning     of 

heretics,  20 

ROME  and  History,  113,  180 
RUSSELL,  Earl,  on  Popery,  300 
RCSSELL,  Lord  William,  300 

BANCROFT,  Archbishop,  and 
James  II.,  439 ;  his  circular 
letter  anent  Dissenters,  450 

SCOTCH  Persecutions  undwr 
James  II. ,  419 

SCOTT'S,  Sir  Walter,  writings,  145^ 

SEVEN  BISHOPS,  The— their  trial, 
436 

SHELDON,  Archbishop,  317 


SOLEMN    League   and    Covenant, 

The,  360 

STAR  Chamber,  358 
STUARTS,  The,  305 

TAYLOB,  Rowland,  26  ;  on  tran- 
substantiation,  42  ;  his  birth,  1 18 ; 
influenced  by  Latimer's  sermons, 
118;  Rector  of  Hadleigh,  119  ; 
summoned  to  London,  122; 
interview  with  Gardiner,  124 ; 
in  prison  two  years,  125  ;  his 
martyrdom,  127-132 ;  his  part 
ing  wishes,  133 

TRACTARI AN  MOVEMENT,  273,  295 
TRELAWNEY,  Ballad  of,  446 

UNIFORMITY  ACT,  1662,  316 
UNION  AMONG  EVANGELICALS,  114 
UNIVERSITIES,   The,  and  loyalty, 
426 

WALKER,  Obadiah,  427 

WARD,  Samuel— birth,  235;  at 
Haverhill,  237  ;  at  Ipswich,  239 ; 
prosecuted,  242  ;  subsequent  life, 
244  ;  returns  to  Ipswich,  245 ; 
his  sermons,  248  ;  his  doctrine, 
249 ;  his  style  and  language,  250  ; 
"Christ  is  All  in  All,"  251; 
"  Balm  from  Gilead,"  253 

WYCLIF — religious  condition  of 
England  in  his  age,  2 ;  bis  work, 
3 ;  supports  supremacy  of  Holy 
Scripture,  4 ;  attacks  errors  of 
Church — one  of  the  first  to 
revive  preaching,  6  ;  first  trans- 
lator  of  Bible  into  English,  8. 

YOUNG,  Thomas,  381 


WOODFALL  AND  KINDER,  PRINTERS,   LOKO  ACRE,   LONDON. 


LARGER    WORKS 

BY   THE   LATE 

Right    Rev.   JOHN    CHARLES    RYLB,    D.D., 

Sometime  Lord  Bishop  of  Liverpool. 


Published    by   CHAS.   J.  THYNNE,  Wycliffe    House,  6,  Great 
Queen  Street,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C. 


Expository  Thoughts  on  the  Gospels.  Designed  for  Family  and 
Private  Reading,  with  Text  complete,  and  Copious  Notes.  A  new 
and  thoroughly  Revised  Edition,  well  printed  on  specially  pre 
pared  paper,  complete  in  Four  Volumes.  Crown  8vo,  dark  blue 
cloth,  lettered  in  gold,  uniform  with  the  "  Wycliffe "  Series  of  the 
Bishop's  Works.  Price  143.  net ;  with  gilt  edges,  i6s.  net ;  half 
Persian,  gilt  tops,  i8s.  net ;  half  Morocco,  gilt  edges,  243.  net ; 
whole  Morocco,  gilt  edges,  323.  net. 

This  work  consists  of — 

I.  The  text  of  the  Authorised  Version   of  the   Gospels  divided   into 

short  sections. 

II.  Short  Expositions  of  each  section,  specially  intended  for  reading 
aloud  at  family  worship,  for  pastoral  visits,  or  for  private  use. 

III.  A  full  and  complete  Commentary  of  the  Gospels, — critical,  ex 
planatory,  exegetical,  and  illustrative,  containing  many  interesting 
quotations  from  authors  little  known,  both  ancient  and  modern, 
and  full  examinations  of  many  leading  topics  under  discussion  in 
the  present  day. 

Short  Expository  Readings  on  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.  With 
the  Text  complete.  A  Selection  for  Family  Reading,  Mothers' 
Meetings,  District  Visitors,  etc.  Crown  8vo,  dark  blue  cover  gilt, 
2s.  net. 

Bethany.  Expository  Thoughts,  with  Notes,  on  the  Eleventh  Chapter 
of  St.  John's  Gospel,  with  appropriate  Hymns  in  large  type.  In 
tended  for  Tunes  of  Sorrow  and  Bereavement.  Small  4to,  cloth  gilt, 
is.  6d.  net. 

THE     "WYCLIFFE"     SERIES. 

Eight   Uniform  Volumes,  large  post  8vo,  dark  blue  cloth,  2s.  6d.  each 
net,  with  gilt  edges,  33.  6d.  net. 

Light  from  Old  Times;  or,  Protestant  Facts  and  Men. — Second 
Edition. 

CONTENTS. — Introduction  for  our  Own  Days.  John  Wycliffe.  Why 
were  our  Reformers  Burned?  John  Rogers,  Martyr.  John  Hooper, 
Bishop  and  Martyr.  Rowland  Taylor,  Martyr.  Hugh  Latimer,  Bishop 
and  Martyr.  John  Bradford,  Martyr.  Nicholas  Ridley,  Bishop  and 
Martyr.  Samuel  Ward.  Archbishop  Laud.  Richard  Baxter.  William 
Gurnall.  James  II.  and  the  Seven  Bishops. 

A  Special  Illustrated  Coronation  Edition  of  this  book  is  issued  at  the 
above  \  rices. 


Books  by  the  Late  Bishop  J.  C.  RYLE,  D.D.— Continued. 

The  Upper  Room,  and  other  Sermons  delivered  on  important  public 
occasions.  Being  a  few  Truths  for  the  Times. 

Principles  for  Churchmen.  A  Manual  of  Positive  Statements  on 
some  Subjects  of  Controversy.  Fourth  Edition.  Revised,  and 
containing  the  Bishop's  Farewell  to  his  Diocese. 

Knots  Untied.  Plain  Statements  on  Disputed  Points  in  Religion, 
from  the  Standpoint  of  an  Evangelical  Churchman.  Thirteenth 
Edition,  enlarged.  500  pp. 

A  special  unabridged  People's  Edition  of  this  work  in  handy  Vol. 
Size,  Cloth  gilt,  is.  net ;  with  gilt  edges,  2s.  net. 

Holiness :  Its  Nature,  Hindrances,  Difficulties,  and  Roots.  Being  a 
Series  of  Papers  on  the  Subject,  with  Introductory  Essay,  and 
Supplementary  Extracts  from  Old  Writers.  Fifth  enlarged  Edition. 

Old  Paths.  Plain  Statements  on  some  of  the  Weightier  Matters  of 
Christianity,  from  the  Standpoint  of  an  Evangelical  Churchman. 
Fourth  Edition. 

Practical  Religion.  Being  Plain  Papers  on  the  Daily  Duties,  Ex 
perience,  Danger,  and  privileges  of  Professing  Christians.  Second 
Edition. 

The  Christian  Loaders  of  England,  in  the  Eighteenth  Century.  Being 
the  Lives  of  J.  Wesley,  Whitefield,  Grimshaw,  Romaine,  Rowlands, 
Berridge,  Venn,  Walker,  Hervey,  Toplady,  and  Fletcher  of  Madeley, 
with  selections  from  their  works. 

The  foregoing  Eight  Volumes  in  Half  Persian,  gilt  tops,  #s.  6d.  net.    Half 
Morocco,  gilt  edges,  6s.  each  net.     Whole  Morocco,  gilt  edges,  Ss.  each  net. 

Home  Truths.  A  Re-issue  of  the  Miscellaneous  Writings  of  Bishop 
Ryle,  D.  D.  Revised  especially  for  this  work,  in  6  volumes,  foolscap 
8vo,  size  6f  by  4,  in  Half  Morocco,  with  gilt  edges,  45.  net  per  vol. 
Half  Persian,  gilt  tops,  2s.  6d.  net,  dark  blue  cloth,  uniform  with 
the  Bishop's  other  works,  is.  6d.  each,  net. 

Hymns  for  the  Church  on  Earth.  Eighth  Enlarged  Edition  of 
400  hymns,  limp  cloth,  2s.  6d.  net ;  with  gilt  edges,  35.  6d.  net ; 
limp,  roan,  wkh  gilt  edges,  55.  6d.  net ;  Morocco  gilt  edges,  8s.  6d. 
net.  A  Choice  Collection  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Poetry,  intended 
for  private  and  devotional  use. 

Hymns  for  the  Church  on  Earth.  The  Original  Edition  containing 
300  Hymns.  Small  8vo,  limp  cloth,  2s.  net. 

Bishops  and  Clergy  of  Other  Days.  With  an  Introduction  on  the 
Real  Merits  of  the  Reformers  and  Puritans.  Crown  8vo,  dark  blue 
cloth,  2s.  net. 

Boys  and  Girls  Playing,  and  other  Sermons  for  Children.  With  Six 
Illustrations.  Cloth  gilt,  2s.  net. 

Church  Reform.  A  Series  of  Papers  on  the  Subject,  Revised  and 
Enlarged,  with  full  Notes  and  Introduction.  Crown  8vo,  cloth  is.  6d. 
net.  The  Papers  without  Introduction  and  Notes,  limp  cloth,  9d. 
net. 


The  "thoughts "  Series  of  Small  Books  on  Important  Subjects. 


Thoughts  about  Sunday:  Its  Institution,  Privileges,  and  Due  Obser 
vance.     Limp  cloth,  4d. 

Thoughts  on  Worldly  Conformity.     What  it  is  not,  and  what  it  is. 
Limp  cloth,  4d. 

Thoughts  and  Questions  about  Holiness:  Its  Nature  and  Questionable 
Modern  Ideas  examined.     Cloth,  6d. 

Thoughts  on  Baptism.     For  Churchmen  and  Candidates  for  Confirma 
tion.     Limp  cloth,  4d. 

Thoughts  on  the  Prayer  Book  and  on  Church  and  Dissent.    Limp 

cloth,  4d. 

Thoughts  for  Parents.     Being  a  few  words  on  Prov.   xxii.  6.     Limp 
cloth,  4d. 

Thoughts  on  the  Supper  of  the  Lord.    For  Present  and  Future  Com 
municants.     Limp  cloth,  4d. 

Questions  and  Answers  about  the  Lord's  Supper.    Limp  cloth,  41!. 

Questions  and  Answers  about  Regeneration  and  Baptism.    32  pp. 

In  tinted  cover,  price  2d. 

Thoughts  on  Sickness.     For  Invalids  and  their  friends.     Limp  cloth,  4d. 

Higher  Criticism.    Some  Thoughts  on  Modern  Theories  about  the  Old 
Testament.     Limp  cloth,  4d. 

Shall  We  Know  One  Another  in  Heaven  ?  and  other  Papers.     136  pp. 
Paper  covers,  6d.  net.     Cloth,  gd.  net. 

Thoughts   for  Young    Men,  from    many   points  of  View.       Seventh 
Edition.     Cloth,  gd.  net.  ;  with  gilt  edges,  is.  net. 

Thoughts  on  Immortality.     With  some  Remarks  on  "  Eternal  Hope," 
and  kindred  Subjects.     Cloth,  gd.  net. 

Assurance.     (2  Tim.  iv.  6,  7,  8.)   With  Notes  and  Extracts  from  Writers 
of  the  Seventeenth  Century.     Eighth  Edition.     Cloth,  gd.  net. 

Simplicity  in  Preaching.     A  few  short  Hints  thereon.     Cloth,  gd.  net. 

Is  all  Scripture  Inspired?     An  Attempt  to  Answer  the  Question,— 
With  Notes.     Second  Edition.     Cloth,  gd.  net. 

Regeneration  :  What  it  Means ;   its  Necessity  and  Evidences.     Fifth 
Edition.     Cloth,  gd.  net. 


Tracts  by  The  Late  Bishop  J.  C.  RYLE. 

Price  Is.  6d.  per  dozen. 

A  Churchman's  Duty  about  Diocesan  Conferences. 

Are  there  Few  ?    A  Question  for  the  Times. 

Are  You  Fighting?    Being  Thoughts  on  i  Tim.  vi.  12. 

Are  You  Holy  ?    A  Question  of  Holiness. 

Are  You  Weary  ?     A  Kind  Enquiry. 

"  Buy  a  Sword."    A  Word  for  the  Times  on  Luke  xxii.  36. 

Come  Out.     Being  thoughts  on  separation  from  the  World. 

Faith's  Choice.    Heb.  xi.  24-26. 

His  Presence.    Where  is  it  ?    A  Question  about  the  Real  Presence. 

How  do  you  Worship?    A  Question. 

Is  it  Peace  ?     A  kind  enquiry. 

I  am  a  Churchman  and  Why. 

Let  us  hold  fast  our  Profession.    Thoughts  on  Heb.  iv.  14. 

Looking  unto  Jesus.    Heb.  xii.  2. 

Many  shall  Come.    A  Cheering  Thought. 

One  Blood.     Thoughts  on  Acts  xvii.  26. 

Perilous  Times !    Being  thoughts  for  to-day. 

Prove  and  Hold  Fast.    A  Motto. 

The  Blood.    Thoughts  on  Acts  x* ii.  26. 

The  City,  Or  the  sight  which  stirr«d  St.  Paul. 

The  Present  Distress.    An  Address  for  1898-99. 

Tried  by  its  Fruits. 

What  is  Evangelical  Religion  ? 

Which  Class  ?     A  Question  for  Everybody. 

Your  Sins  ?     A  Subject  for  all  who  think. 

Your  Ways  ?     Thoughts  on  Lam.  iii.  and  Haggai  L 

Price  TWOPENCE   Each. 

A  Guide  to  Churchmen  about  Baptism  and  Regeneration. 
Are  you  Forgiven  ?    An  important  Question  for  everybody. 
Assurance.     2  Tim.  iv.  6-8.     With  Notes  and  Extracts  from  Writers  of 

the  1 7th  Century. 

Hold  Fast :  i  Thess.  v.  2-1.     A  Charge. 

How  Readest  Thou  ?     A  Question  for  everybody  concerning  the  Bible. 
How  should  a  Child  be  trained  ?    An  Important  Question.    Proverbs 

xxii.  6. 

What  is  Wanted  ?    A  Diocesan  Address  Revised  and  Corrected. 
What  is  Real  Happiness  ?    Thoughts  on  Ps.  iv.  6. 

SHORTER    TRACTS    IN     NINEPENNY    PACKETS. 

Disestablishment.    A  Series  of  4  and  8  pp.     Tracts  on  Church  Defence. 
Expository  Tracts.    Gospel  of  St.  Matthew.     Each  8  pp. 

,,  „  „          St.  Mark.  „ 

,,  ,,  ,,          St.  Luke.  ,, 

Our  Sundays.     Tracts  on  the  observance  of  the  Lord's  Day. 
Plain  Speaking.     2  Series  of  4  and  8  pp.     Tracts. 
Thought  for  Heads  and  Hearts.    2  Series  of  4  and  8  pages.  Tracts. 
Words  for  All.     A  Series  of  4  and  8  pp.     Tracts. 
Seed  Corn.    A  Series  of  Gospel  Handbills,  price  6d.  per  packet. 


London :  CHAS.    J.    THYNNE. 


