IE LIGHT on thé 
2 LAST DAYS B 


CHARLES A. BLANCHARD 


ше — 


/ 27 / i е 
) ge > is, Үр, x PF ў / "Ze ut 2 ^t t^ 2 C 


LIGHT ON THE LAST DAYS 


pi i ) | 


ai 
A ў | 
NI 


Light on the Last Days 


Being Familiar Talks on 
the Book of Revelation 


By 


Charles A. Blanchard, D. D. 


President Wheaton College, Ex-President National 
Christian Association, Ex-President Illinois Sab- 
bath Association, Ex-President Federation 
of Illinois Colleges, President Chicago 
Hebrew Mission, Etc. 


Chicago 
The Bible Institute Colportage Association 
826 La Salle Avenue 


COPYRIGHT, 1913, sy 


Tue BIBLE Institute COLPORTAGE Association oF CHICAGO 


Teaching of the Word of God 
a Hle bak i rely diated 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2026 


https://archive.org/details/lightonlastdaysO000char 


PREFACE 


For many years “The Revelation of Jesus Christ, 
which God gave unto Him,” and which He certified to 
the Apostle John by an angel, was to me a sealed book. 
Texts scattered here and there about the book were in- 
spiring and helpful, but I had no comprehensive idea as 
to what the book was about or what it was intended to 
accomplish for the people of God. After years of thought 
and study, some definite conclusions respecting this book 
have been formed which to me seem true and important. 
It is proposed to follow these views with God’s people in 
this volume. 

I have no ambition to write a big book nor to write a 
learned book. It is my desire to write with the Holy 
Spirit as teacher, a true book and a usable book. The 
Revelation which, as I have already said, for many years 
conveyed nothing definite to my mind as to plan, scope 
and teaching has come to be a very blessed and helpful 
portion of the Word of God. 

I am ashamed to think of the manner in which in 
former years it was neglected. I wish that now I under- 
stood it more perfectly than I do, but am grateful to God, 
who is loving and patient with His children, that I have 
attained to so much knowledge concerning its blessed 
teaching as I have, through His Spirit imparted. 

The writing is intended to be strictly constructive and 
in no sense controversial. If views are mentioned which 
seem to me untrue it will not be for the purpose of refu- 


5 


6 Light on the Last Days 


tation, but for the purpose of bringing what I believe to 
be the truth into greater light by contrast. 

The question will doubtless arise in the minds of my 
readers: “Why should we have another book, large or 
small, on the Revelation?” This question has occurred 
to me. Of course anyone who proposes to write a book 
must, in some way, justify his action to himself if he 
fails to justify it to other people. 

This book is written, in the first place, because of my 
years of ignorance. I first read the Bible through in 
course when I was fifteen years old and have since read 
it through many times. I do not know how many, prob- 
ably not less than thirty or forty times. We read the 
Bible by course in family worship. have always done so 
since we had a home. I was raised in the church. 

When so small a boy that I could not keep awake eve- 
nings, I was taken to prayer meeting. We never raised 
the question as to whether we should go to church on 
the Sabbath or to Sunday-school. From the time that 
the children in my father’s home were babes, we were 
all taken regularly on the Sabbath day into the house 
of God. I have heard good preaching all my life and 
what is somewhat different, the preaching of good men, 
for good men are not always good preachers, but I have 
had the privilege of listening to good preachers who were 
also good men. 

I believe I have never heard five sermons on the 
Revelation in my life. I would not say that I have not 
for one may easily forget; but I cannot recall so many, 
and most of the sermons that I have heard preached on 
this book I have listened to within the last few years. 


This Ignorance of the Book Justified 


Not only have the good men and women with whom I 
have associated neglected this book, but they have very 
largely justified this neglect. They have apparently felt, 


Preface 7 


some of them have openly said, that the book was so 
involved, so obscure, that no one could understand it 
and that it really did not make any difference what the 
book meant, so they have confined themselves to the 
teaching and preaching of morals. 

They have dealt with almost all portions of the Word 
of God except this. This treatment of a portion of the 
Word of God seems to me both disrespectful and danger- 
ous. I shared in it myself for years, a fact which is 
confessed with shame and regret. I wish to do what I 
can to apologize and atone for the past. 


A Greatly Needed Book 


Moreover, I believe that the church in this age sorely 
needs the teaching of this book,—needs it for guidance, 
for comfort and for warning. We are approaching the 
times with which this book particularly deals. We have 
no right to be indifferent about it. God has written these 
words for the help of His people in all ages since they 
were written, but they are of special importance to us 
and those who succeed us. 

Still further, I have found that God’s people in our 
time are greatly interested in this book. I have seldom 
preached on it without having friends ask me if the ser- 
mons were in print. This shows that the heart of man 
answers in this case, as in all other cases, to the Word 
of God. Joseph Cook used to say: “God builds по half 
hinges. When He creates a demand He always makes a 
supply.” My experience with my fellow Christians justi- 
fies this remark and shows that people really feel their 
need of this book, as we should expect them to do, since 
God has written it for them. 


The Revelation of Jesus Christ 


Again, the very title of this book seems to constitute 
a challenge to Christian intelligence and faith. It is the 


8 Light on the Last Days 


revelation of Jesus Christ. One may say: “Is not the 
whole Bible a revelation of Jesus Christ?” and we must 
answer, “Yes, it is,” but here is one book which is es- 
pecially declared to be the revelation of Jesus Christ, and 
this must give us our first chapter, to which we pass at 


4” 


CONTENTS 


І.-Тне REVELATION OF JESUS CHmRIST............ eese. 


Many revelations of Him—Revelations in nature— 
Revelations in history—Revelations by moral impression— 
The Bible a special and complete revelation—Giving the 
whole story of His relations to the world—“The” Revela- 
tion—The story of His triumph over His enemies and 
His conquest of the world—Special importance of this 
book evident from its declared authorship and the bless- 
ing pronounced upon those who read. 


П.--Тнв Агтнов or Tug Book, (Chapter 1)......,.:...- 


No portraits of Jesus Christ in His humiliation—No 
full description, hints only— The transfiguration an out- 
flash of His being—Correspondence of the transfiguration 
with the descriptions in Revelation, chapter 1. 


ПІ.-Гнк Times Амр Scope or THE REVELATION, (Chap- 
ӨЛЕН ЯР АРОН На оаа Rs 


What period in the world’s history is covered by this 
book?—The church age—The great tribulation—This a 
natural result of the absence of the church from the 
world—The millennial time the golden age of the world 
—The final judgment of sin—The establishing of the 
kingdom of God in the Holy City. 


IV.—TnuE Times Амр Scopre or THE REVELATION (Сом- 
HUNTED met (ChADLETS eel 22) ЕЕ: 


The book of judgments—The history of the church 
age—The judgments of the great tribulation—The 
destruction of God's enemies— The kingdom of God on 
the earth—The kingdom of God in the Holy City— 


9 


2I 


24 


30 


10 Light on the Last Days 


PAGE 


Mr. Moody’s thought as to the reason why Satan desired 
to prevent saints from understanding this book—Is it 
true that the book has been neglected? 


V.—‘A Вохсн oF Love Letrers,” (Chapters 2 and 3)..... 


These contained in chapters two and three—Source of 
this designation unknown—General characteristics of 
these letters—An affirmation of knowledge as to works, 
troubles and residence—The continual effort to commend 
—The possibility of repentance and the possibility of 
victory—What is signified by the seven churches—Why 
are these particular churches designated?—Does the 
teaching for them apply to others as well?—The order 
in history, 


VL—A Door OPENED IN HEAVEN, (Chapters 4 and 5)...... 

The word “church” not used after chapter three— 
Succeeding scenes set in the heavens, but referring also 
to events which occur on the earth—The rapture of the 
church a comfort to God’s people in every age—Who are 
the four and twenty elders?— Who are the four living 
creatures ?— Contrast between the living creatures and the 
beast—A singular fact as to the standards of nations— 
Why no one able to open the book except Jesus—A 
suffering Saviour the only one fit to speak of judgments. 


УП.—Тне Time or THE Wortp JupcmMENt, (Chapters 6-19) 


The word “judgment” not to be limited—Many judg- 
ments: judgments of conscience, judgments of society, 
judgments of physical and financial ruin, judgments as to 
character, judgments as to work—Saints already judged 
as to character, already inheriting eternal life—Sinners 
already judged as to character, condemned already, but 
all to be judged according to work—The saints when 
they are caught away—The incorrigible at the end of the 
tribulation—The time of the great tribulation—The char- 
acter of the great tribulation. 


VIII—TnEÉ Jupcments or THe Openinc Sears, (Chap- 
ters-6-10). o кы Қ ities Rene 

Three sevens included under one seven—The opening 
of the seventh seal includes the seven trumpets and the 


37 


45 


5I 


58 


Contents 11 


PAGE 
seven bowls—Penalties, their purpose and the method— 
To vindicate law, to reform the wrong doer, to protect 
society, etc.—The tribulation of the six seals human іп 
character—Wars, consequent famines and pestilences— 
The white horse and the rider of the mighty bow—The 
only light in the dark age—A lesson in the mercy of 
God—The tribulation saints—The martyrs of the tribula- 
tion—The judgments of the trumpets and the bowls 
divine and infernal in character—Not the result of human 
activity, but of providential dealing—This according to 
the present method of God, but perfected in character. 


IX.—PausEs IN JUDGMENTS, (Chapters т0-14)............. 64 


Episodes between the breaking of the sixth seal and 
the seventh, between the sounding of the sixth trumpet 
and the sounding of the seventh—No pauses in the 
emptying of the bowls—Judgment succeeding judgment 
until the number seven was completed— Two events oc- 
curing in the first episode—The first fruits of Israel and 
the vast company of the tribulation saints— Work for 
God's chosen people difficult in our day, yet to be com- 
pleted victoriously in the end—' The number one hundred 
and forty-four thousand definite for the indefinitely 
great—All Israel to be saved and all Israel to be mis- 
sionary— Ihe result of the opening of the six seals— 
The time of the great tribulation. 


X.—Tue Tims or Tue Trumpets AND Tur SEconp PAUSE, 
(DITE rie ето) nen IA HOO DEI APT OCCIDIT OI 71 


Silence in heaven— Not strange that it should be so— 
'The angelic host astounded at the revelations of the book 
which now was completely unsealed—The end of the age- 
long struggle between Christ and Satan—No more days 
of good and evil on the earth—Good triumphant—Evil 
ashamed: and driven to cover—Infernal forces torment 
wicked men—No power against good men—No convert- 
ing power in suffering—Men saved by grace, not by 
penalty—The mystery of God—What mystery?—The 
mystery of His revelation in Christ Jesus—How could 
the innocent and eternal One take the form of man?— 
This mystery completed as to its fact and purpose—The 
two witnesses—Uncertainty here—The ark of the cove- 
nant—The lightnings and voices and thunderings and the 
earthquake and great hail, 


12 Light on the Last Days 


PAGE 
XL—'Tur Taree Women or THe REVELATION, (Chap- 
ters.12; 17; I9) cose dod ue НОС 78 


The sun-clothed, star-crowned woman who brought 
forth the man child who was to rule the nations with a 
rod of iron—The scarlet-clothed woman adorned with 
jewels of gold and precious stones riding upon a red 
dragon, filthy with the blood of the martyrs—False re- 
ligion spiritual adultery—The harlot was carried by the 
dragon—The dragon was guided by the harlot—The in- 
terrelation of godless governments and Christless 
churches—Relation of the terms “harlot” and “false 
prophet" both signifying Christless faiths— The first. per- 
haps Rome; the second, Mohammed—Both alike in that 
they teach salvation without repentance and faith in the 
blood of Jesus—The bride the Lamb’s wife—The church 
chosen out of the Gentile world—The marriage of the 
Lamb—Before the millennial kingdom is declared—The 
condition of the millennial kingdom when Christ reigns 
with His saints. 


XII.—Satan—Wuo 15 He, Where 1s He, Wuar 15 HE 
Dorne tt GChapterssr2*and$ о) ИТИЎ 89 


The mystery of sin and suffering—Sin must be possible 
if freedom is permitted—Which is better, to do right 
because you are compelled, or to have the privilege 
of doing wrong, even if you fail of righteousness ?—Satan 
originally an archangel— Probably ruined by his pride— 
The names of Satan indicate his character—Even com- 
mon names very beautiful when those who bear them 
are loving—Even beautiful names repulsive when those 
who bear them are evil—' The case of Job a wonderful 
study—Valuable for all ages—Especially valuable for our 
аре--бағап still has access to the heavenlies, presenting 
himself among the sons of God, accusing the people of 
God—Accuses them day and night—The lake of fire— 
The terrible end of sin and sinners—Wickedness of 
trifling mention concerning it. 


XIIL—'Tzur Reicn or Tug Saints, (Daniel 7, Revelation 20, 
Luke ТОРА ӘР ИТО Те 99 


The Bible accepted as а whole—Strange that people 
can profess to believe it and then proceed to deny it— 
If true, Christ will reign on the earth with His saints— 
Question of exact time unimportant— Truth of the fact 


Contents 13 


PAGE 

the main thing—Power of saints in this age determined 
by faithfulness in the church age—The transfiguration of 
nature and the animal world—The return of the Adamic 
state, yet not a state of innocence, a state of virtue— 
The saints judging angels—A most remarkable state- 
ment to be believed, not to be understood or explained— 
Fear a legitimate motive—Duty of improving our talents 
that we may be granted larger powers—What will be the 
condition of the world in the millennial kingdom? 


XIV.—Tue Воттомі5ѕѕ Pit, (Chapters 9 and 20).......... 109 


The falling star—The stars are the angels of the 
churches— The law was ordained by angels—God’s 
method of caring for His people and ruling among the 
nations—The good protected and the evil purged by the 
angels—The bottomless pit an intimation of continual 
decay in spirit and also of the impossibility of change— 
All spiritual beings tend to fixedness of character—God 
will not have good people always wronged and worried 
by wicked people—There must be separation—The in- 
fernal cavalry—Their power over the wicked—A delight 
to evil spirits to afflict even the evil—The number of the 
demon spirits. 


XV.—Tue Prayers оғ SarNTS, (Chapters 5:8 and 8:3).... 110 


This book intended for common people—Unbelief in 
the value of prayer—The teaching and example of Jesus 
concerning prayer—The golden vases, the incense and the 
prayers—Prayers primarily petitions—Incense a symbol 
of praise—It rises and diffuses, it is fragrant—The in- 
cense and the prayers signify the union of praises and 
petitions—Nothing new in this—From the beginning God 
has taught men to pray and praise—The order of the 
altar, laver, candle-stick, shewbread and golden altar— 
The prayers and praises of God’s people preserved in 
golden vases—Never forgotten by God—A  praiseful 
spirit, a prayerful spirit—A spirit which does not praise 
cannot really pray—Talk none at all about people, talk 
comparatively little to people, talk a great deal with God 
for people. 


XVI—Tue Five Worp Empires, (Daniel 2 and 7, Reve- 
опто апа DE n A ЕО oes «iors 130 


14 Light on the Last Days 


PAGE 


To get good from a book we should remember the pur- 
pose for which it is written—Revelation written to show 
Jesus’ triumph over His enemies and establishing His 
kingdom in the world—Relation between Daniel and the 
Revelation—Four world empires, no more, then the 
kingdom of God—Marvelous description of the coming 
kingdom in Daniel 7—Efforts to establish world empires 
by arms, by learning, by financial skill all failures—AII 
to be failures—No five empires until our King comes— 
Two great battles recorded in the Revelation—The bat- 
tle of Armageddon, the battle of Gog and Magog—The 
battle of Armageddon during tribulation times—The war 
with Gog and Magog after the millennial age—Mysterious 
that even wicked men should dare to fight God—The 
end of each conflict the ruin of evil. 


XVIIL—Tue Hoty Сітү, New JERUSALEM, (Chapters 21 
andi22) Ac ete eie SESS ППТ 130 


Тһе Bible begins with а sinless garden, it ends with a 
sinless city— The world purged from sin—Sinful beings 
cast into the lake of fire—' The nature of the earth 
changed— The wild beasts changed— What will be after 
millennium ?—An age-lasting righteousness—' The founda- 
tions and gates of the city—Where is it to be?—The 
value of such a study as this—' The purpose of such a 
study, that saints may be comforted. 


I 
THE REVELATION OF JESUS CHRIST 


S already said, there are a number of revelations of 
Jesus Christ. 'The universe itself reveals His wis- 
dom and power. The Holy Spirit declares that 
it was through Him that God made the worlds (Hebrews 
1:2). “Тһе heavens declare the glory of God; and the 
firmament sheweth his handy-work. Day unto day utter- 
eth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge. 
There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not 
heard. Their line is gone out through all the earth, and 
their words to the end of the world" (Psalm 19:1-4). 

In the leaf, in the star, in the cyclone, and in the eve- 
ning zephyr we have alike, revelations of the power and 
wisdom and love and goodness of God, who is manifest 
to us in Jesus Christ. So also history is a revealer of 
Jesus Christ. The whole world has from the beginning 
until now believed in God and has been afraid and has 
longed for His loving favor. 

But the whole world has never believed in Jesus 
Christ ; the whole world has not yet heard of Jesus Christ, 
and the homes, cities and nations where Jesus Christ is 
believed in and worshipped as Immanuel (God with us) 
show what kind of person He is. You know the char- 
acter of a man when you see how he affects others. This 
is one of the safest and most decisive methods of judg- 
ment. 

There is not a country community in the world where 
fathers and mothers teach their children of the gentle 

15 


16 Light on the Last Days 


Jesus which is not transformed in character by the teach- 
ing. I, myself, have been in communities in our own land 
and in other lands where Jesus Christ was not known 
and I have also been in communities where He was 
known and I can personally testify to this truth, that 
the story of the nations reveals the character of Jesus 
Christ. 
The Witnesses a Host 


And if my own testimony should be rejected as incom- 
petent, there are a million witnesses who might be sum- 
moned. There will be no break in their testimony, What 
faith in Jesus Christ does in Asia, in Africa, in Europe, 
in the United States, it does in the islands of the sea. 
What it does for the rich and powerful, it does for the 
poor and ignorant. The story of the nations reveals the 
character of Jesus Christ. 

The whole Bible is an unveiling of Jesus Christ. It 
begins with sinless people in a fair and beautiful garden, 
It tells the awful story of the incoming of sin. lt records 
at once the promise of a Saviour. lt gives us through the 
long, weary years the terrible record of the ruin which 
sin has wrought, and it gives us through the long, beauti- 
ful years the delightful record of what faith in God 
through Jesus Christ has wrought. 

It comes down to the day of His birth and the day 
of His death. It tells the story of the founding of His 
churches, the victorious march of His disciples But 
at last it comes to this book which is the object of our 
thought, and while all the time we have been experienc- 
ing revelations of Jesus Christ, we have here ihe revela- 
tion of Jesus Christ; that is to say, more than anywhere 
else in literature, here is found the description of the 
character and work of Jesus Christ our Lord. 


Revelation of Jesus Christ 1% 


Not a Revelation but the Revelation 


The fact that this is the summit and crown of the un- 
veilings of Jesus Christ to the eyes and hearts of men 
does not go to show that the other unveilings are unim- 
portant. Nothing which concerns Him is unimportant 
and the Holy Spirit uses language carefully He 
does not say “Һе” when He means “а” or “ап”; 
when He says "the" He means "the" and He calls 
this "the" Revelation of Jesus Christ. So as we begin 
this book we should remember that God has especially 
dignified the word, upon the study of which we enter. 

He not only calls it the Revelation of Jesus Christ but 
He says that God gave this revelation to Jesus Christ 
and that Jesus Christ sent and signified it by an angel to 
His servant John. We should be warned by such an 
august word against careless and irreverent dealing. The 
entire Book of God is sacred. 

It is not safe for men to neglect, to despise, to ignore 
or to dispute any portion of it, but out of this whole 
library there is no one book which should be ap- 
proached with more reverent mind, more humble heart, 
more continued crying for teaching than this one. Here 
as no where else in revelation do we seem to hear the 
word of God, “Put thy shoes from off thy feet, for the 
place whereon thou standest is holy ground." 


Contempt of Court 


Human courts are accustomed to punish those who 
treat them with disrespect. In many instances judges 
are apparently more anxious to be respected than they 
are to be respectable, they are more determined to avoid 
contempt than they are to avoid practices which are 
contemptible. It is one of the hopeful signs of our times 
that the common people are insisting upon a change in 
this respect. It is self-evident that when courts are truly 


"EVI ght on the Last Days 


ley will ordinarily be treated with respect, 

/do not deserve contempt they will seldom 

егіепсе it, but drunken, covetous, ignorant, 

udges will not in the future, as in the past, be 

helter themselves from proper detestation by 

pe 1 men for despising them, when they deserve 

to be despised. I have been led to this remark by think- 

ing of the manner in which the portion of God's Word 

concerning which we are writing has been treated by 

many professed Christians and by most of those who do 
not have the Christian faith. 

Suppose the Bible to have ended with the Epistle of 
Jude, would not every thoughtful man and woman have 
said: “What is the conclusion of this struggle, what is 
the end of this church? We have here an imperfect pro- 
duction, a beginning and a middle but there is no end." 
When, however, we turn to the magnificient imagery and 
utterances of the Revelation we feel that we have reached 
a conclusion. There is a summing up of the whole 
matter and we feel that this record is complete. If we 
have realized in some small way the character of the 
age-long struggle which has gone forward, and the needs 
of the church, we join in the prayer of the revelator, 
"Even so, come, Lord Jesus !" 


Another Important Consideration 


There is perhaps, no disrespect more serious than to 
neglect to give attention to the words which God has 
spoken for the enlightenment of His people. Over and 
again I have heard men say that they have no idea what 
the Revelation is about, that it is to them dead, so far as 
meaning and life are concerned. These expressions are 
usually given as an excuse for neglect. The fact of ig- 
norance is stated as an excuse for it, that is, because per- 
sons do not know anything about the book they do not 


Revelation of Jesus Christ 19 


try to know anything about it. It is obvious that so 
long as the cause remains, the effect will continue. 

Turn now to the beginning of this tremendous con- 
clusion of the verbal revelation of God: “Тһе Revela- 
tion of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto Him, * * * 
and He sent and signified it by His angel unto His ser- 
vant John,” * * * after which, God pronounces a 
blessing upon the persons who read, the persons who hear 
and the persons who attend to that which is written. 

I believe in the inspiration of every book in the Bible. 
I believe that for His own purposes of mercy, God has 
preserved this long record which He caused to be made, 
but is it not remarkable that the only book which He de- 
clares Himself to have personally given is the one se- 
lected out of all the rest to be set aside and ignored as 
unintelligible or unimportant? When God has taken 
pains to pronounce a blessing upon those who read, upon 
those who hear, and upon those who give attention to 
the things which He writes in a book, men respond by 
saying, sometimes in words, more frequently by action, 
that they know nothing about this book, and that they 
do not care to know anything about it, and that they will 
not listen to or obey it. Was there ever a contempt of 
court like this? 


The Practical Value of the Book 


Before I understood in any measure the teaching 
of the Word of God respecting the second coming of our 
Lord, a friend asked me if I would be willing to examine 
the teaching of the Scripture respecting that great and 
sadly neglected subject. I replied that I would; a time 
was fixed and we met with our Bibles for the study. 

Before beginning the examination, I said to my friend: 
“There is one preliminary question which I would like to 
ask before we begin this study. What is the practical 


20 Light on the Last Days 


value of the doctrine of the pre-millennial coming of our 
Lord?" My friend paused, as if in prayer, and replied: 
*[ suppose if the doctrine is in the Word of God, it has 
a practical value." 

This remark threw a flood of light upon the whole 
matter of Biblical study. It is unquestionably true that 
if a doctrine is in the Word of God, it has a practical 
value. To say that the Bible contains nonsensical or 
unintelligible teaching is a gross and inexcusable con- 
tempt of court. If judges even such as we have now, 
who are often defiled with liquor and tobacco and some- 
times live unclean lives in other respects, who bargain 
and buy and sell that they may be elected or re-elected, 
men who are profane and greedy, if such men would 
fine and imprison a man who dared to talk to them in 
this fashion, how much more will God, the infinitely pure 
and Holy One.allow men to reap terribly if they dare 
to trifle with a record like this. 

In whatever sense it is taken, the Revelation of Jesus 
Christ is not a foolish or unreasonable matter. No Chris- 
tian man or woman has a right to think of it or speak of 
it or act in reference to it as if it were a weak, unimport- 
ant thing. When God takes pains to give a revela- 
tion to Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ commits it to His 
angel to be conveyed to His servant John, and when John 
is especially directed to write this revelation for the in- 
formation and guidance of God's people, and when God 
pronounces a blessing upon those who read and those 
who hear and those who obey, we are dealing with a 
matter of most serious import and we are fools and blind 
if we treat it as if it were not so, 


II 


THE AUTHOR OF THE BOOK 


(Chapter 1) 


T has been a source of regret to many humble souls 
that we have no authentic portrait of Jesus Christ in 
His humiliation. It is only one of a thousand proofs 

for the divine character of the Word that nothing is said 
respecting His personal appearance. When we consider 
who He was, whom His disciples believed Him to be, 
what they declared concerning Him, this reticence seems 
marvelous. 

These four disciples who walked with Him in intimate 
companionship, who loved Him so truly that they laid 
down their lives for His sake, do not tell us whether He 
was tall or short, slight or fleshy, light or dark, brown- 
eyed, black-eyed, blue-eyed,—about it all they tell us 
nothing. The prophets give a hint, “He was a man of 
sorrows,” “His face was marred.” 

One of the evangelists gives us a slight suggestion. 
He records that His enemies said: “Thou art not yet 
fifty years of age." Why should they have said to a man 
just turned thirty that He was not yet fifty? As I have 
remarked, this is a suggestion only, but it is a weighty 
suggestion. The verse ends with the word of the prophet 
that His visage was marred, that He was a man of sor- 
rows. You do not frequently say to a man just past 
thirty, “Thou are not yet fifty,” but we have in the gos- 
pels and here in the beginning of the Revelation of Jesus 
Christ, a description of His appearance in the glory. 


21 


22 Light on the Last Days 


One of the Holy Mountains 


On the Mount of Transfiguration He appeared blazing 
in light as to His face and as to His clothing, the humble 
seamless coat, the gift of pious women who loved Him 
then as they have loved Him ever since, was transfigured 
as well as His countenance. The celestial glory shone 
from Him through eyes and face and garments until His 
disciples, who knew Him well and had sometimes not hon- 
ored Him as they ought, fell upon their faces in rever- 
ence and fear. 

This single outflash of the divine, which we have re- 
corded as an incident in His career of humiliation, is 
shown to be the permanent characteristic of His present 
state. When John heard the mighty voice, he turned 
to see the One who had spoken to him and saw the 
majestic figure of his Saviour, His face shining like the 
sun, His eyes blazing like the fire, His garments shining 
and white like no earthly whiteness; His girdle of gold, 
His hair seeming to radiate electric flashes, His feet even, 
like brass blazing in a furnace. This is the startling fig- 
ure which appeared to John; His word killed and made 
alive, a sword proceeded out of His mouth. One of the 
hymns which they used to sing when I was a boy had 
in it a verse like this: 


“Oh, show me not my Saviour dying, 
As on the cross He bled; 

Nor in the tomb a captive lying, 
For He has left the dead. 

Then bid me not that form extended 
For my Redeemer own, 

Who to the highest heavens ascended 
In glory fills the throne.” 


This word of the poet is neither strange nor unfitting, 
for Jesus Christ will never again appear in the body of 
His humiliation; men will never again buffet Him, men 
will never again spit upon Him, men will never again tie 


The Author of the Book 23 


His sacred hands, men will never again lay the scourge 
across His shoulders. He is in the glory of His resurrec- 
tion body, He has sat down with His Father in His 
Father’s throne, as we shall one day sit with Him in His 
throne. This august and mighty figure, the center of 
the uncounted hosts of angels and saints, the companion 
and fellow ruler with God Almighty, is the One who is 
revealed and the One who conveys the revelation by His 
angel to His servant John, He is our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ. 


III 


THE TIMES AND SCOPE OF THE REVELA- 
TION 


(Chapters 1-22) 


HERE is not space in a work such as I intend this 
to be, short and for the help of busy people who 
desire to get at the heart of this book and not to 

lose themselves in a multiplicity of details, to give the 
various views which good and great men have held re- 
specting the subject of this chapter. I must content my- 
self with stating as clearly as I may the opinions which 
I have formed, and will attempt in this chapter to give 
to the earnest Bible student who wishes to know with 
what time in the history of the human race this book 
deals, a brief, clear, and as God shall help, an accurate 
statement regarding that matter. 

The historic setting is obvious. John was in the island 
which is called Patmos, a prisoner of Jesus Christ. In 
this desert island he saw the revelator of whom I have 
spoken so briefly and imperfectly in the last chapter, and 
after coming into conversation with him he was directed 
to write the things which he had seen, the things which 
were at that time happening and the things which were 
to come hereafter. 

There seems to be very little concerning the past in 
this writing. No mention of Moses, of Abraham, or the 
patriarchs or of the prophets, but after this glance at 
the revelator in his present exalted state, we pass at 
once to his letters to the churches. The churches had 

24 


Times and Scope of the Revelation 29 


been in existence, we may say іп а rough way, for 
seventy years. No one would pretend that in their be- 
ginnings they had attained to the fixed character which 
they have assumed, but from the ascension of Jesus: 
Christ, His people like frightened flocks of sheep gathered 
as they were permitted, to worship and to comfort them- 
selves with the thought of what He was, of what He 
had done and of what He was yet to do. 


The Seven Letters 


These letters to the churches proceed through the first 
series of seven which we have in this book. Ephesus, 
Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and 
Laodicea, each in turn receives its message and when 
the message to Laodicea is ended the revelator says: 
“Behold, I stand at the door." 

There is very general agreement among Bible stu- 
dents, and it is my own opinion, that in these two chap- 
ters, the second and the third, we have a picture of the 
things that had been, the things that were and the things 
that were to come in the life of the church between the 
ascension of Jesus Christ from Olivet and His coming 
again to Olivet to assume the kingdoms of the earth. 

In a word, we have here a picture of the life of the 
church from Pentecost to tbe second coming of our Lord, 
and this brief yet vivid picture of the church age ends 
with the third chapter. 

What will follow the church age? Evidently in some 
form or other the time of the tribulation. Why must the 
time of tribulation follow the church age? Because when 
the church has been withdrawn, while Satan, godless 
governments and Christless religions remain in the world 
there must be tribulation, and such a time of tribulation 
as the world has never known in the mixed state which 
has been from the beginning until now. 

From the fourth chapter through the nineteenth, 


26 Light on the Last Days 


speaking generally, there seems to be an account of this 
time of trouble. We have an introduction to the con- 
vulsions and overturning in the fourth and fifth chapters. 
Jesus Christ appears as the central figure in the heavenly 
kingdom. God the Father is there; the four living beings 
who represent the redeemed creation are there; the 
twenty-four elders who represent the church universal 
are there, and ranged around, now more and now less in 
evidence, are angels and saints in countless myriads of 
millions. 


The Seven-Sealed Book 


This is the setting. Тһе question which arises is ге- 
specting a book, the contents of which are carefully sealed 
from the sight of all. There are seven seals, that is to 
say, the concealment is perfect. No one can know what 
there is in this book, yet there is a desire to know what 
there is in it and some person is sought who may be able 
to open it, but no one is found until Jesus Christ stands 
forth as able and willing to perform this duty. 

He appears as a lamb, as a slain lamb, and yet He is 
termed a lion, a lion of the tribe of Judah. Seal after 
seal is opened, trumpet after trumpet is blown, bowl after 
bowl is poured out and all the time judgments are falling 
upon the world, the world which has rejected Jesus 
Christ, the world from which Jesus Christ has withdrawn 
and from which He has also withdrawn His church so 
that Satan and wicked governments and Christless re- 
ligions possess it for themselves. 

Upon this world these judgments are poured out and 
they are poured out as the book is opened, that is to say, 
as the contents of the book are made accessible to men, 
judgments fall on the earth. It is for this reason that 
I am led to call this book the “Book of Judgments.” 

Finally the awful series is ended; fire and hail on the 


Times and Scope of the Revelation 22 


earth, burning mountains cast into the sea, wormwood 
mingled with the rivers and fountains of water, dis- 
organization in the sun and stars, direct inflictions of 
penalties from above and the opening of the bottomless 
pit, that infernal agents may come forth in millions to 
torment men who have rejected Jesus Christ, all these 
things are over and gone. The beast and the false prophet 
are cast into the lake of fire, and now we come to another 
section of this revelation. 


The Binding of the Dragon 


We have not to do with the judgments which are to 
fall upon a Christ-rejecting world, they are concluded; 
we have not to do with the beast or the false prophet, 
they are in the lake of fire, but tha dragon who has been 
the author and instigator of these agencies of sin and 
consequent sufferings is still alive and at large. 

He is not to remain alive and at large. An angel 
flashes down from the skies and lays hold upon him. 
He binds him with a great chain and shuts him up in the 
bottomless pit and seals the gate that he may not come 
forth, and gives the world a respite of a thousand years. 

A thousand years of peace, a thousand years of, at 
least, apparent holiness, a thousand years of freedom 
from the sickness and suffering and multiplied miseries 
which sin has always caused. It is the golden age of 
the world. Not the age of innocence, but the age of 
virtue; not the age of our sinless fathers, but the age of 
our sin-curing Brother. 

This is the age to which we look when Christ and His 
people will reign on the earth a thousand years. There 
is a mysterious incident connected with the close of this 
thousand years. How can it be that after a thousand 
years of peace and righteousness, of consequent happi- 
ness and prosperity there should be one person in all the 


28 Light on the Last Days 


world who would be willing to follow that dark and 
malignant being who will then emerge from his prison- 
house and seek to deceive the nations for a time. 

The revelation here is in shadow. The unveiling of 
Jesus Christ seems perfect but the unveiling of Satan is 
not perfect and the unveiling of Satan’s followers is not 
perfect, so we must content ourselves with faith where 
we are not permitted knowledge. It is easy to believe 
what we cannot fully understand. 


The Lake of Fire 


Suffice it to say that this revival of Satanic power is 
very short and that at its close Satan also is cast into 
the lake of fire, as the beast and the false prophet were 
a thousand years before, and with him are cast into the 
lake of fire his followers and friends, the persons who 
dared even after the thousand years of the blessed reign 
of Jesus and His saints to rise in rebellion against Him. 

And now we have come to the last section of this won- 
derful unveiling of Jesus Christ, and here again we must 
remember that the unveiling of Jesus Christ is one thing 
and the unveiling of all the facts connected with Him is 
another thing; for example, in this wonderful city, New 
Jerusalem which comes down from God out of heaven, 
adorned with all possible splendors and inhabited by 
uncounted hosts of sinless and happy beings, Jesus 
Christ will reign—this glorious Being whom we saw set 
forth in the first chapter, of this book, we find in the last 
chapter exercising supreme power in this holy city. 

What is this holy city? It is an abode of the saints 
and angels, the holy nations bring their glory and honor 
into it. Is it on the earth or near the earth? We cannot 
tell. It comes down from God out of heaven. If it 
comes to the earth, well and good. It will be a part of 
that new earth in which righteousness is to dwell. If it 
comes near the earth but not to the earth, equally well. 


Times and Scope of the Revelation 29 


We ourselves shall have been in our resurrection bodies 
for more than a thousand years. The sinless angels have 
never been hampered by material temples such as we 
occupy and it is evident that the saved nations will come 
and go through the wonderful streets and palaces of this 
magnificent city as freely as do the angels who have never 
sinned. 

The story of the church age ends with the word of 
the Saviour King: “Behold, I stand at the door, and 
knock,” and the story of the unveiling of Jesus Christ 
ends with the thrice-repeated statement: “Behold, I am 
coming quickly.” Does not the heart of everyone who 
reads these words echo the prayer of that great Elder 
Brother of ours, who received and passed on this revela- 
tion and who having heard this thrice-repeated promise 
of a speedy advent, said: “Even so, come, Lord Jesus." 


IV 


THE TIMES AND SCOPE OF THE REVELA- 
TION—(CONTINUED) 


(Chapters 1-22) 


HUS far we have seen that "The Revelation of 
Jesus Christ, which God gave unto Him," is the sole 
prophetic book in the New Testament. We have 

seen that it naturally ends the revelation which God gave 
to His people. It brings us to the end of sin and the 
triumph of holiness and reéstablishment of the paradise 
of God. The thorns and thistles have passed away. The 
wild beasts of the earth have lost their malignant dis- 
positions. A little child can lead the lion or the bear. 
It is true that these particular images are found in the 
Old Testament prophecy but the time of the realization 
is evidently in the age of this book. 

We have seen that it includes a backward glance at 
things that have preceded, a present survey of the things 
which were in the time of the writer, and a forward look 
to the thing which were yet to be. When the events 
covered in this writing are concluded there will be a new 
heaven and a new earth in which righteousness alone 
will dwell. We have found that the letters to the churches 
conclude the story of the church age, and that the fourth 
chapter gives us a vision of the church resting from the 
labors and conflicts of the long war. 


The Book of Judgments 


In the midst of this glorious and awe-inspiring vision 
the throne of God is surrounded by the representatives 
30 


Times and Scope of the Revelation 31 


of the universal church together with the four living 
creatures who image or signify the redeemed creation or 
the spiritual forces of the redeemed creation, and we 
have the vision of the sealed book. 

The number seven, as all know, signifies perfection. 
The seven spirits of God represent the perfect spiritual 
power of God; the seven seals represent the covering 
which is complete, so that the contents of the book were 
entirely secured, made safe from inspection; and prob- 
ably also they signify not only that the sealing is com- 
plete as to contents but that it is perfect as to power. 
No one was found able to open these seals and to reveal 
the contents of the book. 

In the midst of this vast and resplendent company the 
eyes of the revelator were filled with tears because no 
one was found worthy to open the book; not even to 
look upon it. But finally he was told that the Lion of 
the tribe of Judah could open the book, and looking to 
see the Lion of the tribe of Judah, he saw a lamb as if 
it had been slain. 

We cannot dwell upon this wonderful scene but re- 
mind you that suffering gentleness has always been the 
most powerful force in the history of the world. The 
lion was a lamb that was slain, and this slain lamb alone 
had power to break these seals and reveal to the hosts 
of heaven and the church gathered from all lands and 
the entire church age the secrets recorded in the book. 


The Seals, Trumpets and Vials 


A large part of the book from this point has to do 
with the opening of the seals, the sounding of the 
trumpets and the pouring of the vials. Every seal 
broken, every trumpet sounded, every vial poured out 
is followed by judgments, thunderings, lightnings, earth- 
quakes, pestilences and ruin; all these things attend the 
breaking of the seals. It seems therefore clear that this 


92 Light on the Last Days 


book contained a revelation of the disasters which were 
to come upon the earth at the close of the church age 
before the reign of Christ had begun. 


The Seven Years of Judgment 


All students of the last things have noticed that there 
seem to be at least two special comings of our Lord in- 
cluded under the term “last days." He comes for His 
saints and He comes with His saints. We must not 
dogmatize, we must not criticise, but we must judge as 
well as we may respecting these two events and the time 
which separates them. Apparently they are entirely dis- 
tinct in their character and purpose. 

He comes for His church; the sleeping saints are 
raised and the waking saints are changed. They pass 
away together. Тһе saints, glorified and happy, are to 
be forever with their Lord, and we are told to comfort 
each other with these words. He comes with His saints, 
by the brightness of His appearing to destroy His 
enemies. This seems to be a different errand, accom- 
panied by very different events. Certainly to gather 
His saints and to destroy His enemies are not the same 
thing. 

The two movements might occur at the same time but 
the manner in which they are recorded seems to inti- 
mate a period of separation. The teaching of the Prophet 
Daniel as to the weeks fits in with this thought. Sixty- 
nine weeks seem accounted for in the history of the 
world thus far but the seventieth week does not appear 
as yet to have its place. Is this its time? If so, then 
this period between the coming of our Lord for His 
people and the coming of our Lord with His people for 
the destroying of His enemies would seem to cover a 
period of seven years. This, I think, is so justified by 
all the teaching that we may assume it to be proved. 
The division of the last week into the periods of three 


Times and Scope of the Revelation 33 


and one-half days representing three and one-half years 
is not so clear as the teaching regarding the week as a 
whole, but this also has its place and significance. 


The Last Week of Daniel 


If we are not mistaken in interpreting thus far we 
have, between the coming of our Lord for the calling 
of the church and the coming of our Lord with His 
saints for the destruction of malignant and persecuting 
enemies, these seven years of judgment, and the descrip- 
tion of this seven years is to be found in this book which 
was sealed with seven seals. 

The obvious teaching of this passage seems to be 
that the punishments which were to fall on the sinful 
world when the church had been withdrawn, and the 
whole world was left to the power of the dragon and 
beast and the false prophet, were hidden from the uni- 
verse and could not be manifested until the Lion of 
the tribe of Judah broke the seals of this book. 

As seal after seal was broken, punishment after punish- 
ment was made known, and when the last vial was 
emptied the awful judgments on a godless world were 
concluded. 


Judgments Natural, Not Arbitrary 


All thoughtful people have observed that punishments 
in the plan of God are usually natural and not arbitrary. 
That is to say, they grow out of the transgressions which 
are punished and are not miseries and torments dragged 
in by some powerful and merciless Being. The headache, 
the bleared eyes, the bloated face of the drunkard are 
the natural results of his drunkenness. The laws of his 
being notify him in advance that if he sins in that way 
he will have to suffer in that way, and what is true in 
this particular instance is true in all other cases. 


34 Light on the Last Days 


I mention this fact to say that any person who re- 
flects will see at once that this week intervening between 
the church age and the millennial reign of Jesus Christ 
must be a time of sorrows, shames, miseries, and terrors. 
The world during this period seems to be absolutely 
delivered over to the powers of the prince of darkness. 
Undoubtedly God retains His superintending rights. We 
cannot think of Him as abandoning any part of the uni- 
verse which He had created. The wrath of man always 
praises Him, always will praise Him. When there is a 
remainder of wrath which would not praise Him He 
will restrain it. This is the law of His house. 

But apparently He intends to give the universe a 
sight of what unrestrained evil will do and so He with- 
draws the church which has been persecuted, and ignored 
and sneered at and neglected by godless people over the 
world. He allows Satan and the beast and the false 
prophet unrestrained sway and He allows men to ex- 
perience and the universe to behold the natural results 
of such a state of things. 


The Ruin of Satan, Then the Kingdom of Christ 


These judgments, as I have said, continue through 
the opening of the seals, the sounding of the trumpets 
and emptying of the vials. After this time of judgment 
is concluded we have the story of the setting up of the 
kingdom of Jesus Christ here in this world. In the 
nineteenth chapter the beast and the false prophet and 
those that follow them are cast into the lake of fire. In 
the twentieth chapter Satan, the dragon, is bound and 
chained in the pit for a thousand years, and during that 
thousand years our Lord and His saints reign in the 
earth. ; 

At the end of that thousand years the tenth verse of 
the twentieth chapter tells us that the devil also is cast 


Times and Scope of tbe Revelation 35 


into the lake of fire; that all those who have rejected life 
are also cast into the lake of fire, and then in the twenty- 
first and the twenty-second chapters we have a picture 
of the new heaven and the new earth in which righteous- 
ness shall dwell. 

We have therefore, in this book divisions like these: 
First, the vision of Jesus Christ, chapter one; second, 
Christ's message to the churches, the story of the church 
age, chapters two and three; third, the vision of the 
church in the heavenlies, chapter four; fourth, the revela- 
tion of the judgments of the seven years during which 
evil will reign in the world, chapters five to nineteen; 
fifth, a vision of the reign of Christ on the throne with 
His saints, chapters nineteen and twenty; and finally 
a picture of the new heaven and the new earth in which 
righteousness shall dwell, chapters twenty-one and 
twenty-two. 


The Mysterious Book 


Is it strange that Satan should have done his best to 
prevent the church from apprehending and rejoicing in 
such a revelation as this? Mr. Moody used to say that 
Revelation was the one book in the Bible which told 
about the devil's being cast into the lake of fire. He 
said: “Тһе devil does not wish people to know where 
he is to go, and therefore he tells them that they cannot 
understand the book in which his fate is described." 

This seems very natural, but is it not strange that the 
saints of God should have listened to Satan in this par- 
ticular; that they should have neglected this book, the 
only one which has its divine origin so clearly affirmed, 
which promises such blessing upon those who read, upon 
those who hear, upon those who obey; and which gives 
us the triumphant termination of the age-long war be- 
tween good and evil, light and darkness, God and Satan? 


36 Light on the Last Days 


Is it not strange, I say, that the church has so neglected 
this book! Ought we not to pray God to graciously 
enlighten our own eyes that we may read and understand 
and obey and receive the blessing which was promised? 


V 


*A BUNCH OF LOVE LETTERS" 
(Chapters 2 and 3) 


DO not remember who it was that first named the 

letters to the churches in this way, but it seemed to 

me a very beautiful thing thus to call them, and now 
when I think of them they appear to me under this title. 
I desire in this chapter to do two things: First, to char- 
acterize briefly these seven letters as a whole, and, sec- 
ond, to speak of the periods in the church age which 
they individually and collectively represent. 

And first as to their general characteristics: The 
writer would have us remember that these are the last 
words which Jesus Christ has spoken to His church. 
Each of them begins with a claim to full and complete 
knowledge, “I know thy works," “I know thy works,” 
"I know thy works." This solemn affirmation echoes 
and re-echoes from letter to letter as it also echoes and 
re-echoes from age to age. 


“Thy Works,” “Thy Trouble,” “Thy Home” 


There is, however, a very beautiful variation, or ampli- 
fication in the second and third letters. Smyrna was not 
a working church but a suffering church, and although 
in some translations we have in the Word, “I know thy 
works," we have more distinctly set forth, “I know thy 
trouble.” And the church of Pergamos, which dwelt in 
the midst of powerful evil forces that were seeking to 
drag it down, has also this beautiful expression, “I know 
where thou dost dwell.” 

37 


38 Light on the Last Days 


As I was preaching on this subject recently these 
thoughts filled my mind with a wonderful comfort, a 
light and a blessing. I believe they will be in like man- 
ner helpful to many to whom this word may come. 
Jesus Christ speaking to His people says: “I know 
what you do, I know what you suffer and I know where 
you live.” He does not content Himself with saying, 
*[ know thy works," for this, though in many instances 
it may bring consolation, in many other instances is a 
word of fear. But interpreted in the light of the two 
following expressions the fears are softened and the 
comfort predominates, for it is just as true that Jesus 
knows what His people suffer and that He knows where 
His people dwell as it is that He knows what they have 
done. 


Jesus Takes All into Account 


And it is also true that He judges what they have 
done in connection with what they have suffered and 
with the surroundings which have helped or hindered 
them in the divine life, and so I would say for the com- 
fort of all God's people who begin this chapter, that we 
may be glad that He says in the first place, "I know 
about your works and I know about your trials, the 
trials which arise from your own natures, the trials which 
arise from the solicitations of evil and wicked people 
about you, or from the unkindness of evil and wicked 
people about you, and the trials which arise from the 
direct assault and suggestion of Satan and his demon 
hosts." 

“І know what thou dost suffer and I know where thou 
dost dwell,"—in a home with unconverted people, in a 
home with needy, suffering, irritable, troublesome people, 
I know where thou dost dwell. I have made provision 
for all the circumstances of thy abode just as I have 
made provision for all thy sins. The temptations which 


“A Bunch of Love Letters” 39 


will arise from your dwelling are quite as much in my 
knowledge and in my plan as the temptations which 
arise from any other source," and so the people of God 
may be glad when they read this bunch of love letters 
to think that this One of the shining face and the flashing 
eyes does not use His power of vision to terrify and 
destroy, but to warn, to comfort and console. 

If only we are able with a measure of humble faith to 
say as Peter did when the thrice-repeated question burned 
into his very heart: “Thou knowest all things, thou 
knowest that I love thee," we may then be sure that 
this One who holds the stars in His right hand and walks 
among the candle-sticks, observing with His penetrating 
glance all that we do, knows not only what we do but 
what we endure and what we must meet in the places 
where we dwell and judges us kindly and compas- 
sionately as a father and a Saviour, not as a tyrant and 
a heartless Lord. 


The Joy of Commendation 


Another characteristic which runs throughout this en- 
tire series is the evident joy which this all-knowing Sav- 
iour King has in commending the honest efforts of His 
churches to be and to do according to His will. It seems 
as letter after letter is unfolded that He is not willing 
to allow a single good thing which any of those churches, 
weak and imperfect like ourselves, have done to go un- 
mentioned. “I know thy works, I know thy sufferings, 
I know thy persecutions, I know thy faith, I know thy 
zeal." 

Over and again He records all the good things which 
He is able to say concerning His churches. We humans 
are prompt to criticise and some of us are prompt to 
praise and those who criticise unfavorably seldom praise, 
and those who praise oftentimes lack either courage or 
faithfulness to warn, but this great Captain is equal to 


40 Light on the Last Days 


both these seeming contradictions. He sets forth with 
a loving heart and with a glorious fidelity both the good 
and the evil which He finds in His people. 


A Rare Proof of Friendship 


I remember to have heard a man once say concerning 
my father: “Не furnished this rare proof of friendship, 
that he was able and willing to reprove his friends.” 
This same characteristic we find throughout these letters. 
While the One of the flaming eyes is not willing that any 
effort for holiness should go unmentioned, He is also 
unwilling that any dangerous, lurking sin or toleration of 
sin should be unreproved. 

“You have followers of Balaam among you. You 
have certain followers of Jezebel among you and you 
tolerate them, you do not reprove them, you do not cast 
them out and they are corrupting you and corrupting 
others. You must be faithful and not simply avoid evil 
yourselves, but you must not tolerate evil. If you toler- 
ate evil it will destroy you, it is as if you yourself should 
do it." This is a wonderful thing and is a marked char- 
acteristic of this series of letters. 

Another fact which we find set forth in each one of 
them is that there is opportunity and place for change: 
“Be zealous, and repent,” comes into most of them, 
Smyrna and Philadelphia perhaps the only exceptions. 
And this in connection with the warning and with the 
declaration of sin and failure is also a word of comfort. 
Next to the shame and terror of sin comes the fear that 
repentance is impossible, that the hope of pardon is past. 

But over and again we find this One who walks among 
the churches and who upholds their messengers with 
His right hand, urges upon єт repentance and this 
shows that repentance and pardon are not yet beyond 
reach. 


*4 Bunch of Love Letters" 41 
The Hope of Victory 


And once more we find in each one of these letters 
the possibility of victory and reward: “Не that over- 
cometh,” “he that overcometh," “he that overcometh" ; 
—Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis, Phila- 
delphia, Laodicea—‘“‘he that overcometh,” “he that over- 
cometh.” Even Laodicea has this same hint of possible 
victory and in each case there is joined to the possibility 
of victory the certainty of reward. “He that overcometh 
to him I will give—.” “He that overcometh to him will 
I give.” “Не that overcometh to him I will give—.” 

How like the blessed bells of hope these words ring 
through the hearts of men! We are known thoroughly 
as to our works, as to our tribulations and as to our 
dwellings and as to our failures and as to our efforts 
and as to our utter inabilities. But it is possible that 
we should overcome and if we overcome then we shall 
have the new name, then we shall have the new place, 
and we shall have the abundant reward. And finally, at 
the close of each one of these loving words of Jesus 
Christ to His people, we have this solemn expression: 
“Let the one who has ears to hear, listen.” 


Who Are the Seven Churches? 


I pass now to the question, “What particular churches 
are represented, if any, by this group of letters addressed 
to the seven congregations named?” and I remark, in 
the first place, that it was probably intended as a special 
message for the particular churches indicated. John 
himself had been the pastor at Ephesus and the other 
six churches which he names were grouped in a small 
circle about that ancient and magnificent city. It would 
have been perfectly possible to have committed the mes- 
sages to John for one church in Asia Minor, another in 
Macedonia, a third in Greece, a fourth in Rome and the 


42 Light on the Last Days 


like, but for some reason Jesus Christ pleased to send 
this message to Ephesus, John’s own church, and to these 
other churches which were near to it. 

And there is no doubt but that there was a special 
appropriateness in the particular message sent to each 
particular church, for while the messages have the gen- 
eral characteristics which I have named, each of them 
also has its peculiar word. The entire setting of this 
august transaction forbids us to believe that these letters 
were addressed to these churches for themselves alone. 

There is no partiality with God, there are great 
similarities among His people, and He has the same 
interest in a church in Alaska or in Mexico that He had 
in a church in Greece or Asia Minor, so we must hold 
and teach that these letters are not alone for the seven 
churches to which they are addressed, but are also for 
all churches which have characteristics and circumstances 
that would make them appropriate. 


Letters for All Churches in Every Age 


And still further, because all churches are much alike 
and because in all ages all the characteristics both for 
good and ill which are mentioned in these letters may 
exist, we may believe, we must believe that these letters 
are, all of them, intended for every age in the life of the 
church. 

Wherever Baalism or the worship of nature and the 
exaltation of the people are found as sins and faults 
there the message to Pergamos or Thyatira will be in 
order. But there is also. apparently a reason for be- 
lieving that there is a certain succession in church age 
intimated by these seven letters; for example, Ephesus 
was the church of John. It was in a rich and beautiful 
city; John himself was familiar with the walls, the 
palaces, the theaters, the camps, the baths, the courts of 
that imperial city, and it was not to be wondered at that 


“A Bunch of Love Letters" 43 


in that city, joined with faith and labor, there should also 
be a tendency to a failure in first love and so John speaks 
of this and it was undoubtedly a characteristic of the 
church in the first ages, abundant works, abundant faith, 
abundant sacrifice, but a tendency to self-righteousness, 
a temptation to magnify self and to forget their Saviour. 


We Are in Danger 


This seems to have been a universal tendency; we ex- 
perience it ourselves today. So also Smyrna seems to 
have been surrounded by powerful and malignant forces 
and the church passed from its first age of faith and 
courage and hope and service into a time of deadly per- 
secution which lasted for centuries. 

Historians called them pagan persecutions and papal 
persecutions; call them what you like, they were the 
times when the disciples of Jesus Christ were hunted to 
the caves in the mountains and to the tombs in the plains, 
when every form of death which could be devised that 
would call forth fear and terror among men was inflicted 
upon the disciples of Jesus, and this was the Smyrna age 
that followed the age of Ephesus. 

But after a time persecutions ceased. Popularity in- 
creased, the cross was blazoned on the banners of Rome; 
wherever the eagles of that mighty nation screamed, there 
the cross on which Jesus suffered was elevated and hon- 
ored, and this brought in the age of Pergamos and Thya- 
tira, a time when the church was united with the world, 
when it sought for the friendship and help of the mighty 
and powerful of the earth and did not seek the help that 
comes from God alone. 


Backsliding and Worldliness 


It would be natural that two periods like this should 
conduct to the time of Sardis, when the church had a 
name to live and was dead, when the embers seemed to 


44 Light on the Last Days 


be flickering to their final extinction, and historically we 
find that this was the fact; that the church came to a 
time when ignorance, immorality and superstition were 
practically universal; when the love of power and the 
love of money ate the very heart out of the church of 
Jesus Christ. This was the time of the Sardis church; 
history reveals this age as clearly as it does the other 
which precedes it. 

And then came the time of Philadelphia, the time when 
a handful separated themselves from the corruptions 
which had destroyed the church and Philadelphia gives 
us the age of the Reformation, the time of improvement 
in morals, in knowledge of the Word of God, in belief 
in that Word and an effort to live according to it, but 
the age of Philadelphia was succeeded by the age of 
Laodicea, the time when the church said: “I am rich 
and increased in goods and have need of nothing"; the 
time when people boast of their numbers, of their wealth, 
of their religious activities and do not know that they 
are poor and miserable and blind and naked. 

No thoughtful man who reads the newspapers can 
doubt that we are in this age, and as we read the sad 
boasting of men who are in many instances themselves 
yoked up with a godless and wicked world, who have an 
outside of religion but who have a heart of greed and 
pride and vanity, we are reminded of our own danger 
and of the words of Jesus: “Behold, I stand at the door, 
and knock." 


VI 


A DOOR OPENED IN HEAVEN 


(Chapters 4 and 5) 


HE story of the church ends with the close of these 

letters. Тһе word "church" does not recur. The 

scenes which succeed are set in the heavens, though 
they have reference to some events which occur on the 
earth. 'The Bible description of the occurrences which 
close the church age is found in the fourth chapter of 
First Thessalonians, the fifteenth chapter of First Corin- 
thians, etc. When the Laodicean church is entirely satis- 
fied with herself and her surroundings, when the Balaams 
of the church are crying peace and safety, then in such 
an hour as men do not think Jesus will come. 

He will not come for all, but for His saints. Two 
women will be grinding at the mill; one will be taken, 
the other left. Two men will be plowing in the field; 
one will be taken and the other will be left. Two will 
be sleeping in one bed; one will be taken, the other left. 
In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, the trumpet 
shall sound and the dead will be raised and the living 
saints will be changed. We which are alive and remain 
will not go before those who sleep; they will go before 
us. 

The first resurrection will be completed before a liv- 
ing saint receives his resurrection body, but when those 
who sleep in Jesus are awakened and receive their resur- 
rection bodies, we which are alive and remain shall also 
be changed. The Holy Spirit says we shall be caught 

45 


46 Light on the Last Days 


away to meet Him in the air and that so shall we ever 
be with the Lord, and in the harassed, tempest-tossed 
times of the apostle he said, writing to the people of 
God: “Wherefore, comfort one another with these 
words." 


The Four and Twenty Elders 


This period seems distinctly represented in the fourth 
and fifth chapters of the Revelation. John hears a great 
voice; he sees a door opened in heaven, the throne of 
God is before him; surrounding it are four and twenty 
thrones on which sit the four and twenty elders; four 
living beings are there, mighty intelligences, swift-winged 
with the courage of the lion, the patience of the ox, the 
intelligence of men and the piercing glance of the eagle. 

What is signified by these four and twenty elders? 
Why four and twenty? Why not twenty or fifteen? 
Evidently because these four and twenty elders, clothed 
in white, sitting upon thrones, crowned with gold repre- 
sent the tribes of the old dispensation and the apostles of 
the new. In a word, they represent the church universal 
and this church is not seen scattered about the hills and 
valleys of Asia Minor, laboring, persecuted, bewitched 
and lukewarm, but it is in the presence of God and is 
surrounded by the uncounted hosts of angels who have 
never sinned. 


The Beasts and the Beast 


'The Bible is the finest specimen of book-making known 
to the world. It has given law to the literatures of all 
civilized nations. It is the standard by which they are 
judged and to which they do not attain. Yet the trans- 
lation is a human work and must therefore be imperfect 
as men are imperfect. One of the notable instances of 
this defect is found in the word “beasts,” which recurs so 
frequently throughout the early chapters of this work. 


A Door Opened in Heaven 47 


The student who turns to his Greek Testament finds 
that the word “beasts” is “zoa” in the original and “zoa” 
may signify beasts, but the distinctive character of the 
expression is “living ones.” These four “beasts” are 
more correctly thought of as four magnificent living 
creatures, not beasts in the ordinary human sense of the 
term at all. On the other hand, the word "beast" which 
we find in the latter portion of this book, e. g., 19:20, is 
“therion.” It means a lion or a bear or a leopard or a 
wolf, it signifies a wild beast, so that the expressions 
found here in the early part of this work should never 
be translated “beasts,” but should always be read “living 
creatures," or "living beings.” 

Whom or what do these four living beings represent? 
Opinions differ. Each man must prayerfully study and 
thoughtfully determine as well as he can. To me they 
signify the redeemed creation in which the redeemed 
saints are some day to reign. It may be that they are 
the angelic powers who are to care for this redeemed 
creation. Тһе redeemed people are no longer оп the 
earth, they are in the heavens. The living beings who 
are to care for the redeemed creation are also in heaven. 
They have not yet taken their places upon the earth; by 
and by they will. 

""Then instead of the briar shall come up the fir-tree, 
and instead of the thorn shall come up the myrtle tree, 
and this shall be to the Lord for a name, for an ever- 
lasting sign that shall not be cut off." (See Isaiah, chap- 
ters II, 35 and 55.) ‘The earth itself is changed so that 
it no longer brings forth harmful vegetation, so the 
nature of the brute creation will be changed, the lion 
and the lamb, the ox and the leopard, the little child and 
the deadly reptile all will dwell together in peace and 
harmony, it is fitting that people who have been sancti- 
fied and made fit for a heavenly redemption should 
occupy a heavenly world. 


48 Light on the Last Days 


Beastly Governments 


It is an interesting fact that the nations of the world 
in choosing their emblematic figures have so frequently 
chosen birds and beasts of prey;—the Roman eagles, 
the Russian bear, the double-headed eagles of Austria, 
the lion and unicorn of Great Britain—how has it hap- 
pended that such figures as these have been chosen by 
great nations as their graphic representations ? 

Doubtless because of the fact that the nations have 
been like wild beasts in their relations to their own sub- 
jects and in their relations to one another. They have 
ravenously torn and devoured. Even to this day they 
do the same. Consider the relation of the American 
government to the slaves, to the Indians, to the poor 
and miserable of the cities. 

Consider the history of Great Britain at home, in 
India, in South Africa; consider the history of Spain in 
the eastern and western hemispheres; read the story of 
the nations of the earth, see the poverty, the slaughter 
of little children, the famines and the pestilences which 
have dogged the heels of wars, and it will be instantly 
obvious that wild beasts are the appropriate representa- 
tions of such governments as these. 

I have spoken of the beast because he is suggested by 
the expression “beasts” and not because he appears 
through the open doors in the skies. John does not say 
“the beast”, he says, “living beings,” powerful, intelli- 
gent, beautiful, holy in the presence of God, in the pre- 
sence of Jesus Christ, in the presence of the four and 
twenty thrones upon which sit the four and twenty 
elders, robed in white and crowned with gold. "This is 
the vision which came before John when he heard a 
voice like a trumpet which said: “Come up hither, and I 
will show thee things which must be hereafter.” 


A Door Opened in Heaven 49 
The Book of Judgments 


We have already considered the general purpose of 
this book; it is to reveal Jesus Christ taking possession 
of His kingdom through the call of His saints and the 
destruction of His enemies. Тһе latter are the more 
prominent in this book. As the seals were opened, judg- 
ments fell upon the earth. But I wish to pause a 
moment here to raise this question: “Why was the 
Lamb slain, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the only one 
in heaven or in earth who was fitted to unveil the judg- 
ments which were to fall upon men?” 

No one was found to open the book; John was weep- 
ing because no one was found; he wished to know what 
was included under its seven seals. It seems that the 
celestial universe was looking on; God the Father, the 
universal church, the redeemed creation, the uncounted 
milions of angels all were looking on, apparently to 
see by what method Jesus Christ was to obtain posses- 
sion of His rightful kingdom, and the only one who was 
able to break the seals and to open the book was this 
Lion of the tribe of Judah, this Lamb after it had been 
slain. 

Was not the reason for this fact that only One who 
suffers to save men from judgment is fitted to speak of 
judgment, to reveal it? Simple knowledge is not suf- 
ficient. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up, and so 
we find it set forth at the beginning, that the only one who 
was fitted to speak of the thunders and lightnings and 
earthquake and famines and plagues which were to fall 
upon the earth was the One who died upon Calvary to 
deliver men from the terrors which were to come. 

The Lion of the tribe of Judah prevailed to open the 
book. God the Father who had created men did not 
speak of the judgments; the Holy Spirit who had invited 
men did not speak of the judgments; the One who was 


50 Light on the Last Days 


scourged and spit upon and buffetted and crucified for 
our sins, He it was who loosed the seals and opened the 
book, describing the judgments which were to fall upon 
the unrepentant world. 


VII 


THE TIME OF THE WORLD JUDGMENT 


(Chapters 6-19) 


HEN I was younger the word "judgment" to 
me signified a single event. I thought of it 
as the time of the great white throne, when all 

the nations would be gathered before God for a final 
award. In like manner, resurrection to me was a single 
event which preceded the judgment and which was uni- 
versal in character. Time and the study of the word 
have very seriously modified these views. Judgment now 
seems a more varied and long continued process and the 
resurrections which precede it are at least two. 

Who is to say how many they may be? It is said in 
the Word of God that at the time of the crucifixion of 
Jesus Christ, many of the saints which were dead arose, 
went into Jerusalem and were seen of many (Matthew 
27:52-53). We have no further word respecting those 
resurrected saints. It is significant that we have no 
word respecting the death of Lazarus after his resur- 
rection. 

I have frequently heard ministers and others say that 
he died again, but I never heard any of them give a 
Scripture proof of the statement which they made. Per- 
sonally, I believe that the saints who were resurrected 
at the time of our Lord's murder were his companions 
during the forty days, a sort of guard of honor who 
attended Him in His comings and goings, and I believe 
that when He arose from the side of Olivet to take His 

51 


27 Light on the Last Days 


place on the throne of God, they went with Him and 
entered then in resurrection bodies into the glory. 

While there are some who still insist on a single resur- 
rection for all human beings, I think most persons who 
study the Bible now agree that before the millennium 
the dead saints are reanimated and that the bodies of 
those who have rejected Jesus Christ sleep on until the 
thousand years are past. 


A Thousand Years As One Day 


Before we attain to a very thorough knowledge of the 
Word of God we must come to realize in some measure 
what is implied in the statement that a thousand years 
with God are like one day, and that one day is like a 
thousand years. I think those of us who have come to 
be what the world calls old, or who will soon arrive at 
that stage in life, can realize far better than younger 
persons what this expression means. 

Christians too can comprehend it better than the un- 
saved, for we who are saved have become partakers of 
the eternal life of God, as Jesus said: “I give unto 
them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither 
shall any man pluck them out of my hand.” We humans 
with our little lives and plans can imperfectly at most 
and best comprehend the timelessness of God, but when 
we are studying such subjects as the one which is before 
us in this chapter, we are reminded that God’s thoughts 
respecting time as respecting other matters are not like 
our thoughts, that His modes of speech are not like 
ours. 

Let us then fix in mind at the beginning this thought, 
that judgment in the Bible is a word which may cover 
many different items before it is concluded. Evil deeds 
are judged immediately. Persons who have consciences 
which are at all awake feel the sting and shame of sin 


Time of the World Judgment 59 


when it is committed. They judge themselves and they 
are judged. Individuals and nations suffer disasters 
which mar their happiness or wipe them out, and this 
is also judgment. 


The Judgment as to Works 


Saints do not come into judgment as to position, but 
they do come into judgment as to works; they do not 
have to be saved after they become saints, they are 
saved when they become saints, but they are rewarded 
according as their work shall be, and sinners also are 
judged, not as to their position, for as long as they 
reject Jesus Christ they are condemned already, but they 
are judged as to their works and will be beaten with 
many stripes or with few stripes according to the light 
which they have rejected, the evil deeds which they have 
done. 

What, however, does judgment especially mean in 
the Revelation? What period of time is covered by the 
opening seals, the sounding trumpets and the emptied 
bowls of wrath? When will the seals be opened, the 
trumpets sounded and the bowls be poured out? When 
will these judgments of wars, pestilences, blazing moun- 
tains, bloody. seas, confused heavens, when will these 
things come to be? Here, as throughout this study, one 
must speak according to the light which is given him. 
Every man must speak according to his own light. 
Doing this he does not condemn others but discharges 
his own responsibility. Every man must give account 
of himself and give account of his work to God. 


One of Many Judgments 


To me the time of the judgment of the world is the 
time which intervenes between the coming of Christ for 
His church and the coming of Christ with His church. 


54 Light on the Last Days 


The coming for His church seems to be a silent event, 
unobserved by the busy world. “Behold, I come as a 
thief," He says. 

The thief does not come with great clamor, with a 
sounding of trumpets and a declaration of purpose; he 
comes silently, takes the thing he is after if he can get 
it and goes away. ‘Thus Jesus Christ comes for His 
saints. The dead in Him arise, the living in Him are 
changed, together they are caught away in a moment, 
in the twinkling of an eye and thereafter are with the 
Lord. 

We are commanded to comfort one another with these 
words. But after a time He comes with His saints to 
destroy His enemies by the brightness of His appearing. 
He descends from heaven with His mighty angels, in 
flaming fire, taking vengeance on those that know not 
God. All eyes see Him, they also who pierced Him and 
the kindreds of the world wail because of Him. This 
is not coming like a thief. This is coming like a con- 
queror. Now in between these two comings, the coming 
for His saints and the coming with His saints for the 
destruction of His enemies and the rule of the world, 
lie the times of the book of judgments, the times of the 
opening seals, the sounding trumpets and the emptying 
bowls. 


How Long Will This Be? 


I think about seven years. I cannot see the dividing 
line as many of my brothers do, but there is a distinc- 
tion between the first half and the last half of these 
seven years, this seventieth week of Daniel. Further 
study and prayer may enable me to perceive these two 
periods of three and one-half years each more clearly 
than now. At present I seem to see the week clearly, 
but the divisions of the week not so clearly. 

Let us reflect on the condition of the world when the 


Time of the World Judgment 5D 


saints, both living and dead have been caught away to 
meet the Lord in the air. What will remain in this 
world when this tremendous event has occurred? Evi- 
dently that old dragon, the Devil, will be here. He does 
not go out from the heavenlies until he is banished, and 
he will not leave this world until he is cast into the lake 
of fire. The beast and the false prophet will be here; 
that is, there will be godless governments and Christless 
religions. 

Does this beast (therion) mean a person or a system? 
Quite possibly both, but if we must say one or the other, 
I think undoubtedly a system. Governments which are 
like lions, tigers, leopards, eagles, which scream and tear 
and devour, which murder Armenians, which inflict the 
opium curse on China, which commit nameless atrocities 
in the rubber countries, in Congo land and Peru for a 
little bloody money, these systems will remain and when 
there is not a living or dead saint in the world, when 
there is no Peace Society or Indian Rights Association, 
or Federation of Churches, or anyone else to object to 
the fearful works of godless government, there will 
naturally be a time of trouble such as the world has never 
seen. 


The Harlot and the Dragon 


And in this time, as in our time, the beast will carry 
the harlot (ch. 17), that is, the scarlet woman rides upon 
the great red dragon. In a word, the religious systems 
which reject Jesus Christ, which reject the plan of Jesus 
Christ will be here and they will have their stately pagan 
festivities to sanction and sanctify the bloody deeds of 
godless government. And, fourth, there will remain in 
the world at this time those who have definitely rejected 
Jesus Christ—some dead, some living. The Lord will 
have taken to Himself both the living and sleeping saints 
at His coming for His people, and the persons, both liv- 


56 Light on the Last Days 


ing and dead, who have rejected Jesus Christ will remain. 

The end will not come until the gospel is preached to 
all nations for a testimony, and when the end does come 
the sleeping and living saints will be caught away and 
the persons, both living and dead, who have rejected 
Jesus Christ will remain. 'The dead sleep in their graves, 
the living go about such tasks as they may choose. 

The fearful march of the dragon and of the beast, 
the hypocritical pretences and the tawdry splendors of 
the false prophet and the perplexed minds and despairing 
hearts of godless men, these will be the occupants of the 
world. $ 

As has been said before, all evil minds and evil beings 
are judged already. Judgments against evil men and 
evil nations are revealed day after day and from age to 
age in the unfolding providence of God. 


The Last Sight of Sin 


But there will come a judgment when the beast and 
the false prophet and Satan and all those who reject 
Jesus Christ will be cast into the lake of fire, and this is 
also the time of the opening seals, the sounding trumpets 
and the out-pouring bowls, and this last time, I think, 
is in the week which intervenes between the coming of 
Christ for His people and the coming of Christ with His 
people to take possession of the throne of David, the 
seventieth week of Daniel. 

Some men may say, "What are the raised and changed 
saints doing during this period of seven years?" We 
cannot tell Here again we have an example of the 
reticence of God. He tells us enough to make us realize 
the joys of the saved and the miseries of the lost, but 
neither here nor elsewhere does He gratify idle curiosity. 
There is room for many thoughts about these seven years. 
To some of us it seems as if we shall need them all to 


Time of the World Judgment 57 


confess our failures, to give thanks for our salvation and 
to look upon the glorious face of our Saviour who was 
crowned with thorns and scourged and crucified for us. 


VIII 


THE JUDGMENTS OF THE OPENING SEALS 


(Chapters 6-16) 


T is interesting to note that the series of three sevens 
are really included in one series of seven, that is, 
the seven trumpets are included under the seventh 

seal and the seven bowls are included under the seventh 
trumpet, so that we have in fact a single series in three 
movements—the first six seals opened, then the seventh 
seal which includes the seven trumpets blown, and then 
the last trumpet sounding, introducing the seven bowls 
and concluding the opening of the seven seals. 

There are three theories as to divine penalties. Some 
declare that under the government of God penalties are 
self-inflicted, that is, that the evil doers suffer the natural 
consequences of their evil deeds. Others hold that in 
this government penalties are divinely imposed, that is, 
that God directly visits His wrath, His shames, pains 
and terrors upon evil doers, and others hold that both 
these things are true, but that each is only partially true, 
that neither is universal. 

This is my own conviction, both as regards the present 
time and the time of judgment which will come upon the 
earth with the opening seals. It seems clear to me, both 
from the Word and the work of God, that many of the 
evils which follow wrong doing are the natural conse- 
quences of the deeds done. ‘They are divine in the sense 
that God has so constructed the world that they must 
follow certain offenses. 


58 


Judgments of the Opening Seals 59 


The physical results of sensual living, the hatred and 
contempt which follow avarice and greed, the horror 
and isolation which are visited upon cruelty and oppres- 
sion, all these are both divine and human, that is, they 
result under law and without separation from the acts 
which cause them. 

On the other hand, I feel sure that God providentially 
overturns the plans, brings to nothing the counsels and 
destroys the accumulated treasure of godless and wicked 
men. This judgment is confirmed as we study the world 
in this time, when it is given over to evil, when Jesus 
Christ, having been rejected by the world says to it: “I 
will leave you for a time to yourselves. You object to 
my rule and methods, try your own.” 


The Seals, the Trumpets and the Bowls 


Under the opening of the six seals we find in general 
a time of trouble which may Бе said to arise from the 
warring, wicked interests of men. There is a red horse 
with a rider who bears a great sword. There is a black 
horse who seems to intimate famine which follows war 
—in the Balkans and in Japan and in Manchuria and 
Korea, just as it always has followed hitherto and always 
will follow hereafter. 

And there is the going forth of a pale horse whose 
rider is death, and here we seem to have intimated the 
pestilences, the plagues which have always followed war 
and famine and which will yet follow war and famine 
and which will be especially terrible in the time when 
the living and dead saints are absent from this world, 
when the dragon and the beast and the false prophet have 
unrestricted sway over the bodies and the souls of men. 

And then there is the cry of the souls of the martyrs. 
What martyrs? Тһе martyrs who have preceded the 
coming of our Lord have been caught up with the 
changed living saints to meet Him in the air. They are 


60 Light on the Last Days 


with Him; they will ever be with Him; they comforted 
one another with the thought centuries ago, but here are 
martyrs crying out for vengeance on their foes. Who 
killed these martyrs? Evidently the dragon and the beast 
and the false prophet during these seven years. But 
how should there have been any martyrs, that is, witnesses, 
for Jesus Christ at this time? When these seven years 
begin there is not a living or dead saint in the world; 
the sleeping have been raised and the living have been 
changed and together, a vast company of happy beings, 
they have been caught away to meet the Lord in the air. 
How then does it come about that there are saints to 
be slain? It is easy. to understand who would do the 
killing. It is puzzling for a moment to see who are the 
saints to be killed. This leads to the one broad band of 
light which we find in this awful time of tribulation. 
When the first seal was opened there went forth 


A White Horse with His Rider 


(Chapter 6) 

This rider bore a mighty bow, and went on conquer- 
ing and to conquer. What does this signify? Who was 
he and what was he doing in a world in which there was 
not a dead nor a living saint? What place has he in this 
time of trouble? A white horse, a rider clothed in white 
apparently. It is my conviction that the rider who went 
forth at the opening of the first seal was the same one 
who goes forth in the nineteenth chapter, the eleventh 
to the sixteenth verses. 

And who was this celestial person going forth on this 
white horse, his word piercing like a sword so that he 
could kill and make alive? What was he doing at the 
beginning of this dark and terrible age, when plagues 
sprang out of the earth and fell down from the sky and 
poured out of the bottomless pit, when lightnings and 
thunders and voices were seen and heard from the throne 


Judgments of the Opening Seals 61 


of God? In the world, after the rapture of the church, 
the parousia of our Lord, there will be millions of human 
beings who have rejected the cross of Jesus Christ. They 
will have the Bible, they will have listened to sermons, 
but they will not have accepted Jesus Christ as Saviour 
and Lord. 

How will these people feel, what will these people 
do when they wake up to the fact that there is not a 
godly person in the world? How will the first Sabbath 
after the rapture of the church seem to them? Мо one 
to ring a church bell, no one to lead a congregation in 
singing, no one publicly to read the Scriptures or to 
give an exposition of them. 


Nation Born in a Day 


How will a godless, Christless, churchless world ap- 
pear to these people who have lived with Christian folk 
and acquired at least an outside of Christian morality, 
who have intellectually approved what they have not 
spiritually chosen? It is my opinion that a horror will 
fall upon the souls of those millions and that they will 
come pouring into the kingdom of God in uncounted 
hosts. They will not, however, change the character of 
the world. 

They will be saints, but tribulation saints and they will 
be hated by the dragon and the beast and the false 
prophet precisely as these malicious beings hate good 
people now, and they will be murdered. How many of 
them no one can tell, but multitudes of them, and when 
the fifth seal is opened, John heard the voices of these 
slaughtered saints crying out for vengeance upon their 
enemies. But the answer was that they must wait, that 
the age of slaughter was not ended, that there were yet 
more to be slain as they had been and the number of 
these tribulation saints must be filled up before the lake 
of fire would swallow their murderers. 


62 Light on the Last Days 


When the sixth seal is opened we find convulsions in 
nature but no tokens of assault. But the horrors of the 
godless world with its innocent victims and its red- 
handed murderers and the convulsions of nature will 
have so impressed the kings of the earth, that the great 
men and the rich men, the chief captains and the mighty 
men, and every bondman and every freeman will hide 
themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains, 
and say to the mountains and rocks, "Fall on us, and 
hide us from the face of Him that sitteth on the throne, 
and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of 
His wrath is come; and who shall be able to stand?" 
(ch. 6:15-17). 


The Trumpets and the Bowls 
( Chapters 8, 9, 11, 15, 16) 


Now the plagues of these first six periods, it will be 
obvious, are all of them human in origin. As yet there is 
no token that heaven or hell have taken arms against the 
dwellers on the earth, but the moment that we come to 
the sounding of the trumpets there seems to be a differ- 
ence. 

Hail and fire are cast upon the earth, a great mountain 
burning with fire is cast into the sea, a great star falls 
from heaven and corrupts the rivers and fountains of 
water, the sun is smitten and the stars, the bottomless 
pit is opened, armies of infernal beings pour forth to 
afflict and torment; while the revelator looked, these 
locusts seemed to grow into innumerable armies of horse- 
men; out of the mouths of the horses proceeded fire and 
smoke and brimstone, their tails were like serpents and 
with their heads they hurt. 

Here is no exhibit of human agencies, but evidently 
supernal and infernal powers are at work. Men are not 
afflicting one another; men are not suffering under fam- 
ines and pestilences which their own wars have caused, 


Judgments of the Opening Seals 63 


but heaven has entered the lists, the bottomless pit is 
made open, torments and death are inflicted by super- 
human beings, and at last the bowls are emptied. 

When the first one is poured forth there come grievous 
sores upon the bodies of the godless men of the age; the 
second angel pours out his bowl upon the sea and it 
becomes like the blood of a dead man. The third angel 
pours out his bowl upon the rivers and fountains of water 
and they become blood; the fourth angel pours out his 
vial upon the sun and the sun becomes a means of tor- 
ment rather than a blessing; the fifth angel pours out 
his bowl upon the seat of the beast, the captain of the 
godless government of the age and that kingdom is full 
of darkness and men gnaw their tongues for pain; the 
the sixth angel pours out his bowl and the waters of 
the rivers are dried up, unclean spirits come forth, the 
seventh angel pours out his vial into the air, and then 
comes a great voice out of the temple and from the 
throne, saying: “It is done.” 

Then are voices and thunders and lightnings and a 
great earthquake such as was not since men were upon 
the earth. In a word, the judgments of the tribulation 
time are self-caused and divinely inflicted. They involve 
the hatred and malice and cruelties of men, but are also 
rightful inflictions of an insulted God and the torment 
and death inflicted by infernal agents who pour forth 
from the bottomless pit where Satan is confined. 


IX 


PAUSES IN JUDGMENTS 


( Chapters 10-14) 


HE careful reader of the Revelation observes that 
between the breaking of the sixth seal and the 
seventh and between the sounding of the sixth 

trumpet and the seventh there аге pauses— "episodes," 
some call them—whereas between the sixth and seventh 
bowls there is no pause, but the movement is rapid and 
steady from the outpouring of the first to the outpouring 
of the seventh, and when the seventh bowl is poured out 
there comes a great voice from the temple and from the 
throne, saying: "It is done." 

I do not know why there are to be these pauses, or epi- 
sodes between the opening of the sixth and the seventh 
seals and the sounding of the sixth and seventh trumpets, 
but it is interesting to note what is to occur in these 
pauses, and while, in view of the greatness of the theme 
and differences of opinion between earnest and able stu- 
dents, one must be modest, still there are some things 
which we may learn. 

There were two events recorded as occurring just be- 
fore the opening of the seventh seal. The angel of God 
cried with a loud voice to the four angels who had 
power to hurt the earth, bidding them wait until the ser- 
vants of God has been sealed in their foreheads, and then 
the Spirit proceeds to tell us that from each of the tribes 
of Israel twelve thousand were sealed, or one hundred 
and forty-four thousand of Israel (ch. 7). This is the 


64 


Pauses in Judgments 65 


first event which is recorded as occurring in this pause. 
The second is a mention of the great host of all nations 
and kindreds and people and tongues who stand before 
the Lamb, clothed with white robes and with palms in 
their hands, crying with a loud voice: “Salvation to our 
God which sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb,” 
and it is recorded that all the angels who stood round 
about the throne and the elders and the four living crea- 
tures, fell before the throne on their faces, worshiping 
God, and saying: “Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wis- 
dom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and 
might, be unto our God forever and ever. Amen. And 
one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are 
these which are arrayed in white robes? and whence 
came they? And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. 


The Saints of the Tribulation 


“And he said to me, These are they which came out 
of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes, 
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. There- 
fore are they before the throne of God, and serve Him 
day and night in His temple: and he that sitteth on the 
throne shall dwell among them. 

“They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; 
neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. For 
the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed 
them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of 
waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes.” 

Respecting these transactions let us mediate two ques- 
tions: First, What is the significance of the sealing of 
the one hundred forty-four thousand, and second, Who 
composed this vast company of redeemed ones? Were 
they the church which had been caught away before the 
judgments began, or were they the tribulation saints, 
men and women who had been converted when the white 


66 Light on the Last Days 


horse and his rider of the mighty bow went forth, or 
did they comprise both these companies, the saints who 
make up the bride and the tribulation saints as well? 


The First Fruits of Israel 


It is a very remarkable fact, which awakens the won- 
der of all who reflect upon it, that so few of the Jews 
in the church age accept Jesus Christ as Saviour and 
Lord. From the very beginning it seemed that the 
proclamation of the Messiah who had come was more 
acceptable to Gentiles than to Jews. Many Jews, even 
a great company of the priests were obedient to the 
faith, but the persecutions which arose at Jerusalem scat- 
tered the believing Jews like chaff before а winter's 
storm, and going everywhere, preaching the word every- 
where, it was accepted in large part by the Gentiles. 

There is probably no form of missionary effort today 
which is so difficult and apparently unfruitful as preach- 
ing to the Jews. It seems to make very little difference 
by whom the preaching is done, by Gentile or by Jew, 
by man or by devoted woman, everywhere it seems easy 
for Israel to reject the testimony. 

Personally I have found it extremely difficult to find 
a Jew who reads his own prophets in this age. Of 
course, the rabbis among them do, but as far as I 
can learn myself, the Jews are not in this age interested 
in the subject of religious faith, not even their own. 
Yet there will come a time when the days of the Gentiles 
are fulfilled and the days of Israel will return. God has 
not cast off His people, whom He foreknew, now any 
more than He had in the days when Paul was doing 
his glorious and abiding work. 


Where Are the Ten Tribes? 


I have heard a man who was fairly intelligent and who 
seemed to know a little about the Bible say that it was 


Pauses iu Judgments 67 


obviously impossible that the twelve tribes of Israel should 
be assembled again, inasmuch as ten of those tribes were 
lost and no one knew where they were. Perhaps one 
should not be surprised at expressions like this. Never- 
theless they shock one who is accustomed to read the 
Bible and take it at face value, for the prophet centuries 
ago clearly declared that the day was to come when the 
envy and hatred which existed between Israel and Judah 
should cease, when the long-parted peoples should be 
united and when one king should reign over them, sit- 
ting in the throne of David (Isaiah 11:10-14; Jeremiah 
3:18; Ezekiel 37:10, etc.). 

We human beings, with our little plans and our short 
patience, easily grow weary and it is natural for us to 
judge that what has been or has not been will continue 
to be or will never be, but the everlasting God does not 
reckon in our fashion and is not disturbed by the things 
which agitate us. His gifts and His calling are without 
change and the thing which from the beginning He re- 
solved upon is the thing which in the end He will do. 

So we find here, after the miseries which may be called 
human in origin have been visited upon the world which 
rejected Jesus Christ, the first fruits of Israel are gath- 
ered in. It will be a wonderful day when the twelve 
times twelve thousand are sealed, and one reason why 
multitudes from all nations and people and kindreds and 
tongues will accept our Lord in that day will probably 
be that the chosen people who have for so many centuries 
rested under the curse which they invoked for themselves 
in the judgment hall of Pilate, have at last recognized 
their Messiah and in their hearts have crowned Him 
“Lord of all.” 


68 Light on the Last Days 


Is the Number Definite to Signify an Indefinite 
Number? 


Did the revelator see these one hundred forty-four 
thousand sealed as a number definite, or did this number 
signify the incoming of a vast host of Jews into the faith 
of Jesus Christ? One is here shut up to the best judg- 
ment he may form without guidance from the Word, and 
because it is an interesting inquiry, I record my opinion, 
that we have here the definite for the indefinite. This is 
not an unusual figure of speech and I love to believe that 
the saints from Israel will be a vast host who will come 
in through the dark days of the tribulation period. 

The Holy Spirit, through Paul, says that all Israel 
will be saved (Romans 11:26). It would seem not an 
impossibility that at this time this word might have a 
glorious fulfilling. Should it be so and a vast company 
of the sons of Israel gathered from the east and the 
west and the north and the south, brought on the 
shoulders of men, fished out from the secret places where 
they have been hidden, come to God and if they should 
devote to the proclamation of the gospel the tireless 
patience and remarkable ability which has made them 
leaders in the intellectual and financial world, what a 
host of missionaries that would be and what hosts of 
converts would they gain! 


The Numberless Multitude 


If this opinion should prove to be well grounded, we 
may have a little light on the second question to which 
I referred. ‘Who constitute this great company which 
John saw, surrounded by angel hosts, associated with 
the living creatures who fell before the throne on their 
faces and worshiped God? Were they the bride, the 


Lamb’s wife? I will not say no, yet I hesitate to say 
yes. 


Pauses т Judgments 69 


The saints were at this time with the Lord, but they 
do not seem at this time to be reigning with Him. 
Therefore it is not impossible that they are in this great 
company. But when one of the elders said to the revela- 
tor: "Who are these and whence did they come?" and 
John replied, “Sir, thou knowest," the elder said: 
“These are they which came out of the great tribula- 
tion and have washed their robes and made them white 
in the blood of the Lamb.” 

Now this elder was one of the representatives of the 
church universal and he looks upon this vast company 
of white-robed, redeemed ones and asks John who they 
are and whence they came, and John replied, in sub- 
stance, that he does not know, that the elder must tell 
him, and he proceeds to describe them in terms which 
would seem to identify them with the tribulation saints. 


Not the Bride, but Tribulation Saints 


I am therefore of the opinion, though I hold it as I 
do all judgments concerning this wonderful book, sub- 
ject to further light, that this vast company of redeemed 
. ones were saints of the tribulation, people who had been 
converted in the days when the rider of the mighty bow 
went forth on his white horse conquering and to conquer, 
and also converts who were turned to the worship of 
Jehovah by the testimony of the first fruits of Israel, the 
host of converted Jews who through the great tribula- 
tion had come to know their Lord. 

Whether this opinion shall be found to accord with 
fact or not, it was a wonderful and august vision and 
one calculated to stir the heart of the banished servant 
of Jehovah. In the midst of the wars and famines and 
the pestilences and the massacres and the earthquakes 
and the thunders and lightnings, God's cause still ad- 
vances. 

The Jews who bargained for the murder of Jesus, who 


70 Light on the Last Days 


cried, “Let His blood be on us and on our children,” 
and who for these hundreds of years have so stoutly 
refused to recognize Him, at last have come to see Him 
in His true character and to herald Him to their Gentile 
neighbors, and so between the opening of the sixth seal 
and the end of this week of terrors, the first fruits of 
Israel are gathered and the great host of tribulation 
saints is assembled about the throne of God. 


X 


THE TIME OF THE TRUMPETS AND THE 
SECOND PAUSE 


(Chapters 8-14) 


HEN the record of the sealing of Israel and the 
assembling of the tribulation saints was con- 
cluded, the seventh seal was broken. ‘This was 

the last of the seals; everything which had been recorded 
in the book was now open to inspection; all the steps 
through which Jesus Christ was to come to His throne 
of world empire were now made known or to be made 
known immediately. 

It is not strange that there should have been silence 
in heaven. Here was to culminate the age-long struggle 
between Jesus Christ and His great adversary for the 
possession of the world, and this struggle was to end in 
an overwhelming victory for our Lord. It was not to 
be a drawn battle. Always there was mercy, patient 
waiting through thousands of years, and even when the 
waiting time was about to expire and judgments of the 
day of the Lord were about to begin, still there goes 
forth the white horse with his rider, conquering and to 
conquer; even in the days of the tribulation there are 
saints of the tribulation, multitudes who had rejected 
Christ when He was urged upon them came to Him 
when no longer the bells of the church and the entreaties 
of their friends sounded in their hearts, but though there 
was always compassion, always mercy, always patience, 

71 


12 Light om the Last Days 


still there was law, justice, equity and penalties for those 
who persisted in evil. 


Jesus Must Reign 


Who would have it otherwise? Who would deprive 
the ruler of the universe of the power to punish persist- 
ent wrong doers, which must be in the hands of every 
parent, of every teacher and of every official ruler whose 
work does not fall into hopeless chaos? This anarchy 
will not be the end of God's administration of the uni- 
verse. 


*He sits on no precarious throne, 
Nor borrows leave to be." 


In this time when it is ended and done there will be 
none to dispute His rightful authority. The kings of 
the earth and the great men, and the mighty men, and 
every bondman and every freeman will recognize His 
rightful authority, and to this end the trumpets will 
sound, and when the first angel blows, hail and fire fall 
upon the earth, and when the second sounds, a great 
mountain burning with fire is cast into the sea and a 
third of the sea becomes blood and the creatures in the 
sea die and the ships are destroyed. 


The Trumpets Are Sounding 


When the third angel sounds, a star burning like a lamp 
falls from the sky and the third part of the rivers and 
fountains of water are destroyed, men die because the 
waters are bitter; and when the fourth angel sounds, 
the third part of the sun is smitten and the third part 
of the moon and the third part of the stars, so that the 
very order of day and night is confused and uncertain. 

When the fifth trumpet sounds, the bottomless pit is 
opened and out from it pour volumes of smoke like the 
smoke of a furnace, so that sun and air are darkened 


Time of Trumpets and Second Pause 73 


and out of this smoke come locusts upon the earth and 
they do not devour the grass or green things as other 
locusts have done, but they strike for men, and not 
for all men, but for the men who do not carry the mark 
of God in their foreheads. 

Even these men they cannot kill, but they torment 
them until they wish they might die and seek to die and 
cannot die; and while this host of tormenting beings is 
afflicting men who do not have God’s mark upon their 
foreheads, the sixth trumpet sounds and a voice cries 
from the golden altar, saying to this sixth angel who 
had sounded: “Loose the four angels which are bound 
in the great river Euphrates,’ and they are loosed and 
seem to be in some way associated with a vast army of 
infernal beings, two hundred millions in number, whom 
they sweep over the earth like a devouring flame, so that 
multitudes of men are slaughtered by them. 


No Converting Power in Suffering 


It is interesting to note in the twentieth verse of this 
ninth chapter, at the close of this terrible story of human 
miseries which have followed human pride and vanity 
and rebellion, that all the miseries which have come self- 
inflicted under the opening of the seals, divinely-in- 
flicted under the sounding of the trumpets, do not avail 
to convert those who are not willing to know God. 

The record is, “And the rest of the men which were 
not killed by these plagues yet repented not of the works 
of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and 
idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and wood: 
which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk: neither re- 
pented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor 
of their fornication, nor of their thefts.” 

In those days as in these days, men are turned to God 
and from sin by appeals to reason, by moral considera- 
tions. Suffering is an ordained means to cause men to 


74 Light on the Last Days 


pause and think, but suffering has never saved, it cannot 
save; men are saved by the sight of Jesus, by the power 
of the Holy Spirit; “If they hear not Moses and the 
prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose 
from the dead.” 

As was remarked above, the second pause in the judg- 
ment time comes between the sounding of the sixth and 
the seventh trumpets, and here we have mysteries, hidden 
things which are not yet fully revealed, which belong in 
measure to the time to come. While the sounding of the 
seventh trumpet waits, the revelator saw a mighty angel 
coming down from heaven, clothed with a cloud, a rain- 
bow upon his head, his face like the sun, his feet like 
pillars of fire (ch. 10:1-11). This seems to be a descrip- 
tion of our Lord; possibly He is intended, perhaps it 
was some mighty angel occupied by His spirit sent about 
His work, and this tremendous being had in his hand 
a little book, open. 


The Angels of the Little Book 


We have reached the time for a full unveiling; things 
are now not to be closed up, to be understood in latter 
days, but to be understood quickly for events are has- 
tening to their consummation, and this angel puts his 
right foot upon the sea and his left upon the earth and 
cries with a loud voice as when a lion roars, and when 
he cries seven thunders utter their voices and when 
John was about to record what they said, a voice from 
heaven said, “Do not write the things which the seven 
thunders uttered,” and then the angel who stood upon the 
sea and land lifted his hand and swore that there should 
be time no longer. “But in the days of the voice of the 
seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery 
of God shall be finished, as He declared to His servants 
the prophets” (ch. 10:7). 

I pause a moment to raise a question respecting the 


Time of Trumpets and Second Pause 75 


declaration that time should be no more, and when this 
question is raised, instantly we are reminded that time 
is a measured portion of duration. Humans look at the 
circle of the sun, the changes of the moon, the seasons 
of the year. 

We reckon from one event to another event; we speak 
of five years, of fifty years, of five hundred years, of five 
thousand years, and well enough we may, for we our- 
selves are time creatures as yet; we have had beginnings, 
even if we have received eternal life we have not yet 
come to the fullness of its significance, and so these 
measured portions of duration, to us are important, but 
after we drink into the spirit of the everlasting life, we 
come more and more into the mind of God with whom 
one day is like a thousand years and a thousand years 
like one day. 

By and by, for us as for Him, time will be no more; 
we shall be launched on the ocean of eternity, not simply 
in fact as we are now, but in understanding and feeling, 
as we will be then. 


The Mystery of God 


It is interesting to note in the seventh verse of this 
tenth chapter that in the days of the seventh angel, when 
he begins to sound, the mystery of God is to be finished. 
What is the mystery of God? A mystery is a hidden 
thing which requires revelation in order that it may be 
understood. There are those who object to mysteries, 
who say that they cannot and will not believe the mys- 
terious, as they put it; they will believe what they can 
understand. 

What a small creed this would constitute for any liv- 
ing being, for we all are dwelling in the midst of mysteries 
and shall dwell among them to the end. Our lives are 
mysterious, our sicknesses are mysterious, our minds are 
mysterious, our bodies are mysterious, there are myste- 


16 Light on the Last Days 


ries in the earth beneath and in the heavens above; a few 
have been explained, a thousand wait for the work of 
man or the voice of God, and in the Bible there are mys- 
teries, many of them. 

It was a mystery how the Gentiles and the Jews, hat- 
ing and hateful as they were, could ever come to be 
one body. But my impression is that the mystery of 
God in this particular place signified His incarnation in 
Jesus Christ, His suffering for the redemption of the 
world and the processes of judgment through which He 
would take possession of the world as His rightful realm. 


Many Mysteries, This Mystery of God 


The seventh trumpet was the last of the trumpets. 
Under the seventh of the seals and under the seventh 
trumpet were included the outpouring of the seven bowls, 
and when these seven bowls of wrath were outpoured, 
the mystery of God would be completed, that is, the 
work which Jesus Christ was to do in taking possession 
of His kingdom would be concluded. When the series 
of sevens were ended time should be no more, the mys- 
tery of God would be completed, the kingdoms of this 
world would become the kingdom of our Lord and Sav- 
iour Jesus Christ. 

I do not know who the two witnesses are to be. I 
have heard some say they know and I have friends 
who think they know. Some of them must be mistaken 
for they do not think alike, and I am as yet uncertain. 
Is there here some reference to Moses who had power 
over the waters to turn them into blood, and to Elijah 
who had power to shut the heavens and again to cause 
the rain? 

Are these two men who did not die the deaths of 
other men, but who passed mysteriously and without the 
sight of their fellows, who were buried by the angels 
or caught away in a chariot of fire, are these men to 


Time of Trumpets and Second Pause 77 


take their places in the holy city and are they to be slain 
and to lie unburied in the street, an object of scorn and 
contempt to those who have done the murder? I cannot 
tell. The words are significant, but precisely what they 
are intended to teach, I do not know. We may know 
hereafter, we shall know hereafter if it is needful for us. 

And the measuring of the temple. Does this refer to 
a rebuilt Jerusalem, or is it spiritual in its reference? 
I cannot tell. Some think they know; let us hope that 
we may learn, but at the end of this pause comes the 
sounding of the seventh angel, and after he sounded 
there were great voices in heaven declaring: “The 
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our 
Lord, and of His Christ; and He shall reign for ever 
and ever." 

And after these great voices sounded forth, the four 
and twenty elders fell down upon their faces and wor- 
shiped God, and the temple of God was opened in the 
heavens and there was seen in the temple the ark of 
the testament. That ark has not been seen by human 
eyes for two thousand years. Men have told us that it 
cannot be seen; some have told us that it is hidden in 
the excavations under the temple area. I do not know, 
but the ark of the testament was seen by John and 
there were lightnings and voices and thunderings and 
an earthquake and great hail (ch. 11:19). 


XI 


THE THREE WOMEN OF THE REVELATION 


(Chapters 12, 17, 19) 


HERE are three notable characters in this book in- 
| dicated by the title of this chapter. There is the 
sun-clothed, star-crowned woman of the twelfth 
chapter, the scarlet-clothed woman of the seventeenth 
chapter and the bride of the Lamb of the nineteenth 
chapter. It will be helpful to the student of this por- 
tion of God's Word to think of these three in their sev- 
eral characters and work for a little time. 

There is substantial agreement as to the second and 
third. Students differ in opinion regarding the first. 
Here, as elsewhere, we must find our way carefully and 
with humility, for while Christ's person and work аге 
clearly revealed, we are in the midst of mysteries when 
we consider the mighty beings and events which are 
associated with Him. 

The sun-clothed, star-crowned woman was about to 
give birth to her child and before her, waiting the in- 
fant advent, was a great red dragon with seven heads 
and ten horns and crowns upon his heads; his tail drew 
the third part of the stars and cast them to the earth. 
The woman brought forth a man child who was to rule 
all nations with a rod of iron, and her child was caught 
up to God and to His throne. 

The woman fled into the wilderness where there was 
a place prepared of God that she should be fed a thou- 
sand, two hundred and three-score days. It would be 

78 


The Three Women of Revelation 79 


a help to us if it were recorded that this woman was 
upon the earth, this dragon upon the earth, but it is said 
that the two wonders, the woman and the dragon, were 
in heaven and the record goes forward to say that 
Michael and his angels fought against the dragon and 
that the dragon and his angels resisted, but that in the 
conclusion the dragon was cast from heaven into the 
earth and that his angels were cast out with him. 


The Dragon Cast Out of Heaven 


In the ninth verse of this twelfth chapter the dragon 
is identified. He is said to be the old serpent called the 
devil and Satan. The child of the woman also seems to 
be clearly identified, for he is said in the fifth verse of 
this chapter to be one who was to rule all nations and 
that he was caught up unto God and to His throne. 
There can be no possible doubt, I think, here. ‘The child 
is our Saviour King, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the 
One who is being unveiled in this whole book. 

With these two points determined, the identity of the 
dragon and the identity of the child, we seem to be 
helped forward a little regarding the identity of the 
woman. ‘Two opinions have prevailed respecting her; 
one that she was the church, the other that she was 
Israel. 

Both the church and Israel, however, have had their 
place not in heaven, but on the earth and this wonder of 
the woman, sun-clothed, star-crowned with the moon 
beneath her feet, was seen in heaven and the dragon was 
in heaven and the war which arose was in heaven, and 
as the result of this war, the dragon, that old serpent, 
the Devil and Satan, with his angels who had resisted 
the angels of God were cast out into the earth. 


80 Light on the Last Days 


Who Was the Star-Crowned Woman? 


Does this sun-clothed, star-crowned woman then sig- 
nify Israel or the church or some heavenly representative 
of one or the other? The criticism of Dr. W. J. Erd- 
man on the theory that she represents the church seems 
to be decisive. He says: "The church did not produce 
Jesus Christ, but Jesus Christ founded the church." I 
do not see how the force of this argument is to be 
broken. In my own mind I am shut up to the other pos- 
sibilities. 

I would accept Dr. Erdman’s theory that this woman 
represents Israel without qualification but for the fact 
that the wonder was seen in heaven, and I do not see 
how Israel can be said to have brought forth the Messiah 
there. I am not confident here, the sounding is deep, my 
judgment may change, but these difficulties at present 
push me forward to the conclusion that this sun-clothed, 
star-crowned woman who appeared as a wonder in 
heaven, who brought forth the man child who was to 
rule all nations with a rod of iron, was a heavenly rep- 
resentative of an earthly organization. 


Difficulties No Doubt 


There are difficulties here undoubtedly. The child was 
caught up into heaven to God and to His throne. There- 
fore he was apparently upon the earth; the woman fled 
into the wilderness where she was maintained for twelve 
hundred and sixty days; the war was in heaven, the 
dragon was cast out of heaven into the earth and when 
he was cast out the revelator heard a loud voice rejoice 
that the dragon and his host had been cast out of heaven 
into the earth; the same voice utters a cry of sympathy 
for the earth and the sea because the dragon has been 
cast out of heaven into them. 

The woman flies into the wilderness; there is no 


The Three Women of Revelation 81 


wilderness in heaven. The serpent seeks to drown her 
with a flood, apparently he is no longer in the heavens 
but in the earth. The earth helps the woman by swal- 
lowing the flood which the dragon casts out of his mouth 
after her, and the dragon who has made war in heaven 
and been defeated makes war on the earth with the 
remnant of her seed which keeps the commands of God 
and has the testimony of Jesus Christ. 

Considering the whole setting of this: wonder, I con- 
clude that the sun-clothed, star-crowned woman is a 
heavenly representative of earthly Israel, that the vision 
shifts from heaven to earth without remark and that we 
are dealing in most of this chapter, not with the won- 
der which John saw in heaven, but with the beings rep- 
resented by that wonder who were in the earth. This 
will conduct to the conclusion that Dr. Erdman is right 
in his thought that this woman represents to us Israel 
of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came. 


The Scarlet-Clad Woman 


This splendid but debased and miserable person is 
set before us in the seventeenth chapter. Her garments 
are described; she is said to have been arrayed in purple 
and scarlet and decked with gold and precious stones and 
pearls, and to have held a golden cup in her hand. Upon 
her head was written her name, “Mystery, Babylon the 
Great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the 
Earth.” 

Her character is indicated; she was drunken with the 
blood of saints and with the blood of the martyrs of 
Jesus. And as John wondered, the angel said: “Why 
do you wonder? I will tell you the mystery of the 
woman and of the beast that carries her.” He then goes 
forward to speak at length of the beast, saying that he 
had been but was not, but should finally ascend out of 
the bottomless pit and go into perdition. 


82 Light on the Last Days 


The seven heads of the beast are described as seven 
mountains. They are said to be seven kings, five of 
whom have passed, one of whom is and the other of 
whom has not yet come, but when he comes he is to con- 
tinue for a short time. Тһе beast that was and is not 
is the eighth, is of the seventh and goes unto destruc- 
tion. Тһе ten horns are ten kings and they have one 
mind and give their power and strength to the beast; 
these kings make war with the Lamb and the Lamb 
overcomes them, for He is Lord of lords and King of 
kings. 


The Waters Are Nations 


The waters where the harlot sat are said to have been 
peoples and multitudes and nations and tongues and the 
ten kings are said to hate the harlot, to strip her of her 
glorious apparel, to eat her flesh and burn her with fire, 
for God, it is said, has put into the hearts of these kings 
to fulfill His will and to give their kingdom to the beast 
until the words of God shall be fulfilled. 

And this woman, clothed in purple and scarlet, decked 
with gold and precious stones and pearls, with the golden 
cup in her hand, is said to be that great city which reigns 
over the kings of the earth. 

In the eighteenth chapter following, the destruction of 
Babylon is set forth with events accompanying, the 
wailing of the kings of the earth, the mourning of the 
merchants and the astonishment of shipmen. The apos- 
tles and prophets are called upon to rejoice in the ruin 
of this great city. A mighty angel throws a stone into 
the sea, saying: “Thus with violence shall that great 
city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no 
more at all." 

The voices of musicians, the labors of craftsmen, the 
grinding of millstones and the shining of candles, the 
voice of the bridegroom and bride, all these have passed 


The Three Women of Revelation 83 


away and in this great city is found only the blood of 
the prophets and the saints who have been slain upon 
the earth. 

Who was this scarlet-clad woman whose name was 
Mystery, Babylon, who represented a great city, who 
was splendid in apparel but drunk with blood, who was 
destroyed by the very beast which had borne her and 
who in the end was utterly consumed? 


The False Prophet 


Another baleful being is set forth in the nineteenth 
chapter. He is associated with the beast as the scarlet- 
clad woman was. He is called the false prophet and is 
said to have been cast with the beast into the lake of fire 
burning with brimstone. 

Who was the false prophet? Was he identical with 
the scarlet-clad woman, the harlot, the mystery of Baby- 
lon? If not identical, was he related? The harlot was 
destroyed by the kings; Babylon was destroyed by the 
judgments of God, the false prophet was cast into the 
lake of fire. Do these three names signify one person 
or three persons who are related? Let us seek our way 
as prayerfully and carefully as we can. 


Christless Faiths 


When sin entered the world God promised a Redeemer 
who should bruise the serpent’s head. When the Mosiac 
ritual was wrought out every sacrifice pointed on to the 
Serpent-Bruiser to come. When the reality came the 
shadow ceased to be and since Jesus Christ was born in 
Bethlehem, no Jewish altar has borne its bleeding victim. 

There are more than ten millions of Jews in the world 
today, but there is no Jewish altar nor Jewish sacrifice. 
From the day when Cain brought his offering of the 
fruits of the earth and was rejected while Abel brought 
his lamb for a sacrifice and was accepted, these two altars 


84 Light on the Last Days 


have stood side by side in the world—the altar of Abel 
testifies the guilt of sin and the need of a Redeemer who 
should shed His blood for the offences of the people; in 
every age the altar of Cain has declared that men may 
come to God, bringing the fruits of their own labors 
without the intervention of an offering whose blood has 
been shed. 

No man who judges from human probabilities, could 
possibly have believed that the Christian system would 
survive its first advocates; it was so contrary to the 
natural disposition of men; it was so hated and opposed 
by the wise and wealthy and powerful of the earth that 
anyone who judged from the probability of the case 
would have said that it must surely and quickly die. 

And yet it has lived, strangely lived, and today gives 
every thoughtful person reason to believe that it will 
still progress until all enemies have fallen before it and 
it has become a great mountain to fill the whole earth. 


Harlot Churches 


It is a wonderful figure that we have in this expres- 
sion. The depths and fullness of its meaning we cannot 
begin to comprehend. The bride owes to the husband 
love and reverence, and much as the word is hated in 
our time, true and wifely subjection. The husband owes 
to the wife love and protection and provision and a true 
and loyal comradeship. ‘These hints teach us something 
about what is signified by this expression, the bride, the 
Lamb's wife. 

Idolatries throughout the Word of God are called adul- 
teries. When Israel followed false gods the prophets 
called her a harlot, and when Judah followed the ex- 
ample of Israel the prophets denounced her in most ter- 
rific terms as one who had broken her marriage vows. 
So far all is clear. There is evidently included under 
this term “harlot” the false religions of all countries 


The Three Women of Revelation 85 


and all times, and when it is declared that the false 
prophet is to be cast with the beast into the lake of fire, 
it is a declaration that before the kingdom of Jesus 
Christ is established in this world, all religions which 
teach salvation by any other means than the blood of 
Jesus Christ, will. perish. 


Rome and Mohammed 


Historically there are two great systems which have 
turned the eyes of men from the Saviour of the world: 
The apostasy of Rome and the rivalry of Moham- 
medanism. I think it would be impossible to find in 
Romanism the entire content of the scarlet-clad woman, 
yet there are many things which must awaken thought 
after one studies the long history of that great church. 

The very colors which are worn by cardinals and 
priests are suggestive; the vast accumulations of wealth 
which have been made by that church; the fearful stories 
of the Inquisition which may be apologized for in view 
of ignorance and superstition but which can never be 
justified; the attempt to substitute salvation by ceremon- 
ies, for salvation by repentance, confession, restitution 
and faith in the Lord Jesus, all these are significant and 
no thoughtful man can study this system without being 
oftentimes reminded of the passage which is under con- 
sideration. 

So too the false prophet seems clearly set forth in 
this scripture. The colors are different but the moral 
teaching is much the same: Be obedient to the teach- 
ings of the prophet, and you are assured of paradise. 
Salvation does not come by the blood of Jesus, but by 
the teachings of the prophet. The blood of the saints, 
how freely it was shed! Through how many years was 
it shed! How unrepentant are both these great systems 
today! But the essence of spiritual adultery is the re- 
jection of Jesus Christ and the doctrine that salvation 


86 Light on the Last Days 


may be attained by human exertions. In our time and 
in this country there is no organization or group of 
organizations which is teaching this doctrine so con- 
tinually as are the secret lodges. 

In every village, in every great city are groups of men, 
or men and women which ignorantly or intentionally 
teach all who are willing to learn that salvation is not 
by the blood of Jesus but is by the works of men. The 
devotees of this false system are found everywhere. 
Some of them profess Christian faith as well as the 
pagan faith of the secret order, but you cannot go amiss 
of persons who will assure you without hesitation or 
shame that the orders of which they are members are 
quite as good as the Christian church, while many of 
them will not hesitate to say that in important particulars 
they are better. 

I then identify under these terms the harlot and the 
false prophet all systems in all ages which profess to 
secure the salvation of the human soul irrespective of the 
work of Jesus Christ. It is my conviction that in time all 
thoughtful students of the Word of God must agree 
to this exposition. 


The Bride, the Lamb’s Wife 


We have spoken of the characteristics of the true faith. 
It begins with faith in Jesus, continues following in His 
footsteps and ends with Him in glory. When this last 
stage in the life of the true church is reached, she is 
denominated the bride, the Lamb’s wife. She dwells 
in a home He has provided, she wears garments which 
He has furnished, she is crowned His queen and shares 
with Him in the administration of universal empire. 

Here again there is much which is not revealed along 
with much which is revealed. What is the occupation 
of the risen and reigning Son of God in those days after 
He comes with her to set up His universal empire in the 


The Three Women of Revelation 87 


world? I do not know. When is the marriage of the 
Lamb and His bride to take place? Apparently at the 
end of the great tribulation and just before the millen- 
nium kingdom is declared. 

"Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him: 
for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and His wife 
hath made herself ready. And to her was granted that 
she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for 
the fine linen is the righteousness of saints. And he 
said to me, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto 
the marriage supper of the Lamb. And he saith unto me, 
These are the true sayings of God” (ch. 19:7-9). 


The March of the Conquerors 


And directly.after this majestic proclamation we find 
our Saviour King riding forth in triumph, the beast and 
the false prophet cast into the lake of fire, the dragon 
bound with a chain end cast into a pit for a thousand 
years of imprisonment; the world subdued to Jesus 
Christ, not an open rebel daring to raise his head through- 
out those wide domains; sickness and sorrow and sin 
banished, the saints reigning with their risen and re- 
turned Lord. 

I conclude, therefore, that the sun-clothed, star-crowned 
woman with the moon beneath her feet is a representa- 
tion of Israel as divinely chosen and ultimately redeemed, 
purified and sitting with Jesus to judge the world. The 
scarlet-clad, gem-decked woman seated upon the scarlet 
beast is to me an embodiment of the anti-christian re- 
ligions of all countries and times; wherever we find men 
teaching that salvation can be obtained independent of 
the salvation of Jesus Christ, wherever we find men 
talking about earning their own safety, there we find a 
representative of this Mystery, Babylon, Mother of Har- 
lots and of the Abominations of the Earth. 

The bride, the Lamb’s wife, is to me the church as con- 


8S Light on the Last Days 


stituted in the divine thought and as ultimately to be А 


presented without spot or wrinkle or blemish or any 
such thing in the very presence of God Himself. 

It is my opinion that the bride is to be perfected in 
the coming of the Lord, that those who sleep in Christ 
Jesus and those who live in Him, the former in resur- 
rection bodies, the latter changed in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, and caught away to meet the Lord 
in the air, constitute this wonderful being. 


ж apu mm Ж - 
222 


| oe менее t Ma е 
WE i OLE Mar uy ptum EA M 
tt n AE жне the PAA PE 


90 Light on the Last Days 


wrong, but must on the other hand always do right, 
they are free to have this opinion, as far as I am con- 
cerned. 

There is, however, great danger in even tolerating this 
attitude of mind. Тһе Holy Spirit does not speak in 
approval of persons who say to the Creator: “Why hast 
thou made me thus?" (Roman 9:20). I do not advise 
anyone to take the chances of thus offending the Al- 
mighty ; “In whose hand thy breath is and whose are all 
thy ways” (Daniel 5:23). 

It is not a safe thing to criticise the Almighty, and so, 
apart from the fact that I should personally prefer to be 
a free being, is the danger of even tolerating the wish to 
be anything else. But once more I repeat, if there are 
to be free beings, there must be the possibility of sin. 


*Who Made the Devil?" 


This question which seems irreverent and which cer- 
tainly is a bit dangerous, is oftentimes put to us by god- 
less men. It would be just as sensible to ask who made 
liars, or unkind people, or cheats or thieves. Undoubt- 
edly God is the author of their being and it is equally 
clear that they are the authors of their own sin. "They 
were under no compulsion to plot for the destruction of 
property and the injury of their fellowmen. 

They do this freely, not because they must, but be- 
cause they are evil, and that is the reason why the devil 
does his wicked work, because he is a devil, though at 
his creation he was as innocent as these wicked persons 
were when they lay smiling babies in their cradles. Satan 
undoubtedly had an advantage over them for they came 
into the world with a bent to sin, not a necessity for 
sinning, but a tendency to do wrong. He came into the 
world a spotless being with no tendency to evil, but 
with the possibility of evil. 

I am of the opinion that the Miltonic view is essen- 


Satan 91 


tially true, that he was a celestial being of lofty position 
and corresponding powers. My impression is that am- 
bition, “the last infirmity of noble minds,” deceived him; 
that the fact of eminence bred in him the desire for pre- 
éminence and that this temptation which he could have 
mastered and should have mastered, mastered him. I 
do not profess to affirm; I express my judgment. We 
are sure that he must have been created without sin and 
that his evil doings and evil nature are the result of his 
own work. 


Where Is Satan? 


In Job f:6 and 2:1, it is clearly affirmed that he has 
power to present himself among the sons of God. It 
is equally clear that he has permission to go to and fro 
throughout the earth. From the gospels, in a score of 
places, it is evident that he delights to occupy and con- 
trol human beings. 

I well remember what a shock it was to my whole 
being when I saw for the first time the truth that Satan 
now has access to the very presence of God; that still, 
as four thousand years ago, when the sons of God pre- 
sent themselves before Him Satan comes also among 
them, and from Revelation, the twelfth chapter and tenth 
verse, it appears that he will have this privilege of free 
ingress to and egress from the presence of God and the 
angels until the seventh angel has sounded, until the 
great tribulation is almost at an end, until the kingdom 
of God is at the door. 

“And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is 
come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our 
God, and the power of His Christ: for the accuser of 
our brethren is cast down, which accused them before 
our God day and night." But before this we read that 
"there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought 
against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his 


9 Light on the Last Days 


angels, and prevailed not; neither was their place found 
any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast 
out, that old serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which 
deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the 
earth, and his angels were cast out with him" (ch. 
12:7-12). 


Тһе Sons of God, Satan Came Also 


According to these scriptures Satan has had and has 
now the privilege of appearing among the sons of God. 
He also has power to come and to go from the earth and 
when the church has been carried away from the earth, 
when the sleeping saints have been raised, and the living 
saints have been changed, and the world is given over 
to those beings who have rejected God, when the seals 
have been opened and the trumpets have been sounded, 
and the vials are just to be poured out, the final chapter 
in the penalties which God visits upon a sinful world, 
then he and his hosts will be barred from the celestial 
court. 

They will not longer be permitted to come and go at 
liberty; they will be shut up to the earth where they 
tarry a little on their way to the lake of fire which burns 
with brimstone, their ultimate destiny. If this be a cor- 
rect statement of the teaching of these scriptures, it is 
vastly important and should be thoughtfully and prayer- 
fully meditated by all the sons of God. 


What Is He Doing? 


Names often indicate characters. Frequently they do 
etymologically, always do they when we became ac- 
quainted with the persons who bear them. No American 
needs to be told what you mean if you call him a Wash- 
ington or a Benedict Arnold; no Jew requires to ask 
your meaning if you call him a Judas. It is one of the 
beautiful things in human experience that names of those 


Satan 93 


who love us become sweet to us even when they are not 
themselves specially beautiful. There will probably not 
be one person who will read these words who cannot 
think of some dear friend, pure and noble and helpful 
in character, whose name is not particularly beautiful 
but has come, because of the character of the one who 
bears it, a representation of everything that is delightful 
in human thought. 

Now the names of Satan are etymologically and de- 
rivatively significant. He is an “accuser,” he is a “de- 
stroyer,’ he is a “tempter.” Perhaps the two thoughts 
of destruction and accusation will cover most of the 
works which he performs. He ruins men primarily by 
solicitation to do evil deeds. He did not hesitate to at- 
tack Jesus Christ Himself with this purpose in view. 
“Fall down and worship me,” he said, “and I will give 
you the kingdoms of the world and their glory.” 

In some form or other he makes this same proposition 
to all the sons of men. “Accept me, or the things which 
I control, as your chief good, and I will bestow them upon 
you.” This is his proposition and what multitudes of 
men accept it! How many tens of thousands there are 
today who are by ambition or greed or vanity or lust, 
led into the pits of corruption. 

When he can secure sin on the part of free beings he 
has accomplished all his evil desire, for sin brings with 
it physical ill, intellectual darkness, financial ruin, social 
degredation, the whole list of evil things which men 
fear, yet which men choose when they will to do evil. 


The Case of Job 


The case of Job should be studied more carefully than 
it is by all those who desire to know what Satan is doing 
in this age, for it is a divine revelation as to the char- 
acter and work of that enemy of God and men. It is 
clear from the story of Job that Satan utterly failed in 


94 Light on the Last Days 


his attempt to get him to do evil. In that far away day 
this man of Uz held fast his integrity and positively re- 
fused the way of sin. Job had from God Himself the 
magnificent testimony that he feared God and hated evil. 

The whole story from beginning to end is the story 
of a man who amid the temptations, first of wealth and 
power, and after that of loathsome disease, abject pov- 
erty and forsaking friends, held to the path of duty. 
“In all this Job sinned not” (Job 1:22). And when 
we arrive at the wonderful close of this marvelous story 
God Himself speaking again says to the friends of Job, 
who had felt sure that he was hiding sin somewhere in 
heart or life: "Ask my servant Job to pray for you. I 
will hear him; you have not spoken of me the thing that 
is right as my servant Job has” (Job 42:7, 8). Here then 
we have an absolute breakdown and failure in the at- 
tempt to force a good man into the path of sin. 

What then? Does Satan give up the assault? Not 
at all. That is not his method. He says to God: “Let 
me strip him, then he will curse you to your face.” And 
God says to Satan, first: “АП that he hath is in thy 
power" (ch. 1:12), and again: “Не is in thine hand, 
(ch. 2:6). But in the first instance God said: “Do not 
touch him,” and in the second He said: “Do not destroy 
his life." 


Satan's Favorite Work 


And then the record is that Satan stripped this man 
of Uz to the very bone; one piece of property after 
another was swept away, winds, fires, robbers and thieves, 
all were turned loose upon him until he sat down alone, 
a childless beggar who had been a prince. And when 
the second permission came and Satan was allowed to 
put his hand upon Job himself, he smote him with a 
loathsome disease; here physical torments, social isola- 


Satan 95 


tion and suspicion of friends all combined to make every 
moment a separate and deadly agony. 

Now what does all this show as to the occupation of 
Satan? It teaches as clearly as it can be taught that 
when he cannot succeed in his efforts to make men sin, 
he delights to do all that he can to cause them to suffer. 
My dear mother, who has been with the Lord these 
twenty-two years, said to me, I suppose a hundred times 
when I was a boy at home, speaking of this same ma- 
lignant and evil being: “Не worries whom he can't 
devour with a malicious joy." 

I do not doubt that there are today thousands of godly 
men and women who have maintained such characters 
as Job did under the assaults of satanic temptation, who 
are suffering today as Job did, under satanic assaults on 
the lives of friends, on their property interests and on 
their physical frames, and I am sure that Satan today is 
telling them, as undoubtedly he told Job, that their suf- 
ferings are caused by their sins, whereas these sufferings 
come, not because of their sins, but because of the malice 
and wrath of Satan against people who are living holy 
lives in hard places. 

I believe this one truth is to be so great a comfort to 
thousands of the Lord's people that I shall count it a 
sufficient reward for the time and strength I am expend- 
ing on this book. There аге a great host of the Lord's 
people who do not understand the deadly character of 
this enemy with whom they have to do, and this ignor- 
ance results in spiritual depression and a failure to 
obtain victory. 

The sons of God who are able, humbly yet gratefully, 
to believe that they have such testimony of God respect- 
ing their walk, do not need to be discouraged because 
their children die or their property disappears or their 
bodies are afflicted. When Satan cannot injure a child 


96 Light on the Last Days 


of God in one way, he injures him in another, if he is 
permitted. ‘This is his character and this is his history 
from the beginning until now. 


How Long Will He Keep at Work? 


He will keep at work through the church age. He is 
very busy in Laodicea; he put Balaams in Christian 
pulpits to boasting of denominational successes, of per- 
sonal attainments and the like. He inspires them to say, 
“We are rich and increased in goods," when the poor 
blind leaders of the blind do not know that they are poor 
and miserable and wretched. 

He invites lodges, the present antichrists, to sit once 
a year in houses dedicated to the worship of God through 
Jesus Christ. He inspires men to build up the church 
with wood and hay and stubble—men who do not pray 
by themselves nor with their families, men who do not 
read the Bible, men who do not hallow the Sabbath day, 
men who are not honest in business, men who are not 
clean in life, but who have a little money, some social or 
political station—how many of our churches are cursed 
by such material today—fuel fit for the fire! 

Satan delights to have churches built up in this 
manner. Не delights to have godless men think them- 
selves Christians, confess themselves so, that thus he 
may confuse the minds of sinners, may lead them to be- 
lieve that there is nothing whatever in the faith of Jesus 
Christ, and no man who reads or observes or thinks 
needs to be told that he succeeds too frequently in this 
endeavor. : 

He is not a coward and he is not a quitter. He does 
not leave a man unless he is resisted; he does not vacate 
a community because some nerveless, well-wishing per- 
sons desire he should; he fights for his own hand and 
he does not give up until he is beaten; shameless and 


Satan 97 


impudent, he goes today as in the olden time among the 
sons of God into the very presence of Jehovah. 


And What Does He Do There? 


When he is in the earth, as already seen, he has two 
great lines of labor; he tempts men to sin and when he 
fails in this he seeks to injure them in their families, 
their business arrangements, their physical beings. It 
is obvious that this is not his errand when he comes into 
the presence of God among His sons. What is his busi- 
ness then and there? This also is clearly revealed; it 
is illustrated by example in Job; it is affirmed in the 
tenth verse of the twelfth chapter of Revelation. 

He is the accuser of the brethren, that is, when he 
cannot get them to sin and when he is not permitted to 
do them harm, he goes before God Himself and lies about 
them, and he does this persistently. The Holy Spirit in 
Revelation says that he makes these accusations day and 
night (ch. 12:10). What the character of these accusa- 
tions is we have intimated in the Book of Job. All that 
he can truthfully say against the people of God, of course, 
he will say; sins which have been repented and par- 
doned he will delight to rehearse, and sins which have 
been thought but which have never come to be, which 
he has himself suggested but men have refused, these he 
falsely attributes to the objects of his malicious hatred. 

“Yes, Job has done pretty well; who would not? You 
have given him such a delightful place in the world and 
surrounded him with so many blessings. Take these 
away, and you will see what he will do.” “Yes, I con- 
fess Job did better than I thought he would do; he stood 
the loss of property and of children, but you afflict his 
body, or let me do it and then see what Job will do.” 
This is the position of Satan in the presence of Jehovah. 

He accuses the brethren night and day and he will 


98 Light on the Last Days 


keep this up through the church age and into the great 
tribulation; he will never cease from it until he is cast 
out from the heavens into the earth. The earth which 
he has blackened and marred, the earth which he would 
gladly have utterly destroyed, this will become for a 
little time his prison-house. 

He will no longer be able to range the hills on which 
the sons of God gather, and after a little pause in the 
world which he has sought to destroy but which Christ 
has determined to redeem, he will be cast into the lake 
of fire. 

It is very foolish for people to ask questions about this 
awful lake. If they would think more and pray more 
and talk less, they would have a more wholesome dread 
and would be less inclined to trifling remarks. I have 
been horrified scores of times in meetings of ministers 
and church people to hear jokes about this lake of fire 
followed by laughter on the part of people, who ought 
to dread it for themselves and for their children and 
for their neighbors and friends. We do not compre- 
hend it fully. God grant that we may never be able, but 
no one who has meditated for a little on the character 
of Jesus Christ believes that when He was here in the 
body and when He spoke to John in this last word to 
the churches He was talking about a trifling matter 
when He spoke of the lake of fire that burns with brim- 
stone. 


XIII 


THE REIGN OF THE SAINTS 


(Daniel 7, Revelation 20, Luke 19) 


O one has read thus far in this book without ob- 
IN serving that I assume without question the truth 

of the Bible. I do not understand it all, but I 
believe it all and when I find in it things which I cannot 
explain, which I do not fully understand, I am not led 
to believe that the statements are untrue, but simply that 
I do not comprehend them. In other words, I attribute 
my failure not to my learning, but to my ignorance, and 
thus also I interpret the writings of my fellowmen. 

It is a great mystery to me that persons can profess 
to believe the Bible, can take texts from it and preach 
sermons and at the same time deny in detail that which 
they thus admit in bulk. I have heard this done over 
and over and I am terrified and ashamed to think that 
men who profess to interpret and enforce this holy Word 
can deal with it in this fashion. 


"The Saints Shall Take the Kingdom" 


This statement, made in Daniel 7:18 and in Revela- 
tion 5:10 and 20:6 and in Luke 19:17 and 19, together 
with similar statements which abound in the Word of 
God, would seem to be decisive as to the place and char- 
acter of the millennial reign. The time is definitely 
stated: they shall reign with Him a thousand years. 

It is admitted that this expression might be figurative, 
but there is no intimation that it is, and I do not see 

99 


100 Light on the Last Days 


any reason for lugging in an interpretation which is not 
required. ‘The church age is a time definite; it extends 
from Pentecost to the parousia, from the time of 
Ephesus to the time of Laodicea. The great tribulation 
seems to be a time definite, not perhaps so absolutely 
revealed, yet revealed. From the reason of the case, one 
would say that the time between the coming of our Lord 
for His church, the parousia, and the coming of the 
Lord with His church to assume His kingdom after the 
destruction of His enemies, the Epiphany, would neces- 
sarily be time of trouble such as the world had never 
known. 

When the dead saints have been raised and the living 
saints have been changed and Jesus has taken them away 
from the earth, what must the condition of the earth be? 
I admit that the seventieth week of Daniel has connected 
with it, difficulties of interpretation, but the teaching of 
the prophet meant something. What did it mean? And 
the teaching in Revelation concerning the period of three 
years and one-half, which is by many students believed 
to indicate the last half of the last week (ch. 11:7-12), 
would seem to harmonize with the interpretation inti- 
mated. 


The Days Shall Be Shortened 


One would expect that the time of the tribulation 
would be short. We do not consider it natural that 
Jesus Christ should for a great while leave the world 
in which He suffered and over which He intended to 
reign, to the unrestricted forces of evil, and I am glad 
to remind you once more of the going forth of the white 
horse with his rider of the mighty bow at the breaking 
of the first seal. 

I am not especially concerned with the question of 
exact time. Неге we have the words, “а thousand 
years.” If in place of one thousand it should signify 


The Reign of the Saints 101 


a thousand weeks of years that would be an added con- 
solation and glory. According to the clear teaching of 
Scripture, Jesus Christ is to reign in this world. What 
an august picture of the beginning of His reign do we 
have in Daniel, the seventh chapter, verses nine to four- 
teen! It is equally plain that His saints are to reign 
with Him. This is declared in Daniel and with equal 
positiveness in the Revelation. 

The power of the saints in the millennial kingdom is 
to be determined by their faithfulness during the church 
age. This is clearly set forth in the nineteenth chapter 
of Luke. Why now should we make difficulties where 
there are none? It will be no more impossible for Jesus 
Christ to come to this world in the glory of His Father 
with all His holy angels, destroying His enemies by the 
brightness of His appearing, than it was for Him to 
come a wailing babe in the manger of Bethlehem. 

It would not seem to many of us so remarkable that 
He should come to reign as it was that He should come 
to suffer. While accepting without hesitation the teach- 
ing respecting His advent to suffer shame and ignominy, 
we are not disposed to disown or to render insignificant 
the teaching respecting His glorious appearing. 

I therefore insist that we who are Christians and who 
have built our faith on the unshakable Word of God are 
entitled to the hope and courage which the thought of 
the millennial reign affords. It certainly will not detract 
from any spiritual gladness which we may have in ages 
to come if during this period of a thousand years we 
should, according to the teaching of our Lord, reign with 
Him on the earth. 


Faithful Over a Few Things 


Accepting the Bible teaching respecting the reign of 
Christ with His people on the earth, we find in the 
teaching of Luke nineteen a stimulus to energy and 


102 Light on the Last Days 


faithfulness. In this long, beautiful time when the reign 
of sin will be utterly broken, when there will not be a 
whiskey shop, or a brothel, or a gambling den, or a war 
camp, or a battleship, or a hard-hearted millionaire, or an 
idle beggar, or a crying child, or a heart-broken woman 
in the whole world, when the nature even of wild beasts 
will be changed and the lamb shall lie down unharmed 
by the lion, when the nature of the ground itself shall 
be changed and instead of the thorn shall come up the 
fir-tree and instead of the briar shall come up the myrtle 
tree (Isaiah 55:13), how glorious it will be to live. 

I think that many of us, when we reflect on our sinful- 
ness and our sins, have no special ambition to have 
authority. It will be quite sufficient that we are permit- 
ted the holy companionship of that marvelous age. "That 
we should have been made free in the universe of God, 
that we should come and go without restriction among 
the sinless angels, among the glorified saints, in the 
very presence of our Lord Himself, this will be quite 
enough for us and we shall find the language of joy and 
thanksgiving native to us; we shall love to sit and look 
upon that patient, thorn-crowned, transfigured face that 
suffered the ignominious blows in the halls of Caiaphas 
and Pilate. 

But God has never dealt with His people on the ground 
of worthiness. He supplies all our need according to 
His riches in glory by Christ Jesus; He does not look 
upon us as we are in our weaknesses and infirmities, but 
as we are in Jesus Christ and as we are to be because of 
that which He has done, is doing and is yet to do. He 
suffered for us according to the Scriptures; He was 
raised for us according to the Scriptures; He ascended 
up on high and intercedes for us according to the Scrip- 
tures, and He is coming again to receive us unto Him- 
self according to the Scriptures. And according to the 
Scriptures we are not only to share in the joys of the mil- 


The Reign of the Saints 103 


lennial age, but we are to be entrusted with authority 
according to our faithfulness in the church age. 


The Saints Shall Judge the Angels 


One of the most marvelous questions in the whole 
Bible has always seemed to me to be that one put by the 
Holy Spirit through Paul to imperfect persons like our- 
selves: “Do ye not know that ye shall judge the 
angels?” (1 Corinthians 6:3). I think that most Chris- 
tians, when they think of those sinless beings who have 
been these ages past going hither and yon on the errands 
of God, instinctively shrink from their companionship. 
Not because we do not admire them but because we are 
conscious of our own failures and sins. 

It seems to me that the natural feeling of a Christian 
would be one of shrinking, that we should fear lest we 
should be despised by these who had never known the 
power of temptations such as we have met or the tor- 
ment of sin, and to have it intimated in this question that 
the saints are to sit in judgment on the faithfulness of 
the angels is to me an unspeakable marvel. I do not 
profess to comprehend, I only apprehend. 

But this wonderful teaching seems to harmonize per- 
fectly with the thought which is before us. The saints 
are to reign on the earth; in proportion to their faithful- 
ness they are to have authority over ten cities, over five 
cities, over one city, over a ward. The principle is clear ; 
we are to be entrusted with authority according to the 
use which we have made of the powers and opportun- 
ities which were bestowed. Earthly ambition has been 
a tremendous factor in the history of mankind, both for 
good and evil. 

Desire for power has worked tremendously in the souls 
of men and among the institutions of the world, both 
civil, social and political. I think it is the universal belief 
that where a universal desire is found among normal 


104 Light on tbe Last Days 


men that desire is God implanted and has provided for 
it a God-ordained satisfaction. Is it not true that often- 
times the lower ambitions, which God condemns, have 
crowded out the higher ambitions which He has im- 
planted ? 


Covet the Best Gifts 


Would it not be a glorious thing if today men who 
are striving after power, after money, after pleasure, after 
social recognition, could become enthused with the de- 
sire to become Christ-like and to have a large place in 
His coming kingdom? І have no doubt respecting this 
matter. If the thought of reigning with Christ on the 
earth had been of no value, He would not have told us 
that it was to be the lot of the churches, of some of His 
children, and if it would not be well for men to study 
their talents and opportunites and having determined 
what they are, seek to improve them to the full, there 
never would have been written such parables as that of 
the pounds or the talents. 

These scriptures have one plain teaching, that is, You 
shall have reward according to your energy, according 
to your faithful improvement of that which has been 
committed to you. The nobleman distributed to his 
servants his goods, went to a far country to receive for 
himself a kingdom and returning, took account of his 
servants that he might know how much each one had 
gained by trade, and having received their reports he 
assigned to them responsibilities according to the record 
which they had made. 

Is there any ambiguity in teaching of this kind? Тһе 
nobleman unquestionably represents our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ. The far country into which He 
has gone is the heaven which has received Him; the 
kingdom which He was to receive He has received; He 
has sat down with His father in His throne; He is to 


The Reign of the Saints 105 


return to take account of His servants. This He will 
probably do in those mysterious years between the rap- 
ture of the church and the Epiphany, and having taken 
the account He will distribute authority in the millen- 
nial age according to the work which we have done. 


Differing Motives Are Legitimate 


Persons who do not think as wisely as they should, 
sometimes condemn the use of lower motives because 
there are higher motives which should also be employed, 
but both Scripture and reason teach that we do not de- 
stroy the higher when we insist upon the lower. Foolish 
people sometimes say that they will not be scared into 
Christian faith, yet every person who is not stark mad 
is influenced by fear every day of his life. 

He puts on his overcoat and overshoes lest he should 
take cold; he perils his health to go on a journey to 
secure a debt lest he should lose property; he summons 
the police if his house is assailed lest he should be 
robbed or murdered; he steps off the railway track lest 
he should be run down by an engine; he teaches his 
wife and his children to do the same, and if he had 
a neighbor who did differently he would feel that the 
neighbor should be committed to a mad-house. But 
when the danger of death eternal, which is clearly set 
forth in the Word of God is mentioned, or when the 
danger of failure to gain all of the reward which he 
might gain is mentioned, all at once he becomes enam- 
oured of higher motives and thinks, or says he thinks, 
that we should never be influenced by any other. 

The fact is, we are complex beings and we are in a 
complex universe. There are a thousand different forces 
acting upon us, all of them divine in character and 
divinely intended to work our highest usefulness and 
happiness. Among these motives is the desire for power, 
and while everyone recognizes the glory of earthly 


106 Light on the Last Days 


ambitions, some persons would criticise a spiritual ambi- 
tion. It is safe to say that God does not do this. Cer- 
tainly Jesus Christ was not doing it when He said of 
one man: “Не shall be over ten cities," and of another, 
*He shall be over five." 


Earthly Conditions in the Millennial Age 


We do not know much about them. Someone speaks 

of the reticences of God. He never seeks to gratify idle 
curiosity. ‘There is a divine “needs be" in whatever He 
says and does. We know a few things about the earthly 
conditions; that. the world itself is to be purified and be 
а new world. е very seeds of evil plants which have 
been bringing forth their thistles and thorns for thou- 
sands ds of years will die by fire or otherwise. 
—The nature of the wild beasts will be changed and 
those which for thousands of years have been enemies 
of mankind will become subject to mankind so that a 
little child shall lead them; there will be such a state 
as will naturally result from sinlessness. How beautiful 
the faces will be! How they will smile each into the 
other! How strange to live in a whole world where 
there shall not be a frowning countenance or a slighting 
remark, but where each shall be desiring to comfort and 
strength and help the other! 

Will our houses-remain? I am inclined to think that 
they may. Will the churches that we have built be 
filled with congregations of happy prayerful saints? І 
am inclined to think that they will. Will the theatres 
and the dance houses, which have been devoted to money- 
making through the ruin of the souls of men, be trans- 
formed into assembling places for the worshippers of 
God and the benefactors of men? I am inclined to think 
that they will. 

Wall there still be newspapers? I think so, but there 


will be no accounts of murders, divorces, prize fights; 


The Reign of the Saints 107 


there will be no advertising of tobacco or liquor or any 
other thing which degrades the beings that God has 
made. It will be a wonderful age and this world a new 
world in which righteousness shall dwell will be a 
glorious place in which to live. And He who is our 
Saviour King will sit upon the throne of David; the 
times of Israel will return; the people whom He chose 
will become joyful followers of the One whom their 
fathers rejected and killed. 


Will Our King Be Confined? 


Is it not strange that people should raise petty, 
thoughtless difficulties when contemplating the Bible 
teaching respecting this wonderful time. I have heard 
men say that Jesus Christ will then be “confined” to 
Jerusalem. Who said that He would be "confined" to 
Jerusalem? The Bible says that He will sit upon the 
throne of His father David, but it does not say He will 
be “confined” to that throne. One would suppose to 
listen to such remarks that the mighty Son of God, who 
even when He was here in His humiliation could pass 
unseen through an angry, howling mob, will become a 
helpless victim of His circumstances, will be nailed down 
to a throne of a city, whereas even before He left this 
world He could come and go freely without hindrance 
from obstacles which would prevent the movements of 
men. | 

Let us have done with such things as this, since we 
are no longer children but men, let us put away childish 
things and without attempting to know what is not 
revealed, without pretending to know what God has put 
beyond our power, let us believe the things He has 
declared and let us rejoice in the glorious possibility as 
put before us, and since He has taught that we are to 
rule with Him, and to rule over less or more according 
to our faithfulness, let us be faithful. 


108 Light on the Last Days 


If we have lost time by sin or folly or indifference, 
let us lose no more; let us remember that He is willing 
to restore even the years which the cankerworm has 
eaten (Joel 2:25), and let us expect such things from 
Him as we have never seen or dreamed of, let our lives 
be such that the Holy Spirit may reveal these things 
which the eye of man has not seen, which the heart of 
man has not even conceived, but which God has revealed 
to us by His Spirit through His Word. 


XIV 


THE BOTTOMLESS PIT 


(Chapters 9 and 20) 


HIS dread abode is mentioned twice in the Revela- 
tion. In the ninth chapter, at the sounding of the 
fifth angel, a star falls from heaven to the earth 

and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit. It 
is interesting to note the significance of the star. The 
star fell from heaven and to him was given the key 
of the bottomless pit; that is to say, the star was a per- 
son. This naturally recalls the first chapter and the 
statement that the seven stars in the right hand of the 
Messiah were the seven messengers of the churches. 
Why should this remarkable figure be used to signify 
divine messengers? The stars of the first chapter may 
have been men, they may have been angels. In the 
ninth chapter the statement is explicit: the star was 
an angel. Тһе luminous, splendid being whom John saw 
dropping from heaven to earth was in appearance like 
a shining meteor. It is possible also that the word still 
is used to describe the angel because of the character of 
the being as well as by reason of his appearance. 
Messengers from God are light bearers; they give in- 
formation; they promote gladness, and they produce 
holiness in those who attend to the messages which they 
bear. Here as everywhere there is a correspondence of 
the inner and the outer. The messengers of God produce 
light and they are light. The seven stars are the angels 
of the seven churches. “I saw a star fall from heaven 
109 


110 Light on the Last Days 


unto the earth: and to him was given the key of the 
bottomless pit." 


God Employs Agents in His Work 


The law was ordained by angels in the hand of a 
mediator (Galatians 3:19). "This is a most remarkable 
expression. То ordain is to set in order, to establish. 
It is a thought-provoking expression to say that the law 
was ordained by angels. We have also many instances 
in which the angels are recorded as busied with the con- 
cerns of men. Angels over and again appeared to the 
people of God to counsel, direct, encourage and 
strengthen. They announced the birth of our Lord, they 
comforted Him in His agony, they watched about His 
grave. 

There are many who believe each person who comes 
into the world is attended by a guardian spirit who wards 
off dangers, instructs as to duty, warns against sin and 
strengthens for the performance of appointed service. 
"In heaven their angels do always behold the face of 
my Father" (Matthew 18:10). There are those who 
believe that angels are the God-appointed representatives 
of the heavenly kingdom for the care of nations as well 
as of individuals. Daniel 10:13, 20 and 21 seem to 
intimate that this is the fact. 

It is my own opinion that this is true and that God 
cares for people, for nations, for cities, and towns by 
angel ministers. 


"Millions of spirits walk the earth unseen, 
Both while we sleep and when we wake." 


I mention this because I think we are prone to forget 
God's methods and His methods are important as well as 
the ends which He attains. If it is true that He cares for 
us as He did for our Saviour King through angels, if 
they are interested when we are born and when we suffer 


The Bottomless Pit 111 


and when we die, it is well that we should remember 
the fact and be helped by it. It is my opinion that the 
administration of God's empire is like the administration 
of earthly governments in this, that always agents are 
employed. 'lhis would seem to be the teaching of reason 
and it is evidently the teaching of Scripture. 


A Gloomy Prison-House 


If there were any part of the creation from which 
angel ministers might be excused, one would think it to 
be this dark and wretched abode of infernal spirits in 
which, during the thousand years, Satan is to be con- 
fined. But here in this chapter we find an angel carrying 
the key to this prison and in the twentieth chapter we 
find this angel or another one, who has not only the key 
to this prison, but a great chain in his hand. 

This angel lays hold on the dragon, that old serpent, 
which is the Devil and Satan, and binds him for a thou- 
sand years with this mighty chain. He casts Satan into 
this bottomless pit and closes the door and seals it that 
no power should release him until the thousand years 
of peace and blessing were ended. Thus we find the 
. divine method both as to evil and good; the holy are 
protected and the wicked are punished by the agency of 
angels. 

I may pause a moment to say further that, in my judg- 
ment, the forces of nature are administered by these 
same celestial beings. At all events, in the Revelation 
again and again the throne of God and the heavenly 
beings who surround it seem to be the center out from 
which go forth the thunderings and the lightnings, the 
earthquakes and the mighty voices which awe God's 
children and terrify His enemies. 


112 Light on the Last Days 


What Is the Bottomless Pit? 


Do we have here a description of a place or an intima- 
tion of a moral condition? If the latter, what is the 
spiritual state signified by this expression “the bottom- 
less pit"? I do not look upon these words as describing 
a place. It is easy enough to imagine something of this 
kind; a vast and gloomy cavern within whose deeps “a 
lower deep still threatening to devour me opens wide." 
But the moment one attempts to suppose a physical reality 
corresponding to this imagination, he falls into diffi- 
culties. 

My impression is that we have here an intimation of 
moral character and of separation from God and all holy 
beings. Whatever may be the reason it is true that 
everywhere righteousness is associated not only with 
light but with height, and evil is associated not only with 
darkness but with depth. Joseph Cook years ago spoke 
of the fact that holiness seems to be naturally associated 
with the power to rise, and that vice and crime render the 
spirit sodden and heavy, and that this exaltation or 
downward drag are communicated by the spirit to the 
body. 

'There is no question but that this is true and, of course, 
that it is a divine arrangement, for we do not ourselves 
cause the feelings of exaltation or the feelings of sink- 
ing down; we mount up on wings like eagles, we run 
without being weary and we walk without being faint 
when we are in right relations to God, and this not by 
our own will but by the natural laws of the universe in 
which we are placed. If this be a correct interpretation, 
the word “bottomless” will not perplex us. 

Evil beings belong in a pit, but beings who persist in 
evil grow more evil. It is one of the dire results of 
sin that it becomes more powerful with each hour’s 
supremacy. This is the universal experience of men. 


The Bottomless Pit 113 


The drunkard is not a drunkard at the beginning, he 
becomes a drunkard by drinking; the covetous man is 
not in his youth enslaved by his greed as he is when his 
hairs are gray. 

The first falsehood causes the cheeks to redden and the 
eyes to drop and the heart to tremble, but after a time 
it is not so. It is a fact which appears from both nature 
and revelation that the good man becomes continually 
more settled in his virtue and that the evil man becomes 
more helplessly the victim of his sin. The bottomless pit 
is the state of moral corruption in which all beings are 
who will evil and reject holiness. 


It Is Also a Prison 


What is a prison? It is a place from which there is 
no free egress. Тһе prisoner has not the privilege of 
coming and going at will; he is shut up to the prison 
precincts. He may move in the prison, but he may not 
move out of the prison. And this also is the condition 
of the sinful man, and in proportion as he is a sinner 
the walls are deep and high, the gates are thick and 
strong. In this world good and evil beings associate, 
but the association is outward, not spiritual. 

As the Holy Spirit says in 2 Corinthians 6:14-16: 
“What communion hath light with darkness? And what 
concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he 
that believeth with an infidel? And what agreement hath 
the temple of God with idols?” This spiritual isolation 
is an experienced fact in the lives of men. Husband and 
wife dwell in the same home, sit at the same table, travel 
in the same machine, but it does not follow that they have 
community of spirit; if one of them is a believer and the 
other is an infidel, they cannot have communion of spirit. 
They are separated by the laws of spiritual being. 

Light cannot harmonize with darkness, good cannot 
harmonize with evil; the love of God cannot harmonize 


114 Light on the Last Days 


with the love of this world. “If any man love the world, 
the love of the Father is not in him.” “The friendship 
of this world is enmity with God.” But while spiritual 
relations are thus spiritual, they tend also to become 
realized facts in outward experience. Not only are the 
husband and wife who are not at one, not spiritual mates, 
already separated in spirit, but they are likely to become 
separated in fact. 

The unworthy husband not only fails to share the feel- 
ings of a worthy wife, but he shortly begins to neglect 
his home, he goes early, he stays late, and if this spiritual 
condition continues, he will shortly desert his home and 
go to his own place. This is the present experience of 
thousands of miserable persons, those who had the op- 
portunity of spiritual fellowship and happiness, but who 
rejected it and became separated in position as they were 
already separated in heart. 


Fixed Spiritual States 


I have already referred to the teaching of Joseph Cook, 
who was one of the most profound thinkers the world 
has ever known. In one of his lectures he raised the 
question whether a good man could become so good, so 
established in righteousness that it would be impossible 
for him to sin, and whether an evil man could become 
so evil so established in evil doing that it would be im- 
possible for him to do right. It was his opinion that all 
finite spirits tend continually to fixedness of character 
and position. 

He believed that a good man who persisted in right- 
eousness would ultimately come into such a state that it 
would be absolutely certain that he would not sin, though 
the question of possibility might be waived and that the 
evil man would come into such a state that it was cer- 
tain that he would not choose good, though once more 
the question of inability need not be passed upon. 


The Bottomless Pit 115 


'That this teaching is true, accordant both with reason 
and revelation, is my decided judgment, and it is one of 
the things which should make us continually thoughtful, 
that every free act tends to perpetuate the character out 
of which it springs and also tends to ceaseless reproduc- 
tion of itself. This is a reward of righteousness. "This 
is a terrific penalty of sin. 

While this is unquestionably true, that the pit with 
its soundless depths and its iron walls is subjective, it is 
the apparent teaching of this scripture that there is also 
an objective reality in it. 


“The soul is its own place, 
And of itself can make 

A heaven of hell 

Or hell of heaven." 


But while the soul is its own place, and of itself can 
make a heaven of hell or hell of heaven, it is also true 
that God does not will that evil doers should continually 
be associated with the doers of righteousness. 

This bottomless pit, this condition of moral evil into 
which men come, never by the arbitrary decree of God, 
but always by their own evil choices, has an iron door 
and the key is not in the hands of the demon spirits, but 
is in the hands of the angels of God. Wicked raen are 
shut away from the companionship of the holy beings 
by the will of God as well as by their own evil natures. 

John saw an angel, like a falling star, passing from 
heaven to earth and in his hand he had the key of the 
bottomless pit. He saw this same angel, or another like 
him, with the key in his hand and also with a mighty 
chain. He saw him lay hold upon the dragon, that old 
serpent, the Devil and Satan; he saw him binding that 
dark and malignant being with the chain and shutting 
him up in the pit so that he should no longer be free to 
come and go to accuse and to assail. The world was to 


116 Light on the Last Days 


be made free from his dark and hateful presence for a 
thousand years. 


The Infernal Cavalry 


When the angel seen in the ninth chapter opened this 
prison-house of evil beings, there arose from it vast vol- 
umes of smoke and out from the smoke locusts and these 
locusts were not like those with which we are familiar, 
that eat grass and leaves and green things, but they at- 
tacked men; not all men for there were tribulation saints, 
but all the men who had not the seal of God in their 
foreheads; and they were not permitted to kill these 
wicked men but to torment them for a period of time and 
these tormented men sought death and did not find it. 

Then we have the description of these locusts as they 
appeared to John, like horses with crowned heads and 
men’s faces, and streaming hair, and lion teeth, and iron 
breast-plates and scorpion tails, and they did not come 
and go by their own will, but “had a king over them, 
which is the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in 
the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue 
hath his name Apollyon.” This passage from the ninth 
chapter clearly shows that Satan is familiar with the bot- 
tomless pit already, but he is not confined to it. 

He is hopelessly depraved, he is continually descend- 
ing in the scale of moral being; by character he is sepa- 
rated from God and goodness, and he is permitted to 
associate with holy beings only as God is pleased to per- 
mit. He is not yet shut up for the thousand years, though 
he is shut up, but he may also go forth and may lead his 
uncounted demon hosts to inflict miseries upon men who 
do his will. It is strange that men with the sight of the 
suffering which sin has caused, is causing, must con- 
tinually cause, should ever do wrong. 

We have here in the final plagues which are visited 
upon a wicked world an extension of a state of fact which 


The Bottomless Pit ivi 


exists before our very eyes. Let us be careful; there are 
thousands of people who suffer, not because of their own 
sins but because of the sins of other people, but all suffer- 
ing comes from the sin of someone and the vast major- 
ity of the sufferings of men come upon those who sin. 
At the sounding of the fifth trumpet this same state of 
fact will be revealed in the fullness of its terrible reality. 

Out from this abode of evil spirits, this bottomless 
abode of evil spirits, this deep within whose deeps “a 
lower deep still threatening to devour," will open wide, 
will pour forth locusts with the faces of men, demon 
spirits which have intelligence but who have been per- 
verted morally until they have become a devouring plague 
rather than a heavenly benediction, and while these demon 
spirits now assail all men, the Jobs of mankind as well 
as the Judases, when the fifth trumpet sounds, when the 
bells of the final judgments are sounding through the 
hearts of men, these evil demons, permitted free course 
in the world by the angels who have power to confine 
or to release them, will assail the men who have not the 
seal of God in their foreheads, that is, the men who have 
the mark of the beast in their foreheads and in their 
hands. 


Fools Make a Mock of Sin 


How true it is and how terrible will be the end of 
their laughter! Now they organize their lodges, they 
send out invitations to their dances, they wink and whis- 
per and joke about those who testify concerning their 
secret abominations, they build their palatial saloons and 
gambling dens, they establish their “Everleigh Clubs,” 
they talk about “making a night of it," and “having a 
good time," etc. 

They will be able to do this a little while, but soon 
the church will be caught away and evil men will be 
left to themselves and the dark and malignant spirits 


118 Light on the Last Days 


whom they have chosen for companions; wars will come, 
famines will come, pestilences and plagues will come, 
thunders and lightnings and earthquakes will terrify 
them, diseases will fall upon them, the sea will be like 
blood, the rivers and fountains of waters will be cor- 
rupted, the sun and the moon and the stars will become 
agents of pain instead of blessing, and at the sounding 
of the fifth angel the star-like being, having the key of 
the bottomless pit, will fall from heaven, the pit will be 
opened, the demon locusts will pour forth, the tribulation 
saints who have been the objects of hatred of the men 
who do not have the mark of God will be protected, but 
demon spirits will be free to assail the men who have 
chosen the worship of demons. 

They will be intelligent, but they will be like scorpion 
serpents and the evil men who have laughed and danced 
and feasted and blasphemed and persecuted the righteous, 
will beg to die and death will flee from them. How many 
are the demon hosts dwelling in this bottomless pit who 
will come forth to torment the godless and wicked men 
that will then dwell in the world? We do not know how 
many, but we know that the number of this army which 
poured out at the sounding of the fifth and sixth trumpets 
was two hundred millions. 

We are not told that this exhausted the soundless 
depths of that dread abode, but we see enough and men 
who are careless respecting their living will do wisely if 
before it is too late they pause even now, to meet in 
mercy that Jesus who is shortly to come in judgment. 
It were better for a man that he had never been born 
than that he should live in sin and die without repentance 
and hope. 


XV 
THE PRAYERS OF SAINTS 


(Chapters 5:8 and 8:3) 


S I have said, it is my hope that this book may 

prove usable. I have no ambition to make a reputa- 

tion for learning or to secure earthly rewards from 
the writing. For many years I derived very little ad- 
vantage from the book of Revelation. Since I began 
to study it twenty-eight years ago, it has continually 
grown upon me as a book intended to accomplish real 
blessing for the people of God. 

During the last three years when I have made it a 
continuous study, I have read and heard what I could 
from others about it, and while many of these speakers 
and writers are learned men and I have derived ad- 
vantage from everything they have written and said, it 
has seemed to me in most instances that their work would 
not be especially helpful to a farmer, or a merchant, or 
a physician, or a blacksmith, or a motorman, or a rail- 
way conductor, who should undertake to read them. 

I presume my brothers who have done this work would 
say that these people were not competent to understand 
their writing and that they had not done it for them but 
for a totally different class of people. This may be true 
and it may be legitimate, for different people require 
different modes of approach, but certainly these common 
folk also need this word. There is no intimation as far 
as I know anywhere in the.book that it is intended for 
a single class of persons only. 

119 


120 Light on the Last Days 


I believe it is planned for all the people of God as we 
approach the end of the church age, and I hope this 
writing may be helpful to many of these common people. 
If it is not, it will fail to accomplish the purpose for 
which it is written and I shall be sorry. If it is of 
service to ordinary men and women, housekeepers, school- 
teachers, clerks, students in college, people who cannot 
claim great learning, but who do need to know what 
Jesus Christ is doing and how He is to obtain possession 
of this world which is His rightful inheritance, I say if 
it is of service to this class of persons, I shall be well 
repaid. 


"What Profit Shall We Have If We Pray Unto Him?" 
(Job 21:15) 


This question was asked by a man whose character and 
temper we cannot wholly approve, but my observation 
leads me to believe that there 1s a great host of God's 
people who often in heart and not infrequently in words 
ask the same question. In this Laodicean age when luke- 
warmness has supplanted zeal and when unbelief aspires 
to interpret the Word of God, we are distinctly told by 
many people that there is little or no profit in prayer. 

There are a great multitude of people who pray and 
all persons, even these unbelievers pray when they are in 
dire danger. Prayer meetings on sinking ships are not 
a novelty, and lips which have not prayed when life was 
full and strong are oftentimes given to prayer when the 
tide is running out and death is at hand. But God in- 
tended prayer to be the life breath of His people. Jesus, 
the sinless Son of God, is our great example in this as 
in other respects. 

He prayed in the morning very early, He prayed all 
night, He prayed when He had hard work to do, He 
prayed when hard work had been done. He taught His 


The Prayers of Saints 121 


disciples to pray, and He spoke a parable to men to this 
end: “That men ought always to pray, and not to faint.” 
His followers in every age have patterned after Him in 
this respect. No man has ever had spiritual power who 
has not in some measure learned the prayer life, yet how 
far short we come of His great example and how fre- 
quently ought we to pray, as our brothers did of old, 
that He would become our teacher. 


The Golden Vases, the Incense and the Prayers 


Incense was one of the offerings which was commanded 
under the Mosaic law. It was probably taught directly 
to holy men centuries before that law was given. The 
fragrance and the ascending column were significant. 
When the worshipper approached the tabernacle or the 
temple, the first great object which claimed his atten- 
tion was the altar of sacrifice. By symbol as well as in 
words God thus taught His people that there could be 
no fellowship nor acceptance without life sacrificed, 
blood poured out. The neglect or the refusal to perceive 
this truth is the fundamental error in the Cain worship 
of the world. Men cannot bring to God the works of 
their hands and be accepted, unless they have first brought 
the sacrifice which is commanded. 

Passing on toward the most holy place, the worshipper 
came to the laver, a token that after we have been par- 
doned through shed blood we have need to be washed 
and made clean. ‘This symbolic teaching which we find 
away back in the beginning of Israel's life, we find also 
among the last words spoken in the New Testament: 
“Tf we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to for- 
give us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteous- 
ness." There is probably no one weakness in the church 
today more serious in character and fatal in tendency 
than the neglect of this great truth, that men need not 


122 Light on the Last Days 


only to be pardoned, but also to be cleansed. They should 
not linger ever at the altar, but should pass on to the 
laver. z 

Still going forward, the worshipper found himself in 
the holy place, with light on his left hand and bread on 
his right, which teaches us that after we have been par- 
doned and cleansed we can be lightened and we can be 
fed; that is, we can know what we ought to believe and 
do, and have strength to do it. The candle-stick and 
shewbread are the divine provision for men who have 
been pardoned and cleansed. It is probable that there are 
two capital mistakes made in regard to this divine pro- 
vision. 


No Light for Godless Men 


Godless men are continually asking after light and 
regretting their inabilities before they have been pardoned 
and washed, and godly men who have been pardoned and 
washed are prone to neglect the light which is prepared, 
the bread which is freely offered. Every student of the 
Word of God knows that unpardoned, unwashed men 
cannot have light and they cannot have strength. When 
they say that they cannot understand why God should 
do this or that or the other thing, they speak truly. 

They are blind men and their blindness is doubled for 
it is both in themselves and in their situation; they are 
blind men in the dark; a double inability to see and know 
rests upon them. If they would confess their sins, God 
would be faithful and just to forgive their sins, and to 
cleanse them from all unrighteousness. Then they could 
walk in the light, and men who have eyes and walk in 
the light can see, and furthermore, God would provide 
bread for them so that they could avoid the evils which 
they foresaw and could accomplish the duties which were 
revealed. 

If the worshipper still went on he came to the altar 


The Prayers of Saints 125 


of incense, a golden altar standing before the veil which 
separated the holy place from the most holy place, and 
on this golden altar there were no loaves of bread, no 
bleeding offerings. From time to time on this golden 
altar incense was offered, fragrant clouds ascended from 
it and diffused themselves throughout the holy place. 
This, beyond question, signified the praise and thanksgiv- 
ing which naturally arise from the heart which has been 
pardoned and washed and enlightened and fed. 


Incense a Part of Universal Worship 


I have already alluded to the fact that this part of wor- 
ship was common to holy men through all the early ages. 
In our time, persons who wish to discredit the Christian 
faith and lessen its authority over the souls of men are 
accustomed to make much of the comparative history 
of religions. They make inquiry as to whether or not 
Christianity is the final word in religion. Some of them 

"speak as if they expected themselves to become authors 
of portions of the Word of God. Of course, these ex- 
pectations, if they have them, are not realized. Their 
books die; nay, they are never alive, they are born dead 
and after a few years they are forgotten. 

Yet, as in all error, there is a measure of truth in the 
thought which these brothers are seeking to utter. It 
is never declared in the Bible that God began to speak 
when the holy men who were moved by the Holy Spirit 
began to write. On the contrary, the Bible clearly re- 
veals the fact that God spoke to men in all the ages and 
that from *ime to time some men listened and obeyed, 
while others refused to hear and went on to their ruin. 
Now among the things which God taught men in the 
early ages was undoubtedly much that had to do with 
worship. 

Men always needed to know God, always needed to 
know how to approach Him and He taught them, and if 


124 Light on the Last Days 


they continued to obey they were led on from day to 
day and from holiness to holiness. There is no question 
but that this is the teaching both of reason and revelation, 
and among the things which men learned in this early 
day about the mode of approach to God was the duty 
of praise and the significance of ascending incense, and 
so throughout the ages it has been part and parcel of 
the worship of Almighty God. 


It Still Has Its Place in Worship 


We live in a time when the formal has given way to 
the spiritual. The sign has given way to the thing sig- 
nified. Not in Samaria nor in Jerusalem now do men 
worship God, but true worshippers worship Him in spirit 
and in truth: “He seeks such to worship Him” (John 
4:23). 

But there must remain the same element in the spiritual 
which we found in the formal and so incense must have 
its place. 

What is incense? Incense is praise. Men who have 
been pardoned, cleansed, enlightened, fed can properly 
praise God. Men who are unpardoned cannot really 
praise God at all. They are rebels. How can a rebel 
acceptably speak the praises of his lawful King? If his 
King deserves to be praised, He deserves to be obeyed, 
and so the altar always stands before the holy place. But 
when the soul has been pardoned and cleansed and en- 
lightened and fed, it not only may acceptably offer praise, 
but it is duty to do so. 

And here is set forth the duty of thanksgiving which 
again is one of the points where we fail grievously; in the 
church of Laodicea persons who are lukewarm in religion, 
neither cold nor hot, who profess faith but who have no 
particular interest to extend it would not naturally be 
occupied with the praises of God. "They are not, and it 


The Prayers of Saints 125 


is a notable fact in all the worship of today that the 
note of praise is frequently wanting. 

We have lecturing, exposition, exhortation, oftentimes, 
ad nauseam; blind men speaking of the beauty of color 
and form, and unholy men speaking of the beauty of 
holiness, but little praise; social meetings of the church 
given up to little sermons so that the minister is to do 
the praying and the preaching and nobody is to offer 
praise. ‘This same evil tendency has taken possession of 
our hymns, and you may find a hundred hymns which 
exhort and pray where you will find one which is filled 
with thanksgiving. 


The Prayers and the Incense 


“And another angel came and stood at the altar, having 
a golden censer; and there was given unto him much 
incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all 
saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. 
And the smoke of the incense, which came with the pray- 
ers of the saints, ascended up before God out of the 
angel's hand" (ch. 8:3, 4). 

I think we have now reached a point where we can 
understand the teaching of this beautiful symbol; and, 
in the first place, let us note that the prayers of God's 
saints are precious to Him, and He does not allow them 
to be either forgotten or unanswered. We are in this 
book already far on in the final week of the church age. 
The seals have been opened, the natural evils which arise 
from unrestrained sin have been experienced by the peo- 
ple who dwell in a world from which the saints, dead 
and living have been removed. 

The trumpets are about to sound; visitations of judg- 
ment and the demon hosts from the pit are about to visit 
divine penalties upon men who will not serve God but 
prefer to serve His enemies. Тһе great tribulation is 
on, a time of trouble such as the world has never seen; 


126 Light on the Last Days 


God has left the world to exhibit the natural results of 
unrestrained evil. 

Men might suppose that the prayers of Abraham and 
Isaac and Jacob, of Wickliffe and Huss and Luther, the 
prayers of pious slaves who were whipped because they 
cried when their babies were sold, the prayers of all the 
saints in that dark age, seemed to be forgotten before 
God; godless men would affirm freely then as they do 
now that prayer can at best have nothing but a subjective 
effect, that God pays no attention to it, that He has His 
great mill geared and that it grinds out its grist irrespec- 
tive of the cries of His children. 

But in this age we find the prayers of the saints still 
remembered before God. They have been preserved in 
golden caskets, not one of them is forgotten before Him, 
so let the reader who sometimes has been disheartened 
because his prayers do not seem to have immediate atten- 
tion, take courage and hope. ‘The petitions of God’s 
people are before Him in the heavenly places. 

He takes note of them before the mighty beings who 
control the redeemed universe; He exhibits them before 
the countless millions of angels who have never sinned; 
the redeemed hosts who have through much tribulation 
entered into the kingdom of God, find here the requests 
which they made of their Father so many years before, 
and for the full answers to which they have waited. 


Prayers and Praises 


We should notice not only that the prayers of God’s 
people are preserved and are thought of by our heavenly 
Father, when many times we have forgotten what they 
were, but we should also note that these prayers are 
mingled with praises. The prayers of saints and incense 
were together before the throne of God, and it is sig- 
nificant that the word “much” is inserted here; “There 
was given unto him (the angel) much incense, that he 


The Prayers of Saints 127 


should offer it with the prayers of all saints.” I have 
already spoken of the fact that we are deficient in thanks- 
giving. 

I am sure that it is true. Both my experience and my 
observation have confirmed this judgment. I am also 
thankful to believe that there is far more real thanks- 
giving among the people of God than appears on the sur- 
face; that is to say, our thanksgivings are oftentimes 
unuttered. We are grateful, but we do not express our 
gratitude; we feel, yet do not speak, and this is a grievous 
fault, but it is not so evil as actual, stupid ingratitude 
would be. 

Even among ourselves we know how frequently human 
hearts are broken and homes destroyed, because men and 
women do not express to one another the appreciation 
which in some fashion they really experience. "There are 
many ten thousands of discouraged, broken-hearted men 
and women today who would be comforted and happy if 
the people who are about them would really utter the 
regard which they have. Criticisms are the stock in trade 
of home life to a shameful and deadly extent. 

Husbands criticise wives, wives criticise husbands, par- 
ents criticise children, children criticise parents, and how 
seldom is honest, hearty appreciation and praise rendered 
when everyone concerned would admit that it was due! 
I do not know how many persons are to read these words, 
but I imagine within ten years they will be read by one 
hundred thousand persons. I believe as firmly as I be- 
lieve in my own existence that if these people, be they 
more or fewer, would omit for a year criticisms which 
do not really need to be uttered and would express 
thanksgiving which they know is due, which they in some 
measure feel in their hearts and for which other hearts 
are hungry, the result would be such a flood of happiness, 
such a revival of religion, as the communities in which 
my readers dwell have not known for years. 


128 Light on the Last Days 


Man Is Made in the Image of God 


But man is created in the image of God. This is the 
first word that we have concerning him and God records 
Himself, not merely as our Creator, but our Father. He 
feels toward men as men do to their children. The duty 
of praise is a perpetual obligation. God notices praises as 
He does prayers before the throne of God in the heaven- 
lies. The prayers of the saints with much incense are 
offered before the throne of God. 

Let us therefore be encouraged, both to pray and to 
praise. Neither the one nor the other is unimportant 
to our Heavenly Father. When we forget to pray or to 
give thanks, we grieve Him as well as injure ourselves. 
We ought also to remember that we wrong our fellows 
as well as ourselves and our Father when either our in- 
cense or our petitions are lacking. 


“There is no heart but hath its hours of sadness, 
There is no eye but hath with tears been wet; 

There is no voice but hath been heard to languish, 
O'er hours of darkness it can ne'er forget." 


This is more than poetry, it is fact and in these hours 
of darkness, when hearts are sad and eyes are wet, in the 
time of temptation, in the time of doubt and fear we may 
be and should be helpful to one another. 

Oftentimes the shortest road to the human heart and 
need is by way of the throne of God, even if the burdened 
one is so near that we might touch him with a hand. 
In many homes there are telephone extensions and the 
person who is upstairs may talk with the person who is 
downstairs by way of the central station which is a mile 
distant more easily than he could go down or ask the 
other to come up. It is even so with prayer for our 
friends. 

When we talk to them we may oftentimes blunder; 


The Prayers of Saints 129 


when we talk about them we are practically sure to do 
so, but when we talk to God for them we are very cer- 
tain to be wise and to be helpful, so let us pray and let 
us praise, and let us take from this teaching the joy 
and comfort which God intended it to be, that our prayers 
and our praises will be alike preserved in golden chalices 
forever in the presence of God and our Saviour King 
and the heavenly hosts and the uncounted multitudes of 
the redeemed. 


XVI 


THE FIVE WORLD EMPIRES 


(Daniel 2 and 7; Revelation 19 and 20) 


E, can never profit by a book unless we keep in 

mind the purpose which it 1s intended to serve. 

Let me, therefore, remind you once more that 
the book which we are studying is The Revelation of 
Jesus Christ. There are, as before noted, other revela- 
tions, but this is the Revelation, and this is not the revela- 
tion of Jesus Christ as He was with the Father before 
the world was, nor is it the revelation of Jesus Christ in 
His humiliation, when He was in the form of man, buf- 
feted and scourged and crucified for our salvation. This 
is the revelation of Jesus Christ in the kingdom of His 
Father, and it gives an account of the events through 
which He becomes established in His rightful rule over 
the earth. 

In the beginning of this revelation He is walking among 
the churches and upholding their angels. Then He is 
with the Father, surrounded by the four living beings, 
august and tremendous, who control the redeemed uni- 
verse. He is surrounded by the four and twenty elders, 
that is, by the church universal, and by the uncounted 
hosts of angels who have kept their first estate and never 
sinned. 

At its close He comes forth riding upon a white horse. 
On His head are many crowns, the crowns of universal 
empire. He has now become King of kings and Lord 
of lords. The beast who represents the cruel, oppressive, 

130 


The Five World Empires 131 


corrupt, wicked governments of the world is cast into 
the lake of fire; the false prophet, the scarlet-clad woman, 
the harlot, representative of all the religions of the world 
which teach that men can save themselves, can be saved 
by anything except the blood of Jesus Christ, this false 
prophet is cast into the lake of fire with this beast. 

In other words, when we see Jesus Christ in the closing 
events set forth in this revelation the world empires and 
the world religions are gone, and the kingdom of our 
Lord has become the kingdom of this world both 
spiritually and governmentally. He sways the scepter of 
universal empire. 


Daniel and the Revelation 


All students of this book know that it is closely related 
to Daniel in prophetic outlook. This is not the only case 
of co-ordination between the two testaments. It is safe 
to say that no one will understand the Epistle to the 
Hebrews who does not make a careful study of the Book 
of Leviticus, and that Leviticus will be dead and dark to 
one who does not make a careful and prayerful study of 
Hebrews. 

When we turn to the subject of world empires we in- 
stantly think of Daniel. In two chapters he deals directly 
with this subject. In the first instance, chapter two of 
his prophecy, he interprets the dream of the mighty king 
whose captive he was. In his dream the king saw the 
magnificant statute of a man. The head was of gold, 
the arms and shoulders of silver, the body of brass, the 
legs of iron, and the feet and toes of iron mingled with 
clay. 

As the king looked upon this imaged creation, a stone 
in some unseen unaccountable way detached itself from 
the mountain and smote this image on its feet and re- 
duced it to chaff and dust. Meanwhile this stone becomes 
a great mountain and fills the whole earth. This is, in a 


132 Light on the Last Days 


word, the dream of the king. The prophet has a parallel 
vision which is recorded in the seventh chapter. 


The Vision of the Prophet and of the King 


The interpretation of the vision of the prophet is the 
same as the interpretation of the vision of the king. In 
the case of the king there were four metals, gold, silver, 
brass and iron, and there was a smiting stone which 
destroyed the statute, became a great mountain and filled 
the whole earth. In the prophet’s dream there were four 
great beasts which came up from the sea—that is, there 
were four great governments which had been established 
by men; each of these governments was different from 
the other; the first like a lion, the second like a bear, 
the third like a leopard and the fourth, a beast with great 
iron teeth which devoured and broke in pieces. This 
beast had ten horns and after a time three of them were 
destroyed by a little horn which came up and plucked 
out the three. In this little horn were eyes like the eyes 
of a man and a mouth which spake great things. 

Of course, I need not remind you that horns among 
the prophets were symbols of power, as horns among 
cattle are weapons of offence and defence, so the horns 
on this beast are significant of ten kingdoms, ten world 
powers, which sprang from this fourth beast, dreadful 
and terrible and strange exceedingly. As the prophet 
still beheld, these thrones were cast down, the throne of 
the lion, the throne of the bear, the throne of the leopard, 
the throne of the fourth beast, and the thrones of the 
ten kings which had their power from the fourth gov- 
ernment. 

And when their thrones had all been levelled the 
“Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as 
snow, and the hair of His head like the pure wool: His 
throne was like the fiery flame, and His wheels as burning 
fire.” A fiery flame issued from before him. “Thousand 


The Five World Empires 133 


thousands ministered unto Him, and ten thousand times 
ten thousand stood before Him.” This chapter goes on to 
speak of the one like the Son of Man who comes with 
the clouds of heaven to the Ancient of days and receives 
from Him dominion and glory and kingdom, that all na- 
tions and languages should serve Him. His dominion is 
to be an everlasting dominion and His government is to 
be one that shall not be destroyed. 

It is also interesting to note that in the eighteenth 
verse of the seventh chapter and that in the twenty-seventh 
verse the saints of the Most High are definitely declared 
to share in the kingdom with the Son of Man. As al- 
ready noted, the vision of the king was like the vision of 
the prophet in all that it signified, the only difference was 
in the manner in which the series of events were repre- 
sented to the one and to the other. 


Four Kings, and Then a Fifth 


The teaching here is, in brief, that there are to be four 
world empires, and then a fifth world empire which is to 
destroy what remains of the former four world empires; 
that this fifth world empire is to become universal and 
that power in it is to be swayed by the Son of Man and 
the saints of the Most High. King Nebuchadnezzar was 
told, “You are this head of gold. Your successors, the 
Persians and Medes are the silver kingdom. Their suc- 
cessor is the Macedonian or Grecian kingdom. 

The Roman kingdom which succeeds is to be so great 
and terrible that the preceding kingdoms are to be for- 
gotten.” It is a marvel how perfectly this figure is car- 
ried out in the history of the world. 'The Roman king- 
dom was divided. The Medes and Persians were a 
double kingdom. "The figure had two arms and two legs, 
but a single head and one body, indicating the unity of 
the Babylonian and Macedonian powers as contrasted 
with that of the other two kingdoms. And furthermore 


134 Light on the Last Days 


the feet on which the image stood had ten toes and these 
ten toes represented the ten kingdoms into which the 
Roman empire was to be divided. In A. D. 476 the 
power of Rome departed. In A. D. 1453 the Sultan 
made the Mosque of St. Sophia from what had been a 
great Christian church. Since that time the western and 
eastern empires have been divided kingdoms. 

It is not difficult to see how five may be counted in the 
west and five in the east and it is not difficult to object 
to the count, but the general fact remains that the world 
empire of Rome was first divided into two kingdoms, and 
after that into a large number of smaller kingdoms, and 
that these kingdoms are in varying forms still in exist- 
ence, and according to the teaching both of Daniel and 
Revelation they will continue to exist until the stone 
cut out of the mountain completes its work ; until one like 
to the Son of Man comes to reign with His saints, until 
Jesus Christ our Saviour King gathers to Himself the 
crowns of the world and sways the scepter of universal 
empire. Gathering up these teachings, we learn that in 
the governmental history of the world there are to be 
five universal rulers and only five—Babylon, Medo-Per- 
sia, Macedonia, Rome, eastern and western, and then the 
Lord from heaven. 


Attempts Which Have Proved Failures 


Tt is not difficult, as one reads the history of the world, 
to see how from time to time efforts have been made to 
falsify this prophecy. We need not seek after many ; let 
us take a few. If there were ever a man in this world 
who seemed adapted to universal empire that man was 
Napoleon the First. In intellectual power, in cruel and 
ruthless energy, in comprehensive views, in a world- 
grasping ambition he was seemingly a man of men to 
give us the fifth empire if it were possible that a fifth 
empire should be before Jesus comes. You do not need 


The Five World Empires 135 


to be reminded how marvelously he increased in power 
and how terribly he fell. 

From a peasant home in Corsica to the throne room of 
the Tuilleries, and from the throne room of the Tuilleries 
to the sea-locked island of Helena, and from the sea- 
locked island of Helena to the sarcophagus in the Hotel 
de Invalide on the banks of the Seine: this is the short, 
brilliant, desperate, disappointing story of a human life. 
That he was a God-appointed person to accomplish cer- 
tain results there is no doubt. He smashed as with the 
hammer of Thor the kingdoms which had grown up 
about him. He planned, beyond question, a world empire 
for himself. 

He filled those thrones which he had first shaken down 
and then set up with his own relatives and marshals. But 
he had not taken God into account. He said that “the 
Almighty fought on the side of the strongest battalions.” 
I suppose there never was an army of equal numbers 
more fitted for purposes of war than the half-million men 
who marched into Russia. But the God whom he had 
ignored and despised, with the snow and the cold, wasted 
that vast army until a few scattered thousands they re- 
turned to the border over which, a mighty host, they had 
set forth. 

It is said that one of them, blackened and worn out 
with cold and hunger but borne up with the tremendous 
spirit of a soldier, crossed the Nieman at midnight alone. 
He burst into the home of a friend who could not see 
in his blackened, distorted visage the magnificent soldier 
whom he had known, and said to him: “Who are you?" 
and he replied, “I am Marshal Ney, I am the rear-guard 
of the French army.” 


The World Empire 


There is no doubt but that in our day we have had a 
number of men who have believed it possible to so arrange 


136 Light om the Last Days 


matters as to gather to themselves the power of the world. 
From time to time it has looked as if their attempts might 
succeed. "The Standard Oil, the railroad systems of Har- 
riman, the financial plans of Mr. Morgan—each one of 
these in turn has seemed to bid fair to control the world, 
and each one of them from time to time has been strangely 
and mysteriously smitten. 

These great men, who have seemed to despise all gov- 
ernment, except what they might sway in the realm of 
money, have been brought before courts and legislatures. 
They have been required to answer to the representatives 
of the common people for the treasure they have ac- 
cumulated and the legislation which they have secured. 
No one could have believed years ago that this were pos- 
sible unless he had seen the truth recorded in this scrip- 
ture that there will be four world empires, only four 
world empires before Jesus Christ comes. 

Not even the labor movement of our time, which at 
the present looms largest in the horizon, not even this 
labor movement will be able to falsify the word of God: 
“Four kingdoms and then the Son of Man." "This is the 
teaching of Daniel, this is the teaching of the Revela- 
tion. 'This is the hope of the church in these days when 
there are wars and rumors of wars, earthquakes in divers 
places, men's hearts failing them for fear; saints should 
lift up their heads for now their redemption is nearer than 
when they first believed. 


The Two Final Battles 


There are two great world struggles mentioned in the 
Revelation. The account of the first is found in the sixth 
chapter under the outpouring of the sixth bowl, verses 
twelve to sixteen, and the second is mentioned in chapter 
twenty, verses eight and nine. Тһе first is called the 
battle of Armageddon, the second the battle of Gog and 
Magog against the saints and the beloved city. 


The Five World Empires 137 


Bible students are not agreed respecting either of these 
struggles, or if there be agreement it is that we cannot 
be absolutely sure as to what is intended by them. "There 
are, however, a few facts which seem clear and possibly 
the consideration of these will help us to get further on 
in our study. 

The battle of Armageddon occurs during the tribula- 
tion period. ‘That whole time, as we have before seen, 
is filled with wars, famines, pestilences, earthquakes. It 
will be a time of trouble such as the world has never 
known. Тһе battle of Armageddon is one of the great 
struggles included in this period. It takes place after the 
seven seals have been broken and the seven trumpets have 
sounded and the six bowls have been poured out. 

Evidently, therefore, this struggle comes toward the 
close of the seven years of tribulation. The war with 
Gog and Magog comes after the seventh bowl has been 
poured out, after the beast and false prophet have been 
cast into the lake of fire, after the star-like angel has 
bound the dragon and sealed him up in the bottomless pit 
for a thousand years. For some reason which the Holy 
Spirit does not in any way explain, after the thousand 
years of peace and righteousness, the godless govern- 
ments gone, the Christless religions like Mohammedanism 
and Freemasonry destroyed, after the long imprisonment 
of the dragon, that old serpent, the Devil and Satan, who 
had formerly free ingress and egress even among the 
saints of God—after all these stupendous events, this 
powerful, malignant, desperate king of the demons is 
freed from his prison. 


The Last Great Battle 


One would suppose that the great tribulation and the 
thousand years of the reign of the Word of God would 
have absolutely cured men of the tendency to rebel against 
God. It is one of the proofs of. the divine character of 


138 Light on the Last Days 


the Bible that it takes no time at all to answer questions 
like this. Why should men, after such experience believe 
it possible to sin and be safe? 

The record simply is that Satan is able to deceive them. 
He gathers them to battle against the camp of the saints 
and the beloved city, and while they are thus assembled 
to make war, fire leaps down from heaven and devours 
them, and then the devil who deceived them is cast into 
the lake of fire and brimstone where the beast and the 
false prophet had been thrown a thousand years before. 

We have now made a little progress as regards these 
two great battles. Тһе parties to them are the same. 
Satan and his host war against the saints and the holy 
city. The times differ. In the battle of Armageddon 
there are not only demons and saints in conflict, but on 
the side of the demons there are kings of the earth. But 
at the battle of Gog and Mag kings of the 
earth: G jority ended with the destruction of 
the beast and the false pro who were cast into the 
lake of fire а. thousand years before, so that in the battle 
of Gog and Magog the parties on the side of evil are 
Satan and evil Xin “but no evil organizations are men- 

“tioned 

We are further to note that at the battle of Armaged- 
don the hosts of God seem to consist of men, whereas in 
the battle of Gog and Magog men are not present, but 
when the hosts of Satan have. gathered about the beloved 
city and the camp of the saints, fire leaps down from 
heaven and devours them, and this whirlwind of fire 
carries them into the lake of fire where the beast and 
the false prophet have been a thousand years. ‘This is, 
as far as the Revelation teaches us, the end of Satan 
and his work in this world. 


XVII 


THE HOLY CITY, NEW JERUSALEM 


(Chapters 21 and 22) 


HE last two chapters in this wonderful book tell us 
the story of the world and the church after the 
millennial age. Armageddon will be fought at the 
end of the tribulation and just before the millennial reign 
begins. Then will come the destruction of the beast and 
the false prophet and their followers, that is, godless gov- 
ernment and Christless religions will be consumed ; Satan 
wil be bound, Christ wil assume His throne, and His 
saints wil reign with Him according to their faithful- 
ness, one over ten cities, one over five, and so following. 
After the thousand years of peace and happiness have 
ended, Satan will be loosed out of his prison for a little 
time. He will be able to deceive a certain number of per- 
sons; together with them he will make war on the saints 
and on the earthly Jerusalem, the seat of the throne of 
David, the center of millennial power. 

He and his host will be destroyed as in a whirlwind 
of fire; he and his followers, those who have been deceived 
by him after the millennial reign is over, will be cast into 
the lake of fire where the beast and the false prophet 
were cast a thousand years before, and this will be the 
end of Satan and bad government and Christless religions. 
This is a restatement of the truths which have been here- 
tofore mentioned but which because of their importance 
are entitled to this review. 


139 


140 Light on the Last Days 


The World After Gog and Magog 


It is evident that the nature of the earth, of the beasts 
of the earth and of the men are different in the millennial 
age from what they have hitherto been. The earth itself 
has had burned out of it the seeds of sin and strife which 
were implanted at the fall of our first parents. "Instead 
of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the 
brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be to 
the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall 
not be cut off” (Isaiah 55:13). 

The eleventh of Isaiah gives us a revelation of the 
change in the character of wild beasts. Animals which 
were created subject to man, which became enemies tc 
man when sin entered the world, will again become lov- 
ingly obedient to the human race. Fierce and terrible 
beasts will be led by little children and will not harm 
them. The loosing of Satan and the deceiving of a part 
of the human race will not, so far as we are informed, 
work any change in this respect. 

The majority of men and all the institutions of men 
will retain, as far as we can learn, their holy character. 
'There is no mention of beasts, no mention of harlots, or 
false prophets; the sum total of evil in that post-millen- 
nial struggle is ascribed to Satan and those who are de- 
ceived by him. There is no mention even of evil angels; 
that dark and terrible day seems to be given exclusively 
to the dragon, that old serpent, the Devil and Satan, and 
men whom he deceives; these together, Satan as captain 
and wicked men as followers, make war on the saints and 
beloved city, the earthly Jerusalem, which is the capital 
of the millennial kingdom, the seat of the throne of 
David, and as we have said before, in this instance the 
battle is not by the saints against the wicked, but fire 
comes down from God out of heaven and destroys them. 
Satan and all who remain adherents of his helpless cause 


The Holy City, New Jerusalem 141 


disappear in the lake of fire and we see them no more for- 
ever. 


What of Schools in Millennium 


Many of the Lord's people are interested to know what 
will be the fate of institutions during the millennial age. 
There is no Scripture teaching which warrants us in af- 
firming that men will then be substantially different from 
what they are now, save and except in the matter of sin 
alone. Of course, when there is no godless government, 
but when Christ and His saints reign and when there is 
no false religion, but true worshippers worship the Lord 
in spirit and in truth, there will not be need for many 
institutions which exist at the present time as protests 
against evil. 

There will be no need of temperance societies for there 
will be no liquor trade; there will be no need for mission 
organizations for all men will know the Lord from the 
least to the greatest. The world will be full of the knowl- 
edge of the Lord as the waters fill the sea. There will 
be no need of societies for the protection of women and 
children, for there will be no one to wish or do them 
harm; there will be none to oppress the weak or the un- 
friended in the day when all authority is in the hands of 
Jesus Christ and His saints. 

'There will be need for schools, for children in the thou- 
sand years will be born limited in knowledge as they 
are now. ‘The schools will be able to accomplish vastly 
more in those days than in our time, for there will be no 
hindering causes, no children suffering from insufficient 
nutrition, no children cursed by the vices of their fathers, 
no children compelled to toil unseasonably because their 
parents spend what should buy bread for strong drink 
or at the gambling table. 

There will be the same need for churches than as there 
is now. 'The work will be different, but the need will 


142 Light on the Last Days 


remain. Churches in those days will be places where men 
assemble for communion with God and the offering of 
praise. They will probably be far more beautiful and 
magnificent than they are in this age, for men will love 
God and love the place where His name is recorded. They 
will have abundant means, for vices have always con- 
sumed the estates of men more than any other one thing, 
and when men love God and one another it will be natural 
for them to create magnificent temples with magnificent 
musical arrangements where crowding thousands with 
shining faces will gather to sing the praise of God, to sing 
the praises of Jesus Christ who redeemed them with His 
precious blood. 

It will be a glorious day and every saint who is seek- 
ing to live faithfully in this day of Christ's rejection 
should look forward to that time with great hope and joy 
and thanksgiving. It will be a wonderful age, a won- 
derful world and those who have been true to Jesus Christ 
will have each one his share in the splendors of that 
triumph. 


What Will Be After Millennium? 


Everything that we know on this subject is recorded for 
us in the twenty-first and twenty-second chapters of this 
wonderful book. Repeatedly John says that he saw the 
holy city, New Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from 
God. He goes forward to speak of its magnificence, its 
foundations of precious stones, its gates of single pearls, 
its streets paved with gold, its rivers crystal clear, its 
trees ever in leaf and ever-bearing fruit, its inhabitants 
all holy, no sinful malignant beings, no Satan to tempt, 
no godless governments to oppress, no harlot religions to 
deceive. 

If we gather together all that we know of the holy and 
beautiful and assemble these ideas, we have something 
like what the Holy Spirit describes this marvelous city 


The Holy City, New Jerusalem 143 


to be. Before taking up a question which is most inter- 
esting but which we can probably never definitely answer, 
I call your attention to the relation which this holy city, 
New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, 
sustains to the church age in which you and I are living. 

We are told that this city had twelve foundations and 
that in these twelve foundations were the names of the 
twelve apostles. We are not told who takes the place of 
Judas in this list. Personally, it is my conviction that 
we shall find the name of Paul there, but we are not 
told and though the election of Matthias was not ordered 
and does not seem to have been approved, still it may 
have been. It is not explicitly disapproved, possibly we 
shall find him recorded with the eleven, but the thought 
upon which I wish your minds to rest is that the names 
of the apostles were in the foundations of the city. 

We are further told that the twelve gates through which 
men entered into the city, gates which are not closed by 
day or by night, bear the names of the twelve tribes of 
Israel. I think we have here a fact which thoughtful per- 
sons should meditate. Since the twelve tribes preceded in 
the order of time the twelve apostles, why should the 
names of the twelve apostles be in the foundations of the 
city, while the names of the twelve tribes are applied to 
the gates? 

Would not a human being, writing on this subject ac- 
cording to his own mind, have said that the foundations 
carried the names of the tribes and the gates the names 
of the apostles? This seems to me evident and yet we 
find the facts as they are. And when we meditate these 
facts I think that we can all see that the record cor- 
responds with what must have been the order in reason, 
for the kingdom of God is founded upon the truth of 
Jesus Christ, His character as God man, suffering for 
men, becoming realized in the lives of men, this is the 
divine truth as to the beginning of the kingdom of God, 


144 Light on the Last Days 


but the gates into this city were opened by the twelve 
tribes. 

They first received in shadow the teaching which to us 
is clearly made known. It is therefore evident that if we 
had been sufficiently informed we would have adopted the 
order which the Holy Spirit has chosen, the foundations 
of this city are laid in the truth of Jesus Christ pro- 
claimed by His apostles; the entrance to this city through 
which the nations have come was by the teaching com- 
mitted to the twelve tribes, so the gates are named from 
Israel and the foundations from the apostles of the Lamb. 


Where Is This Holy City, New Jerusalem,To Be? 


The record is that John saw it coming down from God 
out of heaven. Our minds naturally question whether he 
saw it coming down % the earth and having a place here 
on the earth, or whether he saw it coming down to some 
point near the earth. We see the falling star. We do 
not see it strike the earth. Ordinarily when it strikes the 
atmosphere it is consumed. But this glorious city, shin- 
ing not with the light of sun or moon or stars, but with 
the light of God, needing no other light, this bride, the 
Lamb’s wife, comes down from God out of heaven. 

If it comes to the earth that would seem to be a reason 
for supposing the earth to continue and to continue as 
the abode of saints and angels, for we read of this mag- 
nificent city, that the nations bring their glory and their 
honor unto it. If, on the other hand, this holy city comes 
down near the earth, but not to the earth, if it has its 
place in space and not upon the surface of the earth, then 
the saints and the angels may freely come and go, the 
nations of the earth may bring their glory and honor 
unto it; but it would seem to leave the question as to the 
eternity of the earth in a different state. 

Of course, in all cases where there is not a clear and 
definite statement respecting the future, we are shut up 


The Holy City, New Jerusalem 145 


to the best judgments we can form and each man has a 
right to his own judgment, provided he holds it modestly 
and with due regard to the similar right which other peo- 
ple have to their opinions. With this understanding and 
without attempting to dogmatize in regard to this matter, 
I give the best judgment which up to this time I am able 
to form. 

It is my belief that the holy city, New Jerusalem, which 
comes down from God out of heaven, is what we should 
call a supernatural starry existence and is not part and 
parcel of the earth. I incline to the belief that the earth 
itself is not to be eternal, but having been created as a 
holy abode for sinless beings who thereafter sinned but 
were redeemed and were so redeemed that not only they 
but their dwelling place was also once more sanctified, and 
this home of God's saints having been thus purged and 
having for a thousand years contained the throne of Jesus 
Christ, the throne of His father David, will thereafter 
cease to be the particular dwelling place of any particular 
number of God's people. 

If it should happen that this world is to perish as 
other worlds have, it would not surprise me. ‘That it may 
continue indefinitely everyone must admit, but this holy 
city, New Jerusalem, which comes down from God out 
of heaven, bears tokens of an eternal being. 

I will not declare that this is true, for God may change 
the dwelling places of His people in the future, as He 
has in the past, but I incline to the opinion that this city, 
the dwelling place of God our Father, the dwelling place 
of Jesus Christ, our Lord and Saviour, the centre whence 
will go forth throughout the wide universe of God the 
blessed influences of the Holy Spirit, the gathering place 
of the redeemed nations, the many who through the blood 
of Jesus have been purged from sin and made fit to dwell 
in the presence of the Most High, this city whose walls 
shine like battlements of precious stones, whose streets 


146 Light om the Last Days 


gleam with the shining of the most precious metals which 
men know; it is my impression that this city is an eternal 
city and that while we see the redeemed nations passing 
in and out of its pearly gates we may think of them, our 
fathers, and mothers, our brothers and sisters, yes, and 
ourselves, redeemed by the blood of Jesus, as dwelling 
forever in this glorious home. 


A Few Words In Conclusion 


We have now reached the end of this study. I do not 
think that one of all my readers can be more conscious 
of its imperfections than am I, but it has been a help to 
me during these years past to read and think and pray 
about this book. I am sure that this is not only our priv- 
ilege but that it is also our duty, and while there are 
many things about it which I do not understand, things 
which I should like to understand, things which I may 
yet understand, it is my impression that the points on 
which my mind has settled are substantially correct, and 
I believe that those who read and think and pray will 
find comfort, as I have, in this wonderful last book of the 
wonderful revelation of God. 

Let me therefore return in mind to a few of these es- 
sential truths that we may find a comprehensive view of 
them as we lay aside the book. And, first, let us remem- 
ber that we have here the final word respecting the per- 
son and work of Jesus Christ our Lord. The prophets 
began by telling us what He would do as a suffering 
sacrifice for the sins of men. The historians told us what 
He did do when He came as a suffering sacrifice for the 
sins of men. The Revelation tells us what He will do 
when He comes in the glory of His Father to take pos- 
session of the kingdom which is rightfully His. The 
prophets and historians tell us what the world was to do, 
did do to Him; the Revelation tells us what He will do 
to the world. 


The Holy City, New Jerusalem 147 


Second: In the beginning of the Bible we are told 
how Satan came into this world to mar and destroy the 
holiness and happiness which God had established. As 
the history of the kingdom of God goes forward the dark 
and deadly work of this enemy of God and man, and of 
those who are willing subjects to this adversary is con- 
tinually in evidence. 

Were it not for the Revelation we should never know 
what was the doom of this evil spirit, but in this book 
which we have been studying the end of his efforts and 
of his being is clearly set forth. He is to struggle even 
against God Himself. With shameless impudence and 
with desperate hate he accuses the saints before the very 
throne of God. 

But while in former portions of the Bible it seems at 
times as if he might prevail, it becomes evident and grows 
increasingly so through the Revelation that he fights a 
losing battle. At last with his human helpers, disap- 
pointed and destroyed, he is apparently made the sport 
and ridicule of our Heavenly King. 

An angel binds him with a chain, thrusts him into a 
pit, seals up the gate so that he cannot come forth for a 
thousand years and when loosed for a little season, and 
still malignant and determined as ever, he wages war 
against the saints of God and the beloved city, fire leaps 
down from the sky and sweeps him off into a fiery lake, 
after which we see him no more. 

Third: This book not only gives us the glorious truth 
respecting the kingdom of our Lord and Saviour, reveals 
Him with His many crowns and His mighty sword, not 
only shows us the overwhelming ruin which is to come 
upon Satan and his followers, but also gives to us a beau- 
tiful and final word as to the saints of the Most High. 

The imperfections of God’s people, as recorded in all 
portions of His Word, and imperfections of which we 
are personally conscious in our own lives, naturally tend 


148 Light on the Last Days 


to dishearten. If we were shut up to what we see of 
good men and to what we know of ourselves when we 
struggle most successfully against evil, I think we should 
be discouraged. 

But when we consider what God has revealed respect- 
ing our stending in Jesus Christ and respecting the future 
which we are to attain through faith in Him, the case is 
different. As the Revelation shows that Christ is to be 
exalted King over all, crowned with many crowns, as it 
shows that Satan, proud, resplendent with his scarlet 
robes and his costly jewels is to become a miserable cap- 
tive, at last thrown into the pool of fire, so it teaches us 
that the saints, ignorant and imperfect in themselves, but 
strong and wise and glorious in Jesus Christ, shall be 
glorified with Him. This book helps us to courage апа 
self-respect. No man can believe that the saints are to 
occupy the position set forth in the Revelation without 
finding his heart upborne, his eyes uplifted. 

In the fourth place, the book teaches us many things 
which all thoughtful people desire to know respecting 
the coming days. Do not all persons naturally question 
as to the future of the world in which we dwell? Whether 
it is to be as it is or different, or if different in what 
particulars? Here, and in related scriptures, we have 
the future of the world clearly described. 

As sinners are saved by the blood of Jesus, so the world 
itself is to be purged by fire. Тһе creation is to be “de- 
livered from the bondage of corruption.” Тһе world is 
to become again what it was when God made it, “very 
good.” And this world thus redeemed and glorified is to 
be inhabited by holy beings. 

Jesus Christ is to occupy the throne of His father 
David; the saints, men and women like those who read 
these words, are to share this world empire with Him. 
The very earth is to be changed in its character, in its 
appearance so that sweet, fresh waters will go forth in- 


The Holy City, New Jerusalem 149 


habited by multitudes of living creatures where now rocks 
or deadly poisonous streams are found. 

And fifth: While this state is thus glorious, it is not 
the last word which is to be spoken respecting the saints 
of God. For a thousand years Jesus is to reign with 
His saints in the world. After that Satan is to strike his 
last blow, fight his last battle, sustain his last and over- 
whelming defeat. 'Then will come the uncounted ages 
during which the saints shall possess the freedom of the 
universe of God. 

The great city, New Jerusalem, will come down from 
God out of heaven. It is to our minds a visible repre- 
sentation of the eternal and glorious abode of God's peo- 
ple. It is not an earth in heaven, a millennial earth; it 
is a holy city, New Jerusalem, the bride, the Lamb’s 
wife, coming down from God out of heaven. It is lighted 
and ruled by our Heavenly Father. 

The Saviour who redeemed us from the power of sin 
and death and hell is to be our eternal shepherd. The 
vast hosts of sinless ones will come and go freely 
throughout its shining streets. The purified nations of 
the world will bring their glory and honor into it. Should 
not we, who have such hopes as these set before us, “Бе 
instant in season, out of season,” “always abounding in 
the work of the Lord,” forasmuch as we know that 
our “labor is not in vain in the Lord”? 


“Wherefore comfort one another with these words.” 


Sterlinó Books for Christian Workers and Others 


By Rev. James M. Gray, D. D. 
HOW TO MASTER THE ENGLISH BIBLE, 16mo, cloth, 40c net. 
GREAT EPOCHS OF SACRED HISTORY, 16mo, paper, 15c; cloth, 


50 t: 
SALVATION FROM START TO FINISH, 16mo, paper, 15c net; cloth, 


50c net. 
SATAN AND THE WI 16mo, paper, 15c; cloth, 50c net. 
By Rev. R. A. Torrey, 
STUDIES IN THE LIFE AND TEACHINGS OF OUR LORD, 8vo, cloth, 
1.5 t. 
By Reo. William Evans, D. 


E сара НІЅ CREED "AND CONDUCT, 12mo, paper, 25c net; 
THE Book ‘OF BOOKS—WHAT IT IS; HOW TO STUDY IT, 12mo, 


cloth 

HOW TO MEMORIZE, 12mo, cloth, 50c net. 

PERSONAL SOUL-WINNING, 12mo, cloth, $1.00 

do TO PARE SERMONS AND GOSPEL ADDRESSES, 12mo, 

00 net; postage extra 8 
THÉ. GREAT l DOCTRINES OF THÉ BIBLE, 8уо, cloth, $1.50 net; 
postage extra 

OUTLINE STUDY. OF THE BIBLE with Illustrative Charts. 12mo, 
115 pages, cloth, 50c net; postage extra 6c. 

By Rev. A. C. Dixon 

THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE DELUSION, art Stock Covers, 10c. 

PRESENT-DAY LIFE AND rix sioe moe paper, 15c; cloth, 50c net. 

By Rev. (Bishop) W. R. Nicholson, 

ONENESS WITH CHRIST. Edited e ц James M. Gray, р.р. 12mo, 
cloth, with Frontispiece of Author, $1.00 net. 

By Rev. "Alexander Patterson. 


BIRD'S-EYE BIBLE STUDY, 16mo, paper 15с, ог 8 for $1.00; cloth, 30c 


net. 

THE OTHER SIDE OF EVOLUTION: AN EXAMINATION OF ITS 
EVIDENCES, 16:o, cloth, 60c net. 

By H. B. Gibbud. 

“UNDER THE BLUE CANOPY OF HEAVEN:” The Open Air Work- 
ers’ Hand Book. 16mo, cloth, aes "rS 

By Rev. Perry Wayland Sinks, S. T. 

IN THE REFINER'S FIRE: OR THE PROBLEM OF HUMAN SUFFER- 
ING, 12 mo, cloth, 50c net. 

By Rev. O. R. Palmer. 

DELIVERANCE FROM THE PENALTY AND POWER OF SIN, 16mo, 
paper, 15c or 8 for $1.00; cloth, 30c net. 

By Rev. Edward A. Marshall. 


CHRISTIANITY AND NON-CHRISTIAN RELIGIONS COMPARED, 
12mo, cloth, 50c net. А 

Ву James Н. Brookes, D. D. 

ISRAEL AND THE CHURCH, 12mo, paper, 40c; cloth, 75c. 

By Rev. Samuel J. Andrews. 

CHRISTIANITY AND ANTI-CHRISTIANITY IN THEIR FINAL CON. 
FLICT, 8vo, cloth, $1.50 net. 

By Rev. Chas. A. Blanchard, D. D. 


LIGHT ON THE LAST DAYS, Being Familiar Studies in the Book of 


Revelation. 12mo, paper, 25c net; cloth, 75c net. 


THE BIBLE INSTITUTE COLPORTAGE ASSOCIATION 


Send for a complete catalogue. 826 La Salle Avenue, Chicago. 


