LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS. 


©{jHit Gopi|n5^t  :^a.- 

Shelf RJl^l^SOl 

- jmfidz 

UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA. 


LIKE   CHRIST 


THOUGHTS 

ON  THE  BLESSED  LIFE  OF  CONFORMITY 
TO  THE  SON  OF  GOD 

A  Sequel  to  'Abide  in  Christ  ' 

BY  THE  cy^ 
REV.   ANDREW  MURRAY 

AUTHOR    OF 
^ABIDE   IN   CHRIST,'    '  WITH   CHRIST   IN   THE   SCHOOL   OF   PRAYER/  ETC 

^ Even  as  /,  ye  also.' 


f 


PHILADELPHIA 

HENRY    ALTEMUS 

1895 

I 


t>^'^t 


opyrighted  1895,  by  Henry  Altemus* 


The  trlBRARY 

&f  Congress 

WASttmoTON 

.:ii  II 


KBNRY  ALTEMUS,  MANUFACTURER, 
PHILADELPHIA. 


PREFACE. 


In  sending  forth  this  little  book  on  the  Image  of 
our  blessed  Lord,  and  the  likeness  to  Him  to  which 
we  are  called,  I  have  only  two  remarks  by  way  of 
preface. 

The  one  is  that  no  one  can  be  more  conscious  than 
myself  of  the  difficulty  of  the  task  I  have  undertaken, 
and  its  very  defective  execution.  There  were  two 
things  I  had  to  do.  The  one  was  to  draw  such  a  por- 
trait of  the  Son  of  God,  as  'in  all  things  made  like 
unto  His  brethren,'  as  to  show  how,  in  the  reality  of 
His  human  life,  we  have  indeed  an  exact  Pattern  of 
what  the  Father  wants  us  to  be.  What  was  wanted 
was  such  a  portrait  as  should  make  likeness  to  Him 
infinitely  and  mightily  attractive,  should  rouse  desire, 
awaken  love,  inspire  hope,  and  strengthen  faith  in  all 
who  are  seeking  to  imitate  Jesus  Christ.  And  then 
I  had  to  sketch  another  portrait, — that  of  the  believer 
as  he  really,  with  some  degree  of  spiritual  exactness, 
reflects  this  Image,  and  amid  the  trials  and  duties  of 
daily  life  proves  that  likeness  to  Christ  is  no  mere 
ideal,  but  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  a  most 
blessed  reality. 

How  often  and  how  deeply  I  have  felt,  after  having 


8  PREFACE. 

care  of  the  blessed  Lord  of  whose  glory  it  seeks  to 
tell.  May  He  give  us  to  see  that  there  is  no  beauty 
or  blessedness  like  that  of  a  Christ-like  life.  May 
He  teach  us  to  believe  that  in  union  v^ith  Him  the 
Christ-like  life  is  indeed  for  us.  And  as  each  day 
we  listen  to  what  His  Word  tells  us  of  His  image, 
may  each  one  of  us  have  grace  to  say,  '0  my  Father! 
even  as  Thy  beloved  Son  lived  in  Thee,  with  Thee, 
for  Thee  on  earth,  even  so  would  I  also  live.' 

A.  M. 

P.S. — As  the  tone  of  the  meditations  is  mostly 
personal,  I  have,  at  the  close  of  the  volume,  added 
some  more  general  thoughts,  'On  Preaching  Christ 
as  our  Example. ' 


^'v 


CONTENTS. 


LIKE  CHRIST 


1.  Because  we  abide  in  Him, 

2.  He  Himself  calls  us  to  it, 

3.  As  one  that  seiveth, 

4.  Our  Head,     . 

5.  In  suffering  Wrong, 

6.  Crucified  with  Him, 

7.  In  His  Self- Denial, 

8.  In  His  Self -Sacrifice, 

9.  Not  of  the  World, 

10.  In  His  Heavenly  Mission, 

11.  As  the  Elect  of  God, 
13.  In  doing  God's  Will, 

13.  In  His  Compassion, 

14.  In  His  Oneness  with  the  Father, 

15.  In  His  Dependence  on  the  Father, 

16.  In  His  Love,         .... 

17.  In  His  Praying,   .... 

18.  In  His  Use  of  Scripture, 


PAGE 

11 

18 

25 

32 

41 

49 

59 

66 

74 

82 

89 

96 

104 

113 

119 

127 

133 

142 


10 


CONTENTS. 


19.  In  forgiving, 

20.  In  beholding  Him,       .... 

21.  In  His  Humility,  .         ,         .         . 

22.  In  the  Likeness  of  His  Death,     . 

23.  In  the  Likeness  of  His  Resurrection, 

24.  Being  made  conformable  to  His  Death, 

25.  Giving  His  Life  for  Men,    . 

26.  In  His  Meekness, 

27.  Abiding  in  the  Love  of  God, 

28.  Led  by  the  Spirit, 

29.  In  His  Life  through  the  Father, 

30.  In  glorifying  the  Father,     . 

31.  In  His  Glory,        . 

On  preaching  Christ  our  Example, 


PAGE 

150 
157 

167 
175 
185 
197 
205 
213 
220 
229 
237 
248 
258 

265 


FIRST  DAY. 


LIKE   CHRIST: 

BECAUSE  WE  ABIDE  IN  HIM. 

*He  that  saith  he  abideth  in  Him,  ought  himself  also  so 
to  walk,  even  as  He  walked.  '—1  John  ii.  6. 

yj  BIDING  in  Christ  and  ivalhvng  lihe  Clirist: 
"^^  these  are  the  two  blessings  of  the  new  life 
which  are  here  set  before  us  in  their  essential  unity. 
The  fruit  of  a  life  m  Christ  is  a  life  li?ce  Christ. 

To  the  first  of  these  expressions,  aUding  in  Christy 
we  are  no  strangers.  The  wondrous  parable  of  the 
Vine  and  the  branches,  with  the  accompanying  com- 
mand, 'Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you,'  has  often  been 
to  us  a  source  of  rich  instruction  and  comfort.  And 
though  we  feel  as  if  we  had  but  very  imperfectly 
learned  the  lesson  of  abiding  in  Him,  yet  we  have 
tasted  something  of  the  joy  that  comes  when  the  soul 
can  say:  Lord,  Thou  knowest  all  things,  Thou 
knowest  that  I  do  abide  in  Thee.  And  He  knows 
too  how  often  the  fervent  prayer  still  arises:  Blessed 
Lord,  do  grant  me  the  complete  unbroken  abiding. 

The  second  expression,  walking  lihe  Qhrist,  is  not 
less  significant  than  the  first.     It  is  the  promise  of 

11 


13  LIKE  CHRIST: 

the  wonderful  power  which  the  abiding  in  Him  will 
exert.  As  the  fruit  of  our  surrender  to  live  wholly 
in  Him,  His  life  works  so  mightily  in  us,  that  our 
walk,  the  outward  expression  of  the  inner  life,  become 
like  His.  The  two  are  inseparably  connected.  The 
abiding  in  always  precedes  the  walking  like  Him. 
And  yet  the  aim  to  walk  like  Him  must  equally  pre- 
cede any  large  measure  of  abiding.  Only  then  is  the 
need  for  a  close  union  fully  realized,  or  is  the 
Heavenly  Giver  free  to  bestow  the  fulness  of  His 
grace,  because  He  sees  that  the  soul  is  prepared  to 
use  it  according  to  His  design.  When  the  Saviour 
said,  'If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  j^e  shall  abide 
in  my  love,'  He  meant  just  this:  the  surrender  to 
walk  like  me  is  the  path  to  the  full  abiding  in  me. 
Many  a  one  will  discover  that  just  here  is  the  secret 
of  his  failure  in  abiding  in  Christ;  he  did  not  seek 
it  with  the  view  of  walking  like  Christ.  The  words 
of  St.  John  invite  us  to  look  at  the  two  truths  in 
their  vital  connection  and  dependence  on  each  other. 
The  first  lesson  they  teach  is:  He  that  seeks  to 
abide  in  Christ  must  ivalh  even  as  He  ivalked.  Wo 
all  know  that  it  is  a  matter  of  course  that  a  branch 
bears  fruit  of  the  same  sort  as  the  vine  to  which  it 
belongs.  The  life  of  the  vine  and  the  branch  is  so 
completely  identical,  that  the  manifestation  of  that 
life  must  be  identical  too.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  re- 
deemed us  with  His  blood,  and  presented  us  to  the 


BECAUSE   WE  ABIDE  IN  HIM.  13 

J^^ather  in  His  righteousness,  He  did  not  leave  ns  in 
our  old  nature  to  serve  God  as  best  we  could.  Xo; 
in  Him  dwelt  the  eternal  life,  the  holy  divine  life  of 
heaven,  and  every  one  who  is  in  Him  receives  from 
Him  that  same  eternal  life  in  its  holy  heavenly  power. 
Hence  nothing  can  be  more  natural  than  the  claim 
that  he  that  abides  in  Him,  continually  receiving 
life  from  Him,  must  aJso  50  walk  even  as  He  walked. 
This  mighty  life  of  God  in  the  soul  does  not,  how- 
ever, work  as  a  blind  force,  compelling  us  ignorantly 
or  involuntarily  to  act  like  Christ.  On  the  contrary, 
the  walking  like  Him  must  come  as  the  result  of  a 
deliberate  choice,  sought  in  strong  desire,  accepted 
of  a  living  will.  With  this  view,  the  Father  in 
heaven  showed,  us  in  Jesus'  earthly  life  what  the  life 
of  heaven  w^ould  be  when  it  came  down  into  the  con- 
ditions and  circumstances  of  our  human  life.  And 
with  the  same  object  the  Lord  Jesus,  when  we  receive 
the  new  life  from  Him,  and  when  He  calls  us  to  abide 
in  Him  that  we  may  receive  that  life  more  abun- 
dantly, ever  points  us  to  His  own  life  on  earth,  and 
tells  us  that  it  is  to  walk  even  as  He  walked  that  the 
new  life  has  been  bestowed.  'Even  as  I,  so  ye  also:' 
that  word  of  the  Master  takes  His  whole  earthly  life, 
and  very  simply  makes  it  the  rule  and  guide  of  all 
our  conduct.  If  we  abide  in  Jesus,  we  may  not  act 
other. ..se  than  He  did.  'Like  Christ'  gives  in  one 
short  all-inclusive  word  the  blessed  law  of  the  Chris- 


14  LIKE  CHRIST: 

tian  life.  He  is  to  think,  to  speak,  to  act  as  Jesus 
did ;  as  Jesus  was,  even  so  is  he  to  be. 

The  second  lesson  is  the  complement  of  the  first : 
He  that  seeks  to  walk  like  Christ,  must  abide  in  Him, 

There  is  a  twofold  need  of  this  lesson.  With  some 
there  is  the  earnest  desire  and  effort  to  follow  Christ's 
example,  without  any  sense  of  the  impossibility  of 
doing  so,  except  by  deep,  real  abiding  in  Him.  They 
fail  because  they  seek  to  obey  the,  high  command  to 
live  like  Christ,  without  the  only  power  that  can  do 
so — the  living  in  Christ.  With  others  there  is  the 
opposite  error;  they  know  their  own  weakness,  and 
count  the  walking  like  Christ  an  impossibility.  As 
much  as  those  who  seek  to  do  it  and  who  fail,  do  those 
who  do  not  seek  because  they  expect  to  fail,  need 
the  lesson  we  are  enforcing.  To  walk  like  Christ  one 
must  abide  in  Him;  he  that  abides  in  Him  has  the 
power  to  walk  like  Him;  not  indeed  in  himself  or  his 
own  efforts,  but  in  Jesus,  who  perfects  His  strength 
in  our  weakness.  It  is  just  when  I  feel  my  utter  im- 
potence most  deeply,  and  fully  accept  Jesus  in  His 
wondrous  union  to  myself  as  my  life,  that  His  power 
works  in  me,  and  I  am  able  to  lead  a  life  completely 
beyond  what  my  power  could  obtain.  I  begin  to  see 
that  abiding  in  Him  is  not  a  matter  of  moments  or 
special  seasons,  but  the  deep  life  process  in  which,  by 
His  keeping  grace,  I  continue  without  a  moment's 
intermission,  and  from  which  I  act  out  all  my  Chris- 


BECAUSE  WE  ABIDE  IN  HIM.  15 

tian  life.  And  I  feel  emboldened  really  to  take  Him 
in  everything  as  my  example,  because  I  am  sure  that 
the  hidden  inner  union  and  likeness  must  work  itself 
out  into  a  visible  likeness  in  walk  and  conduct, 
f  Dear  reader!  if  God  give  us  grace,  in  the  course  of 
our  meditations,  truly  to  enter  into  the  meaning  of 
these  His  words,  and  what  they  teach  of  a  life  in 
very  deed  like  Christ's,  we  shall  more  than  once  come 
into  the  presence  of  heights  and  depths  that  will 
make  us  cry  out.  How  can  these  things  be?  If  the 
Holy  Spirit  reveal  to  us  the  heavenly  perfection  of 
the  humanity  of  our  Lord  as  the  image  of  the  unseen 
God,  and  speaks  to  us,  'so^  even  so  ought  ye  also  to 
walk,'  the  first  effect  will  be  that  we  shall  begin  to 
feel  at  what  a  distance  we  are  from  Him.  We  shall 
be  ready  to  give  up  hope,  and  to  say  with  so  many. 
It  avails  not  to  attempt  it:  I  never  can  walk  like 
Jesus.  At  such  moment  we  shall  find  our  strength 
in  the  message  He  that  ahidetli  in  Him,  he  must,  he 
can,  also  so  walk  even  as  He  walked.  The  word  of 
the  Master  will  come  with  new  meaning  as  the  assur- 
ance of  strength  sufficient:  He  that  abideth  in  me 
bearetli  much  fruit. 

Therefore,  brother,  abide  in  Him!  Every  believer 
is  in  Christ;  but  not  every  one  abides  in  Him,  in  the 
consciously  joyful  and  trustful  surrender  of  the  whole 
being  to  His  influence.  You  know  what  abiding  in 
Him  is.     It  is  to  consent  with  our  whole  soul  to  His 


16  LIKE  CHRIST: 

being  our  life,  to  reckon  upon  Him  to  inspire  us  in 
all  that  goes  to  make  up  life,  and  then  to  give  up 
everything  most  absolutely  for  Him  to  rule  and  work 
in  us.  It  is  the  rest  of  the  full  assurance  that  He 
does,  each  moment,  work  in  us  what  we  are  to  be, 
and  so  Himself  enables  us  to  maintain  that  perfect 
surrender,  in  which  He  is  free  to  do  all  His  will.  Let 
all  who  do  indeed  long  to  walk  like  Christ  take  cour- 
age at  the  thought  of  what  He  is  and  will  prove 
Himself  to  be  if  they  trust  Him.  He  is  the  True 
Vine;  no  vine  ever  did  so  fully  for  its  branches  what 
He  will  do  for  us.  We  have  only  to  consent  to  be 
branches.  Honour  Him  by  a  joyful  trust  that  He  is, 
beyond  all  conception,  the  True  Vine^  holding  you 
by  His  almighty  strength,  supplying  you  from  His 
infinite  fulness.  And  as  your  faith  thus  looks  to 
Him,  instead  of  sighing  and  failure,  the  Voice  of 
praise  will  be  heard  repeating  the  language  of  faith : 
Thanks  be  to  God !  he  that  abideth  in  Him  does  walk 
even  as  He  walked.  Thanks  be  to  God!  I  abide  in 
Him,  and  I  walk  as  He  walked.  Yes,  thanks  be  to 
God!  in  the  blessed  life  of  God's  redeemed  these  two 
are  inseparably  one:  abiding  in  Christ  and  walking 
like  Christ. 

Blessed  Saviour!  Thou  knowest  how  often  I  have 
said  to  Thee,  Lord,  I  do  abide  in  Thee!  And  yet  I 
sometimes  feel  that  the  full  joy  and  power  of  life  in 


BECAUSE   WE  ABIDE  IN  HIM.  17 

Thee  is  wanting.  Thy  word  this  day  has  reminded 
me  of  what  may  be  the  reason  of  failure.  I  sought 
to  abide  in  Thee  more  for  my  own  comfort  and 
growth  than  Thy  glory.  I  did  not  apprehend  fully 
how  the  hidden  union  with  Thee  had  for  its  object 
perfect  conformity  to  Thee,  and  how  only  he  who 
wholly  yields  himself  to  serve  and  obey  the  Father  as 
completely  as  Thou  didst,  can  fully  receive  all  that  the 
heavenly  love  can  do  for  him.  I  now  see  something 
of  it:  the  entire  surrender  to  live  and  work  like  Thee 
must  precede  the  full  experience  of  the  wondrous 
power  of  Thy  life. 

Lord,  I  thank  Thee  for  the  discovery.  With  my 
whole  heart  I  would  accept  Thy  calling,  and  yield 
myself  in  everything  to  walk  even  as  Thou  didst  walk. 
To  be  Thy  faithful  follower  in  all  Thou  wert  and 
didst  on  earth,  be  the  one  desire  of  my  heart. 

Blessed  Lord !  he  that  truly  yields  himself  to  walk  as 
Thou  didst  walk,  will  receive  grace  wholly  to  abide  in 
Thee.  0  my  Lord !  here  I  am.  To  ivalk  like  Christ ! 
for  this  I  do  indeed  consecrate  myself  to  Thee. 
To  abide  in  Christ!  for  this  I  trust  in  Thee  with  full 
assurance  of  faith.     Perfect  in  me  Thine  own  work. 

And  let  Thy  Holy  Spirit  help  me,  0  my  Lord !  each 
time  I  meditate  on  what  it  is  to  walk  like  Thee,  to 
hold  fast  the  blessed  truth:  as  one  who  abides  in 
Christy  I  have  the  strength  to  walk  like  Christ. 
Amen. 

2 


18  LIKE  CHRIST: 


SECOND  DAY. 


LIKE   CHEIST: 

HE  HIMSELF   CALLS  US  TO  IT. 

'I  have  given  you  an  example,  that  ye  also  should  do 
even  as  /have  done  to  you.' — John  xiii.  15. 

IT  is  Jesus  Christ,  the  beloved  Eedeemer  of  our 
souls,  who  speaks  thus.  He  had  just,  humbling 
Himself  to  do  the  work  of  the  slave,  washed  His  dis- 
ciples' feet.  In  doing  so  His  love  had  rendered  to 
the  body  the  service  of  which  it  stood  in  need  at  the 
supper  table.  At  the  same  time  He  had  shown,  in  a 
striking  symbol,  what  He  had  done  for  their  souls  in 
cleansing  them  from  sin.  In  this  twofold  work  of  love 
He  had  thus  set  before  them,  just  before  parting,  in 
one  significant  act,  the  whole  work  of  His  life  as  a 
ministry  of  blessing  to  body  and  to  soul.  And  as  He 
sits  down  He  says:  '  /  have  given  you  an  example  that 
YE  ALSO  should  do  EVEN  AS  I  have  done  to  you.''  All 
that  they  had  seen  in  Him,  and  experienced  from 
Him,  is  thus  made  the  rule  of  their  life:  '  Eyex  as  I 
have  done,  do  ye  also.  ' 

The  word  of  the  blessed  Saviour  is  for  us  too.     To 
each  one  who  knows  that  the  Lord  has  washed  away 


HE  HIMSELF  CALLS   US  TO  IT.  19 

his  sin  the  command  comes  with  all  the  touching 
force  of  one  of  the  last  words  of  Him  who  is  going 
out  to  die  for  us:  'Even  as  I  have  done  to  you,  so 
DO  YE  ALSO.'  Jesus  Christ  does  indeed  ask  every  one 
of  us  in  everything  to  act  just  as  we  have  seen  Him 
do.  What  He  has  done  to  ourselves,  and  still  does 
each  day,  we  are  to  do  over  again  to  others.  In  His 
condescending,  pardoning,  saving  love,  He  is  our  ex- 
ample ;  each  of  us  is  to  be  the  copy  and  image  of  the 
Master. 

The  thought  comes  at  once:  Alas!  how  little  have 
I  lived  thus;  how  little  have  I  even  known  that  I 
was  expected  thus  to  live !  And  yet,  He  is  my  Lord ; 
He  loves  me,  and  I  love  Him ;  I  dare  not  entertain 
the  thought  of  living  otherwise  than  He  would  have 
me.  What  can  I  do  but  open  my  heart  to  His  word^ 
and  fix  my  gaze  on  His  example,  until  it  exercises  its 
divine  power  upon  me,  and  draws  me  with  irresistible 
force  to  cry:  Lord,  even  as  Thou  hast  done,  so  will  I 
do  also. 

The  power  of  an  example  depends  chiefly  on  two 
things.  The  one  is  the  attractiveness  of  what  it  gives 
us  to  see,  the  other  the  personal  relation  and  influence 
of  him  in  whom  it  is  seen.  In  both  aspects,  what 
power  there  is  in  our  Lord's  example! 

Or,  is  there  really  anything  very  attractive  in  our 
Lord's  example?  I  ask  it  in  all  earnest,  because,  to 
judge  by  the  conduct  of  many  of  His  disciples,  it 


20  LIKE  CHRIST: 

would  really  seem  as  if  it  were  not  so.  0  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  would  open  our  eyes  to  see  the  heavenly 
beauty  of  the  likeness  of  the  only-begotten  Son ! 

We  know  who  the  Lord  Jesus  is.  He  is  the  Son 
of  the  all-glorious  God.  one  with  the  Father  in  nature 
and  glory  and  perfection.  When  H"e  had  been  on 
earth  it  could  be  said  of  Him,  'We  show  you  that 
eternal  life  which  was  with  the  Father,  and  was  mani- 
fested unto  us. '  In  Him  we  see  God.  In  Him  we 
see  how  God  would  act  were  He  here  in  our  place  on 
earth.  In  Him  all  that  is  beautiful  and  lovely  and 
perfect  in  the  heavenly  world  is  revealed  to  us  in  the 
form  of  an  earthly  life.  If  we  want  to  see  what  is 
really  counted  noble  and  glorious  in  the  heavenly  . 
world,  if  we  would  see  what  is  really  Divine,  we  have 
only  to  look  at  Jesus;  in  all  He  does  the  glory  of 
God  is  shown  forth. 

But  oh,  the  blindness  of  God's  children  :  this  heav- 
enly beauty  has  to  many  of  them  no  attraction;  there 
is  no  form  or  comeliness  that  they  should  desire  it. 

The  manners  and  the  way  of  living  in  the  court  of 
an  earthly  king  exercise  influence  throughout  the 
empire.  The  example  it  gives  is  imitated  by  all  who 
belong  to  the  nobility  or  the  higher  classes.  But  the 
example  of  the  King  of  heaven,  who  came  and  dwelt 
in  the  flesh,  that  we  might  see  how  we  might  here  on 
earth  live  a  God-like  life,  alas!  with  how  few  of  His 
followers  does  it  really   find   imitation.     When  we 


HE  HIMSELF  CALLS    US   TO  IT.  21 

look  upon  Jesus,  His  obedience  to  the  will  of  the 
Father,  His  humiliation  to  be  a  servant  of  the  most 
unworthy,  His  love  as  manifested  in  the  entire  giving 
up  and  sacrifice  of  Himself,  we  see  the  most  wondrous 
and  glorious  thing  heaven  has  to  show;  in  heaven 
itself  we  shall  see  nothing  greater  or  brighter.  Surely 
such  an  example,  given  of  God  on  very  purpose  to 
make  the  imitation  attractive  and  possible,  ought  to 
win  us.  Is  it  not  enough  to  stir  all  that  is  within  us 
with  a  holy  jealousy  and  with  joy  unutterable  as  we 
hear  the  message,  'I  have  given  you  an  example,  that 
even  as  I  have  done,  ye  should  also  do  '? 

This  is  not  all.  The  power  of  an  example  consists 
not  only  in  its  own  intrinsic  excellence,  but  also  in 
the  personal  relation  to  him  who  gives  it.  Jesus  had 
not  washed  the  feet  of  others  in  presence  of  His  dis- 
ciples; it  was  when  He  had  washed  their  feet  that  He 
said:  'Even  as  I  have  done  to  you^  ye  should  also 
do. '  It  is  the  consciousness  of  a  personal  relation- 
ship to  Christ  that  enforces  the  command:  Do  as  I 
have  done.  It  is  the  experience  of  what  Jesus  has 
done  to  me  that  is  the  strength  in  which  I  can  go 
and  do  the  same  to  others.  He  does  not  ask  that  I 
shall  do  more  than  has  been  done  to  me.  But  not 
less  either:  Evek  as  I  have  done  to  you.  He  does 
not  ask  that  I  shall  humble  m^^self  as  servant  deeper 
than  He  has  done.  It  would  not  have  been  strange 
if  He  had  asked  this  of  such  a  worm.     But  this  is 


22  LIKE  CHRIST: 

not  His  wish :  He  only  demands  that  I  shall  just  do 
and  be  what  He,  the  King,  has  done  and  been.  He 
humbled  Himself  as  low  as  humiliation  could  go,  to 
love  and  to  bless  me.  He  counted  this  His  Mgliest 
honour  and  blessedness.  And  now  He  invites  me  to 
partake  of  the  same  honour  and  blessedness,  in  loving 
and  serving  as  He  did.  Truly,  if  I  indeed  know  the 
love  that  rests  on  me,  and  the  humiliation  through 
which  alone  that  love  could  reach  me,  and  the  power 
of  the  cleansing  which  has  washed  me,  nothing  can 
keep  me  back  from  saying:  'Yes,  blessed  Lord,  even 
as  Thou  hast  done  to  me,  I  will  also  do. '  The  heav- 
enly loveliness  of  the  great  Example,  and  the  Divine 
lovingness  of  the  great  Exemplar,  combine  to  make 
the  example  above  everything  attractive. 

Only  there  is  one  thing  I  must  not  forget.  It  is 
not  the  remembrance  of  what  Jesus  has  once  done  to 
me,  but  the  living  experience  of  what  He  is  now  to 
me,  that  will  give  me  the  power  to  act  like  Him. 
His  love  must  be  a  present  reality,  the  inflowing  of  a 
life  and  a  power  in  which  I  can  love  like  Him.  It  is 
only  as  by  the  Holy  Spirit  I  realize  what  Jesus  is 
doing  for  me,  and  how  He  does  it,  and  that  it  is  He 
who  does  it,  that  it  is  possible  for  me  to  do  to  others 
what  He  is  doing  to  me. 

'EvEi^  AS  I  have  done  to  you,  do  ye  also!'  What 
a  precious  word !  What  a  glorious  prospect!  Jesus 
is  going  to  show  forth  in  me  the  Divine  power  of  His 


HE  HIMSELF  CALLS    US   TO  IT.  23 

love,  that  I  ma}^  show  it  forth  to  others.  He  blesses 
me,  that  I  may  bless  others.  He  loves  me  that  I 
may  love  others.  He  becomes  servant  to  me  that  I 
may  become  a  servant  to  others.  He  saves  and 
cleanses  me  that  I  may  save  and  cleanse  others.  He 
gives  Himself  wholly  for  and  to  me,  that  I  may  wholly 
give  myself  for  and  to  others.  I  have  only  to  be 
doing  over  to  others  what  He  is  doing  to  me — noth- 
ing more.  I  can  do  it,  just  because  He  is  doing  it  to 
me.  What  I  do  is  nothing  but  the  repeating,  the 
showing  forth  of  what  I  am  receiving  from  Him.* 

"Wondrous  grace!  what  thus  calls  us  to  be  like  our 
Lord  in  that  which  constitutes  His  highest  glory. 
Wondrous  grace!  which  fits  us  for  this  calling  by 
Himself  first  being  to  us  and  in  us  what  we  are  to  be 
to  others.  Shall  not  our  whole  heart  joyously  respond 
to  His  command  ?  Yes,  blessed  Lord !  even  as  Thou 
doest  to  me  will  I  also  do  to  others. 

Gracious  Lord !  what  can  I  now  do  but  praise  and 
pray?  My  heart  feels  overwhelmed  with  this  won- 
drous offer,  that  Thou  wilt  reveal  all  Thy  love  and 
power  in  me,  if  I  will  yield  myself  to  let  it  flow 
through  me  to  others.  Though  with  fear  and  trem- 
bling, yet  in  deep  and  grateful  adoration,  with  joy 

*How  beautifully  the  principle  is  expressed  in  the  words 
of  Moses  to  Hobab  (Num.  x.  32) ,  '  And  it  shall  be,  if  thou 
go  with  us,  yea,  if  thou  go  with  us,  that  what  goodness  the 
Lord  shall  do  unto  us,  the  same  will  2ve  do  unto  thee  '  1 


24  LIKE  CHRIST: 

and  confidence,  I  would  accept  the  offer  and  say: 
Here  I  am;  show  me  how  much  Thou  lovest  me,  and 
I  will  show  it  to  others  by  loving  them  even  so. 

And  that  I  may  be  able  to  do  this,  blessed  Lord, 
grant  me  these  two  things.  Grant  me,  by  Thy  Holy 
Spirit,  a  clear  insight  into  Thy  love  to  me,  that  I 
may  know  how  Thou  lovest  me,  how  Thy  love  to  me 
is  Thy  delight  and  blessedness,  hov/  in  that  love  Thou 
givest  Thyself  so  completely  to  me,  that  Thou  art  in- 
deed mine  to  do  for  me  all  I  need.  Grant  this,  Lord, 
and  I  shall  know  how  to  love  and  how  to  live  for 
others,  even  as  Thou  lovest  and  livest  for  me. 

And  then  grant  me  to  see,  as  often  as  I  feel  how 
little  love  I  have,  that  it  is  not  with  the  love  of  my 
little  heart,  but  with  Thy  love  shed  abroad  in  me, 
that  I  have  to  fulfil  the  command  of  loving  like  Thee. 
Am  I  not  Thy  branch,  0  my  heavenly  Vine?  it  is  the 
fulness  of  Thy  life  and  love  that  flows  through  me  in 
love  and  blessing  to  those  around.  It  is  Thy  Spirit 
that,  at  the  same  moment,  reveals  what  Thou  art  to 
me,  and  strengthens  me  for  what  I  am  to  be  to  others 
in  Thy  name.  In  this  faith  I  dare  to  say.  Amen, 
Lord,  even  as  Thou  doest  to  me,  I  also  do.  Yea, 
Amen. 


AS  ONE  THAT  SERVETH.  25 


THIRD  DAY. 


LIKE    CHRIST: 

AS  ONE   THAT    SERVETH. 

*If  I  then,  your  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your  feet, 
ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet. ' — John  xiii.  14. 
'  I  am  among  you  as  he  that  serveth. ' — Luke  xxii.  27. 

YESTERDAY  we  thought  of  the  right  that  the 
Lord  has  to  demand  and  expect  that  His  re- 
deemed ones  should  follow  His  example.  To-day  we 
will  more  specially  consider  in  what  it  is  we  have  to 
follow  Him. 

*Ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet,'  is  the 
word  of  which  we  want  to  understand  the  full  mean- 
ing. The  form  of  a  servant  in  which  we  see  Him, 
the  cleansing  which  was  the  object  of  that  service, 
the  love  which  was  its  motive  power, — these  are  the 
three  chief  thoughts. 

First,  the  form  of  a  servant.  All  was  ready  for  the 
last  supper,  to  the  very  water  to  wash  the  feet  of  the 
guests,  according  to  custom.  But  there  was  no  slave 
to  do  the  work.  Each  one  waits  for  the  other:  none 
of  the  twelve  thinks  of  humbling  himself  to  do  the 
work.     Even    at   the   table   they   were   full    of    the 


26  LIKE   CHRIST: 

thought,  who  should  be  greatest  in  the  kingdom  they 
were  expecting  {Luke  xxii.  26^  27).  All  at  once 
Jesus  rises  (they  were  still  reclining  at  the  table), 
lays  aside  His  garments,  girds  Himself  with  a  towel, 
and  begins  to  wash  their  feet.  0  wondrous  spectacle ! 
on  which  angels  gazed  with  adoring  wonder.  Christ, 
the  Creator  and  King  of  the  universe,  at  whose  beck 
legions  of  angels  are  ready  to  serve  Him,  who  might 
with  one  word  of  love  have  said  which  one  of  the 
twelve  must  do  the  work, — Christ  chooses  the  slave's 
place  for  His  own,  takes  the  soiled  feet  in  His  own 
holy  hands,  and  washes  them.  He  does  it  in  full 
consciousness  of  His  divine  glory,  for  John  says, 
'Jesus  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given  all  things 
into  His  hands,  and  that  He  was  come  from  God  and 
went  to  God,  rose.'  For  the  hands  into  which  God 
had  given  all  things,  nothing  is  common  or  unclean. 
The  meanness  of  a  work  never  lowers  the  person;  the 
person  honours  and  elevates  the  work,  and  imparts 
his  own  worth  even  to  the  meanest  service.  In  such 
deep  humiliation,  as  we  men  call  it,  our  Lord  finds 
divine  glory,  and  is  in  this  the  Leader  of  His  Church 
in  the  path  of  true  blessedness.  It  is  as  the  Son  that 
He  is  the  servant.  Just  because  He  is  the  beloved  of 
His  Father,  in  whose  hands  all  things  are  given,  it  is 
not  difficult  for  Him  to  stoop  so  low.  In  thus  taking 
the  form  of  a  servant,  Jesus  proclaims  the  law  of  rank 
in  the  Church  of  Christ.     The  higher  one  wishes  to 


AS  ONE  THAT  SERVETH.  27 

stand  in  grace,  the  more  it  must  be  his  joy  to  be  ser- 
vant of  all.  'Whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you, 
let  him  be  your  servant'  {Matt,  xx.  27);  'He  that  is 
greatest  among  you  shall  be  your  servant'  {Matt, 
xxiii,  11).  The  higher  I  rise  in  the  consciousness  of 
being  like  Christ,  God's  beloved  child,  the  deeper 
shall  I  stoop  to  serve  all  around  me. 

A  servant  is  one  who  is  always  caring  for  the  work 
and  interest  of  his  master,  is  ever  ready  to  let  his 
master  see  that  he  only  seeks  to  do  what  will  please  or 
profit  him.  Thus  Jesus  lived :  'For  even  the  Son  of 
man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister, 
and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many'  {Marh  x.  J^o); 
*I  am  among  you  as  he  that  serveth.'  Thus  I  must 
live,  moving  about  among  God's  children  as  the  ser- 
vant of  all.  If  I  seek  to  bless  others,  it  must  be  in 
the  humble,  loving  readiness  with  which  I  serve 
them,  not  caring  for  my  own  honour  or  interest,  if  I 
can  but  be  a  blessing  to  them.  I  must  follow  Christ's 
example  in  washing  the  disciples'  feet.  A  servant 
counts  it  no  humiliation,  and  is  not  ashamed  of  being 
counted  an  inferior:  it  is  his  place  and  work  to  serve 
others.  The  reason  why  we  so  often  do  not  bless 
others  is  that  we  wish  to  address  them  as  their  su- 
periors in  grace  or  gifts,  or  at  least  their  equals.  If 
we  first  learnt  from  our  Lord  to  associate  with  others 
in  the  blessed  spirit  of  a  servant,  what  a  blessing  we 
should  become  to  the  world !     AVhen  once  this  example 


28  LIKE  CHRIST: 

is  admitted  to  the  place  it  ought  to  have  in  the 
Church  of  Christ,  the  power  of  His  presence  would 
soon  make  itself  felt. 

And  what  is  now  the  work  the  disciple  has  to  per- 
form in  this  spirit  of  lowly  service?  The  foot-wash- 
ing speaks  of  a  double  work — the  one  for  the  cleansing 
and  refreshing  of  the  body;  the  other  the  cleansing 
and  saving  of  the  soul.  During  the  whole  of  our 
Lord's  life  upon  earth  these  two  things  were  ever 
united:  'The  sick  were  healed,  to  the  poor  the  gospel 
was  preached.'  As  with  the  paralytic,  so  with  many 
others,  blessing  to  the  body  was  the  type  and  promise 
of  life  to  the  spirit. 

The  follower  of  Jesus  may  not  lose  sight  of  this 
when  he  receives  the  command,  'Ye  ought  also  to 
wash  one  another's  feet.'  Eemembering  that  the  ex- 
ternal and  bodily  is  the  gate  to  the  inner  and  spiritual 
life,  he  makes  the  salvation  of  the  soul  the  first  object 
in  his  holy  ministry  of  love,  at  the  same  time,  how- 
ever, seeking  the  way  to  the  hearts  by  the  ready  ser- 
vice of  love  in  the  little  and  common  things  of  daily 
life.  It  is  not  by  reproof  and  censure  that  he  shows 
that  he  is  a  servant;  no,  but  by  the  friendliness  and 
kindliness  with  which  he  proves  in  daily  intercourse 
that  he  always  thinks  how  he  can  help  or  serve,  he 
becomes  the  living  witness  of  what  it  is  to  be  a  fol- 
lower of  Jesus.  From  such  a  one  the  word  when 
spoken  comes  with  power,  and  finds  easy  entrance. 
And  then,  when  he  comes  into  contact  with  the  sin 


AS  ONE  THAT  SERVETH.  29 

and  perverseness  and  contradiction  of  men,  instead 
of  being  discouraged,  he  perseveres  as  he  thinks  with 
how  much  patience  Jesus  has  borne  with  him,  and 
still  daily  cleanses  him;  he  realizes  himself  to  be  one 
of  God's  appointed  servants,  to  stoop  to  the  lowest 
depth  to  serve  and  save  men,  even  to  bow  at  the  feet 
of  others  if  this  be  needed. 

The  spirit  which  will  enable  one  to  live  such  a  life 
of  loving  service,  can  be  learned  from  Jesus  alone. 
John  writes,  *  Having  loved  His  own  which  were  in 
the  world.  He  loved  them  to  the  end'  {John  xiii,  1). 
For  love  nothing  is  too  hard.  Love  never  speaks  of 
sacrifice.  To  bless  the  loved  one,  however  un- 
worthy, it  willingly  gives  up  all.  It  was  love  made 
Jesus  a  servant.  It  is  love  alone  will  make  the  ser- 
vant's place  and  work  such  blessedness  to  us,  that  we 
shall  persevere  in  it  at  all  costs.  We  may  perhaps, 
like  Jesus,  have  to  wash  the  feet  of  some  Judas  who 
rewards  us  with  ingratitude  and  betrayal.  We  shall 
probably  meet  many  a  Peter,  who  first,  with  his 
^ Never  my  feet,'  refuses,  and  then  is  dissatisfied  when 
we  do  not  comply  with  his  impatient  'Not  only  the 
feet,  but  also  the  head  and  the  hands.'  Only  love, 
a  heavenly  unquenchable  love,  gives  the  patience, 
the  courage,  and  the  wisdom  for  this  great  work  the 
Lord  has  set  before  us  in  His  holy  example:  'Wash 
ye  one  another's  feet.' 

Try  above  all  to  understand  that  it  is  only  as  a  son 
you  can  be  truly  a  servant.     It  was  as  the  Son  Christ 


30  LIKE  CHRIST: 

took  the  form  of  a  servant:  in  this  you  will  find  the 
secret  of  willing,  happy  service.  Walk  among  men 
as  a  Son  of  the  Most  High  God.  A  Son  of  God  is 
only  in  the  world  to  show  forth  His  Father's  glory, 
to  prove  how  God-like  and  how  blessed  it  is  to  live 
only  and  at  any  cost  to  find  a  way  for  love  to  the 
hearts  of  the  lost. 

0  my  soul,  thy  love  cannot  attain  to  this;  there- 
fore listen  to  Him  who  says,  'Abide  in  my  love, '  Our 
one  desire  must  be  that  He  may  sliow  us  how  He 
loves  us,  and  that  He  Himself  may  keep  us  abiding 
in  'His  love.''  Live  every  day,  as  the  beloved  of  the 
Lord,  in  the  experience  that  His  love  washes  and 
cleanses,  bears  and  blesses  you  all  the  day  long.  This 
love  of  His  flowing  into  you,  will  flow  out  again  from 
you,  and  make  it  your  greatest  joy  to  follow  His  ex- 
ample in  washing  the  feet  of  others.  Do  not  com- 
plain much  of  the  want  of  love  and  humility  in 
others,  but  pray  much  that  the  Lord  would  awaken 
His  people  to  their  calling,  truly  so  to  follow  in  His 
footsteps  that  the  world  may  see  that  they  have  taken 
Him  for  their  example.  And  if  you  do  not  see  it  as 
soon  as  you  wish  in  those  around  you,  let  it  only  urge 
you  to  more  earnest  prayer,  that  in  you  at  least  the 
Lord  may  have  one  who  understands  and  proves  that 
to  love  and  serve  like  Jesus  is  the  highest  blessedness 
and  joy,  as  well  as  the  way,  like  Jesus,  to  be  a  bless- 
ing and  a  joy  to  others. 


AS  ONE  THAT  SERVETH,  31 

My  Lord,  I  give  myself  to  Thee,  to  live  this  blessed 
life  of  service.  In  Thee  I  have  seen  it,  the  spirit  of 
a  servant  is  a  kingly  spirit,  come  from  heaven  and 
lifting  up  to  heaven,  yea,  the  Spirit  of  God's  own 
Son.  Thou  everlasting  Love,  dwell  in  me,  and  my 
life  shall  be  like  Thine,  and  the  language  of  my  life 
to  others  as  Thine,  *I  am  in  the  midst  of  you  as  he 
that  serveth. ' 

0  Thou  glorified  Son  of  God,  Thou  knowest  how 
little  of  Thy  Spirit  dwells  in  us,  how  this  life  of  a 
servant  is  opposed  to  all  that  the  world  reckons  honor- 
able or  proper.  But  Thou  hast  come  to  teach  us  new 
lessons  of  what  is  right,  to  show  us  what  is  thought 
in  heaven  of  the  glory  of  being  the  least,  of  the 
blessedness  of  serving.  0  Thou,  who  dost  not  only 
give  new  thoughts  but  implant  new  feelings,  give  me 
a  heart  like  Thine,  a  heart  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  a 
heart  that  can  love  as  Thou  dost.  0  Lord,  Thy  Holy 
Spirit  dwells  within  me;  Thy  fulness  is  my  inherit 
tance;  in  the  joy  of  the  Holy  Spirit  I  can  be  as  Thoi> 
art.  I  do  yield  myself  to  a  life  of  service  like  Thine, 
Let  the  same  mind  be  in  me  which  was  also  in  Thee, 
when  Thou  didst  make  Thyself  of  no  reputation,  ana 
didst  take  upon  Thee  the  form  of  a  servant,  and 
being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  didst  humble  Thy- 
self. Yea,  Lord,  that  very  same  mind  be  in  me  too 
by  Thy  grace.  As  a  son  of  God  let  me  be  the  servant 
of  men.     Amen. 


33  LIKE  CHRIST: 


FOURTH  DAY. 


LIKE   CHEIST: 

OUR  HEAD. 

*  For  even  hereunto  were  ye  called  ;  because  Christ  also 
suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  ye  should  fol- 
low His  steps  :  who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own 
body  on  the  tree,  that  we,  being  dead  to  sins,  should  live 
unto  righteousness. ' — 1  Pet.  ii.  21. 

THE  call  to  follow  Christ's  example,  and  to  walk  in 
His  footsteps,  is  so  high  that  there  is  every 
reason  to  ask  with  wonder.  How  can  it  be  expected 
of  sinful  men  that  they  should  walk  like  the  Son  of 
God?  The  answer  that  most  people  give  is  practi- 
cally, that  it  cannot  really  be  expected  :  the  command 
sets  before  ns  an  ideal,  beautiful  but  unattainable.* 

The  answer  Scripture  gives  is  different.  It  points 
us  to  the  wonderful  relationship  in  which  we  stand  to 
Christ.  Because  our  union  to  Him  sets  in  operation 
within  us  a  heavenly  life  with  all  its  powers,  therefore 
the  claim  may  be  made  in  downright  earnest  that  we 
should  live  as  Christ  did.  The  realization  of  thi 
relationship  between  Christ  and  His  people  is  nect 

*  See  note. 


OUR  HEAD,  33 

sary  for  every  one  who  is  in  earnest  in  following 
Christ's  example. 

And  what  is  now  this  relationship?  It  is  three- 
fold. Peter  speaks  in  this  passage  of  Christ  as  our 
Surety y  our  Example^  and  our  Head, 

Christ  is  our  Surety.  'Christ  suffered  for  ics^ — 
'Who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on 
the  tree.'  As  Surety,  Christ  suffered  and  died  in  our 
stead.  He  bore  our  sin,  and  broke  at  once  its  curse 
and  power.  As  Surety,  He  did  what  we  could  not 
do,  what  we  now  need  not  do. 

Christ  is  also  our  Example  too.  In  one  sense  His 
work  is  unique;  in  another  we  have  to  follow  Him  in 
it;  we  must  do  as  He  did,  live  and  suffer  like  Him. 
^Christ  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  Example''  that 
we  should  follow  in  His  footsteps.  His  suffering  as 
my  Surety  calls  me  to  a  suffering  like  His  as  my  Ex- 
ample. But  is  this  reasonable?  In  His  suffering  as 
Surety  He  had  the  power  of  the  Divine  nature,  and 
how  can  I  be  expected  in  the  weakness  of  the  flesh  to 
suffer  as  He  did?  Is  there  not  an  impassable  gulf 
between  these  two  things  which  Peter  unites  so  closely, 
the  suffering  as  Surety  and  the  suffering  as  Example? 
No,  there  is  a  blessed  third  aspect  of  Christ's  work, 
which  bridges  that  gulf,  which  i&  the  connecting  link 
between  Christ  as  Surety  and  Christ  as  Example,  which 
makes  it  possible  for  us  in  very  deed  to  take  the  Surety 
as  Example,  and  live  and  suffer  and  die  like  Him. 
3 


34  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Christ  is  also  our  HeacL  In  this  His  Suretyship 
and  His  Example  have  their  root  and  unity.  Christ 
is  the  second  Adam.  As  a  believer  I  am  spiritually 
one  with  Him.  In  this  union  He  lives  in  me,  and 
imparts  to  me  the  power  of  His  finished  work,  the 
power  of  His  sufEerings  and  death  and  resurrection. 
It  is  on  this  ground  we  are  taught  in  Eomans  vi.  and 
elsewhere  that  the  Christian  is  indeed  dead  to  sin  and 
alive  to  God.  The  very  life  that  Christ  lives,  the  life 
that  passed  through  death,  and  the  power  of  that 
death,  work  in  the  believer,  so  that  he  is  dead,  and 
has  risen  again  with  Christ.  It  is  this  thought  Peter 
gives  utterance  to  when  he  says:  ^Who  His  own  self 
bore  our  sins  upon  the  tree,'  not  alone  that  we  through 
His  death  might  receive  forgiveness,  but  'that  we, 
being  dead  to  sins,  should  live  unto  righteousness.' 
As  we  have  part  in  the  spiritual  death  of  the  first 
Adam,  having  really  died  to  God  in  him,  so  we  have 
part  in  the  second  Adam,  having  really  died  to  sin 
in  Him,  and  in  Him  being  made  alive  again  to  God. 
Christ  is  not  only  our  Surety  who  lived  and  died  for  us, 
our  Example  who  showed  us  how  to  live  and  die,  but 
also  our  Head,  with  whom  we  are  one,  in  whose  death 
we  have  died,  with  whose  life  we  now  live.  This  gives 
us  the  power  to  follow  our  Surety  as  our  Example : 
Christ  being  our  Head  is  the  bond  that  makes  the 
believing  on  the  Surety  and  the  following  of  the  Ex- 
ample inseparably  one. 


OUR  HEAD,  35 

These  three  are  one.  The  three  truths  may  not  be 
Iseparated  from  each  other.  And  yet  this  happens 
[but  too  often.  There  are  some  who  wish  to  follow 
Christ's  Example  without  faith  in  His  atonement. 
They  seek  within  themselves  the  power  to  live  like 
Him :  their  efforts  must  be  vain.  There  are  others 
who  hold  fast  to  the  Suretyship  but  neglect  the  Ex- 
ample. They  believe  in  redemption  through  the 
blood  of  the  cross,  but  neglect  the  footsteps  of  Him 
who  bore  it.  Faith  in  the  atonement  is  indeed  the 
foundation  of  the  building,  but  it  is  not  all.  Theirs 
too  is  a  deficient  Christianity,  with  no  true  view  of 
sauctification,  because  they  do  not  see  how,  along 
with  faith  in  Christ's  atonement,  following  His  Ex- 
ample is  indispensably  necessary. 

There  are  still  others  who  have  received  these  two 
truths, — Christ  as  Surety  and  Christ  as  Example, — 
and  yet  want  something.  They  feel  constrained  to 
follow  Christ  as  Example  in  what  He  did  as  Surety, 
but  want  the  power.  They  do  not  rightly  under- 
stand how  this  following  His  Example  can  really  be 
attained.  What  they  need  is,  the  clear  insight  as  to 
what  Scripture  teaches  of  Christ  as  Head.  Because 
the  Surety  is  not  some  one  outside  of  me,  but  One  in 
whom  I  am,  and  who  is  in  me,  therefore  it  is  that  I 
can  become  like  Him.  His  very  life  lives  in  me.  He 
lives  Himself  in  me,  whom  He  bought  with  His 
blood.     To  follow  His  footsteps  is  a  duty,  because  it 


36  LIKE  CHRIST: 

is  a  possibility,  the  natural  result  of  the  wonderful 
union  between  Head  and  members.  It  is  only  when 
this  is  understood  aright  that  the  blessed  truth  of 
Christ's  Example  will  take  its  right  place.  If  Jesus 
Himself  through  His  life  union  will  work  in  me  the 
life  likeness,  then  my  duty  becomes  plain,  but  glori- 
ous. I  have,  on  the  one  side,  to  gaze  on  His  Exam- 
ple so  as  to  know  and  follow  it.  On  the  other,  to 
abide  in  Him,  and  open  my  heart  to  the  blessed  work- 
ings of  His  life  in  me.  As  surely  as  He  conquered 
sin  and  its  curse  for  me^  will  He  conquer  it  in  its 
power  iji  me.  What  He  began  by  His  death  for  me, 
He  will  perfect  by  His  life  in  me.  Because  my  Surety 
is  also  my  Head,  His  Example  must  and  will  be  the 
rule  of  my  life. 

There  is  a  saying  of  Augustine  that  is  often  quoted: 
'Lord!  give  what  Thou  commandest,  and  command 
what  Thou  wilt.'  This  holds  good  there.  If  the 
Lord,  who  lives  in  me,  gives  what  He  requires  of  me, 
then  no  requirement  can  be  too  high.  Then  I  have 
the  courage  to  gaze  upon  His  holy  Example  in  all  its 
height  and  breadth,  and  to  accept  of  it  as  the  law  of 
my  conduct.  It  is  no  longer  merely  a  command  tell- 
ing what  I  must  be,  but  a  promise  of  what  I  shall  be. 
There  is  nothing  that  weakens  the  power  of  Christ's 
Example  so  much  as  the  thought  that  we  cannot  really 
walk  like  Him.  Do  not  listen  to  such  thoughts. 
The  perfect  likeness  in  heaven  is  begun  on  earth,  can 


OUR  HEAD.  37 

grow  with  each  day,  and  become  more  visible  as  life 
goes  on.  As  certain  and  mighty  as  the  work  of  surety 
which  Christ,  your  Head,  completed  once  for  all,  is 
the  renewal  after  His  own  Image,  which  He  is  still 
working  out.  Let  this  double  blessing  make  the 
cross  doubly  precious :  Our  Head  suffered  as  a  Surety, 
that  in  union  with  us  He  might  bear  sin  for  us. 
Our  Head  suffered  as  an  Example,  that  He  might 
show  us  what  the  path  is  in  which,  in  union  with 
Himself,  He  would  lead  us  to  victory  and  to  glory. 
The  suffering  Christ  is  our  Head,  our  Surety,  and 
our  Example. 

And  so  the  great  lesson  I  have  to  learn  is  the  won- 
derful truth  that  it  is  just  in  that  mysterious  path  of 
suffering,  in  which  He  wrought  out  our  atonement 
and  redemption,  that  we  are  to  follow  His  footsteps, 
and  that  the  full  experience  of  that  redemption  de- 
pends upon  the  personal  fellowship  in  that  suffering. 
'Christ  suffered  for  us^  leaving  us  an  Example. '  May 
the  Holy  Spirit  reveal  to  me  what  this  means. 

Precious  Saviour !  how  shall  I  thank  Thee  for  the 
work  that  Thou  hast  done  as  Surety?  Standing  in 
the  place  of  me  as  guilty  Thoti  hast  borne  my  sins  in 
Thy  body  on  the  cross.  That  cross  was  my  due. 
Thou  didst  take  it,  and  wast  made  like  unto  me,  that 
thus  the  cross  might  be  changed  into  a  place  of  bless- 
ing and  life. 


88  LIKE  CHRIST: 

And  now  Thou  callest  me  to  the  place  of  crucifix- 
ion as  the  place  of  blessing  and  life,  where  I  may  be 
made  like  Thee,  and  may  find  in  Thee  power  to  suffer 
and  to  cease  from  sin.  As  my  Head,  Thou  wert  my 
Surety  to  suffer  and  die  with  me;  as  my  Head,  Thou 
art  my  Example  that  I  might  suffer  and  die  with 
Thee. 

Precious  Saviour!  I  confess  that  I  have  too  little 
understood  this.  Thy  Suretyship  was  more  to  me 
than  Thy  Example.  I  rejoiced  much  that  Thou 
hadst  borne  the  cross  for  me,  but  too  little  that  I  like 
Thee  and  with  Thee  might  also  bear  the  cross.  The 
atonement  of  the  cross  was  more  precious  to  me  than 
the  fellowship  of  the  cross;  the  hope  in  Thy  redemp- 
tion more  precious  than  the  personal  fellowship  with 
Thyself. 

Forgive  me  this,  dear  Lord,  and  teach  me  to  find 
my  happiness  in  union  with  Thee,  my  Head,  not 
more  in  Thy  Suretyship  than  in  Thine  Example.  And 
grant,  that  in  my  meditations  as  to  how  I  am  to  fol- 
low Thee,  my  faith  may  become  stronger  and  brighter: 
Jesus  is  my  Example  because  He  is  my  life.  I  must 
and  can  be  like  Him,  because  I  am  one  with  Him. 
Grant  this,  my  blessed  Lord,  for  Thy  love's  sake. 
Amen. 

NOTE. 

*Thomas  a  Kempis  has  said,  "All  men  wish  to  be 
with  Christ,  and  to  belong  to  His  people;   but  few 


OUR    HEAD.  39 

are  really  willing  to  follow  the  life  of  Christ."  There 
are  many  who  imagine  that  to  imitate  Jesus  Christ  is 
a  specially  advanced  state  in  the  Christian  life,  to 
which  only  a  few  elect  can  attain;  they  think  that 
one  can  be  a  real  Christian  if  he  only  confesses  his 
weakness  and  sin,  and  holds  fast  to  the  Word  and 
Sacrament,  without  attaining  any  real  conformity  to 
the  life  of  Christ  ;  they  even  count  it  pride  and  fanat- 
icism if  one  venture  to  say  that  conformity  to  the  like- 
ness of  Jesus  Christ  is  an  indispensaMe  sign  of  the  true 
Christian,  And  yet  our  Lord  says  to  all  without  ex- 
ception: "He  that  doth  not  take  his  cross,  and  fol- 
low after  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me;"  He  mentions 
expressly  the  most  difficult  thing  in  His  life — the 
cross,  that  which  includes  all  else.  And  Peter  writes 
not  to  some,  but  to  the  whole  Church;  Christ  hath 
left  us  an  Example  that  we  should  follow  His  foot- 
steps. It  is  a  sad  sign  that  these  unmistakable  com- 
.  mands  have  been  so  darkened  in  our  modern  Chris- 
tianity, that  our  leading  ministers  and  church 
members  have  quietly,  as  by  common  consent,  agreed 
to  rob  these  words  of  their  sting.  A  false  dogmatic 
must  bear  no  small  share  of  the  blame.  To  defend 
the  Divinity  of  our  Saviour  against  unbelief,  men 
have  presented  and  defended  His  Divine  nature  with 
such  exclusiveness,  that  it  became  im^possible  to  form 
any  real  living  conception  of  His  humanity.  It  is 
not  enough  that  we  admit  that  Christ  was  a  true 
man;  no  one  can  form  any  idea  of  this  humanity 
who  is  ever  afraid  to  lose  the  true  Christ,  if  he  does 
not  every  moment  ascribe  to  Him  Divine  power  and 
omniscience.  For,  of  a  truth,  if  Christ's  suffering 
and  cross  be  only  and  altogether  something  super- 


40  LIKE  CHRIST: 

natural,  we  must  cease  to  speak  of  the  imitation  of 
Christ  in  any  true  or  real  sense  of  the  word.  Oh, 
the  gulf  of  separation  which  comes  between  the  life 
of  Christ  and  the  life  of  Christians,  when  the  rela- 
tion between  them  is  only  an  external  one!  And 
how  slow  and  slothful  the  Church  of  our  days  is  to 
apply  the  great  and  distinct  rule  so  clearly  laid  down 
in  the  life  of  Christ,  to  the  filling  of  these  gulfs  and 
the  correcting  of  the  disorders  of  our  modern  life.  The 
Church  of  Christ  will  not  be  brought  again  out  of  its 
confusions  until  the  faithful  actual  imitation  of  her 
Lord  and  Head  again  iecome  tlie  banner  round  ivhich 
she  rallies  His  disciples.'^ — From  M.  Diemer,  Een 
nieutv  hoeh  over  de  navolging  van  Jesus  Christus  (A 
new  book  on  the  imitation  of  Jesus  Christ). 


IN  SUFFERING   WRONG.  41 


FIFTH  DAY. 


LIKE   CHKIST: 

IN  SUFFERING  WRONG. 

*  For  this  is  thankworthy,  if  a  man  for  conscience  toward 
God  endure  grief,  suffering  wrongfully.  For  what  glory  is 
if,  when  ye  be  buffeted  for  your  faults,  ye  shall  take  it  pa- 
tiently? but  if,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take 
it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God.' — 1  Pet.  ii.  19, 
20. 

IT  is  in  connection  with  a  very  everyday  matter  that 
Peter  gave  utterance  to  those  weighty  words  con- 
cerning Christ  as  our  Surety  and  Example.  He  is 
writing  to  servants,  who  at  that  time  were  mostly 
slaves.  He  teaches  them  '  to  be  subject  with  all  fear, 
not  only  to  the  good  and  gentle,  but  also  to  the  fro- 
ward.'  For,  so  he  writes,  if  any  one  do  wrong  and 
be  punished  for  it,  to  bear  it  patiently  is  no  special 
grace.  No;  but  if  one  do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  and 
take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God;  such 
bearing  of  wrong  is  Christ-like.  In  bearing  our  sins 
as  Surety,  Christ  suffered  wrong  from  man;  after 
His  example  we  must  be  ready  to  suffer  wrongfully 
too. 


42  LIKE  CHRIST: 

There  is  almost  nothing  harder  to  bear  than  injus- 
tice from  our  fellow-men.  It  is  not  only  the  loss  of 
pain;  there  is  the  feeling  of  humiliation  and  injus- 
tice, and  the  consciousness  of  our  rights  asserts  itself. 
In  what  our  fellow-creatures  do  to  us,  it  is  not  easy  at 
once  to  recognise  the  will  of  God,  who  thus  allows  us 
to  be  tried,  to  see  if  we  have  truly  taken  Christ  as  our 
example.  Let  us  study  that  example.  From  Him 
we  may  learn  what  it  was  that  gave  Him  the  power 
to  bear  injuries  patiently. 

Christ  ielieved  in  suffering  as  tlie  tvill  of  God,  He 
had  found  it  in  Scripture  that  the  servant  of  God 
should  suffer.  He  had  made  Himself  familiar  with 
the  thought,  so  that  when  suffering  came,  it  did  not 
take  Him  by  surprise.  He  expected  it.  He  knew 
that  thus  He  must  be  perfected;  and  so  His  first 
thought  was  not  how  to  be  delivered  from  it,  but 
how  to  glorify  God  in  it.  This  enabled  Him  to  bear 
the  greatest  injustice  quietly.  He  saw  God's  hand 
in  it. 

Christian!  would  you  have  strength  to  suffer 
wrong  in  the  spirit  in  which  Christ  did?  Accustom 
yourself  in  everything  that  happens,  to  recognise  the 
hand  and  will  of  God.  This  lesson  is  of  more  conse- 
quence than  you  think.  Whether  it  be  some  great  - 
wrong  that  is  done  you,  or  some  little  offence  that 
you  meet  in  daily  life,  before  you  fix  your  thoughts 
on  the  person  who  did  it,  first  be  still,  and  remem- 


IN  SUFFERING   WRONG.  43 

ber,  God  allows  me  to  come  into  this  trouble  to  see  if 
I  shall  glorify  Him  in  it.  This  trial,  be  it  the  great- 
est or  least,  is  allowed  by  God,  and  is  His  will  con- 
cerning me.  Let  me  first  recognise  and  submit  to 
Gocfs  tuill  in  it.  Then  in  the  rest  of  soul  which  this 
gives,  I  shall  receive  wisdom  to  know  how  to  behave 
in  it.  With  my  eye  turned  from  man  to  God,  suf- 
fering wrong  is  not  so  hard  as  it  seems. 

Christ  also  believed  that  God  would  care  for  His 
rights  and  honour.  There  is  an  innate  sense  of  right 
within  us  that  comes  from  God.  But  he  who  lives 
in  the  visible,  wants  his  honour  to  be  vindicated  at 
once  here  below.  He  who  lives  in  the  eternal,  and 
as  seeing  the  Invisible,  is  satisfied  to  leave  the  vindi- 
cation of  his  rights  and  honour  in  God's  hands;  he 
knows  that  they  are  safe  with  Him.  It  was  thus  with 
the  Lord  Jesus.  Peter  writes,  '  He  committed  Him- 
self to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously.'  It  was  a  set- 
tled thing  between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  that  the 
Son  was  not  to  care  for  His  own  honour,  but  only 
for  the  Father's.  The  Father  would  care  for  the 
Son's  honour.  Let  the  Christian  just  follow  Christ's 
example  in  this,  it  will  give  him  such  rest  and  peace. 
Give  your  right  and  your  honour  into  God's  keeping. 
Meet  every  offence  that  man  commits  against  yon 
with  the  firm  trust  that  God  will  watch  over  and  care 
for  you.     Commit  it  to  Him  who  judgeth  righteously. 

Further,  Christ  believed  in  the  power  of  suffering 


44  LIKE  CHRIST: 

love.  We  all  admit  that  there  is  no  power  like  that 
of  love.  Through  it  Christ  overcomes  the  enmity  of 
the  world.  Every  other  victory  gives  only  a  forced 
submission;  love  alone  gives  the  true  victory  over  an 
€nemy,  by  converting  him  into  a  friend.  We  all 
acknowledge  the  truth  of  this  as  a  principle,  but 
we  shrink  from  the  application.  Christ  believed  it, 
and  acted  accordingly.  He  said  too,  I  shall  have 
my  revenge;  but  His  revenge  was  that  of  love,  bring- 
ing enemies  as  friends  to  His  feet.  He  believed  that 
by  silence  and  submission,  and  suffering  and  bearing 
wrong,  He  would  win  the  cause,  because  thus  love 
Tvould  have  its  triumph. 

And  this  is  what  He  desires  of  us  too.  In  our  sin- 
ful nature  there  is  more  faith  in  might  and  right 
than  in  the  heavenly  power  of  love.  But  he  who 
would  be  like  Christ  must  follow  Him  in  this  also, 
that  He  seeks  to  conquer  evil  with  good.  TJie  more 
miotlier  does  Mm  wrong ^  the  more  he  feels  called  to  love 
Mm.  Even  if  it  be  needful  for  the  public  welfare 
that  justice  should  punish  the  offender,  he  takes  care 
that  there  be  in  it  nothing  of  personal  feeling;  as 
far  as  he  is  concerned,  he  forgives  and  loves. 

Ah,  what  a  difference  it  would  make  in  Christen- 
dom and  in  our  churches,  if  Christ's  example  were 
followed!  If  each  one  who  was  reviled,  'reviled 
not  again;'  if  each  one  who  suffered,  'threatened 
aaot,  but  committed  himself  to  Him,  that  judgeth 


IN  SUFFERING   WRONG,  45 

righteously.'  Fellow-Christians,  this  is  literally 
what  the  Father  would  have  us  do.  Let  us  read  and 
read  again  the  words  of  Peter,  until  our  soul  be  filled 
with  the  thought,  'If,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer 
for  it,  ye  take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with 
God:'' 

In  ordinary  Christian  life,  where  we  mostly  seek 
to  fulfil  our  calling  as  redeemed  ones  in  our  own 
strength,  such  a  conformity  to  the  Lord's  image  is 
an  impossibility.  But  in  a  life  of  full  surrender, 
where  we  have  given  all  into  His  hands,  in  the  faith 
that  He  will  work  all  in  us,  there  the  glorious  ex- 
pectation is  awakened,  that  the  imitation  of  Christ  in 
this  is  indeed  within  our  reach.  For  the  command 
to  suffer  like  Christ  has  come  in  connection  with  the 
teaching,  '  Christ  also  suffered  for  us,  so  that  we, 
being  dead  to  sins,  might  live  unto  righteousness.' 

Beloved  fellow-Christian!  wouldst  thou  not  love 
to  be  like  Jesus,  and  in  bearing  injuries  act  as  He 
Himself  would  have  acted  in  thy  place?  Is  it  not  a 
glorious  prospect  in  everything,  even  in  this  too,  to 
be  conformed  to  Him?  For  our  strength  it  is  too 
high;  in  His  strength  it  is  possible.  Only  surrender 
thyself  day  by  day  to  Him  to  be  in  all  things  just 
what  He  would  have  thee  to  be.  Believe  that  He 
lives  in  heaven  to  be  the  life  and  the  strength  of 
each  one  who  seeks  to  walk  in  His  footsteps.  Yield 
*See  note. 


46  LIKE  CHRIST: 

thyself  to  be  one  with  the  sufEering,  crucified  Christ, 
that  thou  mayest  understand  what  it  is  to  be  dead  to 
sins,  and  to  live  unto  righteousness.  And  it  will  be 
thy  joyful  experience  what  wonderful  power  there  is 
in  Jesus'  death,  not  only  to  atone  for  sin,  but  to  break 
its  power;  and  in  His  resurrection,  to  make  thee  live 
unto  righteousness.  Thou  shalt  find  it  equally 
Messed  to  follow  fully  the  footsteps  of  the  sufferiiiy 
Saviour^  as  it  has  been  to  trust  fully  and  only  in 
that  suffering  for  atonement  and  redemption.  Christ 
will  be  as  precious  as  thy  Example  as  He  has  ever 
been  as  thy  Surety.  Because  He  took  thy  sufferings 
upon  Himself,  thou  wilt  lovingly  take  His  sufferings 
upon  thyself.  And  bearing  wrong  will  become  a 
glorious  part  of  the  fellowship  with  His  holy  suffer- 
ings; a  glorious  mark  of  being  conformed  to  His 
most  holy  likeness;  a  most  blessed  fruit  of  the  true 
life  of  faith. 

0  Lord  my  God,  I  have  heard  Thy  precious  word: 
If  any  man  endure  grief,  suffering  wrongfully,  and 
take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God.  This 
is  indeed  a  sacrifice  that  is  well-pleasing  to  Thee,  a 
work  that  Thine  own  grace  alone  hath  wrought,  a 
fruit  of  the  suffering  of  Thy  beloved  Son,  of  the  ex- 
ample He  left,  and  the  power  He  gives  in  virtue  of 
His  having  destroyed  the  power  of  sin. 

0  my  Father,  teach  me  and  all  Thy  children  to  aim 


IN  SUFFERING   WRONG.  47 

at  nothing  less  than  complete  conformity  to  Thy  dear 
Son  in  this  trait  of  His  blessed  image.  Lord  my 
God,  I  would  now,  once  for  all,  give  up  the  keeping 
of  my  honour  and  my  rights  nto  Thy  hands,  never 
more  again  myself  to  take  charge  of  them.  Thou 
wilt  care  for  them  most  perfectly.  May  my  only 
care  be  the  honour  and  the  rights  of  my  Lord! 

I  specially  beseech  Thee  to  fill  me  with  faith  in  the 
conquering  power  of  suffering  love.  Give  me  to  ap- 
prehend fully  how  the  suffering  Lamb  of  God  teaches 
us  that  patience  and  silence  and  suffering  avail  more 
with  God,  and  therefore  with  man  too,  than  might 
or  right.  0  my  Father,  I  must,  I  would  walk  in  the 
footsteps  of  my  Lord  Jesus.  Let  Thy  Holy  Spirit, 
and  the  light  of  Thy  love  and  presence,  be  my  guide 
and  strength.     Amen. 

NOTE. 

'What  is  it  thou  sayest,  my  son?  Cease  from 
complaining,  when  thou  considerest  my  passion,  and 
the  sufferings  of  my  other  saints.  Do  not  say,  "  To 
suffer  this  from  such  a  one,  it  is  more  than  I  can  or 
may  do.  He  has  done  me  great  wrong,  and  accused 
me  of  things  I  never  thought  of.  Of  another  I  might 
bear  it,  if  I  thought  I  deserved  it,  but  not  from  him  !" 
Such  thoughts  are  very  foolish ;  instead  of  think- 
ing of  patience  in  suffering,  or  of  Him  by  whom  it 
will  be  crowned,  we  only  are  occupied  with  the  in- 
jury done  to  us,  and  the  person  who  has  done  it. 
No,  he  deserves  not  the  name  of  patient  wJio  is  only 


48  LIKE  CHRIST: 

willing  to  suffer  as  much  as  he  thinks  proper^  and  from 
whom  he  pleases.  The  truly  patient  man  asks  not 
from  whom  he  suffers,  his  superior,  his  equal,  or  his 
inferior;  whether  from  a  good  and  holy  man,  or  one 
who  is  perverse  and  unworthy.  But  from  whom- 
soever, how  much  soever,  or  how  often  soever  wrong 
is  done  him,  he  accepts  it  all  as  from  the  hand  of 
God,  and  counts  it  gain.  For  with  God  it  is  impos- 
sible that  anything  suffered  for  His  sake  should  pass 
without  its  reward. 

'0  Lord,  let  that  become  possible  to  me  by  Thy 
grace,  which  by  nature  seems  impossible.  Grant 
that  the  suffering  wrong  may  by  Thy  love  be  made 
pleasant  to  me.  To  suffer  for  Thy  sake  is  most 
healthful  to  my  soul.' — From  Thomas  a  Kempis,  Of 
the  Imitation  of  Christy  iii.  19.  That  the  suffering  of 
wrong  is  the  proof  of  true  patience. 


CRUCIFIED   WITH  HIM.  49 


SIXTH  DAY. 


LIKE  CHRIST: 

CRUCIFIED  WITH  HIM. 

'I  am  crucified  with  Christ :  nevertheless  I  live  ;  yet  not 
I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me.  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory- 
save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  v^hom  the 
v^orld  is  crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world. ' — Gal. 
ii.  20,  vi.  14. 

TAKING  up  the  cross  was  always  spoken  of  by 
Christ  as  the  test  of  discipleship.  On  three 
different  occasions  {Matt,  x,  88.,  xvL  24;  Luke  xiv. 
27)  we  find  the  words  repeated,  'If  any  man  will  come 
after  me,  let  him  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  me.' 
While  the  Lord  was  still  on  His  way  to  the  cross,  this 
expression — taking  up  the  cross — was  the  most  appro- 
priate to  indicate  that  conformity  to  Him  to  which 
the  disciple  is  called.*     But  now  that  He  has  been 

*See  note.  Christians  entirely  miss  the  point  of  the 
Lord's  command  when  they  refer  the  taking  up  of  the  cross 
only  to  the  crosses  or  trials  of  life.  It  means  much  more. 
The  cross  means  death.  Taking  up  the  cross  means  going 
out  to  die.  It  is  just  in  the  time  of  prosperity  that  we  most 
need  to  bear  the  cross.  Taking  up  the  cross  and  following 
Him  is  nothing  less  than  living  every  day  with  our  own 
life  and  will  given  up  to  death. 
4 


^0  LIKE  CHRIST: 

crucified,  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  another  expression, 
in  which  our  entire  conformity  to  Christ  is  still  more 
powerfully  set  forth, — the  believing  disciple  is  him- 
self crucified  with  Christ.  The  cross  is  the  chief 
mark  of  the  Christian  as  of  Christ;  the  crucified 
Christ  and  the  crucified  Christian  belong  to  each 
other.  One  of  the  chief  elements  of  likeness  to  Christ 
consists  in  being  crucified  with  Him.  Whoever  wishes 
to  be  like  Him  must  seek  to  understand  the  secret  of 
fellowship  with  His  cross. 

At  first  sight  the  Christian  who  seeks  conformity  to 
Jesus  is  afraid  of  this  truth;  he  shrinks  from  the 
painful  suffering  and  death  with  which  the  thought 
of  the  cross  is  connected.  As  his  spiritual  discern- 
ment becomes  clearer,  however,  this  word  becomes  all 
his  hope  and  joy,  and  he  glories  in  the  cross,  because 
it  makes  him  a  partner  in  a  death  and  victory  that 
has  already  been  accomplished,  and  in  which  the  de- 
liverance from  the  powers  of  the  flesh  and  of  the 
world  has  been  secured  to  him.  To  understand  this 
we  must  notice  carefully  the  language  of  Scripture. 

'I  am  crucified  with  Christ,'  Paul  says;  'neverthe- 
less I  live;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me.' 
Through  faith  in  Christ  we  become  partakers  of 
Christ's  life.  That  life  is  a  life  that  has  passed 
through  the  death  of  the  cross,  and  in  which  the 
poiver  of  that  death  is  alicays  working.  When  I  re- 
ceive that  life,  I  receive  at  the  same  time  the  full 


CRUCIFIED   WITH  HIM,  51 

power  of  the  death  on  the  cross  working  in  me  in  its 
never-ceasing  energy.  'I  have  been  crucified  Avith 
Christ;  yet  I  live;  and  yet  no  longer  I,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  me'  {R,  F.) ;  the  life  I  now  live  is  not  my 
own  life,  but  the  life  of  the  Crucified  One,  is  the  life 
of  the  cross.  The  being  crucified  is  a  thing  past  and 
done:  'Knowing  this,  that  our  old  man  was  {R,  F.) 
crucified  with  Him;'  *They  that  are  Christ's  have 
crucified  the  flesh ;'  'I  glory  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  the  world  hath  been  {R.  F.) 
crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world.'  These 
texts  all  speak  of  something  that  has  been  done  in 
Christ,  and  into  which  I  am  admitted  by  faith. 

It  is  of  great  consequence  to  understand  this,  and 
to  give  bold  utterance  to  the  truth ;  I  have  been  cru- 
cified with  Christ;  I  have  crucified  the  flesh.  I  thus 
learn  how  perfectly  I  share  in  the  finished  work  of 
Christ.  If  I  am  crucified  and  dead  with  Him,  then 
I  am  a  partner  in  His  life  and  victory.  I  learn  to 
understand  the  position  I  must  take  to  allow  the 
power  of  that  cross  and  that  death  to  manifest  it- 
self in  mortifying  or  (R.  V.)  making  dead  the  old 
man  and  the  flesh,  in  destroying  the  body  of  sin 
{Rom,  vi,  6), 

For  there  is  still  a  great  work  for  me  to  do.  But 
that  work  is  not  to  crucify  myself:  I  have  been  cru- 
cified; the  old  man  was  crucified,  so  the  Scripture 
speaks.     But  what  I  have  to  do  is  always  to  regard 


52  LIKE  CHRIST: 

and  treat  it  as  cracified,  and  not  to  suffer  it  to  come 
down  from  the  cross.  I  must  maintain  my  crucifix- 
ion position.  I  must  keep  the  flesh  in  the  place  of 
crucifixion.  To  realize  the  force  of  this  I  must  notice 
an  important  distinction.  I  have  been  crucified  and 
am  dead:  the  old  Adam  was  crucified,  but  is  not  yet 
dead.  When  I  gave  myself  to  my  crucified  Saviour, " 
«in  and  flesh  and  all,  He  took  me  wholly;  I  with  my 
evil  nature  was  taken  up  with  Him  in  His  crucifixion. 
But  here  a  separation  took  place.  In  fellowship  with 
Him  I  was  freed  from  the  life  of  the  flesh ;  I  myself 
died  with  Him ;  in  the  inmost  centre  of  my  being  I 
received  new  life:  Christ  lives  in  me.  But  the  fleshy 
in  which  I  yet  am,  the  old  man  that  was  crucified 
with  Him,  remained  condemned  to  an  accursed  death, 
but  is  not  yet  dead.  And  now  it  is  my  calling,  in 
fellowship  with  and  in  the  strength  of  my  Lord,  to 
see  that  the  old  nature  be  kept  nailed  to  the  cross, 
until  the  time  comes  that  it  is  entirely  destroyed. 
All  its  desires  and  affections  cry  out,  *Come  down 
from  the  cross,  save  thyself  and  us.'  It  is  my  duty 
to  glory  in  the  cross,  and  with  my  whole  heart  to 
maintain  the  dominion  of  the  cross,  and  to  set  my 
seal  to  the  sentence  that  has  been  pronounced,  to 
make  dead  every  uprising  of  sin,  as  already  crucified, 
and  so  not  to  suffer  it  to  have  dominion.  This  is 
what  Scripture  means  when  it  says,  'If  ye  through 
the  spirit  do  make  to  die  (/?.   F.)  the  deeds  of  the 


^tmrnjammm^ 


CRUCIFIED   WITH  HIM.  53 

body,  ye  shall  live'  {Rom,  viii,  13),  *Make  dead 
therefore  your  members  which  areaipon  the  earth.' 
Thus  I  continually  and  voluntarily  acknowledge  that 
in  my  flesh  dwells  no  good  thing;  that  my  Lord  is 
Christ  the  Crucified  One;  that  I  have  been  crucified 
and  am  dead  in  Him ;  that  the  flesh  has  been  crucified 
and,  though  not  yet  dead,  has  been  forever  given  over 
to  the  death  of  the  cross.  And  so  I  live  like  Christ, 
in  very  deed  crucified  wath  Him. 

In  order  to  enter  fully  into  the  meaning  and  the 
power  of  this  fellowship  of  the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord, 
two  things  are  specially  necessary  to  those  who  are 
Christ's  followers.  The  first  is  the  clear  conscious- 
ness of  this  their  fellowship  with  the  Crucified  One 
through  faith.  At  conversion  they  became  partakers 
of  it  without  fully  understanding  it.  Many  remain 
in  ignorance  all  their  life  long  through  a  want  of 
spiritual  knowledge.  Brother,  pray  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  may  reveal  to  you  your  union  to  the  Crucified 
One.  ^I  have  been  crucified  with  Christ;'  *I  glory 
in  the  cross  of  Christ,  through  which  I  have  been 
crucified  to  the  world.'  Take  such  words  of  Holy 
Scripture,  and  by  prayer  and  meditation  make  them 
your  own,  with  a  heart  that  expects  and  asks  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  make  them  living  and  effectual  within  you. 
Look  upon  yourself  in  the  light  of  God  as  what  you 
really  are,  ^crucified  with  Christ.' 

Then  you  will  find  the  grace  for  the  second  thing 


54  LIKE  CHRIST: 

you  need  to  enable  you  to  live  as  a  crucified  one,  in 
whom  Christ  lives.  You  will  be  able  always  to  look 
upon  and  to  treat  the  flesh  and  the  world  as  nailed  to 
the  cross.  The  old  nature  seeks  continually  to  assert 
itself,  and  to  make  you  feel  as  if  it  is  expecting  too 
much  that  you  should  always  live  this  crucifixion 
life.  Your  only  safety  is  in  fellowship  with  Christ. 
'Through  Him  and  His  cross,'  says  Paul,  *I  have  been 
crucified  to  the  world.'  In  Him  the  crucifixion  is  an 
accomplished  reality;  in  Him  you  have  died,  but  also 
have  been  made  alive :  Christ  lives  in  you.  With  this 
fellowship  of  His  cross  let  it  be  with  you,  the  deeper 
the  better:  it  brings  you  into  deeper  communion  with 
His  life  and  His  love.  To  be  crucified  with  Christ 
means  freed  from  the  power  of  sin :  a  redeemed  one,  a 
conqueror.  Eemember  that  the  Holy  Spirit  has  been 
specially  provided  to  glorify  Christ  in  you,  to  reveal 
within  you,  and  make  your  very  own,  all  that  is  in 
Christ  for  you.  Do  not  be  satisfied,  with  so  many 
others,  only  to  know  the  cross  in  its  power  to  atone: 
the  glory  of  the  cross  is,  that  it  was  not  only  to  Jesus, 
but  is  to  us  too,  the  path  to  life,  but  that  each  mo- 
ment it  can  become  to  us  the  power  that  destroys  sin 
and  death,  and  keeps  us  in  the  power  of  the  eternal 
life.  Learn  from  your  Saviour  the  holy  art  of  using 
it  for  this.  Faith  in  the  power  of  the  cross  and  its 
victory  will  day  by  day  make  dead  the  deeds  of  the 
body,  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.     This  faith  will  teach 


CRUCIFIED   WITH  HIM.  55 

you  to  count  the  cross,  with  its  continual  death  to 
self,  all  your  glory.  Because  you  regard  the  cross, 
not  as  one  who  is  still  on  the  way  to  crucifixion,  with 
the  prospect  of  a  painful  death,  but  as  one  to  whom 
the  crucifixion  is  past,  who  already  lives  in  Christ,  and 
now  only  bears  the  cross  as  the  blessed  instrument 
through  which  the  body  of  sin  is  done  away  {Ro?7i, 
vi,  6^  R,  F.).  The  banner  under  which  complete 
victory  over  sin  and  the  world  is  to  be  won  is  the 
cross. 

Above  all,  remember  what  still  remains  the  chief 
thing.  It  is  Jesus,  the  living,  loving  Saviour,  who 
Himself  enables  you  to  be  like  Him  in  all  things. 
His  sweet  fellowship.  His  tender  love,  His  heavenly 
power,  make  it  a  blessedness  and  joy  to  be  like  Him, 
the  Crucified  One,  make  the  crucifixion  life  a  life  of 
resurrection-joy  and  power.  In  Him  the  two  are  in- 
separably connected.  In  Him  you  have  the  strength 
to  be  always  singing  the  triumphant  song:  God  for- 
bid that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  through  which  the  world  hath  been 
crucified  unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world. 

Precious  Saviour,  I  humbly  ask  Thee  to  show  me 
the  hidden  glory  of  the  fellowship  of  Thy  cross.  The 
cross  was  my  place,  the  place  of  death  and  curse. 
Thou  didst  become  like  us,  and  hast  been  crucified 
with  us.     And  now  the  cross  is  Thy  place,  the  place 


.56  LIKE  CHRIST: 

f>t  blessing  and  life.  And  Thou  callest  me  to  become 
like  Thee,  and  as  one  who  is  crucified  with  Thee,  to 
experience  how  entirely  the  cross  has  made  me  free 
from  sin. 

Lord,  give  me  to  know  its  full  power.  It  is  long 
since  I  knew  the  power  of  the  cross  to  redeem  from 
the  curse.  But  how  long  I  strove  in  vain  as  a  re- 
deemed one  to  overcome  the  power  of  sin,  and  to  obey 
the  Father  as  Thou  hast  done!  I  could  not  break  the 
power  of  sin.  But  now  I  see,  this  comes  only  when 
Thy  disciple  yields  himself  entirely  to  be  led  by  Thy 
Holy  Spirit  into  the  fellowship  of  Thy  cross.  There 
Thou  dost  give  him  to  see  how  the  cross  has  iroTcen 
for  ever  the  power  of  sin,  and  has  made  him  free. 
There  Thou,  the  Crucified  One,  dost  live  in  him  and 
impart  to  him  Thine  own  Spirit  of  whole-hearted 
self-sacrifice,  in  casting  out  and  conquering  sin.  Oh, 
my  Lord,  teach  me  to  understand  this  better.  In 
this  faith  I  say,  *I  have  been  crucified  with  Christ.' 
Oh,  Thou  who  lovedst  me  to  the  death,  not  Thy  cross, 
but  Thyself  the  Crucified  One,  Thou  art  He  whom  I 
seek,  and  in  whom  I  hope.  Take  me.  Thou  Cruci- 
fied One,  and  hold  me  fast,  and  teach  me  from 
moment  to  moment  to  look  upon  all  that  is  of  self  a 
condemned,  and  only  worthy  to  be  crucified.  Take 
me,  and  hold  me,  and  teach  me,  from  moment  to 
moment,  that  in  Thee  I  have  all  I  need  for  a  life  of 
holiness  and  blessing.     Amen. 


CRUCIFIED   WITH  HIM,  57 

NOTE. 

*  Jesus  hath  now  many  lovers  of  His  heavenly  king- 
dom, but  few  bearers  of  His  cross.  He  hath  many 
who  desire  His  consolation,  few  His  tribulation; 
many  who  are  willing  to  share  His  table,  few  His 
fasting.  All  are  willing  to  rejoice  with  Him,  few 
will  endure  anything  for  Him.  Many  follow  Jesus 
into  the  breaking  of  bread,  but  few  to  drink  of  the 
cup  whereof  He  drank.  Many  glory  in  His  miracles, 
few  in  the  shame  of  His  cross.'  * 

*To  many  it  seems  a  hard  speech,  "Deny  thyself, 
take  up  thy  cross,  and  follow  Jesus."  Bat  it  will  be 
much  harder  to  hear  that  other  word,  "  Depart  from 
me,  ye  cursed;"  for  only  they  who  now  hear  and  fol- 
low the  word  of  the  cross  shall  then  have  no  fear  of 
the  word  of  condemnation.  For  the  sign  of  the  cross 
will  be  seen  in  the  heaven  when  the  Lord  cometh  to 
judgment,  and  all  the  servants  of  the  cross,  who  in 
their  lifetime  have  been  conformed  to  Christ  cruci- 
fied, will  then  draw  near  to  Christ  their  judge  with 
great  confidence.  Why,  then,  dost  thou  fear  to  take 
up  the  cross  which  fitteth  thee  for  the  kingdom?  In 
the  cross  is  life,  in  the  cross  is  salvation ;  the  cross 
defends  against  all  enemies;  in  the  cross  there  is  the 
infusion  of  all  heavenly  sweetness;  in  the  cross  is 
strength  of  mind,  joy  of  spirit;  the  cross  is  the  height 
of  virtue  and  the  perfection  of  sanctity.  There  is  no 
happiness  for  the  soul  but  in  the  cross.  Take  up, 
therefore,  thy  cross  and  follow  Jesus,  and  thou  shalt 
live  for  ever. 

*From  Thomas  a  Kempis,  Of  the  Imitation  of  Christ,  ii. 
11.     That  the  lovers  of  the  Cross  of  Jesus  are  few. 


58  LIKE  CHRIST: 

'It  thou  bear  the  cross  cheerfully,  it  will  bear  thee. 
If  thou  bear  it  unwillingly,  thou  makest  for  thyself  a 
burden  which  still  thou  hast  to  bear.  What  saint 
was  there  ever  who  did  not  bear  the  cross?  Even 
Christ  must  needs  suffer.  How  then  dost  thou  seek 
any  other  way  than  this,  which  is  the  royal  way,  the 
way  of  the  sacred  cross? 

'He  that  willingly  submits  to  the  cross,  to  him  its 
whole  burden  is  changed  into  a  sweet  assurance  of 
divine  comfort.  And  the  more  the  flesh  is  broken 
down  by  the  cross,  the  more  the  spirit  is  strengthened 
by  inward  grace.  It  is  not  in  man  by  nature  to  bear 
the  cross,  to  love  the  cross,  to  deny  self,  to  bring  the 
body  into  subjection,  and  willingly  to  endure  suffer- 
ing. If  thou  look  to  thyself,  thou  canst  accomplish 
nothing  of  all  this.  But  if  thou  trust  in  the  Lord, 
strength  shall  be  given  thee  from  heaven,  and  the 
world  and  the  flesh  shall  be  made  subject  to  thy  rule. 
Set  thyself,  therefore,  to  bear  manfully  the  cross  of 
thy  Lord,  who  out  of  love  was  crucified  for  thee. 

'Know  for  certain  thou  oughtest  to  lead  a  dying 
life,  for  the  more  any  man  dieth  unto  himself  the 
more  he  liveth  unto  God.  Surely,  if  there  had  been 
any  better  thing,  and  more  profitable  to  man's  sal- 
vation, than  bearing  the  cross,  Christ  would  have 
showed  it  us  by  word  and  example.  But  now  He 
calleth  all  who  would  follow  Him  plainly  to  do  this 
one  thing,  daily  to  bear  the  cross.' — From  Thomas 
a  Kempis.  Of  the  Imitation  of  Christy  ii.  12.  Of 
the  Royal  Way  of  the  Sacred  Cross.  ' 


IN  HIS  SELF-DENIAL.  59 


SEVENTH  DAY. 


LIKE    CHEIST 

IN  HIS   SELF-DENIAL. 

*  We  then  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the  infirmities  of 
the  weak,  and  not  to  please  ourselves.  Let  every  one  of  us 
please  his  neighbor  for  his  good  to  edification.  For  even 
Christ  pleased  not  Himself,  as  it  is  written,  The  reproaches 
of  them  that  reproached  thee  fell  upon  me.  Wherefore  re- 
ceive ye  one  another,  even  as  Christ  also  received  us  to  the 
glory  of  God.  '—ROM.  xv.  1-3,  7. 

'If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself, 
and  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me.' — Matt.  xvi.  24. 

EVEN"  Christ  pleased  not  Himself  :  He  bore  the  re- 
proaches, with  which  men  reproached  and  dis- 
honoured God,  so  patiently,  that  He  might  glorify 
God  and  save  man.  Christ  pleased  not  Himself :  with 
reference  both  to  God  and  man,  this  word  is  the  key 
of  His  life.  In  this,  too.  His  life  is  our  rule  and. 
example;  we  who  are  strong  ought  not  to  please 
ourselves. 

To  deny  self — this  is  the  opposite  of  pleasing  self. 
When  Peter  denied  Christ,  he  said:    I  know  not  the 
man ;    with  Him  and  His  interests  I  have  nothing  to- 
do;    I  do  not  wish  to  be  counted  His  friend.     In  the 


60  LIKE  CHRIST: 

same  way  the  true  Christian  denies  himself,  the  old 
man:  I  do  not  know  this  old  man;  I  will  have  noth- 
ing to  do  with  him  and  his  interests.  And  when 
shame  and  dishonour  come  upon  him,  or  anything  be 
exacted  that  is  not  pleasant  to  the  old  nature,  he 
simply  says:  Do  as  you  like  with  the  old  Adcmi,  I 
will  take  no  notice  of  it.  Through  the  cross  of  Christ 
I  am  crucified  to  the  world,  and  the  flesli,  and  self; 
to  the  friendship  and  interest  of  this  old  man  I  am  a 
stranger;  I  deny  him  to  be  my  friend;  I  deny  his 
every  claim  and  wish;  I  know  him  not. 

The  Christian  who  only  thinks  of  his  salvation  from 
curse  and  condemnation  cannot  understand  this;  he 
finds  it  impossible  to  deny  self.  Although  he  may 
sometimes  try  to  do  so,  his  life  mainly  consists  in 
pleasing  himself.  The  Christian  who  has  taken 
Christ  as  his  pattern  cannot  be  content  with  this. 
He  has  surrendered  himself  to  seek  the  most  com- 
plete fellowship  with  the  cross  of  Christ.  The  Holy 
Spirit  has  taught  him  to  say,  1  have  been  crucified 
with  Christ,  and  so  am  dead  to  sin  and  self.  In  fel- 
lowship with  Christ  he  sees  the  old  man  crucified,  a 
condemned  malefactor;  he  is  ashamed  to  own  him  as 
a  friend :  it  is  his  fixed  purpose,  and  he  has  received 
the  power  for  it  too,  no  longer  to  please  his  old 
nature,  but  to  deny  it.  Because  the  cmcified  Christ 
is  his  life,  self-denial  is  the  laio  of  his  life. 

This  self-denial  extends  itself  over  the  whole  do- 


IN  HIS  SELF-DENIAL.  61 

main  of  life.  It  was  so  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  is 
so  with  every  one  who  longs  to  follow  Him  perfectly. 
This  self-denial  has  not  so  much  to  do  with  what  is 
sinful,  and  unlawful,  and  contrary  to  the  laws  of  God, 
as  with  what  is  lawful,  or  apparently  indifferent.  To 
the  self-denying  spirit  the  will  and  glory  of  God  and 
the  salvation  of  man  are  always  more  than  our  own 
interests  or  pleasure. 

Before  we  can  know  how  to  please  our  neighbour, 
self-denial  must  first  exercise  itself  in  our  own  per- 
sonal life.  It  must  rule  the  body.  The  holy  fasting 
of  Him  who  said,  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone, 
but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth 
of  God ;  and  who  would  not  eat  until  His  Father  gave 
Him  food,  and  His  Father's  work  was  done,  teaches 
the  believer  a  holy  temperance  in  eating  and  drink- 
ing. The  holy  poverty  of  Him  who  had  not  where 
to  lay  His  head,  teaches  him  so  to  regulate  the  pos- 
session, and  use,  and  enjoyment  of  earthly  things, 
that  he  may  always  possess  as  not  possessing.  After 
the  example  of  the  holy  suflEering  patiently  of  Him 
who  bore  all  our  sin  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,  he 
learns  to  bear  all  suffering  patiently:  even  in  the 
body  as  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  desires  to 
bear  about  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus;  with  Paul 
he  keeps  under  the  body  and  brings  it  into  subjection ; 
all  its  desires  and  appetites  he  would  have  ruled  by 
the  self-denial  of  Jesus.     He  does  not  please  himself. 


62  LIKE  CHRIST: 

This  self-denial  keeps  watch  over  the  spirit  too. 
His  own  wisdom  and  judgment  the  believer  brings 
into  subjection  to  God's  word;  he  gives  up  his  own 
thoughts  to  the  teaching  of  the  Word  and  the  Spirit. 
Towards  man  he  manifests  the  same  self-denial  of  his 
own  wisdom  in  a  readiness  to  hear  and  learn,  in  the 
meekness  and  humility  with  which,  even  when  he 
knows  he  is  in  the  right,  he  gives  his  opinion,  in  the 
desire  ever  to  find  and  to  acknowledge  what  is  good 
in  others. 

And  then  self-denial  has  special  reference  to  the 
heart.  All  the  affections  and  desires  are  placed  under 
it.  The  will,  the  kingly  power  of  the  soul,  is  specially 
under  its  control.  As  little  as  self-pleasing  could  be 
a  part  of  Christ's  life,  may  Christ's  follower  allow  it 
ever  to  influence  his  conduct.  'We  ought  not  to  please 
ourselves.  For  even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself.' 
Self-denial  is  the  law  of  his  life. 

Nor  does  he  find  it  hard  when  once  he  has  truly 
surrendered  himself  to  it.  To  one  who,  with  a 
divided  heart,  seeks  to  force  himself  to  a  life  of  self- 
denial,  it  is  hard  indeed;  but  to  one  who  has  yielded 
himself  to  it  unreservedly,  because  he  has  with  his 
whole  heart  accepted  the  cross  to  destroy  the  power  of 
sin  and  self,  the  blessing  it  brings  more 'than  compen- 
sates for  apparent  sacrifice  or  loss.  He  hardly  dare 
any  longer  speak  of  self-denial,  there  is  such  blessed- 
ness in  becoming  conformed  to  the  image  of  Jesus. 


IN  HIS  SELF-DENIAL.  63 

Self-denial  has  not  its  value  with  God,  as  some 
think,  from  the  measure  of  pain  it  causes.  No,  for 
this  pain  is  very  much  caused  by  the  remaining  reluc- 
tance to  practise  it.  But  it  has  its  highest  worth  in. 
,  that  meek  or  even  joyful  acquiescence  which  counts 
nothing  a  sacrifice  for  Jesus'  sake,  and  feels  surprised 
when  others  speak  of  self-denial. 

There  have  been  ages  when  men  thought  they  must 
fly  to  the  wilderness  or  cloister  to  deny  themselves. 
The  Lord  Jesus  has  shown  us  that  the  best  place  to 
practise  self-denial  is  in  our  ordinary  intercourse  with 
men.  So  Paul  also  says  here,  'We  otight  not  to  please 
ourselves^  let  every  one  please  his  neighbour  u?ito  edifi- 
cation. For  even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself.  There- 
fore receive  ye  one  another,  even  as  Christ  has  received 
you.'  Nothing  less  than  the  self-denial  of  our  Lord, 
who  pleased  not  Himself,  is  our  law.  What  He  was 
we  must  be.     What  He  did  we  must  do. 

What  a  glorious  life  will  it  be  in  the  Church  of 
Christ  when  this  law  prevails!  each  one  considers  it 
the  object  of  existence  to  make  others  happy.  Each 
one  denies  himself,  seeks  not  his  own,  esteems  others 
better  than  himself.  All  thought  of  taking  offence,  of 
wounded  pride,  of  being  slighted  or  passed  by,  would 
pass  away.  As  a  follower  of  Christ,  each  would  seek 
to  bear  the  weak  and  to  please  his  neighbor.  The 
true  self-denial  would  be  seen  in  this,  that  no  one 
would  think  of  himself,  but  live  in  and  for  others. 


64  LIKE  CHRIST 

'If  any  man  will  cojne  after  me,  let  him  deny  him- 
self, take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me.'*  This  word 
not  only  gives  us  the  will,  but  also  the  power  for  self- 
denial.  He  who  does  not  simply  wish  to  reach  heaven 
through  Christ,  but  comes  after  Him  for  His  own 
sake,  YfiW  follow  Him.  And  in  his  heart  Jesus  speed- 
ily takes  the  place  that  self  had.  Jesus  only  becomes 
the  centre  and  object  of  -such  a  life.  The  undivided 
surrender  to  follow  Him  is  crowned  with  this  wonder- 
ful blessing,  that  Christ  by  His  Spirit  Himself  be- 
<3omes  his  life.  Christ's  spirit  of  self-denying  love  is 
poured  out  upon  hm,  and  to  deny  self  is  the  greatest 
joy  of  his  heart,  and  the  means  of  the  deepest  com- 
munion with  God.  Self-denial  is  no  longer  a  work 
ie  simply  does  as  a  means  of  attaining  perfection  for 
himself.  Nor  is  it  merely  a  negative  victory,  of 
which  the  main  feature  is  the  keeping  self  in  check. 
Christ  has  taken  the  place  of  self,  and  His  love  and 
gentleness  and  kindness  flow  out  to  others,  now  that 
^elf  is  parted  with.  No  command  becomes  more 
blessed  or  more  natural  than  this:  '  We  ouglit  not  to 
f  lease  ourselves^  for  even  Christ  pleased  not  Himself,'* 
'  Ki  any  man  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and 

rOLLOW   ME.' 

Beloved  Lord,  I  thank  Thee  for  this  new  call  to 
follow  Thee,  and  not  to  please  myself,  even  as  Thou 
4Hst  not  please  Thyself.     I  thank  Thee  that  I  have 


IN  HIS  SELF-DENIAL.  65 

now  no  longer,  as  once,  to  hear  it  with  fear.  Thy 
commandments  are  no  longer  grievous  tome;  Thy 
yoke  is  easy,  and  Thy  burden  light.  What  I  see  in 
Thy  life  on  earth  as  my  example,  is  the  certain 
pledge  of  what  I  receive  from  Thy  life  in  heaven.  I 
did  not  always  so  understand  it.  Long  after  I  had 
known  Thee,  I  dared  not  think  of  self-denial.  But 
for  him  who  has  learned  what  it  is  to  take  up  the 
cross,  to  be  crucified  with  Thee,  and  to  see  the  old 
man  nailed  to  the  cross,  it  is  no  longer  terrible  to 
deny  it.  Oh,  my  Lord  !  who  would  not  be  ashamed 
to  be  the  friend  of  a  crucified  and  accursed  criminal? 
Since  I  have  learned  that  Thou  art  my  life,  and  that 
Thou  dost  wholly  take  charge  of  the  life  that  is  wholly 
entrusted  to  Thee,  to  work  both  to  will  and  to  do,  I 
do  not  fear  but  Thou  wilt  give  me  the  love  and  wis- 
dom in  the  path  of  self-denial  joyfully  to  follow  Thy 
footsteps.  Blessed  Lord,  Thy  disciples  are  not  worthy 
of  this  grace;  but  since  Thou  hast  chosen  us  to  it, 
we  will  gladly  seek  not  to  please  ourselves,  but  every 
one  his  neighbour,  as  Thou  hast  taught  us.  And 
may  Thy  Holy  Spirit  work  it  in  us  mightily.  Amen. 
5 


LIKE  CHRIST: 


EIGHTH  DAY. 


LIKE  CHKIST 

IN  HIS   SELF-SACRIFICE. 

'Walk  in  love,  even  as  Christ  also  hath  loved  us,  and 
hath  given  Himself  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God 
for  a  sweet-smelling  savour. ' — Eph.  v.  2. 

*  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  of  God,  because  He  laid 
down  His  life  for  us  :  and  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives 
for  the  brethren.  '—1  John  iii.  16. 

WHAT  is  the  connection  between  self-sacrifice  and 
self-denial?  The  former  is  the  root  from 
which  the  latter  springs.  In  self-denial,  self-sacrifice 
is  tested,  and  thus  strengthened  and  prepared  each 
time  again  to  renew  its  entire  surrender.  Thus  it 
was  with  the  Lord  Jesus.  His  incarnation  was  a 
self-sacrifice;  His  life  of  self-denial  was  the  proof  of 
it;  through  this,  again.  He  was  prepared  for  the 
great  act  of  self-sacrifice  in  His  death  on  the  cross. 
Thus  it  is  with  the  Christian.  His  conversion  is  to 
a  certain  extent  the  sacrifice  of  self,  though  but  a 
very  partial  one,  owing  to  ignorance  and  weakness. 
From  that  first  act  of  self-surrender  arises  the  obliga- 
tion to  the  exercise  of  daily  self-denial.  The  Chris- 
tian's efforts  to  do  so  show  him  his  weakness,  and 


IN  HIS  SELF-SACRIFICE,  67 

prepare  him  for  that  new  and  more  entire  self-sacrifice 
in  which  he  first  finds  strength  for  more  continuous 
self-denial. 

Self-sacrifice  is  of  the  very  essence  of  true  love. 
The  very  nature  and  blessedness  of  love  consist  in 
forgetting  self,  and  seeking  its  happpiness  in  the 
loved  one.  Where  in  the  beloved  there  is  a  want  or 
need,  love  is  impelled  by  its  very  nature  to  oflEer  up 
its  own  happiness  for  that  of  the  other,  to  unite  itself 
to  the  beloved  one,  and  at  any  sacrifice  to  make  him 
the  sharer  of  its  own  blessedness. 

Who  can  say  whether  this  is  not  one  of  the  secrets 
which  eternity  will  reveal,  that  sin  was  permitted 
because  otherwise  God's  love  could  never  so  fully 
have  been  revealed?  The  highest  glory  of  God's 
love  was  manifested  in  the  self-sacrifice  of  Christ. 
It  is  the  highest  glory  of  the  Christian  to  be  like 
his  Lord  in  this.  Without  entire  self-sacrifice  the 
new  command,  the  command  of  love,  cannot  be  ful- 
filled. Without  entire  self-sacrifice  we  cannot  love 
as  Jesus  loved.  *Be  ye  imitators  of  God,'  says  the 
apostle,  *and  walk  in  love,  even  as  Christ  hath  loved 
us,  and  given  Himself  a  sacrifice  for  us.'  Let  all 
your  walk  and  conversation  be,  according  to  Christ's 
example,  in  love.  It  was  this  love  that  made  His 
sacrifice  acceptable  in  God's  sight,  a  sweet-smelling 
savour.  As  His  love  exhibited  itself  in  self-sacrifice, 
let  your  love  prove  itself  to  be  conformable  to  His  in 


68  LIKE  CHRIST: 

the  daily  self-sacrifice  for  the  welfare  of  others,  so 
will  it  also  be  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God.  *We 
ought  to  lay  down  our  lives'  for  the  brethren.' 

Down  even  into  the  daily  affairs  of  home  life,  in 
the  intercourse  between  husband  and  wife,  in  the  re- 
lation of  master  and  servant,  Christ's  self-sacrifice 
must  be  the  rule  of  our  walk.  *  Likewise,  ye  hus- 
bands, love  your  wives  even  as  Christ  loved  the 
Church,  and  gave  Himself  for  it. ^ 

And  mark  specially  the  words,  *Hath  given  Him- 
self for  us  an  offering  to  God, '  We  see  that  self- 
sacrifice  has  here  two  sides.  Christ's  self-sacrifice 
had  a  God  ward  as  well  as  a  man  ward  aspect.  It  was 
for  us^  but  it  was  to  God  that  He  offered  Himself  as 
a  sacrifice.  In  all  our  self-sacrifice  there  must  be 
these  two  sides  in  union,  though  now  the  one  and 
then  again  the  other  may  be  more  prominent. 

It  is  only  when  we  sacrifice  ourselves  to  God  that 
there  will  be  the  power  for  an  entire  self-sacrifice. 
The  Holy  Spirit  reveals  to  the  believer  the  right  of 
God's  claim  on  us,  how  we  are  not  our  own,  but  His. 
The  realization  of  how  absolutely  we  are  God's  prop- 
erty, bought  and  paid  for  with  blood,  of  how  we  are 
loved  with  such  a  wonderful  love,  and  of  what  blessed- 
ness there  is  in  the  full  surrender  to  Him,  leads  the 
believer  to  yield  himself  a  whole  burnt-offering.  He 
lays  himself  on  the  altar  of  consecration,  and  finds  it 
his  highest  joy  to  be  a  sweet-smelling  savour  to  Ms 


IN  HIS  SELF-SACRIFICE.  69 

God,  God-devoted  and  God-accepted.  And  then  it 
becomes  his  first  and  most  earnest  desire  to  know  how 
God  would  have  him  show  this  entire  self-sacrifice  in 
life  and  walk. 

God  points  him  to  Christ's  example.  He  was 
a  sweet-smelling  savour  to  God  when  He  gave  Him- 
self a  sacrifice /or  us.  For  every  Christian  who  gives 
himself  entirely  to  His  service,  God  has  the  same 
honour  as  He  had  for  His  Son,  He  uses  him  as  an. 
instrument  of  blessing  to  others.  Therefore  John 
says,  'He  who  loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath 
seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen?^ 
The  self-sacrifice  in  which  you  have  devoted  yourself 
to  God's  service,  binds  you  also  to  serve  your  fellow- 
men;  the  same  act  which  makes  you  entirely  God's, 
makes  you  entirely  theirs.* 

It  is  just  this  surrender  to  God  that  gives  the  power 
for  self-sacrifice  towards  others,  and  even  makes  it  a 
joy.  When  faith  has  first  appropriated  the  promise, 
'Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  to  the  least  of  these  my 
brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto  me,'  I  understand  the 
glorious  harmony  between  sacrifice  to  God  and  sacri- 
fice for  men.  My  intercourse  with  my  fellow-men, 
instead  of  being,  as  many  complain,  a  hindrance  to 
unbroken  communion  with  God,  becomes  an  opportu- 
nity of  offering  myself  unceasingly  to  Him. 

Blessed  calling!  to  walk  in  love  even  as  Christ 
*See  note. 


70  LIKE   CHRIST: 

loved  cs,  and  gave  Himself  for  us  a  sacrifice  and 
sweot-smelling  savour  to  God.  Only  thus  can  the 
Church  fulfil  its  destiny,  and  prove  to  the  world  that 
she  is  set  apart  to  continue  Christ's  work  of  self- 
sacrificing  love,  and  fill  up  that  which  remaineth  be- 
hind of  the  afflictions  of  Christ. 

Bat  does  God  really  expect  us  to  deny  ourselves  so 
entirely  for  others?  Is  it  not  asking  too  much? 
Can  any  one  really  sacrifice  himself  so  entirely? 
Christian!  God  does  expect  it.  Nothing  less  than 
this  is  the  conformity  to  the  image  of  His  Son,  to 
which  He  predestinated  you  from  eternity.  This  is 
the  path  by  which  Jesus  entered  into  His  glory  and 
blessedness,  and  by  no  other  way  can  the  disciple 
enter  into  the  joy  of  his  Lord.  It  is  in  very  deed  our 
calling  to  lecome  exactly  lilce  Jesus  in  His  love  and 
self-sacrifice.     'Walk  in  love,  even  as  Christ  loved.' 

It  is  a  great  thing  when  a  believer  sees  and  ac- 
knowledges this.  That  God's  people  and  even  God's 
servants  understand  it  so  little,  is  one  great  cause  of 
the  impotence  of  the  Church.  In  this  matter  the 
Church  indeed  needs  a  second  reformation.  In  the 
great  Eeformation  three  centuries  ago,'  the  power  of 
Christ's  atoning  death  and  righteousness  were  brought 
to  light,  to  the  great  comfort  and  joy  of  anxious  souls. 
But  we  need  a  second  reformation  to  lift  on  high  the 
banner  of  Christ's  example  as  our  law,  to  restore  the 
truth  of  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection  as  it  makes 


IN  HIS  SELF-SACRIFICE.  71 

US  partakers  of  the  life  and  the  likeness  of  our  Lord. 
Christians  must  not  only  believe  in  the  full  union 
with  their  Surety  for  their  reconciliation,  but  with 
their  Head  as  their  example  and  their  life.  They 
must  really  represent  Christ  upon  earth,  and  let  men 
see  in  the  members  how  the  Head  lived  when  He  was 
in  the  flesh.  Let  us  earnestly  pray  that  God's  chil- 
dren everywhere  may  be  taught  to  see  their  holy 
calling. 

And  all  ye  who  already  long  after  it,  oh,  fear  not 
to  yield  yourselves  to  God  in  the  great  act  of  a  Christ- 
like self-sacrifice!  In  conversion  you  gave  yourself  to 
God.  In  many  an  act  of  self-surrender  since  then 
you  have  again  given  yourselves  to  Him.  But  ex- 
perience has  taught  you  how  much  is  still  wanting. 
Perhaps  you  never  knew  how  entire  the  self-sacrifice 
must  be  and  could  be.  Come  now  and  see  in  Christ 
your  example,  and  in  His  sacrifice  of  Himself  on  the 
cross,  ivhat  your  Father  expects  of  you.  Come  now 
and  see  in  Christ — for  He  is  your  head  and  life — what 
He  will  enable  you  to  be  and  do.  Believe  in  Him,  that 
what  He  accomplished  on  earth  in  His  life  and  death 
as  your  example,  He  will  now  accomplish  in  you  from 
heaven.  Offer  yourself  to  the  Father  in  Christ,  with 
the  desire  to  be,  as  entirely  and  completely  as  He, 
an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  unto  God,  given  up  to  God 
for  men.  Expect  Christ  to  work  this  in  you  and  to 
maintain  it.     Let  your  relation  to  God  be  clear  and 


72  LIKE  CHRIST: 

distinct;  you,  like  Christ,  wholly  given  up  to  Him. 
Then  it  will  no  longer  be  impossible  to  walk  in  love 
as  Christ  loved  us.  Then  all  your  intercourse  with 
the  brethren  and  with  the  world  will  be  the  most 
glorious  opportunity  of  proving  before  God  how  com- 
pletely you  have  given  yourself  to  Him^  an  offering 
and  a  sacrifice  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour. 

0  my  God,  who  am  I  that  Thou  shouldst  have 
chosen  me  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  Thy  Son 
in  His  self-sacrificing  love?  In  this  is  His  divine 
perfection  and  glory,  that  He  loved  not  His  own  life, 
but  freely  offered  it  for  us  to  Thee  in  death.  And  in 
this  I  may  be  like  Him;  in  a  walk  in  love  I  may 
prove  that  I  too  have  offered  myself  wholly  to  God. 

0  my  Father,  Thy  purpose  is  mine;  at  this  sol- 
emn moment  I  affirm  anew  my  consecration  to  Thee. 
Not  in  my  own  strength,  but  in  the  strength  of  Him 
who  gave  Himself  for  me.  Because  Christ,  my  ex- 
ample, is  also  my  life,  I  venture  to  say  it :  Father,  in 
Christ,  like  Christ,  I  yield  myself  a  sacrifice  to  Thee 
for  men. 

Father,  teach  me  how  Thou  wouldst  use  me  to 
manifest  Thy  love  to  the  world.  Thou  wilt  do  it  by 
filling  me  full  of  Thy  love.  Father,  do  it,  that  I 
may  walk  in  love,  even  as  Christ  loved  us.  May  I 
live  every  day  as  one  who  has  the  power  of  Thy  Holy 
Spirit  to  enable  me  to  love  every  one  with  whom  I 


IN  HIS  SELF-SACRIFICE.  73 

come  into  contact,  under  every  possible  circumstance, 
to  love  with  a  love  which  is  not  of  me,  but  of  Thy- 
self.    Amen. 

NOTE. 

One  of  the  most  earnest  and  successful  labourers  in 
the  work  of  saving  the  lost  writes  as  follows:  *If  I 
had  not  been  led  to  a  clearer  and  fuller  experience  of 
what  salvation  is,  I  never  could  have  gone  through 
the  work  of  the  last  few  years.  But,  at  the  same 
time,  one  thing  has  continually  been  becoming  clearer, 
that  we  cannot  speak  of  unbroheyi  fellowsliip  with  our 
Lord  unless  we  give  up  ourselves,  and  that  'without 
ceasing,  to  a  world  lying  in  the  wicked  one,  to  save 
in  the  strength  of  our  Lord  what  He  gives  us  to  save. 
A  consecration  to  the  Lord  ivitliout  a  consecration  to 
our  neighbor  becomes  an  illusion  or  leads  to  fanati- 
cism. It  is  this  giving  up  of  ourselves  to  the  world  to 
be  its  light  and  salt,  to  love  it  even  when  it  hates  us, 
that  constitutes  for  all  really  consecrated  souls  the 
true  battle  of  life.  To  find  in  labour  our  rest,  and 
in  fighting  the  sin  around  us  in  the  power  of  Jesus 
our  highest  joy,  to  rejoice  more  in  the  happiness  of 
others  than  our  own,  and  so  not  to  seek  anything  for 
ourselves,  but  everything  for  others,  this,  this  is  our 
holy  calling. ' 

May  God  help  us  not  only  to  admire  such  thoughts, 
but  at  once  to  join  the  little  bands  among  His  chil- 
dren who  are  really  giving  up  everything,  and  making 
their  life  work  the  winning  of  souls  for  Jesus. 


LIKE  CHRIST: 


NINTH  DAY. 


LIKE  CHEIST 

NOT  OF  THE  WORLD. 

*  These  are  in  the  world. '  'The  world  hath  hated  them, 
because  they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  tha 
world. '  *  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of 
the  world. '—John  xvii.   11,  14,  16. 

'  Even  as  He  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world. ' — 1  John  iv.  17. 

IF  Jesus  was  not  of  the  world,  why  was  He  in  the 
world?  If  there  was  no  sympathy  between  Him 
and  the  world,  why  was  it  that  He  lived  in  it,  and 
did  not  remain  in  that  high  and  holy  and  blessed 
world  to  which  He  belonged?  The  answer  is,  The 
Father  had  sent  Him  into  the  world.  In  these  two 
expressions,  *In  the  world,'  'Not  of  the  world,'  we 
find  the  whole  secret  of  His  work  as  Saviour,  of  His 
glory  as  the  God-man. 

'In  the  luorld;'^  in  human  nature,  because  God 
would  show  that  this  nature  belonged  to  Him,  and 
not  to  the  god  of  this  world,  that  it  was  most  fit  to 
receive  the  divine  life,  and  in  this  divine  life  to  reach 
its  highest  glory. 

'In  the  tuorldj^   in  fellowship  with  men,  to  enter 


J 


NOT  OF  THE  WORLD,  75 

into  loving  relationship  with  them,  to  be  seen  and 
known  of  them,  and  thus  to  win  them  back  to  the 
Father. 

'In  the  world;'*  in  the  struggle  with  the  powers 
which  rule  the  world,  to  learn  obedience,  and  so  to 
perfect  and  sanctify  human  nature. 

'Not  of  the  ivorld^^  but  of  heaven,  to  manifest  and 
bring  nigh  the  life  that  is  in  God,  and  which  man 
had  lost,  that  men  might  see  and  long  for  it. 

' Not  of  the  world;'*  witnessing  against  its  sin  and 
departure  from  God,  its  impotence  to  know  and 
please  God. 

'Not  of  the  luorld;'*  founding  a  kingdom  entirely 
heavenly  in  origin  and  nature,  entirely  independent 
of  all  that  the  world  holds  desirable  or  necessary,  with 
principles  and  laws  the  very  opposite  of  those  that 
rule  in  the  world. 

'Not  of  the  tvorld;^  in  order  to  redeem  all  who  be- 
long to  Him,  and  bring  them  into  that  new  and 
heavenly  kingdom  which  He  had  revealed. 

'Li  the  world^^  'Not  of  the  loorld,'*  In  these  two 
expressions  we  have  revealed  to  us  the  great  mystery 
of  the  person  and  work  of  the  Saviour.  'Not  o/the 
world,'  in  the  power  of  His  divine  holiness  judging 
and  overcoming  it;  still  in  the  world,  and  through 
His  humanity  and  love  seeking  and  saving  all  that 
can  be  saved.  The  most  entire  separation  from  the 
world,  with  the  closest  fellowship  with  those  in  the 


76  LIKE  CHRIST: 

world ;  these  two  extremes  meet  in  Jesus,  in  His  own 
person  He  has  reconciled  them.  And  it  is  the  calling 
of  the  Christian  in  his  life  to  prove  that  these  two 
dispositions,  however  much  they  may  seem  at  vari- 
ance, can  in  our  life  too  be  united  in  perfect  har- 
mony. In  each  believer  there  must  be  seen  a  heavenly 
life  shining  out  through  earthly  forms. 

To  take  one  of  these  two  truths  and  exclusively 
cultivate  it,  is  not  so  difficult.  So  you  have  those 
who  have  taken  ^Not  of  the  world,'  as  their  motto. 
From  the  earliest  ages,  when  people  thought  they 
must  fly  to  cloisters  and  deserts  to  serve  God,  to  our 
own  days,  when  some  seek  to  show  the  earnestness  of 
their  piety  by  severity  in  judging  all  that  is  in  the 
world,  there  have  been  those  who  counted  this  the 
only  true  religion.  There  was  separation  from  sin, 
but  then  there  was  also  no  fellowship  with  sinners. 
The  sinner  could  not  feel  that  he  was  surrounded  with 
the  atmosphere  of  a  tender  heavenly  love.  It  was  a 
one-sided  and  therefore  a  defective  religion. 

Then  there  are  those  who,  on  the  other  side,  lay 
stress  on  *In  the  world,'  and  very  specially  appeal  to 
the  words  of  the  apostle,  'For  then  must  ye  needs  go 
out  of  the  world.'  They  think  that,  by  showing  that 
religion  does  not  make  us  unfriendly  or  unfit  to  enjoy 
all  that  there  is  to  enjoy,  they  will  induce  the  world 
to  serve  God.  It  has  often  happened  that  they  have 
indeed  succeeded  in  making  the  world  very  religious. 


NOT  OF  THE  WORLD.  77 

but  at  too  high  a  price; — religion  became  very 
worldly. 

The  true  follower  of  Jesus  must  combine  both.  If 
he  does  not  clearly  show  that  he  is  not  of  the  world, 
and  prove  the  greater  blessedness  of  a  heavenly  life, 
how  will  he  convince  the  world  of  sin,  or  prove  to  her 
that  there  is  a  higher  life,  or  teach  her  to  desire  what 
she  does  not  yet  possess?  Earnestness,  and  holiness, 
and  separation  from  the  spirit  of  the  world  must 
characterize  him.  His  heavenly  spirit  must  manifest 
that  he  belongs  to  a  kingdom  not  of  this  world.  An 
unworldly,  an  other-worldly,  a  heavenly  spirit  must 
breathe  in  him. 

And  still  he  must  live  as  one  who  is  'in  the  world.' 
Expressly  placqd  here  of  God,  among  those  who  are 
of  the  world,  to  win  their  hearts,  to  acquire  influence 
over  them,  and  to  communicate  to  them  of  the  Spirit 
which  is  in  him,  it  must  be  the  great  study  of  his  life 
how  he  can  fulfil  this  his  mission.  Not,  as  the  wisdom 
of  the  world  would  teach,  by  yielding,  and  comply- 
ing, and  softening  down  the  solemn  realities  of  relig- 
ion, will  he  succeed.  No,  but  only  by  walking  in  the 
footsteps  of  Him  who  alone  can  teach  how  to  be  in 
the  world  and  yet  not  of  it.  Only  by  a  life  of  serv- 
ing and  suffering  love,  in  which  the  Christian  dis- 
tinctly confesses  that  the  glory  of  God  is  the  aim  of 
his  existence,  and  in  which,  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
he  brings  men  into  direct  contact  with  the  warmth 


78  LIKE  CHRIST: 

and  love  of  the  heavenly  life,  can  he  be  a  blessing  to 
the  world. 

Oh,  who  will  teach  us  the  heavenly  secret,  of  unit- 
ing every  day  in  our  lives  what  is  so  diflBcult  to  unite, 
— to  be  in  the  world,  and  not  of  the  world?  He  can 
do  it  who  has  said :  *They  are  not  of  the  world,  even 
AS  I  am  not  of  the  world.'  That  'EVEi^  as'  has  a 
deeper  meaning  and  power  than  we  know.  If  we 
suffer  the  Holy  Spirit  to  unfold  that  word  to  us,  we 
shall  understand  what  it  is  to  be  in  the  world  as  He 
was  in  the  world.  That  *evex  as'  has  its  root  and 
strength  in  a  life  union.  In  it  we  shall  discover  the 
divine  secret,  that  the  more  entirely  one  is  not  of  the 
worlds  the  more  fit  he  is  to  he  in  the  world.  The  freer 
the  Church  is  of  the  spirit  and  principles  of  the 
world,  the  more  influence  she  will  exert  in  it. 

The  life  of  the  world  is  self-pleasing  and  self-exal- 
tation. The  life  of  heaven  is  holy,  self-denying  love. 
The  weakness  of  the  life  of  many  Christians  who  seek 
to  separate  themselves  from  the  world,  is  that  they 
have  too  much  of  the  spirit  of  the  world.  They  seek 
their  own  happiness  and  perfection  more  than  aught 
else.  Jesus  Christ  was  not  of  the  world,  and  had 
nothing  of  its  spirit ;  this  is  why  He  could  love  sin- 
ners, could  win  them  and  save  them.  The  believer 
is  as  little  of  the  world  as  Christ.  The  Lord  says: 
'Not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world.' 
In  this  new  nature  he  is  born  from  heaven,  has  the 


NOT  OF  THE   WORLD.  79 

life  and  love  of  heaven  in  him;  his  supernatural 
heavenly  life  gives  him  power  to  be  in  the  world 
without  being  of  it.  The  disciple  who  believes  fully 
in  the  Christ-likeness  of  his  inner  life,  will  experience 
the  truth  of  it.  He  cultivates  and  gives  utterance  ta 
the  assurance:  'Even"  as  Christ,  so  am  I  not  of  the 
world,  because  I  am  in  Christ.'  He  understands 
that  alone  in  close  union  with  Christ  can  his  separa- 
tion from  the  world  be  maintained ;  in  as  far  as  Christ 
lives  in  him  can  he  lead  a  heavenly  life.  He  sees 
that  the  only  way  to  answer  to  his  calling  is,  on  the 
one  side,  as  crucified  to  the  world  to  withdraw  him- 
self from  its  power;  and,  on  the  other,  as  living  in. 
Christ  to  go  into  it  and  bless  it.  He  lives  in  heaven 
and  walks  on  earth. 

Christians!  see  here  the  true  imitation  of  Jesus 
Christ.  'Wherefore  come  out  from  among  them,  and 
be  ye  separate,  saith  the  Lord.'  Then  the  promise 
is  fulfilled,  'I  will  dwell  in  them  and  walk  in  them.* 
Then  Christ  sends  you,  as  the  Father  sent  Him,  to 
be  in  the  w^orld  as  the  place  ordained  of  your  Father 
to  glorify  Him,  and  to  make  known  His  love.  Not 
so  much  in  the  desire  to  leave  earth  for  heaven,  as  in 
the  willingness  to  live  the  life  of  heaven  here  on 
earth,  does  a  truly  unworldly,  a  heavenly  spirit,  mani- 
fest itself. 

*Not  of  the  world'  is  not  only  separation  from  and 
testimony  against  the  world,  but  is  the  living  mani- 


80  LIKE  CHRIST: 

festation  of  the  spirit,  and  the  love,  and  the  power  of 
the  other  world,  of  the  heaven  to  which  we  belong, 
in  its  divine  work  of  making  this  world  partaker  of 
its  blessedness. 

O  Thou  great  High  Priest!  who  in  Thy  high- 
priestly  power  didst  pray  for  ns  to  the  Father,  as 
those  who,  no  more  than  Thyself,  belong  to  the 
world,  and  still  must  remain  in  it,  let  Thy  all-prevail- 
ing intercession  now  be  effectual  in  our  behalf. 

The  world  has  still  entrance  to  our  hearts,  its 
selfish  spirit  is  still  too  much  within  us.  Through 
unbelief  the  new  nature  has  not  always  full  power. 
Lord,  we  beseech  of  Thee,  as  fruit  of  Thy  all-power- 
ful intercession,  let  that  word  be  fully  realized  in  us: 
*Not  of  the  world,  eyek  as  I  am  not  of  the  world.' 
In  our  likeness  to  Thee  is  our  only  power  against  the 
world. 

Lord,  we  can  only  be  like  Thee  when  we  are  one 
with  Thee.  We  can  only  walk  like  Thee  when  we 
abide  in  Thee.  Blessed  Lord,  we  surrender  ourselves 
to  abide  in  Thee  alone.  A  life  entirely  given  to 
Thee  Thou  dost  take  entire  possession  of.  Let  Thy 
Holy  Spirit,  who  dwells  in  us,  unite  us  so  closely  with 
Thyself  that  we  may  always  live  as  not  of  the  world. 
And  let  Thy  Spirit  so  make  known  to  us  Thy  work 
in  the  world,  that  it  may  be  our  joy  in  deep  humility 
and  fervent  love  to  exhibit  to  all  what  a  blessed  life 


NOT  OF  THE  WORLD.  81 

there  is  in  the  world  for  those  who  are  not  of  the 
world.  May  the  proof  that  we  are  not  of  the  world 
be  the  tenderness  and  fervency  with  which,  like  Thee, 
we  sacrifice  ourselves  for  those  who  are  in  the  world. 
Amen. 


82  LIKE  CHRIST: 


TENTH  DAY. 


LIKE   CHEIST 

IN  HIS  HEAVENLY  MISSION. 

*  As  Thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I  also 
sent  them  into  the  world. ' — John  xvii.  18. 

'As  my  Father  hath  sent  me,  even  so  send  I  you. ' — John 
XX.  21. 

THE  Lord  Jesus  lived  here  on  earth  under  a  deep 
consciousness  of  having  a  mission  from  His 
Father  to  fulfil.  He  continually  used  the  expression, 
*The  Father  hath  sent  me.'*  He  knew  what  this 
mission  was.  He  knew  the  Father  had  chosen  Him, 
and  sent  Him  into  the  world  with  the  one  purpose  of 
fulfilling  that  mission,  and  He  knew  the  Father 
would  give  Him  all  that  He  needed  for  it.  Faith  in 
the  Father  having  sent  Him  was  the  motive  and  power 
for  all  that  He  did. 

*  It  will  repay  the  trouble  to  compare  carefully  the  fol- 
lowing passages :  John  v.  24,  30,  37,  38,  vi.  38,  39,  40,  44, 
vii.  16,  28,  29,  33.  viii.  16,  18,  26,  29,  42,  ix.  4,  xi.  42,  xii. 
44,  45,  49,  xiii.  20,  xiv.  24,  xv.  21,  xvi.  25,  xvii.  8,  18,  21, 
23,  25,  XX.  21.  Christ  wanted  men  to  know  that  He  did 
not  act  independently,  but  on  behalf  of  Another  who  had 
sent  Him.  The  consciousness  of  a  mission  never  left  Him 
for  a  moment. 


IN  HIS  HEAVENLY  MISSION  83 

In  earthly  things  it  is  a  great  help  if  an  ambassa- 
dor knows  clearly  what  his  mission  is;  that  he  has 
nothing  to  do  but  to  care  for  its  accomplishment; 
and  that  he  has  given  himself  undividedly  to  do  this 
one  thing.  For  the  Christian  it  is  of  no  less  conse- 
quence that  he  should  know  that  he  has  a  mission, 
what  its  nature  is,  and  how  he  is  to  accomplish  it. 

Our  heavenly  mission  is  one  of  the  most  glorious 
parts  of  our  conformity  to  our  Lord.  He  says  it 
plai*nly  in  the  most  solemn  moments  of  His  life;  'that 
EVEN  AS  the  Father  sent  Him,'  so  He  sends  His  dis- 
ciples. He  says  it  to  the  Father  in  His  high-priestly 
prayer,  as  the  ground  upon  which  He  asks  for  their 
keeping  and  sanctification.  He  says  it  to  the  dis- 
ciples after  His  resurrection,  as  the  ground  on  "which 
they  are  to  receive  the  Holy  Spirit.  K'othing  will 
help  us  more  to  knoAV  and  fulfil  our  mission  than  to 
realize  how  perfectly  it  corresponds  to  the  mission  of 
Christ,  how  they  are,  in  fact,  identical. 

Our  mission  is  like  His  in  its  object.  Why  did  the 
Father  send  His  Son?  To  make  known  His  love  and 
His  will  in  the  salvation  of  sinners.  He  ^vas  to  do 
this,  not  alone  by  word  and  precept,  but  in  His  own 
person,  disposition,  and  conduct  to  exhibit  the 
Father's  holy- love.  He  was  so  to  represent  the  un- 
seen Father  in  heaven,  that  men  on  earth  might  know 
what  like  the  Father  was. 

After  the  Lord  had  fulfilled  His  mission  He  as- 


84  LIKE  CHRIST: 


cended  into  heaven,  and  became  to  the  world  like  the 
Father,  the  Unseen  One.  And  now  He  has  made 
over  His  mission  to  His  disciples,  after  having  shown 
them  how  to  fulfil  it.  They  must  so  represent  Him, 
the  Invisible  One,  that  from  seeing  them  men  can 
judge  what  He  is.  Every  Christian  must  so  be  the 
image  of  Jesus— must  so  exhibit  in  his  person  and 
conduct  the  same  love  to  sinners,  and  desire  for  their 
salvation,  as  animated  Christ,  that  from  them  the 
world  may  know  what  like  Christ  is.  Oh,  my  soul! 
take  time  to  realize  these  heavenly  thoughts:  Our 
mission  is  like  Christ's  in  its  object,  the  showing  forth 
of  the  holy  love  of  heaven  in  earthly  form. 

Like  Christ's  in  its  origin  too.  It  was  the  Father's 
love  that  chose  Christ  for  this  work,  and  counted  Him 
worthy  of  such  honour  and  trust.  We  also  are  chosen 
by  Christ  for  this  work.  Every  redeemed  one  knows 
that  it  was  not  he  who  sought  the  Lord,  but  the  Lord 
who  sought  and  chose  him.  In  that  seeking  and 
drawing  the  Lord  had  expressly  this  heavenly  mission 
in  view.  'Ye  have  not  chosen  me,  but  I  have  chosen 
you  and  ordained  you,  that  ye  should  go  and  bring 
forth  fruit. ' 

Believer!  whoever  thou  art,  and  wherever  thou 
dwellest,  the  Lord,  who  knows  thee  and  thy  sur- 
roundings, has  need  of  thee,  and  has  chosen  thee  to 
be  His  representative  in  the  circle  in  which  thou 
movest.     Fix  thy  heart  on  this.     He  has  fixed  His 


I 


IN  HIS  HEAVENLY  MISSION  85 

heart  on  thee  and  saved  thee,  in  order  that  thou 
shouldst  bear  and  exhibit  to  those  who  surround 
thee  the  very  image  of  His  unseen  glory.  Oh,  think 
of  this  origin  of  thy  heavenly  mission  in  His  everlast- 
ing love,  as  His  had  its  origin  in  the  love  of  the 
Father.  Thy  mission  is  in  very  truth  just  like  His. 
Like  it,  too,  in  the  fitting  for  it.  Every  ambassa- 
dor expects  to  be  supplied  with  all  that  he  needs  for 
his  embassy.  *He  who  hath  sent  me  is  with  me. 
The  Father  hath  not  left  me  alone;'  that  word  tells 
us  how,  when  the  Father  sent  the  Son,  He  was  always 
with  Him,  His  strength  and  comfort.  Even  so  the 
Church  of  Christ  in  her  mission:  *Go  ye  and  teach 
all  nations,'  has  the  promise:  'Lo,  I  am  with  you 
alway. '  The  Christian  need  never  hold  back  because 
of  unfitness.  The  Lord  does  not  demand  anything 
which  He  does  not  give  the  power  to  perform.  Every 
believer  may  depend  on  it,  that  as  the  Father  gave 
His  Holy  Spirit  to  the  Son  to  fit  Him  for  His  work  so 
the  Lord  Jesus  will  give  His  people  too  all  the  prepar- 
ation they  need.  The  grace  to  show  forth  Christ 
evermore,  to  exhibit  the  lovely  light  of  His  example 
and  likeness,  and  like  Christ  Himself  to  be  a  Foun- 
tain of  love  and  life  and  blessing  to  all  around,  is 
given  to  every  one  who  only  heartily  and  believingly 
takes  up  his  heavenly  calling.  In  this  too,  that  the 
sender  cares  for  all  that  is  needful  for  the  sent  ones> 
is  our  mission  like  His. 


SQ  LIKE  CHRIST: 

And  like  also  in  the  consecration  icliicli  it  demands. 
The  Lord  Jesus  gave  Himself  entirely  and  nndivid- 
edly  over  to  accomplish  His  work;  He  lived  for  it 
alone.  'I  must  work  the  work  of  Him  that  sent  me 
while  it  is  day:  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can 
work.'  The  Father's  mission  was  the  only  reason  of 
His  being  on  earth;  for  that  alone  He  would  live;  to 
reveal  to  mankind  what  a  glorious  blessed  God  the 
Father  in  heaven  was. 

As  with  Jesus,  so  with  us.  Christ's  mission  is  the 
only  reason  for  onr  ieing  on  eartli;  were  it  not  for 
that,  He  would  take  us  away.  Most  believers  do  not 
believe  this.  To  fulfil  Christ's  mission  is  with  them 
at  best  something  to  be  done  along  with  other  things, 
for  which  it  is  difficult  to  find  time  and  strength. 
And  yet  it  is  so  certainly  true:  to  accomplish  Christ's 
mission  is  the  only  reason  of  my  being  upon  earth. 
Then  first  when  I  believe  this,  and  like  my  Lord  in 
His  mission  consecrate  myself  undividedly  to  it,  shall 
I  indeed  live  well-pleasing  to  Him.  This  heavenly 
mission  is  so  great  and  glorious,  that  without  an  en- 
tire consecration  to  it  we  cannot  accomplish  it. 
^'ithout  this,  the  powers  which  fit  us  for  it  cannot 
take  possession  of  us.  Without  this,  we  have  no  lib- 
erty to  expect  the  Lord's  wonderful  help  and  the 
fulfilment  of  all  His  blessed  promises.  Just  as  with 
Jesus,  our  heavenly  mission  demands  nothing  less 
than  entire  consecration.     Am  I  prepared  for  this? 


IN  HIS  HEAVENLY  MISSION  87 

Then  I  have  indeed  the  key  through  which  the  holy 
hidden  glories  of  this  word  of  Jesus  will  be  revealed 
to  my  experience:  'As  the  Father  sent  me,  even  so 
send  I  you.' 

0  brothers!  this  heavenly  mission  is  indeed  worthy 
that  we  devote  ourselves  entirely  to  it  as  tlie  only 
thing  we  live  for. 

0  Lord  Jesus!  Thou  didst  descend  from  heaven  to 
earth  to  show  us  what  the  life  of  heaven  is.  Thou 
couldst  do  this  because  Thou  wert  of  heaven.  Thou 
didst  bring  with  thee  the  image  and  Spirit  of  the 
heavenly  life  to  earth.  Therefore  didst  Thou  so 
gloriously  exhibit  what  constitutes  the  very  glory  of 
heaven :  the  will  and  love  of  the  unseen  Father. 

Lord!  Thou  art  now  the  Invisible  One  in  heaven, 
and  sendest  us  to  represent  Thee  in  Thy  heavenly 
glory  as  Saviour.  Thou  dost  ask  that  we  should  so 
love  men  that  from  us  they  may  form  some  idea  of 
how  Thou  lovest  them  in  heaven. 

Blessed  Lord!  our  heart  cries  out:  How  canst 
Thou  send  us  with  such  a  calling?  How  canst  Thou 
expect  it  of  us  who  have  so  little  love?  How  can  we, 
who  are  of  the  earth  earthy,  show  what  the  life  of 
heaven  is? 

Precious  Saviour!  our  souls  do  bless  Thee  that  we 
know  that  Thou  dost  not  demand  more  than  Thou 
givest.      Thou  who  art  Thyself  the  Life  of  heaven, 


88  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Thou  livest  Thyself  in  Thy  disciples.  Blessed  be  Thy 
holy  name,  they  have  from  Thee  Thy  Holy  Spirit 
from  heaven  as  their  life-breath.  He  is  the  heavenly 
life  of  the  soul:  whoever  surrenders  himself  to  the 
leading  of  the  Spirit  can  fulfil  his  mission.  In  the 
joy  and  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  we  can  be  Thy  image- 
bearers,  can  show  to  men  in  some  measure  what  Thy 
likeness  is. 

Lord,  teach  me  and  all  Thy  people  to  understand 
that  we  are  not  of  the  world,  as  Thou  wert  not  of  the 
world,  and  therefore  are  sent  of  Thee,  even  as  Thou 
wert  sent  of  the  Father,  to  prove  in  our  life  that  we 
are  of  that  world,  full  of  love,  and  purity,  and  bless- 
ing, of  which  Thou  wert.     Amen. 


AS  THE  ELECT  OF  GOD,  89 


ELEVENTH  DAY. 


LIKE  CHRIST 

AS  THE  ELECT  OF  GOD. 

*  Predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son, 
that  He  might  be  the  firstborn  among  many  brethren. '— - 
Rom.  viii.  29. 

SCEIPTUEE  teaches  us  a  personal  election.  It 
does  this  not  only  in  single  passages;  its  whole 
history  of  the  working  out  here  in  time  of  the  coun- 
sels of  eternity  ,  proves  it.  We  see  continually  how 
the  whole  future  of  God's  kingdom  depends  upon  the 
faithful  filling  of  His  place  by  some  single  person; 
the  only  security  for  the  carrying  out  of  God's  pur- 
pose is  His  foreordaining  of  the  individual.  In  pre- 
destination alone  the  history  of  the  world  and  of 
God's  kingdom,  as  of  the  individual  believer,  has  its 
sure  foundation. 

There  are  Christians  who  cannot  see  this.  They 
are  so  afraid  of  interfering  with  human  responsi- 
bility, that  they  reject  the  doctrine  of  divine  predes- 
tination, because  it  appears  to  rob  man  of  his  liberty 
of  will  and  action.  Scripture  does  not  share  this 
fear.     It  speaks  in  one  place  of  man's  free  will  as 


90  LIKE  CHRIST: 

though  there  were  no  election,  in  another  of  election 
as  though  there  were  no  free  will.  Thus  it  teaches 
lis  that  we  must  hold  fast  both  these  truths  alongside 
each  other,  even  when  we  cannot  understand  them, 
or  make  them  perfectly  to  harmonize.  In  the  light 
of  eternity  the  solution  of  the  mystery  will  be  given. 
He  who  grasps  both  in  faith  will  speedily  experience 
how  little  they  are  in  conflict.  He  will  see  that  the 
stronger  his  faith  is  in  God's  everlasting  purpose,  the 
more  his  courage  for  work  will  be  strengthened ;  while, 
on  the  other  side,  the  more  he  works  and  is  blessed, 
the  clearer  it  will  become  that  all  is  of  God. 

For  this  reason  it  is  of  so  much  consequence  for  a 
believer  to  make  his  election  sure.  The  Scriptures 
give  the  assurance  that  if  we  do  this,  'we  shall  never 
stumble'  {R.  F.).  The  more  I  believe  not  only  in 
general  that  I  am  elected  of  God,  but  see  how  this 
election  has  reference  to  every  part  of  my  calling,  the 
more  shall  I  be  strengthened  in  the  conviction  that 
God  Himself  will  perfect  His  work  in  me,  and  that 
therefore  it  is  possible  for  me  to  be  all  that  God  really 
expects.  With  every  duty  Scripture  lays  upon  me, 
with  every  promise  for  whose  fulfilment  I  long,  I  will 
go  to  find  in  God's  purposes  the  firm  footing  upon 
which  my  expectations  may  rest,  and  the  true  meas- 
ure by  which  they  are  to  be  guided.  I  shall  under- 
stand that  my  life  on  earth  is  to  be  a  copy  of  the 
heavenly  life-plan,  that  the  Father  has  drawn  out,  of 


AS  THE  ELECT  OF  GOD.  91 

what  I  am  to  be  on  earth.  Christian!  make  your 
calling  and  election  sure ;  let  it  become  clear  to  you 
that  you  are  elected,  and  to  what;  *If  ye  do  these 
things,  ye  shall  never  stumble. '  Quiet  communion 
with  God  on  the  ground  of  His  unchangeable  purpose 
imparts  to  the  soul  an  immovable  firmness  that  keeps 
from  stumbling. 

One  of  the  most  blessed  expressions  in  regard  ta 
God's  purpose  concerning  us  in  Christ  is  this  word: 
'Predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His 
Son.'  The  man  Christ  Jesus  is  the  elect  of  God;  in 
Him  election  has  its  beginning  and  end.  *In  Him 
we  are  chosen;'  for  the  sake  of  our  union  with 
Him  and  to  His  glory  our  election  took  place.  The 
believer  who  seeks  in  election  merely  the  certainty  of 
his  own  salvation,  or  relief  from  fear  and  doubt, 
knows  very  little  of  its  real  glory.  The  purposes  of 
election  embrace  all  the  riches  that  are  prepared  for 
us  in  Christ,  and  reach  to  every  moment  and  every 
need  of  our  lives.  'Chosen  in  Him  that  we  should 
be  holy  and  blameless  before  Him  in  love,'  it  is  only 
when  the  connection  between  election  and  sanctifica- 
tion  is  rightly  apprehended  in  the  Church  that  the 
doctrine  of  election  will  bring  its  full  blessing  (2 
Ihess,  ii.  IS;  1  Pet.  i,  2).  It  teaches  the  believer  how 
it  is  God  who  must  work  all  in  him,  who  will  work 
all  in  him,  and  how  he  may  rely  even  in  the  smallest 
matters  upon  the  unchangeable  purpose  of  God  to 


93  LIKE  CHRIST: 

work  out  itself  in  the  accomplishment  of  everything 
that  He  expects  of  His  people.  In  this  light  the 
word  'Predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of 
His  Son'  gives  new  strength  to  every  one  who  has  be- 
gun to  take  what  Christ  is  as  the  rule  of  what  he 
himself  is  to  be. 

Christian !  would  you  in  very  deed  be  like  Christ, 
fix  your  mind  upon  the  thought  of  how  certainly  this 
is  God's  will  concerning  you;  how  the  whole  of  re- 
demption has  been  planned  with  the  view  of  your 
becoming  so;  how  God's  purpose  is  the  guarantee 
that  your  desires  must  be  fulfilled.  There,  where 
your  name  is  written  in  the  book  of  life,  there  stands 
also,  'Predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of 
His  Son. '  All  the  powers  of  the  Deity  which  have 
already  wrought  together  in  the  accomplishment  of  the 
first  part  of  the  eternal  purpose,  the  revealing  of  the 
Father's  perfect  likeness  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  are 
equally  engaged  to  accomplish  the  second  part,  and 
work  that  likeness  in  each  of  God's  children.  In  the 
work  of  Christ  there  is  the  most  perfect  provision 
possible  for  the  carrying  out  of  God's  purposes  in 
this.  Our  union  to  Christ,  held  fast  in  a  living  faith, 
will  be  an  all-prevailing  power.  We  can  depend  upon 
it  as  something  ordained  with  a  divine  certainty, 
and  that  must  come  if  we  yield  ourselves  to  it.  Has 
not  God  elected  us  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of 
His  Son? 


II 


AS   THE  ELECT  OF  GOD,  93 

It  can  easily  be  nnderstopd  what  a  powQrful  influ- 
ence the  living  consciousness  of  this  truth  will  have. 
It  teaches  us  to  give  up  ourselves  to  the  Eternal  Will, 
that  it  may,  w^ith  divine  power,  effect  its  purpose  in 
us.  It  shows  us  how  useless  and  impotent  our  own 
efforts  are  to  accomplish  this  work ;  all  that  is  of  God 
must  also  be  through  Him.  He  who  is  the  begin- 
ning, must  be  the  middle  and  the  end.  In  a  very 
wonderful  manner  it  strengthens  our  faith  with  a 
holy  boldness  to  glory  in  God  alone,  and  to  expect 
from  God  Himself  the  fulfilment  of  every  promise 
and  every  command,  of  every  part  of  the  purpose  of 
His  blessed  will. 

And  where  does  this  likeness  to  Christ  consist?  la 
Sonship.  It  is  to  the  image  of  His  Son  we  are  to  be 
conformed.  All  the  different  traits  of  a  Christlike 
life  resolve  themselves  into  this  one  as  their  spring 
and  end.  We  are  'predestinated  unto  the  adoption 
of  children  by  Jesus  Christ. '  It  was  as  the  Son  Christ 
lived  and  served  and  pleased  the  Father.  It  is  only 
as  a  son  with  the  spirit  of  His  own  Son  in  my  heart, 
that  I  can  live  and  serve  and  please  the  Father.  I 
must  each  day  walk  in  the  full  and  clear  conscious- 
ness: like  Christ,  I  am  a  son  of  the  Most  High  God, 
born  from  above,  the  beloved  of  the  Father.  As  a 
son  the  Father  is  engaged  to  provide  my  every  need. 
As  a  son  I  live  in  dependence  and  trust,  in  love  and 
obedience,  in  joy  and  hope.     It  is  when  I  live  with 


94  LIKE  CHRIST: 

the  Fathei:  as  a  son,  that  it  becomes  possible  to  make 
any  sacrifice  and  to  obey  every  command. 

Believer!  take  time  and  prayer  to  take  in  this 
truth,  and  let  it  exercise  its  full  power  in  your  soul. 
Let  the  Holy  Spirit  write  it  into  your  inmost  being, 
that  you  are  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  His  Son.  The  Father's  object  was  the  hon- 
our of  His  Son,  'that  He  might  be  the  firstborn 
among  many  brethren.'  Let  this  be  your  object  too 
in  all  your  life  so  to  show  forth  the  image  of  your 
Elder  Brother,  that  other  Christians  may  be  pointed 
to  Him  alone,  may  praise  Him  alone,  and  seek  to  fol- 
low Him  more  closely  too.  Let  it  be  the  fixed  and 
only  purpose  of  your  life,  the  great  object  of  your 
believing  prayer,  that  *  Christ  be  magnified  in  my 
body.'  This  will  give  you  new  confidence  to  ask  and 
expect  all  that  is  necessary  to  live  like  Christ.  Your 
conformity  to  Christ  will  be  one  of  the  links  connect- 
ing the  eternal  purpose  of  the  Father  with  the  eternal 
fulfilment  of  it  in  the  glorifying  of  the  Son.  Your 
conformity  to  Christ  becomes  then  such  a  holy, 
heavenly,  divine  work,  that  you  realize  that  it  can 
come  only  from  the  Father,  but  that  from  Him  you 
can  and  shall  most  certainly  receive  it.  What  God's 
purpose  has  decreed,  God's  power  will  perform.  ^ 
What  God's  love  has  ordained  and  commanded,  God's 
love  will  most  certainly  accomplish.  A  living  faith 
in  His  eternal  purpose  will  become  one  of  the  mighti- 


AS  THE  ELECT  OF  GOD.  96^ 

est  powers  in   urging  and  helping  us  to  live  lik\ 
Christ. 

0  Thou  incomprehensible  Being,  I  bow  before 
Thee  in  deepest  humility.  It  has  been  such  a 
strength  to  know  that  Thy  Son  has  chosen  me,  in 
order  to  send  me  into  the  world  as  Thou  hadst  sent 
Him.  But  here  Thou  hast  led  me  still  higher,  and 
shown  that  this  mission  to  be  as  He  was  in  the  world 
was  from  eternity  decreed  by  Thyself.  0  my  God, 
my  soul  bows  prostrate  in  the  dust  before  Thee. 

Lord  God,  now  that  Thy  child  comes  to  Thee  for 
the  fulfilment  of  Thy  own  purpose  he  dares  confi- 
dently look  for  an  answer.  Thy  will  is  stronger  than 
the  very  hindrance.  The  faith  that  trusts  Thee  will 
not  be  put  to  shame.  Lord,  in  holy  reverence  and 
worship,  but  with  childlike  confidence  and  hope,  I 
utter  this  prayer:  Father,  give  me  the  desire  of  my 
soul,  conformity  to  the  image  of  Thy  Son ;  Father, 
likeness  to  Jesus,  this  is  what  my  soul  desires  of  Thee. 
Let  me,  like  Him,  be  Thy  holy  child. 

0  my  Father,  write  it  in  Thy  book  of  remem- 
brance, and  write  it  in  my  remembrance  too,  that  I 
have  asked  it  of  Thee  as  what  I  desire  above  all 
things,  conformity  to  the  image  of  Thy  Son. 

Father,  to  this  Thou  hast  chosen  me;  Thou  wilt 
give  it  me,  to  Thine  own  and  His  glory.     Amen. 


LIKE  CHRIST: 


TWELFTH  DAY. 


LIKE   CHKIST 

IN   DOma    GOD'S  WILL. 

*  For  I  came  down  from  heaven,  not  to  do  my  own  will, 
but  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  me. ' — John  vi.  38,  v.  3. 

IN  the  will  of  God  we  have  the  highest  expression  of 
His  divine  perfection,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
highest  energy  of  His  divine  power.  Creation  owes 
its  being  and  its  beauty  to  it;  it  is  the  manifestation 
of  God's  will.  In  all  nature  the  will  of  God  is  done. 
In  heaven  the  angels  find  their  highest  blessedness  in 
doing  God's  will.  For  this  man  was  created  with  a 
free  will,  in  order  that  he  might  have  the  power  to 
choose,  and  of  his  own  accord  do  God's  will.  And, 
lo !  deceived  by  the  devil  man  committed  the  great  sin 
of  rather  doing  his  own  than  God's  will.  Yes,  rather 
Ms  own  than  God^s  will!  in  this  is  the  root  and  the 
wretchedness  of  sin. 

Jesus  Christ  became  man  to  bring  us  back  to  the 
blessedness  of  doing  God's  will.  The  great  object  of 
redemption  was  to  make  us  and  our  will  free  from 
the  power  of  sin,  and  to  lead  us  again  to  live  and  do 
the  will  of  God.     In  His  life  on  earth  He  showed  us 


IN  DOING  GOD'S   WILL.  97 

what  it  is  to  live  only  for  the  will  of  God;  in  His 
death  and  resurrection  He  won  for  us  the  power  to 
live  and  do  the  will  of  God  as  He  had  done. 

'Lo,  I  come  to  do.  Thy  will,  0  God.'  These  words, 
uttered  through  the  Holy  Spirit  by  the  mouth  of  one 
of  His  prophets  long  ages  before  Christ's  birth,  are 
the  key  to  life  on  earth.  At  Nazareth  in  the  carpen- 
ter's shop,  at  the  Jordan  with  John  the  Baptist,  in 
the  wilderness  with  Satan,  in  public  with  the  multi- 
tude, in  living  and  dying,  it  was  this  that  inspired 
and  guided  and  gladdened  Him;  the  glorious  will  of 
the  Father  was  to  be  accomplished  in  Him  and  by 
Him. 

Let  us  not  think  that  this  cost  Him  nothing.  He 
says  repeatedly,  ^N^of  my  ivill^  but  the  will  of  the 
Father,'  to  let  us  understand  that  there  was  in  very 
deed  a  denial  of  His  own  will.  In  Gethsemane  the 
sacrifice  of  His  own  will  reached  its  height,  but  what 
took  place  there  was  only  the  perfect  expression  of 
what  had  rendered  His  whole  life  acceptable  to  the 
Father.  Not  herein  is  sin,  that  man  has  a  creature- 
will  different  from  the  Creator's,  but  in  this,  that  he 
clings  to  his  own  will  Avhen  it  is  seen  to  be  contrary 
to  the  will  of  the  Creator.  As  man,  Jesus  had  a 
human  will,  the  natural,  though  not  sinful  desires 
which  belong  to  human  nature.  As  man.  He  did  not 
always  know  beforehand  what  the  will  of  God  was. 
He  had  to  wait,  and  be  taught  of  God,  and  learn 
7 


98  LIKE  CHRIST: 

from  titne  to  time  what  that  will  was.  But  when  the 
will  of  His  Father  was  once  known  to  Him,  then  He 
was  always  ready  to  give  up  His  own  human  will,  and 
do  the  will  of  the  Father.  It  was  this  that  consti- 
tuted the  perfection  and  the  value  of  His  self-sacrifice. 
He  had  once  for  all  surrendered  Himself  as  a  man,  to 
live  only  in  and  for  the  will  of  God,  and  was  always 
ready,  even  to  the  sacrifice  of  Gethsemane  and  Cal- 
vary, to  do  that  will  alone. 

It  is  this  life  of  ohedience^  wrought  out  by  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  the  flesh,  that  is  not  only  imputed  to  us,  but 
imparted  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  Through  His 
death  our  Lord  Jesus  has  atoned  for  our  self-will  and 
disobedience.  It  was  by  conquering  it  in  His  own 
perfect  obedience  that  He  atoned  for  it.  He  has  thus 
not  only  blotted  out  the  guilt  of  our  self-will  before 
God,  but  broken  its  power  in  us.  In  His  resurrection 
He  brought  from  the  dead  a  life  that  had  conquered 
and  destroyed  all  self-will.  And  the  believer  who 
knows  the  power  of  Jesus'  death  and  resurrection, 
has  the  power  to  consecrate  himself  entirely  to  God's 
will.  He  knows  that  the  call  to  follow  Christ  means 
nothing  less  than,  to  take  and  speak  the  words  of  the 
Master  as  his  own  solemn  vow,  ^I  seek  not  my  own 
will,  but  the  will  of  the  Father.' 

To  attain  this  we  must  begin  by  taking  the  same 
stand  that  our  Lord  did.  Take  God's  will  as  one 
great  whole,  as  the  only  thing  for  which  you  live  on 


IN  DOING   GOD'S    WILL.  99 

earth.  Look  at  the  sun  and  moon,  the  grass  and 
flowers,  see  what  glory  each  of  them  has,  only  because 
it  is  just  doing  God's  will.  But  they  do  it  without 
knowing  it.  Thou  canst  do  it  still  more  gloriously, 
because  knowing  and  willing  to  do  it.  Let  thine 
heart  be  filled  with  the  thought  of  the  glory  of  God's 
will  concerning  His  children,  and  concerning  thee, 
and  say  it  is  Thy  one  purpose  that  that  will  should 
be  done  in  thee.  Yield  thyself  to  the  Father  fre- 
quently and  distinctly,  with  the  declaration  that  w4th 
thee,  as  Tvith  Jesus,  it  is  a  settled  thing  that  His 
beautiful  and  blessed  will  must  and  shall  be  done. 
Say  it  frequently  in  thy  quiet  meditations,  with  a 
joyful  and   trusting  heart:     Peaise   God!     I    may 

LIVE   OXLY   TO    DO   THE   WILL   OF   GOD. 

Let  no  fear  keep  us  back  from  this.  Think  not 
that  this  will  be  too  hard  for  us  to  do;  God's  will 
only  £eems  hard  as  long  as  we  look  at  it  from  a  dis- 
tance, and  are  unwilling  to  submit  to  it.  Just  look 
again  how  beautiful  the  will  of  God  makes  everything 
in  nature.  Ask  yourself,  now  that  He  loves  and 
blesses  you  as  a  child,  if  it  is  right  to  distrust  Him. 
The  will  of  God  is  the  will  of  His  love,  how  can  you 
fear  to  surrender  yourself  to  it? 

Nor  let  the  fear  that  you  will  not  be  able  to  obey 
that  will,  keep  you  back.  The  Son  of  God  came  on 
earth  to  show  what  the  life  of  man  must  and  may  be- 
come.    His  resurrection  life  gives  us  power  to  live  as 


100  LIKE  CHRIST: 

He  lived.  Jesus  Christ  enables  us,  through  His  Spirit, 
to  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  according  to  the  will 
of  God. 

*I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God:'  before  ever  the 
Lord  Jesus  was  come  down  to  earth,  a  believer  in  the 
Old  Testament  was  able,  through  the  Spirit,  to  speak 
that  word  of  himself  as  well  as  for  Christ.  Christ 
took  it  up  and  filled  it  with  new  life-power.  And 
now  He  expects  of  His  redeemed  ones  that,  since  He 
has  been  on  earth,  they  will  even  more  heartily  and 
entirely  make  it  their  choice.  Let  us  do  so.  AVe 
must  not  first  try  and  see  whether,  in  single  instances, 
we  succeed  in  doing  God's  will,  in  the  hope  of  after- 
wards attaining  to  the  entire  consecration  that  can 
say:  'I  come  to  do  Thy  will.'  No,  this  is  not  the 
right  way.  Let  us  first  recognize  God's  will  as  a 
whole,  and  the  claims  it  has  upon  us,  as  well  as  its 
blessedness  and  glory.  Let  us  surrender  ourselves  to 
it  as  to  God  Himself,  and  consider  it  as  one  of  the 
first  articles  of  our  creed:  I  am  in  the  world,  like 
Christ,  only  to  do  the  Father's  will.  This  surrender 
will  teach  us  with  joy  to  accept  every  command  and 
every  providence  as  part  of  the  will  we  have  already 
yielded  ourselves  to.  This  surrender  will  give  us 
courage  to  wait  for  God's  sure  guidance  and  strength, 
because  the  man  who  lives  only  for  God's  will  may 
depend  upon  it  that  God  takes  him  for  his  reckoning. 
This  surrender  will  lead  us  deeper  into  the  conscious- 


I 


IN  DOING   GOD'S    WILL.  101 

ness  of  our  utter  impotence,  but  also  deeper  into  the 
fellowship  and  the  likeness  of  the  beloved  Son,  and 
make  us  partakers  of  all  the  blessedness  and  love  that 
the  Son  has  prepared  for  us.  There  is  nothing  that 
will  bring  us  closer  to  God  in  union  to  Christ  than 
loving  and  keeping  and  doing  the  will  of  God. 

Child  of  God !  one  of  the  first  marks  of  conformity 
to  Christ  is  obedience,  simple  and  implicit  obedience 
to  all  the  will  of  God.  Let  it  be  the  most  marked 
thing  in  thy  life.  Begin  by  a  willing  and  whole- 
hearted keeping  of  every  one  of  the  commands  of 
God's  holy  Word.  Go  on  to  a  very  tender  yielding 
to  everything  that  conscience  tells  thee  to  be  right, 
even  when  the  Word  does  not  directly  command  it. 
So  shalt  thou  rise  higher;  a  hearty  obedience  to  the 
commandments,  as  far  as  thou  knowest  them,  and  a 
ready  obedience  to  conscience  wherever  it  speaks,  are 
the  preparation  for  that  divine  teaching  of  the  Spirit 
which  will  lead  thee  deeper  into  the  meaning  and 
application  of  the  Word,  and  into  a  more  direct  and 
spiritual  insight  into  God's  will  with  regard  to  thy- 
self personally.  It  is  to  those  wJio  obey  Him  God 
gives  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  whom  the  blessed  will 
of  God  becomes  the  light  that  shines  ever  more 
brightly  on  our  path.  *If  any  man  will  do  His  will 
he  shall  know.'  Blessed  will  of  God!  blessed  obedi- 
ence to  God's  will!  oh,  that  we  knew  to  connt  and 
keep  these  as  our  most  precious  treasures! 


102  LIKE  CHRIST:  \ 

And  if  ever  it  appear  too  hard  to  live  only  for  God's 
will,  let  us  remember  wherein  Christ  found  His 
strength :  it  was  because  it  was  the  Father'' s  will  that 
the  Son  rejoiced  to  do  it.  'This  commandment  have 
I  received  of  my  Father, '  This  made  even  the  laying 
down  of  His  life  possible.  Our  union  to  Jesus,  and 
our  calling  to  live  like  Him,  ever  point  to  us  to  His  * 
Sonship  as  the  secret  of  His  life  and  strength.  Let 
U  be  our  chief  desire  to  say  each  day:  I  am  the 
l^^ather's  beloved  child,  and  to  think  of  each  com- 
•nandment  as  the  Father'^ s  will ;  a  Christlike  sense  of 
Bonship  will  lead  to  a  Christlike  obedience. 

0  my  God,  I  thank  Thee  for  this  wondrous  gift. 
Thy  Son  become  man,  to  teach  us  how  man  may  do 
the  will  of  his  God.  I  thank  Thee  for  the  glorious 
calling  to  be  like  Him  in  this  too,  with  Him  to  taste 
the  blessedness  of  a  life  in  perfect  harmony  with  Thy 
glorious  and  perfect  will.  I  thank  Thee  for  the 
power  given  in  Christ  to  do  and  to  bear  all  that  will. 
I  thank  Thee  that  in  this  too  I  may  be  like  the  first- 
begotten  Son. 

1  come  now,  0  my  Father,  afresh  to  take  up  this 
my  calling  in  childlike,  joyous  trust  and  love.  Lord, 
I  would  live  wholly  and  only  to  do  Thy  will.  I  would 
abide  in  the  Word  and  wait  upon  the  Spirit.  I 
would,  like  Thy  Son,  live  in  fellowship  with  Thee  in 
prayer,  in  the  firm  confidence  that  Thou  wilt  day  by 


IN  DOING  GOD'S   WILL.  103 

day  make  me  to  know  Thy  will  more  clearly.  0  my 
Father,  let  this  my  desire  be  acceptable  in  Thy  sight. 
Keep  it  in  the  thoughts  of  my  heart  for  ever.  Give 
me  grace  with  true  joy  continually  to  say:  Not  my 
^will,  but  the  will  of  my  Father  must  be  done:  I  am 
here  on  the  earth  only  to  do  the  will  of  my  God. 
<Amen. 


104  LIKE  CHRIST: 


THIRTEENTH  DAY. 


LIKE    CHEIST 

IN  HIS  COMPASSION. 

*  Then  Jesus  said,  I  have  compassion  on  the  multitude. ' 
— Matt.  x.  32. 

*  Shouldst  not  thou  also  have  had  compassion  on  thy 
fellow -servant,  even  as  I  had  compassion  on  thee?'— Matt. 
xviii.  32. 

ON  three  different  occasions  Matthew  tells  us  that 
our  Lord  was  moved  with  compassion  on  the 
multitude.  His  whole  life  was  a  manifestation  of 
the  compassion  with  which  He  had  looked  on  the 
sinner  from  everlasting,  and  of  the  tenderness  with 
which  He  was  moved  at  the  sight  of  misery  and 
sorrow.  He  was  in  this  the  true  reflection  of  our 
compassionate  God,  of  the  father  who,  moved  with 
compassion  towards  his  prodigal  son,  fell  on  his  neck 
and  kissed  him. 

In  this  compassion  of  the  Lord  Jesus  we  can  see 
how  He  did  not  look  upon  the  will  of  God  He  came 
to  do  as  a  duty  or  an  obligation,  but  had  that  divine 
will  dwelling  within  Him  as  His  own,  inspiring  and 
ruling   all   His  sentiments  and  motives.     After  He 


IN  HIS  COMPASSION.  105 

had  said,  'I  came  from  heaven,  not  to  do  my  own 
will  but  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  me,'  He  at  once 
added,  'And  this  is  the  tuill  of  the  Father,  that  of 
all  He  hath  given  me,  I  should  lose  nothing,  but 
should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day.'  'And  this 
IS  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  me,  that  every  one  which 
believeth  on  the  Son  may  have  everlasting  life. '  For 
the  Lord  Jesus  the  will  of  God  consisted  not  in  cer- 
tain things  which  were  forbidden  or  commanded. 
No,  He  had  entered  into  that  which  truly  forms  the 
very  heart  of  God's  will,  and  that  is,  that  to  lost 
sinners  He  should  give  eternal  life.  Because  God 
Himself  is  love.  His  will  is  that  love  should  have  full 
scope  in  the  salvation  of  sinners.  The  Lord  Jesus 
came  down  to  earth  in  order  to  manifest  and  accom- 
plish this  will  of  God.  He  did  not  do  this  as  a  ser- 
vant obeying  the  will  of  a  stranger.  In  His  personal 
life  and  all  His  dispositions  He  proved  that  the  lov- 
ing will  of  His  Father  to  save  sinners  was  His  own. 
Not  only  His  death  on  Golgotha,  but  just  as  much 
the  compassion  in  which  He  took  and  bore  the  need 
of  all  the  wretched,  and  the  tenderness  of  His  in- 
tercourse with  them,  was  the  proof  that  the  Father's 
will  had  truly  become  His  own.  In  every  way  He 
showed  that  life  was  of  no  value  to  Him  but  as  the 
opportunity  of  doing  the  will  of  His  Father. 

Beloved  followers  of  Christ,  who  have  offered  your- 
selves to  imitate  Him,  let  the  will  of  the  Father  be  to 


106  LIKE  CHRIST: 

you  what  it  was  to  your  Lord.  The  will  of  the  Father 
in  the  mission  of  His  Son  was  the  manifestation  and 
the  triumph  of  divine  compassion  in  the  salvation  of 
lost  sinners.  Jesus  could  not  possibly  accomplish 
this  will  in  any  other  way  than  by  having  and  show- 
ing this  compassion.  God's  vnll  is  for  vs  what  it  was 
for  Jesus:  the  solvation  of  the  perishing.  It  is  impos-^ 
sible  for  us  to  fulfil  that  will  otherwise  than  by  hav- 
ing, and  bearing  about,  and  showing  in  our  lives  the 
compassion  of  our  God.  The  seeking  of  God's  will 
must  not  be  only  denying  ourselves  certain  things 
which  God  forbids,  and  doing  certain  works  which 
God  commands,  but  must  consist  specially  in  this, 
that  we  surrender  ourselves  to  have  the  same  mind 
and  disposition  towards  sinners  as  God  has,  and  that 
we  find  our  pleasure  and  joy  alone  in  living  for  this. 
By  the  most  personal  devotion  to  each  poor  perish- 
ing sinner  around  us,  and  by  our  helping  them  in 
compassionate  love,  we  can  show  that  the  will  of 
God  is  become  our  will.  With  the  compassionate 
God  as  our  Father,  with  Christ  who  was  so  often 
moved  with  compassion  as  our  life,  nothing  can  be 
more  just  than  the  command  that  the  life  of  every 
Christian  should  be  one  of  compassionate  love. 

Compassion  is  the  spirit  of  love  which  is  awakened^ 
bv  the  sio^ht  of  need  or  wretchedness.      What  abun- 
dant  occasion  is  there  every  day  for  the  practice  of 
this  heavenly  virtue,  and  what  a  need  of  it  in  a  world 


IN  HIS  COMPASSION,  107 

80  full  of  misery  and  sin !  Every  Christian  ought 
therefore  by  prayer  and  practice  to  cultivate  a  com- 
passionate heart,  as  one  of  the  most  precious  marks 
of  likeness  to  the  blessed  Master.  Everlasting  love 
I  longs  to  give  itself  to  a  perishing  world,  and  to 
find  its  satisfaction  in  saving  the  lost.  It  seeks  for 
vessels  tuJiich  it  may  fill  with  the  love  of  God^  and  send 
out  among  the  dying  tliat  they  may  drink  and  live  for 
ever.  It  asks  hearts  to  fill  with  its  own  tender  com- 
passion at  the  sight  of  all  the  need  in  which  sinners 
live,  hearts  that  will  reckon  it  their  highest  blessed- 
ness, as  the  dispensers  of  God's  compassion,  to  live 
entirely  to  bless  and  save  sinners.  0  my  brother, 
the  everlasting  compassion  which  has  had  mercy  on 
thee  calls  thee,  as  one  who  has  obtained  mercy,  to 
come  and  let  it  fill  thee.  It  will  fit  thee,  in  thy 
compassion  on  all  around,  to  be  a  witness  to  God's 
compassionate  love. 

The  opportunity  for  showing  compassion  we  have 
all  around  us.  How  much  there  is  of  temporal  want! 
There  are  the  poor  and  the  sick,  widows  and  or- 
phans, distressed  and  despondent  souls,  w^ho  need 
nothing  so  much  as  the  refreshment  a  compassionate 
heart  can  bring.  They  live  in  the  midst  of  Chris- 
tians, and  sometimes  complain  that  it  is  as  if  there 
are  children  of  the  world  who  have  more  sympathy 
than  those  who  are  only  concerned  about  their  own 
salvation.     0  brothers,  pray  earnestly  for  a  compas- 


108  LIKE   CHRIST: 

sionate  heart,  always  on  the  lookout  for  an  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  some  work  of  love,  always  ready  to 
be  an  instrument  of  the  divine  compassion.  It  was 
the  compassionate  sympathy  of  Jesus  that  attracted 
so  many  to  Him  upon  earth :  that  same  compas- 
sionate tenderness  will  still,  more  than  anything, 
draw  souls  to  you  and  to  your  Lord.* 

And  how  much  of  spiritual  misery  surrounds  us 
on  all  sides!  Here  is  a  poor  rich  man.  There  is  a 
foolish,  thoughtless  youth.  There  is  again  a  poor 
drunkard,  or  a  hopeless  unfortunate.  Or  perhaps 
none  of  these,  but  simply  people  entirely  wrapt  up 
in  the  follies  of  the  world  which  surround  them. 
How  often  are  words  of  unloving  indifference,  or 
harsh  judgment,  or  slothful  hopelessness,  heard  con- 
cerning all  these  I  The  compassionate  heart  is  want- 
ing. Compassion  looks  upon  the  deepest  misery  as 
the  place  prepared  for  her  by  God,  and  is  attracted 
by  it.  Compassion  never  wearies,  never  gives  up 
hope.  Compassion  will  not  allow  itself  to  be  re- 
jected, for  it  is  the  self-denying  love  of  Christ  which 
inspires  it. 

The  Christian  does  not  confine  his  compassion  to 
his  own  circle;  he  has  a  large  heart.  His  Lord  has 
shown  him  the  whole  heathen  world  as  his  field  of 
labour.  He  seeks  to  be  acquainted  with  the  circum- 
stances of  the  heathen ;  he  carries  their  burden  on  his 
*  See  note. 


IN  HIS  COMPASSION,  109 

heart;  he  is  really  moved  with  compassion,  and 
means  to  help  them.  Whether  the  heathenism  is 
near  or  far  ofE,  whether  he  witnesses  it  in  all  its  filth 
and  degradation,  or  only  hears  of  it,  compassionate 
love  lives  only  to  accomplish  God's  will  in  saving  the 
perishing. 

Like  Christ  in  Bis  compassion:  let  this  now  be 
our  motto.  After  uttering  the  parable  of  the  Com- 
passionate Samaritan,  who,  'moved  with  compassion,* 
helped  the  wounded  stranger,  the  Lord  said,  'Go  and 
do  likewise.'  He  is  Himself  the  compassionate  Sa- 
maritan, who  speaks  to  every  one  of  us  whom  He  has 
saved,  *Go  and  do  likewise.'  Even  as  I  have  done 
to  you,  do  ye  likewise.  We,  who  owe  everything  to 
His  compassion,  who  profess  ourselves  His  followers, 
who  walk  in  His  footsteps  and  bear  His  image,  oh,  let 
us  exhibit  his  compassion  to  the  world.  We  can  do 
it.  He  lives  in  us.  His  Spirit  works  in  us.  Let  us 
with  much  prayer  and  firm  faith  look  to  His  example 
as  the  sure  promise  of  what  we  can  be.  It  will  be 
to  Him  an  unspeakable  joy,  if  He  finds  us  prepared 
for  it,  not  only  to  show  His  compassion  to  us,  but 
through  us  to  the  world.  And  ours  will  be  the  un- 
utterable joy  of  having  a  Christ-like  heart,  full  of 
compassion  and  of  great  mercy. 

O  my  Lord!  my  calling  is  becoming  almost  too 
high.     In  Thy  compassionate  love,  too,  I  must  fol- 


110  LIKE  CHRIST: 

low  and  imitate  and  reproduce  Thy  life.  In  the 
compassion  wherewith  I  see  and  help  every  bodily 
and  spiritual  misery,  in  the  gentle,  tender  love  where- 
with every  sinner  feels  that  I  long  to  bless  men,  must 
the  world  form  some  idea  of  Thy  compassion.  Most 
merciful  One!  forgive  me  that  the  world  has  seen  so 
little  of  it  in  me.  Most  mighty  Kedeemer!  let  Thy 
compassion  not  only  save  me,  but  so  take  hold  of  me 
and  dwell  in  me  that  compassion  may  be  the  very 
breath  and  joy  of  my  life.  May  Thy  compassion 
towards  me  be  within  me  a  living  fountain  of  com- 
passion towards  others. 

Lord  Jesus,  I  know  Thou  canst  only  give  this  on 
one  condition,  that  I  let  go  my  own  life,  and  my 
efforts  to  keep  and  sanctify  that  life,  and  suffer  Thee 
to  live  in  me,  to  be  my  life.  Most  merciful  One,  I 
yield  myself  to  Thee!  Thou  hast  a  right  to  me, 
Thou  alone.  There  is  nothing  more  precious  to  me 
•than  Thy  compassionate  countenance;  what  can  be 
more  blessed  than  to  be  like  Thee? 

Lord,  here  I  am.  I  have  faith  in  Thee,  that 
Thou  Thyself  wilt  teach  and  fit  me  to  obey  Thy  word : 
*Thou  shouldst  have  had  compassion,  even  as  I  had 
compassion  on  thee.'  In  that  faith  I  go  out  this 
very  day  to  find  in  my  intercourse  with  others  the 
opportunity  of  showing  how  Thou  hast  loved  me. 
In  that  faith  it  will  become  the  great  object  of  my 
life  to  win  men  to  Thee.     Amen. 


IN  HIS  COMPASSION,  111 


NOTE. 


*Evil  can  only  be  overcome  by  the  contact  of  a 
most  personal  self-devotion,  never  by  a  love  that 
stands  at  a  distance.  **  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,'* 
Jesus  said:  ye  yourselves  just  as  you  are,  in  the 
midst  of  society:  in  everyplace  and  every  moment 
a  sanctifying  power  must  flow  out  from  you  and 
your  presence.  Christ  Himself  is  the  life  and  the 
light.  In  all  that  He  does,  or  says,  or  suffers,  it  is 
always  Himself;  whoever  separates  aught  from  Him- 
self no  longer  preserves  it,  it  vanishes  in  his  hands. 
And  just  this  is  the  radical  error  of  our  modern 
Christianity.  Men  separate  the  words  and  works  of 
Christ  from  Himself,  and  so  it  comes  that  many,  with 
all  they  do  as  Christians,  have  never  found  Christ 
Himself.  So  th^re  are  many  who  trust  in  His  suffer- 
ing and  merit,  who  cannot  show  that  they  have 
any  real  fellowship  with  Him,  or  truly  follow  Him. 
Christ  had  His  abode  not  only  in  Cana  of  Galilee, 
but  also  in  Gethsemane  and  on  Calvary.  Alas !  are 
there  not  many  who  make  their  boast  -of  the  cross, 
and  yet  are  more  afraid  of  the  real  cross  than  they 
are  of  the  devil?  They  have  so  wisely  arranged  their 
profession  of  Christ's  cross,  that  no  loss  to  their 
honour,  their  goods,  or  their  liberty  can  ever  come 
from  ,it.  Christ's  trae  and  actual  imitation  must 
ouce  again,  as  in  the  olden  times,  become  the  stand- 
ard of  Christendom.  Only  and  alone  in  this  way 
will  faith  again  conquer  unbelief  and  superstition. 
Many  are  laboring  hard  at  present  to  prove  to  a 
doubting  world  the  inspiration  of  Holy  Scripture, 
the  truth  of  the  words  and  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 


112  LIKE  CHRIST: 

It  is  labour  in  vain,  to  try  and  prove  by  words  and 
argument  that  which  can  alone  be  made  hnoivn  hy  its 
own  self-evidencing  power  and  its  actual  presence! 
Let  the  proof  be  given  in  your  deeds,  that  the  spirit 
of  the  miracles  dwells  in  \'o\xy  prove  above  all  in 
your  life^  that  Jesus  Christ  is  continuing  in  you  His 
heavenly  eternal  life;  and  your  words  will  bring 
many  to  believe.  But  if  you  are  wanting  in  this 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power,  be  not 
surprised  if  the  world  bestow  little  attention  on  your 
eloquent  arguments.  The  hour  is  come  that  all 
Christendom  must  rise  up  as  one  man,  and  in  the 
poiver  of  Christ  repeat  over  again  what  Christ  Himself 
did  to  a  perishing  world.  This  is  the  need  there  is 
for  the  imitation  of  Jesus  Christ:  this  is  the  only 
valid  proof  for  the  truth  of  Christianity.' — From  M. 
Diemer,  Een  nieuiv  ioek  va7i  de  navolging  van  Jesus 
Christus. 


IN  HIS  ONENESS   WITH  THE  FATHER.      113 


FOURTEENTH  DAY. 


LIKE    CHRIST 

IN  HIS  ONENESS  WITH  THE  FATHER. 

*  Holy  Father,  keep  through  Thine  own  name  those  whom 
Thou  hast  given  me,  that  they  may  be  one,  even  as  we  are. 
That  they  all  may  be  one  ;  even  as  Thou,  Father,  art  in  me, 
and  I  in  Thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us :  that  the 
world  may  believe  that  Thou  hast  sent  me.  And  the  glory 
which  Thou  gavest  me  I  have  given  them  ;  that  they  may 
be  one  even  as  we  are  one.  I  in  them,  and  Thou  in  me, 
that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one  ;  and  that  the  world 
may  know  that  Thou  hast  sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them, 
even  as  Thou  hast  loved  me.  '—John  xvii.  11,  21,  22. 

WHAT  an  unspeakable  treasure  we  have  in  this 
high  -  priestly  prayer!  There  the  heart  of 
Jesus  is  laid  open  to  our  view,  and  we  see  what  His 
love  desires  for  us.  There  the  heavens  are  opened 
to  us,  and  we  learn  Avhat  He  as  our  Intercessor  is 
-ijontiuually  asking  and  obtaining  for  us  from  the 
Father. 

In  that  prayer  the  mutual  union  of  believers  has  a 
larger  place  than  anything  else.  In  His  prayer  for  all 
who  in  future  shall  believe,  this  is  the  chief  petition, 
vers.  20-26.  Three  times  He  repeats  this  prayer  for 
their  unity. 
8 


114  LIKE  CHRIST: 

The  Lord  tells  us  plainly  why  He  desires  it  so 
strongly.  This  unity  is  the  only  convincing  proof  to 
the  world  that  the  Father  had  sent  Him,  With  all  its 
blindness,  the  world  knows  that  selfishness  is  the 
curse  of  sin.  It  helps  but  little  that  God's  children 
tell  that  they  are  born  again,  and  that  they  are 
happy,  that  they  can  do  wonders  in  Jesus'  name,  or 
can  prove  that  what  the  Scriptures  teach  is  the 
truth.  When  the  world  sees  a  church  from  which 
selfishness  is  banished,  then  it  will  acknowledge  the 
divine  mission  of  Christ,  because  He  has  wrought 
such  a  wonder,  a  community  of  men  who  truly  and 
heartily  love  one  another. 

The  Lord  speaks  of  this  unity  three  times  as  the 
reflection  of  His  own  oneness  with  the  Father.  He 
knew  that  this  was  the  perfection  of  the  Godhead ; 
the  Father  and  Son,  as  persons  separate,  and  yet 
perfectly  one  in  the  living  fellowship  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  And  He  cannot  imagine  anything  higher 
than  this,  that  His  believing  people  should  with  Him 
and  in  Him  be  one  with  each  other,  eyek  as  He  and 
the  Father  are  one. 

The  intercession  of  the  Lord  Jesus  avails  much;  it 
is  all -prevailing.  What  He  asks  He  receives  of  His 
Father.  But  lo!  the  blessing  which  descends  finds 
no  entrance  in  hearts  where  tbere  is  no  open  door, 
no  place  prepared,  to  receive  it.  How  many  believers 
there  are  who  do  not  even  desire  to  be  one  even  as 


IN  HIS  ONENESS   WITH  THE  FATHER.      115 

the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one !  They  are  so  accus- 
tomed to  a  life  of  selfishness  and  imperfect  love,  that 
they  do  not  even  long  for  such  perfect  love;  they 
put  off  that  union  until  they  meet  in  heaven.  And 
yet  the  Lord  thought  of  a  life  on  earth  when  He 
twice  said,  'That  the  world  may  know.' 

That  'they  may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  one.'  The 
Church  must  be  awakened  to  understand  and  to 
value  this  prayer  aright.  This  union  is  one  of  life 
and  love  at  once.  Some  explain  it  as  having  refer- 
ence to  the  hidden  life-union  which  binds  all  believers 
even  under  external  divisions.  But  this  is  not  what 
the  Lord  means;  He  speaks  of  something  that  the 
world  can  see,  something  that  resembles  the  union 
between  God  the  Father  and  God  the  Son.  The 
hidden  unity  of  life  must  be  manifest  in  the  visible 
unity  and  fellowship  of  love.  Only  when  it  be  omes 
impossible  for  believers,  in  the  different  smaller 
circles  in  which  they  are  associated,  not  to  live  in 
the  full  oneness  of  love  with  the  children  of  God 
around  them ;  only  when  they  learn  that  a  life  in 
love  to  each  other,  such  as  Christ's  to  us,  and  the 
Father's  to  Him,  is  simple  duty,  and  begin  to  cry  to 
God  for  His  Holy  Spirit;  to  work  it  in  them,  then  only 
will  there  be  a  hope  of  change  in  this  respect.  The 
fire  will  spread  from  circle  to  circle  and  from  church  to 
church,  until  all  who  truly  do  the  will  of  God  will  con- 
secrate themselves  to  abide  in  love,  even  as  God  is  love. 


/ 

116  LIKE  CHRIST: 

And  what  are  we  to  do  now,  while  we  wait  for  and 
wish  to  hasten  that  day?  Let  every  one  who  takes 
up  earnestly  the  word  of  the  Master,  '  Even  as  I,  so 
also  ye,'  let  him  begin  with  his  own  circle.  And  in 
that  circle  with  himself  first.  However  weak  or 
sickly,  however  perverse  or  trying  tlie  members  of 
Christ's  body  may  be  with  whom  he  is  surrounded,  ^ 
let  him  live  with  them  in  close  fellowship  and  love. 
Whether  they  are  willing  for  it  or  not,  whether  they 
accept  or  reject,  let  him  love  them  with  a  Christ-like 
love.  Yes,  to  love  them  as  Christ  does  must  be  the 
purpose  of  his  life.  This  love  will  find  an  echo  in 
some  hearts  at  least,  and  awaken  in  them  the  desire, 
too,  to  seek  after  the  life  of  love  and  perfect  one- 
ness. 

But  what  discoveries  such  effort  will  bring  of  the 
impotence  of  the  believer,  who  has  been  hitherto 
satisfied  with  the  ordinary  Christian  life,  at  all  to 
reach  this  standard!  He  will  soon  find  that  nothing 
■will  avail  but  a  personal,  undivided  consecration. 
To  have  a  love  like  Christ's,  I  must  truly  have  a  life 
like  Christ's:  I  must  live  with  His  life.  The  lesson 
must  be  learnt  anew,  that  Christ  in  the  fullest  sense 
of  the  word  will  be  the  life  of  those  who  dare  to  trust 
Him  for  it.  Those  who  cannot  trust  with  a  full 
trust,  cannot  love  with  a  full  love. 

Believer,  listen  once  more  to  the  simple  way  to 
such  a  life.     First  of  all  acknowledge  your  calling 


7.Y  HIS  ONENESS   WITH  THE  FATHER.      117 

to  live  and  love  just  like  Christ.  Confess  your  ina- 
bility to  fulfil  this  calling,  even  in  the  very  least. 
Listen  to  the  word,  that  Christ  is  waiting  to  fit  you 
to  fulfil  this  calling,  if  you  will  give  yourself  unre- 
servedly to  Him.  Make  the  surrender  in  this,  that 
conscious  of  being  utterly  unable  to  do  anything  in 
your  own  strength,  you  offer  yourself  to  your  Lord 
to  work  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do.  And  count 
then  most  confidently  upon  Him,  who  in  the  power 
of  His  unceasing  intercession  can  save  completely,  to 
work  in  you  what  He  has  asked  of  His.  Father  for 
you.  Yes,  count  on  him  who  has  said  to  the 
Father,  *Thou  in  me  and  I  in  them,  that  they  may 
be  one,  even  as  we  are  one,'  that  He  will  manifest 
His  life  in  you  with  heavenly  power.  As  you  live 
with  His  life,  you  will  love  with  His  love. 

Beloved  fellow-Christians,  the  oneness  of  Christ 
with  the  Father  is  our  model:  even  as  they,  so 
must  we  be  one.  Let  us  love  one  another,  serve  one 
another,  bear  with  one  another,  help  one  another, 
live  for  one  another.  For  this  our  love  is  too  small: 
but  we  will  earnestly  pray  that  Christ  give  us  His 
love  wherewith  to  love.  With  God's  love  shed 
abroad  in  our  hearts  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  we 
shall  be  so  one  that  the  world  will  know  that  it  is 
indeed  the  truth,  that  the  Father  sent  Christ  into 
the  world,  and  that  Christ  has  given  in  us  the  very 
life  and  love  of  heaven. 


118  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Holy  Father,  we  know  now  with  what  petitions 
He,  who  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession,  continually 
approaches  Thee.  It  is  for  the  perfect  unity  of  His 
disciples.  Father,  we  too  would  cry  to  Thee  for 
this  blessing.  Alas,  how  divided  is  Thy  Church! 
It  is  not  the  division  of  language  or  country  that  we 
deplore,  not  even  the  difference  of  doctrine  or  teach- 
ing that  so  much  grieves  us.  But,  Lord!  the  want 
of  that  unity  of  spirit  and  love  whereby  Thy  Church 
should  convince  the  world  that  she  is  from  heaven. 

0  Lord!  we  desire  to  confess  before  Thee  with 
deep  shame  the  coldness,  and  selfishness,  and  dis- 
trust, and  bitterness  that  is  still  at  times  to  be  seen 
among  Thy  children.  We  confess  before  Thee  our 
own  want  of  that  fervent  and  perfect  love  to  which 
Thou  hast  called  us.  0  forgive,  and  have  mercy 
upon  us. 

Lord  God !  visit  Thy  people.  It  is  through  the 
one  Spirit  that  we  can  know  and  show  our  unity  in 
the  one  Lord.  Let  Thy  Holy  Spirit  work  power- 
fully in  Thy  believing  people  to  make  them  one.  Let 
it  be  felt  in  every  circle  where  God's  children  meet 
each  other,  how  indispensable  a  close  union  in  the 
love  of  Jesus  is.  And  let  my  heart,  too,  be  delivered 
from  self,  to  realize,  in  the  fellowship  with  Thy 
children,  how  we  are  one,  even  as  Thou,  Father, 
and  Thy  Son  art  one.    Amen. 


I 


IN  HIS  DEPENDENCE  ON  THE  FATHER.     119 


FIFTEENTH  DAY. 


LIKE    CHEIST 

m  HIS  DEPENDENCE  ON  THE  FATHER. 

*  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  The  Son  can  do  nothing 
of  Himself,  but  what  He  seeth  the  Father  doing  :  for  what 
things  soever  He  doeth,  these  the  Son  also  doeth  in  like 
manner.  For  the  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  showeth  Him 
all  things  that  Himself  doeth  :  and  greater  works  than  these 
will  He  show  Him,  that  ye  may  marvel. ' — John  v.  19,  20. 

*  I  know  mine  own,  and  mine  own  know  me,  even  as  the 
Father  knoweth  me  and  I  know  the  Father. ' — John  x.  15 
(R.  v.). 

OUR  relation  to  Jesns  is  the  exact  counterpart  of 
His  to  the  Father.  And  so  the  words  in  which 
He  sets  forth  His  intercourse  with  the  Father  have 
their  truth  in  us  too.  And  as  the  words  of  Jesus 
in  John  v.  describe  the  natural  relation  between 
every  father  and  son,  whether  on  earth  or  in  heaven, 
they  are  applicable  only  to  the  Only-begotten,  but  to 
every  one  who  in  and  like  Jesus  is  called  a  son  of 
God. 

We  cannot  better  catch  the  simple  truth  and  force 
of  the  illustration  than  by  thinking  of  Jesus  with 
His  earthly  father  in  the  carpenter's  shop  learning 


120  LIKE  CHRIST: 

his  trade.  The  first  thing  you  notice  is  the  entire 
dependence :  *The  son  can  do  nothing  of  himself,  but 
what  he  seeth  the  father  doing.'  Then  j'ou  are 
struck  by  the  implicit  obedience  that  just  seeks  to 
imitate  the  father:  *for  whatsoever  things  the  father 
doeth,  these  doeth  the  son  in  like  manner.'  You 
then  notice  the  loving  intimacy  to  which  the  father 
admits  him,  keeping  back  none  of  his  secrets:  'for 
the  father  loveth  the  son,  and  showeth  him  all  things 
that  himself  doeth.'  And  in  this  dependent  obedi- 
ence on  his  son's  part,  and  the  loving  teaching  on 
the  father's  part,  you  have  the  pledge  of  an  ever- 
growing advance  to  greater  works :  step  by  step  the 
son  will  be  led  up  to  all  that  the  father  himself  can 
do:  *  Greater  works  than  these  will  he  show  him, 
that  ye  may  marvel. ' 

In  this  picture  we  have  the  reflection  of  the  rela- 
tionship between  God  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  His 
blessed  humanity.  If  His  human  nature  is  to  be 
something  real  and  true,  and  if  we  are  to  understand 
how  Christ  is  in  very  deed  to  be  our  example,  we 
must  believe  fully  in  what  our  blessed  Lord  here 
reveals  to  us  of  the  secrets  of  His  inner  life.  The 
words  He  speaks  are  literal  truth.  His  dependence 
on  the  Father  for  each  moment  of  His  life  was  abso- 
lutely and  intensely  real:  'The  Son  can  do  nothing 
of  Himself,  but  what  He  seeth  the  Father  doing.' 
He  counted  it  no  humiliation  to  wait  on  Him  for 


IN  HIS  DEPENDENCE  ON  THE  FATHER.     121 

His  commands:  He  rather  considered  it  His  highest 
blessedness  to  let  Himself  be  led  and  guided  of  the 
Father  as  a  child.  And  accordingly  He  held  himself 
bound  in  strictest  obedience  to  say  and  do  only  what 
the  Father  showed  him:  'Whatsoever  things  the 
Father  doeth,  these  the  Son  also  doeth  in  like 
manner.' 

The  proof  of  this  is  the  exceeding  carefulness  with 
which  in  everything  He  seeks  to  keep  to  Holy  Scrip- 
ture. In  His  sufferings  He  will  endure  all  in  order 
that  the  Scriptures  may  be  fiilfilled.  For  this  He 
remained  the  whole  night  in  prayer.  In  such  con- 
tinued pra3^er  He  presents  His  thoughts  to  the 
Father,  and  waits  for  the  answer,  that  He  may  know 
the  Father's  will.  No  child  in  his  ignorance,  no 
slave  in  his  bondage,  was  ever  so  anxious  to  keep  to 
what  the  father  or  master  had  said,  as  the  Lord  Jesus 
was  to  follow  the  teaching  and  guidance  of  His 
Heavenly  Father.  On  this  account  the  Father  kept 
nothing  hid  from  Him:  the  entire  dependence  and 
willingness  always  to  learn  were  rewarded  with  the 
most  perfect  communication  of  all  the  Father's  se- 
crets. *For  the  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  showeth 
Him  all  things,  and  will  show  Him  greater  works 
than  these,  that  ye  may  marvel.'  The  Father  had 
formed  a  glorious  life  plan  for  the  Son,  that  in  Him 
the  Divine  life  might  be  shown  forth  in  the  condi- 
tions of  human  existence:  this  plan  was  shown  to  the: 


122  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Son   piece  by  piece  until  at  last  all  was  gloriously 
accomplished. 

Child  of  God,  it  is  not  only  for  the  only-begotten 
Son  that  a  life  plan  has  been  arranged,  but  for  each 
orue  of  His  children.  Just  in  proportion  as  "we  live  in 
more  or  less  entire  dependence  on  the  Father  will 
this  life  plan  be  more  or  less  perfectly  worked  out  in 
our  lives.  The  nearer  the  believer  comes  to  this 
entire  dependence  of  the  Son,  'doing  nothing  but 
what  He  sees  the  Father  do,'  and  then  to  His  im- 
plicit obedience,  'whatsoever  He  doeth,  doing  these 
in  like  manner,'  so  much  more  will  the  promise  be 
fullllled  to  us:  *The  Father  showeth  Him  all  things 
that  He  Himself  doeth,  and  will  show  Him  greater 
works  than  these.'  Like  Chkist!  that  word  calls 
us  to  a  life  of  conformity  to  the  Son  in  His  blessed 
dependence  on  the  Father.  Each  one  of  us  is  invited 
thus  to  live. 

To  such  a  life  in  dependence  on  the  Father,  the 
first  thing  that  is  necessary  is  a  firm  faith  that  He 
will  make  known  His  will  to  us.  I  think  this  is 
something  that  keeps  many  back:  they  cannot  be- 
lieve that  the  Lord  cares  for  them  so  much  that  He 
will  indeed  give  Himself  the  trouble  every  day  to 
teach  them  and  to  make  known  to  them  His  will,  * 
just  as  He  did  to  Jesus.  Christian,  thou  art  of  more 
value  to  the  Father  than  thou  knowest.  Thou  art 
as  much  worth  as  the  price  He  paid  for  thee — that 


IN  HIS  DEPENDENCE  ON  THE  FATHER,     123 

is,  the  blood  of  His  Son :  He  therefore  attaches  the 
highest  value  to  the  least  thing  that  concerns  thee, 
and  will  guide  thee  even  in  what  is  most  insignifi- 
cant. He  longs  more  for  close  and  constant  inter- 
course with  thee  than  thou  canst  conceive.  He  can 
use  thee  for  His  glory,  and  make  something  of  thee, 
higher  than  thou  canst  understand.  The  Father 
loves  his  child,  and  shows  him  what  He  does.  That 
He  proved  in  Jesus:  and  He  will  prove  it  in  us  too. 
There  must  only  be  the  surrender  to  expect  His 
teaching.  Through  His  Holy  Spirit  He  gives  this 
most  tenderly.  Without  removing  us  from  our  circle, 
the  Father  can  so  conform  us  to  Christ's  image,  that 
we  can  be  a  blessing  and  joy  to  all.  Do  not  let  un- 
belief of  God's  compassionate  love  prevent  us  from 
expecting  the  Father's  guidance  in  all  things. 

Let  the  unwillingness  to  submit  yourself  as  little 
keep  you  back.  This  is  the  second  great  hindrance. 
The  desire  for  independence  was  the  temptation  in 
paradise,  is  the  temptation  in  each  human  heart.  It 
seems  hard  to  be  nothing,  to  know  nothing,  to  will 
nothing.  And  yet  it  is  so  blessed.  This  dependence 
brings  us  into  most  blessed  communion  with  God : 
of  us  it  becomes  true  as  of  Jesus,  *The  Father  loveth 
the  Son,  and  showeth  Him  all  things  whatsoever  He 
doeth.'  This  dependence  takes  from  us  all  care  and 
responsibility:  we  have  only  to  obey  orders.  It  gives 
real  power  and  strength  of  will,  because  we  know  that 


124  LIKE  CHRIST: 

He  works  in  ns  to  will  and  to  do.  It  gives  ns  the 
blessed  assurance  that  our  work  will  succeed,  because 
we  have  allowed  God  alone  to  take  charge  of  it. 

My  brother,  if  you  have  hitherto  known  but  little 
of  this  life  of  conscious  dependence  and  simple  obe- 
dience, begin  to-day.  Let  your  Saviour  be  your  ex- 
ample in  this.  It  is  His  blessed  will  to  live  in  you, 
and  in  you  to  be  again  what  He  was  here  on  earth. 
He  only  longs  for  your  acquiescence.  He  will  work 
it  in  you.  Offer  yourself  to  the  Father  this  day, 
after  the  example  of  the  First-begofcten,  to  do  noth- 
ing of  yourself  but  only  what  the  Father  shows  you. 
Fix  your  gaze  on  Jesus  as  also  in  this  the  Example 
and  Promise  of  what  you  shall  be.  Adore  Him  who, 
for  your  sake,  humbled  Himself,  and  showed  how 
blessed  the  dependent  life  can  be. 

Blessed  dependence!  it  is  indeed  the  disposition 
which  becomes  us  towards  such  a  God.  It  gives  Him 
the  glory  which  belongs  to  Him  as  God.  It  keeps 
the  soul  in  peace  and  rest,  for  it  allows  God  to  care 
for  all.  It  keeps  the  mind  quiet  and  prepared  to 
receive  and  use  the  Father's  teaching.  And  it  is  so 
gloriously  rewarded  in  the  deeper  experience  of  holy 
intercourse,  and  the  continued  ever-advancing  dis- 
coveries of  His  will  and  work  with  which  the  Father 
crowns  it.  Blessed  dependence!  in  which  the  Son 
lived  on  earth,  thou  art  the  desire  of  my  soul. 

Blessed   dependence!    it  was  because  Jesus  knew 


IN  HIS  DEPENDENCE  ON  THE  FATHER.     125 

that  he  was  a  So7i  that  he  thus  loved  to  be  depend- 
ent on  the  Father.  Of  all  the  teaching  in  regard  to 
the  likeness  to  Christ  this  is  the  centre  and  sum:  I 
must  live  as  a  Son  with  my  Father.  If  I  stand  clear 
in  this  relationship,  as  a  son  realizing  that  the  Father 
is  everything  to  me^  a  sonlike  life,  living  through  the 
Father,  will  be  its  natural  and  spontaneous  outcome. 

0  my  Father,  the  longer  I  fix  my  gaze  upon  the 
image  of  the  Son,  the  more  I  discover  the  fearful 
ruin  of  my  nature,  and  how  far  sin  has  estranged 
me  from  Thee.  To  be  dependent  upon  Thee;  there 
can  be  no  higher  blessedness  than  this:  to  trust  in 
all  things  in  a  God  such  as  Thou  art,  so  wise  and 
good,  so  rich  and  powerful.  And  lo!  it  has  become 
the  most  difficult  thing  there  can  be;  we  would 
rather  be  dependent  on  our  own  folly  than  the  God 
of  ail  glory.  Even  Thine  own  children,  0  most 
blessed  Father!  often  think  it  so  hard  to  give  up 
their  own  thoughts  and  will,  and  to  believe  that  ab- 
solute dependence  on  God,  to  the  very  least  things, 
is  alone  true  blessedness. 

Lord!  I  come  to  Thee  with  the  humble  prayer: 
teach  me  this.  He  who  purchased  with  His  own 
blood  for  me  the  everlasting  blessedness,  hath  shown 
me  in  His  own  life  wherein  that  blessedness  consists. 
And  I  know  He  will  now  lead  and  keep  me  in  it.  0 
my  Father!  in  Thy  Son  I  yield  myself  to  Thee,  to  be 


126 


LIKE  CHRIST: 


made  like  Him,  like  Him  to  do  nothing  of  myself, 
but  what  I  see  the  Father  doing.  Father!  Thou 
wilt  take  even  me  too,  like  the  Firstborn,  and  for 
His  sake,  into  Thy  training,  and  show  me  what  Thou 
doest.  0  my  God !  be  Thou  a  Father  unto  me  as 
unto  Christ,  and  let  me  be  Thy  son,  as  He  was* 
Amen. 


IN  HIS  LOVE.  127 


SIXTEENTH  DAY. 


LIKE  CHRIST 

IN  HIS  LOVE. 

'A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you,  That  ye  love  one 
another ;  even  as  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye  also  love  one 
another.' — John  xiii.  34. 

*  This  is  my  commandment,  That  ye  love  one  another, 
even  as  I  have  loved  you. ' — John  xv.  13. 

EVEN  AS:  We  begin  to  understand  somewhat  of 
the  blessedness  of  that  little  word.  It  is  not 
the  command  of  a  law  which  only  convinces  of  sin 
and  impotence:  it  is  a  new  command  under  a  new 
covenant,  that  is  established  upon  better  promises. 
It  is  the  command  of  Him  who  asks  nothing  that 
He  has  not  provided,  and  now  offers  to  bestow.  It 
is  the  assurance  that  He  expects  nothing  from  us, 
that  He  does  not  work  in  us:  evek  as  I  have  loved 
you,  and  every  moment  am  pouring  out  that  love 
upon  you  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  even  so  do  ye 
love  one  another.  The  measure,  the  strength,  and 
the  work  of  your  love  you  will  find  in  my  love  to  you. 
Even  as  I  have  loved  you :  that  word  gives  us  the 
measure  of  the  love  wherewith  we  must  love  each 
other.     True  love  knows  no  measure:  it  gives  itself 


128  LIKE  CHRIST: 

entirely.  It  may  take  into  consideration  the  time 
and  measure  of  showing  it;  but  love  itself  is  ever 
whole  and  undivided.  This  is  the  greatest  glory 
of  Divine  Love  that  we  have,  in  the  Father  and  Son, 
two  persons,  who  in  love  remain  One  Being,  each 
losing  Himself  in  the  other.  This  is  the  glory  of  the 
love  of  Jesus,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  that  He  loves 
us  even  as  the  Father  loves  Him.  And  this  is  the 
glory  of  brotherly  love,  that  it  will  know  of  no  other 
law,  than  to  love  even  as  God  and  Christ. 

He  who  would  be  like  Christ  must  unhesitatingly 
accept  this  as  his  rule  of  life.  He  knows  how  diflB- 
cult,  how  impossible  it  often  is  thus  to  love  brethren, 
in  whom  there  is  so  much  that  is  offensive  or  un- 
amiable.  Before  going  out  to  meet  them  in  circum- 
stances where  his  love  may  be  tried,  he  goes  in  secret 
to  the  Lord,  and  with  his  eye  fixed  on  his  own  sin 
and  unworthiness  asks:  How  much  owest  thou  thy 
Lord?  He  goes  to  the  cross  and  seeks  thereto  fathom 
the  love  wherewith  the  Lord  has  loved  him.  He  lets 
the  light  of  the  immeasurable  love  of  Him  who  is  in 
teaven,  his  Head  and  his  Brother,  shine  in  upon  his 
soul,  until  he  learns  to  feel  Divine  Love  has  but  one 
law;  love  seeks  not  its  own,  love  gives  itself  wholly. 
And  he  lays  himself  on  the  altar  before  his  Lord; 
even  as  Thou  hast  loved  me,  so  will  I  love  the 
brethren.  In  virtue  of  my  union  with  Jesus,  and  in 
Jesus  with  them,  there  can  be   no  question  of  any- 


IN  HIS  LOVE.  129 

thing  less:  I  love  them  as  Christ  did.  Oh  that 
Christians  would  close  their  ears  to  all  the  reasonings 
of  their  own  hearts,  and  fix  their  eyes  only  on  the 
law  which  He  who  loves  them  has  promulgated  in 
His  own  example:  they  would  realize  that  there  is 
nothing  for  them  to  do  but  this — to  accept  His  com- 
mands and  to  obey  them. 

Our  love  may  recognize  no  other  measure  than 
His,  because  His  love  is  the  strength  of  ours.  The 
love  of  Christ  is  no  mere  idea  or  sentiment;  it  is 
a  real  divine  life  power.  As  long  as  the  Christian 
does  not  understand  this,  it  cannot  exert  its  full 
power  in  him.  But  when  his  faith  rises  to  realize 
that  Christ's  love  is  nothing  less  than  the  imparting 
of  Himself  and  His  love  to  the  beloved,  and  he  be- 
comes rooted  in  this  love  as  the  source  whence  his 
life  derives  its  sustenance,  then  he  sees  that  his  Lord 
simply  asks  that  he  should  allow  His  love  to  flow 
through  him.  He  must  live  in  a  Christ -given 
strength;  the  love  of  Christ  constrains  him,  and 
enables  him  to  love  as  He  did. 

From  this  love  of  Christ  the  Christian  also  learns 
what  the  loovTc  of  his  love  to  the  brethren  must  be. 
We  have  already  had  occasion  to  speak  of  many  man- 
ifestations of  love:  its  loving  service,  its  self-denial, 
its  meekness.  Love  is  the  root  of  all  these.  It 
teaches  the  disciple  to  look  upon  himself  as  really 
called  upon  to  be,  in  his  little  circle,  just  like  Jesus, 
9 


130  LIKE  CHRIST: 

the  one  who  lives  solely  to  love  and  help  others. 
Paul  prays  for  the  Philippians:  *That  your  love  may 
abound  more  and  more  in  knowledge,  and  in  all 
judgment '  {Phil  i.  9).  Love  does  not  comprehend 
at  once  what  the  work  is  that  it  can  do.  The  be- 
liever who  prays  that  his  love  may  abound  in  knowl- 
edge, and  really  takes  Christ's  example  as  his  rule 
of  life,  will  be  taught  what  a  great  and  glorious  work 
there  is  for  him  to  do.  The  Church  of  God,  and 
every  child  of  God,  as  well  as  the  world,  has  an 
unspeakable  need  of  love,  of  the  manifestation  of 
Christ's  love.  The  Christian  who  really  takes  the 
Lord's  word,  '  Love  one  another,  even  as  I  have  loved 
you,*  as  a  command  that  must  be  obeyed,  carries 
about  a  power  for  blessing  and  life  for  all  with  whom 
he  comes  in  contact.  Love  is  the  explanation  of  the 
whole  wonderful  life  of  Christ,  and  of  the  wonder  of 
His  death:  Divine  Love  in  God's  children  will  still 
work  its  mighty  wonders. 

'Behold  what  manner  of  love!'  'Behold  how  He 
loved!'  These  words  are  the  superscription  over 
the  love  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son.  They  must 
yet  become  the  keywords  to  the  life  of  every  Chris- 
tian. They  will  be  so  where  in  living  faith  and  true 
consecration  the  command  of  Christ  to  love,  even  as 
He  loved,  is  accepted  as  the  law  of  life.  As  early  as 
the  cal]  of  Abraham  this  principle  was  deposited  as  a 
living  seed  in  God's  kingdom,  that  what  God  is  for 


IN  HIS  LOVE.  131 

ns,  we  must  be  for  others.  'I  will  bless  thee,'  ^and 
thou  shalt  be  a  blessing. '  If  *I  have  loved  you'  is  the 
highest  manifestation  of  what  God  is  for  us,  then 
*Even  so  love  ye'  must  be  the  first  and  highest  ex- 
pression of  what  the  child  of  God  must  be.  In 
preaching,  as  in  the  life  of  the  Church,  it  mast  be 
understood:  77ie  love  which  loves  like  Christ  is  the 
sign  of  true  discipleship. 

Beloved  Christians!  Christ  Jesus  longs  for  you 
in  order  to  make  you,  amid  those  who  surround  you, 
a  very  fountain  of  love.  The  love  of  heaven  would 
fain  take  possession  of  you,  in  order  that,  in  and 
through  you,  it  may  work  its  blessed  work  on  earth. 
Yield  to  its  rule.  Offer  yourself  unreservedly  to 
its  indwelling.  ,  Honour  it  by  the  confident  assur- 
ance that  it  can  teach  you  to  love  as  Jesus  loved. 
As  conformity  to  the  Lord  Jesus  must  be. the  chief 
mark  of  your  Christian  walk,  so  love  must  be  the 
chief  mark  of  that  conformity.  Be  not  disheart- 
ened if  you  do  not  attain  it  at  once.  Only  keep  fast 
hold  of  the  command,  'Love,  even  as  I  have  loved 
you.'  It  takes  time  to  grow  into  it.  Take  time  in 
secret  to  gaze  on  that  image  of  love.  Take  time  in 
prayer  and  meditation,  to  fan  the  desire  for  it  into 
a  burning  flame.  Take  time  to  survey  all  around 
you,  whoever  they  be,  and  whatever  may  happen, 
with  this  one  thought,  'I  must  love  them.'  Take 
time  to  become  conscious  of  your  union  with  your 


132  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Lord,  that  every  fear  as  to  the  possibility  of  thus 
loving,  may  be  met  with  the  word:  'Have  not  I 
commanded  you :  Love  as  I  have  loved  '  ?  Chris- 
tian, take  time  in  loving  communion  with  Jesus,  your 
loving  example,  and  you  will  joyfully  fulfil  this  com- 
mand, too,  to  love  even  as  He  did. 

Lord  Jesus,  who  hast  loved  me  so  wonderfully,  and 
BOW  commandest  me  to  love  even  as  Thou,  behold 
me  at  Thy  feet.  Joyfully  would  I  accept  Thy  com- 
mands, and  now  go  out  in  Thy  strength  to  manifest 
Thy  love  to  all. 

In  Thy  strength,  0  my  Lord !  Be  therefore  pleased 
to  reveal  Thy  love  to  me.  Shed  abroad  Thy  love  in  my 
heart  through  Thy  Holy  Spirit.  Let  me  live  each  mo- 
ment in  the  experience  that  I  am  the  beloved  of  God. 

Lord,  let  me  understand  that  I  can  love,  not  with 
my  own,  but  with  Thy  love.  Thou  livest  in  me. 
Thy  Spirit  dwells  and  works  in  me;  from  Thee 
there  streams  into  me  the  love  with  which  I  can  love 
others.  Thou  dost  only  ask  of  me  that  I  understand 
and  accept  my  calling,  and  that  I  surrender  myself 
to  live  as  Thou  didst.  Thou  wouldest  that  I  look 
upon  my  old  nature  with  its  selfishness  and  unloving- 
ness  as  crucified,  and  in  faith  prepare  to  do  as  Thou 
commandest. 

Lord,  I  do  it.  In  the  strength  of  my  Lord,  I 
would  live  to  love  even  as  TJioii  hast  loved  me.    Amen. 


IN  HIS  PRAYING.  133 


SEVENTEENTH  DAY. 


LIKE   CHEIST 

IN  HIS  PRAYING. 

*  And  in  the  morning,  rising  up  a  great  while  before  day. 
He  went  out,  and  departed  into  a  desert  place,  and  there 
prayed.' — Mark  i.  35. 

*  And  He  saith  unto  them,  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into 
a  desert  place,  and  rest  awhile. ' — Mark  vi.  31. 

IN  His  life  of  secret  prayer,  too,  my  Saviour  is  my 
example.  He  could  not  maintain  the  heavenly 
life  in  His  soul  without  continually  separating  Him- 
self from  man,  and  communing  with  His  Father. 
With  the  heavenly  life  in  me  it  is  no  otherwise:  ife 
has  the  same  need  of  entire  separation  from  man,  the 
need  not  only  of  single  moments,  but  of  time  enough 
for  intercourse  with  the  Fountain  of  Life,  the  Father 
in  heaven. 

It  was  at  the  commencement  of  His  public  minis- 
try that  the  event  happened  which  so  attracted  the 
attention  of  His  disciples  that  they  wrote  it  down. 
After  a  day  full  of  wonders  and  of  work  at  Capernaum 
{vers.  21-32)^  the  press  in  the  evening  became  still 
greater.     The  whole  town  is  before  the  door;    sick 


134  LIKE  CHRIST: 

are  healed,  and  devils  are  cast  out.  It  is  late  before 
they  get  to  sleep ;  in  the  throng  there  is  little  time 
for  quiet  or  for  secret  prayer.  And  lo,  as  they  rise 
early  in  the  morning,  they  find  Him  gone.  In  the 
silence  of  the  night  He  has  gone  out  to  seek  a  place 
of  solitude  in  the  wilderness;  when  they  find  Him 
there,  He  is  still  praying. 

And  why  did  my  Saviour  need  these  hours  of 
prayer?  Did  He  not  know  the  blessedness  of  silently 
lifting  up  His  soul  to  God  in  the  midst  of  the  most 
pressing  business?  Did  not  the  Father  dwell  in 
Him?  and  did  He  not  in  the  depth  of  His  heart  en- 
joy unbroken  communion  with  Him?  Yes,  that  hid- 
den life  was  indeed  His  portion.  But  that  life,  as 
subject  to  the  law  of  humanity,  had  need  of  continual 
refreshing  and  renewing  from  the  fountain.  It  was 
a  life  of  dependence;  just  because  it  was  strong  and 
true,  it  could  not  bear  the  loss  of  direct  and  constant 
intercourse  with  the  Father,  with  whom  and  in  whom 
it  had  its  being  and  its  blessedness. 

What  a  lesson  for  every  Christian!  Much  inter- 
course with  man  is  dissipating,  and  dangerous  to  our 
spiritual  life:  it  brings  us  under  the  influence  of  the 
visible  and  temporal.  Nothing  can  atone  for  the  loss 
of  secret  and  direct  intercourse  with  God.  Even 
work  in  the  service  of  God  and  of  love  is  exhausting: 
we  cannot  bless  others  without  power  going  out  from 
us;    this  must  be  renewed  from  above.     The  law  of 


il 


IN  HIS  PRAYING.  185 

the  manna,  that  what  is  heavenly  cannot  remain  good 
long  upon  earth,  but  must  day  by  day  be  renewed 
afresh  from  heaven,  still  holds  good.  Jesus  Christ 
teaches  it  us:  I  need  every  day  time  to  have  com- 
munion with  my  Father  in  secret.  My  life  is  like 
His,  a  life  hid  in  heaven,  in  God;  it  needs  time  day 
by  day  to  be  fed  from  heaven.  It  is  from  heaven 
alone  that  the  power  to  lead  a  heavenly  life  on  earth 
can  come. 

And  what  may  have  been  the  prayers  that  occupied 
our  Lord  there  so  long?  If  I  could  hear  Him  pray, 
how  I  might  learn  how  I  too  must  pray!  God  be 
praised !  of  His  prayers  we  have  more  than  one  re- 
corded, that  in  them  too  we  might  learn  to  follow 
His  holy  example.  In  the  high-priestly  prayer  {John 
xvii.)  we  hear  Him  speak,  as  in  the  deep  calm  of 
heaven,  to  His  Father;  in  His  Gethsemane  prayer, 
a  few  hours  later,  we  see  Him  call  out  of  the  depths 
of  trouble  and  darkness  unto  God.  In  these  two 
prayers  we  have  all :  the  highest  and  the  deepest  that 
there  is  to  be  found  in  the  communion  of  prayer  be- 
tween Father  and  Son. 

In  both  these  prayers  we  see  how  He  addresses  God. 
Each  time  it  is  Father!  0  my  Father!  In  that  word 
lies  the  secret  of  all  prayer.  The  Lord  knew  that 
He  was  a  Son,  and  that  the  Father  loved  Him:  with 
that  word  He  placed  Himself  in  the  full  light  of  the 
Father's  countenance.     This  was  to  Him  the  greatest 


136  LIKE  CHRIST: 

need  and  greatest  blessing  of  prayer,  to  enter  into  the 
full  enjoyment  of  the  Father's  love.  Let  it  be  thus 
with  me  too.  Let  the  principal  part  of  my  prayer 
be,  the  holy  silence  and  adoration  of  faith,  in  which 
I  wait  upon  God  until  He  reveals  Himself  to  me,  and 
gives  me,  through  His  Spirit,  the  loving  assurance 
that  He  looks  down  upon  me  as  a  Father,  that  I  am 
well-pleasing  to  Him.  He  who  in  prayer  has  not  time 
in  quietness  of  soul,  and  in  full  consciousness  of  its 
meaning,  to  say  Abba  Father,  has  missed  the  best 
part  of  prayer.  It  is  in  prayer  that  the  witness  of 
the  Spirit,  that  we  are  children  of  God,  and  that  the 
Father  draws  nigh  and  delights  in  us,  must  be  exer- 
cised and  strengthened.  *If  our  heart  condemn  us 
not,  we  have  confidence  toward  God ;  and  whatsoever 
we  ask,  we  receive  of  Him,  because  we  obey  His  com- 
mandments, and  do  the  things  that  are  pleasing  in 
His  sight. ' 

In  both  these  prayers  I  also  see  what  He  desired : 
tliat  the  Father  may  be  glorified.  He  speaks:  'I  have 
glorified  Thee;  glorify  Thy  Son,  that  Thy  Son  also 
may  glorify  Thee.'*  That  will  assuredly  have  been 
the  spirit  of  every  prayer;  the  entire  surrender  of 
Himself  only  to  live  for  the  Father's  will  and  glory. 
All  that  He  asked  had  but  one  object,  'That  God 
might  be  glorified.'  In  this  too  He  is  my  example. 
I  must  seek  to  have  the  spirit  of  each  prayer  I  offer: 
Father!    bless  Thy  child,  and  glorify  Thy  grace  in 


IN  HIS  PRAYING,  137 

me,  only  that  Thy  child  may  glorify  Thee.  Every- 
thing in  the  universe  must  show  forth  God's  glory. 
The  Christian  who  is  inspired  with  this  thought,  and 
avails  himself  of  prayer  to  express  it,  until  he  is 
thoroughly  imbued  with  it,  will  have  power  in 
prayer.  Even  of  His  work  in  heaven  our  Lord  says : 
'Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that  will  I  do, 
that  the  Father  may  le  glorified  in  the  Son, '  0  my 
soul,  learn  from  thy  Saviour,  ere  ever  thou  pourest  out 
thy  desires  in  prayer,  first  to  yield  thyself  as  a  whole 
burnt-offering,  with  the  one  object  that  God  may  be 
glorified  in  thee. 

Then  thou  hast  sure  ground  on  which  to  pray. 
Thou  wilt  feel  the  strong  desire,  as  well  as  the  full 
liberty,  to  ask  the  Father  that  in  each  part  of  Christ's 
example,  in  each  feature  of  Christ's  image,  thou 
mayest  be  made  like  Him,  that  so  God  may  be  glori- 
fied. Thou  wilt  understand  how,  only  in  continually 
renewed  prayer,  the  soul  can  surrender  itself  to  wait 
that  God  may  from  heaven  work  in  it  what  will  be 
to  His  glory.  Because  Jesus  surrendered  Himself  so 
entirely  to  the  glory  of  His  Father,  He  was  worthy  to 
be  our  Mediator,  and  could  in  His  high-priestly 
prayer  ask  such  great  blessings  for  His  people.  Learn 
like  Jesus  only  to  seek  God's  glory  in  prayer,  and 
thou  shalt  become  a  true  intercessor,  who  can  not 
only  approach  the  throne  of  grace  with  his  own 
needs,  but  can  also  pray  for  others  the  effectual  fer- 


138  LIKE  CHRIST: 

vent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  that  availeth  much. 
The  words  which  the  Saviour  put  into  our  mouth  in 
the  Lord's  Prayer:  *Thy  will  be  done,'  because  He 
was  made  like  unto  His  brethren  in  all  things,  He 
took  from  our  lips  again  and  made  His  own  in  Geth- 
semane,  that  from  Him  we  might  receive  them  back 
again,  in  the  power  of  His  atonement  and  interces- 
sion, and  so  be  able  to  pray  them  even  as  He  had 
done.  Thou  too  shalt  become  Christlike  in  that 
priestly  intercession,  on  which  the  unity  and  pros- 
perity of  the  Chnrch  and  the  salvation  of  sinners  so 
much  depend. 

And  he  who  in  every  prayer  makes  God's  glory  the 
chief  object  will  also,  if  God  calls  him  to  it,  have 
strength  for  the  prayer  of  Gethsemane.  Every  prayer 
of  Christ  was  intercession,  because  He  had  given 
Himself  for  us;  all  He  asked  and  received  was  in  our 
interest;  every  prayer  He  prayed  was  in  the  spirit  of 
self-sacrifice.  Give  thyself  too  wholly  to  God  for 
man,  and  as  with  Jesus  so  with  us,  the  entire  sacri- 
fice of  ourselves  to  God  in  every  prayer  of  daily  life  is 
the  only  preparation  for  those  single  hours  of  soul- 
struggle  in  which  we  may  be  called  to  some  special 
act  of  the  surrender  of  the  will  that  costs  us  tears  and 
anguish.  But  he  who  has  learnt  the  former  will 
surely  receive  strength  for  the  latter. 

0  my  brother!  if  thou  and  I  would  be  like  Jesus, 
we  must  especially  contemplate  Jesus  praying  alone 


IN  HIS  PRAYING.  139 

in  the  wilderness.  There  is  the  secret  of  His  wonderr 
ful  life.  What  He  did  and  spoke  to  man,  was  first 
spoken  and  lived  through  with  the  Father.  In  com* 
munion  with  Him,  the  anointing  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  each  day  renewed.  He  who  would  be  like 
Him  in  his  walk  and  conversation,  must  simply  begin 
here,  that  he  follow  Jesus  into  solitude.  Even  though 
it  cost  the  sacrifice  of  night  rest,  of  business,  of  in- 
tercourse with  friends,  the  time  must  le  found  to  he 
alone  with  the  Father.  Besides  the  ordinary  hour  of 
prayer,  he  will  feel  at  times  irresistibly  drawn  to  enter 
into  the  holy  place,  and  not  to  come  thence  until  it 
has  anew  been  revealed  to  him  that  God  is  his  portion. 
In  his  secret  chamber,  with  closed  door,  or  in  the 
solitude  of  the  wilderness,  God  must  be  found  every 
day,  and  our  fellowship  with  Him  renewed.  If 
Christ  needed  it,  how  much  more  we!  What  it  was 
to  Him  it  will  be  for  us. 

What  it  was  to  Him  is  apparent  from  what  is  writ- 
ten of  His  baptism :  'It  came  to  pass  that,  Jesus  also 
being  baptized  and  praying^  the  heaven  was  opened, 
and  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  in  a  bodily  shape  like 
a  dove  upon  Him :  and  a  voice  came  from  heaven 
which  said,  Thou  art  my  beloved  Son,  in  Thee  I  am 
well  pleased.'  Yes,  this  will  be  to  us  the  blessing  of 
prayer:  the  opened  heaven,  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit, 
the  Father's  voice,  the  blessed  assurance  of  His  love 
and  good  pleasure.     As  with  Jesus^  so  ivith  us;  from 


140  LIKE  CHRIST: 

dbove^from  dbove^  must  it  all  come  m  answer  to  prayer. 
Christlike  praying  in  secret  will  be  the  secret  of 
Christlike  living  in  public.  0  let  us  rise  and  avail 
ourselves  of  our  wonderful  privilege — the  Christlike 
boldness  of  access  into  the  Father's  presence,  the 
Christlike  liberty  with  God  in  prayer. 

0  my  blessed  Lord,  Thou  hast  called  me,  and  I 
have  followed  Thee,  that  I  may  bear  Thy  image  in 
all  things.  Daily  would  I  seek  Thy  footsteps,  that 
I  may  be  led  of  Thee  whithersoever  Thou  goest. 
This  day  I  have  found  them,  wet  with  the  dew  of 
night,  leading  to  the  wilderness.  There  I  have  seen 
Thee  kneeling  for  hours  before  the  Father.  There  I 
have  heard  Thee,  too,  in  prayer.  Thou  givest  up  all 
to  the  Father's  glory,  and  from  the  Father  dost  ask, 
and  expect,  and  receive  all.  Impress,  I  beseech 
Thee,  this  wonderful  vision  deep  in  my  soul:  my 
Saviour  rising  up  a  great  while  before  day  to  seek 
communion  with  His  Father,  and  to  ask  and  obtain 
in  prayer  all  that  He  needed  for  His  life  and  work. 

0  my  Lord !  who  am  I  that  I  may  thus  listen  to 
Thee?  Yea,  who  am  1  that  Thou  dost  call  me  to 
pray,  even  as  Thou  hast  done?  Precious  Saviour, 
from  the  depths  of  my  heart  I  beseech  Thee,  awaken 
in  me  the  same  strong  need  of  secret  prayer.  Con- 
vince me  more  deeply  that,  as  with  Thee  so  with  me, 
the  Divine  life  cannot  attain  its  full  growth  without 


IN  HIS  PRAYING.  141 

much  secret  comnmniou  with  my  heavenly  Father, 
so  that  my  soul  may  indeed  dwell  in  the  light  of  His 
countenance.  Let  this  conviction  awaken  in  me  such 
burning  desire  that  I  may  not  rest  until  each  day 
afresh  my  soul  has  been  baptized  in  the  streams  of 
heavenly  love.  0  Thou,  who  art  my  Example  and 
Intercessor !  teach  me  to  pray  like  Thee.     Amen. 


142  LIKE  CHRIST: 


EIGHTEENTH  DAY. 


LIKE   CHRIST 

IN  HIS  USE  OF  SCRIPTURE. 

*  That  all  things  must  be  fulfilled  which  were  written  in 
the  law  of  Moses,  and  the  Prophets,  and  in  the  Psalms, 
concerning  me. ' — Luke  xxiv.  44. 

WHAT  the  Lord  Jesus  accomplished  here  on  earth 
as  man  He  owed  greatly  to  His  use  of  the 
Scriptures.  He  found  in  them  the  way  marked  in 
which  He  had  to  walk,  the  food  and  the  strength  on 
which  He  could  work,  the  weapon  by  which  He  could 
overcome  every  enemy.  The  Scriptures  were  indeed 
indispensable  to  Him  through  all  His  life  and  passion : 
from  beginning  to  end  His  life  was  the  fulfilment  of 
what  had  been  written  of  Him  in  the  volume  of  the 
Book. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  adduce  proofs  of  this. 
In  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness  it  was  by  His 
'It  is  ivritten^  that  He  conquered  Satan.  In  His 
conflicts  with  the  Pharisees  He  continually  appealed 
to  the  Word:  ^What  saith  the  Scripture?''  'Have 
ye  not  read?''  'Is  it  not  written?''  In  His  inter- 
course  with  His   disciples  it  was   always  from   the 


^1 


IN  HIS   USE  OF  SCRIPTURE,  143 

Scriptures  that  He  proved  the  certainty  and  necessity 
of  His  sufferings  and  resurrection:  'How  otherioise 
can  the  Scriptures  te  fxdfilledV  And  in  His  inter- 
course with  His  Father  in  His  last,  sufferings,  it  is  in 
tlie  words  of  Scripture  that  He  pours  out  the  com- 
jiaint  of  being  forsaken,  and  then  again  commends 
His  spirit  into  the  Father's  hands.  All  this  has  a 
very  deep  meaning.  He  was  Himself  the  living 
Word.  He  had  the  Spirit  without  measure.  If  ever 
any  one,  He  could  have  done  without  the  written 
Word.  And  yet  we  see  that  it  is  everything  to  Him. 
More  than  any  one  else  He  thus  shows  us  that  tlie  life 
of  God  in  human  fiesli  and  the  word  of  God  in  human 
speech  are  inseparably  connected.  Jesus  would  not 
have  boen  what  He  was,  could  not  have  done  what  He 
did,  had  He  not  yielded  Himself  step  by  step  to  be 
led  and  sustained  by  the  Word  of  God. 

Let  us  try  and  understand  what  this  teaches  us. 
The  Word  of  God  is  more  than  once  called  Seed ;  it 
is  the  seed  of  the  Divine  life.  We  know  what  seed 
is.  It  is  that  wonderful  organism  in  which  the  life, 
the  invisible  essence  of  a  plant  or  tree,  is  so  concen- 
trated and  embodied  that  it  can  be  taken  away  and 
made  available  to  impart  the  life  of  the  tree  else- 
where. This  use  may  be  twofold.  As  fruit  we  eat 
it,  for  instance,  in  the  corn  that  gives  us  bread ;  and 
the  life  of  the  plant  becomes  our  nourishment  and 
our  life.     Or  we  sow  it,  and  the  life  of  the  plant  re- 


144  LIKE  CHRIST: 

produces  and  multiplies  itself.     In  bath  aspects  the 
Word  of  God  is  seed. 

True  life  is  found  only  in  God.  But  that  life  can- 
not be  imparted  to  us  unless  set  before  us  in  som^ 
shape  in  which  we  know  and  apprehend  it.  It  is  in 
the  Word  of  God  that  the  Invisible  Divine  life  takes 
shape,  and  brings  itself  within  our  reach,  and  be- 
comes communicable.  The  life,  the  thoughts,  the 
sentiments,  the  power  of  God  are  embodied  in  His  '*j 
Tvords.  And  it  is  only  through  His  Word  that  the 
life  of  God  can  really  enter  into  us.  His  Word  is  the 
seed  of  the  Heavenly  life. 

As  the  bread  of  life  we  eat  it,  we  feed  upon  it.  In 
eating  our  daily  bread,  the  body  takes  in  the  nourish- 
ment which  visible  nature,  the  sun  and  the  earth, 
prepared  for  us  in  the  seed-corn.  We  assimilate  it, 
and  it  becomes  our  very  own,  part  of  ourselves,  it  is 
our  life.  In  feeding  upon  the  Word  of  God,  the 
powers  of  th.e  Heavenly  life  enter  into  us,  and  become 
our  very  own;  we  assimilate  them,  they  become  a 
part  of  ourselves,  the  life  of  our  life. 

Or  we  use  the  seed  to  plant.  The  words  of  God 
are  sown  in  our  heart.  They  have  a  Divine  power  of 
reproduction  and  multiplication.  The  very  life  that 
is  in  them,  the  Divine  thought,  or  disposition,  or 
power  that  each  of  them  contains,  takes  roots  in  the 
believing  heart  and  grows  up;  and  the  very  thing  of 
which  the  word  was  the  expression,  is  produced  within 


IN  HIS   USE  OF  SCRIPTURE,  145 

US.  The  words  of  God  are  the  seeds  of  the  fulness  of 
the  Divine  life. 

When  the  Lord  Jesus  was  made  man,  He  became 
entirely  dependent  upon  the  Word  of  God,  He  sub- 
mitted Himself  wholly  to  it.  His  mother  taught  it 
Him.  The  teachers  of  Nazareth  instructed  Him  in 
it.  In  meditation  and  prayer,  in  the  exercise  of 
obedience  and  faith.  He  was  led,  during  His  silent 
years  of  preparation,  to  understand  and  appropriate 
it.  The  Word  of  the  Father  was  to  the  Son  the  life 
of  His  soul.  What  He  said  in  the  wilderness  was 
spoken  from  His  inmost  personal  experience :  *Man 
shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that 
proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God.'  He  felt  He 
could  not  live  but  as  the  Word  brought  Him  the  life 
of  the  Father.  His  whole  life  was  a  life  of  faith,  a 
depending  on  the  Word  of  the  Father."  The  Word 
was  to  Him  not  instead  of  the  Father,  but  the  vehicle 
for  the  living  fellowship  with  the  living  God.  And 
He  had  His  whole  mind  and  heart  so  filled  with  it, 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  could  at  each  moment  find 
within  Him,  all  ready  for  use,  the  right  word  to  sug- 
gest just  as  He  needed  it. 

Child  of  God !  would  you  become  a  man  of  God, 
strong  in  faith,  fall  of  blessing,  rich  in  fruit  to  the 
glory  of  God,  be  full  of  the  Word  of  God.  Like 
Christ,  make  the  Word  your  bread.  Let  it  dwell 
richly  in  you.     Have  your  heart  full  of  it.     Feed  on 

io 


143  LIKE  CHRIST: 

it.  Believe  it.  Obey  it.  It  is  only  by  believing 
and  obeying  that  the  Word  can  enter  into  onr  inward 
parts,  into  our  very  being.  Take  it  day  by  day  as 
the  Word  that  proceedeth,^  not  has  proceeded,  but 
proceedeth,  is  proceeding  out  of  the  mouth  of  God, 
as  the  Word  of  the  living  God,  who  in  it  holds  living 
fellowship  with  His  children,  and  speaks  to  them  in 
living  power.  Take  your  thoughts  of  God's  will, 
and  God's  work,  and  God's  purpose  with  you,  and 
the  world,  not  from  the  Church,  not  from  Christians 
around  you,  but  from  the  Word  taught  you  by  the 
Father,  and  like  Christ,  you  will  be  able  to  fulfil  all 
that  is  written  in  the  Scripture  concerning  you. 

In  Christ's  use  of  Scripture  the  most  remarkable 
thing  is  this:  He  found  Himself  there;  He  saw  there 
His  oivn  image  and  likeness.  And  He  gave  Himself 
to  the  fulfilruent  of  what  He  found  written  there. 
It  was  this  that  encouraged  Him  under  the  bitterest 
sufferings,  and  strengthened  Him  for  the  most  diffi- 
cult work.  Everywhere  He  saw  traced  by  God's  own 
hand  the  Divine  waymark :  through  suffering  to  glory. 
He  had  but  one  thought:  to  be  what  the  Father  had 
said  He  should  be,  to  have  His  life  correspond  exactly 
to  the  image  of  what  He  should  be  as  He  found  it  in 
the  Word  of  God. 

Disciple  of  Jesus,  in  the  Scriptures  thy  likeness  too 
is  to  be  found,  a  picture  of  what  the  Father  means 
thee  to  be.     Seek  to  have  a  deep  and  clear  impression 


IN  HIS    USE  OF  SCRIPTURE.  147 

of  what  the  Father  says  in  His  word  that  thou  should- 
est  be.  If  this  is  once  fully  understood,  it  is  incon- 
ceivable what  courage  it  will  give  to  conquer  every 
difficulty.  To  know:  it  is  ordained  of  God;  I  have 
seen  what  has  been  written  concerning  me  in  God's 
book;  I  have  seen  the  image  of  what  I  am  called  in 
God's  counsel  to  be:  this  thought  inspires  the  soul 
with  a  faith  that  conquers  the  world. 

The  Lord  Jesus  found  His  own  image  not  only  in 
the  institutions,  but  specially  in  the  believers  of  the 
Old  Testament.  Moses  and  Aaron,  Joshua,  David, 
and  the  Prophets,  were  types.  And  so  He  is  Himself 
again,  the  image  of  believers  in  the  New  Testament. 
It  is  especially  in  Hirn  and  His  example  that  we  must 
find  our  own  image  in  the  Scriptures.  'To  be 
changed  into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  by 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,'  we  must  in  the  Scripture- 
glass  gaze  on  that  image  as  our  own.  In  order  to  ac- 
complish His  work  in  us,  the  Spirit  teaches  us  to 
take  Christ  as  in  very  deed  our  Example,  and  to 
gaze  on  every  feature  as  the  promise  of  what  we 
can  be. 

Blessed  the  Christian  who  has  truly  done  this;  who 
has  not  only  found  Jesus  in  the  Scriptures,  but  also 
in  His  image  the  promise  and  example  of  what  he  is 
to  become.  Blessed  the  Christian  who  yields  him- 
self to  be  taught  by  the  Holy  Spirit  not  to  indulge  in 
human  thoughts  as  to  the  Scriptures  and  what  it  says 


148  LIKE  CHRIST: 

of  believers,  but  in  simplicit}^  to  accept  what  it  re- 
veals of  God's  thoughts  about  His  children. 

Child  of  God!  it  was  'according  to  the  Scriptures' 
that  Jesus  Christ  lived  and  died;  it  was 'according 
to  the  Scriptures'  that  He  was  raised  again:  all  that 
the  Scriptures  said  He  must  do  or  suffer  He  was  able 
to  accomplish,  because  He  knew  and  obeyed  them. 
All  that  the  Scriptures  had  promised  that  the  Father 
should  do  for  Him,  the  Father  did.  0  give  thyself 
up  with  an  undivided  heart  to  learn  in  the  Scriptures 
what  God  says  and  seeks  of  thee.  Let  the  Scriptures 
in  which  Jesus  found  every  day  the  food  of  His  life, 
be  thy  daily  food  and  meditation.  Go  to  God's  Word 
each  day  with  the  joyful  and  confident  expectation, 
that  through  the  blessed  Spirit,  who  dwells  in  us,  the 
Word  will  indeed  accomplish  its  Divine  purpose  in 
thee.  Every  word  of  God  is  full  of  a  Divine  life  and 
power.  Be  assured  that  when  thou  dost  seek  to  use 
the  Scriptures  as  Christ  used  them,  they  will  do  for 
thee  what  they  did  for  Him.  God  has  marked  out 
the  plan  of  thy  life  in  His  Word;  each  day  thou  wilt 
find  some  portion  of  it  there.  Nothing  makes  a  man 
more  strong  and  courageous  than  the  assurance  that 
he  is  just  living  out  the  will  of  God.  God  Himself, 
who  had  thy  image  portrayed  in  the  Scriptures,  will 
see  to  it  that  th^  Scriptures  are  fulfilled  in  thee,  if 
like  His  Son  thou  wilt  but  surrender  thyself  to  this 
as  the  highest  object  of  thy  life. 


IN  HIS   USB  OF  SCRIPTURE.  149 

0  Lord,  my  God!  I  thank  Thee  for  Thy  precious 
Word,  the  Divine  glass  of  all  unseen  and  eternal  reali- 
ties. I  thank  Thee  that  I  have  in  it  the  image  of 
Thy  Son,  who  is  Thy  image,  and  also,  0  wonderful 
grace!  my  image.  I  thank  Thee  that  as  I  gaze  on 
Him  I  may  also  see  what  I  can  be. 

0  my  Father!  teach  me  rightly  to  understand  what 
a  blessing  Thy  Word  can  bring  me.  To  Thy  Son, 
when  here  on  earth,  it  was  the  manifestation  of  Thy 
will,  the  communication  of  Thy  life  and  strength, 
the  fellowship  with  Thyself.  In  the  acceptance  and 
the  surrender  to  Thy  Word  He  was  able  to  fulfil  all 
Thy  counsel.  May  Thy  Word  be  all  this  to  me  too. 
Make  it  to  me,  each  day  afresh  through  the  unction 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Word  proceeding  from  the 
mouth  of  God,  the  voice  of  Thy  living  presence  speak- 
ing to  me.  May  I  feel  with  each  word  of  Thine  that 
it  is  God  coming  to  impart  to  me  somewhat  of  His 
own  life.  Teach  me  to  keep  it  hidden  in  my  heart 
as  a  Divine  seed,  which  in  its  own  time  will  spring 
up  and  reproduce  in  me  in  Divine  reality  the  very 
life  that  was  hid  in  it,  the  very  thing  which  I  at  first 
only  saw  in  it  as  a  thought.  Teach  me  above  all,  O 
my  God,  to  find  in  it  Him  who  is  its  centre  and  sub- 
stance, Himself  the  Eternal  Word.  Finding  Him,  and 
myself  in  Him,  as  my  Head  and  Exemplar,  I  shall  learn 
like  Him  to  count  Thy  Word  my  food  and  my  life. 

1  ask  this,  0  my  God,  in  the  name  of  our  blessed 
Christ  Jesus.     Amen. 


150  LIKE  CHRIST: 


NINETEENTH  DAY. 


LIKE   CHEIST 

IN  FORGIVING. 

*  Forbearing  one  another,  and  forgiving  one  another,  if 
any  man  have  a  quarrel  against  any :  even  as  Christ  for- 
gave you,  so  also  do  ye, ' — Col.  iii.  13. 

IN  the  life  of  grace  forgiveness  is  one  of  the  first 
blessings  we  receive  from  God.  It  is  also  one 
of  the  most  glorious.  It  is  the  transition  from  the  old 
to  the  new  life;  the  sign  and  pledge  of  God's  love: 
with  it  we  receive  the  right  to  all  the  spiritual  gifts 
which  are  prepared  for  us  in  Christ.  The  redeemed 
saint  can  never  forget,  either  here  or  in  eternity,  that 
he  is  a  forgiven  sinner.  Nothing  works  more  might- 
ily to  inflame  his  love,  to  awaken  his  joy,  or  to 
strengthen  his  courage,  than  the  experience,  contin- 
ually renewed  by  the  Holy  Sj)irit  as  a  living  reality, 
of  God's  forgiving  love.  Every  day,  yes,  every 
thought  of  God  reminds  him:  I  owe  all  to  pardoning 
grace. 

This  forgiving  love  is  one  of  the  greatest  marvels  in 
the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  nature.  In  it  God 
finds  His  glory  and  blessedness.     And  it  is  in  this 


IN  FORGIVING.  151 

glory  and  blessedness  God  wants  His  redeemed  people 
to  share,  when  He  calls  upon  them,  as  soon  and  as 
much  as  they  have  received  forgiveness,  also  to  bestow 
it  upon  others. 

Have  you  ever  noticed  how  often  and  how  expressly 
the  Lord  Jesus  spoke  of  it?  If  we  read  thoughtfully 
our  Lord's  words  in  Matt,  vi,  12^  15;  xviii.  2-25; 
Mark  xi,  25^  we  shall  understand  how  inseparably 
the  two  are  united:  God's  forgiveness  of  us  and  our 
forgiveness  of  others.  After  the  Lord  was  ascended 
to  grant  repentance  and  forgiveness  of  sins,  the 
Scriptures  say  of  Him  just  what  He  had  said  of  the 
Father,  we  must  forgive  like  Him.  As  our  text  ex- 
presses it,  even  as  Christ  has  forgiven  you,  so  also  do 
ye.     We  must  be  like  God,  like  Christ,  in  forgiving. 

It  is  not  difficult  to  find  the  reason  for  this.  When 
forgiving  love  comes  to  us,  it  is  not  only  to  deliver  us 
from  punishment.  No,  much  more;  it  seeks  to  win 
us  for  its  own,  to  take  possession  of  us  and  to  dwell 
in  us.  And  when  thus  it  has  come  down  to  dwell  in 
us,  it  does  not  lose  its  own  heavenly  character  and 
beauty:  it  still  is  forgiving  love  seeking  to  do  its 
work  not  alone  towards  us,  but  in  us,  and  through  us, 
leading  and  enabling  us  to  forgive  those  who  sin 
against  us.  So  much  so  is  this  the  case,  that  we  are 
told  that  not  to  forgive  is  a  sure  sign  that  one  has 
himself  not  been  forgiven.  He  who  only  seeks  for- 
giveness from  selfishness  and  as  freedom  from  punish- 


152  LIKE  CHRIST: 

tnent,  but- has  not  truly  accepted  forgiving  love  to 
rule  his  heart  and  life,  proves  that  God's  forgiveness 
has  never  really  reached  him.  He  who,  on  the  other 
hand,  has  really  accepted  forgiveness  will  have  in  the 
joy  with  which  he  forgives  others,  a  continual  confir- 
mation, that  his  faith  in  God's  forgiveness  of  himself 
is  a  reality.  From  Christ  to  receive  forgiveness,  and 
nice  Christ  to  bestow  it  on  others:  these  two  are  one. 
Thus  the  Scriptures  and  the  Church  teach:  but 
what  do  the  lives  and  experience  of  Christians  say? 
Alas!  how  many  there  are  w^ho  hardly  know  that 
thus  it  is  written,  or  who,  if  they  know  it,  think  it 
is  more  than  can  be  expected  from  a  sinful  being;  or 
who,  if  they  agree  in  general  to  what  has  been  said, 
always  find  a  reason,  in  their  own  particular  case, 
why  it  should  not  be  so.  Others  might  be  strength- 
ened in  evil;  the  offender  would  never  forgive  had 
the  injury  been  done  to  him ;  there  are  very  many 
eminent  Christians  who  do  not  act  so;  such  excuses 
are  never  wanting.  And  yet  the  command  is  so  very 
simple,  and  its  sanction  so  very  solemn:  *Even  as 
Christ  has  forgiven  you,  so  also  do  ye;'  'If  ye  for- 
give not,  neither  will  your  Father  forgive  you.' 
With  such  human  reasoning  the  Word  of  God  is  made 
of  none  effect.  As  though  it  were  not  just  through 
forgiving  love  that  God  seeks  to  conquer  evil,  and 
therefore  forgives  even  unto  seventy  times  seven. 
As  though  it  were  not  plain,  that  not  what  the  of- 


IN  FORGIVING.  153 

fender  would  do  to  me,  iut  what  Christ  has  done^ 
must  be  the  rule  of  my  conduct.  As  though  confor- 
mity to  the  example  not  of  Christ  Himself,  but  of 
pious  Christians,  were  the  sign  that  I  have  truly  re- 
ceived the  forgiveness  of  sins. 

Alas!  what  Church  or  Christian  circle  in  which  the 
law  of  forgiving  love  is  not  grievously  transgressed? 
How  often  in  our  Church  assemblies,  in  philan- 
thropic undertakings  as  well  as  in  ordinary  social  in- 
tercourse, and  even  in  domestic  life,  proof  is  given 
that  to  many  Christians  the  call  to  forgive,  just  as 
Christ  did,  has  never  yet  become  a  ruling  principle 
of  their  conduct.  On  account  of  a  difference  of 
opinion,  or  opposition  to  a  course  of  action  that  ap- 
peared to  us  right,  on  the  ground  of  a  real  or  a  fan- 
cied slight,  or  the  report  of  some  unkind  or  thought- 
less word,  feelings  of  resentment,  or  contempt,  or 
estrangement,  have  been  harbored,  instead  of  loving^ 
and  forgiving,  and  forgetting  like  Christ.  In  such 
the  thought  has  never  yet  taken  possession  of  mind 
and  heart,  that  the  law  of  compassion  and  love  and 
forgiveness,  in  which  the  relation  of  the  head  to  the 
members  is  rooted,  must  rule  the  whole  relation  of 
the  members  to  each  other. 

Beloved  followers  of  Jesus!  called  to  manifest  His 
likeness  to  the  world,  learn  that  as  forgiveness  of 
your  sins  was  one  of  the  first  things  Jesus  did  for  you, 
forgiveness  of  others  is  one  of  the  first  that  you  can 


154  LIKE  CHRIST: 

do  for  Him.  And  remember  that  to  the  new  heart 
there  is  a  joy  even  sweeter  than  that  of  being  for- 
given ;  even  the  joy  of  forgiving  others.  The  joy  of 
being  forgiven  is  only  that  of  a  sinner  and  of  earth : 
the  joy  of  forgiving  is  Christ's  own  joy,  the  joy  of 
heaven.  Oh,  come  and  see  that  it  is  nothing  less 
than  the  work  that  Christ  Himself  does,  and  the  joy 
with  which  He  Himself  is  satisfied  that  thou  art 
called  to  participate  in. 

It  is  thus  that  thou  canst  bless  the  world.  It  is  as 
the  forgiving  One  that  Jesus  conquers  His  enemies, 
and  binds  His  friends  to  Himself.  It  is  as  the  for- 
giving One  that  Jesus  has  set  up  His  kingdom  and 
continually  extends  it.  It  is  through  the  same  for- 
giving love,  not  only  preached  but  sJioum  in  the  life 
of  Bis  disciples,  that  the  Church  will  convince  the 
world  of  God's  love.  If  the  world  see  men  and  wo- 
men loving  and  forgiving  as  Jesus  did,  it  will  be  com- 
pelled to  confess  that  God  is  with  them  of  a  truth. 

And  if  it  still  appear  too  hard  and  too  high,  re- 
member that  this  will  only  be  as  long  as  we  consult 
the  natural  heart.  A  sinful  nature  has  no  taste  for 
this  joy,  and  never  can  attain  it.  But  in  union  with 
Christ  we  can  do  it:  He  who  abides  in  Him  walks 
even  as  He  walked.  If  you  have  surrendered  your- 
self to  follow  Christ  in  everything,  then  He  will  by 
His  Holy  Spirit  enable  you  to  do  this  too.  Ere  ever 
you  come  into  temptation,  accustom  yourself  to  fix 


IN  FORGIVING.  155 

your  gaze  on  Jesus,  in  the  heavenly  beauty  of  His  for- 
giving love  as  your  example:  'Beholding  the  glory  of 
the  Lord,  we  are  changed  into  the  same  image,  from 
glory  to  glory.'  Every  time  you  pray  or  thank  God 
for  forgiveness,  make  the  vow  that  to  the  glory  of 
His  name  you  will  manifest  the  same  forgiving  love 
to  all  around  you.  Before  ever  there  is  a  question  of 
forgiveness  of  others,  let  your  heart  be  filled  with 
love  to  Christ,  love  to  the  brethren,  and  love  to  the 
enemies:  a  heart  full  of  love  finds  it  blessed  to  forgive. 
Let,  in  each  little  circumstance  of  daily  life  when  the 
temptation  not  to  forgive  might  arise,  the  opportu- 
nity be  joyfully  welcomed  to  show  how  truly  you  live 
in  God's  forgiving  love,  how  glad  you  are  to  let  its 
beautiful  light  shine  through  you  on  others,  and  how 
blessed  a  privilege  you  feel  it  to  be  thus  too  to  bear 
the  image  of  your  beloved  Lord. 

To  forgive  like  Thee,  blessed  Son  of  God !  I  take 
this  as  the  law  of  my  life.  Thou  who  hast  given  the 
command,  givest  also  the  power.  Thou  who  hadst 
love  enough  to  forgive  me,  wilt  also  fill  me  with  love 
and  teach  me  to  forgive  others.  Thou  who  didst 
give  me  the  first  blessing,  in  the  joy  of  having  my 
sins  forgiven,  wilt  surely  give  me  the  second  blessing, 
the  deeper  joy  of  forgiving  others  as  Thou  hast  for- 
given me.  Oh,  fill  me  to  this  end  with  faith  in  the 
power  of  Thy  love  in  me,  to  make  me  like  Thyself, 


156.  LIKE  CHRIST: 

to  enable  me  to  forgive  the  seventy  times  seven,  and 
ao  to  love  and  bless  all  around  me. 

0  my  Jesus!  Thy  example  is  my  lav\r:  I  must  be 
like  Thee.  And  Thy  example  is  my  gospel  too:  I 
can  be  as  Thou  art.  Thou  art  at  once  my  Law  and 
my  Life.  What  Thou  demandest  of  me  by  Thy  ex- 
ample, Thou  workest  in  me  by  Thy  life.  I  shall  for- 
give like  Thee. 

Lord,  only  lead  me  deeper  into  my  dependence  on 
Thee,  into  the  all-suflBciency  of  Thy  grace  and  thy 
blessed  keeping  which  comes  from  Thy  indwelling. 
Then  shall  I  believe  and  prove  the  all-prevailing 
power  of  love.  I  shall  forgive  even  as  Christ  has 
forgiven  me.     Amen. 


IN  BEHOLDING  HIM.  157 


TWENTIETH  DAY. 


LIKE  <HEIST 

IN  BEHOLDma  HIM. 

'  But  we  all,  with  open  face  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the 
gloiy  of  the  Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same  image,  from 
glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord. ' — 2  Cob. 
iii.  18. 

MOSES  had  been  forty  days  on  the  mount  in  eom- 
munion  with  God.  When  he  came  down,  his 
face  shone  with  Divine  glory.  He  did  not  know  it :/ 
himself,  but  Aaron  and  the  people  saw  it  {Ex.  xxxip. 
SO).  It  was  so  evidently  God's  glory  that  Aaron  and 
the  people  feared  to  approach  him. 

In  this  we  have  an  image  of  what  takes  place  in 
the  New  Testament.  The  privilege  Moses  there  alone  , 
enjoyed  is  now  the  portion  of  every  believer.  When 
we  behold  the  glory  of  God  in  Christ,  in  the  glass  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures,  His  glory  shines  upon  us,  and 
into  us,  and  fills  us,  until  it  shines  out  from  us  again. 
By  gazing  on  His  glory  the  believer  is  changed 
through  the  Spirit  into  the  same  image.  Beholding 
Jesus  makes  us  like  Him. 

It  is  a  law  of  nature  that  the  eye  exercises  a  mighty 


158  LIKE  CHRIST: 

influence  on  mind  and  character.  The  education  of  ./ 
a  child  is  carried  on  greatly  through  the  eye;  he  is 
moulded  very  much  by  the  manners  and  habits  of 
those  he  sees  continually.  To  form  and  mould  our 
character  the  Heavenly  Father  shows  us  His  Divine 
glory  in  the  face  of  Jesus.  He  does  it  in  the  expec- 
tation that  it  will  give  us  great  joy  to  gaze  upon  it, 
and  because  He  knows  that,  gazing  on  it,  we  shall  be 
conformed  to  the  same  image.  Let  every  one  who 
desires  to  be  like  Jesus  note  Tiow  he  can  attain  to  it. 

Look  continually  to  the  Divine  glory  as  seen  in 
Christ.  What  is  the  special  characteristic  of  that 
glory  ?  It  is  the  manifestation  of  Divine  perfection  in 
human  form.  The  chief  marks  of  the  image  of  the 
Divine  glory  in  Christ  are  these  two:  His  humilia- 
tion and  His  love. 

There  is  the  glory  of  His  humiliation.  When  you 
see  how  the  eternal  Son  emptied  Himself  and  became 
man,  and  how  as  man  He  humbled  Himself  as  a  ser- 
Tant  and  was  obedient  even  unto  the  death  of  the 
cross,  you  have  seen  the  highest  glory  of  God.  The 
glory  of  God's  omnipotence  as  Creator,  and  the  glory 
of  God's  holiness  as  King,  is  not  so  wonderful  as  this: 
the  glory  of  grace  which  humbled  itself  as  a  servant 
to  serve  God  and  man.  We  must  learn  to  look  upon  ^.. 
this  humiliation  as  really  glory.  To  he  hitmhled  like 
Christy  must  le  to  us  the  only  thing  worthy  the  name 
of  glory  on  earth.     It  must  become  in  our  eyes  the 


IN  BEHOLDING  HIM.  159 

most  beautiful,  the  most  wonderful,  the  most  desir- 
able thing  that  can  be  imagined ;  a  very  joy  to  look 
upon  or  to  think  of.  The  efEect  of  thus  gazing  upon 
it  and  admiring  it  will  be  that  you  will  not  be  able  to 
conceive  of  any  glory  greater  than  to  be  and  act  like 
Jesus,  and  will  long  to  humble  yourself  even  as  He 
did.  Gazing  on  Jesus,  admiring  and  adoring  Him, 
will  work  in  us  the  same  mind  that  there  was  in 
Him,  and  so  we  shall  be  changed  into  His  image. 

Inseparable  from  this  is  the  glory  of  His  love. 
The  humiliation  leads  you  back  to  the  love  as  its  ori- 
gin and  power.  It  is  from  love  that  the  humiliation 
has  its  beauty.  Love  is  the  highest  glory  of  God. 
But  this  love  was  a  hidden  mystery,  until  it  was 
manifest  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  only  in  His  human- 
ity, in  His  gentle,  compassionate,  and  loving  inter- 
course with  men,  with  foolish,  sinful,  hostile  men, 
that  the  glory  of  Divine  love  was  first  really  seen. 
The  soul  that  gets  a  glimpse  of  this  glory,  and  that 
understands  that  to  love  Wke  Christ  is  alone  icortliy  0} 
the  name  of  glory .^  will  long  to  become  like  Christ  in 
this.  Beholding  this  glory  of  the  love  of  God  in 
Christ,  he  is  changed  to  the  same  image. 

You  would  be  like  Christ?  Here  is  the  path. 
Gaze  on  the  glory  of  God  in  Him.  In  Him^  that  is  to 
say:  do  not  look  only  to  the  words  and  the  thoughts 
and  the  graces  in  which  His  glory  is  seen,  but  look  to 
Himself,  the   living,  loving  Christ.      Behold  Him, 


160  LIKE  CHRIST: 

look  into  His  very  eye,  look  into  His  face,  as  a  loving 
friend,  as  the  living  God. 

Look  to  Him  in  adoration.  Bow  before  Him  as 
God.  His  glory  has  an  almighty  living  power  to  im- 
part itself  to  US,  to  pass  over  into  us  and  to  fill  us. 

Look  to  Him  in  faith.  Exercise  the  blessed  trust 
that  He  is  yours,  that  He  has  given  Himself  to  you, 
and  that  you  have  a  claim  to  all  that  is  in  Him.  It 
is  His  purpose  to  work  out  His  image  in  you.  Be- 
hold Him  with  the  joyful  and  certain  expectation : 
the  glory  that  I  behold  in  Him  is  destined  for  me. 
He  will  give  it  me;  as  I  gaze  and  wonder  and  trust, 
I  become  like  Christ. 

Look  to  Him  with  strong  desire.  Do  not  yield  to 
the  slothfulness  of  the  flesh  that  is  satisfied  without 
the  full  blessing  of  conformity  to  the  Lord.  Pray 
God  to  free  you  from  all  carnal  resting  content  with 
present  attainments,  and  to  fill  you  with  the  deep  un- 
quenchable longing  for  His  glory.  Pray  most  fer- 
vently the  prayer  of  Moses,  'Show  me  Thy  glory.' 
Let  nothing  discourage  you,  not  even  the  apparently 
slow  progress  you  make,  but  press  onwards  with  ever 
growing  desire  after  the  blessed  prospect  that  God's 
Word  holds  out  to  you:  'We  are  changed  into  the 
same  image,  from  glory  to  glory. ' 

And  as  you  behold  Him,  above  all,  let  the  look  of 
love  not  be  wanting.  Tell  Him  continually  how  He 
has  won  your  heart,  how  you  do  love  Him,  how  en- 


IN  BEHOLDING  HIM,  161 

tirely  you  belong  to  Him.  Tell  Him  tLat  to  please 
Him,  the  beloved  One,  is  your  highest,  your  only 
joy.  Let  the  bond  of  love  between  you  and  Him  be 
drawn  continually  closer.  Love  unites  and  makes 
like. 

Like  Christ !  we  can  be  it,  we  shall  be  it,  each  in 
our  measure.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  pledge  that  it 
shall  be.  God's  Holy  Word  has  said,  *  We  are  changed 
into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord, '  This  is  the  Spirit  that  was 
in  Jesus,  and  through  Whom  the  Divine  glory  lived 
and  shone  on  Him.  This  Spirit  is  called  'The  Spirit 
of  glory. '  This  Spirit  is  in  us  as  in  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  it  is  His  work,  in  our  silent  adoring  contempla- 
tion, to  bring  over  into  us  and  work  within  us,  what 
we  see  in  our  Lord  Jesus.  Through  this  Spirit  we 
have  already  Christ's  life  in  us,  with  all  the  gifts  of 
His  grace.  But  that  life  must  be  stirred  up  and  de- 
veloped: it  must  grow  up,  pass  into  our  whole  be- 
ing, take  possession  of  our  entire  nature,  penetrate 
and  pervade  it  all.  We  can  count  on  the  Spirit  to 
work  this  in  us,  if  we  but  yield  ourselves  to  Him  and 
obey  Him.  As  we  gaze  on  Jesus  in  the  W^ord,  He 
opens  our  eyes  to  see  the  glory  of  all  that  Jesus  does 
and  is.  He  makes  us  willing  to  be  like  Him.  He 
strengthens  our  faith,  that  what  we  behold  in  Jesus  can 
be  in  us,  because  Jesus  Himself  is  ours.  He  works 
in  us  unceasingly  the  life  of  abiding  in  Christ,  a 
11 


163  LIKE  CHRIST: 

whole-hearted  union  and  communion  with  Him.  He 
does  according  to  the  promise:  The  Spirit  shall 
glorify  me:  for  He  shall  take  of  mine  and  shall  show 
it  unto  you.'  We  are  changed  into  the  image  on 
which  we  gaze,  from  glory  to  glory,  as  hy  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord,  Let  us  only  understand,  that  the  fulness 
of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  us,  and  that  he  who  believ- 
ingly  surrenders  himself  to  be  filled  with  Him,  will 
experience  how  gloriously  He  accomplishes  His  work 
of  stamping  on  our  souls  and  lives  the  image  and  like- 
ness of  Christ. 

Brother!  beholding  Jesus  and  His  glory,  you  can 
confidently  expect  to  become  like  Him:  only  trust 
yourself  in  quietness  and  restfulness  of  soul  to  the 
leading  of  the  Spirit.  '  The  Spirit  of  glory  rests  upon 
you.'*.  Gaze  on  and  adore  the  glory  of  God  in  Christ; 
you  will  be  changed  with  Divine  power  from  glory 
to  glory;  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the  mighty 
transformation  will  be  wrought  by  which  your  desires 
will  be  fulfilled,  and  like  Christ  will  be  the  blessed 
God-given  experience  of  your  life. 

0  my  Lord!  I  do  thank  Thee  for  the  glorious  as- 
surance that  while  I  am  engaged  with  Thee,  in 
my  work  of  beholding  Thy  glory,  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  engaged  with  me,  in  His  work  of  changing 
me  into  that  image,  and  of  laying  of  Thy  glory  on 
me. 


IN  BEHOLDING  HIM.  163 

Lord !  grant  me  to  behold  Thy  glory  aright.  Moses 
had  been  forty  days  with  Thee  when  Thy  glory  shone 
upon  Him.  I  acknowledge  that  my  communion  with 
Thee  has  been  too  short  and  passing,  that  I  have 
taken  too  little  time  to  come  under  the  full  impres- 
sion of  what  Thine  image  is.  Lord !  teach  me  this. 
Draw  me  in  these  my  meditations  too,  to  surrender 
myself  to  contemplate  and  adore,  until  my  soul  at 
every  line  of  that  image  may  exclaim :  This  is  glori- 
ous! this  is  the  glory  of  God!  0  my  God,  show  me 
Thy  glory. 

And  strengthen  my  faith,  blessed  Lord!  that,  even 
when  I  am  not  conscious  of  any  special  experience, 
the  Holy  Spirit  will  do  His  work.  Moses  knew  not 
that  his  face  shone.  Lord!  keep  me  from  looking  at 
self:  May  I  be  so  taken  up  only  with  Thee  as  to  for- 
get and  lose  myself  in  Thee.  Lord !  it  is  he  who  is 
dead  to  self  who  lives  in  Thee. 

0  my  Lord,  as  often  as  I  gaze  upon  Thine  image 
and  Thine  example,  I  would  do  it  in  the  faith,  that 
Thy  holy  Spirit  will  fill  me,  will  take  entire  possession 
of  me,  and  so  work  Thy  likeness  in  me,  that  the 
world  may  see  in  me  somewhat  of  Thy  glory.  In 
this  faith  I  will  venture  to  take  Thy  precious  word, 
*From  glory  to  glory,'  as  my  watchword,  to  be  to 
me  the  promise  of  a  grace  that  grows  richer  every 
day,  of  a  blessing  that  is  ever  ready  to  surpass  itself, 
and  to  make  what  has  been  given  only  the  pledge  of 


164  LIKE  CHRIST: 

the  better  that  is  to  come.  Precious  Saviour!  gazing 
on  Thee  it  shall  indeed  be  so,  'From  glory  to  glory.' 
Amen. 

NOTE. 

I  have  left  the  preceding  piece  as  it  was  originally 
published  in  Dutch.  The  English  Eevised  Version 
translates:  'But  we  all,  with  unveiled  face  reflecting 
as  in  a  mirror  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  transformed 
into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as 
from  the  Lord  the  Spirit;'  and  gives  in  the  margin 
^beholding  as  in  a  mirror.'  It  is  difficult  to  settle 
which  is  the  better  translation,  as  the  original  can 
bear  both  meanings.  I  confess  that  heholding  ap- 
pears to  me  better  to  suit  the  passage:  the  reflecting 
the  image  can  only  come  after  we  have  been,  or  at 
least  as  we  are  being,  'transformed  into  the  same 
image. '  It  is  only  as  we  are  transformed  into  it  we 
can  reflect  it:  the  means  of  the  transformation  ap- 
pear to  be  almost  better  expressed  by  heholding  than 
reflectiyig.  However  this  may  be,  even  if  we  prefer 
to  translate  reflecting,  what  has  been  said  on  behold- 
ing does  not  lose  its  force :  it  is  the  intent,  longing, 
loving,  adoring  gaze  on  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face 
of  the  Beloved  Son  that  transforms. 

What  rich  instruction  in  regard  to  the  Divine 
Photography  of  which  the  text  speaks  there  is  in 
what  we  see  in  the  human  art!  In  the  practice  of 
the  photographer  we  see  two  things:  faith  in  the 
power  and  effects  of  light,  and  the  wise  adjustment  of 
everything  in  obedience  to  its  laws.  With  what  care 
the  tenderly  sensitive  plate  is  prepared  to  receive  the 
impression!  with  what  precision  its  relative  position 


IN  BEHOLDING  HIM,  165 

to  the  object  to  be  portrayed  is  adjusted !  how  still 
and  undisturbed  it  is  then  held  face  to  face  with 
that  object!  Having  done  this,  the  photographer 
leaves  the  light  to  do  its  v/onderful  work :  his  work 
is  indeed  a  work  of  faith. 

May  we  learn  the  precious  lessons.  Let  us  believe 
in  the  light,  in  the  power  of  the  light  of  God,  to 
transcribe  Christ's  image  on  our  heart.  *We  are 
changed  into  the  same  image  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord.'  Let  us  not  seek  to  do  the  work  the  Spirit 
must  do :  let  us  simply  trust  Him  to  do  it.  Our  duty 
is,  to  seek  the  prepared  heart,  waiting,  longing,  pray- 
ing for  the  likeness;  to  take  our  place  face  to  face 
with  Jesus,  studying,  gazing,  loving,  worshipping, 
and  believing  that  the  wonderful  vision  of  that  Cruci- 
fied One  is  the  sure  promise  of  what  we  can  be ;  and 
then,  putting  aside  all  that  can  distract,  in  stillness 
of  soul,  silent  unto  God,  just  to  allow  the  Blessed 
Spirit  as  the  Light  of  God  to  do  the  work.  Not  less 
surely  or  wonderfully  than  in  the  light-printing 
which  is  done  here  on  earth,  will  our  souls  receive 
and  show  the  impress  of  that  wonderful  likeness. 

I  feel  tempted  to  add  one  thought:  what  a  solemn 
calling  that  of  ministers  as  the  servants  of  this  Heav- 
enly Photography,  ^ministers  of  the  Spirit'  in  His 
work  (see  2  Cor.  iv.  6) :  to  lead  believers  on,  and 
point  them  to  Jesus  and  every  trait  in  that  blessed 
face  and  life  as  what  they  are  to  be  changed  to;  to 
help  them  to  that  wistful  longing,  that  deep  thirst- 
ing for  conformity  to  Jesus,  which  is  the  true  prepa- 
ration of  soul;  to  teach  them  how,  both  in  public 
worship  and  private  prayer,  they  have  just  to  place 
themselves  face  to  face  with  their  Lord,  and  give 


166  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Him  time,  as  they  unbare  and  expose  their  whole  in- 
ner being  to  the  beams  of  His  love  and  His  glory,  to 
come  in  and  take  possession,  by  His  Spirit  to  trans- 
form them  into  His  own  likeness. 

*  Who  is  suflBcient  for  these  things?  Our  suflBciency 
is  of  Grod,  who  hath  made  us  able  ministers  of  the 
Spirit. ' 


IN  HIS  HUMILITY.  167 


TWENTY-FIRST  DAY. 


LIKE   CHRIST 

IN  HIS  HUMILITY. 

'  In  lowliness  of  mind  each  counting  other  better  than 
himself.  Have  this  mind  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ 
Jesus,  who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  emptied  Himself, 
taking  the  form  of  a  servant,  being  made  in  the  likeness  of 
men  ;  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  He  humbled 
Himself,  becoming  obedient  unto  death,  yea,  the  death  of 
the  cross. '—Phil.  ii.  3-8  (R.  V.). 

IN  this  wonderful  passage  we  have  a  summary  of  all 
the  most  precious  truths  that  cluster  round  the 
person  of  the  blessed  Son  of  God.  There  is  first,  His 
adorable  Divinity:  'iii  the  form  of  God^'^  ^  equal  ivith 
God,''  Then  comes  the  mystery  of  His  incarnation, 
in  that  word  of  deep  and  inexhaustible  meaning: 
'He  emptied  Himself .'*  The  atonement  follows,  with 
the  humiliation,  and  obedience,  and  suffering,  and 
death,  whence  it  derives  its  worth :  'He  humbled  Him- 
self^ becoming  obedient  unto  deaths  even  the  death  of 
the  cross/  And  all  is  crowned  by  His  glorious  exal- 
tation: 'God  hath  highly  exalted  Him,''  Christ  as 
God,  Christ  becoming  man,  Christ  as  man  in  humilia- 
tion working  out  our  redemption,  and  Christ  in  glory 


168  LIKE  CHRIST: 

as  Lord  of  all:  such  are  the  treasures  of  wisdom  this 
passage  contains. 

Volumes  have  been  written  on  the  discussion  of 
some  of  the  words  the  passage  contains.  And  yet 
sufficient  attention  has  not  always  been  given  to  the 
connection  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  this  won- 
drous teaching.  It  is  not  in  the  first  place  as  a  state- 
ment of  truth  for  the  refutation  of  error,  or  the 
strengthening  of  faith.  The  object  is  a  very  differ- 
ent one.  Among  the  Philippians  there  was  still 
pride  and  want  of  love:  it  is  with  the  distinct  view 
of  setting  Christ's  example  before  them,  and  teach- 
ing them  to  humble  themselves  as  He  did,  that  this 
portion  of  inspiration  was  given:  'In  lowliness  of 
mind  each  counting  other  better  than  himself.  Have 
this  mind  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus. ' 
He  who  does  not  study  this  portion  of  God's 
Word  with  the  wish  to  become  lowly  as  Christ 
was,  has  never  used  it  for  the  one  great  purpose 
for  which  God  gave  it.  Christ  descending  from 
the  throne  of  God,  and  seeking  His  way  back  there 
as  man  through  the  humiliation  of  the  cross, 
reveals  the  only  way  by  which  we  ever  can  reach 
that  throne.  The  faith  which,  with  His  atone- 
ment, accepts  His  example  too,  is  alone  true  faith. 
Each  soul  that  would  truly  belong  to  Him  must  in 
union  with  Him  have  His  Spirit,  His  disposition,  and 
His  image. 


f 


IN  HIS  HUMILITY.  169 

'Have  this  mind  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ 
Jesus,  who  being  in  the  form  of  God  emptied  Him- 
self, and  as  a  man  humbled  Himself.'  We  must  be 
like  Christ  in  His  self-emptying  and  self-humilia- 
tion. The  first  great  act  of  self-abnegation,  in  which 
as  God  He  emptied  Himself  of  His  Divine  glory  and 
power  and  laid  it  aside,  was  followed  up  by  the  no 
less  wondrous  humbling  of  Himself  as  man,  to  the 
death  of  the  cross.  And  in  this  amazing  twofold  hu- 
miliation, the  astonishment  of  the  universe  and  the 
delight  of  the  Father,  Holy  Scripture  with  the  ut- 
most simplicity  tells  us  we  must,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
be  like  Christ. 

And  does  Paul,  and  do  the  Scriptures,  and  does 
God  really  expect  this  of  us?  Why  not?  or  rather, 
how  can  they  expect  anything  else?  They  know  in- 
deed the  fearful  power  of  pride  and  the  old  Adam  in 
our  nature.  But  they  know  also  that  Christ  has  re- 
deemed us  not  only  from  the  curse  but  from  the  power 
of  sin,  and  that  He  gives  us  His  resurrection  life  and 
power  to  enable  us  to  live  as  He  did  on  earth.  They 
say  that  He  is  not  only  our  Surety,  but  our  Example 
also;  so  that  we  not  only  live  through  Him,  but  like 
Him.  And  further,  not  only  our  Example  but  also 
our  Head,  who  lives  in  us,  and  continues  in  us  the 
life  He  once  led  on  earth.  With  such  a  Christ,  and 
such  a  plan  of  redemption,  can  it  be  otherwise?  The 
follower  of  Christ  must  have  the  same  mind  as  was  in 


170  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Christ;   he  must  especially  be  like  Him  in  His  hu- 
mility. 

Christ's  example  teaches  us  that  it  is  not  sin  that 
must  humble  us.  This  is  what  many  Christians 
think.  They  consider  daily  falls  are  necessary  to 
keep  us  humble.  This  is  not  so.  There  is  indeed  a 
humility  that  is  very  lovely,  and  so  of  great  worth,  as 
the  beginning  of  something  more,  consisting  in  the 
acknowledgment  of  transgression  and  shortcomings. 
But  there  is  a  humility  which  is  more  heavenly  still, 
even  like  Christ,  which  consists,  even  when  grace 
keeps  us  from  sinning,  in  the  self-abasement  that  can 
only  wonder  that  God  should  bless  us,  and  delights 
to  be  as  nothing  before  Him  to  whom  we  owe  all.  It 
is  grace  we  need,  and  not  sin,  to  make  and  keep  us 
humble.  The  heaviest-laden  branches  always  bow  the 
lowest.  The  greatest  flow  of  water  makes  the  deepest 
river-bed.  The  nearer  the  soul  comes  to  God,  the 
more  His  majestic  Presence  makes  it  feel  its  little- 
ness. It  is  this  alone  that  makes  it  possible  for  each 
to  count  others  better  than  himself.  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Holy  One  of  God,  is  our  example  of  humility:  it 
was,  knowing  that  the  Father  had  given  all  things 
into  His  hands,  and  that  He  was  come  from  God  and 
went  to  God,  that  He  washed  the  disciples'  feet.  It- 
is  the  Divine  presence,  the  consciousness  of  the  Di- 
vine life  and  the  Divine  love  in  us,  that  will  make 
us  humble. 


IN  HIS  HUMILITY.  171 

It  appears  to  many  Christians  an  impossibility  to 
say:  I  will  not  think  of  self,  I  will  esteem  others  bet- 
ter than  myself.  They  ask  grace  to  overcome  the 
worst  ebullitions  of  pride  and  vainglory,  but  an  en- 
tire self-renunciation,  such  as  Christ's,  is  too  difficult 
and  too  high  for  them.  If  they  only  understood  the 
deep  truth  and  blessedness  of  the  word,  *He  who 
humbles  himself  shall  be  exalted,'  *He  who  loses  his 
life  shall  find  it,'  they  would  not  be  satisfied  with  any- 
thing less  than  entire  conformity  to  their  Lord  in 
this.  And  they  would  find  that  there  is  a  way  to 
overcome  self  and  self -exaltation:  to  see  it  nailed  to 
Christ's  cross,  and  there  keep  it  crucified  continually 
through  the  Spirit  {GaL  v.  21^.;  Rom.  viii,  13),  He 
only  can  grow  to  such  humility,  who  heartily  yields 
himself  to  live  in  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  death. 

To  attain  this,  two  things  are  necessary.  The  first 
is  a  fixed  purpose  and  surrender  henceforth  to  be 
nothing  and  seek  nothing  for  oneself;  but  to  live  only 
for  God  and  our  neighbour.  The  other  is  the  faith 
that  appropriates  the  power  of  Christ's  death  in  this 
also,  as  our  death  to  sin  and  our  deliverance  from  its 
power.  This  fellowship  of  Christ's  death  brings  an 
end  to  the  life,  where  sin  is  too  strong  for  us;  it  is 
the  commencement  of  a  life  in  us  where  Christ  is  too 
strong  for  sin. 

It  is  only  under  the  teaching  and  powerful  working 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  one  can  realize,  accept,  and 


172  LIKE  CHRIST: 

keep  hold  of  this  truth.  But  God  be  thanked,  we 
have  the  Holy  Spirit.  Oh,  that  we  may  trust  our- 
selves fully  to  His  guidance.  He  icill  guide  us,  it  is 
His  Tvork;  He  will  glorify  Christ  in  us.  He  will 
teach  us  to  understand  that  we  are  dead  to  sin  and 
the  old  self,  that  Christ's  life  and  humility  are  ours. 

Thus  Christ's  humility  is  appropriated  in  faith. 
This  may  take  place  at  once.  But  the  appropriation 
in  experience  is  gradual.  Our  thoughts  and  feelings, 
our  very  manners  and  conversation,  have  been  so 
long  under  the  dominion  of  the  old  self,  that  it  takes 
time  to  imbue  and  permeate  and  transfigure  them 
with  the  heavenly  light  of  Christ's  humility.  At 
first  the  conscience  is  not  perfectly  enlightened,  the 
spiritual  taste  and  the  power  of  discernment  have  not 
yet  been  exercised.  But  with  each  believing  renewal 
of  the  consecration  in  the  depth  of  the  soul:  *I  have 
surrendered  myself  to  be  humble  like  Jesus,'  power 
will  go  out  from  Him,  to  fill  the  whole  being,  until 
in  face,  and  voice,  and  action  the  sanctification  of  the 
Spirit  will  be  observable,  and  the  Christian  will  truly 
be  clothed  with  humility. 

The  blessedness  of  a  Christlike  humility  is  unspeak- 
able. It  is  of  great  worth  in  the  sight  of  God,  'He 
giveth  grace  to  the  humble.'  In  the  spiritual  life  it 
is  the  source  of  rest  and  joy.  To  the  humble  all  God 
does  is  right  and  good.  Humility  is  always  ready  to 
praise  God  for  the  least  of  His  mercies.     Humility 


IN  HIS  HUMILITY.  173 

does  not  find  it  diflBcult  to  trust.  It  submits  uncon- 
ditionally to  all  that  God  says.  The  two  whom  Jesus 
praises  for  their  great  faith  are  just  those  who 
thought  least  of  themselves.  The  centurion  had  said, 
'I  am  not  worthy  that  Thou  shouldest  come  under 
my  roof;'  the  Syrophenician  woman  was  content  to 
be  numbered  with  the  dogs.  In  intercourse  with  men 
it  is  the  secret  of  blessing  and  love.  The  humble 
man  does  not  take  offence,  and  is  very  careful  not  to 
give  it.  He  is  ever  ready  to  serve  his  neighbour,  be- 
cause he  has  learnt  from  Jesus  the  Divine  beauty  of 
being  a  servant.  He  finds  favour  with  God  and  man. 
Oh,  what  a  glorious  calling  for  the  follower  of 
Christ!  To  be  sent  into  the  world  by  God  to  prove 
that  there  is  nothing  more  divine  than  self-humilia- 
tion. The  humble  glorifies  God,  he  leads  others  to 
glorify  Him,  he  will  at  last  be  glorified  with  Him. 
Who  would  not  be  humble  like  Jesus? 

0  Thou,  who  didst  descend  from  heaven,  and  didst 
humble  Thyself  to  the  death  of  the  cross.  Thou  call- 
est  me  to  take  Thy  humility  as  the  law  of  my  life. 

Lord,  teach  me  to  understand  the  absolute  need  of 
this.  A  proud  follower  of  the  humble  Jesus  this  I 
cannot,  I  may  not  be.  In  the  secrecy  of  my  heart, 
and  of  my  closet,  in  my  house,  in  presence  of  friends 
or  enemies,  in  prosperity  or  adversity,  I  would  be 
filled  with  Thy  humility. 


174  LIKE  CHRIST: 

0  my  beloved  Lord !  I  feel  the  need  of  a  new,  a 
deeper  insight  into  Thy  crucifixion,  and  my  part  in 
it.  Eeveal  to  me  how  my  old  proud  self  is  crucified 
with  Thee.  Show  me  in  the  light  of  Thy  Spirit  how 
I,  God's  regenerate  child,  am  dead  to  sin  and  its 
power,  and  how  in  communion  with  Thee  sin  is 
powerless.  Lord  Jesus,  who  hast  conquered  sin, 
strengthen  in  me  the  faith  that  Thou  art  my  life,  and 
that  Thou  wilt  fill  me  with  Thy  humility  if  I  will 
submit  to  be  filled  with  Thyself  and  Thy  Holy  Spirit. 

Lord,  my  hope  is  in  Thee.  In  faith  in  Thee  I  go 
into  the  world  to  show  how  the  same  mind  that  was 
in  Thee  is  also  in  Thy  children,  and  teaches  us  in 
lowliness  of  mind  each  to  esteem  others  better  than 
himself.     May  God  help  us.     Amen. 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  DEATH         175 


TWENTY-SECOND   DAY. 


f  LIKE   OHEIST 

IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  DEATH. 

*  For  if  we  have  been  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of 
His  death,  we  shall  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  His  resurrec- 
tion.—For  in  that  He  died,  He  died  unto  sin  once.— Like- 
wise reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead  unto  sin,  but 
alive  unto  God  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. '—Rom.  vi.  5, 
10,  11. 

IT  is  to  the  death  of  Christ  we  owe  our  salvation. 
The  better  we  understand  the  meaning  of  that 
death,  the  richer  will  be  our  experience  of  its  power. 
In  these  words  we  are  taught  what  it  is  to  be  one  with 
Christ  in  the  likeness  of  His  death.  Let  every  one 
who  truly  longs  to  be  like  Christ  in  his  life,  seek  to 
understand  aright  what  the  likeness  of  His  death 
means. 

Christ  had  a  double  work  to  accomplish  in  His 
death.  The  one  was,  to  work  out  righteousness  for 
us,  the  other  to  obtain  life  for  us.  When  Scripture 
speaks  of  the  first  part  of  this  work,  it  uses  the  ex- 
pression, Christ  died  for  our  sins :  He  took  sin  upon 
Himself,  bore  its  punishment;  so  He  made  atone- 
ment, and  brought  in  a  righteousness  in  which  we 


m 


176  LIKE  CHRIST: 


could  stand  before  God.  When  Scripture  speaks  of 
the  second  part  of  this  work,  it  uses  the  expression: 
He  died  to  sin.  Dying  for  sin  has  reference  to  the 
judicial  relation  between  Him  and  sin:  God  laid  our 
sin  upon  Him :  through  His  death  atonement  is  made 
for  sin  before  God.  Dying  to  sin  has  reference  to  a 
personal  relation ;  through  His  death  the  connection 
in  which  He  stood  to  sin  was  entirely  dissolved. 
During  His  life  sin  had  great  power  to  cause  Him 
conflict  and  suffering :  His  death  made  an  end  of  this. 
Sin  had  now  no  more  power  to  tempt  or  to  hurt 
Him.  He  was  beyond  its  reach.  Death  had  com- 
pletely separated  between  Him  and  sin.  Christ  died 
to  sin. 

Like  Christ,  the  believer  too  has  died  to  sin ;  he  is 
one  with  Him,  in  the  likeness  of  His  death.  And 
as  the  knowledge  that  Christ  died  for  sin  as  our  atone- 
ment is  indispensable  to  our  justification;  so  the 
knowledge  that  Christ,  and  we  with  Him  in  the  like- 
ness of  His  death,  are  dead  to  sin,  is  indispensable  to 
our  sanctification.  Let  us  endeavour  to  understand 
this. 

It  was  as  the  second  Adam  that  Christ  died.  AVith 
the  first  Adam  we  had  been  planted  together  in  the 
likeness  of  Jiis  death:  he  died,  and  we  with  him,  and 
the  power  of  his  death  works  in  us;  we  have  in  very 
deed  died  in  him,  as  truly  as  he  himself  died.  We 
understand  this.     Just  so  we  are   one  plant  with 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  DEATH  177 

Christ  in  the  likeness  of  His  death:  He  died  to  sin, 
and  we  in  Him;  and  now  the  power  of  His  death 
works  in  us.  We  are  indeed  dead  to  sin,  as  truly  so 
as  He  Himself  is. 

Through  our  first  birth  we  were  made  partakers  in 
Adam's  death;  through  our  second  birth  we  become 
partakers  in  the  death  of  the  second  Adam.  Every 
believer  who  accepts  of  Christ  is  partaker  of  the 
power  of  His  death,  and  is  dead  to  sin.  But  a  be- 
liever may  have  much  of  which  he  is  ignorant.  Most 
believers  are  in  their  conversion  so  occupied  with 
Christ's  death /or  sin  as  their  justification,  that  they 
do  not  seek  to  know  what  it  means,  that  in  Him  they 
are  dead  to  sin.  When  they  first  learn  to  feel  theit 
need  of  Him  as  their  sanctification,  then  the  desire  is 
awakened  to  understand  this  likeness  of  His  death. 
They  find  the  secret  of  holiness  in  it;  that  as  Christ, 
so  they  also  have  died  to  sin. 

The  Christian  who  does  not  understand  this  always 
imagines  that  sin  is  too  strong  for  Him,  that  sin  has 
still  power  over  him,,  and  that  he  must  sometimes 
obey  it.  But  he  thinks  this  because  he  does  not  know 
that  he,  like  Christ,  is  dead  to  sin.  If  He  but  be- 
lieved and  understood  what  this  means,  his  language 
would  be,  ^Christ  has  died  to  sin.  Sin  has  nothing 
more  to  say  to  Him.  In  His  life  and  death  sin  had 
power  over  Him;  it  was  sin  that  caused  Him  the 
sufferings  of  the  cross,  and  the  humiliation  of  the 
13 


178  LIKE  CHRIST: 

grave.  But  He  is  dead  to  sin :  it  has  lost  all  claim 
over  Him,  He  is  entirely  and  forever  freed  from  this 
power.  Even  so  I  as  a  believer.  The  new  life  that 
is  in  me,  is  the  life  of  Christ  from  the  dead,  a  life 
that  has  been  begotten  through  death,  a  life  that  is 
entii^ely  dead  to  sin. '  The  believer  as  a  new  creature 
in  Christ  Jesus  can  glory  and  say:  'Like  Christ  I  am 
dead  to  sin.  Sin  has  no  right  or  power  over  me 
whatever.  I  am  freed  from  it,  therefore  I  need  not 
sin.' 

And  if  the  believer  still  sins,  it  is  because  he  does 
not  use  his  privilege  to  live  as  one  who  is  dead  to  sin. 
Through  ignorance  or  unwatchfulness  or  unbelief,  he 
fcrgets  the  meaning  and  the  power  of  this  likeness 
of  Christ's  death,  and  sins.  But  if  he  holds  fast 
what  his  participation  with  Christ's  death  signifies, 
he  has  the  power  to  overcome  sin.  He  marks  well 
that  it  is  not  said,  'Sin  is  dead. '  No,  sin  is  not  dead  ; 
sin  lives  and  works  still  in  the  flesh.  But  he  himself 
is  dead  to  sin,  and  alive  to  God ;  and  so  sin  cannot 
for  a  single  moment,  without  his  consent,  have  do- 
minion over  him.  If  he  sin,  it  is  because  he  allows 
it  to  reign,  and  submits  himself  to  obey  it. 

Beloved  Christian,  who  seekest  to  be  like  Christ,  take 
the  likeness  of  His  death  as  one  of  the  most  glorious 
parts  of  the  life  you  covet.  Appropriate  it  first  of 
all  in  faith.  Reckon  that  you  are  indeed  dead  to  sin. 
Let  it  be  a  settled  thing;  God  says  it  to  every  one  of 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  DEATH  179 

His  children,  even  the  weakest;  say  it  before  Him 
too:  'Like  Christ  I  am  dead  to  sin.'  Fear  not  to  say- 
it;  it  is  the  truth.  Ask  the  Holy  Spirit  earnestly  to 
enlighten  you  with  regard  to  this  part  of  your  union 
with  Christ,  so  that  it  may  not  only  be  a  doctrine, 
but  power  and  truth. 

Endeavour  to  understand  more  deeply  what  it  says 
to  live  as  dead  to  sin,  as  one  who,  in  dying,  has  been 
freed  from  its  dominion,  and  who  can  now  reign  in 
life  through  Jesus  Christ  over  it.  Then  there  will 
follow  upon  the  likeness  of  His  death,  accepted  in 
faith,  the  conformity  to  His  death  {Phil,  iii.Y  some- 
thing that  is  gradually  and  increasingly  appropri- 
ated, as  Christ's  death  manifests  its  full  power  in  all 
the  faculties  and  powers  of  your  life. 

And  in  order  to  have  the  full  benefit  of  this  likeness 
of  Christ's  death,  notice  particularly  two  things. 
The  one  is  the  obligation  under  which  it  brings  you, 
*How  shall  we  who  are  dead  to  sin  live  any  longer 
therein?'  Endeavour  to  enter  more  deeply  into  the 
meaning  of  this  death  of  Christ  into  which  you  have 

*T}ie  likeness  of  Christ's  death  in  Rom.  vi.  preced<^s  the 
likeness  of  His  resurrection  ;  no  one  can  be  made  alive  in 
Him  who  has  not  given  himself  up  to  die  with  Him.  The 
conformity  to  Christ's  death  in  Phil.  Hi.  is  spoken  of  as 
comiDg  after  the  knowing  Him  in  the  power  of  His  resur- 
rection :  the  growth  of  the  resurrection  life  within  us  leads 
to  a  deeper  experience  of  the  death.  The  two  continually 
act  and  react. 


180  LIKE  CHRIST: 

been  baptized.  His  death  meant:  Eather  die  than 
sin:  willing  to  die  in  order  to  overcome  sin:  dead, 
and  therefore  released  from  the  power  of  sin.  Let 
this  also  be  your  position;  'Know  ye  not,  that  as 
many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Jesus  Christ  were 
baptized  into  His  death?'  Let  the  Holy  Spirit  bap- 
tize you  continually  deeper  into  His  death,  until  the* 
power  of  God's  Word,  dead  to  sin  until  the  conform- 
ity to  Christ's  death,  is  discernible  in  all  your  walk 
and  conversation. 

The  other  lesson  is  this:  The  likeness  of  Christ's 
death  is  not  only  an  obligation  but  a  power.  0 
Christian  longing  to  be  Christlike,  if  there  be  one 
thing  you  need  more  than  and  above  all  else,  it  is 
this:  to  know  the  exceeding  greatness  of  God's  power 
that  worketh  in  you.  It  was  in  the  power  of  eternity 
that  Christ  in  His  death  wrestled  with  the  powers  of 
hell  and  conquered.  You  have  part  with  Christ  in 
His  death ;  you  have  part  in  all  the  powers  by  which 
He  conquered.  Yield  yourself  joyfully  and  believ- 
ingly  to  be  led  more  deeply  into  the  conformity  to 
Christ's  death,  then  you  cannot  but  become  like 
Him. 

0  my  Lord!  how  little  I  have  understood  Thy 
grace.  I  have  often  read  the  words,  'planted  into 
the  likeness  of  His  death,'  and  seen  that  as  Thou 
didst  die  to  sin,  so  it  is  said  to  Thy  believing  people, 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  DEATH.         181 

^Likewise  also  ye.'  But  I  have  not  understood  its 
power.  And  so  it  came  that,  not  knowing  the  like- 
ness of  Thy  death,  I  knew  not  that  I  was  free  from 
the  power  of  sin,  and  as  a  conqueror  could  have  do- 
minion over  it.  Lord,  Thou  hast  indeed  opened  to 
me  a  glorious  prospect.  The  man  who  believingly 
accepts  the  likeness  of  Thy  death,  and  according  to 
Thy  Word  reckons  himself  dead  to  sin — sin  shall  not 
have  dominion  over  him ;  he  has  power  to  live  for  God. 
Lord,  let  Thy  Holy  Spirit  reveal  this  to  me  more 
perfectly.  I  wish  to  take  Thy  word  in  simple  faith, 
to  take  the  position  Thou  assignest  me  as  one  who  in 
Thee  is  dead  to  sin.  Lord,  in  Thee  I  am  dead  to  sin. 
Teach  me  to  hold  it  fast,  or  rather  to  hold  Thee  fast 
in  faith,  until  my  whole  life  be  a  proof  of  it.  0 
Lord,  take  me  up  and  keep  me  in  communion  with 
Thyself,  that,  abiding  in  Thee,  I  may  find  in  Tliee 
the  death  unto  sin  and  the  life  unto  God.     Amen. 

NOTE. 

At  a  meeting  of  ministers,  where  these  words  in 
Bom.  vi.  11  were  being  discussed,  the  question  was 
.asked  by  the  leader,  which  of  the  five  different 
thoughts  of  the  verse  was  the  most  important.  He 
pointed  out  what  these  thoughts  were.  The  first, 
likewise  also  ye^  suggesting  the  complete  likeness  to 
Him  of  whom  it  had  just  been  said,  *In  that  He 
died.  He  died  unto  sin  once;  in  that  He  liveth.  He 
liveth  unto  God.'     The  second,  reckon  yourselves^  the 


182  LIKE  CHRIST: 

command  in  which  the  duty  of  a  large  but  simple 
faith  is  laid  upon  us.  Then,  dead  indeed  to  si7i,  the 
truth  in  which  the  teaching  of  the  previous  verses  is 
summed  up.  Next,  alive  unto  God^  the  never-failing 
accompaniment  and  the  blessing  of  the  death  to  sin. 
And  then,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord^  in  Him 
who  is  ever  root  and  centre  of  all  Scripture  teaching. 
Which  of  these  clauses  must  be  considered  as  that  the 
right  understanding  of  which  is  most  essential  to  the 
full  experience  of  the  whole? 

The  first  answer  was  at  once  given,  'dead  unto  sin."* 
It  is  certainly  this  expression,  the  leader  remarked, 
that  above  all  has  created  such  deep  interest  in  this 
verse,  and  stirred  so  much  earnest  striving  to  realize 
what  it  implies.  And  yet  it  does  not  appear  to  me 
the  most  important. 

'Alive  unto  God^'^  was  the  answer  of  a  second.  For 
it  is  the  life  of  Jesus  given  to  us  in  regeneration  that 
makes  us  partakers  of  His  death  and  its  power  over 
sin.  *Dead  unto  sin'  is  only  the  negative  aspect  of 
what  we  have  as  a  positive  reality  in  being  alive  unto 
God.  If  we  looked  more  at  the  'alive  unto  God,' 
'the  dead  unto  sin'  would  be  better  understood. 

'Reckon  yourselves'^  was  suggested  by  a  third.  Is 
not  this  command  to  act  faith  in  what  has  been  pre- 
pared us  of  God  the  chief  thought  of  the  verse,  and 
that,  therefore,  to  which  our  chief  attention  must  be 
given? 

Another  brother  now  said,  "Through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord,'^  Our  leader  said:  I  think  I  have  lately 
been  taught  that  this  is  indeed  that  on  the  right  ap- 
prehension of  which  the  power  of  the  whole  verse 
depends. 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  DEATH.  183 

How  man}^  have  been  looking  most  earnestly  for 
the  full  insight  into  the  blessedness  of  being  dead 
unto  sin  and  alive  unto  God,  and  yet  have  failed ! 
How  often  we  have  heard  them  pray,  'Lord,  we  are 
not  yet  utterly  dead,  but  we  long  to  be  so'!  How 
many  others,  who  have  better  understood  the  text, 
and  have  seen  that  everything  depends  upon  the 
*  Reckon  yourselves  to  be  dead,'  upon  the  faith  that 
accepts  God's  statement  of  what  is  already  true  and 
sure,  yet  confess  that  their  faith  is  not  followed  by 
the  power  and  the  blessing  they  hoped  for! 

The  mistake  has  been  this:  they  have  been  more 
occupied  with  the  blessings  to  be  had  in  Jesus,  'dead 
unto  sin,'  'alive  unto  God,'  and  the  question  as  to 
their  experience  of  them,  or  even  with  the  effort  to 
exercise  a  strong  abiding  faith  in  these  blessings  as 
theirs,  than  with  Jesus  Himself,  i:n-  whom  both  the 
blessings,  and  the  faith  that  sees  them,  are  ours. 
The  death  unto  sin,  the  life  unto  God,  are  His  (see 
ver.  10)^  are  IN"  Him,  accomplished,  living,  actual, 
mighty  realities;  it  is  as  ^^^  m^e  in  Him,  and  know 
ourselves  to  be  in  Hini^  and  so  come  away  out  of  our- 
selves to  be  and  abide  m  Him  only  and  always,  that 
the  blessings  which  there  are  in  Him  will,  in  the 
most  simple  and  natural  way  possible,  spontaneously 
become  ours  in  experience,  and  that  we  shall  be 
strengthened  in  faith  to  claim  and  enjoy  them.  It 
must  be  Christ  Jesus  first  and  Christ  Jesus  last.  He 
must  be  all. 

See  how  clearly  this  comes  out  in  the  third  verse  of 
the  chapter:  'Know  ye  not  that  so  many  of  us  as 
were  baptized  into  Jesus  Christy  were  baptized  into 
His  death?'     The  baptism  into  Jesus  Christ  was  the 


184  LIKE  CHRIST: 

first  thing — that  they  had  understood  and  accepted ; 
the  baptism  into  His  death  followed  from  it — this 
they  were  now  yet  to  learn  the  meaning  of.  The 
Lord  Jesus  had  been  baptized  with  water  and  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  yet  He  spoke  of  a  baptism  yet 
to  come;  the  full  outcome  of  His  first  baptism  was  to 
be  the  death  of  the  cross.  Even  so  it  is  with  us. 
AVhen  baptized  unto  Christ  we  'put  on  Christ'  {Gal, 
in.  27)y  we  are  made  partakers  of  Him  and  all  He  is 
and  was,  of  His  death  too.  But  it  is  only  in  course 
of  time  that  we  get  to  understand  this,  and  really  to 
claim  the  power  of  His  death  unto  sin  and  His  living 
unto  God.  But  we  can  do  this  successfully  only  as 
we  hold  fast  the  initial  all-comprehensive  blessing, 
baptized  into  Christ.  It  is  the  faith  that  goes 
away  out  to  take  its  abode  consciously  and  perma- 
nently in  Jesus  that  will  have  the  power  to  say,  'Ik 
Christ  Jesus'  we  are  dead  unto  sin,  and  alive  unto 
God;  'in  Christ  Jesus'  we  do  boldly  reckon  ourselves 
dead  unto  sin  and  alive  unto  God. 

'Baptized  into  His  death:'  what  a  word!  The 
death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  was  the  chief  thing  about 
Him;  it  gives  Him  His  beauty.  His  glory.  His  vic- 
tory. His  power.  In  the  complete  conformity  to  this, 
the  highest  privilege  of  the  Christian  consists.  To 
be  immersed,  plunged  into,  steeped  in  the  death  of 
Christ,  the  whole  being  penetrated  with  the  spirit  of 
that  death,  its  obedience,  its  self-sacrifice,  its  utter 
giving  up  of  everything  that  is  of  nature,  that  has 
been  in  contact  with  sin,  to  pass  through  the  death 
into  the  new  life  that  God  gives:  this  must  be  the 
highest  longing  of  the  Christian.  He  has  been  bap- 
tized into  the  death:  He  yields  himself  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  have  all  that  it  contains  unfolded  and  ap- 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  DEATH,         185 

plied.  And  he  does  this  in  simple  faith:  he  knows 
that  in  Christ  Jesus  he  is  dead  unto  sin  and  alive 
unto  God.  Just  as  the  life  unto  God  is  a  complete 
and  perfect  thing,  and  yet  subject  to  the  law  of 
growth  and  increase,  so  that  he  goes  on  to  life  more 
abundant,  so  with  the  death  to  sin.  In  Christ  he  is 
dead  unto  sin,  completely  and  entirely,  and  yet  the 
full  enjoyment  of  what  that  death  means  and  works 
in  all  its  extent  is  matter  of  growing  intelligence  and 
experience. 

But  let  us  beware  of  wearying  ourselves — how  often 
we  have  done  so! — with  trying  more  to  comprehend 
exactly,  and  to  realize  feelingly,  what  this  death  to 
sin  is,  and  what  the  conscious  reckoning  ourselves 
dead  is,  than  to  remember  that  all  this  comes  only  as 
we  are  and  abide  li^  Christ  Jesus,  in  whom  alone 
these  blessings  are  ours.  I  may  be  so  occupied  with 
the  blessings  and  their  pursuit,  that  I  lose  sight  and 
hold  of  Him  in  whom  I  must  be  abiding  most  en- 
tirely if  I  am  to  enjoy  them.  Let  my  first  aim  be 
in  whole-hearted  faith  and  obedience  to  dwell  in  Jesus^ 
in  whom  are  the  death  unto  sin  and  the  life  unto  God : 
the  whole  state  of  being  which  is  implied  in  these 
words  is  His — He  lives  it^  it  is  His  alone — as  I  lose 
myself  in  Him^  I  may  rest  assured  that  the  blessing 
I  long  for  will  come,  or  rather,  I  shall  know  that  in 
Him  I  have  the  thing  itself,  that  Divine  life  out  of 
death  working  in  me,  even  when  I  know  not  exactly 
to  describe  it  in  words.  And  I  shall  see  how  the 
whole  power  and  blessedness  of  the  command  gathers 
itself  into  the  closing  clause,  *  Likewise  also  ye,  reckon 
yourselves  to  be  indeed  dead  unto  sin,  and  alive  unto 
God,  IN  Christ  Jesus.'  In  Christ  is  the  root  of 
Like  Christ. 


186  LIKE  CHRIST: 


TWENTY-THIRD  DAY. 


LIKE   CHEIST 

IN  THE  LIKENESS   OF  HIS  RESURRECTION. 

*  For  if  we  have  been  planted  together  in  the  likeness  of 
His  death,  we  should  be  also  in  the  likeness  of  His  resur- 
rection, that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by 
the  glory  of  His  Father,  even  so  ive  also  should  walk  in 
newness  of  life. ' — RoM.  vi.  5,  4. 

ON  the  likeness  of  His  death  there  follows  neces- 
sarily the  likeness  of  His  resurrection.  To  speak 
alone  of  the  likeness  of  His  death,  of  bearing  the 
cross,  and  of  self-denial,  gives  a  onesided  view  of  fol- 
lowing Christ.  It  is  only  the  power  of  His  resurrec- 
tion that  gives  us  strength  to  go  on  from  that  like- 
ness of  His  death  as  what  we  receive  at  once  by  faith, 
to  that  conformity  to  His  death  which  comes  as  the 
growth  of  the  inner  life.  Being  dead  with  Christ 
refers  more  to  the  death  of  the  old  life  to  sin  and  the 
world  which  we  abandon;  risen  with  Christ  refers  to 
the  new  life  through  which  the  Holy  Spirit  expels 
the  old.  To  the  Christian  who  earnestly  desires  to 
walk  as  Christ  did,  the  knowledge  of  this  likeness  of 
His  resurrection  is  indispensable.     Let  us  see  if  we 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  RESURRECTION    187 

do  not  here  get  the  answer  to  the  question  as  to  where 
we  shall  find  strength  to  live  in  the  world  as  Christ 
did. 

We  have  already  seen  how  our  Lord's  life  before 
His  death  was  a  life  of  weakness.  As  our  Surety,  sin 
had  great  power  over  Him.  It  had  also  power  over 
His  disciples,  so  that  He  could  not  give  them  the 
Holy  Spirit,  or  do  for  them  what  He  wished.  But 
with  the  resurrection  all  was  changed.  Kaised  by  tlie 
Almighty  power  of  God,  His  resurrection  life  was  full 
of  the  power  of  eternity.  He  had  not  only  conquered 
death  and  sin  for  Himself  but  for  His  disciples,  so 
that  He  could  from  the  first  day  make  them  partakers 
of  His  Spirit,  of  His  joy,  and  of  His  heavenly  power. 

When  the  Lord  Jesus  now  makes  us  partakers  of  His 
life,  then  it  is  not  the  life  that  He  had  before  His 
death,  but  the  resurrection  life  that  He  won  through 
death.  A  life  in  which  sin  is  already  made  an  end 
of  and  put  away,  a  life  that  has  already  conquered 
hell  and  the  devil,  the  world  and  the  flesh,  a  life  of 
Divine  power  in  human  nature.  This  is  the  life  that 
likeness  to  His  resurrection  gives  us:  'In  that  He 
liveth,  He  liveth  unto  God.  Ye  also  likewise,  reckon 
yourselves  alive  unto  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord.'  Oh  that  through  the  Holy  Spirit  God  might 
reveal  to  us  the  glory  of  the  life  in  the  likeness  of 
Christ's  resurrection!  In  it  we  find  the  secret  of 
power  for  a  life  of  conformity  to  Him. 


188  LIKE  CHRIST: 

To  most  Christians  this  is  a  mystery,  and  therefore 
their  life  is  fall  of  sin  and  weakness  and  defeat. 
They  believe  in  Christ's  resurrection  as  the  sufl&cient 
proof  of  their  justification.  They  think  that  He  had 
to  rise  again,  to  continue  His  work  in  heaven  as  Me- 
diator. But  that  He  rose  again,  in  order  that  His 
glorious  resurrection  life  might  now  be  the  very  power 
of  their  daily  life^  of  this  they  have  no  idea.  Hence 
their  hopelessness  when  they  hear  of  following  Jesus 
fully,  and  being  perfectly  conformed  to  His  image. 
They  cannot  imagine  how  it  can  be  required  of  a  sin- 
ner, that  he  should  in  all  things  act  as  Christ  would 
have  done.  They  do  not  know  Christ  in  the  power 
of  His  resurrection,  or  the  mighty  power  with  which 
His  life  now  works  in  those,  who  are  willing  to  count 
all  things  but  loss  for  His  sake  {Phil.  Hi.  8;  Eph.  i. 
19,  20).  Come,  all  ye  who  are  weary  of  a  life  unlike 
Jesus,  and  long  to  walk  always  in  His  footsteps,  who 
begin  to  see  that  there  is  in  the  Scriptures  a  better 
life  for  you  than  you  have  hitherto  known,  come  and 
let  me  try  to  show  you  the  unspeakable  treasure  that 
is  yours,  in  your  likeness  to  Christ  in  His  resurrec- 
tion.    Let  me  ask  three  questions. 

The  first  is:  Are  you  ready  to  surrender  your  life 
to  the  rule  of  Jesus  and  His  resurrection  life?  I 
doubt  not  that  the  contemplation  of  Christ's  example 
has  convinced  you  of  sin  in  more  than  one  point.  In 
seeking  your  own  will  and  glory  instead  of  God's,  in 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  RESURRECTION    189 

ambition  and  pride  and  selfishness  and  want  of  love 
towards  man,  you  have  seen  how  far  you  are  from  the 
obedience  and  humility  and  love  of  Jesus.  And  now 
it  is  the  question,  whether  in  view  of  all  these  things, 
in  which  you  have  acknowledged  sin,  you  are  willing 
to  say:  If  Jesus  will  take  possession  of  my  life,  then 
I  resign  all  right  or  wish  ever  in  the  least  to  have  or 
to  do  my  own  will.  I  give  my  life  with  all  I  have 
and  am  entirely  to  Him,  always  to  do  what  He 
through  His  Word  and  Spirit  commands  me.  If  He 
will  live  and  rule  in  me^  I  promise  unbounded  and 
hearty  obedience.  , 

For  such  a  surrender  faith  is  needed ;  therefore  the 
second  question  is:  Are  you  prepared  to  believe  that 
Jesus  will  take  possession  of  the  life  entrusted  to  Him, 
and  that  He  will  rule  and  keep  it?  When  the  believer 
entrusts  his  entire  spiritual  and  temporal  life  com- 
pletely to  Christ,  then  he  learns  to  understand  aright 
Paul's  words:  *I  am  dead;  I  live  no  more:  Christ 
liveth  in  me.'  Dead  with  Christ  and  risen  again,  the 
living  Christ  in  His  resurrection  life  takes  possession 
of  and  rules  my  new  life.  The  resurrection  life  is  not 
a  thing  that  I  may  have  if  I  can  undertake  to  keep 
it :  No,  just  this  is  what  I  cannot  do.  But  blessed 
be  God !  Jesus  Christ  Himself  is  the  resurrection 
and  the  life^  is  the  resurrection  life.  He  Himself  will 
from  day  to  day  and  hour  to  hour  see  to  it  and  ensure 
that  1  live  as  one  ivho  is  risen  with  Him.     He  does  it 


190  LIKE  CHRIST: 

through  that  Holy  Spirit  who  is  the  Spirit  of  His 
risen  life.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  in  us,  and  will,  if  we 
trust  Jesus  for  it,  maintain  within  us  every  moment 
the  presence  and  power  of  the  risen  Lord.  We  need 
not  fear,  that  we  never  can  succeed  in  leading  such  a 
holy  life  as  becomes  those  who  are  temples  of  the  liv- 
ing God.  We  are  indeed  not  alle.  But  it  is  not  re- 
quired of  us.  The  living  Jesus,  wlio  is  the  resurrec- 
tion, has  shown  His  power  over  all  our  enemies;  He 
Himself,  who  so  loves  us.  He  will  work  it  in  us.  He 
gives  us  the  Holy  Spirit  as  our  power,  and  He 
will  perform  His  work  in  us  with  Divine  faithful- 
ness, if  we  will  only  trust  Him;  Christ  Himself  is 
our  life. 

And  now  comes  the  third  question:  Are  you  ready 
to  use  this  resurrection  life  for  the  purpose  for  which 
God  gave  it  Him,  and  gives  it  to  you,  as  a  power  of 
blessing  to  the  lost?  All  desires  after  the  resurrection 
life  will  fail,  if  we  are  only  seeking  our  own  per- 
fection and  happiness.  God  raised  up  and  exalted 
Jesus  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.  He 
ever  lives  to  pray  for  sinners.  Yield  yourself  to  re- 
ceive His  resurrection  life  with  the  same  aim.  Give 
yourself  wholly  to  working  and  praying  for  the  per- 
ishing: then  will  you  become  a  fit  vessel  and  instru- 
ment in  which  the  resurrection  life  can  dwell  and 
work  out  its  glorious  purposes. 

Brother!  thy  calling  is  to  live  like  Christ.     To  this 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  RESURRECTION.    191 

end  tJiou  hast  already  teen  made  one  with  Him  in  the 
likeness  of  His  resurrection.  The  only  question  is 
now,  whether  thou  art  desirous  after  the  full  experi- 
ence of  His  resurrection  life,  whether  thou  art  willing 
^to  surrender  thy  whole  life  that  He  Himself  may 
manifest  resurrection  power  in  every  part  of  it.  I 
pray  thee,  do  not  draw  back.  Offer  thyself  unreserv- 
edly to  Him,  with  all  thy  weakness  and  unfaithful- 
ness. Believe  that  as  His  resurrection  was  a  wonder 
above  all  thought  and  expectation,  so  He  as  the  Kisen 
One  will  still  work  in  thee  exceeding  abundantly 
above  all  thou  couldst  think  or  desire. 

What  a  difference  there  was  in  the  life  of  the  dis- 
ciples before  Jesus*  death  and  after  His  resurrection ! 
Then  all  was  weakness  and  fear,  self  and  sin:  with 
the  resurrection  all  was  power  and  joy,  life  and  love, 
and  glory.  Just  as  great  will  the  change  be,  when  a 
believer,  who  has  known  Jesus'  resurrection  only  as 
the  ground  of  his  justiiScation,  but  has  not  known  of 
the  liJceness  of  His  resurrection,  discovers  how  the 
Eisen  One  will  Himself  be  his  life,  and  in  very  deed 
take  on  Himself  the  responsibility  for  the  whole  of 
that  life.  Oh,  brother,  who  hast  not  yet  experienced 
this,  who  art  troubled  and  weary  because  thou  art 
called  to  walk  like  Christ,  and  )canst  not  do  it,  come 
and  taste  the  blessedness  of  giving  thy  whole  life  to 
the  Eisen  Saviour  in  the  assurance  that  He  will  live 
it  for  thee. 


193  LIKE  CHRIST: 

0  Lord!  my  soul  adores  Thee  as  the  Prince  of 
life!  On  the  cross  Thou  didst  conquer  each  one  of 
my  enemies,  the  devil,  the  flesh,  the  world,  and  sin. 
As  Conquerer  thou  didst  rise  to  manifest  and  main- 
tain the  power  of  Thy  risen  life  in  Thy  people.  Thou 
hast  made  them  one  with  Thyself  in  the  likeness  of 
Thy  resurrection;  now  Thou  wilt  live  in  them,  and 
show  forth  in  their  earthly  life  the  power  of  Thy 
heavenly  life. 

Praised  be  Thy  name  for  this  wonderful  grace. 
Blessed  Lord,  I  come  at  Thy  invitation  to  offer  and 
surrender  to  Thee  my  life,  with  all  it  implies.  Too 
long  have  I  striven  in  my  own  strength  to  live  like 
Thee,  and  not  succeeded.  The  more  I  sought  to 
walk  like  Thee,  the  deeper  was  my  disappointment. 
I  have  heard  of  Thy  disciples  who  tell  how  blessed  it 
is  to  cast  all  care  and  responsibility  for  their  life  on 
Thee.  Lord,  I  am  risen  with  Thee,  one  with  Thee 
in  the  likeness  of  Thy  resurrection ;  come  and  take 
me  entirely  for  Thy  own,  and  be  Thou  my  life. 

Above  all,  I  beseech  Thee,  0  my  Kisen  Lord,  reveal 
Thyself  to  me,  as  Thou  didst  to  Thy  first  disciples, 
in  the  power  of  Thy  resurrection.  It  was  not  enough 
that  after  Thy  resurrection  Thou  didst  appear  to  Thy 
disciples;  they  knew  Thee  not  till  Thou  didst  make 
Thyself  Icnown,  Lord  Jesus!  I  do  believe  in  Thee; 
he  pleased^  0  he  pleased  to  make  Thyself  known  to  me 
as  my  Life.     It  is  Thy  work;  Thou  alone  canst  do  it. 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  EESURRECTION.    193 

I  trust  Thee  for  it.  And  so  shall  my  resurrection 
life  be,  like  Thine  own,  a  continual  source  of  light 
and  blessing  to  all  who  are  needing  Thee.     Amen. 

NOTE, 

I  add  here  an  extract  from  Marshall  On  Sanctifi- 
cation^  in  which  the  reality  of  our  being  partakers 
with  Jesus  of  the  very  nature  in  which  He  lived  and 
died  and  rose  again,  is  very  clearly  put. 

I  have  often  regretted  that  the  somewhat  anti- 
quated style  of  this  writer,  and  the  introduction  of 
questions  not  of  immediate  interest  to  the  soul  seek- 
ing the  path  of  holiness,  prevents  his  book  from  be- 
ing as  well  known  as  it  deserves  to  be.  It  is  on  all 
hands  acknowledged  to  be  the  one  standard  work  on 
the  subject.  It  has  been  given  him  by  God's  Spirit 
with  wonderful  simplicity  to  set  forth  the  great  truth 
that  holiness  is  a  new  life,  a  new  nature,  prepared  for 
us  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  that  therefore  every  step  in 
the  pathway  of  holiness,  whether  in  the  use  of  the 
means  of  grace  or  in  obeying  God's  commands,  must 
be  one  of  faith.  I  have  thought  that  an  abridgment 
of  the  work,  in  which  all  that  is  essential  is  provided 
in  the  author's  own  words,  would  supply  a  real  want 
and  might  be  a  blessing  to  many.  I  have  prepared 
such  an  abridgment,  which  has  been  issued  by  the 
publishers  of  the  present  work,  under  the  title  of  The 
Highway  of  Holiness. 

*The  end  of  Christ's  incarnation,  death,  and  resur- 
rection was  to  prepare  and  form  an  holy  nature  and 
frame  for  us  in  Himself^  to  be  communicated  to  us  iy 
13 


194  LIKE  CHRIST: 

unmi  and  fellowship  with  Him ;  and  not  to  enable 
us  to  produce  in  ourselves  the  first  originals  of  such 
an  holy  nature  by  our  own  endeavours. 

*1.  By  His  incar7iation  there  was  a  roan  created  in 
a  new  holy  frame,  after  the  holiness  of  the  first 
Adam's  frame  had  been  marred  and  abolished  by  the 
first  transgression ;  and  ihh  neio  J^rame^2i^  i?iv  more 
excellent  than  ever  the  first  Adam's  was,  because  man 
was  really  joined  to  God  by  a  close,  inseparable  union 
of  the  divine  and  human  nature  in  one  person — 
Christ;  so  that  these  natures  had  communion  each 
with  other  in  their  actings,  and  Christ  w^as  able  to  act 
in  His  human  nature  by  power  proper  to  the  divine 
nature,  wherein  He  was  one  God  with  the  Father. 

*Why  v/as  it  that  Christ  set  up  the  fallen  nature  of 
man  in  sucli  a  roonderful  frame  of  holiness^  in  Iring- 
ing  it  to  live  and  act  ly  communion  with  God  living 
and  acting  in  it?  One  great  end  was,  that  He 
wight  coynmunicate  this  excellent  frame  to  His  seed 
that  should  by  His  Spirit  be  born  of  Him  and  be  in 
Him  as  the  last  Adam,  the  quickening  Spirit;  that, 
as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the  earthly  man,  so  we 
might  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly  (i  Cor,  xv, 
4o,  Jf.9)  in  holiness  here  and  in  glory  hereafter.  Thus 
He  was  born  Emmanuel,  God  with  us;  because  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead  tvith  all  holiness  did  first  dtcell 
in  Him  bodily,  even  in  His  human  nature^  that  we 
might  be  filled  with  that  fulness  in  Him  {Matt,  i, 
28;  Col,  a,  9,  10).  Thus  He  came  down  from 
heaven  as  living  bread,  that,  as  He  liveth  by  the 
Father,  so  those  that  eat  Him  may  live  by  Him  [John 
vi,  51^  57) ;  by  the  same  life  of  God  in  them  that  was 
first  in  Him. 


IN  THE  LIKENESS  OF  HIS  RESURRECTION    195 

*2.  By  His  death  He  freed  Himself  from  the  guilt 
of  our  sins  imputed  to  Him,  and  from  all  that  inno- 
cent weakness  of  human  nature  which  He  had  borne 
for  a  time  for  our  sakes.  And,  by  freeing  Himself, 
he  prepared  a  freedom  for  us  from  our  own  natural 
condition;  which  is  both  weak  as  His  was,  and  also 
polluted  with  our  guilt  and  sinful  corruption.  Thus 
the  corrupt  natural  state  which  is  called  in  Scripture 
the  "old  man'*  was  crucified  together  wuth  Christ, 
that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  destroyed.  And  it  is 
destroyed  in  us,  not  by  any  wounds  which  we  our- 
selves can  give  it,  but  by  our  partaking  of  that  free- 
dom from  it,  and  death  unto  it,  that  is  already 
wrought  out  for  us  by  the  death  of  Christ;  as  is  sig- 
nified by  our  baptism,  wherein  we  are  buried  with 
Christ  by  the  application  of  His  death  to  us  {Rom. 
vi.  2,  S,  ^  10,  11). 

'God  "  sending  His  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh  for  sin  (or  'by  a  sacrifice  for  sin,'  as  in  the  mar- 
gin) condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  that  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not 
after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  spirit"  {Rom.  viii.  S,  4)- 
Observe  here,  that  though  Christ  died  that  we  might 
be  justified  by  the  righteousness  of  God  and  of  faith, 
not  by  our  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law 
(Rom.  X.  4.-6;  Phil.  Hi.  9),  yet  He  died  also,  that  the 
righteousness  of  the  law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  and 
that  by  walking  after  His  Spirit,  as  those  that  are  in 
Christ  {Rom,  viii.  Ji).  He  is  resembled  in  His  death 
to  a  corn,  of  wheat  dying  in  the  earth  that  it  may 
propagate  its  own  nature  by  bringiiig  forth  much 
fruit  {John  xii.  2Jf) ;  to  the  passover  that  was  slain 
that  a  feast  might  be  kept  upon  it;    and  to  bread 


196  LIKE  CHRIST: 

broken  that  it  may  be  nourishment  to  those  that  eat 
it  (i  Cor.  V,  7,  8  and  xi.  2Ji)  ;  to  the  rock  smitten 
that  water  might  gush  out  of  it  for  us  to  drink 
{1  Cor.  X.  Ji). 

'He  died  that  He  might  make  of  Jew  and  Gentile 
one  new  man  in  Himself  (Eph,  ii,  15);  and  that  He 
might  see  His  seed,  i.e.,  such  as  derive  their  holy  na- 
ture from  Him  (Jsa.  liii,  10).  Let  these  Scriptures 
be  well  observed,  and  they  will  sufficiently  evidence 
that  Christ  died,  not  that  we  might  be  able  to  form 
an  holy  nature  in  ourselves,  but  that  we  might  re- 
ceive one  ready  ^prepared  and  formed  in  Christ  for  us^ 
by  union  and  fellowship  with  Him. 

'3.  By  His  resurrection  He  took  possession  of  spir- 
itual life  for  us,  as  now  fully  procured  for  us,  and 
made  to  be  our  right  and  property  by  the  merit  of 
His  death,  and  therefore  we  are  said  to  be  quickened 
together  with  Christ.  His  resurrection  was  our  resur- 
rection to  the  life  of  holiness,  as  Adam's  fall  was  our 
fall  into  spiritual  death.  And  we  are  not  ourselves 
the  first  makers  and  formers  of  our  new  holy  nature, 
any  more  than  of  our  original  corruption,  but  both 
are  formed  ready  for  us  to  partahe  of  them.  And,  by 
union  with  Christ,  we  partahe  of  that  spiritual  life 
that  He  tooTc  possession  of  for  us  at  His  resurrection, 
and  thereby  we  are  enabled  to  bring  forth  the  fruits 
of  it ;  as  the  Scripture  showeth  by  the  similitude  of  a 
marriage  union,  Rom:  vii,  4-  "We  are  married  to 
Him  that  is  raised  from  the  dead,  that  we  might 
bring  forth  fruit  unto  God.'* ' 


CONFORMABLE  TO  HIS  DEATH,  197 


TWENTY-FOURTH  DAY. 


LIKE   CHRIST 

BEING  MADE   CONFORMABLE   TO  HIS  DEATH. 

*  That  I  may  know  Him,  and  the  power  of  His  resurrec- 
tion, and  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings,  being  made  con- 
formable to  His  death.  '-—Phil.  iii.  10. 

WE  know  that  the  death  of  Christ  was  the  death  of 
the  cross.  We  know  that  that  death  of  the 
cross  is  His  chief  glory.  Without  that  death  He 
would  not  be  the  Christ.  The  distinguishing  char- 
acteristic, the  one  mark  by  which  He  is  separated 
here  in  earth  and  in  heaven,  from  all  other  persons, 
both  in  the  Divine  Being  and  in  God's  universe,  is 
this  one:  He  is  the  Crucified  Son  of  God.  Of  all  the 
articles  of  conformity,  this  inust  necessarily  be  the 
chief  and  most  glorious  one — conformity  to  His 
death. 

This  is  what  made  it  so  attractive  to  Paul.  What 
were  Christ's  glory  and  blessedness  must  be  his  glory 
too:  he  knows  that  the  most  intimate  likeness  to 
Christ  is  conformity  to  His  death.  What  that  death 
had  been  to  Christ  it  would  be  to  him,  as  he  grew 
conformed  to  it. 


1^  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Christ's  death  on  the  cross  had  been  the  end  of  sin. 
During  His  life  it  could  tempt  Him:  when  He  dieu 
on  the  cross,  He  died  to  sin;  it  could  no  more  reach 
Him.  Conformity  to  Christ's  death  is  the  power  to 
keep  us  from  the  power  of  sin.  As  I  by  the  grace  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  am  kept  in  my  position  as  crucified 
^vith  Christ,  and  live  out  my  crucifixion  life  as  the 
Crucified  One  lives  it  in  me,  I  am  kept  from  sinning. 

Christ's  death  on  the  cross  was  to  the  Father  a 
sweet-smelling  sacrifice,  infinitely  pleasing.  Oh,  if  I 
want  to  dwell  in  the  favour  and  love  of  the  Father, 
and  be  His  delight,  I  am  sure  there  is  nothing  gives 
such  deep  and  perfect  access  to  it  as  being  conform- 
able to  Christ's  death.  There  is  nothing  in  the  uni- 
verse to  the  Father  so  beautiful,  so  holy,  so  heavenly, 
so  wonderful  as  this  sight,  the  Crucified  Jesus.  And 
the  closer  I  can  get  to  Him,  and  the  liker,  the  more 
conformed  to  His  death  I  can  become,  the  more  surely 
shall  I  enter  into  the  very  bosom  of  His  love. 

Christ's  death  on  the  cross  was  the  entrance  to  the 
power  of  the  resurrection  life,  the  unchanging  life  of 
eternity.  In  our  spiritual  life  we  often  have  to 
mourn  the  breaks,  and  failures,  and  intervals  that 
prove  to  us  that  there  is  still  something  wanting 
that  prevents  the  resurrection  life  asserting  its  full 
power.  The  secret  is  here:  there  is  still  some  subtle 
self-life  that  has  not  yet  been  brought  into  the  per- 
fect conformity  of  Christ's  death.      We  can  be  sure 


CONFORMABLE  TO  HIS  DEATH,  199 

of  it,  nothiDg  is  needed  but  a  fuller  entrance  into  the 
fellowship  of  the  cross  to  make  us  to  the  full  partak- 
ers of  the  resurrection  joy. 

Above  all,  it  was  Christ's  death  on  the  cross  that 
made  Hira  the  life  of  the  world,  gave  Him  the  power 
to  bless  and  to  save  {John  xii,  ^^,  2S),  In  the  conform- 
ity to  Christ's  death  there  is  an  end  of  self:  we  give 
up  ourselves  to  live  and  die  for  others;  we  are  full  of 
the  faith  that  our  surrender  of  ourselves  to  bear  the 
sin  of  others  is  accepted  of  the  Father.  Out  of 
this  death  we  rise,  with  the  power  to  love  and  to 
bless. 

And  now,  what  is  this  conformity  to  the  death  of 
the  cross  that  brings  such  blessings,  and  wherein  does 
it  consist?  We  see  it  in  Jesus.  The  cross  means 
entire  self-abnegation.  The  cross  means  the  death  of 
self, — the  utter  surrender  of  our  own  will  and  our  life 
to  be  lost  in  the  will  of  God,  to  let  God's  will  do  with 
us  what  it  pleases.  This  was  what  the  cross  meant  to 
Jesus.  It  cost  Him  a  terrible  struggle  before  He 
could  give  Himself  up  to  it.  When  He  was  sore 
amazed  and  very  heavy,  and  His  soul  exceeding  sor- 
rowful unto  death,  it  was  because  His  whole  being 
shrank  back  from  that  cross  and  its  curse.  Three 
times  He  had  to  pray  before  He  could  fully  say,  ^Not 
my  will,  but  Thine  be  dene.'  But  He  did  say  it. 
And  His  giving  Himself  up  to  the  cross  is  to  say: 
Let  me  do  anything,   rather  than  that  God's  will 


200  LIKE  CHRIST: 

should  not  be  done.  I  give  up  everything, — only 
God's  will  must  be  done. 

And  this  is  being  made  conformable  to  Christ's 
death,  that  we  so  give  away  ourselves  and  our  whole 
life,  with  its  power  of  willing  and  acting,  to  God, 
that  we  learn  to  be  and  work,  and  do  nothing  but 
what  God  reveals  to  us  as  His  will.  And  such  a  life 
is  called  conformity  to  the  death  of  Christ,  not  only 
because  it  is  somewhat  similar  to  His,  but  because  it 
is  Himself  by  His  Holy  Spirit  just  repeating  and  act- 
ing over  again  in  us  the  life  that  animated  Him  in 
His  crucifixion.  Were  it  not  for  this,  the  very  thought 
of  such  conformity  would  be  akin  to  blasphemy. 

But  now  it  is  not  so.  In  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  as  the  Spirit  of  the  Crucified  Jesus,  the  be- 
liever knows  that  the  blessed  resurrection  life  has  its 
power  and  its  glory  from  its  being  a  crucifixion  life, 
begotten  from  the  cross.  He  yields  himself  to  it,  he 
believes  that  it  has  possession  of  him.  Eealizing  that 
he  himself  has  not  the  power  to  think  or  do  anything 
that  is  good  or  holy;  nay,  that  the  power  of  the  flesh 
asserts  itself  and  defiles  everything  that  is  in  him,  he 
yields  and  holds  every  power  of  his  being  as  far  as 
his  disposal  of  them  goes  in  the  place  of  crucifixion 
and  condemnation.  And  so  he  yields  and  holds 
every  power  of  his  being,  every  faculty  of  body,  soul, 
and  spirit,  at  the  disposal  of  Jesus.  The  distrust  and 
denial  of  self  in  everything,  the  trust  of  Jesus  in 


CONFORMABLE  TO  HIS  DEATH,  201 

everything,  mark  his  life.  The  very  spirit  of  the 
cross  breathes  through  his  whole  being. 

And  so  far  is  it  from  being,  as  might  appear,  a 
matter  of  painful  strain  and  weary  eflEort  thus  to 
maintain  the  crucifixion  position,  to  one  who  knows 
Christ  in  the  power  of  His  resurrection — for  Paul 
puts  this  first — and  so  is  made  conformed  to  His 
death,  it  is  rest  and  strength  and  victory.  Because 
it  is  not  the  dead  cross,  not  self's  self-denial,  not  a 
work  in  his  own  strength,  that  he  has  to  do  with,  but 
the  living  Jesus,  in  whom  the  crucifixion  is  an  ac- 
complished thing,  already  passed  into  the  life  of  resur- 
rection. *  I  have  been  crucified  with  Christ:  Christ 
liveth  in  me;'  this  it  is  that  gives  the  courage  and 
the  desire  for  an  ever-growing,  ever  deeper  entrance 
into  most  perfect  conformity  with  His  death. 

And  how  is  this  blessed  conformity  to  be  attained? 
Paul  will  give  us  the  answer.  *  What  things  ivere  gain 
to  me^  these  I  counted  loss  for  Christ.  Yea,  doubt- 
less, I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of 
the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord,  that  I  may 
know  Him,  being  made  conformed  to  His  death.' 
The  pearl  is  of  great  price;  but  oh!  it  is  worth  the 
purchase.  Let  us  give  up  all,  yes,  all,  to  be  ad- 
mitted by  Jesus  to  a  place  with  Him  on  the  cross. 

And  if  it  appear  hard  to  give  up  all,  and  then  as 
our  reward  only  have  a  whole  life-time  on  the  cross, 
oh  let  us  listen  again  to  Paul  as  he  tells  us  what  made 


203  LIKE  CHRIST: 

him  so  willingly  give  up  all,  and  so  intently  choose 
the  cross.  It  was  Jesus — Christ  Jesus,  my  Lord. 
The  cross  was  the  place  where  he  could  get  into  fullest 
union  with  his  Lord.  To  know  Him^  to  win  Hi7n^ 
to  be  found  in  Him^  to  be  made  like  to  Him^ — this 
was  the  burning  passion  that  made  it  easy  to  cast 
away  all,  that  gave  the  cross  such  mighty  attractive 
power.  Anything  to  come  nearer  to  Jesus.  All  for 
Jesus,  was  his  motto.  It  contains  the  twofold  an- 
swer to  the  question.  How  to  attain  this  conformity 
to  Christ's  death?  The  one  is.  Cast  out  all.  The 
other,  And  let  Jesus- come  in.     All  for  Jesus. 

Yes,  it  is  only  knowing  Jesus  that  can  make  the 
conformity  to  His  death  at  all  possible.  But  let  the 
soul  win  Him,  and  be  found  in  Him,  and  know  Him 
in  the  power  of  the  resurrection,  and  it  becomes  more 
than  possible,  a  blessed  reality.  Therefore,  beloved 
follower  of  Jesus,  look  to  Him,  look  to  Him,  the 
Crucified  One.  Gaze  on  Him  until  thy  soul  has 
learnt  to  say:  0  my  Lord,  I  must  be  like  Thee. 
Gaze  until  thou  hast  seen  how  He  Himself,  the  Cru- 
cified One,  in  His  ever  present  omnipotence,  draws 
nigh  to  live  in  thee  and  breathe  through  thy  being 
His  crucifixion  life.  It  was  through  the  Eternal 
Spirit  that  He  ofEered  Himself  unto  God;  that  Spirit 
brings  and  imparts  all  that  that  death  on  the  cross 
is,  and  means,  and  effected,  to  thee  as  thy  life.  By 
that   Holy  Spirit  Jesus  Himself   maintains  in  each 


CONFORMABLE  TO  HIS  DEATH.  203 

60ul,  who  can  trust  Him  for  it,  the  power  of  the  cross 
as  an  abiding  death  to  sin  and  self,  and  a  never-ceas- 
ing source  of  resurrection  life  and  power.  Therefore, 
once  again,  look  to  Him,  the  Living  Crucified  Jesus. 
But  remember,  above  all,  that  while  thou  hast  to 
seek  the  best  and  the  highest  with  all  thy  might,  the 
full  blessing  comes  not  as  the  fruit  of  thy  efforts,  but 
unsought,  a  free  gift  to  whom  it  is  given  from  above. 
It  is  as  it  pleases  the  Lord  Jesus  to  reveal  Himself, 
that  we  are  made  conformable  to  His  death.  There- 
fore seek  and  get  it  from  Himself.  » 

0  Lord,  such  knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me; 
it  is  high,  I  cannot  attain  to  it.  To  know  Thee  in 
the  power  of  Thy  resurrection,  and  to  be  made  con- 
formable to  Thy  death:  these  are  of  the  things  which 
are  hid  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  are  revealed 
unto  babes,  unto  those  elect  souls  alone  to  whom  it  is 
given  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom. 

0  my  Lord!  I  see  more  than  ever  what  utter 
folly  it  is  to  think  of  likeness  to  Thee  as  an  attain- 
ment through  my  effort.  I  cast  myself  on  Thy  mercy : 
look  upon  me  according  to  the  greatness  of  Thy  lov- 
ing-kindness: and  of  Thy  free  favour  reveal  Thyself 
to  me.  If  Thou  wilt  be  pleased  to  come  forth  from 
Thy  heavenly  dwelling-place,  and  to  draw  nigh  to 
me,  and  to  prepare  me,  and  take  me  up  into  the  full 
fellowship  of   Thy  life  and  death,  0  my  Lord,  then 


204  LIKE  CHRIST: 

will  I  live  and  die  for  Thee,  and  the  souls  Thou  hast 
died  to  save. 

Blessed  Saviour!  I  know  Thou  art  willing.  Thy 
love  to  each  of  Thy  redeemed  ones  is  infinite.  0 
teach  me,  draw  me  to  give  up  all  for  Thee,  and  take 
eternal  possession  of  me  for  Thyself.  And  oh !  let 
some  measure  of  conformity  to  Thy  death,  in  its  self- 
sacrifice  for  the  perishing,  be  the  mark  of  my  life. 
Amen. 


GIVING  HIS  LIFE  FOR  MEN,  205 


TWENTY-FIFTH  DAY. 


LIKE    CHRIST 

GIVING   HIS  LIFE   FOR  MEN. 

'  Whosoever  will  be  great  among  you,  let  him  be  your 
servant ;  and  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you,  let  him 
be  your  slave  :  even  as  the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  min- 
istered unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom 
for  many.  '—Matt.  xx.  26,  27,  28. 

'Hereby  know  we  love,  because  He  laid  down  His  life 
for  us  :  and  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the  brethren.  * 
—1  John  iii.  16. 

IN  speaking  of  the  likeness  of  Christ's  death,  and 
of  being  made  conformable  to  it,  of  bearing  the 
cross  and  being  crucified  with  Him,  there  is  one 
danger  to  which  even  the  earnest  believer  is  exposed, 
and  that  is  of  seeking  after  these  blessings  for  his 
own  sake,  or,  as  he  thinks,  for  the  glory  of  God  in 
his  own  personal  perfection.  The  error  would  be  a 
fatal  one:  he  would  never  attain  the  close  conform- 
ity to  Jesus'  death  he  hoped  for:  for  he  would  be 
leaving  out  just  that  which  is  the  essential  element 
in  the  death  of  Jesus,  and  in  the  self-sacrifice  it  in- 
culcates: that  characteristic  is  its  absolute  unselfish- 
ness, its  reference  to  others.     To  be  made  conform- 


206  LIKE  CHRIST: 

able  to  Christ's  death  implies  a  dying  to  self,  a  losing 
sight  of  self  altogether  in  giving  np  and  laying  down 
our  life  for  others.  To  the  question,  how  far  we  are;, 
to  go  in  living  for,  in  loving,  in  serving,  in  saving 
men,  the  Scriptures  do  not  hesitate  to  give  the  un- 
equivocal answer:  We  are  to  go  as  far  as  Jesus,  even 
to  the  laying  down  of  our  life.  We  are  to  consider 
this  so  entirely  as  the  object  for  which  we  are  re- 
deemed and  are  left  in  the  world,  the  one  object  for 
which  we  live,  that  the  laying  down  of  the  life  in 
death  follows  as  a  matter  of  course.  Like  Christ, 
the  only  thing  that  keeps  ns  in  this  world  is  to  be 
the  glory  of  God  in  the  salvation  of  sinners.  Scrip- 
ture does  not  hesitate  to  say  that  it  is  in  His  path  of 
suffering,  as  He  goes  to  work  out  atonement  and 
redemption,  that  we  are  to  follow  Him.* 

How  clearly  this  comes  out  in  the  words  of  the 
Master  Himself :  'Whoever  will  be 'chief  among  you, 
let  him  be  your  bond-servant,  eyeis"  as  the  Son  of 
man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister, 
and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many.'  The 
highest  in  glory  will  be  he  who  was  lowest  in  service, 
and  likest  to  the  Master  in  His  giving  His  life  a 

*  Compare  Matt.  xx.  28  with  Eph.  v.  2,  25,  26;  Phil.  ii. 
5-8 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  21-23,  and  note  how  distinctly  it  is  in  con- 
nection with  His  redemptive  work  that  Christ  is  set  before 
us  as  our  example  :  the  giving  His  life  away  for  others  is 
its  special  significance. 


GIVING  HIS  LIFE  FOR  MEN,  207 

ransom.  And  so  again,  a  few  days  later,  after  hav- 
ing spoken  of  His  own  death  in  the  words:  'The 
hour  is  come  that  the  Son  of  man  should  be  glorified. 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  Except  a  corn  of  wheat 
fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it  abideth  alone:  but 
if  it  die,  it  bringeth  forth  much  fruit;'  He  at  once 
applied  to  His  disciples  what  He  had  said  by  repeat- 
ing what  they  had  already  heard  spoken  to  them- 
selves, 'He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it:  and  he 
that  hateth  his  life  in  this  world  shall  keep  it  unto 
life  eternal.'  The  corn  of  wheat  dying  to  rise 
again,  losing  its  life  to  regain  it  multiplied  manifold, 
is  clearly  set  forth  as  the  emblem  not  only  of  the 
Master  but  of  each  one  of  His  followers.  Loving 
life,  refusing  to  die,  means  remaining  alone  in  sel- 
fishness: losing  life  to  bring  forth  much  fruit  in, 
others  is  the  only  way  to  keep  it  for  ourselves.  Theref^' 
is  no  way  to  find  our  life  but  as  Jesus  did,  in  giving 
it  up  for  the  salvation  of  others.  Herein  is  the 
Father,  herein  shall  we  be  glorified.  The  deepest 
underlying  thought  of  conformity  to  Christ's  death 
is,  giving  our  life  to  God  for  saving  others.  With- 
out this,  the  longing  for  conformity  to  that  death 
is  in  danger  of  being  a  refined  selfishness. 

How  remarkable  the  exhibition  we  have  in  the 
Apostle  Paul  of  this  spirit,  and  how  instructive  the 
words  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  in  him  expressed  to 
us  its  meaning!     To  the  Corinthians  he  says:  'Al- 


208  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Tvays  bearing  about  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
that  the  life  also  of  Jesus  might  be  made  manifest  in 
our  body.  For  we  which  live  are  always  delivered 
to  death  for  Jesus'  sake,  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus 
might  be  made  manifest  in  our  mortal  flesh.  So 
then  death  ivorheth  in  us^  but  life  in  you.'^  'Though 
He  VMS  crucified  through  lueahness^  yet  He  liveth 
by  the  power  of  God.  For  lue  also  are  iveak  in  Hiniy 
but  we  shall  live  with  Him  by  the  power  of  God 
TOWARD  you'  {2  Cor.  iv.  10-12;  xiii,  Ji),  'I  now 
rejoice  in  my  sufferings  for  you^  and  fill  up  that 
w'hich  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  my 
flesh  for  His  body's  sake,  which  is  the  Church' 
{Col.  i,  2]i),  These  passages  teach  us  how  the  vica- 
rious element  of  the  suffering  that  Christ  bore  in  His 
body  on  the  tree,  to  a  certain  extent  still  character- 
izes the  sufferings  of  His  body  the  Church.  Be- 
lievers who  give  themselves  up  to  bear  the  burden 
of  the  sins  of  men  before  the  Lord,  who  suffer  re- 
proach and  shame,  weariness  and  pain,  in  the  effort 
to  win  souls,  are  filling  up  that  which  is  lacking  of 
the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  their  flesh.  The  power 
and  the  fellowship  of  His  suffering  and  death  work 
in  them,  the  power  of  Christ's  life  through  them  in 
those  for  whom  they  labour  in  love.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  in  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings,  and 
the  conformity  of  His  death  in  Phil,  iii.^  Paul  had 
in  view  not  only  the  inner  spiritual,  but  also  the 


GIVING  HIS  LIFE  FOR  MEN,  209 

external  bodily  participations  in  the  suffering  of 
Christ. 

And  so  it  must  be  with  each  of  us  in  some  meas- 
ure. Self-sacrifice  not  merely  for  the  sake  of  our 
own  sanctification,  but  for  the  salvation  of  our  fel- 
low-men,  is  what  brings  us  into  true  fellowship  with 
the  Christ  who  gave  Himself  for  us. 

The  practical  application  of  these  thoughts  is  very 
simple.  Let  us  first  of  all  try  and  see  the  truth  the 
Holy  Spirit  seeks  to  teach  us.  As  the  most  essential 
thing  in  likeness  to  Christ  is  likeness  to  His  death, 
so  the  most  essential  thing  in  likeness  to  His  death 
is  the  giving  up  our  life  to  win  others  to  God.  It  is 
a  death  in  which  all  thought  of  saving  self  is  lost  in 
that  of  saving  others.  Let  us  pray  for  the  light  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  to  show  us  this,  until  we  learn  to  feel 
that  we  are  in  the  world  just  as  Christ  was,  to  give 
up  self,  to  love  and  serve,  to  live  and  die,  'even  as 
the  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but 
to  minister,  and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many.* 
Oh  that  God  would  give  his  people  to  know  their 
calling  that  they  do  not  belong  to  themselves,  but  to 
God  and  to  their  felloio-men ;  that,  even  as  Christ, 
they  are  only  to  live  to  be  a  blessing  to  the  world. 

Then  let  us  believe  in  the  grace  that  is  waiting  to 

make  our  experience  of  this  truth  a  reality.     Let  us 

believe  that  God  accepts  of  our  giving  up   of   our 

whole  life  for  His  glory  in  the  saving  of  others.     Let 

14 


210  LIKE  CHRIST: 

us  believe  that  conformity  to  the  death  of  Jesus  in 
this,  its  very  life-principle,  is  what  the  Holy  Ghost 
will  work  out  in  us.  Let  us  above  all  believe  in 
Jesus:  it  is  He  Himself  who  will  take  up  every  soul 
that  in  full  surrender  yields  itself  to  Him,  into  the 
full  fellowship  of  His  death,  of  His  dying  in  love  to 
bring  forth  much  fruit.  Yes,  let  us  believe,  and  be- 
lieving seek  from  above,  as  the  work  and  the  gift  of 
Jesus,  likeness  to  Jesus  in  this  too. 
.'  And  let  us  at  once  begin  and  act  this  faith.  Let 
us  put  it  into  practice.  Looking  upon  ourselves  now 
as  wholly  given  up,  just  like  Christ,  to  live  and  die 
for  God  in  our  fellow-men,  let  us  with  new  zeal  ex- 
ercise the  ministry  of  love  in  winning  souls.  As  we 
wait  for  Christ  to  work  out  His  likeness,  as  we  trust 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  give  His  mind  in  us  more  per- 
fectly, let  us  in  faith  begin  at  once  to  act  as  followers 
of  Him  who  only  lived  and  died  to  be  a  blessing  to 
others.  -Let  our  love  open  the  way  to  the  work  it  has 
to  do  by  the  kindness,  and  gentleness,  and  helpful- 
ness with  which  it  shines  out  on  all  whom  we  meet 
in  daily  life.  Let  it  give  itself  to  the  work  of  inter- 
cession, land:  look  up  to  God  to  use  us  as  one  of  His 
instruments  in  the  answering  of  those  prayers.  Let 
us  speak  and  work  for  Jesus  as  those  who  have  a  mis- , 
sion  and  a  power  from  on  high  which  make  us  sure 
of  a  blessing.  ..  Let  us  make  soul-winning  our  object. 
Let  us  band,  ourselves  with  the  great  army  of  reapers 


GIVING  HIS  LIFE  FOR  MEN.  211 

the  Lord  is  sendiDg  out  into  His  harvest.  And  ere 
we  thought  of  it,  we  shall  find  that  giving  our  life  to 
win  others  for  God  is  the  most  blessed  way  of  dying 
to  self,  of  being  even  as  the  Son  of  man  was,  a  servant 
and  a  Saviour  of  the  lost. 

0  most  wonderful  and  inconceivably  blessed  like- 
ness to  Christ!  He  gave  Himself  to  men,  but  could 
not  really  reach  them,  until,  giving  Himself  a  sacri- 
fice to  God  for  them,  the  seed-corn  died,  the  life  was 
poured  out;  then  the  blessing  flowed  forth  in  mighty 
power.  I  may  seek  to  love  and  serve  men ;  I  can  only 
really  influence  and  bless  them  as  I  yield  myself  unto 
God  and  give  up  my  life  into  His  hands  for  them;  as 
I  lose  myself  as  an  offering  on  the  altar,  I  become  in 
His  spirit  and  power  in  very  deed  a  blessing.  My 
spirit  given  into  His  hands,  He  can  use  and  bless  me. 

0  most  blessed  God !  dost  Thou  in  very  deed  ask 
me  to  come  and  give  myself,  my  very  life,  wholly, 
even  unto  the  death,  to  Thee  for  my  fellow-men?  If 
I  have  heard  the  words  of  the  Master  aright.  Thou 
dost  indeed  seek  nothing  less. 

OGod!  wilt  Thou  indeed  have  me?  Wilt  Thou 
in  very  deed  in  Christ  permit  me,  like  Him,  as  a 
member  of  His  body,  to  live  and  die  for  those  around 
me?  to  lay  myself,  I  say  it  in  deep  reverence,  beside 
Him  on  the  altar  of  death,  crucified  with  Him,  and 
be  a  livino^  sacrifice  to  Thee  for  men?     Lord!  I  do 


212  LIKE  CHRIST: 

praise  Thee  for  this  most  wonderful  grace.  And  now 
I  come,  Lord  God!  and  give  myself.  Oh  for  the 
grace  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit  to  make  the  transaction 
definite  and  real!  Lord!  here  I  am,  given  up  to 
Thee,  to  live  only  for  those  whom  Thou  art  seeking 
to  save. 

Blessed  Jesus!  come  Thyself,  and  breathe  Thine 
own  mind  and  love  within  me.  Take  possession  of 
me,  my  thoughts  to  think,  my  heart  to  feel,  my 
powers  to  work,  my  life  to  live,  as  given  away  to  God 
for  men.  Write  it  in  my  heart:  it  is  done,  I  am 
given  away  to  God,  He  has  taken  me.  Keep  Thou 
me  each  day  as  in  His  hands,  expecting  and  assured 
that  He  will  use  me.  On  Thy  giving  up  Thyself  fol- 
lowed the  life  in  power,  the  outbreaking  of  the  bless- 
ing in  fulness  and  power.  It  will  be  so  in  Thy  people 
too.     Glory  be  to  Thy  name.     Amen. 


IN  HIS  MEEKNESS.  213 


TWENTY-SIXTH    D^Y. 


LIKE   CHEIST 

IN  HIS  MEEKNESS. 

'Behold,  thy  King  Cometh,  meek.' — Matt.  xxi.  5. 
*  Learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  of  heart,  and  ye 
shall  iBnd  rest  for  your  souls.  '—Matt.  xi.  29. 

IT  is  on  His  way  to  the  cross  that  we  find  the  first 
of  these  two  words  written  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  It 
is  in  His  sufferings  that  the  meekness  of  Jesus  is 
specially  manifested.  Follower  of  Jesus !  who  art  so 
ready  to  take  Thy  place  under  the  shadow  of  His 
cross,  there  to  behold  the  Lamb  slain  for  thy  sins,  is 
it  not  a  precious  thought,  that  there  is  one  part  of 
His  work,  as  the  suffering  Lamb  of  God,  in  which 
Thou  mayest  bear  His  image  and  be  like  Him  every 
day?  thou  canst  be  meek  and  gentle  even  as  He  was. 
Meekness  is  the  opposite  of  all  that  is  hard  or  bitter 
or  sharp.  It  has  reference  to  the  disposition  which 
animates  us  towards  our  inferiors.  'With  meekness,' 
ministers  must  instruct  those  that  oppose  themselves, 
teach  and  bring  back  the  erring  {GaL  vi.  1 ;  2  Tim, 
a,  25) .  It  expresses  our  disposition  towards  superiors : 
we  must  'receive  the  word  with  meekness'  {Jas,  i.  21); 


214  LIKE  CHRIST: 

if  the  wife  is  to  be  in  subjection  to  her  husband,  it 
must  be  in  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  is  in  the 
sight  of  God  of  great  price  {1  Pet,  in.).  As  one  of 
the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  meekness  ought  to  character- 
ize all  our  daily  intercourse  with  fellow-Christians, 
and  extend  to  all  with  whom  we  have  to  do  {Eph.  iv, 
2 ;  Gal.  v.  22 ;  Col  in,  12;  Tit.  Hi.  2).  It  is  men- 
tioned in  Scripture  along  with  humility,  because  that 
is  the  inward  disposition  concerning  oneself,  out  of 
which  meekness  towards  others  springs. 

There  is  perhaps  none  of  the  lovely  virtues  which 
adorn  the  image  of  God's  Son,  which  is  more  seldom 
seen  in  those  who  ought  to  be  examples.  There  are 
many  servants  of  Jesus,  in  whom  much  love  to  souls, 
much  service  for  the  salvation  of  others,  and  much 
zeal  for  God's  will,  are  visible,  and  yet  who  continu- 
ally come  short  in  this.  How  often,  when  ofEence 
comes  unexpectedly,  whether  at  home  or  abroad,  they 
are  carried  away  by  temper  and  anger,  and  have  to 
confess  that  they  have  lost  the  perfect  rest  of  soul  in 
God!  There  is  no  virtue,  perhaps,  for  which  some 
liave  prayed  more  earnestly:  they  feel  they  would 
give  anything,  if  in  their  intercourse  with  partner, 
or  children,  or  servants,  in  company  or  in  busi- 
ness, they  could  always  keep  their  temper  per- 
fectly, and  exhibit  the  meekness  and  gentleness 
of  Christ.  Unspeakable  is  the  grief  and  disappoint- 
ment experienced  by  those  who  have  learnt  to  long 


IN  HIS  MEEKNESS.  215 

for  it,  and  yet  have  not  discovered  where  the  secret 
of  meekness  lies. 

The  self-command  needed  for  this  seems  to  some  so 
impossible,  that  they  seek  comfort  in  the  belief  that 
this  blessing  belongs  to  a  certain  natural  tempera- 
ment, and  is  too  contrary  to  their  character  for  them 
ever  to  expect  it.  To  satisfy  themselves  they  find  all 
sorts  of  excuses.  They  do  not  mean  it  so  ill:  though 
the  tongue  or  the  temper  be  shari3,  there  is  still  love 
in  their  hearts:  it  would  not  be  good  to  be  too  gen- 
tle; evil  would  be  strengthened  by  it.  And  thus  the 
call  to  entire  conformity  to  the  holy  gentleness  of  the 
Lamb  of  God  is  robbed  of  all  its  power.  And  the 
world  is  strengthened  in  its  belief,  that  Christians  are 
after  all  not  very  much  different  from  other  people, 
because,  though  they  do  indeed  say,  they  do  not  show, 
that  Christ  changes  the  heart  and  life  after  His  own 
image.  And  the  soul  suffers  itself,  and  causes  un- 
speakable harm  in  Christ's  Church,  through  its  un- 
faithfulness in  appropriating  this  blessing  of  salva- 
tion: the  bearing  the  image  and  likeness  of  God. 

This  grace  is  of  great  price  in  the  sight  of  God. 
In  the  Old  Testament  there  are  many  glorious  prom- 
ises for  the  meek,  which  were  by  Jesus  gathered  up 
into  this  one,  'Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall 
inherit  the  earth'  (see  Ps.  xxv.  9;  Ixxvi,  9;  Prov. 
in.  SJf,;  Jer.  it.  3).  In  the  New  Testament,  its  praise 
consists  in  this,  that  it  is  His  meekness  that  gives  its 


216  LIKE  CHRIST: 

snpernatnral  incomparable  beauty  to  the  image  of 
our  Lord.  A  meek  spirit  is  of  great  price  in  God's 
sight;  it  is  the  choicest  ornament  of  the  Beloved  Son. 
The  Father  could  surely  offer  no  higher  inducement 
to  His  children,  to  seek  it  above  all  things. 

For  every  one  Tvho  longs  to  jiossess  this  spirit, 
Christ's  word  is  full  of  comfort  and  encouragement: 
'Learn  of  me  that  I  am  meek.'  And  what  will  it 
profit  us  to  learn  that  He  is  meek  ?  Will  not  just  the 
experience  of  His  meekness  make  the  discovery  of  our 
want  of  it  all  the  more  painful?  What  we  ask,  Lord, 
is  that  Thou  shouldest  teach  us  how  2ve  may  be  meek. 
The  answer  is  again  :  'Learn  of  7ne^  that  I  am  meek.  ' 

We  are  in  danger  of  seeking  meekness  and  the 
other  graces  of  our  Lord  Jesus  as  gifts  of  which  we 
must  be  conscious,  before  we  practise  them.  This  is 
not  the  path  of  faith.  'Moses  knew  not  that  his  face 
shone,'  he  had  only  seen  the  glory  of  God.  The  soul 
that  seeks  to  be  meek,  must  learn  that  Jesus  is  meek. 
We  must  take  time  to  gaze  on  His  meekness,  until  the 
heart  has  received  the  full  impression:  He  only  is 
meek:  with  Him  alone  can  meekness  be  found. 
When  we  begin  to  realize  this,  we  next  fix  our  heart 
upon  the  truth:  This  meek  One  is  Jesus  the  Saviour. 
All  He  is,  all  He  has,  is  for  His  redeemed  ones;  His 
meekness  is  to  be  communicated  to  us.  But  He  does 
not  impart  it,  by  giving,  as  it  were  from  Himself, 
somethino:  of  it  awav  to  us.     Xo!  we  must  learn  that 


IN  HIS  MEEKNESS.  217 

He  alone  is  meek,  and  that  only  when  He  enters  and 
takes  possession  of  heart  and  life,  He  brings  His 
meekness  with  Him.  It  is  with  the  meekness  of 
Jesus  that  we  can  be  meek. 

We  know  how  little  He  succeeded  in  making  His 
disciples  meek  and  lowly  while  on  earth.  It  was  be- 
cause He  had  not  yet  obtained  the  new  life,  and  could 
not  yet  bestow,  through  His  resurrection,  the  Holy 
Spirit.  But  now  He  can  do  ifc.  He  has  been  exalted 
to  the  power  of  God  from  thence  to  reign  in  our 
hearts,  to  conquer  every  enemy,  and  continue  in  us 
His  own  holy  life.  Jesus  was  our  visible  Example  on 
earth,  that  we  might  see  in  Him  what  like  the  hid- 
den life  is  that  He  would  give  us  from  heaven,  that 
He  Himself  would  be  within  us. 

'Learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  of  heart:' 
without  ceasing  the  word  sounds  in  our  ears  as  our 
Lord's  answer  to  all  the  sad  complaints  of  His  re- 
deemed ones,  as  to  the  diflSculty  of  restraining  tem- 
per. 0  my  brother!  why  is  Jesus,  your  Jesus,  your 
life,  and  your  strength,  why  is  He  the  meek  and 
lowly  One,  if  it  be  not  to  impart  to  you,  to  whom  He 
so  wholly  belongs.  His  own  meekness? 

Therefore,  only  believe!  Believe  that  Jesus  is  able 
to  fill  your  heart  with  His  own  spirit  of  meekness. 
Believe  that  Jesus  Himself  will,  through  His  own 
Spirit,  accomplish  in  you  the  work  that  you  have  in 
vain   endeavoured  to    do.      'Behold!     thy  King 


218  LIKE  CHRIST: 

COMETH  TO  THEE,  MEEK. '  Welcome  Him  to  dwell  in 
your  heart.  Expect  Him  to  reveal  Himself  to  you. 
Everything  depends  on  this.  Learn  of  Him  that  He 
is  meek  and  lowly  of  heart,  and  you  shall  find  rest  to 
your  soul. 

Precious  Saviour,  grant  me  now,  under  the  over- 
shadowing of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  to  draw  near  unto 
Thee,  and  to  appropriate  Thy  heavenly  meekness  as 
my  life.  Lord,  Thou  hast  not  shown  me  Thy  meek- 
ness as  a  Moses  who  demands  but  does  not  give. 
Thou  art  Jesus  who  savest  from  all  sin,  giving  in  its 
stead  Thy  heavenly  holiness.  Lord,  I  claim  Thy 
meekness  as  a  part  of  the  salvation  that  Thou  hast 
given  me.  I  cannot  do  without  it.  How  can  I 
glorify  Thee  if  I  do  not  possess  it?  Lord,  I  will 
learn  from  Thee  that  Thou  art  meek.  Blessed  Lord, 
teach  me.  And  teach  me  that  Thou  art  always  with 
me,  always  in  me  as  my  life.  Abiding  in  Thee,  with 
Thee  abiding  in  me,  I  have  Thee  the  meek  One  to 
help  me  and  make  me  like  Thyself. 

0  holy  meekness!  Thou  art  not  come  down  to 
earth  only  for  a  short  visit,  then  to  disappear  again 
in  the  heavens.  Thou  art  come  to  seek  a  home.  I 
offer  Thee  my  heart ;  come  and  dwell  in  it. 

Thou  blessed  Lamb  of  God,  my  Saviour  and  Helper, 
I  count  on  Thee.  Thou  wilt  make  Thy  meekness  to 
dwell  in  me.     Through  Thy  indwelling  Thou  dost 


IN  HIS  MEEKNESS.  219 

conform  me  to  Thy  image.  0  come,  and  as  an  act 
of  Thy  rich  free  grace  even  now,  as  I  wait  on  Thee, 
reveal  Thyself  as  my  King,  meek,  and  coming  in  to 
take  possession  of  me  for  Thyself. 

'  Precious,  gentle,  holy  Jesus, 

Blessed  Bridegroom  of  my  heart, 
In  Thy  secret  inner  cliamber, 
Thou  wilt  show  me  what  Thou  art.     Amen. ' 


220  LIKE  CHRIST: 


TWENTY-SEVENTH  DAY. 


LIKE   CHRIST 

ABIDING  IN  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD. 

*  Even  as  the  Father  hath  loved  me,  so  have  I  loved  you  : 
abide  in  my  love.  If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  ye  shall 
abide  in  my  love  ;  even  as  I  have  kept  my  Father's  com- 
mandments, and  abide  in  His  love. ' — John  xv.  9,  10. 

OUR  blessed  Lord  not  only  said,  'Abide  in  me,'  but 
also,  *  Abide  in  my  love.'  Of  the  abiding  in 
Him,  the  principal  part  is  the  entering  into  and 
dwelling  and  being  rooted  in  that  wonderful  love 
with  which  He  loves  us  and  gives  Himself  to  us. 
'Love  seeketh  not  its  own;'  it  always  goes  out  of  it- 
self to  live  and  be  at  one  with  the  beloved ;  it  ever 
opens  itself  and  stretches  its  arms  wide  to  receive  and 
hold  fast  the  object  of  its  desire:  Christ's  love  longs 
to  possess  us.  The  abiding  in  Christ  is  an  intensely 
personal  relationship,  the  losing  ourselves  in  the  fel- 
lowship of  an  Infinite  Love,  finding  our  life  in  the 
experience  of  being  loved  by  Him,  being  nowhere  at 
home  but  in  His  love. 

To  reveal  this  life  in  His  love  to  us  in  all  its  Di- 
vine beauty  and  blessedness,  Jesus  tells  us  that  this 


ABIDING  IN  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD.  221 

love  of  His  to  us  in  which  we  are  to  abide,  is  just  the 
same  as  the  Father's  love  to  Him  in  which  He  abides. 
Surely,  if  anything  were  needed  to  make  the  abiding 
in  His  love  more  wonderful  and  attractive,  this  ought 
to  do  so.  *EvEK  AS  the  Father  loved  me,  so  have  I 
loved  you:  abide  in  my  love.'  Our  life  may  be 
Christlike,  unspeakably  blessed  in  the  consciousness 
of  an  Infinite  Love  embracing  and  delighting  in  us. 

We  know  how  this  was  the  secret  of  Christ's  won- 
derful life,  and  His  strength  in  prospect  of  death. 
At  His  baptism  the  voice  was  heard,  the  Divine  mes- 
sage which  the  Spirit  brought  and  unceasingly  main- 
tained in  living  power,  'This  is  my  Beloved  Son,  in 
whom  I  am  well  pleased.'  More  than  once  we  read: 
'The  Father  Ipveth  the  Son'  {John  in.  35,  v.  20). 
Christ  speaks  of  it  as  His  highest  blessedness:  'That 
the  world  may  know  that  Thou  hast  loved  them,  even 
as  Thou  hast  loved  me;  Thou  lovedst  me  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world;'  'That  the  love  wherewith 
Thou  lovedst  me  may  be  in  them.'  Just  as  we  day  by 
day  walk  and  live  in  the  light  of  the  sun  shining 
around  us,  so  Jesus  just  lived  in  the  light  of  the  glory 
of  the  Father's  love  shining  on  Him  all  the  day.  It 
was  as  THE  BELOVED  OF  GoD  that  He  was  able  to  do 
God's  will,  and  finish  His  work.  He  dwelt  in  the 
love  of  the  Father. 

And  just  so  we  are  the  beloved  of  Jesus.  Even 
AS  the  Father  loved  Him,  He  loves  us.     And  what 


222  LIKE  CHRIST: 

we  need  is  just  to  take  time,  and,  shutting  our  eyes 
to  all  around  as,  to  worship  and  to  wait  until  we  see 
the  Infinite  Love  of  God  in  all  its  power  and  glory 
streaming  forth  upon  us  through  the  heart  of  Jesus, 
seeking  to  make  itself  known,  and  to  get  complete 
possession  of  us,  oflEering  itself  to  us  as  our  home  and 
resting-place.  Oh,  if  the  Christian  would  but  take 
time  to  let  the  wondrous  thought  fill  him,  'I  am 
THE  BELOYED  OF  THE  LoRD,  Jesus  lovcs  me  cYcry  mo- 
ment, just  as  the  Father  loved  Him,'  how  the  faith 
would  grow,  that  one  who  is  loved  as  Christ  was, 
must  walk  as  He  walked ! 

But  there  is  a  second  point  in  the  comparison. 
Not  only  is  the  Love  we  are  to  abide  in  like  that  in 
which  He  abode,  but  the  way  to  our  abiding  is  the 
same  as  His.  As  Son,  Christ  was  in  the  Father's 
love  when  He  came  into  the  world;  but  it  was  only 
through  obedience  He  could  secure  its  continued  en- 
joyment, could  abide  in  it.  Nor  was  this  an  obedi- 
ence that  cost  Him  nothing:  no,  but  it  was  in  giving 
up  His  own  will,  and  learning  obedience  by  what  He 
suffered,  in  becoming  obedient  unto  the  death,  even 
the  death  of  the  cross,  that  He  kept  the  Father  's 
commandments  and  abode  in  His  love.  'Therefore 
doth  my  Father  love  me,  lecaiise  I  lay  down  my  life. 
This  commandment  have  I  received  of  my  Father.' 
*The  Father  hath  not  left  me  alone;  for  I  do  always 
those  things   that   please  Him.'     And  having  thus 


ABIDING  IN  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD.  223 

given  us  His  example,  and  proved  how  surely  the 
path  of  obedience  takes  us  up  into  the  presence  and 
love  and  glory  of  God,  He  invites  us  to  follow  Him. 
'If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  ye  shall  abide  in  my 
love,  EVEN  AS  I  kept  my  Father's  commandments, 
and  abide  in  His  love. ' 

Christlike  obedience  is  the  way  to  a  Christlike  en- 
joyment of  Love  Divine.  How  it  secures  our  bold- 
ness of  access  into  God's  presence!  'Let  us  love  in 
deed  and  in  truths  liereby  shall  we  assure  our  hearts 
before  Him.'  'Beloved!  if  our  heart  condemn  us 
not,  then  have  we  confidence  towards  God;  and  what- 
soever we  ask,  we  receive  of  Him,  lecause  we  heep  His 
,  commandments^  and  do  those  things  that  are  pleasing 
in  His  sight.'  ,How  it  gives  us  boldness  before  men, 
and  lifts  us  above  their  approval  or  contempt,  be- 
cause we  move  at  God's  bidding,  and  feel  that  we 
have  but  to  obey  orders!  And  what  boldness  too  in 
the  face  of  difficulty  or  danger! — we  are  doing  God's 
will,  and  dare  leave  to  Him  all  responsibility  as  to 
failure  or  success.  The  heart  filled  with  the  thought 
of  direct  and  entire  obedience  to  God  alone,  rises 
above  the  world  into  the  will  of  God,  into  the  place 
where  God's  love  rests  on  him:  like  Christ,  he  has 
his  abode  in  the  love  of  God. 

Let  us  seek  to  learn  from  Christ  what  it  means  to 
have  this  spirit  of  obedience  ruling  our  life.  It  im- 
plies the  spirit  of  dependence ;   the  confession  that 


224  LIKE  CHRIST: 

we  have  neither  the  right  nor  the  desire  in  anything 
to  do  our  own  will.  It  involves  teachableness  of 
spirit.  Conscious  of  the  blinding  influence  of  tradi- 
tion, and  prejudice,  and  habit,  it  takes  its  law  not 
from  men  but  from  God  Himself.  Conscious  of  how 
little  the  most  careful  study  of  the  Word  can  reveal 
God's  will  in  its  spiritual  power,  it  seeks  to  be  led, 
and  for  this  end  to  be  entirely  under  the  rule  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  It  knows  that  its  views  of  truth  and 
duty  are  very  partial  and  deficient,  and  counts  on  be- 
ing led  by  God  Himself  to  deeper  insight  and  higher 
attainment. 

It  has  marked  God's  word,  'If  thou  wilt  diligently 
hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  wilt  do 
that  which  is  right  in  His  sight,'  and  understood 
that  it  is  only  when  the  commands  do  not  come  from 
conscience,  or  memory,  or  the  book,  but  from  the 
living  voice  of  the  Lord  heard  speaking  through  the 
Spirit,  that  the  obedience  will  be  possible  and  accept- 
able. It  sees  that  it  is  only  as  a  following  out  of 
the  Father's  personal  directions,  and  as  a  service 
rendered  to  Himself,  that  obedience  has  its  full 
value  and  brings  its  full  blessing.  Its  great  care  is 
to  live  on  the  altar,  given  up  to  God;  to  keep  eye 
and  ear  open  to  God  for  every  indication  of  His 
blessed  will.  It  is  not  content  with  doing  right  for 
its  own  sake:  it  brings  everything  in  personal  relation 
to  God  Himself,  doing  it  as  unto  the  Lord.    It  wants 


ABIDING  IN  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD.  225 

every  hour  and  every  step  in  life  to  be  a  fellowship 
with  God.  It  longs  in  little  things  and  daily  life  to 
be  consciously  obeying  the  Father,  because  this  is 
the  only  way  to  be  prepared  for  higher  work.  Its  one 
desire  is  the  glory  of  God  in  the  triumph  of  His  will: 
its  one  means  for  obtaining  that  desire,  with  all  its 
heart  and  strength  to  be  w^orking  out  that  will  each 
moment  of  the  day.  And  its  one  but  sufficient  re- 
ward is  this,  it  knows  that  through  the  will  of  God 
lies  the  road,  opened  up  by  Christ  Himself,  deeper 
into  the  love  of  God :  *If  ye  keep  my  commandments, 
ye  shall  abide  in  my  love.' 

Oh  this  blessed  Christlike  obedience,  leading  to  a 
Christlike  abiding  in  the  Divine  love!  To  attain  it 
we  must  just  study  Christ  more.  He  emptied  Him- 
self, and  humbled  Himself,  and  became  obedient.  May 
He  empty  us  and  humble  us  too !  He  learned  obedi- 
ence in  the  school  of  God,  and  being  made  perfect, 
became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  tliat  obey 
Him,  We  must  yield  ourselves  to  be  taught  obedience 
by  Him !  We  just  need  to  listen  to  what  He  has  told 
us  how  He  did  nothing  of  Himself,  but  only  what 
He  saw  and  heard  from  the  Father;  how  entire  de- 
pendence and  continual  waiting  on  the  Father  was 
the  root  of  implicit  obedience,  and  this  again  the 
secret  of  ever-growing  knowledge  of  the  Father's 
deeper  secrets.  {Jolin  v.  19^  20.  See  Fifteenth  Day.) 
God's  love  and  man's  obedience  there  are  as  the  lock 
15 


226  LIKE  CHRIST: 

and  key  fitting  into  each  other.  It  is  God's  grace 
that  has  fitted  the  key  to  the  lock,  it  is  man  who 
uses  the  key  to  unlock  the  treasures  of  love. 

In  the  light  of  Christ's  example  and  words,  what 
new  meaning  comes  to  God's  words  spoken  to  His 
people  from  of  old !  *In  blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and 
in  multiplying  I  will  multiply  thee,  because  thou  hast 
obeyed  7ny  voice. '^  *If  ye  will  indeed  obey  my  voice., 
ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me.'  '  The  Lord 
shall  greatly  bless  thee,  if  thou  only  carefully  hearlcen 
unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  God,  to  observe  to  do 
all  these  commandments.'  Love  and  obedience  in- 
deed become  the  two  great  factors  in  the  wonderful 
intercourse  between  God  and  man.  The  Love  of 
God,  giving  Himself  and  all  He  has  to  man;  the 
obedience  of  the  believer  in  that  Love,  giving  him- 
self and  all  he  has  to  God. 

We  have  heard  a  good  deal  in  these  later  years  of 
full  surrender  and  entire  consecration,  and  thousands 
praise  God  for  all  the  blessing  He  has  given  them 
through  these  words.  Only  let  us  beware  that  we  be 
not  led  too  much,  in  connection  with  them,  to  seek 
for  a  blessed  experience  to  be  enjoyed,  or  a  state  to 
be  maintained,  while  the  simple  downright  doing  of 
God's  will  to  which  they  point  is  overlooked.  Let  us 
take  hold  and  use  this  word  which  God  loves  to  use: 
obedience.  *To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice:'  self- 
sacrifice  is  nothing  without,  is  nothing  but   obedi- 


ABIDING  IN  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD,  227 

ence.  It  was  the  meek  and  lowly  obedience  of  Christ, 
as  of  a  servant  and  a  son,  that  made  His  sacrifice 
such  a  sweet-smelling  savour:  it  is  humble,  childlike 
obedience,  first  hearkening  gently  to  the  Father'^s 
voice,  and  then  doing  that  which  is  right  in  His 
sights  that  will  bring  us  the  witness  that  we  please 
Him. 

Dear  reader!  shall  not  this  be  our  life?  so  simple, 
and  sublime:  obeying  Jesus,  and  abiding  in  His  Love. 

O  my  God!  what  shall  I  say  to  the  wonderful  in^ 
terchange  between  the  life  of  heaven  and  the  life  of 
earth  Thou  hast  set  before  me?  Thy  Son,  our  blessed 
Lord,  has  shown  and  proved  to  us  how  it  is  possible 
on  this  earth  of  ours,  and  how  unspeakably  blessed, 
for  a  man  to  live  with  the  love  of  God  always  sur- 
rounding him,  by  just  yielding  himself  to  obey  Thy 
voice  and  will.  And  because  He  is  ours,  our  Head 
and  our  Life,  we  know  that  we  can  indeed  in  our 
measure  live  and  walk  as  we  see  Him  do;  our  souls 
every  moment  abiding  and  rejoicing  in  Thy  Divine 
Love,  because  Thou  acceptest  our  feeble  keeping  of 
Thy  commandments  for  His  sake.  0  my  God,  it  is 
indeed  too  wonderful,  that  we  are  called  to  this  Christ- 
like dwelling  in  love  through  the  Christlike  obedience 
Thy  Spirit  works! 

Blessed  Jesus!  how  can  I  praise  Thee  for  coming 
and  bringing  such  a  life  on  earth  and  making  me  a 


328  LIKE  CHRIST: 

sharer  in  it.  0  my  Lord !  I  can  only  yield  myself 
afresh  to  Thee  to  keep  Thy  commandments,  as  Thou 
didst  keep  the  Father's.  Lord !  only  impart  to  me 
the  secret  of  Thine  own  blessed  obedience;  the  open 
ear,  the  watchful  eye,  the  meek  and  lowly  heart ;  the 
childlike  giving  up  of  all  as  the  beloved  Son  to  the 
beloved  Father.  Saviour!  fill  my  heart  with  Thy 
love;  in  the  faith  and  experience  of  that  love  I  will 
do  it  too.  Yes,  Lord,  this  only  be  my  life:  keeping 
Thy  commandments,  and  abiding  in  Thy  love. 
Amen. 


LED  BY  THE  SPIRIT.  229 


TWENTY-EIGHTH    DAY. 


LIKE    CHEIST 

LED   BY  THE  SPIRIT. 

'  And  Jesus,  being  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit^  returned 
from  Jordan,  and  was  led  by  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness.  * 
— Luke  iv.  1. 

•  Be  filled  with  the  Spirit. '— Eph.  v.  18. 

'For  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are 
the  sons  of  God. '— RoM.  viii.  14. 

FEOM  His  very  birth  the  Lord  Jesus  had  the  Spirit 
dwelling  in  Him.  But  there  were  times  when  he 
needed  special  communications  of  the  Spirit  from  the 
Father.  Thus  it  was  with  His  baptism.  The  de- 
scent of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  Him,  the  baptism  of  the 
Spirit,  given  in  the  baptism  with  water,  was  a  real 
transaction :  He  was  filled  with  the  Spirit.  He  re- 
turned from  the  Jordan  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and 
experienced  more  manifestly  than  ever  the  leading  of 
the  Spirit.  In  the  wilderness  He  wrestled  and  con- 
quered, not  in  His  own  Divine  power,  but  as  a  man 
who  was  strengthened  and  led  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  In 
this  also  'He  was  in  all  things  made  like  unto  His 
brethren.' 


230  LIKE  CHRIST: 

The  other  side  of  the  truth  also  holds  good :  the 
brethren  are  in  all  things  made  like  unto  Him.  They 
are  called  to  live  like  Him.  This  is  not  demanded 
from  them  without  their  having  the  same  power. 
This  power  is  the  Holy  Spirit  dwelling  in  us,  whom 
we  have  of  God.  Even  as  Jesus  was  filled  with  the 
Spirit,  and  then  led  by  the  Spirit,  so  must  we  be  also 
filled  with  the  Spirit  and  be  led  by  the  Spirit. 

More  than  once,  in  our  meditations  on  the  diflFer- 
ent  traits  of  Christ's  character,  it  has  seemed  to  us 
almost  impossible  to  be  like  Him.  "We  have  lived  so 
little  for  it:  we  feel  so  little  able  to  live  thus.  Let 
us  take  courage  in  the  thought:  Jesus  Himself  could 
only  live  thus  through  the  Spirit.  It  was  after  He 
was  filled  with  the  Spirit  that  He  was  led  forth  by 
that  Spirit  to  the  place  of  conflict  and  of  victory. 
And  this  blessing  is  ours  as  surely  as  it  was  His:  we 
may  be  filled  with  the  Spirit;  we  may  be  led  by  the 
Spirit.  Jesus,  who  was  Himself  baptized  with  the 
Spirit,  to  set  us  an  example  how  to  live,  has  ascended 
into  heaven  to  baptize  us  into  the  likeness  with  Him- 
self. He  who  would  live  like  Jesus  must  begin  here: 
He  must  be  baptized  with  the  Spirit.  What  God 
demands  from  His  children  He  first  gives.  He  de- 
mands entire  likeness  to  Christ  because  He  will  give 
us,  as  He  did  Jesus,  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit.  We 
must  be  filled  with  the  Spirit. 

We  have  here  the  reason  why  the  teaching  of  the 


LELi  BY  THE  SPIRIT.  231 

imitation  and  likeness  to  Christ  has  so  little  promi- 
nence in  the  Church  of  Christ.  Men  sought  in  it 
their  own  strength,  with  the  help  of  some  workings 
of  the  Holy  Spirit:  they  did  not  understand  that 
nothing  less  was  needed  than  being  filled  with  the 
Spirit.  No  wonder  that  they  thought  that  real  con- 
formity to  Christ  could  not  be  expected  of  us,  be- 
cause they  had  mistaken  thoughts  about  being  filled 
^ith  the  Spirit.  It  was  thought  to  be  the  privilege  of 
^  few,  and  not  the  calling  and  duty  of  every  cliild  of 
God.  It  was  not  sufficiently  realized  that  'Be  ye 
.:filled  with  the  Spirit,'  is  a  command  to  every  Chris- 
tian. Only  when  the  Church  first  gives  the  baptism 
•of  the  Spirit,  and  Jesus,  as  the  Saviour  who  laptizes 
with  the  Spirit  each  one  who  believes  in  Him,  their 
Tight  place,  only  then  will  likeness  to  Christ  be 
.sought  after  and  attained.  People  will  then  under- 
;stand  and  acknowledge:  to  be  like  Christ  we  must 
be  led  by  the  same  Spirit,  and  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit 
^s  He  was,  we  must  be  filled  with  the  Spirit.  Noth- 
ing less  than  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  live  a  truly  Christian,  Christlike  life. 

The  way  to  arrive  at  it  is  simple.  It  is  Jesus  who 
baptizes  with  the  Spirit:  he  who  comes  to  Him  desir- 
ing it  will  get  it.  All  that  He  requires  of  us  is,  the 
surrender  of  faith  to  receive  what  He  gives. 

The  surrender  of  faith.  What  He  asks  is,  whether 
we  are  indeed  in  earnest  to  follow  in  His  footsteps, 


232  LIKE  CHRIST: 

and  for  this  to  be  baptized  of  the  Spirit.  Do  not 
let  there  be  any  hesitation  as  to  our  answer.  First, 
look  back  on  all  the  glorious  promises  of  His  love 
and  of  His  Spirit,  in  which  the  blessed  privilege  is 
set  forth:  Even  as  I,  ye  also.  Eemember  that  it 
was  of  this  likeness  to  Himself  in  everything  He  said 
to  the  Father:  'The  glory  which  Thou  gavest  me 
have  I  given  them.'  Think  how  the  love  of  Christ 
and  the  true  desire  to  please  Him,  how  the  glory  of 
God  and  the  needs  of  the  world,  plead  with  us  not 
through  our  sloth  to  despise  this  heavenly  birthright 
of  being  Christlike.  Acknowledge  the  sacred  right 
of  ownership  Christ  has  in  you.  His  blood-bought 
ones:  and  let  nothing  prevent  your  answering:  'Yes, 
dear  Lord,  as  far  as  is  allowed  to  a  child  of  dust,  I 
will  be  like  Thee.  I  am  entirely  Thine;  I  must, 
I  will,  in  all  things  bear  Thy  image.  It  is  for  this  I 
ask  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit. ' 

The  surrender  of  faith:  only  this;  but  nothing  less 
than  this  He  demands.  Let  us  give  what  He  asks. 
If  we  yield  ourselves  to  be  like  Him  in  all  things,  let 
it  be  in  the  quiet  trust  that  He  accepts,  and  at  once 
begin  in  secret  to  make  the  Spirit  work  more  might- 
ily in  us.  Let  us  believe  it  although  we  do  not  at 
once  experience  it.  To  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
we  must  wait  on  our  Lord  in  faith.  We  can  depend 
upon  it  that  His  love  desires  to  give  us  more  than  we 
know.     Let  our  surrender  be  made  in  this  assurance. 


LED  BY  THE  %PIRIT,  233 

And  let  this  surrender  of  faith  be  entire.  The 
fundamental  law  of  following  Christ  is  this:  *He  who 
loses  his  life  shall  find  it. '  The  Holy  Spirit  comes 
to  take  away  the  old  life,  and  to  give  in  its  place  the 
life  of  Christ  in  you.  Eenounce  the  old  life  of  self- 
working  and  self- watching,  and  believe  that,  as  the 
air  you  breathe  renews  your  life  every  moment,  so 
naturally  and  continually  the  Holy  Spirit  will  renew 
your  life.  In  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  you 
there  are  no  breaks  or  interruptions:  you  are  in  the 
Spirit  as  your  vital  air:  the  Spirit  is  in  you  as  your 
life-breath:  through  the  Spirit  God  works  in  you 
both  to  will  and  to  do  according  to  His  good  pleasure. 
Oh,  Christian,  have  a  deep  reverence  for  the  work  of 
the  Spirit  who  dwells  within  you.  Believe  in  God's 
power,  which  works  in  you  through  the  Spirit,  to 
conform  you  to  Christ's  life  and  image  moment  by 
moment.  Be  occupied  with  Jesus  and  His  life,  that 
life  which  is  at  the  same  time  your  example  and  your 
strength,  in  the  full  assurance  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
knows  in  deep  quiet  to  fulfil  His  office  of  communi- 
cating Jesus  to  you.  Eemember  that  the  fulness  of 
the  Spirit  ife  yours  in  Jesus,  a  real  gift  which  you  ac- 
cept and  hold  in  faith,  even  when  there  is  not  such 
feeling  as  you  could  wish,  and  on  which  you  count  to 
work  in  you  all  you  need.  The  feeling  may  be  weak- 
ness and  fear  and  much  trembling,  and  yet  the  speak- 
ing, and  working,  and  living  in  demonstration  of  the 


4 

234  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Spirit  and  of  power  {1  Cor,  ii,  S^  Jf),  Live  in  the  faith 
that  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  is  yourself,  and  that  you 
will  not  be  disappointed  if,  looking  unto  Jesus,  you 
rejoice  every  day  in  the  blessed  trust  that  the  care  of 
your  spiritual  life  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
the  Comforter.  Thus,  with  the  loving  presence  of 
Jesus  in  you,  the  living  likeness  to  Jesus  will  be  seen  " 
on  you;  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  dwelling 
within,  the  likeness  of  the  life  of  Christ  Jesus  will 
shine  around. 

And  if  it  do  not  appear  that  in  thus  believing  and 
obeying  your  desires  are  fulfilled,  remember  that  it 
is  in  the  fellowship  with  the  members  of  Christ's 
body,  and  in  the  full  surrender  to  Christ's  service  in 
the  world,  that  the  full  power  of  the  Spirit  is  made 
manifest.  It  was  when  Jesus  gave  Himself  to  enter 
into  full  fellowship  with  men  around  Him,  and  like 
them  to  be  baptized  with  water,  that  He  was  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  it  was  when  He  had 
given  Himself  in  His  second  baptism  of  suffering,  a 
sacrifice  for  us,  that  He  received  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
give  to  us.  Seek  fellowship  with  God's  children,  who 
will  with  thee  plead  and  believe  for  the  baptism  of 
the  Spirit:  the  disciples  received  the  Spirit  not  sin- 
gly, but  when  they  were  with  one  accord  in  one  place. 
Band  thyself  with  God's  children  around  thee  to 
work  for  souls;  the  Spirit  is  the  power  from  on  high 
to  fit  for  that  work :  the  promise  will   be  fulfilled  to 


LED  BY  THE  SPIRIT.  235 

the  believing,  willing  servants,  who  want  Him  not 
for  their  enjoyment,  but  for  that  work.  Christ  was 
filled  with  the  Spirit  that  He  might  be  fitted  to  work 
and  live  and  die  for  us.  Give  thyself  to  such  a  Christ- 
I  like  living  and  dying  for  men,  and  thou  mayest  de- 
pend upon  it,  a  Christlike  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  a 
Christlike  fulness  of  the  Spirit,  will  be  thy  portion. 

Blessed  Lord!  how  wondrously  Thou  hast  provided 
for  our  growing  likeness  to  Thyself,  in  giving  us 
Thine  own  Holy  Spirit.  Thou  hast  told  us  that  it  is 
His  work  to  reveal  Thee,  to  give  us  Thy  Eeal  Pres- 
ence within  us.  It  is  by  Him  that  all  Thou  hast 
won  for  us,  all  the  life  and  holiness  and  strength  we 
see  in  Thee,  is  brouglit  over  and  imparted  and  made 
our  very  own.  He  takes  of  Thine,  and  shows  it  to 
us,  and  makes  it  ours.  Blessed  Jesus!  we  do  thank 
Thee  for  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

And  now,  we  beseech  Thee,  fill  us,  oh  fill  us  full, 
with  Thy  Holy  Ghost!  Lord!  nothing  less  is  suffi- 
cient. We  cannot  be  led  like  Thee,  we  cannot  fight 
and  conquer  like  Thee,  we  cannot  love  and  serve  like 
Thee,  we  cannot  live  and  die  like  Thee,  unless  like 
Thee  we  are  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Blessed,  blessed 
be  Thy  name!  Thou  hast  commanded.  Thou  hast 
promised  it;  it  may,  it  can,  it  shall  be. 

Holy  Saviour!  draw  Thy  disciples  together  to  wait 
and  plead  for  this.     Let  their  eyes  be  opened  to  see 


236  LIKE  CHRIST: 

the  wondrous  unfulfilled  promises  of  floods  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  Let  their  hearts  be  drawn  to  give  them- 
selves, like  Thee,  to  live  and  die  for  men.  And  we 
know  it  will  be  Thy  delight  to  fulfil  Thine  oflBce,  as 
He  that  baptizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire. 
Glory  be  to  Thy  Name.     Amen. 


IN  HIS  LIFE  THROUGH  THE  FATHER.      237 


TWENTY-NINTH    DAY. 


LIKE    CHRIST 

m  HIS  LIFE  THROUaH  THE  FATHER. 

*  Even  as  1  live  by  the  Father,  so  he  that  eateth  me,  even 
he  shall  live  by  me. ' — John  vi.  57. 

EVEEY  contemplation  of  a  walk  in  the  footsteps 
of  Christ,  and  in  His  likeness,  reveals  anew  the 
need  of  fixing  the  eye  on  the  deep  living  union 
between  the  Forerunner  and  His  followers.  Like 
Christ:  the  longer  we  meditate  on  the  word,  the  more 
we  realize  how  impossible  is  it  without  that  other: 
in  Christ.  The  outward  likeness  can  only  be  the 
manifestation  of  a  living  inward  union.  To  do  the 
same  works  as  Christ,  I  must  have  the  same  life. 
The  more  earnestly  I  take  Him  for  my  example,  the 
more  I  am  driven  to  Him  as  my  Head.  Only  an  inner 
life  essentially  like  His,  can  lead  us  to  a  visible  walk 
like  His. 

AVhat  a  blessed  word  we  have  here,  to  assure  us 
that  His  life  on  earth  and  ours  are  really  like  each 
other:  'Even  as  I  live  by  the  Father,  so  he  that  eateth 
me,  even  he  shall  live  by  me.'  If  you  desire  to  un- 
derstand your  life  in  Christ,  what  he  will  be  for  you 


238  LIKE  CHRIST: 

and  how  He  will  work  in  you,  yon  have  only  to  con- 
template what  the  Father  was  for  Him,  and  how  He 
worked  in  Him.  Christ's  life  in  and  through  the 
Father  is  the  image  and  the  measure  of  what  your 
life  in  and  through  the  Son  may  be.  Let  us  medi- 
tate on  this. 

As  Christ's  life  was  a  life  hidden  in  God  in  heaven^ 
so  must  ours  be.  When  He  emptied  Himself  of  His 
Divine  glory,  He  laid  aside  the  free  use  of  His  Divine 
attributes.  He  needed  thus  as  a  man  to  live  by  faith ; 
He  needed  to  wait  on  the  Father  for  such  communi- 
cations of  wisdom  and  power,  as  it  pleased  the  Father 
to  impart  to  Him.  He  was  entirely  dependent  on  the 
Father;  His  life  was  hid  in  God.  Not  in  virtue  of 
His  own  independent  Godhead,  but  through  the  op- 
erations of  the  Holy  Spirit,  He  spoke  and  acted  as 
the  Father  from  time  to  time  taught  Him. 

Exactly  so,  believer,  must  your  life  be  hid  with 
Christ  in  God.  Let  this  encourage  you.  Christ  calls 
you  to  a  life  of  faith  and  dependence,  because  it  is 
the  life  He  Himself  led.  He  has  tried  it  and  proved 
its  blessedness;  He  is  willing  now  to  live  over  again 
His  life  in  you,  to  teach  you  also  to  live  in  no  other 
way.  He  knew  that  the  Father  was  His  life,  and 
that  he  lived  through  the  Father,  and  that  the  Father 
supplied  His  need  moment  by  moment.  And  now 
He  assures  you  that  as  He  lived  through  the  Father, 
even  so  you  shall  live  through  Him.    Take  this  assur- 


IN  HIS  LIFE  THROUGH  THE  FATHER.      239 

ance  in  faith.  Let  your  heart  be  filled  with  the 
thought  of  the  blessedness  of  this  fulness  of  life, 
which  is  prepared  for  you  in  Christ,  and  will  be  abun- 
dantly supplied  as  you  need  it.  Do  not  think  any 
more  of  your  spiritual  life,  as  something  that  you 
must  watch  over  and  nourish  with  care  and  anxiety. 
Kejoice  every  day  that  you  need  not  live  on  your  own 
strength,  but  in  your  Lord  Jesus,  even  as  He  lived 
through  His  Father. 

Even  as  Christ's  life  was  a  life  of  Divine  potver^ 
although  a  life  of  dependence,  so  ours  tvill  also  be. 
He  never  repented  having  laid  aside  His  glory,  to  live 
before  God  as  a  man  upon  earth.  The  Father  never 
disappointed  His  confidence.  He  gave  Him  all  He 
needed  to  accomplish  His  work.  Christ  experienced 
that  blessed  as  it  was  to  be  like  God  in  heaven^  and  to 
dwell  in  the  enjoyment  of  Divine  perfection,  it  was  no 
less  blessed  to  live  in  the  relation  of  entire  depend- 
ence on  earth,  and  to  receive  everything  day  by  day 
from  His  hands. 

Believer,  if  you  will  have  it  so,  your  life  can  be 
the  same.  The  Divine  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus  will 
work  in  and  through  us.  Do  not  think  that  your 
earthly  circumstances  make  a  holy  life  to  God's  glory 
impossible.  It  was  just  to  manifest,  in  the  midst  of 
earthly  surroundings  which  were  even  more  difficult, 
the  Divine  life,  that  Christ  came  and  lived  on  earth. 
As  He  lived  so  blessed  an  earthly  life   through  the 


240  LIKE  CHRIST: 

Father,  so  may  ye  also  live  your  earthly  life  through 
Him.  Only  cultivate  large  expectations  of  what  the 
Lord  will  do  for  you.  Let  it  be  your  sole  desire  to 
attain  to  an  entire  union  with  Him.  It  is  impossible 
to  say  what  the  Lord  Jesus  would  do  for  a  soul  tvho 
is  truly  willi^ig  to  live  as  entirely  through  Him  as 
He  is  through  the  Father,  Because  just  as  He  lived 
through  the  Father,  and  the  Father  made  that  life 
with  all  its  work  so  glorious,  so  will  you  experience 
in  all  your  work  how  entirely  He  has  undertaken  to 
work  all  in  you. 

As  the  life  of  Christ  was  the  maiiifestation  of  His 
real  union  with  the  Father^  so  ours  also,  Christ  says, 
*Even  as  the  Father  has  sent  me,  and  I  live  by  the 
Father.'  When  the  Father  desired  to  manifest  Him- 
self on  earth  in  His  love.  He  could  entrust  that  work 
to  no  one  else  than  His  beloved  Son,  who  was  one 
with  Him.  It  was  because  He  was  Son  that  the 
Father  sent  Him :  it  was  because  the  Father  had  sent 
Him  that  it  could  not  be  otherwise,  but  He  must  care 
for  His  life.  In  the  union  upon  which  the  mission 
rested,  rested  the  blessed  certainty  that  Jesus  would 
live  on  earth  through  the  Father. 

*Even  so,'  Christ  said,  'He  that  eateth  me,  liveth 
by  me.'  He  had  said  before,  'He  that  eateth  my 
flesh  and  drinketh  my  blood  dwelleth  in  me,  and  I 
in  Him. '  In  death  He  had  given  His  flesh  and  blood 
for  the  life  of  the  world ;  through  faith  the  soul  par- 


IN  HIS  LIFE  THROUGH  THE  FATHER.      241 

takes  of  the  power  of  His  death  and  resurrection,  and 
receives  its  rights  to  His  life,  as  He  had  a  right  to 
His  Father's  life.  In  the  words,  'Whosoever  eateth 
Me,' is  expressed  the  intimate  union  and  unbroken 
communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  which  is  the  power 
of  a  life  in  Him.  The  one  great  work  for  the  soul, 
who  truly  longs  to  live  entirely  and  only  by  Christ,  is  to 
eat  Him,  daily  to  feed  on  Him,  to  make  Him  his  own.* 
To  attain  this,  seek  continually  to  have  your  heart 
filled  with  a  believing  and  lively  assurance  that  all 
Christ's  fulness  of  life  is  truly  yours.  Eejoice  in 
the  contemplation  of  His  humanity  in  heaven,  and 
the  wonderful  provision  God  has  made  through  the 
Holy  Spirit  for  the  communication  of  this  life  of 
your  Head  in  heaven,  to  flow  unbroken  and  unhin- 
dered down  upon  you.  Thank  God  unceasingly  for 
the  redemption  in  which  He  opened  the  way  to  the 
life  of  God,  and  for  the  wonderful  life  now  provided 
for  you  in  the  Son.  Offer  yourself  unreservedly  to 
Him  with  an  open  heart  and  consecrated  life  that 
seeks  His  service  alone.  In  such  trust  and  consecra- 
tion of  faith,  in  the  outpouring  of  love  and  cultiva- 
tion of  communion,  with  His  words  abiding  in  you, 
let  Jesus  be  your  daily  food.  He  who  eateth  me 
shall  live  by  me:  even  as  the  Father  has  sent  me,  and 
I  live  by  the  Father. 

*  For  the  application  of  our  text  to  the  Lord's  Supper, 
see  Note. 

16 


242  LIKE   CHRIST: 

Beloved  Christian!  what  think  you?  Does  not  the 
imitation  of  Christ  begin  to  seem  possible  in  the  light 
of  this  proviso?  He  who  lives  through  Christ  can 
also  live  like  Him.  Therefore  let  this  wonderful  life 
of  Christ  on  earth  through  the  Father  be  the  object 
of  our  adoring  contemplation,  until  our  whole  heart 
understands  and  accepts  the  word,  'Even  so,  He  who 
eateth  me  shall  live  through  me.'  Then  we  shall  dis- 
miss all  care  and  anxiety,  because  the  same  Christ 
who  set  us  the  example  works  in  us  from  heaven  that 
life  which  can  live  out  the  example.  And  our  life 
will  become  a  continual  song :  To  Him  who  lives  in 
as,  in  order  that  we  may  live  like  Him,  be  the  love 
and  praise  of  our  hearts.     Amen. 

0  my  God!  how  shall  I  thank  Thee  for  this  won- 
derful grace !  Thy  Son  became  man  to  teach  us  the 
blessedness  of  a  life  of  human  dependence  on  the 
Father;  He  lived  through  the  Father.  It  has  been 
given  us  to  see  in  Him  how  the  Divine  life  can  live 
and  work,  and  conquer  on  earth.  And  now  He  is 
ascended  into  heaven,  and  has  all  power  to  let  that 
life  work  in  us,  we  are  called  to  live  even  as  He  did 
on  earth:  we  live  through  Him.  0  God,  praised  be 
Thy  name  for  this  unspeakable  grace. 

Lord,  my  God,  hear  the  prayer  that  I  now  offer 
to  Thee.  If  it  may  be,  show  me  more,  much  more 
of  Christ's  life  through  the  Father.     I  need  to  know 


IN  HIS  LIFE  THROUGH  THE  FATHER.      243 

it,  0  my  God,  if  I  am  to  live  as  He  did !  Oh,  give 
me  the  spirit  of  wisdom  in  the  knowledge  of  Him. 
Then  shall  I  know  what  I  may  expect  from  Him, 
what  I  can  do  through  Him.  It  will  then  no  longer 
be  a  struggle  and  an  effort  to  live  according  to  Thy 
will,  and  His  example.  Because  I  shall  then  know 
that  His  blessed  life  on  earth  is  now  mine,  according 
to  the  word,  'Even  as  I  through  the  Father,  so  ye 
through  me. '  Then  shall  I  daily  feed  upon  Christ 
in  the  joyful  experience:  I  live  through  Him.  0  my 
Father!  grant  this  in  full  measure  for  His  name's 
sake.     Amen. 

NOTE. 

Though  these  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  in  the  sixth 
of  John  were  not  spoken  directly  of  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per, they  are  yet  applicable  to  it,  because  they  set 
forth  that  spiritual  blessing  of  which  the  Holy  Sup- 
per is  the  communication  in  a  visible  form.  In  eat- 
ing the  bread  and  drinking  the  wine,  our  spiritual 
life  is  not  only  strengthened  because  therein  the  par- 
don of  our  sins  is  signified  and  sealed  to  us,  but  be- 
cause the  Holy  Spirit  does  indeed  make  us  partakers 
of  the  very  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  as  a 
spiritual  reality.  So  one  of  our  Eeformed  Church 
Catechisms,  the  Heidelberg  (Qu,  78),  puts  it  'What 
is  it  then  to  eat  the  broken  body  and  drink  the  shed 
blood  of  Christ?'  *It  is  not  only  to  embrace  with  a 
believing  heart  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ, 
and  so  to  obtain  the  pardon  of  sin  and  life  eternal; 
but  moreover  also  that  we  are  united  to  His  sacred 


2U  LIKE  CHRIST: 

iody  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  dwells  both  in  Ohrist 
and  in  ns,  so  that  we^  though  Christ  be  in  heaven 
and  we  on  earth,  are  new evtheless  flesh  of  His  flesh  and 
bones  of  His  bojies, ' 

It  is  known  that  there  are  in  our  Protestant 
Churches  three  views  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  On  the 
one  hand,  the  Lutheran  with  its  consubstantiation, 
teaching  that  the  body  of  our  Lord  is  so  present  in 
the  breads  that  even  an  unbeliever  eats  no  longer  only 
bread,  but  the  body  of  the  Lord.  On  the  other  the 
Zwingliau  view,  according  to  which  the  effect  of 
the  Sacrament  is  a  very  impressive  exhibition  of  the 
truth  that  the  death  of  Christ  is  to  us  what  wine  and 
bread  are  to  the  body,  and  a  very  expressive  confes- 
sion of  our  faith  in  this  truth,  and  so  of  our  interest 
in  the  blessings  of  that  death.  As  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  the  Word  speaks  to  us  through  the  ear,  so  in  the 
Sacrament  through  the  eye.  Midway  between  these 
views  is  that  of  Calvin,  who  strongly  urges  that  there 
is  in  it  a  mysterious  blessing,  not  well  to  be  expressed 
in  words;  that  it  is  not  enough  to  speak  of  the  life 
which  the  Spirit  gives  to  our  spirit  through  faith, 
but  that  there  is  a  real  communication  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  the  very  flesh  and  blood  of  Jesus  in  heaven 
to  our  very  body,  so  that  in  virtue  of  this  we  are 
called  members  of  His  body,  and  have  His  body  in  us 
as  the  seed  of  the  spiritual  body  of  resurrection. 
While  avoiding,  on  the  one  hand,  the  sacramentarian 
view  of  a  change  in  the  bread,  it  seeks  to  hold  fast, 
on  the  other,  the  reality  of  a  spiritual  substantial 
participation  of  the  very  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord 
Jesus. 
,    This  is  not  the  place  to  enter  on  this  more  fully. 


IN  HIS  LIFE  THROUGH  THE  FATHER.      245 

But  I  am  persuaded  that, when  a  more  scriptural  view 
prevails  as  to  the  relation  between  body  and  spirit^  it 
will  not  be  thought  strange  to  believe  that  without 
anything  like  a  real  presence  in  the  bread  itself,  we 
are  indeed  fed  with  the  very  body  and  blood  of  our 
Lord  Jesus.  The  iody  of  our  Lord  is  now  a  spiritual 
body,  transfigured  and  glorified  into  the  spirit-life 
of  the  heavenly  world,  the  spirit  and  the  body  in 
perfect  unity  and  harmony,  so  that  now  the  Holy 
Spirit  can  freely  dispense  and  communicate  that  body 
as  He  will.  Our  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
which  dwelleth  in  us;  our  bodies  are  members  of 
Christ;  our  mortal  bodies  are  even  now  being  quick- 
ened and  prepared  by  the  indwelling  Spirit  for  the 
resurrection  {Rom.  viii,  11) :  why  should  it  be  thought 
strange  that  by  the  Holy  Spirit  the  communion  of  the 
body  of  Christ,  so  distinctly  promised,  should  be,  not 
an  Old  Testarnent  symbol  or  shadow,  but  a  blessed 
heavenly  reality? 

Calvin's  words  are  as  follows:  'I  am  not  satisfied 
with  the  view  of  those  who,  while  acknowledging  that 
we  have  some  kind  of  communion  with  Christ,  only 
make  us  partakers  of  the  Spirit,  omitting  all  mention 
of  flesh  and  blood.'  'In  His  humanity  also  the  ful- 
ness of  life  resides,  so  that  every  one  who  communi- 
cates in  His  flesh  and  blood,  at  the  same  time  enjoys 
the  participation  of  life.  TJie  flesh  of  Christ  is  like 
a  perennial  fountain  which  transfuses  into  us  the  life 
flowing  forth  from  the  Godhead  into  itself.  The 
communion  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ  is  neces- 
sary to  all  who  aspire  to  the  Christian  life.  Hence 
these  expressions:  **The  Church  is  'the  body  of 
Christ. ' ''    "  Our  bodies  are  'the  members  of  Christ. '  *' 


246  LIKE  CHRIST: 

"We  are  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh  acd  His 
bones."  What  our  mind  does  not  comprehend,  let 
faith  receive,  that  the  Spirit  unites  things  separated 
by  space.  That  sacred  communion  of  flesh  and  blood 
by  which  Christ  transfuses  His  life  into  us,  just  as  if 
it  penetrated  our  bones  and  marrow,  He  testifies  and 
seals  in  the  Supper,  not  by  representing  a  vain  or 
empty  sign,  but  by  these  exerting  an  efficacy  of  the 
Spirit  by  which  He  fulfils  what  He  promises.'  *I 
willingly  admit  anything  which  helps  to  express  the 
true  and  substantial  communication  of  the  body  and 
blood  of  the  Lord,  as  exhibited  to  believers  under  the 
sacred  symbols  of  the  Supper,  understanding  that 
they  are  not  received  by  the  imagination  or  the  intel- 
lect merely,  but  are  enjoyed  in  reality  as  the  food  of 
eternal  life.'  'We  say  that  Christ  descends  to  us,  as 
well  by  the  external  symbol  as  by  His  Spirit,  that  He 
may  truly  quicken  our  souls  by  the  substance  of 
His  flesh  and  blood.'  *Such  is  the  corporal  presence 
which  the  sacrament  requires,  and  which  we  say  is 
here  displayed  in  such  power  and  efficacy,  that  it 
not  only  gives  our  minds  undoubted  assurance  of 
heavenly  life,  but  also  secures  the  immortality  of  our 
flesh.'* 

To  the  soul  who  seeks  fully  to  live  by  Christ  as  He 
did  by  the  Father,  the  sacrament  is  a  real  spiritual 
blessing,  something  more  than  what  faith  in  the  word 
gives.  Let  all  the  praying  and  believing  and  living 
in  which  we  seek  to  realize  the  wonderful  blessing  of 
living  just  as  Christ  did  by  the  Father,  ever  culmi- 
nate in  our  communion  of  the  body  and  blood  at  the 
Lord's  table.     And  let  us  go  forth  from  each  such 

*CalYin's  Institutes,  iv.  17,  §7,  9.  10,  19,  24. 


IN  HIS  LIFE  THROUGH  THE  FATHER.      247 

celebration  with  new  confidence,  that  what  has  been 
given  and  confirmed  on  the  great  day  of  the  feast, 
will  by  Jesus  Himself  be  maintained  in  power  in  the 
daily  life  through  the  more  ordinary  channels  of  His 
grace — the  blessed  fellowship  with  Himself  in  the 
word  and  prayer. 


248  LIKE  CHRIST: 


THIKTIETH  DAY. 


LIKE    CHKIST 

m  GLORIFYING  THE  FATHER. 

*  Father,  the  hour  is  come ;  glorify  Thy  Son,  that  Thy 
Son  also  may  glorify  Thee.  1  have  glorified  Thee  on  the 
earth. ' — John  xvii.  1,  4. 

*  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit ; 
so  shall  ye  be  my  disciples. ' — John  xv.  8. 

11HE  glory  of  an  object  is,  that  in  its  sort  its  in- 
trinsic worth  and  excellence  answers  perfectly 
to  all  that  is  expected  of  it.  That  excellence  or 
perfection  may  be  so  hidden  or  unknown,  that  the 
object  has  no  glory  to  those  who  behold  it.  To 
glorify  is  to  remove  every  hindrance,  and  so  to  reveal 
the  full  worth  and  perfection  of  the  object,  that  its 
glory  is  seen  and  acknowledged  by  all. 

The  highest  perfection  of  God,  and  the  deepest  mys- 
tery of  Godhead,  is  His  holiness.  In  it  righteous- 
ness and  love  are  united.  As  the  Holy  One  He  hates 
and  condemns  sin.  As  the  Holy  One  He  also  frees  the 
sinner  from  its  power,  and  raises  Him  to  communion 
with  Himself.  His  name  is  *The  Holy  One  of  Israel, 
thy  Kedeemer.'     The  song  of  redemption  is:  'Great 


IN  GLOBIFYING   THE  FATHER.  249 

is  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  thee.'  To 
the  Blessed  Spirit,  whose  special  work  it  is  to  main- 
tain the  fellowship  of  God  with  man.  the  title  of 
Holy  in  the  New  Testament  belongs  more  than  to 
the  Father  or  the  Son.  It  is  this  holiness,  judging 
sin  and  saving  sinners,  which  is  the  glory  of  God. 
For  this  reason  the  two  words  are  often  found  to- 
gether. So  in  the  song  of  Moses :  '  Who  is  like  Thee, 
glorious  in  holiness  V  So  in  the  song  of  the  Seraphim : 
^Holy^  Holy^  Holy^  Lord  God  of  hosts ;  the  whole  earth 
is  full  of  ^i^ glory, '  And  so  in  the  song  of  the  Lamb : 
'Who  shall  not  glorify  Thy  Name?  for  Thou  only  art 
Holy,'*  As  has  been  well  said:  'God's  glory  is  His 
manifested  holiness;  God's  holiness  is  His  hidden 
glory.' 

When  Jesus  came  to  earth,  it  was  that  He  might 
glorify  the  Father,  that  He  might  again  show  forth 
in  its  true  light  and  beauty  that  glory  which  sin  had 
so  entirely  hid  from  man.  Man  himself  had  been 
created  in  the  image  of  God,  that  God  might  lay  of 
His  glory  upon  him,  to  be  shown  forth  in  him — that 
God  might  be  glorified  in  him.  The  Holy  Ghost 
says,  *Man  is  the  image  and  glory  of  God.'  Jesus 
came  to  restore  man  to  his  high  destiny:  He  laid 
aside  the  glory  which  He  had  with  the  Father,  and 
came  in  our  weakness  and  humiliation,  that  He 
might  teach  us  how  to  glorify  the  Father  on  earth. 
God's  glory  is  perfect  and  infinite:  man  cannot  con- 


250  LIKE  CHRIST: 

tribute  any  new  glory  to  God,  above  what  He  has: 
he  can  only  serve  as  a  glass  in  which  the  glory  of  God 
is  reflected.  God's  holiness  is  His  glory:  as  the  holi- 
ness of  God  is  seen  in  him,  God  is  glorified;  His 
glory  as  God  is  shown  forth. 

Jesus  glorified  God  iy  obeying  Him,  In  giving  His 
commandments  to  Israel,  God  continually  said,  'Be 
ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy:'  in  keeping  them  they  would 
be  transformed  into  a  life  of  harmony  with  Him,  they 
would  enter  into  fellowship  with  Him  as  the  Holy 
One.  In  His  conflict  with  sin  and  Satan,  in  His 
sacrifice  of  His  own  will,  in  His  waiting  for  the 
Father's  teaching,  in  His  unquestioning  obedience 
to  the  Word,  Christ  showed  that  He  counted  nothing 
worth  living  for,  but  that  men  might  understand 
what  a  blessed  thing  it  is  to  let  this  holy  God  really 
be  God,  His  will  alone  acknowledged  and  obeyed. 
Because  He  alone  is  holy.  His  will  alone  should  be 
done,  and  so  His  glory  be  shown  in  us. 

Jesus  glorified  God  hy  confessing  Him.  He  not 
only  in  His  teaching  made  known  the  message  God 
bad  given  Him,  and  showed  us  who  the  Father  is. 
There  is  something  far  more  striking.  He  continu- 
ally spoke  of  His  own  personal  relation  to  the  Father. 
He  did  not  trust  to  the  silent  influence  of  His  holy  - 
life:  He  wanted  men  distinctly  to  understand  what 
the  root  and  aim  of  that  life  was.  Time  after  time 
He  told  them  that  He  came  as  a  servant  sent  from 


IN  GLORIFYING  THE  FATHER.  251 

the  Father,  that  He  depended  upon  Him  and  owed 
everything  to  Him,  that  he  only  sought  the  Father's 
honor,  and  that  all  his  happiness  was  to  please  the 
Father,  to  secure  His  love  and  favour. 

Jesus  glorified  God  iy  giving  Himself  for  the  tvork 
of  His  redeeming  love,  God's  glory  is  His  holiness, 
and  God's  holiness  is  His  redeeming  love:  love  that 
triumphs  over  sin  by  conquering  the  sin  and  rescuing 
the  sinner.  Jesus  not  only  told  of  the  Father  being 
the  Eighteous  One,  whose  condemnation  must  rest  on 
sin,  and  the  Loving  One  who  saves  every  one  who  turns 
from  his  sin,  but  He  gave  Himself  to  be  a  sacrifice 
to  that  righteousness,  a  servant  to  that  love,  even 
unto  the  death.  It  was  not  only  in  acts  of  obedience, 
or  words  of  confession,  that  He  glorified  God,  but  in 
giving  Himself  to  magnify  the  holiness  of  God,  to 
vindicate  at  once  His  law  and  His  love  by  His  atone- 
ment. He  gave  Himself,  His  whole  life  and  being, 
Himself  wholly,  to  show  how  the  Father  loved,  and 
longed  to  bless,  how  the  Father  must  condemn  the 
sin,  and  yet  would  save  the  sinner.  He  counted 
nothing  too  great  a  sacrifice.  He  lived  and  died  only 
for  this,  that  the  glory  of  the  Father,  the  glory  of 
His  holiness,  of  His  redeeming  love,  might  break 
through  the  dark  veil  of  sin  and  flesh,  and  shine  into 
the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men.  As  He  Himself 
expressed  it  in  the  last  week  of  His  life,  when  the 
approaching  anguish  began  to  press  in  upon  Him : 


252  LIKE  CHRIST: 

*Now  is  my  soul  troubled.  And  what  shall  'I  say — 
Father,  save  me  from  this  hour?  But  for  this  came  I 
unto  the  world:  Father!  Glorify  Thy  Name.' 
And  the  assurance  came  that  the  sacrifice  was  well- 
pleasing  and  accepted,  in  the  answer:  'I  have  both 
glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it  again.' 

It  was  thus  Jesus  as  man  was  prepared  to  have  part 
in  the  glory  of  God :  He  sought  it  in  tlie  humiliation 
on  earth;  He  found  it  on  the  throne  of  heaven.  And 
He  is  become  our  forerunner,  leading  many  children 
to  glory:  He  shows  us  that  the  sure  way  to  the  glory 
of  God  in  heaven  is  to  live  only  for  the  glory  of  God 
on  earth.  Yes,  this  is  the  glory  of  a  life  on  earth : 
glorifying  God  here,  we  are  prepared  to  be  glorified 
w^ith  Him  forever. 

Beloved  Christian!  is  it  not  a  wonderful  calling, 
blessed  beyond  all  conception,  like  Christ  to  live  only 
to  glorify  God,  to  let  God's  glory  shine  in  every  part 
of  our  life?  Let  us  take  time  to  take  in  the  won- 
drous thought:  our  daily  life,  down  to  its  most  ordi- 
nary acts,  may  be  transparent  with  the  glory  of  God. 
Oh !  let  us  study  this  trait  as  one  that  makes  the 
wondrous  image  of  our  Jesus  specially  attractive  to 
us:  He  glorified  the  Father.  Let  us  listen  to  Him 
as  He  points  us  to  the  high  aim,  that  your  Father 
in  heaven  may  he  glorified^  and  as  He  shows  us  the 
way.  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified.  Let  us  remember 
how  He  told  us  that,  when  in  heaven  He  answers  our 


IN  GLORIFYING  THE  FATHER.  253 

prayer,  this  would  still  be  His  object,  and  let  in  every 
breathing  of  prayer  and  faith  it  be  our  object  too: 
*  That  the  Father  may  he  glorifitd  in  the  Son, '  Let  our 
whole  life,  like  Christ's,  be  animated  by  this  as  its 
ruling  principle,  growing  stronger  until  in  a  holy 
enthusiasm  our  watchword  has  become:  All,  All  to 
THE  Glory  of  God.  And  let  our  faith  hold  fast  the 
confidence  that  in  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  there  is 
the  sure  provision  for  our  desire  being  fulfilled: 
*Know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  which  is  in  you? — therefore  glorify  God 
in  your  body  and  in  your  spirit.* 

If  we  want  to  know  the  way,  let  us  again  study 
Jesus.  He  obeyed  the  Father.  Let  simple  down- 
right obedience,  mark  our  whole  life.  Let  an  hum- 
ble, childlike  waiting  for  direction,  a  soldier-like 
looking  for  orders,  a  Christlike  dependence  on  the 
Father's  showing  us  His  way,  be  our  daily  attitude. 
Let  everything  be  done  to  the  Lord,  according  to  His 
will,  for  His  glory,  in  direct  relationship  to  Himself. 
Let  God's  glory  shine  out  in  the  holiness  of  our  life. 

He  confessed  the  Father:  He  did  not  hesitate  to 
speak  often  of  His  personal  relationship  and  inter- 
course, just  as  a  little  child  would  do  of  an  earthly 
parent.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  live  right  before 
men:  how  can  they  understand,  if  there  be  no  inter- 
preter? They  need,  not  as  a  matter  of  preaching, 
but  as  a  personal  testimony,  to  hear  that  what  we  are 


254  LIKE  CHRIST: 

and  do  is  because  we  love  the  Father^  and  are  living 
for  Him,  The  witness  of  the  life  and  the  words 
must  go  together.* 

And  He  gave  Himself  to  the  Father's  work.  So 
He  glorified  Him.  He.  showed  sinners  that  God  has 
a  right  to  have  us  wholly  and  only  for  Himself,  that 
God's  glory  alone  is  worth  living  and  dying  for,  and 
that  as  we  give  ourselves  to  this,  God  will  most  won- 
derfully use  and  bless  us  in  leading  others  to  see  and 
confess  His  glory  too.  It  was  that  men  might  glorify 
the  Father  in  heaven,  might  find  their  blessedness 
also  in  knowing  and  serving  this  glorious  God,  that 
Jesus  lived,  and  that  we  must  live  too.  Oh!  let  us 
give  ourselves  to  God  for  men;  let  us  plead,  and 
work,  and  live,  and  die,  that  men,  our  fellow-men, 
may  see  that  God  is  glorious  in  holiness,  that  the 
whole  earth  may  be  filled  with  his  glory. 

Believer,  '  the  Spirit  of  God  and  of  glory,  the  Spirit 
of  holiness,  rests  upon  you.'  Jesus  delights  to  do  in 
you  His  beloved  work  of  glorifying  the  Father.  Fear 
not  to  say :  0  my  Father,  in  Thy  Son,  like  Tliy  Son^ 
I  will  only  live  to  glorify  Thee. 

0  my  God!  I  do  pray  Thee,  show  me  Thy  glory! 
I  feel  deeply  how  utterly  impossible  it  is,  by  any 
resolution  or  effort  of  mine,  to  lift  myself  up  or  bind 
myself  to  live  for  Thy  glory  alone.     But  if  Thou  wilt 

*  See  note. 


IN  GLORIFYING  THE  FATHER.  255 

reveal  unto  me  Thy  glory,  if  Thou  wilt  make  all  Thy 
goodness  pass  before  me,  and  show  me  how  glorious 
Thou  art,  how  there  is  no  glory  but  Thine;  if,  0  my 
Father!  Thou  wilt  let  Thy  glory  shine  into  my  heart, 
land  take  possession  of  my  inmost  being,  I  never  will 
be  able  to  do  anything  but  glorify  Thee,  but  live  to 
make  known  what  a  glorious  holy  God  Thou  art. 

Lord  Jesus!  who  didst  come  to  earth  to  glorify  the 
Father  in  our  sight,  and  ascend  to  heaven  leaving  us 
to  do  it  now  in  Thy  name  and  stead,  oh!  give  us  by 
Thy  Holy  Spirit  a  sight  of  how  Thou  didst  it.  Teach 
us  the  meaning  of  Thy  obedience  to  the  Father,  Thine 
acknowledgment  that,  at  any  cost,  His  will  must  be 
done.  Teach  us  to  mark  Thy  confession  of  the 
Father,  and  how  Thou  didst  in  personal  testimony 
tell  men  of  what  He  was  to  Thee,  and  what  Thou 
didst  feel  for  Him,  and  let  our  lips  too  tell  out  what 
we  taste  of  the  love  of  the  Father,  that  men  may 
glorify  Him.  And  above  all,  oh!  teach  us  that  it  is 
in  saving  sinners  that  redeeming  love  has  its  triumph 
and  its  joy,  that  it  is  in  holiness  casting  out  sin  that 
God  has  His  highest  glory.  And  do  Thou  so  take 
possession  of  our  whole  heart  that  we  may  love  and 
labor,  live  and  die,  for  this  one  thing,  *Tliat  every 
tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to 
THE  Glory  of  God  the  Fathee.' 

0  my  Father,  let  the  whole  earth,  let  my  heart, 
be  filled  with  Thy  glory.     Amen. 


256  LIKE  CHRIST: 


NOTE. 

*Let  US  begin  by  considering  -what  was  the  ground- 
work of  the  whole  beauty  and  harmony  of  our  blessed 
Saviour's  character.  Love  to  the  Father  was  the 
ruling  motive  of  His  life.  It  so  pervaded  His  nature 
as  to  find  expression,  directly  or  indirectly,  in  every 
word  as  well  as  every  action.  It  will  be  well  if  we 
try  to  realize  something  of  the  perfect  simplicity 
with  which  that  love  was  so  continually  shown  forth 
in  daily  life. 

'We  especially  need  to  remind  ourselves  of  how 
entirely  this  was  the  case,  because,  in  these  days  of 
artificial  manners,  and  of  false  shame,  we  are  so  fre- 
quently tempted  to  conceal  our  true  motives,  and  to 
think  is  a  disgrace  if  we  are  led  into  any  sign  of  be- 
traying our  deepest  religious  feelings.  We  conceal 
thsm  from  those  who  would  not  understand  them, 
lest  perchance  they  should  scorn  our  judgment,  and 
wound  our  sslf-respect;  and  we  too  frequently  even 
hide  them  from  those  who  are  of  like  mind  with 
ourselves,  lest  they  too  might  think  us  lacking  in 
good  taste.  Self  fears  the  slightest  rebuke,  the 
merest  breath  of  disapproval.  So  long  as  our  love  to 
God  is  weak  enough  to  allow  of  its  being  hidden, 
self  will  carefully  hide  it,  rather  than  run  the  least 
risk  of  being  considered  deficient  in  discretion. 

*0f  true  discretion,  which  is  quite  a  different 
thing,  we  shall  find  abundant  examples  in  our 
Master's  life.  But  that  false  discretion,  which 
strives  to  divert  notice,  not  from  ourselves,  but  from 
the  deepest  principles  of  our  conduct,  and  in  order 
to  save  our  own  selfish  feelings  from  being  wounded, 


IN  GLORIFYING   THE  FATHER.  257 

finds  no  counterpart  whatever  in  the  life  of  our  Lord. 
In  His  earthly  nature,  as  man,  Christ  loved  the  Lord 
His  God  with  all  His  heart,  and  with  all  His  strength. 
And  this  all-pervading  love  could  not  but  assert  itself 
continually.  Our  Lord  simply  and  unhesitatingly 
referred  to  it  as  a  simple  fact,  whenever  the  slightest 
occasion  for  doing  so  arose.  It  was  His  avowed  object 
that  the  ivorld  should  know  that  He  loved  the  Father, 
He  frequently  and  emphatically  alluded  to  His  per- 
sonal connection  loith  the  Father  as  the  means  by 
which  He  lived:  it  was  His  consciousness  of  that 
union  which  gave  Him  unfailing  support. 

*  Jesus  Christ  made  known  the  Father's  love;  He 
was  sent  that  He  might  reveal  the  deep  blessedness  of 
belonging  tvholly  to  God,  Even  so  are  we  sent,  each 
one  of  us  in  the  world,  in  order  that  we  may  make 
the  Saviour  known  to  those  around  us.  Through  our 
own  intimate  and  personal  connection  with  Himself, 
we  are  each  one  of  us  to  reveal  the  Son,  even  as  He 
revealed  the  Father.  And  this  we  can  only  do  by 
acting  as  He  did,  by  continually  proving  how  all- 
sufficient  is  the  sense  of  union  with  Himself, ' —  From 
a  chapter  on  the  example  left  us  by  Christ,  in  a  little 
book  containing  many  precious  thoughts,  Steps  on 
the  Upward  Path ;  or,  Holiness  unto  the  Lord.  By 
A.  M.  James. 
17 


258  LIKE  CHRIST: 


THIRTY-FIRST  DAY. 


LIKE   CHRIST 

IN  HIS  GLORY. 

*  We  know  that,  when  He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like 
Him  ;  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  And  every  man  that 
hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure.  * 
— 1  John  iii.  2,  3. 

'And  I  appoint  unto  you  a  kingdom,  even  as  my  Father 
hath  appointed  unto  me. ' — Luke  xxii.  29. 

GOD'S  glory  is  His  holiness.  To  glorify  God  is  to 
yield  ourselves  that  God  in  us  may  show  forth 
His  glory.  It  is  only  by  yielding  ourselves  to  be  holy, 
to  let  His  holiness  fill  our  life,  that  His  glory  can 
shine  forth  from  us.  The  one  work  of  Christ  was  to 
glorify  the  Father,  to  reveal  what  a  glorious  Holy 
God  He  is.  Our  one  work  is,  like  Christ's,  so  by 
our  obedience,  and  testimony  and  life  to  make  known 
our  God  as  *  glorious  in  holiness'  that  He  may  be 
glorified  in  heaven  and  earth. 

When  the  Lord  Jesus  had  glorified  the  Father  on 
earth,  the  Father  glorified  Him  with  Himself  in 
heaven.  This  was  not  only  His  just  reward;  it  was 
a  necessity  in  the  very  nature  of  things.     There  is  no 


IN  HIS  GLORY.  259 

other  place  for  a  life  given  up  to  the  glory  of  God, 
as  Christ's  was,  than  in  that  glory.  The  law  holds 
good  for  us  too :  a  heart  that  yearns  and  thirsts  for 
the  glory  of  God,  that  is  ready  to  live  and  die  for  it, 
becomes  prepared  and  fitted  to  live  in  it.  Living  to 
God^s  glory  on  earth  is  the  gate  to  living  in  God'*s 
glory  in  heaven.  If  with  Christ  we  glorify  the 
Father,  the  Father  will  with  Christ  glorify  us  too. 
Yes,  we  shall  be  like  Him  in  His  glory. 

We  shall  be  like  Him  in  His  spiritual  glory^  the 
glory  of  His  holiness.  In  the  union  of  tha  two  words 
in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  we  see  that  what  is 
HOLY  and  what  is  spikitual  stand  in  the  closest  con- 
nection with  each  other.  When  Jesus  as  man  had 
glorified  God  by  revealing,  and  honouring,  and  giving 
Himself  up  to  His  holiness,  he  was  as  man  taken  up 
into  and  made  partaker  of  the  Divine  glory. 

And  so  it  will  be  with  us.  If  here  on  earth  we 
have  given  ourselves  to  have  God's  glory  take 
possession  of  us,  and  God's  holiness,  God's-  Holy 
Spirit,  dwell  and  shine  in  us,  then  our  human  nature 
with  all  our  faculties,  created  in  the  likeness  of  God, 
sliall  have  poured  into  and  transfused  through  it,  in 
a  way  that  passes  all  conception,  the  purity  aud  the 
holiness  and  the  life,  the  very  brightness  of  the  glory 
of  God. 

We  shall  be  like  Him  in  His  glorified  body.  It  has 
been  well  said:  Embodiment  is  the  end  of  the  ways 


260  LIKE  CHRIST: 

of  God.  The  creation  of  man  was  to  be  God's  master- 
piece. There  had  previously  been  spirits  without 
bodies,  and  animated  bodies  without  spirits,  but  in 
man  there  was  to  be  a  spirit  in  a  body  lifting  up  and 
spiritualizing  the  body  into  its  own  heavenly  purity 
and  perfection.  Man  as  a  whole  is  God's  image,  his 
body  as  much  as  his  spirit.  In  Jesus  a  human 
body — 0  mystery  of  mysteries! — is  set  upon  the 
throne  of  God,  is  found  a  worthy  partner  and  con- 
tainer of  the  Divine  glory.  Our  bodies  are  going  to 
be  the  objects  of  the  most  astonishing  miracle  of 
Divine  transforming  power:  'He  will  fashion  our 
vile  body  like  unto  His  glorious  body,  according  to 
the  working  whereby  He  is  able  even  to  subdue  all 
things  unto  Himself.'  The  glory  of  God  as  seen  in 
our  bodies,  made  like  Christ's  glorious  body,  will  be 
something  almost  more  wonderful  than  in  our  spirits. 
We  are  'waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  re- 
demption of  our  body.'' 

We  shall  be  like  Him  in  His  place  of  honour. 
Every  object  must  have  a  fit  place  for  its  glory  to  be 
seen.  Christ's  place  is  the  central  one  in  the  uni- 
verse: the  throne  of  God.  He  spake  to  His  disciples, 
'where  I  am,  there  shall  my  servant  be.  If  any  man 
serve  me,  Mm  will  my  Father  honour, "^  'I  appoint 
you  a  kingdom,  even  as  my  Father  hath  appointed 
me;  that  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table,  and  sit 
enthrones  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.'     To 


IN  HIS   GLORY.  261 

the  Church  at  Thyatira  He  says:  'He  that  over- 
Gometh  and  keepeth  ray  words  unto  the  end,  to  him 
■will  I  give  power  over  the  nations,  even  as  I  received 
of  my  Father.'  And  to  the  Church  at  Laodicea: 
*To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  on  my 
throne,  eveist  as  I  overcame,  and  am  set  down  with 
my  Father  on  His  throne.'  Higher  and  closer  it 
cannot  be:  *  Even  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of 
the  earthly,  we  shall  also  of  the  heavenly.'  The  like- 
ness will  be  complete  and  perfect. 

Such  Divine  God-given  glimpses  into  the  future 
reveal  to  us  more  than  all  our  thinking,  what  intense 
truth,  what  Divine  meaning  there  is  in  God's  crea- 
tive word:  'Let  us  make  man  in  Our  image,  after 
Our  likeness.'.  To  show  forth  the  likeness  of  the 
Invisible,  to  be  partaker  of  the  Divine  Nature,  to 
share  with  God  His  rule  of  the  universe,  is  man's 
destiny.  His  place  is  indeed  one  of  unspeakable 
glory.  Standing  between  two  eternities,  the  eternal 
purpose  in  which  we  were  predestinated  to  be  con- 
formed to  the  image  of  the  first-born  Son,  and  the 
eternal  realization  of  that  purpose  when  we  shall  be 
like  Him  in  His  glory,  we  hear  the  voice  from  every 
side :  0  ye  image-bearers  of  God !  on  the  way  to 
share  the  glory  of  God  and  of  Christ,  live  a  Godlike, 
live  a  Christlike  life ! 

'I  shall  be  satisfied  when  I  awake  with  Thy  like- 
ness,' so  the  Psalmist  sung  of  old.     Nothing  can 


262  LIKE  CHRIST: 

satisfy  the  soul  but  God's  image,  because  for  that  it 
was  created.  And  this  not  as  something  external  to 
it,  only  seen  but  not  possessed ;  it  is  as  partaker  of 
that  likeness  that  we  shall  be  satisfied.  Blessed  they 
who  here  long  for  it  with  insatiable  hunger;  they 
shall  be  filled.  This,  the  very  likeness  of  God,  this 
will  be  the  glory,  streaming  down  on  them  from 
God  himself,  streaming  through  their  whole  being, 
streaming  out  from  them  through  the  universe. 
*When  Christ  who  is  our  life  shall  be  manifested,  we 
also  shall  be  manifested  with  Him  in  glory.' 

Beloved  fellow-Christians!  nothing  can  be  made 
manifest  in  that  day  that  has  not  a  real  existence 
here  in  this  life.  If  the  glory  of  God  is  not  our  life 
here,  it  cannot  be  hereafter.  It  is  impossible;  him 
alone  who  glorifies  God  here,  can  God  glorify  here- 
after. 'Man  is  the  image  and  glory  of  God.'  It  is 
as  you  bear  the  image  of  God  here,  as  you  live  in  the 
likeness  of  Jesus,  who  is  the  brightness  of  His  glory, 
and  the  express  image  of  His  person,  that  you  will  be 
fitted  for  the  glory  to  come.  If  we  are  to  be  as  the 
image  of  the  heavenly,  the  Christ  in  glory,  we  must 
first  bear  the  image  of  the  earthly,  the  Christ  in  hu- 
miliation. 

Child  of  God !  Christ  is  the  uncreated  image  of 
God.  Man  is  His  created  image.  On  the  throne  in 
the  glory  the  two  will  be  eternally  one.  You  know 
what  Christ  did,  how  He  drew  near,  how  He  sacrificed 


IN  HIS  GLORY,  263 

• 

all,  to  restore  us  to  the  possession  of  that  image.  Oh, 
shall  we  not  at  length  yield  ourselves  to  this  wonder- 
ful love,  to  this  glory  inconceivable,  and  give  our 
life  wholly  to  manifest  the  likeness  and  the  glory  of 
Christ?  Shall  we  not,  like  Him,  make  the  Father's 
glory  our  aim  and  hope,  living  to  His  glory  here  as 
the  way  to  live  in  His  glory  there? 

The  Father\s  glory :  it  is  in  this  that  Christ's  glory 
and  ours  have  their  common  origin.  Let  the  Father 
be  to  us  what  He  was  to  Him,  and  the  Father's  glory 
will  be  ours  as  it  is  His.  All  the  traits  of  the  life  of 
Christ  converge  to  this  as  their  centre.  He  was 
Son;  He  lived  as  Son;  God  was  to  Him  Father. 
As  Son  He  sought  the  Father's  glory;  as  Son  He 
found  it.  Oh!  let  this  be  our  conformity  to  the 
image  of  the  Son,  that  the  Father  is  the  all  in  all 
of  ounlife;  the  Father's  glory  must  be  our  everlast- 
ing hDme.  Beloved  brethren!  who  have  accom- 
panied me  thus  far  in  these  meditations  on  the  image 
of  our  Lord,  and  the  Christlike  life  in  which  it  is  to 
be  reflected,  the  time  is  now  come  for  us  to  part. 
Let  us  do  so  with  the  word,  'We  shall  be  like  Him, 

for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is.     He  who  hath  this 

1 

hope  ill  Him  purifieth  Himself,  even  as  He  is  pure.' 
Like  Christ!  let  us  pray  for  each  other,  and  for  all 
God's  children,  that  in  ever-growing  measure  this 
may  bejthe  one  aim  of  our  faith,  the  one  desire  of 
our  hectt,  the  one  joy  of  our  life.     Oh,  what  will  it 


264  LIKE  CHRIST: 

be  when  we  meet  in  the  glory,  when  we  see  Him  as 
He  is,  and  see  each  other  all  like  Him ! 

Ever  blessed  and  most  glorious  God!  what  thanks 
shall  we  render  Thee  for  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ, 
who  is  the  image  of  God,  and  for  the  light  of  Thy 
glory  which  shines  upon  us  in  Him!  And  what 
thanks  shall  we  render  Thee,  that  in  Jesus  we  have 
seen  the  image  not  only  of  Thine,  but  of  our  glory, 
the  pledge  of  what  we  are  to  be  with  Thee  through 
eternity ! 

0  God!  forgive  us,  forgive  us  for  Jesus'  blood's 
sake,  that  we  have  so  little  believed  this,  that  we 
have  so  little  lived  this.  And  we  beseech  Thee  that 
Thou  wouldst  reveal  to  all  who  have  had  fello^vship 
with  each  other  in  these  meditations,  what  the 
GLORY  is  in  which  they  are  to  live  eternally,  in 
which  they  can  be  living  even  now,  as  they  glorify 
Thee.  0  Father !  awaken  us  and  all  Thy  children  to 
see  and  feel  what  Thy  purpose  with  us  is.  Ve  are 
indeed  to  spend  eternity  in  Thy  glory :  Th j  glory 
is  to  be  around  us,  and  on  us,  and  in  us;  we  are  to 
be  like  Thy  Son  in  His  glory.  Father!  we  leseech 
Thee,  oh  visit  Thy  Church !  Let  Thy  Holy  Spi  rit, 
the  Spirit  of  glory,  work  mightily  in  her;  md  let 
this  be  her  one  desire,  the  one  mark  by  whicl  she  is 
known :  the  glory  of  God  resting  upon  her.  Our 
Father!  grant  it  for  Jesus'  sake.     Amen. 


ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE.      265 


ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE. 

^T  ET  ns  make  man  in  our  image,  aftek  our 
-L^  likeness:'  in  these  "words  of  the  Council  of 
Creation,  with  which  the  Bible  history  of  man  opens, 
we  have  the  revelation  of  the  Eternal  purpose  to 
which  man  owes  his  existence,  of  the  glorious 
eternal  future  to  which  he  is  destined.  God  pro- 
poses  to  make  a  godlike  creature,  a  being  who 
shall  be  His  very  image  and  likeness,  the  visible 
manifestation  of  the  glory  of  the  Invisible  One. 

To  have  a  being,  at  once  created  and  yet  Godlike, 
was  indeed  a  task  worthy  of  Infinite  Wisdom.  It  is 
the  nature  and  glory  of.  God  that  He  is  absolutely 
independent  of  all  else,  having  life  in  Himself,  owing 
His  existence  to  none  but  Himself  alone.  If  man  is 
to  be  Godlike,  he  must  bear  His  image  and  likeness 
in  this  too,  that  he  must  become  what  he  is  to  be,  of 
his  own  free  choice;  he  must  make  himself.  It  is 
the  nature  and  glory  of  the  creature  to  be  dependent, 
to  owe  everything  to  the  Blessed  Creator.  How  can 
the  contradiction  be  reconciled? — a  being  at  once 
dependent  and  yet  self-determined,  created  and  yet 
Godlike.  In  man  the  mystery  is  solved.  As  a 
creature  God  gives  him  life,  but  endows  him  with  the 
wonderful  power  of  a  free  will;   it  is  only  in  the 


266      OX  PEEACHIXG  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE. 

process  of  a  personal  and  voluntary  appropriation 
that  anything  so  high  and  holy  as  likeness  to  God  can 
really  become  his  very  own. 

When  sin  entered,  and  man  fell  from  his  high 
destiny,  God  did  not  give  up  His  purpose.  Of  His 
revelation  in  Israel  the  central  thought  was:  *Be  ye 
holy,  as  I  am  holy, '  Likeness  to  God  in  that  which 
constitutes  His  highest  perfection  is  to  be  Israel's 
hope.  Eedemption  had  no  higher  ideal  than  Crea- 
tion had  revealed ;  it  could  only  take  up  and  work  out 
the  Eternal  purpose. 

It  was  with  this  in  view  that  the  Father  sent  to  the 
earth  the  Son  who  was  the  express  Image  of  His 
person.  In  Him  the  God-likeness  to  which  we  had 
been  created,  and  which  we  had  personally  to  appro- 
priate and  make  our  own,  was  revealed  in  human 
form:  He  came  ta  show  to  us  at  once  the  Image  of 
God  and  our  own  image.  In  looking  upon  Him,  the 
desire  after  our  long-lost  likeness  to  God  was  to  be 
awakened,  and  that  hope  and  faith  begotten  which 
gave  us  courage  to  yield  ourselves  to  be  renewed 
after  that  Image.  To  accomplish  this,  there  was  a 
twofold  work  He  had  to  do.  The  one  was  to  reveal 
in  His  life  the  likeness  of  God,  so  that  we  might  know 
what  a  life  in  that  likeness  was,  and  understand  what 
it  was  we  had  to  expect  and  accept  from  Him  as  our 
Eedeemer.  When  He  had  done  this,  and  shown  us 
tfie  likeness  of  the  life  of  God  in  human  form.  He  died 


ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE.      267 

that  He  might  win  for  us,  and  impart  to  us,  His 
own  life  as  the  life  of  the  likeiiess  of  God^  that  in  its 
power  we  might  live  in  the  likeness  of  what  we  had 
seen  in  Him.  And  when  He  ascended  to  heaven,  it 
,  was  to  give  us  in  the  Holy  Spirit  the  power  of  that 
life  He  had  first  set  before  us  and  then  won  to  impart 
to  us. 

It  is  easy  to  see  how  close  the  connection  is  between 
these  two  parts  of  the  work  of  our  Lord,  and  how 
the  one  depends  upon  the  other.  For  what  as  our 
Example  He  had  in  His  life  revealed,  He  as  our  Ee- 
deemer  by  His  death  purchased  the  power.  His 
earthly  life  showed  the  path.  His  heavenly  life  gives 
the  power,  in  which  we  are  to  walk.  What  God  hath 
joined  together  no  man  may  separate.  Whoever  does 
not  stand  in  the  full  faith  of  the  Eedemption,  has 
not  the  strength  to  follow  the  Example.  And  who- 
ever does  not  seek  conformity  to  the  Image  as  the 
great  object  of  the  Eedemption,  cannot  fully  enter 
into  its  power.  Christ  lived  on  earth  that  He  might 
show  forth  the  image  of  God  m  His  life :  He  lives  in 
heaven  that  we  may  show  forth  the  image  of  God  i?i 
our  lives. 

The  Church  of  Christ  has  not  always  maintained 
the  due  relation  of  these  two  truths.  In  the  Eoman 
Catholic  Church  the  former  of  the  two  was  placed  in 
the  foreground,  and  the  following  of  Christ's  example 
pressed  with  great  earnestness.     As  the  fruit  of  this, 


268     ON  PEE  ACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE. 

she  can  point  to  no  small  number  of  saints  who,  not- 
withstanding many  errors,  with  admirable  devotion 
sought  literally  and  entirely  to  bear  the  Master's 
image.  But  to  the  great  loss  of  earnest  souls,  the 
other  half  of  the  truth  was  neglected,  that  only  they 
who  in  the  power  of  Christ's  death  receive  His  life 
within  them,  are  able  to  imitate  His  life  as  set  before 
them. 

The  Protestant  Churches  owe  their  origin  to  the 
revival  of  the  second  truth.  The  truth  of  God's 
pardoning  and  quickening  grace  took  its  true  place 
to  the  great  comfort  and  joy  of  thousands  of  anxious 
souls.  And  yet  here  the  danger  of  onesidedness  was 
not  entirely  avoided.  The  doctrine  that  Christ  lived 
on  earth,  not  only  to  die  for  our  redemption,  but  to 
show  us  how  we  were  to  live,  did  not  receive  sufficient 
prominence.  While  no  orthodox  Church  will  deny 
that  Christ  is  our  Example,  the  absolute  ?iecessity  of 
following  the  example  of  His  life  is  not  preached 
with  the  same  distinctness  as  that  of  trusting  the 
atonement  of  His  death.  Great  pains  are  taken,  and 
that  most  justly,  to  lead  men  to  accejDt  the  merits  of 
His  death.  As  great  pains  are  not  taken,  and  this  is 
what  is  not  right,  to  lead  men  to  accept  the  imitation 
of  His  life  as  the  one  mark  and  test  of  true  dis- 
.cipleship. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  point  out  what  influence 
the  mode   of  presenting  this  truth  will  exercise  in 


I 


ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE,      269 

the  life  of  the  Church.  If  atonement  and  pardon  be 
everything,  and  the  life  in  His  likeness  something 
secondary,  that  is  to  follow  as  a  matter  of  course,  the 
chief  attention  will  be  directed  to  the  former.  Par- 
don and  peace  will  be  the  great  objects  of  desire ; 
with  these  attained,  there  will  be  a  tendency  to  rest 
content.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  conformity  to  the 
image  of  God's  Son  be  the  chief  object,  and  the 
atonement  the  means  to  secure  this  end,  as  the  fulfil- 
ment of  God's  purpose  in  creation,  then  in  all  the 
preaching  of  repentance  and  pardon,  the  true  aim 
will  ever  be  kept  in  the  foreground;  faith  in  Jesus 
and  conformity  to  His  character  will  be  regarded  as 
inseparable.  Such  a  Church  will  produce  real 
followers  of  the  Lord. 

In  this  respect  the  Protestant  Churches  need  still 
to  go  on  unto  perfection.  Then  only  will  the  Church 
put  on  her  beautiful  garments,  and  truly  shine  in  the 
light  of  God's  glory,  when  these  two  truths  are  held 
in  that  wondrous  unity  in  which  they  appear  in  the 
life  of  Christ  Himself.  In  all  He  suffered  for  us  ^  He 
left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  in  His  foot- 
steps. As  the  banner  of  the  cross  is  lifted  high,  the 
atonement  of  tlie  cross  and  the  felloivsMp  of  the  cross 
must  equally  be  preached  as  the  condition  of  true 
discipleship. 

It  is  remarkable  how  distinctly  this  comes  out  in 
the  teaching  of  the  blessed  Master  Himself.     In  fact, 


270     ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE. 

in  speaking  of  the  cross,  He  gives  its  fellowship  more 
prominence  than  its  atonement.  How  often  He  told 
the  disciples  that  they  must  bear  it  with  Him  and 
like  Him ;  only  thus  could  they  be  disciples  and  share 
in  the  blessings  His  cross-bearing  was  to  win.  When 
Peter  rebuked  Him  as  He  spoke  of  His  being  cruci- 
jBed,  He  did  not  argue  as  to  the  need  of  the  cross  in 
the  salvation  of  men,  but  simply  insisted  on  its  being 
borne,  because  to  Him  as  to  us  the  death  of  self  is 
the  only  path  to  the  life  of  God.  The  disciple  must 
be  as  the  Master.  He  spoke  of  it  as  the  instrument 
of  self-sacrifice,  the  mark  and  the  means  of  giving 
up  our  own  life  to  the  death,  the  only  path  for  the 
entrance  upon  the  new  Divine  life  He  came  to 
bring.  It  is  not  only  I  who  must  die,  He  said, 
but  you  too;  the  cross,  the  spirit  of  daily  self-sac- 
rifice, is  to  be  the  badge  of  your  allegiance  to 
me.  How  well  Peter  learnt  the  lesson  we  see 
in  his  Epistle.  Both  the  remarkable  passages  in 
which  he  speaks  of  the  Saviour  suffering  for  us — 
('Christ  suffered  for  us;  who  bare  our  sins  upon  the 
tree;'  'He  suffered,  the  just  for  the  unjitsV) — are 
brought  in  almost  incidentally  in  connection  with 
our  suffering  like  Him.  He  tells  us  that  as  we  gaze 
upon  the  Crucified  One,  we  are  not  only  to  think 
of  the  cross  as  the  path  in  which  Christ  found  His 
way  to  glory,  but  as  that  in  which  each  of  us  is  to 
follow  Him. 


ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE.      271 

The  same  thought  comes  out  with  great  promi- 
nence in  the  writings  of  the  Apostle  Paul.  To  take 
one  Epistle,  that  to  the  Galatians;  we  find  four 
passages  in  which  the  power  of  the  cross  is  set  forth. 
In  one  we  have  one  of  the  most  striking  expressions 
of  the  blessed  truth  of  substitution  and  atonement: 
*  Being  made  a  curse  for  us^  as  it  is  written,  Cursed  is 
every  one  that  hangeth  on  a  tree.'  This  is  indeed 
one  of  the  foundation-stones  on  which  the  faith  of 
the  Church  and  the  Christian  rests.  But  a  house 
needs  more  than  foundation-stones.  And  so  we  find 
that  no  less  than  three  times  in  the  Epistle  the 
fellowship  of  the  cross,  as  a  personal  experience,  is 
spoken  of  as  the  secret  of  the  Christian  life.  'I  have 
been  crucified  with  Christ.'  'They  that  are  Christ's, 
have  crucified  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts.' 
'God  forbid  that  I  sliould  glory  save  in  the  cross  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  the  world  is  crucified 
unto  me,  and  I  unto  the  world. '  That  Christ  bore 
the  cross  for  us  is  not  all;  it  is  but  the  beginning  of 
His  work.  It  does  but  open  the  way  to  the  full  ex- 
hibition of  what  the  cross  can  do  as  we  are  taken  up 
into  a  lifelong  fellowship  with  Him  the  Crucified 
One,  and  in  our  daily  life  we  experience  and  prove 
what  it  is  to  be  crucified  to  the  world.  And  yet  how 
many  earnest  and  eloquent  sermons  have  been 
preached  on  glorying  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  in  which 
Christ's  dying  on  the  cross  for  us  has  been  expounded^ 


^73      ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE. 

but  our  dying  witli  Him,  in  which  Paul  so  gloried, 
has  been  forgotten ! 

The  Church  does  indeed  need  to  have  this  second 
truth  sounded  out  as  clearly  as  the  first.  Christians 
need  to  understand  that  bearing  the  cross  does  not  in 
the  first  place  refer  to  the  trials  which  we  call  crosses, 
but  to  that  daily  giving  up  of  life,  of  dying  to  self, 
which  must  mark  us  as  much  as  it  did  Jesus,  which 
we  need  in  times  of  prosperity  almost  more  than  in 
adversity,  and  without  which  the  fulness  of  the  bless- 
ing of  the  cross  cannot  be  disclosed  to  us.  It  is  the 
cross,  not  only  as  exhibited  on  Calvary  but  as  gloried 
in  on  account  of  its  crucifying  us,  its  spirit  breathing 
through  all  our  life  and  actions,  that  will  be  to  the 
Christian  and  the  Church  as  it  was  to  Christ,  the 
path  to  victory  and  to  glory,  the  power  of  God  for 
the  salvation  of  men. 

The  Redemption  of  the  cross  consists  of  two  parts- 
Christ  bearing  the  cross,  Christ's  crucifixion  for  us, 
as  our  atonement,  the  opening  up  of  the  way  of  life; 
our  crucifixion,  our  bearing  the  cross  with  Christ,  as 
our  sanctification,  our  walking  in  the  path  of  con- 
formity to  His  blessed  likeness.  Christ  the  Surety 
and  Christ  the  Example  must  equally  be  preached. 

But  it  will  not  be  sufficient  that  these  two  truths 
be  set  forth  as  separate  doctrines;  they  can  exercise 
their  full  power  only  as  their  inner  unity  is  found  in 
the  deeper  truth  of  Christ  our  Head.     As  we  see  how 


ON  PREAQHINQ  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE,      273 

union  with  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  root  in  which  the 
power  of  both  the  Surety  and  the  Example  has  its 
life,  and  how  the  one  Saviour  makes  us  partakers  both 
of  the  atonement  and  the  fellowship  of  His  cross,  we 
shall  understand  how  wonderful  their  harmony  is, 
and  how  indispensable  both  are  to  the  welfare  of  the 
Church.  We  shall  see  that  as  it  is  Jesus  who  opened 
up  the  way  to  heaven  as  much  ly  the  footsteps  He  left 
us  to  tread  in  as  by  the  atonement  He  gave  us  to  trust 
iUy  so  it  is  the  same  Jesus  who  gives  us  pardon 
through  His  blood,  and  conformity  to  Himself 
through  His  spirit.  And  we  shall  understand  how 
for  both  faith  is  the  only  possible  path.  The  life- 
power  of  this  atonement  comes  through  faith  alone; 
the  life-power  of  the  example  no  less  so.  Our 
Evangelical  Protestantism  cannot  fulfil  its  mission 
until  the  grand  central  truth  of  salvation  by  faith 
alone  has  been  fully  applied,  not  only  to  justification, 
but  to  sanctification  too,  that  is,  to  the  conformity 
to  the  likeness  of  Jesus. 

The  preacher  who  desires  in  this  matter  to  lead  his 
people  in  the  path  of  entire  conformity  to  the  Saviour's 
likeness,  will  find  a  very  wide  field  indeed  opened  up 
to  him.  The  Christlike  life  is  like  a  tree,  in  which 
we  distinguish  the  fruity  the  root,  and  the  stem  that 
connects  the  two.  As  in  individual  effort,  so  in  the 
public  ministry,  the  fruit  will  probably  first  attract 
attention.  The  words  of  Christ,  'Do  ye  even  as  I 
18 


274     ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE. 

have  done,'  and  the  frequent  exhortations  in  the 
Epistles  to  love,  and  forgive,  and  forbear,  even  as 
Christ  did,  lead  first  to  a  comparison  of  the  actual  life 
of  Christians  with  His,  and  to  the  unfolding  and 
setting  up  of  that  only  rule  and  standard  of  conduct 
which  the  Saviour's  example  is  meant  to  supply.  The 
need  will  be  awakened  of  taking  time  and  looking 
distinctly  at  each  of  the  traits  of  that  wonderful 
Portrait,  so  that  some  clear  and  exact  impressions  be 
obtained  from  it  of  what  God  actually  would  have  us 
be.  Believers  must  be  brought  to  feel  that  the  life 
of  Christ  is  in  very  deed  the  law  of  their  life,  and 
that  complete  conformity  to  His  example  is  what  God 
expects  of  them.  There  may  be  a  difference  in 
measure  between  the  sun  shining  in  the  heavens  and 
a  lamp  lighting  our  home  here  on  earth;  still  the 
light  is  the  same  in  its  nature,  and  in  its  little  sphere 
the  lamp  may  be  doing  its  work  as  beautifully  as  the 
sun  itself.  The  conscience  of  the  Church  must  be 
educated  to  understand  that  the  humility  and  self- 
denial  of  Jesus,  His  entire  devotion  to  His  Father's 
work  and  will,  His  ready  obedience.  His  self-sacri- 
ficing love  and  kindly  beneficence,  are  nothing  more 
than  what  each  believer  is  to  consider  it  his  simple 
duty  as  well  as  his  privilege  to  exhibit  too.  There  is  • 
not,  as  so  many  think,  one  standard  for  Christ  and  an- 
other for  His  people.  No;  as  branches  of  the  vine, 
as  members  of  the  body,  as  partakers  of  the  same 


ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE.      275 

spirit,  we  may  and  therefore  must  bear  the  image 
of  the  Elder  Brother. 

The  great  reason  why  this  conformity  to  Jesus  is 
so  little  seen,  and  in  fact  so  little  sought  after  among 
a  large  majority  of  Christians,  is  undoubtedly  to  be 
found  in  erroneous  views  as  to  our  impotence,  and 
what  we  may  expect  Divine  grace  to  work  in  us. 
Men  have  such  strong  faith  in  the  power  of  sin,  and 
so  little  faith  in  the  power  of  grace,  that  they  at  once 
dismiss  the  thought  of  our  being  expected  to  be  just 
as  loving,  and  just  as  forgiving,  and  just  as  devoted 
to  the  Father's  glory  as  Jesus,  was,  as  an  ideal  far 
beyond  our  reach;  beautiful  indeed,  but  never  to  be 
realized.  God  cannot  expect  us  to  be  or  do  what 
is  so  entirely  beyond  our  power.  They  confidently 
point  to  their  own  failure  in  earnest  attempts  to 
curb  temper  and  to  live  wholly  for  God,  as  the  proof 
that  the  thing  cannot  be. 

It  is  only  by  the  persistent  preaching  of  Christ  our 
Example,  in  all  the  fulness  and  glory  of  this  blessed 
truth,  that  such  unbelief  can  be  overcome.  Be- 
lievers must  be  taught  that  God  does  not  reap  where 
He  has  not  sown,  that  the  fruit  and  the  root  are  in 
perfect  harmony.  God  expects  us  to  strive  to  speak 
and  think  and  act  exactly  like  Christ,  because  the 
life  that  is  in  us  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  ivhich  was 
171  Him.  We  have  a  life  like  His  within  us;  what 
more  natural  than  that  the  outward  life  should  be 


276      ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE. 

like  His  too?  Christ  living  in  us  is  the  root  and 
strength  of  Christ's  acting  and  speaking  through  us, 
shining  out  from  us  so  as  to  be  seen  by  the  world. 

It  is  specially  the  preaching  of  Christ  our  Example, 
to  he  received  by  faith  alone^  that  will  be  needed  to 
lead  God's  people  on  to  what  their  Lord  would  have 
them  be.  The  prevailing  idea  is  that  we  have  to 
believe  in  Jesus  as  our  Atonement  and  our  Saviour, 
and  then,  under  the  influence  of  the  strong  motives 
of  gratitude  and  consistency,  to  strive  to  imitate  His 
example.  But  motives  cannot  supply  the  strength; 
the  sense  of  impotence  remains;  we  are  brought 
again  under  the  law :  we  ought  to,  but  cannot.  The 
soul  must  be  taught  what  it  means  to  believe  in  Christ 
their  Exa7yiple»  That  is,  to  claim  by  faith  His  Ex- 
ample, His  Holy  Life,  as  part  of  the  salvation  He 
has  prepared  for  them.  They  must  be  taught  to 
believe  that  this  Example  is  not  a  something,  not 
even  a  some  one  outside  of  them,  but  the  living  Lord 
Himself,  the  very  Life,  who  will  work  in  them  what 
He  first  gave  them  to  see  in  His  earthly  life.  They 
must  learn  to  believe  that  if  they  will  submit  them- 
selves to  Him,  He  will  manifest  Himself  in  them  and 
their  life-walk  in  a  way  passing  all  their  thoughts; 
to  believe  that  the  Example  of  Jesus  and  the  conform- 
ity  to  Him  is  a  part  of  that  Eternal  Life  which  came 
down  from  heaven,  and  is  freely  given  to  every  one 
that  lelieveth.     It  is  because  we  are  one  with  Christ, 


ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE.      277 

and  abide  in  Him,  because  we  have  in  us  the  same 
Divine  life  He  had,  that  we  are  expected  to  walk  like 
Him. 

The  full  insight  into  this  truth,  and  the  final  ac- 
ceptance of  it,  is  no  easy  matter.  Christians  have 
become  so  accustomed  to  a  life  of  continual  stumbling 
and  unfaithfulness,  that  the  very  thought  of  their  be- 
ing able  with  at  least  such  a  measure  of  resemblance  as 
the  world  must  recognise,  to  show  forth  the  likeness 
of  Christ,  has  become  strange  to  them.  The  preach- 
ing that  will  conquer  their  unbelief,  and  lead  God's 
people  to  victory,  must  be  animated  by  a  joyous  and 
triumphant  faith.  For  it  is  only  to  faith,  a  faith 
larger  and  deeper  than  Christians  ordinarily  think 
needful  for  salvation,  that  the  power  of  Christ's 
example  taking  possession  of  the  whole  life  will  be 
given.  But  when  Christ  in  His  fulness,  Christ  as 
the  Law  and  the  Life  of  the  believer,  is  preached, 
this  deeper  faith,  penetrating  to  the  very  root  of  our 
oneness  of  life  with  Him,  will  come,  and  with  it  the 
power  to  manifest  that  life. 

The  growth  of  thij  faith  may  in  different  cases 
vary  much.  To  some  it  may  come  in  the  course  of 
quiet  persevering  waiting  upon  God.  To  others  it 
may  come  as  a  sudden  revelation,  after  seasons  of 
effort,  of  struggling  and  failure;  just  one  full  sight 
of  what  Jesus  as  the  Example  really  is,  Himself  beiuff 
and  giving  all  Ke  claims.     To  some  it  may  come  ia 


278      ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE. 

solitude — where  there  is  none  to  help  but  the  living 
<jod  Himself  alone.  To  others  it  will  be  given,  as 
it  has  been  so  often,  in  the  communion  of  the  saints, 
ivhere  amid  the  enthusiasm  and  love  which  the  fellow- 
ship of  the  Spirit  creates,  hearts  are  melted,  decision 
is  strengthened,  and  faith  is  stirred  to  grasp  what 
Jesus  offers  when  He  reveals  and  gives  Himself  to 
make  us  like  Himself.  But,  in  whatever  way  it 
•come,  it  will  come  when  Christ  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  preached  as  God's  revelation  of  what 
His  children  are  to  be.  And  believers  will  be  led, 
in  the  deep  consciousness  of  utter  sinfulness  and  im- 
potence, to  yield  themselves  and  their  life  as  never 
l)efore  into  the  hands  of  an  Almighty  Saviour,  and 
to  realize  in  their  experience  the  beautiful  harmony 
between  the  apparently  contradictory  words :  'In  me, 
that  is,  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  no  good  thing;'  and, 
*I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ,  who  strength- 
-eneth  me. ' 

But  root  and  fruit  are  ever  connected  by  a  stem, 
with  its  branches  and  leaves.  In  the  life  of  Christ 
this  was  so  too.  The  connection  between  His  hidden 
life  rooted  in  God,  and  that  life  manifesting  itself  in 
the  fruit  of  holy  words  and  works,  was  maintained 
l3y  His  life  of  conscious  and  continual  personal  fel- 
lowship with  the  Father.  In  His  waiting  on  the 
Pather,  to  see  and  hear  what  He  had  to  make  known, 
in  yielding  Himself  to  the  leadings  of  the  Spirit,  in 


ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE.      279 

His  submission  to  the  teachings  of  the  Word  which 
He  came  to  fulfil,  in  His  watching  unto  prayer,  and 
in  His  whole  life  of  independence  and  faith,  Christ 
became  our  Example.  He  had  so  truly  been  made 
like  unto  us  in  all  things,  become  one  with  us  in  the 
weakness  of  the  flesh,  that  it  was  only  thus  that  the 
life  of  the  Father  could  be  kept  flowing  freely  into 
Him  and  manifesting  itself  in  the  works  He  did. 
And  just  so  it  will  be  with  us.  Our  union  to  Jesus, 
and  His  life  in  us,  will  most  certainly  secure  a  life 
like  His.  This  not,  however,  in  the  way  of  an 
absolute  necessity,  as  a  blind  force  in  nature  works 
out  its  end;  but  in  the  way  of  an  intelligent, 
willing,  loving  co-operation — a  continual  coming  and 
receiving  from  Him  in  the  surrender  of  faith  and 
prayer,  a  continual  appropriating  and  exercising  of 
what  we  receive  in  watchful  obedience  and  earnest 
effort,  a  continual  working  because  we  know  He 
works  in  us.  The  faith  in  the  vitality  and  the 
energy  of  the  life  in  which  we  are  eternally  rooted 
will  not  lead  to  sloth  or  carelessness,  but,  as  with 
Christ,  rouse  our  energies  to  their  highest  power.  It 
is  the  faith  in  the  glorious  possibilities  that  open  up 
to  us  in  Christ  our  life,  that  will  lead  to  the  culti- 
vation of  all  that  constitutes  true  personal  fellowship 
and  waiting  upon  God. 

It  is  in  these  three  points  of  similarity  that  the 
Christlike  life  must  be  known ;  our  life  like  Christ's 


280     ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE, 

hidden  in  God^  maintained  like  His  in  fellowship  with 
God^  will  in  its  external  manifestation  be  like  His 
too,  a  life /or  God.  As  believers  rise  to  apprehend 
the  trnth,  we  are  indeed  like  Christ  in  the  life  we 
have  in  God  through  Him ;  we  can  be  like  Christ  in 
the  keeping  up  and  strengthening  of  th^t  life  in 
fellowship  with  God;  we  shall  be  like  Christ  in  the 
fruits  which  such  a  life  must  bear;  the  name  of  fol- 
lowers of  Christ,  the  imitation  of  Christ,  will  not  be 
a  profession  but  a  reality,  and  the  world  will  know 
that  the  Father  has  indeed  loved  us  as  He  loved  the 
Son. 

I  venture  to  suggest  to  all  ministers  and  Christians 
who  may  read  this,  the  inquiry  whether,  in  the 
teaching  and  the  thought  of  the  Church,  we  have 
suJBBciently  lifted  up  Christ  as  the  Divine  Model  and 
Pattern,  in  likeness  to  whom  alone  we  can  be  restored 
to  the  Image  of  God  in  which  we  were  created.  The 
more  clearly  the  teachers  of  the  Church  realize  the 
eternal  ground  on  which  a  truth  rests,  its  essential 
importance  to  other  truths  for  securing  their  complete 
and  healthy  development,  and  the  share  it  has  in 
leading  into  the  full  enjoyment  of  that  wonderful 
salvation  God  has  prepared  for  us,  the  better  will  they 
be  able  to  guide  God's  people  into  the  blessed 
possession  of  that  glorious  life  of  high  privilege  and 
holy  practice  which  will  prepare  them  for  becoming 
such  a  blessing  to  the  world  as  God  meant  them  to 


ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE,      281 

be.  It  is  the  one  thing  that  the  world  needs  in  these 
latter  days — men  and  women  of  Christlike  lives,  who 
prove  that  they  are  in  the  world  as  He  was  in  the 
world,  that  the  one  object  of  their  existence  is 
nothing  other  than  Tvhat  was  Christ's  object — the 
glorifying  of  the  Father  and  the  saving  of  men. 

One  word  more.  Let  us  above  all  beware  lest  in  the 
preaching  and  seeking  of  Christlikeness  that  secret 
but  deadly  selfishness  creeps  in,  which  leads  men  to 
seek  it  for  the  sake  of  getting  for  themselves  as  much 
as  is  to  be  had,  and  because  they  would  fain  be  as 
eminent  in  grace  and  as  high  in  the  favor  of  God  as 
may  be.  God  is  love:  the  image  of  God  is  Godlike 
love.  When  Jesus  said  to  His  disciples:  *Be  ye 
perfect,  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect,' 
He  told  them  that  perfection  was  loving  and  blessing 
the  unworthy.  His  very  names  tell  us  that  all  the 
other  traits  of  Christlikeness  must  be  subordinate  to 
this  one:  seeking  the  will  and  glory  of  God  in  loving 
and  saving  men.  He  is  Christ  the  Anointed:  the 
Lord  hath  anointed  "  Him — for  whom?  for  the 
broken-hearted  and  the  captive;  for  them  that  are 
bound  and  them  that  mourn.  He  is  Jesus;  living 
and  dying  to  save  the  lost.  There  may  be  a  great 
deal  of  Christian  work  with  little  of  true  holiness  or 
of  the  spirit  of  Christ.  But  there  can  be  no  large 
measure  of  real  Christlike  holiness  without  a  distinct 
giving  up  oneself  to  make  the  salvation  of  sinners 


283      ON  PREACHING  CHRIST  OUR  EXAMPLE, 

for  the  glory  of  God  the  object  of  our  life.  He  gave 
Himself  for  us,  that  He  might  claim  us  for  Him- 
self, a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works.  Him- 
self FOR  us,  and  us  for  Himself:  an  entire 
exchange,  a  perfect  union,  a  complete  identity  in 
interest  and  purpose.  Himself  for  us  as  Saviour, 
us  FOR  Himself  still  as  Saviour;  like  Him  and  for  Him 
to  continue  on  earth  the  work  He  began.  Whether 
we  preach  the  Christlike  life  in  its  deep  inner  springs, 
where  it  has  its  origin  in  our  oneness  with  Him  in 
God,  or  in  its  growth  and  maintenance  by  a  life  of 
faith  and  prayer,  of  dependence  and  fellowship  with 
the  Father,  or  in  its  fruits  of  humility  and  holiness 
and  love,  let  us  ever  keep  this  in  the  foregrouncj. 
The  one  chief  mark  and  glory  of  the  Christ  is  that 
He  lived  and  died  and  lives  again  for  this  one  thing 
alone:  the  will  and  the  glory  of  the  God  of 

LOYE    IN"    THE    SALVATION    OF    SINNERS.       And    to  be 

Christlike  means  simply  this:  to  seek  the  life  and 
favor  and  Spirit  of  God  only,  that  we  may  be  entirely 
given  up  to  the  same  object*:   the  will  and  the 

GLORY    OF   the    GoD   OF    LOYE  IN  THE    SALVATION   OF 

sinners. 


THE  END. 


i 


'J 


LIBRARY  OF  CONGRESS 


0  009  941  463  7 


