li 


fWwjj  of  €onpM 

J  \Q~)\ 


■ 


MANUAL  OF  THEOLOGY, 


A   TREATISE    ON 


CHRISTIAN    DOCTRINE. 


J 


BY 


J.    L.    DAGG,   D.D. 


The  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness. — 1  Tim.  vi.  3. 


PHILADELPHIA : 
AMERICAN    BAPTIST    PUBLICATION    SOCIETY. 

530      ARCH      STREET. 


1*1 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1871,  by 

AMERICAN  BAPTIST  PUBLICATION  SOCIETY, 

In  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington,  D.  C. 


(K 


PREFACE. 


This  volume  is  designed  for  the  use  of  those  who  have 
not  time  and  opportunity  to  study  larger  works  on  theo- 
logy. In  preparing  it,  my  aim  has  been  to  present  the 
system  of  Christian  doctrine  with  plainness  and  brevity ; 
and  to  demonstrate,  at  every  point,  its  truth,  and  its  ten- 
dency to  sanctify  the  heart.  Men  who  have  inclination 
and  talent  for  deep  research,  will  prefer  more  elaborate 
discussions ;  but  if  the  novice  in  religion  shall  be  assisted 
in  determining  what  is  truth,  and  what  the  proper  use  to 
be  made  of  it,  the  chief  end  for  which  I  have  written  will 
have  been  attained. 

In  delineating  divine  truth,  we  may  exhibit  it  in  dif- 
ferent aspects  and  relations.  We  may  view  it  as  coming 
forth  from  God,  with  supreme  authority ;  or  as  a  system 
revealed  by  Jesus  Christ,  all  the  parts  of  which  beautifully 
harmonize  with  each  other,  and  cluster  around  the  doctrine 
of  the  cross,  the  central  point  of  the  system ;  or  as  enter- 
ing j&e  human  heart  by  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
transforming  it  into  the  image  of  God.  This  last  view  I 
have  labored  to  render  prominent  in  these  pages.  The 
moral  and  religious  principle  in  man  needs  a  suitable  in- 
fluence for  its  development  and  perfection ;  and  such  influ- 
ence this  book  finds  in  the  truths  here  presented.  The 
adaptedness  of  a  doctrine  to  produce  this  effect,  it  regards 

(iii) 


IV  PREFACE. 

as  a  proof  of  its  truth  and  divine  origin ;  and  it  accordingly 
deduces  the  articles  of  faith,  to  a  great  extent,  from  the 
inward  exercises  of  piety.  But  this  is  not  the  only  method 
relied  on  for  demonstrating  their  truth.  Other  sources  of 
religious  knowledge  have  been  examined,  and  especially 
the  Bible  in  which  the  truth  of  God  is  directly  made 
known.  To  this  holy  book,  as  the  highest  standard,  the 
last  appeal  is  always  made ;  and  the  harmony  of  its  deci- 
sions, with  the  deductions  from  our  inward  experience,  is 
carefully  observed  for  the  confirmation  of  our  faith.  While 
the  system  has  been  viewed  as  emanating  from  God,  and 
as  operating  on  man,  attention  has  not  been  directed  ex- 
clusively to  its  origin,  or  its  termination.  The  convergence 
of  all  its  lines  in  the  glorious  centre,  the  cross  of  Christ, 
has  not  been  overlooked.  The  reader  will,  I  hope,  find 
proof  in  these  pages,  that  the  doctrine  of  the  cross  is  the 
doctrine  according  to  godliness. 

It  has  been  no  part  of  my  design,  to  lead  the  humble 
inquirer  into  the  thorny  region  of  polemic  theology.  To 
avoid  everything  that  has  been  a  subject  of  controversy, 
was  impossible ;  for  every  part  of  divine  truth  has  been 
assailed.  But  it  has  been  my  plan  to  pursue  our  course 
of  investigation,  affected  as  little  as  possible  by  the  strife 
of  religious  disputants,  and  to  know  no  controversy,  but 
with  the  unbelief  of  our  own  hearts.  The  questions  which 
are  most  likely  to  perplex  sincere  inquirers  have  been  ex- 
amined ;  and,  if  they  have  not  been  thoroughly  elucidated, 
and  fully  answered,  I  hope  they  have  been  so  disposed  of 
as  to  leave  the  mind  at  rest,  peacefully  reposing  on  truth 
clearly  revealed,  and  patiently  waiting  for  the  light  of 
eternity  to  dispel  all  remaining  darkness. 

In  religion,  men  appear  naturally  fond  of  the  difficult 
and  the  obscure ;  perhaps,  because  they  there  find  escape 


PREFACE.  V 

from  the  disquieting  light  of  clearly  revealed  truth.  Even 
the  novice,  leaving  the  subjects  that  are  plain,  plunges  into 
deep  investigations,  and  abstruse  reasonings,  which  the 
skilful  theologian  thinks  it  wiser  to  avoid.  Hence  arises 
a  necessity  of  frequently  reminding  the  inquirer,  that  there 
are  subjects  which  extend  far  beyond  the  limits  of  his 
vision  ;  and  that,  in  laboring  to  explore  them  further  than 
he  is  guided  by  revelation,  he  is  in  danger  of  mistaking 
hypothesis,  and  the  deductions  of  fallacious  reasoning  for 
the  truth  of  God.  Hypothesis  may  be  lawfully  admitted 
for  the  removal  of  objections,  if  it  be  remembered  that  it 
is  only  hypothesis ;  and  abstruse  reasoning  must  be  allowed, 
when  it  becomes  needful  to  go  into  its  labyrinth,  for  the 
purpose  of  extricating  those  who  have  lost  themselves 
therein ;  but,  for  direct  proof  of  all  the  articles  of  faith, 
this  book  relies  on  express  declarations  of  God's  word,  or 
such  deductions  as  are  adapted  to  plain  and  practical 
minds. 

Any  one  who  may  desire  to  see  a  history  of  religious 
opinions,  will  not  find  it  in  this  work.  Eeligion  is  an 
affair  between  every  man  and  his  God ,'  and  every  man 
should  seek  to  know  the  truth  for  himself,  whatever  may 
be  the  opinions  of  others  respecting  it.  It  has  been  my 
aim  to  lead  the  mind  of  the  reader  directly  to  the  sources 
of  religious  knowledge,  and  incite  him  to  investigate  them 
for  himself,  without  respect  to  human  authority.  He  may 
learn,  from  the  help  which  I  am  proffering  him,  what  my 
views  are,  but  I  will  here  give  him  the  caution,  once  for 
all,  not  to  adopt  any  opinion  which  I  may  advance,  farther 
than  it  is  well  sustained  by  the  word  of  God.  Had  I 
wished  him  to  Hx  his  faith  on  human  authority,  I  should 
have  adduced  quotations  from  writers  of  celebrity  in  sup- 
port of  my  opinions ;  but  I  have  chosen  not  to  do  so.  It 
is  my  desire  that  the  reader  should  see,  in  the  doctrine 


VI  PREFACE. 

here  presented,  so  far  as  respects  human  authority,  nothing 
but  the  mere  opinion  of  a  fallible  worm ;  but  that  so  far 
as  it  is  sustained  by  the  word  of  God,  he  should  receive  it 
as  the  truth  of  God. 

This  volume  contains  nothing  respecting  the  externals 
of  religion.  The  form  of  godliness  is  important  as  well  as 
its  power,  and  the  doctrine  respecting  it  is  a  component 
part  of  the  Christian  system ;  but  I  have  been  unable  to 
include  it  in  the  present  work. 

If  this  humble  attempt  to  benefit  others  should  be  un- 
successful, it  has  not  been  useless  to  myself.  In  the  near 
prospect  of  eternity,  I  have  found  it  good  to  examine  again 
the  foundation  on  which  my  faith  rests.  If  the  perusal 
of  these  pages  give  as  much  profit  and  pleasure  to  the 
reader,  as  the  preparing  of  them  has  given  to  the  writer, 
we  may  find  reason  in  the  future  world  to  rejoice  together, 
that  Christian  friends  have  called  for  this  little  service  to 
the  cause  of  the  Eedeemer. 


CONTENTS 


BOOK    FIEST. 

STUDY  OF  RELIGIOUS  TRUTH. 
CHAPTER  I. 

Page 

The  Obligation, 13 

CHAPTER  II. 
Sources  of  Knowledge - 18 

Inspiration  and  Transmission  of  the  Scriptures 22 

Appendix. — Origin  and  Authority  of  the  Bible 26 


BOOK    SECOND. 

DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   GOD. 

INTRODUCTION. 
Duty  of  Love  to  God - 43 

CHAPTER  I. 
Existence  of  God 50 

CHAPTER  II. 

Attributes  of  God 55 

(vii) 


Viii  CONTENTS. 

Page 

Sec.  I.  Unity 55 

"    2.  Spirituality 56 

"     3.  Immensity,  Omnipresence 60 

"    4.  Eternity  and  Immutability 63 

"  ,5.  Omniscience 67 

"    6.  Omnipotence « 73 

"    7.  Goodness 76 

"    8.  Truth 83 

"    9.  Justice 84 

"  10.  Holiness...— 86 

"  11.  Wisdom 86 

Conclusion 91 


BOOK    THIRD. 

DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  WILL  AND  WORKS  OF  GOD. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Duty  of  Delighting  in  the  Will  and  Works  of  God 95 

CHAPTER  I. 

Will  of  God ,..  99 

Will  of  Command 100 

Will  of  Purpose 102 

CHAPTER  II. 

Creation 110 

CHAPTER  III. 

Providence 115 

Sec.  1.  Preservation . . . .  116 

"    2.  Government  in  general 117 

"    3.  Natural  Government 118 

"    4.  Moral  Government 120 

"    5.  Free  Agency 121 

"     6.  Moral  Necessity 122 

"    7.  Designs  of  Providence 128 

"    8.  Providence  over  Sin 130 

Conclusion 135 


CONTENTS.  IX 

BOOK    FOURTH. 

DOCT.RINE  CONCERNING  THE  FALL  AND  PRESENT  STATE  OF  MAN. 
INTRODUCTION. 

Page 

Duty  of  Repentance 138 

CHAPTER  I. 
Original  State  of  Man 141 

CHAPTER  II. 
The  Fall 144 

CHAPTER  III. 

Man's  Present  State 150 

Sec.  1.  Actual  Sin 150 

"    2.  Depravity 152 

"    3.  Condemnation 157 

"    4.  Helplessness 168 

Conclusion 171 


BOOK    FIFTH 

DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  JESUS  CHRIST. 

INTRODUCTION. 
Duty  of  Believing  in  Jesus  Christ 175 


CHAPTER  I. 

Person  of  Christ 179 

Sec.  1.  Humanity 179 

"    2.  Divinity * 181 

"    3.  Union  of  Natures 201 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER  II. 

Page 

States  of  Christ 203 

Sec.  1.  Original  Glory 203 

"    2.  Humiliation -* 205 

"    3.  Exaltation ~ 206 


CHAPTER  III. 

Offices  of  Christ * 207 

Sec.  1.  Prophet 208 

"    2.  Priest 210 

"    3.  King.... 221 

Conclusion 229 


BOOK    SIXTH. 

DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE   HOLY  SPIRIT. 

INTRODUCTION. 
Duty  of  Living  and  Walking  in  the  Holy  Spirit 234 

CHAPTER  I. 
Personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit - 236 

CHAPTER  II. 
Divinity  of  the  Holy  Spirit 238 

CHAPTER  III. 

Office  of  the  Holy  Spirit 241 

Conclusion. 242 


CONTENTS.  XI 


BOOK    SEVENTH. 

DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 
INTRODUCTION. 

Page 

Duty  of  Gratitude  for  Divine  Grace 244 

CHAPTER  I. 
The  Trinity 246 

CHAPTER  II. 
Covenant  of  Grace 253 

CHAPTER  III. 

Blessings  of  Grace 258 

Sec.  1.  Pardon 262 

"    2.  Justification 265 

"    3.  Adoption 274 

"    4.  Regeneration 277 

"    5.  Sanctification 285 

"    6  Final  Perseverance 287 

"    7  Perfection 30C 

CHAPTER  IY. 

Sovereignty  of  Grace 305 

Sec.  1.  Election 309 

"    2.  Particular  Redemption 324 

"    3.  Effectual  Calling 331 

Conclusion 335 


Xll  CONTENTS 


BOOK    EIGHTH. 

DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 
INTRODUCTION. 

Page 
Duty  of  Preparing  for  the  Future  World 339 

CHAPTER  I. 
Immortality  and  Separate  State  of  the  Soul 341 

CHAPTER  II. 
Resurrection , 345 

CHAPTER  III. 
Last  Judgment 350 

CHAPTER  IV. 
Heaven 357 

CHAPTER  T. 

Hell 364 

Conclusion 376 


MANUAL  OF  THEOLOGY. 


BOOK   FIRST. 
STUDY   OF   RELIGIOUS   TRUTH 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE     OBLIGATION. 

The  study  of  religious  truth  ought  to  be  undertaken  and  prose- 
cuted from  a  sense  of  duty,  and  with  a  view  to  the  improvement 
of  the  heart.  When  learned,  it  ought  not  to  be  laid  on  the  shelf, 
as  an  object  of  speculation ;  but  it  should  be  deposited  deep  in  the 
heart,  where  its  sanctifying  power  ought  to  be  felt.  To  study  the- 
ology, for  the  purpose  of  gratifying  curiosity,  or  preparing  for  a 
profession,  is  an  abuse  and  profanation  of  what  ought  to  be  re- 
garded as  most  holy.  To  learn  things  pertaining  to  God,  merely 
for  the  sake  of  amusement,  or  secular  advantage,  or  to  gratify  the 
mere  love  of  knowledge,  is  to  treat  the  Most  High  with  contempt. 

Our  eternal  interests  are  involved  in  the  subject  of  religion,  and 
we  should  study  it  with  a  view  to  these  interests.  A  farmer  should 
study  agriculture,  with  a  view  to  the  increase  of  his  crop ;  but  if, 
instead  of  this  he  exhausts  himself  in  inquiring  how  plants  propa- 
gate their  like,  and  how  the  different  soils  were  originally  produced, 
his  grounds  will  be  overrun  with  briers  and  thorns,  and  his  barns 
will  be  empty.  Equally  unprofitable  will  be  that  study  of  religious 
doctrine  which  is  directed  to  the  mere  purpose  of  speculation.  It 
is  as  if  the  food  necessary  for  the  sustenance  of  the  body,  instead 
of  being  eaten  and  digested,  were  merely  set  out  in  such  order  as 

(13) 


14  STUDY   OF   RELIGIOUS   TRUTH. 

to  gratify  the  sight.  In  this  case,  the  body  would  certainly  perish 
■with  hunger ;  and,  with  equal  certainty  will  the  soul  famish  if  it 
feed  not  on  divine  truth. 

When  religious  doctrine  is  regarded  merely  as  an  object  of  specu- 
lation, the  mind  is  not  content  with  the  simple  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus,  but  wanders  after  unprofitable  questions,  and  becomes  en- 
tangled in  difficulties,  from  which  it  is  unable  to  extricate  itself. 
Hence  arises  the  skepticism  of  many.  Truth,  which  would  sanctify 
and  save  the  soul,  they  wilfully  reject,  because  it  will  not  gratify 
all  their  curiosity,  and  solve  all  their  perplexities.  They  act  as 
the  husbandman  would,  who  should  reject  the  whole  science  of 
agriculture,  and  refuse  to  cultivate  his  grounds,  because  there  are 
many  mysteries  in  the  growth  of  plants,  which  he  cannot  explain. 

If  we  set  out,  in  our  search  for  religious  truth,  from  a  sense  of 
duty,  and  with  the  purpose  of  making  the  best  possible  use  of  it, 
we  may  hope  for  success.  The  Lord  will  bless  our  efforts ;  for  he 
has  promised,  "If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the 
doctrine."1  As  we  advance,  we  shall  find  out  all  that  is  necessary 
for  any  practical  purpose ;  and  the  sense  of  duty,  under  which  we 
proceed,  will  not  drive  us  beyond  this  point. 

The  sense  of  religious  obligation  which  moves  us  to  seek  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  though  disregarded  by  a  large  part  of 
mankind,  belongs  to  the  constitution  of  human  nature.  Man  was 
originally  designed  for  religion,  as  certainly  as  the  eye  was  formed 
for  the  purpose  of  vision.  It  will  be  advantageous  to  consider  well 
this  fact,  at  the  outset  of  our  inquiries.  We  shall  then  feel  that 
we  are  proceeding  according  to  the  best  dictates  of  human  nature. 

The  various  parts  of  the  world  which  we  inhabit,  are  admirably 
adapted  to  each  other.  Many  of  these  adaptations  present  them- 
selves to  our  most  careless  observation  ;  and,  if  we  search  for  them 
with  diligence,  they  multiply  to  our  view  beyond  number.  The 
seed  falls  to  the  ground  from  its  parent  stalk,  like  a  grain  of  sand ; 
but,  unlike  the  sand,  it  contains  in  its  minute  dimensions,  a  won- 
derful provision  for  the  production  of  a  future  plant.  This  provi- 
sion, however,  would  prove  unavailing,  if  it  did  not  find  a  soil 
adapted  to  give  nourishment  to  the  young  germ.  Moisture  is  also 
needed :  and  the  vapor,  rising  from  a  distant  sea,  is  wafted  to  the 

•John  vii.  17. 


THE   OBLIGATION.  15 

place  by  the  wind,  and,  condensed  in  the  atmosphere,  descends  in 
the  fertilizing  shower.  But  all  these  adaptations  are  insufficient, 
if  warmth  is  not  supplied ;  and,  to  complete  the  process,  the  sun,  at 
the  distance  of  ninety-five  millions  of  miles,  sends  forth  his  en- 
livening beams.  Such  complications  of  arrangements  abound  in 
all  the  works  of  nature. 

The  purposes  which  these  adaptations  accomplish,  are  often  per- 
fectly obvious.  In  plants  and  animals,  they  provide  for  the  life  of 
the  individual  and  the  continuance  of  the  species.  Plants  are 
adapted  to  become  food  for  animals  ;  and  plants  and  animals  render 
important  benefit  to  man.  But  man,  too,  has  his  adaptations ; 
and,  from  a  consideration  of  these,  his  proper  place  in  the  great 
system  of  the  universe  may  be  inferred. 

Like  other  animals,  man  is  so  constituted,  that  provision  is  made 
for  the  continuance  of  his  life,  and  of  the  race.  Were  there  no 
higher  indications  in  his  constitution,  he  might  eat  and  drink,  like 
other  animals ;  and  the  indulgence  of  his  natural  appetites  and 
propensities  might  be  the  highest  end  of  his  being.  But,  for 
human  beings  so  to  brutalize  themselves,  is  a  manifest  degradation 
of  their  nature.  They  possess  endowments,  which,  as  every  one 
feels,  fit  them  for  far  nobler  purposes. 

The  high  intellectual  powers  of  man,  call  for  appropriate  exer- 
cise. His  knowledge  is  not  confined  to  objects  near  at  hand,  nor 
to  such  relations  and  properties  of  things  as  are  immediately  per- 
ceived by  the  senses ;  but  his  reason  traces  remote  relations,  and 
follows  the  chain  of  cause  and  effect  through  long  successions. 
From  the  present  moment  he  looks  back  through  past  history,  and 
connects  events  in  their  proper  order  of  dependence.  By  his 
knowledge  of  the  past  he  is  able  to  anticipate  and  prepare  for  the 
future.  In  the  causes  now  existing,  he  can  discover  the  effects 
which  will  be  developed  long  hereafter.  Such  endowments  agree 
well  with  the  opinion  that  he  is  an  immortal  being,  and  that  the 
present  transitory  life  is  preparatory  to  another  which  will  never 
end ;  but  they,  by  no  means,  accord  with  the  supposition,  that  he 
dies  as  the  brute.  No  one  imagines  that  the  ox,  or  the  ass,  is  con- 
cerned with  the  question  whether  an  immortality  awaits  him,  for 
which  it  is  important  that  he  should  prepare ;  but  the  idea  of  a 
future  state  has  had  a  place  in  the  human  mind  in  all  ages,  and 
under  all  forms  of  religion.     The  bee  and   the  ant  provide  for 


16  STUDY   OF  KELIGIOUS   TRUTH. 

the  approaching  winter ;  and  the  winter,  for  which  their  instincts 
lead  them  to  prepare,  comes  upon  them.  If  the  future  life,  which 
men  have  so  generally  looked  for,  which  their  minds  are  so  fitted 
to  expect,  and  for  which  many  have  labored  to  prepare,  with  un- 
ceasing care,  should  never  be  realized,  the  case  would  violate  all 
analogy,  and  be  discordant  with  the  harmony  of  universal  nature. 

The  human  mind  is  fitted  for  continued  progress  in  knowledge ; 
and,  therefore,  for  a  state  of  immortality.  This  adaptation  in- 
cludes an  insatiable  desire  of  knowledge,  and  an  ability  to  acquire 
it.  The  little  chicken,  not  many  hours  after  it  has  left  the  shell 
in  which  its  feeble  existence  commenced,  is  able  to  select  its  food, 
to  roam  abroad  in  search  of  it,  and  to  return  to  its  mother's  wing 
for  protection.  Man  is  born  into  the  world,  the  most  helpless  of 
animals.  Tedious  weeks  pass  away  before  the  development  of  his 
intellectual  powers  begins  to  appear.  The  progress  is  slow,  and 
many  months  of  gradual  improvement  pass,  before  he  becomes 
equal  in  ability  for  self-preservation,  to  many  other  creatures  that 
have  lived  a  few  hours.  These  animals,  however,  stop  at  a  point 
beyond  which,  it  may  be  said,  they  never  go.  The  birds  of  the 
present  age  build  their  nests  just  as  they  were  built  five  thousand 
years  ago ;  and  the  admirable  social  arrangements  found  among 
bees  and  ants  have  undergone  no  improvement.  But  no  point,  no 
line,  bounds  the  progress  of  the  human  mind.  Though  we  are  now 
familiar  with  the  great  improvements  which  have  been  made  in  arts 
and  sciences,  we  contemplate  them  with  admiration  and  astonish- 
ment ;  and  we  feel  that  a  boundless  career  is  open  before  the  in- 
tellect of  man,  inviting  the  efforts  which  he  finds  himself  internally 
prompted  to  make.  But,  as  far  as  each  individual  of  the  race  is 
concerned,  the  vast  fields  of  knowledge  open  before  him  in  vain, 
his  power  to  explore  them  exists  in  vain,  an^d  the  desire  to  explore 
burns  in  vain  in  his  breast,  if  the  present  life,  which  flies  as  the 
weaver's  shuttle,  is  the  only  opportunity  granted,  and  if  all  his 
hopes  and  aspirations  are  to  be  forever  buried  in  the  grave. 

The  moral  faculties  with  which  man  is  endowed,  adapt  him  to  a 
state  of  subjection  to  moral  government.  Our  minds  are  so  con- 
stituted, that  we  are  capable  of  perceiving  a  moral  quality  in 
actions,  and  of  approving  or  disapproving  them.  A  consciousness 
of  having  done  what  is  right,  affords  us  one  of  our  highest  plea- 
sures ;  and  the  anguish  of  remorse  for  evil  deeds,  is  as  intolerable 


THE    OBLIGATION.  27 

as  any  suffering  of  which  the  human  heart  is  susceptible.  Our 
conscience  exercises  a  moral  government  within  us,  and  rewards  or 
punishes  us  for  actions  according  to  their  moral  character.  Much 
of  our  happiness  depends  on  the  approbation  of  those  with  whom 
we  associate.  Hence,  we  find  moral  government  without,  as  well 
as  within  ;  and  at  every  point,  in  our  relations  to  intelligent  beings, 
we  feel  its  restraints.  Where  are  the  bounds  of  this  moral  govern- 
ment ?  It  must  be  as  extensive  as  our  relations  to  moral  beings, 
and  as  lasting  as  our  existence. 

That  men  are  immortal  and  under  a  moral  government,  by 
which  their  future  state  will  be  made  happy  or  miserable,  accord- 
ing to  their  conduct  in  the  present  life,  are  fundamental  truths  of 
religion.  Man  is  a  religious  animal ;  because  a  persuasion  of  his 
immortality  and  an  expectation  of  future  retribution  so  readily 
find  a  place  in  his  mind.  No  one  imagines  that  such  thoughts 
were  ever  entertained  for  a  moment,  by  any  one  of  the  innumerable 
brute  animals  that  have  trodden  the  earth.  But  in  the  human  race, 
such  thoughts  have  been  prevalent  in  all  nations  and  ages ;  have 
mingled  with  the  cogitations  of  the  learned  and  the  unlearned, 
the  wise  and  the  unwise ;  and  have  blended  religion  thoroughly 
with  the  history  of  mankind. 

The  considerations  which  have  been  presented,  establish  the 
claim  of  religious  truth  to  our  highest  respect  and  most  diligent 
investigation.  He  who  disregards  its  claim  acts  contrary  to  his 
own  nature,  and  degrades  himself  to  the  level  of  the  beast  that 
perishes.  That  men  do  so  degrade  themselves,  is  a  fact  which 
correct  views  of  religious  truth  cannot  overlook  :  "  The  ox  knoweth 
his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib ;  but  Israel  doth  not  know, 
my  people  doth  not  consider."1  It  is  a  peculiar  glory  and  excel- 
lence of  the  Christian  revelation,  that  it  is  adapted  to  this  fallen 
condition  of  mankind ;  and  that  it  has  power  to  effect  a  restoration. 
It  is  medicine  for  the  sick,  as  well  as  food  for  the  healthy.  A 
healthy  appetite  calls  for  food ;  and  the  food,  when  received,  ad- 
ministers needed  nourishment ;  so  that  between  the  healthy  stomach 
and  the  nutritious  food,  the  adaptation  is  reciprocal.  But  in  sick- 
ness the  stomach  loathes  food,  and  rejects  the  medicine  which  is 
needed  to  effect  a  cure :  yet  the  adaptation  of  the  medicine  to  the 

JIs.  i.  3. 


18  STUDY   OF   RELIGIOUS   TRUTH. 

condition  of  the  sick  man  still  remains.  Just  so  it  is  with  respect 
to  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Though  rejected  by  men,  it  is  "  worthy 
of  all  acceptation/'  because  it  is  a  remedy,  precisely  adapted  to 
our  depraved  state.  Thousands  of  thousands  have  experienced  its 
restoring  power,  and  unite  in  recommending  its  efficacy  to  the  mul- 
titudes who  are  unwilling  to  make  trial  of  it. 

In  contemplating  the  truths  of  religion,  we  may  view  them  in 
various  aspects.  We  may  consider  them  as  proceeding  from  God ; 
as  demonstrated  by  abundant  proof;  as  harmonizing  with  one  an- 
other ;  and  as  tending  to  the  glory  of  God.  It  is  interesting  and 
instructive  to  view  them  in  immediate  contact  with  the  human 
heart,  and,  like  the  Spirit  of  God,  brooding  over  the  original 
chaos,  bringing  order  out  of  confusion,  and  infusing  light  and  life 
where  darkness  and  death  had  previously  reigned.  In  exerting  this 
new-creating  power,  the  divinity  of  Christian  truth  appears ;  and 
the  demonstration  of  it  is  the  more  satisfactory,  because  practical, 
and  leveled  to  the  capacity  of  all. 

As  religious  beings,  let  us  seek  to  understand  the  truths  of 
religion.  As  immortal  beings,  let  us  strive  to  make  ourselves 
acquainted  with  the  doctrine  on  which  our  everlasting  happiness 
depends.  And  let  us  be  careful  that  we  do  not  merely  receive  it 
coldly  into  our  understandings,  but  that  its  renewing  power  is  ever 
operative  in  our  hearts. 


CHAPTER  II. 

SOURCES    OP    KNOWLEDGE. 


We  find  ourselves  in  a  world  where  we  have  no  continuing  abode. 
Within  us,  and  without  us,  we  have  proofs  and  admonitions  that 
our  chief  interests  lie  in  another  world,  and  that  our  chief  busi- 
ness in  this  is  to  prepare  for  the  future  state,  into  which  we  shall 
very  soon  enter.  We  need  information  respecting  that  unseen 
world  and  the  right  method  of  preparing  for  it,  and  no  other  know- 
ledge can  be  so  important  to  us  as  this.  Can  it  be  that  we  have 
no  means  of  acquiring  it  ?     For  our  guidance  in  the  things  of  this 


SOURCES   OF  KNOWLEDGE.  19 

world,  every  necessary  provision  has  been  made.  We  possess  eyes  ; 
and  the  world  in  which  we  are  placed  affords  the  light  that  is 
needed  to  render  them  useful  in  directing  our  steps.  We  possess 
understanding ;  and  means  of  knowledge  from  without  are  pre- 
sented, by  which  we  may  select  the  objects  of  our  pursuit,  and  the 
best  methods  of  gaining  them.  We  may  hence  infer  that  some 
means  of  knowledge  respecting  our  highest  interests  must  exist. 
The  sources  from  which  this  knowledge  may  be  obtained,  are  the 
following : 

1.  Our  moral  and  religious  feelings. — Brute  animals  have  in- 
stincts by  which  they  are  guided;  and  in  man,  also,  instinctive 
propensities  exist,  adapted  to  his  nature  and  the  condition  and  cir- 
cumstances of  his  being.  Maternal  affection  is  not  confined  to 
brutes  as  an  instinct  peculiar  to  them,  but  it  is  found  in  the  highest 
degree  in  the  human  mother;  and  in  her  breast,  mingles  with 
moral  and  religious  feelings  peculiar  to  human  nature  and  insepa- 
rable from  it.  The  human  mother  feels  the  moral  obligation  to  take 
care  of  her  child,  antecedent  to  all  reasoning  on  the  subject.  When 
we  determine  what  is  right  or  wrong  by  a  process  of  reasoning,  we 
judge  according  to  some  law,  or  rule  of  right ;  but,  in  this  case, 
the  mother  is  a  law  to  herself.  She  needs  no  teaching  from  with- 
out, to  inform  her  that  it  is  her  duty  to  take  care  of  her  offspring. 
Sin  may  so  debase  human  nature,  that  mothers  may  be  without 
natural  affection — and  such  mothers  may  evince  no  moral  feeling ; 
but,  however  it  may  be  buried  under  our  corruptions,  the  moral 
principle  is  an  element  of  our  nature.  Because  of  it,  even  the 
heathen  are  a  law  unto  themselves,  and  show  the  work  of  the  law 
written  in  their  hearts.  The  moral  feeling  which  at  first  co-operates 
with  the  mother's  instinctive  affection  to  induce  her  to  take  care  of 
her  child,  co-operates  afterwards  with  her  reason  in  devising  the 
best  method  of  promoting  its  good. 

When  it  was  to  be  determined  which  of  two  women  was  the  mother 
of  a  living  child  claimed  by  both,  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  decided, 
that  the  maternal  relation  existed  where  maternal  affection  existed. 
On  the  same  principle  we  may,  from  our  moral  and  religious  feel- 
ings, infer  our  relation  to  moral  government  and  to  the  Supreme 
Ruler.  From  this  law,  written  in  the  heart,  we  might  obtain  much 
religious  knowledge,  if  the  fall  of  man  had  not  obscured  the 
writing. 


20  STUDY   OF   RELIGIOUS   TRUTH. 

2.  The  moral  and  religious  feelings  of  our  fellow-men. — We  are 
formed  for  society,  and  are  capable  of  benefiting  each  other  in  the 
things  of  this  life,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come.  The  judgments  of 
others  assist  our  judgments  ;  and  their  moral  and  religious  feeling3 
may,  in  like  manner,  assist  ours.  In  the  approbation  or  disappro- 
bation of  mankind,  we  may  find  an  important  means  of  knowing 
what  is  right  or  wrong.  Hence,  it  is  a  rule  of  duty  to  do  those 
things  which  are  "  of  good  report." 

If  an  ancient  writing  is  transmitted  to  us  in  numerous  copies, 
all  of  which  are  mutilated  and  greatly  effaced,  the  probability  of 
ascertaining  what  the  original  was  is  far  greater,  when  we  compare 
many  copies  with  each  other,  than  it  would  be,  if  we  possessed  one 
copy  only.  For  the  same  reason,  the  moral  and  religious  feeling 
of  mankind  generally,  is  a  source  of  knowledge  more  to  be  relied 
on,  than  that  which  is  opened  for  our  examination  in  the  moral 
nature  of  a  single  individual.  A  hardened  transgressor's  own  con- 
science may  fail  to  reprove  him,  when  his  crimes  shock  the  moral 
sense  of  the  whole  community ;  and,  from  their  disapprobation,  he 
might  learn  the  iniquity  of  his  conduct,  though  all  moral  feeling 
were  extinguished  in  his  own  breast. 

In  examining  this  second  source  of  knowledge,  we  observe  the 
common  consent  of  mankind,  that  there  is  a  God ;  that  he  ought 
to  be  worshipped  ;  that  there  is  a  difference  between  virtue  and  vice  ; 
that  a  moral  government  exists,  which  is  partly  administered  in 
this  life  by  Divine  Providence  ;  that  the  soul  of  man  is  immortal ; 
and  that  a  future  retribution  awaits  all  men  after  death.  These 
truths  of  religion  appear  in  the  history  of  mankind,  through  all  the 
corruptions  which  have  covered  and  obscured  them. 

3.  The  course  of  Nature.  —  Things  are  so  arranged  by  the  Cre- 
ator and  Ruler  of  the  world,  that  some  actions  tend  to  promote, 
and  others  to  destroy,  tbfe  happiness  of  the  individual  and  of 
society.  By  observing  the  tendency  of  actions,  we  may  learn  what 
to  do  and  what  to  avoid.  God  has  established  the  nature  of  things, 
and  the  voice  of  Nature  is  the  voice  of  God.  Conscience  is  God 
speaking  within  us,  but,  because  of  man's  apostasy  from  God,  it 
often  delivers  false  oracles.  Hence,  we  do  well  to  turn  our  ear  to 
the  voice  of  God,  speaking  in  universal  Nature. 

The  tendency  of  vice  to  produce  misery,  is  obvious  to  every  one 
who  observes  the  course  of  things  around  him.     Drunkards  and 


SOURCES   OF   KNOWLEDGE.  21 

gamblers  impoverish  themselves,  ruin  their  families,  waste  their 
health,  and  bring  themselves  to  an  untimely  grave,  not  unfrequently 
by  violent,  and  sometimes  by  suicidal  hands.  In  ten  thousand 
ways,  crime  of  every  species  exhibits  its  pernicious  tendency,  and, 
in  this  arrangement  of  things,  the  moral  government  of  God  is 
clearly  seen,  and  the  conduct  which  he  approves,  is  pointed  out 
by  the  finger  of  his  Providence.  Enough  of  God's  moral  govern- 
ment appears  in  the  present  life,  to  demonstrate  its  existence ;  and 
the  imperfection  which  is  manifest  in  its  present  administration, 
furnishes  satisfactory  proof  that.it  extends  beyond  the  present 
life,  and  is  perfected  in  the  world  to  come. 

The  religious  knowledge  which  may  be  obtained  from  the  three 
sources  which  have  been  enumerated,  constitutes  what  is  called 
Natural  Religion.  Though  insufficient  to  meet  the  wants  of  man 
in  his  fallen  condition,  it  teaches  the  fundamental  truths  on  which 
all  religion  is  based,  and  leads  to  the  higher  source  of  knowledge 
by  which  we  may  become  wise  to  salvation.     This  is 

4.  Divine  Revelation. — Because  all  other  means  of  knowledge 
are  insufficient  to  bring  men  to  holiness  and  happiness,  God  has 
been  pleased,  in  pity  to  our  race,  to  make  known  his  will  by  special 
revelation.  Besides  his  voice  in  conscience  and  in  Nature,  he 
utters  his  voice  from  heaven.  This  revelation  was  anciently  made 
by  prophets,  who  were  commissioned  to  speak  to  men  in  his  name, 
and  afterwards  by  his  Son  from  heaven.  To  us,  in  these  latter 
days,  he  speaks  in  his  written  word,  the  Bible,  which  is  the  perfect 
source  of  religious  knowledge,  and  the  infallible  standard  of  reli- 
gious truth. 

The  Bible  consists  of  two  parts: — 1.  The  Old  Testament,  or 
Hebrew  Scriptures.  This  is  the  book  very  carefully  preserved  by 
the  Jews  throughout  the  world,  and  held  sacred  by  them  as  a  reve- 
lation from  God.  2.  The  New  Testament.  This  consists  of  various 
writings,  which  have  been  carefully  preserved  by  the  Christians 
sf  past  ages,  and  are  now  regarded  by  them  as  a  revelation  from 
Sod,  made  through  the  immediate  followers  of  Jesus  Christ. 

We  shall  here  assume  that  the  Bible  is  a  revelation  from  God. 
If  the  reader  has  any  doubt  on  this  point,  he  may  study,  to  ad- 
vantage, any  of  the  numerous  works  extant  on  the  Evidences  of 
Christianity;  or,  in  the  absence  of  more  elaborate  productions,  he 
may  read   a   small  tract  by  the  Author,  entitled,  The  Origin  and 


22  STUDY    OF    RELIGIOUS    TRUTH. 

Authority  of  the  Bible.  [This  Tract  has  been  introduced  into  the 
present  work  as  an  Appendix,  pp.  26-42.] 

Inspiration  and  transmission  of  the  Scriptures. — The  Bible, 
though  a  revelation  from  God,  does  not  come  immediately  from 
him  to  us  who  read  it,  but  is  received  through  the  medium  of  hu- 
man agency.  It  is  an  important  question,  whether  its  truth  and 
authority  are  impaired  by  passing  through  this  medium.  Human 
agency  was  employed  in  the  first  writing  of  the  Scriptures,  and 
afterwards  in  transmitting  them,  by  means  of  copies  and  transla- 
tions, to  distant  places,  and  succeeding  generations. 

The  men  who  originally  wrote  the  Holy  Scriptures,  performed 
the  work  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Such  was  the 
extent  of  this  influence,  that  the  writing,  when  it  came  forth  from 
their  hands,  was  said  to  be  given  by  inspiration  of  God.  So  Paul 
said,  with  special  reference  to  the  Old  Testament :  "  All  Scripture 
is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable  .  . .  that  the  man 
of  God  may  be  perfect,  thoroughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works."1 
Though  Moses  and  the  prophets  executed  the  writing,  it  is  said  to 
have  been  given  by  God,  and  the  perfection  attributed  to  it  demon- 
strates that  it  had  not  suffered  by  the  instrumentality  which  he  had 
chosen  to  employ.  Christ  referred  to  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  as 
the  word  of  God.2  Paul  represents  what  was  spoken  by  the  pro- 
phets, as  spoken  by  God.3  Peter  attributes  to  the  writings  of  Paul 
equal  authority  with  that  of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.4  Paul 
also  claims  equal  authority  for  what  he  spoke  and  wrote.5  Christ 
promised  to  his  apostles,  after  his  departure,  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  described  the  effect  of  his  influence  on  them  in  these 
words :  "  It  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Spirit  of  your  father 
which  speaketh  in  you."6  This  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  poured 
out  upon  them  on  the  day  of  Pentecost ;  and  their  possession  of  it 
was  proved  by  their  power  to  speak  with  tongues,  and  work  mira- 
cles. From  all  this,  we  learn  that  what  was  spoken  and  written 
by  inspiration,  came  with  as  high  authority  as  if  it  had  proceeded 
from  God  without  the  use  of  human  instrumentality.  When  Peter 
said  to  the  lame  man,  "  In  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth, 
rise  up,  and  walk,"7  the  voice  which  spoke  was    Peter's,  but  the 

1 2  Tim.  iii.  16,  17.  2  Mark  vii.  13.        3  Heb.  i.  1.        4  2  Peter  iii.  16. 
6 1  Cor.  xiv.  37 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  10.  6  Matt.  x.  20.    7  Acts  iii.  6. 


SOURCES   OF   KNOWLEDGE.  23 

power  which  restored  the  ankle  bones,  was  God's.  The  words, 
though  Peter's,  were  spoken  under  divine  influence,  or  the  divine 
power  would  not  have  accompanied  them.  So  the  gospel,  received 
from  the  lips  of  the  apostles,  was  received,  "not  as  the  word  of 
men,  hut  as  it  is  in  truth  the  word  of  God."1  The  men  who  spoke 
and  wrote  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  were  the  instru- 
ments that  God  used  to  speak  and  write  his  word.  Their  pecu 
liarities  of  thought,  feeling,  and  style,  had  no  more  effect  to  prevent 
what  they  spoke  and  wrote  from  being  the  word  of  God,  than  their 
peculiarities  of  voice  or  of  chirography. 

The  question,  whether  inspiration  extended  to  the  very  words  of 
revelation,  as  well  as  to  the  thoughts  and  reasonings,  is  answered 
by  Paul:  "We  preach,  not  in  the  words  which  man's  wisdom 
teacheth,  but  which  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth."2  The  thoughts 
and  reasonings  in  the  minds  of  the  inspired  writers,  were  not  a 
revelation  to  others  until  they  were  expressed  in  words ;  and  if 
the  Holy  Spirit's  influence  ceased  before  expression  was  given  to 
these  thoughts  and  reasonings,  he  has  not  made  a  revelation  to 
mankind.  On  this  supposition,  we  cannot  read  the  Bible  as  the 
word  of  God,  but  as  the  word  of  men ;  of  good  and  honest  men,  it 
is  true,  but  nevertheless  of  fallible  men.  The  opinion  that  the 
expression  is  merely  human,  undermines  the  confidence  with  which 
the  word  of  God  deserves  to  be  regarded ;  because  we  know  not  when, 
or  how  far,  that  expression  may  fail  to  convey  the  meaning  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  It  can  no  longer  be  said,  that  the  Scriptures  are  "  a 
more  sure  word  of  prophecy,"3  that  "they  cannot  be  broken,"4 
and  that  the  things  written  "are  the  commandments  of  the  Lord."5 

The  doctrine  of  plenary  inspiration,  if  properly  understood,  does 
not  imply  that  the  Holy  Spirit  employed  the  writer  as  an  uncon- 
scious instrument.  It  maintains  that  his  memory,  and  other  men- 
tal powers,  were  employed  in  the  execution  of  the  work,  as  truly 
as  his  hand  ;  but  it  insists  that  the  latter  was  as  certainly  controlled 
by  the  unerring  guide  as  the  former.  Nor  does  the  doctrine  imply, 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  original  author  of  every  word  contained 
in  the  sacred  volume.  It  records  the  speeches  of  Satan,  and  of 
the  Orator  Tertullus,  and  records  them  faithfully ;  but  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  not  the  author  of  these  speeches. 

1 1  Thess.  ii.  13.  2 1  Cor.  ii.  13.  32  Peter  i.  19. 

4  John  x.  35.  5 1  Cor.  xiv.  37. 


24  STUDY   OF   KELIGIOUS   TRUTH. 

In  1  Cor.  ch.  7,  Paul  distinguishes  between  what  he  delivered* 
as  a  commandment  of  the  Lord,  and  what  he  spoke  without  such 
commandment.  It  may  appear,  at  first  view,  that  he  disclaims  in- 
spiration with  regard  to  the  things  of  the  last  kind.  But  if  it  be 
admitted,  that  these  things  were  matters  of  human  advice  without 
divine  authority,  it  does  not  follow,  that  the  writing  which  contains 
his  advice,  is  uninspired.  The  inspired  word  which  records  the 
speeches  of  Satan  and  Tertullus,  may  record  the  prudent  counsel 
of  a  wise  apostle,  even  when  that  counsel  does  not  come  with  the 
full  sanction  of  divine  authority.  But,  in  giving  this  counsel,  Paul 
says,  "  I  think  that  I  have  the  Spirit  of  God,"  v.  40 ;  and,  if  he 
thought  that  he  gave  it  by  the  Spirit,  it  would  be  rash  in  us  to 
think  otherwise.  We  are  not  to  understand  the  word  "  think,"  as 
implying  doubt  in  Paul's  mind,  and  we  need  have  no  doubt  that 
the  counsel  which  he  gave,  was  by  the  wisdom  from  above. 

Although  the  Scriptures  were  originally  penned  under  the  un- 
erring guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  does  not  follow,  that  a  con- 
tinued miracle  has  been  wrought  to  preserve  them  from  all  error  in 
transcribing.  On  the  contrary,  we  know  that  manuscripts  differ 
from  each  other ;  and  where  readings  are  various,  but  one  of  them 
can  be  correct.  A  miracle  was  needed  in  the  original  production 
of  the  Scriptures ;  and,  accordingly,  a  miracle  was  wrought ;  but 
the  preservation  of  the  inspired  word,  in  as  much  perfection  as  was 
necessary  to  answer  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  given,  did  not 
require  a  miracle,  and  accordingly  it  was  committed  to  the  provi- 
dence of  God.  Yet  the  providence  which  has  preserved  the  divine 
oracles,  has  been  special  and  remarkable.  They  were  at  first  com- 
mitted to  the  Jews,  who  exercised  the  utmost  care  in  their  preser- 
vation and  correct  transmission.  After  the  Christian  Scriptures 
were  added,  manuscript  copies  were  greatly  multiplied ;  many  ver- 
sions were  prepared  in  other  languages ;  innumerable  quotations 
were  made  by  the  early  fathers ;  and  sects  arose  which,  in  their 
controversies  with  each  other,  appealed  to  the  sacred  writings,  and 
guarded  their  purity  with  incessant  vigilance.  The  consequence 
is,  that,  although  the  various  readings  found  in  the  existing  manu- 
scripts, are  numerous,  we  are  able,  in  every  case,  to  determine  the 
correct  reading,  so  far  as  is  necessary  for  the  establishment  of  our 
faith,  or  the  direction  of  our  practice  in  every  important  particular. 
So  little,  after  all,  do  the  copies  differ  from  each  other,  that  these 


SOURCES   OF   KNOWLEDGE.  25 

minute  differences,  when  viewed  in  contrast  with  their  general 
agreement,  render  the  fact  of  that  agreement  the  more  impressive, 
and  may  be  said  to  serve  practically,  rather  to  increase,  than  im- 
pair our  confidence  in  their  general  correctness.  Their  utmost 
deviations  do  not  change  the  direction  of  the  line  of  truth ;  and 
if  they  seem  in  some  points  to  widen  that  line  a  very  little,  the 
path  that  lies  between  their  widest  boundaries,  is  too  narrow  to 
permit  us  to  stray.  As  copies  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  though 
made  by  fallible  hands,  are  sufficient  for  our  guidance  in  the  study 
of  divine  truth ;  so  translations,  though  made  with  uninspired  hu- 
man skill,  are  sufficient  for  those  who  have  not  access  to  the  inspired 
original.  Unlearned  men  will  not  be  held  accountable  for  a  degree 
of  light  beyond  what  is  granted  to  them  ;  and  the  benevolence  of 
God  in  making  revelation,  has  not  endowed  all  with  the  gift  of  in- 
terpreting tongues.  When  this  gift  was  miraculously  bestowed  in 
ancient  times,  it  was  for  the  edification  of  all :  and  now,  when  con- 
ferred in  the  ordinary  course  of  providence,  the  purpose  of  con- 
ferring it  is  the  same.  God  has  seen  it  wiser  and  better  to  leave 
the  members  of  Christ  to  feel  the  necessity  of  mutual  sympathy  and 
dependence,  than  to  bestow  every  gift  on  every  individual.  He 
has  bestowed  the  knowledge  necessary  for  the  translation  of  his 
word  on  a  sufficient  number  of  faithful  men,  to  answer  the  purpose 
of  his  benevolence ;  and  the  least  accurate  of  the  translations  with 
which  the  common  people  are  favored,  is  full  of  divine  truth,  and 
able  to  make  wise  to  salvation. 

A  full  conviction  that  the  Bible  is  the  word  of  God,  is  necessary 
to  give  us  confidence  in  its  teachings,  and  respect  for  its  decisions. 
With  this  conviction  pervading  the  mind  when  we  read  the  sacred 
pages,  we  realize  that  God  is  speaking  to  us,  and  when  we  feel  the 
truth  take  hold  of  our  hearts,  we  know  that  it  is  God  with  whom 
we  have  to  do.  When  we  study  its  precepts,  all  our  powers  bow  to 
them,  as  the  undoubted  will  of  our  sovereign  Lord ;  and  when  we 
are  cheered  and  sustained  by  its  consolations,  we  receive  them  as 
blessings  poured  down  from  the  eternal  throne.  Nature  and  science 
offer  no  light  that  can  guide  us  in  our  search  for  immortal  bliss ; 
but  God  has  given  us  the  Bible,  as  a  lamp  to  our  feet,  and  a  light 
tc  our  path.  Let  us  receive  the  gift  with  gratitude  and  commit 
ourselves  to  its  guidance. 


26  STUDY  OF  RELIGIOUS  TRUTH. 

APPENDIX. 
Origin  and  Authority  of  the  Bible. 

I:    ORIGIN. 

We  are  rational  beings ;  and,  as  such,  the  desire  of  knowledge 
is  naturalto  us.  In  early  childhood,  as  each  new  object  of  interest 
comes  under  our  notice,  we  ask,  who  made  it ;  and  as  we  advance 
in  years,  the  same  inquisitiveness  attends  us,  and  prompts  us  to 
investigate  the  sources  of  knowledge  which  are  ever  opening  before 
us.  Brutes  may  look  with  indifference  on  the  works  of  God,  and 
tread  under  foot  the  productions  of  human  ingenuity,  without  in- 
quiry into  their  origin ;  but  rational  men  cannot  act  thus  without 
violence  to  the  first  principles  of  their  nature.  Among  the  objects 
which  have  occupied  a  large  space  in  human  thought,  and  which 
claim  our  consideration,  the  Bible  stands  conspicuous.  Its  anti- 
quity ;  the  veneration  in  which  it  has  been  held,  and  continues  to 
be  held,  by  a  large  part  of  mankind ;  and  the  influence  which  it 
has  manifestly  exerted  on  their  conduct  and  happiness,' are  suffi- 
cient, if  not  to  awaken  higher  emotions,  at  least  to  attract  our 
curiosity,  and  excite  a  desire  to  know  its  origin  and  true  character. 

We  are  moral  beings.  The  Bible  comes  to  us  as  a  rule  of  con- 
duct. The  claim  which  is  set  up  for  it  is,  that  it  is  the  highest 
standard  of  morals,  admitting  no  appeal  from  its  decisions.  We 
are,  therefore,  under  the  strongest  obligations  to  examine  the  foun- 
dation of  this  claim. 

We  are,  if  the  Bible  is  true,  immortal  beings.  Heathen  philo- 
sophers have  conjectured  that  man  may  be  immortal ;  and  infidels 
have  professed  to  believe  it ;  but,  if  we  exclude  the  Bible,  we  have 
no  means  of  certain  knowledge  on  this  point.  Yet  it  is  a  matter 
of  the  utmost  importance.  If  we  are  immortal,  we  have  interests 
beyond  the  grave  which  infinitely  transcend  all  our  interests  in  the 
present  life.  What  folly,  then,  it  is,  to  reject  the  only  source  of 
information  on  this  momentous  subject  !  Besides,  if  we  have  such 
interests  in  a  future  world,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing  how  to 
secure  them,  except  from  the  Bible.  Shall  we  throw  this  book 
from  us,  and  trust  to  vain  conjecture,  on  questions  in  which  our  all 
is  involved  ?  it  would  be  folly  and  madness. 

Let  us  then  inquire,  whence  came  the  Bible  ?     Is  it  from  heaven, 


OEIGIN    OF   THE    BIBLE.  27 

or  from  men  ?     If  it  is  from  men,  is  it  the  work  of  good  men,  o* 
of  bad  men? 

If  bad  men  bad  been  tbe  authors  of  the  Bible,  they  would  have 
made  it  to  their  liking.  If  made  to  please  them,  it  would  please 
other  men  of  like  character.  But  it  is  not  a  book  in  which  bad 
men  delight.  They  hate  it.  Its  precepts  are  too  holy ;  its  doc- 
trines too  pure ;  its  denunciations  against  all  manner  of  iniquity 
too  terrible.  It  is  not  at  all  written  according  to  the  taste  of  such 
men.  There  are  men  who  prize  the  Bible ;  who  pore  over  its  pages 
with  delight ;  who  have  recourse  to  it  in  all  their  perplexities  and 
sorrows ;  who  seek  its  counsels  to  guide  them,  and  its  instructions 
to  make  them  wise ;  who  esteem  its  words  more  than  gold,  and 
feast  on  them  as  their  sweetest  food.  But  who  are  these  men  ? 
They  are  those  who  detest  all  deceit  and  falsehood,  and  whom  this 
very  book  has  transformed,  from  men  of  iniquity  and  vice,  to  men 
of  purity  and  holiness.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  that  the  Bible 
should  be  the  work  of  bad  men. 

It  remains  that  the  Bible  must  be  either  from  heaven  or  from 
good  men.  So  pure  a  stream  cannot  proceed  from  a  corrupt  foun- 
tain. If  it  be  from  good  men,  they  will  not  wilfully  deceive  us. 
Let  us,  then,  look  to  the  account  which  they  have  given  of  its 
origin:  "All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God."1  "The 
things  that  I  write  unto  you  are  the  commandments  of  the  Lord."2 
"  And  so  we  have  the  prophetic  word  more  firm,  to  which  ye  do 
well  to  take  heed,  as  to  a  lamp  shining  in  a  dark  place,  until  the 
day  dawn,  and  the  morning  star  arise  in  your  hearts ;  knowing  this 
first,  that  no  prophecy  of  Scripture  is  of  private  invention.  For 
never,  at  any  time,  was  prophecy  brought  by  the  will  of  man,  but 
the  holy  men  of  God  spake,  being  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."3 

It  may,  perhaps,  be  objected  to  the  use  of  these  quotations,  that 
we  permit  the  Bible  to  speak  for  itself;  but  this  is  no  unprece- 
dented procedure.  If  a  stranger  were  passing  through  our  neigh- 
borhood, and  we  were  desirous  to  know  whence  he  came,  it  would 
not  be  unnatural  to  propose  the  inquiry  to  the  man  himself.  If 
there  were  about  him  marks  of  honesty  and  simplicity  of  character, 
and  if,  after  our  most  careful  investigations,  it  should  appear  that 

1  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  a  1  Cor.  xiv.  37. 

3  2  Peter  i.  19,  20,  21 ;  MachnigTifs  Translation. 


28  STUDY   OF   RELIGIOUS  TRUTH. 

he  has  no  evil  design  to  accomplish,  and  no  interest  to  promote  hy 
deceiving  us,  we  should  rely  on  the  information  we  derive  from  him. 
Such  a  stranger  is  the  Bible ;  and  why  may  we  not  rely  on  its  tes- 
timony concerning  itself?  Nay,  it  is  not  a  stranger.  Though 
claiming  a  heavenly  origin,  it  has  long  dwelt  on  earth,  and  gone  in 
and  out  among  us,  a  familiar  companion.  We  have  been  accus- 
tomed to  hear  its  words ;  and  have  known  them  to  be  tried  with 
every  suspicion,  and  every  scrutiny,  and  no  falsehood  has  been 
detected.  More,  it  has  been  among  us  as  a  teacher  of  truth  and 
sincerity ;  and  truth  and  sincerity  have  abounded  just  in  propor- 
tion as  its  teachings  have  been  heeded.  Old  men  of  deceit  have 
shrunk  from  its  probings,  and  trembled  at  its  threatenings ;  and 
young  men  have  been  taught  by  it  to  put  away  all  lying  and  hypo- 
crisy. Can  it  be  that  the  Bible  itself  is  a  deceiver  and  impostor  ? 
Impossible !  It  must  be,  what  it  claims  to  be,  a  book  from  heaven 
—  the  Book  of  God. 

The  truth  that  the  Bible  is  from  God,  is  not  only  testified  by  the 
inspired  men  who  wrote  it,  but  it  is  established  by  many  other  de- 
cisive proofs,  some  of  which  we  shall  proceed  to  consider. 

The  Divine  origin  of  the  Bible  is  proved  by  the  character  of 
the  revelation  which  it  contains. 

The  character  of  God,  as  exhibited  in  the  Bible,  cannot  be  of 
human  origin.  We  know  what  sort  of  gods  men  make ;  for  they 
have  multiplied  them  without  number.  They  carve  deities  from 
blocks  of  wood  and  stone,  and  worship  them  with  stupid  adoration ; 
but  this  is  not  the  most  debasing  and  abominable  idolatry  of  which 
they  are  guilty.  Their  vain  imaginations  fashion  gods  more  vile 
than  these.  The  blocks  of  wood  or  stone  may  take  the  form  of 
birds,  four-footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things ;  but  the  deities  which 
derive  their  origin  from  the  imaginations  of  men  have  passions  and 
propensities  that  are  beastly,  and  even  worse  than  beastly.  Such 
are  the  objects  which  they  worship  with  laborious  and  costly  devo- 
tion. Let  any  man  visit  the  temples  of  the  heathen,  observe  their 
horrid  ceremonies,  and  study  the  character  of  their  gods ;  and  then 
let  him  say  whether  these  gods,  and  the  God  of  the  Bible,  are  from 
one  common  origin. 

Some  objectors  may  allege  that  the  deities  to  which  we  have 
referred  are  those  of  uncivilized  tribes.  What  then  ?  Were  the 
gods  of  the  most  civilized  nations  better  than  these  ?     What  wero 


ORIGIN    OF   THE    BIBLE.  29 

the  divinities  which  were  worshipped  by  the  ancient  Greeks  and 
Romans,  even  by  their  sages  and  philosophers,  whose  talents  and 
genius  have  been  admired  in  every  age  ?  Jupiter,  their  Optimus 
Maximus,  best  and  greatest,  was  a  monster  of  crime ;  and  Yenus, 
Bacchus,  Mercury,  Mars,  and  the  rest  of  their  deities,  were  his  fit 
companions.  They  were  patrons  and  examples  of  vice.  The  in- 
fidel Rousseau  has  drawn  their  character  correctly.  "  Cast  your 
eyes  over  all  the  nations  of  the  world,  and  all  the  histories  of  na- 
tions. Amid  so  many  inhuman  and  absurd  superstitions,  amid  that 
prodigious  diversity  of  manners  and  characters,  you  will  find  every 
where  the  same  principles  and  distinctions  of  moral  good  and  evil. 
The  paganism  of  the  ancient  world  produced,  indeed,  abominable 
gods,  who  on  earth  would  have  been  shunned  or  punished  as  mon- 
sters, and  who  offered  as  a  picture  of  supreme  happiness  only  crimes 
to  commit  and  passions  to  satiate.  But  vice,  armed  with  this 
sacred  authority,  descended  in  vain  from  the  eternal  abode ;  she 
found,  in  the  heart  of  man,  a  moral  instinct  to  repel  her.  The 
continence  of  Xenocrates  was  admired  by  those  who  celebrated 
the  debaucheries  of  Jupiter  —  the  chaste  Lucretia  adored  the  un- 
chaste Yenus — the  most  intrepid  Roman  sacrificed  to  Fear.  He 
invoked  the  god  who  dethroned  his  father,  and  he  died  without  a 
murmur  by  the  hand  of  his  own.  The  most  contemptible  divinities 
were  served  by  the  greatest  men.  The  holy  voice  of  Nature, 
stronger  than  that  of  the  gods,  made  itself  heard,  and  respected, 
and  obeyed  on  earth,  and  seemed  to  banish  as  it  were  to  the  con- 
finement of  heaven,  guilt,  and  the  guilty."1 

Go  now  to  the  Pantheon,  and  study  the  character  and  works  of 
Rome's  innumerable  deities.  After  infidelity  has  acknowledged 
that  they  are  monsters,  more  vicious  than  men,  and  sending  forth 
a  corrupting  influence  into  human  society,  invite  her  to  study  the 
character  of  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  Bible,  a  Spirit,  whose  form 
cannot  be  represented  ;  a  Being  whose  eyes  cannot  behold  iniquity, 
who  is  glorious  in  holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  and  doing  wonders ; 
and  who  requires  to  be  worshipped  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  Let 
her  stand  with  Moses  in  the  cleft  of  the  rock,  and  hear  the  Lord 
proclaim  his  name :  "  The  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gra- 
cious, long-suffering  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth,  keeping 

1  Brown's  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind,  vol.  iii.  p.  138. 


30  STUDY   OF   RELIGIOUS   TRUTH. 

mercy  for  thousands,  forgiving  iniquity,  and  transgression,  and 
sin,  and  that  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."1  Surely  she 
will  bow  her  head  with  reverence,  and  confess,  this  is  the  voice  of 
God. 

The  account  of  the  life  and  character  of  Christ  given  in  the 
gospels,  is  not  a  fiction  of  human  invention.  The  introduction  of 
Christianity,  its  existence  in  the  world,  the  persecutions  which  it 
has  encountered,  its  spread  in  spite  of  opposition,  and  the  influence 
which  it  has  exerted  on  nations  and  governments,  are  all  so  inter- 
woven with  the  history  of  the  last  eighteen  hundred  years,  that  all 
history  must  be  doubted,  if  these  are  fables.  The  evidence  that 
there  were  such  men  as  Alexander  and  Julius  Caesar,  is  not  so 
abundant  and  indisputable  as  that  Jesus  Christ  appeared  at  the 
time  and  place  stated  in  the  gospels.  The  accounts  of  his  life, 
sufferings,  and  death,  given  by  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John, 
come  down  to  us  with  all  the  marks  of  authentic  history.  No 
signs  of  fraud  can  be  detected  in  the  narratives.  The  admirable 
simplicity  of  the  writers,  their  ingenuousness  in  relating  the  faults 
and  weaknesses  of  their  own  characters,  their  artlessness  in  de- 
picting the  sublime  virtues  of  their  Master,  and  recording  his 
stupendous  works,  and  the  unimpassioned  manner  in  which  they 
described  the  cruel  treatment  he  received  from  his  persecutors  and 
murderers ;  all  these  considerations  place  the  truth  of  their  narra- 
tives beyond  question.  Add  to  all  this,  that  they  had  sufficient 
means  of  knowing  the  truth  of  the  facts  which  they  have  recorded ; 
that  they  attested  the  sincerity  of  their  faith  in  them  by  enduring 
tortures  and  death ;  and  that  those  who  received  their  testimony, 
and  transmitted  it  to  us,  testified  their  faith  in  it  by  like  endurance. 
No  other  facts  in  the  history  of  the  world  have  evidence  so  strong. 
But  if  this  evidence  can  be  rejected,  an  insuperable  difficulty  still 
remains.  It  is  impossible  to  account  for  the  existence  of  the  gos- 
pels on  any  other  supposition,  than  that  they  are  what  they  pro- 
fess to  be,  true  delineations  of  a  real  character.  The  authors  were 
incapable  of  conceiving  such  a  fiction.  Even  such  men  as  Virgil 
and  Homer  were  incapable  of  such  an  effort.  They  could  conceive 
and  describe  such  characters  as  iEneas  and  Ulysses,  but  not  such 
a  character  as  Jesus  Christ.     Besides,  the  learning  of  the  world 

1  Ex.  xxxiv.  6,  7. 


ORIGIN    OF  THE   BIBLE.  31 

was  arrayed  against  Christianity ;  and  to  the  unlearned  and  hum- 
ble fishermen  of  Galilee  the  task  was  assigned  of  recording  the 
life  and  works  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  That  such  men  should  have 
transmitted  to  succeeding  ages  a  fiction  such  as  this,  is  incredible 
—  impossible.  Another  quotation  from  Rousseau  will  show  the 
overpowering  influence  of  these  considerations  on  the  mind  of  an 
infidel:  "I  will  confess  to  you  further,  that  the  majesty  of  the 
Scripture  strikes  me  with  admiration,  as  the  purity  of  the  gospel 
hath  its  influence  on  my  heart.  Peruse  the  works  of  our  philoso- 
phers, with  all  their  pomp  of  diction- — how  mean — how  contempt- 
ible —  are  they,  compared  with  the  Scripture  !  Is  it  possible,  that 
a  book  at  once  so  simple  and  sublime  should  be  merely  the  work 
of  man  ?  Is  it  possible  that  the  sacred  personage  whose  history  it 
contains  should  be  himself  a  mere  man  ?  Do  we  find  that  he  as- 
sumed the  air  of  an  enthusiast  or  ambitious  sectary  ?  What  sweet- 
ness, what  purity  in  his  manner  !  What  an  affecting  gracefulness 
in  his  delivery  !  What  sublimity  in  his  maxims  !  What  profound 
wisdom  in  his  discourses  !  What  presence  of  mind !  What  sub- 
tilty.  What  truth  in  his  replies  !  How  great  the  command  over 
his  passions  !  Where  is  the  man,  where  the  philosopher,  who  could 
so  live  and  die,  without  weakness  and  without  ostentation  ?  Shall 
we  suppose  the  Evangelic  History  a  mere  fiction  ?  Indeed,  my 
friend,  it  bears  not  the  marks  of  fiction.  On  the  contrary,  the 
history  of  Socrates,  which  nobody  presumes  to  doubt,  is  not  so 
well  attested  as  that  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  Jewish  authors  were 
incapable  of  the  diction,  and  strangers  to  the  morality  contained 
in  the  gospels ;  the  marks  of  whose  truth  are  so  striking  and  in- 
vincible, that  the  inventor  would  be  a  more  astonishing  character 
than  the  hero."  x 

If  the  gospels  give  a  true  account  of  Jesus  Christ,  he  was  a 
teacher  from  heaven ;  and  both  the  doctrine  which  he  taught,  and 
the  Scriptures,  to  which  he  often  appealed  as  of  divine  authority, 
are  from  God. 

The  method  of  salvation  revealed  in  the  Bible  is  not  a  human 
device.  The  preaching  of  Christ  crucified  was  to  the  Jews  a  stum- 
bling-block, and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness,  yet  salvation  by  the 
Cross  is  the  grand  peculiarity  of  the  gospel.     Were  Christianity 

1  Fuller's  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  69. 


32  STUDY    OF    RELIGIOUS    TRUTH. 

a  cunningly-devised  fable,  a  doctrine  so  offensive  to  mankind  would 
not  have  been  made  prominent  in  the  scheme.  To  this  day,  men 
of  proud  intellect  and  corrupt  heart  reject  the  doctrine  of  salvation 
by  the  obedience  and  sufferings  of  another.  To  the  humble  and 
contrite,  oppressed  with  a  sense  of  sin,  and  seeking,  from  the  bor- 
ders of  despair,  some  divine  method  of  escape  from  the  wrath  to 
come,  this  doctrine  is  thrice  welcome ;  but  the  humble  and  contrite 
are  not  the  men  to  cheat  the  world  with  a  forged  system  of  religion. 

The  blessings  which  the  Bible  confers  on  mankind  have  their 
origin  in  infinite  Benevolence. 

Compare  the  condition  of  those  nations  where  Paganism  reigns, 
with  that  of  the  nations  where  the  most  corrupt  forms  of  Chris- 
tianity exist,  and  you  will  find  the  latter  preferable.  Institute 
another  comparison  between  these,  and  the  lands  where  a  purer 
Christianity  prevails,  and  where  the  Bible,  instead  of  being  with- 
held from  the  common  people,  is  open  to  the  reading  of  all,  and 
you  will  perceive  a  far  better  state  of  human  society,  where  the 
Sacred  Volume  is  best  known.  Compare,  again,  in  these  most 
favored  lands,  the  families  where  the  Bible  is  least  regarded,  with 
those  in  which  its  doctrines  are  revered  and  its  precepts  obeyed, 
and  you  will  be  sensible  that  a  heavenly  influence  pervades  the 
latter.  But  even  in  such  families  as  these,  the  individual  members 
often  differ  widely  from  each  other.  Though  they  may  all  worship 
at  the  same  altar,  and  read  the  same  Bible,  some  have  the  word  of 
truth  on  their  lips  only,  while  others  treasure  it  up  deep  in  their 
hearts,  and  find  it  sweeter  to  their  taste  than  honey  and  the  honey- 
comb. What  elevation  of  character,  what  pure  and  unsullied  bliss 
do  the  latter  enjoy !  Take,  lastly,  an  individual  of  the  last  most 
favored  class,  and  compare  the  different  moments  of  his  life — those 
in  which  the  Bible  is  least  regarded,  with  those  in  which  he  feasts 
on  its  truths  and  promises,  and  experiences  joy  unspeakable  and 
full  of  glory,  while  he  receives  the  divine  word  into  his  heart ;  and 
you  will  have  a  full  view  of  the  blessed  influence  which  the  Bible 
can  impart.  We  know  that  the  sun  is  a  source  of  light  and  heat, 
because  all  is  dark  and  cold  when  his  beams  are  absent ;  and  light 
and  heat  are  found  to  increase  in  proportion  as  we  draw  nearer  to 
him.  Precisely  so  it  is  with  the  Bible.  From  Paganism,  cold  and 
dark,  where  the  Bible  is  unknown,  to  the  saint  in  his  most  raptu- 
rous devotions,  when  he  has  the  sweetest  foretaste  of  heaven  which 


ORIGIN    OF    THE    BIBLE.  33 

mortals  on  earth  can  enjoy ;  the  light  of  truth  which  fills  the  un- 
derstanding, and  the  warmth  of  love  which  glows  in  the  heart,  bear 
an  exact  proportion  to  the  proximity  of  the  Bible.  If  the  sun, 
which  enlightens  the  material  world,  is  the  work  of  a  benevolent 
Creator,  much  more  may  we  ascribe  to  the  same  benevolence  the 
authorship  of  the  Bible,  the  source  of  spiritual  illumination. 

Having  compared  the  Bible  to  the  sun,  it  may  be  a  fit  occasion 
to  remark  that  both  these  lights  have  their  darknesses  —  the  Bible 
its  obscurities,  and  the  sun  its  spots.  The  Deist  may  cavil  at  the 
one,  and  the  Atheist  at  the  other ;  but  the  cavils  of  both  are  alike 
absurd  and  unavailing.  Because  there  are  spots  in  the  sun,  shall 
we  conclude  that  God  did  not  make  it,  or  that  it  is  not  a  blessing 
to  mankind  ?  Yet  this  conclusion  would  not  be  more  irrational 
than  to  deny  that  God  is  the  author  of  the  Bible,  or  that  the  Bible 
is  a  blessing  to  the  world,  because  there  are  obscurities  found  in  its 
pages.  Suppose  it  be  admitted  that  the  spots  in  the  sun,  and  the 
obscurities  in  the  Bible  are  imperfections,  is  God  the  author  of 
nothing  in  which  imperfections  exist  ?  If  everything  material,  and 
everything  human,  be  marked  with  imperfection,  may  not  God 
nevertheless  glorify  himself  by  things  material  and  human  ?  The 
new  Jerusalem  has  no  need  of  a  material  sun  to  enlighten  it,  be- 
cause the  glory  of  God  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof;  but  God 
has  fixed  the  sun  in  the  firmament  to  enlighten  this  world  of  mat- 
ter ;  and  the  sun  in  the  firmament,  notwithstanding  its  spots,  de- 
clares its  Maker's  glory.  So  God  may  make  revelation  of  Himself 
to  the  pure  intelligences  of  heaven  in  language  free  from  human 
imperfection ;  but  when  He  speaks  to  mortals  on  earth,  He  uses 
the  language  of  mortals ;  and  whatever  may  be  the  imperfection 
of  the  medium,  this  revelation  of  God  displays  his  glory  in  the 
brightest  light  in  which  human  eyes  can  behold  it. 

But  are  the  spots  in  the  sun  and  the  obscurities  in  the  Bible  to 
be  accounted  imperfections  ?  The  light  of  the  sun  is  pure  and 
abundant ;  and,  if  it  were  deficient,  the  deficiency  might  be  sup- 
plied, as  well  by  enlarging  the  sun,  as  by  removing  its  spots.  It 
would,  therefore,  be  as  rational  to  complain  that  the  sun  is  not 
larger,  as  to  complain  that  there  are  spots  in  its  disc.  In  like 
manner,  the  light  of  God's  Word  is  pure,  and  sufficient  to  make 
men  wise  to  salvation ; .  and  we  might  as  well  complain  that  the 
Bible  is  not  larger,  as  that  it  contains  obscurities.  Besides,  the 
3 


34  STUDY    OF    RELIGIOUS    TRUTH. 

obscurities  of  the  Bible  may  bave  a  beneficial  use.  If,  as  some 
astronomers  suppose,  the  solar  spots  are  the  body  of  the  sun,  seen, 
through  the  partings  of  its  luminous  atmosphere,  they  can  scarcely 
be  deemed  imperfections ;  much  less  can  they  be  so  regarded,  if 
they  are  streams  of  gas  rising  in  the  sun's  atmosphere,  and  diffusing 
itself  to  become  fuel  for  the  lamp  of  day.  According  to  the  latter 
hypothesis,  the  spots  are  as  far  from  being  imperfections,  as  are 
the  clouds  that  sometimes  darken  our  sky,  but  which  are  the  rich 
sources  of  the  earth's  fertility,  and  the  granaries  of  our  bread.  So, 
some  of  the  obscurities  of  the  Bible  are  the  deep  things  of  God, 
seen  through  the  light  of  revelation  —  the  inscrutable  mystery  of 
the  divine  nature  appearing  through  the  light  with  which  He  has 
clothed  Himself.  Other  mysteries  are,  in  process  of  time,  dissi- 
pated ;  and,  like  clouds  which  burst,  pour  out  a  blessing.  It  was 
a  mystery  "that  the  Gentiles  should  be  fellow-heirs  and  partakers 
of  the  promise  of  Christ  by  the  gospel ;"  but  in  due  time  this  mys- 
tery was  explained,  and'  the  bursting  cloud  poured  the  richest 
blessing  on  all  the  Gentile  world.  The  Old  Testament  dispensation 
was  dark,  abounding  with  shadows  of  good  things  to  come;  but 
since  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  has  arisen,  the  dark  places  have 
been  illuminated,  and  are  full  of  instruction.  Prophecies  have 
been  delivered  in  obscure  language ;  but  their  fulfilment  has  inter- 
preted them.  Some  obscurities  have  given  occasion  to  the  infidel 
to  charge  the  Bible  with  contradictions ;  but  a  careful  examination 
of  the  inspired  word  has  not  only  served  to  repel  the  charge  by 
reconciling  the  apparent  discrepancies,  but  it  has  added  new  proof 
that  the  Scriptures  were  written  by  undesigning  and  honest  men, 
without  any  collusion ;  and  that  there  is  perfect  harmony  in  their 
statements,  even  when  apparently  most  discordant.  Men  of  supe- 
rior intellect  may  find  a  pleasant  and  profitable  exercise  of  their 
powers  in  investigating  those  parts  of  the  Bible  which  are  less 
clear ;  while  its  plainest  truths  are  adapted  to  men  of  least  capa- 
city, and  are  sufficient  for  their  necessities.  Here  are  waters  in 
which  "  a  lamb  may  wade,"  and  in  which  "  an  elephant  may  swim." 
There  is  yet  another  use  of  Bible  obscurities.  When  God  gave  a 
law  to  mankind,  he  did  not  give  one  which  it  was  impossible  to 
violate,  but  one  which  men,  as  free  agents,  might  violate,  and  by 
violating  bring  ruin  on  their  souls.  So,  when  he  gave  a  revelation 
to  mankind,  he  did  not  give  one  which  could  not  be  caviled  at,  but 


ORIGIN    OF    THE    BIBLE.  35 

one  at  which  men  might  cavil,  and,  by  caviling,  bring  wrath  upon 
themselves.  The  obscurities  of  the  Bible  serve  for  this  use ;  for 
the  Bible  itself  declares,  that  it  contains  "  some  things  hard  to  be 
understood,  which  they  that  are  unlearned  and  unstable  wrest  unto 
their  own  destruction."  Let  those  who  choose  rather  to  cavil  at 
the  obscurities  of  the  Bible,  than  to  walk  in  its  light,  read  this 
declaration,  and  fear  and  tremble. 

The  revelations  contained  in  the  Bible  have  the  attestation  of 
miracles.  It  is  a  plain  dictate  of  common  sense,  that  Almighty 
God,  who  created  and  governs  the  world,  may  direct  its  movements 
as  He  chooses.  He  appointed  the  laws  of  Nature,  and  He  may 
suspend  these  laws  whenever  He  pleases,  and  turn  the  course  of 
things  out  of  the  ordinary  channel.  It  is  equally  clear,  that  none 
but  the  Author  of  Nature  can  eifect  such  changes.  It  follows, 
therefore,  that  miracles,  if  wrought  in  attestation  of  a  revelation 
professing  to  be  from  Heaven,  stamp  upon  it  the  seal  of  Omnipo- 
tence. Persons  who  saw  such  miracles  wrought,  reasoned  well 
when  they  said :  "  We  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher  come  from 
God  ;  for  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  that  thou  doest,  except  God 
be  with  him." 

Though  miracles  furnished,  to  those  who  saw  them  with  their  own 
eyes,  a  more  impressive  evidence  than  to  us  who  see  them  through 
the  light  of  history,  yet  the  argument  founded  on  them  is  perfectly 
conclusive,  even  at  the  present  time.  That  Moses  and  the  pro- 
phets, Christ  and  his  apostles,  performed  works  truly  miraculous, 
is  as  well  attested  as  any  ancient  fact  whatever.  The  character  of 
the  works  attributed  to  them,  their  number,  the  circumstances  in 
which  they  were  performed,  the  absence  of  everything  indicating 
fraud  or  imposture,  the  sufferings  by  which  the  witnesses  demon- 
strated their  sincerity,  the  credence  which  their  testimony  obtained 
rapidly  and  extensively,  and  in  the  face  of  bitter  persecution,  and 
the  absence  of  all  counter  testimony ;  all  these  considerations  com- 
pel the  belief  that  miracles  were  wrought,  and  if  wrought,  the 
revelation  which  they  attest  must  be  from  God.  The  evidence, 
though  it  may  be  less  impressive,  is  not  less  decisive  than  it  would 
have  been  if  we  had  personally  witnessed  the  miracles. 

We  are  not  wholly  indebted  for  the  evidence  of  miracles,  to  the 
light  of  history.  It  does  not  need  historical  proof  to  satisfy  our 
minds  that  the  pyramids  of  Egypt  were  built  by  human  labor  and 


86  STUDY    OF    RELIGIOUS    TRUTH. 

skill.  We  are  as  well  satisfied  of  this,  as  if  we  had  seen  them  rise 
under  the  hands  of  the  workmen.  We  know  that  they  are  the 
work  of  man,  because  they  resemble,  in  kind,  other  works  of  man. 
But  he  who  gazes  on  these  stupendous  structures,  may  turn  his  eyes 
to  the  great  globe  beneath  them,  and  feel  equally  well  assured  that 
it  is  not  the  work  of  man.  So,  in  contemplating  a  system  of  hea- 
then mythology  or  philosophy,  we  may  be  convinced  that  it  is  of 
human  origin,  because  it  bears  the  marks  of  man's  workmanship ; 
but  in  contemplating  the  Bible,  and  the  religion  which  it  has  intro- 
duced into  the  world,  we  may  be  as  well  assured  that  the  origin  of 
these  is  superhuman.  A  system  so  destitute  of  everything  which 
could  recommend  it  to  the  carnal  mind,  and  claiming  to  be  attested 
"with  signs  and  wonders,  and  with  divers  miracles,"  could  not,  in 
the  absence  of  such  miracles,  obtain,  according  to  the  ordinary 
course  of  things,  easy  and  extensive  credence  among  mankind,  and 
become  firmly  established  in .  their  confidence.  The  propagation, 
in  such  circumstances,  must  itself  have  been  miraculous.  It  is  of 
no  importance  to  the  present  argument,  whether  the  miracle  was 
wrought  before  the  eyes  of  him  who  received  the  doctrine,  or  on 
his  mind,  to  incline  him  to  receive  it.  In  either  case,  there  was  a 
miracle,  an  interposition  of  Divine  Power,  and  such  an  interposi- 
tion demonstrated  that  the  doctrine  was  from  God. 

The  Prophecies  which  the  Bible  contains,  must  have  proceeded 
from  infallible  foreknowledge.  This  is  proved  by  their  exact 
fulfilment. 

Daniel  prophesied  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  proud  head  of  the 
Babylonian  empire,  then  in  its  glory  and  strength,  that  this  empire 
would  give  place  to  three  others  which  were  to  arise  after  it.1  This 
succession  of  empires,  the  Babylonian,  the  Medo-Persian,  the  Gre- 
cian, and  the  Roman,  is  more  fully  described  afterward  in  the  pro- 
phecies of  Daniel,  together  with  a  series  of  events  extending  down 
to  the  present  time.2  More  than  a  century  before  the  time  of 
Daniel,  the  prophet  Isaiah  predicted3  the  taking  of  Babylon  by 
the  Persians,  who  were,  at  the  time  of  the  prediction,  a  feeble  and 
obscure  nation.  He  foretold  the  very  name  of  the  Persian  leader, 
and  the  manner  of  his  entrance  into  the  city,  through  gates  which, 
by  a  special  ordering  of  Providence,  were  carelessly  left  open  by 

1  Dan.  ii.  39,  45.  2  Ch.  vii;  12.  3  Is.  xxi.  9 ;  xlv.  1,  3. 


ORIGIN    OF    THE    BIBLE.  37 

the  Babylonians  in  their  drunken  festivity.  Other  prophets  fore- 
told the  destruction  and  final  desolation  of  Babylon,1  and  of  Nine- 
veh;2 the  overthrow  of  ancient  Tyre  by  Nebuchadnezzar,3  and 
afterward  of  insular  Tyre  by  Alexander,4  and  the  decline  and  pre- 
sent state  of  Egypt,5  once  the  proudest  of  nations.  All  these  pre- 
dictions were  made  when  the  events  predicted  were  so  improbable, 
that  they  could  not  be  foreknown  by  any  human  sagacity ;  yet 
history,  and  the  reports  of  travellers,  attest  their  exact  accom- 
plishment. Many  other  examples  of  fulfilled  prophecy  might  rea- 
dily be  cited. 

The  prophecies  concerning  the  Jews  are  remarkable,  and  we 
refer  to  them  with  the  more  satisfaction,  because  the  reader  has 
probably,  to  some  extent,  personal  knowledge  of  the  facts  pre- 
dicted. These  people  are  scattered  through  our  nation,  and  through 
most  of  the  nations  on  earth.  Their  synagogues,  in  which  they 
meet  to  worship  the  God  of  their  fathers,  are  found  in  all  our  prin- 
cipal cities.  The  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  are  regularly 
read  in  their  public  worship,  and  are  regarded  with  religious  vene- 
ration, as  their  sacred  book,  received  from  God  by  their  ancient 
prophets,  and  handed  down  to  them  from  their  forefathers.  This 
book  minutely  describes,6  in  the  language  of  prediction,  the  suffer- 
ings -which  they  have  undergone  ;  their  wonderful  preservation  as 
a  distinct  people,  notwithstanding  these  sufferings,  and  their  dis- 
persed condition  among  all  nations.  Other  ancient  tribes,  when 
scattered,  have  been  lost  in  the  general  mass  of  mankind ;  but 
these  people,  after  centuries  of  dispersion  and  persecution,  still 
remain  distinct,  and  stand  forth  to  the  world  as  witnesses  of  the 
wonderful  fulfilment  of  the  predictions  respecting  them,  uttered 
by  their  ancient  prophets. 

The  sacred  writings  of  the  Jews  not  only  contain  predictions  of 
the  dispersion,  sufferings,  and  wonderful  preservation  of  this  peo- 
ple, but  also  furnish  explanation  of  these  extraordinary  events. 
The  book  describes  a  covenant  between  this  nation  and  the  God 
whom  they  worship,  and  its  records  show  that  they  have  repeatedly 
violated  this  covenant,  and  suffered  the  threatened  penalty.  The 
whole  history  of  the  nation  illustrates  the  dealings  of  God  with 


1  Jer.  li.  2  Nahum  i,  iii.  3  Ezek.  xxvi.  7,  11. 

4  Ibid,  xxvii.  32.      6  Ibid.  xxix.  6  Lev.  xxvi ;  Deut.  xxvii.  xxx. 


88  STUDY   OF  RELIGIOUS   TRUTH. 

them,  in  accordance  with  the  stipulations  of  this  covenant.  Once 
before,  as  a  punishment  of  their  unfaithfulness,  they  were  driven 
from  their  land  into  captivity  for  seventy  years,  yet  they  were  pre- 
served and  brought  back.  The  prophetic  declarations  of  their 
sacred  volume  explain  that  their  present  dispersion  and  sufferings 
are,  in  like  manner,  in  consequence  of  their  crimes,  and  that  their 
preservation  is  in  prospect  of  another  restoration.  Their  condi- 
tion, therefore,  resembles  that  of  a  malefactor  nailed  to  the  cross, 
with  his  accusation  written  over  his  head ;  a  fit  punishment  for  the 
nation  that  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory.  They  hold  in  their  hands 
the  book  which  specifies  their  crimes  and  predicts  their  sufferings, 
and  they  furnish,  in  their  persons,  the  spectacle  of  these  predic- 
tions fulfilled.  They  not  only  claim  that  their  book  is  divine,  but 
they  are  the  proof  of  its  divinity. 

The  Jews  may  be  made  witnesses  for  the  New  Testament  also, 
which  they  reject,  and  for  Christianity,  which  they  hate.  What 
crime  so  great,  has  extended  their  dispersion  and  sufferings  through 
the  long  period  of  eighteen  centuries  ?  The  New  Testament  gives 
the  only  satisfactory  answer  to  this  inquiry,  and  it  answers  in  per- 
fect accordance  with  their  own  Scriptures.  They  have  rejected 
and  crucified  their  King,  their  long-expected  Messiah,  whom  their 
prophets  had  foretold.  It  was  predicted  that  he  would  appear 
before  the  tribe  of  Judah  should  become  extinct,  or  should  cease 
to  maintain  a  distinct  government  of  its  own ; 1  before  the  second 
temple  should  be  destroyed ; 2  and  in  490  years  from  the  decree  of 
Cyrus  to  rebuild  Jerusalem.3  At  this  time  Jesus  Christ  appeared, 
claiming  to  be  their  Messiah,  and  furnishing  most  abundant  proofs 
that  he  came  from  God ;  yet,  as  their  prophets  had  foretold,  they 
rejected  him,4  and  united  with  Gentile  rulers  to  destroy  him.5  Their 
own  Scriptures,  and  their  confessed  hatred  of  Jesus  Christ,  fully 
make  out  the  crime  for  which  they  suffer,  and  these  unite  with  the 
known  fact  of  their  sufferings  to  demonstrate  the  Messiahship  of 
Jesus  and  the  divine  origin  of  Christianity. 

The  New  Testament  contains  various  predictions6  which  have 
been  exactly  fulfilled  concerning  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem; 
the  calamities  of  the  Jews ;  their  dispersion  and  their  preservation ; 

1  Gen.  xlix.  10.        2  Haggai  ii.  7, 9.        3  Dan.  ix.  24-27.       4  Is.  liii.  3. 
6  Ps.  ii.  1,  2.  6  Matt,  xxiv ;  Mark  xiii ;  Luke  xxi. 


AUTHOKITY   OF   THE    BIBLE.  39 

also  concerning  the  persecutions  of  Christianity ;  its  spread  through 
the  world,  and  the  Papal  Apostasy.1  Besides  these,  it  contains 
predictions,  yet  not  accomplished,  of  the  conversion  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, the  restoration  of  the  Jews,  and  the  millennial  state  of  the 
Church.  When  these  shall  have  been  fulfilled,  the  prophetical 
evidence  now  constantly  accumulating  will  be  complete. 

In  concluding  this  brief  inqiry  into  the  origin  of  the  Bible,  we 
may  admire  and  adore  the  wonderful  providence  of  God,  which  ha<* 
made  his  enemies  the  preservers  and  witnesses  of  his  revelation. 
The  Jews,  who  killed  the  prophets  and  crucified  the  Son  of  God 
himself,  have  preserved  and  transmitted  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  are  now  witnesses  to  the  world  of  its  divine  origin, 
and  the  truth  of  its  prophecies.  The  Roman  Catholic  Church,  the 
great  Antichrist,  or  man  of  sin,  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  saints, 
has  transmitted  to  us  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament,  and 
now  gives,  in  the  same  two-fold  manner,  its  testimony  to  this  part 
of  the  Sacred  Volume.  Even  the  infidel  scoffer  is  made  an  uncon- 
scious witness.  In  its  pages,  his  very  scoffs  are  predicted,  and  his 
corrupt  heart,  from  which,  rather  than  from  sober  judgment,  these 
scoffs  proceed,  is  portrayed  with  an  accuracy  and  skill  which  be- 
speak the  Author  divine,  the  Searcher  of  hearts.  The  word  which 
"is  quick  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword, 
piercing  even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit,  and  of  the 
joints  and  marrow,  and  is  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents 
of  the  heart,"  must  be  "the  word  of  God."  Even  the  reluctant 
tongue  of  the  infidel,  as  in  the  case  of  Rousseau,  is  sometimes  con- 
strained to  utter  its  testimony  aloud;  and  at  other  times,  when 
danger  comes  or  death  threatens,  his  alarm  and  terror  divulge  the 
truth,  that  his  rock  is  not  as  our  rock,  himself  being  judge.  Un- 
happy infidel !  Is  there  a  God  ?  Hast  thou  an  immortal  soul  ? 
Until  thou  canst,  with  unfaltering  hardihood,  answer,  No  to  both 
these  inquiries,  do  not  cast  away  from  thee  the  Bible,  the  Book 
of  God,  the  Light  of  immortality. 

II.    AUTHOKITY. 

Though  the  Bible  was  written  by  inspired  men,  they  are  to  be 
regarded  merely  as  the  instruments  chosen,  fitted,  and  employed 

1 2  Thess.  ii.  3-12;  1  John  ii.  18 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  1-3. 


40  STUDY   OF   RELIGIOUS   TRUTH. 

by  God,  for  the  production  of  this  work.  God  himself  is  the 
author  of  the  Bible.  When  we  read  its  sacred  pages,  we  should 
realize  that  God  speaks  to  us,  and  when  we  suffer  it  to  lie  neglected, 
we  should  remember  that  we  are  refusing  to  listen  to  God,  when  he 
proffers  to  instruct  us  on  subjects  of  infinite  moment. 

The  Bible  contains  the  testimony  of  God,  and  is  therefore  a  Rule 
of  Faith.  The  declarations  of  an  honest  man  ought  to  be  believed, 
much  more  ought  those  which  are  made  by  the  God  of  truth ;  "if 
we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  greater." 
To  reject  the  testimony  of  God,  is  to  make  him  a  liar.  To  call  a 
fellow-man  a  liar,  is  to  offer  an  insult  of  the  grossest  character. 
This  insult  we  offer  to  the  great  God,  when  we  refuse  to  receive 
his  testimony,  given  to  us  in  his  holy  Word. 

The  Bible  contains  the  precepts  of  God,  and  is  therefore  a  Rule 
of  Duty.  We  are  bound  to  obey  the  commands  of  parents  and 
civil  rulers,  but  God  has  a  higher  claim  on  our  obedience.  He  is 
our  Father  in  heaven,  and  the  Supreme  Lawgiver  of  the  universe. 
Against  this  high  authority  we  rebel,  when  we  refuse  to  obey  the 
precepts  of  the  Bible. 

The  Bible  contains  the  promises  of  God,  and  is  therefore  a  Rule 
of  Hope.  It  determines,  not  only  what  we  are  to  believe  and  to 
do,  but  also  what  we  are  to  expect.  It  presents,  as  the  foundation 
of  our  hope,  the  promise  and  the  oath  of  God,  two  immutable  things, 
in  which  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie.  We  look  to  him  as  the 
rewarder  of  those  that  diligently  seek  him,  and  all  our  confidence 
respecting  the  nature  and  extent  of  this  reward,  and  the  certainty 
of  our  obtaining  it,  is  founded  on  the  sure  word  of  prophecy,  the 
Bible. 

Whether,  as  a  rule  of  faith,  of  duty,  or  of  hope,  the  authority 
of  the  Bible  is  supreme.  We  may  rely  on  the  testimony  of  men, 
but  they  sometimes  deceive  us.  We  may  regulate  ofir  conduct  by 
the  command  of  those  who  are  over  us,  or  by  the  dictates  of  our 
own  conscience,  but  rulers  may  command  what  is  wrong,  and  con- 
science is  not  infallible.  We  may  cherish  hopes  founded  on  human 
promises,  or  the  natural  tendencies  of  things,  but  human  promises 
are  often  delusive,  and  the  promises  of  Nature  are  buds  which, 
however  beautiful  and  fragrant,  are  often  blasted  before  they  pro- 
duce fruit.  God  never  deceives.  "  The  grass  withereth,  and  the 
flower  thereof  falleth  away,  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth 


AUTHORITY   OF    THE    BIBLE.  41 

forever."  When  the  Bible  speaks,  all  else  may  be  silent,  and  its 
decisions  leave  no  room  for  doubt  and  admit  no  appeal. 

The  authority  of  the  Bible  is  independent.  It  was  not  conferred 
on  it  by  the  inspired  men  who  wrote  it ;  nor  does  it  derive  any  from 
the  persons  who  have  transmitted  it  to  us.  The  purest  church  on 
earth  cannot  invest  it  with  authority ;  much  less  can  the  corrupt 
Church  of  Rome.  The  inspired  writers  referred  the  authority  of 
what  they  wrote  to  God ;  and  here  it  must  rest.  The  transcribers 
of  the  manuscripts,  who  have  been  the  agents  of  Providence  in 
preserving  and  transmitting  the  Sacred  "Volume  to  us,  and  the 
printers  and  bookbinders  by  whose  labors  this  volume  is  so  widely 
circulated,  have  conferred  no  authority  on  it,  and  it  has  received 
as  little  from  the  Church  of  Rome  as  from  these.  It  possesses 
authority  simply  because  it  is  the  word  of  God. 

The  authority  of  the  Bible  is  immediate.  Its  address  is  directly 
from  God,  and  directly  to  the  mind  and  heart  of  every  individual 
reader.  We  have  no  mediator  but  Christ,  and  no  infallible  inter- 
preter but  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  may  derive  assistance  from  men 
in  understanding  the  Bible,  but  they  have  no  right  to  understand 
it  for  us.  We  should  employ  our  own  minds  in  the  study  of  God's 
Word,  and  allow  no  human  interpreter  to  intervene  between  God 
and  our  own  conscience.  We  should  say,  each  one  for  himself, 
"  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth." 

What  a  precious  gift  is  the  Bible !  Who  will  not  prize  it?  Who 
will  not  bind  it  to  his  heart  ?  We  stand  on  the  narrow  isthmus  of 
life,  between  two  oceans,  the  boundless  past  and  the  boundless 
future.  The  records  of  eternity  past  are  beyond  our  reach,  but 
the  Ancient  of  Days  has  opened  them,  and  has  revealed  to  us  in 
the  Bible  whatever  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  know.  The  van- 
ishing present  is  all  important  to  us,  because  on  it  depends  our 
everlasting  all,  but  who  will  instruct  us  how  to  use  the  swiftly  pass- 
ing moments  as  we  ought  ?  The  only  wise  God  has  condescended 
to  speak  to  us  in  the  Bible,  and  to  teach  us  how  to  order  our  steps 
in  life's  short  way,  so  as  to  insure  life  eternal.  The  future  world 
is  just  before  us.  For  myself,  I  realize  that  I  am  standing  on  the 
shore  of  the  boundless  ocean,  with  but  an  inch  of  crumbling  sand 
remaining.  I  hear  the  shrieks  of  the  dying  infidel  at  my  side,  to 
whose  view  all  is  covered  with  impenetrable  darkness.  He,  too, 
has  come  to  the  brink,  and  would  gladly  refuse  to  proceed,  but  he 


42  STUDY   OF   RELIGIOUS   TRUTH. 

cannot.  Perplexed,  terrified,  shuddering,  he  plunges  in  and  sinks, 
he  knows  not  whither.  How  precious,  at  this  trying  moment,  is 
the  Book  of  God  !  How  cheering  this  Light  from  heaven  !  Before 
it  I  see  the  shades  retiring.  The  Bible  lifts  its  torch — nay,  not  a 
feeble  torch,  such  as  reason  may  raise,  to  shine  on  the  darkness 
and  render  it  visible ;  the  Bible  sheds  the  light  of  the  noonday  sun 
on  the  vast  prospect  before  me,  and  enables  me,  tranquil  and  joy- 
ful, to  launch  into  eternity  with  the  full  assurance  of  hope.  Mor- 
tals, hastening  to  the  retributions  of  eternity,  be  wise ;  receive  the 
revelation  from  heaven  presented  to  you  in  the  Bible ;  attend  dili- 
gently to  its  instructions,  and  reverence  its  authority,  as  the  word 
of  the  final  Judge  before  whom  you  will  soon  appear. 


BOOK   SECOND. 
DOCTEINE  CONCERNING  GOD 


INTRODUCTION. 

DUTY     OF     LOVE     TO     GOD. 

"  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  and 
with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  might."1  In  this  manner  the 
Bible  commands  the  chief  of  all  duties.  No  reasons  are  assigned 
for  the  requirement.  No  proof  is  adduced  that  God  exists,  or  that 
he  possesses  such  perfections  as  entitle  him  to  the  supreme  love  of 
his  creatures.  Jehovah  steps  forth  before  the  subjects  of  his  go- 
vernment, and  issues  his  command.  He  waits  for  no  formal  intro- 
duction. He  lifts  up  his  voice  with  majesty.  Without  promise, 
and  without  threat,  he  proclaims  his  law,  and  leaves  his  subjects  to 
their  responsibility. 

From  the  manner  of  this  announcement,  we  maj  derive  instruc- 
tion. It  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  enter  into  a  formal  de- 
monstration that  God  exists,  or  a  formal  investigation  of  his  attri- 
butes, before  we  begin  the  duty  of  loving  him.  We  already  know 
enough  of  him  for  this ;  and  to  postpone  the  performance  of  the 
duty  until  we  have  completed  our  investigations,  is  to  commence 
them  with  unsanctified  hearts,  and  in  rebellion  against  God.  From 
the  dawn  of  our  being  we  have  had  demonstrations  of  God's  exist- 
ence and  character,  blazing  around  us  like  the  light  of  noonday. 
The  heavens  and  the  earth  have  declared  his  glory ;  his  ministers 
and  people  have  proclaimed  his  name ;  he  is  not  to  us  an  unknown 
God,  except  so  far  as  our  minds  are  wilfully  blind  to  the  displays 
of  his  glory.  If,  therefore,  we  withhold  the  affections  of  our 
hearts,  we  can  have  no  excuse  in  the  plea  that  more  evidence  is 

1  Deut.  vi.  5. 

(43) 


44  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

needed.  And  with  hearts  so  alienated  from  God  at  the  outset,  all 
our  religious  inquiries  are  likely  to  be  unprofitable.  What  pro- 
bability is  there  that  further  proof  "will  produce  its  proper  impres- 
sion and  effect  on  our  minds,  if  that  which  is  already  in  our  pos- 
session is  unheeded  or  abused  ?  If,  from  what  we  already  know  of 
God,  we  admire  and  love  him,  we  shall  desire  to  know  more  of  him, 
and  shall  prosecute  the  study  with  profit  and  delight ;  but,  if  we 
have  already  shut  him  out  of  our  hearts,  all  our  intellectual  inves- 
tigations respecting  him  may  be  expected  to  leave  us  in  spiritual 
blindness. 

The  duty  required  corresponds,  in  character,  to  the  religion,  of 
which  it  is  an  essential  part.  Heathen  gods  could  not  claim  the 
supreme  love  of  their  worshippers ;  and  heathen  minds  had  no 
idea  of  a  religion  founded  on  supreme  love  to  their  deities.  To 
some  extent,  they  were  objects  of  fear ;  and  much  that  appertained 
to  their  supposed  character  and  history,  served  for  amusement,  or 
to  interest  the  imagination ;  but  the  conduct  attributed  to  them 
was  often  such  as  even  heathen  virtue  disapproved.  Hence,  they 
could  not  be  objects  of  supreme  love ;  and  no  one  claimed  it  for 
them.  The  requirement  of  supreme  love  demonstrates  the  religion 
of  the  Bible  to  be  from  the  true  God ;  and  when  we  begin  our  reli- 
gious investigations  with  the  admission  of  this  obligation,  and  the 
full  recognition  of  it  in  our  hearts,  we  may  be  assured  that  we  are 
proceeding  in  the  right  way. 

The  simplicity  of  the  requirement  is  admirable.  No  explanation 
of  the  duty  is  needed.  Forms  of  worship  may  be  numerous  and 
various,  and  questions  may  arise  as  to  the  forms  which  will  be  most 
acceptable.  Many  outward  duties  of  morality  are  often  determined 
with  much  difficulty.  Perplexing  questions  arise  as  to  the  nature 
of  repentance  and  faith,  and  the  uninformed  need  instruction  re- 
specting them.  But  no  one  needs  to  be  told  what  love  is;  the 
humblest  mind  can  understand  the  requirement,  and  may  feel  plea- 
sure in  the  consciousness  of  rendering  obedience  to  it ;  and  the 
learned  philosopher  stands  in  the  presence  of  this  precept  as  a 
little  child,  and  feels  its  power  binding  every  faculty  that  he  pos- 
sesses. This  simple  principle  pervades  all  religion,  and  binds  all 
intelligences,  small  and  great,  to  God,  the  centre  of  the  great 
system.     Between  it  and  the  power  of  gravitation  in  the  natural 


DUTY    OF    LOVE    TO    GOD.  45 

world,  which  hinds  atoms  and  masses,  pehhles  and  vast  planets,  a 
heautiful  analogy  may  he  traced. 

The  comprehensiveness  of  the  precept  is  not  less  admirable. 
From  it  rises  the  precept,  Love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself;  and  on 
these  two  all  the  law  rests.  We  love  our  neighbors  because  they 
are  God's  creatures,  and  the  subjects  of  his  government,  and  be- 
cause he  has  commanded  us.  We  love  God  supremely,  because  he 
is  the  greatest  and  best  of  beings ;  and  we  love  other  beings,  ac- 
cording to  the  importance  of  each  in  the  universal  system  of  being. 
One  principle  pervades  both  precepts,  as  one  principle  of  gravita- 
tion binds  the  earth  to  the  sun,  and  the  parts  of  the  earth  to  each 
other.  This  law  binds  angels  to  the  throne  of  God,  and  to  each 
other ;  and  binds  men  and  angels  together,  as  fellow-subjects  of 
the  same  sovereign.  The  decalogue  is  this  law  expanded,  and 
adapted  to  the  condition  and  relations  of  mankind.  Love  is  not 
only  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  but  it  is  also  the  essence  of  gospel 
morality.  All  Christian  obedience  springs  from  it ;  and,  without 
it,  no  form  of  obedience  is  acceptable  to  God.  He  who  loves  God 
supremely,  cannot  be  guilty  of  that  unbelief  which  makes  God  a 
liar,  and  he  cannot  reflect  on  the  sins  which  he  has  committed 
against  God,  without  sincere  penitence. 

We  must  not  overlook  the  tendency  of  this  precept  to  produce 
universal  good.  Every  one  knows  how  much  the  order  and  happi- 
ness found  in  human  society,  depend  on  love.  If  all  kind  affections 
were  banished  from  the  hearts  of  men,  earth  would  be  converted  at 
once  into  a  pandemonium.  What  love  is  left  on  earth  renders  it 
tolerable,  and  the  love  which  reigns  in  heaven  makes  it  a  place  of 
bliss.  Perfect  obedience  to  the  great  law  of  love  is  sufficient  to 
render  all  creatures  happy.  It  opens,  within  the  breast,  a  peren- 
nial source  of  enjoyment ;  and  it  meets,  from  without,  the  smile 
and  blessing  of  an  approving  God. 

Though  the  religion  of  love  is  clearly  taught  in  the  book  of  God 
only,  yet,  when  we  have  learned  it  there,  we  can  discover  its  agree- 
ment with  natural  religion.  It  will  be  useful  to  observe  how  the 
moral  tendencies  of  our  nature  accord,  on  this  point,  with  the 
teachings  of  revelation. 

The  wickedness  of  man  has  been  a  subject  of  complaint  in  all 
ages.  The  ancient  heathen  complained  of  the  degeneracy  of  their 
times,  and  talked  of  a  golden  age,  long  passed,  in  which  virtue 


46  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

prevailed.  In  modern  heathen  nations,  together  with  the  depra- 
vity that  prevails,  some  sense  of  that  depravity  exists ;  and  every- 
where the  necessity  or  desirableness  of  a  more  virtuous  state  of 
society  is  admitted.  In  Christian  lands,  the  very  infidels,  who 
scoff  at  all  religion  with  one  breath,  will,  with  the  next,  satirize  the 
wickedness  of  mankind.  It  is  the  united  judgment  of  every  nation, 
and  every  age,  that  the  practice  of  men  falls  below  their  own  stan- 
dard of  virtue.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary,  in  order  to  acquire  the 
best  notions  of  virtue  that  nature  can  give  us,  to  turn  away  from 
the  practice  of  men  to  those  moral  sentiments  implanted  in  the 
human  breast,  which  condemn  this  practice,  and  urge  to  higher 
virtue. 

It  is  well  known  that  men  judge  the  actions  of  others  with  more 
severity  than  their  own.  Our  appetites  and  passions  interfere  with 
the  decisions  of  conscience,  wnen  our  own  conduct  is  the  subject 
of  examination.  Hence,  the  general  moral  sense  of  mankind  is  a 
better  standard  of  virtue  than  the  individual  conscience.  In  look- 
ing to  the  judgment  of  others,  with  a  view  to  determine  the  mo- 
rality of  our  actions,  the  judgment  of  those  is  especially  to  be  re- 
garded who  are  to  be  benefited  or  injured  by  our  deeds.  Hence, 
natural  religion  approves  the  rule  —  Do  unto  others  as  you  would, 
in  like  circumstances,  that  they  should  do  unto  you. 

When  the  vice  of  others  interferes  with  our  happiness,  we  are 
then  most  keenly  sensible  of  its  existence  and  atrocity.  However 
vague  our  notions  of  virtue  may  be,  we  always  conceive  of  it  as 
tending  to  promote  the  happiness  of  others.  Yet  it  is  not  every 
tendency  to  promote  happiness  which  we  conceive  to  be  virtuous. 
The  food  that  we  eat,  and  the  couch  on  which  we  lie,  tend  to  pro- 
mote our  happiness ;  yet  we  do  not  ascribe  virtue  to  these  inani- 
mate things.  Virtue  belongs  only  to  rational  and  moral  agents ; 
and  the  promotion  of  happiness  must  be  intentional  to  be  accounted 
virtuous.  There  is  still  another  limitation.  Men  sometimes  confer 
benefits  on  others,  with  the  expectation  of  receiving  greater  benefits 
in  return.  Where  the  motive  for  the  action  is  merely  the  benefit 
expected  in  return,  the  common  judgment  of  mankind  refuses  to 
characterize  the  deed  as  virtuous.  To  constitute  virtue,  there  must 
be  an  intentional  promotion  of  happiness  in  others ;  and  this  inten- 
tion must  be  disinterested.  Natural  religion  does  not  deny  that  a 
higher  standard  of  morality  may  exist ;  but  it  holds  that  disinte- 


DUTY    OP    LOVE    TO    GOD.  47 

rested  benevolence  is  virtue,  and  it  determines  the  morality  of 
actions  by  the  disinterested  benevolence  which  they  exhibit. 

Some  have  maintained  that  self-love  is  the  first  principle  of  vir- 
tue, its  central  affection,  which,  spreading  first  to  those  most  nearly 
related  to  us,  extends  gradually  to  others  more  remote,  and  widens 
at  length  into  universal  benevolence.  This  system  of  morality  is 
self-contradictory.  While  it  claims  to  aim  at  universal  happiness, 
it  makes  it  the  duty  of  each  individual  to  aim,  not  at  this  public 
good,  but  at  his  own  private  benefit.  Whenever  the  interest  of 
another  comes  in  conflict  with  his  own,  it  is  made  his  duty  to  aim 
at  the  latter,  and  to  promote  that  of  his  neighbor  only  so  far  as  it 
may  conduce  to  his  own.  It  is  true,  that  the  advocates  of  this  sys- 
tem bring  in  reason  as  a  restraining  influence,  and  suppose  that  it 
will  so  regulate  the  exercise  of  self-love  as  to  result  in  the  general 
good.  According  to  this  system,  if  we,  in  aiming  at  our  own  hap- 
piness, practise  fraud  and  falsehood  with  a  view  to  promote  it,  and 
find  ourselves  defeated  in  the  attainment  of  our  object,  we  may 
charge  our  failure,  not  on  the  virtuous  principle  by  which  it  is  as- 
sumed that  we  have  been  moved,  but  on  the  failure  of  our  reason 
to  restrain  and  regulate  it  so  as  to  attain  its  end.  If  it  be  said, 
that  conscience  will  not  permit  us  to  be  happy  in  the  practise  of 
fraud  and  falsehood,  and  that  self-love,  aware  of  this,  avoids  those 
practices  so  inconsistent  with  our  internal  peace,  it  is  clearly  ad- 
mitted that  conscience  is  a  higher  principle  of  our  nature,  to  the 
decisions  of  which  our  self-love  is  compelled  to  yield. 

As  virtue  aims  at  the  general  good,  it  must  favour  the  means 
necessary  for  the  attainment  of  this  end.  Civil  government  and 
laws,  enacted  and  executed  in  wisdom  and  justice,  are  highly  con- 
ducive to  the  general  welfare,  and  these  receive  the  approbation 
and  support  of  the  virtuous.  Were  an  individual  of  our  race,  by 
a  happy  exception  to  the  general  rule,  born  with  a  virtuous  bias 
of  the  mind,  instead  of  the  selfish  propensity  natural  to  mankind ; 
and  were  this  virtuous  bias  fostered  and  developed  in  his  education, 
he  would  be  found  seeking  the  good  of  all.  His  first  benefits  con- 
ferred, would  be  on  those  nearest  to  him ;  but  his  disinterested 
benevolence  would  not  stop  here.  As  his  acquaintance  extended 
into  the  ramifications  of  society,  his  desire  and  labour  for  the 
general  good  would  extend  with  it,  and  civil  government,  whole- 
some laws,  and  every  institution  tending  to  public  benefit,  would 


48  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

receive  his  cordial  approbation  and  support ;  and  every  wise  and 
righteous  governor,  and  every  subordinate  individual,  aiming  at 
the  public  good,  would  be  an  object  of  his  favour.  If  we  suppose 
the  knowledge  of  this  individual  to  increase,  and  his  virtuous  prin- 
ciples to  expand,  widening  the  exercise  of  universal  benevolence ; 
and  if,  at  length,  the  idea  of  a  God,  a  being  of  every  possible  moral 
excellence,  the  wise  and  righteous  governor  of  the  universe,  should 
be  presented ;  how  would  his  heart  be  affected  ?  Here  his  virtuous 
principles  would  find  occasion  for  their  highest  exercise,  and  would 
grow  into  religious  devotion.  This  glorious  being  would  have  the 
highest  place  in  his  admiration  and  love ;  and  the  discovery  of  his 
universal  dominion  would  produce  ineffable  joy.  Such  are  the 
affections  of  heart  which  even  natural  religion  teaches,  that  the 
knowledge  of  God's  existence  and  perfections  ought  to  produce. 

In  God's  written  Word,  we  learn  our  duty  in  a  reverse  method. 
We  are  not  left  to  trace  it  out  by  a  slow  process,  beginning  with 
the  first  exercise  of  moral  principle  in  the  heart,  and  rising  at 
length  to  the  infinite  God ;  but  the  existence  and  character  of  God 
are  immediately  presented,  and  the  first  and  chief  of  all  duties  is 
at  once  announced :  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
thy  heart."  How  sublime  !  how  appropriate  !  The  virtuous  mind 
is  open  to  receive  such  a  revelation ;  and  its  perfect  accordance 
with  the  best  teachings  of  natural  religion,  recommends  it  to  our 
understandings  and  our  hearts.  The  second  commandment,  "  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself,"  is  introduced,  not  as  leading  to 
the  first,  but  as  subordinate  to  it.  It  takes  the  place  which  pro- 
perly belongs  to  it  in  a  revelation  from  the  supreme  authority. 

Love  has  been  divided  into  benevolence,  beneficence,  and  com- 
placence. This  division  may  at  first  appear  inconsistent  with  the 
simplicity  which  has  been  ascribed  to  love.  Benevolence  is  the 
disposition  to  do  good  to  an  object,  and  beneficence  is  the  confer- 
ring of  that  good.  The  latter  is  not  properly  love,  but  the  effect 
or  manifestation  of  it.  On  the  other  hand,  complacence  includes 
the  cause  of  the  love  together  with  the  affection  itself.  Love  may 
be  exercised  toward  an  unworthy  object,  as  when  God  loves  those 
who  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  But  it  may  be  exercised  to- 
ward those  whose  moral  character  renders  them  fit  objects.  In 
this  case,  the  love  being  connected  with  approbation  of  the  cha- 
racter beloved,  is  called  complacence.     When  love  has  an  inani- 


DUTY  OF  LOVE    TO    GOD.  4S 

mate  thing  for  its  object,  as  when  Isaac  loved  savory  meat,  the 
term  refers  to  the  deriving  of  enjoyment ;  but  when  the  object  of 
love  is  a  sentient  being,  the  term  always  implies  the  conferring  of 
enjoyment,  even  when  some  pleasure  has  been  received,  or  some 
enjoyment  in  return  is  expected. 

Love  to  God  implies  cordial  approbation  of  his  moral  character. 
His  natural  attributes,  eternity,  immensity,  omnipotence,  &c,  may 
fill  us  with  admiration ;  but  these  are  not  the  proper  objects- of 
love.  If  we  worship  him  in  the  beauty  of  holiness,  the  beauty  of 
his  holiness  must  excite  the  love  of  our  hearts.  As  our  knowledge 
of  these  moral  perfections  increases,  our  delight  in  them  must  in- 
crease ;  and  this  delight  will  stimulate  to  further  study  of  them ; 
and  to  a  more  diligent  observation  of  the  various  methods  in  which 
they  are  manifested.  The  display  of  them,  even  in  the  most  ter- 
rible exhibitions  of  his  justice,  will  be  contemplated  with  reverent, 
but  approving  awe ;  and  their  united  glory,  as  seen  in  the  great 
scheme  of  redemption  by  Christ,  will  be  viewed  with  unmixed  and 
never-ceasing  delight. 

Love  to  God  includes  joy  in  his  happiness.  He  is  not  only  per- 
fectly holy,  but  perfectly  happy ;  and  it  is  our  duty  to  rejoice  in 
his  happiness.  In  loving  our  neighbor,  we  rejoice  in  his  present 
happiness,  and  desire  to  increase  it.  We  cannot  increase  the 
already  perfect  happiness  of  God,  but  we  can  rejoice  in  that  which 
he  possesses.  If  we  delight  in  the  happiness  of  God,  we  shall 
labor  to  please  him  in  all  things,  to  do  whatever  he  commands,  and 
to  advance  all  the  plans,  the  accomplishment  of  which  he  has  so 
much  at  heart.  Love,  therefore,  includes  obedience  to  his  com- 
mands, and  resignation  and  submission  to  his  will. 

Love  to  God  will  render  it  a  pleasing  task  to  examine  the  proofs 
of  his  existence,  and  to  study  those  glorious  attributes  which  render 
him  the  worthy  object  of  supreme  affection.  Let  us  enter  on  this 
study,  prompted  by  holy  love,  and  a  strong  desire  that  our  love 
may  be  increased. 


50  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   GOD. 

CHAPTER  I. 

existence  op  god. 

There  is  a  God.1 

The  doctrine  that  God  exists,  is  not  now  to  be  demonstrated  as 
a  new  truth.  It  has  been  supposed  in  all  the  preceding  pages ; 
and  the  proofs  of  it  have  been  brought  to  view,  in  various  ways. 
But,  for  the  sake  of  systematic  arrangement,  it  will  be  proper  to 
collect  these  proofs  under  one  head ;  and  a  clearer  statement  of 
them  will  tend  to  the  confirmation  of  our  faith. 

1.  Our  moral  nature  demonstrates  the  existence  of  God. 

Our  moral  nature  is  adapted  to  moral  government.  "We  find 
this  government  within  us  administered  by  conscience,  and  it  meets 
us  from  without  in  the  influence  which  we  experience  from  the 
moral  judgments  and  feelings  of  others.  It  restrains  our  appetites 
and  passions ;  and,  however  unwelcome  this  restraint  may  be  to 
our  vicious  propensities,  every  one  knows  that  it  is  conducive  to 
his  well-being. 

We  are  social  as  well  as  moral  beings.  The  circumstances  in 
which  we  enter  the  world,  and  the  propensities  which  we  bring  with 
us,  unite  to  render  the  establishment  of  society  necessary.  The 
birds  congregate  in  flocks,  and  the  bees  in  swarms,  and  their  in- 
stincts are  adapted  to  the  social  relations  which  they  form.  To 
man  in  society,  moral  principles  are  indispensable.  Banish  from 
every  member  of  human  society  the  restraints  which  his  conscience 
and  the  moral  sense  of  the  community  impose  on  him,  and  you  will 
desolate  the  earth,  or  convert  it  into  a  hell.  Brute-force,  and  dia- 
bolical cunning,  under  the  dominion  of  lawless  passions,  will  take 
the  mastery  of  the  world,  and  fill  it  with  wretchedness. 

From  the  combined  influence  of  our  moral  and  social  principles, 
civil  governments  have  originated,  and  their  existence  has  been 
found  by  experience  indispensable  to  the  well-being  of  society. 
These  governments  have  differed  very  widely  in  their  degrees  of 
excellence ;  and  some  of  them  have  been  most  unrighteously  and 

1  Gen.  i.  1 ;  Ps.  xiv.  1 ;  Mark  xii.  32 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  Heb.  iii.  4. 


EXISTENCE   OF   GOD.  51 

cruelly  administered ;  yet  the  very  worst  of  them  has  been  consi- 
dered preferable  to  wild  anarchy. 

The  notion  of  moral  government,  and  the  feeling  of  its  necessity, 
spring  up  naturally  in  the  human  mind  ;  but  no  earthly  form  of  it 
satisfies  our  desires,  or  meets  our  necessities.  Conscience  restrains 
us ;  and,  when  we  have  disregarded  its  monitions,  stings  us  with  re- 
morse ;  but  men  are  still  wicked.  Public  sentiment  stamps  vice 
with  infamy ;  but,  in  spite  of  public  sentiment,  men  are  vicious. 
Civil  government  holds  out  its  penalties,  and  the  ruler  brandishes 
his  sword ;  but  men  persevere  in  wickedness,  and  often  with  im- 
punity. The  voice  of  nature  within  us  calls  for  a  government  free 
from  these  imperfections.  If,  from  the  idea  of  a  petty  ruler  over  a 
single  tribe  or  nation,  we  ascend  to  that  of  a  moral  governor  over 
all  intelligent  creatures ;  if,  instead  of  the  imperfect  moral  judg- 
ments and  feelings  which  we  find  in  men,  we  attribute  to  this  uni- 
versal ruler,  all  possible  moral  perfections,  if  we  invest  him  with 
knowledge  sufficient  to  detect  every  crime,  and  power  sufficient  to 
manifest  his  disapprobation  of  it  in  the  most  suitable  and  effectual 
way ;  and  if  this  exalted  sovereign,  instead  of  being  far  from  us, 
is  brought  into  such  a  relation  to  us,  that  in  him  we  live,  move,  and 
have  our  being;  we  shall  have  the  most  sublime  conception  of 
moral  government,  of  which  our  minds  are  capable.  This  concep- 
tion is  presented  in  the  proposition,  there  is  a  God.  The  idea  of 
God's  existence,  as  the  moral  ruler  of  the  universe,  accords  pre- 
cisely with  the  tendencies  and  demands  of  our  moral  nature ;  and, 
without  admitting  it,  our  moral  faculties  and  the  phenomena  which 
they  exhibit,  are  totally  inexplicable. 

The  moral  principles  of  our  nature  find  occasion  for  development 
and  exercise,  in  the  relations  which  we  sustain  to  our  fellow-crea- 
tures. But,  for  their  full  development  and  exercise  nothing  furn- 
ishes opportunity,  but  the  relation  which  we  bear  to  God,  and  his 
universal  dominion.  This  exercise  of  them  constitutes  religion. 
Religion  is,  therefore,  the  perfection  of  morality ;  and  the  funda- 
mental doctrine  of  religion  is  the  existence  of  God. 

2.  The  existence  of  the  world  and  the  contrivances  which  it  con- 
tains, demonstrate  the  existence  of  God. 

While  our  moral  nature  leads  us  to  the  conception  of  God,  as 
the  moral  governor  of  the  universe,  and  to  the  belief  of  his  exist- 
ence, our  intellectual  nature  approaches  him,  as  the  Great  First 


52  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

Cau^e.  Reason  traces  the  chain  of  cause  and  effect  throughout  its 
links.  It  finds  every  link  dependent  on  that  which  precedes  it ; 
and  it  asks  on  what  does  the  entire  chain  depend  ?  It  obtains  no 
satisfactory  answer  to  this  question,  until  it  has  admitted  the  ex- 
istence of  an  eternal,  self-existent,  and  independent  being,  as  the 
first  cause  of  all  things.  Here,  and  here  only,  the  mind  finds 
repose. 

The  argument  which  has  been  most  relied  on  in  natural  religion, 
to  prove  the  existence  of  God,  is  derived  from  the  indications  of 
contrivance,  with  which  Nature  abounds.  The  adaptation  of  means 
to  ends,  and  the  accomplishment  of  purposes  by  contrivances  of  con- 
summate skill,  are  everywhere  visible.  Contrivance  implies  a  con- 
triver. The  intelligence  displayed  is  often  found  in  creatures  that 
have  no  intelligence ;  and  in  other  cases,  when  found  in  intelligent 
creatures,  it  is  manifestly  not  from  themselves ;  because  it  exists 
without  their  knowledge,  and  operates  without  their  control.  The 
contrivance  must  be  referred  to  an  intelligent  First  Cause.  This 
argument  for  the  existence  of  God,  is  of  great  practical  value,  be- 
cause it  is  presented  to  our  minds  daily,  and  hourly,  in  all  the 
works  of  Nature.  We  meet  it  in  the  sun-beams,  which  impart  to 
plants  and  animals,  the  warmth  necessary  to  life ;  and,  to  every 
eye,  the  light  without  which,  eyes  would  be  useless.  It  presents 
itself  in  the  eyes  of  every  man,  beast,  bird,  fish,  insect,  and  rep- 
tile, and  is  most  convincingly  exhibited  in  the  arrangements  for 
receiving  and  refracting  the  light,  and  employing  it  for  the  pur- 
poses of  vision ;  a  contrivance  as  truly  mechanical,  and  conformed 
to  the  laws  of  optics,  as  that  which  is  seen  in  the  structure  of  the 
telescope.  We  behold  it  in  the  descending  shower  which  fertilizes 
the  earth,  and  causes  the  grass  to  grow ;  and  in  the  bursting  germ, 
the  spreading  blade,  the  rising  stalk,  and  the  ripening  grain,  in  all 
which  a  skilful  contrivance  is  displayed,  that  infinitely  transcends 
all  human  art.  We  discover  it  in  the  instincts  by  which  the  parent 
hen  hatches  her  eggs,  and  takes  care  of  her  young  ;  and  in  the  adap- 
tation of  every  species  of  animals  on  land,  in  air,  or  in  water,  to 
their  mode  and  condition  of  life.  It  is  seen  in  the  return  of  day 
and  night,  the  revolution  of  the  seasons,  the  wind  that  sweeps  the 
sky,  and  the  vapor  that  rises  from  the  ocean,  and  floats  through 
the  atmosphere.  We  find  it  in  the  bones  of  the  body,  fitted  for 
their  respective  motions,  and  in  the  muscles  which  move  them ;  in 


EXISTENCE    OF   GOD.  53 

the  throbbing  heart,  the  circulating  blood,  the  digesting  stomach, 
and  the  heaving  lungs.  In  every  thing  which  the  eye  beholds,  or 
the  mind  contemplates,  we  discover  the  manifestations  of  the  Cre- 
ator's wisdom  and  power.  The  devotional  heart  is  struck  with  the 
evidence  of  God's  existence,  so  abundantly  displayed  in  all  his 
handiworks,  and  is  incited  to  admire  and  adore.  The  whole 
universe  becomes  a  grand  temple,  pervaded  with  the  presence  and 
glory  of  the  deity ;  and  every  place  becomes  an  altar,  on  which 
may  be  offered  to  him  the  sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanksgiving. 

3.  The  doctrine  that  there  is  a  God,  is  confirmed  by  the  com- 
mon consent  of  mankind. 

There  have  been  tribes  of  men  without  literature,  and,  to  a  great 
extent,  without  science  and  arts;  but  the  notion  of  an  invisible, 
overruling  power,  with  some  form  of  religious  worship,  has  been 
nearly,  or  quite  universal.  In  this  particular,  man  is  distinguished 
from  all  other  animals  that  inhabit  the  globe;  and  if  there  has 
been  any  portion  of  our  race  in  whom  no  idea  of  God  and  religion 
has  appeared,  it  may  be  said  of  them,  that  they  have  so  far  brutalized 
themselves,  as  to  hide  from  view  the  characteristic  distinctions  of 
human  nature.  Now,  however  it  may  be  accounted  for,  that  a  be- 
lief in  the  existence  of  God  has  prevailed  so  generally  among  man- 
kind ;  the  fact  of  its  prevalence  is  an  argument  for  the  truth  of  the 
opinion.  If  it  is  an  ancient  revelation  handed  down  by  tradition, 
that  revelation  proceeded  from  God,  and  therefore  proves  his  ex- 
istence ;  and  if  it  springs  up  naturally  in  the  human  mind,  in  the 
circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed,  what  Nature  universally 
teaches,  may  be  received  as  true. 

4.  Divine  revelation  dispels  all  doubt  as  to  the  existence  of  God. 
In  the  Bible,  the  existence  of  God  is  from  the  very  first  assumed. 

"In  the  beginning,  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth."1  The 
doctrine,  though  formally  declared  in  scarcely  a  single  passage,  is 
represented  as  fundamental  in  religion.  "  He  that  cometh  to  God, 
must  believe  that  he  is;"2  and  the  denial  of  it  is  attributed  to 
folly;  "  the  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God."3  The 
volume  of  revelation  is  a  light  emanating  from  the  Father  of  lights, 
and  is,  of  itself,  an  independent  proof  of  his  existence.  As  we 
study  its  pages,  in  his  light  we  shall  see  light ;  and  a  more  realizing 

1  Gen.  i.  1.  *  Heb.  xi.  6.  3  Ps.  xiv.  1. 


54  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

and  abiding  conviction  that  he,  the  great  Source  of  light,  exists, 
will  occupy  our  minds. 

The  perfect  harmony  between  natural  and  revealed  religion,  with 
respect  to  this  doctrine,  confirms  the  teaching  of  both.  "  The 
heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  firmament  showeth  his 
handiwork.  Day  unto  day  uttereth  speech,  and  night  unto  night 
showeth  knowledge."1  While  heaven  and  earth,  day  and  night, 
speak  for  God,  he  speaks  for  himself  in  his  inspired  word,  confirm- 
ing the  testimony  which  they  give,  and  completing  the  instruction 
which  they  convey.  Revelation  never  contradicts  or  sets  aside  the 
teachings  of  natural  religion.  God  affirms,  that  "the  invisible 
things  of  him  are  from  the  creation  of  the  world  clearly  seen,  being 
understood  by  the  things  that  are  made ;  even  his  eternal  power 
and  Godhead."2  It  is  no  derogation  from  the  authority  or  perfec- 
tion of  the  Scriptures,  that  we  study  natural  religion.  The  Scrip- 
tures themselves  direct  us  to  this  study.  "Ask  the  beasts,  and 
they  shall  teach  thee,  and  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  they  shall  tell 
thee."3  The  same  God  who  speaks  to  us  in  his  word,  speaks  to  us 
also  in  his  works ;  and  in  whatever  manner  he  speaks,  we  should 
hear,  and  receive  instruction. 

It  is  a  lamentable  proof  of  human  depravity,  that  men  should 
deny  or  disregard  the  existence  of  God.  We  read  of  the  fool,  who 
says  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God ;  of  nations  that  forget  God ; 
and  of  individuals  who  have  not  God  in  all  their  thoughts.  Such 
persons  do  not  delight  in  God ;  and  therefore  they  say,  "  Depart 
from  us  ;  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways."  Of  such  athe- 
ism, the  only  effectual  cure  is  a  new  heart.  For  the  occasional 
suggestion  of  atheistic  doubts,  with  which  a  pious  man  may  be 
harassed,  the  remedy  is,  a  diligent  study  of  God's  word  and  works, 
a  careful  marking  of  his  hand  in  Providence,  and  a  prayerful  and 
confiding  acknowledgment  of  him  in  all  our  ways.  If  we  habitu- 
ally walk  with  God,  we  shall  not  doubt  his  existence. 

The  invisibility  of  God  is  one  of  the  obstacles  to  the  exercise  of 
a  lively  faith  in  his  existence.  It  may  assist  in  removing  this  ob- 
stacle, to  reflect  that  the  human  mind  is  also  invisible ;  and  yet  we 
never  doubt  that  it  exists.  We  hear  the  words,  and  see  the  actions 
of  a  fellow-man,  and  these  indicate  to  us  the  character  and  state  of 

1  Ps.  xix.  1,  2.  .  2  Rom.  i.  20.  3  Job  xii.  7. 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  55 

his  mind,  so  as  to  excite  in  us  admiration  or  contempt,  love  or 
hatred.  If,  while  we  listen  to  his  words,  and  observe  his  actions, 
we  clearly  perceive  the  intelligence  from  which  these  words  and 
actions  proceed,  why  can  we  frot,  with  equal  clearness,  perceive  the 
intelligence  from  which  the  movements  of  nature  proceed  ?  If  we 
can  know,  admire,  and  love,  an  unseen  human  mind,  it  is  equally 
possible  to  know,  admire,  and  love  an  unseen  God. 


CHAPTER  II. 

ATTRIBUTES     OF     GOD. 


As  we  acquire  knowledge  of  other  beings,  and  of  the  relations 
which  they  hold  to  us,  opportunity  is  given  for  the  development  of 
our  moral  principles,  and  the  exercise  of  our  moral  feelings.  It 
accords  with  the  dictates  of  individual  conscience,  with  the  moral 
judgments  common  to  mankind,  and  with  the  teachings  of  God's 
word,  that  the  feelings  which  we  exercise,  and  the'  actions  which 
we  perform  towards  others,  should  have  regard  to  their  characters 
and  their  relations  to  us.  To  understand  our  duty  towards  God, 
we  must  know  his  character.  It  is  not  enough  to  believe  that  he 
exists,  but  we  should  labour  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  him.  Let 
us,  then,  reverently  inquire,  Who  is  the  Lord  ? 

Section  I.  — UNITY. 

There  is  but  one  God.1 

The  heathen  nations  have  worshipped  many  gods ;  but  the  in- 
spired volume  throughout  inculcates  the  doctrine,  that  there  is  but 
one  God.  Moses  said,  "Hear,  0  Israel,  the  Lord  our  God  is  one 
Lord;"2  and,  in  the  New  Testament,  the  same  truth  is  taught: 
"There  is  one  God,  and  one  Mediator  ;"3  "  To  us  there  is  but  one 
God."4 

1  Deut.  vi.  4 ;  Ps.  lxxxvi.  10 ;  Mark  xii.  29,  32 ;  John  xvii.  3 ;  Gal.  iii.  20 ; 
Eph.  iv.  6 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  5 ;  James  ii.  19. 
9  Deut.  vi.  4.  3 1  Tim.  ii.  5.  4 1  Cor.  viii.  6. 


56  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

It  is  not  clear  that  the  unity  of  God  can  be  proved  by  natural 
religion.  In  some  of  the  reasonings  which  have  been  relied  on, 
the  thing  to  be  proved  is  assumed.  The  most  satisfactory  argu- 
ment is  derived  from  the  uniformity  of  counsel,  which  appears  in 
the  works  of  creation  and  providence.  The  same  laws  of  Nature 
prevail  everywhere ;  so  that,  in  passing  from  one  region  to  another, 
we  never  feel  that  we  have  entered  the  dominion  of  another  Lord. 
Light  which  emanates  from  the  remote  fixed  stars,  possesses  the 
same  properties,  and  obeys  the  same  laws,  as  that  which  comes 
from  the  sun  of  our  own  system. 

The  proof  from  revelation  is  clear  and  decisive.  It  is  true,  that 
plural  names  of  the  deity  are  frequently  used  in  the  Old  Testament ; 
but  it  is  manifest  that  they  were  not  designed  to  teach  the  doctrine 
of  polytheism.  In  Deut.  vi.  4,  the  word  "God"  is  plural,  in  the 
original  Hebrew ;  but  the  whole  passage  contains  the  most  une- 
quivocal declaration  of  the  unity  of  God.  In  Gen.  i.  1,  the  name 
"God"  is  plural,  but  the  verb  "created"  is  singular,  and  therefore 
bars  out  all  inference  in  favour  of  polytheism.  In  several  pas- 
sages, plural  pronouns  are  used  when  God  speaks  of  himself. 
"  Let  us  make  man  ;" l  "  Let  us  go  down ;" 2  "  The  man  is  become 
as  one  of  us;"3  these  passages,  and  especially  the  last  of  them, 
cannot  well  be  reconciled  with  the  doctrine  of  God's  unity,  so 
abundantly  taught  elsewhere,  without  supposing  a  reference  to  the 
doctrine  of  the  trinity,  which  will  be  considered  hereafter. 

The  unity  of  God  renders  his  moral  government  one,  uniting  the 
subjects  of  it  into  one  great  empire.  It  leaves  us  in  no  doubt  to 
whom  our  allegiance  is  due  ;  and  it  fixes  one  centre  in  the  universe 
to  which  the  affections  of  all  hearts  should  be  directed.  It  tends 
to  unite  the  people  of  God:  as  we  have  "one  God,",  so  we  have 
"one  body,  and  one  spirit."4 

Section  II.  — SPIRITUALITY. 

God  is  a  Spirit.5 

By  our  external  senses  we  obtain  knowledge  of  properties 
which  belong  to  a  class  of  substances  called  matter;  such  as 
extension,    solidity   or   impenetrability,    divisibility,   figure,   color. 

1  Gen.  i.  26.  2  Gen.  xi.  7.  3  Gen.  iii.  22. 

4  Eph.  iv.  4,  6.  6  John  iv.  24 ;  Is.  xxxi.  3  ;  Heb.  xii.  9. 


ATTEIBUTES    OF    GOD.  57 

By  consciousness,  we  have  knowledge  of  our  own  thoughts  and 
feelings ;  and  these  we  ascribe  to  a  substance,  called  mind, 
which  is  capable  of  perceiving,  remembering,  comparing,  judging, 
reasoning,  and  willing.  The  distinction  between  these  two  classes 
of  substances  is  recognised  in  the  judgments  of  all  men.  We  never 
attribute  thought  to  fire,  air,  earth,  or  water ;  and  we  never  con- 
ceive of  mind  as  round  or  square,  black  or  white.  The  properties 
which  we  discover  in  our  own  minds,  we  attribute  to  the  minds  of 
others ;  and  we  readily  conceive  the  existence  of  these  properties 
in  beings  of  a  different  order.  The  term  spirit  is  used  to  denote 
an  immaterial  and  intelligent  substance,  or  being;  one  which  is 
without  the  peculiar  properties  of  matter,  and  possesses  properties 
analogous  to  those  of  the  human  mind.  In  this  sense,  God  is  a 
spirit.  He  is  not  extended,  solid,  and  divisible,  like  a  rock,  a  tree, 
or  a  human  body ;  but  thinks  and  wills,  in  a  manner  free  from  all 
imperfection. 

The  .texts  of  Scripture  which  directly  teach  the  spirituality  of 
God,  are  few.  It  may  be  inferred  from  Isaiah  xxxi.  3 :  "  The 
Egyptians  are  men,  and  not  God ;  and  their  horses  flesh,  and  not 
spirit."  The  foundation  of  the  parallelism,  in  this  passage,  is  that 
God  is  a  spirit.  It  may  be  inferred,  also,  from  the  language  of 
Scripture,  in  which  God  is  called  the  Father  of  spirits :  "  We  have 
had  fathers  of  our  flesh,  which  corrected  us,  and  we  gave  them 
reverence ;  shall  we  not  much  rather  be  in  subjection  to  the  Father 
of  spirits,  and  live?"1  A  father  and  his  children  possess  a  com- 
mon nature,  and,  as  the  fathers  of  our  flesh,  are  flesh,  so,  the 
Father  of  our  spirits,  is  spirit.  There  is  one  passage  which  teaches 
the  doctrine  expressly,  "  God  is  a  spirit  ;"2  and  this  would  be  suffi- 
cient to  prove  it,  if  it  were  taught  nowhere  else. 

It  is  no  objection  to  the  doctrine  of  God's  spirituality,  that 
bodily  parts,  as  hands,  feet,  eyes,  &c,  are  ascribed  to  him.  These 
are  manifestly  mere  accommodations  of  language,  because  we  have 
no  words  more  suitable  to  express  the  operations  of  the  divine 
mind.  If  it  were  inadmissible  to  speak  of  God's  eyes,  because  he 
lias  not  material  organs  of  vision,  as  we  have,  it  would  also  be  in- 
admissible to  speak  of  God's  seeing,  because  he  does  not  see  by 
means  of  material  light,  as  we  do ;  or  to  speak  of  God's  thinking, 
because  his  thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts. 

1  Heb.  xii.  9.  2  John  iv.  24. 


58  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

The  practical  use  of  this  doctrine  is  taught  by  Christ :  "  God  is 
a  spirit,  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and 
in  truth."1  In  offering  him  homage,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  come 
before  him  with  a  bended  knee,  or  a  prostrate  body ;  but  our  minds, 
our  spiritual  nature,  must  render  the  homage,  or  it  will  be  unac- 
ceptable to  him. 

The  spirituality  of  God  is  the  foundation  of  the  second  com- 
mandment in  the  decalogue  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any 
graven  image,  or  the  likeness  of  anything  that  is  in  heaven  above, 
or  that  is  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  that  is  in  the  water  under  the 
earth;  thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor  serve  them."2 
The  reason  assigned  for  this  commandment  is,  that  the  Israelites 
saw  no  form  when  God  manifested  his  presence  to  them  at  Mount 
Sinai.3  He  appeared  to  them  in  cloud  and  fire.  A  pillar  of  cloud 
and  fire  went  before  the  Israelites  in  their  journey  through  the 
wilderness,  as  a  token  of  the  divine  presence.  This  token  appeared 
at  the  tabernacle ;  and  afterwards  in  the  temple  built  and  dedicated 
by  Solomon.  God  appeared  to  Moses  in  a  burning  bush.  We  are 
not  to  understand  from  these  things,  that  God  is  either  cloud  or 
fire.  These  are  material,  and  not  spiritual  substances.  As  what 
is  purely  spiritual  cannot  be  perceived  by  our  bodily  senses,  God 
was  pleased  to  employ  these  material  symbols  to  give  a  sensible 
demonstration  of  his  presence.  For  the  same  reason,  he  sometimes 
presented  himself  in  human  form.  In  all  these  material  manifest- 
ations of  himself,  which  are  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament,  there 
is  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  the  second  person  in  the  Godhead, 
who  thus  exhibited  himself;  the  same  that  afterwards  appeared  in 
human  flesh,  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  called  the  Angel 
of  the  Lord,  the  Angel  of  the  Lord's  presence,  and  yet  he  is  called 
Jehovah ;  and  the  reverence  due  to  Jehovah  is  claimed  for  him.  A 
created  angel  is  not  entitled  to  this  name,  or  this  honour ;  but  they 
both  belong  to  the  Son  of  God,  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  who, 
after  his  incarnation,  was  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  This  opinion 
is  confirmed  by  the  teachings  of  the  New  Testament:  "No  man 
hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared  him."4  Of  the  Father, 
Jesus  says,  "  Ye  have  neither  heard  his  voice  at  any  time,  nor  seen 

»  John  iv.  24.         *  Ex.  xx.  4,  5.         3  Deut.  iv.  12-18.         4  John  i.  18. 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  59 

his  shape  j"1  and  he  said  to  his  disciples,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me, 
hath  seen  the  Father."2  A  comparison  of  these  passages  may 
satisfy  us,  that  all  the  manifestations  of  the  deity  to  human  senses, 
whether  visible  or  audible,  were  made  in  the  person  of  the  Son,  or 
Word  of  God. 

The  spirituality  of  God  contradicts  the  pantheistic  notion  that 
the  universe  is  God.  The  universe  is  not  spirit.  In  its  material 
fabric,  intelligence  is  displayed ;  but  this  intelligence  does  not  belong 
to  the  material  fabric  itself,  for  matter  cannot  think  or  know.  To 
present  our  religious  devotions  to  the  universe,  is  an  idolatry  not 
less  degrading  than  that  of  the  most  stupid  of  the  heathen  nations. 
They  worship  stocks  and  stones ;  but  this  philosophy  clothes  every 
clod  of  earth  with  divinity,  and  entitles  it  to  our  worship.  The 
heathen  render  divine  honors  to  a  few  men,  whom,  for  extraordinary 
merit,  they  enroll  among  the  gods ;  but  this  notion  directs  our  wor- 
ship to  every  man,  and  to  every  beast  of  the  field.  It  is  a  notion 
perfectly  adapted  to  crush  the  outflowings  of  the  devotional  heart, 
as  they  rise  to  the  one,  indivisible,  spiritual  intelligence,  to  whom 
alone  divine  worship  is  due. 

The  notion,  that  God  is  the  Soul  of  the  universe,  may  not  be 
liable  to  precisely  the  same  objection.  But  what  does  the  propo- 
sition mean  ?  The  only  sense  in  which  we  can  possibly  understand 
that  God  is  the  Soul  of  the  universe,  is,  that  he  sustains  a  relation 
to  the  universe  analogous  to  that  which  the  human  soul  sustains  to 
the  body  with  which  it  is  connected.  But  how  extensive  is  this 
analogy  ?  The  soul  did  not  create  the  matter  of  which  the  body  is 
made ;  did  not  form  the  skilfully  wrought  parts  of  the  wonderful 
machinery,  or  contrive  their  mysterious  movements,  which  it  studies 
with  admiration,  and  comprehends  only  in  very  small  part.  The 
soul  exercises  but  a  very  limited  control  over  the  body.  The  mus- 
cles of  voluntary  motion  are  under  its  command,  and  move  at  its 
will ;  and,  in  this  fact,  we  may  discover  a  faint  analogy  to  the 
operation  of  Him,  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His 
will,  and  in  whom  every  creature  lives,  moves,  and  has  its  being. 
An  analogy  so  meager  as  this  is  not  sufficient  to  justify  the  meta- 
phorical language  in  which  the  proposition  is  stated.  Yet,  while 
we  reject  the  proposition,  we  may  derive  from  it  a  profitable  sug- 

1  John  v.  37.  2  John  xiv.  9. 


60  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

gestion.  In  our  intercourse  with  the  myriads  of  mankind,  we  per- 
ceive and  acknowledge,  in  the  movements  of  every  human  limb,  in 
the  changes  of  every  human  countenance,  and  in  the  words  which 
fall  from  every  human  tongue,  the  power  and  intelligence  of  an 
operating  human  soul.  Equally  obvious,  and  infinitely  more  extent 
sive,  is  the  control  which  God  exercises,  at  every  moment,  over 
every  part  of  the  universe.  With  a  proper  view  of  God's  spiritu- 
ality, and  of  his  operative  control  over  the  world  and  everything 
in  it,  our  minds  would  hold  intercourse  with  his  mind,  as  direct  and 
undoubted  as  that  which  we  hold  with  the  minds  of  our  fellow-men, 
and  one  more  constant,  and  more  elevating  and  delightful. 

Section  III.  —  IMME  N  SI  T  Y,    OMNIPRESENCE. 

God  is  Everywhere.1 

Every  material  thing  in  the  universe  is  somewhere.  The  sun 
has  its  place ;  the  earth  also,  and  every  grain  of  sand,  and  every 
drop  of  water.  The  drops  of  water  may  change  their  place  per- 
petually, but  every  drop  has,  for  each  moment,  its  own  place,  to 
the  exclusion  of  all  other  matter  in  the  universe. 

In  our  conceptions  of  the  human  mind  we  assign  place  to  it 
also,  though  in  a  different  manner.  We  do  not  attribute  to  it 
length,  breadth,  and  thickness,  as  to  a  block  of  marble,  which  can 
be  measured  by  feet  and  inches ;  but  we  conceive  of  it  as  present 
in  the  human  body,  with  which  it  is  connected,  and  absent  from 
another,  with  which  it  is  not  connected.  Each  mind  is  operated 
on  by  impressions  made  on  the  organs  of  sense  which  belong  to  its 
own  body ;  and  operates  by  its  volitions  on  the  muscles  of  motion 
which  belong  to  that  body.  In  this  view,  we  conceive  of  each 
mind  as  present  in  its  own  body,  and  not  elsewhere ;  and  we  con- 
ceive of  changing  the  place  of  the  mind,  while  its  connection  with 
the  body  continues,  only  by  a  change  in  the  place  of  the  body. 

When  we  conceive  of  finite  spiritual  beings  as  angels,  we  assign 
to  each  some  place ;  because  his  operation,  though  not  confined 
like  that  of  the  human  mind,  to  a  particular  material  body,  is 
nevertheless  limited.  Such  conception  accords  with  the  teaching 
of  Scripture,  in  which  angels  are  represented  as  moving  from  place 
to  place,  to  execute  the  will  of  their  Sovereign.     So  the  angei 

1 1  Kings  viii.  27  ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  7 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  23. 


ATTRIBUTES     OF   GOD.  61 

came  to  Daniel,1  and  to  Peter ; 2  and  so  one  is  represented  as  fly- 
ing through  the  midst  of  heaven.3 

We  must  not  conceive  of  God's  omnipresence  as  if  it  were  ma- 
terial. We  say  that  the  atmosphere  is  present  at  every  part  of  the 
earth's  surface  ;  but  this  is  not  strictly  true.  It  is  not  the  whole, 
but  merely  a  small  part  of  the  atmosphere,  which  is  present  at 
each  place;  God  is  indivisible.  We  cannot  say,  that  a  part  of  his 
essence  is  here,  and  a  part  yonder.  If  this  were  the  mode  of  God's 
omnipresence  in  universal  space,  he  would  be  infinitely  divided, 
and  only  an  infinitely  small  part  of  him  would  be  present  at  each 
place.  It  would  not  be  the  whole  deity,  that  takes  cognizance  of 
our  actions,  and  listens  to  our  petitions.  This  notion  is  unfavor- 
able to  piety,  and  opposed  to  the  true  sense  of  Scripture :  "  The 
eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the 
good."4  "The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  the  righteous,  and  his 
ears  are  open  unto  their  prayers."5 

There  are  passages  of  Scripture  which  speak  of  God's  removing 
from  one  place  to  another ;  of  his  approaching  and  departing ;  of 
his  dwelling  in  heaven,  and  of  his  coming  near  to  his  people,  and 
taking  up  his  abode  with  them.  These  are  manifestly  accommoda- 
tions of  language ;  just  as  when  eyes  or  hands  are  attributed  to 
him.  They  refer  to  the  manifestations  of  his  presence  in  his 
various  works,  and  dispensations,  in  which  such  changes  take  place, 
as  are  appropriately  and  impressively  expressed  by  this  language. 

When  we  deny  a  material  omnipresence  of  God,  as  if  his  essence 
were  divided  and  diffused ;  and  when  we  maintain  that  the  whole  deity 
is  everywhere  present  by  his  energy  and  operation,  it  is  not  to  be 
understood  that  we  deny  the  essential  omnipresence  of  God.  In 
whatever  manner  his  essence  is  present  anywhere,  it  is  present 
everywhere.  What  the  mode  of  that  presence  is,  we  know  not. 
We  know  not  the  essence  of  the  human  mind,  nor  the  mode  of  its 
presence  in  the  body ;  much  less  can  we  comprehend  the  essence 
of  the  infinite  God,  or  the  mode  of  his  omnipresence.  To  that  in- 
comprehensible property  of  his  nature,  by  which  he  is  capable  of 
being  wholly  present  at  the  same  moment,  with  every  one  of  his 
creatures,  without  division  of  his  essence,  and  without  removal  from 


1  Dan.  ix.  23.  •  2  Acts  xii.  7.   '  3  Rev.  xiv.  6. 

4  Prov.  xv.  3.  6 1  Pet.  iii.  12. 


62  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

place  to  place,  the  name  immensity  has  been  given.  The  essence 
of  God  is  immense  or  unmeasured,  because  it  is  unmeasurable.  It 
is  unmeasurable,  because  it  is  spiritual,  and,  therefore,  without  such 
dimensions  as  may  be  measured  by  feet  and  inches ;  and  because, 
in  whatever  sense  dimensions  may  be  ascribed  to  it,  these  dimen- 
sions are  boundless.  Time  has  a  dimension  not  to  be  measured  by 
feet  and  inches :  and  we  may  say  of  time,  that  it  is  omnipresent. 
The  same  moment  exists  in  Europe  and  America,  at  Saturn,  and 
at  the  centre  of  the  earth.  The  omnipresence  of  time  does  not 
explain  the  omnipresence  of  God,  but  it  may  help  us  to  admit  the 
possibility  of  omnipresence  without  division  of  essence,  or  removal 
of  place.  But  the  omnipresence  of  time  is  not  immensity;  for 
time  has  its  measure,  and  a  moment  is  not  eternity. 

It  is  not  derogatory  to  the  dignity  and  glory  of  God,  that  he  is 
present  everywhere.  There  are  foul  places  where  human  beings 
would  prefer  not  to  be ;  but  they  do  not  affect  the  Deity  as  they 
affect  men.  The  sun-beams  fall  on  them  without  being  polluted ; 
and  the  holy  God  cannot  be  contaminated  by  them.  There  are 
scenes  of  wickedness,  from  which  a  good  man  will  turn  away  with 
abhorrence,  and,  in  the  figurative  language  of  Scripture,  God  is 
"  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil:"1  yet,  in  another  place  of 
scripture,  language  no  less  figurative  teaches  us  that  the  eyes  of 
God  behold  the  evil  as  well  as  the  good.2  He  witnesses,  while  he 
abhors. 

A  man  who  sincerely  believes  the  omnipresence  of  God,  cannot 
be  indifferent  to  religion.  To  realize  that  the  moral  Governor  of 
the  universe  is  ever  near,  in  all  his  holiness  and  power,  and  as 
much  present  as  if  he  were  nowhere  else,  must  awaken  solicitude. 
When  a  sense  of  guilt  oppresses,  the  presence  of  such  a  companion 
becomes  intolerable.  The  guilty  man  strives  to  flee  from  the  pres- 
ence of  God,  as  Jonah  did ;  but  the  doctrine  of  God's  omnipres- 
ence teaches  him  that  the  attempt  is  unavailing.  The  power 
of  conscience  tormenting  the  guilty  man,  wherever  he  goes,  is  ter- 
rible ;  but  the  presence  of  the  God  against  whom  he  has  sinned, 
and  whose  wrath  he  dreads,  is  still  more  terrible.  To  the  soul, 
reconciled  to  God,  the  doctrine  is  full  of  consolation.  In  every 
place,  in  every  condition,  to  have  with  us  an  almighty  friend,  a 


»Hab.  i.  13.  2Prov.  xv.  3. 


ATTRIBUTES    OF   GOD.  63 

kind  father,  is  a  source  of  unspeakable  comfort  and  joy.  We  need 
not  fear,  though  we  pass  through  fire  or  flood,  if  God  be  with  us. 
Even  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  we  may  fear  no  evil.  In 
every  circumstance  and  trial,  it  conduces  to  holiness,  to  know  that 
God  is  present. 

Section  IV.— ETERNITY  AND   IMMUTABILITY. 

God  is  Eternal.1 

In  our  knowledge  of  the  objects  which  surround  us,  we  include 
not  only  their  present  state,  but  their  continued  existence,  and  the 
changes  which  they  undergo.  Some  things  pass  before  our  eyes, 
as  visions  of  the  moment ;  others,  as  the  rocks,  the  sun,  the  stars, 
outlast  many  generations  of  men.  Few  living  creatures  remain  in 
life  as  long  as  man ;  but  the  shortness  of  his  life  is  a  subject  of 
daily  remark,  and  of  impressive  scriptural  representation.2  The 
duration  of  the  deity  is  exhibited  in  contrast  thus :  "  Lord,  make 
me  know  mine  end,  and  the  measure  of  my  days,  what  it  is  ;  that  I 
may  know  how  frail  I  am.  Behold,  thou  hast  made  my  days  as  a 
handbreadth,  and  mine  age  is  as  nothing  before  thee."3  A 
thousand  years,  include  many  of  the  ordinary  generations  of  man- 
kind ;  yet,  in  comparison  with  God's  duration,  they  are  said  to  be 
"  as  yesterday  when  it  is  past,  and  as  a  watch  in  the  night."4  To- 
morrow, while  future,  may  appear  to  our  view,  as  a  duration  of 
considerable  length ;  but  yesterday,  when  it  is  past,  how  short  it 
is  !  An  hour  of  the  day,  filled  with  a  great  variety  of  incidents, 
which  it  might  require  many  hours  to  narrate,  is  lengthened  out  in 
our  view;  but  how  short,  how  contracted  is  a  watch  of  the  night, 
in  which  we  sleep  and  awake,  and  know  not  that  time  has  passed ! 
Such,  to  the  view  of  God,  is  the  long  period  of  a  thousand  years. 
To  heighten  our  conception  of  God's  eternity,  it  is  contrasted  with 
the  duration  of  those  natural  things  which  appear  to  possess  the 
greatest  stability :  "  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning,  hast  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  work  of  thy 
hands ;  they  shall  perish,  but  thou  remainest ;  and  they  all  shall 
wax  old  as  doth  a  garment :  and  as  a  vesture  shalt  thou  fold  them 
up,  and  they  shall  be  changed ;  but  thou  art  the  same,  and  thy 

*Deut.  xxxii.  40;   xxxiii.  27;   Ps.  ix.  7;  xe.  2;   cii.  27;  cxlvi.  10;  Isaiah 
lvii.  15;  lxiii.  16  ;  Jer.  x.  10;  Lam.  v.  19;  1  Tim.  i.  17. 
2 1  Chron.  xxix.  15  ;  Job  vii.  6;  Job  ix.  25, 26.  3  Ps.  xxxix.  4,  5.    4  Ps.  xc.  4. 


64  DOCTBINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

years  shall  not  fail."1  But  when  we  have  enlarged  our  concep- 
tions to  the  utmost,  they  still  utterly  fail  to  comprehend  the  vast 
subject.  We  stretch  our  thoughts  backward  and  forward ;  but  no 
beginning  or  end  of  God's  existence  appears.  To  relieve  our  over- 
stretched imagination,  and  to  stop  the  unavailing  effort  to  compre- 
hend what  is  incomprehensible,  we  bring  in  the  negative  idea — no 
beginning,  no  end.  Duration  without  beginning  and  without  end, 
becomes  the  expression  of  God's  eternity. 

That  every  thing,  except  God,  had  a  beginning,  is  a  doctrine  of 
revelation:  "In  the  beginning,  God  created  the  heavens  and  the 
earth.2  This  doctrine,  philosophy  cannot  contradict,  and  perhaps 
cannot  fully  demonstrate.  But  there  are  manifestations  of  design, 
even  in  unorganized  matter,  in  the  kinds  and  quantities  that  exist, 
and  the  uses  to  which  they  are  adapted.  If  matter  is  eternal,  or 
a  production  of  chance,  why  is  it  not  all  of  one  kind ;  and  why 
are  the  kinds  of  it,  and  the  proportionate  quantities  of  each,  so 
apparently  the  result  of  design?  Revelation  answers  this  by  the 
declaration,   "  In  wisdom  thou  hast  made  them  all.3 

In  contemplating  God  as  the  First  Cause,  we  consider  his  exist- 
ence uncaused.  As  we  look  back  through  duration  past,  till  we 
find  one  existence  that  is  without  beginning,  so  we  look  back 
through  the  long  chain  of  effect  and  cause,  till  we  have  found  one 
existence  that  is  without  cause.  Sometimes,  however,  the  concep- 
tion is  clothed  in  language  that  has  not  merely  negative  import. 
Not  satisfied  with  the  merely  negative  idea,  without  cause,  learned 
men  labor  to  assign  a  cause  for  God's  existence,  and  represent  it 
as  the  cause  of  itself,  or  as  including  its  cause  within  itself.  They 
express  this,  by  saying,  that  God  is  self-existent.  This  mode  of 
expression  accommodates  our  tendency  to  philosophize  ;  but  it  per- 
haps conveys  no  other  intelligible  idea,  than  that  God's  existence 
is  without  cause. 

Another  philosophical  expression,  God  necessarily  exists,  seems 
to  possess  some  deep  meaning ;  but  when  we  labor  to  explore  its 
depths,  we  shall,  perhaps,  find  in  it  no.  other  intelligible  idea,  than 
that  God  exists,  and  has  always  existed.  His  existence  has 
always  rendered  his  non-existence  impossible,  because  it  is  impos- 
sible for  anything  to  be,  and  not  to  be,  at  the  same  time.     If  philo- 


»  Heb.  i.  10,  11,  12.  2Gen.  i.  1.  3  Ps.  civ.  24. 


ATTRIBUTES    OF   GOD.  65 

sophy  goes  behind  the  existence  of  God,  in  search  of  a  cause 
necessitating  his  being,  she  wanders  out  of  her  proper  province. 
We  may  permit  her  to  trace  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  as  far 
as  that  relation  is  to  be  found  ;  but  when  she  has  arrived  at  the 
uncaused  existence  of  the  eternal  One,  we  should  say  to  her,  thus 
far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  further. 

The  eternity  of  God  has  been  defined,  existence  without  begin- 
ning, without  end,  and  without  succession.  Time  with  us,  is  past, 
present,  and  future ;  but  God's  existence  is  believed  to  be  a  per- 
petual now.  The  subject  is  beyond  our  comprehension ;  but  it  is 
most  reasonable  to  conclude,  that  God's  mode  of  existence  differs 
from  ours,  as  it  respects  time,  as  well  as  space ;  and  that,  as  he  ex- 
ists equally  at  every  point  of  space,  without  division  of  his  im- 
mensity, so  he  equally  exists  at  every  moment  of  time,  without 
division  of  his  eternity.  Possibly  this  may  be  intimated  in  the 
Scripture  phrase,  "inhabiteth  eternity."1  We  dwell  in  time, 
a  habitation  with  its  various  apartments ;  and  we  pass  from  one 
to  another  in  order ;  but  God's  habitation  is  undivided  eternity. 
Our  lifetime  has  its  parts,  childhood,  boyhood,  manhood,  and  old 
age ;  but  God's  life  is  as  indivisible  as  his  essence. 

God  is  Unchangeable.2 

The  doctrine  of  God's  eternity,  and  that  of  his  unchangeableness, 
are  nearly  allied  to  each  other ;  and  if  his  eternity  excludes  suc- 
cession, it  must  also  exclude  the  possibility  of  change.  Unchange- 
ableness applies  not  only  to  his  essence,  but  also  to  his  attributes. 
His  spirituality  is  ever  the  same,  his  omnipresence  the  same,  and 
so  of  the  rest.  His  purpose,  also,  is  unchangeable ;  it  is  called 
"his  eternal  purpose."3  He  says:  "My  counsel  shall  stand."4 
He  is  said,  in  Scripture,  to  repent;  but,  in  the  same  chapter5  in 
which  it  is  twice  said  that  God  repented,  it  is  also  stated :  "  He  is 
not  a  man,  that  he  should  repent."  We  cannot  suppose  that  the 
sacred  writer  intended  to  contradict  himself  palpably  in  the  com- 
pass of  a  few  verses.  In  accommodation  to  our  modes  of  speaking, 
God  is  said  to  repent  when  he  effects  such  a  change  in  his  work  as 
would,  in  human  actions,  proceed  from  repentance.  Repentance, 
in  men,  implies  grief  of  mind,  and  change  of  work.     The  former  is 

1  Is.  Ivii.  15. 

2  Num.  xxiii.  19 ;  Ps.  cii.  27;  Mai.  iii.  6  ;  Heb.  i.  12 ;  xiii.  8  ;  Jas.  i.  17. 

3  Eph.  iii.  11.  4  Is.  xlvi.  10.  5  1  Sam.  xv. 

5 


66  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

inconsistent  with  the  perfection  of  God,  but  the  latter  is  not.  To 
destroy  the  world  by  the  deluge,  no  more  implied  a  change  in  God 
than  to  create  it  at  first.  Each  act  effected  a  great  change,  but  in 
both  God  remained  unchanged.  No  other  language  could  so  im- 
pressively represent  God's  abhorrence  of  man's  wickedness  to  be 
the  cause  of  the  deluge,  as  that  used  by  the  sacred  historian  :  "It 
repented  the  Lord  that  he  had  made  man  on  the  earth,  and  it 
grieved  him  at  his  heart."1 

When  we  contemplate  the  shortness  of  human  life,  and  the  in- 
cessant change  of  everything  with  which  we  have  to  do  on  earth, 
and  of  ourselves,  as  we  pass  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  we  may 
well  exclaim,  as  we  look  up  to  the  eternal  and  unchangeable  God, 
"Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him."  A  sense  of 
our  comparative  nothingness  is  eminently  conducive  to  humility. 
A  view  of  God's  eternity  and  unchangeableness  is  necessary  to  the 
due  exercise  of  confidence  in  him.  It  is  folly  to  trust  in  uncertain 
riches,  and  in  the  things  which  perish  in  the  using  of  them ;  but 
we  wisely  put  our  trust  in  the  living  God.  The  men  with  whom 
we  converse  are  passing  away ;  the  condition  of  life  is  perpetually 
changing ;  we  are,  in  all  our  relations  to  earthly  things,  as  if  we 
were  on  the  surface  of  a  restless  ocean ;  but  God  is  as  a  rock  amidst 
the  fluctuating  waters ;  and,  while  we  repose  unshaken  confidence 
in  him,  our  feet  stand  firmly,  and  we  can  look  without  dismay  on 
the  troubled  scene  around  us.  Men  of  age  receive  our  reverence, 
and  the  counsels  of  their  long  experience  are  highly  prized.  Who 
will  not  reverence  the  Ancient  of  Days,  the  eternal  God ;  and  who 
will  reject  the  counsel  of  Him,  "whose  goings  forth  have  been 
from  of  old,  from  everlasting"?2 

The  immutability  of  God  has  been  made  a  pretext  for  restraining 
prayer  before  him  ;  but  this  is  wrong.  Even  if  the  giving  or  with- 
holding of  the  blessings  desired  were  unaffected  by  the  prayer, 
there  still  remains  sufficient  reason  for  perseverance  in  offering  the 
petition.  The  devotional  feeling  is  acceptable  to  God,  and  profit- 
able to  the  soul.  If  prayer  will  not  bring  God  to  the  soul,  it  will, 
at  least,  bring  the  soul  to  God.  A  man  in  a  boat,  on  a  dangerous 
water,  may  be  saved  by  means  of  a  rope  thrown  to  him  from  the 
shore.     When  he  pulls,  though  the  rock  to  which  the  other  end  of 


1  Gen.  vi.  6.  8  Micah  v.  2. 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  67 

the  rope  may  be  fastened  does  not  come  to  the  boat,  the  boat  comes 
to  the  rock.     So  prayer  brings  the  soul  to  God. 

But  it  is  not  true,  that  the  giving  or  withholding  of  the  blessing 
desired  is  unaffected  by  the  petition  presented.  Though  God  is 
unchangeable,  his  operation  changes  in  its  effect  on  his  creatures, 
according  to  their  changing  character  and  circumstances.  The 
same  sun  hardens  clay  and  softens  wax.  Adam  was  in  God's  favor 
before  he  sinned ;  but  afterwards  was  under  his  displeasure.  When 
a  man  becomes  converted,  he  is  removed  from  under  the  wrath  of 
God  into  a  state  of  favor  with  him,  and  all  things  now  work  toge- 
ther for  his  good.  In  all  this,  God  changes  not.  God  has,  in 
time  past,  bestowed  blessings  in  answer  to  prayer,  and  his  un- 
changeableness  encourages  the  hope  that  he  will  do  so  in  time  to 
come.  His  whole  plan  has  been  so  arranged,  in  his  infinite  wisdom, 
that  many  of  his  blessings  are  bestowed  only  in  answer  to  prayer. 
The  connection  between  the  prayer  and  the  bestowment  of  the 
blessing,  is  as  fixed  by  the  divine  appointment  as  that  between  cause 
and  effect  in  natural  things.  The  unchangeableness  of  God,  there- 
fore, instead  of  being  a  reason  for  restraining  prayer,  renders 
prayer  indispensable ;  for  our  weak  petitions  have  their  effect  with 
God,  according  to  his  immutable  purpose ;  and,  to  deny  the  possi- 
bility of  this,  would  be  to  deny  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  intercession. 

Section  V.  — OMNI  SCIENCE. 

God  knows  all  things.1 

In  their  stupidity,  men  have  worshipped  gods  of  wood  and  stone, 
which,  having  eyes,  see  not,  and  having  ears,  hear  not ;  but  the 
deity  that  the  Bible  makes  known,  is  a  God  of  knowledge.2  Even 
natural  religion  teaches  that  the  maker  and  governor  of  the  world 
must  possess  intelligence ;  and  the  degrading  idolatry  which  wor- 
shipped birds,  four-footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things,  was  contrary 
to  reason,  as  well  as  to  revelation. 

The  mode  of  God's  knowledge  we  cannot  comprehend.  Scrip- 
ture and  reason  unite  in  teaching  that  his  thoughts  are  not  as  our 
thoughts.  We  derive  our  best  conception  of  his  knowledge  from 
our  own  mental  operations  ;  but  we  ought  to  be  careful  not  to  think 

1  Job  xxxvii.  16;  Ps.  cxlvii.  5  ;  Is.  xlii.  9  ;  xlvi.  9,  10  ;  Acts  i.  24;  Horn,  xl 
33 ;  Heb.  iv.  13;  1  John  iii.  20.  *  1  Sam.  ii.  3. 


68  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

of  him  as  altogether  such  an  one  as  ourselves.  As  lie  differs  from 
all  creatures,  in  mode  of  presence  and  of  duration,  so  he  differs,  in 
mode  of  knowledge,  from  all  other  intelligent  beings. 

God  does  not  acquire  knowledge  after  our  mode.  We  acquire 
knowledge  of  external  objects  by  means  of  our  bodily  senses ;  but 
God  has  no  body,  and  no  organs  of  sense  like  ours.  We  learn  the 
less  obvious  relations  of  things  by  processes  of  reasoning,  which  are 
often  tedious  and  laborious,  but  God  has  no  labor  to  acquire 
knowledge,  and  suffers  no  delay  in  attaining  it.  All  things  are 
naked,  and  open  to  his  eyes.1  We  learn  much  by  the  testimony 
of  others ;  but  God  is  not  dependent  for  knowledge  on  information 
received  from  any  of  his  creatures.  We  obtain  knowledge  of  our 
own  mental  operations  by  means  of  consciousness ;  and,  as  this  is 
without  any  process  of  reasoning,  and  not  by  our  bodily  senses, 
or  the  testimony  of  others,  it  may  give  us  the  best  possible  concep- 
tion of  God's  mode  of  knowledge.  All  things  which  he  knows  are 
before  his  mind  as  immediately  and  completely  as  the  states  and 
operations  of  our  minds  are  before  our  consciousness ;  but  our  best 
conceptions  fall  infinitely  short  of  the  incomprehensible  subject. 
As  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  his  thoughts  higher 
than  our  thoughts.2 

God  does  not  hold  his  knowledge  in  possession,  after  our  mode. 
The  great  store-house  of  our  knowledge  is  memory,  a  wonderful 
faculty,  with  which  the  human  mind  is  endowed.  Without  it,  all 
knowledge  would  pass  from  the  mind,  as  the  image  passes  from  a 
mirror,  when  the  object  producing  it  has  gone  by.  But  if  God's 
duration  is  without  succession,  there  is,  with  him,  no  past  to  re- 
member; and  therefore  memory,  with  him,  is  something  wholly 
different  from  what  it  is  with  us.  His  whole  mode  of  life  differs  so 
widely  from  ours,  that  we  cannot  attribute  human  faculties  to  him, 
without  degrading  his  divinity. 

In  our  study  of  God's  attributes,  it  is  important  to  remember, 
at  every  step  of  our  progress,  that  they  are  all  incomprehensible 
to  us.  We  should  do  this,  not  only  for  the  sake  of  humility,  but 
to  guard  us  against  erroneous  inferences,  which  we  are  liable  to 
draw  from  our  imperfect  conceptions  of  the  divine  nature.  It  is 
instructive  to  notice  how  far  the  elements  of  these  conceptions  are 

1  Heb.  iv.  13.  2  Is.  lv.  9. 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  69 

derived  from  what  we  know  of  our  own  minds.  No  combination 
of  such  elements  can  possibly  give  us  adequate  conceptions  of  the 
eternal  and  infinite  Mind.  Even  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  reveal 
God  to  us,  do  not  supply  the  elementary  conceptions  necessary  to 
a  perfect  knowledge  of  God.  They  speak  to  human  beings  in  hu- 
man language,  and  the  knowledge  which  they  impart  is  sufficient 
for  our  present  necessities,  and  able  to  make  us  wise  to  salvation ; 
but  we  should  remember,  that  human  language  cannot  express  to 
us  what  the  human  mind  cannot  conceive,  and,  therefore,  cannot 
convey  a  full  knowledge  of  the  deity. 

Much  of  human  knowledge  consists  of  mere  negations.  Fre- 
quent exemplifications  of  this  occur  in  our  study  of  the  divine 
attributes.  What  God's  spirituality  is,  we  cannot  positively  know ; 
but  we  know  that  it  is  not  matter.  What  God's  eternity  is,  we  can- 
not comprehend ;  but,  in  our  labor  to  comprehend  it,  we  stretch  our 
positive  conception  of  duration  to  the  utmost  possible  extent,  and 
at  length  seek  relief  in  the  negative  ideas  —  without  beginning, 
without  end,  without  succession.  These  negations  mark  the  imper- 
fection of  our  knowledge.  God's  knowledge  is  direct  and  positive, 
and  he  seeks  no  relief  in  the  negations  that  we  find  so  convenient. 

God  does  not  use  his  knowledge  after  our  mode.  For  the  proper 
directing  of  actions,  knowledge  is  necessary,  both  of  things  actu- 
ally existing,  and  of  things,  the  existence  of  which  is  merely  pos- 
sible. Our  minds  possess  both  these  kinds  of  knowledge  to  a 
limited  extent,  and  use  them  in  an  imperfect  manner.  In  the 
study  of  history  and  geography  we  acquire  knowledge  of  things 
which  are,  or  have  been,  in  actual  existence.  Arithmetic  treats  of 
number,  and  geometry  of  magnitude ;  but  these  sciences  do  not 
teach-  the  actual  existence  of.  anything.  By  reasoning  from  the 
abstract  relations  and  properties  of  things,  our  minds  are  capable 
of  determining  what  would,  or  might  exist,  in  supposed  cases ;  and, 
by  this  process,  our  knowledge  extends  into  the  department  of  things 
possible.  This  knowledge  is  necessary  to  choice ;  and,  therefore, 
to  voluntary  action.  If  but  one  thing  were  possible,  there  would 
be  no  room  for  choice;  and  we  must  know  the  things  possible, 
before  we  can  choose.  God  has  perfect  knowledge  of  things  pos- 
sible, and  these  depend  on  his  power.  He  has,  also,  perfect  know- 
ledge of  things  actual,  and  these  depend  on  his  will.  He  knew 
how  many  worlds  he  could  create,  and  how  many  kinds  of  plants 


70  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING:    GOD. 

and  animals ;  and  out  of  these  he  chose  what  worlds,  plants,  and 
animals,  should  exist.  According  to  our  mode  of  conception,  the 
knowledge  of  things  possible  precedes  the  will  or  purpose  of  God, 
and  the  knowledge  of  things  actual  follows  it.  But  we  dare  not 
affirm  that  there  is  any  succession  of  thought  in  the  divine  mind. 
How  God  uses  his  knowledge,  in  counsel,  or  in  action,  we  cannot 
comprehend. 

The  extent  of  God's  knowledge  is  unlimited.  He  knows  all 
things ;  all  things  possible,  and  all  things  actual.  He  knows  him- 
self perfectly,  though  unknown  by  any  other  being.  The  attri- 
butes which  we  labor  in  vain  to  comprehend,  he  understands  fully. 
His  ways,  to  us  unsearchable,  are  fully  known  to  him  from  the 
beginning  of.  his  works.  All  creatures  are  known  to  him,  and 
everything  that  appertains  to  them  :  the  angels  of  heaven,  the  men 
who  inhabit  the  earth,  and  every  living  thing,  even  to  the  sparrow, 
or  young  ravens,  he  knows,  and  carefully  regards.  The  thoughts 
of  the  mind  he  understands,  and  the  secrets  of  every  heart  he  fully 
searches. 

All  events,  past,  present,  or  future,  are  known  to  God.  Past 
events  are  said  to  be  remembered  by  him ;  and  he  claims  the  fore- 
knowledge of  future  events,  challenging  false  gods  to  a  comparison 
with  him  in  this  respect.1  His  foreknowledge  of  future  events  is 
proved  by  the  numerous  predictions  contained  in  the  Bible,  that 
have  proceeded  from  him.  It  was  given  to  the  Israelites,2  as  a  rule 
for  distinguishing  a  true  prophet  of  the  Lord,  that  his  predictions 
should  be  fulfilled ;  but  a  foreknowledge  of  future  events  could  not 
be  imparted  to  them  from  the  Lord,  if  the  Lord  himself  did  not 
possess  it. 

The  mode  of  God's  foreknowledge  we  cannot  comprehend.  He 
sees  present  things  not  as  man  sees,  and  remembers  the  past  not  in 
he  manner  of  human  memory.  It  is,  therefore,  not  surprising 
that  we  cannot  comprehend  the  mode  of  his  knowledge ;  and  espe- 
cially of  his  foreknowledge^  in  which  we,  least  of  all,  resemble  him. 
We  have  some  knowledge  of  the  present  and  the  past ;  but  of  the 
future  we  have  no  absolute  knowledge.  We  know  causes  at  present 
existing,  from  which  we  infer  that  future  events  will  take  place ;  . 
but  an  absolute  foreknowledge  of  these  future  events  we  do  not 

1  Is.  xli.  22.  2  Deut.  xviii.  22. 


ATTRIBUTES    OE    GOD.  71 

possess.  Some  cause,  of  which  we  are  now  not  aware,  may  inter- 
vene, and  disappoint  our  expectation.  The  phenomena  of  nature, 
which  we  expect  with  the  greatest  confidence,  such  as  the  rising  of 
the  sun,  the  occurrence  of  an  eclipse,  are  foreknown  only  on  the 
condition  that  the  present  laws  of  nature  shall  continue  to  operate, 
without  change  or  suspension.  But  the  Author  of  Nature  may 
interpose,  and  change  the  present  order  of  things.  On  the  suppo- 
sition that  God  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  all  the  causes  now  ope- 
rating ;  that  there  are  fixed  laws  which  determine  the  succession  of 
events ;  and  that  God  perfectly  understands  these  laws ;  we  may 
comprehend  that  God  can  infallibly  predict  things  to  come.  No 
being  but  himself  can  interfere  with  the  order  of  things  which  he 
has  established.  This  mode  of  foreknowledge  we  can,  in  some 
measure,  conceive ;  but  the  supposition  which  it  involves,  that  all 
events  take  place  according  to  an  established  order  of  sequence, 
many  are  unwilling  to  admit.  They  maintain  that  events  depend- 
ent on  the  volitions  of  free  agents,  do  not  so  occur ;  and,  therefore, 
cannot  be  foreknown  after  this  manner. 

Some,  who  adopt  the  view  last  mentioned,  deny  that  God  fore- 
knows future  events,  dependent  on  human  volitions.  They  never- 
theless attribute  omniscience  to  him,  and  understand  it  to  be  the 
'power  of  knowing  all  tilings.  They  say  that,  as  omnipotence  sig- 
nifies a  power  to  do  all  things,  without  the  doing  of  them,  so 
omniscience  signifies  the  power  to  know  all  things,  without  the 
knowing  of  them.  There  is  clearly  a  mistake  here  in  language. 
As  omnipotence  signifies  all  power,  so  omniscience  signifies  all 
knowledge ;  and  God  does  not  possess  omniscience,  if  he  possesses 
merely  the  power  to  know,  without  the  knowledge  itself.  But  it 
may  be  questioned,  whether,  according  to  the  theory,  God  has  even 
the  power  to  know.  The  powTer  of  God  might  have  excluded  such 
contingencies  from  existence  ;  but,  after  having  opened  the  door,  it 
is  difficult  to  understand  how  any  power  could  foreknow,  what  things 
will  enter,  if  they  are  in  their  nature  unforeknowabte.  But  the 
strongest  possible  objection  lies  against  the  theory,  in  that  it  is 
opposed  to  fact.  God  has  predicted  very  many  events  dependent 
on  innumerable  volitions  of  free  agents,  and,  therefore,  must  have 
foreknown  them.  Those  who  have  advocated  this  theory,  in  con- 
nection with  the  opinion,  that  the  duration  of  God  is  an  eternal 
now,  and  that  there  is  strictly  speaking,  neither  foreknowledge  nor 


72  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

after-knowledge  with  him ;  fix  narrow  limits  to  the  divine  omni- 
science. If  God's  knowledge  is  unchangeable,  and  if  he  has  no 
foreknowledge  of  contingencies,  he  can  have  no  after-knowledge 
of  them.  But  the  whole  history  of  mankind  is  dependent  on  con- 
tingencies ;  being  filled  with  them,  and  events  depending  on  them. 
All  this  must  be  a  blank  to  the  view  of  God.  Men  may  know  this 
history,  and  it  may  be  written  out  in  ten  thousand  volumes ;  but 
God  knows  it  not,  for,  though  he  possesses  the  power  to  know,  he  has 
determined  not  to  exercise  it.    How  then  shall  God  judge  the  world  ? 

Human  beings  have  two  modes  of  knowing  past  events ;  one,  by 
memory ;  the  other,  by  inferring  their  existence  from  the  effects 
which  have  followed.  One  man  remembers  that  a  house  was  burned 
down,  having  seen  the  flames  of  its  combustion ;  another  knows 
that  it  was  burned  down,  because  he  sees  its  ashes.  In  one  mode, 
memory  runs  back  along  the  line  of  time  ;  in  the  other,  reason 
runs  back  along  the  line  of  cause  and  effect.  The  only  mode  which 
we  have  of  knowing  future  events,  is  by  the  reasoning  process. 
Whether  God  has  a  method,  analogous  rather  to  our  memory  or 
perception,  than  to  our  reason  ;  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  determine. 
If  he  has,  we  cannot  conceive  of  it,  because  there  is  nothing  like 
it  in  ourselves ;  but  the  absence  of  such  a  power  in  us,  by  no 
means  proves  its  non-existence  in  God.  Some  have  imagined  that 
God  looks  down  the  vista  of  time,  and  sees  future  events,  as  we  see  a 
traveller  approaching  when  he  is  yet  at  a  distance  from  us.  But 
the  cases  are  not  analogous.  We  see  the  traveller  coming,  not 
having  come;  what  is  present,  as  to  time,  and  not  what  is  future. 
His  arrival,  the  future  event,  we  know  only  by  a  process  of  rea- 
soning. The  supposition  is,  that  God  has  an  immediate  perception 
of  the  future  event,  without  any  intervening  process  of  reasoning. 
To  say  that  he  sees  it,  expresses  this  figuratively,  but  does  not  ex- 
plain it. 

The  doctrine  that  there  is  no  succession  in  the  eternity  of  God, 
neither  denies  nor  explains  his  foreknowledge.  1.  It  does  not 
deny.  Some  have  maintained  that  there  is,  strictly  speaking,  neither 
foreknowledge  nor  after-knowledge  with  God ;  and  this  may  be 
admitted,  if  foreknowledge  necessarily  implies  succession  of  thought. 
But  the  foreknowledge  which  we  attribute  to  God,  is  not  knowledge 
antecedent  to  something  else  in  the  divine  mind,  but  knowledge 
antecedent  to  the  event  foreknown.     From  God's  knowledge  pre- 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  73 

dictions  of  future  events  have  proceeded.  Such  knowledge,  in  a 
human  mind,  would  be  foreknowledge ;  and,  in  human  language, 
this  is  its  proper  name.  2.  It  does  not  explain.  The  doctrine 
teaches  that  all  times  and  events,  past,  present,  and  future,  are  alike 
present  to  God.  The  overthrow  of  Babylon  by  Cyrus,  and  the 
prediction  thereof  by  Isaiah,  are  both  historical  events ;  and,  as 
such,  are  supposed  to  have  been  alike  present  to  the  mind  of  God 
from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  Now,  the  fact  that  the  over- 
throw was  present  to  the  mind  of  God,  could  not  be  the  cause  of 
the  revelation  made  to  the  prophet,  and  of  the  prediction  which 
followed ;  for,  according  to  the  doctrine,  the  prediction  was  already 
as  much  present  to  the  mind  of  God  as  the  event  predicted ;  and, 
therefore,  its  existence  must  be  as  much  presupposed  in  the  order 
of  cause  and  effect.  Hence,  to  account  for  this,  or  any  other  predic- 
tion, we  are  compelled  to  admit  that  God  has  a  mode  of  foreknow- 
ledge, into  the  nature  of  which  the  doctrine  of  the  perpetual  now 
gives  us  no  insight. 

But  why  should  we  indulge  ourselves  in  vain  speculations,  or  ex- 
haust ourselves  with  needless  efforts  ?  We  are  like  children  who 
wade  into  the  ocean,  to  learn  its  depth  by  the  measure  of  their 
little  stature,  and  who  exclaim,  almost  at  their  first  step,  0 !  how 
deep  !  Even  Paul,  when  laboring  to  fathom  this  subject,  exclaimed, 
"  0  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of 
God !  how  unsearchable  are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  find- 
ing out  I"1 

In  comparison  with  God's  infinite  intelligence,  how  little  is  all 
human  knowledge  !  We  honor  Newton,  and  other  giants  of  intel- 
lect that  have  appeared  in  the  progress  of  our  race ;  but  their 
highest  glory  was,  to  know  a  very  little  of  God's  ways.  Let  every 
power  of  our  minds  bend  before  his  infinite  understanding,  with 
deep  humility  and  devout  adoration.  We  study  our  own  minds, 
and  find  in  them  much  that  we  cannot  explain ;  and  when  we  use 
the  little  knowledge  of  them  to  which  we  can  attain,  in  our  labored 
efforts  to  understand  something  of  God,  an  important  part  of  its 
use  consists  in  convincing  us  that  we  cannot  find  out  God,  and 
that  his  thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts. 

As  intelligent  beings,  we  may  contemplate  the  omniscience  of 

•Eom.  xi.  33. 


74  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

God  with  devout  admiration  ;  and  as  guilty  beings,  we  should  fear 
and  tremble  before  it.  He  sees  the  inmost  recesses  of  the  heart. 
The  hateful  thoughts  which  we  are  unwilling  a  fellow- worm  should 
know,  are  all  known  to  him,  and  every  thought,  word,  and  deed, 
he  remembers,  and  will  bring  into  judgment.  How  terrible  is  this 
attribute  of  the  Great  Judge,  who  will  expose  the  secrets  of  every 
heart,  and  reward  every  man  according  to  his  works,  though  un- 
observed or  forgotten  by  men  ! 

But  with  all  the  awe  which  invests  it,  this  attribute  of  the  Divine 
Nature,  is  delightful  to  the  pious  man.  He  rejoices  to  say,  Thou, 
God,  seest  me.  He  prays,  Try  me,  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked 
way  in  me,  and  lead  me  into  the  way  everlasting.  Gladly  he  com- 
mits himself  to  the  guidance  of  him  who  has  all  knowledge.  Con- 
scious of  his  own  blindness  and  darkness,  he  knows  not  which  way 
to  take,  or  what  is  best  for  him ;  but  he  puts  himself,  with  un- 
wavering confidence,  into  the  hands  of  the  omniscient  God. 

Section  VI.  — OMNIPOTE  NC  E. 

God  is  able  to  do  whatever  he  pleases.1 

Our  first  idea  of  power,  is  probably  derived  from  the  control 
which  we  possess  over  our  muscles,  and  the  use  which  we  make  of 
them,  to  produce  effects  on  things  about  us.  Our  limbs  and  voice 
become  the  instruments  of  our  power ;  and,  in  the  using  of  them 
for  effecting  our  purpose,  the  notion  of  power  arises.  We  transfer 
this  notion,  and  incorporate  it  into  the  conception  which  we  form 
of  other  intelligent  beings  like  ourselves ;  and  it  thus  becomes  an 
element  in  our  conception  of  the  deity.  In  the  material  world, 
causes  are  followed  by  their  effects  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  in 
which  effects  are  produced  by  the  motion  of  our  limbs ;  and  the 
material  causes  are  said  to  have  power.  It  is  thus  we  speak  of  the 
power  of  steam,  or  of  an  engine. 

We  know  well  that  our  power  is  limited.  Many  things  which  we 
attempt  we  fail  to  accomplish.  To  conceive  of  omnipotence,  we 
introduce,  as  in  other  cases,  the  negative  idea,  without  fail.  This, 
however,  does  not  exclude  the  idea  of  attempt,  desire,  or  will.  It 
derogates  nothing  from  the  omnipotence  of  God,  that  he  does  not 
accomplish  what  he  has  no  desire  or  will  to  accomplish.     It  is  im- 

1  Gen.  xvii.  1 ;  Job.  v.  9 ;  Jer.  xxxii.  17 ;  Matt.  xix.  26 ;  Kev.  i.  8 ;  xix.  6. 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD,  75 

possible  for  God  to  lie,  or  to  deny  himself ;  but  these  are  things 
which  he  does  not  please  to  do,  because  they  are  inconsistent  with 
his  moral  perfections.  Nor  would  the  doing  of  these  things  be  any 
indication  of  supreme  power.  It  is  also  true,  that  God  cannot  do 
things  which  imply  contradiction  in  themselves ;  as,  to  make  a  thing 
to  be,  and  not  to  be,  at  the  same  time ;  to  make  a  circle  to  be  at 
the  same  time  a  square,  &c.  If  finite  power  fails  to  accomplish 
such  things,  it  fails  not  because  it  is  finite,  but  because  the  things 
are  impossible.  No  measure  of  power  could  come  nearer  to  suc- 
cess. Impotence  is  as  good  as  omnipotence  for  accomplishing 
impossibilities. 

We  are  filled  with  awe  in  contemplating  the  omnipotence  of  God. 
When  we  hear  the  voice  of  his  thunder  in  the  heavens,  or  feel  the 
earth  quake  under  the  tread  of  his  foot,  how  do  solemn  thoughts 
of  things  divine  fill  our  minds  !  From  the  rending  cloud,  and  the 
quaking  earth,  let  us  look  back  to  the  power  which  brought  crea- 
tion into  being,  and  forward  to  that  display  of  his  power  which  we 
are  to  witness  on  the  last  day.  Such  a  being,  who  will  not  fear  ? 
Our  minds  exercise  their  power  through  our  bodies,  to  which,  there- 
fore, the  immediate  exercise  of  it  is  limited ;  and  even  over  these 
the  power  is  confined  within  narrow  limits ;  for  we  cannot  add  one 
cubit  to  our  stature,  or  make  one  hair  white  or  black.  But  God 
has  everything  in  the  universe  under  his  immediate  and  perfect 
control.  He  needs  no  instruments,  no  mechanical  aid,  no  series 
of  contrivances ;  but,  at  his  will  the  thing  is  done,  whether  it  be  the 
production  of  an  animalcule,  or  the  creation  of  a  world.  At  our 
will,  a  finger  moves ;  but  at  the  volition  of  God,  a  planet  is  launched 
in  its  orbit,  with  a  force  of  which  the  cannon-ball  gives  but  a  very 
faint  conception.  Hurricanes,  which  sweep  the  earth,  and  lift  up 
the  dwellings,  and  the  very  bodies  of  men,  in  the  air,  have  their 
power.  The  ocean,  which  sports  with  mighty  ships,  has  its  power. 
The  volcano,  which  bursts  forth  with  such  awful  grandeur,  has  its 
power.  But  when  we  have  combined  the  force  of  air,  ocean,  and 
subterranean  fire,  we  must  multiply  it  by  the  number  of  such 
agencies  which  are  operating,  through  all  the  worlds  in  the  whole 
of  God's  vast  empire,  before  we  can  begin  to  conceive  adequately 
of  his  omnipotence.  Lo,  these  are  parts  of  his  ways ;  but  the 
thunder  of  his  power,  who  can  understand  ? l 

1  Job  xxvi.  14. 


76  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 


Section  VII.  —  GOODNESS. 

God  is  Infinitely  Benevolent.1 

God's  goodness,  as  exercised  towards  his  creatures,  is  often  ex 
pressed  in  the  Scriptures  by  the  term  love.  Love  is  distinguished 
as  benevolence,  beneficence,  or  complacence.  Benevolence  is  love  in 
intention  or  disposition ;  beneficence  is  love  in  action,  or  conferring 
its  benefits  ;  and  complacence  is  the  approbation  of  good  actions  or 
dispositions.  Goodness,  exercised  toward  the  unworthy,  is  called 
grace;  toward  the  suffering,  it  is  called  pity,  or  mercy.  The 
latter  term  intimates  that  the  suffering,  or  liability  to  suffer,  arises 
from  the  just  displeasure  of  God. 

Goodness  implies  a  disposition  to  produce  happiness.  We  are 
conscious  of  pleasure  and  pain  in  ourselves,  and  we  know  that  we 
can,  to  some  extent,  cause  pleasure  or  pain  in  others.  Continued 
pleasure  is  happiness ;  continued  pain,  misery.  God  is  able  to 
produce  happiness  or  misery,  when,  and  to  whatever  extent  lie 
pleases.  Which  of  these  is  it  the  disposition  of  his  infinite  nature 
to  produce  ? 

God's  goodness  may  be  argued  from  the  manifestations  of  it  in 
the  works  of  creation.  The  world  is  peopled  with  sentient  be- 
ings, capable  of  pleasure ;  and  sources  of  pleasure  are  everywhere 
provided  for  them.  Every  sense  of  every  animal  is  an  inlet  of 
pleasure ;  and  for  every  sense  the  means  of  pleasure  are  provided. 
What  God  gives  them  they  gather.  His  open  hand  pours  enjoy- 
ments into  their  existence  at  every  moment.  When  we  consider 
the  innumerable  living  creatures  that  are,  at  this  moment,  receiving 
pleasure  from  the  abundant  and  varied  stores  which  his  creating 
power  has  furnished ;  and  when  we  reflect,  that  this  stream  of 
bounty  has  flowed  incessantly  from  the  creation  of  the  world,  we 
may  well  consider  the  fountain  from  which  it  has  descended  as 
infinite. 

It  demonstrates  the  goodness  of  God,  that  the  pleasures  which 
his  creatures  enjoy  do  not  come  incidentally,  but  are  manifestly  the 
result  of  contrivance.  Food  would  nourish  without  the  pleasure 
experienced  in  eating.     We  might  have  been  so  constituted  as  to 

1  Ex.  xxxiv.  6 ;  Ps.  ciii.  2-8;  Zech.  ix.  17 ;  Matt.  vii.  11 ;  Luke  ii.  14 ;  xii.  32 ; 
Rom.  v.  8  :  1  John  iv.  8. 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  77 

be  driven  to  take  it  by  hunger,  and  to  receive  it  with  pain,  but 
little  less  than  that  produced  by  the  want  of  it.  But  God  has 
superadded  pleasure  where  it  was  not  absolutely  necessary,  and 
has  made  the  very  support  of  animal  existence  a  source  of  perpetual 
gratification. 

It  adds  greatly  to  the  force  of  this  argument,  that  indications 
of  malevolent  design  are  not  found  in  the  works  of  God.  Pain  is, 
indeed,  often  experienced,  but  it  never  appears  to  result  from  an 
arrangement  specially  made  for  receiving  it.  There  is  no  organ 
of  our  body  to  which  we  can  point,  and  say,  this  was  specially  de- 
signed to  give  us  pain. 

Mere  animal  enjoyment  is  not  the  highest  that  God  bestows.  To 
his  intelligent  creatures  he  has  opened  another  source  in  the  pur- 
suit and  acquisition  of  knowledge.  We  need  knowledge,  as  well  as 
food ;  and  we  might  be  driven  to  seek  it  by  a  painful  necessity, 
without  deriving  any  pleasure  from  it.  But  here,  again,  the  bene- 
volence of  the  Creator  is  manifested.  Pleasure  is  superadded  when 
we  acquire  necessary  knowledge ;  and,  when  the  progress  has 
reached  the  limit  of  our  necessities,  the  pleasure  does  not  cease. 
The  intellectual  appetite  is  never  satiated  to  loathing. 

But  God  has  made  us  susceptible  of  far  higher  and  nobler  plea- 
sure in  the  exercise  of  virtue  and  religion.  To  this  he  has  adapted 
our  moral  nature,  rendering  us  capable  both  of  the  exercise  and 
the  enjoyment.  For  the  exercise  of  virtue  and  religion,  the  con- 
stitution of  human  society,  and  the  various  relations  which  we  sus- 
tain in  its  organization,  furnish  abundant  occasion ;  and  in  the 
moral  sense  of  mankind,  and  the  approbation  which  virtue  extorts, 
even  when  the  tribute  is  not  spontaneously  rendered,  a  source  of 
enjoyment  is  opened.  In  the  proper  exercise  of  our  moral  powers, 
we  are  capable  of  loving  and  enjoying  God ;  and,  therefore,  of  ex- 
periencing a  happiness  that  infinitely  transcends  all  other  enjoy- 
ment. This  ocean  of  infinite  fulness,  this  source  of  eternal  and 
exhaustless  happiness,  gives  the  full  demonstration  of  God's  infinite 
goodness.  And  this  enjoyment,  also,  never  cloys ;  but,  with  the 
progress,  the  delight  increases. 

The  doctrine  of  God's  goodness,  notwithstanding  the  abundance 
of  its  proofs,  is  attended  with  difficulties.  Though  sentient  beings 
are  not  furnished  with  organs  purposely  prepared  for  the  receiving 
of  pain,  they  have  organs  for  inflicting  it,  which  are  unquestion- 


78  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

ably  the  result  of  contrivance.  The  fangs  of  serpents,  and  the 
stings  of  insects,  are  instances  of  this  kind ;  and  to  these  may  be 
added  the  talons  and  tusks,  or  beaks,  with  which  carnivorous  ani- 
mals rend  their  prey.  How  is  the  existence  of  such  pain-inflicting 
contrivances  to  be  reconciled  with  the  infinite  goodness  of  God  ? 
How  can  we  explain,  in  harmony  with  this  doctrine,  the  suffering 
which  animals  endure  from  the  violence  of  each  other,  from  hunger, 
cold,  and  disease  ?  Above  all,  how  can  we  reconcile  the  innume- 
rable miseries  with  which  human  society  is  filled,  in  every  rank  and 
condition  of  life  ?  If  God  is  infinitely  good,  why  is  human  life 
begun  in  pain,  and  closed  in  pain,  and  subject  to  pain  throughout 
its  whole  course  ? 

These  difficulties  are  of  too  much  magnitude  to  be  overlooked. 
They  perplex  the  understanding,  and  disquiet  the  heart;  and, 
therefore,  demand  a  careful  and  candid  consideration.  The  follow- 
ing observations  are  offered,  to  guard  the  heart  against  their 
influence. 

1.  Admit  the  existence  of  the  difficulties  in  their  full  force,  and 
what  then  ?  Does  it  follow  that  God  is  a  malevolent  being  ?  Were 
he  so,  the  proofs  of  his  malevolence  would  abound,  as  those  of  his 
goodness  now  do.  We  should  everywhere  find  animal  senses 
adapted  to  be  the  inlets  of  misery,  and  the  objects  of  these  senses 
all  adapted  to  give  pain.  Does  it  follow  that  God  is  indifferent 
whether  his  creatures  are  happy  or  miserable?  The  numerous 
provisions  which  are  made  with  a  manifest  reference  to  animal 
enjoyment,  forbid  this  supposition.  Does  it  follow  that  God  is 
capricious  ?  This  conclusion  is  precluded  by  the  fact,  that  what 
suffering  there  is  in  the  world,  runs  throughout  along  with  its  en- 
joyments ;  the  happiness  and  the  misery  are  entwined  with  each 
other,  and  form  parts  of  the  same  system.  By  summing  up  the 
whole,  we  discover  that  animal  life  has  more  enjoyment  than  suf- 
fering, and  that  its  pains  are,  in  most  cases,  incidental.  In  our 
daily  experience,  blessings  are  poured  upon  us  incessantly;  and 
when  suffering  comes,  we  are  often  conscious  that  it  arises  from  our 
abuse  of  God's  goodness,  and  is,  therefore,  no  argument  against  it. 
In  many  other  cases,  we  find  present  suffering  conducive  to  future 
good ;  and  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  it  would  always  be  so, 
if  we  endured  it  with  a  proper  spirit,  and  made  a  wise  improvement 
of  it.     It  becomes  us,  therefore,  when  sufferings  occur,  the  bene- 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  79 

ficial  tendency  of  which  we  cannot  discover,  to  remember  that  we 
comprehend  but  a  very  small  part  of  God's  way.  We  have  found 
every  other  attribute  of  his  nature  incomprehensible  to  us,  and  it 
ought  not  to  surprise  us  that  his  goodness  is  so. 

The  sufferings  which  we  experience  in  ourselves,  or  see  in  others, 
become  an  occasion  for  the  trial  of  our  faith.  To  the  understanding 
of  a  child,  the  discipline  of  his  father  may  appear  neither  wise  nor 
kind.  Indulgences  which  are  craved  may  be  denied ;  and  toils 
and  privations,  exceedingly  unwelcome,  may  be  imposed.  In  these 
circumstances,  it  is  the  child's  duty  to  confide  where  it  cannot  com- 
prehend. So  we  should  exercise  faith  in  the  wisdom  and  goodness 
of  our  heavenly  Father,  and  believe  that  his  ways  are  full  of  good- 
ness, even  when  they  are  inscrutable.  Enough  of  his  goodness  is 
seen  elsewhere  to  satisfy  us  of  its  existence  when  mystery  hides  it 
from  view. 

2.  It  cannot  be  proved  that  an  admixture  of  pain  with  the  large 
measure  of  enjoyment  which  God  bestows  on  his  creatures,  is  incon- 
sistent with  his  goodness.  The  insect  of  a  day,  and  the  immortal 
near  the  throne  of  God,  derive  their  enjoyment  from  the  same  infi- 
nite goodness.  If  the  short-lived  insect  should  pass  its  few  hours 
in  the  sunbeams  without  pain,  and  should  be  annihilated  without 
pain,  the  difficulty  which  now  embarrasses  us  would  not  apply  to 
its  case.  Its  existence,  filled  with  enjoyment,  would  correspond 
with'  our  notions  of  the  Creator's  goodness ;  and  the  finiteness,  or 
very  small  measure  of  its  enjoyment,  would  not  disprove  the  source 
to  be  infinite  from  which  it  proceeds.  Now,  if  a  creature  of  ano- 
ther kind  should  have  enjoyments  a  hundred  fold  greater,  with  an 
abatement  of  one  measure  of  pain,  its  existence,  on  the  whole,  is 
ninety-nine  times  more  desirable  than  that  of  the  insect.  Shall  we, 
then,  deny  that  this  existence  proceeds  from  the  goodness  of  the 
deity  ?  If  the  pain  forms  a  part  of  the  same  system  with  the  plea- 
sure, we  must  attribute  them  to  the  same  author ;  and  the  animal 
that  has  ninety-nine  measures  of  enjoyment  remaining,  has  no  more 
right  to  complain  of  the  abatement  of  one  by  the  endurance  of 
pain,  than  the  insect  supposed  would  have  to  complain  of  the  ab- 
sence of  ninety-nine  measures  which  the  more  favored  creature 
enjoys.  This  consideration  may  satisfy  us  that  the  presence  of 
some  pain,  connected  with  a  far  greater  amount  of  enjoyment,  is 
not  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  that  God  is  infinitely  good. 


80  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  GOD. 

Furthermore,  it  is  perfectly  conceivable  that  pain  itself  may,  in 
some  cases,  enhance  our  pleasures,  as  relief  from  suffering  renders 
subsequent  enjoyment  more  exquisite :  and,  in  other  ways,  which 
we  are  unable  to  comprehend,  pain  may  produce  a  beneficial  result. 
In  this  view,  the  existence  of  pain  cannot  be  inconsistent  with  the 
goodness  of  God. 

3.  Much  of  the  suffering  in  the  world  is  clearly  the  effect  of  sin, 
and  is  to  be  considered  an  infliction  of  divine  justice.  The  justice 
of  God  claims  scope  for  its  exercise,  as  well  as  his  goodness.  The 
goodness  of  God  is  infinite,  if  it  confers  happiness  as  widely  as  is 
consistent  with  the  other  perfections  of  his  nature.  It  is  a  favorite 
theory  with  some,  that  God  aims  at  the  greatest  possible  amount 
of  happiness  in  the  universe  ;  and  that  he  admits  evil,  only  because 
the  admission  of  evil  produces  in  the  end  a  greater  amount  of  hap- 
piness than  its  exclusion  would  have  done.  According  to  this 
theory,  justice  itself  is  a  modification  of  benevolence ;  and  the  pain 
suffered  by  one  being,  is  inflicted  from  love  to  the  whole.  But 
whether  justice  be  a  modification  of  benevolence,  or  a  distinct 
attribute,  its  claims  must  be  regarded ;  and  goodness  does  not  cease 
to  be  goodness,  because  it  does  not  overthrow  the  government  of 
God,  or  oppose  his  other  perfections. 

Some  persons  attribute  all  the  sufferings  of  brute  animals  to  the 
sin  of  man,  but  the  Scriptures  do  not  clearly  teach  this  doctrine ; 
and  we  have  shown  that  the  pain  which  brutes  endure,  may  be 
otherwise  reconciled  with  the  goodness  of  God.  That  animals 
suffer  because  of  man's  sin,  is  clear  in  the  cruelty  which  they  often 
experience  from  human  hands  ;  but  that  all  their  sufferings  proceed 
from  this  cause  is  not  so  clear.  Unless  the  order  of  things  was 
greatly  changed  at  the  fall  of  man,  hawks  had  their  claws  and  beaks 
from  the  day  they  were  created,  and  used  them  before  man  sinned, 
in  taking  and  devouring  other  birds  for  food ;  and,  therefore,  pain 
and  death,  in  brute  animals,  did  not  enter  the  world  by  the  sin  of 
man.  Brute  animals  have,  on  the  whole,  a  happy  existence.  Free 
from  anxiety,  remorse,  and  the  fear  of  death,  they  enjoy,  with  high 
relish,  the  pleasures  which  their  Creator  has  given  them ;  and  it  is 
not  the  less  a  gift  of  his  infinite  goodness,  because  it  is  limited  in 
quantity,  or  abated  by  some  mixture  of  pain. 

4.  It  may  be,  that  God's  goodness  is  not  mere  love  of  happiness 
In  his  view,  happiness  may  not  be  the  only  good,  or  even  the  chief 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  81 

good.  He  is  himself  perfectly  happy ;  yet  this  perfection  of  hia 
nature  is  not  presented  to  us,  in  his  word,  as  the  only  ground,  or 
even  the  chief  ground,  on  which  his  claim  to  divine  honor  and 
worship  rests.  The  hosts  of  heaven  ascribe  holiness  to  him,  and 
worship  him  because  of  it ;  but  not  because  of  his  happiness.  If 
we  could  contemplate  him  as  supremely  happy,  but  deriving  his 
happiness  from  cruelty,  falsehood,  and  injustice,  we  should  need 
a  different  nature  from  that  with  which  he  has  endowed  us,  and  a 
different  Bible  to  direct  us  from  that  which  he  has  given,  before  we 
could  render  him  sincere  and  heart-felt  adoration.  In  the  regula- 
tion of  our  conduct,  when  pleasure  and  duty  conflict  with  each 
other,  we  are  required  to  choose  the  latter ;  and  this  is  often  made 
the  test  of  our  obedience.  On  the  same  principle,  if  a  whole  life 
of  duty  and  a  whole  life  of  enjoyment  were  set  before  us,  that  we 
might  choose  between  them,  we  should  be  required  to  prefer  holiness 
to  happiness.  It  therefore  accords  with  the  judgment  of  God  not 
to  regard  happiness  as  the  chief  good ;  and  the  production  of  the 
greatest  possible  amount  of  happiness  could  not  have  been  his 
prime  object  in  the  creation  of  the  world.  We  may  conclude  that 
his  goodness  is  not  a  weak  fondness  which  indulges  his  creatures, 
and  administers  to  their  enjoyment,  regardless  of  their  conduct 
and  moral  character.  It  aims  at  their  happiness,  but  in  subordina- 
tion to  a  higher  and  nobler  purpose.  According  to  the  order  of 
things  which  he  has  established,  it  is  rendered  impossible  for  an 
unholy  being  to  be  happy,  and  this  order  accords  with  the  goodness 
of  God,  which  aims,  not  at  the  mere  happiness  of  his  universe,  but 
at  its  well-being,  in  the  best  possible  sense. 

If  these  views  are  correct,  the  miseries  which  sin  has  introduced 
into  the  world,  instead  of  disproving  the  goodness  of  God,  proceed 
from  it,  and  demonstrate  it.  They  are  means  used  by  the  great 
Father  of  all,  in  the  discipline  of  his  great  family,  to  deter  from 
the  greatest  of  all  evils.  Precisely  this  use  the  wisdom  from  above 
teaches  us  to  make  of  his  judgments  and  threatenings ;  and  when 
these  awful  means  have  taught  us  the  evil  of  sin,  and  have  been 
blessed  to  us  as  means  of  sanctification,  we  may  perceive  in  them 
a  manifestation  of  God's  goodness. 

5.  To  infer  the  infinitude  of  God's  goodness  from  its  effects,  we 
must  view  them  in  the  aggregate.  The  perfection  of  his  justice 
appears  in  its  minute  and  precise  adaptation  to  each  particular 
6 


82  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

case.  Every  part  of  his  administration  must,  when  brought  to  the 
line  of  rectitude  for  comparison,  be  found  to  agree  with  it  precisely. 
But  as  in  estimating  the  length  of  a  line,  we  do  not  examine  its  parts, 
so  the  infinitude  of  God's  goodness  must  be  judged  from  the  aggre- 
gate -of  its  effects,  as  we  learn  the  power  of  God,  not  from  a  single 
grain  of  sand,  but  from  the  whole  extent  of  creation. 

To  comprehend  this  vast  subject,  we  need  the  infinite  mind  of 
God  himself.  In  events  which  now  appear  to  us  dark  and  mys- 
terious, the  seeds  of  future  benefits  to  his  creatures  may  be  wrapped 
up,  which  will  bring  forth  their  fruit  hereafter,  for  the  use  of 
admiring  and  adoring  intelligences.  The  parts  of  the  great  system 
are  so  wonderfully  adjusted  to  each  other,  that  no  finite  being  dare 
say  that  this  is  useless,  or  that  pernicious  or  hurtful.  Why  God 
has  made  precisely  such  orders  of  creatures  as  inhabit  the  world 
with  us,  and  why  he  has  appointed  to  them  their  various  modes  of 
life,  with  the  advantages  and  inconveniences  peculiar  to  each,  we 
are  wholly  unable  to  say ;  and,  if  we  undertake  to  say  why  he  has 
made  any  creatures  at  all,  we  may  assign  a  reason  which  we  think 
we  understand,  but  of  which,  in  reality,  we  know  but  little.  If 
the  united  intelligence  of  the  universe  could,  lift  up  its  voice  to 
God,  as  the  voice  of  one  creature,  and  say,  "  Why  hast  thou  made 
me  thus  ?"  it  would  be  daring  impiety.  How  unbecoming  then  for 
man,  who  is  a  worm,  to  arraign  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  his 
Maker  ! 

The  goodness  of  God  is  the  attribute  of  his  nature,  which,  above 
all  others,  draws  forth  the  affection  of  our  hearts.  We  are  filled 
with  awe  at  his  eternity,  omnipresence,  omniscience,  and  omnipo- 
tence ;  but  we  can  imagine  all  these  attributes  connected  with 
moral  qualities  which  would  render  them  repulsive.  But  the  good- 
ness of  God,  while  it  is  awful  and  grand,  is  at  the  same  time  pow- 
erfully attractive.  It  is  this,  when  understood  in  its  proper  sense, 
not  as  the  mere  love  of  happiness,  that  renders  Jehovah  the  pro- 
per centre  of  the  moral  universe.  It  is  this  that  attracts  the  hearts 
of  all  holy  intelligences  now  in  heaven,  and  that  is  drawing  to 
that  high  and  holy  place  whatever  on  earth  is  most  lovely  and  ex- 
cellent; and  if  the  hearts  of  any  repel  this  centre,  and  recede 
further  from  it,  they  are  "  wandering  stars,  to  whom  is  reserved 
the  blackness  of  darkness  forever." 


ATTRIBUTES    OF   GOB.  83 


Section  VIII.  —  TRUTH. 

God  is  a  being?  of  inviolable  truth.1 

The  truth  of  God  includes  veracity  and  faithfulness  :  —  veracity 
in  his  declaration  of  things  as  they  are,  and  faithfulness  in  the 
exact  fulfilment  of  his  promises  and  threatenings.  Men  often  err 
in  their  testimony  from  mistake  of  facts,  and  fail  through  inability 
to  fulfil  promises  which  they  have  made  with  honest  intentions. 
The  omniscience  of  God  renders  mistake  with  him  impossible ;  and 
his  omnipotence  and  unchangeableness  render  the  fulfilment  of  his 
intentions  certain.  Truth,  as  a  moral  attribute,  is  the  agreement 
of  what  is  spoken  with  the  mind  of  the  speaker.  We  never  charge 
men  with  want  of  veracity,  when  they  err  in  their  testimony  through 
mere  mistake ;  or  with  want  of  faithfulness,  when  they  fail  to  fulfil 
their  promises  entirely  from  inability.  God's  testimony  is  true, 
because  it  agrees  perfectly  with  his  view  of  things,  and  that  this 
view  agrees  with  the  actual  state  of  things,  results,  not  from  his 
truth,  but  his  omniscience.  His  promises  are  true  because 
they  agree  precisely  with  his  intentions  ;  and  that  these  intentions 
are  exactly  fulfilled,  results  from  other  attributes,  as  has  been  ex- 
plained. Truth  is  understood  for  the  most  part  to  refer  to  some- 
thing spoken  or  written ;  but  the  truth  of  God  may  be  understood, 
in  a  wider  sense,  to  denote  the  agreement  of  all  the  revelations  or 
manifestations  which  he  has  made  of  himself,  with  his  mind  and 
character. 

Because  God's  manifestations  of  himself  are  true,  it  does  not 
follow  that  they  are  complete  and  perfect.  He  showed  his  glory 
to  Moses ;  but  it  was  only  a  part  of  his  glory  that  he  exhibited, 
because  Moses  was  unable  to  bear  the  full  display.  All  manifesta- 
tions to  his  creatures  are  necessarily  limited ;  and  they  are  made 
as  seems  good  in  his  sight.  Our  knowledge  of  God,  which  is  neces- 
sarily imperfect  because  of  our  weakness,  is  often  erroneous, 
through  our  misuse  of  the  manifestations  which  he  has  made.  So 
the  heathen  world,  when  they  knew  God,  glorified  him  not  as  God, 
but  changed  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie. 

When  men  abuse  the  knowledge  of  God  which  they  possess,  and 

»Deut.  xxxii.  4;  Ps.  cxix.142;  John  viii.  26;  Rom.  iii.  4;  Tit.  i.  2;  Heb. 
*i.  18 ;  Rev.  iii.  7. 


84  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

the  means  of  knowledge  which  he  has  afforded  them,  it  is  not  in- 
consistent with  his  character  to  give  them  up,  in  righteous  judg- 
ment, to  their  own  hearts'  lusts.  Because  they  receive  not  the  love 
of  the  truth,  God  shall  send  them  strong  delusions,1  that  they  should 
believe  a  lie.  So  Ahab  desired  a  false  prophecy,  and  his  prophets 
desired  to  gratify  him,  and  God  gave  him  up  to  be  deceived.2  This 
is  expressed,  in  the  prophetic  imagery  of  Scripture,  by  his  sending 
a  lying  spirit  into  the  prophets.  Ahab  was  deceived ;  but  it  was 
in  spite  of  the  true  word  of  God,  by  the  prophet  whom  he  rejected. 
Jeremiah  complains  that  God  had  deceived  him ;  but  this,  in  the 
most  unfavorable  construction  that  can  be  put  on  his  language, 
amounts  to  nothing  more  than  an  impatient  exclamation  of  the  pro- 
phet, under  a  severe  trial. 

We  can  have  no  knowledge  of  God,  except  by  the  manifestations 
he  has  made  of  himself.  When  we  receive  these,  however  made, 
as  expressing  to  us  the  mind  and  character  of  God,  we  exercise 
faith  in  God  But  when  we  close  our  understandings  and  hearts 
against  these  manifestations,  or,  through  disrelish  of  them,  misin- 
terpret them  in  any  manner,  we  are  guilty  of  the  great  sin  of  un- 
belief, which  rejects  the  testimony  of  God,  and  makes  him  a  liar. 

Section  IX.— JUSTICE. 

God  is  perfectly  just.3 

Justice  consists  in  giving  to  every  one  his  due.  It  has  been  dis- 
tinguished into  Commutative  and  Distributive.  Commutative  Jus- 
tice is  fair  dealing  in  the  exchange  of  commodities,  and  belongs  to 
commerce.  Distributive  Justice  rewards  or  punishes  men  according 
to  their  actions,  and  appertains  to  government.  In  either  view, 
justice  relates  to  the  distribution  of  happiness,  or  the  means  of 
procuring  it,  and  presupposes  a  principle  or  rule  to  which  this  dis- 
tribution should  conform,  and,  according  to  which,  something  is  due 
to  the  parties.  Commutative  Justice  regulates  the  giving  of  one 
means  of  enjoyment  in  exchange  for  another,  so  as  not  to  disturb 
the  proportion  of  happiness  allotted  to  each ;  but  Distributive  Jus- 
tice rises  higher,  and  respects  the  very  allotment  or  distribution  of 
happiness,  giving  to  one,  and  withholding  from  another,  according 

1 2  Thess.  ii.  11.  2 1  Kings,  xxii. 

8  Job  xxxiv.  12 ;  Ps.  ix.  4 ;  xcii.  15  ;  Isaiah  xxviii.  17 ;  Rom.  ii.  6. 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  85 

to  rule.  It  is  in  the  latter  sense  only  that  justice  is  attributed  to 
God.  It  implies  the  existence  of  moral  government ;  and  it  is  the 
attribute  which  secures  a  faithful  and  perfect  administration  of  this 
government. 

Some  have  admitted  another  distinction,  to  which  the  name 
Public  Justice  has  been  given.  This  determines  the  character  of 
God's  moral  government,  and  the  rules  according  to  which  it 
proceeds.  It  may  be  regarded  as  a  question  of  definition,  whether 
the  existence  and  character  of  God's  moral  government  shall  be 
ascribed  to  his  justice  or  his  goodness.  As  this  government  tends 
to  the  greatest  good  of  the  universe,  there  appears  to  be  no  reason 
to  deny  that  it  originates  in  the  goodness  of  God ;  and  if  it  be 
ascribed  to  his  Public  Justice,  that  justice  may  be  considered  a 
modification  of  his  goodness. 

In  the  moral  government  of  God,  men  are  regarded  as  moral 
and  as  sentient  beings,  and  the  amount  of  their  enjoyments  is 
regulated  with  reference  to  their  moral  character.  The  precise 
adaptation  of  this  is  the  province  of  justice.  In  the  blindness  of 
human  depravity,  men  claim  enjoyments  as  a  natural  right,  irre- 
spective of  their  moral  character  and  conduct.  They  reject  the 
moral  government  of  God,  and  seek  happiness  in  their  own  way. 
This  is  their  rebellion,  and  in  this  the  justice  of  God  opposes  them. 
This  is  the  attribute  which  fills  them  with  terror,  and  arrays 
omnipotence  against  them.  The  moral  government  of  God  must 
be  overthrown,  and  the  monarch  of  the  universe  driven  from  his 
high  seat  of  authority,  or  there  is  no  hope  of  escape  for  the  sinner. 
He  would  gladly  rush  into  the  vast  storehouse  of  enjoyments  which 
infinite  goodness  has  provided,  and  claim  them  as  his  rvra,  and  riot 
on  them  at  pleasure;  but  the  sword  of  justice  guards  the  entrance. 
In  opposition  to  his  desires,  the  government  of  God  is  firmly 
established,  and  justice  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  his 
throne.  Even  in  the  present  world,  the  manifestations  of  this 
government  are  everywhere  visible ;  and  it  is  apparent  that  there 
is  a  God,  a  God  of  justice,  who  judgeth  in  the  earth  ;  but  the  grand 
exhibition  is  reserved  for  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  Con- 
science now,  in  God's  stead,  often  pronounces  sentence,  though  its 
voice  is  unheeded ;  but  the  sentence  from  the  lips  of  the  Supreme 
Judge  cannot  be  disregarded,  and  will  fix  the  sinner's  final  doom. 

Although  there  are  hearts  so  hard  as  to  be  unaffected  by  a  sense 


86  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

of  God's  justice,  a  right  view  of  this  awful  and  glorious  attribute 
inspires  that  fear  of  the  Lord  which  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom. 
An  abiding  assurance  that  a  just  God  sits  on  the  throne  of  the 
universe,  is  indispensable  to  the  proper  exercise  of  piety. 

Section  X.— HOLINESS. 

God  is  immaculately  holt.1 

Goodness,  truth  and  justice,  are  moral  attributes  of  God. 
Holiness  is  not  an  attribute  distinct  from  these ;  but  a  name  which 
includes  them  all,  in  view  of  their  opposition  to  contrary  qualities. 
It  implies  the  perfection  of  the  assemblage  ; — the  absence  of  every 
thing  in  it  contrary  to  either  of  the  properties  included. 

Men  are  unholy.  Even  the  purest  of  men  have  their  spots.  It 
is  useful  to  contrast  the  character  of  God,  in  this  respect,  with  that 
of  men.  It  increases  our  admiration  and  love,  adds  fervor  to  our 
devotion,  incites  to  worship  him  in  the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  to 
imitate  him  in  our  character  and  lives.  "Be  ye  holy,  for  I  am  holy." 

Section  XI.  — WISDOM. 

God  is  infinitely  wise.2 

Knowledge  and  wisdom,  though  often  confounded  by  careless 
thinkers,  are  different.  "Wisdom  always  has  respect  to  action.  Our 
senses  are  affected  by  external  objects,  and  perceptions  of  them 
arise  in  the  mind,  which  constitute  a  large  part  of  our  knowledge. 
We  learn  their  properties  and  relations,  and  this  knowledge,  laid 
up  in  the  memory,  becomes  a  valuable  store,  from  which  we  may 
take  what  may  be  necessary  for  use.  But  it  is  in  using  this  store 
that  wisdom  is  exhibited.  "When  impressions  from  without  have 
stirred  the  mental  machinery  within,  that  machinery,  in  turn, 
operates  on  things  without.  It  is  in  the  out-goings  of  the  mind 
that  wisdom  has  place,  and  is  concerned  in  forming*  our  plans  and 
purposes  of  action.  Our  knowledge  and  moral  principles  have 
much  influence  in  directing  our  conduct,  and  that  man  is  considered 
wise,  whose  knowledge  and  moral  principles  direct  his  conduct  well. 

1  Ex.  xv.  11 ;  Lev.  xi.  44 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  2  ;  Job.  iv.  18 ;  Ps.  v.  4,  5  ;  xxii.  3  ;  Isa. 
ri.  3  ;  Hab.  i.  13  ;  Matt.  v.  48  ;  1  John  i.  5  ;  Rev.  iv.  8. 

*  Job  iv.  18  ;  xxxvi.  5  ;  Ps.  civ.  24 ;  Prov.  xxi.  30  ;  Rom.  xi.  33  ;  1  Cor.  i.  25. 
1  Tim.  i.  17. 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  87 

Wisdom  is  therefore  regarded  as  consisting  in  the  selection  of  the 
best  end  of  action,  and  the  adoption  of  the  best  means  for  the 
accomplishment  of  this  end. 

God  is  infinitely  wise,  because  he  selects  the  best  possible  end 
of  action.  What  the  end  is  which  Jehovah  has  in  view  in  all  his 
works,  we  cannot  claim  to  comprehend.  The  Scriptures  speak  of 
the  glory  of  God  as  the  end  of  creation  and  redemption,  and  we 
seem  authorized  to  speak  of  this  as  the  end  of  all  his  works  ;  but 
what  is  the  full  import  of  the  phrase,  "the  glory  of  God?"  We 
suppose  it  to  signify  such  a  manifestation  of  his  perfections,  and 
especially  of  his  moral  perfections,  as  is  supremely  pleasing  to  him- 
self, and  therefore  to  all  intelligent  beings  who  are  like-minded 
with  him.     But  we  are  lost  in  the  contemplation. 

God  is  infinitely  wise,  because  he  adopts  the  best  possible  means 
for  the  accomplishment  of  the  end  which  he  has  in  view.  In 
creation  his  wisdom  made  them  all ; l  and  in  redemption  he  hath 
abounded  toward  us  in  all  wisdom.2  He  worketh  all  things  after 
the  counsel  of  his  will  ; 3  and  he  is  wise  in  counsel. 

The  wisdom  of  God  is  an  unfathomable  deep.  His  way  is  in  the 
sea,  and  his  path  in  the  mighty  waters.  0  the  depth  of  the  riches 
both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God ! 4  A  child  cannot 
comprehend  the  plans  of  a  sage  statesman ;  much  less  can  the 
wisest  of  men  comprehend  the  plans  of  the  only  wise  God.  We 
should  ever  bear  this  in  mind  when  we  undertake  to  inquire  into 
the  reasons  of  the  divine  procedure. 

The  question,  why  God  permitted  the  entrance  of  sin  into  the 
world,  has  baffled  the  wisdom  of  the  wise.  As  a  being  of  perfect 
holiness,  he  hates  sin  with  a  perfect  hatred.  Having  infinite 
power  to  exclude  it  from  his  dominions,  why  did  he  permit  its 
entrance  ?  As  the  benevolent  Father  of  his  great  family,  why  did 
he  permit  so  ruinous  an  evil  to  invade  it  ?  Was  there  some  over- 
sight in  his  plan,  some  failure  in  the  wisdom  of  his  arrangements, 
that  rendered  this  direful  disaster  possible  ?  As  our  faith  is  often 
perplexed  with  these  questions,  such  observations  as  the  following 
may  be  of  use  to  assist  its  weakness. 

1.  Sin  is  in  the  world;  and  God  is  infinitely  good  and  wise. 
The  first  of  these  propositions  expresses  a  fact  of  which  we  have 

1  Ps.  civ.  24.  2  Eph-  i#  8#  3  Eph>  L  n  4  Rom>  si>  33# 


88  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

daily  proof,  before  our  eyes  and  in  our  hearts ;  the  second  is  an 
indubitable  truth  of  natural  and  revealed  religion.  Though  we 
may  be  unable  to  reconcile  these  propositions,  they  are  both  worthy 
to  be  received  with  unwavering  faith.  No  man,  in  his  right  mind, 
can  doubt  either  of  them. 

2.  The  existence  of  sin  is  not  to  be  ascribed  to  weakness  in  God. 
He  could  easily  have  barred  it  out  of  his  dominions.  He  might 
have  declined  to  make  moral  agents,  and  have  filled  the  world  with 
creatures  possessing  no  moral  faculties,  and  therefore  incapable 
of  sinning.  Or,  for  aught  that  appears  to  the  contrary,  it  was  in 
his  power  to  create  moral  agents,  and  so  confirm  them  in  holiness 
from  the  first,  as  to  render  their  fall  impossible.  Or,  on  the  very 
first  appearance  of  sin  in  any  one  of  his  creatures,  he  might  have 
at  once  annihilated  the  transgressor,  and  have  prevented  the  evil 
from  spreading,  to  the  ruin  of  his  subjects,  or  even  remaining  in 
his  dominions.  If  we  can,  for  a  moment,  entertain  doubt  on  this 
point,  his  perfect  control  of  the  evil,  now  that  it  has  obtained 
entrance  into  his  dominion,  is  sufficient  to  confirm  our  faith.  It 
has  indeed  entered,  and  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  is  com- 
bined with  his  numerous  legions,  to  give  it  prevalence  and  triumph. 
But,  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  the  son  of  God  appeared  in 
human  nature.  He  chose  the  weakness  of  that  nature  for  the 
display  of  his  power,  in  crushing  the  head  of  the  old  serpent. 
Hence  Christ  is  the  power  of  God.  In  his  deepest  humiliation, 
in  the  hour  while  hanging  on  the  cross,  he  triumphed  over  his  foe, 
and  gave  proof  of  his  triumphant  power,  by  plucking  the  thief, 
who  expired  near  him,  from  the  very  jaws  of  destruction.  The 
cross  exhibits  the  brightest  display  of  omnipotence. 

3.  The  existence  of  sin  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  justice  of 
God.  It  is  the  province  of  justice  to  punish  the  sinner,  but  not  to 
annihilate  his  sin.  Justice,  in  the  wide  sense  in  which  it  is  called 
Public  Justice,  and  coincides  with  Goodness,  will  be  considered,  in 
its  relation  to  this  subject,  in  the  next  observation ;  but,  in  its  ordi- 
nary sense,  it  supposes  the  existence  of  moral  government,  and 
moral  agents,  and,  therefore,  the  possibility  of  transgression.  Laws 
are  made  with  reference  to  the  lawless  and  disobedient ;  and  the 
civil  ruler  would  be  armed  with  the  sword  in  vain,  if  there  could  be 
no  evil-doers  to  whom  he  might  be  a  terror.  Justice  does  not  pre- 
vent the  entrance  of  sin,  but  finds  in  it  an  occasion  for  its  highest 


ATTRIBUTES    OF    GOD.  89 

exercise.  This  attribute  is  displayed  awfully  and  gloriously  in  the 
punishment  of  offenders.  On  seeing  the  destruction  of  Antichrist, 
and  the  smoke  of  his  torment  ascending  up  for  ever  and  ever,  the 
inhabitants  of  heaven  are  represented  as  saying:  "Alleluia;  for 
the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth."1  It  is  in  the  exercise  of  his 
punitive  justice  that  they  understand  his  government,  and  where- 
fore he  is  seated  on  the  throne.  Justice  and  judgment  are  the 
habitation  of  his  throne. 

4.  The  existence  of  sin  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  goodness  of 
God.  Even  those  who  explain  goodness  to  be  the  love  of  happiness 
for  its  own  sake,  and  understand  utility,  or  the  production  of  hap- 
piness, to  be  the  foundation  of  virtue,  do  not  conclude  that  God's 
goodness  must  necessarily  exclude  moral  evil  from  the  world.  On 
the  contrary,  they  suppose  that  he  will  overrule  the  evil  so  as  ulti- 
mately to  produce  a  larger  amount  of  happiness  in  the  universe, 
than  would  have  existed  had  moral  evil  never  entered.  If  this  be 
taken  as  a  mere  hypothesis,  until  it  be  disproved,  it  will  be  sufficient 
to  answer  objections  ;  and  the  hypothesis  cannot  be  disproved  by  a 
mind  incapable  of  comprehending  the  infinite  subject.  If  God's 
goodness  aims  at  the  well-being  of  the  universe,  rather  than  at  its 
happiness,  another  hypothesis,  impossible  to  be  disproved,  may  be 
made,  that  God  overrules  the  existence  of  sin  so  as  to  produce  most 
important  moral  benefits.  What  these  may  be,  we  cannot  be  ex- 
pected to  understand ;  but  of  one  benefit,  at  least,  we  can  form  a 
conjecture.  As  God's  moral  perfections  are  the  glory  of  his  cha- 
racter, so  his  moral  government  is  the  glory  of  his  universal 
scheme ;  and  it  may,  therefore,  have  been  pleasing  to  his  infinite 
mind  to  permit  the  entrance  of  sin,  because  it  gave  occasion  for  the 
display  of  his  justice  and  moral  government.  It  may  accord  best 
with  his  infinite  wisdom,  to  confirm  his  obedient  subjects  in  holiness, 
not  by  physical  necessity,  but  by  moral  influence ;  and  the  display 
of  his  justice  and  moral  government  must  be  a  most  important 
means  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  end.  How  could  the  intel- 
ligences that  are  to  expand  for  ever  in  the  presence  of  his  throne, 
have  those  moral  impressions  which  are  necessary  to  the  perfection 
of  their  holiness,  if  they  should  for  ever  remain  ignorant'  of  his 
justice,  and  hatred  of  sin  ? 

''Rev.  xix.  6. 


90  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

Ir  contemplating  this  subject,  it  is  important  to  keep  in  view, 
that  God's  goodness  is  to  be  estimated  by  its  aggregate  effect.  As 
including  the  love  of  happiness,  it  provides  enjoyments  for  his  crea- 
tures :  in  this  life,  innumerable  and  ever  present,  though  not  infi- 
nite,, or  unmixed ;  and  in  the  life  to  come,  what  eye  has  not  seen, 
or  ear  heard,  or  the  heart  of  man  conceived.  This  mass  of  enjoy- 
ment he  has  not  thrown  before  his  creatures,  that  each  may  secure 
to  himself  what  he  can ;  but  infinite  justice  guards  the  distribution 
of  it.  The  rule  of  distribution  is  that  which  Public  Justice,  or 
God's  goodness,  considered  as  the  love  of  well-being,  has  prescribed 
in  the  establishment  of  his  moral  government.  Infinite  goodness 
secures  the  greatest  possible  good  from  his  universal  administration, 
while  perfect  justice  regulates  all  the  details  of  that  administration, 
in  beautiful  harmony  with  the  grand  design. 

5.  Although  to  do  evil  that  good  may  come  is  reprobated  in  God's 
word,  yet  to  permit  evil,  which  he  overrules  for  good,  accords  with 
his  method  of  procedure.  It  is  said :  "  The  wrath  of  man  shall 
praise  thee,  and  the  remainder  of  wrath  thou  shalt  restrain."1  In 
this  it  is  clearly  implied  that  a  portion  of  the  wrath  is  unrestrained, 
or  permitted,  and  is  overruled  for  good.  Paul  asks,  "What  if  God, 
willing  to  show  his  wrath,  and  make  his  power  known,  endured  with 
much  long-suffering  the  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction  ?"2 
Endurance  and  long-suffering  is  the  permission  of  the  continuance 
of  the  evil ;  and  the  display  of  God's  justice  and  power  thereby,  is 
manifestly  supposed  in  the  Apostle's  question.  The  crucifixion  of 
Christ,  a  deed  perpetrated  by  wicked  hands,  was  permitted  by  God. 
He  was  even  delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknow- 
ledge of  God.  This  event  has  been  overruled  to  good  inconceivably 
great.  Why  may  we  not  suppose  that  it  accorded  with  infinite 
wisdom  to  permit  the  entrance  of  sin,  with  a  view  to  the  glorious 
scheme  of  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  Christ  crucified  is 
the  wisdom  of  God.  In  his  cross,  the  power,  goodness,  justice,  and 
wisdom  of  God,  are  harmoniously  and  gloriously  displayed.  While 
we  glory  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  we  do  not  forget  that  the  enemies 
of  the  cross  are  to  perish.  Mournful  as  the  fact  is,  our  hearts  will 
fully  approve  the  sentence  which  will  be  executed  upon  them,  when 
we  shall  hear  it  pronounced  by  the  lips  of  the  righteous  judge. 

1  Ps.  lxxvi.  10.  2  Rom.  ix.  22. 


ATTRIBUTES     OF    GOD.  91 

Such  was  the  benevolence  of  Paul's  heart,  that  he  was  willing  to 
lay  down  his  life  for  the  salvation  of  souls ;  yet  so  overpowering 
was  his  sense  of  Christ's  claim  to  the  love  of  every  human  heart, 
that  he  did  not  hesitate  to  exclaim :  "If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  anathema  maranatha."1  If  it  accorded 
with  his  love  of  souls  to  pronounce  this  imprecation,  it  will  accord 
with  the  benevolence  of  God  to  punish  the  enemies  of  Christ  with 
everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from 
the  glory  of  his  power.  If  our  minds  now  fail  fully  to  approve  the 
awful  sentence,  it  is  because  we  inadequately  conceive  the  glory 
and  loveliness  of  Christ. 

It  should  fill  us  with  joy,  that  infinite  wisdom  guides  the  affairs 
of  the  world.  Many  of  its  events  are  shrouded  in  darkness  and 
mystery,  and  inextricable  confusion  sometimes  seems  to  reign. 
Often  wickedness  prevails,  and  God  seems  to  have  forgotten  the 
creatures  that  he  has  made.  Our  own  path  through  life  is  dark 
and  devious,  and  beset  with  difficulties  and  dangers.  How  full  of 
consolation  is  the  doctrine,  that  infinite  wisdom  directs  every  event, 
brings  order  out  of  confusion,  and  light  out  of  darkness,  and,  to 
those  who  love  God,  causes  all  things,  whatever  be  their  present 
aspect  and  apparent  tendency,  to  work  together  for  good. 

CONCLUSION. 

The  doctrine  concerning  God  harmonizes  with  the  affections  of 
the  pious  heart,  and  tends  to  cherish  them.  The  moral  nature  of 
those  who  do  not  love  God,  demonstrates  his  existence  and  their 
obligation  to  love  him,  and  consequently,  their  nature  is  at  war  with 
itself.  There  is  a  conflict  within,  between  conscience  and  the  de- 
praved affections.  The  moral  principle  is  in  the  unrenewed  heart, 
overrun  with  unholy  passions ;  and  it  cannot  be  duly  developed, 
until  the  affections  are  sanctified.  When,  by  this  change,  harmony 
has  been  produced  in  the  inner  man,  all  that  is  within  will  har- 
monize with  the  doctrine  concerning  God.  The  mind,  in  its  proper 
and  healthy  action,  joyfully  receives  the  doctrine,  and  finds  in  God 
the  object  of  its  highest  love.  The  pious  man  rejoices  that  God 
exists,  and  that  his  attributes  are  what  nature  and  revelation  pro- 

1 1  Cor.  xvi.  22. 


92  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

claim  them  to  be.  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee  ?  and  there 
is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee."1 

The  doctrine  concerning  God  not  only  harmonizes  with  inward 
piety,  but  tends  to  cherish  it.  If  love  to  God  exists  when  he  is 
but  partially  known,  it  will  increase  as  our  knowledge  of  him  in- 
creases. As  the  pious  man  studies  the  character  of  God,  the 
beauty  and  glory  of  that  character  open  to  his  view,  and  his  heart  is 
drawn  out  towards  it  with  more  intense  affection.  With  such  soul- 
ravishing  views  the  Psalmist  had  been  favored,  when  he  exclaimed, 
"  0  God,  thou  art  my  God ;  early  will  I  seek  thee :  my  soul 
thirsteth  for  thee,  my  flesh  longeth  for  thee  in  a  dry  and  thirsty 
land,  where  no  water  is ;  to  see  thy  power  and  thy  glory,  so  as  I 
have  seen  thee  in  the  sanctuary."2 

The  love  of  God,  which  is  increased  by  a  true  knowledge  of  him, 
is  not  a  mere  feeling  of  gratitude  for  blessings  received.  Many 
persons  talk  of  God's  goodness,  and  profess  to  love  him,  who  have 
no  pleasure  in  contemplating  his  holiness  and  justice,  and  to  whom 
these  are  unwelcome  attributes.  When  such  persons  stand  before 
him  in  the  last  judgment,  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  they  will  find 
him  to  be  a  different  God  from  that  which  they  loved  and  praised 
on  earth.  Love  to  the  true  God  is  love  to  the  God  of  holiness  and 
justice,  the  God  in  whom  every  moral  perfection  is  united ;  and  if 
our  love  is  of  this  kind,  we  shall  delight  to  survey  the  glories  of  the 
divine  character,  and,  apart  from  all  views  of  the  benefits  received 
from  him,  shall  be  enamored  of  his  essential  loveliness. 

The  love  to  God  which  increases  by  a  true  knowledge  of  him,  is 
pervaded  with  a  deep-felt  reverence  for  his  character.  The  familiar 
levity  with  which  he  is  sometimes  approached  and  addressed,  by  no 
means  comports  with  the  awful  exhibitions  of  himself  which  he  has 
made  in  his  works  and  in  his  word.  They  who,  while  they  profess 
to  love  him,  have  no  solemn  sense  of  his  infinite  grandeur  and  holi- 
ness, have  yet  to  learn  the  fear  of  God,  which  is  the  beginning  of 
wisdom.  The  true  knowledge  of  God  will  rectify  this  evil  in  the 
heart. 

The  true  love  of  God  is  accompanied  with  humility.  When  we 
are  absorbed  in  the  contemplation  of  the  human  mind,  we  may  well 
be  filled  with  admiration  of  its  powers  and  capacities.     But  lately, 


1  Ps.  lxxiii.  25.  2  Ps.  lxiii.  1,  2 


ATTRIBUTES    OF   GOD.  9B 

it  rose  into  being,  from  the  darkness  of  nonentity,  a  spark  so 
feebly  glimmering,  that  an  omniscient  eye  only  could  perceive  its 
light.  In  the  short  period  which  has  intervened,  it  has  gradually 
increased  in  splendor,  and  has  probably  astonished  the  world  by 
its  brilliance.  What  was  once  the  feeblest  ray  of  intellect,  has  be- 
come a  Newton,  a  Locke,  a  Howard,  or  a  Napoleon.  And  when 
we  conceive  of  this  immortal  mind,  as  continuing  to  expand  its 
powers  throughout  a  boundless  future,  we  are  ready  to  form  a  high 
estimate  of  human  greatness.  But  when  we  remember  that  man, 
whatever  he  is,  and  whatever  he  is  capable  of,  is  a  creature  formed 
by  the  hand  of  God,  and  endowed  by  him  with  all  these  noble 
faculties;  when  we  consider  that,  with  all  his  advancement  through 
eternal  ages,  he  will  forever  be  as  nothing,  compared  with  the  in- 
finitude of  God ;  and  when  we  look  back  into  past  eternity,  and 
contemplate  God  as  existing  with  all  this  boundlessness  of  perfec- 
tion, ages  of  ages  before  our  feeble  existence  commenced ;  we  may 
well  turn  away  from  all  admiration  of  human  greatness,  and  ex- 
claim, "  Lord,  what  is  man,  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?" 

But  the  strongest  incentive  to  humility  is  found  in  contrasting 
our  depravity  with  God's  holiness.  Noble  as  the  human  intellect 
is,  it  is  ruined  by  its  apostasy  from  God.  Every  depraved  son 
of  Adam,  who  has  studied  the  attributes  of  God,  and  has  attained 
to  some  knowledge  of  his  immaculate  holiness,  may  well  exclaim, 
in  deep  humility,  "  Wo  is  me  !  a  man  of  unclean  lips ;  for  mine 
eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts."1 

The  true  knowledge  of  God  gives  confidence  in  him.  In  view 
of  his  truth,  we  learn  to  put  unwavering  trust  in  the  manifestations 
of  himself  which  he  has  made,  and  the  promises  which  he  has  given, 
for  the  foundation  of  our  hope.  There  are  times  when  the  good 
man  loses  his  sensible  enjoyment  of  the  divine  favor,  and  when  the 
sword  of  justice  appears  pointed  at  his  breast ;  but  even  then,  with 
the  true  knowledge  and  love  of  God  in  his  heart,  he  can  say, 
"  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him." 

The  doctrine  concerning  God  which  the  Bible  teaches,  confirms 
its  claim  to  be  regarded  as  the  word  of  God. 

This  doctrine,  as  we  have  seen,  is  precisely  adapted  to  man's 
moral  nature,  and  calls  forth  the  moral  and  religious  principles 

1  Isaiah  vi.  5. 


94  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING    GOD. 

with  which  his  Creator  has  endowed  him,  into  their  best  and  noblest 
exercise.  If  viewed  apart  from  his  relation  to  God,  man,  the  crea- 
ture so  wonderfully  endowed,  is  an  enigma  in  the  universe ;  but  the 
doctrine  concerning  God  solves  the  mystery.  The  tendency  of 
this  doctrine  to  exert  a' sanctifying  influence,  at  the  very  origin  of 
all  human  feeling  and  action,  demonstrates  that  it  comes  from  God. 
He  who  experiences  its  sanctifying  power  on  his  heart,  has  a  proof 
of  its  truth  that  nothing  else  can  give.  For  this  doctrine,  we  are 
chiefly  indebted  to  the  Bible.  Here  God,  who  has  dimly  exhibited 
himself  in  his  works,  comes  forth  in  a  direct  communication,  and 
like  the  sun  in  the  heavens,  makes  himself  visible  by  his  own  light. 
If  the  religious  principle  within  us  acted  as  it  ought,  the  doctrine 
of  the  Bible  would  be  as  precisely  adapted  to  us  as  the  light  of 
the  sun  is  to  the  eye ;  and  we  should  have  as  thorough  conviction 
that  the  God  of  the  Bible  exists,  as  we  have  that  the  sun  exists, 
when  we  see  him  shining  forth  with  all  his  splendor  in  the  mid- 
heavens. 

The  proof  that  the  Bible  is  the  word  of  God,  will  accumulate  as 
we  make  progress  in  our  investigation  of  religious  truth.  We  have 
advanced  one  step,  by  our  inquiries  into  the  existence  and  attributes 
of  God  ;  and  the  glory  of  the  Bible-doctrine  concerning  God,  has 
shone  on  our  path  with  dazzling  brightness.  Let  us  continue  to 
prosecute  our  studies,  guided  by  this  holy  book ;  and  if  we  open 
our  hearts  to  the  sanctifying  power  of  its  truth,  we  shall  have  in- 
creasing proof,  in  its  influence  on  our  souls,  that  it  comes  from  the 
God  of  holiness. 


BOOK    THIRD. 

DOCTEINE    CONCERNING    THE   WILL 
AND  WORKS  OF  GOD. 


INTRODUCTION 


If  any  one  supposes  that  religion  consists  merely  of  self-denial 
A,nd  painful  austerities,  and  that  it  is  filled  with  gloom  and  melan- 
choly, to  the  exclusion  of  all  happiness,  he  greatly  mistakes  its  true 
character.  False  religions,  and  false  views  of  the  true  religion, 
may  be  liable  to  this  charge ;  but  the  religion  which  has  God  for 
its  author,  and  which  leads  the  soul  to  God,  is  full  of  peace  and 
joy.  It  renders  us  cheerful  amidst  the  trials  of  life,  contented  with 
all  the  allotments  of  Divine  Providence,  happy  in  the  exercises  of 
piety  and  devotion,  and  joyful  in  the  hope  of  an  endless  felicity. 
Heaven  is  near  in  prospect ;  and,  while  on  the  way  to  that  world 
of  perfect  and  eternal  bliss,  we  are  permitted,  in  some  measure, 
to  anticipate  its  joys,  being,  even  here,  blessed  with  all  spiritual 
blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.2  We  are  enabled,  not 
only  to  pursue  our  pilgrimage  to  the  good  land  with  content  and 
cheerfulness,  but  even  to  "delight  ourselves  in  the  Lord."3  Our 
happiness  is  not  merely  the  absence  of  grief  and  pain,  but  it  is 
positive  delight. 

1  Ps.  xxxvii.  4.   Delight  thyself  in  the  Lord. 
Ps.  xl.  8.   I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my  God. 

Ps.  cxix.  47.   I  will  delight  myself  in  thy  commandments. 
Pom.  vii.  22.   I  delight  in  the  law  of  God. 
Ps..  cvii.  22.   Declare  his  works  with  rejoicing. 

2  Eph.  i.  3.  s  ps#  xxxvii.  4. 

(95) 


96  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD; 

The  delight  which  attends  other  religious  exercises  should  be  felt 
in  the  investigation  of  religious  truth,  and  should  stimulate  to  dili- 
gence and  perseverance.  Divine  truth  is  not  only  sanctifying,  but 
it  is  also  beatifying.  To  the  ancient  saints  it  was  sweeter  than 
honey  and  the  honey-comb;1  and  the  early  Christians,  in  " be- 
lieving" the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  "  rejoiced  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory."2  If  we  loved  the  truth  as  we  ought,  we  should 
excellence  equal  delight  in  receiving  it;  and  the  careful  investiga- 
tion of  it  would  be  a  source  of  pure  and  abiding  pleasure.  It 
would  not  suffice  to  employ  our  intellectual  powers  in  the  discussion 
of  perplexing  questions  appertaining  to  religion,  but  we  should  find 
a  rich  feast  in  the  truth  that  may  be  known  and  read  by  all.  The 
man  who  indulges  his  skeptical  doubts,  and  suffers  himself  to  be 
detained  by  questions  to  no  profit,  is  like  one  who,  when  a  boun- 
tiful feast  is  spread  before  him,  instead  of  enjoying  the  offered  food, 
employs  himself  in  examining  a  supposed  flaw  in  the  dish  in  which 
it  is  served.  The  glorious'  truths  which  are  plainly  revealed  con- 
cerning God,  and  the  things  of  God,  are  sufficient  to  enable  every 
one  to  delight  himself  in  the  Lord. 

We  have  before  seen  that  love  to  God  lies  at  the  foundation  of 
true  religion.  Love,  considered  as  simple  benevolence,  has  for  its 
object  the  production  of  happiness,  and  not  the  receiving  of  it. 
But,  by  the  wise  arrangements  of  infinite  goodness,  the  producing 
of  happiness  blesses  him  that  gives  as  well  as  him  that  receives. 
It  is  even  "more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."3  But  when  God 
is  the  object  of  our  love,  as  we  cannot  increase  his  happiness,  we 
delight  in  it  as  already  perfect ;  and  all  the  outflowing  of  our  love 
to  him,  finding  the  measure  of  his  bliss  already  full,  returns  back 
on  ourselves,  filling  us  also  with  the  fulness  of  God.  God  is  love ; 
and  to  love  God  with  all  the  heart  is  to  have  the  heart  filled,  to  the 
full  measure  of  its  capacity,  with  the  blessedness  of  the  divine 
nature.     This  is  the  fulness  of  delight. 

In  the  existence  and  attributes  of  God  a  sufficient  foundation  is 
laid  for  the  claim  of  supreme  love  to  him ;  but,  for  the  active  exer- 
cise of  the  holy  affection,  God  must  be  viewed  not  merely  as  exist- 
ing, but  as  acting.  To  produce  delight  in  him,  his  perfections 
must  be  manifested.     So  we  enjoy  the  objects  of  our  earthly  love 

1  Ps.  xix.  10.  2  1  Pet.  i.  8.  3  Acts  xx.  35. 


DUTY    OF    DELIGHTING    IN    THEM.  97 

by  their  presence,  with  us,  and  the  display  of  those  qualities  whick 
attract  our  hearts.  Heaven  is  full  of  bliss,  because  its  inhabitants 
not  only  love  God,  but  see  the  full  manifestations  of  his  glory.  T  j 
enjoy  God  on  earth,  we  must  contemplate  him  in  such  manifestations 
of  himself  as  he  has  been  pleased  to  make  to  us  who  dwell  on  his 
footstool.  These  we  may  discover  in  the  declarations  of  his  will, 
and  in  his  works,  which  are  the  execution  of  his  will.  In  a  con- 
templation of  these,  the  pious  heart  finds  a  source  of  pure,  ele- 
vating delight. 

When  the  Son  of  God  consented  to  appear  in  human  nature  for 
the  salvation  of  man,  he  said :  "  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  my 
God."  1  If  the  same  mind  were  in  us  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  we, 
too,  would  delight  in  the  will  of  God.  We  should  be  able  to  say 
with  David,  "I  will  delight  myself  in  thy  commandments;"  and 
with  Paul,  "I  delight  in  the  law  of  God."  We  should  yield  obe- 
dience to  every  precept,  not  reluctantly,  but  cheerfully ;  not  cheer- 
fully only,  but  with  joy  and  delight.  It  would  be  to  us  meat  and 
drink  to  do  the  will  of  God,  as  it  was  to  our  blessed  Lord.  Our 
religious  enjoyment  would  consist  not  merely  in  receiving  good 
from  God,  but  in  rendering  active  service  to  him ;  like  the  happy 
spirits  before  the  throne,  who  serve  God  day  and  night,  and  delight 
in  his  service.  Not  only  should  we  delight  to  render  personal  ser- 
vice to  our  Sovereign,  but  we  should  desire  his  will  to  be  done  by 
all  others,  and  should  rejoice  in  his  universal  dominion.  "  The 
Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  rejoice." 

As  the  ancient  saints  delighted  in  the  will  and  government  of 
God,  so  they  delighted  in  his  works.  They  saw  in  them  the  mani-. 
festations  of  his  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness ;  and  they  delighted 
to  meditate  on  them.  His  glory,  displayed  in  the  heavens,  and  his 
handy  work,  visible  in  earth,  they  contemplated  with  holy  pleasure. 
They  rejoiced  to  remember,  "It  is  he  that  made  us;"  and,  in  ap- 
proaching him  with  religious  worship,  they  were  accustomed  to  ad- 
dress him  as  the  Creator  of  all  things  :  "  Lord,  thou  art  God,  which 
hast  made  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  all  that  in  them  is." 2 

The  goodness  displayed  in  God's  works  awakens  gratitude  in  the 
pious  man.  While  he  enjoys  the  gift,  he  recognises  the-  hand 
which  bestows  it;  and  each  blessing  is  rendered  more  dear,  because 

1  Ps.  xl.  8.  s  Acts  iv.  24. 


98  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

conferred  by  him  whom  he  supremely  loves.  He  sees  in  creation  a 
vast  store-house  of  enjoyment,  and  blesses  the  author  of  it.  He 
receives  from  the  providence  of  God  the  innumerable  benefits  which 
are  every  day  bestowed,  and  he  blesses  the  kind  bestower.  God 
is  in  every  mercy,  and  his  heart,  in  enjoying  it,  goes  out  ever  to 
God,  with  incessant  praise  and  thanksgiving. 

The  trial  of  our  delight  in  God  is  experienced  when  affliction 
comes.  The  pious  man  feels  that  this,  too,  is  from  the  hand  of 
God.  So  thought  all  the  saints,  of  whose  religious  exercises  the 
Bible  gives  us  an  account.  They  bowed  under  affliction  in  the 
spirit  of  resignation  to  God,  as  the  author  of  the  affliction.  So 
Job,1  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be 
the  name  of  the  Lord."  So  David,2  "  I  was  dumb,  I  opened  not 
my  mouth;  because  thou  didst  it."  So  Eli,3  "It  is  the  Lord;  let 
him  do  what  seemeth  him  good."  So  Paul's  companions,4  "We 
ceased,  saying,  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  done."  The  ancient  saints 
believed  in  an  overruling  Providence,  and  they  received  all  afflic- 
tions as  ordered  by  him,  in  every  particular ;  and  on  this  faith  the 
resignation  was  founded  by  which  their  eminent  piety  was  distin- 
guished. To  the  flesh,  the  affliction  was  not  joyous,  but  grievous, 
and,  therefore,  they  could  not  delight  in  it,  when  considered  in 
itself;  but,  when  enduring  it  with  keenest  anguish,  they  could  still 
say,  with  Job,  "Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  They  firmly 
believed  that  the  dispensation  was  wisely  and  kindly  ordered,  and 
that  God  would  bring  good  out  of  the  evil ;  and,  however  oppressed 
with  suffering,  and  filled  with  present  sorrow,  they  still  trusted  in 
God ;  and  delight  in  him  alleviated  their  misery,  and  mingled  with 
their  sorrows. 

Let  love  to  God  burn  in  our  hearts  while  we  contemplate  his  ex- 
istence and  attributes.  Let  delight  in  him  rise  to  the  highest  rap- 
ture of  which  earthly  minds  are  susceptible,  while  we  study  his  will 
and  works.  The  grand  work  of  redemption,  into  which  the  angels 
especially  desire  to  look,  and  which  is  the  chief  theme  of  the  song 
of  the  glorified,  is  fitted  to  produce  higher  ecstasy ;  but  even  the 
themes  of  creation  and  providence  may  fill  us  with  delight,  if  we 
approach  them  as  we  Ought.  When  the  foundations  of  the  earth 
were  laid,  the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and  all  the  sons  of  God 


1  Job  i.  21.  2  Ps.  xxxix.  9.  3  1  Sam.  iii.  18.  *  Acts  xxi.  14. 


WILL    OF    GOD. 


99 


shouted  for  joy ;  and  angels  now  delight  to  be  the  ministers  of 
God's  providence.     Let  us,  with  like  devotion  to  Almighty  God, 


delight  in  his  will  and  works. 


CHAPTER  I. 

WILL     OF     GOD. 


The  term  will,  which  always  imports  desire,  is  variously  applied, 
according  to  the  object  of  that  desire. 

1.  It  denotes  intention  or  purpose  to  act.  It  is  said  of  Apollos 
"  His  will  was  not  at  all  to  come  at  this  time,"1  i.  e.,  he  had  nofr 
formed  the  intention  or  purpose  to  come.  In  this  sense,  the  will 
of  God  is  spoken  of:  "  According  to  the  purpose  of  him  who  work- 
eth  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will."2  Purpose  or 
intention  may  exist  before  the  time  of  action  arrives.  When  it  has 
arrived,  the  mind  puts  forth  an  act  termed  volition,  to  produce  the 
desired  effect.  In  human  beings,  purposes  may  be  fickle,  and  may 
undergo  change  before  the  time  for  action  comes ;  but  God's  pur- 
pose or  intention  is  never  changed ;  and  when  the  time  for  pro- 
ducing the  purposed  effect  arrives,  we  are  not  to  conceive  that  a 
new  volition  arises  in  the  mind  of  God;  but  the  effect  follows, 
according  to  the  will  of  God,  without  any  new  effort  on  his  part. 

2.  It  denotes  a  desire  to  act,  restrained  by  stronger  opposing 
desires,  or  other  counteracting  influences.  Pilate  was  "willing" 
to  release  Jesus ; 3  but  other  considerations,  present  to  his  mind, 
overruled  this  desire,  and  determined  his  action.  We  are  com- 
pelled to  conceive  of  the  divine  mind,  from  the  knowledge  which 
we  possess  of  our  own ;  and  the  Scriptures  adapt  their  language 
to  our  conceptions.  In  this  way,  a  desire  to  act  is  sometimes 
attributed  to  God,  when  opposing  considerations  prevent  his  action. 
"  I  would  scatter  them,  were  it  not  that  I  feared  the  wrath  of  the 
enemy."4  uHow  often  would  I  have  gathered,  &c,  and  ye  would 
not."5 

1  1  Cor.  xvi.  12.        2  Eph.  i.  11.        3  Luke  xxiii.  20.        4  Deut.  xxxii.  27. 
*  Matt,  xxiii.  37. 


100  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

3.  It  is  used  with  reference  to  an  external  object  that  is  desired, 
or  an  action  which  it  is  desired  that  another  should  perform. 
"  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouldst  not." l  "Be  it  unto  thee  as  thou 
wilt."2  "Ask  what  ye  will."3  "What  will  ye,  that  I  should  do."4  In 
this  sense,  as  expressing  simply  what  is  in  itself  desirable  to  God, 
will  is  attributed  to  him.  "  Not  willing  that  any  should  perish, 
but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance."5  " I  have  no  pleasure 
in  the  death  of  the  wicked,  &c."6  "  This  is  the  will  of  God,  even 
your  sanctification."7 

4.  Closely  allied  to  the  last  signification,  and  perhaps  included 
in  it,  is  that  use  of  the  term  will,  in  which  it  denotes  command, 
requirement.  When  the  person,  whose  desire  or  pleasure  it  is  that 
an  action  should  be  performed  by  another,  has  authority  over  that 
other,  the  desire  expressed  assumes  the  character  of  precept.  The 
expressed  will  of  a  suppliant,  is  petition ;  the  expressed  will  of  a 
ruler,  is  command.  What  we  know  that  it  is  the  pleasure  of  God 
we  should  do,  it  is  our  duty  to  do,  and  his  pleasure  made  known  to 
us  becomes  a  law. 

Will  of  Command. 

It  is  specially  important  to  distinguish  between  the  first  and  last 
of  the  significations  which  have  been  enumerated.  In  the  first,  the 
will  of  God  refers  exclusively  to  his  own  action,  and  imports  his 
fixed  determination  as  to  what  he  will  do.  It  is  called  his  will  of 
purpose,  and  always  takes  effect.  In  the  last  sense,  it  refers  to 
the  actions  of  his  creatures,  and  expresses  what  it  would  be  pleas- 
ing to  him  that  they  should  do.  This  is  called  his  will  of  precept, 
and  it  always  fails  to  take  effect  when  the  actions  of  his  creatures 
do  not  please  him,  i.  e.,  when  they  are  in  violation  of  his  com- 
mands. The  will  of  purpose  is  intended,  when  it  is  said,  "  Accord- 
ing to  the  purpose  of  him  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel 
of  his  own  will,  "8  and,  "  He  doeth  according  to  his  will  in  the  army 
of  heaven,  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth."9  The  will  of 
precept  is  intended,  when  it  is  said,  "  Thy  will  be  done  in  earth, 
as  it  is  in  heaven.10  Let  it  be  noted  that,  in  the  former  case,  God 
only  is  the  agent,  and  the  effect  is   certain;  in  the  latter,  his 

1  Heb.  x.  5.  2  Matt.  xv.  28.  8  John  xv.  7.  4  Mark  xv.  12. 

6  2  Peter  iii.  9.        6  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11.     7 1  Thess.  iv.  3.        8  Eph.  i.  11. 
9  Dan.  iv.  35.  10  Matt.  vi.  10. 


WILL    OF    GOD.  101 

creatures  are  the  agents,  and  the  effect  is  not  an  object  of  certain 
expectation,  but  of  petition. 

God's  Will  op  Command,  however  made  known  to  us,  is 
our  rule  of  duty.1 

The  Scriptures  make  the  will  of  God  the  rule  of  duty,  both  to 
those  who  have  the  means  of  clear  knowledge,  and  those  who  have 
not.  The  disobedience  of  the  former  will  be  punished  with  man^ 
stripes,  that  of  the  latter  with  few.  No  man  will  be  held  account- 
able, except  for  the  means  of  knowledge  that  are  within  his  reach  ; 
but  these,  even  in  the  case  of  the  benighted  heathen,  are  sufficient 
to  render  them  inexcusable.  We  have  no  right  to  dictate  to  God  in 
what  manner  he  shall  make  his  will  known  to  us ;  but  we  are  bound 
to  avail  ourselves  of  all  possible  means  for  obtaining  the  knowledge 
of  it ;  and,  when  known,  we  are  bound  to  obey  it  perfectly,  and 
from  the  heart. 

Various  terms  are  used  to  denote  the  will  of  God,  as  made  known 
in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  statutes,  judgments,  laws,  precepts,  ordi- 
nances, &c.  The  two  great  precepts,  which  lie  at  the  foundation 
of  all  the  laws,  are,  thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 
heart,  and  thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself.  The  first  of 
these  is  expanded  into  the  four  commandments,  which  constitute 
the  first  table  of  the  decalogue ;  the  second  into  the  six  command- 
ments, which  constitute  the  second  table.  The  decalogue  was 
given  for  a  law  to  the  children  of  Israel,  as  is  apparent  from  its  in- 
troduction. "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  have  brought  thee  out 
of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage."2  It  was,  how- 
ever, distinguished  from  the  other  laws  given  to  that  nation,  by 
being  pronounced  audibly  from  Sinai  with  the  voice  of  God,  and  by 
being  engraved  with  the  finger  of  God  on  the  tables  of  stone. 
When  we  examine  its  precepts,  we  discover  that  they  respect  the 
relations  of  men,  as  men,  to  God  and  to  one  another ;  and  we  find, 
in  the  New  Testament,  that  their  obligation  is  regarded  as  extend- 
ing to  Gentiles  under  the  gospel  dispensation.3  We  infer,  therefore, 
that  the  decalogue,  though  given  to  the  Israelites,  respected  them 
as  men,  and  not  as  a  peculiar  people,  and  is  equally  obligatory  on 
all  men. 

The  ceremonial  law  respected  the  children  of  Israel  as  a  wor- 

1  Ps.  xl.  8;  cxliii.  10;  Matt.  vi.  10;  Rom.  ii.  18;  Ex.  xx;  Rom.  ii.  12-15; 
Eccl.  xii.  13.  2  Ex.  xx.  2.  3  Rom.  xiii.  8,  9  j  Eph.  vi.  2. 


102  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

shipping  congregation,  called  "the  Congregation  of  the  Lord." 
It  commenced  with  the  institution  of  the  passover,  and  ended  when 
Christ  our  passover  was  sacrificed  for  us,  and  when  the  hand- 
writing of  ordinances  was  nailed  to  the  cross.  Then  its  obligation 
ceased.  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  are  ceremonies  of  the 
Christian  dispensation,  obligatory  on  the  disciples  of  Christ,  to  the 
end  of  the  world. 

The  judicial  law  was  given  to  the  Israelites  as  a  nation,  and  is 
not  obligatory  on  any  other  people.  The  principles  of  justice  on 
which  it  was  based,  are  universal,  and  should  be  incorporated  into 
every  civil  code. 

Will  of  Purpose. 

God  wills  whatever  he  does.1 

God  is  a  voluntary  agent.  There  are  many  powers  in  nature 
which  operate  without  volition.  Fire  consumes  the  fuel,  steam 
moves  the  engine,  and  poison  takes  away  life ;  but  these  have  no 
will.  Even  beings  that  possess  will,  sometimes  act  involuntarily, 
and  sometimes  against  their  will,  or  by  compulsion  from  a  superior 
power.  God  acts  voluntarily  in  every  thing  that  he  does ;  —  not 
by  physical  necessity ;  not  by  compulsion  from  any  superior 
power ;  not  by  mistake,  or  oversight,  or  power  unintentionally 
exerted.  Men  may  plead  in  apology  for  their  acts,  that  they  were 
done  in  thoughtlessness,  or  through  inadvertence ;  but  God  has 
never  any  such  apology  to  make.  Known  unto  him  are  all  his 
works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,2  and  therefore  they  have 
been  duly  considered. 

God  does  whatever  he  wills  to  do.3 

God  is  not  omnipotent,  if  he  absolutely  wills  or  desires  to  do 
anything,  and  fails  to  accomplish  it. 

Whatever  God  does  is  according  to  a  purpose  that  is 
eternal,  unchangeable,  perfectly  free,  and  infinitely  wise.4 

That  God  has  a  purpose,  none  can  deny,  who  attribute  wisdom 
to  him.  To  act  without  purpose  is  the  part  of  a  child,  or  an  idiot. 
A  wise  man  does  not  act  without  purpose,  much  less  can  the  only 
wise  God.     Besides,  the  Scriptures  speak  so  expressly  of  his  pur- 

1  Job  xxiii.  13  ;  Dan.  iv.  35 ;  Eph.  i.  11.  2  Acts  xv.  U. 

3  Job  xxiii.  13  ;  Dan.  iv.  35  ;  Eph.  i.  11 ;  Isa.  xlvi.  10 ;  Dan.  xi.  36. 

4  Job  xxiii.  13;  Isa.  xl.  14;  xlvi.  10;  Jer.  li.  29;  Rom.  viii.  28;  Eph  i.  11; 
iii.  11 ;  2  Tim.  i.  9. 


WILL    OF    GOD.  103 

pose,  that  no  one,  who  admits  the  authority  of  revelation,  can 
reject  the  doctrine,  however  much  he  may  misinterpret  or  abuse  it. 
The  term  implies  that  God  has  an  end  in  view  in  whatever  he 
does,  and  that  he  has  a  plan  according  to  which  he  acts. 

The  purpose  of  God  is  eternal  and  unchangeable.  A  wise  man, 
in  executing  a  purpose,  may  have  many  separate  volitions,  which 
are  momentary  actings  of  his  mind ;  but  his  purpose  is  more  dur- 
able, continuing  from  its  first  formation  in  the  mind  to  its  complete 
execution.  The  term  will,  as  applied  to  the  act  of  the  divine  mind, 
does  not,  in  itself,  imply  duration ;  but  the  purpose  of  God,  from 
the  very  import  of  the  phrase,  must  have  duration.  God  must 
have  had  a  purpose  when  he  created  the  world ;  and  the  Scriptures 
speak  of  his  purpose  before  the  world  began.  But  the  duration 
of  it  is  still  more  explicitly  declared  in  the  phrase,  "  the  eternal 
purpose."1  The  term  is  never  used  in  the  plural  number  by  the 
inspired  writers ;  as  if  God  had  many  plans,  or  a  succession  of 
plans.  It  is  one  entire,  glorious  scheme ;  and  the  date  of  it  is 
from  everlasting.  Its  eternity  implies  its  unchangeableness ;  and 
its  unchangeableness  implies  its  eternity ;  and  its  oneness  accords 
with  both  these  properties. 

The  purpose  of  God  is  perfectly  free.  It  is  not  forced  upon  him 
from  without ;  for  nothing  existed  to  restrict  the  infinite  mind  of 
him  who  was  before  all.  It  is  the  purpose  which  he  hath  "pur- 
posed in  himself."2  It  is  his  will ;  and  must,  therefore,  be  volun- 
tary. The  term  purpose  and  will  apply  to  the  same  thing  in  dif- 
ferent aspects  of  it,  or  according  to  different  modes  of  conceiving 
it.  If  purpose  more  naturally  suggests  the  idea  of  duration,  will 
suggests  its  freeness.  It  is  not  the  fate  believed  in  by  the  ancient 
heathens,  by  which  they  considered  the  gods  to  be  bound,  as  truly 
as  men. 

The  purpose  of  God  is  infinitely  wise.  We  have  argued,  that 
God  must  have  a  purpose  because  he  is  wise ;  and,  therefore,  his 
wisdom  must  be  concerned  in  his  purpose.  It  is  not  an  arbitrary 
or  capricious  scheme;  but  one  devised  by  infinite  wisdom,  having 
the  best  possible  end  to  accomplish,  and  adopting  the  best  possible 
means  for  its  accomplishment. 

Writers  on  theology  have  employed  the  term  Decrees,  to  denote 

1  Eph.  iii.  11.  2Eph.  i.  9. 


104  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

the  purpose  of  God.  It  is  an  objection  to  this  term,  that  there  is 
no  inspired  authority  for  its  use  in  this  sense.  When  the  Scriptures 
use  the  term  decree,  they  signify  by  it  a  command  promulged,  to  be 
observed  by  those  under  authority.  It  is  the  will  of  precept,  rather 
than  the  will  of  purpose.  And  further,  its  use  in  the  plural  num- 
ber does  not  accord  so  well  with  the  oneness  of  the  divine  plan. 

Scarcely  any  doctrine  of  religion  has  given  so  much  occasion  for 
cavil  and  stumbling  as  that  of  God's  decrees.  As  if  men  would 
be  wiser  than  God,  they  refuse  to  let  him  form  a  plan,  or  they 
find  fault  with  it  when  formed ;  and  very  few  have  so  much  humi- 
lity and  simplicity  of  faith,  as  to  escape  wholly  from  the  embar- 
rassment which  the  objections  to  this  doctrine  have  produced. 
They,  therefore,  need  a  careful  examination. 

Objection  1.  —  The  purpose  of  God  is  inconsistent  with  the  free- 
agency  of  man. 

It  is  a  full  answer  to  this  objection,  that  a  mere  purpose  cannot 
interfere  with  the  freedom  of  any  one.  When  a  tyrant  designs  to 
imprison  one  of  his  subjects,  until  the  design  is  carried  into  execu- 
tion, the  liberty  of  the  subject  is  not  invaded.  He  roams  as  free 
as  ever,  untouched  by  the  premeditated  evil.  The  infringement  of 
his  liberty  commences  when  the  purpose  begins  to  be  executed,  and 
not  before.  So,  in  the  divine  government,  the  purpose  of  the  Su- 
preme Ruler  interferes  not  at  all  with  the  liberty  of  his  subjects, 
so  long  as  it  remains  a  mere  purpose.  The  objection  which  we  are 
considering,  is  wholly  inapplicable  to  the  doctrine  of  God's  purpose. 
Its  proper  place,  if  it  has  any,  is  against  the  doctrine  of  God's 
providence  ;  and,  under  that  head,  it  will  be  proper  to  meet  it.  It 
was  God's  purpose  to  create  man  a  free-agent ;  and  he  did  so  create 
him.  Thus  far,  neither  the  purpose,  nor  the  execution  of  it,  can 
be  charged  with  infringing  man's  moral  freedom ;  but  they  unite  to 
establish  it.  It  was  God's  purpose  to  govern  man  as  a  free-agent ; 
and  has  he  not  done  so  ?  If  every  man  feels  that  the  providence 
of  God,  while  it  presides  in  the  affairs  of  men,  leaves  him  perfectly 
free  to  act  from  choice  in  every  thing  that  he  does,  what  ground 
is  there  for  the  complaint,  that  the  purpose  of  God  interferes  with 
man's  free-agency  ?  If  the  evil  complained  of  is  not  in  the  execu- 
tion of  the  purpose,  it  is  certainly  not  in  the  purpose  itself. 

This  objection  often  comes  before  us  practically.  When  we  are 
called  upon  for  action  to  which  we  are  averse,  the  argument  pre- 


WILL    OF    GOD.  105 

sents  itself;  if  God  has  fore-ordained  whatever  comes  to  pass,  the 
event  is  certain ;  and  what  is  to  be,  will  be,  without  our  effort.  It 
is  worthy  of  remark,  that  this  argument  never  induces  us  to  deviate 
from  a  course  to  which  we  are  inclined.  If  some  pleasure  invites, 
we  never  excuse  ourselves  from  the  indulgence,  on  the  plea,  that, 
if  we  are  to  enjoy  it,  we  shall  enjoy  it.  The  fact  is  sufficient  to 
teach  us  the  insincerity  of  the  plea,  when  admitted  in  other  cases 
It  prevails  with  us  only  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  ;  and, 
however  specious  the  argument  may  appear,  when  it  coincides  with 
our  inclinations,  we  never  trust  it  in  any  other  case.  No  man  in  his 
senses  remains  at  ease  in  a  burning  dwelling,  on  the  plea,  that,  if 
he  is  to  escape  from  the  flames,  he  will  escape.  The  providence 
of  God  establishes  the  relation  between  cause  and  effect,  and  gives 
full  scope  for  the  influence  of  the  human  will.  To  argue  that 
effects  will  be  produced  without  their  appropriate  causes,  is  to  deny 
the  known  arrangement  of  Providence.  He  who  expects  from  the 
purpose  of  God,  that  which  the  providence  of  God  denies  him,  ex- 
pects the  purpose  to  be  inconsistent  with  its  own  development. 
He  charges  the  plan  of  the  Most  Wise,  with  inconsistency  and  folly, 
that  he  may  find  a  subterfuge  for  criminal  indulgence. 

Objection  2.  —  If  God  purposed  the  fall  of  angels  or  men,  he  is 
the  author  of  their  sin. 

Before  we  proceed  to  answer  this  objection,  it  is  necessary  to 
examine  the  terms  in  which  it  is  expressed.  In  what  sense  did 
God  purpose  the  fall  of  angels  or  men,  or  any  sinful  action  ?  There 
is  a  sense,  familiar  to  the  pious,  in  which  any  event  that  takes 
place,  under  the  overruling  providence  of  God,  is  attributed  to  him, 
whatever  subordinate  agents  may  have  been  concerned  in  effecting 
it.  The  wind,  the  lightning,  the  Chaldeans,  the  Sabeans,  were  all 
concerned  in  the  afflictions  that  fell  on  the  patriarch  Job ;  but  he 
recognised  the  overruling  hand  of  God  in  every  event,  and  piously 
exclaimed :  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ; 
blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."1  So  Joseph,  when  sold  by  his 
brethren  in  Egypt,  saw  the  hand  of  God  in  the  event,  and  ex- 
plained the  design  of  his  providence :  "  For  God  did  send  me  before 
you  to  preserve  life." 2     In  precisely  the  same  sense  in  which  God's 


*Job.  i.  21.  2Gen.xlv.  5. 


106  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

providence  is  concerned  with  such  events,  his  purpose  is  concerned 
with  them ;  and  in  no  other. 

With  this  explanation,  let  us  proceed  to  consider  the  objection. 
Did  Joseph  design  to  charge  on  God  the  authorship  of  his  brethrens' 
sin  ?  Nothing  was  further  from  hrs  mind.  They  had  been  truly 
guilty  of  their  brother's  blood ;  and  their  own  consciences  charged 
them  with  it.  They  felt  that  they  were  responsible  for  the  sin, 
and  Joseph  knew  the  same  ;  and  nothing  that  he  said  was  designed 
to  transfer  the  responsibility  from  them  to  God.  Yet  he  saw 
and  delighted  to  contemplate  the  purpose  of  God  in  the  event. 
That  purpose  was,  "  to  save  much  people  alive."  This  purpose 
was  executed ;  and  God  was  the  author,  both  of  the  purpose  and 
the  beneficial  result.  So,  in  every  case,  the  good  which  he  educes 
out  of  moral  evil,  and  not  the  moral  evil  itself,  is  the  proper  object 
of  his  purpose.  It  should  ever  be  remembered,  that  his  purpose  is 
his  intention  to  act ;  and  that,  strictly  speaking,  it  relates  to  his 
own  action  exclusively.  It  does,  indeed,  extend  to  everything  that 
is  done  under  the  sun,  just  as  the  omnipresence  of  God  extends  to 
everything ;  but  it  extends  to  everything,  no  otherwise  than  as  he 
is  concerned  with  everything ;  and  what  God  does,  and  nothing 
else,  is  the  proper  object  of  his  purpose.  "  He  woreeth  all  things 
after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will." 1  "  I  will  do  all  my  pleasure."2 
"  He  doeth  according  to  his  will  in  the  army  of  heaven,  and 
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth."3  It  cannot  be  too  carefully 
noticed,  that  the  purpose  of  God  relates  strictly  and  properly  to 
his  own  actions.  Now,  God  is  not  the  actor  of  sin,  and  therefore 
his  purpose  can  never  make  him  the  author  of  it. 

The  objection,  though  it  may  appear  to  have  greater  force  when 
applied  to  the  first  sin  of  man,  is  not,  in  reality,  more  applicable  to 
this,  than  to  every  sin  which  has  been  since  committed.  God  made 
Adam,  and  all  his  descendants,  moral  and  accountable  agents,  pre- 
served them  in  being,  and  sustained  their  moral  powers ;  he  per- 
mitted their  sin ;  and  he  overrules  the  evil,  from  the  beginning 
throughout,  to  effect  a  most  glorious  result.  In  all  this,  what  God 
has  done,  and  is  doing,  he  purposed  to  do.  In  all,  his  action  is 
most  righteous,  wise,  and  holy ;  and,  therefore,  his  purpose  is  so. 


1  Eph.  i.  11.  2  Isaiah  xlvi.  10.  *  Dan.  iv.  35. 


WILL    OF    GOD.  107 

He  is  the  author,  not  of  the  moral  evil  which  he  permits,  bat  of 
the  good  of  which  he  makes  it  the  occasion. 

The  distinction  between  the  permission  and  the  authorship  of  sin 
some  have  denied ;  but,  in  so  doing,  they  have  not  the  countenance 
of  God's  word.  The  whole  tenor  of  the  inspired  volume  leads  us 
to  regard  God  as  the  author  of  holiness,  but  not  of  sin.  We  are 
taught  that  in  him  is  no  sin ; J  that  "  he  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no 
darkness;"2  that  "every  good  and  perfect  gift,"  not  sin,  "  cometh 
down  from  the  Father  of  lights;"3  that  God  is  not  tempted  of 
evil,  neither  tempteth  he  any  man.4  In  such  language  we  are 
taught  to  consider  God  as  the  author  and  source  of  holiness ;  and 
it  is  as  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  the  holy  word  to  attribute  sin 
to  him,  as  darkness  to  the  sun.  Yet  this  same  word  teaches  his 
permission  of  evil.  "  He  suffered  all  nations  to  walk  in  their  own 
way."5  His  long-suffering,  of  which  the  Scriptures  speak  so  much, 
implies  the  permission  of  sin.  But  of  that  which  is  highly  dis- 
pleasing to  him,  even  when  he  bears  with  it,  he  cannot  be  the 
author. 

Objection  3.  —  If  God  purposed  the  final  condemnation  of  the 
wicked,  he  made  them  on  purpose  to  damn  them. 

This  objection,  which  impiety  loves  to  present  in  the  most  repul- 
sive form,  it  becomes  us  to  approach  with  profound  reverence  for 
him  whose  character  and  motives  it  impugns.  Let  us  imagine  our- 
selves present  at  the  proceedings  of  the  last  day.  The  righteous 
Judge  sits  on  his  great  white  throne,  and  all  nations  are  gathered 
before  him.  The  books  are  opened,  and  every  man  is  impartially 
judged,  according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body.  The  award  is 
made  up,  and  the  sentence  pronounced.  The  wicked  are  com- 
manded to  "  depart  into  the  fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels;"  and  the  righteous  are  welcomed  into  "the  kingdom  pre- 
pared for  them  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  The  scene  is 
past,  and  the  mysterious  economy  of  God's  forbearance  and  grace 
is  now  finally  closed.  Is  there  anything  in  the  transactions  of  that 
day  which  is  unworthy  of  God  ?  Is  there  anything  which  the  holy 
inhabitants  of  heaven,  throughout  their  immortal  existence,  can 
ever  remember  with  disapprobation  ?     Not  so.     The  Judge,  while 

1 1  John  i.  5.  *  Ibid.  3  James  i.  17. 

*  James  i.  13.  *  Acts  xiv.  16. 


108  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

he  punishes  the  wicked  with  everlasting  destruction,  from  the  pre- 
sence of  the  Lord  and  the  glory  of  his  power,  is  glorified  in  his 
saints,  and  admired  in  all  them  that  believe ; 1  and  he  will  ever  ap- 
pear glorious  in  the  decisions  of  that  day.  If  God's  action  on  that 
day  will  be  so  glorious  to  him,  will  it  be  any  dishonor  to  him  that 
he  has  purposed  so  to  act  ? 

The  idea,  were  any  one  disposed  seriously  to  entertain  it,  that 
God  will  be  taken  by  surprise  at  the  last  judgment,  and  compelled 
to  pass  an  unpremeditated  sentence,  is  for  ever  set  aside  by  the 
fact  that,  as  early  as  the  days  of  Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam, 
the  great  day,  and  especially  the  fearful  doom  of  the  ungodly, 
were  foretold.  "  Behold  the  Lord  cometh,  with  ten  thousand  of 
his  saints,  to  execute  judgment  upon  all ;  and  to  convince  all  that 
are  ungodly  among  them,  of  all  their  ungodly  deeds."2  This  fact 
also  demonstrates  that  the  Lord  will  not  punish  for  the  mere  plea- 
sure of  punishing.  Why  does  he  give  warning  of  that  day  ?  Why 
are  his  messengers  sent  to  warn  men  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come  ?  Why  are  these  messages  delivered  with  so  earnest  entreaty 
and  expostulation,  so  that  his  servants  say,  "  As  though  God  did 
beseech  you  by  us,  we  pray  you,  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled 
to  God."3  As  creatures,  formed  by  his  hand,  he  has  not,  and  can- 
not have,  any  pleasure  in  rendering  them  unhappy ;  but,  as  rebels 
against  his  authority,  enemies  to  his  character  and  government,  and 
the  good  order  of  his  universal  empire,  and  obstinate  rejecters  of 
his  scheme  of  mercy  and  reconciliation,  he  will  take  pleasure  in 
inflicting  on  them  the  punishment  which  his  justice  requires.  The 
reward  of  the  righteous  is  a  kingdom  prepared  for  them  from  be- 
fore the  foundation  of  the  world  ;  but  the  fire  into  which  the  wicked 
will  be  driven,  is  said  to  be  prepared,  not  for  them,  but  for  the 
devil  and  his  angels.4  In  this  significant  manner,  God  has  been 
pleased  to  teach  us,  that  his  punishments  are  prepared,  not  for  his 
creatures,  as  such,  but  only  for  sinners,  and  in  view  of  sins  already 
committed.  Must  he,  to  secure  himself  from  disgrace  and  re- 
proach, be  able  to  plead  that  he  has  been  taken  by  surprise,  and 
that,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  he  had  never  expected  the 
fearful  result?  If  the  proceedings  of  this  great  day  will  be  so 
glorious  to  God  that  he  will  regard  them  with  pleasure  through  all 

«  2  Thes.  i.  9,  10.      2  Jude  14,  15.      3  2  Cor.  v.  20.      *  Matt.  xxv.  34,  41. 


WILL    OF    GOD.  109 

future  eternity,  why  may  he  not  have  regarded  them  with  pleasure  , 
through  all  eternity  past  ? 

The  objection,  originating  in  dislike  of  God's  justice,  wholly  mis- 
represents the  character  of  his  righteous  judgment.  It  leaps  from 
the  creation  of  man  to  the  final  doom  of  the  wicked,  and  wholly 
overlooks  the  intermediate  cause  of  that  doom.  It  proceeds  as  if 
sin  were  a  very  inconsiderable  matter,  and  as  if  it  must  have  been 
so  regarded  by  God ;  and,  therefore,  it  represents  the  punishment 
inflicted  for  it  as  if  inflicted  for  its  own  sake.  The  sentence  pro- 
nounced will  be,  in  the  judgment  of  God,  for  just  and  sufficient 
cause ;  and,  in  all  the  purpose  of  God  respecting  that  sentence,  the 
cause  has  been  contemplated.  What  God  does,  and  why  he  does 
it,  are  equally  included  in  the  divine  purpose ;  and  this  connection 
the  objection  wholly  overlooks.  God  did  not  regard  sin  as  a  tri- 
fling thing,  when,  on  account  of  it,  he  destroyed  the  old  world  with 
the  flood ;  and,  as  if  to  answer  the  very  objection  now  before  us, 
and  convince  men  that  he  did  not  make  them  for  the  pleasure  of 
destroying  them,  it  is  recorded :  "  God  saw  that  the  wickedness  of 
man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that  every  imagination  of  the 
thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually.  And  it  repented 
the  Lord  that  he  had  made  man  on  the  earth ;  and  it  grieved  him 
at  his  heart."1 

Our  best  judgment  decides  that  the  world  ought  not  to  have  been 
made  without  a  purpose,  and  that,  for  its  mighty  movements  now 
to  proceed  without  any  purpose,  is  infinitely  undesirable.  The  best 
work  of  human  hands  that  we  contemplate  with  any  pleasure,  has 
been  formed  with  some  purpose ;  and  no  intelligent  being  can  view 
the  works  of  God  with  satisfaction,  if  he  can  imagine  them  to  have 
been  undertaken  and  executed  without  design.  Who  would  not 
grieve  to  think  that  this  vast  machinery  is  moving  to  accomplish  no 
end ;  that  the  planets  are  hurled  through  space  wildly,  guided  in 
their  course,  and  controlled  in  their  velocity,  by  no  wise  counsel ; 
that  the  sun  shines,  that  animals  exist,  that  immortal  man  lives, 
moves,  and  has  his  being,  without  purpose  ?  In  this  view,  what  an 
enigma  is  our  life  ?  Our  understandings  may  consent  not  to  com- 
prehend the  purpose  for  which  the  world  was  made,  but  to  consent 
that  it  was  made  for  no  purpose,  they  cannot.  Our  intelligent 
natures  wholly  reject  the. thought. 

1  Gen.  vi.  6,  7. 


110  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

The  doctrine  of  God's  purpose,  while  it  recommends  itself  to  our 
understandings,  applies  a  test  to  the  moral  principles  of  our  hearts. 
If  God  has  a  purpose,  we  should  delight  to  study  it,  and  rejoice  in 
the  accomplishment  of  it ;  and  our  hearts  and  lives  should  be  regu- 
lated in  harmony  with  it.  When  we  prefer  that  God  should  have 
no  purpose,  or  that  it  should  be  different  from  what  it  is,  our  hearts 
cannot  be  right  in  his  sight.  If  we  loved  him  as  we  ought,  we 
should  rejoice  in  the  accomplishment  of  his  will,  and  view  with 
pleasure  the  unfolding  of  his  grand  designs.  Holy  angels  study 
the  mystery  of  redeeming  love,  and  learn,  from  the  dispensations 
toward  the  Church,  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God.1  If  right  prin- 
ciples prevailed  in  our  hearts,  we  would  not  presume  to  dictate  to 
the  Infinitely  Wise,  nor  find  fault  with  his  plans,  but  wait  with  plea- 
sure on  the  development  of  his  will :  and  when  we  cannot  see  the 
wisdom  and  goodness  of  his  works,  we  should,  in  the  simplicity  of 
faith,  rest  assured  that  his  plan,  when  fully  unfolded,  will  be  found 
most  righteous  and  most  wise. 


CHAPTER   II. 

works  of  god  —  creation. 

God  created  all  things  out  of  nothing.2 

Originally,  nothing  existed  but  God ;  no  matter,  out  of  which 
visible  things  were  formed,  and  no  spiritual  substance,  out  of  which 
angels  and  human  souls  were  made ;  but  God  gave  to  all  things 
that  exist  their  entire  being. 

It  has  been  argued  that  matter  cannot  be  eternal,  because  self- 
existence  is  too  noble  a  property  to  be  attributed  to  an  inferior 
nature;  but  this  argument  is  not  satisfactory.  Why  may  not  a 
small  thing  exist  without  a  cause,  as  well  as  a  greater  ?  The  pro- 
ducing of  some  particular  effect  we  may  conceive  to  be  easier  for  a 

1  Eph.  iii.  10. 

2  Gen.  i.;  Neh.  ix.  6  ;  Job  ix.  9  ;  Ps.  lxxxix.  11 ;  xcv.  5  ;  ciii.  19  ;  civ.  4,  19; 
Col.  i.  16;  Rev.  iv.  11;  Heb.  iii.  4;  xi.  3;  Acts  xvii.  24. 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  Ill 

higher  nature  than  a  lower ;  but,  in  self-production,  the  effect  is 
equal  to  the  cause,  and  the  difficulty  of  producing  it  must  be  as 
great  for  the  one  nature  as  for  the  other.  In  all  such  a  prion 
reasoning,  we  are  liable  to  deceive  ourselves;  and  perhaps 
the  danger  is  greatest  where  the  reasoning  appears  most  pro- 
found. For  aught  that  philosophy  can  teach  us,  an  atom  of 
matter  is  absolutely  indestructible ;  and,  on  philosophical  princi- 
ples, if  it  must  exist  through  future  eternity,  it  may  have  existed 
through  past  eternity.  The  miracle  of  creation  is  as  far  beyond 
the  demonstrations  of  philosophy  as  the  miracle  of  annihilation. 
When  we  have  proved  the  existence  of  a  God,  able  to  work  mira- 
cles, a  probability  arises  that  matter  may  be  a  production  of  his 
power,  and  we  may  see  creative  intelligence  displayed  in  the  pro- 
perties and  quantities  of  the  various  kinds  of  matter,  and  their 
adaptedness  to  beneficial  purposes.  But,  for  decisive  proof  that  all 
things  were  made  out  of  nothing,  we  turn  to  the  word  of  God,  and 
receive  it  as  a  truth  of  faith,  rather  than  of  reason.  "  Through 
faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of 
God,  so  that  things  which  are  seen  were  not  made  of  things  which 
do  appear."1 

In  the  text  just  quoted,  the  doctrine  of  creation  is  not  expressed 
in  the  language  in  which  it  is  most  commonly  stated.  It  is  not 
said  the  world  was  made  out  of  nothing ;  but  the  same  idea  is  ex- 
pressed in  a  different  manner.  When  we  see  a  statue,  we  see  the 
marble  of  which  it  consists ;  and  when  we  see  a  house,  we  see  the 
materials  of  which  it  is  constructed.  Paul  teaches  that  the  world 
which  we  see  was  not  made  of  the  visible  substances  that  we  behold, 
t.  e.,  it  was  not  formed  of  pre-existent  matter,  but  the  materials  of 
which  it  now  appears  to  be  formed,  were  brought  into  existence  at 
the  time  when  the  things  themselves  were  created. 

The  work  of  creation  was  performed  without  effort.  God  spake, 
and  it  was  done.  He  said,  let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light. 
After  working  six  days,  he  rested  on  the  seventh ;  not  because  he 
was  weary,  but  that  the  seventh  day  might  be  sanctified,  and  made 
a  day  of  rest  for  man.  Wherefore  it  is  said,  the  sabbath  was 
made  for  man.2 

»Heb.  xi.  3.  *  Mark  ii.  27. 


112  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

From  an  examination  of  the  earth's  crust,  geologists  have  dis- 
covered, as  tbey  think,  that  animals  and  plants  existed  long  before 
the  Mosaic  date  of  creation.  Methods  have  been  proposed  to 
reconcile  the  account,  as  contained  in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis, 
with  these  professed  discoveries.  Some  have  supposed  each  of  the 
days  of  creation  to  have  been  a  long  period  of  years.  The  seventh 
day  of  rest,  or  cessation  from  the  work  of  creating,  they  under- 
stand to  have  continued  to  the  present  time,  though  nearly  six 
thousand  years  have  passed  ;  and  they  suppose  that  each  of  the 
preceding  days  may  have  included  an  equally  long  period.  Others 
understand  "the  beginning"  mentioned  in  the  first  verse  of  the 
history,  to  refer  to  a  time  long  anterior  to  that  referred  to  in  the 
second  verse,  "the  earth  was  without  form,  &c."  A  similar  transi- 
tion, though  not  so  sudden,  is  made  in  the  first  chapter  of  John : 
"  In  the  beginning  was  the  word  ; — and  the  word  was  made  flesh."1 
Many  divines  have  been  disposed  to  regard  the  science  of  geology 
with  suspicion,  and  to  consider  its  deductions  as  inimical  to  the 
faith.  But  there  can  be  no  just  ground  to  fear  science,  in  any  of 
its  departments,  so  long  as  it  pursues  its  investigations  legitimately, 
and  makes  its  deductions  with  becoming  modesty.  The  Author  of 
the  Bible  is  the  maker  of  the  world,  and  the  author  of  all  truth ; 
and  his  works  and  his  word  must  harmonize,  for  truth  is  always 
consistent.  Passages  in  his  word  have  been  thought  to  be  incon- 
sistent with  each  other ;  but  a  more  careful  examination  has  shown 
their  harmony,  and  we  need  not  fear  but  that  due  investigation 
will  show  the  word  to  be  consistent  with  all  the  legitimate  deduc- 
tions of  science. 

The  undesigned  coincidences  which  have  been  discovered  in  the 
Scripture  narratives,  constitute  a  highly  satisfactory  part  of  the 
internal  evidence  which  the  bible  contains,  that  its  records  are 
true.  The  proof  which  these  furnish  is  always  the  more  satisfac- 
tory, the  more  manifest  it  is  that  the  coincidence  was  undesigned. 
When  two  portions  of  Scripture,  which  appeared  to  disagree  with 
each  other,  have  been  found,  on  careful  investigation,  to  be  per- 
fectly harmonious,  a  coincidence  has  been  discovered,  that  has  the 
best  possible  evidence  that  it  was  undesigned.  In  this  way  the 
supposed  discrepancies,  which  at  first  embarrassed  us,  turn  out  to 


John  i.  1-14. 


WOKKS    OF    GOD.  113 

the  establishment  of  our  faith ;  and  when  some  still  remain  which 
we  have  not  yet  learned  to  harmonize,  we  are  taught  to  wait 
patiently,  with  the  confident  expectation  that  these  dark  places 
also  will  at  some  time  be  illuminated.  The  same  faith  and  patience 
should  be  exercised  when  science  and  Scripture  are  supposed  to 
disagree.  The  infidel  delights  to  point  out  apparent  discrepancies 
in  Scripture,  and  he  exults  when  he  can  announce  some  supposed 
discovery  of  science  inconsistent  with  the  word  of  revelation. 
While  the  infidel  triumphs,  men  of  weak  faith  stagger ;  but  it  is 
truly  a  weak  faith  that  cannot  withstand  such  a  shock.  We  might 
as  well  doubt  whether  the  sun  shines,  when  his  brilliance  is  eclipsed 
by  a  passing  cloud.  The  mass  of  evidence  that  the  Bible  is  the 
true  word  of  God,  is  so  great  that  we  can  well  afford  to  wait  till 
the  temporary  cloud  passes,  with  the  confident  expectation  that  the 
light  will  again  shine,  perhaps  with  increased  splendor.  Geology 
is  yet  a  recent  science.  What  it  will  do  ultimately  for  the  cause 
of  truth,  future  years  must  decide,  and  it  is  unwise  to  fear  the 
result.  We  may  trust  that  the  ark  of  God  will  be  carried  through 
safely.  Already,  to  some  extent,  the  discoveries  of  the  new  science 
have  turned  out  to  the  establishment  of  the  faith.  It  has  pene- 
trated a  very  small  distance  below  the  earth's  surface,  and,  in  the 
successive  deposits  of  animal  remains,  it  has  found  a  record  from 
which  it  professes  to  read  the  order  in  which  the  various  species  of 
animals  came  into  being.  Between  this  record  and  that  of  Moses, 
there  is  an  undesigned  coincidence.  It  is  especially  remarkable 
that,  by  the  general  consent  of  geologists,  human  remains  are 
found  only  in  the  last  of  the  animal  deposits.  This  fact  points  to 
a  time  agreeing  well  with  the  Mosaic  date  of  creation,  when  men 
began  to  exist,  and  when,  of  course,  a  creating  power  was  exerted. 
If  geology  can  establish  that,  previous  to  this,  a  convulsion  of 
nature  desolated  the  earth,  and  buried  a  whole  generation  of  infe- 
rior animals  in  its  caverns,  be  it  so.  We  will  listen  to  her  argu- 
ments, and  weigh  them  well;  but  we  cannot  omit  to  notice  the 
agreement  of  her  facts  with  the  faithful  record  of  inspiration.  If 
geology  were  to  carry  back  the  origin  of  the  human  race  to  a  date 
long  anterior  to  that  of  Moses,  she  would  contradict,  not.  only  the 
Bible,  but  all  history,  written  and  traditionary.  It  cannot  be 
accounted  for,  that  our  knowledge  of  ancient  history  should  be 
limited  to  so  recent  a  period,  if  the  race  had  previously  existed 
8 


114  THE    WILL    AND    WOKKS    OF    GOD. 

through  thousands  of  generations.  The  progress  in  the  settlement 
of  the  world,  the  establishment  of  ancient  kingdoms,  and  the 
building  of  cities,  are  spread  out  before  us  on  the  pages  of  history, 
and  geology  does  not  contradict  the  record. 

Although  science  will  never  contradict  Scripture,  it  may  correct 
erroneous  inferences  from  it,  and,  in  doing  this,  may  incidentally 
demonstrate  the  wisdom  from  which  the  Bible  emanated.  When 
we  have  arrived  at  mature  years,  we  call  to  mind  instructions  that 
we  received  in  our  childhood  from  a  wise  father,  and  that  were 
adapted  to  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  designed.  They  did 
not  teach  the  sciences  which  we  have  since  learned,  but  they  taught 
us  nothing  contrary ;  and  we  are  now  able  to  see,  in  what  was  said 
and  what  was  omitted  to  be  said,  that  the  father  fully  understood 
the  sciences,  which  it  was  then  no  part  of  his  design  to  teach  us. 
Had  he  not  understood  them,  he  would  have  employed  other  forms 
of  speech,  and  we  should  be  able  to  recollect  some  word  or  words 
that  would  betray  his  ignorance.  So  the  false  revelations  of  the 
heathen  world  contradict  science.  Some  of  them  contradict  the 
very  first  lessons  in  geography,  and  a  child  in  a  christian  school 
can  prove  them  to  be  false.  But  science,  in  all  its  advancement, 
though  it  has  made  its  greatest  attainments  in  the  lands  where  the 
Bible  is  most  known,  has  found  nothing  in  the  Bible  to  contradict. 
The  only  rational  way  to  account  for  this,  is  to  suppose  that  the 
Author  of  the  Bible  understood  the  sciences.  We  nowhere  read 
in  this  work  that  the  earth  is  supported  by  an  elephant,  and  that 
the  elephant  stands  on  a  tortoise ;  but  we  read,  "  He  hangeth  the 
earth  upon  nothing,"1  a  statement  which,  made  in  the  very  infancy 
of  revelation,  may  satisfy  us  that  the  author  of  the  Bible  under- 
stood the  mechanism  of  the  universe.  In  a  past  age  of  ignorance, 
men  supposed  that  Joshua's  command  to  the  sun  to  stand  still,  dis- 
proved the  Copernican  system  of  astronomy;  but  this  childish 
inference  from  the  language  of  Scripture,  is  now  well  understood 
to  be  unwarranted.  Men  of  science,  who  firmly  believe  the 
Copernican  system,  speak  as  freely  of  the  sun  rising  and  the  sun 
setting,  as  those  who  never  have  heard  that  these  appearances  are 
owing  to  the  earth's  rotation.  Future  science  may  teach  us  to 
correct  other  erroneous  inferences  which  many  have  drawn  from 

1  Job  xxvi.  7. 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  115 

the  Scripture ;  and  we  should  be  content  to  learn.  The  result 
will  give  further  proof  that  the  Author  of  Nature  is  the  author  of 
the  Bible. 

Our  hearts  receive  a  strong  impression  of  the  power,  wisdom 
and  goodness  of  the  Lord,  when  we  dwell  on  the  thought  that 
he  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  with  all  that  they  contain. 
Above  all,  when  we  reflect  that  he  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves, 
we  are  constrained  to  acknowledge  his  right  to  require  what 
service,  praise  and  glory  we  are  capable  of  rendering.  He  is  the 
former  of  our  bodies,  and  the  father  of  our  spirits ;  and  shall  we 
not  render  to  him  that  which  is  his  own  ?  Shall  we  not  serve  and 
glorify  him  with  our  bodies  and  our  spirits,  which  are  his  ?  His 
right,  by  virtue  of  redemption,  may  present  stronger  claims,  but 
his  right  by  virtue  of  creation,  is  sufficient  to  establish  our  obliga- 
tion, and  we  ought  to  recognise  its  force. 


CHAPTER  III. 

WORKS    OF   GOD.  —  PROVIDENCE. 

Let  us  approach  nearer  to  the  object  of  our  supreme  love.  Such 
a  being  as  God  would  be  worthy  of  our  hearts'  best  affection,  if  we 
were  wholly  under  the  dominion  of  another  Lord,  and  owed  our 
existence  to  another  creative  power.  Like  the  Queen  of  Sheba, 
when  she  heard  of  the  wisdom  and  glory  of  Solomon,  we  might, 
with  great  propriety,  desire  to  visit  the  remote  palace  of  Jehovah, 
that  we  might  learn  his  character,  and  the  arrangements  of  his 
empire.  If  God,  after  creating  the  world,  had  left  the  manage- 
ment of  it  in  other  hands,  and  had  withdrawn  to  employ  himself 
in  other  works,  our  inquiries  might  well  follow  him,  and  we  might 
laudably  seek  to  know  our  Creator.  But  God  is  not  far  from  us. 
He  did  not,  on  making  the  world,  leave  it  to  itself,  or  commit  it 
into  other  hands ;  but  it  is  an  object  of  his  constant  care,  and  his 
hand  is  concerned  in  all  its  movements.  Whether  we  look  on  the 
right  hand,  or  on  the  left,  we  can  see  where  he  doth  work ;  and,  in 
the  display  of  his  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness,  which  at  every 
moment  meets  our  eyes,  we  find  continued  incitements  to  adore  and 
love. 


116  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

God's  care  of  his  creation,  is  termed  Providence ;  and  includes 
Preservation  and  Government. 

Section  I.  —  PRE  SERV  ATION. 

All  created  things  are  kept  in  being  by  the  will  and 
power  of  God.1 

We  can  as  little  understand  the  act  of  Providence,  as  that  of 
creation ;  but  we  know  that  both  are  acts  of  God,  implying  both 
his  will  and  power.     That  a  continued  preserving  act  is  necessary 
to  keep  his  creatures  in  being,  ought  not  to  be  doubted.     The  ex- 
pression,   "upholding  all   things,"2  clearly  denotes  such  an  act. 
An  architect  may  build  a  house,  which,  when  once  completed,  may 
stand,  independent  of  his  labor  and  skill,  a  monument  of  both,  when 
he  has  fallen  by  the  hand  of  death;   and  we  are  prone  to  con- 
ceive that  the  work  of  God  might  equally  stand,  if  left  to  itself, 
without  his  constant  care  and  support.     But  the  cases  are  widely 
different.     The  human  architect  finds  the  materials  which  he  uses 
already  in  existence ;  and  his  whole  work  consists  in  changing  their 
form,  and  combining  them  in  a  new  order.     The  substances  used 
did  not  receive   their   existence  from  him;    and  the  independent 
being  which  they  possessed  before  the  architect  touched  them,  they 
retain  after  his  hand  has  been  withdrawn.     But  the  very  substance, 
as  well  as  the  form,  of  all  created  things,  came  from  the  hand  of 
God;    and  the  withdrawal   of  that  hand  would  leave  their  being 
unsupported,  or  the   expression,  "upholding   all  things,,,  has   no 
appropriate  meaning. 

Many  have  maintained  that  the  preserving  act  not  only  has  the 
same  author  as  the  creating  act,  but  is  identical  with  it.  They 
consider  it  philosophically  true  that  preservation  is  a  perpetual 
creation.  All  created  existence  is  conceived  to  terminate  at  every 
moment  by  its  natural  tendency  to  annihilation,  and  to  be  repro- 
duced by  a  new  creative  act.  But,  notwithstanding  the  ingenious 
arguments  which  have  been  advanced  in  support  of  this  opinion, 
philosophy  perseveres  in  distinguishing  between  the  two  acts,  re- 
garding creation  as  miraculous,  and  preservation,  as  conformed  to 

i  Job  i.2l;  v.  18;  Ps.  xxxiii.  10-15 ;  ciii.  3-5,  10;  civ.  27-30;  exxvii.  i,  2; 
Prov.  xvi.  9 ;  Matt.  v.  45  ;  x.  Zo ;  Luke  xii.  6 ;  Acts  xvii.  28. 
8Heb.  i.  3. 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  117 

the  laws  of  nature.  We  are  prone  to  conceive,  that,  to  bring  from 
non-existence  into  existence,  differs  from  the  preservation  of  ex- 
istence  already  bestowed.  It  is  enough,  for  every  practical  pur 
pose,  to  attribute  the  preservation  of  all  things  to  the  power  and 
will  of  the  same  being  that  originally  created  them.  At  his  will, 
the  world  came  into  existence ;  and,  at  his  will,  it  continues  to 
exist. 

Section  II.  — GO  VERNMENT  IN  GENERAL. 

All  created  things  are  so  under  God's  control,  that 
their  changes  take  place  according  to  his  purpose.1 

Created  things  are  perpetually  operating  on  each  other  in  the 
relation  of  cause  and  effect.  The  properties  and  powers  by  which 
they  so  operate,  were  given  to  each  of  them  in  their  creation,  and 
are  continued  in  the  act  of  preservation.  It  follows,  therefore, 
that  all  created  things  operate  on  each  other,  and  produce  changes 
in  each  other,  by  the  will  and  power  of  God.  If  they  are  dependent 
for  their  existence,  they  must  be,  for  their  properties  and  powers, 
and,  of  consequence,  for  their  operations. 

God's  control  over  all  events  that  happen,  is  abundantly  taught 
in  the  Scriptures  ;  which  represent  the  wind,2  the  rain,3  pestilence,* 
plenty,5  grass,6  the  fowls  of  the  air,7  the  hairs  of  the  head,8  &c, 
as  objects  of  his  providence. 

The  Scriptures  not  only  attribute  events  to  the  overruling  hand 
of  God,  but  they  represent  him  as  ordering  them  for  the  ac- 
complishment of  some  purpose.  The  grass  grows,  that  it  may  give 
food.9  Pestilence  is  sent,  that  men  may  be  punished  for  their  sins.10 
Joseph  was  sent  into  Egypt,  to  preserve  much  people  alive.11  Nor 
are  there  a  few  events  only  which  are  so  ordered ;  but  it  is  said, 
He  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will.  The 
declaration,  "All  things  work  together  for  good,"  12  &c,  could  not 
be  true,  if  God's  control  were  not  alike  extended  to  all  events, 
causing  them  all  to  co-operate  in  the  fulfilment  of  his  purpose. 

Some  persons  are  unwilling  to  attribute  to  God  the  care  and 

12  Chron.  xx.  6;  Ps.  civ.  4,  7,  10,  13,  14,  19,  32;  Prov.  xvi.  9;  Ps.  lxxvi. 
10;  Dan.  iv.  35;  Rom.  viii.  28;  Eph.  i.  11. 
2  Jonah  iv.  8.  s  Matt.  v.  45.  4  Lev.  xxvi.  25.         5  Gen.  xxvii.  28. 

6  Matt.  vi.  30.  '  Matt.  vi.  26.         8  Matt.  x.  30.  9  Ps.  civ.  14. 

»2  Sam.  xxiv.  15.    "  Gen.  xlv.  7.  12  Rom.  viii.  28. 


118  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

management  of  minute  and  unimportant  events.  They  consider  it 
beneath  his  dignity  to  he  concerned  about  such  trivial  matters. 
They  believe  in  a  General  Providence  over  the  affairs  of  the  world, 
exercised  by  general  laws ;  but  a  Particular  Providence,  exercised 
over  every  particular  incident  of  every  man's  life,  enters  not  into 
their  creed.  But  the  Scriptures  are  plain  on  this  subject.  The 
fall  of  a  sparrow  is  a  very  trivial  event,  yet  it  is  affirmed  by  the 
teacher  from  heaven,  to  be  not  without  our  heavenly  Father.1  If 
great  events  happen  according  to  general  laws,  it  is  equally  true 
of  small  ones ;  and  the  operation  of  these  laws,  in  the  latter  case, 
must  be  as  well  understood,  and  as  perfectly  controlled,  as  in  the 
former.  Moreover,  it  often  happens,  that  very  important  events 
depend  on  others  that  are  in  themselves  trivial  and  unimportant. 
The  King  of  Israel  was  slain,2  and  God's  prophecy  concerning  him 
was  fulfilled,  by  an  arrow  shot  at  a  venture.  How  many  very 
minute  circumstances  must  have  concurred  in  this  act !  That  the 
arrow  was  shot  at  all — that  it  was  then  shot — that  it  was  precisely 
so  directed,  and  with  precisely  the  necessary  force — and  that  it 
met  no  obstacle  on  its  way:  all  these  concurred,  and  all  these 
must  have  been  under  the  control  of  Him,  in  whose  hand  was  the 
life  of  the  king.  As  God's  greatness  permitted  him  to  create  the 
minutest  of  his  works,  so  it  permits  him  to  take  care  of  them ;  and 
this  care  is  as  easy  and  undistracting  to  him,  as  if  his  whole  energy 
were  directed  to  the  care  and  benefit  of  a  single  man  or  angel. 

The  objects  of  God's  Providence  are  all  created  things,  animate 
and  inanimate,  rational  and  irrational.  Some  of  these,  as  angels 
and  men,  are  moral  agents.  All  others,  viewed  as  causing  change 
of  any  kind,  may  be  classed  together  as  natural  agents.  With 
reference  to  this  division  of  the  agencies  under  his  control,  the 
government  of  God  may  be  divided  into  natural  and  moral. 

Section  III.  — NATURAL  GOVERNMENT. 

Among  our  earliest  lessons,  we  learn  that  the  relation  of  cause 
and  effect  exists,  and  that  events  occur  because  of  this  relation  in 
an  established  order  of  sequence.  Were  the  order  of  succession 
not  established,  or  were  we  ignorant  of  it,  we  should  be  unable  to 

1  Matt.  x.  29.  2 1  Kings  xxii.  34. 


WORKS    OF   GOD.  119 

manage  the  most  common  concerns  of  life.  If  food  sometimes 
nourished,  and  sometimes  poisoned,  or  if  we  were  incapable  of 
learning  whether  the  nutritive  quality  belonged  to  bread,  or  to 
arsenic,  we  should  be  unable  to  regulate  the  process  of  eating,  so 
necessary  to  the  preservation  of  life.  But  our  Creator  has  made 
us  capable  of  observing  the  sequences  of  nature,  and  of  learning 
the  order  in  which  they  occur,  and  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect, 
which  the  parts  of  the  succession  sustain  to  each  other.  The  study 
of  these  sequences  is  the  business  of  philosophy ;  but  philosophy 
is  not  confined  to  the  university,  or  the  lecture-room.  It  is  found 
in  every  man's  walk,  and  in  the  every-day  experience  of  life.  The 
child  begins  to  learn  it  in  the  cradle ;  and  without  some  knowledge 
of  it,  men  would  not  know  how  to  shun  the  flood,  the  flames,  or  the 
precipice. 

In  all  departments  of  knowledge  we  classify  the  things  known  ; 
and  the  sequences  of  nature,  classified,  become  what  we  call  laws 
of  nature.  These  are  only  the  regular  modes  in  which  the  sequences 
of  nature  occur.  In  the  phrase,  law  of  nature,  the  term  law  is 
used  in  a  transferred  sense.  When  employed  in  morals,  it  implies 
an  authority  commanding,  and  a  subject  bound  to  obey.  But  na- 
ture is  not  a  being  possessing  authority ;  and  natural  things  are 
not  capable  of  obedience  in  the  proper  sense.  In  morals,  laws 
given  may  be  disobeyed ;  but  the  processes  of  nature  always  con- 
form to  what  are  called  the  laws  of  nature.  The  laws  of  nature 
may  be  regarded  as  the  modes  in  which  the  providence  of  God 
operates.  His  will  has  determined  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect ; 
and,  therefore,  the  laws  of  nature  are  the  orders  of  sequence,  in 
which  it  is  his  will,  that  the  changes  of  natural  things  should  occur. 

When  we  contemplate  the  order  which  prevails  in  the  natural 
world,  we  behold  the  exhibition  of  the  wisdom  which  God's  provi- 
dence displays.  His  natural  government,  as  well  as  his  moral, 
abounds  with  wisdom.  All  his  reasons  for  planning  the  system  of 
things  precisely  as  it  is  we  cannot  presume  to  understand ;  but  the 
advantage  resulting  from  its  order  meets  us  in  every  experience  of 
life.  It  would  be  to  no  purpose  that  we  have  been  so  made  as  to 
be  capable  of  observing  the  sequences  of  nature,  if  these. sequences 
took  place  without  order.  If  chaos  reigned  in  the  succession  of 
events,  philosophy  would  be  impossible,  and  equally  impossible  the 
most  common  arts  of  life.     Reason  would  be  an  unavailing  gift ; 


120  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

and,  if  human  life  were  not  filled  with  perpetual  terror,  the  exemp- 
tion would  arise  rather  from  inability  to  comprehend  its  danger, 
than  from  the  circumstances  of  its  situation. 

Section  IV.  — MORAL  GOVERNMENT. 

A  voluntary  agent,  with  a  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  we  call  a 
moral  agent.  Such  an  agent  is  a  proper  subject  of  moral  law. 
He  may  be  commanded,  and  he  can  obey  or  disobey.  He  can  feel 
the  force  of  moral  obligation,  and  be  affected  by  self-approbation 
or  remorse. 

Moral  law  is  not  an  established  order  of  sequence,  as  the  laws 
of  nature  are.  Some  have  sought  to  find  an  agreement  between 
them  in  this  particular,  by  referring  to  the  fact,  that  a  moral  action 
has  consequences  inseparably  connected  with  it,  which  result  from 
its  moral  quality.  But  the  connection  of  these  consequences  with 
the  moral  action  belongs  rather  to  the  class  of  natural  sequences. 
Like  other  natural  sequences,  the  order  is  inviolable.  But  moral 
law  may  be  violated.  The  order  of  sequence  which  moral  law  aims 
to  regulate,  is  that  which  subsists  between  the  command  and  the 
action,  not  between  the  action  and  its  consequences.  In  the  first 
of  these  sequences,  not  in  the  last,  the  obedience  or  disobedience 
of  moral  law  appears.  If  moral  law  were  an  established  order  of 
sequence,  as  natural  law  is,  none  but  God  could  violate  it,  as  none 
but  he  can  work  miracles.  But,  while  God  cannot  commit  sin, 
which  is  a  transgression  of  moral  law,  it  may  be  committed  by 
angels  and  men,  as  sad  experience  has  proved. 

The  distinction  which  has  been  drawn  between  natural  and 
moral  law  must  be  kept  in  view,  to  understand  the  difference  be- 
tween natural  and  moral  government.  Moral  government  is  a  de- 
partment of  God's  universal  administration,  specially  adapted  to 
moral  agents,  furnishing  scope  for  the  exercise  of  their  moral 
agency,  as,  also,  on  God's  part,  for  the  exercise  of  his  justice.  It 
is  not  inconsistent  with  the  rest  of  his  administration,  but  is  dis- 
tinct from  the  rest,  and  is  the  holy  of  holies,  in  which  the  great 
Supreme  manifests  his  highest  glory.  It  is  true,  that  in  this  the 
will  of  God  is  not  invariably  done ;  whereas,  in  his  natural  govern- 
ment, he  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  will ;  but  it 
must  be  remembered  that  the  term  will  is  used  in  different  senses. 
The  will  which  is  violated  in  moral  government  is  the  will  of  pre- 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  121 

cept ;  that  which  is  invariably  executed  in  natural  government  is 
the  will  of  purpose.  The  whole  of  God's  moral  government  per- 
fectly accords  with  his  purpose.  It  was  his  purpose  to  institute  it ; 
to  create  moral  agents,  to  give  them  a  moral  law,  a  will  of  precept, 
which  they,  as  free  agents,  might  violate  or  not ;  to  permit  the  vio- 
lation, and  to  hold  them  responsible  for  it.  All  this  God  pur- 
posed, and  all  this  he  has  accomplished.  Because  the  term  will  is 
used  in  two  senses,  manifestly  distinct  from  each  other,  it  becomes 
necessary,  in  our  use  of  it,  to  keep  the  distinction  in  view,  lest  our 
reasonings  be  confused. 

The  general  proposition,  under  the  head  of  Government,  page 
117,  was  stated  thus:  "All  God's  creatures  are  so  under  his  con- 
trol, that  their  changes  take  place  according  to  his  purpose."  The 
truth  of  this,  with  respect  to  his  natural  government,  will  be  rea- 
dily admitted.  An  important  part  of  the  changes  which  take  place 
in  the  world,  consists  of  the  actions  performed  by  moral  agents. 
In  applying  the  proposition  to  these,  it  becomes  necessary  to  dis- 
tinguish between  the  efficient  and  permissive  purpose  of  God. 
Even  the  most  sinful  action  cannot  take  place  without  his  permis- 
sion ;  and,  in  this  view,  the  proposition  extends  to  the  moral,  as 
well  as  to  the  natural  government  of  God. 

Section  V.  —  FREE    AGENCY. 

What  is  free  agency?  If  it  signifies  freedom  from  accounta- 
bility to  a  higher  power,  there  is  no  free  agent  but  God.  This, 
however,  is  not  the  sense  in  which  the  term  is  technically  employed, 
and  in  which  it  denotes  voluntary  agency  —  agency  without  com- 
pulsion. 

A  creature  who  acts  voluntarily,  and  knows  the  difference  be- 
tween right  and  wrong,  is  a  proper  subject  of  moral  government. 
The  common  sense  of  mankind  holds  such  an  one  accountable  for 
his  actions.  We  do  not  enter  into  a  metaphysical  inquiry  to  ascer- 
tain by  what  mental  process  the  volition  was  formed;  but  it  is 
enough  for  us  to  know  that  it  was  formed.  If  a  man  does  what  he 
did  not  intend  to  do,  we  admit  the  plea  of  involuntariness ;  but, 
when  the  intention  to  perpetrate  the  deed  is  proved,  together  with 
the  knowledge  of  its  criminality,  no  metaphysical  subtleties  exempt 
him,  in  the  uniform  judgment  of  mankind,  from  being  held  ac- 
countable. 


122  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

Some  have  maintained  that,  in  order  to  responsible  agency,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  will  should  have  a  self-determining  power.  It 
is,  they  maintain,  not  only  necessary  that  the  agent  should  have 
acted  voluntarily,  but  he  should  have  the  power  to  will  otherwise 
than  he  did.  That  he  should  have  had  the  power  to  act  otherwise 
than  he  did,  is  implied  in  his  acting  voluntarily,  i.  e.  without  com- 
pulsion, and  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  his  accountability ;  but  the 
power  to  will  otherwise  than  he  did,  is  a  superaddition  to  volunta- 
riness, which  the  common  sense  of  mankind  does  not  inquire  into ; 
yet,  as  a  metaphysical  perplexity,  it  claims  our  attention. 

Self-determining  power  of  the  will. — It  is  inconsistent  with  philo- 
sophical accuracy  to  speak  of  the  will  as  determining  or  deciding. 
The  faculties  of  the  mind  are  not  distinct  agents,  possessing  a 
separate  existence  from  the  mind  itself.  We  may  say  that  a  man 
understands  or  wills,  or  that  his  mind  understands  or  wills ;  but  to 
say  that  his  understanding  understands,  or  his  will  wills,  is  bad 
philosophy.  If  it  be  conceived  that  the  will  determines  itself,  as 
the  magnetic  needle  determines  its  position,  without  reasoning,  and 
without  choice,  a  supposition  is  admitted  which  will  not  at  all  accord 
with  the  views  of  those  who  advocate  the  self-determining  power 
of  the  will.  But,  if  it  be  conceived  that  the  will  determines  by 
choice,  or  any  other  mental  process,  then  the  will  is  represented  as 
a  distinct  agent,  having  a  mind  of  its  own. 

Power  of  the  will — Here  is  another  incongruity.  In  the  exter- 
nal acts  of  men,  power  and  will  are  concomitants  necessary  to  the 
act.  Without  either,  the  act  cannot  be.  But  to  an  act  of  willing, 
what  is  necessary  besides  the  will  itself?  What  power  must  be 
conjoined  with  it  ?  What  a  supposition  it  would  be,  that  the  will 
has  a  will  to  put  forth  a  volition,  but  has  not  the  power !  Yet 
something  like  this  must  be  conceived,  to  give  a  distinct  and  intel- 
ligible meaning  to  the  phrase,  "  self-determining  power  of  the  will." 

Section  VI.  — MORAL  NECESSITY. 

If  a  number  of  dice  be  put  into  a  box  and  thrown  out  on  a  table, 
it  is  certain  that  every  one  will  take  some  position,  and  will  lie  on 
some  one  of  its  six  sides ;  but  no  one  can  foretell  what  the  several 
positions  will  be,  or  on  which  of  the  six  sides  each  one  will  lie. 
These  positions  are  attributed  to  chance ;  and,  in  a  calculation  of 
chances,  this  case  may  be  adduced  as  an  appropriate  example.    But 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  123 

though  no  one  will  undertake  to  foretell  what  position  each  die  will 
assume,  yet  every  one  believes  that  all  its  motion,  till  its  final 
position  is  assumed,  is  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  nature,  and 
that  the  fall  from  the  box  is  not  more  determined  by  these  laws 
than  the  final  position.  A  mind  which  could  go  through  the  calcu- 
lation, and  estimate  the  precise  effect  of  the  forces  applied,  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end,  on  each  die,  from  the  position  in  which 
it  started,  might  determine  the  result  with  as  much  certainty  as  the 
astronomer  feels  in  computing  an  eclipse.  The  position  of  the  die 
is  not  more  the  effect  of  chance  than  the  occurrence  of  the  eclipse. 
Chance  is,  in  this  case  at  least,  a  relative  term  —  having  reference 
to  our  ignorance. 

That  a  large  part  of  the  events  which  we  esteem  contingent  are 
so  merely  with  reference  to  our  ignorance,  everybody  will  admit ; 
but  it  is  still  a  question,  whether  there  is  any  absolute  contingency 
in  the  world.  Are  there  any  events  which  occur  that  do  not  con- 
form to  an  established  order  of  sequence  ? 

The  doctrine  of  necessity  denies  the  existence  of  absolute  contin- 
gency, and  maintains  that  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect,  with  its 
established  order  of  sequence,  is  not  only  general,  but  universal. 
In  opposition  to  this  doctrine,  many  maintain  that  human  actions 
do  not  conform  to  an  established  order  of  sequence;  and  it  is 
argued  that  such  conformity  would  render  man  a  mere  machine, 
moving  as  he  is  moved,  and,  therefore,  not  accountable  for  his 
actions.  To  this  argument  it  is  replied,  that  the  doctrine  fully 
admits  the  distinction  between  man  as  a  living,  thinking,  willing, 
and  moral  being,  and  a  mere  machine,  which  neither  lives  nor 
thinks ;  and  that  this  difference  is  the  foundation  of  his  accounta- 
bility. It  is  argued,  that  if  his  actions  did  not  follow  from  his  voli- 
tions, by  an  established  order  of  sequence,  they  would  not  be 
voluntary,  and  he  would  not  be  accountable  for  them.  The  vali- 
dity of  this  argument,  so  far  as  it  goes,,  probably  no  one  will  deny ; 
and  the  question  becomes  narrowed  down  to  this :  Do  human  voli- 
tions occur  as  effects  of  antecedent  causes,  in  an  established  order 
of  sequence  ?  The  question  is  one  of  great  difficulty ;  and,  though 
the  minds  of  the  ablest  reasoners  have  been  employed  on  it,  no 
solution  has  been  reached  that  gives  general  satisfaction.  The 
very  difficulty  of  it  may  satisfy  us  that  our  benevolent  Creator  has 
not  made  the  solution  of  it  necessary,  either  to  our  faith  or  our 


124  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

duty ;  and  we  might  leave  the  puzzling  investigation  to  those  pow- 
erful minds  that  are  best  fitted  to  grapple  with  such  abstrusities, 
were  it  not  that  the  subject  is  intruding  itself  into  the  minds  of  all 
inquirers,  and,  to  some  extent,  affecting  their  theological  opinions. 
It  is,  therefore,  desirable  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  wherein  the 
difficulty  of  the  subject  consists,  and  how  far  it  is  connected  with 
our  faith  or  practice. 

Analogy  favors  the  doctrine  of  necessity.  A  regular  order  of 
sequence  is  admitted  to  exist  throughout  the  material  world.  It  is 
admitted  to  exist  also,  to  some  extent,  in  the  operations  of  the 
human  mind.  Impressions  on  the  organs  of  sense  produce  their 
appropriate  sensations  in  the  mind,  according  to  fixed  laws.  Per- 
ceptions follow,  and  judgments,  and  trains  of  reasoning,  all  of 
which  so  far  conform  to  fixed  laws,  that  the  order  of  their  succes- 
sion is  studied  with  a  view  to  find  out  these  laws ;  and  the  science 
of  mental  philosophy  proceeds  on  the  supposition  that  such  laws 
exist,  and  employs  itself  in  finding  them  out.  The  train  of  mental 
operations,  beginning  with  the  sensation  which  immediately  follow? 
the  impression  on  the  organs  of  sense,  terminates  with  the  volitior 
which  immediately  precedes  muscular  action.  A  regular  order  oi 
sequence  may  be  traced  from  the  first,  through  much  of  the  mental 
process  that  is  moving  on  toward  the  ultimate  volition.  Thence 
onward  we  again  espy  the  line  of  succession  in  the  action  which 
follows,  and  in  all  its  effects.  At  most,  but  a  few  links  only  in  the 
chain  can  be  wanting;  and  analogy  favours  the  conclusion  that 
these  are  not  absent,  but  that  they  exist  even  if  we  cannot  trace 
them. 

An  argument  for  the  doctrine  of  necessity  may  be  drawn  from 
the  fact  that  human  volitions  are  every  day  made  a  subject  of  cal- 
culation. A  man  who  would  not  attempt  to  calculate  the  position 
which  a  thrown  die  will  assume,  will  judge  what  a  known  individual 
will  determine  to  do  in  given  circumstances ;  and  so  much  does  he 
rely  on  the  correctness  of  his  calculation,  that  he  will  be  governed 
by  it  in  some  of  his  most  important  concerns.  It  is  thus  that  a 
sagacious  general  often  anticipates  the  movements  of  his  enemy. 
All  this  would  be  impossible  if  the  sequences  of  human  volitions 
were  wild  and  lawless. 

The  doctrine  of  necessity  has  been  argued  from  God's  fore- 
knowledge.    The  more  sagacious  any  one  is,  the  more  successfully 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  125 

he  can  judge  beforehand  what  a  known  individual  will  do  in 
given  circumstances.  As  a  wise  man  may  foreknow,  much  more 
can  the  all-wise  God.  If  all  events  are  contained  in  their  causes, 
and  are  to  be  developed  in  due  time,  in  conformity  to  an  established 
order  of  sequence,  we  can  conceive  that  the  Omniscient  One  sees 
these  events  in  their  causes,  and  foreknows  their  future  develop- 
ment with  infallible  certainty.  On  the  other  hand,  if  there  is 
absolute  contingency  in  the  world,  it  is  out  of  our  power  to  con 
ceive  how  even  God  himself  can  foreknow  it,  and  it  is  alleged 
that  he  may  be  disappointed,  and  perhaps  defeated  in  some  of  his 
plans  by  its  occurrence. 

The  leading  arguments  against  the  doctrine  are,  that  it  is  incon- 
consistent  with  the  free  agency  of  man,  and  that  it  makes  God  the 
author  of  sin. 

It  is  argued  that  the  doctrine  is  inconsistent  with  the  free 
agency  of  man.  While  we  see  the  material  world  moving  around 
us  in  obedience  to  the  laws  of  nature,  we  are  conscious  that  our 
acts  are  not  directed  by  such  a  necessity.  We  choose  every  day 
which  of  two  courses  we  will  take,  and  the  very  choice,  of  which 
we  are  conscious,  implies  the  power  to  take  either.  The  faculty 
of  choosing  would  be  possessed  in  vain,  if  we  were  restricted  to  one 
of  the  courses  by  invincible  necessity.  There  is  no  free  agency 
where  an  individual  is  bound  to  one  way,  and  can  take  no  other. 

To  this  the  advocates  of  necessity  reply,  the  freedom  of  our 
actions,  of  which  consciousness  testifies,  is  fully  admitted  in  their 
doctrine.  Freedom  of  action  consists  in  doing  what  we  please. 
Compulsion  to  act  against  our  will  is  physical  necessity.  The 
moral  necessity  which  is  contended  for,  respects,  not  the  relation 
of  the  volition  to  the  subsequent  action,  but  its  relation  to  ante- 
cedent causes.  When  a  man's  volitions  are  known  to  be  deter- 
mined by  strong  ruling  principles  of  action,  it  is  maintained  that 
his  free  agency  is  as  perfect  as  if  they  were  the  result  of  long 
continued  deliberation,  or  proceeded  from  no  known  cause.  While 
we  are  conscious  that  we  act  from  choice,  and  are  therefore  free 
agents,  we  are  equally  conscious  that  our  choice  itself  is,  in  many 
cases,  determined  instantly  and  firmly  by  strong  ruling  principles ; 
and  that  this  fact,  instead  of  detracting  from  the  free  agency  and 
virtue  of  our  deeds,  is  our  highest  praise. 

It  is  further  argued,  that  the  doctrine  makes  God  the  author  of 


126  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

sin.  The  laws  of  nature,  in  the  material  world,  are  viewed  as 
God's  mode  of  operation.  If  the  sun  shines,  and  the  rain  descends, 
it  is  God  who  gives  light  to  his  creatures,  and  fertilizes  the  ground 
for  their  benefit;  and  when  storms  rage,  and  hurricanes  sweep 
over  the  land,  these,  arising  according  to  the  laws  of  nature  which 
he  has  established,  are  still  regarded  as  God's  operation.  In 
every  case  the  cause  of  the  cause  is  the  cause  of  the  effect.  If 
fixed  laws  govern  with  like  necessity  in  the  department  of  morals, 
it  is  argued  that  God  must  be  viewed  as  the  author  of  all  that 
happens  in  obedience  to  these  laws.  Having  himself  established 
them,  and  created  the  causes  which  contain  all  the  effects  to  be 
developed  in  the  established  order  of  sequence,  he  is  as  truly  the 
author  of  these  effects  as  if  they  proceeded  immediately  from 
his  hand.  It  can  no  longer  be  said  that  sin  has  place  by  his  per- 
mission, any  more  than  it  can  be  said  that  a  storm  arises  by  his 
permission.  Even  sin  must,  like  the  storm,  be  viewed  as  God 
operating.  This  is  the  argument  which  the  advocates  of  necessity 
find  it  most  difficult  to  answer. 

The  philosophical  arguments  on  this  question  appear  to  me  to 
preponderate  on  the  side  of  necessity.  Indeed,  how  philosophy 
could  decide  against  it,  cannot  well  be  conceived.  She  begins  her 
investigations  with  the  assumption  that  laws  of  nature  do  exist, 
and  she  makes  it  her  business  to  find  out  what  these  laws  are.  If 
she  observes  any  events  that  do  not  conform  to  known  laws,  she 
still  assumes  that  there  is  a  law  which  governs  them,  and  she 
renews  her  effort  to  find  it  out.  Hence,  for  philosophy  to  decide 
that  there  are  events  which  conform  to  no  law,  would  be  to  abandon 
the  foundation  on  which  she  has  ever  stood.  If  such  events  ever 
occur,  they  belong  to  a  department  of  nature  which  is  beyond  the 
walks  of  philosophy. 

As  a  theological  question,  the  doctrine  of  necessity  is  seriously 
embarrassed  by  the  difficulty  respecting  the  authorship  of  sin. 
The  whole  subject  of  God's  providence  over  sin,  is  exceedingly 
difficult.  A  future  section  will  be  devoted  to  the  consideration 
of  it. 

Truth,  whether  ascertained  by  philosophy  or  theology,  must  be 
consistent  with  itself.  But  it  ought  to  be  remembered,  that  the  tests 
by  which  philosophy  ascertains  truth,  are  unequal  to  those  which 
theology  applies.     Philosophy  allows  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from 


WORKS    OF   GOD.  127 

an  induction  of  particulars,  which  is  unavoidably  incomplete.  As 
far  as  our  individual  observation  has  extended,  gravitation  is  found 
at  every  part  of  the  earth's  surface.  From  the  testimony  of  others, 
we  know  that  it  exists  wherever  human  foot  has  trodden.  This 
induction  is  sufficient  for  philosophy,  and  she  draws  her  conclusion 
that  gravitation  exists  at  every  part  of  the  earth's  surface,  even  in 
the  regions  denied  to  the  habitation  or  approach  of  men.  If  some 
voyagers  should  testify  that,  on  a  certain  island  in  the  Pacific, 
gravitation  ceases  to  operate  at  the  distance  of  ten  feet  above  the 
earth's  surface,  the  announcement,  if  deemed  worthy  of  credence, 
would  startle  the  whole  race  of  philosophers,  who  would  hasten  to 
institute  the  experiments  necessary  to  determine  the  truth  or  false- 
hood of  the  strange  report.  Should  it  be  found,  on  trial,  that  all 
bodies  thrown  ten  feet  into  the  air,  on  that  island,  go  off  into  un- 
known space,  philosophers  would  inquire  into  the  cause  of  this 
phenomenon,  that  is,  would  endeavor  to  find  a  law  to  which  it  con- 
forms. Thus  philosophy  often  finds  it  necessary  to  rectify  her 
previous  conclusions,  because  these  were  formed  from  an  incom- 
plete induction  of  particulars.  To  Siamese  philosophy,  it  was 
impossible  for  water  to  become  solid,  so  as  to  bear  up  carriages  of 
burden.  So,  much  of  our  wisest  philosophy  may  be  the  erroneous 
conclusions  of  our  ignorance.  God's  knowledge  is  perfect,  and  with 
him  mistake  is  impossible.  If  human  testimony  can  suffice  to 
rectify  a  conclusion  of  philosophy,  much  more  ought  the  testimony 
of  God  to  be  sufficient.  A  "thus  saith  the  Lord,"  is  a  better 
foundation  for  faith  than  all  the  deductions  of  human  philosophy, 
and  then  only  is  faith  divine,  when  it  stands  on  this  foundation. 

Let  us  imagine  all  created  things  to  have  been  brought  into  being, 
and  left,  for  a  time,  in  a  wild  state,  before  the  laws  of  nature  were 
enacted.  In  this  chaos,  the  atoms  would  not  regard  the  very  first 
law  of  philosophy,  which  enjoins  that  matter  at  rest  shall  continue 
at  rest ;  and,  when  put  in  motion,  shall  move  forward  in  a  right 
line  with  uniform  velocity.  All  the  affinities  and  elective  attrac- 
tions, now  so  familiar  to  the  chemist,  would  be  unknown  to  the 
various  species  of  matter,  and  unobserved  by  them.  Particles 
would  dance  and  rest  alternately  in  the  most  capricious  manner. 
They  would  attract  each  other  for  a  time,  and  then  repel  with  un- 
accountable inconstancy.  They  would  remain  for  a  period  in  close 
embrace,  and  then  divorce  each  other  with  the  changeableness  of 


128  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

fickle  lovers.  If,  when  the  fiat  of  Jehovah  reduced  this  confusion 
to  order  by  subjecting  all  the  movements  to  regular  laws,  it  was 
his  pleasure  to  except  some  little  region  of  his  vast  empire  from 
the  operation  of  these  laws,  what  can  philosophy  say  against  it  ? 
If  such- exception  was  made,  it  was  doubtless  made  for  wise  reasons  ; 
perhaps  to  show  to  his  celestial  school  of  intelligences  the  benefit 
of  order  by  retaining  a  memorial  of  the  ancient  chaos ;  as  the 
manna  was  laid  up  in  the  ark  for  the  benefit  of  the  Israelites.  If 
such  a  region  was  permitted  to  remain,  it  was  doubtless  so  bounded 
and  shut  in,  that  its  lawless  confusion  cannot  disturb  the  order  of 
the  universal  empire.  Now,  if  it  should  be  discovered  that  the  link 
of  connection  between  volition  and  the  cause  or  causes  antecedent, 
is  the  place,  and  the  only  place  that  God  has  left  without  law, 
philosophy  must  be  dumb.  If  God  says  that  it  is  so,  we  are  bound 
to  believe  it ;  and  we  may  infer  that  he  so  keeps  this  lawless  con- 
nection under  control,  that  it  shall  not  subvert  his  government. 

If  the  views  which  have  been  presented  are  correct,  the  follow- 
ing conclusions  may  be  considered  established  :  —  1.  The  doctrine 
of  moral  necessity  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  free-agency  and  ac- 
countability of  man.  2.  The  doctrine  cannot  be  disproved  by 
human  philosophy.  3.  "We  ought  not  to  admit  any  inference  from 
it  as  an  article  of  faith,  unless  it  be  supported  by  the  authority  of 
the  Holy  Scriptures. 

Section  VII.  — DESIGNS  OF   PROVIDENCE. 

In  the  view  which  we  have  taken  of  God's  providential  govern 
ment,  we  have  included  the  fact,  that  he  so  orders  the  events  which 
occur,  as  to  accomplish  his  purpose.     This  is  called  predestination. 
The  purpose  of  God  respects  the  end  which  he  has  in  view ;  and 
also  the  means  which  he  uses  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  end. 

The  doctrine  of  predestination  teaches  that  no  event  comes  to 
pass,  which  is  not  under  the  control  of  God ;  and  that  it  is  so 
ordered  by  him  as  to  fulfil  his  purpose.  If  it  would  thwart  his 
purpose,  the  event  is  prevented ;  or  if,  in  part  only  it  would  con- 
duce to  his  purpose,  only  so  far  is  it  permitted  to  happen.  This 
divine  control  extends  over  all  agents,  animate  and  inanimate, 
rational  and  irrational  ;  and  is  exercised  over  each  in  perfect  ac- 
cordance with  its  nature,  and  with  all  the  laws  of  nature  as  origi- 
nally  established.      Physical   agents    are   controlled   as  physical 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  12^ 

agents ;  and  moral,  as  moral  agents.  The  latter  act  as  freely  as 
if  no  providence  over  them  existed.  Their  ends  are  chosen,  their 
means  adopted,  and  their  accountability  exists,  just  as  if  there  were 
no  predestination  of  God  in  the  matter.  Yet  God  is  not  uncon- 
cerned in  any  of  these  acts,  but  overrules  each  and  all  of  them 
according  to  his  pleasure. 

The  holy  men  of  ancient  times  were  accustomed  to  view  the  hand 
of  God  in  everything  with  which  they  had  to  do ;  and  the  passages 
of  Scripture  are  numerous,  in  which  God's  direction  of  man's  affairs 
and  actions  is  taught.  "  A  man's  heart  deviseth  his  way  ;  but  the 
Lord  directeth  his  steps."1  "  The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hands  of 
the  Lord,  as  the  rivers  of  water ;  he  turneth  it  whithersoever  he 
will."2  The  gardener  has  his  rivulet,  with  which  he  waters  his 
beds ;  and,  by  cutting  a  channel  here,  and  damming  up  there,  he 
directs  the  fertilizing  stream  to  whatever  part  of  his  garden  he 
pleases ;  while  the  water,  however  directed,  moves  according  to  its 
own  natural  tendency.  So  the  king's  heart  moves  according  to 
its  own  inclination  ;  but  the  directing  hand  of  God  guides  his  move- 
ments, though  freely  made,  to  the  accomplishment  of  such  ends  as 
infinite  wisdom  has  designed.  The  passages  are  also  numerous, 
which  show  that  this  direction  of  events  is  for  the  accomplishment 
of  some  purpose.  God  meant  it  unto  good.3  All  things  work  to- 
gether for  good.4  Each  particular  event  accomplishes  some  pur- 
pose ;  and  the  whole  combined  accomplishes  the  grand  purpose,  to 
which  the  particular  purposes  are  subordinate.  So  he  who  builds  a 
house,  has,  in  adjusting  each  timber,  a  purpose  subordinate  to  the 
general  or  final  purpose  for  which  the  whole  work  was  undertaken ; 
and,  to  the  accomplishment  of  which,  the  whole  is  directed. 

The  possibility  that  God  should  possess  this  complete  control  of 
all  things,  cannot  be  doubted  by  any  who  admit  the  doctrine  of 
necessity.  Even  if  human  volitions  are  absolutely  contingent,  his 
control  of  overt  acts  must  be  conceived  to  be  as  perfect,  a§  on  the 
other  hypothesis.  As  length  and  breadth  are  necessary  to  consti- 
tute area,  as  weight  and  velocity  are  necessary  to  constitute  force  ; 
so  volition  and  power  are  necessary  to  constitute  action.  He  does 
not  act,  who  has  the  will  without  the  power,  or  the  power  without 
the  will.     Now,  the  power  is  in  the  hand  of  God,  and  under  his 

*  Prov.  xvi.  9.  2  Prov.  xxi.  1.  3  Gen.  1.  20.  4  Rom.  viii.  28. 

9 


130  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

perfect  control ;  and,  therefore,  whatever  the  will  may  be,  no  overt 
act  can  be  performed  but  by  his  permission ;  and  consequently,  no 
influence  can  be  brought  to  bear  on  any  part  of  God's  dominions, 
so  as  to  disturb  his  administration.  This  hook  God  has  in  the  nose 
of  every  rebellious  subject ;  so  that,  however  filled  with  rage,  he 
cannot  move  but  by  God's  permission.1 

Again,  even  if  human  volition  is  absolutely  contingent,  it  is  still 
true,  that  men  often  fortell  it  with  sufficient  certainty  or  probability, 
to  know  how  to  direct  their  actions  with  respect  to  it.  A  sagacious 
sovereign  knows  the  character  of  his  subjects,  and  the  parties  which 
exist  in  his  government ;  and  he  adapts  the  measures  of  his  admin- 
istration to  meet  the  exigencies  as  they  arise.  Why  cannot  God, 
on  the  throne  of  the  universe,  manage  the  affairs  of  his  govern- 
ment with  equal  skill  ?  A  human  sovereign  sometimes  fails  for 
want  of  time  to  deliberate.  His  enemies  form  their  schemes,  and 
their  plots  proceed  to  their  accomplishment  before  he  is  aware  of 
their  designs ;  and,  when  they  are  discovered,  he  cannot  command 
his  resources,  or  digest  his  plan,  in  time  to  meet  the  emergency. 
But  God  sees  every  budding  volition ;  and,  as  all  his  power  may 
be  exerted  at  any  point  of  space^  so  all  the  resources  of  his  infinite 
wisdom  can  arrange  his  plan,  while  the  volition  is  taking  its  form 
as  wisely  and  completely  as  if  it  were  the  result  of  an  eternity  of 
deliberation.  God  is  verily  able  to  govern  the  world ;  and  who 
doubts  that  he  is  willing  ?  And  our  belief  that  God  governs  the 
world,  and  predestinates  its  various  events  to  accomplish  the  counsel 
of  his  will,  is  not  dependent  on  a  metaphysical  speculation. 

Section  VIII. -PROVIDENCE  OVER  SIN. 

Providence  has  been  explained  to  be  the  care  which  God  exer- 
cises over  the  world.  Though  this  care  is  watchful  and  kind,  sin 
has  entered,  bringing  innumerable  evils  in  its  train,  and  is  now 
mingling  in  the  whole  current  of  human  enjoyment,  and  spreading 
havoc  and  death,  where  peace,  order,  life,  and  happiness,  would 
have  reigned  undisturbed.  How  all  this  comes  to  pass,  under  the 
government  of  a  God,  infinitely  wise,  powerful,  and  good,  is  a 
question  of  great  difficulty.  The  observations  which  follow,  will 
not  clear  away  the  darkness  in  which  the  subject  is  involved ;  but 

»  2  Kings  xix.  28. 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  131 

they  may  suffice  to  assist  our  faith,  and  guard  our  hearts  from  un- 
worthy thoughts  of  the  deity. 

1.  The  fact  of  God's  providence  over  sin,  is  incontrovertible,  what- 
ever difficulties  attend  its  explanation.     If  there  were  anything 
from  which  he  would  stand  aloof,  it  would  be  sin,  the  abominable 
thing  which  he  hates  ;  but  nothing  so  clearly  shows  his  providence 
to  be  universal  as  the  abundant  proof  which  is  furnished,  that  it 
extends  over  sin.     Indeed,  if  it  kept  at  a  distance  from  everything 
sinful,  it  would  abandon  all  human  affairs,  which  are  thoroughly 
mixed  with  sin.     The  Scriptures  speak,  in  very  clear  and  strong 
terms,  of  God's  control  over  sinful  agents.     He  brought  the  Chal- 
deans against  Jerusalem,1  and  stirred  up  the  Medes  against  Baby- 
lon.2    These  were  nations  composed  of  wicked  men,  and  could  not 
have  been  moved  by  the  providence  of  God,  if  wicked  agents  were 
not  under  his  control.     Wicked  men  are  called  the  rod,  the  staff, 
the  ax,  the  saw,  in  his  hand ; 3  and  are  therefore  moved  by  him  as 
these  instruments  are,  by  the  hand  of  him  who  uses  them.     The 
Scriptures  descend  with  still  greater  particularity  to  the  very  acts 
of  wicked  agents,  in  which  their  wickedness  is  exhibited,  and  attri- 
butes these  to  God.     So  Shimei's  cursing  of  David4  and  Absalom's 
lying  with  his  father's  wives;5  wicked  as  these  acts  were,  are,  in 
the  words  of  inspiration,  ascribed  to  the  God  of  holiness.     Why  is 
this,  if  it  be  not  designed  to  teach  us  that  the  providence  of  God 
extends  over  sinful  actions.     So  strong  are  some  of  the  represen- 
tations contained  in  the  holy  word,  that,  like  the  ascribing  of  re- 
pentance to  God,  they  need  to  be  explained  by  the  general  tenor 
of  the  sacred  teachings.     He  blinds  the  eyes,6  and  hardens  the 
hearts7  of  sinful  men;  and  sends  them  strong  delusions,8  that  they 
should  believe  a  lie,  and  be  damned  ;  and  he  raised  up9  Pharoah, 
and  hardened  his  heart,30  that  he  might  show  his  power  in  him. 
Such  language  was  certainly  designed  to  make  a  strong  impression 
jn  our  minds,  that  God  exercises  a  perfect  control  over  every  sinful 
agent  in  all  his  acts ;  and  it  is  not  more  clearly  revealed,  that  God 
hates  the  wicked  acts  of  wicked  men,  than  that  he  controls  and 
directs  them  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose.    All  this  we  are 

1  Hab.  i.  6.  z  Isaiah  xiii.  17  ;  Jer.  li.  11.  3  Isaiah  x.  5-15. 

*  2  Sam.  xvi.  11.       5  2  Sam.  xii.  12.        6  John  xii.  40.       7  Rom.  ix.  18. 
8  2  Thess.  ii.  11.       9  Ex.  ix.  16.  ,0  Ex.  vii.  13. 


132  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

bound  to  believe,  whatever  mystery  may  attend  it ;  and  what  we 
know  concerning  any  subject,  is  not  the  less  true,  or  the  less  firmly 
to  be  believed,  because  there  are  other  things  involved  in  it  which 
we  know  not. 

2.  What  we  know  not  concerning  God's  providence  over  sin, 
respects  him  rather  than  ourselves ;  and  we  may,  therefore,  safely 
leave  it  for  him  to  interpret.  How  to  govern  a  world  of  sinful 
agents,  is  a  problem  which  it  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  solve,  as  the 
task  has  not  been  assigned  us.  Had  God  imposed  the  duty  on  us, 
he  would  doubtless  have  taught  us  how  to  perform  it.  But  he  has 
reserved  it  to  himself ;  and  he  giveth  no  account  of  his  matters. 
Instead,  therefore,  of  being  surprised  that  there  are  things  in  God's 
government  which  are  inscrutable  to  us,  we  should  have  reason  for 
surprise  if  it  were  otherwise.  Earthly  governments  have  their 
secrets,  and  these  may  especially  relate  to  the  management  of  the 
hostile.  We  must,  without  taking  offence,  permit  the  Sovereign 
Ruler  of  all  to  have  his  secrets,  and  to  make  known  his  ways  only 
so  far  as  he  pleases.  We  are  often,  in  appearance  at  least,  exceed- 
ingly anxious  to  relieve  the  character  of  God  from  foul  aspersions ; 
but  we  may  safely  leave  him  to  vindicate  himself.  We  shall  do 
well  to  look  to  it,  that  our  very  officiousness  does  not  betray  an 
unwillingness  to  repose  entire  confidence  in  the  wisdom  and  good- 
ness of  his  ways,  when  they  are  past  our  comprehension.  Let  the 
very  darkness  in  which  he  leaves  them  be  improved  by  us  to  the 
trial  and  strengthening  of  our  faith. 

3.  The  distinction  between  God's  permission  of  sin,  and  his  being 
the  efficient  cause  of  it,  is  one  which  we  appear  authorized  to  use 
to  free  our  thoughts  from  embarrassment  when  we  contemplate  this 
subject.  More  than  mere  permission  is  implied  in  many  of  the  ex- 
pressions found  in  Scripture,  that  refer  to  the  influence  by  which 
the  current  of  sinful  propensity  is  directed  into  this  channel,  rather 
than  that.  But  the  notion  that  God  is  the  efficient  agent  in  pro- 
ducing the  sinful  propensity,  we  are  unable  to  reconcile  with  our 
ideas  of  his  character ;  and  it  does  not  appear  to  be  taught  in  the 
sacred  volume.  God  is  a  sun,  and  moral  darkness  arises  from  the 
absence,  rather  than  from  the  presence  of  his  beams.  We  dare 
not  doubt  that,  had  it  been  his  pleasure,  he  might  have  poured  forth 
such  a  flood  of  holy  influence  from  himself  as  would  have  effectu- 
ally preserved  the  human  race  from  all  possibility  of  defilement ; 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  133 

and,  that  he  did  not  do  so,  is  his  permission  of  sm.  But  every  one 
readily  conceives  of  this  as  very  different  from  a  positive  efficiency 
in  the  production  of  moral  evil.  It  is  a  good  maxim,  to  consider 
all  our  good  as  coming  from  God,  and  give  him  the  praise  of  it ; 
and  all  our  evil  as  our  own,  and  give  ourselves  the  hlame  of  it.  In 
like  manner,  when  we  see  sin  in  others,  and  know  that  God  is  over- 
ruling it  for  good,  we  can  blame  them  for  the  evil,  and  praise  God 
for  the  good  which  he  educes  from  it. 

4.  "We  should  restrain  our  philosophy  within  due  bounds,  and  not 
give  ourselves  up  to  its  deductions  when  they  would  disturb  our 
faith.  We  have  already  shown  that  philosophy  is  compelled  to 
rely  on  inductions  which  are  incomplete,  and  that  her  inferences 
have  not  equal  authority  with  the  declarations  of  God.  We  are 
so  constituted  that  we  rely  on  the  uniformity  of  nature's  laws,  and 
therefore  believe  that  they  will  operate  in  the  future  as  they  have 
operated  in  the  past.  This  constitutional  propensity  is  wisely 
given,  fitting  us  to  shape  our  course  in  the  world ;  and,  for  all  the 
purposes  for  which  it  was  given,  it  does  not  deceive  us ;  but  there 
are  limits  within  which  the  propensity  must  be  restrained.  A  child 
asks  the  cause  of  something  which  he  notices,  and  when  we  have 
answered,  he  asks,  What  is  the  cause  of  that  ?  and  when,  in  an- 
swering his  successive  inquiries,  we  have  led  his  mind  up  to  God  as 
the  First  Cause,  he  asks,  Who  -made  God  ?  We  may  very  wisely 
tell  him  that  God  is  self-existent ;  but  this  means  nothing  more  than 
that  his  inquisitive  philosophy  must  stop  here,  having  reached  its 
utmost  bounds.  Now,  whether  we  can  metaphysically  account  for 
it  or  not,  there  is  a  propensity  in  the  human  mind  to  regard  each 
moral  agent  as  a  sort  of  original  source  of  action,  somewhat  as  we 
conceive  of  God.  This  propensity,  perhaps  as  universal  as  the 
propensity  to  rely  on  the  uniformity  of  nature's  laws,  may  have 
been  given  us  for  the  very  purpose  of  checking  our  philosophy  when 
it  would  presume  to  explain  the  origin  of  evil  in  the  heart  of  a 
moral  agent.  Accustomed,  as  it  is,  to  contemplate  the  relation  of 
cause  and  effect,  operating  in  an  established  order  of  sequence,  it 
does  not  submit  to  consider  man  an  original  source  of  action,  but 
labors  to  account  for  the  moral  evil  in  him  by  causes  operating 
from  without,  and  ultimately  traces  it  to  God.  It  may  be  well  to 
inquire  whether  philosophy,  when  it  pushes  the  doctrine  of  neces- 
sity into  the  inmost  arcana  of  this  subject,  does  not  assume  in  the 


134  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

premises  from  which  it  reasons,  that  there  is  a  natural  inertia  in 
mind,  as  in  matter;  or,  rather,  a  sort  of  natural  immutability. 
Among  the  arguments  in  favor  of  moral  necessity,  it  was  stated 
that  the  volitions  of  a  known  individual  under  given  influences,  are 
often  the  subject  of  calculation;  but,  for  successful  calculation, 
the  individual  must  be  known ;  and  in  this,  it  is  implied  that  he 
must  possess  some  fixed  character.  A  change  in  him,  all  the  cir- 
cumstances being  the  same,  makes  a  change  in  the  result.  A 
chemical  experiment  now  operates  precisely  as  it  would  have  done 
before  the  flood,  because  every  atom  of  matter  has  precisely  the 
same  properties  now  that  it  had  then.  Matter  has  a  natural  immu- 
tability ;  but  can  this  be  predicated  of  mind  ?  And  does  not 
philosophy  assume  it  when  it  applies  the  doctrine  of  necessity  to 
mental  phenomena  without  any  limitation,  and  boldly  carries  back 
the  authorship  of  sin  to  God,  as  the  First  Cause.  There  is  a  ten- 
dency in  the  human  mind  to  a  fixed  state  of  virtue  or  vice,  by  the 
power  of  habit ;  but  a  natural  immutability  of  the  mind,  anterior 
to  the  formation  of  habits,  philosophy  ought  not  to  assume.  Mat- 
ter, in  each  atom,  is  immutable ;  and  it  is  mutable  only  in  its  com- 
binations. The  mind  of  man,  though  an  uncompounded  essence,  is 
not  immutable.  God  has  made  matter  immutable  ;  or  operates  im- 
mutably in  matter.  But  if  he  has  not  chosen  to  operate  in  the 
same  manner  in  mind,  but  has  made  each  mind,  in  some  sort,  an 
original  source  of  action,  philosophy  must  submit  to  push  her  orders 
of  sequence  with  confidence  only  where  she  has  firm  ground  to 
stand  on. 

To  illustrate  the  distinction  attempted  in  the  last  paragraph,  let 
us  suppose  a  metallic  globe  placed  on  the  sharp  point  of  a  pyramid. 
No  human  art  could  so  adjust  it  that  it  would  not  fall  to  one  side. 
Mathematically  we  may  demonstrate  the  possibility  of  such  an  ad- 
justment that  the  power  of  gravity,  operating  equally  on  every 
side,  would  retain  it  for  ever  in  the  same  position.  But,  in  spite 
of  mathematics,  the  globe  would  fall  to  one  side ;  and  philosophy 
will  seek  to  account  for  its  fall  as  arising  from  some  failure  in  the 
adjustment,  or  some  external  cause,  as  a  breath  of  air,  operating 
from  without,  and  not  from  any  changeableness  in  the  globe  itself. 
When  once  started  in  the  descent,  the  globe  has  a  tendency  to  mo- 
tion in  the  direction  taken,  but  it  does  not  pass  from  rest  to  motion 
except  from  external  influence.     Now,  if  philosophy  equally  denies 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  135 

that  motion  can  originate  in  the  mind,  and  maintains  that  its  doc- 
trine of  necessity  is  applicable  to  the  mind,  not  only  when  acting 
under  the  influence  of  habit,  but  as  existing  before  habits  were 
formed,  does  not  philosophy  assume  a  natural  immutability  of  mind, 
in  attributing  the  first  start  in  the  wrong  way  to  a  failure  in  God's 
adjustment,  or  to  the  operation  of  external  causes,  which  have  been 
brought  into  being  and  action  by  him  ?  If  philosophy  assumes  this 
in  the  premises  from  which  it  reasons,  its  conclusions  are  not  to  be 
trusted. 

Conclusion. 

Genuine  piety  in  the  heart  prompts  the  inquiry  which  burst 
forth  from  the  lips  of  the  converted  Saul  of  Tarsus,  "  Lord,  what 
wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  It  asks  to  know  the  will  of  God,  for 
the  purpose  of  doing  it,  as  naturally  as  the  infant's  appetite  craves 
the  appropriate  food.  The  men  of  the  world  walk  in  their  own 
ways,  and  fulfil  the  desires  of  their  own  minds ;  but  the  man  of 
piety  desires  to  walk  in  the  way  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do  that  which 
is  pleasing  to  him.  Hence  he  delights  to  meditate  on  his  law. 
The  Bible  would  not  be  a  book  adapted  to  the  state  of  his  mind, 
if  it  did  not  contain  precepts  for  the  regulation  of  his  conduct. 

The  infant's  appetite  not  only  craves  food,  but  appropriate  food ; 
and  this  fact  is  alluded  to  in  the  words  of  Peter,  "  As  new-born 
babes,  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  that  ye  may  grow 
thereby.1  The  Bible,  the  word  of  God,  supplies  the  sincere  milk 
which  the  child  of  grace  needs  and  craves.  It  not  only  gives 
precepts,  but  precisely  such  precepts  as  are  adapted  to  the  holy 
affections  of  the  new-born  soul,  and  tend  to  increase  and  strengthen 
them.  Paul  delighted  in  the  law  of  God,  not  simply  because  it 
was  his  law,  but  because  it  was  holy,  just  and  good.2  The  pure 
morality  of  Christ  and  his  doctrine,  even  infidels  acknowledge; 
and  precisely  the  same  morality  appears  in  the  decalogue,  and  in 
the  two  great  precepts  on  which  hang  all  the  law  and  the  prophets. 
The  decalogue,  written  on  the  tables  of  stone  by  the  finger  of  God, 
has  been  thought  by  some  to  be  the  first  specimen  of  alphabetical 
writing  known  in  the  world.  Whether  this  be  true  or  not,  it  is 
certainly  among  the  earliest  specimens  of  which  we  have  any  know- 

1 1  Peter  ii.  2.  2  Rom.  vii.  12. 


136  THE    WILL    AND    WORKS    OF    GOD. 

ledge.  The  fact,  that  at  so  early  a  period  a  law  so  pure  and 
perfect  was  given  to  mankind,  is  very  remarkable,  and  can  be 
satisfactorily  accounted  for  only  on  the  supposition  that  it  emanated 
from  God.  The  intrinsic  excellence  of  this  law  corresponds  well 
with  the  solemnity  and  grandeur  of  its  promulgation  from  Sinai. 
The  pious  man  admires  its  perfection  and  delights  in  its  holiness, 
and  sees  in  it  a  proof  that  the  Bible  which  contains  it  is  indeed  the 
word  of  God. 

When  the  desires  are  properly  regulated  within,  all  the  out- 
goings of  the  soul  will  be  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God ;  and 
they  will  be  so  adapted  to  the  circumstances  of  our  being,  as  to 
show  that  the  power  which  made  the  things  that  are  without,  is  the 
same  that  works  within  us  to  will  and  to  do.  All  the  works  of 
God,  in  heaven  above,  where  the  sun,  moon  and  stars  declare  his 
glory,  and  in  the  earth  beneath,  which  is  full  of  his  goodness,  are 
fitted  to  excite  our  admiration  and  gratitude.  We  admire  the 
habitation  which  our  Creator  has  provided  for  us,  so  splendid  and 
so  richly  furnished,  and  we  sit,  with  overflowing  gratitude,  at  the 
table  which  his  Providence  has  spread  before  us  with  such  profusion 
and  variety. 

The  doctrine  of  General  Providence  suffices  for  the  exercise  of 
gratitude  in  the  pious  heart.  The  general  arrangements  of  the 
wrorld  in  which  we  are  placed,  show  the  benevolence  of  him  who 
planned  them ;  and  wTe  should  have  just  cause  of  gratitude  to  him 
for  the  wise  and  beneficial  arrangements,  even  if  we  conceived  of 
him  as  leaving  the  world  to  the  operation  of  the  general  laws  which 
he  has  instituted,  and  giving  no  direction  to  them  in  the  minute 
details  of  our  daily  experience.  But  genuine  piety  is  no  less  dis- 
played by  resignation  in  the  hour  of  suffering,  than  by  gratitude  in 
the  general  experience  of  enjoyment.  Yet  resignation  to  God 
under  afflictions  would  be  impossible,  if  they  were  not  viewed  as 
coming  from  the  hand  of  God.  Job  was  resigned  under  his  afflic- 
tion, because  he  considered  it  sent  by  God.  "  Shall  we  receive 
good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall  we  not  also  receive  evil  ?"  To 
the  exercise  of  resignation,  a  belief  in  particular  Providence  is 
necessary.  The  general  arrangements  of  Providence,  which,  be- 
cause of  their  benevolence,  have  called  forth  our  gratitude,  may 
fail,  in  the  particular  exigency  of  our  present  condition,  to  meet 
our  necessities.    We  suffer  in  consequence  of  this  failure,  and  pi-sty 


WORKS    OF    GOD.  137 

prompts  us  to  bear  the  suffering  with  resignation  to  the  will  of  God ; 
but  this  would  be  impossible  if  we  did  not  believe  that  the  particular 
event  happens  according  to  the  will  of  God.  We  must  view 
Providence,  not  merely  as  instituting  general  laws,  but  as  directing 
the  times  and  circumstances  in  which  the  operation  of  these  laws 
shall  cross  our  path. 

In  order  to  the  further  exercise  of  piety,  the  providence  in  which 
we  believe  must  not  only  be  particular,  but  it  must  be  exercised 
with  design.  Resignation  to  blind  fate  is  not  piety.  We  must  not 
only  feel  the  hand  of  God  in  our  affliction,  but  we  must  realise  that 
it  has  been  laid  on  us  with  design.  We  have  to  do,  not  so  much 
with  our  Father's  hand  as  with  our  Father's  heart.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  the  exercise  of  piety,  that  we  should  be  able  to  pene- 
trate his  design  ;  but  we  must  believe  its  existence.  We  are  not 
required  to  understand  or  explain  all  the  mystery  attendant  on 
the  doctrine  of  predestination ;  but  a  belief  of  the  doctrine  is 
necessary  to  an  intelligent  exercise  of  pious  resignation.  A  wise 
Providence,  and  to  such  only  is  intelligent  piety  resigned,  operates 
with  design. 

Human  depravity  is  prone  to  make  an  improper  use  of  divine 
truth.  The  doctrine  concerning  God's  will  of  purpose  is  made  a 
pretext  for  neglecting  his  will  of  command,  and  an  apology  for  past 
disobedience.  The  transgressor  pleads,  "who  hath  resisted  his 
will  ?"  But  sincere  piety  leaves  God  to  execute  his  will  of  purpose 
in  his  own  way,  and  makes  the  will  of  precept  its  rule  of  duty.  It 
leaves  God  to  his  work,  and  delights  in  it  as  the  work  of  God. 
Where  it  cannot  comprehend  his  design,  it  still  trusts  in  him,  and 
rejoices  in  the  assurance  that  he  does  all  things  well.  It  recognises 
him  as  operating  in  all  things  without ;  and,  in  viewing  all  these 
operations,  finds  occasion  for  admiration,  gratitude  and  resignation. 
But  whenever  a  question  of  duty  arises,  it  is  decided,  not  by  the 
inquiry,  What  has  God  done?  or,  What  has  he  purposed  to  do?  but, 
What  has  he  commanded  ?  The  union  of  resignation  and  obedience 
in  the  same  heart,  is  a  test  of  true  piety.  Happy  is  he  in  whom 
their  influence  is  combined.  He  can  delight  to  do  the  will  of  God, 
and  find  a  heaven  in  his  obedience ;  and  he  can  rejoice  even  in 
tribulation,  and  feel  a  bed  of  thorns,  if  God  has  laid  him  on  it,  to 
be  a  bed  of  down. 


BOOK    FOUETH. 

DOCTRINE    CONCERNING   THE   FALL 
AND  PRESENT   STATE   OF   MAN. 


INTRODUCTION. 

DUTY     OF     REPENTANCE.1 

We  have  seen  that  religion  is  not  confined  to  the  intellect,  but 
brings  into  exercise  the  strongest  feelings  of  the  heart.  Love  to 
God,  and  delight  in  his  will  and  works,  have  been  shown  to  be 
essential  elements ;  and  these  are  affections  which  do  not  play  on 
the  surface,  but  move  the  soul  from  its  lowest  depths.  If,  in  our 
study  of  religious  truth,  we  have  proceeded  thus  far  without  feel- 
ing, without  strong  feeling,  our  labor  has  been  unprofitable,  and  we 
would  do  well  to  begin  anew.  No  time  should  be  lost  in  securing 
the  main  end  for  which  God's  truth  should  be  studied  ;  and  if  here- 
tofore we  have  treated  it  as  we  do  the  truths  of  other  science,  we 
should  persevere  in  this  course  no  longer,  lest  the  profane  use  of 
sacred  things  become  habitual,  and  provoke  God  to  deny  us  his 
illuminating  grace. 

Love  to  God,  and  delight  in  his  will  and  works,  are  holy  and 
pleasurable  exercises  of  the  mind ;  but  religion  in  a  sinful  being  is 
necessarily  attended  with  pain.  To  be  at  ease  in  sin,  is  a  proof 
that  the  heart  is  dead,  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  Every  one 
whom  the  spirit  of  God  quickens,  becomes  sensible  of  sin,  and  feels 
the  pang  of  a  broken  heart  on  account  of  it.     The  anguish  of 

1  Matt.  iii.  2.     Repent,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand. 
Acts  xvii.  30.     The  times  of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at,  but  now  com- 
mandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent. 

(138) 


DUTY    OF    REPENTANCE.  139 

remorse  may  be  alleviated  by  a  sense  of  pardoning  mercy ;  but  the 
joy  of  pardon  cannot  stop  the  flow  of  penitence.  Like  the  woman 
to  whom  much  had  been  forgiven,  the  believer,  while  receiving  his 
pardon  with  overflowing  joy,  does  not  lose  his  sense  of  sin,  but  is 
ready  to  wash  the  feet  of  his  Lord  with  tears.  These  tears  have 
their  sweetness. 

The  necessity  of  repentance  is  abundantly  taught  in  the  sacred 
volume.  The  language  of  Christ  is  explicit,  "  Except  ye  repent, 
ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."1  We  have  no  right  to  consider  our- 
selves in  the  way  to  eternal  life,  if  we  are  strangers  to  repentance. 
Nor  will  it  suffice  to  have  been  at  some  time  alarmed  about  our 
sin.  A  false  repentance,  which  needs  to  be  repented  of,  satisfies 
many  a  deluded  soul.  Genuine  repentance  is  a  deep-felt  and 
abiding  sense  of  sin,  a  condemnation  of  ourselves  before  God  on 
account  of  it,  a  turning  away  from  it  with  abhorrence  and  loath- 
ing, and  a  fixed  purpose  of  soul  never  again  to  commit  it,  or  be  at 
peace  with  it.  This  sense  of  sin  drives  the  soul  to  Christ,  and 
unites  with  the  exercise  of  faith  in  Christ,  to  distinguish  genuine 
religion  from  the  counterfeits  with  which  the  world  abounds. 

Reason  teaches  that  it  is  the  duty  of  men,  as  sinners,  to  repent 
of  their  sins.  When  one  man  has  given  just  occasion  of  offence  to 
another,  by  the  common  consent  of  mankind  it  is  his  duty  to  be 
sorry  for  his  offence.  If  we  have  no  sorrow  for  having  offended 
God,  we  treat  him  with  less  respect  than  is  due  to  a  fellow-worm. 
Not  to  be  sorry  is  to  justify  the  offence,  and  virtually  to  repeat  it. 
God  searches  our  hearts,  and  knows  our  inmost  thoughts  ;  and,  if 
we  remain  impenitent  after  having  sinned  against  him,  it  is  as  if  we 
told  him  to  his  face  that  we  did  right  to  treat  his  authority  with 
contempt.  Our  impenitence  insults  the  majesty  of  heaven,  and 
defies  his  wrath. 

But  the  duty  of  repentance  is  not  left  to  be  inferred  from  the 
common  sense  of  mankind.  It  is  true,  that  no  command  to  repent 
is  found  in  the  decalogue.  That  summary  of  duty  was  given  to 
men  as  men,  and  not  as  sinners.  It  was  not  designed  to  restore 
men  to  the  favor  of  God,  and,  therefore,  did  not  treat  with  them  as 
sinners.  But  when  the  gospel  began  to  be  preached,  its  first 
proclamation  was,  "  Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand."2     In  all  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  this  is  the  first  duty 

1  Luke  xiii.  3.  2  Matt.  iii.  2. 

/ 


140  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OP    MAN. 

required  of  men.  Without  it,  not  a  step  can  be  taken  in  the  way 
of  return  to  God ;  and,  without  it,  there  is  no  possibility  of  obtain- 
ing the  divine  favor.  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise 
perish. "  It  is,  therefore,  of  the  very  highest  importance  to  under- 
stand what  repentance  is,  and  to  have  such  views  of  truth  as  will 
tend  to  produce  it  in  our  hearts. 

When  we  approach  a  fellow-man  whom  we  have  offended,  to  offer 
to  him  our  confessions,  and  seek  his  pardon,  it  is  expected  that  we 
shall  be  sensible  of  having  done  wrong,  shall  regret  the  deed,  blame 
ourselves  for  it,  acknowledge  his  right  to  be  displeased,  and  resolve, 
perhaps  promise,  to  do  so  no  more.  All  this  must  exist  in  repent- 
ance toward  God,  if  we  do  not  mean  to  repeat  our  insults  to  the 
Searcher  of  hearts.  We  may  deceive  a  man  like  ourselves  with 
professions  of  penitence  that  are  insincere,  and  designed  merely 
to  propitiate  him,  but  God  cannot  be  deceived,  and  to  attempt  it  is 
to  mock  him. 

In  order  to  sincere  repentance  toward  God,  it  is  indispensable 
that  we  should  understand  that  we  have  sinned  against  him.  Men 
do  not  usually  compare  their  actions  with  his  righteous  law,  but 
with  the  actions  of  other  men.  We  walk  according  to  the  course 
of  this  world,  and  are  satisfied  if  we  conform  to  such  rules  of  con- 
duct as  are  esteemed  reputable  among  men.  Multitudes  pass 
through  life  without  any  proper  conviction  of  sin,  and  die  impeni- 
tent, who  have  never  examined  and  tried  their  conduct  by  a  higher 
rule.  To  undeceive  such  persons,  and  to  strip  them  of  such  false 
and  delusive  pleas,  it  is  necessary  to  convince  them  that  the  course 
of  this  world  is  downward  and  wicked,  and  that  their  conformity  to 
it  should  alarm  rather  than  satisfy  them.  The  doctrine  of  uni- 
versal total  depravity,  is  therefore  conducive  to  true  repentance. 

We  do  not  truly  repent  of  an  offence  to  a  fellow-man,  and  sin- 
cerely ask  pardon,  unless  we  believe  that  he  has  just  cause  to  be 
offended.  If  his  displeasure  has  arisen  from  mere  mistake,  we  ex- 
pect to  appease  him  by  giving  such  information  as  will  correct  his 
mistake.  If  he  has  become  displeased  through  mere  captiousness, 
we  may  justify  ourselves  before  him,  and  convict  him  of  the  wrong. 
In  order  to  the  exercise  of  genuine  repentance  towards  God,  we 
must  know  that  he  has  a  right  to  be  displeased  with  us,  that  he 
has  made  no  mistake  in  the  matter,  and  that  every  attempt  of  ours 
to  convict  him  of  wrong  in  the  case,  will  be  abortive.     To  impress 


O.RIGINAL    STATE    OF    MAN.  141 

all  this  deeply  on  our  minds,  it  is  only  necessary  we  should  be  fully 
convinced  that  we  are  under  just  condemnation  from  God,  and  that 
all  our  pleas  in  self-justification  are  without  foundation. 

Good  men  have  been  accustomed  to  draw  motives  to  penitence 
from  the  doctrines  that  have  been  mentioned.  David  humbled 
himself  before  God,  with  a  confession  of  his  natural  depravity. 
"  Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity ;  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  con- 
ceive me."1  He  viewed  his  sin  with  the  greater  abhorrence,  as  he 
saw  and  confessed  the  justice  of  the  condemnation  which  it  received 
from  his  Judge.  "  That  thou  mightest  be  justified  when  thou 
speakest,  and  be  clear  when  thou  judgest."2 

True  penitence  is  rendered  more  deep  and  pungent  by  a  view  of 
the  wretchedness  and  helplessness  which  sin  has  brought  upon  us. 
So  Paul  exclaimed,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am ;  who  shall  deliver 
me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"3 


CHAPTER  I. 
original  state  of  man. 

The  first  Man  and  Woman  were  created  holy,  and,  for  a 
time,  served  their  creator  acceptably.4 

How  long  the  first  pair  continued  in  their  original  state  of  inno- 
cence and  happiness  we  have  no  means  of  knowing ;  but  that  they 
did  so  continue  for  a  time,  is  apparent  on  the  face  of  the  sacred 
record.  A  free  intercourse  with  their  Maker  existed,  and  the  token 
of  the  divine  favor,  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life,  was  not  denied 
until  a  period  arrived,  distinctly  marked  in  their  history,  when  they 
first  violated  the  covenant  of  their  God. 

The  fact  that  the  first  pair  continued,  for  a  time,  to  serve  God 
acceptably,  proves  that  their  Creator  had  endowed  them  with  the 
powers  necessary  for  this  service.  The  possession  of  these  endow- 
ments is  implied  in  the  phrase,    "  God  created  man  in  his  own 

1  Ps.  li.  5.  2  Ps.  li.  4. 

*  Rom.  vii.  24.  4  Gen.  i.  27,  31 ;  Ecc.  vii.  29. 


142  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

image."1  To  interpret  this  as  referring  to  the  form  of  the  human 
body,  is  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  spirituality  of  God.  It  is  true, 
that  God  was  afterwards  manifested  in  human  form ;  but  the  Scrip- 
tures represent  the  Son  of  God,  in  his  assumption  of  our  nature,  as 
"  made-  like  his  brethren,"  and,  therefore,  to  suppose  his  human 
body  to  have  been  the  pattern  after  which  the  body  of  Adam  was 
formed,  would  change  the  order  presented  in  the  divine  word.  The 
phrase,  "image  of  God,"  as  explained  by  Paul,2  includes  "know- 
ledge, righteousness  and  true  holiness."  It,  therefore,  refers  to 
their  mental  endowments,  by  which  they  were  fitted  for  the  service 
of  God. 

Intelligence  was  necessary  to  render  the  service  to  God  for  which 
man  was  designed.  A  vast  world  had  been  created,  abounding  with 
creatures  which  exhibited,  in  their  wonderful  structure,  the  wisdom 
and  power  of  their  Creator,  and,  in  the  bountiful  provision  made 
for  the  supply  of  their  wants,  his  goodness  was  richly  displayed ; 
but  not  one  of  all  these  creatures  was  capable  of  appreciating  this 
wisdom,  power,  and  goodness.  They  had  eyes  to  see  the  light  of 
the  material  sun ;  but,  though  the  heavens  declared  the  glory  of 
God,  and  the  earth  was  full  of  his  goodness,  to  that  glory  and 
goodness  all  were  totally  blind.  A  creature  was  wanted  capable 
of  knowing  God,  and  this  knowledge  our  first  parents  possessed. 

Something  more  than  mere  intellectual  endowments  was  neces- 
sary to  fit  our  first  parents  for  acceptable  service  to  God.  These 
were  possessed  by  the  angels  that  had  not  kept  their  first  estate, 
and  yet  they  were  enemies  of  God,  and  cast  out  from  his  presence. 
Purity  of  heart  was  needed ;  and,  accordingly,  Adam  and  Eve  were 
endowed  with  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  They  not  only  knew 
God,  but  they  loved  him  supremely.  Every  natural  desire  which 
they  possessed  was  duly  subordinated  to  this  reigning  affection. 
Even  their  love  to  each  other,  pure  and  unalloyed,  was  far  inferior 
to  that  which  they  both  felt  to  him,  who  daily  favored  them  with 
his  visits,  and  taught  them  to  see  his  glory  in  all  his  works  by 
which  they  were  surrounded. 

We  may  interpret  the  phrase,  "image  of  God,"  as  including, 
also,  the  dominion  with  which  man  was  invested  over  all  inferior 
creatures.     When  representing  man  as  the  head  of  the  woman, 

1  Gen.  i.  27.  2  Col.  iii.  10 ;  Eph.  iv.  24. 


ORIGINAL    STATE    OF    MAN.  143 

Paul  speaks  of  him,  in  this  relation,  as  "the  image  and  glory  of 
God."1  This  investiture  of  authority  gives  him  a  likeness  to  God, 
the  Supreme  Ruler.  In  the  state  of  innocence,  man  possessed 
this  authority  without  fear  from  any  of  the  creatures.  Until  he 
had  rebelled  against  his  God,  they  were  not  permitted  to  rebel 
against  him.  As  the  appointed  lord  of  the  lower  world,  all  crea- 
tures rendered  him  homage.;  and,  as  it  were  in  their  name,  he 
stood,  the  priest  in  the  grand  temple,  to  offer  up  spiritual  worship 
and  service  to  the  God  of  the  whole  creation.  From  every  crea- 
ture which  Adam  named  he  could  learn  something  of  God ;  and, 
with  every  new  lesson,  a  new  tribute  of  adoring  praise  was  rendered 
to  the  Maker  of  all. 

In  the  particulars  which  have  been  mentioned,  the  image  of  God 
is  "renewed"  in  those  who  experience  the  regenerating  influences 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  are  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good 
works.  The  word  "renewed"  carries  back  our  thoughts  to  man's 
original  state.  A  new  creation  is  effected  by  the  Spirit,  restoring 
the  regenerate  to  the  knowledge,  righteousness,  and  holiness  from 
which  man  has  fallen.  In  their  renewed  state,  the  effects  of  the 
fall  still  appear,  and  will  remain  until  the  last  enemy,  death,  shall 
be  de^royed ;  but  their  connection  with  the  second  Adam  secures 
the  completion  of  the  good  work  begun,  and  assures  them  that  they 
shall  ultimately  bear  the  likeness  of  the  heavenly,  who  is  the  image 
of  God. 

The  human  soul  bears  likeness  to  God,  "  the  Father  of  spirits," 
in  its  spirituality  and  immortality.  Also,  the  happiness  which 
Adam  and  Eve  enjoyed,  while  their  innocence  remained,  was  a  rill 
from  the  fountain  of  blessedness,  which  is  in  the  eternal  God.  In 
this  happiness  the  image  of  God  appeared,  until  it  became  sadly 
effaced  by  transgression.  The  spirituality  and  immortality  of  the 
soul  remain,  but  the  happiness  of  Eden  has  never  revisited  the 
earth ;  and  it  is  again  to  be  enjoyed  only  in  the  celestial  paradise. 
Spirituality  and  immortality,  without  knowledge,  righteousness, 
holiness,  and  communion  with  the  blessed  God,  would  constitute 
us  immortal  spirits  in  eternal  woe. 

We  may  profitably  look  back  to  the  holy  and  happy  state  in 
which  our  first  parents  stood  when  they  came  from  the  hand  of  their 

1 1  Cor.  xi.  7. 


144  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

Creator  ;  and  we  may,  with  good  effect,  remember  from  whence  we 
have  fallen.  A  due  contemplation  of  this  subject  will  recommend 
to  our  acceptance  the  gracious  plan  of  restoration  which  the  gospel 
unfolds,  in  the  person  and  work  of  the  second  Adam.  What  a 
Sabbath  was  that,  when  God,  resting  from  the  six  days'  work  of 
creation,  held  communion  with  man,  the  last  work  of  his  hands ; 
and  when  man,  unstained  by  sin,  poured  forth  the  first  offering  of 
praise  from  the  newly-created  earth,  free  and  acceptable  to  the 
Creator  !  Such  a  Sabbath  the  earth  does  not  now  know ;  but  such 
a  Sabbath  remains  to  the  people  of  God,  and  blessed  are  they  who 
shall  enter  into  this  rest. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE    FALL. 


The  first  man,  having  been  placed  under  a  covenant  of 
works,  violated  it,  and  brought  its  penalty  on  himself  and 
his  descendants.1 

The  narrative  of  the  Fall,  as  given  in  the  book  of  Genesis,  is  to 
be  considered,  not  as  a  mythical  representation,  but  as  proper  his. 
tory.  It  is  always  so  referred  to  in  subsequent  parts  of  the  sacred 
volume ;  and  its  connection  with  other  historical  events  is  such  as 
excludes  the  supposition,  that  it  was  anything  else  than  simple  fact. 

The  revelation  of  God's  wiU  to  Adam,  as  recorded  in  the  book 
of  Genesis,  is  not  there  called  a  covenant ;  and  some  have  doubted 
the  propriety  of  using  this  term  to  denote  it.  If  the  word,  in  the 
Scripture  use  of  it,  signified,  as  it  does  in  human  transactions,  a 
bargain  made  between  equals,  who  are  independent  of  each  other, 
we  might  well  reject  the  application  of  it  to  this  subject.  But  in 
the  sacred  Scripture,  it  is  used  in  a  more  extended  signification. 
It  denotes,  1.  An  immutable  ordinance.2  Un.der  this  sense  may 
be  included  an  irrevocable  will  or  testament.3     2.  A  sure  and  sta- 


1  Gen.  ii.  17 ;  iii.  6,  16,  17,  18,  19 ;  Rom.  v.  12, 15,  16,  17, 18,  19. 

2  Jer.  xxxiii.  20.  3  Ileb.  ix.  15-17. 


THE    FALL.  145 

hie  promise.1  3.  A  precept.2  4.  A  mutual  agreement.3  With 
this  latitude  of  meaning,  the  word  must  be  considered  applicable 
in  the  present  case ;  yet  there  would  be  no  necessity  to  insist  on 
its  use,  were  it  not  that  the  Scriptures  have  used  it  in  this  applica- 
tion. See  Hosea  vi.  7,  which  may  be  more  properly  rendered  than 
in  the  common  version,  "  They,  like  Adam,  have  transgressed  the 
covenant."  So  the  same  Hebrew  phrase  maybe  understood  in  Job 
xxxi.  33 ;  Ps.  lxxxii.  6,  7. 

As  the  term  covenant  is  sometimes  applied  to  a  free  promise,  in 
which  no  condition  is  stipulated ;  it  is  proper  to  characterize  that 
which  was  made  with  Adam  as  a  covenant  of  works.  It  was 
a  law,  with  a  penalty  affixed.  "  Of  every  tree  of  the  garden, 
thou  mayest  freely  eat;  but  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good 
and  evil,  thou  shalt  not  eat  of  it;  for  in  the  day  that  thou 
eatest  thereof,  thou  shalt  surely  die." 4  No  promise  was  given,  that 
Adam  would  continue  to  enjoy  the  divine  favor  if  he  continued 
obedient;  but  this  may  be  understood  to  be  clearly  implied. 
Whether  higher  favor  than  he  then  enjoyed,  would  have  been 
granted  on  condition  of  his  persevering  in  obedience  through  a 
prescribed  term  of  probation,  we  are  not  informed.  We  have 
reason  to  conclude,  that  a  continuance  in  well-doing,  would  have 
received  stronger  marks  of  divine  approbation  according  to  its 
progress ;  and,  from  what  we  know  of  the  power  of  habit,  as  tend- 
ing to  establish  man  in  virtue  or  vice,  (a  tendency  which  it  has, 
because  God  has  so  willed  it)  the  conjecture  is  not  improbable,  that, 
had  Adam  persevered  in  his  obedience,  he  would,  after  a  time, 
have  been  confirmed  in  holiness.  But,  where  the  Scriptures  are 
silent,  we  should  not  frame  conjectures  and  make  them  articles  of 
faith. 

It  is  vain  and  sinful,  to  arraign  God  at  the  tribunal  of  our  rea- 
son, for  having  prescribed  such  a  test  of  obedience,  as  the  eating 
of  an  apple.  We  may  so  far  forget  the  reverence  due  to  God,  as 
to  call  in  question  the  wisdom  and  goodness,  of  making  so  much 
ado  about  so  little  a  matter ;  but  in  this  we  betray  great  impiety. 
Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  It  is  enough  that 
God  has  done  it.     God's  acts  are  not  little,  when  he  creates  the 


1  Acts  iii,  25  ;  xxxiv.  10 ;  Isaiah  lix.  21.  2  Ex.  xxxiv.  28. 

8  Gen.  xxxi.  44;  xxvi.  28,  29 ;  1  Sam.  xviii.  3.  Gen.  ii.  16, 17. 

10 


146  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

minutest  atom ;  and  God's  requirements  are  not  to  be  contemned, 
when  he  gives  one  of  the  least  of  his.  commandments.  The  very 
simplicity  of  the  thing,  though  human  folly  may  scoff  at  it,  may 
best  agree  with  the  wisdom  of  God.  Had  Adam  made  an  attempt 
to  dethrone  his  Maker,  human  reason  would  admit  the  magnitude  of 
the  crime ;  but  no  greater  evil  would  have  been  inflicted  on  omnipo- 
tence by  his  puny  effort,  than  when  he  ate  the  forbidden  fruit. 
What  difference,  then,  is  there,  in  the  magnitude  of  the  crimes  ? 
None,  in  their  effect;  and  none  in  their  principle.  To  disobey,  is, 
as  far  as  the  creature  can  go,  to  dethrone.  Shall  men  mock  God 
by  permitting  him  to  occupy  the  seat  of  universal  authority,  while 
they  refuse  obedience  to  that  authority  ?  Be  not  deceived ;  God 
is  not  mocked.  He  that  disobeys  God,  rejects  his  reign ;  and  so 
God  views  it.  The  test  of  obedience  prescribed  to  Adam  was  easy ; 
£md  this  very  fact  makes  the  transgression  the  more  inexcusable. 
It  showed  the  greatness  of  Abraham's  faith,  that  it  stood  so  severe 
a  test  when  he  was  required  to  offer  up  his  son  Isaac  ;  and  it  proves 
the  greatness  of  Adam's  sin,  that  it  was  committed,  when  he  might 
so  easily  have  avoided  it. 

What  kinds  of  fruit  the  tree  of  life,  and  the  tree  of  the  know- 
ledge of  good  and  evil,  bore,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing ;  and 
the  knowledge,  if  we  could  attain  to  it,  would  do  us  no  good. 
Some  have  asked,  whether  one  fruit  had  a  natural  efficacy  to  pro- 
duce immortality,  and  the  other  to  produce  death ;  but  this  also  is 
an  unprofitable  question.  Nature  has  no  other  efficacy  than  the 
will  of  God,  and  his  appointment  of  these  trees,  for  the  use  which 
it  was  his  pleasure  they  should  serve,  was  as  efficacious  as  any  law 
of  nature. 

The  sacred  narrative  informs  us  that  the  garden  of  Eden,  in 
which  the  innocent  and  happy  pair  were  placed,  abounded  with 
trees,  yielding  all  sorts  of  pleasant  fruits.  In  the  midst  of  the 
garden,  were  two  trees  distinguished  from  all  the  rest,  and  designed 
for  special  use.  What  that  use  was,  may  be  inferred  from  their 
names.  The  tree  of  life,  of  which  they  were  permitted  to  eat, 
secured  to  them  immortality,  or  exemption  from  the  penalty  of  the 
covenant.  The  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  was  designed 
for  a  different  purpose  ;  and  its  fruit  was  prohibited.  Not  to  know 
good  and  evil,  is  a  distinction  ascribed  to  children.1     Good  and 

1  Deut.  i.  39  :  Heb.  v.  14. 


THE    FALL.  147 

evil,  when  spoken  of  in  contrast,  may  refer  to  the  moral  quality 
of  actions ;  but  they  are  not  restricted  to  this  signification.  When 
Job  said,  "  Shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall 
we  not  receive  evil  ?"  he  did  not  refer  to  the  moral  distinction  be- 
tween actions,  but  to  enjoyment  and  suffering.  When  Barzillai 
declined  to  accompany  David  to  Jerusalem,  and  live  with  him  there, 
and  assigned  as  a  reason  his  inability  to  distinguish  between  good 
and  evil ;  his  reference  was  to  enjoyment,  not  to  moral  quality.1 
Eve  decided  to  eat  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  because  "  she  saw  that 
it  was  good"  not  in  a  moral  sense,  but  " for  food."  Children, 
who  have  not  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  are  instructed  by 
their  parents,  both  what  to  do,  and  what  to  enjoy ;  and  it  is  their 
duty  and  interest  to  follow  the  instructions  received.  The  first 
human  pair  stood  in  the  relation  of  children  to  their  Creator ;  and, 
while  they  abstained  from  the  forbidden  fruit,  they  acknowledged 
their  inability  to  know  good  and  evil,  and  their  dependence  on  the 
guidance  of  infinite  wisdom.  In  abstaining,  they  acknowledged 
the  prerogative  of  God,  to  decide  for  them  what  was  good,  and  what 
was  evil.  The  two .  trees  were  very  significantly  placed  near  to 
each  other,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  garden.  The  tree  of  life  was 
the  symbol  of  the  divine  favor ;  and  the  other  tree,  the  symbol  of 
the  divine  prerogative.  The  trees  of  the  garden,  generally,  yielded 
fruit  that  was  pleasant  and  life-sustaining;  but  the  fruit  of  the 
tree  of  life  was  distinguished  from  the  rest,  as  a  special  pledge  of 
the  divine  favor.  Yet  the  proximity  of  this  tree  to  that  which 
bore  forbidden  fruit,  perpetually  reminded  the  subjects  of  this  pro- 
bation, that  the  favor  of  God  could  be  enjoyed  only  by  respecting 
his  prerogative.  This  token  of  the  divine  authority  was  in  the 
midst  of  the  garden ;  to  remind  them,  that  they  held  the  privilege 
of  eating  all  the  pleasant  fruits,  by  the  grant  of  the  Supreme 
Lord ;  and  that  their  desire  and  enjoyment  of  natural  good,  was 
to  be  regulated  by  the  decision  of  him,  whose  prerogative  it  was  to 
know  good  and  evil. 

The  departure  of  Eve  from  the  straight  line  of  duty  is  distinctly 
marked  in  the  sacred  narrative.  "  When  the  woman  saw  that  the 
tree  was  good  for  food,"2  &c.  When  she  saw.  She  judged  for 
herself  what  was  good.     God's  account  of  the  transgression  is  : 

1 2  Sam.  xix.  35.  2  Gen.  iii.  6. 


14.8    THE  FALL  AND  PRESENT  STATE  OF  MAN. 

"  Behold,  the  man  has  become  as  one  of  us,  to  know  good  and 
evil  ;"1  he  has  usurped  our  prerogative.  This  was  the  first  trans- 
gression. The  desire  of  natural  good  was  made  the  rule  of  action. 
"  When  she  saw,"  &c.  The  desire  of  natural  good  prevailed  over 
reverence  for  the  authority  of  God ;  and,  in  the  transgression  may 
be  seen  not  only  a  desire  of  the  pleasant  fruit,  but  also  a  desire  to 
be  exempt  from  the  necessity  of  referring  to  God's  decision  as  the 
rule  of  conduct — "a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise;"2  to 
make  one  independent  of  God's  wisdom.  Such  was  the  first  trans- 
gression. It  cast  off  the  authority  of  God,  usurped  his  preroga- 
tive, and  gave  the  mind  up  to  the  dominion  of  natural  desire. 

Because  of  his  violation  of  the  covenant,  man  was  excluded  from 
the  symbol  of  the  divine  favor.  A  cherub,  with  a  flaming  sword, 
was  placed  to  guard  the  approach  to  the  tree  of  life,  lest  he  should 
eat  thereof  and  live  for  ever.  He  had  incurred  the  threatened 
penalty,  and  it  began  at  once  to  be  inflicted  on  him. 

What  was  the  precise  import  of  death,  as  the  penalty  threatened 
to  Adam,  is  a  question  of  some  difficulty.  If  it  imported  the  death 
of  the  body,  the  threat  was  not  executed  at  the  time  designated : 
"In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die."  He 
did  not  literally  die  on  the  day  of  his  transgression.  Some  have 
accounted  for  this  by  supposing  that  the  mediation  of  Christ  inter- 
posed, and  prevented  the  execution  of  the  threat.  That  God's  pur- 
pose of  mercy,  through  Christ,  was  kept  in  view  in  his  dealings  with 
Adam,  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt ;  but  the  Scriptures  nowhere 
explain  that  it  rescued  man  from  the  threatened  penalty.  If  im- 
mediate literal  death  was  the  proper  import  of  the  threatened 
penalty,  and  if  Adam  was  rescued  from  it  by  the  mediation  of 
Christ,  he  was  delivered  from  a  less  evil  to  endure  far  greater.  He 
was  spared  to  live  a  life  of  depravity,  and  to  die,  if  he  died  impeni- 
tent, under  the  wrath  of  God,  and  be  doomed  to  eternal  misery. 
If  it  be  said  that  eternal  misery  would  have  followed  his  death  had 
it  taken  place  immediately,  how  can  it  be  accounted  for  that  this 
dreadful  consequence  of  transgression  was  not  intimated  in  the 
threatening  ?  If  it  be  said  that  the  term  death  included  this  also, 
then  the  literal  interpretation  of  it  is  abandoned,  and  its  chief  im- 
port is  made  to  relate  to  another  matter,  of  far  greater  magnitude 

1  Gen.  iii.  22.  «  Gen.  iii.  6. 


THE    FALL.  149 

than  the  dissolution  of  the  body.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  best  ex- 
positor on  this  subject;  and,  after  stating  that  death  was  intro- 
duced into  the  world  by  the  sin  of  Adam,1  sets  this  death  in  con- 
trast with  the  eternal  life  procured  by  Christ :  "  The  wages  of  sin 
is  death ;  but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord."2  As  eternal  life  does  not  consist  in  exemption  from 
literal  death,  so  its  opposite  does  not  consist  in  the  mere  loss  of  life 
to  the  body. 

We  may  understand  that  the  threatened  penalty  was  executed 
on  Adam,  in  its  proper  import,  when  he  was  denied  approach  to  the 
tree  of  life.  This  had  been  to  him  the  symbol  of  the  divine  favor. 
What  notion  he  had  of  death,  as  pertaining  to  the  body,  we  know 
not ;  and  he  may  never  have  been  taught  anything  on  this  subject 
until  he  heard  the  sentence,  "  Dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  shalt 
thou  return." 3  But  Adam,  besides  having  a  body  made  of  dust, 
had  received  from  God  "a  living  soul,"  which  could  not  suffer  dis- 
solution. Some  idea  of  this  living  principle,  which  distinguished 
him  from  the  brutes  around  him,  must  have  formed  a  part  of  that 
"  knowledge"  with  which  he  was  endowed,  and  in  which  the  image 
of  God  in  part  consisted.  What  was  death  to  his  living  soul  ?  He 
knew,  by  happy  experience,  what  it  was  to  have  the  communion 
and  favor  of  the  living  God ;  and  to  be  cut  off  from  these  was  the 
most  dreadful  death,  and  the  only  death  of  which  the  immortal 
spirit  was  capable.  This  penalty  was  inflicted  in  its  awful  import. 
The  separation  of  the  body  from  the  soul,  to  which  the  name  death 
is  given,  bears  some  likeness  to  the  separation  of  the  soul  from 
God ;  and  the  dissolution  of  the  body,  whether  by  worms,  or  the 
funeral  fire,  leads  the  mind  to  the  worm  that  dieth  not,  and  the  fire 
that  is  not  quenched,  which  are  consequences  of  the  second  death. 
Of  this  full  and  most  momentous  import  was  the  death  of  the  soul. 
If  Adam  became  a  believer  in  Christ,  he  was  delivered  from  under 
the  penalty,  and  not  merely  prevented  from  falling  under  it.  The 
dissolution  of  the  body,  which  is  the  extension  of  the  penalty  to 
the  material  part  of  his  constitution,  he  was  not  prevented  from 
enduring;  but  from  this,  too,  he  will  be  redeemed  at  the  resur- 
rection. 

The  fallen  pair  were  not  only  excluded  from  the  tokens  of  God's 

'  Rom.  v.  12.  2  Rom.  vi.  23.  3  Gen.  iii.  19. 


150  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

favor,  but  they  began  to  suffer  positive  inflictions  of  his  displeasure , 
They  were  banished  from  Eden,  the  home  of  their  innocence  and 
joy.  Its  pleasant  shades,  its  beautiful  flowers,  its  fragrant  odors, 
its  delicious  fruits,  they  are  compelled  to  leave  for  ever.  The  de- 
lightful employment  of  dressing  and  keeping  the  garden,  which 
yielded  sustenance  without  painful  toil,  was  to  be  exchanged  for 
hard  labor  in  cultivating  a  cursed  soil,  yielding  briers  and  thorns ; 
and  bread,  hardly  earned  by  the  sweat  of  the  face,  was  to  be  their 
food.  On  the  woman,  first  in  the  transgression,  a  woe  was  de- 
nounced :  "  In  sorrow  shalt  thou  bring  forth  children."1  The  first 
pain,  thus  intimated,  became  the  model  pain  of  exquisite  suffering. 
These  denunciations  foretold  a  sad  future.  Stung  with  remorse, 
harassed  with  fears,  God  offended,  and  their  souls  "undone,  they 
bade  farewell  to  their  late  blissful  abode,  and  became  wanderers  on 
the  earth,  until  their  bodies,  sinking  under  the  weight  of  the  ills 
inflicted,  should  crumble  into  dust.  What  other  evils  were  included 
in  that  dreadful  penalty,  death ;  what  the  full  import  of  the  word, 
they  and  their  posterity  were  to  learn  by  woeful  experience. 


CHAPTER  III. 

AN'S     PRESENT     STATE, 


The  evils  consequent  on  the  disobedience  of  our  first  parents 
were  not  confined  to  them  personally,  but  have  fallen  on  their  de- 
scendants also.  Adam  had  been  created  in  the  image  of  God ;  but 
when  that  image  had  been  lost  by  transgression,  he  begat  a  son  in 
his  own  likeness.2  So  all  his  descendants  since  have  borne  the 
image  of  the  earthly,  fallen  progenitor,  and  have  been  like  him, 
not  only  in  character,  but  in  condition.  The  subject  will  be  exa- 
mined further  in  the  following  sections. 

Section  I.— ACTUAL   SIN. 

Men  oe  all  ages  and  nations  have,  in  their  actions,  vio- 
lated the  law  op  God.3 

The  sacred  volume,  in  describing  the  state  of  the  world  before 

1  Gen.  iii.  16.      2  Gen.  v.  3.      8  Rom.  iii.  9-19 ;  1  John  v.  19  j  Eph.  ii.  2,  3. 


man's  present  state.  151 

the  flood,  says  that  "the  earth  was  filled  with  violence."'  The 
history  of  the  period  before  the  flood  is  very  brief;  yet  we  find,  in 
the  beginning  of  it,  the  murder  of  Abel  by  his  brother;2  in  the 
progress  of  it,  the  bigamy  of  Lamech,3  and  the  murder  which  he 
confessed  to  his  wives ;  and,  in  the  close  of  it,  this  account  of  the 
complete  corruption  of  the  earth,  and  the  general  prevalence  of 
violence.  The  flood  was  sent  in  wrath  for  the  transgressions  of 
men  ;  but  its  waters  did  not  cleanse  the  earth  from  sin.  Iniquities 
prevailed  after  the  flood,  as  they  had  done  before ;  and  the  condi- 
tion of  mankind,  in  all  nations,  was  such  as  Paul  has  described  in 
the  first  chapter  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  The  children  of 
Abraham  were  separated  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  made  a 
peculiar  people  to  God ;  but,  notwithstanding  the  religious  advan- 
tages which  they  enjoyed,  their  history  is  little  else  than  a  record 
of  rebellions  against  God,  and  judgments  inflicted  on  them  for  their 
provocations.  So  common  is  wickedness  in  the  earth,  that  it  is 
called  "the  course  of  this  world,"4  and  it  is  said,  "the  whole  world 
lieth  in  wickedness."5 

From  this  universal  corruption  no  man  is  exempt.  "  There  is  no 
man  which  sinneth  not."6  All  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  brings  to  a 
knowledge  of  themselves  confess,  "  In  many  things  we  offend  all;"7 
and  they  pray,  "Forgive  us  our  sins.5'8  If  others  make  no  con- 
fessions of  sin,  and  no  petitions  for  pardon,  it  is  because  of  the 
blindness  and  hardness  of  their  hearts. 

He  who  looks  into  the  state  of  society  around  him,  finds  proof 
of  man's  wickedness.  Crimes  abound  everywhere ;  and  the  earth 
is  filled  with  violence,  as  it  was  of  old.  Laws  restrain  the  crimes 
and  violence  of  men ;  but  the  very  necessity  of  laws  demonstrates 
the  wickedness  of  mankind.  War  and  oppression  make  up,  in  great 
measure,  the  history  of  our  race ;  and  innumerable  deeds  of  wick- 
edness, which  never  find  a  place  in  the  historic  record,  are  written 
in  God's  book  of  remembrance,  and  will  be  brought  to  light  in  that 
day,  when  men  shall  be  judged  according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the 
body. 

The  actual  transgressions  of  men  consist  in  doing  what  God  has 
forbidden,  and  in  leaving  undone  what  he  has  commanded.     The 

1  Gen.  vi.  11.  2  Gen.  iv.  8.  3  Gen.  iv.  19-23. 

4  Eph.  ii.  2.  e  1  John  v.  19.  6  2  Ch.  vi.  36. 

7  James  iii.  2  8  Luke  xi.  4. 


152  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

latter  are  called  sins  of  omission ;  the  former,  sins  of  commission. 
With  both  these  kinds  of  transgression  all  men  are  more  or  less 
chargeable.  They  who  abstain  from  grosser  crimes  have,  never- 
theless, committed  many  sins,  and  omitted  many  duties.  But  sin, 
in  the  overt  act,  constitutes  only  a  very  small  part  of  man's  sinful- 
ness, as  will  appear  in  the  next  section. 

Section  II.  —  DE  PR  A  VIT  Y. 
ALL   MEN   ARE    BY   NATURE    TOTALLY   DEPRAVED.1 

The  depravity  which  we  have  to  lament  in  mankind,  respects 
their  principles  of  action  as  moral  beings.  As  merely  sentient 
beings,  external  objects  produce  on  them  the  proper  effects ;  and, 
as  rational  beings,  they  draw  conclusions  in  science  with  correct- 
ness. The  disease  and  debility  which  are  the  consequence  of  moral 
evil,  may  impair  both  sense  and  reason ;  but  we  cannot  affirm  of 
these  powers  that  they  are  totally  depraved.  Moral  depravity 
shows  itself  in  outward  acts  of  transgression ;  but,  atrocious  as 
these  often  are,  it  is  chiefly  in  the  heart  that  God  beholds  and  hates 
it.  "  God  saw  that  the  wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth, 
and  that  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only 
evil  continually."2  In  the  heart  it  was  that  God  saw  the  great 
wickedness  of  the  earth.  The  heart  is  a  metaphorical  term,  deno- 
ting those  mental  affections  which  are  the  principles  or  beginnings 
of  action.  Here  depravity  exists  at  the  very  fountain  from  which 
all  human  action  flows. 

The  depravity  of  man  is  total.  We  do  not  mean  by  this  that  his 
conduct  is  as  bad  as  it  could  be,  or  that  no  amiable  affections  have 
a  place  in  his  heart.  The  young  man  who  addressed  our  Redeemer 
with  most  respectful  inquiry  how  to  attain  eternal  life,  appears  to 
have  been  unconverted,  yet  he  possessed  so  amiable  qualities  that 
it  is  recorded,  "  Jesus,  beholding  him,  loved  him."3  The  goodness 
of  God  is  great,  even  to  the  unthankful  and  evil ;  and  he  has  been 
pleased  to  implant  natural  affections  in  hearts  which  desire  not  to 
retain  him  in  their  knowledge,  and  so  to  balance  the  propensities, 
even  where  there  is  no  holiness,  that  life  and  human  society  have 

1  Gen.  vi.  5  ;  viii.  21 ;  Ps.  xiv.  2,  3 ;  li.  5  ;  Rom.  i.  21-25  ;  iii.  9-23  ;  vi.  17 » 
vrii.  5,  6,  7,  8  ;  Eph.  ii.  1  ;  1  John  v.  19. 

2  Gen.  vi.  5.  3  Mark  x.  21. 


man's  present  state.  153 

many  enjoyments.  When  our  first  parents  permitted  natural  desire 
to  prevail  over  the  authority  of  God,  human  depravity  began  to 
flow,  and  what  it  was  at  the  fountain-head,  it  has  been  in  all  the 
streams  that  have  spread  through  the  earth.  Men  seek  good  at 
their  own  choice,  and  walk  in  their  own  ways,  regardless  of  the 
authority  of  God.  The  love  of  God  is  dethroned  from  the  heart, 
and  therefore  the  grand  principle  of  morality  is  wanting,  and  no 
true  morality  exists.  A  total  absence  of  that  by  which  the  actions 
should  be  controlled  and  directed,  is  total  depravity.  Hence  the 
strong  language  of  Scripture,  already  quoted,  is  properly  descrip- 
tive of  human  nature  in  its  fallen  state :  "  Every  imagination  of  the 
thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually." 

Human  depravity  is  universal.  In  heathen  nations,  men  did  not 
delight  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge,  and  their  very  religion 
became  filled  with  abominable  rites.  In  lands  blessed  with  the  light 
of  revelation,  men  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  and  give 
melancholy  proof  that  they  have  not  the  love  of  God  in  them.  The 
rich  and  the  poor,  the  learned  and  the  unlearned,  the  young  and 
the  old,  all  give  evidence  that,  to  serve  and  please  God,  is  not  their 
chief  delight,  their  meat  and  their  drink.  A  few,  converted  by 
divine  grace,  differ  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  esteem  it  their 
pleasure  and  honor  to  obey  God ;  but  these  very  men  testify  that 
it  is  God  who  has  made  them  to  differ,  and  that,  in  themselves, 
they  are  like  other  men.  "  Such  were  some  of  you ;  but  ye  are 
washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified,  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."1  "  I  know  that  in 
me,  that  is,  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  no  good  thing."2 

Depravity  is  natural  to  man;  it  is  born  with  him,  and  not 
acquired  in  the  progress  of  life.  It  is  not  to  be  ascribed  to  evil 
habit,  or  evil  example.  Evil  habits  are  formed  by  evil  doing ;  and 
evil  doing  would  not  be,  if  there  were  no  evil  propensity.  Evil 
example  would  not  everywhere  exist,  if  human  nature  were  not 
everywhere  corrupt;  and  the  tendency  to  follow  evil  example 
would  not  be  so  common,  and  so  much  to  be  guarded  against,  if  it 
were  not  natural  to  man.  The  Scriptures  clearly  teach  this  doc- 
trine. "Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  sin  did  my 
mother  conceive  me."3     The  psalmist  did  not  mean  to  charge  his 

1  Cor.  vi.  11.  *  Rom.  vii.  18.  3  Ps.  li.  5 


154     THE  FALL  AND  PRESENT  STATE  OF  MAN. 

mother  with  crime  in  these  his  humble  confessions,  but  manifestly 
designs  them  to  be  an  acknowledgment  that  his  depravity  was  in- 
woven in  his  nature,  and  bore  date  from  the  very  origin  of  his 
being.  The  Saviour  taught,  that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh,  is 
flesh.1  The  term  flesh,  which  is  here  opposed  to  spirit,  signifies, 
as  it  does  in  other  places,  our  depraved  nature.  It  traces  human 
depravity  up  to  our  very  birth. 

As  every  individual  of  our  race  is  born  of  depraved  parents,  and 
brings  depravity  with  him  into  the  world,  we  are  led  to  conceive  of 
it  as  propagated  from  parent  to  child.  This  accords  with  the 
representations  of  Scripture  :  "  Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  own  like- 
ness."2    It  accords  also  with  analogies  to  which  we  are  familiar. 

Plants  and  animals  propagate  their  like ;  diseases  are  often 
hereditary,  and  the  peculiarities  of  temper  and  mind  by  which 
parents  were  distinguished,  often  appear  in  their  children.  In  our 
proneness  to  find  fault  with  God's  arrangements,  we  ask,  why  was 
the  fallen  nature  of  Adam  propagated,  rather  than  the  original 
nature  which  he  received  from  the  hand  of  God.  But  we  might  as 
well  complain  that  the  ascent  from  the  state  of  sin  to  that  of  inno- 
cence, is  not  as  easy  as  the  descent  was  found  to  be.  Virtue  fits 
the  creatures  of  God  for  society,  and  for  its  most  beautiful  exhibi- 
tions opportunity  is  presented  in  the  social  relations.  All  these 
give  one  creature  an  influence  over  another,  according  to  the  cha- 
racter of  the  relation  between  them.  Even  angels,  who  were 
created  independent  of  each  other,  had  an  influence  on  each  other, 
so  that  the  chief  apostate  in  the  great  rebellion  led  followers  after 
him.  When  man  was  created,  it  appeared  good,  in  the  view  of 
Infinite  Wisdom,  to  institute  closer  social  relations  than  subsisted 
among  angels.  From  these  resulted  a  more  extended  influence 
than  was  known  in  the  angelic  ranks.  Now,  if  Adam  had  trans- 
mitted his  original  nature,  as  created  by  God,  the  effect  would  have 
been  the  same  as  if  the  son  had  been  immediately  created  by  the 
divine  hand,  and  the  peculiarity  designed  to  distinguish  the  human 
race  would  have  been  virtually  abolished. 

Another  complaint  which  sometimes  rises  in  our  murmuring 
minds  is,  that  pious  men  do  not  propagate  their  piety,  but  their 
natural  depravity.     We  might  as  well  complain  that  men  of  great 

1  John  iii.  6.  *  Gen.  v.  3. 


man's  present   state.  155 

scientific  attainments  do  not  transmit  their  knowledge  to  their 
children  as  a  natural  inheritance.  This  complaint  would  have  even 
greater  appearance  of  propriety,  for  their  attainments  are,  in  a 
sense,  their  own ;  but  whatever  of  holiness  is  found  in  man,  is  not 
a  natural  endowment  or  attainment,  but  a  special  gift  of  divine 
grace. 

When  we  have  discovered  that  the  propagation  of  depravity  in 
the  human  race  accords  with  analogies  found  in  nature,  our  minds 
seem  to  obtain  relief;  but,  in  reality,  the  matter  has  not  been 
explained.  Nature  is  not  some  superior  rule  to  which  God  was 
compelled  to  conform,  but  it  is  an  institution  of  his  own,  and  can- 
not be  right  in  the  whole,  if  its  parts  are  not  right.  If  the  propa- 
gation of  human  depravity  is  not  in  itself  right,  all  the  analogies 
of  nature  could  not  make  it  so.  The  true  benefit  of  tracing  these 
analogies  is,  that  we  may  perceive  all  the  arrangements  to  be  from 
the  same  divine  mind,  and  may  the  more  reverently  bow  our  judg- 
ment to  the  decision  of  Infinite  Wisdom,  and  hush  our  murmurs  into 
the  more  profound  silence. 

Our  natural  inquisitiveness  takes  occasion  from  this  subject  to 
indulge  in  unprofitable  speculations.  As  the  depravity  which  is 
propagated  belongs  more  properly  to  the  soul  than  to  the  material 
frame,  we  ask  whether  the  soul  is  propagated.  Some  have  pre- 
ferred to  consider  the  soul  as  a  production  immediately  proceeding 
from  the  creating  power  of  God.  They  suppose  this  to  be  intended 
when  the  Scriptures  say,  that  he  formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within 
him.1  They  regard  the  body  as  all  that  is  propagated,  and  suppose 
the  Creator  to  form  a  spirit  within  it,  as  he  breathed  the  spirit  of 
life  into  the  inanimate  body  of  Adam,  when  he  became  a  living 
soul.  They  view  propagation  as  belonging  to  the  material  part  of 
our  nature,  and  consider  it  impossible,  in  the  nature  of  things,  that 
this  should  generate  an  immaterial  spirit.  The  latter  argument, 
which  is  merely  philosophical,  has  to  struggle  with  the  fact  that 
all  animals  generate  something  more  than  mere  matter,  in  the 
powers  with  which  they  are  endowed,  and  which  bear  a  strong 
resemblance,  in  many  respects,  to  the  mental  endowments  of  man. 
The  preceding  argument,  from  Scripture,  fails  in  this,  that  God  is 
equally  said  to  form  the  body  of  the  child  in  the  womb  of  the 

1  Zech.  xii.  1. 


156     THE  FALL  AND  PRESENT  STATE  OF  MAN. 

mother,1  and  yet  we  never  regard  that  body  as  a  production  of 
immediate  creation.  It  is  true  that  the  body  of  Adam  was  lifeless 
for  a  time ;  but  it  was  not,  as  lifeless,  that  he  begat  a  son  in  his 
likeness.  We  would  not  argue,  from  this  case,  that  all  life,  whether 
in  jplants  or  animals,  is  a  production  of  immediate  creation,  and 
not  of  propagation;  and  it  does  not  appear  that  a  more  valid 
argument  can  be  deduced  from  it,  to  prove  the  immediate  creation 
of  every  human  soul.  After  all,  what  does  the  question  amount 
to  ?  If  the  preservation  of  all  things  is  strictly  a  perpetual  crea- 
tion, the  distinction  is  wholly  annihilated ;  for  the  soul  is,  at  the 
first  moment  of  its  being,  and  at  every  subsequent  moment  through- 
out its  whole  existence,  an  immediate  creation.  But  if  this  view 
be  not  admitted,  it  is  still  true  that  preservation  is  as  dependent 
on  the  efficacious  will  of  God,  as  creation.  God  willed  that  the 
soul  of  Adam  should  exist,  and  it  came  into  being ;  this  we  call 
creation.  God  willed  that  Adam  should  propagate  a  son,  and  that 
this  son  should,  like  the  father,  have  both  a  soul  and  a  body.  The 
progeny  came  into  being  according  to  the  will  of  God.  This  work 
differs  from  the  former,  in  that  it  is  not  singular,  but  conforms  to 
what  we  call  a  law  of  nature ;  but  nature's  laws  have  no  efficacy 
in  themselves ;  and  when  we  attribute  the  work  to  the  efficacious 
will  of  God,  it  is  a  mere  question  of  classification,  whether  we  refer 
it  to  creation  or  Providence. 

An  objection  to  the  doctrine  of  natural  depravity  is  founded  on 
the  fact,  that  Jesus  referred  to  little  children,  as  examples  for  his 
disciples.  This  fact,  however,  will  not  authorize  the  inference, 
that  little  children  are  not  depraved.  The  same  teacher  said  to 
his  disciples,  "Be  ye  wise  as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves."2 
As  something  may  exist,  proper  to  be  imitated  in  animals  which 
have  no  moral  character,  and  even  in  serpents,  notwithstanding 
their  venom,  so,  something  for  imitation  could  be  pointed  out  in 
children,  notwithstanding  their  depravity.  Another  objection  is 
drawn  from  the  statement  of  Scripture,  concerning  children  that 
had  not  done  either  good  or  evil.3  But  the  doctrine  does  not 
affirm  that  all  have  committed  overt  acts  of  transgression.  It 
refers  to  the  first  spring  of  action  in  the  heart ;  and  a  fountain 
may  be  corrupt,  before  it  has  sent  forth  streams,  as  truly  as  after- 

1  Job  xxxi.  15 :  Is.  xliv.  2.  2  Matt.  x.  16.  3  Rom.  ix.  11. 


man's  present  state.  157 

wardtf.  No  objection,  worthy  of  consideration,  can  be  drawn  from 
Paul's  statement,  that  the  children  of  the  Corinthian  Christians 
were  holy  j1  for  this  manifestly  relates  to  their  fitness  for  familiar 
intercourse. 

Yain  it  will  be,  to  receive  the  doctrine  of  human  depravity  into 
our  creed,  if  it  is  not  received  into  our  hearts.  A  thorough  con- 
viction of  our  total  depravity  is  necessary  to  humble  us  before 
God,  and  drive  us  to  the  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uncleanness. 
No  genuine  Christian  experience  can  exist,  where  this  is  not  felt 
and  operative. 

Section  III. —CONDEMNATION. 

All  men  are  born  under  the  just  condemnation  of  God.2 
The  depravity  of  mankind  unfits  them  for  the  favor  and  enjoy- 
ment of  God ;  and  that  separation  from  him,  in  which  the  death 
of  the  soul  consists,  would  be  the  necessary  result,  even  if  no  de- 
claration to  that  effect  were  made  by  the  Supreme  Judge.  But 
this  sentence  has  been  declared.  The  voice  of  Providence  loudly 
leclares  it.  The  pain  with  which  our  first  breath  is  drawn ;  the 
sickness  and  suffering  which  attend  on  the  cradle  ;  the  sorrows  and 
toils  of  our  best  years ;  the  infirmities  of  age ;  and  lastly  death, 
which,  if  it  does  not  terminate  our  course  earlier,  after  threatening 
us  at  every  step,  and  keeping  us  all  our  life-time  in  bondage,  finally 
triumphs  over  us ;  all  these  proclaim,  in  language  not  to  be  misun- 
derstood, that  we  are  under  the  displeasure  of  God.  The  curse  of 
God  rests  on  the  very  ground  that  we  tread ;  and  his  wrath  is 
poured  out  on  our  race  in  the  wars,  famines,  and  pestilence,  with 
which  the  nations  are  often  visited.  The  sentence  is  pronounced 
by  the  voice  of  conscience  within  us,  which  is  to  us  as  the  voice  of 
God  ;  "For  if  our  heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater  than  our  heart, 
and  knoweth  all  things."3  God  speaks  in  his  holy  word,  proclaim- 
ing the  sentence ;  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all 
things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."4 
"  What  things  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to  them  who  are  under  the 
law,  that  every  mouth  may  be  stopped,  and  all  the  world  become 


1 1  Cor.  vii.  14. 

2  Pa.  vii.  11 ;   Mark  xvi.  16 ;  John  iii.  36  ;   Rom.  i.  18  ;  ii.  5,  6 ;  iii.  19  ;  v- 
i2-21.  » 1  John  iii.  20.  *  Gal.  iii.  10. 


158  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

guilty  before  God."  l  The  view  which  is  here  presented  of  man's 
condition,  relates  not  merely  to  his  transgressions,  but  to  his  na- 
tural state.  Hence  it  is  said,  "  And  were  by  nature,  the  children 
of  wrath."2 

These  manifestations  of  God's  displeasure  are  of  early  date, 
commencing  with  the  first  woes  of  mankind.  They  may  be  traced 
to  the  first  sentence  pronounced  on  our  guilty  parents,  when  they 
were  expelled  from  Eden.  Paul  has  explained,  that  we  were  all 
included  in  this  sentence,  and  this  is  the  proper  date  of  our  con- 
demnation. "  By  the  offence  of  one,  judgment  came  upon  all  men 
to  condemnation."3  From  that  hour,  the  descendants  of  Adam, 
their  habitation,  their  employments,  and  their  enjoyments,  have  all 
been  under  the  curse.  Blessings  have,  indeed,  been  poured  out  in 
rich  profusion  on  our  guilty  race ;  but  our  very  basket  and  store 
have  been  cursed,  and  the  cup  of  mercies  has  been  mingled  with 
bitterness.  The  forbearance  and  long-suffering  of  God  are  mani- 
fested ;  but  the  hand  of  his  wrath  is  uplifted. 

The  condemnation  under  which  we  are  born  is  just.  It  is  God's 
sentence;  and  all  his  judgments  are  righteous.  It  is  not  unusual 
for  those  who  are  condemned  by  human  laws,  to  complain  of  their 
sentence ;  and  we  show  our  want  of  reconciliation  to  the  justice  of 
God,  by  our  hard  thoughts  of  God,  when  we  either  suffer  or  fear 
his  displeasure  against  us. 

Our  rebellious  hearts  deny  the  justice  of  our  condemnation,  on 
the  ground  that  God  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves.  If  he  did 
not  create  our  souls  directly  with  depraved  propensities,  he  brought 
them  into  being,  in  circumstances  which  made  their  depravity  cer- 
tain. He  gave  us  existence  at  his  own  pleasure;  and  over  the 
circumstances  of  our  origin  we  had  no  manner  of  control.  It  is 
therefore  unjust,  says  the  carnal  heart,  to  condemn  and  punish  us, 
for  the  sinful  propensities  which  we  bring  with  us  into  the  world, 
or  for  the  sinful  deeds  which  naturally  and  necessarily  proceed 
from  them.  In  this  manner,  we  are  prone  to  transfer  the  blame 
of  our  iniquities  from  ourselves  to  our  Maker.  So  did  Adam; 
"  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest  to  be  with  me,  she  gave  me  of  the 
tree,  and  I  did  eat,"4  and  so  do  all  his  descendants.  Every  one  is 
probably  conscious  that  such  reasonings  have  at  some  time  had  a 


1  Rom.  iii.  19.  2Eph.  ii.  3.  3  Rom.  v.  18.  4  Gen.  iii  12. 


man's    present  state.  159 

place  in  his  mind ;  and  that  it  is  difficult  to  exclude  them  -wholly. 
On  this  account,  they  need  a  full  and  sober  examination. 

A  consideration  which  ought  to  silence  our  accusing  thoughts  of 
God,  is,  that  however  much  we  may  condemn  him,  we  do  not  thereby 
acquit  ourselves.  If  we  admit  that  Adam  would  not  have  eaten 
the  forbidden  fruit  had  not  God  given  him  a  wife  ;  and  if  we  even 
admit  that  God  was  to  blame  for  giving  him  a  wife  who  might  be- 
come his  tempter :  still  this  does  not  exculpate  Adam.  His  wife 
was  certainly  to  blame  for  tempting  him  ;  and  yet  the  guilt  of  his 
transgression  is  not  the  less  on  that  account.  Every  agent  is  re- 
sponsible for  himself.  Distributive  justice,  which  gives  to  every 
man  his  due,  has  no  other  rule,  and  can  have  no  other.  Human 
courts  do  not  excuse  culprits,  because  of  the  corrupting  influences 
which  have  led  them  to  violate  the  law.  The  law  takes  direct  cog- 
nizance of  the  agent  and  his  deed.  This  accords  with  the  common 
sense  of  mankind.  So  divine  justice  condemns  the  wicked  man, 
and  cannot  do  otherwise  than  condemn  him,  however  he  may  have 
become  wicked,  and  whoever  else  may  be  to  blame  for  his  being  so. 
This  principle  we  should  hold  fast  in  all  our  reasonings  on  that 
subject. 

A  difficulty  in  holding  fast  the  principle  just  laid  down,  and 
applying  it  steadily  to  the  case,  arises  from  the  circumstance  that 
the  Judge  by  whom  we  are  condemned  is  also  our  Creator.  To 
free  our  thoughts  from  embarrassment  on  this  account,  let  us  sup- 
pose the  case  were  otherwise.  Let  us  imagine  that,  after  "the 
Sons  of  God  had  shouted  for  joy,'*  at  seeing  the  foundations  of  the 
earth  laid,  and  its  finished  surface  covered  with  verdure  and  beauty, 
the  Most  High  was  pleased  to  appoint  one  of  this  joyful  choir  to 
the  honorable  service  of  populating  this  new  world,  and  to  confer 
on  him  creative  power  for  this  purpose.  Let  us  imagine  that,  just 
as  this  chosen  agent  was  proceeding  to  execute  his  commission,  he 
conceived  the  thought  of  making  himself  the  god  of  the  world  he 
was  about  to  people;  and,  for  this  purpose,  filled  it  with  unholy 
inhabitants,  willing  to  join  him  in  rebellion  against  the  Supreme 
Ruler.  This  case,  though  merely  imaginary,  will  serve  to  test  the 
principle  under  consideration ;  and  the  question  which  it  presents 
for  adjudication,  is,  how,  according  to  the  rule  of  eternal  and  im- 
mutable justice,  ought  this  world  of  rebels  to  be  treated. 

Perhaps  it  will  be  said,  that  the  agent  who  abused  the  creative 


160  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OP    MAN. 

power  conferred  on  him  ought  to  he  punished,  and  that  the  crea- 
tures that  he  had  brought  into  being  ought  to  be  annihilated. 
But  this  is  not  the  plea  which  is  set  up  for  the  human  race.  The 
plea  which  the  sons  of  Adam  present  before  the  Judge  of  the  earth, 
is,  not  that  we  ought  to  be  annihilated,  but  that  we  ought  not  to 
be  condemned  and  punished ;  this  new  order  of  creatures  might 
object  to  annihilation,  and  think  themselves  as  much  entitled  to 
life  and  impunity  as  we  do.  They  might  say,  that  annihilation  is 
only  a  scheme  to  get  the  question  out  of  court,  and  to  free  the 
Judge  from  difficulty ;  but  they  might  insist  on  right,  and  claim,  as 
they  were  created  immortal  by  the  commission  granted  to  him  by 
whom  they  were  made,  they  have  a  right  to  immortality ;  and  that 
this  immortality,  since  their  depravity  is  natural  to  them,  ought  to 
be  free  from  all  punishment.  Now,  the  Judge  might,  for  wise  rea- 
sons, not  chose  to  evade  the  responsibility  of  adjudicating  the  case ; 
What,  then,  would  the  righteous  sentence  be  ?  Even  to  annihilate 
them  against  their  will,  would  be  a  punishment ;  that  ought  not  to 
be  inflicted,  if  the  plea  not  guilty,  because  depravity  is  natural,  can 
be  sustained.  The  plea  before  an  earthly  judge  would  not  stand 
a  moment.  Who  could  bear  that  a  criminal  should  be  acquitted 
and  turned  loose  on  the  community,  because  he  was  born  wicked, 
had  grown  up  wicked,  and  it  wa3  as  natural  for  him  to  commit 
theft,  murder,  and  all  manner  of  crimes,  as  it  was  to  breathe  ? 
Such  a  plea,  which  the  justice  of  men  will  not  admit,  the  justice 
of  God  will  not  admit.  The  new  order  of  creatures  must  be  treated 
as  they  deserve  ;  and  Infinite  Wisdom,  instead  of  annihilating  them, 
must  adopt  some  other  expedient,  to  counteract  the  diabolical  in- 
tentions of  the  agent  that  created  them. 

The  case  which  has  been  supposed  is  not  so  wholly  imaginary  as 
at  first  view  it  may  have  appeared.  Though  it  is  not  true  that  an 
angel  of  light  was  commissioned  to  create  a  population  for  the 
earth,  something  else  was  done  which,  for  all  the  purposes  of  the 
present  discussion,  amounts  to  the  same.  Adam  and  Eve,  while 
yet  in  innocence,  were  commissioned  to  procreate  a  race  of  immor- 
tals, that  should  people  the  new  world.  This  power,  Satan,  ambi- 
tious of  divine  honor,  availed  himself  of  to  make  himself  the  god 
of  the  world.  By  temptation  he  gained  over  the  first  pair  to  his 
design ;  and  so  completely  is  the  procreating  power  with  which  they 
were  invested,  turned  to  his  account,  that  the  offspring  of  it  are 


MAN»S    PRESENT    STATE.  161 

called  the  "children  of  the  devil."1  So  complete  is  his  control  of 
them,  that  he  is  called  "the  spirit  that  worketh  in  the  children  of 
disobedience,"2  and  they  "are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his  will;"3 
and  the  death  which  comes  on  them  for  disobedience  is  attributed 
to  his  power :  "  That  through  death  he  might  destroy  him  that  had 
the  power  of  death,  that  is  the  devil."4  The  imaginary  case, 
therefore,  is  substantially  our  own ;  and,  if  rebellion  against  God, 
subserviency  to  Satan,  and  confederacy  with  him  to  overthrow  the 
government  of  the  King  Eternal,  cannot  be  justified  at  the  tribunal 
of  divine  justice,  we  are  verily  guilty,  and  justly  condemned. 

But  our  accusing  thoughts  of  God  are  suppressed  with  difficulty. 
We  have  seen  that  the  whole  world  is  guilty  before  him ;  and  yet 
every  mouth  is  not  stopped.  We  still  entertain  hard  thoughts,  and 
vent  hard  words  against  him ;  and  the  thing  formed  says  to  him 
that  formed  it,  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus  ? 5  Of  such  impiety 
it  becomes  us  to  beware.  We  should  feel  that  our  depravity  is  our 
own,  however  we  came  by  it ;  that  it  renders  us  wholly  unfit  for  the 
society  and  enjoyments  of  the  holy  place  where  God  dwells,  and 
for  his  favor,  service,  and  communion ;  and  that  it  ought  to  be 
loathsome  in  our  own  view,  and  must  be  so  in  the  view  of  the  holy 
God.  If  our  own  hearts  condemn  it,  we  shall  be  ready  to  admit, 
without  complaint,  that  God  also  condemns  it.  And  what  can  we 
say  against  God  in  the  matter  ?  What  wrong  has  he  done  ?  His 
distributive  justice  does  no  wrong  in  treating  the  unholy  according 
to  their  character.  If  he  has  done  any  wrong,  it  must  relate  to 
the  department  of  public  justice,  which,  as  formerly  explained, 
seeks  the  greatest  good,  and  is  the  same  as  universal  benevolence. 
Now,  who  will  say  that  God's  plan  will  not  produce  the  greatest 
good  ?  Who  is  wiser  and  better  than  God,  to  teach  him  a  prefer- 
able way  ?  When  Satan  gained  his  conquest  over  our  first  parents, 
God  could  have  confined  him  at  once  in  the  pit,  and  inflicted  on 
him  the  full  torment  yet  in  store  for  him ;  and  he  might  have  anni- 
hilated the  whole  race  of  man  in  the  original  pair.  This  would  have 
terminated  the  difficulty  by  an  act  of  power ;  but  who  will  affirm 
that  it  would  have  been  wisest  or  best  ?  God  would  have  appeared 
disappointed  and  defeated.     Distributive  justice  would  have  ap- 

1  1  Jolin  iii.  10 ;  John  viii.  44.        2  Eph.  ii.  2.  3  2  Tim.  ii.  26. 

4  Heb.  ii.  14.  *  Rom.  ix.  20. 

11      , 


162  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

peared  relieved  rather  than  developed.  Satan  triumphed  by  arti- 
fice, and  God  has  chosen  to  defeat  him  by  the  counsel  of  his  wis- 
dom. Satan  exalted  himself  to  dominion  over  the  world ;  God 
chose  to  overcome  him,  not  by  power,  but  by  humiliation.  Satan 
gained  his  success  by  means  of  the  first  Adam  ;  God,  in  the  second 
Adam,  bruised  the  serpent's  head.  Satan,  by  his  success,  gained 
the  power  of  death ;  God,  by  death,  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  has 
destroyed  him  and  his  power.1  Who  will  dare  affirm  that  God's 
way  is  not  best  ?  It  becomes  us  to  feel  assured,  whatever  darkness 
may  yet  remain  on  this  subject,  that  God  would  not  have  given  up 
his  Son  to  free  us  from  condemnation,  if  that  condemnation  had 
not  been  just ;  and  that  he  would  not  have  made  so  great  a  gift,  so 
costly  a  sacrifice,  if  the  scheme  had  not  been  worthy  of  his  infinite 
wisdom ;  or  if  some  other,  by  which  the  sacrifice  might  have  been 
spared,  would  have  been  preferable. 

When  the  question  has  been  settled,  and  the  principle  established, 
that  men  may  be  held  responsible  for  their  own  sins,  without  inqui- 
ring how  they  became  sinners,  a  difficulty  still  remains  as  to  the 
date  of  the  condemnation  under  which  we  all  lie,  and  the  ground 
of  the  original  sentence.  When  the  mind  becomes  perplexed  with 
subtle  reasonings,  it  is  well  to  keep  facts  steadily  in  view,  and  to 
hold  fast  the  plain  testimony  of  inspired  truth.  It  is  expressly 
said,  in  the  unerring  word,  "  By  the  offence  of  one  judgment  came 
upon  all  men  to  condemnation;"  and  again,  "The  judgment  was 
by  one  [offence]  to  condemnation."2  It  is  here  clearly  taught  that 
one  judgment,  one  sentence,  included  all  men,  and  that  this  judg- 
ment was  made  up  and  the  sentence  pronounced  on  one  offence  of 
one  man.  With  this  express  teaching  of  Scripture  facts  agree. 
The  indications  of  God's  displeasure  against  the  race  are  not  post- 
poned until  each  individual  has  been  born  into  the  world.  Every 
mother  is  not  carried  back  to  Eden  before  she  brings  forth  a  son, 
that  he  may,  in  his  own  person,  receive  the  sentence  of  condemna- 
tion, be  denied  access  to  the  tree  of  life,  driven  from  the  garden  of 
delights,  and  doomed  to  sorrow,  toil,  and  death.  Whatever  our 
reasonings  may  say  on  the  subject,  it  is  fully  ascertained  to  be  the 
will  of  God,  before  an  individual  is  born  into  the  world,  that,  when 
born,  he  shall  be  in  the  condition  in  which  the  curse  left  the  father 

1  Heb.  ii.  14.  2  Rom.  v.  16,  18. 


man's  present  state.  163 

of  the  race.  The  Bible,  and  the  voice  of  Nature,  speak  alike  on 
this  point ;  ana  if  our  reasonings  say  that  the  Author  of  Nature 
and  the  Bible  has  done  wrong,  we  should  suspect  that  we  have  erred 
in  our  inferences,  or  in  the  premises  from  which  they  are  drawn. 
And  if  it  could  be  shown  that  a  separate  sentence  is  pronounced 
on  each  individual  as  he  comes  into  the  world,  his  condition  would 
be  no  better.  Being  depraved  by  nature,  we  are  "  by  nature  chil- 
dren of  wrath."1  Wrath  is  still  our  inheritance;  and  if  the  anti- 
quity of  the  sentence  which  appointed  it  be  admitted,  the  measure 
of  that  wrath  is  not  thereby  increased,  nor  the  endurance  of  it 
made  earlier.  As  to  these  results,  the  question  is  one  of  no  im- 
portance whatever.  Its  relation,  as  exhibited  in  Scripture,  to  the 
doctrine  of  justification  by  the  obedience  of  Christ,  constitutes  its 
chief  claim  to  our  careful  consideration. 

The  sentence,  "Dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  return," 
was  pronounced  on  Adam  in  the  singular  number ;  yet  he  appears 
to  stand  under  this  sentence  as  the  representative  of  his  descend- 
ants, on  all  of  whom  the  sentence  takes  effect.  So  Eve  was  ad- 
dressed in  the  singular  number,  "  In  sorrow  shalt  thou  bring  forth 
children ;"  but  she  stood,  in  this  sentence,  as  the  representative  of 
all  her  daughters,  on  whom  this  penalty  falls.  As  the  natural 
parents,  Adam  and  Eve  stood  together  as  the  head  of  the  race ; 
but  there  was  a  peculiar  sense  in  which  that  headship  pertained  to 
Adam.  Though  Eve  was  first  in  the  transgression,  it  is  not  said  by 
one  woman,  but  "  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  the  world."  The 
judgment  was  not  by  the  two  offences  of  the  two  natural  parents 
of  the  race,  but  by  the  one  offence  of  the  one  man ;  the  previous 
offence  of  the  woman  being  left  out  of  the  account.  In  this  head- 
ship Adam  is  contrasted  with  Christ,  being  called  "  the  figure  of 
him  that  was  to  come."2  This  comparison  is  further  brought  to 
view  in  1  Cor.  xv.  45,  47,  where  Christ  is  called  the  second  Adam ; 
and  in  verse  22,  where  it  is  said,  "  As  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in 
Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive."  On  Adam,  who  was  first  formed, 
the  responsibility  of  peopling  the  new  world  with  a  race  of  holy 
immortals  specially  rested  ;  and,  though  Satan  artfully  directed  his 
first  assault  against  the  woman,  his  scheme  would  have  failed  had 
not  Adam  been  gained  over  to  his  interest.     This  divinely  ap- 

1  Eph.  ii.  3.  2  Rom>  v>  i4> 


164  TRE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

pointed  headship  of  Adam  made  his  disobedience  the  turning  point 
ok  which  the  future  condition  of  his  posterity  depended ;  and  Paul 
takes  occasion  from  this  to  illustrate  the  dependence  of  believers 
on  the  obedience  of  the  second  Adam,  for  justification  and  life. 

To  this  view  it  is  objected,  that,  according  to  the  principles  of 
justice,  the  guilt  of  one  man  cannot  be  transferred  to  another,  and 
no  man  can  be  justly  condemned  for  that  of  which  it  is  impossible 
for  him  to  repent.  No  man  living  can  repent  of  Adam's  sin,  and 
the  guilt  of  Adam's  sin  cannot  justly  be  imputed  to  any  other 
person. 

What  are  here  so  confidently  assumed  as  axioms,  may  well  be 
called  in  question.  We  must  believe  the  Scriptures,  when  they 
say,  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."1  "  He 
bore  our  sin  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree."2  And  we  know  that  men 
cannot  repent  of  deeds  which  they  have  wholly  forgotten,  and  yet 
they  are  responsible  for  them.  But  there  is  a  much  shorter  way 
of  getting  at  this  question,  than  by  a  tedious  examination  of  these 
assumed  axioms.  No  man  understands  that  the  guilt  of  Adam  was 
transferred.  It  still  remained  his,  and  was  closely  and  inseparably 
bound  about  him.  But  every  one  knows  that  there  may  be  union 
and  confederacy  in  crime.  In  commercial  affairs,  if  twenty  men 
owe  one  hundred  dollars,  each  may  pay  five  dollars,  and  the  obli- 
gation of  the  whole  will  be  cancelled.  But  in  morals,  if  twenty 
subjects  confederate  to  assassinate  their  king,  each  one  is  guilty  of 
the  whole  crime,  because  each  one  has  the  full  intention  of  it. 
Only  one  of  the  band  may  plunge  the  dagger  to  the  monarch's 
heart ;  but  his  crime  may  be  justly  imputed  to  them  all,  though  his 
guilt  may  not  be  transferred  to  another.  Now,  we  may  inquire, 
whether  such  union  does  not  exist  between  Adam  and  his  de- 
scendants, as  justifies  the  imputation  of  his  sin  to  them;  or,  in 
other  words,  shows  it  to  be  in  accordance  with  justice.  Paul,  in 
comparing  Adam  and  Christ  as  public  heads,  has,  in  the  fifth  chap- 
ter of  Romans,  pointed  out  disagreements  as  well  as  agreements. 
Death  comes  from  the  disobedience  of  the  one  ;  and  life  from  the 
obedience  of  the  other ;  and  in  Rom.  vi.  23,  he  teaches  that  there 
is  an  important  difference  as  to  the  mode  in  which  these  results 
follow.     Death  is  wages,  a  thing  deserved ;  life  is  a  gift.     The 

•Is.  liii.  6.  2lPet.  ii.24. 


man's  present  state.  165 

benefits  of  righteousness  and  life,  received  from  Christ,  are  by  faith ; 
and  "It  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace."1  The  condemna- 
tion and  death  which  are  from  Adam,  are  not  gratuitous  and  arbi- 
trary, but  come  on  us  justly.  We  inquire,  then,  whether  there  is 
such  a  connection  between  Adam  and  his  descendants,  as  renders 
the  imputation  of  his  sin  to  them,  an  act  of  justice. 

1.  There  is  a  moral  union  between  Adam  and  his  descendants. 
His  disobedience  unfurled  the  banner  of  rebellion,  and  we  all  rally 
around  it.  We  approve  the  deed  of  our  father,  and  take  arms  in 
maintaining  the  war  against  heaven,  which  his  disobedience  pro- 
claimed. He  is  the  chief  in  this  conspiracy  of  treason,  but  we  are 
all  accessories.  As  to  the  outward  act,  the  eating  of  the  forbid- 
den fruit,  we  did  not  commit  it ;  but,  regarding  it  as  a  declaration 
of  independence  and  revolt,  we  have  made  it  our  own,  and  it  may 
be  as  justly  set  to  our  account,  as  if  we  had  personally  committed 
the  deed.  In  this  view,  if  we  cannot,  strictly  speaking,  repent  of 
Adam's  sin,  we  may  most  cordially  disapprove  the  whole  revolt 
from  God,  in  which  our  race  is  engaged  ;  may  most  bitterly  regret 
that  it  was  ever  commenced ;  and  may  take  guilt  and  shame  to  our- 
selves in  deep  humiliation  before  God,  that  we  have  been  engaged 
in  it.  With  such  feelings  pervading  our  hearts,  the  doctrine  that 
Adam's  sin  is  imputed  to  us,  will  not  be  rejected  as  inconsistent  with 
justice.  If  we  cannot,  strictly  speaking,  repent  of  it,  we  may  at 
least  take  the  guilt  of  it  to  ourselves,  in  a  sense  which  perfectly 
accords  with  the  feelings  of  true  penitence ;  and  when  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  taught  us  to  impute  it  to  ourselves,  we  shall  not  complain 
that  God  imputes  it. 

2.  There  is  a  natural  union  between  Adam  and  his  descendants. 
He  is  their  natural  parent ;  and,  because  of  this  relation,  they  in- 
herit a  depraved  nature.  Our  moral  union  with  him  renders  our 
condemnation  just,  from  the  moment  we  possess  separate  existence, 
because  of  our  personal  depravity ;  and  our  natural  union  with 
him  rendered  it  proper,  that  our  condemnation  should  be  included 
in  the  general  sentence. 

3.  There  is  a  federal  union  between  Adam  and  his  descendants. 
We  have  before  seen  that  a  covenant,  not  in  the  common,  but  the 
Scripture  sense  of  the  term,  was  made  with  Adam.     This  covenant, 


1  Rom.  iv.  16. 


166  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

this  arrangement  or  constitution  of  things,  made  the  future  cha- 
racter and  condition  of  his  descendants  dependent  on  his  obedience. 
He  was,  in  this  respect,  their  federal  head.  Some  maintain  that 
the  covenant  with  Adam  was  the  covenant  of  nature,  and  that 
there  was  no  federal  headship,  different  from  the  natural  headship 
which  belonged  to  him  as  the  first  parent.  Happily  for  us,  a  deci- 
sion of  this  question  is  not  indispensable  to  our  present  discussion. 
The  natural  and  moral  union  which  we  have  already  considered,  is 
a  just  ground  for  the  divine  sentence  against  the  whole  race,  in  the 
person  of  their  first  parent;  but  a  further  examination  of  this 
question  may  be  conducive  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  subject. 

Since  nature  is  not  something  different  from  God  operating,  it 
cannot  be  of  much  importance  to  determine  how  much  of  the  trans- 
action with  Adam  was  natural,  and  how  much  beyond  the  proper 
province  of  nature.  The  revelation  of  God's  will  in  the  garden 
was  as  much  above  nature,  as  the  subsequent  revelation  from  Sinai ; 
and  so  also  was  the  judgment  pronounced  after  the  transgression. 
But  the  including  of  children  with  their  parents,  in  the  penalty  in- 
flicted for  the  sins  of  their  parents,  is  seen  in  the  providence  of  God, 
both  in  ordinary  and  extraordinary  dispensations.  Every  one 
knows  that  poverty  and  suffering  are  brought  on  children  by  the 
intemperance  and  other  crimes  of  their  parents.  The  evils  of  war, 
famine,  and  pestilence,  judgments  inflicted  for  the  sins  of  men,  fall 
on  children  as  well  as  their  parents.  In  the  deluge,  and  the  burn- 
ing of  Sodom,  children  were  destroyed  with  their  parents.  On 
this  point,  the  word  of  God  agrees  with  his  providence.  We  are 
sometimes  jealous  for  the  Lord's  reputation,  and  are  afraid  to 
speak  of  his  visiting  the  sins  of  parents  on  their  children,  but  we 
are  more  cautious  than  the  Lord  himself.  He  proclaimed  from 
Sinai,  with  his  own  voice,  and  recorded  in  stone  with  his  own  finger, 
"I,  the  Lord  thy  God,  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of 
the  fathers  upon  the  children,  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation 
of  them  that  hate  me."1  And  when  he  showed  his  glory  to  Moses, 
and  proclaimed  his  name,  instead  of  being  jealous  to  conceal  this 
fact,  he  was  jealous  rather  to  make  it  known :  "  Visiting  the  in- 
iquity of  the  fathers  upon  the  children.2 

God's  solemn  declarations  on  this   point  not   only  explain  his 

1  Ex.  xx.  5.  s  ex#  xxxiVt  7t 


man's   present   state  167 

providence,  but,  in  the  most  impressive  manner,  exhibit  the  great 
responsibility  of  parents.  To  bring  an  immortal  into  being,  and  to 
form  his  character  for  time  and  eternity,  is  a  responsibility  most 
momentous.  This  responsibility  devolves  on  men,  and  it  is  proper 
they  should  feel  it.  To  awaken  them  to  a  sense  of  it,  God  ad- 
dresses them  in  the  solemn  language  which  has  been  quoted. 

While  the  Scriptures  stir  up  parents  to  a  sense  of  their  responsi- 
bility, they  leave  to  children  no  pretext  with  which  to  cover  their 
iniquities.  Some  have  said,  "  The  Lord's  ways  are  not  equal.  Our 
fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on 
edge."1  To  these  complainers  God  said,  "Behold  all  souls  are 
mine  ;  as  the  soul  of  the  father,  so  also  the  soul  of  the  son  is  mine  ; 
the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."2  This  is  not  a  law  repealing 
the  decalogue,  but  is  to  be  explained  in  harmony  with  it.  The  sins 
of  parents  affect  both  the  character  and  the  condition  of  their 
children,  and  for  all  this  they  are  responsible ;  but  the  condition 
of  the  children  is  not  worse  than  their  character,  and  therefore  the 
Lord's  ways  are  equal,  and  their  complaints  against  him  ground- 
less. 

The  case  of  Adam  differed  from  that  of  all  fathers  since.  These 
may  transmit  peculiar  tempers  and  propensities,  and  may  influence 
their  children  by  instruction  and  example,  but  they  cannot  bring 
them  into  the  world  free  from  the  depravity  and  condemnation 
which  the  transgression  of  Adam  brings  upon  them.  But,  though 
the  responsibility  on  Adam  was  greater,  it  is  still  true,  as  in  the 
other  cases,  that  his  descendants  are  responsible  for  themselves, 
and  not  one  of  them  will  suffer  beyond  the  demerit  of  his  personal 
character.  Such  is  the  union  between  Adam  and  his  descendants, 
that  depravity  and  condemnation  pass  from  him  to  them,  not  sepa- 
rately, but  as  one  inheritance.  His  sin,  for  which  they  suffer,  is 
their  own  as  well  as  his,  and  it  is  imputed  to  them  because  it 
belongs  to  them  —  is  justly  theirs. 

After  all  the  explanations  that  have  been  made,  it  may  be  that 
our  hearts  still  accuse  God,  and  secretly  say  that,  had  we  been  in 
his  stead,  we  would  have  dealt  more  kindly  with  the  human  race 
than  he  has  done.     These  accusations  of  God,  he  hears;  these 

1  Ez.  xviii.  2.  2  Ezek.  xviii.  4. 


168  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

most  secret  whispers  of  the  heart,  he  fully  understands.  What 
impiety  does  he  see  therein  !  That  we,  who  know  so  little  of  his 
ways,  should  presume  to  be  wiser  or  better  than  he,  is  daring  im- 
piety;  and  if  nothing  else  will  convince  us  that  we  deserve  the 
wrath  of  God,  let  this  impiety  suffice.  Let  us  accuse  no  more,  but 
lay  our  hands  on  our  mouths,  and  in  deep  silence  before  him, 
confess  our  guilt. 

Section   I V.  —  HELPLE  SSNE  SS. 

Men  are  unable  to  save  themselves.1 

The  inability  of  men  to  save  themselves,  respects  both  their 
condemnation  and  their  depravity. 

1.  Men  are  unable  to  free  themselves  from  condemnation. 

The  justice  by  which  we  are  all  condemned  is  immutable.  It  is 
an  attribute  in  the  nature  of  God,  who  is  not  only  the  first  cause 
of  all  things,  but  the  very  standard  of  all  perfection.  When  we 
inquire  whether  God's  ways  are  right,  we  have  only  to  ask  whether 
they  correspond  with  his  own  perfections,  for  there  is  no  higher 
standard  by  which  they  may  be  tried.  As  the  perfections  of  God 
are  immutable,  the  standard  of  right  is  immutable.  A  change  in 
the  law  by  which  we  are  condemned  is  therefore  impossible.  God 
has  sometimes,  from  regard  to  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  some 
men,  given  special  commands  to  them,  which  have  not  been  obliga- 
tory on  all ;  but  the  obligation  to  obey  him,  whatever  his  commands 
may  be,  is  universal  and  perpetual,  and  no  act  of  disobedience  can 
ever  be  justified  under  his  righteous  government. 

The  sentence  of  condemnation  has  been  duly  pronounced.  It 
was  not  a  rash  decision,  needing  to  be  revised.  The  Omniscient 
Judge  knew  well  all  the  facts  in  the  case,  all  the  circumstances 
which  may  be  pleaded  in  extenuation,  all  the  effects  of  his  decision 
on  us,  and  all  the  bearings  of  it  on  his  own  character  and  government. 
His  determination  to  create  the  world  was  not  made  with  greater 
deliberation,  or  on  surer  ground ;  and  we  may  as  soon  expect  him 
to  annihilate  all  the  creatures  that  he  has  made,  as  to  reverse  the 
sentence  by  which  we  are  condemned. 


1  Jer.  xiii.  23 ;  John  iii.  3 ;  vi.  44;  Rom.  iii.  19,  20;  viii.  7,  8;  Gal.  iii.  10; 
Heb.  x.  4  :  xii.  14. 


man's  present  state.  169 

The  Scriptures  affirm,  that  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall 
no  flesh  be  justified.1  The  law  requires  perfect  and  perpetua1 
obedience,  and  can  be  satisfied  with  nothing  less.  Law  is  convertea 
into  mere  advice,  when  its  requirements  are  not  obligatory.  To 
claim  the  privilege  of  violating  the  law,  or  coming  short  of  its 
requirements,  is  to  claim,  so  far,  exemption  from  its  authority,  and 
therefore  from  the  moral  government  of  God.  Such  exemption 
divine  justice  will  not  allow.  Its  language  is,  "  Cursed  is  every 
one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book 
of  the  law  to  do  them/'2  "  What  things  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to 
them  who  are  under  the  law,  that  every  mouth  may  be  stopped, 
and  all  the  world  become  guilty  before  God."3  The  view  which 
is  here  presented  of  man's  condition,  relates  not  merely  to  his 
transgressions,  but  to  his  natural  state.  Hence  it  is  said,  "  And 
were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath."4  So  much  has  God  the 
maintenance  of  his  law  at  heart,  that  he  who  was  in  the  bosom  of 
the  Father,  and  well  understood  all  his  counsels,  has  with  solemnity 
assured  us  :  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  till  heaven  and  earth  pass,  one 
jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the  law  till  all  be  ful 
filled."5 

There  is  a  method  of  rescue  from  condemnation ;  but  it  is  not 
one  of  man's  devising  or  executing.  To  effect  it  required  a  display 
of  wisdom,  power  and  love,  infinitely  beyond  the  highest  efforts  of 
man.  It  is  God's  work,  challenging  the  admiration  of  angels,  and 
demanding  gratitude,  praise,  and  joyful  acceptance  from  every 
human  being. 

2.  Men  are  unable  to  free  themselves  from  depravity. 

The  first  element  of  this  inability  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  men 
lack  the  necessary  disposition.  By  nature  we  love  darkness  rather 
than  light,  sin  rather  than  holiness.  To  be  free  from  depravity  is 
to  be  holy,  and  no  man  can  desire  holiness  or  perfect  conformity 
to  the  law  of  God,  who  does  not  delight  in  that  law.  But  expe- 
perience  and  Scripture  unite  in  teaching  us  that  the  carnal  mind 
is  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be.6  The 
cause  of  this  exists  in  the  fact,  that  the  carnal  mind  is  enmity 

1  Rom.  iii.  20  2  Gal.  iii.  10.  3  Rom.  iii.  19.  4  Eph.  ii.  3. 

1  Matt.  v.  18.  6  Rom.  viii.  7. 


170  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

against  God.  Men  love  the  ways  of  transgression,  and  desire  not 
the  knowledge  of  God's  ways ;  and,  therefore,  they  lack  the  dis- 
position necessary  to  free  themselves  from  depravity,  and  render 
themselves  strictly  conformed  to  the  law  of  God. 

Another  element  which  renders  the  inability  complete,  is,  that 
if  men  had  the  disposition,  they  have  not  the  power.  Men  have 
the  power  to  perform  such  external  acts  as  the  law  of  God  requires 
of  them.  If  they  were  wholly  disposed  to  perform  such  acts,  and 
failed  through  mere  physical  inability,  that  inability  would  be  a 
valid  excuse.  God  accepteth  according  to  what  a  man  hath.1  We 
are  commanded  not  to  forsake  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together ; 
but  the  man  who  is  fastened  to  his  bed  by  palsy  is  not  required  to 
meet  in  the  house  of  God.  Depravity  does  not  consist  in  external 
acts,  but  belongs  to  the  heart ;  and  the  affections  of  the  heart  are 
not  subject  to  volition,  as  the  motions  of  the  limbs  are.  Hence 
the  Apostle  says,  "Ye  cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would."2 
Every  converted  man  knows  the  meaning  of  this  language.  The 
current  of  depraved  affections  in  our  hearts,  which  has  been  flowing 
in  the  wrong  direction  from  the  beginning  of  our  being,  and  gather- 
ing strength  by  the  power  of  habit,  does  not  stop  at  our  bidding. 
A  volition  cannot  stop  it  with  as  much  ease  as  when  it  moves  a 
finger.  If  any  man  thinks  he  has  the  power  to  be  holy  at  will,  let 
him  try  it,  and  he  will  find  his  mistake. 

The  inability  last  described,  which  is  usually  called  moral,  must 
be  distinguished  carefully  from  that  physical  inability  which  excuses 
outward  acts.  Physical  inability  would  prevent  the  action,  even 
if  the  whole  heart  were  bent  on  performing  it.  It  excuses  the 
failure  to  act ;  but  it  will  not  excuse  a  corrupt  or  a  divided  heart. 
The  paralytic  may  be  excused  for  not  attending  at  the  house  of 
God ;  but  he  is  not  excused  for  preferring  to  be  absent,  or  for  pos- 
sessing no  longing  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord.  The  moral  inability 
of  men  consists  in  having  either  a  divided  heart,  or  a  heart  fully 
set  in  them  to  do  evil.  The  former  every  converted  man  laments, 
and  blames  himself  for ;  and  the  latter  is  descriptive  of  uncon- 
verted or  natural  men.  This  includes  the  lack,  both  of  disposition 
and  power,  and  renders  the  inability  complete.     This  inability  is 

1  2  Cor.  viii.  12.  2  Gal.  v.  17 


man's   present   state.  171 

not  an  excuse  for  the  depravity,  but  is  the  depravity  itself,  in  its 
full  influence  over  all  the  powers  of  the  soul. 

The  Scripture  representations  of  men's  inability  are  exceedingly 
strong.  They  are  said  to  be  without  strength, ]  captives,2  in  bond 
age,3  asleep,4  dead,5  &c.  The  act  by  which  they  are  delivered  from 
their  natural  state,  is  called  regeneration,  quickening  or  giving  life, 
renewing,  resurrection,  translation,  creation ;  and  it  is  directly  as- 
cribed to  the  power  of  God,  the  power  that  called  light  out  of  dark- 
ness, and  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead. 

Our  views  concerning  our  character  and  condition  by  nature  are 
wholly  incorrect,  if  we  imagine  that  a  little  work,  which  we  can 
effect  at  pleasure,  will  set  all  right.  Thousands  postpone  the  con- 
cerns of  the  soul  from  this  vain  imagination.  A  true  sense  of  our 
inability  would  drive  us  to  him  who  is  able  to  save. 

CONCLUSION. 

A  careless  admission  that  men  are  sinners  is  often  made  by  per- 
sons who  give  themselves  little  concern  about  religion ;  and  even 
acrimonious  complaints  may  be  freely  vented  by  them  against  the 
iniquities  of  others.  But  such  is  the  stupefying  effect  of  human 
depravity,  that  men  have  very  little  complaint  to  make  against 
themselves ;  and  their  condition,  as  sinners  against  God,  awakens 
very  little  uneasiness.  Occasionally  conscience  may  be  aroused, 
and  produce  alarm ;  but,  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  its  re- 
bukes and  warnings  become  unheeded,  and  men  are  again  lulled  to 
sleep  in  carnal  security.  Until  this  fatal  slumber  is  broken,  and  a 
thorough,  deep-rooted  conviction  of.  sin  seizes  the  mind,  and  allows 
the  man  no  quiet,  his  spiritual  state  exhibits  no  favorable  indi- 
cations. 

Conviction  of  sin  has  sometimes  produced  very  disquieting  effects 
in  the  minds  of  heathen  men,  destitute  of  the  true  knowledge  of 
God.  Costly  sacrifices  and  painful  austerities  have  been  resorted 
to  for  the  purpose  of  appeasing  their  offended  deities.  Nature 
teaches  men  their  danger,  but  cannot  show  them  the  way  of  escape. 
In  these  circumstances,  how  welcome  is  the  light  which  the  Bible 

1  Rom.  v.  6.  2  2  Tim.  ii.  26.  3  2  Pet.  ii.  19 ;  Rom  vi.  16,  17. 

<  1  Thes.  v.  6.  6  Eph.  v.  14 ;  Col.  ii.  13. 


172  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

throws  on  our  path !  It  gives  a  far  clearer  discovery  of  our 
danger,  and,  at  the  same  time,  opens  before  us  the  door  of  hope. 

Conviction  of  sin  may  at  first  respect  merely  our  overt  acts  of 
wickedness ;  but,  if  thorough  and  effectual,  it  will  extend  to  the 
depraved  heart,  from  which  evil  actions  proceed.  It  will  open  to 
our  view  this  fountain  of  corruption,  this  deep  sea  casting  up  miro 
and  dirt.  To  explore  the  deep  windings  of  depravity,  dark  and 
filthy,  we  need  the  torch  of  revelation.  Its  use  in  making  us  ac- 
quainted with  ourselves,  demonstrates  the  divinity  of  its  origin. 
The  woman  of  Samaria  said  of  Jesus,  "  Come  see  a  man  which 
told  me  all  things  that  ever  I  did ;  is  not  this  the  Christ  V'1  And 
the  Bible,  which  tells  us  so  exactly  all  that  is  in  our  hearts,  must 
be  from  God,  the  Searcher  of  hearts.  The  world  of  iniquity  within 
us  was  formerly  to  us  a  land  unknown ;  but  we  have  now  explored 
it  in  part,  and  we  can  testify  that  the  only  correct  map  of  it  is  in 
the  Holy  Scriptures.  As  we  make  progress  in  the  knowledge  of 
ourselves,  throughout  our  course  of  religious  experience,  what  we 
read  in  our  own  hearts  and  what  we  read  in  the  Bible  agree  per- 
fectly, and  we  ever  carry  with  us  a  proof  that  the  doctrine  of  the 
Bible  is  the  truth  of  God. 

Many  who  profess  to  regard  the  Bible  as  a  revelation  from  hea- 
ven, do  not  receive  its  doctrine  concerning  the  present  state  of  man. 
They  cannot  conceive  the  human  heart  to  be  so  deceitful  and  des- 
perately wicked  as  the  Bible  declares  it  to  be ;  and  especially  they 
do  not  so  conceive  of  their  own  hearts.  We  hence  know  that  such 
men  could  not  have  written  the  Bible.  When  the  light  of  truth 
has  produced  in  us  a  thorough  conviction  of  sin,  we  read  the  Bible 
with  new  eyes,  and  we  discover  in  it  the  handwriting  of  him  who 
said,  "I  the  Lord  search  the  heart."2 

The  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin  appears  when  it  is  viewed  as 
committed  against  God.  David  said,  "Against  thee,  thee  only, 
have  I  sinned."3  While  under  genuine  conviction  of  sin,  a  view  of 
God's  perfections  renders  the  conviction  overwhelming.  To  have 
sinned  against  so  glorious  and  excellent  a  being ;  to  have  rebelled 
against  the  rightful  Sovereign  of  the  universe,  and  aimed  at  de- 
throning him;  to  have  violated  his  law,  holy,  just,  and  good;  to 

1  John  iv.  29.  2  Jer.  xvii.  10.  3  Ps.  li.  4. 


man's  present  state.  173 

have  trampled  his  authority  under  our  feet,  insulted  his  majesty, 
despised  the  riches  of  his  forbearance  and  goodness ;  to  have  per- 
severed in  our  course,  notwithstanding  the  calls  of  his  mercy ;  and, 
in  spite  of  all  his  warnings  and  threatenings,  to  have,  feeble  worms 
as  we  are,  defied  his  omnipotent  vengeance  :  when  such  views  of  sin 
are  presented,  in  the  light  of  God's  word,  our  souls  are  filled  with 
anguish,  and  in  the  depth  of  sorrow  and  self-condemnation  we  adopt 
the  publican's  prayer,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."1 

The  word  of  God,  which  pierces  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul 
and  spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and  marrow,  and  is  a  discerner  of  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart,2  often  gives  pain  by  its  probings, 
but  their  tendency  is  salutary.  They  are  unwelcome  to  hypocrites 
and  false  professors ;  but  the  man  of  sincere  piety  prays,  "  Search 
me,  0  God,  and  know  my  heart ;  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts  ; 
and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  into  the 
way  everlasting."3  The  Bible  tears  the  mask  from  the  hypocrite, 
and  shows  to  the  Pharisee  that  all  his  righteousnesses  are  but  filthy 
rags;4  but,  humiliating  as  these  wholesome  instructions  are,  the 
true  penitent  rejoices  to  receive  them.  He  fears  to  be  deceived ; 
and  he  blesses  God  for  the  light  of  truth,  by  which  his  true  cha- 
racter is  revealed. 

When  men's  eyes  are  opened  to  see  their  spiritual  danger,  they 
generally  attempt,  in  their  own  strength,  to  work  out  their  salva- 
tion. These  efforts  prove  unavailing ;  and  they  learn,  by  experi- 
ence, that  they  have  no  help  in  themselves.  This  truth,  though 
clearly  taught  in  the  Bible,  they  never  really  believed  until  it  was 
thus  learned.  Here  arises,  in  the  heart  of  Christian  experience, 
another  confirmation  of  Bible  doctrine.  A  truth  which  no  man 
sincerely  believes  until  the  Spirit  of  God  has  taught  him,  by  inward 
experience,  must  have  proceeded  from  God.  In  the  whole  progress 
of  our  spiritual  life  we  become  increasingly  convinced  of  our  utter 
helplessness  and  entire  dependence  on  strength  divine ;  and  the 
Bible  doctrine  on  this  subject  acquires  perpetually  increasing  con- 
firmation. 

Genuine  Christian  experience  commences  with  conviction  of  sin ; 
but,  blessed  be  God,  it  does  not  end  here.     The  knowledge  of  our 

1  Luke  xviii.  13.        2  Heb.  iv.  12.        3  Ps.  cxxxix.  23,  24.        4  Is.  Ixiv.  6. 


174  THE    FALL    AND    PRESENT    STATE    OF    MAN. 

depravity,  condemnation,  and  helplessness,  would  fill  us  with  des- 
pair, were  it  not  that  salvation,  precisely  adapted  to  our  necessities, 
has  been  provided  by  the  mercy  of  God,  and  revealed  in  the  gospel 
of  his  Son.  The  very  truth,  which  would  otherwise  fill  us  with 
anguish  and  despair,  prepares  for  the  joyful  acceptance  of  salvation 
by  Christ.  He  who  rejects  this  truth  does  not  feel  the  need  of 
Christ ;  and,  therefore,  does  not  come  to  him  for  life.  They  that 
be  whole  need  not  a  physician.1  Let  the  truth  of  this  chapter  be 
received  deep  in  the  heart,  and  we  shall  be  prepared  for  the  pro- 
fitable study  of  the  next  subject. 

»Matt.  ix.  12. 


BOOK  FIFTH. 
DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  JESUS  CHRIST 


INTRODUCTION. 

DUTY    OF    BELIEVING    IN    JESUS    CHRIST.1 

In  close  connection  with  repentance  for  sin,  the  Word  of  God 
enjoins  the  duty  of  believing  in  Christ :  "  Repent  ye,  and  believe 
the  Gospel  :2  "  Testifying  repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  in  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "3  Both  the  duties  relate  to  men  as  sinners, 
and  without  the  performance  of  them,  escape  from  the  penalty  of 
sin  is  impossible.  The  requirement  of  faith,  in  addition  to  repent- 
ance, proves  that  mere  sorrow  for  sin  will  not  suffice ;  and  the 
passages  of  Scripture  are  numerous  in  which  faith  is  expressly 
declared  to  be  necessary  to  salvation:  "Preach  the  Gospel  to 
every  creature.  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved : 
but  he  that  believeth  not,  shall  be  damned."4  "Without  faith  it  is 
impossible  to  please  him."5  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath 
everlasting  life ;  and  he  that  believeth  not,  shall  not  see  life ;  but 
the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."6  "He  that  believeth  not,  is 
condemned  already,  because  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  name  of 
the  only  begotton  Son  of  God."7 


1  Acts  xvi.  31.    Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved. 
John  ix.  35.  Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  ?  Who  is  he,  that. I  might 

believe  on  him  ? 

2  Mark  i.  15.  3  Acts  xx.  21.  *  Mark  xvi.  15,  16. 
6  Heb.  xi.  6.                        &  John  iii.  36.  7  John  iii.  18. 

(175) 


176  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

These  clear  proofs  that  faith  is  necessary  to  salvation,  render  it 
important  to  understand  the  nature  of  faith.  And  since  the  saving 
benefit  does  not  result  from  every  kind  or  exercise  of  faith,  but 
only  from  faith  in  Christ,  what  it  is  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  is 
an  inquiry  of  highest  interest. 

Every  one  who  reflects  on  the  operations  of  his  own  mind,  will 
perceive  that  faith  lies  at  the  foundation  of  every  mental  affection, 
and  of  every  purpose  to  act.  The  testimony  of  our  senses  must 
be  believed,  before  external  objects  can  awaken  any  emotion  in 
the  mind ;  and  the  uniformity  of  nature's  laws,  and  the  deductions 
of  our  reason,  must  be  believed  before  we  can  resolve  to  shun  a 
precipice,  or  to  labor  for  a  future  crop.  In  the  ordinary  affairs 
of  life,  faith  is  the  basis  of  action.  The  man  who  believes  that 
his  house  is  on  fire,  or  that  a  rich  treasure  is  buried  under  it,  acts 
accordingly.  It  is  equally  true  that  faith  lies  at  the  foundation 
of  every  religious  affection  and  of  every  religious  duty.  He  who 
loves  God,  and  delights  in  his  will  and  works,  must  believe  that  he 
is,  and  that  the  will  and  works  in  which  he  delights  are  realities, 
and  possess  the  qualities  which  his  mind  attributes  to  them.  He 
who  repents  of  sin,  must  believe  that  the  sin  of  which  he  repents 
has  been  committed,  and  that  it  possesses  the  evil  nature  which  he 
condemns  and  loathes.  So,  in  everything  else,  faith  is  the  foun- 
dation of  all  religion. 

In  the  view  which  has  been  taken,  faith  is  merely  intellectual, 
and  does  not  imply  any  emotion,  either  pleasurable  or  painful. 
It  may  immediately  excite  emotions,  pleasurable  or  painful,  accord- 
ing to  the  character  of  the  truth  believed,  and  the  state  of  mind 
in  which  it  is  received.  The  belief  of  one  truth  gives  pleasure ; 
and  another,  pain;  and  the  belief  of  the  same  truth  may  give 
pleasure  to  one  mind  and  pain  to  another.  So,  the  truth  of  God, 
which  a  man  dislikes  while  he  is  unconverted,  is  delighted  in  after 
his  heart  has  been  changed. 

Faith,  in  this  general  sense,  is  necessary  to  the  obedience  of  holy 
creatures,  and  mingles  with  all  the  holy  exercises  of  their  minds. 
But  holy  beings  are  incapable  of  repentance,  because  they  have 
no  sin  to  repent  of:  and  they  are  unable  to  approach  to  God 
through  Christ  as  guilty  beings,  seeking  pardon.  The  Gospel 
addresses  men  as   sinners,   and  presents   Christ  to  them  as  the 


DUTY   OF   BELIEVING   IN  JESUS   CHRIST.  177 

Saviour  of  sinners ;  and  the  faith  in  Christ  which  it  requires,  is 
the  receiving  of  the  truth  which  it  declares  concerning  Christ. 

Although  faith  may  be  contemplated  as  merely  intellectual,  and 
as  antecedent  to  all  emotion ;  it  is  not,  in  this  abstract  view  of 
it,  that  faith  in  Christ  is  enjoined  in  the  Gospel,  and  has  the 
promise  of  salvation.  Men  must  receive  "  the  love  of  the  truth, 
that  they  may  be  saved,"1  as  well  as  the  truth  itself.  A  merely 
intellectual  faith,  without  the  love  of  the  truth  believed,  cannot 
produce  the  proper  fruits  of  faith;  for  " faith  worketh  by  love  ;"2 
and  it  cannot  secure  the  blessings  promised  to  faith ;  for  "  with 
the  heart  man  belie veth  unto  righteousness."3  A  faith  which 
dwells  exclusively  in  the  intellect,  and  leaves  the  heart  untouched 
and  cold,  is  the  dead  faith  which  the  apostle  James  describes.4 

Faith  in  Christ,  is  faith  in  the  declarations  of  the  Gospel  con- 
cerning Christ ;  and  it  is  faith  in  these  as  coming  from  God.  It  is 
the  receiving  of  God's  testimony  concerning  his  Son ;  and,  in  this 
view  of  it,  we  see  the  great  sinfulness  of  unbelief;  for  he  who 
believeth  not,  hath  made  God  a  liar.5  We  see,  also,  how  firm 
a  foundation  is  laid  for  strong  faith.  The  Gospel  is  the  Word 
of  God  that  cannot  lie.  Our  senses  may  deceive  us ;  and  the 
deductions  of  our  reason  may  be  false.  Relying  on  these,  we  may 
err,  in  things  pertaining  to  the  present  life ;  but,  in  laying  hold  on 
life  eternal,  we  may  believe  the  truth  of  God  with  unwavering 
confidence.     His  word  cannot  fail. 

Faith  in  Christ  is  necessary  to  salvation.  We  may  believe 
many  things  that  God  has  said  in  his  Holy  Word,  without  believ- 
ing in  Christ;  and  we  may  believe  many  truths  concerning  Christ, 
without  possessing  that  faith  in  him  which  has  the  promise  of 
eternal  life.  True  faith  receives  Christ  entire,  as  he  is  presented 
in  the  Gospel.  If  any  part  of  his  character,  of  his  offices,  or  of 
his  doctrine,  is  unwelcome  to  the  heart,  true  faith  does  not  dwell 
there.  A  perfect  knowledge  of  Christ  is  not  necessary  to  true 
faith :  otherwise  true  faith  would  be  impossible :  for  the  riches  of 
Christ  are  unsearchable,6  and  his  love  passeth  knowledge.7  But 
the  true  believer  delights  in  Christ,  just  so  far  as  he  has  knowledge 

1  2  Thess.  ii.  10.  2  Gal.  v.  6.  3  Rom.  x.  10. 

James  ii.  26.  6  1  John  v.  10.  6  Eph.  iii.  8. 

»  Eph.  iii.  19. 
12 


178  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   JESUS   CHRIST. 

of  him ;  and  desires  to  know  more  of  him,  that  he  may  be  more 
filled  with  his  love.  The  revelation  made  to  the  Old  Testament 
saints  was  obscure ;  but,  so  far  as  they  could  see  Christ,  in  the 
light  which  was  afforded  them,  they  rejoiced  to  see  his  day  and 
were  glad.1 

From  the  necessity  of  faith  in  Christ  may  be  inferred  the 
greatness  of  Christ's  character.  When.  Jesus  said,  "  If  ye  believe 
not  that  I  am  he,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins,"2  he  claimed  an 
importance  to  which  Isaiah  or  Paul  could  never  have  aspired. 
When  the  ministers  of  his  religion  taught,  "  There  is  none  other 
name  under  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved,"3 
they  ascribed  to  him  an  office  of  exceeding  greatness.  If  we 
believe  in  Christ,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  we  fully  justify  all 
that  he  claimed  for  himself,  and  all  that  his  apostles  claimed  for 
him ;  and  we  rejoice  to  render  to  him  all  honor  and  praise. 

We  may  consider  the  question  proposed  to  us :  "  Dost  thou 
believe  on  the  Son  of  God  ?"  On  the  decision  of  this  question 
our  eternal  all  depends.  As  guilty  sinners  we  are  under  condem- 
nation, and  the  wrath  of  God  abides  on  us.  Among  all  the  beings 
in  the  universe,  no  deliverer  can  be  found,  except  Jesus  Christ, 
and  there  is  no  salvation  possible,  except  by  faith  in  him.  It  is, 
therefore,  an  inquiry  of  infinite  importance  whether  we  believe  in 
him.  The  man,  to  whom  the  question  was  proposed  by  the  Saviour, 
very  pertinently  asked  in  turn,  "  Who  is  he,  that  I  might  believe 
on  him?"  We  are  about  to  institute  the  inquiry,  Who  is  he? 
While  we  search  the  Holy  Scriptures,  to  find  the  answer,  let  us 
take  heed  to  it  that  we  believe  in  him  with  all  our  hearts.  Let  us 
rejoice  to  discover  that  he  is  mighty  to  save ;  and  that  he  is,  in 
every  particular,  just  such  a  Saviour  as  we  need.  While  we  study 
his  character  and  works,  let  us  receive  him  into  our  hearts,  and 
yield  ourselves  up  to  him,  as  bought  with  his  blood,  and  seek  to 
glorify  him  with  our  bodies  and  spirits,  which  are  his. 

1  John  viii.  56.  2  John  viii.  24.  8  Acts  iv.  12. 


THE   PERSON   OF   CHRIST.  179 


CHAPTER   I. 

THE    PERSON    OF    CHRIST. 
Section  I.— HUMANITY. 

Jesus  Christ  was  a  man.1 

The  manner  of  Christ's  conception  was  peculiar.  Without  a 
human  father,  he  was  conceived  in  the  womb  of  his  virgin  mother, 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  How  far  the  son  of  Mary,  con- 
ceived in  this  peculiar  manner,  resembled  the  sons  born  of  other 
mothers,  in  the  ordinary  mode  of  generation,  and  how  far  he  dif- 
fered from  them,  we  cannot  certainly  know  from  the  circumstances 
of  his  conception.  The  divine  power,  which  formed  a  man  out  of 
the  dust  of  the  ground,  could  also  form  a  man  in  the  womb  of  the 
virgin:  but  whether  this  extraordinary  production  should  be  a 
man,  or  a  being  of  some  other  order,  depended  entirely  on  the  will 
of  God.  For  the  knowledge  of  what  Jesus  Christ  was,  we  are 
wholly  indebted  to  the  testimony  concerning  him  given  in  the 
sacred  Scriptures. 

The  testimony  of  the  inspired  Word  on  this  point  is  very  explicit. 
Whatever  else  Jesus  Christ  may  have  been,  he  was  certainly  a 
man  ;  for  so  innumerable  passages  of  Scripture  declare.  "  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  a  man  approved;"2  "One  mediator,  the  man  Christ 
Jesus."3 

Jesus  Christ  had  a  human  body.  His  was  not  a  mere  shadowy 
form  of  humanity ;  for,  even  after  his  resurrection,  he  said  to  his 
disciples,  "  Handle  me  and  see  me,  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and 
bones,  as  ye  see  me  have."4  It  was  a  real  body  that  bore  the 
weight  of  the  cross,  and  was  afterwards  nailed  to  it.  It  was  a  real 
body  that  was  pierced  by  the  spear;  and  real  blood  and  water 

1  John  i.  14 ;  Phil.  ii.  7,  8 ;  Heb.  ii.  14-17 ;  Mark  ix.  12 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  5 
Matt.  i.  18-25  ;  Luke  i.  28-35 ;  Gal.  iv.  4 ;  Matt.  iv.  2 ;  xxi.  18 ;  John  iv.  6, 10 
Matt.  viii.  24 ;  xxi.  18;  Mark  ix.  12 ;  Isaiah  liii.  3  ;  John  xi.  35  ;  Luke  xix.  41 
Matt.  xxvi.  37,  38  ;  Luke  xxii.  44 ;  Matt.  iv.  1 ;  Mark  i.  13  ;  Luke  iv.  2 ;  Heb. 
ii.  18  ;  iv.  15  ;  Luke  ii.  10,  52  ;  Matt.  iv.  11 ;  Luke  xxii.  43  ;  Mark  xv.  34. 

2  Acts  ii.  22.  8 1  Tim.  ii.  5.  *  Luke  xxiv.  39. 


180  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

issued  from  the  wound.  It  was  a  real  body  that  was  embalmed 
with  spices  and  laid  in  the  tomb ;  and  that  afterwards  rose  from 
the  dead.  This  body  was  human.  It  had  the  appearance  and 
organs  common  to  human  bodies ;  was  sustained  by  food,  was  sub- 
ject to  hunger  and  weariness,  and  needed  the  rest  of  sleep,  like 
the  bodies  of  other  men. 

Jesus  Christ  had  a  human  soul.  If  the  divine  nature  had  dwelt 
in  his  body  as  a  mere  tabernacle  of  flesh,  and  supplied  to  it  the 
place  of  a  human  soul,  it  could  not  have  been  said  that  "  Jesus 
increased  in  wisdom."1  The  mere  material  fabric  could  have  no 
wisdom,  and  the  wisdom  of  the  divine  nature  was  not  susceptible 
of  increase.  Nor  was  it  some  created  spirit  of  angelic  or  super- 
angelic  nature  that  animated  his  body.  He  was  made  in  all  things 
like  his  brethren  f  and  he  would  not  have  been  a  brother,  one  of 
the  family,  made  like  the  rest,  if  the  spirit  that  dwelt  in  his  human 
flesh  had  not  also  been  human.  Without  this  he  would  not  have 
been  a  man.  If  he  had  not  possessed  a  soul,  he  could  not  have 
said,  "My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful;"3  nor  could  it  have  been 
said,  "When  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin."4  And 
if  his  soul  had  not  been  human,  it  would  not  have  been  a  suitable 
offering  for  the  sin  of  human  beings.  He  took  not  on  him  the 
nature  of  angels,  but  the  seed  of  Abraham.5  He  must  be  made 
like  those  whose  law-place  he  assumed,  and  for  whom  he  made 
himself  a  sacrifice. 

The  soul  of  Christ  was  unlike  the  souls  of  ordinary  men,  in  being 
without  the  taint  of  sin.  The  mention  of  this  exception  proves 
more  strongly  the  likeness  in  other  respects.  "  He  was  in  all 
points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."6  Had  the  divine 
nature  served  as  the  soul  of  Christ,  a  statement  of  this  exception 
would  have  been  needless  and  inappropriate.  Christ  could  be  a 
man  without  being  depraved ;  for  Adam  was  a  man  before  he  fell. 
In  the  comparison  between  Christ  and  Adam  as  public  heads, 
Adam  is  called  the  first  man,  and  Christ  the  second  man,7  The 
humanity  of  the  latter  is  as  real  as  that  of  the  former. 

In  the  working  of  miracles  God  has  shown  that  he  is  able  to 


1  Luke  ii.  52.  2  Heb.  ii.  17.  3  Mark  xiv.  34. 

4  Isaiah  liii.  10.  5  Heb.  ii.  16.  6  Heb.  iv.  15. 

1  Cor.  xv.  47. 


TliE   PERSON   OF   CHRIST.  181 

suspend  the  laws  of  nature ;  and  he  could  have  suspended  that 
law  of  nature  by  which  depraved  parents  generate  depraved 
children.  Had  it  been  his  pleasure,  Jesus  Christ  might  have  had 
a  human  father  as  well  as  a  human  mother ;  and  have  been,  never- 
theless, without  sin ;  for  with  God  all  things  are  possible.  But  it 
was  not  the  pleasure  of  God  that  he  should  be  so  born ;  and  the 
reason  for  his  conception  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  given 
in  the  words  of  the  angel  to  his  virgin  mother :  "  Therefore,  that 
holy  thing  which  shall  be  born  of  thee  shall  be  called  the  Son  of 
God."1  Ordinary  generation  would  have  made  him  the  son  of  man  : 
but  his  generation  was  extraordinary,  because  he  was  also  the  son 
of  God.  The  conception  by  the  Holy  Ghost  did  not  give  the  off- 
spring an  intermediate  nature  between  the  divine  and  the  human, 
such  as  the  demigods  of  the  heathen  were  supposed  to  possess.  In 
that  case,  Christ,  as  the  son  of  God,  would  have  been  the  son  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  not  of  the  Father.  But  the  Holy  Spirit  was  the 
agent  in  preparing  the  body  in  which  the  sacrifice  was  to  be  made  ; 
and  such  was  the  union  between  it  and  the  divinity,  that  the  name, 
Son  of  God,  belonged  to  the  entire  person  so  constituted. 

Section  II.— DIVINITY. 

Jesus  Christ  was  God.2 

As  the  humanity  of  Christ,  conceived  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  could  not  be  known  but  from  the  testimony  of  the  Scrip- 
tures ;  so  his  divinity,  considering  that  he  was  born  of  a  human 
mother,  could  not  be  known  but  from  the  testimony  of  the  same 
unerring  word.  The  conception  by  the  Holy  Ghost  is  sufficient  to 
intimate  that  he  was  not  to  be  an  ordinary  man  ;  and  the  declaration 
that,  in  consequence  of  it,  he  was  to  be  called  the  Son  of  God,  leads 
the  mind  to  conceive  that,  in  some  sense,  he  was  to  partake  of  the 


1  Luke  i.  35. 

2  Mic.  v.  2 ;  Heb.  i.  8 ;  xiii.  8;  Rev.  i.  8,  18  ;  John  ii.  24 ;  x.  15  ;  xxi.  17  ; 
Acts  i.  24 ;  Rev.  ii.  23 ;  Matt,  xviii.  20 ;  xxviii.  20 ;  John  i.  48 ;  Col.  ii.  3  ; 
Jude  25  ;  Matt.  iii.  17  ;  Luke  i.  35  ;  x.  22  ;  John  v.  23  ;  1  John  v.  20 ;  Matt, 
xxviii.  19  ;  Isaiah  xl.  3  ;  Zech.  ii.  8,  10 ;  iv.  8  ;  Mai.  iii.  1 ;  Matt.  iii.  3  ;  1  Cor. 
xv.  47  ;  Rev.  xix.  16 ;  Isaiah  ix.  6  ;  John  i.  1  ;  Rom.  ix.  5  ;  1  Tim.  iii.  16  ;  Heb. 
i.  8  ;  1  John  v.  20  ;  Phil.  ii.  6  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  9  ;  Luke  xxiii.  42  ;  Acts  vii.  59  ; 
Rev.  v.  12;  John  i.  3,  10;  Col.  i.  16;  Heb.  i.  10;  Neh.  ix. 


182  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

divine  nature.  Demigods,  according  to  the  heathen,  had  an 
intermediate  nature  between  that  of  gods  and  men.  But  we  have 
seen  that  Jesus  Christ  was  properly  a  man,  according  to  the  testi- 
mony of  the  Scriptures ;  and  we  have  now  to  appeal  to  the  same 
testimony  to  learn  whether  he  was  also  properly  God. 

The  proofs  on  this  point  are  abundant,  and  will  be  produced 
under  several  distinct  heads. 

I.  The  names  of  God  are  ascribed  to  Jesus  Christ. 

"  The  Word  was  God."1  This  testimony  of  the  beloved  disciple 
is  the  more  important,  because  it  was  his  design  to  inform  us  who 
his  divine  Master  was.  As  he  opens  his  First  Epistle  with  an 
account  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  "  eternal  life  which  was  with  the 
Father,"2  so  he  opens  his  Gospel  with  an  account  of  him  as  the 
Word  which  was  with  God,  and  which  was  God.  The  subsequent 
part  of  the  chapter  clearly  shows  that  this  Word  became  flesh,3 
in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  name  Word  is  given  else- 
where, by  the  same  writer,  to  Jesus  Christ.4  Now  it  is  incredible 
that  the  Gospel  should  open  with  a  declaration  which  has  misled 
its  readers,  in  all  ages,  into  a  belief  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God,  if 
he  were  nothing  more  than  a  mere  man.  To  no  purpose  has  this 
apostle  said  most  earnestly,  "  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from 
idols,"5  if  his  own  teachings  are  such  as  must  inevitably  lead  to 
idolatry.  His  language  is  usually  very  plain  and  simple  :  but  in 
this  case  it  needs  the  torture  of  most  ingenious  criticism,  if  it  does 
not  teach  the  deity  of  Christ.  He  has  written  that  we  might 
believe  in  Christ,  and,  believing,  might  have  life  through  his  name  ;6 
but  if  he  has  so  written  as  to  lead  our  souls  into  the  sin  of  idolatry, 
our  faith  must  be  to  death  rather  than  life. 

"  Who  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever."7  Christ  is  here  called 
God ;  not  in  some  subordinate  sense,  but  over  all,  and  blessed  for 
ever.  His  possession  of  human  nature  is  signified  in  the  phrase, 
"  Of  whom,  as  concerning  the  flesh,  Christ  came."  In  contrast  with 
this,  his  divinity  is  distinctly  brought  to  view.  What  he  was, 
according  to  the  flesh,  is  not  all  that  he  was ;  but  above  that,  he 


1  John  i.  1.  2 1  John  i.  3.  3  John  i.  14. 

4  Rev.  xix.  13.  5 1  John  v.  21.  6  John  xx.  31, 

7  Rom.  ix.  5« 


THE   PERSON   OF    CHRIST.  183 

was  over  all,  God,  blessed  for  ever.    All  the  criticisms  which  have 
been  tried  on  this  text  leave  its  testimony  plain  and  decisive. 

"  My  Lord  and  my  God."1  These  words  of  Thomas  are  a  brief, 
but  very  expressive  declaration  of  his  faith;  and  were  so  received 
by  his  Master :  "  Thomas,  because  thou  hast  seen  me,  thou  hast 
believed."2  So,  the  unfolding  of  Christ's  true  character  to  the 
mind  of  Nathaniel,  drew  forth  his  declaration  of  faith,  "  Thou  art 
the  Son  of  God.3  So  this  confession  of  Thomas  was  elicited  by 
the  opening  of  the  Saviour's  character  to  his  mind.  Both  of  them 
were  doubtless  taught  by  the  same  Spirit  which  revealed  Christ's 
character  to  Peter;4  and  the  faith  of  both  was  accepted,  and 
publicly  approved.  If  Christ  had  not  been  God,  it  behoved  him 
to  correct  his  disciple,  and  save  him  from  idolatry. 

"  Thy  throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever."5  In  this  place,  as  in  the  first 
chapter  of  John,  the  inspired  writer  is  designedly  stating  who  Jesus 
Christ  was.  He  has  represented  him  as  superior  to  the  prophets, 
by  whom  God  spake  in  times  past  to  the  fathers ; — as  superior  to 
the  angels  ; — as  the  proper  object  of  angelic  worship  ; — and  finally 
closes  the  account  with  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,  applied 
to  him,  in  which  he  is  called  God,  and  Lord,  and  said  to  have 
made  the  heavens  and  earth,  and  to  endure  for  ever.  If  he  was 
not  God,  Paul  was  mistaken. 

To  these  texts  in  which  the  name  God  is  applied  to  Jesus  Christ, 
we  may  add  the  following :  "  The  Church  of  God,  which  he  hath 
purchased  with  his  own  blood."6  "  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh."7 
"We  are  in  him  that  is  true,  even  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ;  this 
is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life."8  "So  then  every  one  of  us 
must  give  account  of  himself  to  God ;  "9  compared  with  the 
preceding  verse.  "  He  that  built  all  things,  is  God,"10  considered 
in  connection  with  the  context,  which  shows  that  the  Son  is  the 
builder  here  intended. 

Several  other  passages  may  be  cited  as  pertinent  examples,  if 
the  translation  of  them,  given  in  our  common  English  version,  be 
amended.     "  The  appearing  of  our  great  God  and  Saviour,  Jesus 


1  John  xx.  28.  2  John  xx.  29.  3  John  i.  49. 

4  Matt.  xvi.  17.  ,        6  Heb.  i.  8.  6  Acts  xx.  28. 

7  1  Tim.  iii.  16.  8  1  John  v.  20.  9  Rom.  xiv.  12. 

10  Heb.  iii.  4. 


184  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   JESUS   CHRIST. 

Christ."1  "  The  grace  of  our  God  and  Lord,  Jesus  Christ."2  "  In 
the  kingdom  of  the  Christ  and  God,"  i.  e.  of  him  who  is  both 
Christ  and  God.3  "Before  the  God  and  Lord,  Jesus  Christ."4 
"The  righteousness  of  our  God  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ."1 
These  emendations  of  the  translation  are  not  made  arbitrarily,  but 
are  required  by  a  rule  of  criticism,  founded  on  the  usage  of  Greek 
writers,  as  to  the  repetition  of  the  article,  when  prefixed  to  two 
nouns  connected  by  a  conjunction. 

II.  The  attributes  of  God  are  ascribed  to  Jesus  Christ. 

Eternity. — In  a  prediction  concerning  him  by  Isaiah,  it  is  said : 
"  His  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God, 
the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace."6  The  phrase 
"Everlasting  Father"  may  be  rendered  the  Father  of  Eternity. 
Were  this  name  given  to  him  by  erring  men,  we  might  suppose  it 
inappropriate  :  but  it  is  given  to  him  by  the  infallible  Spirit  that 
spoke  in  the  ancient  prophets.  In  another  prophecy  concerning 
him,  it  is  said :  "  Whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from 
everlasting."7  We  know  that  this  prophecy  referred  to  Christ; 
for  it  is  expressly  applied  to  him  in  Matt.  ii.  6.  In  the  book  of 
Proverbs,  ch.  viii.,  Wisdom  is  introduced,  saying :  "  I  was  set  up 
from  everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was.  *  * 
Then  I  was  with  him,  as  one  brought  up  with  him ;  and  I  was  daily 
his  delight,  rejoicing  always  before  him;  rejoicing  in  the  habitable 
part  of  the  earth ;  and  my  delights  were  with  the  sons  of  men."8 
The  most  consistent  interpretation  of  this  passage,  applies  it  to 
Christ,  the  Eternal  Word,  who  is  called  "  the  Power  of  God,  and 
the  Wisdom  of  God."9  To  these  passages,  we  may  add  the  words 
of  Christ:  "Before  Abraham  was,  I  am."10  As  his  human  nature 
was  not  fifty  years  old,  these  words  could  not  refer  to  it.  They 
attribute  existence  to  him  of  more  ancient  date  than  the  time  of 
Abraham  ;  and,  in  affirming  that  pre-existence,  the  present  tense, 
I  am,  is  employed.  This  very  extraordinary  mode  of  speaking, 
agrees  precisely  with  Old  Testament  language,  describing  the 
self-existent  Jehovah :  "  I  am  that  I  am."    "  I  am  hath  sent  me."11 


1  Titus  ii.  13.  2  2  Thess.  i.  12.  «  Eph.  \ .  5. 

4  1  Tim.  v.  21.  5  2  Peter  i.  1.  6  Isaiah  ix.  6. 

7  Micah  v.  2.  8  Prov.  viii.  23-31.  9  1  Cor.  i.  24. 

10  John  viii.  58.  u  Ex.  iii.  14. 


THE  PERSON  OF  CHRIST.  185 

The  Jews  who  heard  Jesus  speak  thus  concerning  himself,  under- 
stood him  to  claim  divinity;  and  if  he  did  not  design  to  do  so,  it 
is  undeniable  that  he  employed  language  well  calculated  to  mislead 
them. 

Immutability. — "  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and 
for  ever."1  "  They  shall  wax  old  as  doth  a  garment,  and  as  a 
vesture  shalt  thou  fold  them  up,  and  they  shall  be  changed,  but 
thou  art  the  same."2 

Omnipresence. — Christ  promised  to  be  with  his  disciples  always, 
even  to  the  end  of  the  world,3  and,  not  only  at  all  times,  but  at  all 
places :  "  Where  two  or  three  are  met  together  in  my  name,  there 
am  I  in  the  midst  of  them."4  To  fulfill  this  promise,  he  must  be 
omnipresent.  The  same  is  implied  in  the  words,  "  No  man  hath 
ascended  up  to  Heaven,  but  he  that  came  down  from  Heaven,  even 
the  Son  of  man  which  is  in  Heaven."5  His  body  was  on  earth, 
when  he  spoke  these  words ;  and  yet  he  declares  himself  to  be  in 
Heaven.     This  could  not  be  true,  if  he  were  not  omnipresent. 

Omniscience. — Jesus  knew  the  thoughts  of  men,  even  while  shut 
up  in  their  own  breasts.  Other  prophets  had  this  knowledge  com- 
municated to  them,  by  special  revelation,  on  particular  occasions ; 
but  Jesus  had  his  knowledge  at  all  times.  "  He  knew  all  men, 
and  needed  not  that  any  one  should  testify  of  man ;  for  he  knew 
what  was  in  man."6  To  know  the  secrets  of  the  heart,  belongs 
peculiarly  to  Jehovah.  '  "  Who  can  know  it  ?  I,  the  Lord,  search 
the  heart."7  Yet  the  power  of  searching  the  heart,  is  expressly 
ascribed  to  Jesus.  "I  am  he  which  searcheth  the  reins  and 
hearts."8  Peter  appealed  to  Christ,  as  knowing  the  secrets  of  his 
heart,  and  expressly  ascribes  omniscience  to  him.  "  Lord,  thou 
knowest  all  things ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee."9  Christ  claimed 
omniscience  in  the  words,  uNo  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the 
Father,  neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Father,  save  the  Son,  and 
he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal  him."10  Without  omniscience, 
Christ  would  not  be  qualified  to  judge  the  world. 

Omnipotence.  —  Paul,  feeling  his  own  weakness,  desired  the 
power  of  Christ  to  rest  upon  him  ;n  and  he  conceived  of  that  power 

1  Heb.  xiii.  8.  2  Heb.  i.  11,  12.  3  Matt,  xxviii.  20. 

4  Matt,  xviii.  20.  6  John  iii.  13.  6  John  ii.  25. 

7  Jer.  xvii.  10.  8  Rev.  ii.  23.  9  John  xxi.  17. 

10  Matt.  xi.  29.  u  2  Cor.  xii.  9. 


186  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

as  infinite,  when  he  said :  "  I  can  do  all  things,  through  Christ 
which  strengtheneth  me."1  The  omnipotence  of  Christ  is  manifested 
in  the  works  which  he  performs,  of  which  we  shall  presently  speak 
more  particularly.  He  claimed  like  omnipotence  with  the  Father : 
"  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."2  "  What  things  soever 
the  Father  doeth,  these  also  the  Son  doeth  likewise."3  "Neither  shall 
any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand.  No  man  is  able  to  pluck 
them  out  of  my  Father's  hand."4  In  the  prophecy  already  quoted 
from  Isaiah,  he  is  called  "the  Mighty  God;"  and  in  Rev.  i.  8-11, 
he  is  called  "  the  Almighty." 

III.  Divine  works  are  ascribed  to  Christ. 

Creation. — "All  things  were  made  by  him,  and  without  him  was 
not  anything  made  that  was  made."5  "  By  him  all  things  were 
created  that  are  in  heaven  and  that  are  in  earth,  visible  and 
invisible."6  We  may  admit,  that  the  word  "by"  frequently  denotes 
an  instrument  used  in  a  work ;  but  this  is  not  its  invariable  meaning. 
It  is  applied  to  God  the  Father.  "  It  became  him,  of  whom  are 
all  things,  and  by  whom  are  all  things,  in  bringing  many  sons  to 
glory  to  make  the  captain  of  their  salvation  perfect  through 
suffering."7  If  Christ  was  a  created  instrument,  used  in  the  creation 
of  everything  else,  he  was  himself  created  without  such  instru- 
mentality, and  the  words  of  John  were  not  true,  "  Without  him 
was  not  anything  made  that  was  made."  God  created  all  things  by 
Jesus  Christ,8  not  as  a  mere  instrument,  or  as  an  inferior  agent ; 
otherwise  it  could  not  be  said,  "All  things  were  created  by  him 
and  for  him."9  An  inferior  agent,  employed  to  do  a  work,  performs 
it  not  for  himself,  but  for  the  superior  who  employs  him.  The  Son 
co-operated  with  the  Father  in  the  work  of  creation,  as  supreme 
God.  The  word  "by"  implies  no  inferiority.  When  it  is  said 
of  Christ,  he  by  himself  purged  our  sins,10  himself  does  not  denote 
an  agent  inferior  to  Christ. 

Providence. — All  things  are  kept  in  being  by  the  power  of 
Christ,  and  he  must,  therefore,  be  God.  "  Upholding  all  things 
by  the  word  of  his  power."11     All  the  powers  of  the  universe  are 


1  Phil.  iv.  13.  2  John  v.  17.  3  John  v.  19. 

4  John  x.  27,  28.  5  John  i.  3.  '     6  Col.  i.  16. 

T  Heb.  ii.  10.  8  Eph.  iii.  9.  9  Col.  i.  16. 

10  Heb.  i.  3  n  Heb.  i.  3. 


THE   PERSON   OF    C II  FIST.  137 

under  his  management,  and  therefore  ail  the  workings  of  providence 
are  directed  by  him. 

Giving  of  life. — Christ  raised  the  dead  to  life  during  his  personal 
ministry,  not  as  prophets  and  apostles  did,  in  the  name  and  by  the 
power  of  another.  The  apostles  wrought  miracles,  not  by  their 
own  power,  but  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ.1  Jesus,  on  the 
contrary,  claimed  the  power  which  he  exercised  in  the  working  of 
miracles.  "  The  Son  quickeneth  whom  he  will."2  He  claimed  to 
exercise  his  power,  both  in  the  quickening  of  souls  dead  in  sin,  and 
in  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  "  The  hour  is  come,  and  now  is, 
when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  they 
that  hear  shall  live."3  "  The  hour  is  coming  in  the  which  all  that 
are  in  their  graves  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth."4 
The  power  of  raising  the  dead,  is  attributed  by  Paul  to  Christ,  and 
is  called  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  to 
himself.5 

IV.  Numerous  passages  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  unques- 
tionably speak  of  Jehovah,  the  Supreme  God,  are,  in  the  New 
Testament,  applied  to  Jesus  Christ.  Isaiah  vi.  3,  compared  with 
John  xii.  41 ;  Isaiah  xl.  3,  compared  with  Matt.  iii.  1,  3  ;  Isaiah  xlv. 
21-23,  compared  with  Phil.  ii.  9-11 ;  Zach.  xii.  10,  compared  with 
John  xix.  37. 

V.  Divine  worship  was  commanded  to  be  rendered,  and  was 
rendered,  to  Jesus  Christ.  The  angels  were  commanded  to  worship 
him.  "  When  he  bringeth  in  the  first  begotten  into  the  world,  he 
saith:  'Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him.'  "6  Men  are  com- 
manded to  believe  in  him,  trust  in  him,  which  are  acts  of  divine 
worship.  This  has  more  force  when  compared  with  the  declaration : 
"  Cursed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his 
arm."7  Christ  permitted  himself  to  be  worshipped  as  the  Son  of 
God.8  He  was  worshipped  by  his  disciples,  after  his  ascension  to 
Heaven.9  They  were  accustomed  to  call  on  his  name,10  that  is,  to 
address  prayer  to  him.  So  the  dying  Stephen  prayed :  "  Lord 
Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."11     The  administering  or  receiving  of 

1  Acts  iii.  12 ;  iv.  10.  2  John  v.  21.  3  John  v.  25. 

*  John  v.  28,  29.  *  Phil.  iii.  21.  6  Heb.  i.  6. 

7  Jer.  xvii.  5.  8  John  ix.  38.  9  Luke  xxiv.  52. 

10  Acts  ix.  14.  u  Acts  vii.  59. 


188  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   JESUS   CHRIST. 

baptism  in  his  name,  is  an  act  of  religious  worship,  in  which  he  is 
honored  equally  with  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Spirit.1 

VI.  The  equality  of  the  Son  with  the  Father,  is  taught  by  Paul, 
in  Phil.  ii.  9.  His  example,  in  humbling  himself,  and  taking  on 
himself  the  form  of  a  servant,  is  proposed  for  our  imitation ;  but 
there  was  no  humiliation  in  his  taking  on  himself  the  form  of  a 
servant,  if  that  had  been  the  only  character  that  he  could  rightfully 
assume.  But  he  had  a  right  to  claim  equality  with  God,  and  this 
fact  showed  the  greatness  of  his  humiliation.  A  parallel  passage 
is  found  in  2  Cor.  viii.  9 :  "  Though  he  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  he 
became  poor." 

VII.  If  Jesus  Christ  was  not  God,  he  was  justly  condemned  to 
death. 

It  is  difficult  to  state  and  unfold  this  argument,  without  an 
appearance  of  irreverence.  To  charge  the  divine  Jesus  with  crime, 
even  hypothetically,  is  grating  to  the  feelings  of  those  who  love 
and  adore  him.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  he  who  is,  by 
this  argument,  proved  to  be  chargeable  with  crime,  is  the  Jesus  of 
another  gospel,  a  mere  man,  whose  character  and  conduct  are  to 
be  judged  like  those  of  other  men. 

Jesus  was  condemned  to  death  by  the  Jewish  Sanhedrim.  That 
council  reported  to  Pilate,  "  We  have  a  law,  and  by  our  law  he 
ought  to  die,  because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  God."2  On  a 
former  occasion,  Jesus  said  unto  them :  "  My  Father  worketh 
hitherto,  and  I  work."3  And  they  charged  him  with  blasphemy, 
because  he  made  God  his  [own]  Father,  thereby  making  himself 
equal  with  God.  It  was  in  this  peculiar  sense  that  the  charge  of 
making  himself  the  Son  of  God  was  construed,  or  it  would  not  have 
amounted  to  blasphemy.  The  high  priest  who  was  the  president 
of  the  council,  put  Christ  on  his  oath,  "I  adjure  thee  by  the  living 
God;"4  and  propounded  to  him  two  questions  which,  though  men- 
tioned together  by  Matthew  and  Mark,  are  by  Luke  stated  as 
proposed  separately.  "Art  thou  the  Christ?"  and  "Art  thou  the 
Son  of  God?"  It  was  the  affirmative  reply  of  Jesus  to  the  last 
of  these  questions,  which  was  the  ground  of  his  condemnation. 
Jesus  knew  the  sense  in  which  the  question  was  propounded;  and 

1  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  2  John  xix.  7. 

3  John  v.  17.  4  Matt.  xxvi.  62. 


THE   PERSON   OF   CHRIST.  189 

he  was  bound,  on  correct  principles  of  morals,  in  answering  the 
question,  to  answer  it  honestly  and  truly  in  the  sense  in  which  he 
knew  that  the  high  priest  meant  it.  He  therefore  affirmed  on  oath, 
at  that  tribunal,  that  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  in  this  high  sense. 
For  this  he  was  condemned  to  death ;  and  if  he  was  not  what  he 
claimed  to  be,  he  was  guilty  of  perjury  and  of  his  own  death.  On 
this  charge  he  was  condemned  to  death,  by  the  Council,  but  God 
justified  him  by  raising  him  from  the  dead.  "  Declared  to  be  the 
Son  of  God,  with  power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the 
resurrection  from  the  dead."1  This  proved  that  his  condemnation 
was  unjust ;  and  that  he  was  truly  what  he  had  claimed  to  be,  the 
Son  of  God,  in  the  sense  which  the  Jews  accounted  blasphemy. 

The  last  argument  exhibits  the  importance  of  this  doctrine  in  a 
strong  light.  According  to  the  law  of  Moses,  any  one  who  enticed 
to  idolatry  was  to  be  punished  with  death.2  The  council  before 
which  Jesus  was  tried,  was  the  court  which  had  cognisance  of  this 
offence.  A  mere  man,  who  should  claim  divine  honor  to  himself, 
was  guilty  of  this  capital  crime ;  and  although  the  Romans  had 
taken  away  from  the  Jews  the  power  of  inflicting  capital  punish- 
ment, the  council  might,  with  perfect  propriety,  report  to  the 
governor  concerning  such  a  man,  "  By  our  law  he  ought  to  die." 
This  was  their  decision,  as  reported  to  Pilate,  concerning  Jesus ; 
and,  if  he  was  not  entitled  to  the  divine  honor  which  he  claimed, 
the  decision  was  just. 

Two  accusations  were  brought  against  Jesus.  Before  the  Roman 
governor  he  was  charged  with  treason  against  Caesar,  by  making 
himself  king.  Into  this  accusation  the  governor  inquired,  asking 
Jesus,  "  Art  thou  a  king?"  Jesus  answered  in  the  affirmative,  as 
m  the  other  case :  but,  that  he  might  not  convict  himself  of  a 
crime  of  which  he  was  not  guilty,  he  explained,  "My  kingdom  is 
not  of  this  world."3  His  reply  was  satisfactory  to  the  governor, 
who  acquitted  him  on  this  charge.  In  the  other  case  he  not  only 
claimed  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  but  accompanied  the  claim  with  no 
explanation,  to  prevent  the  passing  of  the  sentence.  He  might 
have  said,  I  am  the  Son  of  God,  but  not  in  such  a  sense  as  to 
claim  divine  honor.  He  made  no  such  explanation.  If  Jesus  was 
not  entitled  to  divine  honor,  he  knew  it ;  and  he  knew  also  that 

1  Rom.  i.  4.  2  Deut.  xiii.  6,  8.  3  John  xviii.  36. 


190      DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  JESUS  CHRIST. 

he  deserved  death,  under  the  decision  of  this  court,  for  claiming 
it.  To  make  the  claim  before  the  court,  was  to  be  guilty  of  the 
crime.  To  answer  as  he  did,  on  oath,  if  he  did  not  mean  to  make 
the  claim,  was  perjury.  And  to  permit  the  sentence  against  him 
to  pass,  without  any  effort  to  explain,  was  to  be  guilty  of  his  own 
death.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  Jesus  Christ,  if  not  entitled  to 
divine  honor,  was  a  wicked  man  and  a  deceiver. 

We  might  suppose  the  possibility  of  mistake,  concerning  Christ's 
claim  of  divine  honor  before  the  court  that  condemned  him,  if  he 
had  habitually  disclaimed  such  honor  in  his  previous  ministry. 
But,  instead  of  this,  he  had  taught,  "  It  is  the  will  of  God,  that 
all  men  should  honor  the  Son,  even  as  they  honor  the  Father."1 
He  claimed  superiority  to  the  law  of  the  Sabbath,  and  the  right  of 
working  every  day,  as  his  Father  did :  "  My  Father  worketh  hith- 
erto, and  I  work."2  He  claimed  to  have  been  before  Abraham,  in  lan- 
guage which  appropriately  intimates  self-existence :  "  Before  Abra- 
ham was,  I  am."3  He  claimed  to  be  one  with  the  Father:  "I 
and  my  Father  are  one."4  Moreover,  he  never  rejected  divine 
honor,  when  offered  him.  Paul  and  Barnabas,  at  Lystra,  indig- 
nantly repelled  those  who  approached  to  do  them  honor  as  gods  ;5 
and  the  angel  hastily  prevented  John  from  worshipping  him  :  "  See 
thou  do  it  not.  Worship  God."6  When  the  people  were  minded 
to  take  him  by  force,  and  make  him  king,  he  escaped  from  them. 
He  refused  to  be  "a  judge  or  divider,"7  and  declined  all  civil 
honor,  in  perfect  consistence  with  his  disclaimer  of  it  before  Pilate. 
But  in  equal  consistence  with  his  claim  of  divine  honor  before  the 
Sanhedrim,  he  never  rejected  it  when  offered  by  any  one.  The 
man  to  whom  he  had  given  sight  worshipped  him  as  the  Son  of 
God,8  without  rebuke  ;  and  Thomas  addressed  him,  "  My  Lord  and 
my  God;"  not  only  without  rebuke,  but  with  approbation.9  To 
all  this  we  may  add,  that  the  disciples  to  whom  he  taught  the  prin- 
ciples of  his  religion,  and  who  believed  that  they  had  the  mind  of 
Christ,  were  accustomed  to  render  him  divine  honor.  Many 
proofs  of  his  deity  have  been  cited  above,  from  their  writings. 
That  Paul  did  not  consider  him  a  mere  man,  is  most  clear  from 

1  John  v.  23.  2  John  v.  17.  3  John  viii.  58. 

*  John  x.  30.  5  Acts  xiv.  15.  6  Rev.  xxii.  9. 

7  Luke  xii.  14.  8  John  ix.  38.  9  John  xx.  28,  29. 


THE   PERSON    OF   CHRIST.  191 

Gal.  i.  1 :  Paul  an  apostle,  not  of  men,  neither  by  man,  but  by 
Jesus  Christ;"  and  the  whole  tenor  of  his  writings  shows,  that  he 
felt  such  obligations  to  Christ,  and  reposed  such  trust  in  him, 
as  are  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  belief  that  he  was  a  mere 
creature. 

From  these  facts,  we  must  believe  that  the  deity  of  Christ  is  an 
essential  doctrine  of  Christianity.  As  there  can  be  no  religion 
without  the  existence  of  God ;  so  there  can  be  no  Christian  creed 
in  which  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  deity  is  not  a  fundamental  article. 

But,  clear,  and  abundant  as  the  proofs  on  this  subject  are,  the 
humble  inquirer  into  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  is  sometimes  per- 
plexed with  difficulties  respecting  it.  The  more  common  of  these 
it  will  be  proper  briefly  to  consider. 

Obj.  1.  This  doctrine  is  inconsistent  with  the  Unity  of  God. 
This  objection  will  be  considered  hereafter,  under  the  head  of  "  The 
Trinity." 

Obj.  2.  In  various  passages  Jesus  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  distinct 
from  God,  and  sometimes  in  such  a  manner  as  seems  to  deny  his 
proper  deity. 

Before  we  proceed,  under  this  head,  to  examine  particular  pas- 
sages, we  may  premise  that  the  Scriptures  speak  of  a  two-fold 
connection  between  the  Godhead  and  the  man  Jesus  Christ — a 
personal  union  and  an  indwelling.  The  personal  union  is  not  with 
the  whole  Godhead,  but  with  one  person  or  subsistence  therein. 
It  was  not  the  whole  Godhead  that  was  made  flesh ;  but  the  Word 
that  was  with  God,  and  was  God.  God  sent  forth,  not  the  whole 
Godhead,  but  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman.1  On  the  other  hand, 
the  indwelling  is  of  the  whole  Godhead.  In  him  dwelleth  all  the 
fullness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.2  The  Father  dwelt  in  him,3  and 
the  Spirit  was  given  to  him  without  measure.4  This  indwelling  did 
not  make  him  one  person  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit. 
His  body  was  a  temple  for  the  whole  Godhead.  As  the  Holy 
Ghost,  in  the  prophets,  was  distinct  from  the  prophets;  so  the 
Godhead,  dwelling  in  Jesus  Christ,  was  distinct  from  the  person 
of  Jesus  Christ. 

John  xvii.  3.     "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee 


1  Gal.  iv.  4.  •  2  Col.  ii.  9. 

3  John  xiv.  10.  *  John  iii.  34. 


192  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

the  only  true  God;  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent."  The 
Father  is  here  addressed,  as  the  representative  of  the  Godhead. 
The  Godhead  that  sent  Christ  is  distinct  from  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  but  the  person  sent  was  nevertheless  divine.  His  divinity, 
though  not  affirmed  in  the  passage,  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact 
that  the  knowledge  of  him  was  necessary  to  eternal  life. 

1  Cor.  viii.  6.  "  To  us  there  is  but  one  God,  the  Father,  of 
whom  are  all  things,  and  we  in  him ;  and  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
by  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  by  him."  Here,  again,  the  Father 
is  the  representative  of  the  entire  Godhead,  which  is  in  him,  as 
the  object  of  ultimate  worship,  and  is  one.  "  Of  whom  are  all 
things."  The  same  Godhead  is  in  Jesus  Christ  as  the  medium  of 
manifestation.  "By  whom  are  all  things."  This  text  does  not 
affirm  that  Jesus  Christ  is  a  divine  person ;  but  his  qualification  to  be 
universal  Lord  implies  it.  This  text  no  more  denies  Jesus  Christ 
to  be  God,  than  it  denies  the  Father  to  be  Lord. 

In  the  same  manner  other  similar  passages  may  be  explained. 

Obj.  3.  The  various  passages  which  speak  of  Jesus  Christ  as 
inferior  to  the  Father,  as  sent  by  the  Father,  and  as  working  by 
the  power  of  the  Father,  appear  to  deny  his  proper  deity. 

The  explanation  of  all  these  passages  is  given  by  Paul  in  Phil, 
ii.  5-8.  "Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus  ; 
who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal 
with  God ;  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took  upon  him 
the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men ;  and 
being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,  and  became 
obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross." 

The  Son  of  God,  though  truly  divine,  and  entitled  to  divine 
honor,  humbled  himself;  and,  by  his  union  with  human  nature, 
was  made  under  the  law.  He  was  not  originally  under  the  law, 
but  was  made  under  it.  Hence  we  read  of  his  inferiority  to  the 
Father,  hi3  subjection  to  the  Father's  authority,  &c.  Inferiority 
of  office  does  not  require  inferiority  of  nature.  A  subject  is  infe- 
rior in  authority  to  his  king ;  though  he  is  equal  to  him  in  nature, 
and  may  surpass  him  in  intellectual  and  moral  worth.  Jesus 
Christ  is  inferior  to  the  Father  in  his  human  nature,  and  his  medi- 
atorial office ;  but  in  his  divine  nature  he  is  God  over  all. 

Obj.  4.     Jesus  Christ  appears,  in  Luke  xviii.  19,  to  admit  that 


THE   PERSON    OF    CHRIST.  193 

he  had  not  the  goodness  peculiar  to  God ;  and,  in  Mark  xiii.  32 
to  deny  that  he  had  omniscience. 

"Why  callest  thou  me  good?  none  is  good  save  one,  that  is 
God."  These  words  are  a  question.  Questions  sometimes  imply 
strong  affirmation ;  but,  in  such  cases,  the  reason  of  asking  them 
must  be  apparent.  In  the  present  case  there  is  nothing  in  the 
whole  context  indicating  that  it  was  Christ's  design  to  explain  his 
own  character ;  and  we  may  therefore  conclude  that  the  question 
was  asked  for  another  purpose.  The  young  ruler  thought  himself 
to  be  a  good  man,  and  addressing  Christ  as  another  good  man, 
from  whom  he  was  willing  to  receive  instruction,  asked,  in  the 
spirit  of  self-righteousness,  "What  good  thing  shall  I  do?"1  The 
whole  of  Christ's  discourse  with  this  young  man  was  designed  to 
convince  him  of  his  self-righteousness,  and  the  question  with  which 
it  commenced  was  precisely  adapted  to  this  purpose.  It  was  cal- 
culated to  lead  his  mind  to  the  humbling  reflection  that  all  human 
goodness,  such  as  he  trusted  in,  and  such  as  he  had  attributed  to 
Christ,  was  insignificant  and  worthless  when  brought  into  compari- 
son with  God.  Whether  divine  goodness  belonged  to  Jesus  Christ 
is  here  neither  affirmed  nor  denied.  This  question  the  ruler  never 
thought  of,  and  Christ  made  no  reference  to  it,  and  said  nothing 
about  it. 

Mark  xiii.  32.  "  Of  that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man ; 
no,  not  the  angels  of  heaven ;  neither  the  Son,  but  my  Father 
only."  This  passage  must  be  explained  in  harmony  with  other 
Scriptures.  Were  Gen.  xviii.  21  the  only  passage  of  Scripture 
from  which  we  could  learn  anything  respecting  the  extent  of  God's 
knowledge,  we  should  conclude  that  it  is  not  unlimited  ;  and,  in  like 
manner,  if  Mark  xiii.  32  were  the  only  text  from  which  we  could 
learn  the  extent  of  Christ's  knowledge,  we  should  infer  that  he  is 
not  omniscient.  But  the  proofs  of  his  omniscience,  as  before 
adduced,  are  so  abundant,  that  we  are  obliged  to  seek  an  explana- 
tion of  this  passage  which  shall  be  consistent  with  them.  When 
we  consider  that  it  was  the  spirit  of  Christ  in  the  ancient  prophets, 
that  enabled  them  to  make  their  numerous  predictions — that  he 
personally  predicted  so  many  things,  and  so  much  in  particular 
concerning  this  very  day,2  and  that  this  day  is  emphatically  called 


1  Matt.  xix.  16.  2  Phil.  i.  6. 

13 


194  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

the  day  of  Christ,  the  day  of  the  Lord,1  it  seems  improbable  that 
he  should  be  wholly  ignorant  of  the  time  of  its  coming.  He 
describes  himself  as  a  lord,  coming  unexpectedly  on  his  servants 
after  a  season  of  absence.  Now,  although  we  can  see  a  propriety 
that  the  servants  should  not  know  when  their  lord  would  come,  no 
reason  appears  why  the  lord  himself  should  not  know  it.  These 
facts,  therefore,  favor  an  interpretation  of  the  passage  which  will 
be  consistent  with  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  omniscience. 

The  most  obvious  method  of  interpreting  the  passage  in  harmony 
with  other  Scriptures,  is  to  suppose  that  it  refers  to  the  knowledge 
which  Christ's  humanity  possessed.  In  this  nature  he  was  not 
omniscient ;  for  it  is  said2  that  Jesus  increased  in  wisdom.  The 
Holy  Spirit  communicated  to  his  human  soul,  from  time  to  time, 
such  knowledge  as  was  necessary ;  but  not  all  knowledge,  for 
human  nature  could  not  be  made  omniscient.  There  is,  however, 
an  objection  to  this  interpretation,  on  the  ground  that  Christ 
could  not,  with  truth,  deny  of  himself  any  knowledge  which  either 
nature  possessed.  This  objection  would  be  embarrassing,  if  it 
were  not  true  that  Christ,  in  the  passage,  has  placed  his  know- 
ledge and  that  of  his  Father  in  contrast.  In  the  same  manner  he 
has  denied  omnipotence  of  himself,  in  John  v.  30 ;  not  absolutely, 
but  as  distinct  from  his  Father.  "I  can,  of  mine  own  self,  do 
nothing."  In  the  same  verse,  he,  in  the  same  sense,  speaks  of 
himself  as  without  omniscience  also  :  "  As  I  hear,  I  judge."  The 
question,  "When  shall  these  things  be?"  was  proposed  by  the 
disciples3  to  Christ  as  visible  before  them  in  his  human  nature. 
It  was  not  proper  that  they  should  receive  an  answer ;  for  it  was 
intended  that  they  should  watch :  "  Watch  ye  therefore ;  for  ye 
know  not  when  the  master  of  the  house  cometh."4  As  the  human 
nature  of  Christ  was  the  medium  through  which  the  disciples 
received  their  instruction,  and  as  this  was  one  of  the  times  and 
seasons  which  the  Father  had  reserved  in  his  own  power,5  we  may 
suppose  that  the  Holy  Spirit  had  not  communicated,  and  the  holy 
humanity  of  Jesus  had  not  sought  this  knowledge,  which  was 
unnecessary  to  any  of  the  purposes  of  his  present  ministry.  In 
this  view  it  was  well  calculated  to  check  the  inquisitiveness  of  his 

1  Cor.  v.  5.  2  Luke  ii.  52.  3  Mark  xiii.  4. 

4  Mark  xiii.  35.  5  Acts  i.  7. 


THE   PERSON   OF   CHRIST.  195 

disciples  into  this  matter  which  it  was  not  the  will  of  God  that 
they  should  know,  for  him  to  inform  them,  that  though  the  infinite 
stores  of  his  Father's  knowledge  were  ever  accessible  to  him,  he 
had  not  chosen,  in  his  distinct  character,  in  which  he  revealed  the 
counsels  of  God  to  them,  to  inquire  into  the  matter,  and  could  not, 
therefore,  communicate  to  them  the  knowledge  which  their  unpro- 
fitable curiosity  led  them  to  desire. 

Some  have  thought  it  a  more  satisfactory  solution  of  the  diffi- 
culty to  take  the  word  know  in  the  sense  to  make  known.  This 
sense  it  is  alleged  to  have  in  1  Cor.  ii.  2 ;  but  this  may  be  doubted. 
It  seems  more  proper  to  regard  the  language  as  a  common 
rhetorical  figure,  according  to  which  the  cause  is  put  for  the  effect. 
So  David  said,  "  I  was  dumb  ;"x  meaning,  "  I  was  as  silent  as  if  I 
had  been  dumb."  So  Paul  determined,  in  his  ministry  among  the 
Corinthians,  to  be  as  though  he  knew  nothing  but  Christ  crucified. 
In  the  same  manner,  the  words  of  Christ  may  be  interpreted  as  if 
he  had  said,  "  Your  inquiries  into  the  precise  time  of  my  coming 
will  all  be  in  vain.  No  source  of  information  will  be  available,  to 
give  you  this  knowledge.  As  to  the  effect,  it  will  be  to  you  as  if 
the  knowledge  were  possessed  by  none  but  the  Father ;  who  will 
make  it  known,  not  by  the  ministry  of  men,  angels,  or  his  Son ; 
but  by  his  own  hand,  in  the  execution  of  his  purpose." 

The  two  views  of  this  passage  which  have  been  presented,  differ 
somewhat  from  each  other  ;  but  the  inquirer  is  not  bound  to  decide 
on  their  comparative  merit,  or  to  accept  either  as  unquestionably 
correct.  A  perfect  understanding  of  every  difficult  text,  though 
desirable,  is  not  indispensable  to  the  exercise  of  piety. 

Obj.  5.  Jesus  Christ  is  called  "  the  beginning  of  the  creation 
of  God;"  and  "the  firstborn  of  every  creature."  These  passages, 
while  they  attribute  a  high  character  to  him,  nevertheless  speak 
of  him  as  a  creature. 

Rev.  iii.  14.  "The  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God."  This 
text  may  be  explained  by  others  in  the  same  book :  Rev.  i.  8 ; 
xxi.  6  ;  xxii.  13.  When  Jesus  Christ  is  called  "  the  beginning  and 
the  end,  the  first  and  the  last,"  we  are  not  to  understand  that  he 
was  created  before  other  creatures,  and  that  other  creatures  will 
be  annihilated,  leaving  him  to  survive  them.     The  sense  is,  that 

1  Ps.  xxxix.  9. 


19t)  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING   JESUS    CHRIST. 

all  things  are  from  him  and  to  him  ;  or,  as  Paul  says,  "  All  things 
were  created  by  him  and  for  him."1  He  is  the  original  and  the  first 
cause  of  all  things.  His  being  the  beginning,  is  explained  "  He 
is  before  all  things."  In  this  sense  he  is  the  beginning  of  the 
creation  of  God,  L  e.  its  original  cause. 

Col  i.  15.  "  The  first  born  of  every  creature."  The  clause  "  first 
bor.n  of  every  creature,"  may  be  grammatically  construed  in  two 
different  ways.  The  genitive  "of  every  creature"  may  be  gov- 
erned by  the  word  "  first  born,"  as  a  noun  ;  or  by  the  word  "  first," 
as  an  adjective  of  the  superlative  degree  in  composition.  The 
objection  assumes  that  the  last  of  these  is  the  true  construction. 
Having  decided  on  this,  it  then  infers  that  Christ  is  one  of  the 
creatures,  because  the  superlative  degree  usually  compares  one 
thing  of  a  group  with  the  rest  of  that  group.  But  this  usage  of 
the  superlative,  though  general,  is  not  invariable :  for  this  same 
word  "first"  is  twice  used  in  the  first  chapter  of  John,2  where  the 
comparison  is  of  a  different  kind,  and  our  translators  have,  on  this 
account,  rendered  the  word  as  if  it  had  been  in  the  comparative, 
instead  of  the  superlative  degree :  "  He  was  before  me."  In  proof 
that  Paul  did  not  design  to  group  Christ  with  the  creatures,  as 
one  of  them,  the  following  arguments  may  be  adduced.  The 
descriptive  terms  employed  do  not  accord  with  this  supposition. 
To  make  him  one  of  the  group,  Christ  should  have  been  called  the 
first  created  of  all  creatures,  or  the  first  born  of  all  born :  but  the 
distinction  between  being  born  and  being  created,  excludes  him 
from  the  group  of  creatures. 

2.  There  is  a  further  incongruity  in  the  use  of  the  word 
"every."  We  could  not  say,  Solomon  was  the  wisest  of  every 
man.  Yet  the  objection  makes  Paul  use  this  mode  of  speech.  It 
is  true  that  this  incongruity  may  be  in  part  removed  by  translating 
the  clause  thus  :  "  the  first  born  of  all  creation."  But  even  this 
would  not  naturally  express  the  idea  supposed  to  be  intended.  A 
plural  noun  is  needed,  to  denote  the  group  of  which  Christ  is  sup- 
posed to  be  one  of  the  constituent  parts. 

3.  The  context  proves  that  Paul  did  not  design  to  compare 
Christ  with  created  things,  as  one  of  the  number.  He  says,  "  All 
things  were  created  by  him  and  for  him ;  and  he  is  before  all 

1  Col.  i.  16.  2  John  i.  15,  30. 


THE    PERSON    OF   CHRIST.  197 

things,  and  by  him  all  things  consist."1  This  language  clear Ij 
excludes  him  from  the  number  of  created  things. 

If  we  admit  that  the  genitive  is  governed  by  the  adjective,  the 
arguments  adduced  should  satisfy  us  that  the  adjective  must  be 
understood,  as  in  the  places  referred  to  in  the  first  chapter  of 
John.  But  the  construction,  which  takes  the  genitive  to  be  gov- 
erned by  the  noun,  is  preferable.  According  to  this,  we  may 
translate  the  clause,  "the  whole  creation's  first  born."  God  said, 
"I  will  make  him  my  first  born,  higher  than  the  kings  of  the 
earth."2  The  term  "first  born"  here  denotes  superiority  of  dig- 
nity, in  comparison  with  the  kings  of  the  earth.  To  the  first  born 
belonged,  not  only  superior  dignity,  but  superior  right  of  inherit- 
ance. Christ,  as  the  Son,  was  appointed  "heir  of  all  things."3 
In  respect  both  of  dignity  and  inheritance,  he  is  "  the  creation's 
first  born,"  the  king  and  heir  of  the  whole  creation. 

From  the  fact  that  the  same  Greek  word  is  used  in  v.  18,  some 
have  supposed  that  this  verse  is  explanatory  of  the  former,  and 
that  Christ  is  the  first  born  of  every  creature,  because  he  is  the 
first  born  from  the  dead.  Others,  by  accenting  the  Greek  word  in 
v.  15  on  a  different  syllable,  make  it  to  signify  "first  begetter," 
or  "first  producer." 

Some,  who  admit  the  proper  deity  of  Christ,  suppose  that  his 
human  soul  was  created  before  all  other  creatures,  and  continued 
without  a  human  body  until  the  incarnation  in  the  womb  of  the 
virgin.  But,  according  to  this  opinion,  Christ  was  not  "  made 
like  his  brethren."  Moreover,  as  that  human  soul,  being  a  crea- 
ture, must  have  been  under  law  to  God  from  the  beginning  of  its 
existence,  it  was  not  true  that  he  was  made  under  the  law,  when 
he  was  made  of  a  woman,  as  is  taught  in  Gal.  iv.  4.  We  have 
seen  that  the  texts  do  not  require  such  a  hypothesis  to  explain 
them. 

Obj.  6.  Jesus,  in  John  x.  35,  36,  explained  his  use  of  the  phrase, 
"Son  of  God,"  as  not  implying  proper  deity.  "If  he  called 
them  gods  unto  whom  the  word  of  God  came,  and  the  Scripture 
cannot  be  broken ;  say  ye  of  him  whom  the  Father  hath  sanctified 
and  sent  into  the  world,  Thou  blasphemest ;  because  I  said,  I  am 
the  Son  of  God?" 

1  Col   I  16,  17.  2  Ps.  lxxxix.  27.  3  Heb.  i.  2. 


193      DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  JESUS  CHRIST. 

As  this  objection  opposes  a  very  strong  argument  for  the  divinity 
of  Christ,  it  will  be  proper  to  give  it  a  careful  examination. 

In  examining  the  tenth  chapter  of  John,  in  which  these  words 
are  found,  we  may  observe  the  following  facts : 

1.  The  claim  to  be  the  Christ  was  not  that  on  which  the  charge 
of  blasphemy  was  founded. 

While  Jesus  was  walking  in  Solomon's  porch,  the  Jews  gathered 
round  him,  and  asked,  "  How  long  makell  thou  us  to  doubt  ?  If 
thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly."  They  had  asked  John  the  Bap- 
tist, "  Art  thou  the  Christ?"  The  Jews  were  in  expectation  that 
their  Messiah  would  make  his  appearance  about  this  time ;  and, 
from  the  manner  in  which  these  questions  were  proposed,  it  is 
plain  that  the  claim  to  be  the  Christ  could  not  necessarily  be  blas- 
phemous. It  only  needed  to  be  sustained  by  proper  proof,  and 
the  proposing  of  the  question  intimated  a  readiness  to  admit  the 
claim.  Jesus  did  not  directly  answer  their  question,  but  charged 
them  with  rejecting  the  testimony  which  he  -had  previously  given 
concerning  himself,  and  the  proofs  which  he  had  adduced.  All 
this  they  bore,  without  charging  him  with  blasphemy. 

2.  The  charge  of  blasphemy  was  founded  on  the  claim  to  be  the 
Son  of  God. 

This  point  is  clear  from  the  words  of  Christ,  "  Say  ye,  Thou 
blasphemest,  because  I  said,  I  am  the  Son  of  God?"  He  had 
spoken  of  God  as  his  Father  in  a  peculiar  relation,  according  to 
which  he  could  say,  "  I  and  my  Father  are  one."  This  was  said 
after  such  declarations  concerning  the  power  by  which  his  sheep 
were  kept,  as  represented  himself  omnipotent  as  well  as  his  Father. 
His  oneness  with  the  Father  was,  therefore,  such  a  unity  as  im- 
plied his  possession  of  divine  attributes.  So  the  Jews  understood 
him;  and  this  they  distinctly  declared  to  be  the  ground  of  their 
charge  :  "For  a  good  work  we  stone  thee  not,  but  for  blasphemy ; 
because  thou  being  a  man,  makest  thyself  God."  On  a  former 
occasion  they  had  made  out  the  same  charge  against  him  on  the 
same  ground.  He  had  spoken  of  God  as  his  father  in  a  peculiar 
sense,  which  implied  co-operation  with  the  Father,  beyond  what 
a  mere  creature  could  claim ;  and  they  who  heard  him,  under- 
standing the  high  claim  which  he  set  up,  charged  him  with  blas- 
phemy, because  "  he  called  God  his  Father,  making  himself  equal 


THE  PERSON  OF  CHRIST.  199 

with  God."1  It  was  precisely  on  this  ground  that  he  was  reported 
to  Pilate,  by  the  Jewish  Sanhedrim,  as  worthy  of  death  :  "  By  oui 
law,  he  ought  to  die,  because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  God."2 
They  also  reported  to  Pilate  that  "  he  made  himself  Christ  a 
king ;"  but  they  do  not  say  that  for  so  doing  he  deserved  to  die 
by  their  law.  They  said,  "  Whosoever  maketh  himself  a  king 
speaketh  against  Cassar."3  This  was  an  offence  of  which  the 
Roman  law  might  take  cognisance,  and  which  Pilate  might  judge  ; 
but  the  other  offence  was  a  sin  of  which  the  Roman  law  would 
take  no  cognisance.  The  charge  of  blasphemy  was  investigated 
by  the  Jewish  court,  and  was  not  made  out  on  the  claim  to  be 
"  Christ  a  king." 

3.  Jesus  knew  that  the  charge  of  blasphemy  would  be  left  with- 
out foundation,  if  he  should  explain  that,  in  claiming  divine  Son- 
ship,  he  did  not  mean  to  claim  divine  attributes  or*honors. 

The  charge  of  blasphemy  was,  for  making  himself  God,  and 
equal  with  God.  Now,  the  Jews  called  God  their  Father ;  and 
believers  and  angels  are  called  sons  of  God.  To  claim  sonship  in 
this  sense  could  not  be  blasphemy.  Jesus  knew  all  this,  and 
showed  himself  able  to  avail  himself  of  the  plea  which  might  be 
based  on  this  distinction.  He  referred  to  the  Scripture  use  of  the 
term  "  gods,"  in  its  application  to  Hebrew  magistrates ;  and  showed 
clearly,  that,  if  the  words  which  he  had  used  were  to  be  justified 
by  availing  himself  of  this  distinction,  he  understood  well  how  to 
do  it. 

4.  Jesus  did  not  plead,  that  in  making  himself  the  Son  of  God, 
he  did  not  intend  to  claim  divine  attributes  or  honors. 

What  has  been  supposed  to  imply  this,  is  merely  a  question, 
which  affirms  nothing :  "  Say  ye  ?"  In  this  aspect,  it  is  like  the 
question  proposed  to  the  young  ruler :  "  Why  callest  thou  me 
good  ?"  Jesus  was  not  now  on  trial  before  a  regular  court,  but 
was  addressed  by  a  company  of  malignant  and  captious  men,  to 
whom  he  did  not  feel  bound  to  give  answers  and  explanations  at 
their  demand.  When  they  asked  to  know  plainly,  whether  he  was 
the  Christ,  instead  of  answering  them,  he  charged  them  with 
rejecting  the  testimony  and  proofs  which  he  had  already  given,  and 
with  murderous  intentions  towards  him.     So,  when  they  state  their 

1  John  v.  17,  18.  2  John  xix.  7.  3  John  xix.  12. 


200  DOCTRINE    CONCERNING   JESUS   CHRIST. 

charge  of  blasphemy,  he  charged  them  with  inconsistency  in  making 
it  out.  They  were  desirous  to  condemn  him.  When  he  was  finally 
delivered  to  the  Roman  governor,  "  Pilate  knew  that  the  chief 
priests  had  for  envy  delivered  him  to  them."1  Jesus,  who  knew 
what  was  in  man,  fully  understood  that  their  pretended  jealousy 
for  the  divine  honor,  was  hypocritical.  Some  of  them,  as  members 
of  the  great  council,  could  readily  have  found  Scripture  for  being 
themselves  styled  "  Gods,"  yet  they  would  give  no  patient  attention 
to  the  proofs  which  Jesus  offered,  to  sustain  his  claim  to  the  dignity 
he  assumed. 

5.  Instead  of  leaving  the  matter  to  rest  on  the  plea  which  these 
words  have  been  supposed  to  imply,  Jesus  reasserted  his  intimate 
union  with  the  Father :  "  That  ye  may  know  and  believe  that  the 
Father  is  in  me,  and  I  in  him."2  After  this,  it  is  added,  "therefore 
they  sought  again  to  take  him."  It  is  manifest  that  the  Jews  did 
not  understand  him  to  retract  the  claim  which  had  given  them 
offence. 

The  Jewish  magistrates,  though  called  gods,  in  a  subordinate 
sense  of  the  term,  had  nothing  of  that  intimate  union  with  the 
Father  which  Jesus  claimed.  They  were,  after  all,  mortal  men. 
"  I  have  said  ye  are  gods,  and  all  of  you  are  children  of  the  Most 
High ;  but  ye  shall  die  like  men."3  But  concerning  himself,  Jesus 
had  said :  "  As  the  Father  hath  life  in  himself,  so  hath  he  given  to 
the  Son  to  have  life  in  himself."4  "  The  Son  quickeneth  whom  he 
will."5  "  The  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God."6  The 
Father  hath  committed  all  judgment  to  the  Son."7  "I  and  my 
Father  are  one."8  If,  after  making  these  high  claims,  Jesus  had 
quailed  before  his  enemies,  and  sought  shelter  in  likening  himself 
to  mortal  judges,  called  gods,  he  would  not  have  closed  his  address 
by  re-asserting  that  which  had  given  them  offence.  "  Believe  me, 
that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  me." 

We  should  remember  that  Jesus  was  not  now  on  trial.  These 
words  were  not  spoken  before  the  Sanhedrim,  where  the  plea  which 
they  are  supposed  to  contain,  was  needed,  if  needed  at  all.  When 
formally  arraigned  before  that  tribunal,  Jesus  did  not  object  to 

1  Matt,  xxvii.  18.  2  John  x.  38.  3  Ps.  lxxxii.  6  7. 

4  John  v.  26.  5  John  v.  21.  6  John  v.  25. 

7  John  v.  22.  8  John  x.  30. 


THE   PERSON    OF   CHRIST.  201 

their  jurisdiction,  nor  to  the  oath  administered  by  the  high  priest. 
He  answered  directly  and  plainly  the  question  which  the  high 
priest  propounded,  though  he  knew  well  that  the  answer  which  he 
gave  would,  in  the  judgment  of  the  court,  convict  him  of  blasphemy. 
Where  now  is  the  plea  which  he  is  supposed  to  have  made  on  the 
former  occasion  ?  He  then  understood  its  bearing  on  the  point. 
Has  he  forgotten  it  now  ?  The  plea  urged  on  a  former  occasion, 
at  a  different  place,  to  a  different  company,  when  not  on  trial,  and 
not  on  oath,  cannot  avail  now,  unless  repeated  in  due  form.  Besides, 
when  before  made,  if  made  at  all,  it  was  obscure,  and  hidden  under 
the  form  of  a  question.  It  is  now  needed  in  plainness  and  by 
direct  affirmation.  But  Jesus  does  not  produce  the  plea.  Let 
those  who  urge  the  objection  we  are  considering,  account  for  his 
silence. 

Section  III.— UNION  OF  NATURES. 

The  two  natures  op  Jesus  Christ,  the  divine  and  the 
human,  are  united  in  one  person.1 

The  name  Son  of  God,  properly  denotes  his  divine  nature  ;  and 
the  name  Son  of  Man,  his  human  nature.  He  frequently  called 
himself  the  Son  of  God ;  more  frequently,  the  Son  of  Man.  Both 
these  names  were  used  as  denoting  one  and  the  same  person.  The 
whole  use  of  them  indicates  this ;  but  there  are  some  passages 
which  show  it  more  clearly  than  others.  After  speaking  of  himself 
as  the  Son  of  God,  he  says  the  Father  hath  given  him  authority  to 
execute  judgment,  because  he  is  the  son  of  man.2  Here  the  same 
person  is  manifestly  called  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  Son  of  Man. 
In  other  cases,  attributes  or  works  which  belong  to  one  nature,  are 
ascribed  to  his  person,  denoted  by  the  name  which  is  derived  from 
the  other  nature.  "  No  man  hath  ascended  up  to  Heaven,  but  he 
that  came  down  from  Heaven,  even  the  Son  of  Man,  which  is  in 
Heaven."3  Here  he  is  named  from  his  human  nature,  the  Son  of 
Man ;  while  omnipresence  is  ascribed  to  him,  which  belongs  to  his 
divine  nature.  Another  example  of  like  kind  is,  "  The  Son  of 
Man  is  Lord  also  of  the  Sabbath."4     The  superiority  to  the  Sab- 

1  John  iii.  13  ;  Rom.  i.  4;  ix.  5 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  8 ;  Matt.  i.  23. 

2  John  v.  27.  s  John  iii.  13.  4  Mark  ii.  28. 


202  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   JESUS   CHRIST. 

bath  belongs  to  his  divine  nature,  but  the  name  by  which  he  is 
designated  belongs  to  the  human.  On  the  other  hand,  he  is  called 
God,  and  the  Lord  of  Glory,  when  his  blood  and  his  crucifixion, 
things  pertaining  to  his  human  flesh,  are  the  subjects  of  discourse. 
"They  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  Glory."1  "The 
Church  of  God,  which  he  hath  purchased  with  his  own  blood."2 

How  two  natures  so  widely  different,  should  be  so  united,  we 
cannot  understand.  In  the  union  of  the  body  and  soul  of  man  in 
one  person,  there  is  a  similar  fact  which  we  are  unable  to  compre- 
hend ;  but  if  we  should  disbelieve  it,  we  should  reject  the  testimony 
of  our  own  consciousness.  We  have,  therefore,  no  plea  for  rejecting 
the  doctrine  now  before  us,  on  the  ground  of  its  mysteriousness. 

The  union  of  the  two  natures  does  not  confound  the  properties 
peculiar  to  each.  The  humanity  is  not  deified,  nor  the  divinity 
humanized.  So,  the  body  of  man  does  not  become  spirit,  by  its 
union  with  the  soul ;  nor  does  the  soul  become  matter,  by  its  union 
with  the  body. 

The  union  of  Christ's  divinity  with  his  humanity,  is  a  different 
thing  from  the  indwelling  of  the  Godhead  in  him.  The  Holy  Ghost 
dwells  in  believers,  so  that  their  bodies  are  called  his  temple,  but 
this  union  does  not  constitute  them  one  person.  So,  though  Jesus 
said,  "  The  Father  is  in  me,  and  I  in  him,"  he  addressed  his  Father, 
and  spoke  of  him,  as  a  distinct  person.  The  same  is  true  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  which  dwelt  in  him,  being  given  to  him  without 
measure. 

The  personal  union  is  more  than  a  mere  manifestation  of  the 
divine  nature  through  the  human.  God  manifests  himself  in  the 
works  of  creation.  But  this  manifestation  is  not  a  personal  union ; 
otherwise,  the  universe  must  be  God. 

This  union  is  indissoluble.  Jesus  will  ever  be  the  Lamb  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne,3  and  will  for  ever  appear,  in  his  glorified 
humanity,  to  the  worshipping  saints,  who,  with  adoring  praise,  will 
for  ever  sing,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  to  receive  power 
and  riches,  and  wisdom  and  strength,  and  honor  and  glory  and 
blessing."4 


1 1  Cor.  ii.  8.  2  Acts  xx.  28. 

8  Rev.  vii.  17.  4  Rev.  v.  12. 


STATES    OF   CHRIST.  203 


CHAPTER  II. 

STATES    OP     CHRIST. 
Section  I.— ORIGINAL  GLORY. 

Before  his  incarnation,  the  Son  of  God  was  in  intimate 
communion  of  glory  and  blessedness  with  the  father.1 

The  existence  of  Christ,  previous  to  his  appearing  in  the  world, 
is  proved  by  passages  of  Scripture,  that  do  not  expressly  declare 
his  divinity. 

If  we  had  no  further  teaching  on  the  subject,  we  might  suppose 
that  he  was  a  created  spirit,  had  enjoyed  honor  and  happiness  in 
the  presence  of  God,  and  had  consented  to  appear,  in  obedience  to 
the  will  of  God,  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  the  proofs 
which  have  been  adduced  from  other  parts  of  Scripture,  clearly 
show  that  this  pre-existent  spirit  was  God,  and  not  a  creature. 

Several  names  are  ascribed  to  the  pre-existent  divinity  of  Jesus 
Christ.  John  calls  him  the  Word  of  God.2  He  is  more  frequently 
called  the  Son  of  God.  Various  passages  speak  of  him  as  the  Son 
of  God,  antecedent  to  his  coming  into  the  world.  He  is  called  the 
Angel  of  the  Lord,  the  Angel  of  the  Lord's  presence,  the  Angel 
of  the  Covenant,  the  Captain  of  the  Lord's  hosts.  It  is  also 
supposed  that  he  is  intended  to  be  designated,  in  the  8th  chapter 
of  Proverbs,  by  the  name  Wisdom. 

To  ascertain  the  precise  import  of  these  several  names,  is 
attended  with  difficulty.  He  appears  to  be  called  the  Angel  or 
Messenger,  because  he  is  sent  to  make  known,  or  to  execute,  the 
will  of  God.  He  is  probably  called  the  Word  of  God,  because  he 
is  the  medium  through  which  the  mind  of  God  is  made  known. 
Why  he  is  called  the  Son  of  God,  is  a  question  on  which  divines 

1  John  i.  15,  30 ;  iii.  13,  17,  31 ;  vi.  38  ;  viii.  58  ;  xvii.  5  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  47 ;  Gen. 
xviii. ;  xxh.  15  ;  xxxii.  30 ;  Ex.  iii. ;  xx. ;  Acts  vii.  30,  35,  38  ;  John  i.  3  ;  Col.  i. 
16 ;  Heb.  i.  2,  10;  Mic.  v.  2 ;'  John  viii.  58 ;  Heb.  i.  8 ;  xiii.  8 ;  Rev.  i.  8,  18. 

2  John  i.  1. 


204  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

have  differed.  His  miraculous  conception,  his  mediatorial  office, 
his  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  his  investiture  with  supreme 
dominion,  have  been  severally  assigned,  as  the  reason  of  the  title ; 
but  these  appear  rather  to  declare  him  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  or  to 
belong  to  him  because  of  that  relation,  than  to  constitute  it.  The 
phrases  first-born,  first-begotten,  only-begotten,  seem  to  refer  to 
the  true  ground  of  the  name,  Son  of  God  :  but  what  these  signify, 
it  is  probably  impossible  for  us  to  understand.  The  ideas  of 
peculiar  endearment,  dignity,  and  heirship,  which  are  attached  to 
these  terms,  as  used  among  men,  may  be  supposed  to  belong  to 
them,  as  applied  to  the  Son  of  God ;  but  all  gross  conceptions  of 
their  import,  as  if  they  were  designed  to  convey  to  our  minds  the 
idea  of  derived  existence,  and  the  mode  of  that  derivation,  ought 
to  be  discarded  as  inconsistent  with  the  perfection  of  Godhead. 
Some  have  considered  the  titles  Christ,  and  Son  of  God,  as  equal 
and  convertible ;  but  the  distinction  in  the  use  of  them,  as  pointed 
out  in  our  examination  of  the  charges  brought  against  the  Re- 
deemer, shows  the  error  of  this  opinion.  When  Saul  at  Damascus,1 
and  Apollos  in  Achaia,2  preached  to  the  Jews  that  Jesus  was  the 
Christ,  the  aim  was  to  convince  them  that  Jesus  was  the  Messiah, 
long  expected  by  their  nation.  But  when  Saul  preached  "  Christ, 
that  he  is  the  Son  of  God,"3  and  when  the  eunuch  professed  his 
faith,  "I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,"4  more  than 
the  mere  messiahship  of  Jesus  is  manifestly  intended.  Christ  or 
Messiah  is  a  title  of  office:  but  the  phrase  "  Son  of  God,"  denotes, 
not  the  mere  office,  but  the  exalted  nature  which  qualified  for  it. 

The  possession  of  proper  deity  is  alone  sufficient  to  show  that  the 
Son  of  God  was  glorious  and  happy  eternally ;  but  we  may  learn 
the  same  truth  from  the  language  of  Scripture  directly  referring 
to  this  subject.  "  And  now,  0  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thine 
own  self,  with  the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee,  before  the  world 
was."5  "For  ye  know  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that 
though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he  became  poor,  that  ye 
through  his  poverty  might  be  rich."6  "  Then  I  was  by  him,  as  one 
brought  up  with  him ;  and  I  was  daily  his  delight,  rejoicing  always 


1  Acts  ix.  22.  2  Acts  xviii.  28.  3  Acts  ix.  20. 

4  Acts  viii.  37.  5  John  xvii.  5.  6  2  Cor.  viii.  9. 


STATES    OF   CHRIST.  205 

before  him."1  "Who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not 
robbery  to  be  equal  with  God."2  "  The  only  begotten  Son,  which 
is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father."3  The  full  communion  of  the  Son 
with  the  Father,  in  all  the  glory  and  blessedness  of  the  Godhead, 
is  to  be  inferred  from  these  passages. 

Section   II.— HUMILIATION. 

The  Son  of  God  assumed  human  nature,  and  in  that  nature 
lived  a  life  of  toil  and  sorrow,  and  died  an  ignominious  and 
painful  death.4 

The  full  history  of  this  wonderful  humiliation,  is  given  by  the 
four  Evangelists ;  and  is  often  referred  to  in  the  New  Testament, 
and  sometimes  in  the  prophetic  declarations  of  the  Old. 

In  contemplating  this  mystery  of  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh," 
we  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  divine  nature  underwent  any  real 
change.  God  cannot  cease  to  be  God.  The  change  was  in  the 
manifestation,  and  not  in  the  nature.  In  this  manifestation,  even 
the  angels  were  concerned,  for  it  is  a  part  of  the  mystery  that 
"  God  manifest  in  the  flesh"  was  "seen  of  angels;"5  but  so  won- 
derful was  this  new  mode  of  manifestation,  that  the  angels  could 
not  readily  know  their  God,  in  this  humble  form,  as  the  babe  of 
Bethlehem,  and  the  man  of  sorrows.  Hence,  they  needed  a  special 
command  from  the  eternal  throne,  before  they  could  render  him 
divine  worship :  "  When  he  bringeth  the  first-begotten  into  the 
world,  he  saith,  '  Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him.'  "6  But 
this  fact,  it  may  be  objected,  shows  it  to  have  been  a  concealment, 
rather  than  a  manifestation.  This,  to  some  extent,  is  true ;  but  it 
is  a  concealment  resembling  that  by  which  God  showed  himself  to 
Moses  in  the  cleft  of  the  rock,  concealing  the  beams  of  insufferable 
brightness,  that  the  favored  servant  might  see  the  back  parts  of 
his  glory.  So  the  angels,  while  they  behold  the  Godhead  veiled 
in  human  nature,  obtain  views  of  the  divine  glory,  which  would 
otherwise  have  been  impossible.  These  are  the  things  "into  which 
the  angels  desire  to  look."7     "Unto  the  principalities  and  powers 


1  Prov.  viii.  30.  .         2  Phil.  ii.  6.  3  John  i.  18. 

*  2  Cor.  viii.  9.  6  1  Tim.  in.  16.  6  Heb.  i.  6. 

7 1  Pet.  i.  12. 


206  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

in  heavenly  places,  might  be  known  by  the  Church." — by  the 
redemption  and  salvation  of  the  Church,  through  the  humiliation 
and  death  of  Christ, — "the  manifold  wisdom  of  God."1 

The  lowest  point  of  Christ's  humiliation,  was  his  death  by  cru- 
cifixion, and  his  being  held  for  a  time  under  the  power  of  death, 
as  a  prisoner  in  the  grave.  Some  have  thought  that  he  descended 
into  hell ;  but  this  opinion  has  arisen  from  misinterpretation  of  the 
Scripture,  "It  was  said,  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell:"2 
but  the  word  "hell"  signifies  in  this  place,  as  it  does  in  many 
others,  the  unseen  world,  or  the  state  of  departed  spirits.  When 
it  is  said,  "  He  went  and  preached  unto  the  spirits  in  prison,"3  the 
meaning  is,  that  he,  by  his  spirit,  in  the  ministry  of  Noah,  who 
was  a  preacher  of  righteousness,  preached  to  the  antediluvians, 
who,  being  disobedient,  and  rejecting  the  ministry,  were  swept 
away  by  the  flood,  and  were,  when  these  words  were  penned, 
spirits  in  prison. 

The  glorious  benefits  resulting  to  us  from  the  deep  humiliation 
of  Christ,  are  intimated  in  the  words  of  Paul :  "  that  ye  through 
his  poverty  might  be  rich."4  The  extent  of  the  riches  which  we 
shall  acquire  by  his  poverty,  eternity  must  disclose. 

Section  III.  — EX  ALT  AT  10  N. 

The  Son  of  God,  in  human  nature,  was  raised  from  the 
dead,  ascended  to  heaven,  and  was  invested  with  supreme 
dominion  over  all  creatures.5 

The  facts  of  Christ's  exaltation,  like  those  of  his  humiliation, 
are  related  in  the  Scripture  narrative,  and  referred  to  in  various 
parts  of  the  sacred  volume. 

The  exaltation,  like  the  humiliation,  produced  no  real  change 
in  his  divine  nature.  It  affected  the  manifestation  of  it,  and  also 
wrought  a  real  change  in  the  condition  of  the  human  nature. 
This  nature  is  now  perfectly  happy.  Jesus  has  received  the  joy 
that  was  set  before  him  ;6  and  saints,  who  are  to  be  happy  with 

1  Eph.  iii.  10.  2  Ps.  xvi.  10.  3  1  Pet.  iii.  19. 

4  2  Cor.  viii.  9. 

5  Matt,  xxviii.;  Mark  xvi.;  Luke  xxiv. ;  John  xx.;  Acts  i.  11 ;  vii.  56 ;  is.  4; 
1  Cor.  xv.  4-8 ;  Phil.  ii.  9,  10,  11. 

6IIeb.  xii.  2. 


OFFICES    OF    CHRIST.  207 

him  for  ever,  are  said  to  "enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord."1 
On  this  nature  rests,  also,  the  full  glory  of  the  Godhead,  "the 
glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."2  As  through  him 
the  brightest  manifestations  of  the  divine  glory  are  made  to 
intelligent  creatures,  so  through  him  they  receive  the  commands 
of  supreme  authority.  "  He  is  head  of  principalities  and  powers." 
"  He  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and  set  him  at  his  own  right  hand 
in  the  heavenly  places,  far  above  all  principalities  and  powers,  and 
might  and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named,  not  only  in 
this  world,  but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come."3 

The  glory  to  which  Christ  has  been  exalted,  is  not  a  subject  of 
idle  speculation,  in  which  we  have  no  interest.  In  his  address  to 
his  Father,  he  said,  in  allusion  to  his  disciples,  "  The  glory  which 
thou  hast  given  me,  I  have  given  them."4  Hence,  while  we  suffer 
with  Christ,5  and  for  Christ,  in  this  world,  we  may  rejoice  in  the 
hope  of  being  glorified  with  him. 


CHAPTER  III. 

offices  of  christ. 

Jesus  Christ  is  the  mediator  between  God  and  men.6 
A  mediator  is  a  middle  person  between  two  parties.  The  term 
is  especially  applied  to  one  who  interposes  between  parties  at  vari- 
ance, with  a  view  to  effect  a  reconciliation.  Men  are  under  the 
displeasure  of  God,  on  account  of  their  sins,  and  are  in  rebellion 
against  him,  and  enemies  in  mind  by  wicked  works.  Christ  ap- 
pears as  mediator,  to  effect  a  reconciliation. 

The  duty  of  a  mediator  differs,  according  to  the  relation  of  the 
parties.  When  the  variance  between  them  arises  wholly  from 
misunderstanding,  an  explanation  is  all  that  is  necessary  to  effect 
a  reconciliation.     In  this  case  a  mediator  is  simply  an  interpreter. 

1  Matt.  xxv.  21.  2  2  Cor.  iv.  6.  3  Eph.  i.  20,  21. 

4  John  xvii.  22.  5  Rom.  viii.  17. 

6 1  Tim.  ii.  5  ;  2  Cor.  v.  18 ;  Col.  i.  20 ;  1  John  ii.  1 ;  Gal.  i.  4 ;  iii.  13 ;  Tit. 
u.  14. 


208  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

When  an  offence  has  been  given,  hut  such  a  one  as  may  be  par- 
doned on  mere  entreaty,  the  mediator  becomes  an  intercessor.  But 
when  the  circumstances  are  such  as  to  require  satisfaction  for  the 
offence,  the  mediator  must  render  that  satisfaction  or  become  surety 
for  the  offender.  On  God's  part,  as  he  has  committed  no  wrong, 
nothing  more  is  required  than  an  Interpreter,1  to  show  to  man  his 
uprightness.  But,  on  the  part  of  guilty  man,  it  is  necessary  that 
the  Mediator  should  be  both  Intercessor  and  Surety. 

The  union  of  two  natures  in  Christ  qualifies  him  for  the  work 
of  mediation.  As  man,  he  sympathizes  with  us,  is  accessible, 
both  when  we  desire  to  present  petitions  and  to  receive  instruction  ; 
and  he  is  capable  of  standing  as  our  substitute  or  surety,  and  of 
making  the  requisite  satisfaction  to  divine  justice.  As  God,  he 
understands  fully  the  claims  against  us,  has  ready  access  to  the 
offended  Sovereign,  has  all  the  knowledge  which  it  can  be  necessary 
to  communicate  to  us,  and  can  give  dignity  and  value  to  the  satis- 
faction offered  in  our  behalf.  These  qualifications  are  found  in 
no  other  person,  and  accordingly  "  There  is  none  other  name  under 
heaven,  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved."2 

In  the  one  office  of  Mediator  three  offices  are  included,  which 
need  separate  consideration :  those  of  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King. 


Section   I.  —  PROPHET. 

Jesus  Christ,  as  Prophet,  makes  revelation  from  God  to 

MEN.3 

Among  the  revelations  made  by  prophets,  the  foretelling  of 
future  events  has  held  a  conspicuous  place :  but  this  does  not 
constitute  the  whole  of  the  office.  The  word  prophesy  does  not 
always  refer  to  future  events,  as  is  apparent  from  an  incident  in  the 
injurious  treatment  which  our  Redeemer  received  at  his  trial. 
When  blindfolded  he  was  struck  by  one  of  the  attendants,  who 
contemptuously  demanded,  "  Prophesy  who  is  he  that  smote  thee."4 
From  this  example  we  learn  that  the  term  was  not  exclusively  used 

1  Job  xxxiii.  23.  2  Acts  iv.  12. 

3  Isaiah  lxi.  1 ;  Luke  iv.  18,  23  ;  Heb.  ii.  3 ;  1  Pet,  i.  11 ;  Deut.  xviii.  18 ; 
J}hn  iii.  34 ;  xvi.  1 ;  Rev.  i.  1. 

4  Matt.  xxvi.  68. 


OFFICES   OF   CHRIST.  201* 

for  the  foretelling  of  future  events,  but  was  applied  to  the  making 
of  any  declaration  which  required  superhuman  knowledge. 

Jesus  Christ,  as  a  Prophet,  was  superior  to  all  other  prophets. 
Moses  was  so  far  distinguished  above  the  rest,  that  it  was  said  no 
prophet  had  arisen  like  him  ;x  but  Moses  foretold  the  coming  of 
Jesus  Christ,  in  these  words :  "  The  Lord,  thy  God,  will  raise  up 
unto  thee,  a  prophet  from  the  midst  of  thee,  of  thy  brethren,  like 
unto  me;  unto  him  ye  shall  hearken,"2  Elijah  was  a  prophet, 
highly  distinguished  in  his  day,  and  was  translated  to  heaven, 
without  tasting  death:  but  Moses  and  Elijah  appeared  on  the 
mount  of  transfiguration,  to  lay  down  their  prophetical  office  and 
honors  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  when  the  voice  from  heaven  said, 
"  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear  ye  him."3  Moses  and  Elijah  were 
to  be  heard  in  their  day ;  but  the  voice  from  the  excellent  glory 
singled  out  Jesus  as  the  superior  prophet,  whose  instructions  we 
are  commanded  to  receive. 

Not  only  was  Christ  superior  to  the  prophets  of  the  former  dis- 
pensation, but  it  was  he  who  qualified  them  for  their  office,  and 
spoke  through  them."4  This  fact  accords  with  his  statement, 
"  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  :  the  only  begotten  Son  which 
is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared  him."5  He  is,  in 
this  view,  the  only  Prophet,  the  only  Revealer  of  the  mind  of 
God.  Before  his  personal  ministry  commenced,  he  made  revelation 
by  prophets  whom  he  inspired ;  during  his  ministry,  he  spoke  as 
one  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father ;  and  after  he  left  the  world,  he 
continued  to  make  revelation,  through  his  apostles  and  others,  to 
whom  he  gave  his  Spirit.  The  last  book  of  the  Bible  is  a  revela- 
tion which  he  gave  to  his  servant  John  ;6  and  the  whole  Bible  is 
now  to  us  as  the  word  of  Christ.  His  truth  he  still  uses,  as  the 
Prophet  of  the  Church,  instructing  his  people  into  the  knowledge 
of  God. 

God  has  sometimes  been  pleased  to  make  known  his  will  by  the 
ministry  of  angels;  but  the  prophets,  whom  he  ordinarily  em- 
ployed, were  men  of  like  passions  with  ourselves.  There  was 
peculiar  fitness,  as  well  as  condescending  kindness,  that  the  great 
Prophet  of  the  Church  should  be  one  in  our  own  nature.     Though 

1  Deut.  xxxiv.  10.  ?  Deut.  xviii.  15.  3  Matt.  xvii.  5. 

*  1  Pet.  i.  11.  5  Jolm  i  18.  e  Rev  i  1# 

14 


210  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

it  was  true,  "Never  man  spake  like  this  man,"1  it  was  still  true, 
that  he  spoke  with  the  voice  of  a  man ;  and,  instead  of  the  ter- 
rific thunders  heard  from  Sinai,  addressed  those  who  were  willing 
to  receive  his  instructions,  in  the  accents  of  tenderness,  as  an 
affectionate  friend.  But  such  affection  might  have  existed,  without 
the  knowledge  necessary  to  make  known  the  whole  mind  of  God. 
This  qualification  his  divine  nature  supplied.  Paul  asks,  on  one 
occasion,  "  Who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord  ?  and  who  hath 
been  his  counsellor  ?2  But,  it  had  been  predicted  of  Jesus,  that  he 
should  be  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor.3  He  was  the  wisdom  of 
God,  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  and  was  therefore  fully  quali- 
fied to  reveal  the  mind  and  counsel  of  God  to  men. 

At  the  feet  of  this  Prophet  let  us  sit,  that  we  may  learn  the 
knowledge  of  God.  With  Mary,  let  us  take  our  place  there,  leav- 
ing the  cumbering  cares  of  the  world,  and  opening  our  ears  and 
our  hearts  to  receive  his  heavenly  instructions.  Peter,  James,  and 
John,  who  saw  his  glorious  form  in  the  holy  mount,  when  the 
bright  vision  had  passed  away,  were  left  in  possession  of  the 
divine  command:  "  Hear  ye  him."  Let  us  take  this  direction  as 
the  guide  of  our  way,  until  we  shall  be  admitted  to  the  brighter 
vision  of  his  glory,  of  which  the  former  was  but  a  shadow. 


Section  II.— PRIEST. 

Jesus  Christ,  as  Priest,  made  an  efficacious  sacrifice  for 
the  sins  of  his  people,  intercedes  for  them  at  the  right 
HAND  OF  God,  and  blesses  them  with  all  spiritual  blessings.4 

A  prophet  approaches  men  with  revelations  from  God ;  but  a 
priest  approaches  God  in  behalf  of  men.  His  chief  business  is  to 
offer  sacrifice,  and  make  intercession.  Priests  have  existed  in  the 
various  religions  of  the  heathen  world ;  but  in  the  forms  of  worship 
instituted  by  divine  authority  for  the  observance  of  the  Hebrew 
nation,  we  find  the  most  instructive  exposition  of  the  priestly 


1  John  vii.  46.  2  Romans  xi.  34.  3  Isaiah  ix.  6. 

4  Ps.  ex.  4 ;  Zech.  vi.  13  ;  Heb.  iv.  14,  15  ;  v.  6  ;  vi.  20  ;  vii.  24,  26  ;  viii. 
1 ;  ix.  11,  12,  14,  26  ;  x.  12,  14 ;  Isaiah  liii.  5,  7,  12  ;  John  i.  29  ;  x.  15  ;  1  Cor. 
v.  7  ;  Eph.  v.  2;  1  Tim.  ii.  6 ;  Heb.  ix.  26 ;  x.  5  ;  xiii.  12 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24 ;  fii.  18; 
1  John  i.  7 ;  Rev.  v.  9  ;  vii.  14 ;  Rom.  viii.  34 ;  Heb.  vii.  25 ;  ix.  24. 


OFFICES   OF   CHKIST.  211 

office.  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  explains  the  design  of  this 
institution,  and  sets  forth  the  Levitical  priests  as  types  of  Christ 
in  his  priesthood.  It  is  there  stated  to  be  the  duty  of  the  priest  to 
offer  gifts  and  sacrifices  for  sins.1 

The  text  last  quoted  refers  to  two  kinds  of  offerings  which  the 
priest  presented :  one  for  thanksgiving,  the  other  for  propitiation. 
Various  offerings  were  prescribed  as  expressions  of  gratitude  for 
mercies  received,  and  others  to  make  atonement  for  sins.  Christ- 
ians make  their  offerings  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  through 
Christ,  as  their  Mgh  priest;  but  the  only  atoning  sacrifice  is  the 
offering  which  he  made  of  himself,  when  he  gave  his  life  a  ransom 
for  us.2 

All  propitiatory  sacrifices  involve  the  idea  of  substitution.  The 
animal  offered  represented  the  offerer,  and  bore  his  sins,  which 
were  confessed,  over  its  head.3  So  Christ  bore  our  sins,4  our 
iniquities  being  laid  on  him.  With  reference  to  the  use  of  lambs 
in  sacrifice,  he  is  called  "  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh  away  the 
sin  of  the  world."5  The  idea  of  substitution  is  clearly  conveyed 
in  such  passages  as  these :  "  For  a  good  man  some  would  dare  to 
die ;  but  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we 
were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."6  "  He  who  knew  no  sin  was 
made  sin  for  us."7 

Those  who  deny  the  divinity  of  Christ,  deny  also  the  doctrine 
of  .his  vicarious  sacrifice.  When  he  is  said  in  Scripture  to  die  for 
us,  they  understand  the  import  of  the  language  to  be,  that  he  died 
for  our  benefit ;  but  they  exclude  the  idea  of  his  suffering  in  our 
stead,  bearing  the  penalty  due  to  our  sins,  that  we  might  be 
released  from  it.  He  is  supposed  to  have  died  for  our  benefit,  in 
that  he  gave  us  an  example  of  patience  and  resignation  in  suffer- 
ing, confirmed  the  doctrine  that  he  taught,  and,  by  rising  from  the 
dead,  established  the  truth  of  the  soul's  immortality,  and  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body.  These  several  benefits,  all  will  admit,  are 
derived  from  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ :  but  they  do 
not  fully  come  up  to  the  import  of  the  strong  language  which  the 
Scriptures  employ  in  relation  to  this  subject.     The  ancient. mar- 


1  Heb.  v.  1.  2  Matt.  xx.  28.  3  Lev.  xvi.  21. 

4  1  Pet.  ii.  24.  »  John  i.  29.  6  Romans  v.  8 

7  2  Cor.  v.  21. 


212  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   JESUS   CHRIST. 

tyrs  generally  set  us  a  noble  example  of  patience  and  resignation 
in  suffering  and  death.  Many  of  them  exhibited  a  fortitude  and 
triumph  in  the  prospect  of  their  dying  agonies,  not  seen  in  the 
example  of  our  Redeemer.  In  the  garden,  his  soul  was  exceed- 
ingly sorrowful  in  the  prospect  of  his  sufferings,  and  he  thrice 
prayed  that  the  cup  might  pass  from  him ;  and,  on  the  cross, 
though  he  was  all  submissive  to  his  Father,  and  yielded  his  spirit 
at  last  into  his  Father's  hands,  yet  he  exhibited  none  of  that  joy- 
ful exultation  which  has  often  shone  forth  in  the  martyr's  last 
moments,  but  he  seemed  oppressed,  shrouded  in  gloom,  and 
mourning  the  withdrawal  of  his  Father's  presence.  All  this  may 
be  accounted  for,  if  we  consider  that  his  death  was  unlike  that  of 
the  martyrs,  because  he  endured  in  it  the  wrath  of  the  Father, 
due  to  our  transgressions.  If  his  death  had  been  merely  to  set 
us  an  example,  it  might  be  said,  with  greater  propriety,  that 
Peter,  Paul,  and  other  Christian  martyrs,  died  for  us :  but  Paul 
will  not  admit  this ;  for  he  says,  in  a  manner  which  implies  a 
strong  denial,  "Was  Paul  crucified  for  you?"1 

The  sincerity  of  the  ancient  Christians  was  demonstrated  by 
their  readiness  to  suffer  and  die,  rather  than  renounce  the  faith 
which  they  professed.  Christ's  death  may  be  said  to  confirm  his 
sincerity  in  the  same  way ;  but  if  this  is  what  is  meant  by  his 
dying  for  us,  Stephen,  James,  Peter,  and  Paul  died  for  us  in  this 
sense.  But  though  the  death  of  Jesus  may  be  understood  to 
establish  his  sincerity  for  the  confirmation  of  his  doctrine,  he  was 
accustomed  to  refer,  for  this  purpose,  not  to  his  death,  but  to  his 
miraculous  works  and  his  resurrection.  It  was  his  resurrection 
also,  rather  than  his  death,  which  established  the  truth  of  the 
soul's  immortality  and  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  If,  there- 
fore, these  confirmations  of  truth  for  our  benefit  are  what  is  intended 
by  Christ's  dying  for  us,  it  would  be  more  correct  to  say,  that  he 
wrought  miracles  and  rose  from  the  dead  for  us.  But  his  death 
has  so  prominent  a  place  in  the  Scriptures,  as  that  to  which  we 
are  indebted  for  eternal  life,  that  we  are  compelled  to  seek  for  a 
higher  sense  of  the  phrase,  "  Christ  died  for  us." 

The  humble  disciple  of  Jesus,  who  is  willing  to  learn,  as  a  little 
child,  in  what  sense  his  Lord  and  Master  died  for  him,  needs  only 

1 1  Cor.  i.  13. 


OFFICES    OF   CHRIST.  213 

to  read  with  attention  the  passages  of  Scripture  which  have  been 
quoted,  and  which  fully  establish  the  doctrine,  that  Christ's  death 
was  an  atoning  sacrifice  for  our  sins.  This  doctrine  is  essential  to 
Christianity.  It  is  the  grand  peculiarity  of  the  Christian  scheme. 
Hence  Paul  determined  to  know  nothing  but  "  Christ  crucified,"1 
to  glory  in  nothing  but  "  the  cross  of  Christ."2  The  gospel  was 
the  preaching  of  Christ  crucified.3  It  was  a  stumbling  block  to 
the  self-righteous  Jews,  and  foolishness  to  the  philosophical  Greeks ; 
but  to  those  who  received  it  to  the  salvation  of  their  souls,  it  was 
Christ,  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God.4  It  was  not 
Christ  transfigured  on  Mount  Tabor ;  not  Christ  stilling  the  tem- 
pest, and  raising  the  dead ;  not  Christ  rising  triumphantly  from 
the  grave,  and  ascending  gloriously,  amidst  shouts  of  attendant 
angels,  to  his  throne  in  the  highest  heavens :  but  Christ  on  the 
cross,  expiring  in  darkness  and  woe,  that  the  first  preachers  of  the 
Gospel  delighted  to  exhibit  to  the  faith  of  their  hearers.  This 
was  their  Gospel ;  its  centre,  and  its  glory.  It  was  faith  in  this 
Gospel  that  controlled  the  hearts  of  their  converts,  and  made 
them  ready  to  die  for  him  who  had,  by  his  death,  procured  for 
them  eternal  life.  In  this  faith  they  exclaimed,  "  God  forbid  that 
I  should  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."5  To 
this  they 'referred  when  they  said,  "I  am  crucified  with  Christ; 
nevertheless  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me ;  and  the 
life  which  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son 
of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for  me."6 

The  doctrine  of  Christ's  atoning  sacrifice  explains  the  Old  Tes- 
tament dispensation.  To  what  purpose  were  its  victims  brought 
to  the  altar,  and  the  rites  of  its  worship  all  stained  with  blood  ? 
Was  God  really  pleased  with  the  slaughter  of  animals,  and  the 
smell  of  their  sacrifice  ?  Paul  has  explained,  that  these  were  a 
shadow  of  good  things  to  come  ;7  but  the  body  is  of  Christ.  As 
mere  types  of  Christ's  atoning  sacrifice,  ■  they  are  intelligible. 
This  they  prefigured.  "  Christ  also  hath  loved  us,  and  given  him- 
self for  us ;  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  of  sweet  smelling 
savor  ;"8  and  it  was  only  because  of  their  reference  to  this  sacrifice, 

1 1  Cor.  ii.  2.  2  Gal>  vi  14#  8 1  Cor  j  23 

*  Rom.  i.  16.  5  Gal<  vi#  14  e  GaL  iif  20. 

7  Heb.  x.  1.  s  Eph>  v#  2.  j 


214  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   JESUS   CHRIST. 

that  the  sacrifices  of  the  preceding  times  were  acceptable  to  the 
Lord. 

The  general  prevalence  of  sacrifices,  in  the  religions  of  the 
world,  is  a  fact  which  it  is  difficult  to  account  for.  If  it  be  sup- 
posed to  arise  from  principles  implanted  in  human  nature,  it  will 
furnish  a  strong  argument  to  prove  that  human  nature  has  ever 
felt,  and  must  feel,  the  necessity  for  such  a  sacrifice  as  is  made  by 
the  death  of  Christ.  If  the  prevalence  of  sacrifices  be  accounted 
for  by  tracing  them  to  an  ancient  institution,  given  to  our  race  by 
revelation  from  God,  an  argument,  still  stronger  in  favor  of  our 
doctrine,  is  furnished  by  the  fact.  It  appears,  from  this  view  of 
the  subject,  that  the  institution  is  not  only  more  ancient  than  the 
laws  of  Moses,  but  has  come  down  from  the  time  when  Abel 
offered  to  God  a  more  acceptable  sacrifice  than  Cain.1  As  this 
sacrifice,  like  all  subsequent  ones  which  were  offered  by  faith,  had 
reference  to  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  the  whole  institution  of  sacri- 
fice bears  testimony  to  it. 

The  sacrifice  of  Christ,  which  is  the  object  of  Christian  faith  on 
earth,  will  be  the  song  of  glorified  saints  in  heaven.  The  Lamb, 
in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  will  appear  in  their  view,  not  as  once 
honored  and  powerful,  but  as  having  been  made  a  sacrifice,  "  a 
lamb  that  had  been  slain."2  He  was  once  the  victim  on  the  sacri- 
ficial altar,  but  he  will  be  the  object  of  adoration  in  the  everlasting 
song,  "Unto  him  that  loved  us,"3  &c. 

When  the  birth  of  Jesus  was  announced  by  the  angel,  it  was 
said,  "  His  name  shall  be  called  Jesus,  for  he  shall  save  his  people 
from  their  sins."4  This  was  the  grand  design  of  his  coming  into 
the  world :  "  The  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that 
which  was  lost."5  To  effect  this  salvation,  a  sacrifice  was  demanded; 
and,  that  he  might  make  the  required  sacrifice,  it  was  necessary 
that  he  should  assume  human  nature :  "  When  he  cometh  into  the 
world,  he  saith :  Sacrifice  and  offering  thou  wouldest  not,  but  a  body 
hast  thou  prepared  me."6  "It  was  necessary  that  this  man  have 
somewhat  to  offer."7  His  humanity  was  the  victim  laid  on  the 
altar,  for  which  reason  it  is  said,  "  He  bore  our  sins  in  his  own 
body,  on  the  tree."8   "  The  Captain  of  our  salvation  must  be  made 

1  Heb.  xi.  4.  2  Kev.  v.  6.  3  Rev.  i.  5. 

4  Matt.  i.  21.  5  Luke  xix.  10.  6  Heb.  x.  5. 

*  Heb.  viii.  3.  8 1  Pet.  ii.  24. 


OFFICES   OF   CHRIST.  215 

perfect  through  suffering  ;"r  and  he  must,  therefore,  have  a  nature 
capable  of  suffering :  "  For  this  cause,  he  was  made  lower  than 
the  angels,  that,  for  the  suffering  of  death,  he  might  be  crowned 
with  glory  and  honor."2  There  is,  doubtless,  also  a  peculiar  fitness 
in  the  arrangement,  by  which  the  Redeemer  is  the  near-kinsman 
of  the  redeemed ;  and  the  sacrifice  made  in  the  nature  that  had 
sinned.  Had  the  Son  of  God  undertaken  the  salvation  of  angels, 
there  would  have  been  a  fitness  in  his  taking  on  him  the  nature  of 
angels  :  but  as  he  came  to  save  men,  he  took  on  him  human  nature, 
and  was  made  in  all  points  like  his  brethren.3 

While  the  fact  of  the  sacrifice  depended  on  the  assumption  of 
a  nature  capable  of  suffering,  the  undertaking  of  the  work,  the 
efficacy  of  the  sacrifice,  the  power  to  lay  down  his  life,  and  the 
power  to  take  it  again,  depended  on  the  divine  nature  of  Christ. 
The  divine  nature,  alone,  could  not  be  made  under  the  law :  and 
the  human  nature,  alone,  could  not  have  originally  consented  to  be 
made  under  the  law ;  and  would  not  thereby,  had  it  been  possible, 
have  exhibited  any  humiliation,  any  voluntary  impoverishing  of 
himself,  that  we  might  be  made  rich.  The  question  has  sometimes 
been  proposed,  how  much  obedience  did  the  human  nature  of 
Jesus  Christ  owe  for  itself,  and  how  much  did  it  render  for  the 
benefit  of  others  ?  but  this  is  a  useless  question,  and  is  asked  on  a 
mistaken  apprehension  of  the  facts  concerning  Christ's  assumption 
of  our  nature.  The  man  Christ  Jesus  never  had  an  existence 
separate  from  the  divine  nature.  The  Word  did  not  enter  into 
flesh  previously  existing  ;  but  "  the  Word  was  made  flesh."4  Had 
the  Word  entered  into  a  previously  existing  man,  we  might  con- 
ceive of  the  obligations  which  that  man  had  previously  owed  to 
the  law,  and  the  continuance  of  those  obligations.  But  the  Son 
of  God  was  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem 
them  that  were  under  the  law.5  As  the  obligations  were  assumed 
for  their  benefit,  the  whole  fulfilment  of  them  must  have  been  for 
their  benefit.  As  the  assumption  of  human  nature  was  designed 
for  the  salvation  of  his  people,  all  that  he  did  and  suffered  in  that 
nature,  is  to  be  viewed  as  a  part  of  the  great  design,  and  consti- 
tuting a  part  of  the  work. 


1  Heb.  ii.  10.  «  Heb#  jj  9#  3  Heb>  ii#  16>  17i 

*  John  i.  14.  »  Gal.  iv.  5. 


216  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST, 

We  are  not  permitted  to  suppose  that  the  divine  nature  of  Jesus 
Christ  could,  in  itself,  endure  the  sufferings  necessary  to  make 
atonement,  or  that  it  did,  in  the  proper  sense,  suffer  with  the 
human  nature.  We  cannot  conceive  that  the  perfect  blessedness 
of  God  can  consist  with  the  endurance  of  suffering,  any  more  than 
we  can  conceive  the  divine  immensity  shut  up  within  the  limits  of 
a  human  body.  Yet  we  are  authorized  to  conclude,  that  whatever 
Jesus  did  or  suffered,  does,  in  some  manner,  represent  to  us  the 
mind  of  God.  To  think  God  to  be  altogether  such  an  one  as  our- 
selves,1 is  a  gross  and  sinful  view  of  him,  which  he  resents :  but 
we  are,  nevertheless,  compelled  to  form  our  conceptions  of  his  mind 
from  the  knowledge  which  we  have  of  our  own.  This  mode  of 
conception  his  word  authorizes.  The  pity  of  a  father  for  his  chil- 
dren, is  made  by  God  himself  the  image  in  which  we  are  to  see 
his  pity  for  those  who  fear  him.2  Pity,  as  exercised  by  human 
beings,  may  be  a  very  painful  emotion  ;  but,  when  we  attribute  it 
to  God,  we  must  conceive  of  it  as  posesssing  all  that  is  excellent 
in  human  pity,  but  without  the  imperfection  of  pain.  So,  the 
mind  of  the  holy  Jesus  exhibits  to  us  the  mind  of  God.  The  pity 
which  he  felt,  however  painful  it  may  have  been  to  his  human  soul, 
is  an  image  in  which  we  are  permitted  to  see  the  compassion  of 
God.  Could  we  have  before  our  contemplation  all  the  affections 
and  emotions  that  the  holy  soul  of  Jesus  ever  experienced,  we 
might  learn  therein  more  of  the  mind  of  God  than  is  otherwise 
discoverable :  and  if  we  understood  the  affections  and  emotions 
of  which  he  was  the  subject  in  his  last  hours,  we  should  probably 
understand,  better  than  in  any  other  way,  how  the  divine  perfec- 
tions were  concerned  in  his  atoning  sufferings.  It  is  our  duty  to 
look  to  Jesus,  who  endured  the  cross,3  and  to  study  his  character, 
that  the  same  mind  may  be  in  us,  and  we  feel  the  stronger  obli- 
gation to  study  with  what  mind  he  suffered  death ;  because  Paul 
prayed  to  have  fellowship  with  his  sufferings,  and  to  be  conformed 
to  his  death.4 

What,  then,  were  the  emotions  of  Jesus  in  his  last  sufferings  ? 
When  he  consented  to  make  the  sacrifice  in  the  body  prepared  for 
him,   he  said,   "  Thy  law  is  within  my  heart."3     He  doubtless 


1  Ps.  1.  21.  2  Ps.  ciii.  13.  3  Heb.  xii.  2. 

*  Phil.  iii.  10.  6  Ps.  xl.  8. 


OFFICES    OF   CHRIST.  217 

retained  this  law  in  his  heart,  through  his  intensest  agony,  and 
approved  it,  even  while  he  was  undergoing  its  dire  penalty.  In 
this  particular  Paul  had  fellowship  with  him,  for  he  could  say,  "  I 
delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man."1  When  Jesus 
bore  our  sins  in  his  body  on  the  tree,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  his  human  soul  had  a  sense  of  the  great  evil  of  sin ;  other- 
wise we  cannot  understand  how  it  should  approve  the  law  under 
which  he  was  suffering  the  penalty  for  sin.  Whatever  other  emo- 
tions had  a  place  in  his  mind,  we  are  authorized  to  conclude  that 
he  had  a  deep  sense  of  the  evil  of  the  sins  which  he  bore,  and  of 
the  excellence  of  the  law  which  those  sins  opposed.  While  love, 
stronger  than  death,  identified  him  with  his  people,  who  were 
under  the  sentence  of  the  violated  law,  he  loved  also  that  law  with 
all  his  heart.  These  contending  affections  painfully  struggled 
together  in  his  breast.  The  sins  of  his  people  were  not  offences 
which  he  had  personally  committed  ;  and  therefore  remorse,  in  the 
proper  sense,  was  not  an  ingredient  in  his  suffering.  But  an  affec- 
tionate husband,  who  loves  his  wife  as  his  own  flesh,  would,  when 
grieving  for  a  crime  which  she  has  committed,  feel  nearly  the  same 
agony  as  if  he  had  personally  committed  it ;  so,  when  Christ  loved 
the  Church,  and  gave  himself  for  it,  he  felt  the  sins  of  the  Church 
as  if  they  had  been  his  own.  In  this  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin, 
which  was  an  element  in  the  sufferings  of  Jesus,  it  was  lawful  for 
Paul  to  desire  fellowship  with  him.  The  Scripture  teaches  that 
Jesus  offered  himself  to  God,  through  the  eternal  Spirit.2  This 
Spirit  produces  love  to  God  and  his  law  in  the  hearts  of  believers, 
and  gives  them  a  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin ;  in  both  which  particu- 
vars  they  have  fellowship  with  Christ  in  his  sufferings.  Now,  if  we 
suppose  that  the  Spirit,  which  was  given  to  Christ  without  measure, 
opened  to  his  view,  when  hanging  on  the  cross,  the  full  glory  of 
the  divine  law  which  the  Church,  his  bride,  had  violated ;  and  the 
full  enormity  of  the  sins  which  his  people  had  committed;  what 
intense  agony  would  these  discoveries  produce !  No  agony  of  the 
deepest  penitence  could  surpass  it.  Yet  all  this  Jesus  probably 
felt ;  and  in  all  this  we  may  well  pray  to  have  fellowship  with  him. 
If  the  view  which  we  have  taken,  gives  us  any  just  insight  into 
the  emotions  which  rent  the  holy  soul  of  Jesus,  when  he  hung  on 

1  Roni.  vii.  22.  2  Heb.  ix.  14. 


218  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

the  cross  for  us,  it  should  make  us  feel,  deeply  feel,  the  moral 
power  of  that  cross.  To  think  as  he  thought,  and  feel  as  he  felt, 
is  enough  to  constrain  us  to  live  to  him  who  died  for  us.  No  higher 
motive  to  holiness  can  be  needed,  than  that  which  proceeds  from 
the  cross. 

The  denial  of  Christ's  divinity,  and  that  of  his  atonement, 
consistently  accompany  each  other.  We  should  have  little  need 
of  a  divine  person,  to  fulfil  the  offices  ascribed  to  Christ,  if  that  of 
making  an  efficacious  sacrifice  for  sin  be  not  included.  The  system 
in  which  these  two  cardinal  doctrines  are  omitted,  is  another 
gospel,  which  Paul,  and  the  first  ministers  of  the  Christian  religion, 
knew  not ;  and  which  cannot  meet  the  necessities  of  lost  men.  It 
is  worthy  of  special  remark,  that  the  two  positive  institutions  of 
Christianity — baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper,  refer  to  these  two 
doctrines,  and  silently  and  significantly  preach  them.  In  baptism, 
we  devote  ourselves  to  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
acknowledging  the  divinity  and  authority  of  each  person  in  the 
Godhead :  and  the  divinity  of  the  second  person  is  more  especially 
acknowledged  in  those  brief  accounts  of  baptism,  in  which  persons 
are  said  to  have  been  baptised  in  the  name  of  Christ.  In  the 
Lord's  supper,  the  doctrine  of  atonement  is  clearly  set  forth. 
"  This  is  my  blood  of  the  New  Testament,  which  is  shed  for  many 
for  the  remission  of  sins."1  The  two  ordinances  have,  from  the 
days  of  the  apostles,  been  observed  by  the  great  body  of  professing 
Christians ;  though  their  form  and  use  have  not  been  kept  pure,  as 
they  were  originally  delivered,  and  the  two  doctrines  which  they 
set  forth,  have  been  maintained  in  the  great  body  of  Christian 
professors,  in  all  ages  ;  though  accompanied  with  much  corruption. 

The  Scriptures  plainly  teach  that  the  propitiatory  sacrifice  of 
Christ  was  necessary  to  render  the  justification  of  a  sinner  consistent 
with  the  justice  of  God.  "  Whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a 
propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness 
for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past,  through  the  forbearance  of 
God ;  to  declare,  I  say,  at  this  time,  his  righteousness,  that  he 
might  be  just,  and  the  justifier  of  him  which  believeth  in  Jesus."2 

Had  it  not  been  absolutely  necessary,  we  cannot  account  for  it, 
that  God  should  have  inflicted  such  suffering,  or  even  permitted  it 

1  Matt.  xxvi.  28.  2  Rom.  iii.  25,  26. 


OFFICES    OF   CHRIST.  219 

to  fall,  on  his  beloved  Son,  who  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and 
separate  from  sinners."  The  death  of  Christ,  if  he  was  not  a  divine 
person,  was,  as  we  have  before  shown,  the  effect  of  perjury  and  suici- 
dal prevarication  on  his  part ;  and  if  it  was  not  an  atoning  sacrifice 
indispensably  necessary  to  satisfy  divine  justice,  it  is  difficult  to 
show  that  it  was  not,  on  the  part  of  the  Father,  a  display  of  injustice 
and  cruelty  towards  the  Son  of  his  love.  Why  was  his  ear  deaf  to 
the  thrice-repeated  petition,  "Let  this  cup  pass  from  me"  ?  Why 
had  the  sorrows  of  Gethsemane,  and  the  bloody  sweat  of  the 
agonized,  but  innocent,  sufferer,  no  effect  to  move  the  pity  of  the 
"Father,  to  whom  Christ  had  said:  "I  know  that  thou  hearest  me 
always."1  The  resigned  language  of  the  suffering  Jesus,  and  the 
condition  on  which  he  bases  the  petition,  furnish  the  answer :  "  0 
my  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me ;  nevertheless, 
not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."2 

Whatever  views  of  propriety  may  be  entertained  by  short-sighted 
mortals,  it  is  manifestly  the  teaching  of  sacred  Scripture,  that  God 
could  not,  consistently  with  his  justice,  forgive  our  sins  on  our 
mere  asking,  or  even  on  our  penitential  acknowledgments.  We 
are  required  to  forgive  offences  till  seventy  times  seven,  when  a 
brother  acknowledges  his  trespass ;  but  sins  against  God  are  not 
private  offences,  to  be  remitted  in  the  same  manner.  A  judge  who 
should  pardon  a  criminal,  that,  according  to  law,  ought  to  be 
condemned,  and  turn  him  loose  on  the  community,  would  be  false 
to  his  sacred  office.  So  God  sustains  the  character  of  a  righteous 
Judge  ;  and,  sooner  than  disregard  the  claims  of  law,  and  overthrow 
his  moral  government,  he  is  willing  to  plunge  the  sword  of  justice 
into  the  heart  of  his  beloved  Son.  And  such  is  the  reverence  of 
the  Son,  for  the  law  of  his  Father  and  the  claims  of  justice,  that 
lie  patiently  consents  to  be  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  that  his 
death  may  justify  God  in  forgiving  and  saving  the  guilty. 

How  the  death  of  Christ  rendered  full  satisfaction  to  divine 
justice,  is  a  question  which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  consider, 
under  the  head  of  Justification. 

Those  who  oppose  the  doctrine  of  atonement,  have  viewed  it  as 
inconsistent  with  justice,  that  the  innocent  should  suffer  for  the 
guilty.     Their  views,  however,  are  plainly  at  variance  with  those 

1  John  xi.  42.  2  Matt.  xxvi.  39. 


220  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

which  are  presented  in  the  Book  of  God.  "  He  suffered,  the  just 
for  the  unjust."1  "  He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew 
no  sin;  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him."2 
Even  in  human  affairs,  sureties  are  allowed  to  pay  the  debts  of 
others  ;  and,  with  reference  to  this  well-known  arrangement  among 
men,  Christ  is  called  the  surety  of  the  better  covenant.3  To  render 
such  suretyship  consistent  with  justice,  his  voluntary  consent  must 
be  given,  and  he  must  have  had  a  perfect  right  to  dispose  of 
himself.  The  right  he  possessed,  because  of  his  divinity ;  and  the 
consent  was  given  in  the  covenant  of  grace  which  he  made  with 
the  Father.  • 

A  part  of  the  priest's  office  consisted  in  making  intercession  for 
the  people.  The  high  priest  did  this  in  a  special  manner,  when  he 
went  into  the  holy  of  holies.  Jesus  interceded,  when  he  prayed 
for  Peter  that  his  faith  might  not  fail ;  and  when  he  poured  forth 
to  his  Father  the  beautiful  prayer  recorded  in  John  xvii.  But 
now,  in  the  holy  of  holies,  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  he  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.4  How  that  intercession  is 
carried  on,  we  cannot  undertake  to  explain.  What  his  mode  of 
asking  is,  we  know  not ;  but  in  some  mode,  he  asks,  and  the  heathen 
are  given  to  him  for  an  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth  for  a  possession.5  In  some  mode,  while  he  sympathises  with 
his  suffering  followers  on  earth,  he  asks  grace  for  them,  to  help 
them  in  their  trials  and  sorrows,  and  his  intercession  prevails. 

The  remaining  part  of  the  priest's  office  consisted  in  blessing 
the  people.6  The  high  priest  did  this,  on  his  return  from  the  holy 
of  holies.  This,  also,  our  great  High  Priest  will  do,  in  the  most 
public  manner,  when  he  shall  return  from  the  heavens  which  he 
has  entered,  and  meet  his  people  in  the  great  congregation  at  the 
last  judgment.  It  is  of  little  importance,  whether  we  refer  this 
act  of  blessing  to  the  priestly  or  the  kingly  office  of  Christ.  It  was 
anciently  said,  that  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge, 
and  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth.7  Yet  we  refer  Christ's 
teaching  to  his  prophetical,  rather  than  to  his  priestly  office.  So, 
though  the  ancient  priests  blessed  the  people,  yet,  as  the  priest's 

1 1  Pet.  iii.  18.  2  2  Cor.  v.  21.  3  Heb.  vii.  22. 

*  Heb.  vii.  25.  5  Ps.  ii.  8.  6  Num.  vi.  22-27. 

'  Mai.  ii.  7. 


OFFICES   OF   CHRIST.  221 

office  was  to  approach  God,  in  behalf  of  men;  rather  than  to 
approach  men  with  either  revelations  or  blessings  from  God ;  we 
may  consider  the  blessings  conferred  on  the  obedient  subjects  of 
Christ's  reign,  as  the  bestowments  of  his  royal  munificence ;  and, 
therefore,  as  appertaining  to  his  kingly  office.  This  accords  with 
the  language  of  Scripture :  "  Then  shall  the  King  say :  '  Come,  ye 
blessed  of  my  Father.'  "*  But  all  Christ's  offices  yield  blessings  to 
his  people ;  and  were  undertaken  by  him  for  their  sake. 

Section  III.— KING. 

Jesus  Christ,  as  the  mediator  between  God  and  men, 
exercises  kingly  authority  over  all  creatures,  to  the  glory 
of  God,  and  the  good  of  his  people.2 

•  The  superscription  which  Pilate  placed  on  the  cross,  was,  "  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  the  King  of  the  Jews."  This  writing  expressed  a  truth 
of  which  its  author  was  not  aware.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  the 
Messiah,  foretold  by  the  Hebrew  prophets,  and  expected  by  the 
nation  as  the  king  who  would  rule  over  them,  and  raise  them  to 
great  prosperity. 

The  Hebrew  word  Messiah,  to  which  the  Greek  word  Christ 
corresponds,  signifies  the  Anointed.  "When  kings  and  priests  were 
introduced  into  office  among  the  Israelites,  it  was  usual  to  anoint 
them  with  oil.  We  have  one  example,  in  which  a  prophet  was  set 
apart  to  his  work,  by  the  same  ceremony.3  Jesus  was  the  Anointed, 
because  he  sustained  all  these  offices;  and,  although  he  was  not 
introduced  into  either  of  them,  by  a  literal  anointing  with  oil,  he 
had  the  unction  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  of  which  the  literal  unction 
with  oil  was  a  type.  The  words  of  Isaiah,  read  by  him  in  the 
synagogue  of  Nazareth,  were  applied  to  himself:  "The  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  God  is  upon  me,  because  he  hath  anointed  me  to  preach,"4 
&c.  Here  the  anointing  must  be  understood  as  referring  to  his 
prophetical  office.  The  same  reference  seems  to  have  been  made 
with  taunt  and  derision  by  the  individual  who  smote  Jesus,  and  said  : 


1  Matt.  xxv.  34. 

2  Num.  xxiv.  17 ;  Ps.  ii.  6 ;  Isaiah  xxxii.  1 ;  Zech.  ix.  9 ;  Matt.  xxi.  5  ;  John 
xviii.  36  ;  Matt.  xxv.  34 ;  Heb.  ii.  9  ;  Rev.  v.  13 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  15  ;  Rev.  xvii.  14 ; 
xix.  16 ;  Eph.  i.  20-23 ;  v.  23';  Phil.  ii.  9,  10. 

3  1  Kings  xix.  16.  4  Isaiah  lxi.  1. 


222      DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  JESUS  CHRIST. 

"Prophesy,  thou  Christ,  who  is  he  that  smote  thee?"1  In  this 
taunt,  it  was  implied,  that  the  Christ  was  expected  to  be  a  prophet. 
But  from  the  common  use  of  anointing,  we  are  led  to  refer  the  term 
Christ  rather  to  the  priestly  and  kingly  offices,  with  which  Jesus 
was  invested.  The  most  common  reference,  is  to  his  kingly  office. 
He  was  reported  to  Pilate,  as  making  himself  "  Christ,  a  king."2 
In  expecting  their  Messiah,  the  Jews  looked  for  a  king,  who  was 
to  rule  over  them  and  deliver  them  from  their  enemies.  Many  of 
the  prophecies  concerning  the  Christ,  relate  to  his  reign  as  king 
over  Israel :  and  when  he,  before  the  Jewish  council,  claimed  to  be 
the  Christ,  he  referred  to  the  future  manifestation  of  his  kingly 
power  and  glory,  "  Hereafter  shall  the  Son  of  man  sit  on  the  right 
'hand  of  the  power  of  God."3 

A  proof  that  Jesus  was  the  promised  Messiah,  is  found  in  the 
fact,  that  the  prophecies  were  fulfilled  in  him.  The  time  and  place 
of  his  birth,  and  the  tribe  and  family  from  which  he  was  to  spring, 
were  particularly  foretold ;  and  the  events  corresponded  to  the 
predictions.  Many  prophecies  of  events  in  his  life,  sufferings,  death, 
burial,  and  resurrection,  were  exactly  fulfilled.  Jesus  appealed 
with  confidence  to  the  Scriptures,  for  proof  of  his  claims  :  "  Search 
the  Scriptures;  for  they  are  they  that  testify  of  me."4  And  the 
apostles  said:  "To  him  give  all  the  prophets  witness."5 

Further  proof  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  is  furnished  by  the 
testimony  of  John  the  Baptist,6  by  the  voice  of  the  Father  at  his 
baptism,7  and  at  his  transfiguration  in  the  mount  ;8  by  his  works, 
to  which  he  often  appealed  in  proof  of  his  claim  ;  and  by  his  claim 
itself,  which  was  made  repeatedly  during  his  ministry  ;  and  finally 
before  the  Jewish  council,  and  before  Pilate,  and  which  was  sus- 
tained by  his  miracles,  and  ultimately  by  his  resurrection  from  the 
dead. 

To  all  these  proofs  it  may  be  added,  that  the  Jews  have  found 

no  other  Messiah.     They  have  confidently  expected  one,  and  the 

time  for  his  coming  has  long  passed.     Either  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is 

•the  Messiah  foretold,  or  the  prophecies  were  false,  and  the  religion 

of  which  they  were  a  part  was  not  from  God. 


1  Matt.  xxvi.  68.  2  Luke  xxiii.  2.  3  Luke  xxii.  6 

4  John  v.  39.  6  Acts  x.  43.  6  John  iii.  28. 

7  Matt.  iii.  17  8  Matt.  xvii.  5. 


OFFICES   OF   CHRIST.  223 

Jesus  Christ,  as  the  Supreme  God,  had,  of  original  right,  sov- 
ereign authority  over  all  creatures.  But  when  the  Word  was  made 
flesh,  he  took  on  him  the  form  of  a  servant;  and,  for  a  time, 
appeared  divested  of  divine  power  and  glory.  But,  after  having 
humbled  himself,  and  completed  the  service  for  which  his  humili- 
ation was  necessary,  it  pleased  God  to  reward  that  service  by 
exalting  him  to  supreme  authority  over  all  creatures.  "  All  power 
is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth."1 

A  peculiarity  of  Christ's  dominion  as  Mediator,  is,  that  it  is 
exercised  by  him  in  human  nature.  Why  it  was  the  pleasure  of 
God  to  exalt  human  nature  to  a  dignity  so  high,  it  is  impossible  for 
us  fully  to  comprehend.  We  see  in  it  the  complete  defeat  of  Satan, 
the  apostate  angel,  who  aimed  to  bring  our  inferior  nature  entirely* 
under  his  power.  He  triumphed  over  the  first  Adam :  but  the 
second  Adam  has  triumphed  over  him,  and  will  bring  him  into 
complete  subjection,  with  all  the  hostile  powers  that  he  has  set  in 
array ;  and  will,  in  the  very  nature  over  which  Satan  triumphed, 
bring  them  into  subjection  under  his  feet.  This  dominion  over 
principalities  and  powers  Jesus  Christ  exercises,  with  a  reference 
to  the  good  of  his  people,  redeemed  from  among  men.  To  secure 
this  benefit,  the  exercise  of  his  dominion  in  human  nature  doubtless 
contributes.  The  redeemed  are  one  with  him,  as  he  is  one  with 
the  Father.  That  wonderful  prayer  is  fulfilled,  "  that  they  all 
may  be  one ;  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  they 
also  may  be  one  in  us."2  They  are  admitted  to  a  communion  with 
God,  far  more  intimate  and  glorious  than  could  otherwise  be  en- 
joyed ;  and  are  exalted  to  such  honor,  that  they  are  said  to  reign 
with  Christ.  This  dignity  is  nowhere  ascribed  to  angels.  Jesua 
Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  This  exercise  of 
divine  authority,  through  the  human  nature  of  Jesus  Christ,  will 
manifest  the  glory  of  God  in  its  richest  displays ;  and  angels  and 
men  will  here  learn,  through  eternal  ages,  the  perfections  of  the 
divine  nature,  and  will  for  ever  admire  and  adore,  with  ineffable 

Another  peculiarity  of  this  dominion,  is,  that  it  opens  a  new  dis- 
pensation to  rebellious  men.     When  the  angels,  that  kept  not  their 

1  Matt,  xxviii.  18.   ■  2  John  xvii.  21. 


224  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  J.ESUS   CHRIST. 

first  estate,  sinned  against  God,  they  were  driven  from  his  pres- 
ence, and  condemned  to  hopeless  woe.  No  mediator  was  provided 
for  them ;  and  no  gospel  of  salvation  was  ever  proclaimed  in  their 
ears.  Such  ah  administration  of  divine  authority,  as  gives  hope 
of  pardon  to  offenders,  was  unknown  in  the  government  of  the 
world  until  man  sinned ;  and  this  administration  constitutes  a  dis- 
tinguishing feature  of  Christ's  mediatorial  reign.  Hence,  he  is  the 
Mediator  between  God  and  men,  and  not  between  God  and  angels  ; 
and  hence  the  Mediator  is  emphatically  called  "  the  man  Christ 
Jesus."1  On  earth,  the  Son  of  man  had  power  to  forgive  sins  ;2  and 
in  heaven  he  sits  on  a  throne  of  grace,  to  which  we  are  permitted 
and  invited  to  come,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to 
help  in  every  time  of  need.  When  God  displayed  his  glory  to  Moses, 
and  proclaimed  his  name  in  the  hearing  of  that  favored  servant,  his 
forgiving  mercy  had  a  conspicuous  place  in  the  revelation :  "  The 
Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious,  long  suffering,"3  &c.  So,  in  heaven, 
where  his  full  glory  is  seeri,  the  dispensation  of  his  mercy  from  the 
throne  of  grace  on  which  the  exalted  Mediator  sits,  constitutes 
the  most  lovely  and  attractive  exhibition  of  the  divine  glory  that  the 
happy  worshippers  are  permitted  to  behold. 

Of  the  two  peculiarities  which  have  been  mentioned  as  distin- 
guishing the  mediatorial  dominion  of  Christ,  the  first  could  not 
exist  until  the  humanity  of  Christ  was  exalted  to  the  throne. 
Then  the  mediatorial  reign,  in  its  full  development,  commenced, 
when  the  Father  said,  "  Sit  thou  at  my  right  hand,  until  I  make 
thine  enemies  thy  footstool."4  But  the  second  peculiarity  existed 
in  an  incomplete  administration  of  this  mediatorial  reign,  which 
was  exercised  from  the  time  of  man's  fall.  Before  the  efficacious 
sacrifice  for  sin  was  made,  in  which  the  humanity  of  Christ  became 
the  victim,  the  merits  of  that  sacrifice  were  anticipated ;  and,  through 
its  virtue,  pardons  were  bestowed  on  believers,  from  the  days  of 
Abel.  It  is  now  made  known  to  us,  that  these  pardons  were 
bestowed  through  the  second  person  in  the  Godhead,  who  had 
engaged,  as  the  surety  for  sinners,  to  do  the  work  which  he  has 
since  performed :  and  the  inquiries  of  angels,  and  the  faith  of  Old 
Testament  saints,  were  all  directed  forward  to  the  coming  of  Christ, 

1  1  Tim.  ii.  5.  2  Matt.  ix.  6. 

3  Ex.  xxxiv.  6.  *  Ps.  ex.  1. 


OFFICES   OF   CHKIST.  225 

for  explanation  of  that  mysterious  dispensation  by  which  rebels 
obtained  mercy. 

Jesus  Christ  is  head  over  all  things  to  the  Church.  He  exercises 
his  supreme  authority  for  the  benefit  of  his  people,  for  whose  sake 
he  sanctified  himself  to  undertake  the  work  of  mediation.  He  is 
head  over  principalities  and  powers ;  and  angels  honor  and  obey 
him,  and  are  sent  forth  as  ministering  spirits,  to  minister  to  the 
heirs  of  salvation.  He  is  Lord  over  all  the  earth ;  and  regulates 
every  agent  and  every  event  in  the  world,  so  that  "  all  things  work 
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  If  Christ  is  ours,  all 
things  are  ours ;  for  all  things  are  in  his  hands,  and  he  holds  them 
for  the  benefit  of  his  people. 

In  the  few  words  which  Jesus  spoke  respecting  his  kingdom, 
when  he  stood  before  Pilate,  the  most  important  instruction  is 
conveyed.  We  cannot  too  much  admire  the  wisdom  with  which  he 
accurately  described,  in  so  few  words,  the  kingdom  that  he  came 
to  establish :  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world.  If  my  kingdom 
were  of  this  world,  then  would  my  servants  fight."1  The  kings  of 
the  earth  maintain  their  authority  by  force.  The  coerced  obedience 
which  they  procure,  is  often  reluctantly  rendered.  The  proper 
subjects  of  Christ's  kingdom  are  a  willing  people,2  who  voluntarily 
give  themselves  up  to  his  authority,  and  serve  him  with  delight. 
In  extending  his  kingdom  he  has  not  allowed  carnal  weapons  to  be 
used ;  but  such  only  as  are  powerful,  through  God,  to  bring  the 
heart  into  subjection :  "  Every  one  that  is  of  the  truth,  heareth 
my  voice."3  He  who  receives  the  truth,  hears  the  voice  of  the 
king,  and  acknowledges  his  authority.  To  believe  the  truth,  is  to 
obey  the  Gospel ;  and  this  is  to  be  subject  to  Christ  as  king.  The 
Jews  had  expected  the  Messiah  to  set  up  a  kingdom,  which  would 
be  like  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth,  and  surpass  them  in  glory. 
The  disciples  of  Jesus  entertained  similar  views ;  and  hence  arose 
the  request  to  sit  on  his  right  hand,  and  on  his  left,  in  his  king- 
dom. Hence,  too,  arose  their  despondency  when  they  saw  him 
crucified.  They  had  thought  that  it  was  he  who  was  to  restore 
the  kingdom  to  Israel  ;4  and  his  death  darkened  their  prospects, 
and  cut  off  their  hopes.    The  faith  of  the  expiring  thief  recognised 

1  John  xviii.  36.  2  Ps.  ex.  3. 

3  John  xviii.  37.  4  Luke  xxiv.  21 ;  Acta  i.  6. 

15 


226  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

the  expiring  Jesus  as  king ;  and  prayed,  "  Lord,  remember  me, 
when  thou  comest  into  thy  kingdom  i"1  but  the  mourning  disciples 
of  Jesus  could  not  see  the  bright  prospect  of  his  kingdom,  through 
the  darkness  of  the  grave.  Yet,  the  death  of  Jesus  was  necessary 
to  the  establishment  of  his  kingdom :  "  For  obedience  unto  death, 
he  was  crowned  with  glory  and  honor."2  And  the  dying  love  of 
Christ  is  the  constraining  power  which  brings  the  heart  into  sub- 
jection to  his  authority. 

Wrong  views  respecting  the  nature  of  the  Messiah's  kingdom, 
have  been  productive  of  much  evil.  The  princes  of  this  world 
crucified  the  Lord  of  glory,  because  they  could  not  recognize  him 
in  the  person  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who  came  into  the  world  to 
bear  witness  to  the  truth,  and  not  to  introduce  his  kingdom  with 
the  pomp  which  the  carnal  mind  is  pleased  with.  And  Christ  has 
been  crucified  afresh,  and  put  to  open  shame,  by  his  professed  fol- 
lowers, because  of  their  wrong  notions  respecting  his  kingdom. 
A  visible  ecclesiastical  organization,  distinguished  by  the  observ- 
ance of  external  forms,  has  claimed  to  be  the  kingdom  of  Christ ; 
and  its  power  has  been  extended  and  wielded  by  means  far  differ- 
ent from  those  which  Jesus  authorized.  To  banish  this  corrupt 
Christianity  from  the  earth,  correct  views  respecting  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  must  prevail. 

The  Messiah  was  to  rule  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies ;  and  his 
iron  sceptre  was  to  break  in  pieces,  as  a  potter's  vessel,3  all  who 
are  disobedient,  and  do  not  obey  the  truth :  but  those  who  obey 
the  truth  are  "the  children  of  the  kingdom;"  and  to  them  the 
benefits  and  blessings  of  his  reign  belong.  In  this  restricted  sense, 
none  but  regenerate  persons  enter  into  his  kingdom.4  We  are 
translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son,5  when  we  receive 
his  truth  into  our  hearts.  In  this  sense,  no  profession  of  religion, 
and  no  observance  of  external  forms,  can  bring  any  one  into  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  The  tares  may  resemble  the  wheat :  but  the 
tares  are  the  children  of  the  wicked  one ;  and  the  good  seed  only 
are  the  children  of  the  kingdom  ;6  and  when  the  Son  of  man  shall 
gather  out  of  his  kingdom  whatever  is  offensive  to  him,  the  tares 
will,  equally  with  the  briars  and  thorns,  be  rejected,  as  not  belong- 

1  Luke  xxiii.  42.  2  Phil.  ii.  8,  9  ;  Heb.  ii.  9.  8  Ps.  ii  9. 

*  John  iii.  5.  5  Col.  i.  13.  6  Matt.  xiii.  38. 


OFFICES   OF  CHRIST.  227 

ing  properly  to  his  kingdom,  and  doomed  to  be  burned.  Let  it 
then  be  distinctly  understood,  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  not  a 
great  visible  organization,  consisting  of  good  men  and  bad,  who 
are  bound  together  by  some  ecclesiastical  tie.  He  rules  over  all ; 
but  he  accounts  all  as  the  enemies  of  his  reign  who  do  not  obey 
the  truth :  and  the  hypocrite  and  formalist  have  no  more  part  in 
his  kingdom  than  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate. 

Some  obscurity  has  arisen  in  the  interpretation  of  Scriptures  in 
which  the  word  kingdom  occurs,  from  supposing  that  it  always 
refers  to  the  territory  or  subjects  that  are  under  the  government 
of  a  king.  King-dom  is  king  dominion,  king  jurisdiction.  The  pri- 
mary idea  is  kingly  authority.  In  this  primary  sense  it  is  used  in 
Luke  xix.  12  :  "A  certain  nobleman  went  into  a  far  country  to  re- 
ceive for  himself  a  kingdom."  See  also  Rev.  xvii.  12.  This  radical 
idea  the  word  retains  everywhere ;  but  it  becomes  so  modified  by 
the  connection  in  which  it  is  used,  as  to  refer  to  the  time,  place,  or 
circumstances  in  which  kingly  authority  is  exercised  ;  to  the  per- 
sons over  whom  it  is  exercised ;  and,  sometimes,  to  the  benefits 
resulting  from  its  exercise.  An  example  of  this  last  use  is  found 
in  Rom.  xiv.  17 :  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  righteousness,  peace,  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  phrases,  "kingdom  of  heaven," 
"kingdom  of  God,"  "kingdom  of  Christ,"  "kingdom  of  God's 
dear  Son,"  are  used  with  reference  to  the  reign  of  the  Messiah. 
They  denote  God's  exercise  of  kingly  authority  in  the  'person  of 
the  Messiah  ;  and  this  radical  idea,  as  before  stated,  becomes  modi- 
fied by  the  connection  in  which  the  phrases  are  used.  When  para- 
bles are  introduced  with  the  words  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  like," 
we  are  to  understand  that  some  fact  or  truth  connected  with  the 
reign  of  the  Messiah  is  illustrated  by  the  parable.  It  will  be 
impossible  to  make  sense  of  many  passages,  if  the  term  be  under- 
stood always  to  signify  the  subjects  over  whom  Christ  reigns.  How, 
in  this  signification  of  the  term,  can  the  kingdom  be  like  a  mer- 
chantman,1 a  net,2  a  treasure  ?3  "  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like 
to  a  man  which  sowed  good  seed  in  his  field."4  Here,  no  com- 
parison can  be  intended  between  the  subjects  of  Christ's  reign  and 
the  man  that  sowed  the  seed.    But  the  parable  illustrates  important 


1  Matt.  xiii.  45.     "  2  Matt.  xiii.  47. 

3  Matt.  xiii.  44.  *  Matt.  xiii.  45 


228  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

truth  connected  with  the  reign  of  the  Messiah.  It  teaches  that 
the  world,  represented  by  the  field,  is  under  his  dominion ;  that, 
for  a  time,  the  good  and  bad  are  permitted  to  remain  together ; 
but  that  a  separation  will  finally  be  made,  and  the  blessings  of  his 
reign  will  be  enjoyed  by  those  only  who  are  "  the  good  seed," 
sown  by  himself,  and  who  only  are  "  the  children  of  the  kingdom." 

The  mediatorial  reign  of  Christ  will  include  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day.  It  is  said,  "  We  must  all  stand  at  the  judgment  seat  of 
Christ;"  and  also,  in  describing  the  sentences  pronounced,  "Then 
shall  the  king  say,"  &c.  Then  they  who  condemned  and  crucified 
Christ  the  king,  and  all  who  would  not  have  him  to  reign  over 
them,  shall  stand  at  his  tribunal.  The  decisions  of  that  day  will 
be  made  according  to  the  relation  which  each  individual  has  borne 
to  Christ.  What  men  have  done  to  the  least  of  his  disciples,  he 
will  regard  as  done  to  him ;  and,  according  to  the  dispositions  so 
evinced,  will  be  every  man's  final  doom. 

Will  the  mediatorial  reign  of  Christ  continue  after  the  transac- 
tions of  the  great  day  ?  An  important  change  will  doubtless  then 
take  place  in  the  manner  of  his  reign.  All  his  enemies  will  have 
been  subdued,  all  his  ransomed  people  brought  home,  and  his  last 
act  of  pardoning  mercy  performed.  Yet,  we  are  informed  that 
the  glory  of  God  and  the  Lamb  will  be  the  light  of  the  New  Jeru- 
salem ;l  that  the  Lamb  will  be  in  the  midst  of  the  throne ;  and 
that  he  will  feed  the  redeemed,  and  lead  them  to  the  fountains  of 
living  water.2  From  these  representations,  we  appear  authorized 
to  conclude  that  Christ  will  remain  the  medium  of  communication 
through  which  the  saints  will  for  ever  approach  God,  and  receive 
glory  and  bliss  from  him.  The  language  of  Paul  in  1  Cor.  xv.  25, 
is  not  inconsistent  with  this  opinion :  "  He  must  reign,  until  he 
hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet."  When  it  is  said,  "  Until  the 
law,  sin  was  in  the  world,3  we  are  not  to  conclude  that  sin  was  not 
in  the  world  afterwards :  so,  when  it  is  said,  "  He  must  reign  until," 
&c,  we  must  not  infer  that  he  will  not  reign  after  this  time.  It 
will  not  accord  with  his  own  representation  of  the  subject,  if,  when 
those  who  would  not  have  him  to  reign  over  them,  shall  have  been 
slain  before  his  face,4  he  himself  shall  cease  to  reign.     When  it  is 

1  Rev.  xxi.  23  2  Rev.  vii.  17. 

3  Rom.  v.  13.  4  Luke  xix.  27. 


OFFICES   OF   CHRIST.  229 

said,  "  then  shall  the  Son  be  subject  to  the  Father,1  we  are  not  to 
Understand  that  this  subjection  excludes  the  idea  of  reigning; 
otherwise  it  would  be  implied  that  his  previous  reign  had  not  been 
in  subjection  to  the  Father.  Christ  now  reigns  in  subjection  to 
the  Father ;  but  the  harmony  of  his  administration  with  the  will 
and  perfections  of  God,  cannot  fully  appear  while  rebels  go  at  large 
under  his  government ;  but  when  all  enemies  have  been  subdued, 
the  harmony  of  his  administration  with  the  government  of  God, 
absolutely  considered,  will  be  made  apparent.  The  coincidence  of 
the  two  modes  of  government  will  be  fully  manifested.  This  will 
be  the  time  of  the  restitution  of  all  things.2  He  must  reign  until 
his  enemies  are  subdued ;  and  the  heavens  must  receive  him  until 
the  time  of  the  restitution  of  all  things ;  but  he  will  not,  then, 
either  forsake  heaven  or  cease  to  reign. 


CONCLUSION. 


"  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?"  We  may  now,  with  great  propriety, 
consider  this  question  solemnly  addressed  to  us.  We  have  contem- 
plated the  person,  states,  and  offices  of  Christ.  What  impression 
does  the  contemplation  leave  in  our  minds  ?  What  emotions  has 
it  produced  ?  Have  the  words  of  the  prophet  been  fulfilled  in  our 
case:  "He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness;  and  when  we  shall  see 
him,  there  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  him"  ?  Or,  can  we 
say,  "  He  is  the  chief  among  ten  thousands,  and  altogether  lovely"  ? 
According  as  Christ  appears  in  our  view,  the  evidence  of  our 
spiritual  state  is  favorable  or  unfavorable ;  and  by  this  test,  we 
may  try  our  hope  of  acceptance  through  him,  and  of  reigning  with 
him  for  ever. 

In  the  ordinary  experience  of  mankind,  the  affections  are 
attracted  most  strongly  by  objects  near  at  hand.  To  the  imagi- 
nation, distance  may  lend  enchantment ;  but  the  affections  of  the 
heart  play  around  the  fireside,  and  fix  their  firmest  hold  on  those 
with  whom  we  converse  most  familiarly.     In  accordance  with  this 

1 1  Cor.  xv.  28.  2  Acts  iii.  21. 


230  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

tendency  of  our  nature,  the  Son  of  God  attracted  the  hearts  of  men, 
by  dwelling  among  them,  and  exhibiting  himself  in  familiar  inter^ 
course  with  them,  and  in  the  endearing  relations  well  known  in 
human  society.  We  see  him,  as  the  affectionate  brother  and  friend, 
weeping  in  the  sorrows  of  others,  and  alleviating  their  sufferings  by 
words  and  acts  of  kindness.  The  tenderness  with  which,  when 
hanging  on  the  cross,  he  committed  his  mother  to  the  care  of  his 
beloved  disciple,  is  an  example  of  filial  love,  which  cannot  be 
contemplated  with  an  unmoved  heart.  In  the  simple  narratives  of 
his  life,  which  have  been  given  for  our  instruction,  we  trace  his 
course  in  his  daily  walk  as  a  man  among  men,  going  about  doing 
good,  and  the  traits  of  character  exhibited  in  this  familiar  inter- 
course, call  forth  our  love.  The  heavens  have  now  received  him 
out  of  our  sight,  but  we  know  that,  in  fulfilment  of  his  promise,  he 
is  always  with  us ;  and  we  are  taught  to  regard  him,  not  only  as 
near  at  hand,  but  also  as  sympathizing  with  our  infirmities,  having 
been  tempted  in  all  points  as  we  are.  In  the  humanity  of  Jesus, 
we  see  the  loveliness  of  the  divine  perfections  familiarly  and 
intelligibly  exhibited. 

It  sometimes  happens,  in  the  experience  of  mankind,  that  persons 
of  extraordinary  merit  remain  for  a  time  in  obscurity,  and  that 
those  who  have  been  most  intimate  with  them  have  been  taken  by 
surprise,  when  the  unsuspected  greatness  of  their  character  has 
been  disclosed.  Writers  of  fiction  know  how  to  interest  the  feelings, 
by  presenting  great  personages  under  disguise,  and  unveiling  them 
at  a  fit  moment,  to  produce  impression.  But  incidents,  infinitely 
transcending  all  fiction,  are  found  in  the  true  history  of  Jesus 
Christ,  in  which  the  concealed  majesty  of  his  divinity  broke  forth, 
and  caused  surpassing  astonishment.  The  humble  sleeper  in  the 
boat  on  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  comes  forth  from  his  slumbers,  and 
stills  the  raging  water ;  and  the  beholders  of  the  miracle  exclaim : 
"What  manner  of  man  is  this?"  The  weary  traveller  arrives  at 
Bethany,  and  claims  to  be  the  resurrection  and  the  life,  and 
demonstrates  the  truth  of  his  claim,  by  calling  the  dead  Lazarus 
from  the  tomb.  As  a  condemned  malefactor,  he  hangs  on  the  cross, 
and  expires  with  such  exhibitions  of  divinity,  that  the  astonished 
Roman  centurion  cried:  "Truly  this  man  was  the  Son  of  God." 
We  have  contemplated  the  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ,  not  merely  in 
these  transient  outbursts  which  occurred  while  he  was  on  earth, 


OFFICES   OF   CHRIST.  231 

but  in  the  full  demonstration  which  has  been  given  since  he 
ascended  to  heaven,  and  the  impression  on  our  hearts  ought  to  be 
strong  and  abiding.  The  disciples  who  attended  on  his  personal 
ministry  loved  and  honored  him ;  but  when  they  saw  him  ascend 
to  heaven,  being  more  deeply  impressed  with  his  divinity,  they 
worshipped  him.  Let  us  devoutly  join  in  rendering  him  divine 
honor. 

We  read  with  interest  the  history  of  men  who  have  passed  through 
great  changes  in  their  condition,  and  who,  in  every  condition,  have 
displayed  great  and  noble  qualities.  But  no  changes  of  condition 
possible  to  men,  can  equal  those  which  the  Son  of  God  has  undergone. 
Once  rich  in  his  original  glory,  he  became  so  poor  that  he  had  not 
where  to  lay  his  head  :  and  from  this  depth  of  poverty,  he  has  been 
exalted  to  supreme  dominion,  and  made  proprietor  and  ruler  of  all 
worlds.  Through  these  changes  he  has  ever  exhibited  such  moral 
perfections  as  have  been  most  pleasing  to  God.  In  whatever 
condition  we  view  him,  let  us  delight  in  him,  as  did  his  Father. 

The  offices  which  Christ  sustains  toward  us,  are  such  as  have 
been  in  highest  repute  among  men.  Prophets,  priests,  and  kings 
have  always  been  accounted  worthy  of  honor.  We  should  give 
the  highest  honor  to  Christ,  who,  as  a  prophet,  is  superior  to 
Moses ;  as  a  priest,  superior  to  Aaron ;  and  as  a  king,  the  Lord  of 
David.  These  offices,  as  exercised  by  Christ,  deserve  our  honor, 
not  only  because  of  their  excellence,  but  also  because  of  their 
adaptedness  to  us.  We  are,  by  nature,  ignorant,  guilty,  and 
depraved.  As  ignorant,  we  need  Christ,  the  prophet,  to  teach  us ; 
as  guilty,  we  need  Christ,  the  priest,  to  make  atonement  for  us ; 
and  as  depraved,  we  need  Christ,  the  king,  to  rule  over  us,  and 
bring  all  our  rebellious  passions  into  subjection.  These  offices  of 
Christ  are  also  adapted  to  the  graces  which  distinguish  and  adorn 
the  Christian  character.  The  chief  of  these,  as  enumerated  by 
Paul,  are  faith,  hope,  and  love ;  in  the  exercise  of  faith,  we  receive 
the  truth,  revealed  by  Christ,  the  prophet ;  in  the  exercise  of  hope, 
we  follow  Christ,  the  priest,  who  has  entered  into  the  holiest  of  all, 
to  appear  before  God  for  us ;  and  we  submit  to  Christ,  the  king,  in 
the  exercise  of  love,  which  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  the  principle 
and  sum  of  all  holy  obedience. 

In  the  theology  of  the  ancient  Christians,  Christ  held  a  central 
and  vital  place.     If  we  take  away  from  the  epistles  of  Paul  all  that 


232  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  JESUS   CHRIST. 

is  said  about  Christ,  what  mutilation  shall  we  make  ?  If,  when  we 
have  opened  anywhere  to  read,  as  at  1  Cor.  ch.  i.,  we  expunge 
Christ,  what  have  we  left  ?  Paul,  while  in  ignorance  and  unbelief, 
thought  that  he  did  God  service,  by  persecuting  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 
But  when  his  eyes  were  opened,  to  see  that  the  despised  Nazarene, 
whom  his  nation  had  crucified,  was  the  Lord  of  Glory,  when  he 
learned  that  in  him  are  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge, 
unsearchable  riches,  and  the  fulness  of  grace,  the  heart  of  the 
persecutor  was  changed,  and  he  became  devoted  to  the  service  of 
him  whom  he  had  sought  to  destroy.  Henceforth,  he  counted  all 
things  but  loss,  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus. 
Has  our  knowledge  of  Christ  produced  a  like  effect  on  us  ?  If  our 
hearts  are  in  unison  with  that  of  the  great  Apostle,  we  are  prepared 
to  say,  from  the  inmost  soul,  "  Though  we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven, 
preach  any  other  gospel,"  a  gospel  of  which  Christ  is  not  the  centre 
and  the  sum,  "let  him  be  accursed."1  "If  any  man  love  not  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  be  anathema  maranatha."2 

In  our  investigation  of  religious  truth,  we  have  found  four 
sources  of  knowledge :  our  own  moral  feelings,  the  moral  feelings 
and  judgments  of  others,  the  course  of  nature,  and  the  book  of 
divine  revelation.  The  first  three  of  these  can  give  us  no 
knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his  great  salvation.  For  this 
knowledge  we  are  wholly  indebted  to  the  Bible.  Yet,  when  we 
have  learned  our  lost  and  helpless  state  by  nature,  the  scheme  of 
salvation  which  the  Bible  reveals  is  so  perfectly  adapted  to  our 
condition,  that  it  brings  with  it  its  own  evidence  of  having  origi- 
nated in  the  wisdom  of  God. 

When  Paul  preached  the  gospel  of  salvation,  he  knew  nothing 
but  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified.  He  gloried  in  nothing,  save 
the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  have  tarried  long  in  our 
meditations  on  the  doctrine  concerning  Jesus  Christ ;  and,  before 
we  dismiss  the  subject,  it  may  be  profitable  to  linger  yet  a  little 
time  at  the  cross,  that  we  may  again  survey  its  glory,  and  feel  its 
soul-subduing  power. 

In  the  cross  of  Christ,  all  the  divine  perfections  are  gloriously 
and  harmoniously  displayed.  Infinite  love,  inviolable  truth,  and 
inflexible  justice  are  all  seen,  in  their  brightest  and  most  beautifully 

1  Gal.  i.  8.  2  1  Cor.  xvi.  22. 


OFFICES   OF   CHRIST.  233 

mingled  colors.  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God ;  but  the 
glory  of  the  cross  outshines  the  wonders  of  the  skies.  God's  moral 
perfections  are  here  displayed,  which  are  the  highest  glory  of  his 
character. 

The  cross  of  Christ  is  our  only  hope  of  life  everlasting.  On 
him  who  hangs  there,  our  iniquities  were  laid,  and  from  his  wounds 
flows  the  blood  that  cleanses  from  all  sin.  Our  faith  views  the 
bleeding  victim,  and  peacefully  relies  on  the  great  atoning  sacrifice. 
It  views  mercy  streaming  from  the  cross ;  and  to  the  cross  it  comes 
to  obtain  every  needed  blessing. 

In  the  cross,  the  believer  finds  the  strongest  motive  to  holiness. 
As  we  stand  before  it,  and  view  the  exhibition  of  the  Saviour's 
love,  we  resolve  to  live  to  him  who  died  for  us.  The  world  ceases 
to  charm.  We  become  crucified  to  the  world,  and  the  world 
crucified  to  us.  Sin  appears  infinitely  hateful.  We  regard  it  as 
the  accursed  thing  which  caused  the  death  of  our  beloved  Lord ; 
and  we  grow  strong  in  the  purpose  to  wage  against  it  an  extermi- 
nating war.  By  all  the  Saviour's  agonies,  we  vow  to  have  no 
peace  with  it  for  ever.  The  cross  is  the  place  for  penitential  tears. 
We  look  on  him  whom  we  have  pierced,  and  mourn.  Our  hearts 
bleed  at  the  sight  of  the  bleeding  sufferer,  murdered  by  our  sins ; 
and  we  resolve  that  the  murderers  shall  die.  The  cross  is  a  holy 
place,  where  we  learn  to  be  like  Christ,  to  hate  sin  as  he  hated  it, 
and  to  delight  in  the  law  of  God  which  was  in  his  heart.  In  the 
presence  of  the  cross,  we  feel  that  omnipotent  grace  has  hold  of 
our  heart ;  and  we  surrender  to  dying  love. 

The  wisdom  of  man  did  not  devise  the  wonderful  plan  of 
salvation.  As  well  might  we  suppose  that  it  directed  the  great 
Creator,  when  he  spread  abroad  the  heavens,  and  laid  the  founda- 
tions of  the  earth.  But  as  in  the  heavens  and  earth,  human  reason 
may  see  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God,  so,  to  the  Christian 
heart,  Christ  crucified  is  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of 
God.  The  doctrine  of  the  cross  needs  no  other  demonstration  of 
its  divine  origin,  than  its  power  to  sanctify  the  heart,  and  bring  it 
into  willing  and  joyful  subjection  to  Christ. 


BOOK   SIXTH. 
DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT. 


INTRODUCTION. 

DUTY   OF    LIVING    AND    WALKING    IN    THE    HOLY    SPIRIT.1 

We  live,  move,  and  have  our  being  in  God.  His  presence  is 
ever  with  us ;  and  by  his  power,  we  are,  at  every  moment,  upheld 
in  being,  and  the  faculties  and  powers,  from  which  all  movements, 
corporeal  or  mental,  proceed,  are  preserved  in  existence  and  action. 
Such  is  our  constant  and  immediate  dependence  on  God.  We  are, 
in  like  manner  and  degree,  dependent  on  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  the 
existence  of  spiritual  life,  and  for  the  faculties  and  powers  neces- 
sary to  all  spiritual  action.  Our  dependence  on  the  Holy  Spirit 
extends  still  further.  The  very  disposition  to  holy  action,  proceeds 
from  the  Spirit;  and  the  production  of  this  disposition,  is  his 
peculiar  work  in  sanctification.  In  our  natural  actions,  we  live 
and  move  in  God ;  in  our  spiritual  actions,  we  live  and  walk  in  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

The  Scripture  representations  of  our  dependence  on  the  Holy 
Spirit,  are  full  and  strong.  Our  spiritual  life  comes  from  him,  for 
it  is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth  ;2  and  he  is  called  the  Spirit  of  Life.3 
When  the  prophet  saw  the  dead  bones  in  the  valley,  he  prayed : 
"  Come  from  the  four  winds,  0  breath,  and  breathe  upon  these 
slain,  that  they  may  live  ;"4  and  the  spirit  of  life  entered  into  them. 

1  Gal.  v.  25.    If  we  live  in  the  Spirit,  let  us  also  walk  in  the  Spirit. 

2  John  vi.  63.  "        3  Rom.  viii.  2.  4  Ez.  xxxvii.  9. 

(234) 


LIVING  AND   WALKING  IN   THE   HOLY  SPIKIT.       235 

So  souls,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  are  quickened  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  And  we  live  in  the  Holy  Spirit  as  dependent  on  him  for 
spiritual  life,  as  the  body  is  dependent  for  animal  life  on  the 
atmosphere  which  we  breathe.  Hence  proceed  the  earnest  prayers, 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  be  granted,  and  may  not  be  taken  away.1 
And  hence  the  bestowment  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  regarded  as  the 
giving  of  all  good.2  The  importance  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  influence 
in  the  exercises  of  the  spiritual  life,  may  be  inferred  from  such 
passages  as  the  following:  "Led  by  the  Spirit;"3  "Mind  the  things 
of  the  Spirit;"4  "Filled  with  the  Spirit ;"5  " The  Spirit  lusteth 
against  the  flesh  ;"6  "  If  ye  through  the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds 
of  the  body,  ye  shall  live  ;"7  "  The  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmity  ;"8 
"Changed  into  the  same  image  by  the  Spirit;"9  "The  Spirit 
beareth  witness  with  our  spirits."10 

No  believer,  who  has  any  just  sense  of  his  dependence  on  the 
Holy  Spirit,  for  the  divine  life  which  he  enjoys,  and  all  its  included 
blessings,  can  be  indifferent  towards  the  Agent  by  whom  all  this 
good  is  bestowed.  He  cannot  willingly  "  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit, 
by  whom  he  is  sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption."  He  will  seek  to 
know,  in  all  things,  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit ;  and,  to  him, 
the  communion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  will  be  the  sweetest  foretaste  of 
heaven,  that  can  be  enjoyed  on  earth.  And  to  him,  therefore,  the 
study  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  character  and  office,  will  be  a  source  of 
delight. 

1  Ps.  li.  11,  12.  2  Compare  Matt.  vii.  11  with  Luke  xi.  13 

3  Gal.  v.  18.  *  Rom.  viii.  5.  5  Eph.  v.  18. 

*  Gal.  v.  17.  7  Rom.  viii.  13.  8  Rom.  viii.  26. 

•  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  l0  Rom.  viii.  16. 


236        DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  THE  HOLY   SPIRIT. 

CHAPTER   I. 

personality  of  the  holy  spirit. 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  person,  distinct  from  the  father 
and  the  Son.1 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  person,  and  not  a  mere  influence  or 
operation.     This  may  be  proved  by  the  following  arguments : 

1.  When  Christ  promised  his  coming  as  another  Comforter,  the 
language  clearly  refers  to  him  as  a  person:  "I  will  pray  the 
Father,  and  he  shall  give  you  another  Comforter  that  he  may 
abide  with, you."2  "  The  Comforter  whom  the  Father  will  send  in 
my  name,  he  shall  teach  you."3 

2.  Things  are,  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  attributed  to  the  Holy 
Spirit,  which  can  be  true  only  of  a  person :  "  He  divideth  to  every 
man  severally  as  he  will  ;"4  "  Separate  me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for 
the  work  whereunto  I  have  called  them;"5  "Why  hath  Satan  filled 
thine  heart  to  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost;"6  "Grieve  not  the  Holy 
Spirit."7 

3.  The  commission  given  to  the  apostles  required  them  to 
baptize  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.8  A  mere  influence  or  virtue,  could  not  thus  be 
associated  with  the  Father  and  the  Son ;  nor  would  it  accord  with 
the  language  of  Scripture,  to  speak  of  the  name  of  an  influence ; 
or  with  the  analogy  of  faith,  to  administer  baptism  in  the  name 
of  an  influence.  In  the  apostolical  benediction,  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
connected,  in  a  similar  manner,  with  the  Father  and  the  Son : 
"  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  love  of  God,  and  the 
communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all."9  In  1  Cor.  xii. 
4-6,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  introduced,  together  with  God  the  Father, 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  a  personal  agent  equally  with  them. 

1  Isaiah  xlviii.  16  ;  Matt.  iii.  16  ;  John  xiv.  16,  26 ;  xvi.  7 ;  Acts  x.  19,  20 ; 
xiii.  2;  xv.  28;  xx.  28;  Eph.  iv.  30;  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

2  John  xiv.  16.  3  John  xiv.  26.  *  1  Cor.  xii.  11. 
6  Acts  xiii.  2.                        6  Acts  v.  3.                              7  Eph.  iv.  30. 

8  Matt,  xxviii.  19.  9  2  Cor.  xiii.  14. 


PERSONALITY  OF  THE   HOLY  SPIRIT.  237 

To  these  arguments,  it  may  be  opposed,  that  the  Scriptures 
frequently  use  the  words  Spirit,  Holy  Spirit,  to  denote  divine 
influence.  But  it  is  very  common,  in  language,  for  an  influence 
to  be  designated  by  the  name  of  the  source  from  which  it  emanates. 
We  say :  "  This  plant  thrives  in  the  shade ;  that,  in  the  sun ;"  but 
by  the  word  sun,  we  mean,  not  the  body  of  the  luminary,  but  the 
light  and  heat  emanating  from  it.  So,  when  it  is  said :  "  He  will 
report  that  God  is  in  you  of  a  truth,"1  the  general  omnipresence 
of  God  is  not  meant ;  for  this  is  equally  true  of  all  persons  and 
places.  A  peculiar  presence,  implying  special  divine  influence,  is 
intended.  It  would  be  improper  to  argue  from  this  passage,  that 
God  is  nothing  but  an  influence  ;  and  it  is,  in  the  same  manner, 
improper  to  argue  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  a  person,  because 
the  name  is  used  in  the  Scriptures  for  the  influence  which  he,  as  a 
personal  agent,  exerts. 

The  frequency  with  which  the  name  is  used  to  denote  the 
influence  exerted,  may  perhaps  be  accounted  for,  from  the  fact, 
that  the  name  is  given  to  the  agent,  because  of  his  influence.  It 
cannot  denote  anything  peculiar  in  the  nature  of  the  agent ;  for 
the  first  and  second  persons  in  the  Godhead,  are,  in  their  nature, 
spirit,  and  holy,  as  truly  as  the  third.  The  name  must,  therefore, 
be  regarded  as  distinguishing  him  with  reference  to  his  operation. 
He  is  called  holy,  because  he  is  the  immediate  agent  in  the 
production  of  holiness ;  and  he  is  called  the  Spirit,  the  Spirit  of 
God,  because  he  is  the  immediate  agent  in  exerting  the  invisible, 
life-giving,  divine  influence  which  proceeds  from  God. 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  distinct  from  the  Father  and  the  Son.  The 
same  passages  which  prove  his  personality  prove  this  also.  He 
could  not  be  another  Comforter,  if  he  were  not  distinct  from  the 
Son ;  nor  sent  by  the  Father,  if  he  were  not  distinct  from  the 
Father.  In  the  commission  to  baptise,  and  in  the  benediction,  his 
personality  is  not  more  manifest  than  the  distinction  from  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  with  whom  he  is  named. 

1 1  Cor.  xiv.  25. 


238         DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   THE  HOLY   SPIRIT. 


CHAPTER  II. 

the  divinity  of  the  holy  spirit. 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  God.1 

When  we  have  ascertained  that  there  is  a  person  to  whom  the 
name  Holy  Spirit  is  applied,  we  can  have  little  difficulty  in  arriving 
at  the  conclusion  that  he  is  a  divine  person.  The  following  argu- 
ments establish  this  truth. 

1.  In  the  commission  he  is  equally  included  with  the  Father  and 
the  Son,  in  the  name  into  which  we  are  baptised.  If  he  is  not 
God,  when  we  devote  ourselves  to  him  in  our  baptism,  we  are  guilty 
of  idolatry.  It  is  no  objection  to  this  argument,  that  Paul  says 
the  Israelites  were  baptised  unto  Moses.2  A  formal  baptism  in  the 
name  of  Moses  is  neither  affirmed  nor  intended.  An  analogy  is 
exhibited  between  the  course  of  a  believer  who  dedicates  himself 
to  Christ  in  baptism,  and  the  course  of  the  Israelites,  who  gave 
themselves  up  to  the  guidance  of  Moses,  from  the  Red  Sea  to  the 
promised  land :  but  an  analogy  only  is  all  that  is  intended.  The 
Corinthians  were  not  baptised  in  the  name  of  Paul  ;3  though  it  was 
their  duty  to  follow  him  as  he  followed  Christ :  and  the  Israelites 
were  not  baptised  in  the  name  of  Moses ;  though  they  followed 
him  as  their  leader.  The  Angel,  in  whom  the  name  of  God  was, 
went  before  them,  in  the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire ;  and  Moses, 
equally  with  all  the  rest,  followed  his  guidance,  and  acknowledged 
his  authority. 

2.  In  the  benediction,  the  Spirit  is  named,  equally  with  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  and  regarded  as  the  source  of  spiritual  bless- 
ings. The  words  may  be  considered  a  prayer  to  the  Holy  Spirit, 
for  the  bestowment  of  these  blessings. 

3.  When  the  bodies  of  believers  are  called  the  temple  of  the 

1  Matt,  xxviii.  19 ;  Heb.  ix.  14 ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  7  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  19 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16 ; 
Acts  v.  3,  4. 
2 1  Cor.  x.  2.  8 1  Cor.  i.  13. 


THE  DIVINITY  OF   THE   HOLY   SPIRIT.  239 

Holy  Ghost,1  the  deity  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  recognised.  They 
to  whom  temples  of  wood  or  stone  were  erected,  were  regarded  as 
deities :  and  he  to  whom  the  bodies  of  the  saints  are  temples,  must 
be  God.  But  we  are  not  left  to  our  own  inference  on  this  subject. 
Paul  has  drawn  the  conclusion  for  us :  for  after  having  stated  that 
the  bodies  of  the  saints  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he 
speaks  of  them  as  belonging  to  God  ;2  and  in  another  place,  when 
speaking  of  the  saints  as  a  temple,  he  calls  the  building  a  "  habita- 
tion of  God  through  the  Spirit."3  The  same  view  is  presented  in 
1  Cor.  iii.  16 :  "  Know  ye  not,  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and 
that  the  spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  you  ?  If  any  man  defile  the 
temple  of  God,  him  shall  God  destroy:  for  the  temple  of  God  is 
holy,  which  temple  ye  are."  So  the  heathen  deities  were  imagined 
to  dwell  in  the  temples  dedicated  to  them ;  and  so  God  was  in  his 
holy  temple  at  Jerusalem. 

4.  The  heinousness  of  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  prodf 
of  his  divinity.  When  Ananias  and  Sapphira  lied  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  Peter  explained  the  enormity  of  their  sin  in  these  words  : 
"  Thou  hast  not  lied  to  men,  but  to  God.4  To  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost,  is  to  sin,  not  against  a  creature,  but  against  God.  This 
argument  acquires  greatly  increased  force,  when  we  consider  the 
words  of  Christ :  "  All  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be  for- 
given unto  men ;  but  the  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  shall 
not  be  forgiven  unto  men.5  Whatever  be  the  reason  that  renders 
blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  unpardonable,  it  must  include  in 
it  that  he  is  God.  If  he  is  not  God,  sin  committed  against  him 
would  be  less  heinous  than  that  committed  against  the  Father  and 
the  Son. 

5.  Passages  of  the  Old  Testament  which  speak  of  Jehovah, 
the  Supreme  God,  are,  in  the  New  Testament,  applied  to  the  Holy 
Ghost.6 

6.  The  attributes  of  God  are  applied,  in  Scripture,  to  the  Holy 
Spirit. 


1 1  Cor.  vi.  19.  2 1  Cor.  vi.  20.  3  Eph.  ii.  22. 

4  Acts  v.  3,  4.  5  Matt.  xii.  31. 

6  Ex.  xvii.  7  compared  with  Heb.  iiL  9  ;  Isaiah  vi.  8,  with  Acts  xxviii.  25 ; 
Jer.  xxxi.  31-34,  with  Heb.  x.  15-17. 


240  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   THE   HOLT  SPIRIT." 

Eternity.  "Who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  himself 
without  spot  to  God."1 

Omnipresence.  "  Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy  Spirit  ?  and  whither 
shall  I  flee  from  thy  presence  ?"2 

Omniscience.  "  The  Spirit  searcheth  all  things ;  yea,  the  deep 
things  of  God."3 

7.  Divine  works  are  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Creation.  The  Spirit  of  God  moved  on  the  face  of  the  waters."4 
"  By  his  Spirit  he  garnished  the  heavens.5 

Providence.  "  Thou  sendest  forth  thy  Spirit,  they  are  created ; 
and  thou  renewest  the  face  of  the  earth."6 

Miracles.  "  If  I  cast  out  devils  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  then  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto  you."7  "  To  another  is  given  the 
working  of  miracles  by  the  same  Spirit."8 

Resurrection  of  Christ.  "  Declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with 
power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead."9  Being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  by  the 
Spirit."10 

Resurrection  of  believers.  "  If  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised  up 
Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in  you,  he  that  raised  up  Christ  from 
the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by  his  Spirit  that 
dwelleth  in  you."11 

1  Heb.  ix.  14.  2  Ps.  cxxxix.  7.  s  1  Cor.  ii.  10. 

4  Gen.  i.  2.  6  Job  xxvi.  13.  6  Ps.  civ.  30. 

7  Matt.  xii.  28.  8  1  Cor.  xii.  10.  9  Horn.  i.  4. 

10 1  Pet.  iii.  18.  u  Rom.  viii,  11. 


OFFICE  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.  241 

CHAPTER   III. 

office  of  the  holy  spirit. 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Sanctifier  and  Comforter  of 
God's  people.1 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  author  of  holiness  in  all  those  who  are 
saved :  "  Through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit."2  "  Ye  are  washed, 
ye  are  sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."3  He  is  the  author 
of  the  new  or  spiritual  life  which  is  produced  in  regeneration.4 
Not  only  the  beginning  of  the  new  life,  but  its  whole  progress,  is 
dependent  on  the  Spirit :  wherefore,  believers  are  said  to  live  in 
the  Spirit,5  to  walk  in  the  Spirit,  to  be  led  by  the  Spirit,6  and  to  be 
filled  with  the  Spirit  ;7  and,  for  this  reason  David  prayed,  "  Take 
not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me."8  As  it  is  his  office  to  change  the 
soul,  and  from  a  state  of  death  in  trespasses  and  sins,  bring  it  into 
a  new  life,  so  it  is  his  office  to  change  our  vile  body,  and  fashion 
it  like  the  glorious  body  of  Christ :  "  He  that  raised  up  Jesus 
from  the  dead,  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies  by  his  Spirit 
that  dwelleth  in  you.9  As  both  body  and  spirit  are  redeemed  by 
Christ,  so  both  body  and  spirit  are  changed  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  fitted  for  the  presence  and  enjoyment  of  God. 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Comforter  of  God's  people.  By  his 
teaching,  the  knowledge  of  salvation  by  the  remission  of  sins  is 
obtained.  The  Saviour  promised :  "  He  shall  take  of  mine,  and 
shall  show  it  unto  you."10  In  fulfilment  of  this  promise,  the  Spirit 
makes  known  the  sufficiency  and  suitableness  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour, 
and  the  efficacy  of  his  blood  to  cleanse  from  sin.  By  the  Holy 
Spirit  the  promises  of  the  divine  word  are  applied  to  the  heart. 
Hence,  peace  and  joy  are  called  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.11  These 
spiritual  enjoyments,  which  are  a  foretaste  of  heaven,  are  called 

1  Ps.  li.  10-12 ;  Ezek.xxxvi.  27;  John  xiv.  26  ;  Acts  ix.  31 ;  Kom.  v.  5  ;  viii. 
13,  16,  26;  1  Cor.  vi.  11 ;  2  Cor.  i.  22 ;  iii.  18 ;  Gal.  v.  22 ;  2  Thes.  ii.  13. 

2  1  Pet.  i.  2.  3  1  Cor.  vi.  11.  4  John  iii.  6. 

6  Gal.  v.  25.  6  Gal.  v.  18.  7  Eph.  v.  18. . 

8  Ps.  li.  11.  9  Rom.  viii.  11.  i0  John  xvi.  15. 

11  Gal.  v.  22. 
16 


242         DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  THE   HOLT  SPIRIT. 

"  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit."1  And,  as  the  earnest  is  given  by  him, 
we  have  reason  to  conclude  that  the  full  possession  will  be  given 
by  him.  As  Christ  will  be  the  medium  through  which  the  felicity 
of  the  future  world  will  be  bestowed ;  so,  the  Holy  Spirit  will  be 
the  immediate  agent  in  bestowing  it.  The  first  comfort  here  below, 
and  the  full  bliss  and  glory  of  heaven,  are  alike  his  work. 


CONCLUSION. 


Adam  became  a  living  soul  when  God  breathed  into  him  the 
breath  of  life  :2  and  from  that  time,  the  process  of  breathing  is 
evidence  that  life  exists.  Prayer  may  be  regarded  as  the  breath- 
ing of  the  spiritual  man.  Sufficient  proof  was  given  that  Saul  of 
Tarsus  had  been  converted,  when  the  Lord  said,  "Behold,  he 
prayeth."3  True  prayer  proceeds  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  imparting 
spiritual  life,  and  enkindling  those  spiritual  desires  which  find 
their  vent  in  prayer.  These  desires  are  breathed  into  the  bosom 
of  God,  in  the  exercise  of  filial  confidence  in  him ;  and,  being  in 
accordance  with  the  will  of  God,4  they  are  regarded  by  him  with 
favor,  and  obtain  answers  of  grace  and  peace. 

From  this  view  of  prayer,  we  may  see  the  propriety  of  the 
Apostle's  injunction  :  "Pray  without  ceasing."5  The  cessation  of 
prayer  would  be  the  cessation  of  spiritual  life.  A  form  of  words 
may  not  be  incessantly  used ;  but  spiritual  desires  must  ever  have 
place  in  the  heart ;  and  the  habit  must  ever  exist,  of  looking  to 
God  for  the  fulfilment  of  these  desires.  This  constant  intercourse 
with  God  is  the  life  of  faith.  We  live  with  him,  converse  with 
him,  and  enjoy  communion  with  him,  through  the  Holy  Spirit 
which  dwelleth  in  us. 

We  often  complain  that  our  prayers  are  not  answered ;  but  it 
would  be  profitable  to  inquire,  what  those  unanswered  petitions 
were.  Did  we  ask  for  wealth,  power,  and  long  life  ?  If  so,  our 
desires  were  carnal,  and  did  not  proceed  from  the  Spirit  of  God. 

1  Eph.  i.  13,  14 ;  2  Cor.  i.  22.  2  Gen.  ii.  7.  8  Acts  ix.  11. 

4  Rom.  viii.  27.  5  1  Thess.  v.  17. 


OFFICE   OF   THE  HOLY  SPIIIIT.  243 

We  must  learn  to  regulate  our  desires  by  the  will  of  God,  and  our 
prayers  will  be  sure  to  obtain  a  gracious  hearing. 

Sincere  prayer  begins  with  the  very  commencement  of  spiritual 
life.  An  infant's  cries  express  its  wants,  before  it  knows  how  to 
express  them  in  words;  and  the  tender  mother  will  understand 
this  inarticulate  language.  So  the  desires  of  the  spiritual  infant 
may  be  signified  by  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered:"1  but  the 
Lord  understands  these  groans,  and  knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of 
the  Spirit,  who  maketh  intercession  for  them.  As  the  lamb  in 
the  bosom  of  the  kind  shepherd ;  as  the  babe  on  the  breast  of  its 
tender  mother ;  so  the  spiritual  babe  reposes  on  the  bosom  of  eter- 
nal love ;  and  in  that  bosom  breathes  all  its  desires. 

Spiritual  life,  evidenced  at  first  by  the  breathing  of  prayer,  is 
afterwards  indicated  by  spiritual  growth.  To  be  spiritual,  we 
must  not  ever  remain  babes  in  religion.  Paul  said  to  the  Corin- 
thians, "  I  could  not  speak  unto  you,  as  unto  spiritual,  but  as  unto 
carnal,  even  as  unto  babes  in  Christ."2  Spiritual  life  is  progress- 
ive, and  tends  to  make  us  men,  strong  men  in  Christ  Jesus.  The 
truth  of  God  supplies  the  milk  for  babes,  and  the  strong  meat  for 
those  who  have  attained  to  greater  age.3  We  have  been  engaged 
in  the  study  of  this  truth ;  and  it  will  be  well  for  us  to  inquire 
whether  our  spiritual  life  has  been  nourished  by  it,  and  whether 
we  are  growing  in  faith,  and  love,  and  every  grace.  Unless  the 
truth  strengthens  the  inner  man,  and  gives  increased  vigor  in  the 
Christian  life,  our  study  of  it  has  been  in  vain. 

1  Rom.  viii.  26.  8 1  Cor.  iii.  1.  8 1  Pet.  ii.  2 :  Heb.  v.  12. 


BOOK   SEVENTH, 
DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  DIVINE  GRACE. 


INTRODUCTION. 


As  love  is  the  affection  which  should  arise  in  our  hearts,  from  a 
view  of  God's  character,  so  gratitude  is  the  affection  which  should 
be  produced,  by  a  view  of  the  benefits  that  he  confers.  The  stream 
of  his  benefits  flows  incessantly  so  that  our  cup  is  ever  full.  To 
receive  the  benefits  thoughtlessly,  like  the  brutes  that  perish,  and 
to  enjoy  them  without  thanksgiving  to  him  from  whom  they  come, 
is  demonstration  complete  of  human  depravity.  Such  demonstra- 
tion is  given  daily  and  hourly  in  the  conduct  of  mankind,  and  by 
it  God  is  offended  and  his  wrath  provoked.  The  unthankful  man 
is  the  evil  man,2  and  the  enemy  of  God.  Hence,  when  we  are 
called  on  to  love  our  enemies,  the  example  proposed  for  our  imita- 
tion is  the  bestowment  of  God's  providential  blessing  on  the 
unthankful. 

Love  your  enemies,  and  do  good,  and  lend,  hoping  for  nothing 
again,  and  your  reward  shall  be  great,  and  ye  shall  be  the  child- 
ren of  the  Highest ;  for  He  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful  and  to 
the  evil. 


1  2  Thess.  ii.  13.  We  are  bound  to  thank  God  alway  for  you,  brethren, 
beloved  of  the  Lord,  because  God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen  you  to  sal 
vation,  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  and  belief  of  the  truth. 

1  Cor.  xv.  10.    By  the  grace  of  God,  I  am  what  I  am. 

2  Cor.  ix.  15.     Thanks  be  to  God  for  his  unspeakable  gift. 
2  Luke  vi.  35. 

(244) 


DUTY  OF   GRATITUDE   FOR  DIVINE   GRACE.  245 

We  are  bound  to  thank  God  for  the  blessings  of  providence  so 
incessantly  and  so  richly  bestowed ;  but  far  higher  obligations  to 
gratitude,  arise  from  the  grace  that  bringeth  salvation.1  This 
grace  includes  God's  gift  of  his  Son,  a  gift  so  great  that  no  name 
for  it  can  be  found.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his 
only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not 
perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."2  The  love  of  the  Son,  which 
demands  our  gratitude,  is  not  less  unmeasured,  than  the  love  of 
the  Father :  whence  Paul  labored  to  explore  "  the  height,  the  length, 
the  breadth  and  the  depth  of  the  love  of  Christ,  which  passeth 
knowledge."3  And  our  gratitude  is  not  complete  till  we  acknow- 
ledge and  celebrate  also,  the  love  of  the  Spirit,4  by  whom  believers 
are  fitted  for  the  enjoyment  of  God,  and  brought  into  fellowship 
with  him. 

In  exercising  and  cultivating  our  gratitude  for  the  blessings  of 
salvation,  we  must  distinctly  recognise  that  they  come  from  God, 
and  that  they  are  intentionally  bestowed.  When  we  trace  them  to 
their  source,  the  infinite  love  of  the  triune  God ;  and  when  we  re- 
ceive them,  as  conferred  according  to  his  eternal  counsel,  we  are 
prepared  while  we  enjoy  the  benefit,  to  return  thanks  to  its  Author, 
and  to  exclaim  with  liveliest  emotion,  "Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul, 
and  forget  not  all  his  benefits."5 

That  our  gratitude  to  God  may  be  proportional  to  the  blessing 
received,  we  should  count  his  mercies  over,  and  survey  their  mag- 
nitude. Unmeasurable !  unspeakable !  passing  knowledge  ! — yet  we 
should  labor  to  know  them  ;  and  as  we  make  progress  in  this  spirit- 
ual knowledge,  our  gratitude  should  swell  and  fill  the  enlarged 
capacity  of  the  mind. 

In  order  to  the  full  exercise  of  gratitude  to  God  it  is  necessary 
to  be  thoroughly  impressed  with  the  conviction  that  the  blessings 
received  are  wholly  undeserved,  and  proceed  entirely  from  the 
mere  mercy  and  grace  of  God.  When  we  feel  that  we  are  less 
than  the  least  of  all  God's  mercies,  that  our  only  desert  is  hell, 
and  that  if  salvation  is  bestowed  on  us,  it  will  be  of  his  own  good 
pleasure ;  we  are  prepared  to  give  thanks  for  the  unspeakable  gift, 
and  to  say,  "  Not  unto  us,  0  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name 
give  glory."6 

1  Tit.  ii.  11.  2  John  iii.  16.  3  Eph.  iii.  18,  19. 

*  Rom.  xv.  30.  5  Ps.  ciii.  2.  6  Ps.  cxv. 


246  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

CHAPTER  I. 

the  trinity. 

The  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  are  three  persons  in 
one  divine  essence.1 

The  unity  of  God  is  a  fundamental  doctrine  of  religion ;  and 
no  doctrine  can  be  true  which  is  inconsistent  with  it.  All  admit 
that  the  Father  is  God ;  and  we  have  seen  that  the  Son  is  God, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  is  God,  according  to  the  teachings  of  the 
sacred  Scriptures.  To  reconcile  the  proper  deity  of  these  three, 
with  the  strict  unity  of  God,  is  a  matter  of  great  difficulty.  All 
admit  that  they  cannot  be  three  and  one  in  the  same  respect ;  and 
divines  have  usually  held  that  they  are  three  in  person,  and  one  in 
essence. 

The  doctrine  of  a  three-fold  distinction  in  the  Godhead,  belongs 
especially  to  the  economy  of  grace,  and  is  therefore  more  clearly 
revealed  in  the  New  Testament  than  in  the  Old.  Some  intimations 
of  it,  however,  may  be  found  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  In  the 
very  first  verse  of  the  Bible,  the  name  of  God  is  plural,  and  the 
verb  "  created,"  with  which  it  is  construed,  is  singular.  This 
countenances  the  opinion,  that  there  is  plurality  as  well  as  unity 
in  the  Godhead.  But  since  words  which  are  plural  in  form,  are 
sometimes  used  to  denote  objects  which  are  singular,  this  argument 
for  a  plurality  in  the  Godhead  cannot  be  regarded  as  in  itself  con- 
clusive. It  derives  strength,  however,  from  two  considerations: 
1.  The  Hebrew  scriptures  guard  the  doctrine  of  God's  unity  with 
great  care;  and  if  all  plurality  were  inconsistent  with  it,  this 
important  purpose  of  the  revelation  made  to  the  Hebrews,  would 
have  been  better  subserved  if  none  but  singular  names  for  the 
deity  had  been  admitted,  yet  plural  names  are  very  commonly 
employed.  And  in  one  remarkable  case,  the  Hebrew  name  Mohim, 
is  used  in  an  express  declaration  of  the  divine  unity.  "  Hear,  0 
Israel,  Jehovah,  our  Elohim,  is  one  Jehovah."2     Why  was   the 

1  Matt,  xxviii.  19 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  14 ;  Rev.  i.  4 ;  Gen.  i.  26 ;  iii.  22 ;  xi.  7 ; 
Isaiah  xlviii.  16 ;  John  xiv.  16 ;  Matt.  iii.  16, 17. 

2  Deut.  vi.  4. 


. 


THE   TRINITY.  247 

plural  name  here  introduced  ?  The  declaration  of  the  divine  unity- 
would  have  been  complete  without  it.  If  it  was  introduced  to 
guard  against  an  improper  inference  from  the  use  of  plural  names, 
it  shows  the  use  of  such  names  to  have  been  dangerous,  and 
therefore  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  wisdom  of  revelation.  If 
the  name  Jehovah  be  understood  to  refer  to  the  divine  essence ; 
and  the  name  Elohim,  to  the  three  divine  persons ;  the  passage 
may  be  interpreted  consistently  and  beautifully,  and  it  becomes 
an  explicit  declaration  of  the  New  Testament  doctrine.  2.  The 
Hebrew  scriptures  contain  other  intimations  of  a  plurality  in  the 
Godhead.  Plural  pronouns  are  applied  to  God,  and  consultation 
is  attributed  to  him.  "  Let  us  make  man."1  "  Let  us  go  down  and 
confound  their  language."2  A  consultation  with  created  beings 
cannot  here  be  supposed.  The  opinion  that  God  spoke  in  these  cases, 
after  the  pompous  manner  of  eastern  monarchs,  besides  being,  on 
other  accounts,  wholly  improbable,  is  completely  set  aside,  by  the 
passage,  "Behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one  of  us."3  No  eastern 
monarch  ever  spoke  of  his  individual  unity,  in  this  style.  No 
consistent  interpretation  of  this  language  can  be  given,  without 
admitting  a  plurality  in  the  Godhead  ;  and  this  admission  explains 
the  use  of  plural  names  for  God. 

That  the  plurality  in  the  Godhead  is  three-fold,  has  been  inferred 
from  the  three- fold  ascription  of  holiness4  to  God,  and  the  three-fold 
benediction  of  the  High  Priest.5  A  more  satisfactory  argument  is 
derived  from  passages  in  which  the  three  divine  persons  are  distinctly 
brought  to  view.6 

This  doctrine  is  more  clearly  revealed  in  the  New  Testament. 
In  the  formula  of  Christian  baptism  it  is  clearly  exhibited.7  We 
are  baptised  into  one  name,  because  God  is  one ;  but  that  is  the 
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
because  it  belongs  alike  to  each  of  these  divine  persons.  Here, 
this  doctrine  meets  us,  at  our  very  entrance  on  the  profession  of 
the  Christian  religion.  If  Christ  was  not  God,  he  was  justly 
condemned  to  death,  and  his  religion  is  false ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit, 
the  Comforter  whom  he  promised,  is  as  little  entitled  to  regard  as 

1  Gen.  i.  26.  2  Gen.  xi.  7.  8  Gen.  iii.  22. 

4  Isaiah  vi.  3.  *       6  Num.  vi.  24-26. 

6  Isaiah  xlviii.  16 ;  lxi.  1 ;  Ixiii.  7-10.  7  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 


248  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

he  was.  If  Christ  and  the  Holy  Spirit  are  not  God,  the  form  of 
baptism  should  be  rejected,  as  of  a  piece  with  the  false  religion 
into  which  it  introduces  us.  No  man  can  consistently  receive 
Christian  baptism,  without  believing  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity. 

We  have  spoken  of  this  doctrine  as  belonging  especially  to  the 
economy  of  grace.  It  is  here  that  it  is  most  clearly  unfolded 
to  our  view,  and  without  this  doctrine,  the  covenant  of  grace, 
and  its  developments  in  the  great  work  of  salvation,  cannot  be 
understood.  Yet  there  are  fainter  exhibitions  of  the  doctrine  in 
other  works  of  God.  This  is  true  of  creation.  The  consultation 
at  the  creation  of  man  has  already  been  noticed,  as  a  proof  of 
plurality  in  the  Godhead.  Moses  says,  "  The  Spirit  of  God  moved 
on  the  face  of  the  waters."  Job  says,  "  By  his  Spirit  he  garnished 
the  heavens.  John  says,  "  By  him  (the  Word)  all  things  were 
made."1  All  the  divine  persons,  therefore,  were  concerned  in 
creation :  and  other  passages  teach  that  they  are  also  concerned 
in  providence.2 

The  most  sober-minded  divines  admit  that  there  is  incompre- 
hensible mystery  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  All  attempts  to 
explain  it  have  failed.  Two  methods  which  have  been  proposed  to 
bring  it  within  our  comprehension,  deserve  special  notice. 

Some  who  are  called  Sabellians,  maintain,  that  the  distinction 
between  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  official  and 
not  personal.  They  hold  that  God  is  one  in  person,  as  well  as  in 
essence;  but  that  he  manifests  himself  in  three  different  ways, 
and  that  the  three  different  names  denote  these  three  modes  of 
manifestation.  This  simplifies  the  doctrine  ;  but  it  does  not  accord 
with  the  Scriptures.  According  to  this  view  of  the  doctrine,  we 
might  paraphrase  the  words  of  Christ,  in  John,  xiv.  16,  thus :  "  I, 
who  am  the  same  person  with  the  Father,  will  pray  the  Father, 
who  is  no  other  than  myself,  in  a  different  office,  or  mode  of 
manifestation,  and  he  shall  give  you  another  comforter,  who  is  not 
another,  but  the  same  person  as  my  Father  and  myself."  We  see, 
from  this  specimen,  that  this  explanation  of  the  doctrine  is  at 
variance  with  the  word  of  God. 

Others  admit  the  distinction  of  persons  in  the  Godhead,  and 

1  Gen.  i.  2;  Job  xxvi.  13  ;  John  i.  3.         2  Heb.  i.  3  ;  Isaiah  xxxiv.  15,  16. 


THE  TRINITY.  249 

explain  that  the  three  possess  one  essence,  just  as  three  men, 
Peter,  James,  and  John,  possess  one  nature.  This  is  Tritheism. 
It  makes  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  three  Gods,  just  as 
Peter,  James,  and  John,  are  three  men.  If  we  may  call  the  three 
persons  one  God,  merely  because  they  are  alike  in  their  nature ; 
we  may,  with  equal  reason,  call  all  mankind  one  man ;  and  we  may 
maintain  that  Jupiter,  Neptune,  Pluto,  and  all  the  heathen  deities 
were  one  God.  Paul's  distinction,  "  There  are  gods  many ;  but 
to  us  there  is  but  one  God,"1  is  a  distinction  without  a  difference ; 
for  the  many  gods  are  one,  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the  three 
divine  persons  are  supposed  to  be  one.  This  explanation  must, 
therefore,  be  rejected,  as  inconsistent  with  the  proper  unity  of 
God. 

Attempts  have  frequently  been  made,  to  illustrate  the  mystery 
of  the  Trinity,  by  means  of  material  objects.  One  of  these  may 
be  cited  as  a  specimen  of  the  rest.  Water,  ice,  and  snow,  it  is 
said,  are  different  things,  and  yet  they  are  but  one.  For  aught 
that  appears,  it  would  have  served  quite  as  well,  to  illustrate  the 
mystery,  by  three  separate  glasses  of  water,  all  in  the  liquid  form. 
The  distinction  between  them  would  have  been  as  perfect ;  and  the 
identity  of  nature  would  have  been  as  real,  and  more  apparent. 
All  such  illustrations  darken  counsel  with  words  without  knowledge. 
What  shall  we  liken  unto  the  Lord  ? 

These  efforts  to  explain  the  doctrine,  are  not  simply  fruitless, 
but  they  lead  to  error.  If  the  mind  receives  satisfaction  from 
them,  it  is  by  a  false  view  of  God's  mode  of  existence,  and  thinking 
him  such  an  one  as  ourselves.  It  is  far  wiser  to  admit,  that  none 
by  searching  can  find  out  God :  and  to  abstain  from  unavailing 
efforts  to  comprehend  what  is  incomprehensible  to  our  finite  minds. 
What  God  tells  us  on  the  subject,  we  ought  to  believe ;  and  with 
this  measure  of  knowledge,  we  ought  to  be  satisfied ;  and  all  beyond 
this  is  human  speculation,  of  which  it  is  our  duty  and  interest  to 
beware.  Nor  are  we  justly  liable  to  the  reproach  of  believing 
what  we  do  not  understand.  The  teaching  of  divine  revelation, 
we  may  understand,  and  we  should  labor  to  understand ;  and  the 
mystery  which  remains  unrevealed  to  our  understanding,  is  not  an 
object  of  our  faith.     The  proposition,  God  is  incomprehensible,  is 

1  1  Cor.  viii.  5,  6. 


250  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

simple  and  intelligible,  and  our  faith  embraces  it.  God  is  the 
subject  of  this  proposition ;  and,  if  a  full  understanding  of  the 
subject  were  necessary  to  faith,  a  belief  of  this  proposition  would 
be  impossible.  Though  we  do  not  comprehend  God,  we  comprehend 
the  meaning  of  the  proposition ;  and  this  is  what  we  believe.  So 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  as  an  object  of  our  faith,  may  be 
expressed  in  propositions,  each  one  of  which  is  intelligible,  notwith- 
standing the  incomprehensibility  of  the  subject. 

The  view  which  has  been  presented,  is  important,  to  strengthen 
our  faith  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  So  long  as  we  imagine 
that  a  full  comprehension  of  the  subject  is  necessary  to  the 
exercise  of  faith,  we  must  embrace  the  truth  feebly.  But  let  us 
examine  the  propositions,  in  which  the  doctrine  may  be  expressed, 
and  we  shall  find  each  one  of  them  perfectly  intelligible.  The 
Father  is  God ; — the  Son  is  God ; — the  Holy  Ghost  is  God ; — there 
is  but  one  God.  All  these  propositions,  we  may  understand,  and 
receive  with  unwavering  faith ;  while  we  are  well  assured  that  our 
understandings  fall  infinitely  short  of  comprehending  the  great 
subject,  and  that,  in  harmonizing  the  last  proposition  with  the 
preceding  three,  there  is  a  difficulty  which  finite  intelligence  cannot 
explain. 

In  receiving  a  truth  which  is  attended  with  difficulty,  our  faith 
may  be  assisted,  by  noticing  that  other  truths,  which  we  are 
compelled  to  admit,  are  attended  with  equal  difficulty.  The 
Omnipresence  of  God,  may  be  shown  to  be  as  incomprehensible  as 
the  Trinity.  If,  at  the  same  moment,  a  ball  of  matter  is  here,  a 
ball  there,  and  a  ball  yonder,  we  know  that  there  are  three  balls. 
If,  in  the  illustration,  we  substitute  an  angel  for  the  ball,  we  know 
that  there  are  three  angels  in  the  three  places,  and  not  one  and 
the  same  angel.  Yet  the  doctrine  of  God's  omnipresence  teaches, 
that  a  whole  deity  is  here,  a  whole  deity  there,  and  a  whole  deity 
yonder ;  and  yet  it  is  one  and  the  same  deity  which  is  present  at 
each  place.  If  an  entire  deity  may  dwell,  at  the  same  time,  in 
three  separate  places,  and  yet  be  but  one,  why  may  not  an  entire 
deity  dwell  in  the  three  separate  persons,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  yet  be  but  one  God  ?  There  is,  perhaps,  no 
analogy  between  the  two  cases,  except  in  this,  that  they  alike 
confound  our  arithmetic ;  but  this  analogy  is  sufficient  for  our 
present  purpose.     Were  God's  mode  of  existence  like  that  of 


THE   TRINITY.  251 

created  things,  either  material  or  spiritual,  he  could  not  be  in 
several  places  at  the  same  time,  or  in  three  distinct  persons ;  and 
yet  be  an  undivided  unit.  We  are  compelled  to  admit  the  omni- 
presence of  God,  and  we  should  admit,  with  equal  faith,  on  the 
authority  of  God's  word,  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  ascribing  the 
difficulty  of  the  subject  to  the  incomprehensibility  of  the  divine 
nature. 

The  doctrine  of  God's  omnipresence  has,  in  one  particular, 
greater  difficulty,  than  that  of  the  Trinity.  The  latter  has  a  relief 
not  discoverable  in  the  other,  arising  from  the  consideration,  that 
God  is  not  three  and  one  in  the  same  respect.  God  is  three  in 
person,  one  in  essence ;  and,  although  we  may  be  unable  to  explain 
the  precise  difference  between  person  and  essence,  the  fact  that 
there  is  a  difference,  relieves  the  doctrine  from  the  charge  of 
inconsistency. 

We  study  the  human  mind  in  the  phenomena  which  it  exhibits. 
The  operations  of  memory,  imagination,  reasoning,  &c,  differ 
widely  from  each  other ;  but  we  refer  them  all  to  the  one  indivisible 
substance,  called  mind,  of  which  we  have  no  knowledge,  except 
what  we  acquire  from  the  phenomena.  What  we  know  of  God,  we 
learn  from  the  manifestations  which  he  has  made  of  himself,  in  his 
works  and  word.  In  these  manifestations,  we  discover  the  personal 
distinction  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  yet,  as  taught  by  the 
divine  word,  we  refer  all  the  manifestations  to  the  one  indivisible 
essence,  in  which  the  unity  of  God  consists.  It  is  not  a  threefold 
manifestation  of  the  same  person,  as  the  Sabellians  hold ;  but  a 
manifestation  of  three  distinct  persons,  counselling  and  covenanting 
with  each  other,  one  sending  another,  one  speaking  to  another,  and 
of  the  third,  &c.  Nothing  like  this  appears  in  the  phenomena  of 
one  human  mind :  but  we  cannot  thence  infer,  that  it  cannot  be  in 
the  manifestations  of  one  divine  mind. 

The  word  Trinity  is  not  in  the  Bible,  and  objection  has  therefore 
been  made  to  its  use.  As  signifying  tri-unity,  three  in  one,  it  is 
an  expressive  name  for  the  doctrine.  As  a  convenient  word,  we 
are  at  liberty  to  use  it,  as  we  do  many  other  words  not  found  in 
the  Bible ;  and  the  propriety  of  using  it  is  the  greater,  because 
there  is  no  single  word  in  the  Bible,  which  can  be  substituted  for  it. 
But  we  are  under  no  obligation  to  contend  for  the  name,  which  is 
human,  provided  we  firmly  maintain  the  doctrine,  which  is  divine. 


252  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

The  word  person,  also,  which  is  used  in  stating  this  doctrine,  is 
without  Scripture  precedent.  Some  have  cited,  as  authority  for 
its  use,  the  passage  in  Heb.  i.  3 :  "  Who  being  the  brightness  of 
his  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his  person."  Here,  it  is 
alleged,  the  person  of  the  Father  is  mentioned ;  and,  as  the  Son  is 
his  express  image,  we  must  conclude  that  he,  also,  is  a  person ; 
and,  having  established  the  personal  distinction  between  the  Father 
and  the  Son,  no  doubt  can  remain,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  third 
person.  To  all  this,  it  may  be  answered,  that  the  word  person 
is  not  a  good  rendering  of  the  Greek  word  here  used,  the  sense  of 
which  would  be  better  expressed  by  the  word  substance.  The 
passage  properly  interpreted,  refers  to  the  full  display  of  the 
Godhead,  made  through  Jesus  Christ  as  mediator,  and  not  to  the 
relation  subsisting  among  the  divine  persons.  But  though  there  is 
no  Scripture  precedent  for  the  use  of  the  word,  must  it  therefore 
be  abandoned  ?  A  scrupulosity,  which  should  refuse  to  use  any 
word  not  found  in  the  Bible,  would  be  unwise,  and  lead  to  no  good 
result.  No  one  would  refuse  to  apply  the  word  person  to  Jesus 
Christ,  and  speak  of  him  as  a  holy  and  just  person,  an  extraordi- 
nary or  wonderful  person ;  or  to  say  that  his  divine  and  human 
natures  are  united  in  one  person:  yet  it  would  be  difficult  to 
produce  Scripture  precedent  for  this  application  of  the  term.  Paul 
does  speak,  in  2  Cor.  ii.  10,  of  "the  person  of  Christ;"  but  a  better 
rendering  of  this  passage  would  be,  "in  the  presence  of  Christ;" 
and  Pilate's  wife  said,  Mat.  xxvii. :  "  Have  thou  nothing  to  do  with 
this  just  person ;"  but  the  word  person  is  here  supplied  by  our 
translators,  and  has  no  word  corresponding  to  it  in  the  original 
text.  Yet  our  translators,  in  applying  this  word  to  Christ,  have 
conformed  to  the  common  usage  of  the  word,  adopted  and  sustained 
by  the  common  sense  of  mankind.  Now,  if  Jesus  Christ  was  a 
person,  in  the  common  acceptation  of  the  term ;  and  if  he  addressed 
his  Father,  and  spoke  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  one  human  person 
would  address  another,  and  speak  of  a  third,  it  must  be  an  excessive 
scrupulosity,  which  refuses  to  apply  the  term  to  the  Father,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit,  as  well  as  to  the  Son.  Some  have  preferred  to 
substitute  the  word  manifestation;  but  this  is  equally  without 
Scripture  precedent ;  and  to  say,  that  one  manifestation  speaks  to 
another,  and  of  a  third :  would  be  unintelligible.  We  may,  therefore, 
defend  the  use  of  the  term  person,  provided  we  remember  that  it 


COVENANT   OF   GRACE.  253 

is  a  human  expedient  to  avoid  circumlocution.  But  if  any  one 
proceed  to  draw  from  the  term,  an  inference  which  will  affect  the 
doctrine,  he  must  be  reminded  that  the  word  is  human.  If  any 
one  should  infer,  when  we  speak  of  the  three  divine  persons,  that 
they  are  as  distinct  from  each  other,  in  every  respect,  as  the  threo 
human  persons,  Peter,  James,  and  John,  he  is  building  an  inference, 
on  a  foundation  not  authorized  by  the  word  of  God. 


CHAPTER  II. 

COVENANT     OF    GRACE. 


The  three  Divine  Persons  co-operate  in  man's  salvation 
according  to  an  eternal  covenant.1 

On  a  former  occasion,  it  was  shown  that  the  Scriptures  use  the 
term  covenant  with  great  latitude  of  meaning.  The  propriety  of 
its  use  in  the  present  case,  cannot  well  be  questioned.  We  have 
three  divine  persons,  who  are  parties  in  this  covenant ;  and  the 
doctrine  of  God's  unity  cannot  exclude  the  notion  of  a  covenant, 
without,  at  the  same  time,  excluding  the  distinction  of  persons  in 
the  Godhead.  We  are  not  to  imagine,  as  included  in  this  covenant 
transaction,  a  proposal  of  terms  by  one  party,  and  a  deliberation, 
followed  with  an  acceptance  or  rejection  of  them,  by  the  other 
parties.  These  things  occur,  in  the  making  of  human  covenants, 
because  of  the  imperfection  of  the  parties.  In  condescension  to 
our  weakness,  the  Scriptures  use  language  taken  from  the  affairs 
of  men.  They  speak  as  if  a  formal  proposal  had  been  made,  at 
the  creation  of  man,  addressed  by  one  of  the  parties  to  the  others : 
"Let  us  make  man;"  but  this  is  in  accommodation  to  our  modes 
of  conception.  An  agreement  and  co-operation  of  the  divine 
persons,  in  the  creation  of  man,  is  what  is  taught  in  this  passage. 
This  agreement  and  co-operation  extend  to  all  the  works  of  God : 
"Who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  will."2    The  idea 


1  Ps.  ii.  8 ;  xl.  6-8 ;  lxxxix.  3 ;  Isaiah  xlix.  3-12 ;  John  xvii.  6 ;  Heb.  xiii. 
20 ;  Titus  i.  2. 

2  Eph.  i.  11. 


254  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

of  counsel  in  all  these  works,  accords  with  that  of  consultation 
which  is  presented  in  the  account  of  man's  creation.  In  every 
work  of  God,  the  divine  persons  must  either  agree  or  disagree.  As 
they  alike  possess  infinite  wisdom,  disagreement  among  them  is 
impossible.  The  salvation  of  men  is  a  work  of  God,  in  which  the 
divine  persons  concur.  It  is  performed  according  to  an  eternal 
purpose ;  and  in  this  purpose,  as  well  as  in  the  work,  the  divine 
persons  concur ;  and  this  concurrence  is  their  eternal  covenant. 
The  purpose  of  the  one  God,  is  the  covenant  of  the  Trinity. 

In  the  work  of  salvation,  the  divine  persons  co-operate  in  different 
offices ;  and  these  are  so  clearly  revealed,  as  to  render  the  personal 
distinction  in  the  Godhead  more  manifest,  than  it  is  in  any  other 
of  God's  works.  Beyond  doubt,  these  official  relations  are  seve- 
rally held,  by  the  perfect  agreement  of  all ;  and,  speaking  after 
the  manner  of  men,  the  adjustment  of  these  relations,  and  the 
assignment  of  the  several  parts  in  the  work,  are  the  grand  stipula- 
tions of  the  eternal  covenant. 

That  the  covenant  is  eternal,  may  be  argued  from  the  eternity, 
unchangeableness,  and  omniscience  of  the  parties,  and  from  the 
declarations  of  Scripture  which  directly  or  indirectly  relate  to  it : 
"  Through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant."1  "  His  eternal 
purpose  in  Christ  Jesus."2  "  In  hope  of  eternal  life  promised 
before  the  world  began."3  "  Grace  given  in  Christ  Jesus  before 
the  world  began."4 

Although  God's  purpose  is  one,  we  are  obliged,  according  to  our 
modes  of  conception,  to  view  it,  and  speak  of  it,  as  consisting  of 
various  parts.  So,  the  eternal  covenant  is  one ;  but  it  is  revealed 
to  us  in  a  manner  adapted  to  our  conceptions  and  to  our  spiritual 
benefit.  The  work  of  redemption  by  Christ  is  presented  in  the 
Gospel  as  the  great  object  of  our  faith ;  and  the  stipulation  for 
the  accomplishment  of  this  work,  is  the  prominent  point  exhibited 
in  the  revelation  which  is  made  to  us  respecting  the  covenant  of 
grace.  The  agreement  between  the  Father  and  the  Son  is  con- 
spicuously brought  to  view,  in  various  parts  of  the  sacred  volume : 
"  Thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me."5  "  Ask  of  me,  and 
I  will  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost 


1  Heb.  xiii.  20.  2  Eph.  iii.  11.  8  Tit.  i.  2 

*  2  Tim.  i.  9.  6  John  xvii.  6. 


COVENANT   OF   GRACE.  255 

parts  of  the  earth  for  thy  possession."1  "Sacrifice  and  offering 
thou  didst  not  desire.  Then  said  I,  Lo,  I  come,  in  the  volume  of 
the  book  it  is  written  of  me,  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,  0  God;"2 
and  in  Isaiah,  chapter  xlix.,  the  stipulations  between  the  Father 
and  the  Son  are  presented,  almost  as  if  they  had  been  copied  from 
an  original  record  of  the  transaction. 

According  to  the  covenant  arrangement,  the  Son  appeared  in 
human  nature,  in  the  form  of  a  servant ;  and,  after  obeying  unto 
death,  was  exalted  by  the  Father  to  supreme  dominion.  The  Holy 
Spirit  also  is  revealed  as  acting  in  a  subordinate  office,  being  sent 
by  the  Father  and  by  the  Son.  The  Father  alone  is  not  presented 
as  acting  in  a  subordinate  office ;  but  appears  as  sustaining  the  full 
authority  of  the  Godhead,  sending  the  Son,  giving  him  a  people  to 
be  redeemed,  prescribing  the  terms,  accepting  the  service,  reward- 
ing and  glorifying  the  Son,  and  sending  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  all 
this  the  Father  appears  as  the  representative  of  the  Godhead,  in 
its  authority  and  majesty.  The  Son  also  sustains  a  representative 
character.  The  promise  of  eternal  life  was  made,  before  the  world 
began,  to  the  people  of  God,  in  him  as  their  representative.  The 
reconciliation  between  God  and  men  is  provided  for  by  the  cove- 
nant engagement  between  the  Father  and  the  Son ;  the  Father  act- 
ing as  the  representative  of  the  Godhead,  and  the  Son  as  the 
representative  and  surety  of  his  people.  The  Holy  Spirit  concurs 
in  this  arrangement,  and  takes  his  part  in  the  work,  in  harmony 
with  the  other  persons  of  the  Godhead.  His  peculiar  office  is 
necessary  to  complete  the  plan,  and  to  reward  the  obedience  of  the 
Son  by  the  salvation  of  his  redeemed  people.  The  promises  of 
the  Father  to  the  Son  include  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and, 
therefore,  the  sending  of  the  Spirit  is  attributed  to  the  Son  ;3  and 
sometimes  to  the  Father  at  the  petition  of  the  Son.4 

In  this  order  of  operation,  inferiority  of  nature  is  not  implied, 
in  the  subordination  of  office  to  which  the  Son  and  the  Spirit  vol- 
untarily consent.  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells  in  each  of 
the  divine  persons,  and  renders  the  fulfilment  of  the  covenant 
infallibly  sure,  in  all  its  stipulations.  The  Holy  Spirit,  in  the 
execution  of  his  office,  dwells  in  believers ;  but  he  brings  with  him 


1  Ps.  ii.  8.  •  2  Ps.  xl.  6-18. 

3  John  xvi.  7.  *  John  xiv.  16. 


256  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  so  that  God  is  in  them,  and  they  are 
the  temple  of  God,  and  filled  with  the  fulness  of  God.  The  Son 
or  Word,  in  the  execution  of  his  office,  hecomes  the  man  Jesus 
Christ ;  but  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells  in  him ;  so  that, 
in  his  deepest  humiliation  he  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  God  over 
all,  blessed  for  ever. 

The  order  of  operation  in  this  mysterious  and  wonderful  econ- 
omy, can  be  learned  from  divine  revelation  only.  Here  we  should 
study  it  with  simple  faith,  relying  on  the  testimony  of  God.  In 
the  representation  of  it  here  exhibited,  we  may  discover  that  the 
blessings  of  grace,  proceeding  from  God,  appear  to  originate  in 
the  Father,  "  of  whom  are  all  things,"  to  be  conferred  through 
the  Son,  "  by  whom  are  all  things,"  and  by  the  Spirit,  who  is  the 
immediate  agent  in  bestowing  them,  the  last  in  the  order  of  ope- 
ration. The  approach  to  God,  in  acts  of  devotion,  is  in  the  reverse 
order.  The  Spirit  makes  intercession  in  the  saints,  moving  them, 
as  a  spirit  of  supplication,  and  assisting  their  infirmities,  when 
they  know  not  what  to  pray  for.  Their  prayers  are  offered  through 
Christ,  as  tHe  medium  of  approach ;  and  the  Father,  as  the  highest 
representative  of  the  Godhead,  is  the  ultimate  object  of  the  wor- 
ship. Through  him  [Christ]  we  have  access  by  one  Spirit  to  the 
Father.1  The  Spirit  moves  us  to  honor  the  Son  and  the  Father : 
and  for  this  purpose  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  shows  them 
to  us,  that  we  may  believe  in  him,  and  through  him  approach  the 
Father.  In  this  work  he  acts  for  the  whole  Godhead,  and  there- 
fore his  drawing  is  ascribed  to  the  Father :  "  No  man  can  come  to 
me,  except  the  Father,  which  hath  sent  me,  draw  him."2  When 
we  come  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  whole  Godhead  meets  us  again  in  the 
person  of  the  Mediator  :  for  "  God  is  in  Christ  reconciling  the 
world  unto  himself."3  And  when  we  address  the  Father,  as  the 
ultimate  object  of  our  worship,  the  whole  Godhead  is  there,  and 
receives  our  adorations.  In  the  covenant  of  grace,  the  triune  God 
is  so  presented  to  the  view  of  the  believer,  that  he  may  worship 
without  distraction  of  thought,  with  full  confidence  of  acceptance, 
and  with  a  clear  perception  that  God  is  to  him  all  and  in  alL  In 
the  retirement  of  the  closet,  the  devotional  man  addresses  God  as 
present  in  the  secret  place,  and  holds  communion  with  him,  as  a 

1  Eph.  ii.  18.  2  John  vi.  44.  8  2  Cor.  v.  19. 


COVENANT   OF   GRACE.  257 

i 

friend  near  at  hand.  When  he  comes  forth  into  the  busy  world, 
he  sees  God  all  around  him,  in  the  heavens,  and  in  the  earth ;  and 
holds  converse  with  him  in  this  different  manifestation  of  himself. 
When  he  lifts  his  thoughts  to  the  high  and  holy  place  where  God's 
throne  is,  and  prays,  "Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,"  his  mind 
is  directed  to  the  highest  and  most  glorious  manifestation  of  the 
Deity.  In  all  this  he  suffers  no  distraction  of  thought.  The  same 
omnipresent  One  is  addressed,  whether  conceived  to  be  in  the 
closet,  or  in  the  world,  or  in  the  highest  heavens.  With  equal 
freedom  from  distraction  we  may  worship  the  Infinite  One,  whether 
we  approach  him  as  the  Holy  Spirit,  operating  on  the  heart ;  or  as 
the  Son,  the  Mediator  between  God  and  men ;  or  as  the  Father, 
representing  the  full  authority  and  majesty  of  the  Godhead.  We 
worship  God,  and  God  alone,  whether  our  devotions  are  directed 
to  the  Father,  the  Son,  or  the  Holy  Spirit ;  for  the  divine  essence, 
undivided  and  indivisible,  belongs  to  each  of  the  three  persons. 

To  guard  against  mistake,  it  should  be  observed,  that  the  cove- 
nant which  we  have  been  considering  is  not  identical  with  the  new 
covenant  of  which  Paul  speaks  in  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  The 
latter  is  made,  according  to  the  prophecy  which  he  quotes,  "  with 
the  house  of  Israel  and  the  house  of  Judah  ;"*  whereas  the  cove- 
nant of  which  we  have  treated,  is  not  made  with  man.  There  is, 
however,  a  close  connection  between  them.  In  the  eternal  cove- 
nant, promises  are  made  to  the  Son,  as  the  representative  of  his 
people :  in  the  new  covenant,  these  promises  are  made  to  them 
personally,  and,  in  part,  fulfilled  to  them.  The  promises  are  made 
to  them :  "  I  will  be  to  them  a  God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  a 
people  :"2  and  they  are,  in  part,  fulfilled.  "  I  will  put  my  law  in 
their  minds,  and  write  it  in  their  hearts." 

2  Heb.  viii.  8.  3  Heb.  viii.  10. 

17 


258      DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  DIVINE  GRACE,. 


CHAPTER  III. 

BLESSINGS    OP   GRACE. 
THE   SALVATION   OF  MEN  IS   ENTIRELY   OF  DIVINE   GRACE.1 

Grace  is  unmerited  favor.  Paul  distinguishes,  in  Rom.  iv.  4, 
between  the  reward  of  grace  and  the  reward  of  debt.  When  good 
is  conferred  because  it  is  due,  it  is  not  of  grace.  Whatever  may- 
be claimed  on  the  score  of  justice,  cannot  be  regarded  as  unmer- 
ited favor.  Justice  gives  to  every  man  according  to  his  works ; 
and  if  salvation  were  of  works,  it  could  not  be  of  grace.  Paul 
has  made  this  matter  very  plain :  "To  him  that  worketh,  is  the 
reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but  of  debt.  If  by  grace,  then  it  is 
no  more  of  works ;  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace.  But  if  it 
be  of  works,  then  it  is  no  more  grace ;  otherwise  work  is  no  more 
work."2 

For  the  same  reason  that  salvation  is  not  of  works,  it  is  not  of 
the  law.  The  law  is  the  rule  of  justice,  and  takes  cognisance  of 
men's  works.  If  it  gave  life  to  men,  it  could  be  only  on  the 
ground  of  their  obedience  to  its  requirements ;  for  its  language  is, 
"  The  man  that  doeth  these  things  shall  live  by  them."3  Salva- 
tion by  the  law  is  declared  to  be  impossible :  for  if  there  had  been 
a  law  given  which  could  Ifave  given  life,  verily  righteousness  should 
have  been  by  the  law.4  The  Scriptures  represent  grace  and  law 
as  opposed  to  each  other :  "  The  law  was  given  by  Moses ;  but 
grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."5  "  Received  ye  the  Spirit 
by  the  works  of  the  law,  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith?"6  "  It  is  of 
faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace."7  Sometimes  the  term  law  is 
used  in  an  extended  sense ;  as  when  the  law  of  faith  is  opposed  to 
the  law  of  works  ;8  and  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life,  to  the  law  of  sin 
and  death.9  Hence  we  read  of  "  the  perfect  law  of  liberty,"10  which 
cannot  be  the  rule  of  justice :  that  says,  "  Cursed  is  every  one 

1  Eph.  ii.  5,  7,  8 ;  2  Tim.  i.  9  ;  Rom.  iii.  24 ;  viii.  23 ;  xi.  5,  0 ;  ix.  15,  16. 

2  Rom.  xi.  6.  3  Rom.  x.  5.  4  Gal.  iii.  21. 
6  John  i.  17.  6  Gal.  iii.  2.  7  Rom.  iv.  16. 
8  Rom.  iii.  27.                           9  Rom.  viii.  2.                         10  James  i.  25. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  259 

that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of 
the  law  to  do  them."1  When  the  term  law  is  used  in  this  extended 
sense,  it  denotes  the  method  of  salvation  by  grace  through  faith, 
and  is  carefully  distinguished  from  "the  law  of  works." 

The  doctrine  that  salvation  is  of  grace,  is  taught  in  the  sacred 
Scriptures  with  great  clearness.  In  the  second  chapter  of  the 
epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  the  declaration  is  twice  made,  "  By  grace 
ye  are  saved."  Paul  ascribed  his  own  salvation  to  grace :  "  By 
the  grace  of  God,  I  am  what  I  am."2  He  traces  the  blessing  of 
salvation  to  "  the  grace  given  in  Christ  Jesus,  before  the  world 
began  :"3 — to  "  the  riches  of  his  grace  :"4 — to  "  the  exceeding  riches 
of  his  grace."5 

Salvation  is  entirely  of  grace.  The  passages  already  quoted 
show  that  salvation  is  not  partly  of  grace  and  partly  of  works. 
Grace  and  works  are  so  opposed  to  each  other,  that,  when  it  is 
affirmed  to  be  of  grace,  it  is  denied  to  be  of  works :  "  Not  of 
works  ;  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace."  "  Not  according  to  our 
works ;  but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace."6  The  ex- 
clusion of  all  boasting,7  was,  that  the  blessing  bestowed  is  entirely 
of  grace:  "Not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast."8  Our 
works  are  wholly  excluded ;  because  they  are  all  sinful,  and  can 
deserve  nothing  but  the  wrath  of  God.  Faith  renounces  all  reli- 
ance on  our  own  works,  all  expectation  of  favor  on  their  account ; 
and  asks  and  receives  every  blessing  as  the  gift  of  divine  grace 
through  Jesus  Christ.  When  salvation  is  so  received,  all  boasting 
is  effectually  excluded. 

That  salvation  is  entirely  of  divine  grace,  may  be  argued  from 
the  condition  in  which  the  Gospel  finds  mankind.  We  are  justly 
condemned,  totally  depraved,  and,  in  ourselves,  perfectly  helpless. 
All  this  has  been  fully  proved  in  a  former  chapter ;  is  verified  in 
the  experience  of  every  one  who  is  awakened  to  a  just  view  of  his 
lost  state ;  and  precisely  accords  with  the  language  of  God  to  his 
ancient  people :  "  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself,  but  in  me 
is  thy  help."9  The  second  chapter  of  the  epistle  to  the  Ephesians 
describes  the  condition  of  men  by  nature  :  "  Children  of  wrath," 

1  G*l.  iii.  10.  2  1  Cor.  xv.  10.  3  2  Tim.  i.  9. 

*  Eph.  i.  7.  5  Eph.  ii.  7.  6  2  Tim.  i.  9. 

7  Rom.  iii.  27.  8  Eph.  ii.  9.  9  Hosea  xiii.  9. 


200  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

"dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  "without  hope  and  without  God;" 

and  it  attributes  their  deliverance  from  this  wretched  and  hopeless 

condition,  to  the  grace  of  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy  :  "  But  God, 

in  his  great  love,  wherewith  he  loved  us  even  when  we  were  dead  in 

sins,  hath  quickened  us  together  with  Christ  (by  grace  ye  are  saved), 

and  hath  raised  us  up  together ;  and  hath  made  us  sit  together 

in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.     For  by  grace  ye  are  saved 

through  faith,  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God." 

In  the  eagerness  of  his  desire  to  impress  the  minds  of  the  Ephesian 

Christians  with  a  sense  of  their  obligation  to  divine  grace,  before  he 

reaches  the  conclusion  of  his  argument,  as  if  impatient  to  express 

the  thought  with  which  his  own  mind  was  so  deeply  impressed,  he 

introduced  it  parenthetically,  by  anticipation,  "By  grace  ye  are 

saved."     Afterwards,  when  his  argument  is  completed,  he  repeats 

the  declaration,  and  expands  it  to  the  utmost  fulness  of  meaning, 

when  he  adds  that  faith  itself  is  the  gift  of  God.     If  the  blessing 

bestowed  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace,  and  if  faith  itself  is 

the  gift  of  God,  it  must  be  emphatically  true  that  salvation  is  of 

grace. 

The  blessings  which  are  bestowed  in  salvation,  demonstrate  that 
it  is  entirely  of  grace.  We  shall  proceed  to  a  particular  consid- 
eration of  these,  in  the  sections  which  follow :  but  we  may  here, 
in  a  general  view,  comprehend  them  under  two  gifts,  namely,  of 
Christ,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

The  gift  of  Christ,  to  die  for  us,  and  to  become  to  us  the  author 
of  eternal  salvation,  is  entirely  of  grace :  "  God  so  loved  the 
world  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son."1  "God  commendeth 
his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died 
for  us."2  "He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him 
up  for  us  all ;  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all 
things?"3  Without  the  death  of  Christ,  our  salvation  was  impos- 
sible :  and  we  had  no  claim  on  God  to  draw  forth  from  him  the 
gift  of  his  well-beloved.  He  was  freely  given,  of  God's  great 
love,  wherewith  he  loved  us  :  and  as  he  was  freely  given,  so  all  the 
blessings  which  flow  through  him  are  freely  given  also.  If  any 
man  feels  that  Christ  was  under  obligation  to  die  for  him,  or  that 
God  was  bound  to  give  his  Son  to  make  the  needed  sacrifice  for 

1  John  iii.  16.  2  Rom.  v.  8.  3  Rom.  viii.  32. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  261 

sin,  he  totally  mistakes,  on  a  point  of  vital  importance  to  the  sal 
vation  of  his  soul.  The  doctrine  that  salvation  is  of  grace,  is  not 
a  useless  speculation  ;  but  it  enters  into  the  very  heart  of  Christian 
experience ;  and  the  faith  which  does  not  recognise  it,  does  not 
receive  Christ  as  he  is  presented  in  the  Gospel.  It  is,  therefore, 
a  matter  of  unspeakable  importance,  that  our  view  of  this  truth 
should  be  clear,  and  that  it  should  be  cordially  embraced  by  every 
power  of  our  minds. 

As  the  Son  of  God  was  freely  given  to  effect  our  salvation  by 
his  death ;  so  the  Holy  Spirit  is  freely  given,  to  apply  the  sal- 
vation which  the  Son  has  wrought  out :  "  Tne  love  of  God  is  shed 
abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us/'1 
We  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  gift  of  the  Father's  lovey  who 
bestows  it,  as  earthly  parents  give  good  things  to  their  children.2 
And  this  gift  is  not  bestowed  because  of  merit  in  the  recipient. 
Paul  asks,  "  Received  ye  the  Spirit,  by  the  works  of  the  law,  or 
by  the  hearing  of  faith?"3  From  this  inquiry  we  learn  that  this 
gift  also  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace.4  The  Spirit  is 
given  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  Christ :  and  being  thus  bestowed 
through  Christ,  it  is  one  of  the  good  things  freely  given  together 
with  Christ.  We  are  encouraged  to  pray  that  God  would  give  us 
his  Holy  Spirit :  but  our  prayer  cannot  be  acceptable,  and  will  not 
be  heard,  if  we  ask  the  blessing  as  one  which  is  justly  due,  and 
which  we  may  demand  as  a  right.  When  our  humbled  hearts  plead 
that  God  would,  in  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace,  grant  us  his 
Holy  Spirit,  to  renew  and  sanctify  us,  and  fit  us  for  his  service, 
our  petitions  rise  with  acceptance  to  the  ear  of  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

An  objection  to  the  views  which  have  been  presented,  may  arise 
from  the  fact,  that,  in  the  last  day,  men  will  be  judged  according 
to  their  works.5  But  the  good  works  of  the  saints  are  the  fruit 
of  grace  bestowed ;  and,  although  the  sentence  in  the  great  day 
will  be  according  to  their  works,  the  reward  will  nevertheless  be 
of  grace,  and  not  of  debt.  Their  works  will  be  an  evidence  of 
their  faith ;  and  Christ,  the  Judge,  will  refer  to  them,  as  proof  of 
love  to  him.  The  kingdom  which  he  will  bestow,  will  be,  not  a 
reward  for  the  merit  of  their  works,  but  an  inheritance  prepared 

1  Rom.  v.  5.  2  Luke  xi.  13.  3  Gal.  iii.  2. 

*  Rom.  iv.  16.  5  Rev.  xx.  12. 


262  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

for  them  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.1  It  will  be  as  true 
on  that  day,  as  it  is  now,  and  it  will  be  felt  to  be  true  by  all  the 
saints,  that  eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ.2 

Section  I.  — PAKDON. 

All  who  repent  of  sin  obtain  forgiveness  through  Jesus 
Christ.3 

Forgiveness  implies  deliverance  from  the  penalty  due  to  sin. 
The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  : 
and  when  men  become  sensible  of  the  danger  to  which  they  are 
exposed,  deliverance  from  the  impending  wrath  becomes  an  object 
of  intense  solicitude.  Hence  arises  an  anxious  desire  to  obtain 
forgiveness.  To  persons  in  this  state  of  mind,  the  doctrine  that 
there  is  forgiveness  with  God,  is  most  welcome. 

All  forgiveness  is  bestowed  through  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  he  who 
delivers  from  the  wrath  to  come.4  In  him  "  we  have  redemption 
through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  according  to  the  riches 
of  his  grace."5  He  had  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins  f  and  he  is 
now  exalted  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and 
remission  of  sins.7  That  we  might  be  delivered  from  the  penalty 
due  to  our  sins,  it  was  necessary  that  Christ  should  bear  it  for  us. 
Hence  it  is  true,  that  without  the  shedding  of  blood,  there  is  no 
remission  ;8  and  hence,  in  the  teachings  of  Scripture,  the  forgive- 
ness of  sins  stands  connected  with  redemption  by  the  blood  of 
Christ.  With  this  agrees  the  language  of  the  redeemed:  "Unto 
him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins,  in  his  own  blood."9 

The  blessing  of  forgiveness  is  bestowed  on  all  who  truly  repent 
of  their  sins.  This  is  taught  in  various  passages  of  Scripture. 
"  Repent  ye,  and  be  converted,  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out.19 
"  If  we  confess  our  sins,  God  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our 
sins."11  Repentance  and  remission  of  sins12  were  preached  in  the 
name  of  Christ,  and  are  associated  blessings,  bestowed  by  "  the 
exalted  Prince  and  Saviour."13     When  Jesus  said,  "  Except  ye 

1  Matt.  xxv.  34.  2  Kom.  vi.  23. 

3  Isaiah  lv.  7 ;  Jer.  iii.  12,  22 ;  Luke  xxiv.  46,  47 ;  Acts  ii.  38 ;  hi.  19 ;  v.  31. 

4  1  Thess.  i.  10.  6  Eph.  i.  7.  6  Matt.  ix.  6. 
7  Acts  v.  31.                                  8  Heb.  ix.  22.                      9  Rev.  i.  5. 

10  Acts  iii.  19.  u  1  John  i.  9.  12  Luke  xxiv.  47. 

13  Acts  v.  31. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  263 

repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish,"1  it  was  implied  that,  if  they 
repented,  they  would  escape.  God,  in  the  gospel,  commands  all  men 
everywhere  to  repent,  in  view  of  the  approaching  judgment.2  The 
hope  of  escape  in  that  great  day,  is  clearly  held  out  to  those  who 
obey  the  command,  and  sincerely  repent  of  their  sins. 

Forgiveness  is  sometimes  represented  in  the  Scriptures,  as 
received  by  faith  in  Christ :  "To  him  give  all  the  prophets  witness, 
that  through  his  name  whosoever  believeth  in  him  shall  receive 
remission  of  sin."3  Repentance  and  faith  are  twin  graces, 
proceeding  from  the  same  Holy  Spirit,  and  wrought  in  the  same 
heart ;  and,  although  they  may  be  contemplated  separately,  they 
exist  together,  and  the  promise  of  forgiveness  belongs  to  either  of 
them. 

In  the  New  Testament,  a  connection  appears,  between  the 
remission  of  sins  and  the  ordinance  of  baptism.  John  preached 
the  baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remission  of  sins  ;4  and  Ananias 
commanded  Saul,  "  Arise,  and  be  baptised,  and  wash  away  thy 
sins,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord."5  In  the  Old  Testament, 
a  similar  connection  appears,  between  remission  and  the  sacrifices 
of  that  dispensation.  "Almost  all  things  were  by  the  law  purged 
with  blood,  and  without  the  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission."6 
Yet  Paul  has  taught  us  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  cannot  take 
away  sin  ;7  that  these  offerings  were  only  figures  of  things  to 
come  ;  and  that  the  only  effectual  removal  of  sin  is  by  the  blood 
of  Christ.  Baptism  under  the  gospel,  is  as  truly  a  figure,  as  the 
sacrifices  were  under  the  law.  In  the  ceremonies  instituted  by 
Moses,  the  death  of  Christ  was  prefigured  by  the  death  of  the 
slaughtered  victims ;  and  in  the  gospel  ceremony,  the  burial  and 
resurrection  of  Christ  are  figured  forth  in  the  ordinance  of 
baptism:  and  in  both  cases,  the  remission  connected  with  the 
ceremony  is  merely  figurative.  Our  sins  are  washed  away  in 
baptism,  in  the  same  sense  in  which  we  eat  the  body  and  drink  the 
blood  of  Christ,  in  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's  supper.8  Baptism 
and  the  Lord's  supper  are  duties  to  be  performed  under  the  gospel 

1  Luke  xiii.  3.  2  Acts  xvii.  30.  3  Acts  x.  43. 

*  Mark  i.  4.  8  Acts  xxii.  16.  6  Heb.  ix.  22. 

*  Heb.  ix.  13.  .     8  1  Cor.  x.  16. 


264  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

dispensation ;  as  the  various  ceremonies  instituted  by  Moses,  were 
duties  under  the  former  dispensation ;  but  the  figures  ought  not,  in 
either  case,  to  be  confounded  with  the  things  which  they  represent. 
In  a  figure,  baptism  washes  away  sin :  in  reality,  "  The  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  cleanses  from  all  sin."  We  must  be  careful  not  to 
rely  on  the  figure,  instead  of  the  reality  which  it  represents. 

To  escape  the  wrath  to  come,  is  the  first  desire  of  the  awakened 
sinner ;  and  mercy,  mercy,  forgive,  forgive,  are  the  first  words 
uttered  in  his  earnest  prayers.  Forgiveness  is  bestowed  on  repent- 
ance, and  repentance  is  the  first  duty  enjoined  in  the  gospel.  It 
is  fit  that  the  first  blessing  of  grace  which  the  sinner  anxiously 
seeks,  should  be  connected  with  the  first  duty  required  of  him. 
It  shows,  on  the  one  hand,  the  holiness  of  God,  who  will  not 
pardon  sin,  except  on  the  condition  of  the  sinner's  return  to 
obedience ;  and,  on  the  other,  God's  readiness  to  forgive,  inasmuch 
as  his  wrath  is  averted  at  the  first  step  of  the  sinner's  return.  He 
might  have  required  that  the  sinner  should  undergo  a  long  disci- 
pline of  painful  penance,  and  a  long  course  of  laborious  service, 
as  a  condition  of  release  from  the  indignation  and  wrath  so  long 
provoked.  But  God's  readiness  to  forgive,  is  beautifully  illustrated 
in  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son,  by  the  conduct  of  the  father, 
who,  while  his  son  was  yet  a  great  way  off,  ran,  and  fell  on  his 
neck,  and  kissed  him,1  with  free  and  full  assurance  of  pardon  and 
acceptance.  Such  is  the  love  which  God  manifests  to  the  return- 
ing sinner.  It  hastens  to  receive  him  on  the  first  indication  of 
true  penitence.  Nor  is  it  a  partial  forgiveness  which  is  then 
bestowed.  The  storm  of  divine  wrath,  which  had  been  gathering 
over  the  sinner's  head,  during  all  his  life  of  impenitence,  is  at 
once  dispelled,  and  his  sins,  as  a  thick  cloud,  are  at  once  blotted 
out.2  To  show  the  completeness  of  his  pardon,  his  iniquities  are 
represented  as  buried  in  the  depths  of  the  sea  ;3  not  in  some  shallow 
place,  where  an  ebbing  tide  might  leave  them  uncovered ;  but  in 
the  depths  of  the  ocean,  where,  if  they  should  be  sought  for,  they 
could  never  be  found.  Such  is  God's  forgiveness.  Why  are 
sinners  so  averse  to  seek  it  ? 

Although,  on  the  first  movement  of  a  sinner  in  his  return  to 
God,  the  first  blessing  of  divine  grace  is  bestowed  on  him,  so  full, 

1  Luke  xv.  20.  2  Isaiah  xliv.  22.  3  Mic.  rii  19. 


BLESSINGS   OF  GRACE.  265 

so  freely,  so  gloriously ;  it  does  not  follow,  that  lie  may  safely  stop 
short  in  his  progress.  The  doctrine  of  the  saints'  final  perseve- 
rance, which  we  shall  hereafter  consider,  is  misunderstood  and 
misapplied ;  if  men  take  encouragement  from  it,  to  relax  in  their 
efforts  to  advance  in  the  way  of  holiness.  The  blessing  of  forgive- 
ness, and  the  exercise  of  repentance,  are  connected  with  each 
other,  at  the  beginning  of  the  divine  life ;  and  their  connection 
remains  throughout  its  progress.  We  have  occasion  to  pray  for 
forgiveness,  as  often  as  we  pray  for  our  daily  bread,1  and  the 
prayer  cannot  be  presented  with  a  well  grounded  hope  that  it  will 
be  heard  and  answered,  unless  it  proceed  from  a  penitent  heart. 
Penitence  is  as  necessary  to  pardon,  in  the  saint  who  is  just  finish- 
ing his  warfare,  and  taking  his  departure  for  the  other  world,  as 
it  was  in  the  first  moment  of  his  drawing  near  to  God.  Christ  was 
exalted  "to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins;"  and  if  these 
do  not  accompany  each  other,  they  do  not  come  from  Christ.  He 
who  believes  that  all  his  sins,  past  and  future,  were  forgiven  at  his 
first  conversion,  in  such  a  sense  that  he  may  dispense  with  all 
subsequent  penitence,  and  rest  satisfied  with  his  first  forgiveness, 
has  need  to  learn  again  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of 
Christ. 

Section   II.— JUSTIFICATION. 

All  who  believe  in  Christ,  are  justified  by  his  right- 
eousness IMPUTED  TO  THEM.2 

Justification  is  the  act  of  a  judge  acquitting  one  who  is  charged 
with  crime.  It  is  the  opposite  of  condemnation.  In  Deut.  xxv. 
1,  the  judges  of  Israel  were  commanded,  in  the  discharge  of  their 
official  duty,  to  justify  the  righteous,  and  condemn  the  wicked. 

Justification  is  a  higher  blessing  of  grace,  than  pardon.  The 
latter  frees  from  the  penalty  due  to  sin,  but  it  does  not  fully  restore 
the  lost  favor  of  God.  A  pardoned  criminal,  and  a  just  man  who 
has  committed  no  crime,  stand  on  different  ground.  The  distinction 
between  pardon  and  justification  may  be  illustrated  by  these  words 


1  Matt.  vi.  11, 12. 

2  Acts  xiii.  39 ;  Rom.  iii.  21,  22,  25,  26 ;  x.  4 ;  Gal.  ii.  16 ;  iii.  22,  24 ;  Phil, 
iii.  8-10. 


266  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

of  Job,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  justify  you."1  If,  in  this 
passage,  we  should  substitute  the  word  pardon  for  justify,  every  one 
would  perceive  an  important  change  in  the  meaning.  This  change 
shows  the  difference  between  pardon  and  justification.  Such  is  the 
greatness  of  divine  grace  to  the  sinner  who  returns  to  God  through 
Jesus  Christ,  that  he  is  treated  as  if  he  had  never  sinned ;  and 
this  is  imported  in  the  declaration  that  he  is  justified.  We  are, 
however,  not  to  conceive  of  these  as  separate  blessings.  It  is  not 
true  that  one  sinner  is  justified,  and  another  merely  pardoned : 
but  every  penitent  believer  is  both  pardoned  and  justified.  As 
repentance  and  faith  are  duties  mutually  implying  each  other,  so 
pardon  and  justification  are  twin  blessings  of  grace,  bestowed 
together  through  Jesus  Christ.  All  whom  Jesus  delivers  from  the 
wrath  to  come  are  freely  justified  from  all  things,  and  presented 
faultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory. 

Justification  is  attributed,  in  the  Scriptures,  to  the  blood  and 
the  obedience  of  Christ :  "  Being  justified  by  his  blood,  we  shall  be 
saved  from  wrath  through  him."2  "By  the  obedience  of  one, 
shall  many  be  made  righteous."3  Both  his  blood  and  his  obedience 
were  necessary  to  magnify  the  law,  and  make  it  honorable.  His 
blood  signifies  the  endurance  of  its  penalty ;  and  his  obedience,  the 
fulfilment  of  its  precepts.  On  his  endurance  of  the  penalty,  our 
deliverance  from  wrath  is  based;  and  on  his  fulfilment  of  the 
precepts,  our  complete  justification  before  God.  Justification, 
however,  could  not  be  complete,  without  deliverance  from  the 
penalty;  and  it  therefore  required  both  the  blood  and  the  obedi- 
ence of  Christ;  or,  in  the  language  of  Scripture,  "his  obedience 
*  unto  death." 

Justification  is  by  faith.  On  this  point,  the  Scriptures  are 
explicit.  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God."4 
By  him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from  all  things.5  Faith  does 
not  justify,  because  of  its  own  merit.  Other  graces  co-exist  with 
it  in  the  heart  of  the  believer;  as  repentance,  love,  &c.  And 
these  have  equal  claim  to  merit ;  and  especially  love,  which  is  the 
fulfilling  of  the  law,6  but  faith  is  selected  as  the  justifying  grace  ; 
and  Paul  assigns  the  reason,  "  It  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by 


1  Job  xxvii.  5.  2  Rom.  v.  9.  s  Rom.  v.  19. 

*  Rom.  v.  1.  6  Acts  xiii.  39.  6  Rom.  xiii.  10. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  26? 

grace."1  In  the  very  exercise  of  faith,  merit  is  renounced,  an<? 
the  sole  reliance  is  placed  on  the  merit  of  Christ.  Hence  faith  is 
opposed  to  works :  "  To  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  on 
him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for  righteous- 
ness."2 In  faith,  the  sinner  as  ungodly  comes  to  God,  who  justifies 
the  ungodly,3  through  Christ,  who  died  for  the  ungodly.4  He 
presents  no  plea,  and  entertains  no  hope,  founded  on  personal 
merit,  but  relies  wholly  on  the  blood  and  obedience  of  Christ. 
Faith  is  an  exercise  of  the  believer's  mind ;  and,  as  such,  it  is  as 
much  a  work  as  repentance  or  love,  and  it  produces  other  works : 
for,  "  Faith  worketh  by  love."5  But  it  is  not  as  a  work,  or  as 
producing  other  works,  that  faith  justifies ;  but  as  renouncing  all 
personal  merit  and  self-reliance,  and  receiving  salvation  as  a  gift 
of  free  grace  through  Jesus  Christ. 

In  justification,  righteousness  is  imputed,  accounted,  or  reckoned. 
"David  describeth  the  blessedness  of  the  man  unto  whom  God 
imputeth  righteousness.6  Abraham  believed  God,  and  it  was 
counted  unto  him  for  righteousness  :7  "  For  us,  also,  to  whom  it 
shall  be  imputed,  if  we  believe."8 

How  God  can  justly  account  an  ungodly  man  righteous,  is  a 
problem  which  it  required  infinite  wisdom  to  solve.  How  it  was 
solved  Paul  has  informed  us.  Him  hath  "  God  set  forth  to  be  a 
propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness 
for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past  through  the  forbearance  of 
God ;  to  declare  I  say  at  this  time  his  righteousness,  that  he  might 
be  just,  and  thejustifier  of  him  that  believeth  in  Jesus."*  The 
propitiatory  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  faith  in  that  sacrifice,  are  the 
means  which  God  employs  for  the  solution  of  the  difficult  problem : 
and  these  solve  it  completely  ;  God  himself,  the  perfectly  just  one, 
being  judge.  We  may  not  be  able  fully  to  understand  the  solu- 
tion, and  perceive  all  its  fitness  and  beauty ;  but  we  may  learn 
much  respecting  it,  from  the  light  which  the  Scriptures  throw  on 
it ;  and,  where  we  fail  to  comprehend,  we  ought  patiently  to  wait 
for  the  further  light  which  eternity  will  disclose. 

When  the  Scriptures  speak  of  justification  by  the  obedience  or 


1  Rom.  iv.  16.  2  Rom.  iv.  5.  3  Rom.  iv.  5. 

*  Rom.  v.  6.  «  Gal.  v.  6.  6  Rom.  iv.  6. 

7  Rom.  iv.  3.  8  Rom.  iv.  24.  9  Rom.  iii.  25,  26 


268  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

blood  of  Christ,  faith  is  supposed ;  otherwise,  those  passages  which 
speak  of  justification  by  faith,  would  be  without  meaning.  And 
in  like  manner,  when  they  speak  of  justification  by  faith,  the 
obedience  and  blood  of  Christ  are  supposed ;  otherwise,  it  would 
be  unmeaning  to  say,  "  Justified  by  his  blood :"  *^By  his  obedi- 
ence many  are  made  righteous."  What  Christ  did  and  suffered, 
and  also  our  faith  in  Christ,  are  necessary  to  effect  our  justifica- 
tion ;  and  the  part  which  each  of  these  has  in  the  process,  is  an 
interesting  subject  of  inquiry. 

We  have  already  seen  that  faith  does  not  justify  as  a  meritorious 
work.  If  it  justified  on  the  ground  of  merit,  it  would  need  to 
possess  sufficient  merit  to  satisfy  all  the  demands  of  the  law,  both 
preceptive  and  penal ;  and  in  that  case  the  obedience  and  sufferings 
of  Christ  would  be  unnecessary.  It  is  not  jointly  meritorious  with 
the  obedience  and  sufferings  of  Christ ;  for  they  are  in  themselves 
perfect :  and,  without  addition  from  the  works  of  the  sinner,  mag- 
nify the  law  and  make  it  honorable.  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  is 
the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness,  to  every  one  that  believeth.1 
Faith  disclaims  all  merit  of  its  own,  but  receives  Christ  as  the  pro- 
pitiation that  God  has  set  forth,  and,  as  the  end  of  the  law,  fully 
satisfying  all  its  claims.  Faith  distinguishes  those  to  whom  right- 
eousness is  imputed :  "it  is  unto  all,  and  upon  all  them  that  be- 
lieve ;"2  but  it  is  not,  in  itself,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  the  meri- 
torious cause  of  justification. 

But  merit  is  ascribed,  in  the  word  of  God,  to  the  obedience  and 
sufferings  of  Christ.  His  blood  is  represented  as  a  price  paid,  and 
a  price  of  such  value,  that  our  deliverence  from  under  the  law  may, 
on  the  ground  of  it,  be  justly  claimed :  "  Ye  were  not  redeemed 
with  corruptible  things,  as  silver  and  gold ;  but  with  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ."3  "He  was  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem  them 
that  were  under  the  law."4 

"  Ye  are  not  your  own :  ye  are  bought  with  a  price."5  As  a  com- 
modity may  be  claimed,  when  its  full  value  has  been  paid,  and  the 
purchase  completed ;  so  our  deliverance  from  the  condemnation  of 
the  law,  and  our  justification  before  God,  may  be  claimed  on  the 
merits  of  Christ's  obedience  and  sufferings.     Avenging  justice  is 

1  Horn.  x.  4.  2  Rom.  iii.  22.  3 1  Pet.  i.  18,  i9. 

*  Gal.  iv.  5.  6 1  Cor.  vi.  19,  29. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  269 

satisfied:  "  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins."1  "The  Lord  is 
well  pleased  for  his  righteousness'  sake."2  He  gave  himself  an 
offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  of  sweet  smelling  savor."3 

When  the  Scriptures  speak  of  Christ's  blood  as  the  ground  of 
our  justification,  his  obedience  is  supposed  :  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
when  his  obedience  is  mentioned,  his  sufferings  are  supposed.  His 
obedience  to  the  precepts  of  the  law  would  not  have  sufficed,  if  he 
had  not  also  endured  its  penalty :  and  if,  while  enduring  his  suffer- 
ings, he  had  not  loved  God  with  all  his  heart,  his  sacrifice  would 
have  been  polluted.  A  lamb  without  spot  was  needed;  and  perfect 
obedience  was  therefore  necessary  to  render  his  offering  acceptable. 
His  active  and  passive  obedience  are  both  necessary  to  make  a 
complete  salvation ;  and  when  only  one  i3  mentioned  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, the  other  is  supposed. 

In  being  made  under  the  law,  Christ  became  our  substitute ;  and 
his  obedience  and  sufferings  are  placed  to  our  account,  as  if  we 
had  personally  obeyed  and  suffered,  to  the  full  satisfaction  of  the 
law.  We  are  thus  justified  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ  imputed 
to  us :  "  He  who  knew  no  sin,  was  made  sin  for  us,  that  we  might 
be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him."4  Our  sins  were  im- 
puted to  Christ  when  he  died  for  them ;  and  his  righteousness  is 
imputed  to  us  when  we  receive  eternal  life  through  him.  He  was 
treated  as  if  he  had  personally  committed  the  sins  which  were  laid 
on  him :  and  all  who  believe  in  him  are  treated  as  if  they  had  per- 
sonally rendered  that  satisfaction  to  the  law  which  was  rendered 
by  his  obedience  and  sufferings. 

Nothing  can  be  accounted  the  meritorious  cause  of  justification, 
but  the  obedience  and  sufferings  of  Christ :  yet  faith  is  indispen- 
sable :  "  He  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  and  the 
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."5  By  him  all  that  believe  are  jus- 
tified.6 Faith,  then,  is  the  turning  point,  by  which  a  sinner's  con- 
dition is  determined.  In  God's  method  of  grace,  all  the  benefits 
of  Christ's  satisfaction  to  the  law  are  made  over  to  the  sinner,  as 
soon  as  he  believes :  and  faith,  therefore,  serves  to  him  instead  of 
a  perfect  personal  obedience  to  the  law.  On  his  believing  in 
Christ,  he  is  treated  as  if  he  had  personally  rendered  a  perfect 

1 1  John  ii.  2.  2  Isaiah  xlii.  21.  3  Eph.  v.  2. 

4  2  Cor.  v.  21.  6  John  iii.  36.  6  Acts  xiii.  39. 


270  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

obedience  to  the  law:  and  this  is  the  import  of  those  Scriptures 
which  say  that  faith  is  imputed  to  him  for  righteousness.  It  is 
not  so  imputed,  because  of  any  merit  which  it  possesses ;  but 
because  it  is  that  which  the  Gospel  recognises  in  the  sinner  as 
entitling  him  to  the  full  satisfaction  that  Christ  has  rendered.  When 
faith  is  said  to  be  imputed  for  righteousness,  the  obedience  and 
sufferings  of  Christ,  on  which  faith  lays  hold,  are  viewed  as 
connected  with  it,  and  constituting  the  meritorious  ground  of  its 
acceptance. 

That  the  sin  or  righteousness  of  one  should  be  imputed  to 
another,  has  been  thought  by  some  to  be  inconsistent  with  the 
principles  of  justice,  the  province  of  which  is,  to  give  to  every 
man  his  due.  From  some  cause,  the  notion  of  imputation  has 
prevailed  in  all  ages,  in  the  sacrifices  which  have  been  offered, 
both  by  divine  authority  and  by  heathen  worshippers.  This  notion 
has  the  full  authority  of  God's  word,  and  evidently  lies  at  the 
foundation  of  the  salvation  which  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness 
have  provided  for  guilty  men.  It  would,  therefore,  be  extreme 
folly  in  us  to  reject  this  salvation  because  of  an  objection  which 
may  arise  to  our  erring  reason,  in  determining  the  abstract  prin- 
ciples of  justice.  There  is  no  higher  rule  of  justice  than  God 
himself;  and  what  the  Judge  of  all  does,  must  be  right. 

In  explaining  the  imputation  of  Adam's  sin,  we  showed  that 
there  is  a  threefold  union  between  Adam  and  his  posterity,  render- 
ing the  imputation  of  his  sin  to  them  an  act  of  justice.  There  is, 
in  like  manner,  a  threefold  union  between  Christ  and  his  people, 
rendering  the  imputation  of  their  sin  to  him,  and  of  his  righteous- 
ness to  them,  consistent  with  justice. 

1.  There  is  a  union  of  consent.  Christ  consented  to  the  right- 
eousness of  the  law,  in  its  condemnation  of  his  people,  and  to  the 
necessity  of  satisfaction :  and  they  do  the  same.  He  consented 
to  become  a  substitute  for  them,  and  render  the  required  satisfac- 
tion in  their  behalf:  and  they  joyfully  accept  the  favor.  While 
in  impenitence  and  unbelief,  they  do  not  approve  the  law,  or  its 
sentence,  and  do  not  acknowledge  the  obligation  to  make  satisfac- 
tion. When  they  become  sensible  of  this  obligation,  the  first 
effort  is  to  make  satisfaction  in  their  own  persons.  In  this  state 
of  mind  their  consent  with  Christ  is  only  partial ;  and  the  Gospel 
does  not  pronounce  them  justified.     But  when  they  become  con* 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  271 

vinced  of  their  utter  inability  to  render  satisfaction  in  their  own 
persons,  they  give  themselves  up  to  Christ,  and  not  only  consent, 
but  pray  to  be  found  in  him,  not  having  their  own  righteousness, 
but  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith. 

How  the  union  of  Christ  and  his  people  rendered  it  just  in  God 
to  inflict  the  penalty  of  their  sins  on  him,  and  to  justify  them,  we 
cannot  claim  fully  to  understand.  God  knows  well  what  his  moral 
government  requires;  and  as  he  has  approved  the  arrangement, 
we  may  be  sure  it  must  be  right.  We  may  hope  to  obtain  further 
knowledge  of  this  glorious  mystery  when  the  counsels  of  infinite 
wisdom  are  unfolded  to  our  view  in  the  future  world. 

But  even  here  we  may  see,  in  part,  a  fitness  in  the  procedure. 
Without  the  consent  of  Christ,  we  cannot  suppose  that  justice 
would  have  laid  our  iniquities  on  him :  and,  without  the  consent 
to  be  saved  by  him,  which  faith  yields,  we  cannot  understand  how 
justice  would  have  been  honored  in  our  being  justified.  As  the 
consent  of  Adam's  descendants  to  the  deed  of  their  father,  in 
rebelling  against  the  law  of  his  Sovereign,  justifies  the  imputa- 
tion of  his  sin  to  them ;  so  the  consent  of  Christ  and  his  people  to 
the  divine  scheme  of  grace,  justifies  what  is  done  to  them  both 
in  the  execution  of  the  scheme. 

2.  There  is  a  spiritual  union.  As  Adam  was  the  natural  head 
of  his  posterity,  so  Christ  is  the  spiritual  head  of  his  people. 
Adam's  descendants  are  born  from  him  according  to  the  flesh,  and 
possess  the  nature  which  existed  in  him  as  its  beginning  or  foun- 
tain. Christ's  people  are  born  of  the  Spirit,  and  possess  the  spirit 
which  was  in  Christ  without  measure ;  so  that,  "  If  any  man  have 
not  the  spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his."1  This  union  is  like 
that  of  the  head  and  members  of  the  human  body:  and  by  one 
spirit  believers  are  all  baptised  into  this  one  body."2  It  is  like 
the  union  of  the  vine  and  its  branches ;  through  all  which  the 
same  vitalizing  and  fructifying  sap  circulates.  This  union  secures 
the  perfect  consent,  which  has  already  been  noticed,  between  Christ 
and  his  people ;  and  further  illustrates  the  fitness  of  that  arrange- 
ment by  which  they  are  regarded  as  one  in  the  administration  of 
God's  moral  government. 

3.  There  is  a  federal  union.     As  Adam  was  the  federal  head 

1  Rom.  viii.  9.  2 1  Cor.  xii.  13. 


272  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

and  representative  of  his  descendants  ;  so  Christ  stood,  in  the  cove- 
nant of  grace,  as  the  federal  head  and  representative  of  all  whom 
the  Father  gave  to  him.  For  their  sakes  he  undertook  the  work 
of  mediation ;  and  for  their  sakes  he  did  and  suffered  all  that  was 
necessary  to  the  full  execution  of  the  work.  Justice,  and  every 
other  attribute  of  the  divine  nature,  concurred  in  the  arrangement, 
by  which  he  was  to  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  and  be  satisfied  ; 
and  by  the  knowledge  of  him  to  justify  many.1  And  now,  justice, 
and  every  other  attribute  of  the  divine  nature,  fully  sanction  the 
arrangement,  by  which  his  righteousness  is  imputed  to  all  his  elect 
people,  on  their  believing  in  him.  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  justifieth.  Who  is  he 
that  condemneth?     It  is  Christ  that  died."2 

The  imputation  of  Adam's  sin  to  his  posterity,  is  an  act  of 
justice ;  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness  to  believers,  is  an 
act  of  grace.  The  former  is  on  the  proper  level  of  justice ;  but  the 
latter  rises  above  it.  Justice  has  nothing  to  say  against  it,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  is  fully  satisfied  and  abundantly  honored  by  it ;  yet  the 
plan  did  not  originate  in  the  justice,  but  in  the  love,  of  God,  which 
provided  the  needed  sacrifice.  This  distinction  ought  never  to  be 
forgotten.  If  our  condemnation,  in  our  natural  state,  is  not  just, 
our  deliverance  from  it  is  of  debt,  and  not  of  grace.  When  we 
feel,  in  every  power  of  our  minds,  that  we  are  justly  condemned 
before  God,  and  that  his  wrath  is  our  righteous  due ;  we  can  then 
receive  Christ  and  salvation  by  him,  as  the  gift  of  God,  the  free 
gift,  the  unspeakable  gift,  of  his  grace. 

The  Apostle  James  says :  "A  man  is  justified  by  works,  and  not 
by  faith  only."3  In  this  he  appears,  at  first  view,  to  contradict 
the  words  of  Paul:  "A  man  is  justified  by  faith,  without  deeds  of 
the  law."4  James  has  assigned  a  reason,  which  furnishes  a  clue 
that  leads  to  a  perfect  reconciliation  of  this  apparent  contradiction : 
"For,"  says  he,  "faith  without  works  is  dead."5  Faith  alone,  is 
dead  faith;  and  dead  faith,  according  to  his  teaching,  does  not 
justify ;  and  this  doctrine,  Paul  does  not  contradict.  The  justifying 
faith  of  Paul,  is  living,  working  faith.  He  says  expressly:  " Faith 
works  by  love."6    James  does  not  exclude  faith  from  justification; 

1  Isaiah  liii.  11.  2  Rom.  viii.  33,  34.  3  James  ii.  24. 

*  Kom.  iii.  28.  5  James  ii.  17.  6  Gal.  v.  6. 


BLESSINGS    OF   GKACE.  273 

but,  on  the  contrary,  introduces  works,  not  as  excluding  faith,  but 
as  making  it  perfect:  "  By  works  was  faith  made  perfect."1  As 
thus  perfected,  faith  justifies,  according  to  his  teaching :  and  this 
is  precisely  what  Paul  teaches.  The  works  which  Paul  excludes 
are  not  works  of  faith,  but  works  of  law — not  works,  evidencing 
the  genuineness  and  vitality  of  faith ;  but  works,  claiming  to  be,  in 
whole,  or  in  part,  the  meritorious  cause  of  justification.  Such 
works  are  excluded,  because  they  would  imply  an  imperfection  in 
Christ's  work,  and  give  the  sinner  a  ground  of  glorying.  It  is 
manifest  that  James  insists  on  works,  merely  as  evidences  of  faith : 
"  Show  me  thy  faith  without  thy  works,  and  I  will  show  thee  my 
faith  by  my  works."2  Even  words,  as  well  as  works,  are  necessary, 
to  give  evidence  of  faith :  "  With  the  heart,  man  believeth  unto 
righteousness ;  and  with  the  mouth,  confession  is  made  unto 
salvation."3  So  far  as  words  prove  the  presence  or  absence  of 
faith,  it  is  true,  that,  "  By  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified ;  and 
by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned."4  But  words  without 
works,  avail  nothing;  for  Christ  teaches  that,  "Not  every  one  that 
saith  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  but  he 
that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven."5  And  words 
and  works  together,  avail  nothing,  without  faith ;  for,  whatever  a 
man  may  say  or  do,  if  he  believe  not,  he  "  shall  be  damned." 

A  difference  of  opinion  has  existed  as  to  the  proper  date  of 
justification.  Some  have  regarded  the  day  of  judgment  as  its 
proper  date.  It  is  an  act  of  God,  as  Judge  ;  and,  in  the  judgment 
of  the  great  day,  the  Judge  will  publicly  pronounce,  on  every 
individual,  the  sentence  which  will  determine  his  condition  through 
eternity.  Then  God's  judgments  will  be  fully  revealed ;  but  a 
partial  revelation  of  them  is  made  in  the  present  life:  "Even  now, 
the  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness, 
and  unrighteousness  of  men,  who  hold  the  truth  in  unrighteous- 
ness."6 It  is  true,  "  He  that  believeth  not,  shall  be  damned  ;"7  but 
it  is  also  true,  "He  that  believeth  not,  is  condemned  already."* 
In  like  manner,  it  is  true  that  Christ  will  publicly  own  his  people 
in  the  great  day,  and  pronounce  the  final  sentence  in  their  favor ; 

1  James  ii.  22.  2  James  ii.  18.  3  Eom.  x.  10 

*  Matt.  xii.  37.  5  Matt.  vii.  21.  6  Eom.  i.  18. 

7  Mark  xvi.  16.  8  John  iii.  18. 

18 


274  DOOTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

but  it  is  also  true,  that  they  are  justified  in  the  present  life. 
Hence  Paul  says:  "Ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."1  "All  that  believe  are  justified  from  all  things."2  The 
same  rule  by  which  the  eternal  state  of  men  will  be  determined  in 
the  great  day,  is  now  made  known  on  the  authority  of  him  who 
will  sit  on  the  throne  of  judgment  then,  and  who  is  now  the  Judge 
of  all  the  earth.  By  this  revelation,  men  are  already  condemned 
or  justified,  according  to  their  character.  That  character  is  often 
secret  here.  In  the  great  day,  God  will  judge  the  secrets  of  all 
hearts;  but  he  will  not  establish  a  new  rule  of  judgment:  so  far  as 
that  rule  has  been  correctly  applied  here,  its  decision  will  be 
confirmed  in  the  last  day  by  the  final  sentence. 

Some  have  dated  justification  in  eternity  past,  regarding  it  as 
grace  given  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began.  Justification 
is  not  a  secret  purpose  in  the  bosom  of  God,  but  a  revelation  from 
him,  and  therefore  it  cannot  be  eternal.  It  implies,  not  only  the 
accounting  of  the  sinner  righteous,  but  the  declaring  of  him  right- 
eous ;  otherwise,  it  would  not  be  the  opposite  of  condemnation ;  and 
neither  justification  nor  condemnation  can  be  from  eternity.  God's 
purpose  to  justify  is  eternal,  and  so  is  his  purpose  to  glorify ;  but 
it  is  as  improper  to  say  that  believers  are  justified  from  eternity, 
as  to  say  that  they  are  glorified  from  eternity.  It  is  clearly  the 
doctrine  of  Scripture,  that,  on  believing  in  Christ,  men  pass  from  a 
state  of  condemnation  into  a  state  of  justification. 

Section  III.  — ADO  PT  10  N. 

God  adopts,  as  sons,  all  who  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.3 
In  adoption,  as  practised  among  men,  an  individual  receives  the 
son  of  another  into  his  family,  and  confers  on  him  the  same 
privileges  and  advantages,  as  if  he  were  his  own  son.  In  this 
sense,  God  adopts  all  who  believe  in  Jesus  Christ :  "  We  are  all  the 
children  of  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ."4  "  Behold  what  manner 
of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  on  us,  that  we  should  be  called 
the  sons  of  God."5    This  blessing  of  grace  rises  higher  than  justifi- 

1  1  Cor.  vi.  11.  2  Acts  xiii.  39. 

3  John  i.  12 ;  Rom.  viii.  17  ;  Gal.  iii.26;  1  John  iii.  1,  2. 

4  Gal.  iii.  26.  5  1  John  iii.  ] 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  275 

cation.  Though  a  judge  may  fully  acquit  one  who  is  arraigned 
before  him  on  a  charge  of  crime,  he  does  not  confer,  on  the  man 
so  acquitted,  any  of  the  privileges  or  advantages  which  belong  to  a 
son.  But  the  believer  in  Jesus  is  permitted  to  regard  God,  not 
only  as  a  justifying  Judge,  but  as  a  reconciled  and  affectionate 
Father.  The  problem,  how  he  can  be  put  among  the  children,1  has 
been  solved.  Though  once  afar  off,  he  has  been  brought  nigh  by 
the  blood  of  Christ,  and  made  of  the  household  of  God.2 

Among  the  privileges  and  advantages  which  adoption  secures, 
we  may  enumerate  the  following : 

1.  The  love  of  God,  as  a  kind  Father,  is  secured  to  believers. 
The  Scriptures  frequently  exhibit  the  love  of  God  to  his  people, 
under  the  figure  of  a  Father's  love  to  his  children :  "As  a  Father 
pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him."3 
"  If  ye,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  to  your  children, 
how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  good  things  to 
them  that  ask  him."4  "Your  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need 
of  these  things."5  Corresponding  with  this  encouraging  and 
delightful  exhibition  of  God's  love,  is  the  confidence  with  which 
the  believer  in  Christ  is  inspired  to  approach  his  heavenly  Father : 
"  Because  ye  are  sons,  God  has  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son 
into  your  hearts,  crying  Abba,  Father."6  Hence  Christ  habitually 
spoke  to  his  disciples  of  God  as  their  Father,  and,  before  he  left 
them,  said,  in  language  full  of  endearment  and  encouragement: 
"I  ascend  to  my  Father  and  your  Father;"7  and  hence  he  taught 
them  to  say,  in  their  daily  prayers :  "  Our  Father,  who  art  in 
heaven."8 

2.  The  discipline  of  God,  as  a  kind  and  wise  Father,  is  secured 
to  all  who  believe  in  Jesus:  "Whom  the  Lord  loveth,  he  chasteneth 
and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  receiveth."9  "We  have  had 
fathers  of  our  flesh  which  corrected  us,  and  we  gave  them  reverence. 
Shall  we  not  much  rather  be  in  subjection  to  the  Father  of  Spirits 
and  live?"10  "For  they  verily  for  a  few  days  chastened  us  after 
their  own   pleasure ;    but   he  for  our  profit,   that  we  might   be 

1  Jer.  iii.  19.  2  Eph.  ii.  13,  19.  3  Ps.  ciii.  13. 

*  Matt.  vii.  11.  5.  Matt.  vi.  32.  6  Rom.  viii.  15. 

John  xx.  17.  8  Matt.  vi.  9.  9  Heb.  xii.  6. 
10Heb.  xii.  9. 


276  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

partakers  of  his  holiness."1  Inestimably  rich  is  this  blessing  of 
divine  discipline.  Let  the  wealthy  and  noble  of  the  earth  rejoice 
in  the  advantages  which  give  them  distinction  among  men,  and 
supply  them  with  the  means  of  carnal  enjoyment;  but  let  the 
afflicted  believer  in  Jesus,  rejoice  in  the  lot  which  God  has  assigned 
him,  because  it  has  been  chosen  for  him  by  a  Father  who  knows 
what  is  best  for  him,  and  who  loves  him  so  tenderly  as  to  with- 
hold from  him  no  good  thing.  Having  all  good  in  heaven  and 
earth  at  his  disposal,  he  has  selected  that  portion  for  each  of  his 
children  on  earth,  which  will  best  promote  their  highest  interest. 

3.  Believers  in  Christ  are  made  heirs  of  God:  "If  children,  then 
heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ.'-'2  God,  the 
creator  of  all  things,  is  the  proprietor  of  all  things,  and  his  adopted 
children  are  made  heirs  of  this  vast  estate.  "He  that  overcometh, 
shall  inherit  all  things."3  "All  things  are  yours,  and  Christ  is 
appointed  heir  of  all  things;  and  believers  are  tfo-heirs  with  him."4 

The  inheritance  of  God's  children,  is  frequently  represented  as  a 
kingdom :  "  Fear  not,  little  flock,  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure 
to  give  you  the  kingdom."5  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father, 
inherit  the  kingdom."6 

The  adoption  of  believers  does  not  take  full  effect  in  the  present 
life :  "  We  are  waiting  for  the  adoption,  the  redemption  of  the 
body ;"  "  waiting  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God."7  Flesh 
and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom;  and,  therefore,  this  vile 
body  must  be  changed,  and  fashioned  like  the  glorious  body  of 
Christ,  before  we  can  receive  the  glory  and  joy  which  God  has 
prepared  for  us.  Yet  the  title  to  the  inheritance  is  made  sure, 
since  we  are  co-heirs  with  Christ ;  and  the  promise  and  oath  of 
God,  two  immutable  things  in  which  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie,8 
give  to  the  heirs  of  promise,  the  strongest  possible  assurance,  that 
they  shall  receive  the  inheritance :  "  Beloved,  now  are  we  the  sons 
of  God ;  and  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be ;  but  we  know, 
that  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we  shall  see 
him  as  he  is."9  Though  now  in  exile,  and  pilgrims  and  strangers 
in  the  earth,  perhaps  despised  and  forsaken,  we  are  the.  children 

1  Heb.  xii.  10.  2  Rom.  viii.  17.  3  Rev.  xxi  .7. 

4  1  Cor.  iii.  22.  5  Luke  xii.  32.  6  Matt,  xxv  34. 

7  Rom.  viii.  19.  8  Heb.  vi.  18.  9  Uoha  iii  2. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  277 

of  God,  and  heirs  of  an  inheritance  which  is  incorruptible,  unde- 
filed,  and  fadeth  not  away.  Even  now,  whatever  may  be  our 
poverty,  affliction,  or  reproach,  we  are  the  objects  of  our  Father'? 
care,  and  he  gives  us,  as  an  earnest  of  the  future  inheritance,  so 
much  of  it  in  present  enjoyment,  as  he  sees  to  be  best  for  us.  All 
things  within  the  boundless  dominion  of  Jehovah,  work  together 
for  good,  to  them  that  love  God.1 


Section  IV.— REGENERATION. 

In  all  who  are  finally  saved,  the  Holy  Spirit  produces 
a  great  moral  change,  by  which  they  become  inclined  to 
holiness.2 

In  our  natural  state  we  are  totally  depraved.  No  inclination  to 
holiness  exists  in  the  carnal  heart ;  and  no  holy  act  can  be  performed, 
or  service  to  God  rendered,  until  the  heart  is  changed.  This  change, 
it  is  the  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  effect.  Pardon,  justification, 
and  adoption,  are  changes  in  a  man's  condition ;  but  if  no  other 
change  were  wrought,  the  man  would  remain  a  slave  to  sin,  and 
unfit  for  the  service  and  enjoyment  of  God.  Grace,  therefore, 
does  not  stop  with  a  mere  change  of  condition,  but  it  effects  also 
that  change  in  the  character,  without  which  the  individual  could 
not  participate  in  the  holy  enjoyments  of  heaven,  or  be  fitted  for 
the  society  of  the  blessed. 

Various  forms  of  expression  are  employed  in  the  Scriptures,  to 
denote  the  change  of  heart;  and  they  signify  it  with  various 
shades  of.  meaning.  It  is  taking  away  the  heart  of  stone,  and 
giving  a  heart  of  flesh  ;3  giving  a  new  heart  ;4  putting  the  law  in 
the  heart  ;5  quickening  or  making  alive  ;6  a  resurrection  from  the 
dead;  an  illumination;7  a  conversion,  or  turning  back  to  God.8 
So  great  is  the  change  produced,  that  the  subject  of  it  is  called  a 
new  creature,9   as  if  proceeding,  like  Adam,  directly  from   the 

1  Rom.  viii.  28. 

2  John  iii.  5,  6  ;  Ezek.  xi.  19  ;  xxxvi.  26,  27 ;  xxxvii.  14;  Tit.  iii.  5  ;  James 
i.  18  ;  2  Cor.  v.  17  ;  1  John  iv.  8. 

3  Ezek.  xxxvi.  26.  *  Ezek.  xviii.  31.  5  Heb.  viii.  10. 
6  John  vi.  63 ;  Eph.  ii.  1 ; .  Rom.  vi.  11,  13.  7  Heb.  x.  32. 

8  Ps.  Ii.  13 ;  Matt,  xviii.  3  ;  Ps.  xxv.  16  ;  Isaiah  lix.  20. 

9  2  Cor.  v.  17  ;  Gal.  vi.  15. 


278  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

creating  hand  of  God ;  and  lie  is  said  to  be  renewed,1  as  being 
restored  to  the  image  of  God,  in  which  man  was  originally  formed. 
With  reference  to  the  mode  in  which  the  descendants  of  Adam 
come  into  the  world,  the  change  is  denominated  regeneration  f  and 
the  subjects  of  it  are  said  to  be  born  again.3 

The  change  is  moral.  The  body  is  unchanged ;  and  the  identity 
of  the  mind  is  not  destroyed.  The  individual  is  conscious  of 
being  the  same  person  that  he  was  before  ;  but  a  new  direction  is 
given  to  the  active  powers  of  the  mind,  and  new  affections  are 
brought  into  exercise.  The  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  the 
heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost.4  No  love  to  God  had  previously  existed 
there ;  for  the  carnal  heart  is  enmity  against  God.  Love  is  the 
fulfilling  of  the  law,  the  principle  of  all  holy  obedience  ;  and  when 
love  is  produced  in  the  heart,  the  law  of  God  is  written  there.  As 
a  new  principle  of  action,  inciting  to  a  new  mode  of  life,  it  renders 
the  man  a  new  creature.  The  production  of  love  in  the  heart  by 
the  Holy  Spirit,  is  the  regeneration,  or  the  new  birth ;  for  "  he 
that  loveth,  is  born  of  God.5 

The  mode  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  effects  this  change,  is  beyond 
our  investigation.  All  God's  ways  are  unsearchable ;  and  we 
might  as  well  attempt  to  explain  how  he  created  the  world,  as  how 
he  new-creates  the  soul.  With  reference  to  this  subject,  the 
Saviour  said,  "  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest 
the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  or  whither 
it  goeth;  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."6 

We  know,  from  the  Holy  Scriptures,  that  God  employs  his  truth 
in  the  regeneration  of  the  soul.  "  Of  his  own  will  begat  he  us 
with  the  word  of  truth."7  Love  to  God  necessarily  implies  know- 
ledge of  God,  and  this  knowledge  it  is  the  province  of  truth  to 
impart.  But  knowledge  is  not  always  connected  with  love.  The 
devils  know,  but  do  not  love ;  and  wicked  men  delight  not  to  retain 
the  knowledge  of  God,8  because  their  knowledge  of  him  is  not 
connected  with  love.  The  mere  presentation  of  the  truth  to  the 
mind,  is  not  all  that  is  needed,  in  producing  love  to  God  in  the 

1  Col.  iii.  10 ;  Rom.  xii.  2 ;  Tit.  iii.  5.  2  Tit.  iii.  5. 

3  John  iii.  3,  7  ;  1  Pet.  i.  23.  4  Rom.  v.  5. 

5  1  John  iv.  7.  6  John  iii.  8.  7  James  i,  18. 

8  Rom.  i.  28. 


BLESSINGS    OF   GRACE.  279 

heart.  What  accompanying  influence  the  Holy  Spirit  uses,  to 
render  the  word  effectual,  we  cannot  explain :  but  Paul  refers  to 
it,  when  he  says,  "  Our  gospel  came  not  unto  you  in  word  only,  but 
also  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost."1 — "  but  in  the  demonstra- 
tion of  the  Spirit,  and  with  power."2 

The  term  regeneration  is  sometimes  used  in  a  comprehensive 
sense,  as  including  the  whole  formation  of  the  Christian  character. 
At  other  times  it  is  used  for  the  first  production  of  divine  love  in 
the  heart.  In  the  latter  sense,  the  work  is  instantaneous.  There 
is  a  moment  known  only  to  God,  when  the  first  holy  affection  exists 
in  the  soul.  Truth  may  enter  gradually,  and  may  excite  strong 
affections  in  the  mind,  and  may  for  a  time  increase  the  hatred  of 
God  which  naturally  reigns  in  the  heart.  So  Paul  says,  "  Sin, 
taking  occasion  by  the  commandment,  wrought  in  me  all  manner  of 
concupiscence."3  But,  in  his  own  time  and  manner,  God,  the  Holy 
Spirit,  makes  the  word  effectual  in  producing  a  new  affection 
in  the  soul :  and,  when  the  first  movement  of  love  to  God  exists, 
the  first  throb  of  spiritual  life  commences. 

Faith  is  necessary  to  the  Christian  character ;  and  must  there- 
fore precede  regeneration,  when  this  is  understood  in  its  widest 
sense.  Even  in  the  restricted  sense,  in  which  it  denotes  the 
beginning  of  the  spiritual  life,  faith,  in  the  sense  in  which  James4 
uses  the  term,  may  precede.  But  a  faith  which  exists  before  the 
beginning  of  spiritual  life,  cannot  be  a  living  faith.  Yet  some 
have  maintained  that  faith  produces  love.  This  opinion  is  of 
sufficient  importance  to  demand  a  careful  consideration. 

The  power  of  faith  over  the  actions,  the  conscience,  and  the 
affections  of  the  heart,  every  one  must  admit.  Confidence  placed 
in  a  treacherous  man,  has  often  led  to  a  course  of  action  ruinous 
in  its  effects  on  the  condition  and  character.  A  belief  in  false 
principles  of  morality  blinds  the  conscience,  and  causes  it  to 
approve  the  wrong,  and  condemn  the  right.  "We  may  love  or  hate 
an  individual,  under  a  mistaken  view  of  his  character ;  and  our 
affection  towards  him  may  be  completely  changed,  by  a  better 
acquaintance  with  him.     Now,  it  may  be  asked,  does  not  dislike 

1  1  Thess.  i.  5.  2  1  Cor.  ii.  4. 

8  Roin.  vii.  8.     *  *  James  ii.  17. 


280  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

of  God  proceed  from  a  wrong  view  of  his  character,  and  will  not 
a  true  knowledge  of  him  infallibly  produce  love? 

That  hatred  of  God,  and  a  wrong  view  of  his  character,  accom- 
pany each  other,  no  one  can  deny ;  but  which  of  these  produces 
the  other,  ought  not  to  be  assumed  without  investigation.  We 
readily  judge  well  concerning  those  whom  we  love,  and  ill  concern- 
ing those  whom  we  dislike.  Men's  interests  pervert  their  judg- 
ments. In  a  deliberative  assembly,  parties  are  formed,  according 
to  the  interests  of  individuals ;  and  men  take  sides  according  to 
the  circumstances  which  influence  the  heart.  In  these  cases,  the 
affections  control  the  faith.  The  affections  and  the  faith  mutually 
influence  each  other,  and  if  either  be  wrong,  the  other  cannot  be 
perfectly  right.  The  enmity  to  God  which  rules  in  the  hearts  of 
unregenerate  men,  renders  their  view  of  his  character  incorrect. 
A  perfectly  correct  view  cannot. co-exist  with  enmity  to  him :  and 
yet  it  does  not  follow  that  love  to  him  may  be  produced,  by  giving 
right  views  of  his  character* 

Some  have  maintained  the  opinion  that  a  revelation  of  God's 
love  to  us  is  sufficient  to  produce  love  to  him.  That  it  ought  to  do 
so,  cannot  be  denied ;  and  in  a  heart  under  no  evil  bias,  it  would 
produce  this  effect.  We  may  rather  say,  that  a  heart  in  which  no 
evil  bias  exists,  will  love  God,  on  receiving  a  revelation  of  his 
general  character,  without  waiting  for  evidence  of  special  favor. 
If  our  love  to  God  proceeds  from  a  belief  that  he  loves  us  in 
particular,  it  is  merely  a  modification  of  self-love.  Such  love  has 
no  moral  excellence  in  it ;  for  "  sinners  love  those  that  love  them."1 
Some  have  supposed,  that  the  faith  of  devils  differs  from  the  faith 
of  Christians  in  the  circumstance,  that  it  sees  in  God  no  manifesta- 
tion of  love  towards  them,  and  therefore  can  produce  no  love  in 
their  hearts  towards  God.  But  this  opinion  regards  the  faith  which 
distinguishes  the  people  of  God,  and  purifies  their  hearts,  as 
possessing  no  moral  excellence  in  its  nature.  The  circumstances 
in  which  it  is  exercised,  do  not  make  its  nature  better.  If  it  may 
consist  with  perfect  hatred  to  God,  it  cannot  have  moral  excellence 
in  itself,  or  tend  to  produce  moral  purity. 

An  inspired  writer  has  said,  "  We  love  him,  because  he  first 
loved  us:"2  but  these  words  do  not  teach,  that  our  love  to  God 

JLukevi.  32.  2  Uohn  iv.  19. 


BLESSINGS   OF  GRACE.  281 

originates  in  the  conviction  that  we  are  the  favorites  of  his  love. 
The  love  of  God  towards  us,  operates  both  as  an  efficient,  and  as 
a  motive.  1.  As  an  efficient  cause.  "  For  his  great  love  where 
with  he  loved  us,1  when  we  were  dead  in  sin,  hath  quickened  us 
together  with  Christ."  Here  is  an  operation  entirely  distinct  from 
that  of  mere  motive.  The  dead  body  of  Christ  in  the  grave,  was 
quickened  by  the  Spirit ;  and  a  like  power  quickens  the  dead  soul. 
"  We  believe  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power,  which 
he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead."2  Here 
faith  itself  is  ascribed  to  this  divine  operation.  All  this  operation 
proceeds  from  God's  great  love  wherewith  he  hath  loved  us.  It  is 
plain,  therefore,  that  this  love  operates  as  an  efficient  cause,  before  it 
operates  as  a  motive  to  holiness.  It  cannot  operate  as  a  motive 
without  faith ;  and  faith  is  produced  by  its  efficient  power.  After 
this  efficiency  has  quickened  the  dead  soul,  the  love  of  God  towards 
us  then  operates.  2.  As  a  motive.  The  goodness  of  God  leads  to 
repentance,  and  every  attribute  and  act  of  God  has  a  tendency  to 
call  forth  the  love  of  the  heart,  when  in  the  right  state.  Nothing  so 
effectually  melts  the  heart,  as  a  view  of  God's  great  love  towards 
us,  while  we  were  yet  sinners :  and  of  Christ's  love  in  giving  him- 
self for  us :  but  many  a  heart  has  felt  this  melting  influence, 
without  having  in  view  the  personal  benefit  to  be  received  from  this 
love.  Our  love  to  God  does  not  produce  a  disregard  to  our  own 
happiness,  but  it  rises  above  the  consideration  of  it.  It  is,  there- 
fore, not  a  modification  of  self-love. 

This  divine  operation,  which  is  additional  to  the  motive  power  of 
truth,  proceeds  from  what  has  been  called  the  direct  influence  of 
the  Spirit.  Truth,  as  contained  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  is  a 
revelation  from  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  as  men's  words,  whether 
spoken  or  written,  have  an  influence  on  the  minds  of  other  men, 
so  the  words  of  the  Holy  Spirit  have  an  influence  on  the  minds  of 
all  who  read  the  Bible,  or  hear  the  gospel  preached.  In  this 
indirect  way,  the  Holy  Spirit  operates  on  men's  minds,  as  the 
author  of  a  book  operates  on  all  who  read  his  work.  But  this 
indirect  influence  is  by  means  of  truth  as  a  motive  power ;  and  no 
mere  motive,  operating  on  the  sinner's  heart,  can  induce  .him  to 
love  God  for  his  own  sake.     While  self-love  rules  in  the  mind,  all 

1  Eph.  ii.  4,  5.  2Eph.  i.  19.  20 


282  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

motives  derive  their  power  from  their  relation  to  the  ruling  princi- 
ple ;  and  cannot,  therefore,  establish  a  higher  principle  of  action. 
This  change,  bj  which  true  love  to  God  is  produced,  results  from 
the  direct  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  accompanying  his  word,  and 
making  it  effectual.  It  was  this  direct  influence  which  rendered 
the  word  so  effectual  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,1  which  opened 
Lydia's  heart,2  so  that  she  attended  to  the  things  that  were  spoken 
by  Paul ; — which  gave  the  increase  when  Paul  planted,  and  Apollos 
watered,3 — and  which  has  ever  brought  the  word  to  the  heart,  in 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  and  with  power.4 

The  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  direct  influence,  is  a  funda- 
mental truth  of  the  gospel  dispensation.  That  Jesus  Christ  has 
come  in  the  flesh,  and  completed  the  great  work  for  which  he 
assumed  our  nature,  is  a  truth  that  lies  at  the  foundation  of 
Christianity.  The  gospel  reveals  to  us  the  Spirit  as  well  as  the 
Son.  When  about  to  leave  the  world,  Jesus  promised  another 
Comforter,  who  should  dwell  with  his  disciples  for  ever.  The 
Holy  Spirit,  as  God,  had  always  been  in  the  world :  but  he  was 
now  to  be  present  by  a  peculiar  manifestation  and  operation. 
This  manifestation  and  operation  attended  the  ministry  of  the 
Word  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  the  gospel  has  always  been 
the  sword  of  the  Spirit,5  the  instrument  with  which  he  operates  in 
the  fulfilment  of  his  office  for  which  he  has  come  into  the  world,  in 
answer  to  the  prayer  of  Christ. 

The  experience  of  mankind,  before  the  coming  of  Christ,  pre- 
pared the  way  for  the  introduction  of  his  religion.  The  wise  men 
of  the  world  had  sought  to  know  God,  but  their  laborious  research 
had  been  ineffectual.  Some  other  means  of  knowledge  was,  by 
their  failure,  proved  to  be  necessary :  "  After  that  in  the  wisdom 
of  God,  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased  God  by  the 
foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe."6  While  an 
experiment  was  made  in  the  heathen  world,  demonstrating  the 
necessity  of  revelation,  another  was  in  progress  among  the  people 
of  Israel,  under  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  demonstrating  the  inef- 
ficiency of  revelation,  unless  accompanied  by  direct  influence  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.    The  Israelites  had  this  great  advantage  over  the 

1  Acts  ii.  2  Acts  xvi.  3  1  Cor.  iii. 

*  1  Cor.  ii.  4.  5  Eph.  vi.  17.  6  1  Cor.  i.  21. 


BLESSINGS    OF   GRACE.  283 

heathen  world,  that  to  them  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God.1 
The  Scriptures,  given  by  inspiration  from  God,  were  in  their  pos- 
session :  and  God  spoke  to  them  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers 
manners,  by  prophets  whom  he  raised  up  among  them,  and  inspired 
to  declare  his  will.  That  these  prophets,  with  their  burdens  of 
divine  messages,  might  arrive  in  due  time,  God  represents  himself 
as  rising  up  early  and  sending  them.2  So  abundant  were  the 
means  of  religious  knowledge  granted  them,  that  God  said,  "What 
could  have  been  done  more  to  my  vineyard,  that  I  have  not  done 
in  it?"3  Yet,  with  all  this  advantage,  they  turned  away  from  the 
God  of  Israel,  and  provoked  him  to  anger.  Another  influence 
was  needed,  to  produce  love  and  obedience  to  God.  Hence  it  was 
said,  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  "  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the 
Lord,  that  I  will  perform  that  good  thing  which  I  have  promised 
unto  the  house  of  Israel,  and  to  the  house  of  Judah."*  This  new 
covenant  is  explained  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,5  to  be  the 
spiritual  dispensation  of  the  gospel.  Its  grand  peculiarity  is,  that 
the  law  of  God  is  written  in  the  heart.  The  Israelites  had  the 
revelation  from  God  written  on  stone  and  parchment,  but  it  was 
not  in  their  hearts ;  and  a  new  divine  influence  was  needed  to  put 
it  there.  This  new  divine  influence  was  promised  by  the  prophet, 
and  the  promise  has  been  fulfilled  in  the  direct  influence  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  the  gift  of  which  characterizes  the  gospel  dispensation 
as  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit.6  The  saints  of  God,  under  the 
former  dispensation,  received  this  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  to  them  also  was  the  gospel  preached.7  The  privileges  and 
blessings  of  the  future  dispensation,  were,  by  anticipation,  bestowed 
on  them ;  and  the  Christ  to  come  was  made  their  Saviour,  as  if  he 
had  already  appeared  and  fulfilled  his  work.  But  the  abundant 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  reserved  for  the  times  following 
the  ascension  of  Christ,  and  from  that  day  he  dwells  in  the  Church, 
and  makes  the  bodies  of  believers  his  temple.  This  peculiar  pre- 
sence implies  the  peculiar  influence  by  which  the  truth  is  put  into 
tha  heart ;  that  is,  by  which  men  are  made  to  love  the  truth.  The 
whole  Mosaic  dispensation  was  an  experiment,  demonstrating  the 

1  Rom.  iii.  2.  2  Jer.  xxxii.  33.  s  Isaiah  v.  4. 

*  Jer.  xxxiii.  14.  •    5  Heb.  viii.  6  2  Cor.  iii.  8. 

7Heb.  iv.  2:  Gal.  iii.  8. 


284  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

necessity  of  this  peculiar  influence.  That  covenant  did  not  pro- 
mise this  blessing,  and  God  found  fault  with  it,  because  it  did  not 
secure  the  obedience  of  his  people.  The  experiment  was  made,  in 
his  wisdom,  not  for  his  information,  but  for  our  benefit ;  and,  by 
the  failure  of  that  covenant,  we  are  enabled  better  to  estimate  the 
value  of  the  blessing  that  distinguishes  the  covenant  founded  on 
better  promises. 

That  philosophy  which  shuts  God  out  of  his  creation,  and  sub- 
stitutes laws  of  nature  for  his  ever-present  influence  and  operation, 
stands  ready  to  deny  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  direct  influ- 
ence. It  admits  not  the  possibility  of  any  influence,  but  that  which 
the  means  employed  naturally  tend  to  produce.  But  means  have  no 
natural  efficiency  apart  from  the  will  of  God.  By  the  will  of  God, 
the  truth  has  its  regenerating  and  sanctifying  power ;  for  he  works 
in  us  to  will  and  to  do,  according  to  his  pleasure.1  It  belongs  to 
the  Holy  Spirit,  in  the  economy  of  grace,  to  produce  divine  life  in 
the  soul,  as  he  brooded  over  the  face  of  the  waters,  at  creation, 
reducing  the  chaotic  mass  to  order,  and  filling  it  with  life.  He  is 
pleased  to  work  with  means ;  and  he  employs  the  truth  as  his 
instrument  of  operation.  This  instrument  he  wields  at  his  plea- 
sure, and  he  renders  it  effectual  by  his  divine  power :  "  My  word 
shall  not  return  unto  me  void,  but  it  shall  accomplish  that  which  I 
please,  and  it  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto  I  sent  it."2  By 
the  ordinary  providence  of  God,  the  Bible  operates  in  the  world, 
and  influences  the  minds  of  men :  but  this  providence  equally 
existed  in  the  former  dispensation,  in  which  the  oracles  of  God 
were  possessed  by  the  Israelites,  but  held  by  them  in  unrighteous- 
ness. An  influence  above  the  ordinary  providence  of  God  is 
needed,  to  the  regeneration  of  the  soul.  The  coming  of  Christ 
into  the  world,  and  the  coming  and  abiding  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
belong  to  a  dispensation  which  is  above  the  ordinary  providence 
of  God.  Into  this  new  economy  we  are  ushered,  when  we  are 
translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son.  Here  we  recog- 
nise both  the  Son  and  the  Spirit,  as  specially  given  of  God.  It  is 
contrary  to  the  faith  of  the  gospel  to  regard  Christ  and  his  redeem- 
ing work,  as  things  of  God's  ordinary  providence ;  and  it  is  equally 

1  Phil.  ii.  13.  2  Isaiah  Iv.  11. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  285 

contrary  to  faith  to  consider  the  Spirit  and  his  work  in  the  heart 
as  merely  natural  influence  of  the  truth  on  the  heart. 

Section  V.— S  ANC  T  I  FIC  ATION. 

The  Holy  Spirit  continues  to  sanctify  those  whom  he  has 
regenerated,  and  finally  prepares  them  fully  for  the  holy 
service  and  enjoyment  of  heaven.1 

Regeneration  is  the  beginning  of  sanctification,  but  the  work  is 
not  completed  at  the  outset.  A  new  affection  is  produced  in  the 
heart,  but  it  does  not  govern  without  opposition.  The  love  of  the 
world,  the  love  of  self,  and  all  the  carnal  appetites  and  passions, 
have  reigned  in  the  heart ;  and  the  power  of  habit  gives  them  a 
controlling  influence,  which  is  not  readily  yielded.  Hence  arises 
the  warfare  of  which  every  regenerate  man  is  conscious :  the  flesh 
lusting  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh.2  In 
this  struggle,  the  carnal  propensities  often  threaten  to  prevail,  and 
they  would  prevail,  if  God  did  not  give  a  supply  of  the  Spirit  of 
Jesus  Christ.  "  Without  me,"  said  Jesus,  "ye  can  do  nothing."3 
If  severed  from  the  living  vine,  the  branches  are  sapless,  fruitless, 
dead.  But  "he  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  Spirit  ;"4  and  the 
Spirit  of  life  from  Christ,  the  head,  flows  through  all  the  members 
of  his  body,  and  gives  and  preserves  their  vitality.  This  Spirit  in 
them  lusteth  against  the  flesh,  and  enables  them  to  carry  on  their 
warfare,  and  gives  them  final  victory :  "  He  that  hath  begun  a 
good  work  in  you,  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."5 

As  in  the  beginning,  so  in  the  progress  of  the  work,  the  Holy 
Spirit  operates  by  direct  and  by  indirect  influence.  The  indirect 
influence  is  by  means  of  the  truth.  With  reference  to  this,  the 
Saviour  prayed :."  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth;"6  and,  with 
reference  to  it,  the  Scriptures  connect  "  belief  of  the  truth,"  with 
"sanctification  of  the  Spirit;"7  and  speak  of  the  heart  being  purified 
by  faith.8  The  direct  influence  fixes  the  affections  on  the  truth ; 
or,  in  the  language  of  Scripture,  "writes  the  law  in  the  heart."9 

1  2  Thess.  ii.  13 ;  1  Pet.  i.  2 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  11 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;  Mai.  iii.  3  ;  Eph. 
r.  26  ;  Tit.  ii.  14 ;  Prov.  iv.  18 ;  Phil.  i.  6 ;  1  John  iii.  2. 

2  Gal.  v.  17.  3  John  xv.  5.  4  1  Cor.  vi.  17. 

5  Phil.  i.  6.  •   6  John  xvii.  17.  7  2  Thess.  ii.  13. 

8  Acts  xv.  9.  9  Heb.  x.  16. 


283  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

The  mode  in  which  this  direct  influence  is  exerted,  we  cannot 
explain ;  but  the  result  is,  that  the  truth  produces  its  proper  effect, 
which  otherwise  it  would  fail  to  accomplish,  through  the  depravity 
of  the  heart.  Our  carnal  affections  tend  to  shut  out  the  truth  from 
the  heart ;  hence  Christ  said :  "  How  can  ye  believe,  which  receive 
honor  one  of  another,  and  seek  not  the  honor  that  cometh  from 
God  only?"1  While  carnal  affections  tend  to  prevent  the  propei 
influence  of  the  truth,  the  Spirit  exercises  an  opposite  influence, 
and  "lusts  against  the  flesh."  As  this  influence  gives  the  word 
an  efficacy  which  it  would  not  otherwise  possess,  it  is  something 
superadded  to  the  intrinsic  power  of  the  word.  For  this  direct 
influence,  the  Psalmist  prays :  "  Open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I  may 
behold  wondrous  things  out  of  thy  law;"2  and  for  this,  the  prayers 
recorded  in  the  New  Testament  were  offered :  "  Lord,  increase  our 
faith."3  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  thou  mine  unbelief."4  This 
influence  operated  on  the  two  disciples,  when  their  understandings 
were  opened,  that  they  understood  the  Scriptures.5  This  influence 
is  prayed  for  by  every  child  of  God,  when,  as  he  opens  the  Bible, 
he  prays  that  what  he  is  about  to  read,  may  be  blessed  to  the  good 
of  his  soul.  And  it  is  prayed  for  by  the  faithful  minister  of  the 
gospel,  and  by  every  devout  hearer,  when  at  the  beginning  of  a 
sermon,  they  ask  God  to  make  his  truth  effectual. 

Besides  the  word  of  truth,  the  dispensations  of  Providence  are 
used  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  means  of  sanctification.  Afflictions 
are  often  blessed  to  the  spiritual  good  of  God's  people.  David 
says :  "  Before  I  was  afflicted,  I  went  astray ;  but  now  have  I  kept 
thy  word."6  These  afflictions  are  chastisements  which  our  heavenly 
Father  employs,  to  make  us  partakers  of  his  holiness."7  In 
themselves,  afflictions  have  no  sanctifying  efficacy,  and  many  who 
are  tried  by  them,  are  incited  to  greater  hatred  of  God ;  but  the 
Holy  Spirit  accompanies  them  to  the  believer  with  a  sanctifying 
power,  and  uses  them  to  wean  his  affections  from  the  world,  and 
fix  them  on  God.  When  outward  things  either  cease  to  give  him 
enjoyment,  or  produce  positive  grief  and  pain,  he  finds  within  him 
a  source  of  happiness,  in  the  exercise  of  faith  and  hope  in  God. 
Hence,  in  his  darkest  hours,  as  to  worldly  prosperity,  the  believer 

1  John.  v.  44.  2  Ps.  cxix.  18.  s  Luke  xvii.  5. 

4  Mark  ix.  24.  5  Luke  xxiv#  45#  6  ps>  C5jx>  G7# 


Heb.  xii.  10. 


BLESSINGS    OF   GRACE.  287 

sometimes  finds  his  prospects  of  heaven  most  clear,  and  his  foretaste 
of  future  blessedness  most  delightful. 


Section  VI.— FINAL  PERSEVERANCE. 

We  have  said,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  continues  to  sanctify  those 
whom  he  has  regenerated.  In  consequence  of  this,  they  persevere 
in  a  course  of  holy  obedience  to  the  end  of  life.  Whatever  struggles 
it  may  cost,  and  whatever  temporary  departures  from  the  straight 
line  of  duty  may  mark  their  course,  they  are  graciously  preserved 
from  total  and  final  apostacy.  This  truth  may  be  proved  by  the 
following  arguments : 

1.  By  the  will  of  God,  as  revealed  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  that 
which  is  produced  in  regeneration,  is  immortal.  This  is  signified 
by  the  language  of  the  Scriptures  :  "  The  hidden  man  of  the  heart, 
in  that  which  is  not  corruptible."1  "Being  born  of  the  incorrupti- 
ble."2 "Whosoever  is  born  of  God,  doth  not  commit  sin,  for  his 
seed  remaineth  in  him."3  Grace  in  the  heart  is  here  represented 
as  incorruptible  and  abiding,  and  as  securing  its  possessor  from 
sin,  that  is,  from  a  life  of  sin,  such  as  unregenerate  men  pursue. 
The  same  truth  is  taught  in  these  words  of  Christ :  "  He  that 
believeth,  hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into  condemna- 
tion, but  is  passed  from  death  unto  life."4  The  new  life  which 
grace  produces,  is  in  the  present  possession  of  the  believer,  and  is 
here  called  everlasting.  Its  perpetuity  is  asserted  in  another  form, 
in  the  words  "Neither  shall  he  come  into  condemnation."  If  one 
who  has  been  made  a  new  creature,  and  justified  by  faith,  can 
return  to  the  state  from  which  divine  grace  has  rescued  him,  he 
will  come  again  into  condemnation ;  but  this  is  declared  in  these 
words  of  the  infallible  teacher,  to  be  impossible :  "  If  they  who 
have  passed  from  death  to  life,  may  return  again  to  death,  their 
present  life  is  not  everlasting ;"  and  the  assurance,  neither  shall 
come  into  condemnation,  is  groundless.  The  same  truth  is  exhibited 
in  another  light,  in  these  words  of  Paul :  "  Knowing  that  Christ, 
being  raised  from  the  dead,  dieth  no  more,  death  hath  no  dominion 
over  him ;  likewise  reckon  ye  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto 

\l  Pet.  iii.  4.  2  1  Pet.  i.  23. 

3  1  John  iii.  9.  4  John  v.  24. 


288  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

sin,  but  alive  unto  God,  through  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord."1  Here 
believers  are  taught  to  account  the  new  life  which  they  have 
received,  to  be  like  the  life  of  Christ,  raised  from  the  dead.  As 
death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him,  the  resemblance  would  fail 
in  a  most  important  particular,  if  their  spiritual  life  were  not 
immortal.  As  death  can  have  no  more  dominion  over  the  risen 
Saviour,  so,  death  can  have  no  more  dominion  over  those  who,  in 
regeneration,  have  passed  from  death  to  life,  and  have  been  raised 
up  together  with  Christ. 

2.  The  union  of  believers  with  Christ  is  indissoluble.  His  love 
holds  them  fast.  "Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ," 
&c.2  "  Having  loved  his  own,  he  loved  them  to  the  end."3  "  His 
power  holds  them  fast ;  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand."4  Such  is  their  union  to  him,  that  their  life  is  said  to  be  in 
him,  and  he  is  called  their  life.5  The  life  of  the  risen  Jesus,  is  the 
life  of  his  people,  and  such  is  their  union  with  him,  as  to  render 
this  life  operative  in  them :  "If  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were 
reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being 
reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life."6  As  his  death  was 
efficacious  to  bring  us  into  a  state  of  reconciliation  with  God,  his 
life,  now  that  he  has  been  raised  from  the  dead,  and  is  ever  living 
to  make  intercession  for  us,  and  is  the  source  of  our  life,  hid  in  the 
Godhead,  will  much  more  preserve  us  in  this  state  of  reconciliation, 
and  secure  our  final  and  complete  salvation. 

3.  The  promises  of  God  secure  our  preservation  in  Christ. 
When  the  new  covenant  is  made  with  believers,  by  writing  the  law 
in  their  hearts,  the  accompanying  promise  is :  "I  will  be  to  them 
a  God,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  a  people."7  It  is  true  that  the 
Israelites  were  once  accounted  the  people  of  God ;  and  that  they 
departed  from  God,  and  were  rejected  by  him ;  and  the  same 
departure  and  rejection  might  happen  to  believers  in  Christ,  if  they 
were  under  the  same  covenant.  But  God  found  fault  with  the  old 
covenant  precisely  on  this  ground,  that  it  did  not  secure  his  people 
from  disobedience  and  rejection  :  "  Because  they  continued  not  in 
my  covenant,  and  I  regarded  them  not."8  Having  found  fault 
with  this  covenant,  which  did  not  put  the  law  in  their  hearts,  and 

1  Rom.  vi.  9,  11.  2  Rom.  viii.  35-39.  3  John  xiii.  1. 

4  John  x.  28.  5  Col.  iii.  3,  4.  6  Roui.  v.  10. 

7  Heb.  viii.  10.  8  Heb.  viii.  9. 


BLESSINGS    OF   GRACE.  289 

secure  them  from  rejection,  he  abolishes  that  covenant,  and  makes 
a  new  one,  founded  on  better  promises :  "  I  will  put  my  fear  in 
their  hearts,  that  they  shall  not  depart  from  me."1  "Believers 
are  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation  ;"2  and 
the  power  which  keeps  them  through  faith,  keeps  that  faith  in 
existence  and  exercise,  or  it  would  fail  to  preserve  them.  This 
preservation  of  their  faith,  follows  from  the  intercession  of  Christ,3 
who  prayed  for  Peter,  that  his  faith  should  not  fail ;  and  as  he  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession,4  the  preservation  of  faith  is  secured  by 
the  continued  supplies  of  his  grace,  which  otherwise  would  not  be 
sufficient  for  his  people.  It  is  manifest  that  Paul  entertained  these 
views,  when  he  wrote  to  the  Philippians :  "  Being  confident  of  this 
very  thing,  that  he  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you,  will 
perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."5 

4.  Final  apostasy,  when  it  does  occur,  is  accounted  for,  in  the 
Scriptures,  on  the  ground  that  there  was  an  absence  of  true 
religion.  This  is  clearly  expressed  by  John :  "  They  went  out 
from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us ;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us,  they 
would  no  doubt  have  continued  with  us ;  but  they  went  out,  that 
they  might  be  made  manifest  that  they  were  not  all  of  us."6  With 
this  agrees  the  teaching  of  Christ,  in  the  parable  of  the  seed  sown 
in  different  kinds  of  ground,  and  explained  by  him  of  the  word  in 
its  effect  on  different  classes  of  hearers.  The  stony  ground  hearers 
"  in  time  of  temptation  fell  away,"7  because  the  seed  had  not  much 
depth  of  earth.  There  may  be  much  appearance  of  religion  where 
it  does  not  really  exist.  Some,  the  Saviour  has  informed  us,  will 
seek  to  enter  in,  saying :  "  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in 
thy  name,  and  in  thy  name  have  cast  out  devils  ?  and  in  thy  name 
have  done  many  wonderful  works  ?"  These  applicants  are  rejected, 
not  on  the  ground  that  their  plea  was  false.  Their  profession  of 
Christ,  and  their  prophesying,  and  working  of  miracles,  in  his 
name,  are  not  denied :  but  the  ground  of  this  rejection  is  stated  in 
these  words  :  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity.  I  never 
knew  you."8    Now,  if  any  of  them  had  ever  been  true  followers 

1  Jer.  xxxii.  40.  2 1  Pet.  i.  5.  3  Luke  xxii.  32. 

4  Heb.  vii.  25.  6  Phil.  i.  6.  6 1  John  ii.  19. 

'  Luke  viii.  13.  8  Matt.  vii.  23. 
19 


290  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

of  Christ,  he  must  have  known  them  as  such,  and  therefore  he 
could  not  say :  "  I  never  knew  you." 

The  text  last  considered,  may  assist  us  in  explaining  a  passage 
in  which  many  have  found  difficulty :  "It  is  impossible  for  those 
who  were  once  enlightened,  and  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift, 
and  were  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  have  tasted  the 
good  word  of  God,  and  the  power  of  the  world  to  come,  if  they 
shall  fall  away,  to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance."1  Apostasy, 
after  great  attainments  in  religion,  is  here  supposed ;  but  these 
apostates  had  never  been  true  disciples  of  Christ,  distinguished  by 
love  to  him,  and  works  of  holy  obedience.  In  immediate  connection 
with  his  account  of  them,  Paul  addresses  true  Christians  thus : 
"  Beloved,  we  are  persuaded  better  things  of  you,  and  things 
which  accompany  salvation,  though  we  thus  speak,  for  God  is  not 
unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  and  labor  of  love."2  The  work 
and  labor  of  love  will  be  acknowledged  by  him  in  the  great  day, 
when  the  workers  of  iniquity  will  be  rejected,  whatever  knowledge 
of  divine  things  they  may  have  possessed,  and  whatever  miraculous 
gifts  they  may  have  been  endowed  with.  The  superiority  of  love 
to  all  knowledge,  miraculous  gifts,  and  all  outward  works,  however 
costly  and  self-denying,  is  clearly  taught  in  1  Cor.  xiii.,  and  we 
are  assured  that  all  these,  where  love  is  wanting,  will  avail  nothing. 
Hence  all  these,  if  without  love,  will  not  preserve  from  apostasy 
in  this  life,  nor  from  rejection  in  the  last  day. 

In  a  practical  use  of  this  and  some  other  passages,  the  minds  of 
many  have  been  distressed  with  the  apprehension  that  they  had 
committed  the  unpardonable  sin.  For  their  relief,  it  is  important 
to  observe,  that  the  difficulty  in  the  way  of  the  salvation  of  the 
apostates  here  described,  consists  in  the  impossibility  of  renewing 
them  again  to  repentance.  No  humble  penitent,  therefore,  has 
any  ground  to  fear.  Whatever  his  backslidings  may  have  been,  if 
he  now  truly  repents  of  his  sin,  and  implores  pardon  through  the 
blood  of  the  cross,  he  may  feel  assured  that  the  way  of  salvation 
is  open  to  him.  The  renewal  to  repentance  has,  in  his  case,  been 
accomplished ;  and  he  may  therefore  know  that  he  is  not  in  the 
number  of  those,  to  whom  this  renewal  is  impossible. 

The  confessions  of  men  eminent  for  piety,  prove  that  they  are 

1  Heb.  vi.  2  Heb.  vi.  9. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  291 

not  free  from  sin ;  and  the  cases  of  David,  who  committed  adultery, 
and  Peter,  who  denied  his  master,  prove  that  true  saints  have 
sometimes  fallen  into  gross  sins.  But  David  was  renewed  to 
repentance,  and  the  record  of  his  penitential  acknowledgments  has 
been  transmitted  to  us  in  the  51st  Psalm.  A  look  of  Jesus  melted 
Peter's  heart,  and  he  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly.  But  the 
apostates,  who  are  described  in  the  passage  which  we  have  been 
considering,  are  given  over  to  hardness  of  heart :  "  It  is  impossible 
to  renew  them  again  to  repentance."  The  difficulty  is,  not  that 
the  blood  of  Christ  is  insufficient  to  atone  for  sins  so  atrocious,  but 
that  it  is  impossible  to  renew  them  again  to  repentance.  God 
never  bestows  the  grace  of  repentance  on  such  characters.  But 
when  one  who  has  been  born  of  God,  falls  into  sin,  this  impossibility 
of  renewing  to  repentance  does  not  exist ;  but  his  seed  remaineth 
in  him ;  and  divine  grace  brings  him  back  from  his  wanderings, 
and  restores  him  to  the  paths  of  righteousness.  The  fire  of  divine 
love  in  the  heart,  though  its  flame  may  be  smothered  for  a  time, 
is  more  easily  rekindled  than  when  first  produced ;  and  it  is  never 
true  of  him,  as  it  is  of  an  unregenerate  man  who  falls  away,  that 
the  last  state  is  worse  than  the  first. 

Several  other  passages  of  Scripture,  which  have  been  understood 
to  imply  the  apostasy  of  true  believers,  require  consideration. 

"Every  branch  in  me  that  beareth  not  fruit,  he  taketh  away."1 
This  figurative  representation,  which  the  Saviour  has  employed, 
teaches  that  there  is  a  sense,  in  which  persons  are  "in"  him,  who 
do  not  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  holiness.  Such  persons  do  not 
abide  in  him.2  Their  connection  is  not  vital,  but  professional. 
They  are  among  his  disciples,  but  not  of  them ;  for  if  they  had 
been  of  them,  they  would  no  doubt  have  continued  with  them. 
The  process  of  separating  them,  described  by  the  words,  "he 
taketh  away,"  corresponds  well  with  the  removing  of  a  branch 
which  has  been  grafted  into  a  stalk,  but  has  failed  to  become  vitally 
connected  with  it.  The  perseverance  of  true  saints  is  taught  in 
the  remaining  part  of  the  verse :  "  Every  branch  that  beareth  fruit, 
he  purgeth  it,  that  it  may  bring  forth  more  fruit." 

"  If  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth,  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins ;  but  a 

1  John  xv.  2.  2  John  xv.  6. 


292  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation  which 
shall  devour  the  adversaries."1  This  passage  has  sometimes 
severely  tried  the  faith  of  weak  believers.  When  conscious  of 
having  committed  sins  to  which  their  will  has  consented,  these 
words  present  themselves  in  dreadful  array,  and  seem  to  deter  them 
from  all  further  approach  to  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Jesus,  from 
which  they  once  obtained  peace.  In  such  times  of  trial,  the  lan- 
guage of  faith  is,  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  him."2 
While  this  awful  text  fills  with  terror,  the  existence  of  an  humble 
abiding  trust  in  God  is  thus  demonstrated,  and,  in  view  of  it,  other 
texts  authorize  encouragement  and  hope.  With  these  encouraging 
and  consolatory  texts,  the  passage  now  under  consideration,  if 
properly  understood,  cannot  be  inconsistent.  It  describes  the  sin 
of  those  Hebrews  who,  after  embracing  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
forsook  the  assembly  of  Christians,3  and  turned  back  to  Judaism. 
To  them  no  efficacious  sacrifice  for  sin  remained,  in  the  abolished 
ceremonies  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation ;  and  if  that  of  Christ 
were  renounced,  no  other  could  be  found.  But  these  words  were 
never  designed  to  deter  any  humble  penitent  from  free  approach 
to  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ,  whatever  sins  he  may  have  com- 
mitted. The  assurance  that  Jesus  has  given,  "  Him  that  cometh 
to  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out,"4  is  sufficient  to  banish  all  fear 
from  those  who  put  their  trust  in  him.  The  same  invitation  which 
first  made  them  welcome,  and  the  same  assurance  which  first  gave 
them  peace,  remain  to  encourage  their  continued  confidence  in  his 
power  and  grace. 

"  Of  how  much  sorer  punishment  suppose  ye  shall  he  be  thought 
worthy,  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,  and  hath 
counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant  wherewith  he  was  sanctified,  an 
unholy  thing;  and  hath  done  despite  to  the  spirit  of  grace?"5  The 
difficulty  in  this  passage  is  found  in  the  phrase  "  wherewith  he 
was  sanctified."  Do  these  words  teach  that  persons  who  have  been 
sanctified  may  apostatise  ?  Let  it  be  observed  that  the  word 
sanctify,  among  the  Hebrews,  was  used  to  denote  external  conse- 
cration to  God.6  This  consecration,  under  the  former  dispensa- 
tion, to  which  the  Hebrews  had  been  accustomed,  was  by  the  blood 

1  Heb.  x.  26,  27.  2  Job  xiii.  15.  *  Heb.  x.  25. 

*  John.  vi.  37.  5  Heb.  x.  29.  6  Ex.  xiii.  2 ;  xix.  10,  22,  23,  &o- 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  293 

of  animals.  In  professing  Christianity,  they  had  turned  from  the 
blood  of  animals  to  the  blood  of  Christ ;  and  their  consecration  to 
the  service  of  Christ  was  by  professed  faith  in  his  blood.  In  re- 
turning to  Judaism,  they  rejected  this  precious  blood,  and  accounted 
it  an  unholy  thing,  as  if  it  had  been  the  blood  of  a  vile  impostor. 
But  it  is  better  to  interpret  the  phrase  by  referring  the  pronoun 
"  he"  to  the  last  antecedent,  "  the  Son  of  God."  The  Son  of  God 
was  sanctified  and  sent  into  the  world;1  and  as  the  priests  of  the 
law  were  consecrated  with  blood,  Jesus,  as  our  great  High  Priest, 
may  be  said  to  have  been  consecrated  with  the  blood  of  the  new 
covenant. 

"  The  just  shall  live  by  faith ;  but  if  any  man  draw  back,  my 
soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him."2  In  this  verse  our  translators 
have  supplied  the  words,  "  any  man,"  which  have  no  corresponding 
word  in  the  Greek.  The  regular  translation  would  be,  "  If  he 
draw  back,"  &c.  Thus  rendered,  the  pronoun  "he"  naturally 
refers  to  the  just  man,  mentioned  in  the  preceding  clause ;  and  the 
words  seem  to  imply  that  a  just  man  may  draw  back,  so  that  God 
will  have  no  pleasure  in  him.  An  argument  for  supplying  the 
words  "  any  man,"  may  be  drawn  from  the  fact  that  these  words 
are  quoted  from  the  Septuagint  version  of  Habakkuk  ii.  6,  in 
which  the  last  clause  occurs  first ;  and  the  man  who  draws  back  is 
manifestly  distinguished  from  the  just  man.  The  same  distinction 
is  made  by  Paul  in  the  words  which  immediately  follow :  "  We 
are  not  of  them  who  draw  back  to  perdition,  but  of  them  who 
believe  to  the  saving  of  the  soul."  The  introduction  of  the  words 
"any  man,"  may  therefore  give  a  correct  exposition  of  Paul's 
words :  still,  they  are  an  exposition,  and  not  a  translation.  Paul 
has  inverted  the  order  of  the  two  clauses  written  by  the  pro- 
phet :  and,  in  so  doing,  he  was  doubtless  guided  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  for  some  wise  purpose ;  and  it  becomes  us  to  learn  from  his 
words,  as  they  have  been  given  by  the  Spirit  for  our  instruction  and 
admonition.  The  prophet's  warning  was,  "  If  any  man  draw  back, 
my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him."  This  warning  Paul  places 
in  such  order,  as  to  make  it  apply  to  the  just  man.  What  is  true 
of  any  man,  must  be  true  of  the  just  man ;  and  Paul  will  not  deny 
to  the  just  man  the  benefit  of  this  admonition.     Such  admonition, 

1  John  x.  36.  2  Heb.  x.  38. 


291  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

in  the  apostle's  view,  was  not  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  of  the 
saints'  final  perseverance. 

"  When  a  righteous  man  turneth  away  from  his  righteousness, 
and  committeth  iniquity,  and  dieth  in  them ;  for  his  iniquity  that 
he  hath  done,  shall  he  die."1  These  words  are  to  be  understood 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  words  of  Paul  which  have  just  been 
considered.  The  terms  "just"  and  "  righteous"  are  of  like  import, 
and  are  descriptive  of  those  who  obey  God's  commands,  and  enjoy 
his  favor.  Such  persons  need  the  admonitions  contained  in  these 
passages ;  and  they  are  given  in  language  precisely  adapted  to  the 
case.  To  all,  except  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  there  is  an  uncer- 
tainty respecting  men's  character  in  his  sight ;  and,  on  the  ground 
of  this  uncertainty,  opportunity  is  given  for  the  needed  admonition. 
Paul  spoke  with  confidence,  that  the  Hebrews  whom  he  addressed 
were  "  of  those  who  believe  to  the  saving  of  the  soul :"  yet,  without 
relying  on  his  own  estimate  of  their  character,  or  deriving  from  it 
an  assurance  of  their  perseverance,  he  warned  them  earnestly 
against  apostasy. 

"  If,  after  they  have  escaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  through 
the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  they  are 
again  entangled  therein,  and  overcome,  the  latter  end  is  worse 
with  them  than  the  beginning."2  These  words  describe  men  who 
have  been  reformed  in  their  conduct  by  the  influence  of  the  gospel, 
but  without  a  thorough  change  of  heart.  This  appears  from  the 
proverb  applied  to  them  :  "  The  dog  has  returned  to  his  vomit,  and 
the  sow  that  was  washed,  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire."3  As  the 
temporary  change  of  the  dog  and  the  sow  had  not  altered  their 
natural  propensities,  so  it  was  with  these  men.  Their  change, 
though  a  reform,  had  not  made  them  new  creatures. 

"  Whosoever  of  you  are  justified  by  the  law,  ye  are  fallen  from 
grace."4  These  words  describe  a  change  in  their  doctrinal  views  as 
to  the  method  of  salvation.  They  had  turned  from  salvation  by 
grace  to  salvation  by  the  law.  But  how  far  the  state  of  their 
hearts  was  influenced  by  their  doctrinal  creed,  either  before  or* 
after  the  change  here  described,  the  passage  does  not  inform  us. 

"  Concerning  faith  having  made  shipwreck."5     "  Overthrow  the 

1  Ezek.  xviii.  26.  2  2  Pet.  ii.  20.  8  2  Pet.  ii.  22. 

*  Gal.  v.  4.  6 1  Tim.  i.  19. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  295 

faith  of  some."1  Wrong  views  had  been  inculcated  by  these  men 
respecting  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  It  may  be  that  neither 
they,  nor  those  who  were  misled  by  them,  had  ever  received  the 
love  of  the  truth.     On  this  point  the  passage  says  nothing. 

"  Through  thy  knowledge  shall  the  weak  brother  perish  for  whom 
Christ  died?"2  When  the  stronger  Christian  will  not,  for  the  sake 
of  a  weak  brother,  deny  himself  a  carnal  indulgence,  he  exhibits  a 
criminal  disregard  of  his  weak  brother's  spiritual  interest.  The 
tendency  of  his  conduct  is  the  ruin  of  his  weak  brother  ;  and  the 
criminality  is  to  be  judged  by  its  tendency;  and  is  the  same, 
whether  the  tendency  goes  into  effect,  or  is  prevented  by  the  inter- 
position of  divine  grace.  The  question  propounded  does  not  affirm 
what  the  result  will  be ;  but  impressively  exhibits  the  guilt  of  the 
offender  by  contrasting  his  conduct  with  that  of  Christ.  Christ 
died  for  the  weak  brother ;  and  would  you  cause  him  to  perish, 
rather  than  deny  yourself  a  trifling  gratification  ? 

"  I  keep  under  my  body  and  bring  it  into  subjection,  lest  that 
by  any  means  when  I  have  preached  to  others,  I  myself  should  be 
a  castaway."3  These  words  contain  a  manifest  reference  to  the 
Grecian  games,  in  which  the  herald,  who  announced  them,  took  no 
part  in  the  contest,  or  the  previous  preparation  for  it ;  and  there- 
fore did  not  receive  the  crown.  Paul  was  not  only  a  herald, 
making  the  gospel  proclamation,  but  he  entered  the  lists  as  a  com- 
batant, and  made  diligent  preparation  for  the  conflict,  by  keeping 
under  his  body.  He  did  this,  knowing  that  his  preaching,  or  act- 
ing the  herald,  to  others,  would  not  secure  a  crown  to  himself.  He 
prepared  diligently  for  the  combat,  that  he  might  receive  the 
crown,  and  not  be  a  castaway,  or  one  rejected  by  the  Judge. 

The  explanation  which  has  been  given  of  this  passage,  removes 
all  appearance  of  inconsistency  between  it  and  the  doctrine  of  the 
saints'  final  perseverance ;  yet  it  admits  that  Paul  was  stimulated 
to  activity  and  perseverance  in  the  Christian  conflict,  by  the  belief 
that  his  obtaining  of  the  crown  depended  on  his  perseverance  and 
success  in  the  struggle.  They  who  understand  the  doctrine  of 
perseverance  to  imply  that  God's  people  will  obtain  the  crown 
without  the  struggle,  totally  mistake  the  matter.  The  doctrine  is, 
that  God's  people  will  persevere  in  the  struggle ;  and  to  suppose 

1  2  Tim.  ii  18.  2 1  Cor.  viii.  11.  3  1  Cor.  ix.  27. 


296  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

that  they  will  obtain  the  crown  without  doing  so,  is  to  contradict 
the  doctrine.  It  is  a  wretched  and  fatal  perversion  of  the  doc- 
trine, if  men  conclude  that,  having  been  once  converted,  they  will 
be  saved,  whatever  may  be  their  coarse  of  life.  God's  word  plainly 
declares,  that  "  he  who  soweth  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reap 
corruption:"  and  every  man  who  does  not  keep  under  his  body, 
and  bring  it  into  subjection,  and  who  does  not  endure  to  the  end, 
in  this  spiritual  conflict,  will  assuredly  fail  to  receive  the  crown. 
Without  this,  no  conversion  which  he  may  have  undergone,  and 
not  even  a  call  to  apostleship,  will  secure  the  approbation  of  the 
final  Judge. 

We  have  said  that  the  new  creature  produced  in  regeneration,  is 
immortal ;  but  this  immortality  is  dependent  on  the  will  of  God, 
and  is  secured  by  means  which  God  has  provided.  Adam,  in  his 
primeval  innocence,  was  immortal ;  but  his  life  was  sustained, 
under  God,  by  the  fruits  of  the  garden  which  had  been  assigned  to 
his  use.  So  God  has  appointed  necessary  means  for  preserving 
the  divine  life  in  the  soul,  and  the  use  of  these  means  is  as  indis- 
pensable to  the  accomplishment  of  the  purpose,  in  this,  as  in  all 
other  cases  in  which  he  has  chosen  to  work  by  means.  The 
doctrine  of  final  perseverance,  when  properly  understood,  does  not 
teach  that  God's  people  are  in  no  sense  in  danger  of  final  apostasy. 
Paul  tells  us  that  he  had  often  been  in  perils  of  waters.1  One  of 
these  times  of  danger  was  the  shipwreck  which  he  experienced  in 
his  voyage  to  Rome.  He,  and  all  his  companions  in  the  vessel, 
were  in  great  danger ;  and  they  could  not  have  been  saved,  if  the 
necessary  means  for  their  preservation  had  not  been  used.  Yet 
God  had  both  purposed  and  promised  their  deliverance.  The 
righteous,  notwithstanding  the  purpose  and  promise  of  God,  are 
scarcely  saved.2  They  succeed  at  last,  as  by  a  narrow  escape. 
Through  danger,  imminent  danger,  they  are  at  last  delivered : 
and,  in  order  to  that  deliverance,  the  use  of  the  appointed  means 
is  as  necessary  as  the  appointment  itself; — as  necessary  as  the 
purpose  of  God. 

The  warnings  which  the  Scriptures  give  to  the  people  of  God, 
constitute  an  important  part  of  the  means  which  God  has  appointed 
for  their  perseverance  in  holiness  to  eternal  life.     As  the  rock  in 

1  2  Cor.  xi.  26.  2 1  Pet.  iv.  18. 


BLESSINGS   OF  GRACE.  297 

the  mariner's  chart  guards  him  from  being  dashed  to  pieces,  so 
these  warnings  preserve  the  spiritual  mariner  from  destruction. 
The  awful  warnings  given  by  Paul  to  the  Hebrews,  were  designed 
to  guard  them  against  final  apostasy.  They  therefore  imply  that 
there  was  danger  of  such  apostasy.  The  heirs  of  promise  might 
have  strong  consolation,  in  the  hope  founded  on  the  oath  and 
promise  of  God,  that  they  would  be  brought  safely  through  the 
danger.  In  the  wisdom  of  God,  the  warnings  are  so  given,  as  to 
secure  their  proper  effect,  without  destroying  that  confidence  in 
God,  which  is  the  Christian's  hope  and  joy.  To  make  this  clear, 
and  to  derive  the  proper  benefit  from  these  warnings,  let  us  briefly 
review  them. 

The  warning  given  in  Heb.  vi.  4-7,  was  designed  for  real  Christ- 
ians. Every  clause  in  the  description  of  the  persons,  whose  apostasy 
is  declared  to  be  fatal,  would  in  other  connections  be  understood  to 
denote  true  Christians.  The  Hebrew  Christians  are  elsewhere 
described  as  persons  "illuminated."1  The  first  particular  in  the 
description  here,  is,  "  who  were  once  enlightened."  Other  particu- 
lars are  added,  agreeing  with  well  known  peculiarities,  which  dis- 
tinguished the  followers  of  Christ.  These  words,  therefore,  contain 
a  general  description  of  Christians  ;  and  the  warning  which  they 
contain  was  applicable  to  Christians,  and  designed  for  their  benefit. 
"With  these  features  of  the  Christian  character,  which  are  so  vividly 
portrayed,  and  which  were  so  well  known  in  the  days  of  primitive 
Christianity,  there  was  generally  connected  a  love  to  the  truth, 
which  was  necessary  to  the  full  and  proper  effect  of  divine  instruc- 
tion. When  this  operated,  the  warning  here  proposed  had  its 
proper  effect.  These  persons  were  like  the  fruitful  ground,  which 
received  blessing  from  God  ;2  and  this  love  the  apostle  believed  to 
exist  in  those  to  whom  his  epistle  was  directed.3  They  who 
possessed  this  love  were  moved  by  his  warning,  to  make  advance 
in  spiritual  attainments,  according  to  his  exhortation  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  chapter.  But  this  result  did  not  invariably  follow  the 
instructions  and  warning,  which  were  given  to  those  who  possessed 
the  general  features  of  the  Christian  character.  Apostasy  some- 
times occurred ;  and  apostasy  which  was  final  and  hopeless.  This 
fact  gave  just  occasion  for  the  warning. 

Heb.  x.  32.  2  Heb.  vi.  7.  8  Heb.  vi.  9,  10. 


298  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

Similav  remarks  may  be  made  on  the  passages  in  the  10th 
chapter  of  Hebrews.  That  they  were  designed  as  warnings  to 
true  Christians,  may  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  Paul  includes  himself 
in  the  number.  "  If  we  sin  wilfully,"1  &c,  and  in  the  further  fact 
that  the  just  "are  warned  against  drawing  back."2  The  alarming 
consequences  of  apostasy  are  exhibited  in  the  absence  of  all  further 
sacrifice  for  sin ;  in  the  sore  punishment  which  is  deserved ; — and 
in  the  perdition  to  which  the  apostate  draws  back.  All  these  conse- 
quences were  set  before  the  Christians,  who  are  addressed,  and 
the  apostle  again  expresses  his  confidence,  that  they,  with  himself, 
will,  in  the  belief  and  love  of  the  truth,  receive  the  warning  and  be 
saved. 

The  warnings  against  apostasy,  and  the  exhortations  to  perseve- 
rance, were  not  addressed  to  false  professors,  as  such.  The  apostle 
was  not  solicitous  that  these  should  persevere  in  their  false  profes- 
sion. They  to  whom  his  epistle  was  directed,  were  all  exhorted 
to  hold  fast  their  profession,  on  the  supposition  that  it  had  been 
honestly  made.  All  had  exhibited  the  appearances  of  true  religion, 
and  were  treated  accordingly.  The  plant  which  springs  from  seed 
sown  in  stony  places,  does  not  differ  from  that  which  is  sown  in 
good  ground,  except  in  not  having  much  depth  of  earth ;  and  this 
defect  becomes  manifest,  when  it  withers  under  the  beams  of  the 
sun.  So  those  who  afterwards  apostatise,  agree  in  the  profession 
which  they  make,  and  all  the  appearances  of  religion  which  they 
exhibit,  with  those  who  endure  to  the  end.  The  difference  is,  that 
the  word  has  not  a  deep  place  in  their  hearts  ;  and  this  isrdiscovered 
only  by  their  apostasy/  "  They  went  out  from  us,  that  they  might 
be  made  manifest,  that  they  are  not  all  of  us."3  Hence,  until 
their  apostasy  occurs,  the  same  means  of  spiritual  cultivation  are 
employed  for  their  benefit,  as  for  others ;  the  same  hopes  are 
entertained  for  them ;  and  the  same  language  is  used  in  describing 
them.  The  tendency  of  this  spiritual  cultivation  is  to  render 
them  fruitful,  like  the  rest;  but  it  fails  to  produce  this  effect, 
because  they  have  no  sincere  and  abiding  love  of  the  truth. 

The  doctrine  of  final  perseverance,  properly  understood,  gives  no 
encouragement  to  sluggishness  or  negligence  in  duty ;  much  less 
does  it  lead  to  licentiousness.     He  who  takes  occasion  from  it  to 

1  Heb.  x.  26.  2  Heb.  x.  38.  s  1  John  ii.  19. 


BLESSINGS    OF    GRACE. 


299 


sin  against  God,  or  to  be  indolent  in  his  service,  not  only  misun- 
derstands, and  misapplies  the  doctrine,  but  has  reason  to  fear  that 
his  heart  is  not  right  before  God.  Perseverance  in  holiness  is  the 
only  infallible  proof  that  the  heart  is  right ;  and  he  who  ceases  to 
persevere,  on  the  presumption  that  his  heart  is  right,  believes  with- 
out the  proper  evidence,  and  is  wofully  hazarding  his  eternal 
interests  on  his  presumption.  The  doctrine  is,  that  grace  in  the 
heart  will  produce  perseverance  to  the  end ;  and  where  the  effect 
is  not  produced,  the  cause  does  not  exist.  Every  man,  therefore, 
whatever  his  past  professions  and  attainments  may  have  been,  has 
reason  to  take  alarm,  if  he  finds  his  heart  inclined  to  depart  from 
Christ :  and  the  greater  his  past  attainments  may  have  been,  the 
greater  is  the  occasion  for  alarm ;  because  his  case,  if  he  falls  away, 
will  so  much  the  more  resemble  that  in  which  renewal  to  repent- 
ance is  impossible. 

To  reject  the  doctrine  of  final  perseverance,  tends  to  fix  the 
hope  of  salvation  on  human  effort,  and  not  on  the  purpose  and 
grace  of  God.  If,  in  God's  method  of  salvation,  no  provision  has 
been  made,  which  secures  the  safe  keeping  of  the  regenerate,  and 
their  perseverance  in  holiness,  their  salvation  is  left  dependent  on 
their  own  efforts,  and  their  trust  must  be  in  that  on  which  success 
depends.  All  that  God  has  done  for  them,  will  fail  to  bring  them 
through,  if  this  effort,  originating  in  themselves,  be  not  super- 
added ;  and  the  eye  of  hope  is  necessarily  directed  to  this  human 
effort,  as  that  on  which  the  momentous  issue  depends.  Thus  the 
denial  of  the  doctrine  draws  off  the  heart  from  simple  trust  in 
God,  and  therefore  tends  to  produce  apostasy.  The  just  shall  live 
by  faith.1  Simple  trust  in  God,  is  necessary  to  preserve  the 
spiritual  life  ;  and  to  trust  in  man,  and  make  flesh  our  arm,2  is  to 
fall  under  the  curse,  and  draw  back  to  perdition.  In  our  first 
coming  to  Christ,  we  renounce  all  confidence  in  self,  and  put  our 
entire  trust  in  the  mercy  and  power  of  God :  and  in  the  same  faith 
with  which  we  began,  we  must  persevere  to  the  end  of  our  course. 
Worldly  wisdom  may  encourage  self-reliance,  and  regard  it  as 
necessary  to  success :  but  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above  teaches 
us  to  renounce  and  avoid  it  as  ruinous  to  the  soul. 

Convinced  of  his  weakness  and  helplessness,  the  believer  learns 
more  and  more  in  this  life  of  faith  to  trust  God,  and  to  have  no 

1  Heb.  x.  38.  2  Jer.  xvii.  5. 


300  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

confidence  in  himself.  He  learns,  by  daily  experience,  the 
treachery  of  his  own  heart,  and  is  increasingly  weaned  from 
the  folly  of  trusting  in  it.  It  becomes  his  more  earnest  prayer, 
as  he  makes  greater  progress  in  the  knowledge  of  himself  and 
the  way  of  salvation.  "  Hold  thou  me  up."1  He  looks  forward 
to  the  temptations  and  trials  through  which  he  has  to  pass ; 
and,  unwilling  to  trust  himself  in  the  least  degree,  asks  God, 
earnestly  and  importunately  to  keep  him  to  the  end.  This 
prayer  he  may  hope  that  God  will  answer,  if  the  doctrine 
of  final  perseverance  be  true.  If  the  grace  to  persevere  is  a 
gift  of  God,  it  is  a  proper  subject  of  prayer;  and  that  doctrine 
best  accords  with  God's  method  of  salvation,  which  teaches  us 
to  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  for  the  mercy  and  grace  to 
help  in  every  time  of  need.  We  cannot  now  ask  with  confidence, 
for  grace  to  help  us  through  all  future  times  of  need,  and  to  incline 
and  strengthen  us  to  persevere  to  the  end,  if  the  bestowment  of 
such  persevering  grace  is  not  within  God's  plan  of  salvation. 

The  doctrine  of  final  perseverance  is  full  of  consolation  to  the 
believer,  when  ready  to  faint  in  his  spiritual  warfare.  So  far  as 
he  finds,  in  a  careful  examination  of  his  heart,  evidence  that  the 
love  of  God  has  been  shed  abroad  there  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  is 
enabled  to  regard  this  grace  as  an  earnest  of  the  future  inheritance, 
and  to  rejoice  in  hope  of  obtaining  that  inheritance  in  full  posses- 
sion, at  the  time  appointed  of  his  heavenly  Father.  If  doubts 
arise,  they  spring  not  from  a  view  of  incompleteness  in  God's 
method  of  salvation,  but  they  refer  exclusively  to  the  question 
whether  his  heart  has  been  brought  to  put  simple  and  exclusive 
trust  in  that  divine  method,  and  the  provision  of  mercy  which  it 
includes.  As  the  best  termination  of  these  doubts,  he  views  the 
way  open  for  him  to  come  now,  if  never  before,  and  cast  himself 
on  this  mercy,  so  richly  provided,  and  so  gloriously  adapted  to  his 
necessities. 

Section  VII.— PERFE  C  TION. 

The  process  of  sanctification,  which  is  continued  during  the 
present  life,  is  completed  when  the  subjects  of  it  are  perfectly 
fitted  for  the  service  and  enjoyments  of  heaven.     In  this  work  of 

1  Ps.  cxix.  117. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  301 

the  Spirit,  the  resurrection  of  the  body  is  included,  and  the  fash- 
ioning of  it  like  the  glorious  body  of  Christ.  Having  been  pre- 
destinated to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  God's  dear  son,1  the 
purposed  work  of  grace  is  not  completed  until  we  appear  in  glory, 
with  our  bodies  like  the  glorious  body  of  the  Redeemer.  For  this 
perfect  conformity,  the  saints  on  earth  long,  and  to  it  they  look  as 
the  consummation  of  their  wishes  and  hopes :  "  Then  shall  I  be 
satisfied,  when  I  awake  with  thy  likeness."2  This  was  the  object  of 
Paul's  earnest  desire,  the  prize  for  which  he  put  forth  every  effort. 
He  refers  to  it  in  these  words :  "  If  by  any  means  I  might  attain 
unto  the  resurrection  of  the  dead :  not  as  though  I  had  already 
attained,  either  were  already  perfect ;  but  I  follow  after,  if  that  I 
may  apprehend  that  for  avhich  also  I  am  apprehended  of  Christ 
Jesus.  I  press  toward  the  mark,  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling 
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus."3 

The  work  of  grace  will  not  be  completed  until  the  second  com- 
ing of  Christ :  "  He  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you,  will 
perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."4  Then  the  last  change 
will  be  made,  which  will  fit  us  for  the  eternal  service  and  enjoy- 
ment of  God,  in  his  high  and  holy  place.  Then  we  shall  be  like 
him;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  "Now  we  know  in  part; 
but  then  we  shall  know  even  as  also  we  are  known."  "  Then  that 
which  is  perfect  will  have  come ;"  and  until  then  every  saint  must 
say  with  Paul:  "Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,  or  were 
already  perfect." 

Besides  this  final  perfection,  to  which  the  saints  are  taught  to 
aspire,  there  are  stages  in  their  progress  to  which  the  name  per- 
fection is,  in  a  subordinate  sense,  applied  in  the  Holy  Scriptures. 
The  disembodied  saints,  now  in  the  presence  of  God,  though  they 
have  not  attained  to  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  are  nevertheless 
called  "just  men  made  perfect."5  They  are  free  from  the  body 
of  death,  free  from  sin,  free  from  all  the  tribulations  and  sorrows 
of  this  world,  and  are  present  with  the  Lord,  and  in  the  enjoyment 
of  his  love. 

Even  in  the  present  life  there  are  stages  in  the  Christian's 
progress  to  which  the  term  perfection  is  applied.    When  they  have 


1  Kom.  viii.  29.  2  Ps.  xvii.  15.  3  Phil,  iii.  11,  12,  13. 

*  Phil.  i.  6.  6  Heb.  xii.  23. 


302  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

attained  to  an  enlarged  knowledge  of  divine  truth,  they  are  said  to 
be  perfect,  or  of  full  age,  to  distinguish  them  from  those  who  have 
learned  only  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ.1  Men 
who  make  a  full  and  consistent  exhibition  of  the  religious  character, 
by  a  godly  life,  are  called  perfect.  So  Job  was  "  perfect  and 
upright,  fearing  God  and  eschewing  evil."2  To  Christians  gener- 
ally the  term  "perfect"  appears  to  be  applied,  in  the  exhortation 
of  Paul:  "  Let  us,  as  many  as  be  perfect,  be  thus  minded."3  He 
here  includes  himself  among  the  perfect;  and  yet,  in  the  same 
chapter,4  he  affirms  that  he  was  not  already  perfect.  It  is  clear, 
therefore,  that  the  words  are  used  in  different  senses  in  the  two 
places. 

No  perfection  to  which  the  people  of  God  attain  in  the  present 
life,  includes  perfect  freedom  from  sin.  Job,  though  a  perfect  man, 
said,  "  If  I  justify  myself,  mine  own  mouth  shall  condemn  me.  If 
I  say,  I  am  perfect,  it  also  shall  prove  me  perverse."5  Paul,  though 
numbering  himself  among  the  perfect,  said,  "  When  I  would  do 
good,  evil  is  present  with  me."6  "I  am  carnal,  sold  under  sin."7 
John  says,  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves  ;"8 
and  Solomon,  "  There  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth  that  doeth 
good  and  sinneth  not."9  With  these  declarations  of  God's  word, 
the  experience  of  Christians  in  all  ages  has  agreed;  and  they 
have  found  need  for  the  daily  prayer,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses." 

In  the  precept,  "  Be  ye  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  in  heaven 
is  perfect,"10  we  may  take  the  term  in  its  highest  sense.  As  we  are 
commanded  to  love  God  with  all  the  heart — to  be  holy  because  he 
is  holy ;  it  is  our  duty  to  be  perfectly  free  from  sin ;  and  to  come 
up  to  this  standard,  should  be  our  constant  aim  and  effort.  We 
cannot  attain  to  a  perfect  knowledge  of  God  in  the  present  life ; 
but  we  may  follow  on  to  know  him.11  So  we  cannot  attain  to  a 
perfect  likeness  in  holiness,  yet  we  may  be  "  changed  into  the  same 
image  from  glory  to  glory."12  Progress  in  the  divine  life  is  full  of 
reward,  and  full  of  encouragement,  even  while  we  are  fighting  the 
good  fight  of  faith,  and  before  we  obtain  the  victor's  crown.     The 

1  Heb.  vi.  1 ;  v.  14.  2  Job  i.  1.                            8  Phil.  iii.  15. 

*  Phil.  iii.  12.  6  Job  ix.  20.                       6  Rom.  vii.  21. 

7  Rom.  vii.  14.  8  1  John  i.  8.                      9  Eccl.  vii.  20 

,0  Matt.  v.  48.  u  Hosea  vi.  3.  12  2  Cor.  iii.  19. 


BLESSINGS   OF   GRACE.  303 

promise  of  grace  to  help  in  every  struggle,  of  continued  suc- 
cess in  every  conflict,  and  of  final  victory,  is  sufficient  encourage- 
ment to  put  forth  every  effort.  We  should  ever  press  toward  the 
mark,  ever  keep  the  high  standard  of  perfection  in  view,  and  aim 
to  reach  it.  "  Having  these  promises,  dearly  beloved,  let  us  cleanse 
ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness 
in  the  fear  of  God."1 

The  indication  is  fearful  when  a  man  excuses  sin  in  himself,  on 
the  ground  that  perfection  is  not  attainable  in  the  present  life.  A 
true  Christian  may  have  a  besetting  sin ;  but  any  one  who  has  an 
indulged,  allowed,  or  excused  sin,  has  reason  to  fear  that  the  love 
of  sin  has  never  been  crucified  in  his  heart.  And  he  who  satisfies 
himself  with  any  standard  below  absolute  perfection  in  holiness, 
is  so  far  allowing  sin  in  himself,  and  giving  the  indication  which 
ought  to  alarm  him. 

In  the  spiritual  warfare,  of  which  every  believer  is  conscious, 
the  love  of  God  in  the  heart  is  in  conflict  with  other  affections 
which  are  not  duly  subordinated  to  it.  Growth  in  grace  implies 
an  ascendancy  of  the  holy  affection  over  those  with  which  it  con- 
tends. That  gains  strength,  and  those  grow  weaker,  as  the  house 
of  David  waxed  stronger,  and  the  house  of  Saul  weaker,2  in  their 
struggle  for  the  dominion  over  Israel.  It  is  therefore  our  duty, 
that  we  may  grow  in  grace,  to  cherish  the  holy  affections,  which 
rise  heavenward,  and  to  mortify  the  carnal  affections,  which  are 
earthward  in  their  tendency.  No  man  on  earth  can  justly  claim 
that  the  affections  of  his  heart  are  perfectly  regulated  according 
to  the  high  standard  of  God's  law.  The  internal  conflict  between 
the  law  in  the  members  and  the  law  in  the  mind,  does  not  cease 
till  God  calls  away  the  spirit  from  its  union  with  the  mortal  body. 
The  phrase  "law  in  our  members,"3  does  not  imply  that  our  sin 
belongs  properly  to  our  material  bodies  ;  but  it  nevertheless  appa- 
rently suggests  that  the  conflict  between  the  law  in  the  members 
and  the  law  in  the  mind,  may  be  expected  to  continue  as  long  as 
the  members  and  the  mind  have  their  present  relation  to  each  other. 
Just  men  are  made  perfect4  when  they  become  disembodied  spirits. 
When  absent  from  the  body,  they  are  present  with  the  Lord  ;5  and 
* 

1  2  Cor.  vii.  1.  2  2  Sam.  iii.  1.  3  Kom.  vii.  23. 

*  Heb.  xii.  23.  '  6  2  Cor.  v.  8. 


304  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

they  are  then  holy ;  for  "without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord.1 

We  should  not  attribute  to  death  the  efficiency  of  our  final  de- 
liverance from  sin.  It  is  only  an  instrument  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
uses  in  his  work,  just  as  he  has  used  the  many  afflictions  which 
have  preceded  death,  and  of  which  death  is  the  termination.  As 
this  is  the  last  suffering  which  the  righteous  will  endure,  the  last 
enemy  which  remains  to  be  destroyed,  it  is  appropriately  used  as 
the  last  instrumentality  which  the  Holy  Spirit  will  employ  in  his 
work.  And  it  is  a  most  suitable  instrumentality.  Death  intro- 
duces us  into  the  full  knowledge  of  God,  which  is  necessary  to  the 
perfect  love  of  him.  It  opens  to  our  view  the  unseen  things  of 
the  eternal  world,  that  they  may  have  their  full  and  proper  influ- 
ence on  our  minds.  It  separates  us  for  ever  from  the  things  of 
earth,  to  which  our  affections  have  been  so  strongly  inclined  to 
cleave.  The  death  of  a  beloved  friend  has  often  been  blessed  as 
a  means  of  our  sanctification :  but  when  we  die,  all  our  surviving 
friends  die  to  us  at  once.  The  loss  of  property  has  weaned  us 
from  the  world :  but  at  death  we  lose  all  our  earthly  possessions  at 
a  single  stroke.  God  may  have  burned  down  our  dwellings  and  con- 
sumed in  the  flames  the  coffers  which  contained  our  gold,  when  he 
graciously  designed  to  direct  our  thoughts  to  the  house  not  made 
with  hands,  and  to  the  treasure  which  cannot  be  consumed.  What, 
then,  when  the  earth  itself,  which  he  has  given  for  the  habitation 
of  men,  and  all  therein  which  he  has  given  them  to  enjoy,  shall 
be  burned  up  in  the  last  conflagration ;  or  shall  be  shown  to  us  as 
prepared  to  be  cast  into  that  funeral  fire  ?  This  is  well  adapted 
to  eradicate  from  the  heart  the  love  of  the  things  that  perish. 
This  fit  instrumentality  the  Spirit  employs  in  completing  his  work 
of  sanctification.  Yet,  as  in  all  our  afflictions,  the  efficiency  is  not 
in  the  means  employed,  but  in  the  divine  power  which  employs 
them  to  fulfil  his  gracious  purpose. 

1  TIeb.  wi.  14. 


SOVEREIGNTY  OF   GRACE.  305 


CHAPTER  IV. 

sovereignty.  of  grace. 

God  bestows  the  blessings  oe  his  grace,  not  according  to 
the  works  of  the  recipient,  but  according  to  his  own  sove- 
reign pleasure.1 

God  is  sovereign  in  doing  what  he  pleases,  uncontrolled  by  any 
other  being.  "  He  doth  according  to  his  will,  in  the  armies  of 
heaven,  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  and  none  can  stay 
his  hand,  or  say  unto  him:  'What  doest  thou?'"2  No  sup-erior 
being  exists,  who  can  dictate  to  Jehovah  what  he  should  do,  or 
hinder  him  from  the  execution  of  his  pleasure,  or  call  him  to 
account  for  anything  that  he  has  done. 

Sovereignty  is  to  be  distinguished  from  arbitrariness.  In  the 
latter,  the  will  of  the  agent  directs  the  action,  without  reference  to 
a  wise  or  good  purpose  to  be  accomplished.  When  God  acts,  it  is 
according  to  his  good  pleasure.  His  pleasure  is  good,  because  it  is 
always  directed  to  a  good  end.  He  is  sovereign  in  his  acts,  because 
his  acts  are  determined  by  his  own  perfections.  He  has  a  rule  for 
what  he  does ;  but  this  rule  is  not  prescribed  to  him  by  any  other 
being,  nor  does  it  exist  independently  of  himself.  It  is  found  in 
his  own  nature.     In  his  acts,  his  nature  is  unfolded  and  displayed. 

In  some  respects  the  divine  nature  is  so  far  made  known  to  us, 
that  we  are  able  to  understand  the  rule  to  which  his  acts  conform. 
We  so  far  understand  his  justice,  that  the  distribution  of  rewards 
and  punishments  according  to  the  works  of  men,  is  a  process  for 
which  we  can  account,  and  the  result  of  which  we  can  in  part 
foretell.  But  there  are  mysteries  in  the  divine  nature  which  are 
too  deep  for  us  to  fathom :  and  hence  we  are  unable  to  assign  a 
rule  for  the  divine  proceedings.  These  are  the  cases  which  we 
specially  refer  to  the  sovereignty  of  God.  He  is  not  less  sovereign 
in  his  justice,  than  in  the  dispensations  for  which  he  has  given  us 

1  2  Tim.  i.  9 ;  Horn.  ix.  16 ;  Phil.  ii.  13 ,  Matt.  xi.  25 ;  Luke  x.  21 ;  Eph. 
ii.  4-9. 

2  Dan.  iv.  35. 

20 


306      DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  DIVINE  GRACE. 

no  reason.  But  we  bow  before  bis  sovereignty,  in  the  best  exercise 
of  simple  confidence  in  him,  when  we  are  least  able  to  account  for 
his  doings ;  and  it  has  been  his  pleasure,  to  leave  much  of  his 
proceedings  involved  in  mystery,  that  we  may  have  occasion  for 
the  exercise  of  this  confidence,  which  is  pleasing  to  him,  and 
profitable  to  ourselves. 

We  are  prone  to  demand  the  reason  or  rule  of  God's  acts,  and 
to  prescribe  rules  according  to  which  God  should  act;  but  the  Scrip- 
tures teach  us  to  restrain  this  propensity.  "  Shall  the  thing  formed, 
say  to  him  that  formed  it :  '  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus  ?'"1  "He 
giveth  not  account  of  any  of  his  matters."2  But  though  the 
Scriptures  do  not  explain  those  dispensations  of  God  which  we  are 
compelled  to  refer  to  his  inscrutable  sovereignty,  they  teach  us 
that  God  is  not  governed  by  such  rules  as  human  wisdom  would 
prescribe.  His  ways  are  above  our  ways,  and  his  thoughts  above 
our  thoughts,  as  high  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth.3 

Men  often  complain  that  God's  ways  are  not  equal,  and  charge 
him  with  partiality  in  his  dealings  with  his  creatures.  When  this 
charge  is  brought  against  him,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  imply 
injustice  in  anything  which  he  does,  he  repels  the  charge :  "  Are 
not  my  ways  equal?  Are  not  your  ways  unequal?"4  But  in 
bestowing  the  blessings  of  his  grace,  God  claims  the  right  to  do 
what  he  will  with  his  own.5  He  is  not  bound  to  give  to  every 
one  an  equal  measure  of  undeserved  favor;  or  to  measure  his 
freely  bestowed  blessings,  according  to  the  works  of  those  on 
whom  they  are  bestowed.  This  is  clearly  taught  in  the  inspired 
word :  "  He  hath  saved  us  and  called  us  with  a  holy  calling,  not 
according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace 
which  was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began."6 
"Not  of  works,  but  of  him  that  calleth."7  "Not  of  him  that 
willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy."8 

In  the  condition  of  the  creatures  that  God  has  made,  we  observe 
a  diversity  to  which  we  can  assign  no  limits.  In  the  vegetable 
kingdom,  we  find  productions  varying  from  the  cedar  of  Lebanon 
to  the  minute  blade  of  grass,  some  beautiful  and  fragrant,  or  adapted 


1  Rom.  ix.  20.  2  Job  xxxiii.  13.  3  Isaiah  lv.  9. 

4  Ez.  xviii.  29.  6  Matt.  xx.  15.  •  2  Tim.  i.  9. 

7  Rom.  ix.  11.  8  Rom.  ix.  16. 


SOVEREIGNTY  OF  GRACE.  307 

to  great  utility,  and  others  without  any  quality  in  which  we  can 

perceive  a  reason  for  their  having  been  made.     Among  animals,  a 

boundless  variety  appears,  in  their  size,  modes  of  life,  and  capacity 

for  enjoyment.     In  the  condition  of  human  beings,  the  system  of 

diversity  continues.     As  the   human  species  differs  from  every 

other  species,  so  the  condition  of  each  individual  man  differs  from 

that  of  every  other  individual  belonging  to  the  species.     One  mat. 

passes  his  days  in  affluence  and  ease,  and  another  drags  out  his 

miserable  existence  in  poverty  and  toil.     One  enjoys  almost  unin- 

.  terrupted  health,  while  another,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of 

his  life,  is  oppressed  with  disease  and  pain.    One  possesses  intellect 

susceptible  of  the  highest  cultivation,  and  is  favored  with  all  the 

necessary  means  of  cultivation ;  while  another  gropes  his  way  in 

mental  darkness,  either  from  the  natural  imbecility  of  his  mind,  or 

from  the  disadvantageous  circumstances  in  which  his  lot  of  life  is 

cast.     Why  is  all  this  diversity  ?     We  must  answer  in  the  words 

of  Christ :  "Even  so,  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight."1 

To  some  extent  the  sufferings  and  enjoyments  of  men  in  the  present 

life  are  attributable  to  their  personal  conduct;  and  so  far  the 

reason  for  the  divine  dispensation  towards  them  is  apparent ;  but, 

to  a  far  greater  extent,  no  cause  can  be  assigned  by  human  reason ; 

and  we  are  compelled  to  ascribe  the  mysterious  arrangement  to 

the   sovereignty  of  God.     As   he  is   sovereign  in  creation  and 

providence,  so  he  is  sovereign  in  the  dispensations  of  his  grace. 

"  He  divides  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will."2     He  withholds 

from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  reveals  unto  babes,  as  it  seems 

good   in  his   sight.3    When   the   question   arises :    "  Who   made 

thee  to  differ  from  another  ?"  the  proper  answer  is :  "  It  is  not 

of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that 

showeth  mercy;"4  and  "By  the  grace  of  God,  I  am  what  I  am."5 

In  the  dispensations  of  grace,  full  regard  is  had  to  justice,  and 

nothing  unjust  is  done  to  any  one ;  but  grace  rises  high  above 

justice,  and   gives   ample   room   for   the   display  of  the   divine 

sovereignty,  in  the  distribution  of  blessings  to  which  no  individual 

has  the  slightest  claim. 

Among  the  rules  which  human  officiousness  prescribes  to  God 


1  Matt.  xi.  26.  2 1  Cor.  xii.  11.  3  Matt.  xi.  25. 

*Rom.  ix.  16.  51  Cor.  xv.  10. 


308  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

for  the  regulation  of  his  conduct,  we  are  prone  to  insist  that  the 
blessings  of  his  grace  should  be  distributed  according  to  men's 
works.  We  do  not  presume  to  say,  that  they  should  be  given  for 
men's  works,  for  this  would  render  them  rewards  of  debt,  and  not 
of  grace.  Scripture  and  reason  unite  in  checking  the  presumption 
which  would  claim  all  that  God  bestows,  as  due  on  the  ground  of 
merit :  but,  while  we  relinquish  the  claim  on  the  ground  of  positive 
merit,  we  are  yet  prone  to  conceive  that  there  is  a  fitness  in 
conferring  the  blessings  of  grace  on  those  who  have  the  negative 
merit  of  being  less  wicked  than  others.  In  this  method  of  dispen- 
sation, which  human  wisdom  would  recommend,  the  blessings  are 
conferred,  not  for  men's  works,  but  according  to  their  works :  but 
the  wisdom  of  God  rejects  the  counsel  of  human  wisdom  in  this 
particular.  A  Saul  of  Tarsus,  though  chief  of  sinners,  is  made  a 
happy  recipient  of  divine  grace,  while  an  amiable  young  ruler,  who 
had  kept  the  law  from  his  youth  up,  is  left  to  perish  in  his  self- 
righteousness.  Publicans  and  harlots  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven ; 
while  multitudes,  less  wicked  than  they,  are  left  to  the  course  to 
which  natural  depravity  inclines  them.  These  cases  exemplify  the 
explicit  declarations  of  Scripture,  which  teach,  that  "  we  are  saved 
and  called,  not  according  to  our  works." 

It  is  true,  that  in  the  last  day,  men  will  be  judged  according  to 
the  deeds  done  in  the  body.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that 
salvation  begins  in  the  present  life.  To  the  present  life  the  calling 
of  men  from  darkness  to  light  is  limited ;  and  the  salvation  and 
calling  of  the  present  life,  are  not  according  to  men's  works.  As 
men  are  called  "to  be  holy,"  the  holiness  which  they  exhibit  as  a 
consequence  of  the  salvation  and  calling  which  they  receive  from 
the  grace  of  God,  distinguishes  them  from  other  men,  and  becomes 
a  proper  rule  for  the  decisions  of  the  last  day.  "We  see,  therefore, 
that  the  last  judgment  will  be  according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the 
body ;  while  it  nevertheless  remains,  that  we  are  saved  and  called, 
not  according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  the  purpose  and  grace 
of  God. 


SOVEREIGNTY  OF   GRACE.  309 


Section  1.— ELECTION. 

All  who  will  finally  be  saved,  were  chosen  to  salvation 
by  God  the  Father,  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and 
given  to  Jesus  Christ  in  the  covenant  of  grace.1 

The  doctrine  of  election  encounters  strong  opposition  in  the 
hearts  of  men,  and  it  is  therefore  necessary  to  examine  thoroughly 
its  claim  to  our  belief.  As  it  relates  to  an  act  of  the  divine  mind, 
no  proof  of  its  truth  can  be  equal  to  the  testimony  of  the  Scrip- 
tures. Let  us  receive  their  teachings  on  the  subject  without 
hesitation  or  distrust ;  and  let  us  require  every  preconceived  opinion 
of  ours,  and  all  our  carnal  reasonings,  to  bow  before  the  authority 
of  God's  holy  word. 

The  Scriptures  clearly  teach,  that  God  has  an  elect  or  chosen 
people.  "  Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect."2 
Elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God.3  "  Shall  not  God 
avenge  his  own  elect."4  "Ye  are  a  chosen  generation."5  "God 
hath  chosen  you  to  salvation."6  "According  as  he  hath  chosen 
us  in  Christ."7  Whatever  may  have  been  our  prejudices  against 
the  doctrine  of  election  as  held  and  taught  by  some  ministers  of 
religion,  it  is  undeniable,  that,  in  some  sense,  the  doctrine  is  found 
in  the  Bible ;  and  we  cannot  reject  it,  without  rejecting  that  inspired 
book.  We  are  bound  by  the  authority  of  God,  to  receive  the  doc- 
trine ;  and  nothing  remains,  but  that  we  should  make  an  honest 
effort  to  understand  it,  just  as  it  is  taught  in  the  sacred  volume. 

The  Scriptures  teach  expressly,  that  God's  people  are  chosen  to 
salvation.  "  Beloved,  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  always  to  God 
for  you,  because  he  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen  you  to  salva- 
tion."8 Some  have  been  chosen  by  God9  to  peculiar  offices ;  as 
Paul  was  a  chosen  vessel,  to  bear  the  name  of  Christ  to  the 
Gentiles,  and  David  was  chosen  to  be  the  King  of  Israel.  The 
wh6le  nation  of  Israel  was  chosen  out  of  all  nations  to  be  a 
peculiar  people  to  the  Lord :  but  it  is  very  clear  that  the  eternal 

1  Eph.  i.  4,  5  ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13  ;  1  Pet.  i.  2 ;  ii.  9  ;  John  vi.  37 ;  Rom.  viii.  33 ; 
John  x.  27-29. 

2  Eom.  viii.  33.  8 1  Pet.  i.  2.  *  Luke  xviii.  7, 
6  1  Pet.  ii.  f.                            6  2  Thess.  ii.  13.  7  Eph.  i.  4. 

8  2  Thess.  ii.  13.  9  Acts  ix.  15. 


310  DOCTRINE  CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

salvation  of  every  Israelite  was  not  secured  by  this  national  elec- 
tion ;  for  to  some  of  them  Christ  said,  "  Ye  shall  die  in  your  sins ; 
and  whither  I  go  ye  cannot  come."1  The  election  to  salvation  is 
shown  by  the  words  of  Paul  in  Rom.  ix.  6,  to  be  different  from 
this  national  election  :  "  They  are  not  all  Israel  that  are  of  Israel." 
"  There  is  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace."2  The 
national  election  comprehended  all  Israel,  according  to  the  flesh : 
but  the  election  of  grace  included  those  only  who  will  finally  be 
saved.  It  is  not  a  choice  merely  to  the  means  of  salvation,  for 
these  were  granted  to  all  the  nation  of  Israel :  but  it  was  a  choice 
to  salvation  itself,  and  therefore  respected  the  "  remnant,"  and  not 
the  whole  nation. 

The  Scriptures  plainly  teach  that  the  election  of  grace  is  from 
eternity.  "  God  hath,  from  the  beginning,  chosen  you  to  salva- 
tion."3 "According  as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  from  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world."4  "  According  to  his  own  purpose  and  grace,  which 
was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus  before  the  world  began."5  Election  is 
a  part  of  God's  eternal  purpose.  Had  it  been  his  purpose  to  save 
all  the  human  race,  there  would  have  been  no  elect  from  among 
men  ;  no  peculiar  people,  no  redeemed  out  of  every  nation.  But 
his  purpose  to  save  did  not  include  all  the  race ;  and  therefore,  on 
some  principle  yet  to  be  inquired  into,  some  of  the  race  have  been 
selected,  who  will  receive  the  kingdom  prepared  for  them  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world.  The  eternity  of  God's  election  ought 
not  to  excite  in  our  hearts  any  objection  against  it.  If,  in  the 
final  judgment,  God  will  distinguish  between  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked,  whatever  he  will  then  do  in  righteousness,  it  was  right  for 
him  to  purpose  to  do  from  all  eternity.  In  his  final  sentence,  all 
his  preceding  dispensations  toward  the  children  of  men,  and  all 
their  actions  under  these  dispensations,  will  be  carefully  reviewed, 
and  the  final  doom  of  every  one  will  be  pronounced  in  righteous- 
ness. All  that  will  then  be  present  to  the  divine  mind,  was  before 
it  from  all  eternity ;  and  what  God  will  then  do,  he  purposed  to  do 
from  the  beginning ;  and  the  reasons  for  which  he  will  do  it,  are 
the  reasons  for  which  he  purposed  to  do  it.  There  can  be  no 
wrong  in  the  purpose,  if  it  does  not  exist  in  the  execution.     If 


1  John  viii.  22,  24.  2  Rom.  xi.  5.  3  2  Thess.  u.  13. 

*  Eph.  i.  4.  6  2  Tim.  i.  9. 


SOVEREIGNTY  OF   GRACE.  811 

God  can  fully  justify  at  the  last  day,  before  the  assembled  universe, 
all  his  dispensations  toward  the  children  of  men  ;  all  these  dispen 
sations  must  be  right,  and  the  purpose  of  them  from  eternity  must 
have  been  right :  and  if  a  division  of  the  human  race  can  then  be 
righteously  made,  that  division  was  righteously  made  in  the  purpose 
of  God ;  and  consequently  God's  election  was  made  in  righteousness. 
The  Scriptures  teach  that  election  is  of  grace,  and  not  of  works. 
"  Not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast  ;"*  and  if  it  be  of  works, 
then  grace  is  no  more  grace.2  The  subject  is  illustrated  by  the  case 
of  Jacob  and  Esau,  of  whom  Jacob  was  chosen,  before  the  children 
had  done  either  good  or  evil ;  and  in  applying  this  illustration, 
Paul  says :  "  That  the  purpose  of  God  according  to  election 
might  stand;  not  of  works,  but  of  him  that  calleth."3  In  the  last 
day,  God  will  discriminate  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked, 
according  to  their  works :  and  it  was  the  eternal  purpose  of  God, 
that  this  discrimination  should  then  be  made  on  that  ground ;  but 
the  purpose  of  God  includes  an  earlier  discrimination  made  in 
effectual  calling ;  whence  we  read  of  those  who  are  "  the  called 
according  to  his  purpose."4  This  discrimination,  made  at  the  time 
of  calling,  is  not  according  to  men's  works,  for  it  is  expressly 
said,  "  who  hath  saved  us  and  called  us  with  a  holy  calling,  not 
according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  own  purpose  and 
grace,  which  was  given  us  in  Christ  Jesus,  before  the  world 
began  ;"5  calling  is  a  blessing  of  grace,  not  conferred  for 
previous  works,  nor  according  to  previous  works.  Why  is 
this  benefit  bestowed  ?  The  answer  is,  "  not  of  works,  but  of 
him  that  calleth."6  "Not  of  him  that  willeth,  or  of  him  that 
runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy."7  It  is  God  that  worketh 
in  us  to  will  and  to  do,  of  his  good  pleasure."8  The  first  actual 
separation  of  God's  people  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  is  made 
when  they  are  called  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light ; 
and  this  calling  is  not  according  to  men's  works,  but  according  to 
the  good  pleasure  of  God.  A  discrimination  is  then  made,  for 
reasons  wholly  unknown  to  mortals ;  not  according  to  the  works 
of  men,  but  on  a  ground  which  infinite  wisdom  approves.  The 
reason  of  the  procedure  is  laid  deep  in  the  counsels  of  the  divine 

1  Eph.  ii.  9.  2  Rom.  xi.  6.  3  Rom.  ix.  11. 

*  Rom.  viii.  28.  5  2  Tim.  i.  9.  6  Rom.  ix.  11. 

*  Rom.  ix.  16.  8  Phil.  ii.  13.  .   . 


312  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE  GRACE. 

mind ;  and  we  are  compelled  to  say  respecting  it,  "  How  unsearch- 
able are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past  finding  out!"1  This 
actual  separation  of  God's  people  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  made 
in  their  effectual  calling,  is  like  everything  which  he  does,  the 
fulfilment  of  his  eternal  purpose.  "  He  worketh  all  things  after 
the  counsel  of  his  will  ;"2  and  "  known  unto  him  are  all  his  works 
from  the  beginning."3  The  purpose  to  effect  this  first  actual 
discrimination,  is  God's  election ;  and  the  ground  of  the  discrimi- 
nation when  it  actually  takes  place,  is  nothing  different  from  that 
of  the  purpose  to  discriminate ;  that  is,  it  is  the  ground  of  election. 
The  discrimination,  when  actually  made,  is  approved  by  the  wisdom 
of  God  ;  and  all  the  consequences  of  it  will  be  approved  in  the  last 
day,  and  throughout  all  coming  eternity ;  and  therefore  the  election, 
or  purpose  to  discriminate,  was  approved  by  infinite  wisdom,  in  the 
counsels  of  eternity  past.  When  we  object  to  the  act,  or  the 
purpose,  we  presume  to  be  wiser  than  God. 

From  the  views  which  have  been  presented,  it  necessarily  follows, 
that  election  is  not  on  the  ground  of  foreseen  faith  or  obedience. 
On  this  point,  the  teachings  of  Scripture  are  clear.  They  are 
chosen  not  because  of  their  holiness,  but  that  they  may  be  holy  ;4 
not  because  of  their  obedience,  but  unto  obedience.5  As  the 
discrimination  made  in  effectual  calling  is  God's  work,  and  ante- 
cedent to  all  holiness,  faith,  or  acceptable  obedience ;  the  purpose 
to  discriminate  could  not  be  on  the  ground  of  acts  foreseen,  which 
do  not  exist  as  a  consideration  for  the  execution  of  the  purpose. 
The  discriminating  grace  which  God  bestows,  is  not  on  the  ground 
of  faith  and  obedience  previously  existing,  but  for  a  reason  known 
only  to  God  himself.  This  unrevealed  reason,  and  not  foreseen 
faith  and  obedience,  is  the  ground  of  election. 

The  Scriptures  teach  that  election  is  according  to  the  fore- 
knowledge of  God.6  We  are,  however,  not  to  understand  the  fore- 
knowledge here  mentioned,  to  be  foreknowledge  of  faith  or  good 
works.  Faith  and  good  works  do  not  exist,  before  the  grace 
consequent  on  election  begins  to  be  bestowed;  and  therefore  a 
foresight  of  them  is  impossible.  Moreover,  the  objects  of  this 
divine  foreknowledge  are  the  persons  of  the  elect,  and  not  their 


1  Rom.  xi.  33.  2  Eph.  i.  11.  3  Acts  xv.  18. 

*  Eph.  i.  4.  6 1  Pet.  i.  2.  6 1  Pet.  i.  2. 


SOVEREIGNTY  OF   GRACE.  313 

faith  or  good  works.  "Whom  he  foreknew,  them  he  also  did 
predestinate."1  In  this  foreknowledge  of  persons,  according  to 
the  Scripture  use  of  terms,  a  peculiar  regard  to  them  is  implied. 
It  is  said,  "Hath  God  cast  away  his  people,  whom  he  foreknew."2 
If  simple  knowledge,  without  any  peculiar  regard,  were  all  that  is 
here  implied,  it  would  be  equally  true  that  God  foreknew  the 
heathen  nations,  as  well  as  the  nation  of  Israel. 

This  case  of  national  election  may  serve  also  to  illustrate  the 
ground  of  election  to  salvation.  God's  choice  of  the  Hebrew  nation 
arose  from  a  peculiar  regard  to  them,  not  founded  on  their  superi- 
ority to  other  nations,3  but  on  his  own  sovereign  pleasure.  He 
loved  them,  because  he  would  love  them.  So  the  election  of  grace 
is  according  to  God's  foreknowledge  of  his  people ;  a  foreknow- 
ledge implying  a  peculiar  regard  not  founded  on  any  superiority  in 
the  objects  of  it,  but  arising  from  the  sovereign  pleasure  of  God. 

Election  is  ascribed  to  God  the  Father,  redemption  to  God  the 
Son,  and  sanctification  to  God  the  Holy  Spirit:  "Elect  according 
to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father,  through  sanctification  of 
the  Spirit,  unto  obedience,  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ."4  The  Father,  as  sustaining  the  authority  of  the  God- 
head, is  represented  as  giving  the  elect  to  Christ  in  the  covenant 
of  grace  :  "  Thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  me."5 

The  choice  of  them  was  with  reference  to  Christ,  and  that  they 
might  be  given  to  him,  and  rendered  accepted  in  him.  Hence 
they  are  said  to  be  "  chosen  in  Christ."6  The  election,  or  setting 
of  them  apart  to  salvation,  is,  in  Jude,  attributed  to  God  the  Father, 
by  the  use  of  the  word  sanctify,  which  signifies  to  set  apart : 
"Sanctified  by  God  the  Father."  The  next  clause  of  this  verse, 
"  preserved  in  Christ  Jesus,"  may  denote  that  a  special  divine  care 
is  exercised  over  the  elect,  because  of  their  covenant  relation  to 
Christ,  even  before  their  being  called  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  Pre- 
served in  Christ  Jesus,  and  called." 

Those  who  are  not  included  in  the  election  of  grace,  are  called, 
in  Scripture,  "  the  rest,"7  and  "  vessels  of  wrath."8  Why  they  are 
not  included,  we  are  as  unable  to  explain  as  why  the  others  are 


1  Rom.  viii.  29.  2  Rom.  xi.  1,  2.  3  Deut.  vii.  7 

4  1  Pet.  i.  2.  5  John  xvii.  6.  6  Eph.  i.  4. 

r  Rom.  xi.  7.  8  Rom.  ix.  22. 


311  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

included;  and  we  are  therefore  compelled  to  refer  the  matter  to 
the  sovereignty  of  God,  who,  beyond  all  doubt,  acts  herein  most 
wisely  and  righteously,  though  he  has  not  explained  to  us  the 
reasons  of  his  procedure.  His  absolute  sovereignty,  in  the  dis- 
crimination which  he  makes,  is  expressed  by  Paul  in  these  words : 
"  He  hath  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy ;  and  whom  he  will 
he  hardeneth."1  The  natural  tendency  of  human  depravity  is 
such,  that  the  heart  grows  harder  under  the  general  mercies  which 
God  bestows,  unless  he  superadds  to  all  the  other  benefits  which 
he  confers,  the  renewing  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  which  the 
heart  is  changed.  This  renewing  grace  he  gives  or  withholds  at 
his  sovereign  pleasure.  This  sovereignty,  in  so  bestowing  mercy 
as  to  soften  the  hard  heart,  is  unquestionably  taught  by  the  words 
just  quoted,  however  we  may  interpret  the  phrase  "  he  hardeneth." 
It  is  not  necessary  to  understand  these  words  as  implying  a  posi- 
tive act  of  God,  exerted  for  the  purpose  of  producing  hardness  of 
heart,  and  directed  to  this  end.  When  Paul  speaks  of  the  vessels 
of  mercy,  he  says  that  God  hath  "  afore  prepared"  them  for  glory ; 
but  when  he  speaks  of  the  vessels  of  wrath,  as  fitted  for  destruction, 
he  does  not  say  that  God  has  fitted  them  for  this  end.2  As  the 
potter,  out  of  the  same  mass,  makes  one  vessel  to  honor  and  another 
to  dishonor  ;3  so  God,  out  of  the  same  mass  of  mankind,  prepares 
some  for  glory,  as  vessels  of  mercy ;  while  others,  whatever  benefits 
they  may  receive  from  him,  being  left  without  renewing  grace, 
abuse  the  mercies  which  he  bestows,  and,  growing  harder  by  the 
influence  of  their  natural  depravity,  are  vessels  of  wrath  fitted 
for  destruction. 

Divines  have  used  the  term  "reprobate"  as  equivalent  to  "  non- 
elect  ;"  but  this  is  not  the  Scripture  use  of  the  term.  Paul  says, 
"Examine  yourselves  whether  ye  be  in  the  faith,  prove  your 
own  selves.  Know  ye  not  your  own  selves,  how  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  in  you,  except  ye  be  reprobates?4  Here  all  are  regarded  as 
reprobates  in  whom  Christ  does  not  dwell  by  faith  ;  and,  of  con- 
sequence, the  elect  themselves  are  reprobates  so  long  as  they 
remain  in  unbelief.  Reprobation,  as  a  positive  act  of  God,  is  no 
other  than   the   condemnation  under  which  all  unbelievers  lie. 


1  Rom.  ix.  18.  2  Rom.  ix.  22,  23. 

8  Rom.  ix.  21.  *  2  Cor.  xiii.  5. 


SOVEREIGNTY   OF   GRACE.  315 

From  a  state  of  condemnation,  God,  according  to  his  purpose 
in  election,  delivers  some  by  his  renewing  grace,  and  this  is  no 
injury  or  disadvantage  done  to  the  rest. 

The  doctrine  of  election  is  generally  opposed  by  unrenewed  men  : 
and  even  in  the  minds  of  those  whose  hearts  have  been  renewed 
by  grace,  such  objections  to  it  often  arise  as  to  prevent  the  cordial 
reception  of  it.  The  most  common  of  these  objections  it  will  be 
proper  here  to  consider. 

Obj.  1.  The  doctrine  of  election  offers  no  inducement  to  human 
effort.  Under  the  belief  of  it  men  conclude  that,  if  elected,  they 
will  be  saved,  do  what  they  will ;  and  if  not  elected,  they  will  be 
damned,  do  what  they  can.  Hence  they  decide  that  all  effort  on 
their  part  is  useless,  and  that  it  will  be  as  well  to  live  as  they 
please,  and  dismiss  all  concern  about  their  destiny,  over  which  they 
can  have  no  control. 

That  some  men,  who  profess  to  believe  the  doctrine  of  election, 
make  a  bad  use  of  it,  cannot  be  denied ;  but  it  cannot  be  affirmed 
that  all  who  receive  the  doctrine  reason  or  act  in  the  manner 
stated  in  the  objection.  On  the  contrary,  multitudes,  eminent  for 
holiness  of  life  and  self-denying  labors  in  the  cause  of  Christ,  not 
only  cordially  receive  the  doctrine,  but  ascribe  all  their  holiness 
and  self-denying  labors  to  that  grace  which  they  have  received 
from  God's  electing  love.  Many  who  reject  and  hate  the  doctrine, 
determine  to  live  as  they  please,  and  to  give  themselves  no  concern 
for  the  things  of  God  and  religion :  and  the  same  cause  will  pro- 
duce the  same  effect,  in  unregenerate  men  who  admit  the  doctrine, 
and  pervert  it  by  their  carnal  reasonings  to  a  use  to  which  it  has 
no  legitimate  tendency. 

This  objection  to  election  applies  equally  to  every  part  of  the 
divine  purpose,  and  proceeds  on  the  supposition  that  God  has  pre- 
determined the  end  without  reference  to  the  means  by  which  it  is 
to  be  accomplished.  God  has  his  purpose  in  providence,  as  well 
as  in  grace ;  and  works  all  things  in  each  department  of  his  opera- 
tions, after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will :  but  no  wise  man  will  say, 
"  If  I  am  to  have  a  crop,  I  shall  have  it,  whether  I  plough  and 
sow,  or  not ;  and  therefore  I  need  not  labor,  or  give  myself  con- 
cern to  obtain  bread  to  eat."  The  purpose  of  God  leaves  men 
at  equal  liberty,  and  gives  them  equal  encouragement  to  labor  for 
the  meat  that  perisheth  not,  as  for  that  which  perisheth.     God's 


816  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE  GRACE. 

purpose  does  not  sever  the  connection  between  the  means  and  the 
end,  but  establishes  it ;  and  there  is  nothing,  in  a  proper  view  of 
God's  sovereignty,  whether  in  providence  or  in  grace,  to  induce 
the  belief  that  the  end  may  be  obtained  without  the  use  of  the 
appropriate  means ;  or  that  the  end  need  be  despaired  of  if  the 
appropriate  means  be  used.  The  word  of  God  assures  us,  that  "  he 
who  believes  in  Christ  shall  be  saved,  and  he  who  believes  not  shall 
be  damned ;"  and  there  is  nothing  in  God's  purpose,  or  in  a  proper 
view  of  his  purpose,  to  annul  these  declarations  of  his  word.  The 
purpose  of  God  determines  his  own  action ;  but  his  revealed  word 
is  the  rule  of  ours ;  and  if  we  so  act  as  to  have  his  promise  on  our 
side,  we  may  be  sure  that  his  purpose  also  will  be  on  our  side :  but 
his  purpose  cannot  secure  the  salvation  of  any  who  remain  in  im- 
penitence and  unbelief,  and  under  the  condemnation  of  his  re- 
vealed word. 

It  is  true,  however,  that  election  discourages  such  human  effort 
as  is  made  in  a  wrong  direction.  It  prostrates  all  human  hope  at 
the  feet  of  a  Sovereign  God,  and  teaches  the  prayer,  "  Lord,  if 
thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean."  It  discountenances  all 
effort  to  save  ourselves  by  our  own  works  of  righteousness ;  but 
brings  the  sinner  to  commit  himself  at  once  to  the  sovereign  mercy 
of  God.  He  who,  knowing  himself  to  be  condemned  and  helpless, 
gives  himself,  from  the  heart,  into  the  hands  of  God  as  a  sovereign, 
and  trusts  entirely  to  his  grace  for  salvation,  will  find  no  reason  to 
prefer  that  this  grace  should  be  conferred  according  to  some  pres- 
ent determination  of  the  divine  mind,  rather  than  according  to  the 
counsel  of  eternal  wisdom.  The  objection  to  the  latte$,  if  thor- 
oughly analyzed,  will  be  found  to  contain  in  it  some  lurking  idea 
that  it  is  safer  to  trust  in  something  else  than  in  God's  absolute 
mercy.  As  such  lurking  trust  is  dangerous  to  the  soul,  the  doc- 
trine of  election  has  a  salutary  tendency  to  deliver  us  from  it.  It 
tends  to  produce  precisely  that  trust  in  God,  that  complete  sur- 
render of  ourselves  to  him,  to  which  alone  the  promise  of  eternal 
life  is  made ;  and  if  we  reject  the  doctrine,  we  ought  to  consider 
whether  we  do  not,  at  the  same  time,  reject  our  only  hope  of  life 
everlasting. 

Obj.  2.  The  doctrine  of  election  is  unfavorable  to  the  interests 
of  morality.  If  men  believe  that  God  has  appointed  them  to  sal- 
vation or  damnation,  at  his  own  pleasure,  without  regard  to  their 


SOVEREIGNTY  OF   GRACE.  317 

■works,  the  motive  to  good  works  which  is  drawn  from  the  expec- 
tation of  future  reward  or  punishment,  will  cease  to  influence 
them. 

At  the  last  day  men  will  be  judged  according  to  their  works. 
God's  choice  of  men  to  holiness  and  obedience,  and  the  grace 
bestowed  on  them  to  render  them  holy  and  obedient,  do  not  change 
the  rule  by  which  the  final  judgment  will  be  pronounced :  they, 
therefore,  leave  the  expectation  of  future  retribution  to  have  its 
full  effect  on  the  minds  of  men.  No  one  will  be  condemned  at  the 
mere  pleasure  of  God ;  but  every  sentence  of  condemnation  will 
be  for  sins  committed.  Hence  the  fear  of  future  punishment 
ought  to  deter  men  from  the  commission  of  sin.  None  have  a 
right  to  expect  acceptance  in  the  great  day  who  do  not,  in  the 
present  life,  serve  God  in  sincerity  and  with  persevering  constancy. 
A  belief  that  God,  by  his  grace,  inclines  some  men  to  serve  him, 
and  that  he  determined,  from  eternity,  to  bestow  this  grace  upon 
them,  cannot  diminish,  in  any  well-disposed  mind,  the  proper  in- 
fluence arising  from  the  expectation  of  future  retribution,  or  pro- 
duce indifference  to  the  claims  of  morality.  In  electing  men  to 
salvation,  God  has  devised  no  method  of  accomplishing  his  gracious 
purpose  respecting  them,  but  by  rendering  them  holy  and  obedient ; 
and  therefore  the  doctrine  of  election  teaches  the  indispensable 
necessity  of  holiness  and  obedience,  in  order  to  salvation.  The 
doctrine  is  perverted  and  abused  when  men  take  occasion  from  it 
to  indulge  in  sin. 

Obj.  3.  The  doctrine  of  election  represents  God  as  partial,  and 
is,  therefore,  inconsistent  with  the  Scripture,  which  teaches  that 
"  The  wisdom  which  is  from  above,  is  without  partiality."1 

The  wisdom  from  above,  which  James  declares  to  be  without 
partiality,  dwells  in  the  minds  of  Christian  men,  and  is  exercised 
in  their  intercourse  with  mankind.  It  does  not  incline  or  require 
them  to  feel  equal  affection  toward  all,  or  to  do  good  equally  to  all. 
Within  the  limits  of  justice,  it  requires  that  every  man  shall  have 
his  due ;  and  here,  all  partiality  is  injustice.  In  the  department 
of  benevolence,  the  Christian  man  is  not  bound  to  bestow  his  favors 
with  equality,  on  all  his  fellow  creatures.  The  wisdom  from  above 
guides  him,  in  the  distribution  of  his  favors,  by  other  rules.     So 

1  James  iii.  17. 


318  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE  GRACE. 

God,  the  source  of  this  wisdom,  is  without  partiality  in  the  dispen- 
sation of  his  justice;  but,  in  bestowing  his  grace,  he  acts  as  a 
sovereign,  and  claims  and  exercises  the  right  to  do  what  he  will 
with  his  own.  Partiality  in  a  judge,  when  professing  to  administer 
justice,  is  a  great  wrong ;  but  the  same  judge  may  bestow  special 
favor  on  his  children,  or  near  friends,  or  on  chosen  objects  of 
charity,  without  any  just  imputation  of  wrong ;  and  to  charge  God 
with  partiality,  because  he  bestows  his  favors  as  he  pleases,  is  to 
pour  contempt  on  his  sovereignty,  and  covertly  to  deny  his  right 
to  do  what  he  will  with  his  own.  He  may  well  say  to  man  who 
makes  this  charge:  "Is  thine  eye  evil,  because  I  am  good?" 

Obj.  4.  The  doctrine  of  election  represents  God  as  a  respecter 
of  persons ;  but  Peter  affirmed  that  "  God  is  not  a  respecter  of 
persons."1 

The  same  phrase  has  different  significations,  according  to  the 
connection  in  which  it  is  used.  We  may  affirm  that  God  is,  in  one 
sense  of  the  phrase,  a  respecter  of  persons,  for  his  word  states,  that 
"  he  had  respect  unto  Abel  and  his  offering."2  The  first  Christians 
were  taught,  not  to  have  respect  of  persons,  by  giving  superior 
places,  in  their  religious  assemblies,  to  those  who  were  rich,  and 
wore  gay  clothing.3  The  Hebrew  judges  were  required  not  to  have 
respect  of  persons,  by  favoring  any  one  in  his  cause.4  In  this 
objectionable  sense,  God  is  not  a  respecter  of  persons.  Before  him, 
the  rich  and  great  of  the  earth  are  as  nothing :  yet  he  has  respect 
to  his  saints,  however  humble  and  despised  among  men.  When 
Peter  affirmed  that  God  is  not  a  respecter  of  persons,  he  was 
addressing  the  first  company  of  uncircumcised  persons  to  whom 
the  Gospel  was  preached ;  and  his  words  manifestly  imported  the 
equal  admission  of  Gentiles  with  Jews,  to .  the  privileges  and 
blessings  of  the  Gospel.  "  God  is  not  a  respecter  of  persons ;  but 
in  every  nation,  he  that  feareth  God,  and  worketh  righteousness, 
is  accepted  with  him."5  The  words  express  nothing  contrary  to 
what  Peter  elsewhere  says :  "  Ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal 
priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  peculiar  people,  that  ye  should  show 
forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  you  out  of  darkness  into 
his  marvellous  light."6 

1  Acts  x.  34.  2  Gen.  iv.  4.  8  James  ii.  3. 

*  Lev.  xix.  15.  5  Acts  x.  34,  35.  6 1  Pet.  ii.  9. 


SOVEREIGNTY   OF   GRACE.  319 

Obj.  5.  The  doctrine  of  election  represents  God  as  insincere. 
He  invites  all  men  to  participate  in  the  blessings  of  the  gospel ; 
and  yet,  if  this  doctrine  is  true,  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  are 
not  designed  for  all. 

If  God's  word  teaches  the  doctrine  of  election,  and  if  it  contains 
commands  or  invitations  to  all  men  to  seek  salvation  through 
Christ,  it  is  highly  presumptuous  in  us  to  charge  God  with  insin- 
cerity, because  we  cannot  reconcile  the  two  things  with  each  other. 
We  ought  to  remember  that  we  are  worms  of  the  dust,  and  that  it 
is  criminal  arrogance  in  us  to  judge  and  condemn  the  infinite  God. 
But,  in  truth,  there  is  no  ground  whatever  for  this  charge  of 
insincerity.  God  requires  all  men  to  believe  in  Christ ;  and  this  is 
their  duty,  however  unwilling  they  may  be  to  perform  it.  The 
fact  that  they  are  unwilling,  and  that  God  knows  they  will  remain 
unwilling,  unless  he  change  their  hearts,  abates  nothing  from  the 
sincerity  of  the  requirement.  God  proves  his  sincerity,  by  holding 
them  to  the  obligation,  and  condemning  their  unbelief.  He  promises 
salvation  to  all  who  believe  in  Christ ;  and  he  proves  his  sincerity, 
by  fulfilling  his  promise  in  every  instance.  The  bestowment  of 
special  grace,  changing  the  hearts  of  men,  and  bringing  them  to 
believe  in  Christ,  is,  in  no  respect,  inconsistent  with  any  require- 
ment or  promise  that  God  has  made.  While  men  regard  the  call 
of  the  gospel  as  an  invitation  which  they  may  receive  or  reject  at 
pleasure,  it  accords  with  their  state  of  mind  to  institute  the  inquiry, 
whether  God  is  sincere  in  offering  this  invitation :  but  when  they 
regard  it  as  a  solemn  requirement  of  duty,  for  which  God  will 
certainly  hold  them  accountable,  they  will  find  no  occasion  for 
calling  his  sincerity  in  question. 

Obj.  6.  The  doctrine  of  election  confines  the  benevolence  of 
God  to  a  part  of  the  human  race ;  but  the  Scriptures  teach,  that 
"  the  Lord  is  good  to  all,  and  his  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his 
works."1 

God  is  kind  to  the  unthankful  and  evil,  and  bestows  blessings 
on  the  just  and  the  unjust ;  but  his  benevolence,  though  infinite, 
does  not  produce  in  every  one  of  his  creatures  the  highest  degree 
of  happiness.  The  world  which  we  inhabit  abounds  with  misery, 
and  the  Scriptures  have  warned  us,  that  there  is  a  world  of 

1  Ps.  cxlv.  9. 


320  DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

unmitigated  torment,  into  which  wicked  men  will  be  driven,  to  be 
punished  for  their  sins,  with  the  devil  and  his  angels.  The  justice 
of  God  limits  the  exercise  of  his  benevolence ;  and,  if  we  deny  the 
doctrine  of  election,  it  still  remains  true,  that  the  benevolence  of 
God  will  effect  the  salvation  of  a  part  only  of  the  human  race. 
Now,  unless  it  can  be  shown  that  the  election  of  grace  lessens  the 
number  of  the  saved,  no  objection  can  lie  against  it,  on  the  ground 
of  its  relation  to  God's  benevolence.  Paul  did  not  regard  it  as 
lessening  the  divine  benevolence.  According  to  bis  view  of  the 
subject,  all  Israel  would  have  been  cast  away,  had  not  God  reserved 
a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace.1  What  was  true  of 
this  nation,  is  true  of  all  other  nations.  There  are  causes,  apart 
from  election,  which  intercept  the  flow  of  God's  benevolence  to 
sinful  men  :  and  election,  instead  of  increasing  the  obstacles,  opens 
the  channel  in  which  the  mercy  of  God  can  flow,  to  bless  and  save 
the  lost. 

Obj.  7.  The  doctrine  of  election,  by  teaching  that  God  has 
reprobated  a  part  of  the  human  race  to  hopeless  misery,  represents 
him  as  an  unamiable  being. 

Sinful  men  are  indeed  reprobated,  not  by  the  election  of  grace, 
but  by  the  justice  of  God ;  but  their  reprobation  is  not  hopeless,  so 
long  as  the  gospel  of  salvation  sounds  in  their  ears.  But  the  only 
hope  on  which  they  are  authorized  to  lay  hold,  springs  from  the 
electing  love  of  God.  Instead  of  covering  men's  prospects  with 
the  blackness  of  darkness,  the  doctrine  of  election  sends  a  ray  of 
hope,  the  only  possible  ray,  to  enlighten  the  gloom. 

The  justice  of  God  will  hereafter  doom  the  finally  impenitent,  as 
it  has  already  doomed  the  fallen  angels,  to  hopeless  misery.  The 
unamiable  feature,  which  the  objection  we  are  considering  finds  in 
the  divine  character,  is  the  justice  so  horrible  to  the  workers  of 
iniquity.  The  election  of  grace,  if  it  wholly  annihilated  the  justice 
of  God,  would  receive  the  praises  of  unconverted  men ;  but  it 
cannot  do  this.  The  infinite  benevolence  of  God  cannot  do  this. 
If  men  will  pronounce  the  character  of  God  unamiable,  because  he 
is  just,  and  dooms  sinful  beings  to  hopeless  misery,  they  prove 
thereby  that  they  do  not  love  the  God  whom  the  Scriptures  reveal, 
and  by  whom  they  are  to  be  judged.     Their  quarrel  with  the 

1  Rom.  xi.  2-5. 


SOVEREIGNTY   OF   GRACE.  321 

doctrine  of  election  is,  in  truth,  a  quarrel  with  the  justice  of  God, 
from  which  that  election  has  not  delivered  them. 

Of  the  laborers  in  the  vineyard,  who  received  every  man  his 
penny,  they  who  had  borne  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day,  com- 
plained that  those  who  had  labored  but  one  hour,  received  equal 
wages  with  them.  The  occasion  for  this  complaint  would  not  have 
existed,  if  no  one  had  received  more  than  was  due  to  him,  in  strict 
justice,  according  to  the  amount  of  service  rendered.  So,  if  all 
grace  were  withheld  from  the  human  race,  and  every  one  received 
from  God  what  his  deeds  in  strict  justice  deserve,  no  occasion  would 
exist  for  the  objection  which  is  urged  against  God's  election.  But, 
would  men  be  better  off?  or  would  God  be  more  amiable?  The 
lord  in  the  parable  met  the  objection  thus :  "  Friend,  I  do  thee  no 
wrong.  Is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  do  what  I  will  with  mine  own  ? 
Is  thine  eye  evil,  because  I  am  good?"1  We  are  taught  hereby 
how  to  silence  objections  to  the  sovereignty  of  divine  grace.  "While 
God  does  wrong  to  no  man,  though  he  does  as  he  will  with  his 
own,  it  becomes  us  to  bow  to  his  sovereignty,  and  acknowledge  him 
infinitely  amiable  in  all  his  perfections. 

Not  content  with  the  God  whom  the  Bible  reveals,  and  who  does 
according  to  his  pleasure  in  the  army  of  heaven,  and  among  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth,  we  carve  out  to  ourselves  a  deity  more 
amiable,  in  our  view,  than  he.  If  we  dare  not  strip  him  of  his  jus- 
tice, and  secure  thereby  the  salvation  of  all  men,  we  endeavor  to 
devise  for  him  a  method  of  salvation  less  exposed  to  human  cavil. 
We  aim  to  free  him  from  the  responsibility  of  determining  who 
shall  be  saved ;  and  we  form  the  plan,  and  fix  the  terms  of  salva- 
tion, with  the  design  of  rendering  the  result  contingent  on  the 
actions  of  men.  Our  method  of  grace,  we  admit,  will  not  secure 
the  salvation  of  all  men.  If  the  infinitely  wise  God  should  adopt 
it,  he  would  foreknow  all  its  results,  and  precisely  how  many  per- 
sons, and  what  persons,  would  finally  be  saved  by  it.  Now,  if  he 
should  make  our  plan  his  own,  with  this  foreknowledge  of  its 
results,  it  would  then  be  his  plan,  fixing  as  definitely  the  salvation 
of  those  who  will  be  saved,  as  the  plan  on  which  he  at  present 
proceeds,  and  equally  leaving  the  residue  of  mankind  to  the  awful 
doom  to  which  his  justice  will  consign  them.     Our  preferred  plan 

1  Matt.  xx.  13,  15. 
21 


322  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

may  accord  better  with  the  views  of  finite  worms,  like  ourselves, 
who  know  not  the  end  from  the  beginning ;  but  if  God  should 
adopt  it,  he  would  be  responsible  for  it,  in  all  its  workings,  to  the 
final  issue :  responsible,  though  not  to  any  other  being,  yet  to  him- 
self ;  for  his  acts  must  accord  with  his  perfections,  and  must  receive 
his  own  approbation.  In  selecting  his  present  plan,  he  has  chosen 
it  with  a  full  knowledge  of  all  its  results.  As  the  plan  is  his 
chosen  plan,  so  the  people  whom  it  will  save  are  his  chosen  people. 
We  must  prove  that  our  plan  would  be  better,  before  we  can  main- 
tain that  the  deity  of  our  imagination  would  be  more  amiable  than 
the  God  of  the  Bible. 

Every  proposed  method  of  salvation  that  leaves  the  issue  de- 
pendent on  human  volition,  is  defective.  It  has  been  always  found, 
that  men  will  not  come  to  Christ  for  life.  The  gospel  is  preached 
to  every  creature ;  but  all,  with  one  consent,  ask  to  be  excused. 
The  will  of  men  must  be  changed ;  and  this  change  the  will  itself 
cannot  effect.  Divine  grace  must  here  interpose.  Unless  God 
work  in  the  sinner  to  will  and  to  do,  salvation  is  impossible.  God 
knows  the  force  of  opposition  which  his  grace  will  encounter  in 
each  heart,  and  the  amount  of  spiritual  influence  necessary  to 
overcome  it.  He  gives  or  withholds  that  influence  at  his  pleasure. 
He  has  his  own.  rule  of  acting  in  this  matter — a  rule  infinitely 
wise  and  good.  With  full  knowledge  how  his  rule  will  affect  every 
particular  case,  he  perseveres  in  acting  according  to  it,  however  men 
may  cavil :  and  the  rule  which  infinite  wisdom  adopts  must  be  the 
best ;  nor  can  it  be  any  objection  to  it,  that  infinite  wisdom  knows 
perfectly  its  final  result. 

Obj.  8.  The  doctrine  of  election  does  not  recommend  itself  to 
the  general  acceptance  of  mankind ;  but  is  received  only  by  those 
who  believe  themselves  to  be  in  the  number  of  the  elect ;  and  who 
are  therefore  interested  judges. 

The  truth  or  falsehood  of  a  religious  doctrine  cannot  be  deter- 
mined by  the  acceptance  which  it  obtains  among  men.  What  God 
says,  is  true,  whether  men  receive  or  reject  it.  The  gospel,  which 
is  preached  on  the  authority  of  God's  truth,  is  rejected  by  a  large 
part  of  mankind ;  and  those  who  do  receive  it  are  exposed  to  the 
charge  of  being  interested  judges,  because  they  expect  God's  bless- 
ing through  their  belief  of  it.  All  that  the  objection  says  of  elec- 
tion is  true  of  the  gospel.     It  does  not  prove  the  gospel  untrue ; 


SOVEREIGNTY   OF   GRACE.  328 

and  it  ought  not,  in  the  least  degree,  to  impair  and  weaken  our 
faith  in  the  doctrine  of  election. 

According  to  God's  method  of  grace,  as  revealed  in  his  holy 
word,  the  salvation  of  men  is  made  dependent  on  their  belief  of 
the  gospel.  It  is  a  test  of  genuine  faith,  that  it  cordially  receives 
those  parts  of  divine  truth  which  are  least  acceptable  to  the  carnal 
heart.  Hence  it  arises,  that  the  doctrine  of  election,  or,  which  is 
the  same  thing,  of  God's  sovereignty  in  the  bestowment  of  his 
grace,  often  becomes  the  point  at  which  a  sinner's  submission  to 
God  is  tested.  When  this  doctrine  is  cordially  received,  the  sinner's 
rebellion  against  God  ceases.  When  he  yields  to  the  sovereignty 
of  God  in  bestowing  eternal  life  at  his  pleasure,  he  admits  that 
sovereignty  in  everything  else.  How  much  soever  he  may  permit 
the  monarch  of  the  universe  to  do  what  he  pleases  in  smaller  matters, 
if  he  refuses  to  yield  to  his  sovereignty  in  the  matter  of  highest 
importance,  his  submission  to  God  is  partial,  and  the  spirit  of  re- 
bellion has  not  departed. 

Many  examples  of  Christian  experience  might  be  adduced,  in 
which  a  submission  to  God's  sovereignty  in  bestowing  the  blessings 
of  grace,  became  the  deciding  point  of  a  sinner's  acceptance  of 
Christ. 

Though  the  objection  which  we  have  considered  contains  no 
valid  argument  against  the  doctrine  of  election,  it  may  suggest  an 
important  lesson  to  those  who  admit  this  doctrine. into  their  creed. 
If  men,  as  interested  judges,  decide  in  favor  of  the  doctrine,  and 
regard  it  with  pleasure  merely  because  they  suppose  themselves  to 
be  among  the  favorites  of  heaven,  their  faith  will  be  unavailing. 
No  submission  to  God  is  implied  in  our  approving  of  his  supposed 
favoritism  toward  us.  The  gospel  calls  on  every  sinner  to  give 
himself  up,  through  Christ,  into  the  hands  of  his  offended  sov- 
ereign ;  and  to  do  this  as  a  guilty  creature,  and  not  as  a  supposed 
favorite  of  Heaven.  In  this  complete  surrender,  the  heart  becomes 
fully  reconciled  to  the  doctrine  of  election. 


324  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 


Section  II.— PARTICULAR  REDEMPTION. 

The  Son  of  God  gave  his  life  to  redeem  those  who  were 
given  to  him  by  the  father  in  the  covenant  of  grace.1 

The  Scriptures  teach  that  the  Son  of  God,  in  coming  into  the 
world  and  laying  down  his  life,  had  the  salvation  of  a  peculiar 
people  in  view :  "  Thou  shalt  call  his  name  Jesus,  for  he  shall  save 
his  people  from  their  sins."2  "  The  good  Shepherd  giveth  his  life 
for  the  sheep."3  "  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ  also 
loved  the  Church,  and  gave  himself  for  it,  that  he  might  sanctify 
and  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word,  that  he 
might  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  church."4  The  Scriptures 
also  teach  that  the  expectation  of  the  Redeemer  will  be  fully  real- 
ized, and  that  not  one  of  all  whom  the  Father  gave  him  will  fail 
to  be  saved :  "He  shall  see  his  seed.  He  shall  see  of  the  travail 
of  his  soul  and  be  satisfied."5  "All  that  the  Father  giveth  me, 
shall  come  to  me ;  and  him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast 
out."  "And  this  is  the  Father's  will  which  hath  sent  me,  that  of 
all  which  he  hath  given  me  I  should  lose  nothing,  but  should  raise 
it  up  again  at  the  last  day."6  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also,  whom 
thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am."7 

And  finally,  when  all  shall  be  congregated,  he  will  say,  "  Behold, 
I,  and  the  children  which  God  has  given  me."8  In  presenting  to 
the  Father  all  who  had  been  given  to  him,  in  the  covenant  of  grace, 
to  be  redeemed  out  of  every  kindred,  tongue,  nation,  and  people, 
the  Saviour  will  have  the  full  reward  of  his  obedience  unto  death. 

Redemption  will  not  be  universal  in  its  consummation;  for 
the  redeemed  will  be  out  of  every  kindred,  tongue,  nation,  and 
people  ;9  and  therefore  cannot  include  all  in  any  of  these  divisions 
of  mankind.  And  redemption  cannot  have  been  universal  in  its 
purpose ;  otherwise  the  purpose  will  fail  to  be  accomplished,  and 
all,  for  which  the  work  of  redemption  was  undertaken,  will  not  be 
effected. 


1  Eph.  v.  25-27 ;  Tit.  ii.  14 ;  John  x.  11 ;  Rev.  i.  5,  6 ;  Acts  xx.  28 ;  Heb.  x. 
14 ;  Isaiah  liii.  5,  11. 

2  Matt.  i.  21.  8  John  x.  11.  *  Eph.  v.  25-27. 
6  Isaiah  liii.  10,  11.  6  John  vi.  37,  39.  7  John  xvii.  24. 
8  Heb.  ii.  13.                         9  Rev.  v.  9. 


SOVEREIGNTY   OF   GRACE.  325 

Besides  God's  will  of  purpose,  we  have  seen  that  he  has  a  will  of 
precept.  According  to  the  latter,  he  commands  all  men  every- 
where to  repent ;  he  requires  all  to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
it  is  his  will  that  all  men  should  honor  the  Son.  To  all  who  obey 
his  will  in  these  particulars,  he  gives  the  promise  of  eternal  life. 
The  precept  and  the  promise  are  both  included  in  the  revealed  will 
of  God.  It  is  the  revealed  will  of  God  that  the  gospel  should  be 
preached  to  every  creature,  and  that  every  creature  who  hears 
should  believe,  and  that  all  who  believe  shall  receive  life  everlast- 
ing. The  revealed  will  is  the  rule  of  our  faith,  duty,  and  hope  ;  and 
by  it  those  who  preach  the  gospel,  and  those  who  hear  it,  are 
authorised  and  bound  to  regulate  every  thought  and  action.  In  it, 
Christ  is  exhibited  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world  j1  the  only  name  under 
heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved  f  and  sinners, 
without  exception,  are  invited  and  commanded  to  believe  in  Christ. 
As  the  gospel  is  preached  to  all  men  without  distinction,  and  all 
are  called  upon  to  come  to  Christ  for  life ;  and  nothing  but  man's 
rejection  of  the  gospel  prevents  the  extension  of  its  blessing  to 
all  who  hear  it ;  it  accords  with  the  design  of  God's  revealed 
word,  to  speak  of  the  offices  and  work  of  Christ,  according  to 
men's  obligations  respecting  them.  It  must  be  remembered,  how- 
ever, that  the  gospel  promises  its  blessings  to  those  only  who  obey 
it ;  and,  as  the  promise,  not  the  precept,  is  the  proper  measure  of 
the  benefits  which  it  secures,  its  benefits  are  limited  to  particular 
persons,  even  when  the  limitation  in  its  extent  does  not  appear 
in  the  language  employed.  Christ  is  called  the  Saviour  of  the 
world,3  the  propitiation4  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world ;  and  the 
free  gift  through  him  is  said  to  come  on  all  men  unto  justification 
of  life.5  These,  and  other  like  expressions  of  Scripture,  represent 
the  facts  as  they  would  be,  on  the  supposition  that  all  men  did 
their  duty.  But  notwithstanding  these  general  expressions,  the 
revealed  will  of  God  secures  blessings  only  to  the  obedient,  and  is 
therefore  narrower  in  its  limit  than  the  purpose  or  secret  will  of 
God,  which  not  only  provides  all  needed  grace  for  the  obedient,  but 
also,  for  all  the  elect,  the  grace  necessary  to  render  them  obedient. 

The  remarks  which  have  been  made  may  suffice  to  show  that 

1  John  iv.  42.  •  2  Acts  iv.  12.  8  John  iv.  42. 

4  1  John  ii.  2.  5  Rom.  v.  18. 


326  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

redemption  is  not  universal,  in  any  view  which  can  properly  be 
taken  of  it.  It  is  particular  in  its  consummation,  and  in  its 
purpose ;  and  it  is  equally  so  in  the  revelation  of  it,  which  is  made 
in  the  gospel.  The  general  terms  "  all  men,"  "  the  whole  world," 
&c,  which  the  Scriptures  employ  in  speaking  of  its  extent,  cannot 
be' understood  to  secure  its  benefits  to  the  impenitent  and  unbeliev- 
ing. According  to  God's  secret  will,  or  will  of  purpose,  redemp- 
tion is  secured  by  the  death  of  Christ  to  all  the  elect ;  according 
to  his  revealed  will,  it  is  secured  to  those  only  who  believe. 

The  adaptedness  of  Christ's  death  to  serve  as  a  ground  for  uni- 
versal gospel  invitations,  constitutes  it  in  the  view  of  some  persons 
a  universal  redemption.  But  no  one  can  with  propriety  be  said  to 
be  redeemed,  who  does  not  obtain  deliverance,  and  who  never  will 
obtain  it.  Other  persons  who  maintain  the  doctrine  of  particular 
redemption,  distinguish  between  redemption  and  atonement,  and 
because  of  the  adaptedness  referred  to,  consider  the  death  of 
Christ  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  all  men ;  or  as  an  atonement 
for  sin  in  the  abstract.  In  Rom.  v.  11,  the  only  place  in  the  New 
Testament  where  the  word  atonement  occurs,  the  Greek  word  for 
which  it  stands,  is  the  same  that  is  rendered  reconciling — reconcilia- 
tion,  in  other  places.1  The  reconciliation  is  not  between  God  and 
sin  in  the  abstract,  for  such  a  reconciliation  is  impossible.  It  is  a 
reconciliation  of  persons ;  and  such  a  reconciliation  as  secures  eter- 
nal salvation.  "  If,  when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to 
God,  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall 
be  saved  by  his  life."2  In  Paul's  view,  all  those  for  whom  Christ's 
death  made  reconciliation  or  atonement,  will  certainly  be  saved ; 
and  therefore  atonement  cannot  be  universal,  unless  salvation  be 
universal.  It  is  possible  to  use  the  word  atonement  in  such  a  sense, 
as  to  render  the  question  respecting  the  extent  of  the  atonement 
one  of  mere  definition  :  but  it  is  best  to  use  the  words  of  Scripture 
in  the  Scripture  sense. 

In  reconciling  the  vicariousness  of  Christ's  death  with  the 
universal  call  of  the  gospel,  a  difficulty  arises,  which  may  be  stated 
thus : — 

An  unrestricted  invitation  to  all  who  hear  the  gospel,  to  come 
to  Christ  for  life,  seems  to  imply  that  universal  provision  has  been 

1  Rom.  xi.  15 ;  2  Cor.  v.  18,  19.  2  Rom.  v.  10. 


SOVEREIGNTY  OF   GRACE.  327 

made  in  him ;  and  in  order  to  the  making  of  universal  provision,  it 
appears  necessary  that  he  should  have  borne  the  sins  of  all  men. 

But  the  supposition  that  he  bore  the  sins  of  the  whole  human 
race,  is  attended  with  much  difficulty.  Multitudes  died  in  impeni- 
tence before  he  came  into  the  world,  and  were  suffering  for  their 
sins  in  the  other  world,  while  he  was  hanging  on  the  cross.  How 
could  he  be  a  substitute  for  these,  and  suffer  the  penalty  for  their 
sins,  when  they  were  suffering  it  in  their  own  persons  ?  And  if 
he  endured  the  penalty  for  the  sins  of  all  who  have  since  died,  or 
shall  hereafter  die  in  impenitence,  how  shall  they  be  required  to 
satisfy  justice  a  second  time  by  personal  suffering  ? 

For  a  solution  of  this  difficulty,  with  which  the  minds  of  many 
have  been  much  perplexed,  it  has  been  supposed  that  the  amount 
of  suffering  necessary  to  make  an  atoning  sacrifice,  is  not  increased 
or  lessened  by  the  amount  of  sin  to  be  atoned  for.  This  hypothesis 
is  entitled  to  respect,  not  only  because  of  the  relief  which  it 
affords  the  mind,  but  also  because  it  has  recommended  itself  to 
the  general  acceptance  of  learned  and  pious  men.  Neverthe- 
less, like  every  other  hypothesis  invented  for  the  removal  of 
difficulty,  it  should  not  be  made  an  article  of  faith,  until  it  has 
been  proved. 

In  support  of  the  hypothesis,  it  has  been  argued  that  since  the 
wages  of  sin  is  death,  Christ  must  have  died  for  a  single  sin,  and 
he  needed  only  to  die,  in  making  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world. 

This  argument  does  not  sustain  the  hypothesis,  unless  it  be 
assumed  that  death  is  the  same  in  every  supposable  case.  But 
death  may  be  an  easy  and  joyful  transition  from  this  world  to  the 
world  of  bliss.  Such  was  not  the  death  of  Christ.  Death,  as  the 
wages  of  sin,  includes  more  than  the  mere  dissolution  of  the  body : 
and  Christ,  in  dying  for  sin,  endured  an  amount  of  sorrow  which 
was  not  necessary  to  mere  natural  death.  In  this  suffering,  the 
expiatory  efficacy  of  his  death  chiefly  consisted;  and  we  dare  not 
assume  that  the  amount  of  it  must  be  the  same  in  every  suppos- 
able case.  The  sufferings  of  Christ  derive  infinite  value  from  his 
divine  nature;  but,  being  endured  by  his  human  nature,  their 
amount  could  not  be  infinite ;  hence  it  is  supposable  that  the 
amount  might  have  been  different  in  different  circumstances.  The 
inhabitants   of  Sodom   and  Gomorrah  will,  in  the  last   day,  be 


328  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

doomed  to  the  second  death,  equally  with  the  more  guilty  inhabit- 
ants of  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida :  but  the  anguish  attendant  will 
be  more  intolerable  in  one  case  than  in  the  other.  Analogy  would 
seem  to  require,  that  Christ,  suffering  for  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world,  must  endure  more  than  if  suffering  for  only  one  sin. 

The  advocates  of  the  hypothesis  urge,  that  the  atonement  is 
moral,  and  not  commercial ;  and  they  object,  that  the  notion  of  so 
much  suffering  for  so  much  sin,  degrades  it  into  a  mere  commer- 
cial transaction.  According  to  an  illustration  before  given,  if 
twenty  men  owe  one  hundred  dollars,  commercial  justice  is  satis- 
fied when  each  man  has  paid  five  dollars ;  but  when  twenty  men 
have  conspired  to  commit  murder,  moral  justice,  or  rather  distrib- 
utive justice  (for  commercial  justice  is  also  moral),  holds  every 
man  guilty  of  the  deed,  and  as  deserving  of  capital  punishment 
as  if  he  alone  had  committed  the  crime.  On  the  same  principle,  it 
is  maintained,  moral  justice  does  not  divide  the  death  of  Christ 
into  parts,  accounting  so  much  for  each  offence ;  but  regards  it  as 
equally  sufficient  for  many  offences,  as  for  one;  and  equally 
sufficient  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  as  for  the  sins  of  the 
elect. 

The  argument  is  not  conclusive.  It  is  not  true,  that  the  princi- 
ple of  distributive  justice  repels  the  notion  of  so  much  suffering 
for  so  much  sin.  Justice  has  its  scales  in  government,  as  well  as 
in  commerce ;  and  an  essential  part  of  its  administration  consists 
in  the  apportionment  of  penalties  to  crimes.  It  does  not  account 
the  stealing  of  herbs  from  a  neighbor's  garden,  and  the  murder  of 
a  father,  crimes  of  equal  magnitude ;  and  it  does  not  weigh  out  to 
them  equal  penalties.  The  justice  of  God  has  a  heavier  penalty 
for  Chorazin  and  Bethsaida,  than  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah. 
Everything  of  which  we  have  knowledge  in  the  divine  administra- 
tion, instead  of  exploding  the  notion  of  so  much  suffering  for  so 
much  sin,  tends  rather  to  establish  it.  The  objection  that  it  is 
commercial,  is  not  well  founded.  Though  justice  in  government, 
and  justice  in  commerce,  may  be  distinguished  from  each  other,  it 
does  not  follow,  that  whatever  may  be  affirmed  of  the  one,  must 
necessarily  be  denied  of  the  other.  Distributive  justice  is  not  that 
which  determines  the  equality  of  value,  in  commodities  which  are 
exchanged  for  each  other :  but  it  does  not  therefore  exclude  all 
regard  to  magnitudes  and  proportions.     In  the  language  of  Scrip- 


SOVEREIGNTY   OF   GRACE.  329 

tura,  sins  are  debts,1  the  blood  of  Christ  is  a,  price,2  and  his  people 
are  bought.3  This  language  is  doubtless  figurative :  but  the  figures 
would  not  be  -appropriate,  if  commercial  justice,  to  which  the  terms 
debt,  price,  bought,  appertain,  did  not  bear  an  analogy  to  the  dis- 
tributive justice  which  required  the  sacrifice  of  Christ. 

In  the  case  adduced  for  illustration,  every  accomplice  in  the 
murder  is  held  guilty  of  the  crime,  because  every  one  has  the  full 
intention  of  it.  Justice,  viewing  the  crime  in  the  intention,  ac- 
counts each  one  guilty,  and  requires  the  penalty  to  be  inflicted 
on  him.  It  does  not  admit  that  the  punishment  of  one  will  be 
equivalent  to  the  punishment  of  all:  but,  in  this  very  case,  em- 
ploys its  scales  to  give  to  every  one  his  due,  and  apportions  the 
amount  of  penalty  inflicted,  to  the  amount  of  crime. 

This  examination  of  the  argument  discovers,  that  it  is  not  con- 
clusive. If  the  atonement  of  Christ  excludes  all  regard  to  the 
amount  of  sin  to  be  expiated,  the  exclusion  does  not  arise  from  the 
abstract  principles  of  distributive  justice,  as  distinguished  from 
commercial,  but  from  something  peculiar  in  the  great  transaction. 
No  transaction  like  it  with  which  it  may  be  compared,  has  ever 
occurred.  The  wisdom  and  justice  of  God  have  decided  this  single 
case,  and  have  decided  it  right.  Christ  did  endure  just  so  much 
suffering,  as  would  expiate  the  sins  that  were  laid  on  him.  What 
amount  of  suffering  would  have  been  necessary,  if  he  had  expiated 
but  one  sin,  is  a  question  which,  so  far  as  we  know,  has  never  been 
decided  in  the  court  of  heaven.  When  we  confidently  decide  it, 
we  are  in  danger  of  intruding  into  those  things  which  do  not  belong 
to  us.  If  the  Holy  Scriptures  teach  us  nothing  on  the  subject,  we 
should  not  seek  to  be  wise  above  what  is  written. 

The  Scriptures,  so  far  as  I  know,  contain  no  proof  of  the  hypo- 
thesis. The  best  argument  in  its  favor  is  drawn  from  Hebrews 
ix.,  in  which  it  is  taught  that,  if  the  sacrifices  of  the  old  dispensa- 
tion had  been  efficacious,  they  would  not  have  needed  to  be  re- 
peated. This  seems  to  involve  the  principle,  that  an  efficacious 
sacrifice  for  sin,  when  once  made,  will  suffice  for  all  sin,  however 
it  may  be  multiplied  in  all  future  time ;  and  this  principle,  if  estab- 
lished, establishes  the  hypothesis  before  us.  But  the  clause  "  then 
would  they  not  have  ceased  to  be  offered,"  may  be  taken  without 

1  Matt.  vi.  12.  2 1  Cor.  vi.  20 :  1  Pet.  i.  18.  3 1  Cor.  vi.  20. 


330  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

an  interrogative  point  following,  and  the  argument  of  Paul  will  be, 
that  the  sacrifices  of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  if  efficacious, 
would  have  continued  to  be  offered  from  year  to  year,  making 
atonement  for  the  sins  of  each  year  as  it  passed,  and  would  not 
have  been  superseded  by  another  covenant,  as  the  Lord  had  fore- 
told by  his  prophet.  So  interpreted,  the  argument  of  Paul,  instead 
of  establishing  the  hypothesis,  subverts  it.  But  if  the  clause  be 
read  with  the  interrogative  point,  it  may  still  be  understood  to 
refer  to  the  remembrance  from  year  to  year  continually  of  the 
same  sins,  that  had  once  been  atoned  for.  When  the  sins  of  one  year 
had  been  atoned  for,  why  should  the  very  same  sins  be  brought  into 
remembrance  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  years,  and  the  offering 
for  them  repeated,  if  the  first  offering  had  been  efficacious  ?  So 
understood,  the  apostle's  argument  does  not  establish  the  principle 
involved  in  the  hypothesis. 

If,  after  a  thorough  examination  of  the  hypothesis,  we  should, 
instead  of  making  it  an  article  of  faith,  be  inclined  to  abandon  it ; 
and  if  the  difficulty  which  it  was  invented  to  remove  should  perplex 
us ;  we  may  obtain  relief,  as^we  are  compelled  to  do  in  other  cases, 
by  receiving  the  whole  of  God's  truth  on  his  authority,  even  though 
the  harmony  of  its  parts  is  not  apparent  to  our  weak  understand- 
ings. In  this  way,  theological  difficulties  furnish  an  opportunity 
for  the  exercise  of  confidence  in  the  divine  veracity :  and  our  state 
of  mind  is  never  better  or  safer  than  when,  in  simple  faith,  we 
take  God  at  his  word. 

So  far  as  we  have  the  means  of  judging,  the  sufferings  of  Christ, 
when  viewed  apart  from  the  purpose  of  God  respecting  them,  were 
in  themselves  as  well  adapted  to  satisfy  for  the  sins  of  Judas  as  of 
Peter.  But  we  cannot  affirm  this  of  every  act  which  Christ  per- 
formed in  his  priestly  office.  His  intercessions  for  Peter  were  par- 
ticular and  efficacious ;  and  these,  as  a  part  of  his  priestly  work, 
may  be  included  with  his  sufferings,  as  constituting  with  them  the 
perfect  and  acceptable  offering  which  he,  as  the  great  High  Priest, 
makes  for  his  people.  The  atonement  or  reconciliation  which 
results,  must  be  as  particular  as  the  intercessions  by  which  it  is 
procured. 

Some  have  maintained  that,  if  the  atonement  of  Christ  is  not 
general,  no  sinner  can  be  under  obligation  to  believe  in  Christ, 


SOVEREIGNTY   OE   GRACE.  331 

until  he  is  assured  that  he  is  one  of  the  elect.  This  implies  tfhat 
no  Dinner  is  bound  to  believe  what  God  says,  unless  he  knows  that 
God  designs  to  save  him.  God  declares  that  there  is  no  salvation, 
except  through  Christ ;  and  every  sinner  is  bound  to  believe  this 
truth.  If  it  were  revealed  from  heaven,  that  but  one  sinner,  of  all 
our  fallen  race,  shall  be  saved  by  Christ,  the  obligation  to  believe* 
that  there  is  no  salvation  out  of  Christ,  would  remain  the  same. 
Every  sinner,  to  whom  the  revelation  would  be  made,  would  be 
bound  to  look  to  Christ  as  his  only  possible  hope,  and  commit  him- 
self to  that  sovereign  mercy  by  which  some  one  of  the  justly  con- 
demned race  would  be  saved.  The  abundant  mercy  of  our  God 
will  not  be  confined  to  the  salvation  of  a  single  sinner ;  but  it  will 
bring'  many  sons  to  glory  through  the  sufferings  of  Jesus,  the  Cap- 
tain of  our  salvation.  Yet  every  sinner,  who  trusts  in  Christ  for 
salvation,  is  bound  to  commit  himself,  unreservedly,  to  the  sovereign 
mercy  of  God.  If  he  requires  some  previous  assurance  that  he  is 
in  the  number  of  the  elect,  he  does  not  surrender  himself  to  God, 
as  a  guilty  sinner  ought.  The  gospel  brings  every  sinner  prostrate 
at  the  feet  of  the  Great  Sovereign,  hoping  for  mercy  at  his  will, 
and  in  his  way :  and  the  gospel  is  perverted  when  any  terms  short 
of  this  are  offered  to  the  offender.  With  this  universal  call  to 
absolute  and  unconditional  surrender  to  God's  sovereignty,  the 
doctrine  of  particular  redemption  exactly  harmonizes. 


Section  III.  — EFFECTUAL  CALLING. 

The  Holy  Spirit  effectually  calls  all  the  elect  to  repent 
and  believe.1 

The  gospel  calls  all  who  hear  it  to  repent  and  believe.  This 
call  proceeds  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  qualifies  the  ministers  of 
the  gospel  for  their  work,  and  gives  them  the  written  word.  But 
men  resist  and  disobey  this  call  of  the  Spirit,  and  remain  under 
condemnation.  "Ye  do  always  resist  the  Holy  Ghost;  as  your 
fathers  did,  so  do  ye."     "Which  of  the  prophets  have  not  your 

1  John  vi.  37  ;  Rom.  viii.  26,  30 ;  1  Cor.  i.  24 ;  2  Tim.  i.  9 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  Jude 
1,  2 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  4 ;  1  The'ss.  i.  ^6. 


332  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

fathers  persecuted?"1  "He  shall  be  revealed,  taking  vengeance 
on  all  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel."2 

Besides  the  call  which  is  external,  and  often  ineffectual,  there  is 
another,  which  is  internal  and  effectual.  This  always  produces 
repentance  and  faith,  and  therefore  secures  salvation.  The  former 
external  call  is  intended  in  such  passages  of  Scripture  as  the  fol- 
lowing :  "Because  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused."3  "Many  be 
called,  but  few  chosen."4  The  internal  and  effectual  call  is  de- 
signed in  the  following  passages  :  "  Who  hath  saved  us,  and  called 
us  with  a  holy  calling."5  "Whom  he  predestinated,  them  he 
also  called;  whom  he  called,  them  he  also  justified."6  "  Called 
to  be  saints."7  "  Among  whom  are  ye  also  the  called  of  Jesus 
Christ."8  "  To  them  who  love  God,  who  are  the  called  according  to 
his  purpose."9  It  is  not  true  of  all  who  receive  the  external  call, 
that  they  are  predestinated  to  life,  justified  and  saved.  Whenever 
these  blessings  are  represented  as  belonging  to  the  called,  the 
internal  and  effectual  call  must  be  meant. 

We  have  before  distinguished  between  the  direct  and  the  indirect 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  external  call  being  by  means  of 
the  written  or  preached  word,  belongs  to  the  indirect  influence  of 
the  Spirit.  To  render  this  call  effectual,  the  direct  influence  is 
superadded ;  and  the  gospel  is  then  said  to  come,  not  in  word  only,10 
but  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  with  power.11  The  external 
call  is  disobeyed,  because  men  will  not  come  to  Christ  that  ihey 
may  have  life :  the  internal  call  operates  on  the  will  itself,  working 
in  men  to  will  and  to  do,  and  rendering  God's  people  willing  in 
the  day  of  his  power.  As  distinguished  from  the  external  call,  the 
internal  is  always  unresisted.  In  the  process  of  conversion,  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  violently  resisted ;  but  this  resistance  is  directed 
against  the  outward  means.  The  internal  grace  softens  and  sub- 
dues the  heart,  and  brings  it  into  peaceful  subjection  to  the  gospel 
of  Christ. 

The  internal  grace,  which  renders  the  outward  call  effectual,  is 
the  grace  of  regeneration.     Hence  regeneration,  considered  as  the 

1  Acts  vii.  51,  52.  2  2  Thess.  i.  7,  8.  3  Prov.  i.  24, 

4  Matt.  xx.  16.  5  2  Tim.  i.  9.  6  Eom.  viii.  30. 

7  Rom.  i.  7.  8  Rom.  i.  6.  9  Rom.  viii.  28. 

10 1  Thess.  i.  5.  »  1  Cor.  ii.  4. 


SOVEREIGNTY   OF   GRACE.  333 

work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  the  same  as  effectual  calling ;  considered 
as  the  change  of  the  sinner's  heart,  it  is  the  effect  of  this  calling. 
The  calling  is  effectual,  because  it  produces  regeneration  in  the 
subject  on  whom  it  operates. 

In  effectual  calling,  the  Holy  Spirit  displays  his  omnipotence. 
"  We  believe  according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power,  which 
he  wrought  in  Christ,  when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead."1  The 
same  power  which  created  the  world,  and  said,  "  Let  there  be  light, 
and  there  was  light,"  is  needed  in  the  new  creation  of  the  sinner. 
"  God,  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  hath 
shined  in  our  hearts."2  "We  are  his  workmanship,  created  in 
Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works."3  "According  as  his  divine 
power  hath  given  unto  us  all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and  god- 
liness, through  the  knowledge  of  him  that  hath  called  us  to  glory 
and  virtue."4  His  power  in  creating  the  world  was  unresisted; 
and  equally  unresisted  is  the  power  by  which  he  new-creates  the 
heart.  The  outward  means  which  the  Spirit  sends  may  be  resisted ; 
but  when  the  Spirit  himself  comes  in  the  omnipotence  of  his  grace, 
resistance  vanishes. 

In  effectual  calling,  the  Holy  Spirit  acts  as  a  sovereign.  In 
bestowing  the  various  gifts  which  he  conferred  on  the  ancient 
Christians,  he  acted  as  a  sovereign:  "All  these  worketh  that  one 
and  the  self-same  Spirit,  dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will."5 
He  is  equally  sovereign  in  giving  regenerating  grace.  "  Of  his 
own  will  begat  he  us  with  the  word  of  truth."6  Grace  is  sovereign 
in  election  by  the  Father,  redemption  by  the  Son,  and  effectual 
calling  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  discrimination  which  grace  makes 
among  the  children  of  men,  first  appears  in  effectual  calling.  This 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  leads  up,  through  the  redemption  of  Jesus 
Christ,  to  God  the  Father,  to  whose  electing  love  we  are  taught  to 
ascribe  all  the  blessings  of  eternal  salvation.  In  this  reverse  order 
we  look  back,  along  the  stream  of  mercy,  to  the  fountain  from 
which  it  flows.  This  reverse  order  is  observed  in  the  precept, 
"Make  your  calling  and  election  sure."7     Our  calling  proceeds 

1  Eph.  i.  19,  20.  2  2  Cor.  it.  6.  3  Eph.  ii.  10. 

*  2  Pet.  i.  3.  5  1  Cor.  xii.  11.  6  James  i.  18. 

*  2  Pet.  i.  10. 


334  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

from  our  election  ;  but  we  ascertain  our  election  by  first  ascertain- 
ing our  calling. 

In  effectual  calling,  the  Holy  Spirit  operates  on  the  elect.  These 
are  "  sanctified  by  God  the  Father,  preserved  in  Christ  Jesus,  and 
called."1  They  whom  the  Spirit  calls  are  "  chosen  in  Christ  from 
the  foundation  of  the, world."2  "As  many  as  were  ordained  to 
eternal  life  believed."3  The  Spirit's  effectual  calling  fulfils  the 
word  of  Christ,  "  All  that  the  Father  giveth  me,  shall  come  to  me."4 
"  Other  sheep  have  I,  which  are  not  of  this  fold ;  them  also  I  must 
bring."5 

It  has  been  asked,  for  what  purpose  does  God  send  his  outward 
call  to  the  non-elect,  since  it  will  be  ineffectual,  unless  accompanied 
with  his  omnipotent  grace.  We  might  as  well  ask  for  what  purpose 
does  God  give  men  his  law,  when  they  will  not  obey  it ;  or  why 
does  he  institute  a  moral  government  over  them,  when  they  will 
not  submit  to  it.  Instead  of  demanding  God's  reasons  for  what 
he  does,  it  becomes  every  man  rather  to  inquire,  what  reason  he 
can  render  to  God,  for  violating  his  holy  law,  and  rejecting  the 
call  of  his  gospel.  We  may  be  sure  that  God  will  do  right,  and 
will  be  able  to  vindicate  his  ways  before  the  intelligent  universe ; 
and  we  should  regard  our  propensity  to  call  in  question  the  wisdom 
and  righteousness  of  his  procedure,  as  an  alarming  evidence  of  our 
want  of  submission  to  his  will. 

Objection.  If  repentance  and  faith  are  gifts  of  grace  bestowed 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  effectual  calling,  men  on  whom  this  grace  is 
not  conferred,  are  not  blameworthy  for  being  impenitent  and 
unbelieving. 

The  objection  virtually  assumes,  that  men  are  under  no  obliga- 
tion to  serve  God  further  than  they  please  ;  or  that  if  their  unwil- 
lingness to  serve  him  can  be  overcome  by  nothing  less  than  omni- 
potent grace,  it  excuses  their  disobedience.  Let  the  man  who 
makes  to  himself  this  apology  for  his  impenitence  and  unbelief, 
consider  well,  with  what  face  he  can  present  his  plea  before  the 
great  Judge.  "  I  did  not  serve  God,  because  I  was  wholly  unwill- 
ing to  serve  him ;  and  so  exceedingly  unwilling  that  nothing  less 


1  Jude  1.  2  Eph.  i.  4-13  3  Acts  xiii.  48. 

4  John  vi.  37.  6  John  x.  16. 


SOVEREIGNTY   OF   GRACE.  385 

than  omnipotent  grace  could  reconcile  me  to  the  hated  service." 
Who  will  dare  offer  this  plea  on  the  great  day  ? 

The  efficacious  grace  which  renders  the  gospel  successful,  is  the 
grand  peculiarity  of  the  gospel  dispensation. 

This  grace  was  bestowed  in  a  smaller  measure,  before  the  com- 
ing of  Christ,  and  during  his  personal  ministry ;  but  the  abundant 
outpouring  of  it  was  reserved  for  the  Pentecost  that  followed  the 
Saviour's  ascension,  and  the  times  succeeding.  The  apostles  were 
commanded  to  remain  in  Jerusalem,  until  they  were  endued  with 
power  from  on  high,  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  fell  on 
them  rendered  their  preaching  far  more  successful  than  the  minis- 
try of  Christ  himself  had  been.  Had  God  bound  himself,  by  rule, 
to  give  an  equal  measure  of  grace  to  every  human  being,  and  to 
leave  the  result  to  the  unaided  volitions  of  men,  the  extraordinary 
success  which  marked  the  first  period  of  Christianity  would  not 
have  existed.  It  must  be  ascribed  to  the  efficacious  grace  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  whom  the  Saviour  promised  to  send  after  he  should 
go  to  the  Father.  To  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  the  success  of  the 
word,  in  all  ages,  must  be  attributed :  and  the  glorious  millennial 
day  so  long  expected  by  the  church  will  not  come,  until  the  Spirit 
be  poured  out  from  on  high.1  Hence,  all  good  men  looking  for- 
ward to  this  glorious  day,  have  not  relied  for  its  coming  on  the 
superior  morality  and  religious  tendency  of  future  generationsy  but 
have  prayed  for  it  and  have  hoped  for  success,  only  through  the 
abundant  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  • 


CONCLUSION. 


Our  Saviour  frequently  rebuked  those  who  trusted  in  themselves 
that  they  were  righteous,  and  despised  others.  This  self-righteous 
temper  prevailed  in  the  sect  of  the  Pharisees ;  and  Paul,  who  was 
a  Pharisee,  was  obliged  to  renounce  it,  when  he  became  a  follower 
of  Christ.  He  then  prayed  to  be  found,  not  having  his  own 
righteousness,  but  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith.    In 

1  Isaiah  xxxii.  15. 


386  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  DIVINE   GRACE. 

his  strong  desire  and  earnest  prayer  for  the  salvation  of  his 
countrymen,  the  Jews,  he  regarded  it  as  their  great  and  fatal 
error,  that,  "  being  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  they  went 
about  to  establish  their  own  righteousness." 

Self-righteousness  is  offensive  to  God.  The  king,  in  the  parable, 
was  displeased,  because  one  of  the  guests  appeared  at  the  marriage, 
not  having  on  a  wedding  garment.  But  when  we  array  ourselves 
in  our  own  righteousness  of  filthy  rags,  and  present  ourselves  in 
the  assembly  of  the  saints,  before  the  God  of  holiness,  and  claim 
his  approbation  and  smile,  because  we  are  thus  arrayed,  we  offer 
insult  to  the  King  Supreme.  We  evince  that  we  have  no  right 
appreciation  of  his  holiness  and  justice  :  and  while  we  profess  to 
honor  him  as  God,  we  so  degrade  his  moral  perfections  as  to  make 
him  altogether  such  an  one  as  ourselves.  This  temper  of  mind 
rejects  the  mediation  and  righteousness  of  Christ,  and  thereby  sets 
at  nought  the  counsel  of  God,  in  the  great  scheme  of  salvation. 
The  Father  is  well  pleased  with  the  Son,  for  his  righteousness'  sake  ; 
and  he  cannot  be  well  pleased  with  those  who  despise  that  righteous- 
ness, and  choose  to  appear  in  their  own. 

Self-righteousness  is  ruinous  to  the  soul.  It  may  be  highly 
esteemed  among  men ;  for  the  Pharisees,  who  loved  the  praise  of 
men  more  than  the  praise  of  God,  obtained  their  reward,  in  being 
honored  for  their  great  sanctity.  But  God  searches  the  heart,  and 
in  his  view  the  outward  sanctity  avails  nothing,  while  all  within 
is  rottenness.  Yet  the  disguise  cheats  mankind,  and  cheats  him 
who  wears  it.  Blindly  and  stupidly  trusting  to  his  own  righteous- 
ness, he  is  at  ease,  and  cries  Peace,  Peace,  until  sudden  destruction 
comes  upon  him.  It  is  one  of  Satan's  most  successful  artifices,  to 
lull  men  to  sleep  in  their  own  righteousness.  Many  who  have 
been  alarmed  by  a  view  of  their  outward  sins,  have  reformed  their 
lives ;  and,  relying  on  their  morality,  have,  without  any  heart- 
religion,  without  any  true  faith  in  Christ,  fatally  dreamed  their 
life  away  in  the  vain  hope  that  all  will  be  well  at  last.  So  difficult 
is  it  to  rouse  men  from  this  delusion,  that  publicans  and  harlots 
entered  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  the  self-righteous 
Pharisees.1 

The  doctrine  of  grace  is  the  remedy  for  self-righteousness.     It 

1  Matt.  xxi.  31. 


SOVEREIGNTY   OF   GRACE.  337 

is  a  remedy  which  the  unholy  heart  greatly  dislikes,  but  if  once 
received,  it  proves  an  effectual  antidote  to  the  evil.  It  slays  all 
self-dependence,  and  lays  the  guilty  sinner  prostrate  at  the  feet  of 
mercy.  He  turns  from  his  own  righteousness,  as  from  his  sins, 
with  loathing  and  abhorrence,  and  pleads,  and  trusts,  and  hopes 
for  mercy  only  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  In  this  method  of  salvation 
there  is  no  compromise  with  the  self-righteous  spirit ;  no  reliance 
is  admitted  either  on  absolute  merit,  or  on  comparative  merit. 
Every  one  is  required  to  come  to  Christ,  as  most  guilty  and  vile, 
and  to  seek  mercy  as  the  chief  of  sinners.  He  must  bring  no  plea 
that  he  is  more  worthy,  or  less  unworthy  than  his  neighbor.  So 
long  as  he  relies  on  such  a  plea,  the  door  of  mercy  is  shut  against 
him.  He  is  taught  to  receive  salvation  as  a  free  gift,  absolutely 
free,  without  money  and  without  price. 

The  doctrine  of  grace  completely  excludes  all  human  boasting 
This  was  Paul's  view  of  it.  "  Where  is  boasting  then  ?  It  is  ex- 
cluded. By  what  law?  Works?  Nay,  but  by  the  law  of  faith."1 
Its  tendency  to  humble  men  before  God,  and  teach  them  to  glory 
in  the  Lord  alone,  is  an  excellence  which  the  inspired  apostle 
highly  prized.  This  endeared  the  doctrine  to  him,  and  should 
endear  it  to  us.  We  are  prone  to  think  of  ourselves  above  what 
we  ought  to  think :  but  we  have  the  means  at  hand  for  humbling 
our  pride,  in  the  interrogatory,  "  Who  made  thee  to  differ  from 
another?  and  what  hast  thou,  that  thou  didst  not  receive?"2 

This  doctrine  presents  the  strongest  motive  to  holiness.  It  has 
been  charged  against  it,  that  it  leads  to  licentiousness ;  and  this 
charge  is  as  old  as  the  days  of  the  apostles.  It  was  then  asked, 
"  Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ?"3  and  it  was 
falsely  asserted  that  they  taught,  "  Let  us  do  evil,  that  good  may 
come."4  If,  in  advocating  this  doctrine,  we  meet  with  similar 
charges,  we  may  rejoice  in  the  proof  thus  furnished,  that  we  stand 
on  apostolic  ground.  But  the  whole  charge  is  without  foundation. 
Men  may  be  self-righteous  Pharisees,  and,  at  the  same  time,  live  in 
urn;  but  when  self-righteousness  is  destroyed  by  the  Spirit  of  grace, 
the  man  becomes  dead,  not  only  to  the  law,  but  also  to  sin,  and, 
being  dead  to  sin,  he  can  live  no  longer  therein.     Men. may,  in  a 

1  Rom.  iii.  27..  2 1  Cor.  iv.  7. 

3  Rom.  vi.  1.  *  Rom.  iii.  8. 

22 


838  DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   DIVINE   GRACE. 

self-righteous  spirit,  abstain  from  sin,  while  they  love  it.  But  the 
doctrine  of  grace,  when  received  into  the  heart,  destroys  the  very 
love  of  sin.  A  sense  of  obligation  for  free  and  unmerited  mercy, 
occupies  the  heart,  and  constrains  to  holy  obedience. 

This  doctrine  is  honorable  to  God.  All  flesh  is  humbled  before 
him,  and  he  alone  is  exalted.  The  cross  of  Christ  is  elevated ; 
and  men  are  attracted  to  it,  and  taught  to  glory  in  it  alone.  The 
full  salvation,  as  it  comes  forth  from  the  triune  God,  in  its  com- 
pleteness, and  perfect  adaptedness  to  our  wretched  and  lost  condi- 
tion, becomes  the  object  of  our  admiring  delight,  and  calls  forth 
our  joyful  ascriptions  of  praise. 

This  doctrine  unites  the  people  of  God.  All  come  to  Christ  on 
the  same  level.  The  rich,  the  poor,  the  learned,  the  unlearned 
the  bond,  the  free ;  all  come  to  him,  without  distinction  of  rank, 
or  of  merit.  All  melt  before  him  into  penitence  and  love,  and 
their  hearts  become  one.  Under  the  full  influence  of  this  doctrine, 
no  man  can  glory  in  men,  or  treat  with  contempt  a  fellow  member 
of  Christ,  a  weak  brother  whom  Christ  has  received. 

This  doctrine  prepares  us  to  join  the  song  of  the  redeemed  in 
heaven.  Even  here  we  learn  to  sing,  "  Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us, 
but  unto  thy  name  give  the  glory,"1  and  the  same  shall  be  our 
song,  when  we  stand  before  the  throne.  "  Salvation,  and  glory, 
and  honor,  and  power,  unto  the  Lord  our  God."2  The  celestial 
harps  cannot  sound  a  self-righteous  note.  It  would  disturb  the 
heavenly  harmony.  Every  heart  feels,  and  every  song  declares, 
that  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."3 

1  Ps.  cxv.  1.  %  Rev.  xix.  1.  Jonah  ii.  9. 


BOOK   EIGHTH. 
DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 


INTRODUCTION. 

DUTY  OP    PREPARING    FOR    THE    FUTURE    WORLD.1 

The  people  of  God  have  ever  been  strangers  and  pilgrims  in  the 
earth.  Though  in  the  world,  they  are  not  of  the  world ;  and,  both 
by  their  professions  and  their  deportment,  they  declare  plainly, 
that  they  seek  another  country,  as  their  final  home.  Hence,  they 
walk  not  according  to  the  course  of  this  world,  and  are  deaf  to  its 
enticements,  and  appear  to  have  their  eyes  fixed  on  objects  that 
the  world  sees  not.  So  Moses  endured,  as  seeing  him  who  is  invis- 
ible.2 So  he  turned  his  back  on  the  pleasures  of  sin,  and  the 
treasures  of  Egypt,  and  had  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the 
reward,  to  be  obtained  in  the  future  world.  So  patriarchs,  pro- 
phets, apostles,  and  martyrs,  have  lived  for  eternity,  and  have  left 
their  testimony  to  mankind,  that  they  were  not  of  this  world,  and 
that  their  treasure,  their  hearts,  and  their  final  home  to  which  they 
journeyed,  were  in  heaven.  These  examples  call  on  us  for  imita- 
tion, and,  if  we  possess  the  wisdom  and  spirit  by  which  they  were 
actuated,  we  too  shall  make  it  the  business  of  our  lives,  to  prepare 
for  the  future  world. 

The  precepts  of  revelation  call  on  us  to  prepare  for  eternity. 

1  Amos  iv.  12.     Prepare  to  meet  thy  God. 

2  Cor.  iv.  18.    "We  look  not  at  the  things  which  are  seen  and  temporal,  but 
at  the  things  which  are  unseen  and  eternal. 

2  Heb.  xi.  27. 

(339) 


340   DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 

"Prepare  to  meet  thy  God."  "Set  your  affections  on  things 
above."1  "Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  on  earth,  but  lay 
up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  heaven ;  for  where  your  treasure  is, 
there  will  your  heart  be  also."2  "  0  that  they  were  wise,  that  they 
would  consider  their  latter  end."3  All  revelation  calls  as  with  one 
voice,  as  with  a  voice  from  heaven,  a  voice  of  warning,  expostula- 
tion, and  earnest  entreaty,  to  quit  this  perishing  world,  to  flee  from 
the  wrath  to  come,  to  lay  hold  on  eternal  life,  and  to  seek  a  con- 
tinuing city,  an  enduring  portion,  in  the  world  to  come.  With  re- 
ference to  this  future  world,  every  duty  is  enjoined,  every  promise 
made,  every  motive  presented,  and  he  whose  eye  is  not  steadfastly 
fixed  on  that  world,  has  no  reason  to  hope  that  he  will  secure  the 
inheritance  of  the  saints. 

Since  the  motives  to  holiness,  and  to  diligence  in  the  pursuit  of 
it,  are  drawn  so  abundantly  from  the  future  world,  a  knowledge  of 
that  world  is  of  great  importance  to  all  men.  Every  man  knows 
that  the  time  of  his  continuance  on  earth  is  short  and  uncertain ; 
and  while  fully  assured  that  he  must  leave  this  world,  and  that  the 
time  of  his  departure  is  just  at  hand,  to  make  no  inquiry  concern- 
ing the  world  to  which  he  is  going,  or  to  disregard  authentic  infor- 
mation concerning  it,  and  the  means  of  obtaining  happiness  there, 
is  folly  in  the  extreme.  It  is  therefore  wise  to  study  the  doctrine 
concerning  the  future  world,  and  to  study  it  as  a  subject  of 
momentous  personal  interest.  At  every  step  in  our  progress,  we 
should  ask,  how  does  this  truth  affect  my  heart  ?  Am  I  so  run- 
ning as  to  obtain?  Are  my  prospects  clear?  Ought  I  not  to 
renew  my  diligence,  and  to  seek  more  earnestly  the  guidance  and 
help  needed,  that  I  may  finish  my  course  with  joy? 

1  Col.  iii.  2,  2  Matt.  vi.  19,  20,  21.  8  Deut.  xxxii.  29. 


IMMORTALITY  OF  THE   SOUL.  341 


CHAPTER   I. 

immortality  and  separate  state  of  the  soul. 

When  the  human  body  dies,  the  soul,  which  is  immortal, 
continues  to  exist  in  a  separate  state.1 

When  the  body  dies,  the  atoms  of  which  it  consisted  are  not 
annihilated ;  but  they  separate  from  each  other,  and  continue  to 
exist  in  a  different  state,  or  in  new  combinations.  The  mind,  which 
had  previously  existed  in  connection  with  the  body,  and  had,  in 
that  connection,  exhibited  phenomena,  superior  to  matter,  and 
peculiar  to  mind,  now  disappears,  and  no  longer  manifests  itself  as 
formerly.  Though  it  has  disappeared,  analogy  suggests,  that  it 
has  not  been  annihilated.  The  same  philosophy  that  teaches  the 
indestructibility  of  the  atoms  which  compose  the  body,  gives  its 
sanction  to  the  doctrine,  that  the  soul  is  immortal.  As  the  soul  is 
not  a  compound  substance,  like  the  body,  it  is  not  susceptible  of 
decomposition,  and,  therefore,  if  it  continues  to  exist,  it  must  exist 
entire,  with  the  properties  peculiar  to  it. 

Though  philosophy  gives  its  sanction  to  the  doctrine  of  the 
soul's  immortality,  it  arrives  at  the  truth  through«so  many  perplex- 
ing difficulties,  that  it  grasps  it  finally  with  but  a  feeble  faith. 
Plants  are  bodies  of  peculiar  organization ;  and  are  endowed  with 
vitality,  either  arising  from,  or  connected  with,  their  organization. 
Brute  animals  possess  organized  bodies,  endowed  with  vitality,  and, 
in  connection  with  this  vitality,  properties  are  exhibited,  which 
resemble  those  of  the  human  mind.  In  surveying  the  ord'er  of 
beings,  from  the  most  imperfect  plant,  through  the  rising  scale,  up 
to  man,  the  most  exalted  of  animals,  philosophy  asks,  whether  man 
alone  is  immortal.  This  question,  with  which  philosophy  is  embar- 
rassed, natural  religion  comes  in  to  answer.     The  moral  faculty  of 

1  Luke  xvi.  22,  23 ;  xxiii.  43  ;  Matt.  xxii.  31,  32 ;  Luke  xx.  37,  38 ;  Rev.  xiv. 
13 ;  Heb.  xii.  23 ;  2  Cor.  v.  6,  8 ;  Phil.  i.  23;  1  Thess.  v.  10 ;  Eccl.  xii.  7. 


S42      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   THE   FUTURE  WORLD. 

man,  and  its  adaptedness  to  religion,  separate  him  widely  from  all 
other  animals,  and  justify  the  conclusion  that  he  alone,  of  all  the 
creatures  that  inhabit  the  earth,  is  destined  to  immortality. 

Philosophy  and  natural  religion  have,  after  all,  only  an  obscure 
view  of  this  important  truth.  Life  and  immortality  are  brought  to 
light  by  the  gospel.1  Divine  revelation  was  needed,  to  make  the 
truth  clear ;  and  that  revelation,  in  the  light  of  the  gospel,  has  so 
exhibited  the  truth,  that  he  who  does  not  see  it,  is  wilfully  blind. 
In  the  dawn  of  revelation  under  the  former  dispensation,  so  much 
light  was  thrown  on  this  truth,  that  believers  of  that  age  regarded 
themselves  as  pilgrims  and  strangers  in  the  earth,  and  declared 
plainly  that  they  sought  a  continuing  city,  a  place  of  everlasting 
abode,  in  another  world.  But  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  has 
poured  the  light  of  noonday  on  this  momentous  truth.  The  doctrine 
of  Jesus,  and  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  have  lifted  the  veil  that 
hid  the  invisible  world  from  our  view,  and  we  are  now  permitted 
to  look  into  it,  with  the  full  assurance  of  hope. 

When  the  soul  leaves  its  mortal  tenement,  we  are  taught  by  the 
Scriptures  that  it  is  not  companionless.  The  departing  spirit  of 
Lazarus  was  borne  by  angels  to  Abraham's  bosom.2  This  discourse 
of  our  Saviour  concerning  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  was  designed 
to  give  us  knowledge  of  the  future  world.  It  is  not  called  a  parable, 
but  if  we  regard  it  as  such,  it  should  be  remembered,  that  the 
parables  of  Jesus  were  not  like  the  fables  of  JEsop,  in  which  beasts 
and  birds  spoke  and  reasoned,  but  were  representations  drawn 
from  nature,  and  conformed  to  the  existing  properties  of  things. 
In  this  view,  though  we  are  not  obliged  to  regard  the  account  of 
the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  as  the  actual  history  of  two  individuals, 
it  is  such  a  representation  as  our  divine  teacher  was  pleased  to 
employ,  to  give  us  some  knowledge  of  the  unseen  world.  In  this 
representation,  the  angels,  who,  according  to  sacred  teaching  in 
which  is  no  parable,  are  ministering  spirits,3  sent  forth  to  minister 
to  them  who  are  heirs  of  salvation,  are  hovering  around  the 
despised  beggar,  in  his  last  suffering,  and  receiving  his  released 
spirit,  to  bear  it  to  its  final  happy  abode.  Death,  to  the  departing 
saint,  is  not  a  journey  through  a  solitary  way.  He  is  no  sooner 
Separated  from  earthly  friends,  than  he  finds  himself  in  a  company 

1  2  Tim.  i.  10.  2  Luke  xvi.  22.  8  Heb.  i.  14. 


IMMORTALITY   OF  THE   SOUL.  343 

of  celestial  spirits,  who  offer  themselves  as  his  attendants  and 
guides,  to  his  eternal  and  blissful  home. 

Paul  has  taught  us,  that  believers,  who  depart  from  the  dissolving 
tabernacle,  when  absent  from  the  body,  are  present  with  the  Lord.1 
The  promise  made  to  the  dying  thief,  is  fulfilled  to  every  expiring 
saint :  "  To-day,  thou  shall  be  with  me  in  paradise."2  More  than 
this,  he  has  promised :  "  I  will  come  again,  and  receive  you  unto 
myself,  that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also."3  As  the  'Lord 
descended  on  Mount  Sinai,  with  ten  thousands  of  his  angels,  so  he 
comes  with  these  attendant  spirits,  to  the  chamber  in  which  the 
Christian  dies.  As  he  enters  the  unseen  world,  he  can  joyfully 
exclaim  :  "  I  will  fear  no  evil,  for  thou  art  with  me."  In  company 
with  his  blessed  Lord,  and  borne  by  ministering  spirits,  the  depart- 
ing saint  is  conveyed  to  the  mansion  which  Jesus  has  prepared  for 
him  in  the  Father's  house.  Here,  he  is  brought  into  Abraham's 
bosom,  into  intimate  communion  with  the  Father  of  the  faithful, 
and  all  the  holy  patriarchs,  prophets,  and  apostles,  and  with  all  the 
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect. 

The  paradise  to  which  the  departing  spirit  goes,  is  not  a  place 
distinct  from  the  heaven  in  which  God  makes  the  most  glorious 
manifestation  of  himself,  and  in  which  the  glorified  body  of  Christ 
has  been  received  until  the  restitution  of  all  things.  The  idea,  that 
the  disembodied  spirit  has  a  separate  existence  in  sheol  or  hades, 
shut  out  from  the  glorious  assembly  near  the  throne,  has  originated 
from  a  misinterpretation  of  Scripture.  Sheol  or  bades  means  the 
unseen  world  into  which  the  spirit  enters,  when  it  leaves  the  body  ; 
but  nothing  is  determined,  by  the  use  of  the  term,  respecting  the 
place  or  condition  of  the  departed.  The  rich  man  and  Lazarus 
alike  went  to  the  unseen  world  ;  but  the  rich  man  was  "  in  torment," 
and  Lazarus  "in  Abraham's  bosom." 

When  separated  from  the  body,  the  soul  does  not  lose  the  mental 
powers  which  belong  to  it.  The  power  of  perception  remains  :  for 
the  rich  man,  though  the  eyes  of  the  body  were  closed  and  in  the 
grave,  lifted  up  other  "  eyes"  in  hell,  and  saw  Abraham  afar  off. 
The  power  of  memory  remains :  for  Abraham  said :  "  Son,  remem- 
ber that  thou,"  &c.  The  capacity  of  enjoying  and  suffering  renins  : 
for  Lazarus  was  comforted,  and  the  rich  man  tormented.      It 

1  2  Cor.  v.  8.  2  Luke  xxiii.  43.  3  John  xiv.  3. 


344      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   THE   FUTURE   WORLD. 


appears,  also,  from  the  discourse  between  Abraham  and  the  rich 
man,  that  disembodied  spirits  not  only  know  each  other,  but  are 
allowed  to  hold  converse  with  each  other.  Doubtless  their  modes 
of  perceiving,  and  of  communicating  with  each  other,  differ  widely 
from  ours ;  and  all  attempts  to  understand  what  is  entirely  beyond 
our  experience  and  conception,  must  necessarily  fail.  What  the 
Scriptures  teach  on  the  subject,  is  all  that  we  can  possibly  know : 
and  they  explicitly  declare  that  the  instruction  which  they  give  on 
the  subject,  leaves  our  knowledge  imperfect:  "We  know  in  part."1 
"We  see  through  a  glass  darkly."2 

The  Scriptures  teach  us  that  the  departed  spirit  of  the  saint  is 
free  from  suffering.  It  no  longer  groans,  being  burdened.3  Lazarus 
is  comforted.4  Together  with  freedom  from  suffering,  it  enjoy3 
freedom  from  sin.  The  spirits  of  just  men,  when  separated  from 
the  bodies  in  which  they  groaned,  are  "  made  perfect."5  They  are 
admitted  into  the  high  and  holy  place,  where  nothing  impure  can 
enter. 

The  souls  of  the  wicked,  as  well  as  of  the  righteous,  are  immortal, 
and  survive  the  body.  They,  too,  have  their  companions ;  for  the 
devil,  by  whom  they  have  been  led  captive,  and  his  angels,  with 
whom  they  are  to  suffer  everlasting  punishment,  receive  them  into 
their  society.  Their  mental  powers  and  capacities  remain,  to  see 
heaven  and  glory  at  a  distance,  to  remember  and  bitterly  regret 
their  sin  against  God,  and  the  opportunity  of  mercy  despised,  and 
to  endure  torments  without  mitigation,  or  hope  of  relief. 

Some  persons  have  supposed  that  departed  spirits  become  angels, 
and  have  cited,  in  proof  of  this  opinion,  the  words  of  the  angel  to 
John :  "  I  am  thy  fellow-servant,  and  of  thy  brethren,  the  prophets."6 
They  understand  that  the  angel  declares  himself  to  be  the  spirit 
of  one  of  the  ancient  prophets.  But  this  is  an  erroneous  interpre- 
tation of  the  passage,  which  may  be  correctly  interpreted  thus  : 
"  I  am  the  fellow-servant  of  thee,  and  the  fellow-servant  of  thy 
brethren,  the  prophets."  The  angels  are  spirits,  but  not  human 
spirits.  They  were  never  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  Christ ;  and 
therefore,  in  their  joyful  announcement  to  the  shepherds  of  Beth- 
lehem, they  said :  "  Unto  you,"  not  unto  us,  "  is  born  this  day  in 


1  1  Cor.  xiii.  9.  2 1  Cor.  xiii.  12.  s  2  Cor.  v.  4. 

4  Luke  xvi.  25.  6  Heb.  xii.  23.  6  Rev.  xix.  10. 


RESURRECTION.  345 

the  city  of  David,  a  Saviour."1  Hence  the  song  of  redemption, 
when  heard  in  heaven,  is  described  as  a  new  song,2  having  never 
been  sung  by  the  angelic  choirs.  Paul  has  clearly  distinguished 
between  the  innumerable  company  of  angels,3  and  "  the  spirits  of 
just  men  made  perfect,"  though  they  are  named  together,  as  com- 
ponent parts  of  the  great  society  into  which  men  are  introduced, 
when  they  become  believers  in  Christ. 


CHAPTER  II. 

RESURRECTION. 


The  bodies  op  all  who  die,  will  be  raised  from  the  dead, 
and  re-united  to  their  spirits,  for  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day.4 

Philosophy  and  natural  religion  may  attain  to  an  obscure  dis- 
covery of  the  soul's  immortality ;  but  we  should  have  remained 
ignorant  concerning  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  if  we  had  not 
been  instructed  by  divine  revelation.  From  God's  book  we  learn 
that  the  body  is  redeemed,5  as  well  as  the  soul ;  and  that  the  body 
shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption.  That  no 
doubt  may  remain  on  the  subject,  the  body  which  is  to  be  raised 
again,  is  described  as  the  corruptible,  the  vile  body,  the  body 
deposited  in  the  grave  :6  "  This  corruptible  shall  put  on  incor- 
ruption."7  "  Who  shall  change  this  vile  body."8  "All  that  are 
in  their  graves  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth."9  Paul 
urges  not  to  use  the  members  of  the  body  for  sinful  purposes, 
because  the  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  :10  and,  with  ref- 
erence to  the  same  body  he  says,  "  If  the  Spirit  of  him  that  raised 
up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in  you,  he  that  raised  up  Christ  from 
the  dead,  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal  bodies,  by  his  Spirit  that 

1  Luke  ii.  11.  2  Rev.  v.  9.  8  Heb.  xii.  22,  23. 

4  John  v.  28,  29;  Dan.  xii.  2;  Job  xix.  25-27;  Ps.  xvii.  15;:  Acts  iv.  2; 
xxiv.  15  ;  xxvi.  8 ;  Rom.  viii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  12-54 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  14-17 ;  Rev. 
sx.  6,  12,  13. 

5  1  Cor.  vi.  20.  6  John  v.  28.  7 1  Cor.  xv.  53. 
8  Phil.  iii.  21.                         *  John  v.  28.                       10 1  Cor.  vi.  19. 


346      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   THE   FUTURE   WORLD. 

dwelleth  in  you."1  No  doubt  can  remain  that  the  Scriptures  teach 
the  resurrection  of  the  mortal  body,  the  body  that  dies,  and  enters 
the  grave. 

The  resurrection  of  the  body  is  not  only  taught  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, but  it  is  exemplified  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ. 
The  fact  that  he  was  raised  from  the  dead,  is  testified  by  many 
witnesses,  who  saw  him,  and  conversed,  and  ate  and  drank  with 
him,  after  his  resurrection ;  and  who  confirmed  the  truth  of  their 
testimony  by  astonishing  miracles  and  sufferings.  On  this  grand 
fact  the  truth  of  Christianity  depends ;  and  therefore  the  doctrine 
of  the  resurrection  is  fundamental  and  vital  to  the  Christian 
system.  If  it  is  not  true,  Christ  is  not  risen ;  and,  if  Christ  is 
not  risen,  Paul  admits  "  our  preaching  is  vain,  and  your  faith  is 
vain,  and  we  are  found  false  witnesses  of  God."2 

As  the  resurrection  is  a  desirable  privilege  to  the  just,  only,  it 
is  treated  of,  in  some  passages  of  Scripture,  as  if  it  appertained 
to  them  exclusively  :  but  other  passages  teach  that  it  will  be  univer- 
sal :  "  There  shall  be  a  resurrection  of  the  just  and  of  the  unjust."3 
"  All  that  are  in  their  graves  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  come  forth, 
they  that  have  done  good  to  the  resurrection  of  life,  and  they  that 
have  done  evil  to  the  resurrection  of  damnation."4  The  only  ex- 
ception to  its  universality  will  be  in  the  case  of  those  who  shall  be 
found  alive  at  Christ's  second  coming.  Concerning  these,  Paul 
has  taught  us  that  they  will  undergo  a  change5  equivalent  to  that 
which  they  pass  through  who  shall  have  died  and  risen  again. 
Their  case,  therefore,  is  virtually  no  exception  to  the  general  rule  : 
"It  is  appointed  unto  all  men  once  to  die."6  "As  in  Adam  all 
die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive."7 

The  power  by  which  the  dead  are  raised,  is  God's.  To  the-Sad- 
ducees,  who  erred  respecting  the  resurrection,  the  Saviour  said, 
"Ye  do  err,  not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  nor  the  power  of  God."8 
It  is  a  work  which  nothing  short  of  omnipotence  could  accomplish. 
The  Son  of  God  is  represented  as  the  immediate  agent,  "Who 
shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his 
own  glorious  body,  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able 

1  Horn.  viii.  11.  2 1  Cor.  xv.  14,  15.  8  Acts  xxiv  15. 

4  John  v.  28,  29.  6 1  Cor.  xv.  52.  «  Heb.  ix.  27. 

7 1  Cor.  xv.  22.  8  Matt.  xxii.  29. 


RESURRECTION.  34" 

even  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself."1  Even  when  he  was  on 
earth,  weak  and  despised,  he  claimed  this  power :  "  The  hour  is 
coming,  when  all  that  are  in  their  graves  shall  hear  his  voice  [the 
voice  of  the  Son  of  God],  and  shall  come  forth."2  At  his  com- 
mand, who  said,  "Lazarus,  come  forth,"  the  dead  shall  quit  their 
graves,  and  assemble  at  his  tribunal :  and  the  power  which  he  will 
manifest,  in  bringing  them  before  him,  will  demonstrate  his  right 
to  judge  them. 

The  resurrection,  though  it  will  require  the  same  power  that 
created  the  world  out  of  nothing,  will  not  be  another  creation. 
The  glorified  body  will  not  be  created  out  of  nothing,  but  will  be 
formed  out  of  the  vile  and  mortal  body  wh?ch  the  spirit  once  in- 
habited :  "  Who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fash- 
ioned," &c.3  The  same  body  of  Jesus  which  was  nailed  to  the 
cross  and  laid  in  the  tomb,  was  raised  from  the  dead,  and  wa»s  seen 
by  the  disciples  ascending  from  Mount  Olivet.  It  had  been  trans- 
figured on  Mount  Tabor,  and  rendered  glorious  in  the  view  of  the  dis- 
ciples who  were  present ;  and  now  it  is  crowned  with  glory  and 
honor,  in  the  presence  of  all  the  celestial  hosts.  It  is  now  the 
"glorious  body,"  into  the  likeness  of  which  he  will  fashion  our 
vile  bodies,  when  he  fits  them  to  inhabit  the  mansions  that  he  has 
prepared. 

How  the  "  vile  body"  will  be  changed,  we  know  not.  We  are 
tinder  no  obligation  to  suppose  that  all  the  gross  matter  of  which 
it  consists,  will  be  included  in  the  glorious  body  into  which  it  will 
be  fashioned.  The  corruptible  body  is  perpetually  losing,  in  the 
daily  waste  which  it  undergoes,  the  atoms  of  matter  which  compose 
it,  and  having  their  place  supplied  by  other  atoms,  received  from 
the  nourishment  taken  in  to  supply  the  waste.  The  nails  are  pared 
away,  and  the  hair  shorn  off;  and  other  growth  succeeds,  to  take 
the  place  of  that  which  is  lost.  The  bones,  muscles,  and  all  other 
parts  of  the  body,  undergo  a  change  as  real,  though  not  so  appar- 
ent, and  as  unceasing.  The  fluid  parts  of  the  body  change  more 
rapidly ;  and  the  solid  parts  are  absorbed  and  renewed  by  the  de- 
posit of  other  matter,  in  the  processes  of  nutrition  and  assimila- 
tion. It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  all  the  matter  thus  lost, 
during   a  life  of  fourscore  years,  will  be  gathered  again.     The 


1  Phil.  iii.  21.  2  John  v.  28.  3  Phil.  iii.  21. 


348   DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 

identity  of  the  body  during  life  did  not  imply  an  identity  of  the 
atoms  composing  it :  and  much  less  is  an  identity  of  atoms  neces- 
sary to  be  preserved,  when  it  is  changed  into  the  glorious.  Paul's 
teaching  on  this  point  is  explicit :  "  Thou  sowest  not  that  body 
that  shall  be,  but  bare  grain ;  but  God  giveth  it  a  body  as  it  hath 
pleased  him."  What  is  deposited  in  the  ground,  is  bare  grain; 
but  the  body  which  God  giveth  consists  of  the  blade,  the  ear,  and 
the  full  corn  in  the  ear.  The  body  deposited,  dies ;  that  is,  it  is 
decomposed,  and  ceases  to  be  the  bare  grain  deposited.  Part  of 
its  matter  is  lost,  and  part  enters  into  the  composition  of  the  new 
plant,  and  God  adds  other  matter,  constructing  such  a  body  as 
pleases  him.  Such  is  the  illustration  which  this  inspired  writer 
gives  of  the  process  by  which  the  dead  will  be  raised ;  and  we  are 
certainly  freed  by  it  from  the  obligation  of  regarding  a  philo- 
sophical identity  of  atoms,  as  necessary  to  be  preserved  in  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead. 

Yet,  let  us  observe  the  relation  which  the  glorious  body  has  to 
the  vile  body.  It  is  not  another  body,  but  the  vile  body  changed. 
In  Paul's  illustration,  he  says :  "  God  giveth  it  a  body  as  it  hath 
pleased  him,  and  to  every  seed  his  own  body."1  So,  every  man 
who  rises  from  the  grave,  will  come  forth  with  his  own  body.  How- 
ever changed,  he  will  recognise  himself,  and  will  be  recognised  by 
others,  as  the  same.  When  wheat,  rye,  barley,  and  other  grains, 
are  sown  in  the  ground,  a  grain  of  each  may  be  deposited  in  the 
same  bed;  and  when  they  spring  up  together,  though  all  have 
bodies  differing  from  the  bare  grain  that  was  sown,  they  differ  also 
from  each  other.  Every  seed  has  "his  own  body;"  and  it  may 
be  determined  with  certainty  which  is  the  wheat,  which  the  rye, 
which  the  barley,  &c.  The  illustration  is  doubtless  incomplete : 
but  the  wisdom  of  inspiration  has  given  it,  to  assist  our  conceptions 
of  this  mysterious  subject ;  and  our  faith,  without  presuming  to  be 
wise  above  that  which  is  written,  should  thankfully  receive  the 
instruction  graciously  imparted. 

What  will  be  the  form  and  the  properties  of  the  glorified  body, 
it  is  impossible  for  us  to  know.  Even  the  beloved  disciple  who  lay 
on  the  bosom  of  Jesus  did  not  claim  to  know  this  : — "  Beloved,  it 
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be  :  but  we  know  that  when  he 

1 1  Cor.  xv.  37,  38.  2 1  Cor.  xv.  38. 


RESURRECTION.  349 

shall  appear,  we  shall  be  li.ke  him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."1 
It  ought  to  satisfy  u»s  that  we  shall  be  fashioned  like  the  glorious 
body  of  Christ.  But  though  this  general  information  ought  to  be 
sufficient,  the  Scriptures,  while  they  do  not  attempt  to  describe  a 
glorified  body,  have  given  us  some  information  respecting  it. 

It  is  incorruptible.  Our  bodies  here  undergo  perpetual  decay 
and  perpetual  renewal ;  and  they  finally  suffer  decomposition, .and 
return  to  dust.  The  glorified  body  will  suffer  no  decomposition,  no 
waste,  and,  therefore,  will  not  need  renewal.  The  process  of 
nutrition  by  food,  and  the  organs  of  digestion,  will  not  be  needed. 
"  Meats  are  for  the  belly,  and  the  belly  for  meats ;  but  God  shall 
destroy  both  it  and  them."2  The  glorified  body  will  be  adapted  to 
all  the  purposes  for  which  it  will  be  used ;  but,  as  our  mode  of  life 
will  be  entirely  different,  corresponding  changes  will  be  made  in 
the  members  and  organs,  to  adapt  the  body  to  the  mode  of  life 
into  which  it  enters. 

It  will  be  spiritual.  Paul  affirms  this.  He  says,  "  It  is  sown  a 
natural  body,  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body.  There  is  a  natural  body, 
and  there  is  a  spiritual  body."3  What  a  spiritual  body  is,  we  are 
unable  to  say.  We  shall  not  be  pure  or  uncompounded  spirit,  as 
God  is ;  for  we  shall  have  a  "  body,"  which  God  cannot  be  said  to 
have.  But  that  body  will  be  "  spiritual,"  as  distinguished  from  the 
natural  or  grossly  material  bodies  that  we  now  possess.  It  will 
be  freed  from  the  inactivity,  the  ponderableness  that  now  binds  us 
to  the  earth ;  and  will  be  fitted  for  swift  motion,  similar  to  that  of 
which  angelic  spirits  are  capable. 

It  is  immortal.  "Now  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality."4 
As  there  will  be  no  need  to  supply  a  daily  waste  in  each  individual 
body,  or  to  preserve  it  from  corruption,  so  there  will  be  no  need  to 
supply  a  waste  of  the  race  by  death.  "  They  neither  marry,  nor 
are  given  in  marriage ;  neither  can  they  die  any  more ;  for  they 
are  equal  unto  the  angels."5  In  a  state  of  being  so  different  from 
the  present,  we  shall  need  bodies  of  far  different  construction  and 
properties ;  and,  from  the  likeness  which  we  are  to  bear  to  the 
angels,  we  may  infer  that  our  spiritual  bodies  will  resemble,  to 
some  extent,  the  spirituality  of  these  holy  and  immortal  beings. 

1 1  John  iii.  2.  1  Cor.  vi.  13.  3  1  Cor.  xv.  44. 

*  1  Cor.  xv.  53.  5  Luke  xx.  35,  36. 


350      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   THE   FUTURE  WORLD. 

The  true  and  perfect  pattern  to  which  we  shall  be  conformed,  is  the 
glorious  body  of  the  Redeemer,  who,  though  once  dead,  now  liveth 
for  ever,  and  who  will  give  us  to  share  his  own  immortality.  "  Be- 
cause I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."1 

With  what  body  the  wicked  will  come,  and  to  what  likeness  they 
will  be  conformed,  the  Scriptures  do  not  tell  us.  As  they  will  be 
raised,  to  stand  in  the  judgment,  and  receive  the  sentence  under 
which  they  will  suffer  everlasting  punishment,  in  the  fire  prepared 
for  the  devil  and  his  angels ;  we  may  conclude  that,  both  in  body 
and  spirit,  they  will  be  fitted  and  capacitated  for  the  everlasting 
endurance  of  the  torments  inflicted.  We  know  that  their  bodies 
will  not  be  "  glorious,"  for  their  resurrection  will  be  "  unto  shame 
and  everlasting  contempt."2  Conjecture,  on  points  which  revela- 
tion has  not  enlightened,  must  be  unprofitable. 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE    LAST    JUDGMENT 


In  the  last  day  Jesus  Christ  will  come  to  judge  the  world  ; 
and,  having  assembled  all  men  before  him,  will  pass  sen- 
tence on  them  according  to  their  works.3 

Natural  religion  leads  us  to  expect  future  retribution ;  and  of 
course  some  sort  of  judgment,  by  which  that  retribution  will  be 
awarded.  Even  the  heathen  mythology  had  its  judges,  iEacus, 
Minos,  and  Rhadamanthus,  by  whom  the  dead  had  their  place  and 
condition  assigned  to  them  in  the  other  world.  But  the  doctrine 
of  a  public,  general  judgment,  is  peculiar  to  revelation.  This 
teaches,  that,  besides  the  judgment  passed  on  each  individual  when 
he  leaves  this  world,  there  will  be  a  final  judgment,  in  which  all  men 
will  stand  at  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ,  and  receive  their  final 
sentence  from  his  lips.  "  God  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  which  he 
will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  by  that  man  whom  he  hath 

1  John  xiv.  19.  2  Dan.  xii.  2. 

8  Rev.  xx.  11,  12;  Acts  xvii.  30,  31;  Eccl.  xi.  9 ;  xii.  14;  Matt.  xii.  36; 
1  Pet,  iv.  4,  5 ;  2  Cor.  v.  10. 


THE   LAST   JUDGMENT.  351 

ordained."1  "It  is  appointed  unto  all  men  once  to  die,  and  after 
this  the  judgment."2 

As  the  condition  of  each  soul  will  be  determined,  when  it  leaves 
the  body,  another  judgment  may,  to  our  finite  minds,  appear  to  be 
unnecessary;  but  the  wisdom  of  God  has  determined  otherwise. 
All  the  reasons  for  this  divine  appointment,  we  cannot  presume  to 
understand ;  but  we  are  able  to  conceive  of  some  important  advan- 
tages which  may  arise  from  a  general  judgment. 

The  general  judgment  will  publicly  and  impressively  vindicate 
the  ways  of  God,  in  the  view  of  all  intelligent  beings.  The  mys- 
tery of  the  divine  administration  will  then  be  fully  unfolded ;  the 
wisdom  and  righteousness  of  all  God's  dispensations  will  then  be 
made  apparent ;  the  justice  of  the  sentences  then  pronounced  will  be 
rendered  perfectly  clear ;  and,  on  every  creature,  as  he  leaves  the 
tribunal,  to  go  to  the  place  assigned  him,  an  impression  will  have 
been  made,  which  will  last  throughout  eternity.  It  is  for  the  glory 
of  God,  that  his  perfections  should  thus  be  displayed,  in  the  view 
of  his  intelligent  creatures ;  and  the  remembrance  of  this  great 
day  will  constitute  an  important  element  in  the  happiness  or  misery 
to  which  each  individual  will  be  adjudged. 

The  general  judgment  will  be  honorable  to  Jesus  Christ.  It  is 
called  "  the  day  of  Christr"3  When  Jesus  stood,  as  an  arraigned 
malefactor,  before  the  Jewish  council,  he  claimed,  in  their  presence, 
to  be  the  Christ,  and  he  referred  to  this  day  as  the  time  when  his 
claim  would  be  acknowledged.  This  will  be  the  day  of  Christ,  the 
d-ay  when  every  knee  shall  bow  to  him,4  and  every  tongue  confess 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.5 

The  general  judgment  will  extend  to  the  bodies  of  men.  The 
previous  judgment,  at  the  death  of  each  individual,  affects  the  spirit 
only.  But  men  are  to  be  judged  according  to  the  deeds  done  in 
the  body,  and  it  is  fit  that  they  should  be  judged  in  the  body,  and 
especially  inasmuch  as  the  body  is  to  participate  in  the  final  retri- 
bution. 

The  general  judgment  will  suitably  mark  the  final  victory  over 
all  God's  enemies.  Among  men,  days  of  triumph  have  been  ob- 
served, when  wars  have  terminated,  and  victory  has  been  attained. 


1  Acts  xvii.  31.  2  Heb.  ix.  27.  3  Phil.  i.  6 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  2. 

*  Rom.  xiv.  11.  5  Phil.  ii.  11. 


352      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE   WORLD. 

In  the  great  day  of  the  Lord,  all  the  enemies  of  God  will  have 
been  subdued ;  the  kingdom,  which,  as  rebels  against  him,  they 
have  seized  and  claimed,  will  have  been  fully  restored ;  and  uni- 
versal peace  and  order  will  have  been  established  in  Jehovah's 
empire.  At  this  day  of  triumph,  it  is  suitable  that  all  creatures 
should  be  present,  to  do  honor  to  the  victory,  and  to  him  by  whom 
it  has  been  achieved.  • 

The  judge  on  the  last  day  will  be  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  who 
was  condemned  at  the  bar  of  Caiaphas  and  of  Pilate.  How  changed 
the  scene !  They  who  then  condemned  him  to  death,  will  now 
tremble  before  him,  and  be  condemned  by  him  to  death  eternal. 
"  The  Father  has  committed  all  judgment  to  the  Son."1  The  trans- 
actions of  the  great  day  will  form  a  part  of  his  mediatorial  admin- 
istration. Having  undertaken  to  restore  order  to  God's  empire, 
in  which  the  rebellion  of  the  human  race  had  broken  out,  and 
having  assumed  the  office  of  Mediator  for  this  purpose,  it  will  be 
proper,  in  this  office,  to  complete  the  work ;  and  therefore  Christ 
the  Mediator  will  be  the  Judge  in  the  last  great  day:  "We  must 
all  stand  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ."2 

At  the  day  of  judgment  Christ  will  make  his  second  coming. 
This  coming  is  frequently  spoken  of  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  He 
instituted  the  Lord's  supper,  to  be  observed  until  he  come.3  Be- 
lievers are  described  as  looking  for  his  appearing.4  As  men  look 
for  a  beloved  friend  who  has  gone  away,  leaving  a  promise  of 
return ;  so  believers  in  Christ  look  for  the  return  of  their  Lord, 
who  has  promised,  "I  come  quickly  ;"5  and  they  pray,  "Even  so, 
come,  Lord  Jesus."6  He  came,  formerly,  with  sin ;  not  sin  of  his 
own,  but  the  sin  of  his  people,  which  the  Lord  laid  on  him.  Hav- 
ing fully  expiated  this  by  his  death,  he  will  come,  the  second  time, 
without  sin  unto  salvation."7  On  this  great  and  terrible  day, 
Christ  will  come  to  the  salvation  of  his  people,  and  will,  at  the 
same  time,  take  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  obey 
not  the  gospel.  In  a  subordinate  sense,  he  is  said  to  come,  when 
he  displays  his  power,  either  in  the  deliverance  of  his  people,  or 
in  the  destruction  of  his  enemies.     But  all  these  times  are  over- 

1  John  v.  22.  2  Rom.  xiv.  10.  3  1  Cor.  xi.  26. 

*  Heb.  ix.  28.  5  Rev.  xxii.  12.  6  Rev.  xxii.  20. 

'  Heb.  ix.  28. 


THE   LAST   JUDGMENT.  606 

looked  in  the  computation,  when,  with  reference  to  his  appearing 
for  judgment,  it  is  said,  "  he  will  come  the  second  time."  This  will 
be  the  great  day  of  deliverance  and  of  wrath.  There  are  other 
comings  mentioned  in  Scripture,  not  included  in  this  computation, 
which  are  only  preparatory  and  subordinate. 

An  impression  has  often  prevailed  among  the  followers  of  Christ, 
that  his  second  coming  was  near  at  hand.  This  impression,  when 
soberly  entertained,  has  a  salutary  influence.  Compared  with  the 
eternity  which  is  to  follow,  the  interval  until  the  day  of  judgment 
is  exceedingly  short ;  and  but  a  very  little  part  of  this  short  inter- 
val is  included  in  the  life  of  any  one  individual ;  whose  prepara- 
tion for  judgment  must  be  completed  before  he  is  called  away  by 
death.  It  is  therefore  true  concerning  every  one,  that  the  time  is 
short,1  and  that  the  Judge  standeth  before  the  door.2  But  the 
expectation  that  Christ's  coming  will  be  so  hastened  as  not  to  leave 
time  for  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  or  for  the  measure  of  duty  and 
suffering  to  which  he  has  appointed  us,  is  of  injurious  tendency. 
An  erroneous  impression  on  this  subject  had  so  disquieted  the 
minds  of  the  Thessalonian  Christians,  that  Paul  thought  it  neces- 
sary, in  his  second  epistle  to  them,  to  free  them  from  its  influence : 
"  Be  not  shaken  in  mind,  or  troubled,  as  that  the  day  of  Christ 
is  at  hand."3  It  may  be  that  they  had  mistaken  his  design,  when, 
in  his  first  epistle  to  them,  he  said,  "  We  which  are  alive  and  remain 
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  shall  not  prevent  them  which  are 
asleep."4  They  may  have  understood  him  to  intimate,  by  his  use 
of  the  word  "we,"  that  he  expected  to  be  alive  and  remain  when 
Christ  should  appear.  He  may  have  used  this  word  as  including 
himself,  in  interest,  in  the  number  of  those  who  will  be  alive  at 
the  second  coming;  or  he  may  intimate  that  believers  of  each 
successive  generation  should  regard  themselves  as  placed,  for  the 
time,  on  the  watch-tower,  to  look  for  the  coming  of  Christ,  and 
that,  compared  with  those  who  had  fallen  asleep,  all  who  at  any 
time  are  alive  and  remain,  should  regard  themselves,  though  look- 
ing for  his  coming,  as  having  no  advantage  to  prevent  [go  before, 
or  get  the  start  of]  those  that  are  asleep.  Whatever  may  have 
been  Paul's  design  in  using  this  mode  of  speech,  it .  is  dear,  from 

1 1  Cor.  vii.  29.  2  James  v.  9. 

8  2  Thess.  ii.  2.  *  1  Thess.  iv.  15. 

23 


354      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   THE   FUTURE   WORLD. 

his  second  epistle,  that  he  did  not  mean  to  make  the  impression 
that  the  coming  of  Christ  was  so  near  at  hand.  He  stated  ex- 
plicitly, that  the  day  will  not  come,  "  unless  there  he  a  falling  away 
first,  and  the  man  of  sin  be  revealed."1  It  was  necessary  that 
time  should  be  allowed  for  the  Romish  apostasy.  So  now,  there 
are'  various  prophecies  remaining  to  be  fulfilled  ;  as,  the  calling  of 
the  Gentiles,  the  conversion  of  the  Jews,  and  the  millennial  state 
of  the  Church.  All  these  must  be  accomplished  before  the  coming 
of  Christ ;  and,  while  these  prophecies  remain  unfulfilled,  believers 
should  not  permit  themselves  to  be  troubled  in  mind  by  those  who 
would  persuade  them  that  the  end  of  the  world  is  just  at  hand. 

Some  suppose  that  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  the  resurrection 
of  the  righteous  dead,  will  precede  the  millennium,  and  that  the 
resurrection  of  the  wicked  will  be  at  the  end  of  the  thousand 
years.  This  opinion,  according  to  which  the  reign  of  Christ  will  be 
personal,  is  founded  chiefly  on  Rev.  xx.  4,  5:  "And  I  saw  the  souls 
of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  and  for  the 
word  of  God,  and  which  had  not  worshipped  the  beast,  neither  his 
image,  neither  had  received  his  mark  upon  their  foreheads,  or  in 
their  hands  ;  and  they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand 
years.  But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again  until  the  thousand 
years  were  finished.  This  is  the  first  resurrection."  In  carefully 
examining  this  passage,  we  may  observe  that  the  first  resurrection 
here  mentioned  does  not  include  all  the  righteous  dead,  but  only 
the  martyrs  ;  and  that  it  is  not  a  resurrection  of  their  bodies,  but 
of  their  souls :  "  I  saw  the  souls  of  them,  and  they  lived,"  &c. 
Making  due  allowance  for  the  boldly  figurative  language  employed 
in  this  prophetical  book,  we  may  understand  this  passage  to  mean, 
that  generations  of  holy  men  will  arise,  at  the  time  here  referred 
to,  who  will  so  much  resemble  the  ancient  martyrs  in  zeal  and  de- 
votion to  the  service  of  God,  that  it  will  be  as  if  the  souls  of  these 
martyrs  had  returned  in  new  bodies.  So  Elijah  reappeared,  in 
the  person  of  John  the  Baptist ;  not  literally,  but  in  the  figurative 
sense  in  which  we  may  interpret  the  passage  before  us ;  which,  so 
understood,  teaches  a  spiritual,  and  not  a  personal  reign  of  Christ. 
It  is  true  that  Paul  says,  "the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first:"3 
but  the  meaning  of  this  is,  that  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  before 

1  2  Thess.  ii.  3.  2  1  Thess.  iv.  16. 


THE   LAST   JUDGMENT.  355 

the  living  saints  shall  be  changed.  The  interval,  however,  he 
represents  to  be  exceedingly  short :  "  In  a  moment,  in  the  twink- 
ling of  an  eye,  the,  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be 
raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed."1  Whether  the 
wicked  dead  will  be  raised  at  the  precise  moment  at  which  the 
righteous  dead  will  be  raised,  we  are  not  expressly  informed ;  but, 
from  the  representations  of  the  scene  which  are  given  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, we  may  infer  that  one  voice,  one  trumpet  will  call  forth  all 
the  dead,  and  that  one  hour2  will  suffice  for  the  resurrection  of  all. 
In  one  and  the  same  day,3  the  great  day  of  the  Lord,  he  will  be 
revealed  in  naming  fire,  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not 
God ;  and  will  come,  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  admired  of 
all  them  that  believe.4 

The  place  of  the  final  judgment  will  be  on  earth.  Here  Jesus  was 
humbled,  condemned,  and  crucified ;  and  here  he  will  be  glorified,  and 
sit  in  judgment  over  all  the  world.  When  he  ascended  from  the  earth, 
it  was  foretold  that  he  would  return  as  he  had  ascended.5  A  cloud 
received  him  out  of  the  sight  of  his  disciples,6  who  were  gazing 
after  him  as  he  went  up ;  and,  on  his  return,  he  will  be  seen  coming 
in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and  great  glory.7  A  multitude 
of  angels  and  the  spirits  of  the  just  will  attend  him.  The  bodies 
of  his  saints,  called  forth  from  their  graves,  will  rise  to  meet  him 
in  the  air,  and  reunited  with  their  spirits,  will  appear  before  him. 
The  living  saints  will  be  changed  and  form  a  part  of  the  company 
at  his  right  hand.  The  wicked  dead  will  be  raised,  and  will  stand 
on  the  left  hand  of  the  Judge.  On  what  part  of  the  earth  the 
Saviour  may  choose  to  fix  the  throne  of  judgment,  we  are  not 
informed,  nor  is  it  a  matter  of  any  moment.  Why  Sinai  was 
selected  for  the  giving  of  the  law,  Calvary  for  the  crucifixion,  and 
Olivet  for  the  ascension,  we  know  not.  It  is  enough  for  us  to 
know,  that  he  will  come,  and  that  we  must  appear  before  him. 

In  the  description  of  the  great  day,  contained  in  the  book  of 
Revelation,  it  is  said,  that  the  Judge  will  be  seated  on  a  great  white 
throne,  and  that  the  books  will  be  opened ;  and  that  another  book 
will  be  opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life :  and  the  dead  will  be 

1  1  Cor.  xv.  52.  2  John  v.  25.  3  Acts  xvii.  31. 

4  2  Thess.  i.  8-10.       •  5  Acts  i.  11.  6  Acts  i.  9. 

7  Matt,  xxiv  30;  Rev.  i.  7. 


856      DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 

judged  out  of  the  things  which  are  written  according  to  their 
works.1  The  representation  is  douhtless  figurative,  hut  we  may 
learn  from  it  that  the  decisions  will  he  made  in  perfect  justice ; 
and  that  the  acquittal  of  the  righteous  will  be  an  act  of  grace. 
Their  names  will  be  found  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life.  They  will 
be  accepted  in  that  day,  because  they  belong  to  Christ,  and  in 
proof  of  their  attachment  to  him,  their  work  and  labor  of  love  in 
his  cause,  and  towards  his  people,  will  be  brought  into  remembrance.2 
In  the  transactions  of  this  great  day,  notwithstanding  the  great- 
ness of  the  multitude  that  will  be  assembled,  no  individual  will  feel 
himself  lost  in  the  immense  throng,  or  concealed  from  the  view  of 
the  omniscient  Judge.  Every  one  will  be  brought  to  judgment,  as 
if  he  were  the  only  creature  present,  and  every  one  will  give 
account  of  himself,  and  receive  sentence  for  himself  with  as  much 
discrimination  and  perfection  of  justice,  as  if  the  judge  were 
wholly  absorbed  in  the  consideration  of  his  single  case.  So 
rapidly  do  our  minds  move,  even  now  while  bound  to  our  sluggish 
bodies,  that  we  can  review  our  past  history  in  a  few  moments,  and 
judge  and  condemn  ourselves  before  God.  With  a  rapidity  beyond 
our  present  conception,  the  deeds,  words,  and  thoughts  of  our  whole 
lives  will  pass  in  review  before  us  on  that  day,  and  we  shall  realize 
that  the  eye  of  God  is  fixed  on  each  particular  with  as  thorough 
knowledge  of  it,  as  if  that  deed,  word,  or  thought,  were  the  only 
one  on  which  he  sat  in  judgment.  How  can  we  bear  a  scrutiny  so 
severe,  a  knowledge  so  perfect  ?  How  shall  we  abide  a  judgment 
so  strict  ?     Who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ? 

1  Rev.  xx.  11,  12.  2  Matt.  xxv.  34-40. 


HEAVEN.  357 


CHAPTER  IV. 

HEAVEN. 

The  righteous  will  be  taken  to  heaven,  and  made  per- 
fectly  HAPPY  FOR   EVER   IN    THE    PRESENCE   AND   ENJOYMENT   OF 

God.1 

Godliness  has  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that 
which  is  to  come.  It  often  happens  that  the  believer  in  Christ  has 
an  afflicted  lot  in  the  present  world ;  but,  in  the  midst  of  tribula- 
tions, he  is  enabled,  through  grace,  to  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of 
God.  So  much  does  the  happiness  of  his  present  life  depend  on 
the  hope  of  a  better  portion  hereafter,  that  he  is  said  to  be  "  saved 
by  hope."2  This  hope  has  for  its  object  an  inheritance  that  is 
incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away.3  He  is  taught 
by  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  to  look  for  this  portion,  not  in  this  world 
of  sin,  not  in  the  pursuits  and  enjoyments  of  carnal  men,  but  in 
another  and  better  world,  to  which  his  faith  and  hope  are  ever 
directed. 

The  believer's  portion  is  laid  up  in  heaven.4  That  heaven  is  a 
place,  and  not  a  mere  state  of  being,  we  are  taught  by  the  words 
of  Christ,  who  said,  "I  go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you;"5  but  in 
what  part  of  universal  space  this  happy  place  is  situated,  the  Bible 
does  not  inform  us.  It  is  sometimes  called  the  third  heavens,6  to 
distinguish  it  from  the  atmospheric  heaven,  in  which  the  fowls  of 
heaven  have  their  habitation,  and  from  the  starry  heavens,  which 
visibly  declare  the  glory  of  God.  The  glory  of  the  third  heavens 
is  invisible  to  mortal  eyes ;  and  the  place  may  be  far  beyond  the 
bounds  within  which  suns  and  stars  shine,  and  planets  revolve. 
Some  have  imagined  that  it  is  a  vast  central  globe,  around  which 

1  Matt.  xxv.  34 ;  Luke  xii.  32 ;  John  xiv.  2 ;  Col.  iii.  4 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  17  ; 
Luke  xxii.  29,  30 ;  Acts  xiv.  22 ;  Rev.  iii.  21 ;  vii.  15-17  ;  xiv.  4 ;  1  Pet.  i.  3,  4  ; 
Matt.  xxv.  21 ;  John  xvii.  24 ;  Rev.  xxi.  4 ;  xxii.  3. 

2  Rom.  viii.  24.  3  1  Pet.  i.  3,  4.  *  Col.  i.  5. 
5  John  xiv.  2.                               6  2  Cor.  xii.  2. 


858   DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 

the  stars  of  heaven  are  making  their  slow  revolutions,  carrying 
with  them  their  systems  of  attendant  planets.  There  is  something 
pleasing  in  this  conjecture,  which  connects  astronomical  science 
with  the  hopes  of  the  Christian :  but  it  must  be  remembered  that 
it  is  mere  conjecture.  No  telescope  can  bring  this  glorious  place 
within  the  reach  of  human  view.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear 
heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things 
which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him."1  Yet,  though 
science  cannot  give  us  a  knowledge  of  this  happy  world,  divine 
revelation  has  made  us  to  some  extent  acquainted  with  it.  Paul 
adds  to  the  words  just  cited,  "  but  God  hath  revealed  them  to  us 
by  his  Spirit."  By  faith,  which  is  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen, 
we  look  at  things  unseen  and  eternal.  The  light  of  revelation 
brings  the  glories  of  the  distant  land  before  the  eyes  of  our  faith ; 
and  in  the  spiritual  enjoyment  which  we  are  made  to  experience, 
even  in  this  land  of  exile,  we  have  an  earnest2  and  foretaste  of 
heavenly  joy.  These  drops  of  heaven  sent  down  to  worms  below, 
unite  with  the  descriptions  found  in  God's  holy  word,  to  give  such 
ideas  of  heaven  as  it  is  possible  for  us  to  form ;  but  at  best,  we 
know  only  in  part.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear,  what  we  shall  be," 
or  where  we  shall  be,  or  in  what  our  bliss  will  consist.  But 
though  in  looking  forward  to  the  inheritance  in  prospect,  we  are 
compelled  to  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  we  may  yet  discover  that 
the  future  happiness  of  the  saints  will  include  the  following 
elements : 

1.  An  intimate  knowledge  of  God.  Now  we  know  in  part,  but 
then  we  shall  know  even  as  we  are  known.3  Heaven  is  "  the  high 
and  holy  place,  where  God  resides,  the  court  of  the  great  King." 
He  says,  "heaven  is  my  throne."4  Though  present  everywhere 
throughout  his  dominions,  he  manifests  himself  in  a  peculiar  man- 
ner in  this  bright  abode,  of  which  the  glory  of  God  and  the  Lamb 
are  the  light.  Here  the  blessed  are  permitted  to  see  God.  To 
see  God,  as  human  eyes  now  see  material  objects,  by  means  of 
reflected  light,  will  be  as  impossible  then  as  it  is  now,  for  God  is 
a  spirit :  but  we  shall  have  such  a  discovery  of  God,  as  is  most 
appropriately  expressed  by  the  word  see ;  otherwise,  the  promise 


1 1  Cor.  ii.  9.  2  Eph.  i.  14. 

3  1  Cor.  xiii.  12.  4  Isaiah  lxvi.  1. 


HE  A  VEX.  359 

of  Christ  would  not  be  fulfilled.     "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart  * 
for  they  shall  see  God."1    The  knowledge  of  God  will  be  communi- 
cated through  the  Mediator.     "No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any 
time  ;  the  only  begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father, 
he  hath  declared  him."2   Though  God  dwells  in  light  which  no  man 
can  approach  unto,  and  is  a  Being  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  or  can 
see  ;3  yet  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face 
of  Jesus   Christ,  the  same  that  shines  into  the  hearts  of  God's 
people  on  earth,  fills  the  world  of  bliss.     There  no  sun  or  moon 
shines ;  but  "  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the 
light  thereof."     The  glory  of  God  is  the  illumination,  and  the  Lamb 
is  the  luminary  from  which  it  emanates.     Jesus  will  still  be  our 
teacher  there,  and  through  him  we  shall  acquire  our  knowledge  of 
the  perfections  and  counsels  of  God. 

Our  knowledge  of  God  will  be  for  ever  increasing.  On  earth? 
believers  "  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,"  and  the  advantages  for  attaining  to  higher  knowledge, 
instead  of  ceasing  at  death,  will  be  far  greater  in  heaven.  The 
perfections  and  counsels  of  the  infinite  God,  will  be  an  exhaustless 
source  of  knowledge,  a  boundless  subject  of  investigation ;  and 
the  Mediator,  the  equal  of  the  Father,  and  his  bosom-counsellor, 
will  be  our  all-sufficient  instructor ;  and  our  glorified  spirits  will 
be  fitted  to  prosecute  the  study  through  eternal  ages.  It  follows, 
that  we  shall  continue  to  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  while 
immortality  endures. 

The  angels  diligently  study  the  dealings  of  God  with  his  people 
on  earth,  and,  by  this  means,  acquire  knowledge  of  God's  mani- 
fold wisdom.  They  saw  his  creative  skill  and  power  displayed, 
when  the  creation  sprang  forth  from  his  hand  in  its  unmarred 
beauty;  and  they  rejoiced  in  songs  and  shoutings.  They  learned 
the  justice  of  God,  when  some  of  their  number  were  driven  from 
heaven  for  their  transgression,  and  doomed  to  interminable  woe. 
While  the  angels  have  been  making  the  dispensations  of  God's 
providence  and  grace  their  delightful  study,  we  cannot  suppose 
that  the  spirits  of  the  just,  who  are  their  companions  in  glory, 
have  been  indifferent  to  these  subjects ;  which  interested  them  so 
deeply  while  on  earth.     It  must  be,  that  they  continue  to  make 

1  Matt.  v.  8.  2  John  i.  18.  3  1  Tim.  vi.  16. 


360   DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 

progress  in  the  knowledge  which,  while  here  below,  they  so  ear- 
nestly desired  to  acquire,  and  in  which  they  made  a  small  begin- 
ning. Here,  the  ways  of  God  appear  dark  and  mysterious,  and 
the  doctrine  taught  us  in  his  word,  is  attended  with  difficulties, 
which  our  finite  minds  labor  in  vain  to  remove.  We  desire  instruc- 
tion on  these  points ;  and  Jesus  has  said,  "  What  I  do,  thou  know- 
est  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."1  We  wait  now  for 
the  fulfilment  of  this  promise ;  and  we  hope  hereafter,  with  the 
spirits  that  are  before  the  throne,  to  drink  in  the  knowledge  which 
we  are  here  so  desirous  to  obtain,  which  we  so  greatly  long  to 
acquire. 

How  far  the  learning  of  the  future  world  will  include  the  sci- 
ences which  are  taught  in  the  schools  on  earth,  it  is  of  little  use 
to  inquire.  It  will  certainly  include  whatever  is  necessary  to  the 
knowledge  of  God.  We  shall  study  his  works,  his  moral  govern- 
ment, and  the  mysterious  scheme  of  redemption.  New  truths,  of 
which  we  have  now  no  conception,  will  be  unfolded  to  our  view ; 
and  the  truths  of  which  we  have  now  some  knowledge,  will  be 
exhibited  in  new  relations,  and  with  new  attractions.  The  truths 
which  now  appear  discordant  with  each  other,  will  have  light 
thrown  on  their  connecting  links ;  and  the  whole  will  be  seen,  in 
one  grand  system  of  beautiful  proportion  and  perfect  harmony, 
and  in  everything  God  will  be  displayed.  All  our  knowledge 
will  be  the  knowledge  of  him. 

2.  Perfect  conformity  to  God.  The  first  man  was  made  in  the 
image  of  God;  and  the  subjects  of  regeneration  are  renewed,  after 
the  image  of  God.  But  the  likeness  given  in  creation  has  been 
lost ;  and  that  which  is  reproduced  in  regeneration  is  incomplete. 
God's  people  are  striving  and  praying  for  a  higher  degree  of  con- 
formity ;  and  they  are  looking  to  the  future  world  for  the  consum- 
mation of  their  wishes  :  "  Then  shall  I  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake 
in  thy  likeness."2  They  are  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the 
image  of  God's  Son,3  who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God.4  As 
they  study  the  divine  character  here,  they  grow  in  conformity  to 
it :  "  We,  beholding  as  in  a  glass,  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are 
changed  into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the 

1  John  xiii.  7.  2  Ps.  xvii.  15. 

3  Rom.  viii.  29.  4  Col.  i.  15. 


HEAVEN.  361 

Spirit  of  the  Lord."1  The  same  transforming  influence  which  the 
knowledge  of  God  exerts  in  this  life,  will  continue  in  the  future 
world.  As  we  make  progress  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  we 
advance  from  glory  to  glory,  in  the  likeness  of  God ;  and  this 
progress  will  be  interminable,  through  all  our  immortal  existence. 
We  shall  be  like  him;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."2 

In  being  conformed  to  God,  who  is  love,  we  shall  love  the  display 
of  divine  perfection,  of  which  we  shall  obtain  increasing  discoveries, 
in  our  study  of  the  character,  works,  and  government  of  God. 
As  our  knowledge  enlarges,  our  love  to  the  things  learned  will 
become  more  intense,  and  the  new  developments  which  will  be 
made  at  every  stage  of  our  endless  advancement  will  be  increas- 
ingly ravishing.  What  would  be  subjects  of  barren  speculation  to 
merely  intellectual  beings,  will  be  to  us  as  moral  beings,  having  a 
moral  likeness  to  God,  sources  of  ineffable  bliss,  ever  rising  higher 
and  higher  in  its  approach  towards  the  perfect  and  infinite  blessed- 
ness of  God. 

3.  A  full  assurance  of  divine  approbation.  In  this  world 
we  groan,  being  burdened.  A  sense  of  sin,  and  God's  dis- 
pleasure on  account  of  it,  often  fills  the  mind  with  gloom. 
We  see,  in  the  gospel  of  Christ,  how  God  can  be  just,  and  the 
justifier  of  the  believer  in  Jesus  :  but  our  faith  is  often  weak.  We 
are  conscious  of  daily  offences  against  infinite  love ;  and  the  bitter- 
ness of  grief  possesses  the  soul.  Oh !  to  see  our  Father's  face, 
without  a  cloud  between,  and  to  feel  that  perfect  love  occupies  the 
full  capacity  of  our  hearts,  and  governs  every  emotion  !  We  pant 
after  God,  the  living  God.  We  long  for  heaven  ;  because  there  we 
shall  dwell  for  ever  in  the  light  of  his  countenance.  The  sentence 
of  the  last  judgment,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,"  will  give 
an  eternal  assurance  of  divine  acceptance,  and  perfect  love  in  the 
heart  will  for  ever  exclude  all  fear. 

4.  The  best  possible  society.  Paul  thus  describes  this  society : 
"  Ye  are  come  unto  Mount  Zion,  and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God, 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels,  to 
the  general  assembly  and  church  of  the  first  born,  which  are  written 
in  heaven,  and  to  God,  the  Judge  of  all,  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect,  and  to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant."3 
Our  brethren  who  have  gone  before  us,  with  some  of  whom  we 

1  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  2 1  John  iii.  2.  3  Heb.  xii.  22-24. 


362   DOCTRINE  CONCERNING-  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 

took  sweet  counsel  here,  and  went  to  the  house  of  God  in  company, 
are  there  waiting  to  welcome  our  arrival.  The  angels  that  attend 
on  us  as  ministering  spirits,  during  our  pilgrimage  here,  will 
convey  us,  when  we  leave  the  world,  to  the  glorious  abode,  in 
which  they  ever  behold  the  face  of  our  Father  in  heaven,  and  will 
form  part  of  the  happy  society  into  which  we  shall  be  introduced. 
There  we  shall  be  with  Jesus,  the  Mediator,  who  loved  us,  and 
gave  himself  for  us,  in  whose  blood  we  shall  have  washed  our 
robes,  and  made  them  white ;  there  we  shall  approach  to  God,  the 
Judge  of  all,  who  is  our  Father,  the  object  of  our  love,  and  the 
source  of  our  joy.  In  such  society  we  shall  spend  eternity.  We 
are  travelling  to  our  final  home,  through  a  desert  land,  a  waste 
howling  wilderness,  but  we  seek  a  city ;  and  God  is  not  ashamed 
to  be  called  our  God,  for  he  hath  prepared  for  us  a  city.1  A 
city  is  a  place  where  society  abounds.  The  rich  and  noble  resort 
to  cities,  that  they  may  enjoy  life.  Here  they  display  their  wealth, 
erect  magnificent  palaces  for  their  residence,  and  multiply  the 
means  of  enjoyment  to  the  utmost  possible  extent.  In  our  eternal 
home,  we  shall  not  be  lonely  pilgrims ;  but  we  shall  dwell  in  the 
city  of  our  God  ;  where  the  noblest  society  will  be  enjoyed,  where 
the  inhabitants  will  be  all  rich,  made  rich  through  the  poverty  of 
Jesus,  and  all  kings  and  priests  to  God ;  and  where  the  King  of 
kings  holds  his  court,  and  admits  all  into  his  glorious  presence. 

5.  The  most  delightful  employment.  The  future  happiness  of 
the  saints  is  called  a  rest :  but  it  is  not  a  rest  of  inactivity ; 
which,  however  desired  it  may  sometimes  be,  by  those  who  inhabit 
sluggish  bodies,  is  not  suited  to  spiritual  beings.  The  rest  resem- 
bles the  Sabbath,  the  holy  day,  in  which  the  people  of  God 
now  lay  aside  their  worldly  cares  and  toils,  and  devote  the  sacred 
hours  to  the  worship  of  God.  Such  a  sabbatism  remains  for  the 
people  of  God,  when  the  cares  and  toils  of  this  life  shall  have  ceased 
for  ever.  To  the  glorified  saints,  inaction  would  be  torture,  rather 
than  bliss.  Their  happiness  will  not  consist  of  mere  passive  enjoy- 
ment. They  will  serve  God  day  and  night ;  and,  in  this  service, 
will  find  their  highest  enjoyment.  They  pray  now,  that  his  will 
may  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  done  in  heaven ;  and  when  they  are 
themselves  taken  to  heaven,  they  will  delight  to  do  his  will,  as  it  is 

1  Heb.  xi.  16. 


HEAVEN.  363 

done  by  all  the  heavenly  host.  The  worship  of  God,  and  the  study 
of  his  holy  word,  form  a  part  of  the  delightful  employment  of  the 
saints  on  the  earthly  Sabbath.  So,  to  worship  God  with  joyful 
songs  of  praise  and  suitable  ascriptions  of  glory,  constitutes,, 
according  to  the  Scripture  representation,  a  part  of  the  saints' 
employment  in  glory.  The  subjects  of  their  transporting  songs, 
and  rapturous  ascriptions  of  praise  and  glory,  will  be  supplied  by 
their  continually  fresh  discoveries  of  the  divine  perfections,  the 
study  of  which  will  also  form  an  important  part  of  their  blissful 
employment. 

6.  The  absence  of  everything  which  could  mar  their  happiness. 
Sin,  which  here  pollutes  all  our  joys,  will  never  enter  there ;  for 
nothing  entereth  that  defileth.1  Devils  and  wicked  men  will  be 
confined  in  their  eternal  prison,  and  will  be  able  to  molest  no  more. 
The  sorrows  and  afflictions  of  this  world  will  have  passed  away. 
There  will  be  no  more  sickness,  no  more  curse ;  and  death,  the  last 
enemy,  will  have  been  destroyed. 

7.  A  free  use  of  all  the  means  of  enjoyment.  Future  happiness 
is  promised  as  a  kingdom:  "Fear  not,  little  flock,  it  is  your  Father's 
good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom."2  u  Come,  ye  blessed  of 
my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom."3  A  king  is  superior  to  all  the 
nobles  of  his  realm,  and  holds  the  highest  place  of  dignity  in  his 
dominions.  Christ,  as  king,  is  crowned  with  glory  and  honor ; 
and  believers  also  will  be  exalted  to  glory,  honor,  and  immortality. 
The  subjects  of  earthly  despots  are  often  deprived  of  their  posses- 
sions by  the  injustice  of  those  who  have  power  over  them  ;  but  the 
king  is  above  the  reach  of  such  injustice.  He  commands  the 
resources  of  his  dominions,  and  makes  them  contribute  to  his 
pleasure.  Hence,  to  minds  accustomed  to  regal  government, 
royalty  conveys  the  idea  of  the  most  abundant  resources,  and  the 
highest  measure  of  undisturbed  enjoyment ;  hence  the  language  of 
Paul :  "  Now  ye  are  full ;  now  ye  are  rich ;  ye  have  reigned  as 
kings."4  In  this  view,  the  children  of  God  will  be  made  kings. 
Besides  the  honor  to  which  they  will  be  exalted,  their  enjoyments 
will  be  boundless.  All  the  resources  of  creation  will  be  made 
tributary  to  them,  and  no  one  will  dispute  their  claim,  or  hinder 

1  Rev.  xxi.  27.  2  Luke  xii.  32. 

3  Matt  xxv.  34.  *  1  Cor.  iv.  8. 


364      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   THE   FUTURE  WORLD. 

their  enjoyment.  Earthly  crowns  are  often  tarnished  by  the 
iniquity  of  those  who  wear  them,  but  the  crown  bestowed  on  the 
children  of  God  is  a  crown  of  righteousness,  not  only  because  it  is 
righteously  conferred,  but  because,  without  any  unrighteous  violence, 
the  wearers  will  have  all  the  honors  and  enjoyments  of  royalty 
secured  to  them  for  ever. 


CHAPTER  V. 

HELL. 

The  wicked  will  be  cast  into  hell,  where  they  will  suffer 
everlasting  punishment  for  their  sins.1 

Natural  religion  teaches  the  doctrine  of  future  retribution ;  and 
even  the  heathen  had  their  notions  of  punishment  to  be  endured  in 
another  world,  for  crimes  committed  in  this.  Conscience  in  every 
man's  breast,  as  the  agent  of  him  who  placed  it  there,  inflicts 
torture,  often  intolerably  severe,  for  iniquities  perpetrated,  and  it 
teaches  the  transgressor,  when  he  hears  God's  voice  in  the  thunder, 
or  beholds  any  remarkable  display  of  the  divine  power,  to  tremble 
in  the  apprehension  of  suffering  the  wrath  of  heaven.  Though 
conscience  often  sleeps,  for  a  long  period,  over  the  sinner's  guilty 
deeds,  yet  some  special  dispensation  of  Providence  sometimes 
awakens  it,  and  calls  upon  it  to  inflict  its  tortures.  So  Joseph's 
brethren,  when  brought  into  difficulties  in  Egypt,  were  reminded 
of  their  cruelty  to  their  brother,  and  filled  with  anguish  by  the 
remembrance.2  But  conscience,  in  some  hardened  transgressors, 
sleeps  undisturbed,  while  life  lasts ;  and  natural  religion,  in  view 
of  the  proofs  that  a  great  God  reigns,  infers  that  it  will  be  awakened 
in  another  life  which  is  to  follow.  Moreover,  in  the  allotments  of 
the  present  life,  a  partial  disclosure  of  God's  moral  government  is 
made,  in  the  rewarding  of  virtue,  and  the  punishing  of  vice ;  but  it 

1  Ps.  ix.  17  ;  Matt.  x.  28  ;  xiii.  40-42  ;  xxiii.  29,  33  ;  xxv.  41-43  ;  Mark  ix. 
43 ;  2  Thess.  i.  7-9 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  4,  9,  10 ;  Jude  7 ;  Rev.  xiv.  11 ;  xx.  10,  14,  15 ; 
xxi.  8. 

2  Gen.  xlii.  21. 


HELL.  365 

is  so  incomplete,  as  here  seen,  that  we  are  compelled  to  conclude, 
that,  either  the  Governor  of  the  Universe  is  not  perfectly  righteous, 
or  his  distribution  of  rewards  and  punishments  reaches  into  a  future 
state.  Hence,  the  expectation  of  future  punishment  for  crimes 
committed  in  this  life,  accords  with  the  dictates  of  conscience  and 
reason. 

But  the  strongest  and  most  impressive  proof  of  this  momentous 
truth,  is  furnished  by  divine  revelation.  In  God's  book,  the  lessons 
of  natural  religion  are  taught  with  clearness  and  force ;  and  the 
wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness  and 
unrighteousness  of  men.  From  this  infallible  word,  we  learn  that 
wicked  men  treasure  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and  the 
revelation  of  the  righteous  judgments  of  God.1  We  know  that  this 
day  of  God's  wrath  will  be,  when  he  shall  be  revealed  in  flaming  fire, 
taking  vengeance  on  all  them  that  know  not  God,  and  obey  not  the 
gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  be  punished  with  ever- 
lasting destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  from  the  glory 
of  his  power.2  This  day  of  judgment  and  wrath  will  not  be  in  the 
present  life :  for  "  it  is  appointed  to  all  men  once  to  die,  and  after 
this  the  judgment."3  "  The  rich  man  died,  and  in  hell  lifted  up 
his  eyes,  being  in  torments."4  Men  will  be  called  from  their  graves 
to  the  judgment ;  and  from  the  judgment,  the  wicked  will  be 
sentenced  to  everlasting  punishment.  God  is  to  be  feared,  because, 
beyond  the  destroying  of  the  body,  he  can  destroy  both  soul  and 
body  in  hell.5  Vain  are  the  dreams  of  infatuated  mortals,  who 
suppose  that  the  only  punishment  to  be  endured- for  sin  is  in  the 
present  life.  Conscience  and  reason  unite  their  voice,  to  awaken 
them  from  their  delusion ;  and  revelation  depicts  the  future  retribu- 
tion before  their  eyes  so  clearly,  that  they  must  see  it,  unless  wilfully 
and  obstinately  blind. 

The  magnitude  of  the  evil  included  in  damnation  may  be  inferred 
from  the  importance  which  the  Scriptures  attach  to  salvation.  It 
was  a  great  work  which  Christ  undertook,  when  he  came  to  seek 
and  to  save  them  that  were  lost  ;6  to  save  his  people  from  their 
sins  ;7  not  to  condemn  the  world,  but  to  save  the  world  ;8  to  deliver 
from  the  wrath  to  come.9    If  wrath  and  damnation  had  been  trivial 

1  Rom.  ii.  5.  2  2  Thess.  i.  8.  3  Heb.  ix.  27. 

4  Luke  xvi.  23.  6  Matt.  x.  28.  6  Luke  xix.  10. 

7  Matt.  i.  21.  8  John  iii.  17.  9  1  Thess.  i.  10. 


366      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  THE   FUTURE   WORLD. 

matters,  the  sending  of  God's  only  son  into  the  world,  the  laying 
of  our  sins  upon  him,  and  the  whole  expedient  adopted  to  deliver 
us  from  these  inconsiderable  evils,  would  have  been  unworthy  of 
infinite  wisdom.  It  would  not  deserve  to  be  called  "  a  great 
salvation  j"1  and  the  intelligence  of  the  Saviour's  birth,  brought  by 
the  angels,  would  not  deserve  to  be  called  "  good  tidings  of  great 
joy."2  Paul  declared,  "It  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all 
acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  ;"s 
and  Paul  was  of  this  mind,  because  he  believed  the  salvation  of  a 
sinner  to  be  a  work  of  vast  magnitude.  In  this  view  of  it,  he 
said :  "  My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is,  that  they 
might  be  saved."4  In  this  view,  he  relinquished  every  earthly 
hope,  and  gave  himself  to  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  enduring  all 
hardships  and  sufferings,  if  by  all  means  he  might  save  some.5  Why 
did  he  labor  thus,  why  suffer  thus,  if  wrath  and  damnation  are  evils 
of  little  magnitude  ?  Paul  understood  the  matter  otherwise,  when 
he,  said,  "  Knowing  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men."6  It 
is  said  in  the  Scripture,  "Who  knoweth  the  power  of  thine  anger? 
Even  according  to  thy  fear,  so  is  thy  wrath."7  The  utmost  dread 
with  which  any  finite  mind  can  regard  the  wrath  of  God,  will  be 
realized,  and  more  than  realized,  when  that  wrath  is  poured  out  on 
him.  The  power  of  God's  anger,  finite  intelligence  cannot  con- 
ceive ;  but  God  understands  it  well,  and  the  full  estimate  of  it  was 
regarded,  in  the  deep  counsels  which  devised  the  scheme  of  salva- 
tion. An  almighty  Saviour,  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  was 
chosen,  because  salvation  was  a  work  requiring  such  an  agent  for 
its  accomplishment.  The  gospel  is  sent  forth  into  the  world,  with 
the  declaration  of  its  great  Author,  "  He  that  believeth  and  is 
baptised  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be 
damned."8  Every  sound  of  the  glorious  gospel  speaks  of  salvation 
and  damnation.  Every  accent  of  mercy,  inviting  the  sinner  to 
come  to  Christ  for  life,  is  a  warning  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come. 
Diminutive  views  of  sin,  and  of  the  wrath  of  God  due  to  sin,  permit 
the  sinner  to  sleep  in  neglect  of  the  great  salvation  that  God  has 
provided. 

The  human  heart  is  prone  to  doubt  the  doctrine  of  eternal  dam- 

1  Heb.  ii.  3.  2  Luke  ii.  10.  3  1  Tim.  i.  15. 

*  Rom.  x.  1.  5  1  Cor.  ix.  22.  6  2  Cor.  v.  11 

7  Ps.  xc.  11.  8  Mark  xvi.  16. 


HELL.  367 

nation.  The  facts  reported  in  the  gospel,  that  Christ  came  into 
the  world,  died,  and  rose  again,  are  so  abundantly  attested,  that 
few  have  the  hardihood  openly  to  deny  them.  These  are  past  facts, 
which  rational  men  cannot  well  permit  themselves  to  doubt ;  but 
eternal  woe  is  something  future,  unseen,  and  unfelt.  The  apprehen- 
sion of  it  disquiets  men,  and  disturbs  their  enjoyments ;  and  hence 
they  are  prone  to  drive  it  from  them.  The  threat  of  indignation 
and  wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish,  is  fearful ;  but  if  they  listen  to 
it,  and  interpret  it  in  its  full  import,  they  cannot  remain  at  ease. 
Hence  arises  a  criminal  and  fatal  tendency  not  to  take  God  at  his 
word,  in  these  fearful  warnings  and  denunciations ;  but  to  persuade 
ourselves  that  they  will  never  be  executed.  Some  relieving  method 
of  interpretation  is  adopted,  or  some  view  taken  of  God's  benevo- 
lence and  mercy,  by  which  the  sinner  may  be  permitted  to  remain 
at  ease,  and  hope  that  all  will  be  well.  Hence  we  see  the  aston- 
ishing fact,  that  multitudes  practically  neglect  the  gospel,  who  dare 
not  openly  deny  it.  If  they  verily  believed  that  the  wrath  of  God 
abides  on  them ;  that  the  treasures  of  wrath  are  daily  increasing, 
and  that  the  accumulated  vengeance  is  just  ready  to  burst  on  their 
heads  in  a  fearful  tempest ;  they  would  not,  they  could  not  remain 
at  ease.  To  appreciate  justly  and  fully  the  gospel  of  eternal  sal- 
vation, we  must  believe,  thoroughly  believe,  the  doctrine  of  eternal 
damnation.  All  our  misgivings,  as  to  the  truth  of  this  doctrine, 
proceed  from  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief;  and  lead  to  a  neglect  of 
the  great  salvation. 

Some  have  sought  relief,  in  the  apprehension  of  future  misery, 
from  the  idea  that  the  language  of  Scripture,  which  describes  it, 
is  figurative.  The  descriptions  of  future  happiness  in  heaven,  are 
figurative  ;  but  the  figures  convey  very  imperfect  ideas  of  the 
reality.  So  it  is  with  the  figures  which  describe  future  misery. 
The  fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels  ;x  the  lake  of  fire  ;2 
unquenchable  fire  ;3  the  worm  that  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  that  is 
not  quenched  ;4  are  terrific  descriptions ;  but  they  are  not  exagge- 
rations. They  are  figures ;  but  they  come  short  of  the  reality. 
When  God  punishes,  he  punishes  as  a  God.  Who  knoweth  the 
power  of  thine  anger?     What  omnipotent  wrath  can  accomplish, 

1  Matt.  xxv.  41.  2Rev.  xx.  10. 

»  Matt.  iii.  12.  *  Mark  ix.  44. 


368      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   THE   FUTURE   WORLD. 

all  language  fails  to  describe,  and  all  finite  minds  are  unable  to 
conceive. 

Of  what  elements  future  misery  will  consist,  we  cannot  tell ;  but 
it  will  include  poignant  remorse,  and  a  sense  of  divine  wrath,  with 
the  absence  of  all  enjoyment,  and  of  all  hope.  It  will  produce,  in 
the  subjects  of  it,  weeping,  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  They 
will  realize  that  they  are  shut  out  for  ever  from  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  into  outer  darkness;  and  they  will  remember  the  good 
things  which  they  once  enjoyed,  never  more  to  be  enjoyed  again ; 
and  the  opportunities  of  mercy,  once  neglected,  never  more  to 
return.  They  will  be  tormented  in  the  flame,  without  a  drop  of 
water  to  cool  their  tongues.  Their  hatred  of  God  will  be  complete  ; 
and  they  will  blaspheme  his.  name,  while  they  feel  themselves 
grasped  in  the  hand  of  his  almighty  wrath,  without  power  to  extri- 
cate themselves.  Devils,  and  wicked  men,  all  under  the  same  con- 
demnation, will  be  their  eternal  companions :  and  the  companion- 
ship, instead  of  affording  relief,  will  be  an  aggravation  of  their  woe. 
The  whole  throng,  hateful,  and  hating  one  another,  will  be  tor- 
mentors of  one  another.  The  malignant  passions,  which,  on  earth, 
caused  wars,  assassinations,  cruelty,  oppression,  and  every  species 
of  injury,  will  be  let  loose  without  restraint  to  banish  peace  and 
brotherhood  for  ever  from  the  infernal  society ;  and  the  passions 
which  burn  in  the  hearts  of  wicked  men  on  earth,  and  destroy  all 
internal  peace,  and  sometimes  drive  to  suicide,  will  then  be  unre- 
strained, and  do  their  full  work  of  torture ;  and  relief  by  suicide, 
or  self-annihilation,  will  be  for  ever  impossible.  0,  who  can  endure 
such  torments  ?  Who  will  not,  with  every  energy,  and  at  every 
sacrifice,  seek  to  escape  from  devouring  fire  and  everlasting  burn- 
ings ? 

As  heaven  is  a  place,  so  is  hell.  Judas  went  to  his  own  place  ;l 
and  the  rich  man  desired  that  his  brethren  might  not  come  to  this 
place  of  torment.2  In  what  part  of  universal  space  this  place  is 
situated,  we  know  not.  Heaven  is  above,  and  hell  beneath;  but 
astronomy  has  taught  us,  that,  in  consequence  of  the  earth's  diur- 
nal rotation,  the  up  and  down  of  absolute  space  is  not  to  be  deter- 
mined by  the  position  of  the  little  ball  which  we  inhabit.  If  the 
third  heaven,  where  God  resides,  be  a  region  of  perfect  light  and 

1  Acts  i.  25.  2  Luke  xvi.  28. 


HELL.  869 

glory,  beyond  the  limits  within  which  stars  and  planets  revolve; 
and  if  its  inhabitants  see  the  sun  and  stars,  as  beneath  their  feet : 
the  region  of  outer  darkness  may  be  in  the  opposite  extreme  of 
space,  where  sun  and  stars  shine  not,  and  where  the  glory  of  God 
is  for  ever  unseen.  But,  wherever  it  is,  the  broad  way  that  sinners 
go,  leads  to  it ;  and  they  will  at  length  certainly  find  it. 

The  duration  of  future  misery  will  be  eternal.  This  is  expressly 
declared  in  Scripture.  "  These  shall  go  away  into  everlasting 
punishment ;  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal."1  The  words 
everlasting  and  eternal  are  renderings  of  the  same  Greek  word, 
which  is  applied  alike  to  the  future  state  of  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked.  The  punishment  of  these,  and  the  happiness  of  those,  will 
be  of  equal  duration.  Both  will  be  eternal  or  everlasting.  The 
criticism  which  would  take  the  word  in  a  different  sense,  in  one 
case,  from  that  which  it  is  admitted  to  have  in  the  other,  is  rash 
and  dangerous.  The  same  truth  is  taught  in  other  passages  of 
Scripture : — "  Where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not 
quenched."2  "  The  smoke  of  their  torment  ascendeth  up  for  ever 
and  ever."3  "  Suffering  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire."4  The  last 
passage,  inasmuch  as  it  refers  to  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomor- 
rah, which  were  destroyed  by  fire  from  heaven,  may  contain  an 
allusion  to  that  fire ;  but  this,  viewed  in  itself,  was  not  eternal  fire. 
It  was  a  type  of  future  wrath,  and  may  be  regarded  as  its  begin- 
ning, and  first  outbursting.  The  fire  which  consumed  the  cities 
of  the  plain,  has  long  since  ceased  to  burn ;  but  the  wrath  due  to 
their  guilty  inhabitants  did  not  then  cease  to  burn  :  for  the  day  of 
judgment  will  find  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,5  with  guilty  Chorazin, 
Bethsaida,  and  Capernaum,  all  doomed  to  suffer,  according  to  their 
several  measures  of  guilt,  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire.  These 
cities,  in  their  fearful  overthrow,  are  set  forth  as  an  example ;  and 
from  the  visible  beginning  of  their  awful  doom,  we  may  faintly 
conceive  what  will  be  the  end.  But  it  will  be  more  tolerable  for 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment,  than  for  those  who 
hear  and  reject  the  gospel  of  Christ;  who  must,  therefore,  suffer 
the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire,  in  its  fiercest  burnings,  and  in  its 
everlasting  duration. 

1  Matt.  xxv.  46.  '  2  Mark  ix.  44.  3  Rev.  xiv.  11. 

4  Jude  i.  7.  5  Matt.  xi.  21. 

24 


870      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING   THE   FUTURE  WORLD. 

Future  misery  will  not  be  purifying  in  its  effect.  The  afflictions 
which  the  righteous  endure  in  this  world  are  fatherly  chastisements, 
inflicted  in  love,  and  God  designs  them  for  the  profit  of  his  child- 
ren, that  they  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness.1  Future  misery 
will  be  inflicted  not  on  the  children  of  God,  but  on  the  enemies  of 
God ;  not  in  love,  but  in  wrath.  And  it  will  not  be  designed  for 
the  profit  of  its  subjects,  but  for  the  vindication  of  the  law  and 
justice  of  God,  "to  show  his  wrath  and  make  his  power  known."2 
Affliction  purifies  the  righteous,  not  by  any  inherent  tendency 
which  it  possesses,  but  by  the  accompanying  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  The  wicked,  even  in  the  present  life,  grow  hardened  under 
affliction,  and  sometimes  blaspheme  God,  while  they  gnaw  their 
tongues  with  pain.3  In  the  world  to  come,  the  Holy  Spirit  will 
send  forth  no  sanctifying  influence  to  render  future  torments  puri- 
fying. Many  of  the  wicked  he  gives  up  to  hardness  of  heart,  even 
in  the  present  life ;  and  to  all  of  them  the  day  of  grace  will  be 
past  for  ever. 

The  opinion  that  they  will  be  ultimately  restored  to  the  favor 
of  God,  and  taken  to  heaven,  is  not  authorized  by  the  Scriptures.4 
On  the  contrary,  it  teaches  that  the  Master  of  the  house  will 
"shut  the  door;"  that  there  is  a  great  gulf5  between  the  two 
worlds,  rendering  passage  from  one  to  the  other  impossible ;  that 
the  unjust  and  filthy  will  remain  unjust  and  filthy  still.6  Jesus 
said  to  some,  "  Ye  shall  die  in  your  sins ;  and  whither  I  go  ye 
cannot  come  :"7  and  he  said  concerning  Judas  Iscariot,  "It  had 
been  good  for  that  man  if  he  had  not  been  born."8  The  last  words 
cannot  be  true,  if  Judas  at  any  future  time,  however  remote, 
shall  be  taken  to  heaven,  to  enjoy  for  ever  the  perfect  happiness 
of  that  world :  for  the  eternal  weight  of  glory  which  will  then  be 
awarded  to  him,  will  far  more  than  outweigh  all  his  previous 
sufferings.  The  Scriptures  teach  that  the  heavens  have  received 
Jesus  Christ,  "until  the  restitution  of  all  things:"9  but  if  his 
restitution  implied  a  restoration  of  all  to  the  favor  of  God,  Christ's 
second  coming  would  be  deferred  until  its  accomplishment.  But 
as  Christ  will  come  from  heaven  to  judge  the  world,  and  will  in 

1  Heb.  xii.  10.  2  Rom.  ix.  22.  3  Rev.  xvi.  10,  11. 

*  Luke  xiii.  25.  5  Luke  xvi.  26.  6  Rev.  xxii.  11. 

7  John  viii.  21.  8  Matt.  xxvi.  24.  9  Acts  iii.  21. 


HELL.  371 

tlte  judgment,  condemn  the  wicked  to  everlasting  punishment,  we 
must  conclude  that  the  restitution  of  all  things  will  be  regarded  as 
complete  and  for  ever  fixed ;  when  the  final  judgment  shall  have 
decided  the  eternal  state  of  all,  and  the  order  which  had  been 
disturbed  by  the  enemies  of  God,  shall  have  been  fully  restored  in 
his  kingdom. 

Future  misery  will  not  be  annihilating  in  its  effect.  It  is  called 
death,  the  second  death:  but  the  first  death  does  not  imply  anni- 
hilation of  either  soul  or  body ;  and  neither  does  the  second.  It 
is  called  destruction :  but  as  the  men  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
were  destroyed1  in  the  overthrow  of  those  cities,  but  are  neverthe- 
less to  appear  in  the  day  of  judgment,2  destruction  does  not  imply 
annihilation.  An  immortal  spirit  suffers  destruction  when  it  is 
separated  from  God  and  happiness,  and  doomed  to  eternal  misery. 
So  the  wicked  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction,  from 
the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power.3 
Besides  death  and  destruction,  the  word  corruption  is  used  as  the 
opposite  of  life.  "  They  that  sow  to  the  flesh,  shall  of  the  flesh 
reap  corruption,  and  they  that  sow  to  the  Spirit,  shall  of  the  Spirit 
reap  life  everlasting."4  Corruption  is  not  annihilation.  The  death 
of  the  body  is  followed  by  corruption  and  the  worm ;  so  that  we 
may  say  to  corruption,  Thou  art  my  father ;  and  to  the  worm, 
Thou  art  my  mother  and  sister.5  Hence,  corruption,  and  the  worm 
that  dieth  not,  are  figures  employed  to  denote  the  consequences  of 
the  second  death.  By  the  flesh,  to  which  men  sow,  and  of  which 
they  reap  corruption,  we  do  not  understand  the  material  body,  but 
the  depraved  mind.  The  corruption  of  this  is  its  moral  disorgani- 
zation, or  utter  loss  of  holiness.  Were  annihilation  intended,  the 
worm  that  dieth  not,  would  cease  to  have  anything  on  which  to 
feed ;  and  the  fire  that  cannot  be  quenched,  would  cease  to  burn 
for  want  of  fuel.  If  the  wicked  are  to  be  destroyed  by  instanta- 
neous annihilation,  that  destruction,  instead  of  being  an  infliction 
of  torment,  will  be  a  termination  of  all  suffering.  This  does  not 
accord  with  the  Scripture  representations  of  the  future  portion  of 
the  wicked :  and  no  good  reason  can  be  assigned  for  raising  the 
bodies  of  the  wicked,  if  they  are  to  be  immediately  annihilated. 

1  Luke  xvii.  29.         •  2  Matt.  x.  15.  3  2  Thess.  i.  9. 

4  Gal.  vi  8.  5  Job.  xvii.  14. 


S7J   DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 

If  destruction  is  to  be  a  process,  whether  rapid  or  lingering,  by 
which  annihilation  is  to  be  produced,  it  will  not  be  everlasting 
destruction,  or  everlasting  punishment;  for  the  process  and  the 
punishment  will  sooner  or  later  cease.  To  no  purpose  can  it  be 
called  eternal  punishment,  when  the  subjects  of  it  shall  have 
eternally  ceased  to  exist.  To  no  purpose  can  any  be  said  to  suffer 
the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire,  when  the  fire  itself  shall  have  eternally 
terminated  their  suffering.  And  to  no  purpose  will  the  smoke  of 
their  torment  ascend  for  ever  and  ever,  when  the  torments  them- 
selves shall  have  eternally  ceased. 

Some  understand  the  words,  "  Every  one  shall  be  salted  with 
fire,"1  to  import,  that  the  fire  of  hell,  instead  of  consuming  its 
victims,  will,  like  salt,  preserve  them.  Whether  this  be  its  mean- 
ing or  not,  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  vessels  of  wrath 
fitted  for  destruction,  will  be  adapted  to  the  suffering  which  they 
will  undergo.  Instead  of  wasting  away  under  its  influence,  or 
having  their  powers  of  endurance  benumbed,  we  may  rather  con- 
clude, that,  as  the  righteous  will  perpetually  ascend  in  bliss,  the 
wicked  will  perpetually  sink  in  woe.  Their  deep  is  bottomless,2  and 
being  banished  from  the  presence  of  God,  they  may  continue  to 
recede  from  him  for  ever.  Their  capacity  for  suffering,  their 
tormenting  passions,  their  hatred  of  God,  and  of  one  another, 
may  all  increase  indefinitely,  through  eternal  ages.  As  wandering 
stars,  to  whom  is  reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever,  they 
will  continue  to  fly  further  and  further  from  God,  the  eternal 
source  of  light  and  happiness,  into  deeper,  and  still  deeper  dark- 
ness and  woe.  0,  that  men  would  seek  the  Lord,  while  he  may  be 
found. 

Obj.  1.  The  justice  of  God  does  not  require,  and  will  not 
permit,  the  infliction  of  eternal  torments  for  the  sins  committed  in 
the  short  period  of  human  life.  If  eternity  be  divided  by  the 
number  of  sins  which  any  man  commits,  during  the  whole  course 
of  his  probation  on  earth,  the  quotient  will  be  eternity:  and  it 
follows,  that  future  misery  cannot  be  eternal,  unless  an  eternity  of 
torment  be  inflicted  for  every  sin.  An  eternity  of  woe  for  one 
transgression,  shocks  all  the  sense  of  justice  which  God  has 
implanted  in  the  human  breast. 

1  Mark  ix.  49.  2  Rev.  xx.  3. 


HELL.  373 

This  objection  proceeds  on  the  radical  mistake,  that  men  cease 
to  be  moral  agents,  bound  by  the  law  of  God,  when  they  have 
passed  into  the  world  of  woe.  God's  dominion  is  universal ;  and 
the  inhabitants  of  hell  are  as  much  bound  to  love  and  obey 
him,  as  those  of  heaven  or  earth.  Men  who  die  in  their  sins, 
will  carry  with  them  not  only  the  guilt  accumulated  during  the 
present  life,  but  the  inclination,  confirmed  by  habit,  to  continue  in 
sin.  They  will  hate  God  and  blaspheme  his  name,  and  their  sins 
cannot  cease  to  be  offensive  to  God,  because  their  moral  character 
has  become  fixed  and  unalterable.  A  sinner  cannot  become  inno- 
cent by  being  confirmed  in  sin.  Were  it  so,  the  inhabitants  of  hell 
would  be  innocent  beings  ;  their  habitation  would  be  as  pure  as  the 
high  and  holy  place  where  God  dwells ;  and  their  blasphemies 
would  be  as  little  offensive  to  God  and  all  holy  beings,  as  the  songs 
of  angels.  All  this  is  manifestly  absurd.  Sin  continued,  will 
deserve  and  provoke  continued  wrath  ;  and  the  future  condition  of 
the  wicked  is  chiefly  terrible,  because  they  are  abandoned  by  God 
to  the  full  exercise  and  influence  of  their  unholy  passions,  and  the 
consequent  accumulation  of  guilt  for  ever  and  ever. 

If  God's  justice  will  not  permit  him  to  punish  sinners  with  ban- 
ishment from  his  presence,  and  confinement  in  the  regions  of  woe, 
beyond  a  limited  period  of  time ;  then  it  will  follow,  that  when 
this  limited  period  of  suffering  shall  have  passed,  justice  will  not 
only  permit,  but  will  absolutely  require,  that  they  should  be  re- 
leased. Who  can  believe  that,  after  a  thousand  years  spent  in 
blaspheming  God,  and  strengthening  their  enmity  to  his  character 
and  government,  they  shall  be  turned  loose,  to  roam  at  large  in 
God's  dominions,  and  to  visit  at  pleasure  the  holy  and  happy  place 
where  nothing  entereth  that  defileth?"1  Who  can  believe  that 
God's  justice  will  demand  this,  and  will  authorize  them  to  demand 
it  ?  Yet  all  this  will  follow,  if  the  ground  assumed  in  the  objection 
be  not  false. 

Obj.  2.  God's  benevolence  will  not  permit  him  to  inflict  such 
misery  on  his  creatures.  He  claims  them  as  his  offspring,  and 
represents  himself  as  their  Father :  and,  as  no  human  parent  would 
so  treat  his  children,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  benevolent 
Father  of  all  will  be  so  unfeeling  and  unmerciful. 

1  Rev.  xxi.  27. 


374      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE   WORLD. 

This  objection,  while  it  claims  to  honor  God's  benevolence,  dis- 
honors his  veracity.  Our  inferences  from  God's  benevolence  may 
all  be  mistake ;  but  God's  word  must  be  true  :  and  he  who,  relying 
on  the  deductions  of  his  own  reason,  rejects  the  warnings  that  God 
has  graciously  given  him,  will  find,  in  the  end,  that  he  has  acted 
most  foolishly  and  wickedly. 

The  objection  assumes  what  is  inconsistent,  not  only  with  the 
truth  of  God's  declarations  as  to  the  future,  but  also  with  known 
and  undeniable  facts  of  the  past  and  present.  Had  the  objector 
been  present  when  man  came  forth  in  his  original  purity  from  the 
hand  of  his  Maker,  he  would,  on  the  principle  assumed  in  his 
objection,  have  predicted,  with  confidence,  that  God  would  never 
permit  this  fair  production  of  his  creative  power  and  skill  to  become 
involved  in  the  fall  and  its  consequent  evils.  Had  he  been  present, 
in  the  garden  of  Eden,  when  the  serpent  said,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely 
die,"  he  would,  in  his  professed  honor  of  God's  benevolence,  have 
confirmed  the  declaration  made  by  the  father  of  lies.  The  misery 
endured  by  the  human  race  in  every  age,  from  the  fall  to  the  pres- 
ent moment,  in  every  region  of  the  globe,  in  every  tribe,  in  every 
family,  in  the  daily  and  hourly  experience  of  every  individual,  is 
all  inconsistent  with  the  principle  assumed  in  the  objection.  If, 
at  the  creation,  it  would  have  denied  the  possibility  of  what  we 
know  has  occurred,  how  can  we  trust  it  when  it  now  denies  the 
possibility  of  what  God  says  shall  be  ?  When  our  inferences  op- 
pose fact,  and  the  truth  of  God,  we  may  be  assured  that  they  are 
wrong. 

When  pestilence  is  desolating  a  land,  God  sees  the  wretchedness 
that  is  produced,  and  hears  the  cries  of  the  suffering,  and  could, 
with  one  breath,  drive  far  away  the  cause  of  the  fatal  malady. 
When  a  ship  is  wrecked  in  the  raging  ocean,  God  hears  the  cries 
of  the  sinking  mariners,  and  understands  well  their  terror  and 
anguish,  and  could,  without  effort,  bear  the  shattered  vessel  at 
once  to  its  destined  port  in  safety.  Were  the  objector  in  God's 
stead,  would  he  be  deaf  to  the  cries  of  his  children  ?  Would  he 
not  promptly  afford  the  needed  relief  ?  He  would.  What  then  ? 
Is  he  benevolent,  and  is  God  unfeeling  and  unmerciful  ?  So  the 
objection  would  decide ;  and  we  know,  therefore,  that  it  is  not 
according  to  truth. 

God  is  of  right  the  Father  of  his  creatures :  but  he  says,  "  If  I 


HELL.  375 

be  a  father,  where  is  my  honor?"1  and  he  complains,  "I  have- 
nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against 
me."2  By  their  rebellion,  men  have  become  the  children  of  the 
wicked  one.  Christ  said,  "  If  God  were  your  Father,  ye  would 
love  me;"3  implying  that  those  whom  he  addressed  were  not  the 
children  of  God.  To  such  men  God  is  not  a  Father,  but  an 
offended  and  insulted  moral  Governor.  He  is  benevolent ;  but  his 
benevolence  does  not  overthrow  his  moral  government.  On  the 
contrary,  it  enforces  the  claims  of  justice.  To  turn  loose  the 
guilty,  and  to  permit  the  lawless  to  roam  at  large  through  his 
dominions,  to  disturb  the  peace  and  order  of  his  government,  and 
render  the  obedient  unhappy,  would  not  be  benevolence.  God's 
benevolence  is  against  the  sinner ;  and  when  the  walls  of  the 
infernal  prison  are  broken  down,  and  its  guilty  inmates  are  per- 
mitted to  fill  the  universe  with  crime  and  wretchedness,  it  will  no 
longer  be  true  that  God  is  love. 

In  contemplating  the  awful  subject  of  future  misery,  and  its 
relation  to  God's  benevolence,  our  minds  may  find  some  relief  in 
regarding  the  misery  as  the  natural  and  proper  effect  of  sin.  God 
has  so  constituted  the  nature  of  man,  that  he  feels  remorse  for 
crime ;  and  he  has  so  constituted  the  nature  of  external  things, 
that  drunkenness,  and  many  other  sins,  produce  poverty  and  suf- 
fering. We  have  not  the  hardihood  to  complain  that  this  consti- 
tution of  things  is  not  benevolent.  He  who,  knowing  that  fire 
will  burn,  voluntarily  puts  his  hand  into  the  flame,  has  no  right  to 
charge  God  with  want  of  benevolence,  because  he  has  made  it  the 
nature  of  fire  to  burn.  Much  of  future  misery  may  be  regarded 
as  the  natural  effect  of  sinful  passions,  tearing  the  soul  by  their  vio- 
lence, or  of  an  upbraiding  conscience,  gnawing  within,  as  the  worm 
that  dieth  not.  "God  is  a  consuming  fire,"  ever  present  to  the 
workers  of  iniquity;  and  his  nature  must  change  if  his  wrath 
cease  to  burn  against  sin.  The  nature  of  things,  as  constituted 
by  God,  and  as  including  the  nature  of  God  himself,  must  render 
the  sinner  miserable.  If  he  would  cease  to  be  miserable,  he  must 
escape  from  himself,  and  must  find  another  God,  and  another 
universe. 

1  Mai.  i.  6.  •  s  Isaiah  i.  2.  3  John  viii.  42. 


876      DOCTRINE   CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 


CONCLUSION. 

This  world  is  not  such  a  habitation  as  a  wise  man  would  desire 
to  live  in  for  ever.  The  young  and  thoughtless  expect  to  find 
happiness  in  it;  but  experience  teaches  that  the  expectation  is 
vain  and  delusive.  Disappointment,  care,  and  sorrow  form  a  large 
part  of  human  life ;  and  as  men  approach  the  end  of  their  course, 
they  can  adopt  the  language  of  the  patriarch  Jacob  :  "  Few  and 
evil  have  been  the  days  of  my  pilgrimage."1  This  sad  experience 
results  from  the  fact,  that  God's  curse  rests  on  the  world,  because 
it  is  full  of  sin :  and  what  wise  man  would  wish  to  live  for  ever  in 
a  habitation  that  God  has  cursed  ? 

If  this  were  the  only  world,  it  would  be  well  for  us  to  make  the 
best  of  it :  but  we  have  abundant  proof  that  another  world  exists ; 
and  a  revelation  from  it  has  been  made,  by  which  we  may  learn 
how  to  obtain  a  portion  there,  that  will  be  full  of  unmixed  happi- 
ness, and  will  endure  for  ever.  We  are  called  on  to  relinquish  our 
delusive  hope  of  earthly  good,  and  lay  hold  on  the  hope,  set  before 
us,  that  is  sure  and  certain :  to  give  up  our  pursuit  of  the  unsatis- 
fying and  short-lived  pleasures  of  the  present  life,  and  to  seek  the 
substantial  and  eternal  joys  of  the  life  to  come.  It  is  certainly 
the  part  of  wisdom  to  obey  this  call. 

Another  fact  needs  to  be  considered.  Whether  we  will  or  not, 
we  are  compelled  to  leave  this  world,  and  take  up  our  eternal  abode 
in  another  habitation,  either  of  joy  or  woe.  If  we  had  all  possible 
enjoyment  here,  it  would  be  but  momentary,  and  would  not  deserve 
a  thought  in  comparison  with  eternal  happiness  and  misery.  We 
are  rapidly  passing  through  this  world,  to  our  eternal  home. 
Whether,  in  this  lodging  place  of  wayfaring  men,  our  comforts 
shall  be  'few  or  many,  is  a  matter  of  very  little  moment,  and 
unworthy  of  anxious  care :  but  it  is  extreme  folly  to  be  uncon- 
cerned about  the  world  to  which  we  are  hastening,  and  where  our 
condition  will  be  fixed  for  ever. 


1  Gen.  xlvii.  9. 


CONCLUSION.  377 

There  are  some  things  in  religion  which  are  hard  to  be  under- 
stood, and  about  which  some  persons  are  inclined  to  be  skeptical : 
but  is  there  any  other  thing  so  incredible,  as  that  intelligent  and 
immortal  beings  should  make  the  things  of  this  fleeting  world 
their  chief  care,  and  give  themselves  no  concern  about  eternity  ? 
If  the  fact  were  not  daily  before  our  eyes,  who  could  believe  it  ? 
Were  the  Bible  to  inform  us  that  there  are  intelligent  immortals 
in  a  remote  planet  who  thus  act,  the  skeptic  would  appear  almost 
excusable  who  should  doubt  the  truth  of  the  statement ;  but  that 
book  tells  us  of  men,  intelligent  and  immortal  men,  who  are 
blinded  by  the  god  of  this  world,  and  led  captive  by  him  at  his 
will,  and  who  do  not  consider  their  latter  end,  but  rush  on  to 
destruction,  as  the  ox  goeth  to  the  slaughter.  This  testimony, 
than  which  the  Bible  contains  nothing  more  incredible,  is  verified 
by  the  whole  history  of  mankind.  From  this  reigning  folly  even 
Christian  men  are  but  partly  delivered.  Even  they  perpetually 
need  the  exhortation,  "Be  not  conformed  to  this  world;"1  and,  to 
preserve  them  from  the  fascinating  power  of  "  the  things  seen, 
which  are  temporal,"  they  should  look  habitually  at  "the  things 
which  are  unseen  and  eternal."  For  this  purpose,  the  doctrine 
concerning  the  future  world  is  to  them  very  important.  "  This  is 
the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith  :"2  and  faith, 
being  "  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of 
things  not  seen,"3  must  lay  hold  on  the  realities  of  the  invisible 
and  future  world. 

The  doctrine  concerning  the  future  world  teaches  us  to  set  a 
proper  value  on  earthly  good.  If  the  honors  of  the  world  tempt 
us,  let  us  remember  that,  in  the  grave,  the  king  and  the  meanest 
of  his  subjects  will  lie  on  the  same  level,  and  mingle  with  the  same 
dust ;  and  that,  in  the  resurrection,  the  noble  of  the  earth,  who 
have  not  sought  the  honor  that  cometh  from  God,  will  rise  to  shame 
and  everlasting  contempt.  If  the  pleasures  of  the  world  invite, 
let  us  conceive  of  them  as  the  bait  with  which  Satan  would  ensnare 
our  souls,  and  lead  them  into  everlasting  torments.  If  our  hearts 
incline,  at  any  time,  to  covetousness,  let  us  contemplate  the  rich 
man  in  hell,  stripped  of  all  his  possessions,  and  unable  to  procure 
a  drop  of  water  to  cool  his  parched  tongue.     So  let  us  keep  eter- 

1  Rom.  xii.  2.  2 1  John  v.  4.  3  Heb.  xi.  1. 


378   DOCTRINE  CONCERNING  THE  FUTURE  WORLD. 

nity  directly  in  view ;  and,  in  its  light,  the  honors,  pleasures,  and 
wealth  of  this  world  will  lose  their  lustre,  and  cease  to  charm. 

This  doctrine  teaches  us  how  to  bear  the  afflictions  of  life.  The 
heaviest  affliction  that  can  crush  the  spirit  here,  is  far  lighter  than 
the  weight  of  wrath  which  falls  on  the  wicked  in  the  world  to  come. 
Why,  then,  should  a  living  man  complain,  a  man  for  the  punishment 
of  his  sins  ?*  So  long  as  he  still  lives,  out  of  torment,  out  of  hell,  his 
suffering,  however  severe,  is  inconceivably  less  than  his  sins  deserve. 
Moreover,  his  afflictions,  if  endured  with  humble  resignation  to  God, 
are  conducing  to  his  holiness.  Though  light  and  momentary,  they 
work  out  for  him  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory.2  With  eternity  in  view,  the  heaviest  and  most  enduring 
anguish  of  this  life  appears  light  and  momentary ;  and  we  can 
rejoice  to  endure  it,  because  of  the  glorious  effects  which  it  will 
produce  in  the  eternal  world. 

This  doctrine  teaches  the  value  of  religion.  Learning  and  talent, 
agreeable  manners  and  amiable  disposition,  are  all  worthy  to  be 
prized;  but  they  do  not  secure  eternal  blessedness.  Religion  is  the 
one  thing  needful,  the  good  part  that  will  never  be  taken  from  us.3 
Let  sinners  despise  religion  and  curl  the  lip  with  scorn,  when  you 
speak  of  its  claim  on  their  regard :  but  even  they,  when  eternity  is 
near  in  prospect,  learn  the  value  of  what  once  they  despised. 
With  eternity  in  view,  how  precious  is  religion !  how  precious  the 
Bible  which  teaches  it ! 

This  doctrine  endears  Christ  to  believers.  He  is  precious,  for 
what  he  is  in  himself;  but  this  preciousness  is  enhanced  by  the 
consideration,  that  it  is  he  who  delivers  us  from  the  wrath  to  come, 
who  is  preparing  a  place  for  us  in  the  world  of  bliss,  who  will  come' 
and  take  us  to  himself,  an5  for  ever  lead  us  to  the  fountains  of 
living  waters,  in  that  lan^  «tf  everflowing  delight. 

This  doctrine  consoles  us,  under  the  loss  of  Christian  friends. 
We  follow  them  to  the  tomb,  and  our  tears  flow  freely :  but  we 
sorrow  not  as  those  who  have  no  hope.  They  are  not  lost  to  us, 
but  have  only  gone  home  before  us ;  and  we  are  waiting  to  be  sent 
for,  when  it  shall  be  the  pleasure  of  our  heavenly  Father.  Our 
separation  from  them  is  short,  for  we  are  fast  approaching  our 

1  Lam.  iii.  39.  2  2  Cor.  iv.  17.  8  Luke  x.  42. 


CONCLUSION.  379 

journey's  end,  and  then  we  shall  join  them  again,  never  more  to 
part. 

This  doctrine,  if  received  in  lively  faith,  enables  the  Christian  to 
meet  death  with  joy.  When  a  man  repents  of  sin,  and  believes  in 
Christ,  he  is  prepared  to  die  safely ;  but  he  may  nevertheless, 
through  the  weakness  of  his  faith,  be  afraid  to  die.  To  meet 
death  without  fear,  requires  strong  faith  in  Christ,  as  the  Saviour 
of  sinners.  To  meet  death  with  joy,  requires  strong  faith  in  the 
doctrine  concerning  the  future  world.  When  we  can  stand,  like 
Moses  on  Pisgah's  top,  and  view  the  good  land  in  all  its  beauty,  our 
hearts  leap  forward,  with  strong  desire,  to  go  over  Jordan,  and 
possess  it.  We  long  to  join  the  happy  company,  who  dwell  for 
ever  in  the  presence  of  our  God.  0  to  be  free  from  sin,  as  they 
are ; — to  behold  the  face  of  Jesus,  as  they  do ; — to  partake  of  their 
bliss,  and  unite  in  their  everlasting  hallelujahs ! 

Header,  what  are  your  prospects  in  the  future  world  ?  Have 
you  received  the  love  of  the  truth,  that  you  may  be  saved  ?  Does 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  enter  your  heart,  with  sanctifying  power? 
Are  you  daily  striving,  by  a  holy  life,  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God 
our  Saviour  in  all  things  ? 


THE  END. 


