School of Theology at Clarem 


il 


Wud 


49919 


i 








Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


From the library of 
LLOYD E. SMITH 











eign ont 

7 1 Ut boack 
SC (Ute tim fo Pne ty PA leads 
pea OLA pn OOO 


























. i - . . - 2 Whe ‘ | 
lagu «fl ; * o : 
: .s a I 
i ’ ll . ene | 
Rr ~ - A ” i * 
x ;: , ‘ 2 
) P * 4 ‘ 
: 7 ; i . ’ 7 , . ¥ | 
i ; | 
| 3 i - , 
{ * 
: 2 ' 
{ - ' 
* Z 
- i i 
P 
j F : 
; 7 
‘ . 
% + e 
c ‘ - 7 
’ ; . 
\ 4 - 
| 
. 3 | 
_ >» u 
; x 
a | 
4 \ | ( 
Pe i 
‘ ‘ 4 | 
’ i 
HI 
] { ae 
| ‘ | 
ho | of 
2 i 
"y rh % fs ? 
f = 
; e aoe 
‘ ‘ 
q ‘ re 


yt VN 
rel 
ee 
iBas. 
MEMOIR 


OF 


ANON. = Hae JeUeD S0,.N , 


MISSIONARY TO BURMAH. 


JAMES D. KNOWLES 


“Come, Lord, and, added to thy many crowns, 
Receive yet one, the crown of all the earth, 
THOU, who alone art worthy.””...... Cowper 


NEW EDITION. 


PHILADELPHIA: 


‘AMERICAN BAPTIST PUBLICATION SOCIETY, 
1420 CHESTNUT STREET. 


‘T hesloou Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 


Entere-c according to Act of Congress, in tne year 1835, 


By Gounp, Krvpann. & Lincon, 


Ia the Clerk’s Office of the tistrict Court of Massachusette 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER I.—Mrs. Judson’s Birth, Education, and Con- 


VETSIUL coe sescccccnceserescesccrsescecscescsese 


CHAPTER II.—Mrs. Judson’s Connexion with Mr. Jud- 


SOD: 0'n:0:0.0;010\s o's owiececies vee ces cdecccsccecionsenisioe 


CHAPTER I I.—Embarkation—Voyage—Arrival at 


Calenttareccwseccesaneceecicisieciesicsscieacicaiccdenss 


CHAPTER IV.—Difficulties with the Bengal Govern- 
ment—Mr. and Mrs. Judson, and Mr. Rice, become 


Bea p tints sais ees ciclo nes tivivicie oe sinceisiia viealsin.se sive nie 


CHAPTER V.—Mr. and Mrs. Judson, and Mr. Rice, sail 
for the Isle of France—Mrs. Newell’s Death—Mr. Rice 
sails for America—Mr. and Mrs. J. saul for Madras— 
Arrival at Rangoon,....-.c-ccocseccsecccecccesces 


CHAPTER VI.—Sketch of the Geograpky, History, Re- 
ligion, Language, &c. of the Burman Empire,...-«e« 


CHAPTER VII.—Establishment of the Mission at Ran- 


BOON, soccccccrcceccccescesccssccscnsccccccccces 


CHAPTER VIII.—Letters of Mrs. Judson—Birth ané 
Death of a Son—Arrival of Mr. and Mrs. Hough,.... 


CHAPTER IX.—Mr. Judson’s Visit to Chittagong—Per 
secution of Mr. Hough, and his Departure for Benga 
—Return of Mr. Judson—Arrival of Messrs. Colmas 


and Wheelock,...-sececcrecesssccrvececsccccsecs 


‘ 
CHAPTER X.—Mr. Judson commences Preaching— 
First Convert baptized—Death of Mr. Wheelock,...+ 


CHAPTER XI.—Visit to Ava—Unsuccessful Interviev 
with the King,..cccc.seceescsecessccvcnsessescoes 


84 


105 


123 


(42 


(75 


19g 


AMAK 


2a hey 53 
= sas) nent hts ead nerds tnd dey erode 
i is, Sineeae AN Be Feast je 
= me, a s4nys f fat; vat td 
ae patente Levis Sina x nate moe 
o> vasa dander eyredt.. atotivibet te : 
Sr he a qo yeaa! ta _ byte ‘ 
Bran cea, bee erky 2 alee 
ni a ion Nea AE Sy ihe 18 
ita aniliy tesuehod has is 
Sawer siitces yuegero itt 
Sere ai 4 18 ie ree res} 


WF pF ze 
yy 
hice, as ¢ 





MEMOIR 


CHAPTER I. 
Mrs. Judson’s Birth, Education, and Conversio:, 


‘I am a man, and feel a concern in everything 
that relates to mankind,” was the generous sentiment 
of a Roman poet,* which touched a kindred chord, 
even in the bosoms of his iron hearted countrymen. 
It is this universal sympathy which has always given 
a charm to Biography. The earliest human compo- 
sitions were narratives of the exploits and adventures 
of distinguished individuals. istory, which has 
_ been called “ philosophy teaching by example,” owes 
the greater part of its usefulness and interest, to its 
sketches of individual character, and its details of 
private conduct. The inspired volume itself has this 
additional evidence of its origin from Him who knows 
what is in man, that a large portion of it consists of 
Biography. The life and the death of many, both 
of the enemies and of the friends of God, are here 
recorded, to teach mankind, in the most emphatic 
manner, the happiness which springs from piety, and 
the folly of those who know not God, and obey not 
the Gospel. 

* Terence. The well known words, ‘Homo sum, humani 
nil a me alienum puto,” were received with loud plaudits by 
the audience. ! 


10 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


It is remarkable, too, that Jehovah has thought 
proper to mention, in his word, with honorable com- 
mendation, many ‘holy women,” whose lives dis- 
played the excellence of religion, and whose zeal in 
duty, firmness in suffering, and intrepidity in danger, 
entitle them to rank among the noble band, of whom 
the world was not worthy. 'The Bible, though writ- 
ten in a part of the earth where the female charac- 
ter is undervalued, is full of testimony to the moral 
and intellectual worth of woman. It is no small 
evidence of its divine origin, that it thus rises above 
a prejudice which seems to be universal, except where 
the Bible has dispelled it. Christianity alone teaches 
the true rank of women ; and secures to the loveliest 
and best portion of our race, the respect and influence 
which belong to them. 

But no precedent nor argument is needed to justify 
the publication of a Memoir of Mrs. Judson, ‘Those 
who have acquired any knowledge of her, are, # is 
believed, desirous to know more; and all the friends 
of Missions must wish to trace the progress of a life 
which has been so closely connected with the history 
of the Burman Mission. 


Mrs. Ann H. Jupson was the daughter of Mr 
John and Mrs. Rebecca Hasseltine. She was born 
December 22, 1789, at Bradford, (Massachusetts,) 
where her venerable parents yet reside. 

It has been said, that the character of men is 
formed by the education which they receive; the 
companions among whom they are placed ; the pur- 
suits to which they are led by inclination or necessity ; 
and the general circumstances of the situation into 
which accident or choice may have guided them. 

This opinion, though doubtless it derives some 
plausibility from the undeniable effects of education, 
of example, and of the numberless other influences 
which affect the minds and the hearts of men, is yet 
untrue, in regard both to the intellectual and moral 
tharacter. Neither the reason nor the affections are 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 1 


80 obsequious to the power of’ external circumstances, 
as readily to take any new shape and direction. 

There exist, without doubt, in the original strucs 
ture of every mind, the distinctive elements of the 
future character. Favorable opportunities may be 
needed, to develope this character, but they cannot 
alone create it. The ‘villaze Hampden,” or the 
“mute, inglorious Milton,” may exist, in many a 
hamlet ; and the call of an oppressed country, or the 
inspirations of learning, might arouse and summon 
them forth to action, but could not bestow the noble 
patriotism of the one, nor the genius of the other. 

It is for this reason, that men feel a curiosity to 
learn something of the early life of individuals, distin- 
guished either by uncommon qualities, or by remark- 
able actions. It seems to be thought, that such 

individuals must have exhibited, in childhood, some 
of the traits which marked their mature years. It 
gives no surprise to the admirers of Pope, tu learn 
that he “lisped in numbers ;” and those who were 
charmed and moved by the eloquence of Massillon, or 
Whitefield, would readily beueve, that the former 
was accustomed, while a boy, to repeat to his school- 
fellows the sermons which he had heard ; and that the 
latter composed discourses while he served, at an early 
age, as a waiter at an inn. 

The lamented individual, a sketch of whose life 
is attempted in the following pages, was known to 
the public, almost wholly as a Missionary. But 
every one, who feels a concern to know what she did 
and suffered, in the performance of her office, will be 
desirous to learn some facts relating to ner early life, 
and some details of her personal history. ‘These will 
naturally be expected to shed light on her public char- 
acter, and to strengthen the interest with which her 
eventful course w'!l be followed. 

It is a cause of regret, that the means of gratify 
ing this natural curiosity are so few and scanty. The 
reasons have already been explained,why no more of 
the ; roductions of her pen have been preserved ; and 


12 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


the reader may easily imagine the difficulty of gath« 
ering the fugitive recollections which yet linger in the 
memory of her friends. From this source, however, 
a few facts have been collected. 

In her earliest years, she was distinguished by 
activity of mind, extreme gayety, a strong relish for 
social amusements, and unusually ardent feelings. 
She possessed that spirit of enterprise, that fertility 
in devising plans for the attainment of her wishes, 
and that indefatigable perseverance in the pursuit of 
her purposes, of which her subsequent life furnished 
sO many examples, and created so frequent occasions. 
Her restless spirit, while a child, was often restrained 
by her mother; and the salutary prohibitions which 
this excellent parent was sometimes forced to impose, 
occasioned so much grief, that Mrs. Hasseltine once 
said to her, “I hope, my daughter, you will one day 
be satisfied with rambling.” 

An eager thirst for knowledge is commonly the 
attendant, and often the parent, of a restless, enter-“ 
prising disposition. It was so in the case of Mrs. 
Judson. She loved learning, and a book could al'ure 
her from her favorite walks, and from the gayest so- 
cial circle. The desire for knowledge is often found 
in connexion with moderate intellectual faculties; 
and in such cases, with favorable opportunities, the 
individual may make a respectable pilene in learn- 
ing. But this desire is almost invariably an attribute 
vf eminent mental powers: and the person thus hap- 
pily endowed, needs nothing but industry and ade- 
quate means, to ensure the attainment of the highest 
degree of literary excellence. 

Mrs. Judson’s mind was of a superior order. It 
was distinguished by strength, activity, and clearness, 
She has, indeed, left no memorials, which can be pro- 
duced, as fair specimens of her talents and literary 
acquirements. She wrote much, but her writings 
have perished, except letters and accounts of mission- — 
ie proceedings, written without any design to ex- 
hibit her abilities, or display her learning. But no 


MEMCIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 19 


one can review her life, and read what she has written 
and published, without feeling that her mind possessed 
*nusual vigor and cultivation. 

She was educated at the Academy in Bradford, a 
seminary which has become hallowed by her memory, 
and by that of Mrs, Newell, the proto-martyr of the 
American Missions. Here she pursued her studies 
with much success. Her perceptions were rapid, her 
memory retentive, and her perseverance indefatigable. 
Here she laid the foundations of her knowledge, and 
here her intellect was stimulated, disciplined and di 
rected. Her preceptors and associates ever regardea 
her with respect and esteem ; and. considered her ar- 
dent temperament, her decision and perseverance, 
and her strength of mind, as cminous of some un- 
common destiny. 

Her religious character, however, is of the most 
importance, in itself, and in connexion with her future 
life. The readers of this Memoir will feel the deep- 
est concern, to trace the rise and progress of that 
spiritual renovation, and that divine teaching, which 
made her a disciple of the Saviour, and prepared her 
for her labors in his zervice. 

Of this momentous change, the following account 
written by herself, has happily been rescved from the 
fate which befell the greater part of mer private 
iournals :— 

“ During the first sixteen years of my life, I very 
seldom felt any serious impressions, which I think 
were produced by the Holy Spirit. ! was early 
taught by my mother (though she was then ignorant 
of the nature of true religion) the importance of ab- 
staining from those vices, to which children are 
iable—as telling falsehoods, disobeying my parents, 
taking what was not my own, &c. She also taught 
me, that if I were a good child, [ should, at death, 
escape that dreadful hell, the thought of which some- 
times filled me with alarin and terror. I, therefore. 
made it a matter of conscience to avoid the above- 
mentioned sins, to say my prayers night and mork’1g, 

2 


14 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


and to abstain from my usual play on the Sabbath, 
not doubting, but that such a course of conduct 
would ensure my salvation. 

** At the age of twelve or thirteen, I attended the 
ucademy at Bradford, where 1 was exposed to many 
more temptations than before, and found it much 
more difficult to pursue my pharisaical method. Inow 
began to attend balls, and parties of pleasure, and 
found my mind completely occupied with what I daily 
heard were “innocent amusements.” My conscience 
reproved me, not for engaging in these amusements, 
but for neglecting to say my prayers, and read my 
Bible, on returning from them; but I finally put a 
stop to its remonstrances, by thinking, that, as I was 
old enough to attend balls, 1 was surely too old to say 
prayers. ‘Thus were my fears quieted; and for two 
or three years, I scarcely felt an anxious thought rel- 
ative to the salvation of my soul, though I was rapid- 
ly verging towards eternal ruin. My disposition was 
gay in the extreme; my situation was such as afford- 
ed me opportunities for indulging it to the utmost ; 
I was surrounded with associates, wild and volatile 
like myself, and often thought myself one of the hap- 
piest creatures on earth. 

“The first circumstance, which in any measure 
awakened me from this sleep of death, was the follow 
ing. One Sabbath morning, having prepared myself 
to attend public worship, just as I was leaving my 
toilet, I accidentally took up Hannah More’s Strict- 
ures on Fermale Education ; and the first words that 
caught my eye were, She that liveth in pleasure, is 
dead while she liveth. ‘They were written in italics, 
with marks of admiration; and they struck me to 
the heart. I stood for a few moments, amazed at the 
incident, and half inclined to think, that some invisi- 
ble agency had directed my eye to those words. At 
first, 1 thought I would live a different life, and be 
more serious and sedate ; but at last I thought, that 
the words were not so applicable to me, as I first 
‘magined, and resolved to think no more »f them. 


MEMUIR OF MRS, JUDSON. c 15 


“In the course of a few months (at the age of 
fifteen,) I met with Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress. 
read it as a Sabbath book, and was much interested 
1 the story. I finished the book on a Sabbath, and 
it left this impression on my mind—that Christian, 
because he adhered to the narrow path, was carried 
safely through all his trials, and at last admitted into 
heaven. I resolved, from that moment, to begin a 
religious life; and in order to keep my resolutions, 
I went to my chamber and prayed for divine assist- 
ance. When I had done, I felt pleased with myself, 
and thought I was in a fair way for heaven, But I 
was perplexed to know what it was to live a religious 
life, and again had recourse to my system of works. 
The first step, that appeared necessary for me to take, 
was, to refrain from attending parties of pleasure, 

-and be reserved and serious in the presence of the 
other scholars. Accordingly, on Monday morning, 
I went to school, with a determination to keep my 
resolution, and confident that I should’ I had not 
been long in school, before one of the young ladies, 
an intimate friend of mine, came with a very anima- 
ted countenance, and told me that Miss ina 
neighbouring town, was to have a splendid party on 
new year’s day, and that she and I were included in 
the party selected. I coolly replied, that I should not 
go, though I did receive an invitation. She seemed 
surprised, and asked me what was the matter. [ 
replied, that I should never again attend such a 
party. I continued of the same opinion during the 
day, and felt much pleased with such a good op- 
portunity of trying myself. Monday evening, the 
daughters of sent in to invite me and my sisters 
to spend the evening with them, and make a family 
visit. I hesitated a little, but considering that it wag 
to be a family party merely, I thought I could go 
without breaking my resolutions. Accordingly 1 
went, and found that two or-three other families of 

oung ladies had been invited. Dancing was soon 
introduced ; my religious plans were forgetten ; I join- 








16 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


ed with the rest—was one of the gayest of the gay— 
and thought no more of the new life I had just be 
gun. On my return home, I found an invitation 
from Miss in waiting, and accepted it at once. 
My conscience let me pass quietly through the 
amusements of that evening also; but when I re- 
tired to my chamber, on my return, it accused me of 
breaking my most solemn resolutions. I thought I 
should never dare to make others, for I clearly saw, 
that I was unable to keep them. 

‘From December, 1805, to April, 1806, I scarce- 
ly spent a rational hour. My studies were slightly 
attended to, and my time was mostly occupied in 
preparing my dress, and in contriving amusements 
for the evening, which portion of my time was whol- 
ly spent in vanity and trifling. I so far surpassed 
my friends in gayety and mirth, that some of them 
were apprehensive that I had but a short time to 
continue in my career of folly, and should be sudden- 
nA cut off. Thus passed the last winter of my gay 
ife. 

“In the spring of 1806, there appeared a little at- 
tention to religion, in the upper parish of Bradford. 
Religious conferences had been appointed during the 
winter, and I now began to attend them regularly. 
[ often used to weep, when hearing the minister and 
others, press the importance of improving the pres- 
ent favorable season, to obtain an interest in Christ, 
lest we should have to say, The harvest is past, the 
summer ts ended, and we are not saved. I thought I 
should be one of that number; for though I now 
deeply felt the importance of being strictly religious, 
it appeared to me impossible I could be so, while in 
the midst of my gay associates. I generally sought 
some retired corner of the room, in which the meet- 
ings were held, lest others should observe the emo- 
tions I could not restrain; but frequently after being 
much affected throughs the evening, I would return 
home, in company with some of my light companions, 
and assume an air of gayety very foreign to mv 





MEMOIR OF MRS JUDSON. 17 


heart. The Spirit of God was now evidently oper 
ating on my mind; I lost all relish for amusements ; 
felt melancholy and dejected; and the solemn truth, 
that I must obtain a new heart, or perish forever, lay 
with weight on my mind. My preceptor was a 
pious man, and used frequently to make serious 
remarks in the family. One Sabbath evening, speak- 
ing of the operations of the Holy Spirit on the 
hearts of sinners, a subject with which I had been 
hitherto unacquainted, he observed, that when un- 
der these operations, Satan frequently tempted us to 
conceal our feelings from others, lest our conviction 
should increase. I could hear him say no more ; but 
rose from my seat, and went into the garden, that I 
might weep in secret over my deplorable state. I[ 
felt, that I was led captive by Satan at his will, and 
‘that he had entire control over me. And notwith- 
standing I knew this to be my situation, I thought I 
would not have any of my acquaintance know that I 
was under serious impressions, for the whole world. 
The ensuing week, I had engaged to be one of a 
party to visit a young lady in a neighbouring town, 
who had formerly attended the academy. The state 
of my mind was such that I earnestly longed to be 
free from this engagement, but knew not how to gain 
my end, without telling the real reason. This I 
could not persuade myself to do; but concluded on 
the morning of the appointed day, to absent myself 
from my father’s home, and visit an aunt, who lived 
at some distance, and who was, I had heard, under 
serious impressions. I went accordingly, and found 
my aunt engaged in reading a religious magazine. [| 
was determined she should not know the state of my 
mind, though I secretly hoped, that she would tell 
me something of hers. I had not been with her long, 
before she asked me to read to her. I began, but 
could not govern my feelings, and burst into tears. 
She kindly begged to know what thus affected me. 
I then, for the first time in my life, communicated 
feelings which I had determined should be known to 


18 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


none but myself. She urged the importance of my 
cherizhing those feelings, and of devoting myself en- 
tirery to seeking an interest in Christ, before it should 
beeforever too late. She told me, that if I trifled with 
impressions which were evidently made by the Holy 
Spirit, I should be left to hardness of heart, and 
blindness of mind. Her words penetrated my heart, 
and I felt resolved to give up everything, and seek 
to be reconciled to God. That fear, which I had 
ever felt, that others would know that I was serious, 
now vanished away, and I was willing that the whole 
universe should know, that I felt myself to be a lost 
and perishing sinner. TI returned home, with a burst- 
ing heart, fearing that I should lose my impressions, 
when associated with the other scholars, and con- 
vinced. that if I did, my soul was lost. As I entered 
my father’s house, I perceived a large party of the 
scholars assembled to spend the evening. It will be 
the height of rudeness, thought I, to leave the com 
pany; but my second thought was, if I lose my soul, 
{ lose my all. Ispoke to one or two, passed through 
the room, and went to my chamber, where I spent 
the evening, full of anxiety and distress. I felt that 
if 1 died in that situation I must perish ; but how to 
extricate myself I knew not. I had been unaccus- 
tomed to discriminating preaching ; I had nct been in 
the habit of reading religious books; I could not un- 
derstand the Bible; and felt myself as perfectly igno- 
rant of the nature of true religion as the very heathen. 
In this extremity, the next morning, I ventured to 
ask the preceptor what I should do. He told me to 
pray for mercy, and submit myself to God.’ He also 
pe into my hands some religious magazines, in which 

read the conviction and conversion of some, who, I 
perceived, had once felt as I now felt. I shut myself 
up in my chamber, denied myself every innocent grat- 
ification ; such as eating fruit and other things, not 
absolutely necessary to support life, and spent my aays 
in reading and crying for mercy. 

** But I had seen, as yet, very little of the awful 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 19 


wickedness of my heart. I knew not yet the force of 
that passage, The carnal mind is enmity against God. 
I thought myself very penitent, and almost prepared, 
by voluntary abstinence, to receive the divine favor. 
After spending two or three weeks in this manner, 
without obtaining the least comfort, my heart began 
to rise in rebellion against God. I thought it unjust 
m him, not to notice my prayers and my repentance. 
I could not endure the thought, that he wasa sover- 
eign God, and had a right to call one and leave anoth- 
er to perish. So far from being merciful in calling 
some, I thought it cruel in him to send any of his 
creatures to hell for their disobedience. But my chief 
distress was occasioned by a view of his perfect purity 
and holiness. My heart was filled with aversion and 
hatred towards a holy God ; and I felt, that if admitted 
_into heaven, with the feelings I then had, I should be 
as miserable as I could be in hell. In this state, I 
longed for annihilation ; and if I could have destroyed 
the existence of my soul, with as much ease as that 
of my body, I should quickly have done it. But that 
glorious Being, who is kinder to his creatures, than 
they are to themselves, did not leave me to remain 
long in this distressing state. I began to discover a 
beauty in the way of salvation by Christ. He appear- 
ed to be just Heras Saviour as I needed. J saw how 
God could be just, in saving sinners through him. I 
committed my soul into his hands, and besought him 
to do with me what seemed good in his sight. When 
I was thus enabled to commit myself into the hands 
of Christ, my mind was relieved from that distressing 
weight which had borne it down for so long a time. 
[ did not think that I had: obtained the new heart, 
which I had been seeking, but felt happy in contem- 
plating the character of Christ, and particularly that 
disposition, which led him to suffer so much, for the 
sake of doing the will and promoting the glory of his 
heavenly Father. A few days after this, as I was 
reading Bellamy’s True Religion, I obtained a new 
view of the character of God. His justice, display- 


80 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


ed in condemning the finally impenitent, which I hac 
befure viewed as cruel, now appeared to be an expres- 
sion of hatred to sin, and regard to the good of beings 
n general. A view of his purity and holiness filled 
ny soul with wonder and admiration. I felt a aispo- 
sition to commit myself unreservedly into his hands, 
and leave it with him to save me or cast me off; for I 
felt I could not be unhappy, while allowed the privi- 
lege of contemplating and loving so glorious a Being. — 
I now began to hope, that I had passed from death 
unto life. When I examined myself, I was constrain- 
ed to own, that I had feelings and dispositions, to 
which I was formerly an utter stranger. I had 
sweet communion with the blessed God, from day to 
day; my heart was drawn out in love to Christians 
of whatever denomination; the sacred Scriptures 
were sweet to my taste; and such was my thirst for 
religious knowledge, that I frequently spent a great 
part of the night in reading religious books. O how 
different were my views of myself and of God, from 
what they were, when I first began to inquire what 
I should do to be saved. I felt myself to be a poor 
lost sinner, destitute of everything to recommend 
myself to the divine favor: that I was, by nature, 
iclined to every evil way; and that it had been the 
mere sovereign, restraining mercy of God, not my 
own goodness, which had kept me from committing 
the most flagrant crimes. This view of myself hum- 
bled me in the dust, melted me into sorrow and con- 
trition for my sins, induced me to lay my soul at the 
feet of Christ, and plead his merits alone, as the 
ground of my acceptance. I felt that if Christ had 
not died, to make an atonement for sin, I could not 
ask God to dishonor his holy government so far as to 
save so polluted a creature, and that should he even 
now condemn me to suffer eternal punishment, it 
would be so just that my mouth would be stopped, 
and all holy beings in the universe would acquiesce 
in the sentence, and praise him as a just and right- 
eous God. My chief happiness now consisted in 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 2) 


EEE the moral perfections of tne glonous 
od. I longed to have all intelligent creatures love 
him; and felt, that even fallen spirits could never he 
released from their obligations to love a Being pos- 
sessed of such glorious perfections. I felt happy in 
the consideration, that so benevolent a Being gov- 
erned the world, and ordered every passing event. 
[ lost all disposition to murmur at any providence, 
assured that such a Being could not err in any dis- 
pensation. Sin, in myself and others, appeared as 
that abominable thing, which a holy God hates—and 
I earnestly strove to avoid sinning, not merely be- 
cause I was afraid of hell, but because I feared to 
displease God, and grieve his Holy Spirit. I attend- 
ed my studies in school, with far different feelings and 
different motives, from what I had ever done before 
I felt my obligation to improve all I had to the glo- 
ry of God; and since he in his providence had favor- 
ed me with advantages for improving my mind, | 
felt that I should be like the slothful servant, if I 
neglected them. I, therefore, diligently employed all 
my hours in school, in acquiring useful knowledge, 
and spent my evenings and part of the night in 
spiritual enjoyments. 

“While thus recounting the mercies of God to my 
soul, I am particularly affected by two considerations ; 
the richness of that grace, which called and stopped 
me in my dangerous course, and the ungrateful re- 
turns I make for so distinguished a blessing. I am 
prone to forget the voice which called me out of 
darkness into light, and the hand which drew me 
from the horrible pit and the miry clay. When I 
first discerned my Deliverer, my grateful heart of- 
fered him the services of a whole life, and resolved 
to acknowledge no other master. But such is the 
force of my native depravity, that I find myself prone 
to forsake him, grieve away his influence from my 
heart. and walk in the dark and dreary path of the 
backslider. I despair of making great attainmenta 
m the divine 'ife, and look forward to death only, to 


92 MEMUIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


free me from my sms and corruptions. ‘Till that 
blessed period, that hour of my emancipation, I am 
resolved, through the grace and strength of my 
Redeemer, to maintain a constant warfare with my 
mbred sins, and endeavour to perform the duties 
incumbent 9n me, in whatever situation I may be 
placed. 


‘Safely guide my wandering feet, 
Travelling in this vale of tears ; 
Dearest Saviour, to thy seat 
Lead, and dissipate my fears.’ 


The cnange in her feelings and views, which she 
has thus described, was a thorough and permanent 
one. She immediately entered on the duties, and 
sought for the pleasures, of religion, with all the 
ardor of her natural character. Several letters to 
her young friends, written soon after this period, 
have been preserved. ‘They are almost exclusively 
confined to religious topics; and some of them, ad- 
dressed to individuals who had not then made the 
Saviour their refuge, breathe an earnest desire for 
their welfare, and a faithfulness in beseeching them ~ 
to repent of their sins and believe in the Redeemer, 
hick indicate the early workings of the same zeal 
that afterwards led her to Burmah. 

“‘ Redeeming love,” says an intimate friend, “was 
now her theme. One might spend days with her, 
without hearing any other subject reverted to. The 
throne of grace, t»o, was her early and late resort. 
{ have known her to spend cold winter evenings in a 
chamber without fire, and return to the family with 
a solemnity spread over her countenance, which told 
of Him with whom she had been communing. Nor 
was her love of social pleasures diminished, although 
the complexion of them was completely changed. 
Even at this late period, I fancy I see her, with strong 
feelings depicted on her countenance, inclining over 
her Bible, rising to place it on the stand, retiring to 
her chamber, and after a season of prayer proceeding © 


MBMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 93 


to visit this and that family, to speak of Him whom 
her soul loved. She thirsted for the knowledge of 
gospel truth, in all its relations and dependencies. 
Besides the daily study of Scripture, with Guise, Or- 
ton and Scott before her, she perused with deep in- 
terest the works of Edwards, Hopkins, Bellamy, 
Doddridge, &c. With Edwards on Redemption, she 
was instructed, quickened, strengthened. Welldo I 
remember the elevated smile which beamed on her 
countenance, when she first spoke to me of its pre- 
cious contents. She had transcribed, with her own 
hand, Edwards’ leading and most striking remarks 
on this great subject. When reading Scripture, ser- 
. mons, or other works, if she met with any sentiment 
or doctrine, which seemed dark and intricate, she 
would mark it, and beg the first ciergyman who cal- 
led at her father’s, to elucidate and explain it.” 
Her religious feelings were nevertheless affected 
by the same fluctuations as those of other Christians. 
he fervor of her affections made her, indeed, more 
liable than persons of a more equable temperament, 
to the changes, which physical as well as moral cau- 
ses occasion in the spiritual joysof Christians. Her 
piety did not consist in feeling ; but there is no true 
religion without feeling ; and the heart which has 
ever been suitably affected by the stupendous truths 
and hopes of Christianity, cannot be satisfied with a 
dull insensibility, or even with a calm ‘equanimity. 
There will be a consciousness of disproportion be- 
tween the subjects which Christianity presents to the 
mind, and the feelings which they awaken ; and the 
self-reproach that will thus be occasioned, will be 
increased, by a recollection of the strong affections 
and lively joys which the heart experienced in the 
ardor of its first love. Every believer has frequent 
occasion to accuse himself of a want of lively sensi- 
bility to his privileges and duties ; and while he can 
look back to seasons when he was more zealous in 
his piety, and when his enjoyment of religious pleas- 
ures was greater than at present, he wil’ fear that 


24 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


he has receded instead of advancing. He will deplore 
his unfaithfulness and coldness, and will write “ bitter 
things” against himself. 

Mrs. Judson’s journal contains many details of 
nese alternations of joy and sorrow, of hope and 
self-accusation, of which all Christians are, in some 
degree, partakers. A few extracts will now be in- 
serted : 


“* July 30, 1806. I find my heart cold .and hard. 
I fear there is no sp.ritual life in me. [ am im an 
unhappy state, for nothing in life can afford me sat- 
isfaction without the light of God’s countenance. 
Why is my heart so far from thee, O God, when it 
is my highest happiness to enjoy thy presence! Let 
me no more wander from thee ; but 


‘Send down thy Spirit from above, 
And fill my soul with sacred love.? 


“ Aug. 5. Were it left to my choice, whether to 
follow the vanities of the world, and go to heaven 
at last, or to live a religious life, have trials with sin 
and temptation, and sometimes enjoy the light of 
God’s reconciled countenance, I should not hesitate 
a moment in chocsing the latter; for there is no 
real satisfaction in the enjoyments of time and sense. 
If the young, in the midst of their diversions, could 
picture to themselves the Saviour hanging on the 
cross, his hands and feet streaming with blood, his 
head pierced with thorns, his body torn with scourg- 
es, and reflect, that by their wicked lives, they open 
those wounds afresh, they would feel constrained to 
repent, and cry for mercy on their souls. O my 
God, let me never more join with the wicked world, 
or take enjoyment in anything short of conformity 
to thy holy will. May I ever keep in mind the 
solemn day, when I shall appear before thee ! May 
{ ever flee to the bleeding Saviour, as my only re- 
fuge, and renouncing my own righteousness, may I 
rely entirely on the righteousness of thy dear Son ! 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON 25 


“ fug. §. Ihave many doubts about my spiritual 
state. I fear I do not really love the divine charac- 
ter ; and if not, what a dreadful situation I am in! 
And is 1t "payee that I have never given myself 
away io God in sincerity and truth? I will do it 
now. In thy strength, O God, I resign myself into 
thy hands, and resolve to live devoted to thee. I 
des.re conformity to thy will, more than anything 
beside. I desire to have the Spirit of Christ, to be 
adorned with all the Christian graces, to be more 
engaged in the cause of Christ, and feel more con 
cerned for the salvation of precious souls. 

«31, Another Sabbath is past. Have attended 
pe worship, but with wandering thoughts. O 

ow depraved I find my heart! Yet I cannot think 
of going back to the world, and renouncing my Sa 
viour. O merciful God, save me from myself, and 
enable me to commit myself entirely to thee. 

* Sept. 2. I have discovered new beauties in the 
way of salvation by Christ. The righteousness 
which he has wrought out is complete, and he is 
able io save the chief of sinners. But above all, his 
wondrous dying love, and glorious resurrection, as 
tonish my soul. How can IJ ever sin against this Sa 
viour again? O keep me from sinning against thee 
dear Redeemer, and enable me to live to the promo- 
tion of thy glory. 

“14, Ihave, this day, publicly professed myself 
a disciple of Christ, and covenanted with him, at his 
sacred table.* Iam now renewedly bound to keep 
his commandments, and walk in his steps. O may 
this solemn covenant never be broken. May I be 
guarded from the vanities of this life, and spend all 
my days in the service of God. O keep me, merciful 
God, keep me; for I have no strength of my own; 
I shall dishonor thy cause, and ruin my soul, unless 
guided by thee. { 

“‘ Nov. 8. Another day, for which 1 must give an 


She became a member of the Congregational Church in 
Bradford. 


Poi) MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON, 


account, has gone into eternity. It will appear, on 
the great day, dressed in the very garb which I have 
given it. Spent the evening with my young reli- 
gious friends, and Mr. P. whose conversation was 
remarkably solemn. He advised us to make reso- 
utions for the government of our daily conduct. 
. feel myself unable to keep any resolutions that I 
may make; but humbly relying on the grace of God 
for assistance, I will try. I do desire to live wholly 
devoted to God, and to have every sin in my heart 
entirely slain. 

«QO thou Ged of all grace, I humbly beseech thee 
to enable me to keep the following resolutions :— 
When I first awake, solemnly devote myself to God, 
for the day. Read several passages of Scripture, and 
then spend as long time in prayer, as circumstances 
permit, Read two chapters in the Old Testament, 
and one in the New, and meditate thereon. Attend 
to the duties of my chamber. If I have no needle 
work to do, read in some religious book. At school, 
diligently attend to the duties before me, and let not 
one moment pass unimproved. At noon, read a por- 
tion of Scripture, pray for the blessing of God, and 
spend the remainder of the intermission, in reading 
some improving or religious book. In all my stud- 
ies, be careful to maintain a humble dependance on 
divine assistance. In the evening, if I attend a 
religious meeting, or any other place for instruction, 
before going, read a portion of Scripture. If not, 
spend the evening in reading, and close the day as 
I began. Resolve also to strive against the first 
résengs of discontent, fretfulness and anger; to be 
meek, and humble, and patient, constantly to bear in 
mind, that I am in the presence of God; habitually 
to look up to him for deliverance from temptations; 
and in all cases, to do to others, as I would have 
them do to me. 

“ Nov. 6. I daily make some new discoveries of 
the vileness and ev‘l of my heart. I sometimes fear, 
that it is impossible for a spark of grace to exist in 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. oy] 


a heart so full of sin. Nothing but the power of 
God can keep me from returning to the world, and 
becoming as vain as ever. But still I see a beauty 
in the character of Christ, that makes me ardently 
desire to be like him. All the commands of God ap- 
pear perfectly right and reasonable, and sin appears 
so odious as to deserve eternal punishment. O how 
deplorable would be my situation, thus covered with 
sin, was it not for the atonement Christ has made. 
But he is my Mediator with the Father. He has 
magnified the law and made it honorable. He can 
save sinners, consistently with the divine glory. God 
can now be just, and the justifier of those who be- 
lieve in his Son. 

26. This is the evening before thanksgiving day, 
and one which I formerly spent in making prepara- 
‘tion for some vain amusement. But for the first 
time in my life, I have spent it in reading and pray- 
ing, and endeavouring to obtain a suitable frame of 
mind for the approaching day. How much reasou 
have I to be thankful for what God has done for me, 
the year past. He has preserved my forfeited life; 
he has waited to be gracious; he has given me kind 
friends, and all the comforts of life; and, more than 
all, he has-‘sent his Holy Spirit, and caused me to 
feel my lost condition by nature—inclined me to 
trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, as my only Saviour, 
and thus changed the whole course of my life. 
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, 
bless his holy name! 

«“ Dec. 22. I am this day seventeen years old. 
What an important year has the past been to me. 
Either I have been made, through the mercy of Ged, 
a partaker of divine grace, orI have been fatally de- 
ceiving myself, and building on a sandy foundation. 
Either I have in sincerity and truth, renounced the 
vanities of this world, and entered the narrow path 
which leads to life, or I have been refraining from 
them for a time on y, to turn again and relish them 
More than ever. God grant that the latter may 


28 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


never be my unhappy case. Though I feel myself to 
be full of sin and destitute of all strength to persevere, 
yet if I know anything, I do desire to live a life of 
strict religion, to enjoy the presence of God, ana honor 
the cause to which I have professedly devoted myself. 
I do not desire my portion in this world. I find more 
real enjoyment in contrition for sin, excited by a view 
of the adorable moral perfections of God, than in all 
earthly joys. I find more solid happiness in one even- 
ing meeting, when divine truths are impressed on my 
heart by the powerful influences of the Holy Spirit, 
than I ever enjoyed in all the balls and assemblies I 
have attended during the seventeen years of my life. 
Thus when I compare my present views of divine 
things, with what they were, at this time last year, | 
cannot but hope Iam a new creature, and have begun 
to live a new life. 

“ April 11.- Now I know that God is a prayer 
hearing God. When I retired this evening, to spend 
sometime in prayer, I found I had no heart to pray. 
I could pray for nothing but a spirit of prayer; when, 
contrary to all my expectations, my feelings were 
suddenly changed, and I obtained great freedom of 
access to the mercy seat. I felt it good to draw near 
to God, and pour out my soul before him, Astonish- 
ing .ove and unbounded benevolence in the infinite 
God, thus to let his creatures come near, and par- 
take of the happiness which he himself enjoys. O 
Jesus, make me humble; let me love thee more, and 
be daily more devoted to thy dear cause. 

“April 12. Sabbath. Have this holy day en- 
joyed the privilege of commemorating the dying love 
of Christ. O how condescending did the divine Re- 
deemer appear! I felt my heart drawn out in love 
to God for his great goodness to the children of 
men. Five new members were added to the church. 
How animating to see so many come over to the 
Lord’s side, and subscribe to be his! And was I in- 
deed called at an early age, called in the bloom of 
youth, to be a partaker of the grace of God? I, whe 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 99 


was opposed to everything good—who was a faith 
fui servant of the adversary of souls? How easily 
might I have been eft to go on ‘n my own chosen 
way, “ill repentance was too late. How earnestly do 
{ now desire to live entirely devoted to the ser- 
vice of Christ, to express my gratitude, by keeping 
his commands, and living near to him. But, alas! 
notwithstanding all he has done for me, so depraved 
is my heart, atic so inclined to every evil, that I shall 
wander from God, grieve his spirit, wound his cause, 
and destroy my soul, unless kept by his mighty 
power. On sovereign grace alone I rely for grace 
and strength to persevere. 

“18. Too much engaged in worldly things. 
Worldly thoughts will creep in, and destroy my re- 
ligious comfort. I have much to make me constant- 

-ly devoted, yet I am comparatively stupid. I am 
surrounded by a wicked world, where vice and im- 
morality are prevailing, and very little real religion 
to be found. Lord, take care of thine own cause, 
and let not the enemy be exalted over thy people. O 
take care of thy children, and animate them with thy 
presence in the wilderness. ”” 


These extracts are sufficient to show the exercises 
of her mind, for some months after her conversion. 
We have omitted a considerable portion, because our 
space is limited, and because we think that much 
caution ought to be used, in disclosing to the pub- 
lic eye the private feelings of the Christian. In the 
bosom of every true believer hope predominates ; 
but many causes often throw a cloud over his joys, 
and sometimes obscure the brightness of hope itself.* 

At such times he may doubt that he is a Chris- 
tian; and if he records or utters his feelings, they 
have a tone of sadness and despondency, which is in 


* These causes sometimes have their origin in the disorders of 
the body. Dr. Johnson, Cowper, and others, are examples of 
the power of disease to disturb the mind, and interrupt the trans 
quil tenor of religious ssblaaciuing 


-_ 


80 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


melancholy contrast with the state of his mind at 
other times, when the candle of the Lord shines upon 
his head. Some Christians, too, possess a sanguine 
temperament, which impels them continually to ex- 
tremes. A journal of their daily experience would 
depict them, on one day, as rejoicing and steadfast 
believers, and on the next, perhaps, as harassed with 
doubts, not onl; of their personal piety, but of the 
truth of Christianity itself; it would show them, at 
one time, as fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, and 
at another, as criminally conformed to this world. 
It may, perhaps, be sometimes useful to the Chris- 
tian to peruse such statements of the feelings of 
others ; because they inform him that his own joys 
and sorrows correspond with those of other Chris- 
tians, and that occasional doubts and fears are not 
mcompatible with genuine piety and prevailing hope. 
God himself has seen fit to give us, in his word, the 
spiritual exercises of several eminent saints, and es- 
pecially of David, who seems to have been placed 
in almost every variety of human condition, and to 
have been visited with trials of every kind to which 
our nature is subject, that he might be an example 
to all future saints, and that his feelings and experi- 
ence, as displayed in his Psalms, might comfort and 
instruct the church in every age. 

But the complaints and self-reproaches of uninspir- 
ed saints, may possibly be injurious to some profes- 
sors of religion, by lowering the standard of piety, 
and appeasing their consciences for their own defi- 
ciencies. And the enemies of religion are liable to 
regard them as inexplicable inconsistences, and as 
proofs that religion is the parent of melancholy, and 
is devoid of permanent and tranquil happiness. 

The following letter of Mrs. J. written at an ear- 
ly period of her religious life, shows how correctly 
she thought, in relation to the exercises of a renewed 
heart. She here explains the cause of much of her 
own darkness of mind, and self distrust. Growth in 
grace requires an increasing acquaintance with the 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. $1 


na‘ure of sin, and of our unworthiness; and this 
knowledge will be likely to darken and distress the 
mind, unless faith be strong, and the efficacy of the 
atonement be very clearly discerned. 


TO MISS L. K. 
** Newbury, Sept. 20, 1807. 

“You requested me, dear L, to write soon after 
my return. With pleasure I comply, as it fixes you 
in my imagination, and gives me sensations almost 
as pleasing ‘as a verbal intercourse. O may that 
Spirit which unites the hearts of the children of God 
in love, direct my thoughts, and guide my pen ta 
write that which may be usefu! in our journey to 
another world. You ask, ** what are the evidences of 
. growth in grace.” From reading the lives of pious 
people, and the word of God, I have come to the 
following conclusion, though different from my ideas 
formerly. 

« A person who grows in grace will see more and 
more of the dreadful wickedness of his heart; of its 
Ipposition to everything good; and of its deceitful- 
ness and fickleness. When Isaiah saw more uf God 
and his glory, his first expressions were not—I am 
more like God, because I have seen more of him; but 
nis language was this, Wo ts me, for Iam undore, 
because I am a man of uncleun lips. 'The more grace 
Christians have, the more clearly they can see the 
contrast between holiness and sin; and while it leads 
them to hunger, thirst and strive for the one, it leads 
them to loathe, abhor, and mourn for the other. 
Growth in grace will consequently lead them to know 
more about Jesus Christ, and the great need they 
have of him for a whole Saviour. He willappear to 
them daily more needful as a prophet, priest, and 
king, his character more lovely, and his spirit more 
feairable, They also feel more the worth of souls. 
As they are convinced daily of the dreadful nature 
of sin, so they will feel more anxious to save sin- 
rers from the consequences of it. This will nec 


oe MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSOY 


essarily lead them to pray more often, earnestly a.id 
fervently, give them a disrelish for the vanities of the 
world, and a sincere and hearty desire to devote ail 
they have to him, and serve him entirely. But one 
great evidence is not yet mentioned, perhaps the 
greatest. They will be constantly watching, and 
endeavouring to find whether they grow m grace. 
They will watch their improvemen: from time to 
ume, in every portion of Holy Writ which they read, 
every sermon they hear, and the providences which 
occur, either afflictive or the contrary. 

‘These, dear L, are my ideas respecting the sub- 
‘ect. There are many other evidences, but these 
are sufficient, if true, to convince us whether we 
make any improvement in a divine life. If we have 
made none, under the rich cultivation we have en- 
joyed, then we may be sure we are unacquaint- 
ed with that path which is as a shining light, which 
shineth more and more unto the perfect day.” 

Mrs. Judson, early m her religious lite, showed 
her desire to be useful to her fellow men. Her ac- 
tive mind was not satisfied without sume effort to 
benefit those around her. She accordingly engaged, 
soon after this period, in the occupation of instruct- 
ing a school, impelled mainly by the desire to be use- 
ful. There are few situations, which furnish better 
opportunities of imparting permanent benefit, than 
that of the instructer of a school. In New Eng- 
land, this office is regarded with a good degree of 
the honorable estimation to which it is entitled; and 
it is to be wished, that a larger number of educated 
ober ladies would employ themselves in a service so 

eneficial to their own minds, and so vitally impor- 
tant to the rising generation. 

The following extract from Mrs. Judson’s journal, 
dated May 12, 1807, shows the conscientious princi- 
ples which actuated her; and proves that her mind 
was thus early swayed by the resolution to live nof 
unto herself, but to Him who died for her, and rose 
again. Her zeal for the spiritual welfare uf others, 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 33 


and her decision of character, are here seen, in a 
very striking light: 

‘Have taken charge of a few scholars. Ever 
since I have had a comfortable hope in Christ, I have 
desired to devote myself to him, in such a way, as 
to be useful to my fellow creatures. As Providence 
has placed me in a situation of life, where I have an 
opportunity of getting as good an education as I de- 
sire, I feel it would be highly criminal in me not to 
improve it. I feel, also, that it would be equally 
criminal to desire to be well educated and accom- 
plished, from selfish motives, with a view merely to 
gratify my taste and relish for improvement, or my 
pride in being qualified to shine. I therefore resolved 
ast winter, to attend the academy, from no other 
motive, than to improve the talents bestowed by God, 
so as to be more extensively devoted to his glory, 
and the benefit of my fellow creatures. On being 
lately requested to take a small school, for a few 
months, | felt very unqualified to have the charge 
of little immortal souls; but the hope of doing them 
good, by endeavouring to impress their young and 
tender minds with divine truth, and the obligation ] 
feel, to try to be useful, have induced me to comply. 
I was enabled to open the school with prayer. 
Though the cross was very great, I felt constrained, 
by a sense of duty, to take it up. The little crea- 
tures seemed astonished at such a beginning. Prob- 
ably some of them had never heard a prayer before. 
O may [ have grace to be faithful in instructing 
these little immortals, in such a way as shall be 
pleasing to my heavenly Father.” 

She was engaged, at intervals, for several years, 
in teaching schools in different towns.* She was al- 
ways diligent and faithful in her endeavours to en- 
lighten the minds and to form the manners of her 

upils ; but she regarded the fear of the Lord as the 
eginning of wisdom; and she strove to guide her 


* She taught schools in Salem, Haverhil and Newbury 


$40 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


dear pupi.s to the Saviour. She felt herself to be 
intrusted, in some measure, with the charge of their 
souls; and she watched for them as one vhat must 
give account. It is believed, that her prayers and 
efforts were not in vain; and that some of her pupils 
in this country will mingle their praises before the . 
throne of the Redeemer, with those of ransomed 
Burmans, adoring him for her instrumentality in 
leading them to repentance and faith in his name. 

From her journal we select a few additional ex- 
tracts, which will show the state of her feelings, and 
the progress of her piety. 

« June 12. For a week or two past, have had 
very little enjoyment in religion, and almost every 
duty has appeared burdensome. But, praised be 
God, I have enjoyed much, yesterday and to-day. 
1 find, that reading the exercises of Miss Anthony 
has a great tendency to humble me, and quicken my 
spiritual life. I long to possess her spirit, and be as 
much engaged in the service of God, as that dear 
saint was. I feel an attachment to her, stronger 
than I ever felt for any person, while I was in an 
unconverted state. If love to the children of God 
is an evidence of having been born again, I have 
reason to think, that this is my happy case. I know 
that I love Christians, and love those most, who are 
most actively engaged in the cause of Christ; and at 
the throne of grace, I feel at times, my soul drawn 
out in love to them, and in as ardent desires for their 
spiritual welfare, as for my own. 

“17. Have had some deep sense of religion this 
day. Read the life of Dr. Hopkins, of Newport. 
Fiad much edification and happiness in reading such 
books. In the evening had much conversation with 
some of the family on the subject of religion. Ap- 
pearances rather encouraging. 

“18, Have enjoyed much to-day, while reading 
and meditating on the distinguishmg doctrines of 
grace. My heart acquiesced and rejoiced in them, 
{f [ enjoy comfort in anything, it is when I have a 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON,- SE 


realizing sense of God’s holy character. I feel hap- 
py, when I reflect that God will overrule all things 
for the promotion of his own glory. In my walk, 
this evening, my thoughts were intensely fixed on 
the greatness and majesty of the Supreme Being, 
and on the numberless sins I have committed against 
him. Then they turned to the glorious way of 
salvation, which this great and most gracious Being 
has provided. I desired to give myself entirely to 
Christ, have him for my Prophet, Priest, and King, 
be entirely devoted to him, and give him all the 
glory of my salvation. O Jesus, ever give me 
such views of thyself, as shall entirely take away my 
thoughts from this vain world. 
* July 6. It is just a year, this day, since I 
entertained a hope in Christ. About this time in 
. the evening, when reflecting on the words of the 
lepers, If we enter into the city, then the fumine is 
in the city, and we shall die there ; and if we sit 
still here, we die also, 1 felt that if I returned to the 
world, I should surely perish ; if I staid where I then 
was, I should perish; and I could but perish, if I 
threw myself on the mercy of Christ. ‘Then came 
light, and relief, and comfort, such as I never knew 
before. O how little have I grown in grace, since 
that time. How little engaged in religion am I now, 
compared to what I was then. ‘Then the world had 
not the least share in my thoughts or heart. Noth- 
ing but religion engrossed my affections, and I 
thought that nothing else ever would. But though 
my heart is treacherous, I trust that I have some 
evidence of being a true Christian ; for when contem- 
plating the moral perfections of God, my heart is 
leased with, and approves of, just such a Being. 
is law, which once appeared unjust and severe, now 
appears to be holy, just, and good. His justice ap- 
pears equally glorious as his mercy, and illustrative 
of the same love to universal happiness. ‘The way 
of salvation by Christ appears glorious, because 


! 


896 MEMOIR OF MBS, JUDSON. 


herein God cin be just, and yet display his mercy to 
the penitent smuer.” 


At this point, her regular journal ceases, and a 
few occasional paragraphs only have been preserved, 
concerning her subsequent views and feelings. They 
do not differ materially from those which have al- 
ready been quoted, except that they show a gradual 
enlargement of desires for the prosperity of the 
church of God; and indicate that God was prepar- 
ing her mind for her future duties. 

‘“‘ March 17—(probably 1809.) Have had some 
enjoyment in reading the life of David Brainerd. It 
had a tendency to humble me, and excite desires to 
live as near to God as that holy man did. Have 
spent this evening in prayer for quickening grace. 
Felt my heart enlarged to pray for spiritual blessings 
for myself, my friends, the church at large, the 
heathen world, and the African slaves. Felt a willing- 
ness to give myself away to Christ, to be disposed of 
ashe pleases. Here I findsafetyand comfort. Jesus 
is my only refuge. I will trust his word, and rest my 
soul in his hands. I will depend on him, not only 
for the salvation of my soul, but for daily grace and 
strength to persevere in a religious course. O may I 
now begin to live to God. 

«94, At the commencement of the last week, 4 
had high hopes of being more engaged in religion 
than ever before. But I have reason to fear, that I 
relied too much on my own strength. I still find 
cause to be humbled in the dust, for my inconstancy 
and rebellion. I have done little for the cause of 
God—too often indulged in trifling conversation. In 
this way, I grieve the Holy Spirit, and bring dark- 
ness upon my mind. And yet I hope, that I have 
bad some right feelings. I would not deny what I 
have enjoyed, though it is but small. I have at times 
felt engaged in prayer for the prosperity of the 
sa and for the conversion of the heathen and 

ews.” 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 37 


CHAPTER II. 


Mrs. Judson’s Connexion with Mr. Judson 


Tue event, which determined the nature of her 
future life, was her marriage with Mr. Judson. 
Some particulars respecting the circumstances which 
led to this connexion, will now be stated. A few 
facts, however, in relation to Mr. Judson himsell; 
must previously be mentioned. 

He was born at Malden, (Mass.) August 9, 1788. 
He graduated at Brown University, in 1807. Soon 
afterwards he commenced making the tour of the 
United States. ‘Some providential occurrences, 
while on his journey, led him to doubt the truth of 
those deistical sentiments which he had recently 
adopted. His mind became so deeply impressed 
with the probability of the divine authenticity of 
the Scriptures, that he could no longer continue his 
journey, but returned to his father’s house, for the 
express purpose of examining thoroughly the foun- 
dation of the Christian religion. After continuing 
his investigations for some time, he became con- 
vinced that the Scriptures are of divine origin, and 
that he himself was in a lost situation by nature, 
and needed renovation previously to an admittance 
into heaven. It now became his sole inquiry, What 
shall I do to be saved ? 

“The Theological Seminary at Andover, Massa- 
ehusetts, was about this time established; but the 
cules of the institution required evidence of evan- 
gelical piety in all who were admitted. Mr. Judson 
was desirous of entering there, for the purpose of be- 
ing benefited by the theological lectures; but hardly 
ventured to make application, conscious that he was 
destitute of the proper qualifications. His ardent 
desire, however, to become acquainted with the 
religious students, and to Fe in a situation to gain 


88 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


religious instruction, overcame every obstacle, and 
he applied for admittance ; at the same time assuring 
the icicssonn of his having no hope that he had 
been a subject of regenerating grace. He was, not- 
withstanding, admitted ; and, in the course of a few 
weeks, gained satisfactory evidence of having obtain- 
ed an interest in Christ, and turned his attention to 
those studies which were most calculated to make 
him useful in the ministry. 

‘¢ Some time in the last year of his residence in 
this theological seminary, he met with Dr. Buchanan’s 
‘Star in the East.” This first led his thoughts 
to an Eastern Mission. The subject harassed his 
mind from day to day, and he felt deeply impressed 
with the importance of making some attempt to res- 
cue the perishing millions of the Fast. He communi- 
cated these impressions to various individuals, but 
they all discouraged him. He then wrote to the Di- 
rectors of the London Missionary Society, explaining 
his views, and requested information on the subject 
of Missions. He received a most encouraging re- 
ply, and an invitation to visit England, to obtain in 
person the necessary information. 

* Soon after this, Messrs. Nott, Newell and Hall, 
joined him, all of them resolving to leave their 
native land, and engage in the arduous work of 
Missionaries, as soon as Providence should open the 
way.” * 

There was, at that time, no Missionary Society, 
in this country, to which these young men could 
look for assistance and direction. The spirit of 
prayer and of exertion for the spread of the Gospe 
through the world, had not then been sufficiently 
diffused, to awaken the American churches to com- 
bined action for the support of foreign Missions. 

The formation of a Missionary Society in this 
country was, therefore, a desirable measure. Ag 
these young men were all Congregationalists, they 
looked, of course, to their own denomination for the 

* History of the Burman Mission, p. 14 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 39 


aid which they needed. An opportunity was j)resent- 
ea, to lay the subject before a number of the leading 
ministers of that denomination, at the meeting of 
the Massachusetts Association, at Bradford, in June, 
1810. At this meeting, the following paper, written 
by Mr. Judson,* was presented: 

*'The undersigned, members of the Divinity Col- 
' lege, respectfully request the attention of their Rev- 
erend Fathers, convened in the General Association 
at Bradford, to the following statement and inquiries: 

«They beg leave to state, that their minds have 
been long impressed with the duty and importance 
of personally attempting a Mission to the heathen; 
that the impressions on their minds have induced a 
serious, and they trust, a prayerful consideration of 
the subject in its various attitudes, particularly in re- 
lation to the probable success, and the difficulties at- 
tending such an attempt; and that after examining 
all the information which they can obtain, they con- 
sider themselves as devoted to this work for life, 
whenever God in his providence shall open the way 

“They now offer the following inquiries, on which 
they solicit the opinion and advice of this Association. 
Whether, with their present views and feelings, 
they ought to renounce the object of Missions as 
visionary or impracticable; if not, whether they 
ought to direct their attention to the.eastern or the 


* It 1s not the purpose of this work, to extol or to defend Mr. 
Judson. We shall therefore omit any notice of some unpleasant 
occurrences. We are not concerned to claim for him the exclu- 
sive honor of having led the way in originating the American 
Board of Commissioners. This praise, however, has been attri- 
buted, in unqualified terms, to one of his associates. [ Life of 
Mills, p. 37. ] It is, indeed, a point of little importance, what 
individual is honored by God as the instrument of signal benefits 
to mankind. His alone is the wisdom to inspire, and the 

trength to execute ; and the most distinguished of his servants are 
nade to feel, that it is not by their might or power, but by his 
Spirit, that holy desires are cherished, and good purposes accom. 
plished. We have contented ourselves with stating facts, leav- 
ing the reader to make his own inferences. 


40 ME&1\IR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


western v-rld; wnether they may expect patronage 
and support from a Missionary Society in this coun- 
try, or must commit themselves to the direction of a 
European Society; and what preparatory measures 
they ought to take previous to actual engagement? 
“The undersigned, feeling their youth and inex- 
perience, look up to their Fathers in the Church, 
and respectfully solicit their advice, direction, and 


prayers. ApvonrrAm Jupson, JR. 


Samvue.u Nort, Jr. 
Samue.u J. MrIuus. 
Samue. NEwWELL.’’ 


This important paper was at first signed by two 
other individuals, Mr. Richards and Mr. Rice; but 
their names were omitted, from a fear that the ap- 
plication of so many individuals, at one time, might 
occasion embarrassment, 

‘This document,” says the biographer of Mr. Mills, 
‘< was referred to a Special Committee, who, in their 
report, recognised the imperative obligation and im-. 
portance of Missions—expressed their conviction that 
the gentlemen who had thus modestly expressed their 
views, ought not to renounce, but sacredly cherish 
their sacred impressions; and submitted the outlines 
of a plan, which at that meeting was carried into 
effect, in the appointment of a Board of Commission- 
ers for Foreign Missions, for the purpose of devis- 
ing ways and means, and adopting and prosecuting 
measures for promoting the spread of the Gospel 
in heathen lands.” : 

Mr. Judson and his associates expected and desir- 
ed an immediate appointment as Missionaries; but 
the Board, being unprovided with funds, and not 
having as yet matured any plan of operations, advis- 
ed them to continue their studies, and wait for further 
information. But fearing that several years might 
elapse before a missionary spirit would be sufficiently . 
excited in this country, Mr. Judson solicited and ob- 
tained leave of the Board to visit England, to ascer 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 4i 


tain whether any measures of cooperation could be 
concerted between the London Missionary Society 
and the Board, and whether any assistance could be 
obtained from that Society, in case the Board itself 
should be unable to sustain a Mission.* 

He sailed in January, 1811, for England Three 
weeks after sailing, the vessel was captured by a 
French privateer; and after being detained several 
weeks as a prisoner on board, he was confined ina 
prison at Bayonne. By the exertions of an American 
gentleman, he was released on parole, and at length 
with great difficulty he obtained passports from the 
Emperor, and proceeded to England, where he ar- 
rived in May. 

It was found, that no concert of measures could 
be arranged; but the London Society agreed to 
support Mr. J. and his companions as Missionaries, 
if the American Board should not be able to do it. 

Mr. J. returned to America, and at the meeting of 
the Board, at Worcester, in September, 1811, he 
and one of his missionary brethren earnestly solicit- 
ed an immediate appointment, as they were extreme- 
ly anxious to be engaged in missionary labors, and 
as there was a prospect of war between England 
and the United States, which would probably inter- 
rupt their plans entirely. They stated, that if the 
Board was unable to support them, they would ac- 
cept an appointment from the London Society. ‘The 
Board resolved, notwithstanding the scantiness of 
its funds, to establish a Mission in Burmah; and 
Messrs. Judson, Nott, Newell, and Hall, were im- 
mediately appointed. Messrs. Richards and Warren 


* Instructions of the Board to Mr. Judson. 

+t is said, [Life of Mills, p. 40.] that Mr. Judson “ felt him- 
self justified in entering into partial arrangements, at least, with 
the London Missionary Society, to become their Missionary in 
the East Indies.” The fact is, that Mr. J. made no arrange- 
ment which interfered with his preference to receive the appoint- 
ment of the American Board. The London Society gave to him 
and his associates instructions, to be used at their option. 


4 


42 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


were received at the same meeting, as Missionaries, 
with instructions, however, to continue their studies 
fora while. Mr. Rice was afterwards appointed, 
It is interesting to contrast the state of the American 
Board, at that time, when its members hesitated, 
from a fear of the want of adequate funds, with the 
present condition of that powerful body. 

During the session of the Association, at Bradford, 
in 1810, Mr. Judson first saw Miss Hasseltine. An 
acquaintance was soon after formed, which led toa 
direct offer of marriage on his part, including, of 
course, a proposition to her, to accompany him in his 
missionary enterprise. 

She was thus placed in a situation of peculiar 
difficulty and delicacy. The influence which her 
affections ought to have, in deciding a question of 
this kind, it would not, in ordinary cases, have been 
difficult to determine. But in this case, her embar- 
rassment was increased, by the conflict which might 
arise between affection and duty. A person so con- 
scientious as she was, would wish to form a decision 
on the important question of her duty, respecting 
missionary labors, uninfluenced by any personal con- 
siderations. Hesitation fo assume an oflice so respon- 
sible, and so arduous, would spring up in any mind; 
but Miss Hasseltine was required to decide on this 
point, in connexion with another, itself of the utmost 
consequence to her individual happiness. It was im- 
possible to divest herself of her personal feelings, 
and she might have some painful suspicions, lest her 
affections might bias her decision to become a Mis- 
sionary; while female delicacy and honor would forbid 
her to bestow her hand, merely as a preliminary and 
necessary arrangement. ¢ 

There was another circumstance which greatly 
increased the difficulty of a decision. No female had 
ever left America as a Missionary to the heathen, 
The general opinion was decidedly opposed to the 
measure. ‘t was deemed wild and romantic in the 
extleme, and altogether inconsistent with prudence 


= 3 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 44 


and delicacy. Miss H. had no example to» guide 
and allure her. She met with no encouragement 
from the greater part of those persons, to whom she 
applied for counsel. Some expressed strong disappro- 
bation of the project. Others would give no opinion, 
Two or three individuals, whom it might not be prop- 
er to name, were steady, affectionate advisers, and en- 
couraged her to go. With these exceptions, she was 
forced to decide from her own convictions of duty, 
and her own sense of fitness and expediency.* 

h It was well for the cause of Missions, that God as- 
signed to Miss Hasseltine the honorable yet difficult 
office of leading the way in this great enterprise. 
Her adventurous spirit and her decision of character 
eminently fitted her to resolve, where others would 
hesitate, and to advance, where others might retreat. 
She did decide to go, and her determination, without 
doubt, has had some effect on the minds of other 
females, who have since followed her example.t 


*The remark of one lady respecting Mrs. J. would express 
the feelings of many others. ‘I hear,” said she, ‘ that Miss H. 
is going to India. Why does she go?” ‘* Why, she thinks it 
her duty; would not you go, if you thought it your duty?’ * But,”” 
replied the good lady, with emphasis, “‘ J would not think it my 
duty.’? Many questions of duty, it may be suspected, are de- 
cided in this summary manner. e 

+ The following extract from Mrs. Newell’s journal, dated 
October 20, 1810, refers to Mrs. Judson, and it shows that Mrs. 
Newell had not then decided to go to India : 

&¢ A female friend called upon us this morning. She informed 
me of her determination to quit her native land, ta endure the 
sufferings of a Christian amongst heathen nations—to spend her 
davs in India’s sultry clime. How did this news affect my heart ! 
Is ‘she willing to do all this for God; and shall I refuse to lend 
my little aid, in a land where divine revelation has shed its 
clearest rays? I have felt more for the salvation of the heathen, 
this day, than I recollect tu have felt through my whole past life. 

‘‘ How dreadful their situation! What heart but would bleed 
at the idea of the sufferings they endure to obtain the joys of 
paradise! What can J do, that the light of the Gospel may 
shine upon them? They are perishing for lack of knowledge, 
while I enjoy the glorious privileges of a Christian land! Great 
God, direct me! O make me ir some avay beneficial 0 immor. 
al souls.”’ 


44 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON 


To Mrs. Judson undoubtedly belongs the praise 
of being the first American female, who resolved 
leave her friends and country, to bear the Gospel to 
the heathen in foreign climes. : 

Her journal at this time shows that her mind was 
in a state of extreme anxiety, and that she resorted 
for direction and help to Him who gives wisdom to 
the ignorant, and who guides the meek in judgment: 


* Aug. 8, 1810. Endeavoured to commit myself 
entirely to God, to be disposed of according to his 
pleasure. He is now trying my faith and confidence 
in him, by presenting dark and gloomy prospects, 
that I may be enabled, through divine grace, to gain 
an ascendency over my selfish and rebellious spirit, 
and prefer the will of God tomy own. Ido feel that 
his service is my delight. Might I but be the means 
of converting a single soul, it would be worth spend- 
ing all my days to accomplish. Yes, I feel willing 
to be placed in that situation, in which I can do 
most good, though it were to carry the Gospel to the 
distant, benighted heathen. 

‘‘ Sept. 10. For several weeks past, my mind has 
been greatly agitated. An opportunity has been pre- 
sented to me, of spending my days among the hea- 
then, in attempting to persuade them to receive the 
Gospel. Were I convinced of its being a call from 
God, and that it would be more pleasing to him, for 
me to spend my life in this way than in any other, 
{ think I should be willing to relinquish every earth- 
ly object, and, in full view of dangers and hardships, 
give myself up to the great work. 

‘* A consideration of this subject has occasioned 
much self-examination, to know on what my hopes 
were founded, and whether my love to Jesus was 
sufficiently strong to induce me to forsake all for his 
cause. At times I have felt satisfied, that I loved 
him, on account of his own glorious perfections, and 
have been desirous that he should do with me as he 
should please, and place me in that situation, in 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 45 


which I can be most useful. I have felt great satis 
Shiction in committing this case to God, knowing that 
he has a perfect understanding of the issue of all 
events, is infinitely wise to select the means best cal- 
culated to bring about the most important ends, and 
is able and willing to make the path of duty plain 
before me, and incline me to walk therein. At other 
~ times, I have felt ready to sink, being distressed with 
fears about my spiritual state, and appalled at the 
rospect of pain and suffering, to which my nature 
Is so averse, and apprehensive, that when assailed by 
temptation, or exposed to danger and death, I should 
not be able to endure, as seeing Him who is invisible. 
But I now feel willing to leave it entirely with God. 
He is the fountain of all grace; and if he has design- 
ed me to be a promoter of his cause, among those 
who know him not, he can qualify me for the work, 
and enable me to bear whatever he is pleased to in- 
flict. Iam fully satisfied, that difficulties and trials 
are more conducive, than ease and prosperity, to pro- 
mote my growth in grace, and cherish an habitual 
sense of dependence on God. While the latter please 
my animal nature, and lead me 10 seek happiness in 
creature enjoyments, the former afford convincing 
’ proofs that this life is designed to be a state of trial, 
and not a state of rest, and thus tend to wean me 
from the world, and make me look up to heaven as 
my home. Time appears nothing when comparea 
with eternity, and yet events the most momentoua 
depend on the improvement of these fleeting years. 
O Jesus, direct me, and Iam safe; use me in thy 
service, and I ask no more.. I would not choose my 
portion of work, or place of labor; only let me know 
thy will, and I will readily comply. 5 ite 
** Oct. 28. My mind has still been agitated fos 
two or three weeks past, in regard to the above 
mentioned subject. But I have, at all times, felt a 
disposition to leave it with God, and trust in him to 
direct me. Ihave, at length, come to the conclusion, 
that if nothing in providence appears to prevent ! 


46 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


must spend my daysina heathen land. I ama crea. 
ture of God, and he has an undoubted right to do 
with me, as seemeth good in his sight. I rejoice 
that I am in his hands—that he is everywhere pres- 
ent, and can protect me in one place as well as in 
another. He has my heart in his hands; and when 
Iam called to face danger, to pass through scenes of 
terror and distress, he can inspire me with fortitude, 
and enable me to trust in him. Jesus is faithful; his 
promises are precious. Were it not for these consid- 
erations, I should, with my present prospects, sink 
down in despair, especially as no female has to my 
knowledge ever left the shores of America, to spend 
her life among the heathen; nor do I yet know that 
I shall have a single female companion. But God is 
my witness, that I have not dared to decline the offer 
that has been made me, though so many are ready to 
call ita * wild, romantic undertaking. If I have 
been deceived in thinking it my duty to go to the 
heathen, I humbly pray, that I may be undeceived, 
and prevented from going. But whether I spend my 
days in India or America, I desire to spend them in 
the service of God, and be prepared to spend an eter- 
nity in his presence. O Jesus, make me live to thee, 
and I desire no more. 

*¢ Nov. 25. Sabbath. Have spent part of this 
holy day in fasting and prayer on account of the dark- 
ness of my mind, and the many internal trials of 
2 spiritual nature that I have lately experienced. 
Though destitute of that engagedness I could desire, 
\ had some freedom in pouring out my soul to God, 
and some confidence that he would grant my peti- 
tions. When I consider the great wickedness of my 
neart, I hardly venture to approach the throne of 
grace. But when I recollect, that God has promised 
to hear the cries of the poor and needy, and that he 
has even given his Son to die for those who are sunk 
deep in sin, I find some encouragement to prostrate 
myself before the mercy seat, and plead the divine 
promises. Of late, I have had but little enjoyment, 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 4G 


though my mind has been constantly exercised with 
divine truth. Yet I hope, that God will overrule 
these trials for my good. I have long since given 
myself to God; he has an undoubted right to dispose 
of me, and try meas he pleases. Though he slay 
me, yet will I trust in him. 

‘* He who has styled himself a prayer hearing God, 
graciously manifested himself to my soul, and made 
it easy and pleasant to pray. Felt a longing desire 
for more grace, for more unreserved devotedness 
to God. When I get near to God, and discern the 
excellence of the character of the Lord Jesus, and 
especially his power and willingness to save, I feel 
desirous that the whole world should become ac- 
quainted with this Saviour. Iam not only willing to 
spend my days among the heathen, in attempting to 
enlighten and save them, but I find much pleasure in 
the prospect. Yes, I am quite willing to give up 
temporal comforts, and live a life of hardship and 
trial, if it be the will of God. 


‘I can be safe, and free from care, 
On any shore, since God is there.’ 


* Oct. Sabbath—(probably 1811.) Another holy 
day calls me to the house of God. O that I may 
enjoy his presence, and rest in him. This morning 
had some faint views of my unworthiness and noth- 
ingness before God. Felt ashamed, that I had ever 
indulged the least complacency in myself, when I am 
so. exceedingly depraved. I can find no words to 
express my own vileness; and yet I sometimes exalt 
myself, and wonder the Supreme Being takes no more 
notice of my prayers, and gives me no more grace. 
This evening attended a female prayer meeting. 
Felt solemn and engaged in prayer. Longed for 
clearer views of God, and stronger confidence in him. 
Made a new dedication of myself to God. Felt per- 
fectly willing to give up my friends and earthly com- 
forts, provided I might, in exile, enjoy the presence 
of God. I never felt more engaged in prayer fo! 


48 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


special grace, to prepare me for my great undertaking. 
than this evening. I am confident God will support 
me in every trying hours I have strong hope, that 
in giving me such an opportunity of laboring for 
him, he will make me peculiarly useful. No matter 
where I am, if I do but serve the infinitely blessed 
God; and it is my comfort, that he can prepare me to 
serve him. Blessed Jesus, I am thine forever. Do 
with me what thou wilt; lead me in the path in 
which thou wouldst have me go, and it is enough. 

‘« Nov. 23. My heart has been quite revived this 
evening with spiritual things. Had some views of 
the excellent natureof the kingdom of Christ. Long- 
ed, above all things, to have it advanced. Felt an 
ardent desire to be instrumental of spreading the 
knowledge of the Redeemer’s name, in a heathen 
land. Felt it a great, an undeserved privilege, to 
have an opportunity of going. Yes, I think I would 
rather go to India, among the heathen, notwithstand- 
ing the almost insurmountable difficulties in the way, 
than to stay at home and enjoy the comforts and 
luxuries of life. . Faith in Christ will enable me to 
bear trials, however severe. My hope in his power- 
ful protection animates me to persevere in my pur- 
pose. O, if he will condescend to make me useful 
in promoting his kingdom, I care not where I per- 
form his work, nor how hard it be. Behold the hand- 
maid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy 
word.” 


The resolution of Mr. and Mrs. Judson, to devote 
themselves to the service of their Saviour as Mission- 
aries, was not formed in the ardor of youthful enthu- 
siasm. It was not the impulse of an adventurous 
spirit, panting for scenes of difficulty and danger. 
They had cherished no romantic views of the mis- 
sionary enterprise. They had calmly estimated its 
hazards and its toils. ‘They foresaw what it would 
cost them, and the issue to which it would probably 
ead them both, They knew well what they must 


MEMOi1R OF MRS. JUDSON. 49 


do and suffer; and they yielded themselves as willing 
sacrifices, for the sake of the far distant heathen. 

As a proof of this, an extract of a letter from Mr, 
Judson to Mr. Hasseltine may here be quoted. It is 
in every view a remarkable document. Its design 
was, to ask the father’s consent to his daughter’s 
marriage, and her consequent departure for India. 
The letter is alike honorable to the writer and to the 
parent. An ordinary lover wouid have solicited the 
desired consent, by a strong statement of every en- 
couraging consideration, and by throwing the bright 
tints of hope over the dark clouds which enveloped 
the future. Mr. Judson resorted to no such artifice. 
He knew that the case was too solemnly interesting 
for anything but simplicity and godly sincerity. He 
knew that the excellent man whom he addressed, 
_was capable of sacrificing his feelings to his duty, 
and was able to decide the painful question proposed 
mene in single hearted submission to his Saviour’s 
will. 

After mentioning to Mr. H. that he had offered 
marriage to his daughter, and that she had ‘said 
something about consent of parents,” Mr. Judson 
proceeds thus: 

“1 have now to ask, whether you can consent to 
part with your daughter early next spring, to see her 
no more in this world; whether you can consent to 
her departure for a heathen land, and her subjection 
to the hardships and sufferings of a missionary life; 
whether you can consent to her exposure to the dan- 
gers of the ocean; to the fatal influence of the south- 
ern climate of India; to every kind of want and dis- 
tress; to degradation, insult, persecution, and perhaps 
a violent death. Can you consent to all this, for the 
sake of Him who left his heavenly home, and died 
for her and for you; for the sake of perishing immor- 
tal souls; for the sake of Zion, and the glory of God? 
Can you consent to all this, in hope of soon meeting 
your daughter in the world of glory, with a crown 
of righteousness, brightened by the acclamations of 

5 


50 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


praise which shall redound to her Saviour from nea. 
thens saved, through her means, from eternal wo and 
despair?” 

an the enemy of Missions, after reading this let- 
ter, accuse Missionaries of ambitious and selfish pur 
poses? Could a man, capable of writing thus, in 
such circumstances, be actuated by any of the ordi- 
nary motives, which govern human actions? Could 
a father give up a daughter to such an alliance, and 
such a destiny, from any impulse, inferior to the con- 
straining love of Christ? 

The following letter from Miss H. to an intimate 
friend proves that she had duly estimated the im- 
eagind and the difficulties of the subject, and had 

een guided to a decision, after deliberate reflection 
and earnest prayer to God. 


TO MISS L. K. 
“ Beverly, Sept. 8, 1810. 

“TJ can, but fora moment, turn my thoughts on 
the dealings of God with us. He made us inhabi- 
tants of the same town; and living near each other, 
as we have, no wonder the similarity in the turn of 
our minds produced strong affection. The same 
opportunities were afforded, and under the same 
instructers we obtained our education. We mutu- 
ally assisted each other in lightness, dissipation, and 
vanity. When God, by his Holy Spirit, convinced 
one of her lost undone condition, her first object was 
to convince the other. Our convictions were the 
same. How often did we converse on our awful 
situation, and mingle our tears for our hardness and 
stupidity. ‘The fields and groves frequently heard 
our complaints, the moon and stars in the stillness of 
evening witnessed our sorrow. Did God leave us ta 
act out the horrid enmity of our hearts? Did he 
leave us to blaspheme his holy name, and eurse the 
day in which we were born? No. Lét our souls be 
filled with astonishment—he led us to Jesus, the 
Saviour of sinners! Can we deny that the Saviour 
appeared to us the chief among ten thousands? Did 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 5i 


we not frequently meet to converse abou the things 
of the kingdom, and eagerly inquire, ‘h. w we could 
most promote the glory of God?? ‘These facts, my 
friend, we cannot deny. But where is now that 
engagedness for God? What have we ever done for 
him who has so distinguished us? O Lydia, let us 
weep—let us be deeply affected with our ingratitude 
in living no more devoted to him. O let us, dear L. 
now begin, and sacrifice everything that comes in 
competition with the glory of God, and give our 
whole selves to him. 

‘‘T have ever made you a confidant. I will still 
confide in you, and beg for your prayers, that ] may 
be directed in regard to the subject which I shall 
communicate. 

‘¢] feel willing, and expect, if nothing in providence 

revents, to spend my days in this world in heathen 
ands. Yes, Lydia, I have about come to the deter- 
mination to give up all my comforts and enjoyments 
here, sacrifice my aflection to relatives and friends, 
and go where God, in his providence, shall see fit to 
place me. My determinations are not hasty, or 
formed without viewing the dangers, trials and hard- 
ships attendant on a missionary life. Nor were my 
determinations formed in consequence of an attach- 
ment to an earthly object; but with a sense of my 
obligations to God, and with a full conviction of its 
being a call in providence, and consequently my duty. 
My feelings have been exquisite in regard to the sub- 
ject. Now my mind is settled and composed, and is 
willing to leave the event with God—none can sup- 
port one under trials and afflictions but him. In him 
alone I feel a disposition to confide. 

“How short is time, how boundless is eternity! 
if we may be considered worthy to suffer for Jesus 
here, will it not enhance our happiness hereafter? O 
pray forme. Spend whole evenings in prayer for those 
who go to carry the Gospel to the poor heathen.” 


Mr. and Mrs. Judson were married at Bradford, 
February 5, 1812. 


62 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSOUN. 


CHAPTER III. 
Embarkation—Voyage—Arrival at Calcutta. 


On the 6th of February, 1812, Mr. Judson, and 
Messrs. Samuel Newell, Samuel Nott, Jr. Gordon 
Hall, and Luther Rice, were ordained, as Missionaries, 
in the Tabernacle Church, in Salem. On the 19th 
of February, Messrs. Judson and Newell, with 
their wives, sailed from Salem, in the brig Caravan, 
Captain Heard, for Calcutta. The Rev. Mr. Nott 
and lady, and Messrs. Hall and Rice, sailed for the 
same port, on the 18th, from Philadelphia, in the 
ship Harmony, Captain Brown. 

Phe Missionaries were now embarked on their 
great enterprise. They had, as they supposed, taken 
a last farewell of their friends on earth; and they 
were hastening to distant lands, to wear out their 
lives in teaching the dying idolaters of India the 
knowledge of that Saviour, who died on Calvary, that 
whosoever should believe in him might not perish, 
but have everlasting life. Never were men engaged 
ina nobler service. Never did benevolence impel men 
to a more worthy sacrifice of ease, and of all that the 
heart values in the domestic relations, and in civilized 
society. If the soul of man is of inestimable worth, 
and if the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ is the 
only instrument of its recovery and salvation, then 
does the missionary enterprise surpass, in the impor- 
tance of its aims, and the benevolence of its motives, 
every other effort of the human mind. It is not the 
purpose of this work to advocate, by abstract reason 
ing, the cause of Missions. The whole argument 
lies within a narrow compass, and may be well stat- 
ed in the language of Dr. Johnson, whose gigantic 
mind was little liable to be affected by the wayward 
impulses of enthusiasm. ‘If obedience to the will 
of God be necessary to happiness, and knowledge ot 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 63 


hs will be necessary to obedience, I know not how 
he that withholds this knowledge, or delays it, can 
be said to love his neighbour as himself. He that 
voluntarily continues ignorance, is guilty of all the 
crimes which ignorance produces; as to him tha 
should extinguish the tapers of a light-house, migh 
justly be imputed the calamities of shipwrecks.” * 
Mrs. Judson was now afloat on an untried element, 
which was bearing her rapidly away from her home 
and kindred. The struggle, ina heart so strong in its 
affections as hers, must have been severe. We have 
seen that she had calmly weighed the difficulties and 
the hazards of the undertaking, and was under the 
influence of no temporary excitement, nor bold spirit 
of adventure. She knew well what she must sur- 
render, and the objects which called for the sacrifice, 
—and she left all, for the sake of her Saviour, and of 
‘her perishing fellow men. Why should such disin- 
terested benevolence and heroic firmness fail to obtain 
the applause of men, who are ready to admire and 
praise these qualities, when exerted on other occasions 
and for other objects? Why should the voice of elo- 
quence, and the lyre of the poet, which delight to 
commemorate the self-denial, and patriotism, and 
noble daring of the wise and good, be mute, wher the 
Missionary departs on his errand of mercy? The 
memory of Lady Arabella Johnson has been the re- 
cent theme of eulogy, on the spot where Mrs. Jud- 
son embarked for India.t In what worthy quality of 
heart or mind was the Missionary inferior to the 
accomplished Puritan? How did the arduous enter- 
prise of Mrs. J. in grandeur of aim, generous self- 
denial, devoted affection, and intrepid courage, fall 
short of that which has embalmed the memory of 


* Boswell’s Life of Johnson. 

+ At the late centennial celebration of the settlement of Salem, 
ta 1628, Judge Story, in his Address, spoke in suitable terms of 
Lady Johnson, a daughter of the Earl of Lincoln, who accompa- 
nied lier husband among the first settlers of Salem, and died soom 
after her arrival. j5* 


b4 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


Lady Johnson? Why, then, should noi the Mission- 
ary be included in the following tribute to female 
excellence, as true as it is beautiful? 

‘“‘TIn the path of duty, no sacrifice is with them too 
high, or too dear. The voice of pleasure, or of 
power, may pass by unheeded; but the voice of afflic- 
tion, never. ‘The chamber of the sick, the pillow of 
the dying, the vigils of the dead, the altars of relig 
ion, never missed the presence or the sympathies of 
womaa. ‘Timid though she be, and so delicate, that 
the winds of heaven may not too roughly visit her, 
on such occasions she loses all sense of danger, and 
assumes a preternatural courage, which knows not, 
and fears not, consequences. ‘Then she displays that 
undaunted spirit, which neither courts difficulties, nor 
evades them; that resignation, which utters neither 
murmur nor regret; and that patience in suffering, 
which seems victorious over death itself.” * 

The dangers of the ocean are sufficient to intims- 
date any heart, unless it be fortified with a better ar- 
mor than that which Horace deemed necessary for 
the first maritime adventurer.t But Mrs. J. and her 
companions encountered no other than the usual inci- 
dents of a voyage. Some extracts from her journal 
and letters will be read with interest: 


“Feb. 18. ‘Took leave of my friends and native 
land, and embarked on board the brig Caravan, for 
India. Had so long anticipated the trying scene of 
parting, that I found it more tolerable than I had 
feared. Still my heart bleeds. O America, my native 
'and, must I leave thee? Must I leave my parents, 


* Judge Story’s Address. 
¢ Illi robur et es triplex t 
Circa pectus erat, qui fragilem truci 
Commisit pelago ratem, 
Primus. Horace L. I. Car. Hl. 
Sure oak and three fold brass surrounded his heart, who first 
trusted a frail vessel to the merciless ocean. 
: Smart’s Translation 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 55 


my sisters and brother, my friends beloved, and all 
the scenes of my early youth? Must I leave thee, 
Bradford, my dear native town, where I spent the 
pleasant years of childhood; where I learned to lisp the 
name of my mother; where my infant mind first be- 
gan to expand; where I entered the field of science; 
where I learned the endearments of friendship, and 
tasted of all the happiness this world can afford; 
where I learned also to. value a Saviour’s blood, and 
to count all things but loss, in comparison with the 
knowledge of him? Yes, I must leave you all, fora 
heathen land, an uncongenial clime. Farewell, hap- 
py, happy scenes,—but never, no, never to be for- 
gotten. 

*©19, Sea-sick all day, and unable to do anything. 
My thoughts, more than usual, fixed on divine things. 
Longed for the enjoyment of God’s presence on our 
passage, that we may be preparing for usefulness in 
future life. In the night had many distressing appre- 
hensions of death. Felt unwilling to die on the sea, 
not so much on account of my state after death, as 
the dreadfulness of perishing amid the waves. 

*©91, Somewhat relieved from sickness, and able 
to read a few chapters in the Bible. Never had a 
greater sense of our obligations to live devoted to 
Gor, resulting from his distinguished mercies. Even 
on the ocean, confined as I am, | find many sources 
of enjoyment, and feel as happy as when on land, in 
the midst of my friends. 

“ Feb, 22. O fora heart to live near to God, and 
serve him faithfully. I need nothing so much as 
ardent piety. I should feel happy in the consideration 
of having left my native land, and my father’s house, 
if by making this sacrifice, the kingdom of Christ 
should be promoted. May it be my great object to 
live a useful, holy life, and prepare to die a peaceful 
death. 

“27, This day has been regarded by our friends 
on land as a day of fasting and prayer for the pros- 
petity of this Mission, and I hope the same object 


56 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSIN. 


has not been forgotten by us on the sea. 1 spent 
sometime this evening on deck. ‘The weather wag 
pleasant; the motion of the vessel gentle, though rap- 
id; the full moon shone clearly on the water; and all 
things around conspired to excite pleasing thougn 
melancholy sensations. My rative land, my hoine, 
my friends, and all my forsaken enjoyments, rushed 
into my mind; my tears flowed profusely, and I could 
not be comforted. Soon, however, the consideration 
of having left all these for the dear cause of Christ, 
and the hope of being, one day, instrumental of 
leading some poor degraded females to embrace him 
as their Saviour, soothed my griefs, dried up my tears, 
and restored peace and tranquillity to my mind. 

«29, ‘The weather continues pleasant, so that we 
are able to spend much time on deck. I see that 
there is no situation in life in which trials and enjoy- 
ments, pains and pleasures, are not intermingled. 
calculated on nothing but difficulties and distresses, 
during the voyage, and am disappointed in finding 
many pleasures. God frequently deprives his chil 
dren of the good things of this world, that they may 
be sensible they have no portion here. Have I not, 
then, reason to fear that | am receiving my only por- 
tion? And yet my heart tells me, that I do not wish 
to take these things as my portion. I would rather 
be deprived of them than that they should deprive 
me of the enjoyment of the light of God’s counte- 
nance. I desire a heavenly inheritance that will nev- 
er fail me. I desire that the great, the infinite God, 
may be my fortion, my friend, my all.” 


TO HER MOTHER. 
“© At Sea, Sabbath eve, March 1, 1812. 
‘‘No daughter would ever more gladly relieve the 
anxieties of a mother, than I yours, ‘The motives 
which induced me to go, and you to give your con- 
sent, ought now to support us, and prevent our indul- 
ging useless regret for what we cannot help. The 
life I now lead is much happier than I expected. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 57 


Though deprived of many sources of enjoyment, | 
am surrounded with mercies. I have heen sick every 
day since we sailed until to-day. My sickness has 
not been very distressing. I have been quite well 
part of the time; and when my sickness returned, 
found almost immediate relief from lying down. | 
suffer the most for the want of an appetite. However, 
we have such a variety of provisions on board, | 
generally find something I can relish. From the 
order and regularity of things m the cabin, you 
would hardly imagine we are on board of a vessel. 
The captain is a young gentleman of an amiable 
disposition and pleasing manners. He and all the 
officers treat us with the greatest kindness and respect. 
Everything they have is at our service. Last Sab- 
bath, the first of our being here, we had no preach- 
ing or religious worship. ‘To-day it was proposed to 
the captain to have worship in the cabin. He 
readily assented, and joined with us, together with 
two of the other officers. I have not heard the 
least profane language since I have been on board 
the vessel. This is very uncommon.” 


‘‘ March 5. Began Cave’s Lives of the Apostles 
and Martyrs. O for that ardent piety which was so 
conspicuous in them, and for that willingness to suffer 
for Christ’s sake, which they manifested. I long to 
have my mind raised above fleeting, transitory objects, 
and placed entirely on those with which my soul is 
most nearly concerned, that so I may live as becomes 
a stranger and pilgrim on the earth. May even that 
one tie which still binds me to earth, though so 
strong and endearing, not hold my heart, my thoughts 
from Him, who alone is worthy of my supreme 
regard. 

“7, Have enjoyed religion more than usual, and 
felt peculiarly desirous of being more spiritual and 
heavenly minded. Although I am almost secluded 
from the world, and have few things to attract my 
attention, yet I find that my heart frequently wandera 


See 


58 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


from God in search of happiness from other objects 
[ find it equally necessary to watch and pray, as 
when surrounded by worldly temptations. 

«12, Spent most of the day in reading, and the 
avening in religious conversation. We conversed 
much on death, and the probability of our finding an 
early grave. The subject was solemn and affecting, 
yet secretly pleasing and consoling. I never felt 
more willingness to die, or a stronger hope in Christ. 
Am astonished that I have thought no more of dying, 
and made no more preparation for death. Resolve 
to make it the business of each day, to prepare to die. 

‘March 18. Enjoyed more than usual, in secret 
prayer. Continue to feel impressed with the conver- 
sation of last evening, and to realize the importance 
of living a holy, spiritual life. 

‘©14. Have been reading the Lives of Sir William 
Jones, and Dr. Doddridge. What a striking differ- 
ence between the two characters. The former dis- 
tinguished for his erudition; the latter for his piety. 
The great object of the one, was evidently the attain- 
ment of literary fame, and the applause of man, 
The other sought chiefly the good of immortal souls, 
and the approbation of God. Enjoyed much this 
evening in conversation and praver. Perhaps some 
of my friends at home were praying for me; and in 
answer to their prayers, the Holy Spirit came to ani- 
mate and comfort my heart. I feel thankful that God 
has given me an opportunity and inclined my heart, 
to leave all my friends for a heathen land. I desire 
no higher enjoyment in this life, than to be instrumen- 
tal of leading some poor, ignorant heathen females, 
to the knowledge of the Saviour. To havea female 
oraying society, consisting of those who were once 
-n heathen darkness, is what my heart earnestly pants 
after, and makes a constant subject of prayer. Re- 
ae to keep this in view, as one principal object of 
my life. 

“ April-6. Spent the evening in conversing on re- 
ligious subjects, particularly the difficulty of living a 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 59 


holy, spiritual life. We resolved to be more wutch- 
ful over the sins of our hearts, and make greater ef= 
forts to live devoted to God. O may these resolu- 
tions not be in vain; for our future usefulness depends 
essentially on our advancement in the divine life. At 
present I feel that I am a weak Christian indeed, and 
if only sincere, am willing to be considered the very 
least in the whole church.” 


TO HER SISTER. 
" ‘At Sea, April 11, 1812. 

“1 find Mr. Judson one of the kindest, most faith- 
ful, and affectionate ot husbands. His conversation 
frequently dissipates the gloomy clouds of spiritual 
darkness which hang over my mind, and brightens 
my hope of a happy eternity. I hope God will make 
us instrumental of preparing each other for useful- 
eo le this world, and greater happiness in a future 
world.” 


** May 18. Have enjoyed an uncommon degree o1 
peace and comfort, for many days. I do not recollec 
any period of my life, in which I have, for so long a 
time, had such constant peace of mind. ‘The last 
fortnight, I have spent in reading the Scriptures, and 
works on their authenticity and inspiration. Have 
gained much clearer views of the Christian religion, 
its blessed tendency, its unrivalled excellence. Christ 
appears peculiarly precious, amiable and glorious, as 
the author -of such a religion. Of late, I have had 
no anxious feelings about my future situation in hfe, 
_ though all before me is so uncertain; but have had a 

disposition to leave all with my heavenly Father, to 
do with me as he pleases. I sometimes feel very 
thankful, that God has called me from my friends and 
native land, to a land of strangers, of spiritual dark- 
ness and death, thereby giving me an opportunity of 
denying myself those enjoyments, on which I have 
been too prone to set my heart, and has thereby, 1 
trust, led me to feel more deeply my dependence on 
him, and choose him for my only portion.” 


60 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


TO MISS L. K. 


At Sea, N. Lat. 9, E. Long. 86. 
& My dearest L 

‘*When I reflect on the many sources of enjoy: 
ment I have left in my native land; when I think of 
my home, and the friends of my youth, the idea of 
having left them forever, is exquisitely painful, Yet 
I have never regretted having left them for the cause 
of Christ. No, my dear Lydia, in my most gloomy 
hours, or in the apparent near approach of death, I 
never have, for a moment, repented my having cho- 
sen the rugged, thorny path through which a Mis- 
sionary must pass, in preference to the smooth and 
easy life I might have led in my native country. The 
thought of having acted from a sense of duty, in 
thus voluntarily quitting my native land, has always 
been a powerful opiate to calm my fears in the midst 
of danger, and to induce me to place unlimited confi- 
dence in God. 

‘As it respects my voyage, thus far it has been 
pleasant. ‘Che morning we sailed, I was taken 
_ with sea-sickness. I had anticipated the most dis- 
tressing sensations from this sickness, but was agree- 
ably disappointed; for I felt no worse through the 
whole, than if I had taken a gentle emetic. I kept 
my bed for the most of the time for four days, We 
had a strong, favorable wind the first week we sailed, 
which carried us into mild, comfortable weather. 
‘The change of the weather in so short a time was so 
great, together with sea-sickness and the want of exer- 
cise, that I soon lost all relish for my food. Every- 
thing tasted differently from what it does on land, 
and those things I was the most fond of at home, I 
loathed the most here. But I soon began to find the 
real cause of my ill health. It was want of exercise. 
For sometime we could invent nothing which could 
give us exercise equal to what we had been accus 
tomed to. Jumping the rope was fina/ly invented, 
and this we found to be of great use. 1 began and 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 6] 


jumped it several times in the day; and found my health 
gradually return, until I was perfectly well. I men- 
tion these particulars, that you, should you ever go 
to sea, may escape ill health. 1 never enjoyed more 
perfect health in my life than I do now; and I 
attribute it to my exercising so much. 
6° We found it exceedingly hot the first time that 
we crossed the equator. hen going round the 
Cape of Good Hope, we had rough, rainy weather 
for twenty days. I never knew till then “the dan- 
gers of the deep.” I never felt before, my entire 
dependence on God for preservation. Some nights I 
never slept, on account of the rocking of the vessel 
and the roaring of the winds. Yet God preserved 
us—enabled us to trust in him and feel safe. Surely 
we have every reascn to confide in God, and leave it 
with him to dispose of us as he pleases. We have 
again crossed the equator, and are within a few days’ 
sail of Calcutta. My heart rejoices at the thought 
of once more seeing land. Yes, even the thought of 
seeing the land of strangers and heathenish darkness, 
produces sensations before unknown. We know not 
- where we shall go, or in what part of the world we 
. shall spend our remaining days. But I feel willing 
to leave it all with our heavenly Father. I doubt 
not he will protect us, and place us in that station in 
which we shall be most useful. I have spent the 
most of my time, since on the water, in reading. 
I knew I needed a more intimate acquaintance with 
the sacred Scriptures; consequently, I have confined 
my attention almost exclusively to them. I have 
read the New Testament once through in course, 
two volumes of Scott’s Commentary on the Old, 
Paley, Trumbull, and Dick, on the Inspiration of 
the Scriptures, together with Faber and Smith on 
the Prophecies. I have been much interested in 
reading these authors on inspiration, on account of 
my almost total ignorance of the evidences of the 
divinity of the Scriptures, and I gained fresh evi 
dence of the reality of ue Christian religion. O 


62 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


my dear Lydia, how much enjoyment Christians ose 
by neglecting to study the Bible. ‘The more we are 
conversant with it, the more shall we partake of the 
spirit of its author, and the more we shall feel that 
this world is not our home, and that we are rapidly 
’ hastening to another.” 


‘© May 24. Sabbath. We have had worship as 
usual, in the cabin. The subject of the sermon was 
lukewarmness in religion. I felt that a great part 
of it was applicable to myself. I am confounded, 
when I consider the indifference with which I have 
regarded and treated so great a being as God. How 
little ardor I have felt in the cause of Christ, and 
how little zeal have I manifested for his glory. Under 
the impression of the truths of this sermon, I renew- | 
edly commend myself to God, all unholy and pollut- 
ed as I am, and beg that he will sanctify me, and 
make me more engaged in his blessed service. We 
are now near the place of our destination—just ready 
to enter astrange land, where all are unknown to us, 
and we to them; and where we shall at once be exposed 
to the influence of an unhealthy climate. We know 
not the manner in which we shall be received, nor 
the place of our final residence. All the future is 
involved in dark uncertainty. But God is good in 
bringing us into circumstances, where we are com- 
pelled to trust in him. God is everywhere, and is 
ever ready to hear our cries, and succour us in our 
distresses.” 


TO HER SISTER. © 
: s¢ At Sea, June 16. 
“* My dear Sister A——, - 
“Instead of beginning to fill your letter immedt- 
ately after we sailed, I have left it to begin to fill it 
when our voyage is nearly completed. I have writ- 
ten to mamma and sister KE, the particulars respecting 
my voyage thus far, consequently, it is unnecessary 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 63 


or me now to say any more. Day before yesterday 
we came in sight of land, after being out only one 
hundred and twelve days. We could distinguish 
nothing on land except the towering mountains of 
Golconda. Yesterday morning we were nearer land, 
and could easily discover the trees on the shore. 
Some appeared to be placed regularly in rows, others 
were irregular and scattered. The scene was truly 
delightful, and reminded me of the descriptions I have 
read of the fertile shores of India-—the groves of 
orange and palm trees. I likewise thought it prob- 
able that these shores were inhabited by a race of 
beings, by nature like ourselves, but who, not like us, 
are ignorant of the God who made them, and the 
Saviour who died for them. Yesterday we saw two 
vessels. One was a large ship, and the captain 
thought it to be a British man-of-war, as she was 
lying still till we came up with her. As soon as she 
hoisted the flag, we found her to be an American, 
We had high hopes of her being the vessel in which 
the other Missionaries sailed. With impatience we 
cameupwithher. She hailed us, and wished to know 
our longitude. Our captain asked her name, and 
where she was from, and to our great disappointment, 
we found she was not the Harmony. You have ne 
idea how interesting the sight—a vessel at the side of 
us, so near that we could hear the captain speak— 
for he was the first person we have heard speak since 
we sailed, except what belong to the ship. The 
other was an English vessel, she spoke with us to- 
day. ' We are now at anchor in the Bay of Bengal, 
and dare not go any farther to night, as we have not 
et got a pilot. Everything before us is uncertain, 
hether we shall ever again be on land, or where 
we shall live, is known only to our heavenly Father. 
‘‘ Monday. We have been very anxious this morn- 
ing to get a pilot. At length a vessel was seen at a 
distance, and it proved to bea pilot vessel. He hasjust 
this moment come on board, with his two servants. 
One of them is a Hindoo. He exactly answers the 


64 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


description we have had of those poor beniglitea 
creatures. He looks as simple and feminine as you 
can imagine. What an alteration would a belief in 
Christianity make in such a degraded creature. It 
we have a favorable wind, we hope to get to Calcutta 
to-morrow. O how soonwill our labors in the Mission 
begin! Yet we are happy the time is so near, when 
we may begin to labor for Christ in a pagan land. 

“ Tuesday. Last night was the most dangerous, 
and to me, by far the most unpleasant we have had. 
The navigation here being dangerous, on account of 
the sand shoals, the pilot came to anchor before dark. 
The sea was high, and kept the vessel in continua! 
motion. About ten, the mate came down, and told 
us the cable had parted, and the anchor gone. I 
thought all hope of our safety was entirely gone, 
and immediately began to inquire into my prepared- 
ness foran entrance into another world. The thought 
- of being shipwrecked was exceedingly distressing, 
and [ could not but think the providence of God 
would preserve us, on account of this infant Mission. 
In him I confided, and he preserved us. They got 
the ship under way; and the pilot being well acquaint- 
ed with the shoals, we met with no difficulty. I slept 
none at all, in consequence of the continual noise, 
and profane language on deck. ‘The captain has 
never used any profane language since we have been 
with him; but the pilot, much more than we have 
ever heard before. The scene is now truly delight- 
ful. We are sailing up the river Hoogly, a branch 
of the Ganges, and so near the land, that we can 
distinctly discover objects. On one side of us are 
the Sunderbunds—[islands at the mouth of the Gan- 
ges.] ‘The smell which proceeds from them is fra- 
grant beyond description. We have passed the 
mango trees, and some large brick houses. 

“ Wednesday. I have never, my dear sister, wit- 
nessed or read anything so delightful as the present 
scene. On each side of the Hoogly, where we are 
now passing, a1 > the Hindoo cottages, as thick togeth- 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 65 


er as the houses in our seaports. They are very 
small, and in the form of hay-stacks, without either 
chimneys or windows. They are situated in the 
midst of trees, which hang over them, and appear 
truly romantic. The grass and fields of rice are 
perfect y green, and herds of cattle are everywhere 
feeding on the banks of the river, and the natives are 
scattered about, differently employed. Some are 
fishing, some driving the team, and many are sitting 
indolently on the banks of the river. ‘The pagodas 
we have passed, are much handsomer and larger than 
the houses. Notwithstanding the scene is so pleasant, 
on account of the works of nature, yet it is truly 
melancholy when we reflect, that these creatures, so 
numerous, so harmless, have immortal souls, and like 
us are destined to the eternal world—and yet have 
none to tell them of Christ. I suppose the natives 
that live on these shores, for many miles, have never 
seen a Missionary. I should be happy to come and - 
live among them, in one of their little houses, if it 
was as large a field for usefulness as some others. 
There are many elegant English seats near the shore. 
Weare within four or five miles of Calcutta. When 
we get there I will write you again. O what reason 
have we to be thankful, for so pleasant, so prosperous 
a voyage.. There is seldom a voyage so short as 
ours—we have not yet been out four months. I hope 
God will make us useful, and keep us near to himself.” 

“Well, Abigail, here we are safe in Calcutta har- 
bour, and almost stunned with the noise of the natives. 
Mr. Judson has gone on shore, to find a place for us 
to go. This city is by far the most elegant of any I 
have ever seen. Many ships are lying at anchor, and 
hundreds of natives all around. ‘They are dressed 
yery curiously with white, hanging er over their 
shoulders. But I have not time to describe anything 
at present. We have plenty of fruiton board. The 
bananas are a very delicious fruit; they taste much 
like a rich pear. 

6* 


66 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


“ Thursday. Warriet and I are yet on board the 
vessel, and have not been on land. Mr. Judson did 
not return yesterday, until the evening, and had not 
gained permission from the Police office to live in the 
country, consequently we could not go on shore, 
Mr. J. and Mr. Newell are gone again to-day, and 
what will be their success, I know not. The East 
India Company are violently opposed to Missions, and 
have barely given liberty to their own countrymen to 
settle here as preachers. We have nothing:to expect 
from man, and everything from God. I think I never 
have felt more confidence in God, to protect and di- 
rect this Mission, than this morning. . If he has any- 
thing for us to do here, he will doubtless open a door 
for our entrance; if not, he will send us to some oth- 
er place. We have given ourselves to him, devoted 
ourselves to his service, and have every reason, from 
past experience of his mercy, still to trust and confide 
in his goodness. O my dear sister, what a source of 

‘happiness and comfort, that God reigns, even on these 
heathen shores of darkness and wretchedness. Cap- 
tain Heard has just come on board, and given us a 
very polite invitation to go to the house he has pro- 
cured for himself on shore. ‘The politeness and kind- 
ness of this man have been remarkable. Throughout 
our passage, he has treated us with every possible at- 
tention, and made it muck more comfortable than it 
otherwise would have been. O, live near to God in 
a Christian land, and think, feel, and pray much for 
the millions who are perishing for the want of the 
knowledge of a Saviour. So little time as we have 
to hve in this world, must be improved to the best 
advantage. We shall soon meet in the eternal world, 
and then the more we have done for Christ, the hay - 
pier we sha’. be.” 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 67 


CHAPTER IV. 


Difficulties with the Bengal Government—Mr. and Mrs. Judson 
and Mr. Rice become Baptists. 


On the 18th of June, 1812, the Missionaries land- 
ed at Calcutta, where they were met and welcomed 
to India, by the venerable Dr. Carey. He immedi- 
ately invited them to Serampore, to reside in the 
mission family, until the other Missionaries, in the 
Harmony, should arrive.* They accordingly stayed 
one night in Calcutta, and the next morning, they 
took a boat, and went up the river, fifteen miles, to 
Serampore. Here they were received with the ut- 
most kindness by the mission family. Mrs. J. speaks, 
in warm terms, of the piety, industry, economy, and 
order, which distinguished the operations at that 
great missionary establishment. Messrs. Carey, 
Marshman, and Ward, then resided there with their 
families. Dr. Carey was employed in translating the 
Scriptures; Dr. Marshman, his wife, and son, taught 
a male and female school. Mr. Ward superintended 
the extensive printing establishment. 

The following letter of Mrs. J. contains some in- 
teresting particulars: 


TO HER SISTER. \ 


‘¢ Serampore Mission-House. 


‘1 have left your letter, my dear sister M. until the 
last, to continue my narrative to the family. I con- 
cluded A’s with saving, Captain Heard had just invit- 
ed us to go to his house. Mr. Judson came on board 
with an invitation from Dr Carey to spend the mght 
with him. I got into a palankeen—Mr. Judson walk- 
ed tothe house Jt was with considerable fear I rode. 


* The Harmony an ‘ved six weeks after the Caravan. 



































ei © L 4, pe = 

n, Rea ‘ snes Pots 

at: sae ? a *e 
68 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. oF 


as the streets were full of natives and English car- 
riages.. Chose who carried me went so much faste1 
than Mr. Judson, that I soon lost sight of him, and 
did not know where they would carry me. They, 
however, stopped before a large stone building, which 
I soon found to be Dr. Carey’s house. We were di- 


_ rected up a pair of stairs, through one or two large 


rooms, into his study. He arose, shook hands with 


us, and gave us a cordial welcome to this country. 


His house is curiously constructed, as the other Eu- 
ropean houses are here. There are no chimneys or 
fire-places in them, the roofs are flat, the rooms twen- 
ty feet. in height, and proportionably large. Large 
windows, without glass, open from one room to 


another, that the air may freely circulate through the 


house. ‘They are very convenient for this hot cli- 
mate, and bear every mark of antiquity. In the 
evening we attended meeting in the English Episco- 


pal Church. It was the first time of our attending 


meeting for above four months, and as we entered the 
church, our ears were delighted with hearing the or- 
gan play our old favorite tune, Bangor. The church 
was very handsome, and a number of punkahs,some- 
thing like a fan several yards in length, hung around, 
with ropes fastened to the outside, which were pulled 
by some of the natives, to keep the church cool. 

e spent the night at Dr. Carey’s, and were rejoic- 
ed to find ourselves once more in a house on land. 
Very near the house, is a charity school, supported by 


_ this mission, in which are instructed two hundred 


boys and nearly as many girls. They are chiefly 


children of Portuguese parents, and natives of na 


cast. We could see them all kneel in prayer time, 
and hear them sing at the opening of the school. Tt 
was really affecting to see these poor children, picked 
up in the streets, learning to sing the praise and read 
the word of God. 


“‘ While at Dr. C.’s we saw a wedding procession — 


pass. The bridegroom was carried in a palankeen 


with flowers in his hands. and on his head. He- 6 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 69 


appeared to be about ten years of age. ‘The proces- 
sion were dressed in uniform, with large branches of 
flowers, and instruments of music. The Hindoos 
are frequently married when children, the contract 
being made by their parents. In the afternoon, we 
left Calcutta, for Serampore, having previously receiv- 
ed an invitation from the Missionaries to reside with 
them, until our brethren arrive. We were met at 
the water side by Messrs. Marshman and Ward, who 
led us to the house, and introduced us io their wives. 
They received us very cordially. Theschool kept b 

Mrs. Marshman consists almost entirely of the child- 
ren belonging to the mission, and European young 
ladies. ‘They are taught various kinds of needle- 
work, embroidery, &c. and study the languages. 
Mrs. Marshman’s eldest daughter, fourteen years of 
age, reads and writes Bengalee and English; and has 
advanced some way in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. 
The three families live in separate houses, but all eat 
together, in a large hall in the mission-house. The 
bell rings at five in the morning, for the boys to arise 
for school. Again at eight, for breakfast. Immedi- 
ately after breakfast, we all assemble in the chapel, 
for prayers. Begin with singing a hymn, in which 
most of the children join; read a chapter in the Bible, 
and conclude with prayer. On the Sabbath, they 
have worship in English, from eleven till one: In 
Bengalee, for the natives, in the afternoon, and in 
English again in the evening. Monday evening they 
have a religious conference for the native brethren 
and sisters. ‘Tuesday morning an hour is spent in 
explaining passages of Scripture. Thursday and 
Saturday evenings, in conference meetings. ‘These 
Missionaries are eminently pious as well as learned. 
The garden is as far superior to any in America, as 
the best garden in America is to a common farmer’s, 
[t consists of several acres, under the highest state 
of cultivation. Fruits of various kinds, plants, flow 

ers and vegetables, grow here in great abunuance. 
The pine-apple grows on a low bush, the plantaiv on 


70 MEMUIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


a tall stalk, and the cocoa-nut on a high tree, resem 
bling our pine tree. 

“The third day after we came here, there was a 
celebration of the worship of Juggernaut. We went 
about ten in the morning. The immense multitude 
of natives assembled on the occasion, and the noise 
they made, answered to the account Buchanan gave. 
The idol was set on the topof a stone building. He 
is only a lump of wood, his face painted with large 
black eyes, and a large red mouth. He was taken 
from his temple, and water poured on him to bathe 
him. This is introductory to a more solemn act of 
worship, which will be performed a fortnight hence. 
After these poor deluded creatures had bathed their 
god, they proceeded to bathe themselves. Poor, 
miserable, deluded beings, they know not what they 
do. O Mary! the inhabitants of America know 
nothing of poverty, slavery and wretchedness, com- 
pared with the natives of India. So very numerous, 
they cannot get employ; and when they do, they are 
treated by Europeans like beasts more than like men. 
Many of them die for the want of nourishment. 
Add to all this, they are ignorant of the only way of 
salvation. Who would not pity the poor heathen, 
and rejoice to contribute their mite to relieve some of 
their distresses !”” 


After they had been here about ten days, Messrs. 
Judson and Newell were summoned to Calcutta, and 
an order of the government was read to them, re- 
quiring them immediately to leave the country, and 
return to America. The government of India, at that 
time, were resolutely opposed to missions. Their 
motives we need not now canvass. The charter of 
the East India Company, which was renewed in 1813, 
was so amended in its passage through Parliament, — 
hy the zealous exertions of Wilberforce, Smith, 
Thornton, Fuller, and other friends of Christ in 
Great Britain, as to secure toleration for missionary 
efforts The British possessions in the East were 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 71 


constituted an Episcopal See, and placed under the 
superintendence of a Bishop, and three Archdeacons. 
The Rev. Dr. Middleton was the first Bishop, and 
was succeeded by Bishop Heber, who has since died. 
It is just to say, that a great change of feeling has 
taken place among the officers of government, and 
the European residents in India. ‘Their fears con 
cerning the effects of missionary operations have sub- 
sided, and they are disposed to favor and promote them. 

This order was a very alarming and distressing 
one, Thethought of returning, without accomplish- 
ing, in any degree, their object, was insupportable. 
The instructions of the Board of Commissioners, 
when they left America, directed them to fix the seat 
of their mission in the Burman empire, unless circum- 
stances should render it inexpedient to attempt it. 
All the Missionaries, however, thought it impractica- 
ble to establish a mission there. The despotic char- 
acter of the government, and the failure ot all previ- 
ous attempts to introduce the Gospel into that empire, 
induced them to renounce the idea of a Burman mis- 
sion. Mr. Nott, in a letter to a friend, said, “The 
Burman empire seems at present out of the question.” 
Mrs. Newell, in her journal, July 16, 1812, says: 
“We cannot feel that we are called in providence to 
go to Burmah. Every account we have from that 
savage, barbarous nation, confirms us in our opinion, 
-that the way is not prepared for the spread of the 
Gospel there.” ‘They therefore petitioned for leave 
to go to the Isle of France, which was granted; and 
Mr. and Mrs. Newell sailed about the Ist of August. 
As the vessel could accommodate but two passengers, 
Mr. and Mrs. Judson remained in Calcutta two 
months longer. 'They were entertained with the 
most liberal hospitality, at the house of Mr. Rolt, an 
English gentleman; and the treatment which they 
received from other Christirn friends was kind and 
soothing to their feelings, atuid their difficulties. 

About this time, Mrs. Judson wrote the following 
etter to her sisten:; ; 


72 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


“Calcutta, Aug. 23, 1812. 
% My dear Sisters, 

«¢ A melancholy pleasure pervades my mind, when 
| take up my pen to address those whom I love, and 
whom I never expect to meet again in this world, 
When thinking of my friends and much loved native 
land, I frequently join with Ossian in saying, ‘ There 
is a joy in grief, when peace dwells in the breast of 
the sad.’ Grief for the deprivation of my friends, | 
love to indulge; and I find every such indulgence 
binds them more closely to my heart. Can'I forget 
thee,O mycountry? CanI forget the scenes of child- 
hood, and the more endearing scenes of riper years? 
Can I forget the parental roof, sisters, companions, and 
associates of my life? No, never! Never, till this 
pulse ceases to beat, this heart to feel. Yet, my dear 
girls, think not, that Iam habitually melancholy, or 
regret having left my native land. 1 never was hap- 
pier, never was more cheerful, and never more satis- 
fied in having engaged in my arduous undertaking.” 


The following paragraph, from the same letter, 13 
quoted here, because the opinion of Mrs. Judson, on 
the subject referred to, is entitled to much weight, and 
applies, with equal force, to almost every heathen 
country: 


‘*¢ Good female schools are extremely needed in this 
country. I hope no Missionary will ever come out 
here, without a wife, as she, in her sphere, can be 
equally useful with her husband. I presume Mrs. 
Marshman does more good in her school than half 
the ministers in America.” 


An event occurred, at this time, which it is neces- 
sary to state. Mr. and Mrs. Judson, and Mr. Rice, 
whose minds were led, during the voyage from Amer- 
ica, to a consideration of the subject of baptism, be- 
came convinced, soon after their arrival in India, that 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 73 


their former sentiments were unscriptural. They 
accordingly adopted Baptist principles, and were bap- 
tized in Caleutta. This change is mteresting in itself, 
and in its consequences; for it resultel in the estab- 
lishment of the Burman Mission, and in the formation 
of the Baptist General Convention in the United 
States. The great Head of the church seems to have 
made this a leading event in that series of causes 
which aroused the Baptist Churches in America, to 
the duty of engaging in Foreign Missions. 

The progress of this change in the opinions ot 
Mr. and Mrs. Judson will be related, without com- 
ment, in theirown words. It is due to them to prove, 
undeniably, that it was the result of a thorough 
and deliberate investigation; that it was a simple 
obedience to what they believed to be the truth, 
and that it cost them sacrifices of feeling and of 
interest, of which persons less pious would have been 
incapable. From Mrs. Judson’s journal and letters 
a few extracts will be made, which will sufficiently 
establish these points. A letter, written after hei 
arrival at the Isle of France, says: 


“J will now, my dear parents and sisters, give you 
some account of our change of sentiment, relative 
to the subject of Baptism. .Mr. Judson’s doubts 
commenced while on our passage from America. 
While translating the New Testament, in which he 
was engaged, he used frequently to say, that the 
Baptists were right in their mode of administering 
the ordinance. Knowing he should meet the Baptists 
at Serampore, he felt it important to attend to it more 
closely, to be able to defend his sentiments. After 
our arrival at Serampore, his mind for two or three 
weeks was so much taken up with missionary inqui- 
ries, and our difficulties with government, as to pre- 
vent his attending to the subject of baptism. But 
as we were waiting the arrival of our brethren, and 
having nothing in particular to atiend to, he again 
took up the subject. I mee to have him give it up. 


14 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


and rest satisfied in his old sentiments, and frequent 

ly told him if he became a Baptist, would not. He, 
however, said he felt it his duty to examine closely 
a subject on which he had so many doubts. After 

we removed to Calcutta, he found in the library in 
our chamber, many books on both sides, which he 
determined to read candidly and prayerfully, and to 
aold fast, or embrace the truth, however mortify- 
ing, however great the sacrifice. I now commenced 
reading on the subject, with all my prejudices on the 
Pedobaptist side. We had with us Dr. Worcester’s, 
Dr. Austin’s, Peter Edwards’, and other Pedobaptist 
writings. But after closely examining the subject 
for several weeks, we were constrained to acknow- 
ledge that the truth appeared to lie on the Baptists’ 
side. It was extremely trying to reflect on the con- 
sequences of our becoming Baptists. We knew it 
would wound and grieve our dear Christian friends 
in America—that we should lose their approbation 
and esteem. We thought it probable the Commis- 
sioners would refuse to support us; and what was 
more distressing than anything, we knew we must be 
separated from our missionary associates, and go 
alone to some heathen land. These things were very 
trying to us, and caused our hearts to bleed for an- 
guish. We felt we had no home in this world, and 
no friend but each other. Our friends at Serampore 
were extremely surprised when we wrote them a letter 
requesting baptism, as they had known nothing of 
our having had any doubts on the subject. We 
were baptized on the 6th of September, in the 
Baptist chapel in Calcutta. Mr. J. preached a sermon 
at Calcutta on this subject soon after we were 
baptized, which, in compliance with the request of 

anumber who heard it, he has been preparing for the 
press. Brother Rice was baptized several weeks. 
after we were. It was a very great relief to our 
minds to have him join us, as we expected to be 
entirely alone in a mission.” 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 7 


The day after her baptism, she wrote to her paienta 
an account of the progress of their inquiries on the 
subject, in which she mentions some additional par- 
ticulars: 


‘* Mr. J. resolved to examine it candidly and prayer- 
fully, let the result be what it would. No one in the 
missicn family knew the state of his mind, as they 
never conversed with any of us on this subject. J 
was very fearful he would become a Baptist, and 
frequently suggested the unhappy consequences if he 
should. He always answered, that his duty compel- 
led him to examine the subject, and he hoped he 
should have a dispesition to embrace the truth, though 
he paid dear for it. I always took the Pedobaptists’ 
side in reasoning with him, although I was as doubtful 
of the truth of their system as he. After we came 
to Calcutta, he devoted his whole time to reading on 
this subject, having obtained the best authors on both 
sides. After having examined and reexamined the 
subject, in every way possible, and comparing the 
sentiments of both Baptists and Pedobaptists with 
the Scriptures, he was compelled, from a ccnviction 
of the truth, to embrace those of the former. I con- 
fined my attention almost entirely to the Scriptures, 
compared the Old with the New Testament, and tried 
to find something to favor infant baptism, but was 
convinced it had no foundation there. I examined 
the covenant of circumcision, and could see no reason 
for concluding that baptism was to be administered 
to children, because circumcision was. Thus, my 
dear parents and sisters, we are both confirmed Bap- 
tists, not because we wished to be, but because truth 
compelled us to be. A renunciation of our former | 
sentiments has caused us more pain, than anything 
which ever happened to us through our lives.” 


Several extracts from her journal will more fully 


disclose her feelings at this time, and will show how 
reluctantly she came to the result: 


< 


76 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


“ Aug. 10. Besides the trials occasioned by the 
orders of government, I see another heavy trial just 
comiag upon me. Mr. J.’s mind has been for some- 
time much exercised in regard to baptism. He has 
been lately examining the subject more closely. All 
his prejudices are in favor of Pedobaptism; but he 
wishes to know the truth, and be guided in the path 
of.duty. If he should renounce his former senti- 
ments, he must offend his friends at home, hazard his 
reputation, and, what is still more trying, be sepa- 
rated fror his missionary associates. 

*Q3, . have been much distressed the week past, 
in view of the probable separation between our 
missionary brethren and ourselves. Mr. J. feels 
convinced from Scripture, that he has never been 
baptized, and that he cannot conscientiously adminis- 
ter baptism to infants. This change of sentiment 
must necessarily produce a separation. As we are 
perfectly united with our brethren in every other 
respect, and are much attached to them, it is inex- 
pressibly painful to leave them, and go alone toa 
separate station. But every sacrifice that duty 
requires, must be made. I do not myself feel 
satisfied on the subject of baptism, having never 
given it a thorough examination. But I see many 
difficulties in the Pedobaptist theory, and must ac- 
knowledge that the face of Scripture does favor the 
Baptist sentiments. I intend to persevere in exam- 
ining the subject, and hope that I shall be disposed 
to embrace the truth, whatever it may be. It is 
painfully mortifying to my natural feelings, to 
think seriously of renouncing a system which I have 
been taught from infancy to believe and respect, 
O that the Spirit of God may enlighten and direct 
my mind—may prevent my retaining an old error, 
or embracing a new one! 

“Sept.1. [have been examining the subject ot 
baptism for sometime past, and, contrary to m 
prejudices and my wishes, am compelled to believe, 
that believers’ baptism alone is found in Scripture 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 47 


If ever ] sought to know the truth; if ever I looked 
up to the Father of lights; if ever I gave up myself 
to the inspired word, I have done so during this 
investigation. And the result is, that, laying aside 
my former prejudices and systems, and fairly appeal- 
ing to the Scriptures, I feel convinced that nothing 
really can be said in favor of infant baptism or 
sprinkling. We expect soon to be baptized. O 
may our hearts be prepared for that holy ordinance! 
and as we are baptized into a profession of Christ, 
may we put on Christ, and walk worthy of the 
high vocation wherewith we are called. But in 
consequence of our performance of this duty, we 
must make some very painful sacrifices. We must 
be separated from our dear missionary associates, 
and labor alone in some isolated spot. We must 
expect to be treated with contempt, and cast off by 
many of our American friends—forfeit the charac- 
ter we have in our native land, and probably have 
to labor for our own support, wherever we are sta- 
tioned. O, our Heavenly Father, wilt thou be our 
friend. Wilt thou protect us, euable us to live to 
thy glory, and make us useful in some retired part 
of this eastern world, in leading a few precious souls 
to embrace that Saviour whom we love and desire 
to serve. 

‘©5, Every week and day convinces me of the 
goodness and care of my Heavenly Father. When 
prospects are dark and gloomy, when my soul is 
cast down with distressing apprehensions, he leads 
me to feel my dependence on him, and lean on 
the bosom of Infinite Love. Iam now willing to 
acquresce in the divine dealings with us, and go 
alone with Mr. J. to that place which providence 
shall direct. I feel confident that Jesus will go 
with us, and direct our steps; and in that case, it is 
of little consequence whether we have more or lesa 
society. When I consider how short my life will 
probably be, and how soon the eternal world will 
»pen to my view, I Bonds at myself for having 


73 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


had so much anxiety about the place where, and the 
circumstances in which, I shall spend these few days. 
O for a true missionary spirit, and a willingness to 
suffer all things for the cause of Christ. 

“Oct. 2. Have had an uncommon sense of 
divine things, for sometime past, and found great 
consolation in committing all my ecncerns into the 
hands of a faithful God. For several days my mind 
has been so much impressed with the goodness of 
God, that Icould not help repeating to myself, How 
god is God! O for such an habitual sense of his 
moral perfections as banishes all anxiety and dis- 
trust. 

* Nov. 1, Sabbath. Another opportunity of cele- 
brating the love of Jesus at his table. It has been 
asweet season to my soul, a season of renewed 
dedication of myself to his service. I never saw a 
more striking display of the love of God, than was 
manifested in those who came around the commu- 
nion table, and who have been emphatically called 
from the highways and hedges—Hindoos and Por- 
tuguese, Armenians and Musselmans, could join 
with Europeans and Americans, in commemorating 
the dying love of Jesus. Surely nothing but divine 
grace could have removed prejudices, early and in- 
veterate, from the minds of these different charac- 
ters, and united them in the same sentiments and 
pursuits. 

‘Brother Rice was this day baptized. He has 
been examining the subject for sometime, and final- 
ly became convinced that it was his duty to be bap- 
tized in Christ’s appointed way. I consider it a 
singular favor, that God has given us one of our 
brethren to be our companion in travels, our associ- 
ate and fellow laborer in missionary work.’? 


Mr. Judson, in a letter to Dr. Bolles, of Salem, 
dated Calcutta, September 1, 1812, says: 


Within a few months I have experienced an 
entire change of sentiments on the subject of Bap- 


MEMOIR OF MRS JUDSON. 79 


tism. My doubts concerning the correctness of my 
former system of belief, commenced daring my pas- 
sage from America to this country; and after many 
painful trials, which none can know, but those who 
are taught to relinquish a system in which they had 
been educated, I settled down in the full persuasion, 
that the immersion of a professing believer in Christ 
is the only Christian Baptism. 

** Mrs. Judson is united with me in this persua- 
sion. We have signified our views and wishes to 
the Baptist Missionaries at Serampore, and expect 
to be baptized in this city next Lord’s-day. 

s* A separation from my missionary brethren, and 
a dissolution of my connexion with the Board of 
Wommissioneis, seem to be necessary consequences. 
The Missionaries at Serampore are exerting them- 
selves to the utmost of their ability, in managing 
and supporting their extensive and complicated mis- 
sion. 

“‘ Under these circumstances, I lookto you. Alone, 
m this foreign, heathen land, I make my appeal to 
those, whom, with their permission, I will call my 
Baptist brethren in the United States.” 


The Baptist Missionaries at Serampore had nu 
agency in producing this change. Dr. Carey, ina 
letter to Dr. Staughton, dated Oct. 20, 1812, says: . 


‘¢ Since their arrival in Bengal, brother and sistei 
Judson have been baptized. Judson has since that 
preached the best sermon upon Baptism, that I ever 

eard on the subject, which we intend toprint.* ) 
yesterday heard that brother Rice had also fully 
made up his mind upon baptism. 

‘«‘ As none of us had conversed with brother Jud 
son before he showed strong symptoms of a tenden 
cy towards believers’ baptism, I inquired of him whar 
had occasioned the change. He told me, that op 
the voyage he had thought much about the circum 


* Four edi ions of this Sermon have been published in Boston 


80 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


stances that he was coming to Serampore, where alt 
were Baptists; that he should, in all probability, 
have occasion to defend infant sprinkling among us; 
and that, in consequence, he set himse f to examine 
into the grounds of Pedobaptism. ‘This ended ina 
conviction, that it has no foundation in the Word of 
God, and occasioned a revolution in his sentiments, 
which was nearly complete before he arrived in 
India. He mentioned his doubts and convictions to 
Mrs. J. which operated to her conviction also, and 
they were both of them publicly baptized at Calcutta. 
I expect, however, that he will give the account of 
this change in an appendix to his sermon, which will, 
of course, be more correct than my statement. 

*¢ Brother Rice was, on the voyage, thought by 
our brethren to be the most obstinate friend of Pedo- 
baptism, of any of the Missionaries. I cannot tell 
what has led to this change of sentiment, nor had 1] 
anv suspicion of it, till one morning, when he came 
before I was up, to examine my Greek Testament: 
from some questions which he asked that morning, 
I began to suspect that he was inquiring; but I yes- 
terday heard that he was decidedly on the side of 
believers’ baptism. I expect, therefore, that he will 
soon be baptized.” 


These extracts have been made, for the purpose 
of silencing forever the imputation of unworthy mo- 
tives, which some persons have attributed to these 
Missionaries. Ifachange of opinion was ever made 
deliberately and conscientiously, it was this. Eve- 
ty possible motive but the fear of God and the love 
of truth, impelled them in the opposite direction. 
The difficulties of their situation were greatly in- 
creased by their change of sentiment. heir con- 
nexion with the American Board of Commissioners, 
they considered as dissolved. They could expect 


_no further support from that Board; and they could 


not be sure that their Baptist brethren would aid 
them. They could not stay in Hindostan, and vet 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 81 


ther resolved to devote themselves ts missionary 
labors, if any position could be found, where they 
might stay and toil. At one time, they thought it 
expedient to attempt a mission in South America; 
and Mr. Judson commenced the study of the Por- 
tuguese language. Japan, Persia, Madagascar, and 
other countries, were thought of, as fields for mis- 
sionary efforts. Mr. Judson had long regarded 
Burmah as the most desirable station; but it seemed 
inexpedient, at that time, to attempt to establish a 
mission there. The following extract ofa letter 
from Mrs. Judson, dated Calcutta, September 19, 
will show in what light the design was regarded, 
and will increase the evidence which many other 
events afford, that a special providence conducted 
them to Rangoon, contrary to their expectations, 
and to all apparent probabilities: 


*¢ We had almost concluded to go to the Burman 
empire, when we heard there were fresh difficulties 
existing between the English and the Burman gov- 
ernment. If these difficulties are settled, I think it 
probable we shall go there. It presents a very ex- 
tensive field for usefulness, containing seventeen 
millions of inhabitants;—and the Scriptures have 
never been translated into their language. This 
circumstance is a very strong inducement to Mr. 
Judson to go there, as there is no other place where 
he could be equally usefal in translating. But our 
pr.vations an dangers would be great. There, are 
no bread, potatoes, butter, and very little anima, 
fiiod. The natives live principally on rice and fish. 
I should have no society at all, except Mr. J. for 
there is notan English female inall Rangoon. But 
I could easily give up these comforts, if the gov- 
ernment was such as to secure safety to its subjects, 

_‘ But where our lives would depend on the cap- 
rice of a monarch, or of those who have the power 
of life and death, we could never feel safe, unless 
we always had strong faithin God. Notwithstand- 


82 MEMOIR OF MRS. IUDSON. 


ing these difficulties, we are perfectly willing to go, 
if Providence opens the way. Mr. Judson has writ- 
ven to Mr. Chater, at Ceylon, to get all the infor- 
mation respecting that place he can. Felix Carey 
has lately arrived from Rangoon, and wishes us to 
return with him, as he is entirely alone, there be- 
ing no other Missionary in all Burmah. Mr. Jud 
son and myself enjoy perfect health, and yet this 
is the most fatal month in the year, and is consid- 
ered more sickly this year, than many years before. 
All our brethren have been sick with fevers, but are 
getting better. Why we are thus distinguished 
with such uncommon health, we know not, but can 
only ascribe it to the sovereign mercy of our Heay- 
enly Father. We are still at Mr. Rolt’s, in Cal- 
cutta, where we are treated with the greatest kind- 
ness. I hope these favors will not induce us to 
forget our great object, or make us less engaged in 
our mission, than when we were deprived of them. 
Mr. J. and myself spend the greater part of our 
time alone, and endeavour to realize the greatness 
of the work in which we have engaged—our depen- 
dence on God for success and direction—and the 
shortness and uncertainty of life.” 


The following letter to her parents shows that 
they were still ‘perplexed, but not in despair-- 
persecuted, but not forssken.” 


* Calcutta, Oct. 9, 1812. 
‘My dear and honored Parents, 
‘I know you wish to hear from us every opportu- 

nity; and to hear of our continued prosperity will 
‘aflord you peculiar pleasure. When we reflect on 
the goodness and mercy of‘our Heavenly Father tous 
since we left ouruative land, we are filled with wonder 
and gratitude, and feel the obligations these distin-- 
guished favors lay us under, of renewedly devoting 
ourselves to his service. We view his hand in 
leading us by a way we knew not, and in raising 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 83 


us up friends where we had no reason to expect 
them. If God has made it our duty to leave oar 
home and friends, he has given us a home hete in 
a land of strangers, and friends who are kind and 
sympathizing. Ifhe has presented dark and gloomy 
prospects, and for a time hedged up our way, yet 
he has enabled us to trust him in the dark, to feel 
our entire dependence on him, and lean on him for 
direction and support. We are still at Mr. Rolt’s, 
in Calcutta, where we receive every attention" we 
can wish. Although we are so comfortable here, 
and have everything we wish, yet we long to get 
away to the place where we shall labor among the 
heathen. Mr. Judson is making daily exertions to 
get away. We have at present some prospect of 
going to Java. It presents a wide field for mission- 
ary labors, and no missionary is there. We have 
spoken for a passage; and unless some new pros- 
pects open of getting into the Burman empire, it is 
probable we shall go to Java, if government will 
permit. 

“‘ The missionary cause continues to prosper in 
this country, and constant additions are making to 
the churches. As many as twenty have been added 
to the Baptist church in Calcutta, since we have 
been here. I heard the relations of four native wo- 
men before the church, a short time since, which 
were very interesting. ‘They were converted by 
the means of a native who is a preacher, and has 
been the means of converting a great number. 
Last Sabbath I communed with this church, which 
is composed of Europeans, Armenians, Hindoos, 
Portuguese, and a class of people called_half-cast, 
on account of one of their parents being a European, 
the other a Hindoo. I could not but be aflected 
to see so many which were called emphatically from 
the ‘highways and hedges,’ commemorating the 
dving love of Christ in a heathen land.” 


94 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON 


CHAPTER YV. 


fr. and Mrs. Judson and Mr. Rice sail for the Isle of France— 
Mrs, Newell’s death—Mr. Rice sails for America—Mr. and 
Mrs. Judson sail for Madras—Arrival at Rangoon. 


Tue Bengal government were offended by the 
stay of the Missionaries at Calcutta, supposing, 
>robably, that they intended to remain in Bengal. 

“They accordingly,” says Mrs. Judson,* “issued 
amost peremptory order for our being sent immedi- 
ately on board one of the Honorable Company’s ves- 
sels, bound to England. A petty officer accompanied 
Messrs. Rice and Judson to their place of residence, 
and requested them not to leave it without permis- 
sion. We saw our names inserted in the public pa- 
pers as passengers on board a certain ship, and now 
there appeared very little hope of our escape. Mr. 
Rice and Mr. Judson, however, soon ascertained 
that a ship would sail for the Isle of France, in two 
days. They applied for a pass from the chief mag- 
istrate, but were refused. ‘They communicated to 
the captain of the ship their circumstances, and ask- 
ed if he would venture to take them on board with- 
out a pass. He replied that he would be neutral; 
that there was his ship, and that they might do as 
they pleased. 

‘© With the assistance of the gentleman in whose 
house we were residing, we obtained coolies (por- 
‘ers) to convey our baggage, and, at twelve o’clock 
at night, we embarked, though the gates of the 
dock-yards were closed, and the opening of them at 
that time of night quite contrary to the regulations 
ofthe Company. ‘The next morning the ship sailed. 
She had proceeded down the river for two days, 
when a government despatch arrived, forbidding the 


* Burman Mission, pp. 18, 19.---Messrs. Nott and Hall obtained 
a passage for Bombay, and sailed thither about November 20. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 85 


pilot to go farther, as passengers were on boar 1 whe 
had been ordered to England.” 


The following letter of Mrs. J. to her parents 
contains some interesting particulars of the unpleas- 
ant and hazardous situation in which they were 
placed by this unexpected detention. 


© At Sea, N. Lat. 12, Dec. 7, 1812. 
“© My dear Parents, ; 

“We immediately concluded that it was not safe 
to continue on board the remainder of the night. 
Mr Rice and Mr. Judson took a boat and went on 
shore to a tavern little more than a mile from the 
ship. The captain said that I, and our baggage, 
could stay on board with perfect safety, even should 
an officer be sent to search the vessel. ‘The next 

day we lay at anchor, expecting every hour to hear 
some intelligence from Calcutta. In the evening, 
the captain received a note from the owner of the 
vessel, saying he had been at the Police to inquire 
the cause of the detention of his ship; and the cause 
assigned was, ‘it was suspected there were persons 
on board which the captain had been forbidden to 
receive,’ and that the ship could not proceed, until 
it was ascertained that no such persons were on 
board. The pilot immediately wrote a certificate 
that no such persons were on board, at the same 
time giving a list of all the passengers. I got into 
a small boat and went on shore, where the brethren 
nad been anxiously waiting through the day. We 
knew not what course to take, as it was then impos- 
sible that we could proceed in that ship, without a 
pass from the magistrate. Brother Rice set. out 
directly for Calcutta, to see if it was possible to get 
a pass, or do anything else. We spent the night 
and the next day at the tavern, without hearing any- 
thing from the ship, fearing that every European 
we saw was in search of us. Brother Rice returned 
from Calcutta, but had oe nothing. ‘The own- 


86 MAMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


er of the vessel was highly offended at his ship’s be 
ing detained so long on our account, and would de 
nothing more to assist us. We feit our situation 
was peculiarly trying, and could see no end to our 
difficulties. 

‘Early the next morning we received a note 
from the captain, saying he had liberty to proceed, 
but we must take our baggage from the vessel. 
We thought it not safe to continue at the tavern 
where we were, neither could we think of returning 
to Calcutta. But one way was left—to go down 
the river about sixteen miles, where there was 
another tavern. I went on board to see about our 
baggage, as the brethren did not think it safe for 
them to go. As we could get no boat at the place 
where we were, I requested the captain to let our 
things remain until the vessel reached the other 
tavern, where I would try to get a boat. He con- 
sented, and told me I had better go in the vesse., 
as it would be unpleasant going so far in a small 
boat. Iwas obliged to go on shore again, to inform 
the brethren of this, and know what they would do. 
Brother Rice set out again for Calcutta, to try to 
get a passage to Ceylon, in a ship which was an- 
chored near the place we were going to. Mr. J 
took a small boat in which was a small part of our 
baggage, to go down the river, while I got into the 
pilot’s boat, which he had sent on shore with me, 
to go to the ship. As I had been sometime on 
shore, and the wind strong, the vessel had gone 
down some distance. Imagine how uncomfortable 
my situation. Ina little boat rowed by six natives, 
entirely alone, the river very rough, in consequence 
of the wind; without an umbrella or anything to 
screen me from the sun, which was very hot. The 
natives hoisted a large sail, which every now and 
then would almost tip the boat on one side. I 
manifested some fear to them, and to comfort me, 
they would constantly repeat, ‘Cutcha pho annah 
sahib, cutcha pho annah,’ The meaning, Never 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 87 


fear, madam, never fear. After sometime we came 
up with the ship, where I put our things in order, 
to be taken out inan hour ortwo. When wecame 
opposite the tavern, the pilot kindly lent me his 
boat and servant to go on shore. I immediately 

rocured a large boat .o send to the ship, for our 

aggage. I entered the tavern, astranger, a female, 
and unprotected. I called for a room, and sat down 
to reflect on my disconsolate situation. I had 
nothing with me buta few rupees. I did not know 
that the boat which I sent after the vessel would over- 
take it, and if it did, whether it would ever return 
with our baggage; neither did I know where Mr. J. 
was, of when he would come, or with what treat- 
ment I should meet at the tavern. I thought of 
home, and said to myself, These wre some of the 
many trials attendant on a missronary life, and which 
Thave anticipated. 

‘©In a few hours Mr. Judson arrived, and toward 
night, our baggage. We had now given up all hope 
of going to the Isle of France, and concluded either 
to return to Calcutta, or to communicate our real 
situation to the tavern keeper, and request him to 
assist us. As we thought the latter preferable, Mr. 
J. told our landlord our circumstances, and asked 
him if he could assist in getting us a passage to 
Ceylon. He said a friend of his was expected dows 
the river the next day, who was captain of a vessel 
bound to Madras, and who, he did not doubt, would 
take us. This raised our sinking hopes. We wait- 
ed two days; and on the third, which was Sabbath, 
the ship came in sight, and anchored directly before 
the house. We now expected the time of our 
deliverance had come. The tavern-keeper went on 
board to see the captain for us; but our hopes were 
again dashed, when he returned and said the cap- 
tain could not take us. We determined, however, 
to see the captain ourselves, and endeavour to per- 
suade him to let us have a passage at any rate, 
We had just sat down to supper, when a letter was 


88 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


handed us. We hastily opened it, and, te cur great 
surprise and joy, in it was a oe from the magis- 
trate, for us to go on board the Creole, the vesse 
we had left. Who procured this pass for us, or in 
what way, we are still ignorant; we could only view 
the hand of God, and wonder. But we had every 
reason to expect the Crevle had got out to sea, as 
it was three days since we left her. There was a 
possibility, however, of her having anchored at Sau- 
gur, seventy miles from where we then were. We 
had let our baggage continue in the boat into which 
it was first taken, therefore it was all in readiness; 
and after dark, we all three got into the same boat, 
and set out against the tide, for Saugur. It was a 
most dreary night to me; but Mr. J. slept the great- 
er part of the night. The next day we had a favor- 
able wind, and before night reached Saugur, where 
were many ships at anchor, and among the rest we 
had the happiness to find the Creole. She had been 
anchored there two days, waiting for some of the 
ship’s crew. I never enjoyed a sweeter moment in 
my life, than that when I was sure we were in sight 
of the Creole. After spending a fortnight m such 
anxiety, it was a very great relief to find ourselves 
safe on board the vessel in which we first embarked. 
All of us are now attending to the French language, 
as that is spoken altogether at the Isle of France. 
Though it has pleased our Heavenly Father lightly 
to afflict us, yet he has supported and delivered us 
hb our trials; which still encourages us to trust in 
um.” 


In her private journal, Mrs. J. thus records her 
feelings, at this time: 


* Dee. 20. Have enjoyed religion very little, since 
I came on board this vessel. In secret prayer, I am 
so much troubled with vain and wandering thoughts, 
and have so little sense of the divine presence, and so 
little enjoyment of God, that I know I am making 
no advances in preparation for usefulness among the 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 89 


heathen. Yet in my dullest frames, the idea of find- 
ing myself in the midst of them at last, encourages 
me to hope, that God will finally make me useful, in 
enlightening and saving some of their precious souls. 

92, ‘This day closes the twenty-third year of 
my life, I have been reflecting cn the many favors 
I have received, and the ingratitude of which I have 
been guilty the past year; and my heart has been 
uncommonly affected by the review. In the course 
of the past year, I have assumed a new name, and 
new relative duties—left my father’s house, the cir- 
cle of my dear friends, my beloved native land—and 
have been safely conducted across the ocean, In 
these events, I would acknowledge the kind hand 
of my Heavenly Father. In changing my name, he 
has allowed me to take the name of one, who loves 
the cause of Christ, and makes the promotion of it 
the business of his life—one, who is, in every respect, 
the most calculated to make me happy and useful, 
of all the persons I have ever seen. I would also 
acknowledge the hand of God, in supporting me 
through the trying scene of leaving my friends, and 
in making my voyage so comfortable and happy. 
Nor has our Heavenly Father forsaken us, in this 
part of the world, but has raised us up friends in a 
strange land, has preserved our lives and our health, 
in an uncongenial climate, has led us to examine 
the truths of his word, and given us clearer views, 
than ever before, of the ordinances of his house. 
He has afflicted us, it is true; but many favorable 
circumstances are not to be forgotten. And he is 
now carrying us to a land, where we have some 
hope of finding a home for life. When again I 
reflect on the returns I have made for so much kind- 
ness, my heart sinks within me. I feel that I have 
misused all the favors and privileges [ have enjoyed, 
aud though never under so great obligation, was 
never so guilty, so unworthy, so unqualified to serve 
him, But I renewedly commend myself to his mer- 
cy, and implore him to forgive my sins, to cleanse 

8* 


56 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


my pollutions, and enable me henceforth to live to 
him, and to him alone. 

** Dec. 30. Very light winds for several days. 
Make slow progress. Shall probably arrive at the 
Isle of France, in the most dangerous season, when 
there are frequent hurricanes and storms on the 
coast. I have been trying to feel willing to die, at 
any time, and under any circumstances, that God 
shall appoint. But I find my nature shrinks from 
the idea of being shipwrecked and sunk amid the 
waves. This shows me how unlike I am to those 
holy martyrs, who rejoiced to meet death, in the 
most horrid forms. I have enjoyed religion but lit- 
tle on board this ship, feeling an uncommon degree 
of slothfulness and inactivity. Spent some time, 
last evening, in prayer for awakening and restoring 
grace. I greatlv feel the need of more confidence 
in God, and reliance on the Saviour, that when dan- 
ger and death approach, I may composedly resign 
myself into his hands, and cheerfully wait his will. 

‘© Jam. 7, 1818. We have been at sea nearly six 
weeks, and are within a week’s sail of the Isle of 
France. It is a long passage, but we have had con- 
trary winds, and much rough weather. ‘There are 
four passengers, besides ourselves and the captain’s 
wife. None of them in the least seriously inclined, 
We three have worship twice every Sabbath, and 
prayers in our room every evening. ‘The other pas- 
sengers spend their Sabbaths on deck in playing 
cards and chess, and trifling conversation. It is very 
trying to us to see the Sabbath profaned in such a 
way. But we cannot prevent it. Though they 
treat us with respect, yet I presume they consider 
us as superstitious, enthusiastic, unsocial creatures 
But we know it is our great’ business to serve our 
Heavenly Father, and prepare for usefulness among 
the heathen. In order to do this, we must take 
those methods which make us appear contemptil ie 
in the eyes of the men of this world. We continue 
to attend to the French language. Find nothing 
difficult about it 


. ~ 
MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 91 


“Jon. 17. Have at last arrived in port;* but O — 
what news, what distressing news! Harriet is dead. 
Harriet, my dear friend, my earliest associate in the 
Mission, is no more. O death, thou destroyer of do- 
mestic felicity, could not this wide world afford vic- 
tims sufficient to satisfy thy cravings, without enter- 
ing the family ofa solitary few, whose comfort and 
happiness depended much on the society of each oth- 
er? Could not this infant Mission be shielded from 
thy shafts! Byt thou hast only executed the com- 
mission of a higher power. Though thou hast 
come, clothed in thy usual garb, thou wast sent by 
a kind Father to release his child from toil and pain. 
Be still, then, my heart, and know that God has 
done it. Just and true are thy ways, O thou King 
of saints! Who would not fear thee? Who would 
not love thee? 

18. Brother Newell has just been on board. 
Poor, disconsolate, broken hearted widower. He has 
borne his afflictions alone, without a single Christian 
friend to comfort his heart. His feelings allow him 
to give us a few broken hints only of Harriet’s death. 

** Soon after they left Calcutta, in consequence of 
contrary winds and storms, the vessel was found to 
be in a leaky, sinking condition, which obliged them 
to put into Coringa to repair. Before the vessel 
got in, Harriet was seized with the bowel complaint, 
which was extremely distressing in her situation. 
She however was considerably recovered before they 
yu to sea again, and was in hopes of getting to the 

sle of France before she was confined. But they 
again had contrary winds, which made their pas- 
sage so much longer, that she was confined on board 
the vessel. She was safely and very comfortably de- 
livered of a little girl, a Srtnight before the vessel 


* The Isle of France is situated in the Indian ocean, in fifty- 
eight degrees twenty-seven &. nutes east longitude, and twenty 
degrees south latitude. It is about thirty-three miles long, and 
twenty-four broad from east to west. It was captured from the 
French by the English, who still retain possession of it. 


92 MEM)IR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


arrived. She was much better for a few duys than 
she had been for weeks before; and the child was 
perfectly well, and appeared as likely to live as any 
coud. In a few days a storm came on; and as she 
and the infant were much exposed to the wet weath- 
er, they both took cold, which speedily terminated 
the life of the infant, and threw Harriet into a con- 
sumption, of which she died, on the 30th of No- 
vember. She thought herself in a consumption 
from the first of her illness, and endeavoured to be 
prepared to meet the king of terrors. She had her 
reason perfectly to the last moment of her life. She 
felt no fear of death, but longed for its approach. 
The day before she died, her physician told her she 
would not continue another day. She lifted up her 
hands, and exclaime?, ‘ O glorious intelligence.? She 
took a formal leave o: Mr. Newell, and delivered to 
him messages to her friends with the greatest compo- 
sure. She frequentiy mentioned in her sickness, that 
she had never repented leaving her native country, 
and that the consideration of having left it for the 
cause of Christ, now afforded her great consolation. 
She died in a happy, composed frame, without a 
struggle or a groan. Her body now lies, solitary 
and alone, in yonder heathy ground. No marble 
monument* is erected to speak her worth, no com- 
mon gravestone to tell the passing stranger, ‘here 
lie the remains of one, who, for the love of Christ and 
immortal souls, left the bosom of her friends, and 
found an early grave ina land of strangers.? But 
angels will watch her dust, even in this benighted 
land; and at the resurrection of the just, it will be 
re-united to her immortal spirit, which, no doubt, is 
now in the full enjoyment of her God, 

“« Jan, 23. No prospect of remaining long on this 
island. It seems as if there was no resting place for 
me on earth. O when will my wanderings termi 


* A monument has since been erected over her grave, by the 
American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 93 


nate? When shall I find some little spot, that I can 
call my home, while in this world? Yet I rejoice in 
all thy dealings, O my Heavenly Father; for thou dost 
support me urder every trial, and enable me to lean 
or thee, Thou dost make me to feel the sweet- 
hess of derivmg comfort from thee, when world- 
ly comforts fail Thou dost not suffer me to sink 
down in despondency, but enablest me to look 
forward with joy, to a state of heavenly rest and 
happiness. There I shall have te wander no more, 
suffer no more; the face of Jesus will be unveiled, 
and { shall restin the arms of Jove, through all eter- 
nity 

‘¢ Jan. 31. Sabbath. Was taken very ill during 
the night, but am now somewhat relieved. My 
illness has led me to think of death, and inquire 
whether I am prepared for that solemn event I 
. think I can say, that I feel happy in the prospect. 
And yet my heart feels a pang at the thought of 
eaving my dear husband to bear alone the trials 
and fatigues of a missionary life. I am willing, I 
should be thankful to live longer on his account, and 
for the sake also of laboring among the heathen. 
But the kind of life I lead induces me to look at the 
grave with more composure than I otherwise should 
do, and appreciate the worth of that religion which 
can make us happy when stripped of earthly com- 
forts—and happier still, in view of the eternal 
world. 

‘Mr, J. has gone to preach to the soldiers, and 
brother Rice to conduct worship in the hospital; 
so that being quite alone, I have sought and enjoy- 
ed a precious season of prayer and communion with 
God. O for a closer walk with God, and more 
fervor in the performance of religious duties. O that 
I could fill up every moment with rervice acceptable 
to the dear Redeemer. 

“‘ Feb, 12. Some religious enjoyment, but guilty 
of much stupidity, hardness of heart, and wander- 
ing thoights. Have felt some longing desires to 


94 MEMOIR OF MKS. JUDSON, 


be free from sin, and present with the Saviour. 
Formerly, I was very desirous of living a long 
life—death generally appeared as the king of terrors 
But of late, I have wished that> my pilgrimage 
would soon terminate, and death and the grave 
have worn an inviting appearance. This change 
of feeling is not occasioned by any present distress 
or discontent with life, for my days are tranqui! 
and happy. Perhaps these new desires are a prelude 
to my speedy departure from this world. O should 
this ie the case, may I, in that solemn transporting 
hour, adopt these lines of Watts:— 


* Joyful, with all the strength I have, 
My quivering lips shall sing, 

Where is thy boasted vict’ry, grave? 
And where’s the monster’s sting ?? 


6698. Had a special season of prayer this evening, 
to confess my sins, and bewail the depravity of my 
heart. Had some faint views of the infinite excel- 
lence of God, which caused me to mourn that I sin 
so much against him, and to long for strength to 
vanquish my spiritual foes. Felt happy that God 
reigns; that he has a church in this world, on which 
he has set his love, having redeemed it with the 
blood of his own dear Son. But O now seldom 
do I get near to God, or have any sense of divine 
things. At what a poor, low rate I live. If a 
Chr 3tian, surely I am the least, the vilest, entirely 
unworthy the notice of an infinite God. Yet Jesus 
can be honored in the salvation of one so mean, so 
unworthy. Divine grace will be more conspicuous, 
than in the salvation of those, who have less to be 
forgiven. [ will still hope in thy mercy, O infinite 
Redeemer—that thou wilt enable me to persevere 
in thy service, and finally save my sinful soul. 

“‘ March 7. Sabbath. I am alone, as usual, on 
the Sabbath. Have been spending the forenoon 
m self-examination and prayer. Much distressed 
on reviewing my exercises and feelings, for some 


MEMOIR OF MRS JUDSON, 95 


daye past. I see that I have greatly declined in 
religion; have less frequently than formerly affecting 
views of my own sinfulness, and refreshing views 
of the divine character. O that I might live a more 
holy life! I would be more watchful, more prayer- 
ful, more willing to deny myself, that I may live near 
to God; but in my own strength, I can do nothing. 
If Jesus is pleased to strengthen me, and give mea 
spirit of perseverance, it will be easy for me to keep 
his commandments. But if not, I shall wither and 
die ; [ shall give up the contest, and my sins will 
come off conquerors. O Jesus, prevent it. My sins 
are thine enemies, as well as mine. Let them not 
triumph over one who humbly dares to hope that 
she loves thee, and who now gives herself entirely to 
thee. Thou wilt not, O my Saviour, desert me at 
last. Thou knowest I have left my native land, and 
the comforts of social life, from desire to serve thee, 
and comply with the clear dictates of duty. And 
now when I have but few comforts left, O give m 
the enjoyment of thy presence. Give me thyself, and 
Task no more. I will be satisfied with this as my 
portion in life, and my eternal portion beyond the 
grave.” 


It was thought expedient that Mr. Rice should 
return to America, for the purpose of exciting the 
attention of the Baptist churches in this country. » 
He accordingly sailed for the United States, in March, 
1813. He was welcomed on his arrival with great © 
affection, and was successful, in a very short time, 
in awakening such a spirit of missionary exertion in 
the Baptist churches, that a large number of Mission- 
ary Societies were formed in various parts of the 
country; and in April, 1814, the Baptist General 
Convention was formed in Philadelphia.* One of 


*It has since been called ‘* The General Convention of the 
Baptist Denomination in the United States, for Foreign Missions 
and for other important objects relating to the Redeemer’s king- 
dom.” It holds its sessicn once in three years. It is composed 


96 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


the first acts of the Convention was to appoint Mr. 
and Mrs. Judson as their Missionaries, leaving it to 
their discretion to select a field of labor. Mr. Rice, 
also, was appointed a Missionary, but was requested 
to prosecute, for a while, his zealous and successful 
agency in forming Auxiliary Societies, and collecting 
unds. 


We will now resume our extracts from Mrs. J.’s 
journal: 


“¢ Murch 18. Brother Rice has just left us, and 
taken passage for America, Mr. J. and [ are now 
entirely alone; not one remaining friend in this part 
of the world. The scenes through which we pass 
are calculated to remind us that this world is not our 
home, and that we are fast verging towards the 
grave. No matter how soon we leave this world, if 
we only live to God while we live. In that case, to 
die is gain. Yet we are willing, and even desirous 
to live a few years, that we may serve God among .- 
the heathen, and do something towards spreading 
a knowledge of the Saviour in this benighted 
world. 

‘30. Have been confined to my bed for a fort- 
night past. God has mercifully carried me through 
a scene of great pain and weakness, and prevented 
many evils which my ignorance might have occasion- 
ed. May I be grateful for divine mercies received, 
and humbly devote to his service the life he has 
spared, aud the health and strength he has so far 
restored. 


of ** Delegates from the Missionary Societies, Associations, 
Churches, and other religious bodies of the Baptist Denomination, 
which shall annually contribute to the funds, under the direction 
of this body, asum amounting to at least one hundred dollars, 
each being entitled to one representative and vote, and for every 
additional sum of one hundred dollars, one additional represen*a- 
tive and vote shall be allowed.”? The executive business is 
performed by a Board, consisting of a President, Vice-Presi- 
dents, a Corresponding and a Recording Secretary, a Treasurer, 
Assistant I'reasurer, and forty Managers. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 97 


‘‘] have felt a little revived of late, and long more 
than ever to get settled among the heathen, and 
begin to do something for the cause of Jesus. | J 
feel that I have been too worldly minded, too much 
concerned about my own comfort and «onvenience, 
and too indolent, since I have been engaged in my 
great undertaking. Resolved, through divine grace, 
to be more concerned for the prosperity of Zion, and 
= improve my time more diligently than I have ever 
done. 

** April 10. Have just returned from Harriet’s 
grave—not able to visit it before, on account of the 
distance. The visit revived many painful, solemn 
feelings. But a little while ago, she was with us on 
board ship, and joined us daily in prayer and praise. 
Now her body is crumbling to dust, in a land of 
strangers, and her immortal spirit has doubtless 
joined the company of holy spirits around the throne, 
where she can sing in much more exalted strains, 
than when a prisoner here below. I was struck on 
beholding a large cross in the centre of the cemetery, 
higher than any of the grave stones. This remind- 
ed me of the triumph of the cross over death and 
the grave, a triumph in which every saint will at 
last partake, and be crowned with eternal life. O 
how animating the thought, that Jesus has himself 
entered the grave, and opened a path to eternal glo- 
ry. He is with his disciples when they enter the 
gloomy passage. He was with my dear depart- 
ed sister. O may he be with me. 

«93. Iam astonished to find my houghts so vain 
and worldly, when I have so little connexion with 
the world. Alas, I can donothing of myself. Ican- 
not, in my own strength, subdue one sinful feeling, or 
even think a good thought. But I see one who ts 
able to do all things. Yes, blessed Saviour, thy 
blood cleanseth from all sin, and if thou wilt, thou 
canst make me clean. Vile and guilty as I am, on 
thee 1 hang all my hopes; to thee I come fer par- 
doning and sanctifying grace. O reject me not, cast 


92 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


me not off; but glorify the riches of that grace 
which can save a soul so unholy, so undeserving.” 


The affecting incident related in the following let- 
ter, exemplifies the warmth of her benevolence, and 
the energy of her character: 


TO HER SISTERS, 
Isle of France—Port Louis, March 12, 1€18. 

«A circumstance took place this evening, the re- 
cital of which, I think, will interest your feelings, and 
which greatly encourages me to plead the cause of 
humanity whenever an opportunity offers. Last 
night I heard a considerable noise in the yard in which 
we live, connected with another family. We went 
to the door, and saw a female slave with her hands 
tied behind her, and her mistress beating her with a 
club, in a most dreadful manner. My blood ran cold 
within me, and I could quietly see it no longer. I 
went up to the mistress, and in broken French, asked 
her to stop, and what her servant haddone. She im- 
mediately stopped, and told me that her servant was 
very bad, and had lately run away. I talked with 
her, till her anger appeared to be abated, and she 
concluded her punishment with flinging the club she 
had in her hands, at the poor creature’s head, which 
made the blood run down on her garment. ‘The ~ 
slave continued with her hands tied behind her all 
night. They were untied this morning, and she 
spent the day in labor, which made me conelude she 
would be punished no more. But this evening, I 
saw a large chain brought into the yard, with a ring 
at one end, just large enough to go round her neck, 
On this ring were fixed two pieces of iron about an 
inch wide, and four inches long, which would come 
on each side of her face to prevent hereating. The 
chain was as large and heavy as an ox chain, and 
reached from her neck tothe ground. 'The ring was 
fastened with a lock and key. The poor creature 
stood trembling while they were preparing to put 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 99 


the chain on her. The mistress’ rage again kindled 
at seeing her, and she began beating her again, as 
the night before. I went to her again, and begged 
she would stop. She did, but so full of anger that 
she could hardly speak. When she had become a 
little calm, [ asked her if she could not forgive her 
servant. I told her that her servant was very bad, 
but that she would be very good to forgive her. 
She made me to understand that she would forgive 
her, because J had asked her; but she would not have 
her servant to think it was out of any favor to her. 
She told her slave that she forgave her, because 1 
requested it. ‘The slave came, knelt and kissed my 
feet, and said, ‘’Mercie, madam,—mercie, madam,” 
meaning, Thank you, madam. I could scarcely for- 
bear weeping at her gratitude. ‘The mistress prom- 
ised me the chain should not be put on her, and or- 
dered it carried away. I have felt very happy this 
evening, that this poor slave can lie down and sleep, 
without that heavy chain. But O, my dear sisters, 
how much more wretched is the spiritual than the 
temporal state of these slaves. ‘They have none to 
tell them of their danger, none to lead them to that 
Savigur, who is equally the friend of the slave and 
-he master. 

“We have sometimes thought of staying on this 
island, as Missionaries are really needed here. But 
when we compare this population with many other 
places which are equally needy, we cannot feel justi- 
fied in staying here. ‘The governor of this island 
would patronize a mission, and would be pleased to 
have us continue here. Mr. J. and brother Rice 
have preached every Sabbath to the English soldiers. 
We long to get to the place where we shall spend 
the remainder of our lives in instructing the heathen, 
I want one of you with me very much, as Iam ene 
tirely alone. I wish it were possible for one of you 
tocome. A voyage from America here looks tri- 
fling to what it did when I was in America. I ex- 
pect to take <ne or two more voyages before we are 


100 MEMOIR OF MRS, 1UDSON. 


settlel. How happy should I feel, to spend one eve- 
ning at home, and give you an account of the scenes 
through which we have passed. But that happiness 
I do not expect to enjoy. I often look at death with 
very animating feelings. ‘Then I hope to meet all 
my friends, to be no more separated. Let us, m 
sisters, live near to God, and make it our only busi- 
ness to promote his glory. Then we shall be pre- 
pared for a happy meeting, and the trials through 
which we have passed in this life will only heighten 
our felicity.” 

‘© May 6. Have been distressed for some days, on 
account of the gloomy prospect before us. We have 
engaged a passage to Madras, and expect soon to 
embark, not knowing what may befall us there. 
We shall probably meet with great difficulties and 
trials; and we know not to what part of the world we 
shall have next to direct our course. Everything 
respecting our little mission is involved in uncertain- 
ty. I find it hard to live by faith, and confide entirely 
in God, when the way is dark before me. But if 
the way were plain and easy, where would be the 
room for confidence inGod? Instead, then, of mur- 
muring and complaining, let me rejoice and be thank- 
ful that my Heavenly Father compels me to trust in 
him, by removeing those things, on which we are 
naturally inclined to lean. 1 daily feel my unfit- 
ness for the great work, which I have undertaken, 
and hope that God is making use of these trials to 
fit me for future life among the heathen. O, if our 
trials may be then sanctified, we will rejoice; nor in 
all thy chastisements, O blessed Jesus, will we wish 
to have the rod removed, until thou hast effectually - 
subdued us to thyself.” 


_Among the English soldiers on the island, was one 
pious man, who became very strongly attached to 
the Missionaries. His piety and his zeal for the wel- 
fare of his fellow soldiers furnish an instructive exam- 
ple to other Christians, Mrs, J, thus describes him: 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 101 


“His first appearance was solemn, humble, and 
unassuming; and such we have ever found him. He 
told us he was a member of a church that had 
been formed in one of the regiments by the Mission- 
aries at Serampore, and that that regiment was now 
on Bourbon, a neighbouring island, but he had been 
sent to this island on business. Though he is an 
illiterate man, and has had but few advantages, yet 
he converses on the distinguishing doctrines of the 
Gospel with a sense and propriety which will scarce- 
ly be found among Christians in higher life. 

«Mr. Judson made inquiries of him respecting 
the religious state of the soldiers in this place, and 
whether opportunity could be had of preaching to 
them. He informed him that he knew of but one 
pious soldier in either of the regiments on this island, 
and that there could be no possibility of preaching 
to them, unless a private room could be procured for 
the purpose. He immediately made every exertion 
to hire a room, and at last succeeded; but was oblig- 
ed to give eight dollars a month, which he has paid 
out of his own private property, that his fellow sol- 
diers might have opportunity to hear the Gospel. 
This soldier has visited us almost every day for two 
months past, and we have seldom found him inclined 
to converse on any other subject besides experimen 
tal reiigion. ‘Though his income is very small, and 
he has a family to support, yet he has given us, since 
we have been here, the value of twenty dolla‘s, 
We have frequently observed that we have seldum 
enjoyed religion to so high a degree in the society 
of any other, as we have in the conversation and 
prayers of this man; and we doubt not, though his 
situation in life is low, but he will shine in heaven, 
as a star of the first magnitude.” 


After long deliberation as to the course which they 
should pursue in their present embarrassing and une 
foreseen condition, Mr. and Mrs. Judson resolved to 
attempt a mission at Perune , or Prince of Wales’ 


102 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


’ Island, situated on the coast of Malacca, and inhab- 
ited by Malays. As no passage to that island could 
be obtained from the Isle of France, they resolved 
to visit Madras, with the hope of obtaining a passage 
thence to Penang. They accordingly sailed tur Ma- 
dras, in May, 1813. ‘They had a pleasant passage, 
Mrs. J.’s journal contains this memorandum during 
the voyage: 


“ June 1. Just passing the island of Ceylon, and 
expect to reach Madras in three days. I have this 
day renewedly given myself to God, to be used and 
disposed of as he sees best. I feel that I am but an 
empty vessel, which must be cleansed and filled with 
grace, or remain forever empty, forever useless. If 
ever such a ‘poor creature as I am does any good, it 
will be entirely owing to the sovereign grace of God, 
to his own self-moving goodness, inclining him to 
give grace to one so depraved, so unworthy as I am.”’ 


The Missionaries arrived at Madras in June.* 
They were kindly received and entertained by Mr. 
and Mrs. Loveless, English Missionaries stationed 
there, and by other friends of Christ in that city. 
But here they were disappointed. No passage for 
Penang could be procured. Fearful that the English 
government in Bengal would, on learning their arriv- 
al, send them to England, they resolved to take pas- 
sage in a vessel bound to Rangoon. Accordingly, 
after a stay at Madras of a few days, they sailed for 
Rangoon. ‘Thus by a wonderful series of providen- 
tial occurrences, they were impelled, contrary to 
their expectations and plans, to the Burman Empire. 
Mrs. J. says: 


* Madras is the seat of one of the Presidencies of Hindostan. 
It is situated on the coast of Coromandel, in eighty degrees twen- 
ty-five minutes east longitude, and thirteen degrees five minutes 
north latitude, and is about one thousand miles south west from 
elites In 1794, the population of the city of Madras was 


MEMOIR UF MRS. JUDSON. 103 


** June 20. We have at last conclua2d, in our 
jistress, to go to Rangoon, as there is no vessel 
about to sail for any other place, ere it will be tou 
late to escape a second arrest. O, our Heavenly 
Father, direct us aright! Where wilt thou have 
us go? What wilt thou have us do? Our only 
hepe is in thee, and to thee alone we look for 
protection. , let this mission yet live before thee, 
notwithstanding all opposition, and be instrumental 
of winning souls to Jesus in some heathen land. 
It is our present purpose to make ‘Rangoon our 
final residence, if we find it practicable to live in such 
a place; otherwise to go thence to Penang, or some 
of the Malay islands. But I most sincerely hope 
that we shall be able to remain at Rangoon, among 
the Burmans, a people who have never heard the 
sound of the Gospel, or read, in their own language, 
of the love of Christ. Though our trials may be 
great, and our privations many and severe, yet the 
presence of Jesus can make us happy, and the con- 
sciousness that we have sacrificed all for his dear 
cause, and are endeavouring to labor for the salvation 
of immortal souls, will enable us to bear our priva- 
tions and trials, with some degree of satisfaction and 
delight. The poor Burmans are entirely destitute 
of those consolations and joys which constitute our 
happiness; and why shordd we be unwilling to part 
with a few fleeting, incousiderable comforts, for the 
sake of making them sharers with us in joys exalted 
as heaven, durable as eternity! We cannot expect 
to do much in such a rough, uncultivated field; yet 
if we may be instrumental in removing some of the 
rubbish, and preparing the way for others, it will be 
asufficient reward. I have beenaccustomed to view 
this field of labor with dread and terror; but I now 
feel perfectly willing to make it my home the rest of 
my life. I even feel a degree of pleasure, in the 
thought of living beyond the temptations peculiar to 
European settlements in the east. Our hearts will 
perhaps b2 more entirely devoted to our work, and 


104 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


the care of our own souls. ‘To-morrow we expect 
to leave this place, (Madras,) and the few frienda 
we have found here. Adieu t) polished, 1efined, 
Christian society. Our lot is not cast among you, 
but among pagans, among barbarians, whose tender 
mercies are crucl. Indeed we voluntarily forsake 
you, and for Jesus’ sake, choose the latter for our 
associates. O may we be prepared for the pure and 
polished society of heaven, composed of the followers 
or the Lamb, whose robes have been washed in his 
lood. 

‘¢ June 22. Embarked on board the Georgiana for 
Rangoon. Our good friend Mr. B. came on board, 
and spent the day with us—a great comfort in our 
lonely situation.* O the happy day will soon come, 
when we shall again meet all our Christian friends 
who are now scattered in so many different parts of 
the world—meet to part no more in our Heavenl 
Father’s house, where all our trials will be over, all 
our sighs be hushed, and all our tears forever wiped 
away. 

£O glorious hour, O blessed abode, 
We shall be near and like our God.? 


“ June 80. Still on our way to Rangoon. Have 
been confined to my bed for several days, but am 
now a little better. My thoughts are uncommonly 
fixed on divine things, and earnestly desirous of being 
prepared to glorify God amid the trials that are before 
us. I feel happier than ever, that we have chosen 
Rangoon for our field of labor, and cannot but hope 
that we shall yet see the goodness of the Lord, in the 
land of the living.” 


The passage to Rangoon was unpleasant and dane 
gerous. The vessel was old, and was in imminent 
al of shipwreck; but by the blessing of God, the 

Missionaries, in July, 1813, arrived safely at Rangoon, 


* A valuable European female, whom Mrs. Judson had engag- 
ed to accompany her, fell dead on the deck, just before the yesse! 
sailed, thus leaving her without any female attendant. j 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 105 


the place where their Saviour had design { they 
should labor for him many years, and whe ¢ they 
were to be the instruments of gathering a little shureh 
of redeemed Burmans. They were guided hither 
by the special providence of God. No on-, who 
reviews the series of occtrrences from the (‘me of 
their arrival in Calcutta, can doubt that Ged was 
preparing the way for establishing the Burman Mis- 
sion, and for summoning the American Jsaptist 
churches to the holy labors and pleasures of the 
missionary enterprise. Can any American Baptist 
be blind to the indications of duty, in reference to this 
Mission; or deaf’ to that voice of Providence, which 
calls on the churches of our denomination, to cunsider 
themselves as pledged to the Saviour to sustzin this 
Mission, till Burmah shall be converted to Gc 1? 

The Baptist Board of Foreign Missions in the 
. United States, were so fully convinced of the r duty 
to sustain the mission, that in the close of tl e year 
1815, they appointed Mr. George H. Houy:h and 
his wife as Missionaries, to assist Mr. Judson. Mr, 
Hough had acquired a knowledge of the printing 
business, and, it was hoped, would be able to br nefir 
the Burmans, by the agency of the press, as w: Il as 
by preaching the Gospel. They sailed from F aila 
delphia, in December, 1815, for Calcutta. 


—<_—. 


CHAPTER VI. 


Sketch of the Geography, History, Religion, Languag &c 
o1 the Burman Empire. 

Tue Burman empire is situated in that pa.t of 
the continent of Asia, lying between Hindostan and 
China, and so far partaking of the characteristics of 
each, as to be properly designated by the compound 
epithet, Chan-India, which Malte-Brun, the geogra 
pher, has bestowed on it. 


106 MEMOIR )F MRS. JUDSON. 


Previously to the recent war between the Britist - 
and the Burma.s, the empire included the kingdom 
of Ava, and the conquered provinces of Cassay and - 
Arracan, on the west; Lowashan and Yunshan, on 
the east; and Pegu, Martaban, Tenasserim, Mergui, 
Tavoy, and Junkseylon, on the south. It covered a 
space between the ninth and twenty-sixth degrees of 
north latitude, and between the ninety-second and 
one hundred and second of east longitude, being about 
one thousand and fifty geographical miles in length, 
and six hundred in breadth. It probably contained 
one hundred and ninety-four thousand square miles. 
By the late treaty, the British retain the province 
of Arracan, on the west; and on the south, Yay, 
‘Tavoy and Mergui, and 'Tenasserim, with the islands 
and dependencies, taking the Satwen river as the 
line of demarkation on that frontier. These cessions 
have considerably diminished the extent and the 
power of the Burman empire, as may beseen by an 
inspection of the map; but the precise limits of the 
portions lost and retained are not sufficiently known 
to enable us to state them with much accuracy. 
Nor is it important for the purposes of this work, 
since the field for missionary effort is not changed 
by these political events, though greater facilities 
are afforded by this extension of the British sway. 

History.a—The history of the Burman. empire 
resembles that of all other oriental nations. It isa 
melancholy detail of usurpations and conquests, of 
sanguinary wars between rival chiefs, and of the 
subjection of many petty states to the ambition and 
tyranny of one more powerful kingdom. Ava Prop- 
er is the original state, which has successively sub- 
dued the other provinces which compose the empire. 
Ava was itself at one time subject to the king of 
Pegu; but in the sixteenth century its numerous and 
warlike inhabitants revolted, and obtained possession 
of the provinces of Ava and Martaban. Malte- 
Brun says: 

“<The Burmans continued masters of the country 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 107 


till 1740, when a civil war broke out in consequence 
of a revolt in the conquered provinces of Pegu, and 
was prosecuted on both sides with savage ferocity, 
In 1750 and 1751, the Peguans, with the aid of'arms - 
imported by Europeans, and the active services of 
some Dutch and Portuguese eat their rivals, and in 
1752, Ava, the capital, surre: Jered to them at discre- 
tion. Dweepdee, the last ot’ a long line of Burman 
kings, was taken prisoner, with all his family, except 
two sons, whoescapedintoSiam. Binga Della, king 
of Pegu, returned to his hereditary dominions, leav- 
ing the government of Ava to his son Apporasa. 
When the conquest appeared complete and settled, 
one of those extraordinary characters which Provi- 
dence sometimes raises up to change the destinies 
of nations, now appeared. This was a Burman, 
called Alompra, a man of obscure birth, known by 
_the name of ‘the huntsman,’ and the chief of Man- 
chaboo, thena poorvillage. Having collected around 
him one hundred picked men, he defeated the Peguan 
detachments in small skirmishes. Improving in 
experience, and acquiring confidence in his own 
strength, he attracted more numerous followers; and 
in the autumn of 1753, suddenly advanced, and 
obtained possession of Ava. Defeating the king 
ot Pegu, in several subsequent engagements, he 
invaded his territories, and in three months took his 
capital, which he gave up to indiscriminate plunder 
and carnage. Having sustained some indignities 
from the Siamese, he invaded Siam; but, during the 
siege of the metropolis of that kingdom, his career 
of conquest was suddenly terminated in 1760 by a 
fatal disease, in the fiftieth year of his age, and ninth 
of his reign. Alompra was succeeded by his son 
Namdojee Praw, a minor. Shembuan, the uncle 
of this prince, brother to Alompra, acted as regent, 
’ and, on the death of his nephew, assumed the crown. 
Shembuan declared war against the Siamese, and 
took their capital in 1766, but did not retain perma- 
nent possession of thatcountry. Jn 1767 the empire 


168 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


was invaded by a Chinese army, 50,000 strong, or 
the side of Yunnan, which advanced as far as a vil- 
loge called Chiboo; but the Burmans cut off thei) 
supplies, and then destroyed the whole of'them, except 
_ 2500, who were sent in fetters to the Burman capital, 
compelled to labor in their respective trades, and 
encouraged to marry Burman wives, and become 
naturalized subjects. Shembuan subdued Cassay 
in 1774, and died n 1776. His son and successor, 
Chenguza, a debauched and bloody tyrant, was de- 
throned and put to death in 1782, in a conspiracy 
headed by his own uncle, Minderagee, who took pos- 
session of the government. This prince was the 
fourth son of Alompra. In 1785 he sent a fleet of 
buats against Arracan, which he easily conquered. 
He then marched against Siam, where he met with 
some checks; and, finding himself unable to retain 
possession of the interior, was obliged to content 
himself with the dominion of its western coast, as 
far south as Mergui, including the two important 
seaports of Tavoy and Mergui, which were ceded to 
him by a treaty of peace in 1793. 

“In 1795 his Burman Majesty marched an army 
of 5000 men into the English province of Chitta- 
gong, holding an army of 20,000 in readiness to join 
them in Arracan. His object was to claim three 
notorious robbers, who had taken refuge in that 
country. This force was confronted by a strong 
detachment from Calcutta. The affair was amica- 
bly adjusted by the delivery of the refugees, whose 
enormous guilt was established, and the Burmans 
withdrew without committing any disorders. In 
June, 1819, Minderayee Praw died, and was succeed- 
ed by his grandson. 'The junior branches of the 
family revolted, and scenes of massacre ensued.”?* 

Population.—It is impossible to make a statement 
with any pretensions to accuracy, relative to the 
population of countries little known to foreigners, 
where no regular census is published, and where the 


* Malte-Brun, book li. pp. 268, 269, Philadelphia edition. 


MEMOIR OF MRS, ‘UDSON. 109 


pride of the government and people inclines them to 
exaggerate their numbers and power. The popula- 
tion of Buimah was estimated by Colonel Symes, in 
1795, at seventeen millions; by Captain Cox, in 
1300, at no more than eight millions; and Captain _ 
Canning,.in 1810, believed that this estimate exceed- 
ed the truth. Snodgrass, in his Burmese War, } ‘1b- 
lished in 1827, says, ‘ The population of Ava (mean- 
mg, by this term, the whole empire) has been 
greatly overrated by travellers, their accounts being 
founded on the thickly peopled banks of the rivers, 
or drawn from the natives, who have estimated their 
numbers beyond the truth.? There can be no 
doubt, however, that the empire contains several 
millions of immortal beings, who have no hope, and 
are without God in the world. 
Climate, &¢.—** Though this empire,” says Malte- 
- Brun, ‘extends into the torrid zone, it enjoys a tem- 
perate climate, in consequence of the elevation of 
its territorv. The healthy and robust constitutions 
of the natives show the salubrity of the climate. 
The seasons are regular. Extreme cold is unknown, 
and the intense heat which precedes the rainy sea- 
son is of short duration. ‘This country exhibits eve- 
ry variety of soiland exposure. A flat marshy delta 
extends along the mouths of the Irrawaddy. Be- 
yond this are pleasing hills, picturesque valleys, and 
majestic mountains. The fertile soil of the south- 
ern provinces yields crops of rice equal to those of 
the finest districts of Bengal. Although the surface 
is more irregular and mountainous to the north, the 
lains and vaileys, especially those situated on the 
eres of the great rivers, produce excellent wheat, 
and the different corn and leguminous crops which 
are cultivated in Hindostan. Sugar canes, excellent 
tobacco, indigo, cotton, and the tropical fruits, are 
-indigenous in this favored country. Agriculture is 
said to be in an improved state, though the methods 
followed have never yet been satisfactorily described. 
Tn.a district to the aia of Amarapora, the tea 


110 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


leaf grows, but not equal to that which is produced 
in China, and seldom used except as a pickle. The 
teak tree grows in all parts of the country, though 
properly a native of the mountains. Almost every 
kind of timber found in Hindostan is produced in the 
southern parts. Fir grows in the mountains, and 
turpentine is extracted from it; but the natives do 
nut use the wood in carpentry, being prejudiced 
against it on account of its softness. 

*¢ The plains are well stocked with cattle; but in 
the neighbourhood of the forests they are exposed 
to frequent ravages from the tigers, which are very 
numerous in this country. Pegu abounds in ele- 
vhants, 

*’'The chief minerals are found in Ava Proper. 
Six days’ journey from Bamoo, near the Chinese 
frontier, are the gold and silver mines of Badooem. 
There are also mines of gold, silver, rubies, and sap- 
phires, now open in a mountain called Woobolootan, 
near the river Ken-duem. But the richest are in 
the neighbourhood of the capital. Precious stones 
are found in several other parts of theempire. Iron, 
tin, lead, antimony, arsenic, and sulphur, are in 
great abundance. Great quantities of very pure 
amber are dug up near the river, and gold is found 
in the sands of the mountain streams. One of 
these in the north, situated between the Ken-duem 
and the Irrawaddy, is called ‘the stream of golden 
sand.” (Shoe Lien Kioop.) There are no dia- 
monds or emeralds in the empire; but it has ame- 
thysts, garnets, beautiful chrysolites, and jasper. 
There are, near Amarapora, quarries which yield 
marble equal to the finest in Italy. It is monopo- 
lized by the government, and consecrated to the 
making of images of Gaudama., This empire con- 
. tains celebrated and very productive petroleum wells, 
which yield a large revenue to goverament, being 
retained as a monopoly.” * 


* Malte-Brun, book li. p. 269 


MEMOIR )F MRS. JUDSON. 111 


Character and Manners of the Inhabitants.—The 
character of the Burmese is undoubtedly very much 
affected by the nature of their government. They 
are represented to be indolent, inhospitable, deceit- 
ful and crafty. A people oppressed by despotic 
rulers, and harassed with vexatious taxes, have no 
motive to steady industry, the fruits of which may 
be wrested from them by the government, or by 
subordinate civil agents. The distrust which is 
engendered, and the fears that such a system awak- 
ens, prevent hospitality, and make the people cold 
hearted, unfeeling, and suspicious. The rapacity 
of the rulers occasions efforts to conceal property, 
and produces cunning, falsehood, and perjury. 
Enterprise and genius are checked, because the 
individual can hope for no personal advantage from 
his exertions. nder a better government—such 
-as would be produced by the influence of Christiani- 
ty—the character of the Burmang would, without 
doubt, become highly respectable. They possess 
acute minds, and lively imaginations. They are 
not fierce nor revengeful. ‘Their domestic relations 
are generally maintained with affection and fidelity. 
There is no cast; and social intercourse has no other 
restraints than those which spring from the nature 
of their religion and government. Malte-Brun says: 

«The Burmans differ remarkably in physical and 
in moral character from the Hindoos. Lively, impa- 
tient, active and irascible, they have none of the 
habitual indolence of the natives of Hindostan, 
nor are they addicted to that gloomy jealousy 
which prompts so many eastern nations to immure , 
their females in the solitudes of a harem. The 
sexes have equally free intercourse as in Europe, 
but they treat the women as an inferior order of 
beings. 'Their testimony in a court of justice is less 
valued. They are often sold or lent to strangers 
without blame or scruple. They are much engag- 
ed in labor, and, on the whole, faithful] to the conju 
gal tie The Burmans participate ot’ the Chinese 


112 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


physiognomy. The women, especially in the north- 
ern parts, are fairer than those of the Hindoos. but 
less delicately formed. ‘The men are not tall, but 
active and muscular. They pluck their beards, and 
thus give themselves a youthful appeatance. Both 
men and women color the teeth, and the edges of the 
eye-lids with black. Marriages are not contracted 
before puberty. Polygamy is prohibited, but con- 
cubinage is admitted without limitation. ‘The bod- 
ies of the dead are buried. ‘They are less delicate 
and cleanly in their eating than the Hindoos. ‘They 
kill no domestic animals, being prohibited by their 
religion, but make abundant use of game. The 
lower orders eat lizards, guanas, and snakes. ‘They 
are very indulgent to the manners and customs of 
strangers. ‘The sitting posture is reckoned among” 
thein the most respectful, though this mark of defer 

ence has been mistaken by some strangers, for an 
expression of insolence. 

“¢ Manufactures and Commerce.-—The Burmans 
excel in the art of gilding. The capital maintains 
aconsiderabie commercial intercourse with Yunnan, 
the nearest province of China. It exports cotton, 
amber, ivory. rubies, sapphires, and betel nuts; birds, 
and edible nests, from the Eastern Islands; and re- 
ceives in return raw or manufactured silk, velvets, 
gold-leaf, paper, sweet-meats, and a variety of hard- 
ware. By the rive Srrawaddy there is a great in- 
land trade in the transport of rice, salt, and pickled 
sprats, from the lower provinces, to support the 
capital and northern districts. Some foreign arti- 
cles are brought by Arracan, and carried over 
' the mountains by men, but the greater part by the 
Irrawaddy. Broadcloth, some hardware, coarse 
muslins, Cossimbazar silk handkerchiefs, china-ware 
and glass, are the leading commodities Some lac, 
silver and precious stones are exported. In 1795, 
the quantity of timber exported to Madras and Cal- 
cutta, amounted to a value of £200,000 sterling. 
About 3000 tons of shipping are ‘a peaceable times, 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. {13 


puilt in this country, and sod in different parts of 
India. ‘The maritime ports of this empire are more 
commoiiously situated than those of any other pow- 
er, particularly the harbour of Negrais. ‘lhe cur- 
rency consists of silver, bullion and lead, in small 
pieces; 1s the Burmans, like the Chinese, have no 
cpin;??* 

Government.—* The government is strictly mo. 

narchical. ‘The emperor is an absolute sovereign, 
and is regarded as the sole lord and proprietor of life 
and property in his dominions; and without the con- 
currence of any, his word is irresistible law. Four 
private ministers of state, (called Atwenwoon) and 
four public ministers of state, (Woongyee) are the 
organs of administration. The latter compose the 
supreme court of the empire, (Loot-dau) in the 
name of which all imperial edicts are issued. 
. The Burman empire is divided into districts, 
each of which is governed by a viceroy, (Myo- 
woon) and a court, (Yong-dau.) The district 
courts are composed of a president, (Ray-woon) 
—collector-general, (Akoon-woon) —collector of 
port duties, (Akouk-woon) — magistrates, (Seet- 
kai,)—auditors, (Nah-kan-dau) —and secretaries, 
(Sa-ray-gyee.) 

“The members uf the district courts, and the 
wives, relations, and tavorites of viceroys, have alsc 
the privilege of holding private courts, and of decid- 
ing petty causes, subject to appeal to higher au- 
thonty.*? ¢ 

‘*When anything belonging to the Emperor ts 
mentioned, the epithet “golden” is attached to it. 
When he is said to have heard anything, ‘it has 
reached the golden ears; a person admitted to his 
presence “has been at the golden feet; ” the perfume 
of roses is described as grateful to the golden nose.” 
The sovereign is sole proprietor of all the elephants 
in his dominions; and the vrivilege to keep or ride on 
one is only granted to men of the first rank, Ne 


~ ® Malte-Brun, book li, p>. 275, 274 
+ History of the Burman M ‘sion, p. 11- 
10% 


114 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


honors are hereditary. All offices end dignities de- 
pend immediately on the crown. The ésalve, ot 
chain, is the badge of nobility; and superiority of 
rank is signified by the number of cords or of divi- 
sions. ‘Fhe council of state consists of the princes 
of the royal family. Men of rank have their barges 
‘dragged by war boats, common water-men not being 
admitted into the same boat with them. ‘Temporary 
houses are built for them at the places where they 
mean to stop in travelling. 

_ A singularly absurd custom takes -place in this 
country in certain forms of political homage shown 
to a white elephant, a preternatura] animal kept for 
the purpose, superbly lodged near the royal palace, 
sumptuously dressed and fed, provided with func- 
tionaries like a second sovereign, held next in rank 
to the king, and superior to the queen, and made to 
‘receive presents and other tokens of respect from for- 
eign ambassadors. 

“The court of Ava is fully as proud as that of 
Pekin. The sovereign acknowledges no equal. The 
punctilios of ceremony are numerous, and rigidly 
followed; and the utmost guardedness is observed in 
any diplomatic intercourse with foreign states. The 
manners of the great are often pleasing, but they are 
crafty; and the tenures by which they hold their of- 
fices render them rapacious. Obliged to give large 
presents to the king, they have recourse to extor- 
tion, speculations in trade, and almost universal mo- 
nopoly. Great vicissitudes of fortune are occasioned 
by royal caprice.”* 

Religion.—The Burmans are idolaters, of the sect 
of Boodh. This religion is spread over. the Burman 
empire, Siam, Ceylon, Japan, Cochin-China, and 
the greater part of China Proper. It has been con- 
tended, that it was also the ancient religion of Hin- 
dostan itself, and that the prevailing brahminical su- 
perstitions were the invention of later times. It is 


* Malte-Brun, book li. p. 275. 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 115 


ndeed probable, that all the idolatrous systems of 
religion, which have ever existed in the world, have 
had a common origin, and have been modified by the 
different fancies and corruptions of different nations. 
The essence of idolatry is everywhere the same. 
It is everywhere ‘abominable ” in its principles and 
its rites, and everywhere the cause of indescribable 
and manifold wretchedness. 

It is asserted by Mr. Ward, that two of the six 
schools of philosophy which once flourished among 
the Hindoos, taught the same atheistical principles 
as the disciples of Boodh now maintain; and it is in- 
disputable, that these two sects were numerous be- 
fore the appearance of Boodh. ‘This personage is 
said in Burman books to have been a son of the 
king of Benares, and to have been born about the 
year 600 before Christ. He is supposed to have 
adopted the atheistical system of these sects, and his 
principles were espoused and maintained by the suc: 
cessive monarchs of his family, who are charged b: 
the Brahmins with the crime of destroying their re- 
ligion, and substituting atheism. At length, how- 
ever, the Brahmins obtained the ascendency, and 
arming themselves with the civil power, they so 
effectually purified Hindostan from the offensive her- 
esy, that scarcely a vestige of the Boodhist super- 
stition is now to be traced in that country.’ It found 
a refuge in Ceylon, and neighbouring regions; and 
the most learned Burmans assert, that it was in- 
troduced into that empire, about four hundred and 
fifty years after the death of Boodh, or (as he is more 
- commonly called) Gaudama. 

The Boodhists believe, that, like the Hindoo Vish- 
noo, Boodh has had ten incarnations, which are de- 
scribed in the Jatus, amounting, it is said, to five 
hundred and fifty books. The following summary 
statement of the principles of Boodhism is copied 
from the valuable work of Mr. Ward on the History, 
Literature, and Religicn of the Hindoos: 

«The Boodhists dr not believe in a First Cause: 


116 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. : 
they consider matter as eternal; that every portion 
of animated existence has in itself its own rise, ten- 
dency and destiny; that the condition of creatures on 
earth, is regulated by works of merit and demerit; 
that works of merit not only raise individuals to 
happiness, but as they prevail, raise the world itself 
to prosperity; while on the other hand, when vice is 
predominant, the world degenerates, till the universe 
itself is dissolved. ‘They suppose, however, that 
there is always some superior deity, who has attained 
to this elevation by religious merit; but they do not 
regard him as the governor of the world. 'To the 
present grand period, comprehending all the time in- 
cluded in a kulpu, they assign five deities, four of 
whom have already appeared, including Gaudama 
or Boodh, whose exaltation continues five thousand 
years, two thousand three hundred and fifty-six of 
which had expired A.D. 1814. After the expiration 
of the five thousand years, ancther saint will obtain 
the ascendency, and be deified. Six hundred mil- 
ons of saints are said to be canonized with each 
deity, though it is admitted that Boodh took only 
twenty-four thousand devotees to heaven with him. 

‘The lowest state of existence is in hell; the next, 
is that in the form of brutes; both these are states 
of punishment, The next ascent is to that of man, 
which is probationary. The next includes many 
degrees of honor and happiness up to demi-gods, &c. 
which are states of reward for works of merit. The 
ascent to superior deity is from the state of man. 

‘The Boodhists are taught, that there are four 
superior heavens, which are not destroyed at the 
end ol’ a kulpu; that below these there are twelve 
other: heavens, followed by six inferior heavens; af- 
ter which follows the earth, then the world of'snakes, 
and then thirty-two chief hells; te which are to be 
added one hundred and twenty hells of milder tor- 
ments. 

‘The highest state of glory is absorption. The 
verson who is unchangeable in his resolution, whe 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 117 


has obtained a knowiedge of things past, present, 
and to come, through one kulpu, who can make 
himself invisible, and go where he plegses, and who 
has attained to complete abstraction, Will enjoy ab- 
sorption.* 

“Those who perform works of merit, are admit- 
ted to the heavens of the different gods, or are made 
kings, or great men on earth; and those who are 
wicked, are born in the forms of different anima!s, 
or consigned to different hells. The happiness of 
these heavens is wholly sensual. 

“The Boodhists believe, thatat the end of a kul- 
pu, the universe is destroyed. To convey some idea 
of the extent of this period, the illiterate Cingalese 
use this comparison; if’ a man were to ascend a 
mountain nine miles high, and to renew these jour- 
neys once in every hundred years, till the mountain 
were worn down by his feet to an atom, the time 
required to do this, would be nothing to the fourth 
part ofa kulpu. 

© Boodh, before his exaltation, taught his follow- 
ers, that after his ascent, the remains of his body, 
his doctrine, or an assembly of his disciples, were to 
be held in equal reverence with himself. When a 
Cingalese, therefore, approaches an image of Boodh, 
he says, ‘I take refuge in Boodh; I take refuge in his 
doctrine, I take refuge in his followers.’ 

« There are five commands delivered to the com 
mon Boodhists; the first forbids the destruction of 
animal life; the second forbids theft; the third adul- 
tery; the fourth falsehood; the fifth the use of spir- 
ituous liquors. ‘There are other commands for the 
superior classes, or devotees, which forbid dancing, 


* The Hindoo idea of absorption is, that the soul is received ito 
the divine essence; but as the Boodhists reject the doctrine of a 
separate Supreme Spirit, it is difficult to say what are their ideas 
of absorption. Dr. Buchanan says, (A. Researches, vol. vi. p. 
180) Nighan ‘‘iioplies (that is, among the Burmans) exemption 
froin all the miseries incident to humanity, but by no means an- 


dihilation.”” 


{18 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


songs, music, festivals, perfumes, elegant dresses, 
elevated seats, &. Among works of the highest 
merit, one is the feeding of a hungry infirm tiger 
with a person’s own flesh. 

«The temples erected in honor of Boodh,* in the 
Burman empire, are of various sizes and forms, as 
quadrangular, pentagonal, hexagonal, heptagonal, 
or octagonal. ‘Those of a round spiral form can be 
erected only by the king, or by persons high in 
office. An elevated spot is preferred for the erection 
of these edifices; but where such an elevation can- 
not be found, the building is erected upon the second, 
third, fourth, fifth and sixth terrace. 

“The priests worship at the temples daily, or 
ought to do so.. The worship consists in present- 
ing flowers, incense, rice, beetle-nuts, &c. repeating 
certain prayers. ‘The priest cleanses the temple, 
preserves the lights, and receives the offerings. A 
worshipper may present his own offerings, if he is 
acquainted with the formulas. The five commands 
are repeated by a priest twice a day to the people, 
who stand up and repeat them after him. 

‘¢ Boodh, as seen in many temples, appears seated 
upon a throne placed on elephants, or encircled by a 
hydra, or in the habit of a king, accompanied by 
his attendants. In most of the modern images, 
however, he is represented in a sitting posture, with 
his legs folded, his right hand resting upon his right 
thigh, and his left upon his lap: a yellow cloth is 
cast over his left shoulder, which envelopes his right 
arm. His hair is generally in a curling state, like 
that of an African; his ears are long, as though dis- 
tended by heavy ear-rings. The image is generally 
placed in the centre of the temple, under a small 
arch prepared for the purpose, or under a small 


*<* When the author asked a Boodhist, why, since the object 
of their worsaip was neither creator nor preserver, they honored 
him as God; he was answered, that it was an act of homage to 
exalted merit !? 


MEMOIR OF wks. JUDSON. 119 


porch “of wood, neatly gilded. Images of celestial 
attendants, male and female, are frequently placed 
in front of the image. 

“Tt appears evident from their writings, that the 
ancient religion of the Burmans consisted principal- 
ly in religious austerities. When a person becomes 
initiated into the priesthood, he immediately re- 
nounces the secular state, lives on alms, and abstains 
from food after the sun has passed the meridian. 
The ancient writings of the Burmans mention an 
order of female priests; but it is likely that these 
were only female mendicants. 

‘Priests are forbidden to marry; they are to live 
by mendicity; are to possess only three garments, a 
begging dish, a girdle, a razor, a needle, and a cloth 
to strain the water which they drink, that they may 
not devour insects. 

‘© The priests reside in houses which are built and 
offered to them as works of merit. There are nu- 
merous colleges, which are built in the style of a 
palace, by persons of wealth, and in which boys 
are taught. 

“The priests are the schoolmasters, and teach 
gratuitously as a work of merit, the children being 
maintained at home by their parents. If a priest 
finds a pupil to be of quick parts, he persuades the 
parents to make him a priest; but if a boy wishes 
to embrace a secular life after he has been sometime 
in the college, he is at liberty to do so. 

“The Burman feasts are held at the full and 
change of the moon. At these times all public 
business is suspended; the people pay their homage 
to Gaudama, at the temples, presenting to the im 
age, rice, fruits, flowers, candles, &c. Aged people 
often fast during the whole day. Some visit the 
colleges, and hear the priests read portions of the 
Boodhist writings. 

* According to the religion of Boodh, there are 
no distinctions of cast. ‘The Burmans burn their 


120 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


dead with many ceremonies, especially the bodies 
of the priests.” * 


The religion of Burmah, then, is, in effect, alhetsm, 
and the highest reward of piety, the object of earn- 
est desire and unwearied pursuit, is annihilation, 
How wretched a system is this; how devoid of ade- 
quate motives to virtue, and how vacant of conso- 
lauon! O how must every humane heart, and 
much more every Christian, desire, that the ptre 
and glorious Gospel may shed its light upon this 
gross darkness! 

Language.—T he Burman language is peculiar to 
itself, We cannot know what affinity it has to 
some of the Indo-Chinese languages, which are not 
yet investigated; but it is essentially different from 
the Sanscrit, the parent of almost all the languages 
of India Proper, and indeed from every language, 
that has vet come under the observation of Euro- 
peans. ‘This is the common language of the coun- 
try, for colloquial and other ordinary purposes; 
though in some of the provinces other dialects are, 
to some extent, spoken. 

- It is-a very difficult language; and it cost Mr. 
Judson, though he possessed an uncommon apti- 
tude for the acquisition of languages, the labor of 
several years, before he was able to speak and 
write it with ease. His difficulties, however, were 
peculiarly great, as there were no grammars, nor 
dictionaries, nor other aids, to facilitate his progress, 

The character in common use appears to the eye 
of an American, to be a series of circular marks. 
Hence it has been called the Round O Language. 
ene specimen has been engraved for his 
work. 


* Ward’s View of the History, Literature and Religion ¢ the 
Yindoos, vol. ii. pp. 887—393. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


‘PI4ON aj0yN ayy apoasad Jp. ystaygQ fo u0rSiy34 ayy 
pup “780] 2q puv avaddnsrp 11m ‘suorsyas asyof sayzo yo ym 4941950} ‘awmoy fo pun “4a 
“uoynyy fo ‘nuynig fo ‘ypoug fo uorsijas ay; *aouay s4vah paspuny om} 40 auo ynogyr 

‘NOLLVISNVULL 


28 pb bscdk stow Coco sece cece ceegbetogo & 
Hesow gefobeeto oe coo coe 30h ccealsbe 


CLOT CLEA 99 Cee cee to ceccces Cb cecece Slo 


Serre croceveces oP eds CDoeogSeo 


‘NOSGN£ “UN AM ‘NVWUNA NI LOVUL V Wows 


ht, like the langue 


& 


S¢It%s written from left to ri 


The common books are composea 


ges of Europe. 


11 


122 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


of the palmyra leaf, on which the letters are en 
gravee with styles, and are better executed than 
those ef the Hindoos. Sometimes they write on 
plates of gilded sheet iron. In a Burman version 
of the Lord’s prayer, the Missionaries could scarce- 
ly discover three genuine Sanscrit words; but many 
syllables are found coinciding with those of the col 
loquial dialect of the Chinese. A knowledge of 
letters is very generally diffused. Many read and 
write the vulgar tongue, though few understand 
the learned and sacred volumes. The Burmans are 
fond of poetry and music; and in the latter, make 
use of an instrument formed of a series of reeds, on 
the principle of Pan’s reed. They possess epic and 
religious poems of great celebrity, and recite in 
verse the exploits of their heroes. Colonel Symes 
was astonished at the number of books contained 
in the royal library, where the contents of each 
chest are written on the outside in letters of gold.” * 

There is, also, a sacred language, called the Palt. 
It is a dialect of the Sanscrit, and was introduced 
into Burmah with the religion of Boodh. The sa- 
cred books were written in Ceylon, where this form 
of the Sanscrit had obtained currency, and thence 
were carried to Burmah. This language became, 
of course, the language of religion; and gradually 
intermingled many of its words and forms, with the 
common language. ‘Thus, although the Pali is now 
a dead language, cultivated by the learned only, some 
knowledge of it is indispensable to him, who would 
acquire a perfect knowledge of the Burman, and is 
useful to a Missionary. It is said to be rich, har- 
monious, and flexible; and Malte-Brun affirms, that 
it is the language of religion, and is used by the 
priests and the learned in the whole of Chin-India, 
except Malacca, Cochin-China and Tonquin. 

It was a wise Providence, which selected, as the 
pioneer and founder of the Burman Mission, so 


* Malte-Brun, vol. ii. p. 274. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 123 


thorough a scholar, and so able a philologist as Mr. 
Judson. He has accomplished a service 0.” inesti- 
mable utility, by preparing a Grammar anc a Dic- 
tionary of the Burman and Pali languages, which 
will render the acquisition of these languages com- 
paratively an easy task to future Missionaries. Had 
he done no more, his life would have yielded rich 
fruit to the Missionary cause. 


—<——. 


CHAPTER VII. 


Establishment of the Mission at Rangoon. 


RanGoon is the principal seaport of the Burman 
empire. It is situated thirty miles from the sea, on 
the Rangoon river, one of the outlets of the Irra- 
waddy. It liesin sixteen degrees forty-seven minutes 
north latitude, and ninety-six degrees nine minutes 
east longitude, and is 670 miles southeast of Calcutta. 
‘‘ The river,” says Captain Cox,* “is one of the 
finest for shipping I have ever seen. It is about six 
hundred yards wide at Rangoon, the water in general 
deep from shore to shore, the bottom good, and 
current moderate.” Ships of 800 or 900 tons can 
come up tothe wharves. The townstretches about 
a mile along the bank of the river, and is not more 
than a third of a mile broad. In 1795, it contained 
5000 taxable houses. In 1812, they had been 
reduced to 1500, by fire and bad government.t The 
number of inhabitants, in 1813, was stated by Mr. 
Judson, to be 40,000. Some of the inhabitants were 
of Portuguese extraction, and had two or three 
churches and priests. The Armenians also had one 
ehurch. 

The first Protestant Missionaries who visited 


* Cox’s Burman Empire, p. 5. 
+ Malte-Brun, book li. p. 273. 


e 


124 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. . 


Burmah, were Messrs. Chater and Mardon, who 
went thither from Serampore, in 1807. Mr. Mardon, 
aller a few months, left the station, and Mr. Chater 
was joined by Mr. Felix Carey, the eldest son of 
Dr. Carey. Soonafter, Messrs. Prichettand Brain, 
from the London Missionary Society, arrived; but 
Mr. Brain soon died, and Mr. Prichett, after a year’s 
residence, removed to Vizagapatam. Mr. Chater 


- remained four years, and madea considerable progress 


in the language. He translated the Gospel, by 
Matthew, which was revised by Mr. Carey, and 
afterwards printed at Serampore. At length Mr. 
Chater relinquished the mission, and removed to 
Ceylon. Mr. Carey remained, and was joined bya 
young man from Calcutta, who soon quitted the 
station. When Mr. Judson arrived, Mr. Carey had 
gone to Ava, by order of the King. Thus had 
every attempt of the English Missionaries failed. 
and this fact seems to show still more conclusively, 
that God reserved for the American Baptist Churches 
the duty of establishing and sustaining the Burman 
Mission. 

Mrs. Carey, who was a native of the country, 
still resided at Rangoon, in the mission house, which 
Mr. Chater had erected, in a pleasant rural spot, 
half'a mile from the walls of the town. The house 
was built of teak wood, and was large and conven 
ient for that climate, though the inside was unfinish 
ed, and the beams and joists were naked. Connected 
with it were gardens enclosed, containing about twe 
ee of ground, and full of fruit trees of various 

nds, 

In this quiet spot Mr. and Mrs. J. found a home, 
and felt that at last they had reached a place where 
they could labor for the Saviour. But their situae 
tion, even here, was not without trials. Mrs. Jude 
son, in a letter to her parents, dated July 30, 1813, 
gays: 


We felt very gloomy and dejected the first night 


’ MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 125 


we arrived, in view of cur prospects; bat we were 
enabled to lean on God, and to feel that he was able 
to support us under the most discouraging circum- 
stances. The next mornmng I prepared to go on 
shore, but hardly knew how I should get to Mr. 
Carey’s house, as there was no method of' convey+ 
ance, except a horse, while I was unable to ride. 
It was, however, concluded that I should be carried 
in an armed chair; consequently when I landed, one 
was provided, through which were put two bamboos, 
and four of the natives took me on their shoulders, 
When they had carried mea little way into the town, 
they set me down under a shade, when great num- 
‘ers of the natives gathered around, as they had 
neldom seen an English female. Being sick and 
weak, I held my head down, which induced many of 
she nauve females to come very near, and look 
under my bonnet. At this I looked up and smiled, 
wt which they set up a loud laugh. They again 
took me up to carry, and the multitude of natives 
gave a shout, which much diverted us. They next 
tarried me to a place they call the custom-house. 
It was a small open shed, in which were seated on 
mats several natives, who were the custom-house 
officers. After searching Mr. Judson very closely, 
they asked liberty for a native female to search me, 
to which I readily consented. I was then brought 
to the mission house, where I have entirely reco- 
vered my health.” 


Her journal contains some interesting exercises 
of her mind, for a few weeks after her arrival in 
Rangoon. It will be seen that she enjoyed an un- 
common degree of communion with God, and felt ~ 
a solemn pleasure in devoting herself anew to the 
service of her Redeemer, in the great work of 
communicating to the Burmans the knowledge of 
salvation: 


« July 22, It is ne 2 week since we arrived 


126 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


here. My health is quite restored ; and I feel much 
more contented and happy, than I ever expected to 
be in such a situation. I think I enjoy the promises 
of God, in a higher degree than ever before, and 
have attained more true peace of mind and trust in 
the Saviour When I look back to my late vituation, 
in that wretcned old vessel, without any accommoda- 
tions—scarcely the necessaries of life—no physi- 
cian—no: female attendants—so weak, that I could 
not move, I hope I am deeply sensible of the kind 
care of my Heavenly Father, in carrying me safely 
through the peculiar dangers of the voyage, and 
giving me once more a resting place on land. 
Still, were it not for the support we derive from the 
Gospel of Jesus, we should be ready to sink down 
in despondency, in view of the dark and gloomy 
scenes around us. But when we recollect that 
Jesus has commanded his disciples to carry the 
Gospel to the heathen, and promised to be with 
them to the end of the world; that God has promised 
to give the heathen to his Son, for an inheritance, 
we are encouraged to make a beginning, though in 
the midst of discouragement, and leave it with him 
to grant success, in his own time and way. I find 
here no dear female friends, with whom I can unite 
in social prayer, nor even one with whom I can con- 
verse, I have, indeed, no society at all, but that of 
Mr. J.; yet I feel happy in thinking that I gave up 
this source of pleasure, as well as most others, for 
the sake of the poor heathen. ‘Though Iam un- 
worthy of being allowed to do anything for Christ, 
[ am happy that he has made it my duty to lve 
among them, and labor for the promotion of tke 
kingdom of heaven. O if it may please the dear 
Redeemer to make me instrumental of leading some 
of the females of Burmah to a saving acquaintance 
with him, my great object will be accomplished, my 
highest desires gratified; I shall rejoice to have 
relinquished my comforts, my country, and my 
home. But when I consider my vileness, my unfit. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 127 


ness to communicate divine truth; when [ consider 
how mixed with sin my best and purest motives 
ever are, I fear I shall never be used as an instrument 
in promoting the holy cause of Christ. I feel my 
soul sometimes pressed down with a weight of sin, 
so that I can hardly find utterance at the throne of 
grace—can only weep over my vileness, and groan 
for deliverance. At such times, I feel a disposition 
to pray earnestly, that God will not withhold his 
blessing on my account, but overlook my guilt, and 
for Jesus’ sake let this infant mission live and prosper. 
O Lord, here I am; thou hast brought me to this 
heathen land, and given me desires to labor for thee. 
Do with me what pleaseth thee. Make me useful 
or not, asseemeth good in thy sight. But O let my 
soul live before thee; let meserve none but thee; let 
a have no object in life, but the promotion of thy 
glory. 

“¢ July 24. My mind has been serious and solemn 
this evening, and I have enjoyed a most precious 
season of communion with God. Felt my own needy, 
helpless state, but at the same time realized the 
ability and willingness of Christ to give me all 
needed grace. O it is sweet to lean on him, and 
find rest forthe soul. I donot know that Iever had 
more longing desires to be free from sin, to be holy 
as God is holy, and to serve him with all my powers. 
Could not but mourn and weep over my remaining 
sinfulness, unbeliefand hardness of heart, and breathe 
out my longing desires for more sanctifying grace. 
I do rejoice that God has brought me to this heathen 
land—deprived me of many things from which I once 
derived happiness, and taught me that I must now 
seek happiness in him alone. Our situation is such 
that we are compelled to trust in God; and we find 
in reading his word, and meditating on the proniises 
therein contained, such strength and support a3 we 
never before experienced. Lord, let us live to thee, 
and serve thee faithfully in this heathen Jand, and we 
ask no more 


128 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


« Aug. 15. It is indeed an unfailing source of 
consolation, that we have a God to whom we may 
at all times repair, and make known our wants by 
prayer and supplication. When we feel discour- 
aged, in view of the many and great obstacles in 
the way of spreading the Gospel, and in view of our 
own vileness and unfitness to be employed in this 
blessed work, we are often relieved and an.mated 
by the assurance, that all things are possible with 

od, that it is easy for him to remove every obsta- 
cle, and that he is ever ready to hear our cries for 
divine assistance. I have enjoyed a most happy sea- 
son at the throne of grace this evening. When I 
first approached, I was depressed with a sense of 
my darkness, stupidity and guilt. But these feel- 
ings soon gave way to earnest and longing desires 
for more holiness, conformity to God, and devoted- 
ness to his cause. I know not that I ever had so 
strong desires to live to God, and continually enjoy 
his presence, as I have had thisevening. Yet I felt 
a melting, broken heart, on account of my sins, and 
some joylul feelings in view of death, which would 
deliver me from all my spiritual enemies, and intro- 
duce me into the presence of Him whom alone I 
desire to serve, in my present sirful, imperfect 
state. Ihave begun to study the language. Find 
it very hard and difficult, having none of’ the usual 
helps in acquiring a language, except a small part 
of a Grammar, and six chapters of St. Matthew's 
Gospel, by Mr. Carey, now at Ava.* 

“ Aug. 21. Have been reviewing the past week, 
and find great cause for mourning and lamentation, 
for thanksgiving and praise. God is good. God is 
love. All his works are indicative of his wisdom and 
power; and a discovery of his glorious perfections 


* Mr. Carey subsequently finisaed and published the Gosped 
of Matthew, and made some progress in translating the other 
Gospels ; but how far, cannot now be ascertained, as his manue 
scripts were, it is supposed, all lost on his journey to Ava, ia 
1814 —Note by Mr. Judson 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 12S 


must produce implicit confidence anc trust in all 
ioly beings. It is my comfort and happiness, that 
tust such a Being is at the head of the universe, and 
has the entire control and direction of the kingdoms 
of the earth, and of every individual, from the high- 
sst to the lowest. How transporting is the thought, 
shat this great and infinitely glorious Being is ac- 
sessible to finite, mortal, sinful creatures; that he 
‘s not only willing to receive them, but commands 
them to come and partake of that happiness, which 
ne himself enjoys. What blessings, what infinite, 
eternal blessings, have been procured for sinners, 
through the sufferings of Jesus © Who can describe 
the height and depth, the breadth and length of the 
love of Christ? Yes, blessed Saviour, the perfec- 
tions of thy Father, the glories of the Godhead, are 
revealed to sinners, through thy agonies and death. 
They are not only revealed, but enjoyed. The 
discovery transforms us into thine own image, and 
makes the heart a fit residence for thy Holy Spirit. 
When, blessed Lord, wilt thou visit Burmah, and 
take up thine abode in the hearts of these idolaters? 
When wilt thou be pleased to gratify those desires 
and longings, which thou hast thyself excited in our 
hearts? When shall cruel, idolatrous, avaricious 
Burmah know, that thou art the God of the whole 
earth, and alone deservest the homage and adoration 
of all creatures? Hasten it, Lord, in thine own 
time. 

‘‘ Had a comfortable and happy season in prayer 
this evening. Felt a disposition to pray, that God 
would enable us to continue in this country, hear 
with submission and fortitude the trials and afflic- 
tions before us, and spread the light of truth through 
the empire. ‘The promises of the Gospel encourag- 
ed me to plead earnestly for the conversion of this 
people; and I felt most deeply, that the divine power 
alone is competent to perform this work, And 
though we cannot yet make known the Gospe,, it is 
easy for God to prepare their hearts to receive the 


180 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


Savic.ur, as soon as they shall hear the joyful sound 
I could not help weeping over the dreadful situa- 
tion of these immortal beings, who are daily going 
into eternity, with all their sins on their guilty heads, 
and none to warn them of their danger, and point 
out the way of escape. We long to speak their lan- 
guage. O Jesus, be with us, and assist us in all ow 
studies and all our exertions. 

“Jug. 28. I fear that I have declined in religion 
the past week. Nothing do I dread so much as be- 
coming cold and worldly minded, and losing the life 
of religion in the soul. Though I have but few 
temptations, I find that the innate depravity of my 
heart is constantly showing itself, in some way or 
other. [find it is just as necessary to watch and pray, 
and guard against easy besetting sins, in this hea- 
then land, as in any other situation. O for a more 
holy heart, more fervent love to God, and more 
ardent longings for the promotion of’ his cause. 

«« Have been writing letters this week to my dear 
friends in America, Found that a recollection of 
former enjoyments, in my own native country, 
made my situation here appear less tolerable. ‘The 
thought that I had parents, s’sters and beloved 
friends, still in existence, and at such a distance, that 
it was impossible to obtain a look, or exchange a 
word, was truly painful. While they are still in 
possession of the comforts I once enjoyed, I am an 
exile from my country, ana my father’s house, de- 
prived of al] society, and every friend, but one, and 
with scarcely the necessaries of life. These priva- 
tions would not be endured with patience in any 
other cause but that in which we are engaged. But 
since it is thy cause, blessed Jesus, we rejoice that 
thou didst give us so many enjoyments to sacrifice, 
and madest it so plainly our duty to forsake all, in 
order to bring thy truth to the benighted heathen. 
We would not resign our work, but live contented 
witn our lot, and live to thee. 

“¢ Sent. 5. Yes, I do feel thankful that God has 


MEMUIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 181 


brought me to this heathen land, and pliced mein a 
situation peculiarly calculated to make me feel my 
dependence on him, and my constant need of the in- 
fluences of the Holy Spirit. I enjoy more, in read- 
ing the Scriptures, and in secret prayer, than for 
years before; and the prosperity of this mission, and 
the conversion of this people, lie with weight on my 
mind, and draw forth my heart in constant interces- 
sion, And I do confidently believe, that God will 
visit this land with gospel light, that these idol tem- 
ples will be demolished, and temples for the worship 
of the living God erected in their stead. 

12. Our heavenly Father has graciously pre- 
served us, through another week, and given us to 
enjoy the privileges of another day of rest. We 
always find the Sabbath a great relief and refresh- 
ment to our minds; for on this day, we lay aside our 
’ studies, and everv worldly employment, and devote 

our time exclusively to the duties of religion. I 
have not enjoyed much through the day; but thi 

evening, in secret prayer, I had some glimpse of di 

vine things, which greatly enlivened and animated 
my soul. While I felt burdened with sin, partic- 
ularly that of a hard, insensible heart, the thought 
that God remains the same, still carrying on his great 
plan, according to his own will, for the glory of his 
name, and the good of his church and kingdom, 
went through my mind with such awe-inspiring in- 

‘fluence, that I feit no more anxiety for my iasigni 

ficant self, and could not refrain from pouring out my 
soul, for the prosperity of Zion, and the display of 
God’s glory among theheathen, Of how little con- 
sequence are al] things pertaining to our finite inter- 
ests, conipared with the glory of the infinitely blessed 
and ever glorious God. And how consoling the 
thought, that God will overrule all events, all the 
wrath of sinful men and fallen spirits, to the promo- 
tion of his own glory, in the greatest possible hap- 
piness of his holy kingdom. O fora heart to love 
this God more, and serve him better, 


182 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


‘©1§. JI have not been able to attend much to the 
study of the language for several days, in conse- 
quence of ill health, but hope I am making some 
progress. I feel that this at present is my great ob- 
ject; and that when my attention is diverted to any- 
thing else, my time is lost. 

“ Sept. 25. I feel composed and tranquil this eve- 
ning, and desire to be truly thankful that we have 
closed another week in circumstances so comfortable, 
and are brought once more to the confines of holy 
time I desire also to be ‘truly thankful for the 
sweetness I have enjoyed in divine things through- 
out the week. We have been reading at our daily 
worship, the several last chapters of John, and the 
beginning of Acts; and I think we never enjoyed so 
much in reading the Scriptures together, and in con- 
versing on the sufferings and death of Christ—his 
instructions to the disciples as he led them through 
those amazing scenes, and the first formation af the 
Christian church. [ never entered so much into 
the feelings of the disciples, when receiving his last 
instructions; when deserting him through fear; when 
following him to the cross; when consigning him to 
the tomb. And 1 could almost participate in their 
joy, when they suw him risen from the dead; when 
1e appeared in the midst of them, telling them that 
he had all power in heaven and earth. The disci- 
ples had seen one of the darkest times the church had 
ever realized. They were ready to give up all for 
lost. But light arose out of the darkness of the 
‘omb. They fell that Jesus was indeed the Ck rist 
—the Son of God. And no longer afraid of the 
face of man, they announced themselves the for 
lowers of Jesus, and declared to the whole world 
the wonders of his dying love. How fullof instruc 
tion and consolation is thy word, O blessed Jesus! 
How able to make the simple wise. Let the whole 
world hear the story of thy dying love. Let heathen 
nations know that thou didst dwell in flesh, and die 
for sinners, and now art able and mighty to save. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 183 


** Oct.-8. To-day, I have been into the town, 
and [ was surprised at the multitude of people, with 
which the streets and bazars are filled. Their coun- 
tenances are intelligent; and they appear to be capa- 
ble, under the influence of the Gospel, of hecoming 
a valuable and respectable people. But at present 
their situation is truly deplorable, for they are given 
to every sin. Lying is so common and universal 
among them, that they say, ‘ We cannot live with- 
out telling lies? They believe the most absurd no- 
tionsimaginable. My teacher told me the other day, 
that when he died he would go to my country. I 
shook my head, and told him he would not; but he 
laughed, and said he would. I did not understand 
the language sufficiently to tell him where he would 
go, or how hecould be saved. Othou Light of the 
world, dissipate the thick darkness which covers 
Burmah, and let thy light arise and shine. O dis- 
play thy grace and power among the Burmans— 
subdue them to thyself, and make them thy chosen 
people.” 


From this period her private journal is lost, except 
a few paragraphs, written several yearsafter. ‘This 
lors is greatly to be regretted, but is now irreparable. 
Te portions of her journal which have been quoted 
wil, we presume, be regarded as among the most 
interesting and valuable parts of this work. They 
cectainly are adapted to increase our respect for her 
memory. Her deep and habitual piety is more fully 
exemplified in her private journal, than in ner public 
Writings, and in the open actions of her life. What 
% written for a person’s own eye alone, is likely to 
be sincere and unreserved. ‘Therecan be no motive 
to express feelings and desires which do not exist in 
the heart. 

llaving immediately commenced the study of the 
language, Mr. and Mrs. J. hired a teacher, an abe 
and intelligent man. But as he did not understand 
English, their only method, at first, of acquiring in 

12 


134 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSUR 


formation concerning the laaguage, was to point te 
various objects, the names of -which the teacher pro- 
nounced in Burman. ‘Thus they gradually obtained 
some knowledge of its vocabulary and its structure; 
but without a grammar or a dictionary, and with so 
-itt.e aid from their teacher, their progress was slow 
and discouraging. But they prosecuted their studies 
cheerfully, animated by the prospect of being able, 
at no distant period, to communicate to these idola- 
trous Burmans, in their own language, the tidings 
of salvation through a crucified Kedeemer. 

Extracts from the ‘‘ History of the Burman Mis- 
sion” will in future be made, as occasion may re- 
quire, without any special notice. 


Sept. 19, 1813. This is the first Sabbath that 
we have united incommemorating the dying love of 
Christ at his table. ‘Though but two in number, 
we feel the command as binding, and the privilege as 
great, as though there were more; and we have in- 
ieed found it refreshing to our souls. 

*¢ Dec. 11. ‘To-day, for the first time, I have vis- 
ited the wife of the Viceroy. I was introduced to 
her by a French lady, who has frequently visited her. 
When we first arrived at the government house, she 
was not up, consequently we had to wait sometime. 
But the inferior wives of the Viceroy diverted us 
much by their curiosity, in minutely examining 
everything we had on, and by trying on our gloves, 
bonnets, &c. At last her Highness made her ap 
pearance, dressed richly in the Burman fashion, with 
a long silver pipe in her mouth, smoking. At her 
appearance, all the other wives took their seats at a 
respectful distance, and sat in a crouching posture, 
without speaking. She receivec me very politely. 
tock me by the hand, seated me upon a mat, an¢ 
herself by me. She excused herself for not coming 
in sooner, saying she was unwell. One of the wo 
men brought her a bunch of flowers, of which she. 
took several.and ornamented my cap. She was very 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 135 


mqu sitive whether I had a husband and children 
- whether I was my husband’s first wite—meaning by 
this, whether I was the highest among them, sup- 
posing that Mr. Judson, like the Burmans, had 
many wives; and whether I intended tarrying long 
in the country. 

‘© When the Viceroy came in, I really trentded, 
for [ never before beheld such a savage looking crea- 
ture. His long robe, and enormous spear, nota lit- 
tle increased my dread. He spoke to me, however, 
very condescendingly, and asked if I would drink 
some rum or wine. When I arose to go, her High- 
ness again took my hand, told me she was happy to 
see me, that I must come to see her every day. 
She led me to the door; I made my salam, and de- 
parted. My object in visiting her was, that if we 
‘should get mto any difficulty with the Burmans, I 
could have access to her, when perhaps it would not 
be possible for Mr. Judson to have an audience with 
the Viceroy.” 


They were soon convinced of the wretched and 
Unsettled state of the country. Several robberies’ 
happened near them; and the governor of a neigh- 
bouring province was assassinated inopen day. The 
assassin was put to death in a cruel manner, having 
most of his bones broken, and being left to languish 
in the prison five or six days, in this dreadful situa- 
tion. 


“© April 16, 1814. Mr. Carey has lately returned 
from Calcutta, and much refreshed our minds with 
letters and intelligence from our friends. We are 
so mucn debarred from all social intercourse with 
the rest of the Christian world, that the least intel- 
liyence we receive from our friends is a great luxury, 

s¢ We feel more and more convinced, that the Gos- 
pel must be introduced into this country, through 
many trials and difficulties, through much se f-denial 
and earnest prayer. ‘The strong prejudices of the 
Burmans, their foolish conceit of superiority over 


186 MEMOIR OF MRS. 3UDSON. 


other nations, the wickedness of their lives, together 
with the plausibility of their own religious tenets, 
make a formidable appearance in the way of their 
receiving the strict requirements of the Gospel of 
Jesus. But all things are possible with God, and 
he is our only hope and confidence. He can make 
mountains become valleys, and dry nlaces streams of 
water.” 


In August, Mr. Carey, his wife and children 
embarked in a brig for Ava, having his furniture, 
medicine, wearing apparel, &c. onboard. ‘The brig 
upset in the river, and Mrs. Carey, two children, all 
the Women servants, and some of the men servants 
who could not swim, were drowned. Mr. Carey 
endeavoured to save his little boy, three years old, 
but finding himself sinking, ve was obliged to aban 
don the child. 

Mr. J. and his wife were thus left without any 
Christian friends; but they proceeded diligently in 
their studies, enjoying the presence of God, and 
feeling an unceasing persuasion that they were in 
the path of duty. Mrs. J. wrote thus to a friend: 


‘As it respects ourselves, we are busily employed 
all day long. I can assure you that we find much 
pleasure in our employment. Could you look into 
a large open room, which we cal] a-verandah, you 
would see Mr. Judson bent over his table, covered: 
with Burman books, with his teacher at his side, a 
venerable looking man in his sixtieth year, with a 
cloth wrapped round his middle, and a handkerchief 
round his head. They talk and chatter all day long, 
with hardly anv cessation. 

“My mornings are busily employed in giving 
lirections to the servants—providing food for the 
family, &c. At ten my teacher comes, when, were 
you present, you might see me in an inner room, at 
one side of my study table, and my teacher the.other, 
reading Burman, writing, talking, &. [have many. 
nore interruptions than Mr. Judson, as I have the 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 13% 


entire management of the family. This [ took upon 
myself, for the sake of Mr. Judson’s attending more 
closely to the study of the language; yet I have found 
by a year’s experience, that it was the most direct 
way I could have taken to acquire the language; as 
I am frequently ebliged to speak Burman all day. 3 
can talk and understand others better than Mr. Jud- 
son, though he knows more about the nature and 
construction of the language. 

‘©A new Vice: y has lately arrived, who is much 
beloved and respected by the people. He visited us 
soon after his arrival, and told us that we must come 
to the government house very often. We have been 
once or twice since, and were treated with much more 
familiarity and respect than are natives of the coun 
try. 

‘< Weoften converse with our teachers and servants 
on the subject of our coming to this country, and tell 
them if they die in their present state they will surely 
be lost. But they say, ‘ Our religion is good for us, 
yours for you.’ But we are far from being discour 
aged. Wearesensible that the hearts ofthe heathen, 
as well as those of Christians, are in the hands ot 
ne and in his own time he will turn them unto 

amis? 


‘Ina letter to Mr. Newell, written about this time 
Mrs. Judson says: ; 


*¢ As it respects our temporal privations, use has 
made them familiar and easy to be borne; they are 
of short duration, and when brought in competition 
with the worth of immortal souls, sink into nothing. 
We have no society, no dear Christian friends, and 
with the exception of two or three sea captains, who 
now and then call on us, we never see a Huropean 
face. When we feel a disposition to sigh for the 
enjoyments of our native country, we vara our eyea 
on the miserable objects around. We Yel.cld some 
of them laboring hard for a scanty cubsistenre 
»yppressed by an avaricious govermrcn’, which is 

12* 


188 -MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


ever ready to seize what industry has ha/dly earnea. 
We behold others sick and diseased, daily begging 
their few grains of rice, which, when obtained, are 
scarcely sufficient to protract their wretched existence, 
and with no other habitation to cover them from the 
burning ..un or chilly rains, than that which a small 
piece of cloth raised on four bamboos, under the 
shade of a tree, can aflord. While we behold these 
scenes, we feel that we haveall the comforts, and in 
comparison, even the luxuries of*life. We feel that 
our temporal cup of blessings is full and runneth 
over. But is our temporal lot so much superior to 
theirs? O how infinitely superior are our spiritual 
blessings! While they vainly imagine to purchase 
promotion in another state of existence, by strictly 
worshipping their idols, and building pagodas, our 
hopes of future happiness are fixed on the Lamb of 
God, who taketh away the sin of the world. When 
we have a realizing sense of these things, my dear 
brother, we forget our native country and former 
enjoyments, feel contented and happy with our lot, 
with but one wish remaining—that of being instru- 
mental of leading these Burmans to partake of the 
same source of happiness with ourselves. ea 

‘Our progress in the language is slow, as it is 
peculiarly hard of acquisition. We can, however, 
read, write, and converse with tolerable ease; and 
frequently spend whole evenings very pleasantly in 
conversing with our Burman friends. We have 
been very fortunate in procuring good instructers, 
Mr. Judson’s teacher is a very learned man, was 
formerly a priest, and resided at court. He hasa 
thorough knowledge of the grammatical construc- 
tion of the language; likewise of the Pali, the learn- 
ed language of the Burmans.” 


After the first 12 months of their residence in 
Rangoon, Mrs. J.’s health had been on the declme, 
and as tnere was no medical aid in the country, she 
elt the nevessity of going to some foreign port for . 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 139 


rts restoration. Such was the state of the mission. 
that she could not consent that Mr. J. should ac- 
company her. She therefore embarked in January, 
1815, for Madras, at which place she entirely recov- 
ered, and returned in the April following. During 
her absence, Mr Judson had no Christian with 
whom he could converse, or unite in prayer. He 
however pursued his great object, the acquiring of 
the language; and, during this interval, was much 
encouraged by accounts from America, of the rapid 
increase of a missionary spirit. 

He thus expresses his feelings on receiving a copy 
of the proceedings of the Baptist General Conven- 
tion in the United States, and letters from the Sec- 
retary of their Board of Foreign Missions: 


* These accounts from my dear native land were 
- so interesting as to banish from my mind all thoughts 
of study. This general movement among the Bap- 
tist churches in America is particularly encourag- 
ing, as it affords an additional indication of God’s 
merciful designs in favor of the poor heathen. It 
unites with all the Bible Societies in Europe and 
‘America, during the last twenty years, in furnishing 
abundant reason to hope, that the dreadful darkness 
which has so long enveloped the earth, is about to 
flee away before the rising sun. Do not the suc- 
wesses Which have crowned some missionary exer- 
tions seem like the dawn of morning on the east? 
O! that this region of Egyptian carkness may ere 
long participate in the vivifying beams of light. 

«* None but one who has had the experience, can 
tell what feelings comfort the heart of a solitary 
Missionary, when, though all the scenes around him 
present no friend, he remembers, and has proof, that 
there are spots on this wide earth, where Christian 
brethren feel that his cause is their own, and pray to 
the same God and Saviour for his welfare and sue- 
cess. ‘Thanks be to God, not only for ‘rivers of 
evlless joys abv ve,? but for ‘rills of comfort here 
delow.?” 


440 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


The following account of Mr. Judson’s attempt 
te communicate religious instructi.n to his teacher, 
wili be read with interest. It shows the views of 
the educated Burmans on the subject of religion, and 
the style of argument in whic they defend their 
opinions : 


“¢ Sept. 30,1815. Had the following conversation 
with my teacher. This man has been with me 
about three months, and is the most sensible, learn- 
ed, and candid man that I have ever found among 
the Burmans. He is forty-seven years of age, and 
his name is Oo Oungmeng. I began by saying, Mr. 
J. is dead. Oo.—I have heard so. J.—His soul is 
lost, I think. Oo.—Why so? J.—He was nota 
discipie of Christ. Oo.—How do you know that? 
you could not see his soul. J.—How do you know 
whether the root of the mango tree is good? You 
cannot see it; but you can judge by the fruit on its 
‘branches. Thus I know that Mr. J. was not a 
disciple of Christ, because his words and actions 
were not such as indicate the disciple. Oo.—And 
so all who are not disciples of Christ are iost? J.— 
Yes, all, whether Burmans or foreigners. Oo.— 
This is hard. J.—Yes, it is hard, indeed; otherwise 
I should not have come all this way, and le{t parents 
and all, to tell you of Christ. (He seemed to feel 
the force of this, and after stopping a little, he said,). 
How is it that the disciples of Christ are so fortu- 
nate above all men? J.—Are not all men sinners, 
and deserving of punishment in a future state® 
Oo.—-Yes, all must suffer in some future state for 
the sins they commit. The punishment follows the 
crime, as surely as the wheel ofa eart follows the 
footsteps of the ox. J.—Novw, according to the 
Burman system, there is no escape. According to 
he Christian system there is. Jesus Christ has 
died in the place of sinners; has borne their sins— 
and now those who believe on him, and become his 
disciples, are released {rom the punishment they de- 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 14) 


serve. At aeath they are received into heaven, and 
are happy forever. Oo.—That I will never believe. 
My mind is very stiff on this one point, namely, that 
all existence involves in itself principles of misery 
and destruction. J.—Teacher, there are two evil 
futurities, and one good. A miserable future exis- 
tence is evil, and annihilation or nigban is an evi., 
a fearful evil. A happy future existence is alone 
good. Oo.—I admit that it is best, if it could be 
perpetual; but it cannot be. Whatever is, is liable 
to change, and misery, and destruction. Nighan is 
the only permanent good, and that good has been 
attained by Gaudama, the last deity. J.—If there 
be no eternal being, vou cannot account for any- 
thing. Whence this werld, and all that we see? 
Oo.—Fate. J.—Fate! the cause must always be 
equal to the effect. See, [ raise this table; see, aiso, 


that ant under it: suppose I were invisible; would a 


wise man say the ant raised it? Now fate is not 
even anant. Fate is a word, that is all. It is not 
an agent, nota thing. What is fate? Oo.—The 
fate of creatures is the influence which their good 
or bad deeds have on their future existence. J.—If 
influence be exerted, there must be an exerter. If 
there be a determination, there must be a determin- 
er. Oo.—No; there is no determiner. ‘There can- 
not be an eternal Being. J.—Consider this point. 
It is a main point of true wisdom. Whenever there 
is =n execution of a purpose, there must be an 
agent. Oo.—(After a little thought) I must say 
that my mind is very decided and hard, and unless 
you tell me something more to the purpose, I shall 
never believe. J.—Well, teacher, I wish you to 
believe, not for my profit, but for yours. 1 daily 
pray the true God to give you light, that yon may 

elieve. Whether you will ever believe in this 
world I don’t know; but when you die 1 know you 
will believe what I now say. You will then appear 
before the God you now deny. Qo.- -I don’t know 
that ” 


142 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSCN. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Letters of Mrs. Judson—Birth and Death of a Son—Arrival of 
Mr. and Mrs. Hough. 


Tue following letters, written by Mrs. Judson to 
her family, contain a statement of several interesting 
incidents: : 

** Rangoon, Sept. 26, 1815. 


«« My dear Parents, Sisters, and Brother, 


‘‘ Many months have passed since I attempted to 
write you, owing entirely to the great improbability 
of letters reaching you during the continuance of 
the war. But as we have lately heard that this 
unhappy contest has ended, and that peace is again 
restored, [ am once more induced to take up my pen, 
though I shall be able to write but a few lines. 
Goodness and mercy still follow us, still the protect- 
ing hand of our Heavenly Father is-held out for our 
assistance; and though we have seen days and nights 
of affliction, we experience the fulfilment of this 
promise, Lo, Iam with you. In my last, I gave you 
a general account of events from our arrival here to 
that date. In a month or two from that date, I 
embarked for Madras, to procure medical assist- 
ance, and hoping a change of air would conduce to 
the restoration of my health. [was obliged to 
leave Mr. Judson here alone, without a single asgu- 
ciate to animate him in his arduous work. We did 
not think it his duty for him to leave the mission, if 
I coull possibly go alone. But though I was separ 
ated from him, and felt for the first time in my life 
that I.was entirely alone in this wide world, yet I 
could not but trace the kind dealings of God in in- 
clining every one with whom I had any concern, to 
favor and assist me in my way. ‘The Viceroy gave 
me an order to take a woman with me, free from 


} £s10IR OF MRS. SUDSON 148 


expense, a thing which is generally attended with 
HOR difficulty, owing to the Burman law which 
orbids any female to leave the country. We went 
to him ourselves with a small present, which is cus- 
tomary when a favor is asked. On his seeing it, he 
inquired if we had any business; and on Mr. Judson’s 
presenting the petition, he immediately commanded 
his writer to give us an official order, without caus- 
ing us any expense whatever. The captain with 
who a I went refused any pay for my passage, though 
he provided every necessary for one in ill health. I 
staid at Madras six weeks, and resided at Mr. Love- 
less’ house, where I received every attention. When 
about to leave Madras, I sent the physician under- 
whose care I had been, seventy rupees, which he im- 
mediately returned, saying, he was happy if he had 
been serviceable to me. After an absence of three 
’ months, I safely arrived at Rangoon, where I founc 
Mr. Judson well, and laboring hard, though entire- 
ly alone.” My health continued to mend, and on the 
11th of September I was made the happy mother of 
a little son. I had no physician or assistant what- 
ever, excepting Mr. Judson. Since the birth of our 
little son, my health has been much better than for 
two years before. I feel now almost in a new state 
of existence. Our hands are full, and though our 
prospects in regard to the immediate conversion of 
the Burmans are dark, yet our trust in God is strong, 
and our hopes animating. 

“Mr. Judson has made considerable progress in 
the Pali language, which is the learned language of 
the Burmans, and without a knowledge of which, a 
man is not considered learned. I have again coim- 
menced studying the Burman, though I am not vet 
able to sit long at a time. 

*¢ You doubtless are expecting to hear by this time 
of the Burmans inquiring what they shall do to be 
raved, and rejoicing that we have come to tell them 
how they may escape eternal misery. Alas, you 
know not the difficulty of communicating the least 


144 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


truth to the dark mind of a heathen, particularly 
those heathen who have a conceited notion of their 
own wisdom and knowledge, and the superior excel- 
lence of their own religious system. Sometimes 
when I have been conversing with some ofthe women, 
they have replied, ‘ Your religion is good for you, 
ours for us. You will be rewarded for your good 
deeds in your way—we in our way.’ At other times, 
when Mr. J. had been telling them of the atonement 
by Christ, they would reply that their minds were 
stiff, that they did not yet believe, &c. But these 
things do not discourage us. We confidently believe 
that God in his own time will make his truth effectual 
unto salvation. We are endeavouring to convince 
the Burmans by our conduct, that our religion is 
different from theirs; and I believe we have suc- 
ceeded in gaining the confidence and respect of those 
with whom we have any concern, so that they tell 
others who know us not, that they need not to beafraid 
to trust us, for we do not know how to tell farsehoods 
as the Burmans do. Weare very particular to pay, 
at the appointed time, for whatever we purchase. 
‘The Burmans are surprised to see us always employ- 
ed, particularly me, as the Burman women never 
think of doing any work if they can get their rice 
without. 

‘ Our present teacher is a learned man for a Bur- 
man; he was once a priest, and lived at the golden 
feet, as they call the city of Ava. He makes every 
exertion possible to please us, lest he like his 
predecessors should lose his place. He is the fourth 
we have had, and we give him only fifteen tickals a 
month, which is about seven dollars. 

“JT know, my dear mother, you long very much to 
see my little son, I wish you were here to see him. 
He is a sprightly boy, and already begins to be very 
uae We hope his life may be preserved, and 

is heart sanctified, that he may become a Mission 
ary among the Burmans.” 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 145 


** Rangoon, Dec. 8, 1815. 
“ My dear Sisters, 

*¢{n regard to the language, which sister A. wish- 
es ‘to hear how 1tsounds,’ we feel quite at home, and 
can converse with ease on common subjects. We 
find the subject of religion by far the most difficult, 
on account of the want of religious terms in their 
language. They have not the least idea of a God 
who is eternal—without beginning orend. All their 
deities have been through the several grades of 
creatures, froma fowl toadeity. When their deities 
take heaven, as they express it, they cease to exist, 
which, according to their ideas, is the highes* state 
of perfection. It is now two thousand years since 
Gaudama, their last deity, entered on his state of 
- perfection; and though he now ceases to exist, they 
still worship a hair of his head, which is enshrined 
in an enormous pagoda, to which the Burmans go 
every eighth day. They know of no other atone- 
ment for sin, than offerings to their priests and 
their pagodas. You cannot imagine how very 
difficu/t it is to give them any idea of the true God 
and the way of salvation by Christ, since their pres- 
ent ideas.of deity are so very low. 

“Mr. Judson has obtained a tolerable knowledge 
of the construction of the language, and only needs 
time and practice to make it perfectly familiar. 1 can 
read and write, but am far behind Mr. J. in this part, 
though in conversation, Iam his equal. Doubtless 

ou expect by this time, that some of the Burmans 

ave embraced the Christian religion, or at least, are 
seriously inquiring respecting it. Our hopes have 
frequently been raised by the serious and candid at- 
tention of some, but have as frequently sunk again 
by beholding their almost total indifference. At one 
time our hopes were quite 1aised by the serious at- 
tention of the son of a Governor, who came to us 
about a year, to learn English. He at times ap- 
peared solemn and inquisitive; but about six months 

13 


146 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


ago his father lost his office; he of course lost his 
sense of dignity, mixed with his servants, and lost, 
we fear, most of his seriousness. He came here his 
last Sabbath to bid us farewell, as his father was 
called up to Ava. I asked him if he had forgotten 
the instructions he had formerly received. He said 
he had not, and repeated to us what we had told him 
concerning the character of God and of Christ. 
We gave him a copy of Matthew’s Gospel, which 
has been printed, and which he gladly received, say- 
ing, not a day should pass, without his reading it. 
Mr. J. told him, every time he read, he must ask 
God to give him light, and enable him to under- 
stand ‘t. Another, anold man above sixty, frequent- 
ly visited us, and said he wished to be instructed in 
our way, as he called it. He was of Portuguese 
descent, though a Burman in his habits. Mr. J. 
talked much to him about his depraved nature, and 
the necessity ofa new heart. The last time he caine, 
he inquired if we would not give money to those who 
were baptized and joined us, when Mr. J. told him no. 
He then asked what it was to have a new heart. 
Mr. J. told him—when he replied, that he had gota 
new heart—that he believed in Christ and the true 
God. Mr. J. asked him how long since he felt his 
heart was new? He said he was a Christian—was 
baptized in infancy—had always worshipped the true 
God, and had those feelings Mr. J. described. Mr, 
J. told him he was still in a very dangerous state, 
and if he died as he was, he would surely go to hell, 
He replied, vour sayings are very hard, and I can- 
not immediately understand them. Some other in 
stances, still more encouraging, I could mention, but 
we must wait to see the event. These things, hows 
ever, do not discourage us. It is God alone, who 
can effectually impress the mind with divine truths; 
and though seed now sown may long lie buried in 
the dust, yet at some future period it may spring up, 
an] bear fruit to the glory of God. When we read 
wlat wonders God is doing in the earth, in sending 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 147 


the Gospel into all parts of the world—when we read 
of Otaheitans and Chinese embracing the Gospel— 
shall we think it hard fer him to convert the Bur- 
mans? : 

“The town just now is all in confusion. The 
present Viceroy is recalled by the King, and the for- 
mer Viceroy is again to take the government of Ran- 
goon. The present Viceroy has been here only a 
year and three months; he is much beloved by the 
people, ten thousand of whom will go with him. 

e have had a very peaceable, comfortable time du- 
ring his administration; the town was ina flourish- 
ing state; robberies very seldom, on account of the 
effectual means he has taken to suppress them, and 
we strongly hoped ne would be permitted to continue 
here for sometime. The present Viceroy and wile 
are nearly related to the King. ‘They haveadaugh- 
ter fifteen years old, who on her arrival at. Ava is to 
be presented to the Prince Regent. She is a seusi- 
ble, smart, satirical girl; with a mind as capable of 
improvement as any young lady’s in America. She 
and her mother have ever treated me with marked 
attention. I went to take leave of them two or three 
days ago; and when I entered the room where they 
receive company, finding they were not, present, I 
took my seat with the women who had assembled 
to pay their respects, and which is two or three steps 
lower than where the Viceroy’s family sit. When 
the wife and daughter came in, they immediately told 
me to take my place with them, for it was not fite 
ting that the wile ofa priest should sit there. When 
I came away, her ladyship presented me witha string 
of coral, which is the second she has given me since 
her residence here. . 

“O how I long to visit Bradford! and spend a 
few evenings by your firesides, in tellmg you what 
T have seenand heard. Alas! we have no fireside, 
no social circle; we are still alone in this miserable 
country, surrounded by thousands who are ignorant 
of the true God, and only way of salvation by Jesus 


148 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


Christ. O pray for us, that we may be faithfal un 
to death, and never give up or be discouraged, 
though we may not have immediate success. We 
still feel happy in our employment, and have reason 
to thank God that he has brought us here. Wede 
hope to live to‘see the Scriptures translated into the 
Burman language, and to see a church formed from 
among these idolaters. Did you know how much 
Mr. J. has to do, you would not wonder he does not 
write to you more. He sits at close study twelve 
hours out of the twenty-four.” 


Some of the difficulties of the Burman language 
are thus described by Mr. Judson, in a letter to Dr 
Bolles, of Salem, dated Rangoon, January 16, 1816- 


‘*] just now begin to see my way forward in this 
language, and hope that two or three years more 
will make it somewhat familiar; but I have met with 
difficulties that I had no idea of before I entered on 
the work. Fora European or American to acquire 
a living oriental language, root and branch, and 
make it his own, is quite a different thing from his 
acquiring a cognate language of the west, or any 
of the dead languages, as they are studied in the 
schools. One circumstance may serve to illustrate 
this. I once had occasion to devote a few months to 
the study of the French. I have now been above 
two years engaged in the Burman. If I were to 
choose between a Burman and a French book, to be 
examined in, without previous study, I should, with 
out the least hesitation, choose the French. When 
we take up a western language, the similarity in the 
characters, in very many terms, in many modes of 
expression, and in the general structure of the sen 
tences, its being in fair print, (a circuznstance we 
hardly think of,) and the assistance of grammars, 
dictionaries, and instructers, render the work com 
paratively easy. But when we take up a language - 
spoken by a people on the other side of the earth, 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 149 


whose very thoughts run in channels diverse from 
ours, and whose modes of’ expression are consequently 
all new and uncouth; when we tind the letters and 
words all totally destitute of the least resemblance 
to any language we had ever met with, and these 
words not fairly divided, and distinguished, as in 
western writing, by breaks, and points, and capitals, 
but run together ir. one continuous line, a sentence 
or paragraph see:ning tothe eye but one long word; 
when, instead of clear characters on paper, we find 
only obscure scratches on dried palm leaves strung 
together, and called a book; when we have no 
dictionary, and no interpreter to explain a single 
word, and must get something of the language, 
before we can avail ourselves of the assistance of a 
native teacher,— 


‘Hoe opus, hic labor est.’ 


I had hoped, before I came here, that it would not 
be my lot to have to go alone, without any guide, 
in an unexplored path, especially as Missionaries had 
been here before. But Mr. Chater had_left the 
country, and Mr, Carey was with me very little, 
before he left the mission and the missionary work 
altogether. . ‘ 
«T long to write something more interesting and 
encouraging to the friends of the mission; but it 
must not yet be expected. It unavoidably takes 
several years to acquire such a language, in order 
to converse and write intelligibly on the great truths 
of the Gospel. Dr. Carey once told me that. after 
he had been some years in Bengal, and thought he 
-was doing very well, in conversing and preaching 
with the natives, they, (as he was afterwards con- 
vinced) knew not what he was about. A young 
Missionary, who expects to pick up the language in 
a year or two, will probably find that he has not 
counted the cost. If he should be so fortunate as 
to obtain a good interpreter, he may be useful by 
that means. But he will learn, esnecially if he is ip 
13* 


156 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


a new place, where the way is not prepared, and no 
previous ideas communicated, that tc qualify himself 
to communicate divine truth intelligibly, by his voice 
or pen, is not the work of a year. However, nor 
withstanding my present greai incompetency, I aim 
beginning to translate the New Testament, being 
extremely anxious to get some parts of Scripture, a1 
least, into an intelligible shape, if for no other pur- 
pose than to read, as occasion offers, to the Burmans 
with whom I meet.” 


At this juncture, their Heavenly Father was pleased 
to visit therm with the most distressing trial, which 
can wring a parent’s heart. Their darling boy, who 
was their solace in their lonely condition, was removed 
from them by death. The event is described ina 
letter of Mrs. J with all the pathos of a mother’s 
SOTTOW: 


** Rangoon, May 7, 1816. 
“* My dear Parents, 


‘* Little did I think when I wrote you last, that my 
next letter would be filled with the melancholy 
subject on which I must now write. Death, regard 
iess of our lonely situation, has entered our dwelling, 
and made one of the happiest families wretched. 
Our little Roger Williams, our only little darling 
boy, was three days ago laid in the silent grave. 
Eight months we enjoyed the precious little gift, in 
which time he had so completely entwined himself 
around his parents’ hearts, that his existence seemed 
necessary to theirown. But God has taught us by 
afflictions, what we would not learn by mercies—- 
that our hearts are his exclusive property, and what 
ever rival intrudes, he will tear it away. 

«© As I feel incapable of writing on any other sub- 
ject, I will give you ne of his little pro- 
dation, and the last painful scene which has rent our 
hearts. 

‘*He was a remarkably pleasant child,—never 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 151 


eried except when in pain, and what we often op 
served to each other was the most singular, he never. 
during his little existence, manifested the least an 
ger or resentment atanything. This was not owing 
to the want of intellect, for his tender feelings of 
sensibility were very conspicuous. Whenever I 01 
his father passed his cradle without taking him, he 
would follow us with his eyes to the door, when 
they would fill with tears, his countenance so ex- 
pressive of grief, though perfectly silent, that it 
would force us back to him, which would cause his 
little heart to be as joyful as it had been before sor- 
rowful. He would lie hours on a mat by his papa’s 
study table, or by the side of his chair on the floor, 
if he could only see his face. When we had finish- 
ed study, or the business of the day, it was our ex- 
ercise and amusement to carry him round the house 
or garden, and though we were alone, we felt notour 
solitude when he was with us. For two months 
before he died, I observed with much anxiety, that 
he had violent fits of perspiration every night, and a 
slight degree of fever. But as he appeared well 
through the day, and had a good appetite for his 
food, and continued to grow fleshy, I strongly hoped 
it would wear off, and terminate in the cutting of 
his teeth But alas! all our hopes were blasted. 
Tuesday morning when I took him from his cradle, 
he appeared as well as usual; but not long after, he 
was taken with a violent coughing, which continued 
without cessation for halfan hour. This brought 
on a fever, which continued strong through the day 
and night; but Wednesday morning it abated, and 
he slept quietly through the day, and took his food 
with as good an appetite as usual. Thursday his 
cough returned, and with it the fever, which again 
much alarmed us, and we sent for a Portuguese 
priest, (the only person who knows anything about 
medicine in the place,) who gave him a little rhu- 
oarb and gascoign powder. But nothing appcared 
# affect the distress in his throat, which was the 


{52 MEMO.:8 (CF MRS. JUDBSON. 


zause of his coughing, and made him breathe so 
hard, that every breath could be heard some way. 
Friday night I sat by him till two o’clock, when, 
being much fatigued, l retired, and Mr. Judson took 
him, The little creature drank his milk with much 
eagerness, (he was weaned ) and Mr. Judson thought 
he was refreshed and would go to sleep.. He laid 
him in his cradle—he slept with ease for half an 
hour, when his breath stopped without a struggle, 
and he was gone! ‘Thus died our little Roger. 


© Short pain, short grief, dear babe, was thine,— 
Now, joys eternal and divine.’ 


We buried him in the afternoon of the same day, in 
a little enclosure, the other side of the garden. 
Forty or fifty Burmans and Portuguese followed, 
with his afflicted parents, the last remains to the si- 
lent grave. All the Burmans who were acquainted 
with us, endeavoured to sympathize with us, and 
console us under our loss. Our little Roger was the 
only legitimate child of foreign parents in the place; 
consequently he was quite a curiosity to the Bur- 
mans. But what shall [ say about the improvement 
we ure to make of this heavy affliction? Wedo not 
feel a disposition to murmur, or to inquire of our 
Sovereign why he has done this. We wish rather, 
to sit down subinissively under the rod and bear the 
smart, till the end for which the affliction was sent, 
shall be accomplished. Our hearts were bound 
up in this child; we felt he was our earthly all, our 
only source of innocent recreation in this heathen 
land. But God saw it was necessary to remind us 

f our error, and to strip us of our only little al. O 
may it not be in vain that he hasdone it. May weso 
improve it, that he willstay his hand and say, ‘It is 
enough.? 

“ May i8. It is just a fortnight to-day, since our 
little boy died. We feel the anguish a little abated, 
and have returned to our study and employment; but 
when ior a moment we: realize what we once pos 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 153 


sessed, and our now bereaved state, the -vound 
opens and bleeds afresh. Yet we would st_ll say, 
*'Thy will be done.’ 
_ 'Two or three days ago, the wife of the Viceroy 
made us a visit in all her state. She had heard of 
the death of the little white child, as she called him, 
and came to pay a visit of condolence. I once car- 
ried him to her house, when she took the velvet 
cushion on which she usually sits, and placed the 
little boy upon it, and exclaimed, What a child, 
how white, &c. After caressing him for sometime, 
I got up to go, but she requested me to stay till the 
Viceroy came in. He soonentered the room, when 
she again exclaimed, ‘ Look, my Lord, see what a 
child! look at his feet, look at his hands,’ both of 
which were remarkably fleshy. The old Viceroy, a 
huge looking man, who has at least twenty or thir 
ty children, smiled on the little babe, made some in- 
quiries respecting him, and took his leave. Ever 
since that time, when we met, she would anxiously 
inquire about him. When she saw me after lis 
death, she smote her breast, and said, ‘ Why did 
you not send me word, that I might have come to 
is funeral?? I told her I did not think of anything, 
my distress was so great. She then tried to com- 
fort us, and told us not to weep. She was accom- 
panied by all her officers of state and attendants, 
all of which were about two hundred people. I 
gave her tea, sweetmeats and cakes, with which 
she appeared much pleased. O that she might be 
come a real disciple of Jesus! \ 

‘*T sometimes have good opportunities of com- 
municating religious truths to the women in the 
government-house, and hope I shall have an oppor- 
tunity of conversing with the wife of the Viceroy 
herself. 

“All is Egyptian darkness around us—not a 
glimpse of light. Mr. Judson had just completed a 
tract in the Burman language, a summary of the 
Christian religion, when his eyes became so weak, 


54 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


and his head so much affected, that he was obliged 
to lay aside all study, and could not even look inte 
an Finglish book. It is now six weeks since this took 
place, and he is now only able to study about halt 
the day. This we feel to be a severe affliction, My 
health is indifferent. We are anxiously looking for 
the arrival of the other Missionaries, who we hope 
will strengthen this mission.” 


Mr. Judson’s health had now become so impaired, 
by close attention to study, that he was forced to 
desist from reading, and from all other mental exer- 
tion, for several months. He was apprehensive, 
shat it would be necessary to take a voyage to Ben- 
gal, for the restoration of his health, though he felt 
a great reluctance to suspend, for a moment, his ef- 
forts to prepare himself for usefulness among the 
idolatrous millions, who were perishing around him, 
Exercise on horseback, and a more nutritive diet, 
restored his health, in some degree; but he was on 
the point of sailing for Calcutta, when he received 
the joyful intelligence, that Mr. and Mrs. Hough 
had arrived in Bengal, and would soon join them in 
Rangoon. The vessel in which Mr. and Mrs. J. 
were about to take passage, being detained longer 
than was expected, they determined to relinquish 
the design, and to remain in Rangoon. Mr, Jud- 
son’s heaith gradually became better, and he was 
enabled to resume his literary iabors. During the 
period of his illness, while incapable of reading, from 
the weakness of his eyes. he employed himself in 
preparing a grammar of the language, for the bene- 
fit of future Missionaries. 

Mr. Hough arrived in Calcutta, in April, 1816. 
Dr. Carey had recently received letters from Mr. 
Judson, informing him, that he wished several small 
tracts printed at Serampore. ‘The Dr. and his asso- 
ciates immediately advised, that a printing office be 
established at Rangoon; and, with their characteris- 
tic liberality, made a present to the mission of a- 


MEMUrk vF MRS. JUDELN 15& 


printing press, types and other printing apparatus, 
with which Mr. Hough and wile arrived at Ran- 
goon, in October, 1816. 

It was a joyful event to Mr. and Mrs. Judson to 
be thus reinforced by two other Missionaries. They 
had been laboring in silence and sorrow, for three 
years, without the encouraging thought, that they 
were, the meanwhile, conferring any direct benefit 
on the natives. They were, however, preparing 
themselves for usefulness. ‘They had so far become 
familiar with the language, that they could con- 
verse with considerable facility, and Mr. Judson 
had prepared two tracts, which were printed by Mr. 
Hough, soon after his arrival. Mr. Judson says, in 
a letter written at this period: 


**The British Baptists have made a noble begin- 
ning in Western India. It remains for American 
Baptists to make an attempt on the eastern side. 
As for myself, I fear I shail prove only a pioneer, 
and do a little in preparing the way for others, 
But such as I am, I feel devoted to the work, and, 
with the grace of God, and the help of the Society, 
am resolved to persevere to the end of my life.” 


A letter of the same date, to Mr. Rice, will show 
what considerations prevented discouragement un- 
der such circumstances: 


“If any ask what success I meet with among the 
natives—tell them to look at Otaheite, where the 
Missionaries labored nearly twenty years, and not 
meeting with the slightest success, began to be 
neglected by all the Christian world, and the very 
name of Otaheite was considered a shame to the 
cause of missions; but now the blessing begins to 
descend. ‘Tell them to look at Bengal also, where 
Dr. Thomas had been laboring seventeen years, that 
is, fromm 1783 to 1800, before the first convert, Krish- 
no, was baptized. When a few converts are once 
made, things move on, But it requires a much 


156 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


longer time than I have been here, to make a first 
impression on a heathen people. If they ask again, 
What prospect of ultimate success is there? ‘Tell 
them, as much as that there is an almighty and 
faithful God, who will perform his promises, and no 
more. If this does not satisfy them, beg them to 
let me stay and make the attempt, and let you come, 
and give us our bread; or, if they are unwilling to 
risk their bread on such a forlorn hope as has noth- 
ing but the word of God to sustain it, beg of them 
at least not to prevent others from giving us bread. 
And if we live some twenty or thirty years, they 
may hear from us again. 

‘“‘[ have already written many things home about 
Rangoon. The climate is good, better than any 
other part of the east. But it is a most wretched 
place. Missionaries must not caiculate on the least 
comfort, but what they find in one another and in 
their work. However, if a ship was lying in the 
river, ready to convey me to any part of the world 
I should choose, and that too with the entire appro- 
bation of'all my Christian friends, I should not, for 
a moment, hesitate on remaining. This is an 
immense field; and, since the Serampore Missionaries 
have left it, it seems wholly thrown on the hands of 
the Americans. If we desert it, the blood of the 
Burmans will be required of us. 

‘¢In encouraging young men to come out as 
Missionaries, do use the greatest caution. One 
wrong-headed, conscientiously obstinate man would 
rain us. Humble, quiet, persevering men; men of 
sound, sterlicg talents, of decent accomplishments, 
and some natural aptitude to acquire a language; men 
of an amiable, yielding temper, willing to take the 
lowest place, to be the least of all, and the servants 
of all; men who enjoy much closet religion—who live 
near to God, and are willing to suffer all things for 
Christ*s sake, witho :t being proud of it ;—these are 
the men we need.” 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 157 


A letter written by Mr. Hough, February 20th, 
1817, contains some interesting particulars relative 
to the mission; and also describes the Burman mode 
of burying their priests. 


‘©] can say truly, f had no idea of the state ot 
heathenism, before I saw it. A warm hearted 
Christian in America would think, that a poor 
miserable idolater would leap for joy at the message 
of grace. But it is not so in Burmah: 

6 Here Satan binds their captive minds 
Fast in his slavish chains.’ 

“The few with whom brother Judson has con- 
versed, since I have been herve, appear inaccessible to 
truth, Theysit unaffected, and go away unimpressed 
with what they have heard. ‘They are unconvinced 
by arguments, and unmoved by love; and the con- 
version of a Burman, or even the excitement of a 
thought towards the truth, must and will be a 
sovereign act of divine power. We long to see that 
act of power displayed: even one instance would fill 
us with joy. 

‘*Brother Judson has never yet been abroad to 
preach. He has applied himself constartly to the 
study of the language, with a view to the translation 
of the New Testament. We both concur in the 
opinion, that before preaching be undertaken, to any 
considerable degree, some portion of the Scriptures 
should be in circulation. 

“The Burmans, when anything is said to them 
on the subject of divine truth, inquire for our holy 
books; and it is a pleasing fact, that scarcely a Bur- 
man, with the exception of females, is incapable of 
reading. Besides, during the progress of translation, 
many theological terms, eePrerage to the different 
branches of doctrine, may be familiarly acquired, and 
their use established; which, without much consider- 
ation, might be erroneously employed, and thus 
wrong ideas conveyed. Having, therefore, press 
and types here, we cannot conscientiously withhold 
from this people the precious oraclesof God. This 


158 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


opinion has influenced us to issue, as saun as prepar 
ations could possibly be made, two small tracts; one 
a summary of Christian doctrine, and the other a 
catechism. ‘The one I was enabled to print the lat- 
ter part of the last, and the other the first of the 
present, month. ‘These two little tracts are the first 
printing ever done in Burmah; and it is a fact, 
gratelul to every Christian feeling, that God has 
reserved the introduction of this art here, for his own 
use. 

‘‘ When a priest dies, he has peculiar honors paid 
him. Several months since, a neighbouring priest 
died, or returned—tfor the Burmans think it undig- 
nified to say that @ priest dies—his body was imme- 
diately wrapped up in tar and wax; holes were 
perforated through the feet, and some distance up. 
the legs, into which, one end of a hollow bamboo 
was inserted, and the other fixed in the ground; the 
body was then pressed and squeezed, so that its 
fluids were forced down through the legs, and con- 
veyed off by means of the bamboos; in this state of 
preservation the body has been kept. For some 
days past, preparations have been making to burn 
this sacred relic, and to-day it passed off in fumiga- 
tion! 

‘It may be said of the Burman, as of every oth- 
er pagan religion, there is no power in it to make 
men better; and its best precepts are no criterion by 
which to judge of the moral character of its devo- 
tees. The Burmans are subtle, thievish, mercena- 
ry, addicted to robbery and fraud; truth and honesty 
are not known among them as virtues. They are 
excessively prone to gambling and sporting. 

“The government of the country is in the will of 
the Sovereign, who considers his subjects as slaves; 
in short, every person coming into ‘he country, re- 
te himself ‘the King’s most willing slave.? The 

iceroy of Rangoon acts with a power limited only 
by the King, He punishes criminals with severity 

he mildest manner of sufferirg death is to have 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON, 159 


che heaa taken off. which is done witha large knife, 
at one stroke. Reprieves from extreme desert, 
however, are often purchased with money; but when 
a malefactor is destitute of friends and money, he 
dies without mercy.” 


—@—— 


CHAPTER IX. 


Mr. Judson’s Visit to Chittagong---Persecution of Mr. Hough, and 
his Departure for Bengal—Return of Mr. Judson—Arrival of 
Messrs. Colman and Wheelock. 


Tue prospects of the Mission now became bright- 
er. The language had been acquired by Mr. and 
Mrs. Judson, a grammar had been prepared, two 
tracts were printed; the one containing a view of 
the Christian religion, of which one thousand copies 
were printed, and the other a catechism, of which 
three thousand copies were printed. An edition of 
eight hundred copies of the Gospel by Matthew, 
translated by Mr. Judson, was commenced. 

But God was about to gladden their hearts, by 
showing them some of the fruits of that seed, woick 
they had scattered with tears. In March, 1817, 
Mr. Judson wrote thus to the Corresponding Secre- 
tary: 


«‘T have this day been visited by the first inqui- 
rer after religion, that I haveseenin Burmah. For 
although in the course of the two last years I have 
preached the Gospei to many, and thougn some have 
visited me several times, and conversed on the sub- 
ject of religion; yet I have never had mucn reason 
to believe that their visits originated in a spirit of 
sincere inquiry. Conversations on religion have al- 
ways been of my proposing; and though I have 
sometimes been encouraged to hope that truth had 
made some impression, never, until to-day, have I 


160 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


met with one who was fairly entitled to the epithet 
of Inqutrer. 

“As I was sitting with my teacher, as usual, a 
Burman of respectable appearance, and followed by 
a servant, came up the steps, and sat down by me. 
[ asked him the usual question, where he came from: 
to which he gave me no explicit reply; and I vegan 
to suspect that he had come from the government 
house, to enforce a trifling request, which in the 
morning we had declined. He soon, however, unde- 
ceived and astonished me by asking, ‘How long a 
time will it take me to learn the religion of Jesus?? 
I replied that such a question could not be answered. 
{f God gave light and wisdom, the religion of Jesus 
was soon learned; but without God, a man might 
study all his life long, and make no proficiency. But 
how, continued [, came you to know anything of Je- 
sus? Have yeu been here before? ‘No.? Have 
you seen any writings concerning Jesus? ‘I have 
seen two little books.? Whois Jesus? ‘He is the 
Son of God, who, pitying creatures, came into this 
world, and suffered death in their stead.? Who is 
God? ‘He is a Being without beginning or end, 
who is not subject to old age or death, but always 
is.’ I cannot tell how I felt at this moment. 
This was the first acknowledgement of an eternal 
God, that I had ever heard from the lips of a Bur- 
man. I handed him a tract and catechism, both of 
which he instantly recognised, and read here and,- 
there, making occasional remarks to his follower, 
such as, § This is the true God—this is the right 
way,’ &c. Tnow tried to tell him some things about 
God and Christ, and himself; but he did not listen 
with much attention, and seemed anxious only to 
get another book. I had already told him two or 
three times that I had finished no other book; but, 
that in two or three months, I would give him a 
laiger one which I was now daily employed in trans- 
lating. ‘But,’ replied he, ‘have you not a little of 
that book done, which you will graciously give me 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 161 


now?’ And J, beginning to think that God’s time 
was better than man’s, folded and gave him the two 
first half sheets, which contain the first five chapters 
of Matthew; on which he instantly rose, as if his 
business was all done; and having received an invi- 
tation to come again, took leave. Throughout his 
short stay, he appeared different from any Burman 
[I have met with. He asked no questions about 
customs and manners, with which the Burmans 
tease us exceedingly. He had no curiosity, and no 
desire for anything, but § more of this sort: of writ- 
ing.’ In fine, his conduct proved that he had some- 
thing on his mind, and I cannot but hope that J 
shall have to write about him again. 

“© March 24. We have not yet seen our inquirer; 
but to-day we met with one of his acquaintances, 
who says that he reads our books ail the day, and 
shows them to all who call upon him. We told him 
to ask his friend to come and see us again. : 

*¢96. An opportunity occurs of sending to Ben- 
gal. Iam sorry that I cannot send home more in- 
teresting letters. But I am not yet in the way of 
collecting interesting matter. I have found that I 
could not preach publicly to any advantage, with- 
out being able, at the same time, to put something 
into the hands of the hearers. And, in order to 
gualify myself to do this, I have found it absolutely 
necessary to keep at home, and confine myself to 
close study, for three or four years. I hope, how- 
ever, alter Matthew is finished, to make a more pub- 
lic entrance on my work than has yet been done. 
But many difficulties lie in the way. Our present 
house is situated in the woods, away from any neigh- 
bours, and at a distance from any road. In this sit- 
uation, we have no visiters, and no passing travei- 
lers, whom we could invite to stop and hear of 
Christ. My attempts to go out and find auditors 
have always occasioned such a waste of time, and 
interruption of study, as would not often be indulg- 
ed in, or justified. ‘Weare very desirous of’ build 

14* 


162 MEMOIR UF MRS. JUDSON. 


‘ng a small house near the town, on sonte public 
road.” 


Mrs. Judson wrote thus to a friend in August, 
1817: 


«Since Mr. Hough’s arrival, he kas. printed a 
tract of considerable length, being a view of the 
Christian religion, which Mr. Judson had previous- 
ly vomposed; and also a small catechism for children, 
and Matthew’s Gospel. These are in circulation, 
and are well understood by those who read them. 
Many have called at the mission house, to inquire 
more particularly into the new religion. But we 
have frequently observed in these inquirers a fear 
lest uthers should discover their inclination to inquire. 
Sometimes, when two or three intimate friends have 
been seriously engaged in conversing on religious 
subjects, if others, with whom they were not ac- 
quainted, called at the same time, they would be 
silent, and take their leave. This makes us feel the 
tmportance of trying to obtain the patronage of 
government. In a few months, Mr. Judson will 
complete a dictionary of the Burman language; 
after which he will, perhaps, go up to Ava, the resi- 
dence of the King. 

“If we were convinced of the importance of mis- 
sions, before we left our native country, we now also 
see and feel their practicability. We could then pic- 
ture to ourselves the miserable situation of heathen 
nations; but we now see a whole populous empire, 
rational ard immortal like ourselves, sunk in the 
grossest idolatry; given up to follow the wicked in- 
clinations of their depraved hearts; entirely desti- 
tute of any real principle, or the least spark of true 
benevolence. Let those who plead the native inno- 
cence and purity of heathen nations, visit Burmah. 
Their system of religion has no power over ‘the 
heart, or restraint on the passions. Besides being 
destitute of life, it provides no atonement for sin 
Here, also, the Gospel triumphs over this, and eve 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 163 


ry other religion in the world. This is the grand 
difference; this makes the Gospel ‘ z00d news,’ in- 
deed, to the heavy laden and sin-sick soul. 

‘“¢ How interested you would be, could you meet 
with my little society of females on the Sabbath. 
Interested I say—yes, you would be interested, if it 
was only from this circumstance—that these poor 
idolaters enjoy the means of grace, and sit under the 
sound of the Gospel. I have generally fifteen or 
twenty. They are attentive while I read the Scrip- 
tures, and endeavour to teach them about God. 
One of them told me the other day, that she could 
not think of giving up a religion which her parents, 
grand-parents, &c. &c. had embraced, and accepting 
a new one, of which they had never heard. I ask- 
ed her if she wished to go to hell, because her pro- 
genitors had gone there. She replied, if with all 
her offerings and good works on her head, (speaking 
in their idiom) she must go to hell, then let her go. 
I told her, if she went to hell after having heard of 
the Saviour, her very relations would contribute to 
torment and upbraid her, for her rejection of that 
Saviour of whom they had never heard, and that 
even she herself would regret her folly when it was 
too late. If I do, said she, I will then cry out to you 
to be my intercessor with your God, who will cer- 
tainly not refuse you. Another told me that she did 
believe in Christ, and prayed to him every day. } 
asked her if she also believed in Gaudama, and pray- 
ed to him. She replied, she worshipped them both. 
{ have several times had my hopes and expectations 
raised by the apparent seriousness of several females, 
as Mr. Judson has in regard to several men; but their 
goodness was like the morning cloud and early dew, 
which soon passeth away. Four or five children 
have committed the catechism to memory, and often 
repeat it to each other.” 


The following letter describes some of the offer- 
ings made by the Burmans at their festivals, and 


164 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


also contains a description of the celebrated pagoda 
at Rangoon: 


‘¢ This 1s the season for the great feast of Gauda- 
ma. It commenced yesterday, and it is to cont:nue 
for three days. It is observed all over the country: 
but I presume the multitude collected in this place 
is much greater than at any other, excepting Ava 
Priests and people come in boats froma great distance, 
to worship at the pagoda in this place, which is 
supposed to containa relic of Gaudama. The Vice- 
roy, on these days, goes out in all the pomp and 
splendor possible, dressed and ornamented with all 
his insignia of office, attended by the members of 
government and thecommon people. After kneeling 
and worshipping at the pagoda, they generally spend 
the day in amusements, such as boxing, danc- 
ing, singing, theatrical exhibitions, and fire-works, 
Most of the older people spend the night at the 
pagoda, and listen to the instructions of the priests. 

‘Great and expensive offerings are made at this 
season. Qne last vear, presented by a member of 
government, cost three thousand tickals, or twelve 
hundred dollars, It wasa kind of portable pagoda, 
ma‘le of bamboo and paper, richly ornamented with 
gold leaf and paintings. Jt was a hundred feet in 
height. and the circumference of its base about fifty. 
Half way up its height, was a man ludicrously dres- 
sed, with a mask on his face, white wings on his 
shoulders, and artificial finger nails, two inches in 
length, in the posture of dancing. ‘This offerin 
was carried by sixty men, preceded by a band o 
music, and followed by the officer who made it, and 
his suite. Other offerings presented at this festival, 
are various kinds of artificial trees, the branches and 
twigs of which are filled with cups, bowls, handker- 
chiefS, and garments of all descriptions; these are 
given to the slaves attached to the pagoda, who, the 
week following, have something iikea fair, to dispose 
of their offerings. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 165 


* The pagoda to which such multitudes resort, is 
one cf the largest and most splendid in the empire, 
After having ascended a flight of steps, a large gate 
opens, when a wild, fairy scene is abruptly presente 
ed to view. It resemcles more the descriptions we 
sometimes have in novels, of enchanted castles, ¢1 
ancient abbeys in ruins, than anything we ever meet 
in real life. The ground is completely covered with 
a variety of ludicrous objects, which meet the eye in 
every direction, interspersed with the banyan, cocoa 
nut, and toddy trees. Here and there are large open 
buildings, containing huge images of Gaudama; some 
in a sitting, some in a sleeping position, surrounded 
by images of priests and attendants, in the act of 
worship, or listening to his instructions. Before 
the image of Gaudama, are erected small altars, on 
_ which offerings of fruit, flowers, &c. are laid. Large 
images of elephants, lions, angels, and demons, to- 
gether with a number of indescribable objects, all 
assist in filling the picturesque scene. 

“The ground on which this pagoda is situated, 
commands a view of the surrounding country, which 
presents one of the most beautiful landscapes in 
nature. ‘he polished spires of the pagodas, glisten- 
ing among the trees at a distance, appear like the 
steeples of meeting-houses in our American seaports, 
The verdant appearance of the country, the hills and 
valleys, ponds and rivers, the banks of which are 
covered with cattle, and fields of rice; each, in their 
turn, attract the eye, and cause the beholder to 
exclaim, ‘ Was this delightful country made to ke 
the residence of idolaters? Are those glittering 
spires, which, in consequence of association of ideas, 
recall to mind so many animating sensations, but the 
rionuments of idolatry?? O my friend! scenes like 
these, productive of feelings so various and opposite, 
do, notwithstanding, fire the soul with an unconquer- 
able desire to make an effort to rescue this people 
from destruction, and lead them to the Rock that is 
higher than they.” 


166 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


In November, 1817, Mr. Edward Wheelock, a 
member of the Second Baptist Church in Boston, and 
Mr. James Colman, a member of the Third Baptist 
Church in that city, sailed from Boston, to join the 
_ Mission. They were young men of talents, and of 
exemplary piety, who were constrained by the love 
of Christ to offer themselves as messengers of the Sa- 
viour, to bear nis unsearchable riches to the distant 
heathen. With the hope that the sentiments utter- 
ed by these excellent young men, who were so soon 
summoned away from their earthly toils, may enkin- 
dle a flame of zeal in some kindred hearts, the fol- 
lowing extracts are quoted from their letters to the 
Board: 


Mr. Colman wrote thus—‘‘ Since IT came to the 
above conclusion, my mind has been unwavering. 
It is true, mountains, at times, have arisen between 
myself and the eastern world. My way has been 
hedged up by difficulties, which to the eye of human 
reason might appear insurmountable. But duty has 
constantly appeared the same. Indeed, I esteem 
missionary work, not only as a duty for me to per- 
form, but as a privilege for me to enjoy; a privilege 
which I value more than the riches of the earth. 
Only give me the rich satisfaction of holding up the 
torch of truth, in the benighted regions of Burmah! 
This is the object which lies nearest my heart; for 
this, I can cheerfully leave my native land, and the 
bosom of my beloved friends. I pant to proclaim 
the Gospe! to those who are ignorant of it; to pre- 
sent to their minds that firm foundaticn on which 
my own hopes of eternal happiness are built. Llook 
to Burmah as my home, and as the field of my fu- 
ture toils. 'To the wretched inhabitants of that em- 
os I long to present the Bible, the fountain of 

nowledge, and to direct their wandering steps to 
the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls. Nor can 
[ refrain from cherishing the hope, that my feeble 
labors among them will be crowned with the bles | 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. | 16? 


sing of Heaven. Some, IJ trust, will be induced to 
forsake the worship of idols, and to bow the knee to 
Him, on whose vesture and thigh is written, King 
of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Prompted, ‘as I be- 
lieve, by a deep sense of the worth of souls, and by 
the command of our blessed Saviour, who says, ‘ Go 
ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every 
crealure;’and encouraged oe his promise of constant 
assistance and direction to his servants, I voluntarily 
and joyfully offer myself to be your Missionary to 
the Burman empire. May the Lord preside over 
your deliberations, and grant me, if it can be consis- 
tent with his holy will, the unspeakable happiness 
of proclaiming the love of Jesus to the miserable 
heathen.” 


Mr. Wheelock closed his application to the Board 
_ with the following lines: 


“To you, honored fathers, is my mind directed, 
as to those, who, under God, must decide my case 
To you I offer, freely and joyfully offer myself, to 
become your Missionary, to aid those already under 
your patronage, to turn the poor Burmans from 
tdols, to serve the living and true God. And O! if it 
is consistent that one so unworthy, and so unquali- 
fied as myself, should engage in this glorious work, 
deny me not, I beseech you, the unspeakable privi- 
lege; deny me not the fondest, the most ardent de- 
sire of my soul, that can, in this world, be gratified. 
To deny me this, would be to deprive me of the 
greatest happiness which, in this world, I can pos- ~ 
sibly enjoy. I would rather be a Missionary of the 
cross, than a King onathrone. Let the menof this 
world possess its glittering toys; .et the miser grasp 
his cankered gold: let the voluptuary enjoy his sor- 
did pleasures; let the ambitious ascend to the pinna- 
cle of earthly honor; but let me enjoy tke sweet 
satisfaction of directing the poor pagans to the 
‘Lamb of God.’ [court no greater good; I desire 
no greater joy; I] seek no greater honor. To Bur- 


168 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


mah would T go; in Burmah would I live; m Burmah 
would I toil; in Burmah would 1 die; and in Burmak 
would I be buried.” 


In December, 1817, Mr. Judson left Rangoon on 
a visit to Chittagong, in Arracan, for the purpose of 
benefitting his health, and of procuring one of the 
nat.ve Christians, residing there, who spoke the Bur 
man language, to assist him in his first public at- 
tempts to preach the Gospel. He designed to be 
absent but three months: but the vessel was de- 
tuined by contrary winds, and becoming unmanage- 
uble in the difficult navigation along the coast, her 
direction was changed for Madras, and Mr. Judson 
had the unspeakable anguish of being borne away 
from the scene of" his missionary labors, to a distant 
part of India, which he had no wish to visit. The 
vessel was unable to reach Madras, and Mr. Judson 
was carried to a place three hundred miles from 
that citv, to which he was obliged to travel by land. 
Here he endeavoured to obtain a passage for Ran- 
goon but was unsuccessful; and he was detained at 
Madras, till July 20, when he sailed for Rangoon in 
an English ship. 

During his absence, very alarming incidents oc- 
curred at Rangoon, which threatened, for a while, 
to destroy the mission. Nothing, indeed, but the 
special providence of God, and the firmness of Mrs. 
Judson, prevented an abandonment of the station, 
which might have been final. Under date of Janu- 
ary 18, 1818, she thus wrote to Dr. Baldwin: 


‘We still live in a quiet manner, unmolested by 
government, or robbers. The Viceroy’s family treat 
us with respect and affection, now and then sending 
us an elephant, to accompany them m their excur- 
sions. Her Highness, the Vicereine, professes a 
particular regard for me, and IJ, in return, have pre- 
sented her with a translation of Matthew’s Gospel, 
a tract, and catechism, and have had two or three | 


MEMOIR OF MRS JUDSON. 169 


opportunities of conversing with her privately on 
the subject of religion. How much she reads in 
the former, or believes in the latter, I am unable to 
say; but neither produces any visible effect. She 
ordered the instructress of one of her daughters to 
give the catechism to her to commit to memory. 

“ January 30. The Burman Mr. Judson men- 
ioned sometime ago, as being the first serious inquire 
e:, and one who has excited the most hope, came 
to-day to the mission-house. It is now almosta 
year since he first came, and with much apparent 
anxiety inquired, ‘How long time will it take me to 
learn the religion of Jesus?? We have since fre 
quently inquired, but obtained little information res 
este him, until to-day. Soon after his first visit, 
e was appointed Governor of a cluster of villages 
situated on the Syrian river, in the country of Pegu. 

‘He has been at Rangoon but once since, and then 
on business by order of the Viceroy. and obliged to 
return immediately. 

‘<T asked him if he had become a disciple of Jesus 
Christ. He replied, ‘I have not yet, but Iam think- 
ing and reading in order to become one. I cannot 
yet destroy my old mind; for when I see a handsome 
patso, (a cloth the Burman men wear,) or a hana- 
some gownbown, (the handkerchief worn on the 
head,) I still desire them. ‘Tell the great teacher, 
when he returns, that I wish to see him, though | 
am not a disciple 0 Christ.? He requested the re- 
maining part of Matthew’s Gospel, also catechisms 
and tracts for his followers. I gave all of hts attend- 
ants tracts; on which he said to them, ‘’'Take and 
read them attentively, and when you have embraced 
the doctrines they contain, come here, and converse 
with the teacher.’ ” 


A letter, dated February 18, 1818, says: 


‘Tt is now four years and a half, since we took up 
wr residence in this spiritually benighted land, and 
. this day do we offer our thanks to God, for hay- 

15 


170 _ MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


ing brought and continued us here. To this day 
ean we testify that God is good; that he isa faith- 
ful, covenant-keepmg God, who is worthy of the en- 
tire trust and confidence of all his creatures. Never, 
for a moment, has he left us to feel, that our first 
views of the practicability of missions were visionary; 
consequently, we have been preserved from those 
distressing, agonizing feelings, resulting from regret 
and disappointment in a darling object. On the 
contrary, we feel that missions to the heathen are 
not only practicable, but that the very blood of their 
souls will be required at the hand of those Christians, 
who neglect to make exertions to send the Gospel 
among them.” 


Mrs. Judson thus describes the events to which, 
in the preceding page, we alluded: 


‘Three months of Mr. Judson’s absence had 
nearly expired, and we had begun to look for his 
return, when a native boat arrived, twelve days 
from Chittagong, bringing the distressing intelli- 
gence, that neither Mr. Judson nor the vessel had 
been heard of at that port. I should not have given 
so much credit to this report, as to have allowed its 
harassing my feelings, had it not been corroborated 
by communications from my friends in Bengal, 
which arrived just at this time From the circum 
stance, that the vessel had not reached the port of 
destination, I knew not what conclusion to draw. 
Hope, at times, suggested the idea that the ship’s 
course might have been altered. that she might yet 
be safe; but despondency more frequently strove to 
convince me that all was lost. ‘Thus was I, for 
four months, in that agonizing state of suspense, 
which is frequently more oppressive than the most 
dreaded certainty. ; 

‘¢ 'T'wo or three days after the arrival of the above 
intelligence, Mr. Hough received an order, couched 
in the most menacing language, to appear immedi- 
ately at the court-house, to give an ac ount of him 


MEMOIR OF MKS. JUDSON. 171 


sell ‘This, so unlike any message we had ever 
before received from government, spread consterna- 
tion and alarm among our teachers, domestics, and 
adherents; some of whom followed Mr. Hough at a 
distance, and heard the appalling words, from some 
of the petty officers, that a royal order had arrived, 
for the banishment of all foreign teachers. As it 
was latewhen Mr. Hough arrived at the court-house, 
he was merely ordered to give security for his appear- 
ance at an early hour on the approaching day, when, 
to use their own unfeeling language, ‘If he did not 
tell all the truth relative to his situation in the coun- 
try, they would write with his heart’s blood.’ 

** Our embarrassments at this period, were great- 
ly increased by the circumstance, that the Viceroy 
and family, who had always been our steady friends, 
had been recently recalled to Ava; and the present 
Viceroy, with whom we had but a slight acquaint- 
ance, had left his family at the capital. Mr. Hough 
was not sufficiently acquainted with the language, 
to allow his’appealing in person to the Viceroy; and 
as it is not.customary for females to appear at hits 
court, in the absence of the Vicereine, we had 
nothing before us but the gloomy prospect of being 
obliged to submit to all those evils, in the power of 
petty officers to inflict, when unprotected by higher 
authority. 

“The following days, Friday and Saturday, Mr. 
Hough was detained at the court-house, and under 
the necessity of answering, through an interpreter, 
the most trivial questions; such as, what were the 
names of his parents, how many suits of clothes he 
had, &c. all which were written down in the most 
forma] manner imaginable. The court would not 
aliow his retiring for any refreshment; and this, 
together with several other petty grievances, con 
vinced us that it was their object to harass and 
distress us as much as possible: feeling safe i the 
idea that circumstances were such that we could not 
apneal to the Viceroy.” 


172 MEMOIR OF MRS- JUDSON 


It appeared, in the issue, that the object cf the 
Burman officers was, to extort money from Mr. 
Hough. Anorder had been received from the King, 
that the Portuguese priests, three in number, should 
eave the country. To ascertain who they were, 
the Viceroy had issued an order that all the foreign 
priests should appear at the court-house, not intend- 
Ing that any but the Portuguese should be examined, 
further than to ascertain that they were not Portu- 
guese. Mr. H. and Mrs. J. resolved to appeal to 
the Viceroy, and Mrs. J.’s teacher drew up a 
petition, which she herself presented, with some of 
the feelings and of the intrepidity of Esther. The 
Viceroy immediately commanded, that Mr. Hough 
should receive no further molestation, 

About this time, that dreadful disorder, the cholera 
morbus, began to rage among the natives. It was 
in the hottest season of the year, and Rangoon was 
soon filled with consternation. The natives attrib- 
uted the disease to evil spirits, who were traversing 
the streets; and they endeavoured to expel them, by 
making a noise. Cannons were accordingly fired, 
and every one began beating his house with clubs 
and other instruments of uproar. But the disease 
continued to make frightful ravages. By the bles- 
sing of God, however, not a single individual, on 
the mission premises, died. ‘There was, at this 
time, too, a report of war between England and 
Burmah, and the English vessels were hastening to 
depart. It was now six months since Mr. Judson 
had been heard from. In these distressing circum- 
stances, Mrs. Judson wrote toa friend, under date 
of July 2: 


*‘Mr. Hough, for sometime past, has heen 
desirous to have Mrs. Hough, myself, and his chil- 
dren, go to Bengal. But I have ever felt resolved 
not to make any movement until I hear from Mr. 
Judson. Withina few days, however, some circum- 
stances have occurred, which have induced me to 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON, 173 


make preparations for a voyage. nere is but one 
remaining ship ia the river, and if an embargo 13 
laid on English ships, it will be impossible for Mr. 
Judson (if he is yet alive) to return to this place. 
But the uncertainty of meeting him in Bengal, and 
the possibility of his arriving in my absence, cause 
me to make preparations with a heavy heart. 
Sometimes I feel inclined to remain here, alone, and 
hazard the consequences. I should certainly conclude 
on this step, if any probability existed of Mr. Jud- 
son’s return. This mission has never appeared in 
so low a state as at the present time. It seems now 
entirely destroyed, as we all expect to embark for 
Bengal in a day or two. Alas! alas! how changed 
our prospects since Mr. Judson left us. How dark, 
how intricate the providence which now surrounds 
us! Yet it becomes us to be still, and know that he 
- is God, who has thus ordered our circumstances. 

“ July 14. Alone, my dear friends, in this great 
’ house, without an individual, excepting my little 
girl and Burmans, I take my pen to relate the 
strange vicissitudes through which I have passed 
within a few days. 

‘¢ On the 5th of this month, I embarked with Mr. 
Hough and family for Bengal, having previously dis- 
posed of what I could not take with me. I had en- 
gaged Mr. Judson’s teacher to accompany me, that 
in case of meeting him in Bengal, he could go on 
with his Burman studies. But the teacher, fearing 
the difficulties arising from his being a Burman, 
broke his engagement, and refused to-go. My dis- 
inclination to proceed in the course commenced, lad 
mcreased to such a degree, that [was on the point 
of giving up the voyage mysell; but my passage was 
paid, my baggage on board, and I knew not how to 
separate mysell’ from the rest of the mission family, 
"he vessel, however, was several days in going 
down the river; and when on the point of putting 
out to sea, the captain and officers ascertained she 
was in a dangerous state, in consequence of having 

15% 


174 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


been improperly loaded, and that she must be de- 
tained for a day or two at the place in which she 
then lay. I immediately resolved on giving up the 
voyage, and returning to town, Accordingly the 
captain sent up a boat with me, and engaged to for- 
ward my baggage the next day. I reached town 
in the evening—spent the night at the house of the 
only remaining Englishman in the place, and to-day 
have come out to the mission-house, to the great joy 
of all the Burmans left onour premises. Mr. Hough 
and his family will proceed, and they kindly and 
affectionately urge my return. I know I am sur- 
rounded by dangers on every hand, and expect to 
see much anxiety and distress; but at present I am 
tranquil, and intend to make an effort to pursue 


my studies as formerly, and leave the event with 
God.” 


Thus did this noble minded woman resolve to re- 
main alone at Rangoon, and confront all the perils 
which might beset her; although it was entirely un- 
certain whether her husband was yet alive. The 
event justified her courage, and rewarded her con 
stancy. 

In a few days, Mr. Judson returned to Rangoon 
and the apprehensions of his wife were at once dis- 
pelled. ‘The vessel in which Mr. and Mrs. Hough 
had taken passage, was detained several weeks; but 
they finally sailel for Bengal, carrying with them 
the greater partofthe printing apparatus. 

In April, 1315, Messrs. Colman and Wheelock, 
with their wives, arrived at Calcutta, from Boston, 
after a pleasant voyage, during which their prayers 
and zealous instructions were made instrumental, by 
the Holy Spirit, in the convers‘on of several of the 
seamen. ‘They sailed from Calcutta, August 19, for 
Rangoon, where they arrived, September 19, a few 
weeks after the return of Mr. Judson. ‘Thus did 

he clouds, which had recently hung over the mis- 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 175 


sion, disperse; and the Missionaries felt the trutk 
and beauty of the sentiment: 


“ The Lord can clear the darkest skies, 
Can give us day for night ; 

Make drops of sacred sorrow rise 
To river of delight.” 


—>— 


CHAPTER X. 


Mr. Judson commences Preaching—First Convert baptized— 
Death of Mr. Wheelock, 


Tue mission had now been established several 
years, and something had been done, by private 
’ conversation, and through the press, to convey the 
knowledge of salvation to the natives. But it was 
thought that the time had arrived for more public 
and enlarged efforts. Mr, Judson was sufficiently 
master of the language to preach publicly. Tracts 
and portions of the Scriptures were ready to be 
placed in the hands of inquirers. It was, therefore, 
resolved to erect a small -building, (called a zayat) 
adjoining. the mission premises, near a great road 
leading to one of the principal pagodas, and conse- 
quently much thronged, Here it was designed to 
preach the Gospel, and to converse with any per- 
sons who might choose to visit it. This was a haz- 
ardous attempt. ‘The Missionaries had remainea 
unmolested, because they had lived retired, and had 
been able to obtain the favor of the Viceroy. But 
a public attempt to preach the Gospel, and to con- 
vert the natives to Christianity, was likely to attract 
the attention and displeasure of the government. 
It was well known, that a renunciation of the estab- 
lished religion would be punished with death, But 
the Missionaries resolved to make the attempt, and 
trust in the Lord for protection. 


176 MEMOIR GF MRS. JUDSON, 


- Messrs. Colman and Wheelock immeaietely com: 
menced the study of the language, but their health 
was so impaired, particularly that of Mr. W. that 
sheir progress was slow and limited. 

In April, 1819, the zayat was openec , and a new 
era in the mission commenced. Mr. Judson says. 


*¢ To-day the building of the zayat being suffi- 
ciently advanced for the purpose, I called together a 
few people that live around us, and commenced 
public worship in the Burman language. I say 
commenced, for though I have frequently read and 
discoursed to the natives, I have never before con- 
ducted a course of exercises which deserved the 
name of public worship, according to the usual ac- 
ceptation of that phrase among Christians; and 
though I began to preach the Gospel, as soon as I 
could speak intelligiblvy, I have thought it hardly 
becoming to apply the term preaching, (since it has 
acquired an appropriate meaning in modern use,) to 
my imperfect, desultory exhortations and conversa 
tions. But I hope, though with fear and trembling, 
that I have now commenced a course of public wor- 
ship and regular preaching. 

“The congregation to-day consisted of fiftven 
persons only, besides children, Much disorder and 
inattention prevailed, most of them not having been 
accustomed to attend Burman worship. May the 
Lord grant his blessing on attempts made in great 
weakness, and under great disadvantages; and all 
the glory will be his. 

“ April 6. This evening I went, for the second 
time, to heara popular Burman preacher. On our 
arrival, we found a zayat, in the precincts of one of 
the most celebrated pagodas, lighted up, and the 
floor spread with mats, In the centre was a frame 
raised about eighteen inches from the ground, where 
the preacher, on his arrival, seated himself. Ife 
appeared to be about forty-five vears old, of very 
pleasar.t countenance, and harmonious speech. He 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. td 


was once a priest. but is now a layman. The peo 

ple, as they came in, seated themselves on the mats, 
the men on one side of the house, and the women 
on the other. It was an undistinguished day, and 
the congregation was very small, not more than one 
hundred, When we entered, some said, ‘ There 
come some wild foreigners;? but when we sat down 
properly, and took off our shoes, they began to say, 
‘No, they are not wild, they are civilized.? Some. 
recognised me, and said to another, ‘It is the En- 
glish teacher? a name by which T am commonly 
known. The preacher soon took notice of us, entered 
int some conversation, invited us to visit him, and 
so on; but on learning that | was a Missionary, or, 
in their idiom, a religion-making-teacher, his coun- 
tenance fell, and he said nomore. ‘The people being 
now convened, one, appointed for the purpose, called 
- three times for silence and attention. Fach one 
then took the flowers and leaves which had been 
previously distributed, and placing them between 
his fingers, raised them to his head, and in that re- 
spectful posture, remained motionless, until the ser- 
vice was closed. This ceremony we of course 
declined. When all things were properly adjusted, 
the preacher closed his eyes, and commenced the 
exercise, which consisted in repeating a portion from 
their sacred writings. His subject was the conversion 
of the two prime disciples of Gaudama, and their 
subsequent promotion and glory. His oratory 1 
found to be entirely different from all that we call 
oratory. At first, he seems dull and monotonous; 
but presently, his soft, mellifluent tones win their 
way into the heart, and lull the soul into that state 
of calmness and serenity, which, toa Burman mind, 
somewhat resembles the boasted perfection of their 
saints of old. His discourse continued about half 
an hour; and at the close, the whole assembly burst 
out into a short prayer, after which all rose and 
retired. ‘his man exhibits twice every evening, 
iu :“*rent places. Indeed he is the only popula? 


178 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


lay preacher in the place. As for the priests, they 
preach on special occasions only, when they are 
drawn frum their seclusion and inactivity, by the 
solicitations of their adherents. 

“‘ April 25. Lord’s-day. Yesterday we comr.eted 
the zayat, set up the front stairs, and laid open the 
entrance from the road. This morning I took my 
seat on the floor in the open porch, under some 
solemn impression of the great responsibility attached 
to my new mode of life. cr 

‘‘In the forenoon the members of the mission 
family came over to have our usual worship, having 
concluded to hold it for a few Sundays in the zayat, 
rather than in the house, in order to give the Bur- 
mans some idea of the place. 

“In the afternoon our people came together, and 
several came in from the road, so that we had an as- 
sembly of between twenty-five and thirty, besides 
children. At the close of the service, I distributed 
several tracts to the strangers. 

“April 27. One of the most attentive of the 
hearers last night, came again, with a petty officer 
from another village. ‘They staid most of the day, 
and received a great dea) of instruction; and leh 
with the promise that they would come as often as 
the distance of their residence would permit. Con- 
siderably encuuraged to-day with the hope that God 
Is preparing a people in this benighted land. 

«©28, Nothing interesting through the day. At 
night, encountered a bitter opposer: he had visited 
Bengal, and some foe to missions had poisoned his 
mind; he manifested a most virulent spirit. I felt 
that he would most gladly be foremost in destroying 
us. But through divine grace I was enabled to treat 
him with meekness and gentleness, and he finally 
left me politely. He appeared to be rich, and had 
several followers.” 


Mrs. Judson thus describes the zayat, and the 
method of conducting the school: 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON, 179 


“The zayat is situated thirty or forty rods from 
the mission-house, and in dimensions is twenty-seven 
by eighteen feet. It is raised four feet from the 
ground, and is divided into three parts. The first 
division is laid entirely open to the road, without 
doors, windows, or a partition in the front side, and 
takes up a third part of the whole building. It is 
made of bamboo and thatch, and is the place where 
Mr. Judson sits all the day long, and says to the 
tals by, ‘Ho! every one that thirsteth,? &c. 

he next, and middle division, is a large airy room, 
with four doors and four windows, opening: in oppo- 
site directions; made entirely of boards, and is white- 
washed, to distinguish it from the other zayats 
around us. 

“In this room we have public worship in Burman 
on the Sabbath; and in the middle of which I am 
- now situated at my writing table, while six of the 
male scholars are at one end, each with his torch and 
black board, over which he is industriously bending, 
and emitting the curious sounds of the language. 
The third, and last division, is only an entry way, 
which opens into the garden, leading to the mission 
house. : 

“In this apartment, all the women are seated, with 
their lights and black boards, much in the same po- 
sition and employment as the men. The black board, 
on which all the Burmans learn to read and write, 
answers the same purpose as our slates. ‘They are 
about a yard in length, made black with charcoal 
and the juice of a leaf; and letters are clearly imprin- 
ted with a species of white stone, a little similar to 
our slate pencils. A lesson is written out on this 
board by an instructer; and when the scholar is per 
fect master of it, it is erased, and a new one written. 
The Burmans are truly systematic in their elemen- 
tary instructions, and a scholar is not considered 
qualified to read without spelling, until he has a per- 
fect knowledge of all the various combinations of 
‘etters,”’ 


1380 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


At this time Mrs. Judson wrote the folluwing 
letter to her sisters: 

* Rangoon, April 29, 1819. 
‘My dear Sister M. 

« Being left alone in my room this afternoon, | 
know not how I can spend it more pleasantly than in 
Writing to a dear, far-distant sister, whom I never 
expect to meet again until we arrive at our Father’s 
house in heaven. ‘Though it is seven years since I 
left my native land and scenes of my earliest years, 
they are as fresh in my recollection as though it 
were but yesterday; and the wound then inflicted 
every now and then opens and bleeds afresh. I be- 
lieve very few females who have left their native 
country, have had it in their power to make such 
sacrifices as myself. When I think of my pleasant 
home, and dear Bradford friends; the flatterin 
prospects and sources of enjoyment which I left, 
am olten led to wonder how I was ever made willing 
to forsake them, and deliberately embrace a life 
replete with vicissitudes as the present. But, my 
dear sister Mary, a little sacrifice for the cause of 
Christ is not worth naming; and I feelit a privilege, 
of which Iam entirely undeserving, to have had it 
in my power to sacrifice my all for Him who hesita- 
ted not to lay down his life for sinners. I rejoice 
that I had a pleasant home, dear friends, and flat- 
tering prospects, to relinquish, and that once in my 
lite [had an opportunity of manifesting my little 
attachment to the cause of Christ. I know you 
often wish to know certainly, whether I still approve 
of the first step I took in the missionary cause; and 
whether, if {had the choice again to make, with 
my present knowledge and views of the subject, I 
- should make the same. Well, I frankly acknowledge 
that I should do just the same, with this exception; 
that IT should commence such a life, with much more 
fear and trembling, on account of my unfitness: and 
should almost hesitate whether one so vile, so poors 
ly jualified, ought to occupy a sphere of so mucn. 


MEMOIR OP MRs. JUDSON. 181 


usefulness. I do at times feel almost ready to sink 
down in despair, when I realize the responsibility of 
my situation, and witness my short-comings in duty. 
If I have grown any in grace since I left America, 
it has consisted entirely in an increasing knowledge 
of my unspeakably wicked heart. As to my real 
religious enjoyment, I think, generally speaking, I 
have not experienced more than when in America. 
I do hope, however, vile as I am, to obtain an in- 
heritance in that better world, where Jesus has 
prepared mansions for his followers, and will intro- 
duce them there himself, sprinkled with his blond, 
and clothed in his righteousness. 

“Relative to the mission, it is gaming ground 
slowly, but I hopesurely. We have a place erected 
for public worship, where Mr. Judson and myself 
spend the day in conversing with all who call; he 
. with the men, and I with the women. On the 
Sabbath we have regular public worship in the 
Burman language. ‘The building is situated on one 
of the public roads; which, on account of its being 
Jined on both sides with pagodas, is called Pagoda 
road. 

“This last week has been a very interesting one 
to us, on account of having had several very hope- 
ful inquirers, who really appeared to be a prepared 
people for the Lord. I have a meeting every Wed- 
nesday evening with the females, many of whom 
appear attentive and inquisitive. 

“‘[ have been attending to the Siamese laaguage 
for a year anda half. It is a language easy of ac- 
quisition, when one has a teacher he understands, 
I have not found it so difficult as the Burman; but 
tt has been owing, probably, to the teacher’s being 
a Burman, as well as Siamese scholar. There are 
several thousands of Siamese who live in Rangoon, 
and who speak and write the pure language of Siam. 
With the assistance cf the teacher, I have made a 
translation of the Burman catechism, tract, and 
Matthew. I have algo, nearly completed a transla 


182 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


tion of une of their celebrated books into English 
It is an account of the incarnation of one of their 
deities, when he existed in the form of a great ele- 
plant.” 


The 30th of April, 1819, is a memorable day in 
the history of this Mission. On that day, Moung 
Nau,* the first convert, made his first visit to the 
zayat. He was then silent and reserved, and excit- 
ed little attention or hope. But the next day, and on 
several succeeding days, he repeated his visit. Mr. 

. Judson says in his journal, May 5: 


*“Moung Nau has been with me several hours. 
T begin to think that the grace of God has reached 
his heart. He expresses sentiments of repentance 
for his sins, and faith in the Saviour. The sub- 
stance of his profession is, that from all the dark- 
ness, and uncleanness, and sins of his whole life, he 
has found no other Saviour but Jesus Christ; no- 
where else can he look for salvation; and therefore 
he proposes to adhere to Christ, and worship him 
all his iife long. 

‘It seems almost too much to believe, that God 
has begun to manifest his grace to the Burmans; but 
this day I could not resist the delightful conviction, 
that this is really the case. Praise AND GLORY BE 
TO HIS NAME FOREVERMORE. Amen. 

‘¢ May 6. Moung Nau was again with me a 
great part of the day. He appears to be slowly 
growing in religious knowledge, and manifests a 
teachable, humble spirit, ready to believe all that 
Christ has said, and obey all that he has commanded. 

‘¢ He is thirty-five years old, no family, middling 
‘abilities, quite poor, obiiged to work for his living, 
and therefore his coming day after day to hear the 


*Tt may be well here to state, that the Burmans use a number 
of titles, like our Mr. Miss and Mrs, to designate individuals, with 
reference to their age: Moung denotes a young or middle aged 
man: Ko, an elderly man; Ov, an old man; Mee, a girl; Mah, a 
young or middle aged woman ; Mai, a woman of some respect 
ability ; May, an old woman. 4 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 183 


truth, affords stronger evidence that it has iaxen 
hold of his mind. May the Lord graciously lead 
his dark mind into all the truth, and cause him to 
cleave inviolably to the blessed Saviour. 

s°§, Burman day of worship. Thronged with 
visiters through the day, Had more or less compas 
ny, without intermission, for about eight hours. 
Several neard much of the Gospel, and engaged to 
come again. Moung Nau was with me a great 
part of the day, and assisted me much in explaining 
things to new comers. ‘Towards night, a man 
came in, by name of Moung Shwa Oo, whom I 
think it time to mention particularly, as he has vis- 
ited me several times, and though, like Moung Nau, 
apparently backward at first, he appears to be really 
thoughtful) He is.a young man of twenty-seven, 
of very pleasant exterior, and evidently in good cir- 
cumstances. 

** May 9. Lord’s-day. Moung Shwa Oo came 
in the morning, and staid through the whole day. 
Only two or three of all I conversed with yesterday 
came again—Had, however, an asseubly of thirty— 
After worship, some warm disputation. I begin to 
feel that the Burmans cannot stand before the 
truth. In the course of conversation, Moung Nau 
declared himself a disciple of Christ, in presence of a 
considerable number; and even Moung Shwa Oo 
appeared to incline the same way. 

“11, Had more or less company from morning 
till night. Among the rest, Moung Shwa Oo, and 
two or three others, who appear to be pretty well 
satisfied that the Boodhist religion has no founda 
tion. Conversation was very animated, and some- 
what encouraging; but [ wanted to see more seriouse 
ness, and more anxiety to be saved {rom sin, 

“ H[eard much to-day of the danger of introducing 
a new religion. All agreed in opinion, that the 
King would cut off those who embraced it, being a 
King who could not bear that his subjects should 
jiffer in sentiment from himself, and who has, for a 


a 


184 MEMUIR OF MRS, JUDSON, 


long time, persecuted the priests of the established 
religion of the empire, because they would not sanc- 
tion all his innovations. Those who seemed most 
favorably disposed, whispered me, that I had better 
not stay in Rangoon and talk to common prope: 
but go directly to the ‘lord of life and death’ Ifhe 
approved of the religion, it would spread rapidly; 
but, in the present state of things, nobody would 
dare to prosecute their inquiries, with the fear of 
the King before their eyes. They brought forwaré 
the case of the Kolans, a sect of Burmans, whe 
have been proscribed and put to death under severa 

reigns. I tried to set them right in some points. 
and encouraged them to trust in the care of an Al 

mighty Saviour; but they speak low, and look arouna 
fearfully, when they mention the name of the ‘ owt 
ev of the sword.’ 

*°18. Moung Shwa Doan, a man who has at- 
tended two Sundays, and made some occasional vis- 
its, was with me several hours. He professes +o 
have felt the truth of this religion, ever since he 
first heard about it, and now desires to be a disciple 
of Christ. He has obtained, I find, esnsiderable 
knowledge of the Christian system; buv% degs not ap- 
pear to have much sense of his own sina. May the 
Spirit teach him what man cannot 

** May 21. Had several attent.v. hearers; among 
the rest Moung A. who says that ue good news has 
taken hold of his mind. I have heen so frequently 
disappointed in visiters, who appeared promising the 
first time, but never came again, that I have lost all 
credit in early professions; yet I cannot but hope 
well of this man, especially as Moung Nau appear- 
ed to like him better than any other inquirer. 

* June 6. Lord’s-day. After partaking of the 
Lord’s supper in the evening, we read and consider- 
ed the following letter of Moung Nau, which he 
wrote of his own accord: 3 

‘IT, Moung Nau, the constant recipient of your ex- 
cellent favor, approach your feet Whereas my 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 185 


lords intee have come to the country of Burmah, 
not for the purpose of trade, but to preach the reli- 
gion of Jesus Christ, the Son of the eternal God, I, 
having heard and understood, am with a joyful 
mind filled with love. 

ST believe that the Divine Son, Jesus Christ, suf- 
fered death in the place of men, to atone for their 
sins. Like a heavy laden man, I feel my sins are 
very many. The punishment of my sins I deserve 
to suffer. Since it is so, do you, sirs, consider that 
I, taking refuge in the merits of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and receiving baptism, in order to become 
his disciple, shall dwell one with yourselves, a band 
of brothers, in the happiness of heaven, and there- 
fore grant me the ordinance of baptism.* It is 
through the grace of Jésus Christ, that you, sirs, 
have come by ship from one country and continent 
to another, and that we have met together. I pray 
my lords three, that a suitable day may be appoint- 
ed, and that I may receive the ordinance of baptism. 

‘ Moreover, as it is only since I have met with 
you, sirs, that I have known about the eternal God, 
I venture to pray that you will still unfold to me 
the religion of. God, that my old disposition may he 
destroyed, and my new disposition improved.’ 

“We have all, for sometime, been satisfied con- 
cerning the reality of his religion, and therefore 
voted to receive him into church fellowship, on his 
being baptized, and proposed next Sunday for ad- 
ministering the ordinance. ° 

“ June 20. Lord’s-day. ‘To-day Moung Shwa 
Doan appeared again, after an absence of several 
weeks, and a little revived our hopes concerning him. 
Several whom I have particularly mentioned, have 
discontinued their visits, though I am satisfied that 


*« At the time of writing this, not having heard much of ba 
tism, he seems to have ascribed an undue efficacy to the ordi- 
mance. He has since corrected his error; but the translates 
thinks it the most fair and impartial, to give the letter just as it 
was written at first.”’ 

16* 


, 


186 MEMUIR OF MRS, JUDSON, 


they are convinced of the falsity of the Burman re 
tigion, and ofthe truth of the Christian. I cannot 
possibly penetrate their motives. Whether, after 
several visits, they meet with some threatening sug- 
gestion, that awakens their fears of persecution, or 
whether, at a certain stage in their inquiries, they 
get such an insight into the Gospel, as arouses the 
enmity of the carnal heart, Tam not able from my 
experience hitherto to ascertain.” 


During the period embraced in the preceding ex- 
tracts, they had been annoyed by vexatious taxes, 
which they were forced to pay. In June, the news 
arrived that the King had died, or (as the Burmans 
expressed it,) “chad gone up to amuse himself in the 
celestial regions.””? His grandson succeeded to the 
throne, after putting to death one of his uncles, and 
imprisoning another, who soon alter died. Suchare 
the usual accompaniments of the accession of a new 
monarch in oriental countries, ‘ 

* June 28. Had some encouraging conversation 
with Moung Thah-lah, a young man who has been 
living in our yard several months. He had lately 
made me several visits at the zayat, and appeared 
very thoughtful and teachable. ‘To-day, on being 
asked the state of his mind, he replied with some 
feeling, that he and all men were sinners, and expos- 
ed to future punishment; that, according to the 
Boodhist system, there was no way of pardon; but 
that according to the religion which I taught, there 
was not only a way of pardon, but a way of enjoying 
endless happitess in heaven; and that, therefore, he 
wanted to believe in Christ. Istated to him, as usu- 
al, that he must think much on the love of Christ, 
and pray to God for an enlightened mind and new 
heart, and then gave him a form of prayer suited to 
his case, 

‘In the evening female meeting, his sister, Mah 
Baik, whose husband also lives in our yard, manifest- 


MEMUIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 187 


ad considerable feeling, (especially when Mus. Jud- 
son prayed with her alone,) and expressec strong 
desires to obtain an interest in the Saviour.” 


On the 27th of June, 1819, the first baptism oc 
curred in the Burman empire. Jt was a day of un 
utterable joy to the Missionaries, who had so long 
been ‘‘yoing forth weeping, bearing precious seed.” 


‘* June 27, Lord’s-day. There were several stran 
gers present at worship. After the usual course, [ 
called Moung Nau before me, read and commented 
on an appropriate portion of Scripture, asked him 
several questions concerning his faith, hope, and love, 
and made the baptismal prayer, having concluded to 
have all the preparatory exercises done in the zayat. 
We then proceeded to a large pond in the vicinity 
the bank of which is graced with an enormous im 
age of Gaudama, and there administered baptism te 
the first Burman convert. O, may it prove the be 
ginning of a series of baptisms in the Burman em 
pire, which shall continue in uninterrupted succes- 
sion to the end of time! 

** July 4. Lord’s-day. Wehave had the pleasure 
of sitting down, for the first time, at the Lord's 
table, with a converted Burman; and it was my 
privilege,—a privilege to which I have been looking 
forward with desire for many years,—to administer 
the Lord’s supper in two languages.” 


The power and grace of God thus displayed in the 
conversion of one Burman, the first who ever ven 
tured publicly to profess the religion of Christ, afford- 
ed the strongest eviderice of his approbation of the 
mission; and ministered the most cheering encour« 
agement to the Missionaries. ‘The new convert be 
came a valuable assistant to Mr. Judson, and showed 
a strong desire to communicate to others the know- 
ledge of that Saviour, who had become precious to 
his own heart. Mrs. Judson says, in a etter, dated 
June 3: 


188 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


sLattle did I think, when I last wrote, that I 
should so soon have the joyful intelligence to come 
municate, that one Burman has embraced the Chris- 
tian religion, and given good evidence of being a 
true disciple of the dear Redeemer. This event, 
this single trophy of victorious grace, has filled our 
hearts with sensations hardly to be conceived by 
Christians in Christian countries. This circum- 
stance has convinced us, that God can and does 
operate on the minds of the most dark and ignorant; 
and that he makes his own truths, his own words, 
the instrument of operation. It serves, also, to 
encourage us to hope, that the Lord has other cho- 
sen ones in this place. As Mr. Judson has given 
some account of the first impressions of this man, 
and as I have had him particularly under my in- 
struction since his conversion, I will give you some 
of his remarks in his own words, with which you 
will be much interested. ‘In our religion, there is 
no way to escape the punishment due to sin; but 
according to the religion of Christ, he himself has 
died in order to deliver his disciples. I wish all the 
Burmans would become his disciples; then we should 
meet together as you do in your country; then we 
should all be happy together in heaven. How great 
are my thanks to Jesus Christ for sending teachers 
to this country! and how great are my thanks to 
the teachers for coming! Had they never come and 
built that zayat, I should never have heard of Christ 
and the true God. I mourn that so much of my 
life passed away before I heard of this religion. 
How much I have lost!’ It is peculiarly interesting 
to see with what eagerness he drinks in the truths 
from the Scmptures. A few days ago, I was read- 
ing with him Christ’s sermon on the mount. He 
was deeply impressed, and unusually solemn. * These 
words,’ said he, ‘take hold on my very heart; they 
make me tremble. Here God commands us to de 
everything that is good in secret, not to be seen of 
men. How unlike our religion is this! When Bur 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 189 


mans make offerings to the pagodas, they make a 
great noise with drums and musical instruments, that 
others may see how good they are. But this relig- 
ion makes the mind fear God; it makes 1t of its 
own accord fear sin.? When I read this passage, 
Lay not up for yourselves treasures, §c. he said, 
‘ What words are these! It does not mean that we 
shall take the silver and gold from this world and 
carry them to heaven; but that by becoming -the 
disciples of Jesus, we shall live in such a manner as 
to enjoy heaven when we die.2 We have taken 
him into our employ for the present as a copyist, 
though our primary object was to have him near us, 
that we might have a better opportunity to know 
more of him before he received baptism, and of im 
parting to him more instruction than occasional 
visits could afford. Mornings and evenings he 
spends in reading the Scriptures, and when we all 
meet in the hall for family worship, he comes and 
sits with us; though he cannot understand, he says 
he can think of God in his heart. 

“ June 4. I have just had a very interesting meet- 
mg with the women, fifteen in number. ‘They ap- 
peared unusually solemn, and I could not help hoping 
that the Holy Spirit was hovering over us, and 
would ere long descend, and enlighten their precious 
immortal souls. ‘Their minds seem to be already 
prepared to embrace the truth, as their prejudices 
in favor of the Burman religion are apparently de- 
stroyed. They also appear to be convinced, that 
the atonement for sin provided in the Gospel is suit- 
able for persons in their situation. But they fre- 
quently say, the great difficulty in the way of their 
becoming Christians is, the sinfulness of their hearts, 
which they cannot yet overcome. O for the influ- 
ences of that Spirit, which can alone effect the mighty 
change!” 


The operations of the mission thus proceeded, 
with many encouraging indicatiors of divine favor, 


190 MEMOIR OF MRS. .UDSON, 


and of the »ffect of truth on the minds of several of 
the Burmans. Moung Thah-lah, Moung E, Mah 
Baik and others, appeared to be seriously intent on 
the salvation of their souls. 

In July, Mr. Judson enlarged and revised the 
tract for a new edition, and added to it several 
prayers. Its title was, ** A View of the Christian 
Religion, in four parts, Historical, Practical, Pre- 
ceptive, and Devotional.” It was sent to Serampore 
to Mr. Hough, and an edition of five thousand cop- 
ies was printed. 

On the 7th of August, Mr. Wheelock embarked 
for Bengal, in so low astate of health, that no hopes 
were entertained of his return. A few days after 
he sailed, a violent fever deprived him of his reason, 
and in a paroxysm of delirium, he plunged into the 
sea, and was drowned, the vessel sailing with such 
velocity, that no effort could be made to save him 
Thus early did his Master call him away from the 
earth. ‘The desire of his heart to visit the heathen 
was gratified; but he was not permitted to do any- 
thing, to lead them to the Saviour whom he loved. 
Mysterious, indeed, are the ways of God. Mrs. 
Wheelock, who accompanied him on the voyage, 
proceeded to Bengal. The Board offered to defray 
the expenses of her return to this country; but she 
preferred to remain in Calcutta, hoping that she 
might be useful to the heathen. She has since been 
married to Mr, Jones, of Calcutta. 

Several visiters attended occasionally at the zayat, 
but we cannot take special notice of any others, than 
those who became real believers in the Saviour, and 
were baptized. 


* August 22, Lord’s-day. Two of the adherents 
of the Mangen teacher, the popular preacher that I 
mentioned sometime ago, were present at worship. 
T had much conversation with them; in the course 
of which, I so clearly refuted their system, in two or 
three ins‘ances, that they could not refrain from an 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 19) 


involuntary expression of assent and apprebation. 
They directly said, however, that it was impcssible 
for them to think of embracing a new religion. 1 
never saw more clearly the truth of our Saviour?s 
words, Ye wili nol come unto me. 

‘© After worship, had another conversation with 
Moung Thalh-lah. He hopes that heis a disciple of 
Jesus Christ in heart; but wants to know whether 
a profession of religion is indispensable to sa'vation, 
He fears the persecution that may hereafter come on 
those who forsake the established religion of the 
empire. I gave ‘iim such explanation as I thought 
suitable, and left him, with the solemn considera- 
tion, that unless he loved Christ above his own life, 
he did not love him sincerely, and ought not to hope 

_ that he is interested in his redemption, 

‘* His sister Mah Baik is in a very similar state. 
She has been particularly attentive and solemn in 
her appearance for sometime past. 

*©94, Another conversation with Moung Thah- 
lah, which at length forces me to admit the convic- 
tion that he is a real convert; and I venture to set 
him down the second disciple of Christ among the 
Burmans. Heappears to haveall the characteristics 
of a new born soul; and though rather timid in re- 
gard to an open profession, has, I feel satisfied, that 
love to Christ, which will increase and bring him 
forward in due time.” 


The 26th of August was made memorable by the 
first visit of Moung Shwa-gnong, a learned teacher 
of considerable distinction. He appeared to be half 
leist and half skeptic. 


* Aucust 27, The teacher Moung Snwa-gnong 
came aga.n, and staid from noon till quite dark, 
We conversed incessantly the whole time; but I fear 
that no real impression is made on his proud, skepti- 
cal heart. He, however, promised to pray to the 
eternal God, through Jesus Christ, and appeared at 


92 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


times to be in deep thought. He is a man of very 
superior argumentative powers. His conversation 
would probably shake the faith of many. 

‘* Jug. 81. A man, by the name of Moung Ing, 
has visited the zayat five or six days in succession. 
At first, a variety of other company prevented my 
attending much to him, and he cunversed chiefly 
with Moung Nau, and employed himself in reading 
Matthew. He once told Moung Nau, that he had 
long been looking after the true religion, and was 
ready to wish that he had been born a brute, rather 
than to die in delusion and go to hell. Sunday I 
conversed with him largely, and his attention, du- 
ring worship, was very close and solemn. ‘To-day 
he has made me half inclined to believe that a work 
of grace is begunin his soul. He says that he for- 
. merly had some idea of an eternal God, from his moth- 
>r,'who was christened a Roman Catholic, in conse- 
quence of her connexion with a foreigner; but that 
the idea was never rooted in his mind, until he fell 
in with the zayat. Withina few days he has begun 
to pray to this God. He is quite sensible of his sins 
and of the utter inefficiency of the Boodhist religion; 
but is yet in the dark concerning the way of salva 
tion, and says that he wants to know more of Christ, 
that he may love him more. Lord Jesus, give him 
the saving knowledge of thine adorable self! 

‘* September 8, A great crowd of company through 
the*whole day; the teacher, Moung Shwa-gnong, 
from ten o’clock till quite dark, with several of his 
adherents. Heis acomplete Proteus in religion, and 
I never know where to find him. We went over a 
vast deal of ground, and ended where we began in 
apparent incredulity. 

** After he was gone, Moung Ing, who has been 
listening all day, followed me home to the house, 
being invited to stay with Moung Nau, through the 
night. We conversed all the evening, and his ex- 
pressions have satisfied us all, that he isone of God’s 
chosen people. His exercises have been of a much 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 193 


- stronger character than those of the others, and he 
expresses himself in the most decided manner. He 
desires to become a disciple in profession, as well as 
in heart, and declares his readiness to suffer persecu- 
tion and death for the love of Christ. When I sta- 
ted the danger to which he was exposing himself, 
and asked him whether he loved Christ better than 
his own life, he replied, very deliberately and sol- 
emnly, ‘When I meditate on this religion, I know 
not what it is to love my own life.? Thus the poor 
fisherman, Moung Ing, is taken, while the learned 
teacher, Moung Shwa-gnong, is left. 

“Sept. 6. Spent the evening in conversing with 
Moung Byaa, a man who, with his family, has lived 
near us for sometime, a regular attendant on wor- 
ship, an indefatigable scholar in the evening school, 
where he has learned to read, though fifty years old, 
and a remarkably moral character. In my last 
conversation, sometime ago, he appeared to be a 
thorough legalist, relying solely on his good works; 
but yet sincerely desirous of knowing and embracing 
the truth. The greater part of the evening was spent 
in discussing his erroneous views; his mind seemed 
so dark and dull of apprehension, that I was almost 
discouraged. ‘Towards the close, however, he seem- 
ed to obtain some evangeu.cal discoveries, and to re- 
ceive the humbling truths of the Gospel, in a man- 
ner which encourages us to hope that the Spirit of 
God has begun to teach him. The occasion of tis 
conversation was, my hearing that he said that ke 
intended to become a Christian, and be baptizea 
with Moung Thah-lah. He accordingly professes 
a full belief in the eternal God, and his Son Jesus 
Christ. 

“11, Moung Shwa-gnong has been with me al 
day. It appears that he accidentally obtained the 
idea of an eternal Bemg, about eight years ago; and 
it has been floating about in his mind, and disturb- 
‘ng. his Boodhist ideas, ever since. When he heard 
af us, which was through one of his adherents, to 

17 


194 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. ~ 


whorn IJ had given a tract, this idea received consid« 
erable confirmation; and to-day he has fully admit- 
ted the truth of this first grand principle. ‘The lat- 
ter part of the day, we were chiefly employed in 
discussing the possibility and necessity of a divine 
revelation, and the evidence which proves that the 
writings of the apostles of Jesus contain that reve- 
lation; and I think I may say, that he is half inclin- 
ed to admit all this. He is certainly a most interest- 
ing case. The way seems to be prepared in his 
mind, for the special operation of divine grace 
Come, Holy Spirit, Heavenly Dove! 

‘* His conversion seems peculiarly desirable, on ac- 
count of his superior talents and extensive acquain- 
tance with Burman and Pali literature. He is the 
most powerful reasoner I have yet met with in this 
country, excepting my old teacher, Oo Oungmen, 
(iow dead,) and he is not at all inferior to him. 

* Oct. 23. At night, Moung Thah-lah and Moung 
Byaa presented a paper, professing their faith in Je- 
sus Christ, and requesting to be baptized—but in 
private. We spent sometime with them. They 
appear to have experienced divine grace; but we 
advised them, as they had so little love to Christ as 
not to dare to die for his cause, to wait and recon- 
sider the matter. 

“99, ‘The teacher came again, after an interval 
of three weeks; but he appears to be quite another 
man. Ele was mentioned before the Viceroy as hav 
ing renounced the religion of the country. The 
Viceroy gave no decisive order; but merely said, 
‘Inquire further about him.’ This reached the ears 
of Moung Shwa-gnong, and he directly went to the 
Mangen teacher, and, I suppose, apologized, and 
explained, and flattered. He denies that he really 
recanted, and I hope he did not. But he is evident 
ly falling off from the investigation of the Cliristian 
religion. He made but a short visit, and took 
eave, as soon as he could decently. : 

«Nov. 6. The two candidates for haptism again 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 195 


preseuted their urgent petition, that they might be 
aptized; not absolutely in private, but about sun- 
set, away from public observation. We spent some 
hours in again discussing the subject with them, and 
with one another. We felt satisfied, that they were 
humble disciples of Jesus, and were desirous of re- 
ceiving this ordinance, purely out of regard to his 
command, and their own spiritual welfare; we felt, 
that we were all equally exposed to danger, and 
needed a spirit of mutual :andor, and forbearance, 
and sympathy; we were convinced, that they were 
influenced rather by desires of avoiding unnecessary 
exposure, than by that sinful fear, which would 
plunge them into apostasy, in the hour of trial; and 
when they assured us, that if actually brought be- 
fore government, they could not think of denying 
their Saviour, we could not conscientiously refuse 
their request, and therefore agreed to have them 
baptized to-morrow at sunset. 

*¢7, Lord’s-duy. We had worship as usual, and 
the people dispersed. About half an hour before 
sunset the two candidates came to the zayat, accom- 
panied by three or four of their friends; and, after a 
short prayer, we proceeded to the spot where Moung 
Nau was formerly baptized. ‘The sun was not al- 
lowed to look upon the humble, timid profession 
No wondering crowd crowned the overshadowing 
hill. No hymn of praise expressed the exulting 
feeling of joyous hearts. Stillness and solemnity 
pervaded the scene. We felt, on the banks of’ the 
water, as a little, feeble, solitary band. But per- 
haps some hovering angels took note of the event, 
with more interest than they witnessed the late cor 
onation; perhaps Jesus looked down on us, pitied 
and forgave our weaknesses, and marked us for his 
awn; perhaps, if we deny him not, he will acknow- 
ledge us another day, more publicly than we ven- 
ture at present to acknowledge him. 

‘In the evening, we all united in commemorating 
the dying love of our Redeemer; and I trust we en- 


196 MEMOIR OF MRS JUDSON. 


joyed a little of his gracious presence in the mids‘ 
of us. 

“‘ Nov. 10. This evening is to be marked as the 
date of the first Burman prayer meeting that was 
ever held. None present but myself and the three 
converts. Two of them made a little beginning— 
such as must be expected from the first essay of 
converted heathens. We agreed to meet for this 
purpose every Tuesday and Friday evening, imme- 
_ diately after family worship; which, in the evening, 
has for sometime been conducted in Burman and 
English; and which these people and occasionally 
some others have attended. 

“14, Lord’s-day. Have been much gratified to 
find, that this evening the THREE CONVERTS RE- 
PAIRED TO THE ZAYAT, AND HELD A PRAYER MEET 
ING OF THEIR OWN ACCORD. 

<¢ 96, Ever since the affair of Moung Shwa-gnong, 
there has been an entire falling off at the zayat. I 
sometimes sit there whole days, without a single 
visiter, though it is the finest part of the year, and 
many are constantly passing. 

«¢ We and our object are now well known through- 
out Rangoon. None wish to call, as formerly, out 
of curiosity; and none dare to call from a principle 
of religious inquiry. And were not the leaders in 
ecclesiastical affairs confident that we shall never 
succeed in making converts, I have no doubt we 
should meet with direct persecution and banishment. 

‘‘Our business must be fairly laid before the Em- 
peror. If he frown upon us, all missionary attemvts 
within his dominions will be out of the question. 
If he favor us, none of our enemies, during the con- 
tinuance of his favor, can touch a hair of our heads. 
But there is a greater than the Emperor, before 
whose throne we desire daily and constantly to lay 
the business. O, Lord Jesus, look upon us in our 
.ow estate, and guide us in our dangerous course! 

‘Dee. 4. Another visit from Moung. Shwa- 
gnong.. After several hours spent in metaphysical - 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 197 


cavils, he owned that he did not believe anything 
that he had said, and had only been trying me and 
the religion, being determined to embrace nothing 
bu. what he found unobjectionable and impregnable, 
‘What,’ said he, ‘ do you think that I would pay 
you the least attention, if I found you could not 
answer all my questions, and solve all my difficul- 
ties?? He then proceeded to say, that he really be~ 
lieved in God, his Son Jesus Christ, the atonement, 
&e. Said I, (knowing his deistical weakness,) 
‘Do you beiieve all that is contained in the book of 
Matthew, that I have given you? In particular, do 
you believe that the Son of God died on a cross?? 
‘ Ah,’ replied he, ‘ you have caught me now. I be- 
lieve that he suflered death, but I cannot admit that 
he suffered the shameful death of the cross.’ ‘ There- 
_ fore,’ said I, ‘you are not a disciple of Christ. A 
true disciple inquires not whether a fact is agree- 
able to his own reason, but whether it is in the 
book. His pride has yielded to the divine testimony. 
Teacher, your pride is still unbroken. Break down 
your pride, and ‘yield to the word of God.’ He 
stopped, and thought. ‘ As you utter these words,’ 
said he, ‘I see my error; I have been trusting in my 
own reason, not in the word of God.’ Some inter- 
ruption now occurred. When we were again aione, - 
he said, ‘ This day is different from all the days on 
which I have visited you. I see my error in trust- 
ing in my own reason; and I now believe the cruci- 
fixion of Christ, because it is contained in the Scrip- 
ture.’ Sometime after, speaking of the uncertainty 
of life, he said he thought he should not be lost, 
thongh he died suddenly. Why? ‘Because I love 
Jesus Christ.2 Do you really love him? *‘ No one 
that really knows him, can help loving him.’ And 
50 he departed.” 


Mr ana Mrs. Hough being in Bengal, and the 
lamented Wheelock having died, Mr. Judson, and 
kis excellent and phils associate, Mr. Colman, 


198 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


with their wives, were the only Missionaries at 
Rangoon. It seemed evident, that it would be m 
yain to proceed in their missionary labors, unless 
the favor of the Monarch could be obtarned. They 
resolved, therefore, after earnest prayer to God, to 
visit the capital. Permission was obtained from 
the Viceroy, a boat was procured, and other pre- 
parations were made, for their long passage up the 
iwrawaddy. 


— 


CHAPTER XI. 


Visit to Ava—Unsuccessful Interview with the King—Return to 
Rangoon—Death of Mr. Colman. 


Messrs. Judsonand Colman immediately set out on 
their visit to Ava, leaving their families at Rangoon, 
On the 22d of December, 1819, they embarked in a 
boat six feet wide, and forty feet long, and rowed by 
ten men. The faithful Moung Nau accompanied 
them as a servant. ‘They took with them, as a pres- 
ent to his Burman Majesty, the Bisxe, in six vol- 
-umes, covered with gold leaf, in the Burman style; 
and each volume enclosed in a rich wrapper. Seve- 
ral pieces of fine cloth, and other articles, were de- 
signed for presents to other members of the govern- 
ment; as nothing can be done at an oriental court 
without presents. 

Their passage up the river was attended with 
much danger from robbers, who often committed 
depredations on boats, and usually murdered some 
of the passengers. But the Lord preserved them 
from molestation. Mr. Judson, in his journal, thus 
describes the ruins of Pah-gan, a city two hundred 
and sixty miles from Rangoon, and once the seat of 
government: 


« Jan, 18. Took a survey of the splendid pago- 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 199 


das, and extensive ruins, in the environs of this once 
famous city. Ascended, as far as possible, some of 
the highest edifices; and at the height of one hun- 
dred feet, perhaps, beheld-all the country round, 
covered with temples and monuments of every sort 
and size; some in utter ruin, some fast decaying, and 
some exhibiting marks of recent attention and repair. 
The remains of the ancient wall of the city stretched 
beneath us. The pillars of the gates, and many a 
grotesque, dilapidated relic of antiquity, checkered 
the motley scene. All conspired to suggest those 
elevated and mournful ideas, which are attendant 
on a view of the decaying remains of ancient gran- 
deur; and though not comparable to such ruins as 
those of Palmyra and Balbec, (as they are represen- 
ted,) still deeply interesting to the antiquary, and 
more deeply interesting to the Christian Missionary. 
Here, about eight hundred years ago, the religion 
of Boodh was first publicly recognised, and estab 

lished as the religion of the empire. Here Shen 
Ah-rah-han, the first Boodhist apostle of Burmah, 
under the patronage of King Anauralah-men-zau, 
disseminated the doctrines of atheism, and taught 
his disciples to pant after annihilation as the supreme 
good. Some of the ruins before our eyes were prob- 
ably the remains of pagodas, designed by himself 
We looked back on the centuries of darkness that 
are past. We looked forward and Christian hope 
would fain brighten the prospect. Perhaps we stand 
on the dividing line of the empires of darkness 
and light. O, shade of Shen Ah-rah-han! weep 
over thy fallen fanes; retire from the scenes of thy 
past greatness! But thou smilest at my feeble voice. 
Linger, then, thy little remaining day. A voice 
mightier than mine—a sti!l small voice—will ere long 
sweep away every vestige of thy dominion. The 
churches of Jesus will soon supplant these idolatrous 
monuments, and the chanting of the devotees of 
Boodh will die away before the Christiau hymn of 
praise.” 


260 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON,. 


On the 25th of January, 1820, they arrived safely 
at Amarapora, at that time the capital of the empire, 
nearly 500 miles from Rangoon. It has since been 
forsaken, and the capital established at Ava, four 
miles below. 

The particulars of their interview with the King 
are 50 important, that we shall insert them with ht 
tle alteration. 


“ January 26. We set out early in the morning, 
and repaired to the house of Mya-day-men, former 
Viceroy of Rangoon, now one of the public minis- 
ters of state (Woongyee.) We gave him a valua- 
ble present, and another of less value to his wile, 
the lady who formerly treated Mrs. J. with so much 
politeness. ‘They both received us very kindly, and 
appeared to interest themselves in our success, We, 
however, did not disclose our precise object; but only 
petitioned for leave to behold the golden face. Up- 
on this, his Highness committed our business to 
Moung Yo, one of his favorite officers, and directed 
him to introduce us to Moung Zah, one of the pri- 
vate ministers of state (Atwenwoon,) with the 
necessary orders. ‘This particular favor of Mya-day- 
men prevents the necessity of our petitioning and 
feeing all the public ministers of state, and procuring 
formal permission from the high court of the empire. 

‘In the evening, Moung Yo, who lives near our 
boat, called on us, to say that he would conduct us 
to-morrow. We lie down in sleepless anxiety. 
To-morrow’s dawn will usher in the most eventful | 
day in our lives. 'To-morrow’s eve will close on 
the bloom or the blight of our fondest hopes. Yet 
it is consoling to commit this business into the hands 
of our Heavenly Father,—to feel that the work is 
his, not ours; that the heart of the monarch, before 
whom we are to appear, is under the control of Om 
nipotence; and that the event will be ordered in the 
manner most conducive to the divine glory and the 
greatest good. God may, for the wisest purpose, . 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 20) 


suffer our hopes to be disappointed; and if so, why 
should short-sighted, mortal man, repine? Thy 
will, O God, be ever done; for thy will is inevitably 
the wisest and the best. 

“ Jan. 27. We left the boat, and put ourselves 
under the conduct of Moung Yo. He carried us 
first to Mya-day-men, as a matter of form; and 
there we learned, that the emperor had been private- 
ly apprized of our arrival, and said, ‘ Let them be 
introduced.’ We therefore proceeded to the palace. 
At the outer gate we were detained a long time, un- 
til the various officers were satisfied that we had a 
right to enter; after which we deposited a present 
for the private minister of state, Moung Zah, and 
were ushered into his apartments in the palace-yard. 
He received us very pleasantiy, and ordered us to 
ait before several Governors and petty Kings, who 
were waiting at his levee. We here, for the first 
time, disclosed our character and object—told him, 
that we were Missionaries, or § propagators of reli- 
gion; that we wished to appear before the Einpe- 
ror, and present our sacred books, accompanied with 
a petition. He took the petition into his hand, look- 
ing over about half of it, and then familiarly-asked 
several questions about our God, and our religion, 
to which we replied. Just at this crisis, some one 
announced that the golden foot was about to ad- 
vance; on which the minister hastily rose up, and 
put on his robes of’ state, saying, that he must seize 
the moment to present us to the Emperor. We 
now found that we had unwittingly fallen on an un- 
propitious time, it being the day of the celebration 
of the late victory over the Cassays, and the very 
hour, when his Majesty was coming forth, to wit- 
ness the display made on the occasion. * When the 
Minister was dressed, he just said, ‘How can you 
propagate religion in this empire? But come along.? 
Our hearts sunk at these inauspicious words. He 
conducted us through various splendor and parade, 
until we ascended a flight of stairs, and entered a 


202 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


most magnificent hall. Hedirected us where to sit 
and took his place on one side; the present was 
placed on the other, and Moung Yo, and anather 
officer of Mya-day-men, sat.a little behind. ‘l'he 
scene to which we were now introduced, really sur- 
passed our expectation. ‘The spacious extent of the 
hall, the number and magnitude of the pillars, the 
height of the dome, the whole completely covered 
with gold, presented a most grand and imposing 
spectacle. Very few were present, and those evi- 
dently great officers of state. Our situation prevent- 
ed us from seeing the farther avenue of the hall; 
but the end where we sat opened into the parade, 
which the Emperor was about to inspect. We re- 
mained about five minutes, when every one put 
himself into the most respectful attitude, and Moung 
Yo whispered, that his Majesty had entered. We 
looked through the hall, as far as the pillars would 
allow, and presently caught sight of this modern 
Ahasuerus. He came forward, unattended—in soli- 
tary grandeur—exhibiting the proud gait and majes- 
ty of an eastern monarch. His dress was rich, but 
not distinctive; and he carried in his hand the gold- 
sheathed sword, which seems to have taken the 

lace of the sceptre of ancient times. But it was 

is high aspect and commanding eye, that chiefly 
rivetted our attention. Hestridedon Every head, 
excepting ours, was now in the dust. We remain- 
ed kneeling, our hands folded, our eyes fixed on the 
monarch. When he drew near, we caught his at- 
tention. He stopped, partly turned towards us— 
‘Who are these?’ ‘The teachers, great King,’ I 
replied. ‘What, you speak Burman—the priests 
that I heard of last night?? ‘ When did you arrive? 
* Are you teachers of religion?’ ‘Are you like the 
Portuguese priests?? ‘Are you married?? ‘Why 
do you dress so?’ These, and some other simi ar 
questions, we answered; when he appeared to be 
nape with us, and sat down onan elevated seat— 

is hand resting on the hilt of his sword, and his eyes - 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. i 205 


intently fixed on us. Moung Zah now began to 
read the petition, and it ran thus:— 


ss¢'The American teachers present themselves to 

receive the favor of the excellent King, the Sovereign 
of land and sea. Hearing that, on arcount of the 
greatness of the royal power, the roya. country was 
in a quiet and prosperous state, we arrived at the 
town of Rangoon, within the royal dominions; and 
having obtained leave of the Governor of that town, 
to come up and behold the golden face, we have 
ascended, and reached the bottom of the golden feet. 
In the great country of America, we sustain the 
character of teachers and explainers of the contents 
of the sacred Scriptures of our religion. And since 
it is contained in those Scriptures, that, if we pass 
to other countries, and preach and propagate relig- 
ion, great good will result, and both those who teach 
and those who receive the religion, will be freed 
from future punishment, and enjoy, without decay 
or death, the eternal felicity of heaven,—thet royal 
permission be given, that we, taking refuge in the> 
royal power, may preach our religion in these domin- 
ons, and that those who are pleased with our 
preaching, and wish to listen to and be guided by it, 
whether foreigners or Burmans, may be exempt 
from government molestation, they present them- 
selves to receive the favor of the excellent King, the 
’ Sovereign of land and sea.’ 


‘‘ The Eniperor heard this petition, and stretched 
out his hand. Moung Zah crawled foiward anc 
presented it. His Majesty began at the top, and 
deliberately read it through. In the meantime, I 
gave Moung Zah an abridged copy of the tract, in 
which every offensive sentence was corrected, at.c 
the whole put into the handsomest style and dress 
possible, After the Emperor had perused the 
petition he handed it back, without saying a word, 
and took the tract. Our hearts n w rose to God, 


204 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


for a display of his grace, ‘O, have mercy on 
Burmah! Have mercy on her King!’ But, alas! 
the time was not yet come. He held the tract long 
enough to read the two first sentences, which assert, 
that there is one eternal God, who is independent of 
the incidents of mortality, and that, besides him, 
there is no God; and then with an air of indifference, 
erhaps disdain, he dashed it down to the ground! 
Maine Zah stooped forward, picked it up, and 
handed 1t to us. Moung Yo made a slight attempt 
to save us, by unfolding one of the volumes which 
composed our present, and displayingits beauty; buz 
his Majesty took no notice. Our fate was decided. 
After a few moments, Moung Zah interpreted his 
royal master’s will, in the following terms: ‘In 
regard to the objects of your petition, his Majesty 
gives no order. In regard to your sacred books, his 
Majesty has no use for them—take them away.’ 
°¢ Something was now said about brother Colman’s 
skill in medicine; upon which the Emperor once more 
opened his mouth, and said, ‘ Let them proceed to 
the residence of my physician, the Portuguese priest; 
let him examine whether they can be useful to me 
in that line, and report accordingly.? He then rose 
from his seat, strided on to the end of the hall, and 
there, after having dashed to the ground the first 
intelligence that he had ever received of the eternal 
God, his Maker, his Preserver, his Judge, he threw 
himself down on a cushion, and lay listening to ~ 
tle music, and gazing at the parade spread out before 
im. 
© As for us and our presents, we were hurried away 
without much ceremony. We passed out of the 
palace gates with much more facility than we enter- 
ed, and were conducted first to the house of Mya- 
day-men. There his officer reported our reception, 
but in as favorable terms as possible; and as his 
Highness was not apprized of our precise object, 
our repulse appeared, probably, to him, not so deci 
sive as we knew it to be. We were next conductea 


- MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 205 


two miles, through thesun and dust of the streets 
of Ava, to the residence of the Portuguese priest. 
He very speedily ascertained that we were in posses- 
sion of no wonderful secret, which would secure the 
Emperor from all disease, and make him live forever; 
‘and we were accordingly a.lowed to take leave of 
the reverend Inquisitor, and retreat to our boat.” 


The next day, they made some other efforts to 
accomplish their object, but in vain. 


‘© We ascertained, beyond a doubt, that the policy 
of the Burman government, in regard to the tolera~ 
tion of any foreign religion, is precisely the same 
with the Chinese; that it is quite out of the question, 
whether any of the subjects of the Emperur, who 
embrace a religion different from his own, will be 
exempt from punishment; and that we, in presenting 
a petition to that effect, had been guilty of a most 
egregious blunder—an unpardonable offence. 

“It was now evening. We had four miles to 
walk by moon-light. T’wo of our disciples only 
followed us. They had pressed as near as they 
ventured to the door of the hall of audience, and 
listened to words which sealed the extinction of their 
hopes and ours. For sometime we spoke not, 


£Some natural tears we dropped, but wiped them soon. 
The world wasall before us, where to choose 
Our place of rest, and Providence our guide.’ 


And, as our first parents took their solitary way 
through Eden, hand in hand, so we took our way 
through this great city, which, to our Jate imagina- 
_tion, seemed another Eden; but now, through the 
magic touch of disappointment, seemed blasted and 
withered, as if smitten by the fatal influence of the 
cherubic sword. 

‘¢ Arrived at the boat, we threw ourselves down, 
completely exhausted in boly anc mind. For three 
days we had walked eight miles a day, the most of 
the way in the heat of the sun; which, even at this 

38 


206 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


season, in the interior of these countries, is exceed 
ingly oppressive; and the result of our travels and 
toils has been—the wisest and best possible—a result, 
which, if we could see the end trom the beginning, 
would call forth our highest praise. O, slow of 
heart to believe and trust in the over-ruling agency 
of our own Almighty Saviour! ” 


An incident which occurred about fifteer years 
before, shows the policy of the Burman gove:nment 
respecting religion, 


«The Roman Catholic priests converted to their 
faith a Burman teacher of talents and distinction. 
They took great pains to indoctrinate him thor- 
oughly in their religion, and entertained great hope 
of his usefulness in their cause. After his return 
from Rome, whither they had sent him to complete 
his Christian education, he was accused by his 
nephew, a clerk in the high court of the empire, of 
having renounced the established religion. ‘The 
Emperor, though he was far from approving the 
retigion of Boodh, ordered that he should be com- 
pelled to recant. ‘The nephew seized his uncle, cast 
him into prison and fetters, caused him to be beaten 
and treated unmercifully; and at length had recourse 
to the torture of the iron mall. With this instru- 
ment he was gradually beaten, from the ends of his 
feet up to his breast, until his body was little else 
but one livid wound. At every blow, the sufferer 
pronounced the name of Christ; and declared after- 
wards, that he felt but little or no pain. When he 
was at the point of death, under the hands of his 
tormentors, some persons who pitied his case, weut 
to the Emperor with astatement that he was a mad- 
*man, and knew not what he was about; on which 
the Emperor gave orders for his release. The 
Portuguese took him away, concealed him until he 
was able to move, then sent him privately in a boat 
to Rangoon, and thence by ship to Bengal, where 
he finished his days. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSOY ~ 207 


‘ After this occurrence, the Roma. priests, of 
whom there were only four in the country, did 
nothing in the way of proselyting, but confined 
their labors to their own flocks, which were com- 
posed of the descendants of foreigners. 'The man 
who accused his uncle was, at the time Mr. Judson 
visited the capital, the very first of the private min- 
isters of state. Furthermore, the chief Queen, who 
had great influence with his Majesty, was partic- 
ularly attached to the religion and the priests of 
Boodh.” 


So hopeless was the prospect of obtaining per- 
mission from the Burman government to preach the 
Gospel to its subjects, that the Missionaries resolved 
to return immediately to Rangoon. The passage 
down the river was rapid. At Prome, about 300 
miles from Ava, they met the teacher, Moung 
Shwa-endng, who had come from Rangoon, on a 
visit to a sick friend. : 


“ We stated to him,” says Mr. Judson, “all our 
adventures at court, the distressing result of the ex- 
pedition, and the present danger of propagating or 
professing the religion of’ Christ, and wound off w th 
the story of the iron mall. He appeared to be less 
affected and intimidated by the relation, than we 
could have expected. : : 

« He repeated with considerable emphasis the 
most prominent points of his present faith, as 
follows:—‘ I believe in the Eternal God, in his Son 
Jesus Christ, in the atonement which Christ has 
nade, and in the writings of the apostles, as the 
true and only word of God.’ ‘ Perhaps,’ continued 
he, you may not remember, that during one of my 
last visits, you told me that I was trusting in my 
own understanding, rather than the divine word. 
From that time, I have seen my error, and en- 
deavoured to renounceit. You explained to me also 
the evil of worshipping at pagodas, though I told 


208 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


you that my heart did not partake in the worship. 
Since you left Rangoon, I have not lifted up my- 
folded hands before a pagoda, It is true I some- 
times follow the crowd, on days of worship, in order 
to avoid persecution; but I walk up one side of the 
pagoda, and walk down the other. Now, you say 
that I am not a disciple. What lackI yet?? Iwas 
now satisfied that he had made a little advance, 
since our last interview, which required a corres- 
ponding advance on my side. I replied, therefore, 
‘ Teacher, you may be a disciple of Christ in heart, 
but you are nota full disciple. You have not faith 
and resolution enough to keep all the commands of 
Christ, particularly that which requires you to be 
baptized, though in the face of persecution and 
death. Consider the words of Jesus just. before 
he returned to heaven, He that believeth, and is 
baptized, shall be saved. He received this communi- 
cation in profound silence, and with that air, which 
I have observed to come upon him, when he takes 
a thing into serious consideration. Soon after, I 
hinted our intention of leaving Rangoon, since the 
Emperor had virtually prohibited the propagation 
of the Christian religion, and no Burman, under such 
circumstances, would dare to investigate, much less 
to embrave it. This intelligence evidently roused 
him, and showed us that we had more interest in his 
heart than we thought. ‘ Say not so,’ said he, 
‘there are some who will investigate notwithstand- 
ing; and rather tnan have you quit Rangoon, I will 
go myself to the Mangen teacher, and have a pub- 
lic dispute. I know I can silence him. I know the 
truth is on my side.’ *‘ Ah,’ said I, ‘ you may have 
a tongue to silence him, but he has a pair of fetters, 
and an iron mall to subdue you. Remember that.’? 


On the 18th of February, they arrived at Ran- 
goon. ‘They immediately called the three disciples 
together, and lisclosed to them the melancholy result 
of their visit. They stated to them their design of 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. — 209 


leaving Rangoon, and endeavouring to establish a 
mission in a district between Bengal and Arracang 
whica is under the government of Bengal, but ig 
inhabited chiefly by Arracanese, who speak a lan- 
guage similar to the Burman. A Missionary from 
Bengal, (De Bruyn) formerly resided at Chittagong, 
the chief town in this district, and baptized seveial 
converts, who at his death were left without instruc- 
tion. 

They expected that the disciples would be intimi- 
dated by the refusal of the Emperor to tolerate the 
Christian religion. Mr. J. says: 


“We thought that if one out of the three remained 
firm, it was as much as we could reasonably hope 
ior. But how delightfully were we disappointed. 
They all, to a man, appeared immovably the same, 
yea, rather advanced in zeal andenergy. ‘They vied 
with each other, in trying to explain away difficul- 
ties, and to convince us, that the cause was not yet 
quite desperate. ‘But whither are the teachers go- 
ing?? was, of course, ananxious inquiry. We then 
asked them severally what they would do. Moung 
Nau had previously told us, that he would follow 
us to any part of the world. He was only afraid 
that he should be a burden to us; for, not being ac- © 
quainted with another language, he might not be 
able to get his living in a strange land. ‘As for 
me,’ said Mouny Thah-lah, ‘I go where preaching 
is t) be had.? Moung Byaa was silent and thoug ht- 
(ul. At last he said, that as no Burman woman is 
allowed to leave the country, he could not on ac- 
count of his wife, follow the teachers; but {contin- 
ued he, with some pathos,) if I must be telt here 
alone, 4 shall remain performing the duties cf Jesus 
Christ's religion; no other shall [think of. ‘This in- 
terview with the disciples rejoiced our hearts, and 
causfd us to praise God for the grace which he has 
manifzsted to them.” 
18* 


210 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


It war soon ascertained, that the converts were 
unanimously desirous that the Missionaiies should 
not forsake the station at present; and that several in- 
dividuals were examining the new religion. Moung 
Byaa came to them, with his brother-in-law, Moung 
Myat-yah: 


s¢ ¢'Teacher,’? said he, ‘my mind is distressed; 1 
can neither eat nor sleep, since I find you are going 
away. I have been around among those who live 
Near us, and J find some who are even now exam- 
ining the new religion. Brother Myat-yah is one of 
them, and he unites with mein my petitions. (Here 
Myat-yah assented that it was so.) Do stay with 
us a few months. Do stay till there are eight or ten 
disciples. Then appoint one to be the teacher of 
the rest; I shall not be concerned about the event; 
though you should leave the country, the religion 
will spread of itself. ‘The emperor himself cannot 
stop it. But if you go now, and take the two dis- 
ciples that can follow, I shall be left alone. I can- 
not baptize those who may wish to embrace this re= 
ligion, Whatcanido?? Moung Nau came in, and 
expressed himself in a similar way. He thought 
that several would yet become disciples, notwith- 
standing all opposition, and that it was best for us 
to stay awhile. We could not restrain our tears at 
hearing all this; and we told them, that as we lived 
only for the promotion of the cause of Christ among 
the Burmans, if there was any prospect of success 
in Rangoon, we had no desire to go to any other 
place, and would, therefore, reconsider the matter.” 


Thus, at the moment when ruin seemed to threat- 
en the mission, the Lord was strengthening the 
hearts of the converts, and encouraging the Mis- 
sionaries to remain at their posts, and proceed in the 
work of teaching the religion of the Gospel, trust- 
ing in his powe~ for protection. It was finally re- 
solved, that Mr and Mrs. Judson should continue 
at Rangoon, anc that Mr. and Mrs. Colman should 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 211 


proceed to Chittagong, and form a station there, at 
which the other Missionaries, and the converts, 
might find a refuge, should it be found impossible to 
remain at Rangoon, and where the Gospel might 
be spread among a population as idolatrous and 
wretched as that of Burmah itself. Accordingly, 
in Marck, 1820, Mr. and Mrs. Colman seh ed 
for Bengal, whence they proceeded to Chittagong, 
where they arrived in June. 

They erected a house in the midst of the native 
population, and made rapid progress in the acquisi- 
tion of the language, which was commenced while 
in Rangoon. Mr. Colman had begun to communi- 
cate the truths of the Gospel publicly, and had wit- 
nessed their effect on the mind of his teacher, when 
these animating prospects were blasted by the sud- 
den and lamented death of this valuable Missionary. 

In Chittagong, he might have lived comfortably 
in civilized Christian society, under the. protection 
of the English government, and been usefully em- 
ployed in missionary avocations. But, in imitation 
of the Redeemer, and prompted by feelings of com- 
passion for immortal souls, he chose his residence in 
a native village, Cox’s Bazar, where he was surround- 
ed by poverty, ignorance and delusion, and where, 
too, he fell a martyr to his zeal, July 4, 1822. 

Mrs. -Colman returned to Bengal, where she 
engaged, with great zeal, in the instruction of | 
female children. She was afterwards married to the 
Lah Mr. Sutton, an English Baptist Missionary in 

ndia. 

Mr. and Mrs. Judson were thus again left alone 
at Rangoon; though their solitude was cheered by 
the affectionate attachment of the converted Bur- 
mans, and by the appearances of sincere inquiry in 
the minds of several others. The teacher, Moung 
Shwa-gnong, became gradually settled and firm in 
his faith, though he still hesitated to be baptized, 
Another learned casuist, named Oo Yan, visited Mr. 
Judson, and disputed with him, with much subtlety 
and zeal. 


212 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


« He was ready to admit, that the atheistic system 
of the Boodhists was not tenable; but endeavoured 
to fortify himself on a middle system, between that 
and the Christian; the very system in which Moung 
Shwa-gnong formerly rested, and which, for distinc- 
tion’s sake, may be fitly termed the semi-atheistic. 
Its fundamental doctrine is, that divine wisdom, not 
concentrated in any existing spirit, or embodied in 
any form, but diffused throughout the universe, and 
partaken in different degrees by various intelligences, 
and in a very high degree by the Boodhs, is the true 
and only God. This poor system, which is evident- 
ly guilty of suicide, Oo Yan made every possible 
effort to keep alive; but I really think, that in his 
own mind he felt the case to be hopeless. His mode 
of reasoning, however, is soft, insinuating, aad 
acute; and so adrcitly did he act his part, that 
Moung Shwa-gnong, with his strong arm, and J, 
with the strength of truth, were scarcely able to 
keep him down. 

“¢ March 15. Another visit from the teacher, 
accompanied by his wife and chid. Again discus- 
sed the necessity of assembling on the Lord’s-day. 
Found that the sacraments of baptism and the 
supper are in his mind liable to similar objections. 
Forsook, therefore, all human reasoning, and rested 
the merits of the case on the bare authority of 
. Christ: Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I com- 

mand you. Notwithstanding the remains of’ his 
deistical spirit, however, 1 obtained, during this 
visit, more satisfactory evidence of his real conver- 
sion, than ever before. He said that he knew 
nothing of an eternally existing God, before he met 
with me; that, on hearing that doctrine, he instant- 
y believed it; but that it was a long time before he 
closed with Christ. ‘Can you recol ect the time?* 
said I. ‘ Notprecisely,? he replied; ‘ but it was during 
a visit when vou discoursed concerning the Trinity, 
the Divine Sonship of Jesus, and the great suffer- 
‘ngs which ‘he, though truly God, endured for hig 


MEMOIR OF MRS. srpson, 2138 


aisciples. He afterwards spoke with mvch Christian 
feeling, on the preciousness of the last ; art of the 
sixth chapter of Matthew, which he heard me read, 
day before yesterday, at evening woishif 

91, Moing Thah-lah introduced one of’ his 
relations, by name Moung Shwa-ba, as desirous of 
considering tie Christian religion. Spent an hour 
or two in conversing with him. He was alterwards 
present at evening worship, and staid to converse, 
after the rest had retired. 

©2292, Another conversation with Moung Shwa- 
ba. He appears to be underdeep religious impres- 
sions. His language and his looks evince an uncom- 
mon solemnity of spirit, an earnest desire to be saved 
from the wrath tocome. After praying with him, 
I left him in company with Moung Thah-lah. 

6°24. Spentall the evening with Moung Shwa- 
ba. Feel satisfied that he has experienced a work of 
divine grace; but think it advisable to defer his 
baptism, until Sunday after next, in order to allow 
him full time to reexamine the religion, and the 
foundation of his hopes. 

s¢ 96, Lord’s-day. 'Three women present at wor- 
ship—acquaintances of Moung Shwa-gnong. They 
have visited Mrs. J. once or twice before. Mah 
Men-la- renounced Gaudama some years ago, and 
adopted the semi-atheistic system, but without ob- 
taining any real satisfaction. Two years ago she 
met with a copy of the tract, which gave her an idea 
of an eternally existing God; but she knew not 
whence the papercame. At length, Moung Shwa- 
gnong told her that he had found the true wisdom, 
and directed her to us. Her case appears very 
hopeful.” 


On the 20th of April, Moung Shwa-ba was bap- 
tized, and immediately proposed to visit his native 
town, for the purpose of communicating to his 
friends the treasure which he had found:—So nat. 
ural y Joes every renewed heart feel and obey the 


214 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


impulse of the missionary spit t, unless its emotions 
be chilled by avarice, or pe verted by erroneous 
views of the Gospel. ‘This convert, too, is a re- 
markable example of the rapid efficacy with which 
the Spirit of God is sometimes pleased to operate 
onthe human mind. In the course of three days, 
from being an atheist, utterly ignorant of the true 
Goi, he became a disciple of Christ, and by nis sub- 
sequent conduct manifested the sincerity of his at- 
tachment.’ Thus does the siniple hearted man ol- 
ten embrace the Gospel, while the learned disputant 
cavils and doubts, and at last believes with reluc- 
tance, if at all. Moung Shwa-gnong was many 
months in arriving at the stateof mind, which Moung 
Shwa-ba reached in three days. 

Moung Shwa-ba was afterwards taken into the 
service of the mission, and became very useful asan 
assistant to Mr. Judson. The following extracts 
from Mr, Judson’s journal exhibit the progress of 
divine truth among the inquirers: 


‘April 20. Mah Men-la and her friends have 
been with Mrs. Judson all day. She gives increas- 
ing evidence of being a real disciple; but is extreme- 
ly timid, through fear of persecution. One of her 
remarks deserves notice, as a natural expression of 
true Christian feeling. ‘ I am surprised,’ said she, 
‘to find this religion has such an effect on my mind, 
as to make me love the disciples of Christ more than 
my dearest natural relations.’ She 1s a woman of 
very superior discernmert and mental energy. One 
of the women who have frequently accompanied her 
in her visits, met with a tract at old Pegu, about six 
weeks ago, and came all the way to Rangoon, 
chiefly, she says, on that account. Thisday Ihave 
finished the translation of the Epistle to the Ephe 
sians, begun before I went to Ava, but intermitted 
on a. count of the weakness of my eyes. It is with 
real joy that I put this precious writing into the 
nands of the discip.es. It isa great accession te 


MEMOIR OF MRS JUDSON. 215 


their scanty stock of Scripture, for they have had 
nothing hitherto but Matthew. Intend to give them 
Acts, as fast ss mv eyes will allow. 

«© 30. Lord’s-day. One of the busiest days 1 
nave ever spent. Nota multitude of visitants, as 
formerly. That we cannot expect in present cir- 
cumstances. But, beside the usual evening assem- 
bly, there were eight or ten present at worship, 
some of whom were with me from nine in the 
morning till ten at night. Mah Men-la and her 
company were with Mrs. Judson, who has had a 
serious attack of the liver complaint, for a fortnight 
past, and is now in a course of salivation. 

“ Oo Yan, after having searched out all the du- 
ficult points of religion, came to-day to the ne plus 
ulira—How are sin and eternal misery reconcilable 
with the character of an infinitely holy, wise, and 
powerful God? He at length obtained such satis- 
faction, that he could not restrain laughing, from 
pure mental delight, and kept recurring to the subject, 
aud repeating my remarks to those aroundhim. He 
Was accompanied, as usual, by his two frends, 
Moung Thah-a and Moung Myat-lah, husband of 
Mah Men-la. With these came also one Moung 
Yo, adisciple of Moung Shwa-gnong, a poor man, 
but a sharp reasoner. He was, or pretended to be, 
on the semi-atheistic plan. [See page 212.] After 
ascertaining his precise ground, I used an argument, 
which, in a late combat with Oo Yan, I found quite 
invincible. It is simply this: ‘ No mind, no wisdom 
—temporary mind, temporary wisdom—eternal mind, 
eternal wisdom.’ Now, asall thesemi-atheists firmly 
believe in eternal wisdom, this concise statement 
sweeps, with irresistible sway, through the ver 
joints and marrow of their system. And though it 
may seem rather simple and inconclusive, to one ac- 

uainted with Burman reasoning, its effect is uni- 
ae decisive. No sooner is this short sentence 
uttered, than one significantly nods his head, as if to 
say, There you have it, Another cries out to the 


216 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON, 


opponent, You are undone, destroyed. Another 
says, 'Talk about wisdom; where else will you find 
it? The disputant himself, who was, perhaps, 
preparing a learned speech about the excellence and 
efficacy and eternity of wisdom, quite disconcerted 
by this unexpected onset, sits looking at the wreck 
of his system, and wondering at the simple means 
‘vhich have spread such ruin around him; presently 
ne looks up, (for the Burmans are frequently can- 
did,) and says, Your words are very appropriate. 
And perhaps his next question is, How can I become 
a disciple of the God you worship? 

* All the visiters to-day, and indeed all the semi- 
atheists, are despisers of Gaudama, and the estab- 
ished religion of the land. Moung Shwa-gnong 
has disseminated this heresy in Rangoon for several 
years; but since he has become acquainted with us, 
he frequently tells his adherents, I know nothing; if, 
you want true wisdom, go to the foreign teacher, 
and there you will find it. I have reason to believe 
that this heresy is not confined to Rangoon, but is 
taking root in various parts of the country, and pre- 
paring the way for the Christian religion. O, for 
toleration—a little toleration. We will be content 
to baptize in the night, and hold worship in private, 
but we do pray that we may not be utterly banished 
from the land; that we may not be cut up, root and 
branch. O, that these poor souls who are groping 
in the dark, feeling after the truth, may have time 
and opportunities to find the precious treasure, 
which will enrich them forevermore. We are all 
looking with anxiety towards the golden feet. Our 
Viceroy, Moung Shwa-thah, has gone thither on a 
visit; and itis doubtful whether he will return, or 
his rival Mya-day-men. If the latter, there 1s some 
reason to hope that we shall keep footing m Rangoon 
at least during his administration.” 


Tt would be interesting to trace the exercises of 
mind, of several individuals, as detailed in Mr. 


MEMUIF OF MKS. JUDSON. 217 


J.’s journal, among whom were Moung Myat- 
yah, Moung Thah-yah, Moung Nyo-dwa, Moung 
Gway, and others. But the quotations which we 
have already made must suffice. On the 4th of 
June, Moung Myat-yah and Moung Theh-yah were 
baptized, and received into the church. In refer- 
ence to Mrs. Judson’s health, Mr. J. says: 


© June 27. Mrs. J. after having been through two 
courses of salivation for the liver complaint, at length 
despairs of recovering, without some proper medical 
assistance. For a few days, we have hoped, that 
she would get some relief from the various applica 
‘tions which are made, though at the expense of an 
almost total exhaustion of strength; but this morn- 
ing, to our utter disappointment, the disorder has 
returned with increased violence; and her constitu- 
. tion appearsto be rapidly failing. Ihave intended, for 
some time past, to send her alone to Bengal; but she 
has become too weak, and the present circumstances 
of the case are too alarming, to allow such a measure; 
and I have,therefore, concluded to accompany her.” 


They immediately commenced their preparations 
for sailing. Onascertaining that they were about to 
depart, Moung Nyo-dwa and Moung Gway request 
ed baptism, with great urgency, stating, that as 
they had fully embraced the religion of Christ, they 
could not remain easy without being baptized, agree 
ably to his command, ‘They were accordingly bap 
tized on the 16th of July. 

The ship being detained, the teacher Moung 
Shwa-gnong expressed his desire to testify his faith 
and attachment to the Saviour, by being baptized, 
und becoming a member of the church. The 
church, being satisfied that he had become a sincere 
disciple of the Saviour, though from fear and other 
causes he had hesitated to avow his faith, by a 
public profession, joyfully agreed to receive him as 
a ssetibey after baptism. He was accordingly ba 
tized on the 18thof July ‘The mind of Mah Mep-la 

; 19 - 


218 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


was so much affected on this occasion, that she re- 
quested to be immediately baptized; and as there 
- Was the most satisfactory evidence of her sincere 
conversion, she was baptized the same evening, 
being the tenth Burman convert, and the first female, 
On returning to the house, she said: * Now I have 
taken the oath of allegiance to Jesus Christ, and I 
have nothing to do but to commit myself, soul and 
body, into the hands of my Lord, assured taat he 
will never suffer me to fall away.” 

It must be regarded as a signal proof of the favor 
of God, that, notwithstanding the hostility of the 
government, and all the unfavorable circumstances 
which obstructed the operations of the mission, so 
much had been accomplished. The language had 
been acquired, and a grammar and dictionary com- 
piled; a portion of the Scriptures had been transla- 
ted and printed; tracts had been issued; some know- 
ledge of the truths of the Gospel had been commu- 
nicated to many minds; and ten individuals had been 
made subjects of the grace of God, and at the 
hazard of their lives had been baptized into the 
name of the Sacred Trinity. Surely, if no more had 
been effected by this mission, no one, who knows 
the value ofa single soul,. would think that it was 
established and sustained in vain. 

On the 19th of July, Mr. and Mrs. J. sailed for 
Bengal. They were accompanied to the vessel by 
all the native converts, and by nearly a hundred othe 
individuals, who testified sincere grief at their de- 
parture. 


. 


—_—~»>— 


CHAPTER XII. 


Arrival in Calcutta—Return to Rangoon—Dr. Price joins the 
Mission—Mrs. Judson sails for America 


Tuey arrived in Calcutta on the Sth of August. 
Mrs. Judson’s health seemed to have derived no ee 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 219 


sential benefit from the voyage. For the advantage 
of a more healthful climate, she was removed to Se- 
rainpore. The state of her health continued sach, 
that it was, forawhile, thought necessary that she 
should remain several months in Bengal; but more 
favorable symptoms soon appeared, and she resolved 
to return with her husband to the scene of their la- 
bors. On the 5thof January, 1821, they arrived in 
Rangoon. 


“ January 5, As we drew near the town, we 
strained our eyes to distinguish the countenances of 
our friends amid the crowd that we saw assembled 
on the wharf. The first that we recognised was 
the teacher, Moung Shwa-gnong, with his hands 
raised to his head, as he discerned us on the deck; 
and, on landing, we met successively with Mah Men- 
la, and Moung Thah-lah, and several others, mea, 
women, and children, who, after our usual examina- 
tion at the custom-office, accompanied us to the mis- 
sion-house. Soon after, Moung Nau, and others 
came in, who had not, at first, heard of our arrival. 
In the evening, I took my usual seat among the disci- 
ples; and when we bowed down in prayer, the hearts 
of us all flowed forth in gratitude and praise. 

“ January 6. In the morning we went to the 
government-house. The lady of the Viceroy re- 
ceived Mrs. J. with the familiarity of a friend. We 
sat sometime conversing with her. She informed 
us that she was now Woon-gyee-gah-dau, an‘ was 
allowed to ride in a wau; (a vehicle carried by “orty 
or fifty men;) dignities which very few Bui van 
ladies attain. While we were sitting with her, the 
Viceroy just made his appearance, stalking along, as 
usual, with his great spear. He looked down upon 
us a moment, saying, ‘Ah! you are come;’ and then 
passed on. ’ , 

*©13, Have spent the past week in getting our 
things in order, and receiving visits from the disci 
ples and inquirers. Yesterday, Moung Gway, the 


220 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON 


only one of the baptized whom we had not seen, 
returned from the woods, on hearing of c cr arrival; 
and I am now able to record, (and I du i with the 
most heart-felt satisfaction and grateful praise to the 
preserving Saviour,) that though they have, for the 
space of six months, been almost destitute of the 
means of grace, and those who lived in our yard 
-have been dispersed, and forced, through fear of 
heavy extortion and oppression from petty officers 
of government, to ‘flee into the woods, or take refuge 
under some government agi who could protect 
them; yet not one of them has dishonored his profes- 
sion, but all remain firm in their faith and attachment 
to the cause. 

‘The most important event, (and that relates of 
course to Moung Shwa-gnong,) remains to be men- 
tioned. it will be remembered that he was accused 
before the former Viceroy, of being a heretic; and 
that the simple reply, ‘Inquire further,’ spread dis- 
may among us all, and was one occasion of our visit 
to Ava. Soon after Mya-day-men assumed the 

overnment of this province, all the priests and of- 
Noor of the village, where Moung Shwa-gnong 
lives, entered into a conspiracy to destroy him. 
They held daily consultations, and assumed a tone 
of triumph; while poor Moung Shwa-gnong’s cour- 
age began to flag—and though he does aot like to 
own it, he thought he must flee for his life. At 
length one of the conspiracy, a member of the su- 
preme court, went into the presence of the Viceroy, 
and, in order to sound his disposition, complained 
that the teacher, Moung Shwa-gnong, was making 
every endeavour to turn the priests’ rice-pot bottom 
upwards. What consequence? said the Viceroy. 
Let the priests turn it back again. This sentence 
was enough; the hopes of the conspiracy were blas- 
ted; and all the disciples felt that they were sure of 
toleration under Mya-day-men. But this adminis- 
tration will not probably continue many months, 

“ Jan.21. Lord’s-day. All the disciples but one, 


MEMU.R OF MRS. JUDSON. 221 


and all the hopeful inquirers, were present at wor- 
ship; who, together with some others, made up an 
assembly of about twenty-five adults, all paying 
respectful and devout attention; the most interesting 
asuembly, all things considered, that I have yet seen, 
How impossible it seemed, two years ago, that such 
a precious assembly could ever be raised up out of 
the Egvptian darkness, the atheistic superstition, ot 
this heathen land. Much encouraged by the general 
appearance of things this day. Why art thou ever 
east down, O my soul! and why art thou disquieted 
within me! Hope thou in God—the God of the 
Burmans, as weil as David’s God—for I shall yet 
praise him for the help of his countenance, revealed 
in the salvation of thousands of these immortal 
souls,” 


The occurrences during several succeeding months 
were similar to those which have been stated. ‘The 
zayat was visited by many individuals, some of whom 
came to scoff, others to dispute, and a few to inquire 
the way to Zion. The little church dwelt amidst 
its enemies, unharmed; owing its safety, however, 
in part, to the great caution with which the concerns 
of the mission were conducted. It was not generally 
known at Rangoon, that any person had renounced 
the religion of Boodh, and embraced that of Christ. 

On the 4th of March, Moung Ing, who was the 
second convert, but whose absence from Rangoon 
had prevented his joining the church, was baptized. 
During his absence, however, he had. endeavoured 
to spread the knowledge of the Saviour, by conver- 
sation with his friends. 

On the 20th of May, 1821, the Rev. Jonathan D 
Price was set apart as a Missionary to Burmah, in 
the Sansom-Street Meeting-house, Philadelphia. 
He had received a medical education, and was to act 
m the joint character of a Missionary and Physician. 
A few days after, he, with his wife and. child, sailed 
from Salem, for Calcutta, where he arrived on the 
27th of November. 197 


229 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


Mr. Judson now employed Moung } nwa-gnong 
to assist him in a thorough revision of those parts 
of the New Testament which had been translated, 
lhut not yet printed, viz. the Epistle to the Ephesians, 
and the first part of Acts. These were sent to 
Serampore to be printed. 

On the 15th of June, Mah Myat-lah was bap 
tized, an added to the little band of believers. 


‘* July 14. In the interval of receiving company, 
I have lately been employed in translating; have 
finished the Gospel and Epistles of John, those 
exquisitely sweet and precious portions of the New 
Testament, and am now employed on the latter part 
of Acts. I find Moung Shwa-ba a most valuable 
assistant, in all parts of missionary work. Moung 
Shwa-gnong also begins ‘to be dissatisfied with 
deing a mere discipie, and hopes that he shall some- 
time be thought worthy of being a teacher of the 
Christian religion? These two, with Mah Men- 
la, are, at present, the flower of our littlechurch. I 
have no reason, however, to complain of the conduct 
of any. considering the great disadvantages under 
which they all labor. Some have grown compara- 
tively cold; but none have forgotten their first love. 
Praise forever be to Him, 


*¢ Who is faithful to his promises, 
And faithful to his Son.” 


+ Jugust 4. Am just recovering from the second 
fit of sickness which I have had this season. ‘The 
first was the cholera. morbus; the present has been 
a fever. ‘The second day after I was taken, Mrs. 
J. was taken with the same; and for several days 
we were unable to help one another. Through 
divine mercy, however, we contrived to get our 
Medicines from time to time, and are now in a con- 
valescent state, so far as the fever is concerned. 
Mrs, J. however, is suffering severely under the liver 
complaint, which, notwithstanding continual saliva- 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 223 


tions, is making such rapid and alarming advances, 
as to preclude all hope of her recovery in this part 
of the world.” 


The alarming character of Mrs. Judson’s disease 
made it evident, that she must repair to some more 
propitious climate, to regain her health. It was, at 
last, resolved, that she should visit America; and on 
the 2istof August, sheembarked for Bengal. The 
feelings with which she parted from her husband, 
and from the little church, may be better conceived 
than described Her own words are: 


«Those only who have been through a variety 
of toil and privation, to obtain a darling object, car 
realize how entirely every fibre of the heart adheres 
to that object, when secured. Had we encountered 
no difficulties, and suffered no privations in our 
attempts to form a church of Christ, under the 
government of a heathen despot, we should have 
been warmly attached to the individuals composing 
it, but should not have felt that tender solicitude and 
anxious affection, as in the present case. 

‘*Rangoon, from having been the theatre, in 
which so much of the faithfulness, power and mercy 
of God had been exhibited—from having been con- 
sidered, for ten years past, as my home for life—and 
from a thousand interesting associations of ideas, had 
become the dearest spot on earth. Hence you will 
readily imagine that no ordinary consideration could 
have induced my departure.” 


The following letter to Dr. Baldwin contains an 
account of her arrival in Calcutta, and of her ar- 
rangements for visiting England: ' 


¢ Calcutta, Dec. 8, 1821. 
“Rey. and dear Sir, 
“IT left Rangoon last August, and arrived in Cal- 
eutta on the 22d of September. My disorder gained 


224. +§=& MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


ground so rapidly, that nothing but a voyage to sea 
and the benefit of a cold climate, presented tl.e least 
hcpe of life. You will readily imagine that nothing 
but the prospect of a final separation would have in- 
duced us to decide on this measure, under circum- 
stances so trying as those in which we were placed. 
But duty to God, to ourselves, to the Board of Mis- 
sions, and to the perishing Burmans, compelled us 
to adopt this course of procedure, though agonizing 
to all the natural feelings of our hearts. On my 
arrival in Calcutta, inquiries were immediately made 
relative to a voyage to America. But, to my great 
disappointment, I found most of the American Cap- 
tains far from being disposed to take passengers, on 
account of having their cargoes engaged to the ex- 
tent of the tonnage of their vessels. One Captain, 
however, offered to give me a passage for fifteen 
hundred rupees, but I could not think of causing the 
Board so great an expense. In mentioning my cir- 
cumstances to Mrs. Thomason, (lady of the Rev. 
Mr. Thomason, chaplain) she suggested the advan- 
tages of a voyage to England, on account of the 
superior accommodations, medical advice, and female 
passengers, in English ships. ‘The pious Captain 
of a ship bound to England was then residing in 
ner family; with him she consulted, and they made 
arrangements for my passage for five hundred ru- 
pees, proviacd I went ina cabin with three children, 
who were going to England. _ As my only object in 
going to sea, is restoration of health, I did not hesi- 
tate to secure a passage, though I should have re- 
joiced (since I must take a long voyage) to have 
gone direct to America, ‘The father of the children 
. has since arrived in Calcutta, and has very kindly 
offered to pay the whole price of the cabin, (which 
is four thousand rupees) which will enable me to go 
to England, free of expense to the Board. 

“If the pain in my side is entirely removed, while 
on my passage to Europe, I shall return to India in 
the same ship, and proceed immediately to Rangoon, 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 225 


But if not, I shall go over to America, and spend 
one winter in my dear native country. As ardently 
as I long to see my beloved friends in America, I 
cannot prevail on myself to be any longer from Ran- © 
goon than is absolutely necessary for the preserva- 
tion of my life. [have had a severe struggle relative 
to my immediate return to Rangoon, instead of go-— 
ing to England. But I did not venture to go con- 
trary to the convictions of reason, to the opinion 
of an eminent and skilful physician, and the repeated 
mjunctions of Mr. Judson. © 

“Relative to the Rangoon mission, I presume 
Mr. Judson has given youall the information. But 
perhaps I have received letters of a later date, and 
may be able to communicate something, of which 
you may not have heard. My last from Rangoon 
was dated October 26. Moung Shwa-gnong had 
been accused before the Viceroy, and had disappear- 
ed. Mr. Judson had felt much anxiety and distress 
on his account, fearing he kad done something in 
the way of retraction, which prevented his visiting 
him. But ina fortnight, he was agreeably surprised 
at seeing him enter. Moung Shwa-gnong informed 
Mr. Judson, that, having been accused, he thought 
it the wisest way to keep out of sight; that he had 
put all his family on board a boat, and was going up 
the country among the sect of heretics with whom 
he once associated, and had now come to take leave, 
obtain tracts, gospels, &c. Mr. Judson furnished 
him with what was necessary, and hid him God 
speed. He will, no doubt, do much good among that 
class of people; for it is impossible for him to be any 
time with his friends, without conversing on the sub- 
ject of religion. Moung-Ing had returned, as stead- 
fast, and as much devoted to the causeasever. He, 
and Moung Shwa-ba, spend every evening in reading 
the Scriptures, and finding the places where the 
apostles preached, on a map which Mr. Judson has 
made for them. Another Burman has been bap- 
tized. who gives decided evideice of being a true 


226 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


Chnstian. Have we not, my dear sir, every reason 
to trust in God in fut ire, when we see what he has 
done in Rangoon? Could you see at once the 
difficulties in the way of the conversion of the 
Burmans, the grace of God would appear ten times 
as conspicuous as it now does. When we hardly 
ventured to hope that we should ever see a truly 
converted Burman, how great is our joy to see a 
little church rise up in the midst of that wilderness, 
consisting of thirteen converted Burmans.” 


On her passage, she had a severe attack of her 
complaint, which confined her to her cabin for 
several days. During her cou.finement, two young 
ladies of rank and influence frequently inquired 
concerning her health. She occasionally requested 
them to read to her such seiections as she thought 
might have a salutary effect upon their minds. To 
these exercises, she added much serious converse; 
and soon had the happiness of seeing their minds 
solemnly impressed. ‘Their seriousness continued 
during the rest of the voyage; but what has been 
the issue, we have had no means of ascertaining. 

Having arrived in Kingland, with health somewhat 
improved, she was introduced to the excellent Joseph 
Butterworth, Esq., Member of Parliament. He po- 
litely urged her to make his house her home; which 
invitation she accepted with the liveliest emotions.* 


* Mi Butterworth, at a meeting of the English Baptist Mis- 
sionary Society, thus gracefully alluded to Mrs. Judson’s visit: 

After some remanks upon the pleasing success which haa 
attended missionary exertions among all denominatioas of Chris- 
tians, he proceeded to mention that respecting oae interesting 
scene of labor, which had been slightly touched on m the Report, 
he could add some further particulars which had recently come to 
his knowledge. He referred to the Burman Exapire, and his 
information was derived from Mrs. Judson, whora he had lately 
the pleasure of receiving under his roof, and whose visic teminded 
him of the apostolic admonition, ‘ Be not forge: W to entertain 
sirangers, for thereby some have entertained ange @ unawares.” 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 227 


While in his family, ste was favored with an in 
troduction to many persons distinguished for litera- 
ture and piety, particularity Wilberforce, Babington, 
ard Sumner, the King’s chaplain. 

It was thought expedient that Mrs. Judson should 
visit Cheltenham, for the benefit of its mineral] 
waters. She was recommended by Mr. Butterworth 
co an eminent physician of that place, and there spent 
several weeks. 

About the same time she received a pressing invi- 
tation from friends in Scotland, to visit them, with 
a kind offer to defray her expenses. Acceding to 
this proposal, she spent several weeks in that land 
of Christian hospitality. Here she received a ree 
quest from the American Baptist Board, to return 
in the New York packet. She proceeded to Liver- 
pool for embarkation; but was persuaded to take 
passage in a much more cominodious vessel, by a 
number of Liverpool ladies, who generously defrayed 
the expense of her passage. 

In August, 1822, she took final leave of her Brit- 
ish friends, who had become inexpressibly endeared 
to her by many valuable presents and innumerable 
acts of kindness. ‘‘ Often has she mentioned,” says 
a friend, ‘‘ with the brightest glow of affection, the 
high-toned piety of English and Scottish Christians, 
and the prelibations of heaven which she enjoyed in 
their society.” 

The following memorandum has been found among 
her papers: 


« August 16. Embarked on board the Amity, for 
the United States. Mr. and Mrs. Deakin, Miss 
Hope, Miss Jones and her brother, accompanied me, 
about fifty miles, and returned in the steam-boat. 
After the departure of these very dear friends, I 
felt sad and disconsolate, being quite alone, without 
any Christian friend on board, or any female with 
whora I can converse. Yet I am notalone. The 
same kind and glorious Being, who, notwithstanding 


228 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


all my provocations, las hitherto directed my steps, 
and at times granted me his presence, is still, I trust, 
with me, and will make my way prosperous. I 
hope to enjoy much of his presence, during my 
passage, and spend more time in the immediate 
duties of religion, than my late rambling life has 
admitted. Should I be preserved through the voy 
age, the next land I tread will be my own native 
soil, ever-loved America, the land of my birth. I 
cannot realize that I shall ever again find myself“in 
my own dear home at Bradford, amid the scenes of 
my early youth, where every spot is associated with 
some tender recollection. But the constant idea, 
that my dear J. is not a participator of my joys, 
will mar them all.” 


The following letter from Mr. Judson, to Dr. 
Baldwin, will show the state of things at Rangoon, 
up to the time of its date. 


«* Rangoon, Feb. 6, 1822. 


* Rev. and dear Sir, 

«I have baptized one man only, since I last 
wrote you; nor are there any others, at present, 
who are preparing tocome forward. ‘The last pros- 
ecution of our most distinguished disciple, Moung 
Shwa-gnong, which took place in September last, 
and terminated in his being obliged to flee for his 
life, struck a fatal blow to all religious inquiry. 
Since that time, I have confined myself almost en- 
tirely t translating. About half the New Testa- 
ment is now finished, and I am desirous of finishing 
the whole, if possible, before making any further 
missionary movement. When that work is disposed 
of, I expect to feei more free to go forth and encoun- 
ter the hazards, which may attend an open and ex 
tensive declaration of the Gospel. I am fully per- 
suaded that the way will soon be opened for the 
introduction and establishment of true religion in 
this country. Difficulties may obstruct, delays mey 
mtervene, the faith of Missionaries and their sup- 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 229 


porters may be severely tried; but at the right time, 
the time marked out fiom all eternity, the Lord wil! 
appear in his glory. 

‘‘ Brother Price arrived here’in December, ard 
brother Hough in January following. I believe :< 
is the desire of us all to live and die among thu 
Burmans.” 


—~p>—- 


CHAPTER XIII. 


Mrs. Judson’s Visit to America—Mr. Wade joins the Mission— 
Sail for Calcutta. 


Mrs. Jonson arrived at New York on the 25th of 
September, 1822. The following letter expresses 
her feelings on revisiting her native country. 


TO MR. JUDSON’S PARENTS. 
Philadelphia, Sept. 27, 1822, 
“«My dear Parents, 

« With mingled sensations of joy and sorrow, I 
address a few lines to the parents of my beloved hus- 
band—joy, that I once more find myself in my own 
native country, and with the prospect of meeting 
with loved relatives and friends—sorrow, that he 
who has been a participator in all my concerns for 
the last ten years, is not now at hand to partake 
with me in the joyful anticipations of meeting those 
he so much loves. I left Liverpool on the 16th of 
August, and arrived in New York harbor day before 
yesterday. On account of tne prevalence of the yel- 
ow fever, prudence forbade my landing. Accor- 
dingly I embarked on board the steam-boat for this 

lace, where I arrivel a few hours ago. It was my 

intention to pass a week in Philadelphia, and ther 

go to Providence, and thence to you in Woburn, ag 

3t would be on my way to Bradford, where I shall 
2U 


230 ' “MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


spend thc winter. But Dr. Staughton wishes me 
to go on to Washington, which will detain me in 
this part of the country a week longer. However, 
I hope to be with you in a fortnight from this time. 
My health is much improved since I left England, 
and I begin to hope that the disorder is entirely erad- 
icated.” 


Of the various incidents which occurred during 
this visit to America, the Compiler was encouraged 
to hope for a particular narrative, by her brother, 
Dr. Elnathan Judson, whose kind attentions to her 
during her visit, she frequently mentions in her let- 
ters with the warmest gratitude. But the state of 
his health has prevented that gentleman from per- 
forming a service for wnich he is so well qualified, 
and which would have been so acceptable to the 
readers of this work.* From the letters of Mrs, 
Judson, with which we have been favored, we sha 
make such extracts as will furnish a general view of 
her proceedings during her visit. 

After a short stay in Philadelphia, she hastened te 
meet her parents and friends in Bradford. Here, iz 
the bosom of her native home, she had hoped so far 
‘> regain her health, as to be enabled to embark 
egain for Burmah, early in the ensuing spring. 
But the excitement of feeling produced by this visit 
co the scenes and the friends of her childhood, and 
the exhaustion of strength, resulting from the neces 
sily of meeting and convers ng with numerous Vis- 
iters, added to the effect of the cold climate of New- 
England, on a constitution so long accustomed to 
the tropical heat of Burmah, obliged her to leave 
Bradford, after a stay of six weeks, and spend the 
winter in Baltimore. 

The letters which will now be inserted will fully 
disclose the real state of her health, her feelings, and 


*This amiable and lamented gentleman has died, since \1¢_ 
previous editions of this work were published. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 231 


her employments. We have thought that they 
would not only be interesting, as furnishing a better 
view of he. character, than any remarks of a biog- 
rapher could impart, but necessary, to correct the 
erroneous ideas which may sti:. exist insome minds. 
There were persons, who, from motives which we | 
shall not attempt to investigate, were busy in 
misrepresenting Mrs. Judson’s character and con- 
duct. It was said that her health was not seriously 
impaired, and that she visited the south with a view 
to excite attention and applause. To such persons, 
the perusal of these letters, in which she utters her 
feelings to her friends without reserve, will, it is 
hoped, minister a rebuke sufficiently severe, to 
awaken shame and penitence; and to those who may 
have been unwarily led to form unfavorable opinions 
respecting Mrs. Judson, we cannot doubt that 
these letters will afford welcome evidence of her 
modest and amiable disposition, consistent and ex- 
emplary demeanor, ardent piety, and steady, irre- 
pressible devotion to the interests of the mission. 


TO HER SISTERS. 
* Baltimore, Dec. 3, 1822. 
“ My dear Sisters, 

* . have at last arrived at my home for the 
winter, and though it looks stormy and cold out- 
side, it is warm and comfortable within my chamber, 
and I am as well as can be expected after such a 
journey. Surely no person ever had so much 
reason for thankfulness as [ have. Through how 
many dangers and journeys have I been preserved— 
how many kind friends meet me wherever I go—and 
how many mercies attend me! Bless the Lord, O 
my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name. 
But though I am not in Rangoon, I doubt not you 
will be pleased with a narration of my adventures ; 
so [ will write in my usual style. 

“ I left Dr. Baldwin’s on Tuesday morning, in 
company with Mr. H. We had a pleasant ride to 


232 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSUN. 


Providence, at which place we arrived about five 
o’clock in the afternoon. I sent my letters to Mr. 
B. who soon came to the hotel, and urged my going 
to his house. Butas we were to go on board the 
steam-boat the same night, I declined. He then 
said he would come with his carriage, and conduct 
me to the steam-boat; at the same time saying, he 
hoped to have a ship ready to sail for India in the 
spring, and should rejoice to give me and other 
Missionaries a passage gratis. He drove me in his 
chaise to the boat about ten o’clock at night, where 
many passengers had embarked. The wind was 
fair, the sky clear, and we had a most charming 
passage through the Sound. For the first time since 
my arrival in America, I slept all night, lulled to 
sleep by the motion of the boat. We reached New 
York at four, on Thursday morning. Soon after 
light, Mr. C. of Boston, came on board, having 
been apprized of my coming, by letters from his 
wife. He procured a carriage, and conducted me ta 
the house of Mr. C. a pious, wealthy Baptist. It 
rained very hard, and as Mr. H. was obliged to ga 
ou, Mr. C. of Boston, very kindly offered to 
accompany me to Philadelphia, on the next day, 
rather than I should go in the rain. Accordingly, 
[ passed Thursday in New York. In the evening, 
one of the most interesting prayer meetings was 
held, that ever I attended. Many pious, devout 
Christians were present; seven prayers were offered, 
and as many addresses. ‘They proposed devoting, 
individually, a part of every Sabbath morning to 
pray for the restoration of my health. Friday 
morning, at six o’clock, we again went on board the 
steam-boat for Philadelphia. It was a most charm- 
ing day; and so mild, that I found my cloak burden- 
some. Forty miles was land carriage; but having 
very pleasant company, I felt not much fatigued. 
We arrived in Philadelphia at nine o’clock in the 
evening of the same day. I found the weathe so 
warm, that a fire was unnecessary. So much for 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSOS 233 


reports which say there is no difference in the cli- 
mates. Sunday morning, brother Elnathan arrived; 
and on Monday we set off for this city, and arrived 
on Tuesday .ncrning. Jam very comfortably situ- 
ated. and keep n my chamber most of the time.” 


TO REV. DR. WAYLAND. 
“Baltimore, Dec. 5, 1822, 


‘How much of heaven might Christians enjoy 
even here on earth, if they would make an effort, if 
they would keep in view what ought to be thei 
great object in life. If they would but make the 
enjoyment of God their main pursuit, how much 
more consistent with their profession would be their 
conduct, how much more useful their lives, and how 
much more rapidly would they ripen for eternal glory. 
Christians do not sufficiently assist each other in their 
spiritual walk. ‘They are not enough in the habit 
of conversing familiarly and affectionately on the 
state of each other’s souls, and kindly encouraging 
each other to persevere and get near to heaven. 
One degree of grace attained in this world is worth 
more than every earthly enjoyment. 

‘¢ My journey to this place was pleasant though 
fatiguing. I passed one night only in New York, 
and spent a most pleasant evening in the society of 
a large party of good people, who were collected 
together for the purpose of prayer. Many fervent 
petitions were presented in behalf of the perishing 
Burmans, and the little church established in that 
country. It was an evening to me full of interest; 
but I found at the conclusion, that my strength was 
quite exhausted, and I began to fear whether I should 
be able tocontinue my journey. I reached Philadel- 
phia late on Friday evening, where I met my brother. 

‘‘[ ought to have mentioned that I found muchof 
a true missionary spirit existing in New York; and 
that the intelligence of Mr. Colman’s death seemed 
to havea proper eflest—that of exciting to greater 

a os 20 


234 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


effort and more fervent prayer that faithful Mission 
aries may be raised up to fill the places of those that 
are removed. 

“Dec. 9. I began this letter as you will see from 
its date some days ago; but a violent cold taken the 
evening I received rours, prevented my finishing it. 
I feel very thankful that I am no farther north than 
Baltunore, for I am confident that the cold would 
soon destroy me. 1 have not been out of the house 
since I arrived, and hardly. out of my chamber. 
My health is certainly better than when I left Boston, 
though I have a heavy cold and some cough. 

‘* What can be done to excite a missionary spimt 
in this country? I dare not engage in the subject 
till [ am better. It would take up my whoie soul, 
and retard my recovery. A little while, and we are 
in eternity; before we find ourselves there, let us do 
much for Christ.” 


TO MRS. CHAPLIN, OF WATERVILLE. 


“ Baltimore, Dec. 19, 1822 
**My dear Mrs, Chaplin, , 


s© All your kind favors, dictated, I doubt not, bv 
the sincerest affection, have been received, al. 
demand from me an early communication, with a 
particular account of my present situation, plans and 

rospects. I did intend writing you from Bostc_, 

ut such was the state of my health and engage- 
ments with our dear friends in that city, that | was 
necessitated to defer it ti’! the present time. Rela- 
tive to my leaving New England for the south, 
when you shall hear my reasons, you will, I dare 
say, join with me in thinking, that duty to myself 
and Mr. Judson required my proceeding as I have. 
1 had never fully counted the cost of a visit to my 
dear native country and beloved relativ’s. Idid not 
expect that a scene which 1 had anticipated as so 
joyous, was destined to give my health and constitu- 
tion a shock which would require months to repair. 
During my passage from England, my health was 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 935 


most perfect, not the least symptom of' niy original 
disorder remained. But from the day of my arrival, 
the idea that I was once more on American ground 
banished all peace and quiet from my mind, and for 
the first four davs and nights I never closed m 
eyes to sleep! This circumstance, together wil 
dwelling on my anticipated meeting with my friends, 
occasioned the most alarming apprehensions. Still, 
however, I flattered myself, that after my first meet- 
ing with my friends was over, I should gradually 
recover my composure, and hastened my departure 
for the eastward. I reached my father’s in about a 
fortnight after my.arrival in this country—and had 
not been able to procure a single night’s sleep. 
The scene which ensued brought my feelings to a 
crisis, nature was quite exhausted, and I began to 
fear wouldsink. ‘lo be concise, my health began to 
decline in a most alarming manner, and the pain in 
ay side and cough returned. I was kept in a state 
of constant excitement, by daily meeting with my 
old friends and acquaintances; and during the whole 
six weeks of my residence at my father’s, I had not 
one quiet night’s rest. I felt the cold most severely, 
and found, as that increased, my cough increased, 
s¢ You may not perhaps be aware of the circum- 
stance, that Mr. Judson’s only brother is a physician 
of some considerable skill, under government, and 
located for the winter in this city. During my stay 
at Bradford, his letters were most frequent and 
urgent, relative to my removal to the south, for the 
purpose of salivating, as the most dangerous conse- 
quences would ensue, should I, with my Indian - 
constitution, salivate at the north. I saw that my 
disorder was rapidly gaining ground—my nervous 
system had become so much affected, that the very 
sight of an old dear friend was quite distressing, and 
I really desired to get away from the sight of every 
human being, as it had become very painful to talk. 
Thus situated, there was no hope of my recovery, 
as my father’s house was throngel with visitera 


-— 


236 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


from day to day. Painful as it was to think of leav- 
‘ng my beloved family, I felt convinced, since it was 
my only object in visiting this country, duty requir- 
ed that everything should yield to endeavours to 
regain my health. I knew that retirement, and 
freedom from company and excitement, were as 
necessary as a milder climate, neither of which could 
be obtained in Bradford. My sister had made ar- 
rangements to accompany me; but meeting in Boston 
with a pious man going on to Washington, and 
knowing I should receive the kindest attention when 
once with my brother, I desired her to return to 
Bradford to comfort my parents. 

‘¢T have been in this city about a fortnight, and 
am very comfortably situated with my brother at a 
boarding-house, where I refuse to see company of 
every description, till my health is re-established. I 
find the climate mild and delightful—have the best 
medical attendance in the city, through the influence 
of my brother—have commenced a course of mercu- 
ry, which, I trust, through the blessing of God, 
will perfectly restore my health—and find my ner- 
vous system so far restored to its usual state, that 
I am able to study four and five hours every day. 
This, to me, is an unspeakable comfort, as I hope 
my time will not be entirely lost in my endeavours 
to regain my health. While in England, my friends 
repeatedly urged my writing an account of the Bur- 
man Mission, as se little information had hitherto 
been communicated. On my passage I made a be- 
ginning, ina ‘* Series of Letters addressed to Mr. 
Butterworth,” in whose house I resided during my 
stay in England. While at Bradford, I was unable 
to proceed in this work; but since my arrival here, 
my freedom from interruption has enabled me to go 
on—and I find much jleasure in the consideration, 
that I shall be able to give to my friends, not only 
in England, but America, that information relative 
to the Burman Empire, which my state of health 
forbids my verbally communicating. My object is, © 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. Q37 


to give an account of the American Baptist Mission 
to Burmah—its origin, progress, and success; consis 
ting principally in a corapilation of those letters and 
documents transmitted to friends in America, inter 
spersed with accounts of the jx pulation, manners, 
and customs of the Burmans. 

‘Thus, my dear Mrs. C. have I been particular, 
and I fear tiresome, in my account of myself. But 
your kindness, your affectionate concern for my wel- 
fare, is all the excuse I have to offer. Your kind 
hint, relative to my being injured by the lavish at- 
tention of our dear friends in this country, has much 
endeared you to my heart. JI am well aware that 
human applause has a tendency to elate the soul, 
and render it less anxious about spiritual enjoyments, 
particularly if the individual is conscious of deserv- 
ing them. But I must say, that since my return to 
this country, I have often been affected to tears, in 
hearing the undeserved praises of my friends, feeling 
that I was far, very far from being what they imag- 
ined; and that there are thousands of poor, obscure 
Christians, whose excellences will never be known 
in this world, who are a thousand times more de- 
serving of the tender regard of their fellow Chris-” 
tians. thanT am. Yet I trust, I am grateful to m 
Heavenly Father for inclining the hearts of his 
children to look on me witha friendly eye.. The re- 
tired life I now lead, is much more congenial to my 
feelings, and much more favorable to religious enjoy- 
ment, than when in England and America, where I 
was kept ina continual bustle ofcompany. Yes, it 
is in retirement that our languishing graces are re- 
vived, our affections raised to God, and our souls 
refreshed and quickened by the influences of the Ho- 
ly Spirit. If we would live near the threshold of 
heaven, and daily take a glance of our promised in- 
heritance, we must avoid not only worldly, but reli- 
gious dissipation. Strange as it may seem, I do 
believe there is something like religious dissipation, 


% 
x 


238 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


in a Christian’s being so entirely engrossed in reli 
gious company, as to prevent his spiritual enjoy- 
ments.”? 


TO HER SISTER. 
‘Baltimore, Dec. 25, 1822. 
** My dear Sister Mary, 

«‘ Many thanks for the concern you manifest for 
my spiritual health, as it is to me a convincing evi- 
dence that you constantly pray for me. Whatever 
is my situation, however flattering my prospects of 
a worldly nature, all is loss and dross unless I feel 
something of that spiritual peace and comfort which 
our Lord bequeathed to his disciples. And I know 
of no means so directly calculated to insure this 
peace to us, as the fervent and earnest prayers of 
those who enter heaven, as it were, to lay the case 
of their friends before their Father. [am in this 
city much more comfortably situated than you im- 
agine, or Lanticipated. I have always found full 
employment of time, and much retirement from com- 
pany of every description, the grand secret for liv- 
ing near to God, and the right performance of duties 
incumbent on us. In these respects I have not been 
so comfortably situated since I left Rangoon, as 
now, excepting on my passage from England to this 
country. When I first arrived, I requested the ser- 
vants of the house to say, when any person requested 
to see me, that ‘ Mrs. Judson did not see company.’ 
For I felt resolved that my health should be my 
first consideration. 

‘Brother EK. is absent, engaged in his official du- 
ties, nearly all day, so that I have the disposal of 
my time entirely. Ispend about five hours in the 
day in arranging letters relative to the Burman Mis- 
sion; and feel very happy in the consideration, that 
in my endeavours to regain my health, my time. is 
not all lost—for in this publication, Christians will 
have a more correct view of the little church in Ran- 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 239 


goon, when they see from what materials it has 
heen raised, than I could give them by conversing 
months. In addition to these advantages I have an 
assistant copyist, a pious, excellent young lady. I 
have been here three weeks, but have not been out 
of the house, and scarcely out of my chamber, since 
my arrival. Ihave the best and most experienced 
medical attendance in the city. ‘The physiciaps 
here say-[ should not have lived through the winter 
in New England. They have thought it best to 
salivate me; and I am now under a course of mercu- 
ry, and feel my mouth considerably affected. My 
cough has been very severe, until within two days 
past; and I trust, in consequence of the mercury, it 
1s beginning to subside. ‘The physicians say there 
is no doubt but I shall recover by spring; but I de- 
sire to leave it with Him, who seeth the end from 
the beginning, and who doeth all things well. Why 
am I spared? O may it be to promote the cause of 
Christ in Burmah, and to be successful in winning 
souls. May we make it our great business to grow 
in grace, and to enjoy closet religion. Here is the 
place for us to prepare for usefulness. I have re- 
ceived several good spiritual letters since I have 
been here—one from Scotland.” 


TO HER SISTER. 
s¢ Baltimore, Jan. 5, 1823. 
‘© My dear Sister, 2 

“‘T have been spending part of this forenoon in 
prayer for myself, Mr. Judson, the Burman mission, 
parents and sisters, &c. and have now concluded ta 
pass the remainder in writing to you. 

«T am very comfortably situated, the weather 
mild, and I think my health improving. Soon after 
my arrival in this city, brother called a consultation 
of physicians, when it was decided that my cough, 
which had much increased, was in consequence of 
my liver being affected; and that in order to have it 
removed, I must be salivated. It is nearly three 


240 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


* weeks, since I commenced miy old employment of 
taking mercury. I ain now in astate of salivation, 
my cough is almost entirely removed, the pain in 
my side has subsided, and I begin to think my recov- 
ery is nearly completed I continue, however, to 
‘ake mercury, and shall probably be kept in this 
state for three weeks to come. I have not been out 
of the house since I arrived, and hardly out my 
chamber. 

“‘T receive a great many letters, some of which 
are very spiritual and interesting. ‘The one you 
forwarded the other day, was from a niece of Mr. 
Butterworth, a most interesting letter. She says 
her uncle has put to interest, for my Burman school, 
£100 sterling, and much more is collected. I find 
it is the opinion of my London physicians, that I 
shall. not Ave if I return to the East. Friends in 
England say, ‘Mr. Judson must come there.’ But 
I say no—I must make another trial. I still hope to 
get away in the spring, but not before April or May. 
I shall go on to the north; as early as the travelling 
will allow. I long to be among you again, though 
' believe it is much better for my health to be here.” 


TO REV. DR. WAYLAND. 
© Baltimore, Jan. 22, 1823. 


“JT want the Baptists throughout the United 
States to feel, that Burmah must be converted 
through their instrumentality. ‘They must do more 
than they nave ever yet done. ‘They must pray 
more, they must géve more, and make greater eftorts 
to prevent the Missionary flame from becoming ex- 
tinct. Every Christian in the United States should 
feel as. deeply impressed with the importance of 
making continual efforts for the salvation of the 
heathen, as though their conversion depended solely 
on himself. Every individual Christian should feel 
himself guilty if he has not lone and does not con- 
tinue to do all in his power for the spread of the’ 


MEMOIR UF MRS. JUDSON. 241 


gospel aua the enlightening of the heathen world. 
But I need not write thus to you. You see, you 
feel the misery of the heathen world. Try to 
awaken Christians around you. Preach frequently 
on the subject of Missions. I have remarked it to 
be the case, when a minister feels much engaged for 
the heathen, his people generally partake of his 
spirit. 

‘*T rejoice to hear that there 1s a prospect of 3 
revival of religion in Boston. May it reach all our 
societies.” 


TO HER SISTER. 
** Baltimore, Feb, 12, 1823 
“ My dear Sister, 

“The first moment I am able to hold a pen is ‘n 
reply to yours, which I received yesterday. It 
found me in bed, weak and feeble, but its contents 
rejoiced my heart. If I have ever felt a disposition 
to complain of my deprivation of health, it has been 
since I have heard of the reformations at Andover 
and Boston. O could I have endured the cold of 
New-England, how rejoiced I should have been to 
have passed the winter, where my soul would have 
been refreshed with those spiritual showers. I do 
‘indeed long once more to see the power of God dis- 
played in the awakening of sinners and tha reviving 
of Christians. But though I am deprived at present 
of this unspeakable privilege, my soul rejoices to 
hear that God still remembers his church in mercy, 
that he still manifests himself a prayer hearing God. 
How gladly would I set offimmediately for Bradford 
if I did not think it presumptuous. For the last 
month, I have been very feeble,—hardly able to 
write to anv one. I have had two slight attacks of 
bleeding at the lungs; and in consequence of this, 
have been reduced very low by bleeding at the arm, 
I have been bled five times, and think I am now 
getting better. 

‘¢ My friends here are very kind. But in all my 

4 21 


Q4Q MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON 


afflictions, my only consolation has been derived from 
the consideration, that God my father and my por- 
tion reigns, and orders all my changes.” 


TO MRS CHAPLIN, OF WATERVILLE. 
*¢ Baltimore, Feb. 17, 1823. 
‘M7 ever dear Mrs. Chaplin, 

‘Your kind and affectionate letter found me in 
bed, so weak, that I was obliged to read it at inter- 
vals; but it afforded heartfelt consolation. But 
thanks to our Heavenly Father, whose guardian 
care and love I have so largely experienced, I am 
now much better, and once more enjoy the prospect 
of gaining that degree of health, which will allow 
my return to Burmah; there to pass my remaining 
days, few or many, in endeavouring to guide immor- 
tal souls to that dear Redeemer, whose presence can 
make joyful a sick chamber, a dying bed. For the 
last month, I have been very ill. ‘The disease seem- 
ed to be removed from the liver to the lungs. Ihave 
raised blood twice, which the physicians thought 
proceeded from the lungs, though I am inclined to 
think to the contrary, and believe it came only from 
the mouth of some vessel in the throat. I was, 
however, bled so frequently, and so largely, that my 
strength was quite reduced. At present, I am free 
- from every unfavorable symptom, but am still weak. 

‘1am rejoiced to hear that Mr. Boardman has 
offered himself to supply dear Colman’s place. If 
avtuated from motives of love to God, and concern 
for precious souls, tell him he will never regret the 
sacrifice, but will find thase spiritual consolations, 
which will more than compensate for every priva- 
tion. I shall rejoice to afford him every assistance 
in the acquisition of the language, which my health 
will allow, though I fear he will not be ready to sail 
so early as I hope to embark. 

«My dear Mrs. Chaplin, this is the third day { 
have been writing this letter, on account of my 
weakness. But I am gairing a little every day. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 243 


‘Yesterday, I had a little female prayer meeting in 
my chamber—trust the blessed Saviour was near us 
O, it is good to get near to God, to enjoy his pres. 
ence, and feel, whether in life or death, we are his. 
Open your mouth wide, and I will fill it, is a promise, 
of which we do not think sufficiently. How much 
real enjoyment we lose, by not striving more ear 
nestly to partake largely of the influence of the 
Holy Spirit. 

“‘Let us, my dear sister, so live, that our union to - 
Christ, the vine, may not only be satisfactory to 
ourselves, but to all around us. On earth we serve 
God; in heaven, enjoy him—is a motto I have long 
wished to adopt. When in heaven we candonoth 
ing towards saving immortal souls.” 


TO ONE OF HER SISTERS. 
© Baltimore, Feb. 25, 1823. 
“ My dear Sister, 

“From the tenor of my last, I know you will all 
feel anxious to hear from me, consequently, I take 
the earliest opportunity to write you. My health 
is daily improving; but after being reduced so low 
as I have been, by bleeding from the arm, I must 
expect to gain very gradually. My liver complaint 
seems entirely removed, and were | not so very fee- 
ble, I would set off for Bradford to-morrow. But] 
can now ride only an hour at a time, and am much 
fatigued after that. But God has been kind, ‘un- 
speakably kind to me, and enabled me to cast all my 
cares and concerns on him; and I have hea eae 
been led to say, it is good for me to be aftlicted. 
There are some spiritual, heavenly minded Chris 
tians in this place, who have often refreshed me by 
their conversation and prayers. A few days ago, I 
had a prayer meeting in my chamber, and I trust 
Christ was one in the midst of us. Dr. Staughton 
sent me yesterday Mr. Judson’s journal, lately re- 
ceived. God is doing wonders in Rangoon, and 
building up his little church there. Five more have 


244 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


been baptized, making eighteen in all, and severa 
others seriously inquiring. Three females have late- 
ly been baptized, who formerly attended my Wednes- 
day meeting. They have set up, of their own 
accord, a female prayer meeting. Is not this en- 
couraging? Dr. Price had received an order from 
the Emperor to go to Ava, on account of his 
medical skill; and Mr. Judson was about to accom- 
pany him, in order to make another effort for tolera- 
tion. You will readily imagine my anatety to get 
back to Rangoon. I yet hope that my health will 
enable me to return this spring. O that God would 
incline the heart of the Emperor to favor the intro- 
duction of the Christian religion, and protect the 
little church formed there. 

“I hope to get to Bradford by the last of March, 
Brother E. will probably travel with me. But I 
must give up all idea of visiting and talking, on ac- 
count of the weakness of my lungs. I have received 
a great many letters this winter, which have been a 
great consolation in my retired situation. 

“‘T am rejoiced to hear that there is a prospect of 
more attention to religion at Bradford. God wi. 
be inquired of by his children, and in answer to their 
prayers will pour out his Holy Spirit.” 


TO REV. DR. WAYLAND. 
* Washington, March 16, 1823, 

“'The intelligence communicated in Mr. Judson’s 
letter to Dr. Baldwin, kindly transmitted in your 
last, is truly astonishing and interesting. The late 
accession to the little church in Rangoon, under ex 
isting circumstances, is wonderful indeed, and has a 
tendency to increase our confidence in God, and 
strengthen the assurance that the mission will never 
be destroyed. Mr. Judson’s journal:has been re- 
ceived by the Corresponding Secretary, which con- 
tains the particulars of the late conversions. It is 
to me peculiarly interesting, being well acquainted 
with the name of every one, 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 245 


**f Jong to be in Rangoon, and am anxiously hop- 
‘ng to get away ‘his spring. Do make inquiries 
relative to the saikng.of ships from Boston and Sa- 
lem. I must not miss cne good opportunity. 

‘Tam pleased with Washington. Weshall, how 
evel, probably travel towards Boston by the first of 
April. Iam rejoiced to hear of the revival of reli- 
gion in your city, and particularly that it seems 
spreading among our churches. May it not subside 
previously to my arrival among you, as I need the 
refreshing a revival of religion has a tendency to give. 
In Andover, also, I hear there is much attention; 
and Dr. Staughton mentions in a late letter, that 
there is considerable excitement among his people. 
These revivals of religion, my dear brother, are the 
glory of our country, and the preservatives of cur 
- Christian graces. How fervently should we pray for 
their commencement and continuance. I am some- 
times almost inclined to murmur that health and 
circumstances rendered necessary my removal to the 
south, this winter, where I have seen so few seasons 
of refreshment. Yet I do trust that heavenly con- 
solation has sometimes been imparted, though to one 
so undeserving. It often appears to me, that I have 
done very little for the cause of Christ, and therefore 
has my health been removed. But if again I am 
permitted the privilege of living on heathen ground— 
if ever again I find myself in a situation to impart 
instruction to those who have never before heard of 
Christ, I think now I shall make a greater effort to 
serve God more faithfully than ever before.” 


TO ONE OF HER SISTERS. 
** Washington, March 27, 1823. 
“ My dear sister, 

«* When I last wrote, I was induced to hope that 
my health and the travelling would allow my being 
on my way to Bradford before this. But I am yet 
the subject of disappointment and trial, and it is 
urdoubtedly for the ep that I should be. We 

1 


246 "MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


came to Washington three weeks ago, and have, 
during this period, heen busily employed in super 

intending and correcting the proof sheets of my little 
history, now in press. Itis nearly completed. A 
little exposure to the cold has returned a slight pain 
in my side, from which I had been entirely free for 
two months previous. This makes me cautious and 
afraid of travelling till the weather is milder in your 
region, I most ardently long to get home; but even 
my friends in New England advise me not to come 
till May. I hope, however, to be in Bradford by 
the last of April, for I have not given up the ex- 
pectation of sailing for India in May. I am much 
pleased with Washington—have met with several 
engaged Christians. We had a very interesting 
prayer meeting at the College a few daysago, when 
twenty of the students, who are pious, joined us. 
I was much gratified in receiving a visitfrom David 
Brown, the converted Indian. What cannot re- 
ligion effect? ‘To see this savage transformed into 
an interesting and enlightened Christian, teaches us 
what can be done by the eflorts of Christians. O 
how frequently I think, should I be permitted to re- 
turn to Burmah again, that in communicating relig- 
ious truth, I shall depend more on the influences of 
the Holy Spirit than ever before. Here I believe is 
the grand mistake of Missionaries, and the principal 
reason why they have no more success. ‘They de- 
pend on their own exertions, not on the power of 
God. I think I do sometimes have a little sense of 
divine things, and at such times long more than 
ever to return to Rangoon. My only consolation, 
in view of my long, tedious voyage, is, that God is 
my confidence; and | have his promise, to direct my 
steps, if I commit my ways to him. Hope you 
continue to enjoy the presence of that Saviour, who 
condescends to take up his abode with sinful crea- 
tures, when they prefer him to the enjoyments of time 
and sense.”? 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. Q47 


TO REV. DR. WAYLAND. 
“* Washington, April 1, 1823. 

‘«T have time to write a few lines only, requesting 
vou to forward the enclosed by the ship Bengal, 
which [ understand is to sail for India on the 15th of 
thismonth. You will, I trust, writeto Mr Judson, 
and give him all the information in your possession. 
I do hope, however, that these letters will not arrive 
many days before myself, for I have now nearly 
determined to sail in the George or Danube, if I can 
get a passage. I do most anxiously desire to arrive 
at home, for I find this unsettled kind of life, and 
constant exposure to company, very unfavorable to 
religious enjoyment and progress in the divine life, 
without which, our existence is of little worth. I 
_ am most thoroughly convinced, my dear brother, 
that our usefulness depends almost entirely on our 
religious state of feeling. If we habitually enjoy 
that intimate communion with God which allows 
our entering in, and bringing away a portion of the 
spirit possessed by the very inhabitants of heaven, 
. we may feel assured that we shall be enabled so far 
to diffuse this spirit among those with whom we are 
surrounded, and that our efforts and lives will not 
be in vain. I have felt much impressed this winter 
with this sentiment, that Christians in their prayers 
do not make it asufficient object to enter into heaven. 
In this exercise we professedly converse with God. 
When our spirits, then, do not enter into his pres- 
ence in heaven, when we are either indifferent, or 
suffer our thoughts to wancer from the Being ad- 
dressed, do we not meck God, and render ourselves, 
by this exercise, deserving of his frowns rather than 
his favors? Itis, my brother, a sclemn thing tobea 
Christian. But my time for writing is alinost ex- 

ired. My health is much, very much improved. 
tates no cough, no pain in the side, and generally 
sleep well. What cause for gratitude! My only 
‘ear now is, that the same cause which occasioned 


248 MEMOIR UF MRS. JUDSON. 


a relapse on my first arrival in this country wil. 
again operate on my return to New England. 1 
hope to be in Boston by the first of May, and should 
the George or Danube sail earlier than the last of 
May, I shall make arrangements to be there in 
April.” 


TO REV DR. WAYLAND. 
‘* Washington, April 22, 1823. 


**It was my hope and expectation when I last 
wrote, that I should now be on my way to Boston, 
instead of being in this city. But daily occurrences 
convince me that it is not in man that walketh to 
direct his steps. I left this place a fortnight ago, 
and set out, as I then thought, to visit my friends at 
the North. ! proceeded as far as Baltimore, but 
found that my strength was not sufficiently restored 
to encounter the fatigues of so jong a journey. 
This, together with the hope of exciting more 
attention to the subject of Missions among the 
members of the General Convention, which will 
soon meet here, induced me to return. Ishall leave 
this city on the 5th of May, and proceed direct to 
Boston, without making any stay as I had intended 
in the principal cities through which we shall pass. 
But, O my os my heart sickens at the apathy 
and unconcern relative to the subject of Missions, 
which are in many places exhibited. I sometimes 
say to myself, Will not the missionary flame become 
entirely extinct, and the mission already established 
in Burmah, die for want of support? Then again 
I call to mind the loving «indness and faithfulness — 
of God in sustaining and continuing the Mission 
through so many discouragements, and when no 
created arm could afford the least assistance. I am 
also comforted with the consideration, that there 
still exist a little few, who would, I have no doubt, 
risk their all ‘to hold the rope fast at the mouth of 
the well.? But by whom shall Jacoh arise, for he is 
wmall? Where are our young men, fired with the 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 949 


love of Christ and compassion for immortal souls, 
who are destrous of leaving their comforts and their 
homes for a few years, to serve their Redeemer in 
foreign lands? Where are our fathers, who, lamen- 
ting their former want of zeal in erecting the 
standard of the cross in those countries so long 
given up to the control of the prince of darkness, 
nw exert their dying energies, in exhorting their 
y unger brethren to care for the perishing heathen, 
to leave a double portion of ministerial work for 
them to perform, and to spend the vigor of youth 
and health, in attempting to build up the walls of 
Jerusalem in foreign lands? Who is willing to obey 
this last, this most benevolent command of our 
Lord, Go ye into all the world, and preach the 
Gospel to every creature? But Imuststop. I dare 
‘not trust my feelings on this subject. Loss of sleep 
for this night will be the consequence of indulging 
myself thus far.” 


While Mrs. J. was in Washington, the Bap- 
tist General Convention held a session in that city. 
A committee was appointed to confer with her 
respecting the Burman Mission; and at her sugges- 
tion several important measures were adopted. 
Her conversation and statements produced, on the 
members of the Convention, the same effect which 
had resulted from her intercourse with other indi- 
viduals since her arrival—a deeper concern in the 
interests of the mission; a more lively conviction of 
the duty of the American Baptist Churches to 

Sustain and enlarge it; and a stronger disposition te 
pray for its prosperity, and to contribute liberally for 
its support. 

About this time, her “ History of the Burman 
Mission” was published, the copyright of which she 
presented to the Convention. ‘This book has been 
very useful in this country, and in England, where 
an edition was published. It was, indeed, a compi- 
lation of ‘acts, which had, for the most part, been 


250 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


publishea before; but it presented them in a brief 
and well-digested narrative. Asa literary eflort. it 
does her credit; and if criticism should suggest 
amendments, it might be alleged, in the melancholy 
words of the great English lexicographer, that it 
was written, “not in the soft obscurities of retire- 
ment, or under the shelter of academic bowers; but 
amid inconvenience and distraction, in sickness and 
in sorrow.” 

Mrs. Judson returned to Massachusetts early in 
the spring of 1823. Her health was but partially 
restored; and urgent solicitations were employed by 
her friends, to induce her to remain in this country 
another year. But her desire to return to Burmah 
was so strong, that she resisted every persuasion, 
and prepared to take a second, and, as she was 
convinced, a final, farewell of her friends and coun- 
try. There was, at times, an almost prophetic 
foreboding in her mind, as if “coming events cast 
their shadows before.? But she resolved to return, 
whatever might be the will of God respecting the 
mission or herself. 

It was a happy circumstance that she was not to 
go alone. The Board of Missions had appointed 
Rev. Jonathan Wade, and Mrs. Deborah AWade, 
of Edinburgh, (N. Y.) as Missionaries to Burmah;- 
and it was resolved that they should accompany 
Mrs. Judson. The following letter was written by 


Mrs. Judson to her sister, a few days before her 
embarkation. 


‘* Boston, Saturday morning. 
* My dear Sister, 

«We arrived in safety at six o’clock on Thursday. 
We were immediately informed that Mr. and Mrs. 
Wade would be in town to-day, to sail with me. 
This was animating intelligence, and I felt tl.e hand 
of God was in it, for he had heard my prayers. 
Yesterday we went on board the ship, chose my 
sabin, and agreed with the captain to take us all for 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 251 


twelve hundred dollars. The accommodations are 
excellent, clean, and airy. It is a most beautifu. 
ship, ani the captain seems disposed to do every- 
thing in lis power for our comfort. I am to visit 
his wife this afternoon. I am now making prepara- 
tious for my passage. Monday, we have a prayer 
meeting, and on Tuesday we go to Plymouth. I 
have yet to visit Saugus, Charlestown, Cambridge, 
and Salem. I am doubting whether I ought to visit 
Bradford again, or not. My nerves are in such a 
state, that [ have to make every possible exertion 
to keep them quiet. It will only increase iny agita- 
tion to take a formal leave of my friends and home.” 


On Lord’s day, June 21, they went on board the 
ship Edward Newton, Captain Bertody. ‘ They 
‘were accompanied by a large concourse of Chiris- 
tian friends to the wharf, where fervent prayer, by 
Rev. Dr. Baldwin, was offered up to Him, who 
‘holds the winds in his fist, and rules the boisterous 
deep.? The parting scene was peculiarly tender 
and affecting to many. As the boat moved from 
the shore towards the ship, at the particular request 
of Mrs. Wade, the company united in singing the 
favorite hymn, 


© From whence doth this union arise?’ &c. ~ 


«‘The missionary friends manifested much com- 
posure, as they receded from the land of' their nativ- 
ity, probably never more to return, When in the 
cabin, a hope was expressed to Mrs. Wade, that 
they might have a safe and prosperous passage. 
- She replied, ‘If Jesus is with us, we shall have 
aothing to fear: 


© With Christ in the vessel, 
We’il smile at the storm,’ ”* 


After a prosperous voyage, during . which they 
weve treated with the utmost kindness by Vap’ ain 
Bertody, of whose politeness Mrs. Judson repeated 


952 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


ly speaks in her letters with much gratitude, they 
arrived in Calcutta, Oct. 19, and sailed in a few 
weeks for Rangoon. 


—_—p— 


CHAPTER XIV. 


Messrs. Judson and Price visit Ava—Mrs. Judson and Mr. and 
rs. Wade arrive at Rangoon. 


WE now return to Mr. Judson and his associates 
at Rangoon. Our last notice,of them, dated Feb- 
ruary, 1822, stated that Dr. Price and his wife had 
arrived,* and that Mr. and Mrs. Hough had return- 
ed to Rangoon. One of the converts, Moung Thah- 
lah, died in November, of that dreadful disease, the 
cholera morbus. The appalling rapidity with which, 
in less than nineteen hours, it hurried him from a 
state of perfect health, into eternity, prevented Mr. 
Judson From being informed of his sickness, till he 
was insensible. But there is no doubt that his soul 
ascended to join the multitude of the just made per- 
fect—the first fruits of the missionin Burmah. Mr, 
Judson, in his journal, says: 


‘“* March 12. Have had nothing to notice lately, 
except the progress of the translation. During a 
few months past, I have finished Matthew, (a new 
translation) Mark, and Luke, and this day pass into 
Hive i the intermediate books being previously 

one. 

‘* June 30. Am just recovering from severe ill 
ness. A few weeks ago, was taken witha fever, 
slight at first, but daily increasing in violence, until 
the event became very dubious. On recovering 


* Mrs. Price died at Rangoon on the 2d of May, 1822, after 
a painful illness. Her mind was peaceful and Beppe in the 
prospect of death. 3 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 253 


from the effects of the fever, and just resuming the 
translation. I was suddenly seized with the cholera 
norbus, though that disease is not now prevalent in 
the place; and several hours of suffering elapsed; 
before medicine took effect. This, with the quanti- 
ty of laudanum administered, deprived me of the lit- 
tle remaining strength which the fever left me, and 
[am now scarcely able to hold my pen. It is sin- 
gular, that last rainy season I was subject to the 
same diseases, though in a different order; and I as- 
cribe it to the ascendency which the climate of Ran- 
goon is obtaining over my constitution. Ifit be the 
will of God, I feel desirous of living to finish the 
New Testament in Burman,—a work which must 
otherwise be suspended for some time.” 


./ Several individuals were, at this time, in an en- 
couraging state of mind. On the 21st of July, 
another female, Mah Doke, was baptized. 

Soon after the arrival of Dr. Price, information 
concerning his medical character was conveyed to 
the Emperor, who immediately ordered that he 
should visit the capital, Obedience was indispensa- 
ble, and Mr. Judson resolved to accompany him, 
with the hope of making some favorable impressions 
on the mind of the monarch. Previously to their 
departure, he had the pleasure of baptizing four 
other individuals, Moung Thah-a, May Mee, May 
Zoo, and Mee Men-oo—the latter a girl, whom Dr. 
Price had cured of blindness. These individuals 
gave the best evidence of piety, and of sincere desire 
to obey the Saviour. 

Eighteen persons had now been baptized, as dis- 
ciples of Christ. The exercises of their minds, 
which the limits of this work do not allow us to state 
in detail, prove that the Spirit of God operates in 
the same manner on the minds of all who are 
bro ight to the knowledge of the truth as it isin Je- 
sus, produermng penitence for sin, conviction of the 
utter ruin of the soul, rene on the righteousness 


254 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON, 


cf the Son of God for justification; a peaceful hope 
and a desire to obey his commandments, and to en- 
joy his favor. They prove, also, that the Gospel is 
everywhere the power of God unto salvation; and 
that wherever it is preached, with fidelity and 
prayerfulness, God honors it as the instrument of 
converting men from darkness to light, and from the 
power of Satan unto God. 

On the 28th of August, Mr. Judson and Dr. Price 
embarked ina boat for Ava. Mr. Judson’s journa’ 
says: 


« After much tedious detention, resulting from our 
connexion with government, brother Price and my 
self set out from Rangoon, on the 28th of August, 
in a boat furnished at the public expense; and on the 
27th of September reached Ava, the present capital, 
a few miles below Amarapora. We were immedi- 
ately introduced to the King, who received brother 
Price very graciousiy, and made many inquiries 
about his medical skill, but took no notice of me, ex 
cept as interpreter. The Atwenwoon Moung Zah, 
however, immediately recognised me, made a few 
inquiries about my welfare, in presence of the King 
and after his Majesty had withdrawn, conversed a 
little on religious subjects, and gave me some private 
encouragement to remain at the capital. 

“ Oct. 1. To-day the King noticed me for the 
first time, though I have appeared before him nearly 
every day since our arrival. After making some in- 
quiries, as usual, about brother Price, he added, 
‘ And you, in black, what are you? a medical man 
toor? ‘Not a medical man, but a teacher of reli- 
gion, your Majesty.? He proceeded to make a few 
inquiries about my religion, and then put the alar- 
ming question, whether any had embraced it. J 
evaded, by saying. ‘Not here.’ He persisted. 
‘Are there any in Rangoon?? ‘There area few.’ 
‘Are they foreigners?? I trembled for the conse- _ 
quence of an answer, which might involve the little 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 255 


caurch ia ruin; but the truth must be sacrificed, or 
the conseyuences hazarded; and I therefore replied, 
‘There are some foreigners and some Burmans.? 
He remained silent a few moments, but presently 
showed that he was not displeased, by asking a great 
variety of questions on religion, and geography, and 
astronomy, some of which were answered in sucha 
satisfactory manner, as to occasion a general expres- 
sion of approbation in all the court present. After 
his Majesty retired, a Than-dau-tsen (a royal sec- 
retary) entered into conversation, and allowed me to 
expatiate on several topics of the Christian : ‘ugion, 
in my usual way. And all] this took place in the 
hearing of the very man, now an Atwenwoon, who, 
many years ago, caused his uncle to be tortured al- 
most to death, under the iron mall, for renouncing 
' Boodhism and embracing the Roman Catholic reli- 
gion! But I knew it not at the time, though, from 
his age, a slight suspicion of the truth passed across 
my mind. ‘Thanks to God for the encouragemen* 
afehis day! The monarch ofthe empire has distinct 
ly understood, that some of his subjects have embrac- 
ed the Christian religion, and his wrath has been re- 
strained. Let us then hope, that, as he becomes 
more acquainted with the excellence of the religion, 
he will be more and more willing that his subjects 
should embrace it. 

‘¢3, Left the boat, and moved into the house or- 
dered to be erected for us by the King. A mere 
temporary shed, however, it proves to be, scarcely 
sufficient to screen us from the gaze of the people 
without, or from the rain above. It is situated near 
the present palace, and joins the enclosure of Prince 
M. eldest half brother of the King. 

“4, Qn our return from the palace, whither we 
go every morning after breakfast, Prince M. sent 
for me. I had seen him once before, in company 
with brother Price, whom he called for medical ad- 
vice. To-day he wished to converse on science and 
religion. He is a fine young man of twenty-eight, 


256 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


but greatly disfigured by a paralytic affection of the 
armsand legs. Being cut off from the usual sources 
of amusement, and having associated a little with 
the Portuguese padres, who have lived at Ava, he 
has acquired a strong taste for foreign science. Mv 
communications interested him very much, and } 
found it difficult to get away, until brother Price 
sent expressly for me to go again to the palace.” 


The journal mentions that Mr. J. was ill abort 
ten days with the fever and ague, and that he after- 
wards held several conversations at the palace, with 
various distinguished individuals, on the subject of 
religion. It then proceeds: 


“ Oct. 22. Brother Price went to Amarapora, to 
meet a gentleman just arrived from Rangoon, who 
we hope may have letters for us. At night, broth- 
er Price returned, with a large parcel of letters and 
magazines and newspapers from our beloved, far- 
distant, native land—and what was still more inter 
esting to me, eight sheets from Mrs. Judson, on her 
presage towards England, the first direct intelligence 

have received from her, since she left Madras 
roads. A single line from Bengal informs me of 
the death of dear brother Colman, but leaves me 
ignorant of the particulars. May our bereaved sis- 
ter be supported under this heaviest of all afflictions; 
and may the severe loss which the mission has sus- 
tained, be sanctified to us all. 

‘°93,. Had some pleasant conversation with Moung 
Z. in the palace, partly in the hearing of the King. 
At length his Majesty came forward, and honored 
me with some personal notice for the second time, 
inquired much about my country, and authorized 
me to invite American ships to his dominions, assur- 
ing them of protection, and offering every facility 
for the purposes of trade. 

“28, Spent the forenoon with Prmce M. He 
obtained for the first time, (though I have explain- 
ed it to him many times,) some view of the nature 


v 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 257 


of the atonement, and cried out, ‘Good, good.? He 
then proposed a number of objections, which I re- 
moved, to his apparent satisfaction. Our subse- 
quent conversation turned,as usual, on pots of 
geography and astronomy. He candidly acknowl- 
edged, that he could not resist my arguments in fa- 
vor of the Copernican system; and that, if he admit- 
ted them, he must also admit that the Boodhist 
system was overthrown. , 

* Oct.°30, Spent part of the forenoon with Prince 
M. and his wite, the Princess of S. own sister of the 
King. Gave h>r a copy of Mrs. Judson’s Burman 
Catechism, with which she was much pleased. 
They both appear to be somewhat attached to me, 
and say, do not return to Rangoon; but, when your 
wife arrives, call her to Ava. The King will give 
you a piece of ground, on which to build a kyoung, 
(a house appropriated to the residence of sacred 
characters.) 

“31. Visited the Atwenwoon Moung K. whom 
I have frequently met at the palace, who has treat- 
ed me with distinguished candor. He received me 
very politely, and, laying aside his official dignity, 
entered into a most spirited dispute on various 
points of religion. He pretended to maintain his 
ground without the shadow of doubt; but I am in- 
clined to think that he has serious doubts. We 
parted in a friendly manner, and he invited me to 
visit him occasionally. 

“ Nov. 1. Visited the Tset-kyah-woongyee, at 
his particular request, with brother Price. He made 
the usual inquiries, medical and theological, and 
treated us with marked politeness. 

«© N. B. The Woongyees, of which there are fcur, 
rank next to the members of the royal family, being 
public ministers of state, and forming the high court 
of the empire. The Atwenwoons, of which there 
are six or seven, may be termed private ministers of 
state, farming the privy council of the King. The 
next in rank to the Woongyees, are Woondenks, 

QQ* 


258 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


asststants or deputies of the Woongyees. The sub 
ordinate officers, both of the palace and of the high 
sourt, are quite innumerable. 

“©6. Since the last date, have been confined with 
another return of the fever and ague. 

“7, WVentured to call again on the great Prince, 
and was rather better received, but had no religious 
conversation. 

“11. Visited the Than-dau-tsen Moung Tsoo, 
(of Oct. 1st) and spent an hour very agreeably, 
though unable to introduce religion. He manifests 
more personal friendship than any other of my Ava 
acquaintances. 

“N. B. Understood that, according to the public 
registers, forty thousand houses have been removed 
from Amarapora to Ava, the new capital, and that 
thirty thousand remain. The Burmans reckon ten 
persons, great and small, to a house, which gives 
seven hundred thousand for the whole population of 
the metropolis of Burmah. 

«* Nov. 12. Spent the whole forenoon with prince 
M. and his wife. Made a fuller disclosure than 
ever before of the nature of the Christian religion, 
the object of Christians in sending me to this 
country, my former repulse at court, and the 
reason of it, our exposure to persecution in Ran- 
goon, the affair of Moung Shwa-gnong, &c. &c. 
They entered into my views and feelings with 
considerable interest; but both said decidedly, that 
though the King would not himself persecute any 
one on account of religion, he-would not give any 
order exempting from persecution, but would leave 
his subjects throughout the Empire, to the regular 
administration of the local authorities. 

‘‘ After giving the Prince a succinct account of 
my religious experience, I ventured to warn him of 
his danger, and urged him to make thr Chnistian 
religion his immediate personal concern. He appear- 
ed, for a moment, to feel the force cf what I said, 
but soon replied, ‘Iam yet young, only twenty-eight © 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON 259 


f am desirous of studying all the foreign arts and 
sciences. My mind will then be enlarged, and I 
shall be capable of judging whether the Christian 
religion be true or not.’ * But suppose your High. 
ness changes worlds in the meantime.’ His counte- 
nance again fell. ‘ It is true,’ said he, ‘I know not 
when [shall die.” I suggested that it would be well 
to pray to Goa for light, which, if obtained, would 
enable him at once to distinguish between truth and 
falsehood; and so we parted. O, Fountain of Light; 
shed down one ray into the mind of this amiable 

Prince, that he may become a patron of thine 
infant cause, and inherit an eternal crown.” 


Mr. J. found great difficulty in obtaining a piece 
of ground, on which to build a house. The King 
gave him a lot, but the grant was soon revoked. 
’ Mr, J. says: 


* In prosecuting this business, I had one notice- 
able interview with the King. Brother Price and 
two English gentlemen were present. The King 
appeared to be attracted by our number, and came 
towards us; but his conversation was directed 
chiefly tome. Heagain inquired about the Burmans 
who had embraced my religion. ‘Are they real 
Burmans? Do they dress like other Burmans?? &c. 
I had occasion to remark, that I preached every 
Sunaay. ‘What! in Burman?’ Yes. ‘Let us 
hear how youpreach.? I[hesitated. An Atwenwoon 
repeated the order. I began with a form of worship, 
which first ascribes glory to God, and then declares 
the commands of the law and the Gospel; after which 
I stopped. ‘Go on,’ said another Atwenwoon. 
The whole court was profoundly silent. I proceed- 
ed witha few sentences declarative of the perfections 
of God, when his Majesty’s curiosity was satisfied, 
and he interrupted me. Inthe course of subsequent 
conversation, he asked what I had to say of Gauda- 
ma. I replied, that we all knew he was son of 
King Thog-dau-dah-nah; that we regarded him ag 


260 MEMUIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


a wise man and a great teacher, but did not ca: 
him God. ‘That is right,’ said Moung K. N. ar 
Atwenwoon who had not hitherto appeared very 
friendly to me. And he proceeded to relate the 
substance of a long communication, which I had 
lately made to him in the privy council room, about 
God, and Christ, &c. And this he did, in a very 
clear and satisfactory manner, so that I had scarce- 
ly a single correction to make in his statement. 
Moung Z. encouraged by all this, really began to 
take the side of God, before his Majesty, and said, 
‘Nearly all the world, your Majesty, believe in an 
eternal God; all, except Burmah and Siam, these 
little spots? His Majesty remained silent; and 
after some other desultory inquiries, he abruptly 
arose and retired.”? 


Mr. J. at length procured a piece of ground, 
pleasantly situated on the bank of the river, just 
without the walls of the town, and about a mile 
from the palace, on which he built a small house. 
Qn visiting the Woongyee, to pay him for the 
land, an interesting scene occurred: 


“A few noblemen and their attendants were 
present, which prevented me from immediately 
producing the money. His Excellency soon took 
notice of me, and from seven o’clock till nine, the 
time was chiefly occupied in conversation on relig- 
ious subjects. I found opportunity to bring forward 
some of my favorite arguments, one of whicF. in 
particular, seemed to carry conviction to the minds 
of all present; and extorted from the great man an 
expression of praise—such praise, however, as is 
indicative of surprise, rather than approbation. 
When the company retired, my people at the outer 
door overheard one say to another, ‘Is it not pleas- 
ant to hear this foreign teacher converse on religion?” 
‘Ay,’ said the other, ‘but his doctrines are derog- 
atory to the honor ef Lord Gaudama.* When 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 261 


they were gone, I presented the money, szying, 
that I wished to defray the expense of fencing the 
ground, which had been graciously given me. His 
Excellency was pleased with the offer, but gently 
declined accepting anything. He then looked stead- 
ily at me, as if to penetrate into the motives of my 
conduct; and recollecting the mancuvres of the first 
English settlers in Bengal, thought he had discov- 
ered something—* Understand, teacher, that we do 
ot give you the entire owning of this ground, 
We take no recompense, lest it become American 
territory. We give it to you for your present 
residence only; and when you go away, shall take 
it again? ‘When I go away, my lord, those at 
whose expense the house is to be built, will desire 
to place another teacher in my stead.’ ‘ Very well, 
Jet him also occupy the place; but when he dies, or 
when there is no teacher, we will take it.? ‘In that 
“case, my lord, take it.? 

“ Jan. 18. Removed to Chagaing, into a house 
which Prince M. has allowed brother Price to build 
on his ground, in expectation that a change of air 
and residence would relieve me from the fever and 
ague, under which J suffer nearly every other 
day. It is. my intention, however, to return imme- 
diately to Rangoon, the time being nearly expired, 
which I at first proposed to spend in Ava, and the 
ends for which I came up, being sufficiently gained. 

6¢ 92, ‘Took leave of Prince M. He desired ime 
to return soon, and bring with me all the Christian 
Scriptures, and translate them into Burman; § for,? 
said he, § J wish to read them all.? 

“94, Went to take leave of the King, in 
company with Mr. I.. collector of the port of Ran- 
goon, wko arrived last evening. We sat a few mo- 
ments conversing together. ‘ What are you talking 
about?? said his Majesty. ‘ He is speaking of his 
return to Rangoon,’ replied Mr. L. ‘ What does he 
return for? Let them not return. Let them both, 
(that is, brother Piice and myself,) stay together. 


262 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


If one goes away, the other must remain alone, ana 
will be unhappy.’ ‘ He wishes to go forashort time 
on.y,’ replied Mr. L. to bring his wife, the female 
teacher, and his goods, not having brought anything 
with him this time; and he will return soon.? Hz 
Majesty looked at me, ‘ Will you then come again ?* 
I replied in the affirmative. ‘When you come 
again, is it your intention to remain permanently, cr 
will you go back and forth, as foreigners commonly 
do?? ‘When I come again, it is my intention to 
remain permanently.’ ‘ Very well,’ said his Majes- 
ty, and withdrew into his inner apartment. 

‘¢ Heard to-day of the death of Mah Myat-la, sis- 
ter of Mah-Men-la, one of the most steadfast of the 
church in Rangoon. 

‘¢ Jan. 25. Embarked on a small boat, intending 
to go day and night, and touch nowhere, in order 
to avoid the robbers, of which we have lately had 
alarming accounts. 

s© Feb, 2. Lord’s-day. At oue o’clock in the 
morning, reached Rangoon, seven days from Ava. 

‘¢ Several of the disciples soon came over from 
Dahlah, on the opposite side of the river, whither. 
they and some others of the disciples and inquirers 
have taken refuge, to escape the heavy taxations 
and, the illegal harassments of every kind allowed 
under the new Viceroy of Rangoon. Others of the 
disciples have fled elsewhere, so that there is not a 
single one remaining in Rangoon, except three or 
four with us. The house of some of the disciples 
has been demolished, and their place taken by gov- 
ernment, at the instigation of their neighbours, who 
hate them on account of religion. Mah Myat-la 
died before the removal. Her sister gave me the 
particulars of her death. Some of her last expres- 
sions were—‘ I put my trust in Jesus Christ—I love 
to pray to him—am not afraid of death—shall soon 
be with Christ in heaven.” 


During more than two -years after this period, no 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 263 


regular jo 1rnal was kept by either of tle Missiona- 
ries; and our narrative of the very important events 
which occurred in this interval, must be gathered 
from letters written to various individuals in this 
country. 

The follow-ng letter from Mr. Judson to Rev. Dr. 
Sharp, of Boston, exhibits the state of the mission, 
during several months after his return to Rangoon: 


“Rangoon, Aug. 5, 1823. 
“Rev and dear Brother, 


*¢ Tt is with reai satisfaction, that Iam able to in- 
form you of the completion of the New ‘Testament 
in Burman, about six weeks ago; since which I have 
added, by way of introduction, an epitome of the 
Old Testament, in twelve sections, consisting of a 
summary of Scripture History, from the creation to 
the coming of Christ, and an abstract of the most 
important pruphecies of the Messiah and his king 
dom, from the Psalms, Isaiah, and other prophets. 
I trust this work will be found as valuable, as any 
part of the preceding; for though not, strictly speak- 
ing, the word of God, it is compiled almost entirely 
in the words of Scripture, is received by the converts 
with great, eagerness, and found to be peculiarly in- 
teresting and instructive; and forms, moreover, a 
sort of text-book, from which I 1m able to commu-r 
nicate much information on the history, types, and 
prophecies of the Old Testament, in a systematic 
manner. 

‘¢T have heard but little from Ava since I left. 
Prince M. sometimes inguires for me, and wishes to 
hear more about the Christian religion. Brother 
Price is building 3 small brick house on the opposite 
side of the river, the King having given him bricks. 
I expect to remove as soon as Mrs. Judson returns, 
from whom I have not, however, received a word 
of intelligence for nearly ten months. Brother 
Hough has not yet been able to get types from Ben- 
gal; no printing, therefore, has been done since his 
return 


864 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


«| hope it will not be long before the Gospel and 
Epistles of John are printed. They have been 
ready for the press above a year, and have been so 
thoroughly and repeatedly revised, that I flatter 
myself that subsequent translators will not find it 
necessary to make many alterations. Indeed, all 
the Gospels and the Acts are ina tolerable state; the 
Epistles are still deficient. But I never read a 
chapter without a pencil in hand, and Griesbach anc 
Parkhurst at my elbow; and it will be an object 
with me through life, to bring the translation into 
such a state, that it may be a standard work.” 


On the 5th of December, 1523, Mrs. Judson, with 
Mr, and Mrs. Wade, arrived at Rangoon. Mr. 
Judson, in a letter to Rev. Dr. Baldwin, thus an- 
nounced this joyful event: 

«‘ Rangoon, Dec. 7, 18238. 
* Rev. and dear Sir, 

“‘[T had the inexpressible happiness of welcoming 
Mrs. Judson once more to the shores of Burmah, 
on the 5th inst. We are now on the eve of depar 
ture for Ava. . 

“¢ My last letter from ‘rother Price mentions that 
the King has inquired many times about my delay, 
and the Queen has expressed a strong desire to see 
Mrs. Judson in her foreign dress. We sincerely 
hope that her Majesty’s curiosity will not be con- 
fined to dress. : 

‘*Mr, and Mrs. Wade appear in fine health and 
spirits, and J am heartily rejoiced at their arrival, 
just at the present time. ; 

‘*T enclose the translation of a letter from Moung 
Shwa-ba, which has been lying by me sometime, 
for want of a good opportunity of conveyance.” 
T:anstation of a letter, written by Moung Shwa-ha, to Rev. Dr, Bala- 

win, and translated from the Burman original, Sept. 23, 1823, 

“ Moung Shwa-ba, an inhabitant of Rangoon, a 
town of Burmah, one vho adheres to the religion 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 205 


of Christ, and has been baptized, who meditates 
on the mmeasurable, incalculable nature of the 
divine splendor and glory of the Invisible, even 
the Lord Jesus Christ and God the Father, and 
takes refuge in the wisdom and power and glory 
of God, affectionately addresses the great teacher 
Baldwin, a superintendent of missionary aflairs in 
the city of Boston, of America. 


‘* Beloved elder Brother, 

‘Though in the present state, the places of our 
residence are very far apart, and we have never met, 
yet by means of letters, and of the words of teacher 
Judson, who has told me of you, I love you, and 
wish to send you this letter. When the time ar 
rives in which we shali wholly put on Christ—him, 

-in loving whom we cannot tire, and in praising whom 
we can find no end, and shall be adorned with those 
ornaments, which the Lord will dispense to us out 
of the heavenly treasure house, that he has prepar- 
ed, then we shall love one another more perfectly 
than we do now. 

«Formerly, I was in the habit of concealing my 
sins, Jhat they might not appear; but now I am con- 
vinced, that I cannot conceal my sins from the Lord 
who sees and knows all things; and that I cannot 
atone for them, nor obtain atonement fiom my for- 
mer objects of worship. And accordingly, I count 
‘mysell'to have lost all, under the elements of the 
world, and through the grace of the faith of Christ 
only, to have gained the spiritual graces and rewards 
pertaining to eternity, which cannot be lost. ‘There- 
fore, I have no ground for boasting, priue, passion, 
andself'exaltation. And without desiring the praise 
of men, or seeking my own will, I wish to do the 
will of God the Father, ‘lhe members ofthe body, 
dead in trespasses and sins, displeasing to God, I de- 
sire to make instruments of righteousness. not fol- 
lowing the will of the flesh. Worldly desire and 
heavenly desire being contrary the one to the other 

j 23 


266 MEMOIR GF MRS. JUDSON. 


and the desire of visible things counteracting the de 
sire of invisible things, I am asa dead man. How 
ever, he quickens the dead. He awakens those that 
slezp. He lifts up those that fall. He opens blind 
eyes. He perforates deaf ears. He lights a lamp 
in the great house of darkness. He relieves the 
wretched. He feeds the hungry. The words of 
such a benefactor, if we reject, we must die forever, 
and come to everlasting destruction. Which cir~ 
cumstance considering, and meditating also on sick- 
ness, old age and death, incident to the present 
state of mutability, I kneel and prostrate myself, and 
pray before God, the Father of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, who has made an atonement for our sins, 
that he may have mercy on me and pardon my sins, 
and make me holy, and give me a repenting, believ- 
ing, and loving mind. 

ee Formerly, I trusted in my own merits; but now, 
through the preaching and instrnetion of teacher 
Judson, I trust in the merit of the Lord Jesus 
Christ. The teacher, therefore, is the tree; we are 
the blossoms and fruit. He has labored to partake 
of the fruit, and now the tree begins to bear. ‘The 
bread of life he has given, and we eat. The 
water from the brook which flows from the top of 
mount Calvary, for the cleansing of all filth, he has 
brought, and made us bathe and drink. The 
bread of which we eat, will yet ferment and rise. 
‘The water which we drink and bathe in, is the 
water of an unfailing spring; and many will yet 
drink and bathe therein. Then all things will be 
regenerated and changed. Now we are strangers 
and pilgrims; and it is my desire, without adhermg 
to the things of this world, but longing for my 
native abode, to consider and inquire, how long | 
must labor here; to whom I ought to show the light 
which I have obtained; when I ought to put it up, 
and when disclose it. 

“The inhabitants of this country of Burmah, 
being i in the evil practice of’ forbidden lust, erroneous 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON, 267 


worship, and false speech, deride the religion of 
Christ. However, that we may bear patiently 
derision, and persecution, and death, for tne sake of 
the Lord Jesus Christ, pray for us. I do thus pray. 
For, elder brother, I have to bear the threatening 
of my own brother, and my brother-in law, who 
say, ‘ We will beat and bruise and pound you; we 
will bring you into great difficulty; you associate 
with false people; you keep a false religion; and you 
speak false words.? However, their false religion is 
the religion of death. The doctrine of the cross is 
the religion of life, of love, of faith. Tama servant 
of faith. Formerly I wasaservant of Satan. Now 
I am a servant of Christ. And a good servant 
cannot but follow his master. Moreover, the 
divine promises must be accomplished. 
_ “Jn this country of Burmah, are many strayed 
sheep. Teacher Judson, pitying them, has come to 
gather them together, and to feed them in love. 
Some will not listen, but run away. Some do listen 
and adhere to him: and that our numbers may 
increase, we meet together, and pray to the great 
Proprietor of the sheep. 

“Thus I, Moune Suwa-za, a disciple of teacher 
Judson, in Rangoon, write and send this letter to 
the great teacher Batpwin, who lives in Boston, 
America.” 


Mr. Wade, in a letter to Dr, Staughton, then the 
Corresponding Secretary, gave some account of the 
passage from America: 


‘Rev. and very dear Sir, f 

‘* Guided and directed by the kind providence ot 
(rod, we have reached in safety the place of our 
destination. His goodness and mercy have con- 
stantly attended us since we left America. May it 
provoke our gratitude and incite us to new obedi- 
ence. 

“During the voyage from Boston to Calcutta, 


263 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


after having recovered from sea sickness, I applied 
myself to the study of the Burman language under 
the instructions of Mrs. Judson. The captain 
allowed us to have worship on deck every Sabbath 
and expressed not only a willingness, but some 
anxiety, that I should take frequent opportunities to 
converse with thesailors on the important concerns 
of their souls. ‘They gave good attention to 
instruction, though without any very apparent 
religious feeling. Most of them were Roman 
Catholics. The captain was well convinced of the 
utility and consequent importance of having wor- 
ship among the sailors on the Lord’s-day. 

‘© We arrived in Calcutta on the 19th of October, 
and, in about two weeks after, found a ship that 
was to sail for Rangoon in a few days. We were 
informed that there was a great prospect of a war 
between the Englishand Burmans. On this account, 
we were urgently advised by all the friends in Se- 
rampore and Calcutta not to venture ourselves in 
Rangoon. This advice was enforced by anaccount 
of the real state of things, kindly afforded for the 
purpose, by the chief secretary of the government 
of Bengal. Notwithstanding, we felt it our duty, 
if an opportunity offered, to venture, trusting in 
the great Arbiter of life and death for protection. 
Consequently, we engaged a passage in the above 
mentioned ship, and sailed on the 15th of November, 
and arrived in Rangoon on the 5th of December. 
‘I trust we all felt some emotions of gratitude to the 
great Fatcer of all our mercies, when we entered 
this great empire of darkness; where, having been 
wanderers for seven months, we found a place that 
we could call our own, which, though in a barbarous 
land, far from friends, is desirable, because we have 
some assurance that it is the place of residence 
designated for us by God himself—and 


‘Heaven itself, without my God, 
Would be no joy to me.? 


© The prospect of war has been daily increasing 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 269 


ever since we arrived. We cannot predict the fina! 
issue; but we pray that it may be for the advance- 
ment of the object of this Mission.” 


— — 


CHAPTER XyV. 
Mr. and Mrs. Judson visit Ava—War with the British. 


Mr. and Mrs. Junson, immediately after her ar- 
rival, left Rangoon for Ava, leaving Mr. and Mrs, 
Wade, with Mr. Hough and family, at Rangoon. 

The following letter of Mrs. Judson to her pa- 
rents, contains a brief account of the passage, and 
of the state of things at Ava. It is the last letter 

that she wrote, belore the occurrence of those dread- 
ful events, which, for nearly two years, subjected 
the Missionaries to sufferings and dangers, which 
have had few parallels in the history of missions. 


sé Ava, Feb. 10, 1824. 
“© My dear Parents and Sisters, 

«© After two years and a half wandering, you will 
be pleased to hear that I have at last arrived at 
home, so far as this life is concerned, and am once 
more quietly and happily settled with Mr. Judson. 
When I retrace the scenes through which I have 
passed, the immense space I have traversed, and 
the various dangers, seen and unseen, from which I 
jave been preserved, my heart is filled with grati- 
tude an! praise to that Being, who has at all times 
been my protector, and marked out all the way be- 
fore me. Surely no one was ever more highly fa- 
vored, no being was ever under greater obligations 
to make sacrifices for the promotion of God’s glory, 
than [am at thismoment. AndI think I feel, more 
than ever, the importance of being spiritual aut 
humble, and so to cherish the influences of the Ho- 
y Spirit, that in the copymunicatioy of divine truth, 

3 


270 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


powerful impressions may be made, and that I may 
no more wander from Him, who is deserving of ali 
my services and affections. 

“<T wrote from Rangoon, but for fear my letters 
should not have arrived, I will mention a few things 
therein contained. We had a quick and pleasant 
passage from Calcutta to Rangoon. Mr. J.’s boat 
was all in readiness, my baggage was immediately 
taken from the ship to the boat, and in seven days 
from my arrival, we were on our way. to the 
capital. Our boat was small and inconvenient; but 
the current at this season 1s so very strong, and the 
wind always against us, that our progress was slow 
indeed. The season however was cool and delight- 
ful; we were preserved from dangers by day and 
robbers by night, and arrived in safety in six weeks. 
The A-rah-wah-tee (Irrawaddy) is a noble river; its 
banks everywhere covered with immortal beings, 
destined to the same eternity as ourselves. We of 
ten walked through the villages; and though we 
never received the least insult, always attracted uni-~ 
versal attention, A foreign female was a sight 
never before beheld, and all were anxious that their 
friends and relatives should have a view. Crowds 
followed us through the villages, and some who 
were less civilized than others, would run some way 
before us, in order to have a long look as we ap- 
proached them. In one instance, the boat being 
sometime in doubling a point we had walked over, 
we seated ourselves down, when the villagers as 
usual assembled, and Mr. Judson introduced the 
subject of religion, Several old men who were 
present entered into conversation, while the multi- 
tude wasallattention. ‘The apparent school-master 
of the village coming up, Mr. Judson handed him a 
tract, and requested him to read. After proceeding 
some way, he remarked to the assembly, that such 
a writing was worthy of being copied, and asked Mr. 
Judson to remain while he copied it. Mr, Judson 
informed him he might keep the tract, on. condition 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 971 


he read it to all hisneighbours. We could not but 
hope the Spirit of God would bless those few simple 
truths to the salvation of some of their souls. 

“Our boat was near being upset in passing 
through one of the rapids, with which this river. 
abounds. The rudder became entangled in the 
1ocks, which brought the boat across the stream, 
and laid her on one side. The steersman, however, 
had presence of mind sufficient to cut the rudder 
from the boat, which caused her to right, without 
experiencing any other inconvenience than a thor- 
ough fright, and the loss of our breakfast, which 
was precipitated from the fireplace into the water, 
together with everything on the outside of the boat. 

**Qn our arrival at Ava, we had more difficulties 
to encounter, and such as we had never before expe- 
- rienced. We had no home, no house to shelter us 
from the burning sun by day, and the cold dews at 
night. Dr. Price had kindly met us on the way, 
and urged our taking up our residence with him; 
but his house was in such an unfinished state, and 
the walls so damp, (of brick, and just built) that 
spending two or three houfs threw me into a fever, 
and induced me to feel that it would be presumption 
to remain longer. We had but one alternative, to 
remain in the boat till we could build a small house 
on the spot of ground which the King gave Mr. 
Judson last year. And you will hardly believe it 
possible, for I almost doubt my senses, that in just 
a fortnight from our arrival, we moved into a house 
built in that time, and which is sufficiently large to 
make us comfortable. It is in a most delightful sit- 
nation, out of the dust of the town, and on the 
bank of the river. The spot of ground given by 
his Majesty is small, being only 120 feet dng, and 
75 wide; but it is our own, and is the most hea thy 
situation I have seen. Our house is raised four feet 
from the ground, and consists of three small rooms 
and a verandah. 

*¢T hardly know how we sha.! bear the hot season, 


272 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


which is just commencing, as our house is built of 
boards, and before night, is heated like an oven. 
Nothing but brick s a shelter frovi the heat of Ava, 
where the thermometer, even in the shade, frequent 
ly rises to a hundred and eight degrees. We have 
worship every evening in Burman, when a number 
of the natives assemble; and every Sabbath Mr. 
Judson preaches the other side of the river, in Dr. 
Price’s house. We feel it an inestimable privilege, 
that amid all our discourageiments we have the lan- 
guage, and are able constantly to communicate 
truths which can save the soul. 

‘‘ My female school has already commenced, with 
three little girls, who are learning to read, sew, &c. 
Two of them are sisters, and we have named them 
Maru and Abby Hasselline. One of them is to be 
supported with the money which the ‘ Judson Asso- 
ciation of Bradford Academy? have engaged to col- 
lect. They are fine children, and improve as rapidly 
as any children in the world. ‘Their mother is de- 
ranged, and their father gave them to me to educate, 
so that I have been at no expense for them, except- 
ing their food and clothes. I have already begun to 
make inquiries for children, and doubt not we shall 
be directed in regard to our school, 

‘‘[ have not yet been at the palace, the royal 
family all being absent. 'They returned to Amara- 
pora a day or two after our arrival, where they will 
remain till the new palace in this city is finished, 
when they will take possession in the usual form, 
and Ava in future will be their residence. My old 
friend, the lady of the Viceroy of Rangoon, who 
died in my absence, came to the boat to see me im- 
mediately on being informed of my arrival. All her 

ower and distinction ceased at the death of her 
vushand, and she is now only a private woman. 
She is, however, a very sensible woman, and there 
is much more hope of aer attending to the subject 
of religion now, than when in public life. I intend 
to visit her frequently, and make it an object to fix 


MEMOIR UF MRS, JUDSON. 273 


her attention to the subject. In consequence of war 
with the Bengal government, foreigners are not se 
much esteemed at court as formerly. I know not 
what effect this war will have on our mission; but 
we must leave the event with Him who has hitherto 
directed us.” . 


Rumors of approaching war with the Bengal 
government had, for sometime, disturbed the public 
mind. It has been well ascertained, that his Bur- 
man Emperor cherished the ambitious design of 
invading Bengal. He had collected in Arracan, an 
army of 30,000 men, under the command of his 
most successful General, Maha Bandoola. It is 
said, that the army was furnished with a pair of 
golden fetters, destined to the honorable service of 
_being worn by the Governor General of India, when 
he should be led as a captive to the golden feet, at 
Ava.* 

The Bengal government, however, resolved to 
anticipate the blow, by a sudden irruption into. the 
Burman empire. ‘The encroachments of the Bur- 
mese government on the Company’s possessions hud 
been long a subject of complaint; and all attempts 
to obtain redress had been met by neglect, and at 
last, by preparations for invasion on the part of’ the 
Burmese. 

In May, 1824, an army of about six thousand 
English and native troops, under the command of 
Sir Archibald Campbell, arrived at Rangoon. So 
entirely unexpected was this attack, that no resis- 
tance was made, except a few shots from the fortifi- 
cations along the river. 

The following letter from Mr. Wade to Mr, Law- 
son, of Calcutta, relates the wonderiul escape of the 
Missionaries {rom the fate which seemed, for several] 
hours, tobe impending over them. ‘Truly, the Lord 
is a present help in tro. ble. He interposed on this 


® Snodgrass Burmese War, p. 277. 


Q74 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


occasion, while the heathen raged, and suffered them 
to do his prophets no harm. 


** Rargoon, May 15, 1824. 
“ Dear brother Lawson, 

‘¢ You would not think it strange if, by this time, 
we should express some regret for our imprudence 
m having left Bengal, contrary to the advice of our 
friends. If we had remained in Calcutta or Seram- 
pore, we should doubtless have been exempt from 
the inexpressible sufferings of body and mind, which 
we experienced during a part of the present week. 
But since God has graciously preserved our lives, 
and restored to us rest and quietness, for reasons 
which may easily be conceived by a Christian, we 
rejoice that we have been afflicted. 

‘‘ We did not apprehend, until last Monday, that 
war was declared against the Burmans. The most 
credible information which we could obtain, assured 
us, that all grievances were amicably settled. But 
on Monday last, information came, that a number of 
ships were at the mouth of the river. Government 
immediately ordered every person in Rangoon who 
wears a hat, to be taken prisoner, which was accor- 
dingly done. In the course of the succeeding night, 
Mr. Hough and myself were chained, and put into 
slose confinement, under armed keepers. In the 
norning the fleet was in sight of the town, and our 
Keepers were ordered to massacre us the moment the 
first shot was fired upon the town. But when the 
firing commenced, our murderers were 830 effectually 
panic struck, that they all slunk away into one core 
ner of the prison, speechless, and almost breathless, 
The next shot made our piison tremble and shake, 
as if it would be immediately down upon our heads. 
Our keepers now made for the prison door: we used 
every exertion to persuade them to remain, but all 
to no purpose; they broke open the door and fled. 
In a few moments after, the firing ceased; and we 
expected the troops were landing, and that we should 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. Q75 


be soon released; when, horrible to relate, about fif- 
ty Burmans rushed into the prison, drew us out, 
stripped us of everything but pantaloons; our na- 
ked arms were drawn behind us, and corded as tight 
as the strength of one man would permit; and we 
were almost literally carried through the streets 
upon the points of their spears, to the seat of judg- 
ment, and were made to sit upon our knees, with 
our bodies bending forward, for the convenience of 
the executioner, who was ordered that moment to 
behead us. None of us understood the order but 
Mr. Hough. He requested the executioner to de- 
sist a moment, and petitioned the Ray-woon to send 
him on board the frigate, and promised to use his 
influence to prevent any further firing upon the town. 
The linguists seconded the proposal, and pleaded that 
.we might be reprieved for a few moments. 
s° The Ray-woon answered, If the English fire 
again, there shall be no reprieve: and asked Mr. 
Hough if he would positively promise to put an im- 
mediate stop to the firing, which you will recollect 
had been discontinued, from the time that our keep- 
ers in prison fled. At this moment, several shots 
were sent very near us: the government people fled 
from the seat of judgment, and took refuge under 
the banks of a neighbouring tank. All the others 
fled from the town, but kept us before them: we 
were obliged to make our way as fast as possible, for 
the madness and terror of our attendants allowed us 
no compliments. 
- We were soon overtaken by the government 
people, fleeing upon horseback. 
s¢ About a mile anda half from the town they halt- 
ed, and we were again placed before them. Mr. 
Hough and the linguists renewed their petition. 
After a few moments’ conversation, his irons were 
taken off, and he was sent on board the frigate, with 
the most awful threatenings to himself and us, if he 
lid not succeed. 
‘The remainder of us were obliged again to re- 


276 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


sume our march, Finally, a part of us were con- 
fined in a strong building, at the foot of the golden 
pagoda. 1, with two others, was taken into the 
pagoda, and confined.in a strong building, and left 
under the care of a door-keeper. After dark this 
fellow, by the promise of a present, was induced to 
remove us into a kind of vault, which had but a 
smal; aperture, and was without windows: it afford- 
ed only sufficient air for the purpose of respiration. 
The fellow himself, I believe, ran away. We were 
several times alarmed during the night. 

‘¢ The next morning early, we were searched for 
by our blood thirsty enemies, who, upon finding we 
were not in the room where they left us, concluded 
that we had escaped and fled. We expected every 
moment we should be discovered, when, to our great 
relief, we heard them cry out, ‘The English are 
coming! and they fled. .We waited, however, in 
vain, to hear some sound which would assure us 
that it would be safe to cry out for assistance; for 
we soon found we were again surrounded with 
Burmans. 

*¢ About noon, the English troops came up, and 
to our inexpressible joy, relieved us from our unpleas- 
ant situation. Assoonas I] could be disengaged from 
my galling chains, I hastened to the mission-house, 
to learn the fate of Mrs, Wade and Hough. I 
found them safe and well; but though notimprisoned, 
they had experienced yreat sufferings, and escaped 
great dangers, Mr. Hough & also found safe at the 
mission-house. When we met and heard the re- 
lation of cach other’s dangers and escapes, we felt 
constrained to join in the most hearty acknowledg- 
ments of gratitude to God, by whose divine inter- 
position our lives had been preserved. 

*] have too little room to think ofentering upon 
our feelings when we viewed ourselves as in one 
moment more, to launch into eternity. Suffice it to 
say, | feltan assurance in the grace of God, which dis- 
armed death of its terror. The hope of the Gospel 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 277 


seemed to me a treasure, whose value was beyond 
all computation. Finally, I trust the dangers and 
sufferings of the past week have yielded me a rich 
spiritual harvest. 

«© All who had been taken prisoners, and ordered 
to be executed by the Burmans, were on Wednesday 
regained, and set at liberty by the English troops. 
All the Burmans have fled to the jungles, and have 
built several stockades in different directions from 
the town, some of which have already been taken 
and burned by the English troops. 

«* The Ray-woon orders every person to be put to 
death who betrays the least desire to return to Ran- 
goon. Numbers of Siamese, Parsees, Portuguese, 
Musselmans, and even Burmans, have been found 
in the jungles, who have been murdered by the Bur- 

-mans themselves. 

‘© Monday, 17. The army has penetrated the 
country for several miles around us. The result of 
every engagement, as yet, has been in favor of the 
English. 

«You will be able to obtain a full account of the 
state of affairs in this place, from the public papers, 
else I should be more minute in my communications. 

‘It is between two and three months since we 
have received any letter from Mr. Judson or Doe 
tor Price. It is impossible to predict their fate. 
We tremble whenever we think of them. We car, 
only pray, that God, who has delivered us out of 
the hands of our cruel enemies, may deliver then: 
also.” 


LETTER FROM MR. HOUGH TO DR. STAUGHTON. 


‘€ Rangoon, June 6, 1824, 
“ Rev. and dear Sk 


‘’We are now amid the 1oise and bustle of war, 
and are surrcunded, on all sides, by an army of ten 
thousand British troops, a greater part of which 
came up the river, and tabi the town on the 

€ 
2 


278 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


lithult. The town was completely evacuated when 
the British landed, by the Burmans, who all fled 
into the interior of the country. Many skirmishes 
have taken place since, and we are now, from the 
forces which the Burman chiefs are collecting, 
expecting, probably within sight and hearing, a 
bloody and destructive battle. ‘The Burmans have 
exercised many cruelties, both on one another, and 
on a few prisoners who have unhappily fallen into 
their hands, This presents no inducement to the 
English to spare their lives. The war, according to 
every present appearance, must continue for some- 
time tocome. Every Burman Christian, excepting 
Moung Shwa-ba, has fled, and all missionary work, 
excepting the study of the language, has ceased. 

«* We have not heard from brothers Judson and 
Price for a long time. Now all communication is 
cut off. We cannot but feel many anxieties on 
their account. ‘The mission property here has 
sustained no injury; and, unless the Burmans make 
a sudden irruption, will, I trust, under God, remain 
undisturbed. Should we, however, fali into the 
hands of the Burmans, in their present state of 
feeling, we have no human probability on which to 
hope for safety.” 


Messrs. Hough and Wade, with their wives, 
30on after returned to Bengal, their stay in Rangoon 
being attended with danger, while they had no . 
opportunity of effecting anything for the mission. 
Mr, and Mrs. Wade here continued the study of 
the language; and Mr. W. employed himself in 
printing the Burman Dictionary, which had been 
compiled by Mr. Judson—a work of great value to 
future Missionaries. 

The situation of the Missionaries at Ava now 
became a subject of intense anxiety to all the 
friends of the mssion. There was too much rea- 
son to fear that they had fallen victims to the 
hasty resentment of a vindictive and haughty 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUULSON.  Q79 


government. The English troops were uniformly 
victorious. Army after army of the Burmans was 
defeated ; and the English were on the advance 
towards the capital. These events were likely to 
incense the Burman government, and t») ind ce 
them to treat all foreigners with the utmost severity, 

For nearly two years the cloud which concealed 
their fate hung dark and portentous. That suspense, 
which is often as dreadful as the most awful certain- 
ty, agitated the minds of their relatives, and of al! 
the friends of missions, with alternate hopes and 
fears. ‘Those who cherished the belief that the 
Missionaries were alive, refied only on the power of 
that God who had so signally protected this mission, 
and who, by an interposition almost as visibly 
miraculous as that which rescued Peter from his 
enemies, had recently preserved the Missionaries at 
Rangoon from instant and apparently inevitable 
death. It was, moreover, nearly certain, that if 
the Missionaries were living, they were subjected tc 
imprisonment, and to dreadful sufferings, both cor- 
poreal and mental. 

These considerations produced a deep anxiety in 
the public mind, which has seldom been witnessed, 
and which, it is believed, drew from many hearts 
continual and importunate prayer to God, that he 
would hear the sigh of the prisoners, and protect 
his servants from the rage of the heathen, and from 
_ the perils of war. 

At length this painful suspense was terminated by 
he joyful news, that the Missionaries were alive, 
ind were safe in the English camp. The British 
roops, after an almost uninterrupted series of suc- 
sessful combats, had penetrated to Yandabo, about 
‘orty miles from the capital. The Burmese govern- 
nent had hitherto haughtily refused to comply 
‘vith the terms proposed by the British commander. 
Sut the near approach of the English troops, and 
he prospect of the speedy capture of the goldep 


Q8n ° MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


city, so operated on the fears of the Monarch, tnat 
he yielded, and signed a treaty of peace, in which ne 
ceded a large portion of his territory, and agreed to 
pay acrore of rupees, een five millions of dollars,) 
in four instalments. e was required, moreover, to 
liberate all the English and American prisoners, 
Mr. and Mrs. Judson, and Dr. Price, were thus 
rescued fromthe grasp of their oppressors; and on 
the 24th of F:bruary, 1826, they were received, 
with the kindest hospitality, at the British camp. 
Mrs. Judson wrote thus © 


TO HER SISTER, 


‘¢ British Camp, Yandabo, 40 miles 
from Ava, Feb. 25, 1826. 
“6 My dear Sister A. 


«« Happy indeed am I to be in a situation once 
more to write you, and to find myself under the 
protection of a Christian government. To have 
my mind once more relieved from those agonizing 
expectations and fearful apprehensions to which it 
has so lomg been subject, almost incapacitates me 
for writing, from excess of joy, and, I trust, sincere 
gratitude to Him, who has afflicted and delivered us 
from our afflictions. I have on'y time to write a 
line or two, just to inform you of our emancipation 
and comfortable circumstances. 

‘‘Four or five days ago, my hopes of being 
released from the Burman yoke were faint indeed; 
but through the kindness of Sir Archibald Campbell, 
who demanded us of the Burman government, we 
obtained our liberty, and are now under his protec- 
tion, and receive from him every possible attention, 
He has provided us with a tent near his own, during 
our stay an the banks of the Irrawaddy, and one 
of the largest gun- boats to convey us to Rangoon. 
Pea'e was ratified yesterday, and in a few days we 
shall proceed down the river. ; 

«We havea little daughter, born seven months 
after the imprisonment of her father; she 1s a lovely 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 2 281 


ghild, and now more than a year old. We call her 
Maria Eliza Butterworth. aria’s nurse, together 
with two little Burman girls, Mary and Abby, | 
have brought with me, and shall now have it in 
aD power to take them with me wherever I go. 

yy health is now good, having just recovered 
from a’ dreadful fever, during the neight of which I 
was delirious, for several days, and in the absence 
of Mr. J. without any person to look after me 
excepting servants. Perhaps no person was ever 
brought so low, and recovered. It appeared a 
miracle to every one, and I could only say, It is the © 
Lord who has done it. So entirely exhausted waa 
my strength, that I could not move a limb for 
sometime, or stand on my feet for six weeks after; 
and even now, three months since my fever left me, 
I have hardly strength to walk alone, though I am 
perfectly well in other respects. 

« We shall probably continue in the Burman em- 
pire, but in some part under British protection. 
God has been with us through all our sufferings, 
and intermingled mercies all the way. Bless his 
holy name, for he is a prayer hearing God, and will 
not forsake his people in their distress. _Remembe2 
us in your prayers. 

**P, S. This is the first letter I have written for 
nearly two years.” 


—— 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Account of the Scenes at Ava during the War. 


Te sufferings of the Missicnaries, during thia 
‘ong and disastrous period, surpassed all that the 
most alarmed and fertile imagination had conceived, 
Of the dreadful scenes at Ava, a minute account 
was written by Mrs. J mason to Dr. Elnathan Jad 

24 


982 MEMOIR OF MRS. JULSON. 


son, who has kindly furmshed i: for this work. hh 
will be read with strong and painful interest. Fic- 
‘ion itself kas seldom invented a tale more replete 
with terror 


“Rangoon, May 26, 1826. 
My beloved Brother, ° 

“T commence this letter with the intention of 
yiving you the particulars of our captivity and suf- 
ferings at Ava. How long my patience will allow 
my reviewing scenes of disgust and horror, the con- 
clusion of this letter will determine. I had kept a 
journal of everything that had transpired from our 
arrival at Ava but destroyed it at the commence- 
ment of our d fficulties. 

« The first certain intelligence we received of the 
declaration of war by the Burmese, was on our ar- 
rival at Tsen-pyoo-kywon, about a hundred miles 
this side of Ava, where part of the troops, under 
the command of the celebrated Bandoola, had en- 
camped. As we proceeded on our journey, we met 
Bandoola himself, with the remainder of his troops, 
gaily equipped, seated on his golden barge, and sur- 
rounded by a fleet of gold war boats, one of which 
was instantly despatched the other side of the river 
to hail us, and make all necessary inquiries. We 
were allowed to proceed quietly on, when we had 
informed the messenger that we were Americans, 
not English, and were going to Ava in obedience to 
the command of his Majesty. 

** On our arrival at the capital, we found that Dr. 
Prive was out of favor at court, and that suspicion 
rested on most of the foreigners then at Ava. Your 
brother visited at the palace two or three times, but 
found the King’s manner toward him very different 
from what it formerly had been; and the Queen, 
who had hitherto expressed wishes for my speedy 
arrival, now made no inquiries after me, nor intuma- 
ted a wish tc see me. Consequently, I made no ef- 
‘ort ‘0 visit at the paace, though almost daiy in 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 983 


vited to visit some of the branches of the roya 
family, who were living in their own houses, out 
of the palace enclosure. Under these circumstan- 
ces, we thought our most prudent course lay in pros- 
ecuting our original intention of building a house, 
and commencing missionary operations as occasions 
offered, thus endeavouring to convince the govern- 
ment that we had really nething to do with the 
present war. 

‘©In two or three weeks after our arrival, the 
King, Queen, all the members of the royal family, 
end most of the officers of government, returned 
to Amarapora, in order to come and take posses- 
sion of the new palace in the customary style. 
As there has been much misunderstanding relative 
to Ava and Amarapora, both being called the capi- 
ial of the Burmese Empire, I will here remark, that 
present Ava was formerly the seat of government; 
but soon after the old King had ascended the throne, 
wt was forsaken, and a new palace built at Amarapo- 
ra, about six miles from Ava, in which he remained 
during his life. Inthe fourth year of the reign of 
the present King, Amarapora was in its turn forsa 
ken, and a new and beautiful palace built at Ava, 
which was then in ruins, but is now the capital of the 
Burmese Empire. The king and royal family had 
been living in temporary buildings at Ava, during 
the completion of the new palace, which gave occa 
sion for their returning to Amarapora. 

«1 dare not attempt a description of that splendid 
day, when majesty with all its attendant glory en 
tered the gates of the golden city, and amid the ac+ 
clamations of millions, [ may say, took possession of 
the palace. ‘The saupwars of the provinces border 
ing on China, all the Viceroys and high officers of 
the kingdom, were assembled on the occasion, dressed 
in their robes of state, and ornamented with the in- 
signia of their office. ‘The white elephant, richly 
adornec with gold and jewels, was one of the most 


284 MEMCIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


beautiful objects in the procession. The King ane 
Queen alone were unadorned, dressed in the simple 
garb of the country; they, hand in hand, entered 
the garden in which we had taken our seats, anc 
where a banquet was prepared for -neir refiesk- 
ment. All the riches and glory of the empire were 
on this day exhibited to view. The number and 
immense size of the elephants, the numerous horses, 
and great variety of vehicles of al descriptions, far 
surpassed anything I have ever seen or imagined. 
Soon after his Majesty had taken possession of the 
new palace, an order was issued that no foreigner 
should be. allowed to enter, excepting Lansago. 
We were a little alarmed at this, but concluded it 
was from political motives, and would not, perhaps, 
essentially affect us. 

“ For several weeks, nothing took place to alarm 
us, and we went on with our school. Mr. J. preached 
every Sabbath, all the materials for building a brick 
house were procured, and the masons had made 
considerable progress in raising the building. 

s On the 23d of May, 1824, just as we had con 
e.uded worship at the Doctor’s house, the other 
side of the river, a messenger came to inform us 
that Rangoon was taken by the English. The in- 
telligence produced a shock, in which was a mixture 
of fear and joy. Mr. Gouger, a young merchan: 
residing at Ava, was then with us, and had muctl: 
more reason to fear than the rest of us. We all, 
however, immediately returnec to our house, and 
hezan to consider what was to be done. Mr. G. 
went to Prince Thar-yar-wa-dee, the King’s most 
influential brother, who informed him he need not 
give himselt’ any uneasiness, as he had mentioned 
the subject to his Majesty, who had replied, that 
‘the few foreigners residing at Ava, had nothing 
to do with the war, and should not be molested.’ 

s‘ The government were now allin motion. An 
army of ten or twelve thousand men, under the | 
command of the Kyee-woon-gyee, were sent off in- 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 985 


tnree or four days, and were to be joined by the 
Sakyah-voon-gyee, who had previously been ap- 
pvinted Viceroy of Rangoon, and who was on his 
way thither, when the news of its attack reached 
him, No doubt was entertained of the defeat of the 
English; the only fear of the King was, that the 
foreigners, hearing of the advance of the Burmese 
troops, would be so alarmed, as to flee on board 
their ships and depart, before there would be time ta 
secure them as slaves. ‘ Bring for me,? said a wild 
young buck of the palace, ‘six kala pyoo, (white 
strangers,) to row my boat; and ‘to me,’ said the 
ady of a Woon-gyee, ‘send four white strangers to 
manage the affairs of my house, as I understand 
they are trusty servants.? The war boats, in high 
glee, passed our house, the soldiers singing and 
dancing, and exhibiting gestures of the most joyous 
kind, Poor fellows! said we, you will probably 
never dance again. And it so proved, for few if 
any ever saw again their native home. * 

‘* As soon as the army were despatched, the gov- 
ernment began to inquire the cause of the arrival 
of the strangers at Rangoon. ‘There must be spies 
in the country, suggested some, who have invited 
them over. And who so likely to be spies, as the 
Englishmen residing at Ava? A report was in 
circulation, that Captain Laird, lately arrived, had 
brought Bengal papers which contained the inten- 
tion of the English to take Rangoon, and it was 
kept a secret from ‘.is Majesty. An inquiry was 
instituted. The three Englishmen, Gouger, Laird, 
and Rogers, were called and examined. It was 
found they had seen the papers, and were put in 
confinement, though not in prison. We now began 
to tremble for ourselves, and were in daily expec- 
tation of some dreadful event. 

«© At length Mr. Judson and Dr. Price were sum- 
moned to a court of examination, where strict_in- 
quiry was made telative to all they knew. The 
great point seeried to be whether they had been in 


286 ' MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


the habit of making communications to foreigners, 
of the state of the country, &c. They answered, 
they had always written to their friends in America, 
but had no correspondence with English officers, or 
the Bengal government. After their examination, 
they were not put in confinement as the Englishmer 
had been, but were allowed to return to the 
houses. In examining the accounts of Mr. G. in 
was found that Mr. J. and Dr. Price had taken 
money of him to a considerable amount. Ignorant 
as were the Burmese of our mode of receiving 
money by orders on Bengal, this circumstance, to 
their suspicious minds, was a sufficient evidence, 
that the Missionaries were in the pay of the En- 
glish, and very probably spies. It was thus repre- 
sented to the King, who, in an angry tone, ordered 
the immediate arrest of the ‘ two teachers.’ ; 
‘On the 8th of June, just as we were preparing 
for dinner, in rushed an officer, holding a black book, 
with a dozen Burmans, accompanied by one, whom, 
from his spotted face, we knew to be an execution- 
er, and a ‘son of the prison.’ ‘ Where is the teach- 
er’? was the first inquiry. Mr. Judson presented 
himself. ‘* You are called by tne King,’ said the of- 
ficer; a form of speech always used when about to 
arrest acriminal. ‘Thespotted man instantly seized 
Mr. Judson, threw him on the floor, and produced 
the small cord, the instrument of torture. Icaugh 
hold of his arm; ‘Stay, (said I,) I will give you 
money.’ ‘Take her too,’ said the officer; ‘she alse 
isa foreigner.’ Mr. Judson, with an imploring look, 
begged they would let me remain till further or 
ders. The scene was now shocking bevond descri:- 
tion. ‘The whole neighbourhood had collected—the 
masons at work on the brick house threw down 
their tools, and ran—the little Burman children 
were screaming and cryiuag—the Bengalee servants 
stood in amazement at the indignities offered their 
master—apd the hartened executioner, with a kind 
of hellish ‘yy, drew tigl t the cords, hound Mr. Jud ~ 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 287 


eon fast, and dragged him off I knew not whither. 
In vain | begged and entreated the spotted face to 
(ake the silver, and loosen the ropes; but he spurned 
my offers, and immediately departed. I gave the 
money, however, to Moung Ing to follow after, to 
make some further attempt to mitigate the torture 
of Mr. Judson; but instead of succeeding, when a 
few rods from the house, the unfeeling wretches 
again threw their prisoner on the ground, and drew 
the cords still tighter, so as almost to prevent respi- 
ration. 

‘The officer and his gang proceeded on to the 
court house, where the Governor of the city and of- 
ficers were collected, one of whom read the order of 
the King, to commit Mr. Judson to the death pris 
on, into which he was soon hurled, the door closed—: 
and Moung Ing saw no more. What a night was 
now before me! I retired into my room, ana en- 
deavoured to obtain consolation from committing my 
case to God, and imploring fortitude and strength to 
suffer whatever awaited me. But the consolation 
of retirement was not long allowed me, for the mag- 
istrate of the place had come into the verandah, and 
continually called me to come out, and submit to his 
examination. But previously to going out, I de- 
stroyed all my letters, journals, and writings of every 
kind, lest they should disclose the fact, that we had 
correspondents in England, and had minuted down 
every occurrence since our arrival in the country. 
When this work of destruction was finished, I went 
out and submitted to the examination of the magis- 
trate, who inquired very minutely of everything I 
knew; then ordered the gates > the compound to be 
shut, no person to be allowed to go inor out, placed 
a guard of ten ruffians, to whom he gave a strict 
charge to keep me safe, and departed. 

s°J* was now dark. I retired to an inner room 
with my four little Burman girls, and barred the 
doors. The guard instantly ordered me to unbar 
the doors and come out, or they would break the. 


988 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


house down. I obstinately refused to obey, and en 
deavoured to intimidate them by threatening to com- 
plain of their conduct to nigher authorities on the 
morrow. Finding me resolved in disregarding their 
orders, they took the two Bengalee servants, and 
confined them in the stocks in a very painful posi- 
tion. YF could not endwme this; but called the head 
man to the window, and promised to make them all 
a present in the morning, if they would release the 
servants. After much debate, and many severe 
threatenings, they consented, but seemed resolved 
to annoy me as much aspossible. My unprotected, 
desolate state, my entire uncertainty of the fate of 
Mr. Judson, and the dreadful carousings and al- 
most diabolical language of the guard, all conspired 
to make it by far the’ most distressing night I had 
ever passed. You may wellimagine, my dear broth- 
er, that sleep was a stranger to my eyes, and peace 
and composure to my mind. 

‘The next morning, I sent Moung Ing to ascer- 
tain the situation of your brother, and give him 
food, if’ still living. He soon returned, with the in- 
telligence, that Mr. Judson, and all the white for- 
eigners, were contined in the death prison, with three 
pairs of iron fetters each, and fastened to a long 
pole, to prevent their moving! The point of my 
anguish now was, that I was a prisoner myself, and 
could make no efforts for the release of the Mission- 
aries. I begged and entreated the magistrate to 
allow me to go to some member of government to 
state my case; but he said he did not dare to con- 
sent, for fear I should make my escape. I next 
wrote a note to one of the King’s sisters, with whom 
I had been intimate, requesting Lr to use her in- 
fluence for the release of the teachers. ‘The note 
was returned with this message—She ‘did not un-— 
derstand it,——which was a polite refusal to inter- 
fere; though I afterwards ascertained, that she had 
an anxious desire to assist us, but dared not on ac-~ 
count of the Queen. The day dragged heavily 


MEMOIR OF MAS. JUDS)N, 289 


away, and another dreadful night was beforeine. 1 
' endeavoured to soften the feelings of the guard, by 
giving them tea and segars for the night; so that 
they allowed me to remain inside of my room, with- 
out threatening as they did the night before. But 
the idea of your brother being stretched on the bare 
floor in irons and confinement, haunted my mind like 
a spectre, and prevented my obtaining any quiet 
sleep, though nature was almost exhausted. 

‘On the third day, I sent a message to the 
Governor of the city, who has the entire direction 
of prison affairs, to allow me to visit him with a 
present. This had the desired effect; and he 
immediately sent orders to the guards, to permit my 
going into town. The Governor received me 
pleasantly, and asked me what I wanted. I stated 
to him the situation of the foreigners, and particularly 
that of the teachers, who were Americans, and had 
nothing to do with the war. He told me it was 
not in his power to release them from prison or rons, 
but that he could make their situation more comfort- 
able; there was his head officer, with whom IJ must 
consult, relative to the means. 'The officer, who 
proved to be one of the city writers, and whose 
countenance at the first glance presented the most 
perfect assemblage of all the evil passions attached 
to human nature, took me aside, and endeavoured 
to convince me, that myself, as well as the prisoners, 
was entirely at his disposal—that our future comfort 
must depend on my liberality in regard to presents-— 
and that these must be made in a private way and 
unknown to any officer. in the government! What 
must I do, said I, to obtain a mitigation of the 
present sufferings of the two teachers? ‘ Pay tome,’ 
said he, ‘two hundred tickals, (about a hundred 
dollars,) two pieces of fine cloth, and two pieces of 
handkerchiefs? T had taken money with me in the 
Inorning, our house being two miles from the 
prison—-l could not easily return. This I oflered to 


the writer, and begged he would not insist on the 
25 


290 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


other articles, as they were not in my possession, 
He hesitated for sometime, but fearing to lose the 
sight of so much money, he concluded to take it, 
promising to relieve the teachers from their most 
painful situation. 

‘J then procured an order from the Governor, 
for my admittance into prison; but the sensations 

produced by meeting your brother in that wretched. 
horrid situation, and the affecting scene which 
ensued, I will not attempt to describe. Mr. Judson 
crawled to the door of the prison—for I was never 
allowed to enter—gave me some directions relative 
to his release; but before we could make any 
arrangement, I was ordered to depart, by those iron 
hearted jailers, who could not endure to see us enjoy 
the poor consolation of meeting in that miserable 
place. In vain I pleaded the order from the 
Governor for my admittance; they again harshly 
repeated, ‘ Depart, or we will pull you out.? The 
same evening, the Missionaries, together with the 
other foreigners, who paid an equal sum, were taken 
out of the common prison, and confined in an open 
shed in the prison enclosure. Here I was allowed 
to send them food, and mats. to sleep on; but was 
not permitted to enter again for several days. 

** My next object was to get a petition presented 
to the Queen; but no person being admitted into the 
palace, who was in disgrace with his Majesty, I 
sought to present it through the medium of her 
brother’s wife I had visited her in better days, 
and received particular marks of her favor. But 
now times were altered: Mr. Judson was in prison, 
and I in distress, which was a sufficient reason for 
giving me a cold reception. I took a present of 
considerable value. She was lolling on her carpet 
as I entered, with her attendants around her. 1] 
waited not for the usual question to a supphant, 
‘What do you want?? but in a bold, earnest, yet 
respectful manner, stated our distresses and our 
wrongs, and begged her assistance. She partly 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. Q91 


raised her head, opeasd the present I had brought, 
and coolly replied, ‘ Your case is not singular; all 
the foreigners are treated alike.’ ‘ But it is singu- 
lar,’ said I, ‘the teachers are Americans; they are 
ministers of religion, have nothing to do with war 
or politics, and came to Ava in obedience to the 
King’s command. ‘They have never done anything 
to deserve such treatment; and is it right they 
should. be treated thus?? ‘The King does as he 
pleases,’ said she; ‘I am not the King, what can I 
do?? * You can state their case to the Queen, and 
obtain their release,’ replied I. ‘Place yourself in 
my situation,—were you in America, your husband, 
innocent of crime, thrown into prison, in irons, and 
you a solitary, unprotected female—what would you 
do?? With a slight degree of feeling, she said, ‘I 
will present your petition,—come again to-morrow.’ 
I returned to the house, with considerable hope, 
that the speedy release of the Missionaries was at 
hand. But the next day Mr. Gouger’s property, to 
the amount of fifty thousand Rupees, was taken and 
carried to the palace. ‘The olficers, on their return, 
politely informed me, they should visit our house on 
themorrow. I felt obliged for this information, and 
accordingly made preparations to receive them, by 
secreting as many little articles as possible; together 
with considerable silver, as I knew, if the war 
should be protracted, we should be ina state of 
starvation without it. But my mind was in a 
dreadful state of agitation, lest it should be discov- 
ered, and cause my being thrown into prison. And 
had it been possible to procure money from any 
other quarter, I should not have ventured on such a 
step 

* The following morning, the royal treasurer, the 
governor of the north gate of the palace, who was 
in future our steady friend, and another nobleman, 
attended by forty or fifty followers, came to take 
possession of all we had. 1 treated them civilly, 
gave them chairs to sit on, tea and sweetmeats for 


292 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


their refreshment; and justice obliges me to say 
that they conducted the business of confiscation 
with more regard to my feelings than I should have 
thought it possible for Burmese officers to exhibit. 
The three officers, with one of the royal secretaries, 
alone entered the house; their attendants were or 
dered to remain outside. They saw I was deepiy 
affected, and apologized for what they were about to 
do, by saying, that it was.painful for them to take 
possession of popes not their own, but they were 
compelled thus to do by orderof the King. ‘ Where 
is your silver, gold, and jewels?’ said the royal 
treasurer. ‘I have no gold or jewels; but here is 
the key of a trunk which contains the silver—do 
with it as you please.? The trunk was produced, 
and the silver weighed. ‘This money,’ said I, * was 
collected in America, by the disciples of Christ, and 
sent here for the purpose of building a kyoung,(the 
name of a priest’s dwelling) and for our support, 
while teaching the religion of Christ. Is it suitable 
that you should take it? (The Burmans are averse 
to taking what is offered in a religious point of view, 
which was the cause of my making the inquiry.) 
‘We will state this circumstance to the King,’ said 
one of them, ‘and perhaps he will restore it. But 
is this all the silver you have?*? I could not tell a 
falsehood: ‘'The house is in your possession,’ I re- 
plied; ‘search for yourselves.? ‘Have you not de- 
posited silver with some person of your acquaint 
ance?’ ‘ My acquaintances are all in prison, with 
whom should I deposit silver?’ They next ordered 
my trunk and drawers to be examined. The secre- 
tary only was allowed to accompany me in this 
search. Everything nice or curious, which met his 
view, was presented to the officers, for their decision, 
whether it should be taken or retained. I begged 
they would not take our wearing apparel, as it 
* would be disgraceful to take clothes partly worn, 
into the possession of his Majesty, and to us they 
were of unspeakable value, They assented, and 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 293 


took a list only, and did the same with the books, 
medicines, &c. My little work table and rocking 
chair, presents from my beloved brother, I rescued 
from their grasp, partly by artifice, and partly 
through their ignorance. ‘They left also many arti 
cles, which were of inestimable value, during our 
long imprisonment. 

*¢ As soon as they had finished their search and 
departed, I hastened to the Queen’s brother, to hear 
what had been the fate of my petition; when, alas, 
all my hopes were dashed, by his wife’s coolly say- 
ing, ‘I stated your case to the Queen, but her Maj- 
esty replied, The teachers will not die; let them re- 
main as they are.’ My expectations had been so 
much excited, that this sentence was like a thunder- 
clap to my feelings. For the truth at one glance 
assured me, that if the Queen refused assistance, 
who wouid dare to intercede forme? With a heavy 
heart I departed, and on my way home, attempted 
to enter the prison gate, to communicate the sad 
tidings to your brother, but was harshly refused ad- 
mittance; and for the ten days following, notwith- 
standing my daily efforts, I was not allowed to enter. 
We attempted to communicate by writing, and alter 
being successful for a few days, it was discovered; 
the poor fellow who carried the communications was 
beaten and put in the stocks; and the circumstance 
cost me about ten dollars, besides two or three days 
of'agony, for fear of the consequences. 

“The officers who had taken possession of our 
property, presented it to his Majesty, saying, * Jud- 
son is a true teacher; we found nothing in his house, 
but what belongs to priests. In addition to this 
money, there are an immense number of books, 
medicines, trunks of wearing apparel, &c. of which 
we have only takena list. Shall we take them, or 
1et them remain?? ‘° Let them remain,’ said the 
King, ‘and put this property by itself, for it shall 
be restored to him again, if he is found innocent.’ 
This was an allusion to ibe idea of his being « spy 

fs) 


994 MuMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


«: For two or three months following, I was sab 
rect to continual harassments, partly through my 
ignorance of police management, and partly throagh 
the insatiable desire of every petty officer to enrich 
nimself through our misfortunes. When the officera 
came to our house, to confiscate our property, they 
insisted on knowing how much I had given the Gov- 
ernor and prison officers, to release the teachers fron 
the inner prison. I honestly told them, and they 
demanded the sum from the Governor, which threw 
him into a dreadful rage, and he threatened to put 
all the prisoners back into their original place. I 
went to him the next morning, and the first words 
with which he accosted me were, ‘ You are very bad; 
why did you tell the royal treasurer that you had 
given meso much money?’ ‘The treasurer inquir- 
ed; what could Isay?? I replied. ‘Say that you 
had given nothing,’ said he, ‘and I would have made 
the teachers comfortable in prison; but now I know 
not what will be their fate.? ‘But I cannot tell a 
falsehood,’ I replied. ‘My religion differs from 
a forbids prevarication; and had you stood 

y me with your knife raised, I could not have said 
what you suggest.’ His wife, who sat by his side, 
and who always, from this time, continued my firm 
friend, instantly said, ‘Very true—what else could 
she have done? I like such straight forward con- 
duct; you must not (turning to the Governor) be 
angry with her.’ I then presented the Governor 
with a beautiful opera glass, I had just received 
from England, and begged his anger at me would 
not influence him to treat the prisoners with unkind- 
ness, and I would endeavour, from time to time, to 
make him such presents, as would compensate for his 
loss ‘You may intercede for your husband only; 
for your sake, he shall remain where he is; but let 
the other prisoners take care of themselves.’ [ 
pleaded hard for Dr. Price; but he would not listen, 
and the same day had him returned to the inner 
prison, where he remained ten days. He was then 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 295 


take out in consequence of the Doctor’s promising 
a piece of broad-cloth, and my sending two pieces 
of handkerchiefs. 

*¢ About this period, I was one day summoned to 
the Loot-dau, in an official way. ‘What new evil, 
was before me, I knew not, but was obliged to go. 
When arrived, I was allowed to stand at the bottom 
of the stairs, as no female is permitted to ascend the 
steps, or even to stand, but siton the ground. Hun- 
dreds were collected around. The officer who pre- 
sided, in an authoritative voice, began; ‘ Speak the 
truth, in answer to the questions I shall ask. If 
you speak true, no evil will follow; but if not, your 
life will not be spared. It is reported that you have 
committed to the care of a Burmese officer, a string 
of pearls, a pair of diamond ear-rings and a silver 
tea-pot. Is it true?’ ‘It is not,’ I replied; ‘ and if 
“i or any other person can produce these articles, 

refuse not to die.? The officer again urged the 
necessity of ‘speaking true.’ I told him I had noth- 
ing more to say on the subject, but begged he 
would use his influence to obtain the release of Mr. 
Judson from prison. 

«T returned to the house, with a heart much 
lighter than I went, though conscious of my perpet- 
ual exposure to such harassments. Notwithstand- 
ing the repulse I had met in my application to the 
Queen, I could mot remain without making continu- 
al effort for your brother’s release, while there was 
the least probability of success. ‘Time after time 
my visits to the Queen’s sister-in-law were repeat- 
ed, till she refused to answer a question, and told 
me by her looks, I had better keep out of her pres- 
ence. For the seven following months, hardly a day_ 
passed, that I did not visit some one of the members 
of government, or branches of the royal family, in 
order to gain their influence in our behalf; but the 
only benefit resulting was, their encouraging promi- 
ses preserved us from despair, and induced a hope of 
the speedy te ‘miration of our difficulties, which en 


296 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


abled us to bear our distresses better than we otners 
wise should have done. I ought, however, to men- 
tion, that by my repeated visits to the different 
members of government, I gained several friends, 
who were ready to assist me with articles of food, 
though in a private manner, and who used their in- 
fluence in the palace to destroy the impression of 
our being in any way engaged in the present war. 
But no one dared to speak a word to the King or 
Queen in favor of a foreigner, while there were such 
continual reports of the success of the English arms. 

«During these seven months, the continual extor- 
tions and oppressions to which your brother, and the 
other white prisoners were subject, are indescribable. 
Sometimes sums of money were demanded, some- 
times pieces of cloth, and handkerchiefs; at ovher 
times, an order would be issued, that the white for- 
eigners should not speak to each other, or have any 
communication with their friends without. Then, 
again, the servants were forbidden to carry in their 
food, without an extra fee. Sometimes, for days 
and days together, I could not go into the prison till 
after dark, when I had two miles to walk, in returns 
ing to the house. O how many, many times, have 
I returned from that dreary prison at nine o’clock at 
night, solitary and worn out with fatigue and anx- 
iety, and thrown myself down in that same rocking 
chair which you and Deacon L. provided for me in 
Boston, and endeavoured to invent some new scheme 
for the release of the prisoners. Sometimes, for a 
moment or two, my thoughts would glance toward 
America, and my beloved friends there—but for near- 
ly a year and a half, so entirely engrossed was every 
thought with present scenes and sufferings, that I - 
seldom reflected on a single occurrence of my former 
life, or recollected that I had a friend in existence 
out of Ava. 

‘You, my dear brother, who know my stron 
attachment to my friends, and how much ‘ionel 
have hitherto experienced from retrospect, can judge 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 297 


from the above circumstances, how intense were 
my sufferings. But the point, the acme of my 
distiess, consisted in the awful uncertainty of our 
final fate. My prevailing opinion was, that my 
husband would suffer violent death and that I 
should, of course, become a slave, and languish out 
a miserable though short existence, in the tyrannic 
hands of'some unfecling monster. But the consola- 
tions of religion, in these trying circumstances, 
were neither ‘few nor small.’ It taught me to 
look beyond this world, to that rest, that peaceful 
happy rest, where Jesus reigns, and oppression never . 
enters. But how have I digressed from my relation, 
I will again return. 

«The war was now prosecuted with all the 
energy the Burmese government possessed. New 
troops were continually raised and sent down the 
river, and as frequent reports returned of their being 
all cut off. But that part of the Burmese army 
stationed in Arracan, under the command of Ban- 
doola, had been more successful. Three hundred 
prisoners, at one time, were sent to the capital, as 
an evidence of the victory that had been gained, 
The King began to think that none but Bandoola 
understood the art of fighting with foreigners; 
consequently his. Majesty recalled him with the 
design of his taking command of the army that had 
been sent to Rangoon. On his arrival at Ava, he 
Was received at court in the most flattering manner, 
and was the recipient of every favor in the power 
of the King and Queen to bestow. He was, in 
fact, while at Ava, the acting King. I was resolved 
to apply to him for the release of the Missionaries, 
though some members of government advised me 
not, lest he, being reminded oftheir existence, should 
issue an immediate order for their execution, But 
it was my last hope, and, as it proved, my last 
application. ‘ 

«‘ Your brother wrote a petiti »n privately, stating 
every circumstance that would have a tendency to 


998 MEMOIR OF MRS. J\DSON. 


interest him inour behalf. With fear and :rembling 
[ approached him, while surrounded by a crowd of 
flatterers; and one of his secretaries took the peti- 
tion, and read it aloud. After hearing it, he spake 
to me in an obliging manner—asked several ques- 
tions relative to the teachers—said he would think 
of the subject—and bade me come again. I ran to 
the prison to communicate the favorable reception 
to Mr. Judson; and we both had sanguine hopes 
that his release was at hand. But the Governor of 
the city expressed his amazement at my’ temerity, 
and said he doubted not it would be the means of 
destroying all the prisoners. In a day or two, 
however, I went again, and took a present of 
considerable value. Bandoola was not at home; 
but his lady, after ordering the present to be taken 
into another room, modestly informed me that she 
was ordered by her husband to make the following 
communication—that he was now very busily 
employed in making preparations for Rangoon; but 
that when he had retaken that place and expelied 
the English, he would return and release all the 
prisoners. 

s¢’Thus again were all our hopes dashed; and we 
felt that we could do nothing more, but sit down 
and submit to our lot. From this time we gave up 
all idea of being released from prison, till the termi- 
nation of the war; but I was still obliged to visit 
constantly some of the members of government, 
with little presents, particularly the Governor of the 
city, for the purpose of making the situation of the 
prisoners tolerable. I generally spent the greatei 
part of every other day at the Governor’s house 
' giving him all the information relative to American 
manners, customs, government, &c. He used tobe 
so much gratified with my communications, as to 
feel greatly disappointed, if any occurrence prevent- 
ed my spending the usual hours at his house, 

* Some months after your brother’s imprisonment, 
| was permitted to make a little bamboo room in 


MEMUIR OF MRS JUDS 299 


the prison enclosures, where he could be much by 
himself, and where I was sometimes allowed to 
spend two or three hoars. It so happened that the . 
two months he occupied this place, was the coldest 
part of the year, when he would have suffered much 
in the open shed he had previously occupied. After 
the birth of your little niece, I was unable to visit 
the prison and the Governor as before, and found I 
had lost considerable influence, previously gained; 
- for he was not so forward to hear my petitions 
when any difficulty occurred, as he formerly had 
been. When Maria was nearly two months old, 
her father one morning sent me word that he and 
all the white prisoners were put into the inner 
prison, in five pairs of fetters each, that his little 
room had been torn down, and his mat, pillow, &c. 
been taken by the jailers.5 This was to me a 
dreadful shock, as I thought at once it was only a 
prelude to greater evils. 

‘*T should have mentioned before this, the defeat 
of Bandoola, his escape to Danooyboo, the complete 
destruction of his army and loss of ammunition, 
and the consternation this intelligence produced at 
court. The English army had leit Rangoon, and 
were advancing towards Prome, when these severe 
measures were taken with the prisoners. _ 

‘¢ ] went immediately to the Governor’s house. 
He was not at home, but had ordered his wife to 
tell me, when I came, not to ask te have the addi 
tional fetters taken off, or the prisoners released, for 
tt could not be done. I went to the prison-gate, 
but was forbid to enter. All was as still as death— 
not a white face to be seen, or a vestige of Mr. J.’s 
little room remaining. I was determined to see the 
Governor, and know the cause of this additional 
oppression; and for this purpose returned into town 
the same evening, at an hour I knew he would be at 
home, He wasin his audience room, and, as [ enter- 
ed, looked up without speaking, but exhibited a 
mixture of shame and affected anger in his counte- 


s00 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


nance, Ibegan by saying, Your Lordship has hith- 
erto treated us with the kindness ofa father. Our 
obligations to you are very great. We have looked 
to you for protection from oppression and cruelty 
You have in many instances mitigated the sufferings 
of those unfortunate, though innocent beings, com- 
mitted to your charge. You have promised me par- 
ticularly, that you would stand by me to the last, and 
though you should receive an order from the King, 
ae would not put Mr. J. todeath. Whatcrime Las 
€ committed to deserve such additional punishment? 
The old man’s hard heart was melted, for he wept 
like a child. ‘I pity you, Tsa-yar-ga-dau, (a name 
by which he always called me) I knew you would 
make me feel; I therefore forbade your application. 
But you must believe me when I say, I do not wish 
to increase the sufferings of the prisoners. When 
I am ordered to execute them, the least that I can 
do is, to put them out of sight. I will now tell 
ou (continued he) what I have never told you be- 
ore, that three times I have received intimations 
from the Queen’s brother, to assassinate all the 
white prisoners privately; but I would not do it. 
And I now repeat it, though I execute all the 
others, I will never execute your husband. But I 
cannot release him from his present confinement, 
and you must not ask it.2 I had never seen him 
manifest so much feeling, or so resolute in denying 
me a favor, which circumstance was an additional 
reason for thinking dreadful scenes were before us. 
‘‘The situation of the prisoners was now dis- 
tressing beyond description. It was at the com- 
mencement of the hot season. There were ahove 
a hundred prisoners shut up in one room, without 
a breath of air excepting from the cracks in the 
boards. I sometimes obtained permission to go to 
the door for five minutes, when my heart sickened 
at the wretchedness exhibited. The white prisoners, 
from incessant perspiration and loss of appetite, 
looked more like the dead than the living. I made 


MEMUIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 301 


daily applications to the Governor, offering him 
money, which he refused; but all that I gained, was 
_ permission for tae foreigners to eat their food out- 
side, and this continued but a short time. 

‘¢ It was at this period, that the death of Bandoola 
was announced in the palace. ‘The King heard it 
with silent amazement, and the Queen, in eastern 
style, smote upon her breast, and cried, ama! ama! 
(alas, alas.) ho could be found to fill his place? 
who would venture since the invincible Bandoola 
had been cut off? Such were the exclamations 
constantly heard in the streets of Ava. The com- 
mon people were speaking low of a rebellion, in case 
more troops should be levied. Foras yet the com- 
mon people had borne the weight of the war; not a 
tickal had been taken from the royal treasury. At 
length the Pakan Woon, who a few months before 
had been so far disgraced by the King as to be 
thrown into prison and irons, now offered himself tc 
head a new army that should be raised on a dif- 
ferent plan from those which had hitherto been 
raised; and assured the King in the most confident 
manner, that he would conquer the Einglish, and 
restore those places that had been taken, in a very 
short time. He proposed that every soldier should 
receive a hundred tickals in advance, and he would 
obtain security for each man, as the money was to 
pass through his hands. It was afterwards found 
that he had taken, for his own use, ten tickals from 
every hundred. He was a man of enterprise and 
talents, though a violent enemy to all foreigners, 
His offers were accepted by the King and govern- 
ment, and all power immediately committed to him. 
One of the first exercises of his power was, to ar- 
rest Lansago and the Portuguese priest, who had 
hitherto remained unmolested, and cast them into 

rison, and to subject the native Portuguese and 

engalecs to the most menial occupations. ‘I'he 

whole town was in alarm, lest they should feel the 

eflects of his power; and it was owing to the 
26 


$02 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


malignant representations of this man, that the 
white prisoners suffered such a change in their cir- 
cumstances, as I shall soon relate. 

‘‘ After continuing in the inner prison for nore 
than a month, your brother was taken with a fever. 
I felt assured he would not live long, unless removed 
from that noisome place. To effect this, and in or- 
der to be near the prison, I removed from our house 
and put up a small bamboo room in the Governor’s 
enclosure, which was nearly opposite the prison gate. 
Here I incessantly begged the Covernor to give me 
an order to take Mr. J. out of the Jarge prison, and 
place him in a more comfortable situation; and the 
old man, being worn out with my entreaties, at 
length gave me the order in an official form; and al- 
so gave orders to the head jailer, to allow me to go 
in and out, all times of the day, to administer medi- 
cines, &c. I now felt happy indeed, and had Mr. 
J. instantly removed into a little bamboo hovel, so 
low, that neither of us could stand upright—but a 
palace in comparison with the place he had left ” 


——- 
CHAPTER XVII. 


Narrative continued—Removal of the Prisoners to Oung-pen ‘a— 
Mrs. Judson follows them. 


“ NorwiTHsTANDING the order the Governor had 
given for my admittance into prison, it was with the 
greatest difficulty that I could persuade the under 
jailer to open the gate. I used to carry Mr. J.’s 
ood myself, for the sake of getting in, and would 
then remain an hour or two, unless driven out. 
We had been in this comfortable situation but two 
or three days, when one morning, having carried in 
Mr. Judson’s breakfast, which in consequence of 
fever he was unable to take, I remaimed longer than - 
usual, when the Governor in great haste sent for 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. $02 


me. I promised him to return as soon as | had as- 
certained the Governor’s will, he being much alarm- 
ed at this unusual message. I was very agreeab.y 
disappointed, when the Governor informed me, that 
he only wished to consult me about his watch, and 
seemed unusually pleasant and conversable. I found 
afterwards, that his only object was, to detain me 
until the dreadful scene, about to take place in the 
prison, was over. For when I left him to go tomy 
room, one of the servants came running, and with a 
ghastly countenance, informed me, that all the white 
prisoners were carried away. I would not believe 
the report, and instantly went back to the Governor, 
who said, he had just heard of it, but did not wish 
totell me. I hastily ran into the street, hoping to 
get a glimpse of them before they were out of sight, 
but in this was disappointed. I ran first into one 
street, then another, inquiring of all I met, but no 
one would answer me. At length an old woman 
told me the white prisoners had gone towards the 
little river; for they were to be carried to Amarapo- 
ra. I then ran to the banks of the little river, about 
half a mile, but saw them not, and concluded the old 
woman had deceived me. Some of the friends of 
the foreigners went to the place of execution, but 
found them not. I then returned to the Governor, 
to try to discover the cause of their removal, and 
the probability of their future fate. The old man 
assured me that he was ignorant of the intention of 
government to remove the foreigners till that morn- 
ing. ‘Thatsince I went out, he had learned that the 
prisoners were to be sent to Amarapora; but for 
what purpose, he knew not. ‘I will send off a man 
immediately,’ said he, ‘to see what is to be done with 
them. You can do nothing more for your husband,’ 
continued he, ‘ take care of yourself” With a heavy 
heart I went to my room, and having no hope to 
excite me to exertion, I sunk down almcst in despair, 
For several days previous, I had been actively en 
gaged in building my own little room, and making 


$04 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


our hovel comfortable. My thoughts had been al- 
most entirely occupied in contriving means to get 
into prison. But now I looked towards the gate 
with a kind of melancholy feeling, but no wish to 
enter. All was the stillness of death, no preparation 
of your brother’s food, no expectation of meeting 
him at the usual dinner hour, all my employment, 
all my occupations seemed to have ceased, and I had 
nothing left but the dreadful recollection that Mr. 
Judson was carried off, | knew not whither. It was 
one of the most insupportable days I ever passed. 
Towards night, however, I came to the determina- 
tion toset off the next morning for Amarapora; and 
for this purpose was obliged to go to our house ovt 
of’ town. 

“‘ Never before had | suffered so much from fear 
in traversing the streets of Ava. The last words of 
the Governor, ‘Take care of yourself,;? made me 
suspect there was some design with which I was un- 
acquainted. I saw, also, he was afraid to have me 
go into the streets, and advised me to wait till dark, 
when he would send me in a cart, andaman to open 
the gates. I took two or three trunks of the most 
valuable articles, together -with the medicine chest, 
to deposit in the house of the Governor; and after 
committing the house and premises to our faithful 
Moung Ing and a Bengalee servant, who continued 
with us, (though we were unable to pay his wages,) 
I took leave, as I then thought probable, of our house 
in Ava forever. 

*©On my return to the Governor’s, I found a ser- 
vant of Mr. Gouger, who happened to be near the 
prison when the foreigners were led out, and followed 
on to see the end, who informed me, that the prison- 
ers had been carried before the Lamine Woon, at 
Amarapora, and were to be sent the next day to a 
v.ilage he knew not how far distant. My distress 
was a little relieved by the intelligence that our 
friend was yet alive, but still I knew not what was 
to become of him. ‘The next morning I obtained a 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, $05 


pass from government, and with my little Maria, 
who was then only three months old, Mary and Abby 
Hasseltine, (two of the Burman children,) and our 
Bengalee cook, who was the only one of the party 
that could afford me any assistance, I set off for Ain- 
arapora. ‘The day was dreadfully hot; but we ob- 
tained a covered boat, in which we were tolerably 
comfortable, till within twomiles of the government 
house, I then procured a cart; but the violent mo- 
tion, together with the dreadful heat and dust, made 
me almost distracted. But what was my disap- 
pointment on my arriving at the court house, to find 
that the prisoners had been sent on two hours be- 
fore, and that I must go in that uncomfortable mode 
four miles further with little Maria in my arms, 
whom I held all the way from Ava. The cart man 
refused to go any further; and after waiting an hour 
in the burning sun, I procured another, and set off 
for that never to be forgotten place, Oung-pen-la, 
[I obtained a guide from the Governor, and was con- 
ducted directly to the prison-yard. But whata scene 
of wretchedness was presented to my view! The 
prison was an old shattered building, without a roof; 
the fence was entirely destroyed; eight or ten Bur- 
mese were on the top of the building, trying to make 
something like a shelter with leaves; while under a 
little low projection outside of the prison sat the fo- 
reigners, chained together two and two, almost dead 
with suffering and fatigue. The first words of your 
srother were, ‘ Why have youcome? I hoped you 
would not follow, for you cannot live here.’ It was 
now dark. I had no refreshment for the suffering 
prisoners, or for myself, as I had expected to pro- 
cure all that was necessary at the market of Ama- 
rapora, and I had no shelter for the night. I asked 
one of’ the jailers if 1 might put up a little bamboc 
mouse near the prison; he said no, it was not cus- 
tomary. I. then begged he would procure me a 
shelter for the night, when on the morrow I coud 
find some place to live in. He took me to his heuse, 
26* 


806 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


in which there were only two small roonis—one is 
which he and his family lived—the other, which was 
then half full of grain, he offered to me; and in that 
little filthy place, I spent the next six months of 
wretchedness. I procured some half boiled water, 
instead of my tea, and, worn out with fatigue, laid 
myself down on a mat spread over the paddy, and 
endeavoured to obtain a little refreshment from sleep. 
The next morning your brother gave me the follow- 
ing account of the brutal treatment he had received 
on being taken out of prison: 

*© As soon as I had gone out at the call of the 
Governor, one of the jailers rushed into Mr. J.?s 
little room—roughly seized him by the arm—pulled 
him out—stripped him of all his clothes, excepting 
shirt and pantaloons—took his shoes, hat, and all his 
bedding—tore off his chains—tied a rope round his 
waist, and dragged him to the court house, where 
the other prisoners had previously been taken. 
They were then tied two and two, and delivered 
into the hands of the Lamine Woon, who went on 
before them on horseback, while his slaves drove 
the prisoners, one of the slaves holding the rope 
which connected two of them together. It was in 
May, one of the hottest months in the year, and 
eleven o’clock in the day, so that the sun was intol- 
erable indeed. They had proceeded only half a 
mile, when your brother’s feet became blistered, 
and so great was his agony, even at this early period, 
that as they were crossing the little river, he ardent- 
ly longed to throw himself into the water to be free 
from misery. But the sin attached to such an act 
alone prevented. They had then eight miles to 
walk, Thesand and gravel were like burning coals 
to the feet of the prisoners, which soon became 
perfectly destitute of skin; and in this wretched 
state, they were goaded on by their unfee ing 
drivers. Mr. J.’s debilitated state, in consequence 
of fever, and having taken no food that morning 
rendered him less capable of bearing such hardships 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 807 


than the other prisoners. When about half way 
on their journey, as they stopped for water, your 
brother begged the Lamine Woon to allow him to 
ride his horse a mile or two, as he could proceed uo 
farther in that dreadful state. But a scornfui, 
malignant look, was all the reply that was made. 
He then requested Captain Laird, who was tied 
with. him, and who was a strong, healthy man, to 
allow him to take hold of his shoulder, as he was 
fast sinking. ‘This the kind-hearted man granted 
for a mile or two, but then found the additional 
burden insupportable. Just at that period, Mr.’ 
_Gouger’s Bengalee servant came up to them, and 
seeing the distresses of your brother, took off his 
head dress, which was made of cloth, tore it in two, 
gave half to his master, and half to Mr. Judson, 
which he instantly wrapped round his wounded 
feet, as they were not allowed to rest even for a 
moment. The servant then offered his shoulder to 
Mr. Judson, and was almost carried by him the 
remainder of the way. Had it not been for the 
support and assistance of this man, your brother 
thinks he should have shared the fate of the poor 
Greek, who was one of their number, and when 
taken out of prison that morning was in perfect 
health. But he was acorpulent man, and the sun 
affected him so much that he fell down on the way 

His inhuman drivers beat and dragged him until 
they themselves were wearied, when they procured 
a cart, in which he was carried the remaining two 
miles. But the poor creature expired, in an hour or 
two after their arrival at the court house. The 
Lamine Woon seeing the distressing state of the 
prisoners, and that one of their number was dead, 
concluded they should go no further that night, 
otherwise they would have been driven on until they 
reached Oung-pen-la the same day. An old shed 
was appointed for their abode during the night, but 
without even a mat or pillow, or anything to cover 
them. The curiosity of the Lamine Woon’s wife, 


308 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


induced her to make a visit to the prisoners, whoze 
wretchedness considerably excited her compassion, 
and she ordered some fruit, sugar, and tamarinds, 
for their refreshment; and the next morning rice 
was prepared for them, and as poor as it was, it was 
refreshing to the prisoners, who had been almost 
destitute of food the day before. Carts were alse 
provided for their conveyance, as none of them 
were able to walk. All this time the foreigner. 
were entirely ignorant of what was to become of 
them; and when they arrived at Oung-pen-la, and 
saw the dilapidated state of the prison, they imme- 
diately, all as one, concluded that they were there 
to be burnt, agreeably to the report which had pre- 
viously been in circulation at Ava. They all 
endeavoured to prepare themselves for the awful 
scene anticipated; and it was not until] they saw 
preparations making for repairing the prison, that 
they had the least doubt that a cruel lingering death 
awaited them. My arrival was in an hour or two 
alter this. 

“The next morning I arose and endeavoured to 
find something like food. But there was no market, 
and nothing to be procured. One of Dr. Price’s 
friends, however, brought somercold rice and vege- 
table curry, from Amarapora, which, together with 
acup of tea from Mr, Lansago, answered for the 
breakfast.of the prisoners; and for dinner, we made 
acurry of dried salt fish, which a servant of Mr. 
Gouger had brought. All the money I could com- 
mand in the world, I had brought with me, secreted 
about my person; so you may judge what our pros- 

ects were, in case the war should continue long. 

ut our Heavenly Father was better to us than our 
fears; for notwithstanding the constant extortions 
of the jailers, during the whole six months we were 
at Oung-pen-la, and the frequent straits to which 
we were brought, we never really suffered for the 
want of money, though frequently for want ot’ pro- 
visions, Which were not procurable.. Here at this 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. $09 


lace my personal bodily sufferings commenced. 
hile your brother was confined in the city prison, 
I had been allowed to remain in our house, in which 
I had many conveniences left, and my health had 
continued good beyond all expectations. But now 
[ had not a single article of convenience—not even 
a chair or seat of any kind, excepting a bamboo 
floor, ‘The very morning after my arrival, Mary 
Hasseltine was taken with the srrall pox, the natu- 
ral way. She, though very young, was the only 
assistant I had in taking care of little Maria. But 
she now required all the time I could spare from 
Mr. Judson, whose fever still continued in prison, 
and whose feet. were so dreadfully mangled, that 
for several days he was unable to move. I knew 
not what to do, for I could procure no assistance 
from the neighbourhood, or medicine for the suffer- 
ers, but was all day long going oackwards and 
forwards from the house to the prison with little 
Maria in my arms. Sometimes I was greatly 
relieved by leaving her, for an hour, when asleep, 
by the side of her father, while I returned to the 
house to look after Mary, whose fever ran so high 
as to produce delirium. She was so completely 
covered with the small pox, that there was no 
distinction in the‘pustules. As che was in the same 
little room with myself, I knew Maria would take 
it; I therefore inoculated her from another child, 
before Mary’s had arrived at such a state as to be 
infectious. At the same time, I inoculated Abby, 
and the jailer’s children, who all had it so lightly as 
hardly to interrupt their play. But the inoculation 
in the arm of my poor little Maria did not take— 
she caught it of Mary, and had it the natural 
way. She was then only three months and a half 
vil, and haa been a most healthy child; but it 
was above three months before she perfectly recov- 
ered from the effects of this dreadful disoruer. 
*© You will recollect I never had the small pox, but 
was vaccinated previously tc leaving America. In 


810 MEMOIR OF MRS JUDSUN, 


consequence of being for so long a time cpa 
exposed, I had nearly a hundred pustules formed, 
though no previous symptoms of fever, &c. The 
jailer’s children having had the small pox so lightly, 
in consequence of inoculation, my fame was spread 
all over the village, and every child, young and old, 
who had not previously had it, was brought for in- 
oculation. And although I knew nothing about the 
disorder, cr the mode of treating it, I inoculated 
them all with a needle, and told them to take care of 
their diet,—all the instructions I could give them. 
Mr. Judson’s health was gradually restored, and he 
found himself much more comfortably situated, 
than when in the city prison. 

«¢ The prisoners were at first chained two and two; 
but as soon as the jailers could obtain chains suf- 
ficient, they were separated, and each prisoner had 
but one pair. The prison was repaired, a new fence 
made, and a large airy shed erected in front of the 
prison, where the prisoners were allowed to remain 
during the day, though locked up in the little close 
prison at night. All the children recovered from the 
small pox; but my watchings and fatigue, together 
with my miserable food, and more miserable lodg- 
ings, brought on one of the diseases of the country, 
which is almost always fatal to foreigners. My 
constitution seemed destroyed, and in a few days I . 
became so weak as to be hardly able to walk to Mr. 
Judson’s prison. In this debilitated state, I set off 
ina cart for Ava, to procure medicines, and some 
suitable food, leaving the cook to supply my place. 
I reached the house in safety, and for two or three 
days the disorder seemed at a stand; after which it 
attacked me so violently, that I had no hopes of re- 
covery left—and my only anxiety now was, to return 
to Oung-pen-la to die near the prison. It was with 
the greatest difficulty that I obtained the medicine 
chest from the Governor, and then had no one to 
administer medicine. JI huwever got at the lauda- — 
num. and by taking two drops at a time for severa 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, $1. 


hours, it so far checked the disorder, as to enable 
me to get on board a boat, though so weak that I 
could not stand, and again set off for Oung-pen-la. 
The last four miles was in that pamful conveyance, 
the cart, and in the midst ofthe rainy season wnen 
the mud almost buries the oxen. You may form 
some idea of a Burmese cart, when I tell you their 
wheels are not constructed like ours, but are simply 
round thick planks with a hole in the middle, through 
which a pole that supports the body is thrust. 

s©J just reached Oung pen-la when my strength 
seemed entirely exhausted. The good native cook 
came out to help me into the house; but so altered 
and emaciated was my appearance, that the poor 
fellow burst into tears at the first sight. I crawled 
on to the mat in the little room, to which I was con- 
fined for more than two months, and never perfectly 
recovered, until I came to the English camp. At 
this period, when I was unable to take care of my- 
self, or look after Mr. Judson, we must both have 
died, had it not been for the faithful and affectionate 
tare of our Bengalee cook. A common Bengalee 
cook will do nothing but the simple business of 
cooking: But he seemed to forget his cast, and al- 
most his‘own wants, in his efforts to serve us. He 
would provide, cook, and carry your brother’s food, 
and then return and take care of me. I have 
frequently known him not to. taste of food till near 
night, in consequence of having to go -so far for 
wood and water, and in order to have Mr. Judson’s 
dinner ready at the usual hour. He never com- 
plained, never asked for his wages, and never for a 
moment hesitated to go anywhere, or to perform 
any act we required. | take great pleasure in speak- 
ing of the faithful conduct of this servant, who is 
still with us, and I trust has been well rewarded for 
his services. 

“« Our dear little Maria was the greatest sufferer 
at this time, my illness depriving her of her usual 
nourishment, and neither a nurse nor a drop of milk 


$12 MEMOIR JF MRS. JUDSON. 


could be procured in the village. By making pres 
ents to the jailers, 1 obtained leave for Mr. Judson 
to come out of prison, and take the-emaciated crea- 
ture around the village, to beg a little nourishment 
{rom those mothers who had young children. Her 
cries in the night were heart-rending, when it was 
impossible to supply her wants. I now began to 
think the very afllictions of Job had come upon me, 
When in health, I could bear the various trials and 
vicissitudes through which I was called to pass. 
But to be confined with sickness, and unable to assist 
those who were so dear to me, when in distress, 
was almost too much for me to bear; and had it not 
been for the consolations of religion, and an assured 
conviction that every additional trial was ordered by 
infinite love and mercy, I must have sunk under iny 
accumulated sufferings. Sometimes our jailers seem 
ed a little softened at our distress, and for several 
days together allowed Mr. Judson to come to the 
house, which was to me an unspeakable consolation. 
Then again they would be as iron-hearted in their 
demands, as though we were free from sufferings, 
and in affluent circumstances. ‘The annoyance, the 
extortions, and oppressions, to which we were sub- 
jects during our six months’ residence in Oung-pen- 
a, are beyond enumeration or description. 

‘¢Tt was sometime after our arrival at Oung-pen- 
la, that we heard of the execution of the Paken 
Woon, in consequence of which our lives were still 
preserved. Tor we afterwards ascertained, that the 
white foreigners had been sent to Oung-pen-la, for 
the express purpose of sacrificing them; and that he 
himself intended witnessing the horrid scene. We 
had frequently heard of his intended arrival at 
Oung-pen-la; but we had no idea of his diabolical 
purposes. He had raised an army of fifty thousand 
men, (a tenth part of whose advance pay was found in 
nis house, ) and ex pected to march against the English 
army in a short time, when he was suspected of high 
treason, and instantly executed without the least ex-. 


MEMOIR OF MRS sJUDSUN. $13 


amination Perhaps no death in Ava ever produced 
such universal rejoicings, as that of the Pakan Woon. 
We never, to this day, hear his name mentioned, 
but with an epithet of reproach or hatred. Anoth- 
er brother of the King was appointea to the com- 
mand of the army now in readiness, but with no 
very sang wine expectations of success. Some weeks 
after the departure of these troops, two of the Woon- 
gyees were sent down for the purpose of negotiating. 
But not being successful, the Queen’s brother, the 
acting King of the country, was prevailed on to go. 
Great expectations were raised in consequence; but 
his cowardice induced him to encamp his detachment 
of the army ata great distance from the English, 
and even at a distance from the main body of the 
Burmese army, whose head-quarters were then at 
Maloun. Thus he effected nothing, though reports 
were continually reaching us, that peace was nearly 
concluded. 

‘‘'The time at length arrived for our release from 
the dreary scenes of Oung-pen-la. A messenger 
from our friend, the Governor of the north gate of 
the palace, informed us that an order had been given, 
the evening before, in the palace, for Mr. Judson’s 
release. On the same evening an official order ar- 
rived; and with a joyful heart I set about preparing 
for our departure early the following morning. 
But an unexpected obstacle occurred, which made 
us fear that [should still be retained as a prisoner. 
The avaricious jailers, unwilling to lose their prey, 
insisted, that as.my name was not included in the 
order, I should not go. In vain I urged that I was 
not sent there as a prisoner, and that they had no 

authority over me—they still determined T should 

not go, and forbade the villagers from letting me a 

cart. Mr. Judson was then taken out of prison, 

and brought to the jailers’? house, where, by prom- 

ises and threatenings, he finally gained their consent, 

on “ondition that we would leave the remaining part 
27 


614 MEMOIR UF MRS. JUDSON. 


of our provisions we had recently received from Ava 
Jt was noon before we were allowed to depart, 
When we reached Amarapora, Mr. Judson was 
»abliged to follow the guidance of the jailer, who con- 
ducted him to the Governor of the city. Having 
made all necessary inquiries, the Governor appoint- 
ed another guard, which conveyed Mr. Judson to 
the court-house in Ava, to which place he arrived 
sometime in the night. I took my own course, pro- 
cured a boat, and reached our house before dark. 

‘“« My first object the next morning, was to go in 
search of your brother, and I had the mortification 
to meet him again-in prison, though not the death 
prison. I went immediately to my old friend, the 
Governor of the city, who now was raised to the 
rank of a Woongyee. He informed me that Mr. 
Judson was to be sent to the Burmese camp, to act 
as translator and interpreter; and that he was put in 
tonfinement for a short time only, till his affairs were 
settled, Early the following morning I went to — 
this officer again, who told me that Mr. Judson had 
that moment received twenty tickals from govern- 
ment, with orders to go immediately on board a boat 
for Maloun, and that he had given him permission 
“to stop a few moments at the house, it being on his 
way. Ihastened back to the house, where Mr. Jud- 
son soon arrived; but was allowed to remain only a 
short time, while I could prepare food and clothing 
for future use. He was crowded into a little boat, 
where he had not room sufficient to lie down, and 
where his exposure to the cold damp nights threw 
him into a violent fever, which had nearly ended all 
his sufferings. He arrived at Maloun on the third 
day, where, ill as he was, he was obliged to enter 
mmediately on the work of translating. He remain- 
ed at Maloun six weeks, suflering as much as he had 
at any time in prison, excepting he was not in irons, 
noz exposed to the imsults of those cruel jailers, 

* For the first fortnight after his departure, my - 
anxiety was less than it had been at any time pre+ 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 315 


vious, since the commencement of our difficulties, 1 
knew the Burmese officers at the camp would feel 
the value of Mr. Judson’s services too much to al- 
iow their using any measures threatening his life. 
{ thought his situation, also, would be much more. 
comfortable than it really was—hence my anxiety 
was less. But my health, which had never bee.. re- 
stored, since that violent attack at Oung-pen-la, 
now daily declined, till I was seized with the spotted 
fever, with all its attendant horrors. I knew the 
nature of the fever from its commencement; -and 
from the shattered state of my constitution, together 
with the want of medical attendants, I concluded it 
must be fatal. The day I was taken with the fever, 
a Burmese nurse came and oftered her services for 
Maria. ‘This circumstance filled me with gratituc - 
and confidence in God; for though I had so lony 
and so constantly made efforts to obtain a person 
of this description, I had never been able; when a* 
the very time I most needed one, and without any 
exertion, a voluntary offer was made. My fever 
raged violently, and without any intermission. [ 
began to think of settling my worldly affairs, and of 
committing my dear little Maria to the care of a 
Portuguese woman, when I lost my reason, and was 
insensible toall aroundme. At this dreadful period, 
Dr. Price was released from prison; and hearing of 
my illness, obtained permission to come and see me. 
He has since told me that my situation was the most 
distressing he had ever witnessed, and that he did 
not then think I should survive many hours. My 
nair was shaved, my head and feet covered with blis- 
ters, and Dr. Price ordered the Bengalee servant 
who took care of me, to endeavour to persuade me 
to take a little nourishment, which I had obstinately 
refused for several days. One of the first things 
I recollect was, seeing this faithful servant standing 
by me, trying to induce me to take a little wine and 
water. I was in fact so far gone, that the Burmess 
neighbours who had come in to see me exy ire, sand, 


$16 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


‘She is dead; and if the King of angels shoula 
some in, he could not recover her.’ ~ 

“The fever, I afterwards understood, had run 
seventeen days when the blisters were applied. I 
now began to recover slowly; but it was more thea 
a month after this before I had strength to stand. 
While in this weak, debilitated state, the servant 
who had followed your brother to the Burmese camp, 
came in, and informed me that his master had arriv- 
ed, and was conducted to the court-house in town. 
I sent off a Burman to watch the movements of 
government, and to ascertain, if possible, in what 
way Mr. Judson was to be disposed of. He soon 
returned with the sad intelligence, that he saw Mr. 
Judson go out of the palace yard, accompanied by 
two or three Burmans, who conducted him to one of 
the prisons; and that it was reported in town, that 
he was to be sent back to the Oung-pen-la prison. 
I was too weak to bear ill tidings of any kind; but 
ashock so dreadful as this, almost annihilated me. 
For some time, I could hardly breathe; but at last 
gained sufficient composure to despatch Moung Ing 
to our friend, the Governor of the north gate, and 
begged him to make one more effort for the release 
of Mr. Judson, and prevent his being sent back to 
the country prison, where I knew he must suffer 
much, as I could not follow. Moung Ing then went 
in search of Mr. Judson; and it was nearly duck, 
when he found him in the interior of an ohs ure 
Beate I had sent food early in the afternoon, but 

eing unable to find him, the bearer had returned 
‘with it, which added another pang to my distresses, 
as I feared he was already sent to Oung-peo-la. 

“If I ever felt the value and efficacy of prayer, I 
did at this time. I could not rise from my couch; I 
could make no efforts to secure my husband; I vould 
only plead with that great and powerful Iseing who 
has said, ‘Call upon me in the day of trouble, and 
4 will hear, and thou shalt glorify me;? and who ~ 
waue me at this ‘ime feel st. powerfully this promise, 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON $17 


that I became quite composed, feeling assured that 
my prayers would be answered. 

‘When Mr. Judson was sent from Maloun to 
Ava, i; was within five minutes’ notice, and without 
his knowledge of the cause. On his way up the river, 
he accidentally saw the communitation made ta 
government respecting him, which was simply this: 
‘We have no further use for Yoodathan, we there- 
fore return him to the golden city.’ On arriving at 
the court-house, there happened to be no one pres- 
ent who was acquainted with Mr. J. The presiding 
officer inquired from what place he had been sent to 
Maloun. He was answered from Oung-pen-la, Let 
him then, said the officer, be returned thither—when 
he was delivered to a guard and conducted to the 
place above mentioned, there to remain until he cowid 

e conveyed to Oung-pen-la. In the meantime the 
Governor of the north gate presented a petition to 
the high court of the Empire, offered himself as Mr. 
Judson’s security, obtained his release, and took him 
to his house, where he treated him with considera- 
ble kindness, and to which I was removed as soon 
as returning health would allow. 

‘The advance of the English army towards 
the capitai at this time threw the whole town into 
the greatest state of alarm, and convinced the gov- 
ernment that some speedy measures must be taken 
to save the golden city. They had hitherto rejected 
all the overtures of Sir Archibald Campbell, imag- 
ining, until this late period, that they could in some 
way or other drive the English from the country. 
Mr. Judson and Dr. Price were daily called to the 
palace and consulted; in fact nothing was done 
without their approbation. Two English officers, 
also, who had lately been brought to Ava as prison: 
ers, were continually consulted, ana their good offi- 
ces requested in endeavouring to persuade the Brit- 
ish General to make peace on easier terms. It was 
finally conclided that Mr. Judson and one of the 
‘aflicers above mentioned, should be sent 10mediately 

27* 


318 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


to the English camp, in order to negotiate The 
danger attached to a situation so responsible, under 
a government so fickle asthe Burmese, induced your 
brother to use every means possible to prevent his 
being sent Dr. Price was not only willing, but de- 
sirous of going; this circumstance Mr. Judson rep- 
resented to the members of government, and begged 
he might not be compelled to go, as Dr. Price could 
transact the business equally as well as himself. 
After some hesitation and deliberation, Dr. Price 
was appointed to accompany Dr. Sandford, one of 
the English officers, on condition that Mr. Judson 
would stand security for his return; while the other 
English officer, then in irons, should be security for 
Dr. Sandford. The King gave them a hundred 
tickals each, to bear their expenses, (twenty-five of 
which Dr. Sandford generously sent to Mr. Gouger, 
still a prisoner at Oung-pen-la,) boats, men, and a 
Burmese officer, to accompany them, though he 
ventured no farther than the Burmancamp. With 
the most anxious solicitude the court waited the ar- 
rival of the messengers, but did not inthe least relax 
in their exertions to fortify the city. Men and 
beasts were at work night and day, making new 
stockades and strengthening old onrs, and whatever 
buildings were in their way were immediately torn 
down. Our house, with all that surrounded it, was 
levelled to the ground, and our beautiful little com- 
pound turned into a road and a place for the erection 
of cannon. All articles of value were conveyed 
out of town, and safely deposited in some other 
iace. 
are At length the boat in which the ambassador had 
been sent was seen approaching a day earlier than 
was expected. As it advanced towards the city, th 
Yanks were lined by thousands, anxiously inquiring 
their success. But no answer was given—the gov- 
ernment must first hear the news. The palace gates 
were crowded, the officers at the Loot-dau were - 
seated, when Dr, Price made the following commu- 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 819 


avcation: ‘he General and commissioners will 
make no alteration in their terms, except the hundred 
lacks (a lack is a hundred thousand) of rupees, may 
be paid at. four different times. The first twenty- 
five lacks to be paid within twelve days, or the army 
will continue their march.’ In addition to this, the 
prisoners were to be given up immediately. The 
General had commissioned Dr. Price todemand Mr. 
Judson and myselfand little Maria. ‘This wascome 
municated to the King, who replied, ‘They are 
not English, they are my people, and shall not go.’ 
At this time I had no idea that we should ever be 
released from Ava. The government had learned 
the value of your brother’s services, having employ- 
ed him the last three months; and we both conclud- 
ed they wonld never consent to ourdeparture. The 
foreigners were again called to a consultation, to see 
what could bedone. Dr. Price and Mr. Judson told 
them plainly that the English would never make 
peace on any other terms than those offered, and that 
it was in vain to go downagain without the money. 
It was then proposed that a third part of the first 
sum demanded should be sent down immediately. 
Mr. Judson objected, and still said it would be use- 
less, Some of the members of government then 
intimated that it was probable the teachers were on 
the side of the English, and did not try to make 
them take a smaller sum; and also threatened if 
they did not make the English comply, they and 
their families should suffer. 

‘‘In this interval, the fears of the government 
were considerably allayed, by the offers of a Gene- 
ral, by name Layar-thoo-yah, wno desired to make 
one more attempt to conquer the English, and dis- 
perse them. He assured the King and government, 
that he could so fortify the ancient city of Pagan, 
as to make it impregnable; and that he would there 
defeat and destroy the English. His offers were 
heard, he marched to Pagan with a very considerable 
foree, and made strong the forti‘ications But the 


$20 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON 


English took the city with perfect euse, and dis- 
persed the Burmese army; while the General fled to 
Ava, and had the presumption to appear in the pres- 
ence of the King, and derrand new troops. The 
King being enraged that he had ever listened to him 
for a moment, in consequenc+ of which the negotia- 
tion had been delayed, t!.e English General provoked, 
and the troops daily advancing, that he ordered the 
General to be immediately executed! The poor fel 
low was soon hurled from the palace, and beat all 
the way to the court-house—when he was stripped 
of his rich apparel, bound with cords, and made to 
kneel and bow towards the palace. He was then 
delivered into the hands of the executioners, who, 
by their cruel treatment, put an end to his existence, 
before they reached the place of execution. 

*“*The King caused it to be reported, that this 
General was executed, in consequence of disobeying 
his commands, ‘not to fight the English.’ 

‘* Dr. Price was sent off the same night, with part 
of the prisoners, and with instructions to persuade 
the General to take six lacks instead of twenty-five. 
He returned in two or three days with the appalling 
intelligence, that the English General was very an- 
gry, refused to have any communication with him, 
and was now within a few days’ march of the capi- 
tal. The Queen was greatiy alarmed, and said the 
money should be raised immediately, if the English 
would only stop their march. The whole palace 
was in motion, gold and silver vessels were melted 
ups the King and Queen superintended the weighing 
of a part of it, and were determined if possible to 
save their city. ‘Tne silver was ready in the boats 
by the next evening; but they had so little confi- 
dence in the English, that afterall the r alarm, they 
concluded to send down six lacks only, with the ase 
surance that if the English would stop where they 
then were, the remainder should be forth coming 
immediately. 

« The government now did not even ask Mr. Jud- 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. $21 


son the question whether he would go o1 not; bvt 
some of the officers took him by the arm, as he was 
walking in the street, and told him he must go im- 
mediately on board the boat, to accompany two Bur- 
mese officers, a Woongyee and Woondouk, who 
were going down to make peace. Most of the Eng- 
lish prisoners were sent at the same time. The 
General and commissioners would not receive the 
six lacks, neither would they stop their march; but 
promised, if the sum complete reached them before 
they should arrive at Ava, they would make peace. 
The General also commissioned Mr. Judson to col- 
Ject the remaining foreigners, of whatever couutry, 
and ask the question before the Burmese govern- 
ment, whether they wished to go or stay. Those 
who expressed a wish to go should be delivered up 
immediately, or peace would not be made. 

‘¢ Mr, Judson reached Ava at midnight; had all 
the foreigners called the next morning, and the ques- 
tion asked. Some of the members of government 
said to him, * You will not leave us—you shall be- 
come a great man if you will remain.’ He then 
secured himself from the odium of saying that he 
- wished to leave the service of his Majesty, by recur- 
ring to the order of Sir Archibald, that whoever 
wished to leave Ava should be given up, and that ] 
had expressed a wish to go, so that he of course 
must follow. The remaining part of the twenty- 
five lacks was soon collected; the prisoners at Oung- 
yen-la were all released, and either sent to their 

ouses, or down the river to the Englishs and in two 
days from the time of Mr. Judson’s return, we took 
an ailectionate leave of the good natured officer who 
had so long entertained us at his house, and who 
now accompanied us to the water side, and we then 
left forever the banks of Ava. 

“It was on a cool, moonlight evening, in the 
month of March, that with hearts filled with grati- 
“tude to God, and overflowing with joy at our pros- 
~ pects, we passed down the Irrawaddy, surrounded 


$22 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


hy six or eight golden boats, and accompanied by 
all we had on earth, The thought that we had 
still to pass the Burman camp, would sometimes 
occur to damp our joy, for we feared that some ob- 
stacle might there arise to retard our progress. Nor 
were we mistaken in our conjectures. We reached 
the camp about midnight, where we were detained 
two hours; the Woongyee, and high officers, insist- 
ing that we should wait at the camp, while Dr. 
Price, (who did not return to Ava with your brother, 
but remained at the camp,) should go on with the 
money, and first ascertain whether peace would be 
made. The Burmese government still entertained , 
the idea, that as soon as the English had received 
the money and prisoners, they would continue their 
march, and yet destroy the capital. We knew not 
but that some circumstance might occur to break 
off the negotiations; Mr. Judson therefore strenu- 
ously insisted that he would not remain, but go on 
immediately. The officers were finully prevailed on 
to consent, hoping much from Mi Judson’s assis- 
tance in making peace. 

“We now, for the first time, for more than a year 
and a half, felt that we were free, anc no longer 
subject to the oppressive yoke of the Burmese, 
And with what sensations of delight, on the next 
morning did I behold the masts of the steam-boat, 
the sure presage of being within the bounds of civi- 
lized life. As soon as our boat reached the shore, 
Brigadier A. and another officer came on board, con- 
gratulated us on our arrival, and invited us on board 
the steam-boat, where I passed the remainder of the 
day; while your brother went on to meet the Gene- 
ral, who, with a detachment of the army, had en- 
camped at Yandabo, a few miles further down the 
river. Mr. Judson returned in the evening, with an 
invitation from Sir Archibald, to come immediately 
to his quarters, where I was the next morning intro- 
duced, and received ‘vith the greatest kindness by - 
the General, who had a tent pitched for us near his 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 323 


own—took us to his own table, and treated us with 
the kindness of a father, rather than as strangers of 
another country. 

“We feel that our obligations to General Camp- 
bell can never be cancelled. Our final release from 
Ava, and our recovering all the property that had 
there been taken, was owing entirely to his efforts. 
This subsequent hospitality, and kind attention to 
the accommodations for our passage to Rangoon, have 
left an indelible impression on our minds, which can 
never be forgotten. We daily received the congrat- 
ulation of the British officers, whose conduct towar'a 
us formed a striking contrast to that of the Burmese. 
I presume to say, that no persons on earth were ever 
happier than we were during the fortnight we passed 
at the English camp. For several days, this single 
idea wholly occupied my mind, that we were out of 
the power of the Burmese government, and once 
more under the protection of the English. Our 
feelings continually dictated expressions like these: 
What shall we render to the Lord for all his benefits 
toward us. 

«‘ The treaty of peace was soon concluded, signed 
by both parties, and a termination of hostilities pub- 
licly declared. Weleft Yandabo, after a fortnight’s 
residence, and safely reached the mission house in 
Rangoon, after an absence of two years and three 
months. 

s¢ A review of our trip to, and adventures in Ava, 
often excites the inquiry, Why were we permitted 
to go? What good has been effected? Why did J 
not listen to the advice of friends in Bengal, and- 
remain there till the war was concluded? But all 
that we can say, is, Jt is not in man that walketh to 
direct his steps. So far as my going round to Ran- 
goon, at the time I did, was instrumental in bring 
ing those heavy afilictions upon us, I can only state, 
that if T ever acted from a sense of duty in my life, 
it was at that time; for my conscience would not 
allow se any peace, when I though* of sending for 


$24 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


your brother to come to Calcutta, in prospect of the 
approaching war. Our Society at home have lost no 
property in consequence of our difficulties; but twa 
years of precious time have been lost to the mission, 
unless some future advantage may be gained, in 
consequence of the severe discipline to which we 
ourselves have been subject. We are sometimes 
‘nduced to think, that the lesson we found so very 
hard to learn, will have a beneficial effect through 
our lives; and that the mission may, in the end, be 
advanced rather than retarded. 

‘©We should have had no hesitation about re- 
taaining in Ava, if no part of the Burmese empire 
had been ceded to the British. But as it was, we 
felt it would be an unnecessary exposure, besides the 
missionary field being much more limited, in conse- 
quence of intoleration. We now consider our fu- 
ture missionary prospects as bright indeed; and our 
only anxiety is, to be once more in that situation 
where our time will be exclusively devoted to the 
instruction of the heathen.” 


In aconcluding pazagraph, dated Amherst, July 
Q7, she adds: 


«From the date, at the commencement .of this 
long letter, you see, my dear brother, that my pa 
tience has continued for two months. I have fre- 
quently been induced to throw it aside altogether, 
but feeling assured that you and my other friends 
are expecting something of this kind, I am. in- 
duced to send it with all its imperfections, ‘This 
letter, dreadful as are the scenes herein described, 
gives you but a faint idea of the awful reality. The 
anguish, the agony of mind, resulting from a thou- 
sand little circumstances impossible to delineate or 
paper, can be known by those only, who have beer 
im similar situations. Pray tor us, my dear brother 
and sister, that these heavy afflictions may not be 
in vain, but may be blessed to our spiritual good, 
and the advancement of Christ’s church among the 
heathen “ 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 82h 


At the clase of this long and melancholy nai rative, 
we may appropriately introduce the followirg trib- 
ute to the benevolence and talents of Mrs. Judson, 
written by one of the English prisoners, who were 
confined at Ava with Mr. Judson. It was pub- 
lished in a Calcutta paper, after the conclusion of 
the war: 


‘Mrs. Judson was the author of those eloquent 
and forcible appeals to the government, which pre- 
pared them by degrees for submission to terms of 
peace, never expected by any, who knew the hau- 
teur and inflexible pride of the Burman court. 

‘¢ And while on this subject, the overflowings of 
grateful feelings, on behalf of myself and fellow 
prisoners, compel me to add a tribute of public 
thanks to that amiable and humane female, who, 
though living at a distance of two miles from our 
prison, without any means of conveyance, and very 
feeble in health, forgot her own comfort and infir- 
mity, and almost every day visited us, sought out 
and administered to our wants, and contributed in 
every way to alleviate our misery. 

s While we were all left by the government des 
titute of food, she, with unwearied perseverance, by 
some means or other, obtained for us a constant 
supply. 

““When the tattered state of our clothes evinced 
the extremity of our distress, she was ever ready to 
replenish our scanty wardrobe. 

*¢ When the unfeeling avarice of our keepers con- 
fined us inside, or made our feet fast in the stocks, 
she, like a ministering angel, never ceased her ap- 
plications to the government, until she was author 
ized to communicate to us the grateful news of our 
enlargement, or of a respite from our galling oppres 
sions. 

‘ Besides all this, it was unquestionably owing 
in a chief degree, to the repeated eloquence, anc 
forcible appeals of Mrs. Judson, that the untutorea 

QR 


326 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


Burman was finally made willing to secure tre wel- 
fare and happiness of his country, by a sincere 
peace.” 


—— 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
Removal to Amherste-Mrs. Judson’s Death. 


Tne following letter from Mrs. Judson is a valu 
able proof, that the severe sufferings and appalling 
dangers which she had experienced, did not abate 
her love for the souls of the Burmans, nor diminish 
her desire to go onward with the Mission. She had 
devoted her life to this service; and she was ready to 
die whenever the sacrifice should be needful for the 
welfare of the heathen. 


TO MRS. CHAPLIN, OF WATERVILLE. 
** Rangoon, April 26, 1826. — 
“My dear Mrs. Chaplin, 

“T live, again to write you, again to attempt a 
continuance of a correspondence which has been to 
me so valuable, and which I wish to be continued 
till the end of life. We have formerly talked of tri- 
als and privations, but for the last two years we 
have felt the fullimport of these words. Our bodily 
and mental sufferings have often been such as to cause 
me, in moments of despair, to exclaim, ‘ We shall 
one day perish by the hand of Saul.?» But that kind 
Being, who has ever upheld us, has in safety brought 
us through so many narrow passages, that our faith 
assures us of being brought into a wide field at last. 
But, my dear Mrs. Chaplin, I am distressed to finu, 
that those afflictions which are often productive of 
much advantage to the children of God, have passed 
away without, I fear, leaving those salutary effects, 
for which [ had hoped. And yet I trust the pras- © 
perity of the Burman mission, (still the dearest ob- 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. $27 


tect of our hearts,) will be promoted by those events, 
which have taken place the last two years. We 
have no longer to solicit the patronage of ahaugkty 
Monarch, for the establishment of our mission, or to 
court the favor of the Woongyees, to prevent the 
persecution of the converts; but in future shall be 
allowed to sit under our own vine and fig-tree, and 
call to perishing, immortal beings, to listen to the 
glad tidings of the Gospel. 

“‘We are now busily employed in preparing for 
our departure to Amherst. We shall doubtless be 
obliged to go through many trials, as it is a new 
place, and no houses yet built. But the Burmese 
population will be considerable, and we shall have 
every advantage for prosecuting the mission. Four 
of our Christian families have already gone, and 
we shall follow in a few days. My female school 
will, [ trust, soon be in operation—then you shall 
hear from me constantly.” 


Alas! her fond anticipations were soon disappoint- 
ed. The mission is indeed, we trust, to go on, 
until Burmah shall be converted to God. But she 
who had assisted in its establishment, who had 
largely shared in its trials and joys; and to whose 
firmness, intrepidity, ready presence of mind, and 
devoted affection, her husband and Dr. Price were 
indebted, under God, for the preservation of their 
lives, during their imprisonment at Ava, was soon 
to be summoned away from her toils and sufferings 
on earth, to the presence of her Saviour. 


LETTER FROM MR. JUDSON TO DR. BOLLES, THE COR 
RESPONDING SECRETARY. 


*¢ Rangoon, March 25, 1826. 
‘* Rev. and dear Sir, 

« Through the kind interposition of our Heavenly 
Father, our lives have been preserved, in the most 
imminent danger, from the hand of the executioner, 
and in repeated instances of most alarming illness, 


328 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


during my protracted imprisonment of one year and 
seven months—nine months in three pair of fetters, 
two months in five, six months in one, and two 
months a prisoner at large. Subsequent to the 
latter period, I spent about six weeks in the house 
of the north Governor of the palace, who petitioned 
for my release, and took me under his charge; and 
finally, on the joyful 2ist of February last, took 
leave, with Mrs. Judson and family, of the scene 
of our sufferings—suflerings which, it would seem, 
have been unavailing to answer any valuable mis- 
sionary purpose, unless so far as they may have 
been silently blessed to our spiritual improvement 
and capacity for future usefulness. Let me beg 
Four prayers, that it may not be in vain, that we 

ave been afflicted. Dr. Price remains in the ser- 
vice of his Burmese Majesty My intention, on 
leaving Ava, was to proceed to Mergui or Tavoy, 
ports south of Rangoon, and ceded by the treaty to 
the British government; but since arriving, I have 
found it advisable to wait a little, previous to the 
evacuation of this place by the British troops, with 
a view to settling at a new town about to be estab- 
lished in the neighbourhood of Martaban, on the 
dividing line between the British and Burman terri- 
tories. 

‘* Tt 1s supposed that all Martaban will remove to 
the new place, on the other side of the Salwen river. 
The emigration also from all the southern districts 
of Burmah will be great, so that the native popula- 
tion will far exceed that of the places first mentioned. 
Add to which, that it is much more centrical, and, 
from the superior productiveness of the adjacent 
country, and the facility of communication with 
S'am, will probably become a place of much great- 
er trade. 

‘The disciples and inquirers have been dispersed 
in all directions. Several are dead; several I found 
yn my passage down the river, and gave them notice 
of my plars, in case they might wish to follow; and 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON $29 


several are in this place waiting for some movement. 
Moung Shwa-ba has been in the mission house 
through the whole, and Moung Ing with Mrs. 
Judson at Ava. Moung Shwa-gnong I have been 
unable to find, but understood he was alive some- 
where in the interior We had a pleasant meeting 
with Mah Men-la and her sister Mah Doke, who 
were living in boats at Prome, and instantly resolved 
to accompany us. I long for the time when we 
shall be able to re-erect the standard of the Gospel, 
and enjoy once more the stated worship and 
ordinances of the Lord’s house. I feel a strong 
desire henceforth to know nothing among this 
people, but Jesus Christ and him crucified; and under 
an abiding sense of the comparative worthlessness 
of all worldly things, to avoid every secular. occupa- 
tion, and all literary and scientific pursuits, and 
devote the remainder of my days to the simple dec- 
laration-of the all-precious truth of the Gospel of 
our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ.” 


On the 1st of April, Mr. Judson left Rangoon, in 
company with Mr. Crawford, the Commissioner of 
the Governor General of India, on an exploring ex- 
pedition, to a part of the territories ceded by the 
Burmese to the British. They proceeded to the 
mouth of the Salwen, or Martaban river, (see map,) 
where they fixed on the site of a town, on the east- 
ern bank, which they called Amherst, in honor of 
the Governor General. On this occasion, the 60th 
chapter of Isaiah was read by Mr. Judson, and a 
prayer offered. The British flag was hoisted, and 
other ceremonies signalized the occupation of this 
spot, as the seat of the English government in the 
newly ceded territories. 

On the 9th of April, Mr. Judson returned to 
Rangoon, and made immediate preparations to pro- 
ceed to erste 

* 


830 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


LETTER FROM MR. JUDSON TO THE CORRESPONDING 
SECRETARY. 
* Rangoon, July 31, 1826. 
‘© Rev. and dear Sir, 

“ At the date of my last letter, I was waiting for 
an opportunity of removing to Amherst. Since then, 
the Commissioner, Mr. Crawford, who is appointed 
to negotiatea secondary treaty with the courtof Ava, 
renewed his proposal for me to accompany the em- 
bassy, and pledged himself, in case of my complying, 
to use his interest to procure the insertion of an ar- 
ticle in the treaty, favorable to religious toleration 
—an object which I have had at heart so many years, 
and which, though now on account of the opening 
in the south provinces, not so necessary as formerly, 
yet greatly favorable to the gradual introduction of 
religion, into all parts of the country, from the sta- 
tion which we propose occupying. With these 
views, I thought it my duty to accept the offer. 
Desirous, however, of making a commencement in 
the new place, as early as possible, and unwilling to 
disappoint the native converts, who had left this, in 
the full expectation of our immediately following 
them, | accompanied Mrs. Judson and family thither, 
in the end of last month, and after seeing them com- 
fortably settled, in a temporary house belonging to 
Captain Fenwick, Civil Superintendant of the place, 
which he kindly vacated for Mrs. Judson’s accommo- 
dation, [ returned to Rangoon the 9th inst. The 
embassy will leave this for Ava, on the receipt of 
final orders from Bengal, which are daily expected.” 


{t was during the absence of Mr. Judson, that 
Mrs, Judson was seized with the fatal disorder, 
which terminated her life, on the 24th of October, - 
1826. ‘The shocks which her constitution had re- 
ceived, from previous attacks of disease, and during 
the scenes at ava, rendered her incapable of with 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 831 


standing the violence of this last attack. She died 
-~died in a strange place—and surrounded by stran- 
gers. Such was God’s will. It would be consoling 
to know more of the state of her mind, during her 
sickness, and of her feelings in prospect of death, 
But she is gone. Her life was a series of proofs, 
that she loved the Saviour; and we may believe, 
with entire confidence, that she has entered into the 
joy of her Lord. 

The following letters from her husband contain a 
statement of all the particulars which could be ob- 
tained concerning her last sickness and death. His 
feelings it would be presumptuous to attempt to de- 
scribe. His letters, though he has not suffered him- 
self to dwell on his dreadful loss, indicate so much 
of suppressed anguish, that every heart must be 
moved to sympathy. : 

In a letter to the Corresponding Secretary, dated 
Ava, Dec. 7, 1826, Mr. Judson, after stating that 
he had been unsuccessful in obtaining a provision in 
the treaty for religious toleration, and that his ab- 
sence from home would be extended to seven or 
eight months, adds: 


** But above all, the news of the death of my be- 
loved wife, has not only thrown a gloom over all my 
future prospects, but has forever imbittered the re 
collection of the present journey, in consequence of 
which, I have been absent from her dying bed, and 

revented from affording the spiritual comfort which 
i lonely circumstances peculiarly required, and of 
contributing to avert the fatal catastrophe, which 
has deprived me of one of the first of women, the 
best of wives. 

‘<T commenti myself and motherless child to you 
sympathy and prayers.” 


. 


§$2 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


LETTER FROM MR. JUDSON TO MRS. HASSELTINE, OF 
BRADFORD, (MASS.) 
s* Ava, Dec. 7, 1826. 
“ Dear Mother, 

‘© This letter, though intended fcr the whole fam: 
ly, I address particularly to you; for it isa mother’s 
heart that will be most deeply interested in its mel- 
ancholy details. I propose to give you, at different 
timas, some account of my great irreparable loss, of 
which you will have heard, before receiving this 
letter. 

“T left your daughter, my beloved wife, at 
Amherst, the 5th of July last, in good health, com- 
fortably situated, happy in being out of the reach 
of our savage oppressors, and animated in prospect 
of a field of: missionary labor opening under the 
auspices of British protection. It affords me some 
comfort, that she not only consented to my leaving 
her, for the purpose of joining the present embassy 
to Ava, but uniformly gave her advice in favor of 
the measure, whenever I hesitated concerning my 
duty. Accordingly, I left her. On the fifth of 
July, I saw her for the last time. Our parting. was 
much less painful than many others had been. We 
had been preserved through so many trials and 
vicissitudes, that a separation of three or four 
months, attended with no hazards, to either party, 
seemed a light thing. We parted, therefore, with 
cheerful hearts, confident of a speedy reunion, and 
indulging fond anticipations of future years of 
domestic happiness. After my return to Rangoon, 
and subsequent arrival at Ava, I received several 
letters from her, written in her usual style, and 
exhibiting no subject of regret or apprehension, 
except the declining health of our little daughter 
Maria. Her last was dated the 14th of Sept. She 
says, ‘I have this day moved into the new house, 
and, for the first time since we were broken up at 
Ava, feel myself at home. ‘The house is large and 


MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 333 
convenient, and if you were here I should feel quite 
happy. ‘The native population is increasing very 
fast, and things wear rather a favorable aspect. 
Moung Ing’s school has commenced with ten 
scholars, and more are expected. Poor little Maria 
-s still feeble. I sometimes hope she is getting bet- 
ter; then again she declines to her former weakness. 
When I ask her where Papa is, she always starts up 
and points torvards the sea. ‘The servants behave 
very well, and I have no trouble about anything 
excepting you and Maria. Pray take care of your- 
self, particularly as it regards the intermittent fever 
at Ava. May God preserve and bless you, and 
restore you in safety to your new and old home, is 
the prayer of your affectionate Ann.’ 

* On the 3d of Oct. Capt. F , Civil Superin- 
tendant of Amherst, writes, ‘ Mrs. Judson is extreme-= 
ly well.2 Why she did not write herself by the 
same opportunity, | know not. On the 18th, the 
same gentleman writes, ‘I can hardly think it right 
to tell you, that Mrs. Judson has had an attack of 
fever, as before this reaches you, she will, I sincere- 
ly trust, be quite well, as it has not been so severe 
as to reduce her. ‘This was occasioned by too close 
attendance on the child. However, her cares have 
been rewarded in a most extraordinary manner, as 
the poor babe, at one time, was so reduced, that no 
rational hope could be entertained of its recovery; 
but at present a most favorable change has taken 
place, and she has improved wonderfully. Mrs. 
Judson had no fever last night, so that the intermis- 
sion is now complete.’ ‘The tenor of this letter was 
such, as to make my mind quite easy, both as it 
regarded the mother and the child. My next com- 
munication was a letter with a black seal, handed 
me by a person, saying he was sorry to inform me 
of the death of the child. I know not whether this 
was a mistake on his part, or kindly intended to 
prepare my mind for the real intelligence. 1 went 
into ny room, and opened the letter with feeling of 





$34 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


gratitude and joy, that at any rate the mother was 
spared. It was from Mr. B , Assistant Superin- 
tendant of Amherst, dated the 26th of October, and 
began thus: 

«6 ¢ My dear Sir, to one who has suffered so much 
and with such exemplary fortitude, there needs but 
litt.e preface to tell a tale of distress. It were cruel 
indeed to torture you with doubt and suspense. Ts 
sum up the unhappy tidings in a few words—Mrs., 
Judson ts no more.’ 

* At inservals, I got through with the dreadful 
letter, and proceed to give you the substance as 
indelibly engraven on my heart. 

*« «arly in the month she was attacked with a 
most violent fever. From the first she felt a strong 
presentiment that she should not recover, and on 
the 24th, about eight in the evening, she expired. 
Dr. R was quite assiduous in his attentions, 
both as friend and physician. Capt. F procured 
her the services of a European woman from the 
45th regiment; and be assured all was done, that © 
could be done to comfort her in her sufferings, and 
to smooth the passage to the grave. We all feel 
deeply the loss of this excellent lady, whose short- 
ness of residence among us was yet sufficiently long 
to impress us with a deep sense of her worth and 
virtues. It was not until about the 20th that Dr. R. 
began seriously to suspect danger. Before that 
period, the fever had abated at intervals, but its last 
approach baffled all medical skill. On the morning 
of the 238d, Mrs. Judson- spoke for the last time. 
The disease had then completed its conquest, and 
from that time, up to the moment of dissolution, she 
jay nearly motionless, and apparently quite insensi- 
ble. Yesterday morning, I assisted in the last mel- 
ancholy office of putting her mortal remains in the 
coffin; and in the evening her funeral was attended 
by all the European officers now resident here. 
We have buried her near the spot where she first: 
‘anded; and I have put up asmall rude fence around 











MEMOIR OF MRS. 3UDS ny 335 


the grave, to protect it from incaution  ntrusion. 
Your little girl Mariais much better. Mrs. Whitlock 
has taken charge of her; and I hope she will con- 
tinue to thrive under her care.* 

“Two days later, Captain F. writes thus to a 
friend in Rangoon: 

‘© ¢] trust that you will be able to find means to 
inform our friend of the dreadful loss he has suffered. 
Mrs. Judson had slight attacks of fever from the 8th 
or 9th inst. but we had no reason to apprehend the 
fatal result. I saw her on the 18th, and at that 
time she was free from fever, scarcely if at all redu- 
ced. I was obliged to go up the country on a sud- 
den business, and did not hear of her danger until 
my return on the 24th; on which day she breathed 
_ her last at 8, P. M. I shall not attempt to give you 
an account of the gloom which the death of this 
most amiable woman has thrown over our small so- 
ciety. You, who were so well acquainted with her, 
must feel her loss more deeply; but we had just 
’ known her Jong enough to value her acquaintance 

as a blessing in this remote corner. I dread the ef- 
fect it will have on poor Judson. I am sure you 
will take every care that this mournful intelligence 
may be opened to him as carefully as possible.? 

“The only other communication on this subject 

_that has reached me, is the following line from Sir 
Archibald Campbell to the envoy: ‘Poor Judson: 
will be dreadfully distressed at the loss of his gcod 
and amiable wife. She died the other day at Am- 
herst, of remittent fever, eighteen days ill.’ 

“You perceive, that I have no account whatever 
of the state of her mind, in view of death and 
eternity, or of her wishes concerning her darling 
babe, whom she loved most intensely. I hope to 
glean some information on these points from the 
physician who attended her, and the native converts 
who must have been occasionally present. 

**] will not trouble you, my dear mother, with an 
account of my own private feelings—the bitter 


836 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


heart-rending anguish, which for some days would 
not admit of mitigation, and the comfort which the 
Gospel subsequently afforded, the Gospel of Jesus 
Christ, which brings life and immortality to light. 
Blessed assurance—and let us apply it afresh to our 
hearts—that while Iam writing and you perusing 
these lines, her spirit is resting and rejoicing in the 
heavenly paradise, 

* Where glories shine, and pleasures roll, 

That charm, delight, transport the soul ; 

And every panting wish shall be 

Possess’d of boundless bliss in thee.’ 
And there, my dear mother, we also soon shall be, 
unitmg and participating in the felicities of heaven 
with her, for whom we now mourn. * Amen—even 
80, come, Lord Jesus.’ ”- 


TO THE SAME, 
«¢ Amherst, Feb. 4, 1827. 

s¢ Amid the desolation that death has made, I taxe 
up my pen once more to address the mother of my be- 
loved Ann. I am sitting in the house she built—in 
the room where she breathed her last—and at a win- 
dow from which I see the tree that stands at the 
head of her grave, and the top of the ‘small rude 
fence,? which they have put up ‘to protect it from 
incautious intrusion.’ 

‘*Mr. and Mrs. Wade are living in the house 
having arrived here about a month after Ann’: 
death; and Mrs. Wade has taken charge of my poo 
motherless Maria. I was unable to get any account. 
of the child at Rangoon; and it was only on my 
arriving here, the 24th ult. that I learned she war 
still alive. Mr. Wade met me at the landing place, 
and as | passed on to the house, one and another of 
the native Christians came out, and when they saw 
me, they began to weep. At length we reached the 
house; and | almost expected to see my Love coming 
out to meet me, as usual: but no, I saw only in the 
arms of Mrs. Wade, a poor little puny child, who 


MEMOIR us MRS, JUDSON. §37 


could not recognise her weeping father, and trom 
whose infant mind had long been erased all recollec- 
tions of the mother who loved her so much. 

«She turned away from me in alarm, and I, obhi- 
ged to seek comfort elsewhere, found my way to the 
grave; but who ever obtained comfort there? Thence 
[ went to the house, in which J left her; and looked 
at the spot where we last knelt in prayer, and where 
we exchanged the parting kiss, 

‘The doctor who attended her has removed to 
another station, and the only information I can ob- 
tain, is such as the native Christians are able to 
communicate. 

*© Tt seems that her head was much affected, during 
her last days, and she said but little. She sometimes 
complained thus—‘ 'The teacher 1s long in coming 

‘andthe new Missionaries are long in coming: I must 

die alone, and leave my little one; but as it is the 
will of God, IF acquiesce in his will. Iam not afraid 
of death, but I am afrasd I shall not be able to bear 
these pains. Tell the teacher that the disease was 
most violent, and I could not write; tell him how 
I suffered and died; tell him all that you see; and 
take care of the house and things until he returns.? 
When she was unable to notice anything else, she 
would stil] call the child to her, and charge the nurse 
to be kind to it, and indulge it in everything, until 
its father should return. The last day or two, she 
lay almost senseless and motionless, on one side— 
her head reclining on her arm—her eyes closed—and 
at 8 in the evening, with one exclamation of distress 
m the Burman language, she ceased to breathe. 

** Feb. 7, I have been on a visit to the physician 
who attended her in her illness. He has the char- 
acter of a kind, attentive and skilful practitioner; 
and his communications to me have been rather con- 
soling. 1am now convinced that everything possi- 
ble was done; and that had I been present myself, 
[ could not have essentially contributed to avert the 
fatal termination of the disease The doctor was 

29 


388 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


with her twice a day, and frequently spent the 
greater part of the night by her side. He says, 
that from the first attack of the fever, she was per- 
suaded she should not recover; but that her mind 
was uniformly tranquil and happy in the prospect of 
death. She only expressed occasional regret at leav- 
ing her child, the native Christians, and the schools, 
before her husband or another missionary family 
could arrive. 'The last two days she was free from 
pain. On her attention being roused by reiterated 
questions, she replied, ‘I feel quite well, only very 
weak.? ‘These were her last words. 

«© The doctor is decidedly of opinion that the fatal 
termination of the fever is not to be ascribed to the 
localities of the new settlement, but chiefly to the 
weakness of her constitution, occasioned by severe 
privations and long protracted sufferings which she 
endured at Ava. Oh, with what meekness, patience, 
magnanimity, and Christian fortitude, she bore those 
sufferings! And can I wish they had been less? Can 
I sacrilegiously wish to rob her crown of a single 
gem? Much she saw and suffered of the evil of 
this evil world; and emmently was she qualified to 
relish and enjoy the pure and holy rest into which 
she has entered. ‘True, she has been taken from a 
sphere, in which she was singularly qualified, by her 
natural disposition, her winning manners, her devot- 
ed zeal, and her perfect acquaintance with the 'lan- 
guage, to be extensively serviceable to the cause of 
Christ; true, she has been torn from her husband’s 
bleeding heart, and from her darling babe; but m- 
finite wisdom and love have presided, as ever, in 
this most afflicting dispensation. Faith decides, that 
it is all right; and the decision of faith, eternity will 
soon confirm. 

“‘T have only time to add, (for Iam writing in 
great haste, with very short notice of the present 
opportunity of sending to Bengal,) that poor little 

aria, though very feeble, is, I hope, recovering from 
her long illness. She began indeed to recover, while 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. $39 


under the care of the lady who kindly took charge 
of her, at her mother’s death; but when after M1. 
Wade’s arrival she was brought back to this house, 
she seemed to think that she had returned to her 
former home, and had found in Mrs. Wade her own 
mother. And certainly the most tender, affectionate 
care is not wanting to confirm her in this idea.” 


But there was yet in reserve another trial, to add 
bitterness to the cup of his sorrow. The poor 
motherless child survived but a few months. Her 
father thus announced her death. 


TO MRS. JUDSON’S MOTHER. 
« Amherst, April 26, 1827. 
© Dear Mother Hasseltine, 
__ “& My sweet little Maria lies by the side of her 
fond mother. The complaint, to which she was 
subject several months, (an affection of the bowels,) 
proved incurable. She had the best medical advice; 
and the kind care of Mrs. Wade could not have been, 
m any respect, exceeded by that of her own mother. 
But all our efforts, and prayers, and tears, could not 
propitiate the cruel disease. ‘The work of death 
went forward; and after the usual process, excruci- 
ating toa parent’s feelings, she ceased to breathe, 
on the 24th inst. at three o’clock, P. M. aged two 
years and three months. We then closed her faded 
eyes, and bound up her discolored lips, where the 
dark touch of death first appeared, and folded her 
little hands—the exact pattern of her mother’s, on 
her cold breast. The next morning, we made her 
last bed, in the small enclosure which surrounds her 
mother’s lonely grave. Together they rest in hope, 
under the hope tree, (Hopia) which stands at the 
head of the graves; and together, I trust, their 
spirits are rejoicing, after a short separation of pre- 
cisely six months. 
‘Thus I am left alone in the wide world. My 
father’s family, and all my relatives, have been, for 


840 MEMOIR OF MRS..JUDSON. 


many years, separated from me, by seas that I shal 
never repass. ‘They are the same to me asif buried. 
My own dear family I have actually buried: one in 
Rangoon, and two in Amherst. What remains for 
me, but to hold myself in readiness to follow the dear 
departed to that blessed world, 
‘Where my best friends, my kindred dwell, 
Where God, my Saviour, reigns 2? 2 
The following letter, though written at a later 
period, may properly be introduced here: 


TO MRS JUDSON’S SISTERS 
«© Maulmein, Dec. 4, 1827 
“@ My dear Sisters, 

“Tt is a most affecting thought to me, that when 
you were expressing your feelings for my poor moth- 
erless Maria, and requesting that she might be sent 
home—that very day, perhaps hour, death was lay- 
ing his stiffening hand on her little emaciated form, 
and turning a deaf, pitiless ear to the supplications 
of her agonized father, and the yearning wishes of 
dear distant relatives. Death mocks at us, and tram- 
pies our dearest hopes and our lives in the dust. 

readful tyrant, offspring and ally of sin! But go 
on now, and do thy worst. Thy time will come. 
The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death. 
Yes, awful power, thou shalt devour thyself and 
die. And then my angelic Ann, and my meek blue- 
eyed Roger, and my tender-hearted, affectionate, 
darling Maria,—my venerable father, you, my dear 
sisters, that still remain, our still surviving parents, 
and I hope, myself, though all unworthy, shall be 
rescued from the power of death and the grave; 
and when the crown of life is set on our heads, and 
we know assuredly, that we shall die no more, we 
shall make heaven’s arches ring with songs of praise 
to Him, who hath loved us, and washed us from 
our sins in his own blood. 

‘Tt is also an affecting thought, that when sister. 
M. was writing hers of the 24th of October, 1826, 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. $41 


that very day, perhaps hour, the object of her sis- 
terly love was just becoming incapable of reviprocat- 
ing the affectionate salutation. Her head was re- 
clining on herarm She was thinking, I doubt not, 
of her absent husband, her distant parents and sis- 
ters; and above all, of her poor sickly orphan child, 
whose plaintive cries she could nomore hush. And 
she thought, I doubt not, of her Saviour, and the 
heavenly glory that was just opening to her view. 
But on all these subjects, a cloud of darkness must 
ever rest, till dispelled by the light of heaven. All 
my questioning of the people who were about her 
dying bed, has been able to elicit no other particu- 
RE age those which I have already communi- 
cated. 

*¢ You ask many questions, in A.’s letter of March 
23, about our sufferings at Ava: but how can I an- 
swer them now? ‘There would be some pleasure in 
reviewing those scenes, if she were alive; but now 
I cannot. The only pleasant reflection—the only 
one that assuages the anguish of retrospection—is, 
that she now rests far away, where no spotted faced 
executioner can fill her heart with terror; where no 
unfeeling magistrate can extort the scanty pittance 
which she had preserved through every risk, to sus- 
tain her fettered husband and famishing babe, no 
more exposed to lie on a bed of languishment, and 
stung with the uncertainty, what would become of 
her poor husband and child, when she was gone. 
No, she has her little ones around her, I trust, and 
has taught them to praise the source whence their 
deliverance flowed. Yes, her little son, his soul en- 
larged to angel’s size, was perhaps the first to meet 
her at heaven’s portals, and welcome his mother to 
his own abode. And her daughter followed her in 
six short months. Had she remained, it seems to 
me impossible to have complied with your request, 
and sent her far from me over the seas. 

‘*¢ How happy should I be to find myself once more 
in the bosom of the family in Bradford, and tell you 


$42 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON, 


ten thousand things that I cannot put on paper. 
But this will never be. Nor is it of much conse- 
quence. <A few more :olling suns, and you will hear 
of my death, or I of yours. Till then, believe me 

our most affectionate brother. And when we meet 
in heaven—when all have arrived, and we find all 
safe, forever safe, and our Saviour ever safe and 
* glorious, and in him all his beloved—oh shall we not 
be happy, and ever praise Him who has endured the 
cross to wear and confer such a crown!”* 


Theve is a moral sublimity in the feelings which 
these le*ters disclose. Here are the workings of the 
strongest conjugal affection, and the tenderest pa- 
rental love. Here, too, are the triumphs of a faith 
which looks beyond the grave; and the consolations 
of a hope which gathers brightness from sorrow. 
Many hearts, we trust, are accustomed to remember 
this bereaved husband and father at the throne of 
mercy. May the grace of his Saviour ever be suf- 
ficient for him; and strengthen him to go onward in 
his missionary work, till he shal! finish his course, 
and wear the crown. 

The following lines, written by Mrs. Boardmar, 
on the death of the little Maria, may be appropriate- 
ly introduced here. They possess much poetic 
merit. But the tender, pious feeling which per 
vades them, enhances their value: 


Ah! this is death, my innocent ; ’tis he, 
Whose chilling hand has touch’d thy tender frame. 
With placid feeling, we behold thee still, 

For thou art lovely in his cold embrace— 
Serene thy whiten’d brow,—and thy mild eye 
Ting’d with a deeper blue than when in health. 
Thy trembling ps are pale—thy bosom throbs ; 
Yet still we weep not—for full well we know, 
_This agitation is thy soul’s release, 

From its low tenement, to mount above. 

Thou heed’st us not ; not e’en the bursting sigh 
Of thy dear father, now can pierce thine ear. 

And yet that look, that supplicating glance, 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 343 


What would it crave? what wouldst thou ask, my .ove? 
Has e’er thy father told thee ofa spot, 
A dwelling place from human ken concealed? 
A mansion where the weary, and the sad, 
And broken hearted, find a sweet repose? 
And has he told thee, in that resting place 
There calmly slumbers one, whose gentle hand, 
From earliest infancy, supplied thy wants? 
Whose bosom was thy pillow; and whose eye 
Forever beam’d on thee, with fondest love? 
And wouldst thou seek thy mother in the grave? 
(For ’tis the grave I speak of)—there is rest 
And thou art weary, love, and need’st repose. 
Though short thy life, full many a day of pain, 
And night of restlessness, has been thy lot. 
Born in a heathen land,—far, far remov’d 
From all thy parents lov’d, in former years— 
When thou first saw’st the light, these were not there, 
‘To kneel beside thy mother, and implore 
Blessings upon thy little head, and sing 
The song of gratitude, and joy,-and praise. 
Strangers were there ; strangers to truth and peace ; 
Strangers to feeling; strangers to her God. 
Thy father came not then to kiss his babe, 
And glad the heart of her who gave thee birth. 
Alas! a loathsome, dark, and dreary cell 
Was his abode,—anxiety his guest. 
Thy mother’s tale, replete with varied scenes, 
Exceeds my powers to tell ; but other harps, 
And other voices, sweeter far than mine, 
Shall sing her matchless worth, her deeds of love, 
Her zeal, her toils, her sufferings, and her death. 
But all is over now. She sweetly sleeps, 
In yonder new-made grave ; and thou, sweet babe, 
Shalt soon be softly pillowed on her breast. 
Yes, ere to-morrow’s sun shall gild the west, 
Thy father shall have said a long adieu 
To the last ling’ring hope of earthly joy: 
Thy throbbings will have ceas’d ; thine eye be closed £ 
- And thon, Maria, wilt have found thy rest. 
Thy flesh shall rest in hope, till that great day, 
When He who once endur’d far greater woes 
Than mortal man can know ; who when on earth 
Receiv’d the little children to his arms, 
Graciously blessing them, shall come again: 
Shall come—not im the garb of sinful man— 


844 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


But clothed in majesty, array’d in power. 

Then shall thy dust arise—nor thine alone ; 

But all who sleep shall wake and rise with thee. 
Then, like the glorious body of thy Lord, 

Who wakes thy dust, this fragile frame shall be. 
Then shalt thou mount with him on angel’s wings ; 
Be freed from sorrow, sickness, sin and death, 
And in his presence find eternal bliss. 


Those who have followed, thus far, this eventf. 
narrative, do not need any comment to assist them 
to form an estimate of Mrs. Judson. We cannot, 
however, refrain from taking notice of two or three 
prominent points of her character. 

Her habitual piety is the most lovely and impor- 
tant trait. It was not an official devotion, assumed 
on particular occasions. It was not a flame which 
blazed up brightly at rare and uncertain intervals. 
She was everywhere and at all times, the Christian 
and the Missionary. She walked with God. Her 
secret journals, in which she recorded her thoughts, 
with no witness but' the Searcher of hearts; her 
most private letters, in which she poured out her 
feelings without reserve, are marked by even more 
of fervent and humble piety than her public wri- 
tings. Religion was the chosen theme of her con- 
versation; and it is known that she spent much time 
in secret devotion. The hopes of religion support- 
ed her in her appalling sufferings; and the love of 
Christ constrained her to persevere unto death in her 
efforts to lead the poor wanderers of Burmah to the 
Shepherd and Bishop of their souls. : 

er unwearied perseverance 1s another character- 
istic. Something of this may be attributed to her 
natural temperament; but it is mainly to be ascribed 
to tne ardor of her desire for the salvation of men. 
We have seen her, amid perplexities, disease and 
danger, pressing steadily onward towards the great 
object to which her life was devoted. The state of 
her health repeatedly forced her away from the. 
scene of her labors; but she returned the monient 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. $45 


that her recruited strength would permit. The 
tumults of war and the exasperated barbarity of 
the government, subjected her and her associates to 
sufferings unparalleled in the history of modern 
missions, But assoon as peace returned, instead of 
flying from a country where she had endured so 
much, and where her ‘benevolent toils had been so 
cruelly requited, her first thoughts were directed to 
the reestablishment of the mission. 

Of her intellectual powers, it is needless to sa 
anything. Her actions and her writings fanten 
ample evidence of superior talents. 

It would be proper to say something in this place, 
of her person, her manners, and her private charac- 
ter. On these points, however, we can say little 
from personal knowledge, as the author had but 
once the pleasure of an interview with her. The 
portrait prefixed to this volume is thought by her 
. friends to be a correct resemblance of her, as she 
appeared during her late visit to the United States. 
In her manners, there was much unaflected dignity: 
but she was affable; and there was an attractive 
grace in her conversation, resulting from the union 
of mental strength with feminine affections. Her 
dispositions were kind, and her benevolence warm, 
active, and unwearied. Her constitutional temper- 
ament was ardent,and may sometimes have had too 
much influence over her feelings. ‘The important 
and sorrowful scenes through which she passed, call- 
ing for decision, activity, energy, and fortitude, were 
less favorable than the sheltered and quiet retirement 
of domestic life, for the cultivation of the so:ter and 
the gentler qualities; and their effect may have been 
perceptible in her character. But a woman, placed 
in her situation, and tasked with her duties, is not 
to be judged by any ordinary standard. Weappeal, 
with confidence, to the course of her life, to her 
journals and letters, and to those persons, of kindred 
minds and feelings, who have conversed with her, 
for ample testimony to the warmth of her affections, 


846 MEMOIR OF MRS, JUDSON. 


to her aflability, modesty and meekness, as well ae 
to the strength of her intellect, and the ardor of her 
zeal for the welfare of mankind. Envy, with its 
acute vision, and calumny, with its open ear and 
ready tongue, although they have assailed her, have 
never insinuated a doubt of the purity of her life. 
She was a mark for malice, aimed not at her alone, 
but at the cause of her Saviour. The reproaches” 
which were meant for him, fell on her; but she was 
content to suffer for hissake. She felt, too, that she 
was imperfect. Her journals and letters exhibit 
numerous proofs of her acquaintance with her own 
heart, and of her deep grief for the deficiency of her 
holiness. But she is perfect now; and doubtless 
she looks back upon her life on earth with adoring 
wonder and gratitude for the grace of her Saviour, 
who pardoned her sins, and made her useful in his 
service, and conducted her, at last, by many a 
rough path, and through many deep waters, to the 
rest which remaineth for the people of God. 

It appears to be a mysterious and afflictive dispen- 
sation, that she was summoned away, at the moment 
when the prospects of the mission seemed the most 
inviting, She had become familiar with the lan- 
guage; and she had acquired much experience. She 
had arrived at a spot where she could, without 
restraint, employ all her influence for the spiritual 
benefit of the heathen. But God saw fit to remove 
her; for her work was done. She had not lived in 
vain. Five converted Burmans had gone before her 
to heaven. Her name will be remembered in the 
churches of Burmah, in future times, when the Pa- ~ 
godas of Gaudama shall have fallen; when the spires 
of Christian temples shall gleam along the waters 
of the Irrawaddy and the Salwen; and when the 
‘ golden city’ shall have lifted up her gates to let the 
King of Glory in. Let us hope, meanwhile, that 
her bright examnle will inspire many others with the 
generous resolution to toil and to die, like her, for 
the salvation of the heathen. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 347 





Tue remains of Mrs. Judson were buried at 
Amherst, under a large tree, (the Hopia,) and about 
fifty rods from the house where she had resided. Two 
marble grave-stones, procured at the expense of a 
number of female friends in this country, have been 
sent to Amherst, under the direction of the Board, 
and placed over her grave, with the following neat 
and appropriate inscription, written by the Rev. Dr. 
Bolles, the Corresponding Secretary :— 


ERECTED TO THE MEMORY 
oF 


ANN H. JUDSON, 
WIFE OF ADONIRAM JUDSON, 


MISSIONARY 
OF THE a 
BAPTIST GENERAL CONVENTION, IN THE UNITED STATES, 
TO THE 
BURMAN EMPIRE. 
She was born at Bradford, 
In the State of Massachusetts, North America, 
Dec. 22, 1789. 
She arnved, with her Husband, at Rangoon, 
In July, 1813; 
And there commenced those 
MISSIONARY TOILS, 
Which she sustained with such 
CHRISTIAN FORTITUDE, DECISION, AND PERSEVERANCE, 
Amid Scenes of : 
Civil Commotion and Personal Afiliction, 
As won for her 
Universal Respect and Affeetion 
She died, at 
Amherst, Oct, 24, 1826, 


348 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


The following obituary lines were written by oue 
of the most accomplished literary ladies in this coun- 
ty. They were accompanied by a polite note to 
the Editor, in which she expressed her high sense 
of the “energy, disinterestedness and sublime piety,” 
which distinguished the character of Mrs. Judson. 


ON READING THE MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 


I saw her on the strand.—Beside her smil’d 
Her native land, and her beloved home, 
With all their pageantry of light and shade, 
Streamlet and 2% There stood her childhood’s friends 
Sweet sisters, who had shar’d her inmost thoughts, 
And saint-like parents, whose example rais’d 
Those thoughts to Heaven. It was a strong array! 
And the fond heart clung to its rooted loves. 
But Chris, had given it panoply, which earth 
Might never overthrow. 
And so she turn’d 
To boisterous ocean, and forsook the clime 
Whose halcyon bowers had nurs’d her joyous youth. 
Again I look’d.—It was a foreign shore. 
The tropic sun had laid his burning head 
On twilight’s lap. A gorgeous palace caught 
His last red ray, while hoarse the idol song 
To Boodah, mingled with the breeze that curl’d 
Broad Irrawaddy’s tide. Why do ye point 
To yon lone prison? Who is he that gropes 
Amid its darkness with those fetter’d limbs ? 
Mad pagans! do ye thus requite the man 
Who toils for your salvation ? 
See that form 
Bending in tenderest sympathy to soothe 
The victim’s sorrow. Tardy months pass by, 
And find her still intrepid at the post 
Of danger, and of disappointed hope. 
Stern sickness smote her, but she felt it not 
Heeded it not, and still with tireless zeal 
Carried the hoarded morsel to her love ; 
Dar’d the rude arrogance of savage power 
To plead for him, and bade his dungeon giow 
With her fair brow, as erst the angel’s smile 
Arous’d imprison’d Peter, when his hands, 
Loos’d from their chains, were lifted high m praise, 
There was another scene, drawn by his haud 
Whose pallid pencil blotteth all the grace 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON 349 


And loveliness of man. Keen anguish pours 
Its fiercest darts into that martyr’s soul, 
Who is about to wash her garments white 
In the Redeemer’s blood, and glorious rise 
From tribulation to a world of rest. 

Dark Burman faces are around her bed, 
And one pale babe,—to hush whose wailing ery 
She checks the death-groan, and with fond embrace 
Still clasps it firmly ies icy breast, 
Even till the heart-strings break. 

He comes! he comes 
The wearied man of God, from distant toil. 
His home, while yet it seems a misty speck 
His glance descries,—half wondering that the step 
Of his beloved glides not o’er the heath, 
As wont, to meet him, 
Ah! what heatnen lip, 

In its strange language, told him, that on earth 
Nothing remain’d which to his throbbing heart 
In that hour’s desolation he might press, 
Save that poor, famish’d infant. Days of care 
Were measur’d to him, and long nights of griet 
Weigh’d out,—and then that lithe, moaning one 
Went to its mother’s bosom, and slept sweet 
’Neath the cool branches of the Hopia-tree. : 

”T'was bitterness to think that bird-like voice 
Must bre-the no more. This is to be alone! 
Alone in this wide world. Yet not without 
A Comforter. For the meek heart, that trusts 
Its all to Heaven, and sees its treasur’d things 
Unfold their hidden wing, and thither soar, 
Doth garner up its hopes more firmly there, 
And toward that blessed hour look joyously, 
Which binds its sever’d links, to break no more 


Hartford (Conn.) L. H. S. 


The following Address, which has appeared in ad 
the previous editions of this book, it is thovglit 
proper to retain, and to insert in this place. It con- 
tains some valuable information respecting the con- 
dition of females in the East; and it appeals, with 
eloquence and force, to the sensibilities of the female 
heart—to the sympathies and compassion of Christian 
mothers, wives and daughters. It is a happy pe- 
culiarity of modern benevolent exertions, that females 

30 > 


350 MEMOIR OF MRS. SUDSUN. 


are invited to participate in the holy work of lenefit 
ing and saving mankind. There are posts which 
they may occupy, appropriate to their warm affec- 
tions and their untiring zeal, and yet to their modest 
and retiring habits. A large proportion of the whole 
sum of good, which is accomplished in the world, is 
the result of female diligence and liberality. In the 
support of the Burman mission, the ladies of our 
churches and congregations may contribute essential 
aid. The female schools seem to claim their special 
attention, as the most direct and efficacious method 
of elevating the social condition, cultivating the 
minds, and saving the souls of the women of Bur- 
mah. It was with a view to these schools, that this 
Address was written; and although she who here 
uttered her thoughts and her benevolent desires, is 
gone to the world of spirits, yet, being dead, she still 
speaks; and we persuade ourselves, that her voice 
will not be heard in vain. 


ADDRESS 


TO FEMALES IN AMERICA RELATIVE TO THE SITUA, 
TION OF HEATHEN FEMALES IN THE EAST. 


“ Boston, Nov. 19, 1822. 


“In the land of my birth, rendered doubly dear 
from the long-entertained thought of never again be- 
holding it; in the country favored by Heaven above 
most others, it is with no common sensations, I 
address my sisters and female friends on this most 
interesting subject. Favored as we are, from in- 
fancy, with instruction of every kind; used as we are 
to view the female mind in its proper state; and 
accustomed as we are to feel the happy effects of 
female influence, our thoughts would fain turn away 
from the melancholy subject of female degradation, 
of female wretchedness. But will our feelings of 
pity and compassion—will those feelings which alone 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 35) 


render the female character lovely, allow us to turn 
away—to dismiss the subject altogether, without 
making an effort to rescue—to save? No! I think 
I hear your united voices echo the reply: ‘Our 
efforts shall be joined with yours. Show us tli sit- 
uation of our tawny sisters the other side of the 
world, and though the disgusting picture break our 
hearts, it will fill us with gratitude to Him who has 
made us to differ, and excite to stronger exertion in 
their behalf’ Listen, then, to my tale of wo! 

“In Bengal and Hindostan, the females, in the 
higher classes, are excluded from the society of men. 
At the age of two or three years, they are married 
by their parents to children of their own rank in 
society. On these occasions, all the parade and 
splendor possible are exhibited; they are then con- 
ducted to their father’s abode, not to be educated, 
not to prepare for the performance of duties incum- 
bent on wives and mothers, but to drag out the usual 
period allotted in listless idleness, in mental torpor, 
At the age of thirteen, fourteen, or fifteen, they are 
demanded by their husbands, to whose home they 
are removed, where again confinement is their lot. 
No social intercourse is allowed to cheer their gloomy 
hours; nor have they the consolation of feeling that 
they are viewed, even by their husbands, in the light 
of companions. So far from receiving those delicate 
attentions which render happy the conjugal state, 
and which distinguish civilized from heathen nations, 
the wife receives the appellation of my servant, or my 
dog, and is allowed to partake of what her lordly 
husband is pleased to give at the conclusion of his 
repast! In this secluded, degraded situation, females 
in India receive no instruction; consequently, they 
are wholly uninformed of an eternal state. No won- 
der mothers consider female existence a curse; 
hence their desire to destroy their female offspring, 
and to burn themselves with the bodies of their de- 
ceased husbands. This last circumstance might 
imply some attachment, were it not a well-known fact, 


So2 MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 


that the disgrace of a woman who refuses to burn 
with the corpse of her husband is such, that her 
nearest relations would refuse her a morsel of 
rice to prevent her starvation.* Thus destitute of 
all enjoyment, both here and hereafter, are the females 
in Bengal. Such is their life, such their death—an¢d 
here the scene is closed to mortal view! But they 
are amiable, say some, and destitute of those violent 
passions, which are exhibited among females in our 
own country. My beloved friends, be not deceived. 
Who ever heard that ignorance was favorable to 
the culture of amiable feelings? ‘Their minds are 
in such a state of imbecility, that we might hope to 
find at least an absence of vicious feelings. But facts 
prove the contrary. Whenever an opportunity for 
exhibiting the malignant passions of the soul occurs, 
human nature never made a more vigorous effort tc 
discover her odious deformity, than has been ob- 
served in these secluded females. 

“ But let us turn our eyes from tne present picture 
to one not less heart-rending bvt where hope may 
have a greater influence to brighten and to cheer. 
The females in the Buruen empire (containing a 
population far above the United States of America, 
are not, like the fema‘es in Bengal, secluded from al 
society. In this yespect, they are on an equality with 
ourselves. Wives are allowed the privilege of eating 
with their husbands. They engage in domestic con- 
cerns, and. thus, in some respects, the Burman 
females deserve our particular sympathy and atten- 
tion. But they enjoy little of the confidence or 
affections of their husbands, and to be born a female, 
is universally considered a peculiar misfortune. The 
wife and grown daughters are considered by the 
husband and father as much the subjects of disci- 
pline as younger children; hence it is no uncommon 
thing for females of every age and description to 

* Since this Address was written, the practice of b 

d Pp ete | 


widows in India has been abolished by law. This is one 
the blessed effects of Christianity. 


MEMOIR OF MRS. JUDSON. 353 


suffer under the tyrannic rod of those who should be 
their protectors. ; : 

“ Burmah, also, like her sister nations, suffers the 
female mind to remain in its native state, without an 
effort to show how much more highly she has been fa- 
yored. ‘The females of this country are lively, inquisi- 
tive, strong and energetic, susceptible of friendshipand 
the warmest attachment, and possess minds naturally 
capable of rising to the highest state of cultivation 
and refinement. But, alas! they are taught nothing 
that has a tendency to cherish these best native feel- 
ings of the heart. That they possess strong, ener- 
getic minds, is evident from their mode of conversing, © 
and from that inquisitive turn, which is so conspicu- 
ous. It may not, perhaps, be uninteresting to men- 
tion a particular display of mental energy, as exhibited 
in the early inquiries of Mah Men-la. 

_ “Some time previous to our arrival in Rangoon, 
her active mind was led to inquire the origin of all 
things. Ifa Boodh was deity, who created al) that 
her eyes beheld? She inquired of this person and 
that, visited all the teachers within the circle of her 
_ acquaintance; but none were able to give her satis- 
factory information on the subject. Her anxiety 
increased to such a degree, that her own family 
feared she would be deranged. She finally resolved 
on learning to read, that she might be able to gain 
the desired information from their sacred books. 
Her husband, willing to gratify her curiosity in this 
respect, taught her to read himself. After having 
acquired what very few Burman females are allowed 
to acquire, she studied the sacred books, which left 
her mind in the same inquisitive state as when she 
commenced. For ten years she had continued her 
inquiries, when, one day, a neighbor brought in a 
tract written by Mr. Judson, ‘from which she derived 
her first ideas of an eternal God. Her next difficulty 
arose from her being ignorant of the residence of the 
author of the tract, and it was not till after the erection 
of the zayat, that this difficulty was removed By 
30 * - 


BoA MEMOIR OF MKS. JUDSON. 


her inquiries respecting the Christian religion, she 
evinced a mind, which, had it been early and prop- 
erly cultivated, would have hardly been surpassed 
by females in our own country. And happy am ] 
to add, that she not only became rationally and 
speculatively convinced of the truths of the gospel, 
but was, I trust, taught to feel their power on her 
heart, by the influence of the Holy Spirit, embraced 
them, has become an ornament to her profession ; 
and her daily walk and conversation’ would shame 
many professors of religion in Christian countries. 

“Shall we, my beloved friends, suffer minds like 
these to lie dormant, to wither in ignorance and de- 
lusion, to grope their way to eternal ruin, without an 
effort, on our part, to raise, to refine, to elevate, and 
to point to that Saviour who has died equally for 
them as for us? Shall we sit down in indolence 
and ease, indulge in all the luxuries with which we 
are surrounded, and which our country so bounti 
fully affords, and leave beings like these, flesh and 
blood, intellect and feeling, like ourselves, and of our 
own sex, to perish, to sink into eternal misery? No! 
By all the tender feelings of which the female mind ~ 
is susceptible; by all the privileges and blessings 
resulting from the cultivation and expansion of the 
human mind; by our duty to God and our fellow- 
creatures, and by the blood and groans of Him who 
died on Calvary, let us make a united effort; let us 
call on all, old and young, in the circle of our ac- 
quaintance, to join us in attempting to meliorate the 
situation, to instruct, to enlighten, and save females 
in the Eastern world; and though time and circum- 
stances should prove that our united exertions have 
been ineffectual, we shall escape at death that bitter 
thought, that Burman females have been lost, without 
an effort of ours to prevent their ruin. 


“ANN H. JUDSON” 


ft 3985 


as Fes 27 


ee 


ya we iki hi 
Race" Wk Gf ay 


Meher ee i 











a 





. ais a 


i. 
Neil at 
Leen. ee 




















BV Knowles, James Davis, 1798-1833. 

3271 Memoir of Ann H. Judson, missionax 

J81 New ed. Philadelphia, American Bapt 
KT tion Society [c1835] 
1835 354p. port. 18cm. 

1. Judson, Ann (Hasseltine) 1789-1, 

2. Missions--Burma. I. Judson, Ann . 

1789-1826. 

. 

A 3¢385 : 





\ 
\ A 


QQ 
SANA \ NY \\ \ 
CY 
\ 


~ 


XX < \ 


AX 


~ 
\< 


\ ~~ 


AK A 


WWRY \\ 
— \ \ \ 


Jee 


YE 





AW 
\\ WQ\\ 
SN 


CELL 


WH 
iin 


Lie Z 
Z ty 
WH g tii 
Yi ig: Ly 5, 
tity 


OOM SS SS \\ Sy 
SARS : NS ANS WAS NN RQ MA WA |W 
SS WN 


Cr 


BK 


We 
“ty 


SA 
i, 
ttt 


Ye 


Zi 


Yj}, 


Yj 


MZ. 
titty 


ti 
yy, “tty 


ti 


Yj, 3 


Ze 


WN 
SRN 


\ 


