r  BS  1 
****** 

1  4-50 

f  Cs 

if- 


i'vi'' 


MEMOIR 


RELATIVE  TO  THE 


PROGRESS  of  the  TRANSLATIONS 


g>arre&  Scriptures, 

In  the  year  1815» 
ADDRESSED  TO  THE  SOCIETY, 


SERAMPQRp' 
feftlttTtSD  AT  THR  MISSION  PBfeSJ* 


1816. 

/ 


MEMOIR 


RELATIVE 

TO  THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  TRANSLATIONS  OF  THE 

§>aCLTfc  §>Ctt}3tUtT0, 

In  the  year  1815.    Addressed  to  the  Society. 
Very  dear  Brethren, 

Both  the  season  of  the  year,  and  the  present 
state  of  our  Funds,  now  call  on  us  to  lay  before  you  Ihe  state  of  the 
Translations  in  which  we  are  engaged.  In  doing  this,  however,  it  does 
not  seem  necessary  this  year  to  particularize  every  translation  in  our 
hands:  in  some  of  them  there  can,  of  course,  have  been  but  little  pro- 
gress made,  as  they  are  chiefly  in  a  state  of  preparation  ;  while  in  others, 
which  have  been  longer  in  hand,  the  progress  made  in  printing  has  been 
more  rapid. 

It  is  now  ten  years  since  we  matured  the  plan  of  giving  the  Scriptures 
in  the  various  languages  of  India,  taken  in  its  widest  sense,  as  embrac- 
ing China  and  the  countries  which  lie  between  that  country  and  Ben- 
gal. In  this,  our  object  was,  not  to  act  on  the  plan  of  excluding  others, 
but  to  secure,  to  the  utmost  of  our  power,  the  accomplishment  of  the  work. 
At  that  time,  indeed,  there  was  not  an  individual  within  the  verge  of  our 
knowledge,  who  had  engaged  in  the  work;  and  that  others  have  since 
been  excited  to  engage  in  the  same  undertaking,  we  account  clear  gain 
to  the  cause.  At  theend  of  ten  years,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  pause, and 
take  a  review  of  what  has  been  actually  accomplished,  as  it  may  afford 
matter  for  gratitude,  and  ground  for  encouragement  relative  to  what  re- 
mains. What  has  been  done  will  appear  from  the  present  state  of  the 
different  versions  as  they  stand  at  press. 

In  the  course  of  the  past  year,  the  Pentateuch  has  been  printed  off  in 
the  Orhsa language.  This  fully  completesthat  version  ofthe  Scriptures, 
and  thus  the  whole  of  the  sacred  Oracles  are  now  published  in  too  ofthe 
languages  of  India,  (the  Bengalee  and  the  Orissa ). 

In  the  Sungskrit  the  Historical  books  have  been  completed  at  press.  In 
this  ancient  language,  therefore,  the  parent  of  nearly  all  the  rest,  three 
of  the  five  parts  into  which  we  divide  the  Scriptures,  are  both  translat- 
ed and  published,  the  New  Testament,  the  Pentateuch,  and  the  Histori- 
cal books.  Two  remain,  the  Hagiographa,  which  is  now  put  to  press, 
and  the  Prophetic  books,  the  translation  of  which  is  nearly  finished. 

A 


MEMOIR  RELATIVE  TO 


In  the  Hindee  language,  the  Historical  books  are  printed  off:  three  fifths 
of  the  whole  Scriptures  are  therefore  published  in  this  language.  The 
Hagiographa  is  also  put  to  press,  and  the  Prophetic  books' translated.  It 
was  mentioned  in  the  last  memoir,  that  the  second  edition  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament in  this  language  was  nearly  finished :  it  is  now  in  circulation. 

In  the  Mahratta  language,  the  Historical  books  are  nearly  printed  off? 
the  Pentateuch  and  the  New  Testament  have  been  long  in  circulation. 
These  five  are  the  languages  in  which  the  Old  Testament  is  most  consi- 
derably advanced  at  press.  After  these,  ranks  the  Shikh,  in  which  the 
New  Testament  is  printed  off,  and  the  Pentateuch  printed  nearly  to  the 
end  of  Exodus. 

In  ihe  Chinese,  the  Pentateuch  is  put  to  press ;  but  various  circumstan- 
ces have  concurred  to  retard  the  printing.  The  method  of  printing  with 
moveable  types,  being  entirely  new  in  that  language,  much  time  is  ne- 
cessarily requisite  to  bring  it  to  a  due  degree  of  perfection.  The  present 
type  in  which  we  are  printing,  is  the  fourth  in  size  which  we  have  cut, 
each  of  which  has  sustained  a  gradual  reduction.  This  last,  in  which  we 
are  printing  both  the  Pentateuch  and  the  Epistles,  is  so  far  reduced,  that, 
while  a  beautiful  legibility  is  preserved,  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament 
will  be  comprized  in  little  more  than  the  size  of  an  English  Octavo  Bi- 
ble,and  the  New  Testament  will  be  brought  into  nearly  the  same  num- 
ber of  pages  as  an  English  New  Testament.  The  importance  of  this  in 
saving  paper,  and  in  rendering  the  Scriptures  portable,  appeared  such  as 
to  induce  us  to  risk  the  delay  which  would  be  unavoidably  occasioned 
from  every  character  being  cut  anew  both  for  the  New  and  Old  Testa- 
ment. Another  circumstance  however  has  added  to  the  delay  :  while 
preparing  these  types,  we  put  to  press  an  Elementary  work  in  Chinese, 
under  the  name  of  "  Clavis  Sinica,' '  which  when  once  begun,  it  was  requi- 
site to  finish.  This  work,  together  with  the  text  and  a  translation  of  the 
Ta-hyoh,  a  small  Chinese  work  added  by  way  of  appendix,  forms  a  vo- 
lume of  more  than  six  hundred  4to  pages.  Before  it  was  fully  complet- 
ed, however,  we  were  requested  to  print  brother  Morrison's  Grammar ; 
and  this  work  it  appeared  desirable  to  finish  also  with  as  little  delay  as 
possible.  The  unavoidable  employment  of  our  Chinese  types  and  work- 
men in  printing  these  elementary  works,  which  together  exceed  nine 
hundred  pages,  has  of  course  much  retarded  the  printing  of  the  Scrip- 
tures; but  as  the  last  of  these  works  will  be  finished  by  the  end  of  Au- 
gust, we  hope  in  future  to  proceed  in  printing  the  Scriptures  with  little 
or  no  interruption.  This  preparatory  work,  however,  if  it  has  retarded 
the  mere  printing  of  the  Scriptures,  has  not  been  without  its  advantages 
in  improving  the  translation  of  them.  In  this  department  much  progress 
has  been  made ;  in  addition  to  the  New  Testament,  the  translation  of  the 
Old  is  advanced  nearly  to  the  end  of  the  prophet  Ezekiel. 

In  the  Telinga  language  the  New  Testament  is  more  than  haff  through 
the  press.  In  the  Bruj  also  the  New  Testament  is  printed  nearly  to  the  end 
of  the  epistle  to  the  Romans.-— Three  of  the  four  Gospels  are  finished  in 
the  Pushtoo  or  Affghan  language,  the  Bulochee,and  the  Assamese.  Those 
in  which  St,  Matthew  is  either  finished,  or  nearly  so,  are  the  Kurnata, 


THE  TRANSLATIONS. 


iheKunkuna,the  Moo!tanee,the  Sindhee,  theKashmeer,  the  Bikaneer, 
the  Nepal,  the  Ooduypore,  the  Marawar,  the  Jwypore,  the  Khassee,  and 
the  Burman  languages. 

From  this  sketch,  the  present  state  of  the  translations  may  easily  be 
seen.  It  w  ill  appear,  that  the  whole  of  the  Scriptures  bave  been  pub- 
lished in  two  of  the  languages  of  India  |  the  New  Testament,  the  Penta- 
teuch, and  the  Historical  books,  in /our;  the  New  Testament,  and  the 
Pentateuch,  in  five ;  the  New  Testament  alone  in  six  ?  four  of  the  Gos- 
pels in  eight;  and  three  of  them  in  twelve  of  the  languages  of  India? 
while  in  twelve  others,  types  are  prepared^  and  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew 
in  the  press. 

Having  thus  given  a  brief  view  of  the  present  state  of  the  various  ver- 
sions, relative  to  both  translating  and  printing,  we  now  wish  to  lay  be- 
fore the  public  a  few  ideas  respecting  the  various  languages  spoken  in 
India,  of  which  the  present  advanced  state  of  the  work  has  put  us  in  pos- 
session, but  with  which  we  were  not  fully  acquainted  at  the  beginning 
of  the  work. 

To  those  who  examine,  with  a  critical  eye,  the  languages  of  India  al= 
ready  enumerated ,  it  will  appear,  that  they  form  two  classes  §  those  which 
owe  their  origin  wholly  to  the  Sungskrit,  and  those  which  have  a  certaii 
affinity  with  the  Chinese  in  its  colloquial  medium,  the  only  way  indeed 
wherein  any  language  can  be  connected  with  the  Chinese,  as  its  writ» 
ten  medium  stands  distinct  from  every  alphabetic  language,  its  cha= 
racters  being  formed  on  a  totally  different  principle.  The  mo  nosy  11  a= 
bicsystem,  however,  with  its  tones,  and  the  peculiar  pronunciation  of  the 
Chinese  colloquial  medium  known  from  its  deficiency  in  certain  sounds, 
have  evidently  so  affected  certain  languages  spoken  near  China,  as  t® 
alter  the  sound  of  many  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and  to  give  the  Iasx= 
guages  themselves,  a  cast  of  so  peculiar  a  nature,  as  cannot  be  account- 
ed  for  without  a  reference  to  the  Chinese  system.  Such  is  the  case  in  va= 
rious  degrees  with  the  Siamese,  the  Burman,  the  Khassee,  and  the  Tibet 
languages.  That  the  Chinese  language  had  either  originated  or  greatly 
affected  the  languages  in  the  vicinity  of  China,  was  more  than  suspected 
by  us  many  years  ago,  as  well  as  that  a  knowledge  of  Chinese  would 
throw  much  light  on  these  languages;  which,  added  to  its  own  intrinsic 
value,  induced  us  to  determine  on  commencing  the  study  of  this  lan- 
guage as  early  as  thirteen  years  ago. 

But  it  is  to  those  languages  which  owe  their  origin  to  the  Sungskrit, 
a  class  by  far  the  most  numerous,  that  we  would  now  call  the  attention 
of  the  public.  To  give  the  Scriptures  in  these,  after  the  acquisition 
of  the  Parent  language,  and  one  or  two  of  the  chief  cognate  branches,  ap- 
peared, from  the  beginning,  a  work  by  no  means  involving  insuperable  • 
difficulties ;  and  our  opinion  relative  to  the  importance  of  the  object,,  and 
the  certainty  with  which  it  can  be  accomplished,  is  now  by  no  means  al- 
tered. But  in  our  prosecution  of  it,  we  have  found,  that  our  ideas  relative 
to  the  number  of  languages  which  spring  from  the  Sungskrit  were  far 
from  being  accurate.  The  fact  is,  that  in  this  point  of  view ,  India  is  to  this 


4  MEMOIR  RELATIVE  TO 

day  almost  an  unexplored  country.  That  eight  or  nine  branches  had  sprung 
from  that  grand  philological  root,  the  Sungskrit,  we  well  knew.  But 
we  imagined  that  the  Tamul,  the  Kurnata,  the  Telinga,  the  Guzrattee, 
the  Oi  issa,  the  Bengalee,  the  Mahratta,  the  Punjabee,  and  the  Hindoo- 
stanee,  comprized  nearly  all  the  collateral  branches  springing  from  the 
Sungskrit  language;  and  that  a'l  the  rest  were  varieties  of  theHindee, 
and  some  of  them  indeed  little  better  than  jargons  scarcely  capable  of 
conveying  ideas. 

But  although  we  entered  on  our  work  with  these  ideas,  we  were  ulti- 
mately constrained  to  relinquish  them.  First,  one  language  was  found  to 
differ  widely  from  the  Hindee  in  point  of  termination,  then  another,  and 
in  so  great  a  degree,  that  the  idea  of  their  being  dialects  of  the  Hindee 
seemed  scarcely  tenable.  Yet  while  they  were  found  to  possess  termi- 
nations for  the  nouns  and  verbs  distinct  from  the  Hindee,  they  were 
found  as  complete  as  the  Hindee  itself;  and  we  at  length  perceived,  that 
we  might  with  as  much  propriety  term  them  dialects  of  the  Mahratta, 
or  the  Bengalee  language,  as  of  theHindee.  In  fact,  we  have  ascer- 
tained, that  there  are  more  than  twenty  languages,  composed,  it  is  true,  of 
nearly  the  same  words,  and  all  equally  related  to  the  common  parent, 
the  Sungskrit,  but  each  possessing  a  distinct  set  of  terminations,  and 
therefore  having  equal  claims  to  the  title  of  distinct  cognate  languages. 
Among  these,  we  number  the  Juypore,  the  Brwj,  the  Ooduyapore,  the 
Bikaneer,  the  Mooltanee,  the  Marawar,  the  Magudha,  or  South  Bahar, 
the  Sindh,  the  Myth/1,  the  Wuch,  the  Xtitch,  the  Harutee,  the  Kosbula, 
&c.  languages,  the  very  names  of  which  have  scarcely  reached  Europe, 
but  which  have  been  recognized  as  distinct  languages,  by  the  natives  of 
India,  almost  from  time  immemorial. 

That  these  languages,  though  differing  from  each  other  only  in  their  ter- 
minations, and  a  few  of  the  words  they  contain,  can  scarcely  be  termed 
dialects,  will  appear,  if  we  reflect,  that  there  is  in  India  no  general  lan- 
guage current  of  which  they  can  be  supposed  to  be  dialects.  The  Sung- 
skrit, the  parent  of  them  all,  is  at  present  the  current  language  of  no 
country,  though  spoken  by  the  learned  nearly  throughout  India.  Its 
grammatical  apparatus  too,  the  most  copious  and  complex  perhaps  on 
earth,  is  totally  unlike  that  of  any  of  its  various  branches.  To  term 
them  dialectsof  the  Hindee  is  preposterous,  when  some  of  them,  in  their 
terminations,  approach  nearer  the  Bengalee  than  the  Hindee,  while 
others  approximate  m,ore  nearly  to  the  Mahratta.  The  fact  is,  indeed,  that 
the iatestand  most  exact  researches  have  shewn,  that  the  Hindee  has  no 
country  which  it  can  exclusively  claim  as  its  own.  Being  the  language 
of  the  Musulman  courts  and  camps,  it  is  spoken  in  those  cities  and  towns 
which  have  been  formerly,  or  are  now,  the  seat  of  Musulman  princes; 
and  in  general  by  those  Musnlmans  who  attend  on  the  persons  of  Eu- 
ropean gentlemen  in  almost  every  part  of  India.  Hence,  it  is  the  lan- 
guage of  which  most  Europeans  get  an  idea  before  any  other,  and  which 
indeed  in  many  instances  terminates  their  philological  researches.  These 
circumstances  have  led  to  the  supposition,  that  it  is  the  language  of  the 
greater  part  of  Hindoostani  while  the  fact  is,  that  it  is  not  always  un- 


THE  T  R  A  N  S  L  A  T  1  O  N  S.  5 

derstootl  among  the  common  peopleat  the  distance  of  only  twenty  miles 
from  the  great  towns  in  which  it  is  spoken,  These  speak  their  own  ver- 
nacular language,  in  Bengal  the  Bengalee,  and  in  other  countries  that 
which  is  appropriately  the  language  of  the  country,  which  may  account 
for  a  circumstance  well  known  to  those  gentlemen  who  fill  the  judicial 
department,  namely  that  the  publishing  of  the  Honourable  Company's 
Regulations  in  Hindoostanee  has  been  often  objected  to,  on  the  ground 
that  in  that  language  they  would  be  unintelligible  to  the  bulk  of  the 
people  in  the  various  provinces  of  Hindoostan.  Had  this  idea  been  fol- 
lowed up,  it  might  have  led  to  the  knowledge  of  the  fact,  that  each  of 
these  various  provinces  has  a  language  of  its  own,  most  of  them  nearly 
alike  in  the  bulk  of  the  words,  but  differing  so  widely  in  the  grammati- 
cal terminations,  as,  when  spoken,  to  be  scarcely  intelligible  to  their 
next  neighbours. 

We  now  proceed  to  particularize  the  various  languages  which  are 
spoken  in  Hindoostan,  including  those  in  which,  at  the  date  of  this  me* 
moir,  we  had  not  commenced  a  translation,  as  well  as  those  wherein  a 
translation  was  then  begun.  In  examining  these  languages,  it  will  assist 
the  reader  if  we  give  as  a  specimen  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  each  of  them,  not 
indeed  in  the  Indian  characters,  but  speltin  one  uniform  method  in  Eng- 
lish letters.  In  these  specimens,  two  things  will  deserve  notice,  the  vari- 
ous Words  including  the  pronouns,  which  constitute  the  identity  pervad= 
ing  these  languages ;  and  the  Terminations,  which  form  the  specific  differ- 
ence between  them.  The  pronouns  in  almost  all  these  languages  are  ra- 
dically the  same  ;  if  we  therefore  select  the  Words  which  occur  in  the 
specimen  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee  languages, 
exclusive  of  the  pronouns,  and  trace  them  in  the  other  specimens,  it  will 
enable  us  to  see  how  far  these  languages  really  agree,  after  which,  any 
one  who  compares  the  specimens  with  each  other,  as  diversified  by  their 
peculiar  terminations,  will  be  able  to  judge  how  far  they  form  distinct 
languages. 

As  the  Bengalee  is  a  leading  language  among  those  collateral  branch- 
es which  contain  the  greatest  portion  of  Sungskrit,  and  the  Hindee  a 
leading  language  among  those  which  admit  a  certain  mixture  of  Persi- 
an words,  it  will  greatly  assist  us  in  forming  our  judgment  of  the  rest,  if 
we  carefully  examine  the  Lord's  prayer  in  these  tw  o  languages  first.  In 
examining  these,  we  find,  that,  independently  of  the  pronoirasJ  they 
contain  the  following  words ; 

B 


MEMOIR  RELATIVE  TO 


S  Sthi 
lau) 


0 

heaven, 
abiding. 

Father. 

name, 
hallowed, 
be  re  *arded. 
be. 

kingdom. 


Swurga, 
ha, 

hnewale 

b  Nam, 
6  Pubitra, 

cManja-huoak, 
'  I  Howe* 
8  Rajya, 

Q  CAgmon  httook,  coming  be, 
"  ^toe,  come. 

10  - 

rTemun, 

11  ^Sei  muta?  so. 
£  Tissa, 

n  SP"thibee,       the  earth 

{Doomya 
■to  Ustakriya, 

13  IKhatirkwa, 

14  Kurajaookj 

15  ^ 

$Nitya, 
AU  IJeene-layak 


,-  QBhukshya, 

17  IKhorak, 

18  " 


Deo. 
[Ebuogs, 

(  Our, 
c  Riodhar, 
iKurujdhar^ 
Mafkur, 

t  ::.n., 

Pureeksha, 
Luoayio. 

' 

_  C  Apud, 
'  iBooraee 


19 


food, 
give 

and 

debtor. 

forgive, 
debt. 

temptation,  trial, 
lead. 

not. 

but-  [tural 
evil  moral  and  na  - 
evil. 


cPoritran  k.  deliver. 
lChhorawot 

for. 


^  I  Kyounki, 

q  CvSuda-surbukhshune,  ever* 
^  I  Humes  ha,  always. 
Q1  C'hnkti, 

^IPurokrum,  P°wer- 


<  Gourub, 
IMahutum,  S^ry, 


will 

be  done. 

to  day. 

constant, 
proper  for  life. 

In  this  list  of  words,  where  two  are  given  to  denote  the  same  thing,  the 
first  word  is  that  which  occurs  in  the  Bengalee  specimen,  and  the  other5 
that  in  Italics,  the  word  occurring  in  the  Hindee  specimen  :  w  here  only 
one  is  given,  it  is  radically  the  same  in  both. 

The  words  in  the  Hindee  specimen  amount  to  thirty-two;  but  those 
in  the  Bengalee  specimen  are  thirty-four,  as  two  phrases  are  admitted  to 
express  the  adverb  so,"  temun  and  sei  muta  ;  and  two  words,  ebung  and 
O  to  express  the  conjunction  v'  and."  Of  the  words  in  the  Bengalee 
specimen,  all  are  Sungskrit  with  the  exception  of  ma/,  forgive,  which  is 
a  Persian  word,  but  so  common  in  Bengalee,  that  it  would  be  nearly  as 
fastidious  to  reject  it  on  that  account,  as  it  would  be  in  an  English  wri- 
ter to  exclude  the  word  character  because  it  is  pure  Greek.  Of  the  thir- 
ty-two words  in  the  Hindejt  specimen,  about  six  are  of  Persian,  or,  more 
properly,  of  Arabic  origin.  The  rest  are  either  radically  the  same  with 
the  corresponding  Bengalee  terms,  as  jissa,  tissa,  &c.  or  they  are  Sung- 
skrit words  which  have  obtained  a  greater  degree  of  currency  inHindees 
than  the  corresponding  Sungskrit  words  found  in  the  Bengalee  speci- 
men.   This  will  be  found  to  be  the  case  in  others  of  these  cognate  lan- 

Having  thus  given  the  words  in  the  two  leading  languages,  we  proceed 
to  examine  the  others,  beginning  from  Kashmeer,  the  most  northen  pro- 
vince in  Hindoostan,  and  taking  the  Western  sidealong  the  Indus;  then 
adverting  to  those  spoken  in  the  Middle  provinces,  from  the  Punjab  to 
Bengal ;  afterwards  noticing  the  languages  on  the  Eastern  side  of  India, 
and  finally,  those  spoken  in  the  Decan  (Dwkshina)  or  the  South  of  In- 
dia. 


THE  TRANSLATIONS.  $ 

3.  We  begin  with  (hat  of  the  Kashmeer.  In  the  specimen  of  the  Lord's 
prayer  given  in  this  language,  the  reader  will  find  at  least  twenty-five  of 
the  thirty-two  words  given,  radically  the  same  with  those  occurring  to. 
the  Bengaleeand  Hindee  specimens;  he  will  however  find  some  of  them 
considerably  altered.  Thus  ruhnewule,  he  remaining,  is  changed  to  roo° 
jnvcali  ;  awe,  come,  to  yiye  ;  rin,  debt,  to  roon,  &c.  But  beside  these 
twenty-five  words,  several  Sungskrit  words  occur  which  are. common  in 
Bengalee,  though  not  admitted  into  the  Lord's  prayer,  as,  of  two  or 
three  synonymous  expressions,  one  alone  could  be  chosen.  Such  are  fro» 
wiw,  save,  in  Bengalee  tarao  ;  pureechhay,  trial,  temptation;  muhimat 
greatness.  The  vet b  "huo,he,"  is  here  metamorphosed  into  chho. 

4.  The  next,  proceeding  eastward,  is  the  Dogura,  which  is  spoken  in 
a  mountainous  country  reaching  from  Kashmeer  to  Almoraon  thenorth= 
west,  and  ending  a  little  distance  west  of  Hurdwar.  Of  the  thirty-two 
words  in  the  specimen,  twenty  Jive  are  radically  the  same,  and  used  in 
precisely  the  same  meaning.  The  vocative  particle  He  is  however 
changed  to  JE,  and  bap,  is  changed  for  bub.  Several  others  of  the  word? 
also  are  Sungskrit,  as  busne,  dwell,  Bengalee,  busun,  to  sit;  jtUgut,  the 
world,  in  Bengalee  the  same  ;  and  pooklm^  temptation,  probably  the 
same  with  the  Bengalee pureeksha. 

5.  The  next,  as  we  proceed  westward,  is  the  Wuch  ( the  Ooch  of  Ar- 
row smith,)  which  country  lies  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Indus,  and 
extends  from  the  Punjab  to  Auch.  Of  the  thirty-two  w  ords  in  the  spe- 
cimen, twenty-six  are  radically  those  found  in  the  Bengaleeand  Hindee 
specimens ;  but  pita  is  changed  to  pioo  and  dena  to  dewun.  If  the  whole 
specimen,  however,  be  compared  with  that  in  its  sister  language,  near> 
ly  every  word  will  be  found  to  differ  somewhat  in  sound  from  the  cor- 
responding words  therein,  so  that  a  Doogarese  translation  of  the  scrip- 
tures must  be  nearly  unintelligible  to  a  native  of  the  Wuch  country,  and 
vice  versa. 

6.  Still  farther  west,  on  the  banks  of  the  Tndus,  we  come  to  the  tract 
of  country  in  which  the  Sindhee  language  is  current ;  which  extends  from 
the  Wuch  country  to  the  shore  opposite  .Naryee.  Of  the  thirty-two  roots 
in  the  specimen,  twenty-four  agree  either  with  the  Bengalee  or  the  Hin- 
dee ;  several  changes  are  made  in  the  words,  however,  by  the  peculiar 
geni  us  of  the  language;  thus  pita,  father,  is  pit ;  jemutt,  as,  tejuhuta  ;  and 
temun,  so,  iuhuta  ;  churdeo,  forgive,  is  chhudda  $  and  booraee,  ei  il,  buck- 
line. 

1.  Farther  south,  but  adjoining  this  country  ,  there  is  another  language 
spoken,  which  we  term  the  Southern  Sindhee,  and  the  terminations  of 
which  differ  from  the  Sindhee  just  mentioned^  in  almost  every  instance* 
Of  the  words  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee  specimens,  twenty-four  maj 
be  traced  in  this  as  radically  the  same;  but  here  bap,  father,  becomes 
bhabba  ;  jemun,  as,jeena  ;  and  temun,  so,  teena,  Sic.  Beside  these  twen- 
ty-four words,  however,  several  Sungskrit  words  occur  which  are  com- 
mon in  Bengalee;  thus  bihun,  residing,  is  the  same  with busun ;  moonda„ 
evil,  in  Bengalee  is  munda  3  and  prutapoo,  energy,  power,  is  the  Ben- 
galee prutap. 


8  M  EMOIPv  RELATIVE  TO 

8.  The  Kutch.  Proceeding  south-west,  we  come  to  the  Kutch  country, 
by  Arrowsmith  written  "  CutchJ"  In  the  Kutch  we  can  trace  twenty- 
four  words  of  those  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee  systems.  Pita,  however, 
here  becomes  pi;  jemun^jtdo  ;  and  temun,  tedo.  Khadya,  is  the  Bengalee 
khadya,  food,  things  which  can  be  eaten.  Compared  with  either  the 
western  or  southern  Sindh,  or  with  the  Wuch,  the  difference,  asheard 
In  conversation,  will  be  found  considerable. 

9.  Proceeding  southward,  we  come  to  the  peninsula  of  Goojurat,  which 
joins  itself  to  the  coast  of  Kutch.  In  the  specimen  of  this  language,  no 
less  than  twenty-eight  of  the  words  can  be  traced  which  are  found  in  the 
Bengalee  and  Hindee  spec  mens.  Jemun,  how  ever,  is  changed  to  jeta} 
and  temun  to  tela  ;  while  booraee,  evil,  is  metamorphosed  into  bhoondaee. 
The  specimen,  taken  in  the  aggregate,  diffeismuch  from  any  of  the  fore- 
going. 

10.  The  Kunkuna.  Where  theGoojurattee  ends,  the  Kunkuna  language 
begins,  which  is  spoken  at  Bombay,  and  thence  up  the  coast  as  far  as  Goa. 
The  Lord's  prayer  exhibits  ( wenty-five  of  the  words  occurring  in  the  Ben- 
galee and  Hindee  specimens;  but,  beside  these,  there  are  several  Sung- 
skrit  words  which  assume  nearly  the  same  form  as  they  have  in  Benga- 
lee. Thus  bhooyi,  the  earth,  is  common  in  the  latter  language;  kelle,  done, 
is  from  kri,  to  do;  khawche,  food,  from  khao,  eat;  and  keerti,  renown2 
glory,  is  the  same  in  Bengalee. 

These  eight  languages  will  be  found  to  extend  in  succession,  from  the 
north  of  India  to  the  south-west  extremity,  where  the  Tamul  begins. 
We  now  return  to  the  North,  and  beginning  with  the  Punjabee,  trace 
those  languages  which  are  spoken  in  the  middle  provinces,  extending  in 
a  south-east  direction  from  the  Punjab  to  Bengal. 

11.  The  Punjabee.  The  first  of  these  is  the  Punjabee,or  the  languageof 
the  Shikhs,  of  w  hich  we  have  published  a  concise  grammar.  This  language 
extends  through  the  Punjab,  or  the  country  of  the  five  rivers.*  The 
country  is  bounded  by  the  Indus  on  the  west,  while  on  the  east  it  reaches 
toLoodianaor  Sirhend.  In  the  specimeu  given  of  this  language,  the  rea- 
der will  find  thirty  of  the  w  ords  occurring  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee 
specimens:  but  instead  of  jemun,  as,  he  will  find  jispurkar,  which  is  form- 
ed from  the  Hindeejis,  w  hat,  and  the  Bengalee  prukar,  manner. 

12.  The  Bikaneer.  Proceeding  south  ward ,  we  come  to  the  Bika- 
neer  language,  which  on  the  west  extends  to  the  territory  in  which  the 
Wuch  is  spoken.  In  the  Lord's  prayer,  as  given  in  this  language,  the 
reader  may  identify  twenty-nine  of  the  words  found  in  the  Hindee  and 
Bengalee.  He  will  also  find  sunsar  for  the  world,  or  the  earth ;  and  but 
for  strength,  both  which  are  Sungskrit  words,  occurring  in  the  same 
sense  in  Bengalee . 

13.  The  Marawar.  South-west  of  the  Bikaneer  country  lies  that 
wherein  the  Mai  .war  language  is  spoken.  The  Lord's  prayer  in  this  lan- 
guage exhibits  twenty-eight  of  the  thirty-two  words  particularized  in  the 

*  From  punj, Jive,  and  ab,  water* 


THE  TRANSLATIONS. 


9 


Bengalee  and  Hindee  specimens.  Mophik,  manner,  and  jor,  power, 
are  also  words  well  known  in  Bengalee  and  Hindee. 

14.  The  Juya-poora  territory  begins  where  the  Marawar  ends.  In  the 
Lord's  prayer,  as  given  in  this  language,  the  reader  may  trace  twenty- 
nine  of  the  words  found  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee  specimens.  Buncha 
will,  and  pruja,  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  are  also  common  in  Ben- 
galee. 

15.  The  Ooduya-poora.  South  of  the  Marawar  territory  lies  that  in 
which  the  Ooduypore  language  is  spoken.  The  Lord's  prayer  in  this 
language  contains  twenty-eight  of  the  roots  found  either  in  the  Hindee 
or  the  Bengalee  specimens.  It  also  contains  a  few  words  common  in 
Bengalee ;  among  which  are,  Icarjo ,  for  debt.  Xhamuna,  for  will,  desire, 
is  a  corruption  of  the  Persian  lchatirkhwa;  and  lenadhar,  for  debtor,giver, 
is  probably  the  Bengalee  word  denadhar. 

16.  The  Harutee.  East  of  Ooduypore,  the  Harutee  language  is  spok- 
en ;  which  though  current  in  a  territory  so  near  the  Ooduypore  and  the 
Bruj,  differs  greatly  from  them  both.  In  the  specimen  of  the  Lord's 
prayer  in  this  language,  the  reader  may  easily  identify  twenty-two  of  the 
words  mentioned  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee  specimens;  and  of  the 
other  words  several  may  be  traced  to  similar  words  in  Bengalee :  oojul, 
here  used  for  hallowed,  in  Bengalee  means  bright,  illustrious $jumeet 
the  earth,  is  a  Persian  word  common  in  Bengal ;  pekshya,  bread  or  food, 
is  bhuksya  in  Bengalee;  denan,  debt,  is  the  Bengalee  dena;  and  jus,  glo- 
ry, is  the  same  in  Bengalee.  Bugus,  gratuitously  forgive,  is  from  the 
Persian  buksheedun,  to  give,  whence  bukshees,  common  in  both  Benga- 
lee and  Hindee. 

17.  The  Maluwa.  South  of  Ooduypore  lies  Maluwa,  the  Malva  of 
Arrowsmith.  The  capital  of  this  province  is  the  city  of  Oojjein,  renowned 
in  Indian  history  as  the  royal  seat  of  Vikrumaditya,  Bhoja,  and  other 
sovereigns  of  note.  It  was  formerly  a  principal  seat  of  Hindoo  litera- 
ture and  philosophy.  In  the  Lord's  prayer, as  given  in  this  language,  the 
reader  will  be  able  to  trace  about  twenty  of  the  words  occurring  in  the 
Bengalee  and  Hindee  specimens;  but  many  of  the  rest  are  Sungskrit 
words  frequently  occurring  in  Bengalee,  as  sutyulvk,  heaven  ;  sovdha? 
holy,  pure ;  pran-rukhwa,  from  pronrukha,  perservation  of  life  bhyayka^ 
from  bhay,  expense ;  jugut,  the  world;  apurunchi,  and  ;  dhurma-roop 
prubha,  splendor,  glory,  &c. 

18.  The  Bruj.  Around  Agra  is  spoken  the  Bruj  language,  which 
extends  quite  to  the  Vindya  mountains.  Of  the  words  in  the  Lord's 
prayer,  the  reader  will  find  twenty-eight  correspond  with  those  occur- 
ring either  in  the  Bengalee  or  Hindee  specimens,  and  two  or  three 
Sungskrit  words  of  frequent  recurrence  in  Bengalee,  though  not  used  in 
the  Lord's  prayer  :  snch  are  bhojun,  for  bread  or  food  ;  khema-kuro,  in 
the  sense  of  forbear  or  forgive.  Dhurtee,  for  the  earth,  is  a  word  well 
known  in  Hindee. 

19.  Bundelkhund,  or  Brihmunda-khunda,  lies  due  west  of  Allahabad, 
and  occupies  the  banks  of  the  Jumna  from  Mow  to  Kulpee.  This  lan- 

C 


10  MEMOIR  RELATIVE  TO 

guage  meets  the  Mai \va  language  on  the  west,  the  Bruj  on  (he  north,  and 
the  Mahratta  on  the  south.  The  specimen  of  the  Lord's  prater  given, 
contains  twenty-five  of  the  words  found  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee  spe- 
cimens. Pooni,  and;  yog,  worthy;  and  sunsar,  the  world,  are  also  found 
therein. 

20.  The  Mahratta.  Notwithstanding  so  great  part  of  the  sacred  ora- 
cles is  already  published  in  this  language,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  add 
a  specimen  of  the  Mahratta  here,  as  it  begins  where  the  Bundelkhund 
and  Malwa  end.  In  this  specimen  of  the  Lord's  prayer  the  readermay 
trace  twenty-nine  oi the  words  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee,  and  there  are 
several  of  the  remaining  words  which  are  used  in  Bengalee,  such  as 
ksherna,  forgive,  just  mentioned  ;  poruntoo,  but,  &c. 

21.  The  Magudha.  The  Magudha  is  the  language  of  South  Bahar:  it 
begins  where  the  Mahratta  language  ends,  and  extends  nearly  to  the 
banks  of  the  Ganges.  In  the  Lord's  prayer  given  in  this  language,  the 
reader  may  identify  twsnty-four  of  the  words  found  in  (he  Bengalee  and 
Hindee  specimens.  Several  of  the  others  also  are  Sungskrit  words  fre- 
quently recurring  in  Bengalee:  thussuws^r,  the  earth,  the  world,  is  the 
same  in  Bengalee  ;  khiwawa,  food,  is  the  substantive  of  the  verb  fchawan, 
cause  to  e  it;  and  prubhootia,  power,  is  evidently  an  abstract  noun  from 
prubhoo,  Lord. 

These  eleven  languages  occupy  the  middle  provinces  of  India,  which 
extend  from  Kashmeer  to  Bengal.  We  now  come  to  those  on  the  north- 
east side  of  India,  among  which,  one  of  the  first  is, 

22.  The  North  Koshala.  This  language  is  spoken  in  the  country  to 
the  north  east  of  Oude,  or  Uyodhya,  the  country  famous  among  the  Hin- 
doos for  havinggiven  birth  to  Koushulyu,  the  mother  of  Rama.  In  the 
specimen  given  of  this  language,  the  reader  may  trace  twenty- seven  of  the 
words  found  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee  specimens;  and  nearly  all 
tne  remaining  words  are  pure  Sungskrit;  such  are  ichcha-poorbuk,  for 
will;  sunsar,  the  world,  already  mentioned ;  yogya,  worthy,  proper; 
ahnr,  food  ;  udkurm,  evil,  unholiness,  with  some  others. 

23.  The  Mitkiles.  Proceeding  south-east,  we  come  to  the  province 
of  Mithilee  orTirhool,  which  is  also  esteemed  classic  ground  among 
the  Hindoos,  because  deemed  the  birth  place  of  Seeta,  Junuka  her  father 
being  reputed  the  king  of  this  country.  On  the  south  it  abuts  on  the  most 
northern  province- of  Bengal,  and  northward  it  extends  to  the  kingdom 
of  Nepal.  In  the  specimen  given  of  this  language,  the  reader  may  trace 
twenty  of  the  radical  words  given  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee  specimens; 
but  among  the  rest  there  are  several  which  have  been  already  mention- 
ed as  Sungskrit  words  common  in  Bengal ;  as  sunsar,  the  world  ; yogya, 
proper;  khaek,  food,  irom  khau,  eat;  mudi/a,  in  ;  puruntoo,  but,  &c 

24.  The  Nepal.  Turning  to  the  nonh-east,  we  come  to  the  kingdom 
of  Nepal,  the  language  of  which,  termed  bv  the  natives  the  Kash-poora 
language,  is  evidently  a  branch  from  the  same  parent  stock  as  those 
already  mentioned.  In  the  Lord's  prayer  the  reader  will  find  no  less 
than  twenty-nine  of  the  words  which  occur  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee 


THE  TRANSLATIONS.  11 

specimens.  Bap,  father,  he  will  however  find  metamorphased  into 
baboo:  and  for  the  earth  he  will  find  the  word  log,  people,,  which  occurs 
both  in  Sungskrit  and  Bengalee  in  nearly  the  same  sense  :  thus  teen  lok, 
means  the  three  worlds,  heaven,  earth,  and  Patal. 

25.  The  Assamese.  Still  farther  east  lies  the  kingdom  of  Assam.  In 
the  specimen  exhibited  of  ihis  language  may  be  traced  twenty-nine  of 
the  words  found  in  the  Bengalee  and  Hindee  specimens  :  khabur,  food, 
also,  is  derived  from  Ichao,  eat.  While  it  assimilates  more  with  the  Ben- 
galee language,  however,  than  most  of  those  already  mentioned,  its  ter- 
minations still  render  it  a  different  language. 

Having  thus  taken  a  view  of  the  languages  on  the  West,  in  the  Middle, 
and  on  the  East  side  of  India,  it  may  now  be  proper  to  add  specimens 
also  of  those  in  the  Decan  (Dukshina),  or  the  countries  to  the  South  of 
Bengal,  iu  which  we  are  engaged  ;  which  are  three. 

26.  The  Orissa  or  Oot-kul.  This  language  is  almost  identically  the 
same  with  the  Bengalee,  while  it  still  possesses  different  terminations, 
and  even  a  different  character.  In  the  specimen  of  the  Lord's  prayer 
given,  the  reader  will  be  able  to  trace  thirty-one  of  the  words  which  oc- 
cur in  the  Bengalee  specimen  ;  he  will  also  find  kshema  used  in  the  sense 
of  "forgive."  But  notwithstanding  the  close  affinity  which  it  has  to  the 
Bengalee,  its  peculiar  terminations  cause  the  whole  specimen  to  differ 
much  in  sound  from  that  given  iu  the  latter  language. 

27.  The  Telinga.  Bordering  on  Orissa  we  come  to  the  Telinga language. 
In  the  specimen  of  the  Lord's  prayer  given  in  this  and  the  Kurnata  lan- 
guage, the  reader  can  easily  trace  the  link  of  connexion  subsisting  between 
nearly  all  these  descended  from  the  Sungskrit.  In  the  Lord'*  prayer,  as 
given  in  thislanguage,  he  may  trace  at  \east  fifteen  of  the  wordsspecified 
in  the  Bengalee  specimen;  he  will  however  find  the  Sungskrit  cheyya, 
done,  used  instead  of  kura.  Bhoomi,  the  earth,  is  another  Sungskrit  word 
common  in  Bengalee. 

28.  The  Kurnata.  This  language  commences  w  here  the  Telinga  ends, 
and  meets  the  M  thr attaon  one  side,  and  the  Goojuratee  on  the  other. 
In  this  specimen  can  be  traced  no  less  than  sixteen  of  the  words  which 
appear  in  that  given  in  Bengalee,  though  so  much  disguised  b\  the  dif- 
ference of  termination;  prukash,  appear,  is  also  precisely  the  same  in 
Bengalee.    For  kuro.  do,  the  reader  will  find  mora. 

We  have  now  traced  twenty-eight  languages  derived  from  the  Sung- 
skrit; and  if  to  these  we  add  the  Tamul  and  the  iVJalayalim,  we  shall  find 
thirty  collateral  branches  springing  from  one  philological  root,  the  whole 
of  which,  with  the  exception  of  the  Telinga  and  the  Kurnata,  and  one 
or  two  others,  will  be  found  to  have  nearly  nine  tenths  of  the  words  in 
common  with  each  other,  most  of  them  the  same  pronouns,  and  all  of 
them  the  same  mode  of  construction. 

It  may,  however,  be  proper  to  add,  that  w  hile  the  languages  of  the 
South  peninsula  derive  at  least  one  half  of  the  words  they  contain,  im- 
mediately from  ihe  Sungskrii,  (hey  aresupposed  to  derive  a  great  part 
if  not  the  whole  of  the  remainder  from  another  source,  which  certain  of 


\ 


!§  MEMOIR  RELATIVE  TO 

our  learned  friends  at  Madras  suppose  to  be  the  language  often  term- 
ed the  High  Tamul. 

We  might  here  close  the  investigation  of  these  languages ;  but  it  has 
occurred  to  us  since  we  began  the  examination,  that  it  would  not  be  im- 
proper to  add  specimens  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  the  languages  to  the 
West  and  the  East  of  India,  in  which  we  are  engaged,  as  these  will  clear- 
ly mark  where  the  Sungskrit  family  ends.  Thus  the  Pushtoo,  or  Affghan 
language,  on  the  west,  has  evidently  too  small  a  proportion  of  Sungskrit 
words  to  render  a  comparison  between  the  two  specimens  at  all  practi- 
cable, and  the  Bulochee  specimen  is  scarcely  less  remote  from  the  Sung- 
skrit; while  the  Khassee  language,  to  the  east  of  Bengal,  seems  quite  as 
far  removed  from  the  Sungskrit,  as  the  Pushtoo  on  the  west;  and  the  Bur- 
man  language  still  decreases  in  point  of  affinity  to  that  ancient  philologi- 
cal parent.  But  this  will  be  seen  more  clearly  from  an  examination  of 
the  specimens  in  each  of  these  languages. 

29.  The  Pushtoo  or  Affghan.  This  language,  as  has  been  stated  in 
a  former  memoir,  is  spoken  beyond  the  Indus,  by  a  people  respecting 
w  hom,  perhaps,  a  greater  probability  appears  on  the  side  of  their  being 
descended  from  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel,  than  can  be  urged  relative  to  any 
other  nation.  O  when  shall  they  begin  to  "  return,  going  and  weep- 
ing"— when  shall  they  begin  "  to  seek  the  Lord  their  God  !"*  In  the 
Lord's  prayer,  as  given  in  this  language,  although  nearly  half  the  words 
are  familiar  to  us  through  their  being  current  in  Bengalee  and  Hindee, 
yet  scarcely  four  of  them  can  be  traced  to  the  Sungskrit  language.  It 
is  therefore  evident  that  here  the  languages  derived  from  the  Sungskrit 
end  on  the  western  side  of  India,  which  idea  will  be  confirmed  by  our 
recurring  to, 

30.  The  Bulochee.  This  language  is  spoken  on  the  western  banks 
of  the  Indus,  the  Bulochee  nation  extending  westward  to  Persia.  The 
specimen  of  the  Lord's  prayer  given  in  this  language,  contains  scarce- 
ly more  Sungskrit  words  than  that  in  the  Pushtoo;  the  words  therein 
which  are  familiar  in  Bengalee  and  Hindee,  about  one  half,  become 
thus  through  the  medium  of  the  Persian,  from  which  this  language  bor- 
rows so  largely.  To  look  for  any  language  beyond  this  westward,  as  de- 
rived from  the  Sungskrit,  were  a  fruitless  research.  We  now  turn  to  the 
east  side  of  India. 

31.  The  Khassee.  This  language  is  spoken  by  a  small  nation  to  the 
east  of  Silhet,  who  inhabitthe  mountains  extending  from  Silhet  nearly  to 
the  borders  of  China.  In  this  specimen  three  or  four  Sungskrit  words  may 
be  traced,  but  so  disguised  by  the  monosyllables  prefixed  or  added  to 
them,  that  they  are  not  easily  recognized  ;  while  the  pronouns  gna,  I, 
fee,  thou,  kee,  they  ;  and  the  frequent  recurrence  of  thesyllables  ming> 
eig,  ung,  &c.  plainly  indicate  its  distant  affinity  with  the  Chinese  mono- 
syllabic system,  however  widely  it  differs  from  it  in  its  present  state. 

32.  The  Burman  language.  This  language  has  borrowed  the  Sung- 
skrit alphabet,  in  which  it  is  now  constantly  written.  But  notwithstand- 
ing this,  scarcely  three  Sungskrit  words  can  be  descried  in  the  specimen 

*  See  Jer.  chap.  i.  4,  5. 


THE  TRANSLATIONS. 


it 


given.  Syllables,  however,  which  accord  with  those  in  the  Chinese  col- 
loquial system,  are  to  be  found  in  abundance;  and  indeed  the  language 
adopts  two  of  the  four  Chinese  tones.  We  here  find  the  Sungskrit  ar- 
rested in  its  progress  eastward  therefore,  and  constrained  to  lend  its  al- 
phabet—to do  litde  more  than  clothe  and  express  another  system,  said,  by 
those  who  have  studied  it  most  closely,  to  be  originally  monosyllabic, 
and  which  still  retains  tones  completely  foreign  to,  the  Sungskrit  system. 
The  languages  which  spring  from  the  Sungskrit  therefore,  evidently  form 
a  whole  of  themselves,  and  taken  together,  constitute  a  philological  fa- 
mily, which  for  number  and  close  resemblance  to  each  other,  can  scarce- 
ly be  paralleled. 

Both  although  this  variety  of  languages  gives  to  the  work  in.which  we 
are  engaged,  a  highly  formidable  appearance,  since  they  almost  con- 
fuse themind  by  theirnumber,  the  difficulty  will  be  found  more  apparent 
than  real,  particularly  when  they  are  taken  singly  as  they  occur.  With  a 
previous  knowledge  of  the  mode  of  construction,  and  nine  tenths  of  the 
words. in  any  one  language,  the  study  of  it  can  scarcely  deserve  the 
name  of  labor.  The  peculiar  terminations  being  once  familiarized, 
(scarcely  a  hundred  in  any  one  of  those  languages,)  the  language  is  al- 
ready understood.  Nothing  remains  dark  and  uncertain  to  discourage  the 
pursuit;  and  the  gradual  acquisition  of  four  or  five  hundred  words,  the 
tenth  of  as  many  thousands,  the  general  number  of  words  in  these  lan- 
guages, has  little  in  it  that  requires  hard  study.  It  will  be  evident,  there- 
fore, that  to  a  person  already  acquainted  with  Sungskrit,  Bengalee,  and 
Hindee,  the  acquisition  of  ten  of  these  languages  will  cost  scarcely  the 
labor  of  acquiring  one  language  totally  new  to  him,  as  it  will  be  merely 
that  of  familiarizing  himself  with  less  than  five  thousand  words,  a  labor 
performed  by  every  one  who  adds  to  Latin  a  knowledge  of  Greek  ;  a  la- 
bor certainly  far  inferior  to  that  of  committing  to  memory  five  thousand 
Chinese  characters,  each  describing  a  different  idea  by  ?l  different  com- 
bination of  strokes,  and  far,  very  far  less  than  that  involved  in  the  pre- 
vious acquisition  of  the  Hindee,  Beugalee,  and  Sungskrit  languages. 

But  much  as  any  two  of  these  languages  may  approximate,  the  termi- 
nations, though  in  few  instances  exceeding  a  hundred,  are  so  often  re- 
peated in  discourse,  that  a  language  formed  of  the  same  radical  woids, 
will,  when  spoken,  be  scarcely  intelligible  to  one  of  a  neighbouring  pro- 
vince.  This  will  be  evident  from  an  example:  the  Mahratta  specimen 
of  the  Lord's  Prayer  ha-<  twenty-nine  out  of  its  thirty-two  words  agreeing 
with  the  Bengalee  ;  but  of  the  hundred  and  nineteen  syllables  which  it 
contains,  no  less  than  fifty-nine  will  be  found  to  differ  in  sound  from  those 
in  the  Bengalee  specimen ;  so  that  while  the  languages  have  nearly  the 
same  words  in  common  with  each  other,  in  discourse  only  one  half  of  the 
sounds  convey  the  same  idea,  and  the  other  half,  (i.  e.  the  terminations) 
so  disguise  these,  as  to  render  the  whole  nearly  unintelligible.  This  will 
notappear  strange,  when  it  is  considered,  thatthe  radical  words,  and  the 
pronouns,  which  are  nearly  alike  in  all  the  languages,  convey  the  idea 
in  its  unmodified  state  ;  but,  whether  it  be  that  of  a  thing,  a  quality,  or 

D 


1*4 


MEMOIR  RELATIVE  TO 


an  action ;  and  it  the  former,  whether  it  be  singular  or  plural ;  if  the  lafc- 
ler,  whether  it  be  affirmed  or  denied,  advised,  commanded,  or  forbidden, 
must  be  learnt  from  the  different  terminations,  w  hich  convey  the  idea  to 
them  nd,  with  the  various shadesof  meaning  nicely  discriminated.  Hence 
languages  unintelligible  for  want  of  an  acquaintance  with  the  termina- 
tions, become  plain  and  clear  when  these  are  acquired. 

From  this  it  will  appear,  that  while  those  who  speak  these  cognate  lan- 
guages, varied  as  they  are  by  their  different  terminations,  are  almost  un- 
in!elligible  to  each  other,  a  few  persons,  acquainted  with  Sungskrit,  and 
the  leading  cognate  languages,  familiar  with  Indian  grammar,  and  the 
principles  on  which  the  permutation  of  letters  is  founded,  may,  with  lit- 
tle difficulty,  obtain  that  knowledge  of  these  languages,  which  to  those 
unacquainted  therewith  might  seem  almost  unattainable ;  and  by  a  dili- 
gent improvementof  nativetalent  and  knowledge,  if  the  means  for  print- 
ing are  furnished,  compress  into  a  few  years  what  might  seem  otherwise 
the  work  of  ages,  and  accelerate  the  general  introduction  of  Christia- 
nity into  India,  possibly  by  half  a  century. 

In  the  method  we  pursue,  however,  this  labor,  if  not  actually  short- 
ened, is  ;it  least  greatly  facilitated.  It  is  a  well  known  fact,  that  one 
to  whom  a  language  is  vernacular,  can  in  general  express  an  idea  there- 
in with  a  degree  of  perspicuity  and  neatness,  scarcely  attainable  by  a  fo- 
reigner in  a  long  period  of  years.  Of  this  we  became  early  sensible 
from  repeated  trials  in  Bengalee.  We  have  long  observed,  that  on  com- 
municating an  idea  to  a  learned  Bengalee,  with  a  wish  that  he  would  ex- 
press it  in  his  own  way,  he  has  done  it  in  a  mannerso  clear  and  expres- 
sive, that  while  we  could  fully  comprehend  the  forceof  every  word  em- 
ployed, we  have  found  it  almost  impossible  to  express  it  with  equal  force 
and  freedom  ourselves.  It  therefore  occurred  to  us,  that  if,  to  this  free- 
dom and  forceof  expression,  strict  accuracy  could  be  united,  aversion 
of  the  scriptures  might,  in  a  very  few  years,  be  produced  in  the  various 
cognate  languages  of  India,  superior  to  what  might  be  expected  possibly 
in  halfa  century  from  a  man'sgoing  into  each  of  these  countries,  sitting 
down  to  acquire  the  language  ab  origine,  and  then  forming  the  style  of  a 
translation  himself  with  the  stiffnessand  baldness  for  many  years  inse- 
parable from  a  man's  writing  in  a  foreign  language.  We  therefore  first 
made  the  trial  in  one  or  two  of  the  languages  with  which  we  were  most 
familiar,  and  finding  it  succeed  beyond  our  expectation,  we  extended 
it  to  others.   The  process  of  the  work  is  nearly  as  follows : 

On  engaging  a  pundit  in  one  of  these  cognate  languages,  after  having 
examined  and  ascertained  his  qualifications,  we  give  him  an  approved 
version  of  the  Scriptures  in  a  language  with  which  he  is  well  acquaint- 
ed, fox  most  of  the  pundits  we  employ,  while  good  Sungskrit  scholars,  are 
also  acquainted  with  at  least  one  or  two  of  the  cognate  languages  of  In- 
dia beside  their  own  vernacular  tongue,  and  some  of  them  with  three 
or  four.  Then  placing  him  among  two  or  three  other  pundits  who  have 
been  for  years  employed  with  us,  we  direct  him  to  express  the  ideas  he 
finds  there  in  his  own  vernacular  idiom  with  the  utmost  care  and  exacts 
Bess,  and  to  ask  questions  wherever  he  finds  it  necessary.  Meantime  tUf 


THE  TRANSLATIONS. 


15 


grammatical  terminations,  and  the  peculiarities  of  the  language,  are  ac- 
quired, possibly  by  the  lime  he  has,finisbed  the  first  gospel.  The  work  of 
revision  is  then  begun  with  the  pundit.  This  at  first  proceeds  exceeding- 
ly slow,  as  nothing  is  suffered  to  go  to  press  till  fully  understood  and  ap- 
proved, and  in  some  instances  the  alterations  made  are  so  numerous  as 
to  leave  little  of  the  first  copy  standing.  This  revision  is  however  of  the 
highest  value,  as  the  discussions  which  it  originates,  both  lay  open  the  lan- 
guage to  us,  and  the  sense  of  the  original  to  the  pundit.  As  we  ad  vance, 
we  proceed  with  increased  ease  and  pleasure,  and  seldom  go  through  the 
fourth  gospel,  without  feeling  ourselves  on  firm  ground  relative  to  the 
faithfulness  and  accuracy  of  the  version.  Thus  a  first  version  of  the  New 
Testament  is  produced,  not  inferior  in  accuracy,  and  far  superior  in  point 
of  style  and  idiom,  to  the  first  version  of  the  Bengalee  New  Testament, 
the  product  of  seven  years'  severe  labor  and  study.  The  Old  Testament 
becomes  still  more  easy;  and  the  knowledge  and  experience  acquired 
in  bringing  the  first  edition  of  the  Scriptures  through  the  press,  form  no 
contemptible  preparation  for  the  revision  of  a  second  edition  of  the  New 
Testament. 

The  Printing  of  these  versions  is  highly  important,  as  for  want  of  the 
means  to  print  them,  versions  have  often  lain  almost  useless,  and  in  some 
instances  may  have  been  lost.  In  this  part  of  the  work  we  been  favored 
with  such  assistance,  that  we  have  types  ready  for  printing  in  almost  eve- 
ry one  of  these  languages.  Some  of  them  have  a  peculiar  character  of 
their  own,  as  the  Orissa,  the  Kashmeer,  the  Wuch,  the  Goojuratee,  &c. 
In  the  greater  part  of  them,  however,  the  Deva-nagree  is  familiar  to  most 
of  those  who  can  read,  and  as  this  alphabet  is  perfectly  complete,  while 
some  of  the  local  alphabets  are  greatly  deficient,  it  seems  desirable  to 
extend  the  Deva-nagree  as  widely  as  possible.  It  would  indeed  great- 
ly facilitate  the  progress  of  knowledge,  if  it  could  have  that  extension 
given  it  in  India,  which  the  Roman  alphabet  has  obtained  in  Europe. 
This  we  wish  if  possible  to  promote  ;  and  hence,  though  we  have  cast 
several  founts  of  types  in  the  local  characters  for  the  use  of  those  who 
now  read  these  alone  ;  yet  as  many  prefer  the  Nagree,  it  is  our  design 
ultimately  to  publish  an  edition  of  most  of  these  in  the  Nagree  charac- 
ter. 

That  the  labor  is  not  lost  which  is  thus  employed  in  giving  the  Scriptures 
in  a  language,  though  spoken  by  not  more  than  two  millions  of  people,  as 
is  probably  the  case  with  some  of  these,  must  be  obvious  to  all  who  areac- 
quainted  with  the  state  of  things  in  the  British  Isles.  The  value  of  this  has 
been  demonstrated  in  Wales,  where  the  word  of  God,  being  translated 
into  the  vernacular  language  of  that  small  principality,  has,  age  after 
age,  brought  forth  fruit  in  the  most  abundant  manner.  This,  however,  it 
could  scarcely  have  done  in  the  same  degree,  had  the  Welsh  been  left  to 
derive  all  their  knowledge  of  the  scriptures  from  the  English  language, 
although  it  is  the  language  of  their  nearest  neighbours,  and  spoken  in  a 
certain  degree  among  themselves.  The  importance  of  this  will  further 
appear,  if  we, on  the  other  hand,  consider  the  state  of  things  in  Ireland,  in 
the  vernacular  language  of  which,  the  Scriptures,  if  wholly  translated  and 


M  EMOIR  RELATIVE  TO 


printed,  have  never  yet  been  circulated  to  any  extent ;  and  to  this  very 
day  we  find  the  inhabitants,  under  a  splendid  and  numerous  protestant 
establishment,  which  conducts  worship  in  the  English  language,  almost 
as  ignorant  of  the  Scriptures  as  the  Hindoos  themselves.  The  expenseand 
labor  which  have  been  so  commendably  applied  within  these  few  years 
past  to  the  completion  of  a  Gaelic  version  of  the  Scriptures,  though  that 
language  is  far  less  extensive  than  any  ofthe  Indian  languages,  serve  fur- 
ther to  shew  the  value  of  the  object  before  us*. 

The  importance  of  thus  preparing  versions  of  the  Scriptures,  in  all  these 
languages,  if  possible,  will  further  appear,  if  we  consider  the  ease  with 
which  the  gospel  may  be  introduced  by  any  missionary  into  one  of  these 
provinces  when  this  is  once  effected.  A  missionary  who  may,  in  some  fu- 
ture period,  wish  to  carry  the  gospel  thither,  may  not  possess  that  turn  of 
mind  which  would  enable  him  to  sit  down  with  delight  to  so  arduous  a 
work  as  the  translation  of  the  Scriptures — he  may  not  possess  that  know- 
ledge of  the  originals  which  such  a  work  requires ;— or  he  may  not  have  a 
press  at  hand  to  print  the  Scriptures  when  translated — or  funds  to  meet  the 
expense: — but  devoid  ofall  these,  with  the  Scriptures  in  his  hand  already 
translated,  he  can  begin  proclaiming  thje  glad  tidings  of  mercy  to  perish- 
ing sinners ;  yea,  the  very  perusal  of  the  Scriptures,  with  care  and  dili- 
gence, will  be  to  him  both  grammar  and  dictionary,  in  the  acquisition  of 
the  language. 

Nor  when  the  Scriptures  are  thus  translated,  will  a  European  missiona- 
ry be  in  every  instance  requisite  for  the  purpose  of  introducing  the  gospel 
into  these  provinces.  A  brother  born  and  raised  up  in  India,  or  even  a 
Hindoo  convert,  though  incapableof  translating  the  Scriptures,  may  ac- 
quire the  local  character,  if  different  from  his  own,  go  among  his  border- 
ing neighbours,  and  quickly  attain  a  language  so  nearly  allied  to  his 
own.  Thus  several  of  our  brethren  born  in  Bengal,  are  now  employed  in 
Hindoostan  ;  and  not  only  have  brethren  Kerr,  Thompson,  and  Peter,  na- 
tives of  Calcutta,  carried  the  gospel  into  various  parts  of  India;  but  our 
brother  Krishnoo-das,  whose  memory  is  precious  among  us,  took  the  Oo- 
rissaNew  Testament,  went  into  that  country,  learned  the  language, and 
labored  there  with  brother  Peter,  till  arrested  in  his  career  by  that 
sickness  which  at  length  conducted  him  to  his  Father's  house  above. 

The  Expense  of  giving  a  version  in  each  of  these  languages  is  also  far 
from  being  great.  Our  experience  in  the  work  of  translating  and  print- 
ing enables  us  at  this  time  to  judge  pretty  correctly  respecting  the  ex- 
penseof  one  of  these  versions :  and  we  think,  that,  ingeneral,  now  types 
are  prepared,  and  all  things  are  ready  for  the  work,  the  expense  of  pun- 
dit's wages  for  translating  the  New  Testament,  and  bringing  it  through 
the  press,  and  that  of  printing  a  thousand  copies,  including  types,  paper, 
&c.  will  be  little  more  than  four  thousand  rupees,  or  s£500;  which  sum 
we  think  will  both  secure  a  version  in  almost  any  one  of  these  langua- 
ges, and  an  edition  of  a  thousand  copies;  a  number  sufficient  to  convey 
the  knowledge  ofthe  gospel  into  any  one  of  these  provinces,  as  well  as  to 
secure  the  translation  against  the  possibility  of  being  lost.  A  second 
edition  of  three  or  four  thousand  copies  will*  of  course,  come  for  about  a 


THE  TRANSLATIONS. 


17 


rupee  each  copy.  Thus  then  Five  Hundred  Pounds  w  ill  almost  secure 
the  gospel's  being  given  to  any  one  of  the  provinces  of  India ;  and  were 
any  friend  either  in  his  life  time,  or  in  his  will,  to  devote  five  hundred 
pounds  to  this  purpose,  the  effect  of  it  might  continue  operating  from 
generation  to  generation  till  time  itself  shall  be  no  more.  Were  we  to 
include  the  whole  of  the  Scriptures  in  one  of  these  languages,  the  ex- 
pense could  be  ascertained  with  equal  ease.  The  Old  Testament  is  to 
the  JSew  as  seven  to  twenty-five,  that  is,  it  contains  more  than  thrice,  but 
less  than  four  times  the  quantity  of  the  New.  Two  Thousand  Pounds  there- 
fore, would  now  defray  the  expense  of  translating  the  whole  of  the  Sa- 
cred Oracles  into  almost  any  one  of  these  cognate  languages,  and  of 
printing  a  first  edition  of  a  thousand  copies. 

It  is  from  a  view  of  these  circumstances,  that  we  have  been  induced  t© 
improve  to  the  utmost  those  advantages  which  we  possess  for  carrying 
forward  the  w  ork.  It  is  true,  that  at  the  date  of  (his  memoir,  we  had 
not  begun  the  translation  of  the  Scripture  in  eight  or  nine  of  these  lan- 
guages, as  the  Southern  Sindh,  the  Kutch,  theMarawar,  theMalwa,  the 
jVlagudha,  the  North-Khoshula,  and  the  Mithilee.  But  whoever  will 
refer  to  the  Specimens  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  these,  and  reflect  on  the 
ease  with  which  they  can  be  added  to  the  rest,  will  not  wonder,  if  we 
candidly  acknowledge,  that  should  Divine  Providence  spare  our  lives, 
and  continue  to  us  the  advantages  now  enjoyed,  it  is  not  our  intention 
to  stop  till  every  province  and  district  throughout  India  shall  have  the 
word  of  God  in  its  own  vernacular  tongue.  For  granting,  that  to  ac- 
quire the  remaining  tenth  cf  the  words  in  these  dialects,  may  be  diffi- 
cult to  persons  advanced  in  years,  it  will  appear  evident  to  those  who 
duly  reflect  on  the  subject,  that  it  will  be  still  more  difficult  for  others 
hereafter,  who  may  be  totally  new  to  the  work,  to  acquire,  through  the 
medium  of  the  Sungskrit  and  the  chief  collateral  tongues,  an  accurate 
knowledge  of  the  other  nine  tenths  of  the  words  in  these  languages, 
together  with  that  experience  in  the  work  of  translation,  which  can 
only  result  from  many  years'  acquaintance  therewith.  Convinced 
therefore  that,  at  our  time  of  life,  we  cannot  serve  our  generation  more 
effectually  in  any  other  way,  it  is  our  determination,  as  far  as  the  Lord 
shall  enable  us,  to  devote  the  remainder  of  our  days  to  labouring  there-' 
in  ourselves,  and  to  the  training  of  others  to  the  work,  who  may  carry 
it  forward  when  we  are  laid  in  the  grave. 

It  may  not  be  improper  to  mention  the  exertions  which  certain  of  our 
brethren  are  already  making  for  the  sake  of  farther  forwarding  this 
work.  The  labors  of  brother  Chamberlain  in  the  Bruj  version  have 
been  already  mentioned  ;  and  though  at  present  removed  from  the  spot 
on  which  that  language  is  spoken,  he  has  continued  his  study  of  the  lan- 
guage,and  hasinthelastfew  months  prepared  the  greater  part  of  the  New 
Testament  for  the  press. — Brother  Robinson  at  Java  has  made  so  great 
a  progress  in  the  Malay  spoken  at  Batavia,  that  the  Literary  Society,  af- 
ter examining  his  version  of  St.  Matthew  therein,  have  requested  him  to 
proceed  in  the  work  of  translation,  and,  as  atoken  of  respect,  have  elect- 
ed him  a  member  of  their  own  body.— Brother  Clmter,  at  Ceylon,  has 

E 


MEMOIR    RELATIVE  TO 


put  to  press  a  Grammar  of  the  Cingalese  language,  which  is  approved 
and  encouraged  by  those  gentlemen  ihere  who  are  most  conversant  w  ith 
the  language  ;  and  he  writes,  that  he  hopes  ere  long  to  be  enabled  to  ren- 
der some  assistance  in  the  Cingalese  translation  of  the  scriptures. — Bro- 
ther Trowt,  now  settled  at  Samarang,  is  applying  with  great  industry 
and  success  to  the  Javanese  language  with  a  view  lo  a  translation  of  the 
Scriptures;  and  has  it  in  comtemplation  to  send  us  a  copy  of  the  Java- 
nese alphabet,  that  we  may  prepare  a  fount  of  tyes. — Brother  Judson 
too,  at  Rangoon,  is  apply ing  with  great  assiduity  to  the  Burman  lan- 
guage, with  the  view  of  ultimately  assisting  in  the  same  good  and  im- 
portant work. 

Of  tiie  state  of  our  Funds,  dear  brethren,  it  is  proper  that  w  e  should 
put  you  in  possession.  In  addition  to  the  balance  we  had  in  hand,  at  the 
date  of  the  last  memoir,  w  e  have  received  Four  Thousand  Rupees,  the 
moiety  of  the  sum  which  the  Corresponding  Committee  had  in  haud  at 
the  end  of  the  \ ear  1814,  and  which  w  as  voted  us  at  their  half  yearly 
meeting  held  in  July  1814;  for  which  sum  we  beg  you  to  offer  the  Bi- 
ble Society  our  most  cordial  thanks. — We  are  also  indebted  to  the  benefi- 
cence of  the  American  Board  of  Commissioners,  for  a  farther  sum  of  Sicca 
JLupees  1156,  which  they  have  kindly  remitted  us  this  year.  And  a  be- 
quest* from  America  claims  our  particular  notice,  as  it  is  the  first  of  the 
kind  with  which  the  Translation  Fund  has  been  favoured. 

These  sums,  however,  leave  only  a  balance  in  hand  of  1212  Rupees, 
-which  sum  is  far  more  than  absorbed  in  the  versions  now  in  the  press. 
For  all  the  wages  of  the  Pundits,  therefore,  and  the  expense  of  the  ver- 
sions, wc  have  to  borrow  money  as  we  are  able,  till  we  receive  new 
supplies  from  yon,  and  the  supporters  of  the  work  in  Britain  and  Ameri- 
ca ;  which  sum,  if  itbe  that  required  for  the  whole  year,  will  amount  to 
nearly  Four  Thousand  Pounds  ;  for  the  wages  of  the  Pundits  which  we, 
relying  on  thf  liberality  of  the  public,  have  engaged,  in  the  different 
language-,  amount  to  1200  Rupees  monthly,  or  £  1800  annually ;  and 
the  printing  of  the  different  versions  will  amount  to  full  two  thousand 
pounds  more. 

W.  CAREY, 

March  21,  1816.  J-  MARSHMAN, 

W.  WARD. 

*  This,  is  a  bequest  by  Miss  Rebecca  Cox  of  which 
and  oilier  lixecutors  have  kindly  and  generously  rt, 
legally  due,  from  the  interest  they  take  in  the  work  i 


i  Robert  Ralstone,  Esq. 
milled  to  us  before  it  wu& 
[t  is  intended  to  forward.. 


THE  TRANSLATIONS. 


IS 


O 

H 
<! 

c 


O  Lf5 
O  C> 


"™     uT  a  £  q,  _2  c 
2  MQ  O  I  cj 

£  "  S.  I  .2 
m  >  =  c  2  8  s 


ii  -^8 
EE  u  ^° 

.5  <«  © 
ffi  »  ° 

I  J3 


"1 


I      —    - rt 

£      4/  .5 

8  S3* 


o 
o 


o  o 
oo 


OO 
OO 


e  «  § 


1^ 


C  <y 

P4 


:   93   ^  >> " 

0)  »-  a 

'S<»  SO.- 

o  2 


CO  «- 
—  3 


G~4  1/ 


O     W  _  M 


CO  «J  i, 
4)   U3  "5 


S  4)  I 

i_|cS  ©  ^ 

^  '£  I  <£  xT 

'-r  ,o      a.  © 

1  O 


^?ii|^B 
rao8  |  2 

c  £  cu  .-o  >n  £ 
s  c  »-.-c  O  <2 
g  J  is  i-cij  *  3 

SU43£«o  P> 
O  " 


^  s  =  s  « s 


.2 
~  S  c 

©wa 


4-  o 

4-  o  r"_  .-s 


^  "E  -a 


o*o  a 
Sf  -2  4) 

«  s  u  =  -a 

a£  a^-a^ 


■o*.so*o* 


2  4>  2  ^  ~  S  £^ 


GOt3  4J  ^-  i 

a  5^.  " 


!2  ?  =  a 

a  fc^.— 

«    ^     fS  CK 


_  a  J  .a , 
o  °  ~ 


-5  « 
a  ^  o>  _B 

35  o- 


%  C £  O  '5  ' 


43  s  laj 
5  -4=  >  - 


^  a" 

43  ^ 
33  m 

4-  -c  a 
5  a  o 

a  js 


—  a 

43  ? 


*    91  " 

=5  S  a  - 
co  .  a.  =  £-  2  5  a; 

*  =  ^  c  I  ^«  ^' 

G  ^2  i~i  vfi  3  *3  & 


APPENDIX, 


This  Appendix  contains  specimens  of  (he  Lord's  Prayer,  and  the  two 
principal  tenses  of  the  verb  "  to  be,"  in  thirty-four  languages.    It  was 
originally  intended  to  confine  these  specimens  to  the  cognate  languages 
derived  from  the  Sungskrit  which  are  given  here,  twenty-eight  in  num- 
ber; but  it  was  supposed  that  the  insertion  of  the  specimens  in  the 
Pushtoo  and  Bulochee,  the  Khassee  and  the  Burman  languages,  would 
serve  to  illustrate  the  subject  by  shewing  both,  westward  and  eastward, 
where  the  Sungskrit  language  ceases  to  influence  others ;  the  Pushtoo  and 
.Bulochee  languages  to  the  west  of  Hindoostan  appearing  to  differ  as 
widely  from  the  cognate  languages  of  Sungskrit  origin,  as  the  Khassee 
and  Burman  to  the  east.   A  specimen  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  in  Sungskrit 
seemed  also  desirable  :  we  have  therefore  added  two,  the  first  is  (hat 
which  stands  printed  in  the  Gospels,  while  the  second  specimen  includes 
every  Sungskrit  word  found  in  the  Bengalee  specimen.     The  Sungskrit 
of  this  is  equally  pure  with  that  of  the  other ;  but  the  words  thus  become 
the  basis  of  the  various  cognate  languages,  are  perhaps  less  in  use  than 
those  which  compose  the  first  Sungskrit  specimen.    Such  indeed  is  the 
copiousness  of  that  language,  that  ten  specimens  of  the  Lord's  prayer 
might  be  given  in  it,  all  equally  pure,  but  all  different  from  each  other. 
To  close  the  whole,  a  specimen  of  the  Lord's  prayer  is  added  in  Chinese, 
not  as  a  document  to  illustrate  any  fact,  but  merely  because  to  some  it 
may  be  pleasing  to  see  the  Lord 's  prayer  in  this  language  added  to  the 
rest.    This  makes  the  number  of  languages  in  which  the  Lord's  prayer 
is  exhibited,  thirty-four,  and  the  number  of  the  specimens,  thirty- five. 


The  Sungskrit  language. 

The  Present  and  Past  Tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Singular.  Plural. 
J7humus;m/,*  I  am.  Vwyurng  smus,  We  are. 

TwMmiisi,  thou  art.  Yooyung  smus,  ye  are. 

T«  wsti,  he  is.  Te  swnti,  they  are. 

Past. 

 asung,  I  was.  — asma,  We  were. 

 asees,  thou  wast.  — — asta,  ye  were. 

 aseet,  he  was.   aswm,  they  were. 

*  Separated,  Uhung-usni,  twung-usi.  The  Sungskrit  verb  has  the  Dual 
number  also  ;  but  as  the  other  languages  have  it  not,  it  is  omitted  in  the, 
Siungskrt.  F 


APPENDIX. 


The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  swwrgwstliasmutpitus,  tuwa  nam  pztvishywte,  twva  tajyumugu- 
chchhutoo  kriyate,  titvestwng  ywtha  swMrge  twtha  pritluyang.  Us- 
makung  jeevanarlutng  bhwkshitmjismwbhyMmw  dya  dehi,  wsmakumrin- 
Mmztsman  khwmapwya  yittiia  vuyumusm dkumudhuruumnrm'dn  khttmap u- 
yama,  Msman  pwreekshayang  nia  nwy«,  kintwwsman  mwndanmochw- 
ya,  yitto  rajywng  pwrakr^mo  mahatwywncha  s«rv?<da  twviva.  A- 
men. 

Another  specimen. 
He  nos  swurgustha  pitws,  twva  nam  pwvitrung  manyutang,  yutha 
swurge  twtha  prithivyang  tuveshtung  knyutang,  wdyasman  nityte 
b Iim ksh y u mu  s  m  w  b h y  itn  g  dehi,  ywthavwyMng  swwrindhritavttttts  kstot- 
mwmtthe  twthasmwdrmwng  kshi(rowsw</,  pwreekshayamMsman  ma  mt- 
ya,  apwdwstWMsman  ptmtrabi  ywta  asiuvwkshmiwng  rajyw  shwkti 
gourwvapi  tuva.  Amin. 

No.  1.  The  Bengalee  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 


Sing. 
Ami  aclihi,  I  am. 
Toomi  achho,  thou  art. 
Se  achhe,  he  is. 


Present. 

Plur. 

Amra  achhi,  We  are,  &e. 
Toomra  achho. 
Se  achhe. 


Past. 

 ■  chhilam,  I  was.   chhilam,  We  were,  See. 

 chhila,  thou  wast.   chhila. 

 chhilo,  he  was.   ■  chhila. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  amarder  swwrgwstha  pita,  tomar  nam  pi«bitra  manyet  ht/ook, 
tomar  rajyer  agmwn  Iruook,  jemun  swwrge  temwn  prithibeete  tomar 
istakriya  kwra  jaook.  Udya  amarder  nitya  bhwkshya  amardigke  deo, 
ebung  jemwn  amra  apnarder  rindhareerdigke  maf  kuri  seiy  muta  am- 
arder rin  maf  kwra,  ebitng  amardigke  pwrikshya,  lwoyaiyo  na  kintoo 
amardigke  apwdtmite  pwritran  kwra,  kenwna  s«da  stubwkshime  rajya 
o  shwkti  o  gourwb  tomar.  Amen. 


APPENDJX, 


23 


No.  2.  The  Hindee. 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 

Present.  , 


Sing. 


Plur. 


Mm  boon,  I  am.  Hum  hin,  We  are,  &c. 

Toon  hi,  thou  art.  Toom  ho. 

Wahhi,  he  is.  We  hi. 

Past, 

 tha,  I  was.   the,  We  were,  &c. 

 tha,  thou  wast.   the. 

 tha,  he  was.   the. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
I  sarugmen  rithnewale  hwmoke  bap,  tera  iram  pwvittwr  howe,  te- 
ra  raj  awe,  tere  khatirkhwah  swrugmerc  jisa  tisa  dooniyamen  ki- 
ya  jawe.  Hwmonke  jeene  layuk  khorak  aj  lumioko  dewo,  our  hu- 
moka  rin  hwmoko  maf  kwro  jisa  ham  wpne  k?mtjdaronko  maf  kur- 
te  hin,  our  pwreekshamera  hi*monko  mut  lewo,  lekin  booraeesen 
hwraowko  chhorawo,  kyounki  raj  our  pwrakritm  our  muhatttm  hume- 
sha  tere.  hira.  Amen. 


No.  3.  The  Kashraeera  language. 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be.5' 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 
Bo  chhos,  I  am.  Asi  chhye,  We  are,  &c. 

Choo  chhok,  thou  art.  Toohi  chhiw. 

Soo  chho,  he  is.  Tim  chhye. 

Past. 

•  asoos,  I  was.   asi,  We  were,  &e. 

 asook,  thou  wast,   asiw. 

 as,  he  was.  — _  asj. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
Hiswurgwndar  roojzmwalisaiimali;  toohwndoo  nam  puvitraswmpni, 
toohundoo  raj  yiye,  toohi  khaterkhah  swwrgus  undur  yesoo  dhurtee 
wndttr  kwran  yiye.  Use  jorws*  laywk  khorwk  wsi  aj  deytw,  bhiya 
saroo  roon  use  maph  kwriw,  yisoo  use  punwrnn  kunijdrfrtra  maph 
kwran  chhoo  bhiya  use  pwreechhay  wndur  muh  heyiw,  lekin  boo- 
raeeyanish  trwwiw,  kanji  raj  bhiya  parakrum  bh/ya  midiima  Iim- 
mesh  toohi  cbhow.  Amen. 


APPENDIX. 


No.  4.  The  Dogura  language. 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 


Sing. 
Mooj  hi,  I  am. 
Tooj  hi,  thou  art. 
Oo  hi,  he  is. 

 ■  sa,  I  was. 

 as,  thou  wast. 

 sa,  he  was. 


Present. 


Past. 


Plur. 

Moojwa  he,  We  are,  &c. 
Toojwa  he- 
Oonha  he. 

 se,  We  were,  &c. 

 se. 

—  se. 


The  Lord's  Prayer.  • 
E  soorngbichoomen  busnewale  Mjhahawde  bub,  toojhaja  nam  puvi- 
tra  haye,  toojhaja  raj  awyan,  toojhajenei  sooruga  jei  t'eijuguUchuj 
bichooye  kita?i  jaye.  Ujhuje  jioone  jogya  khorak  aj  wjhajo  dey- 
na,  hoor  wjhajan  kwrwj  maphi  knrya  jeya  ujhyau  apne  kwrujdan- 
yanjo  niaphi  kuringe,  hoor  pookhanje  wjhahanjo  mwt  leva,  tanbha- 
lya  booraeeje  chharaya,  kehwje  raj  hoor  SMmwrwtha  hoor  bwraeeya 
nitya  toojhahaje  he.  Amen. 


No.  5.  The  Wuch  language. 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 


Sing. 
Minhn  h an,  I  am. 
Toon  he,  thou  art. 
So  he,  he  is. 

— —  ha,  I  was. 

 ha,  thou  wast. 

 ha,  he  was. 


Present. 


Past. 


Plur. 

Usan  ahew,  We  are,  &c 
Toosan  ho. 
Oh  bin. 

 ahe,  We  were,  &c. 

 ahe. 

 ahe. 


The  Lord's  Prayer. 
Aee  swrngbich  rxhunwala  wsda  pioo,  tera  naw  pwvitra  tha,  tera  raj 
awa,  tera  dilraatha  surugbieh  jnha  tuba  dooniya  bich  kwra  wwngna. 
l/ska  jeevtmlaywk  khawwn  aj  nsko  dewa,  biawsda  dewwn  wsko  chho- 
raj«ha  r<see  wpna  dewunwaleko  chhordelwn,  bia  ajmitt  bich  wsko 
na  thttn  pwra  WHchhriakwri  wsko  chhor  dea,  kyounki  raj  bia  pwra- 
kurum  bia  muhutum  suda  toosde  hin.  Amen. 


No.  (5.  The  Sindh  language. 


The  two  principal  censes  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 

Ma  ha/?,  "I  am.  Use  uhioo,  We  are,  &e. 

Toon  ahc,  thou  art,  Twwe  ho. 

So  ahe,  he  is.  Hoy  ahe;?.. 

Past. 

 has,  I  was.   hawa,We  were,  &c, 

 ho«e,  thou  wast.   ■  hbo. 

 ho,  he  was.   ha. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
Ae  SMi'Mg  mjunj  rwhw.nwara  asfcja  p?t,  ttihuja  nam  puvitra  thae,  tw- 
huju  r;  j  acha,  tuhuja  khMtirkhah  surug  mwnj  juhuta  tuhuta  dooniya 
nittnj  kura  w?<ngn«.  l/skha  jeewn  layuk  kha?fn  aj  wskha  deo,  bhi  muja 
dewn  uska  chbmda  juha  asa'pahitja  deMnwarokhun  chitdda  hin,  bhi 
ajmttt  munj  Msjamut  wudha,  pttra  wuchhrtkhe  chhitrao,  chhwjaraj  bhi 
puntkurum  bhi  mwhatMin  toowwja  bin.  Amen. 


No.  7.  The  Southern  Sindh. 


The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  '*  to  b< 


Sing. 

Aoon  h;mdoos,  I  am. 
Toon  hooiide,  thou  art. 
O^lio  hoondo,  he  is. 

 hoose,  I  was. 

 hoe?j,  thou  wast. 

 boo,  he  was, 


Plur. 

Us?an  hoo/idasew,  We  are,&c. 
Uwen  hoondo?j. 
Ohe  hoonda?i. 


Past. 


hooase, 

hoeon. 

hoa. 


We  were,  &c. 


The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  suriigmen  bihunwara  ussaja  bhablia,  toohija  nawoo?i  pwvitr« 
thiye,  toohija  rajoo  ache,  toohija  wnssree  swragmen  jeena  teerm  alim- 
men  kiyo  wwngne.  C7ssakhe  jeewun  juhwree  khorak  ajoo  ussakhe 
diyo,  uoon  ussajo  kiyo  ussakhe  bhukisoo  kwriya  jeena  ttssa  pahi jwni 
luhinewa  roonikhe  bhukisoo  kunda  hoowdase,  uoon  aji  moowdeme?* 
wssakhe  na  hyo,  bwla  bhoochhiraeeywthon  chhudiyaeeo,  kohooki 
rajoo  uoon  pnttapoo  uoon  m«hati<moo  sudaee  unwawja  hoonda.  A* 
men. 


«6  APPEND!  X. 

No.  8.    The.Kutch  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 
Hajtn  asuw,  I  am.  Ami  asunti,  We  are,  &e. 

Too  as</,  thou  art.  Toomi  asiiti. 

To  asu,  he  is.  Te  astiti. 

Pas*. 

 asa'llo,  I  was.  -  asinlle,  We  were,  &c 

 asillo,  thou  wast.   asiile. 

■  asillo,  he  was.   asille. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  amgelo  swwrgari  a?il3o  bapoosoo,  toomgelennam  puvitraman- 
ya  jawo,  toomgelen  rajya  prukashoa  jawo,  kwshi  swurgantoon  tushi 
hhooyincheri  toomgelen  ishta  kriya  kelli  jawo.  Aji  amge(e«  sudun 
khawchew  amka?i  diya,  ani  kusen  ami  amgele?i  denenkara?»k  roon 
sorta  t?isen  amgelew  roon  sorya,  amkaw  pureekshetttoo  gheoo  naka 
tuvi  amka?i  apisiyatoolo  sooth<ya ;  teyiten  rajya  ani  bid  ani  keerti  ni- 
runttir  toomgeli  asa.  Amen. 


No.  9.    The  Goojuratee  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Sing.  PI  nr. 

Mm  h%n,  I  am.  Useen  hanh,  We  are,  &e. 

,'i'oon  hin,  thou  art.  Tooseea  hunhooH. 

So  hi,  .lie  is.  So  hin.  J 

Past. 

 san,  I  was.  — —  sa«h,  We  were, 

«  ■  sin,  thou  wast.  — —  sunhoon. 

— —  see,  he  was.   sin. 

,  .  The  Lord's  Prayer. 

He  swMrtfgnien  n*hnewale  lmmare  pita,  tera  nam  pwvitra  howe, 
tera  raj  awre,  tera  ishta  jispn/kar  swarwgmm  tisprukar  pritheev^'khi 
keeta  jawe.  l/mare  jeebitnlaik  khaua  wmaretauee  ajoo  dewhoo,  ute 
jispr?*kar  usee  apneeaw  kurujaeeyawko  maph  kurdehan  tise  usara 
kuruj  usaretanee  maph  kwroo,  ate  usareko  pfaeekhyavikhe  praput 
mat  kun<h«o,  horkia  hamaretanee  boorete  chhooraoo,  kioonke  raj  ute 
p«rakwr«ni,  «te  ninhaXam  sabh  kalvikhe  tenthee.  Amen. 


APPENDIX. 


No.  10.    The  Kunkuca  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  ue," 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 
Amoo  e  nya,  I  am.  Usee  iyew,  We  are,  &e„ 

Toomi  iyew,  thou  art  Tuxveen  iyo. 

Oo  ahe,  he  is.  Oonnee  ahe. 

Past. 

. — — ■  hos,  I  was.  —  hoaseew,  We  were,  &c. 

hoyen,  thou  wart.  hoa. 

- — -  ae,  he  was.  hoa. 

Tke  Lord's  Prayer. 
I  surugmen  rwhtmwara  usacje  pi,  twwawjo  nam  pmitivr  thfno,  tu*~ 
waajo  raj  awe,  tMwa?ijo  w/shwoowaro  surugmen  edo  tedo  madooemerc 
kiyo  binae,  £7sawje  jeeneje  kaje  khada  uj  wsanke  d?'o,  wwree  «sa«= 
je  decoo  Msanke  raaph  kwryo  jedo  wsee  nsawje  kt<rwjdarke  mapb  ku- 
rioowtha,  wwree  pureksyamew  wsawke  m«  gino,  lekunboochhraeesere 
wsarake  chhwdae,  kitfheeje  raj  wuree  purakkum  wuree  matwm  swdae 
tttwanje  ae.  Amen. 


No.  11.    The  Punjabee  or  Sbikh  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  he" 
Present. 

Sing,  Plur. 
Moon  chhuoy,  I  am.  Ume  chhe^ye?#  We  are,  &e, 

Too  chheya,  thou  art.  Toome  chho. 

Te  chhe,  he  is.  ,      Te  chhwye. 

Past. 

— -  hoto,  I  was.  •  hota,  We  were,  &c. 

 hoto,  thou  wast.   hota. 

•  •  hoto,  he  was.   hota. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
O  suregmewrwa  wala,  araara  pita,  taboo  nam  puvitra  yet  tare 
raj  awe,  tare  kbaturkha  swrgma  jeta  teta  doomyama  kwra  jay«.  Ama- 
ite  jeenelaywk  khoorak  aj  araane  do,  wu\i  amaroo  roosa  amanemap 
kKrojetoame  potano  kunydarane  map  kurtye  churuye,  xvuli  pu= 
reekshama  amone  mo  sop?m,  bhoondaeethi  chhorawo,  kemwke  raj 
wwli  prakrwm  mili  mahaUna  humesha  tumarhe  chhe.  Amen. 


APPENDIX. 


Th; 
Oo 


\o. 


I  he  two 


ihan,  I  am. 
ho,  thou  ai 
he  is. 


!.    The  Bikaiieer  language. 
incipal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be. 
Present. 


Pas'. 


—  tho,  I  was. 

 tho>  thou  wast. 

 tho,  he  was. 


P 

Mhera  haw 
Then  ho. 
Wi  hi. 


the. 
the. 


The  Lord's  Prayer. 
I  swwrgmin  rwhnawalo  mhanka  babha,  tharo  new  puvitrw  hoowo, 
tharo  raj  avvo,  tharee  khatirkhaji  swufgmen  jise  thee  sungsai  nun 
kjuyaH  jawo.  Mhanke  jeevitnyogya  khorak  aj  mhanko  dewo,  our 
mhani  rin  mhako  maph  kitro  jiso  mhaka  linayianiw  ehhor  dew,  our 
piintkhraiw  mhane  mtiti  iewo,  ler  nikhedaeesooH  ehborawo,  k}  mini 
raj  pur  bul  our 'mwhatMra  rojeena  thaftka  Inn.  Amen. 


No.  1; 


TLe  Mara  war  lan^ua^e. 


The  itvo  principal  lenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be.5' 


Sii 


Boon  boon,  I  am. 
The  ho,  thou  ait. 
Ooee  he,  he  is. 

 ha,  T  was. 

 ha,  thou  wa:: 

— —  ha,  he  was. 


Present. 


Past, 


Vim. 

Manhwre  haw,  We  are,  &c, 
T hanhwre  ho. 
Wehee  hi. 

 be,  We  were,  &c- 

 he. 

 he. 


The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  sitrwgmanhee  ndiurihare  mawhure  bap.?o,  tahhura  nam  pwv/tntf 
hohee,  tahttre  raj  awe,  tahttra  iehchha  maphik  surwgma/mee  jeliura 
teh?{radoantyama«hee  kurayajahee.  Mawhukoow  jeene  laywk  khaire- 
koun  aj  marthitkoon  do,  wide  manh?:ra  oodhar  mawhwkoon  maph  kwro 
ji/sa  ma/diwre-apre  oodharowalaretajiee  maph  kurehe,  wide  pwreek- 
shamardiee  mawkttretanee  ma  tan  lawo,  lekwr  boo//raeeh»ow  chhoc- 
rawo,  ka'«««jeere  raj  wwle  jar  wide  muhima  su<\%  thewhwee  hosee. 
Amen. 


APPENDIX. 


No.  14.    The  Juya-poora  language. 
The  two  principal  lenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 


Sing. 
Mun  chhoow,  I  am. 
Toon  chha,  thou  art. 
Oo  chha,  he  is. 

 chho,  I  was. 

 chho,  thou  wast. 

  chho,  he  was. 


Past. 


Plur. 

Mhe  chhaw,  We  are,  &e, 
The  chho. 
Wa  chha. 

 chha,  We  were,  &c. 

>— —  chha. 
■  chho. 


The  Lord's  Prayer. 
I  swurgmen  rewawala  mhaka  bap,  thanro  nam  ptmtra  hoy,  thanka 
rajawe,  thanka  banchha  swurgmin  jusya  twsya  prujamin  karya  jawe. 
Mhakutawijeeva  layakkhawan  aj  mhune  dewo,ttwur  ndioko  rin  mha- 
ne  maph  kwro  jisyo  mhake  upne  1  indaran  maph  kurochho,  wwur  pu- 
reekhamen  mhane  mut  lewo,  lekttr  booraeesen  chhwrawo,kyanlakani 
raj  uwur  purakrwm,  uwwr  mahatum  swdai  tha?*ka  chha.  Amen. 


No.  15.    The  Ooduya  poora  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present* 

Sing.  Plur. 
Humusta  boon,  I  am.  Hamastarc  haw,  We  are,  &c. 

Toomasta  hi,  thou  art.  Toomastan  ho. 

Ooee  ha,  he  is.  Weee  ha. 

Past. 

 ho,  I  was.   ha,  We  were,  &c. 

 ho,  thou  wast.   ha. 

 ho,  he  was.   ha. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
E  sttrungma  ruhnawala  xnhara  dahajee,  tala  nam  pwvitra  hoowe, 
thara  raj  awsee,  thara  khamwnkhan  surwngmew  jussya  tussya  dooni- 
yamin  kwyawe.  Makee  aj  layuk  khoorak  aj  mana  dya,  uni  mato' 
kurjo  malotanee  maphkwro  jyoon  mahar  upnan  lenadaraktaeemaph 
kwruha,  unin  parwkhmen  mardutanee  muti  lyo,  leeen  booraeesoon 
•chhoorawo,kyoonkaraj  unntpurakuramwnui  mwhatam  rojeena  thanri. 
Amen. 

H 


APPENDIX. 


No.  16.    The  Harutee  language- 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 
Hoon  chhoo??.  I  am.  Mho  chhan,  We  are,  &c. 

Too  chhe,  thou  art.  Thaw  chho. 

Oo  elm,  he  is.  W«  chhe. 

Past. 

 chhyo,  I  was.   chha,  We  were,  &c. 

 chhyo,  thou  wast.   chha. 

 chhyo,  he  was.   chha. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
A  soorugmen  rewahala  manka  dajee,  thanka  nam  oojulo  howin,  than- 
ka  raj  owe«,  thanke  khaturkha  chili  soorugmen  jeementeemen  jnmee- 
men  kw-rj  an  jawow,  ma?<ka  jeeha  maphuk  petyo  aj  dyo,  our  mhan- 
ka  mathako  denon  mhawee  b?<g«s  dyo,  jusya  mhan  upnan  dhnnyow- 
kan  bng?<sya  chhi,  our  mhanka  pr«rchyaniennmtlyo,  leknn  booraeeko 
thi  kura,sontalokaikaraj  our  mareepharee  our  jushnmeshathankoee 
chhin.  Amen. 


No.  17.    The  Maluwa  language. 
The  tuo  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 
Hoon  hoon,  1  am.  Mhan  haw,  We  are,  &c. 

Toon  bin,  thou  art.  The  ho. 

Oo  hi,  he  is.  We  ha. 

Past. 

  ho,  I  was.   ha,  We  were,  &c. 

 ho,  thou  wast.  t   ha. 

 ho,  he  was.   h'a« 

/  The  Lord's  Prayer. 
Ho  suty  olokmanhe  buswawala  mhake  jee,  thanra  nawn  sooddha 
howin,  titmaro  raj  awe,  tumare  oolang  sntyolokmewee  jisoon  son  ani 
jwgwtmanee  bhi  keeda  jawo.  Mhanka  pran  rnkhwa  maphik  khnr- 
cheeuw  ai  hoo  mlianke  ttlang  mokulee  deejyo,  upurunchi  bhyayka 
roon  mhanke  ttlang  hin  oofthan  pur  maph  kur  bami  howi  jiunee  twr- 
awsomh«n'upna?iOodhara  lewawalanke  ulzug  phar  kutikhaleedaho, 
ajooptui  mhawketanee  parkhamenitttm  mutineep  lee  jyo,  nprnnchi 
rahankitoc  eson  pnrmarakhi  jyo,  kyjunptraci  raja  our  purakrum  owjwn 
Ulwrmaraopi  prnbhawa  sudd,  kaltanee  tumaroee  bnnyan.  Amen 


APPENDIX. 


31 


No.  18.    The  Bruj  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present, 

Sing.  Plur. 
Mm  hoon,  I  am.  '  Hum  here,  We  are,  &c. 

Tin  ho,  thou  art.  Toom  hon. 

Yua  hi,  he  is.  We  hiw. 

Past. 

 bhuyo,  I  was.   bhuyo,  We  were,  &c. 

— —  bhuyo,  thou  wast.   bhuyo. 

— —  bhuyo,  he  was.   bhuyo. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  swwrgmeu  ruhnuware  humare  pita,  toomharo  nam  pwvitru  ho- 
ee,  toomharo  raj  awi,  jisa  toomharo  banc'm't  swurgmew  hintiso  dhur- 
teemeu  hoow  kuryoujay.  Humare  jeebun  layuk  bhojun  aj  humofc oon 
deoo,  our  jisiw  hum  apne  kurj  w arewk oon kshema  kurira  hin  tisiw  hee  hu- 
maro  rin  humiu  kshema  kuro,  our  humkoon  pureekshamiu  muti  leoo, 
pwruntoo  humkoow  booraeetin  chhoorhawyo,  yakamn  raj  our  purak- 
r«m  our  muhatum  suda  toomharo  hee  hin.  Amen. 


No.  19.    The  Bundelkhund  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Plur. 

Hume  hutwe,  We  are,  &c. 
Toome  hutwe. 
Tene  hutwe. 

Past. 

 hute,  We  were,  Sec, 

 hute. 

 hute. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
Ye  swwrgmi  ruhunware  humaooke  duda,  toomre  nam  puvitra  howut, 
toomre  raj  awut,  toomre  mwnmaphuk  swurgmi  jiso  tiso  sunsarme  kuro 
jawut.  Humore  jeevun  yog  bhojun  ajoo  humakoou  det,  poonihumaoo- 
ka  oodhar  hum'aookoow  maphuk  kuvut,  jiso  humre  upne  oodharwaren- 
koora  maphuk  kurtoo  hi,  pooni  pureechhamera,  humaookoore  jhwnoo  let, 
kintoo  booraweete  chhoorawut,  kapi  raj,  pitni  bid,  puni  muhatum  ni- 
tyoo  toomre  huto.  Amen. 


Sing. 
Hum  hutoo,  I  am. 
Toom  hutoo,  thou  art. 
So  hutoo,  he  is. 

 huto,  I  was. 

— —  huto,  thou  wast. 
— —  huto,  he  was. 


APPENDIX. 


No,  20.    The  Mahratta  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 

Amhi  ah  aw.  We  are,  &e. 
Toon  ah  as,  thou  art.  Toomhi  aha. 

To  aha,  he  is.  To  ahat. 

Past. 

 hotan,  I  was.  — -  hote,  We  were,  &e. 

■ — —  hota,  thou  wast.   hote. 

—  hot<i,  he  was.  ■  hote. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  amche  swurgustha  pita,  toomcha  nam  puvitia  manya  howo, 
toomcha  rajya  prukash  howo,  jusa  swurgeen  tusa  prithiveent  toorn- 
chee  ishta  kriya  kelee  jawo.  Aj  amcha  nitya  bhuksbya  amhas  dya, 
am  jusu  amhee  amche  oodharukaws  rin  kshuma  kurtontusa  amcha  rin 
kshuma  kura,  amhas  pureekshent  gheoon  nwka,  puruntoo  amhas  apu- 
dahoon  ooddhar  kura,  kanki  suda  survukshuneew  rajya  tutha  shukti 
tutha  gouruva  toomcha.  Amen. 


No.  21.     The  Magudha  or  South  Bahar  language, 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 
Hum  hiikhun,  I  am.  Humurunhi  hukhunhi,  We  are,  &c. 

Toh  hokhuii,  thou  art.  Tohurunhi  hokhunht. 

Oouh  hikhun,  he  is.  Oonhwkwnhi  hikhunln. 

Past. 

 huseekhun,  I  was.   -  huleekhunhi,  We  were,  &c. 

 hwsokhun,  thou  wast.   huloukhunhi. 

 husikhwn,  he  was.   hidikhunhi. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  swrgiak  rahniharwa  humrunhikar  muhtar,  tor  nean  shoodha 
hookhun,  tor  rujwa  awokhun,  tor  nronpoorsya  surgiame  jisuu  tisun 
sunsaimekur  jayiklmn.  Hiramrmhike  jiatmek  khiwawa  ajoo  deyo- 
khwnhumurmhike^aoorhumurumhikerkurjowahumrikechhori  deyo- 
Minn  jisunhumurumhi  upna  moojermhike  chhori  dehokhun,  aoor 
purichhame  hurourumhike  chhori  dehokhun,  kintoo  moodipitmase 
chhorawhi,  kahika  rajia  aoor  prubhootia  aoor  muhima  swdiva  tohu- 
rwmhiker  hokhun.  Amen. 


APPENDIX. 


S3 


No.  22.    The  North  Koshala. 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 


Sing. 
Hum  uhee,  I  am. 
Toonhun  who,  thou  art. 
li,  he  is. 

rwha,  I  was. 
ruha,  thou  wast, 
ruha,  he  was. 


Present. 


Past. 


Plur. 

Hwvnwren  unhin,  We  are,  &c, 
Tohttren  who. 
Te  unh'm. 

 ■  nthe,  We  were,  &c. 

  ruheoo. 

 •  rwhe,, 


The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  siiYugmuhinan  ruhmhara  hurarenuke  bap,  tohar  nam  pwvitwr 
boi,  tohar  raj  awi,  tohar  ichchhapoorbwk  surugmuhinm  jusa  twsasim- 
sarmtihinaw  kiha  jaee.'  Humrenukuhun  jeeyiyogya  ahar  ajoo  hum* 
renkimhun  dehoo,  poom  humrenkur  rin  knmrenkunhun  chhorj  dehoo 
jusa  humren  upne  rimhuvikunhun  chhorutahiw,  poom  pureekshamwhi- 
man  humrenkunhu»  jini  lehoo,  putdhw  raise  chhorahoo,  kaheseki  raj 
poom  pooroosharuth  pooni  mwhatim  niti  tohttren  ahin.  Amen. 


No.  23.  The  Mithilee  language. 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  u  to  be." 


Sing. 
Hum  ckM,  I  am. 
Tohen  chhwha,  thou  art. 
Se  Mchhi,  he  is. 

 chhiflwhoow,  I  was. 

— —  chhulaha,  thou  wast. 
 chhula,  he  was. 


Present. 

Plur. 

Humra  cheea,  We  are,  &c. 
Tohuran  chh?<hu. 
Se  Mchhi. 

Past. 

 chhwlwhoo?;,  We  were,  &c= 

 chhwla'ia. 

 chhwia. 


The  Lords  Prayer. 
He  swrwgka  ruhnihute  humw  bap,  tohar  nam  puv&ra  hothoo,  tohar 
rajya  awthoo,  tohar  ishta  juhun  swrgmMdhya  tidjune  simsarmt^dhya 
kuenjae,  hwmra  jeewekyogya  khaek  hzmiraken  deha,  aor  hwmar  rin 
hmnramaph  kuniha  juhun  kwmra  wpna  nmakew.  maph  kztricmtha,  aor 
hitmrake/i  piaeeksha  mudhya  jwmba  neha,  pwrwntoo  ttdhunahastm 
chhoorawwha,  kuhunekee  raj)  a  aor  pwrakrwni  aor  mahatmya  survuda 
tohar  achi.  Amen. 

I 


£4 


APPENDIX. 
No.  24.    The  Nepal  language. 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be. 
Present. 


Plnr.  . 
Hamiheroo  chhouw,  We  are,  &c. 
Tinuheroo  chho. 
Tmheroo  chhun. 
Past. 

 thiyoun,  We  were,  &c. 

 thiyon. 

 thiya. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  sttrwgman  nthneheroo  hamra  baboo,  tera  nam  p?«vitra  hola,  tera 
raj  awla,  tera  khatirraaphik  swrwgman  jwsta  twsta  logmaw  gwree  jala. 
Hamilaee  banchna  layek  khorak  aj  hamilaee  dewoo,  awwr  hann'he- 
rookee  rin  hamiheroolaee  maph  g?tr  jwsto  Yrnmva  aphna  k«<rwjdarlaee 
maph  gwrdwchhou,  awttr  pwreekshaman  hamilaee  wa  lyou,  lekin 
booraeeswng  chhraw,  ky alia  raj  awier  purakrwm  awtfr  muhatma 
swda  twmra  chha.  Amen. 


Sing. 

Homi  chhouw,  I  am/ 
Timi  chhon,  thou  art. 
So  chha,  he  was. 

 thiyouw,  I  was. 

 thiyou,  thou  wast. 

- —  thiya,  he  was. 


No.  25.    The  Assam  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be," 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 
Muy  acho,  I  am.  Ami  acho,  We  are,  &c. 

Tuy  achcr,  thou  art.  .  Tomolak  acha. 

Si  ache,  he  is.  Sibilak  ache. 

Past. 

 achiian,  I  was.   achiljra,  We  were,  &c. 

 aclnla,  thou  wast.   achila. 

  achiia,  he  was.   achiknta. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
He  amar  swwrgwt  thwka  Pitri,  tomar  nam  pwvitrw  many  a  hok 
tomar  rajya  prukash  hok,  jene  swurgut  teneki  pfttiubeeto  tomar 
banchit  kurum  kura  hok.  Ajiamar  khabitr  beham  amztk  diya,  aroo 
jeneki  amar  dhwroowahuntwk  ami  suho  teiieki  amar  dhar  era,  am-' 
ak  pureekshali  ni  nibo,  kintoo  amak  apttdwr  pma  pwritran  kara 
kiywno  suda-surbuda  rajya  aroo  shwkti  aroo  gourwb  eisuk^l  tomar. 
Amen. 


APPENDIX. 


35 


No.  26.  The  Orissa  or  C' 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  t 


Sing. 

Arabhe  uchhoou,  I  am. 
Toombhe  uchha,  thou  art. 
Se  uchhunti,  he  is. 


Ambhwmanc  uchho<m,  We  arc,  &c. 
Toombhum-j  ue  « •  hha. 
Semane  uchhttnii'. 
Pas*. 

 thiloou,  I  was.   thiloon,  We  were,  &c. 

 ■  tbila,  thou  wras*   thila. 

 thile,  he  was.   thjie. 

The  Lord's  Prayer, 
He  ambnumanunkur  swurgustha  pita,  toombfaur  nam  pubitra  man- 
ya  heoo,  toombhur  rajya  prukash  heoo,  jemuta  swurgure  temwta  pri- 
thibeere  toomblmr  ishta  kn'ya  kura  jaoo.  Ayi  ambhumanunkur  nttya 
bhuksha  anibhumanunkoo  diyo,  poom  jemuta  ambhemane  ambhu- 
nianimkur  rindhareemanunkoo  kshuma  kuri  seee  muti  ambhuma- 
nunkur  rin  kshuma  kur,  ambhumammkoo  pureekshare  ghenajao  na, 
poom  anibhumanunkoo  apuduroo  ruksha  kur,  kfpana  suda  surbukshu- 
nure  rajya  o  shiukti  o  gourub  toombhur.  Amen. 


No.  27.    The  Telinga  language. 
TheJwo  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present, 

Plur. 

Menwo  oonnanio;>,  We  are,  &c. 
Meeroo  oonnarco. 
Waroo  oonnaroo, 

Past. 

 ooutam, 


Sing. 

Nenoo  oJmianoo,  I  am. 
Neew  ,h  jonnawoo,  thou  art 
Wadoo  oonnadoo,  he  is. 


oontim,  I  was. 
oontiwj,  thou  wast. 


We  w  ere,  &c. 


oontm. 

oondm. 


The  Lord's  Prayer. 
Waya  swurgumundoo  oonne  mayokka  tundri,  meeyokka  namumo* 
puvitrumoo  cheyyupwduni,  neeyokka  rajymoo  ran?',  neeyokka  ishtu- 
moo  yelagoona  swurgirniundo  alagoona  bhoomiyundoonnrco  cheyyupu- 
dwni :  Mayokka  jeev«nanukoo  urhunihia  bhukshyamunoo  eeweH  ma- 
korwkoo  iyya,  yelagoona  meraoo  mayokka  roongrustulunoo  kshuma 
chesto  oontiamo  alageona  mayokka  roonumunoo  mfmini?/nookoorclu 
khuma  cheyya,  mumnu/noo  pureekshuyundoo  teesupowuddoonna 
yemunte  munimunoo  cheddutunumoonunchi  winchipettoo,  yedika- 
rwnunioowwllunoo  rajyumoo,purakrt<!n«nioo  muhatuiyumoonnoo  surwu* 
da  neeyokkyyewe.  Amen. 


S5  APPENDIX, 

~No  28.    The  Kurnata  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 
Nanoo  iddhene,  I  am.  Nawoo  iddhewe,  We  are,  &c. 

Neeuoo  iddhee,  thou  ait.  Neewoo  iddhiree. 

Utunoo  iddhane,  he  is.  Utuvoo  iddhare. 

Pad. 

 idde,  I  was.   idde  woo,  We  were,  &c. 

— -  i&di,  thou  wast.   zddiree. 

 jddwnoo,  he  wast.   idduroo. 

The  Lord's  Prayer.  - 
Yulo  nummgala  swwrg?<  didlaroowu  twnde,  yevinna hesuroo  pwvitra- 
wageddimthaddoowgulij  ninna  raj yu woo  pn/kashttwagwli,  hyagesw^r- 
gudullo  hage  bhoomeeyulla  uinnv,  iahta  kn'yeyoomarwlwppMdMr^.  Ee- 
hottoo  nummugu\adwa.guloo  timboowu  diMvyztwwunoo  numxnuguhama 
kooritoo  kondoo,  hyage  nawoo  n ymmw gu la  salwgarwnna  kooritoo  salu- 
wanna  bittubidtemo  hage  nurnmugvla  salawanna  bittwbidoo,  num- 
mugidunna  pitreeksheyulla  tegwdoo  kondoo  hogabyada  muttenduroo 
nummununna  apiatin?jdash«yindarMksIusoo,yakeyMndwroo  swda  surva 
kaludulla  rajywwoo  shwktiy oo  gourwvuwoonnoo  m'nnudoo.  Amen. 


No.  29.    The  Pushtoo  or  Affghan  language. 

The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 

Sing.  Plur. 
Zoo  era,  I  am.  Monga  zoo,  We  are,  &c. 

To  e,  thou  art.  Taso  ywe. 

Uitgu  duh ,  he  is.  Hwgawra  dee. 

rast. 

 oowam,  I  was.   woo,  We  were,  &c. 

 we,  thou  wast.    we. 

'  wo,  he  was.   woo. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 
Pwlar  chnmonj  tth  j  wh  pasm alike  ye,  nom  swta  dtjpakwe,  badsha- 
hee  swta  dazahwrwh  we,  aw  dareing  kka  j mIi  pabwhekhtke  dwh  pu- 
jumkith  daraduh  s?<ta  jaree  see.  Root/  dakaree  orjee  mongfdilarah 
padee  orj  wamongwhta  rakuru.h,  aw  darang  laka  karasdarano  kha- 
plolara  monguh  wubnkho  turjonah  shamongah  wwbakshee,  aw 
mongah  pajmaikhtke  raah  ajwwh,  b//lk«h  lahbudeechekhah  mon- 
guh  khalas  karah,  dupara  dudeehjuh  badshahee  aw  koodrat  aw 
loyee  tur  orjee  dabaduh  por  lahagahchekhah  to  anyee.  Amen. 


A  P  'P  END  I  X. 
No.  30.    The  Bulociiee  langiiafe. 
Tfte  tivo  principal  ttn»es  of  the  Verb  11  to  be.'3 
Present. 


37 


Sing. 

sM«nik  h?istian,  I  am. 
Teek  liusteet,  thou  ari. 
Vnik  bust,  he  is. 

:  bitwgan,  I  was. 

 bitugut,  thou  wast 

 beet,  he  was. 


Plar. 

Mimikwii  lwstin,  We  are,  &c». 
Tikwn  rnvsteet. 
Aik?ni  &»&timt>. 

Past. 

 hiiugeen,  We  were,  &c. 

 bitageet. 

•  bitKgimt. 

The  Lords  Prayer. 
Ho  men  j««nta  nindt/gani  maianra  pit,  si/ir.ara  nam  pahuk  b£ti£g?% 
swmara  mistiri  kai,  swmari  khatwrk  hwah  men  jzaitajosi  junjosi  men 
wugara  kiiti/gMt  s«twgi.  Maianra  jundngina  laik  worak  mii/ian:  a  mw- 
roji  dint,  digwr  maianha  warn  maianra  puhul  k?mit  h?mjcsi  mari 
wwti  wamdarania  puhul  kutugunt,  digur  maianra  men  ajmayia  mu- 
jirit,  lekin  ash  bwdiya  ashtanir,  p/atii/ya  kuh  niisluii  digux  feuwut 
digur  j/jumwt  humishuii  swrnri  has  tit.  Amen. 


No.  31.    The  Khassee  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 


Sing. 
Gna-dun,  I  am. 
Fee-dun,  thou  art. 
Oo-dwn,  he  is. 


Gna-laladi<n,  I  was. 
I'ee-laladttu^  thou  wast. 
Oo- laladan,  he  w  as. 

Ha  oojoongabMndra  ool 
teng  bubha  ooniuaneitnig 
ba  habeneng,  koomkata  li 
kakam.  Minta  kajoongo; 
dra  maya,  pateng  koomk 
bachimmram  inyamap  I 


Present, 


Past. 


Plur. 

Ee-d?m,  We  are,  &c 

Fee-dun. 

Kee-dim. 


Ee-lalackn,  We  were,  &c. 
Fee-lalad«n. 
Kee-laladwn. 
Lord's  Prayer. 

wng  habeneng  ookpa  kajoongpbikakwt- 
ajoongphi  kashmmg  banahtng,  koomka- 
lundeoo  o«ko/n  kajoongphi  kabasgnobha 
itindra  halakashni  kababam  cbagnabun- 
l  magnabundra  kajoonggnabimdra  iyaki- 
nkuta  kajootiggnab;<ndi'f{  karamtwmap, 
iyugnabuudr«  hakabapoorsang  I'llani  i)  agnab«udra  uakabajunjar 
tupunlay,  aoa.e.  halakasgoi  kashnitng pateog  karub  oolehe  kajoog- 
ua.    Aim  a. 

J 


S3  APPENDIX, 

No,  32.    The  Burman  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be/'  or  rather  the  participle* 

Present. 

rheethang,    I,  thou,  lie,  being, 
rheckrathung,  we,  ye,  they,  being. 
Past. 

rheekfthharfg,    i,  thou,  he,  been, 
rh-jekrakhithang,  ws  ,  ye,  they,  been. 
The  Lord  s  Prkyer. 

Tfchar.pa  koumgen  gne  nedauiootha  kyoonda*ten*apa-kliuin.i5eda, 
kodonmec  nam*,  dathi  yoothe  thiphitse  damoobo,  kodauangandathi 
thooavou  lajedamooba,  thato  kaumgennai  koda  ulodakne  ugnee  si- 
sbee  utain  puthawee  mveba  phitsedamo  obfi.  Kyoon(iado  atheh 
tyeya  akarago  kyooiuia  do  ava  nepethuna  damoo  ba-kyooudado 
ohee  kyoemee  thenthaloo  dohgo  kyenhoot  thogih  tho-kyoonda  a  do 
tspit  kyoenieema  kyenloot  tomo^ba,  .sihko  mukauni  thupien  tsoua 
inaii  than  umop  ayanai,  kyoond  adoga  mukheden  nii  joothva  da- 
noobalin  kyooudaaojiolee  nmkj  am  thee  mukem  lootomooba,  abigyau 
peehoomooga  kodanaingan  i  choon  tugo  anoobadothee  utseen  mu- 
kiat  tsi  damoo  thaun  gyani  Uee.  Amem 

N.  B.  The  pronunciation  of  the  letters  is  so  varied  by  the  accents  and 
tones  affiled  to  the  Burman  words,  that  we  are  somewhat  doubtful  rela- 
tive to  this  speciiurn,  the  :>ulfc  of  .» h:ch  is  ajuoh  increased  by  the  intro- 
duction of  compound  words. 

t 

No.  33.    The  Chinese  language. 
The  two  principal  tenses  of  the  Verb  "  to  be." 
Present. 


Slrg 


Plur 


Gno  shee,  I  am.  Gno-tung  shee,  We  are,  &c. 

Irr  shee,  thou  art.  Irr-tung  shee. 

T'ha  shee,  he  is.  T'ha-tung  shee. 

Past. 

,  tSal  I  was.*   ts^i-  ^e  were,  &c. 

thou  wast.  tsai. 

 -was.   tsai. 

The  Lord's  Prayer. 

Ga6-tuvigtsai  t'hyen  fo6  hoo,  irr  mingchhing-shlng,  irr  wang  chee1, 
ir?  yueh  tsdb-chbing  yu  tee  yu  yu  t'hyen  yen.  Kin  yih  tse  oo-tung 
,.  ;h  k\  ea  h  ang-ehhih,sbyea  oo-tung  foo-kkyen  yao oo-tung shyea  too 
I  k'tii  r.6-U;n  *  chyea  yea,  wooti  yun  oo-tung  hyen  uy  koo-hob,  rsai 
kyeu  oc^ung  chliih  yu  ngoh-hyoong,  khaiirr  wy  cbee  kwoh  cbee 
kbynen  chee  ycoag  yu  sbee-shee  Amen. 

FJLNIS* 


