•  •<••: • 


THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

DAVIS 


GIFT  OF 


THE  PIERCE  FAMILY 


S"4?l>yl£Satt 


Copyrighted.  A  S.£*nuslC?1877. 


MEMOIRS 


OF 


PHILIP  P.  BLISS 


EDITED  BY 

D.    W.    WHITTLE: 

• 
CONTRIBUTIONS  BY 

REV,  E.  P,  GOODWIN,  IRA  D,  SANKEY,  AND  GEO,  F,  ROOT, 
INTRODUCTION   BY  D.  L.  MOODY. 


A.    S.    BARNES     &     COMPANY, 

NEW  YORK,  CHICAGO,  AND  NEW  ORLEANS. 
1877. 

LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
DAVIS 


Copyright,  1877,  by  A.  S.  Barnes  &  Co. 


PREFACE. 


kind  indulgence  of  the  reader  is  asked  for  the  imperfeo 
-4-  tions  that  may  be  discovered  in  these  Memoirs.  The  Editor 
is  a  novice  in  work  of  this  kind.  It  was  undertaken  by  him  at  the 
solicitation  of  friends  who  desired,  if  a  life  was  to  be  written,  a  cor 
rect  and  reliable  narrative  of  the  facts  which,  from  past  association, 
he  could  seem  to  give  better  than  others,  and  who  were  willing, 
in  receiving  the  narrative,  to  overlook  the  crudeness  of  its  literary 
performance. 

It  is  not  expected  that  the  work  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  many 
outside  of  those  in  some  way  acquainted  and  in  sympathy  with,  the 
loved  friend  of  whom  it  speaks,  and  whose  simple  desire  in  reading 
the  book  will  be  to  know  him  better — to  know  all  that  can  be  known 
of  the  man  and  his  work.  To  all  such  the  interest  in  the  subject 
of  the  memoir  will  lead  them  to  overlook  its  faults.  To  all  others, 
it  can  only  be  said  that  no  claim  is  made  for  the  book,  except  that 
it  is  a  loving  and  faithful  attempt  to  truthfully  narrate  what  could 
be  recalled  from  memory,  and  gathered  from  all  reliable  sources,  of 
the  life  of  Mr.  Bliss.  Much  could  undoubtedly  have  been  profitably 
omitted,  and  no  one  could  feel  more  keenly  than  the  writer  that 
much  could  profitably  be  added  to  make  a  complete  picture  of 
this  variously-gifted,  large-hearted,  consecrated  Christian  man. 
"What  is  presented  will  seem  to  his  dearest  friends  but  fragments 
of  glass,  through  which  will  be  caught  glimpses  of  the  man  they 
knew.  This  is  all  that  it  seems  to  the  writer. 


4  PREFACE. 

But  one  other  word  of  apology  remains  to  be  presented  to  the 
general  public  for  the  issuing  of  the  book  to  them.  The  profits 
arising  from  its  sale  are  to  be  devoted  to  the  mother  and  such  of 
the  family  of  Mr.  Bliss,  other  than  his  children,  who  were  depend 
ent  upon  him  for  maintenance.  The  impression  has  been  made 
by,<statements  as  to  the  response  to  Mr.  Moody's  appeal,  that  an  abun 
dant  provision  has  been  realized  for  his  family.  So  far  as  the  orphan 
children  are  concerned,  this  is  happily  true.  The  children  of  the 
Sabbath  schools  have  sent  in,  up  to  the  present  time,  penny  con 
tributions  amounting  in  the  aggregate  to  about  $9,500.  This 
money  is  in  the  hands  of  trustees  for  the  purpose  mentioned  in  the 
appeal,  viz.,  the  erection  of  a  monument  and  the  education  and 
maintenance  of  the  children.  It  cannot  be  diverted  from  this 
object. 

All  collections,  so  far  as  known,  are  for  the  same  definite  pur 
pose.  The  estate  of  Mr.  Bliss  is  in  the  hands  of  an  executor,  who 
is  under  legal  responsibility  to  administer  for  the  benefit  solely  of 
the  heirs-at-law,  the  minor  children.  Whatever  may  be  realized 
from  the  railroad  company,  from  insurance,  from  copyright  inter 
ests,  must  be  kept  and  accounted  for  to  the  minor  children  when 
of  age.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  while  a  fair  provision  is  made  for 
the  boys,  other  objects,  dear  to  the  heart  of  both  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bliss,  are  left  wholly  unprovided  for.  Mr.  Bliss  left  a  will  which 
stipulated  that  $200  a  year  should  be  paid  to  his  mother  ;  but  in 
probating  the  will  it  was  ruled  that,  as  he  had  changed  this  clause 
since  the  will  was  dated,  and  the  change  was  without  attestation, 
the  original  clause,  which  was  $100  a  year,  was  all  that  could  be 
allowed.  In  addition  to  this  mother,  there  were  sisters  and  neph 
ews  who  were  constant  recipients  of  his  assistance,  and  for  whom 
he  had  plans  of  future  aid  that  would  have  been  realized  to  them 
had  he  lived. 

This  statement  is  not  made  as  the  basis  of  any  appeal  for  a  con 
tinuation  of  contributions.  No  solicitations  are  made  that  the 


PREFACE.  5 

book  should  be  bought  as  an  act  of  charitable  donation.  The  facts 
are  stated  to  justify  the  publication  of  the  book  as  giving  friends 
who  desire  the  privilege,  the  opportunity  of  creating  a  fund  t©  be 
used  in  carrying  out  in  some  measure  the  plans  of  Mr.  Bliss  for 
his  family.  By  assignment  with  the  publishers,  all  copyright  profits 
will  be  paid  over  to  Eev.  E.  P.  Goodwin,  H.  G-.  Spafford  and  D. 
W.  Whittle,  as  Trustees. 

Acknowledgments  and  thanks  are  hereby  tendered  to  the  friends 
who  have  kindly  assisted  in  the  preparation  of  this  book,  by  fur 
nishing  letters  of  Mr.  Bliss  and  giving  incidents  connected  with  his 
life  and  work. 

The  obligations  that  the  writer  and  all  friends  are  under  to 
Messrs.  John  Church  &  Co.,  Mr.  Bliss's  publishers,  and  the  owners 
of  the  copyrights  upon  the  words  and  music  of  his  songs  and  hymus, 
for  permitting  without  cost  the  use  of  the  words  and  music  com 
piled  in  this  work,  and  the  contributions  of  Mr.  Bliss  from  the 
Song  Messenger,  are  hereby  gratefully  acknowledged. 

The  composers,  whose  chapter  of  songs,  as  a  memorial  to  their 
loved  brother  and  companion  in  labor,  constitutes  so  attractive  and 
valuable  a  feature  of  the  memoirs,  are  cordially  remembered  for  the 
cheerful  assent  they  have  rendered  to  the  request  made  for  their 
contributions. 

That  God  may  add  His  blessing,  and  that  His  children  who  read 
this  book  may  be  quickened  in  spiritual  life,  and  that  some  unsaved 
one  may  be  led  to  the  acceptance  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  a  word 
or  sentence  here  read  and  applied  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  is  the  high 
est  ambition  and  sincere  prayer  of  the  writer. 

D.  W.  WHITTLE. 
CHICAGO,  Feb.  19th,  1877. 


INTRODUCTION. 


~T  HAVE  pleasure  in  giving  a  word  of  introduction  to  the  work 
of  my  friends,  Major  Whittle  and  Doctor  Goodwin,  in  presenting 
to  the  public  the  memoirs  of  my  dear  friend  and  brother,  P.  P. 
Bliss.  I  regret  the  little  time  at  my  disposal  prevents  my  writing 
more  fully  concerning  the  man  and  his  work.  I  could  probably 
add  nothing  to  the  facts  of  his  life  that  are  here  compiled,  but  I 
would  like  to  tell  something  of  how  I  loved  and  admired  him.  I 
believe  he  was  raised  up  of  God  to  write  hymns  for  the  Church  of 
Christ  in  this  age,  as  Charles  Wesley  was  for  the  church  in  his  day. 
His  songs  have  gone  around  the  world,  and  have  led  and  will  con 
tinue  to  lead  hundreds  of  souls  to  Christ.  In  my  estimate,  he  was 
the  most  highly  honored  of  God,  of  any  man  of  his  time,  as  a 
writer  and  singer  of  Gospel  Songs,  and  with  all  his  gifts  he  was  the 
most  humble  man  I  ever  knew.  I  loved  him  as  a  brother,  and 
shall  cherish  his  memory,  giving  praise  to  God  for  the  grace  mani 
fested  in  him,  while  life  lasts. 

D.  L.  MOODY. 
BOSTON,  February  19th,  1877. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

PAGE 

Mr.  Bliss'  Ancestry — His  Father,  John  Bliss — His  Early  Days — Love  for 
Music — First  Sight  of  a  Piano — Connection  with  the  Church— Influ 
ence  of  a  Pious  Father's  Example — First  Musical  Instruction — W.  B. 
Bradbury— Bliss'  Tribute  to  his  Memory ' 15 

CHAPTER  II. 

Teaching  in  Rome — Acquaintance  with  and  Marriage  to  Lucy  Young — Her 
Character — Working  upon  the  Farm  and  Teaching  Music — Letter  from 
Rev.  Darius  Cook — Mr.  Bliss  in  his  New  Home — His  Father's  Last  Days 
— "  Grandfather's  Bible."  . .  21 


CHAPTER  IIL 

Mr.  Bliss'  First  Musical  Composition — Twelve  Years'  Song  Writing — Geo. 
F.  Root's  Recollections  of  him — Drafted  in  the  Army — Mr.  Bliss  re 
moves  to  Chicago— His  Labors  and  his  Friends  in  the  West 30 

CHAPTER  IV.        , 

God's  Instruments — Mr.  Bliss'  first  Meeting  with  Mr.  Moody — His  first  Ac 
quaintance  with  the  Writer — One  of  our  Household — Memorial  by  Rev. 
Dr.  Goodwin — Mr.  Bliss'  Connection  with  the  First  Congregational 
Church  and  Sunday  School  in  Chicago 41 


CHAPTER  V. 

In  Evangelistic  Work— Mr.  Moody's  Appeal  to  Mr.  Bliss— The  Turning 
Point — An  Experimental  Meeting  at  Waukegan — Bliss'  Consecration 
of  himself  to  God's  Service — His  Faith  and  Self-denial — Working  for 
the  Young — An  Incident — His  Methods  of  Teaching 49 


10  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

PAGE 

Mr.  Bliss  as  a  Composer  and  Author — His  first  Sunday  School  Hymn — "  If 
Papa  were  only  Ready  " — His  Systematic  Habits  and  Manner  of  Work 
ing — The  Last  Hymn  he  Wrote — The  Music  burned  at  Ashtabula — 
His  Facility  of  Expression 1 57 

CHAPTER  VII. 

The  Joyful  Experiences  of  1876— Gospel  Meetings  at  St.  Louis— Trip  to 
Alabama—"  Not  Tom  Thumb  "—Visit  to  Kenesaw  Mountain— The  In 
spiration  of  the  Scene — "  Hold  the  Fort "  and  the  Incident  which  sug 
gested  it 65 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Four  Days'  Work  at  Augusta,  Georgia — Homeward  Bound — Rev.  Dr.  Vin 
cent's  Tribute — Visit  to  Mr.  Moody's  Old  Home — Return  to  Chicago — 
Relations  with  Mr.  Sankey  and  the  Brethren  in  Chicago — Visit  to  Kala- 
mazoo,  Michigan — Mr.  Bliss'  Personal  Influence  there — Interesting 
Letters 72 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Mr.  Bliss  at  Jackson,  Michigan — An  Affecting  Scene  at  the  State  Prison — 
Return  to  Chicago— The  Ministers'  Meeting  at  Farwell  Hall— The  Last 
Time  Mr.  Bliss  sang  in  Chicago — "  Are  Your  Windows  Open  Toward 
Jerusalem  ?  " 80 

CHAPTER  X. 

Meetings  at  Peoria,  Illinois — Proposed  Trip  to  England — Letter  from  a  Boy 
Convert — Thanksgiving  Day — "Jolly  Jonathan " 85 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Foreshadowings  of  the  Separation — Mr.  Bliss'  Last  Visit  to  Chicago — Mer 
ry  Christmas  at  Home — The  Last  Earthly  Labors — The  Journey  to  the 
Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death—"  His  Works  do  live  After  Him"— 
"  A  Voice  from  Heaven  " 90 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Mr.  Bliss'  Hymns—"  Press  Forward"—"  Hail,  Happy  Morning  "—«  Peter's 
Denial" — "Lord  Save  Me" — "Once  More  with  Mournful  Step" — 


CONTENTS.  11 

PAGE 

"Naught  to  Charges  False" — "The  Ascension"  —  "  Bethesda  " — 
"  There's  a  Light  in  the  Valley  " — "  Hosanna,  Hosanna  " — "  Safe  with 
the  Master" — "The  Beggar  by  the  Wayside" — " I  Must  Abide  with 
Thee  " — "  And  yet  there  is  Room  " — "  Remembered  " — "  Follow  Me  " 
— "Look  and  Live" — "  Only  Believe " — "Look  not  upon  the  Wine" 
"The  Spirit  Tree "—" Beautiful  Rain" 97 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

"My  Savior's  Charms" — "Let  the  Lower  Lights  be  Burning" — "Jeru 
salem  so  Fair"— "How  goes  the  Battle  V  "—" Only  a  Little  Child"— 
"  Where  He  Leads  we  will  Follow  "—"  Waiting  at  the  Well "— "  Won 
drous  Love  " — "On  what  Foundation  ?  " — "  Sailing  into  Port " — "  Over 
Yonder  " — "  Remember  the  Poor  " — "  Passing  Away  " — "  God  is  always 
Near  Me  "—"Man  the  Life-Boat "— "  The  Temperance  Ship "— "  Turn 
to  the  Right  " — "Only  a  Step  to  Heaven" — "To  Depart,  which  is  Bet 
ter  "— "  Praying  Always  "— "  Soon  and  Forever  " 113 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Incidents  suggesting  some  of  Mr.  Bliss'  Hymns — "  Whosoever  Will " — 
"  Jesus  Loves  Me  " — "  Blessed  are  they  that  Do  " — "  Free  from  the 
Law" — "  Only  an  Arm  or- Bearer  " — "Pull  for  the  Shore" — "I  Know 
not  the  Hour"— "Down  Life's  Dark  Vale  we  Wander"— "The  Light 
of  the  World  is  Jesus"— "The  Holy  Spirit "—"  Wishing,  Hoping, 
Knowing  " — "  Almost  Persuaded  " — "  Hallelujah,  'Tis  Done  " — "  Good 
News" — "  Will  you  Meet  me  at  the  Fountain?  " — "  Hallelujah  !  He  is 
Risen" — "Seeking  to  Save" — "At  the  Feet  of  Jesus" — "The  Half 
was  never  Told  " 129 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Mr.  Bliss'  Second  Collection  of  Hymns — "  My  Prayer  " — "  More  to  Follow  " 
— "Calling  Now" — "Spirit  Divine" — "Beautiful  Song  of  Love" — 
"Daniel's  Band" — "Ask,  Seek,  Knock" — "Love  One  Another" — 
"Fear  Not" — "Mourn,  Pray,  Praise" — "  Song  in  Scripture" — "Good 
Cheer  " — Innocent  Childhood  " — "  Lord  Jesus,  Come  " — "  Good  Night 
till  Then  "— "  The  Four  Rulers  "— "  To  Die  is  Gain  " 147 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Gospel  Songs — "  Nearer  to  Me  " — "  We  Trust  in  the  Lord  " — "  How  much 
Owest  Thou  ?  " — "  The  Three  Mountains  " — Gospel  Hymns  and  Sacred 
Songs — "Where  are  the  Nine?" — "Where  hast  thou  Gleaned  To- 
Day  ?  " — "  No  Other  Name  " — Gospel  Hymns  No.  2 — "  In  Zion's  Rock 
Abiding  "— "  I'm  on  the  Lord's  Side  "— "  Hallelujah !  what  a  Savior  1 "  160 


12  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  XVH. 

PAGE 

Song  Incidents — Letter  from  Ira  D.  Sankey — The  Influence  of  Mr.  Bliss' 
Songs  for  Good — Gospel  Hymns  in  China  and  Japan — Letters  from 
Missionaries — Letter  from  Rev.  Arthur  T.  Pierson — Illustrations  of 
the  Power  of  Song 168 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Mr.  Bliss'  Hymns  in  England — Letter  from  Rev.  Henry  Burton — A  Life 
Changed  by  a  Hymn — Singing  at  Nashville,  Tennessee — Letters  from 
Ministers,  Singers  and  Converts 179 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Mr.  Bliss'  Miscellaneous  Poems — "  Fortune's  Best  Gift " — "  Farewell  Old 
Year"— "The  Wood  Bird's  Song— "  Let  us  have  Peace"— "  Aunt 
Tabitha's  Trials  "— "  The  Last  Bugle  "— "  Boys  Wanted"—"  Work  and 
Pray  " — "  There's  Monny  a  Shlip  " — "  Sire  and  Son  " — "  For  Me  " — 
"  "Tis  the  Heart  makes  the  Home  " — "  Loving  Little  Lou  " — "  The  Pho 
tograph" — "Room  for  one  More" — "Mr.  Lordly  and  I" — "  The  Tin 
Wedding  "—"  Willie's  Wooing  "— "John  Chinaman"— "A  Tragical 
Tail " — "  When  Grandmamma  is  Gone  " — "  Resolution  " — "  Bushnell" 
"  Welcome  " 192 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Miscellaneous  Writings  of  Mr.  Bliss — A  School  Composition  in  1859 — Con 
tributions  to  the  Song  Messenger — From  Grave  to  Gay  and  Gay  to 
Grave — How  should  Children  Sing  ? — Praise  Meetings 208 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

• 

Mr.  Bliss'  Correspondence — Letters  to  his  Family — His  Love  for  them  and 
his  Devotion  to  the  Gospel  Work — Beautiful  Tribute  from  Florida — 
"When  Jesus  Comes." 230 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

Letters  to  a  Christian  Lady — His  Religious  Life  and  Experience — Letters 
to  his  Nephew — Words  of  Wisdom — Letters  to  his  Co-laborer 254 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Mr.  Bliss'  Last  Hymns — Music  by  his  Friends,  Sankey,  Lowry,  Doane, 
McGranahan,  .Root,  Stebbins,  Case,  Palmer,  Murray,  Christie  and 
Mrs.  Scott. ....  .  273 


CONTENTS.  13 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

PAGE 

The  Disaster  at  Ashtabula — The  Newspaper  Accounts — The  Story  of  an 
Eye-Witness — Mr.  Bliss  goes  back  to  save  his  Wife  and  is  burned  to 
Death 290 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

In  Memoriam — Feeling  and  Glowing  Tributes,  in  Poetry  and  Prose,  from 
Editors,  Clergymen,  Singers  and  Friends,  to  the  Memory  of  the  De 
parted  Song  Writer 298 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

The  Last  of  Earth — Memorial  Services  at  Rome,  Pennsylvania — Eloquent 
Address  by  Rev.  Dr.  Goodwin,  of  Chicago 322 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 


The  Memorial  Services  in  Chicago—Addresses  by  Mr.  Moody,  Dr.  Goodwin, 

and  Others— The  Song  Service  at  the  Tabernacle 341 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Memorial  Services  at  South  Bend,  St.  Paul,  Louisville,  Nashville,  Kala- 
mazoo  and  Peoria 349 


BLISS'    LAST    HYMNS 


SET  TO  MUSIC  BY  HIS  FRIENDS. 


SET  TO  Music  BY  PAGE 

ANOTHER  SOLDIER  FALLEN Geo.  F.  Hoot 274 

I  BELIEVE Rev.  R.  Lowry 275 

MY  REDEEMER Jos.  McGranahan 276 

WITHIN,  ABOUT,  ABOVE. T.  C.  O'Kane 277 

TELL  ME  MORE  ABOUT  JESUS Jas.  McGranaTian 278 

WHAT  WILT  THOU  HAVE  ME  TO  DO  ? W.  H.  Doane 279 

GEORGIE'S  WELCOME „ Jas.  McGranahan 280 

WISF  TO  WIN C.  C.  Case 281 

ONLY  A  LITTLE Wilbur  A.  Christie 282 

CONSTRAINED  BY  LOVE Geo.  F.  Root 283 

I  TRUST,  O  LORD,  TO  THEE J.  R.  Murray 284 

STAND  STILL,  O  CHILD  OF  GOD Geo.  C.  StebUns 285 

ARISE,  WORK  AND  PRAY Mrs.  C.  H.  Scott 286 

THE  GOOD  NEWS H.  R.  Palmer 287 

WHEN  MY  WEARY  HANDS  ARE  FOLDED Ira  D.  Sankey. .  .  289 


LAST  SONG  OF  P.  P.  BLISS. 
HK  KNOWS.  .  .366 


MEMOIR    OF   P.  P.  BLISS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

MB.  BLISS'S  ANCESTRY — HIS  FATHER,  JOHN  BLISS — HIS  EARLY  DAYS — LOVE 
FOR  MUSIC — FIRST  SIGHT  OF  A  PIANO — CONNECTION  WITH  THE  CHURCH 
— INFLUENCE  OF  A  PIOUS  FATHER'S  EXAMPLE — FIRST  MUSICAL  INSTRUC 
TION — W.  B.  BRADBURY  AND  BLISS'S  TRIBUTE  TO  HIS  MEMORY. 

I  COPY  the  following  from  a  memorandum  found  among  Mr. 
Bliss's  papers,  endorsed  "  P.  P.  Bliss,  1861,"  and  containing 
the  genealogy,  memorial  and  statistics  of  the  Bliss  family,  obtained 
from  his  father,  uncles  and  "  The  Seventh-day  Baptist  Memorial:" 
"  The  earliest  notice  of  our  ancestors  that  we  have  is  contained  in 
the  will  of  Governor  Arnold,  dated  1677,  in  which  he  gives  to  his 
daughter,  Damaris  Bliss,  wife  of  John  Bliss,  a  parcel  of  land  in  the 
precincts  of  Newport.  Governor  Arnold  also  mentions  the  name 
of  George  Bliss  as  one  of  whom  he  had  bought  lan^  and  whom  he 
named  as  one  of  the  first  purchasers  of  the  island  of  Quononicut : 
Beginning,  then,  with  John  Bliss — who,  with  his  brother  George 
Bliss,  and,  tradition  says,  one  other  brother,  came  from  Wales  with 
their  widowed  mother  and  were  early  settlers  of  Connecticut — we 
have  the  following  genealogical  table,  which,  with  one  exception, 
we  know  to  be  correct  :  John  Bliss  married  Damaris  Arnold,  1670. 
Josiah  Bliss,  their  son,  died  1748.  William  Bliss,  son  of  Josiah, 
born  1728,  married  Barbara  Phillips,  October  20th,  1750.  They 
had  seven  sons  and  five  daughters.  The  third  son,  John  Bliss,  was 
born  January  17th,  1760,  and  was  the  grandfather  of  the  writer. 
He  learned  the  trade  of  a  shoemaker,  and  on  the  fourth  day  of 
November,  17 — ,  married  Eeliance  Babcock,  of  Dartmouth,  Mass. 
In  1788,  he  moved  to  Greenfield,  Saratoga  County,  New  York,  and 
purchased  a  farm  of  one  hundred  acres ;  there  being  at  that  time 


16  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

but  one  log  hut  at  Saratoga  Springs,  situated  near  High  Eock 
Spring,  seven  miles  from  his  house.  In  February,  1801,  he  walked 
from  Greenfield  to  Newport,  Rhode  Island,  for  the  purpose  of 
submitting  to  the  ordinance  of  baptism. 

"  John  Bliss  had  sixteen  children.  Twelve  were  sons,  but  only 
two  of  them  survived.  My  father,  Isaac  Bliss,  was  one  of  twins. 
He,  with  his  brother  Josiah,  was  born  April  29,  1797.  He  was 
married  to  Lydia  Doolittle,  June  7,  1831.  They  had  five  children  : 
Phebe,  born  May  27,  1832  ;  Eeliance,  born  May  14,  1834 ;  Philip 
Paul,  born  July  9,  1838  ;  Elizabeth,  born  May  1,  1842  ;  James  D., 
born  July  10,  1846.  Keliance  died  November  4,  1847  ;  James  D., 
February  15,  1847." 

Under  date  of  January,  1864,  in  Mr.  Bliss'  diary  is  this  note  : 
"January. — Pa  Bliss  died,  the  best  man  I  ever  knew."  Mr.  Bliss 
had  great  affection  for  his  father,  and  dearly  loved  his  memory.  I 
have  often  heard  him  speak  with  great  tenderness  of  his  simple, 
child-like  faith.  "  He  lived  in  continual  communion  with  his 
Savior;  always  happy,  always  trusting,  always  singing.  Mother 
used  sometimes  to  say  to  him,  laughingly,  that  all  his  hymns  com 
menced  with  the  word  '  come ; '  and  I  can  remember  many  of  them 
that  he  used  to  sing.  There  were  ( Come,  ye  sinners,  poor  and 
needy  ; '  '  Come  on,  my  partners  in  distress  ; '  '  Come,  ye  that  love 
the  Lord.'  He  was  always  a  poor  man,  but  early  in  the  morning, 
and  after  the  toil  of  the  day,  in  the  evening,  sitting  in  the  porch 
of  his  humble  home,  his  voice  would  be  heard  in  song,  and  I  can 
almost  hear  him  now,  singing  upon  the  other  side,  '  Come  to  that 
happy  land,  come,  come  away.'  He  was^  diligent  reader  of  the 
Bible,  and  had  the  most  implicit  faith  in  its  teachings,  and  a  deep 
reverence  for  its  commands.  My  first  recollection  of  him  is  his 
daily  family  prayer.  Devout,  tender  and  child-like  ;  repeating  over 
and  over  again,  year  after  year,  about  the  same  words,  until  we  all 
knew  them  by  heart,  his  prayers  were  very  real,  very  holy  to  me  in 
my  childhood.  It  was  very  hard  for  father  ever  to  punish  us  chil 
dren,  and  when  he  did,  he  suffered  more  than  we.  He  would 
talk  to  us  with  great  solicitude,  and  when  we  would  say  we  were 
sorry,  and  would  do  better,  he  would  be  full  of  joy,  and  would  say, 
'  That  is  right ;  that  is  right.' " 

In  addition  to  this  testimony  of  Mr.  Bliss,  all  the  recollections 
of  his  sisters  and  neighbors  go  to  show  that  he  was  a  man  of  lovely 


FAMILY   HISTORY.  17 

simplicity  and  tenderness  of  nature,  and  of  devoted  piety.  His 
character  and  example  had  much  to  do  in  moulding  the  character 
of  his  son.  This  father  died  at  Rome,  Pennsylvania,  in  the  home 
of  Philip,  and  was  buried  in  the  village  cemetery.  His  wife,  Lydia 
Bliss,  and  her  two  daughters  survive  to  mourn  over  the  loss,  to 
them,  of  the  son  who  had  taken  for  many  years  the  place  of  hus 
band  and  father,  but  also  to  rejoice  that  father  and  son,  who  were 
so  dear  to  each  other  on  earth,  are  reunited  in  Heaven.  The  last 
words  of  the  dying  father  were,  "  Philip,  take  care  of  your 
mother  ; "  and  most  unselfishly  was  the  charge  fulfilled  until  death 
called  him  away,  and  most  fitting  does  it  seem  that  the  writer  of 
these  lines  should  be  penning  them  to  fulfill  the  loving  task  from 
which  the  son  is  forever  removed  in  bodily  presence,  but  which  shall 
still  be  performed  by  his  memory,  cherished  and  perpetuated  in 
these  pages.  The  work  is  thrice  hallowed  in  the  memory  of  the 
dying  fathers  charge,  the  tender  associations  connected  with  this 
dearly  loved  brother  and  friend,  and  the  privilege  of  a  ministry  of 
love  to  "his  mother  and  mine." 

Philip  Paul  Bliss  was  born  in  Clearfield  County,  Pennsylvania, 
July  9,  1838,  in  the  usual  log  home  occupied  by  the  early  settlers  of 
the  mountain  and  forest  region  of  Northern  Pennsylvania.  In  Feb 
ruary,  1844,  the  family  removed  to  Kinsman,  Trumbull  County, 
Ohio,  where  they  resided  for  three  years.  In  1847,  they  returned 
to  Pennsylvania,  residing  in  Espeyville,  Crawford  County.  In  No 
vember,  1848,  they  removed  to  Tioga  County.  During  these  years 
of  his  boyhood,  Philip  had  few  advantages  in  the  way  of  schooling. 
Moving  from  place  to  place  and  in  sparsely  settled  regions,  he  had 
to  take  such  teaching  as  he  could  get.  His  father's  singing  and 
praying  and  reading  the  Scriptures,  his  mother's  daily  lessons,  with 
the  contact  of  the  grand  scenery  around  his  home,  the  mountains, 
valleys,  forests  and  streams  of  which  were  ever  dear  to  him,  made 
up,  for  the  most  part,  the  influences  that  were  brought  to  bear 
upon  his  first  ten  years  of  life.  He  early  developed  a  passion  for 
music,  and  would  sit  and  listen  with  delight  to  his  father  singing, 
when  but  a  child,  and  very  early  sang  with  him.  He  would 
readily  catch  up  a  tune,  and  whistle  it  or  play  it  upon  some  rude 
musical  instrument  of  his  own  manufacture. 

Mr.  Bliss  has  told  me  of  the  impression  made  upon  him,  when 
lie  was  about  ten  years  of  age,  by  the  first  piano  he  had  seen.  He 


18  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

was  a  large,  overgrown  boy,  and  one  day,  down  in  the  village,  as 
he  was  passing  by  a  house,  he  heard  music,  sweeter  than  anything 
he  had  ever  before  listened  to.  The  door  stood  open  and  he  was 
irresistibly  drawn  toward  the  sweet  sounds  that  came  from  within. 
He  was  barefoot,  and  entered  unobserved  and  stood  at  the  parlor 
door,  listening,  entranced,  as  a  young  lady  played  upon  the  piano. 
As  she  ceased  playing,  he  exclaimed,  with  an  intense  desire,  "0, 
lady,  play  some  more."  She  looked  around,  surprised,  and  with  no 
appreciation  of  the  tender  heart  that  had  been  so  touched  by  her 
music,  said,  "  Go  out  of  here  with  your  great  feet,"  and  he  went 
away  crushed,  but  with  the  memory  of  harmonies  that  seemed  to 
him  like  heaven. 

In  1849,  at  the  age  of  eleven  years,  he  went  away  from  home 
to  work  upon  a  farm.  His  sister  says:  "I  remember  well  the 
morning  he  left.  All  of  his  clothing  was  done  up  in  a  handker 
chief  and  carried  in  his  hand.  When  he  went  out  of  the  gate,  he 
threw  back  to  us  children  two  pennies  and  went  on  down  the  road 
and  would  not  look  back." 

In  1851,  he  had  this  memorandum  :  "  Worked  on  farm  for 
Marvin  at  nine  dollars  a  month."  He  was  then  only  thirteen  years 
of  age.  The  next  year,  he  was  in  a  lumber  camp,  on  Pine  Greek, 
as  assistant  cook.  In  1853  he  was  on  Dyer's  Hill,  in  Covington, 
cutting  logs.  The  next  year,  he  worked  in  a  saw-mill  in  Portage, 
New  York.  Thus  five  years  of  his  life,  from  the  age  of  eleven  to 
sixteen,  passed  on  the  farm  and  in  the  lumber  camp,  in  toiling  for 
bread.  With  a  great  desire  for  education,  a  portion  of  the  seasons 
during  this,  period  was  passed  in  school,  and  every  opportunity  that 
presented  for  improvement  was  eagerly  taken  advantage  of. 

In  1850,  while  at  school  near  Elk  Run,  a  revival  commenced 
among  the  scholars,  conducted  by  a  Baptist  minister,  and  he  at 
that  time  made  his  first  public  profession  of  Christ.  A  short  time 
after,  he  was  immersed  in  the  creek  near  his  own  home,  some  four 
miles  from  the  school,  by  a  minister  of  the  Christian  Church,  who 
was  at  the  time  holding  meetings  in  the  neighborhood.  He  became 
connected  with  the  Baptist  Church  near  the  school.  His  own  rela 
tion  of  his  Christian  experience  has  always  been  that  he  never  had 
any  marked  period  of  conversion  ;  that  he  could  never  remember 
the  time  when  he  did  not  love  the  Savior — when  he  was  not  sorry 
for  his  sins,  and  when  he  did  not  pray.  He  undoubtedly  ex- 


EARLY   LIFE.  19 

perienced  regeneration  in  answer  to  the  prayers  of  a  godly  father  at 
a  very  early  age,  and  all  through  life  manifested  that  he  was  a  child 
of  God. 

In  1855,  he  spent  the  winter  in  a  select  school  at  East  Troy, 
Bradford  County,  Pennsylvania.  In  1856,  he  worked  on  a  farm  in 
the  summer  and  taught  school  in  the  winter,  at  Hartsville,  Alle- 
gany  County,  New  York.  He  was  then  but  eighteen  years  of  age, 
and  his  quickness  of  mind  for  learning,  and  his  industry  in  the  im 
provement  of  opportunities,  are  in  a  marked  way  indicated  by  the 
fact  that  he  was  fitted  to  become  a  teacher.  It  was,  to  be  sure,  a 
humble  position,  but  still  it  was  a  position,  and  indicated  aspiration. 
The  place  sought  him  because,  in  the  judgment  of  the  School 
Board,  he  was  the  man  for  the  place. 

The  following  winter  he  passed  at  Towanda,  Pennsylvania,  and 
at  Towner  Hill.  Here  he  met  for  the  first  time  Mr.  J.  G.  Towner, 
who  was  afterward  associated  with  him  in  concerting,  and  received 
that  winter,  in  Mr.  Towner's  singing  school,  his  first  systematic 
instruction  in  music.  The  same  winter,  he  attended  a  musical 
convention  at  Rome,  Pennsylvania.  This  was  the  first  convention 
he  ever  attended,  and  it  did  much  to  strengthen  his  growing  passion 
for  music,  and  to  develop  his  native  talent  in  harmony.  In  the 
providence  of  God,  the  convention  was  in  charge  of  W.  B.  Brad 
bury,  then  in  the  commencement  of  his  life-work  as  a  composer 
of  sacred  music  for  the  children.  From  the  time  of  this  meeting, 
Mr.  Bliss  cherished  a  deep  affection  for  Mr.  Bradbury  and  a  rever 
ence  for  the  gifts  God  had  bestowed  upon  him  as  a  composer. 
How  much  this  meeting  had  to  do  with  the  moulding  of  his  future 
life,  in  the  turning  of  his  thoughts,  almost  unconsciously 'to  himself, 
in  the  direction  of  a  work  similar  to  Mr.  Bradbury's,  we  can  never 
know.  How  appropriate  now  to  Mr.  Bliss  is  the  song  written  by 
him  upon  the  death  of  the  lamented  Bradbury  : 

WE  LOVE  HIM. 

We  love  him, though  his  friendly  hand 

Has  never  clasped  our  own  ; 
His  gentle  voice  and  loving  smile 

We  never  yet  have  known. 
We  love  the  sweet,  the  blessed  songs 

That  he  to  us  has  giv'n ; 


MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

We  know  lie  loved  us  here  on  earth ; 
We  love  him  though  in  heaven. 

CHORUS. — We'll  roll  the  chorus  of  praise  along, 

Till  "  Over  the  River  "  we  go ; 
He'll  lead  us  then  in  more  beautiful  songs 
Than  ever  we  knew  below. 

We  love  the  sparkling  "  Golden  Chain," 

The  "  Shower  "  of  beauties  rare  ; 
The  "  Censer  "  full  of  joyous  praise, 

"  Fresh  Laurels,"  green  and  fair. 
We  love  to  sing  his  songs  of  heaven, 

Of  Jesus  and  His  love ; 
They  make  us  happier  here  below, 

And  raise  our  thoughts  above. 

We  love  the  things  that  he  has  loved; 

We  love  his  earthly  name  ; 
And  when  we  know  his  angel  form, 

We'll  love  him  just  the  same. 
We'll  love  each  other  better  then, 

We'll  love  "  Our  Father  "  more  ; 
We'll  roll  a  sweeter  song  of  praise 

Along  the  "  Golden  Shore." 


CHAPTER  IL 

TEACHING  IN  ROME — ACQUAINTANCE  WITH  AND  MARRIAGE  TO  LUCY  YOUNG 
, — HER  CHARACTER — WORKING  UPON  THE  FARM  AND  TEACHING  MUSIC — 
LETTER  FROM  REV.  DARIUS  COOK — MR.  BLISS  IN  HIS  NEW  HOME— HIS 
FATHER'S  LAST  DAYS — "GRANDFATHER'S  BIBLE." 

IN  1858,  Mr.  Bliss  was  at  Almond,  New  York,  and  in  the  winter 
of  that  year  he  taught  in  the  Rome  Academy  at  Rome,  Penn 
sylvania.  The  previous  year,  his  musical  gift  had  brought  him 
into  an  acquaintance  with  the  family  of  Mr.  0.  F.  Young,  a  thrifty 
farmer  and  a  devout  Christian  man,  who,  some  thirty  years  be 
fore,  had  come  into  the  valley  to  teach  school,  and  had  married 
one  of  his  pupils,  the  daughter  of  Peter  Allen,  a  leading  citizen  of 
Rome,  and  was  now  the  head  of  a  happy  family,  consisting  of 
Grandma  Allen,  her  daughter  his  wife,  with  their  five  children, 
two  sons  and  three  daughters.  The  whole  family  were  singers, 
and  Mr.  Young  being  one  of  the  School  Board,  Mr.  Bliss  was 
invited  to  make  their  house  his  home,  and  soon  became  as  one  of 
the  family.  He  brought  here  his  younger  sister,  that  she  might 
attend  school  and  be  with  him  for  the  winter. 

The  descriptions  given  of  Mr.  Bliss  by  his  friends,  and  a  da 
guerreotype  taken  at  this  time,  indicate  that  he  was  possessed  of 
unusual  personal  attractions.  Of  large  frame  and  finely  propor 
tioned,  a  handsome,  frank,  open  face,  with  fine,  large,  expressive 
eyes,  and  always  buoyant  and  cheerful,  full  of  the  kindliest  feeling, 
wit  and  good  humor,  with  a  devout  Christian  character,  and  of  un 
sullied  moral  reputation,  he  became  a  universal  favorite  among 
young  and  old.  Among  his  pupils  were  the  children  of  Mr.  Young, 
who  became  his  most  intimate  friends.  The  eldest  daughter,  Lucy, 
then  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  was  the  associate  and  companion 
of  Mr.  Bliss'  sister,  and  thus  these  young  people  were  thrown  much 
together.  During  the  winter,  the  singing  school,  the  spelling 
class  and  the  choir  meetings  went  on  as  is  wont  in  the  country 


23  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Tillages  of  the  East,  and  these  two  "kept  company/'  and  found 
ere  long  that  they  were  necessary  to  each  other's  happiness.  So, 
one  beautiful  morning  in  the  following  spring,  June  1,  1859,  with 
Pa  and  Ma  Young  accompanying,  they  went  in  a  very  quiet  way  to 
the  little  town  of  Wysocks,  six  miles  down  the  valley,  and  were 
married  by  the  minister,  in  the  parlor  of  the  minister's  house. 

It  is  a  beautiful  ride  down  the  valley  of  the  Wysocken.  The 
hills  rise  up  grandly  on  either  side ;  the  brook  flows  rapidly  by, 
its  babbling  and  murmurings  heard  from  the  road,  hidden  some 
times  in  deep  dells  by  overhanging  trees,  and  gleaming  in  the 
light  through  open  fields.  The  woods  were  filled  with  wild  flowers 
and  singing  birds,  that  June  morning,  and  the  world  was  full 
of  poetry  to  these  two  dear  friends  as  they  rode  to  their  wedding. 
Happy  in  the  love  of  God,  happy  in  each  other's  love,  how  rich 
they  were  !  Of  money  they  had  absolutely  none.  Mr.  Bliss  did 
not  possess  at  this  time  fifty  dollars'  worth  of  worldly  goods.  Mr. 
Young  derived  a  comfortable  support  from  his  farm,  but  had  noth 
ing  wherewith  to  endow  the  young  couple,  beyond  the  warm  welcome 
to  the  old  homestead  of  the  loved  daughter  and  the  one  whom  he 
had  Ions:  loved  as  a  son.  They  came  back  to  the  home,  and  Mr. 
Bliss,  taking  off  his  Sunday  clothes,  went  out  to  work  on  the  farm, 
and  Lucy  went  into  the  kitchen  to  help  her  mother. 

I  find  in  his  diary  this  mention  of  this  event  in  his  life  :  "June 
I,  1859 — Married  to  Miss  Lucy  J.  Young,  the  very  lest  thing  I 
could  have  done."  And  looking  back  upon  the  eighteen  years  they 
have  lived  together  on  earth,  and  all  they  were  to  each  other,  in 
the  experiences  of  joy  and  sorrow,  of  poverty  and  prosperity,  that 
they  passed  through,  no  one  who  knew  them  but  would  acquiesce 
and  recognize  the  providence  of  God  in  bringing  them  together. 
Mrs.  Bliss  was  in  many  things  the  opposite  and  the  complement 
of  her  husband.  He  was  by  nature  poetical,  impulsive,  demon 
strative,  easily  moved  ;  she  strongly  practical,  steady,  reticent,  and 
with  great  adherence  of  purpose.  She  was  both  wife  and  mother 
to  him  from  the  first  of  their  union.  She  was  of  a  deep  nature, 
loving,  tender  in  her  affection,  beyond  what  most  who  knew  her 
gave  her  credit  for.  His  buoyant,  joyful,  affectionate,  warm-hearted 
demonstrativeness  naturally  made  her  more  reserved  manner  seem 
constrained  ;  but  all  who  learned  to  know  her  loved  and  ad 
mired  her,  and  thanked  God  that  Philip  Bliss  had  such  a  wife.  At 


STUDYING   MUSIC.  23 

the  time  of  her  marriage,  she  was  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church  in  Kome,  having  made  profession  of  faith  in  Christ  at  the 
age  of  sixteen.  Mr.  Bliss,  about  the  time  of  his  marriage,  became 
connected  with  the  same  church,  and  labored  efficiently  with  them 
in  church  work,  being  for  some  time  the  Superintendent  of  a  Union 
Sunday  School  in  the  village,  and  is  remembered  by  many  of  the 
grown-up  people  in  this  connection. 

The  year  after  his  marriage,  Mr.  Bliss  worked  upon  the  farm 
for  his  father-in-law,  and  received  for  his  support  thirteen  dollars 
a  month,  the  amount  usually  paid  to  farm  hands.  That  winter  he 
commenced  teaching  music  in  Bradford  County,  at  two  dollars  an 
evening  "and  found."  The  year  1860  he  ever  reckoned  as  a  mem 
orable  one  in  his  history.  The  little  knowledge  he  had  obtained 
of  music  made  him  feel  deeply  how  little  he  knew,  and  gave  him 
the  most  burning  desire  to  prosecute  a  thorough  study  of  the  art. 
His  soul  was  filled  with  that  which  he  longed  to  express,  but  the 
future  looked  dark  to  him.  He  had  no  means  and  no  prospect  of 
being  able  to  secure  any  further  education.  For  a  time  he  became 
burdened  and  depressed  with  these  thoughts. 

In  July  and  August  of  that  year,  a  Normal  Academy  of  Music 
was  held  in  Geneseo,  New  York,  under  Perkins,  Cook,  Bassini  and 
others.  It  was  the  great  event  of  the  period  among  the  musical  peo 
ple  of  the  surrounding  country.  The  advantages  to  be  offered  in 
training  and  culture  were  unusual,  and  of  the  utmost  value  to  those 
desiring  to  cultivate  music.  Poor  Bliss  obtained  the  programme,  and 
eagerly  pored  over  the  inducements  and  opportunities  it  offered. 
It  was  just  what  he  needed.  It  would  be  such  a  joy  to  him  to  meet 
these  masters  in  the  art — such  a  help  to  him  for  all  the  future  ; 
but  the  expense  was  far  beyond  his  means.  He  had  not  a  dollar  in 
the  world.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  go.  He  was  almost  heart 
broken  about  it.  He  threw  himself  upon  the  old  settee  in  the 
sitting-room  one  day,  when  no  one  but  Grandma  Allen  was  in  the 
room,  and  he  says,  "I  just  cried  for  disappointment.  I  thought 
everything  had  come  to  an  end  ;  that  my  life  must  be  passed  as  a 
farm  hand  and  country  schoolmaster,  and  all  bright  hopes  for  the 
future  must  be  given  up."  Grandma  was  full  of  sympathy,  and 
wanted  to  know  all  about  the  trouble.  After  she  had  been  told 
about  the  academy,  she  said,  "Now,  Phil.,  what  does  that  cost  ?" 
"  Well,  Grandma,"  he  said,  "it  would  take  as  much  as  thirty  dol- 


24  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

lars."  "Well,  thirty  dollars  is  a  good  deal  of  money,"  said  the 
kind  old  lady  ;  "  I  have  an  old- stocking  that  I  have  been  dropping 
pieces  of  silver  in  for  a  good  many  years,  and  I'll  just  see  how  much 
there  is.  Perhaps  there  are  thirty  dollars,  and  if  there  are,  why, 
you  can  take  it  and  go  to  the  Normal."  The  stocking  was  brought 
out  and  found  to  contain  more  than  the  thirty  dollars,  and  Bliss 
spent  six  weeks  of  the  hardest  study  of  his  life  at  the  Normal. 
God  bless  dear  old  Grandma  Allen.  The  world  owes  her  interest  com 
pounded  a  hundred  times  over  as  long  as  she  lives,  and  a  grateful  re 
membrance  after  her  death,  for  what  she  did  that  day  for  P.  P.  Bliss. 

In  the  winter  of  1860,  Mr.  Bliss  formally  took  up  the  business 
of  a  professional  music  teacher.  In  his  diary  he  says  :  "  Old  Fanny 
(a  horse)  and  a  twenty-dollar  melodeon  furnished  by  0.  F.  Young 
set  me  up  in  the  profession."  The  next  three  years  were  passed 
in  and  about  Borne.  He  was  quite  successful  as  a  teacher,  and 
during  the  winter  months  had  plenty  of  employment.  In  the  sum 
mer  he  worked  upon  his  father-in-law's  farm,  and  again  attended 
the  Normal  Academy  in  1861,  and  in  1863.  In  1861,  he  writes  : 
"  Summer  at  Geneseo,  New  York,  T.  E.  Perkins,  T.  J.  Cook  and 
Pychowski,  faculty  this  season."  In  1862,  there  is  this  memoran 
dum  :  "  Worked  on  farm.  Did  not  go  off  to  school  this  summer — 
partly  on  account  of  my  health  and  partly  on  account  of  my 
wealth  !  Winter,  Honesdale,  Pennsylvania,  made  the  acquaintance 
of  I.  Brundage,  a  good  Eev.  and  singer."  To  be  a  good  minister 
and  a  good  singer  was  to  occupy  a  large  place  in  Mr.  Bliss'  affec 
tions,  and  he  ever  esteemed  Mr.  Brundage  as  a  very  dear  friend. 
Indeed,  long  before  he  entered  upon  the  life  of  an  evangelist,  while 
following  the  profession  of  music,  he  had  scores  of  warm-hearted 
personal  friends  among  the  ministers  of  the  Gospel.  He  had  a 
great  respect  for  their  calling — a  desire  to  be  helpful  to  them  in 
their  work,  and  a  love  for  them  individually,  which  all  who  came  to 
know  him  most  cordially  reciprocated.  From  no  other  class  of  per 
sons  have  so  many  and  so  tender  expressions  of  love  for  his  memory 
and  sorrow  at  his  death  been  received  as  from  the  ministers. 

During  these  years  at  Kome,  Mr.  Bliss'  pastor  was  Eev.  Dar 
win  Cook.  Mr.  Bliss  esteemed  him  very  highly,  and  ever  spoke 
of  him  with  affection.  He  has  often  said  that  it  was  Mr.  Cook's 
encouraging  words,  more  than  anything  else,  that  stimulated  him 
to  excel  in  his  profession,  and  particularly  turned  his  attention  to  the 


BEGIKKIN'G   OF   PllOFESSIO^AL  LIFE.  2'j 

composition  of  melodies  for  Sunday  school  songs.  Mr.  Cook  is  still 
living,  and. participated  in  the  funeral  exercises  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bliss  in  Towanda,  and  writes  as  follows  of  his  recollections  of  Mr. 
Bliss  : 

MERRYALL,  January  31, 1877. 
MAJ.  WHITTLE  : 

Dear  Bro. — I  am  sorry  that  I  can't  help  you  more.  I  went  to  Rome  in  1850, 
and  left  in  1858.  About  1855,  I  first  met  P.  P.  Bliss  in  the  church  at  Rome 
He  stood  in  the  choir  and  sang.  In  our  little  company  he  could  not  fail  to  be 
observed.  Therefore  1  said  to  Mr.  O.  F.  Young,  my  chorister,  "  That  young 
man's  voice  is  worth  a  thousand  dollars  a  year.  Perhaps  he  does  not  know 
it.''  Mr.  Young  took  him  home  with  him  to  dinner,  and  afterward  gave  him 
his  daughter.  Mr.  Bliss  afterward  said  that  remark  of  mine  was  the  first 
hint  lie  ever  received  that  he  had  any  competency  or  any  possibilities  more 
than  ordinary.  From  that  time,  I  occasionally  met  him  while  he  was  holding 
singing  conventions.  He  began  to  compose  laughable  medleys,  and  to  sing 
money  out  of  the  pockets  of  the  penurious. 

I  well  remember  that  on  one  occasion  such  a  man  gave  five  dollars  to  some 
benevolence,  if  Bliss  would  sing  his  medley.  I  heard  him  sing  his  "  Little 
Willie,"  at  a  fortieth  wedding  anniversary,  when  the  thought  struck  me,  what 
a  power  has  song  to  impress  the  Gospel.  I  went  to  him  and  told  him  the 
thought.  I  mentioned  the  remark  of  one  who  said,  "  Let  me  make  the  songs 
of  a  nation,  and  I  care  not  who  makes  its  laws."  I  instanced  a  case  at  hand 
then  and  there,  in  which  his  song,  in  five  minutes,  had  effected  more  than  eight 
years  of  preaching. 

He  was  married  in  June,  1859.  At  the  tenth  anniversary  I  met  him  again, 
and  was  greatly  pleased  at  his  evident  rapid  development.  When  Mr.  Brad 
bury  died,  I  wrote  to  him,  that  if  his  (Mr.  Bradbury's)  mantle  had  fallen  on 
any  one,  he  (Mr.  Bliss)  must  be  the  man.  After  the  loss  of  his  first  child,  he 
wrote  to  me,  and  indeed  kept  me  informed  of  his  doings  and  progress,  and  when 
he  and  Major  Whittle  were  in  the  South,  he  had  forwarded  to  me  a  daily, 
now  and  then,  to  tell  me  of  his  work.  He  had  not  united  with  the  church 
when  1  left  Rome,  in  the  spring  of  1858,  and  I  do  not  know  the  precise  date  of 
that  union. 

I  am  thankful  that  I  ever  met  that  man,  and  that  I  was  permitted  to  give 
him  encouragement  in  the  right  direction.  He  stated  publicly  in  a  large  con 
gregation  "  that  this  man  had  done  him  more  good  than  any  other  man."  I 
don't  now  recall  anything  very  important  in  his  religious  development.  We 
only  met  occasionally  after  1858. 

His  wife  grew  up  in  our  Sabbath  school,  was  strong,  bright,  active,  promis 
ing,  with  a  good  musical  talent.  It  was  quite  natural  that  the  two  should  bo 
drawn  together.  I  always  esteemed  her  very  highly. 

Yours  in  the  Lord, 

DARWIN  COOK. 
Merryall,  Bradford  Co.,  Pennsylvania. 


26  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

In  1863,  Mr.  Bliss  writes  :  "Geneseo  again.  Perkins,  Bassini 
and  Zundel.  A  very  good  term  for  me.  Winter,  taught  at  Cas 
tile,  New  York.  Boarded  at  D,  Bovee's.  A  pleasant  winter,  only 
my  wife,  Lou,  was  at  home;  so  I  was  only  half  a  man,  if  Jialf." 
The  instructors  of  Mr.  Bliss  at  these  Normals  all  speak  in  the  high 
est  terms  of  his  unusual  intelligence  and  remarkable  proficiency. 
Bassini,  at  his  first  Normal,  selected  him  as  his  most  intelligent 
pupil,  and  in  that  and  succeeding  years  took  unwonted  interest  in 
him,  in  giving  him  private  lessons  upon  the  use  of  the  voice. 
Much  of  his  remarkable  power  in  this  respect,  he  felt,  was  due  to 
the  careful  and  scientific  instruction  received  from  Bassini.  With 
a  quick  apprehension  and  a  thinking  mind,  Mr.  Bliss  desired  to  be 
intelligent  in  his  profession,  and  was  always  wishing  to  be  taught, 
ever  ready  to  receive,  and  careful  to  retain  instruction.  He  never 
felt  that  he  himself  was  a  master,  and  ever  preferred  to  be  a  scholar 
rather  than  a  teacher. 

During  this  period  of  his  life  at  Eome,  from  the  proceeds  of 
his  singing  schools,  he  saved  up  a  few  hundred  dollars,  and  bought 
a  little  cottage,  to  which  he  removed  his  parents,  and  for  a  time  set 
up  housekeeping.  The  dear  old  father,  who  had  passed  most  of 
his  days  in  humble  homes  in  the  backwoods,  was  now  sixty-five 
years  of  age.  The  little  cottage  in  Rome  was  a  better  home  than 
he  had  ever  lived  in.  Many  months  his  children,  "Phil"  and 
"  Lou,"  had  planned  the  surprise  that  awaited  him.  They  had 
saved  in  every  possible  way  to  buy  and  plainly  furnish  the  little 
home.  When  all  was  made  ready,  Father  Bliss  was  sent  for. 
The  day  of  his  arrival  in  Rome,  he  stopped  at  Father  Young's  for 
dinner.  In  the  afternoon,  the  happy  children  took  the  gentle, 
laughing,  gray-haired  old  Christian  in  the  wagon,  and  riding  along 
the  one  village  street,  asked  him  to  pick  out  the  house  that  they 
had  selected  to  be  his  home.  Two  or  three  times  he  essayed  to 
express  his  choice,  picking  out  the  humblest,  and  each  time  taking 
a  poorer  one,  until  at  last  he  gave  up,  a  little  troubled  that  he  might 
have  been  too  ambitious.  When  the  happy  Phil,  almost  too  full 
to  contain  himself,  turned  the  team,  and  driving  back  up  the 
street,  stopped  at  a  pretty  little  cottage,  a  neat  piazza  in  front, 
a  large  yard  filled  with  blossoming  lilacs  and  budding  apple  trees, 
it  looked  very  beautiful ;  and  as  the  strong  man  lifted  his  father 
from  the  wagon,  it  was  a  very  happy  hour  to  him,  as  he  said, 


BRIKGS   HIS   FATHER  TO   ROME.  27 

"This  is  your  home,  father."  The  dear  old  man  sat  down  in  a 
chair  placed  for  him  upon  the  stoop,  and,  with  tears  running  down 
his  cheeks,  said,  "  Phil,  I  never  expected  to  have  so  good  a  home 
on  earth  as  this." 

Here  the  last  months  of  the  life  of  the  old  saint  passed  away 
sweetly,  peacefully  and  happily.  The  remembrance  of  these,  his 
last  days,  were  always  exceedingly  precious  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss. 
The  burden  of  life  in  some  degree  rolled  away,  and  he  entered 
more  into  the  sunlight  that  awaited  him  in  fullness  in  the  life 
beyond.  "The  first  time  I  ever  saw  Father  Bliss,"  Mrs.  Bliss  once 
told  me,  "he  reproved  me  for  laughing  on  Sunday."  Brought 
up  by  a  Puritan  father,  living  in  communion  with  God,  drinking 
daily  from  the  Bible,  the  only  book  he  ever  read,  life  was  to  him 
very  solemn,  and  everything  around  him  was  related  to  God  and  to 
eternity.  His  children  all  felt  this  atmosphere  in  their  association 
with  him,  and  none  of  them  drank  in  more  of  the  father's  sense 
of  the  reality  of  eternal  things  than  did  his  son.  There  is  a  root 
and  stalk  for  every  beautiful  flower  that  blooms,  a  spring  for  every 
flowing  stream  ;  and  all  that  has  given  power  on  the  earth  to 
Philip  Bliss'  songs  finds  its  root  in  the  Bible  of  the  Hebrews,  its 
stalk  in  the  living  characters  developed  by  that  Bible  among  the 
Puritans.  The  stream  of  melody  that  flowed  through  him,  making 
glad  the  people  of  God,  had  its  spring  in  the  intense  reality 
of  spiritual  things  that  came  down  to  him  from  a  godly  an 
cestry. 

During  these  months  with  his  children,  the  father  laid  aside 
everything  of  austerity  that  had  ever  associated  itself  with  him, 
and  was  like  a  happy  child.  Mr.  Bliss  often  thanked  God  for  his 
goodness  in  permitting  him  to  have  the  joy  of  making  his  dear 
father  happy,  and  of  being  with  him  in  his  last  days.  In  January, 
1864,  after  only  a  few  months  in  the  home  he  thought  so  much 
better  than  he  was  entitled  to,  the  father  died,  and  was  taken  to  his 
Heavenly  home,  to  meet  the  great  surprise  of  knowing  what  "God 
hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him."  There  can  be  no  more 
fitting  close  to  this  chapter  than  the  song  of  Mr.  Bliss,  written, 
much  of  it,  from  personal  recollection,  and  which  he  usually  pre 
faced,  in  singing,  by  a  few  remarks  about. his  father,  and  by  saying, 
very  devoutly,  "I  thank  God  for  a  godly  ancestry." 


28  MEMOIK   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 


MY  GRANDFATHER'S  BIBLE. 

A  CENTENNIAL   SONG. 

The  Sabbatli  day — sweet  day  of  rest — 

Was  drawing  to  a  close  ; 
The  summer  breeze  went  murm'ring  by, 

To  lull  me  to  repose  : 
I  took  my  father's  Bible  down — 

His  father's  gift  to  him — 
A  treasure  rare,  beyond  compare, 

Though  soiled  the  page,  and  dim. 

"  Old  friend,"  said  I,  "if  thou  couldst  tell, 

What  would  thy  mem'ries  be  ?  " 
And  from  the  Book  there  seemed  to  come 

This  evening  reverie  ; 
"  Good  will  to  men,  Peace  be  to  thee! 

My  mission  aye  hath  been, 
To  tell  the  love  of  Him  who  died 

To  save  a  world  from  sin. 

"  A  hundred  years  ago  I  sailed, 

With  those  who  sail  no  more, 
Through  perils  dread  ;  by  land  and  sea, 

I  reached  New  England's  shore  ; 
There,  on  a  soul- worn,  faithful  band 

This  soothing  psalm  did  fall  : 
Lord,  Thou  hast  been  our  dwelling  place, 

In  generations  all. 

• '  Year  after  year,  in  temples  rude, 

Upon  the  desk  I  lay, 
To  teach  of  Him,  the  Great  High  Priest ; 

The  Life,  the  Truth,  the  Way. 
And  multitudes  who  listened  there 

To  God's  life-giving  word 
Are  resting  from  their  labors,  now, 

'  For  ever  with  the  Lord.' 

*'  Anon  a  lowly  home  I  found, 

But  Love  and  Peace  were  there.  .  . 
The  children  with  the  father  read, 
And  knelt  with  him  in  prayer ; 


GRANDFATHER'S  BIBLE.  29 

And  through  the  valley,  as  one  passed, 

I  heard  her  sweetly  sing : 
O  Grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ? 

O  Death,  where  is  thy  sting  ? 

Hold  fast  the  faith,"  the  old  Book  said  ; 

"  Thy  father's  God  adore.  .  .   ; 
And  on  the  '  Rock  of  Ages  '  rest 

Thy  soul  forever  more." 
"Amen,"  said  I,  "  by  grace  I  will, 

Till  at  His  feet  we  fall, 
And  join  the  everlasting  song, 

And  crown  Him  Lord  of  All. 


CHAPTER  III. 

MR,  BLISS'  FIRST  MUSICAL  COMPOSITION — TWELVE  YEARS'  SONG  WRITING 
— GEO.  F.  ROOT'S  RECOLLECTIONS  OF  HIM — DRAFTED  IN  THE  ARMY — 
MR.  BLISS  REMOVES  TO  CHICAGO — HIS  LABORS  AND  HIS  FRIENDS  IN  THE 
WEST. 

nnHE  first  composition  of  Mr.  Bliss,  so  far  as  is  known,  was  in 
J-  the  year  1864,  while  in  his  own  house  at  Rome.  He  writes 
in  his  diary  :  "1864. — Lived  in  Rome,  Pennsylvania.  Worked  on 
farm  some ;  wrote  music  some  ;  housekeeping  some ;  taught  in 
Nunda,  Castile,  etc.  Saved  one  hundred  dollars  this  year."  Mr. 
James  McGranahan,  for  years  a  musical  friend  of  Mr.  Bliss,  was, 
during  the  summer  of  1864,  a  clerk  in  the  country  store  and  post 
office  of  Rome.  He  says  :  "  I  well  remember  Bliss'  first  published 
composition.  He  sent  the  manuscript  to  Root  &  Cady,  and  after 
a  time  he  received  back  a  proof  in  print.  He  brought  in  the  copy 
to  show  me  and  ask  my  opinion  as  to  corrections.  I  had  had  one 
or  two  pieces  printed,  and  knew  just  how  he  felt,  and  we  had  a 
very  pleasant  time  over  his  first  piece.  It  was  a  great  pleasure  to 
him,  and  yet  he  had  a  great  deal  of  wonder  that  anything  he  had 
written  was  worth  publishing.  The  name  of  the  piece  is  "Lora 
Yale,"  copyrighted  by  Root  &  Cady  in  1865,  and  published  as 
sheet  music.  Before  sending  to  Root  &  Cady,  he  had  forwarded 
it  to  Bradbi^ry,  and  by  him  it  had  been  refused,  much  to  Mr. 
Bliss'  disappointment^but  he  was  encouraged  by  friends  to  send 
it  to  Mr.  Root. 

LORA  VALE. 
SONG  AND  CHORUS  BY  P.  P.  BLISS. 

Calmly  fell  the  silver  moonlight 

Over  hill  and  over  dale, 
As  with  mournful  hearts  we  lingered 

By  the  couch  of  Lora  Vale. 


LOKA    VALE.  31 

She  was  dying,  gentle  Lora  ; 

She  was  passing  like  a  sigli 
From  a  world  of  love  and  beauty 

To  a  brighter  world  on  high. 

CHORUS. — Lora,  Lora,  still  we  love  thee, 

Tho'  we  see  thy  form  no  more, 
And  we  know  thou'lt  come  to  meet  us, 
When  we  reach  the  mystic  shore. 

Brightly  dawned  the  morrow's  morning, 

Over  hill  and  over  dale, 
Still  with  mournful  hearts  we  lingered 

By  the  side  of  Lora  Vale. 
She  was  almost  at  the  river. 

When  the  light  broke  from  the  sky, 
And  she  smiled  and  whispered  faintly, 

"  I  am  not  afraid  to  die." 

Softly  through  the  trellised  window 

Came  the  west  wind's  gentle  breath, 
But  she  heeded  not  its  mildness. 

For  she  slept  the  sleep  of  death  ; 
And  beyond  the  silver  moonbeams, 

Aye,  beyond  the  stars  of  night, 
Now  she  dwells,  our  darling  Lora, 

In  the  home  of  angels  bright. 

This  was  the  commencement  of  the  exercise  of  his  gifts  as  a 
composer.  The  style  of  the  song  will  show  that  the  conception  of 
the  use  of  song  as  conveying  Gospel  truth  had  not  yet  come  to 
him.  It  is  a  song  of  sentiment,  of  a  kind  good  in  its  way,  but 
which  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  have  got  him  to  write 
during  the  last  years  of  life.  The  song  became  popular,  and 
enjoyed  a  sale  of  several  thousands.  Let  the  reader  place  in  con 
trast  the  words  of  this  song,  sweet  in  its  sentiment,  but  purpose 
less  in  teaching,  and  without  specific  mention  of  Christ,  and  the 
words  of  the  two  latest — so  far  as  is  known — hymns  that  he  ever 
wrote,  found  in  this  book,  and  some  correct  idea  of  his  development 
can  be  obtained. 

From  1864  to  1876,  twelve  years,  his  pen  was  busy  in  giving 
expression  to  the  songs  that  came  thronging  through  his  soul.  All 
of  his  work  was  done  during  these  years.  He  was  twenty-six  years 


32  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

old  when  he  wrote  his  first  song,  and  thirty-eight  when  he  wrote 
his  last.  In  the  year  1863  or  '64  he  first  met  Mr.  George  F.  Root, 
of  Chicago.  The  acquaintance  then  formed  became  an  intimate 
friendship,  and  was  one  of  the  links  in  the  chain  of  providences  that 
led  him  into  a  larger  field  of  usefulness,  and  finally  into  the  place 
God  was  preparing  him  for,  of  a  Gospel  singer.  Mr.  Eoot  thus 
writes  of  his  first  impressions  and  memories  of  Mr.  Bliss  : 


My  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Bliss  did  not  begin  very  early  in  his  life,  though 
it  might  have  been  near  the  beginning  of  his  musical  career.  He  had  attend 
ed  a  term  or  two  of  a  normal  musical  institute,  had  taught  some,  and  had 
given  some  concerts  near  his  home,  when  he  wroLe  his  first  letter  to  me. 
This  letter  contained  an  early — perhaps  his  first  —  musical  composition,  A 
song  entitled  Lora  Vale. 

The  song  was  promising,  but  the  letter  was  more  so,  as  indicating  an  indi 
vidual  entirely  out  of  the  common  run  of  literary  or  musical  aspirants.  I 
think  this  letter,  with  many  other  mementoes  of  Mr.  Bliss  that  would  now  be 
useful,  was  in  my  office  and  was  destroyed  at  the  great  fire  of  Chicago,  Oct.  8 
and  9,1871;  at  any  rate,  they  cannot  now  be  found. 

We  published  Lora  Vale,  and  this  led  to  further  correspondence.  And  our 
interest  constantly  increased  in  this  many-sided  "  country-boy,"  as  he  called 
himself.  His  curious  conceits,  so  piquant  and  varied,  his  beautiful  penman 
ship,  his  bright  nature,  that  could  not  seem  to  see  anything  unhappy  or 
unbeautiful  in  life,  attracted  us  strongly,  and  led  often  to  letters  on  my  part 
that  were  not  needed  for  business  purposes,  but  were  for  the  sake  of  the 
answer  they  were  sure  to  bring.  The  deeper  nature  of  the  manxlid  not  show 
then,  but  that  which  did  appear  was  "  pure  and  lovely,  and  of  good  report." 

Whether  the  proposition  to  come  to  Illinois  was  out  of  the  whole  cloth 
from  us,  or  whether  he  intimated,  as  our  correspondence  progressed,  that  he 
would  like  to  come,  I  do  not  remember ;  but  about  1863  or  '64  he  did  come, 
and  pleasant  was  our  surprise  to  find  that  our  bright  and  attractive  letter- writer 
lived  in  a  "  house  "  every  way  worthy  of  him.  It  is  rare  indeed  to  find  both 
mind  and  body  alike  so  strong,  healthy  and  beautiful  in  one  individual  as  they 
were  in  him.  He  went  to  work,  first  about  the  State,  holding  musical  conven 
tions  and  giving  concerts  and  attending  to  the  interests  of  certain  parts  of  our 
business  ;  sending  to  us  occasional  communications  for  our  musical  paper  and 
occasional  compositions.  I  do  not  recall  particulars  about  these  compositions. 
I  only  know  that  it  was  my  pleasure  to  look  them  over  and  suggest,  if  I 
could,  improvements,  or  hint  at  faults  now  and  then,  especially  in  the  earlier 
ones.  I  say  my  pleasure,  for  never  had  teacher  so  teachable  and  docile  a  sub 
ject  for  criticism  (I  can  hardly  say  pupil,  for  I  .never  taught  him  regularly), 
nor  one  who  repaid  with  such  generous  affection  the  small  services  that  were 
in  this  way  rendered  to  him.  His  modesty  as  well  as  his  generosity  always 
inclined  him  to  give  to  others  much  of  the  credit  that  belonged  to  his  own 


GEO.    F.    ROOT'S   REMINISCENCES.  33 

Heaven-sent  gifts.  A  favorite  signature  in  his  letters  to  me  was  "  Your  Poor 
Pupil  Bliss." 

I  do  not  know  of  his  modes  or  habits  of  composition,  but  do  know  of  his 
wonderful  fertility  and  facility.  His  responses  to  the  calls  for  the  many 
kinds  of  literary  and  musical  work  that  we  soon  found  he  could  do  always 
surprised  us  as  much  by  their  promptness  as  by  their  uniform  excellence.  It 
is  probable  that  with  every  topic  that  entered  his  inind  there  came  trooping 
multitudes  of  congruous  ideas,  images  and  words,  and  he  had  only  to  take  his 
choice  ;  and  his  choice  was  always  happy,  always  appropriate  and  often  strik 
ing  in  its  originality  and  beauty.  As  Mr.  F.  W.  Root,  in  a  recent  number  of  the 
Musical  Visitor,  says  of  Mr.  Bliss :  "  His  faculty  for  seizing  upon  the  salient 
features  of  whatever  came  under  his  notice  amounted  to  an  unerring  instinct. 
The  one  kernel  of  wheat  in  a  bushel  of  chaff  was  the  first  thing  he  saw." 

It  was  lovely  to  see  how  near  to  all  he  did  was  his  religion.  There  was  for 
him  no  line  on  one  side  of  which  was  a  bright  face  and  on  the  other  a  solemn 
one.  His  smile  went  into  his  religion  and  his  religion  into  his  smile.  His 
Lord  was  always  welcome  and  apparently  always  there  in  his  open  and  loving 
heart.  It  was  this  that  made  his  liveliness  so  irresistibly  sweet  and  attractive. 
5Tou  constantly  felt  its  sphere  of  innocence.  This  hymn,  by  a  kindred  spirit, 
is  a  most  true  expression  of  his  constant  condition : 

Thy  happy  ones  a  strain  begin  ; 

Dost  not  Thou,  Lord,  glad  souls  possess  ? 
Thy  cheerful  Spirit  dwells  within  ; 

We  feel  Thee  in  our  joyf ulness. 

Our  mirth  is  not  afraid  of  Thee  ; 

Our  life  rejoices  to  be  bright ; 
We  would  not  from  our  gladness  flee, 

We  give  full  welcome  to  delight. 

Thou  wilt  not,  Lord,  our  smiles  deny ; 

Dost  thou  not  deem  them  of  rich  worth  ? 
Our  cheer  flows  on  beneath  Thine  eye ; 

We  feel  accepted  in  our  mirth. 

We  turn  to  Thee  a  smiling  face, 

Thou  sendest  us  a  smile  again  ; 
Our  joy,  the  richness  of  Thy  grace, 

Thine  own,  the  cheer  of  this  glad  strain. 

In  speaking  of  himself  in  a  lecture  before  a  State  Sunday  School  Associa 
tion,  this  pleasant  insight  occurs.  After  making  the  remark,  "  Let  song 
develop  feeling  and  then  do  not  fail  to  use  it  to  direct  and  purify  affection,"  he 
goes  on  :  "I  well  remember  a  loving,  large-eyed  lad  who  in  the  day  school 
could  scarcely  sing  the  old  song  of 

A,  B,  C,  D,  E,  F,  G  ('  Haste  thee,  winter'), 
3 


34  MEMOIR   OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

but  that  the  tears  would  fall  and  mark  the  time.  The  lad  knew  not  why  he 
wept,  but  the  faithful  Christian  teacher  turned  this  mighty  motive  power  to 
heavenly  purposes,  and  gave  these  outflowing  sympathies  wholesome  food. 
So  the  love  of  song  grew  and  prevailed,  so  the  channel  of  the  affections 
widened,  and  so  the  lad,  though  taller  grown,  stands  here  to  plead  for  song." 

In  another  article  in  his  correspondence  with  our  musical  paper,  he  speaks 
in  a  characteristic  way  of  the  death  of  a  friend  who  had  written  some  poetry  for 
him  ;  but  other  extracts  from  this  article  are  so  illustrative  of  his  every -day 
life  that  we  also  insert  them  here  in  their  order. 

He  begins  with  speaking  of  a  "general  association  of  ministers,"  in  which 
he  conducted  the  music,  thus : 

There  was  a  deal  of  mighty  fine  talking,  a  few  earnest  prayers,  but  very  little  hearty 
singing.  Why  is  it  that  so  few  ministers  sing  ?  Wouldn't  it  improve  their  voices,  and  hearts 
too? 

But  please  don't  put  me  down  as  fault-finding.  I  think  Pinshine  and  its  author  had  a  full 
share  of  attention.  On  the  other  hand  let  me  tell  this.  During  the  convention  in  Barling- 
ton,  Iowa,  a  few  weeks  since,  which, by  the  way,  was  a  "  real  good  one  " — though  the  first 
since  W.  B.  Bradbury  was  there,  fourteen  or  fifteen  years  ago— it  was  my  good  fortune  to  be 
a  guest  of  Dr.  Salter,  Pastor  of  the  Congregational  Church,  and  to  hear  at  family  worship 
such  solid  tunes  as  Duke  Street,  Peterdoro,  St.  Martin's,  etc.,  sung  by  all  the  household,  all 
singing  soprano  in  a  spirited  manner,  making  a  lasting  impression  on  my  soul. 

I  don't  believe  ministers'  and  deacons'  families  are  a  whit  worse  than  other  folks, — N.  B. 
Ify  father  was  never  even  a  sexton— but  I  do  believe  that  every  Christian  family  should  be 
a  praise-giving  band,  and,  if  possible, '  psalm-singers.' 

Since  Burlington,  I  have  sung  in  Waukegan  and  Milburn,  within  forty  miles  of  Chicago, 
and  the  statistics  show  that  not  one-half  of  the  children  of  that  county  (Lake)  are  in  Sunday 
School,  nor  in  any  way  '  hear  the  Gospel  sound.'  Surely  there  is  work  enough  to  do  ! 

An  event  worthy  to  be  recorded  and  never  to  be  forgotten  is  the  departure— I  can't  say 
death — of  Kate  Cameron.  Her  name  was  first  on  a  list  of  thirty  to  unite  with  our  church  the 
very  day  she  received  the  welcome  to  the  Church  above. 

She  has  written  many  sweet  spiritual  songs,  but  none  more  beautiful,  I  think,  than 
"  That  City,"  written  for  The  Joy,  and  sung  at  her  own  funeral : 

"  You  tell  me  of  a  city 

That  is  so  bright  and  fair, 

Oh,  why  do  not  the  friends  I  love 

Talk  more  of  going  there  ?  " 

Sure  enough,  I  wonder  why  we  don't  ? 

And  here  again  — after  we  had  suggested  that  he  occupy  a  certain  place 
regularly  in  the  paper.  This  was  among  the  last  things  before  increasing 
work  on  his  part  and  new  business  relations  on  ours  caused  a  loving  separation, 
after  a  nearly  ten  years'  connection. 

P.  P.  BLISS,  HIS  COLUMN. 

SELECTED  EDITORIAL. 

In  assuming  editorial  charge  of  this  column,  we  make  our  editorial  bow  (wow),  etc. 
The  editor  fondly  hopes,  etc. 

In  our  treatment  of  those  vast  and  vital  issues  of  the  momentous  future,  we  shall  endeavor 
to  maintain  a  persistent,  etc. 

In  view  of  our  past  editorial  experience,  we  can  confidently  promise— etc. 


EDITORIAL   DEBUT.  35 

Our  old  friends  and  acquaintances  need  scarcely  to  be  told  that  they  may  expect  us  to  pay 
—o,  etc.,  etc. 

EDITORIAL  CORRESPONDENCE  ! — AHEM  1 

OMAHA,  Neb.,  July  15, 1873. 

Just  five  hundred  miles  in  twenty-four  hours— and  you'll  see  the  center  of  the  world ! 
No, not  quite.  We  call  it,  "Away  out  West,"  but  it  lacks  thirty  miles  of  being  the  middle 
of  Uncle  Sam's  farm  !  [1  was  tempted  to  go  the  thirty  miles  further,  so  I  could  say  I'd  been 
half-way  across.] 

And  the  programmes  said,  "  The  Fifth  Annual  State  Sunday  School  Convention."  Though 
as  to  numbers  and  results  'twas  called  the  beginning  of  things. 

''Elaborate  and  elegant,"  was  the  unanimous  verdict  on  the  church  decorations  ;  "  Cordial 
and  complete,"  the  welcome  ;  "Harmonious  and  helpful"  all  the  exercises. 

The  success  of  the  music  department  is  the  subject  of  this  article.  Saml.  Burns,  Superin 
tendent  of  the  M.  E.  S.  S.,  of  Omaha,  in  behalf  of  the  Executive  Committee,  sent  on  for  fifty 
copies  of  the  book  to  be  used,  and  had  two  or  three  weeks' practice:  so  much  for  preparation. 

Professor  Nightingale,  President  of  the  Convention,  was,  as  you'd  know  by  his  name,  a 
musical  spirit,  and  gave  the  singing  its  proper  place  and  time  in  each  session,  so  that  music 
seemed  to  be  one  of  the  exercises,  and  not  a  mere  pastime.  So  much  for  selection. 

Dr.  J.  H.  Vincent,  of  New  York,  father  and  founder  of  the  ^'Berean  Series'"1  and  u  S.  School 
Journal"  being  the  prominent  speaker,  aided  the  singing  materially,  not  only  by  his  kindly 
words  concerning  it,  but  by  engaging  heartily  in  it,  both  its  chorus  and  quartette.  So  much 
for  sympathy. 

Mr.  F.  J.  Hartley,  of  London,  Eng.,  also  a  live  worker  in  S.  S.,  manifested  a  wonderful 
interest  in  everything  pertaining  to  American  institutions,  and  complimented  the  style  of 
our  S.  S.  songs  aucl  the  manner  in  which  they  are  rendered,  as  worthy  of  imitation.  So  much 
for  Christian  charity. 

The  Children's  Mass  Meeting  of  course  was  a  grand  success,  and  the  speeches  and  songs 
"  splendid !  "  Among  the  pieces  sungwere :  "  Hold  the  Fort,"  "  Daniel's  Band,"  "  More  to 
Follow,"  "  Heaven  for  Me,"  ''  Pull  for  the  Shore,"  and  "  Remembered."  (At  that  time  re 
cently  issued.) 

Something  about  an  "  Old  Piano  "  was  sung  and  apparently  enjoyed,  but  some  folks  might 
consider  "  sacred"  songs  only  appropriate,  and  perhaps  nothing  had  better  be  said  about 
41  profane  "  songs  in  such  a  solemn  convention.  (?) 

All  in  all,  a  more  social  convention  (ice  cream  included)  could  not  be  imagined.  And  in 
the  years  to  come,  Nebraska  will  be  a  bright  star  in  the  Sunday  School  firmament. 

That  her  Sunday  School  singing  may  be  as  popular  as  the  U.  P.  R.  R.,  and  her  Christian 
charity  be  as  broad  and  inviting  as  her  blooming  prairies,  is  the  wish  of 

StJNSHINK. 

The  Joy  is  a  good  name  for  a  singing  book.  Don't  you  think  so  ?  The  name  was  discov 
ered,  as  a  great  many  other  good  things  are  yet  to  be,  in  the  Bible.  Turn  to  Jeremiah,  33d 
chapter  and  llth  verse— and  you  will  find  it.  Though,  as  it  may  not  be  convenient  to  turn 
just  now — people  seldom  turn  to  look  up  a  quotation — it  may  be  well  enough  to  print  it  here. 

41  The  voice  of  joy,  and  the  voice  of  gladness  ;  the  voice  of  the  bridegroom,  and  the  voice 
of  the  bride  ;  the  voice  of  them  that  shall  say,  Praise  the  Lord  of  Hosts:  for  the  Lord  is  good ; 
for  His  mercy  endureth  forever." 

Dear  Bliss  and  dear  Mrs.  Bliss,  I  cannot  think  of  you  without  a  pang  and 
a  longing,  but  I  know  they  will  gradually  wear  away,  arid  nothing  but  joy  will 
remain  for  our  next  meeting. 

GEO.  F.  ROOT. 

The  article  by  F.  W.  Root,  in  Church's  Musical  Visitor  for 
January,  1877,  quoted  from  by  Mr.  Geo.  F.  Koot,  is  so  excellent  in 
its  appreciation  of  Mr.  Bliss  that  it  is  given  entire  : 


36  MEMOIK   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

I  have  just  been  looking  in  our  charming  little  holiday  gift-book,  illustra 
ting  Mr.  Bliss'  poem,  "Hold  the  Fort,"  written  upon  an  incident  familiar  to 
all,  which  occurred  in  our  civil  war.  I  consider  this  work  an  extraordinary 
combination  of  effects,  a  striking  cluster  of  pure  gems  of  sentiment.  The  first 
element  in  it  is  an  appeal  to  love  of  country ;  our  patriotism  stirs  mightily 
within  us  as  we  read  of  the  gallant  struggles  of  our  soldiers  at  Altoona  Pass 
— of  their  heroic  endurance  and  final  deliverance  by  General  Sherman.  Then 
we  see  the  thrilling  story  idealized  and  glorified  by  being  put  to  a  spiritual  use 
by  the  evangelist,  Major  Whittle.  Next  comes  Mr.  Bliss'  strong,  epigram 
matic  poem,  crystallizing  the  parallel  drawn  by  his  fellow-laborer,  and  pointing 
it  with  Gospel  truth  that  it  may  strike  home  to  every  hearer.  The  pictures, 
however  they  be  considered  from  a  technical  standpoint,  stimulate  the  imagi 
nation  to  a  more  vivid  apprehension  of  the  allegory,  and  then  comes  the  musio 
touching  the  whole  with  Promethean  fire  and  giving  it  wings  that  it  may  fly 
to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  and  to  the  innermost  recesses  of  the  soul. 
A  man  must  be  without  patriotic  enthusiasm,  without  religious  sentiment, 
and  without  aesthetic  sensibility  who  can  look  upon  this  work  unmoved  ;  and 
especially  will  he  be  affected  if  he  mourns  with  us  the  untimely  death  of  the 
poet-musician,  who  contributed  such  important  elements  to  it.  If  ever  a  man 
seemed  fashioned  by  the  Divine  hand  for  special  and  exalted  work,  that  man 
was  P.  P.  Bliss.  He  had  a  splendid  physique,  a  handsome  face,  and  a  dignified, 
striking  presence.  It  sometimes  seemed  incongruous,  delightfully  so,  that  in 
one  of  such  great  size  and  masculine  appearance  there  should  also  appear  such 
gentleness  of  manner,  such  perfect  amiability,  such  conspicuous  lack  of  self- 
assertion,  such  considerateness  and  deference  to  all,  and  such  almost  feminines 
sensitiveness.  He  had  not  had  opportunities  for  large  intellectual  culture,  but 
his  natural  mental  gifts  were  wonderful.  His  faculty  for  seizing  upon  the  sali 
ent  features  of  whatever  came  under  his  notice  amounted  to  an  unerring 
instinct.  The  one  kernel  of  wheat  in  a  bushel  of  chaff  was  the  first  thing  he 
saw.  And  his  ability  to  control  words  and  phrases  so  that  they  should  realize 
a  thousand  odd  conceits  of  his  imagination  seemed  unlimited.  I  know  that  he 
sometimes  met  adverse  criticism  upon  the  rhymes  which  he  threw  off  upon 
local  subjects  ;  but  by  far  the  greater  number  of  these  little  effusions  sparkled 
with  wit  and  appropriateness,  and  his  shortcomings  were  remarkably  few  for 
one  who  was  obliged  to  make  an  airy,  fantastic  muse  conform  to  the  circum 
scribed  requirements  of  a  monthly  magazine.  Examine  the  work  which  really 
enlisted  his  whole  soul,  and  you  will  see  nothing  but  keen  discernment,  rare 
taste,  and  great  verbal  facility.  His  Gospel  hymns  contain  no  pointless  verses, 
awkward  rhythms  or  forced  rhymes,  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  glow  with  all 
that  gives  life  to  such  composition. 

Mr.  Bliss  possessed  wide  human  sympathies,  and  had  a  strong  social  instinct : 
his  acquaintances  immediately  became  his  friends,  as  a  natural  consequence  of 
his  many-sided  attractiveness.  The  last  time  I  saw  him  for  more  than  a  passing 
moment  was  at  his  home,  a  beautiful  little  town  among  the  hills  of  the  Upper 
Susquehanna  valley,  far  enough  away  from  railroads,  telegraphs,  and  the 
other  great  auxiliaries  of  driving  care  and  tumultuous  traffic  to  allow  the  im- 


F.    W.    ROOT'S   CONTRIBUTION.  37 

agination  to  escape  from  tlie  world.  He,  with  his  wife  and  little  boys,  together 
with  a  number  of  relatives,  spent  a  clear  sunshiny  Saturday  of  last  summer, 
surrounded  by  congenial  friends  from  the  neighborhood  and  from  a  distance, 
all  feeling  conscious  of  living  a  delightful  little,  pastoral,  around  which  was 
thrown  a  peculiarly  graceful  halo  of  friendly  intercourse.  At  the  close  of  this 
golden  day,  just  before  taking  our  departure,  four  of  us,  including  our  host, 
stood  out  under  the  twining  branches  of  the  grove  in  which  we  were  assem 
bled,  and  sang  from  memory  the  little  quartette,  "  The  Two  Roses  " — two  roses 
that  were  there  in  radiant  bloom  have  been  gathered  ! — after  which  Mr.  Bliss, 
full  of  the  glowing  happiness  which  had  been  evident  with  him  throughout 
the  day,  exclaimed  :  "  0,  dear  friends  ;  why  can't  you  all  stay  over  till  to-mor 
row  ?  We  would  then  have  as  good  a  Sunday  time  as  we've  had  a  Saturday 
time  to-day  !"  Mr.  Bliss'  voice  was  always  a  marvel  tome.  He  used  occasion 
ally  to  come  to  my  room,  requesting  that  I  would  look  into  his  vocalization 
with  a  view  to  suggestions.  At  first  a  few  suggestions  were  made,  but  latterly 
I  could  do  nothing  but  admire.  Beginning  with  E  flat,  or  even  D  flat  below,  he 
would,  without  apparent  effort,  produce  a  series  of  clarion  tones,  in  an  ascend 
ing  series,  until  having  reached  the  D  (fourth  line  tenor  clef)  I  would  look  to  see 
him  weaken  and  give  up,  as  would  most  bass  singers  ;  but  no,  on  he  would  go, 
taking  D  sharp,  E,  F,  F  sharp  and  Q,  without  weakness,  without  throatyness, 
without  a  sound  of  straining,  and  without  the  usual  apoplectic  look  of  effort. 
I  feel  quite  safe  in  saying  that  his  chest  range  was  from  D  flat  below  to  A  flat 
above,  the  quality  being  strong  and  agreeable  throughout  and  one  vowel  as 
good  as  another.  He  would  have  made  name  and  fortune  on  the  dramatic  stage 
had  he  chosen  that  profession  and  studied  a  more  scientific  class  of  music  than, 
that  in  which  he  chose  to  work.  The  lavishness  of  natural  endowment  may  be 
also  seen  in  his  musical  compositions,  though  in  not  so  high  a  degree.  He 
never  composed  upon  large  designs,  and  so  never  expanded  his  natural  gifts 
into  any  very  comprehensive  creative  ability.  But  I  find  enough  in  his  melo 
dies  to  justify  myself  in  saying  that  he  had  the  instincts  of  a  musical  composer. 
"  When  Jesus  Comes  "  deserves  to  live  by  the  side  of  the  best  songs  of  the 
church  ;  its  intellectual  side  is  well  enough,  and  its  emotional  element  is  to  me 
irresistible.  And  I  venture  to  say  that  it  will  live,  unless  I  am  also  mistaken 
in  the  belief  that  the  religious  progress  of  to-day  (of  which  this  song  is  an 
outgrowth)  is  giving  deeper  consideration  to  the  things  of  the  heart  than  has 
been  given  in  any  epoch  known  to  history  hitherto,  or,  indeed  unless  certain  Gos 
pel  singers  kill  the  piece  by  a  very  mistaken  way  of  rendering  it.  Mrs.  Bliss 
was  so  thoroughly  devoted  to  her  husband,  that  her  life  merged  in  his.  There 
is  a  melancholy  satisfaction  in  the  thought  that  this  dire  calamity  did  not  part 
this  most  devoted  couple. 

In  1865,  Mr.  Bliss  writes  :  "  Summer,  concerted  with  J.  G-. 
Towner.  A  pleasant  singer,  honest  partner  and  lively  companion. 
Made  a  hundred  dollars  in  two  weeks.  Drafted  in  the  United  States 
Army  two  weeks."  Mr.  Bliss  reported  for  duty  at  Carlisle  barracks 


38  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

after  being  drafted,  and  after  two  weeks'  service  was  discharged, 
it  being  evident  that  the  war  was  at  an  end,  and  that  no  more  men 
would  be  needed. 

He  again  writes  :  "  About  November  1st,  George  F.  Eoot  wrote 
to  ask  us  if  the  'Yankee  Boys'  would  come  West  and  engage 
with  Eoot  &  Cady.  The  ( Yankee  Boys '  very  readily  consented 
in  consideration  of  a  guaranteed  salary  and  expenses  paid.  Came 
to  Chicago,  November  21st,  1865.  December,  1865,  '  Yankee  Boys/' 
not  succeeding  in  the  concert  line,  tender  their  resignation  .to  Eoot 
&  Cady,  who  gracefully  accept,  but  propose  to  retain  '  Mr.  Bliss ' 
in  their  employ  'if  he  will  stay.'  Answer,  he  will  stay.  Thus 
Root  &  Cady  very  kindly  disengage  me  from  a  life  which  is  be 
coming  irksome.  They  offer  me  a  hundred  and  fifty  dollars  a 
month  and  expenses  of  self  and  wife.  On  settlement,  our  receipts 
were  so  small  that  I  told  Mr.  Cady  I  would  ask  only  a  hundred 
dollars  a  month,  which  he  allowed.'''  At  the  close  of  1808,  the  firm 
advanced  his  salary  both  for  the  preceding  and  succeeding  year. 

From  this  time  on  for  eight  years,  Mr.  Bliss'  occupation  was 
the  holding  of  musical  conventions  and  the  giving  of  concerts, 
and  private  instruction  in  music  in  towns  through  the  Northwest. 
For  four  years  his  conventions  were  held  under  his  arrangement 
with  Eoot  &  Cady ;  after  that,  by  independent  appointment. 
He  was  very  popular  as  a  musical  conductor  and  teacher,  and  was 
much  sought  after  for  convention  work.  During  the  first  of  his 
engagement  with  Eoot  &  Cady,  Mrs.  Bliss  was  employed  as  clerk 
in  Eoot  &  Cady's  store,  then  in  the  Crosby  Opera  House  Building, 
on  Washington  street,  Chicago.  This  position  she  filled  for  about 
six  months,  and  then  accompanied  her  husband  in  all  of  his 
travels,  to  assist  in  his  concerts  and  convention  work.  Every  sum 
mer  they  would  return  to  Eome  to  visit  the  old  homestead.  Dur 
ing  these  visits  to  his  home,  in  the  rest  and  peace  he  enjoyed  there 
among  the  hills,  many  of  Mr.  Bliss'  sweetest  pieces  were  written. 
Their  home,  during  these  years,  they  considered  as  being  in 
Chicago.  About  one-fifth  of  their  Sundays  were  probably  passed 
here.  They  boarded,  for  some  years,  with  musical  companions,  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  0.  Blackman,  and  were  always  deeply  attached  to  these 
dear  friends.  In  February,  1868,  he  remained  in  Chicago  some 
weeks,  writing  music  for  a  book  published  by  Eoot  &.  Cady,  called 
"The  Triumph." 


LIFE   IIS"   CHICAGO,    ETC.  39 

On  December  28th  of  the  same  year,  he  writes  :  "  Bought  my 
gold  watch — a  hundred  and  sixty  dollars."  At  the  close  of  this 
year,  he  writes  in  his  diary  :  "Thus  the  overruling  Providence  has 
led  me  by  unmistakable  evidences  to  see  and  recognize  His  dealing 
with  me  all  through  life's  journey.  Truly  we  have  much  to  be 
thankful  for.  My  dear  wife,  my  greatest  earthly  treasure,  joins  in 
the  opinion  that  we  are  and  ever  have  been  highly  favored  of 
Heaven  ;  that  we  find  our  greatest  enjoyment  in  each  other's  so 
ciety,  when  striving  to  make  each  other  happy,  and  our  highest  aim 
is  to  be  useful  to  ourselves  and  others,  and  to  '  glorify  God  that  we 
may  enjoy  Him  forever.' ' 

The  sentiment  of  gratitude  that  ever  actuated  Mr.  Bliss  is  shown 
in  these  lines.  His  first  impulse,  in  every  good  thing  that  came 
to  him,  and  in  all  his  joy  and  happiness,  sometimes,  to  others, 
arising  from  comparatively  trifling  causes,  was  to  fall  on  his  knees 
and  thank  God.  The  sentiment  of  deep  attachment  to  his  wife 
that  pervaded  his  life  is  also  shown.  They  were  indeed  insep 
arable  and  fond  of  each  other  and  helpful  to  each  other,  in  all 
the  relations  of  life  here  and  hereafter,  beyond  the  conception  of 
many  who  bear  the  relation  of  husband  and  wife,  even  though  they 
profess  that  the  relationship  is  sanctified  in  Christ.  May  the 
example  of  these  dear  friends  in  this  respect  be  owned  of  God  to 
make  more  happy  many  a  Christian  home  where  they  were  known 
and  loved,  and  where  what  is  here  feebly  represented  is  known  to 
be  true  of  them. 

During  1869,  Mr.  Bliss  wrote  songs  and  tunes  for  "  The  Prize," 
a  Sunday  School  book  published  by  Root  &  Cady,  and  also  wrote 
some  pieces,  which  were  published  as  sheet  music.  He  held  con 
ventions  at  Bushnell,  Carthage,  Randolph,  Hamilton,  Mason  City, 
Lamoille,  Delavan,  Secor,  Washington,  Momence,  Peoria  and  Ha 
vana,  in  Illinois,  and  in  Brockton,  New  York — thirteen  conven 
tions  in  all,  running  in  time  from  one  to  four  weeks.  While  at  his 
home  in  the  summer  (Rome,  Pennsylvania,)  he  writes  :  "June  1, 
celebrated  our  tin  wedding."  "June  5. — To  Boston  for  the  Ju 
bilee.  Stopped  in  New  York  and  heard  Parepa  at  Steinway  Hall ; 
also  Levy,  the  great  cornetist,  Campbell,  the  base,  and  at  Boston, 
Ole  Bull,  Arbuckle,  Gilmore  and  Co."  "June  20.— To  Brooklyn 
to  hear  H.  W.  Beccher  preach."  He  closes  his  memorandums  for 
the  year  with  an  acknowledgment  of  blessings  received.  Notes 


40  MEMOIR   OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

his  settlement  with  Root  &  Cady,  and  mentions  that  he  has 
"plenty  of  convention  engagements  at  one  hundred  dollars  for 
four  days."  He  adds  :  "  In  daily  contact  with  G.  F.  Root,  J.  R. 
Murray,  Balatka,  0.  Blackman,  W.  S.  B.  Mathews,  D.  C.  C.  Mil 
ler,  H.  R.  Palmer  and  other  good  musicians." 

This  brief  mention  of  his  life  for  one  yeai  will  show  that  he  was 
a  busy  man.  He  had  very  little  idle  time.  He  had  established  a 
reputation  and  was  regarded  as  successful  in  his  profession,  and  with 
a  bright  future  before  him  as  a  musician. 

During  this  year,  1869,  an  event  occurred  in  his  history,  that  he 
regarded  of  the  same,  pivotal  nature  in  its  resuHs  to  him  as  was  the 
loan  of  Grandma  Allen,  that  enabled  him  to  go  to  Geneseo,  and  the 
meeting  with  Mr.  Root,  that  led  to  his  coming  west.  This  event 
was  the  meeting  with  and  forming  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  D.  L. 
Moody  as  narrated  in  the  following  chapter. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

GOD'S  INSTRUMENTS — Mil.  BLISS'  FIRST  MEETING  WITH  MR.  MOODY — HIS 
FIRST  ACQUAINTANCE  WITH  THE  WRITER — ONE  OF  OUR  HOUSEHOLD — 
MEMORIAL  BY  REV.  DR.  GOODWIN — MR.  BLISS*  CONNECTION  WITH  THE 
FIRST  CONGREGATIONAL  CHURCH  AND  SUNDAY  SCHOOL  IN  CHICAGO. 

IN  the  special  manifestation  of  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in 
the  Church  of  Christ,  it  has  often,  and  perhaps  usually,  been 
that  the  instruments  He  may  have  chosen  to  use  have  a  very  inti 
mate  connection  with  and  relationship  to  each  other,  which  it  is 
permitted  us  to  trace,  and,  in  so  doing,  more  fully  recognize  His 
presence  in  and  with  the  church,  and  His  overruling  providence  in 
the  life  of  every  child  of  God. 

In  the  summer  of  1869,  Mr.  Moody  was  holding  Gospel  services 
in  Wood's  Museum,  near  the  corner  of  Randolph  and  Clark  streets, 
in  Chicago.  For  half  an  hour  preceding  his  theater  meeting,  he 
was  in  the  habit  of  speaking  in  the  open  air  from  the  steps  of  the 
Court  House  near  by.  Mr.  Bliss  has  told  me  of  this  meeting  as  fol 
lows  :  "  I  had  been  nearly  four  years  in  the  West,  at  that  time,  and 
had  passed  a  good  many  Sundays  in  Chicago,  returning  from  the 
country  where  I  was  occupied  holding  Musical  Conventions  ;  but  I 
had  never  met  Moody.  One  Sunday  evening,  my  wife  and  I  went 
out  for  a  walk,  -before  going  to  church,  and  passing  up  Clark  street, 
we  came  upon  the  open-air  meeting.  I  was  at  once  attracted  by  the 
earnestness  of  the  speaker,  who,  I  was  told,  was  Moody,  and,  wait 
ing  until  he  closed  with  an  earnest  appeal  for  all  to  follow  him  to 
the  theater,  we  decided  we  would  go,  and  fell  in  with  the  crowd, 
and  spent  the  evening  in  his  meeting  there.  That  night  Mr. 
Moody  was  without  his  usual  leader  for  the  singing,  and  the  music 
was  rather  weak.  From  the  audience  I  helped  what  I  could  on 
the  hymns,  and  attracted  Moody's  attention.  At  the  close  of  the 
meeting,  he  was  at  the  door  shaking  hands  with  all  who  passed  out, 
and  as  I  came  to  him  he  had  my  name  and  history  in  about  two 


42  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

minutes,  and  a  promise  that  when  I  was  in  Chicago  Sunday  even 
ings,  I  would  come  and  help  in  the  singing  at  the  theater  meetings. 
This  was  the  commencement  of  our  acquaintance.  I  sang  at  the 
theater  meetings  often  after  that,  and,  making  longer  stops  in 
Chicago  in  connection  with  writing  music,  I  was  often  at  the  noon 
meeting,  and  was  frequently  made  use  of  by  Moody  in  his  various 
gatherings." 

How  little  did  either  of  the  two  men  who  met  that  night  at  the 
theater  door  realize  what  God  was  preparing  them  for,  and  the 
relation  they  would  in  future  years  sustain  to  one  another  in  the 
work  of  winning  souls. 

The  following  year,  in  May,  1870,  I  first  met  Mr.  Bliss.  I  had 
heard  his  name  mentioned  by  Mr.  Moody,  several  times,  as  having 
sung  at  some  of  his  meetings,  and  of  his  having  asked  Root  &  Cady 
"where  in  the  world  they  had  kept  such  a  man  for  four  years,  that 
he  hadn't  become  known  in  Chicago."  Mr.  C.  M.  Wyman  (since 
deceased)  was  at  that  time  in  Chicago,  working  with  Mr.  Bliss  in 
making  songs.  He,  with  Bliss,  was  an  earnest  Christian,  and  both 
came  to  Moody's  meetings  when  they  could.  I  think  the  first  im 
pression  Mr.  Moody  received  of  the  power  of  solo  singing  in  Gos 
pel  work  he  obtained  from  these  two  men  ;  at  all  events,  such  impres 
sions  as  he  may  have  had  were  crystalized  by  his  use  of  them.  He 
had  a  sense  of  personal  loss  in  his  tone,  as  he  would  say,  "  to  think 
that  such  a  singer  as  Bliss  should  have  been  around  here  for  the 
last  four  years  and  we  not  known  him." 

At  the  time  mentioned,  I  received  an  invitation  from  my  friend, 
Mr.  Talcott,  of  Rockford,  to  come  out  and  address  the  Winnebago 
Sunday  School  Convention,  and,  if  possible,  to  bring  a  singer  with 
me.  I  consulted  Mr.  Moody  about  a  singer  and  was  referred  to 
Wyman.  I  called  upon  Wyman,  and  found  that  a  previous  engage 
ment  would  prevent  his  going.  VYT.ile  talking  with  him,  Bliss 
came  in,  and,  after  an  introduction,  he  was  solicited  by  us  both  to 
go.  He  cheerfully  and  pleasantly  consented,  and  met  me  at  the 
depot  the  same  afternoon.  I  was  much  impressed  at  this  conven 
tion  with  Bliss'  power  as  a  singer,  and  was  won  toward  him  from 
the  first  as  a  lovable  man. 

A  few  days  after  our  return,  Mr.  T.  M.  Avery  was  asking  me  if 
I  knew  who  could  be  obtained  to  take  charge  of  the  singing  of  the 
First  Congregational  Church,  then  about  to  move  into  their  new 


REV.    DR.    GOODWIN'S   RECOLLECTIONS.  43 

building  on  the  corner  of  Washington  and  Ann  streets.  I  told 
him  of  my  experience  with  Mr.  Bliss,  and  the  opinion  Mr.  Moody 
had  of  him,  and  that  I  should  like  to  have  him  meet  him.  An  ap 
pointment  was  made  for  a  day  following,  and  Mr.  Bliss  was  brought 
into  communication  with  the  people  of  that  church,  with  the  result 
narrated  by  Dr.  Goodwin.  My  residence,  at  the  time,  was  only  one 
block  from  the  church,  and  as  Mr.  Bliss  wished  to  be  near  his  new 
field  of  labor,  he  and  his  wife  became  inmates  of  my  family,  where 
they  remained  until  they  commenced  housekeeping  in  November 
of  the  same  year.  It  was  at  this  house,  No.  43  South  May  street, 
that  he  wrote,  "Hold  the  Fort,"  "I  am  so  glad  that  Jesus  loves 
Me,"  and  other  of  his  popular  pieces.  The  memory  of  those  days 
is  very  pleasant,  very  sacred  to  us.  A  dear  old  father — since 
passed  into  glory — my  dear  friend  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss'  dear 
friend,  Charles  Severance,  a  noble,  manly  young  man,  loved  by  us  all, 
who  died  the  following  spring,  were  then  with  us.  What  precious 
seasons  of  family  worship  ;  what  animated  discussions  of  Bible  truth 
with  my  father ;  what  interest  in  talking  over  songs  and  sermons. 
Sunday  schools  and  plans  of  work  !  How  kind  and  tender  dea.r 
Bliss  was  to  my  invalid  father  !  How  he  would  cheer  him  in  his 
joyous,  hearty  way,  and  in  the  singing  of  his  favorite  songs  !  Plow 
welcome  he  always  was  when  he  came  home  from  his  conventions  ; 
how  sorry  we  always  were  to  have  him  go.  In  all  the  time  he  was 
with  us,  he  was  always  the  same  kind-hearted,  cheerful,  loving 
and  lovable  man.  Of  his  Christian  work  at  this  time  the  following, 
contributed  by  Dr.  Goodwin,  will  furnish  the  most  complete  record: 

In  July,  1870,  Mr.  Bliss  became  leader  of  the  choir  of  my  First  Congrega 
tional  Church  of  Chicago,  and  a  few  months  later,  the  Superintendent  of  the 
Sabbath  school.  He  continued  to  hold  both  of  these  positions  for  something 
more  than  three  years,  resigning  his  superintendency  only  when  he  had  fairly 
entered  upon  his  work  as  a  singing  evangelist,  As  may  be  supposed,  1  saw 
liiin  very  often  during  all  this  period,  and  came  to  know  him  well ;  and  the 
memory  of  the  friendship  that  grew  up  between  us,  and  interlocked  our  hearts 
more  and  more  as  the  fellowship  of  worship  and  work  went  on,  is  and  will 
ever  be  a  perpetual  joy.  His  was  a  nature  to  invite  confidence  and  to  keep  it 
Thoroughly  frank  and  unsuspecting,  with  not  a  thought  of  policy  or  craft, 
intensely  sympathetic  and  outspoken,  with  a  heart  overflowing  with  kindness 
of  spirit,  a  conscience  quick  to  hear  and  imperative  to  heed  every  call  of  duty, 
a  devotion  to  the  service  of  the  Master  that  never  seemed  to  falter  or  grow 
cold,  he  drew  me  to  him  from  the  first  as  a  brother  and  yoke-fellow  to  be  ex- 


44  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

eeedingly  beloved  and  rejoiced  in ;  and  the  better  I  knew  him  the  more  I 
admired  the  unaffected  simplicity  and  beauty  of  his  character — the  more  I  felt 
impressed  with  the  depth  and  earnestness  of  his  piety — the  more  I  leaned 
upon  and  valued  his  cooperation. 

Few  pastors,  I  am  persuaded,  are  privileged  to  have  in  their  choristers  such 
gifted,  sympathizing,  efficient  helpers.  Too  often,  it  is  to  be  feared,  the  pulpit 
and  the  choir  gallery  are  out  of  harmony  as  to  the  ends  proposed,  or  the 
methods  by  which  the  ends  agreed  on  shall  be  sought ;  and  the  cases  are  uot 
few,  nor  hard  to  find,  where  in  the  handling  of  choir-leaders  and  those  who 
abet  them,  the  Lord's  house  is  turned  into  a  concert  hall,  the  service  of  song 
made  largely  a  device  for  filling  and  renting  pews,  and  the  minister  compelled 
to  sandwich  his  part  in  between  performances  that  suggest  anything  but  the 
worship  of  God  or  the  salvation  of  men.  Sometimes,  indeed,  he  has  to  come 
to  his  duties  in  the  pulpit  after  the  world  and  the  flesh  and  the  devil  have, 
through  the  fingers  and  lips  of  an  unconverted  organist  and  choir-leader,  set 
things  moving  to  their  liking,  and  then  turn  the  service  over  to  them  after  the 
sermon,  to  be  finished  up  as  they  may  elect.  Doubtless  the  devil  likes  that 
way  of  conducting  Sabbath  services.  If  he  can  only  get  people's  heads  full  of 
waltzes,  and  operas,  and  sonatas  and  what-not  else,  before  the  preaching 
comes,  and  then  have  a  chance  to  follow  it  up  with  a  march  or  an  aria  of  his 
own  selection,  the  preacher's  thirty  minutes  of  Gospel  will  not  greatly  damage  his 
interests.  Little  wonder  that  preaching  in  such  circumstances  saves  few  souls. 
It  is  like  expecting  harvest  with  the  enemy  invited  to  go  before  the  toiler,  sow 
ing  tares,  and  to  follow  him  gathering  up  and  snatching  away  the  seed. 

To  those  who  knew  anything  of  P.  P.  Blisa,  it  will  not  be  needful  to  say 
that  he  had  no  sympathy  with  any  such  idea  of  the  music  of  the  sanctuary. 
He  shared  to  the  fullest  extent  my  feeling,  that  the  disposition  to  make  the  song 
and  service  of  God's  house  showy  and  entertaining  was  an  abomination  in  God's 
sight.  He  held,  as  I  did,  that  all  music  in  connection  with  worship,  whether 
by  instrument  or  voice,  should  be  consecrated  and  worshipful.  In  his  concep 
tion,  he  who  led  at  the  organ  should  be  one  to  come  to  the  keys  fresh  from  his 
closet,  one  who  should  pray,  as  his  hands  swept  over  the  manuals,  that  the 
power  of  God  might,  through  him,  constrain  the  people's  hearts  to  worship  in 
spirit  and  in  truth.  So  he  believed  that  all  who  led  in  the  service  of  song 
should  sing  with  grace  in  their  hearts  ;  that  the  music  should  be  strictly  spirit 
ual  music — not  selections  made  on  grounds  of  taste,  high  musical  character, 
but  selections  aimed  at  honoring  God,  exalting  Jesus  Christ,  magnifying  His 
Gospel — music,  in  a  word,  that  God's  Spirit  could  wholly  own  and  use  to  com 
fort,  strengthen,  and  inspire  God's  people,  and  lead  unsaved  souls  to  Christ. 
Accordingly  the  highest  devotional  character  marked  all  his  selections,  all  his 
rehearsals,  all  his  leadership  in  the  Lord's  house.  It  was  his  invariable  cus 
tom  to  open  his  rehearsals  by  prayer.  He  often  invited  me  to  lead  in  that  ser 
vice,  and  to  address  the  choir  on  the  subject  of  the  singing  adapted  to  worship  ; 
and  few  weeks  passed  without  his  impressing  the  spiritual  idea  as  the  all-con 
trolling  one,  and  one  never  to  be  forgotten  by  those  who  were  to  lead  the 
praises  of  the  congregation. 


AS   A   CHORISTER.  45 

As  Mr.  Bliss  stood  in  the  clioir  gallery,  partly  facing  the  singers,  during  his 
leadership,  there  was  exactly  in  front  of  him,  in  the  center  of  the  eastern  win 
dow  of  the  transept  a  large  crimson  cross.  Many  times  during  rehearsals  he 
would  point  thither,  saying,  "  I  am  glad  we  have  the  cross  always  before  us. 
Let  us  forget  everything  else  when  we  sing.  Let  us  seek  to  have  the  people 
lose  sight  of  us,  of  our  efforts,  our  skill,  and  think  only  of  Him  who  died  there 
on,  and  of  the  peace,  comfort,  strength,  joy  He  gives  them  that  trust  Him."  It 
is  not  strange  that,  with  such  a  chorister  in  charge,  all  solicitude  about  an- 
therns  and  voluntaries  vanished  from  the  preacher's  mind.  Whatever  the 
selection,  I  knew  it  would  be  full  of  worship  alike  in  the  sentiment  and  the 
rendering,  would  prepare  the  way  for  the  Word  of  God  ;  and  when  the  sermon 
was  ended,  no  matter  what  the  final  thought,  whether  admonition,  encourage 
ment  or  appeal,  I  always  felt  sure  that  the  chorister's  heart  was  one  with  mine, 
and  that  I  could  commit  the  closing  service  to  him,  as  I  sometimes  did,  with 
perfect  confidence  that  the  impression  sought  to  be  produced  would  be  deepened. 

This  was  preeminently  true  of  Mr.  Bliss'  management  of  the  singing  in  all 
gatherings  for  prayer.  He  was  a  royal  helper  here.  He  loved  such  fellowship, 
could  not  bear  to  have  things  drag  and  grow  listless  and  stupid,  as  they  some 
times  do.  His  sunny,  buoyant  nature  could  not  tolerate  such  an  atmosphere, 
his  warm,  fresh  feelings  brought  him  at  once  to  the  rescue.  He  would  break 
out  at  such  times  with  one  of  his  ringing  songs  that  would  go  through  all 
hearts  like  the  blast  of  a  bugle,  and  set  everything  astir.  He  was  especially 
fond  of  songs  that  magnified  the  name  and  grace  of  Christ,  and  urged  to  larger 
trust  and  consecration  and  engageduess  in  His  service.  "  Free  from  the  Law," 
"More  Holiness  give  Me,"  "  t  gave  My  Life  for  Thee,"  The  Half  was  never 
Told,"  "  Hold  fast  till  I  Come,"  were  among  his  favorites,  and  they  would 
sometimes  scatter  the  gloom  and  despondency,  or  coldness  of  a  meeting,  as  a 
sudden  burst  of  sunshine  through  a  thick  sky  puts  to  rout  clouds  and  fog.  In 
deed,  a  stupid,  lifeless  meeting  with  P.  P.  Bliss  in  it  would  have  been  a  mar 
vel.  All  through  his  songs  and  his  words  of  witness  breathed  the  spirit  of 
absorbing  devotion.  With  him  the  coming  of  the  Lord  was  a  Scripture  truth, 
so  real  and  vivid  that  his  life  felt  the  inspiration  of  it  in  everything  he  said  or 
did.  He  felt  profoundly  that  the  Bridegroom  might  come  at  any  moment,  and 
it  was  hence  his  intense  desire  to  have  his  work  done,  his  lamp  trimmed,  and 
to  be  ready  to  enter  into  the  marriage.  During  the  last  two  years  while  en 
gaged  as  an  evangelist,  he  was  rarely  present  in  the  prayer-meetings ;  but 
whenever  he  was  there,  almost  invariably  before  he  spoke  or  sang,  he  gave 
expression  to  the  feeling  that  possibly  he  might  be  witnessing  for  the  last 
time.  The  very  last  evening  when  he  met  with  us,  he  came  forward  near  the 
close  of  the  meeting,  uttering  this  thought,  sang  as  a  word  of  counsel  and  en 
couragement  to  all  young  converts,  a  number  of  whom  had  been  testifying 
during  the  evening,  the  song  whose  chorus  is  : 

Hold  fast  till  I  come, 
Hold  fast  till  I  come ; 
A  bright  crown  awaits  th.ee ; 
Hold  fast  till  I  come. 


46  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

In  his  Sunday  school  relations,  he  was  especially  happy  and  beloved.  It  is 
safe  to  say  that  no  school  ever  had  a  superintendent  who  held  larger  place  in 
the  children's  hearts  than  he  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  see  why.  He  was  an  enthusiastic 
lover  of  children.  It  never  cost  him  any  effort  to  meet  children  on  their  level, 
for  he  lived  there.  He  knew  a  child's  nature  by  instinct,  or  rather  he  possessed 
such  a  nature,  and  could  no  more  help  gathering  about  him  the  little  four  and 
five-year-olds  of  the  infant  class,  and  talking  to  them  in  a  way  that  every  one 
of  them  understood  wherever  he  was,  than  a  florist  could  help  gathering  roses 
and  japonicas  and  fuchsias  about  him,  and  talking  to  them  day  by  day.  And  the 
same  of  older  children.  The  consequence  was,  that  whenever  he  appeared  be 
fore  the  school,  every  face  brightened  instantly.  Every  eye  was  intent,  every 
ear  eager.  He  never  had  to  ring  for  order  while  he  was  talking ;  never  had  any 
rough,  turbulent  boys  whom  he  could  not  interest  and  control.  The  look  of 
his  eye,  the  sound  of  his  voice  was  all-potent.  The  members  of  his  school, 
young  and  old,  felt  him  to  be  a  personal  friend,  and  so  he  was.  He  knew  very 
many  of  them  by  name.  He  entered  keenly  into  all  their  childish  experi 
ences  ;  was  always  ready  to  listen  to  the  unbosomings  which  they  were  eager 
to  pour  into  his  ears ;  to  answer  their  questions  and  give  the  counsel  they 
sought.  It  was  marvelous  to  see  how  completely  and  without  effort  he  pos 
sessed  their  confidence,  and  how  supremely  he  swayed  them  by  his  opinion. 
Whatever  lie  said  was  law  and  gospel  in  the  fullest  sense  ;  and  wherever  he 
went, as  it  was  his  delight  to  go,  among  the  children's  homes,  especially  those 
of  the  humbler  sort,  in  times  of  sickness,  his  sunny  presence  and  cheery 
words  and  stirring  songs  were  better  than  all  medicines.  Patience,  courage, 
hopefulness  always  followed  bis  visits ;  and  parents  were  as  glad  to  see  him 
as  the  children,  and  often  as  much  helped  by  his  coming. 

Mr.  Bliss'  ability  to  teach  children  to  sing  was  amazing,  and  it  was  com 
pensation  for  a  long  pilgrimage  to  see  him  handle  a  school  when  training  it 
musically.  From  the  moment  he  named  a  piece,  he  seemed  to  inspire  all  with 
his  enthusiasm.  Not  an  eye  would  wander,  not  a  face  be  dull.  He  would  say 
a  few  pithy  words,  explaining  the  sentiment  of  the  song,  a  few  more,  possibly, 
about  the  music  and  how  to  render  it  ;  sing  a  strain  or  two  alone,  and  then, 
after  two  or  three  repetitions,  the  school  would  inarch  through  and  ring  it  out 
as  if  they  had  been  familiar  with  it  for  months.  It  was  as  if  he  had  the  gift 
of  infusing  music  into  everybody.  No  matter  how  little  musical  culture  or 
skill  teachers  and  scholars  had,  no  matter  how  out  of  key  or  out  of  time,  they 
were  naturally  inclined  to  sing.  Somehow  when  Mr.  Bliss  led,  the  difficulties 
and  irregularities  and  discords  seemed  to  disappear,  and  there  was  one  grand 
thrill  of  feeling,  one  royal  burst  of  harmony. 

The  best  thing  about  this  singing  was  that,  like  that  of  the  choir  gallery,  it 
was  never  for  show.  Mr.  Bliss  would  have  abominated  any  attempt  at  musical 
display,  or  anything  simply  entertaining  as  truly  on  the  part  of  children  at. 
adults.  With  him  the  Sunday  school  and  all  the  departments  and  appliances 
of  it  meant  salvation.  He  believed  with  his  whole  heart  in  the  early  conver 
sion  of  children.  He  was  wont  to  say  that  he  could  never  remember  the  time 
when  he  did  not  trust  in  Christ  as  his  Savior  and  desire  to  serve  Him.  He 


AS   A   SUNDAY   SCHOOL    SUPERINTENDENT.  47 

felt  profoundly  that  when  Jesus  said  "  Suffer  the  little  children  to  come  unto 
Me  and  forbid  them  not,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  He  meant  to 
have  parents  and  all  understand  that  He  was  the  children's  Savior,  and  that 
in  their  tenderest  years  the  little  ones  might  know  renewing  grace  and  become 
the  children  of  the  Kingdom.  He  greatly  coveted  such  early  trust  in  Christ, 
and  with  increasing  devotion  brought  to  bear  all  the  agencies  at  his  command 
to  secure  it.  Next  to  the  word  of  God,  he  felt  the  instrumentality  of  song  to 
be  most  potent  and  used  it  mightily.  Praying  before  he  sang,  praying  while 
he  sang,  and  exhorting  all  others  to  sing  prayerfully  and  in  the  spirit,  he  led 
the  school.  Many  times  he  would  stop  in  the  middle  of  a  song  to  lift  up  the 
cross,  emphasize  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  urge  every  heart  to  immediate  decision 
on  the  Lord's  side.  He  often  did  it  with  tears — tears  in  his  eyes  and  tears  in 
his  voice  ;  and  time  and  again,  as,  with  that  wonderful  pathos  and  sweetness 
of  which  he  was  such  a  master,  he  poured  forth  his  soul  in  the  affectionate 
entreaties  of  "  Calling  Now,"  or  "  Almost  Persuaded,"  all  hearts  would  melt 
as  if  touched  of  God,  and  the  solemn  hush  that  followed  seemed  like  a  moment 
of  universal  prayer  and  consecration. 

God  richly  blessed  this  dear  brother's  songs  and  labors  in  the  school.  Dur 
ing  his  connection  with  it  there  was  rarely  a  communion  season  without  some 
of  its  members  coming  forward  to  unite  with  the  church  ;  and  if  the  names  of 
all  whom  he  helped  by  word  and  song  to  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  Savior,  while  ho 
was  Superintendent,  could  be  called,  there  would  rise  up  a  great  cloud  of  wit 
nesses.  Doubtless  much  of  the  seed  sowed  proved  like  that  in  the  parable, 
seed  by  the  wayside,  in  stony  ground,  among  thorns,  and  came  to  naught.  But 
there  was  left,  nevertheless,  a  generous  portion  that  brought  forth,  some  thirty, 
some  sixty,  some  an  hundred  fold  ;  and  the  harvest  among  the  children  from 
his  sowing  is  only  begun. 

We  saw  but  little  of  Mr.  Bliss  after  he  entered  upon  his  work  as  an  evan 
gelist,  but  what  we  did  see  made  us  all  feel  that  more  and  more  the  spirit  of 
anointing  was  upon  him.  Whenever  he  could,  he  came  back  for  a  visit  to  the 
old  place  of  toil  and  prayer,  and  never  wrthout  stirring  all  our  hearts  by  some 
word  of  cheer,  or  of  incitement  to  larger  devotion  in  the  Master's  service. 
Often  he  would  set  the  blood  bounding  by  a  new  song  rendered  as  only  he 
could  do  it ;  and  very  likely  he  would  follow  this  with  a  prayer,  whose  child 
like  simplicity  and  earnestness  and  pathos  revealed  how  intimate  his  commun 
ion  was  with  God,  and  how  he  longed  to  be  more  and  more  used  in  winning 
souls.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  during  these  last  years  Christ  was  in  all 
his  thoughts  ;  as  one  of  his  later  songs  expresses  it : 

My  only  song  and  story, 

Is  Jesus  died  for  me  ; 
My  only  hope  of  glory 

The  cross  of  Calvary. 

Would  that  the  spirit  of  such  a  discipleship  might  pervade  all  our  singers, 
our  Sunday  School  superintendents,  our  teachers,  our  church  members.  Then 


48  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

there  would  be  singing  in  the  spirit,  praying  in  the  spirit,  working  in  the 
spirit,  and  heaven  would  be  kept  jubilant  over  souls  rescued  from  sin.  May 
God  help  all  who  read  the  record  of  this  consecrated  life  to  enter  Into  the 
secret  of  its  joy  and  its  power — to  be  determined  not  to  know  anything  save 
Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified. 

E.  P.  GOODWIN. 


CHAPTER  V. 

I1T  EVANGELISTIC  WORK — ME,.  MOODY'S  APPEAL  TO  MB.  BLISS — THE  TURNING 
POINT — AN  EXPERIMENTAL  MEETING  AT  WAUKEGAN — BLISS'  CONSECRA 
TION  OF  HIMSELF  TO  GOD'S  SERVICE — HIS  FAITH  AND  SELF-DENIAL — 
WORKING  FOR  THE  YOUNG — AN  INCIDENT — HIS  METHODS  OF  TEACHING. 

DURING  the  winter  of  1873-4,  Mr.  Bliss  received  many 
letters  from  Mr.  Moody,  then  in  Scotland,  urging  him  to 
give  up  his  business,  drop  everything  and  sing  the  Gospel.  Similar 
letters  came  to  the  writer,  urging  that  we  should  go  out  together 
and  hold  meetings.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  were  ready  for  this,  if  they 
could  see  it  as  the  Lord's  will.  Mrs.  Bliss'  characteristic  remark 
was  :  "I  am  willing  that  Mr.  Bliss  should  do  anything  that  we  can 
be  sure  is  the  Lord's  will,  and  I  can  trust  the  Lord  to  provide  for 
us,  but  I  don't  want  him  to  take  such  a  step  simply  on  Mr.  Moody's 
will."  There  was  much  prayer  and  much  hesitation  on  Mr.  Bliss' 
part  in  approaching  a  decision  upon  the  matter.  He  doubted  his 
ability  to  be  useful  in  the  work  ;  doubted  whether  the  drawing  he 
felt  toward  it  was  of  the  Lord  or  his  own  inclinations.  Mr.  Moody 
continued  to  write.  One  of  his  sentences  I  remember  was  :  "You 
have  not  faith.  If  you  haven't  faith  of  your  own  on  this  matter,  start 
out  on  my  faith.  Launch  out  into  the  deep."  A  solemn  providence 
of  God  that  occurred  at  this  time,  and  very  deeply  impressed  both 
Mr.  Bliss  and  myself,  is  linked  in  the  chain  that  drew  us  into  the 
work.  In  November,  1874,  my  Christian  brother  and  dear  personal 
friend  and  nearest  neighbor,  Mr.  H.  G.  Spafford,  received  a  tele 
gram  from  England  announcing  the  drowning  of  his  four  dear 
children  in  the  loss  of  the  "  Ville  de  Havre."  His  wife,  who  accom 
panied  the  children,  had  been  rescued  and  sent  the  despatch.  These 
friends  were  dear  to  Mr.  Bliss  and  myself,  and  their  affliction  was  a 
deep  personal  sorrow. 

Mr.  Spaiford  left  at  once  for  Europe,  to  bring  home  his  wife, 
and  while  there  had  a  conference  with  Mr.  Moody  relating  to  Mr. 
4 


50  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Bliss  going  with  me  into  Gospel  work.  Upon  his  return,  he  urged 
the  matter  upon  us,  and  his  words  and  representations  were  used  of 
God  in  bringing  us  both  to  regard  it  as  probable  that  we  should 
respond  to  the  call.  Shortly  after  this  return  of  Mr.  Spafford.  and 
while  we  were  waiting  for  some  opening  to  indicate  the  Lord's  will, 
an  interview  on  the  cars  with  Rev.  C.  M.  Saunders,  of  Waukegan, 
Illinois,  led  to  our  arranging  to  go  there  for  three  or  four  evenings, 
as  an  experiment.  If  the  Lord  blessed  us  and  souls  were  converted, 
we  would  take  it  as  indication  of  His  will,  that  He  called  us  into  the 
work.  Through  Mr.  Saunders  I  am  furnished  with  copies  of  the 
following  letters  concerning  these  meetings  : 

ELGIN  WATCH  Co.,  CHICAGO,  March  16th,  1874. 

Bliss,  Cole  and  myself,  God  willing,  will  be  with  you  Tuesday,  Wednesday 
and  Thursday  evenings,  next  week,  March  24,  25  and  26. 

D.  W.  WHITTLE 

CHICAGO,  March,  14,  1874. 

Dear  Brother  Saunders  :  Bro.  Whittle  will  write  you  that  he  and  I  are 
coming  to  Waukegan,  Tuesday,  24th  inst.  I  know  that  you  and  all  God's 
people  will  pray  for  the  Spirit's  power  to  accompany  the  effort.  Solicit  the 
singers  to  come  and  assist  me  in  the  singing.  Would  like  a  good  organ  and  all 
the  "  Sunshine  "  in  town.  *  *  Organ  in  front  of  congregation,  if  possible, 
and  good  light  all  over  the  room,  I  venture  to  suggest.  Every  time  you  think 
of  our  coining,  offer  a  prayer  that  it  may  be  purely  for  God's  glory.  Amen. 
Wife  and  brother  unite  in  love  to  thee  and  thine. 

Sincerely,  P.  P.  BLISS. 

The  Tuesday  evening  meeting  was  not  an  encouraging  one,  as 
to  attendance,  and  had  no  marked  result,  except  in  the  very  power 
ful  impression  upon  the  minds  of  Bliss,  dear  brother  Cole  and  my 
self,  that  the  Lord  was  with  us.  The  next  day  it  rained  and  we 
looked  for  a  still  smaller  audience,  but  it  was  twice  as  large.  Be 
fore  the  meeting  closed,  there  were  blessed  indications  of  the  work 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  people.  The  place  became  very  solemn, 
and  as  dear  Bliss  sang  "Almost  Persuaded,"  every  word  seemed 
filled  with  power.  In  different  parts  of  the  house,  sinners  arose  as 
he  sang,  presenting  themselves  for  prayer,  and  souls  that  night 
rejoiced  in  Christ.  Our  hearts  were  very  full,  and  a  great  respon 
sibility  was  upon  us.  The  next  afternoon,  we  all  three  met  in  the 
study  of  the  Congregational  Church,  where  our  meetings  were  held, 
and  spent  some  hours  in  prayer.  Bliss  made  a  formal  surrender  of 


BLISS'   SELF-CONSECRATION.  51 

everything  to  the  Lord  ;  gave  up  his  musical  conventions  ;  gave  up 
his  writing  of  secular  music  ;  gave  up  everything,  and  in  a  simple 
chiJdlike,  trusting  prayer,  placed  himself,  with  any  talent,  any  power 
God  had  given  him,  at  the  disposal  of  the  Lord,  for  any  use  He 
could  make  of  him  in  the  spreading  of  His  Gospel.  Dear  Cole 
united  with  us  in  this  consecration.  It  was  a  wonderful  afternoon. 
As  I  think  back  upon  the  scene  in  that  little  study,  and  recall 
Bliss'  prayer,  and  the  emotions  that  filled  us  all  in  the  sense  of  God's 
presence,  the  room  seems  lit  up  in  my  memory  with  a  halo  of  glory. 
This  meeting  of  consecration  was  followed  by  a  wonderful  meeting 
in  the  evening.  Some  twenty  or  more  accepted  Christ,  and  a  spirit 
of  deep  conviction  was  upon  many  souls.  We  returned  to  Chicago 
in  the  morning,  praising  God — Bliss  to  find  substitutes  for  his  con 
ventions,  and  I  to  resign  my  business  position.  From  that  Wednes 
day,  March  25,  1874,  up  to  December  15,  1876,  when  I  parted 
from  Mm  no  more  to  meet  on  earth,  I  never  heard  Mr.  Bliss  express 
a  r«_  srec  that  he  made  this  surrender,  that  he  gave  himself  to  God  for 
Hif>  work.  His  income  from  his  business  at  this  time  was  good  and 
growing.  His  reputation  as  a  composer  was  recognized,  and  he 
looked  forward  with  his  wife  to  soon  being  in  a  condition  where  he 
could  settle  down  and  be  at  home,  giving  up  his  convention  work. 
His  decision  involved  the  giving  up  of  income,  the  simple  trusting 
God  for  all  means  of  support,  the  relinquishing  of  all  plans  for  ever 
settling  down  in  a  home,  a  lowering  of  his  reputation  in  the  eyes 
of  many  well-meaning  musical  friends,  who  recognized  his  ability  to 
become  a  leader  in  the  art,  and  the  taking  up  of  a  laborious,  self-deny 
ing  calling — a  calling  in  which  it  is  not  possible  for  one  to  abide  un 
less  laborious  and  self-denying.  None  of  these  things  that  he  gave  up 
did  Bliss  ever  speak  of.  He  was  as  silent  about  them  as  the  disciples 
in  the  Gospels,  when,  with  their  eyes  on  the  Lord,  they  followed 
Him  over  Palestine,  are  silent  about  the  boats,  nets  and  fishes  they 
left  by  the  sea  of  Galilee.  I  think  Bliss  truly  counted  these  things 
nothing  compared  with  the  joy  of  being  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  the  gladness  of  being  used  to  impart  life  by  the  Gospel  to  dead 
souls.  On  our  way  to  Waukegan/that  morning,  he  selected  a  verse 
which,  said  he,  "let  us  keep  as  our  watchword  in  the  work."  The 
verse  is  in  Hebrews  xii,  2  :  "  Looking  unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and 
Finisher  of  our  faith  ;  who,  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him, 
endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,  and  is  set  down  at  the  right 


52  MEMOIE   OF   P.    T.    BLISS. 

hand  of  the  throne  of  God."  Many  and  many  a  time  has  his  cheery 
utterance  of  the  words  "  Looking  unto  Jesus"  chased  away  despon 
dency,  and  given  grace  and  courage  for  the  trials  of  the  way.  There 
is  a  strange  silence  on  the  earth  to  me,  as  the  thought  comes  that 
I  am  never  to  hear  that  voice  here  again.  May  my  memory  of 
it  ever  be  connected  with  these  words,  so  dear  to  him,  and  may  the 
thought  that  he  is  up  there  forever  with  the  Lord  be  to  us  all,  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  greater  inspiration  than  was  the 
voice  so  loved,  so  missed. 

It  is  not  necessary  that  I  should  enter  into  any  detailed  account 
of  Mr.  Bliss'  work  while  an  evangelist.  The  memorials  printed 
in  this  book  are  sufficient  evidence  of  the  acceptance  of  his  labors  to 
the  church  of  Christ,  and  of  his  endorsement  by  the  ministers  of 
the  Gospel  of  all  evangelical  denominations  as  one  approved  of 
God.  In  the  chapters  devoted  to  his  songs  will  be  found  such  inci 
dents  as  I  can  recall  connected  with  his  singing  the  Gospel.  Tho 
towns  and  cities  he  visited  in  the  work  were  as  follows  :  In  1874 — 
Waukegan  and  Turner  Junction,  Illinois ;  Geneva,  Wisconsin  ; 
Elgin,  Illinois ;  Whitewater,  Wisconsin ;  Detroit,  Michigan  ;  Pitts 
burgh,  Pennsylvania.  In  1875 — Chicago;  Louisville  and  Lexington, 
Kentucky  ;  Nashville  and  Memphis,  Tennessee  ;  St.  Paul  and  Minne 
apolis,  Minnesota ;  Milwaukee,  Wisconsin.  In  1876 — Racine  and 
Madison,  Wisconsin  ;  St.  Louis,  Missouri ;  Mobile,  Montgomery 
and  Selma,  Alabama  ;  Augusta,  Georgia  ;  Kalamazoo  and  Jackson, 
Michigan ;  Peoria,  Illinois — twenty-five  in  all.  From  all  of  these 
places  there  will  be  some  to  meet  him  in  glory  and  to  recognize  him 
as  the  one  through  whose  personal  influence  they  were  led  to  accept 
salvation. 

As  memory  runs  back  over  the  audiences  assembled  in  these 
yarious  places  to  hear  him  sing,  and  who  were  often  moved  by  his 
melodies  as  the  breath  of  wind  moves  the  bending  grain,  now  weep 
ing,  now  exulting,  now  thrilled  by  the  Christ  exalted  in  his  song, 
I  offer  the  fervent  prayer  that  all  who  ever  heard  him  sing  on  earth 
may  sing  -with  him  in  Heaven ;  and  that  any  before  whom  these 
lines  may  come,  whose  memory,  with  mine,  runs  back  to  meetings 
where  they  were  "Almost  Persuaded,"  and  almost  rose  as  accepting 
Jesus,  as  he  sang,  but  are  still  unsaved,  may  now  at  once  decide 
and  give  themselves  up  to  Christ.  May  all  the  singers  whom  ho 
loved  and  so  often  prayed  for  be  ready,  as  he  was,  for  the  sum- 


ILLUSTRATION   OF   UNBELIEF.  53 

mons  home,  and  may  they  join  that  choir  of  blood-washed  ones  on 
high,  where  he  and  his  dear  wife  are  now  singing,  "  Saved  by  the 
Blood  of  the  Crucified  One."  May  all  the  dear  ministers  in  these 
places,  who  loved  him  and  prayed  with  him,  and  for  him,  be 
anointed  with  power  from  on  high,  to  win  souls,  laboring  as  those 
who  know  not,  as  he  knew  not,  how  short  the  time  may  be. 

During  the  last  year  of  his  life,  Mr.  Bliss  had  an  increased  desire 
to  work  for  the  children  and  young  people.  He  conducted  a  daily 
meeting  for  them,  and  with  most  blessed  results.  Hundreds  of 
them,  I  believe,  have  been  led  to  Christ,  intelligently  and  savingly, 
in  his  meetings.  In  Peoria,  he  expressed  to  me  very  decidedly  his 
determination  to  work  more  earnestly  in  that  direction.  His  ten 
derness  of  nature  and  sympathy  fitted  him  specially  for  reaching  the 
hearts  of  the  young.  They  were  drawn  to  him  because  they  knew 
he  loved  them. 

A  little  incident  that  occurred  in  Peoria  will  illustrate  his  sym 
pathy  for  children.  It  was  just  before  Christmas,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bliss  were  busy  each  day  in,procuring  presents  to  take  home  to  lit 
tle  Paul  and  George,  and  to  Grandma,  and  all  at  home.  One  day 
Bliss  was  on  the  street  and  noticed,  as  he  was  passing,  a  little  girl, 
poorly  clad,  standing  in  front  of  a  toy-store  window,  gazing  intently 
and  longingly  at  the  dolls  displayed  in  large  numbers  and  in  a  pretty 
arrangement  from  large  to  small,  in  the  window.  He  stopped  at 
once,  and  kindly  and  earnestly  said,  "Now  just  pick  out  the  one 
that  you  want,  and  you  shall  have  it.  I  will  go  in  and  buy  it  for 
you."  He  would  have  been  delighted  to  do  so,  he  said — had  already 
done  it  in  his  own  mind — but  the  child  looked  around  at  him  with  a 
painful  expression  of  distrust  and  unbelief,  and,  gathering  her  shawl 
over  her  head,  hurried  away,  not  heeding  his  repeated  assurances 
that  she  could  have  a  doll  if  she  wanted  it.  "  That  is  just  the  way 
sinners  treat  Christ,"  said  he,  as  he  told  me  about  it.  "  I  was  real 
grieved  that  the  little  one  wouldn't  let  me  do  for  her  what  I  wanted 
to,  and  that  she  distrusted  me,  when  I  just  wished  with  all  my  heart 
to  make  her  happy.  I  think  I  understand  a  little  better  how  the 
Lord  feels  at  our  unbelief  of  His  precious  promises." 

I  wish  all  the  dear  young  people  and  children  who  have  ever 
attended  Mr.  Bliss'  meetings  to  know  how  sincere  and  tender  an 
interest  he  had  in  their  welfare.  He  very  much  prized  the  testi 
monies  of  the  children  given  to  him  on  cards,  or  in  little  notes,  and 


54  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

many  of  them  are  filed  away  among  his  papers.  He  had  a  faculty 
for  interesting  the  children  in  the  Scriptures,  and  secured  their 
participation  in  the  meetings  by  giving  out  texts  and  asking  each  to 
bring  a  verse  upon  the  text  and  recite  it.  "Love,"  "Peace," 
" Grace,"  " Faith,"  "Believe,"  "Heaven,"  and  other  texts  were 
used  by  him.  Of  course  the  singing  was  made  a  specialty  of  in  his 
meetings.  He  sang  a  great  deal  with  the  children,  and  some  for 
them.  He  always  secured  their  attention  to  the  sentiment  of  the 
hymns  and  the  truth  taught  in  them,  before  singing,  and  would 
have  them  pray  with  him  for  God  to  bless  the  singing.  The  sing 
ing  was  thus  taken  up  out  of  the  place  of  mere  entertainment  too 
often  assigned  it  in  meetings,  and  was  made  a  spiritual  power  in 
worship  and  in  preaching  the  Gospel.  When  he  prayed,  he  usually 
had  the  children  follow  him  audibly.  After  singing  and  prayer, 
he  would  have  the  texts  repeated,  and  request  that  any  who  wished 
to  confess  Christ  as  their  Savior  should  do  so,  after  they  had  re 
peated  their  verse.  Many  a  grown  person  has  been  led  in  this 
manner,  in  his  meetings  (for  as  many  adults  attended  them  as  chil 
dren),  to  overcome  their  timidity,  and  to  know  the  joy  that  cornes 
from  obeying  the  word  in  Komans  x,  10,  by  "  confessing  with  the 
mouth  the  Lord  Jesus."  After  recitation  of  texts  and  singing,  he 
would  give  them  a  ten  minute  lesson  from  the  word.  The  follow 
ing  are  some  of  his  outlines  for  these  lessons  : 

HEAR  AND  REMEMBER. 


Matt,  xv,  10.  "Hear." 

Matt,  xvii,  5.  "  Hear  Him' 

Mark  iv,  24.  "What." 

Luke  viii,  18.  "  Now." 


John  xv,  20.  Remember. 

Matt,  vii,  12.  Do. 

John  ii,  5.  Do  it. 

John  xv,  14.  Do. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

"  The  man  who  loved  music." 

"  The  broken  arm." 

"  Two  girls  who  '  loved/  " 

COME. 

Gen.  vii,  1.  Come  ihou. 

Isaiah  i,  18.  Come  now. 

Matt,  xi,  28.  Come  unto  me. 

Rev.  xxii,  20.  Come,  Lord  Jesus. 


HIS  METHODS  OF  TEACHING.  55 


Upon  the  blackboard  he  would  have 


C     /\      M  Come. 

H     I  1      M        I — ^         Home. 

L     V      ./      V  .      Love. 


"1  AM." 

John  viii,  12.    Liglit. 
John  x,  9.          Door. 
John  xi,  11.      Good  Shepherd. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

"  Know  Him." 
"Mr.  Homer  Book." 
"  Mute  speaking  Father." 
"  Sick  boy  told  to  eat." 

"ALL  THINGS." 
2  Cor.  iv,  14.      For  your  sakes. 
2  Cor.  v,  17.      Are  become  new. 

2  Cor.  v,  18.  Are  of  God. 

2  Cor.  vi,  4.  Approving  ourselves. 
2  Cor.  vi,  10.      Possessing  all  things. 

These  are  given  as  illustrating  his  preparation  for  his  meetings, 
and  his  method  of  using  the  Scriptures.  I  have  wished  to  give 
them,  and  to  briefly  sketch  his  manner  of  conducting  meetings,  for 
the  benefit  others  may  derive  as  to  methods  of  interesting  the  chil 
dren  in  religious  services,  and  also  to  have  Mr.  Bliss  remembered  as 
something  more  than  a  singer,  in  the  evangelical  work  in  which  he 
was  engaged.  He  was  much  used  of  God  in  preaching  the  word 
in  the  manner  above  set  forth,  as  well  as  in  singing.  The  services 
he  has  conducted  alone  in  various  parts  of  the  country,  which  he 
used  to  call  "praise  meetings,"  have  been  much  blessed,  and  were 
abundant  evidence  of  his  ability  for  the  general  work  of  an  evan 
gelist.  It  would  be  an  injustice  to  his  memory  fco  think  of  him  as 
a  singer  only,  and  to  consider  that  the  part  he  has  borne  in  the 
work  which  has  been  owned  of  God  was  simply  that  of  singing. 
"We  pray  to  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  to  raise  up  the  singer  to  take 
his  place  in  singing  the  Gospel ;  but  shall  we  ever  have  again  singer, 
poet,  composer,  preacher,  all  combined  in  one  of  like  character 
with  Philip  Bliss  ?  If  necessary  for  the  church,  yes.  By  the 


56  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

grace  of  God  lie  was  what  he  was.  But  it  seems  to  many  of  us 
that  "take  him  for  all  in  all,  we  ne'er  shall  look  upon  his  like 
again."  He  has  been  given  to  us  to  show  how  beautiful  the  gifts 
of  God  may  become  when  shining  out  through  a  Christian  life, 
from  a  soul  consecrated  by  the  bldod  of  Christ,  and  sanctified  by 
the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

MB.  BLISS  AS  A  COMPOSER  AND  AUTHOR — HIS  FIRST  SUNDAY  SCHOOL  HYMN 
— "  IF  PAPA  WERE  ONLY  READY  " — HIS  SYSTEMATIC  HABITS  AND  MANNER 
OF  WORKING — THE  LAST  HYMN  HE  WROTE — THE  MUSIC  BURNED  AT 
ASHTABULA — HIS  FACILITY  OF  EXPRESSION. 

r  I  THOUSANDS  of  people  who  never  saw  Mr.  Bliss  feel  that  they 
JL  knew  and  loved  him  through  his  hymns.  To  them  and  to 
the  generation  to  come,  the  principal  interest  in  his  life  will  center 
around  these  productions  of  his  pen.  It  is  proposed  to  collect  in 
this  and  following  chapters  such  facts  in  regard  to  the  composition 
and  use  of  the  best  known  and  most  widely  used  of  his  songs  as  will 
be  of  interest  to  the  world. 

The  first  song  Mr.  Bliss  wrote,  that  was  used  in  Sunday  schools 
or  Gospel  meetings,  is  the  piece  found  in  Gospel  Songs,  entitled  "If 
Papa  were  only  Ready."  He  caught  the  song  from  reading  in  a  re 
ligious  paper  of  a  little  boy  dying  and  telling  his  father,  just  before 
death  came  to  take  him  away,  that  he  was  afraid  "he  would  not 
come  to  heaven  because  he  couldn't  leave  the  store."  He  wrote  the 
words  and  music  in  May,  1867,  at  Borne,  Pennsylvania,  and  sent  it 
on  to  Mr.  Root,  who  was  much  pleased  with  it  and  caused  its  imme 
diate  publication.  The  following  are  the  words  : 

IF  PAPA  WERE  ONLY  READY. 

I  should  like  to  die,  said  Willie,  if  my  papa  could  die  too, 

But  he  says  he  isn't  ready,  'cause  he  has  so  much  to  do ; 

And  my  little  sister  Nellie  says  that  I  must  surely  die, 

And  that  she  and  mamma — then  she  stopp'd,  because  it  made  me  cry. 

But  she  told  me,  I  remember,  once  while  sitting  on  her  knee, 
That  the  angels  never  weary,  watching  over  her  and  me ; 
And  that  if  we're  good   (and  mamma  told  me  just  the  same  before), 
They  will  let  us  into  heaven  when  they  see  us  at  the  door. 


58  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

There  I  know  I  shall  be  happy,  and  will  always  want  to  stay ; 
I  shall  love  to  hear  the  singing,  I  shall  love  the  endless  day ; 
I  shall  love  to  look  at  Jesus,  I  shall  love  Him  more  and  more, 
And  I'll  gather  water-lilies  for  the  angel  at  the  door. 

There  will  be  none  but  the  holy — I  shall  know  no  more  of  sin  ; 
Though  I'll  see  mamma  and  Nellie,  for  I  know  he'll  let  them  in, 
But  I'll  have  to  tell  the  angel,  when  I  meet  him  at  the  door, 
That  he  must  excuse  my  papa,  'cause  he  couldn't  leave  the  store. 

Nellie  says,  that  may  be  I  shall  very  soon  be  called  away  ; 
If  papa  were  only  ready,  I  should  like  to  go  to-day ; 
But  if  I  should  go  before  him  to  that  world  of  light  and  joy, 
Then  I  guess  he'd  want  to  come  to  Heaven  to  see  his  little  boy. 

The  books  of  songs  by  Mr.  Bliss  are  as  follows  :  "The  Charm, " 

1871  ;  "  The  Song  Tree,"  a  collection  of  parlor  and  concert  music, 

1872  ;  "  The  Sunshine,"  for  Sunday  Schools,  1873  ;  "  The  Joy," 
for   conventions    and    for   church   choir   music,    1873;    "Gospel 
Songs,"  for  Gospel  meetings  and  Sunday  Schools,  1874. 

All  of  these  books  are  copyrighted  by  John  Church  &  Co.,  and 
it  is  by  their  permission  that  the  selections  of  Mr.  Bliss'  poetry, 
given  herewith,  are  taken,  for  the  most  part,  from  these  books. 
In  addition  to  these  publications,  in  1875  he  compiled,  and  in  con 
nection  with  Mr.  Sankey  edited,  "  Gospel  Hymns  and  Sacred  Songs," 
and  in  1876,  his  last  work  was  the  preparation  of  the  book  known  as 
Gospel  Hymns  No  2,  Mr.  Sankey  being  associated  with  him  as 
editor.  These  last  two  books  are  published  by  John  Church  &  Co. 
and  Biglow  &  Main  jointly — the  work  of  Mr.  Bliss  in  them,  under 
the  copyright  of  John  Church  &  Co.  Very  many  pieces  of  Mr. 
Bliss'  appear  in  the  books  of  Geo.  F.  Boot  and  H.  K.  Palmer,  and 
many  were  published  in  sheet  music  form.  A  large  number  of  his 
popular  pieces  were  published  in  "  The  Prize,"  a  book  of  Sunday 
School  songs,  edited  by  £eo.  F.  Root,  in  1870. 

From  the  above  it  will  be  seen  that  he  was  an  industrious 
worker.  From  1870  to  1876,  six  years,  his  pen  was  very  busy.  The 
above  seven  books,  forty  or  fifty  songs  in  sheet  form,  many  pieces 
in  books  of  others  in  exchange  for  what  they  had  furnished  him, 
with  much  miscellaneous  writing  as  contributor  to  a  musical  journal, 
and  in  other  directions,  and  all  this  in  connection  with  his  conven 
tion,  choir  and  Sunday  school  work  up  to  1874,  and  from  that 


AUTHORSHIP.  59 

time  constantly  in  evangelistic  work,  make  us  marvel  that  he  found 
time  to  do  so  much.  It  can  only  be  explained  by  an  admission 
of  his  wonderful  gifts,  that  made  his  song  writing  not  so  much  a 
matter  of  labor  as  a  delight — an  outflow  of  melody  that  must  find 
expression,  and  a  careful  and  laborious  training  of  fit  methods  of 
expression  of  words  and  harmony  for  the  melody  with  which  his 
soul  was  filled.  He  was  a  very  systematic  and  orderly  man  in  all 
of  his  surroundings.  Scrupulously  neat  in  person  and  apparel, 
and  with  the  sensitiveness  of  a  woman  in  matters  of  taste,  and 
a  shrinking  from  all  suggestion  of  vulgarity  in  anything  in  him 
or  around  him,  his  study  or  place  of  work,  wherever  he  might 
be,  partook  of  the  nature  of  the  man.  His  books  and  papers 
were  in  order,  his  desk  or  table  usually  clear,  and  his  work 
prosecuted  in  a  business-like  manner.  It  pained  him  to  have  things 
in  a  "helter  skelter"  way  about  him.  A  misspelled  word  in  a 
letter,  or  the  wrong  pronunciation  of  a  word  in  an  address,  was  to 
him  like  a  note  out  of  harmony  in  music.  His  penmanship  was 
very  neat,  and  his  letters  and  manuscripts, as  completed  by  him,  are 
without  blots  or  erasures.  He  never  liked  to  write  a  letter  with  a 
pencil,  and  would  always  copy  over  a  piece  of  music  if  possible, 
rather  than  to  send  it  to  his  publishers  with  erasures.  And  yet 
none  of  his  friends  will  remember  him  as  being  one  known  as  a  pre 
cise  man,  in  a  manner  to'  make  others  feel  preciseness  in  his  com 
pany.  His  joyous  nature,  and  happy  and  good  humored  way  of 
noticing  others'  defects,  and  of  carrying  out  his  rules,  kept  away  any 
uncomfortable  feeling  on  the  part  of  any  one  associated  or  brought 
in  contact  with  him.  His  tenderness  was  such  he  would  not  have 
injured  the  feelings  of  a  child  for  worlds. 

Mr.  Bliss'  best  songs  were  never  studied  themes  connected  with 
the  Sunday  school  lessons  of  those  years.  They  were  studied  pieces, 
and,  he  himself  often  said,  were  not  a  success.  They  did  not  have 
inspiration  in  them.  He  could  not  sit  down  at  any  time,  and  upon 
a  given  theme  write  a  given  song  that  would  be  a  success.  Some 
times  a  melody  would  come  to  him,  and  he  would  work  it  out  and 
write  it  down  and  wait  for  words.  Sometimes  the  lines  for  a  chorus 
would  be  the  first  suggestion  of  a  hymn.  Sometimes  the  last  verse 
of  a  hymn  would  form  in  his  mind  and  would  be  written  down,  and 
hymn  and  tune  be  worked  up  from  it.  More  often  the  whole  hymn, 
in  theme,  structure  of  words,  chorus  and  tune,  would  be  born  at 


60  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

once,  and  all  written  out  together.  This,  he  has  told  me,  was  true 
of  the  hymns  that  have  been  most  sung.  "  Hold  the  Fort/' 
"  Down  Life's  dark  Vale  we  Wander,"  "  More  to  Follow,"  "  Jesus 
Loves  Me,"  "  Windows  open  toward  Jerusalem,"  were  written  in 
this  manner.  His  own  soul  was  full  and  was  thrilled  with  the 
themes  that  took  possession  of  him.  My  most  vivid  recollections 
of  him  will  always  be  of  his  entire  self  abandonment  of  joy  in  the 
consciousness  of  being  used  of  God  in  bringing  out  in  song  some 
precious  Gospel  truth,  some  exalting  view  of  Christ.  He  has  come 
to  me  often  with  the  theme  of  a  hymn,  and  with  his  face  shining 
and  eyes  moist,  explained  his  plan  and  purpose  as  in  his  mind,  and 
asked  me  to  thank  God  and  pray  with  him  that  God  might  bless  the 
song.  He  never  felt  that  the  songs  originated  with  him.  They 
seemed  to  him  to  come  through  him  from  God.  As  he  grew  in  the 
knowledge  of  God's  word,  he  would  marvel  at  the  truth  he  had 
expressed  in  his  songs  without  knowing  it.  At  the  time  of  writing 
"  Hold  the  Fort,"  he  had  no  clear  views  as  to  the  testimony  of  the 
Scriptures,  that  the  attitude  of  the  Christian  should  always  be  the 
daily  expectation  and  desire  of  the  personal  return  of  Jesus  Christ. 
When  this  truth  came  in  power  into  his  soul,  he  recognized  the 
purpose  of  God  in  his  writing  the  hymn,  and  that  its  use  by  the 
church  all  around  the  world  was  on  account  of  its  harmony  with 
the  word  of  God,  upon  a  truth  intended  to  arouse  Christians. 

After  his  consecration  to  Christ  for  His  service  in  saving  souls. 
Mr.  Bliss'  experience  crystalized  more  and  more  into  an  appre 
hension  of  a  personal  Savior.  Christ  risen — Christ  ever  present 
with  us — Jesus,  the  real,  living,  personal  Jesus  of  the  Gospels, 
came  closer  and  closer  to  him.  His  communion  with  Christ  was 
uninterrupted.  And  his  songs  in  these  days  abounded  with  Christ. 
The  last  year  of  his  life,  nearly  all  the  songs  he  wrote  contain  the 
three  themes  of  Gospel  testimony,  Christ  died  for  our  sins,  He 
lives  for  our  justification,  He  is  coming  again  in  a  glory  which  we 
are  to  share.  He  did  not  plan  these  hymns  with  any  purpose  to 
teach  these  truths,  and  was  surprised  himself  when  his  attention 
was  called  to  the  fact  of  the  uniformity  of  their  testimony  in  these 
directions.  He  simply  wrote  of  what  filled  his  own  heart  and  had 
come  to  his  own  soul.  "  The  Half  was  never  Told,"  "  No  other 
Name  is  Given,"  "  Hallelujah  !  what  a  Savior,"  "  Are  your  Win 
dows  open  toward  Jerusalem  ?"  "Hallelujah  !  Ho  is  Risen,"  "At 


HIS  LAST  SOSTG.  61 

the  Feet  of  Jesus,"  "Hallelujah!  'tis  Done,"  all  of  which  ap 
pear  in  Gospel  Hymns  No  2,  are  examples  of  the  truth  of  this  state 
ment.  It  is  also  very  suggestive  to  notice  the  character  of  teaching, 
in  words  furnished  by  other  authors  with  music  written  by  him, 
that  appear  in  this  same  work.  I  am  sure  that  he  did  not  contem 
plate  any  test  of  this  kind  in  making  his  selections  from  scores  of 
manuscript  songs  that  were  monthly  sent  to  him ;  he  simply  set 
music  to  the  words  that  inspired  music  in  his  soul.  I  do  not  think 
he  ever  exchanged  a  word  with  any  one  as  to  any  distinctive  char 
acter  of  teaching  in  the  songs  selected  ;  but  all  these  words  that  he 
selected  convey  the  same  leading  truths.  "  Look  away  to  Jesus," 
"  Hold  fast  till  I  Come,"  "  Out  of  the  Ark,"  "  Till  He  come,"  "  It 
is  well  with  My  Soul,"  etc.,  are  examples.  Mr.  Bliss'  songs  can 
only  be  understood  and  appreciated  by  an  understanding  of  the 
reality  to  him  of  the  truths  they  convey,  as  connected  with  a  per 
sonal  Christ.  The  words  he  sang  so  grandly — 

Christ  Jesus  is  my  all  in  all, 
My  comfort  and  my  love, 
My  life  below,  and  He  shall  be 
My  joy  and  crown  above — 

just  filled  his  soul.  I  believe  he  had  no  more  thought,  in  sing 
ing  them,  of  doing  anything  for  the  entertainment  of  people,  or  to 
excite  admiration,  than  the  meadow  lark  mounting  to  heaven,  sing 
ing  as  it  soars.  He  sang  from  an  overflowing  heart  to  the  praise  of 
his  Savior.  The  last  words  that  I  know  of  his  writing  were  the 
two  pieces,  "My  Eedeemer,"  and  "I've  passed  the  Cross  of  Cal 
vary."  Nothing  that  he  ever  wrote  made  him  more  happy.  I  can 
see  him  now,  as  he  came  into  my  room  at  Peoria  and  stood  by  my 
table,  with  the  words  of  the  latter  piece  written  in  pencil,  and  I 
can  hear  his  earnest  voice  as  he  read  the  verses  and  called  my  atten 
tion  to  the  "empty  tomb"  and  the  "vantage  ground ;  "  and  the 
tears  filled  his  eyes  as  he  stood  for  a  moment  and  spoke  of  the  risen 
Christ,  the  acceptance  we  have  in  Him,  and  the  victory  over  sin  and 
over  the  flesh  that  faith  in  such  acceptance  gives  the  believer. 
Now  he  said,  "  If  the  Lord  will  give  me  a  tune  for  this,  I  believe  it 
will  be  used  to  bring  some  souls  on  to  the  mountain."  The  Lord 
gave  him  a  tune  during  the  last  week  of  his  life  at  Rome.  He  sang 
it  to  the  family  with  inspiring  effect,  but  the  written  music  then 


62  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS, 

used  was  burned  at  Ashtabula.  It  was  one  of  a  few  pieces  that  he 
placed  in  his  satchel,  to  look  over  during  his  journey.  The  family 
are  all  musicians,  but  cannot  recall  the  melody  that  inspired 
them  that  evening,  and  we  shall  not  hear  it  as  he  sang  it  until  we 
stand  with  him  in  the  rapidly-hastening- on  resurrection  morning, 
and  know,  with  him,  the  fullness  of  Christ's  resurrection  power. 
I  think  that  then,  among  the  voices  of  the  redeemed,  we  shall  dis 
tinguish  his,  and  hush  our  praises  for  a  moment  to  listen  to  the 
tune  the  Lord  had  given  him  as  he  sings — 

Oh,  glorious  height  of  vantage  ground, 
Oh,  blest  victorious  hour  ! 

God  grant  to  all  who  read  a  part  in  that  first  resurrection. 

In  writing,  Mr.  Bliss  had  a  marvelous  command  of  words  and 
facility  in  selecting  the  very  happiest  phrases  to  express  his  thought. 
A  favorite  entertainment  with  him  was  to  have  a  word  selected,  and 
each  of  the  party  present  make  as  many  words  as  possible  from  the 
letters  contained  in  the  word  chosen.  After  each  had  written  out 
all  the  words  he  could  conjure,  and  lists  were  compared,  it  would  al 
ways  be  found  that  he  had  two  or  three  words  the  most.  He  loved 
to  make  adjectives  and  alliterations  of  words,  commencing  with 
the  same  letter,  as  in  the  lines, 

"  Earth's  fairest  floicers  will  droop  and  die. 
Life's  dearest  joys  flit  fleetest  by." 

He  had  all  the  gifts  of  a  natural  poet  in  instinct  and  imagina 
tion,  and  the  faculty  of  expressing  his  thoughts  in  fitting  musical 
words  and  sentences.  There  was  a  charm  in  the  nicely  balanced, 
sensitive  criticism  which  he  would  in  a  deprecating  way  give  upon 
verses  submitted  him  for  criticism,  or  which  he  himself  had  written, 
that  is  very  pleasant  to  recall. 

The  pieces  that  contain  most  of  the  true  genius  of  poetry,  in  the 
latest  edition  of  Gospel  Hymns,  as  viewed  by  those  of  critical  taste, 
would  probably  be  the  hymn  "Eternity,"  by  Miss  Ellen  Gates,  and 
"  Arise  and  Shine,"  by  Miss  Mary  Lathbury  ;  and  no  words  that  he 
ever  set  to  music  ever  so  inspired  Mr.  Bliss,  or  so  satisfied  his  po 
etic  instincts.  He  could  not  read  or  sing  the  words  without  enthu 
siasm.  Indeed,  the  music  he  wrote  for  them  shows  how  keenly  in 
sympathy  with  the  words  he  must  have  been.  Never  did  music 


63 

more  aptly  express  the  heart  that  beats,  in  living  words,  than  the 
inspiring  melody  of  "Arise  and  Shine,"  and  the  sweet,  solemn 
strains  of  "  Eternity,"  as  completed  by  him. 

It  is  not  claimed  for  Mr.  Bliss  that  the  works  he  leaves  behind 
him  would  give  him  a  reputation  as  a  great  poet.  He  was  very  far 
from  classing  himself  in  the  list  of  poets  at  all.  But  it  is  claimed 
that  he  possessed  the  true  poetic  genius  in  a  far  more  than  ordinary 
degree,  and  that,  had  his  life  been  spared,  he  would  have  given  ex 
pression  to  poetry  equal  to  the  very  best  of  our  sacred  hymns.  There 
will  be  many  who  will  claim  this  for  some  of  the  pieces  that  he  has 
left  behind  him.  Let  the  hymns  speak  for  themselves,  and  may  his 
prayer  be  answered,  that  the  gifts,  the  style  and  the  person  of  the 
author  be  lost  sight  of  in  the  theme  they  present. 

It  has  been  stated  that  Mrs.  Bliss  wrote  several  hymns  which  were 
published  in  Mr.  Bliss'  books  under  the  name  of  "Paulina."  This 
is  a  mistake.  Sd  far  as  is  known,  Mrs.  Bliss  never  wrote  any  hymns 
or  songs.  Two  pieces  of  very  popular  music  were  suggested  by  her 
to  Mr.  Bliss,  and  were  written  out  by  him  and  published  as  her  com 
positions.  One  of  them  was  "I  will  Love  Jesus  ; "  the  other,  "  Eock 
of  Ages."  Both  melodies  are  very  beautiful,  and  were  Mrs.  Bliss' 
suggestion.  The  words,  "  I  will  Love  Jesus,"  were  written  by  Mrs. 
Dr.  Griswold,  of  Chicago,  for  many  years  a  friend  of  Mr.  Bliss,  and 
the  writer  of  many  popular  hymns  set  to  music  by  Mr.  Bliss,  George 
F.  Root,  and  other  composers.  Her  nom  de  plume  has  always  been 
"  Paulina."  The  above  and  three  other  pieces  written  by  Mrs.  Gris 
wold,  viz.,  "We're  going  Home  To-morrow,"  "Hold  Fast  till  I 
Come,"  "Who  is  on  the  Lord's  Side  ?"  with  music  by  Mr.  Bliss, 
appear  in  Gospel  Hymns.  The  name  "Paulina"  was  associated 
with  Mrs.  Bliss  in  the  Memorial  Services  held  in  Chicago,  and  the 
impression  there  given  that  she  was  the  writer  of  the  hymns 
credited  to  that  name. 

Several  pieces  known  as  Mr.  Bliss',  and  made  popular  by  his 
music,  will  be  missed  from  this  collection.  They  are  omitted  because 
the  words  were  not  written  by  him.  Several  of  them  were  changed 
by  him  to  adapt  them  to  the  music.  Many  of  them  have  an  entire 
verse  or  words  for  chorus  added  by  Mr.  Bliss  ;  but  no  pieces,  so  far 
as  could  be  known,  have  been  printed  in  his  memoirs,  except  those 
of  which  he  was  the  sole  author.  Among  popular  pieces  known  as 


64 


MEMOIB   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 


Bliss'  hymns,  the  following,  with  the  names  of  the  authors  of  the 
words,  are  given : 


"Only  Remembered," 

"  What  hast  Thou  done  for  Me  ?  " 

"  I  bring  My  Sins  to  Thee," 

"  What  shall  the  Harvest  be  ?  " 

"  Look  Away  to  Jesus," 

"  Precious  Promise," 

"  Crown  of  Rejoicing," 

"  Eternity," 

"  Arise  and  Shine," 

"  Waiting  and  Watching  for  Me," 

"  Till  He  Come," 

"  The  New  Song," 

"  It  is  well  with  my  Soul," 

"Go  bury  thy  Sorrow," 

"He  Knows," 


Dr.  H.  Bonar. 

Miss  Frances  Havergal. 

Miss  Frances  Havergal. 

Mrs.  Emily  L.  Oakey. 

Rev.  Henry  Burton. 

Nathaniel  Niles. 

Rev.  J.  B.  Atchinson. 

Ellen  H.  Gates. 

Mary  A.  Lathbury. 

Unknown. 

Rev.  E.  H.  Bickersteth. 

Rev.  A.  T.  Pierson. 

H.  G.  Spafford. 

Unknown. 

Alice  Carey. 


The  latter  piece  was  found  in  manuscript,  set  to  music,  among 
Mr.  Bliss'  papers,  and  was  supposed,  by  friends,  to  have  been 
written  by  him,  and  has  been  so  spoken  of.  It  was  certainly  among 
the  last  pieces  that  he  set  to  music,  and  the  thoughts  it  expresses,  so 
appropriate  to  what  awaited  him,  were  vividly  upon  his  mind  in 
changing  the  words  and  arranging  the  music  during  his  last  days. 
It  can  thus  truly  be  regarded  as  his  last  song.  But  the  sweet  poem 
he  used  was  from  the  pen  of  the  gifted  Alice  Carey.  All  of  these 
corrections  and  the  giving  of  credit  to  whom  it  is  due  are  so  in  ac 
cordance  with  the  spirit  of  Mr.  Bliss,  that  the  writer  takes  pleasure 
in  making  these  remarks. 


CHAPTER  VII. 


THE  JOYFUL  EXPERIENCES  OP  1  876  —  GOSPEL  MEETINGS  AT  ST.  LOUIS  —  TRIP  TO 
ALABAMA  —  "  NOT  TOM  THUMB  "  —  VISIT  TO  KENESAW  MOUNTAIN  —  THE  IN 
SPIRATION  OF  THE  SCENE  —  "  HOLD  THE  FORT  "  AND  THE  INCIDENT  WHICH 
SUGGESTED  IT. 

IN  writing  of  the  last  days  of  Mr.  Bliss,  his  own  words  near  the 
close  of  1876  are  recalled,  and  naturally  introduce  what  comes 
to  the  mind,  and  lead  to  a  brief  resume  of  the  work  of  the  whole  of 
the  last  year  of  his  life.  He  counted  it  a  year  of  special  mercy  and 
blessing.  He  had  been  permitted  to  carry  out  his  plans  as  to  places 
he  would  like  to  visit,  and  as  to  songs  he  would  like  to  publish,  and 
had  had  his  prayers  answered  in  the  conversion  of  friends,  and 
deeper  spiritual  experience  for  himself  and  others.  The  reader  can 
but  notice,  as  he  foll'ows  him  through  the  year,  that,  by  the  mercy 
of  God,  his  work  rounded  out  to  completion,  and  it  was  a  year 
passed  very  much  as  ,  he  would  have  liked  to  have  had  it,  had  he 
known  that  upon  the  very  last  day  of  the  year  his  friends  would 
have  been  searching  for  his  body,  and  that  his  work  on  earth  was 
to  end  with  1876. 

In  January  of  that  year,  Mr.  Bliss  was  at  Racine  and  Madison, 
Wisconsin,  and  was  much  blessed  and  very  happy  in  Gospel  work. 
Christians  were  much  revived,  and  many  unsaved  in  both  places 
were  led  to  Christ.  In  the  latter  place  he  became  much  attached  to 
Rev.  Mr.  Bright,  pastor  of  the  Baptist  Church,  who,  a  few  months 
later,  fell  dead  in  his  pulpit  from  disease  of  the  heart.  Mr.  Bliss 
was  much  impressed  by  the  news  of  his  sudden  death,  and  expressed 
himself  as  wishing  just  such  a  departure. 

In  the  latter  part  of  January,  Mr.  Bliss  went  to  St.  Louis,  where 
he  remained  until  March,  singing  in  the  Gospel  meetings  held  in 
the  Rink,  and  holding  a  service  of  his  own  for  the  young  people  in 
Dr.  Ganse's  (Presbyterian)  Church,  which  was  largely  attended,  and 
will  be  long  remembered  by  scores  of  the  young  people  in  St.  Louis. 
5 


66  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

He  sang  the  Gospel  Hymns  in  the  Jail  and  Reform  Schools  and  in  near 
ly  all  the  reformatory  institutions,  while  there.  In  March,  he  went 
to  Mobile,  Alabama,  to  fill  an  appointment  fora  Gospel  meeting. 
The  route  chosen  was  by  rail  to  Vicksburg,  Mississippi,  and  from 
thence  by  steamer  to  New  Orleans,  and  by  rail  from  there  to  Mobile. 
Mrs.  Bliss  accompanied  him,  and  the  trip  was  a  great  source  of  pleas 
ure  to  them  both.  The  new  section  of  country,  the  scenes  of  inter 
est  connected  with  the  war,  the  rapid  entering  into  spring,  as  they 
traveled  south,  all  conspired  to  make  the  journey  a  delightful  one. 
In  the  evening  upon  the  steamboat,  Mr.  Bliss  entertained  the  pas 
sengers  for  half  an  hour  or  more  in  singing  at  the  piano  ;  and  at  the 
close,  when  Captain  and  all  who  could  come  in  to  the  cabin  were 
collected,  he  would  sing  a  familiar  hymn,  and  then  very  pleasantly 
propose  and  lead  in  worship.  The  visit  to  Mobile  was  a  delightful 
one.  The  pastors,  the  Mayor  (an  excellent  Christian  man),  and 
Christian  people  generally,  manifested  the  utmost  cordiality  and 
kindness,  and  did  all  in  their  power  to  make  the  visit  a  happy  one, 
and  the  meetings  a  success.  God  was  pleased  to  add  His  blessing 
upon  the  efforts  put  forth,  and  many  were  impressed  by  Gospel 
truth,  and  many  were  led  to  confess  Christ.  The  meetings  of  Mr. 
Bliss  for  young  people,  held  in  the  Baptist  church,  were  much 
blessed.  The  church  was  crowded  each  afternoon,  and  very  many 
were  led  to  the  Savior  by  his  preaching  of  Christ  in  song,  in  Bible 
instruction,  and  personal  appeal. 

Never  did  his  singing  seem  more  effective  than  in  one  of  the 
meetings  held  in  this  city,  on  Sunday  evening,  in  the  Opera  House. 
The  audience  was  composed  entirely  of  men,  and  crowded  every 
part  of  the  house.  He  sang  as  solos,  "  Pull  for  the  Shore,"  "  Noth 
ing  but  Leaves,"  "What  shall  the  Harvest  Be  ?"  and  "Memories 
of  Childhood,"  with  great  power.  A  solemnity  came  over  all  who 
listened  as  his  deep,  sweet  voice  took  up  the  mournful  cadence, 
"Nothing  but  Leaves,"  and  when  he  sang  the  "Trundle  Bed," 
there  was  hardly  a  dry  eye  in  the  audience.  Nearly  two  hundred 
men  sought  an  interest  in  the  prayers  of  Christians,  that  they  might 
be  saved.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  were  very  happy  in  the  work  in 
Mobile,  and  cherished  pleasant  memories  of  the  friends  there. 

After  ten  days  in  Mobile,  Mr.  Bliss  went  to  Montgomery,  and 
Bang  in  the  meetings  held  in  the  City  Hall.  Great  interest  was  at 
once  manifested,  and  the  meetings  were  largely  attended.  The 


TEIP  THROUGH   ALABAMA.  67 

pastors  and  people  here,  as  afc  Mobile,  were  most  hospitable  and 
cordial  in  the  welcome  extended  to  their  Northern  brethren. 
Here,  as  in  Mobile,  special  pains  were  taken  to  hold  services  for  the 
colored  people,  and  arrangements  made  for  their  attending  the  gen 
eral  meetings.  Mr.  Bliss'  singing  was  greatly  enjoyed  by  the  col 
ored  people,  and  he  in  turn  was  much  moved  by  their  wild  and 
plaintive  melodies.  When  he  had  been  singing  the  song  of  his  com 
posing,  "  Father,  I'm  Tired,"  they  would  be  broken  down  in  uncon 
trollable  emotion.  His  labors  at  Montgomery  were  owned  of  God, 
and  closed  in  a  meeting  participated  in  by  all  the  pastors,  and 
where  scores  of  souls  confessed  to  a  hope  in  Christ. 

From  Montgomery  Mr.  Bliss  went  to  Selma,  having  as  fellow- 
passengers  General  Tom  Thumb  and  family.  Upon  arriving  at 
Selma,  a  crowd  was  found  gathered  at  the  depot  to  see  the  General. 
Mr.  Bliss  found  it  difficult  to  get  off  the  steps  of  the  car,  and  while 
standing  for  a  moment  before  the  staring  crowd,  said  solemnly : 
"Gentlemen,  you  are  mistaken,  I  am  not  Tom  Thumb."  The 
people  with  a  hearty  laugh  made  way  for  him.  Selma  has  become 
well  known  in  Christian  circles  throughout  the  country,  for  the  con 
secrated  activity  of  a  band  of  Christian  laymen,  who,  under  the  in 
spiration  of  Hall  and  Cree,  some  five  years  ago,  organized  there  the 
first  Young  Men's  Christian  Association  of  Alabama.  These  dear 
brethren  made  Christian  work  in  their  city  a  delight  to  their  visit 
ors.  Their  hearts  and  homes  were  wide  open — their  enthusiasm 
and  zeal  in  the  work  unbounded.  An  immense  cotton  warehouse 
was  cleaned  up  and  seated  for  the  meetings  ;  ladies  and  gentlemen 
from  the  church  choirs  came  in  to  supply  a  fine  chorus  ;  the  sainted 
Rev.  Alfred  Morrison — taken  to  heaven  just  a  little  before  Mr. 
Bliss — and  all  the  pastors,  gave  a  hearty  support  to  the  effort,  and 
a  blessed  work  was  enjoyed.  Here,  as  in  Montgomery  and  Mobile, 
Mr.  Bliss  conducted  young  people's  meetings,  with  precious  fruit 
for  Christ. 

Mrs.  Bliss  returned  to  Chicago  from  Selma,  to  arrange  for  clos 
ing  up  their  house  for  a  summer's  removal  to  Rome,  leaving  Mr. 
Bliss  to  fill  an  appointment  at  Augusta,  Georgia.  The  trip  to 
Augusta  was  made  via  the  Selma  and  Dalton  Railroad  through 
Rome,  Georgia,  and  from  thence  to  Atlanta,  to  give  Mr.  Bliss  ail 
opportunity  to  visit  Kenesaw  Mountain,  where  occurred  the  inci 
dent  that  gave  rise  to  the  song,  "  Hold  the  Fort."  He  stopped  at 


68  VISIT    TO    K  EKES  AW   MOUNTAIN. 

Marietta  on  a  beautiful  April  morning,  and,  after  dinner  with  the 
writer,  rode  out  two  miles  to  the  mountain.  The  carriage  left  us 
about  three-fourths  of  a  mile  from  the  summit,  and  we  pursued  our 
journey  on  foot.  The  violets  were  just  in  blossom,  and  we  paused 
frequently  to  stoop  and  gather  them,  or  to  cut  canes  from  the  young 
hickory  trees,  by  the  side  of  the  path.  Upon  the  summit,  the  ruina 
of  the  earthwork  near  which  General  Polk  was  killed,  and  part  of  the 
framework  of  the  signal  station  from  which  Sherman  had  the  mes 
sage  signaled  to  "  hold  the  fort,"  were  found. 

It  was  a  bright,  clear,  sunny  day,  and  the  landscape  for  miles 
in  every  direction  was  before  our  view  from  this  remarkable  eleva 
tion.  Altoona  Mountain,  where  the  fort  was  held,  could  be  plainly 
seen  twenty  miles  to  the  north  ;  and  the  intervening  valley  across 
which  Sherman  hurried  his  troops  was  at  our  feet. 

Bliss  enjoyed  the  scene  to  the  full.  He  took  in  all  of  its  beauty 
and  all  of  its  inspiration.  We  read  the  passage  concerning  the  com 
ing  of  our  Lord  from  heaven — knelt  in  prayer  and  consecration — 
and  then  sang  "  Hold  the  Fort,"  looking  out  upon  the  distant 
mountain,  looking  up  to  the  clear  blue  sky,  and  hoping  and  almost 
expecting  that  Jesus  might  then  appear,  so  near  He  seemed  to  us 
that  April  day.  I  thank  my  Heavenly  Father  that  I  was  led  to  so 
urge  my  friend  and  brother  to  make  that  mountain  visit.  He 
reckoned  it,  while  he  lived,  as  one  of  his  blessed  days,  and  the  mem 
ory  of  it  to  me  is,  and  will  continue  to  be  while  life  lasts,  a  transfig 
uration  scene.  How  little  did  we  think  that  day,  that  ere  the  year 
should  close,  for  him  the  battle  would  be  won,  and  he  be  taken  to 
the  mountains  of  glory,  to  signal  for  his  Lord  to  the  soldiers  in  the 
valley,  "  Cheer,  my  Comrades,  Cheer."  May  the  voice  that  rang 
out  so  grandly  from  the  summit  of  Kenesaw  that  glorious  after 
noon  still  go  ringing  on  around  the  earth  in  the  same  message  there 
sung,"  I  am  Coming,"  hastening  the  appearing  of  the  Lord  and  the 
glad  day  when  we  shall  be  caught  up  with  living  and  departed 
loved  ones,  "to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air ;  and  so  shall  we  ever  be 
^with  the  Lord."  "  Amen.  Even  so,  come  quickly,  Lord  Jesus."  • 

"We  conclude  this  chapter  with  Mr.  Bliss'  glorious  hymn, 
"  Hold  the  Fort,"  with  the  story  which  suggested  it. 

During  October,  1864,  just  before  Sherman  began  his  famous 
march  to  the  sea,  while  his  army  lay  camped  in  the  neighborhood  of 
Atlanta,  the  army  of  Hood  in  a  carefully  prepared  movement  passed 


,  HOLD   THE   FORT.  69 

the  right  flank  of  Sherman's  army,  and  gained  his  rear,  commenced 
the  destruction  of  the  railroad  leading  north,  burning  blockhouses 
and  capturing  the  small  garrisons  along  the  line.  Sherman's  army 
was  put  in  rapid  motion,  following  Hood,  to  save  the  supplies  and 
larger  posts,  the  principal  of  which  was  located  at  Altoona  Pass,  a 
defile  in  the  Altoona  range  of  mountains,  through  which  ran  the  rail 
road.  General  Corse,  of  Illinois,  was  stationed  here  with  a  brigade 
of  troops,  composed  of  Minnesota  and  Illinois  regiments,  in  all  about 
1,500  men,  Colonel  Tourtelotte  being  second  in  command.  A  mill 
ion  and  a  half  of  rations  were  stored  here,  and  it  was  highly  im 
portant  that  the  earthworks  commanding  the  Pass  and  protecting 
the  supplies  should  be  held.  Six  thousand  men,  under  command 
of  General  French,  were  detailed  by  Hood  to  take  the  position.' 
The  works  were  completely  surrounded  and  summoned  to  surrender. 
Corse  refused,  and  sharp  fighting  commenced.  The  defenders  were 
slowly  driven  into  a  small  fort  upon  the  crest  of  the  hill.  Many 
had  fallen,  and  the  result  seemed  to  render  a  prolongation  of  the 
fight  hopeless.  At  this  moment,  an  officer  caught  sight  of  a  white 
signal  flag,  far  away  across  the  valley,  twenty  miles  distant,  upon 
the  top  of  Kenesaw  Mountain.  The  signal  was  answered,  and  soon 
the  message  was  waved  across  from  mountain  to  mountain  : 

"  Hold  the  Fort ;  I  am  coming.  W.  T.  SHERMAN." 

Cheers  went  up  ;  every  man  was  nerved  to  the  full  appreciation 
of  the  position  ;  and,  under  a  murderous  fire,  which  killed  or 
wounded  more  than  half  the  men  in  the  fort — Corse  himself  being 
shot  three  times  through  the  head,  Colonel  Tourtelotte  taking  com 
mand,  though  himself  badly  wounded — they  held  the  fort  for  three 
hours,  until  the  advance  guard  of  Sherman's  army  came  up.  French 
was  obliged  to  retreat. 

No  incident  of  the  war  illustrates  more  thrillingly  the  inspiration 
imparted  by  the  knowledge  of  the  presence  of  the  commander,  and 
that  he  is  cognizant  of  our  position,  and  that,  doing  our  utmost,  he 
will  supplant  our  weakness  by  speedy  reinforcements.  So,  the  mes 
sage  of  Sherman  to  the  soldiers  of  Altoona  becomes  the  message  of 
the  Great  Commander,  who  signals  ever  to  all  who  fight  life's  battle, 
"  Hold  the  Fort." 


70  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

In  May,  1870,  Mr.  Bliss  accompanied  me  to  Kockford,  Illinois, 
to  sing  at  a  Sunday  School  Convention.  He  there  heard  me  relate 
the  above  incident  as  an  illustration  of  the  inspiration  derived  by 
the  Christian  from  the  thought  of  Christ  as  our  Commander  and 
of  His  coming  to  our  relief.  The  song  was  born  at  once  in  his  mind, 
and  on  his  return  to  Chicago,  while  at  my  house,  he  wrote  it  out 
and  published  it  in  sheet  music  form. 

HOLD  THE  FORT. 

Ho !  iny  comrades,  see  the  signal 

Waving  in  the  sky  ! 
Reinforcements  now  appearing 

Victory  is  nigh ! 

CHORUS — "  Hold  the  fort,  for  I  am  coming," 

Jesus  signals  still. 
Wave  the  answer  back  to  heaven, 
— "By  thy  grace,  we  will." 

See  the  mighty  host  advancing, 

Satan  leading  on  ; 
Mighty  men  around  us  falling, 

Courage  almost  gone : 

See  the  glorious  banner  waving, 

Hear  the  bugle  blow : 
In  our  Leader's  name  we'll  triumph 

Over  every  foe. 

Fierce  and  long  the  battle  rages, 

But  our  Help  is  near  ; 
Onward  comes  our  Great  Commander 

Cheer,  my  comrades,  cheer ! 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


POUR  DAYS'  WORK  AT  AUGUSTA,  GEORGIA — HOMEWARD  BOUND— REV.  DR. 
VINCENT'S  TRIBUTE — VISIT    TO  MR.  MOODY'S   OLD   HOME — RETURN   TO 

CHICAGO — RELATIONS  WITH  MR.  SANKEY  AND  THE  BRETHREN  IN  CHI 
CAGO — VISIT  TO  KALAMAZOO,  MICHIGAN — MR.  BLISS'  PERSONAL  INFLU 
ENCE  THERE — INTERESTING  LETTERS. 

MR.  BLISS  remained  in  Augusta  but  five  days,  but  was  much 
used  of  God  during  that  time.  His  singing  made  a  deep  im 
pression  on  the  people,  and  his  earnest  words  of  testimony  were 
owned  in  the  conversion  of  many  to  Christ.  On  Easter  Sunday  he 
sang  in  the  open  air,  at  a  meeting  held  in  the  court-house  square. 
Between  three  and  four  thousand  people  were  present,  and  gave  the 
most  rapt  attention  as  he  sang  "Hallelujah,  He  is  Risen,"  and 
other  Gospel  songs.  His  afternoon  service  was  crowded  with  peo 
ple,  and  much  religious  interest  immediately  developed. 

April  17th,  Mr.  Bliss  left  Augusta  for  Chicago.  Here  he  packed 
away  books  and  papers,  and  made  arrangements  to  store  away  fur 
niture  until  he  and  his  family  should  return  at  the  close  of  the  year 
to  again  make  a  home.  The  books  then  put  away  he  was  never  to 
see  again.  It  was  to  him  a  final  disposition  of  his  earthly  effects. 
With  wife  and  children  he  left  Chicago,  May  1st,  for  Rome,  Pennsyl 
vania,  the  old  home,  intending  here  to  pass  the  summer  in  rest  and 
in  writing  songs  for  the  winter  campaign,  and  commencing  the 
work  again  in  October.  It  was  a  very  happy  summer  to  him.  Tho 
little  invalid  George  was  greatly  benefited  by  the  change  of  air  and 
scene,  and  rapidly  grew  well  and  strong.  Old  friends  came  to  visit 
them,  and  many  dear  familiar  scenes  and  friends  were  visited  by 
them.  During  the  summer,  a  Normal  Institute  was  held  in  Towan- 
da,  and  one  beautiful  Saturday,  all  the  singers  came  up  in  carriages 
to  Rome,  and  passed  the  day  with  Mr.  Bliss.  He  was  happy  as  a 
child,  with  the  pleasure  of  the  meeting  with  old-time  friends,  and 
the  singing  under  the  trees  of  the  old-time  songs.  He  attended  for 


72  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

.a  few  days  the  Sunday  School  Parliament  conducted  by  Rev.  W.  E. 
Crafts,  at "  Thousand  Island  Park  ; "  visited  the  Philadelphia  Expo 
sition  ;  sang  at  the  Chautauqua  Assembly,  and  greatly  enjoyed  its 
sessions  and  the  intercourse  with  Christian  friends  there,  and  passed 
a  week,  that  he  counted  a  very  delightful  one,  at  the  home  of  Mr. 
Moody  at  Northfield,  Massachusetts.  Mrs.  Bliss  was  his  constant 
companion  during  the  summer,  at  all  of  these  places.  Mr.  J.  H. 
Vincent,  conductor  of  the  Chautauqua  Assembly,  thus  writes  of 
Mr.  Bliss'  services  there  and  his  personal  recollections  of  him  : 

The  fearful  tragedy  of  last  Friday  evening  sent  a  thrill  of  horror  through 
out  the  country,  before  the  names  of  the  unfortunate  victims  had  been  an 
nounced.  But  what  was  the  consternation  and  grief  of  the  American  church, 
when  the  telegraph  made  known  the  fact  that  among  the  unrecognized  or  un- 
recovered  passengers  was  the  evangelist  and  singer,  P.  P.  Bliss,  who,  through 
his  many  songs,  and  especially  through  his  association  with  Major  Whittle  in 
evangelistic  labor,  was  so  well  and  so  widely  known. 

Mr.  Bliss  was  on  his  way  to  Chicago  to  engage  in  special  labors.  I  have  the 
impression  that  he  had  been  summoned  there  to  assist  in  the  meetings  of  the 
week  of  prayer.  He  was  accompanied  by  his  lovely  and  devoted  wife,  who 
went  down  with  him  in  the  fated  train,  and  who  with  him  entered  the  Fa 
thers  house. 

According  to  the  report  of  one  of  the  rescued  passengers,  Mr.  Bliss,  after 
the  accident,  escaped  from  the  car,  and  then  returned  to  save  his  wife.  Finding 
that  she  could  not  be  brought  out,  he  resigned  himself  to  her  doom,  and  they 
perished  together. 

Mr.  Bliss  was  one  of  the  noblest  and  one  of  the  gentlest  of  men.  He  had 
the  delicacy  of  a  woman  and  the  strength  of  a  man.  His  physique  was  mag 
nificent.  I  think  he  was  one  of  the  most  handsome  men  I  ever  met.  Large, 
well  proportioned,  graceful,  with  a  fine,  manly  face,  full  of  expression.  That 
body  of  his  was  a  grand  instrument  of  music,  and  from  its  strength  came  forth 
sweetness  and  power.  His  voice  was  deep,  of  wonderful  compass  and  pathos. 
As  it  rang  out  through  the  woods  at  Chautauqua,the  most  thoughtless  would 
stop  and  listen.  Its  marvelous  magnetic  charm  was  intensified  by  the  energy 
of  the  Divine  Spirit,  which  so  thoroughly  possessed  the  body  and  soul  of  the 
sweet  singer.  To  the  utmost  transparency  of  his  pure  and  simple  character  he 
added  a  fervent  and  childlike  faith.  He  was  a  rare  Christian.  He  knew  and 
believed  and  enjoyed  and  lived  and  preached  and  sang  the  Gospel  of  Christ. 
His  songs  were  for  the  glory  of  Christ.  I  never  knew  a  man  more  thoroughly 
imbued  with  the  Christian  spirit.  He  had  one  aim  and  one  work  in  life.  He 
was  always  on  the  look-out  for  souls.  He  coveted,  above  everything  else,  spir 
itual  results.  At  our  "Sunday  School  Assembly,"  in  private  conversation,  in 
the  prayer-meetings,  in  the  eventide  conferences,  on  the  platform,  everywhere, 
he  seemed  absorbed  in  this  one  great  work.  Last  evening  I  received  from  a 


TRIBUTE   OF   EEV.    DE.    VltfCEIslT.  73 

personal  friend  and  Gliautauqua  Sunday  School  worker  a  letter  in  which  the 
following  allusion  to  Mr.  Bliss  will  illustrate  the  impression  he  made  : 

"  I  do  not  know  how  it  has  appeared  to  you,  but  I  have  been  impressed  with 
the  idea  that  Brother  Bliss  grew  very  rapidly  in  grace  the  last  year.  1  noticed, 
for  instance,  a  great  difference  between  the  Syracuse  Convention  of  1875  and 
your  Chautauqua  meeting  of  last  summer.  He  came  to  the  Lake  full  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith,  and  all  his  work  was  accompanied  by  divine  power. 
You  may  not  have  noticed  it,  but  I  saw  a  change  from  his  very  first  utterance 
on  the  platform  ;  and  I  certainly  never  knew  one  more  happy  in  his  selections, 
suggestions,  etc.  I  remember,  in  one  of  the  deeply  impressive  meetings  when 
a  soul  said  he  would  '  try  to  seek  the  Lord,'  quiek  as  thought  Mr.  Bliss  said  to 
him  '  spell  it — t-r-u-s-t.'  In  the  meetings  you  assigned  to  me  I  found  him  a 
helper  indeed  from  the  time  he  reached  the  grounds,  prompt,  unassuming,  but 
most  decided,  and  with  that  earnest,  serious  manner  befitting  the  winner  of 
souls.  The  felicity  of  his  hymn  and  tune  selections  is  generally  known,  but  the 
force  of  his  Christian  character,  his  directness,  energy  and  downright  devotion 
should  be  emphasized  now  that  we  have  lost  him." 

One  of  the  holiest,  Mr.  Bliss  was  one  of  the  cheeriest  of  men.  His  w<is  not- 
a  somber  piety.  There  was  no  touch  of  asceticism  in  his  nature.  He  was  as 
simple  as  a  child,  and  full  of  genial  humor.  His  personal  letters  overflow  with 
playfulness,  puns,  rhymes,  and  personal  thrusts  of  the  wittiest  but  always  of 
the  most  generous  character.  He  lived  in  the  light.  It  was  the  light  of  the 
Lord,  and  that  is  the  light  of  love.  He  never  had  anything  but  good  to  say  of 
his  brethren.  He  never  carped  nor  criticised.  He  saw  in  others  what  he  had 
most  of  in  himself.  He  "  took  to"  people.  He  loved  his  fellow  men. 

I  am  not  competent  to  speak  of  Mr.  Bliss  as  a  musician.  No  doubt  many  of 
his  songs  lack  the  fire  of  true  poetry  and  the  ring  of  the  immortal  music,  but 
when  he  sang  them  the  words  became  poetry,  and  the  melodies  the  very  soul 
of  music.  Many  of  his  productions  have  real  merit,  and  will  live  and  be  sung 
for  a  hundred  years  to  come.  They  are  charged  with  the  sentiment  and  the 
force  of  the  living  Gospel.  "  I  am  so  glad  that  our  Father  in  Heaven  "  will  be 
a  child-song  in  the  church  of  the  future.  "  If  there's  only  one  song"  of  his 
that  remains, it  will  be  that  one.  His  "  Almost  Persuaded  "  has  the  solemnity 
of  eternity  in  it.  Many  a  soul  has  been  led  by  it  to  immediate  decision.  "  Still 
there's  More  to  Follow,"  has  kindled  the  faith  of  the  believer  and  led  him  to 
seek  more  of  the  wondrous  "grace"  and  "  love  "  and  "  power"  which  are  the 
burden  of  it.  "  The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus  "  is  a  song  which  derives  pe 
culiar  significance  from  the  tragic  end  of  its  author.  Did  he  sing  at  the  last : 

No  darkness  have  we  who  in  Jesus  abide  ? 

That  the  prayer  of  the  song  "  When  Jesus  Comes/'  was  fulfilled  in  his  last 
moments  I  cannot  doubt. 

Oh,  let  my  lamp  be  burning, 
When  Jesus  comes. 

I  can  hear  him  sing  again,  out  of  the  tempest  in  which  his  earthly  bark  was 


74  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

foundered,  as  his  redeemed  spirit  looked  upon  the  shores  of  the  glorious  land 
just  beyond: 

Bright  gleams  the  morning,  sailor,  uplift  the  eye, 
Clouds  and  darkness  disappearing,  glory  is  nigh  ! 
Safe  in  the  life-boat,  sailor,  sing  evermore, 
"  Glory,  glory,  hallelujah  !    pull  for  the  shore." 

Mrs.  Bliss  was  in  every  way  worthy  of  the  noble  companion  of  her  life  and 
death.  Like  him  she  was  remarkably  pure  and  simple.  She  was  his  helper  in 
couventions,  and  she  encouraged  him  to  put  forth  his  earliest  efforts  as  a  mu 
sician.  How  her  rich  alto  voice  would  pour  forth  its  volumes  of  music  as  they 
stood  together  on  the  Chautauqua  platform  !  I  have  heard  them  again  and 
again  sing  at  night  to  an  immense  concourse  of  people,  and  amidst  the  stillness 
of  the  grave  the  people  would  hear  these  voices  of  the  Lord  calling  to  them  as 
out  of  eternity. 

And  the  orphaned  children !  How  often  in  our  travels  together  have  those 
dear  parents  talked  of  the  treasures  of  heart  and  home.  May  the  Father  of 
the  fatherless  be  the  protector  of  the  little  darlings  !  I  sincerely  hope  that 
Mr.  Moody 's  call  for  a  penny  collection  in  all  the  Sunday  Schools  of  the  coun 
try,  January  14,  will  receive  a  prompt  and  liberal  response. 

The  circumstances  combined  to  render  the  disaster  of  the  Friday  evening — 
that  fearful  holocaust — the  most  horrible  of  all  modern  accidents.  The  terri 
ble  crash  of  eleven  cars  as  they  fell  seventy  feet,  the  howling  winds,  the 
crushing  ice,  the  freezing  waters,  the  drifting,  blinding  snow,  the  raging  fires, 
and  the  black,  starless  skies !  What  agony  did  the  victims  experience  !  No 
mortal  tongue  can  describe  it ! 

But  that  tempest  was  to  our  dear  Bliss  and  his  wife  the  "  whirlwind  "  in 
which  they  were  caught  up,  as  by  a  "  chariot  of  fire,"  into  the  kingdom  of  the 
Eternal.  Whether  killed  by  the  fall,  or  the  waters,  or  the  fire,  it  mattered 
little  to  them.  Whether  the  struggle  was  for  but  a  moment,  or  protracted  for 
many  minutes,  it  was  for  them  to  look  the  dear  Lord  in  the  face — the  Lord 
whom  they  had  trusted  and  loved  so  long— and  all  was  well.  And  all  now 
is  well. 

How  can  we  account  for  such  a  wonderful  visitation  ?  Are  good  men  so 
plentiful  that  the  Lord  can  remove  one  so  useful  just  at  the  time  of  his 
largest  promise  ?  What  does  it  all  mean  ? 

Well,  we  are  not  called  upon  to  explain  it.  God  does  not  require  His  ser 
vants  to  account  for  or  to  defend  His  administration.  But  we  do  see  a  few 
things  in  the  visitation  which  give  us  some  light  and  consolation. 

1.  The  departed  brother  and  his  wife  »were   ready.     They  were  ripe  for 
heaven.     Why  should  we  mourn  or  wonder  when  the  chorus  of  the  skies  is 
made  stronger  and  sweeter  ? 

2.  The  songs  our  dear  brother  wrote  are  still  with  us.     And  they  have 
received  a  new  sweetness  and  significance  and  power  by  the  tragic  end  of  the 
singer  of  them. 

3.  This  death  has  startled  into  new  activity  and  consecration  the  workers 


VISITS   KORTHFIELD.  75 

in  all  the  churches.  Who  can  estimate  the  intensified  convictions,  the  strength 
ened  purposes,  the  redoubled  diligence  among  that  blessed  brotherhood 
who  are  at  work  in  America — and  all  this,  under  God,  caused  by  this 
solemn  call. 

4.  By  the  peculiar  method  of.  the  divine  providence  in  the  present  case,  a 
holy  Christian  life  is  brought  before  the  public.     Brother  Bliss  now  preaches 
with  a  tongue  of  fire  to  the  millions.     Tens  of  thousands  who  had  never  seen 
nor  even  heard  of  the  departed  are  now  brought  face  to  face  with  his  lovely 
character,  and  with  the  Christ  he  so  faithfully  proclaimed. 

5.  But  is  there  no  ministry  in  the  sphere  to  which  he  has  been  removed, 
for  such  a  royal  soul  as  his  ? 

Dear  Bliss  !  The  memories  will  come — his  face,  his  noble  form,  his  gentle 
manners,  his  fervent  prayers  and  appeals,  his  deep  absorption  in  the  one  beau 
tiful  work  of  his  life  !  Farewell,  dear  friend  !  Our  hearts  bleed  at  the  thought 
that  we  shall  see  him  no  more  here  !  The  world  seems  lonely  without  him ! 
But  we  shall  meet  yonder  ! 

J.  H.  VINCENT 
Plainfield,  N.  J.,  January  4,  1877. 

While  at  Northfield,  in  September,  Mr.  Bliss  accompanied  Mr. 
Moody  to  Greenfield,  Brattleboro,  Keene  and  adjacent  towns,  and 
sang  at  meetings  Mr.  Moody  conducted.  He  writes  :  "  September 
18,  1876. — Just  returned  from  a  week  with  Bro.  Moody,  in  his  home 
at  Northfield,  driving  one  hundred  miles  over  Vermont,  Massachu 
setts  and  New  Hampshire  hills,  and  holding  eleven  meetings."  He 
greatly  enjoyed  this  visit,  as  did  also  Mrs.  Bliss,  although  both 
would  laughingly  mention  Mr.  Moody's  habit  of  making  the  best  use 
of  his  visitors  that  he  could,  as  manifest  by  his  using  them  at 
eleven  meetings  in  a  week. 

October  1st,  Mr.  Bliss  arrived  in  Chicago,  and  was  present  at 
Moody  and  Sankey's  opening  service.  He  was  the  guest,  at  this 
time,  of  Mr.  H.  M.  Thompson,  of  the  Brevoort  House,  and  here  com 
pleted  several  of  the  songs  that  appeared  in  Gospel  Hymns  No.  2. 
He  did  not  participate  in  any  of  the  Chicago  meetings  in  a  public 
way,  but  for  three  weeks  was  a  constant  attendant,  and  was  greatly 
blessed  in  the  remarkable  services  that  opened  Mr.  Moody's  work  in 
Chicago,  and  in  the  personal  contact  with  Mr.  Moody  and  Mr. 
Sankey,  with  the  latter  of  whom  he  spent  most  of  his  time,  remov 
ing  for  a  couple  of  weeks  to  Mr.  Sankey's  hotel,  that  they  might  be 
uninterruptedly  together.  Until  this  time  they  had  never  been  much 
together  in  the  work,  but  had  arranged  for  their  hymn  books 
mostly  by  correspondence.  Now,  they  had  what  both  had  long  de- 


76  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

sired — a  season  of  personal  conference,  that  cemented  more  closely 
the  bonds  of  brotherhood  between  them. 

The  hundreds  of  those  who  have  compared  and  criticised  these 
two  men,  and,  judging  of  what  is  in  us  all  by  nature,  have  thought 
of  them  as  in  any  manner  envious  or  jealous  of  one  another,  would 
have  a  clearer  apprehension  of  what  the  grace  of  God  in  the  heart 
can  do,  if  they  could  have  known  the  loving  relationship  that  ex 
isted  between  them.  It  was  a  scene  long  to  be  remembered,  to  be 
with  them  alone  for  an  hour  in  the  room  at  the  Pacific  Hotel,  as  they 
compared  and  tested  and  criticised  the  songs  to  be  used  in  their 
meetings.  First,  one  would  be  at  the  organ  rendering  a  song,  then 
the  other,  and  both  laughing,  crying  and  praying  together  over 
their  work.  They  rejoiced  in  each  other's  gifts,  and  praised  God 
for  the  honor  conferred  upon  them  in  being  used  in  His  service. 
Mr.  Bliss  would  never  listen,  if  he  could  avoid  it,  to  depreciation  of 
others,  and  in  all  the  writer's  fellowship  with  him,  he  cannot  recall 
an  unkind  or  envious  expression  or  act  toward  those  whom  he  may 
have  esteemed  better  singers  or  of  greater  reputation  than  himself. 
God  answered  to  him  in  a  remarkable  degree  his  prayer, 

Only  an  Instrument,  ready  His  praises  to  sound  at  His  will, 
Willing,  should  He  not  require  me,  in  silence  to  wait  on  Him  still. 

He  could  sit  and  listen  to  the  singing  of  others,  and  pray  for 
them,  and  rejoice  in  God's  using  them,  without  a  thought  to  mar 
his  communion  with  God.  During  this  sojourn  in  Chicago,  many 
precious  gatherings  of  brethren  consecrated  to  evangelistic  work  were 
enjoyed  by  Mr.  Bliss.  Needham  and  Stebbins,  Moorhouse,  Charles 
Inglis,  Eockwell,  Morton,  Jacobs,  Farwell,  Spafford,  Dean  and 
others  were  frequently  together  in  those  days,  dining  with  Moody, 
and  discussing  Gospel  truth  or  plans  of  work,  or  in  Bliss'  room 
listening  to  some  new  song.  These  brethren  and  others  engaged  in 
the  work  were  all  dear  to  Mr.  Bliss,  and  were  many  times  mentioned 
by  name  in  his  prayers.  He  delighted  to  hear  of  the  blessing  of 
God  upon  their  labors,  and  to  see  of  their  own  growth  in  grace. 

October  21st,  the  brethren  separated  for  their  different  posts 
near  Chicago.  Mr.  Bliss  went  to  Kalamazoo,  Michigan,  Mrs.  Bliss 
accompanying  him.  The  evening  of  their  arrival,  they  were  enter 
tained  at  Rev.  Mr.  Spencer's,  where,  with  thoughtful  hospitality, 
all  the  pastors  of  the  city  were  gathered  to  give  them  welcome.  It 


BLISS  AT  KALAMAZOO.  77 

was  a  very  pleasant  aud  profitable  meeting,  and  both  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bliss  often  recurred  to  it  as  having  given  them  much  pleasure. 
The  meetings  held  here  were  participated  in  by  all  the  ministers, 
and  from  the  first  were  much  blessed.  Mr.  Bliss  conducted  a 
young  people's  meeting  here  as  in  other  places,  and  with  happy 
results.  Many  there  look  upon  him  as  the  instrument  in  God's 
hands  of  leading  them  to  Christ.  He  sang  in  the  young  ladies' 
seminary,  and  at  the  Baptist  College,  and  in  many  private  residences 
to  the  sick  and  invalid  ones.  The  dear  friend  there,  who  for  seven 
years  or  more  has  been  confined  to  his  room,  will  well  remember  the 
sunshiny  day,  when  Mr.  Bliss  came  and  sang  to  him  the  "  Ninety 
and  Nine,"  "  Hallelujah,  what  a  Savior,"  and  how,  in  the  seasons 
of  prayer  and  reading  the  word  that  followed  this  visit,  he  gave 
his  heart  to  the  Lord.  In  a  little  while,  he  will  cross  the  tide,  and 
will  know  in  its  fullness  the  truth,  "Hallelujah,  what  a  Savior." 
The  dear  young  man  who  met  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  in  the  singing 
room,  grown  reckless  from  repeated  failures  in  his  experiments  at 
becoming  a  Christian,  will  never  forget  the  pressure  of  the  hands 
that  were  so  kindly  placed  upon  his  shoulders,  or  the  earnest,  loving 
look  from  the  eyes  that  met  his,  or  the  words  so  earnestly  spoken, 
telling  him  that  his  failure  had  come  from  his  experiments,  and 
urging  him  now,  without  experimenting,  to  trust  Christ  fully  for  all 
things,  and  make  a  full  commitment  to  Him.  Very  earnestly  did 
both  these  dear  friends  pray  for  this  young  man.  Very  faithful 
was  dear  Mrs.  Bliss  in  her  encouragement  and  counsel  to  him,  and 
very  happy  were  both  of  them  when,  the  day  of  their  departure, 
they  took  their  leave  of  him,  an  intelligent,  decided,  happy  Chris 
tian.  Never  will  dear  H.  forgot  the  interest  taken  in  his  conversion 
by  Mr.  Bliss,  nor  the  sympathy  and  faith  of  Mrs.  Bliss  with  his 
dear  parents,  when  they  were  praying  to  God  for  his  salvation.  H. 
has  sent  me  a  copy  of  a  letter  received  from  Mr.  Bliss,  which  speaks 
his  heart,  and  tells  of  his  personal  interest  in  his  Lord's  work : 

JACKSON,  MICH.,  20th  November,  1876. 

God  bless  you,  my  dear  friend  H.,  or  Brother  "  Fred,"  as  I  prefer  to  call  you. 
It  is  just  as  I  expected.  Your  letter  didn't  surprise  me  a  bit. 

Welcome  to  the  ranks.  Now  "  forward,  march,"  in  the  service  of  our 
Captain.  You  are  not  the  man  to  sit  still  and  prosper.  And  I'm  so  glad,  Fred, 
that  you've  begun  in  time  to  put  in  a  full  day's  work.  So  here's  my  heart's 
"  Good  Cheer,"  and  I  expect  to  see  you  take  both  hands  and  pull  with  a  will. 


78  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

The  kind  of  a  "  Christian "  you  are  to  be  will  be  largely  determined  in  ttie 
next  few  months,  I  might  have  said  weeks. 

Lend  a  hand  to  that  score  or  more  of  your  associates  and  the  college  boys. 
Pull  them  in  shore  before  they  drift  down  to  the  rapids.  Help  some  weak 
friend  by  a  lift  on  his  burden. 

Oh,  how  the  world  needs  happy,  singing,  joyful  young  Christians  ! 

I  congratulate  you  upon  the  good  times  you  are  going  to  have  in  the  service 
of  the  Lord.  If  the  Devil  knocks  you  down  occasionally,  you'll  fall  on  your 
knees  ;  and  then  he'll  soon  leave  you.  Good  is  the  Lord.  Amen. 

Should  have  replied  sooner,  but  hoped  to  see  you.  We  all  go  to  Chicago 
to-morrow  night.  Love  to  father,  mother  and  sisters. 

Yours  in  Galatians  ii,  20, 

P.  P.  BLISS. 

Just  beginning  to  get  hold  here.    Pray  for  us. 

One  evening,  at  Kalamazoo,  while  on  the  way  to  the  service, 
this  verse  was  repeated  and  became  a  favorite  with  us  from  that  on, 
and  was  almost  daily  quoted  : 

In  peace  I  go ;  no  fear  I  know 
Since  Christ  walks  by  my  side. 
His  love  to  me  my  joy  shall  be, 
His  words  shall  be  my  guide. 

Among  the  papers  found  in  his  trunk  was  a  slip  with  that  verse 
written  upon  it.  "Whatever  comes,  let  us  just  stick  to  that,"  he 
would  remark,  and  it  truly  expressed  the  atmosphere  in  which,  in 
those  days,  he  seemed  to  be  walking.  Each  day  the  Master  gave 
him  some  special  work,  some  special  blessing.  Some  years  before,  he 
had  given  a  concert  in  Kalamazoo,  and  was  entertained  for  the  night 
by  a  gentleman  who  a  little  time  after  had  died.  Mr.  Bliss  sought 
out  the  family,  and  found  a  representative  of  them  in  a  daughter 
who  had  married  a  well-known  business  man,  but  neither  of  them 
Christians.  God  used  his  visit  to  them,  and  both  were  led,  before 
the  meeting  closed,  to  accept  Christ,  and  were  very  happy  in  His  love, 
and  are  now  among  the  most  active  Christian  workers  of  the  place. 

Another  letter,  received  from  a  young  lady  in  Kalamazoo,  and 
given  below,  will  tell  its  own  story  as  to  the  faithfulness  of  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Bliss  to  individual  souls — the  simple  secret  of  all  success  in 
evangelistic  work,  from  the  time  that  Jesus  talked  with  Nicodemus 
by  night  and  the  woman  at  Samaria  at  noon,  to  the  present  hour. 

Faithfulness  in  private  work  with  individuals  must  keep  pace 
with  service  in  public  to  *  ^e  crowds,  or  that  will  be  no  power. 


INTERESTING   LETTER.  79 

KALAMAZOO,  MICH.,  February  10,  1877. 
MR.  WHITTLE: 

DEAR  SIR — I  was  baptized  last  Sunday,  and  while  I  realize  that  "  with  God 
all  things  are  possible/'  still  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  any  one  but  Mr.  Bliss 
could  have  induced  me  to  take  this  step.  1  ain  a  minister's  daughter  and  have 
been  a  constant  attendant  on  divine  worship,  and  have  attended  many  revivals 
where  sinners  nocked  to  Christ,  but  they  always  left  me  just  outside  the  fold. 
When  Mr.  Bliss  sang  "Only  Trust  Him,"  it  touched  my  heart.  Then  he  was 
so  sympathetic,  and  he  said  that  he  did  not  know  the  time  when  he  was  con 
verted.  He  left  feeling  entirely  out  of  the  question  ;  and  while  others  made 
"  great  the  mystery  of  godliness,"  with  him  it  was  "  Only  Trust  Him." 

I  promised  Mrs.  B.  that  I  would  write  to  them  at  Jackson,  but  was  very  busy 
with  my  studies,  and,  as  I  told  Dr.  Hodge,  I  waited  too  long ;  but  he  thought 
that  in  heaven  they  would  rejoice  with  far  greater  joy  than  they  could  on  earth. 
But  heaven  seems  a  great  way  off.  and  there  are  a  great  many  passages  in  the 
Bible  I  cannot  understand,  and  when  I  heard  of  their  death  it  seemed  to  me  that 
God  did  not  care  for  His  children  ;  but  with  all  such  thoughts  I  see  again  the 
glorious  singer,  and  hear  in  sweetest  accent,  "  Only  Trust  Him."  There  was 
no  one,  excepting  my  dear  papa,  mamma  and  sister,  whose  death  I  would  have 
regretted  so  much.  I  can  scarcely  realize  that  I  knew  them  only  three  short 
weeks.  I  spent  the  afternoon  with  them  at  their  rooms  here.  They  were  the 
happiest  hours  of  my  life.  Mrs.  Bliss  gave  me  her  photograph,  but  the  only 
one  I  have  of  him  hangs  on  memory's  walls,  and  it  shall  never  be  obliterated. 
I  have  a  beautiful  letter  that  they  wrote  me  while  they  were  here.  I  am  very 
glad  that  you  came  to  Kalamazoo.  I  pray  for  you  that  God  will  make  you  very 
successful  in  winning  souls  to  Him. 

I  gave  Mr.  Bliss  "  Bunyan's  Complete  Works,"  and  wrote  on  the  fly  leaf,  "  I  go 
to  prepare  a  place  for  you — that  where  I  am  there  ye  may  be  also  ; "  but  little 
did  I  think  he  would  so  soon  be  there.  The  last  night  they  were  here  we  were 
the  last  ones  to  leave  the  church.  At  the  door,  Mr.  Bliss  turned  around  and 
said,  "  Good  bye,  old  Methodist  Church,  I  shall  not  see  you  again  ;  "  but  to  me 
he  said,  "  I  will  just  say  good  night  to  you ;  we  shall  meet  again  in  the  morn 
ing."  He  won  the  love  of  all.  Heaven  seems  nearer  and  dearer  now  that  they 
are  there  ;  but  how  we  miss  them  here  !  Mr.  Bliss  said  to  me  some  time  before 
he  left,  "  I  shall  watch  for  you  in  heaven."  I  know  they  are  waiting  for  me 
at  the  beautiful  gate.  Will  you  pray  for  me,  Mr.  Whittle,  that  I  may  be  a 
happy,  devoted  Christian  and  meet  them  there  ? 

Yours  in  the  blessed  hope  of  John  vi,  47,  ****  *** 

The  afternoon  Mr.  Bliss  left  Kalamazoo,  the  young  men,  many 
of  them  new  converts,  surprised  him  by  gathering  at  the  depot  and 
singing  him  a  farewell  from  Gospel  Songs.  The  last  song,  which 
closed  as  the  train  came  up  to  the  station,  was  "  We're  going  Home 
To-morrow." 


CHAPTER  IX. 

MB.  BLISS  AT  JACKSON,  MICHIGAN — AN  AFFECTING  SCENE  AT  THE  STATE 
PRISON — RETURN  TO  CHICAGO — THE  MINISTERS'  MEETING  AT  FARWELL 
HALL — THE  LAST  TIME  MR.  BLISS  SANG  IN  CHICAGO — "ARE  YOUR  WIN 
DOWS  OPEN  TOWARD  JERUSALEM  ?  " 

FKOM  the  llth  to  the  21st  of  November,  1876,  Mr.  Bliss  was  in 
Jackson,  Michigan,  in  union  meetings.  He  was  much  used 
here,  and  was  in  an  unusual  degree  anxious  to  talk  personally  with 
the  unsaved.  The  first  Sunday  evening  he  conducted  a  meeting  of 
his  own  in  the  Kev.  Mr.  Matte's  church,  and  with  much  blessing. 
A  dear  friend,  employed  by  the  railroad  company,  with  his  wife, 
was  present  that  evening,  and  both  remained  for  personal  conversa 
tion  with  him.  They  were  singers  and  were  glad  to  have  him  talk 
with  them,  and  before  he  left  them,  both  accepted  Christ.  That 
friend  is  now  leading  the  singing  in  the  church  where  he  was  con 
verted,  and  is  spoken  of  by  the  pastor  as  one  of  his  most  active 
workers. 

The  Michigan  State  Prison  is  located  at  Jackson,  and  on  both 
Sunday  mornings  of  Mr.  Bliss'  stay  in  the  city,  he  conducted  ser 
vice  for  the  eight  hundred  inmates  there.  The  most  tender,  elo 
quent,  and  earnest  appeal  that  could  have  possibly  been  made  to 
sinners  to  accept  the  love  of  Christ  was  made  by  him  at  his  last 
meeting  with  these  dear  men,  Sunday  morning,  November  19th. 
He  spoke  of  their  homes,  and  of  the  little  children,  who  missed  their 
papas  ;  told  them  of  his  own  dear  little  Paul  going  around  the  room, 
and  kneeling  at  the  different  chairs  and  praying  for  his  papa  and 
mamma  ;  then  turned  all  their  awakenefl  sympathies  to  Christ,  by 
speaking  of  how  impossible  it  would  be  for  him  to  give  up  his  dear 
little  boy  to  die  for  others,  and  to  die  a  death  of  great  suffering,  and 
those  for  whom  he  died  to  be  his  enemies.  "  Oh,  friends,"  he  said, 
with  tears,  "  I  could  not  do  it,  but  this  is  what  God  did  for  you. 
He  loved  you  and  gave  His  Son  to  die  for  you."  The  Spirit  of  God 


INCIDENTS  AT  JACKSOK.  81 

was  upon  Mr.  Bliss  that  morning  in  that  prison,  and  as  he  spoke 
and  as  he  sang,  the  hearts  of  those  hardened  men  melted  like  wax. 
Defiant  faces  softened,  and  grew  beautiful  with  earnest,  tender, 
sympathetic  feeling.  The  animal  and  sensuous  expression  pre 
dominant  in  many  faces  passed  away,  as  they  looked  upon  that  ear 
nest  face,  and  saw  the  tears  falling  as  he  plead  with  them  of  Christ's 
love,  and  then  sang,  as  if  singing  for  God  alone  : 

Man  of  Sorrows.     What  a  name 
For  the  Son  of  God,  who  came 
Rebel  sinners  to  reclaim. 

Hallelujah!  what  a  Savior  ! 

Two-thirds  of  the  men  there  seemed  quite  broken  down  by  the 
reality  of  the  things  of  God.  They  never  will  forget  the  service  of 
thafc  hour.  A  strange  feeling  of  the  sense  of  the  presence  of  Jesus 
Christ  came  over  the  writer  while  Mr.  Bliss  was  talking,  and  the 
expression  upon  the  faces  of  the  men  was  softening  under  his  words. 
It  seemed  to  be  an  explanation  of  the  words  spoken  of  Christ:  ' e  Then 
drew  near  unto  Him  publicans  and  sinners,  for  to  hear  Him."  He 
was  filled  with  sympathy  and  love,  and  his  dear  servant  that  day 
was  near  enough  to  the  Master  to  reflect  His  spirit. 

.  Here,  as  at  Kalamazoo,  Mrs.  Bliss  accompanied  her  husband  to 
nearly  every  meeting,  and  sang  once  or  twice  with  him  every  even 
ing.  His  personal  interest  in  the  unsaved  was  made  manifest  by 
an  incident  that  occurred  in  Jackson.  Late  one  evening,  at  the  close 
of  a  meeting,  he  went  to  the  telegraph  office  in  the  depot,  to  send 
a  message.  While  writing  his  dispatch,  an  operator  came  in,  and, 
without  noticing  Mr.  Bliss,  commenced  speaking  to  the  two  or  three 
railroad  men  who  were  in  the  room,  about  the  meeting.  His  first 
words,  as  laughingly  reported  by  Mr.  Bliss  to  the  writer,  were4: 
"  Well,  I've  been  to  church,  and  if  I  couldn't  preach  better  than 
that  man,  I'd  quit  the  business.  The  singing  though,  was  good. 
I  think  Bliss  knows  how  to  sing  and  I'll  go  again,  perhaps,  to  hear 
him."  Stepping  up  to  the  counter  and  taking  up  Mr.  Bliss'  dis 
patch,  he  at  once  recognized  him,  and  in  a  manly  way  said  ::  "  Well,, 
no  offense  intended.  I  didn't  know  you  were  here;  but  I  don't 
take  back  a  word,  except  the  swearing.  I  don't  believe  a  word 
Whittle  said."  Without  entering  into  an  argument,  Mr.  Bliss  pre 
sented  the  Gospel  to  him,  and  urged  upon  him  the  one  way  of  salva- 
6 


82  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

tion.  The  young  man  objected  very  strongly  to  a  statement  in  the 
sermon,  that,  no  matter  how  sincere  people  were  in  their  belief, 
they  were  lost  if  they  rejected  God's  truth.  "Well,"  said  Mr. 
Bliss,  "  isn't  it  like  this  ?  If  a  man  wants  to  go  to  Chicago  to-night, 
and  he  makes  a  mistake,  and  when  the  Detroit  train  comes  from 
the  west,  he  takes  it  and  goes  east.  Thinking  very  sincerely  that 
he  is  on  his  way  to  Chicago  won't  help  him  a  bit.  He  must  believe 
what  the  conductor  tells  him,  that  he  is  wrong,  and  face  about  or 
he  will  never  reach  Chicago."  The  railroad  men  chimed  in  an 
assent  to  this  illustration.  "Just  what  happened  on  my  train,  the 
other  day,"  said  a  conductor.  "  A  man  was  going  east,  when  he 
wanted  to  go  west,  and  I  had  hard  work  to  make  him  believe  he 
was  wrong."  It  was  late  and  Mr.  Bliss  was  very  tired,  but  for  some 
time  he  remained  speaking  to  this  friend.  Nor  did  he  forget  the 
interview.  Each  day  he  prayed  for  this  young  man,  and  the  very 
last  person  he  spoke  to  in  Jackson  was  this  operator,  urging  him 
to  accept  Christ  and  take  his  stand  as  His  follower. 

The  stay  in  Jackson  was  a  very  brief  one,  but  blessed  of  God  to 
rn  any  souls.  The  closing  meeting,  held  in  the  Methodist  Church, 
Bliss  often  referred  to  as  one  of  the  best  of  the  year.  After  the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  Mr.  Bliss  sang,  "  I  have  a  Savior — He's 
pleading  in  glory,"  with  its  sweet  refrain,  "  For  you  I  am  praying. 
I'm  praying  for  you,"  as  found,  with  music  by  himself,  in  Gospel 
Songs.  He  sang  this  piece  a  great  deal,  and  poured  out  his  heart 
in  real  prayer  as  he  sang  it.  During  his  singing,  those  present  who 
desired  the  prayers  of  God's  people  were  invited  to  rise,  and  how 
happy  he  would  be,  as  he  sang,  to  see  them  respond.  While  sing 
ing  it  one  evening,  his  heart  going  out  for  sinners,  he  added  this 
verse,  not  found  in  the  song  as  printed  in  Gospel  Hymns  : 

And  Jesus  is  calling,  how  can  you  reject  Him  ? 
He  says  He  loves  sinners,  so  then  He  loves  you. 
O  friend,  do  believe  it,  arise  and  accept  Him, 
Give  Jesus  your  heart,  while  I'm  praying  for  you. 

That  night  in  Jackson,  as  he  sang,  a  hundred  or  more  arose,  and 
the  Spirit  of  God  was  felt  in  power  in  the  meeting.  After  his  sing 
ing,  prayer  was  offered,  asking  that  those  impressed  might  then  and 
there  decide  and  fully  accept  Christ  as  their  Savior,  as  presented  to 
them  in  the  word.  Mr.  Bliss  then  sang  "  Hallelujah,  'tis  Done  ;" 


CLOSING   SERVICES.  83 

and  all  who  would  accept  and  were  willing  to  confess  Christ  and 
promise  to  commence  His  service  were  given  the  opportunity  of 
so  doing  by  arising.  Nearly  all  who  had  arisen  for  prayer  again 
arose,  and  the  singer's  face  fairly  shone  with  joy  as  he  sang : 

There's  a  part  in  that  chorus  for  you  and  for  me, 
And  the  theme  of  our  praises  forever  will  be  : 

Hallelujah,  'tis  done!  i  believe  on  the  Son  ! 

I  am  saved  by  the  blood  of  the  Crucified  One  ! 

The  meeting  in  Jackson  closed  November  21st,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bliss  came  to  Chicago  to  attend  the  Christian  Convention  called  by 
Mr.  Moody.  During  the  session  he  made  an  address  upon  the  use 
of  song  in  worship,  and  sang  at  the  prayer  meeting  of  ministers  in 
Farwell  Hall,  presided  over  by  Mr.  Moody,  on  the  morning  of 
November  24th.  Over  a  thousand  ministers  were  present,  and  the 
intense  spiritual  feeling  prevailing  found  fit  expression  through 
Bliss  in  song.  After  he  had  sung  "  Are  your  Windows  Open 
toward  Jerusalem  ? "  his  own  soul  thrilled  by  the  conscious  pres 
ence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  one  dear  minister  cried  out,  "  God  bless 
Mr.  Bliss  for  that  song  ; "  and  scores  of  ameiis  came  from  as  many 
earnest,  tender  hearts.  This  was  the  last  time  he  sang  in  Chicago. 
None  who  were  present  in  Farwell  Hall  that  forenoon  will  ever  for 
get  the  power  with  which  he  sang.  Mr.  Moody. leaned  forward  in 
his  chair,  occupied  with  the  song  and  the  singer,  and  overcome 
by  the  feeling  produced  by  the  music  and  the  sentiment  of  the 
hymn.  It  was  the  last  time  he  was  to  hear  him  this  side  of 
the  River.  When  next  he  hears  his  voice,  it  will  be  in  the 
Heavenly  choir. 

"ARE  YOUR  WINDOWS  OPEN  TOWARD  JERUSALEM?" 

Do  you  see  the  Hebrew  captive  kneeling1, 

At  morning-,  noon  and  night,  to  pray? 
In  his  chamber  he  remembers  Zion, 

Though  in  exile  far  away. 

CHORUS  : — Are  your  windows  open  toward  Jerusalem, 

Though  as  captives  here  a  "  little  while"  we  stay? 
For  the  coming  of  the  King  in  his  glory, 
Are  you  watching  day  by  day? 


84:  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Do  not  fear  to  tread  the  fiery  furnace, 

Nor  shrink  the  lion's  den  to  share ; 
For  the  God  of  Daniel  will  deliver, 

He  will  send  His  angel  there. 

Children  of  the  living  God,  take  courage  ; 

Your  great  deliverance  sweetly  sing, 
Set  your  faces  toward  the  hill  of  Zion, 

Thence  to  hail  our  coming  King. 

The  foregoing  was  suggested  to  Mr.  Bliss  while  attending  a  Sun 
day  service  at  the  State  Prison  in  Joliet,  Illinois,  where  he  had 
gone  to  sing.  Mr.  H.  G.  Spafford,  of  Chicago,  addressed  the  pris 
oners,  and  used  Daniel  in  Babylon,  as  an  illustration  to  them  of 
Gospel  truth,  and  asked  the  question  in  closing — "  Are  your  win 
dows  open  toward  Jerusalem  ?  " 


CHAPTER  X. 

MEETINGS  AT  PEORIA,  ILLINOIS — PROPOSED  TRIP  TO  ENGLAND — LETTER  FROM 
A  BOY  CONVERT — THANKSGIVING  DAY — "JOLLY  JONATHAN." 

ON  the  25th  of  November,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss,  with  the  writer,  left 
Chicago,  for  Peoria,  Illinois.  It  was  of  our  Father's  goodness, 
that  we  should  all  be  together,  while  there,  in  the  hospitable  care  of 
aur  dear  friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kobert  Grier.  Our  rooms  joined  and 
were  connected  with  each  other,  and  we  were  thus  constantly  to 
gether.  Had  we  known  that  the  separation  was  so  near,  we  could 
not  have  planned  for  ourselves,  for  the  fullest  enjoyment  of  the  few 
days  remaining,  as  our  Heavenly  Father  planned  for  us.  Both  of 
us  had  long  known  and  loved  Eeynolds,  Tyng,  Mcllvaine  and  other 
Christian  workers  in  Peoria,  and  it  was  a  joy  to  meet  with  them 
and  their  families  and  to  work  with  them  for  souls.  In  no  place 
were  the  dear  brothers  of  the  ministry  more  cordial  and  kind  in 
their  welcome  and  fellowship.  A  hearty  support  was  given  to  the 
meetings  by  all  the  churches,  and  Rouse's  Hall  was  kept  full  from 
night  to  night  with  people  brought  in  by  the  faithful  visitation  of 
Christians  to  hear  the  Grospel.  Mr.  Bliss  had  many  musical  friends 
in  Peoria,  and  under  the  direction  of  Messrs.  Bacon  and  Pitt  he 
found  a  choir  ready  to  assist  him,  that  gave  him  much  delight. 
Very  earnest  and  faithful  were  they  all,  and  very  highly  did  Mr. 
Bliss  appreciate  and  enjoy  their  services. 

While  in  Peoria,  our  dear  brother,  Mr.  R.  C.  Morgan,  of  Lon 
don,  England  (whose  article  upon  Mr.  Bliss,  taken  from  Tlie 
Christian,  will  be  found  in  the  chapters  devoted  to  memorial  ser 
vices),  paid  us  a  visit,  and  passed  some  days  with  us.  His  imme 
diate  object  in  coming  was  to  talk  with  us  about  a  visit  to  England. 
This  was  proposed  to  us  before  he  came,  by  Mr.  Moody,  but  was 
now  to  be  considered.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  were  both  favorably  in 
clined  to  the  proposition,  but  desirous  of  knowing  and  doing  the 
will  of  the  Lord  in  the  matter.  I  find  in  our  diary,  under  date  of 


86  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.   BUSS. 

December  4th :  "  To-day  Bliss,  and  wife  and  I  united  in  special 
prayer  that  God  would  guide  as  to  our  future  movements.  Moody 
has  spoken  about  our  going  to  England.  We  expect  Brother  Morgan 
of  London  here,  this  week,  to  suggest  this  to  us.  The  pastors  meet 
in  Chicago,  to-day,  to  consider  inviting  us  there  after  Mr.  Moody 
leaves,  and  calls  are  before  us  from  various  places.  We  know  not 
what  is  best,  but  trust  we  are  all  willing  to  be  led,  and  we  ask  the 
Master  to  plan  for  us  and  to  keep  us.  We  had  rather  go  anywhere 
else  than  to  Chicago,  and  shrink  much  from  following  Mr.  Moody 
there.  May  God  give  us  wisdom  to  know  His  will." 

Mr.  Bliss,  from  the  very  first,  had  an  almost  unaccountable 
aversion  to  the  plan  proposed  of  his  returning  from  his  Christmas 
visit  to  his  children,  to  Chicago,  and  work  there.  He  desired  to 
remain  in  the  East,  working  in  New  England,  while  Moody  an4 
Sankey  were  in  Boston.  The  expression  in  his  last  letter  before 
coming  west  is  explained  by  this  reluctance.  The  subject  of  con 
versation  during  these  days  at  Peoria  naturally  turned  much  upon 
the  proposed  trip  to  England.  Mrs.  Bliss  was  disposed  to  leave  her 
children  in  this  country.  She  said,  "  They  are  under  as  good  care 
with  sister  Clara  as  they  could  possibly  be.  They  love  her  now  aa 
•much  as  they  do  me,  and  I  believe  it  would  be  better  for  them  and 
better  for  us  in  the  work,  if  they  are  left  in  Eome."  In  comment 
ing  upon  this,  the  remark  was  made  that  if  accident  should  occur 
and  we  were  drowned,  the  children  would  be  safe.  Her  reply  was, 
"  Well,  I  shouldn't  think  of  that.  If  we  ask  the  Lord  to  guide 
us,  and  it  seems  best  for  all  to  go,  and  we  are  all  drowned,  it  is  all 
right  It  is  the  Lord's  will,  and  it  will  be  best  We  should  all  go 
together."  When  Mr.  Burchell's  dispatch,  stating  that  "Bliss, 
wife  and  children  were  among  the  dead,"  was  shown  me,  these  words 
of  Mrs.  Bliss  came  very  vividly  to  my  mind. 

In  Peoria  Mr.  Bliss  held  his  children's  meetings  each  afternoon, 
at  the  Methodist  Church,  and  became  more  interested  than  ever  in 
the  work  for  the  young,  and  earnestly  expressed  his  determination 
to  more  and  more  labor  in  that  direction.  A  number  of  very  in 
teresting  conversions  in  his  meetings  gave  him  much  pleasure.  One 
dear  little  German  boy,  a  manly  little  fellow  of  eight  years  old,  in 
terested  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  very  much.  He  was  an  intelligent  boy, 
and  had  a  business-like  way  of  speaking  of  his  having  accepted 
Christ>  that  commended  him  specially  to  Mrs.  Bliss,  who  was  always 


THAXKSGIVIXQ    DAY.  37 

repelled  by  affectation  in  young  or  old,  and  was,  perhaps  uncon 
sciously,  a  little  unsympathetic  toward  children  on  this  account. 
It  was  during  a  conversation  suggested  by  her  speaking  of  her  con 
fidence  in  this  boy,  that  Mr.  Bliss  said,  "  You  do  not  understand 
the  child  nature.  You  never  had  a  childhood,  but  were  always  a 
mother  child."  Since  their  death  the  following  letter  was  received 
from  their  little  Peoria  friend.  It  is  given  verbatim  : 


PEORIA,  I1L,  January  27. 
DEAR  BROTHER  WHTTTLX: 

I  saw  a  piece  in  the  Standard  of  you  and  Mr.  Bliss,,  I  saw  that  you  and  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Morgan,  of  London,  were  getting  up  a  book  of  the  life  of  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Bliss,  and  wanted  to  have  letters  from  those  who  have  been  blessed  or 
converted  by  his  songs.  I  can  say  that  I  was  converted  when  they  was  sing 
ing  the  second  hymn,  "  Hallelujah,  'tis  Done."  In  singing  the  chorus  of  it,  I 
thought  do  1  believe  on  the  Son  ?  and  so,  as  you  gave  the  first  invitation  for  all 
that  were  not  Christians  and  wanted  to  be  prayed  for  to  rise,  and  then  asked 
how  many  wanted  to  settle  it  now  to  rise,  I  was  among  that  lot  that  rose  as 
there  were  forty  or  fifty,  you  said.  I  saw  five  or.  sir  that  rose  that  were  right 
behind  me.  I  attended  all  of  Mr.  Bliss'  children's  meetings,  as  also  I  attended 
all  of  yours.  It  was  Thanksgiving  night,  at  the  Centennial  Hall,  in  which  I 
.was  converted.  I  expect  you  know  me.  I  am  eight  years  old.  I  remain,  as 
ever,  your  friend, 

WILLIAM  B.  HERSCHBERGER. 

It  was  a  very  sad  day  for  me  when  I  received  the  news  of  brother  Bliss' 
death.  As  there  was  crying  and  sobbing  when  we  heard  it,  as  my  brother  kept 
asking  what  was  the  matter.  I  hope  you  will  pray  for  our  family  and  for  me, 
as  I  will  continue  to  pray  for  you. 

This  letter  fully  justifies  Mrs.  Bliss  in  her  opinion  of  her  little 
friend  William. 

Mr.  Reynolds  writes  from  Peoria,  in  connection  with  Mr.  Bliss* 
labors,  that  over  fifty  scholars  in  his  Sunday  School  testified  that 
they  attributed  the  influence  leading  to  their  decision  for  Christ  to 
the  special  labors  of  Mr.  Bliss.  In  the  evening  meetings  for  adults, 
God  gave  him  also  many  souls  in  Peoria.  One  night  he  was  the 
last  one  home,  and  as  he  came  home  and  hung  up  his  coat  in  the 
hall,  he  remarked,  in  his  happy  way,  "  My  last  inquiry  meeting  was 
at  the  gate.  Three  dear  young  men,  all  hungry  for  the  Gospel, 
and  two  of  them  have  taken  Christ" 

Our  last  visit  together  to  the  afflicted  was  made  in  Peoria.     He 


88  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

sang  for  one  who  was  under  peculiar  bereavement,  and  who  longed 
for  release  from  life's  burdens,  his  hymn,  "  Father,  I'm  Tired." 
The  frail  girl  to  whom  he  sang  seemed  much  nearer  that  day  to 
"  crossing  the  tide"  than  the  strong  singer  who  so  cheered  her  with 
his  song  ;  but  she  still  lives,  and  may  for  many  a  day,  to  praise  the 
grace  that  can  sustain  and  bless  in  the  deepest  affliction,  while  he 
has  gone. 

Among  the  many  precious  meetings  in  Peoria  that  come  throng 
ing  to  the  mind,  none,  as  connected  with  these  loved  ones,  is  more 
clearly  remembered  than  the  Thanksgiving  morning  prayer-meet 
ing,  in  Dr.  Edwards'  church.  Dear  Bliss  was  full  of  the  spirit  of 
praise,  and,  as  always,  when  upon  that  theme,  he  lifted  us  all  into 
sympathy  with  him.  He  sang  the  song  of  his  own  composing, 
called  "  Grandfather's  Bible,"  prefacing  it  by  remarking  how  much 
he  had  to  praise  God  for  in  having  had  a  godly  ancestry  ;  and  very 
full  of  tender  reminiscences  to  all  were  the  old  tunes  woven 
in  to  tell  the  story  of -the  Puritans'  Bible.  He  loved  to  sing  the 
old  time  tunes,  and  the  hymns  his  father  and  mother  taught  him, 
and  very  sweetly  he  sang  them  that  morning,  causing  the  tears 
to  flow  from  the  eyes  of  many  children  "  of  parents  passed  into 
the  skies." 

Thanksgiving  Day  we  spent  with  the  kind  friends  who  were 
entertaining  us.  After  dinner,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  sang.  He  had 
written  many  very  popular  songs  that  he  never  sang  after  he 
went  into  Gospel  work,  and  that  I  knew  nothing  of.  One  of  these, 
called  "  Jolly  Jonathan,"  I  had  heard  of  his  singing  at  Northfield 
for  Mr.  Moody,  and  greatly  to  the  latter's  delight,  and  I  wished  to 
hear  it.  He  had  refused  several  times  in  Kalamazoo  and  Jackson, 
on  our  Saturday  rest  days,  and  upon  this  occasion  I  was  the  more 
importunate.  Mrs.  Bliss  finally  said,  "  Well,  Mr.  Bliss,  you  had 
better  let  the  Major  hear  what  it  is  ;  but,  Major,  Mr.  Bliss  is  through 
making  and  singing  that  kind  of  songs,  and  he  doesn't  like  to  have 
people  remember  him  as  singing  them."  I  appreciate  now,  as  I  did 
not  then,  how  out  of  sympathy  he  had  become,  in  the  habitual  tone 
of  his  mind,  with  all  that  was  not  connected  with  Christ  during 
these  last  days. 


JOLLY  JONATHAN".  89 


JOLLY    JONATHAN.      - 

Haow  du  yu  du,  my  naburs  ?  I'm.  glad  tu  see  yu  all, 

Just  make  yerselves  tu  hum,  I  say  ;  I'm  tickled  with  your  call, 

I  guess  you'll  find  Columby  a  purty  place  tu  stay  ; 

I  kalkelate  you  never  see  a  land  so  fair  and  gay. 

Ameriky,  Ameriky,  Ameriky,  Hooraw ! 

Ameriky,  Ameriky,  Ameriky,  Hooraw  1 

Aw,  "beg  you  pawdon,  mistah  ;  a  chawming  land  I  see, 
But,  aw,  acwas  the  watahs  wide  a  lawdly  land  theah  be — 
A  land  we  call  Old  Hingland,  magnifithent  and  grand ; 
A  higheh  awdeh  Bwiton,  hath,  a  wich,  a  noble  band. 
Britannia,  Britannia,  Britannia,  Huwaw  ! 
Britannia,  Britannia,  Britannia,  Huwaw  ! 

Och,  bother,  shtop  yer  blarney,  just  let  Quid  Ireland  shpake  ; 

A  blessid  darlin'  koonthry,  too,  she  is,  and  no  mishtake,     , 

Sich  gintlemanly  pigs,  oh,  sich  praties  there  are  raised, 

Wid  niver  once  a  shnake,  ye  mind,  Saint  Patrick's  name  be  praised  1 

Ould  Ireland,  Ould  Ireland,  Ould  Ireland,  Hoorah  ! 

Ould  Ireland,  Ould  Ireland,  Ould  Ireland,  Hoorah ! 

Nix  komarouse  der  Deitchland,  das  is  der  land  for  me  ; 

Mit  shootsenfest,  mit  sangerbund  und  sauerkraut  so  free  ; 

Yaw,  yaw,  das  is  der  koontry,  mein  faderland  so  dear, 

I  love,  oh,  my  !  I  feels  so  pad,  I'll  dake  some  lager  bier. 

Der  Deitcherland,  Der  Deitcherland,  Der  Deitcherland,  yaw,  yaw  ! 

Der  Deitcherland,  Der  Deitcherland,  Der  Deitcherland,  yaw,  yaw  1 


CHAPTER  XI. 

FORESHADOWINGS  OP  THE  SEPARATION — MR.  BLISS'  LAST  VISIT  TO  CHICAGO 
— MERRY  CHRISTMAS  AT  HOME— THE  LAST  EARTHLY  LABORS — THE 
JOURNEY  TO  THE  VALLEY  OF  THE  SHADOW  OF  DEATH — "HIS  WORKS 
DO  LIVE  AFTER  HIM" — "A  VOICE  FROM  HEAVEN." 

THERE  seems  now,  in  looking  back  over  our  intercourse  in 
Peoria,  a  foreshadowing  of  approaching  separation.  One  day 
while  taking  a  walk  that  was  almost  a  daily  one  with  Mr.  Bliss  and 
the  writer,  up  the  Bluff,  we  spoke  that  the  time  might  be  near  at 
hand,  when  one  of  us  would  be  walking  alone,  and  thinking  of  the 
departed  one  in  places  where  we  had  been  together.  He,  always 
inclined  toward  "the  hope,"  said  :  "Just  as  probable  that  Christ 
may  come  and  we  all  go  together.  What  a  beautiful  day  this  would 
be  for  Him  to  come."  We  had  talked  of  the  sudden  death  of  our 
friend  Samuel  Moody,  Mr.  Moody's  brother,  and  in  connection  with 
that  event  and  the  view  we  had  of  the  Lord's  return,  our  minds 
were  often  turned  toward  what  now  recurs  as  almost  premonitory 
of  what  was  to  come.  On  the  14th  of  December,  we  held  our  last 
meeting.  From  8.30  A.  M.  to  5  P.  M.,  with  intermission  at  noon,  we 
held  a  Christian  Convention.  Mr.  Bliss  sang  through  the  day,  and 
spoke  with  his  usual  earnestness  and  emphasis  upon  the  use  of  song 
in  worship.  In  the  evening,  accompanied  by  Brother  Morgan, 
who  had  spent  the  day  with  us,  we  went  to  Rouse's  Hall.  On  the 
way,  Mrs.  Bliss  remarked  :  "  Major,  if  you  want  us  to  sing  '  Waiting 
and  Watching/  to-night,  you  must  not  say  anything  before  asking 
us  to  sing.  It  is  all  that  I  can  do  to  control  my  feelings  anyway, 
when  we  do  sing  it,  and  if  you  introduce  it  by  remarks,  I  shall 
break  down."  They  sang  this  piece,  and  "I  Know  not  the  Hour 
that  My  Lord  will  Come,"  that  evening — the  last  I  ever  heard  them 
sing  together.  Mr.  Bliss  sang  "Eternity"  alone. 

That  evening  we  left  for  Chicago.     We  breakfasted  and  dined 
with  Mr.  Moody  at  theBrevoort  House,  and  arranged  that  we  should 


LAST  EARTHLY  LABORS.  91 

take  up  the  work  in  Chicago,  Sunday,  December  31  ;  I  going  back 
to  Peoria,  and  Bliss  going  to  visit  his  children  until  that  time. 
After  the  Lord  was  through  with  us  in  Chicago,  we  were  to  go  to 
England.  Bliss  yielded  about  coming  to  Chicago,  but  to  the  last 
was  unconvinced  as  to  its  being  best. 

They  left  that  Friday  afternoon  by  the  5.15  Michigan  Southern 
train.  Before  leaving  the  hotel,  we  met  for  a  few  moments  of 
prayer  in  Room  13,  and  I  parted  with  them  there,  never  again  to 
meet  on  earth.  He  passed  the  following  Sunday  in  Towanda,  Penn 
sylvania,  with  his  mother  and  his  sister,  Mrs-.  Willson.  Three 
letters  that  he  wrote  from  there  all  speak  of  the  joy  he  felt  at  the 
meeting  with  the  mother — of  his  thankfulness  for  the  peace  that 
seemed  to  be  filling  her  soul  and  the  blessing  her  prayers  and  faith 
had  been  to  him.  Monday,  December  18th.  he  rode  by  stage  to 
Rome,  and  the  parents  were  with  their  dear  little  boys  again.  All 
of  the  associations  of  home  for  both  of  them  clustered  around  Father 
Young's  house  in  Rome,  their  frequent  happy  resting-place  on  life's 
journey ;  they  came  with  joy  to  it  now,  both  almost  as  merry  as 
their  little  boys.  They  had  been  purchasing  and  making  articles 
for  Christmas  presents  for  weeks,  and  came  with  a  trunk  full  of 
surprises  for  the  approaching  holiday.  '  When  Christmas  came, 
Mother  Bliss  was  sent  for,  and  all  the  family  circle  within  reach 
were  gathered  at  the  old  home.  Mr.  Bliss  was  the  Santa  Claus. 
On  Saturday  he  went  out  on  to  the  hillside  and  cut  the  Christmas 
tree,  and  with  his  own  hands  arranged  it  in  the  parlor  and  hung  his 
surprises.  Saturday  evening,  the  presents  were  distributed  and 
"  the  happiest  Christmas  he  had  ever  known,"  as  he  said,  was  quickly 
passed.  He  had  surprises  for  everybody  and  spent  the  day  in  mak 
ing  everybody  happy.  From  Grandma  Allen  down  to  little  George, 
everybody  in  the  entire  circle  was  remembered,  and  portions  were 
sent  outside  the  circle  to  all  of  whom  he  could  learn  in  the  village 
as  being  in  want.  He  himself  was  not  without  his  surprises.  Gifts 
from  the  wife  and  other  loved  ones,  and  a  magnificent  music  box 
from  his  loved  friend  and  publisher,  Mr.  Church,  added  to  his 
happiness.  This  Christmas  was  to  him  the  crowning  joy  and  mercy 
of  a  year  of  joys  and  mercies.  His  heart  overflowed  with  thankful 
ness  to  God  and  with  earnest  desire  to  do  more  in  the  service  of 
Christ.  He  visited  nearly  every  day  among  the  neighbors,  and  urged 
the  claims  of  Christ  upon  the  personal  attention  of  those  unsaved. 


92  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

He  attended  nearly  every  meeting,  and  sang  and  gave  Bible  readings, 
and  made  personal  appeals  to  his  friends  to  at  once  decide  for  Christ. 
All  testify  that  they  never  knew  him  so  earnest.  Grandma  Allen 
says  :  "  Why,  that  man  would  come  in  and  say,  (  Grandma,  I  wish  I 
could  see  every  person  in  this  valley  a  Christian. ":  The  dear  old 
Grandma  is  very  quaint  and  original  in  her  way,  and  "  Phil,"  as  all 
at  home  called  him,  loved  to  draw  out  her  odd  sayings.  The  little 
account  Grandma  gave  me  of  one  of  his  home  meetings  with  them, 
on  one  of  the  last  days,  when  they  gathered  for  a  Bible  talk  and 
sing,  will  illustrate  the  enjoyment  she  gave  him.  She  said  :  "  He 
had  been  asking  them  all  around  where  they  had  rather  have  seen 
Jesus,  when  He  was  on  the  earth,  if  they  had  to  select  one  place. 
They  all  selected  different  places,  and  he  said  he  would  rather  have 
seen  Him  as  He  went  up  into  heaven  from  the  Mount  of  Olives  ; 
and  then  he  asked  me  where  I  had  rather  have  seen  Him,  and  I 
told  him  that  I  had  rather  have  seen  Him  when  He  was  a  little 
helpless  baby,  there  in  the  manger,  among  the  oxen,  and  helped 
take  care  of  Him,  and  he  just  cried  about  it." 

God  blessed  Mr.  Bliss'  testimony  and  labor  during  this  last 
week  to  the  conversion  of  many  old  friends  and  neighbors,  and  some 
score  or  more  feel  that  they  owe  their  decision  to  his  influence,  and 
that  the  light  they  have  received  from  the  Son  of  God  came  through 
him. 

Mr.  Bliss'  last  meeting  was  held  Wednesday  evening,  December 
27.  He  was  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  sang  with  more  than  usual 
power.  Among  the  pieces  that  friends  remember  as  sung  that  night 
are :  "  Alas  !  and  did  my  Savior  Bleed  ?  "  to  the  tune  of  Dundee  ; 
"  Happy  Day,"  and  "  In  the  Christian's  Home  in  Glory."  He  sang 
as  solos  "Eternity,"  "Father,  I'm  Tired,"  and  as  a  closing  song, 
"Hold  Fast  till  I  Come."  In  singing  "Father,  I'm  Tired,"  he 
took  occasion  to  speak  of  his  companion  in  the  work,  and  of  his 
affection  for  him,  and  that  he  -would  sing  the  piece  because  it  was 
one  of  his  favorites.  The  last  song,  probably,  that  he  sang  on  earth 
was  "  Hold  Fast  till  I  Come."  He  prefaced  his  singing  it  by  say 
ing  that  it  was  one  of  the  first  occasions  of  its  being  sung,  and  that 
it  might  be  the  last  song  he  should  ever  sing  to  them. 

On  Wednesday,  a  letter  came  to  me  from  Mr.  Bliss,  in  which  he 
wrote  : 

"  I  hear  nothing  from  you  definite  as  to  my  being  wanted  in 


THE  LAST  JOURNEY.  93 

Chicago  next  Sunday.  Unless  I  hear  from  you,  I  shall  not  leave 
this  week."  This  letter  came  in  the  morning.  He  had  been  adver 
tised  to  sing  in  Mr.  Moody's  Tabernacle  the  following  Sunday  after 
noon.  It  was  necessary  to  telegraph  him  to  come.'  But  evening 
came  and  found  me  at  my  home  and  the  telegram  was  not  sent.  I 
had  not  forgotten  it,  but  did  not  want  to  send  it.  I  did  not  know 
then,  I  do  not  know  now,  why.  All  day  long,  it  was  upon  my  mind 
and  was  spoken  of  to  friends  that  Bliss  must  be  telegraphed  for,  and 
that  I  did  not  like  to  take  the  responsibility  of  doing  it.  Late  in 
the  evening,  the  dispatch  was  forwarded. 

Thursday  morning,  he  took  his  little  boys  into  a  room  by  them 
selves  and  prayed  with  them,  bade  good-bye  to  all,  and,  standing 
upon  the  threshold  for  a  moment,  said  :  "  I  would  love  to  stay. 
I  would  far  rather  stay  than  go,  if  it  were  God's  will ;  but  I  must  be 
about  the  Master's  work."  He  wrote  back  from  Waverly,  New  York, 
a  station  on  the  Erie  Eailroad,  the  same  afternoon  :  "  Tickets  for 
Chicago,  via  Buffalo  and  Lake  Shore  Railroad.  Baggage  checked, 
through.  Shall  be  in  Chicago  Friday  night.  God  bless  you  all 
forever." 

Taking  the  afternoon  train  at  Waverly,  he  expected  to  be  in 
Buffalo  at  twelve  o'clock  that  night,  and  connect  with  a  train  that 
would  arrive  in  Chicago  Friday  evening.  Ten  miles  from  Waverly 
(as  I  learned  from  the  conductor,  in  tracing  him  up),  the  engine  of 
the  train  broke,  and  they  were  detained  three  hours.  Their  con 
nection  with  this  train  was  thus  lost  ;  and  upon  arriving  at  Hor- 
nellsvillo  late  in  the  evening,  they  evidently  decided  to  wait  over, 
and  have  a  night's  rest,  and  arrive  in  Chicago  Saturday  morning  at 
nine  o'clock — for  at  Hornellsville  they  left  the  train,  and  are  regis 
tered  at  the  hotel,  which  they  left  Friday  morning,  taking  the 
train  which  connected  at  Buffalo  with  the  Chicago  train,  wrecked 
at  Ashtabula,  Ohio.  The  children  were  not  with  them,  but  had 
been  left  at  Rome,  Pennsylvania,  in  the  care  of  grandparents  and 
aunt. 

The  story  of  the  disaster  by  which  these  two  precious  lives  were 
lost  will  be  found  in  another  chapter.  What  experience  they 
passed  through, that  night  of  fear  and  pain,  we  shall  not  know  until 
we  meet  them  on  the  other  side.  We  may  confidently  believe  that 
God  gave  them  abundant  grace  for  all  they  met  of  suffering,  and 
that  Christ  was  consciously  near  to  them  in  their  moment  of  need. 


94  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

The  time  was  shortened  for  the  elect's  sake  and  they  were  soon  at 
home.  From  all  the  evidence  that  could  be  gathered  from  the 
testimony  of  survivors,  it  is  believed  that  the  Buffalo  and  Cleveland 
parlor  car,  in  which  they  were  seen  by  Mr.  Burchell,  a  lady  passen 
ger,  and  by  the  newsboy  of  the  train,  struck  first  upon  the  ice  after 
the  fall  of  the  bridge,  and  that  another  car  fell  upon  it,  crushing 
and  probably  instantly  killing  the  passengers  within.  The  floor  of 
this  car  was  identified  in  removing  the  wreck,  and  lay  flat  upon  the 
ice,  with  the  water  that  had  come  from  the  melted  snow  and  ice, 
mingled  with  ashes  and  cinders  frozen  over  it,  substantiating  the 
above  theory. 

Saturday  morning,  December  30th,  when  I  read  the  report  of  the 
disaster,  my  heart  sank  within  me,  and  I  feared  the  worst.  I  imme 
diately  telegraphed  to  Eome  to  know  if  Mr.  Bliss  had  left.  But 
about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  before  any  reply  from  Rome,  Mr. 
BurchelPs  telegram  came,  and  we  were  face  to  face  with  the  awful 
fact  of  their  death.  The  next  morning  we  were  at  Ash  tabula, 
and  remained  for  three  days,  until  all  the  wreck  had  been  removed, 
searching  first  for  their  bodies,  then  for  anything  that  could  be  identi 
fied  as  having  been  connected  with  them.  We  found  nothing ;  and  up 
to  this  time  nothing  has  been  found.  Their  watches,  sleeve  buttons, 
chains,  keys,  rings,  not  one  thing  connected  with  them  has  come 
to  light.  Scores  of  such  articles  have  been  raked  up  from  the  bot 
tom  of  the  river,  but  none  of  them  are  theirs.  They  have  gone,  as 
absolutely  and  completely  gone,  as  if  translated  like  Enoch. 

Of  the  meeting  with  the  stricken  households,  and  the  dear  orphan 
boys,  and  the  days  of  mourning  passed  with  them,  I  cannot  speak. 
God  graciously  manifested  Himself  in  the  comfort  vouchsafed  to  the 
aged  parents,  and  to  brothers  and  sisters  who  shared  their  grief,  and 
it  was  better  indeed  to  be  "  in  the  house  of  mourning  than  the  house 
of  feasting."  Some  of  the  number  there  gathered  were  led  to  con 
secrate  themselves  to  the  work  of  Christ,  and  are  now  engaged  in 
prosecuting  the  work  of  the  dear  departed  brother  in  singing  the 
Gospel.  Many  at  the  funeral  service  held  in  Rome  were  led  to  ac 
cept  of  Christ,  and  from  all  over  the  land  has  come  testimony  that 
Christ  has  been  magnified  in  the  death  of  His  child  as  in  his  life. 
Scores,  by  the  very  fact  of  his  death,  have  been  impressed  and  turned 
to  God.  Hundreds  will  receive  the  truth  through  the  pathos  of 
memory  of  his  death,  giving  new  meaning  to  the  truths  of  his 


A   VOICE   FROM   HEAVEN". 


95 


songs.  "  God's  ways  are  always  right."  No  mistake  has  been  made. 
We  bow  in  submission  to  His  will,  and  pray  that  this  afflictive  prov 
idence  may  be  sanctified  to  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God  and  that,  "  with 
windows  open  toward  Jerusalem,"  we  may  live  day  by  day,  ready 
for  "  the  coming  of  the  King  in  His  beauty,"  or  for  our  departure 
to  be  with  Him.  "Amen,  even  so,  come  quickly,  Lord  Jesus." 

The  following  lines,  printed  upon  a  leaflet,  were  found  in  Mr. 
Bliss'  trunk.  He  carried  the  leaf  for  a  long  time  in  his  pocket- 
book,  until  creased  and  worn,  and  it  was  placed  among  his  papers. 
God  in  grace  grant  to  writer  and  to  readers,  that  the  message  may 
be  as  appropriate  as  a  voice  from  us,  when  we  depart  to  be  with 
Christ,  as  it  surely  is  in  every  line  from  him. 

A  VOICE   FROM  HEAVEN. 

I  shine  in  the  light  of  God,  Rev.  xxi.  23. 

His  likeness  stamps  my  brow,  1  John  iii.  2. 

Through  the  shadows  of  death  my  feet  have  trod,  1  Cor.  xv.  55. 

And  I  reign  in  Glory  now !  Rev.  xxii.  5. 

No  breaking  heart  is  here,  Matt.  xxvi.  38. 

No  keen  and  thrilling  pain,  Job  xxxiii.  19. 

No  wasted  cheek,  where  the  frequent  tear  Rev.  xxi.  4. 

Hath  roll'd  and  left  its  stain.  Ps.  xlii.  3. 

I  have  found  the  joys  of  Heaven,  Is.  xxxv.  1.0. 

I  am  one  of  the  angel-band  :  Heb.  xii.  22. 

To  my  head  a  crown  of  gold  is  given,  1  Pet.  v.  4. 

And  a  harp  is  in  my  hand  !  Ret),  xiv.  2. 

I  have  learn'd  the  song  they  sing,  Is.  xxxviii  20. 

Whom  Jesus  hath  set  free  ;  John  viii.  36. 

And  the  glorious  walls  of  Heaven  still  ring  Is.  Ix.  18. 

With  my  new-born  melody  I  Rev.  xv.  3. 

No  sin,  no  grief,  no  pain —  Is.  xxv.  8. 

Safe  in  my  happy  home  1  John  xiv.  2. 

My  fears  all  ned,  my  doubts  all  slain,  Acts  vii.  55. 

My  hour  of  triumph  come  !  Rom.  viii.  37. 

O  friends  of  mortal  years,  Prov.  xvii.  17. 

The  trusted  and  the  trim  !  1  John  i.  7. 

Ye  are  walking  still  through  the  valley  of  tears,  Heb.  x.  36. 

But  I  wait  to  welcome  you.  Luke  xvi.  22. 


96  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS, 

Do  I  forget  ?— Oh  no  !  Mai.  iii.  16. 

For  memory's  golden  chain  2  Pet.  i.  15. 

Shall  bind  my  heart  to  the  hearts  below,  1  John  iv.  7. 

Till  they  meet  and  touch  again.  1  Thess.  iv.  13. 

Each  link  is  strong  and  bright,  John  i.  61. 

And  love's  electric  flame  Dan  ix.  21. 

Flows  freely  down  like  a  river  of  light  Rev.  xxii.  1. 

To  the  world  from  which  I  came.  1  John  iv.  9. 

l)o  you  mourn  when  another  star  1  Cor.  xv.  41. 

Shines  out  from  the  glittering  sky  ?  Dan.  xii.  3. 

Do  you  weep  when  the  raging  voice  of  war  Deui,  xxxii.  1. 

And  the  storms  of  conflict  die  ?  Mark  iv.  89. 

Then  why  do  your  tears  run  down,  Luke  viii.  52. 

And  your  hearts  be  sorely  riven,  Prov.  xiv.  10. 

For  another  gem  in  the  Savior's  crown,  Is.  Ixii.  3. 

And  another  soul  in  Heaven?  Luke  xxiii.  43. 


Farewell,  dear  friend  and  brother,  true  yokefellow  in  the  service 
of  Jesus  Christ.  The  path  is  often  lonely  without  you,  and  as  they 
sing  the  songs  you  used  to  sing,  and  we  listen  in  vain  for  the  voice 
so  wedded  to  the  music,  and  music  so  wedded  to  the  words,  our 
hearts  ache  as  the  echoes  die  away,  and  a  strange  silence  is  on  the 
air,  as  if  the  song  itself  mourned  for  the  singer.  No  resting  place 
beneath  the  sod  can  receive  the  tears  we  would  shed,  or  the  flowers 
we  would  bring  to  tell  how  we  loved  thee.  We  turn  from  the 
earthly  memories  to  the  heavenly  realities.  The  days  are  fast  pass 
ing  by  ;  soon  upon  the  other  shore  we  shall  greet  you,  and  you  shall 
lead  our  praises  to  Him  who  hath  redeemed  us  from  our  sins  by  His 
shed  blood,  and  in  His  risen  life  hath  given  us  resurrection  hope, 
and  to  whom,  even  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  we  now  give  all  the 
praise  for  every  sweet  memory  and  for  every  precious  anticipation 
of  future  joy  connected  with  you. 


CHAPTER  XII. 


MR.  BLISS'  HYMNS — "  PRESS  FORWARD  " — "  HAIL,  HAPPY  MORNING  " — "  PETER' S 
DENIAL" — "LORD  SAVE  ME" — "ONCE  MORE  WITH  MOURNFUL  STEP" — 

"NAUGHT     TO     CHARGES     FALSE" — "THE    ASCENSION" — "  BETHESDA  " — 

"THERE'S  ALIGHT  IN  THE  VALLEY" — "  HOSANNA,  HOSANNA" — "SAFE 
WITH  THE  MASTER" — "THE  BEGGAR  BY  THE  WAYSIDE" — "i  MUST 

ABIDE  WITH  THEE" — "AND  YET  THERE  IS  ROOM" — "REMEMBERED" — 
"FOLLOW  ME" — "LOOK  AND  LIVE" — "ONLY  BELIEVE" — "LOOK  NOT 
UPON  THE  WINE" — "THE  SPIRIT  TREE" — "BEAUTIFUL  RAIN." 

THE  following,  of  Mr.  Bliss'  compositions,  were  published  in 
"  The  Prize,"  a  collection  of  Sunday  School  hymns,  etc.,  by 
George  F.  Root,  issued  in  1870,  and  the  words  are  used  by  permis 
sion  of  the  publishers,  Messrs.  John  Church  &  Co.,  Cincinnati, 
Ohio: 

PRESS  FORWARD. 

Press  forward,  press  forward,  press  forward  to  the  prize  ; 
While  life's  bright  morn,  with  rosy  hue, 
Bedecks  the  flowers  that,  bathed  with  dew, 
Salute  thy  waking  eyes, 
Press  forward  to  the  prize, 

Forward,  forward,  press  forward  to  the  prize, 
Forward,  forward,  press  forward  to  the  prize. 

Press  forward,  press  forward,  press  forward  to  the  prize ; 
When  in  the  morn  of  life  thy  heart 
From  heaven's  high  calling  would  depart, 

And  doubts  and  fears  arise, 

Press  forward  to  the  prize. 

Press  forward,  press  forward,  press  forward  to  the  prize; 
When  morn  and  noon  of  life  are  past, 
And  evening  shadows  lengthen  fast, 
And  swift  the  daylight  flies, 
Press  forward  to  the  prize. 


98  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Press  forward,  press  forward,  press  forward  to  the  prize 
Though  sweet  the  songs  we  sing  below, 
A  richer  Prize  will  heaven  bestow, 
And  there  our  treasure  lies, 
Press  forward  to  the  prize. 


HAIL,  HAPPY  MORNING. 

Hail,  happy  morning,  hail,  holy  day  I 
Calling  from  earthly  labors  away  ; 
Sweet  words  of  wisdom,  glad  songs  of  joy, 
Now  be  our  best  employ. 

CHORUS. — Sing  once  more  the  happy,  happy  song, 

While  the  golden  moments  roll  along, 
"  Come  to  the  temple,  come,  come  away/' 
"  Hallow  the  Sabbath  day." 


Emblem  of  heaven,  sweet  day  of  rest, 
In  thy  "  remembrance  "  may  we  be  blest. 
So  may  our  songs  and  lives  ever  say, 
"Hallow  the  Sabbath  day." 

Rest  from  our  labors,  rest  from  our  cares ; 
Rest  in  our  praises,  rest  in  our  prayers  • 
So  the  commandment  would  we  obey. 
"  Hallow  the  Sabbath  day." 


PETER'S   DENIAL. 

In  the  garden,  boldly, 

Peter  would  have  fought : 
Now  he  answers  coldly, 
"  Nay,  I  know  Him  not." 

CHORUS. — I  would  stand  forever 

Near  my  Savior's  side, 
Lest  to  glory  yonder 
I  should  be  denied. 


LORD,    SAVE  ME.  99 

Though  life's  stony  pathway 

Be  with  dangers  fraught, 
Let  iny  falt'rings  never 

Say,  "  I  know  Him  not." 

Though  long  years  of  sorrow 

Be  iny  earthly  lot, 
Let  my  murm'rings  never 

Say,  "  I  know  Him  not." 

In  the  dark  temptation, 

Vows  and  prayers  forgot, 
Let  my  yielding  never 

Say,  "  1  know  Him  not." 

So,  in  toil  or  pleasure, 

Deed  or  word  or  thought, 
Let  me  never,  never 

Say,  "  I  know  Him  not." 


LORD,   SAVE  ME. 

Winds  are  boist'rous,  waves  are  high, 
Midnight  gloom  o'erspreads  the  sky  ; 
Fearfu^  sinful,  sinking  down, 
Peter's  prayer  I  make  my  own. 

CHORUS. — Mountain  waves  of  sin  I  see, 

In  Thy  mercy,  "  Lord,  save  me," 
Mountain  waves  of  sin  I  see, 
In  Thy  mercy,  "  Lord,  save  me." 

Lord,  Thou  bidst  me  come  to  Thee, 
Thou  alone  my  help  must  be  ; 
On  the  treach'rous  waves  I  stand, 
Savior,  hold  me  by  Thy  hand. 

Lord,  my  feeble  faith  forgive, 
Help  divine  may  I  receive  ; 
All  my  guilty  fears  remove, 
Wherefore  can  I  doubt  Thy  love. 


100  MEMOIR   OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 


ONCE  MORE  WITH  MOURNFUL  STEP. 

Once  more  with  mournful  step  and  slow, 
Across  the  inurm'ring  brook  they  go ; 
Once  more  beneath  the  olive's  shade, 
The  garden's  well  known  paths  they  tread  ; 
A  Savior's  sorrows  we  may  mourn, 
For  surely  He  our  griefs  hath  borne. 

Each  brow  is  sad,  each  heart  with  woe 

Is  breaking,  since  He  said,  "  I  go." 

And  see,  a  warlike  band  appears, 

And  fainting  hopes  are  crushed  with  f eara : 

Alas,  our  guilt  His  sorrow  made, 

On  Him  was  our  transgression  laid. 

Though  all  forsake  the  Lord  and  flee, 

Again  He  answers,  "  I  am  He." 

Again  the  falt'ring  foes  arise, 

The  bitter  cup  He  drinks  and  dies. 

A  Savior's  love  behold  revealed, 

And  with  His  stripes  we  now  are  healed, 


NAUGHT   TO  CHARGES  FALSE. 

Naught  to  charges  false  replying, 

In  gentle  mood, 
Hearing  all,  but  naught  denying, 

Our  Savior  stood. 

CHORUS. — Gentle,  lamb-like  would  I  be, 

Savior,  more  and  more  like  Thee. 

Priestly  rage  and  perjured  story, 

In  vain  are  brought ; 
So,  the  mighty  Lord  of  glory, 

Now  answers  not. 


While  "  Away  with  Him  "  they're  crying, 

His  cross  they  raise  ; 
On  that  shameful  cross,  while  dying, 

For  them  He  prays. 


BETHESDA.  101 


THE  ASCENSION. 

e<  Wait  in  Jerusalem  together," 
Wait,  said  the  risen  Lord  ; 
Wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father 
Ye  from  Me  have  heard. 

Wait  for  the  power  of  His  glory, 

Wait  for  His  high  commands ; 
Then  shall  ye  spread  abroad  the  story, 

In  all  distant  lands. 

Thus,  while  the  chosen  who  believed  Him 

Gazed  on  the  face  of  Love, 
So,  from  their  sight  a  cloud  received  Him, 

Up  to  Heaven  above. 

And  while  toward  Heav'n  they  steadfastly  gazed, 

Behold  two  men  in  white  apparel 
Who  said  unto  them  : 

Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing  ? 
Why  are  ye  sorrowful  ?    Why  do  ye  weep  ? 
As  ye  have  seen  your  Savior  ascending, 
So  in  His  glory  shall  He  appear,  He  appear. 


BETHESDA. 

Near  the  healing  pool  Bethesda,  day  by  day, 
Where  the  gentle  breezes  through  the  porches  play, 
Many  weak  and  weary,  halt  and  withered  lay, 
Waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  water. 

CHORUS. — Weary  waiting  at  Bethesda's  side, 
For  the  moving  of  the  healing  tide, 
Lord,  from  Thee  be  all  my  strength  supplied, 
While  waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  water. 

So  in  helpless  misery  and  sin  I  lie, 
Hearing  not  the  footstep  of  the  angel  nigh, 
Trembling,  hoping,  fearing  lest  at  last  I  die, 
Waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  water. 


102  MEMOIK  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

Jesus  knows  the  mourner's  grief  and  hears  his  sighs, 
Sees  the  look  of  anguish  and  the  streaming  eyes, 
Kindly  speaks  and  bids  the  weary  sufferer  "  Rise/' 
Waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  water. 

Loving  Savior,  all  my  weakness  Thou  dost  see, 
Still  Thy  tender  mercies,  Lord,  bestow  on  me, 
Speak  the  word,  and  let  me  stand  complete  in  Thee, 
Waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  water. 


THERE'S  A  LIGHT   IN   THE  VALLEY. 

Through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  I  must  go, 

Where  the  cold  waters  of  Jordan  roll ; 
But  the  promise  of  my  Shepherd  will,  I  know, 

Be  the  rod  and  the  staff  to  my  soul. 
Even  now,  down  the  valley  as  I  glide, 

I  can  hear  my  Savior  say,"  Follow  me  t " 
And  with  Him  I'm  not  afraid  to  cross  the  tide, 

There's  a  light  in  the  valley  for  me. 

CHORUS.— There's  a  light  in  the  valley, 

There's  a  light  in  the  valley  for  me, 
And  no  evil  will  I  fear  while  my  Shepherd  is  so  nea* 
There's  a  light  in  the  valley  for  me,  for  me. 

Now  the  rolling  of  the  billows  I  can  hear, 

As  they  beat  on  the  turf -bound  shore  ; 
But  the  beacon  light  of  love,  so  bright  and  clear, 

Guides  my  bark,  frail  and  lone,  safely  o'er. 
1  shall  find  down  the  valley  no  alarms, 

For  my  Savior's  blessed  smile  I  can  see ; 
He  will  bear  me  in  His  loving,  mighty  arms, 

There's  a  light  in  the  valley  for  me. 


HOSANNA!    HOSANNA ! 

From  the  Mount  of  Olives  descending, 

See  the  multitude  draw  nigh ; 
Low  before  the  Holy  One  bending, 

Hear  them  all  with  rapture  cry : 

CHORUS. — Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
Hosanna,  hosanna,  hosanna,  in  the  highest . 


SAFE   WITH   THE   MASTER.  103 

Some,  their  highest  honor  bestowing, 

Spread  their  garments  in  the  way  ; 
Others  leafy  branches  are  strewing; 

All,  rejoicing,  shout  and  say  : 

All  around  the  city  are  crying, 

"  Who  is  this  1"  "  What  priest  or  king  ?  " 

While  within  the  temple  replying 
Hear  the  children  sweetly  sing : 

We  our  truthful  worship  would  give  Thee, 

Humbly  at  Thy  feet  would  fall, 
In  our  hearts  would  gladly  receive  Thee, 

Jesus,  Savior,  Lord  of  all. 


SAFE    WITH    THE  MASTER. 

Where  is  now  our  loved  one  ? 

Where,  0  where  1 
Not  where  the  living  weary, 

Not  where  the  dying  moan  ; 
Not  where  the  day  is  dreary, 

Not  where  the  night  is  lone ; 
Not  in  a  home  of  weeping, 

Not  in  a  darkened  room  ; 
Not  in  a  graveyard  sleeping, 

Not  in  a  silent  tomb, 

No,  not  there  ;  no,  not  there  1 

Where  is  now  our  loved  one  ? 

Where,  O  where? 
Safe  in  a  land  immortal, 

Safe  in  a  country  rare, 
Safe  in  a  heavenly  portal, 

Safe  in  a  mansion  fair. 
Safe  with  the  joys  supernal, 

Safe  with  the  bless'd  to  bow, 
Safe  with  the  Love  Eternal, 

Safe  with  the  Master  now, 

There,  yes,  there  ;  there,  yes,  there  \ 


104  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 


THE  BEGGAR  BY  THE  WAYSIDE. 

By  the  wayside,  near  the  city, 

Sits  a  beggar,  poor  and  blind ; 
Who  can  pass  him  without  pity  ? 

Who  so  careless  and  unkind? 
Now  his  sightless  eyes  upturning, 

Shaded  by  the  leafy  palms, 
Tears  his  wrinkled  cheeks  are  burning, 

As  he  faintly  asks  for  alms. 

CHORUS. — Oh,  we  love  the  wondrous  story, 

How  the  blind  received  their  sight ; 
May  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory 
Lead  us  into  heavenly  light. 


Lo,  the  multitude  draws  near  him  ; 

"  What  means  this  ?  "  we  hear  him  cry  ; 
How  the  answer  seems  to  cheer  him. 

"  It  is  Jesus  passing  by." 
Hear  him  crying  "  Mercy,  mercy," 

Though  rebuked  by  those  before, 
"  Jesus,  Son  of  David,  mercy," 

Hear  him  crying  more  and  more. 


Now  the  blessed  Master,  standing, 

Hears  the  beggar's  earnest  cry, 
While  in  gentle  tones  commanding, 

"  Bring  the  blind  Bartimeus  nigh." 
"  What  wilt  thou  ?  "  He  asks,  while  o'er  Him 

Falls  a  halo  golden  bright ; 
Low  the  beggar  bends  before  Him— 

"  Lord,  that  I  receive  my  sight." 


Hush  !  the  multitude  are  bending, 

Breathless  in  the  fading  light, 
While,  his  "  saving  faith  "  commending, 

Jesus  says,  "  Receive  thy  sight !  " 
Joy  !  he  sees  ;  and,  upward  gazing, 

Hails  the  glorious  light  of  day, 
And  rejoicing,  singing,  praising, 

"  Follows  Jesus  in  the  way." 


AND   YET  THERE   IS   BOOM.  105 


I  MUST    ABIDE   WITH  THEE. 

Through  the  crowded  streets  of  Jericho,  see 

The  Holy  Nazarene  go, 
Hear  the  shout  of  praise  from  the  happy  ones  there 

Who  His  healing  virtues  know. 

CHORUS. — Praise  ye  the  Lord,  His  mercies  show, 

Ever  in  His  love  confide. 
More  than  we  ask  will  He  bestow, 
Willingly  with  us  abide. 

In  the  friendly  shade  of  a  sycamore  tree, 

The  joyful  publican  see  ; 
Hear  the  Master's  voice  saying,  "Zaccheus,  come, 

For  I  must  abide  with  thee." 

Like  an  earnest  little  Zaccheus,  I 

Would  fain  the  Holy  One  see, 
1  would  haste  with  joy  at  the  blessed  command, 

"  For  I  must  abide  with  Thee." 


AND  YET  THERE  IS  ROOM. 

"  Go  forth,"  said  the  Master,  "and  make  no  delay  ; 
Invite  to  the  banquet,  invite  all  to-day  ; 
The  chosen  have  tarried,  bring  hither  the  blind, 
The  poor  and  the  needy  ;  leave  no  one  behind." 

CHORUS. — Now  all  things  are  ready,  the  Master  says,  "  Come," 
The  whole  world  is  bidden,  "  and  yet  there  is  room." 
The  whole  world  is  bidden,  the  whole  world  is  bidden, 
The  whole  world  is  bidden,  "and  yet  there  is  room." 

Then  quickly  the  servants  went  out  from  their  Lord, 
His  message  they  published  with  joyful  accord. 
From  highways  and  hedges  they  called  to  the  feast, 
And  welcomed  with  rapture  each  wondering  guest. 

0,  wayworn  and  weary,  despise  not  the  call, 
Reject  not  that  mercy,  'tis  free — free  to  all ; 
Thy  Father  is  waiting  to  welcome  thee  home  ; 
Oh  !  haste  to  the  banquet  while  "  yet  there  is  room." 


106  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 


REMEMBERED. 

Fading  away,  like  the  stars  of  the  morning 

Losing  their  light  in  the  glorious  sun  ; 
So  let  me  steal  away,  gently  and  lovingly, 

Only  remembered  by  what  I  have  done. 

CHORUS. — Ever  remembered,  forever  remembered, 

Ever  remembered  while  the  years  are  rolling  on  ; 
Ever  remembered,  forever  remembered, 
Only  remembered  by  what  I  have  done. 

So  let  my  name  and  my  place  be  forgotten, 

Only  my  life-race  be  patiently  run ; 
So  let  me  pass  away,  peacefully,  silently, 

Only  remembered  by  what  I  have  done. 

So,  in  the  harvest,  if  others  may  gather 

Sheaves  from  the  fields  that  in  spring  I  have  sown  ; 

Who  plowed  or  sowed  matters  not  to  the  reaper — 
I'm  only  remembered  by  what  I  have  done. 

Fading  away  like  the  stars  of  the  morning, 
So  let  my  name  be  unhonored,  unknown  ; 

Here,  or  up  yonder,  I  must  be  remembered — 
Only  remembered  by  what  I  have  done. 


FOLLOW  ME. 

Hear  the  blessed  Savior  say, 

Follow  Me,  follow  Me, 

In  the  darkness  and  the  day,  follow,  follow  Me. 
Follow,  though  the  torrents  pour, 
Follow,  though  the  lions  roar, 
Follow,  I  have  gone  before  ; 

Follow,  follow  Me. 

CHORUS. — Oh,  hear  Him  saying, 

Follow,  follow,  follow,  follow,  follow,  follow  Me. 
Blessed  Savior,  may  we  ever  follow,  follow  Thee. 


LOOK   AND   LIVE.  107 

When  the  tempter's  voice  is  heard, 

Follow  Me,  follow  Me, 
Rest  upon  My  Holy  Word,  Follow,  etc. 
All  thy  doubts  and  fears  I  know, 
All  thy  weariness  and  woe ; 
Forward  humbly,  boldly  go. 

Follow,  etc. 


Never  shall  thy  foes  prevail, 

Follow  Me,  follow  Me. 
Never  shall  My  promise  fail.    Follow,  etc. 
Follow  Me,  let  naught  allure, 
Follow  Me,  thy  rest  is  sure, 
Follow  Me,  it  shall  endure. 

Follow,  etc. 


LOOK  AND  LIVE. 

Look  to  Jesus,  weary  one, 

Look  and  live,  look  and  live  ; 
Look  at  what  the  Lord  has  done, 

Look  and  live  ; 
See  Him  lifted  on  the  tree, 

Look  and  live,  look  and  live  ; 
Hear  Him  say,  "  Look  unto  Me," 

Look  and  live. 

CHORUS.— Look  !  the  Lord  is  lifted  high, 
Look  to  Him,  He's  ever  nigh, 
Look  and  live,  why  wil.  ye  die  ? 
Look  and  live. 


Though  unworthy,  vile,  unclean, 

Look  and  live,  look  and  live  ; 
Look  away  from  self  and  sin, 

Look  and  live. 
Long  by  Satan's  power  enslaved, 

Look  and  live,  look  and  live  ; 
Look  to  Me,  ye  shall  be  saved, 

Look  and  live. 


108  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Though  you've  wander'd  far  away, 

Look  and  live,  look  and  live  ; 
Harden  not  your  heart  to-day, 

Look  and  live. 
Tis  thy  Father  calls  thee  home, 

Look  and  live,  look  and  live  ; 
Whosoever  will  may  come, 

Look  and  live. 


ONLY  BELIEVE. 

Earnestly  the  ruler  on  the  Lord  did  call, 

Tenderly  entreating  at  His  feet  did  fall ; 
"My  little  daughter  near  to  death  doth  lie, 

Come,  Lord,  and  heal  her,  or  she  soon  must  die." 
"  Trouble  not  the  Master  ;"  soon  they  came  and  said, 
"  Trouble  not  the  Master,  for  thy  daughter  is  dead." 

Sweetest  words  of  comfort  then  did  Jesus  give, 
"  Be  not  afraid,  only  believe." 

CHORUS. — Call  on  the  Lord,  His  mercies  still  endure  ;* 
Call  on  the  Lord,  His  promise  still  is  sure ; 
Life,  life  eternal  all  may  now  receive. 
Be  not  afraid,  only  believe. 

In  the  darkened  chamber  bends  the  mother  low, 
O'er  her  only  daughter,  with  a  mother's  woe  : 
Darkened  now  forever  is  her  once  bright  home  ; 
Tearfully  she  falters,  "  Has  the  Master  come  ?  " 

"  Wherefore  are  ye  weeping?  "  'tis  the  Master's  voice  ! 

"  She  is  only  sleeping,"  doth  the  mother's  heart  rejoice  ; 
Trustingly  the  father  says,  "  We  will  not  grieve. 
Be  not  afraid,  only  believe." 

Quietly  the  Master  bids  the  mourners  go  ; 
All  a  parent's  tenderness  His  actions  show; 
Ah,  what  holy  rapture,  oh,  what  glad  surprise, 
At  His  gentle  voice  commanding,  "  Maid,  arise." 
Courage,  fainting  mother,  trust  a  loving  Lord  ; 
Courage,  fearful  brother,  rest  forever  on  His  word  ; 
Tender  youth  and  age,  in  Him  alone  can  live  ; 
"  Be  not  afraid,  only  believe." 


LOOK  NOT  UPOX  THE  WINE.  109 


WHAT   SHALL   THE   HARVEST   BE? 

Words  suggested  by  D.  HAYDN  LLOYD.    Music  by  P.  P.  BLISS. 

Sowing  their  seed  by  the  dawn-light  fair, 
Sowing  their  seed  in  the  noontide  glare, 
Sowing  their  seed  in  the  fading  light, 
Sowing  their  seed  in  the  solemn  night, 
Oh,  what  shall  the  harvest  be  ? 

CHORUS. — Sown  in  the  darkness  or  sown  in  the  light, 
Sown  in  our  weakness  or  sown  in  our  might 
Gathered  in  time  or  eternity, 
Sure,  ah  sure,  will  the  harvest  be. 

Sowing  their  seed  by  the  wayside  high, 
Sowing  their  seed  on  the  rocks  to  die, 
Sowing  their  seed  where  the  thorns  will  spoil 
Sowing  their  seed  in  the  fertile  soil, 
Oh,  what  shall  the  harvest  be  ? 

Sowing  the  seed  of  a  lingering  pain, 
Sowing  the  seed  of  a  maddened  brain, 
Sowing  the  seed  of  a  tarnished  name, 
Sowing  the  seed  of  eternal  shame — 
Ah,  sure  will  the  harvest  be  ! 

Sowing  their  seed  with  an  aching  heart, 
Sowing  their  seed  while  the  tear-drops  start, 
Sowing  in  hope  till  the  reapers  come, 
Gladly  to  gather  the  harvest  home. 
Oh,  what  shall  the  harvest  be? 


LOOK  NOT  UPON  THE  WINE. 

Though  its  ruby  blush  so  fair 

In  the  silver  cup  be  cast, 
Of  the  deadly  "serpent's  sting  "  beware,  beware, 

'Twill  pierce  thy  soul  at  last. 

CHORUS. — Look  not  thou  upon  the  wine  when  it  is  red  ; 

When  it  moveth  itself  aright, 
All  the  light  and  beauty  now  around  it  shed 
Soon  will  end  in  sorrow's  night. 


110  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

'Tis  a  "mocker,"  luring  on, 
With  its  "raging,"  fiery  breath, 

And  its  burning  work  is  never,  never  done, 
Its  flames  are  flames  of  death. 

Tarry  not,  resolve  to-day 
From  the  blighting  curse  to  flee  ; 

'Tis  the  voice  of  wisdom  calls  away,  away ; 
Be  bold,  be  firm,  be  free. 


THE  SPIRIT  TREE. 

"  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them,"  the  Savior's  words  we  read, 

And  He  looks  from  His  mansions  above, 
And  He  knows  if  our  hearts  have  received  the  precious  seed, 
For  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  Love. 

CHORUS.— Oh,  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  pure, 

May  they  all  be  found  in  me,  in  me, 
May  my  heart  and  my  life  ever  yield  the  golden  fruits 
Of  the  beautiful  Spirit  Tree. 

Though  the  dark  clouds  of  sorrow  surround  us  as  they  may, 

And  the  pitfalls  of  passion  annoy  ; 
Still  believing,  rejoicing,  we  onward  press  our  way, 

For  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  Joy. 

Though  on  seas  of  affliction  our  little  bark  be  tossed, 

Though  the  high  rolling  billows  increase, 
Still  with  hope  for  our  anchor  we  never  can  be  lost, 

And  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  Peace. 

Other  fruits  in  their  season  we  never  fail  to  find, 

If  with  eyelids  unsealed  we  can  see  ; 
All  that's  gentle  and  tender,  long-suffering  and  kind, 

Is  the  fruit  of  this  beautiful  tree. 

In  the  sunlight  of  heaven  the  waving  branches  glow, 

Shedding  perfume  and  gladness  around  ; 
Naught  of  evil  or  danger  the  dwellers  'neath  it  know, 

For  with  Goodne  ;s  its  branches  are  crowned. 


BEAUTIFUL   BAIN.  Ill 

Sometimes,  trembling  and  doubting,  our  home  seems  far'  away, 

And  the  leaves  of  the  tree  dry  and  sere  ; 
But  the  sweet  fruits  of  Faith  oil  the  topmost  branches  sway, 

Bringing  joys  of  the  better  land  near. 

Bringing  hope  to  the  weary  and  comfort  to  the  sad, 

Bearing  promise  of  heavenly  birth  ; 
Making  joyful  the  lowlands,  the  desert  places  glad, 

For  "  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth." 

Naught  impure  or  unholy  the  Spirit  Tree  can  bear ; 

Evil  trees  evil  fruits  only  show  ; 
No  profane  or  intemp'rate  the  purer  life  can  share, 

Or  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  Tree  know. 


BEAUTIFUL   RAIN. 

Hear  the  music  of  the  rain  falling  down 
On  the  roof  and  window  pane,  falling  down. 
Murmur  not,  it  seems  to  say, 
For  our  Father's  love  to-day 
Orders  only  in  our  way 

Good  to  fall, 

Like  the  gentle  falling  rain 
Over  mountain,  lake  and  plain, 
Will  His  tender  care  remain 

Over  all. 

CHORUS. — Hear  the  music  of  the  rain,  beautiful  rain, 

As  the  pearly  drops  in  showers  pattering  fall. 

Hear  the  sweet  subdued  refrain, 

On  the  roof  and  window  pane, 

Of  our  Father's  tender  love  for  all. 

Hear  the  music  of  the  rain  falling  down, 
On  the  roof  and  window  pane,  falling  down. 
What  a  lesson  does  it  bring, 
What  a  chorus  does  it  sing, 

What  a  message  from  our  King  of  His  love. 
And  we  seem  to  hear  Him  say, 
Come,  ye  children,  learn  My  way, 

From  My  fold  no  longer  stray.     Look  above. 


112  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Hear  the  music  of  the  rain  falling  down, 
On  the  roof  and  window  pane,  falling  down. 
So  our  Father,  kind  and  true, 
Showers  of  blessings,  ever  new, 

On  the  good  and  evil,  too,  stUl  doth  send  ; 
And  a  cheerful  song  we  raise, 
To  His  honor  and  His  praise, 

For  the  love  that  crowns  ou*  da.r»  v  the  end. 


CHAPTER    XIII. 


"MY  SAVIOR'S  CHARMS" — " LET  THE  LOWER  LIGHTS  BE  BURNING" — "JERU 
SALEM  SO  FAIR  "— "  HOW  GOES  THE  BATTLE  ?  " — "  ONLY  A  LITTLE  CHILD  " 
— "  WHERE  HE  LEADS  WE  WILL  FOLLOW  " — "  WAITING  AT  THE  WELL  " — 
"  WONDROUS  LOVE" — "  ON  WHAT  FOUNDATION?  " — "  SAILING  INTO  PORT  " 
— "  OVER  YONDER  " — "  REMEMBER  THE  POOR  " — "  PASSING  AWAY  " — "  GOD 
IS  ALWAYS  NEAR  ME" — "MAN  THE  LIFE- BOAT  " — "THE  TEMPERANCE 
SHIP" — "TURN  TO  THE  RIGHT" — "ONLY  A  STEP  TO  HEAVEN" — "TO 
DEPART,  WHICH  IS  BETTER." — "PRAYING  ALWAYS" — "SOON  AND  FOR 
EVER." 

JN  1871,  "The Charm,  a  Collection  of  Sunday  School  Music,  by 
P.  P.  Bliss,"  was  published.     By  permission  of  the  publishers, 
Messrs.  Church  &  Co.,  Cincinnati,  we  print  the  following  hymns 
by  Mr.  Bliss  : 

MY  SAVIOR'S  CHARMS. 

Charms  in  choral  numbers, 

Charms  in  martial  strains, 
Charms  in  social  chorus, 

Charms  in  glad  refrain. 

CHORUS. — But  no  other  charms  can  be 

Like  my  Savior's  charms  to  me ; 

Lovely  charms 

Lasting  charms, 
Are  my  Savior's  charms  to  me. 

Charms  in  sanctus  holy, 

Charms  in  festal  lays, 
Charms  in  freedom's  anthem, 

Charms  in  childhood's  praise. 

Charms  in  harp  and  organ, 

Charms  in  reed  and  string, 
Charms  in  trumpet  pealing, 

Charms  in  everything. 


114  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 


LET  THE   LOWER  LIGHTS  BE  BURNING. 

ON  a  dark,  stormy  night,  when  the  waves  rolled  like  mountains  and  not  a  star  was  to 
be  seen,  a  boat,  rocking  and  plunging,  neared  the  Cleveland  harbor.  "  Are  you  sure  this  is 
Cleveland  ?"  asked  the  captain,  seeing  only  one  light  from  the  light-house.  "  Quite  sure, 
sir,"  replied  the  pilot.  "  Where  are  the  lower  lights  ? "  "  Gone  out,  sir."  il  Can  you  make 
the  harbor  ?  "  lt  We  must,  or  perish,  sir  !  v  And  with  a  strong  hand  and  a  brave  heart,  the  old 
pilot  turned  the  wheel.  But  alas,  in  the  darkness  he  missed  the  channel,  and  with  a  crash 
upon  the  rocks  the  boat  was  shivered,  and  many  a  life  lost  in  a  watery  grave.  Brethren,  the 
Master  will  take  care  of  the  great  light-house :  let  its  keep  the  lower  lights  burning  f — D.  L. 

MOODT. 

Brightly  beams  Our  Father's  mercy 

From  His  Light-House  evermore; 
But  to  us  He  gives  the  keeping 

Of  the  lights  along  the  shore. 

CHORUS. — Let  the  lower  lights  be  burning  ! 
Send  a  gleam  across  the  wave  ; 
Some  poor,  fainting,  struggling  seaman 
You  may  rescue,  you  may  save. 

Dark  the  night  of  sin  has  settled, 

Loud  the  angry  billows  roar  ; 
Eager  eyes  are  watching,  longing 

For  the  lights  along  the  shore. 

Trim  your  feeble  lamp,  my  brother. 

Some  poor  sailor,  tempest-tost, 
Trying  now  to  make  the  harbor, 

In  the  darkness,  may  be  lost. 


JERUSALEM  SO  FAIR. 

O,  Jerusalem,  the  golden — city  bright  and  fair ; 
All  the  sanctified,  the  purified,  the  glorified  are  there  ; 
There  the  Savior  we  shall  see,  and  His  glory  we  shall  share, 
In  Jerusalem  so  bright  and  fair. 

CHORUS. — 0  Jerusalem,  so  fair  !    O  Jerusalem  so  fair ! 

All  the  sanctified,  the  purified,  the  glorified  are  there  ; 
There  the  Savior  we  shall  see,  and  His  glory  we  shall  share, 
In  Jerusalem  so  bright  and  fair. 


HELP.  115 

O  Jerusalem,  the  golden — city  of  the  blest ; 
Where  the  glory  beams  eternal  on  thy  towers  in  beauty  drest ; 
Where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  the  weary  are  at  rest, 
In  Jerusalem  so  bright  and  fair. 

O  Jerusalem,  the  golden — city  fair  and  bright : 
How  thy  pearly  gates  in  splendor  soon  will  burst  upon  our  sight; 
How  thy  golden  streets  will  glow,  for  the  Lamb  is  all  the  light, 
In  Jerusalem  so  bright  and  fair. 


HOW  GOES  THE  BATTLE? 

*'  Victory,  victory  !  "  hear  the  angels  say, 
When  a  gentle  word  turns  angry  thoughts  away  ; 
Though  the  stormy  battle-field  a  little  heart  may  be, 
'Tis  a  mighty  conflict,  'tis  a  glorious  victory. 

CHORUS. — How  goes  the  battle,  then,  what  news  to-day? 
One  side  is  gaining  ground — one  giving  way  1 
Rally  for  the  right,  oh,  battle  manfully, 
Let  the  blessed  angel  band  shout  the  victory. 
44  Victory,  Victory,"  Zion  shall  be  free, 
Let  the  blessed  angel  band  shout  the  victory. 

*'  Victory,  victory ! "  shout  the  evil  throng, 
When  a  little  heart  gives  room  to  purpose  wrong ; 
Then  the  holy  angel  bands  do  sadly  turn  away  ; 
"'  Victory,  our  victory ! "  the  evil  spirits  say. 

"  Victory,  victory !  "  soon  we  all  may  sing, 
"  Glory  be  to  Thee,  0  Lord,  our  heavenly  King ! 
Thou  hast  overthrown  the  last,  the  dreaded  enemy  ; 
Thine  alone,  the  battle,  Lord,  be  Thine  the  victory." 


HELP. 

Help  me  to  sing, 

Savior  and  King  ; 

Heart  service  only  to  Thee  would  I  bring. 


116  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Help  me  to  read, 
Thy  grace  I  need, 
Lest  I  offend  Thee  in  thought,  word  or  deed, 

Help  me  to  pray  ; 

Guard  lest  I  stray  ; 

Keep  Thou  my  feet  in  the  heavenward  way. 

Help  I  implore, 

Thee  to  adore  ; 

Praise  would  I  render  to  Thee  evermore. 


"ONLY  A  LITTLE  CHILD. 

"For  whom  is  the  bell  tolling  ? "  I  asked  a  man  at  the  church  door. 
He  replied,  "  Only  a  little  child." 

'  "  Only  a  little  child," 
Pause  not  here  to  weep ; 
Scarcely  on  earth  she  smiled, 
Ere  she  fell  asleep, 
Fell  asleep. 


"Only  a  little  child," 

God  to  us  had  given ; 

Pure  and  undefiled, 

Only  fit  for  heaven. 

Fit  for  heaven. 

"  Only  a  little  child," 
That  our  love  possessed, 
That  our  cares  beguiled, 
That  is  now  at  rest, 
Now  at  rest. 

"  Only  a  little  child," 
Such  as  Jesus  blessed, 
We  were  unreconciled, 
Only  He  thought  best, 
FTft  thought  best. 


WAITING   AT  THE  WELL.  117 


WHERE  HE  LEADS  WE  WILL  FOLLOW. 

See  the  gentle  Shepherd  standing 

Where  the  quiet  waters  flow ; 
•gf  To  the  pastures  green  inviting, 
Hungry,  thirsty,  let  us  go. 

CHORUS. — Where  He  leads  we  will  follow, 
Where  He  leads  we  will  follow, 
Where  He  leads  we  will  follow, 
We  will  follow  all  the  way. 

Only  by  the  door  we  enter, 

All  who  enter  He  will  save ; 
Life  abundantly  bestowing, 

Though  His  life  the  Shepherd  gave. 

Safe  within  the  fold  He  leads  us, 
He  the  Shepherd,  we  His  own ; 

And  as  Him  the  Father  knoweth, 

Precious  thought — of  Him  we're  known. 


WAITING    AT  THE  WELL. 

Little  thought  Samaria's  daughter, 

On  that  ne'er  forgotten  day, 
That  the  tender  Shepherd  sought  her, 

As  a  sheep  astray  ; 
That  from  sin  He  longed  to  win  her — 

Knowing  more  than  she  could  tell, 
Of  the  wretchedness  within  her, 

Wailing  at  the  well. 

CHOBUS. — Hear,  O  hear !  the  wondrous  story, 
Let  the  winds  and  waters  tell — 
'Tis  the  Christ,  the  King  of  Glory, 
Waiting  at  the  well. 

'Neath  the  stately  palm  tree  swaying, 
Listened  she  to  words  of  truth, 

While  each  thought  was  backward  straying, 
O'er  her  wasted  youth. 


118  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Hast'ning  homeward  with  desire 
All  His  wondrous  speech  to  tell. 

Asked  she,  "  Is  not  the  Messiah 
Waiting  at  the  well?" 

Yet  salvation's  well  is  flowing-, 

And  the  Savior  listens  there — 
Every  want  and  care  foreknowing — 

To  our  humble  prayer. 
By  His  gracious  smile  of  favor, 

While  our  hearts  with  rapture  swell,, 
Well  we  know  it  is  the  Savior, 

Waiting  at  the  well. 


WONDROUS    LOVE. 

Behold  the  love  of  God,  wondrous  love,  wondrous  love. 
On  sinful  man  bestowed,  wondrous  love. 

CHORUS. — Herein,  herein  is  lave  ; 
The  Father  from  above 
His  Son  did  give  that  we  might  live  I 
Oh  wondrous,  wondrous  love. 

His  love  is  full  and  free,  wondrous  love,  wondrous  love, 
'Tis  offered  you  and  me  ;  wondrous  love. 

No  merit  of  our  own  ;  wondrous  love,  wondrous  love, 
He  saves  by  grace  alone ;  wondrous  love. 

He  offers  life  to-day ;  wondrous  love,  wondrous  love, 
Accept  it  while  ye  may  ;  wondrous  love. 


ON  WHAT  FOUNDATION? 

On  what  foundation  do  you  build,  neighbor, 

Your  hopes  for  the  future  fair  1 
Do  your  walls  reach  down  to  the  rock  below, 

And  rest  securely  there? 
Sad  wrecks  lie  'round  you  on  the  sand,  neighbor, 

The  floods  and  the  storms  are  near ; 


SAILING   IKTO   PORT.  119 

Will  the  strong  blast  hurl  to  the  earth  thy  walls, 
Or  blanch  thy  cheek  with  fear  ? 

CHORUS. — On  what  foundation  do  you  build,  neighbor, 

Your  hopes  for  the  future  fair  ? 
Do  your  walls  reach  down  to  the  rock  below, 
And  rest  securely  there  ? 

On  sure  foundation  would  you  build,  neighbor  ? 

Take  heed  to  the  Lord's  commands ; 
Ever  fast  and  firm,  while  the  storms  go  by, 

This  Rock  of  Ages  stands. 
Alas  !  what  folly  'tis  to  build,  neighbor, 

A  mansion  so  fair,  so  grand, 
With  its  costly  walls  and  its  lofty  towers, 

On  Sin's  delusive  sand. 


SAILING   INTO  PORT. 

"  SOME  ships  cross  the  ocean  with  clear  skies,  smooth  seas  and  fair  winds,  and  come  into 
port  with  streamers  flying  and  bands  of  music  making  jubilee.  Others  come  in  storms,  with 
the  skies  black  as  night,  the  wind  like  a  hurricane,  and  the  sea  like  mountains — and  they 
come  in  all  battered,  yards  gone,  masts  splintered,  hardly  enough  left  to  hang  together.  But 
the  difference  amounts  to  nothing.  The  only  important  thing  from  first  to  last  is,  not  what 
the  log  says  about  storm  or  calm,  but  that  they  all  steer  close  to  the  compass,  and  do  their 
best  to  make  the  harbor.  So  they  only  get  there  safely,  what  happened  to  them  by  the  way  is 
of  no  account.  So  as  to  God's  children.  There  may,  there  will  be  vast  variety  of  experience  : 
to  some,  prosperity,  success,  joy— to  others,  adversity,  defeat,  grief.  But  what  may  be  your 
lot  or  mine,  is  of  no  consequence.  The  one  only  thing  of  moment  is,  that  we  stick  close  to 
our  chart  and  push  for  port  with  all  our  might.  So  we  gain  that,  the  pleasures  or  perils  of  the 
way  do  not  matter."— Extract  from  a  sermon  preached  by  Dr.  E.  P.  Goodwin,  First  Congrega 
tional  Church,  Chicago. 

«  Sailor,  though  the  darkness  gathers, 

Though  the  cold  waves  surge  and  moan, 
Trust  thy  bark  to  God's  great  mercy, 
Falter  not,  sail  on,  sail  on. 

CHORUS.— Sailing  into  port,  what  matter, 

Drooping  sail  or  shattered  mast  ? 
Glory,  glory  fills  the  harbor, 
There  we'll  anchor  safe  at  last. 

Sailor,  though  with  streamers  flying 
Yonder  proud  ship  mounts  the  foam, 

And  with  bands  of  music  playing, 
Gains  the  port  and  welcome  home. 


120  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Sailor,  though  the  lightning  flashes, 
Though  thy  sails  be  rent  and  torn, 

Peace  shall  come  on  Hope's  bright  pinions 
And  deliverance  with  the  morn. 


OVER  YONDER. 

Over  yonder,  over  yonder, 

Where  the  saints  and  angels  dwell, 
Over  yonder,  over  yonder 

Is  the  home  I  love  so  well. 
There  my  loved  ones  wait  to  greet  me, 

Wait  to  clasp  me  by  the  hand. 
There  my  Savior,  too,  will  meet  me, 

Meet  me  in  Immanuel's  land. 

Over  yonder,  over  yonder, 

Stands  my  mansion  bright  and  fair ; 
All  the  glory,  all  the  glory 

Of  the  kingdom  I  shall  share. 
By  the  tree  of  life  eternal, 

Crystal  streams  forever  flow  ; 
While  the  leaves  of  healing  mercy 

On  its  waving  branches  grow. 

Over  yonder,  over  yonder, 

Sin  and  sorrow  are  unknown : 
Hallelujahs,  Hallelujahs, 

Evermore  surround  the  throne. 
Never  will  I  fear  the  journey 

Through  the  dark  and  shadowy  vale ; 
For  my  Savior  will  be  near  me, 

Never  can  His  promise  fail. 


REMEMBER  THE  POOR. 

Tig  winter,  and  ye  by  your  fireside  so  warm 

May  feel  not  the  blast  of  the  pitiless  storm; 

But  cold  winds  are  sweeping  o'er  mountain  and  moor, 

And  lone  ones  are  starving — Remember  the  poor. 

Remember  the  poor, 

Remember  the  poor. 
And  lone  ones  are  starving — Remember  the  poor. 


GOD   IS   ALWAYS   tfEAR   ME. 

To  one  of  the  least,  in  My  name,"  saitli  the  Lord, 
No  visit  of  mercy  shall  lose  its  reward  ;  " 
But  measure  for  measure  shall  earth-life  restore, 
And  treasure  in  heaven — Remember  the  poor. 

Remember  the  poor, 

Remember  the  poor. 
And  treasure  in  heaven — Remember  the  poor. 

Oh,  give  of  thy  bounty,  thy  gratitude  show  ; 

So  freely  receiving,  as  freely  bestow  ; 

In  mansions  so  fair  on  the  evergreen  shore, 

Would  you  be  remembered  ?    Remember  the  poor. 

Remember  the  poor, 

Remember  the  poor. 
Would  you  be  remembered  ?     Remember  the  poor. 


PASSING  AWAY. 

TEACHER. — What  do  the  beautiful  roses  say? 
SCHOLARS. — Sweet  is  our  perfume,  but  short  is  our  stay ; 

TEACHER. — What  says  the  humming  bird,  do  you  know  ? 
SCHOLARS. — Winter  is  coming  and  soon  I  must  go. 

ALL. — Passing  away,  Passing  away  ; 

Second  and  minute  and  hour  and  day ! 
Birdie  and  blossom,  how  brief  is  your  stay ; 
Passing  away,  passing  away. 

TEACHER. — What  says  the  clock,  with  its  tick-a-tick,  tick  ? 
SCHOLARS. — Time  passes  swiftly,  be  quick,  oh,  be  quick  ! 

TEACHER. — What  are  the  words  of  the  rivulet's  song? 
SCHOLARS. — I  cannot  tarry,  I  must  run  along. 

TEACHER. — What  does  the  sun  in  the  morning  say  ? 
SCHOLARS.— Over  I  go  for  another  bright  day. 

TEACHER. — What  does  your  heart  by  its  beating  tell  ? 
SCHOLARS. — Earth-life  is  passing,  then  where  will  I  dwell  ? 


GOD  IS   ALWAYS   NEAR  ME. 

God  is  always  near  me, 

Hearing  what  I  say  ; 
Knowing  all  my  thoughts  and  deeds, 

All  my  work  and  play. 


MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

God  is  always  near  me, 

In  the  darkest  night 
He  can  see  me  j  ust  the  same 

As  by  mid-day  light. 

God  is  always  near  me, 

Though  so  young  and  small ; 
Not  a  look  or  word  or  thought, 

But  God  knows  it  all. 


MAN   THE   LIFE   BOAT. 

Hark !  I  hear  the  captain  calling, 

Earnestly  and  long : 
41  Rocks  ahead  !  the  breakers  threaten ! 
Bear  a  hand — Be  strong  ! " 

CHORUS. — Man  the  life-boat,  blaze  the  signal ! 

Never  can  we  fail ; 
No,  the  nation  must  be  rescued, 
Ternp'rance  shall  prevail ! 

Firm  amid  the  storm  and  danger, 

Faithful,  tried  and  true — 
Though  a  mighty  host  opposes — 

Stand  the  Temp'rance  crew. 

Loud  the  billows  dash  around  us, 

O'er  the  angry  sea ; 
Night  comes  on  and  souls  are  dying, 

Will  ye  idle  be? 


THE  TEMPERANCE   SHIP. 

The  temp'rance  ship  is  sailing  on  ; 

Sailing  on, 

Sailing  on, 
The  temp'rance  ship  is  sailing  on 

Though  angry  billows  roar. 
To  bless  the  world  she's  sailing  on, 

Sailing  on, 

Sailing  on. 

To  bless  the  world  she's  sailing  on, 
To  reach  a  fairer  shore. 


THE  TEMPEKANCE   SHIP. 

CHORUS. — Oh,  rally,  freemen,  rally ! 

Do  you  hear  the  fearful  cry  ? 
'Tis  the  solemn  wail  of  warning 

From  the  drunkard  doomed  to  die 
'Tis  the  prayer  of  wife  and  mother, 
"Pis  the  shriek  of  anguish  wild  ; 
"  Will  you  help  a  falling  brother — 
Will  you  save  my  darling  child  ?  " 

The  mountain  waves  are  rolling  high, 

Boiling  high, 

Rolling  high, 

The  mountain  waves  are  rolling  high, 

The  pirate  fleet  is  strong. 
We  call  for  men  to  do  or  die, 
Do  or  die, 
Do  or  die, 

We  call  for  men  to  do  or  die 
To  crush  the  mighty  wrong. 

Arise,  young  man,  for  you  must  fight, 

You  must  fight, 

You  must  fight, 
Arise,  young  man,  for  you  must  fight, 

A  foe  that  seems  a  friend. 
The  well  worn  way  that  seemeth  right, 

Seemeth  right, 

Seemeth  right, 

The  well  worn  way  that  seemeth  right, 
Alas  !  in  death  doth  end. 

Ho,  friends  of  temp'rance,  firmly  stand, 

Firmly  stand, 

Firmly  stand, 
Ho,  friends  of  temp'rance,  firmly  stand, 

To  meet  the  daring  foe. 
For  God,  for  Truth,  for  Native  Land, 

Native  Land, 

Native  Land, 

For  God,  for  Truth,  for  Native  Land 
We  dare  to  strike  the  blow. 

We  see  the  blinded  rush  along, 

Rush  along, 

Rush  along, 
We  see  the  blinded  rush  along, 


MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

The  broad  and  downward  way. 
Then  raise  at  least  a  prayer  or  song, 
Prayer  or  song, 
Prayer  or  song, 

Then  raise  at  least  a  prayer  or  song 
To  save  them  while  we  may. 


TURN  TO  THE  RIGHT. 

'Tis  a  rule  in  the  land  that  when  travelers  meet, 

Travelers  meet, 
In  highway  or  byway,  in  alley  or  street, 

Alley  or  street, 
On  foot  or  in  wagon,  by  day  or  by  night, 

Each  favors  the  other  and  turns  to  the  right 

What  a  wonderful  measure  of  trouble  we'd  shun, 

Trouble  we'd  shun, 
If  all  the  humanity  under  the  sun, 

Under  the  sun, 

While  passing  each  other  were  truly  polite, 
And  wishing  "  Good  morrow,"  would  turn  to  the  right. 

What  a  pity  when  selfishness  stands  in  the  way, 

Stands  in  the  way, 
And  hinders  one's  hearing  what  Wisdom  would  say, 

Wisdom  would  say ; 

There's  joy  on  the  journey,  the  end  is  delight, 
To  those  in  life's  highway  who  turn  to  the  right. 


ONLY  A  STEP  TO  HEAVEN. 

Day  by  day  we  saw  her  failing, 

As  the  summer  time  went  by  ; 
And  the  world  grew  dark  and  lonely 

When  we  knew  that  she  must  die. 
Still  her  heart  seemed  fondly  clinging 

To  the  blessed  promise  given  : 
"  I  am  not  afraid,"  she  whispered, 

"  For  'tis  but  a  step  to  heaven." 


TO   DEPART,    WHICH   IS  BETTER.  125 

CHORUS. — Nearer,  nearer  come  the  angels, 

Till  the  earth  worn  bands  are  riven  ; 
Nearer,  nearer,  seems  the  glory, 
Till  'tis  but  a  step  to  heaven. 

In  the  Savior's  mercy  trusting, 
Walking  closely  by  His  side ; 
Scarcely  did  she  hear  the  rippling 

Of  the  darkly  flowing  tide— 
"  Do  not  grieve" — sweet  words  of  comfort 

To  her  weeping  mother  given : 
"  I  am  not  afraid,"  she  whispered, 
"  For  'tis  but  a  step  to  heaven." 

"  Do  not  sing  to  me  of  heaven 

As  a  home  far,  far  away  ; 
'Tis  a  narrow  stream  divides  us, 

We  may  cross  it  in  a  day. 
Only  let  me  cling  to  Jesus, 

To  the  blessed  word  He's  given  ; 
Then  my  soul  is  filled  with  glory, 

Then  'tis  but  a  step  to  heaven." 


TO  DEPART,  WHICH  IS  BETTER? 

To  THE  MEMORY  OP  C.  M.  WYMAN. 

And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying  unto  me,  Write,  hlessed  are  the  dead  which  die  ia 
the  Lord :  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labors,  and  their  works  do  fol 
low  them. 

Hark,  on  the  shore  of  "  Imraanuera  Land," 
Shout  the  "  Triumphant "  and  glorified  band  ; 
Singing  as  only  the  ransomed  can  sing — 
Sweet  hallelujah,  to  Jesus  their  King. 
Amen,  Amen,  Amen. 

"  Farewell,"  we  sigh,  as  our  friends  leave  the  strand, 
"  Welcome,"  they  sing  in  "  Immanuel's  Land." 

Mourning  below  is  rejoicing  above  ; 

We  tell  of  sorrow  while  they  sing  of  love. 

Lovingly  called  from  his  labors  below  ; 
Suddenly  summoned,  but  ready  to  go  : 
Laying  the  cross  and  the  life  burden  down, 
Gladly  receiving  the  robe  and  the  crown. 


126  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Not  without  hope  are  we  mourning  to-day  ; 
"  Thy  will  be  done,"  we  are  trying  to  say : 
Here  'neath  the  "  Shadowy  Rock  "  we  will  rest — 
God  is  "  Our  Father,"  and  His  ways  are  best. 


PRAYING   ALWAYS. 

TEACHER.— Little  eyes, 

Looking  wise, 

Have  you  said  your  morning  prayer? 
Have  you  thought, 
As  you  ought, 

Of  our  Heavenly  Father's  care  ? 
Tell  me  what  our  prayer  should  be 
When  the  morning  light  we  see  ? 

ALL.— Pleasant  light, 

Clear  and  bright, 
Shining  on  the  world  to-day. 
So  may  love 
From  above 

Shine  along  our  upward  way  ; 
So  let  every  thing  we  see 
Turn  our  thoughts,  O  Lord,  to  Thee. 

ALL.— Water  clear, 

Standing  near ; 

Wash  our  hands  and  faces  clean. 
May  the  Lord, 
By  his  word, 

Wash  our  hearts  from  every  sin. 
So  let  everything  we  see 
Turn  our  thoughts,  O  Lord,  to  Thee. 

GIRLS.— Cloak  and  hood, 

New  and  good, 

Made  to  keep  our  bodies  warm. 
Words  of  truth, 
Learned  in  youth, 
Keep  our  souls  from  every  harm. 
So  let  every  thing  we  see 
Turn  our  thoup-hta.  O  Lord, 


SOON  AND   FOKEVEE. 

BOYS. — Boot  or  shoe, 

Old  or  new, 

Let  us  keep  them  clean  and  neat ; 
Let  us  pray, 
That  we  may 

Some  day  walk  the  golden  street ; 
So  let  everything  we  see 
Turn  our  thoughts,  O  Lord,  to  Thee. 

GIRLS. — Collar  white, 

Ribbons  bright ; 
Apron,  bonnet,  shawl  or  dress ; 

So  may  we 

Ever  be 
Clad  in  Jesus'  righteousness ; 

So  let  everything  we  see 

Turn  our  thoughts,  0  Lord,  to  Thee. 

BOYS. — Top  or  ball, 

Treasures  all ; 
Books  and  toys  1  dearly  prize  ; 

Yet  may  I, 

When  1  die, 
To  my  heavenly  treasures  rise  ; 

So  let  everything  we  see 

Turn  our  thoughts,  0  Lord,  to  Thee. 

ALL. — Night  or  day, 

Work  or  play ; 
In  our  hearts  may  be  a  prayer ; 

God  can  see, 

If  there  be— 
Well  He  knows  what  thoughts  are  there 

So  let  everything  we  see 

Turn  our  thoughts,  O  Lord,  to  Thee. 


SOON  AND  FOREVER. 

Only  a  few  more  years, 
Only  a  few  more  cares  ; 

Only  a  few  more  smiles  and  tears, 
Only  a  few  more  prayers  : 


128  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Only  a  few  more  wrongs, 
Only  a  few  more  signs  : 

Only  a  few  more  earthly  songs 
Only  a  few  good-byes : 

Then  an  eternal  stay, 
Then  an  eternal  throng ; 

Then  an  eternal  glorious  day, 
Then  an  eternal  song.   " 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


INCIDENTS  SUGGESTING  SOME  OF  MR.  BLISS'  HYMNS — "''  WHOSOEVER  WILL  " — 
"JESUS  LOVES  ME" — "BLESSED  ARE  THEY  THAT  DO" — "FREE  FROM 
THE  LAW  " — "  ONLY  AN  ARMOR-BEARER  " — "  PULL  FOR  THE  SHORE  " — 
"I  KNOW  NOT  THE  HOUR" — "DOWN  LIFE'S  DARK  VALE  WE  WANDER" 
"THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD  IS  JESUS " — "THE  HOLY  SPIRIT" — "WISH 
ING,  HOPING,  KNOWING" — "ALMOST  PERSUADED" — "HALLELUJAH,  'TIS 
DONE  " — "  GOOD  NEWS  " — "  WILL  YOU  MEET  ME  AT  THE  FOUNTAIN  ?  " — 

"HALLELUJAH!  HE  is  RISEN" — "SEEKING  TO  SAVE" — "AT  THE  FEET 

OF  JESUS" — "THE  HALF  WAS  NEVER  TOLD." 

"  "YTTHOSOEVER  Will  may  Come/'  was  written  during  the 
VV  winter  of  1869  and  '70,  after  hearing  Henry  Moorhouse, 
of  England,  preach  from  the  text,  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that 
He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him 
should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting  life/'  John  iii,  16.  Mr  Moor- 
house  preached  every  night  for  a  week  from  this  same  text,  and  the 
new  views  of  the  f reeness  and  fullness  of  the  invitation  of  the  Gospel 
to  sinners  that  many  Christians  in  Chicago  at  that  time  received, 
are  well  expressed  in  Mr.  Bliss'  hymn  : 

"WHOSOEVER  WILL." 

"Whosoever  hearetli,"  Shout,  shout  the  sound  ! 
Send  the  blessed  tidings  all  the  world  around  ; 
Spread  the  joyful  news  wherever  man  is  found, 
"  Whosoever  will  may  come." 

CHORUS. — "  Whosoever  will,  whosoever  will," 

Send  the  proclamation  over  vale  and  hill ; 
'Tis  a  loving  Father  calls  the  wand'rer  home  ; 
"  Whosoever  will  may  come." 

Whosoever  cometh  need  not  delay  ; 

Now  the  door  is  open,  enter  while  you  may  ; 

Jesus  is  the  true,  the  only  living  way  ; 

"  Whosoever  will  may  come." 
9 


130  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

"  Whosoever  will,"  the  promise  secure  ; 
"  Whosoever  will,"  forever  must  endure  ; 
"  Whosoever  will,"  'tis  life  forever  more 
"  Whosoever  will  may  come." 


I  think  it  was  in  June,  1870,  that  "  Jesus  Loves  Me"  was  writ 
ten.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  were  at  the  time  members  of  my  family, 
at  43  South  May  street,  Chicago.  One  morning,  Mrs.  Bliss  came 
down  to  breakfast  and  said,  as  she  entered  the  room  :  "  Last  even 
ing,  Mr.  Bliss  had  a  tune  given  him  that  I  think  is  going  to  live 
and  be  one  of  the  most  used  that  he  has  written.  I  have  been  sing 
ing  it  all  the  morning  to  myself  and  cannot  get  it  out  of  my  mind." 
She  then  sang  over  to  us  the  notes  of  "  Jesus  Loves  Me."  The 
idea  of  Mr.  Bliss  in  writing  it  was  that  the  peace  and  comfort  of  a 
Christian  were  not  founded  upon  his  loving  Christ,  but  upon  Christ's 
love  to  him,  and  that  to  occupy  the  mind  with  Christ's  love,  would 
produce  love  and  consecration  in  keeping  with  Romans  v,  5  :  "  The 
love  of  God  (to  us)  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  is  given  to  us."  This  view  of  Gospel  truth  was  at  this  time 
being  very  preciously  brought  to  the  souls  of  believers  in  Chicago 
by  the  preaching  of  Moorhouse  and  Mr.  Moody  and  by  the  Dublin 
tracts  and  English  Commentaries  upon  Gospel  Truth,  which, 
through  Mr.  Moody,  began  to  be  circulated  among  Christians. 
How  much  God  has  used  this  little  song  to  lead  sinners  and  fearful 
timid  Christians  to  "  look  away  to  Jesus"  eternity  alone  can  tell. 

JESUS  LOVES  ME. 

I  am  so  glad  that  Our  Father  in  Heaven 
Tells  of  His  love  in  the  Book  He  has  given  ; 
Wonderful  things  in  the  Bible  I  see, 
This  is  the  dearest,  that  Jesus  loves  me. 

CHORUS. — I  am  so  glad  that  Jesus  loves  me, 
Jesus  loves  me,  Jesus  loves  me, 
I  am  so  glad  that  Jesus  loves  me, 
Jesus  loves  even  me. 

Though  I  forget  Him  and  wander  away, 
Kindly  He  follows  wherever  I  stray, 
Back  to  His  dear  loving  arms  would  I  flee. 
When  I  remember  that  Jesus  loves  me. 


BLESSED   ARE   THEY  THAT  DO.  131 

Oh,  if  there's  only  one  song  I  can  sing, 
When  in  His  beauty  I  see  the  great  King ; 
This  shall  my  song  in  eternity  be, 
O  what  a  wonder  that  Jesus  loves  me. 


"Blessed  are  They  that  Do  His  Commandments."  The  verse 
in  Eev.  xxii,  14,  suggested  this  hymn.  The  tune  was  a  favorite 
with  Mr."  Bliss,  but  after  he  learned  more  fully  the  fullness  of  the 
Gospel,  he  was  dissatisfied  with  the  words  on  account  of  the  impres 
sion  they  left  that  the  right  to  the  tree  of  life  was  secured  by  our 
doing.  It  seemed  clear  to  him  that  the  translation  of  the  verse  in 
question  claimed  by  many  of  the  commentators,  "  Blessed  are  they 
that  have  washed  their  robes,  that  they  may  have  right  to  the  tree  of 
life,"  etc.,  must  be  the  correct  one,  and  it  took  away  all  Scrip 
ture  authority  for  the  teaching  of  his  hymn  in  that  direction.  The 
truth  presented  in  the  Scriptures  as  to  saved  ones  walking  in  the 
path  of  obedience,  he  could  with  a  little  change  have  taught  in  the 
hymn,  and  this  he  intended  doing.  During  his  last  week  in  Kome, 
he  called  the  attention  of  his  brother-in-law,  Mr.  Young,  to  the 
above  points  of  objection  to  the  words,  and  said :  "I  cannot  use  it 
as  it  is.  I  see  so  clearly  its  contradiction  of  the  Gospel  that  I  have 
no  liberty  in  singing  it,  and  must  make  a  change  in  it  before  it  goes 
into  another  book."  This  was  the  only  hymn  he  has  written,  that 
I  am  aware  of,  that  is  liable  to  criticism  in  this  direction : 

BLESSED  ARE   THEY  THAT  DO. 

Hear  the  words  our  Savior  hath  spoken, 

Words  of  life  unfailing  and  true  ; 
Careless  one,  prayerless  one,  hear  and  remember, 

Jesus  says,  "  Blessed  are  they  that  do." 

CHORUS. — Blessed  are  they  that  do  His  commandments, 
Blessed,  blessed,  blessed  are  they. 

All  in  vain  we  hear  His  commandments. 

All  in  vain  His  promises  too  ; 
Hearing  them,  fearing  them  never  can  save  us, 

Blessed,  oil,  blessed  are  they  that  do. 


132  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

They  with  joy  may  enter  the  city, 

Free  from  sin,  from  sorrow  and  strife  ; 

Sanctified,  glorified,  now  and  forever, 
They  may  have  right  to  the  Tree  of  Life." 


"Free  from  the  Law."  Just  before  Christmas,  1871,  Mrs.  Bliss 
asked  a  friend,  "  What  shall  I  get  for  my  husband  as  a  Christmas 
present  ? "  and,  at  the  suggestion  of  this  friend,  purchased  and 
presented  him  with  the  bound  volume  of  a  monthly  English  peri 
odical  called  Things  New  and  Old.  Many  things  in  these  books  of 
interpretation  of  Scripture  and  illustrations  of  Gospel  truth  were 
blessed  to  him,  and  from  the  reading  of  something  in  one  of  these 
books,  in  connection  with  Eomans  viii,  and  Hebrews  x,  10,  sug 
gested  this  glorious  Gospel  song  : 

ONCE   FOR  ALL. 

Free  from  the  law,  oh,  happy  condition  ! 
Jesus  hath  bled  and  there  is  remission ; 
Cursed  by  the  law  and  bruised  by  the  fall, 
Grace  hath  redeemed  us  once  for  all. 

CHORUS. — Once  for  all,  oh,  sinner,  receive  it, 
Once  for  all,  oh,  brother,  believe  it : 
Cling  to  the  Cross,  the  burden  will  fall ; 
Christ  hath  redeemed  us,  once  for  all. 

Now  are  we  free — there's  no  condemnation  ; 
Jesus  provides  a  perfect  salvation, 
"  Come  unto  Me,"  oh  hear  His  sweet  call, 
Come  and  He  saves  us,  once  for  all. 

"  Children  of  God  !  "  oh,  glorious  calling  1 
Surely  His  grace  will  keep  us  from  falling, 
Passing  from  death  to  life  at  His  calling, 
Blessed  salvation,  once  for  all. 


"Only  an    Armor-Bearer"  was  suggested  by  the   account  of 
Jonathan's  going  up  against  Michmash,  as  given  in  I  Samuel,  xiv  : 


PULL  FOR  THE   SHORE.  133 


ONLY  AN  ARMOR-BEARER. 

Only  an  armor-bearer,  proudly  I  stand, 
Waiting  to  follow  at  the  King's  command  ; 
Marching,  if  Onward  shall  the  order  be, 
Standing  by  my  Captain,  serving  faithfully. 

CHORUS. — Hear  ye  the  battle  cry,  "  Forward,"  the  call ! 

See!  see  the  faltering  ones,  backward  they  fall. 
Surely  the  Captain  may  depend  on  me, 
Though  but  an  armor-bearer  I  may  be. 

Only  an  armor-bearer,  now  in  the  field, 
Guarding  a  shining  helmet,  sword  and  shield, 
Waiting  to  hear  the  thrilling  battle-cry, 
Ready  then  to  answer,  "  Master,  here  am  I." 

Only  an  armor-bearer,  yet  may  I  share 
Glory  immortal,  and  a  bright  crown  wear  : 
If,  in  the  battle,  to  my  trust  I'm  true, 
Mine  shall  be  the  honors  in  the  Grand  Review. 


PULL    FOR  THE  SHORE. 

"  We  watched  the  wreck  with  great  anxiety.  The  life-boat  had 
been  out  some  hours,  but  could  not  reach  the  vessel  through  the 
great  breakers  that  raged  and  foamed  on  the  sand-bank.  The  boat 
appeared  to  be  leaving  the  crew  to  perish.  But  in  a  few  minutes  the 
Captain  and  sixteen  sailors  were  taken  off,  and  the  vessel  went  down. 

"'When  the  life-boat  came  to  you,  did  you  expect  it  had 
brought  some  tools  to  repair  your  old  ship  ? '  I  said. 

"  '  Oh,  no,  she  was  a  total  wreck.  Two  of  her  masts  were  gone, 
and  if  we  had  stayed  mending  her  only  a  few  minutes,  we  must 
have  gone  down,  sir.' 

"  (  When  once  off  the  old  wreck  and  safe  in  the  life-boat,  what 
remained  for  you  to  do  ?' 

"  'Nothing,  sir,  but  just  to  pull  for  the  shore."1 

"  Therefore,  if  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature  :  old 
things  are  passed  away  ;  behold,  all  things  are  become  new." 


134  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

"  "Wherefore,  my  beloved,     *    *    *    work  out  your  own  salva 
tion  with  fear  and  trembling." — Things  New  and  Old. 

Light  in  the  darkness,  sailor,  day  is  at  hand  ! 
See  o'er  the  foaming  billows  fair  Haven's  land. 
Drear  was  the  voyage,  sailor,  now  almost  o'er ; 
Safe  within  the  life-boat,  sailor,  pull  for  the  shore. 

CHORUS. — Pull  for  the  shore,  sailor,  pull  for  the  shore  ! 

Heed  not  the  rolling  wave,  but  bend  to  the  oar  ; 
Safe  in  the  life-boat,  sailor,  cling  to  self  no  more  ! 
Leave  the  poor  old  stranded  wreck  and  pull  for  the  shore. 

Trust  in  the  life-boat,  sailor,  all  else  will  fail, 

Stronger  the  surges  dash  and  fiercer  the  gale  ; 

Heed  not  the  stormy  winds,  though  loudly  they  roar ; 

Watch  the  "  bright  and  morning  star,"  and  pull  for  the  shore. 

Bright  gleams  the  morning,  sailor,  uplift  the  eye ; 
Clouds  and  darkness  disappearing,  glory  is  nigh  ; 
Safe  in  the  life-boat,  sailor,  sing  evermore  ; 
"  Glory,  glory,  hallelujah  ! "  pull  for  the  shore. 


"I  Know  not  the  Hour  when  my  Lord  will  Come."  These 
words,  Mr.  Bliss  has  told  me,  were  suggested  to  him  in  reading  the 
book  "  Gates  Ajar  "  and  criticisms  upon  it.  His  idea  was  that  what 
we  may  know  from  the  Scripture,  that  we  shall  be  with  the  Lord, 
is  sufficient,  and  that  we  may  be  happily  content  in  saying  of  all 
that  is  mere  speculation,  "/  know  not,"  offsetting  it  by. what  we 
are  permitted  to  say  "  /  know."  The  music  for  the  words  was  com 
posed  by  his  friend,  James  McGranahan,  while  visiting  Mr.  Bliss. 
Both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  loved  the  song  very  much  and  often  sang 
it  together,  and  have  both  told  me  of  how  the  tune  came  to  Mi\ 
McGranahan.  Mr.  Bliss  had  handed  him  the  words  and  asked  him 
to  see  what  he  could  get  for  a  tune.  He  worked  upon  it  a  long 
time,  making  harmonies  and  trying  to  satisfy  himself  with  some 
thing  that  would  properly  express  the  words,  but  without  success. 
When  supper  time  came  he  did  not  care  for  supper,  and  when  bed 
time  came  they  all  went  to  their  rooms  leaving  him  in  the  parlor  at 
the  piano.  He  worked  away  for  some  time,  but,  dissatisfied  with  the 


THAT  WILL  BE   HEAVED   FOE   ME.  135 

result,  lay  down  upon  the  floor  and  fell  into  a  doze.  After  a  little 
time  he  woke  up,  and  the  tune,  chorus  and  all  had  come — different 
from  the  harmonies  he  had  worked  upon,  but  just  the  thing.  In 
the  morning  he  sang  it  to  Bliss,  who  was  delighted  with  it  and  im 
mediately  adopted  it  for  use. 

THAT  WILL  BE  HEAVEN  FOR  ME. 

I  know  not  the  hour  when  my  Lord  will  come 

To  take  me  away  to  His  own  dear  home  ; 

But  I  know  that  His  presence  will  lighten  the  gloom, 

And  that  will  be  glory  for  me. 
Yes,  that  will  be  glory,  oh,  that  will  be  glory,  be  glory  for  me  ; 

And  that  will  be  glory  for  me, 

Oh,  that  will  be  glory  for  me ; 

Yes,  that  will  be  glory,  oh,  that  will  be  glory  for  me  ; 
But  I  know  that  His  presence  will  lighten  the  gloom, 

And  that  will  be  glory  for  me. 

I  know  not  the  song  that  the  angels  sing, 

I  know  not  the  sound  of  the  harp's  glad  ring  : 

But  I  know  there'll  be  mention  of  Jesus  our  King, 

And  that  will  be  music  for  me. 
Yes,  that  will  be  music,  oh,  that  will  be  music,  be  music  for  me  ; 

And  that  will  be  music  for  me, 

Oh,  that  will  be  music  for  me  ; 

Yes,  that  will  be  music,  oh,  that  will  be  music  for  jne  ; 
But  I  know  there'll  be  mention  of  Jesus  our  King, 

And  that  will  be  music  for  me. 

I  know  not  the  form  of  my  mansion  fair, 

I  know  not  the  name  that  I  then  shall  bear ; 

But  I  know  that  my  Savior  will  welcome  me  there, 

And  that  will  be  heaven  for  me. 
Yes,  that  will  be  heaven,  oh,  that  will  be  heaven,  be  heaven  for  me ; 

And  that  will  be  heaven  for  me, 

Oh,  that  will  be  heaven  for  me  ; 

Yes,  that  will  be  heaven,  oh,  that  will  be  heaven  for  me  ; 
But  I  know  that  my  Savior  will  welcome  me  there, 

And  that  will  be  heaven  for  me. 


"  Down  Life's  dark  Vale  We  Wander  "  was  written  in  Peoria, 
Illinois — I  think  in  1872.     It  was  suggested  by  a  conversation  with 


136  MEMOIE   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Mrs.  Wm.  Eeynolds  and  Mrs.  Tyng  upon  the  subject  of  our  Lord's 
personal  return.  One  of  the  ladies  quoted  a  sentence  from  a  work 
of  Anna  Shiptou's  as  to  the  joy  and  comfort  it  gave  her,  day  by 
day,  to  think  each  morning  at  sunrise,  "  This  maybe  the  day  of  His 
coming."  Mr.  Bliss  was  much  impressed — more  deeply  so  than 
ever  before — by  the  reality  of  the  subject,  and  a  few  days  after,  as 
he  was  coming  down  stairs  from  his  room  with  the  thought  of  look 
ing  for  the  Lord  upon  his  mind,  he  commenced  singing  "Down 
life's  dark  vale  Ve  wander,"  the  words  coming  to  him  as  easily  as 
the  steps  he  took  down  the  stairs.  He  at  once  wrote  it  out  with 
the  music  as  now  sung. 

WHEN    JESUS    COMES. 

Down  life's  dark  vale  we  wander, 

Till  Jesus  comes  ; 
We  watch  and  wait  and  wonder, 

Till  Jesus  comes. 
Oh,  let  my  lamp  be  burning, 

When  Jesus  comes ; 
For  Him  my  soul  be  yearning, 
When  Jesus  comes. 

CHOIUJS. — All  joy  His  lov'd  ones  bringing, 

When  Jesus  comes  : 
All  praise  through  heaven  ringing, 

When  Jesus  comes. 
All  beauty  bright  and  vernal, 

When  Jesus  comes, 
All  glory,  grand,  eternal, 

When  Jesus  comes. 

No  more  heart- pangs  nor  sadness, 

When  Jesus  comes  ; 
All  peace  and  joy  and  gladness, 

When  Jesus  comes. 
All  doubts  and  fears  will  vanish, 

When  Jesus  comes ; 
All  gloom  His  face  will  banish, 

When  Jesus  comes. 

He'll  know  the  way 'was  dreary, 

When  Jesus  comes ; 
He'll  know  the  feet  grew  weary, 

When  Jesus  comes. 


THE   LIGHT   OF  THE   WORLD.  137 

He'll  know  what  griefs  oppressed  me, 

When  Jesus  comes  ; 
Oh,  how  His  arms  will  rest  me ! 

When  Jesus  comes. 


et  The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus"  was  written  in  the  summer 
of  1875,  at  his  home,  No.  664  West  Monroe  street,  Chicago.  It 
came  to  him  all  together,  words  and  music,  one  morning  while  pass 
ing  through  the  hall  to  his  room,  and  was  at  once  written  out. 

THE  LIGHT   OF  THE   WORLD   IS  JESUS. 

11 1  am  the  light  of  the  world." — JOHN  ix,  5. 

The  whole  world  was  lost  in  the  darkness  of  sin  ; 

The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus. 
Like  sunshine  at  noonday  His  glory  shone  in ; 

The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus. 

CHORUS. — Come  to  the  Light,  'tis  shining  for  thee  ; 
Sweetly  the  Light  has  dawned  on  me. 
Once  I  was  blind,  but  now  I  can  see  ; 
The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus. 

No  darkness  have  we  who  in  Jesus  abide  ; 

The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus. 
We  walk  in  the  Light  when  we  follow  our  Guide  ; 

The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus. 

Ye  dwellers  in  darkness  with  sin-blinded  eyes, 

The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus. 
Go  wash  at  His  bidding,  and  light  will  arise, 

The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus. 

No  need  of  the  sunlight  in  heaven,  we're  told, 

The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus. 
The  Lamb  is  the  light  in  the  City  of  Gold, 

The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus. 


138  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

"The  Holy  Spirit,  Resist  not,  Grieve  not,  Quench  not,"  was 
suggested  to  him  by  B.  F.  Jacobs.  He  loved  the  song  himself,  and 
the  words  are  among  the  most  beautiful  he  has  written.  He  felt 
that  more  should  be  sung  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  wrote  this  after 
being  in  the  work. 

THE  HOLY  SPIRIT. 
"  Three  warnings  ;  Resist  not,  Grieve  not,  Quench  not." 

The  Spirit,  oh,  sinner, 

In  mercy  doth  move, 
Thy  heart,  so  long  hardened, 

Of  sin  to  reprove. 
Resist  not  the  Spirit, 

Nor  longer  delay  ; 
God's  gracious  entreaties 

May  end  with  to-day. ' 

Oh,  child  of  the  kingdom, 

From  sin  service  cease  ; 
Be  filled  with  the  Spirit, 

With  comfort  and  peace. 
Oh,  grieve  not  the  Spirit, 

Thy  Teacher  is  He, 
That  Jesus,  thy  Savior, 

.  May  glorified  be. 

Defiled  is  the  temple, 

Its  beauty  laid  low, 
On  God's  holy  altar 

The  embers  faint  glow, 
By  love  yet  rekindled, 

A  flame  may  be  fanned  ; 
Oh,  quench  not  the  Spirit, 

The  Lord  is  at  hand. 


"Wishing,  Hoping,  Knowing/'  he  wrote  to  bring  Christians 
into  a  more  full  assurance  of  salvation,  in  connection  with  his  experi 
ence  in  Gospel  meetings  with  doubting  Christians  who  were  look 
ing  to  their  feelings  instead  of  the  word  of  God. 


ALMOST   PERSUADED.  139 


WISHING,  HOPING,   KNOWING. 

A  long  time  I  wandered  in  darkness  and  sin, 

And  wondered  if  ever  the  light  would  shine  in  ; 

I  heard  Christian  friends  tell  of  raptures  divine, 

And  wish'd,  how  I  wish'd  that  their  Savior  were  mine. 

CHORUS. — I  wish'd  He  were  mine,  yes,  I  wish'd  He  were  mine 
I  wish'd,  how  I  wish'd  that  their  Savior  were  mine. 

I  heard  the  glad  gospel  of  "  good  will  to  men  "  ; 
I  read  whosoever  again  and  again  ; 
I  said  to  my  soul,  "  Can  that  promise  be  thine  ?  " 
And  then  began  hoping  that  Jesus  were  mine. 

CHORUS. — I  hoped  He  was  mine,  yes,  I  hoped  He  was  mine : 
I  then  began  hoping  that  Jesus  was  mine. 

Oh,  mercy  surprising,  He  saves  even  me ; 
"  Thy  portion  forever,"  He  says,  "  will  I  be." 
On  His  word  I'm  resting — assurance  divine, 
I'm  "  hoping  "  no  longer — I  know  He  is  mine. 

CHORUS. — I  know  He  is  mine,  yes,  I  know  He  is  mine  ; 

I'm  "  hoping  "  no  longer —  I  know  He  is  mine. 


Rev.  Mr.  Brundage  tells  of  the  origin  of  "  Almost  Persuaded," 
in  a  sermon  preached  by  him  many  years  ago.  The  closing  words 
of  the  sermon  were — "  He  who  is  almost  persuaded  is  almost  saved, 
but  to  be  almost  saved  is  to  be  entirely  lost."  Mr.  Bliss  being  in  the 
audience,  was  impressed  with  the  thought,  and  immediately  set  about 
the  composition  of  what  proved  one  of  his  most  popular  songs, 
deriving  his  inspiration  from  the  sermon  of  his  friend,  Mr.  Brun 
dage. 

ALMOST  PERSUADED. 

"Almost  persuaded"  now  to  believe; 
"  Almost  persuaded  "  Christ  to  receive. 

Seems  now  some  soul  to  say, 
"  Go,  Spirit,  go  Thy  way, 

Some  more  convenient  day 

On  Thee  I'll  call." 


140  MEMOIR    OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

"  Almost  persuaded,"  come,  come,  to-day  ; 

"Almost  persuaded,"  turn  not  away. 
Jesus  invites  you  here, 
Angels  are  ling'ring  near, 
Prayers  rise  from  hearts  so  dear  ; 
O  wand'rer,  come ! 

"Almost  persuaded,"  harvest  is  past ! 
"  Almost  persuaded,"  doom  comes  at  last ! 
"  Almost  "  cannot  avail ; 
"  Almost  "  is  but  to  fail ! 

Sad,  sad  that  bitter  wail — 
"Almost,  but  lost!" 


"  Hallelujah  !  'tis  Done."  In  compiling  Gospel  Songs,  in  1874, 
Mr.  Bliss  desired  to  publish  in  it  the  well-known  hymn,  "Hallelu 
jah  !  Thine  the  Glory,"  then  much  used  in  religious  services.  The 
owners  of  the  copyright  of  the  hymn  declined  his  application  for  its 
use,  and  he  wrote  "  Hallelujah  !  'tis  Done,"  to  supply  the  want. 
Hundreds  of  souls  have  been  led  to  decide  for  Christ  by  this  hymn, 
and  the  church  has  reason  to  rejoice  at  that  refusal. 

HALLELUJAH!   'TIS   DONE. 

"Pis  the  promise  of  God,  full  salvation  to  give 
Unto  him  who  on  Jesus  His  Son  will  believe. 

CHORUS.— Hallelujah  !  'tis  done,  I  believe  on  the  Son  ; 

I  am  saved  by  the  blood  of  the  Crucified  One ;  Crucified  One. 

Though  the  pathway  be  lonely,  and  dangerous,  too, 
Surely  Jesus  is  able  to  carry  us  through. 

Many  loved  ones  have  I  in  yonder  heavenly  throng ; 
They  are  safe  now  in  glory,  and  this  is  their  song, 

Little  children  I  see  standing  close  by  their  King, 
And  He  smiles  as  their  song  of  salvation  they  sing: 

There  are  prophets  and  kings  in  that  throng  I  behold, 

And  they  sing  as  they  march  through  the  streets  of  pure  gold : 


WILL  YOU   MEET   ME   AT  THE   FOUNTAIN?  141 

There's  a  part  in  that  chorus  for  you  and  for  me, 
And  the  theme  of  our  praises  forever  will  be : 

CHORUS. — Hallelujah !  'tis  done,  I  believe  on  the  Son ; 

I  am  saved  by  the  blood  of  the  Crucified  One,  Crucified  One. 


"  Good  News  "  was  written  in  March,  1874,  about  the  time  Mr. 
Bliss  went  to  Waukegan  for  his  first  Gospel  meetings,  and  was  first 
sung  there  : 

GOOD  NEWS. 

Hear  ye  the  glad  good  ne1  ws  from  heaven  ? 
Life  to  a  death- doomed  race  is  given ; 
Christ  on  the  cross  for  you  and  me 
Purchased  a  pardon  full  and  free. 

CHORUS. — He  that  belie. veth,  he  that  belie veth, 

He  that  believeth  hath  everlasting  life  ; 
He  that  believeth  hath  everlasting  life. 

When  we  were  lost,  the  Son  of  God 
Made  an  atonement  by  His  blood ; 
When  we  the  glad  good  news  believe, 
Then  the  atonement  we  receive. 

Why  not  believe  the  glad  good  news  ? 
Why  still  the  voice  of  God  refuse  ? 
Why  not  believe,  when  God  hath  said, 
All,  all  our  "  guilt  on  Him"  was  laid. 


"  Will  You  Meet  Me  at  the  Fountain  ? "  was  suggested  by  a 
remark  of  a  friend  at  the  Chicago  Exposition,  in  1873,  as  they 
parted  to  make  the  tour  of  the  building.  The  remark  was,  "  Meet 
Me  at  the  fountain."  It  made  a  melody  in  his  heart  in  the  sug 
gestion  of  another  meeting,  and  blossomed  out  into  the  song  : 

WILL  YOU  MEET  ME  AT  THE  FOUNTAIN? 

Will  you  meet  me  at  the  fountain, 

When  I  reach  the  glory-land  ? 
Will  you  meet  me  at  the  fountain  ? 

Shall  1  clasp  your  friendly  hand  ? 


142  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Other  friends  will  give  me  welcome, 
Other  loving  voices  cheer ; 

There'll  be  music  at  the  fountain  ; 
Will  you,  will  you  meet  me  there  ? 

CHORUS. — Yes,  I'll  meet  you  at  the  fountain, 
At  the  fountain  bright  and  fair  ; 
Oh,  I'll  meet  you  at  the  fountain, 
Yes,  I'll  meet  you,  meet  you  there. 

Will  you  meet  me  at  the  fountain  ? 

For  I'm  sure  that  I  shall  know 
Kindred  souls  and  sweet  communion 

More  than  I  have  known  below, 
And  the  chorus  will  be  sweeter, 

When  it  bursts  upon  my  ear, 
And  my  heaven  seem  completer, 

If  your  happy  voice  I  hear. 

Will  you  meet  me  at  the  fountain  ? 

I  shall  long  to  have  you  near, 
When  I  meet  my  loving  Savior, 

When  His  welcome  words  I  hear. 
He  will  meet  me  at  the  fountain, 

His  embraces  I  shall  share  ; 
There'll  be  glory  at  the  fountain  ; 
Will  you,  will  you  meet  me  there  ? 


"Hallelujah  !  He  is  Risen,"  was  written  in  the  South,  in  the 
spring  of  1876,  and  was  first  sung  by  him  on  Easter  afternoon,  1876, 
in  the  Court  House  Square  of  Augusta,  Georgia,  to  an  audience  of 
five  thousand  people  gathered  to  hear  the  Gospel.  None  who  were 
there  will  ever  forget  the  radiant  face,  or  the  triumphant,  ringing 
tones  with  which  he  sang — 

He  is  risen,  He  is  risen, 
Living  Lord  and  coming  King. 

HALLELUJAH!  HE  IS  RISEN! 

Hallelujah  !  He  is  risen  ! 

Jesus  is  gone  up  on  high ! 
Burst  the  bars  of  death  asunder, 

Angels  shout  and  men  reply  : 


SEEKING  TO    SAVE.  143 

He  is  risen,  He  is  risen, 
Living  now  no  more  to  die. 

Hallelujah,  He  is  risen ! 

Our  exalted  Head  to  be ; 
Sends  the  witness  of  the  spirit 

That  our  Advocate  is  He  ; 
He  is  risen,  He  is  risen, 

Justified  to  Him  are  we. 

Hallelujah,  He  is  risen  ! 

Death  for  aye  hath  lost  its  sting, 
Christ,  Himself  the  Resurrection, 

From  the  grave  His  own  will  bring  : 
He  is  risen,  He  is  risen, 

Living  Lord  and  coming  King. 


"  Seeking  to  Save  "  was  suggested  by  some  remarks  made  in 
conversation  with  Mr.  Bliss,  by  Dr.  Wadsworth,  of  the  Methodist 
Episcopal  Church  of  Mobile,  Alabama,  upon  the  unity  of  the  three 
parables  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  Luke. 

SEEKING   TO   SAVE. 

Tenderly  the  Shepherd, 

O'er  the  mountains  cold, 
Goes  to  bring  his  lost  one 

Back  to  the  fold. 

CHORUS. — Seeking  to  save,  seeking  to  save, 

Lost  one,  'tis  Jesus  seeking  to  save. 
Seeking  to  save,  seeking  to  save, 
Lost  one,  'tis  Jesus  seeking  to  save. 

Patiently  the  owner 

Seeks  with  earnest  care, 
In  the  dust  and  darkness 

Her  treasure  rare. 

Lovingly  the  Father 

Sends  the  news  around  : 
"  He  once  dead  now  liveth — 
Once  lost  is  found." 


144  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

"  At  the  Feet  of  Jesus  "  came  from  the  Scripture  suggestions  of 
passages  containing  that  phrase. 

AT   THE  FEET  OF  JESUS. 

At  the  feet  of  Jesus, 

List'ning  to  His  word,       « 
Learning  wisdom's  lesson 

From  her  loving  Lord, 
Mary,  led  by  heavenly  grace, 
Chose  the  meek  disciple's  place. 
At  the  feet  of  Jesus  is  the  place  for  me, 
•  There  a  humble  learner  would  I  choose  to  be. 

At  the  feet  of  Jesus, 

Pouring  perfume  rare, 
Mary  did  her  Savior 

For  the  grave  prepare  ; 
And,  from  love  the  "  good  work"  done, 
She  her  Lord's  approval  won. 
At  the  feet  of  Jesus  is  the  place  for  me, 
There  in  sweetest  service  would  I  ever  be. 

At  the  feet  of  Jesus, 

In  that  morning  hour, 
Loving  hearts  receiving 

Resurrection  power, 
Haste  with  joy  to  preach  the  word  : 
"Christ  is  risen,  Praise  the  Lord!" 
At  the  feet  of  Jesus,  risen  now  for  me, 
I  shall  sing  His  praises  through  eternity. 


"  The  Half  was  Never  Told  "  was  suggested  by  reading  notes 
by  his  dear  friend  and  sometimes  fellow  laborer  in  Gospel  work, 
James  M.  Brookes,  of  St.  Louis,  upon  the  Queen  of  Sheba's  visit 
to  Solomon. 

THE  HALF  WAS  NEVER  TOLD. 

Repeat  the  story  o'er  and  o'er, 

Of  grace  so  full  and  free  ; 
I  love  to  hear  it  more  and  more, 

Since  grace  has  rescued  me. 


MEETING  AT   FARWELL   HALL.  145 

CHORUS. — The  lialf  was  never  told, 

The  half  was  never  told, 
Of  grace  divine,  so  wonderful, 
The  half  was  never  told. 

Of  peace  I  only  knew  the  name, 

Nor  found  my  soul  its  rest 
Until  the  sweet-voiced  angel  came 

To  soothe  my  weary  breast. 

My  highest  place  is  lying  low 

At  my  Redeemer's  feet ; 
No  realty  in  life  I  know, 

But  in  His  service  sweet. 

And  oh,  what  rapture  will  it  be 

With  all  the  host  above, 
To  sing  through  all  eternity 

The  wonders  of  His  love. 

The  Columbus  Glee  Club  lately  paid  a  visit  to  the  President  and 
Mrs.  Hayes  at  the  White  House.  They  sang  a  number  of  ditties  m 
the  corridor.  At  the  close  of  the  second  song  Mrs.  Hayes  made  a 
special  request  for  her  favorite  tunes.  Among  them  was,  "  Let  the 
Lower  Lights  be  Burning." 

The  last  time  Mr.  Bliss  sang  for  Mr.  Moody  was  on  Thursday, 
November  23,  at  Farwell  Hall.  Mr.  Moody  conducted,  at  ten  o'clock 
that  morning,  a  prayer  meeting  of  ministers.  Nearly  one  thousand 
pastors  from  all  parts  of  the  Northwest  were  present.  It  was  a  very 
earnest,  very  solemn,  and  impressive  gathering.  The  Spirit  of  God 
was  present,  and  many  hearts  were  brought  to  a  new  and  more  en 
tire  consecration  to  Christ.  Mr.  Moody  at  this  meeting  suggested 
the  Alliance  for  Prayer,  and  a  list  was  there  made  of  over  four  hun 
dred  churches  who  covenanted  to  pray  for  each  other  until  God  re 
vived  His  work  in  their  midst. 

Rev.  W.  A.  Spencer  was  appointed  as  the  Secretary  of  the  Alli 
ance,  and  very  blessed  and  encouraging  to  the  faith  of  God's  people 
have  been  the  reports  that  have  come  to  him  as  the  result  of  this 
united  prayer. 

Mr.  Bliss  was  seated  at  the  organ  and  led  in  the  singing.  His 
own  heart  was  full  of  Christ,  and  he  was  melted  by  the  scene  before 
him  of  these  hundreds  of  dear  ministers  re-consecrating  themselves 
30 


146  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

so  humbly  and  tearfully  to  the  work  of  saving  souls.  His  singing 
came  with  mighty  power  from  a  full  heart,  and  with  the  conscious 
power  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  At  the  height  of  interest  in  the  meet 
ing,  at  Mr.  Moody's  request  he  sang,  "Are  your  windows  open  to 
ward  Jerusalem  ? "  His  face  fairly  shone  as  he  sang,  and  half  of 
those  present  were  in  tears  under  the  influence  of  the  song.  Mr. 
Moody  leaned  his  head  forward  upon  the  desk,  filled  with  emotion, 
and  as  the  words,  so  gloriously  sung,  "For  the  coming  of  the  King 
in  His  beauty  are  you  watching  day  by  day  ?"  died  away,  the  feeling 
of  every  heart,  I  believed,  was  expressed  by  a  dear  minister  who  ex 
claimed  " God  bless  Mr.  Bliss  for  that  song."  "Amen"  came  from 
many  a  voice  and  from  all  hearts. 

It  was  the  last  song  he  sung  in  Farwell  Hall.  It  was  the  last 
time  that  his  loved  friend  and  brother  Mr.  Moody  heard  his  voice 
in  song.  A  fitting  scene  and  a  fitting  theme  to  close  the  record  of 
their  work  together  on  the  earth. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

MR.  BLISS*  SECOND  COLLECTION  OF  HYMNS — "  MY  PRAYER  " — "  MORE  TO  FOL 
LOW  » — "CALLING  NOW" — "SPIRIT  DIVINE" — "BEAUTIFUL  SONG  OF 
IOVE" — "DANIEL'S  BAND" — " ASK,  SEEK,  KNOCK " — "LOVE  ONE  ANOTH 
ER" — "FEAR  NOT" — "MOURN,  PRAY,  PRAISE" — "SONG  IN  SCRIPTURE  " 

— "GOOD   CHEER" — INNOCENT   CHILDHOOD" — "LORD   JESUS,  COME" — 
"GOOD  NIGHT  TILL  THEN" — "THE  FOUR  RULERS" — "  TO  DIE  IS  GAIN." 

THE  second  collection  of  hymns  bearing  Mr.  Bliss'  name  on  the 
title  page  is  "  Sunshine  for  Sunday  Schools,"  published  by 
Messrs.  John  Church  &  Co.,  in  1873.    The  following  hymns  were 
included  in  that  work,  and  are  given  here  by  permission  of  the  pub 
lishers. 

MY  PRAYER. 

More  holiness  give  me, 

More  strivings  within, 
More  patience  in  suff'ring, 

More  sorrow  for  sin, 
More  faith  in  my  Savior, 

More  sense  of  His  care, 
More  joy  in  His  service, 

More  purpose  in  prayer. 

More  gratitude  give  me, 

More  trust  in  the  Lord, 
More  pride  in  His  glory, 

More  hope  in  His  word, 
More  tears  for  His  sorrows, 

More  pain  at  His  grief, 
More  meekness  in  trial, 

More  praise  for  relief. 

More  purity  give  me, 

More  strength  to  o'ercome, 
More  freedom  from  earth-stains, 

More  longings  for  home. 


148  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS, 

More  fit  for  the  kingdom, 
More  used  would  I  be, 

More  blessed  and  holy, 
More,  Savior,  like  TJiee. 


MORE  TO  FOLLOW. 

"  A  vast  fortune  was  left  in  the  hands  of  a  minister  for  one  of  his  poor  parishioners.  Fear- 
ing  that  it  might  be  squandered  if  suddenly  bestowed  upon  him,  the  wise  minister  sent  him  A 
little  at  a  time,  with  a  note,  saying  :  •  This  is  thine  ;  use  it  wisely ;  there  is  more  to  follow. 
Brethren,  that's  just  the  way  God  deals  with  us."— D.  L.  MOODY. 

Have  you  on  the  Lord  believed  ? 

Still  there's  more  to  follow  ; 
%  Of  His  grace  have  you  received  ? 

Still  there's  more  to  follow. 
Oh,  the  grace  the  Father  shows  I 

Still  there's  more  to  follow  ; 
Freely  He  His  grace  bestows, 

Still  there's  more  to  follow. 

CHORUS. — More  and  more,  more  and  more. 

Always  more  to  follow, 
Oh,  His  matchless,  boundless  love  I 
Still  there's  more  to  follow. 

Have  you  felt  the  Savior  near  ? 

Still  there's  more  to  follow  ; 
Does  His  blessed  presence  cheer  ? 

Still  there's  more  to  follow. 
•  Oh,  the  love  that  Jesus  shows  ! 

Still  there's  more  to  follow  ; 
Freely  He  His  love  bestows, 

Still  there's  more  to  follow. 

Have  you  felt  the  Spirit's  power? 

Still  there's  more  to  follow  ; 
Falling  like  the  gentle  shower? 

Still  there's  more  to  follow. 
Oh,  the  power  the  Spirit  shows  I 

Still  there's  more  to  follow  ; 
Freely  He  His  power  bestows, 

Still  there's  more  to  follow. 


SPITIIT  DIVINE.  149 


CALLING  NOW. 

44  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock." 

"  They  that  are  whole  have  no  need  of  the  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick .  I  came  not  to 
call  the  righteous,  Imt  sinners  to  repentance." 

"  I  have  redeemed  thee — I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name." 
"  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts." 

This  loving  Savior 

Stands  patiently ; 
Though  oft  rejected, 

Calls  again  for  thee. 

CHORUS. — Calling  now  for  thee,  prodigal, 

Calling  now  for  thee  ; 
Thou  hast  wandered  far  away, 
But  He's  calling  now  for  thee. 

Oh,  boundless  mercy, 

Free,  free  to  all  J 
Stay,  child  of  error, 

Heed  the  tender  call. 

Though  all  unworthy, 

Come,  now,  come  home — 
Say,  while  He's  waiting, 

"Jesus,  dear,  I  come." 


SPIRIT   DIVINE. 

Spirit  Divine,  Spirit  Divine. 

Be  Thou  the  Day-star  in  my  darkness  to  shine 

Spirit  of  Truth,  Spirit  of  Truth, 

Be  Thou  the  Teacher  and  the  Guide  of  my  youth. 

Spirit  of  Love,  Spirit  of  Love, 

Be  Thou  the  Leader  to  my  mansion  above. 

Spirit  of  Power,  Spirit  of  Power, 

Be  Thine  the  praises  of  my  song  evermore. 


150  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 


BEAUTIFUL  SONG  OF  LOVE. 

I  may  not  know  all  the  melodies  of  heaven, 
Sounding  afar  o'er  the  golden  streets  aglow, 

Yet  to  my  soul  let  the  sweet  refrain  be  given, 
Come,  blessed  angels,  your  chorus  I  would  know. 

CHORUS. — Teach  me,  teach  me, 

Teach  me  the  song  of  the  beautiful  and  holy  ones, 

Teach  me  the  song  of  the  pure  ones  above ; 
Oh,  teach  me  the  song  of  the  beautiful  and  holy  ones, 
Teach  me  the  beautiful  song  of  love. 

I  may  not  know  all  the  glorified  immortals 
Standing  before  Him,  the  holy,  holy  King, 

Yet  would  I  join,  as  1  near  the  shining  portals, 
Loud  hallelujahs, your  chorus  sweet  to  sing. 

Soon  shall  I  hear  them,  the  melodies  of  heaven, 
Sounding  afar  through  the  golden  streets  aglow. 

Soon  to  my  soul  shall  the  sweet  refrain  be  given, 
Soon,  blessed  angels,  your  chorus  I  shall  know. 


DANIEL'S  BAND. 
Dedicated  to  *'  Daniel's  Band  "  of  the  First  Congregational  Church,  Chicago. 

Standing  by  a  purpose  true, 

Heeding  God's  command, 
Honor  them,  the  faithf  ul  few, 

All  hail  to  Daniel's  Band  I 

CHORUS. — Dare  to  be  a  Daniel ! 

Dare  to  stand  alone  ! 
Dare  to  have  a  purpose  firm, 
Dare  to  make  it  known. 

Many  mighty  men  are  lost 

Daring  not  to  stand, 
Who  for  God  had  been  a  host, 

By  joining  Daniel's  Band. 


LOVE   0KB   ANOTHER.  161 

Many  giants  great  and  tall, 

Stalking  through  the  land, 
Headlong  to  the  earth  would  fall, 

If  met  by  Daniel's  Band. 

Hold  the  Gospel  banner  high, 

On  to  victory  grand  ! 
Satan  and  his  host  defy, 

And  shout  for  Daniel's  Band. 


ASK,    SEEK,    KNOCK. 

**  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given ;  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find." 

Precious  promise !  Lord,  I  wonder  Thou  art  still  so  kindl 
"  Knock,  it  shall  be  opened,"  if  we  only  could  believe. 

Ask,  seek,  knock — Savior,  help  us  to  receive. 
CHORUS. — Ask,  seek,  knock,  hear  the  loving  Savior  say : 
Ask,  seek,  knock — Savior,  help  me  to  obey. 

Jesus,  I  ask  Thee  now,  for  Thine  is  all  the  power, 
Give  me  grace  to  look  to  Thee  in  dark  temptation's  hour. 
Help  me  to  remember  'tis  Thy  gentle  voice  I  hear. 
Ask,  seek,  knock —  Savior,  wherefore  should  I  fear  ? 

Lord,  I  am  waiting  now  Thy  blessed  face  to  see ; 
Earnestly  I'm  knocking,  knocking;  open,  Lord,  to  me. 
To  Thy  cross  I'll  cling  till  Thou  a  blessing  dost  bestow. 
Ask,  seek,  knock — Lord,  I  will  not  let  Thee  go. 


LOVE   ONE  ANOTHER. 

This  is  My  commandment, 
That  ye  love  one  another, 
That  ye  love  one  another, 
As  I  have  loved  you. 

Blessed  words  of  Jesus 

We  have  heard  to-day — 
Savior,  by  Thy  spirit, 

Help  us  to  obey. 
May  Thy  love  unite  us 

To  the  living  Vine ! 
May  our  hearts,  enlightened, 

Glow  with  love  divine ! 


352  MEMOIR   OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

May  we  seek  Thy  glory, 

Strife  and  envy  flee  ; 
By  our  love  to  others, 

Prove  our  love  to  Thee. 
Ever  more  as  brethren, 

In  sweet  union  live. 
As  we  wish  forgiveness, 

May  we  each  forgive. 

Grant  us  Thy  salvation, 

Fill  us  with  Thy  love  ; 
Give  us  each  a  foretaste 

Of  the  joys  above. 
Ever  meek  and  lowly, 

Ever  kind  and  true, 
Ever  pure  and  holy, 

Paths  of  peace  pursue. 

This  is  My  commandment. 
That  ye  love  one  another, 
That  ye  love  one  another, 
As  I  have  loved  you. 


FEAR  NOT. 

What  did  the  angel  to  the  shepherds  say  ? 

Fear  not,  fear  not, 
On  that  bright  morning  of  our  Lord's  birth-day  ? 

CHORUS.— Fear  not,  fear  not, 

Fear  not,  fear  not,  let  the  Gospel  sound. 
Fear  not,  fear  not, 

Roll  the  world  around ; 
Trembling  souls,  dismiss  your  fear, 
To  the  mercy  seat  draw  near, 
To  the  mercy  seat  draw  near. 

What  said  the  Master  when  the  waves  ran  high  ? 

Fear  not,  fear  not, 
To  His  disciples  said  He,  "  It  is  I." 

What  to  the  ruler  did  the  Savior  say  ? 

Fear  not,  fear  not, 
When  cold  and  lifeless  His  dear  daughter  lay  ? 


MOURN",    PRAY,    PRAISE.  153 

What  to  the  Marys  was  the  cheering  word  ? 

Fear  not,  fear  not, 
When  they  with  joy  beheld  the  risen  Lord? 

What  saith  the  Son  of  Man,  the  First  and  Last  ? 

Fear  not,  fear  not, 
He  whose  eternal  word  abideth  fast  ? 


GOING   HOME. 

Though  the  way  seems  lone, 

And  the  sunlight  gone  ; 
Though  the  blinding  tears  will  fall. 

Let  us  look  away, 

And  be  glad  to-day, 
At  the  thought  of  going  home. 

CHORUS. — Going  home, 
Going  home, 

To  our  Father's  house  on  high,  going  home 
Where  there's  no  more  night, 
And  the  Lamb  is  the  light, 
We  are  going  by  and  by. 

Though  the  world  is  drear, 

And  the  tempter  near, 
And  his  arrows  pierce  the  soul ; 

Yonder  beams  the  strand 

Of  the  Promised  Land, 
JTis  the  long-sought  final  goal. 

Though  in  hostile  lands, 

Over  burning  sands 
Now  with  weary  feet  we  roam, 

But  a  few  years  more, 

And  'twill  all  be  o'er, 
He  will  come  to  take  us  home. 


MOURN,  PRAY,  PRAISE. 

Mourn,  yes  mourn, 
But  not  for  her  at  rest, 
And  happy  with  the  blest ; 


154  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Her  toils  and  trials  cease, 
Her  soul  may  rest  in  peace, 
In  perfect  peace. 

Pray,  yes  pray, 
But  not  for  her  in  heaven ; 
Pray  we  may  be  forgiven, 
And  at  the  last  may  stand, 
With  her  in  Glory  Land, 
A  happy  band. 

Praise,  yes,  praise, 
That  in  the  Crucified 
She  lived,  and  loved,  and  died. 
May  grace  our  souls  refine, 
And  may  her  hope  divine 
Be  thine  and  mine.    Amen. 


SONG  IN  SCRIPTURE. 

A  song  bursts  from  the  starry  sky, 

Starry  sky,  starry  sky, 
And  angels  from  their  throne  on  high 

Shout  aloud  their  holy  joy. 
JOB  xxxvii,  4,  5,  6,  7. 

But  oh,  earth's  first  and  warlike  song, 

Warlike  song,  warlike  song, 
Of  vengeance,  murder,  guilt  and  wrong ! 

Evermore  it  rolls  along. 
GENESIS  iv,  23,  24. 

A  song  rings  o'er  the  sounding  sea, 

Sounding  sea,  sounding  sea, 
"  The  Lord  hath  triumphed  gloriously  " — 

Praise  Him  for  the  victory. 
EXODUS  xv,  1,  2. 

O,  list  the  welcome  Christmas  song, 
Christmas  song,  Christmas  song  ! 

Of  heaven's  bright  and  shining  throng — 

We  the  Gospel  strain  prolong. 
LUKE  ii,  8, 9, 10,  11.  * 


GOOD   CHEER.  155 

A  psalm  floats  on  the  evening  air, 

Evening  air,  evening  air, 
And  Jesus'  gentle  voice  is  there — 
Oh,  may  we  His  worship  share  1 
MARK  xiv,  22,  23,  24,  26. 

There'll  be  a  song  of  glad  accord, 

Glad  accord,  glad  accord, 
Through  heaven's  eternal  anthems  heard, 
"Alleluia,  praise  the  Lord  !" 
REVELATION  xix,  6. 


GOOD  CHEER! 

Good  cheer,  good  cheer  ! 

For  a  happy  New  Year 
Is  brightly  smiling  before  us  ; 

Let  merry  bells  ring, 

Let  happy  hearts  sing, 
Good  cheer,  good  cheer  is  the  chorus. 

Adow.n  the  past, 

One  look  we  cast, 
For  friends  and  fancies  olden  ; 

Then  forward  glance, 

And  dream  perchance, 
Of  future  days  more  golden. 

CHORUS. — Good  cheer,  good  cheer  1 
For  a  happy  New  Year 

Is  brightly  smiling  before  us, 
Let  merry  bells  ring, 
Let  happy  hearts  sing, 

Good  cheer,  good  cheer  is  the  chorus. 
Good  cheer,  good  cheer  ! 

For  the  glad  and  happy  New  Year  I 
Good  cheer,  good  cheer  ! 

For  the  glad  and  happy  New  Year  1 

Good  cheer,  good  cheer! 

For  a  happy  New  Year 
Is  brightly  smiling  before  us, 

Let  merry  bells  ring, 

Let  happy  hearts  wing, 
Good  cheer,  good  cheer  is  the  chorus. 


156  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

In  future  years, 
From  smiles  and  tears, 
Our  lives  shall  luster  gather  ; 
And  come  what  may, 
We'll  always  say, 
"  Thy  will  be  done,  our  Father." 


f     INNOCENT  CHILDHOOD. 

Sweet  little  violets, 

Born  in  the  wild- wood  ; 
Purest  of  loveliness, 

Innocent  childhood  ; 
Shy  as  the  antelope, 

Brown  as  a  berry, 
Free  as  the  mountain. air, 

Romping  and  merry. 
CHORUS. — Tra  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  &c. 

Blue  eyes  and  hazel  eyes 

Peep  from  the  hedges, 
Shaded  by  sun -bonnets 

Fray'd  at  the  edges  ; 
Up  in  the  apple-trees, 

Heedless  of  danger, 
Manhood  in  embryo 

Stares  at  the  stranger. 

Out  in  the  hilly  patch, 

Seeing  the  berries — 
Under  the  orchard  trees, 

Feasting  on  cherries — 
Trampling  the  clover  blooms 

Down  'mong  the  grasses, 
No  voice  to  hinder  them, 

Dear  lads  and  lasses. 

Dear  little  innocents ! 

Born  in  the  wild- wood  ; 
Oh,  that  all  little  ones 

Had  such  a  childhood  1 
Heaven's  blue  over  them, 

Earth's  green  beneath  them, 
No  sweeter  heritage 

Could  we  bequeath  them. 


GOOD   NIGHT  TILL  THEN.  157 


LORD  JESUS,  COME. 

Lord  Jesus,  come  ! 

Nor  let  us  longer  roam 
Afar  from  Thee  and  that  bright  place 
Where  we  shall  see  Thee  face  to  face. 

CHORUS. — Lord  Jesus,  come! 
Lord  Jesus,  come ! 


Lord  Jesus,  come  ! 

Thine  absence  here  we  mourn 
No  joy  we  know  apart  from  Thee, 
No  sorrow  in  Thy  presence  see. 


Lord  Jesus,  come ' 

And  take  Thy  people  home, 
That  all  Thy  nock,  so  scattered  here, 
With  Thee  in  glory  may  appear. 


GOOD   NIGHT   TILL   THEN. 

I  journey  forth,  rejoicing, 

From  this  dark  vale  of  tears, 
To  heavenly  joy  and  freedom 

From  earthly  bonds  and  fears, 
Where  Christ  our  Lord  shall  gather 

All  His  redeemed  again, 
His  kingdom  to  inherit; 

Good-night,  good-night  till  then. 


Why  thus  so  sadly  weeping, 

Beloved  ones  of  my  heart  ? 
The  Lord  is  good  and  gracious, 

Though  now  He  bids  us  part. 
We  oft  have  met  in  gladness, 

And  we  shall  meet  again, 
All  sorrow  left  behind  us ; 

Good-night,  ^ood-night  till  then. 


158  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

I  go  to  see  His  glory, 

Whom  we  have  loved  below  ; 
I  go,  the  blessed  angels 

And  hoi  v  saints  to  know  ; 
Our  lovely  ones  departed, 

I  go  to  find  again, 
And  wait  for  you  to  join  us  : 

Good-night,  good-night  till  then. 


The  two  hymns  following  are  taken  from  "  The  Joy,"  issued  by 
Messrs.  Church  &  Co.,  in  1873  : 

THE  FOUR  RULERS. 

"  Is  it  safe?  is  it  safe?  "  hear  the  timid  cry  1 

"  Who  will  tell  me  what  to  do  ? 
Is  it  safe  to  wait  ?  is  it  safe  to  try  ? 

Ah  me,  if  I  only  knew  ! " 
Alas,  said  I,  come  tell  me,  pray, 

What  foolish  man  is  this  ? 
The  laughing  echoes  seemed  to  say, 

"His  name  is  COWARDICE." 


Will  it  pay  1  will  it  pay  ?  "  came  a  frenzied  yell 
From  a  surging,  scowling  crowd  ; 

From  the  men  of  State  and  of  Church  as  well- 
In  sorrow  my  head  I  bowed. 

Can  man,  immortal  man,  thought  I, 
So  low  and  selfish  be  ? 

Their  gilded  motto  streamed  on  high, 
I  read  it  POLICY. 


'  Will  it  please?  will  it  please?  "  'twas  a  soulless  sound, 

Floating  on  the  perfumed  air, 
And  again  I  sighed  as  I  looked  around 

On  the  captives  of  fashion  there. 
'What  ho,"  I  cried,  "and  whither  now? 

Whose  worshipers  are  ye  ?  " 
Before  their  queen  I  saw  them  bow  ; 
Twas  cruel  VANITY. 


TO    DIE    IS    GAIK.  169 

"  Is  it  right  ?  is  it  right  ?"  'twas  a  ringing  tone, 

And  the  jostling  crowd  stood  still, 
For  the  voice  was  clear  though  it  rose  alone, 

And  spake  with  a  heavenly  thrill.  4 

"  Joy,  joy,  sweet  angel  voice,"  1  cried, 

"  Dwell,  ever  dwell  with  me," 
"  This  thine  to  choose,"  the  voice  replied, 

"  My  name  is  HONESTY." 


TO   DIE   IS   GAIN. 

"  To  die  is  gain," 

All  earthly  cares  forsaking, 

From  toil  and  pain, 
To  endless  joy  awaking, 

To  die  is  gain. 

To  die  is  gain, 
My  weary  soul  home  bringing  ; 

O'er  heavenly  plain, 
Sweet  angel  voices  singing, 

To  die  is  gain. 

To  die  is  gain, 
From  strife  and  sin  to  sever, 

With  Christ  to  reign, 
Forever,  oh,  forever, 

To  die  is  gain. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

GOSPEL  SONGS. — "NEARER  TO  ME" — "WE  TRUST  IN  THE  LORD" — "HOW 
MUCH  OWEST  THOU?" — "THE  THREE  MOUNTAINS  "—GOSPEL  HYMNS 
AND  SACRED  SONGS. — "WHERE  ARE  THE  NINE  ?  " — "  WHERE  HAST  THOU 
GLEANED  TO-DAY?" — "  NO  OTHER  NAME" — GOSPEL  HYMNS  NO.  2. — "  IN 
ZION'S  ROCK  ABIDING  "— "  I'M  ON  THE  LORD'S  SIDE  " — "  HALLELUJAH  ! 
WHAT  A  SAVIOR  !  " 

IN  1874,  Messrs.  Church  &  Co.  published  "  Gospel  Songs,  a  Choice 
Collection  of  Hymns  and  Tunes,  New  and  Old,  for  Gospel  Meet 
ings,  Sunday  Schools,  etc.,  by  P.   P.  Bliss."     In  addition  to  com 
positions  formerly  published,  the  following  were  contained  in  that 
work  : 

NEARER    TO   ME. 

Be  near,  O  God,  to  me, 

Nearer  to  me  ; 
So  shall  I  truly  be 

"  Nearer  to  Thee." 
Thy  face  I  cannot  see, 
Still  be  Thou  near  to  me, 
Nearer,  0  God,  to  me, 

Nearer  to  me. 

Fold  me  beneath  Thy  wing, 

O  Savior  divine : 
There  may  I  sweetly  sing, 

"  Jesus  is  mine." 
O'er  all  life's  stormy  sea, 
Still  be  Thou  near  to  me, 
Nearer,  0  God,  to  me, 
Nearer  to  me. 

Thy  hand,  in  youth's  wild  way, 

Did  me  uphold ; 
Forsake  me  not,  I  pray, 

When  I  am  old  ; 


WE   GLORY  IN  THE  LORD.  161 

I  put  my  trust  in  Thee, 
Now  and  eternally, 
Be  near,  0  God,  to  me, 
Nearer  to  me. 


WE  GLORY  IN  THE  LORD. 

Written  for  K.  A.  Burnell  apoii  his  fiftieth  hirthday,  July,  1874. 

Come,  brethren,  as  we  march  along, 

Come  glory  in  the  Lord : 
Bring  each  a  psalm,  a  sacred  song, 

And  glory  in  the  Lord  : 
His  hand  hath  led  us  hitherto, 

Come  glory  in  the  Lord  ; 
We've  proved  His  precious  promise  true  ; 

Oh,  glory  in  the  Lord. 

CHOKUS. — Forget  the  trials  by  the  way, 

Press  toward  the  great  reward ; 
Exalt  the  cross  of  Christ  to-day, 
And  glory  in  the  Lord. 


Though  we  in  danger  dread  may  be, 

We  glory  in  the  Lord ; 
In  perils  oft,  by  land  and  sea, 

We  glory  in  the  Lord  ; 
In  weary  watchings  night  and  day 

We  glory  in  the  Lord ; 
He  says, "  With  you  I  am  alway  " — 

We  glory  in  the  Lord. 


Fight  on,  O  soldier  of  the  cross  ; 

We  glory  in  the  Lord ; 
For  Jesus'  sake  count  all  things  loss, 

And  glory  in  the  Lord  ; 
In  life  or  death,  in  ease  or  pain 

We  glory  in  the  Lord  ; 
"  To  live  is  Christ,  to  die  is  gain  "— 

We  glory  in  the  Lord. 
11 


162  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 


HOW  MUCH  OWEST  THOU? 

How  much  owest  thou? 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 
For  years  of  tender  watchful  care, 
A  father's  faith,  a  mother's  prayer, 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 
For  calls  and  warnings  loud  and  plain, 
For  songs  and  sermons  heard  in  vain, 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 
Thy  day  of  grace  is  almost  o'er, 
The  judgment  time  is  just  before, 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 
O  child  of  God  and  heir  of  Heaven, 
Thy  soul  redeemed,  thy  sins  forgiven, 

How  much  owest  thou  ? 


THE  THREE  MOUNTAINS. 

Between  me  and  my  Savior 

Three  mighty  mountains  rose, 
That  all  the  way  and  ever 

My  coming  did  oppose  ; 
And  darkness  gathered  round  me, 

The  light  was  growing  dim, 
Until  my  Savior  found  me, 

And  now  I  rest  in  Him. 

I  waited  for  a  feeling, 

Some  new,  mysterious  power, 
A  heavenly  light  revealing 

My  heart  as  ne'er  before  ; 


WHERE  ARE  THE   KIKE?  163 

This  mountain  dark  and  gloomy 

Concealed  a  loving  Lord, 
Until  His  voice  came  to  me — 

"My  child,  believe  My  word." 

I  waited  for  a  fitness  ; 

To  pray  would  be  a  sin  ; 
My  past  life  bore  the  witness 

How  vile  my  heart  had  been  ; 
This  mountain  crushed  my  spirit 

Till  God  deliverance  gave — 
'Twas  sinners  without  merit 

That  Jesus  came  to  save. 

And  then  my  fear  of  failing, 

Of  hopes  indulged  in  vain, 
Of  efforts  unavailing 

Eternal  life  to  gain — 
This  mountain  rose  before  me ; 

I  called  for  help  divine  ; 
Said  Jesus,  "  Dost  thou  love  Me  ? 

Then  rest  thy  life  in  Mine." 


"  Gospel  Hymns  and  Sacred  Songs  "  was  the  joint  production  of 
Messrs.  Bliss  and  Sankey,  and  the  preface  to  it  bears  fac-similes  of 
their  autograph  signatures.  The  work  was  published  in  1875,  by 
Biglow  &  Main,  New  York  and  Chicago,  and  John  Church  &  Co., 
Cincinnati.  The  following  hymns  were  published  in  it  : 

WHERE  ARE  THE  NINE? 

Wand'ring  afar  from  the  dwellings  of  men, 
Hear  the  sad  cry  of  the  lepers — the  ten. 
"  Jesus  have  mercy  ! "  brings  healing  divine  ; 
One  came  to  worship,  but  where  are  the  nine  ? 

CHORUS. — Where  are  the  nine  ? 
Where  are  the  nine  ? 

Were  there  not  ten  cleansed? 
Where  are  the  nine  ? 


164  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

Loudly  the  stranger  sang  praise  to  the  Lord, 
Knowing  the  cure  had  been  wrought  by  His  word, 
Gratefully  owning  the  Healer  Divine  ; 
Jesus  says  tenderly,  "  Where  are  the  nine?" 

"  Who  is  this  Nazarene  ?"     Pharisees  say  ; 

"  Is  He  the  Christ?  tell  us  plainly,  we  pray." 
Multitudes  follow  Him  seeking  a  sign, 
Show  them  His  mighty  works — Where  are  the  nine  ? 

Jesus  on  trial  to-day  we  can  see. 
Thousands  deridingly  ask,  "  Who  is  He?  " 
How  they're  rejecting  Him,  your  Lord  and  mine ! 
Bring  in  the  witnesses — Where  are  the  nine  ? 


WHERE  HAST  THOU  GLEANED  TO-DAY? 

Weary  gleaner,  whence  comest  thou, 

With  empty  hands  and  clouded  brow  ? 

Plodding  along  thy  lonely  way, 

Tell  me,  where  hast  thou  gleaned  to-day  ? 

Late  I  found  a  barren  field, 

The  harvest  past  my  search  revealed, 

Others  golden  sheaves  had  gained, 

Only  stubble  for  me  remained. 

CHORUS.— Forth  to  the  harvest  field,  away ! 

Gather  your  handfuls  while  you  may ; 
All  day  long  in  the  field  abide, 
Gleaning  close  by  the  reaper's  side. 

Careless  gleaner,  what  hast  thou  here, 

These  faded  flow'rs  and  leaflets  sere  ? 

Hungry  and  thirsty,  tell  me,  pray, 

Where,  oh,  where  hast  thou  glean'd  to-day? 

All  day  long  in  shady  bow'rs, 

I've  gaily  sought  earth's  fairest  flow'rs ; 

Now,  alas  !  too  late  I  see 

All  I've  gathered  is  vanity. 

Burden'd  gleaner,  thy  sheaves  I  see; 
Indeed  thou  must  a- weary  be  ! 
Singing  along  the  homeward  way, 
Glad  one,  where  hast  thou  glean'd  to-day  ? 


IN   ZION'S   BOCK   ABIDING.  165 

• 

Stay  me  not,  till  day  is  done, 

I've  gathered  handfuls  one  by  one  ; 

Here  and  there  for  me  they  fall, 

Close  by  the  reapers  I've  found  them  all. 


NO   OTHER  NAME. 

One  offer  of  salvation, 

To  all  the  world  make  known  ; 

The  only  sure  foundation 
Is  Christ  the  Corner  Stone. 

CHORUS. — No  other  name  is  given, 

No  other  way  is  known, 
'Tis  Jesus  Christ,  the  First  and  Last, 
He  saves,  and  He  alone. 

One  only  door  of  heaven 

Stands  open  wide  to-day, 
One  sacrifice  is  given, 

'Tis  Christ,  the  living  way. 

My  only  song  and  story 

Is — Jesus  died  for  me ; 
My  only  hope  for  glory, 

The  Cross  of  Calvary.  - 


In  1876,  "  Gospel  Hymns  No.  2  "  made  its  appearance,  contain 
ing  the  following  of  Mr.  Bliss'  compositions  : 

IN  ZION'S  ROCK  ABIDING. 

In  Zion's  Rock  abiding, 

My  soul  her  triumph  sings  ; 
In  His  pavilion  hiding, 

I  praise  the  King  of  kings. 

CHORUS. — My  High  Tower  is  He  ! 
To  Him  will  I  flee ; 
In  Him  confide,  in  Him  abide ; 
My  High  Tower  is  He  I 


166  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

Wild  waves  are  round  me  swelling, 
Dark  clouds  above  I  see  ; 

Yet,  in  my  Fortress  dwelling, 
More  safe  I  cannot  be. 

My  Tower  of  strength  can  never 
In  time  of  trouble  fail ; 

No  power  of  hell,  forever, 
Against  it  shall  prevail. 


I'M  ON  THE  LORD'S  SIDE. 

We're  marching  to  Canaan  with  banner  and  song, 
We're  soldiers  enlisted  to  fight  'gainst  the  wrong  ; 
But,  lest  in  the  conflict  our  strength  should  divide, 
We  ask,  who  among  us  is  on  the  Lord's  side? 

CHORUS. — Oh,  who  is  there  among  us,  the  true  and  the  tried, 

Who'll  stand  by  his  colors — who's  on  the  Lord's  side  ? 
Oh,  who  is  there  among  us,  the  true  and  the  tried, 
Who'll  stand  by  his  colors — who's  on  the  Lord's  side  ? 

The  sword  may  be  burnished,  the  armor  be  bright, 
For  Satan  appears  as  an  angel  of  light ; 
Yet  darkly  the  bosom  may  treachery  hide, 
While  lips  are  professing,  "  I'm  on  the  Lord's  side." 

Who  is  there  among  us  yet  under  the  rod, 

Who  knows  not  the  pardoning  mercy  of  God  ? 

Oh,  bring  to  Him  humbly  the  heart  in  its  pride  ; 

Oh,  haste  while  He's  waiting  and  seek  the  Lord's  side. 

Oh,  heed  not  the  sorrow,  the  pain  and  the  wrong 
For  soon  shall  our  sighing  be  changed  into  song ; 
So,  bearing  the  cross  of  our  covenant  Guide, 
We'll  shout,  as  we  triumph,  "  I'm  on  the  Lord's  side." 


HALLELUJAH!   WHAT  A  SAVIOR  1 

"  Man  of  sorrow  "  what  a  name 
For  the  Son  of  God,  who  came 
Ruined  sinners  to  reclaim — 
Hallelujah !  what  a  Savior  1 


HALLELUJAH  !   WHAT  A   SAVIOR  !  167 

Bearing  shame  and  scoffing  rude, 
In  my  place  condemned  He  stood, 
Sealing  my  pardon  with  His  blood — 
Hallelujah !  what  a  Savior ! 

Guilty,  vile  and  helpless  we  ; 
Spotless  Lamb  of  God  was  He, 
"  Full  atonement  " — can  it  be  ? 
Hallelujah,  what  a  Savior  I 

Lifted  up  was  He  to  die, 
"  It  is  finished  "  was  His  cry, 
Now  in  heaven  exalted  high. 
Hallelujah,  what  a  Savior ! 


CHAPTER  XVII 


8ONG  INCIDENTS — LETTER  FROM  IRA  D.  SANKEY — THE  INFLUENCE  OF  MR. 
BLISS*  SONGS  FOR  GOOD — GOSPEL  HYMNS  IN  CHINA  AND  JAPAN — LETTERS 
FROM  MISSIONARIES — LETTER  FROM  REV.  ARTHUR  T.  PIERSON — ILLUS 
TRATIONS  OF  THE  POWER  OF  SONG. 

THE  following  letter  from  Mr.  Bliss'  friend  and  co-worker,  Mr. 
Sankey,  will  be  read  with  peculiar  interest  at  this  time  : 

It  was  in  the  autumn  of  1870  that  I  for  the  first  time  met  P.  P.  Bliss.  I  had 
just  arrived  in  Chicago  to  join  Mr.  Moody  in  his  work  in  that  city,  and  had 
gone  with  him  to  attend  the  noon-day  prayer  meeting  in  Lower  Farwell  Hall. 
Mr.  Bliss  was  leading  the  singing,  and  at  the  close  of  the  meeting  Mr.  Moody 
demanded  of  us  a  song.  Seating  himself  at  the  piano  which  was  in  the  room, 
we  sang  from  "  Hallowed  Songs : " 

Oh,  think  of  the  home  over  there, 

By  the  side  of  the  Kiver  of  Light, 
Where  the  saints,  all  immortal  and  fair, 

Are  robed  in  their  garments  of  white, 
Over  there,  over  there. 

This  was  our  first  song  together,  and  the  last  one  we  sang,  a  few  days  before 
he  passed  "  Over  There,"  was  "  Hallelujah !  what  a  Savior  ! "  It  was  my  pleas 
ure  to  have  met  Mr.  Bliss  very  often  afterward,  in  the  Saturday  noon  meetings, 
for  the  study  of  the  International  Sunday  School  Lessons.  In  these  meetings, 
as  well  as  in  the  usual  daily  prayer  meetings,  he  was  always  a  blessing  and  an 
inspiration. 

During  the  time  I  was  in  Chicago,  prior  to  our  going  to  England,  I  became 
familiar  with  many  of  Mr.  Bliss'  songs,  and  they  struck  me  as  being  specially 
adapted  for  reaching  the  masses,  and,  that  I  might  have  them  in  convenient 
shape  for  use  in  evangelistic  work,  I  gathered  a  number  of  them  from  his 
"  Charm  "  and  "  Sunshine,"  and,  with  other  sacred  songs,  arranged  them  into 
a  "  Musical  Scrap  Book,"  which,  with  my  Bible,  was  the  only  book  I  took  with 
me  across  the  sea. 

It  was  while  singing  from  this  scrap  book,  ' '  Jesus  of  Nazareth  Passeth 
By,"  "  Come  Home,  Prodigal  Child,"  and  Mr.  Bliss'  "  Hold  the  Fort,"  "  Jesua 
Loves  Me,"  and  "  Free  from  the  Law,"  in  the  old  Cathedral  city  of  York,  and 


THE  LNTLTJESTCE   OF  BLISS5   SOKGS   FOR   GOOD.  169 

in  Sunderland,  England,  that  we  began  to  fully  realize  the  wonderful  power 
there  was  in  these  Gospel  songs.  The  demand  for  them  soon  became  so  great 
that  we  were  compelled  to  have  them  published  in  a  cheap  form,  which  we  did, 
under  the  title  of  "  Sacred  Songs  and  Solos."  This  collection  contained  a 
number  of  Mr.  Bliss'  best  songs,  which,  together  with  a  companion  book  of 
"  Words  Only"  (the  latter  being  sold  fora  penny)  is  believed  to  have  attained  a 
larger  circulation  than  any  collection  of  hymns  and  tunes  ever  published. 

The  first  of  Mr.  Bliss'  hymns  that  became  popular  in  Great  Britain  was 
"  Jesus  Loves  Even  Me,"  and,  more  than  any  other  hymn,  it  became  the  key 
note  of  our  meetings  there.  The  next  song  which  became  immensely  popular 
was  "  Hold  the  Fort,"  and  it  is  to-day,  perhaps,  the  most  popular  sacred  song 
in  England  or  America. 

I  should  think  Mr.  Bliss'  "  Almost  Persuaded"  has  won  more  souls  to  the 
Savior  than  any  other  hymn  written  by  him. 

It  has  been  no  unusual  thing,  in  our  special  meetings  for  young  converts, 
to  have  them  testify  that  it  was  the  singing  of  "  Almost  Persuaded,"  or  "  What 
shall  the  Harvest  Be  ? "  that  led  them  to  decide  for  Christ.  During  the  last 
year,  the  hymn  "  Waiting  and  Watching  "  has  been  specially  blessed,  and  we 
believe  that  through  the  singing  of  this  little  hymn,  thousands  have  been  led 
to  desire  to  live  a  better  and  a  holier  life.  This  song,  with  many  of  his  new 
ones,  will  ever  have  a  deeper  and  a  tenderer  meaning  to  us,  now  that  he  has 
entered  within  the  gates  into  the  city  of  the  great  King,  where  he  may  be 
"  Waiting  and  Watching"  for  us  ;  and  with  what  new  joy  and  rejoicing  shall 
we  now  sing  his  sweet  words  : 

Many  loved  ones  have  I  in  yon  heavenly  throng  ; 
They  are  safe  now  in  glory,  and  this  is  their  song  : 
Hallelujah  !  'tis  done  !  1  believe  on  the  Son  ; 

I  am  saved  by  the  blood  of  the  crucified  One." 

* 

"  He  was  not,  for  God  took  him."    Gen.  v,  24. 

IRA  D.  SANKEY. 
BOSTON,  Feb.  1877. 

The  following  letters  from  Japan  and  China  are  given  in  full  to 
show  the  far-reaching  influence  of  the  Gospel  Hymns  and  the  sym 
pathy  of  Mr.  Bliss  in  work  for  Christ  all  over  the  earth.  He  loved 
and  prayed  for  all  who  named  the  name  of  Christ,  and  especially 
prayed  for  those  engaged  in  missionary  labor  in  foreign  lands.  The 
writer  of  these  letters  he  became  interested  in  through  his  wife, 
who  was  a  cousin  of  Mrs.  True.  She  had  accompanied  her  hus 
band,  who  was  a  missionary  in  Japan,  and  after  his  death  remained 
in  that  country  with  her  little  girl,  to  carry  on  the  work  of  winning 
souls  for  Christ.  The  letter  of  October  llth  Mr.  Bliss  received  at 
Jackson,  Michigan,  in  the  latter  part  of  November.  He  read  it 
over  to  me,  with  his  heart  full  of  sympathy  for  the  lonely  one  in 


170  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

the  Lord's  work  in  the  far  off  land,  and  with  much  emotion  said  : 
"  Whittle,  we  should  be  ashamed  of  ourselves  if  we  ever  speak  of 
sacrificing  anything  in  being  in  the  work  as  we  are,  compared  with 
such  devotion."  Very  fervent  and  tender  was  the  prayer  that  fol 
lowed  for  this  sister  and  for  all  missionary  laborers.  The  same  day 
he  ordered  a  hundred  books  forwarded  by  his  publishers  to  Japan. 
The  happy  letter  of  January  1st  he,  of  course,  never  saw.  Two 
days  before  it  was  written  he  had  passed  into  the  presence  of  the 
King  to  receive  the  "  well  done "  of  the  Master,  in  answer  to  the 
prayers  in  the  far  away  mission  home  in  Japan,  and  from  many  and 
many  another  home  and  heart  made  glad  by  his  Christian  sympathy 
and  Christian  song.  May  many  a  Christian  who  reads  these  letters 
be  stimulated  to  remember  in  prayer  this  dear  sister  in  Christ,  for 
whom  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  prayed,  and  the  cause  of  Christ  in  Japan, 
and  all  over  the  earth.  These  dear  servants  of  Jesus  who  have 
gone  out  from  us  are  our  brethren  in  the  Lord.  Let  us  bear  them 
often  before  the  Throne.  Let  us  have  a  place  in  our  hearts  for 
them  always,  for  "  their  work's  sake,"  and  let  us  encourage  them  by 
our  sympathy  and  by  our  aid  in  every  way  we  can,  for  Jesus'  sa*ke. 

"  There  is  one  body,  and  one  spirit,  even  as  ye  are  called  in  one  hope  of 
your  calling ;  One  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism,  One*  God  and  Father  of  all, 
who  is  above  all,  and  through  all,  and  in  you  all."  Eph.  iv,  4-6. 

It  was  clear  to  Mr.  Bliss,  from  the  Scriptures,  that  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  was  delayed  by  the  lukewarmness  of  the  Church  in 
spreading  the  Gospel,  and  may  his  frequent  and  oft-repeated 
prayer  be  speedily  answered,  that  the-  baptism  of  the  Spirit  may 
come  upon  the  Church,  that  she  may  complete  the  number  of  such 
as  shall  be  saved,  and  the  Lord  may  return. 

TOKIO,  JAPAN,  October  11,  1876. 
PROF.  P.  P.  BLISS: 

DEAR  BROTHER, — Your  kind  note  of  July  8th  lies  before  me.  I  had  it  in 
my  heart  to  reply  by  the  first  mail  after  its  reception,  but  an  unusual  pressure 
of  care  and  labor,  incident  to  a  change  of  residence  and  work,  made  it  impossible. 

You  know  somewhat  of  our  work  in  Yokohama,  by  way  of  Sister  Sarah,  I 
presume.  Perhaps  you  will  not  take  less  interest  in  my  present  field  of  labor. 
Last  August,  I  was  applied  to,  by  a  Japanese  Christian,  to  take  charge  of  a 
school  for  girls,  in  one  of  the  principal  streets  of  this  immense  city.  He  pro 
posed  to  furnish  the  building  and  be  responsible  for  all  of  the  expenses  of  the 
school  except  the  salary  of  myself  and  assistant. 


LETTER  FROM   JAPAN.  171 

The  fact  that  such  an  opening  occurred  in  the  native  city,  where  all  of  the 
missionaries  wished  to  go,  but  were  not  able,  because  of  government  restrictions, 
made  it  seem  to  me,  and  to  all  with  whom  I  spoke  of  the  matter,  sufficiently 
important  to  warrant  me  in  leaving  the  work  in  which  1  had  been  engaged  to 
occupy  a  field  so  hopeful.  Now  I  am  here  in  the  midst  of  heathendom  with 
my  little  girl,  and  no  other  person  in  the  house  except  natives.  The  school  is 
opening  well,  I  think,  and  I  hope  to  be  used  of  God  in  preparing  many  of  these 
dear  girls  for  usefulness  in  this  land,  where  Satan  has  so  long  reigned.  I  do 
indeed  find  that,  were  it  not  for  the  very  precious  promises  of  God,  my  lot 
would  be  one  of  special  trial.  I  am  not  alone,  but  even  the  presence  of  a 
Heavenly  Friend  does  not  still  the  heart-cries  for  earthly  love  and  sympathy. 

The  harvest  is  great  and  the  laborers  few ;  so  I  will  not  be  impatient,  but 
when  the  Master  has  finished  the  plan  for  me  here,  I  shall  be  glad,  I  think, 
to  join  my  dear  one  on  the  other  shore.  I  hope  you  will  not  understand  me 
to  complain  of  my  lot.  Far  from  it.  I  know  that  I  am  entirely  unworthy  of 
this  blessed  work  ;  my  heart  will  sometimes  ask  why  my  dear  husband,  who 
was  so  much  better  fitted  for  it,  and  who  so  wished  to  engage  in  it,  was  taken 
home,  and  I  sent  alone.  God  does  not  make  mistakes. 

You  very  kindly  offer  to  furnish  some  singing  books  for  our  use.  I  am 
very  glad  to  accept,  as  we  teach  English  (that  is  the  attraction  to  bring  in- 
pupils),  and  singing  is  a  very  important  help.  I  have  one  copy  of  Gospel 
Hymns  and  Sacred  Songs,  and  we  have  already  learned  a  few  pieces,  but,  of 
course,  find  it.  very  difficult  to  do  so  without  books. 

I  do  not  wish  to  make  too  large  a  request,  but  if  you  can  send  fifty  copies, 
I  will  sell  as  many  as  I  can  to  the  girls,  and  pay  you  for  as  many  as  you  wish, 
or  use  the  money  for  other  mission  purposes.  You  see  I  take  you  at  your 
word,  and  believe  in  accepting  all  the  aid  offered  us  by  Christian  friends. 

I  wish  I  could  tell  you  how  much  we  need  your  prayers.  I  can  not,  but  I 
pray  God  to  teach  all  Christians  at  home  to  pray  as  never  before  for  this  land 
in  this  time  of  special  interest  in  her  history. 

With  the  prayer  that  God  will  make  you  the  instrument  for  leading  many 
more  souls  into  the  Kingdom,  I  am  your  sister  in  Christ, 

MARIA  T.  TRUE. 
No.  12  GINZA  SANCHOME,  TOKIO,  JAPAN. 

I  meant  to  have  said  if  you  prefer  to  send  any  other  book,  do  so,  of  course. 
I  spoke  of  that  because  I  have  enjoyed  the  music  much. 


No.  12  GINZA  SANCHOME,  TOKIO,  Jan.  1st,  1877. 
PROP.  P.  P.  BLISS  : 

DEAR  BROTHER, — Surely  it  is  a  pleasant  thing  to  be  able  to  begin  this  new 
year  by  writing  a  letter  of  thanks. 

We  had  our  Christmas  festivities  on  the  26th,  as  we  could  not  prepare  in 
one  day,  and  our  school-rooms  are  also  our  church,  and  so  we  did  not  wish  to 
decorate  on  Saturday.  There  were  more  than  three  hundred  persons  present, 


172  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

and  nearly  all  were  Japanese.     For  this  I  was  very  thankful,  as  it  furnished 
the  opportunity  to  tell  many  for  the  first  time  of  our  Savior's  wondrous  love. 

I  retired  exceedingly  weary,  but  glad  in  heart,  because  I  believed  the  Mas 
ter  was  pleased  with  our  efforts  to  spread  the  news  of  His  love.  Before  I  arose 
next  morning,  a  servant  announced  at  my  door,  "Americano  yubin"  (Ameri 
can  mail)  1  He  knew  full  well  that,  notwithstanding  my  fatigue,  I  would  wish 
to  know  at  once  the  glad  tidings.  I  hastened  to  see  what  was  in  store  for  me 
and  to  my  surprise  and^'oy,  there  were  the  "  hymn  books."  I  cannot  tell  you 
how  glad  I  was,  but  I  told  our  Father,  and  I  am  sure  He  will  return  a  hundred 
fold.  At  morning  worship  we  had  a  thanksgiving  service,  and  afterward  the 
girls  and  I  had  a  "  sing."  I  wish  you  could  have  seen  their  happy  faces,  as 
they  saw  the  nice  new  books,  and  turned  at  once  to  find  "  Whosoever  Will." 
They  had  learned  that  from  my  one  copy,  and  sang  it  the  evening  before.  But 
there  were  so  many !  What  was  intended?  There  was  no  letter  to  explain, 
and  I  could  not  wait  a  whole  month  to  know,  and  so  I  just  said  we  will  share 
our  joy  with  the  other  three  schools  in  our  mission.  I  gave  a  part  to  Miss 
Youngman,  who  has  a  girls'  school,  and  some  to  Mr.  Ballagh,  who  has  a  boys' 
school  in  Yokohama,  and  sent  some  to  Miss  Marsh  for  her  school,  also  in  Yoko 
hama.  That  leaves  a  nice  supply  for  us,  and  we  sing  and  sing  until  we  are 
hoarse  !  I  hope  I  have  not  done  wrong  with  them.  The  others  were  delighted, 
and  you  may  be  sure  that  your  name  and  songs  will  be  well  known  in  our 
mission  in  Japan  at  least. 

I  wonder  whether  you  would  not  be  interested  in  a  sketch  prepared  by  one 
of  the  girls  in  my  school  for  our  Christmas  entertainment.  I  have  a  class  of 
three,  in  English  composition,  and  a  few  days  before  Christmas  I  told  them 
that  for  their  own  profit  and  the  pleasure  of  their  friends,  I  wished  them  to 
prepare  something  on  the  life  of  Daniel.  There  is  no  translation  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  they  must  do  it  from  what  they  could  get  from  their  English 
Bibles  without  help,  and  read  without  correction.  I  think  I  will  send  you  one 
of  them ;  not  because  it  is  so  good,  but  to  show  you  a  little  the  ability,  and 
turn  of  mind  of  a  girl  fifteen  years  old. 

This  is,  as  you  see,  "New  Year's,"  and  the  custom  of  calling  prevails  even 
in  Japan.  I  have  written  in  odd  minutes  between  calls. 

With  many  thanks,  and  ready  to  refund  whatever  part  of  price  you  say 
and  with  love  to  Mrs.  B.,  I  am  yours  truly, 

M.  T.  TRUE. 


Mrs.  True  sends  the  sketch  spoken  of,  which  we  omit  here,  as 
foreign  to  the  purpose  of  this  work.  She  adds  a  postscript,  con 
cluding  as  follows  : 

I  will  send  by  this  mail  a  Japanese  hymn  book.  If  you  have  not  seen  one, 
you  may  be  interested  in  it.  There  is  great  difficulty  in  getting  hymns  to  fit 
any  meter  which  pleases  the  Japanese  ear.  I  wish  we  had  some  musicians  to 
compose  music  according  to  their  ideas — that  is,  in  a  meter  which  they  like— 


LETTER   FKOM   CHIKA.  173 

and  we  could  get  translations  to  fit,  I  think  music  is  such  a  power  here  as 
everywhere. 


The  following  letter  from  a  missionary  lady  in  China  testifies  to 
the  appreciation  there  of  Mr.  Bliss'  hymns  : 

SOOCHOW,  CHINA,  Dec.  11, 1876. 
MB.  P.  P.  BLISS: 

DEAR  SIR, — I  am  sure  from  the  spirit  of  your  songs — which  many  of  us  in 
this  far  land  love  to  sing — that  you  are  interested  in  all  missionary  operations 
and  will  be  interested  in  hearing  that  some  of  your  hymns  are  being  given  to 
this  people.  I  know  a  number  of  the  missionaries  have  translated  your  hymns 
into  Chinese,  and,  as  they  are  favorites  with  me,  I  translate  them  oftener  than 
those  of  any  other  writer,  to  use  in  a  little  paper  I  edit,  called  the  Glad  Tidings . 
Messenger.  Thinking  you  may  like  to  see  one  of  your  songs  in  Chinese,  I 
send  you  my  last  little  paper,  in  which  you  can  perhaps  recognize,  "  Blessed 
are  They  that  Do,"  though  I  changed  it  somewhat  for  convenience  in  rhythm. 

May  God  use  your  service  of  song,  and  bless  you  richly  in  all  its  effects. 

Yours  truly, 

MRS.  GKO.  F.  FITCH. 


A  St.  Louis  friend  writes  : 

ST.  Louis,  MISSOURI,  February  5,  1877. 
MAJOR  D.  W.  WHITTLE  : 

On  one  of  those  Sunday  afternoons  when  a  Gospel  meeting  was  being  held 
by  yourself  and  Mr.  Bliss,  in  the  skating  rink,  there  came  as  fearful  a  storm  of 
wind  and  rain  as  I  ever  witnessed.  The  old  timbers  quivered  ominously. 
You  were  speaking,  but  the  noise  was  so  great  as  to  cause  you  to  stop.  The 
storm  continuing,  plain  symptoms  of  alarm  were  becoming  visible  in  the  audi 
ence.  Mr.  Bliss,  noticing  this;  by  an  inspiration  from  God,  struck  up  a  verse 
of  the  grand  old  hymn,  "  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  Way."  The  storm  was  at 
its  fiercest.  Just  as  he  sang  the  words,  "  He  rides  upon  the  storm,"  there  was 
an  instantaneous  cessation  of  the  storm  ;  a  little  break  occurred  in  the  cloud, 
and  a  bright  ray  of  brilliant  light  flashed  directly  and  fully  for  a  moment  upon 
his  face.  Mrs.  B.  had  been  uneasy,  and  asked  me — I  was  right  at  her  side — 
if  there  was  any  danger.  I  reassured  her,  and  when  the  incident  occurred, 
she  looked  at  me  with  one  of  the  pleasantest  and  sweetest  smiles  and  nodded 
her  head  ;  her  look  and  manner  being  as  much  as  to  say,  all  is  perfectly  safe, 
for  He  who  rides  upon  the  storm  has  sent  the  brightness  of  His  sunshine  upon 
us  at  this  moment,  as  He  sent  the  rainbow. 

W.  H.  W. 

Eev.  Arthur  T.  Pierson,  of  Detroit,  speaks  from  the  fullness  of 
his  heart  respecting  the  dead  singer  : 


174:  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BUSS, 

DETROIT,  February  13, 1877. 
MY  DEAR  BROTHER  WHITTLE: 

I  have  but  a  few  moments  in  which  to  give  you  my  estimate  of  our  dear 
departed  Brother  Bliss.  You  know  what  rare  opportunity  that  four  weeks' 
stay  at  my  house  afforded  me  for  knowing  you  both.  When  I  think  of  him,  I 
think  of  Anointed  Song.  You  remember  when,  to  fit  your  sermon,  1  wrote 
those  words,  "  With  harps  and  with  viols,"  that  he  went  away  to  his  room  for 
a  season  of  prayer,  before  he  was  willing  to  attempt  to  compose  the  music  for 
those  verses.  Is  it  any  marvel  that  dear  Bliss'  songs  have  been  made  so  con 
spicuously  the  channels  for  the  conveyance  of  spiritual  impressions,  when  we 
know  that  not  only  the  words,  but  the  music,  too,  are  "sanctified  by  the  word 
of  God  and  prayer  ?  "  Has  not  Mr.  Bliss  been  God's  instrument,  in  these  days  of 
perverted  church  music  and  operatic  quartettes,  to  teach  us  how  the  Gospel  may 
be  sung,  as  well  as  preached  ? 

He  was  well  named  "  Bliss."  What  a  happy  man  he  was  !  What  a  ray 
of  sunshine,  what  a  spring  of  joy  in  the  household  !  My  children  will  never 
forget  him  ;  and  will  always  think  of  him  as  an  illustration  of  the  blessed 
peace  and  radiant  cheerfulness  of  a  Christian  life.  Ah,  dear  Whittle,  what 
Cowper  calls  that  "  poor,  lisping,  stammering  tongue  "  lies  silent  now,  but  "  in 
a  nobler,  sweeter  song,"  he  sings  the  power  of  Christ  to  save. 

Affectionately   thine, 

ARTHUR  T.  PIERSON. 


Extract  from  a  letter  dated 

MOBILE,  ALABAMA,  February  6, 1877. 

The  night  of  that  fearful  disaster  we  were  holding  a  church  sociable  at  our 
house.  It  was  bitter  cold,  but  a  good  many  had  assembled,  and  near  the  close 
of  the  evening  my  brother  sat  down  to  the  piano  and  with  a  group  of  voices 
commenced  singing  some  of  those  now  household  hymns  of  the  Bliss  and  San- 
key  collection — among  others,  "  We're  going  Home  To-morrow."  How  little 
we  thought  then  of  the  terrible  tragedy  that  was  being  enacted  in  another  part 
of  our  land,  and  was  even  then  taking  home  the  two  who  first  sang  it  to  us 
here  in  Mobile,  and  in  the  singing  led  so  many  to  long  for  the  home  beyond. 
To  me  it  will  ever  be  sacred  to  their  memory. 

How  vividly  are  the  incidents  of  his  short  stay  here  with  us  recalled.  Our 
acquaintance  makes  us  feel  a  part  ownership  in  him  as  a  friend  ;  and  is  he  not 
the  dear  noble  brother  of  us  all  who  name  the  name  of  Christ  ? 

The  church  has  lost  in  him  and  his  dear  wife  two  members  of  its  very  own 
family  circle.  Eternity  alone  can  tell  the  deep  impression  made  upon  all  by 
his  song  sermons  in  the  pulpit,  where  his  beautiful  voice  told  so  pleadingly  the 
"  old,  old  story  "  to  poor  dying  sinners,  or  spoke  the  praises  of  his  God  in  halle 
lujahs  for  the  finished  work  of  the  Son.  A  chord  of  universal  sympathy  has 
been  touched  in  our  city,  and  we  would  fain  join  our  voices  with  those  of  his 
many  friends  everywhere,  in  chanting  his  last  sad  requiem.  May  we  be  as 
ready  when  our  summons  comes.  H.  H.  D. 


INCIDENTS.  175 

APPLETON,  Wis.,  March  6,  1877. 

In  the  spring  of  1875,  it  was  my  privilege  to  hear  the  vocalist,  Mr.  P.  P. 
BlisS,  in  Chicago.  With  the  earnest  preaching  and  exhortation  of  Mr.  Whittle, 
some  of  the  sweet  melodies  of  Mr.  Bliss  were  intermingled.  Never  before 
did  I  so  understand  the  .power  of  sacred  song  to  touch  the  heart,  leading  Chris 
tians  to  clasp  closer  and  closer  their  birthright,  and  calling  the  wanderer  home. 
It  was  a  mixed  multitude  that  evening,  of  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor.  Near 
me  sat  a  group  of  young  men,  looking  torn  and  "  bruised  by  the  fall."  As  Mr. 
Bliss  sang  the  appeal  embodied  in  the  song,  "Oh,  brother,  believe  it,  Chrisl 
has  redeemed  us  once  for  all,"  I  observed  tears  coursing  down  those  hard 
cheeks.  The  wanderers  were  touched, — perhaps  saved. 

Eternity  alone  can  estimate  the  value  of  these  consecrated  gifts  of  song, 
and  the  part  they  bear  in  the  rescue  of  fallen  humanity.  Humanly  speaking, 
great  multitudes  have  heard  and  obeyed  the  call  sent  to  them,  through  the 
"  Gospel  Hymns  "  of  our  departed  friend.  His  voice  will  be  heard  on  earth 
no  more,  but  his  work  still  lives.  And  he  lives.  Ashtabula  was  but  the  dark 
river,  or  the  "  chariot  of  fire"  to  bear  him  away  to  the  home  of  which  he  had 
so  often  sung.  It  was  the  new  life,  and  the  "new  song"  begun;  'twas  Im 
mortality.  L.  A.  B. 


One  Sunday  a  man  came  into  the  Sunday  School  at  the  Boston 
North  End  Mission,  drawn  by  the  sweetness  of  the  children's  sing 
ing.  He  remained  until  the  close,  and  came  again  that  evening  to 
the  prayer-meeting.  When  the  customary  invitation  to  seek  the 
Savior  was  given,  he  came  forward  and  found  "  peace  in  believing." 
To  a  few  who  had  remained  to  pray  with  the  penitent  seekers  he 
said,  "  My  friends,  I  feel  that  I'm  a  saved  man,  and  /  owe  it  to 
your  children's  singing  'Jesus  loves  me,'  this  afternoon.  I  couldn't 
realize  it,  I've  been  such  a  miserable  sinner  ;  but  after  I  went  away 
I  thought  it  over,  'Jesus  loves  me;'  and  then  I  thought  of  the 
next  line,  *  For  the  Bible  tells  me  so,'  and  I  tried  to  believe  it,  and 
I  came  here  this  evening  to  get  you  to  pray  for  me."  He  became  a 
regular  attendant  at  the  Mission,  and  gave  the  clearest  evidence  of 
a  genuine  change  of  heart. 


At  one  of  the  revival  meetings  at  Edinburgh  a  gay,  giddy  girl 
attended.  She  went  late  and  was  unable  to  get  a  seat,  so  she  wan 
dered  about  in  the  hall  outside.  Inside  the  church  they  were  sing 
ing,  led  by  Mr.  Sankey, — 


176  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Oh,  I  am  so  glad 
That  Jesus  loves  me, 
Jesus  loves  me, 
Jesus  loves  me. 

The  words  went  to  her  heart  and  her  conscience,  and  she  said,  "  I 
cannot  sing  that."  When  that  meeting  broke  up  she  went  to  the 
meeting  for  anxious  inquirers,  and  is  now  a  rejoicing  Christian. 


A  missionary  of  the  American  Sunday  School  Union  in  Mis 
souri,  after  he  had  organized  a  Sunday  School  recently,  sang  to 
them  Mr.  Bliss'  delightful  song, — 

I  am  so  glad  that  Jesus  loves  me, 

and  followed  it  with  the  question,  "  Are  you  glad  ?  If  not,  why  ?  " 
He  had  hardly  finished  when  a  young  man  rose,  and  rushing  up  to 
him,  threw  his  arms  around  his  neck,  sobbing,  "  Oh,  sir,  you  must 
not  leave  here  till  I'm  a  Christian  ! "  Prayer  was  offered  for  him, 
antl  he  was  saved.  Then  he  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  that  song  !  I  could 
not  get  away  from  it  and  it  has  saved  me." 


A  young  woman  in  England  went  to  a  meeting  where  she  heard 
Mr.  Sankey  singing  this  same  hymn, — 

I  am  so  glad  that  Jesus  loves  me, 

and  while  the  hymn  was  being  sung,  began  to  feel  for  the  first  time 
in  her  life  that  she  was  a  sinner.  All  her  sins  came  up  in  array 
before  her  ;  and  so  numerous  and  aggravated  did  her  sins  appear, 
that  she  imagined  she  never  could  be  saved.  She  said  in  her  heart, 
"Jesus  cannot  love  me.  He  could  not  love  such  a  sinner  as  I." 
She  went  home  in  a  state  of  extreme  mental  anguish,  and  did  not 
sleep  that  night.  Every  opportunity  of  obtaining  more  light  was 
eagerly  seized.  She  took  her  place  in  the  "  Inquiry  Koom."  There 
she  found  to  her  astonishment  and  joy  that  Jesus  could,  DID,  DOES 
love  sinners.  She  saw  in  God's  opened  Word  that  it  was  for  sin 
ners  Jesus  died,  and  for  none  others.  When  she  realized  this  she 
too  began  to  sing  : 

I  am  so  glad  that  Jesus  loves  me, 

Jesus  loves  me,  Jesus  loves  me,  even  me. 


THE  POWER  OF   SONG.  ]  77 

Iii  a  praise  meeting,  during  the  revival  services -in  Chicago,  Mr. 
Sankey  spoke  as  follows  in  regard  to  the  power  of  this  and  other 
hymns  : 

What  I  have  to  thank  God  especially  for  is  tlie  wonderful  way  He  has  used 
the  power  of  song.  I  remember  about  five  years  ago  coming  to  yonder  depot 
one  morning  early.  It  was  my  first  visit  to  this  great  city,  and  I  knew  none 
here  save  one  man.  I  went  along  Madison  street,  up  State  street,  to  the  North 
Side,  and  met  my  dear  brother  Moody.  I  had  met  him  one  year  before  in  a 
distant  State,  while  he  was  engaged  in  the  work  of  the  Master.  As  I  went 
along  those  streets,  I  recollect  how  I  wondered  if  God  had  a  work  here  for  me 
in  my  coming  to  this  city,  or  whether  I  had  come  on  my  own  volition,  and  how 
while  thinking  in  this  way  I  sent  up  a  prayer  to  God  to  bless  me  in  the  service 
in  which  I  was  about  to  engage.  With  thankfulness  I  remember  the  very  first 
day  I  spent  in  this  city.  Somewhere  down  here  we  came  among  the  sick  and 
lowly,  and  went  from  one  house  to  another  singing  and  praying  with  the  peo 
ple  ;  and  what  a  blessing  we  received! 

God  led  us  into  other  fields.  I  remember  when  the  Tabernacle  was  rebuilt 
how  I  used  to  enjoy  gathering  the  little  people  in,  and  teaching  them  those 
sweet  songs  that  are  already  encircling  the  globe.  Yes,  encircling  the  globe, 
for  but  a  few  days  ago  I  received  a  copy  of  these  Gospel  Hymns  printed  in  the 
Chinese  language.  They  are  sung  in  Africa  and  Asia,  and  are  heard  in  France 
and  Germany,  England  and  America.  I  remember  what  peace  and  pleasure  I 
had  as  1  first  taught  these  little  hymns  on  the  North  Side.  One  day  a  lady 
called  on  me  when  I  first  had  those  classes,  and  said,  "  There  is  a  little  singing 
girl  belonging  to  one  of  your  classes  who  is  dying.  She  wants  you  to  go  and 
see  her."  1  went  to  her  home — a  little  frame  cottage — and  there  I  found  a  lit 
tle  maid  dying — one  whom  I  had  known  so  well  in  the  Thursday  evening 
meetings.  I  said,  "My  dear  child,  how  is  it  with  you  ?  "  "  Will  you  pray  for 
my  father  and  mother  as  you  pray  for  us  ?  "  was  the  reply.  "  But  how  is  it 
with  yourself  ?  "  I  again  asked.  "  Oh,  sir,"  she  answered,  "  they  tell  me  I  am 
about  to  die,  but  I  have  found  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "  When  did  you 
become  a  Christian  ?  "  I  inquired.  "  Don't  you  remember  one  Thursday  when 
you  were  teaching  me  to  sing — 

I  am  so  glad  that  Jesus  loves  me, 
Jesus  loves  me,  Jesus  loves  me  ; 

and  don't  you  remember  how  you  told  us  that  if  we  only  gave  our  hearts  to 
Him,  He  would  love  us  ?— and  I  gave  it  to  Him." 

What  that  little  dying  girl  said  to  me  helped  to  cheer  me  on  more  than 
anything  I  had  heard  before,  because  she  was  my  first  convert.  Thank  God, 
there  have  been  many  since. 


During  a  Western   Sunday  School   Convention,  there  arose  a 
cry  of  dissatisfaction,  "A  ring!"  "A  ring!"    The  strange  and 
12 


178  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

false  charge  was  made  that  the  managers  were  conducting  the  con 
vention  according  to  some  recent  scheme.  Quite  a  discordant 
excitement  ensued,  during  which  a  distinguished  singer  who  was 
present,  was  called  on  to  sing.  He  sang, — 

All  this  I  did  for  thee, 
My  precious  blood  I  shed 
That  thou  mightst  ransomed  be, 
And  rescued  from  the  dead  ; 
All  this  I  did  for  thee— 
What  hast  thou  done  for  me  ? 

Through  the  song  Christ  seemed  to  whisper  to  the  discordant 
convention,  "  Peace,  be  still/'  and  when  the  song  had  ceased,  a 
calm,  Christ-like  spirit  had  filled  the  convention  and  continued 
with  it  to  the  end. 


A  gentleman  in  Edinburgh  was  in  distress  of  soul,  and  hap 
pened  to  linger  in  a  pew  after  the  noon  meeting.  The  choir  had 
remained  to  practice,  and  began 

Free  from  the  law,  oh,  happy  condition,  etc. 

Quickly  the  Spirit  of  God  carried  that  truth  home  to  the  awakened 
conscience,  and  he  was  at  rest  in  the  finished  work  of  Jesus. 


Mr.  Sankey  was  with  Mr.  Moody  in  Philadelphia,  years  since, 
during  the  progress  of  a  very  interesting  meeting  at  Dr.  Reed's 
church,  when  many  were  being  awakened,  and  sang  the  beautiful 
Gospel  hymn,  "Almost  Persuaded."  After  the  close  of  the  meet 
ing,  an  attorney,  who  had  been  very  much  interested,  came  forward 
and  said  that  he  was  not  only  "almost"  but  "altogether  per 
suaded  "  to  put  his  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  This  sweet  song  wai 
used  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  carrying  the  blessed  Gospel  of  God's  Son 
to  his  heart. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


MR.  BLISS'  HYMNS  IN  ENGLAND  —  LETTER  PROM  REV.  HENRY  BURTON  —  A 
LIFE  CHANGED  BY  A  HYMN  —  SINGING  AT  NASHVILLE,  TENNESSEE  —  LET 
TERS  FROM  MINISTERS,  SINGERS  AND  CONVERTS. 


following  letter  from  Eev.  Henry  Burton  bears  testimony 
-1-    to  the  influence  of  Mr.  Bliss'  hymns    upon  the   people  of 
England. 

15  APSLEY  CRESCENT,  BRADFORD,  Eng.  Feb.  19,  1877. 
MY  DEAR  BROTHER: 

I  am  much  obliged  for  your  letter  received  yesterday,  with  its  deeply  inter 
esting  notices  of  our  beloved  friend.  His  death  has  been  quite  a  shock  to  us 
all  on  this  side  the  water,  for  though  not  personally  known  to  us,  his  name  has 
become  a  household  word  in  all  the  Christian  churches  of  Great  Britain. 
We  seemed  to  love  him  as  a  brother.  There  was  such  a  sweet  and  winning 
power  about  his  simple  songs  that  they  carried  us  captive  before  we  knew  it. 
No  one  can  estimate  the  influence  his  melodies  have  exerted  upon  the  spiritual 
life  of  England.  We  praise  God  for  His  precious  gift  of  song,  and  now  that 
He  has  called  our  dear  brother  up  to  the  hallelujahs  of  the  sky,  we  are  dumb 
because  He  has  done  it. 

I  had  a  letter  from  Brother  Bliss,  dated,  "  Kome,  Pa.,  25th  May,  1876."  It 
was  mainly  in  reference  to  the  hymns  I  sent  him,  but  there  is  one  sentence  in 
it  that  is  so  characteristic  of  the  humble  follower  of  Jesus,  I  will  transcribe 
it  for  you  : 

Thanks  for  your  complimentary  mention  of  the  songs  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  writing. 
You  need  not  call  them  mine.  If  there  is  any  good  in  any  of  them,  it  came  from  Him,  the 
Source  of  all  good.  To  Him  he  all  the  praise. 

As  to  the  hymns  I  sent,  you  are  quite  at  liberty  to  make  any  use  of  them 
you  may  see  fit. 

Praying  that  the  rich  blessings  of  the  All-Mighty,  the  All-  Loving  One  may 
rest  evermore  abundantly  upon  your  labors,  I  am 

Yours  in  Christian  Fellowship  and  Love, 

HENRY  BURTON. 

The  following,  from  an  unknown  writer,  is  clipped  from  the 
Youth's  Companion  : 


180  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

On  the  stage  at  one  of  the  Liverpool  theaters,  a  comic  singer  came  out 
before  the  footlights  to  sing.  Just  as  he  was  about  to  commence  his  waggish 
melody,  the  tune  of  a  sweet  Sunday  School  hymn,  learned  before,  came  sud 
denly  to  mind,  and  so  confused  him  that  he  completely  forgot  his  part.  Ee 
stood  a  moment  trying  to  recall  it,  and  then  retired,  covered  with  shame. 
The  manager,  enraged  at  his  failure,  and  still  more  enraged  at  his  apparently 
foolish  explanation,  paid  him  the  remainder  of  his  wages  and  ordered  him  at 
once  to  quit  his  service.  Out  of  employment,  he  wandered  about  the  city  like 
the  unclean  spirit,  seeking  rest  and  finding  none.  His  heart  was  full  of  curses, 
and  to  drown  his  mortification  he  drank  deep  and  desperately,  till  his  days  and 
nights  were  one  continual  debauch. 

In  the  meantime,  Mr.  Moody  and  Mr.  Sankey  began  their  meetings  in 
Liverpool.  The  fame  of  the  evangelists  was  in  every  mouth,  and  the  young 
actor,  hearing  them  discussed  and  ridiculed  among  his  low  associates,  con 
ceived  the  idea  of  writing  a  burlesque  about  them,  to  be  put  upon  the  stage. 
He  sobered  himself  sufficiently  to  begin.  But  he  felt  he  could  not  make  his 
work  complete  without  more  "  points  "  or  "  hits  "  to  give  it  zest.  So  he  deter 
mined  to  attend  a  meeting  himself,  and  hear  the  men  whom  he  intended  to 
lampoon.  He  went,  and  the  same  power  that  in  the  sudden  memory  of  that 
early  hymn  had  driven  him  once  from  the  stage  arrested  him  and  held  him  a 
reverent  listener.  At  the  close  he  remained  among  the  penitent  inquirers,  and 
was  soon  led  to  accept  the  Lord  Jesus  as  his  Master.  The  young  man  is  now 
in  London,  preparing  himself  to  be  a  missionary. 

Often  a  remembered  hymn  will  keep  sacred  hold  of  a  wicked  heart  when 
nothing  else  can.  That  simple  Sunday  School  song,  to  the  poor  comedian,  was 
a  voice  come  back  from  his  by-gone  and  better  days.  In  spite  of  himself  it 
changed  his  fate,  and  led  the  way  to  the  still  better  days  beyond. 

Our  meetings  in  Nashville,  Tennessee,  were  advertised  to  com 
mence  April  15.  When  the  time  drew  near,  the  writer  was 
detained  in  Chicago  by  sickness  in  his  family,  and  Mr.  Bliss  started 
alone.  Before  starting,  application  was  made  by  telegraph  and 
letter  to  different  brethren  to  accompany  him  and  preach  at  the 
opening  services,  but  without  success.  Bliss  prayed  over  the  mat 
ter,  and  left  Chicago  very  happy  and  peaceful  in  mind,  saying, 
"Don't  you  worry  a  bit,  W.  The  Lord  has  some  one  to  be  with 
me,  I  know."  We  had  both  thought  of  telegraphing  Dr.  Brookes, 
of  St.  Louis,  to  go,  thinking  of  him  as  just  the  one  needed,  but 
deciding  that  it  would  be  of  no  use  to  send  to  him,  as  he  was  too 
busy  in  his  work  at  St.  Louis  to  go  so  far  from  home.  The  morn 
ing  after  leaving  Chicago,  before  the  train  reached  Louisville,  Bliss 
went  through  the  cars,  distributing  Scripture  texts.  As  he  entered 
the  St.  Louis  sleeping  car,  there  sat  Dr.  Brookes.  With  a  joyous 


SINGIKG   AT   NASHVILLE.  181 

greeting  Bliss  exclaimed,  "  This  is  the  answer  to  my  prayer.  You 
are  to  go  to  Nashville  to-night  with  me,  to  take  W.'s  place."  The 
Doctor  looked  rather  puzzled  at  his  assurance,  and  replied,  "I  am 
sorry  to  disappoint  you,  but  I  am  on  my  way  to  deliver  a  lecture  to 
the  students  at  Danville  College,  at  their  commencement  to-mor 
row  ;  and  as  I  can't  possibly  reach  Danville  in  time  by  going  on  to 
Nashville,  I  am  afraid  your  prayer  is  not  answered."  Bliss  said, 
"Well,  wait  until  we  get  to  Louisville  and  see.  I  am  sure  that 
you  are  going  to  Nashville  with  me."  On  their  arrival  at  Louis 
ville,  Dr.  Brookes  was  amazed  to  find  that  he  had  made  a  mistake 
of  seven  days  in  the  date  of  his  appointment,  and  that  his  lecture 
could  not  be  delivered  until  the  week  following.  He  went  on  with 
Bliss  and  Conducted  the  meetings  for  a  week.  The  evening  ser 
vices  were  held  in  the  Exposition  Building,  and  from  four  to  five 
thousand  people  gathered  nightly  to  hear  the  Gospel  preached  by 
Brookes  and  sung  by  Bliss,  and  very  blessed  results  were  secured. 
Bliss  has  told  me  that  the  first  evening  he  was  with  the  Doctor  at 
the  Exposition  service,  he  sang,  "When  Jesus  Comes."  He  was 
troubled  at  noticing  that  the  Doctor  leaned  forward  and  covered 
his  face  with  his  hands.  He  thought  something  in  the  hymn  must 
have  met  with  his  disapproval ;  but  before  he  closed  the  song  he 
saw  that  it  was  sympathy  with  the  song  and  emotions  in  glad 
accord  with  it,  that  possessed  him.  Many,  many  times  afterward 
did  he  have  to  sing  to  the  Doctor  "When  Jesus  Comes." 

I  believe  it  was  at  Nashville  that  Mr.  Bliss  called  upon  an 
invalid  lady  who  had  been  speechless  for  some  years.  She  had  once 
been  a  singer,  and  after  he  had  sung  to  her,  she  whispered  to  him, 
"  My  great  regret  now  is  that  when  I  had  my  voice  I  did  not  use 
it  more  to  sound  His  praises."  The  incident  made  a  deep  impres 
sion  upon  him,  and  led  him  to  write  the  words  of  the  song,  "  Work 
for  your  Master,"  found  in  an  incomplete  condition  among  his 
papers  and  finished  by  "Paulina." 


The  following  letters  need  no  introduction  or  explanation  : 

BOSTON,  February  19, 1877. 
MAJOR  D.  W.  WHITTLE  : 

A  young  lady  came  into  the  inquiry  room  at  the  Tabernacle,  on  Wednesday 
evening  in  great  distress,  saying  she  had  been  seeking  for  years  for  forgive 
ness  of  her  sins,  but  had  kept  the  matter  very  secret  and  never  intended  to 


182  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

"  confess  Christ "  till  He  had  given  her  abundant  light  and  assurance.  She 
would  not  promise  to  make  known  her  seeking-  to  her  companions,  and  went 
away  as  dark  as  she  came,  carrying  with  her,  however,  the  verse,  "  He  that 
believeth  not  God  maketh  Him  a  liar."  She  returned  on  Friday  night,  and 
while  Mr.  Sankey  was  singing  "There's  a  Light  in  the  Valley,"  she  said,  "  I 
will  do  anything  for  such  a  Savior,"  and  peace  came  at  once.  In  the  inquiry 
room  she  arose  and  said,  "  I  will  take  Jesus."  She  is  now  rejoicing. 

I  am  truly  yours, 

W.   G.    CORTHELL. 

209  BKOADWAT,  INDIANAPOLIS,  January  27, 1877. 
DEAR  BROTHER  WHITTLE: 

I  notice  in  one  of  my  religious  papers  a  call  on  all  who  may  have  any  facts 
to  communicate  respecting  the  influence  of  the  compositions  of  the  lamented 
Bliss  to  communicate  them  to  you.  It  is  certainly  due  to  his  memory  and 
eminent  services  that  I  acknowledge  the  very  large  use  my  family,  (who  have 
labored  widely  for  years  as  Gospel  singers,  and  are  known  as  the  "  Carman 
Family  ")  have  made  of  his  songs.  1  may  particularly  instance  his  "  Ninety 
and  Nine,"  "If  Papa  were  only  Ready,"  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,"  "  Almost  Per 
suaded,"  "How  Much  Owest  Thou?  "  and  "  Calling  Now."  They  have  sung 
these  in  revival  meetings  in  Syracuse,  Rochester,  Erie,  Cleveland,  Norwalk, 
Dayton,  Richmond,  Indianapolis,  Evansville,  and  many  other  places,  deeply 
impressing  thousands. 

An  aged  and  skeptical  gentleman  in  Norwalk,  Ohio,  dated  his  convictions, 
which  led  him  to  Christ,  to  hearing  Mrs.  Carman  sing  "  If  Papa  were  only 
Ready."  Quite  a  list  of  persons  in  Cleveland  were  reported  to  her  as  converted 
through  her  singing  in  that  city,  where  she  and  our  three  boys  made  much 
use  of  Mr.  B.'s  pieces.  Both  in  direct  Gospel  work,  and  also  in  their  "  Evenings 
of  Song,"  his  compositions  have  been  found  by  them  invaluable.  And  beyond 
any  of  these,  Mrs.  B/s  "  Rock  of  Ages  "  has  been  their  great  standard  quartette. 

Yours  fraternally, 

J.  N.  CARMAN, 
Pastor  North  Baptist  Church,  Indianapolis 


GENEVA  LAKE,  Wis.,  February  8, 1877. 
MAJOR  WHITTLE: 

In  compliance  with  your  request,  made  through  the  columns  of  the  Stand 
ard,  permit  me  to  tell  you  of  the  great  blessing  which  has  come  to  me  through 
the  hymns  of  "  dear  brother  Bliss."  That  one  commencing,  "  Down  life's  dark 
vale  we  wander,"  has  been  such  a  comfort.  His  hymns  are  so  full  of  the  Gos 
pel  of  Christ,  I  shall  ever  remember  with  pleasure  those  days  when  I  was 
permitted  to  listen  to  that  voice,  which  is  now  hushed  to  human  ears,  but 
which  is  continually  praising  "  Him  who  loved  us  and  washed  us  from  sin 
and  unto  Him  be  the  glory  forever,  Amen,"  and  with  whom  we  hope  to  join  in 
singing  praises  forever,  "  when  Jesus  comes."  ******* 


LETTERS  FROM   MINISTERS  AXD   OTHERS.  183 

LEA  V»N  WORTH:,  Feb.  7.  1877. 
MAJOR  D.  W.  WHITTLE  : 

DEAR  BROTHER  — Having  seen  a  notice  of  your  request  published  in  the 
Sunday  School  Times,  I  take  pleasure  in  responding  and  giving  iny  testimony 
in  favor  of  the  music  written  by  your  late  friend  and  colleague.  I  have  been 
singing  and  teaching  for  twenty-five  years,  and  in  all  that  time  have  never 
been  more  impressed  for  good,  or  so  thoroughly  awakened  and  revived  spir 
itually,  by  any  music,  as  by  that  of  Mr.  Bliss.  Last  Sabbath,  I  sang  selections 
from  it  (including  Mrs,  Bliss')  for  the  convicts  in  the  Military  Prison  at  Fort 
Leavenworth,  and  all  seemed  deeply  interested  and  affected. 

The  songs  call  commendations  from  many  wherever  heard,  and  the  fate  of 
their  author  is  felt  and  sincerely  lamented  here  as  elsewhere.  1  am  heartily 
in  love  with  his  sweet  melodies  and  recommend  the  use  of  the  book  wherever 
I  go.  Respectfully, 

L.  J.  EARLY. 


DABLINGTON,  Wis.,  Jan.  27, 1877. 
MAJOR  WHITTLE: 

DEAR  SIR  — I  can  truly  say  that  I  have  been  blessed,  in  listening  to  many 
of  the  songs  of  the  late  P.  P.  Bliss.  The  song,  "  What  hast  Thou  done  for 
Me  ?  "  has  been  more  impressive  to  me  than  many  a  sermon  that  I  have  heard. 
I  had  a  little  brother  about  three  years  and  a  half  old,  who  died  on  the  23d 
of  March,  1876,  who,  a  few  hours  before  his  death,  told  his  papa  to  sing. 
"I  should  like  to  die.  said  Wilie,  if  my  Papa  could  die  too,"  and  his  papa 
sung  that  beautiful  song  composed  by  Mr.  Bliss,  "  If  Papa  were  Only  Ready," 
and  before  night  his  soul  had  taken  its  flight  to  the  Spirit  Land.  Often,  when 
he  was  with  us,  he  used  to  sing,  in  his  childish  way,  "  I  am  so  glad  that  Jesus 
loves  Me." 

Eternity  alone  can  reveal  the  good  that  has  been  and  will  be  accomplished 
by  the  beautiful  songs  of  P.  P.  Bliss. 

Tours  truly, 

EUGENE  HAL  STEAD. 


HUNTINGTON,  INDIANA,  February  4, 1877. 
D.  W.  WHITTLE  : 

DEAR  CHRISTIAN  BROTHER  IN  CHRIST  — I  can  see  that  I  have  been  greatly 
blessed  by  the  hymns  of  the  late  P.  P.  Bliss— especially  with  the  one  called 
"  Jesus  Loves  Me."  It  was  daily  food  to  my  soul.  I  greatly  regret  that  sc 
fine  a  musician  and  useful  man  was  so  suddenly  called  away  in  the  prime  of 
life.  I  pray  to  our  Father  in  Heaven  that  his  music  may  be  a  blessing  to  all 
generations.  Yours  in  Christian  love, 

SOLOMON  DILL. 


184  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

•  NEW  YOBK,  February  8, 1877. 

MAJOR  D.   W.  WHITTLE: 

DEAII  SIR  — I  was  converted  at  Louisville,  Kentucky,  while  your  meetings 
were  being  held  there,  about  two  years  ago,  and  I  can  say  that  I  was  greatly 
blessed  through  the  sweet  singing  of  Mr.  P.  P.  Bliss. 

Yours  respectfully, 

E.  P.  BRIGGS. 


CHICAGO,  March  8, 1877. 
DEAR  BROTHER  WHITTLE: 

In  response  to  your  request,  I  take  pleasure  in  communicating  the  follow 
ing  facts  in  regard  to  my  life,  and  conversion  through  the  instrumentality  of 
that  song  by  Mr.  Bliss,  ''What  shall  the  Harvest  Be  ?  " 

At  the  breaking  out  of  the  war,  in  1861,  I  hastened  to  take  service  in  the 
army,  and  soon  after — in  August  of  that  year — I  was  appointed  a  First  Lieuten 
ant  in  the  regular  army.  At  that  time,  I  was  not  yet  eighteen  years  of  age, 
and  never  had  been  away  from  home  influences.  I  had  never  tasted  any  kind 
of  intoxicating  liquor,  and  did  not  know  one  card  from  another.  The  regiment 
to  which  I  was  assigned  was  principally  officered  by  young  men,  many  of  whom 
were  old  in  dissipation.  The  new  life  was  an  attractive  one,  and  I  entered  upon 
it  with  avidity.  In  a  very  few  months,  I  became  a  steady  drinker  and  a  con 
stant  card  player.  I  do  not  remember  to  have  made  any  attempt  to  resist  the 
encroachments  of  vice  ;  on  the  contrary,  I  took  a  mad  delight  in  all  forms  of 
dissipation.  I  laughed  at  the  caution  of  older  heads,  and  asserted,  with  all 
the  egotism  of  a  boy,  that  I  could  abandon  my  bad  habits  at  any  time.  But 
the  time  speedily  came  when  I  recognized  the  fact  that  my  evil  desires  had 
obtained  the  complete  mastery  of  my  will,  and  that  I  was  no  longer  able  to 
exercise  any  control  over  myself.  From  that  hour  I  knew  no  peace.  The 
years  that  followed  were  but  a  succession  of  struggles  against  the  dominion 
of  my  appetite,  and  a  repetition  of  failures.  With  each  failure,  I  lost  some 
thing  of  my  power  of  resistance  and  gained  something  of  evil.  In  1870,  I 
resigned  my  commission  and  returned  to  civil  life,  determined  to  make  one 
last  stand  against  my  passions  by  breaking  away  from  my  old  associations 
and  beginning  a  new  life.  The  result  was  attained  in  my  condition  of  a  few 
months  ago.  I  do  not  like  to  recall  the  past  six  years.  They  are  as  a  fright 
ful  dream,  from  which,  thank  God !  I  was  at  last  awakened ;  but  the  recollec 
tion  of  which  will  always  bring  sorrow  and  remorse. 

When  the  Tabernacle  was  opened,  last  fall,  I  was  in  Chicago,  presumably 
on  my  way  to  Minnesota.  Only  a  few  weeks  before,  I  had  left  my  family, 
promising  with  my  last  words  that  I  would  stop  drinking,  and  try  once  more 
to  be  a  sober  man.  I  did  not  keep  the  promise  five  minutes ;  I  could  not.  I 
stopped  here,  actuated  by  a  desire  to  indulge,  unrestrained,  my  appetite  for 
liquor' and  cards,  and  in  those  few  weeks  I  had  taken  a  fearful  plunge  down 
ward.  At  last  I  had  made  up  my  mind  that  there  was  absolutely  no  hope  for 
me,  and  I  wanted  the  end  to  come  quickly.  1  gave  myself  up  to  the  wildest 
debauchery,  and  speculated,  with  a  reckless  indifference  on  how  much  longei 


LETTER  FROM  W.  0.  LATTIMORE.  185 

my  body  could  endure  the  fearful  strain.  In  anticipation  of  sudden  death,  I 
carefully  destroyed  all  evidences  of  my  identity,  so  that  my  friends  might 
never  know  the  dog's  death  I  had  died.  It  was  while  in  this  condition  that  I 
one  day  wandered  into  the  Tabernacle  and  found  a  seat  in  the  gallery.  I 
looked  at  the  happy  faces  about  me  and  I  hated  them.  I  had  all  the  vindic 
tive  feeling  of  a  wild  animal  hunted  to  his  last  covert  and  waiting  in  impo 
tent  rage  the  final  blow  that  is  to  end  his  miserable  life.  I  did  not  pay  much 
attention  to  the  service.  I  was  drowsy  and  stupefied  with  liquor.  But  after  a 
while  there  was  a  perfect  stillness,  out  of  which  presently  rose  the  voice  of 
Mr.  Sankey  (may  God  forever  bless  him  !)  in  the  song,  "  What  shall  the  Har 
vest  Be?"  The  words  and  music  attracted  my  attention,  and  I  straightened 
up  to  listen.  They  stirred  me  with  a  strange  sensation,  and  when  presently  he 

sang — 

Sowing  the  seed  of  a  lingering  pain, 
Sowing  the  seed  of  a  maddened  brain, 
Sowing  the  seed  of  a  tarnished  name, 
Sowing  the  seed  of  eternal  shame, 
Oh,  what  shall  the  harvest  be? 

the  words  pierced  me  like  an  arrow.  My  deadened  conscience  was  aroused, 
and  with  one  swift  glance  memory  recalled  my  bright  boyhood,  my  wasted 
manhood,  and  showed  me  my  lost  opportunities.  Every  word  of  the  song  was 
true  of  my  own  case,  and  in  bitter  agony  I  was  reaping  the  harvest  my  mis 
deeds  had  brought  me.  I  thought  of  my  old  mother,  my  loving,  faithful  wife" 
and  children,  and  of  how  they,  too,  were  compelled  to  reap  of  my  harvest  of 
dishonor.  My  awakened  conscience  lashed  me  as  with  a  whip  of  scorpions, 
and  I  rushed  from  the  Tabernacle  and  sought  to  drown  its  voice  in  more  whis 
ky.  But  it  was  of  no  use.  Wherever  I  went,  whether  to  the  bar  of  the  sa 
loon,  or  to  the  gaining  table,  or  to  the  solitude  of  my  own  room,befoi-e  my  eyes 
in  letters  of  fire  were  always  the  words,  "  What  shall  the  harvest  be  ?  "  For 
two  weeks  I  endured  this  torture,  having  no  rest,  until  at  last  on  my  knees  I 
cried  to  God  for  mercy,  and  He  heard  my  prayer.  Broken,  weak,  and  vile  and 
helpless,  I  came  to  Him,  believing  that  ''the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin,"  and  trusting  that  His  love 'and  compassion  would 
regard  even  me.  And,  Major,  I  have  not  trusted  in  vain.  He  has  removed 
from  me  my  old  desires  and  appetites,  and  made  me  a  new  creature  in  Christ 
Jesus.  He  has  guided  me,  shielded  me,  and  fought  my  battles  for  me,  and 
day  by  day  my  faith  grows  brighter,  and  my  love  stronger. 

"  The  Lord  is  my  rock,  and  my  fortress,  and  my  deliverer  ;  my  God,  my 
strength,  in  whom  I  will  trust ;  my  buckler,  and  the  horn  of  my  salvation, 
and  my  high  tower." 

Very  truly,  yoift  friend  and  brother  in  Christ, 

W.  O.  LATTIMORE. 

UPPER  ALTON,  Illinois,  February  30, 1877. 
BROTHER  WHITTLE: 

During  Mr.  Bliss'  tour  with  Dr.  John  Hall,  in  1874,  I  met  him  in  Spring 
field,  Illinois.  The  services  were  held  in  the  interests  of  the  Sunday  School 


186  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Union,  in  the  First  Presbyterian  Church.  Governor  Beveridge,  in  a  few  re 
marks,  introduced  the  speaker  (Dr.  Hall)  and  the  singer  (P.  P.  Bliss).  At  the 
close  of  the  services,  while  conversing  with  Brother  Bliss,  when  I  inquired  oi 
his  welfare,  he  said,  "  I  am  happy  as  a  king  to-night.  This  has  been  one  of 
the  most  joyful  days  of  my  life."  "Why  so?"  I  asked.  "lam  just  thirty- 
five  years  old  to-day,"  he  replied.  "  Indeed  ;  then  I  congratulate  you  on  your 
present ;  and  pray  tell  me  how  does  the  review  of  the  past  appear  ?  Has  not 
God  helped  you  ?  "  A  glow  of  gratitude  and  meekness  lightened  up  his  face 
as  he  said,  "  Yes,  wonderfully  ;  I  am  amazed.  Oh,  how  God  has  helped  me." 
Then,  grasping  my  hand,  while  great  tears  welled  up  in  his  eyes,  with  all  the 
pathos  of  his  soul  he  said  :  "  Pray  for  me,  that  success  may  not  be  a  tempta 
tion  to  me."  Evidently  the  great  desire  of  his  heart  was — 

Oh,  to  be  nothing — nothing 
Only  to  lie  at  His  feet. 

Yours  in  the  word  and  work  of  the  Gospel  till  Jesus  comes, 

W.  S.  SLY. 
Pastor  M.  E.  Church. 


ST.  Louis,  Mo.,  February  10,  1877. 
To  BROTHER  WHITTLE: 


DEAR  SIR—  *******  you 

recollect  that  whilst  engaged  at  St.  Louis,  I  was  a  constant  attendant  at  all  the 
meetings  you  two  held  at  the  Rink,  the  First  Presbyterian  Church  (Dr.  Gantz's) 
and  also  at  the  First  Methodist  Episcopal  Church.  I've  never  forgotten  you  in 
my  daily  and  evening  prayers,  and  would  love  to  see  you  once  more.  Bro.  Bliss 
seemed  to  take  deep  interest  in  my  spiritual  welfare,  and  he  told  me  that  God 
had  a  work  for  me  to  do  in  a  singing  capacity,  as  he  had,  and  he  gave  me  great 
encouragement  in  that  direction.  I  do  not  regret  his  sudden  departure  from 
earth  at  all,  because  God  was  satisfied  with  what  he  had  striven  hard  to  do 
while  in  the  body,  in  saving  souls  for  the  Master's  use.  The  harvest  is  great, 
I  know,  but  then  new  laborers  will  spring  up,  and  finish  the  work  left  un 
finished  by  those  our  Heavenly  Father  deemed  proper  to  take  unto  Himself. 
From  your  Brother  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord, 

JAS.  W. 


OWECO,  Feb.  9, 1877. 

MR.  WHITTLE  : 

DEAR  SIR  — In  looking  over  the  letters  I  have  received  from  Mr.  Bliss,  I  find 
one  written  to  me  January  28,  1873,  in  reply  to  ojie  I  wrote,  informing  him  of 
the  death  of  one  of  the  members  of  our  church  whom  he  was  acquainted  with, 
she  being  the  leading  soprano  singer  in  our  choir  and  a  very  active  and  uselul 
member  of  our  Sabbath  School,  and  in  the  prime  of  life. 

He  writes  :  "  It  has  always  seemed  desirable  to  me  to  be  permitted  to  go 
directly  from  the  full  activities  of  Christian  life  here,  to  the  beautiful  mansions 


WOEKIJTG   FOE  JESUS.  187 

yonder ;  no  interim  of  old  age,  second  childhood,  or  idle  waiting."  It  seemed 
to  me  that  this  had  been  so  literally  fulfilled  in  his  case  that  it  might  add  in 
terest  to  his  biography.  You  will  notice  that  the  word  directly  is  underscored, 
which  is  the  same  as  it  is  in  his  letter  to  me.  His  whole  letter  is  full  of  good 
cheer.  It  was  written  just  after  the  church  in  Chicago  was  burned,  of  which 
he  speaks,  and  finally  ends  up  by  saying :  "  But  know  the  living  Lord  has 
something  better  for  us  ;  shall  rebuild  immediately." 

We  are  glad  to  see  that  you  have  found  a  man  to  take  Mr.  Bliss'  place,  and 
that  you  are  laboring  on  in  the  Master's  cause. 

We  pray  that  you  may  have  great  success  in  the  work. 

Yours  truly, 

D.  M.  PITCHER. 

DETROIT,  MICH.,  Feb.  3, 1877. 
MAJOR  WHITTLE  : 

DEAR  BROTHER  — Though  we  are  comparatively  strangers,  I  trust  we  are 
trying  now  to  serve  the  same  Master.  I  say  now.  As  you  may  remember,  in 
the  business  men's  meeting  at  Kalamazoo,  election  morning,  I  spoke  to  you 
and  told  you  I  could  not  make  a  start,  though  I  was  a  church  member,  I  felt 
so  guilty  on  account  of  my  past  life.  You  told  me  to  just  take  God  at  His 
word  and  trust  the  results  with  Jesus.  I  went  home  and  resolved,  God  being 
ray  helper,  I  would.  I  told  my  wife  (whom  you  will  probably  remember  as 
the  invalid  who  came  to  the  four  o'clock  meeting  and  requested  Brother  Bliss 
to  sing  the  Ninety  and  Nine)  of  my  resolve,  and  we  started  there  and  then,  but 
very  weak.  The  next  afternoon,  Brother  Bliss  called  on  us  at  our  house  and 
spent  about  half  an  hour  in  singing  those  sweet  songs,  in  which  myself  and 
wife  joined  by  special  request  from  that  dear  brother.  He  sang  "  Rock  of 
Ages,"  and  related  the  circumstances  under  which  Mrs.  B.  composed  the  tune. 
He  then  sang  "  Sowing  the  Seed."  I  gave  him  a  little  bouquet  of  violets  for 
Mrs.  Bliss,  and  we  parted  to  meet  no  more  on  earth.  I  mention  these  little 
things  as  I  date  all  my  true  Christian  experiences  to  those  two  meetings — one 
with  you,  the  other  with  him  ;  and,  dear  brother,  I  truly  thank  God  to-night  that 
His  servants  pointed  me  to  God  and  not  to  any  explanation  of  their  own.  I 
did,  1  trust,  take  God  at  His  word. 

I  soon  moved  to  Detroit  and  here  I  have  joined  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.  and  am  try 
ing  to  work  for  the  Master.  My  prayer  to  God  is  to  be  such  an  one  as  the 
blessed  Savior  will  be  willing  to  work  through  for  His  name's  honor.  I  have 
several  missions  to  superintend  in  connection  with  the  Y.  M.  C.  A.,  and  feel  that 
I  want  Brother  Whittle  to  remember  me  at  the  Throne  of  Grace.  May  our 
blessed  Jesus  prosper  His  work  in  your  hands,  is  my  prayer. 

I  remain  very  truly  your  friend  in  Christ, 

GEORGE  H.  EVENS. 

LINDLET,  Steuben  Co.,N.  Y.,  Feby.  12,  1877. 
MR.  D.  W.  WHITTLE  : 

DEAR  BROTHER  — During  the  summer  of  1874,  I  met  a  person  who  heard 
Mr.  Bliss  sing  "  Almost  Persuaded;  "  he  said  he  never  heard  anything  like  it. 


188  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

I  shortly  saw  an  advertisement  of  the  Gospel  Songs  by  P.  P.  Bliss,  for  sale  by 
Church  &  Co.  in  Cincinnati,  and  thought  this  particular  piece  must  be  in  it ; 
so,  in  November,  1874,  I  sent  for  the  Gospel  Songs.  Lo  and  behold,  1  then  had 
"Almost  Persuaded  " — my  wife  being  a  splendid  soprano  singer,  myself  only 
an  ordinary  bass— and  we  commenced  learning  them.  Every  new  one  we 
commenced  was  always  better  than  the  last  one  ;  so  in  the  course  of  six 
months  we  could  handle  every  piece  in  the  book.  After  these  came  along  the 
Gospel  Hymns,  and  of  course  we  could  not  do  without  it. 

In  February,  1875,  a  stranger  (by  name  L.  D.  Ayers)  came  in  our  midst  and 
got  permission  to  preach  in  the  Free  Methodist  Church,  the  only  one  here,  it 
being  a  mile  from  my  house.  He  had  been  preaching  about  a  week  before  1 
thought  it  worth  while  to  go  and  hear  him ;  and  when  I  did  go,  I  was  satisfied 
that  he  was  no  fanatic.  He  could  not  sing,  and  the  singing  was  very  poor. 
I  then  took  hold  to  help  him  with  the  four  others,  so  that  the  singing  was  put 
on  me.  After  going  a  week,  I  told  my  wife  I  could  not  get  along  any  longer 
with  the  singing  without  her  help,  and  that  she  must  go  and  do  the  singing, 
which  she  did.  After  going  a  few  nights,  singing  from  our  old  hymn  books, 
we  then  commenced  singing  one  and  two  pieces  of  Bliss'  on  an  evening  and  it 
was  just  like  magic  on  the  preacher  and  audience,  and  the  house  began  to  fill 
with  people  from  a  distance  to  hear  the  singing  and  preaching.  About  seven 
ty  were  converted,  nearly  all  heads  of  families  ;  backsliders  were  reclaimed. 
It  was  indeed  a  great  feast  of  good  things.  The  preacher  admitted,  as  did  nearly 
all,  that  these  Gospel  Songs  of  P.  P.  Bliss  did  more  than  the  preaching.  The 
result  was  that  a  couple  of  hundred  of  Gospel  Songs  are  now  distributed  in 
Tioga  valley,  including  a  large  number  of  Gospel  Hymns. 

Yours  in  Christ, 
ISAAC  SANDT. 

KALAMAZOO,  MICHIGAN,  Feb.  16, 1877. 
MY  DEAR  BROTHER  WHITTLE  : 

We  were  holding  our  watch-night  service  when  the  news  of  the  death  of 
Brother  Bliss  and  wife  came.  The  10.30  train  of  Sunday  evening  brought  us 
a  paper  at  11,  and  just  before  the  hour  of  12  I  made  the  announcement.  I 
never  saw  anything  like  it.  There  were  four  hundred  people  in  the  chapel, 
and  all  were  in  deepest  sorrow  in  an  instant— many  in  sobs  and  tears, 
others  in  silent  and  solemn  meditations  and  prayer  for  God  to  help  and 
comfort  the  poor  mother — for  we  then  supposed  the  whole  family  had  gone 
together. 

With  reference  to  Brother  Bliss'  labors,  I  would  say  that  last  Thursday 
evening,  at  our  prayer  service,  Miss  Jessie  Ains worth,  who  has  united  with  our 
church,  came  to  me  and  said  that  she  was  led  to  the  Savior  through  the  sing 
ing  of  Brother  Bliss.  I  asked  her  if  she  could  name  any  particular  piece  that 
led  to  her  awakening.  She  said  he  sang  the  piece  with  tho  words  "Cut  it 
down/'  referring  to  the  h'g  tree,  and  she  felt  it  meant  her.  She  told  me  thii 
with  rejoicing  that  she  ever  heard  Brother  Bliss. 


LETTERS  FROM   MINISTERS   AND   OTHERS.  189 

There  are  other  individuals,  and  many  of  them,  I  dare  say,  who  have  attrib 
uted  their  conversion  to  his  singing.  I  am  quite  sure  Brother  E.  C.  C.  was 
first  awakened  by  his  singing. 

And  now  a  word  about  our  religious  state.  I  may  say  our  condition  as  a 
society  has  never  been  better  in  the  history  of  the  church.  There  have  been 
to  date  one  hundred  and  seventeen  accessions  to  the  Methodist  E.  Church,  and 
scarcely  a  week  that  does  not  bring  some  new  heart  to  the  Blessed  Christ.  To 
Him  be  all  the  glory. 

When  we  have  given  the  silver  trumpets  the  right  sound,  till  the  dear 
Savior  says,  as  in  Brother  Bliss'  case,  it  is  enough,  then  we  will  meet  Brother 
B.  again  and  the  throng  of  the  blood- washed. 

I  think  of  Brother  B.'s  words  and  song  daily,  and  endeavor  to  respond,  Yes  I 
Yes  !  My  Savior,  Yes  1 

Are  your  windows  open  toward  Jerusalem  ? 

Though  as  captives  here  a  little  while  we  stay  ; 
For  the  coming  of  the  King  in  His  glory, 

Are  you  watching  day  by  day  ? 

Your  Brother,  H.  F.  SPENCER, 

Pastor  Methodist  Church. 


KALAMAZOO,  March,  1877. 
DEAR  MR.  WHITTLE  : 

The  Gospel  in  Mr.  Bliss'  sweet  hymns  and  the  Gospel  in  his  own  and  Mrs. 
Bliss'  personal  pleading  with  me  led  me  to  Christ.  What  this  interest  was  in 
Christ-like  spirit  and  faithfulness  can  be  judged  by  the  following  incident  and 
the  two  extracts  from  Mr.  Bliss'  letters  that  I  enclose :  A  lady  came  to  me 
since  Mr.  Bliss'  death,  and  said  she  had  something  to  say  to  me,  and  it  was 
this  :  The  evening  before  Mr.  B.  left  Kalamazoo,  Mrs.  Bliss  came  to  her  after 
the  evening  meeting  and  spoke  to  her  about  me,  asking  her  to  keep  her  eye 
on  me  and  after  she  had  left  to  talk  to  me  on  the  subject  of  religion,  "  For," 
said  she,  "I  may  never  see  him  again,  and  I  have  taken  a  deep  interest  in 
him."  Oh,  Mr.  Whittle,  how  this  message  comes  to  me  now  as  from  the  dead. 
Now  I  have  at  least  two  less  to  pray  for  me  on  earth,  but  two  more  in  heaven. 
I  trust  that  I  may  ever  hold  up  the  cross  of  Christ  wherever  I  may  be,  and  at 
last,  when  God  will  call  on  me,  that  I  may  be  able  to  say,  under  standingly, "  It 
is  well,  1  am  ready."  Pray  for  me,  Mr.  Whittle,  for  I  have  a  great  many  things 
to  contend  with,  and  above  all  pray  that  I  may  be  able  to  fully  overcome  my 
greatest  enemy,  smoking.  JOHN  xiv,  14. 

Every  day  I  see  or  hear  something  about  Mr.  Bliss.  My  greatest  hope  is 
to  meet  him  in  heaven.  Yours, 

R.  H.  D. 

I  remember  once  hearing  Mr.  Bliss  talking  to  old  Father  Denary,  of  this  place, 
who  has  but  one  arm.  I^e  said,  "  Well,  Father  Denary,  when  we  meet  in 
Heaven,  I  shall  not  know  you  by  your  one  arm,  shall  I?  Remember,  we're 


190  MEMOIE  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

going  home  to-morrow."    And  the  tears  streamed  down  the  old  man's  cheeks 
as  he  answered,  "  No,  thank  God,  thank  God! '" 


The  following  are  Mr.  Bliss'  letters  above  referred  to : 

JACKSON,  MICH.,  November,  1876. 
DEAR  SIR: 

Remember  still  there's  more  to  follow.  Do  not  depend  on  yourself,  but 
look  ever  to  Jesus.  He'll  carry  you  through.  *  *  *  *  Oh,  how  my  heart 
goes  out  toward  you  and  my  dear  friends  in  Kalamazoo.  May  God  bless  you 
all.  Yours  for  His  sake, 

P.  P.  BLISS. 

MY  DEAR  BROTHER  : 

Your  letter  gives  us  much  pleasure.  May  you  ever  take  Jesus  as  your 
leader,  and  be  an  armor-bearer,  working  for  the  Lord.  When  you  are  sure 
that  you  are  free  from  everything  (you  know  the  old  enemy  I  make  this 
fling  at),  please  write  to  me  again.  *  *  *  I  shall  always  feel  that  I 
have  an  interest  in  you  and  your  welfare.  *  *  *  May  God  ever  bless  you 
and  have  you  in  His  keeping.  Mrs.  B.  and  the  rest  send  regards  to  yourself 
and  friends.  Yours  for  His  sake, 

BLISS  &  Co. 

JACKSON,  Mich.,  January  8, 1877. 
MR.  D.  W.  WHITTLE: 

BELOVED  BROTHER  — In  Jackson,  as  elsewhere,  many  hearts  are  mourning 
for  the  loved  ones  in  Israel  that  have  fallen.  How  dear  and  precious  is  their 
memory  to  us. 

You  will  remember  that  on  the  evening  of  your  first  Sabbath  in  Jackson, 
Mr.  Bliss  came  over  to  the  Second  Congregational  Church.  His  singing  and 
speaking  were  blessed  of  God,  and  on  that  evening  our  chorister  and  wife  were 
converted  through  Mr.  Bliss,  and  joined  the  church  last  Sunday.  The  entire 
congregation  were  deeply  impressed. 

Affectionately  your  brother  in  affliction, 

J.  L.  MAILE, 
Pastor  2d  Cong.  Church,  Jackson,  Mich. 


From  Charlie,  a  little  lad  in  Nashville,  who  trusts  he  became  a 
Christian  in  Mr.  Bliss'  meetings  there  in  April,  1875  : 

NASHYILLB,  February  25, 1877. 
MY  DEAR  FRIEND,  MR.  WHITTLE  : 

I  received  your  kind  letter  a  few  weeks  ago  ;  also  Mr.  Bliss'  picture  and 
song,  for  which  Ma,  my  little  sister  and  brother,  join  me  in  returning  many 


IN   MEMORIAM.  191 

thanks.     I  wish  you  to  remember  me  in  your  prayers.     I  would  be  so  glad  to 
see  you.     Below  I  send  a  copy  of  Mr.  Bliss'  letter  to  uie  : 

MASTER  CHARLES  : 

Mr  LITTLE  FRIEND  — Your  kind  letter  was  received  in  due  time.  We  have  been  flying  about 
so  that  this  is  the  first  good  chance  I  have  had  to  reply.  Mr.  Whittle  and  I  both  thank  you 
very  much  for  your  token  of  good  will  to  our  little  boys.  They  are  not  old  enough  to  answer, 
but  we  will  keep  your  gifts  for  them.  We  will  pray  for  you.  I  was,  as  your  mother  says,  full 
of  tun  when  I  was  a  boy.  Mrs.  Bliss  says  I  have  not  gotten  over  it  yet.  I  do  love  fun,  and 
love  to  romp  and  play  with  my  little  boys.  We  have  a  little  baby  boy  ten  months  old.  Paul 
Bliss  is  nearly  three  years  old,  and  I  love  my  friends  and  music  very  much ;  but  that  does  not 
prevent  my  loving  Jesus.  No,  I  think  I  love  Him  all  the  more  for  giving  me  so  many  pleasant 
things  and  a  cheerful,  happy  heart.  I  hope  you  pray  to  God  every  day.  Pray  for  me.  My 
love  to  Sister  Annie,  for  Jesus'  sake.  Yours  in  Him, 

P.  P.  BLISS. 


P.  P.  BLISS— IN   MEMORIAM. 

[From  the  St.  Paul  (Minnesota)  Dispatch.] 

In  a  burst  as  of  heavenly  music,  he  came, 
And  heart  spoke  to  heart  with  each  tone  ! 

'Twas  Christ  and  His  cross  was  the  glorified  theme 
Which  gathered  all  hearts  into  one  ! 

We  heard  him  !  it  seemed  that  a  seraph  had  sung 

Enwrapped  in  a  mortal's  disguise  ! 
But  while  the  deep  cadence  around  us  still  hung, 

The  seraph  had  pass'd  to  the  skies. 

Oh  mourn  not  for  him,  or  the  dear  ones  he  loved, 

For  soon  was  the  agony  o'er, 
And  the  jewels  God  gave  him  to  gladden  his  life 

Will  be  his  on  the  evergreen  shore  ! 

Dear  Brother,  farewell  1     What  wonders  desired 

Shall  now  to  thy  vision  unfold  ! 
What  chords  thou  didst  touch  in  thy  moments  inspired, 

Whose  vibrations  may  never  be  told ! 

R. 
ST.  PAUL,  January  2, 1877. 


CHAPTER    XIX. 


MR.    BLISS*    MISCELLANEOUS  POEMS — "  FORTUNE'S  BEST    GIFT" — "FAREWELL, 

OLD  YEAR" — "THE  WOOD  BIRD'S  SONG" — "LET  us  HAVE  PEACE" — 
"AUNT  TABITHA'S  TRIALS" — "THE  LAST  BUGLE" — "BOYS  WANTED" — 
"WORK  AND  PRAY" — "THERE'S  MONNY  A  SHLIP" — "SIRE  AND  SON" — 
"FOR  ME" — "'TIS  THE  HEART  MAKES  THE  HOME " — "  LOVING  LITTLE 
LOU" — "THE  PHOTOGRAPH" — "ROOM  FOR  ONE  MORE" — "MR.  LORDLY 
AND  I" — "THE  TIN  WEDDING" — "WILLIE'S  WOOING" — "JOHN  CHINA 
MAN  " — "  A  TRAGICAL  TAIL  " — "  WHEN  GRANDMAMMA  IS  GONE  "— "  RESO 
LUTION  " — "  BUSHNELL  " — "  WELCOME." 

~\T EARLY  all  of  the  following  have  been  published  in  sheet 
_L\  music  form  by  Messrs.  Church  &  Co.  The  others  appeared 
in  the  Sony  Messenger,  by  the  same  publishers.  The  words  are 
here  given  by  their  permission. 

FORTUNE'S  BEST  GIFT. 

Dame  Fortune  smiled  upon  my  youth, 

Gave  me  kind  friends  and  parents  dear, 
Who  taught  me  virtue,  love  and  truth, 

The  right  to  love,  the  wrong  to  fear. 

Gave  me  of  learning  my  small  share — • 

My  verse  exhibits  that  is  small — 
Gave  my  heart  strength  its  ills  to  bear, 

Gave  health,  strength,  voice,  friends,  learning,  all. 

Through  childhood's  days  she  led  me  on 

And  smiled  upon  my  boyhood  years ; 
Her  favors  all,  save  wealth,  I've  won, 

But  wealth  brings  cares  and  toils  and  tears. 

She's  given  me  all  I'd  have  her  given, 

She's  given  me  cause  to  hope  through  life, 
And  after  life  to  hope  for  heaven, 

And  next  to  heaven  she's  given  MY  WIFE. 
-\KCADE  N.  Y.,  Last  day  of  October,  1874. 


THE  WOOD  BIRD'S  so:tfG.  193 


FAREWELL,   OLD  YEAR. 

Farewell,  old  year,  farewell ; 

We  can  no  longer  stay  ; 
Our  spreading  sails  the  breezes  swell 

To  speed  our  onward  way  : 
With  song  of  wave  and  splash  of  oar 
We  leave  thy  fond,  familiar  shore. 

Farewell,  old  year,  farewell ; 

We  leave  thy  sacred  shore  ; 
Yet  oft  on  thee  will  mem'ry  dwell, 

And  count  thy  treasures  o'er, 
While  future  years  will  brighter  shine 
Reflecting  joys  as  pure  as  thine. 

Farewell,  old  year,  farewell, 

'Tis  late — we  must  be  gone  ; 
One  day,  again,  thy  scenes  will  tell 

When  earthly  life  is  done  ; 
One  day  again  thy  joys  we'll  see, 
From  earthly  ills  and  sorrows  free. 
December,  1869. 


THE  WOOD  BIRD'S  SONG. 

Hear  ye  not  the  wood  bird's  song, 

As  it  gaily  floats  along, 

On  the  breeze  so  sweet  and  clear, 

Telling  that  the  spring  is  near  ? 

Cold  the  winter  winds  have  blown, 

Sad  the  leafless  moan, 

Silent  now  those  perfumed  bowers, 

Gone  the  fragrant,  blooming  flowers. 

Over  prairie,  grove  and  hill, 
Hear  that  song,  so  loud  and  shrill. 
Blessed  harbinger  of  spring, 
Welcome  tidings  dost  thou  bring — 
Tidings  of  a  brighter  clime, 
Tidings  of  a  sweet  spring  time, 
Blooming  flow'ret,  bush  and  tree- 
Songster  sweet,  we  welcome  thee. 
April,  1869. 

13 


194  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 


LET  US  HAVE  PEACE. 

Over  the  land  of  our  weal, 

Freedom  and  union  increase  ; 
List  to  the  earnest  appeal, 
"Let  us,  oh,  let  us  have  peace." 

Members  of  church  and  of  state, 

Let  your  iniquities  cease  ; 
Only  the  good  are  the  great — 
"Let  us,  oh,  let  us  have  peace." 

What  though  our  neighbors  do  wrong, 

Slander  and  envy  increase  ? 
Cheerily  join  in  our  song, 
"Let  us,  oh,  let  us  have  peace." 

Fortune  to  freedom  shall  yet 
Grant  a  perpetual  release  : 
Let  us  forgive  and  forget ; 

"Let  us,  oh,  let  us  have  peace." 
August,  1869. 


AUNT  TABITHA'S   TRIALS. 

Pots,  kettles  and  pans,  pans,  kettles  and  pots  ! 

I'm  sick  of  their  sight,  and  I'd  give  them  all  for  a  bunch  of  "  forget-me-nots  ;" 
But  my  children  cannot  live  on  the  scent  of  a  nosegay  fair ; 
They  would  much  prefer  a  chicken  pie  to  flow'rets  rich  and  rare, 
But  I  never  complain. 

Tub,  boiler  and  suds,  suds,  boiler  and  tub  ! 

My  arms  are  red  and  my  fingers  are  spread,  with  terrible,  terrible  rub. 
You  may  talk  of  your  babbling  brooks,  you  may  sing  of  the  streamlets  bright ; 
It  would  take  waters  of  both,  I  know,  to  make  these  clothes  white, 
But  I  never  complain. 

Wood,  shavings  and  coal,  coal,  shavings  and  wood  ! 

My  fire  has  gone  out,  though  I  coaxed  it  as  long  and  patient  as  any  one  could 
You  may  sing  of  the  "  Brave  Old  Oak,"  you  may  praise  "  Mountain  Pine," 
I'd  rather  have  some  splinters  now,  to  kindle  this  fire  of  mine, 
But  1  never  complain. 


BOYS  WANTED.  195 

Pan,  duster  and  broom,  broom,  duster  and  pan ! 

I'm  worried  to  death,  and  I'd  give  all  the  world  if  I'd  only  been  born  a  man. 

Oh,  pity  me,  ye  who  dwell  in  cabins  with  one  small  room  ; 

Oh,  pity  me,  ye  who  never  know  what  'tis  to  handle  a  broom. 

But  I  never  complain. 
January,  1870. 


THE  LAST  BUGLE. 

The  sad  muffled  drum  sounds  the  last  march  of  the  brave, 
The  soldier  retreats  to  his  quarters,  the  grave, 
Under  death, whom  he  owns  his  Commander-in-chief. 
No  more  he'll  "  turn  out  with  the  ready  relief," 
But  in  spite  of  death's  terrors  and  hostile  alarms, 
When  he  hears  the  last  bugle,  he'll  stand  to  his  arms. 

Farewell,  brother  soldier,  in  peace  may  you  rest, 
And  light  lie  the  turf  on  each  mouldering  breast, 
Until  that  review  when  the  souls  of  the  brave 
Shall  behold  their  chief  ensign,  fair  mercy's  flag  wave  • 
Then,  freed  from  death's  terrors  and  hostile  alarms, 
When  we  hear  the  last  bugle,  we'll  stand  to  our  arms. 


BOYS  WANTED. 

Written  for  Daniel's  Band,  Louisville,  Kentucky. 

Boys  are  wanted,  so  they  say, 
Boys  are  wanted  every  day, 
Boys  are  wanted  ;  we  will  pay 
Cash  for  boys. 

CHORUS. — Boys  are  wanted,  brave  and  true, 
Boys  of  mind  and  muscle,  too, 
Boys  who  dare  the  right  to  do, 
Faithful  boys. 

Boys  are  wanted,  here  and  there, 
Boys  who  will  for  work  prepare, 
Boys  are  wanted  everywhere, 
Willing  boys. 

Boys  to  handle  hoe  and  spade, 
Boys  to  bend  who're  not  afraid, 
Boys  to  follow  any  trade, 

Business  boya. 


196  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

• 

Boys  of  speech  and  boys  of  song. 
Boys  to  righten  many  a  wrong. 
Boys  to  help  the  world  along, 
Noble  boys. 

Boys  the  busy  world  employ, 
Boys,  and  not  self-acting  toys, 
Boys  are  wanted — real  boys — 

Boys,  Boys,  Boys. 


WORK  AND  PRAY, 

OR,  THE  TEMPERANCE  WOMAN'S  WATCHWORD. 

Do  you  hear  the  thrilling  sound,  floating  out  upon  the  air, 

That  stills  at  once  the  noisy  throng  ? 
'Tis  the  tender,  pleading  tone  of  a  mother's  voice  in  prayer, 

Tis  followed  by  a  burst  of  song. 

CHORUS. — Rise,  oh  rise,  the  day  begins  to  dawn, 

The  shadows  flee  away,  away ; 

We're  a  faithful  praying  band,  bound  to  purify  the  land- 
Our  watchword  "  work  and  pray." 

In  the  sweet  and  holy  name  of  humanity  we  plead, 

For  temperance  we  sing  and  pray  ; 
For  our  fathers  and  our  sons  and  our  brothers  intercede, 

To  drive  the  demon  drink  away. 

'Tis  the  old  familiar  shout  of  the  army  of  the  Lord, 

The  Ruler  of  the  earth  and  heaven. 
He  alone  can  give  the  power,  He  alone  can  speak  the  word, 

To  Him  alone  the  praise  be  given. 


THERE'S  MONNY  A  SHLIP. 

Och,  list  to  my  sorryfull  song, 
For  matthers  is  all  goin'  wrong  : 
And  shure  I  must  shpake, 
Or  me  heart  it  will  break, 
An'  I'll  not  be  detainin'  ye  long. 


SIRE   AXD   SOi*.  19? 

Bad  luck  to  Miss  Kittle  McKay, 

She's  taken  me  sinses  away, 

Say  in'  "  Monny  a  shlip  twixt 

The  cup  and  the  lip." 

Ah,  there's  monny  a  shlip  now,  they  say. 

Ah,  Kittie  was  nate  as  ye  plaze, 
Faith,  she  could  make  butther  and  chaze, 
She  minded  the  pig, 
And  the  praties  she'd  dig 
In  sich  illegant,  lady-like  ways. 
I  bought  me  a  rake  and  a  shpade, 
A  gim  of  a  gairden  I  made, 
*  Coom  tind  it,"  I  said, 
But  she  shook  her  swate  head, 
And  I'm  wonderf  ull  sorry  indade. 

My  shanty  I  plashtered  wid  mud, 

And  I  shtop't  all  the  howels  that  I  could ; 

Thin  my  blankets  I  shpread 

Wid  new  .shtraw  in  my  bed, 

And  the  matther  so  pleasantly  shtoocL 

Then  I  towld  her  my  love  and  intint, 

But  she  said  she  wad  niver  consint, 

And  from  my  poor  lip,  thin, 

The  cup  she  let  shlip,,  thin, 

And  off  wid  Mike  Rooney  she  wint. 

And  shure,  I'll  be  niver  supplied 

While  h«r  shweetness  to  me  is  denied. 

Me  heart  is  so  lone, 

In  me  bosom,  och,  hone  1 

I'd  as  soon  we'd  a  both  of  us  died. 

Me  sorrows  to  shmodder  I'll  try, 

Though  monny  a  time  will  I  sigh, 

To  think  that  the  cup 

Which  others  may  s  up 

Has  no  dhrop  for  my  two  lips  so  dry. 


SIRE  AND  SON. 

Farewell,  my  son,  if  thee  must  go 
To  find  a  western  home, 

Thy  father's  blessings  follow  thee, 
Though  far  thy  feet  may  roam. 


198  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Thee  was  a  frail  and  feeble  lad — 
How  soon  to  man  has  grown  ; 

Now  I  am  feeble,  failing,  too — 
'Tis  hard  to  stay  alone. 

Good  cheer,  my  sire,  a  year  or  two, 

And  you  my  home  will  share, 
In  peace  and  comfort  spend  your  days 

Without  a  want  or  care. 
Old  neighbor  Williams'  letter  says 

That  he  is  well  to  do, 
And  gives  consent  to  my  request 

About  his  daughter  Sue. 

'Tis  well,  my  son.     Long  since  I  mind 

Another  bright-eyed  maid — 
How  like  thy  mother  is  that  smile — 

But  now  I'm  sore  afraid 
Thee'll  hardly  find  a  place  for  me. 

A  year — how  long  'twill  be  ; 
My  son,  I  may  not  need  thy  care  ; 

God  bless  thy  home  and  thee. 

Farewell,  my  son,  though  miles  away, 

For  thee  my  prayers  shall  rise 
That  heaven  may  cheer  life's  fleeting  hours 

And  peace  illume  thy  skies  ; 
My  heart  to  thee  will  fondly  turn 

Where'er  my  feet  may  roam  ; 
And  by  and  by  we'll  meet  again, 

My  son,  we'll  meet  at  home. 


FOR  ME. 

There's  not  a  flower  that  decks  the  field, 
Nor  bud  by  wayside  bower  concealed  ; 
Whose  life  a  perfume  rich  doth  yield, 

But  blooms  for  me,  but  blooms  for  me  ; 
There's  not  a  star  in  yon  deep  blue, 
That  shines  with  radiance  calm  and  true, 
Nor  mirrored  in  the  morning  dew, 

But  shines  for  me,  but  shines  for  me. 

There's  not  a  heart  whose  beating  thrills 
In  sympathy  with  human  ills, 


LOVIKG    LITTLE   LOU.  199 

WTiose  longing  loving  only  fills, 

But  beats  for  ine,  but  beats  for  me. 
There's  not  a  joy  the  heart  can  move, 
No  pleasure  here,  no  bliss  above, 
No  earthly  weal,  no  heavenly  love, 

But  waits  for  me,  but  waits  for  me. 


The  ten  songs  that  follow  are  published  in  sheet  music  form  by 
S.  Brainard's  Sons,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  by  whose  permission  the  words 
are  here  inserted : 

'TIS  THE   HEART  MAKES  THE   HOME.* 


'Tin  the  heart  makes  the  home,  ever  brightly  to  bloom  : 
'Tis  the  heart,  'tis  the  heart  makes  the  home. 
Through  the  dark,  weary  day  or  in  joy's  milder  ray, 
'Tis  the  heart,  'tis  the  heart  makes  the  home. 
Though  humble  and  poor  is  my  cot  on  the  moor, 
The  love-light  brightly  beams  through  the  gloom  ; 
Though  storms  gather  round,  purest  joys  here  are  found. 
And  I  turn,  fondly  turn  to  my  home. 

'Tis  the  heart  makes  the  home,  though  afar  we  may  roam ; 

'Tis  the  heart,  'tis  the  heart  makes  the  home. 

How  we  turn  from  the  new  to  the  old,  tried  and  true  ; 

'Tis  the  heart,  'tis  the  heart  makes  the  home. 

No  halls  of  the  gay,  let  them  lure  as  they  may, 

Ever  charui  while  the  heart  longs  for  home  ; 

We  laugh  o'er  our  fears,  and  we  smile  through  our  tears, 

Still  the  home  of  the  heart  whispers  come. 


LOVING  LITTLE  LOU.* 

With  a  bright  winning  smile  I  remember, 

And  a  glance  of  her  witching  eye  so  blue, 
Like  a  soft  sunny  day  in  December, 

To  my  life  came  my  loving  little  Lou. 
And  the  dim  future  way  seemed  to  brighten, 

And  life's  daily  duties  dearer,  dearer  grew, 
And  my  lone,  weary  heart  seemed  to  lighten, 

At  the  thought  of  my  loving  little  Lou. 

CHORUS. — And  to-day  with  my  darling  here  beside  me, 

With  her  loving  heart,  so  noble,  kind  and  true, 
I  can  battle  with  the  sorrows  that  betide  me, 

For  the  sake  of  my  loving  little  Lou. 
By  permission  of  S.  BBAINABD^  SONS,  Cleveland,  owners  of  Copyright  of  words  and  music. 


200  MEMOIR   OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

Softly  down  on  a  calm  summer  even, 

Shone  the  stars  from  the  distant  dome  of  blue ; 
But  a  light  brighter  far  had  been  given 

To  the  eye  of  my  loving  little  Lou. 
As  I  told  her  the  old  simple  story, 

To  my  heart  her  form  I  nearer,  nearer  drew  ; 
Just  a  tear  and  a  smile  bright  with  glory, 

Then  I  called  her  my  darling  little  Lou. 

Many  years,  happy  years  have  departed  ; 

Many  friends,  faithful  friends,  are  lost  to  view, 
But  can  I  ever  bow  broken-hearted, 

While  I'm  blessed  with  my  loving  little  Lou  ? 
No,  the  dream  of  the  past  stealing  o'er  me 

Gives  the  present  all  the  fairer,  fairer  hue, 
While  the  bright  future  smiles  aye  before  me, 

With  the  life  of  my  loving  little  Lou. 


THE    PHOTOGRAPH.* 

Oh,  what  a  pretty  picture,  dear, 

Your  likeness,  darling  Lou, 
'Twill  make  you  jealous  yet,  I  fear, 

It  is  so  much  like  you. 
A  pretty  picture,  really  ; 

I'd  know  if  I  shall  see, 
But  if  'tis  very  pretty,  why, 

It  can't  look  much  like  me  ; 

DUET. — Not  at  all  like  me,  not  at  all  like  me? 
Oh,  the  likeness  I  don't  see, 
Tho'  'tis  true,  tho'  'tis  bright,  tho'  'tis  beautiful, 
Tho'  'tis  true,  tho'  'tis  bright,  tho'  'tis  beautiful. 
Oh,  'tis  not  at  all  like  me, 

Oh,  yes,  my  dear,  'tis  true  as  life, 

And  art  can  do  no  more. 
It  is  so  very  much  like  you, 

I've  kissed  it  o'er  and  o'er. 
Ha,  ha,  'tis  poor,  the  likeness,  sir, 

I  do  not  quite  discern, 
But  tell  me,  pray,  can  you  e'er  say 

It  kissed  you  in  return  ? 
*  By  permission  of  S.  BRAINABD'S  80579,  Cleveland,  owners  of  Copyright  of  words  and  music. 


BOOM   FOR  OKE   MORE.  201 

The  picture  kissed  me  V  now,  my  dear, 

You  surely  are  in  fun, 
For  though  I  kiss  it  o'er  and  o'er  . 

It  never  pays  me  one. 
Ha,  then  you're  wrong,  I've  caught  you  now, 

And  you  will  quite  agree, 
That  if  it  never  kisses  back, 

'Tis  not  at  all  like  me. 

DUET. — 'Tis  like  you,  as  all  can  see, 
'Tis  like  you,  as  all  can  see, 
Oh,  the  likeness  you  must  see, 
So  true,  so  bright,  so  bright,  so  beautiful, 
So  true,  so  bright,  so  beautiful, 
'Tis  like  you,  as  all  can  see. 


ROOM  FOR  ONE  MORE.* 

All  aboard  for  the  depot ;  hurrah,  we  can't  wait ; 
Ten  minutes  to  train  time,  hurry  up,  you'll  be  late ! 
Oh,  yes,  here  is  room,  find  a  seat  near  the  door ; 
For  we're  never  so  full  but  there's  room  for  one  more. 

CHORUS. — Room  for  one  more.     Room  for  one  more, 

Never  so  full  bfct  there's  room  for  one  more. 

Room  for  one  more,  Room  for  one  more  ; 

So  we're  never  so  full  but  there's  room  for  one  more. 

There  is  "  room  for  one  more,"  in  the  world's  omnibus  ; 

What  need  of  complaining,  or  making  a  fuss  ? 

We  can  bear  being  crowded,  the  ride  is  soon  o'er,    . 

So  we'll  just  move  along  and  make  "  room  for  one  more."3 

There  is  "room  for  one  more,"  in  the  cause  that  is  just, 
Stand  firm  to  your  purpose,  be  patient  and  trust; 
•   Though  the  basement  be  crowded,  the  hall  running  o'er, 
In  the  broad  upper  story  "there's  room  for  one  more." 

There  is  "  room  for  one  more  "  in  the  heart  that  is  true  ; 
Always  room  for  the  worthy,  it  may  be  for  you  ; 
Love's  realm  is  unbounded,  its  sea  has  no  shore, 
And  there's  never  a  heart  but  has  "  room  for  one  more." 
*  By  permission  of  S.  BBAIKAKD'S  SONS.  Cleveland,  owners  of  Copyright  of  words  and  r.iuelc. 


202  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 


MR.  LORDLY  AND  I.* 

Mister  Lordly  keeps  a  wallet,  so  do  I, 

He  has  piles  of  greenbacks  in  it,  none  have  I, 

He's  no  happier  with  his  coupons  than  am  I 

With  my  little  empty  wallet  light  and  dry. 

I  hide  my  purse,  lest  he  should  see 

The  empty  thing  and  pity  me. 

His  fine  wife  has  dainty  fingers,  mine  has  not ; 
But  she  gives  him  curtain  lectures,  mine  does  not. 
He  goes  home  and  gets  a  scolding,  I  a  kiss ; 
She  a  frown,  but  mine  a  smile  and  perfect  bliss. 
She  rules  his  house,  her  rights  demands 
And  holds  possession  in  her  hands. 

Mister  Lordly  has  his  failings,  so  have  I, 

But  he  wears  his  in  his  bosom,  outside  I. 

He  will  leave  the  world  his  money  by  and  by, 

I  shall  leave  my  friends  my  metn'ry  when  I  die. 

He's  worlds  of  wealth  his  own  to  call, 

I've  love  and  hope,  and  that  is  all. 

He  has  those  that  court  his  favor,  none  have  I ; 
But  I've  wondrous  satisfaction,  glad  am  I. 
I'd  not  change  it  for  his  millions,  no,  not  I. 
We  must  both  return  our  income  by-and-by, 
Then  pray  what  difference  wfll  there  be 
Twixt  Mister  Lordly 's  self  and  me? 


THE  TIN  WEDDING  * 
•  • 

Ten  years  ago  to-day  two  hearts  did  fain  begin 
To  walk  in  wedlock's  winding  way,  and  share  their  mutual  tin  ; 
Ten  years  ago  to-day,  it  seems  but  yester  morn, 
And  now  they  come  around  and  say  'tis  time  to  blow  the  horn.  * 

CHORUS.—  We  come  with  a  clatter  and  din,  we  come  with  a  trumpet  and  tray, 
We  come  with  a  tinkle  of  tin,  to  welcome  our  friends  to-day ; 
Hear  the  tinkle,  tinkle,  tinkle  of  the  tin 
In  the  dining-room,  the  kitchen  and  the  hall* 
With  a  culinary  chorus  we'll  perpetuate  the  din 
And  our  wishes  for  the  weal  of  all. 

*  By  permission  of  S.  BRAINARD'S  SONS,  Cleveland,  owners  of  Copyright  of  words  aud  music. 


JOHN   CHINAMAN-. 

Teii  years  ago — 'tis  strange,  how  swift  the  years  have  flown — 
But  you  and  I  don't  seem  to  change,  like  some  that  we  have  known  ; 
We  love  our  kith  and  kin,  our  friends  are  £ind  and  true, 
And  all  our  hopes,  and  loves  and  tin  are  just  as  good  as  new. 

Then  fill  the  cup  to-day,  and  raise  Britannia  high, 

Enjoy  their  luster  while  we  may,  'twill  tarnish  by  and  by  ; 

The  present  let  us  prize,  the  future  welcome  in, 

With  "  crystal,"  "  silver,"  "  golden"  joys,  we'll  never  want  for  tin. 


WILLIE'S  WOOING.* 

When  the  snowy  daisies  decked  the  meadows  fair, 
And  the  apple  blossoms  filled  the  balmy  air  ; 
When  the  verdant  woodlands  smil'd  in  beauty  rare, 
My  Willie  came  to  me  a-wooing. 

CHORUS. — Darling  Willie  came  across  the  lea, 

Bright-eyed  Willie  came  a-wooing  me  ; 
Oh,  skip,  ye  little  lambkins,  sing,  ye  birds,  in  glee, 
For  Willie  came  to  me  a-wooing. 

Violets  he  brought  me  from  the  shady  dell, 
And  his  loving  glances  told  he  loved  roe  well ; 
But  the  half  he  said  I'll  never,  never  tell, 
When  Willie  came  to  me  a-wooing. 

Now  the  flow'rs  have  faded  with  the  blooming  spring, 
Soon  the  fruitful  autumn  brighter  joys  will  bring  ; 
Here  upon  my  finger  shines  a  golden  ring, 
Since  Willie  came  to  me  a-wooing. 


JOHN   CHINAMAN.* 

John  Chinaman,  dear  sir,  since  you're  making  such  a  stir 
In  the  waves  that  wash  along  our  western  strand  ; 

Stop  the  jingle  of  your  gong,  while  we  sing  our  greeting  song, 
As  you  gaze  upon  our  broad  and  happy  land. 

CHORUS. — Ho,  John  Chinaman,  now,  John  Chinaman, 
Leap  o'er  the  crumbling  wall, 
Bring  along  your  tea,  for  don't  you  see 
We've  room  enough  to  welcome  all  ? 
*  By  permission  of  S.  BKAIKAKD'S  SONS,  Cleveland,  owners  of  Copyright  of  words  and  music. 


204  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

John  Chinaman,  Esquire,  though  we  really  don't  admire 
All  the  Oriental  notions  you  may  bring, 

We  have  room  enough  for  you,  and  we've  work  enough  to  do, 
And  our  nation's  song  of  welcome  now  we  sing. 

John  Chinaman,  they  say  you  have  loitered  by  the  way, 
While  the  nations  of  the  world  were  marching  on, 
So  we're  waiting  now  to  see  what  a  "  forward  march  "  there'll  be 
In  the  future  of  our  distant  neighbor,  John. 


A  TRAGICAL  TAIL* 

Oh,  listen  a  while  to  my  tragical  tale, 

Be  still  as  you  ever  can  be, 
For  I  will  be  heard  while  I  wildly  bewail 

The  fate  of  poor  Thomas  Maltese. 

CHORUS. — Ah,  pity  poor  kitty  Thomas  Maltese  ; 

Ah  me,  ah  me,  ah  me ;  ah,  pity  poor  kitty,  ah  me,  ah  ine. 

Old  Thomas  was  one  of  the  nicest  of  cats  ; 

So  kind,  and  so  clean,  and  so  quick ; 
We  s'pose  that  he  used  to  kill  mices  and  rats, 

But  we  know  that  he  killed  the  poor  chick. 

Well,  what  if  he  did  ?  must  the  poor  fellow  die  ? 

You've  enough ;  do  you  grudge  him  a  crumb? 
We're  all  fond  of  chicken,  though  may  be  more  sly, 

We're  Done  of  us  better  than  "  Tom." 


Old  Thomas  has  been  a  faithful  old  friend, 

But  now  they  declare  he  must  die ; 
I'm  sorry  to  think  of  his  terrible  end ; 

If  I  only  had  time,  I  would  cry. 

Don't  kill  the  poor  Thomas  ;  I  think  it  a  sin, 

Because  he  has  seen  his  "  best  day  ; 
But  they'll  dig  him  a  grave  and  they'll  tumble  him  in, 

And  that's  what  he'll  get  for  his  pay. 
*  By  permission  of  8.  BBAINAED'S  SONS,  Cleveland,  owners  of  Copyright  of  words  and  mnF5c. 


WHEN   GRANDMOTHER  IS   GONE.  205 


WHEN  GRANDMOTHER  IS  GONE.* 

In  her  old  arm  chair  she's  sitting, 

As  in  the  days  of  long  ago, 
While  she's  knitting,  knitting,  knitting, 

Gently  rocking  to  and  fro ; 
And  a  dark'ning  thought  steals  o'er  me, 

Like  a  shadow  o'er  the  lawn, 
Of  the  lonely  days  before  me 

After  grandmother  is  gone. 

CHORUS. — Oh,  when  grandmamma  is  gone,  when  grandmamma  is  gone, 

And  her  prayers,  and  tears  and  toils  for  us  are  o'er, 
Who  will  cheer  us  day  by  day  all  along  our  weary  way 
To  the  beautiful,  the  ever  shining  shore  ? 


Silvered  locks  beneath  the  border 

Of  her  snow-white  cap  I  see, 
"  Through  a  glass,"  though  dimly,  fondly, 

Falls  her  loving  gaze  on  me  ; 
On  the  high,  old-fashioned  bureau, 

Lies  the  choicest  book  she's  known  ; 
Who  will  turn  its  sacred  pages 

After  grandmamma  is  gone  ? 

Years  ago,  a  dear  companion 

Promised  her,  a  blushing  bride, 
"  To  protect,  to  love,  to  cherish  " 

"  E'en  till  death  should  them  divide." 
O'er  a  low  mound  'neath  the  willow, 

Summer  roses  long  have  blown; 
They  will  bloom  above  another 

After  grandmamma  is  gone. 

O'er  the  hills  the  sun  is  setting, 

And  the  twilight  shadows  come  — 
Still  she's  waiting,  waiting,  waiting, 

Till  the  Master  calls  her  home. 
Though  I  weep  for  friends  departed, 

While  they're  going  one  by  one, 
I  shall  have  one  more  in  heaven 

After  grandmamma  is  gone. 
*  By  permission  of  S.  BRAIN  ARD'S  SONS,  Cleveland,  owners  of  Copyright  of  words  and  music. 


200  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 


RESOLUTION. 

If  you've  any  task  to  do,  task  to  do, 

Let  me  whisper,  friend,  to  you,  do  it,  do  it,  do  it. 

If  you've  anything  to  say,  thing  to  say, 

True  and  needed,  yea  or  nay,  say  it,  say  it,  say  it. 

If  you've  anything  to  give,  thing  to  give, 

That  another's  joy  may  live,  give  it,  give  it,  give  it. 

If  some  hollow  creed  you  doubt,  creed  you  doubt, 

Though  the  whole  world  hoot  and  shout,  doubt  it,  doubt  it,  doubt  it. 

If  you've  any  debt  to  pay,  debt  to  pay, 

Rest  you  neither  night  nor  day,  pay  it,  pay  it,  pay  it. 


The  two  compositions  following  appeared  in  "  The  Joy,"  pub 
lished  by  Church  &  Co.  in  1873  : 


BUSHNELL. 

' '  In  me  ye  may  have  peace  ; 

My  peace  1  give  to  you. 
Rest,  troubled  soul,  rest  in  the  Lord, 
His  love  will  bear  thee  through. 

"  In  me  ye  may  have  peace ; 

Though  wars  against  thee  rise, 
Hope  thou  in  God,  be  not  dismayed, 
Lift  up  thy  weeping  eyes. 

"  In  me  ye  may  have  peace ; 

Dear  Lord,  our  refuge  be, 

In  weal  or  woe,  in  life  or  death, 

We  would  abide  in  Thee." 


WELCOME. 

Welcome,  welcome,  welcome, 

Messengers  of  love  ! 
Kindred  souls  with  joy  are  swelling, 

Like  the  blest  above. 


WELCOME.  207 

Welcome,  welcome,  welcome, 

Joy  illumes  our  way  ; 
Love  shall  reign  in  every  bosom 

With,  unbounded  sway. 

Praises,  praises,  praises, 

For  the  sacred  past, 
For  the  mercies,  rich,  abundant, 

Freely  o'er  us  cast ; 
Praises,  praises,  praises, 

For  the  glad  to-day, 
For  the  future,  grand  and  glorious, 

Praise,  oh,  praise  for  aye. 


CHAPTER  XX. 


MISCELLANEOUS  WRITINGS  OP  MR.  BLISS — A  SCHOOL  COMPOSITION  IN  1859 
— CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THK  SONG  MESSENGER — FROM  GRAVE  TO  GAY 
AND  GAY  TO  GRAVE — HOW  SHOULD  CHILDREN  SING? — PRAISE  MEETINGS.. 

npHE  following  composition  was  written  by  Mr.  Bliss  when  at 
JL    school,  in  1859 : 

You  are  aware,  my  old  friends,  that  you  live  in  an  age  of  darkness  and 
ignorance  — an  age  in  which  temptation  and  depravities  are  becoming  more 
and  more  numerous.  You,  too,  live  in  a  land  of  slavery — a  land  on  which  the 
frowns  of  a  just  condemnation  shade  with  an  uncommon  darkness.  The  cry 
of  the  oppressed  and  howl  of  the  drunkard  are  ever  to  be  heard  on  our  moun 
tains  and  in  our  valleys  ;  deeds  of  sin  are  ever  before  us  ;  the  wicked  strug 
gle  that  sin  may  ever  be  predominant ;  and  we  live  to  endure  the  deep  curse 
of  slavery  and  poverty  which  was  brought  on  by  the  sins  of  our  fathers.  These 
considerations  seem  to  forbid  that  we  should  ever  attempt  to  elevate  ourselves, 
our  country,  or  succeeding  generations  by  the  acquirement  of  knowledge. 

We  cannot  but  remember  that  ignorance  is  weakness  ;  that  an  ignorant  and 
depraved  people  will  ever  be  slaves  ;  and  that  on  the  ignorance  of  our  youth 
depends  the  future  slavery,  the  poverty,  the  misery,  the  contempt,  and  the 
disgrace  of  our  despised  country.  Go  on,  then,  with  a  contemptible  ambition 
and  dogged  perseverance  in  the  gully  which  leads  to  disgrace  and  dishonor. 
Press  downward.  Go  and  gather  thorns  from  the  marshes  of  ignorance  ;  inhale 
of  the  foulness  therein  ;  drink  deep  of  their  stagnant  pools  and  then  join  in 
the  march  of  retrogradation.  Become  ignorant  and  depraved  and  you  will  be 
contemptible.  Hate  God  and  disobey  Him,  and  continual  unhappiness  will  be 
yours. 

In  the  bound  volumes  of  the  Song  Messenger,  a  monthly  musical 
publication  formerly  issued  by  Root  &  Cady,  now  published  by  John 
Church  &  Co.,  are  found  several  contributions  from  Mr.  Bliss,  writ 
ten  over  the  pseudonym  of  Pro  Phundo  Basso.  Mr.  Bliss  was,  at 
the  time  they  were  written,  connected  in  a  musical  wray  with  Root 
&  Cady,  and  at  their  request  contributed  these  pieces  to  make 
the  paper  more  spicy  and  attractive  by  the  vein  of  fun  and  good- 


A   RETROSPECTIGRAPH.  209 

natured  satire  that  runs  through  these  compositions.  A  few  speci 
mens  are  given,  that  Mr.  Bliss'  fun-loving  and  wit-creating  char 
acteristics  may  be  appreciated. 

A  RETROSPECTIGRAPH. 
At  ye  close  of  ye  Normal  Academic  of  Musick,  at  Jaftesville,  12th  daye  of  8th  month,  1869. 

I  must  confess  almost  of  you, 

And  take  ourselves  to  thee, 
And  then  I  want  to  be  a  while, 

And  then — well,  let  us  see. 

Gone  is  our  Normal,  past,  expired — 

The  hand  of  mem'ry  sweeps 
Backward,  still  backward,  there,  I'm  wired ; 

Hush,  booby,  "why  these  weeps?" 

We've  had  a  good  time,  haven't  we? 

And  every  one  supposes 
Of  all  the  chorus,  psalm  or  glee, 

The  biggest  thing  was  "  Moses." 

As  King  of  Egypt,  I  confess, 

He's  taken  some  attention, 
But  as  a  Pennamite,  I  guess 

That  from  this  ere  convention, 

About  the  sweetest  influence  shed, 
"  Still  gently  o'er  me  stealin'," 
As  once  a  brother  poet  said, 
Is  this  kind,  social  feel  in'. 

And  let's  not  choke  it  down  with  care, 

Nor  let  the  sweet  flower  perish, 
But  keep  it  blooming  fresh  and  fair, 

And  friendly  feelings  cherish. 

And  when  life's  croquet  game  is  o'er 

And  all  our  arches  past, 
May  we  wild  rovers  rove  no  more, 

But  hit  the  port  at  last. 

Ah,  beg  your  pardon ;  by  your  grace, 

'Twas  also  my  intention, 
If  you  would  grant  me  time  and  space, 

Some  local  points  to  mention. 
14 


MEMOIR   OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

Three  cheers  for  Janes ville  I  propose, 
Hip,  hip — ah,  that  don't  bring  it ; 

If  I'd  count,  one,  two,  three,  I  s'pose . 
You'd  all  jump  up  and  sing  it. 

Such  lovely  ladies,  model  men, 

What  verse  shall  sound  your  praises  ? 

Such  soothing  sidewalks  (!),  then  again 
Such  beautiful  bouquetses. 

Joy  be  with  Janesville,  so  say  I, 

And  so  say  all  of  us, 
May  thine  aquatic  fowls  hang  high, 

Thy  singers  sing  no  wuss. 

And  now,  good  bye,  Janesvillians,  all, 
We  take  our  leave  informal ; 

May  no  sad  tho'ts  your  hearts  appal 
At  mem'ry  of  our  Normal. 

I  cannot  stop  till  I  declare 
That  no  field  hand  or  farmer 

In  music's  realm  can  we  compare 
With  our  Prof.  H.  K.  Palmer. 

And  though  the  singers  bloom  at  morn, 

At  noon  his  larynx  withers, 
While  here  for  weeks,  fatigue  we  scorn, 

And  scale  him  all  to  slithers. 

In  every  heart  some  seeds  of  truth 
Strong  root  have  daily  taken, 

And  oft  the  sweetest  songs  of  youth 
Will  thoughts  of  Root  awaken. 

We  came  to  learn  the  laws  of  song, 

And  now  we  go  as  sudden, 
And  won't  we  keep,  thro'  all  life  long, 

Kind  thoughts  of  W.  Ludden? 

And  yet  around  the  faculty 
My  muse  immured  still  lingers, 

To  celebrate  the  praise  of  he 

Who  teacheth  "  wiggling  fingers." 

A  model  teacher,  too,  is  he, 

Nor  doth  waste  words  nor  wrath  use, 
A  man  and  a  musician  see 

In  W.  S.  B.  Mathewe. 


A   LAYE.  211 


Then  my  friend  Titcoinb— friend  ?  Yes,  sir, 

Because  of  genus  homo, 
He's  more  than  homo,  he  is  vir, 

They  say  he's  found  a  chromo. 

All  sorts  of  dispositions  here 

We've  had,  though  now  dispersing, 

And  as  we  go,  I  think  'tis  clear, 
We've  all  had  first  rate  Nourse-ing. 

And  now  I'm  done,  you  think  'tis  time  ; 

Good  bye — we're  off  to-ruorrow  ; 
May  life  be  smoother  than  my  rhyme, 

And  more  of  heaven's  light  borrow. 


A  LAYE. 

Wouldst  have  renown,  dost  thirst  for  fame 
High  honors  wouldst  thou  see  ? 

Seekst  wealthe,  withal,  and  for  thy  name 
Large  popularitie  ? 

Harkee.     I  know  a  handiwaye 

Of  which  I'll  blaze  to  thee  ; 
My  charges  ?    Naught !     I'll  sing  my  laye 

Gratuitouslie. 

1  Highwaye  to  honor,"  is  ye  name 

"  And  immortal  itie," 
But  of  ye  plan  I  dare  not  claime 
Originalitie. 

While  he  his  conscience  sore  must  hurt, 

Whate'er  his  calling  be, 
Who  doth  to  wealthe  and  fame  assert 

Insensibilitie. 

Do  this,  and  thus  thy  aims  conceal, 

So  noted  thou  shalt  be, 
Nor  word  nor  look  shall  e'er  reveal 

Thine  ingenuitie. 


212  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

First :  Love  thyself  all  things  above, 
So  loved  thou  shalt  be, 

And  joy  at  finding  in  thy  love 
Compatibilitie. 

Next :  Praise  thyself,  thyself  may  bless, 

Thyself  continuallie ; 
So  shall  thy  sweet  self-praise  possess 

Iinmutabilitie. 

And  yet  two  simple  souls,  I  praye, 
Might  'scape  ye  rules  scot  free — 

Ye  mindeful  list'ner  to  my  laye, 

And  eke  PRO  PHTJNDO  B. 

December,  1869. 


HIS  COURTSHIPPE. 

Written  by  himself  with  ye  full  aud  williuge  consent  of  bis  lawful  and  beloved  Miranda. 

(In  ye  tone  of  A.) 

Twas  on  a  sun  full  morning, 

All  in  ye  month  of  May, 
When  all  ye  birds  and  lambkins 

Did  skippe  and  eke  did  playe  ; 
A  songfull  youth  did  saunter 

With  hearte  so  glad  and  gaye, 
Adown  a  trodden  cow-path, 

Yclept  ye  "  Milkey  Waye  " 
(Which  youth  itt  was  Pro  Phundo 

Maybe  'twere  good  to  saye), 
His  tunefull  voice  lamenting 

Of  "  faithfull  ole  dogg  Traye," 
Whose  gentle,  kinde  attentions 

Nor  age  nor  grieffe  could  swaye. 

Bewhiles  ye  kine  bereaved 

Most  mournfully  did  braye, 
All  for  ye  youthfull  callings 

Ye  butcherman  did  slaye  : 
Full  many  a  cock  a-crowing 

With  many  a  piping  jay, 
To  greete  ye  gladsome  morning 

Did  cheerfully  essaye, 


HIS   COUETSHIPPE.  213 

Likewise  to  joine  Pro  Phundo, 

And  swell  his  roundelaye  ; 
Ye  gorgeous  sun  aslantwise 

Did  send  Ins  kindest  raye  ; 
Beglimmering  on  ye  milk  paile 

Of  Miss  Miranda  Gray. 

Pro  Phundo's  hearte  did  kindle 

As  it  were  kiln-dried  haye 
Upon  a  bar  post  leaning 

(Long  since  gone  to  decaye), 
Ye  question  there  he  popped, 

Nor  risked  to  delay, 
Whiles  Miss  Miranda  blithely 

Drew  forth  ye  foaming  spray e  ; 
Nor  fright  nor  fitt  of  fainting 

Did  she  at  this  betraye, 
But  gentlemaidly  courage 

And  valour  did  displaye. 
Consented  \*  hence  Pro  Phundo 

Pro  Phundo  is  to-day  e 


-  -  '  if 


Come,  all  ye  sad  and  single, 

Who  listen  to  my  laye, 
Attende  unto  my  counsell 

And  eke  ye  same  obeye. 
From  sweete  and  solid  comfor.te 

Prythee  no  longer  straye  ; 
From  foolish  affectation 

Turn  heartily  awaye. 
Be  honest  in  your  courtshippe, 

And  frank  also,  I  praye. 

When  to  an  honest  damsell 
An  honest  youth  doth  paye 

His  honest  hearte's  affection, 
Why  should  she  answer  "  Naye  ?  " 

"  Begone  ! "  her  tonge  a  telling, 
Whiles  all  her  hearte  says  "  staye  1 " 

Pro  Phundo  and  Miranda, 

May  all  be  blest  as  they.     ~ 
Jannary,  1870. 


214  MEMOIIl   OF   P.    T.    BLISS. 


HOW  INTO  MUSIC. 

Miranda  says  — wbitch  makes  itt  so— 

I'd  better  write  and  tell 
Why  into  musick  I  did  go, 

And  where  and  how,  as  well. 

No  doubt  to  me  you've  noticed  oft 

His  is  ye  longest  life, 
And  eke  his  head  doth  lie  most  soft 

Who  most  doth  please  his  wyfe. 

So  list,  give  ear,  attende  while  I 

My  narrative  unfold ; 
So  shall  my  head  reposef  ull  lie 

For  doing  as  I'm  tolde. 

''  Why  I'm  in  musick  ?  "  oh,  my  eye 

I  can  no  clearlier  see, 
Than  I  could  guess  ye  reason  why 
Miranda  married  me  I 

Where  f  'neath  ye  tunef  ull  hemlocks  dear 
That  roll  their  anthems  grand 

O'er  Pennsylvania's  northern  tier  — 
Miranda's  native  land. 

Elk  Run  first  taught  me  melodie, 
While  angling  through  its  dales, 

Its  saw-mills  gave  my  rhythm  to  me, 
Its  sun-fish  gave  me  scales. 

Ye  friskie  fox  staccato  taught, 

Ye  screech  owl  tremolo  ; 
Ye  mill  wheels  mezzo  forte  brought, 

Ye  dam  fortissimo. 

Ye  scythe  whet  and  ye  cross  cut's  ring, 

Ye  ox  cart's  tenore  creake 
Did  to  my  hearte  a  musick  sing 

That  words  can  never  speake. 

Thus  all  things  musick  brought  to  me, 
Whitch  still  to  me  doth  cling, 

Whitch  same,  I  argue,  easilie 
Did  me  to  musick  bring. 


WHAT  POE  ? 

How  into  musick  I  did  go 

I'll  lastlie  saye  to  thee, 
And  of  my  scantie  ways  I  know 

Thou'lt  laugh  right  inerrilie. 

In  '59  resolved  I 

Tu  "  go  itt  "  though  so  young, 
So  started  out  with — purpose  high — 
"  Old  Fannie"  and  ye  "  pung." 

O'er  Bumptown  hills  and  Litchfield's  heights, 

By  Susquehanna's  shore, 
I  taught,  by  tallow  candle's  light, 

Myself,  if  no  one  more. 

In  schoolhouse,  church  and  tavern  halle 
Ye  "singin'  skule"  was  founde; 

But  once  a  week  on  each  I'd  call, 
And  so  I  "boarded  'round." 

Two  dollars  by  a  night  received 

My  every  waunt  supplied, 
Miranda  (may  I  be  believed) 

Was  also  satisfied. 

Through  snowdrift,  mud  and  rain  I'd  ride, 

By  turnpike,  gulfe  or  ferrie, 
Miranda  nioastlie  by  my  side, 

And  we  were  happy — verrie. 

Such  lots  of  friends  and  worlds  of  funn 

Would  more  than  fill  this  letter, 
I'll  stop  and  write  another  one, 

Miranda  says  I'd  better. 
February,  1870. 


WHAT   FOR? 

Why  do  you  sing  ?  Say  ?  can  you  tell  ? 

Speak,  Tenor,  Base,  Soprano  I 
Why  all  this  fuss  of  "  scale"  and  "  swell" — 

This  "  mezzo  "  and  "piano?  " 

Why  waste  at  "  Normals  "  time  and  strength- 
Say  nothing  of  the  money  — 

To  talk  of  "  power,  pitch  and  length  ?  " 
It  seems  to  me  so  funny. 


MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Just  here  1  want  to  stop  and  laugh 
To  see  Don  Quix  dismounted, 

When  asked  the  spaces  of  the  staff — 
Don't  answer  till  you've  counted. 

Then  think  of  taking  lessons,  too  — 

A  notion  universal — 
And  some,wi*h  nothing  else  to  do, 

Frequent  the  choir  rehearsal ! 

Alas,  this  wanton  waste  of  breath 

Doth  rouse  my  indignation, 
And  loudly — so  my  judgment  saith — 

Demands  investigation. 

"  Why  do  you  sing? "  Here  comes  Lo  Dee 

With  voice  of  mimic  thunder  ; 
He  always  flats  on  fourth  space  G, 
But  that's  a  minor  blunder. 

"  Haw,  haw  !  old  boy,  who  wouldn't  sing? 

My  treat ;  come  on,"  he  thundered  ; 
"  Two  thousand  from  the  minstrel  ring, 

For  chorister  twelve  hundred." 

"  Why  do  you,"  ah,  who  comes  ?— let's  see — 

Walk  in,  Professor  Blowhardt; 
They  say  you  sing  the  tenor  B. 
Be  seated  ;  you  need  no  card. 

You  say  you've  left  the  St.  Paul  choir. 

I've  heard  the  tale  completer  ; 
They  couldn't  raise  your  sal'ry  higher 

Unless  they  robbed  poor  Peter. 

"  Why  do  " — Miss  Hisee  is  it  you  ? — 

You  want  a  what  ?  position  ? 
But  fifteen  hundred  won't  quite  do 
For  such  a  fine  musician  ? 

O,  yes  you'll  advertise,  I  see, 

With  lengthy  explanation — 
No  odds,  you  say,  what  liturgy 

Or  what  denomination. 


THE   KEVERIE. 

Why !  Bless  my  soul,  here's  Prima  Don 

Signora  Al  To  Etta  ! 
With  diamond  brooch  and  broad  chignon, 

And  says  "  Write  me  a  letter 

To  introduce  me  in  St.  L 

To  Mr.  Blank's  committee  ; 
They  say  they'll  pay  their  quartet  well ; 

I'm  tired  of  this  dull  city." 


"  Jesus  loves  me,  loves  me  well — 

'Twas  my  little  daughter,  Nell, 
Out  beneath  the  cherry  tree 
Singing  quite  extempore. 

"  Darling,  come."    I  call  her  twice, 
But  the  bird-like,  childish  voice 
Caroled  still  the  sweet  refrain, 
So  my  calling  was  in  vain. 

Then  I  went  and  joined  her  there, 

Kissed  her  cheeks  and  stroked  her  hair, 
"  Darling,"  said  I,  "  Can  you  tell 

Why  you  sing  ?  "     Then  little  Nell 

Raised  her  witching  hazel  eyes 

With  a  look  of  sweet  surprise, 
"  Cause  I  love  to,"  answered  she ; 

"  Papa,  come  and  sing  with  me." 
August,  1870. 


THE  REVERIE. 

'Twas  night.    Above  South  Bend  the  silvery  stars 
Shone  softly  ;  and  the  dust  that  all  day  long 
Kept  drifting  heap  on  heap,  until  the  streets 
Like  turbid  rivers  rapid  rolling  seemed 
And  on  the  sidewalk  gathered  ankle  deep ; 
And  in  the  parlor,  dining-room  and  hall 
Flew  freely,  penetrating  everywhere 
In  copious  showers,  begriming  hands  and  face 
In  rich  abundance,  and  in  clouds  profuse 
Eyes,  ears,  hair,  teeth  beclouding,  was  at  rest. 


218  MEMOIK  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

On  the  veranda,  where  the  cooling  breeze, 
Sweet-scented  as  by  water  lilies,  rose, 
Alone  in  somber  silence,  thus  I  mused : 

"  The  Normal's  ended  ;  and  how  brief  it  seems ; 
Begun  —half  done — and,  ere  we  knew  it — gone, 
And  with  it  what?    ****** 

(Some  '  skeeters/  I  am  sure.) 

How  rich  and  wise  we  came  ;  and  though  our  friends, 
The  teachers  and  the  dear  South  Benders  say 
All  right — good  bye  1 — we  leave,  alas !  how  poor, 
And  so  lament — (oh,  bother,  dogs,  be  still :) 

Down  in  the  country  we  were  first — here  last ; 
There  king  of  toadies  ;  here  a  toad  'mong  kings. 
And  what  a  fall  was  there,  my  countrymen, 
When  all  our  princely  ornaments  did  turn 
To  warts  unseemly. 

Ah,  what  sickening  grief, 
When  Maestro  Bassini  said,  Not  so  ; 
And  down  to  '  Zca,  i-a '  with  saddened  heart 
Ingloriously  we  tumbled ; 

or  when  he 

Who  touched  the  keys,  and  at  his  bidding  gushed 
With  limpid,  liquid  sound  the  '  silver  spring,' 
Our  fort(e)  demolished  with  his  magic  '  touch,' 
And  then,  like  Master  Mason  as  he  was, 
On  firm  foundation  taught  us  how  to  build 
More  lasting  structure ; 

or  when  G.  F.  R. 

Urbanely  smiled  and  drew  with  cruel  skill 
The  lever  of  our  teaching  safety  valve, 
And  all  the  gas  of  self-esteem  escaped, 
And  with  a  chill  of  disappointment  sore 
We  saw  the  bubble  of  our  fame  collapse  ; 
Or  when  a  voice  from  Boston  said  '  luni  turn  ! ' 
And  we  were  silent,  or  '  achieved '  cried, 
'  A  new  created  world,'  right  on  the  tick.' " 

What  wonder  we  go  home  disconsolate, 

And  fail  to  see  wherein  the  'vantage  lies 

Of  tending  Normals  thus  ?     But  there's  the  bell 

Notre  Dame — 'tis  midnight — I  retire, 


CANST  THOU   IMAGINE  ?  219 

Miranda  long  in  sleep  serene  hath  lain, 

Sweetly  unconscious  of  my  whereabouts  ; 

Softly  my  downy  couch  I  seek  and  so 

To  wonted  labor,  teachers  hence  repair, 

Though  humbled,  earnest;  though  in  weakness  strong. 

Boast  not,  but  labor  patiently;  anon 

The  glory  cometh. 

Bear  in  mind, 

The  empty  hogshead  makes  the  louder  noise  ; 
And  brass  may  glimmer  e'en  where  gold  is  dim, 
The  shallow  brook  may  down  the  rivers  roll, 
And  you— Whist,  Hush  ! 

Miranda  waketh ; 
I  may  '  quit.' 

September,  1870. 


CANST  THOU  IMAGINE? 

Well,  there, 

I  declare ! 

I  can't  sing  or  write  a  paean 
Fit  to  sound  the  praise  of  Leon, 

Mid  this  humming, 

Fiddling,  drumming, 
Though  a  pleasant  street  to  be  on. 

There,  hark ! 

Yes,  it's  Clark- 
Fife,  guitar,  triangle,  flute, 
Organ, — anything  to  suit, — 

Pipe  and  horn, 

Night  and  morn, 
Rumpty  tumpty,  hootty  toot. 

Hey,  boys, 

What  a  noise  ! 

Ah,  I  wonder  what  that  air  is, 
Wonder  if  they  know  what  care  is  I 

Ho,  ho,  ho  ! 

See  the  show — 
1  Who  can  beat  that  ?  "    Rome  or  Paris  ? 


MEMOIK  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

Canst  thou  imagine  a  beautiful  day 
And  a  long  wagon-box  half  full  o'  hay 
A-rolling  afar  o'er  the  mountains  away, 
Containing  a  dozen  of  singers  so  gay  ? 

Canst  thou  imagine  a  beautiful  tree, 
A-spreading  its  branches  so  fair  and  so  free, 
A-saying  to  you  and  a- singing  to  me — 
"  Evergreen,  evergreen  mayst  thou  be  ?  " 

Canst  thou  imagine  a  beautiful  bird, 
A-singing  the  sweetest  song  you  ever  heard  ? 
Listen  thou,  listen  thou,  catch  every  word, 
So  should  this  bosom  by  this  song  be  stirred. 

Canst  thou  imagine  a  beautiful  stream, 
A-babbling,  a-babbling  along  like  a  dream, 
Like  life's  low  lullaby  doth  it  not  seem  ? 
Here  we  uncheck,  thus,  and  water  our  team. 

(A  large  snake  is  seen  in  the  water  ;  the  off  horse  starts  up  suddenly,  a 
carpet  bag  falls  out  behind,  etc,  etc.) 


'Twas  night- 
Clad  in  white, 

I  was  sleeping — sleeping  some ; 

For  Miranda  was — yes — dumb ; 
But  she  woke 
Me  and  spoke — 
The  Turks  !  The  Turks !  They  com(b) !  they  com(b) ! 

"  Then  there  was  hurrying  to  and  fro," 
And  I  am  very  much  afraid 
I  ne'er  again  on  earth  shall  know 
Another  just  such  serenade  ! 


The  Leon  farmers  and  their  farms — 
The  floral  beauties  of  the  vales, 
Its  daughters,  daisies — matchless  charms — 
I  can't  describe — my  pencil  fails. 

Sing?  Yes, 

More  or  less, 

But  it  isn't  my  intention 


HOW  SHOULD  CHILDREN"  SING  ? 

To  describe  our  Grand  Convention 
In  this  letter, 
Though  a  better 
Is  beyond  my  comprehension. 
No.  2  Clark  street,  Leon,  New  York,  October,  1870. 


ROMB,  PA.,  May  23,  1870, 

MR.  EDITOR: 

Is  it  pretty  to  sing  in  the  cars  ? 

We  drew  out  a  thousand  miles  of  music  from  the  "  Prize  "  last  week,  com- 
itig  from  Chicago.  There  was  also  an  opposition  quartet,  led  by  a  Buffalo  edi 
tor,  accompanied  by  spotted  pasteboards  and  a  wicker  demijohn.  Supported 
by  some  ministerial  and  musical  friends,  we  opened  on  them  such  batteries  as 
"  The  Armor  of  Light,"  "  ImmanuePs  Land,"  "  There's  a  Light  in  the  Valley," 
etc.,  which  soon  compelled  them  to  beat  an  ignominious  retreat,  taking  their 
demijohn,  but  leaving  a  visible  odor  of  poor  tobacco  and  worse  whisky. 

But  didn't  we  have  a  pleasant  children's  meeting  last  night,  introducing  the 
"  Prize  "  as  a  prize  to  the  delighted  Sunday  School  ?  and  didn't  we  enjoy  their 
hearty  hand-shakings  and  their  boisterous  "  Thank  you,  sirs  ?  "  And  didn't  we 
pick  up  the  bouquets  that  were  thrown  for  "  Remembered,"  etc.,  if  it  was  Sunday 

night  ? 

"  New  life  I  breathe  while  on  the  sea," 

Or  in  "  my  country  home  ; " 
And  "  a  farmer's  life  is  the  life  for  me," 
But  "  there's  no  place  like  " — Rome. 

And  if  I  had  time, 
I'd  tell  you  in  rhyme 

The  farmer's  dolce  joys  ; 
But  such  a  song 
Would  be  so  long 

That — ho,  here  come  the  boys 
With  an  extra  hoe, 
And  away  we  go 

To  the  field  to  plant  the  corn  ; 
How  I  love  the  flowers, 

And  the  blast  of  the  dinner  horn. 


HOW  SHOULD  CHILDREN  SING? 

All  agree  that  children  sliould  sing.  The  time  for  discussing  that  question 
eeased  when  music,  as  a  science,  began  to  be  taught  in  our  common  schools  ; 
when  piano  and  organ  became  as  common  in  household  furniture  as  book-case 
and  bureau,  and  when  instruction  book  and  sheet  music  came  to  be  as  famil 
iar  to  our  boys  and  girls  as  spelling-book  and  newspaper. 


222  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

All  know  that  children  love  to  sing.  Next  after  the  adoption  of  a  resolution 
that  the  birds  "  can  and  are  hereby  authorized  to  warble,"  may  come  the  ques 
tion  of  granting  the  children — God's  own  bright  birds  of  Paradise — permission 
to  express  their  delights  in  song.  All  thoughtful,  observing  people  admit  the 
power  of  children's  songs.  We  may  question  the  introduction  into  Sunday 
Schools  of  object-teaching,  of  blackboard  exercises,  or  of  the  library  books  ; 
but  we  must  have  singing  books.  A  Sunday  School  may  prosper  in  a  dark 
basement  room,  with  low  walls  and  poor  ventilation,  but  music  is  indispensa 
ble.  You  may  have  a  flower  garden  without  a  fountain,  a  parlor  without 
pictures,  or  a  summer  day  without  the  sunshine  ;  but  do  not  expect  a  wide 
awake,  stirring,  effective  Sunday  School — a  school  that  shall  enjoy  a  healthful 
popularity,  and  be  in  the  highest  sense  successful,  without  Sunday  School  sing 
ing — the  "  Sunshine  of  Songs." 

Therefore,  we  are  not  here  to  meet  the  question,  "  Shall  the  children  sing  ?  " 
but  to  suggest  WHAT,  and  HOW.  Singing  is  emotional  utterance.  Singing 
"earnestly,"  "heartily,"  "  lustily,"  as  Wesley  directs, .is  one  thing,  and  a  good 
one ;  making  a  loud,  harsh,  discordant  sound  is  quite  another  and  different 
exercise. 

While  all  that  really  deserves  the  name  of  music  is  usually  regulated  by 
the  law  of  musical  form,  it  does  not  follow  that  all  emotional  utterance  is 
singing.  All  music  is  sound  ;  but  all  sounds  are  not  music. 

What  shall  the  children  sing?  Unquestionably  we  cannot  be  too  careful 
to  guard  against  putting  a  cup  of  poisoned  song  to  their  youthful  lips,  and  yet 
I  cannot  sympathize  with  those  who  would  have  only  doctrinal,  didactic,  dog 
matic  songs,  or  rather  sermons.  If  a  child  really  sings,  he  must  not  only  fully 
understand,  but  love  the  meaning  of  the  words  employed. 

We  must  not  expect  the  infant  class  or  ten-year-olds  to  appreciate  and 
enjoy  as  we  do  that  which  we  call  the  best,  in  sentiment  or  in  song.  Remem 
ber,  "  milk  for  babes,  strong  meat  for  men."  Make  the  difference  apparent ; 
strive  to  lead  them  to  a  higher  musical  taste  and  nobler  spiritual  enjoyments, 
but  do  let  the  children  sing  of  birds  as  well  as  of  burdens  ;  of  beauty  as  well 
as  of  duty  ;  of  earth  pleasures  as  well  as  of  heavenly  treasures  ;  of  temporal 
employments  as  well  as  of  spiritual  enjoyments.  Let  song  develop  feeling, 
while  it  never  fails  to  direct  and  purify  the  affections. 

I  well  remember  a  loving,  large- eyed  lad  who  in  the  day-school  could 
scarcely  sing  the  old  song  of  A  B  C  D  E  F  OJ,  but  that  the  tears  would  fall  and 
mark  the  time.  The  lad  knew  not  why  he  wept,  but  the  faithful  Christian 
teacher  turned  this  mighty  motive  power  to  heavenly  purposes,  and  gave  these 
outflowing  sympathies  wholesome  food.  So  the  love  of  song  grew  and  pre 
vailed  ;  so  the  channel  of  the  affections  widened,  and  so  the  lad,  though  taller 
grown,  stands  here  to  plead  for  song. 

Thank  God  for  simple  schpol-day  song, 

Scorn  not  the  childish  lay  ; 
The  feeble  spark  of  love-light  f anued 

May  end  iii  heavenly  day. 


HOW  CHILDREN   SHOULD  SING?  223 

In  order  to  sing1  properly  and  profitably,  the  time  must  be  entirely  given  to 
and  the  attention  wholly  fixed  upon  the  exercise.  No  slamming  of  doors,  no 
communication  among  officers,  no  walking,  talking  nor  parade  of  visitors 
should  be  allowed  to  disturb.  We  might  as  well  walk  or  talk  during  a  prose 
prayer  (I  did  not  say  prosy)  as  to  thus  disturb  a  prayer  in  verse.  I  would  as 
soon  think  of  speaking  to  a  brother  while  praying  as  while  singing. 

Then  it  seems  to  me  the  leader  of  children's  singing  needs  often  to  say. 
"Not  too  loud."  Earnestness  is  not  always  best  manifested  by  loudness. 
Noise  is  not  always  power.  Besides,  more  voices  are  injured  by  forced,  screamy 
sounds  than,  perhaps,  by  all  other  evil  means  combined.  "  Like  pastor,  like 
people  ; "  BO,  like  choristers,  like  choir.  If  the  leader  be  careless  in  style,  in 
tonation,  pronunciation,  etc.,  tbose  led  will  very  likely  be  even  more  so. 
"  Good  singing  "  means,  first,  sweet,  pleasant  tones,  true  intonation,  distinct 
articulation,  etc.  Earnestness,  vigor,  life,  spirit,  etc.,  come  afterwards,  and 
depend  upon  the  first.  Mr.  O.  Blackman,  teacher  of  music  in  the  high  and 
primary  schools  of  Chicago,  and  author  of  "Graded  Singers,"  for  juvenile 
instruction,  says  that  the  Sunday  hour  in  some  of  the  mission  schools  nearly 
counteracts  all  the  week's  work,  by  this  terrible  practice  of  screaming. 

In  teaching  children  new  songs,  is,  perhaps,  the  greatest  care  necessary. 
Let  the  chorister  sing  over  two  or  three  times,  in  easy,  pleasant,  correct  man 
ner,  lines  and  stanzas  of  the  hymn,  thus  giving  good  examples,  which  in  music 
as  in  morals,  are  much  more  powerful  than  precepts ;  especially  if  precept  and 
example  differ. 

May  not  the  Sunday  School  meet  once  a  week,  say  on  Thursday  or  Friday 
evening,  and  practice  their  music  ?  Now,  don't  frown  and  say,  "  impracticable," 
unless  you  have  tried  and  found  it  so.  Usually  young  people  are  glad  enough 
to  be  called  together ;  and  cannot  a  "  singing  meeting  "  be  made  interesting  and 
profitable?  Engage  some  earnest  lady  or  gentleman  leader  at  a  fair  salary  ; 
if  convenient,  have  a  piano  or  organ  to  accompany ;  invite  the  choir  of  the 
church  to  assist,  and  singing  meetings  will  "pay."  Invariably  question  the 
children  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  difficult  and  unusual  words  of  the  song,  so 
that  first  of  all  they  may  be  able  to  sing  with  the  head — that  is,  "  with  the  un 
derstanding."  I  have  a  painful  recollection  of  some  ridiculous  misconceptions 
of  such  words  as  "  Prone  to  wander,"  which  I  thought  meant  a  long-legged 
fowl  wandering  in  a  swamp  !  "  Fearless  I'll  launch  away,"  was  simply  a  mis 
pronunciation  of  lunch  away.  Nor  do  I  like  to  admit  that  my  comprehension 
was  unusually  dull ;  in  proof  of  which,  let  me  mention  the  case  of  a  little  imagi 
native  listener — he  sings  among  the  angels  now,  and  can  understand  their  song 
better,  1  am  sure — who  came  home  from  Sunday  School  one  day  praising  the 
song,  but  wondering  at  the  request,  "  Let  me  die  in  a  harness-shop  ! "  You 
smile  at  the  mistake ;  but  is  it  not  a  serious  neglect  not  to  give  the  dear  chil 
dren  more  light?  One  of  the  greatest  evils  of  fashionable  singing  is  the  in 
articulate  delivery  of  words. 

Adaptation  of  songs  to  the  lesson,  especially  that  of  the  closing  piece,  is 
very  important,  though  often  disregarded  by  superintendents  and  choristers. 
How  much  more  effective  a  lesson  when  "harrowed  in"  by  an  appropriate 


224:  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

song ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  how  often  have  we  seen  the  impression  of  a 
lesson  almost  completely  removed  by  the  unfortunate  introduction  of  some  in 
appropriate  rattle-te-bang  song,  because  the  children  could  "  make  it  go"  well, 
or  visitors  were  present,  and  the  school  must  be  made  to  "  show  off." 

A  great  need  in  all  Sunday-school  work  Is  sincerity.  Nowhere  is  hypocrisy 
so  wofully  apparent,  so  generally  tolerated,  and  so  powerfully  taught,  as  in 
singing.  What  else  can  we  expect  when  children  see  the  church  members 
turning  leaves  or  idly  gazing  about  the  room  while  singing  "  Nearer,  my  God, 
to  Thee,"  or  witness  a  solo  or  quartet  display  the  words,  "Jesus,  Lover  of 
my  Soul,"  to  the  tune  "  When  the  Swallows  Homeward  Fly  ?  "  Not  to  speak 
of  a  singing  master  who,  if  he  be  not  otherwise  intemperate,  stands  before 
them  with  tobacco-stained  teeth,  or  with  smoke-tainted  breath,  singing  the 
sweet,  pure  songs  of  Zion. 

Above  all  things,  then,  sing  and  thereby  teach  others  to  sing  feelingly,  with 
the  spirit.  Show  your  sincerity  in  song  worship,  and  the  children  will  learn 
to  be  sincere.  In  a  word,  if  you  would  have  them  sing  sweetly,  earnestly  and 
devotionally,  sing  thus  before  them  ;  for  in  nothing  are  children  more  apt  at 
imitation  than  in  singing. 

Sing  not  alone  with  lip  and  voice, 
But  with  the  heart  and  soul  rejoice  ; 
Then  they  that  hear  will  join  thy  praise, 
And  real,  heartfelt  songs  shall  raise. 
April,  1873. 


THE  POWER  OF  SONG. 

Sunday  School  worker,  do  you^appreciate  the  power  of  song  ? 

Think  how  readily  children  catch  the  meaning  of  a  hymn,  and  how  last 
ing  may  be  its  influence.  Remember  how  many  have  been  led  to  the  cleans 
ing  Fountain  through  the  instrumentality  of  song,  when  argument  and  en 
treaty  have  failed.  Cannot  you,  yourself,  remember  now  songs  that  you  heard 
in  childhood  ?  More,  can  you  not  recall  the  very  voice  and  manner  in  which 
they  were  sung?  While  the  sermons — ably  written,  well  delivered  sermons, 
with  their  nights  of  oratory  and  tender  appeal— where  are  they?  Their  very 
texts  forgotten  !  Their  flashing  brilliancy  lost  in  the  dark  sea  of  forgetfulness, 
at  least  so  far  as  you  are  concerned.  Not  so  the  song.  Many  of  us  can  remem 
ber  the  tunes  and  hymns  sung  in  church  last  Sunday.  How  many  can  repeat 
the  text  from  which  the  sermon  was  published  ? 

Fellow-singer,  are  you  not  guilty  of  under-estimating  our  talents,  while  we 
may  be  over-estimating  our  rights  ?  Bury  not  the  God-given  talent,  but  with 
all  thy  powers  serve  the  Master.  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  then,  all  ye  people,  both 
young  men  and  maidens,  old  men,  and  children  ;  "  and  let  us  remember,  when 
we  stand  up  in  the  congregation  to  sing,  that  we  are  either  singing  to  the  Lord. 


DIRECTIONS   TO   YOUNG   WEITEES   OF   MUSIC.  225 

or  (is  it  possible  ?)  taking  His  name  in  vain!  Praising,  or  playing  the  hypo 
crite  !  Worshiping  or  mocking  ! 

Sing  on,  then,  oh  children,  teachers,  Christians  !  and  may  there  be  not  a  few 
who  hear,  and  learn  to  love  the  story  of  the  cross,  by  singing  it.  Sing  on,  fellow 
traveler,  and  may  there  meet  you  in  the  "  Better  Land"  many  a  redeemed  soul 
washed  and  made  white,  to  whose  mortal  ear  your  voice  is  familiar,  and  who 
will  give  thanks  eternally  for  being  led  thither  by  the  sanctified  influence  of 
your  song. 

June,  1873. 


TO  YOUNG  WRITERS  OF  MUSIC. 

EASY   DIRECTIONS. 

1.  "Write,  much.    All  old  masters  wrote  much  ;  otherwise  they  would  never 
have  obtained  what  you  and  I  so  much  desire — immortality.     For  instance, 
what  would  one  page  of  Shakespeare's  "  Paradise  as  you  like  it,"  have  amounted 
to?    Or,  read  a  single  paragraph  of  Mark  Twain's  "  Impudence  Abroad,"  and 
stop !     No,  my  dear  young  friend,  with  the  voluminous  Beethoven,  the  pro 
digious  Mozart  and  the  everlasting  Wagner  for  your  illustrious  examples — 
write,  write,  write  !  ! 

2.  Think  well  of  your  own.    Nothing  can  be  more  unnatural  in  a  young 
author,  writer,  poet,   etc.,    than   lack   of  appreciation.     I  speak   with  much 
earnestness  on  this  point ;  for,  depend  upon  it,  your  reputation  at  home  and 
abroad,  nine  times  out  of  ten,  will  be  no  "  freak  of  fortune"  bestowed  by  fairy 
hands,  or  thrown  gratuitously  at  your  feet  by  an  indulgent  public,  but  will 
begin  and  end  with  yourself. 

Think  of  the  youthful  Mendelssohn  rehearsing  snatches  of  his  "  Creation  " 
before  the  crowned  heads  of  England  and  the  Sandwich  Islands  1  Think  of 
the  immortal  Nero  playfully  stabbing  his  youthful  associates,  so  that  he  might 
gain  the  first  prize  in  thorough  bass  and  madrigal !  Think  of  Mephistopheles, 
etc.,  ad  lib. 

3.  Live  and  die  poor.    Here  a  great  many  fail.    'Tis  so  hard  to  continually 
and  effectually  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  seductive  wiles  of  earthly  riches.     Alas  I 
how  many  buds  of  poesy  are  choked  by  sordid  thoughts  of  filthy  lucre  !     How 
many  sweet   singers   have  bren  gagged  by    Mammon's  golden  chain !     How 
many  Fra  Diavolos  have  been  lured  from  zenith  of  the  lofty  art  by  the  ignis 
fatuus  of  earth's  glittering  gems  !     How  many  a  poor  singing-master  do  you 
know,  who  is  likely  soon  to  retire  and  die  in  affluence  ! 

Remember  Edgar  A.  Poe,  who,  in  spite  of  "  marble  bust,"  his  "  velvet  so  fa  " 
and  "  purple  lining,"  was  poor  as  a  raven.  Remember  poor  John  Howard  Paine 
who  wrote  some  sweet  verses  about  home  and  birds,  etc.,  and  then  died  with 
out  one.  Remember  Rossini,  Parepa,  etc. ;  be  careful  to  live  poor  and  die  poor. 

4.  Go  West !     Doubtless  upon  this,  more  than  anything  else,  depends  your 
future   greatness.     By  all  means   follow  the  star    of  empire !     What  would 
Christopher  Columbus  have  known  of  fame  to-day  if  he  had  sailed  North  from 


226  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Genoa  (or  even  East),  instead  of  West  ?  Where  would  the  May  Flower  have 
landed,  had  she  pointed  otherwise  than  West  ?  Remember,  oh,  my  young  Ver- 
dis,  Handels,  Goethes,  Chaucers,  Coopers,  etc — remember  the  great  Yo  Semite. 
Remember  the  great  undeveloped  future.  Remember  Brigham  Young. 
Remember  the  Modocs,  and  go  West. 
June,  1873. 


IT  PAID. 

I  refer  to  our  vacation.  Spiritually,  physically  and  financially,  it  was  a 
success.  Here  is  the  record  . 

One  week  visiting  at  Portage,  New  York,  amid  scores  of  relatives  and  the 
scenery  of  the  Genesee  River,  the  wildest  in  creation  (the  scenery,  not  the  rel 
atives).  One  week  working  on  the  farm,  "  the  dear  old  farm,"  in  Rome,  Penn 
sylvania,  and  my  arm  is  lame  yet.  One  week  convention  in  Rome,  and  it  was 
joyous  (new).  One  week  in  Towanda,  Pennsylvania,  likewise  joyful  (first 
time).  One  week  in  Chester,  Vermont,  at  State  Sunday  School  Convention, 
"Brilliant  with  Bliss  and  Sunshine  I"  (Original.) 

Firstly,  then,  it  paid  spiritually.  Any  man's  heart  will  be  rested  by  going 
home  and  looking  again  into  the  loving  faces  of  his  mother  and  sisters.  A 
singing  man  will  be  much  cheered  by  taking  his  own  new  book  and  going  back 
to  his  "  own  native  land  "  for  a  convention.  But  how  my  soul  feasted  on  the 
Sunday  School  praise  meetings,  Bible  readings,  etc.,  and  the  wonderful  sym 
pathy  of  the  Vermont  State  Convention.  C.  M.  Wyman,  whose  name  is  so  pre 
cious  to  many  who  will  read  this,  used  to  teach  music  in  Chester,  and  his 
brother,  remarkably  like  him,  was  in  the  Convention.  Do  you  wonder  that  I 
enjoyed  making  mention  of  his  intense  Christian  character  and  musical  fervor? 
Do  you  blame  me  for  asking  Vermont  to  send  us  more  such  men  ?  Do  you 
suppose  I  could  then  and  there*sing  his  own  "  Immanuel's  Land"  unmoved? 
Surely,  voice  and  skill  are  much,  but  soul  and  character  more. 

Secondly,  it  paid  physically.  All  singing  men  are  °not  constitutionally 
lifters.  Therefore  the  variety  of  digging  potatoes  for  one's  own  breakfast,  of 
splitting  kindlings,  shaking  apple  trees,  engineering  wheelbarrows,  etc.,  to  say 
nothing  of  moving  pianos,  transferring  baggage  and  carrying  valises,  babies, 
etc.,  has  been  found  useful.  Depend  upon  it,  my  dear  fellow-sitter,  the  think 
ing  machine  will  not  "  produce  "  unless  some  attention  be  paid  to  the  furnace, 
boiler,  pipes,  etc.  Don't  crowd.  You're  on  time  !  What's  the  hurry  ? 

Lastly,  (and  leastly,  if  we  only  could  see  it),,  it  paid  financially.  Of  course 
the  expense  was,  like  many  a  musical  man's  expense,  greatly  in  excess  of  re 
ceipts,  but  money  is  worth  only  what  it  will  bring,  and  we  doubt  if  ever  the 
money  expended  would  have  brought  us  more  satisfaction.  Somehow  the 
"  panic  "  didn't  seem  to  reach  Vermont,  as  they  paid  and  over-paid  us,  and  no 
collection  !  I  go  to  Clinton,  Missouri,  next  week,  and  I  hope  it  will  pay. 

Musically  and  truly, 

P.  P.  B. 


PEAISE  MEETINGS.  227 


PRAISE  MEETINGS. 

The  ternG*  "  praise  meeting,"  "service  of  song,"  "  praise  service,"  etc.,  have 
of  late  become  quite  common  in  connection  with  religious  gatherings.  What 
is  the  best  manner  of  conducting  a  praise  meeting  ? 

First :  Every  meeting  for  God's  worship  should  be  a  praise  meeting.  We 
always  have  much  for  which  we  should  offer  praise.  "  In  everything  by  prayer 
and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto 
God."  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength,"  and  "  whoso  offereth  praise 
glorifieth  Me." 

Many  a  good  sermon  has  been  blown  away  for  want  of  a  hearty  hymn  to 
harrow  it  in.  Many  and  many  a  poor  prayer-meeting  has  dragged  its  slow 
length  along  for  want  of  the  lubrication  of  a  cheerful  praise-spirit  manifested 
in  some  soulful  song. 

A  special  "praise  meeting,"  like  any  other,  can't  be  worth  anything  and 
cost  nothing.  Preparation  and  percussion  are  the  two  p's  requisite.  Give,  a 
meeting-house,  with  a  common-sense  platform,  a  cabinet  organ,  and  one  book 
of  hynma  and  tunes  to  each  individual  present,  good  light  and  perfect  ventila 
tion,  and  he  is  indeed  a  heavy  minister  who  can  manage  to  have  a  dull,  unin 
teresting,  unprofitable  service.  Preparation  may  extend  to  arrangement  of 
hymns  selected  beforehand,  as  didactic,  descriptive,  devotional,  etc.,  and  tunes 
as  chanting,  cantabile,  choral,  etc.,  authorship  and  incidents  of  hymns  and 
tunes,  date  of  composition,  etc.  ;  Bible  texts  volunteered  from  the  audience, 
on  praise,  containing  the  word  "praise,"  or,  whom  should  we  praise?  why? 
when?  where?  how?  etc.,  with  prayers  full  of  purpose,  are  among  the 
necessary  preparations.  Percussion  in  my  next. 
DETROIT,  October  22, 1874. 

"  How  did  it  go  off? "  is  as  frequently  and  as  properly  asked  of  a  praise 
meeting  or  any  other  religious  or  musical  meeting,  as  of  a  cannon. 

One  very  important  thing  is  promptness.  Don't  wait  for  anybody,  or  any 
thing.  First,  ask  a  blessing.  "My  soul,  wait  thou  only  upon  God;  for  my 
expectation  is  from  Him;  "then  a  familiar  hymn  and  tune  which  all  can  sing. 
"Ariel,"  "Shining  Shore,"  "Rock  of  Ages,"  or  "Sweet  Hour  of  Prayer," 
will  be  a  good  "  send  off."  Urge  every  one  to  sing  as  well  as  may  be,  but 
be  very  careful  that  no  one  or  two  or  four  sing  so  well  as  to  separate  themselves 
from  the  rest.  When  the  sun  rises,  stars  disappear.  One  who  sings  a  little  too 
well  may  discourage  a  dozen.  Stimulate  the  desire  to  sing  rather  than  urge 
singing  as  a  duty. 

"  Why  is  ye  always  a  whistlin',  Jem  ?  "  asked  a  laboring  man  of  his  fellow. 
"  I  whistles  to  make  myself  happy,"  said  he  ;  "  What  for  do  you  ?  "  "I  has 
to  whistle  'cause  I  is  happy,"  was  the  reply.  How  many  poor  Christians  we've 
seen  singing  to  make  themselves  happy;  how  few  have  to  sing  because  they 
are  happy.  Good  singing  may  produce  good  feeling,  but  better  have  the  heart 
right,  then  good  singing,  true  praise,  will  be 


228  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

The  Christian's  vital  breath 
The  Christian's  native  air. 

Don't  criticise  too  severely.  Many  matters  of  time,  tune,  etc.,  will  regulate 
themselves,  or,  at  least,  be  most  improved  by  being  well  let  alone.  And  gen 
erally,  those  who  sing  at  all  think  they  sing  pretty  well ;  so  don't  waste  time 
and  breath  by  scolding.  If  your  congregation  had  a  chance  to  sing  oftener, 
they  would  sing  better. 

The  best  way  to  learn  to  sing  is  to  sing.  Make  due  allowance  for  the 
modesty  of  such  singers  as  that  good  old  deacon  who  said  he  knew  his  voice 
was  rough  and  heavy,  so  in  order  to  not  make  any  discord  he  always  tried  to 
keep  a  little  behind  the  rest ! 

Occasional  Scripture  texts,  illustrations,  prayers,  etc.,  will  add  greatly  to  the 
interest  of  a  praise  meeting.     Finally,  adjourn  just  before  the  meeting  is  out. 
The  best  time  to  stop  is  just  when  you  feel  most  like  going  on.     So  I  stop. 
December,  1874. 


1.  E.  THAT  IS  MIRANDA. 

[Of  course  I  write  it ;  but  it's  about  her.] 

On  reading  something  like  this  from  a  letter  received  from  her  old  fellow  in 
New  York.  She  don't  know  that  I  read  it ;  but  while  she  was  getting  the  baby 
to  sleep,  I  peeped  into  her  desk,  and  as  the  letter  lay  there  in  the  further  cor 
ner,  in  plain  sight,  under  some  old  scrap-books  and  things,  my  eye  very  nat 
urally  fell  on  the  following  sweet  and  touching  extract : 

"  And  now  my  own  dear  Mirandy,  i  sympathize  for  you.  If  you  can't  stand  it  any  longer 
fly— i  will  meat  you.  How  can  you  indure  that  base  one  ?  i  pity  you  i  pity  you.  M.K.  t., 
esq." 

After  reading  that  and  some  more,  I  felt  inspired,  and  sat  right  down  on  the 
spur  of  the  occasion,  and  wrote  the  following  beautiful  philippic : 

Pity  that  blackbird  singing  on  that  thorn  bush, 
Pity  that  thorn  bush  that  that  blackbird  sings  on, 
Pity  Pro  Phundo  and  the  teara  he  would  shed — 
Don't  pity  me,  sir. 

Pity  that  terrier  that  has  a  wharf  rat  caught, 
Pity  that  wharf  rat  that  a  terrier  has  caught, 
Pity  yourself  and  your  own  poor  wife,  but 
Don't  pity  me,  sir. 

We're  awful  poor,  but  still  we're  middling  happy, 
We're  not  to  blame  for  living  in  Chicago  ; 
Some  folks  may  think  Pro  Phundo  is  a  bore,  but 
Don't  pity  me,  sir. 


I.    E.    THAT  IS  MIRANDA.  229 

I  am  content  to  board  and  wash  and  darn  him, 
I  am  not  growing  poor  by  living  with  him, 
I  am  not,  by  a  long  shot,  "  Mirandy  "— 
Don't  pity  me,  sir. 

And  ten  more  similar  stanzas,  when  my  feelings  overwent  me,  and  I  laid 
my  head  down  on  my  penwiper,  and,  in  the  ecstasy  so  familiar  to  all  poets, 
soon  fell  asleep. 

YOURS  AND  OTHERS. 
March,  1874. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


MB.  BLISS'  CORRESPONDENCE  —  LETTERS  TO  HIS  FAMILY  —  HIS  LOVE  FOR  THEM 
AND  HIS  DEVOTION  TO  THE  GOSPEL  WORK  —  BEAUTIFUL  TRIBUTE  FROM 
FLORIDA  —  "WHEN  JESUS  COMES." 


greater  part  of  the  following  letters  were  written  by  Mr. 
Bliss  to  his  relatives  ;  the  others,  to  those  who  were  so  near 
and  dear  to  him  as  to  seem  to  be  of  his  own  kin.     The  first  one  con 
tains  the  first  poetry  he  is  known  to  have  written  : 

EAST  TROY,  July  29,  1855. 
EVER  DEAR  BROTHER  AND  SISTER  : 

********* 
My  mind  is  established,  with  full  purpose  of  heart,  to  serve  God,  to  live 
acceptably  and  be  prepared  to  meet  my  Judge  in  peace.     Let  us  be  careful  to 
love  God  supremely,  and  keep  His  commandments,  that  He  will  be  willing  to 
own  us,  and  that  we  may  all  meet  around  His  throne  to  part  no  more. 

P.  P.  B. 


This  world  is  all  a  fleeting  show, 

With  trouble,  toil  and  care  ; 
Its  joys  are  trivial  and  we  know 

Its  pleasures  can't  endure. 

The  best  of  friends  and  neighbors  part, 

And  as  we  say  farewell, 
How  often  does  the  tender  heart 

With  thoughts  of  friendship  swell. 

But  if  no  more  on  earth  we  meet, 

Our  friendship  can't  be  riven, 
And  let  us  live  prepared  to  greet 

With  raptured  joy  in  heaven. 

Written  and  composed  by 

PHILIP  P.  BLISS. 


LETTERS  TO   FRIENDS.  231 

SPRINGFIELD,  March  2, 1856. 
DEAR  FRIENDS  : 

With  much  pleasure  I  take  up  my  pen  to  inform  you  of  my  condition.  At 
present,  I  am  in  the  enjoyment  of  good  health  ;  my  cough  is  nearly  cured  by 
taking — good  care,  and  as  to  my  having  been  hurt,  I  am  sorry  you  have  heard 
of  it,  for  it  is  entirely  well  now.  The  circumstances  are  thus  :  Last  Friday  as 
I  was  drawing  logs  with  a  pair  of  young  oxen,  belonging  to  Mr.  Campbell,  they 
started  while  I  was  astride  of  the  log,  hooking  the  chain,  and  rolled  the  log  on 
to  my  left  foot,  and  drew  it  about  twelve  feet  before  I  could  stop  them  ;  then 
you  see  I  was  in  a  predicament  noways  desirable  ;  being  entirely  alone,  and 
some  ways  from  the  house.  I  was  obliged  to  dig  away  the  snow  from  under 
my  foot  (a  process  somewhat  tedious)  before  I  could  get  loose.  My  boot  was 
considerably  mangled,  but,  happy  to  say,  my  foot  escaped  injury,  or  ifearly  so, 
although  it  was  quite  painful  for  a  day  or  two.  I  was  able  to  go  to  school  the 
next  Monday. 

I  am  sorry  to  say  that  yesterday  was  the  last  day  of  our  school.  Oh,  how  I 
wish  you  could  have  been  here.  We  had  a  grand  exhibition  in  the  Baptist 
Church,  before  about  200,000,000,000,000— no!  no!  200  spectators;  and  it  was 
a  show  indeed.  Such  times  we  had  with  the  gal-gal-gal vaiiic  battery  and  slippers, 
which  made  us  dance  whether  we  felt  disposed  to  or  not  ;  and  such  good  dia 
logues,  and  everything  passed  off  so  interestingly  and  agreeably  that  all  en 
joyed  themselves  very  well.  But  when  we  had  finished  our  performances,  and 
had  to  take  the  farewell  hand  and  to  say  good-bye  in  earnest,  I  tell  you  it 
seemed  like  parting  with  friends,  and  indeed  it  was ;  for  many  an  eye  was 
filled  with  tears,  and  all  expressed  their  wishes  that  we  might  meet  again,  on 
earth ;  but  1  have  reason  to  believe  that  if  we  are  not  granted  this  privilege,  the 
greater  part  of  us  will  meet  in  heaven,  to  enjoy  each  other's  friendship  forever. 

I  have  formed  a  great  many  acquaintances  in  my  life,  but  never  did  I  as 
sociate  with  those  that  were  so  dear  to  my  heart,  as  since  I  have  been  here. 
All  are  so  friendly,  so  charitably  disposed,  that  one  cannot  but  love  their 
society.  I  shall  prefer  staying  in  Springfield  this  summer  to  any  other  part  of 
the  world  excepting  home.  Mr.  Campbell  wishes  me  to  remain  with  him  this 
summer,  but  I  have  made  no  agreement  with  him  to  that  effect,  nor  shall  I 
until  I  hear  your  minds  expressed  on  the  subject. 

For  myself  I  feel  as  strong  in  the  Lord  as  ever  and  have  nothing  discour 
aging  to  say  to  any  one,  and  I  thank  God  I  am  what  I  am,  and  am  determined 
that  nothing  shall  separate  me  from  the  love  of  Christ.  Pray  for  me  that  I  may 
make  Heaven  my  home  when  done  with  the  things  of  this  world.  I  wish  I 
could  be  at  home  to  enjoy  the  good  of  the  meetings  with  you,  but  you  must 
remember  me.  Give  my  love  to  all  who  take  the  trouble  to  inquire  after  my 
welfare. 

Write  often  and  give  me  all  the  news.  When  you  have  made  any  maple 
sugar,  j  ust  send  me  word,  and  I  will  start  for  home,  I  reckon ! 

It  is  still  good  sleighing  here  and  pretty  cold  weather  too.  No  news,  I  be 
lieve,  so  good  bye.  In  a  hurry, 

P.  P.  BLISS. 


232  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

TOW  AND  A,  SUSQUEHANNA  COLLEGIATE  INSTITUTE,  August  26,  1857. 

BEAK  FRIENDS: 

You  will  see  by  the  date  of  this,  that  I  am  here,  and  I  can  tell  you  I  am 
well,  and  well  satisfied,  too,  with  my  situation,  being  now  comfortably  located 
in  the  institution  and  commenced  my  collegiate  course  to-day.  I  put  right 
down  to  Towanda,  Monday  afternoon,  after  I  came  back  from  home  a-foot  ; 
stayed  over  night ;  came  up  here  Tuesday  morn  and  did  chores  all  day  ;  got 
my  board,  and  was  allowed  $1.00  to  apply  on  tuition ;  since  that  time  have 
earned  50  cts.  There  is  a  chance  of  my  getting  all  the  jobs  of  work  I  want  to 
do,  which  will  pay  my  way.  Board,  lodging,  washing,  lights  and  fuel,  room 
rent  included,  cost  me  just  .$2.00  per  week.  Have  a  nice  spacious  room  on 
tke  fourth  floor,  facing  Front  St.,  where  I  have  a  full  view  of  the  whole  city 
and  suburbs.  A  very  pleasant  place  this  is,  and  the  people  are  very  hospitable, 
especially  the  steward  and  his  wife,  which  will  be  of  great  benefit  if  I  can 
retain  their  good  will  and  friendship,  which,  of  course,  I  shall  strive  to  do.  I 
am  a  kind  of  chore-boy,  but  I  am  not  ashamed  of  it.  I  saw  wood,  bring  water, 
sweep  rooms  at  so  much  apiece,  and  am  resolved  to  earn  every  penny  I  pos 
sibly  can  honorably. 

To-day  we  commenced  ;  just  organized;  classed  off  a  few  classes.  Don't 
expect  to  have  much  of  a  school  this  week  ;  just  got  arranged  into  classes.  I 
intended  to  go  to  some  other  school  than  this,  but  I  guess  I  could  not  have 
been  better  situated.  Hear  what  Mr.  Dayton,  the  steward,  says :  "  Come  along 
to  school  one,  two  or  three  terms,  and  if  you  can't  pay  me  now,  pay  me 
after  you  have  earned  it ;  for  if  you  teach  this  winter,  you  can  then  pay  me  ; 
so  come  along."  So  I've  come,  and  oh,  how  I  Avish  I  could  afford  to  stay  about 
four  years ;  but  it  is  as  it  is,  and  I  won't  complain,  but  "  do  the  very  best  1 
can,"  you  may  be  sure.  I  have  taken  up  Grammar,  Algebra,  Physiology  and 
Latin  for  my  studies  during  the  coming  term. 

Towanda  is  twenty  miles  east  of  Troy,  a  direct  line  of  stages  running 
between,  and  a  trusty  stage-driver  (lucky  for  me). 

I  must  close  and  save  some  for  next  time.  Expecting  to  hear  from  you  soon, 
I  remain  as  ever 

Your  affectionate  Brother, 

PHILIP  P.  BLISS. 


KINMUNDT,  ILLINOIS,  July  9, 1868. 
MY  DEAR  MOTHER: 

I  have  not  heard  anything  from  you  since  we  came  West.  Phe  and  Mate 
have  both  written ;  Mr.  Youngs  also,  but  you  have  not.  We  hope  you  are 
well,  and,  if  so,  I  think  you  are  becoming  quite  worldly  not  to  write  to  any 
oi  us. 

We  have  all  good  health  and  times.  Warren  is  in  good  spirits  as  usual. 
We  have  six  hours'  singing  per  day.  But  oh  !  how  warm  the  weather  I !  Heavy 
thunder  showers  also.  Expect  we'll  be  here  till  July  24th ;  then  go  up  the 
Mississippi  River  to  Winona.  Pray  for  us  that  we  may  have  a  pleasant  and 


LETTERS  TO   RELATIONS.  233 

prosperous  journey.  Almost  every  Sabbath  I  go  out  to  address  the  Sabbath 
Schools  and  sing  with  them.  In  several  towns  I  have  held  children's  meetings 
at  five  o'clock,  Sabbath,  trying  to  do  something  for  the  cause  of  the  Master. 
If  He  shows  me  the  way  for  work  in  this  direction — and  because  I  like  it,  I 
think  He  will — I  mean  to  give  some  considerable  time  to  it,  and  I  write  es 
pecially  to  ask  you  to  pray  for  me  in  this  field  of  labor,  the  Sabbath  School. 
Pray  that  I  may  be  blessed  in  leading  the  children  to  Christ,  and  glorify  God, 
not  myself. 

July  9th,  1868. 

July  9th,1838. 

30  years ! ! ! 

Do  you  remember  thirty  years  ago  ?  Well,  I  don't  curse  the  day,  as  Job 
did.  No  ;  I've  been  so  brought  up  and  so  blessed,  that  it  is  a  good  thing  for 
me  to  live,  and  yet  I  may  say  "  to  die  is  gain.  " 

I'm  growing  old!  but,  I'm  not  sorry.  What!  sorry  to  think  we  are 
"Almost  home  ;"  nearer  the  "shining  shore."  Nearer  through  the  swamps 
and  snares  of  this  life,  nearer  the  bounds  of  life  eternal  ?  No,  I'm  not  sorry ' 
Roll  on,  Roll  on.  Good  bye.  Be  faithful.  Trust  in  the  Lord  forever, 

Your  son, 

P.  P. 


BUSHNELL,  ILLINOIS,  January  10,  1869. 
DEAR  MOTHER: 

This  is  the  Lord's  Day,  but  between  the  services  it  seems  right,  and  proper 
to  write  to  you. 

'Tis  very  pleasant ;  not  a  cloud  to  be  seen,  no  wind  stirring,  all  is  peace 
ful  ;  the  town  is  quiet,  and  the  bright  sun  is  shining.  How  this  day  reminds 
us  of  that  eternal  Sabbath,  the  rest  remaining  for  the  people  of  God.  I  sup 
pose  Pa  Young  is  at  home  to-day,  and  has  told  you  all  about  us.  Truly  the 
Lord  has  been  very  good  to  us  the  past  year,  and  we  trust  Him  for  the  years 
to  come. 

I  hope  you,  too,  have  enjoyed  yourself  better  and  are  rising  to  higher  life 
and  attaining  greater  spiritual  growth  than  in  years  before.  I  make  it  my  daily 
prayer  that  you  may  be  contented,  established  in  the  faith  and  filled  with  the 
love  of  God. 

Your  letters  for  a  few  months  past,  and  Mr.  Young's  report  in  particular, 
lead  me  to  hope  your  last  days  will  be  your  best.  God  grant  it ! 

I  think  we  may  be  home  in  May.  Then  what  shall  I  bring  you  ?  I  think 
you  have  been  a  pretty  good  little  girl,  and  anything  you  want,  ask  for  it ! 

Lou  is  writing  to  Phe.  We  are  both  in  the  best  of  health.  Lou  never  had 
go  good  health,  she  says,  since  she  can  remember. 

There  goes  the  bell !  So  good  day  for  this  time.  May  the  Lord's  word  com 
fort  and  sustain  you  and  us.  Your  own  big  boy, 

P.  P. 


234  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

CARTHAGE,  IIXIHOIS,  January  29,  1869. 

DEAR  MOTHER; 

This  is  Sunday,  a  quiet  room,  good  dinner,  pleasant  day  and  sleepy  wife — 
Lou  is  most  sick — all  favorable  for  letter- writing. 

My  mind,  for  a  few  days  past — though  I  have  been  unusually  busy — has 
dwelt  considerably  on  the  departed  days  and  friends.  Four  years  ago !  How 
swift  the  years  go  by.  Yet,  I  don't  believe  I  would  recall  them,  or,  if  in  my 
power,  stay  the  flight  of  time. 

One  of  Pa's  prayer  meeting  expressions  used  to  be  "improve  the  time." 
This  is  what  we  need  to  do,  then  the  future  has  no  fears,  the  past  no  regrets. 

How  about  "  tin  wedding  ?  "  Don't  you  think  'twill  be  nice  ?  We  couldn't 
afford  a  wedding  when  we  were  married.  Now  I've  tried  the  goods  and  think 
I've  found  a  choice  article ;  so  I  want  to  celebrate.  Had  we  better  have  it  in  A.  P.'s 
new  house,  on  account  of  more  room — that  is,  if  they'll  let  us  ?  Of  course  you 
need  not  say  anything  of  this,  to  them,  or  any  one  else,  if  you  please  to  keep  it. 

May  the  Lord  give  you  grace  for  all  your  trials  and  save  us  all  in  Heaven. 

Your  big  boy, 

BLISS. 


FAIRBUKY,  October  31, 1870. 
DEAR  PHE  &  Co. 

How  do  you  do  ?  and  how  do  your  women  folks  do  ?  Did  Lou  tell  you  of 
my  silver-tipped  "baton"  present?  Having  much  'cess  and  such  good  times. 
Wish  you  and  Mate  could  tend  my  big  conventions  all  the  time.  I  often  thank 
the  good  Father  for  giving  me  voice  and  talents  in  my  profession.  How  much 
better  for  me  that  He  led  me  out  of  the  humble  life  in  which  I  was  born,  and  I 
hope  better  for  the  world  and  His  cause.  I  am  glad  I  have  such  a  good  sister, 
too.  You  always  remind  me  so  much  of  Pa.  If  we  all  had  his  faith  and  trust 
— such  humility  !  but  lam  glad  and  thankful  we  were  always  poor  ;  and  oh,  we 
begin  to  see  dnd  feel,  how  mucli  we  owe  to  Pa  for  his  example  and  influence. 
We  may  be  in  better  circumstances,  but  we  can  hardly  hope  to  lead  a  better, 
purer,  more  zealous  Christian  life.  Only  if  we  can  meet  him  "  where  the 
wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest  " —  one  of  his  favorite 
passages.  May  "  Our  Father  "  bless  you  all.  P.  P. 


CHICAGO,  February  19, 1871. 

MY  DEAR  MOTHER  : 

I  wish  I  might  have  written  you  on  your  last  birthday,  which  I  see  by  the 
record  in  Pa's  old  Bible,  was  February  16th,  1805.  Seventy-six,  ah,  no,  I  mean 
sixty-six  years  old !  Well,  the  Lord  be  praised  for  giving  me  a  mother  so  old 
and  so  great  and  good.  I  thank  Him  daily  for  early  influences  intended  to 
lead  me  to  Christ.  For,  whatever  of  poor  advantages,  small  houses,  plain 
living,  threadbare,  patched  clothing,  back-woods  society,  and  unpleasant  recol 
lections  of  my  childhood  I  have  to  cherish,  this  precious  thought — my 
parents  prayed  for  me,  even  before  I  knew  the  meaning  of  prayer,  and  they 


LETTERS  TO   FEIEKDS.  235 

consecrated  me  to  the  Lord  and  His  service,  nor  can  a  prayer,  earnest  and 
heartfelt,  ever  be  forgotten  before  God.     I  feel  the  answer  to  prayer  every  day. 

Am  just  home  from  Sunday  School;  six  hundred  and  eighty-five  present ; 
the  Holy  Spirit  was  there  also.  Pray  that  the  Lord  will  bless  me  in  the  work. 
Pray  for  my  assistant  officers,  for  the  choir,  some  of  whom  are  not  Christians. 
Pray,  too,  for  L.  M.,  a  young  lawyer,  almost  persuaded,  and  for  C.  A.  Pray, 
too,  for  Mr.  S.,  who  "can't  quite  come ; "  he  knows  the  way.  These  three  I  am 
very  anxious  about,  but  many  are  seeking  the  kingdom,  and  I  believe  these 
will  yet  be  saved.  Jesus  seems  very  precious  to  us  in  our  home  ;  we  talk  of 
the  Lord,  and  I  love  to  feel  as  if  He  were  one  of  our  family — really  our  Father. 

I  meant  to  tell  you  all  about  our  new  house,  and  describe  our  daily  life, 
how  we  get  up  at  six  ;  milk  our  cow,  by  setting  a  pail  on  the  back  steps  with  a 
ticket  in  it  (8c.  a  quart) ;  shake  the  grate  so  the  fire  starts  ;  make  tea,  coffee  or 
chocolate,  sometimes  tea  and  coffee  or  chocolate,  then  buckwheat  cakes — good 
ones — flour  from  Rome,  Pennsylvania,  country  butter,  and  beef  or  veal.  The 
market  man  comes  twice  a  week  and  gets  our  order  for  whatever  we  want,  and 
sends  a  team  around  with  it  free  of  cost.  Our  fuel  is  quite  a  bill  ;  the  rent 
forty  dollars  ;  so  our  living  is  very  nearly  one  hundred  dollars  a  month — just 
about  the  same  as  boarding,  and  so  much  nicer.  Then  we've  just  bought  a  P. 
Annie.  Yes,  sir,  after  Waiting  twelve  years,  I  thought  I  must  have  one. 

The  bell  is  ringing  for  evening  service,  so  I  must  go.  Now  don't  scold  me 
for  waiting  so  long,  nor  for  writing  so  much.  I  am  very  busy  on  The  Charm, 
a  copy  of  which  I  shall  send  you  as  soon  as  out.  Phe  must  have  the  first,  as 
she  named  it.  Write  often.  Lou  joins  in  love. 

P.  P.  B. 


67  WASHINGTON  STREET,  CHICAGO,  August  4, 1871. 
Our  darling  friend,  sweet  Mrs.  Case, 
The  image  of  your  smiling  face, 
With  rosy  cheeks  and  eyes  so  bright, 
Seems  ever  pleading  :  "  Write,  do  write." 

Since  we  received  your  friendly  letter, 
My  darling  wife  has  grown  much  better  ; 
Enjoys  the  bliss  of  bed  and  table, 
But  yet  to  write  seems  hardly  able. 

Ah,  with  what  joy  would  we  'uns  greet  you, 
If  at  the  Normal  we  could  meet  you  ! 

What  "  shakes,"  and  "  thrills,"  what  cordial  k s, 

In  case  the  Cases  blest  the  Blisses. 

Of  course,  we'll  have  you  at  Gustavus', 
But  oh,  from  dusty,  long  rides  save  us — 
To  your  house  ?  "  yes,  'tis  our  decision, 
Provided  you  have  large  provision. 


236  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

This  open  question  I  must  pop  : 
You  didn't  tell  me  where  to  stop. 
If  at  Burghill,  or  if  at  Greenville, 
Or  leave  the  R.  R.  at  that  Mean  ville 


Where,  one  cold  midnight,  I  remember, 
We  were  dumped  out — but  then,  September 
Will  be  more  pleasant.     My  intention 
Now  is  to  have  a  loud  convention. 


Good-bye,  our  love  to  Me.  and  Addie ; 
Be  a  good  girl  and  mind  your  daddie. 

B.  P.  P. 


CHICAGO,  Dec.  8, 1871. 
DEAB  FRIENDS: 

Thought  maybe  you  would  like  to  hear  a  few  words  from  us. 

We  have  been  roaming  as  usual,  only  a  little  more  so.  For  instance,  in  the 
last  three  weeks  we  have  visited  Philadelphia,  New  York,  New  Haven,  Albany, 
Providence,  Boston,  and  Portland,  Maine. 

We  left  Portland  Wednesday  morning  and  arrived  home  late  Thanksgiving 
eve.  So  we  gave  our  thanks  while  traveling.  We  think  we  have  so  much  to 
be  thankful  for.  The  Lord  has  been  very  good  to  us,  and  we  have  done  so 
little  in  return. 

Oh  I  did  not  tell  you  what  we  have  been  doing  East.  Mr.  Bliss  has  been 
singing  with  D.  L.  Moody  in  his  fire  meetings.  Mr.  Moody  is  trying  to  raise 
money  to  rebuild  his  Mission  Sabbath  School. 

We  have  had  a  splendid  time.  You  remember  how  we  talked  last  summer, 
about  going  to  the  Jubilee  next  spring.  It  is  rather  uncertain  now  whether 
we  can  afford  it  or  not ;  but  we  shall  see. 

Are  you  coming  to  the  Chicago  Normal  next  summer?  If  so, we  shall  hope 
to  have  you  with  us  some  of  the  time. 

We  have  not  much  that  is  elegant  here  rfow,  but  we  have  the  most  "mag 
nificent  inelegance,"  that  the  world  has  ever  known.  It  is  almost  a  miracle 
how  the  people  could  put  up  so  many  little  "  shanties  "  in  such  a  short  space 
of  time. 

So  you  see  Mac's  folks.  Remember  us  to  them.  Mr.  Bliss  says  ask  if  Mr. 
Case  opens  his  conventions  with  prayer. 

That  the  good  Lord  may  keep  you,  and  bless  you  and  yours,  is  the  earnest 
prayer  of  your  friend, 

Lou  BLISS. 

Remember  us  to  father  and  mother,  brothers  and  sisters.  Don't  forget  to 
write. 


LETTERS  TO   FKIEKDS.  237 

CHICAGO,  January  29, 1873. 
DEAR  BROTHER  C.  C.  C. : 

How  is  it  with  thee?  And  thy  darling  Annie  e'l  Just  about  now  you  are 
preparing  for  Baconsburg,  and  Mr.  Seward. 

Do  you  know  my  wife  actually  proposed — as  I  have  to  go  East  in  a  few 
weeks, — that  we  come  to  B.  and  attend  your  Convention !  Had  it  not  been  for 
an  impudent  Iowa  town  calling  us  away  the  same  week,  I  do  believe  we'd  a 
been  thar  !  If  this  reaches  you  in  Convention  don't  stop  singing — Go  right  on 
with  "  The  Multitude  of  Angels  " — and  at  recess  squeeze  Mr.  Seward's  hand 
awfully  for  me.  Don't  promise  him  to  be  at  Binghamton  this  summer  all  the 
time  ;  come  to  Chicago  some. 

Are  full  of  business  of  all  kinds — Conven  and  S.  Sch.— (which  means  Sunday 
School). 

Mr.  Young's  wife's  brother  is  with  us  this  winter,  kind  o'  helping  round. 

How  are  the  dear  friends  Mac  and  Addie  ?    Bless  their  hearts ! 

Boston  Jibulo  is  rather  doubtful  since  the  fire.  I'll  tell  you,  instead  of 
going  there,  you  all  come  here  and  get  used  to  the  climate  and  city  before  the 
Normal.  I  want  to  see  you  very  much  and  tell  you  how  we  love  you  !  What's 
the  use  keepin'  such  things  to  one's  self  all  the  time  ?  Seems  as  if  our  friends 
are  leaving  us  every  day  for  the  "  other  side."  We  must  talk  fast,  the  boat 
is  coming. 

Love  to  Pa  Williams'  folks.  Do  your  best.  Live  near  the  Lord.  Farewell. 

P.  P.  B. 

KIND  KASES: 

We  wish  ye  well ; 
Lou  is  lying  loosely  low ! 
Big-eyed  Baby  PAUL  prospers, 
"  Sunshine"  smiles  soothingly. 
"  P.  P.  Jr."  jolly ; 

"P.P.  Sr."  silly! 

[N.  B. — That  last  line  is  composed  for  the  occasion  by  Mrs.  P.  P.  Bliss.] 

What  I  mean  to  communicate  is  the  good  news  that  all  is  well.  Only  I 
have  to  go  to  Monmouth  Monday  for  a  Convention.  I  don't  want  to  leave  home 
one  bit,  but  Brother  Hanchett — you  remember  him — says  come.  Chicago  seems 
to  me  very  pleasant  and  friendly,  as  all  the  world  ever  has. 

Wish  you  lived  here.     Adieu. 

I  must  go  and  sing  to  baby.  He  likes  me  ;  you  would  like  him.  Come  and 
see.  P.  p. 


CHICAGO,  11, 9, 72. 
DEAR  BROTHER  C.  C.  C.  c.  c.  c.  c  c. 

Your  $40  favor  received  this  day. 

Blessings  on  ye  both. 
Grace,  mercy,  peace,  joy, 


238  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

Love,  gladness,  beauty, 
Happiness,  cheerfulness, 
Comfort,  voice,  business, 
Wife,  friends,  classes, 
Oysters  and  tight  pants 
Be  yours  forever. 

P.  P.  B.  &  Co.  are,  as  usual,  digging  ditties  at  my  desk.  Choir  splendid. 
S.  S.  ditto.  The  Lord's  work  going  on  surely.  Wife  not  very  comfort 
able — hopeful  always.  A  teacupful  of  love  as  strong  as  boneset  to  each 
of  ye. 

Our  horse  is  no  better,  and  now  the  stove's  got  it !  't  won't  draw. 

How's  Greeley?  Poor  man.  Hurrah  for  Black!  Why  don't  Grant  and 
May  write  to  me  ?  Tell  'em  I  have  a  tip  of  the  old  elephant's  tusk  on  my  desk 
and  will  call  it  "  Mizpah,"  if  Grant  will  find  in  Genesis  what  that  means. 
Adieu,  Adieu. 

P.  P.  B. 


CHICAGO,  January  15, 1873. 
DEAR  MOTHER  : 

May  the  Lord  be  very  near  to  you  and  bless  your  soul  for  the  sweet,  good 
letter  we  received  to-day.  Lou  says  that  ever  since  we  saw  you  last  year,  on 
the  hill,  and  at  Towanda,  your  letters  have  been  splendid  ;  and  she  never  en 
joyed  a  visit  with  you  so  much  in  the  world  as  the  last  one. 

Darling  Paul,  how  you  would  love  him!  I  just  begin  to  appreciate  what 
you  have  done  for  me !  He  is  a  nice,  fat  boy  ;  sleeps  and  eats  well ;  has  a 
great  big  head,  big  blue  eyes  and  indications  of  light  hair.  O.  P.  Young ! 

Lou  says  as  soon  as  he  can  go  out  you  shall  have  a  picture.  Warren  mani 
fested  a  great  deal  of  pleasure,  more  than  we  expected.  He  often  mentions 
him  in  his  letters.  Warren  is  still  teaching  in  Southern  Illinois,  and  can  stay 
here  in  the  West  as  long  as  he  wishes  ;  plenty  of  business  for  him. 

I  hope  Willie  Jennings  will  do  well ;  and  I  can  agree  with  you  that  per 
haps  he  needs  contact  with  the  world  and  business.  God  bless  him  ;  and  the 
more  I  can  help  him  and  other  of  my  relations,  the  better. 

You  will  find  in  a  box  sent  to  Towanda,  a  black  dress  ;  have  it  made  "  up 
and  down,"  to  wear  to  Chicago !  Won't  we  have  a  good  re-union,  when  we  all 
get  home  to  heaven?  I  so  want  to  see  Pa  Bliss  and  Reliance — Jamie,  and  the 
blessed  JESUS  ! ! 

Truth  is  :  the  mercy  and  favor  of  Our  Father  in  Heaven  seem  continually 
shining  on  us,  unworthy  and  unthankful  as  we  are.  Oh  how  we  ought  to 
praise  and  love  Him.  Help  us. 

Can't  you  and  your  folks  find  me  some  stuff  for  "  Song  Tree  "I " 

Don't  go  to  Boston  Jubilee.     I  don't  believe  'twill  pay. 

I'm  glad  1  ever  knew  you. 

P.  P.  B. 


LETTERS  TO   FRIENDS.  239 

12  SOUTH  ELIZABETH  STKEET,  CHICAGO,  May  24,  1873. 
SWEET  SPIRITS: 

Tried  and  True,  worthy  brother  and  sister.  Our  partners  in  the  ever 
lasting  inheritance.  [How  thankful  ought  we  to  be  for  such  friends !]  You 
speak  of  friends  being  convenient — "  to  pay  in  advance,"  etc.  I  believe  it  was 
some  such  unimportant  matter  that  kept  us  from  the  "  Feast—  ival  "  at  Cin 
cinnati.  But  we  are  soon  to  have  a  "  G.  B."  in  Chicagano.  Corne  and  "  burst." 

My  old  mither  and  sister  Jennings  are  visiting  us  for  a  few  weeks.  They 
both  love  you  as  well  as  they  can  till  they  know  you  better. 

Yes,  indeed,  the  Lord  has  blessed  "  Sunshine  "  greatly.  Help  us  to  praise 
Him  for  it.  It's  His  book  any  how,  and  He  should  have  the  praise.  No  end 
of  compliments  for  page  10. 

The  Paul  boy  is  in  his  usual  spirits — gay  and  blissful.  Next  Sunday,  I 
think,  he  will  put  on  his  best  (McGranahan's)  robes  and  be  baptized. 

My  "  Joy  "  is  full.  Sunday  School  prosperous,  thirty  joined  the  church  last 
Sunday.  We  are  in  our  new  basement.  Kate  Cameron  died  last  week.  We 
sung  her  "  That  City,"  from  "  Joy,"  at  her  funeral.  May  we  all  follow  her. 

AMEN. 


[To  Mrs.  W.  J.  Crafts.] 

CHICAGO,  Aug.  7, 1873. 
OUR  DEAR  SISTER  SARA: 

How  kind  of  you  to  send  a  full  volume  of  your  sweet  things  when  we 
know  you  must  be  very  busy.  You  are  not  "  our  debtor,"  neither,  indeed,  can 
you  ever  be  ;  our  lives  have  been  made  sweeter  and  richer  by  your  contact,  and 
the  oftener  you  come  by  letter  or  by  bodily  presence,  the  better  for  us. 

Yes,  thank  you  and  your  good  mother  (how  we'd  love  to  see  her),  the  Eye 
Teaching  came.  It  is  a  rich  thing  for  me,  and  must  do  good.  Dr.  Vincent  is 
jolly — great  and  good.  Some  people  are  great  and  good,  but  can't  be  jolly.  I 
can't  like  them  quite  so  well. 

By  the  way,  whence  comes  the  song  from  which  you  quote, 

Watching  and  waiting  for  me  ? 

Bro.  Hartley  gave  it  all  to  me,  but  I  am  anxious  to  know  if  it  is  copyright. 
No,  I  don't  seem  to  rest  much  in  hope  of  seeing  a  throng  of  heavenly  ones 
waiting  and  watching  for  me — they  might  be  in  better  business — nor  of  hear 
ing  echoes  of  my  songs  there.  I  want  something  better.  About  the  best  thing 
in  Heaven  seems  to  me  will  be  eternal  freedom  from  sin  and  Jesus'  immediate 
presence. 

There  we  shall  see  His  face 
And  never,  never  sin. 

If  we  can  will  write  you  from  Rome,  Pennsylvania,  where  we  must  leave 
Paul  with  hie  grandmother. 


240  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

We  have  delightfully  cool  weather  in  Chicago  this  summer.  Are  very 
much  occupied  with  our  N.  N.  Musical  Institute,  which  is  a  success. 

Good-bye — Bless  you, 
3  BLISSES 
love  you  much. 

CHICAGO,  Nov.  1, 1873. 
DEAK  PHE: 

Eight  years  ago  to-day,  Towner,  Bliss  and  wife,  "Yankee  Boys,"  arrived 
in  Chicago.  How  God  has  blessed  us  all  the  way.  Seems  as  if  He  picked  me 
out  from  the  beginning !  He  must  have  had  His  eye  on  me  and  on  the  work 
He  was  preparing  for  me  when  we  lived  on  Elk  Run.  He  has  helped  us  so 
far,  and  surely  He  will  not  let  go  of  us  now. 

More  and  more  I  am  praying  for  one  thing— Consecration  to  Christ.  All 
from  Him,  all  for  Him,  all  to  Him. 

Aid  me  by  your  prayers.  May  you  be  a  blessing  to  all  and  so  be  always  blest. 

P.  P. 


CHICAGO,  Last  day  of  1873.    Normal. 
PRECIOUS  PHRIENDS  : 

Why  didn't  you  stay  a  week  with  us?    Come  back  now 

I  write  on  business — Real  " State" 

Do  you  wish  to  sell  your  puburban  soperty  at  Ridgeland  ?  I  will  give  you 
$150  a  foot  for  135  feet !  Provided  you  will  take  13^  feet !  on  Church  Avenue 
at  $1500  a  foot  in  part  payment.  Seriously — help  me  to  be  thankful  for  about 
$500  extra  copyright  which  came  yesterday.  God  is  and  has  been  surprising 
me  with  such  success.  Help  me  to  make  it  a  real  success — and  not  a  hin 
drance  to  my  own  and  others'  spiritual — which  is  the  real  welfare. 

My  birthday  verse  is  Prov.  xxx  9,  (beginning  with  the  8th  verse).  Please, 
if  you  have  not  seen  it,  let  Mr.  Case  also  see  the  inclosed  criticism  on  N.  N.  M. 
I. concert.  This  is  a  little  pleasanter,  but  oh,  "  what  difference  will  there  be?" 

I'd  rather  have  a  little  girl  or  boy  smile  in  my  face  and  say,  "I  think  you 
are  real  good,"  which  means — though  it  may  be  not  comprehended — "  I  think 
you  are  some  like  Jesus,"  than  to  have  a  column  of  high  sounding  praises  in 
every  newspaper  in  Chicago.  "  The  things  that  are  .not  seen  are  eternal,"  I 
tell  you  ;  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  within,"  and  let's  you  and  I  get  as  much 
of  it  packed  up  as  possible  before  we  take  our  long  journey.  Amen. 

I  am  not  forgetting  the  little  songs  for  you  and  C.  C. 

Forty  Kisses 

From  three 


CHICAGO,  February  7,  1874. 
DEAR  MOTHER  : 

I  thank  you  for  the  Portage  letter.    It  is  a  good  one.    You  must  have 
noticed  that  lately  we  do  enjoy  your  letters  more  than  we  used  to  do.     You 


LETTERS   TO   FRIEKDS.  241 

will  let  me  say  it — that  it  seems  to  us  your  spirit  grows  sweeter,  and  your  life 
more  even  and' calm.  It  is  not  surprising  that  it  should  be  so  ;  for  haven't  you 
and  your  friends  prayed  for  it?  If  we  are  in  Christ, may  we  not  all  expect  to 
grow  more  and  more  like  Him  ?  Let  us  try  to  live  in  the  Vine  and  bear  fruit 
to  the  honor  of  His  Holy  Name.  You  may  be  sure  we  shall  pray  for  you,  and 
I  never  can  forget  that  you  prayed  for  me  and  watched  over  me  many  years 
before  I  could  pray  for  myself.  I  love  to  make  mention  of  praying  parents  in 
my  prayers  and  conversation.  I  feel  the  strength  every  day  of  the  early  relig 
ious  training  and  surroundings— just  as  a  man  must  be  benefited  all  his  life 
time  by  youthful  physical  exercise.  I  am  determined  the  godly  ancestry  shall 
not  stop  with  me,  but  that  Paul  shall  be  the  subject  of  much  prayer.  He  shall 
inherit  a  good  fortune  of  faith,  even  if  his  worldly  goods  can  be  tied  up  in  a 
cotton  handkerchief,  as  mine  were  when  I  started  for  Troy. 

Well,  we  are  tired  and  sleepy  to-night.  The  choir,  about  frfty  in  number, 
came  in  and  surprised  us  last  night  ;  brought  a  big  basket  full  of  pop-corn, 
nuts  and  candy  for  their  own  refreshment,  and  a  beautiful  silver  tea  set,  six 
pieces,  tea  and  coffee  pots,  cream  and  sugar  bowls,  butter  dish,  and  spoon- 
holder,  frosted  finish  and  finely  lettered  B.  Cost  seventy-five  dollars.  You 
may  believe  we  were  surprised  and  cheered.  Bless  their  kind  hearts  !  I  don't 
know  as  I  shall  ever  find  such  a  good  choir  again.  I  told  them,  jokingly,  if 
I'd  known  I'd  got  such  a  fine  present,  I  might  have  resigned  before  !  Now 
when  you  and  Phee  come  to  see  us,  we  can  give  you  better  tea,  maybe. 

Good  night,  be  good  to  yourself  and  Phe.  Take  care  of  little  Phil,  and  I 
will  remember  you  in  my  will.  P.  P. 


CHICAGO,  February  13, 1874. 
EOT  ov  KONTENT: 

All  well.  Tried  again  to  splash  on  to  you  at  Conneaut  or  Burghill,  and 
couldn't  quite  do  it.  Arrived  home  last  Friday,  and  the  choir  had  'sprised  us 
with  a  clothes-basket  full  of  pop-corn,  nuts  and  candy  for  themselves  and  a 
set  of  silver  tea  things — six  pieces — for  us.  Bless  'em  !  So  much  I  get  for 
resigning.  Who  would  not  be  resigned  ? 

I  go  to  Iowa  next  week,  in  the  region  of  Br'n  Waugh,  Rheam,  Turgeson, 
et  al.  Expect  a  good  time.  I  just  tell  you  we  had  a  grand,  good  big  conven- 
.tion  at  Honesdale,  Pa.,  "175"  singing  "Hallelujah  Chorus,"  "How  lovely 
are  the  Messengers,"  "  In  Heavenly  Love  Abiding,"  etc.  This  was  the  country 
of  my  beginning. — a  poor  village  singin'  master.  Now  "the  Professah  from 
Chicago  "  with  his  accomplished  lady,  wearing  better  clothes  and  more  hair, 
seemed  to  make  a  much  profounder  effect.  I  hope  we  were  not  vain,  but  we 
can't  deny  a  little  pride  at  our  success. 

Paul  Bliss  is  the  blessedest  child,  fat  and  healthy,  good-natured  as — as — his 
paw, — that's  me. 

Oh,  1  am  writing  some  such  good  song&— of  the  prayer-meeting  order — 
now-a  days. 

16 


242  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

The  Lord  has  wonderfully  blessed  "Sunshine  Songs."  "Calling  Now,"  I 
found  at  Gustavus',  or  rather  at  your  house,  do  you  remember?  And  that 
like  Mac's  "  Heaven  for  me,"  has  been  sung  and  complimented  very  much  in 
this  country  and  in  England.  Bro.  Sankey  is  doing  wonders  in  Scotland,  with 
Moody.  Pray  for  me  and  my  songs.  If  it  does  others  half  as  much  good  to 
sing  them  as  it  does  me  to  write  them  I  am  thankful. 

To  God  be  ALL  the  glory.  Our  church  is  to  be  re-dedicated  Sunday.  Dohn 
is  to  lead  the  music. 

I  know  not  what  they'll  do.  More  showy  music  was  demanded,  and  I  re 
signed.  I  must  insist  on  plain  music  for  devotion  in  public  worship.  And  I 
can  have  no  sympathy  with  operatic  or  fancy  music  for  Sunday. 

Pardon  so  long  a  letter ;  but  I  love  you. 

P.  P.  B. 


DEAR   TT ~  CHICAGO,  Mch.  9, 1874. 

Yours  received  and  oh,  how  good  it  seems  to  have  such  a  sister  to  write 
such  letters.  You'll  never  know  how  much  you  help  me.  Your  sweet  patient 
life — your  abiding  trust  even  in  the  thick  darkness— and  your  earnest  sisterly 
prayers  all  help  me  ;  and  1  don't  know  how  much,  either. 

But  what  an  accumulation  of  prayer  must  be  before  the  throne  for  some  of 
us.  And  then  the  dear  Jesus  praying  for  us — think  of  that !  Earthly  friends 
are  good,  but  what  a  Friend  we  have  above  !  Be  sure  you  are  remembered  by 
us — but  how  much  better  by  Him.  Oh,  surprising  mercy  !  to  love  His  enemies, 
to  die  to  win  our  love.  On  His  sweet  word  I'm  resting,  "  I  know  no  safer  stand, 
not  e'en  where  glory  dwelleth  in  Immanuel's  land." 

I  send  a  book  in  your  name  to  W.  H.  The  best  book  I've  read  in  a  long 
time — "  Arthur  Bonnicastle."  I  hope  W.  H.  will  succeed.  He  has  the  mate 
rial,  if  he  can  only  cultivate  persistent,  steady  pluck  ;  if  he  is  not  too  much 
like  his  uncle.  My  prayers  are  for  him  ever. 

Lou  proposes  to  send  you  some  things  you  need,  if  you  will  tell.  A  box 
worth  a  dollar  or  $1.50,  wouldn't  cost  more'n  2s.  for  express. 

She  thinks  she  can  buy  things  here  cheaper  than  you  can  there.  Make  out 
a  list  from  silk  dresses  down  to  sewing  machines. 

I  go  to  Michigan  Monday  morning.  Yours  all  the  way. 

P.  P. 


CHICAGO,  March  28,  '74. 
DEAR  MA  AND  PHE: 

How  is  it  with  ye  ?    I  have  some  news  to  say  : 

First,  I  am  about  to  change — in  fact,  have  changed  my  plan  of  work.  In 
tending  to  write  and  sing  Gospel  songs  in  Gospel  meetings,  instead  of  Conven 
tion  teaching.  So  giving  all  my  time,  voice  and  heart  to  the  cause  of  Christ, 
direct.  I've  always  wanted  to  do  this,  and  now  I  can  and  must. 

Oh  !  pray  that  God  may  use  me  and  bless  my  songs  (His  gift)  to  the  win- 


LETTERS   TO   FRIEKDS.  243 

ning  of  many  precious  souls.  Praise  Him  continually  for  selecting  me,  even 
me,  out  of  such  surroundings,  and  giving  me  such  honor.  You  can't  imagine 
how  perfectly  happy  I  am,  and  Lou  too,  already. 

Major  Whittle  and  I  were  at  Waukegan  three  days  and  gained  by  the  Holj 
Spirit  thirty  votes  for  Christ.  He,  too,  has  given  up  all  for  Jesus'  service,  and 
we  shall  likely  go  together  a  good  deal.  Pray  for  us. 

Your  devoted, 
PHIL. 

CHICAGO,  June  11, 1874. 
MR.  AND  MRS.  CRAFTS  : 

Jude  iid. 

I  was  married  before  I  was  twenty-one.  I  pity  poor  folks  who  have  to  wait 
and  wait !  Much  valuable  time  is  lost  by  waiting. 

But  I  thank  Dr.  Vincent  for  favor  received,  don't  you  ?  How  I  wish  you 
would  come  and  see  the  Blissful  family.  Why  not  ?  We  have  more  room  now 
than  when  you  were  here.  Paul  would  say  "  De  auntie  "  and  "  How  do  unkie." 
Yes,  I  know  girls  don't  grow  old  so  fast,  if  married — therefore  I  wanted  you 
to  marry. 

Chautauqua  ?  H'm !  Michigan  is  a  much  beautifuller  lake,  and  as  to  boat 
rides,  etc.,  we  hope  to  see  some  crafts  here  in  Chicago,  some  day,  perhaps  a 
fleet  of  'em. 

Let  ffus  hear  from  you  often,  please.  Who  is  this  W.  F.  Crafts  ?  What 
color  hair?  What  church  ?  Is  he  rich  ?  Tall  and  handsome  ?  Good  affec 
tion,  too  ? 

Only  may  he  be  as  happy  in  married  life  as  has  been  his  and  your  loving 
friend  and  brother,  P.  P.  BLISS. 

Maj.  Whittle  and  I  are  holding  meetings,  day  and  night,  in  the  Second 
Presbyterian  Church,  South  Side. 

God  is  wonderfully  blessing  us  in  every  way.  Help  us  to  praise  Him 
for  it. 

I  am  preparing  a  book  of  Gospel  Songs  for  our  special  use,  and  would  be 
right  glad  to  have  you  send  a  list  of  hymns  and  tunes  which  have  been  most 
successful  in  your  experience.  And  above  all,  pray  for  the  book.  All  the  good 
in  it  must  come  from  God. 


CHICAGO,  December  11, 1874. 
DEAR  MOTHER  : 

I  beg  your  pardon  for  not  sending  your  $2.00  sooner.  I  have  been  away 
from  home  and  very  busy  in  Gospel  singing  at  Pittsburgh. 

Lou  telegraphed  me  Tuesday  that  she  and  the  boys  were  both  sick ;  so  I 
came  home.  Will  is  almost  sick,  too.  I've  been  flying  around  after  a  doctor, 
and  got  a  good  nurse.  Sophy  is  a  little  better,  so  that  she  can  help  Annie, 
and  now  I  guess  we  are  all  a  little  better. 

I  can  tell  you  that  this  Gospel  song  singing  and  talking  to  people  about 


244  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

Christ  and  His  love  will  be  my  business  after  this.  Everything  else  is  poor 
business.  I  am  so  thankful  for  what  the  dear  Lord  has  done  for  me  since  last 
April.  Nothing  like  it.  How  good  God  has  been  to  me  since  first  you  knew 
me.  Help  me  to  praise  Him,  and  pray  for  me,  as  I  know  you  will  while  you 
live.  Much  happiness  to  you  all.  Yours  truly, 

P.  P.  B. 


GALT  HOTTSK,  LOUISVILLE,  KENTUCKY,  Feb.  16, 1875. 
DEAR  MOTHER  AND  MATE: 

I  can't  wait — must  tell  you  that  the  Lord  has  done  and  is  doing  a  great  and 
mighty  work  here.  Thousands  and  thousands  crowding  daily  and  nightly 
to  hear  the  old-fashioned  Gospel  of  Christ.  Three  or  four  meetings  daily ; 
200  or  250  arose  for  prayers  Sunday  night.  This  morning  I  had  a  glorious 
praise  meeting  in  the  hotel.  Last  evening,  in  the  mass  meeting  in  the  hall, 
an  immense  opera  house  jammed  full — 2500  or  3000  people.  Among  those 
who  arose  for  prayer,  and  went  down  into  the  inquiry  room  with  me,  and  I 
trust  gave  her  heart  to  the  Lord,  was — guess  who  ?  My  heart  is  full  as  1 
write  it— V  ***D*W****1  Hallelujah!  There  is  joy  in  heaven. 

If  all  the  meetings  had  been  carried  on  and  only  this  one  result,  how  richly 
paid  I  would  have  been.  Yet  hundreds  of  souls  just  as  precious  have  been 
saved,  we  believe.  Oh!  how  good  God  has  been  and  how  precious  Jejius  iny 
Master  is  to-day.  I  write  in  V  *  *  *'s  name,  who  sends  her  love  to  you  all, 
and  asks  that  you  and  I  set  apart  Sunday,  Feb.  28,  to  pray  for  her,  and  to  praise 
the  Lord  for  His  goodness. 

Of  course  you  will  pray  and  praise  for  me.  It  is  in  answer  to  your  prayers 
of  years  ago  and  to  the  prayers  of  him  who  now  dwells  in  the  glory  land,  that 
God  has  chosen  me.  Not  a  day,  hardly  a  meeting  passes  but  I  think,  and  can 
it  be  that  He  has  chosen  me  to  be  an  instrument,  a  vessel  in  which  to  carry 
the  water  of  life  to  perishing  souls  ?  Oh  !  pray  daily  that  I  may  be  a  vessel 
sanctitied  and  meet  for  the  Master's  use. 

I  must  be  brief — want  to  go  and  call  on  V  *  *  *  and  see  if  she  is  in  the 
light  this  morning.  Also  want  to  write  to  Phe  and  Lou  the  news.  Five  meet 
ings  for  to-day.  I  sing. 

All  sick  at  home  last  I  heard.  Will  had  measles  ;  babies  exposed  and  Lou 
tired.  I  hope  the  Lord  will  take  care  of  them  all.  I  know  He  will.  Love 
to  all.  Joyfully, 

PHIL. 

APRIL  1. 
DEAR  MOTHER  : 

**-#*****# 
I  send  you  papers  of  the  meetings,  so  I  needn't  write  you  anything  of  them  ; 
only  must  say  'tis  a  glorious  calling  to  be  a  messenger  for  such  a  King  and  to 
carry  such  tidings,  and  to  see  so  much  success. 

Oh!  pray  for  me  while  you  live,  and  rejoice  with  me  that  God  has  set  such 


LETTERS  TO   FRIENDS.  345 

honor  upon  me.    Pray  that  I  have  two  things, — power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and 
a  humble  heart. 

Love  to  all  the  dear  ones.     I  expect  to  come  East — Syracuse,  New  York 
State  Sunday  School  Convention,  June  8. 

Your  happy  boy, 
664  W.  Monroe,  Chicago.  P.  P.  BLISS. 


DEAR  SISTER  PHE: 

Very  pretty  poetry  you  sent  me.  Where  did  you  get  it?  The  subject, 
•"  Hope,"  has  always  been  my  motto,  and  the  Christian's  hope!  It  seems  to 
me  that  I  can  see  Pa  now,  as  he  used  to  stand  up  in  the  little  old  school- house 
and  tell  his  friends  and  neighbors  of  his  hope,  "  which  was  like  an  anchor  to 
the  soul,  both  sure  and  steadfast ; "  or,  his  hope  finally  to  come  off  conqueror 
— "  yea,  more  than  conqueror  through  Him  that  loved  us,"  or  he  hoped  we 
would  all  "be  up  and  doing,"  and  hoped  we  would  all  meet  him  in  "the 
bright  mansions  Jesus  has  gone  to  prepare."  Oh  1  how  dark  the  world  would 
be  without "  Hope." 

Take  fast  hold  of  the  promises— those  blessed  promises.  "  If  I  go  and  pre 
pare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again  and  receive  you,"  etc.  Let's  not  for 
get  who  said  this ;  and  won't  He  come  ?  We  may  forget  our  promises,  but 
Jesus  never.  We  may  get  tired  waiting,  but  He  will  come  and  "  receive  us." 
Oh !  be  ready  ;  and  when  I  get  to  thinking  about  it  I  can't  help  saying — 

How  long,  dear  Savior,  oh,  how  long 
Shall  this  bright  hour  delay  ?  etc. 

Sing  that  as  Pa  and  Ma  used  to,  on  a  Sabbath  morning,  to  the  tune  of 
Northfield,  and  think  of  me. 

I  hope  we  are  getting  nearer  the  kingdom,— making  some  little  progress  in 
Divine  life  ;  not  as  much  as  could  be  wished  ;  but  do  you  remember  Gideon's 
band  in  Scripture,  "faint  yet  pursuing."  Oh,  trust  in  the  Lord,  as  Job  says, 
"though  He  slay  me  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him."  Lord,  give  us  all  such  trust, 
and  save  us  through  Christ  our  Redeemer.  Amen.  P.  P. 

I  believe  we  should  think  of  Jesus  when  we  pray,  as  a  dear  friend  really 
listening  to  us  and  ready  to  aid,  not  as  some  great  power  to  be  dreaded.  So 
let  us  come  with  boldness,  liberty,  freedom,  believing  His  word  and  hoping  in 
His  mercy.  He  likes  to  have  us  come  in  earnest,  as  the  poor  blind  men  came, 
saying,  "  Lord,  if  Thou  wilt,"  and  then  He  is  ready  to  say  "  I  will." 


CHICAGO,  January  9,  1876. 

DEAR  MOTHER: 

Happy  New  Year !  What  different  circumstances  the  different  years  bring 
us.  Where  and  how  were  we  in  1866  ?  And  January  1,  1856,  1846,  etc.  This 
is,  on  many  accounts,  the  best  and  happiest  New  Year  we  ever  saw.  I  cannot 


.246  MEMOIB   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

begin  to  recount  the  mercies  of  the  past,  nor  do  I  appreciate  the  blessings  of 
the  present.  I  can  only  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd  ; "  then  I  am  His 
sheep,  and  because  He  cares  for  me  I  desire  to  live  for  Him.  Amen. 

We  are  all  quite  well.  Paul  and  George  are  a  little  bad-coldish,  but  so  as 
to  eat  and  sleep ;  Will  and  Lou  ditto.  I  came  home  from  Milwaukee  last  night ; 
have  been  there  six  weeks.  The  meetings  for  the  past  week  have  been  greatly 
blessed.  Many  professed  to  accept  the  Gospel.  Praise  the  Lord.  Dear  Bro. 
Whittle  goes  to  Racine  this  week.  I  shall  join  him  on  Friday.  Next  week 
we  go  to  Madison,  the  capital  of  Wisconsin,  and  the  week  after,  the  25th,  to 
St.  Louis.  Please  pray  for  all  these  places.  God  will  answer.  I  can  testify  to 
you  that  this  life  of  service  to  Him  who  hath  bought  us  is  a  very  delightful 
one.  My  cup  of  joy  has  always  been  full,  but  in  these  glorious  meetings  it 
often  runs  over ;  and  I  have  to-day,  Sunday,  been  at  home  all  day  with  my 
family,  resting  and  rejoicing.  Lou  and  I  have  had  sweet  communion  with 
each  other  and  the  Lord.  I  am  thankful  for  a  wife  who  can  enter  into  and 
share  the  joy  of  Christian  consecration  and  service.  Of  course  it  is  the 
greatest  trial  of  our  lives,  so  f&r,  to  be  separated  so  much,  but  it  seems  to  me 
especially  hard  for  her.  My  time  is  so  taken  up  with  the  meetings,  going 
and  seeing,  etc.,  while  she  is  left  with  the  monotonous,  every-day  duties  of 
home  life,  and  that  almost  like  yours,  a  widow.  But  nevertheless,  the  Lord 
has  given  her  a  cheerful  heart,  and  she  is  just  as  content  and  reconciled  as 
any  one  could  be ;  says  she  would  not  detain  me  if  she  could,  and  prays,  oh, 
so  earnestly,  for  my  success  and  safety.  Again,  I  thank  God  for  a  praying 
wife  and  a  praying  mother.  What  would  I  have  been  but  for  both  ?  The 
Lord  only  knows. 

Some  talk  has  been  had  of  our  coming  to  Towanda,  but  now  it  looks  doubt 
ful,  at  least  for  the  present.  If  we  go  South,  as  invited,  from  St.  Louis  to 
Mobile,  Montg6mery,  Macon,  Savannah,  etc.,  shall  probably  come  around  to 
New  York  or  somewhere  to  meet  Moody  and  Sankey,  in  March  or  April.  This 
is  all  uncertain,  but  you  can  say  to  all  who  ask,  We  do  not  know.  If  the  Lord 
approves  of  the  plans,  I  am  thinking  of  coming  East  about  May  and  remaining 
till  September  or  longer.  Then  you  may  not  be  at  all  surprised  if  on  New 
Year's,  1877,  my  letter  comes  from  England. 

I  have  no  plan  nor  wisdom.  Where  "  He  leads  I  would  follow."  Pray 
that  "  upper  wisdom  "  be  given  us  in  all  these  things. 


OWEGO,  Tuesday. 
DEAB  CASE,  SMACK  &  Co. : 

1  meant  it,  I  wish  I  could  be  with  you.  My  prayers  and  best  wishes  are  for 
you. 

In  Case  we  can  get  home  to  your  concert  after  next,  i.  e.,  July  28,  may  I 
sing  my  Centennial  Gospel  Song  and  have  the  quartet  names  on  slips  inclosed  ? 
"  Arise  and  &rine,"  not  yet  printed.  Our  little  vis  with  you  yesterday,  only 
makes  us  hungry  for  more.  Don't  fail  to  go  to  Rome.  We  must  not,  cannot 
let  go  of  you.  Please  write  oftener  the  coming  year  than  you  did  last. 


LETTERS  TO   FRIENDS.  247 

I  did  not  sleep  a  wink  last  night,  went  to  bed  about  one.  Stage  came  at 
3.20.  "  Great  is  tlie  Lord,"  and  "  The  Lord  is  good,  a  stronghold  in  the  day  of 
trouble,"  and  kindred  themes  kept  running  through  my  mind — and  with  my 
prayers  and  praises  I  could  not  sleep. 

We  go  on  to-morrow  morning,  and  expect  to  get  to  New  York  the  25th. 

Please  may  we  find  a  love-letter  from  all  of  you  at  Biglow  &  Main's,  76  East 
Ninth  Street,  New  York  ? 

Yours  in  haste — a  crowd  of  relatives  are  waiting — Yours  as  of  old, 

P.  P.  BLISS. 

Lou  joins  in  severest  love. 


May  8, 1876. 

In  regard  to  your  convention,  "  I  pray  thee  have  me  excused."     This  is  the 
best  kind  of  convention  ticket,  and  I  am  full  of  engagements  as  long  as  I  live. 
TERMS  :  "  Whosoever  will  may  come." 
INSTRUMENT  USED — "  The  Sword  of  the  Spirit." 
TIME — "  Now  is  the  accepted  time." 


While  ^ve  were  yet  Sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."    Romans,  v.  8. 


ACADEMY    OF    MUSIC. 


GOSPEL   MEETINGS, 

7.30  P.   M.  each   Evening,  commencing  Dec.  2 1st,    1875, 

CONDUCTED  BT 

D.  W.  WHITTLE  AND  P.  P.  BUSS. 

Singing  by  Chorus  Choir  conducted  by  P.  P.  BLISS.        Solos  by  P.  P.  BLISS. 

ADMIT  BEARER WEDNESDAY  EVENING. 

In  addition  to  Evening  Services,  a  Noon  Meeting  will  be  held  at  the  Academy  of 
Music  each  day  from  12  to  1  o'clock,  a  Bible  Eeading  from  3  to  4  o'clock,  and  Young 
People's  Meeting  from  4  to  5  o'clock.  Admission  free  WITHOUT  TICKET.  Tickets  for 
Evening  Services  can  be  obtained  without  cost,  upon  application  at  Wisconsin  News 
Co.,  of  Pastors  of  Churches,  or  of  E.  Upson,  Chairman  Committee,  Youug  Men's 
Library  Rooms,  at  Academy  of  Music. 


ROME,  PENNSYLVANIA,  May  8, 1876. 


DEAR     k        -u"""1 —  "  AND 

Yours  received  in  Chicago.     We  didn't  stop  at  Burgville.    Put  the  two 
babies  and  two  girls  in  a  palace  car  in  Chicago,  and  left  the  same  car  in  Wa- 


24:8  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

verly,  New  York,  for  Towanda — our  station.  You  may  have  heard  of  Towanda 
before.  Some  second-class  Normal  is  to  be  held  there  this  summer ;  but  'twont 
be  much  of  a  concern  'cause  my  name  isn't  on  the  cireulaire. 

Print,  brother,  print  with  care, 

And  print  "  P.  P."  on  your  cireulaire. 

However  I  may  be  induced  to  smile  on  you  during  the  term — if  you  give 
me  my  "Choice."  While  in  Selma,  Alabama,  I  received  the  information  of 
Towanda  Normal,  and  at  once  foresaw  G.  F.  R.,  Mac,  and  Cases,  et  al.,  spending 
a  Saturday  and  Sunday  in  Rome — ten  miles  away — "praise  meeting"  incur 
church,  etc.  More  than  this,  D.  L.  Moody  writes  me  from  Chicago:  "I 
want  to  see  you,  and  if  you  will  tell  me  where  you  will  be  I  will  come  and  see 
you  this  summer."  Wouldn't  it  be  good  to  have  Moody  here  when  you  are  ? 

Our  boys  are  pretty  well.  Paul  is  a  little  croupy,  running  out  so  much ; 
but  George  seems  better,  right  away.  Wife  is  somewhat  worn  and  wearied, 
but  all  things  considered,  we  were  never  better  off.  Wish  you  were  as  well. 

Love  to  all  the  dear  Williamses. 

Yours  till  we  see  you — after  that  we  can't  promise. 

P.  P.  P. 


KALAMAZOO,  MICHIGAN,  November  3, 1876. 
DEAR  MAMMA: 

Let  me  give  you  a  good  morning  kiss  and  wish  you  a  "  Merry  November !  " 

Your  last  letter  was  received,  I  think,  and  I  was  glad,  of  course,  as  a  good 
boy  ought  to  be. 

We  have  been  here  two  weeks,  and  about  the  best  two  weeks  we  ever  had. 
Your  prayers  are  being  answered,  and  I  am  thankful  for  a  mother  who  prays. 
I  hope  my  boys  will  remember  with  profit  the  prayers  of  their  father  and 
mother.  Please  to  pray  for  them,  and  for  those  who  have  care  of  them. 

We  have  been  to  Chicago  meetings  some,  and  sent  you  papers.  Oh  !  what 
a  privilege  to  live  in  these  days  and  to  be  in  any  way  connected  with  such  a 
work  of  grace  ! 

Do  you  enjoy  anything  or  anybody  this  winter?  How  is  your  health  and 
mind  and  spirit?  Is  it  well  with  your  soul  ? 

Song  of  Solomon,  ii,  14,  is  a  sweet  verse.  It  is  the  Lord  speaking  to  us,  His 
children.  He  wants  us  to  look  up  and  speak  to  Him.  How  good  He  is.  What 
grace !  what  grace  !  I  send  you  a  song, 

Hallelujah,  what  a  Savior  ! 

Mr.  Sankey  and  I  are  to  have  a  new  book  in  January. 

Now  I  must  go  to  prayer-meeting.  Guess  you'd  better  direct  to  Chicago, 
T.  M.  C.  A. 

Don't  know  how  long  we'll  stay  here,  nor  where  we'll  go  next.  Anywhere 
with  Jesus.  Yours  and  His  son, 

P.  P.  BLISS. 


LETTERS  TO   FRIENDS.  249 

JACK    AND    HIS    SON, 

Which  amounts  to  JACKSON,  November  18, 1876. 
DEAR  "  MA:" 

This  is  our  last  week  here  ;  next  I  may  write  you  from  Chicago.  Yours 
received.  I  am  sorry  for  your  eye. 

Do  not  cry  ;  do  not  cry. 
For  I  hope  it  will  be  better 

By  and  by,  by  and  by  ; 
Wipe  it  with  your  little  handkerchief, 

Do  not  sigh,  do  not  sigh, 
You  have  eyes  worth  looking  out  of, 

So  have  I,  so  have  I. 
Beams  and  motes  are  woful  bothers, 

In  your  eye,  in  your  eye, 
But  a  bile  on  yours  or  other's 

Is  "  too  high  !  "—far  too  high  ! 

I  sent  C.  W.  a  box  of  books,  but  hear  nothing  from  it.  Hope  they've 
got  'em. 

Thanks  for  the  compliments  to  my  boys.  I  think  you  and  I  have  nice  sons. 
I  want  to  see  my  son  P.  P.  Do  you  want  to  see  yooirs  ?  Well  wait  till  about 
Christmas,  if  the  Lord  will.  Lou  is  making  a  worsted  mat  to  put  on  our  table. 
I'll  have  to  go  and  get  a  table. 

[Closed  by  Mrs.  Bliss.] 

Phil  has  been  called  away  and  his  parting  words  were,  "You  finish  this 
letter."  The  mat  he  spoke  of  is  made  of  shaded  worsted  from  a  very  dark 
scarlet  down  to  a  pink  ;  I  think  it  will  be  very  handsome.  When  I  was 
keeping  house  I  never  found  time  for  any  fancy  work,  and  now  that  I  have 
a  little  time  I  am  trying  to  improve  it.  We  have  sold  or  given  away  nearly 
all  the  things  we  had,  so  that  when  we  go  to  keeping  house  again  we  will  have 
to  start  all  anew.  I  have  kept  my  bedding,  table  linen,  and  silver,  and  about 
all  the  furniture  we  have  is  some  clothes  boxes.  So  if  we  ever  do  get  a  house 
of  our  own,  I  shall  have  everything  new  to  start  with. 

We  sent  you  a  paper  telling  you  all  about  the  meetings  in  Kalamazoo. 
Whittle  and  Bliss  are  being  very  much  blessed  in  their  work.  There  are  many 
precious  souls  born  into  the  Kingdom  every  day.  The  Lord  is  very  good  to 
us.  He  keeps  our  children  in  such  good  health,  and  takes  such  good  care  of  us. 
We  get  pretty  homesick  to  see  the  boys,  but  must  wait  until  about  Christmas. 

It  is  getting  so  dark  that  1  cannot  see  ;  so  please  excuse  me, 

Hastily  yours, 

YOUR  SMALLEST  DAUGHTER. 


250  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

PEOBIA,  ILLINOIS,  November  30,  "fo. 
DEAR  MAC  : 

Yours  with  music  came  duly.  Thanks.  Have  only  time  to  acknowledge 
and  hope  to  see  you  if  we  come  to  Rome,  Christmas,  as  we  hope  to  do. 

Having  most  blessed  meetings  here, — still  praying  the  Lord  to  send  you 
into  singing  Gospel  -songs  in  Gospel  meetings. 

Glad  you  could  call  on  my  folks  at  Towanda ;  wish  I  could  do  as  much  for 
you.     Wishing  you  a  merry  Thanksgiving  and  a  Happy  "  77," 

Yours  as  ever, 

P.  P.  AND  Lou  B. 

At  the  time  of  writing  the  above  letter,  Mr.  Bliss  turned  to  his 
companion  and  said  "Who  is  there  that  McGranahan  could  go 
with  to  sing  the  Gospel  ?  "  A  few  moments'  talk  followed,  but  no 
one  could  be  thought  of  with  whom  he  would  be  likely  to  go.  One 
month  from  the  date  of  this  letter,  Mr.  Bliss  was  killed  and  these 
lines  are  now  being  added  in  Dubuque,  Iowa  ;  where  Mr.  McGrana 
han  is  sfnging  the  Gospel  in  meetings  conducted  by  the  companion 
to  whom  Mr.  Bliss  that  day  spoke.  His  prayers  are  answered. 


A  dearly  loved  friend  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss,  in  sending  copies 
of  letters,  thus  writes: 

JACKSONVILLE,  FLORIDA,  Feb.  28, 1877. 

Your  letter  with  regard  to  the  memoir  you  are  preparing  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bliss  came  duly  to  hand.  Am  sorry  I  could  not  have  replied  sooner. 

1  am  very  glad  that  you  have  undertaken  this,  for  1  think  thereby  the  world 
will  know  more  of  the  character  of  one  of  the  most  unselfish,  humble  Chris 
tians  I  ever  knew.  One  could  not  know  Mr.  Bliss  well  without  being  the 
better  for  it.  He  has  helped  me  in  my  Christian  life  much.  I  have  played  for 
his  musical  conventions  held  in  different  times  in  Illinois,  and  heard  much  of 
his  teaching  in  music  for  the  past  sixteen  years,  and  the  same  lovely,  simple 
faith  has  always  been  very  apparent.  My  first  acquaintance  with  these  dear 
friends  was  in  Warsaw,  New  York,  my  home  before  I  was  married,  where 
Mr.  B.  was  employed  to  lead  the  choir  of.  the  Congregational  Church  for  six 
months.  I  belonged  to  that  choir,  and  under  his  teaching  was  made  to  see  more 
in  every  hymn  sung  than  I  had  ever  before  imagined  could  be  found  in  them. 
He  was  always  careful  to  have  every  part  of  the  choir's  worship  done  in  the 
most  reverential,  thoughtful  manner  possible.  His  Master's  glory  was  always 
his  highest  aim.  He  has  had  great  influence  in  his  convention  work,  of  late 
years.  He  always  opened  the  morning  session  with  prayer,  followed  by  some 
devotional  piece  of  music,  which  he  would  always  use  with  good  effect ;  and 
then  a  few  words  would  fall  from  his  lips  upon  the  subject  which  was  so  near 


LETTERS   TO    FRIENDS.  251 

and  dear  to  his  heart — the  saving  of  souls — and  all  eyes  would  moisten  and 
hearts  were  touched  in  many,  many  instances. 

1  believe  the  Lord  crowned  with  His  blessing  all  these  words.  Mr.  Bliss' 
pleasant,  genial  manner  made  him  a  favorite  wherever  he  went,  especially 
among  the  young ;  so  every  word  spoken  by  him  before  the  convention  was 
treasured  and  believed.  So  he  has  been  doing  evangelical  work  for  a  good 
many  years. 

I  have  copied  only  such  parts  of  Mr.  Bliss'  letters  as  might  be  of  some  use 
to  you,  knowing  you  will  have  no  time  to  waste  in  reading  anything  else.  I 
cannot  let  them  go  without  expressing  my  thanks  to  you  for  this  generous 
work  you  are  doing.  I,  with  hundreds  of  others,  will  be  so  glad  to  have  such 
a  memoir.  I  cannot  cease  regretting  that  so  many  letters  which 'might  have 
been  so  useful  now  are  destroyed.  Our  peculiar  circumstances  of  giving  up 
friends  and  home  in  pursuit  of  health  called  forth  many  letters,  beautiful 
letters  of  loving  sympathy,  ever  turning  our  thoughts  to  the  Great  Healer,  and 
always  telling  of  his  own  great  joy  and  perfect  happiness  in  working  for  the 
Master.  It  was  his  real,  natural  life.  His  father  was  just  such  an  humble 
earnest  Christian  before  him. 

I  have  been  pained  by  mistakes  made  by  the  press,  especially  in  one  case 
where  he  was  said  to  have  been  a  Christian  for  the  last  six  years,  and  another 
saying  his  wife  taught  him  his  first  lessons  of  Divine  love.  She  was  a  loving, 
faithful  wife,  but  her  rich  Christian  experience  was  developed  under  his  in 
fluence,  instead  of  as  the  press  stated.  N.  E.  M. 


The  following  are  the  letters  from  Mr.  Bliss  to  which  Mrs.  M. 
so  feelingly  alludes  : 

DETROIT,  MICHIGAN,  October  the  last,  1874. 
OUR  DEAR  BROTHER  AND  SISTER: 

Surely  no  name  is  too  sacred  to  represent  the  relationship,  though  the 
many,  many  miles  stretching  between  us  seem  to  make  us  very  distant  rela 
tives.  How  much  you  are  both  in  my  thoughts  and  prayers.  It  is  sad  to  say 
"  good-bye." 

Your  penciled  note  gave  us  great  pleasure,  although  a  portion  ("for  me") 
had  been  omitted.  Surely  our  past  acquaintance  warrants  the  supposition  that 
anything,  everything,  we  may  write,  will  be  perfectly  understood  and  gladly 
received  by  each  other.  Never  destroy,  copy,  or  restrain  anything  suggested 
in  regard  to  any  member  of  the  Bliss  family. 

While  this  is  being  written  you  are' being  whirled  rapidly  away,  westward, 
chatting  gayly  of  the  aunt-elopes  or  Buffalo  (Bills),  plowing  snow  banks,  eat 
ing  venison,  or,  it  may  lH,  sending  back  a  thought  or  word  to  "664,"  "  Gospel 
Songs,"  "  Paul"  and  his  "  corner,"  etc.,  etc.,  while  here,  in  the  study  of  Rev. 
Arthur  Tappan  Pierson,  Pastor  of  the  First  Presbyterian  Church — a  mighty 
man,  a  perfect  scholar  and  such  a  genial  affinity — these  lines  are  penned  to 


252  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

you,  though  the  hour  is  taken  from  the  noon  prayer-meeting.  Four  meetings 
a  day  leave  little  time  for  anything  else.  So  this  may  be  regarded  as  home 
missionary  work ! 

You  will  not  expect  much  in  this  letter  concerning  Chicago  :  a  very  tender 
feeling  is  awakened  by  the  name  ;  a  gentle  "  redness  of  eyes"  is  induced  by 
thoughts  of  wife  and  Paul  and  George.  Yet  the  mighty  question  of  my  dear 
Master's  business  engages  with  a  profound  interest  my  whole  soul.  While 
the  souls  of  men  are  dying,  and  the  good  news  of  the  glorious  Gospel  will  be 
so  eagerly  listened  to,  it  is  no  time  to  hesitate. 

Dear  Lou  is  trying  hard  to  say,  "  Go,  and  God  speed  thee,"  and  her  true 
woman's  nature  is  being  so  ennobled  and  consecrated  that,  with  no  less  love  for 
me  but  so  much  more  for  the  blessed  Jesus  and  His  sweet  service,  her  heart 
has  heaven's  own  rest  of  peace. 

Morning  prayer  meeting  at  eight  o'clock,  attendance  from  100  to  250,  led  by 
Whittle,  Bliss  or  some  other  preacher.  Bequests  by  the  dozen  are  read,  one 
at  a  time,  and  prayer,  silent  or  audible,  offered  for  each  one. 

Five  persons  arose  for  prayer  this  morning ;  groups  of  six  or  more  remained 
to  talk  or  pray  together.  Noon  meeting  daily  at  Young  Men's  Hall.  Whittle 
leads  to-day.  Bible  reading  every  P.  M.,  and  to-day  a  children's  meeting  at  3  ; 
Gospel  meeting  at  T.30  (prayer  meeting  at  7) ;  and  oh,  how  you  would  enjoy 
seeing  and  helping  on  such  a  work.  Incidents?  Details?  Where  to  begin, 
is  the  only  question.  Last  evening  two  girls  came  up  to  me  to  "  talk  religion," 
just  in  fun  !  'Twas  a  painful  sight ;  my  heart  was  grieved — the  Holy  Spirit, 
oh,  how  much  more  !  This  morning  one  of  them  came  to  prayer  meeting  and 
spoke  of  it  with  grief  and  penitence.  One  of  the  first  families  have  a  "  high- 
toned"  girl  who  hasn't  spoken  to  her  father  for  three  years  1  She  is  asking 
prayer  ;  but  we  told  her  this  morning,  How  can  you  ask  prayer  ?  how  can  you 
pray  with  such  a  heart?  Scores  are  being  converted — hopefully,  joyfully, 
scripturally  converted.  Praise  ye  the  Lord. 

Two  weeks  more  here  ;  then  we  go  to  Pittsburgh.  Pray  for  us  there.  De 
cember  or  January  will  probably  bring  us  to  Boston,  Massachusetts. 

Anywhere  with  Jesus. 

You  will  now  be  released,  as  the  time  for  children's  meeting  is  near.     Let 
us  live  near  the  Lord,  be  happy,  trustful,  bold,  earnest,  real  Christians.     Serve 
Him  who  saves  us,  because  we  are  saved  and  not  to  be  saved. 
Your  names  are  in  my  prayers. 

Very  sincerely,  your  brother, 

P.  P. 


I 
MH.-WAUKEB,  December  30, 1875. 


Our  meetings  here  are  good.  All  the  churches  united,  crowds  attending, 
and  many  professing  to  be  saved  by  believing  the  Gospel,  the  gift  of  God. 
How  I  do  love  to  offer  it  as  a  free  gift  and  hear  the  delightful  reply,  "  Why,  if 


LETTERS  TO   FRIENDS.  253 

my  debt  is  paid,  and  God  says  it  is,  I  must  believe  it  or  make  Him  a  liar."  "  I 
accept  Jesus  as  my  Savior."  "  Is  that  the  way  to  be  saved?"  "  I'll  live  for 
Him  who  died  for  me,"  etc.  etc.  No  joy  in  this  world  like  this  service. 


Mrs.  M.  introduces  another  letter  with  the  following  prefatory 
note,  and  tells  us  the  origin  of  "When  Jesus  Comes  :  " 

The  following  is  from  our  last  letter  from  Mr.  Bliss,  written  a  few  days 
before  his  death.  You  will  probably  remember  the  ride  to  which  he  alludes, 
about  the  bluffs  and  cemetery  of  Peoria.  A  few  years  ago  while  visiting  us  at 
Peoria,  we  took  the  same  places  in,  in  an  afternoon  drive.  It  was  on  a  lovely 
October  day ;  the  air  was  hazy  and  dreamy,  and  all  nature  was  clothed  in  her 
brilliant  fall  colors,  making  the  cemetery  a  most  charming  picture.  We  drove 
slowly,  winding  about  from  path  to  path,  now  on  the  hillside,  now  in  the 
valley,  all  keeping  perfect  silence.  We  all  seemed  to  feel  the  same  quieting 
influence.  As  we  left  the  carriage  to  go  into  the  house,  Mrs.  Bliss  burst  into 
tears.  We  went  into  the  parlor  together,  Mr.  Bliss  going  directly  to  his  own 
room.  While  in  the  parlor,  Mrs.  Bliss  told  me  what  beautiful  thoughts  she  had 
been  having  of  her  babe  in  heaven,  (it  was  the  fall  after  the  birth  of  her  first 
child,)  and  said  she  had  never  enjoyed  a  ride  so  much.  All  the  surrounding 
circumstances  had  seemed  to  make  her  feel  an  unusual  peaceful  resignation  to 
the  loss  of  that  child.  Before  long,  Mr.  B.  came  down  with  a  slip  of  paper  in 
his  hand,  saying,  "  Girls,  I  want  to  read  to  you  what  I  have  here.  See  my 
child  that  was  born  of  that  ride.  I  have  never  had  more  peaceful,  enjoyable 
thoughts  than  this  afternoon."  Turning  to  me,  he  said,  "  Nett,  I  shall  never 
forget  that  ride."  Then  he  read  to  us,  "  When  Jesus  Comes."  I  have  the 
same  slip  of  paper  now,  and  I  need  not  say,  I  prize  it. 

ROME,  PENNSYLVANIA,  December  20,  1876. 

We  are  home  for  a  week  or  so ;  expect  to  leave  the  family  all  here  Satur 
day.  Probably  return  to  Chicago  December  30. 

On  my  table  lie  the  proof-sheets  of  "Gospel  Hymns  No  2,"  a  proposition 
for  a  Canadian  copyright,  and  an  invitation  for  Whittle  and  Bliss  to  come  to 
London,  England,  all  of  which  engage  my  consideration  and  prayerful  thought. 
I  think  we  may  go  to  England  about  May  1st.  Don't  ask  me  if  I  shall  leave 
my  wife  and  boys.  Pray  for  us  in  song  prayer  with  thanksgiving. 

The  meetings  at  Peoria  were  very  satisfactory.  All  the  churches  united, 
and  many  professed  to  accept  the  "  gift  of  God." 

May  the  Lord  give  you  great,  peace  and  rest.  May  all  our  lamps  be  trimmed 
and  burning  "  When  Jesus  comes."  Oh,  how  we  missed  you  at  Peoria,  on  our 
ride  round  the  bluffs,  cemetery,  etc.  I  wanted  to  see  "  Wib,"  but  failed. 

May  the  new  year  bring  you  abundant  blessings. 

P.  P.  BLISS. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

LETTERS  TO  A  CHRISTIAN  LADY— HIS  RELIGIOUS  LIFE  AND  EXPERIENCE- 
LETTERS  TO  HIS  NEPHEW — WORDS  OF  WISDOM — LETTERS  TO  HIS  CO- 
LABORER. 

rpHE  following  letters,  and  extracts  from  letters,  are  kindly  fur- 
1  nished  by  a  Christian  lady,  years  ago  a  teacher  of  Mr.  Bilks, 
his  first  instructor  in  music,  and  for  whom  he  always  entertained 
sentiments  of  the  highest  esteem,  gratitude  and  affection,  and  whom 
he  was  led  to  correspond  with  in  a  peculiarly  confidential  manner 
concerning  his  spiritual  life  and  plans  of  work  for  Christ,  seeking 
her  counsel  and  sympathy.  This  lady  thus  writes  : 

Away  back  in  1857  I  first  met  Mr.  Bliss  when  he  entered  tlie  Collegiate 
Institute  at  Towanda,  in  which  school  I  then  had  charge  of  the  department 
of  music.  His  complete  attention  and  excellence  in  the  singing  class  brought 
him  especially  to  my  attention  and  esteem,  and  my  every  remembrance  of  him 
at  that  time  is  laden  with  some  grace  or  goodness  of  character.  Always  in  the 
true  place  at  the  right  time,  noble,  modest  and  courteous,  and  of  wealth  of  heart 
and  soul  he  possessed  a  princely  store.  A  pure,  fresh,  sweet  life  consecrated 
thus  early  to  the  Lord,  unostentatious  but  sincerely  glad  to  be  heard  in  suppli 
cation  or  praise  and  ofttimes  in  the  midst  of  professors  and  pupils,  I  have  heard 
him  in  such  humble,  reverent  prayer  that  I  knew  he  had  learned  of  Him  who 
alone  giveth  such  understanding.  I  do  not  know  that  any  of  his  private  letters 
are  to  have  a  place  or  part  in  the  book  which  you  are  helping  to  prepare, 
but  if  I  may  modestly  and  unknown  to  the  public  help  you  in  the  least  partic 
ular  to  catch  any  new  or  more  beautiful  picture  of  our  lamented  friends,  I 
shall  be  satisfied.  Perhaps  in  lifting  the  veil  from  a  life  so  loyal  and  devoted 
to  Christ,  so  faithfully  tender  to  wife,  children,  home,  and  friends,  you  may  find 
in  these  extracts  a  few  gems  which  you  may  like  to  put  upon  the  golden  thread 
which  is  to  hold  the  picture  of  a  man  so  royal  and  grand,  so  loving  and  sweet. 
After  long  years  of  separation,  after  he  had  gained  new  friends,  new  dignities 
and  new  honors,  as  well  as  superior  mental  and  spiritual  attainments,  he  came 
back  to  find  me,  with  the  gratitude  and  simplicity  of  a  child,  thanking  me  for 
what  I  had  done  for  him  and  begging  still  to  call  me  "teacher,"  which  name 
I  find  in  the  last  letter  he  wrote  to  me.  In  his  wonderful  friendship  and 


LETTERS   TO   FRIEKD^.  255 

fidelity,  I  have  found  strength,  peace  and  comfort.  Always  in  my  greatest 
need  his  letters  came,  and  if  in  my  invalid  days  I  was  ready  to  weep  or  faint 
or  mourn,  I  had  remembered  some  word  or  hymn  or  benediction  of  his  and 
found  courage  and  peace. 


The  following  are  quotations  from  Mr.  Bliss'  letters  : 

EOT  OP  KONTENTMENT,  October  6, 1871. 

Had  I  received  your  kind  invitation  sooner,  and  had  the  health  of  Mrs.  B. 
been  sufficient,  you  would  have  seen  us  on  the  recent  trip  East.  We  spent  a 
Sunday  in  Owego,  and  are  now  safe  at  home  again  ;  but  my  wife  is  not  well. 
She  has  been  down  the  valley  and  almost  across  the  narrow  stream.  No;  I 
don't  like  such  figures.  The  blessed  Lord  has  led  us  up  the  kill,  and  by  the 
gift  of  suffering  made  this  poor  life  more  glorious  and  heaven  even  dearer. 
How  glad  I  am  at  your  saying  "Jesus  the  best  of  all."  May  you  continue  to 
rest  in  Him  ;  whether  living  or  dying,  be  "to  "  Him  ;  whether  here  or  yonder, 
be  with  Him.  If  you  have  received  the  "  Charm  ".  I  sent  you,  let  the  "  Light  in 
the  Valley"  cheer  you,  "Over  Yonder"  win 'you,  and  "Jesus  Loves  even  Me  " 
entertain  you.  The  Sunday  School  and  choir  and  convention  work  to  which  I 
have  been  called  seems  to  prosper.  Conventions  every  week  somewhere  ;  Sun 
day  School,  709  last  Sunday.  Pray  for  your  pupil,  that  his  life  may  be  to  many 
what  yours  is  and  has  been  to  him. 

[The  winter  after  the  great  fire,  1872.] 

Forgive  me,  but  I  had  a  real  good  cry  over  the  pleasant  memories  of  your 
last  letter,  and  since  then  have  been  laughing  at  your  mistake  in  supposing  me 
to  be  anything  else  than  the  overgrown,  awkward  boy  you  used  to  be  kind  to. 
Please  don't  talk  about  our  being  on  ahead  of  you  and  beg  for  us  to  wait  for 
you.  The  best  thing  in  your  letter,  the  best  thing  about  any  of  us  is  the  re 
flection  of  the  dear  Savior's  love.  Oh,  isn't  it  the  name  above  every  name — 
precious  Jesus !  yes,  indeed,  we  have  hugged  the  interests  of  the  Redeemer's 
kingdom  close,  and  if  I  could  tell  you,  but  I  never  can  here,  how  His  loving 
arms  here  encircle  me  and  mine. 

Our  little  "  Kot  of  Kontentment  "  is  on  the  West  Side,  nearly  a  mile  from 
the  burnt  district.  The  music  books,  instruments,  sheet  music,  etc. — the 
earthly  substance  in  which  my  plans  centered — all  gone  with  the  Opera  House. 
Of  course  we  lost  all — insurance  in  "home  companies" — but  I  can't  say  we've 
suffered  anything  by  the  fire.  Good  health  and  plenty  to  do  ;  lots  of  friends, 
voice  and  faith ;  what  need  I  more  ?  Now  I'll  let  you  rest.  Only  pray  to-night 
for  me,  that  God  may  use  me  more  and  more  for  His  kingdom.  Good-bye. 
Wait.  Won't  we  have  a  good  song  when  we  all  get  home  ?  " 


256  MEMOIB      *    P.    P.    BLISS. 

December  22, 1873. 

I  am  glad  you  are  only  six  yeai  ahead  of  me.  If  I  live  fast,  maybe  I  can 
quite  come  up  to  you  yet.  I  honestly  think  it's  beautiful  to  grow  old — one  can 
appreciate  good  things  and  avoid  bad  ones  so  much  better. 

And  now,  my  sister,  poor  as  is  the  prop,  unsafe  as  may  be  the  arm,  it 
will  be  joy  to  think  you  do  so  lean  upon  it ;  to  think  that  you  believe  in  me 
enough  to  let  your  tired  heart  rest  in  unquestioning  confidence,  if  it  may,  in 
my  sympathy.  I  do  feel  sometimes  that  for  Jesus'  sake,,  I'd  like  to  bear  some 
body's  burdens,  my  way  is  so  pleasant,  and  my  life  work  so  agreeable.  I  can 
only  say  He  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters.  And  yet  I  would  not  boast  of 
myself.  'Tis  not  that  I  am  strong  ;  more  likely  'tis  that  He  in  tender  mercy 
spares  my  sad  ruin  which  His  omniscience  knows  a  little  load  would  cost. 

I  have  an  offer  to  lead  the  music  in  San  Francisco  Tabernacle,  Handel  and 
Haydn  Society,  &  Co.,  at  a  salary  of  $3,000  in  gold.  Do  not  press  me  for  rea 
sons  for  not  going.  I  only  mention  this  to  you  because  I  know  you  will 
rejoice  in  anything  like  my  prosperity. 

Wife  and  Paul  send  much  love  and  unite  in  an  invitation  for  you  to  come 
and  see  us. 

Now  I  must  go.  Good  bye.  I'll  send  you  a  new  song  in  a  few  days.  So 
help  me  by  prayer  and  pen,  dear  friend,  and  so  use  me,  heart,  hand  and  voice, 
as  He  would  have  you.  Be  sure  that  your  influence  from  my  first  day  at  T. 
till  now,  has  been  only  helpful  and  Christian.  My  music  is  the  better  and 
purer,  my  life  brighter  and  my  heart  stronger  and  larger  for  your  share  in 
instructing  me. 


January,  1874. 

If  the  dear  Lord  so  wills  it,  I'm  coming  to  see  you  some  day,  and  you  shall 
again  be  my  teacher.  I  have  only  "  Sunshine"  and  "  Joy  "  in  my  heart  and 
life,  and  if  I  might  know  Him  who  has  given  by  sharing  the  gift,  I  shall  be 
the  happier. 


CHICAGO,  March  10, 1874. 

PRINCESS  LOUISA:     » 

Your  chatty  communication  containing  the  "  personal  heart  "  letters  of  the 

far  away  E is  before  me.  I  can't  now  remember  much  of  her  spirit. 

However,  these  are  beautiful  Christian  letters.  A  rich  and  varied  experience 
was  necessary  to  develop  such  a  heart.  I'll  send  some  music  as  you  direct. 
This,  I  must  say,  is  another  apology  only  for  the  elegant,  elaborate  letter  I 

owe  you.  Going,  Going,  G ,  and  my  train  leaves  in  twenty  minutes.  But 

between  true  friends  there  can  be  no  debit  and  credit  system.  Believe  me,  if 
we  had  called  at  your  house,  or  if  ever  you  do  come  to  our  "  Kot  ov  Kontent " 
there'll  be  music  or  would  have  been  time  improved.  Bah  !  what  an  awk 
ward  sentence !  I'll  keep  close  to  the  shore  after  this. 

So  we  are  well,  happy,  cheerful,  content,  peace  like  a  river.  Wish  you  the 
same  now  and  ever.  I  am  flying  from  Iowa  to  Michigan  and  stop  in  Chicago  for 
one  night  to  sing  my  new  song,  "  Work  and  Pray,"  at  a  women's  temperance 


Copyrighted.  A.S.£ames&C?  J877. 


LETTERS  TO   FRIENDS.  257 

song,  at  a  Union  Temperance  mass  meeting.     I  believe  in  women,  prayer  and 
God  ;  so  there's  only  one  side  for  me  in  the  great  crusade. 

George  Rodgers,  of  England,  gave  one  of  his  world- renowned  lectures  on 
the  "  Tabernacle,"  in  our  church  last  evening,  and  I  sang  a  new  song  for  him, 
"  Wishing,  Hoping,  Knowing."  I  have  a  very  winning  call  to  London,  Eng 
land,  for  this  summer,  to  sing  "  Gospel  Songs."  Shall  I  go  ? 

Wife  and  Paul  send  much  love. — If,  when  I  come  home,  I  can  "  steal  awhile 
away,"  you  may  get  a  letter,  song  or  sermon. 

Till  then  as  ever,  Blissfully 

Yours. 


March  31, 1874. 

My  dear  wife  is  fully  my  equal  as  a  performer  and  far  superior  in  matters 
of  taste,  criticism,  etc.  You  mistake  when  you  suppose  criticism  "hurts" 
me.  True  as  Hive,  I  don't  want  to  know  the  favorable  things  said  about  me, 
nearly  so  much  as  I  desire  to  hear  objections. 

Since  writing  you  before,  the  way  has  been  very  clearly  made  known  to 
me  and  my  wife,  for  my  immediate  future.  We  have  long  prayed  God  to  lead 
me  into  the  widest  field  of  efficient  labor.  He  has  repeatedly  come  near  to  us 
in  His  delightful,  conscious  manifestations,  and  now  I  am  fully  persuaded  He 
calls  me  to  give  my  time  and  energies  to  writing  and  singing  the  Good  News. 
I  am  constrained,  by  what  Christ  is  and  has  been  to  me,  to  offer  all  my  powers 
directly  to  His  sweet  service.  Beginning  with  this  desire,  prompted,  I  am  sure, 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  lam  willing — we  are  willing — to  leave  ourselves  where  we 
always  have  been,  in  our  Father's  loving  hands.  He  has  led  us  in  spite  of  our 
plans  into  all  and  only  pleasant  and  prosperous  ways.  It's  no  time  to  distrust 
or  question  now.  Pardon  me  if  this  all  sounds  like  "cant,"  to  you.  My 
meaning  is  to  be  honest  and  real.  Pray  for  us,  if  you  can,  that  I  may  be 
honored  by  "helping  Jesus."  Major  Whittle  goes  with  me  to  preach  the 
Gospel  while  I  try  to  sing  it.  Our  only  aim,  sincerely,  above  all  else,  is  to  win 
souls  to  Jesus  Christ. 

Yours,  in  His  love, 

P.  P.  B. 


July  20, 1874. 

I  did  not  see  the  appropriateness  of  my  trying  to  write,  as  my  wife  ought 
to.  Of  Paul  I  can  never  tell  you  one  half.  He  is  (and  always  has  been)  "just 
the  right  age  to  be  interesting;"  has  twenty  or  thirty  teeth — a  large  head, 
brown  hair,  chubby  hands,  big  feet,  of  course — a  perfectly  healthy,  happy 
boy.  Can  say  "Papa's  chatterbox,"  "Mamma's  pigeon,"  and  can  tease  most 
effectually  for — "  Nandy  !  "  Mrs.  Bliss  is  in  excellent  health  and  spirits,  as 
usual.  As  she  is  not  to  read  this,  I  must  say  she  is  an  extraordinary  woman. 
You  don't  know  many  women  of  such  unselfish  devotion,  sublime  faith  and 
child-like  trust.  She  lives  so  near  the  Lord  that  I  ought  to  be  a  good  man. 

17 


258  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Humanly  speaking,  my  life  would  have  been  a  failure  without  her.  God  bless 
her.  I  am  engaged  to  write  and  sing  Gospel  songs  in  this  country  this  fall 
and  winter.  Yours  for  Lou,  *• 

BLISS. 


August  8,  1874. 

DEAR  SISTER: 

I  am  just  home  for  a  day  from  the  State  Convention  of  "  Y.  M.  C.  A,"  Aurora, 
Illinois,  and  go  Monday  to  S.  S.  Teachers'  Assembly  at  Chautauqua  Lake,  New 
York.  I  wish  you  were  to  be  there.  I  wish  you  could  have  been  yonder. 
But  I  mind  me  of  a  convention  soon  to  be  called  "  of  all  kindreds  and  tongues 
and  nations,"  where  the  theme  will  be  "  Hallelujah  to  the  Lamb."  To  that  our 
ardent  souls  aspire.  During  that  grand  convention  I'll  tell  you  how  good  God 
has  been  to  me  and  mine. 

Dear  wife  desires  me  first  of  all  to  thank  you  for  the  kind  letter,  and  to  say 
for  her  that  she  is  not  feeling  quite  well  these  days,  and  begs  you  will  excuse 
her  from  writing. 

Our  Paul  boy  is  just  all  we  could  wish,  every  way,  and  I  perceive  we  are 
coming  to  think  quite  a  good  deal  of  him.  If  and  if  we  could  "  come  to  the 
mountain,"  about  September,  1  am  sure  you  would  be  happy.  Pardon  me  for 
writing  on  my  business  paper,  but  I  want  you  to  hear  about  Gospel  Songs,  etc. 

Are  you  teaching,  gardening  or  what?  You  wouldn't  send  me  a  picture  of 
yourself,  so  1  of  course  had  to  make  one  :  Age,  40  ;  complexion  very  fair  ; 

height,  5  ft.  2  in.  ;  weight,  122  Ibs  ;  hair  inclining, ;  teeth  good  ;  mouth 

large  ;  lips  thin,  and  smiling  e}'es,  blue,  large  and  watery  ;  dress  neat  and  a 
perfect  fit;  carriage  erect  and  easy  !  How's  that?  T would  all  be  impolite  in 
me  but  for  old  acquaintance's  sake.  However,  this  "  tabernacle"  will  soon  be 
"  dissolved,"  it's  the  other  house  I'm  most  interested  in,  and  I  can  see  that  in 
every  utterance  of  your  pen,  "the  things  that  are  not  seen  are  eternal," 
aren't  they  ? — What  trifles  engage  the  attention  of  the  king's  children  !  How 
we  dishonor  our  loving  Father  by  making  so  much  of  every  thing  else  and  so 
little  of  His  blessed  word  and  kingdom.  I  know  I  do— God  forgive  me. 

Specimen  "Gospel  Songs"  inclosed.  Pray  for  them  and  us.  2  Cor.  ix, 
8  =  the  seven  A'&.  Yours  in  Him, 

P.  P.  B. 

March  18, 1875. 

Major  Whittle  and  I  had  a  series  of  wonderfully  successful  Gospel  meetings 
in  Louisville,  Kentucky.  We  go  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  March  23.  Pray  for 
us  and  write  me  there,  please,  care  John  Church  &  Co.  Wife  and  sons  are 
well  and  happy  and  would  be  so  glad  to  have  you  come  and  visit  us.  Why 
not  ?  The  front  chamber  will  be  all  ready  painted,  papered,  etc.,  by  the  time 
you'll  get  here  and  this.  I'm  away  from  home  much  of  the  time.  The  piano, 
a  glorious  upright,  is  here,  and  you  may  have  access  to  a  musical  library 
—considerable. 


LETTERS  TO   HIS   KEPHEW.  259 

Are  you  in  the  midst  of  maple  sugar,  etc.?  When  we  come  to  Owego  again, 
"  It  may  be  for  years,"  etc. 

This  singing  and  talking  about  the  Good  News  of  a  present,  perfect,  free 
salvation  and  justification  by  faith  is  so  popular  and  attractive  I  don't  believe  I 
shall  ever  find  time  for  any  thing  else  ;  and  seems  to  me  it's  needed.  How 
much  of  everything  else  we  hear  preached,  and  how  little  Gospel. 

I  sent  you  papers  from  Louisville,  will  also  from  Cincinnati.  Wife  unites 
in  love  unchanging.  Please  to  rest  in  it.  Yours  ever, 

P.  P.  B. 


The  following  letters  were  written  by  Mr.  Bliss  to  his  nephew, 
who  is  frequently  noticed  in  the  preceding  chapter,  by  his  initials 
"  W.  H."  This  nephew  was  a  member  of  Mr.  Bliss'  household  for 
some  two  years  during  his  absence  as  an  evangelist,  and  was  regarded 
by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  B.  almost  as  a  son. 

OKLAND,  INDIANA,  December  11,  1871. 
DEAR  NEPHEW  : 

Your  good  long  letter  came  two  days  ago.  It  is  a  good  composition  and 
shows  a  spirit  of  trust  in  the  Lord  and  at  the  same  time  a  desire  to  help  your 
self,  which,  if  continued,  must  lead  to  a  successful  life. 

I  am  so  glad  for  you  that  a  way  is  so  pleasantly  opened  for  your  schooling. 
God  bless  you  in  it.  As  to  "  agency  "  or  similar  means  of  raising  money,  I  am 
not  very  favorable  to  the  sort ;  still  you  might  try,  after  study  hours,  some 
physical  labor  would  seem  better.  Let  me  make  a  proposition  if  you  are  quite 
sure  that  your  school  is  the  thing  and  that  you  will  stay  through.  I  will  pay 
your  tuition  for  you.  Then  perhaps  you  can  earn  enough  to  clothe  yourself. 
Of  course  'twill  be  better  for  you  to  try  (as  I  know  you  will)  to  be  helping 
yourself  just  the  same.  If  you  would  as  soon,  I'd  like  to  have  you  ask  me  for 
money  at  any  time  instead  of  borrowing  elsewhere.  DON'T  GET  IN  DEBT. 

You  ask  my  advice.  Be  easy  in  old  clothes,  don't  mind  any  large,  coarse 
boots  ;  stand  up  straight,  look  pleasant,  speak  more  cheerfully.  I  know 
you  will  succeed  as  long  as  you  read  the  Bible  and  pray  much.  Watch 
and  pray. 


CHICAGO,  November  22,  1872. 
DEAR  WILLIE: 

May  yours  be  a  happy  Thanksgiving  day  ;  will  it  help  to  make  it  such  if  I 
tell  you  that  Aunt  Lou  and  I  have  been  talking  a  good  deal  about  you,  and  con 
cluded  to  say  you  may  expect  $10  a  month  from  us  after  December.  That  is, 
the  first  January,  1873,  and  on  the  first  of  each  month  of  the  year,  I  will  send 
you  check  for  $10.  God  bless  you  with  it,  my  dear  boy,  and  may  your  mother's 
prayers  be  answered. 


260  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Would  it  be  well  to  keep  a  strict  cash  account  ?  Prove  to  us  all  that  you  can 
keep  out  of  debt.  As  a  business  matter  it  is  always  right  for  us  to  recommend 
what  we  think  is  a  good  thing. 

In  the  things  of  the  Kingdom  we  should  do  with  our  might.  I'd  be  glad  to 
have  you  look  at  Congregationalism — that  is,  I  am  so  happy  in  this  work  and 
with  this  church,  I  am  desirous  of  opening  its  doors  to  my  friends.  Did  you 
ever  say  to  what  denomination  you  belong  ?  Of  course  you  should  have  a 
choice,  and  learn  to  love  your  own,  and  labor  for  its  good.  May  the  Lord  guide 
you  into  all  truth.  Pray  it  earnestly  and  often. 

Aunt  Lou  joins  in  love. 

P.  P.  B. 


CHICAGO,  October  15, 1873. 
DEAR  WILLIE: 

I  did  not  receive  the  letter  you  mention.  I  would  advise  you  to  teach  this 
winter.  Your  record  of  work  is  a  good  one.  "  Do  not  be  discouraged  "  is  cheap 
and  common  advice,  but  I  know  you  and  I  will  often  be  discouraged.  Prayer, 
asking  for  faith,  and  reading  the  promises  are  my  remedies.  Be  sure,  my  dear 
boy,  God  has  great  things  for  us  to  do  and  to  be.  We  are  all  praying  for  you 
and  watching.  Farewell.  Your  uncle 

PHIL. 


CHICAGO,  February  10, 1874. 
DEAR  FRIEND  AND  NEPHEW  W.  H. : 

How  do  you  do  by  this  time  ?  You  must  not  think  you  have  been  overlooked, 
forgotten,  nor  slighted.  I  have  been  trying  to  ascertain  what  might  be  the 
best  thing  to  write.  Of  course  I  am  not  competent  to  advise  ;  every  one  must 
decide  and  act  for  himself.  This  has  been  a  hard  lesson  for  me  to  learn,  and 
I've  not  yet  graduated  in  it.  Still,  we  can  by  suggestions,  etc.,  often  assist 
each  other  in  making  conclusions.  So  I  will  speak  quite  freely  as  we  have 
talked.  I  have  a  great  deal  of  faith  in  you,  to  begin  with;  or,  to  speak  more 
properly,  I've  a  strong  faith  in  God,  and  believe  He  will  by  various  means  de 
velop  you  and  in  answer  to  prayers  make  the  most  of  you.  You  and  I  may 
sometimes  complain  of  a  lack  of  opportunities ;  or  regret  inabilities,  when,  if 
we  labor  and  patiently  wait,  it  will  appear  that  "  God's  ways  were  best."  If 
we  admit  that  in  advance,  and  then  are  willing  to  be  led,  we  certainly  must 
come  into  a  cheerful  content ;  for  of  course  we  desire  the  best  in  all  things.  I 
am  not  sorry  to  hear  that  you  are  with  your  Pa  in  the  woods ;  for  'twas  with 
him  in  such  places,  1  learned  a  great  many  useful  things,  and  received  a  good 
education.  One  thing  I  am  glad  to  say — "Doc."  as  we  used  to  call  him, 
always  had  a  good  word  of  cheer  for  a  fellow,  and  never  by  word  or  example 
led  us  boys  astray.  He  was  a  kind,  hard-working,  pleasant  man,  whose 
influence  was  always  on  the  right  side. 


LETTERS   TO   HIS   NEPHEW.  201 

After  you  wrote  to  me  about  "  medicine,"  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Anderson — and 
also  went  about  this  city  to  learn  what  I  could  of  the'  project.  The  matter,  as 
you  proposed  it,  did  not  shine  very  brightly  to  my  eyes  ;  so  I've  looked  about 
in  other  directions.  What  would  you  think  of  going  into  a  drug  store  for  a 
time  ?  Or  have  you  abandoned  this  line  of  thought  entirely  ?  If  in  mental 
and  spiritual  matters  you  can  be  as  thorough  as  you  are  in  physical  (chopping 
and  sawing  for  instance),  you'll  succeed.  And  that  is  what  we  are  expecting 
of  you,  old  boy  I  Purpose — Pluck — PUSH !  Faith  in  self,  in  friends,  in 
God  ;  Pluck  to  plan,  to  push,  to  plod, 

[The  poetry  is  original  and  composed  for  the  occasion  ;  please  commit  it  to 
heart  and  commit  your  heart  to  it.]  I  thought  of  you  and  prayed  most  earn 
estly  for  you  as  we  came  through  Wellsville.  In  fact  I  looked  for  you  a  little  ; 
didn't  know  but  maybe  you'd  happen  down  by  the  depot. 

Well,  really,  you  must  pardon  me  for  such  a  long  letter,  and  I  haven't  said 
anything  yet.  We  are  all  well — that  begins  to  sound  like  a  letter — Paul  is 
awake  as  usual ;  Aunt  Lou  in  the  bedroom  with  him  ;  Warren  off  down  town 
somewhere  ;  Chicago  lively  and  lovely.  Won't  you  and  your  Pa  come  out  and 
make  us  a  visit  ?  I  tell  you,  we'd  be  mighty  tickled  to  have  you.  The  old 
ladies  switched  Chicago  in  good  style,  and  we  weren't  ashamed  of  them.  I 
guess  we  could  get  along  with  you.  Come  and  try  it. 

I  go  to  Iowa  next  week.  This  convention  business  keeps  me  sliding  in  the 
season  of  it.  God  bless  you.  Let  me  hear  from  you. 

Truly  your  Uncle 

PHIL. 


May  15,  74. 
DEAR  BEARDLESS  BOY  : 

Sorry  you're  sick  ;  "  Beware  of  dogs."     Phil,  iii,  2. 

Guess  you  worked  too  hard  moving  us.  I  am  writing  up  in  the  beautiful 
study  which  I  found  all  papered  and  carpeted  and  in  order  waiting  for  me,  last 
week,  when  I  came  home  from  a  Gospel  meeting  trip.  Oh,  my  boy,  I  rather 
guess  I've  a  wife  as  is  a  wife.  God  bless  her  this  minute. 

What  a  blessed  trial  that  Mansfield  experience  was.  How  did  Jennings 
stand  it  ?  Did  he  show  his  Bliss  ?  or  did  he  at  the  hotel  kneel  down  and  say, 
"  all  right ;  all  things  work  together  for  good  ?  " 

Of  course  we  are  happy  and  all  pretty  well.  Paul  has  another  tooth  and 
Phenie  another  dress.  House  in  good  shape.  I  spent  a  very  interesting  hour 
in  the  barn  to-day,  sawing  and  splitting  the  kindling  boards  you  hauled.  I 
had  to  think  of  you  considerably.  Old  Mr.  Young,  "  O.  W.,"  is  around  yet; 
he  seems  very  feeble;  don't  get  in  till  midnight  sometimes,  poor  fellow! 

Maj.  Whittle  and  wife  come  to  tea  and  we  have  a  Gospel  meeting  on  West 
ern  Avenue  this  evening.  Expect  a  good  time.  We  go  to  Whitewater, 
Wisconsin,  next  week  ;  will  be  there,  probably,  when  you  read  this.  Pray  for 
us.  Well,  good  day,  3  John  ii.  P.  P.  B. 


262  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

DETROIT,  October  9,  1874. 
DEAR  WILL  : 

Don't  you  begin  to  believe  that  I  don't  think  of  you  every  day  ?  I  believe 
in  you  and  in  the  power  of  prayer  and  a  life  of  faith.  You  must  succeed,  and 
in  order  to  true  success,  if  you  would  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  or  of 
science  or  greatness,  you  must  become  as  a  little  child — humble  and  teachable, 
desirous  of  being  led.  I  trust  you  have  this  spirit  in  a  good  degree  ;  keep  it ; 
pray  for  more  faith  and  trust.  Don't  apply  yourself  too  closely  to  books 
and  such.  Don't  stay  too  long  in  the  rat-pit.  Make  haste  slowly.  Save  time 
by  waiting  for  some  things.  Save  health.  Confide  everything  to  your  loving 
Aunt  Lou.  She's  a  faithful  friend,  and  though  her  corrections  may  seem 
grievous,  who  wouldn't  be  correct  f 

The  meetings  are  immense.  Crowds  and  crowds — many  standing  all 
through,  and  many  had  to  go  away  from  the  door  of  one  of  the  largest 
churches  last  evening.  Your  prayers  are  being  answered.  Praise  God  for  it. 
To  Him  be  all,  ALL  the  glory.  Amen.  his 

UNCLE      x 

mark. 

DETROIT,  November  17,  1874. 
DEAR  W.  H.  J  : 

You  are  in  my  thought  and  prayers  daily.  I  am  anxious  that  your  sojourn 
in  Chicago  shall  do  all  for  you,  in  every  way,  that  we  hope  or  God  intends. 
I  need  not  say  to  you,  and  yet  it  is  a  pleasure,  your  aunt  and  I  are  "  glad  you 
came."  Of  course  I  am  away  so  much.  The  important  thing  to  me  is  that  you 
make  it  pleasant  for  her.  She  says  you  do  that,  so  I  am  content.  Thank 
God.  Only  don't  let  the.  mental  do  injustice  to  your  physical  and  spiritual 
energies.  A  holy  man  means  a  whole  man — symmetrical,  well-balanced  ;  so 
have  a  look,  my  dear  boy,  each  day,  into  all  things  concerning  the  "  full  man." 
Confide  all  to  Him  who  careth  for  you.  Pray  for  much.  Be  courteous  to  all, 
familiar  with  few,  intimate  with  none. 

Say  to  the  girls  that  we  will  be  home  to  breakfast  Friday  morning  and  that 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Whittle  will  probably  be  with  us,  at  about  9  o'clock.  Don't 
forget  this. 

I  am  glad  to  hear  so  good  a  report  from  the  Bliss  boys.  Aunt  Lou  arrived 
this  morning  and  surprised  me  on  my  return  from  prayer-meeting.  I  am  very 
glad  she  could  come. 

The  meetings  go  on  grandly;  many  souls  daily  profess  Christ,  and  the 
church  more  and  more  revived.  I  have  some  thrilling  incidents  to  relate, 
when  I  come  home.  Pray  for  the  meeting  at  Dr.  Goodwin's  church  for  Sun 
day  evening  next.  Read  this  little  book  carefully  and  hand  it  to  some  friend. 
Good  bye.  Your  loving  Uncle, 

P.P. 

LoTTisvnxE,  February  25, 1875. 
DEAR  WILL  : 

Put  in  your  vote  for  Aunt  Lou  to  come  next  week,  if  she  don't  come  before, 
—and  she  can  just  as  well  bring  a  baby  or  two  as  not.  Plenty  of  room  and 


LETTERS   TO    HIS   NEPHEW.  263 

servants  here,  AND  I  want  to  see  'em  ;  I'd  like  to  look  in  at  you  to-day.  Wish 
you  could  corne  to  one  of  these  glorious  meetings ;  but  pray  on.  The  Lord  is 
doing  a  mighty  work  here.  Praise  Him.  Here's  a  letter  from  Harry  Moor- 
house,  the  "  boy  preacher."  I  pray  for  you  ;  so  does  Major,  every  day,  and  I 
believe  you  are  being  led  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Let  us  ask  God  to  correct  and 
direct  us  ;  and  then  be  very  careful  to  recognize  and  follow  His  leadings.  We 
need  to  ask  wisdom  daily,  and  He  says  "  it  shall  be  given  him,"  Math,  vii,  7, 
and  James  i,  5.  Now  ask.  Hastily  but  heartily,  Yours, 

UNCLE  PHIL. 


NASHVILLE,  May  10, 1875. 
DEAR  WILL  : 

I  don't  blame  you,  'tis  too  bad  !  Pardon  me.  Your  letters  are  good  and 
helpful.  Your  diagnosis  of  sin,  etc.,  was  a  good  thing,  and  I  used  it.  No  use 
to  try  to  tell  you  of  our  glorious  meetings.  The  papers  poorly  do  that.  Oh, 
pray  on  for  me,  that  I  may  be  humble  and  empty,  fit  for  use.  Your  opinion  of 
Aunt  Lou  is  quite  correct.  I  believe  you  are  to  give  her  a  great  deal  of  com 
fort  in  answer  to  prayers  for  you.  Fight  on,  my  brave  boy.  Faith  is  Victory. 
Take  good  care  of  your  health  and  don't  study  too  close.  Send  your  Aunt  Lou 
to  this  sunny  South,  if  you  can.  Bite  Paul  if  he  bites  George.  Yes,  I  send 
papers  to  Allegany.  Telegram  just  received  from  Montreal,  asking  us  to  stop 
there  a  week  or  two  on  our  way  to  London.  Answered  we'd  come  for  a  few 
days,  beginning  June  15,  the  week  after  New  York  Convention.  God  is  so 
good  to  us,  and  His  work  so  precious.  You  must  excuse  me  if  I  talk  that  as 
you  do  medicine.  Success  to  you.  Live  near  the  Lord,  "  Looking  unto  Jesus." 


NASHVILLE,  May  12, 1875. 
DEAR  WILL  : 

If  your  Aunt  Lou  is  not  here  by  the  time  you  get  this,  you  need  not  read 
it ;  for  I'll  be  so  disappointed.  I'll  be  ill-natured  and  won't  mean  it.  I  hope 
you  are  now  about  getting  on  the  street  cars  to  go  to  depot,  so  she'll  be  here 
to-morrow  night.  My  heart  is  all  flatting  out,  I  think,  for  want  of  a  wise 
woman  to  hold  it  together — what  do  the  doctors  call  it,  home-sickness  ?  The 
climate  is  beautiful  here — weather  still  cold  and  healthful.  If  the  Lord  had 
sent  the  usual  warm  weather,  all  say  our  meetings  would,  hnmauly  speaking, 
have  been  much  less  successful.  The  people  here  are  so  cordial  and  intense. 
You  must  never  speak  harshly  of  rebels  again. 


[This  letter  commenced  by  Mrs.  Bliss  finished  by  Mr.  B.] 

MEMPHIS,  TENNESSEE,  Saturday,  1875. 
DEAR  WILL: 

We  have  just  returned  from  a  delightful  boat-ride  on  the  grand  old  Missis 
sippi.    It  was  cool  on  the  boat,  and  we  all  feel  greatly  refreshed.     We  saw 


264  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

them  land  a  mule,  which  furnished  fun  enough  to  last  your  uncle  and  Major  a 
whole  year. — And  now  she  is  interrupted  and  this  mule  continues.  We  are 
just  wallowing  in  strawberries  and  cream  ;  only  the  berries  are  a  little  sour 
and  the  cream  is  skim  milk.  Bouquets  are  coming  in  by  the  basket- full.  Aunt 
Lou  has  been  sick  as  a  Swede  for  two  days ;  better  now.  I  am  well,  but  it  takes 
two  collars  a  day  to  keep  me  singing. 

Your  letters  rejoice  our  hearts  greatly.  It  is  in  answer  to  many  prayers 
that  God  is  giving  you  peace,  and  I  expect  you  to  grow  in  all  grace.  God  grant 
it.  Application  is  the  sure  road  to  success.  Stick  to  your  team. 

Yours  joyful, 

UNCLE  PHIL. 


ROME,  Friday,  1875. 
DEAR  ONES  ALL  : 

I  wonder  how  you  all  get  along  so  well  as  you  seem  to ;  but  "  God  is  great 
and  God  is  good."  We  pray  for  you  every  day.  Received  your  telegram  and 
the  dear  boys'  pictures  last  night  ;  we  are  very  thankful.  The  picture  of  Paul 
is  splendid.  I  think  George  looks  a  little  as  if  he  were  attending  clinics,  but 
am  glad  for  as  good  a  likeness  as  this.  You  may  get  this  after  we  come  home, 
so  I'll  be  brief.  Expect  us  Thursday,  if  not  there  before. 

A  great  and  powerful  work  of  grace  has  begun  here  ;  we  all  know  that  God 
is  with  us,  and  souls  are  being  gathered  into  the  fold.  Of  all  the  places  in  the 
world  where  I'd  love  to  work  for  Christ,  this  old  home  of  ours  is  the  most  in 
teresting.  Oh,  how  good  it  is  of  my  Master  to  let  me  tarry  here  for  a  few  days 
in  His  sweet  service.  May  He  abundantly  reward  you  for  helping  us.  It  is 
all  for  His  sake.  To  Him  be  the  glory.  Amen. 

P.  P.  B. 


CHICAGO,  October,  1875. 

I  suggested  to  Mrs.  E.  Willson  to  come  West  by  way  of  Wellsville  and  call 
on  you  'uns.  Maybe  you've  planned  to  go  to  Towanda ;  if  so,  so.  Do  what 
and  go  where  you  think  best,  only  always  remember  Psa.  xxxii,  8.  In  every 
thing  believe  that  He  has  proved.it  to  you  and  me.  It  will  be  an  awful  sin 
for  either  of  us  to  ever  doubt  it. 

How  precious  Christ  is  to  me  to-day.  He  has  been  here  in  the  study  all  the 
morning.  He  is  looking  over  now  as  you  read  this— He  says,  "  Fear  not,  only 
believe,"  and  I  hear  your  answer,  "  Lord,  I  believe ;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief." 
Amen. 

P.  P.  B. 


ST.  PAUL,  October  30, 1875. 

Aunt  and  I  expect  to  enjoy  your  success.  To  see  you  as  the  happy  proprie 
tor  of  a  first-class  pill-shop,  and  a  leading  scalawag  in  your  bloody  business.  Go 
on,  I  may  be  sick  myself,  some  day,  and  you  may  save  me  an  immense  Dr.  bill. 


LETTERS  TO   HIS   NEPHEW.  265 

I  tried  your  R —  for  my  boil ;  but  what  will  now  "amuse"  me?  I  have  two 
others  !  Will  send  two  or  three  papers, — to  give  away.  I  have  sent  to  your 
mother  and  mine,  etc.  The  snow  has  stopped  falling,  but  'tis  cold  and 
dreary. 

An  old  man  told  us  this  morning  in  prayer-meeting,  that  "the  Gospel  net 
is  being  drawn  in  ;  some  self-righteous  fish  will  flop  over  the  top  of  the  net, 
and  some  low  mud  suckers  creep  under  ;  but  a  great  haul  is  sure  ! "  The  last 
night  in  St.  Paul  was  glorious  ;  but  between  two  verses  of  a  song  Whittle  told 
them  if  they  smelt  fire  'twas  some  papers  in  the  hall  below.  'Twas  a  narrow 
escape.  Some  dresses,  carpets,  etc.,  burned,  but  no  alarm  sounded,  or  a  fearful 
calamity  might  have  prevented  this  letter.  Give  thanks  for  this. 


MINNEAPOLIS,  MINNESOTA,  November  10,  1875. 
DEAR  WILL: 

1  am  as  well  as  could  be  expected.  Aunt  Lou  came  this  morning  while  we 
were  at  prayers.  I  expected  her  on  the  West  Wisconsin  Road,  arriving  at  8.40, 
instead  of  which  she  came  on  the  Milwaukee  Road  at  7.30.  She  had  to  run  all 
over  town  to  find  me,  but  I  was  rather  pleased  to  be  found.  She  has  now  had 
her  .breakfast,  and  when  she  gets  her  hair  combed  up,  we  think  she  will  look 
pretty  decent,  for  a  Chicago  creature !  Says  she  had  a  pleasant  trip,  but  thinks 
home  is  pleasant,  too ;  and  if  I'd  come  home  'twould  be  better  yet.  I  am 
delighted  with  the  report  she  brings  of  home  affairs,  including  W.  H.  Surely 
prayers  are  being  answered,  and  you  and  I  ought  to  have  more  faith. 

The  meetings  are  going  on  lively  ;  increased  interest ;  good  results.  Don't 
know  when  we  may  come  home — perhaps  Monday,  maybe  Friday,  watch ! 

Aunt  says  tell  you  that  the  woman  you  saw  on  the  train  had  a  cancer  ;  been 
to  Chicago  to  consult  doctors.  They  pronounced  her  incurable,  and  she  comes 
home  to  Minneapolis  to  die. 

How  thankful  we  all  ought  to  be.  God  is  good.  Let  us  line  as  we  talk — 
praising  Him  who  owns  us.  I  want  to  write  to  Roxie  and  Mr.  Maynard  ;  so 
you'll  excuse  brevity.  Pray  for  us. 

Your  unctious  Uncle, 

P.  P.  BLISS. 


MILKY  WALKT,  December  8, 1875. 
WEAK  DILL: 

I  hope  you  are  as  well  as  I  am ;  but  what  shocking  "bad  weather,"  as  we 
say  for  Rush.  Really  I  think  we  should  never  find  fault  with  the  weather. 
Fault-finding  rarely  pays,  except  with  one's  self,  where  'tis  hardest  to  find. 
You  have  wondered,  in  a  letter,  how  we  could  even  "endure "  you  as  you  were 
last  year.  Let  me  assure  you  of  continued  "endurance,"  and  I  expect  an  in 
creased  interest  in  you  and  your  welfare.  'Twill  be  a  sad  termination  to  the 
Jennings  aud  Bliss  alliance,  the  day  that  we  find  a  tendency  to  deceit  and  fal- 


266  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

sity  on  either  part.  True  friendship  is  honest.  We  hope  to  see  you  through 
your  studies  and  in  good  condition  as  to  heart  and  life.  I  believe  you  desire 
to  be  ALL  that  'tis  possible ;  so  we  will  help  you  all  we  can,  to  retain  all  of 
nobility  of  character  in  all  things,  and  to  choose  all  principles  of  truth  and 
excellence  from  the  various  channels  opened  up.  I  hope  you  will  not  adopt  a 
habit  because  I  have  it,  nor  because  any  one  else  has  it,  but  from  choice — be 
cause  it  is  good.  Of  course  we  will  see  things  in  you  to  criticise ;  shall  try  to 
do  it  kindly,  for  I  know  you  want  it  done ;  and  may  we  all  be  as  little  children  ; 
then  only  can  we  successfully  enter  any  kingdom  of  usefulness  and  peace. 
God  bless  you. 

Of  the  work  here  I'll  only  say  it  is  better,  apparently,  than  in  any  other 
place  we  have  ever  been  in  for  the  first  week.  Yet  this  is  a  German  city — a 
phlegmatic  people — a  very  "hard  place."  But  so  much  the  more  need  of 
work ;  so  much  the  more  honor  to  Christ  in  the  victory.  Four  meetings  daily, 
and  from  twenty  to  forty  professing  Christ  every  day.  The  Jews  are  growing 
more  and  more  approachable  and  tender,  which  makes  me  hope  the  Lord  is 
the  nearer.  The  Gentiles  are  rejecting  the  Gospel  according  to  Scripture. 
Then  the  Jews  shall  be  gathered  in  according  to  Scripture.  "  Oh,  let  my  lamp 
be  burning  when  Jesus  comes,"  is  my  prayer. 

Of  course  I  must  be  allowed  to  enclose  a  considerable  deal  of  love  to  be 
handed  over  to  my  dear  boys,  Paul  and  George.  I  hope  their  mamma  will 
have  started  for  "  Milwaulkey  "  before  you  get  this.  "  Remember  me"  also 
to  Mrs.  Maynard,  Phenie  and  Annie.  Good  P.  M.  Whittle  has  gone  to  Bible 
reading.  I  must  go  to  young  people's  meeting. 

Your  loving  Uncle, 

P.  P. 


ST.  Louis,  February,  14, 1876. 

DEAR  " COUSIN  WILL:" 

A  happy  day  to  you.  Pardon  my  neglect ;  but  of  course  a  letter  to  your 
aunt  is  intended  for  "  family  use"  generally,  and  so  when  I  hear  from  her  I 
hear  from  you  as  well.  Your  interests  are  ours, — and  ours,  I  hope,  are  to 
some  extent  yours.  Am  glad  your  folks  are  coming  into  VVellsville.  It  looks 
to  me  as  if  the  Lord  might  be  taking  this  way  to  prepare  a  place  for  you,  and 
especially  to  have  a  home  at  last  for  your  father  and  mother.  They  seem  to 
need  one,  and  never  have  had  one.  Let  us  pray  the  Lord  to  lead  in  all  our 
plans  and  theirs,  constantly. 

The  papers  are  so  full  of  Babcock  and  whisky  trials  and  tribulations,  that 
they  have  no  room  for  report  of  our  meetings.  Three  to  five  thousand  souls 
every  day ;  fifty  to  one  hundred  asking  prayers,  daily ;  and  individual  souls 
hungry  for  conversation  privately,  personally,  is  the  condition  of  things  from 
my  stand  point.  Our  prayers  and  expectations  are  that  this  last  week  will  be 
the  best  of  all.  Pray  for  us  daily. 

I  have  been  to  the  Missouri  Medical  College,  where  the  boys  at  first  made 
fun,  extemporized  burlesque  Whittle  and  Bliss  meetings,  sung  Gospel  songs, 


LETTERS  TO   FRIENDS.  267 

etc.  Now  they  are  decidedly  serious.  All  come  to  the  Rink.  Some  happy 
young  converts.  One  said  if  we'd  continue  another  week  he  believed  the 
whole  college  would  be  converted.  They  have  earnest,  bold  Christian  pro 
fessors.  I  also  had  the  opportunity  of  reaching  one  hundred  and  fifty  young 
ladies  in  a  seminary  with  good  results. 

You  gave  ine  a  good  illustration  of  salvation,  sanctification,  etc.,  in  that 
story  of  the  poor,  weak  boy  who  only  needed  good  food  to  make  him  well. 
Watch  for  some  more  such. 

Give  my  regards  to  Roxie  and  see  that  she  is  fed  on  the  Bread  of  Life.  We 
must  try  to  help  our  friends  to  be  happy,  joyous  Christians.  "The  joy  of  the 
Lord  is  your  strength."  Always  rejoicing,  I  am  your  loving 

UNCLE  PHIL. 


MOBILE.  Marck  11,  Sabbath. 
DEAR  W.  H. : 

All  well.  Why  don't  you  one  of  you  write  a  word,  at  least,  "All  well," 
every  day  ?  The  last  we  heard  was  written  Tuesday  ;  most  a  week,  and  we 
get  anxious. 

The  work  here  is  the  greatest  and  most  apparently  successful  of  any  we 
ever  had.  Crowds  at  every  meeting,  and  many  seeking  the  truth.  Young 
people's  meeting  P.  M.  is  mine ;  over  one  thousand  in  attendance  and  one 
hundred  or  one  hundred  and  fifty  standing  for  prayers.  Isn't  it  good  ?  I  read 
a  part  of  lona's  letter,  and  had  prayer  offered  for  her,  and  I  think  her  letter 
helped  to  decide  many  souls.  It  might  not  be  best  to  tell  her  so. 

The  weather  here  is  a  failure,  orange  groves  a  fraud  and  the  bananas  a 
humbug.  Oh  for  664  !  You  may  look  for  a  package  of  overcoats  and  under 
clothing  at  Re  veil's  the  middle  or  last  of  next  week.  We  expect  to  go  to  Mont 
gomery  Saturday,  and  begin  there  Sunday  ;  so  address  us  accordingly  ;  here  till 
the  18th,  if  by  telegraph  ;  by  mail  until  the  14th  ;  then  to  Montgomery,  Alabama. 
We  feel  confident,  from  all  advices,  that  you  are  getting  along  nicely  and  we 
expected  you  would  when  we  left.  Our  prayers  are  heard  in  the  morning  and 
at  evening  for  you  all.  Here  is  a  ticket  for  George,  and  a  picture  for  Paul. 
Aunt  and  the  Whittles  join  in  love  to  you  all. 

Lovingly,  your  Uncle. 


MONTGOMBBY,  March'20,  1876. 

DEAR  WILL  : 

Yours  received.  Good.  Your  throat  is  doubtless  measly.  Am  encouraged 
about  you  and  your  studies.  I  BELIEVE  IN  YOU,  or  I'd  never  have  sent  for  you. 
You  will  succeed,  and,  I  expect,  be  a  glorious  man,  an  agreeable  companion 
and  friend,  a  good  doctor  and  a  pride  and  joy  of  all  the  family.  We  are  praying 
for  you  to  be  all  that  is  possible  ;  and  though  you  and  I  have  some  mean  flesh  in 
us,  God's  grace  can  overcome  it.  Think  often  of  Christ  as  a  personal  friend  and 
helper,  and  less  of  self  or  what  man  can  do.  Our  meetings  are  glorious.  The 


268  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Lord  is  very  near  to  us  and  all  things  are  working  together.  The  city  is  being 
flooded  with  circular  letters  —  one  kind  to  Christians,  one  to  unbelievers.  A 
mighty  work  is  begun.  Your  prayers  for  us  all  are  being  answered.  Don't 
let  go  of  us. 

Think  will  be  home  about  April  10th,  or  15th.  I  don't  dare  to  say  much  about 
it,  or  you  couldn't  read  my  letter,  for  the  tears  would  blot  it  so ;  and  Aunt 
Lou  has  reception  from  12  to  1  and  she  hasn't  time  to  cry.  But  we  love  our 
home  and  friends.  Our  boys,  dear  Paul  and  George,  God  bless  them  and  you 
this  minute.  Your  loving  Uncle, 

P.  P.  B. 


MONT-GUM-OR-RYE,  or  GUM  MOUNTAIN,  March  24,  1876. 
DEAK  WILL: 

Sorry  you're  sick.  I  should  be  more  inclined  to  employ  you  to  look  after 
my  health  when  you've  learned  to  take  care  of  your  own.  We  are  well. 
Three  little  words,  but  how  much  they  are  worth ;  we  don't  begin  to  appre 
ciate  them,  I  am  sure.  Your  good  letters  from  home  cheer  and  quiet  us  in  our 
home-sickness. 

The  good  Lord  is  greatly  blessing  His  work  here  ;  we  never  had  more 
blessed  meetings  anywhere.  He  is  also  supplying  our  wants  in  other  ways, 
bountifully,  for  which  please  help  us  to  praise  Him. 

Good  letters  from  the  Homer  House.  Thank  'em  ;  also  the  664  folks.  Bless 
'em  all.  Your 

U.  P. 


CHICAGO,  June  1, 1876. 
DEAR  WILL: 

You  remember  I  had  to  take  what  was  the  sunny  side,  this  morning,  but 
now,  at  4  P.  M.,  I'm  all  right.  So  in  life's  journey,  bravely  endure  what  you 
can't  cure  ;  your  shady  side  is  coming  by  and  by.  I've  no  excuses  for  writing 
to  you  so  soon ;  only  to  reassure  you  of  our  real  love  for  you,  both  for  our  rela 
tion's  sake  and  your  own  sake.  I  am  asking  the  good  Lord,  who  has  so  lov 
ingly  led  me,  lo,  these  many  years,  to  guide  you  f  ally.  Ask  Him  all  about 
your  plans.  Seek  to  honor  Him  in  all  things  and  He  will  bless  you.  Turn 
squarely  away  from  every  known  evil  way  of  thought  and  action.  Ask  the 
Spirit  to  search  you  and  reveal  yourself  to  yourself  ;  then  "  Look  to  Jesus." 
Believe  in  your  Aunt  Lou.  Be  as  good  to  her  as  you  think  of  ;  she's  worth  it. 
She  did  favor  my  coming,  or  I'd  not  have  been  here  to-day  ;  which  you  can 
read  and  apply  to  yourself,  too.  If  the  way  does  not  open  for  you  to  find  some 
pleasant  paying  business  here,  I  think  you  can  go  home  if  you  don't  more 
than  pay  traveling  expenses.  'Twould  do  you  and  your  folks  all  a  great  deal 
of  good.  That  is  why  I  proposed  it — for  the  moral  effect.  You  want  to  be  all 
that  is  possible  to  your  family.  Those  young  brothers  must  know  and  love 
you,  and  personal  worth,  impress  of  character,  is  more  than  profession  or 
money.  Now  talk  more  with  "  Aunt  Lou  "  about  yourself,  your  plans,  and 


LAST  LETTERS.  269 

your  future.  Accept  her  suggestions.  She  is  a  safe  adviser ;  and  be  what  you 
are  capable  of  being — a  cheerful,  chatty  companion,  and  a  worthy  Christian, 
pure  and  peaceable. 


TOWANDA,  June  16, 1876. 
DEAR  W.  H. : 

We  had  two  glorious  praise  meetings  at  Rome,  Sunday  and  Monday  nights, 
and  yesterday  we  came  to  Towanda  with  divided  hearts — strongly  convicted 
that  there  was  work  for  us  in  Rome,  yet  irresistibly  drawn  toward  our  home 
and  loved  ones.  We  prepared  for  our  Chicago  trip,  but  prayed  for  guidance ; 
and  went  to  bed  at  eleven,  still  undecided.  Talking  and  praying  at  twelve 
o'clock,  the  minister  from  Rome  drove  up  and  said  they  had  had  two  meetings 
that  day  and  voted  unanimously  that  I  should  return.  We  could  not  fail  to  re 
cognize  that  as  the  answer  to  prayer,  and  so  have  decided  to  go  back  to  what 
we  believe  to  be  the  work  the  Lord  hath  appointed  us.  Souls  are  anxious  and 
we  have  faith  that  a  great  blessing  awaits  our  dear  village  of  Rome.  Pray 
for  us. 

Shall  probably  stay  over  Sunday  and  may  not  stop  at  Wellsville  on  our  way 
home.  If,  for  any  reason,  you  think  best,  telegraph  to  Towanda,  Pennsylvania, 
and  Aunt  Lou  will  start  any  day  for  Chicago  straight.  Hope  the  girls  have  got 
dresses  all  made  and  will  have  a  nice  time  at  the  picnic.  I  wish  they  and  my 
two  boys  were  here.  The  Lord  reward  Mrs.  Johnson  for  her  care  and  love  to 
us.  Tell  her  "  inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  to  the  least  of  these,  etc."  And 
now  adieu.  Bless  you.  I  will  write  your  mother  to-day,  and  I  think  I'll  call 
on  Dr.  Anderson,  and  see  him  and  his  plan  for  you.  UNCLE  PHIL. 

Chicago  seems  now  to  come  into  our  programme  about  Thursday  or  Friday 
of  next  week  ;  but  sooner,  if  any  of  you  say  so. 


The  following  letters  I  received  from  Mr.  Bliss  during  1876  ;  the 
last  of  them  being  written  two  weeks  previous  to  his  death  : 

ROME,  PENNSYLVANIA,  May  4,  1876. 
DEAR  WHITTLE  : 

1  hardly  know  where  to  direct,  but  I  must  write  to  you.  We  had  a  most 
delightful  trip  from  Chicago.  The  weather  was  just  right,  car  comfortable, 
children  as  good  as  two  good  kittens,  and  "all  things  worked  together  for 
good."  Had  a  blessed  visit  over  Sunday  with  my  sister,  in  Wellsville,  New 
York,  and  a  union  praise  meeting  of  power  in  Beecher's  church  there.  Arrived 
safely  home,  May  2d.  George  seemed  a  little  tired  with  the  journey,  but  is 
getting  rested  and  happy.  I,  the  undersigned,  took  a  dawful  cold  id  by  head, 
cubbing  hobe  frob  that  warb  dibit.  Am  getting  room,  etc.,  ready  to  begin' 


270  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

^ 

work  in  earnest  next  week.  I  wish  you  were  all  here  with  us  and  could  stay 
here  all  summer.  But  if  the  Tabernacle  needs  you — and  I  don't  believe  the 
Lord  will  let  you  go  there  unless  you  are  needed — then  that's  the  place  for  you. 
May  His  presence  ever  go  with  us  both.  Amen.  In  regard  to  book,  etc.,  my 
only  thought  is  to  write  all  summer,  if  the  Lord  will  please  to  send  me  some 
good  hymns,  then  His  wisdom  in  regard  to  publishing.  I  thank  you  for  your 
interest  in  me,  and  hope  I  shall  do  nothing  to  disappoint  or  grieve  you,  or 
especially  to  grieve  my  Master  and  yours.  I  said  to  Church  about  what  you 
and  I  agreed  upon,  nothing  definite;  but  in  general  a  book  for  our  work  would 
be  wanted  next  season,  and  I  wanted  him  to  see  Moody. 

My  wife  has  been  quite  sick,  wearied  and  worn — though  not  worried — by 
the  journey.  Picking  and  packing  is  hard  work.  She  has  lain  in  bed  all  day, 
but  is  well  enough  to  laugh  at  the  newspaper  article  and  your  joke  on  the 
parasols,  which,  she  says,  reminds  her  of  the  five  dollars  you  owe  her  since 
we  left  the  Battle  House.  Yours  resting, 

P.  P.  B. 


ROME,  PENNSYLVANIA,  May  11, 1876. 
PEAR  BROTHER  : 

Nothing  special,  only  yours  received.  All  well ;  I  like  hymn  of  "  Hope  in 
His  Mercy  "  very  much  ;  shall  set  it  soon  and  sing  it  some.  Am  surprised  to 
hear  of  Moody  running  off  to  so  many  conventions,  etc.  Have  asked  him  to 
give  us  a  little  time  on  his  way  East,  or  I'd  come  to  him. 

We  think  George  is  improving.  He  eats  and  sleeps  Blissfully.  Paul  has 
all  sorts  of  circuses  with  pigs,  calves,  dead  chickens,  mice,  snakes,  lizards  and 
other  "  nice  pets,"  much  to  his  mother's  consternation. 

I  have  declined  eight  invitations  (all  I've  had).  Am  determined  to  rest  and 
write  all  summer.  Had  a  good  visit  with  my  mother,  yesterday,  in  Towan- 
da.  My  wife,  Lucy  Jane,  is  usually  busy  buying  carpets,  curtains,  paper, 
furniture,  etc.  She  says  I  can't  stand  it  and  I  ain't  a-goin'  to.  I  reply,  with 
my  proverbial  complacency,  "  All  right." 

Had  a  good  prayer  meeting  last  evening  and  read  together,  Psa.  cxix,  1  to 
8,  also  97  to  104  and  129  to  136,  "Look  and  be  merciful,"  "  Words  giveth 
light,"  "  Make  thy  face  to  shine."  May  the  Lord  give  us  all  light, "  more  light," 
Father  Love  used  to  say. 

LoVe  to  dear  Abbie,  May,  baby  and  all ;  Charlie  may  wait. 

Tours  when  you  want  me, 

P.  P.  B. 


ROME,  PENNSYLVANIA,  June  16,  1876. 
DEAR  BROTHER: 

Yours  received.     We  haven't  any  earthly  house  yet.     Had  a  pleasant  trip 
to  Chicago,  while  there  and  return.     Found  the  boys  and  girls  all  right. 


LAST   LETTERS.  271 

Think  Monroe  street  more  desirable  than  Adams.  I  have  many  letters  to 
answer,  but  in  a  lot  60x325  would  have  plenty  of  room  for  croquet. 

The  weather  is  quite  warm  here,  and  the  taxes  in  Chicago  are  nearly  as 
high  as  at  Lake  View  ! 

Had  a  good  letter  from  Brother  Sankey,  but  I  wouldn't  want  to  live  on  a 
cross  street  or  in  a  south  front.  Vincent  wants  you  at  Chautauqua,  the  last 
three  days.  I  think  I  will  be  thar,  if  we  get  our  house  furnished.  I  want  a 
large  dining-room  and  a  bath-room  ten  feet  square. 

•Augusta  is  reported  to  have  paid  Moody  $1,500  and  the  papers  say  he 
deserved  it.  Would  you  want  a  Mansard  or  a  barn  to  hang  your  clothes  in  ? 

I  received  $100  from  Augusta  and  if  you  did  $200  there,  my  part  is  $60, 
please  endorse  $40  on  the  you  owe  me ;  and  if  our  house  has  a  study  with 
east  windows  in  it,  I  shall  be  satisfied.  Paul  is  out  with  Grandpa,  mowing 
the  front  yard,  but  I  don't  believe  we'd  ever  be  contented  on  the  South  Side  ; 
do  you?  You  said  "twelve  alsos  in  8th  Romans."  I  can't  find  but  eleven. 
To-morrow  is  picnic,  but  I  can't  afford  time  to  go.  I  want  a  house  near  the 
street  cars.  My  mother  and  Mr.  Jennings  are  here  ;  we  are  having  a  family 
gathering.  Take  your  wife  to  Chicago  and  Chautauqua.  I'd  be  willing  to  go 
a  little  west  of  Wood  street  on  Monroe  or  Warren  avenue. 

Tend  to  your  part  of  the  horse,  and  don't  be  running  off  to  conventions, 
female  prayer-meetings,  etc.  We  might  make  a  bedroom  of  the  back  parlor. 
Give  our  love  to  Charlie.  Mail  and  Way.  I'll  be  glad  when  we're  in  it  and 
it's  paid  for. 

"  Tell  him  to  keep  cool  and  get  rested  for  next  winter,"  nay  wife  says.  In 
fact,  she  says  so  much,  I  fear  I  may  have  mixed  up  some  things  she  says 
about  our  Chicago  home  with  my  letter  to  you. 


ROME,  PENNSYLVANIA,  August  22, 1876. 
DEARLY  BELOVED  BROTHER:  * 

Your  pome  is  quite  overcoming.  My  time  is  too  precious  and  the  game  too 
insignificant  to  reply  in  kind.  Am  bent  on  a  month  of  quiet ;  so  let  me  alone. 

Just  replied  to  Mrs.  M.'s  cordial  invijtation  to  visit  them  in  N.  "  No,"  to  J. 
C.,  who  offered  to  come  to  Towanda  to  see  me.  "  No,"  to  a  Canadian  camp- 
meeting.  No,  I  have  not  committed  myself  to  C.  or  anybody  else  for  anything 
except  the  Lord  and  you. 

Nothing  about  book  from  Bro.  Sankey  or  Moody.  I  agree  with  you  about 
book  and  everything.  I  guess  Moody  will  let  G.  H.  and  S.  S.  alone  as  it  is. 

Wife  is  good  and  I  am  glad.  All  things  are  working  together.  Have 
planned  to  leave  the  boys  here  with  Grandma  and  Aunt  Clara,  this  winter,  so 
wife  can  go  with  me.  Sent  all  of  our  folks  (six)  to  Centennial  yesterday  for  a 
week.  Boys  are  doing  finely. 

Where  are  Charlie  and  May?  Wait,  like  yourself,  deserves  spanking. 
Same  to  your  wife.  Yours  infirm, 

P.  P.  B. 


272  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

TOWAJTDA,  Sunday,  December  17,  1878. 

DEAR  WHITTLE  : 

We  are  within  ten  miles  of  the  boys,  arrived  here  at  two  o'clock  this  morn 
ing,  four  hours  late  ;  so  are  spending  this  Lord's  Day  with  my  sister,  where  my 
dear  old  mother  is  "  waiting."  I  am  glad  for  a  day  with  her  who  gave  me  my 
first  music  lesson.  And  she  is  enjoying  us  so  much.  We  remember  you  in  our 
morning  prayers.  Suppose  Chicago  is  all  settled.  Nevertheless  my  feeling  is 
the  same,  though  my  faith,  I  hope,  is  stronger.  If  He  says  go  I'm  ready. 

N.  B. — The  Lord  is  your  Shepherd.  He  will  carry  you  through.  Hope 
your  wife  is  better.  Dear  child  !  may  the  Lord  bless  her  to-day.  We  hope  to 
go  to  Rome  to-morrow.  Shall  look  for  a  letter  from  you  soon.  I  hope  the 
Lord  will  lead  the  meeting  at  P.  Give  our  regards  to  the  "  singers  as  well  aa 
the  players  upon  instruments  "  who  are  there.  Also  to  the  Grier  House,  Tyngs, 

Reynolds,  "Hams,"  etc. 

In  peace  1  go, 
No  fear  I  know. 
Wish  you  the  same, 

P.P. 


CHAPTER   XXIIL 

MB.  BLISS'  LAST  HYMNS— MUSIC  BY  HIS  FRIENDS,  SANKBY,  LOWRY,  DOANE, 
MCQRANAHAN,  ROOT,  STEBBINS,  CASE,  PALMER,  MURRAY,  CHRISTIE  AND 
MRS.  SCOTT. 

A  FITTING  close  to  these  memoirs  is  the  contribution  here 
made  to  the  memory  of  Mr.  Bliss,  by  friends  who  were  very 
dear  to  him,  and  to  whom  he  was  very  dear,  and  with  whom  he  was 
in  peculiarly  pleasant  relations,  writing  songs  of  praise  to  the  same 
blessed  Eedeemer  and  Lord,  sending  out  the  messages  of  the  Gospel 
on  wings  of  music  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  These  friends  have  kindly 
taken  the  hymns  that  were  written  by  Mr.  Bliss  during  his  last 
days,  and  for  which  he  had  not  prepared  music,  and  their  compo 
sitions,  with  his  words,  are  here  for  the  first  time  published,  by 
consent  of  John  Church  &  Co.,  by  whom  words  and  music  are 
copyrighted. 

Very  kind  and  loving  have  been  the  messages  that  these  brethren 
have  sent  with  their  music.  "I  thank  you  for  the  privilege," 
writes  dear  Mr.  Lowry.  "  Dear  Bliss  — very  gladly,  very  cheer 
fully,  anything  you  want,"  was  the  tender  reply  of  Eoot,  Palmer, 
and  all  who  were  asked  to  make  this  contribution  to  the  memory 
of  their  loved  friend  and  brother.  "  Anything  I  can  do  for  dear 
Bliss'  orphan  boys  or  for  his  family,  count  on  me  to  do  it,"  was  the 
immediate  reply  of  Doane  ;  and  so  this  tribute  comes  from  full, 
loving  hearts.  No  thanks  are  expected  by  any,  but  to  all  this 
acknowledgment  of  their  kindness  is  due  and  is  gratefully  rendered. 
Surely,  those  called  of  God,  and  honored  with  such  a  glorious 
mission,  are  yoked  together  in  much  to  call  forth  mutual  praise 
and  prayer. 


Another  Soldier  Fallen. 


In  Memory  of  P.  P.  Bliss. 


Verses  by  E.  E.  REXFORD. 
,  lit  on  Moto. 


Chorus  and  Music  by  G.  F.  ROOT. 

J L  _^__        __^L 


Au1  "* 

\  m 

m.        •        i      * 

e      *      «      « 

rm  fi 

-    i           1        H        * 

&        \       \ 

»  •"    i" 

'     i       i  " 

232  *  J 

r    !       !       1       ! 

\     m     m     j 

«•        | 

i 

1.  An-oth-er  soldier  fall-  en,  In  the  rank  and  file  of  God;  A  life's  grand  record 
2.  Oh,  faithful  armor-bearer,  How    ma-nyeyes  are  dim,     Because  you  join  no 
3.  Oh,  comrade  in  God's  army,The  battle  trum-pet  ring;     The  dear  old  flag  you 

^Vi*4   i*  1  *    *  —  ^  —  -  i  ^  —  •  —  »  1  "»    ?    ?  —  ?~T7z-"i  —  an  *  —  tia  a  —  i 

-h-r-S-*- 

_i    ;  i  ,,.J  — 

-!  1  ^  —  >- 

u«  —  1«  —  ;  1 

r  —  pj. 

4/-S  — 

—  j^~ 

_j  —  j  —  .  —  _ 

|  !  1_ 

—  f-  «**iH 

end  •  ed, 
long  -  er 
fought  for 

An  earth-  ly  pathway  trod;  Safe  in     the  home  he  sung    of,     Till 
Earth's  mighty  bat-tie  hymn;  True  heart,  loved  as  a  broth-  er,     Your 
Up  -  on  the  winds  we  fling;  The  thought  of  you  will  strengthen  The 

»        Q 

p 

r                 p 

-L. 

A               ^ 

&      0     0 

\           I 

^     tf     '      I 

\jf,  • 

5     5 

\        i             ~l 

^        _xi?      *l; 

DB 

&r  • 

!  : 

j 

hardest  hearts  were  stirred,  Among  the  songs  eternal  His  own  sweet  voice  is  heard. 
friendly  hand  we  miss,  But  think  with  heart  exultant,  He  knows  what  heaven  is. 
weak  heart  in  the  fray,  And  this  the  word  we  send  you,  We'll  "hold  the  fort"  to-day  ! 

>  r  r 


CEIORUS. 


Oh,     no  -  ble  chris-tian      sol 


-  dier,     Y 


our  mem  -'ry    shall    be    dear; 


:— i t==0=t 


B 


S 


* 


i 


For  while  you  sing   the   New  Song  there,  Your  own  shall  bless  us    here, 

s  g  g  i-T-p-?1—*  r  .  f— f-jPL-f 


i^ 


£=P=F 


•I 


Copyright,  1877,    y  John  Church  «fc  Co. 


-r 


I  Believe. 


"Lord,  I  believe ;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief."    MARK  9,— 24. 
P.  P.  BLISS.  REV.  R.  LOWRY. 


jg~y    *4  '- 

_^  .  f- 

B  —  i  J  — 

"J,  ^  

1.    My         fears        a  -  rise,    And  clouds    ob  -  scure    my    way; 
2.    By           sin        oppressed,  To      Thy     dear   cross       I      flee; 
3.    When  Death  shall  come,  O,        Sav  -  ior,    come    with    him, 

•[*•          -          -        ~        •»•       J          - 

r\»    U    i    >i                          r    • 

,    • 

P             « 

H                    & 

•-i.-,  r?  Cfcl                L  • 

•        L- 

r  *  ;       i 

0 

-^LLLuP.4  —  L  F.  

»     it  L_ 

-L-\  

£_£_3;  jSZ  1  

*-  r  r  -j^^~  -f- 

-f.  —  i  1 

-i  —  i  n 

}L  k^rft  —  "1  1  s 

i         i 

_H  H  H  

if""75*  

pT>"    7        ZZH         ^    •        4 

d           J 

5 

3          i  "                   I 

:.^".  •"       *L 

•        _M^, 

J            -a?-                             "  '                           t^P  •*•                f 
With     tear  -  ful    eyes      And    ach    -    ing  heart      I      pray  : 
I           smite     my  breast;    Be      mer    -    ci  -  ful       to      me; 
And      bear      me  home,     Where  tears    no    eyes   shall   dim. 

r\.  i,  i      K1           C3       f 

•      Mi 

pa 

m—  —Q.               1 

~f*i  P  \j                  • 

"   k?  - 

i          P 

»                               1 

S  SZEZI                   p-  •        p 

-  r    •        P 

L           r 

p            ^ 

"  7              F       r. 

1 

!                U 

i 

I        ! 

!    '  *~^    ,          it 

i                    i 

W^^.1^   \}                         ^    •       ^    T 

&\             1 

J         J         J 

J          5~        ^i        2 

Sav  -  ior,     re  -  lieve,         Thy  pres-ence  brings  re  - 
Let      me     not     grieve,       Thou  canst  dis  -  pel    my 
In     grace    re  -  ceive          The  ser  -  vice  here    so 

^  -Hr-'7                                             *    tl 

lief; 
grief; 
brief; 

<                               ^        ! 

1  J.^U 

-1  1  i  h~- 

1        1      

_^(  1  

1-1  H 

||^^         <S|-.,..  .*,     *| 

^  •       ^ 

_J  ^  i  ( 

£|L^_|] 

«/                                      •>    •        ^. 

"Lord.       I        be  - 
"Lord,       I        be  - 
"Lord,       I        be  - 

1 

w       -tft 

lieve  ;   Help  Thou  mine     un  -    be  -  lief.'7 
lieve;    Help  Thou  mine     un  -    be  -  lief.'* 
lieve  ;    Help  Thou  mine     un  -    be  -  lief.'' 

_fci—  r--r—  £—  C  —  ^=g=n 

?  j>  ,JLJ  r:  U- 

-f  —  '  —  i  

—  -^»  H 

Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  <fe  Co. 

275 


P.  P.  BLISS. 


MY  Redeemer. 


1 


^ 


JAMES  MCGRANAHAN. 


I 


1.  I      will  sing    of       my    Re-deem-er  And  His  won-'drous  love  to     me; 

2.  I      will  tell    the     won'drous  sto-ry,  How  my  last         es-tate   to    save, 

3.  I      will  praise  my  dear  Re-deem-er,  His  tri  -  umph  -  ant  pow'r  I'll  tell, 

will  sing    of       my    Re-deem-er  And  His  heav  n  -  ly  love  to     me; 


m 


±3± 


£3EEB33= 

:££— p-h^E] 


ess 


•*•  •*•  -^^ 


S=5± 


On   the  cru  -  el     cross  He  suf-fered,    From  the  curse  to  set     me    free. 

In    His  boundless  love  and  mer- cy,      He    the  ran    -  somfree-ly     gave. 

How  the  vie -to  -  ry    He    giv- eth     O-  ver    sin,  and  death,  and  hell. 

He  from  death  to     life  hath  brought  me,  Son  of    God,  with  Him  to      be. 

1     s 


Sing,  oh  I  sing  of  my  Redeemer,  Sing,  oh!  sing  of  my  Redeemer, 


blood  He  purchased  me,  With  His    blood    He  purchased  me;    On         the 


d    the 


He    sealed  my  par     -     don, 

JU  /J   //*£ 


cross  H*e  sealed  my  pardcTn,  Oh          the  cross  He  sealed  my  pardon,    Paid    the 

.Repeal  P  P.  after  last  verse. 


debt,  and  made    me    free,  And  made  me         free,    and  made    me  free. 


izia: 


Copyright,  1877,  by  Joh.n  Church  &  Co. 

276 


P.  P.  BLISS. 


Within,  About,  Above. 


i 


£-£ 


T.  C.  O'KANE. 


? 


&m 


* 


1.  I  looked  with-in  and  ponder'd  How  cold  my  heart  had  been;  Is 

2.  I  looked  about  and  ponder'd, What  shipwrecks  strew  the  strand!  Is 

3.  I  looked  above  and  wondered,  What  glp-ry  beaming  there !  My 


-9 I-»-T-  9      * 

Pfe^H 

>— '  fr  •    *—& 


id  wondered,  What  glo-ry  beaming 

^4-P-g  •—  1 1  '  r  f  •  r 

—?.  -  H— — i -5 — h-»— ; — » — »  .  9- 

\J J 1 & ! LI 


_»_i 9. 

\J 


•v—v- 


iffl$~*  —  fr~9~*~f^i 

ps 

_^_  ^ 

- 

ih  —  h 

ls=s 

—  h-  —  hH 

^\)  *    j  •  .  j  j  -•  j  - 

J 

j  .   9 

u«     «     ! 

this  the  life  of  faith,    I  said,  Or 
there  a  God  in  heav'n  a-bove,  And 
Sav-ior,  precious  Savior,  too  !  My 

'      {}*      3      ' 

am      1    "dead    in  sin?"  I 
will  His  kingdom  stand?  How 
man-sion,  oh,      how  fair  !    He 

•      •          •        \         \ 

r\»   L.  i      p  •   p     *  •  p 

*        f 

t 

*  *   i 

*-)•,  P  U     p    •    p     p    •    L 

p- 

—  f   - 

1          i 

\ 

Si.  p  

Z  a  QL           £    r      n 

L 

T3 

—jl 

! 

i 

x      u«    /      v    ^ 
p     L  i        j          N  _  N       N 

/ 

N 

r 

b 

t 

N     IS       fc. 

•< 

it 

V  i  r  b"   c  •     «    J  •-  tfP 

j 

ii     ^I 

JL  b   Cc 

•? 

*t— 

•!   • 

J       J    "Uh 

7 

5    DB  J 

-«-—  -I  

1 
•& 
31 

^       - 

J 

*     *    •*!«    1 

see       no  right  or 
sin         is  growing 
smil  -  ing  says  "b< 

p        p    p  •  p 

ti  -  tie,             I     feel  no  "heav'nly  glow,"  Is 
tronger,        How  truth  and  jus-tice  fail,     Is 
•eady,"          To  join  the  ransomed  throng;  I 

•  I 

> 

5    • 

*•)•,]?  U    p  «^!p    f^*'|> 

•< 

^r 

ZIK  U*7      L        "T        j        j5 

7 

^^j 

i 

«  —  «  »_ 

-U 

j     r 

Je  -   sus  Christ  my  Savior  now,  How  can  He  save  me    so  ?  Is 

Christ  a  mighty  King  to  come,    Does  ev-'ry  pray'r  a,-  vail  ?  Is 

know  my  King  is  coming  soon,  Lord  Je  -  sus,  oh,  how  long !  I 

T-tot-^- =^-~^~ r     1 1 '      '" 


Je  -  sus  Christ  my  Savior  now,  How  can  He  save  me  so  ? 
Christ  a  mighty  King  to  come,  Does  ev  -  'ry  pray'r  a  -  vail  ? 
know  my  King  is  coming  soon,  Lord  Je  -  sus,  oh,  how  long! 

fr    L  '  L    f~"  f    f  *  P~F'£:  —  GJ-*— k3=i      ^B: 


^i^F^ 

*  •    p 


ga 


"p — r~? 


Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  4  C!o. 

277 


Tell  Me  more  about  Jesus. 


p.  p.  BLISS. 


JAMES  McGRANAHAN. 


1.  'Tis  known  on  earth  and  heav-en      too,  'Tis  sweet  to      me     be- 

2.  Earth's  fairest  flowr's  will  droop  and  die,  Dark  clouds  o'erspread  yon 

3.  When  overwhelmed  with  un  -  be  -  lief,When  burdened  with     a 

4.  And  when  the  Glo  -  ry-land  see,  And  take  the     place  pre« 


•$=F- 


ffi 


£ 


S=4=fc 


cause  'tis  true;  The  old,  old  story  is  e'er  new,     Tell  me  more  about  Jesus. 

azure  sky;  Life's  dearest  joys  flit  fleetest  by,       Tell  me  more  about  Jesus. 

blinding  grief;Come  kindly  then  to  my  relief,    Tell  me  more  about  Jesus. 

par'd  for  me,Thro'  endless  years  my  song  shall  be,Tell  me  more  about  Jesus. 

m          m    m  mm       m*  J    m     ^~       "P~    •£•  *  ^~       •&•    &*      m    In  _        »    - 


&£ 


.*. — *-i — W--F- 


T        t*— 


CHORUS. 


^^ 


-& k  — 


Tell    me  more  a-bout    Je  -  sus,     Tell  me  more  a  -  bout  Je-sus ; 

.    f  f  f-T 


v    v    v    iH-f-v-f-^H 


p 


m 


Him  would  I  know  who  loved  me  so,Tell  me  more  a  -  bout  Je-  sus. 


-y — y- 


Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  &  Co 

27R 


What  wilt  Thou  have  Me  to  Do? 


'Lord,  what  will  Thou  haye  me  to  do  ?"    ACTS  9,— 6. 


W.  H.  DOANE. 


1.  What  \vilt  Thou  have  me  to  do,  O  Lord,  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? 

2.  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do,  O  Lord,  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? 

3.  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do,  0  Lord,  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? 


gfcfc^r-Hr 

^HHyfl-L/     U     U- 


& 


-ff         f         f         P         ft         f 


±=t 


:£ 


— i — ff f*_  s_ 


m 


I    «      *      0      4    • 


Thou  hast  redeemed  me,Thy  right  I  own,Thine  are  my  pow'rs,  my  Savior,  alone. 

Is       it  to  la-bor?  I'll  glad-ly  go;      Is     it     to  wait ?  then  let  it  be  so. 
Sing      of  Thy  mercy  who  died  for  me  ?   Tell  the  good  news,  salvation  is  free  ? 


»•',- 


Thou  hast  for  me  such  great  things  done,  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? 
On  -  ly  Thy  will  I      ask    to  know,  What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to    do  ? 
Say,  shall  I  work  or    sing  for  Thee,    What  wilt  Thou  have  me  to    do  ? 

?      f"  t>        rn^^a 


m 


V     V 


M 


What  is  the  la-bor  ap-point-  ed  me, Where  shall  I   la-bor  for  Thee? 

What  is  the  la-bor  ap-point- ed  me, Where  shall  I  la-bor  for  Thee? 

What  is  the  la-bor  ap-point- ed  me, Where  shall  I   la-bor  for  Thee? 

ff.f  r* 


H 


Hil 


Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  &  Co. 

279 


Georgie's  Welcome. 

Words  by  P.  P.  Bliss,  upon  the  birth  of  his  little  boy,  George  Goodwin  Bliss. 

'And  whoso  shall  receive  one  such  little  child  in  my  name,  receiveth  Me."    MATT.  18,— 5. 

P.  P.  BLISS.  JAS.  McGRANAHAN. 


1.  Welcome  in  the  dear  Lord's  name,  Welcome  as  can  be;       He  has  said  "it 
3.  Je  -  sus  is    our  Shepherd,  dear,  We  in     Him  believed ;      He    to  us     has 


DUETT. 


atS 


P»s 


is        the  same      As    receiv  -  ing    me."      Tar  -  ry,  if      it     be      His  will, 
come    so  near,       Him  have  we  re-  ceived.     Welcome,  then,  dear  Je  -  sus,  Thou, 


*=5 


Ma-ny    a  happy    year;      But     if  not   we  glad- ly  still     Bid  thee  w el-come 
Who  our  life  didst  give,       Humbly  at    Thy  feet  we  bow,   And  Thy-self   re- 


9                             9 

-|  r 

1                    1    

r     f 

-\               -\ 

JL    •    <L-'- 

»  ,  •         !».,• 

f       \j              DZj 

REFR4IN. 


^E? 


here.  Welcome  in    the  dear  Lord's  name,  Wei  -  come   as      can     be ; 

ceive. 


•f—- — fr 


M-^ 


»-ff — r— r-HF! 

r^— *-+ — H 


E: 


^ 


::ut 


^H 


[e        has  said    "it      is          the  same        As       re  -  ceiv  -  ing    me." 


-J^=, 


Copyright,  1877/by  John  Church  &  Co. 

280 


Wise  to  Win. 


P.  P.  BLISS. 


C.  C.  CASE. 


God    of    wis-dom   hear    my  cry,    Heal    this  bro-ken  heart"; 
To     Thy  work    I     glad  -  ly    go,     Mas  -  ter,  lead    me      on; 
Winning  wis-  dom  have     I  none,    All    must  come  from  Thee ; 


£ 


I 


F=F=P 


r-^rr 


v 


-|         ln^=z 


Weak  and  sinful,  Lord,  am  I,  Strength  divine  impart.  By 
Of  Thy  grace  the  world  must  know,  Trophies  must  be  won. 
Thine  the  power,  and  Thine  alone  All  the  praise  shall  be. 

.      f    f  --&-^f     t4tU=S= 


the 


"»- 


rp= 


I 


£ 


wa    -      -    ter  of         Thy  word, 


wash     me,  wash 


me 


^s'\    i 

"    r      r 

r    r  i  •  " 

r     I  r    r  • 

L     L      L 

f     »•      f 

P    i*  *  • 

!*      *    P 

By. 

U  i     V                \     v  r                  f     y  i 

the  wa-ter                        of  Thy  word,                  wash  mo  from 

from        all    sin ; 

=^==rf=q 


B 


y=r 


y         Thy  Ho    -      -    ly    Spir     -     it, 
— ft— f — 


?: 


5 


I 


from  all  sin 


h 


By  theHo-Iy 


tr 

Lord,  make      me  wise,  yes,  wise  to    win. 


1      »    •  •   I 
Lr-  it,  Lord, 


make  me  wise,  yes,  make  me  wise  to  win. 


Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  <fe  Co. 

281 


p.  P.  BLISS. 


Only  a  Little. 

fcrdkfe 


WILBUR  A.  CHRISTY. 


1.  'Mid  those  who  were  thronging  the  altar  a-nigh,With  gifts  for  the  Lord  of 

2.  '"Tis    only  a  little,"  she  said  to  her  boy,  "But  God  has  to  us  been     so 

3.  The  pennies,  and  farthings,  and  mites  as  of  old,  Abound  in  the  church  of  to- 


ft* 


-0—0—0-^m— 


s= 


i 


: 


light,         There  came    a  poor  wid-  ow,  while     Je  -  sus  stood  by,     And 
good.        He        tells    us   He  hears  the  young     ra-  vens  that  cry,     We'll 
day,  While  shek  -  els    of    sil-  ver,   and      tal-ents    of  gold,    Are 


tim  -  id-ly  cast  in  her  mite. 
trust  Him  to  give  us  our  food." 
thrown  by  the  world  a  -  way  ; 


"'Tis  on  -  ly  a  lit  -  tie,"  she 
'Twas  on  -  ly  a  lit  -  tie,  the 
And  oft  a  poor  wid  -  ow,  in 


£s 


1 


Heat 


^r=£ 


5=* 


* 


i: 


Lbi— f* 


said  with    a    sigh,     And  turned  from  the  tern  -  pie      a  -  way, 
Sav  -  ior  looked  on,    He       saw    that    in  love     it    was    given, 
love  and    in  trust,    Hath    laid     on   the   al  -  tar    of     heav'n, 

f        f       f          l*-*-H 


"But 
His 


fe3 


Trtr 


no      one  can  of-  fer  more  gladly  than   I,  The    little  we   have     to  pay." 


no     one  can  of- 

blessings  attended  the  deed  that  was  done,'Twas  great  in  the  record  of  heav'n. 

mite  that  outweighs  in  God's  balances  just,  The  talents  the  wealthy  have  giv'n. 


Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  &  Co. 

2S2 


CHORUS. 


Only  a  Little.    Concluded. 


-fc= 


£±=: 


'Tis    on 


HIS 


lya    lit-tle, 


Yes,   on  •    -      ly  a    lit-tle, 


But  in 


^.  ,  ,r  TJ»  f  rr-rr  r  r  i  HK-^-fLf-^-H>  f  P  r  f  r 
^y-rfr-r — "H*  kf  k-^t^-U-v  b-¥=  rl  i  4--L-L-  r  r  •  'r  'r  r 
s£$uii2=: .  ±3: —  ^_»_»_-_^_r  ^=Q 


Only  a  little,  yes,  only  a  little, 


y  a  little,  yes,  only  a  little,  But  in 


faith  and-in  love  it  was  giv'n,  Though  on 


On-ly    a    lit-tle,  yes,  on-ly    a    lit-tle, 


"^-^lii^1*11^*  ^       ^        ^       i 


ly    a  lit  -  tie, 


r  r 


--*-?  ^  g*r-"-f- 

Tis  great  in  the  records  of    heav'n. 
4" 


on-ly  a  lit-tle,  yes,  on- ly   a    lit-tle, 

Constrained  by  Love. 


P.  P,  BLISS. 


GEO.  F.  ROOT. 


•        9       ^-J=^U!-3 


1.  Con-strained  by  love  of  Christ,  I  sing,  Oh,  love  unbounded,  free ! 

2.  My  Sav  -  iorfrometer-nal    woe,        He  gave  Himself  to    be; 

3.  My    ris  -  en  Lord,  a  precious  name,    1   long  have  loved  it  well ; 

4.  My  heav'nly  King,  before  the  throne,  I      in    His  name  ap-pear ; 

•^     <3 


—    ^ v        w w «r m       i  w^  ^  ^  ^        i*r 

__is  name,  my  Savior,Lord  and  King,  My  song  of  songs  shall  be. 
E-  ter  -  ni-ty    alone  can  show  The  price  He  paid  forma 

But  His      e-ter-nal  love  for  me  Is  more  than  tongue  can  tell. 

My  pray 'rs  He  hears,  my  name  will  own,  My  song  He  loves  to  hear. 

Hbr££=f 


^j  9      V 


19      f      ?- 


1 


CopyrigUt,1877,  bv  John  Church  &  Co. 

283 


p.  P.  BLISS. 


I  Trust,  0  Lord,  in  Thee. 


J.  R,  MURRAY. 


Earnestly. 


•• — : — - --»  ~ —    **    j^       | Lj        i j. 

'JL  ,  |   K  «n  ji— 9^^-^E^PF^-^^^^^ 

-A — (_.    _p         1 — |  •]   g— JT  •  ..  nrij g — 9— --^—  -- — h- — 

•^.   y^~  *   *     *      J  V  -3^  £    9-1—     *— "r-g. — : 

1.    I         do      be-lieve  that       Je-sus  died      To   save        a  world  from  woe,    Tl 


That 

I     asked    a    lit  -   tie    child,  her  face  With  an   -   gel  light      a  -  glow,  How 
3.    I     would  see  Je  -  sus,      sir,  said   I,       To   one       in  manhood's  prime,For 


-9 9- 


•      I        I 


on  the  cross  the  cruci-fied  His  mighty  love  did  show.  I  do  believe  Thy 
she  obtained  for-giving  grace, That  I  her  joy  might  know.  A  look  she  gave  of 
ref  -  uge  to  the  rock  would  fly  In  the  ac-cept  -  ed  time.  Tell  me,  for  I  would 


!4i£ 


-9-9-9^  ^-^^-[a^-^-,-.-. ,  I  J     ^    J— 

gos  -  pel  true  Would  come  at  God's  command;  But  how  to  come,  or  what  to  do  i 
sad  surprise.That  I  should  doubting.be, While  tear  drops  filled  her  wonder  eyes,  She 
come  to-day,  Show  me  the  way,  acd  how;  He  read  the  words  "I  am   the  way,"  And 

-9  •  "t  yj^iL»jfc-f--g-^ — p_^v_»— 9.    ,  — ^— f-r— — - 

*  i .     u   i  — p--^ — 9 — i r — i-     i    -s — r         r__ 


i 


Ff 


can   not  un-derstand,  But  how  to  come,  or  what  to  do      I    can    not  un-derstand. 
answered  "He  loves  me,"  While  teardrops  filled  her  wonder  eyes  she  answered"He  loves  me." 
said  "Just  trust  Him  now,"He  read  the  words  "I  am  the  way,"And  said"  Just  trust  Him  now." 

=^— -: 1— 


«—/«- 


t  i 


Dear  aged  pilgrim,  drawing  near 
To  death  .s  dark,  shadowy  vale, 

How  dost  thou  "read  thy  title  clear?" 
Does  saving  faith  avail  ? 

He  answered  as  he  neared  the  shore, 
And  earth's  lights  grew  more  dim  ; 
J:  Forever  and  forever-more, 
1  rest  it  all  in  Him.:  II 


Jesus,  Thou  Son  of  God,  to  Thee 
I  breathe  this  prayer  sincere: 
Thine,  Thine  forever  would  I  be, 

0  save  me  now  and  here. 

It  was  Thy  plan  and  not  my  own 
That  Thou  shouldst  die  for  me; 
j|:  Thine  is  the  power,  and  Thine  alone, 

1  trust,  O  Lord,  in  Thee.:|| 


Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  &  Co. 

284 


Stand  Still,  0,  Child  of  God  I 


Ex.  xiv,  13,  and  14.    JOSH,  iii,  13.    ii  CHBON.  xx,  17. 
P.  P.  BLISS,  finished  by  MAJOR  D.  W.  WHITTLE.  GEO.  C.  STEBBINS. 


1.  Stand  still  and  trust  His  might,  Who  bids  your  trembling  cease; 

2.  Stand  still,  tho'  Jordan's  wave  In  gath'ring  billows  roar; 

3.  Stand  still,  and  sing,  and  praise,     c  The  bat  -  tie  is    not  thine ; 


s 


'-=3^ 


I 


The    Lord  for  you  shall  fight,         And    ye  shall  hold  your  peace. 
The    Lord  will  surely  save,  MarclTon      to  Canaan's  shore. 

Stand  still,  while  God  displays       His    grace  and  pow'r  divine. 


& 


CHORUS. 


-* *~ 


* + 


\  Ij-J-'j  .     Jv: 

"/^K*  -I  ^~l       '  ~M~ 


Standstill,  oh,  child  of    God!          What-ev  -  erill    be-tide ; Stand 


t-fc-O *-i « « « &-!• 

t£$=z^=*=t=^--i=i 


r 


1        ^ 
still  and  trust  His  word,          And     in    His  love  a  -  bide,    Stand 


still    and  trust  His    word,          And    in     His  love      a-  bide. 

i 


Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  &  Co. 

285 


Arise,  Work  and  Pray. 

"The  effectual,  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much."    JAB.  5,— 16. 
"And  I  will  show  Thee  my  faith  by  my  works."    JAS.  2, — 16. 


P.  P.  BLISS. 


MRS.  C.  H.  SCOTT. 


s 


2 


1.  Somewhere,  says  a  mother,  my  dar-lingis  dwelling,      I've  watched  for    my 

2.  Somewhere,  in  his  office,     a    husband  is  writing,       The    tri    -    als      of 

3.  Somewhere  in  the  wide  world,  a  sis-ter  or  brother,       May  now        be      re- 


* 


i^^=3 


£      I  h-~fc 

giaLz— ^S 


1 


boy       till  my    eyes  have  grown  dim ;      His  sins       and  temp-ta-tions         I 
bus  - 'ness  have  wrinkel'd  his  brow,  The  spir  -    it's    entrea-ties         he 

claimed  from  the  broad  downward  way  ;•     A     soul         is       indan-ger,     child, 


m 


e 


31: 


would  not  be  telling,  Christ  on  -  ly  can  save  him,  oh,  pray,  pray  for  him. 
long  has  been  fighting,  His  wife  says,  Dear  Christian  friend,  pray  for  him  now. 
fath-er,  or  moth-er,  Oh,  slum  -  ber  no  long-  er,  arise,  work  and  pray. 


a-— 

2-fe— 

D 

-+-.  w 

i                  *f 

—  T 

-i  —  i  — 

i  . 

2t£py* 

7 

9               1 

55  ,  .  _1 

/CN 


1st  and  2d  verses. 


Oh,  pray  for  him  now,  Oh,  pray  for  him  now,Christ  only  can  save  him,  Oh,  pray  for  him  now. 
Arise,  work  and  pray,  Arise,  work  and  pray,  Oh,  slumber  no  longer,  Arise,work  and  pray. 


*.*.    AJL*E    E-EE-    p       4B.       -  T  N    i 


Copyright,  1877.  by  John  Church  &  Co. 

286 


The  Good  News. 


P.  BLISS. 


H.  B.  PALMER. 


1.  I've  heard  the  good  news  in  the  Gos  -  pel,  It  makes  me  so  hap-py  and  free 

2.  Some-times  when  I  walk  in  the  dark-ness,  My  path-way  I  hard-ly  can  see, 

3.  He      tells  me  that  soon   I  shall  see    Him,  I   won-der  how  long  it  will  be; 


That  Je-sus  re-mem-bers  the  chil  -  dren, 
But  trust-ing  "Our  Fath-er  in  Heav  -  en," 
He's  gone  to  pre-pare  me  a  man  -  sion, 


I  know  He  will  care  for  me. 
1  know  He  will  choose  for  me. 
I  know  He  will  come  for  me. 


IF! 


m 


i 


I  know  He  will    care  for  me,   for  me,    I  know  He  will  care  for  me, 
I  know  He  will  choose  for  me,   for  me,   I  know  He  will  choose  for  me, 
I  know  He  will  come  for  me,   for  me,   I  know  He  will  come  for  me, 


i 


rr 


** 


-*-i — 


Yes,  Je-sus  remembers  the  chil  -  dren,    I  know  He  will  care  for  me. 
But  trust-ing  "Our  Fath-er  in  Heav-en,"  I  know  He  will  choose  for  me. 
He's  gone  to  pre-pare  me  a  man  -  sion,    I  know  He  will  come  for  me. 


Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  &  Co. 

287 


The  Good  News.  Concluded. 


n 

mowers. 

Z5— 

y 

N.           ^i 

P 

h  J 

C 

n     ^      fc. 

JL.. 

7      j 

n    _i 

J    KZ 

J    J  J  '--^ 

fro 

J      * 

0, 

S    i 

a      * 

•  JTT    J 

v-v/ 

I     J 

s     9 

0 

• 

«  ...5.- 

*    *•  »    € 

J 

I  know  He 
I  know;  He 
I  know  He 

•f-  •*•     *• 

will 
will 
will 

•0- 

care 
choose 
come 

-0- 

for  me, 
for  me, 
for  me, 

•0-    -0- 

for  me, 
for  me, 
for  me, 

I  know  He 
I  know  He 
I  know  He 

•f-  ^  •*- 

will  care  for  me, 
will  choose  for  me, 
will  come  for  me, 

c^\* 

I 

111                    ; 

' 

M         A 

!    i       i 

^    9    '       i 

J»  1        i 

j           ! 

.  | 

1-              -1           H 

—  —  9  F^- 

h4-J 

-F  F— 

H  J        •  1  J  — 

—  \-i  — 

—0-  

—  !*- 
—  \-+-  ' 

_JZ  j/—j  j/_ 

-i»-"fr 

>-W  1-4  

-f-  —  (•  !*- 
-t-j  —  .  1.4— 

4  4  H 

5 


^ 


i^ 

-*-.  -0-^-0- 


Yes,  Je  -  sus    re  -mem-bers  the  chil  -  dren,  I  know  He  will  care  for  me. 
But  trust-ing  "Our  Fath-er  in  Heav  -  en,"  I  know  He  will  choose  for  me. 
He's  gone  to  pre-pare  me    a  man  -  sion,   I  know  He  will  come  for  me. 

•+  f-      .'          *•    + 


When  My  Weary  Hands  are  Folded. 

'When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee ;  and  through  the  rivers,  they 
shall  not  overflow  thee."    ISA.  43,— 2. 


Words  written  by  P.  P.  BLISS  for  I.  D.  S. 


IRA  D.  SANKEY. 


— fr- 0 ah 

-J  -J L 

•$    -0-     -0- 


1.  When  my  wea  -  ry     hands    are  fold  -  ed      on     my  faint  -  ly 

2.  But       a  great  -  er     joy       'twill  give  me      if    some  toil  -  ing 

3.  When  the  songs  of     earth     are     o  -  ver,   and    my  last  "good 


B 


llfcy"""^   £-«U-| 

Bug  "-^-^_4_^-^ 

throbbing  breast,  And    my  soul    has 
one     can  say,       I       have  helped  to 
bye"    is    said,       When  my  life  -  less 

§Edzifrzr-*    •  .    »  —  JK  r  r  —  h  P— 

spread  her  pin  -  ions 
bear     his  bur-  den 
form  they  fol  -  low 

—  »  0  r  »  —  - 

—  0  *  1  ! 

h-  »  p  —  j*  J  _  _d 

-?  —  5->—  -H 

Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  &  Co. 

288 


When  My  Weary  Hands,  etc.    Concluded. 


!P 


2 


? 


for  the  cit  -  y  of  the  blest ;  'Twill  be  sweet  to 
and  have  cheered  him  on  the  way ;  Oh  !  I'll  praise  His 
to  the  dwell-ing  of  the  dead ;  'Twill  be  sweet  if 


Q.^,     »  —  *-n»  —  r-pf  r     r  • 

-f—far-t  ^ 

i       ^ 
n    u  i        1        is     1 

—  y  1  y  js-v— 
i 

IL                    '                   1L 

—  j  y  j  y  

,        i      .  h  ^^r  ^ 

-y-j2.V  :  5  _/>    J 

45  ^  Us  j  

j  ^  6d  ^  ^  — 

^  —  d  —  J—  d- 

_3_;=^^_J 

—  1  —  a  1  —  

hear      the  loved  ones  sing  some  dear    fa  -    mil  -  iar     song, 
grace     for  -  ev  -  er     who  hath  died    to        ran  -  som     me, 
friends  re-mem  -  ber     and  shall  mark  the      qui  -   et      spot, 


r     -    ,            J 

j 

.^~— 

i       r       i* 

& 

(•  p 

>  k      »        W      W        5 

i 

a 

| 

i 

1 

W   • 

Z  E 

^    r     r,    r     r, 

ft. 

jj 

r 

rit. 


As       I  rise    to    join  the  chorus  of    the  blood-washed,  holy  throng 
And  hath  chosen  me     a  shar-  er  in    His  bless  -  ed  work  to    be. 
Tell  -  ing  on  -  ly  that  the  sleeper  hath  not  quicklybeon  for-  got. 

£-£*H»TfTPf    "-£— S-i     fii— g 


But  if  one  poor  tired  wand'rer  shall  be  guided  home  by  me, 
'Twere  a  grander,  nobler  monument  throughout  all  eternity ; 
And  to  Him  shall  be  the  glory,  unto  whom  all  praise  is  due> 
For  the  love  that  hath  redeemed  us,  and  hath  made  my  Heaven  two. 


5. 

When  among  the  ransomed  millions,  by  His  grace  redeemed  I  stand, 
Then  my  song  shall  swell  the  chorus  of  the  glad  triumphant  band ; 
Oh,  how  sweet  will  be  the  resting,  when  my  conflicts  all  are  past,. 
Oh,  the  mighty  "Alleluia"  of  our  victory  at  last ! 

Copyright,  1877,  by  John  Church  <ft  Co. 

289 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


THE  DISASTER  AT  ASHTABULA  —  THE  NEWSPAPER  ACCOUNTS  —  THE  STORY  OF 
AN  EYE-WITNESS  —  MR.  BLISS  GOES  BACK  TO  SAVE  HIS  WIFE  AND  IS 
BURNED  TO  DEATH. 


railroad  train  on  which  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  rode  to  their 
death  left  Buffalo,  New  York,  on  Friday  afternoon,  December 
29,  1876.  At  eight  o'clock  that  evening,  while  approaching  Ashta- 
bula  station,  and  crossing  a  ravine,  the  bridge  gave  way,  and  the 
train,  with  its  precious  freight  of  human  lives,  was  precipitated  to  the 
bottom.  Fresh  as  is  the  memory  of  this  horror  in  the  minds  of  all, 
the  newspaper  accounts  given  at  the  time  will  be  read  now  with 
renewed  interest,  and  fittingly  form  a  part  of  the  record  made  in 
these  pages. 

[Dispatch  to  the  Chicago  Tribune.] 

ASHTABULA,  OHIO,  December  30,  1876. 

The  proportions  of  the  Ashtabula  horror  are  now  approximately  known. 
Daylight^  which  gave  an  opportunity  to  find  and  enumerate  the  saved,  reveals 
the  fact  that  two  out  of  every  three  passengers  on  the  fated  train  are  lost.  Of 
the  160  passengers  whom  the  maimed  conductor  reports  as  having  been  on 
board,  but  fifty-  nine  can  be  found  or  accounted  for.  The  remaining  100, 
burned  to  ashes  or  shapeless  lumps  of  charred  flesh,  lie  under  the  ruins  of  the 
bridge  and  train. 

The  disaster  was  dramatically  complete.  No  element  of  horror  was  want 
ing.  First,  the  crash  of  the  bridge,  the  agonizing  moments  of  suspense  as  the 
seven  laden  cars  plunged  down  their  fearful  leap  to  the  icy  river-bed  ;  then 
the  fire  which  came  to  devour  all  that  had  been  left  alive  by  the  crash  ;  then 
the  water,  which  gurgled  up  from  under  the  broken  ice  and  offered  another 
form  of  death  ;  and,  finally,  the  biting  blast  filled  with  snow,  which  froze  and 
benumbed  those  who  had  escaped  water  and  fire.  It  was  an  ideal  tragedy. 

The  scene  of  the  accident  was  the  valley  of  the  creek  which,  flowing  down 
past  the  eastern  margin  of  Ashtabula  village,  passes  under  the  railway  three 
or  four  hundred  yards  east  of  the  station.  Here  for  many  years  after  the  Lake 
Shore  road  was  built  there  was  a  long  wooden  trestle-work,  but  as  the  road 
was  improved  this  was  superseded  about  ten  years  ago  with  an  iron  Howe  truss, 


THE   DISASTER  AT  ASHTABULA.  291 

built  at  the  Cleveland  shops,  and  resting  at  either  end  upon  high  stone  piers, 
flanked  by  heavy  earthen  embankments.  The  iron  structure  was  a  single  span 
of  159  feet,  crossed  by  a  double  track  seventy  feet  above  the  water,  which  at 
that  point  is  now  from  three  to  six  feet  deep,  and  covered  with  eight  inches  of 
ice.  The  descent  into  the  valley  on  either  side  is  precipitous,  and,  as  the  hills 
and  slopes  are  piled  with  heavy  drifts  of  snow,  there  was  no  little  difficulty  in 
reaching  the  wreck  after  the  disaster  became  known. 

The  disaster  occurred  shortly  before  eight  o'clock.  It  was  the  wildest  win- 
ter  night  of  the  year.  Three  hours  behind  its  time,  the  Pacific  Express,  which 
had  left  New  York  the  night  before,  struggled  along  through  the  drifts  and 
the  blinding  storm.  The  eleven  cars  were  a  heavy  burden  to  the  two  engines, 
and  when  the  leading  locomotive  broke  through  the  drifts  beyond  the  ravine, 
and  rolled  on  across  the  bridge,  the  train  was  moving  at  less  than  ten  miles  an 
hour.  The  head  lamp  threw  but  a  short  and  dim  flash  of  light-in  the  front, 
so  thick  was  the  air  with  the  driving  snow.  The  train  crept  across  the  bridge, 
the  leading  engine  had  reached  solid  ground  beyond,  and  its  driver  had  just 
given  it  steam,  when  something  in  the  undergearing  of  the  bridge  .snapped. 
For  an  instant  there  was  a  confused  crackling  of  beams  and  girders,  ending 
with  a  tremendous  crash,  as  the  whole  train  but  the  leading  engine  broke 
through  the  framework,  and  fell  in  a  heap  of  crushed  and  splintered  ruins  at 
the  bottom.  Notwithstanding  the  wind  and  storm,  the  crash  was  heard'by 
people  within-doors  half  a  mile  away.  For  a  moment  there  was  silence,  a 
stunned  sensation  among  the  survivors,  who  in  all  stages  of  mutilation  lay 
piled  among  the  dying  and  dead.  Then  arose  the  cries  of  the  maimed  and 
suffering  ;  the  few  who  remained  unhurt  hastened  to  escape  from  the  shattered 
cars.  They  crawled  out  of  windows  into  freezing  water  waist-deep.  Men, 
women  and  children,  with  limbs  bruised  and  broken,  pinched  between  timbers 
and  transfixed  by  jagged  splinters,  begged  with  their  last  breath  for  aid  that 
no  human  power  could  give. 

Five  minutes  after  the  train  fell,  the  fire  broke  out  in  the  cars  piled  against 
the  abutments  at  either  end.  A  moment  later,  flames  broke  from  the  smoking- 
car  and  first  coach  piled  across  each  other  near  the  middle  of  the  stream.  In 
less  than  ten  minutes  after  the  catastrophe,  every  car  in  the  wreck  was  on  fire, 
and  the  flames,  fed  by  the  dry  varnished  work  and  fanned  by  the  icy  gale, 
licked  up  the  ruins  as  though  they  had  been  tinder.  Destruction  was  so  swift 
that  mercy  was  baflied.  Men  who,  in  the  bewilderment  of  the  shock,  sprang 
out  and  reached  the  solid  ice,  went  back  after  wives  and  children  and  found 
them  suffocating  and  roasting  in  the  flames.  The  neighboring  residents, 
startled  by  the  crash,  were  lighted  to  the  scene  by  the  conflagration,  which 
made  even  their  prompt  assistance  too  late.  By  midnight,  the  cremation  was 
complete.  The  storm  had  subsided,  but  the  wind  still  blew  fiercely,  and  the 
cold  was  more  intense.  When  morning  came,  all  that  remained  of  the  Pacific 
Express  was  a  winrow  of  car  wheels,  axles,  brake-irons,  truck-frames,  and 
twisted  rails  lying  in  a  black  pool  at  the  bottom  of  the  gorge.  The  wood  had 
burned  completely  away,  and  the  ruins  were  covered  with  white  ashes.  Here 
and  there  a  mass  of  charred,  smoldering  substance  sent  up  a  little  cloud  of 


292  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

sickening  vapor,  which  told  that  it  was  human  flesh  slowly  yielding  to  the 
corrosion  of  the  fire.  On  the  crest  of  the  western  abutment,  half  buried  in  the 
snow,  stood  the  rescued  locomotive,  all  that  remained  of  the  fated  train.  As 
the  bridge  fell,  its  driver  had  given  it  a  quick  head  of  steam,  which  tore  the 
drawhead  from  its  tender,  and  the  liberated  engine  shot  forward  and  buried 
itself  in  the  snow.  The  other  locomotive,  drawn  backward  by  the  falling  train, 
tumbled  over  the  pier  and  fell  bottom  upward  on  the  express  car  next  behind. 
The  engineer,  Folsom,  escaped  with  a  broken  leg  ;  how,  he  cannot  tell,  nor  can 
any  one  else  imagine. 

There  is  no  death-list  to  report.  There  can  be  none  until  the  list  of  the 
missing  ones  who  traveled  by  the  Lake  Shore  Road  on  Friday  ip  made  up. 
There  are  no  remains  that  can  ever  be  identified.  The  three  charred,  shape 
less  lumps  recovered  up  to  noon  to-day  are  beyond  all  hope  of  recognition. 
Old  or  young,  male  or  female,  black  or  white,  no  man  can  tell.  They  are 
alike  in  the  crucible  of  death.  For  the  rest,  there  are  piles  of  white  ashes  in 
which  glisten  the  crumbling  particles  of  calcined  bones  ;  mother  places  masses 
of  black,  charred  debris,  half  under  water,  which  may  contain  fragments  of 
bodies,  but  nothing  of  human  semblance.  It  is  thought  that  there  may  be  a 
few  corpses  under  the  ice,  as  there  were  women  and  children  who  sprang  into 
the  water  and  sank,  but  none  have  been  thus  far  recovered. 

[Dispatch  to  the  Cleveland  Leader.] 

The  haggard  dawn,  which  drove  the  darkness  out  of  this  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  seldom  saw  a  ghastlier  sight  than  was  revealed  with  the 
coming  of  this  morning.  On  either  side  of  the  ravine  frowned  the  dark  and 
bare  arches  from  which  the  treacherous  timbers  had  fallen,  while  at  their  base 
the  great  heaps  of  ruins  covered  the  one  hundred  men,  women  and  children 
who  had  so  suddenly  been  called  to  their  death.  The  three  charred  bodies  lay 
where  they  had  been  placed  in  the  hurry  and  confusion  of  the  night.  Piles 
of  iron  lay  on  the  thick  ice,  or  bedded  in  the  shallow  water  of  the  stream. 
The  fires  smouldered  in  great  heaps,  where  many  of  the  hapless  victims  had 
been  all  consumed,  while  men  went  about  in  wild  excitement,  seeking  some 
trace  of  a  lost  one  among  the  wounded  or  dead. 

The  list  of  saved  and  wounded  having  been  already  sent,  the  sad  task 
remains  of  discovering  who  may  be  among  the  dead.  The  latter  task  will  be 
the  most  difficult  of  all,  until  the  continued  absence  of  here  and  there  a  friend 
will  allow  of  but  one  explanation — that  he  was  among  those  who  took  this 
fatal  leap. 

All  the  witnesses  so  far  agree  to  the  main  facts  of  the  accident.  It  was 
about  8  o'clock,  and  the  train  was  moving  along  at  a  moderate  rate  of  speed, 
the  Ashtabula  station  being  just  this  side  of  the  ravine.  Suddenly,  and  with 
out  warning,  the  train  plunged  into  the  abyss,  the  forward  locomotive  alone 
getting  across  in  safety.  Almost  instantly,  the  lamps  and  stoves  set  fire  to  the 
cars,  and  many  who  were  doubtlessly  only  stunned,  and  who  might  otherwise 
have  been,  saved,  fell  victims  to  the  fury  of  the  flames. 


THE   DISASTER  AT  ASHTABULA.  293 

On  the  arrival  of  the  Cleveland  train,  the  surgeon  of  the  road  organized  his 
corps  of  assistants,  and  made  a  tour  of  the  various  hotels,  where  the  wounded 
were  attended  to,  such  help  being  given  to  each  as  was  possible.  The  people 
of  Ashtabula  lent  a  willing  hand,  and  all  that  human  skill  and  money  could 
do  to  save  life  or  ease  pain  was  done.  The  train  which  came  from  Cleveland 
for  the  purpose  was  immediately  backed  into  position,  and  long  before  daylight 
the  least  wounded  were  being  prepared  for  transportation  to  Cleveland,  to  be 
sent  to  hospitals  or  their  homes. 

The  scenes  among  the  wounded  were  as  suggestive  almost  as  the  wreck  in 
the  valley.  The  two  hotels  nearest  the  station  contained  a  majority  of  these, 
as  they  were  scattered  about  on  temporary  beds  on  the  floors  of  the  dining- 
rooms,  parlors  and  offices.  In  one  place,  a  man  with  a  broken  leg  would  be 
under  the  hands  of  a  surgeon,  who  rapidly  and  skillfully  went  at  his  work. 
In  another,  a  man  covered  with  bruises  and  spotted  over  with  pieces  of  plas 
ter,  would  look  as  though  he  had  been  snowed  upon,  except  when  the  dark 
lines  of  blood  across  his  face  or  limb  told  a  dif^rent  story.  In  some  other 
corner,  a  poor  woman  moaned  from  the  pain  which  she  could  not  conceal, 
while  over  all  there  brooded  that  hushed  feeling  of  awe  which  always  accom 
panies  calamities  of  this  character. 

Towards  morning,  the  cold  increased  and  the  wind  blew  a  fearful  gale, 
which,  with  the  snow,  that  had  drifted  waist-deep  at  points  along  the  line, 
made  all  work  extremely  difficult. 

At  6  o'clock, the  beds  in  the  sleeping-car  of  the  special  train  were  made  up, 
and  such  of  the  wounded  as  could  be  moved  were  transferred  there. 

The  story  of  most  painful  interest  to  us — to  all  who  will  read 
this  book,  and  all  who  knew  and  loved  P.  P.  Bliss  and  his  wife — is 
that  told  by  Mr.  J.  E.  Burchell,  partner  of  Mr.  B.  F.  Jacobs,  of 
Chicago,  who  was  on  the  ill-fated  train.  We  give  his  account  in 
full : 

There  were  eleven  cars  on  the  train  that  left  Buffalo  at  two  o'clock  Friday 
afternoon.  There  were  two  engines,  three  baggage,  one  smoker,  two  coaches, 
three  sleepers  and  one  parlor  car.  I  should  judge  there  were  250  passengers. 
We  pulled  out  of  Buffalo  in  a  blinding  snow-storm,  an  hour  late,  and  ran  at 
the  rate  of  about  fifteen  miles  an  hour  until  about  an  hour,  or  may  be  only 
half  an  hour,  before  the  accident,  when  she  slacked  up  to  about  ten  miles  an 
hour.  The  second  engine  was  taken  on  at  about  Dunkirk.  Just  before  reach 
ing  the  bridge,  the  snow  was  very  heavy,  and  at  that  station  near  by,  the  name 
of  which  I  have  forgotten,  there  was  every  danger  of  being  snowed  in.  We 
had  lost  an  hour  and  a  half  from  Buffalo  to  the  bridge. 

Before  reaching  the  bridge,  I  went  through  the  train  and  noticed  that  the 
coaches  and  the  smoker  were  filled.  The  smoker  did  not  come  in  its  regular 
order.  There  were  two  passenger  coaches  ahead  of  it.  Next  behind  the  smoker 
was  the  parlor  car,  in  which  Mr.  Bliss  and  his  family  were,  and  I  noticed  it 


294  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

was  one-third  full.    I  was  in  the  car  behind  the  parlor,  and  my  car  was  filled 
Behind  that  were  the  three  sleepers,  which  were  also  nearly  filled. 

We  neared  the  bridge  at  about  7:45,  though  due  at  Ashtabula  at  5:15.  East 
of  the  bridge  the  country  is  rolling,  and  beyond  the  creek  it  grows  more  level. 
We  ran  on  the  structure  at  a  rate  of  about  ten  miles  an  hour,  and  the  whole 
train  was  on  the  bridge  when  it  gave  way.  The  bridge  is  about  two  hundred  feet 
long,  and  only  the  first  engine  had  passed  over  when  the  crash  came,  the  weight 
of  the  falling  cars  nearly  pulling  back  the  locomotive  that  had  passed  over. 

The  first  thing  I  heard  was  a  cracking  in  the  front  part  of  the  car,  and  then 
the  same  cracking  in  the  rear.  Then  came  another  cracking  in  the  front  loud 
er  than  the  first,  and  then  came  a  sickening  oscillation  and  a  sudden  sinking, 
and  I  was  thrown  stunned  from  my  seat.  I  heard  the  cracking,  and  splinter 
ing  and  smashing  around  me.  The  iron  work  bent  and  twisted  like  snakes, 
and  everything  took  horrid  shapes.  I  heard  a  lady  scream  in  anguish,  "  Oh ! 
help  me  ! "  Then  I  heard  the  cry  of  fire.  Some  one  broke  a  window  and  I 
pushed  out  the  lady  who  had  screamed.  I  think  her  name  was  Mrs.  Bingham. 

The  train  lay  in  the  valley  in  the  water,  our  car  a  little  on  its  side,  both 
ends  broken  in.  The  rest  of  the  train  lay  in  every  direction,  some  on  end, 
some  on  the  side,  crushed  and  broken,  a  terrible  but  picturesque  sight.  Below 
were  the  water  and  broken  ice ;  seventy  feet  above  was  the  broken  bridge. 

Mrs.  Bingham  sank  down  in  the  snow  and  I  went  back  after  my  coat. 
Securing  that,  I  went  to  her  and  carried  her,  with  a  dozen  stumbles  and  falls, 
up  the*  bank.  The  snow  in  the  valley  was  nearly  to  my  waist,  and  I  could 
only  move  with  difficulty.  The  wreck  was  then  on  fire.  The  wind  was  blow 
ing  from  the  east  and  whirling  blinding  masses  of  snow  over  the  terrible  ruin. 

The  crackling  of  the  flames,  the  whistling  wind,  the  screaming  of  the  hurt, 
made  a  pandemonium  of  that  little  valley,  and  the  water  of  the  freezing  creek 
was  red  with  blood  or  black  with  the  flying  cinders.  I  did  not  then  know  that 
any  lives  had  been  lost.  All  had  escaped  alive,  though  all  were  bruised  or 
injured.  The  fire  stole  swiftly  along  the  wreck,  and  in  a  few  moments  the 
cars  were  all  in  flames.  The  ruins  covered  the  whole  space  between  the  two 
piers,  the  cars  jammed  in  or  locked  together.  One  engine  lay  in  the  creek, 
smashed  to  pieces,  the  ruins  breathing  steam  and  fire. 

I  carried  Mrs.  Bingham  to  the  only  house  near  by,  and  which  appeared  to 
be  an  engine-house,  i  was  completely  exhausted,  and  remained  there  forty- 
five  minutes,  when  the  injured  began  to  arrive.  I  think  there  were  fifty-two 
brought  in  alive,  but  one  or  two  died  after  their  removal  to  the  town,  where 
they  were  subsequently  taken.  The  town  was  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
distant. 

I  did  not  go  back  to  the  wreck,  but  from  the  engine-house  door  I  could  see 
into  the  ravine,  and  the  fearful  scene  it  presented.  The  sight  was  sickening. 
The  whole  wreck  was  then  on  fire,  and  from  out  the  frozen  valley  came  great 
bursts  of  flame.  There  were  crowds  of  men  there,  but  the  fire  beat  them  back, 
and  they  could  do  nothing.  The  wounded  were  lying  around  in  the  snow,  or 
were  laid  on  stretchers  or  taken  on  the  backs  of  men  and  carried  up  the  bluff. 
The  spectacle  was  frightful,  but  those  who  had  gone  to  assist  worked  steadily 


THE  DISASTER  AT  ASHTABULA.  295 

and  well  in  spite  of  the  intense  heat.  They  carried  away  all  who  could  be 
rescued,  and  then  waited  mournfully  for  the  flames  to  subside,  so  that  bodies 
might  be  taken  out.  As  fast  as  the  injured  were  secured,  they  were  taken  to 
the  hotel.  That  was  some  time  before  anything  could  be  done,  for  in  thirty 
minutes  after  the  fall  it  was  impossible  to  get  near  it  for  the  fire.  I  think  it 
likely  that  a  great  many  were  buried  under  the  cars,  and  lost  in  that  way. 

The  hotel  was  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  creek,  and  as  the  long 
line  of  stretchers  and  stout  men  bore  the  sufferers  along,  the  stormy  air  was 
filled  with  meanings  of  anguish.  At  the  hotel,  the  wounded  were  kindly  cared 
for.  Physicians  and  surgeons  were  early  on  hand,  and  every  effort  was  made 
to  relieve  the  sufferers.  One  lady,  whose  foot  had  been  crushed,  was  carried 
shrieking  in  labor  pains  to  the  little  hotel,  and  during  the  night  she  gave 
birth  to  a  child. 

From  the  top  of  the  bluff  to  the  water's  edge  it  is,  I  should  think,  from 
seventy  to  eighty  feet,  and  along  that  bluff  there  ranged  lines  of  excited  men 
looking  down  on  the  burning,  helpless  agony  below.  It  was  a  heart-rending 
scene.  The  mangled,  bleeding  bodies  writhed  in  the  terrible  tortures  around 
them.  Some  died  with  prayer  and  some  with  shriekings  of  woe  on  their  lips. 
Some  were  caught  in  the  iron  and  woodwork,  and  held  while  the  flames  crept 
upon  them  and  burned  them  in  the  very  sight  of  cool,  rippling  water.  As  they 
died,  they  fixed  their  bloodshot  eyes  longingly  upon  the  snow  that  beat  piti 
lessly  down,  and  lay  white  and  beautiful  on  their  smoke-blackened  faces. 
The  fire  crept  steadily  on  through  the  snow  flakes,  leaping  from  one  mass  of 
ruins  to  another,  licking  up  the  blood  as  it  passed  along,  and  crushing  out 
human  lives  as  remorselessly  as  it  curled  around  the  stubborn  woodwork. 

When  the  train  fell,  Mr.  Bliss  succeeded  in  crawling  through  a  window, 
supposing  he  could  pull  his  wife  and  children  after  him.  But  they  were 
jammed  fast  and  every  effort  of  his  was  unavailing.  The  car  was  all  jammed 
up,  and  the  lady  and  her  children  were  caught  in  the  ironwork  of  the 
seats.  Finding  that  he  could  not  save  them,  he  staid  there  with  them 
and  died. 

Most  all  the  passengers  who  escaped  did  so  by  way  of  the  windows.  There 
was  no  egress  at  the  doors,  for  the  stoves  were  there.  One  lady  was  pulled 
from  a  window,  and  almost  every  stitch  of  clothing  stripped  from  her,  and 
when  they  were  taking  her  out  the  rescuing  party  could  hear  the  screams  of 
women  and  children  for  aid,  but  could  render  them  no  assistance. 

Those  who  came  from  the  wreck  said  they  could  see  into  the  cars  and  could 
see  the  charred  trunks  of  those  who  had  been  literally  burned  to  death.  They 
described  them  as  wholly  unrecognizable  beyond  identification,  and  present 
ing  the  most  ghastly  scene  they  had  ever  looked  on.  Some  of  the  unfortu 
nates  were  burned  literally  to  ashes,  and  in  some  cases  only  calcined  bones 
were  left  to  tell  that  human  beings  had  ever  been  there. 

Of  the  fifty- two  taken  from  the  wreck,  all  were  more  or  less  injured,  and 
about  forty  of  them  dangerously,  if  not  fatally.  I  don't  remember  any  names. 
I  was  badly  shaken  up  and  bruised,  and  I  think  there  was  only  one  man  who 
was  as  little  hurt  as  I  was. 


296  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

There  was  a  fire-engine  there,  but  there  was  no  hose.  I  think  the  fire 
lasted  about  an  hour,  and  by  that  time  all  the  cars  were  burned.  I  don't  think 
any  one  was  taken  out  alive  after  the  fire.  I  am  fearful  that  all  who  were  not 
saved  before  the  flames  got  headway  perished  in  the  general  conflagration. 

I  should  say  there  were  at  the  least  reckoning  one  hundred  and  fifty  per 
sons  killed  outright  or  burned  to  death,  and  this  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  some 
of  the  officers  claim  that  there  were  only  one  hundred  and  sixty -five  on  the 
train. 

I  don't  know  the  name  of  a  human  being  among  the  killed,  except  Mr.  Bliss 
and  his  family,  and  I  don't  know  the  names  of  any  of  the  injured.  All  along 
the  road  coming  from  the  scene  are  anxious  men,  fearful  that  friends  or  rela 
tives  were  on  the  train  and  killed  or  injured.  Perhaps  some  of  them  may  yet 
hear  of  deplorable  losses,  for  the  railroad  officials  admit  that  there  were  over 
one  hundred  killed. 

Fortunately,  the  dear  children  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  had  been 
left  at  Rome,  and  they  were  safe.  The  father  and  mother  ( '  went 
before  "  them  into  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


IN  MEMORIAM — FEELING  AND  GLOWING  TRIBUTES,  IN  POETRY  AND  PROSE, 
FROM  EDITORS,  CLERGYMEN,  SINGERS  AND  FRIENDS,  TO  THE  MEMORY 
OF  THE  DEPARTED  SONG  WRITER. 

FROM  various  sources  we  select  a  few  of  the  many  good  things 
which  have  been  said  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  since  the  sad  event 
of  their  death.     "  None  knew  them  but  to  love  them  ;  none  spoke 
but  to  praise  them." 

The  editorial  columns  of  the  Chicago  Inter- Ocean  contained  the 
following  glowing  tribute  to  our  friend,  written  while  it  was  still 
supposed  that  Mr.  Bliss'  children  were  among  the  lost  at  Ashtabula  : 

P.  P.  Bliss,  the  song  writer,  the  author  of  "  Hold  the  Fort,"  "The  Armor- 
Bearer,"  "  Almost  Persuaded,"  and  scores  of  other  popular  songs,  was  on  the 
train  that  went  down  with  a  crash  to  terrible  destruction  at  Ashtabula.  He 
was  coming  from  the  holiday  meeting  at  his  old  home,  with  its  tender  mem 
ories  clinging  to  him,  to  hold  a  grand  praise  meeting  in  Chicago,  to  which  he 
was  looking  forward  with  all  the  wholesome  enthusiam  of  his  stalwart,  Chris 
tian  manhood.  Moving  along  a  line  leading  from  joyous  scene  to  pleasant 
duty,  he  was  stopped  midway  to  die  with  wife  and  children  ;  to  die  in  an 
attempt  to  save  those  he  loved  from  a  terrible  fate. 

This  horror  of  a  railroad  disaster  has  darkened  many  a  home  ;  in  the  case 
of  Mr.  Bliss  it  destroyed  one — blotted  it  out  as  with  a  thunder  crash.  The 
catastrophe  has  depressed  the  public,  a  public  already  sore  to  the  heart's  core 
over  the  Brooklyn  theater  disaster ;  but  in  the  death  of  Mr.  Bliss  it  touches 
chords  that  bring  it  home  as  a  family  grief  to  every  church  and  Sabbath  School 
in  America  and  England. 

Mr.  Bliss  was  the  song  writer  of  the  church  and  Sabbath  School.  He  stood 
prominent  among  those  earnest  workers  who  have  invested  Sabbath  School 
music  with  the  cheerfulness,  lightness,  brightness  and  briskness  that  were 
wanting  in  the  old  hymns,  and  who  have  added  to  them  new  pathos  and  ten 
derness.  His  works  were  songs  rather  than  hymns,  and  they  were  written 
under  the  inspiration  of  the  ideal  song  writer.  In  words  and  music  his  com 
positions  were  adapted  to  the  longings  and  wants  of  those  he  desired  to  reach. 
The  illustrations  were  familiar,  the  methods  were  striking,  the  sentiment  was 
an  echo  of  the  feeling  in  his  own  heart.  He  seized  quickly  upon  incident  or 


298  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

figure,  or  story,  and  turned  it  to  good  account.  Catching  suggestions  from  the 
actual  life  of  the  people,  his  songs  and  his  musical  compositions  came  to  the 
masses  as  revelations.  The  relation  of  an  army  incident  suggested  "  Hold  the 
Fort."  It  was  written  on  the  impulse  of  the  moment,  and  it  has  traveled  the 
world  over.  It  has  been  translated  into  not  only  nearly  all  the  European  lan 
guages,  but  into  Chinese  and  the  native  languages  of  India.  It  is  not  too 
much  to  say  that  it  is  popular  beyond  any  other  Sabbath  School  song  of  the 
age.  And  with  it  travel  others  almost  as  popular  ;  "  What  Will  the  Harvest 
Be?  "  "  Almost  Persuaded,"  "  Only  an  Armor- Bearer,"  etc.,  etc. 

When  we  remember  that  every  child,  from  the  lisping  four- year-old  to  the 
youth  of  fifteen  or  eighteen,  is  singing  in  Sabbath  School  and  home,  "  Only  an 
armor-bearer  proudly  I  stand,"  and  that  not  only  in  home  and  Sabbath  School, 
but  at  political  meetings,  people  have  been  shouting'  "  Hold  the  fort,  for  I  am 
coming,"  then,  and  not  till  then,  do  we  realize  how  near  this  man,  whom  we 
of  Chicago  knew  so  well,  was  to  the  people  at  large.  And  when  we  read  these 
songs  and  hear  the  simple  music,  we  go  further,  and  realize  how  much  he 
has  helped  all  people,  but  particularly  the  young,  toward  a  better  life. 

Mr.  Bliss  was  a  fine  specimen  of  the  vigorous  and  robust  man.  He  was 
gifted  with  a  sweet  voice  and  an  attractive  manner.  He  carried  into  his 
musical  work  the  martial  bearing  and  movement  of  the  commander  in  a  great 
crusade.  This  spirit  breathes  along  his  lines  and  swells  in .  all  his  music. 
Children  caught  quickly  this  heroic  spirit.  His  military  figures  found  the 
nation  responsive.  He  is  never,  in  any  composition,  at  a  halt.  He  is  always 
marching  forward  or  struggling  upward.  There  is  always  the  suggestion  of 
the  leader's  plume  to  the  front ;  there  is  always  a  purpose,  a  hope,  a  promise, 
a  resolve,  at  the  heart ;  there  is  always  present  the  spirit  that  moves  masses 
to  responsive  or  heroic  moods,  or  that  pathos  that  calls  out  the  best  there  is  in 
man.  Hence  the  popularity  of  Mr.  Bliss'  compositions,  and,  more  important, 
the  good  influence  they  have  exerted. 

As  with  Mr.  Moody,  the  people  of  Chicago  have  watched  the  course  of  Mr. 
Bliss  with  peculiar  interest.  Those  earnest  in  Christian  work  observed  with 
pleasure  his  growing  toward  the  conviction  that  he  must  enter  a  wider  field. 
They  were  familiar  with  the  doubts  in  his  own  mind,  which  went  down  one 
by  one  under  the  resolve  that  he  must  do  his  whole  duty,  and  they  have 
rejoiced  over  the  good  results  of  his  work.  And  this  class  of  earnest  workers, 
numbering  in  its  ranks  Mr.  Moody  and  many  of  the  ministers  of  the  city, 
have  seen  with  clearer  vision  than  the  masses  the  spirit  and  purpose  of  Mr. 
Bliss.  They  have  known  him  better  and  have  understood  him  better  than 
have  the  people  at  large.  But  to  all  he  has  spoken  as  a  friend  ;  and  standing 
appalled  before  the  Ashtabula  horror,  many  will  turn  shivering  to  the  picture 
of  the  song-maker  struggling  to  save  his  wife  and  children.  And  then  will 
come  that  vivid  picture  of  his  own : 

On,  like  a  fiend  in  its  towering  wrath, 
On,  and  destruction  alone  points  the  path; 
Mercy  I  O  heaven  I  the  sufferers  wail — 
Feehle  humanity,  naught  can  avail. 


REV.  DR.  SEMPLE'S  SERMON.  299 

So  he  went  down  to  death.  And  of  this  sudden  coming  of  death  he  has 
said: 

I  know  not  the  hour  when  my  Lord  will  come 

To  take  me  away  to  His  own  dear  home ; 
But  I  know  that  His  presence  will  lighten  the  gloom, 
And  that  will  be  glory  for  me. 

People  think  and  speak  in  formula  furnished  by  this  man  now  dead,  and 
many  will  recall  reminiscences  of  his  home  life  that  make  very  touching  this 
picture  of  his  terrible  death.  One  of  his  intimate  friends  relates  how  many 
of  his  compositions,  now  famous,  first  found  shape  in  his  own  home  ;  of  how, 
with  wife  and  children  and  a  few  chosen  friends  about  him,  he  first  sung  the 
songs  that  were  to  be  given  to  the  world.  And  this  friend  tells  of  how  the 
singer  and  his  family  rejoiced  over  the  perfecting  of  some  work  that  reflected 
an  experience  or  trial  or  struggle  or  rejoicing  that  they  themselves  had  lived 
through.  The  man  spoke  from  the  heart  of  his  home,  and  no  wonder  he 
touched  the  popular  heart. 

In  a  sermon  preached  at  Minneapolis,  Minnesota,  on  the  6th 
of  January,  Kev.  E.  F.  Semple,  D.  D.,  expressed  himself  as  follows 
respecting  Mr.  Bliss  and  his  work.  Want  of  space  alone  prevents 
our  publishing  the  sermon  in  full : 

There  are  many  stricken  households,  widely  scattered,  greatly  mourning 
the  disaster  at  Ashtabula  bridge.  Some  of  our  number  lost  near  kindred  on 
that  dreadful  night :  the  joy  of  the  marriage  succeeded  by  the  wail  of  death. 
And  there  was  one  widely  known  and  greatly  beloved.  Hence,  thousands  in 
this  and  in  other  lands,  as  the  electric  wire  flashed  the  sad  intelligence  of  his 
decease,  cried  in  the  bitterness  of  their  grief,  "  Alas  1  my  brother." 

Wherever  the  sweet  "  Gospel  Songs"  were  sung,  and  especially  where  the 
voice  of  him  who  wrote  them  had  been  heard,  there  is  sorrow  such  as  has  sel 
dom  been  surpassed.  With  feelings  of  peculiar  sadness,  relieved  only  by  the 
light  from  beyond,  we  who  linger  a  little  behind  now  sing, 

Down  life's  dark  vale  we  wander, 
Till  Jesus  comes. 

And  hereafter,  as  we  join  in  the  familiar  song,  there  will  come  to  us  thoughts 
of  a  night  dark  and  stormy  ;  and  as  we  look  through  the  blinding  tempest  we 
shall  see  a  noble  form  moving  calmly  on,  and  a  manly  face  turned  heavenward, 
and  shall  hear  a  voice  of  marvelous  compass  and  sweetness  singing,  in  trustful 
strains,  mingling  with,  and  rising  above,  the  meanings  of  the  wintry  winds — 

Though  the  pathway  be  lonely  and  dangerous,  too, 
Surely  Jesus  is  able  to  carry  us  through  ; 

and  then  as  the  weary,  blistered  feet  touch  the  heavenly  shore,  we  catch  the 
triumphant  refrain — 


300  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Hallelujah !  'tis  done  !    I  believe  on  the  Son, 
I  am  saved  by  the  blood  of  the  Crucified  One. 

You  all  know  to  whom  I  refer.  I  have  scarcely  felt  that  I  could  trust  my 
self  to  speak  his  name.  I  had  come  to  know  him  intimately,  and  to  love  him 
tenderly,  and  to  confide  in  him  implicitly.  The  brother  beloved  who  had  la 
bored  with  him  in  Gospel  services,  and  was  competent  to  form  a  judgment  of 
his  character,  said  of  him,  "  He  is  the  purest  minded  man  I  ever  knew."  There 
certainly  have  been  few  so  loving,  unselfish  and  kind.  He  was  singularly  art 
less.  He  wore  no  disguise.  In  presence  dignified  and  commanding  as  Saul 
among  the  children  of  Israel,  he  was  in  spirit  simple,  and  unostentatious,  and 
confiding  as  a  child.  His  songs  were  like  himself.  They  were  the  utterances 
of  his  own  great  heart.  They  claimed  no  relation,  and  had  none,  to  the  meas 
ured  and  lofty  poetry  of  the  Homeric  hymns.  They  were  sweet  lyrics  rather. 
The  most  intellectual  were  moved  by  them.  The  unlearned  understood  them. 
They  were  fragrant  with  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  I  doubt  not  led  many  to  Him. 
Already  they  are  sung  in  every  land.  Though  born  within  the  last  decade,  they 
have  overtaken  the  sacred  hymns  of  Watts,  and  Newton,  and  Toplady ;  and 
some  of  them  will  live  as  long.  It  was  well  said  of  such  songs  as  "  Hold  the 
Fort,"  "  Almost  Persuaded,"  "  When  Jesus  Comes,"  and  "  We're  Going  Home 
To-morrow,"  that,  "  As  the  years  roll  on,  like  the  handsful  of  seed  dropped  in 
the  furrow,  they  shall  yield  increasing  harvests,  till  from  all  lands  and  kin 
dreds  and  tongues  there  shall  come  up  a  mighty  throng  to  cast  their  crowns 
at  the  feet  of  that  dear  Lord  whose  dying  love  it  was  our  brother's  highest 
joy  to  magnify."  And  we  fully  accord  with  the  judgment  of  another,  that 
"  Evangelical  song  lost  its  greatest  exponent  when  Philip  P.  Bliss  staid  by 
the  car  in  Ashtabula  Creek,"  and  burned  to  death  in  the  fruitless  attempt 
to  save  his  wife — an  act  characteristic  of  his  affectionate  and  self-forgetful 
nature. 

This  dear  brother  has  sown  seeds  in  the  hearts  of  many  whom  I  now  ad 
dress,  which  I  fervently  hope  shall  yet  bring  forth  immortal  fruitage  in  their 
salvation.  How  tenderly  did  he  speak  to  the  young,  of  Christ,  the  children's 
friend,  and  urge  them  to  come  to  Him.  How  earnestly  did  he  pray  that  they 
might  know  Jesus,  and  rejoice  in  His  light.  The  memory  of  those  November 
days  will  abide  with  us  down  to  the  winter  of  life,  and  we  shall  always  be 
thankful  that  our  dear  brethren  in  Christ,  Whittle  and  Bliss,  came  this  way  ; 
loving  evangelists,  who  pointed  us  to  the  wicket  gate  of  Mercy,  and  bade  us 
hasten  to  it. 

*  *  *  *  *  *  *  * 

I  recall  a  sweet  and  solemn  service,  when  our  dear  brother  and  his  equally 
lovely  wife  sang  together  a  hymn  which  was  prophetic  of  their  end — may  it 
be  of  our  peaceful  departure  : 

Through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  I  must  go, 

Where  the  cold  waves  of  Jordan  roll ; 
But  the  promise  of  my  Shepherd  will,  I  know, 

Be  the  rod  and  staff  of  my  soul. 


FKOM    EEV.    G.    C.    WATERMAN.  301 

Even  now  down  the  valley  as  I  glide, 

I  can  hear  my  Savior  say,  "  Follow  me  ;  " 
And  with  him  I'm  not  afraid  to  cross  the  tide, 

There's  a  light  in  the  valley  for  me. 

Now  the  rolling  of  the  billows  I  can  hear, 
As  they  beat  on  the  turf-bound  shore, 

But  the  beacon  light  of  love  so  bright  and  clear 
Guides  my  bark  frail  and  lone  safely  o'er. 

I  shall  find  down  the  valley  no  alarms, 
For  my  blessed  Savior's  smile  I  can  see, 

He  will  bear  me  in  His  loving,  mighty  arms- 
There'  s  a  light  in  the  valley  for  me. 

Dear  brother  and  sister,  sweet  singers  in  Israel,  farewell !  There  is  a  strange 
stillness  in  the  air  since  you  went ;  a  strange  sorrow  in  our  hearts.  But  it  is 
well ;  for  God  hath  done  it.  Perchance  the  day  on  which  you  left  us  was  a 
festal  day  in  heaven,  and  your  voices  were  needed  in  the  song  of  the  redeemed. 
Farewell  ;  yet  not  forever.  On  some  glad  day,  not  afar  off,  we  shall  hope  to 
meet  you  yonder  : 

Saved  through  the  blood  of  the  Crucified  One. 

From  Eev.  G.  C.  Waterman  we  have  the  following  words  of 
loring  praise  : 

Philip  Bliss  was  my  friend.  I  loved  him  as  a  brother,  and  have  good  rea 
son  to  believe  that  the  love  was  returned  in  full  measure.  My  acquaintance 
with  him  began  a  few  years  before  he  went  to  Chicago,  and  up  to  that  time 
was  intimate,  so  that  a  friendship  struck  its  roots  into  our  hearts  which  has 
lived  and  grown  through  ten  years  of  separation.  In  those  days  he  was  engaged 
in  teaching  singing  schools,  holding  musical  conventions  and  occasionally  giv 
ing  concerts  with  Mr.  John  G.  Towner,  who  was  his  first  teacher  in  music. 
He  was  a  frequent  guest  at  my  house,  coming  sometimes  alone,  sometimes  with 
Mr.  Towner,  and  sometimes  bringing  his  wife  with  him,  but  always  welcome. 
His  personal  appearance  and  bearing  were  such  as  to  attract  and  win  respect 
and  friendship  wherever  he  went.  Nature  had  lavished  upon  him  a  profusion 
of  charms.  Not  Saul  or  David  was  more  eminent  among  his  fellows  for  fine 
physique  and  manly  beauty.  Homer  would  have  put  him  high  among  his 
heroes  and  described  him  with  his  choicest  epithets.  He  was  at  once  dignified 
and  genial ;  a  subtle  and  peculiar  grace,  which  never  degenerated  into  softness 
or  sickly  sentimentality,  invested  all  that  he  did  or  said.  Behind  this  there 
lay,  not  quite  concealed,  no  small  amount  of  power.  These  qualities,  in  com 
bination  with  the  instructive  faculties  which  he  possessed  in  a  high  degree, 
fitted  him  in  an  admirable  manner  for  the  work  of  teaching  in  his  chosen  pro 
fession.  There  was  running  through  his  temperament  a  rich  vein  of  genial 
humor,  bubbling  forth  in  all  sorts  of  unlooked-for  ways,  in  odd  conceits  and 
quaint  terms  of  expression,  in  rhymes  and  jingles,  which  made  him  a  most 
delightful  companion  and  correspondent.  In  it  all  there  was  never  a  drop  of 


302  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

scalding  sarcasm,  biting  acidity  or  turbid  foulness;  it  was  always  pure, 
sweet  and  healthful  as  the  waters  from  the  mountain  spring. 

After  a  few  years  of  this  pleasant  intercourse,  our  paths  diverged  from  the 
quiet  valley  in  which  they  had 'crossed  and  recrossed  so  often,  his  to  lead  into 
the  heart  of  the  life  of  the  West,  mine  to  wind  along  in  other  humble  re 
treats  ;  but  from  time  to  time  golden  threads  were  thrown  across  the  interven 
ing  space,  slender  but  strong,  holding  together  loving  hearts  in  two  circles. 
When  at  length  the  great  sorrow  of  my  life  came  upon  me  and  death  quenched 
the  central  light  of  my  household,  he  poured  out  the  wealth  of  his  loving 
heart  in  words  of  tender  sympathy,  bidding  me  "  lean  hard  on  the  great  Bur 
den-bearer,"  and  helped  me  with  a  brother's  strong  sympathy.  I  have  not 
seen  him  since  he  entered  upon  his  active  evangelistic  work  with  Major 
Whittle,  but  have  followed  him  with  deep  interest,  and  rejoiced  in  all  that 
God  hath  wrought  through  them.  Soon  after  he  begun  this  work,  two  years 
ago  this  very  day,  January  13th,  he  wrote  me  thus  :  "  Do  I  enjoy  this  Gospel 
song  singing  ?  What  a  queer  question  for  a  musical  minister  to  ask  !  There 
never  was  anything  like  it.  Certainly  the  Master  blesses  us  greatly,  even 
now  ;  with  greater  experience  and  greater  faith  we  are  expecting  the  increase 
of  blessing.  *  *  *  Still  there's  more  to  follow ; "  to  this  he  subscribed 
himself,  "  Gospel  Songfully  Yours." 

In  the  Peoria  (Illinois)  Transcript,  we  find  the  following,  from 
Rev.  A.  R.  Thompson,  Pastor  of  the  Second  Presbyterian  Church 
in  that  city : 

O,  thou  sweet  singer  !  hast  thou  passed  away 
While  yet  thy  voice  is  lingering  on  our  ear  ? 

Must  hearts  so  full  of  joy  but  yesterday 
Give  place  to  sorrow  and  the  bitter  tear  ? 

Is  thy  sweet  life  of  love  and  song  no  more  ? 

Thy  noble  manhood  scarcely  reaching  prime  ; 
Yet  in  its  richness  fertile  with  a  store 

Of  sacred  melody  and  heavenly  rhyme. 

No  more,  sweet  singer!  Oh  these  words  "no  more" — 
Thy  voice  shall  thrill  and  soften  every  breast; 

Thy  anthems  sung,  thy  mission  now  is  o'er, 
And  thou  hast  gone  to  thy  celestial  rest. 

Tender  and  loving,  song  was  but  thy  prayer — 

An  inspiration  strain  from  realms  above — 
And  in  angelic  music  thou  didst  bear 

The  soul's  petition  to  a  God  of  love. 


FROM   KEY.    R,    W.    MORGAN.  303 

Thy  noble  wife !  of  self  the  counterpart, 

Whose  voice  and  being  blended  with  thine  own  : 

In  counsel,  love,  encouraging  thy  heart, 
Till  she,  so  loving,  in  thy  nature  shone. 

Bright  spirits  both  !  your  work  on  earth  is  done, 
Your  memory  in  sweet  song  shall  ever  live — 

Your  life  of  faith  and  love  ere  now  has  won 
A  crown  of  Him  whose  joy  it  is  to  give. 

R.  W.  Morgan,  editor  of  The  Christian,  published  in  London, 
England,  discourses,  in  a  letter  to  his  journal,  as  follows,  respecting 
the  work  of  Mr.  Bliss  : 

"  And  devout  men  carried  Stephen  to  his  burial,  and  made  great  lamenta 
tion  over  him."  Something  of  this  kind  has  been  repeated  here.  The  lamen 
tation  is  over  two  of  the  sweetest  singers  in  Israel — Mr.  and  Mrs.  P.  P.  Bliss — 
without  even  the  mournful  satisfaction  of  carrying  them  to  their  burial.  I 
scarcely  know  how  to  write  the  sorrowful  tidings  which  I  have  to  send  to-day. 
I  had  gone  to  Canada  for  Christmas  week,  and  returned  on  Saturday  night 
(Dec.  30)  to  meet  these  friends  in  Jesus,  and  make  some  final  arrangements  as 
to  their  coming  to  England  with  Major  Whittle  in  the  spring.  Though  I  had 
heard  on  the  way  of  a  frightful  railway  accident  at  Ashtabula,  in  Ohio,  it  did 
not  occur  to  me  that  they  would  be  traveling  by  that  very  train — the  Pacific 
Express.  But  on  arriving  at  Chicago  I  was  appalled  to  hear  that  they  had 
perished  on  the  previous  night. 

I  have  already  written  of  my  sojourn  at  Peoria,  where  I  spent  a  few  days 
with  them.  Mr.  Bliss  was  a  saint  indeed,  and  his  wife  a  true  helpmate  to  him. 
"  A  prince  and  a  great  man  is  fallen  in  Israel,"  and  of  him  and  his  sweet 
wife  it  may  well  be  added,  "  They  were  lovely  and  pleasant  in  their  lives,  and 
in  their  death  they  were  not  divided." 

On  Saturday  night,  Major  Whittle,  Mr.  Farwell,  Mr.  Jacobs  and  others 
went  to  the  scene  of  the  accident,  to  endeavor  to  recover  the  remains,  but  a 
telegram  to  Mr.  Moody  says  that  most  of  the  bodies  recovered  are  quite  unrec 
ognizable  ;  and  there  seems  no  likelihood  of  anything  being  found  of  this 
beloved  brother  and  sister  whom  Chicago  mourns,  and  thousands  all  over  the 
land  and  through  the  world  are  mourning,  and  will  mourn  more  deeply,  as  the 
hymns  he  wrote,  and  which  they  sang  together,  are  more  fully  understood. 
Their  bodies  have  probably  been  burned  to  ashes,  but  they  are  themselves 
transfigured,  and  to  us  the  hymns  are  transfigured  also.  We  have  been  saying 
one  to  another  that,  read  in  the  light  of  this  fiery  translation,  they  seem  all 
changed  to  prophecies.  How  differently  shall  we  now  sing — 

I  know  not  the  hour  when  my  Lord  shall  come, 
To  take  me  away  to  His  own  dear  home, 
But  I  know  that  His  presence  will  lighten  the  gloom, 
And  that  will  he  glory  for  me. 


304  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

I  know  not  the  form  of  my  mansion  fair, 
I  know  not  the  name  that  I  then  shall  bear ; 
But  I  know  that  my  Savior  will  welcome  me  there, 
And  that  will  be  heaven  for  me. 

After  the  Chicago  fire  he  wrote  and  dedicated  to  Mr.  Moody  the  words  and 
music  "  Roll  on,  O  "billow  of  fire  ! "  the  chorus  of  which  must  have  come  back 
with  even  more  vividness  in  the  fire  in  which  he  perished  than  when  written 
in  recollection  of  the  fire  from  which  he  had  escaped. 

How  much  more  tenderly  shall  we  now  sing  that  childlike  carol  which  was 
the  one  that  took  the  earliest  hold  of  us  at  home — 

I  am  so  glad  that  onr  Father  in  heaven 
Tells  of  His  love  in  the  Book  He  has  given. 
Wonderful  things  in  the  Bible  I  see  ; 
This  is  the  dearest — that  Jesus  loves  me. 

It  melts  one's  heart  to  think  how,  in  the  agony  of  that  last  hour,  the  hus 
band  and  wife  needed  to  cling,  as  to  an  anchor  within  the  vail,  to  the  assur 
ance  that,  even  in  this  terrible  ordeal,  "Jesus  loves  me." 

After  a  visit  to  a  beautiful  cemetery  in  Peoria,  Illinois,  and  with  his 
thoughts  specially  drawn  toward  the  "blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  appear 
ing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Savior  Jesus  Christ,"  he  wrote — 

Down  life's  dark  vale  we  wander, 
Till  Jesus  comes, 

and  although  the  death  of  the  individual  is  not  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to 
receive  His  bride  to  Himself,  yet  what  a  sublime  fulfillment  did  those  simple 
lines  receive  on  that  dreadful  night ! 

He'll  know  what  griefs  oppressed  me,   • 

When  Jesus  comes. 
Oh,  how  His  arms  will  rest  me, 

When  Jesus  comes. 

And  now  that  he  is  gone  how  inspiriting  will  be  the  war-song,  as  we  think 
how,  trusting  in  the  living  God,  he  held  the  fort  in  death ! — 

Ho,  my  comrades,  see  the  signal 

Waving  in  the  sky  ; 
Reinforcements  now  appearing. 

Victory  is  nigh. 
«•  Hold  the  fort,  for  I  am  coming  ! " 

Jesus  signals  still, 
Wave  the  answer  back  to  heaven — 
41  By  thy  grace  we  will." 

A  story  was  told  yesterday  of  a  missionary  in  South  Africa  going  into  a 
kraal  to  rest,  and  the  first  sounds  he  heard  were  from  a  Zulu  singing  this  tune. 
So  these  stirring  strains  go  round  the  world. 


TRIBUTES  TO   HIS   MEMORY.  305 

As  we  remember  how  our  noble  brother  stood,  and  how  he  fell,  shall  we 
not  mean  something  more  than  ever  before  in  singing  ? — 

Dare  to  be  a  Daniel  ! 

Dare  to  stand  alone  ! 
Dare  to  have  a  purpose  firm  ! 

Dare  to  make  it  known  ! 

To  us  here,  it  seems  as  if  his  patient  and  truthful  voice  was  singing  out  of 
the  darkness  and  terror  of  that  wintry  storm — 

Brightly  beams  our  Father's  mercy, 

From  His  lighthouse  evermore  ; 
But  to  us  He  gives  the  keeping 

Of  the  lights  along  the  shore ; 

and  that  he  appeals,  with  outstretched  hands,  on  behalf  of  others — 

Let  the  lower  lights  be  burning, 

Send  the  gleam  across  the  wave ; 
Some  poor  fainting,  struggling  seaman 

You  may  rescue,  you  may  save. 

For  he  met  his  end  not  far  from  the  very  spot  (Cleveland  harbor)  where  the 
catastrophe  occurred,  which,  related  by  Mr.  Moody,  was  the  occasion  of  his 
writing — 

Trim  your  feeble  lamp,  my  brother, 

Some  poor  seaman,  tempest-tost. 
Trying  now  to  make  the  harbor, 

In  the  darkness  may  be  lost. 

He  was  a  man  full  of  sympathy,  and  the  wisdom  of  the  truest  Christian 
sympathy  shows  itself  in  the  hymn  in  which  he  counsels  the  burdened  one, 

Go  tell  it  to  Jesus,  and  all  will  be  right. 

Gently  and  lovingly  he  leads  the  mourner  on : 

Go  gather  the  sunshine  He  sheds  on  thy  way, 
He'll  lighten  thy  burden — go,  weary  one,  pray. 

And  there  is  a  moral  grandeur  in  the  self-sacrifice  and  generosity  which  he 
commends,  and  which  were  indeed  but  the  reflection  of  his  own  inner  life : 

Go  bury  thy  sorrow,  let  others  be  blest ; 

Go  give  them  the  sunshine,  tell  Jesus  the  rest. 

In  the  same  vein  of  advancing  experience  is  the  familiar  hymn  which  was 
suggested  by  Mr.  Moody's  address  on  Assurance — 

I  wished  He  was  mine, 

And  then  began  hoping  that  Jesus  was  mine. 

I'm  hoping  no  longer,  I  know  He  is  mine. 

20 


306  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

At  the  Industrial  Exposition  at  Chicago  it  was  an  every-day  appointment 
"Meet  me  at  the  Fountain."  Our  sweet  singer,  his  mind  always  set  on  the 
things  above,  caught  up  the  words,  and  wrote — 

\  Will  you  meet  me  at  the  fountain, 

When  I  reach  the  glory -land  ? 
Will  you  meet  me  at  the  fountain  ? 

Shall  I  clasp  your  friendly  hand  ? 
Other  friends  will  give  me  welcome, 

Other  loving  voices  cheer, 
There'll  be  music  at  the  fountain  ? 

Will  you,  will  you,  meet  me  there  T 

I  spent  but  a  few  days  in  his  society,  but  the  impression  he  has  left  upon 
nay  heart  is  well  expressed  in  the  question  and  the  assurance — 

Will  you  meet  me  at  the  fountain  ? 

I  shall  long  to  have  yon  near. 
When  I  meet  my  loving  Savior, 

When  His  welcome  words  I  hear. 

And  so  I  might  go  on,  for  "  Still  there's  more  to  follow." 

Oh,  the  grace  the  Father  shows ; 
Oh,  the  love  that  Jesus  shows  ; 
Oh,  the  power  the  Spirit  shows  ! 

This  was  his  experience,  and  although  the  flow  of  his  sweet  melodies  is 
•tayed  on  earth,  before  the  throne — drinking  of  the  water  of  life  which  pro 
ceeds  from  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb — he  will  praise  on  through  the 
long  day  of  his  eternal  life ;  and  the  refrain  of  the  unfinished  song  through 
the  ages  to  come  will  be — 

Still  there's  more  to  follow. 

Perhaps  it,  is  well  that  the  stream  of  song  has  been  diverted  to  the  heavenly 
land.  We  might  hare  gone  on  asking  for  some  new  thing,  thinking  more  of 
the  songs  than  of  the  salvation  of  which  they  speak,  and  forgetting  the  Giver 
in  the  gift.  Therefore  the  only  wise  God  our  Savior  has  transfigured  those  we 
have,  and  shown  us  depths  of  sacred  tenderness,  and  love,  and  courage  that  we 
had  only  dimly  seen  before  ;  and,  thus  enriching  the  songs  we  possess,  He  has 
caught  up  the  singer  to  His  throne  and  heart,  while  we  are  left  to  urge  them 
that  are 

Almost  persuaded  now  to  believe, 

Almost  persuaded  Christ  to  receive, 

to  yield,  and  say — 

Fully  persuaded,  Jesus  is  mine  : 
Fully  persuaded.  Lord,  I  am  thine. 

And  as  one  by  one  saved  souls  confess  the  Savior's  name,  our  departed  friend 
will  remember  that  he  said,  and  by  the  grace  of  God  fulfilled  his  pledge — 


FEOM   PHILIP   PHILLIPS.  307 

Surely  my  Captain  may  depend  on  me, 
Though  but  an  armor-bearer  I  may  be. 

Now  he  is  gone,  and  his  memory  is  very  fragrant.  We  may  write  his  epi 
taph  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Bonar's  hymn,  which  Mr.  Bliss  had  set  to  music,  and 
the  second  verse  of  which  is  peculiarly  suitable  and  true  of  his  most  unselfish 
life— 

So,  in  the  harvest,  if  others  may  gather 

Sheaves  from  the  fields  that  in  spring  I  have  sown; 
Who  plowed  or  sowed  matters  not  to  the  reaper : 
I'm  only  remembered  by  what  I  have  done. 

And  no  doubt  can  remain  on  any  heart  that  there  has  been  a  full  and  blessed 
answer  to  the  aspiration,  which  he  had  set  to  sweetest  strains — 

And  when,  with  my  glorified  vision,  at  last 

The  walls  of  "  that  city  "  I  see, 
Will  any  one  then  at  the  Beautiful  Gate 

Be  waiting  and  watching  for  me  ? 

"  And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto  me  Write,  Blessed  are  the 
dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth :  yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they 
may  rest  from  their  labors  ;  and  their  works  do  follow  them." — Rev.  xiv,  13. 

George  C.  Needham,  the  evangelist,  wrote  to  a  friend,  soon  after 
Mr.  Bliss'  death  : 

A  great  and  sore  trouble  has  fallen  upon  us.  Messrs.  Moody,  Sankey, 
Whittle,  Stebbins  and  others  of  us  who  were  identified  in  work  with  our 
departed  friend  can  only  weep  and  mourn  to-day,  though  sorrowing  not  as 
those  who  have  no  hope. 

During  the  past  three  years,  Mr.  Bliss  had  been  identified  with  Major  Whit 
tle  in  Gospel  labors,  and  both  men  were  the  bosom  friends  of  Messrs.  Moody 
and  Sankey.  In  personal  appearance  he  was  a  fine  specimen  of  a  vigorous 
man.  Large,  well-proportioned,  noble  in  presence — he  never  failed  to  produce 
an  impression  on  the  passer-by.  Possessing  princely  manners,  and  imbued 
with  a  true  spirit  of  the  Christian  gentleman,  a  man  of  rare  worth  and  grace 
and  spiritual  attainments  has  passed  from  us. 

Since  the  hope  of  our  Lord's  coming  dawned  upon  the  heart  of  our  brother, 
he  loved  to  speak  of  that  prospective  day.  The  last  time  I  talked  with  him,  he 
said  he  would  interweave  that  truth  into  his  new  hymns,  and  so  teach  the  peo 
ple  to  look  and  wait  for  the  Son  from  heaven.  Many  of  his  pieces  are  full  of 
the  gladness  and  the  joyousness  of  that  hope. 

A  year  ago,  during  Mr.  Bliss'  life,  Philip  Phillips,  the  singer, 
wrote  : 

Mr.  P.  P.  Bliss  combines  the  rare  gifts  of  writing  and  singing  Sacred  Song, 
and  like  Chicago,  his  home,  has  come  into  public  favor  rapidly,  and  while 


* 

308  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

young.  He  is  an  excellent  Christian  man,  a  member  of  the  Presbyterian 
Church,  and  about  thirty-two  years  of  age.  This  present  year  he  has  resigned 
his  position  as  chorister  of  a  large  church  in  Chicago,  and  cast  in  his  lot  as 
singer  with  D.  W.  Whittle,  as  a  lay  evangelist.  They  are  at  the  present  time 
laboring  in  the  Southern  States  of  America.  Mr.  Bliss  has  brought  out  the 
"Charm"  and  "Sunshine"  of  Sacred  Song,  and  goes  about  literally  as  an 
ensample  of  his  book.  He  is  author  of  "  Almost  Persuaded,"  "  Hold  the  Fort," 
"  When  Jesus  comes,"  "I  am  so  Glad  that  Jesus  Loves  Me,"  •'  Dare  to  be  a 
Paniel,"  "  Only  an  Armor-Bearer,"  "  What  shall  the  Harvest  be  ?"  etc. 

The  following  poem,  by  Rev.  Arthur  T.  Pierson,  D.  D.,  of 
Detroit,  comes  to  us  with  the  explanatory  words  of  the  author  :  "  I 
read  at  an  immense  mass  meeting  held  here  in  the  Opera  House, 
Sunday  afternoon,  the  following  impromptu  verses,  in  memory  of 
P.  P.  Bliss.  A  harp  draped  and  adorned  with  floral  decorations  was 
placed  on  the  platform  ;  and  knowing  that  this  was  to  be,  I  framed 
these  verses  after  my  morning  service.  If  you  publish  them,  please 
let  italics  go  in,  as  I  have  interwoven  strains  from  Bliss' favorite 
songs,  and  the  italics  indicate  them.  The  haste  in  which  they  were 
written  will  explain  their  crude  shape,  as  I  could  not  destroy  their 
impromptu  character  by  attempt  at  revision. 

The  harp  of  Zion's  psalmist  now  is  still, 

Ten  thousand  eyes,  in  bitter  grief,  have  wept, 
Because  the  hand  that,  with  a  master's  skill, 

These  silver  chords  so  long,  so  sweetly  swept, 
Is  turned  to  ashes  in  the  fatal  flames  I 

Because  no  more  that  voice  Redemption  sings 
And  sounds  the  Name  above  all  other  names, 

With  whose  high  praises  even  heaven  rings. 

The  harp  is  still !  the  harper  is  not  here  ! 

No  more  shall  that  anointed  silver  tongue 
Arouse  the  dull  and  inattentive  ear, 

And  teach  us  how  the  gospel  may  be  sung  ; 
How  poet's  harp  and  heart,  alike  devote, 

Both  words  and  melodies  may  consecrate, 
Till  Jesus'  call  may  sound  on  every  note, 

And  win  the  wanderer  to  the  narrow  gate ! 

The  earthly  harp  is  still,  but  up  on  high, 

Where  everlasting  anthems  ceaseless  roll, 
A  golden  harp,  resounding  in  the  sky, 

Thrills  with  the  triumph  of  a  ransomed  soul. 


FROM  HARPER'S  WEEKLY.  30$) 

There,  'mid  the  host  of  the  celestial  choir, 

His  sorrow  buried,  and  his  heart  at  rest, 
He  has  "  more  holiness"  his  soul's  desire — 

Safe  in  the  arms  of  Jesus — on,  His  breast  I 

Weep  not  for  him,  who  now  doth  fully  know 

The  depth  of  mercy  and  the  grace  divine, 
The  blood  that  washed  and  made  him  white  as  snow, 

And  sings  with  rapture — "  Yes,  I  know  He's  mine," 
He  leadeth  him,  He  guides  him  icith  His  eye  ; 

Light  of  the  world,  He  brightly  beams  on  him ; 
And,  brethren,  we  shall  meet  him  by  and  by 

When  not  a  tear  the  ransomed  eye  shall  dim. 

Catch  up  and  echo  ye  his  trumpet  tone  : 

Let  whosoever  heareth  shout  the  sound  ; 
We'll  tell  of  Him  who  saves  and  saves  alone, 

Till  sinners  shall  receive — the  world  around  ;  •    . 

Shall  shout  'tis  done,  Ltoo.believe  the  Son — 

Till  prodigals  come  home  and  kiss  His  feet, 
Till  hearts  emptied  of  self,  by  grace  are  won, 

Nothing  but  vessels,  for  His  use  made  meet. 

He'd  bid  us,  could  he  speak,  from  mansions  fair, 

Rescue  the  perishing — not  mourn  the  dead, 
Bid  burdened  souls  dismiss  their  load  of  care, 

And  know  that  Jesus  loves  them — for  them  bled. 
He  seems  to  shout,  from  over  Jordan's  wave, 

Hold  ye  the  fort !  by  help  of  grace  divine, 
Let  lower  lights  be  burning,  you  may  save 

Some  struggling  sailor — if  your  light  doth  shine. 

We  will  not  weep  !  when  Jesus  comes,  we'll  fly, 

Our  weary  souls  shall  rest ;  we're  going  home. 
He  gave  his  life  for  us,  why  should  we  sigh  ? 

For  soon  our  weary  feet  no  more  shall  roam. 
We're  coming  to  the  cross,  anew  to  be 

With  Jesus  crucified — that  so,  ere  long, 
We  may  the  saints  and  our  dear  Jesus  see, 

And  join,  with  harps  in  hand,  in  that  new  song. 

Harper's  Weekly  published  an  excellent  portrait  of  Mr.  Bliss, 
jiccompanied  by  the  following  references  to  him  : 

Among  the  victims  of  the  dreadful  railroad  calamity  at  Ashtabula  were  the 
evangelist  Philip  P.  Bliss   and  his  wife.    Mr.  Bliss  was  the  author  of  the 


310  MEMOIR  Otf   P.    P.    BLISS. 

well-known  hymn,  "  Hold  the  Fort."  He  was  on  his  way  to  take  part  in  the 
Gospel  meetings  at  Chicago,  where  he  was  highly  esteemed.  Probably  no 
modern  hymn  has  been  more  widely  sung  in  England  and  America  than  the 
one  just  named.  According  to  the  statements  of  those  who  were  in  a  position 
to  know,  Mr.  Bliss  made  a  heroic  effort  to  save  his  wife  when  he  might  have 
saved  himself,  and,  failing  in  this,  remained  and  died  with  her,  the  two  offer 
ing  their  prayers  together  as  the  fatal  flames  approached  them,  like  the  old 
martyrs  at  the  stake  ;  and  thus,  united  in  life,  they  were  not  divided  in  death. 
Those  who  remain  pursuing  the  work  in  which  he  was  engaged  have  already 
provided  the  means  for  educating  his  children,  two  young  boys,  and  bringing 
them  up  in  the  way  their  father  walked,  and  for  erecting  an  appropriate  monu 
ment  to  the  memory  of  this  faithful  pair.  The  death  of  Mr.  Bliss  has  elicited 
throughout  the  country  many  expressions  of  sorrow.  He  was  but  thirty-eight 
years  old  at  the  time  of  his  decease,  and  had  only  in  the  later  years  of  his  life 
become  a  proficient  in  music.  Ten  years  ago,  he  entered  the  music  store  of 
Messrs.  Root  &  Cady  in  Chicago,  and  remained  there  until  the  great  fire  of 
1871.  Since  then  he  has  been  an  active  evangelist,  and  with  Major  Whittle 
has  made  long  tours  through  the  country.  Some  of  his  best-known  pieces  are, 
"  Hold  the  Fort,"  "  Pull  for  the  Shore,"  "  Jesus  loves  even  Me."  His  songs 
have  done  much  to  popularize  the  religious  movement  of  our  day,  which  has 
so  visibly  affected  the  masses  of  the  population  in  England,  Scotland,  Ireland, 
and  the  United  States. 

Simeon  Gilbert  writes  to  The  Advance  as  follows  : 

The  telegraphic  announcement  that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  P.  P.  Bliss  were  on  board 
the  fatal  train  which  plunged  into  the  gulf  with  that  broken  bridge  at  Ashta- 
bula,  Ohio,  and  perished  with  the  rest,  sent  a  pang  of  sorrow  throughout  the 
country.  All  who  perished  in  that  most  appalling  disaster  left  friends  to 
mourn  their  loss  and  cherish  their  memory  ;  but  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Bliss,  whoso 
hymns  and  tunes  had  made  him  a  favorite  in  thousands  of  churches  and  with 
millions  of  Sunday  School  scholars,  his  mourners,  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic, 
are  innumerable. 

The  life  of  Mr.  Bliss  was  a  voice — the  voice  of  one  singing,  with  a  wonder 
ful  persuasiveness,  of  the  "  good  tidings  of  great  joy  for  all  people."  He 
wrote  his  own  hymns,  composed  his  own  tunes,  and  sung  them,too.  During 
the  past  three  or  four  years,  his  Gospel  hymns  and  tunes,  popularized  partly 
by  himself,  and  still  more  by  his  dear  friend,  Mr.  Sankey,  have  been  used 
oftener  and  by  larger  numbers  than  those  of  any  other  cotemporary  composer. 
Being  dead,  he  yet  speaketh,  and  the  circumstances  of  his  death  will  give  a 
peculiar  sacredness  to  the  songs  and  tunes  which  he  has  left  us.  No  doubt 
some  of  them  will,  having  met  a  special  want  in  the  development  of  the  Chris 
tian  life  of  the  period,  and  served  their  temporary,  but  not  on  that  account 
•unimportant,  use,  pass  away;  but  some  of  them,  we  are  confident,  will  take 
their  place  among  those  which  the  church  will  not  let  die.  Those  who  shall 
hereafter  pause  to  trace  the  distinctive  qualities,  the  timbre,  so  to  speak,  of 


FROM   SIMEON   GILBERT.  311 

the  Christian  life  of  this  time,  will  note  that  what  Charles  Wesley  was  to 
John  Wesley,  Mr.  Bliss  has  been  to  Mr.  Moody. 

The  best  of  Mr.  Bliss'  hymns  and  tunes  are  simple  and  lucid  utterances  of 
the  heart  of  the  Gospel  and  of  the  Christian  experience  of  those  who  put  com 
plete  trust  in  Christ  as  a  perfect  Savior.  Not  keyed  to  the  same  pitch  as 
Luther's  famous  battle-hymn,  "  A  strong  tower  is  our  God,"  he  yet  gauged 
the  popular  temper  and  want  of  the  churches  equally  well.  The  present  mor« 
particularly  aggressive  form  of  evangelistic  work  owes  as  much  to  what  Mr. 
Bliss  and  his  singing  co-laborers  have  contributed  as  to  any  other  human 
instrumentality. 

In  George  Herbert's  "  Country  Parson,"  the  parson  preaching  is  told  that 
he  must  first  "dip  in  his  own  heart"  his  words  before  he  speaks  them.  Mr. 
Bliss  had  experienced  his  own  songs  before  he  composed  them.  It  is  not 
clai-med  that  he  was  a  great  poet,  or  that  he  possessed  the  genius  for  some  of 
the  sublimer  strains  of  music,  but  he  had  the  sense  and  the  tact  which  are  not 
often  equaled  in  matching  words  and  tunes,  and  suiting  both  to  the  popular 
requirement. 

Mr.  Bliss  was  only  thirty-eight  years  old.  He  was  born  in  Rome,  Pennsyl 
vania.  His  parents  were  very  poor,  and  his  early  advantages  were  extremely 
limited.  To  the  last,  his  admirable  wife  was  to  a  singular  degree  his  greatest 
helper.  One  of  his  first  instructors  in  music  was  Mr.  Root.  Coming  to  Chi 
cago  some  ten  years  ago,  be  was  employed  in  the  music  establishment  of 
Root  &  Cady.  The  great  fire  of  1871  dissolved  that  connection,  and  he  has 
been  wont  to  say  that  the  fire  was  the  making  of  him,  setting  him  at  liberty 
to  devote  himself  to  the  special  kind  of  work  to  which  he  felt  himself  called 
of  God.  His  first  church  connection  was  the  Methodist,  but  coming  to  Chi 
cago  he  united  with  the  First  Congregational  Church,  Dr.  Goodwin's,  and  was 
for  a  number  of  years  both  its  chorister  and  Sunday  School  Superintendent. 

One  of  the  sweetest  of  the  hymns  and  tunes  composed  by  him  is  the 
one  entitled,  "  When  Jesus  Conies."  Among  those  most  in  use,  and  which 
have  been  most  evidently  blessed  in  the  using  are  the  "  Hallelujah,  'tis  Done! '' 
"  Calling  now  for  Thee ;  "  "  Whosoever  Will ;  "  "  That  will  be  Heaven  for  Me ; " 
"  Hold  the  Fort ;  "  "  Once  for  All ; "  "  We're  going  Home  To-morrow ;"  the  one 
so  dear  to  the  little  ones,  "  Jesus  Loves  even  Me  ; "  "  More  to  Follow  ; "  "  Where 
Hast  thou  Gleaned  To-day ;"  "The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus;"  "Let  the 
Lower  Lights  be  Burning  ;  "  "  Pull  for  the  Shore,"  and  "  My  Prayer." 

Last  Sunday,  in  some  schools,  and  we  presume  in  many,  the  hymns  used 
were  exclusively  those  which  Mr.  Bliss  has  left  us.  The  one  beginning,  "  Free 
from  the  law,  oh,  happy  condition,"  Mr.  Moody  thinks  will  live  always. 

Of  late,  as  is  well  known,  he  has  been  the  constant  associate  in  evangelistic 
work  of  Major  D.  W.  Whittle.  No  one  can  possibly  feel  his  loss  more  deeply 
than  our  friend  Major  Whittle.  They  had  seemed  as  necessary  to  each  othei 
as  Moody  and  Sankey.  At  the  time  when  he  met  his  death  he  was  on  his  way 
to  Chicago  to  join  Major  Whittle  in  carrying  forward  the  work  in  this  city 
begun  by  Messrs.  Moody  and  Sankey.  The  first  report  was  that  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bliss,  with  their  two  little  children,  were  all  caught  up  in  an  undivided  group 


312  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

to  their  heavenly  home.    It  was  since  ascertained,  however,  that  the  children 
had  been  left  with  their  grandmother  in  Rome,  Pa. 

Rev.  W.  W.  Patton,  who  knew  Mr.  Bliss  long  and  intimately, 
thus  speaks  of  his  life  and  labors  : 

Among  the  many  victims  of  the  Ashtabula  calamity,  none  will  be  more 
widely  and  deeply  mourned  than  Mr.  P.  P.  Bliss,  who  perished  with  his  wife, 
their  remains  being  entirely  consumed  by  the  flames.  He  was  the  author  of 
the  most  popular  of  the  pieces  sung  in  the  Moody  and  Sankey  meetings  in  this 
country  and  abroad,  such  as  "  Hallelujah/tis  Done  ;"  "  What  shall  the  Harvest 
Be?"  "Whosoever  Will;"  "More  to  Follow;"  "  That  will  be  Heaven  for 
Me  ; "  "  My  Prayer  ;  "  "  Almost  Persuaded  ; "  "  How  Much  Owest  Thou  ?  "  and 
many  others,  both  the  words  and  music  of  which  were  composed  by  him.  He 
also  wrote  the  music  to  many  others  of  the  favorite  hymns  which  are  sung  in 
those  meetings.  In  addition  to  this,  he  was  an  uncommonly  effective  singer, 
having  a  rich  baritone  voice,  well  cultivated  and  full  of  expression. 

Mr.  Bliss  was  born  in  the  wilds  of  Northern  Pennsylvania,  and  was  of  quite 
humble  extraction.  He  had  but  few  advantages  in  early  life.  He  married, 
young,  a  lady  of  his  own  social  position,  who  had  much  strength  of  character, 
who  through  life  was  his  unfailing  good  genius.  "  I  owe  everything  to 
my  wife,"  he  once  remarked  to  a  friend.  Mr.  Bliss  for  a  time  was  in  the 
employment  of  the  publishing  firm  of  Root  &  Cady,  Chicago,  and  held 
musical  conventions  at  leading  points  through  the  Northwest.  His  early 
religious  connections  were  with  the  Methodists ;  but,  on  going  to  Chicago, 
he  united  with  the  First  Congregational  Church,  under  the  pastoral  care  of 
Rev.  Dr.  Goodwin,  and  became  the  leader  of  the  choir  and  the  Superinten 
dent  of  the  Sunday  School,  during  a  period  of  several  years.  Such  was  the 
kindness  of  his  heart,  the  warmth  of  his  piety,  and  the  personal  interest 
which  he  took  in  the  members  of  the  choir  and  school,  that  he  won  the  affec 
tion  as  well  as  the  regard  of  the  whole  church  which  now  mourns  him  with  a 
special  sense  of  bereavement. 

When  Major  Whittle,  induced  by  the  example  and  urgent  entreaty  of  Mr. 
Moody  and  other  Christian  friends,  surrendered  his  business  and  gave  himself 
to  the  work  of  a  lay  evangelist,  Mr.  Bliss  decided  to  become  his  fellow-laborer, 
and  to  "sing  the  Gospel,"  while  Mr.  Whittle  preached  it.  And  this  he  has 
done  for  the  three  past  years  with  great  success,  visiting  not  only  numerous 
places  in  the  Western  States,  but  also  Louisville,  Nashville,  Atlanta,  Memphis 
and  other  points  at  the  South.  Being  tall  and  well-developed  in  his  physical 
frame,  with  clustering  black  hair  and  a  handsome  face,  and  possessing  easy  and 
polished  manners  and  a  very  joyous  temperament,  together  with  a  wealth  of 
sympathy,  he  impressed  most  favorably  those  who  saw  and  heard  him,  whether 
in  public  or  in  private.  His  singing,  like  that  of  Mr.  Sankey's,  often  led  sin 
ners  to  Christ,  by  its  touching  presentations  of  Gospel  truth.  He  was  not 
much  of  a  poet,  in  the  high  sense,  but  he  had  a  poetic  susceptibility  of  feeling 
and  an  unusual  skill  in  versifying  evangelic  doctrine  in  the  very  phrases  of 


TRIBUTES  TO   HIS   MEMORY.  313 

Scripture,  as  also  in  adapting  the  music  to  the  sentiment  so  as  powerfully 
to  impress  the  hearer.     What  multitudes  have  been  thrilled  by  his  lines  : 

Hallelujah,  'tis  done  ! 
I  believe  on  the  Son ; 
I  am  saved  hy  the  blood  of  the  Crucified  One  ! 

At  the  time  of  his  death,  he  was  announced  to  lead,  at  Dr.  Goodwin's 
church,  a  "  praise  meeting"  of  the  Sunday  School,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  last 
Sunday  of  the  year,  and  also  to  sing,  at  a  later  hour,  in  the  afternoon  services 
of  the  Tabernacle.  It  had  been  arranged  that,  after  the  departure  of  Moody 
and  Sankey  for  Boston,  Whittle  apd  Bliss  should  take  their  places,  and  carry 
on  the  glorious  work.  But,  so  far  as  Mr.  Bliss  was  concerned,  this  was  not  to 
be.  He  had  long  enough  "  held  the  fort,"  and  was  to  be  relieved  from  further 
earthly  service.  The  last  piece  which  he  sang  at  the  First  Congregational 
Church,  before  he  went  East  to  spend  the  holidays  with  family  relatives,  began 
with  the  lines  of  his  own  composition  : 

I  know  not  the  hour  when  my  Lord  will  come 
To  take  me  away  to  His  own  dear  home  ; 
But  I  know  that  His  presence  will  lighten  the  gloom, 
And  that  will  be  glory  for  me  I 


In  the  Cumberland  Presbyterian  "Mrs.  E.  C.  D."  pays  poetical 
tribute  to  "  The  Sweet  Singer." 

He  came  to  "  sing  for  Jesus,"  his  armor  shining  bright : 
We  knew  that  we  could  trust  him  ;  the  Savior  was  his  light. 
The  weary  wanderer,  seeking  peace,  he  guided  to  the  throne, 
And  the  rich  music  of  his  voice  was  used  for  God  alone. 

The  willing  servant  of  the  Lord  is  lost  to  mortal  sight ; 
To  him,  or  us,  no  warning  came  ;  God's  will — it  must  be  right. 
We  shiver  in  our  anguish,  and  the  world's  warm  throbbing  heart 
Hath  felt  the  stroke  of  the  angel  wing  that  bore  the  cruel  dart. 

We  trust  that  in  that  bitter  hour  the  struggle  soon  was  o'er ; 
Perhaps  he  did  not  know  'twas  death  till  on  the  other  shore, 
Where  with  the  darling  of  his  heart  so  safely  by  his  side, 
He  only  wondered  and  rejoiced  that  they  together  died. 

The  pearly  gate  was  open,  they  saw  "the  mansion  fair,** 
And  found  the  Savior  "  waiting,  watching  "  for  them  there  ; 
Waiting  to  bid  them  welcome  home,  to  clasp  them  by  the  hand, 
And  give  them  quiet,  peaceful  rest  in  the  brighter,  better  land. 


314  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

The  reason  why  the  summons  came,  our  Father  knoweth  well ; 
We  only  know  we  miss  him  here ;  the  rest  we  cannot  tell. 
But  let  us  to  the  mercy  seat  bring  all  this  grief  and  sorrow, 
And  wait  to  hear  him  sing  again  when  we  "go  home  to-morrow." 

A  gentleman  in  St.  Paul,  who  took  a  deep  interest  in  the  meet 
ings  of  Whittle  and  Bliss,  which  were  held  in  St.  Paul  about  a  yeai 
ago,  contributes  the  following  : 

The  sad  death  of  Mr.  Bliss,  the  evangelist,  the  preacher  of  Christ's  Gospel 
by  song,  has  come  to  this  city  with  peculiar  force,  and  burdened  many  hearts 
here  with  the  most  genuine  sorrow.  It  is,  therefore,  most  fitting  that  some  pen 
should  strive  to  put  into  words  that  which  so  many  hearts  feel,  and  though  any 
written  tribute  must  fall  short  of  adequate  expression,  still  all  who  knew  and 
loved  Mr.  Bliss  will  be  thankful  that  the  attempt  was  made. 

We  cannot  in  St.  Paul  speak  of  him  as  we  knew  him  long  ago ;  in  other 
communities  he  grew  up,  and  in  other  places  had  his  most  intimate  associa 
tions.  But  he  was  nevertheless  our  fellow-citizen,  our  friend,  our  brother.  lu 
an  emphatic  and  peculiar  sense  he  had  no  continuing  city  ;  no  West,  no  East, 
no  North,  no  South  could  claim  him.  Wherever  souls  needed  the  divine  bless 
ing  and  comfort  of  the  Gospel ;  wherever  there  were  those  whose  sensibilities 
could  be  touched  by  the  sweetest  of  music,  the  glad  evangel  of  salvation  by 
Christ — there  was  Bliss'  home  for  the  hour,  the  day,  the  week,  the  month. 
He  counted  all  men  for  brethren,  and  his  heartfelt  desire  was  that  all,  like  he, 
should  turn  their  faces  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  and,  accepting  the  Savior, 
whose  love  he  so  sweetly  sung,  be  ready  at  any  moment  for  the  summons 
which  should  call  them  to  be  its  inhabitant. 

Those  more  intimately  associated  in  arranging  the  details  of  the  work  which 
Messrs.  Whittle  and  Bliss  engaged  in  in  St.  Paul  will  call  to  mind  the  circum- 
_6tances  under  which  we  first  became  acquainted  with  our  brother  Bliss.  It  will 
be  remembered  how  earnestly  it  was  desired  by  the  committee  in  charge  that 
Whittle  should  not  fail  to  bring  him  with  him  ;  how  circumstances  prevented 
this ;  how  something  in  the  services  was  missing  till  he  came,  and  how  all 
realized,  after  his  coming,  that  Whittle  had  seemed  shorn  of  a  portion  of  his 
power  till  Bliss  was  present  to  preach  by  song  the  same  Gospel  he  so  earnestly 
spoke  to  the  people. 

All  will  recollect,  too,  the  magnificent  presence  God  had  bestowed  upon  the 
man.  It  was  attractive  and  impressive,  drawing  attention  at  once  to  the  sing 
er,  and  aiding  the  effect  which  his  song  had  upon  all  who  heard  it. 

How  sweet  and  tender  was  his  voice,  like  the  spirit  of  the  words  which  he 
wrote  and  of  the  music  which  he  composed.  How  strong  were  his  notes — like 
the  splendid  physique  of  the  singer — like  the  deep  feelings  that  were  in  his 
heart  for  the  souls  of  those  who  listened. 

Those  brought  into  more  familiar  contact  with  Mr.  Bliss  will  gladly  join  in 
ascribing  to  him  a  nature  similar  to  his  voice,  both  sweet  and  strong.  It  was, 


TBIBUTES  TO   HIS   MEitOKY.  315 

many  think,  in  the  incidental  and  less  public  services  that  his  character  shone 
out  most  clearly  and  appeared  to  the  best  advantage. 

He  has,  ere  this,  greeted  those  in  Heaven  whose  weary  hours  he  cheered 
while  in  St.  Paul  by  singing  and  praying  beside  their  beds.  JSo  invitation  to 
a  service  of  this  sort  was  ever  declined ;  nay,  more,  he  seemed  glad  of  these 
quiet  opportunities  to  cheer  and  comfort,  and  convert,  no  doubt,  in  many  in 
stances,  his  fellow-travelers. 

At  the  County  Jail ;  at  ihe  County  Hospital ;  at  the  State  Reform  School  he 
held  little  singing  services,  always  striving  to  appear  at  his  best  and  give  those 
who  heard  him  at  these  places  the  very  sweetest  of  his  efforts. 

His  modesty  about  his  musical  attainments  was  always  apparent,  but  at  no 
time  more  so  than  when  in  the  praise-meeting,  which  he  held  while  here, 
though  the  Opera  House  was  filled  by  the  hope  of  hearing  him  sing  often,  he 
did  not  give  a  single  solo  piece  during  the  whole  two  hours  of  service. 

It  is  needless  that  mention  be  made  of  his  hymns  and  their  music,  both 
words  and  tunes  having  been  written  by  him  in  many  instances.  In  services 
almost  innumerable,  on  this  quiet  Sabbath,  they  are  being  sung  to  the  praise 
and  glory  of  the  God  whom  he  served,  and  so  is  his  highest  ambition  satisfied. 
So  shall  he  live  on  earth,  as  well  as  in  heaven ;  so  "  being  dead,  he  yet  speak- 
eth  "  in  sweetest  words. 

One  characteristic  of  these  hymns  in  the  light  of  his  sad  death  cannot  fail 
of  notice.  Take  them  up  to  select  those  appropriate  to  sing  at  a  memorial  ser 
vice  of  him,  and  how  fit  are  they.  How  often  he  sang 

I  know  not  the  hour  when  my  God  will  come 
To  take  me  away  to  his  own  dear  home  ; 
But  I  know  that  His  presence  will  lighten  the  gloom, 
And  that  will  be  glory  for  me. 

Truly  the  call  came  suddenly,  and  the  gloom  was  very  heavy  on  that  awful 
night,  but  he  died  realizing  what  he  sang  while  living. 
His  last  hymn  in  St.  Paul  contained  this  verse : 

For  those  who  sleep, 
And  those  who  weep, 

Above  the  portals  narrow, 
The  mansions  rise 
Beyond  the  skies, 

We're  going  home  to-morrow. 

So  it  was  to  him  and  his  wife  but  "going  home."  They  were  one  by  all 
the  sacred  ties  of  earth — one  in  holy  purpose  of  blessing  their  fellow-men — 
one  in  the  sad  circumstance  of  death.  God  will  take  care  of  their  children, 
1'or  He  never  breaks  His  promises.  So,  dear  brother,  to-day  in  singing  your 
hynins,  we  bid  you  farewell  in  our  hearts  till  we  shall  meet  "  over  there,"  and 
once  more  hear  your  voice  still  praising  the  Lord  whose  Gospel  you  so  faith 
fully  preached  to  us  here  in  song. 


316  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

At  the  session  of  the  Plymouth  (Ohio)  Musical  Convention, 
under  the  direction  of  Prof.  H.  S.  Perkins,  of  Chicago,  the  follow 
ing  resolutions  were  passed  : 

WHEREAS,  The  dispensation  of  Providence,  in  the  sad,  heart-rending  ca 
lamity  at  Ashtabula,  Ohio,  on  the  evening  of  December  29,  1876,  in  which 
occurred  the  death  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  P.  P.  Bliss,  of  Chicago,  while  in  the  zenith 
of  their  usefulness ;  and 

WHEREAS,  Fully  recognizing  them  as  worthy,  valuable  members  of 
society  and  of  the  musical  profession ;  also  desiring  to  condole  with  the  rela 
tives  of  the  deceased  in  this  time  of  their  great  affliction,  therefore,  by  the 
Huron  County  Musical  Convention  now  in  session  at  Plymouth,  Ohio,  be  it 

Resolved,  That  we  have  been  greatly  pained  by  the  very  sad  aiid  untimely 
death  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  P.  P.  Bliss,  of  Chicago,  for  whom  we  entertained  the 
greatest  respect  and  friendship. 

Resolved,  That  our  most  heartfelt  sympathies  and  condolence  be  extended 
to  the  widowed  mother,  sisters,  and  other  relatives  in  this  hour  of  their  great 
sorrow  and  affliction ;  and  that  a  copy  of  these  resolutions  be  presented  to  the 
Chicago  papers  for  publication,  and  a  copy  be  transmitted  to  the  surviving 
members  of  the  family. 

[Signed  by  Committee.]  H.  S.  Perkins,  Chicago;  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Gray 
Attica,  Ohio ;  A.  L.  Simmons,  Steuben,  Ohio  ;  H.  H.  Johnson,  Havana,  Ohio 

Thomas  Parkison,  Mansfield,  Ohio. 

% 

Rev.  J.  B.  Atchinson,  of  Detroit,  after  many  warm  expressions 
of  his  sympathy  with  the  brother  left  here,  writes  of  Mrs.  Bliss  as 
follows  : 

There  is  no  man,  living  or  dead,  that  ever  exerted  such  a  powerful  influence 
over  me  for  good  as  did  Brother  Bliss.  My  acquaintance  with  him  for  the  past 
few  years  has  greatly  changed  and  directed  my  religious  work,and,  now  that 
he  is  gone  I  feel  his  influence  still.  There  were  many  sad  tears  in  our  home — 
where  he  and  his  wife  had  a  hearty  welcome— when  the  news  of  his  death 
reached  us.  Only  a  short  time  before  he  died,  I  received  a  letter  from  him 
which  is  so  characteristic  of  his  piety,  friendship,  cheerfulness,  wit  and  pleas 
antry,  and  in  all  such  a  striking  coincidence,  when  considered  in  relation  to 
his  death,  that  I  can  but  hope  it  may  find  a  place  in  your  forthcoming  work. 
The  following  is  a  true  copy : 

PEORIA,  ILLINOIS,  December  1, 1876. 
DEAR  BROTHER  : 

Finally— AT  LAST— IN  CONCLUSION— Here's  your  "  Open  Window,"    Sorrow-full  am  I 
that  I  hadn't  one  before.    'Scuse  me. 

Meetings  good— wish  you  the  same.    Wife  is  with  me.    Hope  to  go  home  Xmas. 

Truly, 

BLITTLE  &  WHISS. 


TRIBUTES  TO   HIS   MEMORY.  317 

And  it  proved  to  be  his  "  Finally — at  last — in  conclusion  "  to  me.  How 
iiterally  were  his  hopes  fulfilled,  that  he  should  go  home  Christmas,  and  what 
a  proof  is  his  signature  of  his  very  close  relation  to  you  and  at  the  same  time 
so  characteristic  of  his  pleasantries  and  cheerful  spirit. 

Dear    Bliss  !   I  almost  hear  thy  bugle  voice  singing — 

O  crown  of  rejoicing. 

O  wonderful  song, 
O  joy  everlasting, 

O  glorified  throng, 
O  beautiful  home, 
My  home  can  it  be, 
O  glory  reserved  for  me. 

God  bless  you,  my  dear  Whittle.     My  feeble  prayers  shall  aid  you  all 

they  can. 

Yours  in  glad  sorrow, 

J.  B.  ATCHINSON. 

At  a  conference,  held  January.  2,  1877  of  the  pastors  of  several 
Evangelical  churches  of  Louisville,  Kentucky,  representing  the 
Presbyterian,  Methodist,  Baptist,  Episcopal  and  Lutheran  churches, 
the  distressing  intelligence  was  communicated  of  the  death  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  P.  P.  Bliss  in  the  dreadful  railway  disaster  at  Ashtabula. 
Ohio.  Whereupon  Rev.  Stuart  Robinson  presented  the  following 
memorial  minute,  which  was  unanimously  adopted  : 

In  view  of  the  peculiar  and  interesting  relations  of  Christian  friendship 
between  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  and  our  people,  growing  out  of  the  labors  of 
Messrs.  Whittle  and  Bliss  as  evangelists,  so  remarkably  blessed  of  God,  among 
us,  we  deem  it  eminently  appropriate  that  some  formal  public  expression  be 
given  of  our  profound  sorrow  and  our  tender  sympathy  in  the  grief  of  the 
kindred  and  friends  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  under  this  most  mysterious  Provi 
dence. 

We  desire  to  bear  an  affectionate  testimony  to  the  signally  elevated  Chris 
tian  character  of  these  servants  of  Christ,  so  earnest  and  faithful,  yet  withal 
so  modest  and  unassuming,  and  so  wise  in  winning  souls.  We  recall  with 
gratitude  to  God  the  marvelous  gifts  and  culture  of  the  sweet  Gospel  singer 
whose  strains  were  blessed  of  God  as  the  means  of  comforting  and  edifying 
God's  people,  of  encouraging  desponding  souls,  of  determining  the  halting,  of 
directing  the  inquiring,  and  of  awakening  the  souls  slumbering  in  sin. 

We  can  only  mingle  our  tears  in  silence  with  those  of  the  bereaved  who, 
"  with  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered,"  mourn  that  death  should  have  come 
to  their  loved  ones  in  a  form  so  awful  and  distressing.  "  We  are  dumb.  We 
open  not  our  mouth  because  Thou  didst  it."  Yet  fully  assured  that  this  dread 
ful  affliction  that  was  for  a  moment  "  wrought  out  for  them  an  exceeding  and 


318  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

eternal  weight  of  glory,"  we  bless  God,  and  we  exhort  these  bereaved  friends 
to  bless  God  for  His  marvelous  loving  kindness  in  preparing  them  by  His  grace 
for  so  signally  useful  and  blessed,  though  so  brief,  a  career  on  earth,  and  for 
receiving  the  welcome  plaudit,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servants  ;  enter 
thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord." 

It  is  the  sweet  assurance  of  God's  word,  that  not  only  "  Blessed  are  the  dead 
that  die  in  the  Lord,"  but  also  that  "  their  works  do  follow  them."  Tens  of 
thousands  in  the  church  on  earth  will  continue  to  be  blest  through  the  works 
of  Mr.  Bliss.  They  will  sing  the  Gospel  songs  with  ever  grateful  remem 
brance  of  him  who  put  into  their  mouths  these  new  and  beautiful  strains,  long 
after  he  himself,  called  by  his  Lord  to  "  come  up  higher,"  shall  be  singing  in 
strains  ineffably  more  beautiful  and  glorious  in  the  church  above,  with  the  one 
hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  and  with  "the  harpers  harping  upon  their 

harps,"  the  new  song  before  them. 

STUART  ROBINSON, 

Chairman  of  Com. 
J.  M.  MOTUIIS,  Sec'y. 

On  the  day  following  the  memorial  services  in  Chicago,  the 
Tribune  said,  in  its  editorial  columns  : 

The  intense  interest  and  deep  feeling  manifest  at  the  various  services  held 
yesterday  testify  to  the  affection  and  esteem  in  which  P.  P.  Bliss  and  wife  were 
held  in  Chicago,  and  to  the  sorrow  and  grief  of  this  community  at  their  sad 
fate.  At  the  meetings  led  by  Mr.  Moody  and  Mr.  Sankey,  at  the  Chicago  Ave 
nue  Church  and  the  Tabernacle,  tearful  tributes  were  paid  by  the  co-workers 
of  the  gifted  evangelist  so  suddenly  removed  from  his  chosen  sphere  of  use 
fulness,  and  at  Racine,  Wisconsin,  where  Messrs.  Whittle  and  Bliss  had  suc 
cessfully  carried  forward  the  work  of  revival,  memorial  services  were  also  held 
yesterday.  It  will  be  a  comfort  to  many  sorrowing  hearts  to  learn,  through  the 
dispatch  sent  last  evening  to  the  Tribune  by  Major  Whittle /rom  Ashtabula, 
that  the  two  sons  of  Mr.  Bliss,  who  were  reported  as  having  shared  the  fate 
of  their  parents,  are  safe  at  Rome,  Pennsylvania,  not  having  been  on  the 
doomed  train. 

Henry  Moorhouse,  the  evangelist,  writes  as  follows  : 

My  first  acquaintance  with  dear  Mr.  Bliss  was  some  seven  years  ago,  when, 
accompanied  by  Mr.  Moody  and  Mr.  Herbert  Taylor,  I  called  upon  him  at  his 
room,  and  was  charmed  by  his  sweet  simplicity  of  manner  and  earnest  love 
for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  At  that  time  his  hymns,  which  were  very  sweet, 
did  not  contain  the  same  earnest,  simple  Gospel  truths  which  afterward  made 
them  so  solemn  and  so  powerful  in  winning  souls  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  Year  by 
year,  as  I  again  and  again  visited  America,  I  saw  him  growing  rapidly  in  the 
blessed  truths  of  the  Bible,  and  was  greatly  blessed  and  charmed  by  his  com 
pany  and  conversation.  During  dear  Mr.  Sankey's  visit  to  England,  how  won- 


TRIBUTES  TO   HIS   MEMORY.  319 

derfully  the  Lord  used  those  sweet  hymns  eternity  alone  can  tell,  as  thousands 
of  dear  Christians  have  been  cheered  as  we  have  sung  together  "  I  Know  not 
the  Hour  my  Lord  will  Come,"  and  "  Down  Life's  dark  Vale  we  Wander  till 
Jesus  Comes,"  and  other  kindred  hymns. 

With  all  my  heart  and  soul  I  sympathize  with  the  dear  hereaved  mother 
and  little  children,  and  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  dear  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss,  who  now 
are  safe  within  the  vail  and  who  to-day  are  with  their  blessed  Lord  who  loved 
them  and  gave  Himself  for  them. 

Wirt  Arland,  an  old  school  friend  of  Mr.  Bliss,  said  of  "Hold 
the  Fort : " 

The  hest  known  of  his  pieces  originated  in  a  vivid  description  by  Major 
Whittle  of  the  signaling  from  Kenesaw  Mountain  "  over  the  heads  of  the  rebel 
host."  It  has  gone  round  the  world  and  comes  back  in  the  Chinese  tongue. 
It  has  been  issued  as  a  holiday  gift  book  in  elegant  form  by  William  F.  Gill 
&  Co.,  with  appropriate  pictures  by  Miss  L.  B.  Humphrey  and  Robert  Lewis, 
and  finely  engraved  by  John  Andrew  &  Son.  When  we  last  saw  him  he  had 
been  to  visit,  with  Major  Whittle,  the  spot  from  which  the  message  was  sig 
naled  to  the  Commander  fifteen  miles  distant — "  Hold  the  Fort ! "  Picking  up 
a  bundle,  he  showed  us  three  hickory  sticks  that  he  had  cut  on  the  mountain 
and  said  :  "You  see  we  still  hold  the  fort.  These  are  some  canes  that  I  am 
going  to  have  mounted  for  my  boys  and  myself.  My  boys  are  darling  little 
fellows,  and  I  have  been  feeling  quite  sad  to-day,  since  I  left  them  with  their 
grandfather  at  Rome  and  have  got  to  leave  them  behind  as  I  go  to  Chicago." 

At  a  later  date,  Mr.  Arland  wrote  : 

The  winters  are  drifting  like  flakes  of  snow, 
And  the  summers  like  buds  between, 

since  we  trudged  that  long  snowy  winter,  twenty-one  years  ago,  to  the  same 
school.  The  ripe  fruit  of  his  manhood  was  but  the  generous  fulfillment  of  the 
early  promise  of  a  stalwart  and  genial  boyhood,  and  that  deep  hearty  voice  that 
was  loudest  on  the  play-ground  or  in  the  songs  of  the  noontide  recess,  but 
needed  development  to  form  that  which  fell  with  a  powerful  charm  on  hearts 
yearning  for  the  peace  that  passeth  all  understanding.  We  met  him  for  the 
-last  time  at  Elmira  in  October,  and  we  felt  that  our  friend  had  not  changed, 

only  ripened,  and  his  fervent  "  God  bless  you,  A "  as  the  Erie  train  drew 

up  to  bear  him  to  Chicago,  was  the  blessing  of  one  we  knew  in  the  days  when 
the  principles  of  life  are  tried.  His  love  of  music  was  a  prominent  trait  in  his 
character,  and  many  an  evening  have  we  sat  and  listened  to  his  violin,  wonder 
ing  how  he  who  then  knew  only  how  to  play  by  ear  could  play  to  touch  our 
feelings  so  wonderfully.  He  could  not  read  music  at  this  time.  His  rich,  pow 
erful  bass  voice  was  an  unfailing  help  in  the  school  music,  and  across  all  these 
years  we  can  hear  it  as  he  sang  : 


320  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

Shed  not  a  tear  o'er  your  friend's  early  bier, 

When  1  am  gone,  I  am  gone 
Pause  when  the  slow  tolling  bell  you  shall  hear, 

When  I  am  gone,  I  am  gone. 
Think  as  you  etand  by  my  half  opened  grave ; 
Think  who  has  died  His  beloved  to  save  ; 
Think  of  the  crown  all  the  ransomed  shall  have 
When  I  am  gone,  I  am  gone. 

Eev.  D.  W.  Morgan,  of  Griggsville,  Illinois,  relates  the  following 
incident  relative  to  Mrs.  Bliss,  which  may  be  of  interest  to  our 
readers  : 

I  think  it  was  during  the  summer  of  1868,  shortly  after  Mr.  Bliss  had 
begun  to  turn  his  attention  to  writing  for  our  Sunday  Schools,  that  I  was  in 
conversation  with  Mr.  George  F.  Root  concerning  him.  We  recalled  several 
of  his  recent  pieces,  and  I  remarked  upon  his  wonderful  versatility  of  talent 
as  a  hymn  writer,  song  writer  and  singer. 

Mr.  Root  replied,  with  emphasis,  "  Yes,  I  consider  Mr.  Bliss  as  incompara 
bly  the  rising  musical  man  of  our  day.  He  is  destined  to  more  than  fill  the 
place  made  vacant  by  the  death  of  Mr.  Bradbury." 

In  Mr.  Bliss'  generous  and  enthusiastic  acknowledgment  of  indebtedness 
to  his  noble  wife  for  early  encouragement  in  his  musical  tastes,  he  would 
speak  of  her  selling  the  two  cows  which  were  part  of  her  marriage  patrimony 
to  enable  him  to  pursue  his  musical  studies  at  Geneseo,  New  York.  And  that 
she  was  moved  by  a  pure,  wifely  ambition  to  study  and  work  in  the  same 
direction  with  him,  that  she  might  be  his  peer,  or  at  least  his  constant  sym 
pathizer  and  support  in  musical  endeavor,  of  this  all  are  persuaded  who  have 
listened  to  her  rich,  trained  voice  in  solo  or  accompanying  the  stronger  voice 
of  him  on  whom  she  leaned.  But  the  following  incident  will  illustrate  the 
keen  insight  which  thorough  training  and  close  observation  had  given  her  in 
voice  culture — that  which  pertains  to  the  use  and  abuse  of  the  vocal  organs. 
It  was,  perhaps,  in  November,  1869,  when  I  was  pastor  of  the  Baptist  Church 
in  Gardner,  Illinois.  I  had  worked  up  a  musical  convention  of  two  weeks  for 
Mr.  Bliss,  who,  with  his  wife,  was  conducting  a  similar  convention  in  Peoria. 
I  wrote  them,  as  they  were  on  the  eve  of  coming  to  us,  saying  that  I  should 
await  their  coming  and  see  them  safely  ensconced  in  our  home,  and  see  the 
convention  started,  but  that  I  did  not  expect  to  sing  a  note  nor  preach  a  ser 
mon  for  three  months  ;  that  I  was  under  the  doctor's  ban,  my  throat  granulated 
and  bleeding  and  stubbornly  resisting  all'  treatment.  My  church  had  voted, 
me  leave  of  absence  for  the  winter,  made  generous  provision  for  my  support, 
and  advised  me  to  spend  the  winter  in  the  South. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  came,  and  the  first  evening,  as  we  were  seated  about 
the  fire,  Mrs.  Bliss  said  :  "  Mr.  Morgan,  I  don't  think  you  need  to  go  South  for 
the  recovery  of  your  throat,  nor  even  to  give  up  preaching  or  singing.  I  think 
I  can  tell  what  is  the  difficulty  with  your  throat,  and  can  point  out  its  remedy. 
Tis  brought  on  by  a  vicious  elocution.  You  are  using  an  assumed  tone  of 


TEIBUTES   TO   HIS   MEMORY.  321 

voice,  and  are  probably  unconsciously  imitating  some  one's  voice  that  you  have 
admired.  The  orotund  is  not  your  natural  voice.  By  its  use  you  have  brought 
an  undue  stress  on  the  larynx  and  vocal  chords,  and  they  have  yielded  to 
over  tension.  Your  remedy  is  to  adopt,  arbitrarily,  a  more  tenor  key  of  voice. 
Raise  it  at  least  two  tones  in  conversation,  reading  and  preaching."  I  thanked 
her,  but  replied  that  I  thought  her  remedy  altogether  impracticable  ;  that  I 
could  not  take  up  at  once  another  tone  of  voice.  But  she  insisted  that  it 
could  be  done ;  that  they  would  be  with  us  for  two  weeks,  would  watch  me 
closely  and  help  to  enforce  the  cure.  I  tried  it,  sang  in  most  sessions  of  the 
convention,  and  preached  the  next  Sabbath.  My  throat  toughened  and  I  have 
never  from  that  day  lost  a  religious  or  other  service  from  diseased  throat. 
The  hint  may  be  worth  the  attention  of  other  public  speakers  and  singers. 

Mr.  Morgan  adds  :  "I  have  long  been  accustomed  to  think  of 
Mr.  Bliss  and  speak  of  him  as  my  ideal  Christian  gentleman — the 
most  perfect  specimen  I  had  ever  met." 
21 


CHAPTER   XXVII. 


THE    LAST  OP  EARTH — MEMORIAL  SERVICES  AT  ROME,  PENNSYLVANIA — ELO 
QUENT  ADDRESS  BY  REV.    DR.   GOODWIN,    OP  CHICAGO. 

THE  village  of  Home,  Pennsylvania,  contains  a  population  of 
about  three  hundred,  and  is  located  in  the  Wysocken  Valley, 
surrounded  by  high  hills,  and  is  about  ten  miles  from  Towanda, 
Pennsylvania.  The  funeral  services  in  memory  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Bliss  were  held  on  Sunday,  January  7,  in  the  Presbyterian  Church, 
of  which  both  of  them  had  been  members  during  their  residence  in 
Rome.  Before  the  hour  of  service  (11  o'clock),  sleighs,  from  all 
directions,  coming  over  the  hills  loaded  with  the  families  of  friends 
and  relatives  from  a  distance,  were  arriving  at  the  church.  By 
eleven  o'clock  it  was  crowded  in  every  part.  The  folio  wing  relatives 
of  the  deceased  were  present:  Lydia  Bliss,  his  mother;  Mrs.  M. 
E.  Wilson  and  husband,  and  Mrs.  Phebe  Jennings  and  husband, 
sisters  and  brothers  ;  Wm.  H.  Jennings,  of  Chicago,  nephew  of  Mr. 
Bliss  ;  Mrs.  Andrus,  sister  of  Lydia  Bliss,  with  her  son  and  daugh 
ter,  the  latter  residing  in  Elmira,  N.  Y  ;  the  wife  of  Mr.  McEwen, 
who  was  present ;  Mrs.  Betsy  Allen,  grandmother  of  Mrs.  Bliss  ; 
0.  F.  Young  and  wife,  father  and  mother  of  Mrs.  Bliss  ;  A.  P. 
Young  and  wife,  0.  W.  Young  and  wife,  George  R.  Young,  Mrs. 
C.  C.  Barnes  and  husband,  Mrs.  J.  L.  Ellsworth,  and  Melita  Young, 
brothers  and  sisters  of  Mrs.  Bliss  ;  Nathan  and  Thomas  Young, 
Mrs.  Daniel  Pitcher,  and  Mrs.  Dnnham,  uncles  and  aunts  of  Mrs. 
Bliss,  with  their  families  ;  also  several  cousins  and  more  distant 
relatives  were  present.  A  remarkable  fact  in  connection  with  this 
large  circle  is  that  they  are  all  Christians. 

The  services  were  opened  by  the  reading  of  the  hymn  :  "  God  is 
the  refuge  of  His  saints,"  by  Rev.  Mr.  Keatley,  pastor  of  the  Meth 
odist  church.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  McGranahan,  life-long  friends  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Bliss,  and  well  known  in  musical  circles,  led  the  singing 
of  the  congregation. 


MEMORIAL  SERVICES   AT  ROME.  323 

The  following  scriptures  were  read  by  the  pastor  of  the  Baptist 
Church  :  John  xvii,  18-24 :  Acts  i,  7-11  :  Acts  vii,  55-60  :  1  Cor. 
xv,  12-23  and  50-58  :  1  Thess.  iv,  13-18. 

Prayer  was  then  offered  by  Rev.  G.  W.  Chandler,  pastor  of  the 
Methodist  Church  of  Towanda. 

The  hymn,  "  Rock  of  Ages  "  (set  to  music  composed  by  Mrs. 
Bliss),  was  sung  by  the  choir. 

A  report  of  a  meeting  held  in  Chicago,  on  the  Sunday  after  the 
news  of  the  disaster,  was  then  read  by  Major  Whittle,  who  made 
the  following  remarks,  explaining  the  circumstances  of  the  depart 
ure  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  from  home  and  of  his  being  on  the  ill- 
fated  train : 

% 

We  have  to-day  no  remains  of  these  beloved  friends ;  none  will  ever  be 
found  ;  and  I  am  asked  to  make  a  brief  statement  of  the  circumstances  of  their 
death.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  left  their  home  the  30th  of  December  and  went  to 
Towanda  and  Waverly.  The  last  heard  of  them  was  a  letter  to  the  father  on 
Thursday  that  they  had  bought  tickets  by  way  of  the  Lake  Shore  road,  and 
expected  to  be  in  Chicago  Friday  night.  The  letter  closed  with  the  sentence, 
"  God  bless  you  all  for  time  and  eternity  "—probably  the  last  letter  he  ever 
wrote. 

Mr.  Bliss  was  expected  in  Chicago  to  help  carry  on  the  work  of  Messrs. 
Moody  and  Sankey.  Saturday  morning  in  Chicago,  when  I  read  of  the  terrible 
accident  at  Ashtabula,  my  heart  was  filled  with  fear,  and  1  sent  a  telegram  to 
Towanda  to  know  whether  they  were  there.  It  was  some  time  before  an 
answer  could  come.  His  friends  supposed  he  was  -twelve  or  eighteen  hours 
in  advance  of  this  train.  During  the  day,  while  waiting,  we  went  to  the  rail 
road  office  and  tried  to  get  dispatches  from  the  train,  but  could  only  learn  that 
it  was  a  terrible  accident,  and  that  Mr.  Bliss  was  not  on  the  later  train  that 
left  on  Saturday  afternoon.  My  alarm  increased,  but  I  could  not  take  it  home 
to  my  heart.  But  Saturday  afternoon,  a  telegram  was  received  from  Mr  Bur- 
chell,  who  knew  Mr.  Bliss  intimately,  saying  that  "  Bliss,  wife  and  children 
are  among  the  dead."  And  we  started  i mmediately  for  A  shtabula.  We  arrived 
there  on  Sunday  morning,  and  for  three  days  I  was  there  while  the  wreck  was 
removed,  and  every  search  was  made  that  could  be  to  find  some  relic  of  these 
dear  friends.  The  few  bodies  recovered  were  unrecognizable  except  in  two 
or  three  instances.  We  thought  then  that  the  dear  little  children  were  there. 
And  when  the  dispatch  came  from  Towanda  that  the  children  were  safe  at 
home,  I  fell  on  my  knees  and  than  Red  God  that  the  children  had  been  spared. 

I  came  away  Tuesday  night.  Everything  had  been  removed.  A  stream  of 
water  five  feet  deep  in  the  deepest  and  two  feet  in  the  shallowest  part  flowed 
by.  The  bottom  was  dragged.  Eleven  cars  had  fallen,  one  on  top  of  another. 
The  cars  were  broken  in  fragments.  The  lamps  set  fire  to  the  oil.  It  was  a 
fierce  wind  and  a  terribly  stormy  night.  The  woodwork,  -everything  waa 


324  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

burned,  the  iron  melted  and  not  a  fragment  of  anything  was  left  that  \ve 
could  find. 

And  so  we  are  left  here  to-day  with  nothing  of  these  friends  but  the  thought 
of  them  in  glory. 

Mr.  Burchell  says  he  passed  through  the  passenger  coaches,  and  that  at 
the  last  station  before  the  accident  "  the  snow  was  heavy  and  I  got  out,"  he 
says,  "to  get  some  sandwiches,  and  found  the  two  ordinary  cars  crowded  and 
the  smoking-car  full.  The  next,  a  parlor  car,  was  one  third  full.  Mr.  Bliss 
and  family  were  there.  I  was  in  the  next  car.  Behind  that  were  three  sleep 
ing-cars."  He  gave  the  statement :  "  1  believe  Mr.  Bliss  got  out  through  a 
window,  expecting  to  get  his  wife  and  children  through,  but  the  car  was 
blocked  up  and  escape  was  impossible.  I  believe  Bliss  was  burned  to  death 
trying  to  save  his  wife  and  children."  This,  he  says,  is  his  conjecture. 

There  is  a  story  at  Ash  tabula  of  Mr.  Bliss  escaping  and  going  back,  saying 
his  wife  and  child  were  in  the  wreck,  and  he  would  rather  die  with  them  than 
escape  without  them.  I  cannot  find  that  this  is  true.  That  man  had  a  wife 
and  child  there,  and  we  know  that  Mr.  Bliss  had  no  child  there.  I  suppose 
that  some  one  seeing  the  man  thought  it  was  Mr.  Bliss,  and  that  gave  rise  to 
the  supposition  that  the  children  were  on  board.  We  showed  Mr.  Bliss'  pic 
ture  to  the  passengers  who  were  saved.  We  found  one  lady  who  recognized  it. 

As  to  how  he  came  to  be  on  the  train  :  He  left  Waverly  on  the  train  which 
ought  to  have  been  at  Buffalo  at  midnight  on  Thursday ;  but  it  met  with  an 
accident  twenty  miles  from  Waverly,  was  delayed,  and  did  not  arrive  in  Buffalo 
until  five  o'clock— too  late  to  make  connection.  He  left  that  train  at  Hornells- 
ville,  probably  thinking  that  as  they  could  not  connect,  they  would  wait  over 
and  get  a  night's  rest.  I  find  his  name  at  the  Osborne  House,  Thursday  night. 
He  took  the  train  in  Buffalo  Friday  noon,  and  so  was  brought  to  Ashtubula  to 
be  in  the  accident.  His  trunk  went  on  safely. 

This  is  all  we  know  of  the  story.  We  are  here,  a  circle  of  friends  and  rela 
tives,  and  I  tell  you  the  story  as  we  know  it. 

A  favorite  hymn  of  Mr.  Bliss  "  I  know  not  the  hour  when 
my  Lord  will  come,"  was  then  very  beautifully  sung  by  the  choir. 
Mr.  McGranahan,  the  composer  of  the  music  of  this  hymn,  the 
words  of  which  were  written  by  Mr.  Bliss,  was  so  overcome  as  to  be 
unable  to  conclude  the  singing. 

An  address  was  then  given  by  the  pastor  of  the  First  Congrega 
tional  Church  in  Chicago,  of  which  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  were  mem 
bers  at  the  time  of  their  death,  Eev.  E.  P.  Goodwin,  D.  D.  For 
nearly  three  years  Mr.  Bliss  had  been  chorister  and  Sunday  School 
Superintendent  at  the  church  of  which  Mr.  Goodwin  is  pastor. 
The  following  is  Dr.  Goodwin's  address  : 

My  friends,  I  feel  that  I  have  come  here  as  a  kind  of  representative  of  that 
great  family  that  to-day  all  through  the  land  bows  under  the  grief  that  has 


ADDEESS   OF   TtEV.    DH.    GOODWIN".  325 

gathered  us,  and  mingles  its  tears  and  prayers  with  those  of  this  dear  circle.  In 
deed,  I  seem  almost  to  be  a  member  of  this  household,  so  personal  to  me  is  this 
affliction.  This  dear  brother  had  been  for  years  one  with  whom  I  had  wrought 
for  the  Master  in  most  delightful,  accord.  Our  aims  were  one,  our  sympathies 
in  unison,  our  friendship  hearty,  and  one  of  these  precious  children  bears,  as 
you  may  know,  my  name.  I  come  hence  not  to  speak  in  any  formal  way,  but 
out  of  the  depths  of  my  heart  to  utter  a  few  words  of  loving  tribute  to  one 
whose  character  and  work  I  delight  to  honor. 

Let  me  connect  what  I  have  to  say  with  two  passages  of  Scripture,  viz., 
Psalm  cxvi,  15  :  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints." 
Rev.  xiv,  13:  "And  I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  unto  me,  Write, 
Blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth ;  yea,  saith  the 
Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labors  ;  and  their  works  do  follow  them." 

Dear  friends,  God  makes  no  mistakes.  He  has  made  none  hi  allowing  the 
calamity  which  has  gathered  us  here  in  sorrow,  let  us  make  none  in  reasoning 
about  it.  The  significance  of  God's  Providences  does  not  lie  in  what  we  think 
but  in  what  God  says  about  them.  In  his  testimony  we  can  alone  find  sure 
anchorage  for  faith,  sure  solace  for  bereavement.  Our  reasonings,  apart  from 
His  Word,  instead  of  scattering  the  darkness,  often  deepen  it ;  instead  of  lilt 
ing  our  burdens  from  our  hearts,  often  magnify  them  and  torture  us  with 
keener  sense  of  helplessness.  We  can  as  easily  reason  the  darkness  out  of  a 
room,  as  the  darkness  out  of  God's  dealings.  We  get  rid  of  the  gloom  when  we 
stop  debate,  open  the  shutters,  and  let  the  light  shine  in.  And  we  get  rid  of 
the  gloom  that  enwraps  us  in  these  trial  times  of  faith,  when  we  stop  arguing 
and  ih row  open  the  windows  of  our  souls  to  the  light  of  God's  Word. 

The  first  thought,  therefore,  which  I  suggest  in  connection  with  this  Provi 
dence  is,  that  God's  children  are  not  to  look  upon  death  with  dread,  but  to 
anticipate  it  with  lightness  of  heart,  and,  by  whatsoever  form  it  may  come, 
welcome  and  rejoice  in  it.  If  the  death  of  God's  saints  is  precious  in  His  sight, 
and  the  day  in  which  it  comes  better  than  the  day  of  birth,  surely  His  children 
need  not  be  dismayed ;  much  less  need  they  go  through  life,  as  many  do, 
oppressed  and  tortured  by  gloomy  apprehensions  of  the  last  hour.  Where 
God's  face  beams,  our  faces  ought  to  brighten.  Where  God  pronounces  His 
benediction,  and  all  the  blessed  of  the  Upper  Presence  join  in  special  jubilee, 
we  may  at  least  dismiss  our  fears,  and  even  though  it  be  through  tears,  lift  up 
our  song. 

I  remember  well  when  I  could  not  say  this.  Death  was  the  one  depressing, 
despairful  word  of  all  Scripture.  No  sound  ever  sent  such  chills  through  my 
blood  as  the  mournful  knell  that  was  wont  to  be  rung  out  from  the  village 
church  whenever,  there  was  a  death  in  the  community.  A  funeral  was  of  all 
places  the  place  of  terror.  The  somber  crape  fluttering  so  forbiddingly  at 
the  door,  the  closed  blinds,  the  hushed  voices,  the  grave  faces,  the  robes  of  the 
mourners,  the  tears  and  sobs,  the  sepulchral  utterances  of  the  minister,  the 
mournful  hymns — all  this  went  to  make  a  burial  service  distasteful  and  gloomy 
in  the  extreme.  From  a  child  I  never  attended  one,  even  of  a  relative,  if  it 
could  be  avoided.  This  feeling  was  dominant  for  years.  Indeed,  I  was 


326  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

well  on  in  the  ministry,  before  the  true  teachings  of  Scripture  were  so  appre 
hended  as  to  break  the  hold  of  the  pagan  ideas  which  had  begotten  such  dis 
may.  But,  thank  God,  the  light  of  the  Word  as  it  is  in  these  texts,  and  every 
where  through  these  inspired  utterances,  came  at  last,  and  I  saw  death  as  a  foe 
vanquished  through  Christ,  its  terrors  all  abolished,  and  the  child  of  God  priv 
ileged  to  go  through  life  anticipating  it  as  the  hour  of  his  grandest  triumph,  his 
highest  exultation.  Look  now  at  the  testimony  of  the  Word.  Even  the  Old 
Testament  emphasizes  this  thought.  The  old  patriarchs  had  no  dread  of  dying. 
There  is  something  beautiful  even  in  the  composure  with  which  they  heard 
the  voice,  and  laid  aside  their  tent-life  for  the  better  country.  How  significant 
the  record  that  they  "  fell  asleep,"  "  were  gathered  to  their  fathers,"  "  entered 
into  rest."  What  more  touching  and  home-like,  and  free  from  everything  like 
fear,  than  the  picture  of  a  father,  conscious  that  his  last  hour  is  close  at  hand, 
calling  his  children  about  his  bed-side,  declaring  the  fact  of  his  near  departure, 
giving  them  his  dying  counsels  and  benediction,  and  then  quietly  wrapping 
his  mantle  about  him  and  lying  down  for  the  death  angel  to  close  his  eyes. 
Take  the  death  of  Moses.  First  he  was  closeted  with  God  !  Then  God  rolled 
away  the  cloud  from  the  mountain  top,  touched  his  eyes,  and  gave  him  a  vis 
ion  of  that  fair  land,  in  all  its  length  and  breadth,  which  he  had  so  coveted  to 
enter.  When  He  took  him,  as  it  were,  in  His  arms,  as  a  mother  would  take  a 
child,  and  as  the  vision  of  the  land  of  promise  faded  away,  there  came  instead 
the  vision  of  that  other  country,  even  the  heavenly,  of  which  the  earthly  in 
heritance  was  but  the  feeble  type  ;  and  as  its  surpassing  beauty  burst  upon  his 
eoul,  he  passed  into  the  presence  of  the  King  and  was  clothed  upon  with  a 
transfiguring  glory.  Who  of  us  that  would  have  drawn  back  dismayed  from 
that  dying  hour,  had  it  been  permitted  us  to  be  there  ?  Who  that  would  have 
thought  there  was  need  of  crape,  or  sable  plumes,  or  melancholy  dirges  to 
befit  that  burial  V 

But  Moses  is  no  exception.  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  f  jord  is  the  death 
of  every  saint.  And  God  putting  underneath  the  everlasting  arms,  giving  now 
our  last  earthward  look  over  all  that  is  loveliest  and  best,  and  then  swinging 
the  gates  and  giving  us  to  stand  within  the  city  and  join  the  everlasting  song, 
what  is  this  to  all  God's  chosen  but  death  stripped  of  its  terrors,  and  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  transformed  into  the  shining  highway  by  which  the  chil 
dren  of  the  Kingdom  enter  into  glory.  By  the  witness  of  manifold  Christian 
experiences  there  is  blessed  reality  in  this.  How  many  times  have  we  stood 
by  the  dying  and  seen  the  light  of  heaven  break  over  the  pale  face,  and  all  the 
lines  of  pain  and  trouble  seem  to  be  smoothed  out  as  God  has  spoken  to  His 
chosen.  And  how  many  times  have  we  seen  the  thin  lips  part  while  the  coun 
tenance  shone,  and  caught  some  feebly  whispered  word,  jubilant  testimony 
that  death  was  robbed  of  its  sting  and  the  grave  of  its  victory. 

And  this  is  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel.  It  knows  nothing  of  dread,  nothing 
of  depression  or  dismay  as  connected  with  the  dying  of  God's  people.  On  the 
contrary  every  witness  respecting  it  is  of  unqualified  cheer.  It  is  "  falling 
asleep,"  "entering  into  rest,"  "going  home,"  being  "present  with  the  Lord." 
It  is  hence  that  which  is  to  be  coveted,  and  to  secure  which  is  inestimable 


ADDRESS   OF   EEV.    DR.    GOODWIN.  327 

gain.  Instead,  therefore,  friends,  of  going  up  and  down  in  the  world  with 
despondency  in  our  faces  and  wailings  on  our  tongues  because  death  .confronts 
us  and  we  cannot  escape,  let  us  know  a  more  excellent  way.  Let  us  no  longer 
borrow  the  eyes  of  pagan  mythology  and  see  death  as  a  hideous  demon  roam 
ing  the  earth  for  victims  with  an  insatiate  fury.  Let  us  see  him  rather  through 
the  sweeter  unveiling  of  the  Gospel,  a  blessed  angel  of  light  come  to  set  us 
free  from  burdens,  toil,  vexation,  pain,  everything  that  annoys,  and  to  give  us 
welcome  into  the  ineffable  and  abiding  blessedness  of  our  Father's  house. 

It  does  not  matter,  as  respects  this  sunny  forelock,  in  what  way  death  may 
come.  We  are  wont  to  emphasize  the  terribleness  of  a  catastrophe  like  this  ; 
and  viewed  in  its  physical  aspects  it  is  terrible  beyond  all  comprehension. 
But  this  text-truth  holds  good,  nevertheless.  Can  you  imagine  anything  more 
torturing  than  the  death  that  Stephen  died ;  to  be  set  up  as  a  target  for  paving 
stones,  and  to  have  bone  after  bone  broken  and  life  fairly  battered  out  ?  It  makes 
one  shudder  to  conceive  of  it.  There  must  have  been  the  keenest  pain ;  but 
do  you  imagine  Stephen's  thoughts  were  absorbed  in  that  ?  Ah,  no.  As  the 
cries  of  rage  rang  in  his  ears,  and  the  cruel  missiles  rained  down  upon  him, 
there  opened  to  him  in  the  sky  a  vision  of  glory  that  made  him  forget  every 
thing  else.  He  saw  the  heavens  opened  and  the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the 
right  hand  of  God  ;  and  gazing  upon  that  face,  the  face  of  his  risen  and  glori 
fied  Lord,  he  no  more  heeded  the  crashing  stones,  no  more  the  clamoring  out 
cries,  but  with  a  prayer  of  forgiveness  on  his  lips  "  fell  asleep  "  as  sweetly  as 
a  child. 

Our  brother's  anticipations  of  death  were  all  of  this  unclouded,  hopeful 
kind.  You  find  no  word  of  gloom  in  his  hymns,  but  when  he  touches  the 
thought  of  death  he  almost  invariably  breaks  out  into  a  strain  of  peculiar  ex 
ultation.  Take  that  beautiful  song.  "  That  will  be  Heaven  for  Me,"  sung  in 
the  opening  services.  It  reads  like  a  prophecy,  and  it  exactly  represents  its 
author's  feeling. 

"  I  know  not  the  hour  when  my  Lord  will  come 
To  take  me  away  to  His  own  dear  home  ; 
But  I  know  that  His  presence  will  lighten  the  gloom, 
And  that  will  be  glory  for  me." 

Or  take  that  other  still  more  prophetic  song,  ' '  There's  a  Light  in  the  Val- 
ley." 

I  shall  find  down  the  valley  no  alarms, 
For  my  blessed  Savior's  smile  I  can  see  ; 
He  will  bear  me  in  His  loving,  mighty  arms, 
There's  a  light  in  the  valley  for  me. 

Death,  no  matter  what  its  form,  had  for  Philip  Bliss  no  terrors.  He  be 
lieved  with  all  his  soul,  that  Jesus  Christ  came  to  "abolish  death,"  to  destroy 
him  that  had  the  power  of  death — that  is,  the  devil — and  deliver  them  who 
through  fear  of  death  were  all  their  life-time  subject  to  bondage.  Hence, 
though  leading  his  life  on  in  the  daily  expectation  that  the  end  might  come, 
he  was  not  only  undismayed,  but  overflowing  with  gladness.  I  doubt  not  that 


MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

if,  after  that  terrific  plunge,  there  was  a  moment  of  consciousness,  his  soul 
was  full  of  peace,  and  was  borne  up  in  its  chariot  of  fire  with  a  shout  of  vic 
tory.  And  that  serenity  in  facing  death  by  whatever  form  it  may  come,  and 
that  triumph  over  it,  it  is  the  privilege  of  all  God's  children  to  have. 

The  other  thought  connected  with  these  Scripture  texts  which  I  suggest  is, 
that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  in  no  sense  so  related  to  human  instrumentali 
ties  that  when  any  of  them  drop  out  it  suffers  loss  or  hindrance.  We  are  apt 
to  think  that  it  does.  Our  plans  are  largely  conditioned  by  circumstances  as 
to  their  results.  If  a  crop  fails,  or  a  war  breaks  out,  or  a  panic  occurs,  or  sick 
ness  comes,  our  hopes  are  wrecked  ;  and  we  are  so  conscious  that  we  are  hedged 
about  by  possible  mishaps,  and  can  forecast  no  plans  which  may  not  be  frus 
trated,  that  we  naturally  think  it  must  be  so  with  God.  Like  us,  He  must 
have  His  forming  times  and  seasons,  must  have  His  chosen  instruments  and 
agencies  ;  and  if  these  fail,  there  must  be  great  difficulty  in  making  their  place 
good,  and  the  kingdom,  hence,  be  checked.  We  have  a  feeling  that  certain 
honored  laborers  afe  so  thoroughly  identified  with  the  urging  forward  of  the 
Gospel  that  they  cannot  be  spared ;  that  their  place  cannot  be  filled.  Mr. 
Moody's  words  over  the  sad  tidings  were  the  instinctive  utterance  of  thousands 
of  Christian  hearts :  "  Know  ye  not  that  a  prince  and  a  great  man  is  fallen  this 
day  in  Israel  ?  Who  shall  take  the  place  of  this  sweet  singer,  and  carry  on  his 
noble  work  for  Christ?  It  seems  as  if  this  consecrated  voice  and  pen  could  not 
be  spared,  as  if  they  had  hardly  crossed  the  threshold  of  their  mission  for  the 
good  of  men  and  the  glory  of  God."  But  I  go  back  to  the  word  of  God,  and 
the  history  of  His  church,  and  I  say,  God  takes  in  all  the  meaning  of  this 
providence,  and  He  has  made  no  mistake.  Suppose  we  had  been  among  the 
chosen  people  when  God  called  Moses  up  higher,  and  the  question  had  been 
put  to  us,  Can  you  spare  Moses  ?  Shall  God  take  him  and  provide  you  with 
another  leader  ?  We  should  undoubtedly  have  made  quick  answer,  "Spare 
Moses?  the  man  whose  counsel  is  as  the  word  of  the  Everlasting  One?  him 
who  communes  with  God  face  to  face  and  holds  back  by  his  prayers  the  judg 
ments  we  deserve  ?  him  who  led  us  up  out  of  Egypt,  gave  us  our  laws,  our 
ritual  of  worship,  and  has  brought  us  safely  through  all  our  enemies  to  the 
very  borders  of  the  land  of  promise  !  No,  now  more  than  ever  we  need  him. 
The  land  bristles  with  sons  of  Anak,  and  is  full  of  fenced  cities,  how  can  we 
possess  it?  We  must  have  him  for  counselor,  for  intercessor,  for  captain  of 
the  host.  Take  any  one  else,  but  spare  us  Moses.  If  he  be  taken  all  hope 
dies."  But  God  had  other  plans.  He  knew  how  to  take  Moses  and  yet  pro 
vide  for  Israel  so  that  they  should  go  forward  to  the  immediate  possession  of 
the  land  and  the  longed-for  and  abundant  fruitage  of  their  hopes. 

Or,  to  put  the  case  stronger,  consider  how  indispensable,  judged  from  a 
human  standpoint,  was  the  continuance  in  His  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
He  was  the  embodiment  of  the  mind  and  heart  of  God.  He  knew  all  truth, 
and  exactly  how  to  unfold  and  apply  it  to  men's  hearts.  He  knew  all  wants, 
and  woes,  and  wrongs,  and  was  eager  to  put  them  all  away.  He  was  God  in 
carnate,  and  down  on  men's  level  that  He  might  feel  the  beating  of  their  hearts, 
catch  the  cry  of  their  need  and  break  the  curse  of  sin.  How  could  He  be 


ADDRESS   OF   KEY.    DR.    GOODWIX.  329 

spared,  and  men  be  equally  helped,  and  His  Gospel  pressed  on  with  equal 
potency?  Who  could  open  the  blind  eyes,  unstop  the  deaf  ears,  empty  all  the 
hospitals,  and  asylums,  and  infirmaries  as  He  did?  Who  could  so  unfold  the 
words  of  heaven,  bind  up  the  broken  hearts,  cast  out  the  evil  spirits,  prove  to 
men  that  God  had  not  forgotten  the  world  nor  had  its  control  wrested  from 
Him  by  the  devil  ?  Yet  the  work  of  Christ  only  spread  itself  over  three  and 
a  half  years  ;  and  before  even  that  brief  career  is  ended,  we  hear  from  his  lips 
the  strange  words,  "It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away." 

But  what  was  the  effect  of  Christ's  departure  ?  Why,  that  after  He  left 
the  world,  there  was  more  of  Christ  in  it  than  before.  The  promise  of  the 
Comforter,  conditioned  upon  His  going  away,  was  fulfilled,  and  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  came  upon  the  whole  company  of  believers.  And  thus,  while 
the  Lord  Himself  ascends  to  heaven,  there  to  carry  on  the  work  of  His  inter 
cession  for  His  Church,  these  anointed  men  and  women,  in  whose  hearts  the 
one  absorbing  purpose  is  to  magnify  Jesus  Christ,  go  out  and  are  multiplied  a 
thousand  fold,  and  spread  the  knowledge  of  His  Gospel  to  the  very  ends  of 
the  earth.  Christ  remaining  in  the  world  is  a  single  personality,  teaching, 
healing,  saving,  and  keeping  His  band  of  followers  clinging  timidly  to  His 
skirts,  only  echoing  faintly  His  words  and  repeating  feebly  His  works. 
Christ  gone  from  the  world  and  ascended  into  glory  is  potentially  Christ  repro 
duced  among  all  His  disciples,  and  these  going  forth  with  unparalleled  enthu 
siasm,  boldness  and  power,  preaching  Christ's  Gospel,  re-enacting  Christ's  life 
among  all  the  nations  and  ages.  So  is  it  of  every  great  worker.  When  he 
seems  to  drop  his  toil,  he  only  begins  it.  While  he  enters  into  rest,  God  takes 
up  the  work  which  he  let  fall,  and  sends  it  out  with  His  indorsement  to  repeat 
and  multiply  itself  while  the  world  stands. 

Do  you  suppose  that  when  Charlotte  Elliott  wrote  those  words  now  so 
familiar  in  all  lands : 

Just  as  I  ain  without  one  plea, 

she  dreamed  of  their  destiny  ?  She  lived  in  one  of  the  quiet,  unknown  ham 
lets  of  Old  England  ;  and  hardly  one  in  a  score  that  sing  this  sweet  song  knows 
her  name.  But  how  God  has  taken  that  one  hymn,  born,  doubtless,  in  the 
closet,  and  sent  it  round  the  world,  and  down  through  all  generations  to  save 
souls  and  exalt  Christ.  So  will  it  be  of  our  brother's  work.  Already  witness 
has  come  to  us  that  these  Gospel  songs  have  been  translated  into  Chinese;  and 
not  long  since,  a  missionary  in  Southern  Africa  wrote  home,  that  while  on  one 
of  his  tours  to  establish  a  station  for  preaching  the  Gospel,  he  heard  what 
seemed  familiar  music  in  one  of  the  native  kraals  which  he  was  passing. 
Curious  to  know  what  was  the  occasion,  he  entered  the  hut  and  found  the 
Zulu  children  all  engaged  in  singing  in  their  native  dialect,  "  Hold  the  Fort'!" 
By  a  forelock  kindred  to  this  would  God  have  us  all  inspired  for  our  work. 
It  may  be  true,  it  ought  to  be  true  of  every  loyal  disciple,  that  the  fruitage  for 
Christ  after  death  should  be  to  that  preceding  it,  as  the  harvests  that  wave  over 
the  prairies  to  the  first  handful  of  seed  scattered  thereon.  And  when  such 
leaders  as  our  brother  are  called  home,  not  only  will  they  being  dead  yet  speak, 


330  MEMOIR  OF  P.    P.    BLISS. 

but  their  very  dying,  instead  of  checking  the  Kingdom,  shall  urge  it  on.  There 
will  be  a  Joshua  to  follow  every  Moses,  an  Elisha  every  Elijah,  and  working 
through  all,  the  counsel  that  never  knows  defeat. 

Turning  now  to  some  features  of  our  brother's  character  which  have  im 
pressed  me,  let  me  notice  first,  the  wonderful  sunniness  or  hopefulness  which 
marked  his  life.  I  think  I  might  safely  call  him  the  most  joyous  Christian  I 
have  ever  known.  It  was  a  rare  thing  to  see  a  shadow  even  transiently  cloud 
ing  his  face.  I  remember  when  he  came  to  me  with  one  of  his  Sunday  School 
singing- books  just  ready  for  the  press,  and  desired  help  as  to  a  fitting  name. 
While  we  were  conversing,  suddenly  his  countenance  lighted  up  with  the 
words,  "  1  believe  I  have  it:  why  not  call  it  Sunshine?"  And  some  of  you 
will  recall  how,  on  the  cover  there  was  emblazoned  the  full-orbed  splendor 
of  the  sun.  So  when  the  "  Gospel  Songs  "  came  out,  the  cover  bore  the  same 
device  with  an  open  Bible  in  the  heart  of  the  rays.  No  symbol  could  have 
been  more  apt.  His  life,  if  not  always  led  on  under  a  clear  sky,  always  had  the 
sun  shining  through  the  clouds.  Not  that  he  was  exempt  from  trials.  He  had 
his  share  of  earthly  disappointments,  and  the  keen  discipline  they  bring.  He 
knew  what  it  was  to  be  misapprehended ;  to  have  mean  and  selfish  motives  at 
tributed  to  him  ;  to  be  talked  of  as  having  a  desire  for  self-glorification  in  lead 
ing  the  praise-service  of  the  sanctuary  ;  to  be  accused  of  singing  for  pay.  If  any 
of  you  have  known  what  it  is  to  have  the  conceit  fasten  upon  people's  minds 
that  you  are  other  than  you  seem,  sordid  when  you  aim  to  be  unselfish,  hypo 
critical  when  you  seek  to  be  devout,  you  can  understand  Mr.  Bliss'  feelings 
under  such  imputations.  Yet  he  never  gave  visible  token  of  it.  And  he  knew 
sore  trials.  He  knew  what  it  is  to  stand  by  the  bed-side  of  a  beloved  wife,  and 
press  the  hand  that  seems  growing  chill  with  the  frost  of  death,  and  be  watch 
ing  the  face  for  the  last  look,  and  day  after  day  looking  for  the  dreaded  end  to 
come.  It  was  a  marvel  to  me  how  he  could  go  through  this  and  be  so  calm. 
I  thought  it  must  be  by  a  prodigious  effort  of  will ;  but  I  found,  as  I  knew  him 
better,  that  it  was  the  consciousness  of  God's  tender  presence  and  upbearing 
Jove  that  sustained  him.  His  anchorage  was  within  the  vail,  and  he  believed 
and  proved  that  God  would  be  as  good  as  His  word,  and  keep  him  in  perfect 
peace  whose  mind  was  stayed  upon  Him.  So  when  the  younger  of  these  pre 
cious  children  seemed  daily  slipping  out  of  his  embrace,  and  he  bent  over  the 
crib  that  he  expected  would  so  soon  be  empty,  to  take  what  might  prove  the 
last  kiss,  his  hopefulness  suffered  no  eclipse.  There  seemed  always  to  be  an 
open  door  between  his  soul  and  the  city  of  light. 

As  might  be  anticipated,  his  hymns  and  music  are  full  of  hope  and  exulta 
tion.  There  is  hardly  a  melancholy  verse  or  strain  among  them  all.  Almost 
invariably  both  songs  and  music  swell  and  grow  jubilant  as  they  move  on. 
Hallelujahs  ring  all  through  them.  And  not  a  few,  however  they  begin,  land 
us  in  the  glory  of  the  better  country  before  they  close.  Glad  tidings  are  in 
deed  in  them,  and  are  their  inspiration. 

When  the  sweet  singer  put  his  magnificent  voice  into  the  rendering,  charged 
with  the  fervor  of  his  sympathetic  soul,  as  it  was  his  delight  to  do,  they  that 
listened  had  a  hint  of  what  the  joy  of  the  Upper  Presence  will  be.  His  buoy- 


ADDRESS   OF   REV.    DR.    GOODWIN".  o31 

ancy  was  contagious.  I  have  known  him,  when  a  prayer  meeting  dragged, 
when  very  likely  the  minister  was  dispirited  and  others  shared  the  feeling,  to 
sweep  his  hand  over  the  keys  of  the  piano,  and  alike  by  touch  and  voice  scatter 
the  despondency  as  a  burst  of  sunshine  scatters  fog  ;  and  this  because  he  sang 
as  he  felt.  On  one  of  the  last  occasions  when  he  was  with  us,  in  a  flying  visit 
to  our  city  made  during  his  work  as  evangelist,  he  came  in  late  and  sat  in  the 
rear  of  the  room.  Espying  him,  I  called  him  forward  to  sing  the  hymn  en 
titled  "  My  Prayer."  He  struck  the  piano  keys,  stopped,  and  reading  the  words 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  first  stanza,  "  More  joy  in  His  service,"  said,  "  I  don't 
think  I  can  sing  that  as  a  prayer  any  more.  It  seems  to  me  1  have  as  much  joy 
in  serving  the  blessed  Master  as  it  is  possible  for  me  to  bear." 

And  the  very  last  time  he  was  present  in  a  prayer  gathering,  after  listening 
to  the  testimony  of  a  number  of  young  converts,  he  stepped  to  the  piano,  and 
after  a  word  expressive  of  his  delight  in  hearing  the  new  voices,  he  said  he 
would  sing  a  new  song  that  he  hoped  would  encourage  those  who  had  recently 
come  out  for  Christ.  Then  in  his  own  royal  way,  that  thrilled  every  heart,  he 
gave  us  "Hold  Fast  till  I  Come  :  " 

Oh  spirit  o'erwhelmed  by  thy  failures  and  fears, 
Look  up  to  thy  Lord,  tho'  with  trembling  and  tears  ; 
Weak  faith,  to  thy  call  seem  the  heav'ns  only  dumb  ? 
To  thee  is  the  message,  "  Hold  fast  till  I  come." 

Hold  fast  till  I  come, 

Hold  fast  till  I  come  ; 

A  bright  crown  awaits  thee ; 

Hold  fast  till  I  come. 

This  was  his  spirit  always.  Mr.  Moody  says  God  cannot  use  a  discouraged 
Christian,  if  that  be  so,  it  is  easy  to  see  one  prime  factor  of  Brother  Bliss' 
success  in  his  work.  He  never  lost  heart,  and  so  never  compelled  God  to  set 
him  aside  and  use  some  one  else. 

And  this  is  what  the  Master  wants  us  all  to  be,  what  the  world  greatly  needs 
to  see, — buoyant,  cheerful,  singing  believers.  The  current  idea  is  that  the 
religion  of  Christ  is  something  burdensome,  disheartening,  a  sort  of  sack- 
cloth-and -ashes  life,  chiefly  led  on  through  humiliations,  fightings,  fears. 
Christian  people  are  largely  responsible  for  this.  Like  the  children  of  Israel 
in  the  desert,  we  are  always  ready  to  murmur  at  the  roughness  of  the  way,  the 
lack  of  comforts,  the  bitter  handlings  of  Providence.  Many  grumble  far  more 
than  they  give  thanks.  They  forget  the  daily  manna,  the  sufficient  grace,  the 
fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  the  better  country.  Oh,  the  darkness  that  settles  on 
so  many  Christian  faces,  and  the  despondency  that  enwraps  so  many  Christian 
lives.  How  little  do  we  impress  those  that,  know  us  best  as  being  the  children 
of  a  King  !  How  seldom  do  they  think  of  us  as  possessors  of  incalculable 
treasune,  walking  ever  through  green  pastures,  fearing  no  evil,  having  God's 
arms  about  us,  and  our  faces  shining  with  the  joy  of  our  communion  with 
Christ  and  the  anticipations  of  the  glory  that  is  only  a  few  heart-beats  away  ! 
I  fear  that  instead  of  this,  as  they  see  our  somber  faces  and  hear  our  dolorous 
witness,  they  think  of  treadmills  and  service  under  the  lash.  This  ought  not 


332  MEMOIR  OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

so  to  be.  Dear  brethren,  let  this  life  so  overflowing  with  gladness  help  us  to 
better  things.  Let  it  help  us  to  that  appropriation  of  our  privileges  as  those 
who  have  been  redeemed,  delivered  from  condemnation,  made  now  the  chil 
dren  of  God,  the  heirs  of  the  kingdom,  that  shall  banish  doubt  and  keep  the 
songs  of  jubilee  breaking  continually  from  our  lips. 

Another  trait  of  our  brother's  character  was  his  thorough  unselfishness.  It 
seems  strange  that  he  should  have  been  even  suspected  of  being  sordid  or  eager 
for  self  glorification.  And  yet  there  are  those,  as  has  been  intimated  before, 
that  thought  him  covetous  of  praise  and  pay.  Never  was  suspicion  more 
groundless,  nor  was  there  the  slightest  taint  of  sordidness  about  him.  When 
he  entered  upon  his  career  as  a  Gospel  singer,  his  profession  was  yielding  him 
a  handsome  revenue,  and  (as  his  publishers  have  assured  me)  he  was  certain  to 
realize  affluence.  He  turned  his  back  on  these  prospects,  and  like  the  brother 
with  whom  he  was  associated,  he  surrendered  income  and  ambitions,  and  with 
a  family  to  be  cared  for,  unhesitatingly  committed  himself  to  a  life  that  prom 
ised  not  a  penny.  And  he  never  murmured,  never  was  downcast  and  never 
regretted  the  decision.  Some  of  the  facts  respecting  this  unselfishness  are 
very  significant  as  showing  how  completely  this  spirit  ruled  him.  Take  that 
grand  tribute  paid  him  by  Mr.  Moody  in  the  Tabernacle  at  Chicago  last  Sab 
bath  morning.  He  stated  that  the  royalty  on  the  Gospel  Songs  and  Hymns 
amounted  to  $60,000.  He  proposed  to  Mr.  Bliss  that  he  should  take  $5,000  of 
this  sum  and  provide  himself  with  a  home.  Mr.  Bliss  promptly  declined  the 
offer.  They  had  agreed,  as  he  felt,  that  whatever  income  was  derived  from 
the  books  should  be  devoted  to  benevolent  uses.  And  he  added,  that  if  his 
Master  was  able  to  go  without  a  home,  he  was  sure  he  could  until  some  other 
way  opened  to  secure  it.  Mr.  John  Church,  the  Cincinnati  publisher  of  his 
music,  said  to  me :  "  When  Mr.  Moody  returned  from  Europe  the  last  time, 
Mr.  Bliss  had  nearly  ready  for  publication  a  book  which  I  am  certain  would  have 
netted  not  less  than  $10,000  or  $12,000.  Notwithstanding,  when  Mr.  Moody 
wished  him  to  issue  a  volume  jointly  with  Mr.  Sankey  for  use  in  revival  ser 
vice?,  he  at  once  complied,  and  without  a  word  of  regret  over  the  great  pecu 
niary  sacrifice,  transferred  all  his  choicest  songs  and  music  to  the  new  book." 
Such  things  were  characteristic,  not  exceptional.  He  had  what  I  fear  compar 
atively  few  Christians  have,  a  charity  fund  to  which  he  sacredly  devoted  a 
given  part  of  his  income.  I  do  not  know  what  that  proportion  was,  but  it  has 
come  to  my  knowledge  that  on  occasion  it  yielded  $1,000  in  six  months.  No 
matter  what  needs  pressed,  that  fund  was  never  invaded.  And  the  signifi 
cant  thing  about  it  was  that  it  never  seemed  to  run  dry.  He  has  put  repeatedly 
into  my  hands  sums  ranging  from  $10  to  $25  to  be  used  among  the  poor. 
And  when  I  expressed  surprise  at  his  being  able  to  spare  it,  his  reply  was  that 
God  was  very  good  to  him  and  he  never  lacked.  I  have  known  him  to  hand 
his  pocket-book  to  our  church  visitor  after  some  recital  of  suffering  or  destitu 
tion,  and  tell  her  to  help  herself  in  behalf  of  those  in  need.  I  suspect  that 
when  the  charity  fund  failed  through  the  demands  upon  it,  there  was  a  fresh 
assignment  of  income.  Would  that  more  of  the  Lord's  people  would  follow 
that  practice. 


ADDIIESS   OF   REV.    DR.    GOODWIN".  333 

Then  our  brother  was  always  glad  to  lend  himself  to  every  service  where 
by  he  could  lighten  the  burdens  of  any  afflicted  heart.  He  never  spared  him 
self  in  the  line  of  ministering  comfort  at  funerals,  and  services  among  the 
poor,  and  where  the  Shepherd  had  taken  children  to  the  upper  fold.  Now  in 
the  cottage  of  the  day-laborer,  now  in  the  attics,  or  tenement  houses  where 
poverty  and  wretchedness  abound,  everywhere  he  was  to  be  found  scattering 
gloom,  upbearing  faith,  solacing  aching  hearts,  preaching  Christ  with  the  mar 
vels  of  his  song.  How  often  as  he  sang  have  the  tears  and  sobs  ceased  and 
the  light  broken  in  on  the  faces  full  of  dismay !  There  are  many  homes 
where  the  music  of  that  voice  bringing  God's  comforts  to  the  soul  in  its 
trouble,  lingers  in  a  memory  that  will  never  die. 

So  when  our  brother  sang,  as  he  so  often  did,  by  the  bedsides  of  God's 
afflicted  children,  he  was  greatly  blessed  in  bringing  out  the  bright  side  of 
God's  providences.  I  have  in  mind  a  sister  to  whom  the  night  brings  no 
darkness  and  the  day  no  sun,  who  rarely  missed  a  visit  from  this  pilgrim 
singer  when  he  was  in  the  city.  And  I  have  it  from  her  lips  that  when  that 
silver  voice  rang  through  her  heart,  and  set  forth  the  Christian's  hope  and 
triumph,  her  repinings  ceased,  her  depression  passed  away,  and  forgetful  of 
herself  she  was  filled  with  joyful  thoughts  of  Christ,  and  with  the  spirit  of 
acquiescence  in  His  will. 

Naturally  this  unselfishness  found  its  highest  expression  in  devotion  to  the 
work  of  winning  souls.  Always  single-hearted,  and  faithful  in  using  his 
opportunities  for  doing  good,  after  he  took  up  evangelistic  labor  he  came  to 
have  a  peculiar  intensity  of  zeal  in  spiritual  things.  He  hungered  for  more 
knowledge  of  Christ,  more  of  the  indwelling  power  of  the  Spirit,  and  this  to 
the  end  that  he  might  save  men.  In  his  later  years,  this  desire  was  very 
marked.  His  testimonies  in  social  meetings  always  emphasized  it ;  his  daily 
conversation  had  it  for  a  constant  theme ;  his  appeals  to  Sabbath  School  chil 
dren,  his  songs  were  full  of  it.  Even  his  ordinary  correspondence,  not  only 
that  of  a  friendly  character,  but  that  relating  to  business,  was  permeated  with 
it.  From  the  letters  I  have  seen,  I  am  constrained  to  believe  that  during  the 
last  three  years,  those  letters,  of  whatever  kind,  were  exceptional,  that  did  not 
contain  some  word  of  earnest  witness,  encouragement  or  appeal  in  behalf 
of  Christ  and  His  salvation.  I  saw,  the  other  day,  a  purely  business  letter  in 
which  toward  the  end  was  a  most  affectionate  entreaty  to  accept  Christ  and  live 
for  Him.  I  remember  a  letter  to  a  member  of  the  choir,  in  which  he  pressed 
upon  her  very  earnestly  the  claims  of  her  Savior,  and  she  traces  to  that  appeal 
the  beginning  of  her  life  of  faith.  And  how  many  of  you  can  bear  like  witness 
to  his  solicitude  for  your  salvation  ?  In  how  many  of  your  homes  has  he 
prayed  during  his  transient  home  visits?  With  how  many  of  you  has  he  had 
personal  interviews  concerning  your  eternal  welfare?  How  faithful  he  was  to 
his  Master  and  to  you  in  these  days  of  his  last  fellowship  on  earth.  When  he 
instituted  those  Bible  readings  and  plead  for  souls,  neither  you  nor  he  dreamed 
the  end  was  so  near,  and  that  this  was  his  last  work  for  the  Lord  he  loved. 
But  if  he  had  known  it,  wherein  could  he  have  been  more  faithful  ?  Up  and 
down  this  valley  he  went  day  after  day,  telling  the  old,  old  story,  and  seeking 


334  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

to  persuade  all  who  heard,  to  believe  and  be  saved  ;  and,  as  I  learn,  nearly  a 
score  of  new-born  souls  rejoice  to-day  in  the  hope  of  eternal  life  through  these 
labors. 

This  was  his  spirit  always.  He  never  had  a  choir  rehearsal  that  was  not 
opened  with  prayer ;  and  the  burden  of  his  prayer  was.  that  the  singing  might 
exalt  Christ.  In  the  center  of  one  of  the  stained  windows  of  the  transept  of 
the  church  was  a  large  crimson  cross,  and  around  it  the  words,  "God  forbid 
that  I  should  glory  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Mr.  Bliss  often 
called  attention  to  that  symbol  and  its  motto,  and  said,  "  I  am  glad  the  cross  is 
always  before  us  when  we  sing.  Let  us  seek  to  forget  ourselves  and  magnify 
Christ." 

A  little  incident  that  occurred  at  the, time  of  the  burning  of  our  church,  in 
January,  1873,  illustrates  this.  The  front  gable  of  the  church  was  surmounted 
by  a  large  cross,  and  underneath  it  was  an  immense  window  studded  with  pur 
ple  stars.  As  the  flames  rolled  up  from  within,  the  starry  emblazonry  shone 
out  very  beautifully;  and  when,  climbing  higher,  they  fairly  garlanded  the 
cross  and,  standing  there  among  the  gleaming  stars,  it  seemed  to  dash  the  fiery 
billows  back  as  with  majestic  disdain,  the  sight  was  grandly  impressive.  Com 
ing  up  to  a  young  man.  a  member  of  the  Sabbath  School,  Mr.  Bliss  laid  his  hand 
upon  his  shoulder,  and  said,  "  James,  why  not  give  your  heart  to  the  Savior 
to-night?  Whygiot  come  to  the  cross  this  very  hour?  See  it  yonder!  it  was 
never  so  beautiful,  never  so  dear  to  me  as  now."  And  I  have  it  from  the  lips 
of  the  young  man,  now  a  member  of  the  church,  that  those  words  on  the  pave 
ment  brought  him  to  a  decision,  and  then  and  there  he  planted  the  cross  in  his 
heart.  So  this  dear  brother  wrought  ever.  And  no  words  could  more  truly 
set  forth  the  one  absorbing  purpose  that  ruled  his  life,  than  those  of  one  of  his 
later  and  most  effective  pieces  : 

My  only  song  and  story 

Is— Jesus  died  for  me; 
My  only  hope  of  glory 

The  cross  of  Calvary. 

Would  that  the  thousands  of  Christian  people  whose  hearts  are  saddened  by 
this  providence,  might,  through  it,  come  to  know  a  spirit  of  like  coveting  of 
souls. 

I  name  as  a  final  characteristic  that  our  brother  was  preeminently  a  singer 
of  the  Gospel.  Taking  both  songs  and  music  into  the  estimate,  I  think  I  may 
safely  call  him  the  Gospel  singer  of  the  age.  Certainly  I  know  of  no  one  in 
the  whole  range  of  hymnology  that  has  put  Gospel  truth  into  song  with  the 
clearness,  and  fullness  and  power  which  stamps  the  com  positions  of  P.  P.  Bliss. 
Many  of  his  songs,  especially  his  later  ones,  are  little  else  than  Scripture  versi 
fied  and  set  to  music.  Take,  for  example  : 

"  Jesus  of  Nazareth  Passeth  By," 

"  Free  from  the  Law," 

"Look  and  Live," 

"  Whosoever  Will  may  Come," 


ADDRESS   OF   REV.    DR.    GOODWIN.  335 

"  Hear  ye  the  Glad  Good  News  from  Heaven  ?  " 

"Almost  Persuaded," 

"  Seeking  to  Save," 

"  No  Other  Name." 

There  is  Gospel  enough  in  almost  any  one  of  them  to  lead  a  troubled  soul  to 
Christ.  And  in  no  hymns  with  which  I  am  acquainted,  not  even  Charles 
Wesley's,  is  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  the  blood  of  Christ  as  the  sacrifice  for 
sin.  so  clearly  stated,  so  fully  emphasized  5  and  no  wonder — these  songs  were 
born  in  the  closet  and  at  the  foot  of  the  cross. 

This  is  why,  as  Mr.  Moody  testifies,  no  songs  so  lay  hold  of  people's  hearts. 
In  words  and  music  they  are  surcharged  with  the  very  spirit  of  the  Gospel.  And 
herein  lies  the  secret  of  the  power  which  they  are  destined  to  wield  in  after 
years.  Take  the  hymns  that  have  wrought  themselves  imperishably  into  the 
affections  of  God's  people,  such,  for  example,  as  : 

"  Rock  of  Ages," 

"Just  as  I  am," 

"  Nearer,  my  God,  to  Thee," 

"  Jesus,  Lover  of  My  Soul," 

"  All  hail  the  Power  of  Jesus'  Name," 

and  what  is  the  reason  of  the  place  they  hold  ?  Obviously  this,  that  they  em 
body  truths  which  go  to  the  heart  of  the  Gospel,  truths  that  have  to  do  with 
the  most  vital  experiences  of  the  soul  in  seeking  and  working  out  salvation. 
So  of  these  songs  of  Philip  Bliss.  And  this  is  why  the  Chinese  and  the  Zulus 
sing  them.  They  do  not  sing  "  Hail  Columbia-,"  or  the  "Star  Spangled  Ban 
ner."  They  do  not  care  for  the  story  of  our  native  land ;  they  have  no  interest 
in  either  its  past  or  its  future.  But  the  story  of  Jesus  Christ,  of  the  Lamb 
slain  that  sinners  might  have  pardon,  that  story  finds  a  response  in  their  hearts. 
They  kiiow  they  are  in  darkness.  They  know  they  are  in  trouble.  They 
know  the  curse  of  sin  binds  its  yoke  upon  their  souls,  keeps  its  cry  of  woe 
upon  their  lips.  And  when  they  hear  these  songs,  they  recognize  the  offer  of 
help,  the  opening  up  of  a  way  of  deliverance.  In  a  word,  the  conscious  want 
of  men  the  world  over  is  Christ,  and  these  songs  preach  Him.  They  press  him  so 
fully,  that  if  a  ship  were  wrecked  among  the  South  Sea  Islands,  where  no  mis 
sionary  has  ever  yet  set  foot,  and  the  survivors  should  have  no  Bliss,  nothing 
but  a  copy  of  the  "  Gospel  Songs,"  I  should  expect  in  five  years  to  find 
churches  and  Sunday  Schools  and  revivals  and  missions  among  the  heathen 
round  about. 

They  have  been  most  wonderfully  blessed  already.  At  the  farewell  meet 
ing  in  London,  after  the  labors  of  Brother  Moody  and  Brother  Sankey  were 
closed  in  that  city,  Lord  Shaftesbury  said  that  "if  Mr.  Sankey  had  done  no 
more  than  teach  the  people  to  sing  '  Hold  the  Fort,'  he  would  have  conferred 
an  inestimable  blessing  on  the  British  Empire."  Mr.  Sankey  bears  witness 
that  these  songs  laid  hold  of  the  English  people  with  wonderful  power.  Major 
Cole  says,  "  the  ragged  children  of  London,  children  who  are  largely  street,  waifs 
living  in  the  utmost  ignorance  and  degradation,  flocked  to  hear  and  sing  these 
songs  till  they  had  ten  thousand  of  them  at  a  gathering.  And  to  this  day,  they 


336  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

are  to  be  heard  on  the  streets,  in  the  courtyards,  stables,  shops,  factories,  homes, 
everywhere.  Mothers  rock  their  babes  to  sleep  with  them  alike  among  the 
rich  and  the  poor.  Nobility  and  peasantry  find  common  inspiration  in  them, 
and  to  the  suffering  and  dying  of  every  rank  they  minister  inexpressible 
blessing. 

But  their  grandest  work,  at  home  and  abroad,  has  been  in  preaching  the 
Gospel  and  winning  souls.  Let  me  give  a  single  illustration  of  many  connected 
with  the  recent  revival  services  in  Chicago.  One  of  the  reformed  inebriates 
gays  that  he  had  been  for  years  one  of  the  hardest  of  drinkers.  His  friends 
had  given  him  up  as  a  hopeless  case,  and  he  had  given  up  himself  and  expected 
to  die  as  he  lived,  and  meet  a  drunkard's  awful  doom.  In  this  condition  he 
came  to  Chicago,  and  one  day,  when  more  than  half-intoxicated,  wandered 
aimlessly  with  the  crowd  into  the  Tabernacle,  and  found  a  seat  in  the  gallery. 
He  was  too  intoxicated  to  know  much  about  what  was  going  on,  and  did  not  re 
member  anything  about  the  text  or  the  sermon.  During  the  evening,  Mr.  San- 
key  sang  "  What  shall  the  Harvest  be  ?  "  And  when  he  came  to  the  words — 

"  Sowing  the  seed  of  a  lingering  pain, 
Sowing  the  seed  of  a  maddened  brain, 
Sowing  the  seed  of  a  tarnished  name, 
Sowing  the  seed  of  eternal  shame  ; 
O,  what  shall  the  harvest  be  ?  " 

the  singer's  voice  rang  through  the  inebriate  like  a  trump  of  judgment,  and 
fairly  sobered  him.  The  conscience  so  long  dead  was  roused  and  began  to 
lash  him  with  the  words  of  the  song.  His  wasted,  wretched  life  passed  in 
painful  review  before  him.  The  promise  of  his  youth  blighted,  the  ambitions 
and  hopes  of  manhood  turned  to  ashes,  his  family  beggared  and  disgraced  ; 
his  name  a  byword  of  shame,  his  friends  among  the  pure  and  good  all  alienated 
and  his  fellowship  only  with  the  low  and  vile,  his  whole  career  one  dark, 
damning  record  of  folly  and  sin,  and  before  him  a  gathering  night  of  hopeless 
despair — he  could  not  endure  the  torment  of  such  a  vision.  It  was  hell  before 
the  time.  So  he  went  out  and  tried  to  drown  the  song  in  drink.  But  it  would 
not  die.  It  rang  in  his  ears  by  day  and  by  night,  and  forced  him  again  and 
again  to  the  Tabernacle.  By  and  by  his  sin  so  burdened  him  that  he  went  to 
Mr.  Sawyer's  inquiry  room,  and  there  God  met  him,  took  his  feet  out  of  the 
horrible  pit,  planted  them  on  the  Rock  and  put  a  new  song  into  his  mouth. 
And  now  he  is  doing  with  his  might  to  help  others  bound  by  the  same  curse 
find  the  blessed  liberty  of  the  Gospel. 

This  is  only  one  case  of  scores,  that  during  this  single  revival  have  been 
led  into  the  kingdom  through  the  agency  of  these  hymns.  So  it  has  been 
elsewhere,  so  it  will  continue  to  be.  I  believe,  with  Mr.  Moody,  that  God 
raised  up  Philip  Bliss  as  truly  as  Charles  Wesley  to  save  men  by  singing  the 
Gospel.  And  herein  lies  the  guaranty  of  a  mighty  harvest  of  souls  in  the  days 
to  come.  Few  of  us  have  ever  read  John  Wesley's  or  Isaac  Barrow's  sermons  ; 
but  there  are  none  of  us  who  do  not  sing  Charles  Wesley's  hymns,  and  Isaac 
Watts'  versions  of  the  Psalms.  The  preacher's  horizon  relatively  to  the 


ADDRESS  OF  REV.    DR.    GOODWIK.  337 

singer's  is  an  exceedingly  narrow  one.  He  may  reach  the  men  of  his  city, 
his  country,  his  age,  possibly  a  handful  in  other  lands  and  in  after  years ; 
but  the  singer's  voice  ranges  all  lands,  all  ages.  Not  only  does  it  not  die,  but 
it  gathers  potency  with  every  cycle  of  years.  Such  hymns  as  Rock  of  Ages, 
Just  as  I  Am,  My  Faith  looks  up  to  Thee,  will  be  sung  as  long  as  there  are 
saints  to  be  helped  or  sinners  to  be  saved.  Every  generation  will  only  widen 
their  influence  and  magnify  their  power  as  agencies  which  God  delights  to 
honor.  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  some  of  my  Brother  Bliss'  songs  will  go 
down  the  future  side  by  side  with  these  in  their  ministry  of  Christ  and  salva 
tion.  And  the  fruitage  of  his  life  before  God  called  him,  blessed  as  it  was, 
compared  with  that  which  shall  yet  be  garnered,  will  prove  only  as  the  first 
fruits  to  an  ingathering  that  only  the  arithmetic  of  heaven  can  measure.  He 
dropped  the  seeds  by  handfuls,  but  the  harvest  shall  wave  like  Lebanon. 

While  I  say  these  things,  I  do  not  forget  how  thoroughly  identified  with 
our  brother  in  all  his  aims  and  work,  was  his  dear  wife,  over  whose  early  going 
home  we  both  mourn  and  rejoice  to-day.  She  not  only  cheerfully  accepted  the 
call  of  Providence  which  took  her  husband  so  largely  from  home,  but  with 
constant  and  potent  aid  of  voice  and  pen  she  helped  to  crown  his  work  with 
an  abundant  success.  He  appreciated  such  cooperation,  and  often  recognized 
it,  saying  that  he  "  was  more  indebted  to  his  wife  than  any  one  else  for  what 
he  was  and  what  he  had  done."  "  Lovely  and  pleasant  in  their  lives,  in  their 
death  they  were  not  divided."  Their  memories  are  alike  precious,  and  their 
works  will  alike  follow  them. 

In  the  mountains  of  the  Tyrol,  it  is  the  custom  of  the  mothers,  and  wives 
and  children  to  go  forth  when  the  twilight  gathers,  to  welcome  home  their 
husbands,  and  fathers  and  sons,  from  their  care  of  the  flocks  up  the  mountain 
heights.  And  as  they  go  they  sing  a  strain  or  two  of  some  national  air,  and 
then  listen,  till  apparently  from  the  clouds  there  float  down  to  them  the  answer 
ing  refrains,  and  they  know  that  all  is  well,  and  that  ere  long  they  will  see  the 
faces  and  be  clasped  in  the  arms  of  those  they  love.  Something  so  may  we 
not  venture  to  imagine  it  here.  In  the  deepening  twilight  of  our  sorrow  we 
lift  our  eyes  to  the  uplands  of  the  better  country,  longing  for  the  fellowship  of 
these  dear  departed  ones.  And  as  we  look,  the  sweet  strains  they  taught  us  and 
which  we  were  wont  to  sing  together,  break  instinctively  from  our  lips,  and 
lo,  in  the  pauses  of  our  song  there  seems  to  float  down  to  us  from  the  heavenly 
heights  the  refrain  borrowed  from  our  lips,  "  Watching  and  waiting  for  you." 
Dear  friends,  we  are  the  pilgrims,  and  these  who  have  gone  before  are  the 
ones  at  home.  And  a  little  way  on,  a  few  more  steps  only  of  this  rough  and 
thorny  way,  after  a  few  more  pains,  and  griefs,  and  tears,  and  a  little  more 
blessed  toil  for  Christ  and  for  souls,  we  shall  receive  their  welcome,  share  their 
joy,  and  abide  in  our  Father's  house  forever. 

I  should  be  unfaithful  to  the  spirit  of  my  brother,  and  to  the  significance 
of  this  Providence,  if  I  did  not  add  a  word  of  solemn  admonition.  Dear  friends, 
you  have  been  wont,  some  of  you,  to  meet  the  appeals  of  the  Gospel  for  your 
personal  acceptance  of  Christ,  with  that  old  excuse,  "  when  I  have  a  conve 
nient  season."  Very  possibly  you  used  it,  or  had  it  in  your  thought,  when  you 
22 


338  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

were  pressed  by  my  brother  during  these  last  meetings  held  here  the  week 
before  he  died.  You  may  have  sat  where  you  now  do,  and  as  his  loving  eye 
searched  you  out,  and  his  tender  entreaty  fell  on  your  ear,  you  may  have 
answered,  "  Yes,  I  ought  to  decide  for  Christ,  I  ought  to  make  sure  of  the  sal 
vation  of  my  soul,  and  when  I  have  a  convenient  season,  I  will."  Ah,  that 
hoary  lie,  how  many  souls  it  has  deluded  into  perdition.  What  a  mighty 
witness  this  catastrophe  to  the  Scripture  doctrine — now  is  the  accepted  time. 
Suppose  our  brother  had  gone  through  that  train  on  that  fatal  evening  and 
said  to  his  fellow-travelers,  "  We  propose  to  have  a  little  Gospel  meeting  in  the 
parlor  car.  We  will  sing  a  few  hymns,  have  a  word  or  two  of  Scripture,  and 
a  few  testimonies  and  prayers  as  any  feel  inclined.  We  should  be  glad  to  have 
you  there."  Suppose,  further,  that  such  a  meeting  had  been  held,  and  that 
just  before  the  train  reached  Ashtabula,  Mr.  Bliss  had  said  :  "Friends, this  has 
been  a  delightful  hour.  It  has  made  heaven  seem  very  near,  and  eternal  things 
very  real.  It  is  not  to  be  expected  that  we  shall  ever  meet  again,  and  now  be 
fore  we  part,  I  feel  impressed  to  invite  any  who  have  not  yet  accepted  Christ, 
to  receive  Him  now.  Now  He  stands  at  the  door.  Now  the  Spirit  calls.  To 
morrow  may  be  too  late.  I  will  sing  a  little  song  and  while  I  sing,  will  not 
those  present  without  conscious  peace  with  God,  make  the  great  decision." 
Then,  after  singing  in  his  touching  way  "  Almost  Persuaded,"  imagine  that  just 
as  the  whistle  sounded  for  their  last  stop,  he  closed  the  meeting.  What  various 
comments  would  have  followed.  Let  us  hope  that  there  would  have  been  one 
or  two  at  least  to  accept  the  offered  salvation  and  to  pass  from  death  unto  life. 
But  the  greater  number  would  doubtless  have  stood  aloof.  Some  would  have 
said,  "  This  gentleman  sings  well,  I  should  like  to  hear  him  in  a  concert  where 
they  had  something  besides  hymns."  Some,  "  This  matter  of  salvation  is  of 
great  importance  ;  I  have  often  wished  I  were  a  Christian,  and  when  New 
Year's  comes  round  I  believe  I  will  set  about  being  one  in  earnest."  Others, 
''  These  evangelists  are  all  alike  ;  they  don't  think  it  impertinent  to  interrupt 
a  game  of  cards,  as  this  one  did  ours,  or  a  pleasant  story,  or  conversation. 
Then  they  are  always  talking  about  'blood,'  and  '  wrath,'  and  despair,  and 
making  every  one  feel  so  uncomfortable.  I  wish  they  would  keep  their  reli 
gion  to  themselves."  Possibly  some  would  have  sneered,  and  as  they  stepped 
on  board  as  the  train  started  from  Ashtabula,  said,  "  what  folly  to  be  frightened 
into  getting  on  one's  knees  and  crying  for  forgiveness  here  on  the  cars  !  There 
will  be  time  enough  for  that  when  we  get  home.  They  are  having  a  revival 
in  our  town,  and  the  true  place  to  settle  such  a  question  is  a  church,  or  a  man's 
home."  Then  a  moment  of  adjustment  to  their  places,  the  cards  dealt,  the 
books  resumed,  the  jests  exchanged,  the  storm  noted  and  their  watches  exam 
ined  to  see  how  late  they  would  be  at  Cleveland :  then  that  terrific  plunge— 
the  convenient  season  forever  beyond  their  reach  ! 

Oh,  friend,  if  you  are  here  unsaved,  let  the  voice  of  this  dreadful  calamity 
emphasize  that  one  word  now.  The  word  of  God  has  no  invitation,  no  promise 
for  to-morrow.  Repent  now.  Believe  now.  Escape  for  thy  life  now.  May  God 
help  you  every  one  to  believe  this  day  OE  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  to  be 
saved. 


ADDRESS   OF   MAJOR  WHITTLE.  339 

At  the  close  of  Mr.  Goodwin's  address,  Major  Whittle  announced 
as  a  closing  song  a  hymn  that  had  just  been  found  among  Mr.  Bliss' 
papers — probably  his  latest  work — entitled  "  He  Knows."  He 
remarked  that  had  Mr.  Bliss  desired  to  leave  a  special  message  of 
comfort  to  his  bereaved  friends  appropriate  to  their  present  calamity, 
he  could  not  have  left  anything  more  beautiful  or  more  comforting. 

So  I  go  on  in  the  dark,  not  knowing ; 

I  would  not  if  I  might  ; 
I  would  rather  walk  with  God  in  the  dark 

Than  walk  alone  in  the  light ; 
I  would  rather  walk  with  Him  by  faith 

Than  walk  alone  by  sight. 

Before  the  singing  of  the  hymn  Major  Whittle  briefly  addressed 
the  people  as  follows  : 

I  cannot  but  say  a  word  to  God's  people  who  are  here  in  this  village.  It 
seems  to  me  that  Christian  men  and  women  here  should  consecrate  themselves 
anew  to  God.  It  is  not  a  light  thing  to  have  the  providence  of  God  corne  to 
any  of  us  as  it  has  come  to  you.  You  have  had  two  of  God's  servants  among  you. 
Mrs.  Bliss  stood  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  her  husband,  consecrated  to  God, 
ripening  for  Heaven ;  a  noble,  Christian  woman  ;  my  sister  in  Christ  Jesus.  I 
loved  her  as  I  loved  her  husband.  You  have  had  these  two  servants  of  God 
and  they  have  left  their  testimony  here.  Dear  friends,  I  would  not  want  to  die 
in  this  village  professing  to  be  a  Christian,  and  go  up  to  God  with  a  barren 
record. 

Some  of  you  went  to  school  with  them  and  know  how  right  down  thorough 
they  were.  Take  up  this  work.  Let  the  memory  of  this  dear  brother  inspire 
us.  Let -his  songs  inspire  us.  His  heart  was  here  in  Rome.  He  prayed  for 
you  here  in  Rome.  He  loved  these  hills.  This  valley  was  dear  to  him. 

A  year  ago  he  started  a  union  Sabbath  School,  for  he  loved  the  children. 
Consecrate  yourselves  anew  to  this  work.  Let  his  name  be  attached  to  a  union 
Sunday  School.  And  as  the  echo  of  his  glorious  voice  has  rung  over  these 
hills,  may  it  never  die  away  till  we  are  called  to  meet  him  in  glory. 

You  loved  that  noble  man  as  a  brother.  You  loved  his  wife,  that  dear,  dear 
sister.  You  could  not  bear  to  have  a  word  said  against  him.  But  you  grieved 
Philip  Bliss  in  the  deepest  sympathy  of  his  heart.  When  he  looked  back  upon 
these  hills  for  the  last  time,  he  carried  away  an  ache  in  his  heart  that  many  of 
you  had  a  part  in  putting  there.  You  never  have  given  your  hearts  to  his 
Savior.  Philip  Bliss  loved  Jesus  Christ ;  and  that  anybody  that  he  loved 
should  not  love  Jesus  Christ  made  his  heart  ache.  All  the  best  impulses  of 
your  heart  are  upon  the  side  of  Jesus.  My  friends,  I  beg  of  you  in  the  name  of 
Christ,  in  the  name  of  Philip  Bliss,  in  the  name  of  his  dear  wife  who  grew  up 


340  MEMOIR   OF   P.    P.    BLISS. 

in  your  valley,  and  is  now  in  Heaven,  I  beg  of  you,  young  women,  young  men, 
middle  aged,  give  your  hearts  to  God. 

I  do  pray  God  that  this  may  be  a  blessed  day  to  this  valley,  to  these  pastors, 
and  to  friends  all.  And  I  want  Brother  Goodwin  to  lead  us  in  prayer  before 
we  sing,  that  we  may  consecrate  ourselves  to  the  service  of  our  Master,  and 
tkat  you  will  decide :  I  take  Philip  Bliss'  Savior  as  my  Savior,  his  God  as  my 
God. 

The  Elmira  (New  York)  Advertiser,  from  which  we  have  largely 
drawn  for  the  materials  for  this  chapter,  says  : 

"  The  services  were  about  two  hours  and  a  half  in  duration  and 
were  very  solemn  and  impressive  throughout.  The  many  relatives 
of  the  deceased,  and  the  fact  of  this  having  been  the  home  of  their 
childhood,  and  many  present  remembering  them  as  schoolmates  and 
early  friends,  made  it  seem  to  the  whole  community  like  a  house 
hold  grief.  Never  has  any  event  in  the  history  of  this  beautiful 
valley  so  profoundly  moved  its  population.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  were 
enthroned  in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  Their  memory  will  linger 
long  round  those  beautiful  hills  and  among  the  people  of  the  Wy- 
socken  Valley ; — the  place  they  loved  to  call  their  earthly  home. 
His  last  labor  for  the  Master  was  done  here.  During  the  two  weeks 
of  his  holiday  visit  he  held  almost  nightly  meetings  and  visited  from 
house  to  house,  inviting  his  friends  to  accept  Christ.  God  blessed 
his  labors,  and  a  score  or  more  during  his  visit  turned  to  the  Savior. 

"  At  an  afternoon  service  on  the  day  of  the  funeral,  many  more 
who  had  been  impressed  during  Mr.  Bliss'  labors  publicly  manifested 
their  decision  to  accept  Christ  and  commence  a  Christian  life. 

"  By  special  request,  a  union  meeting  was  also  held  in  Towanda  in 
the  evening — a  memorial  service  participated  in  by  all  the  pastors 
and  people.  Rev.  Darwin  Cook,  pastor  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  twenty 
years  ago  in  Some,  who  gave  Mr.  Bliss  his  first  encouragement  to 
devote  himself  to  the  composition  of  music,  and  who  married  them, 
was  present  and  offered  prayer.  Upon  invitation,  at  the  close,  a 
large  number  rose  as  desiring  the  prayers  of  Christians  that  they 
might  enter  into  a  Christian  experience." 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 


THE  MEMORIAL  SERVICES  IN  CHICAGO — ADDRESSES  BY  MR.  MOODY,    DR.  GOOD 
WIN,  AND  OTHERS— THE   SONG  SERVICE  AT  THE  TABERNACLE. 

FOR  the  account  of  the  memorial  services  held  in  Chicago,  we  are 
much  indebted  to  the  daily  newspapers,  and  have  in  part 
adopted  their  language  as  our  own,  as  it  eloquently  portrays  the 
character  of  the  services  and  the  deep  feeling  betrayed  by  the  people. 

A  large  congregation  assembled  at  the  Tabernacle  on  Sunday 
morning,  December  31,  1876.  Mr.  Moody  had  announced  a  sermon 
on  "  The  Return  of  Our  Lord,"  but  from  the  drapery  of  mourning 
around  the  platform  and  the  galleries,  with  its  heavy  lines  and 
festoons  of  black  and  white,  and  the  pure  beautiful  white  crowns 
which  stood  upon  the  speaker's  stand,  it  was  evident  that,  instead  of 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  us,  the  topic  of  the  morning  was  to  be 
the  departure  of  loved  ones  to  Him.  The  announcement  in  the 
papers  that  Mr.  Bliss,  with  his  entire  family,  had  perished  in  the 
fearful  wreck  of  the  railway  train  at  Ash  tabula,  Ohio,  fell  with  such 
weight  upon  the  ears  and  hearts  of  his  thousands  of  friends  in 
Chicago,  that  for  hours  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  realize  it,  or 
even  to  believe  it  to  be  true.  But,  if  any  of  them  went  with  linger 
ing  hopes  to  the  meeting,  one  look  at  the  great  Tabernacle  with  its 
emblems  of  death  overhanging  the  promises  of  eternal  life  which  are 
inscribed  on  its  walls,  was  sufficient  to  show  that  the  only  hope  of 
ever  seeing  or  hearing  this  sweet  singer  of  our  Israel  again  was  in 
joining  him  on  the  other  shore.  Four  crowns  all  together,  and  all 
for  one  family !  Not  often  does  heaven  bestow  so  lavishly.  One  for 
Paul,  one  for  "  Paulina,"  one  for  the  son  who  bore  his  father's  name, 
and  one  for  little  George  Goodwin ;  these  crowns  are  woven  of  pure 
white  camellias  and  lilies,  but  those  crowns  are  made  of  "  glory." 

While  the  congregation  was  assembling  the  choir  sang  softly  and 
lovingly  several  of  the  favorite  hymns  written  by  the  man  whose 
name  Death  had  written  on  the  tablets  of  history,  and  whose  record 


343  MEMOIR  OF   P.   P.    BLISS. 

God  had  written  in  the  Book  of  Life.  Presently  Mr.  Moody  entered, 
and,  as  all  eyes  were  turned  to  see  how  this  man,  twice  broken  under 
the  weight  of  affliction  since  these  meetings  began,  would  bear 
himself,  and  as  all  ears  were  listening  for  his  first  word  in  his  great 
sorrow,  he  stood  up  in  his  place  and,  with  manifest  trouble  to  keep 
back  the  sobs  and  tears,  he  repeated  those  words  of  David,  "  Know 
ye  not  that  there  is  a  Prince  and  a  great  man  fallen  in  Israel ! " 
Then,  almost  unable  to  speak  for  weeping,  he  said,  "  Let  us  lift  up 
our  hearts  to  God  in  silent  prayer."  A  long  period  of  silence  fol 
lowed,  broken  at  length  by  signs  of  overpowering  emotion,  in  the 
midst  of  which  the  voice  of  Dr.  Chamberlain  was  heard  giving 
thanks  to  God  for  the  hope  of  eternal  life,  on  behalf  of  this  entire 
household  who  had  been  borne  on  angels'  wings  from  the  place  ol 
terror  and  death  up  to  the  bosom  of  God. 

The  congregation  then  joined  in  singing:  "In  the  Christian's 
Home  in  Glory  there  Kemains  a  Land  of  Rest;"  after  which 
Mr.  Moody  arose  and  said: 

I  was  to  take  up  the  subject  of  our  Lord's  return,  but  I  cannot  control  mj 
feelings  so  as  to  speak  as  I  intended.  I  will  take  up  that  subject  at  auothei 
time.  When  I  heard  last  night  that  Mr.  Bliss  and  his  whole  family  had 
perished,  at  first  I  could  not  believe  it,  but  a  despatch  from  a  friend  who  was  or 
the  train  took  away  all  hope,  and  left  me  face  to  face  with  death.  For  the  pasl 
three  months  I  have  seemed  to  stand  between  the  living  and  the  dead,  and  nov» 
I  am  to  stand  in  the  place  of  the  dead.  Mr.  Whittle  and  Mr.  Bliss  wert 
announced  to  hold  the  4  o'clock  meeting  in  the  Tabernacle  to-day,  and  no\\ 
Mr.  Farwell,  and  Mr.  Jacobs,  and  Mr.  Whittle,  with  other  friends,  have  gone  tc 
see  if  they  can  find  his  remains  to  take  them  away  for  burial.  I  have  beer 
looking  over  his  hymns  to  see  if  I  could  find  one  appropriate  to  the  occasion, 
but  I  find  they  are  all  like  himself,  full  of  hope  and  cheer.  In  all  the  years  1 
have  known  and  worked  with  him  I  have  never  once  seen  him  cast  down.  Bui 
here  is  a  hymn  of  his  that  I  thought  we  might  sing.  Once  after  the  wreck  ol 
that  steamer  at  Cleveland,  I  was  speaking  of  the  circumstance  that  the  lowei 
lights  were  out,  and  the  next  time  we  met  he  sang  this  hymn  for  me  ;  it  is  the 
sixty-fifth  in  our  collection ;  let  us  sing  it  now.  It  begins,  "  Brightly  beams  oui 
Father's  mercy,"  but  still  more  brightly  beams  the  light  along  the  shore  tc 
which  he  has  passed.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  a  terrible  storm  he  passed  away, 
but  the  lights  which  he  kindled  are  burning  all  along  the  shore.  He  has  died 
young, — only  about  38  years  old, — but  his  hymns  are  sung  round  the  world, 
Only  a  little  while  ago  we  received  a  copy  of  these  hymns  translated  into  the 
Chinese  language. 

In  spite  of  the  mourning  it  is  sweet  to  think  that  this  whole  family  passed 
away  together,  father  and  mother,  Paul,  only  4  years  old,  and  little  George,  only 


MEMOIUAL   SERVICES   IH  CHICAGO.  343 

2  years  old,  all  gone  home  safe  together.  There  comes  a  voice  to  us  saying, 
"Be  still  and  know  that  I  am  God,"  but  we  know  that  "  our  Father  doeth  all 
things  well." 

The  sixty-fifth  hymn  was  then  sung. 

Mr.  Sankey  read  from  a  letter  he  had  received  from  Mr.  Bliss 
near  his  old  home  in  Towanda,  Pa.,  in  which  his  happy  faith  in  God 
and  his  love  for  his  dear  old  mother  were  sweetly  expressed. 

Rev.  Dr.  Goodwin,  of  whose  church  Mr.  Bliss  had  for  many 
years  been  a  loved  and  honored  member,  then  came  forward 
and  said : 

Ever  since  these  sad  tidings  came  I  have  been  trying  to  say,  "  Not  my  will, 
but  Thine  be  done."  I  don't  know  of  any  death  that  has  come  so  near  to  me. 
For  years  I  have  been  almost  as  a  part  of  that  household  ;  one  of  the  little  ones 
bore  my  name ;  we  have  worked  and  prayed  together,  and  I  have  known  very 
much  of  his  heart  in  connection  with  the  great  mission  of  his  life,  and  shared  in 
his  ever-increasing  delight  that  God  .vas  using  him  and  his  music  so  wonder 
fully.  It  was  hours  after  the  awful  news  came  before  I  could  see  any  light, 
but  at  last  I  seemed  to  see  a  vision  of  a  great  praise  service  in  heaven  with 
Brother  Bliss  leading  it — he  was  to  have  led  a  praise  meeting  at  our  Sunday- 
school  this  afternoon — and  then  I  found  light  in  this  darkness.  Out  of  the  fifty 
Sunday-school  scholars  who  are  xiow  waiting  to  be  received  into  the  fellowship 
of  our  church,  there  is  hardly  one  but  can  bear  witness  to  his  helpfulness  in 
leading  them  to  Christ.  This  morning  it  seems  wonderful  to  me  that  this  whole 
family  should  be  taken  up  together,  all  at  once,  to  enter  the  world  of  praise  and 
take  up  the  new  song ;  a  f nil  household  now,  for  one  had  gone  before.  Out  of 
this  affliction  has  come  V»  them  an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory,  and  so 
I  begin  to  feel  it,  a£  we'i  as  say  it,  all  is  well,  all  is  well.  It  is  not  that  the 
Lord  does  not  care  for  us ;  but  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death 
of  His  saints,"  and  "  The  day  of  his  death  is  better  than  the  day  of  his  birth.'' 
Thirty -five  tina^s  have  I  been  called  this  year  to  comfort  the  mourning  ones  in 
my  congregation,  and  the  thought  has  come  to  me  of  a  little  praise  meeting  in 
Heaven  to-day  of  those  who  have  come  up  from  that  First  Congregational 
Church.  This  is  not  the  time  to  speak  as  I  would  like  to  speak,  but  this  I  can 
say,  that  no  man  is  so  identified  with  the  work  of  the  Lord  but  that  God  can 
glorify  him,  and  still  carry  on  the  work.  Here  is  that  thirteenth  hymn  which 
Mr.  Bliss  sung  for  us  the  other  night.  He  began  by  saying,  "  Brethren,  I  don't 
know  as  I  shall  ever  sing  here  again  (and  he  never  did),  but  I  want  to  sing  this 
as  the  language  of  my  heart." 

"  Let  us  sing  that  hymn,"  said  Mr.  Moody,  which  was  done. 

The  next  speaker  was  Rev.  Dr.  Thompson,  who  had  only  the 
previous  evening  returned  from  a  double  funeral  service  among  his 
relatives  in  another  State,  to  which  he  had  been  summoned  by 


344  MEMOIKS   OF   P.   P.   BLISS. 

telegraph,  and  where  he  had  been  singing  the  hymns  of  Brother 
Bliss  at  the  bedside  of  the  sick  at  the  very  hour  of  the  awful 
calamity.  He  has  learned,  said  the  Doctor,  the  form  of  his  mansion 
fair,  and  the  song  that  the  angels  sing.  "  A  few  days  ago  I  received  a 
letter  from  a  friend  who  had  been  annoyed  at  the  charge  that 
Brother  Bliss  sang  for  gain,  and  desiring  me  to  disprove  it  if  I 
could;  and  when  I  spoke  to  him  about  it,  he  said,  with  a  smile: 
4 1  sing  for  Christ ;  I  have  not  even  a  home  to  my  name.'  His 
songs  are  sung  round  the  world,  and  it  seems  to  me  they  are  sung  in 
glory,  too.  By  and  by  the*  work  of  the  preacher  will  be  done,  but 
the  singing  will  go  on  forever  ;  singing  the  name  of  Jesus  and  the 
triumph  of  the  redeemed." 

After  further  remarks  by  Mr.  Moody,  prayer  was  offered  by  Kev. 
Dr.  Williamson,  especially  in  behalf  of  the  mother  of  the  deceased. 
The  twenty-second  hymn  was  then  sung — "  We're  Going  Home.'' 

Mr.  Moody  then  appointed  two  committees;  the  first  to  raise 
money  and  erect  a  monument  to  the  memory  of  the  dead,  consisting 
of  Messrs.  T.  W.  Harvey,  J.  Y.  Farwell,  Henry  Field,  and 
J.  D.  Sankey.  Mr.  Henry  Field,  of  Field,  Leiter  &  Co.,  was 
appointed  treasurer  of  this  fund,  to  whom  all  contributions  may  be 
addressed.  Mr.  Moody  requested  that  as  there  were  so  many  who 
would  want  a  share  in  this  work  of  love,  that  none  should  give  more 
than  a  dollar. 

A  collection  was  then  taken  for  that  purpose,  the  only  one  ever 
taken  in  the  Tabernacle. 

The  other  committee  was  to  draft  resolutions  and  communicate 
them  to  the  friends  of  the  deceased.  It  consists  of  the  Rev.  Messrs. 
Goodwin,  Bishop  Cheney,  Dr.  Parkhurst,  Dr.  Everts  and  Dr.  Petrie. 
The  benediction  was  pronounced  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Walker. 
At  the  afternoon  services,  the  Tabernacle  was  more  than  com 
fortably  filled.  Those  who  were  there  wore  on  their  countenances  a 
funeral  aspect.  Around  the  pulpit  and  along  the  gallery  were  long 
stretches  of  white  and  black  muslin,  festooned  in  grieving  recollec 
tions  of  Mr.  Bliss'  untimely  end.  A  spirit  of  sadness  prevailed,  and 
the  religion  that  teaches  that  the  death  of  good  men  should  bring  no 
mourning  in  its  train  seemed  to  bring  very  little  consolation  to  the 
vast  number  of  sorrowing  friends,  so  sudden  had  been  their 
bereavement. 

The  usual  exercises  opened  with  music. 


MEMORIAL   SERVICES  IN  CHICAGO.  345 

I  gave  my  life  for  tliee, 

My  precious  blood  I  shed 
That  thou  might'st  ransomed  be 

And  quickened  from  the  dead — 
I  gave,  I  gave  My  life  for  thee ; 
What  hast  thou  given  for  Me  ? 

Mr.  Moody  had  hoped  for  some  better  news,  he  said;  hoped  that 
it  might  turn  out  to  be  a  mistake,  but  a  late  despatch  from  Maj. 
Whittle  dispelled  all  this,  and  confirmed  the  first  horrible  report  of 
the  death  of  Mr.  Bliss  and  his  family,  whose  remains  had  been  re 
covered  though  not  recognizable. 

Mr.  Sankey  sang  "  Watching  and  Waiting  for  Me,"  and  the  audi 
ence  were  still  as  death  as  the  beautiful  words  rang  out. 

Mr.  Moody  said  that  he  had  looked  forward  to  this  Sabbath  to 
hear  Maj.  Whittle  preach  and  Mr.  Bliss  sing.  Only  Friday  night  he 
had  told  his  wife  that  he  was  weary,  and  he  anxiously  awaited  the 
rest  this  Sunday  promised.  But  now  he  found  he  must  take  Maj. 
Whittle's  place.  Only  one  text  suggested  itself  to  him,  and  had 
been  ringing  in  his  head  all  day :  '*  Therefore  be  ye  also  ready."  He 
called  on  those  who  had  heard  him  preach  for  three  months  to  bear 
him  witness  that  he  had  said  nothing  about  death,  confining  himself 
to  life.  But  it  might  be  that  before  long  God  might  lay  him  away,  and 
send  some  one  to  take  his  place,  and  he  could  not  forbear  saying  a 
word  urging  upon  all  the  necessity  of  regeneration  and  preparation. 
His  voice  was  more  subdued  than  usual,  and  in  all  he  said  and  in  all 
his  readings  from  the  Scriptures,  it  came  tremulously  and  mingled 
with  tears.  He  spoke  painfully  and  with  difficulty,  the  words  some, 
times  utterly  unintelligible.  "  Be  ye  therefore  ready.  Don't  put  it  off. 
There  are  some  who  may  say  I  am  preaching  for  effect  and  making 
use  of  this  good  man's  death  to  frighten  you."  Satan  might  even 
say  that  of  him  and  say  it  truly.  He  was  preaching  for  effect,  and 
he  hoped  the  effect  would  be  to  save  the  soul  of  every  human  being 
before  him.  He  felt  that  he  must  warn  them — must  warn  them  of 
the  wrath  to  come  and  the  death  pursuing.  That  death  hath  sent 
many  a  warning  during  the  year,  and  now  an  awful  one  had  come. 
Many  of  them  had  looked  down  upon  the  dead  faces  and  opened 
graves  of  departed  friends.  Would  they  not  heed  those  warnings  ? 
Would  they  not  heed  this  last  one,  that  might  be  even  nearer  to 
themselves  than  any  before  ?  .  Death  had  taken  them  by  surprise,  and 


346  MEMOIKS   OF   P.   P.    BLISS. 

had  taken  Mr.  Bliss  at  the  very  time  the  speaker  was  writing  out  the 
notices  of  Bliss'  appearance  to-day.  He  and  his  wife  were  snatched 
from  life.  But  they  were  ready.  They  might  have  suffered  for  a  few 
minutes,  maybe  for  an  hour,  but  when  they  reached  heaven  there 
was  none  in  all  the  celestial  choir  that  sang  sweeter  or  played  better 
on  his  golden  harp  than  P.  P.  Bliss. 

He  would  rather  have  been  on  that  train  and  taken  that  awful 
leap,  and  died  like  P.  P.  Bliss  and  his  wife,  than  had  them  go  as  they 
did.  And  every  man  would  feel  so  who  knew  God  and  was  ready 
to  die.  Oh  !  might  they  profit  by  the  calamity. 

Mr.  Moody  prayed  long  and  earnestly  for  the  unsaved  souls,  and 
invoked  the  richest  outpourings  of  mercy  on  the  obstinate  hearts. 
At  times  during  the  prayer  he  stopped  for  some  minutes,  utterly 
unable  to  control  his  emotions. 

•   Then  came  a  silent  prayer,  during  which  about  two  dozen  arose 
on  invitation,  to  be  remembered  in  the  invocation. 

"  Kock  of  Ages,"  sung  by  the  congregation,  closed  the  services. 

The  morning  services  on  the  same  day,  at  the  Chicago  Avenue 
Church — widely  and  popularly  known  as  "  Mr.  Moody's  Church  " — 
were  conducted  by  Messrs.  Moody  and  Sankey.  Mr.  Sankey  sang 
several  of  his  Gospel  solos,  one,  "  When  Jesus  Comes,"  a  favorite  of 
Mr.  Bliss,  creating  a  profound  impression  on  the  audience.  The 
whole  service— hymns,  prayers,  and  sermon — had  reference  to  the 
sad  end  of  Mr.  Bliss  and  the  dreadful  railroad  accident  of  Friday. 

Prior  to  the  sermon  Mr.  Moody  offered  up  a  fervent  prayer  for 
Divine  help  to  sustain  them  in  the  sad  bereavement  which  had  c&me 
upon  them.  , 

During  the  sermon  which  followed,  Mr.  Moody  said : 

This  being  the  last  day  of  the  year,  I  had  been  looking  forward  to  it  as  one 
of  the  most  solemn  days  of  the  year,  and  I  had  prepared  some  thoughts  to  bring 
out  on  this  occasion.  But  little  did  I  think  it  was  going  to  be  as  solemn  as  it 
is.  My  thoughts  have  been  drifted  into  another  channel  entirely.  A  text  came 
into  my  mind  when  I  heard  of  the  sudden  death  of  Mr.  Bliss  and  his  family. 
He  was  coming  to  the  city  to  fill  his  appointment  here  to-day.  He  was  to  have 
been  with  us  this  morning,  and  it  seems  almost  as  if  I  am  standing  in  the  place 
of  the  dead.  It  is  always  solemn  to  stand  between  the  living  and  the  dead,  as 
a  preacher  does  ;  but  it  is  a  great  deal  more  solemn  to  step  into  a  dead  man's 
shoes,  as  I  feel  to  have  done  to-day.  The  text  that  occurred  to  me  is  in  the 
twenty-fourth  chapter  of  Matthew  and  the  forty-fourth  verse  :  "  Therefore  be 
ye  also  ready."  Death  often  took  us  by  surprise,  but  it  did  not  find  Mr.  Bliss 


MEMORIAL   SERVICES   IN   CHICAGO.  347 

unprepared.  He  and  his  wife  had  been  ripening  for  heaven  for  years,  and  I 
have  been  thinking  of  that  family  before  the  throne  this  morning  singing  the 
sweetest  song  they  had  ever  sung.  We  should  profit  by  this  awful  calamity. 
God  is  coming  very  near  this  city  ;  there  was  never  before  such  an  inquiring 
after  God  as  there  is  now  ;  and  this  last  stroke  of  Providence  ought  to  be  a 
warning  to  every  one  to  get  in  readiness  to  meet  the  Lord.  If  you  do  not  take 
this  warning  I  do  not  know  what  would  move  your  hearts.  There  are  three 
things  every  man  and  woman  ought  to  be  ready  for— life,  death,  and  judgment. 
Life  is  uncertain  ;  no  man  can  tell  at  what  hour  or  in  what  manner  Death  may 
visit  him.  Accidents  like  the  one  which  occurred  Friday  are  by  no  means  un 
common,  and  may  strike  down  any  one  of  us.  It  therefore  behooves  every  man 
to  place  his  trust  in  Christ,  so  that  he  might  be  prepared  to  meet  Him  at  any 
moment. 

On  the  evening  of  the  5th  of  January,  an  additional  service  was 
held  at  the  Tabernacle.  Inside  the  building  there  were  at  least  8,000 
people ;  outside  there  were  4,000.  The  exercises  were  to  be  more 
than  ordinarily  interesting,  for  it  was  to  be  a  song-service  in  memory 
of  Mr.  Bliss.  Early  in  the  evening  the  crowd  assembled  to  pay  their 
last  tribute,  anxious  to  assist  in  the  rites.  The  Tabernacle  was  filled. 
The  doors  were  locked.  Those  inside  patiently  awaited  the  exercises. 
Outside,  the  unfortunates  pulled  and  pushed  and  crowded  against  the 
building  and  begged  and  implored  the  inexorable  doors  to  open  unto 
them.  It  was  of  no  avail.  Until  the  service  was  ended  the  disap 
pointed  held  possession  of  the  sidewalks,  hoping  to  hear  through  the 
open  windows,  even  if  they  could  not  participate. 

The  whole  service  was  musical,  with  a  brief  introduction  to  the 
hymns  by  Mr.  Moody  and  short  prayers. 

Hallelujah  !  'tis  done,  I  believe  on  the  Son, 
I  am  saved  by  the  blood  of  the  Crucified  One, 

and  the  congregation  took  up  the  chorus.  "  Hold  the  Fort "  came 
next,  the  children  singing  the  fourth  verse  and  the  choir  the  refrain. 
There  were  hundreds  of  young  voices  and  they  sang  with  a  will. 
Mr.  Moody  related  the  circumstances  under  which  the  hymn  was 
written. 

"  Beneath  the  Cross  of  Jesus,"  a  hymn  not  so  well  known  appa 
rently  as  the  rest,  was  sung  exquisitely  by  Mr.  Sankey.  Then  Mr. 
Moody  prefaced  "  Boll  on,  Oh !  Billow  of  Fire,"  with  an  anecdote  of 
its  basis.  To  the  children  again  was  committed  the  twenty-third 
hymn,  "  I  am  so  glad  that  Jesus  loves  me."  They  sang  sweetly,  and 


348  MEMOIRS   OP   P.   P.    BLISS. 

at  the  conclusion  there  was  a  rattle  of  applause  in  the  audience. 
"  Whosoever  will  may  come/'  brought  the  congregation  to  their 
feet. 

"  At  one  of  the  Expositions,"  said  Mr.  Moody,  "  a  common  invita 
tion  was, '  Meet  me  at  the  Fountain,'  and  upon  this  Mr.  Bliss  wrote 
the  hymn,  'Will  you  meet  me  at  the  Fountain?'"  Mr.  Sankey 
sang  it. 

"  Precious  promise  God  hath  given,"  and  Mr.  Moody  read  the 
twenty-third  psalm,  and  Mr.  Sankey  sang,  "  There's  a  Light  in  the 
Valley  for  Me."  "Weary  Gleaner,  Whence  Cometh  Thou?"  Mr. 
Moody  spoke  of  the  Gospel  meetings  in  New  York,  where  the  ser 
vice  had  been  entirely  of  song.  He  thought  such  meetings  profit 
able.  From  a  friend  he  had  learned  that  the  last  seen  of  Mr.  Bliss 
he  had  a  Bible  in  his  hand  and  was  composing  a  song  never  to 
be  heard  on  earth,  only  to  swell  the  waves  of  music  that  roll  across 
the  Heavens.  "  Only  an  Armor-bearer  Proudly  I  Stand,"  sang  Mr. 
Sankey,  the  congregation  joining  in  the  chorus.  "Fading  Away 
like  the  Stars  in  the  Morning,"  a  rich,  beautiful  hymn,  was  exqui 
sitely  rendered  by  Mrs.  Johnson,  and  Mr.  Sankey  followed  with 
"  Waiting  and  Watching,"  the  most  pathetic  of  all  Bliss'  music. 

"  Eock  of  Ages,"  to  the  music  composed  by  Mrs.  Bliss,  and  "  Hold 
the  Fort,"  were  sung  by  the  congregation  as  they  dispersed. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

MEMOBIAL    SEBVICES    AT    SOUTH    BEND,    ST.     PAUL,    LOUISVILLE,     NASHVILLE, 
KALAMAZOO  AND  PEOBIA. 

80  widely  was  Mr.  Bliss  known,  and  so  warmly  was  he  beloved, 
that  the  grief  at  his  death  was  well-nigh  universal  among  all 
professing  the  faith  of  Jesus.  Not  alone  at  Kome  and  Chicago,  but 
at  numerous  other  places,  memorial  services  were  held  in  honor  of 
the  dead  singer.  We  have  culled  largely  from  the  newspaper  reports 
of  these  services,  and  present  them  here  in  connected  form,  as  a  part 
of  the  record  this  book  was  designed  to  perpetuate. 

On  the  evening  of  January  21,  a  large  congregation  assembled  at 
the  Reformed  Church  in  South  Bend,  Indiana,  to  attend  the  services 
held  there  in  honor  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss,  which  were  conducted  by 
the  pastor,  Rev.  N.  D.  Williamson.  The  songs  sung  were  of  Mr. 
Bliss'  own  composition,  and  were  very  effectively  rendered  by  the 
choir  and  congregation.  Two — "  Eternity  "  and  "  Almost  Persuaded  " 
— were  sung  as  solos  by  Miss  Maud  Wellman.  The  pastor  enjoyed 
the  personal  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Bliss,  and  the  affectionate  regard 
which  he  entertained  for  him  was  evident  in  the  deep  feeling  betrayed 
by  the  tones  of  his  voice  in  discoursing  of  his  unspeakably  sad  fate. 
Many  of  the  congregation  also  knew  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss,  and  more 
than  one  gave  evidence  of  tears  to  the  manner  in'  which  their  hearts 
were  touched  by  the  dreadful  story.  At  the  close  of  the  sermon, 
Prof.  J.  Sydenham  Duer  read  with  tender  effect  the  lines  written  on 
Mr.  Bliss3  death  by  Rev.  Dr.  Pierson,  of  Detroit,  entitled  "The 
Silent  Harp."  Hon.  Schuyler  Colfax  had  intended  to  be  present  and 
pay  a  tribute  to  the  memory  of  Mr.  Bliss,  in  lieu  of  which  he  sent  a 
tender  and  beautiful  letter,  which  was  read  by  the  pastor.  Our 
limits  forbid  our  giving  it  space. 

Mr.  Williamson  selected  as  his  text  Revelation  xiv.  13  :  "  Blessed 
are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord — that  they  may  rest  from  their 


350  MEMOIES   OF   P.   P.   BLISS. 

labors,  and  their  works  do  follow  them."    We  copy  the  greater  por 
tion  of  his  discourse  : 

To  "  die  in  the  Lord  "  is  indeed  blessed.  But  to  die  in  the  Lord  it  is  not 
needful  that  you  die  in  your  hed,  at  the  close  of  a  wasting  sickness,  attended  by 
skillful  physicians,  surrounded  by  tearful  friends,  and  bearing  witness  with  your 
dying  breath  to  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  To  die  in  the  Lord  it  is  not  necessary  to 
have  your  body  garnitured  by  all  the  taste  and  skill  that  loving  friends  and 
experienced  undertakers  can  furnish,  nor  to  have  it  followed  by  a  long  train  of 
relatives  and  friends,  nor  to  have  it  deposited  in  the  grave  or  the  tomb  amid  the 
sobbing  of  the  multitude,  nor  to  have  the  spot  visited  by  admiring  friends  dur 
ing  the  years  and  centuries  that  follow. 

To  those  who  die  in  the  Lord,  death  may  come  on  the  highway  with  thunder 
ing  crash,  with  shrieks  and  moans,  and  suffocated  breath,  and  mangled  limbs, 
and  frost,  and  fire,  and  storm-winds  ;  and  it  may  turn  the  body  into  undistin 
guished  ashes,  mingled  with  the  snows  and  waters,  so  that  no  friend  who  seeks 
them  with  the  intensest  gaze  of  agony,  that  he  may  bear  them  to  their  sepulture, 
and  no  admirer  who  would  beautify  the  earth  that  covers  them  with  garlands  of 
gratitude,  can  tell  where  they  are. 

For  even  amid  the  tornado  crash,  the  rending  earthquake,  and  the  consuming 
fire,  the  God  of  the  elements  and  the  God  of  grace  can  enwrap  their  souls  in  His 
everlasting  arms  of  peace,  and  bear  them  with  swifter  than  lightning  wing  into 
the  realms  of  the  painless  and  the  glorified.  And  He  can  keep  watch  and  guard 
over  the  ashes  of  their  physical  decay,  until  the  dawning  of  the  resurrection 
morn,  when  the  power  that  made  the  God- like  Adam  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth 
will  restore  them  in  Christ  like  forms  of  excellence  and  glory !  And  the  empha 
sis  that  such  a  departure  gives  to  the  faith  and  labors  of  a  godly  life,  may  carry 
the  praises  of  the  Lord,  through  the  instrumentality  of  that  life,  infinitely  far 
ther  on  the  broad  world  and  down  the  reaches  of  time  than  a  thousand  peaceful 
death-bed  utterances  possibly  could  do.  Yes !  those  whose  memories  we  honor 
to-night — who  went  into  eternity  on  the  sad  evening  of  the  29th  of  December, 
from  the  Ashtabula  bridge,  amid  the  terrors  and  horrors  of  that  carnival  of  death 
and  destruction,  without  any  premonition  of  the  approach  of  the  grim  monster 
jn  his  most  hideous  mien,  and  whose  physical  forms  disappeared  from  human 
view  in  that  valley  of  death  as  completely  as  that  of  Moses  did  on  Mount  Nebo 
when  the  Lord  buried  him — died  in  the  Lord,  and  of  them  the  "  voice  from 
heaven  "  is  "  heard  saying  unto  me,  write,  blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the 
Lord  ;  yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  labors ;  and  their 
works  do  follow  them." 

Professor  Bliss  and  his  wife  went  to  Rome^Bradford  county,  Pa.,  to  spend 
the  holidays,  preparatory  to  entering  with  Major  Whipple  on  the  labors  of  suc 
ceeding  the  brethren  Moody  and  Sankey  in  the  tabernacle  work  in  Chicago. 
Their  last  visit  in  Rome  was  passed  not  wholly  in  tarrying  with  their  relatives 
and  friends,  but  in  assisting  in  a  series  of  religious  meetings  during  the  last 
week  of  the  year.  The  last  night  Professor  Bliss  was  in  Rome,  which  was  Wed 
nesday  night,  December  27th,  he  sang  a  sacred  song,  the  music  of  his  own  com- 


MEMORIAL   SERVICES   AT   SOUTH   BE1STD.  351 

posing,  and  the  words  written  by  his  wife,  entitled  "  Hold  Fast  till  I  Come."  As 
he  was  about  to  sing  it,  he  remarked,  "  Here  is  a  song  I  have  never  sung  in  pub 
lic,  and  I  don't  know  as  I  shall  ever  sing  it  again."  This  song  is  the  last  one  we 
have  heard  of  his  singing  in  the  earthly  assemblies  of  the  saints. 

On  Thursday  morning,  they  left  Rome.  On  Friday  evening  just  before  dark, 
Professor  Bliss  was  seen  by  a  passenger  whose  life  was  spared,  sitting  in  a  car 
by  the  side  of  his  wife,  with  his  open  Bible  on  his  knee,  and  both  seemed  intently 
engaged  in  the  study  of  the  Sacred  Word,  while  he  was  composing  a  Bible  song, 
which  earth  was  never  to  hear.  And  this  is  the  last  we  know  of  them  in  the 
body.  The  report  that  it  was  Professor  Bliss  who  escaped  from  a  burning  car, 
and  went  back  to  rescue  his  wife,  and  perished  with  her,  may  be  true ;  it  would 
be  just  like  his  tender,  generous,  manly  nature  ;  but  we  do  not  know. 

The  ill-fated  train  in  which  our  friends  had  embarked,  was  made  up  of  two 
express  and  two  baggage  cars,  two  day  passenger  cars,  one  drawing-room  car, 
and  four  sleepers — eleven  cars  in  all— drawn  by  two  locomotives.  As  it  was 
crossing  the  chasm  spanned  by  the  Ashtabula  bridge,  which  was  only  about  one- 
fourth  the  length  of  the  train,  the  first  locomotive  had  barely  reached  the  farther 
abutment,  when  the  bridge  went  down  sixty  feet,  carrying  with  it  the  other 
locomoti-ve  and  the  cars  that  followed  it ;  and  then,  oh,  horror  of  horrors !  the 
other  cars,  with  their  heated  stoves,  and  lighted  candles,  and  precious  freight  of 
human  lives  and  hopes,  went  leaping  down  one  after  another,  one  on  the  top  of 
the  other,  crashing  through  each  other,  and  as  they  leaped  headlong  into  the 
chasm,  the  fiery  stoves  went  sweeping  through  some  of  them  from  one  end  to 
the  other,  with  their  ponderous,  blistering  force,  crushing,  mangling,  and  burn 
ing  the  hapless  inmates.  And  soon  the  bright  light,  shooting  its  red  glare 
heavenwards,  told  the  watchers  at  the  station — some  of  whom  are  with  us 
to-night,  who  also  had  the  blessed  privilege  of  ministering  there  to  the  wants  of 
numbers  of  the  wounded — the  story  that  was  hissing  with  tongues  of  flame  in 
the  ears  of  the  pinioned  prisoners  in  the  deadly  gorge  below,  that  the  fire  fiend 
was  completing  the  work  of  the  wrecking  fiend. 

What  passed  between  our  sunny -hearted  friend  and  his  noble  wife  in  these 
moments  freighted  wilh  the  intensest  terror  that  wreck,  and  frost,  and  storm, 
and  fire  can  combine  to  produce,  we  know  not.  But  we  can  imagine  that  what 
ever  the  number  of  moments  they  were  compelled  to  await  in  that  whirlwind  of 
fire  the  summons  home,  they  had  grace  to  remember  the  song  of  their  own  they 
had  sung  two  nights  before : 

Oh,  child,  in  thy  anguish,  despairing  or  dumb, 
Remember  the  message,  Hold  fast  till  I  come ! 

And  we  can  know  that  at  whatever  point  before  the  completion  of  that  great 
holocaust,  their  ransomed  spirits  left  the  mangled  and  charred  bodies  behind, 
they  started  singing : 

Where  He  may  lead  I'll  follow, 

My  trust  in  Him  repose, 
And  all  the  time  in  perfect  peace, 

ni  sing,  u.  He  knows,  He  knows." 


352  MEMOIKS   OF   P.   P.  BLISS. 


Had  we  the  power  to  follow  and  witness  the  effect  of  the  announcement  of 
the  tragical  earthly  end  of  these  two  writers  of  sweet  sacred  song,  as  it  traveled 
and  is  traveling  over  the  round  world,  what  varied  scenes  of  sorrow  and  regret 
would  we  witness !  Here  we  see  the  brethren  who  have  been  his  especial 
co-laborers,  hasten  to  the  scene  of  disaster  as  quickly  as  possible,  in  a  vain 
anxiety  to  secure  at  least  the  bruised  and  mangled  bodies  of  their  dead  friends 
for  Christian  burial.  There  we  see  the  great  tabernacle,  with  its  vast  assembly 
of  eight  thousand  inside,  and  as  many  waiting  outside  in  the  cold  in  the  vain 
hope  of  gaining  entrance,  filled  and  surrounded  with  mourners.  Yonder  we  look 
upon  the  multitudes  gathered  at  the  home  funeral  service,  where  their  last 
earthly  ministrations  were  rendered.  And  on  the  Atlantic,  and  on  the  Pacific 
coast  of  America,  and  between,  and  over  the  waters  to  the  east,  and  to  the  west,  and 
the  south,  in  Europe  and  Asia  and  Africa,  the  sad  tidings  bring  regret  and  eulogy 
and  grief  to  assembled  thousands,  and  to  solitary  readers  and  hearers.  The 
Christian  songs  that  have  belted  the  world  with  their  melodies,  have  caused  and 
will  cause  their  writers  to  be  mourned  the  world  over.  "  Their  works  do  follow 
them." 

And  words  of  sorrow  for  the  dead,  and  of  gratitude  to  God  for  what  His  ser 
vant  and  handmaiden  have  done  in  the  realm  of  song,  have  been  spoken  in 
multitudes  of  places  by  the  great  and  the  obscure. 

Mr.  Williamson  here  continued  as  follows : 

My  personal  acquaintance  with  Professor  and  Mrs.  Bliss  began  in  1865,  one 
year  after  he  came  to  Chicago.  His  musical  convention  work  here  was  done,  I 
have  been  informed,  in  1869.  He  began  his  purely  evangelistic  work  with  Major 
Whittle  at  the  beginning  of  1874,  and  had  grown  greatly  in  spirituality  and  force 
of  character,  as  well  as  in  breadth  and  power  of  influence.  It  was  our  earnest 
endeavor  to  secure  his  services,  with  those  of  Brother  Whittle,  for  the  series  of 
union  meetings  just  closed,  but  God  so  ordered  affairs  that  the  closing  labors  of 
his  life  were  employed  elsewhere,  and  we  were  saved  the  severity  of  the  shock, 
which  otherwise  would  have  fallen  on  us. 

Still  God  has  come  so  near  to  us  in  this  solemn  providence,  that  it  becomes 
every  man,  woman,  and  child  who  has  heard  the  songs  of  this  man  and  woman, 
to  ask  himself  and  herself,  What  good  ought  I  to  get,  what  good  can  I  get  from 
it  to  my  immortal  soul  ?  If  there  should  be  one  here  who  has  not  sung  or  heard 
the  Bliss  hymns  and  music  before  to-night,  it  will  well  become  even  such  an  one  to 
ask,  What  good  use  can  I  make  of  those  I  have  just  heard  ?  How  much  more 
should  we  do  it,  who  have  become  so  familiar  with  some  of  this  music  and  have 
sung  these  Gospel  Hymns  so  often  ? 

A  service  in  memory  of  Mr.  Bliss  was  held  at  the  House  of  Hope 
Church  in  St.  Paul,  Minnesota.  There  had  been  put  upon  the 
blackboard  the  words,  "  In  memory  of  our  brother  Philip  P.  Bliss," 
and,  the  board  being  wreathed  in  evergreens  and  the  evergreens 


MEMORIAL  SERVICES  AT  ST.   PAUL.  353 

sprinkled  with  white  lilies,  the  whole  formed  a  beautiful  tablet.  It 
was  placed  upon  the  wall  behind  the  platform,  and  under  it  was  a 
cushion  of  flowers  and  vines  upon  which  it  seemed  to  be  resting. 

In  commencing  the  sermon,  the  Superintendent,  Mr.  Cochran, 
read  the  hymn,  both  the  words  and  the  music  of  which  Mr.  Bliss 
wrote,  "  When  Jesus  Comes,"  saying  that  in  no  better  way  could  his 
memory  be  honored  than  by  singing  heartily  the  hymns  which  he 
wrote  to  the  praise  of  God.  The  congregation,  composed  of  the  reg 
ular  attendants  upon  the  Sabbath  School  and  those  who  had  come  in 
to  participate  in  the  services,  then  read  alternately  with  the  Superin 
tendent  the  first  eleven  verses  of  1  Thessaloiiians  v.,  after  which  Mr. 
Charles  H.  Bigelow  led  in  prayer.  Then  was  sung  the  hymn,  the 
words  of  which  Mr.  Bliss  wrote  to  music  furnished  by  another,  "  I 
know  not  the  Hour  when  my  Lord  shall  Come,"  after  which  Rev. 
Mr.  Breed,  the  pastor  of  the  church,  addressed  a  few  words  "  to  the 
grown  people  present."  He  said  he  thought  it  was  generally  the 
case  that  the  manner  and  circumstances  of  our  death  would  generally 
be  found  in  some  measure  to  have  been  anticipated  by  the  thoughts 
and  works  of  our  lives.  He  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  mem 
ber  of  this  very  church  and  Sabbath  School,  whom  no  one  would  have 
thought  to  be  anticipating  sudden  death,  but  to  whom  death  had 
come  almost  unannounced,  by  terrible  accident,  had  marked  in  his 
Bible  two  of  the  verses  which  had  just  been  read.  "  But  of  the  times 
and  the  seasons,  my  brethren,  ye  have  no  need  that  I  write  unto  you." 
"  For  yourselves  know  perfectly  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh 
as  a  thief  in  the  night."  Those  who  had  watched  beside  the  death 
bed  of  that  young  man  have  testified  that  he  met  his  death,  sud 
denly  as  it  came,  calmly  and  with  full  faith  in  his  Savior. 

So,  in  thinking  of  this  sad  death  which  came  to  our  brother  Bliss,  and 
reading  the  hymns,  could  any  one  fail  to  be  struck  with  their  foreshadowing  of 
the  suddenness  of  his  end.  Those  that  have  already  been  sung  were  examples 
of  it,  but  perhaps  the  most  striking,  not  only  in  its  spiritual  but  physical 
aptness,  was — 

Through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  I  must  go 

Where  the  cold  waves  of  Jordan  roll, 
But  the  presence  of  my  Savior  will,  I  know, 

Be  the  staff  and  support  to  my  soul. 

Literally,  Mr.  Bliss  was  called  at  death,  to  pass  through  a  valley  of  the 
shadow,  and  literally  the  cold  waves  overwhelmed  him  upon  that  awful  night. 


354  MEMOIRS   OF  P.   P.   BLISS. 

And  yet  why  should  he  or  any  of  us  be  astonished  at  the  suddenness  of  death, 
for  do  we  not  "  know  perfectly,"  as  the  Apostle  saith,  "  that  the  day  of  the 
Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night  ?"  One  remaining  thought :  the  lesson  to 
us  of  Mr.  Bliss'  life  was  to  consecrate  whatever  talent  God  had  given  to  us  to 
His  service.  It  was  in  his  case  a  musical  gift ;  he  had  fully  consecrated  it,  and 
perhaps  more  than  any  other  writer  of  sacred  music  of  the  century,  his  name 
and  memory  would  live  and  his  music  be  the  means  of  converting  souls  to 
Christ  for  years  and  years  to  come. 

After  Mr.  Breed  had  ceased  speaking,  Mr.  Cochran  said  that 
what  he  had  to  say  was  to  be  addressed  to  the  children  present.  He 
then  reminded  them  how  Major  Whittle  and  Mr.  Bliss  when  holding 
services  in  St.  Paul  had  devoted  part  of  their  vacation  day,  Saturday, 
to  holding  a  children's  service ;  how  the  last  one  had  been  held  in 
this  very  church  the  last  Saturday  of  their  stay  in  St.  Paul.  He 
then  described  how  two  children,  5  and  7  years  old,  had  remembered 
the  text  from  which  Mr.  Bliss  had  spoken  that  morning,  making  the 
five  words  which  composed  it  answer  to  the  five  fingers  of  his  left 
hand  while  he  pointed  to  them  with  his  right,  and  thus  fixing  them 
in  the  minds  of  the  children.  The  text  was,  "  Daniel  purposed  in 
his  heart ;"  and  after  he  had  spoken  from  it  he  made  a  request  of 
the  children,  and  these  same  little  children  here  in  St.  Paul  had 
remembered  this  request,  though  it  was  made  more  than  a  year  ago.  It 
was  that  the  children  present  should  remember  when  they  said  their 
prayers  at  night  to  pray  for  Major  Whittle  and  his  (Mr.  Bliss')  little 
children,  from  whom  they  were  so  often  and  so  long  separated.  The 
speaker  felt  sure  that  though  Mr.  Bliss'  voice  was  forever  silent  in 
this  world,  yet  if  he  could  to-day  speak  from  Heaven  he  would  make 
exactly  the  same  request,  that  the  children  of  St.  Paul  and  every 
where  should  pray  for  his  little  boys,  who  never  again  on  earth 
would  know  a  father's  or  mother's  love,  and  the  message  he  would 
deliver  from  heaven  would  be  the  same  message  he  gave  on  that 
Saturday  morning  in  this  church,  that  all  would  imitate  Daniel  and 
accept  Daniel's  God  in  Jesus  Christ. 

Another  memorial  service  was  held  in  St.  Paul,  of  which  the 
following  letter  gives  an  account : 

ST.  PAUL.  MINN.,  Jan.  31,  1877. 
MAJ.  D.  W.  WHITTLE  : 

MY  DEAR  BROTHER — We  had  a  memorial  service  in  our  little  church  (Day 
ton  Avenue  Presbyterian)  which  was  to  us  very  interesting.  Mr.  Bliss  had 


MEMORIAL  SERVICES  AT  ST.  PAUL.  355 

endeared  himself  to  us  not  only  by  his  sweet  songs,  but  our  children  had  been 
to  his  children's  meetings  here  in  Saint  Paul,  and  so  nearly  all  of  them  knew  him 
personally.  During  our  memorial  service  a  boy  13  years  old  (son  of  Senator  M.) 
arose  and  said  he  wanted  to  bear  testimony  to  Mr.  Bliss'  influence  upon  him. 
He  stated,  between  sobs,  that  the  singing  of  "  I've  Found  the  Pearl  of  Greatest 
Price  "  had  been  the  means  of  leading  him  to  the  Savior.  Other  incidents  were 
given  showing  how  warmly  our  people  felt  toward  him.  We  do  not  forget  your 
labors  here,  and  it  may  cheer  you  to  know  that  none  of  the  boys  and  girls 
belonging  to  our  Sunday  School  who  were  converted  at  that  time  have  gone 
back  again  to  the  world.  A  boys'  prayer  meeting  was  started  soon  after  you 
went  away,  and  has  been  maintained  ever  since.  May  God  prosper  you  in  all 
your  labors.  Very  truly  yours,  L.  A.  GILBERT, 

Superintendent  Dayton  Avenue  Sunday  School. 

At  Louisville,  Kentucky,  the  death  of  Mr.  Bliss  caused  the  most 
profound  sorrow.  His  evangelical  labors  there  created  for  him  a 
general  regard,  while  among  those  with  whom  he  came  in  personal 
contact,  he  was  held  in  affectionate  esteem.  As  one  of  the  local 
papers  expresses  it,  the  great  success  achieved  in  that  city  "  was,  as 
far  as  a  religious  awakening  is  concerned,  something  that  surpassed 
all  precedent.  The  singing  of  Mr.  Bliss  tended  strongly  to  popu 
larize  the  meetings,  and  his  gospel  songs  are  still  used  in  many  of 
our  churches  and  Sunday  Schools." 

A  memorial  service  was  held  at  the  Chestnut  Street  Presbyterian 
Church.  The  attendance,  notwithstanding  the  rain  and  snow  that 
checkered  the  weather's  general  inclemency,  was  so  large  that  the 
seating  capacity  of  the  church  was  wholly  inadequate  to  accommo 
date  the  congregation.  The  aisles  and  every  vacant  space  were  filled 
with  stools  and  chairs,  and  many  remained  standing  until  the  close. 

After  reading  the  parable  of  the  fig  tree  (Luke  xiii),  the  pastor, 
Eev.  Mr.  Simpson,  proceeded  to  say  that  the  words  were  peculiarly 
appropriate  to  the  occasion  for  two  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  this 
was  the  fourth  New  Year's  Sabbath  he  had  spent  among  them  as 
their  pastor,  and  the  words  seemed  to  come  with  peculiar  solemnity 
to  all  who  had  rejected  his  message:  "These  three  years  I  come 
seeking  fruit,  and  find  none;  cut  it  down;"  while  the  interceding 
Savior  pleaded  once  more,  perhaps  only  once,  "  Let  it  alone  this 
year  also." 

The  parable  finally  presented  the  touching  picture  of  the  great  Intercessor 
standing  between  the  sinner  and  his  doom,  and  pleading  one  more  year's  delay. 
How  solemn  to  reflect  that  He  only  asked  one  year,  and  even  that  was  not 


356  MEMOIRS  OF  P.   P.   BLISS. 

assured ;  and  after  that  even  Jesus  promised  to  cease  to  plead  for  the  hardened 
and  impenitent.  Having  at  some  length  expounded  these  thoughts,  he  pro 
ceeded  to  the  second  and  principal  part  of  his  discourse — in  reference  to  the 
occasion  as  a  memorial  service.  In  the  second  place,  he  said,  the  parable  had 
reference  to  two  very  sudden  calamities  that  had  occurred — the  slaughter  of 
certain  Jewish  worshipers  by  Pilate,  and  the  destruction  of  eighteen  by  tne 
falling  of  a  tower  in  Siloam. 

How  suitably  its  lessons  connected  themselves  with  the  many  appalling 
disasters  which  had  lately  shocked  the  public  mind;  and  how  tenderly  these 
lessons  were  impressed  by  the  sad  memories  of  the  terrible  death  they  had  met 
to-night  to  improve.  If  any  might  have  claimed  exemption  from  such  a  fate  it 
was  one  whose  usefulness  seemed  scarcely  in  its  prime,  and  if  he  were  not 
spared  how  could  the  careless  and  indifferent  risk  delay? 

Mr.  Simpson  then  referred  to  Mr.  Bliss'  connection  with  the  work 
in  Louisville  two  years  previously,  and  the  loving  recollections  he  had 
left  behind  him  in  hundreds  of  hearts.  "The  evangelists  had  always 
regarded  it  as  the  most  cheering  work  of  their  lives,  and  hopes  had 
been  cherished  of  their  return  this  winter.  Their  plans,  however, 
had  been  made  to  spend  the  winter  in  Chicago,  continuing  the  work 
Mr.  Moody  had  begun,  and  then  visit  Europe  in  the  summer,  and 
begin  the  work  in  Great  Britain." 

The  speaker  closed  by  an  earnest  appeal  to  all  who  hesitated  to 
accept  the  Gospel,  to  begin  at  once  to  seek  the  Savior,  whose  greater 
love  and  more  terrible  sacrifice  for  them  had  been  feebly  shadowed 
forth  in  this  sad  calamity.  Mr.  Bliss  had  died  to  save  a  dear  wife, 
and  failed;  Christ  had  died  to  save  His  enemies,  and,  as  a  living, 
loving,  pleading  Friend,  stood  now  at  every  heart,  crying,  "  Behold 
I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock  ;  if  any  man  hear  my  voice  and  open 
the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him  and  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  me." 
The  noblest  tribute  they  could  lay  upon  the  grave  of  their  dear 
friend  was  to  know  that  even  his  death  and  its  lessons  had  led  a 
great  multitude  of  the  unsaved  to  the  Master  he  loved  so  well. 

In  response  to  this  appeal,  many  persons  rose  in  acknowledgment 
of  their  purpose  to  begin  that  night  to  seek  the  Savior,  and  after  a 
solemn  prayer  for  them,  the  service  closed. 

The  First  Cumberland  Presbyterian  Church,  in  Nashville,  Tenn., 
was  crowded  on  the  occasion  of  the  Bliss  memorial  services,  even  the 
space  in  the  rear  of  the  seats  being  completely  filled.  The  exercises 
opened  by  a  portion  of  the  choir  singing  u  Almost  Persuaded." 

Dr.  Baird  said  that  only  a  few  years  ago  there  was  a  new  era  in 


MEMORIAL  SERVICES  IN  NASHVILLE.  357 

secular  songs.  People  discovered  that  little  children  could  sing,  and 
from  this  sprang  songs  full  of  simplicity  and  truth,  that  were  caught 
up  and  set  the  world  on  fire.  He  paid  a  touching  tribute  to  Mr. 
Bliss,  dwelling  briefly  on  the  striking  simplicity  of  his  character,  his 
Christian  earnestness  and  devotedness  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  The 
songs  they  would  sing  to-night  were  compositions  of  Mr.  Bliss, 
in .  some  cases  both  the  words  and  music.  The  next  song  they 
would  sing  was  probably  at  this  very  moment  ringing  along  the 
streets  of  London  and  Edinburgh,  and  throughout  America. 

"I  am  so  glad  Jesus  Loves  Me"  was  then  sung,  and  followed  by  a 
prayer  from  Eev.  M.  B.  DeWitt,  in  which  he  alluded  to  the  consecra 
tion  on  the  altar  of  Christ,  and  the  removal  of  the  "  Sweet  Singer " 
and  evangelist  from  his  work  in  this  world  to  take  up  his  songs  in 
Heaven.  The  song  "Watching  and  Waiting"  then  followed. 

Mr.  DeWitt  made  a  few  remarks,  and  was  followed  by  Dr.  Baird, 
who  offered  a  series  of  resolutions,  which  were  adopted  by  a  rising 
vote. 

Rev.  A.  J.  Baird,  pastor  of  the  First  Cumberland  Church,  sends  us 
the  following  letter  respecting  the  above  meeting : 

NASHVILLE,  TENN.,  Jan.  8,  1877. 
MY  DEAR  BRO.  WHITTLE  : 

Last  night  was  a  memorable  evening  with  us.  We  held  a  service  of  song 
in  my  church  in  memory  of  our  dear  Brother  Bliss.  Our  service  consisted  of 
prayer,  a  few  remarks  by  different  persons,  but  chiefly  singing.  The  choir, 
orchestra  and  congregation  joining.  Oh,  it  was  so  sweet  to  recall  the  holy 
memories  of  the  meetings  held  by  yourself  and  our  lamented  brother.  Many 
were  there  who  were  brought  to  the  Savior  during  those  meetings.  Our  songs 
were  :  "Almost  Persuaded,"  "  Waiting  and  Watching,"  "  Jesus  Loves  even  Me," 
"Hallelujah,  'tis  Done,"  "Free  from  the  Law,"  "When  Jesus  Comes,"  "That 
will  be  Heaven  for  Me,"  "  Hold  the  Fort." 

It  is  a  joy  to  join  with  the  friends  in  Chicago  and  elsewhere  in  cherishing  the 
precious  memory  of  our  dear  departed  brother  and  sister. 

A.  J.  BAIRD, 
Pastor  First  Cumberland  Presbyterian  Church. 

A  commemorative  service  in  honor  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bliss  was  held 
in  the  Presbyterian  Church  at  Kalamazoo,  Michigan,  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Young  Men's  Christian  Association.  The  arrange 
ments  for  the  meeting  were  in  the  hands  of  a  committee  of  one  from 
each  of  the  co-operating  churches.  Abundant  material  for  draping 


358  MEMOIKS  OF  P.  P.   BLISS. 

the  church  was  loaned  by  several  of  the  merchants.  Mrs.  Jas. 
Allen  supplied  the  artificial  flowers  used,  made  the  beautiful  cross, 
crown  and  shield  used  in  the  decorations,  and  gave  her  aid,  with 
Mrs.  Frank  Russell,  Mrs.  J.  C.  Burrows  and  Miss  Smith,  to  the  work 
of  preparation.  The  skill  and  taste  exhibited  by  these  ladies  be 
tokened  how  much  they  had  the  subject  at  heart.  The  drapery  of 
black  and  white  extended  fully  around  the  church  on  the  galleries, 
and  was  beautifully  arranged  in  folds.  The  platform  was  arranged 
in  nearly  the  same  manner  as  when  it  was  occupied  by  the  evangel 
ists,  during  their  revival  work  in  that  city.  An  organ  was  placed 
upon  it,  with  the  motto  Mr.  Bliss  had  on  his :  u  God  so  loved  the 
world  that  he  gave  his  Only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believe th 
in  him  should  not  Perish,  but  have  Everlasting  Life,"  forming  an 
acrostic  of  the  word  "  Gospel."  The  singer's  chair  was  in  the  posi 
tion  as  when  used  by  him,  and  appropriately  draped.  The  chair 
Mrs.  Bliss  used  was  elevated  so  as  to  indicate  to  the  audience  the 
place  occupied  in  the  choir  by  her.  It  was  also  fitly  draped.  The 
drapery  was  centred  over  the  pulpit,  and  drooped  to  the  doors  on 
either  side ;  and  at  the  point  of  the  draping  over  the  center  was  a 
cross  on  a  shield ;  underneath  it,  in  large  capitals,  the  title  of  the 
last  song  Mr.  Bliss  sang  while  in  Kalamazoo — "  "Waiting  at  the  Beau 
tiful  Gate."  Over  one  door  leading  into  the  chapel  was  a  superb 
cross;  on  the  other,  a  crown.  Everything  betokened  taste  and  in 
tense  interest  for  the  work.  The  choir  held  the  same  position  as  be 
fore,  with  the  change  of  the  organ  to  the  center.  The  organ  repre 
senting  Mr.  Bliss'  was  silent.  Prof.  C.  J.  Toof  presided  at  the 
other,  and  Mr.  W.  F.  Leavitt,  who  rendered  Mr.  Bliss  effective  aid 
during  his  period  of  service  there,  took  direction  of  the  choir.  The 
ministers  present,  the  members  of  the  choir  and  the  ushers  wore 
suitable  badges  of  mourning. 

Long  before  the  hour  of  beginning  the  house  began  to  fill  rapidly. 
At  the  second  ringing  of  the  bell,  it  was  tolled  with  thirty-eight 
measured  strokes,  that  being  the  number  of  years  of  Prof.  Bliss5 
life.  By  this  time  the  church  was  filled  to  overflowing,  and  many 
were  standing  about  the  doors.  The  exercises  were  opened  by  the 
singing  of  the  hymn,  "  I  know  not  the  hour  when  my  Lord  shall 
Come."  Rev.  Mr.  Sherwood  pronounced  a  brief  and  feeling  invo 
cation.  *"  The  Home  over  There  "  was  sung,  and  the  fifth  chapter 
of  Revelation  was  read  (containing  the  words,  "And  they  sung  a 


MEMORIAL  SEEVICES  IN   5ALAMAZOO.  359 

new  song,"  etc.)  by  the  Moderator  of  the  meeting,  Rev.  Jos.  H. 
France.  A  prayer  was  offered  by  Rev.  Dr.  Hodge.  Mr.  Leavitt  sang 
as  a  solo,  with  great  tenderness  and  clear  expression,  one  of  the  favor 
ite  songs  of  Mr.  Bliss,  "  Oh,  to  be  Nothing."  The  presiding  officer 
then  introduced  the  chief  exercises  of  the  evening  with  a  short  and 
earnest  address,  delivered  with  very  earnest  and  effective  feeling. 

Capt.  Ford,  from  the  Committee  on  Resolutions,  prefaced  the  re 
port  with  an  explanation  that  the  Scripture  used  in  the  first  sentence 
was  the  text  of  Rev.  xiv,  3,  taken  in  part  as  the  basis  of  Hymn  44,  in 
the  Gospel  Hymns,  music  by  Prof.  Bliss;  that  the  reference  to  South 
Africa  was  called  out  by  the  reported  singing  of  his  hymns  in  the 
wilds  of  the  Zulu  country ;  the  first  quotation  of  poetry  was  from 
the  86th  of  the  Gospel  Songs,  the  older  book  of  Mr.  Bliss,  both  words 
and  music  by  him ;  the  text  cited  in  the  first  resolution  was  the 
theme  of  Hymn  24,  Gospel  Hymns,  words  by  Mrs.  Bliss,  music  by 
her  husband,  from  which  the  extract  was  made  in  the  second  reso 
lution;  the  extract  in  the  fourth  resolution  was  from  the  41st 
of  the  Gospel  Hymns,  words  and  music  by  Bliss;  and  that  in  the 
fifth  was  from  the  79th  hymn,  music  also  by  Mr.  Bliss.  He  then 
read  the  resolutions,  as  follows : 

Philip  Paul  Bliss  and  Lucy  Bliss,  his  wife,  have  gone  to  sing,  as  it  were,  a  new 
song  before  the  throne  —  that  song  which  no  man  can  learn  but  they  which  are 
redeemed  from  the  earth.  Their  tragic  death  overshadows  the  whole  Christian 
world.  From  the  north  of  Scotland  to  the  Zulu  huts  of  South  Africa,  from  the 
Far  East  to  the  Far  West — wherever  their  songs  are  sung,  the  poets  and  singers 
will  be  mourned.  He,  cut  off  in  the  prime  of  his  splendid  manhood,  with  all 
his  great  powers  at  their  best ;  she,  worthy  companion  of  his  joys  and  toils — have 
left  time  for  eternity  in  the  black  gorge  of  death  that  opened  at  Ashtabula.  At 
one  dread  plunge  they  went  to  make  real  the  truth  of  his  own  sweet  song : 

Through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  I  must  go, 

Where  the  cold  waves  of  Jordan  roll ; 
But  the  promise  of  my  Shepherd  will,  I  know, 

Be  the  rod  and  the  staff  to  my  souL 
Even  now  down  the  valley  as  I  glide 

I  can  hear  my  Savior  say,  u  Follow  Me," 
And  with  Him  I'm  not  afraid  to  cross  the  tide, 

There's  a  light  in  the  valley  for  me. 

Like  the  singers  of  Nehemiah,  Brother  and  Sister  Bliss  "  kept  the  ward  of 
their  God."  By  the  talents  and  abilities  they  consecrated  to  the  Redeemer ;  by 
their  pure,  strong,  unselfish  Christian  character ;  by  the  priceless  service  they 
have  done  and  through  the  works  they  leave  shall  yet  do  in  His  cause  among 


360  MEMOIRS  OF  P.   P.   BLISS. 

men,  they  have  earned  a  memory  which  the  world  shall  not  willingly  let  die. 
Therefore,  resolved : 

1.  That  the  citizens  of  Kalamazoo  and  vicinity,  so  lately  blessed  by  these  sweet 
singers,  do  deeply  mourn  the  bereavement  of  their  families  and  friends,  and  the 
loss  of  their  living  presence  from  the  fields  of  Christian  usefulness ;  doubting  not, 
however,  that  they  were  "  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body  and  to  be 
present  with  the  Lord." 

2.  That  our  deepest  sympathies,  in  this  hour  of  trial,  go  out  to  the  widowed 
mother  and  sisters  of  the  brother  gone,  to  the  parents  of  Mrs.  Bliss,  to  the  little 
ones  thus  orphaned,  to  all  other  relatives  of  the  sainted  dead,  and  to  the  great 
throng  of  friends  who  are  bereft.     May  all  remember  that, 

For  those  who  sleep 

And  those  who  weep, 
Above  the  portals  narrow, 

The  mansions  rise 
Beyond  the  skies,— 

We're  going  home  to-morrow. 

3.  That  the  special  and  fraternal  sympathies  of  this  people  be  extended  to 
the  friend  and  Christian  brother,  the  companion  and  co-laborer  of  the  dear 
departed,  Major  D.  W.  Whittle,  who  loved  them  with  a  love  like  that  of  David 
for  Jonathan,  "passing  the  love  of  women  ;"  and  we  hope  and  pray  that  he 
may  be  upstayed  by  the  Everlasting  Arms,  that  the  blow  may  be  mercifully 
softened  to  him  by  the  Divine  Hand,  and  blessed  to  the  strengthening  of  his 
heart  and  tongue  for  the  great  work  that  remains  to  him. 

4.  That,  while  this  visitation  of  Providence  seems  mysterious  and  dark,  we 
humbly  recognize  that  "  He  doeth  all  things  well." 

No  darkness  have  we  who  in  Jesus  abide, 

The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus ; 
We  walk  in  the  light  when  we  follow  our  God, 

The  Light  of  the  World  is  Jesus. 

5.  That  the  life  and  labors  of  the  lamented  dead  shall  be  perpetual  incen 
tives  to  the  best  work  we  can  do  for  the  Master. 

Sowing  the  seed  with  an  aching  heart, 
Sowing  the  seed  while  the  tear-drops  start, 
Sowing  in  hopr  till  the  reapers  come, 
Gladly  to  gather  the  harvest  home. 
Oh,  what  shall  the  harvest  be  ? 

6.  That  the  contributions  of  this  community  be  respectfully  solicited  in  aid 
of  the  Bliss  Memorial  Funds,  now  being  raised. 

At  the  commemoration  services  at  Peoria,  Illinois,  Centennial 
Hall  was  crowded  and  many  failed  to  find  seats.  Eev.  J.  D.  Wilson, 
of  Christ  Reformed  Episcopal  Church,  opened  the  service  by  asking 
the  choir  to  sing  the  hymn,  "In  the  Christian's  Home  in  Glory," 
after  which  Rev.  W.  B.  Mcllvaine  led  in  prayer. 


MEMORIAL  SERVICES   Itf  PEORIA.  361 

Eev.  W.  0.  Mappin  then  read,  as  the  scripture  lesson,  selections 
from  the  6th  and  7th  chapters  of  Revelation,  and  the  choir  sung, 
softly  and  beautifully,  the  song,  "  Go,  Bury  thy  Sorrow/'  and  "  When 
the  Comforter  Came,"  followed  by  a  hymn  that  will  always  be  dear 
to  Peoria  Christians,  as  it  was  written  by  Mr.  Bliss  in  that  city,  viz. : 
"  When  Jesus  Comes,"  beginning, 

Down  life's  dark  vale  we  wander, 

Till  Jesus  comes  ; 
We  watch  and  wait  and  wonder, 

Till  Jesus  comes. 

Rev.  John  Weston,  of  Calvary  Mission,  was  the  first  speaker.  He 
said: 

We  can  almost  see  our  departed  brother  as  he  sat  and  sang  before  us,  but  a 
few  days  ago,  his  whole  heart  in  his  song.  He  has  gone  home  ;  he  was  waiting 
and  ready.  What  a  gloom  fell  upon  us  last  Sabbath,  as  the  sad  word  came 
to  us.  So  like  the  old  prophet  of  old,  he  went  home  to  heaven,  not  a  vestige 
left  of  him  on  earth.  Let  a  double  portion  of  his  spirit  rest  on  us  who  are  left. 
We  ask  why  did  God  take  His  servant  away  so?  It  is  not  ours  to  tell,  " God 
moves  in  a  mysterious  way."  ,The  time  will  come  when  we  shall  see  the  wis 
dom  of  God's  dealings  with  us.  His  glory  shall  be  seen  after  all.  It  says  to 
us,  "  Be  ye  also  ready."  Out  of  the  dark  valley  comes  the  voice  to  us,  be  faith 
ful  and  devoted  to  His  service.  Also  a  lesson  to  those  who  are  not  God's 
children.  We  would  not  bring  our  friends  ba'ck.  They  sing  the  "  New  Song ' 
to-night ;  but  to  you  who  have  no  such  hope  the  warning  comes,  "Prepare  to 
meet  thy  God."  You  have  heard  him  sing ;  let  his  sweet  voice  invite  you  to 
follow  him  to  his  home  in  heaven. 

Rev.  Mr.  Thompson,  of  the  First  Baptist  Church,  then  spoke. 

Mr.  Bliss  was  a  man  of  tender  sympathy.  Knowing  sorrow  himself,  he  felt 
for  others  ;  feeling  tenderly  himself  the  love  of  Christ,  he  desired  all  others  to 
know  the  same.  A  man  of  eminent  abilities,  he  was  humble  and  trustful,  and 
gave  all  glory  to  his  God.  How  his  face  would  glow  as  he  sang  "Hallelujah, 
what  a  Savior."  How  my  own  soul  felt  as  he  sang  his  thrilling  songs.  I  am 
told  wherever  he  went  in  domestic  life  he  left  the  savor  of  his  Savior  behind 
a  consecrated  life. 

He  is  gone.  We  feel  as  if  he  was  still  needed  with  us.  God  can  make  his1 
death  more  effective  than  his  life.  "  He  being  dead,  still  speaketh."  He  speaks 
in  song  round  the  world  to-night.  It  was  said  of  Sampson  "he  slew  more  in 
his  death  than  while  living."  How  many  may  be  brought  to  Jesus  by  what  we 
call  his  untimely  death.  "  He  walked  with  God,"  and  "  he  is  not,  for  God  took 
him."  The  Master  has  said,  "Come  up  higher."  One  of  his  songs  says, 
"  We'll  soon  be  at  home  over  there  ; "  now  he  is  there.  Another,  "  I  know  not 
the  hour,"  etc.  He  did  not  know  the  hour,  but  Jesus  called  and  took  him  away 


362  MEMOIKS  OF  P.  P.    BLISS. 

in  His  own  time,  He  knows  "the  song  the  angels  sing"  now.  The  last  song 
our  brother  sung  with  us  was  the  22d,  "  We're  Going  Home  To-morrow." 
Shall  we  meet  them  there  when  God  calls  us  to  meet  all  of  those  who  have  gone 
before? 

The  22d  hymn  was  then  sung  with  deep  feeling  by  the  entire  au 
dience. 

Eev.  A.  A.  Stevens,  of  the  First  Congregational  Church,  next 
came  forward  and  spoke  tenderly  and  kindly  of  the  dead  singer:  He 
spoke  of  the  effect  of  his  songs  upon  himself.  "  It  seems  as  if  we 
were  just  waiting  for  him  to  come  in."  He  spoke  specially  of 
the  songs,  "  Are  your  windows  open  toward  Jerusalem  ?  "  and  "  The 
half  was  Never  Told."  Now  he  knows  the  whole  of  the  glories  of 
heaven.  It  is  a  blessed  thought  that  our  brother  loves  us  still  as  he 
did  when  here.  How  bright  the  prospect  of  our  meeting  dear  friends 
again  in  the  better  world.  How  it  strengthens  us  for  our  work.  If 
any  shall  linger  now  to  accept  Christ,  how  can  they  when  they  re 
member  his  love  and  prayers  so  recently  for  them?  We  cannot  see 
all  the  plan,  but  we  "  know  all  things  work  together  for  good  to 
those  that  love  God." 

Mr.  Stevens  spoke  of  the  cheerfulness  of  Mr.  Bliss  —  always 
cheerful.  "  We  don't  sing  enough,"  said  he.  Let  us  cherish  him 
because  he  was  so  much  like  his  Master. 

Eev.  Mr.  Wilson  at  this  point  led  in  an  earnest  prayer  asking  for 
all  submission  to  the  will  of  God. 

Hymn  No.  13  was  then  sung — 

I  know  not  the  hour  when  my  Lord  will  come. 

Eev.  Ira  J.  Chase,  of  the  Christian  Church,  followed  in  some  very 
appropriate  remarks.  He  wondered  what  Mr.  Bliss  was  doing  when 
death  came.  He  quoted  Mr.  Bliss'  motto  for  1876,  "  Be  ye  there 
fore  steadfast,"  etc.  It  was  his  habit  to  select  a  text  to  be  his  motto 
for  the  year.  Perhaps  he  was  selecting  his  verse.  Perhaps  he  was 
singing.  At  all  events  he  was  ready.  I  am  glad  those  who  have 
spoken  have  made  it  a  practical  matter  with  us  all.  What  testimony 
will  we  leave  behind  us  ?  Why  don't  you  all  prepare  for  the  future  ? 
God  calls  to  us.  It  is  for  each  one  to  say,  "  Oh !  to  be  '  waiting  and 
watching '  up  there !  " 

Mr.  Chase  then  read  a  tribute  to  the  memory  of  the  dead  singer, 
written  by  some  friend  and  given  to  him. 


MEMORIAL   SERVICES   IN   PEORIA.  363 

Rev.  Mr.  Wilson  spoke,  and  asked  to  have  "  Watching  and  Wait 
ing  "  sung,  but  those  accustomed  to  sing  would  not  venture  to  sing 
it.  They  could  not,  and  No.  50  was  taken  in  its  place :  "  I  will  Guide 
Thee  with  Mine  Eye." 

Rev.  H.  S.  Beavis,  of  Grace  Church,  was  then  called  upon,  and 
said  :  "  Silence  might  now  be  golden."  He  could  not  soon  forget  the 
pleadings  of  this  departed  brother  as  he  plead  with  the  youth  of  our 
city.  His  is  one  of  the  lives  that  speak  to  us  and  bid  us  make  our 
lives  sublime.  It  tells  us  of  the  record  we  are  to  make.  It  seems  as 
if  it  were  cut  short  in  the  very  midst  of  fire  and  storm.  Bliss  met 
trials  and  storms  and  overcame  them,  and  speaks  to  us  to  go  forward. 
He  added  enthusiasm  and  untiring  industry  to  his  energy,  and  added 
to  all  consecration  to  the  Master's  work.  He  breathed  it  in  his 
prayer  ;  he  carried  it  in  his  life ;  he  sung  it  in  his  songs.  Let  us 
imitate  him  and  make  our  lives  beautiful,  and  leave  behind  us  the 
fragrance  of  a  consecrated  life. 

Rev.  Mr.  Wilson  followed  in  an  earnest  and  tender  reference  to 
the  dead.  We  would  not  bring  them  back — he  is  happy  now.  There 
are  some  who  might  have  come  to  Jesus  if  they  could  have  heard 
another  song.  There  is  one  hymn  that  has  not  been  referred  to 
to-night,  "  Hold  the  Fort."  What  joy  the  words  "  I  am  coming  " 
brought  to  the  beleaguered  garrison  at  Allatoona ! 

"  Hold  the  Fort "  was  then  sung  with  feeling  by  the  choir  and 
entire  congregation.  After  singing  this  hymn,  Rev.  Mr.  Wilson 
asked  Wm.  Reynolds,  Esq.,  to  take  charge  of  the  meeting. 

A  request  was  made  for  all  who  had  found  Christ  during  the 
meetings  held  here  recently  to  rise.  A  large  number  arose.  "  Now," 
said  the  speaker,  "  who  will  join  these  and  decide  now  ?  While  they 
sing  a  verse  of  Hymn  59,  let  them  rise."  Some  arose,  and  Rev.  Mr. 
Thompson  led  in  prayer,  asking  that  the  death  of  those  beloved  ones 
might  be  the  means  of  leading  many  to  think  of  the  awful  future. 
After  prayer,  No.  15,  "  There  is  a  Gate  that  Stands  Ajar,"  was  sung, 
and  one  of  the  saddest  and  most  impressive  meetings  ever  held  in 
Peoria  was  closed. 

The  following  extract  from  a  private  letter  from  Peoria,  written 
previous  to  the  holding  of  the  above  meeting,  and  soon  after  the 
reception  of  the  news  of  the  Ashtabula  disaster,  will  be  read  with 
interest : 


364  MEMOIRS   OF   P.   P.   BLISS. 

In  every  church  in  the  city,  yesterday,  the  sad  tidings  were  told,  and  heart 
felt,  loving,  stirring  words  were  spoken,  while  we  all  wept  together.  Mr.  Rey 
nolds  made  most  touching  and  thrilling  mention  in  Sabbath  School,  asking  those 
young  people  who  had  been  brought  to  Christ  through  Mr.  Bliss'  meetings  to 
rise.  Over  thirty  arose  to  testify  of  what  he  had  done  for  them.  Oh !  how 
many  precious  souls  will  sparkle  as  gems  in  his  crown  ! 

We  conclude  this  chapter  and  the  volume  with  a  few  letters  from 
Christian  friends  and  co-workers.  The  first  is  from  Rev.  Dr.  J.  H. 
Brookes,  of  St.  Louis : 

ST.  Louis,  Jan.  1,  1877. 
MY  BELOVED  BROTHER  : 

Since  yesterday  morning  there  has  seemed  to  be  a  pall  upon  earth  and 
sky.  One  of  the  Elders  came  to  the  study,  just  before  the  hour  of  preaching, 
and  asked  me  if  I  had  heard  the  sad  news,  and  then  told  me  with  sobs  that  Bliss 
had  been  killed.  The  tidings  stunned  me,  it  was  so  unexpected,  so  impossible, 
my  poor  heart  said. 

Mention  was  made  of  the  heavy  loss  the  church  had  sustained  when  we  met 
for  public  worship,  and  the  tears  of  many  attested  the  strength  of  the  hold 
our  dear  brother  had  taken  upon  the  affections  of  the  saints  here.  Again  we 
met  in  the  evening,  and  remained  in  prayer  and  meditation  upon  the  word,  and 
singing  many  of  the  sweet  songs  Mr.  Bliss  had  composed,  until  the  old  year  had 
gone  away  and  the  midnight  hour  announced  that  we  were  entering  upon  a  new 
year.  Many  were  the  allusions  to  Bliss  and  his  family,  and  to  you  also,  stricken 
to  the  ground  by  this  sudden  and  appalling  blow. 

Oh,  how  my  heart  bled  for  you,  as  the  thought  of  your  loneliness  and 
desolation  of  spirit  and  bitter  disappointment  occurred  to  me ;  but  it  only  led 
some  at  least — no  doubt  many — to  bear  you  before  the  Lord  in  fervent  supplica 
tion.  Surely  He  is  saying  to  you  now,  as  never  before,  "  Be  still,  and  know  that 
I  am  God,"  arid  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  here 
after."  Yes,  He  will  make  this  strange  providence  perfectly  plain  very  soon, 
for,  "  Yet  a  little  while  and  he  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry." 
It  is  the  time,  dear  brother,  for  your  faith  to  meet  the  deep  darkness  rolling  over 
you  with  the  cry,  "  Though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him." 

A  young  man  in  his  prayer,  last  night,  referred  to  Bliss  as  having  taught 
many  of  us  to  sing  "  Waiting  and  Watching,"  and  now  he  is  waiting  and  watch 
ing  for  the  saints  he  had  cheered  on  earth.  Even  so ;  he  is  just  on  the  other 
side  of  the  river,  waiting  and  watching  for  his  companion  in  testimony  and 
service.  Let  us  more  and  more  be  waiting  and  watching  for  that  blessed  hope, 
when  at  our  gathering  together  unto  Jesus,  we  shall  meet  our  beloved  ones  who 
sleep  in  Him.  Oh,  in  the  presence  of  such  a  sore  affliction,  how  our  hearts  cry 
out,  "Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus!"  How  pitifully  little  the  world  seems! 
How  contemptible,  self  I  How  near,  eternity  1  How  bright  and  glorious  the 
home  toward  which  we  are  traveling  1 

These  hurried  words  have  been  written  as  fast  as  my  pen  can  move,  just  to 


LETTEKS  FKOM   FRIENDS  365 

let  you  know  that  some  of  God's  dear  children  in  St.  Louis  have  fellowship  in 
your  sorrow,  and  are  bearing  you  up  in  their  hearts  in  prayer.  The  Lord  will 
bless  this  terrible  trial  in  drawing  you  nearer  to  Himself,  and  giving  you  more 
singleness  of  heart. 

In  a  common  grief,  but  a  common  hope,  too. 

Yours  in  Him,  J.  H  BROOKES. 

MILWAUKEE,  Jan.  18,  1877. 
MY  DEAR  BROTHER  WHITTLE: 

I  have  thought  much  about  you  of  late  and  especially  since  the  death  of  our 
dear  friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Biiss.  We  had  had  several  very  sad  afflictions  in 
our  church,  and  this  one  of  their  so  sudden  departure,  coming  at  the  close  of  the 
year,  made  the  year  go  out  in  gloom.  I  shall  always  remember  the  last  months 
of  1876  as  a  time  of  abundant  and  almost  overwhelming  sorrow.  How  happily 
the  year  began  —  for  me,  at  least  —  when  we  were  working  together  in  this  hard 
field  of  Milwaukee.  The  work  was  a  joy  and  it  was  a  joy  to  see  its  results,  though 
they  were  not  such  nor  so  large,  seemingly,  as  we  had  wished.  In  God's  sight 
they  may  have  been  far  greater  than  the  ones  we  had  expected.  In  the  first  ter 
ror  of  the  calamity  of  December  29,  it  was  difficult  to  get  near  to  the  divine  point 
of  view.  But  we  are  doubtless  now  both  calm  in  the  view  that  the  acts  and  the 
kingdom  of  our  dear  Father  have  all  space  and  all  eternity  to  interpret  them. 
They  are  not  to  be  judged  by  a  single  fearful  night  and  a  single  dreadful  ravine. 
The  flesh  shrinks  from  the  thought  of  the  bruised  and  mangled  frames  of  those 
so  loved,  but  the  spirit  of  faith  remembers  One  who  was  more  bruised  for  our  ini 
quities.  And  that  God  can  use,  in  some  mysterious  way,  the  bruising  of  the 
body  for  the  healing  of  souls,  the  great  example  of  the  wounded  Saviour  teaches 
us.  It  seems  terrible  to  the  shrinking  flesh  to  think  of  dying  by  fire,  but  God 
has  brought  some  of  the  richest  blessings  to  His  church  through  fire.  God's  be 
loved  Zion  owes  much  discipline  of  purifying  and  exaltation  to  this  element  of 
fire.  It  is  the  great  law  of  the  Lord,  expressed  most  astonishingly  upon  Calvary, 
that  the  world  shall  be  saved  with  suffering. 

Thus  the  crushed  and  "broken  frame 

Oft  doth  sweetest  graces  yield, 
And  this  suffering,  toil  and  shame, 

Prom  the  martyr's  keenest  flame, 
Heavenly  incense  is  distilled. 

The  converts  of  last  winter  stand  well ;  we  are  having  some  more  continually, 
and  I  am  hopeful  of  good  results  in  the  Sunday  Schools.  I  wish  I  might  have  an 
afternoon's  quiet  talk  with  you.  Do  you  never  long  for  some  quiet  ?  I  do,  and 
think  it  necessary  to  the  highest  life  of  the  soul. 

With  love, 

GEO.  T  LADD. 


LAST   SONG   OF   P.   P.  BLISS, 
He  Knows. 


P.  P.  B. 


i 


-«-;- 


1.  I    know  not  what  awaits  me,        God  kind  -  ly  veils  mine  eyes, 

2.  One  step    I   see     before  me,       'Tis   all      I  need  to     see, 

_         -,  .  &**•* 


w — 0- 


0** 


S    K    N    i 


hafcfl: 


And  o'er  each  step  of  my  onward  way  He  makes  new  scenes  to  rise; 
The  light  of  heav'n  more  brightly  shines,  When  earth's  illusions   flee; 


m 


=£=££ 


^7-—  —*~9  9       9 


y-^i^ 


And  ev  -  Yy  joy  He  sends  me  comes  A  sweet  and  glad  sur-  prise. 
And  sweet-ly  thro1  the  si-lence  comes  His  lov  -  ing  "Fol  -  low  Me." 

'  "' 


i 


Chorus. 


^--f'-j:Sri 


^r 


Where  He  may  lead  I'll  fol  -  low,         My  trust    in  Him  re  -  pose; 


m 


Copyrighted,  1877,  by  J.  CHURCH  &  Co. 

366 


He  Enows-'-Wndii, 

i N     j 


And  ev  -  'ry  hour  in  per-fect  peace  I'll  sing,  He  knows,  He  knows, 


/5N 


- 


P 


r  f         >    i 

And  ev  -  'ry  Lour  in  per-fect  peace  I'll  sing,  He  knows,  He  knows. 


a 


3. 0  blissful  lack  of  wisdom, 

'Tis  blessed  not  to  know; 
He  holds  me  with  His  own  right  hand, 

And  will  not  let  me  go, 
And  lulls  my  troubled  soul  to  rest 

In  Him  who  loves  me  so 

4.  So  on  I  go,  not  knowing, 

I  would,  not  if  I  might; 
I'd  rather  walk  in  the  dark  with  God 

Than  go  alone  in  the  light; 
I'd  rather  walk  by  faith  with  Him  • 

Than  go  alone  by  sight. 

367 


A    WONDERFUL    RECORD    OF    REVIVAL    TIMES. 


MEMOIRS 

OF 

REV.  CHARLES  G.  FINNEY, 

(THE   CELEBRATED    REVIVALIST   PREACHER), 
WRITTEN    BY 


WITH   A  PORTRAIT   ON    STEEL,  AND    FAC-SIMILE   SERMON    IN    MR, 
FINNEY'S  OWN  HANDWRITING. 


477    PAGES.       POST-PAID,    $2.00. 


"  The  narrative  is  personal,  involving  the  experiences  both  of  the 
author  and  of  those  with  whom  he  had  to  do.  It  presents  the 
memories  and  heart  yearnings  of  a  veteran  pastor  with  a  passion 
for  saving  souls." 

BY    REV.    THEO.    L.    CUTLER,    D.D. 

A  wonderful  volume  it  truly  is.  To  read  it,  stirs  the  soul  like  a  trumpet. 
This  country  has  seen  but  one  Charles  G.  Finney. 

The  most  remarkable  feature  of  this  extraordinary  book  is  the  supernatural 
element.  Finney  lived,  preached,  and  labored  as  if  the  Spirit  of  the  "Most  High 
dwelt  in  him  and  spoke  through  him.  Certainly  mighty  works  were  wrought  by 
Ms  trenchant  voice ;  and  many  who  "  heard  it,  said  that  it  thundered."  Some  of 
the  foremost  Christian  laymen  in  the  Empire  State  were  converted  under  his 
ministry.  He  probably  led  more  souls  to  Jesus  than  any  man  of  this  century. 

BY    REV.    R.    S.    STORRS,    D.D. 

I  have  read  it  with  the  greatest  interest,  and  am  impatient  for  leisure  enough  to 
read  it  again.  What  a  fiery  John  the  Baptist  he  was  in  his  earlier  ministry !  What 
a  marvelous  movement  that  to  which  he  gave  an  impulse,  so  mighty  and  BO  wide ! 

BY    REV.    LYMAN    ABBOTT. 

I  congratulate  you  on  publishing,  in  Dr.  Finney's  biography,  the  most  fascinat 
ing  religious  biography  that  I  ever  read.  It  is  as  dramatic,  as  full  of  surprises, 
almost  as  marvelous  in  its  manifestation  of  divine  power,  as  the  Book  of  Acts.  It 
ia  coming  out  at  just  the  right  time. 

A.    S.    BARNES    &    COMPANY,    Publishers. 

VII 


THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW 

RENEWED  BOOKS  ARE  SUBJECT  TO  IMMEDIATE 
RECALL 


LIBRARY,  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  DAVIS 

Book  Slip-25»«-6,'66(G3855s4)458 


N9  512361 

BV330 

Memoirs   of  B55 

Philip  P.    Bliss.          W5 


LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
DAVIS 


