


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




THE WASON 

CHINESE 
COLLECTION 



Cornell University Library 
BV 3427.R64M61 



Memorials of Cecil Robertson of Sianfu 




3 1924 023 224 987 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tliis bool< is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924023224987 



•ircHmmf 




SKETCH-MAP OF BAPTIST MISSIONS IN NORTH CHINA, SHOWING PLACES 
MENTIONED IN THIS VOLUME. 



CECIL ROBERTSON 





■•^Gucr/''''^^^C<S'<^^^ 



MEMORIALS OF 

CECIL ROBERTSON 
OF SIANFU 

MEDICAL MISSIONARY 



BY 



F. B. J^EYER 

B.A.rD.D. 



SECOND EDITION 



LONDON 
THE CAREY PRESS 

19 FURNIVAL STREET, E.G. 
1916 



1') -...4 r.v\ 



)n/,^-\SO(f 



CONTENTS 

PACK 

ONE OF DR. ROBERTSON'S FAVOURITE HYMNS - vi 
FOREWORD - - - - - vii 

CHAFTBR 

I. BIRTH AND EARLY YEARS - - - I 

II. JOTTINGS FROM DR. ROBERTSON'S DIARY - l8 

III. THE MISSIONARY DESIGNATE - - - 25 

IV. AT YENANFU — GETTING INTO HARNESS - - 41 
V. ON THE EVE OF THE GREAT REVOLUTION - 54 

VI. A BRIEF VIEW OF THE REVOLUTION - -65 

VII. THE OUTBREAK OF THE REVOLUTION - "77 

VIII. SUMMONED TO T'UNG KUAN ... 104 

ix. back again at sianfu - - - - ii9 

x. the last leaves of his diary - - i37 

xi. the triumphant end - - - - 144 

appendix: dr. Robertson's account of his 

VISIT to YENANFU - - - . I69 

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 

TO FACE PACE 

CECIL FREDERICK ROBERTSON - Frontispiect 

DR. ROBERTSON STARTING ON THE JOURNEY TO 

YENANFU - - - - - 44 

DR. CECIL ROBERTSON" AND A GROUP OF PATIENTS - 88 

THE EAST GATE OF SIANFU - - - I32 
DR. CECIL ROBERTSON : GIFT OF TABLET AND 

UMBRELLA - - - - - I32 

THE ORDER OF THE TIGER: DECORATION AND DIPLOMA I6I 

Sketch-Map of Baptist Missions in North China. 



ONE OF DR. ROBERTSON'S FAVOURITE 

HYMNS 

" Father, who art alone 

Our Helper and our stay, 
O hear us, as we plead 

For loved ones far away : 
And shield with Thine almighty hand 
Our wanderers by sea and land. 

" For Thou, our Father God, 

Art present everywhere. 
And bendest low Thine ear 

To catch the faintest prayer. 
Waiting rich blessings to bestow 
On all Thy children here below. 

" O compass with Thy love 

The daily path they tread ; 
And may Thy light and truth 

Upon their hearts be shed. 
That, one in all things with Thy will, 
Heaven's peace and joy their souls may fill. 

" Guard them from every harm 

When danger shall assail, 
And teach them that Thy power 

Can never, never fail : 
We cannot with our loved ones be, 
But trust them. Father, unto Thee. 

" We all are travellers here 

Along life's various road, 
Meeting and parting oft 

Till we shall mount to God, — 
At home at last, with those we love. 
Within the Fatherland above." 



Vi 



FOREWORD 

When I undertook the sacred duty of preparing this 
memorial volume of one so closely associated with 
the Church to which I have the honour to minister, 
I thought of writing his biography; but as I com- 
menced to peruse the material ready to my hand, 
particularly his letters to his family, and especially 
those to his mother, I realized that my share in this 
book must be of a much humbler description, and 
that to connect together these most beautiful records 
from his own hand, as well as the impressions pro- 
duced on his familiar associates, was the highest 
service that I could render. 

It has been a most moving and uplifting office. 
Often as I have looked up from my writing-table to 
the pine-clad mountains, which bathe their massive 
roots in the waters reaching hence to lovely Lucerne, 
I have felt that there is nothing in the spiritual 
landscape so lofty as the experience of a human soul, 
which is accessible in its lower interests to all that is 
human and natural, but which rears itself to Heaven 
in untrodden heights, where its whiteness, undefiled 
by human footstep, lies open to the first sudden 
awakening kiss of dawn, and the last lingering 
tenderness flung from the west. 

The fire that glows in these embers, which I have 
vii 



Foreword 

taken from the altar, is God-enkindled. May it 
spread, awakening in thousands of hearts a kindred 
passion, until the youth of our Christian families 
catch the fire to spread it in a far-reaching confla- 
gration of pure love to God and man. The hope of 
the world's redemption lies there. In another sense 
than the literal the elements have yet to melt with 
fervent heat, and many of the works in which we 
pride ourselves have to be burned up. Is it not 
written also, that creation awaits the uncurtaining 
of the sons of God ? Here at least the curtain has 
been lifted from one of them, of whom Dr. Young, 
whose life he saved, said, when the news of his 
friend's death reached him: "He was the only 
perfect man I ever knew. There was never any- 
thing about him that one could wish otherwise." 

F. B. MEYER. 



vxa 



CECIL ROBERTSON OF SIANFU 

CHAPTER I 
BIRTH AND EARLY YEARS 

Cecil Frederick Robertson was bom at Clapham, 
a suburb on the south of London, on April 9, 1884. 
He was the third child of his parents. His mother 
speaks of him as a bright and happy boy, fond of 
games, tractable, and affectionate. At school he 
won golden opinions for his thoroughness and pains- 
taking industry, but as yet nothing augured the 
distinguished career that lay before him, save that 
his parents, as their children were growing up, 
hoped that one of their family at least should be 
surrendered to the great missionary cause. 

In 1895 the family removed to Tottenham Court 
Road, where the father took up a responsible position 
in the management of the Bank which was to become 
so intimately associated with Cecil's memories in 
future years. " The old home at the Bank," he says, 
writing from China to his mother in anticipation of 
Christmas, 1910, " will always be the home of our 
memory, wherever each one of us is, and nothing 
can be sweeter to any of us than the memory of all 
those years of happy united love, of all our youthful 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu 

hopes and fears, successes and failures, and espe- 
cially of all your and dear father's unselfish love for 
us. I can recall the happy times we used to have — 
the daily walk to school, the evening home-work, the 
sorrow of the toil, and the joy of success. Then 
later came the bigger things — the coming to Christ, 
the joining of the Church, the decision to come 
abroad, if God should permit, and of all your and 
dear father's loving sympathy in every step, and 
much more than sympathy. How much we have to 
be thankful for ! How full of joy those years have 
been, and how little of sorrow and shadow we have 
had ! What depths of gratitude ought they not to 
produce to our Heavenly Father ! Oh for a heart 
of real love and gratitude, which will not be ex- 
hausted in mere words, but will give itself out in 
daily Christ-like ministration to those for whom 
He cares!" And again: "What a precious thing 
the memory of a good and happy home is ! It is 
not until one gets away that one realizes how much 
it means to one, and I am sure that I can never be 
grateful enough for all the happy memories that 
home will always mean to me." On the eve of the 
great rebellion he writes: " Just now there come the 
strains of music from someone playing the har- 
monium. It is one of those lovely hymns of peace 
that Grace [his sister] used to play. These memories 
are very precious, and they come to one with greater 
force now and again." He was always counting on 
a family reunion. " It does not seem a year since 
I left. What a blessed, blessed joy this communion 
of love is ! Distance makes no difference, does it ? 



Birth and'*" Early Years. 

I think it only intensifies it. One day we shall have 
a joyous reunion, which will be all the more joyful 
because we have been parted." That anticipation 
was not to be realized here, but, like the patriarchs, 
he reached forth to and embraced, not an earthly 
city, but the Father's Home, where " they without 
us cannot be made perfect." 

At the age of eleven and a half Cecil was sent to 
the Mercers' School, which he entered in September, 
1895. His career there was eminently successful. 
He was elected a Foundation Scholar in 1897, and 
passed the Junior Cambridge Local, first class, in 
1898. He matriculated at the London University 
in the first division in 1900, passed the Preliminary 
Scientific M.B. Examination of that University in 
1901, and left the school, with an Exhibition of ;£ioo, 
in 1901. 

In the meajiwhiie his character was maturing, and 
on the last night of the old year, 1897, his brother 
and he definitely decided for Christ under my own 
ministry at Christ Church — a fact which I only 
learnt quite recently. 

The family on its removal to Tottenham Court 
Road began to attend at Regent's Park Chapel, 
of which his father became, and still remains, one 
of the most honoured officers. He there enjoyed 
the ministry of the Rev. E. G. Gange. It is to 
this happy circumstance that the preparation of 
these memorials by my hand is due. At the 
Memorial Service, held at Woodgrange Baptist 
Church, Forest Gate, Dr. Lush gave the following 
graphic narrative of those early years : 

3 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

" I come to speak of Cecil Robertson as I have 
knovm hini since he was eleven years of age, and I 
have known him intimately. As Secretary of 
Regent's Park Chapel, I had to interview him for 
admission to the Church, and as Superintendent of 
the Sunday-school I had him as one of my teachers. 
The outstanding feature of his early Ufe was his 
earnestness in all that he did. Speaking of him 
recently, a Christian worker who knew him inti- 
mately described him as one who could always be 
depended upon, and as doing heartily whatever he 
put his hand to. On his conversion to God, he 
joined the Junior, and later the Intermediate Society 
of Christian Endeavour at Regent's Park, and into 
this work he threw himself with great heartiness. 
Subsequently he was transferred to the Senior 
Society of Christian Endeavour, and was appointed 
Convener of the Missionary Committee,- and this 
was another important step in his missionary career. 

" About this period he often spoke to his parents, 
and they to him, about his future work, but up to 
this time it is evident that he had no definite thought 
of becoming a missionary-^he was to be a surveyor. 
Soon after he became Convener of this Missionary 
Committee he initiated a Missionary Exhibition at 
the Chapel, and as Secretary of the Exhibition 
he practically carried it through by himself. It 
involved a great amount of labour, and during 
this time of organization and a.rrangement the 
question was put by his mother: 'What are you 
hoping for as the result of all this labour ?' He 
replied : ' To increase interest in the missionary 

4 



Birth and Early Years. 

work, and to get someone to offer for it.' Though, 
as a matter of fact, he was so fully occupied with 
the working of the Exhibition that he had no time 
even to listen to speakers in its various courts, it 
directly brought about his decision to give his life 
to the Foreign Mission Field. 

" A little later Mr. Shorrock, with whom he was 
to become so closely associated in after years, asked 
one of the lady workers if she knew of any boys or 
girls specially interested in missionary work, and 
she mentioned Cecil Robertson, and introduced the 
lad to the great missionary. This was a further 
step in the decision of his life. Shortly after the 
Exhibition was over he came to his parents, and 
said that if they were willing he would like to offer 
himself. They talked it over that night, and felt 
that if he could be a medical missionary he would be 
spending his life in the best possible way. Sir Alfred 
Pearce Gould, who was greatly interested in the 
lad, advised him to enter the Middlesex Hospital, 
told him of the entrance-scholarships, and en- 
couraged him to try to win one. He followed 
this advice, and his career began. It was a most 
successful one throughout, and he proved to be one 
of the most brilliant among the young medical 
students and graduates in that hospital." 

Dr. Robertson thus summarized the influences 
that moulded his career in these formative 
days: 

" I. Missionary influence at home, an influence 
felt in my boyhood, and far greater than I can 
rightly estimate. As I look back now and get a 

5 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

better perspective of things, I know that home has 
been the greatest influence of my life. 

" 2. Missionary influence at work in a Christian 
Endeavour Society, where I first began to get a 
definite idea that God wanted me to go abroad. 

" 3. John X. 16, a verse that has impressed me 
deeply, and has been the chief factor in making 
my desire definite. Will you ponder on that musi 
in the light of 2 Cor. v. 14, 15 ? 

" I must also express my indebtedness to the 
missionary influence of Regent's Park College, and 
to the Student Movement, factors that came into 
my life during my student days, and helped to keep 
my purpose true." 

These, then, were the mountain springs that fed 
the full river of his life, and these paragraphs must 
be full of inspiration to parents, to workers in 
Christian Endeavour Societies, and to pastors. We 
never know what we are doing when we tend and 
strengthen young life, or place before it, however 
incidentally, the highest ideals of Christian character 
and service. 

The following enumeration of the successive steps 
of his student career must be set down here in detail 
as a refutation of the idea that earnest piety is 
inconsistent with the highest attainments of industry 
and genius, though Dr. Robertson sedulously dis- 
claimed the latter, and insisted that his successes 
were due, under God's blessing, to mental discipline 
and hard application. But probably these are the 
chief constituents of what we know as genius, 
which is the breath of a high purpose in life that 

6 



Birth and Early Years. 

concentrates all faculty and power on a supreme 
object. 

Dr. Cecil Robertson entered the Middlesex Hos- 
pited on September 30, 1901, and the following 
appointments and prizes fell to him in this brilliant 
series : 

In the Medical School he won the Class Prizes in 
Practical Anatomy, in Physiology, and in Practical 
Surgery, and was awarded Certificates of Merit in 
Anatomy, in Pharmacology, and in Practical Mid- 
wifery. 

At the close of his student career he carried oft the 
Governors' Prize, the Freeman Scholarship, and the 
Senior Broderip Scholarship, which is the " Blue 
Ribbon " of the School. 

In the Hospital he held all the usual clinical 
appointments, and in addition served for six months 
as House Physician under Dr. (now Sir James) 
Kingston Fowler, and then was for a like period 
House Surgeon under Mr. (now Sir Alfred) Pearce 
Gould. He took the Diplomas of M.R.C.S, and 
L.R.CP. in 1907, and in May of the same year 
he graduated M.B. and B.S. at the University of 
London. In 1909 he was admitted a Fellow of the 
Royal College of Surgeons of England. 

These notable attainments and successes were 
not allowed to obscure the clear testimony which 
he always maintained for his religious convictions. 
There was never any doubt as to his attitude to 
Jesus Christ. His associates might favour or oppose, 
but his course was perfectly straight and consistent. 
In tliis connection we may quote the testimony of 

7 2 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

Dr. Gottfried O. Teichmann, one of his fellow- 
students at the Middlesex Hospital: "The work 
that he did in connection with the Christian Union 
will remain. When he first went to the Hospital the 
Christian Union was practically dead, but owing to 
his zeal and energy it became a real union of help- 
fulness, and I well remember the morning prayer 
meetings that we used to hold downstairs in one of 
the demonstrators' rooms. What a help they were 
day by day in our hospital work !" 

During these busy years he was keen on various 
branches of Christian service. He held a Sunday- 
school class, took an interest in a boy's club, and 
visited lodging-houses on Sunday evenings . He was 
always fond of work among boys, and seemed to 
realize the urgency of filling every spare moment 
with service of some kind. 

In 1903 he wrote the following in a friend's album : 

" The day is short, 
The task is great, 
The workmen are sluggish, 
The reward is much, 
And the Master's call is urgent." 

His earnest devotion was combined with an 
intensely robust manhood. There was nothing 
effeminate or sickly about him . He was always over- 
flowing with life, gaiety, and interest in all that is 
natural and human. He bore himself as a strong, 
well-built, muscular young fellow, who could bear 
fatigue better than most, and to whom life was sweet. 

In addition to the Scholarships and Degrees men- 
tioned above, he was awarded the Lord Scholarship 
at Regent's ParkXoUege, and was in residence there 

8 



Birth and Early Years. 

for three years; and we are indebted to fellow- 
students — than whom none can form more accurate 
judgments — for the following memoranda: 

" It may be some comfort to you to know that to 
me personally his clean, manly, Christian outlook 
was more than a help ; and I had the good luck in 
my first year at Regent's Park College to be given 
the room opposite to that which Cecil occupied, and 
received more inspiration from his manner of living 
than I can well estimate. Others no doubt have 
written and spoken much of his ability ; I prefer to 
dwell upon the effect of his Christ-filled life upon 
us. Many Regent's Park men are thanking God 
that they were privileged to know Cecil Robertson " 
{Rev. Thomas Powell) . 

" How often have I secretly longed to be the 
man he was ! What an apt pupil he was in the 
School of Christ ! But he would have been the last 
to confess it. He breathed the very spirit of his 
Master " {Rev. A. E. Hubbard, afterwards Us 
brother-in-law). 

The following is from one who was very intimate 
with him in his college days : 

" The news of Cecil Robertson's death came as a 
great shock to those who knew him in college, for 
there was no man in his day who was more respected, 
and more loved. 

" One thinks of him in three ways : As a very true 
man, as a very true friend, and as a very true 
Christian. 

" The fact that he was just a real man, with all 
the spirit, all the love of fun, all the humour of a 

9 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

real human being, may be somewhat overlooked 
in these days when we necessarily give our minds 
rather to his character as a Christian gentleman; but 
it may encourage those who read this memoir, and 
who see the transparent nature of his Christian 
discipleship, to know that he was a true man among 
us, ready for any of the good-humoured joking with 
which every college worthy of the name abounds. 
Some men's joking angers — his never did. It was all 
done with such a good spirit of comradeship that 
when you discovered him to be a real man, and a 
better than yourself, in all the youthful exuberance 
of college life, you ended by loving him the more. 

" But it was in his friendship that he shone. 
When he could spare time from his busy life to 
spend an hour, two hours, three hours, four hours 
after supper in intimate converse, you discovered 
his wonderful powers of affection, of sympathy, of 
love. A quiet, shy, reserved man he was. He did 
not find it easy to speak and tell out what was in 
him, but when he drew aside the curtain, or when 
friendship drew it aside, a heart was revealed true 
and loyaJJas steel, and as tender as a very good 
woman's. It came out, for instance, when a friend 
was lying for weeks on end at death's door, and, 
with all his doctor's knowledge of how disease works, 
he gathered a little company of us (friends of his 
and of the sick man) for prayer, and night after 
night led us to the room adjoining the infirmary 
to pray for him. His friendship did not grow weary 
or slack; it could stand the test of patience. 

" Any man who was privileged to call him 

10 



Birth and Early Years. 

friend learned much of the great gift God has given 
in the love of man for man. But we knew more of 
him than that. We knew him as a man to whom 
God was very real, who had a living friendship with 
Christ, who was moulded by the Master for His 
own use. None could doubt it. Sometimes we 
doubted why we and others were in college; none 
could ever doubt why he was there. Everything 
about him spoke an intense conviction of the love 
of God and of the saving grace of Christ. He was a 
man with a message, a message which he had first 
of all learnt in his own heart and life. His influence 
was one of unmixed goodness. The religious life 
of the college was stronger, the Christian character 
of the men ennobled, because he was there, and 
he was missed by one and all when his duties at 
Middlesex Hospital took him from us. 

" In our blindness we imagine that God can ill 
spare him from China, and yet we doubt not that 
this life, so truly human and yet so Christ-like, has 
not been laid down in vain " {Rev. E. Murray 
Page). 

Yet one other student photograph must be 
appended : 

" Fellow-students in college judge each other's 
worth by standards that differ from those set by 
people who view them from outside. To these the 
badge of a student's distinction is not seldom the 
number and quality of his degrees. But to his 
fellows it is the tone of his life, and his capacity for 
friendship. Unless these are sound and large, a 
man need not expect homage and popularity merely 

II 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

by reason of his intellectual brilliance. None are 
more generous in their appreciation of academical 
success than students ; but we have known brilliant 
men pass from college " unwept, unhonoured, and 
unsung " by members of their colleges, who were 
the best judges of their worth. Cecil Robertson 
was a brilliant student, and Regent's Park men are 
not likely to forget or minimize the glory he has 
added to a roll of intellectual fame already long 
and brilliant. But somehow when I think of him — 
and that is often — it is not the skilled surgeon whom 
I image, but the perfect gentleman, and the choice 
disciple of Jesus Christ, whose friendship I reckon 
one of the most precious acquisitions of college days. 
It began on the evening of my arrival at Regent's 
Park, and he started it by offering, with his quiet 
smile, to help me unpack. And so throughout. He 
was Edways willing to help men to do things — to win 
the ■ footer ' match for his year, to organize coffee 
suppers, to run the Athenian Society, to sing carols. 
But without any deliberate effort on his part he 
helped us to be something finer than we were. 
Virtue went out of him, and if it is true that ' the 
divinest prerogative of friendship is the com- 
munication to others of all we have ourselves 
experienced to be most divine, 'then Cecil Robertson 
proved himself to be a friend of a rare type. It is a 
rarer thing in a theological college than people 
imagine^this communication to fellow-students of 
the Divine in each. I suspect that Cecil Robertson 
was drawing from the Source more constantly than 
some of us. At any rate, he kept the early morning 

12 



Birth and Early Years. 

watch with the Lord, and so was always cheerful at 
breakfast-time — a somewhat severe test of a man's 
tranquillity. Indeed, he impressed me always as a 
fine representative of a fine Christian type, the 
Medical Student Volunteer, healthy, restrained, 
skilful in far vision, and steady in hand. The 
theological student is somewhat different — as his 
work is. But to have one living amongst us who 
so blended devotion and medical skill, somehow made 
the last commission of our Lord very attractive to 
His disciples. 

" One test of a deep friendship is the ease with 
which a man can pray with his friend and talk oft 
of the Lord. It was easy to give the spirit wings 
in Cecil Robertson's company. I have memories of 
many quiet seasons of communion with him at 
college, at his home — whose life I was privileged to 
share — and in Scotland, where he visited me in my 
first charge. Sometimes little was said, but one had 
the sense that, if Christ could be mediated through 
men, it would be men of the type of my friend. 
I asked him, I remember, if he would preach for me 
one Sunday evening. He replied that he could not 
preach a sermon to save his life, but that, if I liked, 
he would tell my people why he was going to China. 
And as I heard Mm speak out the thoughts within 
him, and watched the faces of his hearers, I got on 
the track of the true preacher's secret — conviction 
of a personal experience of the Lord, an under- 
standing of how to find life's great purpose, and a 
resolute purpose to do it. 

" Thinking of all the gracious influence which he 

13 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

shed on us, his fellow-students, I can understand the 
love Cecil Robertson evoked from his Chinese people. 
For the appeal which a devoted Christian gentleman 
makes is intelligible everywhere. He has gone to 
his Lord before the shadows had time to lengthen, 
but my faith is that, somewhere and somehow, he 
is still at his task, the significance of which to us, 
perhaps, he did not realize down here — the task of 
commending the Master by simply living his own 
fine life. But I will tell him some day that for me 
at least he was and must ever be a perfect knight 
of Jesus Christ" {Rev. James Amos, M.A.). 

And the impression made on his fellow-students 
was that also of his pastors and the Church at 
Regent's Park. Rev. E. G. Gauge gives this un- 
hesitating testimony: "Without exception, I have 
never met a more Christ-like young man; even before 
he went to China he was, or seemed to be, eminently 
fitted for the Home-Call." 

" It was my great privilege," writes Mr. Godwin, 
one of the Elders, " to know Dr. Cecil Robertson 
for about eight years before he left for China. His 
personality and deep spiritual earnestness have left 
a deep impression on me, which will never wear off ; 
and when I heard of the wonderful work he was 
doing during the Revolution, knowing him as I did, 
I was not in the least surprised. He only needed 
the opportunity to use his brilliant gifts, and to 
show his strong and gentle character. ... I took 
his. class in the Sunday-school when duty called him 
elsewhere. You could tell at once that the lads 
had a teacher who had gained their attention and 

14 



Birth and Early Years. 

deep affection. I saw a good deal of him during 
the last year he was in England; he attended one 
very precious to us. During the time she was under 
medical treatment, his devotion and generous care 
for the six weeks she was unable to walk, we can 
never forget. Often would he come and read to 
and converse with her; his conversation was always 
helpful and instructive. Often would he carry her 
down and up four flights of stairs, and take her out 
in a bath-chair on the Heath; his great gentleness 
and kindness she will ever remember. 

" Though somewhat retiring, he had a good deal of 
humour, which often flashed out, cheering those 
with whom he came in contact. 

" It was my joy to preside over the last meeting 
he addressed of the Regent's Park Chapel Young 
People's Society before leaving for China. I men- 
tioned in the few remarks I made that he had been 
called to the noblest work in which anyone could be 
engaged. Before commencing his address he said 
he did not quite agree with what I had said; he 
thought the noblest was in doing the Will of God in 
whatever sphere we were placed. Just what I 
expected from him. 

" When his beloved father wrote and told me 
that he had passed into the presence of the Saviour 
he so loved to serve, my thoughts went at once to 
Murray McCheyne, who passed away at the same age, 
the fragrance of whose life is still with us. And so 
will Cecil be remembered for years to come at home, 
and especially in that wonderful country for which 
he so devotedly gave his life. Well done, good and 

15 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord ! 
We loved thee well, but Jesus loved thee best. Good- 
night, until the day break and the shadows flee away, 
and we see our Saviour face to face, and thee too, 
whom we loved so much." 

Few who were present at Bloomsbury Chapel on 
Thursday afternoon, April 3, 1913, will ever forget 
the tender and eloquent words with which the 
great surgeon, to whom Dr. Robertson owed so 
much, and whom he loved so sincerely — Sir Alfred 
Pearce Gould — referred to this portion of his career. 
He recalled the zeal with which he threw himself 
into the Missionary Exhibition, to which we have 
referred, and his introduction to the great appeal of 
medical missions. And then, with the intimate 
knowledge which he had gained of the young 
student's character and gifts during his course at 
the Middlesex Hospital, Sir Alfred described his bril- 
liant successes in passing examinations and winning 
scholarships and prizes, until he took the Fellowship 
of the Royal College of Surgeons, the highest medical 
degree in the world. In a most graphic manner the 
speaker pictured Dr. Robertson's courage and 
devotion, his strength of purpose and consecration 
to the high and holy purposes to which he had 
dedicated himself, and closed by saying: " I am 
not going to utter one sad word. . . . Can we be 
sad over a life like that ? Thank God for Cecil 
Robertson !" And the affection shown by his chief 
was warmly reciprocated. Again and again there 
are allusions in Dr. Robertson's diary to his noble 
friend. Writing to his mother on September 9, 

16 



Birth and Early Years. 

1911, he says : " I had a nice letter from Sir Alfred 
this week. I can never be too grateful for having 
had a year of such intimate contact with him at the 
hospital. What a happy memory it will always 
be !" And among his most ardent desires, when- 
ever he thought of returning home for his furlough, 
was the anticipation of grasping again the hand 
which had so often encouraged him in his student 
career. 



17 



CHAPTER II 

JOTTINGS FROM DR. ROBERTSON'S DIARY 

The Christ-likeness to which so many of his early 
associates have borne witness was not attained 
without a struggle, and of this the following jottings 
from his diary give evidence. This sacred record 
begins with the whole of a favourite hymn, copied 
out in his own hand : 

" That mystic word of Thine, O Sovereign Lord, 
Is all too pure, too high, too deep for me : 
Weary of striving, and with longing faint, 
I breathe it back again in prayer to Thee. 

" Abide in me, I pray, and I in Thee; 

From this good hour, O leave me never more : 
Then shall the discord cease, the wound be healed. 
The lifelong bleeding of the soul be o'er. 

" Abide in me; o'ershadow by Thy love 

Each half -formed purpose, and dark thought c»f sin ; 
Quench, ere it rise, each selfish, low desire. 
And keep my soul as Thine, calm and divine. 

" Abide in me; there have been moments blest 

When I have heard Thy voice and felt Thy power; 
Then evil lost its grasp, and passion, hushed, 
Owned the divine enchantment of the hour. 

" These were but seasons, beautiful and rare; 
Abide in me, and they shall ever be ; 
Fulfil at once Thy precept and my prayer — 
Come and abide m me, and I in Thee." 
i8 



Jottings from Dr. Robertson's Diary. 

January 6, 1907. — Had such a hard struggle with 
my besetting sin, and had to admit defeat. O God, 
help me to overcome ! I seem to lose faith. Oh, 
for more of the victorious power of Christ in the 
daily life, then this and other temptations would lose 
their power. 

January 27. — Much to thank God for during the 
past week. He has been near me. May I never 
stray from Him ! 

February 3. — Failure again to-day ! I failed to 
look to Him, Who alone gives strength; and yet 
how many times this week has victory come by 
obedience to that law ! May I be more humble ! 

March 15. — Fallen again ! How strange it seems 
when I had a special time of communion and prayer 
this morning, and oh how miserably feeble and sad 
are the excuses of it beforehand ! Why is it ? 
Because again I did not seek the presence of Jesus 
Christ. The spiritual sense becomes so blunted) 
unless, immediately the temptation comes, I go to 
Him. It is difficult to go afterwards ! O Lord, 
however little I may desire to seek Thee in my time 
of need, help me to struggle to Thy feet,' and remain 
there until I know that the strength has returned 
to me. 

April 19.— May I not forget that all this success is 
given to me for a purpose. I would use it only for 
Thy glory, O Lord. He;lp me to put aside all selfish 

desires ! 

Tlf^y 7._I am glad to be able to know " my times 
are in Thy hands !" Oh that my life were in more 
accord with that fact ! 

19 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

May 19. — Oh, that I might cast myself more 
wholly on God, and take for myself all His greatness ! 
As I look back on my life since Whit Sunday, 1900, 
my power over sin has largely been in proportion to 
the care with which I have kept the " morning 
watch." O God, I beseech Thee come Thou again 
and take control of all. I cannot control myself 
even in little things. Come, oh come, and help me 
daily to open all my life to Thee. I lose and fail 
without Thee. There has been outward success, 
but how little spiritual. Come Thou, and I will 
yield all to Thee, so that Thou wilt live in me a pure, 
unselfish, true, manly life. Teach me to know how 
little and how weak I am ! Let me not think 
there is any virtue in spending much time in prayer, 
but only that Thou may est come and feed my soul. 

Saturday, June i. — M.B. result. Truly God has 
been good to me, and how little have I given in 
return ! Help me, O God, to give more for Thee. 

Jime 5. — As Dr. S. put it when I left school, I 
have now come to the end of Volume II., and it 
makes me look back to see what progress I have 
made. Much medically, but how much, I wonder, 
have I grown into the fulness of the stature of 
Christ ? How much have I appropriated of my 
inheritance in Him ? How much easier is it for me 
to speak to others about Christ than three or four 
years ago ? How much more do I think of my 
professed Lord and Master, and how much less of 
the good opinion of my fellow-men ? I cannot but 
feel I have come very far short ! How often I have 
faced, in some measure at any rate, these very same 

20 



Jottings from Dr. Robertson's Diary, 

facts within the last five years ! Why is it, then, 
that there is not more enthusiasm, not more fruit ? 
I can only answer, because I have not given Christ 
my full allegiance and faith; I have not liked to 
give up certain things. And now what am I faced 
with ? A life naturally nervous and weak to be 
spent for others in my own strength without real 
spiritual power, or a life made divinely strong by 
the indwelling Spirit used for Christ's glory in His 
service, and daring to face all that men may say 
and think. There is no doubt which I want, but 
have I faith enough ? Oh, may I realize that it is 
not so much my faith, as my faith in Him. I 
must settle this, but, O God, show me Thyself, that 
I may be quite sure of what I am doing ! I cannot 
take any definite step without being sure that I am 
really looking to Thee. 

June i8. — I thought I settled this a week ago, 
but again the old temptation has come up, and I 
have been weak. How blessed is that eighth chapter 
of Romans ! But how it shames one ! O God, lead 
me into a fuller faith in those blessed facts, that it is 
the Spirit of Him that raised up Christ from the 
dead that is to quicken" us ; and that we have not 
received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the 
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, " Abba, 
Father !" I cannot declare that I will keep close 
to Him for all the future, though I want to; but 
I know how weak I am, and just for to-day I can, 
and do most joyfully, trust myself to Him, and pray 
that on the morrow again I may know I am under 
the shadow of His wings. 

21 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

June 25. — Went to see Mrs. Wilson, who told us 
how wonderfully God had provided for her needs 
since Mr. Wilson died. Just step by step, as she has 
committed her way to Him, so He has provided — 
her banking account is just like the barrel of meal 
which nearly runs out, but is always replenished, 
and has never failed. Oh, for a faith which can 
take everything to God in reality, not merely in word, 
and which can truly trust in Him ! 

July 21. — I have been much enjoying the reading 
of " Robert Falconer, " and feel it has been a real help 
to me, but find some things which I must think out. 
One thing is impressed upon me, that God loves 
all men far, far more than we do, and is far more 
anxious and active in their recovery to their true 
life than we, and that therefore, though people will 
not suffer by our faithlessness so much as we, for 
they are in His care, yet we shall be deprived of the 
privilege of working for Him and with Him. Also 
we must learn to look upon men as Christ did, and 
be willing to be spent for them as He was. It is 
more by a demonstration of love guided by God's 
Holy Spirit than by much speaking that we shall 
win men. 

Have taken up the study of Gospel of St. Mark. 
I want to learn more of His character from this vivid 
record, and to learn to look upon my fellows more 
from His point of view, that is, in the light of their 
possibilities. 

July 27. — On reading the above this evening it 
seems to me my attitude is entirely wrong; it is 
not my declaration of love that is of any avail, but 

22 



Jottings from Dr. Robertson's Diary. 

His great grace and love; for surely He wants me 
far, far more than I want Him, wonderful though 
such a fact is. Still there must be a constant yielding 
of my will to His, but also a joyful yielding. 

August 4. — I took Sunday-school this afternoon. 
Felt I did not make things clear enough. How it 
makes me feel the need of being taught of God one's 
self ! How one longs to have that immediate know- 
ledge of God ! Then would self fade away, and God 
would be all in all. 

September i. — Had a nice talk with Lewis this 
afternoon. We both feel much the need of a 
definite authoritative attitude to certain great con- 
troversies — e.g., the virgin birth, future destiny of 
man, etc. At the same time I feel the need of a 
truer knowledge of Christ and a closer fellowship 
with Him. He seems to be the only certainty; but 
how to grow like Him — that is the difficulty . Surely 
this growth in grace is a slow process. As I look 
forward to work in China, and think of having 
students under me, I feel how tremendous is my 
need — both of a closer fellowship with Christ, and a 
definite knowledge of God's plan for men. I must 
try to study the Bible more earnestly and to live 
by it, but so often there is so little inclination so 
to do. 

September 8. — I have been reading " Memorials of 
F. R. Havergal " the last few days, and really they 
are a wonderful revelation of the possibilities of a 
life truly "hid with Christ in God." One thing 
struck me very much. She speaks of the difference 
of watching against temptation when one realizes 

33 3 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

the constant cleansing and the keeping power of 
Christ. " It is the watchfulness of a sentinel when 
his captain is standing by him on the ramparts, 
when his eyes are more than ever on the alert for 
any sign of the approaching enemy, because he knows 
they can only approach to be defeated." How one 
longs to experience something of that triumphant 
faith and walk with God ! I must give myself more 
to prayer and the study of God's Word that I may 
learn of Christ, and that He may indeed Himself 
teach me wondrous things concerning Himself, for 
only then shall I truly know Him, and not merely 
know about Him. Oh to be rid of this miserable 
self, pride, selfishness, etc., and to have a heart open 
to receive Him ! 

September 26. — God's message to me, as I am 
almost overcome by the thought of all that lies 
before me, is: " My work is for a King " (Ps. xlv., 
R.V.). 



24 



CHAPTER III 

THE MISSIONARY DESIGNATE 

During the busy days of a student's life Dr. Robert- 
son made time to attend the Chinese classes, under 
Professor Owen, at King's College, and before he left 
England he was able to write in Chinese characters. 
He was one of the few missionaries in China who 
was able to write his own letters and prescriptions 
in Chinese, and he laid thus the foundation of that 
ready knowledge of the language which made him 
a good preacher in that most difficult of tongues. 

This preparation for his life-work was now ap- 
proaching completion, and in order, as he said, to 
'get his hand in,' Dr. Robertson took locums in 
various places. One of the medical men whom he 
assisted in this way said, on becoming acquainted 
with his life purpose: " I cannot understand how 
Dr. Robertson, with all his brilliant talents, is going 
to throw himself away on the Chinese." How much 
depends on our view-point. Such is the fascination 
of Jesus Christ, that those who have known Him 
and heard His call, count not their lives dear unto 
them, so that they may finish their course, which He 
has marked out, with joy, and fulfil the ministry to 
mankind, with which He has entrusted them. It was 
thus with Cecil Robertson. Dr. Stanley Jenkins, who 

25 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu, 

has so quickly followed his friend into the presence 
of the Lord, and whose love, during those last hours 
of mortal sickness, was infinitely tender, read his 
secret truly when he wrote, after the last sad offices 
had been fulfilled: " Jesus Christ was the beginning 
and end of everything for Robertson . ' ' And the Rev . 
J. C. Keyte's estimate was as true of him, when he 
was a missionary designate, as afterwards in the 
splendid success of his career : ' ' His were the strength 
and sanity of a healthy public school man, combined 
with the devotion of a mystic." 

It is the custom of the Baptist Missionary Society 
to allocate their missionaries to circles of friends or 
clusters of Churches, who agree to be responsible for 
their support. The missionary thus supported is 
regarded as their special representative, and as they 
work for him at home he sends special communica- 
tions from the field. Thus their enthusiasm is 
kindled, and their interest maintained. In pur- 
suance of this plan Dr. Robertson was adopted by the 
Baptist Churches of East London, under the leader- 
ship of the Rev. J. H. French, and he was always 
deeply grateful for the warm sympathy and prayer- 
ful fellowship of the ministers and their people, who 
combined to hold the rope whilst he descended into 
the dark abysses of non-Christian lands. The 
Valedictory Meeting was held on Monday, Septem- 
ber 27, 1909, in the High Road Chapel, Ilf ord, under 
the presidency of Sir Alfred Pearce Gould. 

The final Public Designation Service of the group 
of missionaries, of whom he was one, was held during 
the Session of the Baptist Union and the Missionary 

26 



The Missionary Designate. 

Society held at Reading in the autumn of 1909. 
The charge was delivered in King's Road Chapel by 
the late Rev. Samuel Vincent, the valedictory prayer 
being offered by Professor W. Hackney, M.A. 

On the first Sunday in October, 1909, also the 
first Sunday of my second pastorate at Regent's 
Park Chapel, it fell to me to say good-bye to him 
at the close of the Communion Service. He came 
up to the table from the pew where he was sitting 
with those he loved for the last time, till they sit 
down together at the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. 
We did not know it then. How mercifully God 
veils the future ! The sweet savour of that service 
seems to have remained with him. On September 6, 
1910, he writes to his sister: " How well I remember 
dear Mr. Meyer's words at that last Communion 
Service: ' Behold, I will make thee a new, sharp, 
threshing instrument having teeth ; thou shalt thresh 
the mountains and make them small, and shalt 
make the hills as chaff.' It is a blessed thing to 
have the memory of a service such as that." 

On Tuesday, October 12, 1909, he sailed in the 
Prince Ludwig from Southampton. The students 
of Regent's Park College and many friends saw 
him off at Waterloo Station. His father and brother 
went down with him to Southampton; but he said 
good-bye to his mother in the home — they two alone. 
On the morning of that day he said that he had 
been looking for some little verse that he could give 
them all, and had chosen the words " He is able." 
In his first letter home to his mother he said: " You 
will have heard of the send-off at Waterloo That 

27 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

cheer will live in my ears for many a day. We got 
off from Southampton with nothing more than the 
inevitable lump in the throat. . . . Before I finish 
this letter I want to thank you very much for all 
your help, perhaps to you unconscious, during the 
last few days, and to thank you, too, for the two 
evenings of prayer we all had together." It is thus 
that parents remain at home to intercede, whilst 
their boys go forth to the ends of the earth; but 
who can estimate how much the sacrifice and heart- 
pangs of women like Cecil Robertson's mother count 
in the final reckoning ? 

For the story of his inner life and experiences we 
are permitted to cull the following extracts from 
his letters, which, till almost the end, were weekly 
transmitted to the beloved home-circle, and especially 
to his mother and father. 

October 15, on Board Steamer. — I am very much 
enjoying reading " George Grenfell." What a mag- 
nificent man he must have been ! — always seemed 
to come up smiling despite the greatest difficulties 
and the most pathetic losses. ... I know you are 
remembering us in prayer. Pray especially for our 
spiritual lives on board ship. I can see that it 
is easy to get slipshod over private devotions, and 
that is fatal to real life. There are thirty mission- 
aries on board, and we are going to have Family 
Prayer daily, at 10 a.m., in the saloon, and service 
on Sunday. 

October 22, Naples. — I was delighted to receive 
the budget of letters with the first news of home. 

28 



The Missionary Designate. 

We have been to Pompeii, and seen the wonders of 
that old city, and a great many things of interest 
. . . There are temptations here to slackness in 
spiritual things. One has to be very careful, and 
make time and opportunity for quiet, especially 
when there is such a crowd on board. 

November g, Colombo. — . . . We can count the 
time to Shanghai in days now, and then only two 
or three weeks ! But how much I have to learn ! 
It is no light task, looked at from whatever point 
of view. We know the spiritual force is behind us, 
but the fiesh is a very material thing. 

November 15, Hong Kong. — We are expecting to 
reach Hong Kong about four o'clock this afternoon, 
and are thankful to our Father for keeping us safe, 
for on Thursday we were in danger that we knew 
not of at the time. We afterwards learned that we 
had got out of the regular course, and at one time 
when soundings were taken we were in only 
ten fathoms of water. Though I knew we were in 
danger, you will be happy to know that beyond a 
little physical depression I did not have any fears, 
for I felt that God had some work for some of the 
dozen or so new missionaries on board, and we 
always know that His purposes are always best, 
don't we ? 

November 25, Shanghai. — Rev. Evan and Mrs. 
Morgan met us, and took us to their home, after 
which we went to the Christian Literature Society's 
new office, where we met Dr. Timothy Richard, 
and received our letters, for which very many 
thanks. We were shown over the spacious and 

29 



Cecil Robertsort of" Sianfu. 

well-equipped premises, and in one of tlie tooiAS 
Dr. Richard turned to us and said: "We want 
to give China the message, the right message, and 
in the right way. We want to get it into the 
homes of the officials." He is a grand man; I have 
been much impressed by him. We went on to his 
house to tea, and had a pleasant time, and are to 
spend the evening with him after the Evening 
Service at the Union Church on Sunday. 

December i, Shanghai. — This is to be my letter 
of Christmas greeting to you. We shall all be 
happy, because we shall be in the best communica- 
tion possible — the communication of love. 

December 4, on Board Steamer " Kiang Hsien." — 
Our first week in China will always be a very happy 
memory, for all the kind friends there have lavished 
kindness upon us. On the last day we took tea with 
Dr. Richard, and had another long and interesting 
talk. We dined with Mr. and Mrs. Morgan, after 
which we embarked on this steamer, and left 
Shanghai about 4.30 a.m. 

December 5, Wu-chang. — ^We are leaving this, our 
last stopping-place. David Hill worked here for 
some years. We had a little service this morning in 
the saloon — just eight of us. The Rev. Arnold 
Foster led it. He is a fine man, and has been out 
about thirty-four years. He knew David Hill well 
for twenty years, and can scarcely talk about him 
without the tears beginning to well up. He told me 
that three people, when asked to write about him, 
quite independently all made use of the same 
expression — that on one occasion, when he was 

30 



The Missionary Designate. 

preaching at Hankow, his face appeared as it were 
the face of an angel. 

December 19, en route to Shensi. — This morning 
we had prayers in Chinese — just we four and the 
four Chinese. Ellison, who has been out a year 
and can speak a little Chinese, read from the Gospel, 
and said a few words, and Mr. Ching led in prayer. 
That has thrilled me more than anything. What 
a blessed time it will be when I have led a man to 
Jesus Christ. I have been looking forward to 
Sianfu. How glad I shall be when I can get fully 
into swing there ! I shall certainly work hard at the 
language, and get the first exam, over as soon as 
possible. I shall have to rub up my medicine and 
surgery, but the thing that weighs most on my 
mind is the desire for a closer bond with the Unseen, 
and a more Christ-like spirit. Pray for me for this. 
It will be no easier than at home, but I am quite 
happy in my prospects and happy in the choice of 
my life-work. 

December 24, Sianfu. — We are here at last, and 
very glad of it. A warm welcome from Jenkins, 
Young, Watson, Shields, and Mr. and Mrs. Shorrock. 
Ellison and I are to stay with the Shorrocks. They 
are very kind indeed to me, and are making me very 
comfortable and happy. It was so nice to be called 
by my Christian name for the first time since I left 
Southampton. Little Mary Shorrock is a bright, 
happy, affectionate lassie. 

January, 1910, Sianfu. — We received a warm 
welcome on arrival, and have now settled down to put 
our backs into the language. . . . The city itself is 

31 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

an imposing one, with its massive gates, and the walls, 
which are not less than fourteen yards wide. From 
East Gate to West Gate it is about three to four 
miles. Not only is the city a large one, but it has 
good-sized suburbs outside the gates. One is im- 
pressed with the wideness of the streets compared 
with those of many Chinese cities — wide enough for 
four carriages to drive side by side. Two important 
colleges have been put up within the last ten years 
to carry out the new educational programme. Each 
contains about 400 students, and is well equipped 
with special rooms for professors, chemical labora- 
tory, physics laboratory, museum, drill-ground, gym- 
nasium, and tennis-court. The syllabus is also 
very comprehensive, but the teaching is at present 
very inefficient, the teachers knowing very little 
more than the students, and having far too many 
to teach at once. However, from our point of view, 
these 800 students are perhaps the most important 
people in the city. More than any other class they 
are taking up the cry of " China for the Chinese," 
and are becoming filled with revolutionary ideas. 
Our hospital is situated in the middle of the city, 
and every day there are patients of every class — 
from the dignified scholar to the crouching beggar. 
It is fitted for thirty-seven patients, but at the 
present time we have between sixty and seventy. 
They clamour for admission, and it is hard to refuse. 
An Evangelist holds services each morning and 
evening. A new hospital is to be built in the East 
Suburb. Our preaching-shop is in a comer of the 
South Gate Square, where all classes of men from 

32 



The Missionary Designate. 

all parts of the kingdom congregate, for Sianfu is 
the capital of the West, and on the great trade-route 
of the north to Gan-suh and Thibet. We have a 
further settlement in the East Suburb, where those 
of us live whose work does not demand our presence 
in the city, as it is more healthy. Here there is a hall 
for Sunday services, a girls' school, under the charge 
of Miss Beckingsale and Miss Franklin, and a boys' 
school, under the charge of Mr. Shorrock. 

January 8, 1910, Sianfu. — Now for the daily 
round. Rise about 6.15. Every other day go to 
prayers at 7, conducted by Mr. Shorrock for the 
boys at the school, where I glean a little knowledge 
of Chinese from the address — just a phrase or two. 
Breakfast at 8, followed by family prayer, study, 
reading, till my teacher comes about 10.30. Study 
with him till i. Lunch. Walk till 3. Teacher 
comes at 3.30. Read with him till 5.30 or 6. Do 
some Bible-study till supper at 6.45, after which 
read or study till bed-time. This is .an average day. 
On Sunday I go only to morning service. Every 
Wednesday at 3.30 we have a service for mission- 
aries, conducted by different men, and followed by 
prayer. My teacher is a nice quiet man, who has 
been connected with the Mission for two or three 
years. He has taught two of the ladies, but he is 
not a Christian. The barrier appears to be opium, 
of which he smokes a little every day. Pray that 
he may become a real keen Christian. 

January 12, Sianfu. — I am just now living under 
rather enervating conditions spiritually, not having 
any external assistance of any sort. Just studying 

33 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

the language and living in the pleasant atmosphere 
of Mr. Shorrock's home, and the companionship of 
the other missionaries. One is rather liable to 
stagnate, but I want to use this time for studying 
the Bible and certain of the fundamental truths 
of our Faith, as well as the language. 

January 22, Sianfu. — My visit to these colleges 
yesterday has impressed me more than anything 
up to the present. It brings home to one the 
urgency of the work in this place. We need a man 
badly who will give all his time to work among these 
students, cultivating any door that gives access to 
them, whether Sport, teaching, etc. The thought 
of these hundreds of men, not only in this city, but in 
many others, all going out to spheres of influence 
makes one dumb, and is almost staggering. One 
wants to hurry on so as to be able to get hold of some 
of them. But in the midst of the urgency comes 
the steadying word of St. Paul's Epistle to the 
Corinthians: " As a wise master-builder I have laid 
the foundation ... let every man take heed how he 
buildeth thereupon." After all, we have to be content 
to see that our particular bit of the building is likely to 
be permanent, so that when others come to the finer 
superstructure, they wiU have something real and 
true to work on. But one cannot help looking 
forward to the day when in those halls and lecture- 
theatres there will be given lectures on Christian 
topics — given, perhaps, in association with a College 
Christian Union. 

March 7, Sianfu. — I was reading this morning 
about the Call of Moses. How remarkable that, 

34 



The Missionary Designate. 

in spite of all those personal promises, he still 
wavered. They are great promises for a nervous 
man when he has a difficult task before him; and 
when I contemplate my future work I feel something 
like Moses, for the time will come, when Jenkins goes 
for his furlough in two and a half or three years, 
that I shall have full charge of the new hospital, 
and that will be no light task. I hope, however, 
that by that time I may have learned the secret that 
Moses did not learn till later — to look up instead of 
down. 

April 10, Sianfu. — Thank you for all your loving 
wishes for my birthday. Naturally one looks for- 
ward and backward. It is difficult to see real pro- 
gress in one's spiritual Ufe. Perhaps it is well that we 
cannot, but we may hope that we are making some 
unconsciously. I am more than ever convinced 
that it is character that tells, especially in the little 
things of daUy life. It is good to know of those who 
are prajdng for me and my teacher too. He brought 
me his opiiam-pipe this week. I had asked him for 
it, and he gave it me with a sort of nervous reluc- 
tance. Poor man, I am afraid that he has felt it very 
much. 

June 12, Sianfu. — I have had the unblushing 
audacity to start Evening Prayers with the two 
boys. I read a portion of John, which is in 
the first year's work, and read a prayer which I 
had previously prepared and submitted to my 
teacher. It is not much, but it is a beginning, and 
makes one feel that one is making a little progress. 
We had such a nice hymn this evening at the 

35 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

Shorrocks'— No. 637 in B.C. Hymnal. Sing it 
sometimes on Smiday evenings together. 

July 17, Sianfu. — Mr. Shorrock has been giving 
me a few tests in conversation to see where I am, 
and if ready for my exam, in September. I am glad 
to say that he seemed pleased, and a little surprised, 
I fancy, that I could say as much as I did, whereat I 
thank God and take courage. I am finding the 
Evening Prayers easier, and usually make one or 
two short comments on the portion read. 

September 2, Sianfu. — It is the evening before 
my exam. If all goes well, I start my second year's 
work after this, which includes the seeing of patients 
and taking a few services, though I fear that I shall 
cut a sorry figure at the latter. But it is a blessed 
thing that it is not the only way of doing work; nor 
the most effectual, although it has its place. I 
always think that if only, by God's help, one can 
cultivate the power of friendship and of tackling 
men personally, it is really more effective. But how 
much grace and childlikeness one needs for such 
work ! .*> I was reading yesterday and studying 
Psalm i. How fine it is that the man who makes 
the Word of God his daily meditation will be like a 
firmly-planted tree, always green, always showing 
signs of life, andi^always bearing seasonable fruit. 
It is a great thing always to bear the right fruit at 
the right season. These strong Bible teachings so 
help to brace one up. There is another thing that 
I have been thinking about lately — the holiness of 
God. We think so much of His love that we tend 
to conceive of Him as lenient. How one longs to 

36 



The Missionary Designate. 

become the man of God, completely furnished with 
every good work, rightly dividing the word of truth. 

September 8, Sianfu. — We must learn to find 
our chief delight in doing our work with all our 
heart, and in preserving with increasing care our 
time of communion. How is one, even in a small 
measure, to attain to the Spirit of Christ without that ! 

Joy ! I have had my first out-patient day, and 
saw about thirty patients. It is true it took me 
about four hours, but still it is grand to think that 
at last, after about nine years, I am beginning to get 
at the actual work. 

September i8, Sianfu. — I did a couple of opera- 
tions the other day at the hospital, and saw the out- 
patients again this week. 

October 9, Sianfu. — It does not seem a year on 
Thursday that I left England, but so it is. How 
the time speeds on! Truly it behoves us to buy 
up the opportunity. It is so easy to get selfish and 
self-centred out here. One has to watch against 
losing sight of the main end in view. It is easy to 
serve one's own ends in language-study, in work, and 
in companionship, instead of the Master. I forget 
whether I told you that in the exam. I got ninety- 
five marks on the four papers we had; for oral work, 
eighty-four. The total average being eighty-nine, 
which puts me in what they call the honours divi- 
sion. 

November 20, Sianfu. — The Chinese workmen 
and servants are a great trial to one's patience, and 
interfere with one's peace of mind. How much 
one needs to dwell in the secret place of the Most 

37 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

High to counteract these and other tendencies ! It 
is so easy to be other than sweet-tempered out here, 
as most of our deaUngs with the Chinese of a business 
or professional kind are warranted to try the patience 
of the average man ; but this getting out of patience 
does not further the end in view, and it certainly 
hinders the progress of the Gospel. 

December lo, Sianfu. — To-day my name comes 
on the B.M.S. Calendar, and I know you will have 
been thinking of me very specially. May the 
prayers which will have gone up from many hearts 
be abundantly answered ! If one is not abiding 
under the shadow of the Almighty, one tends to 
become awfully impatient, especially in seeing the 
out-patients — the}^ are so trying; but if we do not 
show forth patience and love, if our faith and love 
are not equal to the conditions we have to meet, one 
cannot help asking what is the good of coming out. 
This is what we have come for — to try, by the grace 
of God, to demonstrate that Christianity is a power 
as well as a doctrine. 

December ii, Sianfu. — I am now able to take 
some active part in the work. My time is still 
mainly occupied with language-study, but I see out- 
patients once a week at the hospital, and, in addi- 
tion, it falls to my share to look after the beys' 
school in the East Suburb where most of us are living. 
We also constantly have in our charge a few opium 
patients, who live with us for three or four weeks 
while breaking off the opium habit. 

December i8, Sianfu. — Since last writing, cir- 
cumstances have arisen that will necessitate my 

38 



The Missionary Designate. 

going to Yenanfu in the middle of February. I 
shall hope to be back by the beginning of May. My 
teacher will go with me, so that I shall not lose any- 
thing in the language-study, and I shall hope to gain 
experience in the work of the province. My only 
regret is that the little help I am able to give Dr. 
Jenkins will be taken away, and more will devolve 
upon him at a time of the year when we are busiest 
at the hospital. 

February 12, 1911, Sianfu. — ^We are feeling very 
much the need of a deeper spiritual life here — I 
think perhaps as much in ourselves as in our Chinese 
Christians. You have no idea how easy it is to get 
half-hearted. People at home are liable to think 
that all missionaries are such keen people, but it is 
terribly easy to get slack in real service and devo- 
tion. One of our teachers was preaching the other 
day and saying that he was at a little village where 
there were many Christians, but only four came. 
He was stajang for the night with a man who was a 
poor farmer, and they slept on the same k'ang (or 
brick stove). When he awoke he found that this 
man had been up some time, spending that early 
hour in prayer. We all need to spend time in this 
way, not only because it is a duty, but because 
prayer is the only source of power. 

{We mil append here two other extracts on the same 
subject) 

July 10, Sianfu. — ^There is one thing I am finding 
more dif&cidt than I have ever done. I find it so 
hard to reserve the time needed for personal devo- 

39 4 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

tion and meditation. But I intend to make a des- 
perate effort for it. To do without it is absolutely 
fatal. Temptations here are so subtle. It is so 
easy to lose that calm and equanimity of which 
there is only one source; and, more than all, one 
remains at such a standstill. Day after day there 
seems to be no real progress. 

February 28, 1913. — Why should I not always 
live in the atmosphere of the presence of God and 
receive still more of His help and inspiration ? 
There are heights and depths in God's fellowship to 
which we may reach; and God will show and revea 
Himself to us that we may have that immediate 
knowledge. Jesus is the solution of all our diffi- 
culties and failures, but the nearer one gets to Him, 
the more ghastly do our failures and sins appear. 

{Ah, happy soul, thou hast thy wish. Thine for 
ever is the unclouded fellowship. — F. B. M.) 



40 



CHAPTER IV 

AT YENANFU— GETTING INTO HARNESS* 

On February i8, 1911, Dr. Robertson left Sianfu 
to visit Yenanfu, in North Shensi. This visit, 
which extended over six weeks, was an important 
episode in his career, and was of real significance in 
the scheme of his life. It was the transition between 
preparation and full service. He left Sianfu a 
learner; he returned a full-fledged worker. In the 
Yenanfu period we have his whole missionary 
career in miniature. He did practically nolliing on 
a large scale during those great days of the following 
year which he had not first done on a small scale 
in Yenanfu. It was his first essay forth to Chinese 
Missionary Service. 

The city of Yenanfu, which governs the pre- 
fecture (ten counties) of that name, is situated ten 
full days' stages north of Sianfu, and eight stages 
south of the great wall of China, and is in the centre 
of North Shensi. The journey from Sianfu to 
Yenanfu cannot always be done in ten days. If 
the weather be wet, or the roads bad, a much 
longer time is required; whereas in the rainy season, 
when the rivers are swollen, the journey is impos- 
sible. For practical purposes, that is, judging by the 

* I am indebted to the Rsv. E. F- Borst-Smith for this 
chapter. — R B. M. 

41 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

time required, Yenanfu is as far from Sianfu as 
Pekin is from London. 

In April, 1910, Yenanfu had been opened as a 
B.M.S. station under the Arthington fund, and in 
the following autumn Suite-chow, five full days' 
journey farther north, was opened and occupied by 
the Rev. and Mrs. J. Watson. 

For the whole of the North Shensi Mission there 
was no doctor. This was felt with special keenness, 
since North Shensi was one of the areas where the 
opium habit was abnormally prevalent. By far 
the greater proportion of adults (women as well as 
men) were, to a smaller or greater degree, victims 
to opium. This is not the place to attempt any 
description of the effects of opium-smoking, except 
just this: it leads to an agonizing craving that can 
only be treated medically. So many and so serious 
are the compHcations which invariably occur during 
the cure that the doctors have repeatedly assured 
non-medical missionaries that they should not 
attempt to supervise it. In Yenanfu large numbers 
were very desirous of being cured. The production 
of opium was being prohibited; purchase would 
soon be prevented; and the anticipation caused 
great anxiety to many. Thus before Dr. Robert- 
son arrived his visit Was looked forward to with the 
greatest of eagerness. 

Of course, language-study was supposed to occupy 
the great proportion of his time, for he was only at the 
beginning of his second year, and the local mission- 
aries were anxious not to be responsible for any 
serious hindrance to this. Yet no one could live in 

42 



At Yenanfu — Getting into Harness. 

the presence of such appalling and appealing need and 
not be keen to grasp to the full the opportunity 
afforded by the visit of a doctor. Arrangements were 
therefore made for the immediate opening of an opium 
refuge, so that not one day should be lost. No one 
was persuaded to enter; only those were admitted 
whose desire for cure was strong, such strong desire 
being amongst the first essentials of the cure. The 
rooms chosen were at the back of the street preach- 
ing-hall. This arrangement made it possible for the 
Evangelist in charge to exercise constant supervision, 
without detriment to his regular duties. The avail- 
able accommodation was fully taxed, about twenty 
being under regular treatment. None of the patients 
were permitted to leave the premises. The weakened 
will would not be able to resist the temptations of 
liberty. But this imprisonment had its distinct 
positive advantages; it meant the constant com- 
panionship of the Chinese Evangelist — a Christian 
of fine character — frequent intercourse with the 
missionary, as well as the attention of Dr. Robertson. 

Since idleness exposes to temptation, occupation 
was afforded. Some were able to have their own 
work sent in to them each day. But everyone had 
his daily Scripture lesson to prepare, and all attended 
morning and evening worship. The Master's three- 
fold method of preaching, teaching, and heahng was 
employed. The patients came under the influence 
of the whole Gospel, of work as well as word, and 
under the spell of the noble Christian character of 
Dr. Robertson. 

The only exception to this Christian prison 
43 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

system was a woman who some months earlier had 
come to a knowledge of the truth through the in- 
fluence of the local missionary's wife, and who had 
since come into her employ. This woman's cure 
was carried on simultaneously with household 
duties. Her case is of interest because her faith 
not only made her whole, but brought her into con- 
flict with her relatives, who persecuted her in many 
ways, attributing their many family sorrows to her 
confession of faith. But so completely had she been 
won that she stood stedfast; and afterwards so 
great was her confidence in Dr. Robertson that when 
any of her friends became ill, she would ask the 
missionary's wife to write to him, describing symp- 
toms and requesting remedies. 

Then, in addition to work amongst opium patients, 
there was the more general medical missionary work. 
From the time Yenanfu had been occupied as a 
mission station, the missionary and his wife had 
done all in their power to alleviate suffering. Certain 
days had been appointed, and a small dispensary 
fitted out. The same time and place were adopted 
by Dr. Robertson, and large numbers of people with 
all kinds of diseases came. The news very quickly 
spread, not only over the whole city, but throughout 
the prefecture, that there was a doctor in Yenanfu, 
and the numbers that came were not only large, but 
representative of the whole area. And then, not only 
sick people, but the friends of the sick people, came 
on behalf of those whose illnesses were too serious 
to permit of their being brought, requesting the 
doctor to visit their homes. I have no record of the 

44 




'.. ..j.ffiff^ fjr/v^tm ^'f^' 



DR. ROBERTSON STARTING ON THE JOURNEY TO 
YENANFU. 



At Yenanfu — Getting into Harness. 

number of these visits, but they were very numerous. 
I have often been a witness of the patience and kind- 
ness, as well as skill, displayed on these occasions. 
If the patients were in the city, the Doctor would 
usually walk;; if some miles away, he would ride his 
horse. By these visits he became one of the most 
familiar and the best-loved figures in the neighbour- 
hood. It is quite safe to say, with deep reverence, as 
well as exact truth, that the general verdict regarding 
these journeyings was : " He went about doing good." 

The whole argument and value of medical mis- 
sions was illustrated. The work thus done was a 
preaching of the Gospel; one could hardly imagine 
any better exemplification of it. Such work was 
an outward and visible sign of the beneficent heart 
of the Gospel. It was not an advertisement abotti 
the Gospel, but an actual expression of the Gospel 
itself. To alleviate suffering and cure disease is 
surely a sufficient end in itself; but the simple fact is, 
it did not end there. By means of the bodily avenue 
the soul was actually reached. In all directions 
hearts hitherto closed were opened. 

But Dr. Robertson was friend as well as physician. 
The social instinct was strong in him; there was no 
suggestion of the recluse in his conduct. The gift 
of sociability is invaluable in China, where every- 
thing is inaugurated with a feast. And it was not 
long before Dr. Roberston went to his first Chinese 
feast. In Yenanfu there is always a long series of 
banquets during the first six weeks of the Chinese 
New Year. During my own residence there I was 
rarely at home for a midday meal during that period. 

45 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

Dr. Robertson reached us toward the end of this 
series of festivities, and was therefore included in 
the invitations. 

At a Chinese feast the new missionary is on his 
trial, and the test is by no means an easy one. The 
dishes are strange; some, at first, unpalatable; most 
are indigestible. Adaptabihty in food, as in all 
else, is one of the first qualifications of the missionary. 
Taste must be sacrificed to tact, digestion to duty. 
Here the faddist fails; but Dr. Robertson was no 
faddist. Chopsticks presented no difficulty to one 
so skilful. He did not succumb to the easy tempta- 
tion of making a few judicious selections. He took 
what was set before him (fat pork as well), asking 
no questions, either for conscience' sake or any other. 
And he was persona grata with all. 

It was at Yenanfu also that Dr. Robertson had his 
first intercourse with officials. We little imagined 
when he accompanied me to meet our Yenanfu 
officials that before that year passed away the 
highest officials of the whole Province of Shensi 
would gratefully recognize Dr. Robertson as bene- 
factor. Yenanfu was a suitable place to begin such 
intercourse. It is essentially an official city. 
Although commercially unimportant, the Head 
Mandarin of the whole prefecture (comprising ten 
counties) resided there. No better training-place 
could be imagined. During and since the Revolu- 
tion a different type of person has come into power, 
but in the spring of 1911 the Manchu dynasty still 
stood, and the etiquette was elaborate and com- 
plicated. It yvas with considerable hgsjtancy th^{ 



At Yenanfu — Getting into Harness. 

Dr. Robertson prepared for the first visit, but his 
unfailing courtesy and essential gentlemanliness soon 
made those of the classes, as those of the masses, his 
friends. 

His first visit was to the Prefect — the civil and 
practically autocratic ruler of the whole Yenanfu pre- 
fecture, obviously a man of commanding influence. 
The Prefect spoke in terms of high praise of the pur- 
pose of Dr. Robertson's visit — " to do good to our 
citizens, and lead them away from their great vice," — 
and promised any help in his power. Next our 
Doctor went to see the County Magistrate — civil 
ruler of the central of the ten counties. This official 
had, during the whole of his term in Yenanfu, been 
the familiar friend of the resident missionary. With 
him Dr. Robertson formed a genuine friendship, 
and there arose between them sincere mutual ad- 
miration and respect. But the Yenanfu official 
whom he came to know most intimately of all was 
the head military Mandarin for the whole prefecture. 
This official was unusually progressive. Perhaps 
no better evidence of this could be given than the 
fact that he sometimes borrowed my bicycle ! In 
things Chinese, he had been my own " guide, philo- 
sopher, and friend," and he occasionally attended 
public worship. He studied the New Testament, 
but was especially attracted by our hymn-book, 
which was always on his guest-room table. With 
him Dr. Robertson's friendship was immediate and 
constant, and both in the private rooms of the 
barracks and in the missionary compound they often 
sji^red me^ls, Their friendship continued gftej 

^7 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

Dr. Robertson had left Yenanfu. This was not owing 
to the fact that the official was suffering from tuber- 
culosis, and that the treatment was carried on by 
correspondence through the missionary for subse- 
quent months, although this, of course, formed an 
extra link. 

Just a few days before Dr. Robertson left Yenanfu 
the local missionary invited the Military Official 
and the County Magistrate to a farewell banquet. 
The date was arranged so as to synchronize with 
the passing through Yenanfu of other missionaries. 
The hours that followed were full of enjoyable inter- 
course. Dr. Robertson, I remember, remarked that 
this was the easy equivalent of much of our general 
social intercourse with friends at home. Dr. Robert- 
son afterwards sent, through myself, to the Military 
Official a copy of the photograph taken that day, and 
it afterwards adorned the walls of his guest-room. 

In this branch of life Dr. Robertson showed him- 
self a full man — robust, generous, cultured, human, 
happy. Looking back, one cannot fail to see in all 
this friendly intercourse with the ofl&cials of Yenanfu 
the providential training of the man, who, later in 
that same year, would be the associate of the highest 
officials of the province — first Imperial, and then 
Republican. 

One inference from the foregoing is that Dr. 
Robertson's knowledge of the Chinese language was, 
for one who had only been fifteen months in the 
country, unusually good. He certainly knew very 
much more than his textbook had taught him. 
Perhaps a doctor has, at the beginning of his Chinese 

48 



At Yenanfu — Getting into Harness. 

career, more enforced conversation than his non- 
medical colleagues. And although the long and 
rambling remarks of patients have often little 
enough to do with their disease or its treatment, 
they are yet rich in material for the student of the 
colloquial language. In any case. Dr. Robertson's 
notebook was never far away, and in addresses 
and conversations he was always on the lookout for 
new words and phrases. But here is another evi- 
dence of the rapid progress he had made in language- 
study : on his way from Sianfu to Yenanfu he gave 
his first address in Chinese, and he redelivered this 
address early in his stay at Yenanfu. Doctors 
always seem to be the keenest evangelists. I have 
never known a medical missionary so engrossed in 
his work of healing that he was indifferent to that 
of preaching. Such men only exist in the fears of 
those of Uttle faith. 

I remember that service very clearly. The 
language was a surprise. The pronunciation was 
distinct and accurate; the idiom unusually true; 
and the vocabulary really wealthy. The sermon 
was the man. The subject was " Faith in the 
Heavenly Father." It came with all the authority 
of deep personal experience. It expressed those 
very qualities that made Dr. Robertson loved by 
all who knew him. Sane and saintly, strong and 
sincere, simple and spiritual, the sermon spoke 
deeply to all who heard it. His preaching and his 
practising were all of a piece. Whether in the pulpit, 
the dispensary, the street, or the home, he was the 
same lovable, attractive, noble man. 

49 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

And what impression was made by his six weeks' 
residence in Yenanfu ? Some time before he went 
the opium patients approached me expressing their 
desire to make some kind of presentation. They 
soon decided that it should take the form of a carved 
inscription — the Chinese equivalent of a printed 
address — to hang over the door of the dispensary 
where the medical work was done. Suggestions for 
the wording were invited. A phrase containing 
four characters in Wenli (the literary language) was 
required. The literal translation of the one ulti- 
mately accepted is: "Save world; spent heart." 
It would not be taking undue licence with the four 
characters to translate them, "He saved others; 
himself he could not save." And looking back now 
upon the choice of inscription, it seems prophetic, 
" signifying by what death he should glorify God." 
In smaller characters the names of the contributors 
were engraved. Had their wishes been carried out 
there would have been great excitement and display 
on the occasion of the presentation. The Chinese 
love a festival of any kind, and it so happened that 
one of the patients was actually the principal bugler 
in the Yenanfu military band. They were all very 
disappointed when they discovered that Dr. Robert- 
son did not approve of a procession through the 
streets of the city, headed by a military band. The 
flourish of trumpets and beating of drums brought 
no pleasure to him. So in deference to his wishes 
this point was conceded, and a simpler ceremony 
arranged. In his response Dr. Robertson took the 
opportunity of delivering an earnest Christiaji ad- 

59 



At Yenanfu — Getting into Harness. 

dress, inviting the patients to faith in the Saviour 
who would keep them from opium and every other 
evil. And over the little dispensary in Yenanfu 
the inscription still hangs, the first he ever received, 
and for the first piece of real medical missionary 
work ever done in North Shensi. 

At the time no one imagined that before another 
year passed the highest authorities in the provincial 
capital would count no honour too great as recog- 
nition of his services. 

On Thursday evening (April 12) he bade farewell 
to his IcLst batch of opium patients, handing them 
over to my care. I well remember the earnest 
words he spoke to them then. On Friday morning 
at four he left Yenanfu to return to Sianfu. The 
furlough of the late Dr. H. Stanley Jenkins was due, 
and the condition of his health demanded a speedy 
return to England, so Dr. Robertson hastened 
to relieve him. It was characteristic that on the 
first day he covered two stages. He sent his own 
horse forward on the preceding day to wait at the 
end of the first stage ; then he borrowed one from 
the Military Mandarin, who also arranged for refresh- 
ment to be prepared for him at the stage, and so by 
a relay of horses he saved one day. Towards the 
end of the journey he repeated the same feat. He 
arrived in Sianfu in time to receive from Dr. Jenkins 
the responsibility for the medical work there, and 
he was still there when Dr. Jenkins returned in the 
end of 1912 to do a few weeks' work together, before 
both were transferred to the higher service. 

But his departure from Yenanfu on that Friday 

51 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

morning did not mean the end of his influence there. 
Before another seven months had passed, Yenanfu 
became the scene of wild and indescribable confusion 
and panic. Some of the oldest inhabitants, who 
remember the great Mohammedan rebellion of sixty 
years ago, which so completely devastated the two 
whole provinces of Shensi and Kansuh that after- 
wards there were not enough men to till the fields, 
said that even the panic of those days was not com- 
parable to that of the autumn of 191 1. Of foreigners 
there was but the one missionary, with his wife, and 
the little one bom during Dr. Robertson's visit. 
The head military official was concerned for their 
safety, and sent two of his most reliable soldiers to 
keep the gate of the mission premises. One was a 
Christian " learner," the other, one of Dr. Robert- 
son's opium patients.* These were selected on 
account of the personal claim it was felt the mis- 
sionaries had on them. The ex-opium patient was 
a most useful man. He was, on the one hand, 
sjonpathetic towards us, and, on the other, a member 
of the Society of Elder Brethren — the secret society 
which caused (and yet sometimes prevented) so 
much havoc in Shensi. Often at nights did he 
convey messages from myself to the man who 
usurped the Prefect's office, and he was certainly one 
of those who contributed to our safety. 

To be associated with us during that two months' 

" reign of terror " meant to be exposed to danger, 

yet the woman patient already referred to remained 

quite faithful through all. Several others of Dr. 

* See " Caught in the Chinese Revolution," p. 47. 

52 



At Yenanfu — Getting into Harness. 

Robertson's patients came into prominence during 
the early weeks of panic, and there is no doubt that 
the memory of his great kindness to them exercised 
a restraining influence. 

As the record of his life and work would never 
be complete without the story of what he did in 
Yenanfu, so the history of the Yenanfu mission will 
not be fully told without some account of that visit. 
The relation between Dr. Robertson and Yenanfu 
was intimate and mutual. He bestowed great 
benefits on that city, and it in its turn had its share 
in training him. North Shensi never left his 
thoughts. Later, when peace was restored, and the 
reopening of work in North Shensi was again being 
seriously considered, it was thought well to con- 
centrate the staff of Suite-chow and Yenanfu in one 
place, and a doctor was promised for the proposed 
reinforced station. Dr. Robertson immediately 
volunteered. He was fast becoming the idol of 
Sianfu, the provincial capital. Many honours were 
heaped upon him, and he had acquired great in- 
fluence. But he readily offered to leave the place 
of his fame for quiet work in a non-conspicuous 
sphere. 

Nothing has been said of the benefit derived by 
the Yenanfu missionaries from his visit, and no 
words can express it. But that period stands out 
clearly in the memory as one of fellowship with one 
whose purity of character was not repellent, whose 
love was robust, whose life inspired the prayer: 

" O God, to us may grace be given 
To follow in his train." 

53 



CHAPTER V 
ON THE EVE OF THE GREAT REVOLUTION 

April 30, Sianfu. — I can assure you that the know- 
ledge that one ispjeing constantly remembered in 
prayer is a source of real comfort and strength. I 
have not a moment's hesitation in saying that I axa 
not one whit less keen about service. It may be 
that my outlook has altered somewhat, and my ideas 
on certain things also ; but for the actual work, both 
the medical and that which is purely and directly 
for the kingdom of Christ Jesus, I am keener to be- 
come of the greatest use possible ! The scope, on 
account of its extent, is bewildering, and it is difficult 
to know how to cope with it. 

May 16, Sianfu. — You must try to picture me 
in different quarters, as I have moved this week into 
the hospital. The Jenkinses have left, and they both 
need a good rest.* We are very busy, but the more 
one has to do, the more one can do. I have the 
daily seeing of in-patients in the morning. Out- 
patients on Fridays. Operations on Saturdays. 
Conducting prayers on Tuesdays and Saturdays for 
in-patients ; and I want also to give a short address to 
out-patients on the day that I see them. In addition, 

* The work at the hospital, therefore, largely devolved 
on Dr. Robertson. 

54 



On the Eve of the Great Revolution. 

I have all the administration and accounts of the 
hospital to see to. 

May 17, Sianfu. — I feel more than ever the 
necessity of keeping the great aim in view. It is 
not difficult to let it slide, but one must keep it ever 
before oneself and the helpers. One needs also 
habitual self-control. Of all places in the world 
this is one of the best as a school of patience, but if 
one gives way to irritability, it is bad for one's 
spiritual life and influence, not to mention one's 
physical condition. 

May 28, Sianfu. — To think of the day when we 
shall all be home together seems almost too much 
at this distance, but I was thinking of the Jenkinses 
to-day, who must now be nearing England, and 
wondering what their thoughts and feelings would 
be. and those of the loved ones who are awaiting 
them. Blessed is the man who has been in the 
habit of cultivating the companionship of Jesus 
Christ, and who does not feel the loss of companion- 
ship that otherwise is bound to come to him ! 

July 23, Sianfu. — Despite the heat, there are 
some things at this time of the year which are really 
beautiful. The blue sky is lovely just now; it is 
such a beautiful deep blue, and the green of the 
trees against it is so pretty. The language-study 
goes slowly. It will take years before anything 
like proficiency is obtained. The weeks come and 
go. The Sundays seem continually chasing one 
another, but one cannot help wondering how far 
" Progress " can be written across one's life. The 
nearer we get to the top, the steeper the way seems. 

55 5 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

July 30, Sianfu. — ^We have had some encourage- 
ment with the opium patients lately. Three who 
broke off the opium with our help are now attendants 
at the services, and I have recently heard from Mr. 
Borst-Smith that two of the opium patients at 
Yenanfu have since joined the Church. The opium 
prevented them doing so previously . One does desire 
to see not only the good general impression of the 
Gospel as the result of staying here, but to see the 
patients gaining a personal faith. 

August 3, Sianfu. — It is easy to be satisfied with 
less than the best. Why should we let the work 
make demands on our energy and time that other 
men would not put into it ? But, as Thomas k 
Kempis has it, " There are many professed lovers 
of Jesus, but few bearers of His Cross." 

September 9, Sianfu. — I have been having my 
exam., and got on better than I expected. Eighty- 
four for my sermon, and eighty and ninety-two for 
my two papers. I am staying with the Shorrocks 
this week-end, and going into the hospital again on 
Monday. There is a sense of freedom in being away 
from it. I am really very fit, and continue to have 
a good appetite and to sleep well. The fact that I 
have worked fairly continuously for two years and 
kept so fit is a good sign for the future and something 
to be thankful for. I have been treating the son 
of one of our language teachers for heart disease. 
He is very much better, and his father is going to 
be baptized and become a member of the Church. 
There is a woman in a room near this. I have 
just heard her praying, probably for her husband, 

56 



On the Eve of the Great Revolution. 

who broke off his opium but has taken to it 
again. 

September 22, Sianfu. — The new church has been 
opened. Yesterday, to-day, and to-morrow meet- 
ings are on. The place has been full every time. 
To many of the visitors it was the first service, but 
all were quiet and orderly. This afternoon it was 
the business meeting, when matters relating to 
Church membership were discussed — ^such as family 
prayer, lawsuits, Sunday observance, schools, patriot- 
ism, the importance of giving. Many of the prob- 
lems that faced Paul are repeated on the mission 
field. . . . It appears that there is trouble in Szechuan. 
The report we have is that the people have risen, 
three Yamens have been burned to the ground, and 
all the foreigners ordered away. In the meantime 
we are perfectly quiet here, a fact which is empha- 
sized by 1,500 soldiers being sent from here to quell 
the disturbance. 

October i, Sianfu. — ^We have telegrams to-day 
from Ching-King that the telegraph wires from the 
capital are cut, and that the soldiers in the city have 
gone over to the revolutionaries. 

October 15, Sianfu. — Just as I am writing this 
letter I have had the news from Hankow that there 
is considerable feeling against the Manchu dynasty. 
Everything is quite quiet here, and we have heard 
of nothing at all disturbing as taking place in this 
province. I am sure that you will be at rest with 
regard to us. There has been no feeling against the 
foreigner as such. But apart from that we are not 
our own ; all our affairs are His and entrusted to Him. 

57 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

October 22, Sianfu. — I have been thinking much 
about you this week, and hope that you have not 
been anxious about us up here. We heard from 
Hankow yesterday that a battle was impending, but 
that all foreigners were being protected. We have 
also had a copy of the Manifesto issued by the leader 
of the Revolutionaries to his followers. The main 
points are — (i) To overthrow the present dynasty. 
(2) To behead all who oppose the Revolution, or 
conceal officials in their houses; all who loot and 
commit outrages of any sort; and all who do any 
harm to foreigners. (3) To reward all who help the 
rebels in any way, either by giving food, ammunition, 
or information about the enemy ; and all who protect 
foreigners and foreign concessions. So you see from 
that that they are keen to protect foreigners. The 
officials certainly will do no harm to foreigners. 
The only people who may are the riff-raff, but these 
will be intimidated by the Manifesto. There is no 
indication of any trouble here. Practically all the 
soldiers and students belong to this revolutionary 
society, so, with practically the whole army on their 
side, one would think that there is little fear of a 
great deal of fighting. 

* * * * * 

These words were evidently written in the early 
morning of that memorable Sunday, and at noon 
the Revolution broke out at Sianfu. This was a 
very notable and formative experience in Dr. 
Robertson's life, and we may suspend our quotations 
from his letters, confessing that their compilation 
and transcription have been a source of profound 

58 



On the Eve of the Great Revolution. 

blessing, and gather up some of the impressions 
that he had produced. " His life," said Miss Beck- 
ingsale, who has now joined him in the presence 
of Christ, " was a benediction, his friendship a 
precious memory. I never knew him to say a word 
or do a deed which one could have wished otherwise." 
" Everybody loved him," says another, " and every- 
body spoke highly of his character and influence." 
" He was one of those charming men," writes the Rev. 
Evan Morgan, " that you occasionally meet with in 
life; his personality and gifts had a great and at- 
tractive beauty. He had unique opportunities, and 
availed himself of them to the full." "He was 
amongst the best of physicians, the most lovable of 
men, a man without a critic, admired and loved by 
all ; the most transparent of Christians, the hero of 
the Revolution, the servant of Jesus Christ. His 
memory will always remain as a fragrance, his in- 
fluence an abiding element in our mission. What a 
strong, manly physique was his, while his spiritual 
life flowed in a deep strong current." 

One of the outstanding features in the records 
which we have been privileged to handle was his 
yearning after the souls of men. Too many of us 
are content to do our Christian work without the 
definite aim and purpose which animated him. 
Whether it was his personal attendant, " the boy," 
who was " such a real Christian " ; or a poor beggar 
who seemed to be awakening to a better life; or a 
student that had undergone an operation; or some 
soldiers; or the high official, whatever he did for 
their physical v^ell-being was subordinate to a 

i9 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

consuming desire to win each and all for Christ. 
" Our concern," he writes, " about their sad physical 
condition ought to make one feel that these folk are 
living in just the same sad condition of spiritual 
darkness when they might be enjoying so much light. 
We get so concerned about what we see, but are so 
callous about what we only conceive with the spiritual 
vision. If we could only have a clearer spiritual 
vision, we should see things which would make us 
wake up a little more !" 

Dr. Robertson's one aim was to find his all in 
Christ. " One needs just to be wholly satisfied with 
Him, then it does not matter where one is. One 
sees some married folks so wholly satisfied with each 
other. Someone recently said to me in a letter: 
' It is nice to find one's first thought is of another, and 
not of one's miserable self.' I could not help feeling 
that this ought to be one's relationship to our 
Blessed Lord. To find our greatest joy in Him; to 
think of Him first. This is the secret of real joy 
and peace, and an even mind and temper in all 
circumstances." 

He was ever yearning after more spirituality and 
a deeper experience of God. " I do want to get 
things in their right perspective, to think more of 
the real things, of the things that are well-pleasing 
to Him. Even here it is easier to think more of what 
one's fellows think, and to give oneself little pats on 
the back. Oh the littleness of one's own heart ! May 
Christ fill us with His gentleness, which can make 
us great." He was also specially proficient in 
the art of prayer and fellowship with God that 

60 



On the Eve of the Great Revolution. 

must have strangely moved and inspired his fellow- 
missionaries. 

The peace of God was with him: " What a won- 
derful thing is the peace of God ! No wonder Paul 
said of it, ' That passeth all understanding.' I had to 
take the united prayer meeting yesterday, and took 
that as my subject. I used to feel that if only we 
could maintain our self-control so as to be always 
even-tempered and calm, it would be good, but I 
feel now that all that is given us by this wonderful 
peace of God." This peace arose in part from his 
habit of seeing the will of God in all the circum- 
stances of his life. It was his habitual attitude. 
" Sometime I must write out all the special provi- 
dences and guidances that we have experienced. 
People talk about coincidences, but when there is a 
plan, there must be Someone to formulate the plan 
and keep things up to time, and that is what I have 
experienced right along the way — everything timed ! ' ' 

We will conclude this chapter with a character 
sketch from one who knew him intimately during 
the earlier stages of his career in China : 

" I think his chief characteristics were thorough- 
ness, humility and teachableness, and a very real 
inner life of communion with God, which, however, 
he only spoke of at rare moments. 

" His thoroughness was seen in everything he did. 
He was as careful in treating the minor ailments of 
the schoolboys as he was in a severe operation. 
The same trait came out in his study of the language; 
he was not content, as most are, to merely recognize 
the complicated Chinese ' characters ' (ideographs), 

6i 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

but set himself from the beginning to write them 
from memory. He was thus able to write the whole 
of his first language exam., and nearly all the second, 
in ' character,' instead of using the ' romanized ' 
spelling, as most of us do. 

" He had the humility that so often accompanies 
the highest attainments. In any hints or help given 
in his study of Chinese, he never needed telling / 
twice, but at once adopted the suggestion, and made / 
it his own by use. The same trait came out in other 
ways — for instance, in a letter he wrote to Mr. / 
Shorrock, who was rather fagged at the time, and 
in which he begged him to get rest and change, he 
added: ' I would urge this, not so much from a 
professional standpoint, but, if you will let me do so, 
as a son, since you have allowed me to take thai 
position in your home.' 

" His inner Ufe was always deep, though there was 
an utter absence of anything like ' cant ' ; and it 
was, perhaps, the fear of this which kept him from 
speaking of it much; when he did, it was always with 
great diffidence, yet with intense reality. One or 
two talks in the early days are very vivid to me, 
especially one on the need, in a missionary's life, of 
guarding against loss of power through lack of time 
for prayer and communion. ' But,' he added, ' I 
always feel there is need to guard against looking 
upon a few moments of prayer as a sort of fetish ! 
One is almost tempted to feel that the mere fact of 
having prayed — perhaps very hurriedly — will keep 
everything smooth and happy during the day, and 
this seems almost to amount to something super 

62 



On the Eve of the Great Revolution, 

stitious !' During his first year he drew up a list 
of subjects for daily prayer to be used by all our 
Shensi staff, including all the stations in the province, 
and the various departments of work, as well as the 
workers in the other two provinces. At our weekly 
prayer meeting he always tried to have some definite 
requests for prayer ready, saying he felt we might 
easily become vague and formal otherwise, and so 
lose the stimulus, as well as the direct results, we 
needed. Later, during the winter of the Revolu- 
tion, he induced the hospital assistants to meet for 
prayer constantly, with the result that many of them 
were definitely led to decide for Christ, and others who 
were already Christians were brought to live more 
Christ-like lives, greatly to the efficiency and smooth 
working of all the departments. The main object — 
leading patients to Christ — was always before him, 
and no professional keenness could damp his eager- 
ness for this. His professional thoroughness some- 
times made the difficulties of proper equipment on 
the mission field very trying to bear. When he was 
with the troops at the fighting front in December, 
191 1, he wrote: ' It is hard to keep sweet with all 
the conditions here, and the lack of any decently 
prepared place to work in, as well as the lack of time 
for quiet, or a quiet place to oneself !' During his 
first months he had a teacher who took opium, and 
was not at first willing to get rid of it. But Cecil 
persuaded him to try, and spent much time and pains 
in helping him, using his small stock of Chinese 
meantime in helping the man to understand that 
only Christ could bring him through such a trial. 

63 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu, 

He was always on the lookout for references in the 
daily study — of New Testament or other books — 
that might be utilized for this end. 

" His unswerving devotion to duty was brought out 
very clearly during the Revolution. He never had 
a moment's hesitation about his duty to stay behind 
when others left, and was ready at once when asked 
to go out to places of difificulty and danger with the 
troops. One of the trials he had to bear at the front 
was being forced to retire with the army from a town 
that the leaders abandoned before attack, though he 
stayed to the last, and was quite prepared to remain 
behind alone with the wounded. He was absolutely 
unmovable when he had made up his mind that a 
certain course was right, and we found this out very 
clearly last June, when we were all preparing to go 
down to the coast for a much-needed holiday. At 
the last moment, only two or three days before we 
were all to start, the plans that had been made for the 
carrying on of the work in the hospital fell through; 
others thought that the convalescents could do very 
well for a few days in the care of the assistants, until 
a substitute could arrive ; but he was not to be turned 
aside, and stayed behind, at a considerable sacrifice 
to himself, and much to our distress, as we feared 
it would mean giving up his holiday altogether. 
Afterwards we all came to see that he was right, and 
the impression made by his staying on for those ten 
days alone will not be lost." 



64 



CHAPTER VI 

A BRIEF VIEW OF THE REVOLUTION* 

The main outlines of the Chinese Revolution of 
1911-12 are known to all interested in that great 
continent country. But whUe the eyes of the world 
were fixed upon Peking and Wuchang, those of us 
who were in far-inland provinces were experiencing 
many of the horrors of war and anarchy little known 
even by the outside world of China. It was with -a 
good deal of surprise, therefore, that we read in a 
leading Shanghai paper in the spring of 1912 of the 
wonderfully " bloodless " Revolution that had taken 
place, it being stated that only about 5,000 in all 
had lost their lives ! The writer was in complete 
ignorance of conditions inland, for in the province 
of Shensi alone probably as many as 15,000 Manchus 
perished during the last week in October, and it is 
estimated that an equal number of Chinese were 
killed during the fighting that followed the first out- 
break, making a death-roll for that one province 
alone of 30,000 ! 

Shensi, the province that lies " West of the Pass," 
as its name denotes, is reached by a long journey of 
some 1,500 mUes from the coast, and is on the high- 
way between Peking and Thibet. To the west, only 

* Contributed by Mrs. Shorrock.— F. B. M. 
65 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

Kansu separates it from the Great Closed Land. On 
its eastern borders, beyond which lies the province 
of Honan, stands the fortress of T'ung Kuan, rightly 
called the " Key to Shensi "—Sianfu, the wealthy 
capital, being the lock which the key opens. Chinese 
travellers from the coast speak of entering " the land 
of barbarians " when they pass through its forbidding 
gates, and leave behind many of the amenities of 
semi-foreignized China, such as electric light and 
macadamized roads, railways, and rickshas. Yet 
to those of us who have made our home there for 
many years, and to the natives of the province, it is 
a pleasant land. The climate is much like that of 
Canada, the dryness making the extremes of heat 
and cold comparatively easy to bear. The soil is 
fertile, and except when drought prevails, two har- 
vests in the year may be regularly reaped from the 
same land. The staple crops are wheat, cotton, 
millet, and, until the prohibitive campaign of recent 
years, opium, which is the most lucrative of all, 
and was widely grown for export to Shantung and 
other coast provinces. 

Shensi is rightly looked upon as the cradle of the 
Chinese race ; and the tomb of the my4;hical Fu Hsi 
is said to be amongst the Northern Hills. From 
time immemorial the province has been the scene 
of rebellion and bloodshed, of devastating flood and 
famine. The capital, Sianfu, " the City of Western 
Peace," is the metropolis of North- West China, and 
teems with busy throngs of merchants and travellers. 
At the beginning of the Christian era it was the 
capital of the Empire, and it was to this historic city 

66 



A Brief View of the Revolution. 

that the Manchu Court fled in 1900, when the 
avenging armies of the West entered Peking after 
the Boxer outrages. Sianfu has the honour to 
contain the oldest monument to Christianity to be 
found in China— the celebrated Nestorian Tablet, 
which was erected in the seventh century, and 
unearthed a thousand years later, outside the West 
Gate. It has now a place of honour in the Hall of 
Tablets in Sianfu, amongst other relics equally 
venerable, though none of greater interest to the 
student of Christian missions. At the present time 
Sianfu is one of the most important and most cos- 
mopoUtan cities in all China. In its crowded 
thoroughfares one may meet men from every one 
of the eighteen provinces, and for the last 200 years 
it has been specially remarkable for its large Manchu 
population, which probably reached the number of 
20,000. Amongst these were many retired ofi&cials, 
who, after amassing considerable wealth — generally 
at the expense of those over whom they ruled — 
made their homes amongst their own people, within 
the Manchu precincts, the walls of which enclosed 
nearly one-third of the whole city of Sianfu. 

It is striking to note that the ultimate cause which 
brought the Manchus to China in the seventeenth 
century was the success of a Shensi rebel leader, who, 
after repeated victories over the Imperial troops, 
actually found himself in possession of Peking, the 
ruling Emperor — the last of the Ming dynasty — 
having committed suicide at his approach. It was 
to oust this man and to reinstate the Mings that the 
Manchus were invited to come to the help of the loyal 

67 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

remnant; and having helped successfully, they re- 
solved to remain as rulers ! Remembering this, 
there is some irony in the story of the Revolution 
of 1911 in Shensi, and the dire punishment meted 
out there to the descendants of these same Manchus 
who triumphed 260 years earlier over the usurper 
from the far west. 

The news of the Revolution which began in 
Wuchang on October 10, 1911, reached us in Sianfu 
on the 15th, and a week later the storm broke there 
also. At noon on Sunday, October 22, the Chinese 
troops, led by Revolutionaries, poured into the city 
from the barracks outside the West Suburb, and 
secured and closed the four great city gates. The 
next step was to seize the arsenal, where a large 
consignment of modem quick-firing rifles was waiting 
for distribution to the Manchu garrison, who were to 
have received them only four days later ! These were 
now dealt out, not only to the rebel soldiers, of whom 
there were only about 1,500, but to all and sundry 
— common citizens, released prisoners, the usually 
feared and distrusted Mohammedans, even the 
beggars on the streets — to anyone, in fact, who would 
go and fight the hated Manchus. Having obtained 
their weapons, many made full use of the opportunity 
thus given them of paying off old scores, and of 
enriching themselves at the expense of their fellow- 
citizens ; and in a short time the whole city was given 
up to looting and violence. 

Banks and business houses suffered alike, and it 
is estimated that in one street alone 4,000,000 taels 
(about ;f5oo,ooo) were stolen on the first night. Had 

68 



A Brief View of the Revolution. 

some plan of guarding the banks been devised at 
the beginning, the provincial exchequer would have 
been well supplied, and the authorities saved from 
the great straits they were afterwards put to for 
want of money ; but the inexperience of the leaders — 
most of them very young, and many of them still in 
their student days — and the suddenness of the out- 
break at the last, were responsible for this mistake, 
as well as for others that had more serious conse- 
quences, and might have been avoided by a little 
more forethought during the early hours of the 
Revolution. 

Meanwhile, in the Manchu quarter, which occupied 
the north-east portion of the city, the garrison, though 
it numbered 5,000 trained men, was speedily over- 
come, for they were armed only with obsolete 
weapons, and were powerless to defend themselves 
against the new magazine rifles in the hands of the 
Revolutionaries. The whole Manchu city was soon 
in flames, and then for days followed a wholesale 
massacre of men, women, and children, the story of 
which is too horrible to detail. Nor should it be laid 
to the door of the Revolutionary party proper. 
Shensi is one of the strongholds of the Ko Lao Hui, 
or " Ancient Society of Brethren," a secret society 
having as its avowed object the overthrow of the 
Manchu dynasty, and incidentally the expulsion of 
all foreigners from the Celestial Empire, the term 
" foreigner " being applied indiscriminately to all 
non-Chinese residents, of whatever nationality. 
Though primarily a patriotic association, it had fallen 
greatly from the original high ideals of its founders 

69 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

and earlier inembers,'and in Shensi at least the name 
of " Ko Lao Hui " has long been a synonjmi for 
robbery and violence of every description, and has 
struck terror to the minds of the peasantry. The 
overwhelming numbers of these " Brethren " greatly 
embarrassed the genuine Revolutionaries, known as 
the " Ke Ming Tang," though the latter, being 
comparatively few in number, could not hope to be 
successful without the help of the Ko Lao Hui. But 
they had not realized the bitterness of hatred to the 
foreigner and to the Manchu rulers which was inbred 
in the " Brethren," and which had been encouraged 
by them in the common people throughout the 
province. To this factor must be attributed the 
brutal massacre of the helpless Manchus, as well as 
the attack on one of the mission houses outside 
Sianfu, where six Swedish children and two adults 
were done to death. Other foreigners were in great 
danger for a time, and the marvel is that no further 
casualties occurred during the time of anarchy that 
followed throughout the whole province. Later on, 
after the first heat of mad revenge had passed, and 
more merciful counsels prevailed, a compromise was 
arrived at between the two parties, and the " Breth- 
ren " agreed to subscribe to the general programme 
of the Revolution, as drawn up for the whole of China, 
and to declare themselves thereby the friends of 
foreigners. Henceforth we were protected by Ke 
Ming Tang and Ko Lao Hui alike, the two parties 
vying with one another in their desire to be- 
friend and help us, and even to shower honours 
upon us ! 

70 



A Brief View of the Revolution. 

When a few weeks later rumours of the state of 
affairs in Shensi, and the danger of the foreigners 
there, reached the coast, a band of nine young men, 
consisting of seven Britons, one American, and 
one Swede, and since known as the " Shensi Relief 
Expedition," left Peking at the end of November, 
and just after Christmas arrived in Sianfu, bringing 
with them several families who had been isolated 
for nearly two months in the north of the province. 
They expected to take all of us to the coast, and 
many were the protests when it was found that 
some had no wish to be so rescued, but were deter- 
mined to remain behind. In the end a party of 
forty-one foreigners started for Peking on January 4, 
leaving in Sianfu a little band of five workers (three 
men and two women), and two children. 

The story of the six months that followed their 
departure cannot be told in full here. But those of 
us who remained behind will never forget the ex- 
periences of those days, nor cease to be thankful 
that we were allowed to stay on, and do what little 
we could to help those who suffered. We were able 
to give immediate relief to the survivors of the 
Manchus, now homeless and destitute. The ma- 
jority of these were old women, who had formerly 
been in afHuent circumstances, and had never known 
a want in all their lives. The heart-breaking scenes 
we saw, and the piteous tales we heard, will never 
fade from our minds, nor the remembrance that 
through our presence a large proportion of the two 
or three thousand survivors were relieved, and the 
authorities finally persuaded to make some tardy 

71 6 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

provision for their needs, though this did not come 
to pass till the following May, after a long winter 
of suffering and privation, when only the foreigners 
dared give them help or shelter. The most pathetic 
moment came just before we left last June, when 
nearly 200 of these poor Manchus presented us with 
a banner, bought out of the pittance they had 
begged on the streets for their daily food, and in- 
scribed with words of gratitude for the help given 
in their hour of need. 

The first result of the overthrow of all authority 
in Sianfu was a reign of terror throughout the 
countryside. In the general anarchy that followed, 
might was right, and deeds of violence were com- 
mitted on all sides. Then a new danger appeared 
in the approach of two Imperial armies, which 
poured into the province to avenge the slaughter 
of the Manchus and reduce Shensi to subjection. 
From the east, Yiian Shih K'ai (then acting for the 
Manchu Government) sent a force of 10,000 foreign- 
drilled troops, splendidly equipped with the latest 
thing in modern rifles and artillery. From the west 
came a composite army of Mohammedans, Manchus, 
and Chinese, later reinforced by hordes of semi- 
civilized tribes from beyond the Great Wall — in all 
numbering 20,000 by the end of February — and led 
by a Manchu, late Viceroy of Shensi and Kansu, 
whose mansion in Sianfu had been reduced to ruins, 
and whose heart was filled with revenge. To meet 
these enemies on east and west, the Shensi leaders 
set about enlisting all and sundry, and before long 
an army — of sorts ! — was despatched to the east, 

72 



A Brief View of the Revolution. 

and another westwards, to stem the incoming tide 
of invasion. But what a rabble they were ! — a 
sprinkling of older troops, with whole regiments of 
lads who had never held a gun, and had first to be 
shown what to do with their weapons; and others 
composed of the scvmi of the population, the ne'er- 
do-weels, many of them outlaws from other pro- 
vinces, all of them " Brethren," who had been a 
terror to all law-abiding citizens, and were now 
given a chance to prove themselves honest fighters. 
And to their credit be it said, these men were more 
than once the saving of the situation, for they 
proved veritable " die-hards." Armed often with 
nothing better than chaff-cutters, sickles, or any old 
knives or spears they could get hold of, they braved 
the fire of the enemy, and, getting to close quarters 
where rifles were useless, did deadly havoc with 
their primitive weapons, and won hard-fought 
victories many times. How the Imperials were 
held at bay so long by such a crowd wUl always be 
a mystery. But it was not to be expected that such 
a state of affairs could last long; step by step the 
enemy closed in on both sides, tUl in their extremity 
the Shensi leaders had almost decided to set fire to 
Sianfu and escape to the hills, leaving the helpless 
inhabitants to fend for themselves. Then suddenly 
came the news of the abdication of the Manchu 
Emperor, and the proclamation of the Republic 
on February i8, 1912. Yiian's eastern army, now 
that peace was made, was at once withdrawn; but 
the western invaders were not to be so easily moved^ 
Their Manchu commander, Sheng Yiin, was bent on 

73 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

revenge, and would believe in no news that came 
through Shensi, which he looked upon as a den of 
thieves and robbers ! 

At this juncture, one of the missionaries* remaining 
in Sianfu (who had been able to help the new Govern- 
ment already in many ways, and had their full 
confidence and respect), with their consent, wrote 
letters to the Manchu Commander-in-Chief, and to 
five of his leading Generals, telling them that peace 
was proclaimed, and begging them in the name of 
humanity to desist from the now hopeless struggle. 
At the same time he wired through the British 
Minister in Peking to Yiian Shih K'ai (now the 
Provisional President of the new Republic) , inform- 
ing him of the acute danger threatening Sianfu 
from the west, and offering to forward any messages 
he might send for the Manchu General. The reply 
came in the form of a lengthy telegram of nearly 
1,000 words, to be sent on to Sheng Yiin, imploring 
him to cease fighting; and this appeal was further 
backed up by the return of the army which had until 
lately been attacking Shensi from the east — the 
Commander, General Chao, being ordered to bring 
Sheng Yiin to terms, if not by peaceable means, then 
by force ! As a result of these drastic measures, 
hostilities finally ceased about the middle of March, 
although Sheng Yiin to the end remained implacable, 

* Mr. Shorrock. One of the compensations for the non- 
participation in the benefit of the Relief Expedition was 
the fact that this veteran missionary was able to com- 
municate directly with Sir John Jordan, H.M. Minister at 
Pekin, and that in answer to his urgent appeal the 
President, Yiian Shih K'ai, was able to send back the army 
to save the city of Sianfu from being sacked. 

74 



A Brief View of the Revolution. 

and finally retired to Kansu, where he is probably 
still nursing his revenge. 

During all these months of fighting the English 
doctors rendered splendid service to the wounded 
soldiers, who were brought in from the east and 
west in large numbers. Both doctors, at first, went 
to the front; but finding the dilSiculties — lack of 
proper premises and equipment, etc. — too great to 
cope with, they returned to the city, leaving their 
assistants at the front to attend to and send on the 
more urgent cases, which could only be satisfactorily 
treated in the Sianfu Hospital. Here the numbers 
grew so rapidly that by March over 600 patients 
were crowded into the hospital and six other build- 
ings, commandeered by the authorities and placed 
at the disposal of the doctors. Between 2,000 and 
3,000 wounded passed through the hospital as in- 
patients during the war, besides the large numbers 
treated outside; and all this work was done by two 
medical men, who had not a single qualified assistant 
on their staff ! Those were the days of makeshifts, 
when stable-boys, cooks, and coolies were all pressed 
into the service, and developed varying gifts, one 
becoming a clever anaesthetist, another proving 
specially skilful in treating burns, and so on ! Dur- 
ing this time of stress and hard work, the doctors 
were ably backed up by the Chinese Red Cross 
Society, as well as by the War Ofiice authorities, 
whose co-operation made possible the great work 
of mercy that was carried on throughout the early 
part of 1912, and still continues in a permanent 
refuge (known amongst the foreign community now 

75 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

as the " Chelsea Hospital "), where 200 men, hope- 
lessly disabled, have found a home, and are being 
helped to learn some means of gaining a livelihood. 
The Chinese do not forget those who have stood 
by them in their time of need. When, at the end 
of June last year, the five of us who had remained 
in Shensi throughout the Revolution were starting 
for a much-needed holiday at the coast, we were 
hardly prepared for the public demonstration that 
took place. The Government insisted on supplying 
our mule-Utters and pajdng all our expenses to 
Hankow — a journey of twelve or fourteen days. 
The military band played us out of the city; repre- 
sentatives of every department — military and civil 
— were assembled outside the gates to bid us fare- 
well; troops were lined up on either side of the road 
at the salute, a detachment escorting us on our 
way; and so we left, as the honoured guests and 
friends of the Shensi Government. As we travelled 
along the hot roads day after day, the best accommo- 
dation that each place could provide was ready for 
us, for none of which we were allowed to pay, and — 
perhaps the most striking of all — not a soldier or 
servant could be persuaded to accept a single cash 
for his services ! Such an experience is unique, 
and made us realize that the months of toil and 
danger had not been in vain, but will surely bear 
fruit in days to come. 



76 



CHAPTER VII 

THE OUTBREAK OF THE REVOLUTION 

It was Sunday morning, October 22, 1911, after 
penning the paragraph on p. 58, that Dr. Robertson 
rode out to visit a patient in the East Suburb. He 
intended to be back in a couple of hours. (We 
borrow here from Mr. Keyte's vivid pages in his 
fascinating book, " The Passing of the Dragon."*) 
It was a perfect day — the still, crisp, cloudless day 
of North-West China. The old city was at its best. 
The food-sellers were doing a brisk trade as they sat 
on their tiny stools at the wayside, moving the 
sizzling rice in its pan, and ladling out the soup. 
It was all so prosperous, so comfortable, so mildly 
busy. Presently he reached the East Gate, where a 
few soldiers loitered. To the north-west of the gate 
stretched the Manchu city, with its wide, healthy 
spaces, its lovely gardens, its grand old trees. From 
the east came the freshness of the open country. 
Altogether it was good to be alive. The Sabbath 
beauty seemed to fall upon the scene. It was so 
far removed from strife. That there was fighting 
going on down in Hupeh they knew, but Hankow 
was far away, in the region of warships, railways, 
and field batteries. Up here in this old-world city 
* Hodder and Stoughton, Londqu. 
77 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

they were surely beyond such strife. When Peking 
and Hankow and Canton had fought it out, then 
Sianfu, hearing of some changed Government, might 
pay her taxes to a new receiver; the long-promised 
railway might come the sooner, and real reforms 
might be undertaken. In the meanwhile Sianfu 
was steeped in the drowsy sunshine. So the doctor 
jogged through the gate to visit his patient in the 
East Suburb. But half an hour later Chang Pei 
Ying had made his raid on the magazine, the first 
shot had been fired in Shensi's revolt, the only way 
by which Dr. Cecil could regain his hospita| in the 
city would be by being hauled over the will, and 
there was an end of peace for many a long day. 

What followed is best described in Dr. Robertson's 
letter of October 25 to his mother: 

On Saturday and Sunday morning all was quiet. 
The Charters' little baby had been very ill, and we 
were very anxious about her. I did not go to the 
morning service, as I wanted to see the little one 
again, and go out to the East Suburb to see Miss 
Beckingsale and the opium patients, returning to 
the city as soon as possible. As I rode out all was 
quiet and peaceful, and there was no sign of trouble, 
though it was very curious that a passing thought 
crossed my mind as I passed along, how dreadful it 
would be if this lovely Sunday morning were dis- 
turbed by fighting. It was only a passing fancy, 
and I thought no more of it. I had not been in the 
East Suburb more than half an hour when we heard 
that the soldiers had captured the arsenal, and that 

78 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

the gates were shut; also that all the tradespeople 
had closed their gates. We immediately conferred 
together as to what to do, our first step being to 
try to send home the girls of the Girls' School. No 
one, however, would hire out carts, and there was 
nothing to do but to wait ; also there was no method 
for the foreigners to get away, even if we wanted 
to do so. We had, however, no intention of so 
doing while the Girls' School was on our hands. 
We therefore remained quietly where we were, 
AU that afternoon and night there was firing in the 
city, and we could see the flames and smoke of 
buildings that were being burned. We sent a man 
out to find out what the West Suburb was like, 
because the soldiers' barracks are there. He did not 
return that evening. I should have added that the 
fires inside the city came only from the Manchu part 
of the city, the north-east quadrant. 

The next morning the man returned, saying that 
the West Gate was open, and that all was quiet in 
the West Suburb and west part of the city. We 
had rumours also that Mr. Henne, the postmaster, 
had been killed. This proved to be false, but he 
had received an injury, the extent of which I do not 
know at the time of writing, but will add later. 
We also had news that a foreign building had been 
burned in the South Suburb. There are only two 
foreign buildings in the South Suburb, one of which 
is that in which some of the Swedish Mission five. 
We sent at once to find out the truth of this. In 
the meantime we consulted together with one or 
two of the Chinese teachers and evangelists, especially 

79 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

with Chow, whose photo I sent you, and who has 
been a great stand-by the whole time. They strongly 
advised us to go away to some neighbouring village 
until the evening, when, if all was quiet, they would 
give us word and we could return. I should say 
also that their advice was first to send away the 
girls in batches, some to their homes and some to 
neighbouring villages. You must understand that 
all this was not easy, for it meant suitable escort — 
one or more reliable married or elderly men with 
each batch. We foreigners were against this, but 
native opinion was so strong that we gave in. Mr. 
and Mrs. Donald Smith went with one batch, and 
various Chinese men went with others, in batches of 
five or six. 

After all had gone away, the rest of us departed: 
Mr. Ellison and Mr. Stanley with their teacher first, 
and Stanley's horse carr57ing a few things; after- 
wards Miss Turner, Miss Thomas, Miss Beckingsale, 
and myself. Miss Beckingsale was on my horse. 
She was still convalescent from her recent illness. 
We took with us all the silver we had, amounting 
to between £40 and £50. Just as we were starting 
the messengers sent to the South Suburb returned, 
sa5dng that five of the foreigners had been killed. 
This seemed to confirm our plans as being the right 
ones to adopt. I cannot tell you the exact feeling 
I had as we started out. I felt calm and collected 
in a measure, but I find it difficult to describe the 
feelings that filled my heart. However, before long 
there was only the sense of peace in the knowledge 
that I was a child of God and a servant of Jesus 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

Christ. We had gone about three or four U, and 
were approaching the village, when we saw a large 
number of the villagers coming out to meet us, and 
not looking very friendly. We skirted the north 
of the village, and before long caught sight of Mr. 
Ellison and Mr. Stanley about 150 yards away. 
Then we saw some of the villagers seize Mr. Stanley's 
horse and fight for the contents of the bag on his 
horse. Then the man who had seized his horse 
galloped across to us, in a rough way ordering Miss 
Beckingsale to get off my horse, which she did as 
quickly as she could. They then took my horse 
and clamoured and fought together for the things 
we were carrying. Finally, they ordered me to 
return to the East Suburb, and there was no help 
for it. We tried to talk peaceably with them, but 
they would not let us go on. We therefore went 
along slowly back, being followed by the crowd 
of at least 60 to 100. We had previously heard a 
rumour that the East Gates were to be opened 
at midday, and that the Revolutionaries were 
coming out to sack our place and presumably kill 
the foreigners. It seemed, therefore, in view of 
what had happened to the people in the South 
Suburb, that we were returning to certain death. 
I had never faced death before, and even then I 
could not realize it, and thought about you and 
darling Grace as I walked back, and cotild hardly 
realize that very likely I should never see you all 
again. However, we all walked quietly back, the 
crowd hanging back after a little while. I should 
have said that they first of all searched our persons, 

8i 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

and took all the silver and most of the belongings 
we were carr37ing. The only thing of any moment 
that any of us suffered was that after the crowd 
had dropped behind some way, one of the men came 
galloping up behind us, right into our midst, and 
knocked Miss Beckingsale over. Fortunately, how- 
ever, she was not seriously hurt, and was able to 
come on with us. The two men, who seemed to be 
the leaders, rode right on into the suburb, and we 
followed, going straight back to our house. 

We waited there for about one and three-quarter 
hours, expecting all the while that the soldiers 
wovild be coming. About an hour after, we heard 
that the soldiers had entered the suburb. We 
therefore had prayer and reading together, and were 
all wonderfully calm. I was especially struck with 
the attitude of the ladies. While we were reading 
news came that the report was false. We soon 
learned, however, that the two men who had ridden 
our horses into the suburb had gone on to the foot of 
the wall, telling those on the top of the wall what 
they had done. The officer on the wall, however, 
told them that they mtist on no account do any 
damage to the foreigners, and must return our 
things. We have since learned that these men 
belonged to a society, the purpose of which is to 
enrich themselves, and it was only by large offers 
from the officers on the wall that they withheld their 
hand from the East Submrb. 

* 4: * * H: 

Another account of that experience is as follows: 
" Of the rest of that walk home I can say but 

82 



The Outbreak, of the Revolution. 

little. It was an inexpressibly solemn time. We 
hardly spoke, and we felt that we should soon be 
done with this world. By the time our gate was 
reached only a few of the most violent of the crowd 
were following. We all went to the house occupied 
by Ellison and Stanley, and then ensued the most 
trying time of ail, sitting for an hour and a half 
awaiting the return of the crowd which would seal 
our doom. We took some milk and biscuits, as we 
had eaten nothing since 8.0 a.m. and it was now 
past one o'clock. Kneeling down, we committed 
ourselves to God's hands. Rising from our knees, 
two of our number made our wills, and gave them 
into the hands of our small serving-boy, who stood 
by, his tears rolling down his cheeks. Dr. Robertson 
wrote a brief account of what had happened to the 
London Secretary of the Mission. These last'duties 
finished, we sat down to await the end. Dr. Robert- 
son read some comforting passages of Scripture, 
notably John xiv. Finally he ceased, and we sat 
in silence. God at this time put a wonderful peace 
into our hearts. No fear, only sorrow that our 
service was so soon ended. No dread, for should 
we not soon see Him face to face ! We thought of 
home, and loved ones, and the possible manner of 
our death, and of the home to which ''we 'were 
speedily going. At the end of an hour and a half 
our servant came rushing back, saying that the 
soldiers were shouting from the walls that we must 
be protected; and the tears that never came at the 
thought of death brimmed in our eyes at the thought 
of release and liberty. 

83 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

" This evening one of the hospital assistants 
turned up. He was let down over the city wall by 
four soldiers to fetch Dr. Robertson. He felt it his 
duty to be there, and hurried off to be drawn up 
before dark. We have all been very happy in 
mutual support and companionship, and Dr. 
Robertson has been a tower of strength to us all. 
It was rather hard to spare him, as he has been 
our leader and chief stand-by." 

S|C 3|C 9|S «|C ^S 

We will now resimie Dr. Robertson's own ac- 
count : 

Later on that afternoon, towards dark, we heard 
that the Rev. and Mrs. Donald Smith had been 
found, and were being brought in. They had 
fared worse than we had, having been surrounded 
by a mob and badly beaten. Mr. Smith had both 
his arms broken, besides wounds of head and leg, 
in addition to many bruises. Mrs. Smith, too, 
suffered not a little on her own account, but I 
expect more through seeing Mr. Smith beaten in 
that way. They were attacked once, and then 
allowed to sit down for a while. Later on they were 
attacked again, and again left. Then some of our 
boys found them, and were able to bring them back 
to us. It has been interesting to notice which of 
our boys have remained staunch, and which have 
left us ; among the former is that boy whom I caught 
trjdng to steal some of my things last year. When 
the Smiths came along, I was able to help them, 
and one began to see God's purpose in getting me 

84 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

out to the East Suburb just before the gate was 
closed, so that I was prevented from returning. 

That evening we all remained at the Bachelor 
House, but the next afternoon the ladies and Smiths 
moved up to the B.Z.M. House, which is only separ- 
ated by the churchyard from the Bachelors'. I also 
went up there to look after Mr. Smith, who could do 
nothing for himself. During that day some of the 
gentry in the T'ung Kuan paid us a visit, sajmig 
that they were doing all in their power to protect 
us. They sent twenty armed men to specially patrol 
our street, and distributed others throughout the 
East Suburb, the special fear being of robbers and 
bad characters from outside. However, though we 
had many alarming reports, none of them came true. 

The next day everything continued as before, 
except that we heard that the Manchus were over- 
come, and the city was in the hands of the reformers. 
The gate was stiU not open, but the firing was less. 
Just as we were having tea, a messenger came to 
say that our head assistant had come along to fetch 
me into the city, as there were so many wounded, 
and Dr. Charter was alone at the hospital. So, 
after a little consultation with the others, I decided 
to go in; but as the gates were closed, I had to be 
hauled up the wall by a rope. It was a weird ex- 
perience, for it is a pretty high wall. Needless to 
say, the inhabitants of the East Suburb were all 
very interested. From the inside of the gate to the 
hospital I was accompanied by four soldiers. On 
the way I was taken to the ammunition stores to 
see the head man, but he was not there. We after- 

85 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

wards met him and two of our business managers — 
one from the hospital and the other of the East 
Suburb — and I was able to tell them about affairs 
in the East Suburb, and next day soldiers were sent 
out to protect them. I need not dwell on the un- 
pleasant sights, but it is needless to say that the 
city presented a very different aspect from that when 
I left it. Shops all closed, soldiers on foot and horse 
getting about on their various errands. I was glad 
to get back to the hospital. I found that the 
Charters' Uttle baby had died the night before. 
The story they had to tell I must try to give you 
later, but will now continue with events as they 
have affected me during the last week. 

November i. — We have been very busy with the 
wounded soldiers and others. Many of the wounds 
we have attended to are the result of not knowing 
how to use a rifle. We have had a lot of soldiers as 
patients, for we were well known amongst them. 
The thing that has been most dreadful is to see the 
little children who have suffered. One little chap 
of twelve with whom I was much taken had terrible 
injuries. He has died. Oh, war is horrible ! Now 
we are receiving people who were wounded at the 
beginning, but who could not, or would not, come 
at first. Their wounds are in a horribly filthy con- 
dition. I have seen more terrible things this last 
ten days than I have seen in all my previous ex- 
perience, and the trying part has been our absolute 
inability to cope adequately with the amount of 
work, especially in the way of nursing, for which 
we have practically no provision. 

86 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

On Thursday evening, after I had got to bed for 
about half an hour, I was called up to go to the 
Provincial College, which is only about two minutes 
ofi. Here I found I had been summoned to see the 
former Provincial Treasurer, the second official of 
the province. He is not a Manchu, but he had 
tried to take his life with a rifle. He had been 
found that evening, and brought to this college, 
which just now is the seat of Government. I sent 
for one of our boys to bring instruments and chloro- 
form; was able to extract the bullet, and I think 
he will get better. While there I met the man who 
is now acting as Governor, so I had the opportunity 
of speaking somewhat of our affairs. I have met 
him once or twice since. On each occasion he has 
been most anxious to show his concern about the 
safety and well-being of the foreigners. I am going 
each day to see my patient at the college. 

We have been anxious concerning the safety of 
the Shorrocks at Fu Yin Ts'un, and of the Youngs, 
who are on their way back from Suite-chow, having 
left Yenanfu on October 23. We sent word to the 
Governor about them, and he said that he had de- 
spatched 100 soldiers to San Yuan to protect and 
escort them down; but I am afraid that all he has 
told us in this way has not been carried out. The 
country is by no means a safe place just now, there 
being no Government. Robbers take their oppor- 
tunity, and make the most of it. The Shorrocks 
are being guarded by 100 men of the village night 
and day, and from what we hear from them by 
letters it is quite necessary. 

87 7 



€«cil Robertson of Sianfu. 

I must go on with my story another day. I want 
to have a Uttle reading and meditation this evening 
before retiring. There has been so Uttle time for it 
these few days, and I do not want to lose the lessons 
that God has to teach me in all this. I think there 
is not one of us but has felt Him to be wonderfully 
near, and having proved once what He could be to 
us when we were face to face with death — ^in thought, 
if not in actuality— it gives confidence in Him for 
the future. Oh that we may trust Him fully, and 
be more useful as the result of this ! 

November 2, Sianfu. — I will now try to tell you 
as far as I can what took place inside the city. It 
so happened that on the first day of this Chinese 
month there was an eclipse of the sun here. Whether 
they purposely arranged to break out on that day 
on that account I cannot say, but the eclipse took 
place about 10.30, and the trouble broke out about 
twelve o'clock. The soldiers first took the arsenal, 
and gave out arms and ammunition to everyone who 
was wiUing to join them, their badge being white. It 
was unfortunate that they had not adopted a more 
distinctive badge, for many bad characters put on 
a white badge, obtained arms, and used them only 
to rob and loot. I cannot tell you just now when 
the attack on the Manchu part of the city first 
began, but it must have commenced soon after, and 
continued more or less incessantly until Wednesday 
morning, when the work was practically finished. 
The object of the Revolutionaries was to exterminate 
the Manchus — man, woman, and child. After Wed- 
nesday they ceased killing the women and girls, but 

88 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

continued to seek out the males. The position of 
the Manchus was absolutely hopeless from the start. 
Though they live in a separate quarter of the city, 
they are not enclosed by a wall; and though every 
Manchu man is a soldier, they are soldiers of the old 
type, and armed with very inferior weapons, thei 
rifles being able to fire only once to the new troops' 
five times; therefore, though there were 5,000 
Manchus, they could do little. The Chinese fired 
their houses, and then kiUed all they could while 
they were escaping. Many of the Manchus climbed 
up the city wall and dropped down the other side, 
some to become badly maimed, others to be killed, 
and perhaps a few to escape. Many took their lives 
either by jumping down wells or by hanging them- 
selves. This was especially the case with the 
women. It is rumoured that there are still very 
many Manchus in hiding, and that is not unlikely. 
The soldiers were allowed to take anything they 
chose from the Manchu city, and when I passed 
through the city three days ago there were plenty 
of beautiful silk garments lined with fine furs on the 
backs of the soldiers, who in consequence presented 
quite a picturesque appearance. A large number 
of people have received injuries owing to the Manchus 
hiding their gunpowder underground, so that there 
were sudden explosions in the burning houses, with 
no previous warning, and many persons who were 
seeking spoil have been severely burned. We have 
had several brought to the hospital suffering from 
burns in this way. One man came in almost naked, 
having had practically all his clothes burned off him. 

89 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

On the second or third day a proclamation was 
issued, the main purport of which was to " raise the 
Chinese and destroy the Manchus," also " protect 
the merchants, the foreigners, and churches of the 
people." Since then a temporary system of policing 
the streets has been established, and every house- 
hold is expected to provide a night-watchman at 
night. The new authorities are also doing their 
utmost to seek out those who looted the shops on 
the first two days. They have already discovered a 
large number, all of whom are being very summarily 
dealt with. However, despite all this, it is still the 
reign of the soldiers, and while soldiers are looking 
after things, it is scarcely likely that there will be 
real peace and safety for the average commoner in 
canying on his daUy avocation. The majority of 
them have been going about lately with drawn 
swords, and not a few innocent persons have suf- 
fered at their hands. 

There must have been a frightful slaughter of the 
Manchus. I expect that foreign countries will be 
horrified when they hear the tidings. It is Eastern, 
but it is horrible. The doctrine of " no quarter " 
is so absolutely foreign to the Western mind, and 
many scores of able and good men must have been 
killed. There are many thinking men who, though 
they dare not say it in public, yet feel that the affair 
has been altogether too severe, and that if people 
were willing to submit, their lives should have been 
spared. One man told me that there had been 
nothing like this in all the past history of China. 
I heard the following of one of the leading pro- 
go 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

fessors: He was a Manchu, had always treated his 
pupils well, and was weU liked by them — indeed, 
was on intimate terms with many. He had been in 
Japan at the same college with the man who is the 
head of the movement here; He therefore went to 
this man, who protected him for two days; but 
then the authorities moved his headquarters, and 
another man took his place. This latter man had 
also been formerly on friendly terms with the 
Manchu official. He treated him, however, as if 
he did not recognize him, asked him who he was, 
and, directly he opened his mouth, showing by his 
speech that he was a Manchu, ordered his men to kill 
him. This is the sort of thing that makes one sick 
at heart. China has none too many good men to 
kill them so ruthlessly, and if they were willing to 
submit to the new Government, why kiU them ? 

One cannot help wondering what wiU ultimately 
happen. Will the new men be able to manage 
affairs ? They are all, or nearly all, very young 
men — e.g., the head of the Foreign Office here is 
only twenty-one, and the Governor cannot be more 
than thirty-five. The only hope seems to me to be 
in the inherently law-abiding and peaceable char- 
acter of the Chinese, who, directly a Government is 
established which is at all reliable, will obey and 
support it. Of course, I do not know what men 
they have in other provinces. The thing that seems 
pretty evident now is that they have too much to 
do, and too few men to carry out their plans. All 
prices are greatly increased. Most foodstuffs are 
double the price, and clothing material is also at 

91 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

least double the price. This is due largely to the 
large amount of looting that was done on the first 
two days by bad characters. They tell me that all 
the shops — silver-shops, pawn-shops, silk merchants, 
boot and shoe shops, cloth-shops, cash-shops, foreign 
food-shops; in fact, all the shops that had things 
that could be taken — were looted. Possibly a few 
escaped, but according to report not many. I must 
stop again for to-night. It is a long story, and 
there is much more to tell. I wish I had better 
powers of description, for I suppose I have seen 
more than most foreigners here. God has guided 
us in a wonderful way. I cannot tell you what He 
has meant in the last few days. How I have longed 
for years for a more intimate knowledge of Him! 
I think that He Himself has been teaching me of 
late. May I be ready to learn all that He has for 
me, and for greater opportunities of service later ! 

November 4, Sianfu. — I have already told you 
that the present military regime is one full of terror 
to the average citizen. There are numerous rumours, 
more or less alarming, every day. To-day it is said 
that a large Mohammedan army is waiting at Ping 
Liang Fu ready to march on Sianfu; also that a 
Manchu army from Peking is coming west, the 
Manchu being said to be victorious at Peking. 
But no reliance can be placed on these reports. 

But now to come back again to affairs as they 
affected the hospital and Dr. and Mrs. Charter. 
Some little time after I had left the hospital to go 
to the East Suburb, Mr. Henne came to see how 
the Charters' little baby was. He came on his 

92 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

horse. On his return the affair had broken out in 
the city, and he was attacked by robbers and bad 
characters, who first demanded his horse, then 
allowed him to walk on a bit, but again set on him, 
inflicting a number of wounds on his head. Had 
he not been rescued by soldiers he would certainly 
have been killed. On his arrival at his house Dr. 
Charter was immediatelysent for, being escorted there 
by soldiers; but after he had finished binding up 
Mr. Henne's wounds it was considered too dangerous 
for him to return through the streets, and he had 
to wait until the next day. In the meantime Mrs. 
Charter and Miss Watt were alone at the hospital, 
with the little baby gradually sinking. Can you 
imagine what a terrible time they must have had 
during those hours, with the city in an uproar, and 
most of the hospital servants in a state of terror ? 

However, all was well until about Monday mid- 
day, when a large crowd of Mohammedans collected 
outside the hospital with intent to kill, and to do 
damage to the building. The ladies felt that their 
last hours had come. Fortunately, however, our 
business manager was on the premises, and he did 
his utmost to comfort and help them. In their 
desperation they cried to God to send them some- 
one reliable who could advise them how to act. In 
the midst of their praying Mr. Lin, whom I have 
already mentioned, came in to tell them not to be 
afraid, because the mob outside would very soon 
disperse, which proved true; so they, too, in a 
wonderful way proved God's nearness in a time of 
extremity. Not long after this Dr. Charter re- 

93 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

turned, and the work of attending to the wounded 
began, and they were kept pretty busy. Their baby 
died on Tuesday night at twelve o'clock, and, as I 
have said before, I was sent for on Wednesday 
afternoon. 

I think, perhaps, I will leave the story of the 
people in the South Suburb for another time. Let 
me tell you of one of the Swedish ladies who lives 
at a place about eighteen miles away. Robbers 
came to loot her house and to kill her, but she 
managed to escape to another house not far off. 
Here she remained two days without food, and her 
pursuers actually came to the very room where she 
was hiding, coming twice; but though she was only 
just behind the door, they did not see her. This 
sounds impossible, but it is so. One ought never to 
lose faith in our God after experiences such as these ; 
and, whatever He has in store for us in the future, 
we shall have been prepared in these days, whether 
it be for more service here or for an early call to be 
with Him. 

The soldiers who went to fetch the Shorrocks from 
Fu Yin Ts'un earlier in the week returned with them 
yesterday, and we are all very glad that they are 
with us again. They have had days of much diffi- 
culty at Fu Yin Ts'un, and it has been necessary 
for them to have a large number of men keeping 
guard night and day to prevent robbers attacking 
them. One night some men were caught attempt- 
ing to set fire to their house, and at another time 
an alarm was given for them to escape to a hiding- 
place on which they had arranged; so we are glad 

94 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

for their sakes as well as ours to have them back 
again. We are now anxious about the people in 
the north of the province, especially for the Youngs, 
who were on their way down from Yenanfu, as we 
know that there are many people in the north who 
have strong feeling against foreigners; but we must 
hope for the best, and wait for news. Soldiers are 
being sent up to escort them back again here. 

November y, Sianfu. — Since writing the above we 
have had news of the Youngs, for which we are 
profoundly thankful. It appears that they left 
Yenanfu on Monday, October 23, the day after the 
trouble broke out here. They first heard of the 
Revolution at the end of the second day's journey, 
but they still came on, and had reached Chung Pu, 
four days from Yenanfu, when they heard more about 
the trouble here, and received a report that the 
foreigners were killed. They went to see the official 
in Chung Pu, who gave them an escort of soldiers. 
At the end of that day's journey a letter from Mr. 
Shorrock reached them by a messenger from Fu Yin 
Ts'un to say that Mr. and Mrs. Donald Smith were 
dead, and that we had aU left the East Suburb. To 
explain Mr. Shorrock writing this, I must say that 
this was the first news he received which seemed 
to be attested by circumstantial evidence, for the 
head-teacher in the school said he had seen them 
both dead on the roadside ! Dr. Young therefore 
decided to attempt to return to Yenanfu. They 
got back to Chung Pu, but here they were deprived 
of aU they had — their horse and all their belongings. 
They then went to the house of a Church member, 

95 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

and later resumed their journey, keeping off the 
main roads, until ultimately they found a cave 
where they could hide. Here they were able to 
get food from friendly people, but they dared not 
go on, for their boys, who were sent out to make 
inquiry, said it was not safe. Finally, they sent their 
boys to the city here to find out how matters stood, 
and they arrived on Saturday night last, November 4. 
On the following day a little company of horse 
soldiers, with some of our men, started to fetch them 
down here, so we hope that before many days they 
will be back amongst us. The details of their ex- 
periences I must wait for. Dr. Young said that 
though the food was coarse, they were getting on 
all right, and were quite safe. He had written his 
letter with a piece of incense-stick, not having any 
pencil to write with. 

Some days ago Mr. Beckman came in to see us. 
He was the missionary living in the South Suburb. 
It appears that the evening of the Sunday on which 
the trouble broke out they had discussed the best 
method of escaping if they were attacked. I ought 
to tell you that living at their house were Mr. and 
Mrs. Beckman, their three children, three other 
children, and Mr. Watney, a young man who has 
only recently come out, and teaches some of the 
children of the Swedish Mission in this district. 
The house is situated outside the walls of the South 
Suburb. It has a large garden in front and at the 
back, and is surrounded by a fairly high wall. In 
the front there is an entrance by a large wooden 
gate. About midnight they were attacked by a 

96 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

band who, as we afterwards heard, consisted largely 
of robbers and bad characters of the neighbourhood. 
AU the servants fled, and not only so, but removed 
the ladder that they had put up against the wall to 
enable them to get over if they were attacked; so 
when they came to this place, they could not find 
the ladder. They put a barrow up against the wall, 
and Mr. Watney climbed up on the wall, their plan 
being to hand the children over; but only one child 
was handed over, and when it began to cry Mr. 
Watney jumped down on the other side. Mr. Beck- 
man called out to them, but had no reply, and 
gathered that Mr. Watney and this child, who was 
his own daughter, a girl of twelve, had been com- 
pelled to run. I ought to say there was no moon to 
enable them to see. Mr. Beckman, his wife, a little 
baby, and a little girl of seven or eight, and the 
rest of the children, then got into a little outhouse 
near by and remained there. Presently they heard 
footsteps, and ther^ was knocking at the door. His 
wife jumped out at once with the little girl of seven 
or eight, but Mr. Beckman remained back for a 
while. He could see that there was only one man in 
the courtyard, for they had set fire to his house, and 
all was lighted up. I do not think he saw his wife 
again after that. They must have caught her and 
killed her at once. He, with the little baby in his 
arms, then went out. The man had disappeared. 
He knew he could not get out at the back, so he 
went round to the front. The front gate was burned 
down, and outside was a mob of people. He ran 
right through them, and made straight for a pool 

97 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

just outside the suburb, and jumped down the side 
into the water, which was about two feet deep. 
Here he stopped for a while in a little recess among 
some thick grass, prajdng God to help him. He 
could hear the men searching for him, and when 
he saw that they had lamps he moved a little 
farther along to a tree, by the side of which he 
remained, still hidden by the thick grass. He heard 
them asking for him, and presently three men were 
deputed to watch until morning. He then heard 
these men come to the conclusion that since it was 
impossible for him to get up on the north side, 
because it was too steep, they would remain watch- 
ing the three other sides. All this time he was 
standing in the water with his little baby in his arms, 
and not once did she utter a sound that might betray 
his presence. After a while he saw the morning 
star, and heard the men remark on it, saying that 
soon it would be light, and they would be able to 
find him. He therefore felt about on the north 
side of the pool, and found a place where he could 
just reach to the top with his arm. He therefore 
put the little baby there. She made a little sound, 
and he took her down again, and sought for another 
place, but not finding one, he returned and put her 
up there again, praying that she might be kept 
quiet. He then managed to climb up, though his 
strength was almost gone, and escaped from his 
watchers, reaching the West Suburb, where he was 
received by his friends. He and his little baby are 
the only two who escaped from that place. It is 
terribly sad. Six children, Mrs. Beckman, and Mr. 

98 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

Watney lost their lives. Mr. Watney and the girl 
(Beclanan) ran for about six miles, but were over- 
taken and done to death by having mud bricks 
thrown at them. One boy who was killed was 
such a jolly little chap. His mother, Mrs. Ahlstrand, 
is such a noble woman, and he was the very idol of 
their home. She had brought him to me to see 
about his eyes, and I had already ordered glasses 
for him from Shanghai. I hear that she and her 
husband have just arrived in the city from their 
station two days' away, so they are safe. 

The new authorities are extremely sorry about 
this affair. They ought to have managed better 
if they really wanted to avoid the bloodshed of 
foreigners, for they must know that in many places 
the people are not really friendly. It was un- 
fortunate that this place was so far outside the 
suburb. Four men have been executed there on 
account of their share in this, and their heads hung 
up outside the gate, with characters saying that this 
is the punishment meted out to those who kill the 
foreigners. 

There has recently been started here a Red Cross 
League, and on Sunday I had a visit from the two 
head men, who told me that they are not able to 
attend to the wounded, as their methods are no 
good ! They asked if we would receive anybody they 
had on their hands who had been wounded ? Of course 
I said we should be very pleased to do so. They told 
us that they are busy with the burial of the dead; 
and are burying them in the Manchu city in pits, 
about ten in one pit. They told me that up to the 

99 



Cecil Robertson ot Sianfu. 

present they have buried 4,000; but, at a low 
estimate, probably 10,000 have been killed, for 
there were 5,000 Manchu soldiers, not counting 
their families, which must bring the total number 
up to at least 10,000. These men told me that more 
have died from suicide, either by poison, strangula- 
tion, or jumping into wells, than by wounds. Also, 
that the Chinese have received comparatively very 
few injuries, which is not surprising in view of their 
superior weapons. It is a remarkable thing that we 
know certainly of the safety of nearly all our Manchu 
Christians. There are many Manchus in hiding; 
we have some here at the hospital who came in 
amongst the wounded, but our boys have since told 
us that they are Manchus. We shall keep them 
here until there is a real chance of their safety. 

We have been receiving a great many rumours of 
all sorts, one of which was that a large Mohammedan 
army from Kansuh was about to march on us here. 
It was waiting at a place eight days distant. To- 
day we hear that forty Mohammedans from the 
west came to ascertain the actual conditions. They 
were taken to see the Governor, and were sent away 
with 50 taels each in their pockets (;^6) to induce 
them to say good words to the folk who sent them ! 

We have also heard that the band of soldiers who 
were sent to Weinan, forty miles east of here, to 
demand its surrender, were joined by robbers who 
appeared to be friends. The robbers, however, set 
on them, killed several, and then went to Weinan, 
and demanded 7,000 taels of silver, which I am told 
they received. This shows how the present trouble 



The Outbreak of the Revolution, 

has brought all the bad elements to the surface; 
the country is simply infested with robbers, and if 
the Government is going to secure real order they 
have a very difficult task before them. 

The city continues quiet, except for little bands 
of horse soldiers galloping about on business, and 
the way these soldiers gallop down the streets is 
most dangerous. One man was brought in here the 
other day who had been knocked over, and he died 
from his injuries. There is not much business being 
done except in foodstuffs . Wounded are still coming 
in, some who were wounded over two weeks ago 
with compound fractures, bullet wounds of hands, 
hands and fingers cut off — all in a most horrible 
state of filth. The suffering that they have been 
undergoing must have been terrible, but many of 
them have been too weak or too frightened to come 
before. 

I must finish for this evening, for, as I am writing, 
I can hear the night-watchman going his round, 
beating his little rattle or drum. It is a most 
peaceful sound. I like to lie in bed and hear him 
gradually come nearer, and then gradually die away 
in the distance. 

November 13, Sianfu. — ^Two days ago the funeral 
of the foreigners who had been killed at the South 
Suburb took place in the garden of the house, which 
is now a complete ruin, the walls alone standing. 
It is amazing to see how thoroughly the ruffians did 
their work that night: every single place was burned, 
not even little outhouses remaining. There must 
have been bitter hatred of the foreigner by those 

lOI 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

who did the deed ; most of them have now fled, and 
the inhabitants of the South Suburb are all afraid. 
The funeral was very trying for some of the relatives, 
especially for the mothers whose children had been 
killed. Mrs. Ahlstrand, of whom I have already 
spoken, was there. One could see how intense was 
her grief ; it was a sad and yet a beautiful picture to 
see her kneeling by the coffin of her little boy !* Poor 
woman, it is a bitter cup ! As we stood together 
amongst the ruins we could not but realize the horror 
of that night, and the ruthlessness of the men who 
did the deed. A number of the Chinese came, 
amongst them the head of the Foreign Office, the 
head of the Military School, and a representative 
of the General, who had left the city to attend to 
affairs in T'ung Kuan, a town on the border of 
the province. 

You will remember that I mentioned that town 
just after my arrival here. It is one of great strategic 
importance. There has been some trouble there, the 
exact nature of which it is difficult to make out. 
The General visited it, three days ago, to try and 
settle affairs, but we have not yet received certain 
news . The Red Cross League sent three of their men 
to us, wanting to borrow instruments and obtain 
drugs. They told me they had been ordered to go to 
T'ung Kuan, where there had been fighting, and to 
attend to the wounded ; but they felt their helpless- 
ness, not knowing at all how to treat wounds. I 
pointed out to them the danger of putting instru- 
ments in the hands of men who did not know how 
* " George, a Little Martyr for Jesus" (Morgan and Scott). 

102 < 



The Outbreak of the Revolution. 

to use them. It was as bad as to give a rifle to a 
man who did not know how to use it, so they had 
to be satisfied with a few brief instructions as to 
how to bind up a simple wound. It would be 
ludicrous if it were not so pitiful. They will doubt- 
less have the more severe cases of those who do not 
die sent to us here; but think of the delay — three 
days' distance — and all the pain and discomfort of 
the journey ! The city is fairly quiet now, but life 
is still pretty cheap ; men are losing their lives for 
very small crimes, and any Manchu males who are 
found are still being killed. 



i°3 



CHAPTER VIII 
SUMMONED TO T'UNG KUAN 

November 23, T'lmg Kuan. — On Wednesday even- 
ing, a week ago, the Youngs got back to the East 
Suburb from the north. I have not yet had a 
detailed account of their experiences, but they 
appeared better in health than I had expected, and 
the httle boy was in good form. On Friday Mr. 
Shorrock and Dr. Young came into the hospital, 
and while they were there the head of the Foreign 
Office, Mr. Lin, came to say that they wanted to 
send one of us to see to the people here who had 
been wounded, because the Red Cross League people 
were not able to meet the urgent needs of the 
situation. So it was arranged that I should come. 
I started right away to get things ready, and left 
the city the next day at noon. It was fortunate 
that Dr. Young and Mr. Shorrock were there, as we 
were able to consult together, and I was able to hand 
over my part of affairs at the hospital to Dr. Young. 

That briefly explains the above address . It appears 
that after affairs broke out in Sianfu, the Shensi 
troops got possession of this place, which is really 
in Shensi Province. The troops consisted of about 
1,000 men. The Manchu official here, however, 
escaped, and, according to reports, went into Honan, 

104 



Summoned to T'ung Kuan. 

asking that troops might be sent to reconquer the 
city. In consequence some soldiers were sent, and 
though the gates were locked, they climbed over the 
wall. When these Honan soldiers entered T'ung 
Kuan, the Shensi troops were practically helpless, 
as they were poorly equipped with ammunition 
and rifles, whereas the Honan soldiers had good 
weapons. The Honan troops must have been here 
several days — six or seven — during which they 
ransacked every house and shop in the place, de- 
manding sUver and valuables, killing if not at once 
shown where the things were. When more Shensi 
troops arrived from the west, the Honan men packed 
up their things on mules and left. One can imagine 
something of the joy of the inhabitants when the 
Shensi troops arrived, for they were fearing that they 
would die of starvation, not having any animals 
left to grind the corn. However, food and fodder 
have been sent from the neighbouring places for the 
inhabitants and the newly arrived soldiers, and the 
food-shops are doing a considerable trade. 

After the Shensi troops occupied the place a 
second time, they asked for the Red Cross League 
people to come. These, however, realized their own 
incompetence to deal with the wounded, and after 
the General returned to Sianfu, I was asked to go. 
As you may guess, we had to work hard to get things 
ready, and had it not been for Miss Watt I do not 
think it could have been done. However, by mid- 
day Saturday, the i8th, all was ready ; but, with 
true Chinese delay, we did not really get on our 
way until the next morning, though we got as far as 

105 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu, 

the East Suburb, where I spent the night with the 
Shorrocks. The next day the carts, four of them, 
with the medicine, dressings, instruments, two 
hospital assistants, my cook, and four Red Cross 
League men to minister to my wants and generally 
to carry out my instructions, went on ahead, leaving, 
as I supposed and had been informed, a horse soldier 
to accompany me, as I was going on my horse. But 
after waiting an hour for this man to turn up, I 
found that he had gone. This seemed rather trying. 
Here was I left behind, the most essential member 
of the expedition ! However, Mr. Shorrock lent me 
a horse, and my horse-boy escorted me until we 
caught them up six and a half miles out. Subse- 
quently we were overtaken by another man who is 
managing everything for me — a very decent fellow, 
a Honan man, awfully keen on everything foreign, 
who has been drill-master to the two largest schools 
in the city. He and I reached Lin T'ung, sixteen and 
a half miles from Sianfu, a little after midday. It 
was our intention to get on farther the same day, 
but our own carts turned up too late, as the roads 
were very bad indeed, owing to rains during the 
previous week. We spent the night at the Yamen. 
The next day my companion and I got on to 
Weinan. 

While at Weinan I heard that the Evangelist at a 
neighbouring place where the C.LM. works, after 
the outbreak of trouble, went to take refuge at the 
house of a Christian. The magistrate at this place 
had already committed suicide. When these men 
heard that robbers had come into the place they 

1 06 



Summoned to T'ung Kuan. 

both took poison; the EvangeUst died, but the other 
man did not. This is a thoroughly Chinese way of 
doing things. In the case of officials it is a mark 
of devotion to commit suicide if the dynasty under 
which they were serving is abolished. 

The next day we had arranged to go by boat, but 
I found that it would take longer than I expected. 
We therefore sent on the goods and some of the 
men by boat, while Tung, one of the hospital 
assistants, and I rode by horse. We hoped to reach 
T'ung Kuan the same day, but it was impossible, 
owing to the rain, for it poured all day long, and 
we had to put up at a little village, the inn being 
none of the best. We all three slept together on 
the k'ang. We had the k'ang heated, but then we 
could not get to lie down for some time because the 
smoke in the room was altogether too overpowering. 
However, we slept all right, and next day got on 
early. Fortunately, it was fine, and we reached 
T'ung Kuan (twenty-four miles) before midday. I 
was thus able to get the premises we were to occupy 
fixed up before the boat arrived the next morning, 
and things were ready for use that afternoon 
(Thursday) . 

On our arrival we went to the Yamen, saw the 
head man, and had food there. That evening we 
slept at our hospital, which was located in premises 
at the back of the post-office. Trestle beds have 
been put up covered with straw and felt. A little 
operating-room is all ready, kitchen, store, cooks, 
and helpers ; the only drawback is that the patients 
are not flocking in as I expected. However, we have 

107 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

ten to start with, and I expect they will come along 
all right. 

It is difficult to realize that we are now in the 
midst of perhaps the most momentous Revolution 
that has happened within the last hundred years, 
the issues of which will be fraught with good or 
bad for the whole world. If one stops to consider, 
one can hardly conceive what may be the outcome ; 
and now, as one thinks of the headquarters at Sianfu 
and here, of the young men who are at the head, of 
their keenness, of their audacity at undertaking such 
an affair, of what they have already done, one cannot 
help wondering what the outcome will be and what 
the future will bring. 

I overheard a rather interesting conversation at 
one inn at which we stopped for midday meal. To 
explain, I must say that I was wearing foreign 
clothes on the journey, the big overcoat I bought 
just before leaving, and the leather boots and 
leggings. Translated freely, it would be like this 
in English: 

A. " What do you think of that woollen over- 
coat ?" 

B. " It does not look very thick, and it is not 
very good-looking, but it must have been very 
expensive." 

A. " No, it is not thick, but I should think it is 
warm." To me: " Is it warm ?" 

C. F. R. " Oh yes, it is all right." 

B. " Oh, he understands Chinese !" 

C. " Yes, he is from the ' Save the World ' Hall 
in the city. There is Dr. Jenkins and Dr. Young 

io8 



Summoned to T'ung Kuan. 

and Dr. Charter there at the hospital. I know 
them. They have been there eight years, and they 
can speak and understand the language; but their 
language is very difficult to understand " (referring 
to English). 

A. " Those leather boots he is wearing look rather 
cold, but I should think they last a long time." 

C. " Yes, they last several years; but they cost 
about 8 taels (£i). These foreigners have a lot of 
money." 

There was a little more of it, which I forget. I 
appeared not to understand, and found it very inter- 
esting. 

Last night I was called out about midnight to go 
to our friends, the Chinese doctors of the Red Cross 
League, who have a patient with a wound of his 
head. This wound has been bleeding periodically, 
and last night they could not stop it, and so sent 
for me. It was really somewhat amusing going 
along there at dead of night with the Red Cross 
men, about six of them, accompanying me with 
drawn swords ready to protect me. They were 
profuse in their promises to protect me, against 
what I do not know, for all the inhabitants of this 
place are so scared they would not touch a dog. 
However, when we reached our destination, I found 
the man with his head plastered up with mud and 
filth to stop the bleeding, which they had effected. 
I removed the mass of plaster and mud with some 
difficulty and cleaned up his head, and succeeded 
without much trouble in stopping the bleeding 
permanently. The wound is not a serious one, and 

109 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

will easily heal up; but because of this wounded 
vessel it was very serious to them. 

I had several more patients yesterday, amongst 
them a young fellow who had received bad bums 
over one-third of his back, one arm, neck, and face. 
They had been done about three weeks previously, 
and the poor fellow was in a most pitiable condition. 
The only treatment that had been adopted was to 
sprinkle dry earth over the bums, which, with the 
discharge from the raw surfaces, had been converted 
into mud, partly dried and caked on, and partly 
moist. It was a sore job to get him clean. His 
bedding was all covered with earth and mud. How- 
ever, we got him moderately clean. There is another 
man with burns who is being brought here to-day. 

We also had a man in yesterday who had been 
beaten for deserting. My word ! the Chinese beat- 
ing is a horrible sort of affair. This is the second 
case I have seen. I saw one some months ago at 
the beggars' home. In each case it was the same. 
Large ulcers of both legs as the result. It will be 
weeks before he is about again. 

To-day we hear there has been fighting with the 
Honan troops about sixty miles to the east, and so 
we are sending men to bring back the wounded here. 
Of course, the Red Cross brethren ought to have 
sent men with the troops for that purpose. It will 
be a bit better than before, however, for most of 
the patients here had been wounded two or three 
weeks before I saw them. These will only have 
been wounded four or five days. 

November 30, T'ung Kuan. — Two more days have 
no 



Summoned to T'ung Kuan. 

slipped away, and we have had four men in from 
the east side, where there has been fighting, but 
only one with a really serious injury. We have had 
various reports as to what has taken place, but the 
last is more reassuring — viz., that the two Generals 
have agreed, and that no more fighting is to take 
place. Each is to remain in his own province; but 
by to-morrow, perhaps, we shall be able to get at 
the facts, for I hear that the Shensi General has 
returned to a place twenty li away. 

December 13, Hua Chou. — On the 2nd the General 
returned to the city, with all the soldiers who had 
gone east against the Honan troops, a peace having 
been concluded, by which each army is to keep 
within its own territory. On that same afternoon I 
received a letter from Mr. Shorrock which made me 
feel it was right to go back to Sianfu — for a day or 
two, at any rate — and in view of this peace it 
seemed possible to go. I therefore started off about 
eleven o'clock on the next day with my former 
companion Tung, who wanted to return to the city, 
leaving my two assistants to look after my patients 
in the meantime. We reached Sianfu about 11 a.m., 
Tuesday, December 5. I found all quiet there, 
though they had had some bad scares of Moham- 
medans coming from the west, the Chinese greatly 
fearing another Mohammedan invasion. I remained 
in Sianfu Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, and 
started back on Friday morning, being accompanied 
by another man called Sun, Tung not being able to 
return for two or three days. On arrival we found 
that there had been fighting the previous day, and 

III 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

that the Shensi troops had been forced to retire to 
within thirteen miles of T'ung Kuan on the east side. 
I went to see the General, but found he was out, 
and afterwards discovered that he had gone out of 
the West Gate. He had practically run away, with his 
guards. This very soon got known in the city, 
and the result was that everybody, soldiers and 
inhabitants alike, wanted to leave the city. The 
West Gate was, however, kept shut until dark. 

By this time the Honan troops had advanced 
farther, and firing was very close, within a mile of 
the walls. At dark it ceased, and the Shensi 
troops retired within the city walls. About dark the 
officers at the Yemen wanted me to move there, I 
afterwards learnt, with the idea of my leaving the 
city at dark with them. I felt it to be my duty to 
remain with the patients. It was easy to see how 
anxious and disturbed all my boys were, so I had 
evening worship with them. I told them that we 
could rest assured that we would be all right, that 
the Honan troops would not want to kill us, who 
were helping men, and were ready to help the 
Honan wounded men likewise. I also spoke about 
God's protection. However, they still remained 
extremely anxious to go, and not one of them would 
have remained with me. It was extremely difficult 
to know what to do. Some of the patients had left, 
and of those who could not walk (five), one or two 
were taken away by their friends. The boys and 
Sun, my companion, all declared that Chinese were 
not like foreigners, and that the Honanese would 
regard all as their enemies, saving none, and having 



Summoned to T'ung Kuan. 

no respect for the Red Cross flag. I was torn with 
conflicting feelings and duties. In the meantime 
Sun secured a cart to wait outside our place to be 
in readiness if we wanted to go, and I then con- 
sented to go if firing broke out again during the 
night. 

About II p.m., when the moon began to get up, 
firing began again just outside the wall. We sent 
to the Yamen to see what they were doing, and 
found that not a soul was there. They had all fled 
some time previously. We then packed up what 
we could and started, and as we went through the 
streets we could see that the city was practically 
empty. How many soldiers remained on the wall 
I do not know, but all the next day there were 
streams of people, both peasants and soldiers, for 
about forty miles from T'ung Kuan. When we 
reached Hua Yin Hsien, a place twelve miles from 
T'ung Kuan, we tried to find out where the General 
was . We discovered the place where his guard were, 
but he with a few others had left some two hours 
previously. So we, too, came on, travelling all night 
and all the next day, finally reaching here in the 
afternoon. The inhabitants of nearly every place 
had shut up shop and fled, as they heard that the 
Manchu troops were coming. As a result, food was 
very difficult to get. Arrived here, we found the 
General, and went to see him. I asked him to send 
a letter to the Honan General, asking if he would 
let me go to T'ung Kuan to see after the patients and 
wounded there, which he consented to do. The next 
day he sent, asking me if I would remain here, as 

"3 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

there were a number of wounded who had been 
brought here. Unfortunately, we had not brought 
away dressings. I therefore sent one of my boys 
back to the city to get them, but it will be three 
days before he can get back. 

Yesterday evening the General from Sianfu 
arrived here, and to-day about 3,000 soldiers have 
arrived. They are going to march on to T'ung 
Kuan to-morrow, and in the event of their re- 
taking that city we shall move on there again. If 
the troops are beaten, we shall have to return to 
Sianfu. This is a bad time for the common people; 
indeed, the reign of the soldier is a reign of terror 
for ordinary folk. We are staying at the-shop of a 
grain merchant who had fled, but when he came 
here the next day he was obviously delighted to 
find that we were stationed here, and not soldiers, 
for he knew that nothing of his would be touched or 
spoiled. 

December 31, Sianfu. — On the 15th Tung joined 
us at Hua Chou, having completed his business at 
Sianfu. When he heard details about T'ung Kuan, 
he also was of opinion that we should have been all 
right had we remained. On the 17th the boy got 
back with the dressings and drugs, and we started 
off at once for Hua Yen Hsien, a place twelve miles 
this side of T'ung Kuan, the army having marched 
on to this place two days previously. We reached 
there about 8 p.m., and found that we were just in 
the nick of time, for there had been fighting during 
the day, and they were just bringing the wounded 
back. Tung quickly found a place where we could 

114 



Summoned to T'ung Kuan. 

see the wounded, and that evening we must have 
seen about thirty odd, our Httle hospital being soon 
filled up. We were very busy on, the five succeeding 
days, and must have seen nearly 150 wounded. On 
December 21 the Shensi troops retook T'ung Kuan, 
and then fighting ceased. We sent the next day to 
see if the drugs and other things we had left were 
still there, but found them all gone, among them 
my cabin trunk. Not only so, but they had dug 
up the floor and dug out the walls of the rooms we 
occupied to see if there was any silver there. They 
had not molested the inhabitants at all. 

On the 23rd a good number of the soldiers re- 
turned to Sianfu, and many of the patients were 
very anxious to go back also — indeed, we could not 
persuade them to stay — and as we had no chloro- 
form (having lost it at T'ung Kuan), I decided to 
take them back to Sianfu myself. Dr. Young had 
gone west to see the wounded, and Dr. Charter was 
alone, so I felt bound to return to help him. On 
the same day nearly twenty returned with me, and 
I was able to change their dressings and attend to 
them a little on the road. It snowed for two days, 
which made it rather unpleasant for those who were 
being carried back, but all arrived safely. You will 
see, therefore, that I spent my Christmas travelling 
on the road in a Chinese cart. 

I got back here on December 26, and found that 
they were expecting the relief party from Tai Yuan 
Fu with the people from Suite-chow and Yenanfu. 
They arrived on December 28th. I expect you will 
have heard all about them, as I suppose the papers 

"5 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

have given reports of their expedition. It was very 
fine of them to come in that way. They appear 
to have had very Uttle diffictilty except on one or 
two occasions, so I hope that they will get through 
to the coast in like manner. They were extremely 
anxious to take every lady down to the coast, but 
Mrs. Shorrock is remaining with Mr. Shorrock. 
Dr. and Mrs. Young and I are also remaining. All the 
rest, I expect, will go back, starting on January 3rd. 
Mr. and Mrs. Watson, Mr. and Mrs. Borst-Smith, 
and Dr. and Mrs. Charter and Miss Watt, whose 
furloughs are due, are all returning home. The rest 
will, I expect, stay at the coast. 

We have seen a large number of wounded, and 
have now about 120 in-patients here, in addition to 
those who can walk and come daily. The result is 
that we are well known throughout the army, and our 
work seems to be appreciated. I think, therefore, 
that there is no cause for anxiety about us. We are 
very busy indeed. It is almost impossible to cope 
with the work, and to do it efficiently is out of the 
question. We have got three or four extra boys in, 
but it is impossible to give the personal attention 
to each patient as we would wish. Dr. Young will 
be back from the west in a day or two, and then we 
shall remain here together. These weeks have been 
full of God's care for us. Someone remarked to .me 
the other day: " I would rather have the chariots 
of fire than all the escorts in the world." The 
" chariots of fire " have been very real during these 
last weeks, and I have been very fit the whole time. 



116 



Summoned to T'ung Kuan. 

The graphic pen of Mr. Keyte* must be called 
into requisition to give a further description of the 
march of that pitiful procession of the wounded 
transport train back to Sianfu on Christmas Eve: 
" Here a wounded man sitting in a chair slung 
between two poles; there a party of four carrying 
a door, and on it a man with a leg broken, splintered 
by a fragment of shell ; for another a litter had been 
improvised, laid on ropes stretched between two 
poles. The soft snow fell persistently all the night 
before their start, and the world lay white around 
them, save where the trampled highroad wound on 
ahead. At last the stage was reached, and they 
found a good inn, doors and windows unbumt, and 
brick beds capable of being fired. Here, then, they 
laid the wounded, and in and out went the surgeon 
(Dr. Robertson), with his one raw assistant provided 
by the Red Cross. The feeble light from a Chinese 
lantern fell on the primitive equipment — a few pots, 
an enamel washbowl or two, some dressings, and a 
few tabloids, that was all — and always the pitiful 
appeals to the surgeon for the ' stop-the-pain 
medicine.' 

" Christmas Day dawned clear, cold, still. Over 
all there brooded peace, covering even the piteous- 
ness of the grim procession with its soft promise. 
Probably, to one man only in that crowd was the 
promise articulate. The young Church of China has 
its own fresh, naive joy, but the gracious memories 
which cluster round the Christmas festival are for 
those in the homelands. To the heart of the Eng- 

* " The Passing of the Dragon," pp. 102-104. 
117 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

lishman this Christmas morn, in its beauty and still- 
ness, brought a message of glory. Someone must be 
told, someone must share the knowledge, that it is 
the birthday of the Christ-Child, and the Red Cross 
boy, to whom the cross of his badge meant so little, 
was told something of the mystery. 

" It was all very far from home, and from what 
Christmas may mean there. There were no carols, 
no joyous greetings ; but joy sang nevertheless in the 
Doctor's heart, for it is given to those who enter 
into the love of Christ to know that His Church, 
elect from every nation, is yet one o'er all the earth. 
There came memories of the Christmas at home, of 
a stately church wherein the worshippers had united 
in intercession for all who on Christmas Day were 
travellers, and for all who were lonely.* But dis- 
tance was no bar to worship. There was possible, 
even on this Chinese highroad, an abundant entrance 
into its fellowship. 

" On the next day bearers and wounded reached the 

Mission Hospital at Sianfu, and the surgeon plunged 

into the hospital, crammed and overflowing with 

wounded." 

* These two petitions are characteristic of our worship 
at Regent's Park Chapel on Christmas Day, as Dr. Robert- 
son remembered. — F. B. M. 



118 



CHAPTER IX 

BACK AGAIN AT SIANFU 

It is necessary at this point to insert an explanatory 
note, the facts of which have been collated from the 
thrilling account of the Relief Expedition by the 
Rev. Ernest F. Borst-Smith, entitled, " Caught in 
the Chinese Revolution." 

After it was known at Peking that not only the 
whole of the Manchu population in Sianfu had been 
practically exterminated, but that eight foreigners 
had been massacred, the Rev. J. C. Keyte, M.A., 
who had just returned from furlough in England, 
decided that at all costs, accompanied or alone, he 
would help those in the interior, whose lives were 
imperilled, to escape to the coast. The story of the 
Relief Expedition has been already fully told, and 
it is not necessary to repeat it here. Suffice it to 
say that eight others joined him in carrying out his 
plans, and that they passed through the country, 
gathering up missionaries in lonely outposts, and 
advancing through the midst of the unsettled and 
menacing populations. Finally, they reached Sianfu, 
and the serious question arose as to who of the mis- 
sionary staff should take advantage of their presence 
and share their escort to the coast. 

Fighting was going on around the city, and several 
119 9 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

branch hospitals within the walls had been im- 
provised, as we have seen. Dr. Young and Dr. 
Robertson felt it impossible to leave. Dr. and Mrs. 
Charter, who had passed through some of the most 
anxious days of the Revolution, also decided to 
remain, but their decision was overruled by the 
consideration that a doctor might be needed to 
render assistance to members of the Relief Party 
on their dangerous journey to the coast. As their 
furlough was in any case almost due, they therefore 
consented to accompany the expedition. A large 
contingent of missionaries, accordingly, joined the 
Relief Party, and the only members of the English 
staff that were left were Mr. and Mrs. Shorrock and 
their daughter Mary, Dr. and Mrs. Young and their 
httle boy, and Dr. Robertson. 

The procession that left Sianfu on January 4 was 
a long one, being more than double the size of that 
which had entered the city on December 28th. The 
entire company numbered 150 persons, including 
Chinese, with ninety-three animals. 

These notes will explain the references in Dr. 
Robertson's diary, to which we now return : 

January 2, 1912. — You say in your letter we can 
only reach you by way of heaven, but one begins to 
find out in days like these how certain that way is. 
We have had to-day a message that Yuan-shih-kai 
is sending up ah escort for us at the request of 
some of the Ambassadors, but it we medicals can 
possibly stay I think we shall do so, as we have so 
many patients to care for. You may rest assured con- 



Back Again at Sianfu. 

ceming us, for the whole army here are our Iriends ; 
and if the Imperialist forces were to capture the 
city, we know that they are equally anxious to see 
that we are safe. We have had to get another house 
to-day for more patients, so now we have three 
houses going, with about 130 in-patients, in addition 
to those coming daily for dressings. 

January 6. — Everything seems very quiet in the 
city just now, and except that many shops are not 
open, all appears quite as usual. What the future 
has in store we cannot know. The only thing is that, 
whatever rowdyism there is, we are almost certain 
to be all right, for the robbers are our friends, as 
are their chiefs, who are most of them in the army. 
One cannot help feeling that the fact of all these 
people being under obligation to us is one more of 
God's ways of protecting and caring for us in these 
days, when things are very unstable and those in 
power may be overturned at any time. 

January 14. — ^We are very busy here. It is now 
just about 9 p.m., and this is the first time to-day 
that I have been able to sit down, although it is 
Sunday. I am looking forward to a nice quiet 
Sunday some time. I wonder when ! It will be a 
great treat some day to reach a place where one can 
attend an English service again. These days that 
are so full are very trying, and one tends to get a 
bit irritable with patients who are worrying and 
clamouring to be seen when I am busy with other 
folk. It is difficult for them to believe that they 
will all be seen by someone in the course of the day. 
This is fine surgical experience, but there are some 

J2J 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

aspects which are too terrible altogether. One ques- 
tion has been often on my mind of late: " Am I 
learning the things which God is wanting to teach me 
in all this ?" I trust so, but we have been so busy, 
so full of work, and I have had so much change, so 
many journeys, that there has not been the time 
for quiet that one could have wished; yet in the 
midst of everything there is the comfort of prayer. 
It is good to prove the reality of these things at 
such a time as this. 

January 21. — We get a bit tired at times, but 
otherwise are very well, and I am very glad that 
we have remained up here. I do hope we may get 
news of peace before long. If we get many more 
wounded, I do not know what we shall do with 
them. Another place has been opened for us on 
the other side of the road to-day, and I expect we 
shall get another fifty or sixty wounded from the 
west this week, as there has been more fighting, and 
it is likely that there will be still more. Anyway, I 
hope it is going to stop before the weather gets 
warmer, or else I fear we shall see something worse 
than war here. May anything in the nature of 
an epidemic be averted ! 

January 21. — ^The latest news is by wire from 
Hankow, and the peace prospects are hopeful. We 
are still as busy as we can be; indeed, there is more 
work than two men can adequately attend to, and 
it is the more trying, as patients cannot be looked 
after as they should be. The ordinary hospital ad- 
ministration is so difficult to work under present 
conditions. A hundred and one details, that would 

122 



Back Again at Sianfu. 

be easy enough at home, out here are next to im- 
possible. The only thing is to compare it, not with 
what might be, but with what might have been. 
Numbers of patients have said to us : " If you had 
not been here, it would have been all up with us." 
The soldiers of some of the regiments tell us that 
their whole regiment will escort us home to England 
when we go ! So there is real appreciation, though 
I guess some think that we are getting plenty of 
silver out of the job. It would have been absolutely 
impossible to leave, unless one were as heartless 
as some of the Chinese, and I could never have con- 
sented to leaving here at this juncture with a clear 
conscience. The soldiers seem very willing to listen 
to the Gospel just now. When I was going round 
late one night, and most of the patients were asleep, 
I found one man with three or four others round 
him. He was the only one who could read, and he 
was reading the Gospel to the others. I have also 
noticed several Gospels open, as if they had recently 
been read. Another evening, in one of the rooms, 
a man asked me if I would send a teacher to explain 
a text that had been given to him on a little card. 
None in that room could read, and they wanted 
someone who would explain to them the Gospel. 
There has been much that has been disappointing, 
but I have been astounded at some of the results. 

January 27. — We have had a lot more wounded 
in from the west, and have had to open another 
place for them, so now we have nearly 350 on our 
hands. It is absurd, when one thinks of it. Middle- 
sex Hospital with two doctors ! We have ceased 

123 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu, 

seeing ordinary out-patients now, because the 
wounded are too many. Sundays are now just like 
other days, and I am afraid that the numbers are 
not likely to diminish just yet. 

February 3. — The Red Cross people are working 
well with us. They are running two of our extra 
hospitals, while the Foreign Office are running the 
other two. The head of the Red Cross — an awfully 
nice fellow — was in here the other day . I was operat- 
ing at the time, and at the end of the operation hesaid : 
" Are you not cold without your fur gown on ?" I 
explained the impossibility of working in a fur 
gown, and he has sent along to Dr. Young and me 
a beautiful little fur-lined jacket with short sleeves, 
specially for working in the wards and operating- 
room. 

February 18. — Chinese New Year's Day, and 
Sunday, too. I have the prospect of a real Sunday, 
the first for many weeks, which I mean to enjoy to 
the full. Despite of fears of strife within the city, 
and threatened dangers without, we have arrived at 
New Year's Day in peace, for which we are pro- 
foundly thankful. A week ago the Red Cross folk 
gave a feast, to which several of the Generals were 
invited and all the foreigners. I could not go 
myself, but I heard there were some speeches. Mr. 
Shorrock preached a sermon, and the head of the 
Red Cross said that if men were to work in the Red 
Cross they must do it for love, and must look upon 
the wounds of the wounded as their own wounds, 
and treat them thus. This is pretty advanced for 
a Chinaman ! 

124 



Back Again at Sianfu. 

February 25. — As the other day I returned through 
the West Gate to the city I was a httle amused when 
the soldiers — about twenty of them — rose and stood 
at attention. I wondered who I was to receive such 
a mark of respect ! 

March 2. — You will be glad to know that there 
has been a much better spirit among the assistants 
here lately. They have been more sympathetic in 
their attitude, and have started a prayer meeting 
once a week on their own initiative. I hope that 
this spirit will be maintained. 

March 10. — It has been good to know in these 
busy days, when we have had but little time to spend 
in private prayer and communion, that you at home 
have been bearing us up. That knowledge is a real 
help, and I sometimes think that it is perhaps for 
the sake of us here that the danger and difficulty, 
which at times have been so near, have been averted. 

March 15. — A few days ago another small town 
was taken by the Mohammedans. It had been 
occupied the day before by about 1,000 Shensi 
troops. The next day the Mohammedans sur- 
rotmded and entered it, slaughtering practically the 
whole force. Poor Shensi ! What a severe atone- 
ment they have had to make for the slaughter of 
the Manchus ! How many scores of families have 
lost one or more members ! Thank God, it is now 
practically over ! 

I have been out this afternoon to the Shorrocks — 
the first time for a month. We feel extremely glad 
to think that we remained here. It has been so 
manifestly God's purpose for us. Let me teU you 

125 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

one thing. After the party left for the coast in 
January, letters were sent to us which, if they had 
reached us in time, would probably have compelled 
us to leave the city; but they did not reach us, 
though others did. Was not that wonderful ? I 
have seen so much more of God's guidance and 
control of events in the last six months, sufficient 
to dispel any doubts as xo His hand being in our 
lives; and if so, it must be in the affairs of nations. 
Otherwise, one's faith must break down. It is 
difficult to see why all this slaughter was permitted, 
but it must be part of the working out of a purpose. 

March 20. — What a delight a real spring morning 
is ! It is one of God's good and perfect gifts. The 
only way is to lean hard on Him. But what a 
perverse spirit one sometimes seems to have — 
knowing well the way one ought to go, but seeming 
to be so far from it. One thing is certain — this 
leaning and an increasing knowledge of Him cannot 
be sudden and quick. It has to be a growth, but 
we ought not to grow too slowly, ought we ? The 
Shorrocks are with us now, as there is danger of 
the soldiers looting the East Suburb. W^e can only 
hope that all will be settled before long, but there 
are some aspects which are serious. We cannot but 
think, however, that there is some way of deliver- 
ance, as so many times has been the case during 
the last few months. And we know that the hosts 
of the Lord are encamped about us. What a sense 
of stability there is in that ! 

April 4. — I have had my work considerably in- 
creased, as Dr. Young is ill with appendicitis. He 

126 



Back Again at Sianfu. 

is a little better to-day, and I am hoping very much 
that he wiU get well enough to go to the coast, 
where conditions are more favourable. You can 
well understand that this is the source of no Uttle 
anxiety, but one finds out in these days the truth 
of, " As thy days, so shall thy strength be." Be- 
sides, our sta5dng here with all this work has been 
so markedly overruled, in almost every detail, that 
I believe this wiU be clear and plain too. This 
thought helps one to keep less disturbed, though 
one's anxiety about Young is not lessened. It seems 
strange to us that this should have happened, but 
it must have a place in the plan. The drugs, which 
we have been wanting so much, have arrived to-day, 
at a time when we had run through our own stock 
of chloroform, having only one bottle left. So you 
see it has come just in time. As Mrs. Young re- 
marked: " It looks as if someone has been managing 
this affair who knew how to time things." 

April 21. — How strange are God's leadings ! 
How little we calculated on this illness of Dr. Young ; 
but it must be in the plan. I am glad to say that he 
is better, but exactly what our future course will 
be we have not quite decided. . . . 

April 23. — Young had a relapse yesterday morn- 
ing, and I felt that the only thing to do was to 
operate on him right away. I did so in the after- 
noon, and, judging from the conditions, it was well 
that I did so. Mrs. Yoimg was present, one of 
our assistants giving the anaesthetic, and another 
helping me. Mrs. Young was a brick ! There are 
few women who could have done what she did. 

127 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu, 

It was a tremendous strain, but I was wonderfully 
helped. God is able to do exceedingly above all 
that we think. One finds this out more and more. 
I almost forgot that it was Dr. Young. It is 
now twenty-four hours after the operation, and he is 
going on as well as one could wish. I have every 
hope that he will get better. If all goes well, and 
he makes a good convalescence, we all hope to get 
away for a holiday. 

April 25. — Young is improving, but I am still a 
little anxious. 

April 28. — The last three days there have been 
special meetings — the Half- Yearly Church Confer- 
ence. Before these meetings there is always a special 
subscription-list for the upkeep of the church. The 
soldiers in our hospitals have contributed, though 
their pay has been by no means liberal, £2 5s. ! 
I am glad to say that I feel really better than before 
Dr. Young's operation, having been stimtilated by 
the pleasiure and relief of his good progress. Truly 
we have experienced the mercy and loving-kindness 
of the Lord ! 

May 19. — We have been able to get some of the 
wards at the military hospitals into much more 
hospital order. When the patients first came in, in 
January, we had to do the best we could; most of 
them sleeping on straw on the floor, covered by 
mats. As soon as they could be procured, trestle 
beds and straw palliasses were prepared; but in 
the winter, Chinese do not like to be in separated 
beds, with each man in a bed. It is not warm 
enough, so they had all the beds together, resulting 

128 



Back Again at Slanfu. 

in considerable overcrowding. But there was no 
help for it, and we had to give in. But now that the 
warm weather has come, and many of the patients 
have gone, we have had all the rooms, previously 
separated by partitions, thrown into one, and each 
man has a bed. They have shown themselves much 
more willing to acquiesce in what we recommend 
than formerly, and in one place I have between 
twenty and thirty men sleeping outside — a great 
accomplishment ! Another thing in which we have 
found a great difference is in taking of milk. Usually 
Chinese patients are very unwilling to take milk; 
but the last three or four months they have not 
only been willing but anxious to do so, believing 
that there is some special virtue in it. It is very 
leasping, too, to see how attentively they listen to 
the Evangelists. Our two Evangelists are very keen, 
and I frequently come upon one or other of them in 
the wards, with a few men listening and sometimes 
asking questions. I have seen also some of our 
own staff talking to patients or explaining a Bible 
passage, or helping them to read. A little cripple 
boy with a happy face I have several times seen 
occupied in this way. Daily prayers, too, are a 
more living act than they used to be. I have 
been specially pleased also in the change which 
has taken place in our senior assistant. He told 
me some time ago that he had given up taking 
prayers, because he felt his bad temper and 
taking prayers did not go together. I told him 
that he had given up the wrong thing, and in 
the last three months there has been a marked 

129 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu, 

change, which has had a beneficial effect on all the 
others. 

June I. — We have been trying to arrange for the 
establishment of an Institute for permanently dis- 
abled soldiers. The General, of whom I have 
written previously, Chang Yiin Shan, when he heard 
about it, and understood the idea, wept because it 
was a foreigner who had thought about it for his 
soldiers, and not he himself. To think that his love 
for his soldiers was so small that he had not thought 
about it ! No wonder that his soldiers love him, 
and will do anything for him. He is a remarkable 
man, of very strong emotions, and has given about 
£140 to us to be spent at our direction for this 
purpose. We shall not have the control of this 
establishment, but he gave the money to us 
because he knew that it would not be wasted. 

June 9. — The city authorities have said that they 
want to pay our travelling expenses down to the 
railway, so that looks as though they have really 
appreciated our staying up here. 

June 17. — We have had to go to three feasts, 
which take up half a day. One was at the invita- 
tion of the Red Cross Society, one at the invitation 
of one of the Generals, Chang Yiin Shan, and the 
other at the invitation of the War Of&ce. Some 
time ago we suggested that they should have a 
sort of Chelsea Hospital for the disabled, and they 
have taken up the idea very readily. The place has 
just been started. They call it, " Pity the Wounded 
Hospital," and the feast to-day took place at the 
new Institute. The head men of the different 

130 



Back Again at Sianfu. 

offices were present, including the head of the 
province and the General spoken of above. These 
two were originally the heads of the Young China 
Party and the Elder Brethren Society, and have 
not been on good terms, so it was very interesting 
to see them together. 

June 23. — Most of the head men of the new 
r6gime are anxious for me to remain in the city for a 
while longer, so I felt that the decision to do so, which 
we had come to on the previous night, was the right 
one. This week we have received two more scrolls 
and tablets. The Church have given us each 
scrolls describing our virtues, and the General has 
given us each a tablet and two scrolls. These are a 
personal affair. 

June 29. — A further presentation was made to-day 
of a tablet extolling our virtues, and of an umbrella. 
The umbrella is a large silk one, with the names 
of subscribers in gold on it, among which are the 
names of the General of one of the two divisions — 
the man who held Chi'en Chou against the Moham- 
medans for three months — and of the Commander 
of his bodyguard. There are also the names of nearly 
300 wounded who have been treated by us. For the 
fact that they are given by the men themselves, 
these things are specially valuable. Most of the 
soldiers are members of the renowned Elder Brethren 
Secret Society, and among them are some of the 
leaders here. This is rather remarkable, for this society 
was formerly always feared as being anti-foreign. 

(The Shorrocks and Youngs have left. What a 
send-off they had !) 

131 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

July 12. — It is astonishing how many things have 
happened to prevent nay going away. However, it 
must be all in the plan, so it's all right. 

July 19. — I am now on the road to Honanfu. 
Quite a number of the soldiers came to see me off, 
which I appreciated very much. It was very nice 
of them; an action like that on their part was 
specially pleasing, as there was no obligation. I do 
hope that these few weeks away will make me more 
fit in every way for next year's work. Despite aU 
God's wonderful dealings with us during these few 
months, I feel somehow that I have made so little 
progress. How one does long for more practical 
holiness ! Perhaps one makes the mistake of look- 
ing for some wonderful revelation of divine power 
instead of bringing our wills to bear on the matter, 
for I believe that faith and holiness are much more 
a question of the will than of the emotions. 

During those months of special stress this year I 
sometimes had to run right away to my room for 
a while, and it helped me when I looked up those 
passages which speak about the people thronging 
our Lord. There was no gate-keeper and no 
organization in those days to make people see Him 
in order, no one to keep them from all clamouring 
at once to be seen by Him. I think that I have 
learned this year to know a little of what His patience 
meant under those circumstances, for He was 
tempted in all points like as we are; but when one 
thinks calmly about these people, their needs, 
difficulties, and sorrows, and when one thinks that 
He is ever by our side, we ought to be patient with 

J33 




THE EAST GATE OF SIANFU. 




CECIL ROBERTSON RECEIVING GIFT OF TABLET AND 
UMBRELLA. (^Seej). 131.) 



Back Again at Sianfu. 

them. One has to become truly humble in mind 
to be able to enter into other folk's difficulties and 
to be truly S3mipathetic. It is so easy to appear 
unselfish and humble to other people when all the 
time one is proud of being thought so. How subtle 
temptation is ! Instead of seeking for all these 
special virtues in oneself, one ought to meditate 
more on the Lord Jesus Christ, on those virtues 
as they are in Him, and, above all, on His love. 
Then these things would come into our lives un- 
consciously, and that is how they ought to come. 
It seems as though one knows so much of the theory 
of it all, as to how it ought to be done, but far too 
little about the reality and practice of it. When 
one gets out here, I think one begins to see the in- 
fluences of one's past life in their true perspective, 
and one owes to home much the larger proportion 
of whatever good one is able to do; and I have 
learned that love and sympathy count for more than 
learning and skill, and indeed anything else. 
***** 
In a subsequent letter Dr. Robertson gave the 
following general epitome of his well-earned holiday: 

I left here in the middle of July, usually the 
hottest time of the year for travelling, and deter- 
mined to take the car-de-luxe (which is the sedan- 
chair) in the road journey to Honanfu. My bearers 
were Szechuenese, all of them opium-smokers. It 
is a marvel to me what physical endurance these 
opium-smoking chair-bearers have. They can go 
for thirty miles a day, and come in at the end almost 

133 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

with a sprint, and appear quite fresh. But non- 
opium-smokers can do a great deal more: they can 
go for another ten miles a day, if it is not kept up 
too long. An escort appointed by the Foreign 
Office accompanied me, and we reached Honanfu 
without incident worthy of note. It was interesting 
to go over the road which was the scene of conflict 
last winter between the Imperialists and the Shensi 
Revolutionaries. A night at Honanfu, and the 
next day we boarded the train for Cheng-Chou, 
the junction for Hankow. The first hour or two 
in a train, after two or three years in the interior, 
is a novel experience. At first one feels very much 
like the country cousin who is paying his first visit 
to London, but the experience very soon ceases to be 
novel, and becomes normal once more. Fortunately, 
we did not have to wait long for a steamer to take 
us down the Yang-tse-Kiang to Kiu-Kiang. What 
a delight that river journey was! such a refreshing 
change after the Shensi plains and the Honan gorges ! 
On arrival we lost no time in getting to the river's 
bank and fixing up coolies and chairs to take us up 
the Kuling Mountain. 

Two hours across a blazing hot plain, covered by 
the green rice gently waving in the breeze; another 
three hours to the top of the hill — and what a climb 
it is ! Feelings of pity make the passenger dis- 
mount and start climbing himself; but he soon 
finds out his weakness, and again gets into his chair. 
But these men with their magnificent physique go 
on without fatigue, taking the inclines steadily, and 
running down the declines at a rate that makes one 

134 



Back Again at Sianfu. 

shudder. What a surprise Ruling itself is ! Perched 
up on the top of a hill, and stretching along Uttle 
dips among the peaks, it is well laid out with 
foreign-built bungalows, in such a way that almost 
all have a wide view out beyond the peaks them- 
selves, across the Yang-tse Valley. The air is 
delicious, but to a resident from the interior of 
China it was a delight to get into a foreign com- 
munity once more, to see little children and old 
people, and to have all the delights of social inter- 
course with those of kindred spirit. How stirring, 
too, to stroll along the central avenue on a Sunday 
evening, with the clear, star-lit sky overhead, and 
first on one side and then on the other to hear the 
sound of hjnnn-singing break out on the stillness, 
or to hear some sacred song which reminded one of 
happy Sunday evenings long since in the old home ! 
A fortnight here soon sped away, and once more 
we got down to the hot plain. 

After spending two or three hours at Kiu-Kiang, 
we again embarked, and in twenty-four hours 
reached Nanking. There was only half a day to 
give to it, but one got something of an impression 
of this large city, with its macadamized roads, its 
twenty-mile wall, its foreign shops, and the buildings 
which are springing up everywhere now. At midnight 
we boarded the train, and were in Shanghai early 
the next morning. After a few days there, mostly 
spent in shopping, I started for Japan. But a fort- 
night in that beautiful country was only long enough 
to make one wish to visit it again. Probably one 
is hardly justified in giving an impression of the 

135 10 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

people after so short a visit, but I could not help 
feeling glad that I am fixed in China rather than 
Japan. There seemed to me something less stable 
and lasting about the Japanese character; but they 
are extremely courteous and anxious to help a 
stranger. 

On my return to China I visited first Tientsin and 
then Peking. There it is not so much the place that 
inspires one as the memory of some of the important 
and stirring events that have occurred in this the 
centre of the Court and of the political intrigues 
of the Chinese Empire. Here, too, one could 
meditate at the Temple of Heaven on those yearly 
ceremonies in which many Emperors have taken 
part. But to the medical missionary ^i the most 
interesting thing is the Union Medical College, where 
an attempt is being made to give the hundred 
students a course as far as possible like ours at home. 

Leaving Peking, twenty hours' journey brought me 
back to the junction of Cheng-Chou, and the rest 
of my journey was just the reverse of my journey 
down. It was good to get away to entirely fresh 
scenes, but it is good to be back again. We have 
regained a more or less normal condition, and are 
now looking forward to Dr. Jenkins's return. 



136 



CHAPTER X 

THE LAST LEAVES OF HIS DIARY 
(October 6, 1912, to March 16, 1913) 

October 6, 1912. — Back once again in Sianfu. It 
is good to be back again. We had a warm welcome 
from Keyte. Bell came over in the evening, and 
we had a day's conference on Thursday. As you 
may imagine, there are many things to do to get 
into ship-shape again. Nearly all our patients have 
been moved to the Red Cross Hospital, where they 
have been looked after by the Chinese doctor from 
the Medical College, Peking. There are only eighteen 
here just now, and that gives me the opportunity 
of getting things fixed up before getting into full 
swing again. There are many new difficulties and 
problems awaiting solution, and we need much 
wisdom in knowing how to direct things aright. 
One feels how small, how feeble, we ourselves are 
in face of these things. There is the Red Cross 
Hospital and the home for the disabled, in which 
though not run by us, we to some extent at least 
have a part. They come to us for advice, and ex- 
press a desire that we should co-operate, which 
indeed we are glad to do. But it is not now a 
question of association for a few months, but of 
getting a basis which shall be of a permanent char- 

137 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

acter between them and us. We hope to make an 
arrangement satisfactory to both sides, as there is 
a great opportunity for the Gospel in both these 
places, and at the Red Cross Hospital there is quite 
a nice little hall where services are conducted every 
Sunday. In addition to this there is all the Church 
work, the evangelistic work, and the clerical work 
associated with the mission and the hospital. Just 
Keyte and I until the end of the year, when Jenkins 
will be back, and we hope others. Doesn't it seem 
terrible to think that now is the time of opportunity, 
such an one as we may never have again, and only 
two or three young men to attack it ? But " one 
with God is a majority." 

October 21. — It is so easy to get keen and find, if 
you look into your motives, that the keenness is 
rather for the success of your own little project than 
for the main object of the glorifying of Christ. 

October 27. — Services are being held at the home 
for disabled soldiers every night. I went to one 
this week. It was fine to have that audience of sixty 
or seventy listening intently without any disorder 
or restlessness. That home is a good piece of work, 
and though we talked about it at first, the credit is 
entirely due to the men who carried it through, 
especially Mr. Shih, who is now at the head of it. 

November 17. — Some day we shall get a true pro- 
portion in our estimation of what people accom- 
plish. " They also serve who only stand and wait." 
Maybe their service is more effectual. 

December 2. — It will be almost Christmas by the 
time this reaches you. It will be a different one for 

138 



The Last Leaves of His Diary. 

all of us — more peaceful and free from anxiety. 
This will be my fourth away from home. There 
have been quite a number of opium-smokers at the 
Chelsea Hospital, and arrangements have been made 
to help them to give up this fatal habit. A special 
courtyard has been allotted to them, into which they 
are locked. Not a few took opium to deaden the 
pains of their wounds, while others have taken it for 
years. We first went round collecting the pipes, etc. 
After this no man who smokes will be allowed in 
the place. May the new year bring to us all more of 
that peace and tranquillity of mind which comes to 
those stayed upon Jehovah. It may bring various 
changes, and whatever it brings of opportunity may 
we be ready for it. 

December 22. — Dr. Jenkins and Dr. Creasey Smith 
have arrived here this week, and it was good to see 
them. They are living at the hospital with Keyte 
and me, and we are quite a happy little party. 

December 30. — Christmas Day we spent quite 
quietly. It was bitterly cold, and in the evening it 
snowed. We had a service here in the hospital in 
the morning, after which I saw the women out- 
patients. The two post-office men came here to 
dinner; then we all went out to the East Suburb 
to tea with the Donald Smiths, and to an English 
service. I am afraid that the friends from China 
have been sa3dng a great deal too much about what 
I have done here, and, after all, what a little it is 
when we think of all the great love of our Lord ! 
I think sometimes that we must so injure His love. 
We do things ostensibly for Him, but there is so 

139 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

much that must wound Hun in it. We were think- 
ing of Malachi together to-day, and I was looking 
up some of Dr. Campbell Morgan's notes. It speaks 
there of the sensitiveness of God's love, and how, 
though they had got the form of the old services 
going on in the Temple, there was so much that 
wearied God and disappointed Him. We think so 
much of coming up to the expectation of friends 
and other people, but to come up to God's ex- 
pectation — not to disappoint Him — that is success. 
And much can come through prayer. One recalls 
the times when we and others got to the impasses 
of life, when there seemed no way, either physically 
or spiritually, when everything seemed black dark- 
ness. At these times He has not been a disappoint- 
ment to us, and now in the daily task we ought not 
to disappoint Him. 

Two of our hospital boys are being baptized. 

January 5, 1913. — You would be pleased to see 
how my boy looks after me. He is about thirty, 
but seems younger, and he is such a real Christian. 
I think I have seen few Chinese who have so mani- 
festly the Christian spirit. I have taken the service 
at the hospital this morning. It always seems such 
a responsibility to take one of the larger services, 
but I sometimes think that we ought to regard a 
conversation with a single individual as a much 
more responsible work, for the opportunity of im- 
pressing him is proportionately greater. 

January 13. — It is difficult to say what are the 
necessary qualifications for people who come out 
here. God uses such manifold varieties of people. 

140 



The Last Leaves of His Diary. 

But of one thing I am confident — no mere pity for 
the degraded state of the Chinese will stand. The 
only thing that can possibly keep one keen is a 
knowledge of the love of Christ and a love for Him. 
Directly one's love wanes one's pity wanes, too ; and 
instead of pitying, one gets annoyed with the things 
which are constantly present to irritate. The only 
thing that can get over that is a greater love, or, 
rather, love for a greater Person. That is the only 
thing that will stand. There is a tower of strength 
in the Bible, for those who constantly study and live 
in it. It is that strength that one needs out here. 

As to our future plans, it is suggested that a man 
should go from here, as soon as the students from 
Hankow come back, to take up the medical work 
at Suite-chow. Of course, the man to go must be 
myself, because Jenkins has built up the work here. 
Before I knew anything of the resolutions of the 
Committee, I had been thinking about the future of 
the medical work in this province, and the desir- 
ability of staffing the station in the north with a 
medical, and it had occurred to me that it would 
be the best thing for me to go there. I have there- 
fore volunteered at the Conference here to go, and 
I expect, if arrangements are made for the proper 
stafiing of this station, that I shall go up there; but 
it could not be till the beginning of 1914. Of course, 
all appointments are liable to change out here, as 
one never knows what may happen; but I think 
that I should enjoy the work in an absolutely new 
place. Not that I am anxious to leave here. After 
all the clear guidance of last year, we ought not to 

141 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

doubt that the same will be given to us this year, 
and, indeed, always. 

January 19. — Six of the men at the Chelsea are 
very keen on learning to read, and now they each 
have a Bible of their own, and were very anxious to 
attend some recent meetings that we held. One of 
our hospital boys also has recently been baptized. 
He was with Dr. Young at Chi'en Chou, and when 
asked why he had changed his attitude to Chris- 
tianity, replied: " It was when I saw Dr. Young 
spend himself for the Chinese soldiers here and 
working so hard. It made my heart receive a 
' moving,' and it inspired me." This is a tribute 
to Young, who is truly a saint. God has given us 
good things, hasn't He ? Not the least of them is 
the love of one's dear ones at home, and of friends. 
I feel that I have had this in abundance. There 
has been so little of sorrow, so little of discipline by 
personal trial for me. I am staying in a beautiful 
Christian home. It does not need possessions to 
make a home, but just love ; and they have real love 
here in abundance, and it is not superficial. 

January 24. — My little stay away has done me 
much good. The Lord seemed so near in that 
home, and I could not help feeling that if friends 
can have such an uplifting influence, how much 
more would the constant companionship of our 
Saviour. I seem to have been brought nearer to 
Him. It is a long time since I have felt so con- 
scious of having received spiritual blessing, and one, 
too, which leads me so directly nearer to our Master. 

I feel so grateful to Him for using this to bring me 

142 



The Last Leaves of His Diary. 

nearer to Him. This makes me feel so happy. The 
Lord Himself seemed so present, and it is for this that 
I rejoice. I do long to walk with Him, and do my 
utmost for Him. The Opium Refuge at the Pen- 
sioners' Hospital is over now, but if twenty out of 
the forty are really rid of it, that is good. 

February 2. — There is much here now to give us 
cause for anxiety — at least, not anxiety, but we are 
made to feel how much we need to be guided by 
God. There is a movement among the older Church 
members to have an Independent Church. I sup- 
pose that every missionary hopes to see this some 
day, but wants at the same time to feel that it is 
led of God. We shall have to be ready to take a 
second place, and instead of being leaders, perhaps 
be servants. 

February 25. — The thought of the Lord's nearness 
has been very precious to me of late, but how it 
reveals one's own failures and shortcomings ! May 
we know the blessed Lord's presence in every time 
and every circumstance ! May He be to us the 
altogether lovely One ! I think sometimes, if we 
only knew Him as He is to be known, in that inti- 
mate way that John knew Him, and others of the 
saints have known Him, we should never want to 
leave Him nor take our eyes from Him. We should 
never want to do anything that would hurt Him at 
all. May He be all this and more, for I cannot 
speak of Him in suitable language. 



143 



CHAPTER XI 

THE TRIUMPHANT END 

After Dr. Robertson's return from the coast in 
September, 1912, as we have gathered from his 
diary, he set about the readjustment and improve- 
ment of the hospital organization and administra- 
tion, which during the revolutionary days had been 
largely in abeyance. With Dr. Jenkins he instituted 
a new nursing department, and the two looked for- 
ward to a rapid development of the work in the 
immediate future. 

He was equally keen on the evangelistic side of 
the work, and was always faithful in attending the 
devotional exercises with the patients and helpers, 
taking a considerable share in the leading of worship 
and in Biblical exposition. He used to take a 
regular share in the religious services of the Chinese 
Red Cross Hospital, and at the Chelsea Hospital, 
which, as we have seen, owed its institution to his 
own suggestion. It was his custom to visit there 
on two evenings a week, taking the evening service, 
and entering into personal intercourse with the 
inmates. On finding that several of the men were 
taking opium, he started a vigorous opium-cure 
work to enable them to break off the pernicious 
habit. This effort was crowned with good results. 

144 



The Triumphant End. 

He was specially happy in his relations with the 
Chinese authorities. From the first he had hit on 
the right way of dealing with them. Too shrewd 
to be easily deceived, he never became cynical; 
whilst he was too generous and manly to bear 
grudges against those who would have imposed on 
him. His sunny and happy disposition made him 
the friend of all, and it is probable that in three 
brief years he secured a position of influence over 
the ruling classes which in other cases could only 
be gained by years of laborious effort. He had also 
many friends among the Swedish missionaries, the 
Catholic Fathers, and other missionary families; 
but he was careful to let none of these social atten- 
tions detract from his Chinese duties. He con- 
tinued as keen as ever on language-study, and tried 
to make time for it, that he might become freer in 
his preaching. For his devotional life he pursued 
the habit of early rising, as providing the only 
opportunity for uninterrupted Bible-study and 
prayer. It was characteristic also that he arranged 
for the morning service of the missionary circle to 
include " some grind as well as devotion," and the 
brethren undertook the systematic study of Dr. 
Adam Smith's " Minor Prophets." 

Mr. Keyte, who was his companion at this time, 
writes : " It was a delightful life which we lived 
together. He was never tired of expatiating on the 
way in which he had been taught to see the work- 
ing of God's plan and care in the occurrences of 
1911-12. He was of the opinion that the story of 
what had happened ought not to be lost. He had 

145 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

evidently been greatly developed in certain aspects 
of the Christian life by what he and others had ex- 
perienced of the grace of God and communion with 
Him in times of distress. ' All thy children shall 
be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace 
of thy children," would, I think, best express the 
sequence." 

So life went quietly and happily forward through 
those quiet months, only there was an evident 
ripening and maturing of character which was 
anticipative of the great vision of the Christ which 
was so suddenly and gloriously to break on him. 

On February i6 he writes to his mother: " On 
Tuesday we got a message from a man who is 
travelling down from Kansu with his family, saying 
that his little boy of two years old was ill with 
smallpox. He wanted us to send up some quicker 
method of bringing him down, and fearing lest his 
child might be bad, I went up myself with a chair, 
riding on my horse, and taking with me a man, who 
rode another horse lent by Mr. Ross, the post- 
master. The letter was dated from a place four 
days' journey away — Pin-chou, in the west. Some- 
how I missed them on the road, and could hear 
nothing of their having passed through various 
places where I made inquiries. I pushed on till I 
reached, in two days, the place from which they 
had sent the letter, but found that they had left 
three or four days before. It was rather trying, 
but the only thing I could do was to come back 
again. I reached home this morning. It was a 
fairly hard ride, but it has shown me that I am far 

146 



The Triumphant End. 

fitter than I thought I was, for I had to take long 
stages, and to do a good deal of walking to save 
the horse." 

In a letter received from Mr. Ross, narrating the 
same incident, there are one or two very character- 
istic touches, which reveal Dr. Robertson's method 
and habit so graphically, that it is well worthy of 
insertion: " You have heard of Dr. Robertson's 
memorable ride to Pin-chou, at the urgent request 
of some Kansu missionaries, to save the life of their 
little baby-boy. He received their note late in the 
afternoon, and came to my office about 4 p.m. We 
walked to my house together, and he stayed for tea. 
I sent my chair with him, and lent him a horse for 
his servant. The cook also placed some cold meat 
and cakes in the chair for him. I don't think that 
he had brought anything with him for his journey. 
We rode together to the West Gate of the city, and 
how well I remember that we dismounted there to 
say good-bye. We lingered together for a minute 
or two without speaking, and then hurriedly said 
good-bye. It was then about dark, and he started 
off alone to ride all night on that dark and lonely 
road. I returned home, but my thoughts were of 
him. A few days previous to this journey we had 
taken a walk together on the city wall, and he told 
me that he thanked God for not having to go home 
after the Revolution, as he feared the praise which 
people might have bestowed on him might have 
injured him spiritually. He never referred to his 
experiences here during the trouble unless com- 
pelled to. The same afternoon he spoke of the 

H7 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

love of Christ, and said that he longed for nothing 
that the world could give him, but he wanted to 
be more conscious of the indwelling of the Spirit of 
Christ. He also spoke of the possibility of his 
removal from Sianfu, and asked me to pray about 
it. I never heard Dr. Robertson say an unkind 
word of anyone. When others criticized in his 
hearing anyone who was not present, he kept silent 
to the end, and then would remember and relate 
something good of the person who had been dis- 
cussed." 

Evidently that journey had told upon him more 
heavily than he realized, for Dr. Jenkins writes that 
on March 5 he was reluctantly compelled to take to 
his bed. His temperature stood at 104°, and he 
was obliged to give in. "I suppose that he must 
have caught some typhus infection when he went 
up to meet the Preedys. He had been back just a 
fortnight when the fever began, but he had been 
feeling very indisposed for some days before, though 
he kept at his post because I was unable to get 
about, and Dr. Hsiao was also ill with typhus." 

" On Friday, the 7th, Dr. Robertson was very de- 
pressed because he could not see the meaning of his 
illness. He had become so accustomed to seek for 
the inner teaching of God's varied providences for 
him, that he was disturbed by his inability to read 
the Father's purpose. But after a day or two he 
came out into the clear sunlight, and was able to 
realize the peace of God. The valley of the shadow 
was entered with all the old courage and the simple 
faith that his Father God was ordering, it all for the 

148 



The Triumphant End. 

best. His soul was wrapt about with untroubled 
serenity, and he often said that ' he was quite at 
peace about it all.' " 

" March ii. — Cecil has had a good night, and is 
comfortable this morning. We feel that all is going 
on as well as we could wish." 

" March 12. — Cecil has had a fairly good night. 
The temperature, though still high, is easily kept 
within bounds. He sends much love to you all, 
and says he has no pain and is comfortable. All is 
going on as well as we can expect." 

" March 13. — Cecil is keeping up fairly well, 
though very weak. The temperature is a little 
lower this morning." 

" March 14. — Cecil is more delirious to-day. We 
are expecting the crisis in a few days. His pulse is 
very weak." 

Mr. Keyte here takes up the story : 

" March 15. — Dr. Jenkins is gone to bed with 
typhus fever. As I write, Cecil is easier and 
cooler. He is not clear in his mind during these 
last two days, but is his own dear patient self. 
Even in delirium, if asked to drink medicine, he 
catches the idea that he is to do something to 
oblige someone, and says : ' Oh, certainly.' I hope 
to be able to-morrow night or Monday to send good 
news. Cecil says that he is quite happy about all, 
and can leave it with God." 

In his lucid moments he would ask for a verse or 
two of Scripture to be read to him. Two of the 
last of these repeated to him by his devoted friend, 
Mr. Keyte, were: "The Lord is my strength and 

149 



Cecil Robertson of Siantu. 

my song, and is become my salvation "; and, " My 
Beloved is mine, and I am His." On hearing the 
latter verse, he responded: " That is good." 

It is a very tragic picture. Two doctors too ill 
to help, and Mr. Keyte left to do his best for them 
and for Dr. Robertson, who was evidently suc- 
cumbing to the fatal malady. 

On Sunday morning, March i6, he was worse. 
His temperature had risen to 105°. He ceased to 
want to get up or in any way exert himself. About 
10 a.m. a kind of coma came on, and he continued 
to grow worse, in spite of the strychnine injections. 
It became clear that the home-call was near, and 
that never again in this world would he see the 
faces of that beloved home-circle to which his heart 
was ever turning, and who by telegram were already 
apprised of his danger. 

As soon as it became certain that the end must 
come speedily, the Chinese helpers could not be kept 
away. No thought of infection would deter them, 
and they seemed prostrated with grief. Probably 
he was hardly conscious of their presence. He grew 
weaker very rapidly, and sank into sleep — the sleep 
in Jesus — a little past noon. Thus, surrounded by 
an atmosphere of sorrowing affection, his gentle, 
noble, and radiant spirit passed into the presence 
of our Lord. 

As the news spread through the city it was 
received with the prof oundest emotion. The soldiers 
of the Chelsea Home were specially desolate. The 
beloved body was wrapped in white silk, which was 
woven there, though not by them. Mr. Shih asked 

150 



The Triumphant End. 

to be aJlowed, as representing the rest, to provide a 
white silk covering for the whole of the outer coffin. 
At the special request of the city authorities the 
funeral was delayed for a day, that the various 
departments of the provincial administration might 
be represented; and though to one of Dr. Robert- 
son's rare modesty any publicity was distasteful, it 
was felt that in this case, in view of his influence in 
the city and with the army, the request should be 
acceded to. He was their dear friend, and their 
ardent affection demanded expression. 

No flowers had bloomed at that date, but the 
soldiers and the Red Cross Brigade, the General, 
and others, sent such artificial wreaths as they could 
make or procure in the brief space of time at their 
disposal. The coffin was placed in the worship-hall 
of the hospital, that those who had loved and 
honoured Lo Tai Fu (Dr. Robertson) might pay their 
last tributes of respect and affection. 

Finally, the beloved body was borne through the 
streets of the city under a catafalque provided by 
General Chang Yiin Shan, the former leader of the 
Ko Lao Hui. It had been decided that the inter- 
ment should take place in the garden of the Mission 
Church in the East Suburb. The funeral proces- 
sion was headed by the cavalry guard and band of 
the Governor of the Province — the Tutu Chang 
Feng Hui. Two white banners, borne by soldiers, 
proclaimed in golden characters to the crowds that 
lined the streets the fame and virtues of him whose 
mortal remains were being borne to their last rest- 
ing-place, On the one the inscription was : " He 

J51 " 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

created happiness throughout the Province of 
Shensi"; and on the other: "By his grace men 
were restored to life." Behind the coffin stretched 
a procession a third of a mile in length. 

"And so," writes Mr. Keyte, " we came to the 
East Gate of the city. It was through this gateway 
he had ridden that Sabbath morning, October 22, 
1911, when the Revolution started. It was over 
the wall here, when these same gates were fast shut, 
that he had been drawn into the city to do his heal- 
ing work. Through it how often he had clattered, 
the hoofs of his horse ringing on the great stones, 
on errands of love and mercy ! And now we fol- 
lowed him, and realized that never again would that 
gallant, gracious figure ride through the old gate- 
way, and that this was his last earthly escort. He 
had loved the old suffering city and its people, he 
had given himself unstintedly for them in the 
service of his Lord and Saviour, and now he had 
gone before. With him it was well — well, indeed — 
but for us who were left there remained an aching 
sense of loss and a deep sorrow. And still the 
band sounded in front, the banners gleamed, and we 
came out of the cool, dark arch of the gate into the 
clear sunlight of the long suburb street, and so for 
a mile to the church." 

The Governor of the Province had been delayed, 
but rode up in full military dress before the memorial 
service had commenced. He sat through the service 
on the platform with Mr. Donald Smith and Mr. 
Keyte, the two missionaries who led the service, 
and himself addressed the crowded congregation, in 

152 



The Triumphant End. 

which the Church, the civic and military authorities, 
and the common soldiers were represented. Of Dr. 
Robertson's life in and service for Shensi the 
Governor spoke with genuine feeling, and agreed 
with the previous speakers that the dynamic for 
both had been supplied by the Christian doctrine, 
which he commended to the congregation for their 
consideration. He explained that he knew but 
little of that doctrine, but he could understand 
such a life as had now closed; and he acknowledged 
that, since Dr. Robertson and all his colleagues 
attributed the good they had wrought to the in- 
spiration of Christ, then the Christian faith was a 
factor that could not be ignored. It was con- 
sidered to be a remarkable tribute of respect that 
this high official should express himself in this 
manner, the more so as it was supposed that he was 
not sympathetic towards religion. But his be- 
haviour throughout was excellent. The whole of 
this moving and impressive spectacle afforded an 
opportunity of reaching hundreds of persons, espe- 
cially of the high ofificial class, who seldom come 
within hearing of Christian teaching, and it was 
taken full advantage of. 

When the service in the chapel was concluded 
the congregation streamed into the yard, where a 
touching incident took place, which is thus narrated 
by Mr. Ross: "The coffin was in the churchyard, 
surrounded by soldiers and other friends of Dr. 
Robertson, most of them weeping bitterly. As I 
tried to approach to lay a wreath on it, I observed 
his ' boy ' clinging to the head of the coffin and 
/ 153 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

weeping as if his heart would break. This is just 
what Dr. Robertson did to us all — he made us love 
him." 

Many maimed and crippled soldiers came on 
crutches or in carts, and gathered round the grave 
of " our doctor," as they called him. While the 
coffin was being lowered, prayer was offered and a 
hymn sung. Two large bunches of peach-blossom 
— the only flowers obtainable — and crosses and 
wreaths of paper flowers from the Chinese Christians, 
were strewn in the grave, and with one last lingering 
look the great gathering slowly dispersed and melted 
back into the streets of Sianfu. But those who 
loved Dr. Robertson in England will never recall 
the respect and affection manifested in Sianfu by 
the officials, soldiers, and people, without the 
profoundest gratitude and regard. 

As soon as the sad tidings of the death of the 
beloved physician began to spread, loving tributes 
to his memory began to pour in. Father Hugh 
Scallon, one of the Roman Catholic missionaries in 
Sianfu, wrote: "The Bishop brought us the sad 
news, and the missionaries, who were assembled for 
the annual retreat, were deeply affected. They felt 
that they had lost a friend and benefactor, one ever 
ready to aid them in times of sickness. My per- 
sonal opinion is that your English doctors are the 
hardest worked people in Sianfu, and if they suc- 
cumb, they die martyrs of charity. If English 
heroism shows itself at the South Pole, it abounds 
in the hospital in China. The Bishop commissions 
me to express to you the heartfelt sympathy of the 

154 



The Triumphant End. 

Catholic Mission in your sad bereavement, and our 
trust that Dr. Cecil Robertson is in enjoyment of 
the reward of a life devoted to the service of God 
and the alleviation of human suffering. ' Verily, I 
say unto you, Whatsoever ye have done to one of 
the least of these My brethren, ye have done it unto 
Me.' " 

To quote Mr. Keyte once more: " Young and 
strong, a master of his craft, with an unusually 
wide experience, his removal means a heavy blow 
to the Baptist Missionary Society, in whose ranks 
he was proud to be numbered, and for which he held 
a loyal affection. Of that more intimate sorrow 
which comes to his own people we may not speak. 
Like so many of the world's best men, he held that 
what was of good in him came to him, under God, 
first and foremost from his mother. In the love of 
earnest Christian parents and brothers and sisters he 
was singularly happy. Of the many beside who 
had helped and influenced his life there remains 
space but to mention two — names so frequently on 
his lips — the one his former ' chief,' Sir Alfred 
Pearce Gould, the other his minister, Rev. F. B. 
Meyer. To his colleagues here he was ever a brother 
beloved; by the foreign commimity generally he 
was loved and honoured." 

It will be remembered that in the awful outbreak 
of the Revolution a little boy of ten, named Ahl- 
strand, had been killed by the ruthless band that 
broke in upon the Swedish Mission House in the 
South Suburb. His mother wrote: "I must tell 
you of a dream that I had the night between Satur- 

155 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

day and Sunday. I dreamt, first, that we were 
busy printing texts on Chinese round cards, with 
Dr. Robertson's name in the centre; then all of a 
sudden I heard a voice saying, ' Though he is dead, 
yet he speaketh,' and by that voice I was awakened 
in the middle of the night. ... I am sure that 
will be true of him, and as his hfe has been a bless- 
ing to all who knew him, his removal will be a call 
to us all to follow Christ and give ourselves out for 
others, as he did." 

But there were many other tributes of affection 
that poured in on the sorrowing hearts in England, 
to whom they came like the healing leaves of the 
Tree of Life. Of these, the following must serve as 
specimens : 

The Rev. A. G. Shorrock, writing from Tientsin: 
"A Chinese letter was waiting for me here saying 
how Cecil was honoured in the hearts of our Chinese 
brethren. ' His earnestness, simplicity, diligence, and 
skill, led them to mourn for him with unusual sorrow. 
His good name is spread in and out of the Church, and, 
though young, he has accomplished much.' This is 
written by one of my own students who is now an 
able Evangelist in Sianfu. How great your thankful- 
ness must be that Cecil has left such a record behind, 
to establish faith in the work and message of the 
missionary in years to come ! How I miss Cecil's 
word of welcome even now ! How different the 
place will be ! But is he not continuing his heavenly 
service, amid conditions which are infinitely better ? 
' His servants shall serve Him.' " 
From Dr. Harold Balme, Tsinanfu : " I feel that 
156 



The Triumphant End. 

I must add a line to the very many that you will be 
receiving at this time, to express to you my deepest 
sympathy in this crushing blow. As one who knew 
Cecil in his student days, and has followed him with 
the keenest interest and highest admiration, the 
news is simply tragic, and now this morning comes 
the tidings that dear Stanley Jenkins has passed 
away also. Words just fail at times like this, and 
one just bows one's head before Perfect Wisdom and 
Perfect Love, knowing that He doeth all things well, 
and that He loves the work in Sianfu as none of us 
can do. It was but the other day that I was speak- 
ing of Jenkins and Cecil in connection with the pos- 
sibility of either of them being appointed here. This 
was before my appointment was settled. I was 
urging with all my strength that either Jenkins or 
Cecil should be transferred, on the ground that in 
my opinion these two men stood shoulders above 
every single one of us in the B.M.S. medical work 
in. China. But the answer which came, which I felt 
was incontrovertible, was that they were both abso- 
lutely indispensable in Shensi, and now the Lord 
has called both away. How utterly strange it does 
seem to our poor finite minds, and yet He will not 
forsake Shensi or allow her to suffer. The memory 
of your son, and the knowledge of his lovely work 
at Sianfu, will be a very precious thing. Everybody 
loved him, and everybody spoke highly of his char- 
acter and influence. May God raise up many hke 
him, called forth by the story of that life which he 
was so ready to lay down a year ago, and which he 
has now 5delded up ! I cannot think of Cecil 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

Robertson without being reminded of Cecil Schofield, , 
the first medical missionary to Shansi. Both had a 
brilliant record at home ; both spent just three years 
in the field; both were carried off by typhus; both 
laid wonderful foundations for the Kingdom of God. 
Others will enter into their labours, and their work 
shall follow them." 

From Dr. Lewis {a fellow-student), T'aiyilanfu : " I 
must write to tell you how deeply I sympathize with 
you in the terrible blow which has recently come 
upon you. Cecil's death has been a real personal 
sorrow to me, for I valued his friendship highly, 
knowing him to be a really good man in the highest 
sense of the word. It is hard to realize that his 
work on earth is completed. But though his term 
of office has been a short one, it has been a glorious 
one. We were very proud of his splendid work 
during the Revolution, and I am thoroughly con- 
vinced that, though he himself has been taken, the 
influence of what he has done still abides, and 
Sianfu is nearer to Christ because your son lived 
there. More recently we have had news of the 
death of Dr. Jenkins, and all our hearts are filled 
with grief at this terrible and inscrutable Providence. 
In the presence of such a crushing blow as this 
one can only bow in wondering submission to the 
God Who overrules all, prapng that He may com- 
fort you and all others who are bereaved, and that 
this great loss may stimulate many more medicals 
to give their lives for China." 

From the Rev. Evan Morgan, Shanghai : " Though 
I had not been in your son's company more than a 

158 



The Triumphant End. 

few days altogether, I had conceived quite a per- 
sonal affection for him. He was one of those charm- 
ing men that you occasionally meet with in life. 
His gifts and personality had a great attraction and 
beauty. He had unique opportunities in China. 
He availed himself of them to the full, and few have 
done such a noble and efficient work as he managed 
to crowd into his short life of service here. Though 
short, his life has been most influential, and his 
work, I fear not to say, has been a great power 
for good and the advancement of the Redeemer's 
Kingdom." 

Perhaps the most touching of all is the following 
letter from the Chinese " boy," so warmly referred 
to in a previous note of Dr. Robertson's diary: 

" Peace ! To begin with, I send my humble 
respects, because you asked Dr. Charter to bring 
from England a beautiful portrait of your son. Dr. 
Robertson. Dr. Charter has already bought glass 
and a frame for it, and I have respectfully received 
it. Many thanks, Mr. and Mrs. Robertson. I shall 
never forget your kindness. It has been brought 
over a thousand hills and ten thousand rivers, and 
has certainly become very precious to me. I 
humbly hang it in my home, and will never for- 
get it. 

" I worked for the [literally ' our '] Doctor. Who 
was to know that the Doctor would suddenly con- 
tract fever, and have the fever so severely ? Al- 
though the fever was so dangerous, everyone hoped 
it would quickly depart. Suddenly in the spring, 
in the third month, the Lord called the Doctor 

159 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu 

home. As the world would say, it certainly was to 
be lamented, but if you examine the true meaning 
of it there is no cause for grief. His body for the 
time being has entered the ground, but his soul 
certainly has returned to heaven. 

" Only think of the time when the Doctor came 
to China to preach the Gospel — of the suffering he 
endured, travelling over the mountains and wading 
through the rivers, in order to cure diseases and 
help the ills of men. This he did for two reasons — 
firstly, because he was in sympathy with the love 
of the Saviour; and, secondly, because he had a 
heart of compassion for men. These two are one. 

" Again, when China was unexpectedly in the 
throes of the Revolution, and soldiers were wounded 
in the east and west parts of Shensi, he exerted his 
heart and strength, and spared no toil. The sound 
of the cannon reached to heaven, and frightened ten 
thousand people ; but the Doctor was full of courage, 
from which it may be seen that he preserved the 
truth in his heart. The Doctor was keen on preach- 
ing the ' doctrine,' and exerted his strength to the 
utmost in healing diseases. Since the time of his 
departure there is no one who does not praise his 
virtue and extol his beautiful life. Those who 
sorrow for him are not few; those who shed tears 
on his account are many. Again, these two are 
one. Now we must mutually trust each other to 
the grace and mercy of God, and think of the com- 
fort of His truth. When the Lord leads us, no 
matter where or when, we will never depart from 
Him to the right hand or to the left. 

i5o 



U5 

u 
u 

o 

< 
u 

Q 

Q 

< 

.J 

Id 

X 

H 



■^ '2 



i ^ 



■::?; 



^ 8 


„ a 


•T^ 


•^"■^- -S 


§ -S 




as ° - c/2 




s 








Repu 
hours 
ofth 
' in 


S Q 55 
















the 
ent 
rtson 

Ha 


~ S* a 


1 


'^fll 


^:&-i 


« 


^ ■^ tei ;e 

S ""^ !^ ^ 


■s t-. 1 




K S 1^ 


E 




« ^ -K, 












'^'^ s 


s 


a,>a,^ 


S !^ !^ 


fe 


^ •« ° 


■« ■§• 




The 
coun 
nglis 
tion 




g 



■~ CO § 
-■^ -^ >-J 
- S s 



^ s § "« 



"3 



05 S a 




The Triumphant End. 

" Do not grieve overmuch. Please read Romans 
XV. 4 and 2 Cor. v. 8, and in general think rightly of 
this teaching; and we will mutually be comforted. 

"Now I am with Pastor Keyte as cook, and he 
also treats me well. Do not grieve because of the 
distance. This year my unworthy country is at 
rest, and the old capital (Sianfu) is peaceful. Even 
the harvest is good. 

" I only hope you will regard it as important to 
keep well. Now, because of a thousand hills and 
ten thousand rivers I cannot in person thank you, 
so I specially on this account use this inch of paper, 
in order to manifest that I sincerely wish to inform 
you with regard to this. My affection is great, but 
my paper is short, so I will say no more. 

" I respectfully wish you peace. I hope that all 
your honourable friends and relatives may receive 
happiness. 

" Your hmnble servant, 

"Chao Lin, 

" Of the market town of Chao Tai, in 
the county of Lantien, in the Pre- 
fecture of Sian, in the Province of 
Shensi, personally addresses you." 

* * * 'ff * 

When the first tidings of Dr. Robertson's illness 
reached this country much prayer was offered on 
his behalf, that he might be spared. But it was 
otherwise ordered, and when we heard that he had 
passed home to God an inexpressible grief filled 
widespread circles of friends. 
On the following Sunday morning we held our 
161 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

memorial service at Regent's Park Chapel, at which 
his favourite hymns were sung, fervent prayers were 
offered for his sorrowing family, and, so well as we 
could, we recounted again the story of his noble 
life. 

On April 19 an impressive service, presided over 
by Rev. J. H. French, was held in the Woodgrange 
Baptist Church by the pastors and members of the 
congregations who for five and a half years had so 
loyally supported Dr. Robertson by their prayers 
and gifts. An enlarged photograph, emblematically 
wreathed in laurels and ivy, recalled the beloved 
features, while the epergne of white lilies spoke of 
the purity of his life. Touching and beautiful 
tributes were paid by the Chairman, by Dr. Percy 
Lush, the Chairman of the Medical Auxiliary, 
who had known Dr. Robertson from his boyhood, 
and the Rev. C. E. Wilson, Foreign Secretary of 
the Baptist Missionary Society. From the speech 
of the latter we quote the concluding paragraphs. 
After describing the scenes of the Revolution, he 
said: 

" I hasten to speak of the time when the acute 
trouble was abated, and when our missionaries who 
had bravely stayed all through the Revolution time 
needed relief. Remember their names ! Cherish 
them in your hearts ! Thank God for them ! Tell 
your children of them ! Let the story of their 
heroism be among your household memories: Mr. 
and Mrs. Shorrock and their daughter Mary; 
Dr. Andrew Young and this doctor's wife and their 
little child; and Cecil Robertson — with no other 

162 



The Triumphant End. 

Europeans. All through those long, trying weeks 
they toiled on, having to go long periods without 
news from home, knowing that their friends were 
anxious about them and wondering if they still sur- 
vived. After that time relief forces went out, and it 
was necessary that some should go away on holiday. 
Mr. and Mrs. Shorrock had to come home, with 
Dr. and Mrs. Young ; but Dr. Robertson determined 
that nothing more was necessary than that he should 
take a brief holiday at the coast, or perhaps a 
journey to Japan. The people and officials, how- 
ever, would not let them leave the city without a 
great ovation. They presented them with memorials 
and decorated them with tokens of love and 
esteem, paid their travelling expenses to the coast, 
sent military escorts with them far out of the city 
to show them honour; and when, his holiday over, 
Robertson returned, it was to a city that already 
loved him and looked upon him as a great benefactor. 

" Dr. Stanley Jenkins soon went back to China. 
The country was still disturbed, and the city far 
from fit for ladies to dwell in, and Dr. Jenkins left 
his wife and two children at the coast while he hurried 
inland. He took out with him from England the 
approved project for the new hospital. He was full 
of enthusiasm for the carrying of this to a successful 
and speedy issue, in order to replace the old and 
dilapidated premises then in use. 

" Then came typhus. It is little wonder that the 
dread disease should work such havoc in the city. 
At the time of the massacre of the Manchus they 
filled the wells with corpses. Frightened men and 

163 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

women, in dread of the soldiery, committed suicide 
by jumping into them. What wonder that the 
springs were poisoned, or that the dreaded typhus 
struck its roots into the overcrowded population! 
The young doctor, who had taken his short holiday 
with the full hope of returning fresh and strong for 
his winter's work, was one of the first victims. The 
Chinese doctor also fell a victim, then Dr. Jenkins ; 
and the new recruit, Dr. Thomas ScoUay, who had 
but just come into the country, had his three col- 
leagues all down together, he alone being able to 
help. And then Robertson died. 

" What are we to say to all these things ? I will 
not deny here in your presence, my friends, that 
when the news came of the death of Robertson, 
and later of Jenkins, my friend Dr. Moorshead and 
I knelt side by side in my office in an agony of 
sorrow. It seemed so wonderful. God tried our 
faith, but we are here to-night, not mourning, but 
to triumph. It is an hour of victory. We thank 
God for a life — for two lives — so pure, so noble. 
They have conquered death. Robertson would not 
have deplored his death. Are we not servants of 
Him who gave as His great ideal of life : ' Even as 
the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but 
to minister, and to give His life a ransom for many ' ? 
That is the Christian's motto. We are not going 
to count our lives by years, by attainments, by 
money laid up, by treasure in the home; our lives 
are measured by the way we fulfil that motto : ' Not 
to be ministered unto, but to minister,' and to give 
our lives, even after the pattern of His ransom. 

164 



The Triumphant End. 

" What are we seeing as a result of their labours in 
Sianf u ? The very atmosphere of the city is changed 
as regards religion. The Governors are thinking of 
advancing the Christian Church. That is surely the 
result of God's work among them. We are em- 
barrassed by the eagerness of the Chinese to under- 
stand and grasp Christianity. They say that with- 
out a revival of the moral and spiritual life of the 
country they cannot fulfil the ideals just coming 
into their hearts and lives, so they want to estab- 
lish Christianity. Was there ever anjrthing more 
pathetic than the announcement in yesterday's 
paper that the new Chinese Cabinet have sent out 
from Peking to every part of that great Republic, 
to the magistrates of every city, an announcement 
in the following significant words : ' If there be a 
band of Christians in your city, tell them that we 
want them to pray for China. If there be a mission- 
hall anywhere in your district, send a message for 
next Sabbath, April 27, asking the people to pray 
for the Republic of China. Let them pray that 
virtuous men may be appointed to office, and peace 
established in our midst, and that the Government 
may be true.' 

" The labour of these two noble men is not in vain. / 
God is unfolding a great plan. With tears we look 
on the memorials of our friends, but we know that 
their lives are now reaching their fruition. Oh that 
our lives may resemble theirs ! Here is the call of 
a noble example, and what is so well worth living for ? 

" Dr. Robertson was a gifted doctor and a skilled 
surgeon. During the dreadful days of revolution 

165 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

his only medical colleague had appendicitis, and his 
life was in danger. Robertson, however, operated 
successfully on him and saved his life. But what we 
remember to-day, and what we hear from China, 
is not so much about his skill, but about his beautiful 
life, his courtesy, his gentleness, his faith in Jesus, 
his spirituality. Though we cannot all be surgeons 
and have his gifts and attainments, we can all aim 
at being known as God's servants, and as being 
without blame before Him in love." 

The Pastor, officers, and friends at Regent's Park 
Chapel are inserting a brass tablet in the vestibule 
of the Chapel, with the following inscription : 

IN 

LOVING MEMORY 
OF 

CECIL F. ROBERTSON, 

M.B., F.R.C.S. 

MEDICAL MISSIONARY OF THE B.M.S., 

WHO, AFTER PASSING THROUGH 

THE GREAT REVOLUTION, I9II-I912, 

DIED OF TYPHUS FEVER 

AT HIS POST, 

SIANFU, SHENSI, IN CHINA, 

ON MARCH i6TH, I9I3, 

AGED 28. 

* * * * * 

Such are the records, so far as human love can 
limn them, of a rare and beautiful character — one 
of God's great gifts to all of us who knew him. He 
adorned the Gospel of his God and Saviour, and 

166 



The Triumphant End. 

made it fragrant and attractive to those who saw 
it embodied in the life of their benefactor; and it 
will take more than one generation before all the 
harvest will be gathered in, which has resulted 
from his sowing. 

The Churches in East London are giving a prac- 
tical evidence of their affectionate appreciation of 
Dr. Robertson's life-work by contributing towards 
the Jenkins-Robertson wing of the new Sianfu 
Hospital, and it is quite possible that some readers 
of these memorials may like to help in the same 
direction. But, after all, the best commemoration 
would be in the reader's afi&rmative response to the 
appealing summons which comes from the throne of 
our exalted Lord and the need of a perishing world — 
from the throne : " Who will go for us ?" from 
the world; "Come over and help us!" What 
higher vocation is there among those which men 
gird themselves to follow? What nobler service 
could engage the energies of a brief mortal life ? 
In what could young men better invest themselves 
than^ in the relief of human misery, whether of body 
or soul? What would give more zest to life, or 
more tranquillity in death ? In all the earth there 
is no profession more noble, more interesting, more 
valuable to our human kind, or more pleasing to 
the Redeemer, than that to which Cecil Robertson 
gave himself; and in this, " he being dead, yet 
speaketh." If he were back again and could choose 
his hfe-work, with all the experience of the past to 
help him, do you suppose that he would not choose 
again to be a medical missionary ? 

167 12 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

The ranks of this noble order of Christian service 
have been sorely depleted in recent years, and 
recruits are not so plentiful as once. But surely 
this can be only a temporary arrest. More than 
a passing phase it must not, cannot be. And that 
the vacant places may be refilled, let each young 
Christian, after reading these memorials, look straight 
into the face of Christ, sa57ing; " If Thou needest me 
out yonder in the dark, bid me come unto Thee." 

The life of Cecil Robertson appeals for volunteers, 
mustering silently as the dew-drops which alight 
so gently on the summer lawns, clad in the beauty 
of holiness, and deft at dealing with the diseases 
of soul or body. Thus will the Master's footprints 
on our world's surface be kept fresh, for He went 
about doing good, and healing all manner of sickness 
and all manner of disease among the people; and 
He left us an example that we should follow in His 
steps. " Who, then, will be baptized for the 
dead ?" 

" Awake ! why linger in the gorgeous town. 
Sworn liegemen of the Cross and thorny crown ? 
Up from your beds of sloth for shame. 
Speed to the eastern mount like flame ; 
Nor wonder, should ye find your King in tears. 
Even with the loud hosanna ringing in His ears." 



1 68 



APPENDIX 

CECIL Robertson's own account of his 

JOURNEY FROM SIANFU TO YENANFU, AND ALSO 
A SHORT RECORD OF HIS WORK THERE 

I MUST start from the beginning and give you as good a 
picture as I can of ray journey and experiences. 

I had some things of my own as well as drugs for 
myself to use at Yenanfu, also for Mr. Watson at 
Suitechou, so that it was necessary to hire three 
animals — one a full load; one half a load, on the top 
of which my boy, Ch'u Stu, our cook, sails; and one 
for the teacher who is accompanying me. These three 
went to San Yuan on Saturday, as that is the direct road 
to this place. I, however, went to Fu Yin Ts'un, as I was 
anxious to see the Bells, who are leaving shortly for 
England. 

Our native cook went with me to show me the way. 
About five miles from Fu Yin, Bell and Jenkins, who are 
staying there, met us on their horses, and we all rode 
along together, reaching there about dark. 

I had a very pleasant Sunday at Fu Yin T'sun. I took 
the service there in the afternoon. It was a little for- 
midable, for they have a somewhat high pulpit. How- 
ever, I got through with it, though not so well as I 
should have liked. 

To-day I left there about 9.30, Mrs. Bell having first 
fitted me up with necessaries. Mr. Bell sent his stable- 

169 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

boy with me on his own horse for about half the way, 
for which I was very glad, as otherwise it would have 
been difficult to find the way. He left me a little after 
midday, and I went on alone to a small place where I got 
a meal and had my horse fed. The folk there seemed 
extremely interested in all my belongings, especially 
because I could understand what they said ; and, what 
served to surprise them more, they could understand what 
I said. The source of the greatest wonder was my 
thermos flask. 

That place was eight or nine miles from here, so it did 
not take a great while to get here, but unfortunately it 
snowed during the latter half of the day. I am staying 
here at the little mission station, where there is an evan- 
gelist, a young fellow who was in the school a few years 
ago. He seemed a bright young fellow, but it is not at 
all an unfit building as native buildings go. They have 
about forty attendants, including members and scholars. 

Tuesday, Fehruary 21, Pai Timg Quan. — As I told 
you yesterday, it snowed, and kept on for the whole 
afternoon and through the night. At first it was decided 
that we should stay there for the day, but later the 
muleteer discovered that there was another party going, 
consisting of a pack mule and a mule litter, so he 
thought he would go too. I could have wished the 
roads had been better for the sake of my little horse, 
who is not quite strong enough for a long journey yet. 
As for myself, I was well fortified against weather of all 
sorts with a skin gown, mackintosh, Wellington boots, 
and a wind-cap. After a little the sun came out, and I 
was very glad of some black glasses, for the brilliance of 
the snow was rather trying. For most of the way we 
travelled along the bank of a river, now by its side, now 
on the side of the hill, and constantly crossing and re- 



Appendix. 

crossing. There is something fascinating about the slow 
dawdle of a mule caravan, the tinkle of the bells, the 
whirrup of the muleteers, and the hill scenery. The 
man in the mule litter is a sort of minor official, who is 
going to Chung Pu to take up duties there at the Yamen. 
We have just exchanged courtesies, that is all at present 
— he is a Hupeh man, and his talk a little difficult to 
follow. This town is of a fair size ; it has a little mission 
station, with an evangelist. There are only two mem- 
bers, and a weekly attendance at Sunday services of 
eight or nine. That is enough to take the grit out of a 
man who has not the real thing in him, is it not? It 
brings home to one the difficulty of these isolated places. 
We ought constantly to remember such in prayer. We 
think much of the big things — the schools, the hospitals, 
and the large agencies at work — these appeal to us ; but 
we tend to forget these isolated workers, who are labour- 
ing faithfully under great difficulties ; but they are sowing 
the seeds of a Church that will be strong some day. 

February 22, Ni Chun, — Here I am at the next stage 01 
my journey. We started soon after it was light, but 
did not arrive till it was just dark, after a fairly cold 
journey. We have been passing through hilly country 
again to-day. 

February 24, Chung Pu. — You will remember that I 
told you there was a minor official travelling with us. 
On Wednesday evening he came into my room at the 
inn and had a chat with me. Like them all, he wanted 
to see all my things, and to know the price of everything. 
He also had his food with me. A little later Ch'u Stu 
came in and wanted to know if I was going to have 
prayers — I have prayers every evening with the teacher 
and my boy Ch'ti Stu. I said, " Yes, presently," so my 
guest after a little retired, and I started to write this 

171 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

letter. Then the teacher came in, and said that my 
guest would like to join us at prayers, for which I was 
very glad ; and the four of us had prayers together. I 
read a portion of John xiv., explaining it briefly, and 
then we stood and I led in prayer. He afterwards had a 
look at the Bible, and I promised to send him one. I 
wonder how he was impressed with it all. It was then 
getting rather late, and so I retired. 

Next day, yesterday, we started off again. I went on 
ahead, as there is a mission station here, and I wanted to 
get a talk with the evangelist. The road in many places 
went through deep gullies, and in other places along ridges 
with a sheer drop on either side of one to two hundred feet, 
and in one place not more than room for the horse to go 
along. However, my little nag did not let me down 
once. When I got here I came along to the little mis- 
sion station, and received a very warm welcome. They 
wanted me to stay there, and I submitted to their 
entreaties. It is rather a novel experience, because last 
night I slept on the same kang (bed) with the evangelist, 
and am living to-day with him in his room. Yesterday 
evening some of the Church members came to prayers, 
which I conducted. This morning, hearing a doctor was 
here, a number of people came to be treated, but, alas ! I 
had no drugs. They were all packed away ; so I had to 
tell them I had no medicine prepared, as I had not 
expected to stay here. Our friend the official has just 
been up to call. It must have been at some personal 
inconvenience, as this is the first day he has been here, 
and it showed his interest. I am going to send him a 
Bible when I get to Yenanfu, and shall probably call on 
him on my way back. 

Saturday, February 25, Lo Ch'uan. — We decided to start 
quite early this morning — at daybreak — and so get the 

173 



Appendix. 

advantage of the hard frozen roads before the sun began 
to melt them, reducing all to mud. The evangelist got 
up quite early, while it was yet dark, and awakened 
Ch'ii Stu, who came into the room we were sleeping in 
and started to get breakfast ready. The evangelist, 
Mr. Hsu, in the meanwhile returned to his kang to 
finish off his sleep. I, however, proceeded to get up 
and have my breakfast. When everything was packed 
up it was still dark. Our good friend the evangelist 
had awakened us too early, and, like the Apostle of old, 
I wished for dawn. The evangelist was sleeping away 
comfortably while I was trying to make myself happy' 
for about an hour opposite an apology of a charcoal fire. 
However, "all's well that ends well," and it enabled 
Ch'ii Stu to go and arouse the muleteer and get him 
along to the little mission station by daybreak ; so that 
we were able to get one-third of the way here before the 
sun became powerful enough to change the hard earth 
into soft mud and the ice and snow into delicious brooks 
that gurgled down all the hills and along all the roads in 
a delightful fashion. 

Travelling is one occasion when Chinese dress is a 
distinct disadvantage, and one cannot help wishing for 
the breeches and gaiters of the Western dress. We have 
continued all day passing through very hilly country, 
and it was really beautiful this morning with the early 
sun on the hills and our road lying along a little stream ; 
but when the difficulties underfoot arose it made the 
beauties tend to disappear. We got here about 4.30 
to 5 o'clock. Unfortunately I have no watch at present, 
and have to depend on the sun ; and when you have had 
nothing more than a snack since five o'clock in the 
morning you feel ravenously hungry. A couple of bowls 
• pf " mery " — that is, strips of dough boiled together with 

J 73 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

bran curd and pieces of fat pork — were followed by 
toasted Chinese bread and marmalade, and accompanied 
by I won't say how many cups of tea. Does not this 
sound sumptuous ? But you do not need anything 
special to tempt your appetite under these circum- 
stances, and I have thoroughly enjoyed it, and feel 
another man. This cook of ours is really excellent 
along the road ; he seems to have got a fixed idea that 
there are three things I require directly I get to an 
inn, viz., hot water for washing, a pot of tea, and a 
charcoal fire, all of which are usually ready in ten 
minutes. 

This inn seems all right to stay at for the Sunday 
(to-morrow), but just now there is one of those bands 
of which I have told you working away pretty hard not 
far off! 

Monday. — To-day we started at daybreak again. We 
had to go up and down some very steep hills, and when 
you take up half a pound of mud with your boot at each 
step you can understand it is pretty difficult. The latter 
part of the day the roads were distinctly better, and 
I hope that means the same for to-morrow. This place, 
Fu Chou, where we arrived about 6 p.m., is tucked 
away at the foot of some hills ; in fact, surrounded by 
hills, on one side quite close, and on the other three 
sides at a little distance. A fairly wide river passes 
round these three sides. I met the evangelist here, and 
he tells me there are many people coming in to Yenanfu 
to break off their opium while I am there. That is two 
days' journey away. It is really in some cases the only 
thing that prevents them joining the Church. 

This is the last day we rest at an inn, for to-morrow 
we reach Yenanfu. We had a somewhat exciting inci- 
dent this morning, and one which might have ended 

174 



Appendix. 

disastrously. We were going along a portion of the 
road which had a high bank on the inner side and on 
the outer side a drop of about 30 feet — certainly not 
less. Along the outer side the muleteer was walking ; 
we three were riding at a walking pace. Suddenly a 
piece of the turf gave way, and the muleteer would have 
fallen down the 30 feet had he not just managed to catch 
hold of the edge with both his hands. We three at once 
jumped off, and Ch'ii Stu and the teacher pulled him 
up. Had he fallen right down he would certainly have 
suffered serious injury, which would have been a great 
misfortune for himself and awkward for us from many 
points of view. A little farther on we met Mr. Shorrock, 
on his way back. Had we not been delayed a day, we 
should have met here and spent the night together, 
which I wish very much we had been able to do. As 
it was, we did not spend more than ten minutes together, 
as it is a long road, and we could not delay. He 
seems to have enjoyed his trip very much. It was 
pleasant to meet on the road like thatj miles away 
from any other foreigner. Then he went on his way, 
and I on mine, and by now thirty miles will be sepa- 
rating us. 

March 2, Yenanfu. — Yesterday I left Kan Ch'uan at 
daybreak and came on ahead on my horse, so that I got 
here about two o'clock in the afternoon. The road was 
good the whole distance, and there were no hills worth 
speaking of. It was a good deal prettier than the other 
road, as it ran along a valley practically the whole way. 
There were more trees about, and the road and general 
surroundings were more like England, and the road was 
good for travelling. It would have been possible to ride 
a bicycle most of the way. Mr. and Mrs. Borst Smith 
had not expected me quite so early, but as I was passing 

175 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu, 

the street preaching-shop Mr. Smith happened to be 
there, so he came out and took me along to his house. 

They were glad to see me, and seemed grateful that I 
had come. Though the premises are small, they are quite 
comfortable. There are two courtyards with rooms on 
each of three sides, and in addition a courtyard devoted to 
a small girls' school of about eight or nine. At a little 
distance off, about a stone's throw, is the little chapel, 
with Mr. Shields' rooms and a school for small boys of 
about eight or nine. On the big street there is a preach- 
ing hall. The city itself, though a "fu" city, is really 
quite small. On the north and west sides are hills fairly 
steep, at the foot of which the city lies, and on the south 
and east sides a river flows round the walls. The two 
sides face two valleys, separated by a hill on which is a 
pagoda or temple. These two valleys contain the main 
roads ; on the one hand from the south and on the other 
toward the north. The north here seems to have got 
a good start. But more of that in future letters. 

March 9, Yenanfu. — At the services here there is quite 
a nice little audience of about twenty to thirty, and, if 
evangelists and colporteurs are included, sixteen com- 
municants. I took the service on Sunday afternoon, and 
delivered my one sermon for the third time. We have 
got two women and two men opium patients just now, 
besides the folks who come here twice a week, for any 
ills they may have, to see me. In addition occasionally 
I go out to see patients, so there is quite a deal to do in 
addition to my study. I have been with Mr. Smith 
to-day to pay my respects to the two highest officials in 
the city. It is the first time I have paid an official visit, 
and I rather enjoyed it. We hired a couple of chairs and 
went to the Yamen. On arrival we went inside the gate 
to an inner courtyard, while Mr. Smith's servant h^d 

176 



Appendix. 

meanwhile gone on ahead with our cards to warn the 
official of our arrival. Presently we were invited to go 
farther, the central gates being opened, and we passed 
through in our chairs, which we then left, and following 
a man, who held up our cards, passed into the guest- 
room, the official having first come out to meet us. 
Inside the guest-room we first made the usual greeting, 
which corresponds with the shaking of hands. Then the 
official, taking a cup of tea from a table, carried it up to 
the chief seat, which was for me, as I was the chief 
guest. We went through the usual form of etiquette, I 
saying, " I am unworthy," he saying, "It is only what 
ought to be." Mr. Smith had the next highest seat, and 
the host took a lower seat. We then had more conver- 
sation, in which I did not take much part, but in which 
there were plenty of compliments flying about, such as 
" It is impossible for us to exhaust our gratitude to you 
for coming to our mean country." To which the reply 
is, " I am unworthy "; or, " How dare I ?" or anything 
else of a humble nature. On referring to our speaking, 
he would say, " You speak extremely well ; I am much 
impressed by it"; to which we reply, "You are too 
complimentary. My knowledge is only a rough general 
acquaintance with the language ; I don't pretend to have 
mastered it," and so on. Then when our business is 
ended he invites us to drink tea. This is the signal for 
us to depart. While we have been talking there are a 
number of servants waiting outside, and the moment 
they see the sign of drinking tea there is a bustle and 
stir to get doors open and the chairs ready for our 
departure. We rise from our seats and go to the door ; 
he comes too, but we beseech him not to escort us out, 
but to " restrain his footsteps." However, of course he 
accompanies us out to our chairs. A final bow is made, 

177 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu, 

and we go off, he having first said that he would come 
and repay the visit. So they will be coming here in a 
day or two. There was really more than this, but it is 
all very interesting, and it seems to work like clockwork. 
At a small place like this the foreigners get much more 
intimate with the officials than at a large place like 
Sianfu. They all seem very cordial and friendly, and 
some are really quite intimate. 

March 12. — Since I commenced my letter we have had 
the return call of the Sub-prefect, but it did not seem at 
all a formal affair, for Mr. Smith had his guests in the 
sitting-room and gave them foreign tea. The Sub-prefect 
stayed quite a long time, asking me about an affliction 
his wife suffers from. How convenient it would be to 
have a lady doctor for a wife ! 

Yesterday the secretary of the Prefect came to consult 
me about a trouble of his. He used to be at Han 
Chungfu, and has acted as a teacher to several of the 
C.I.M. missionaries, though he has a much better post 
now. It seems, therefore, as if I might get quite a 
number of official patients while I am here. I have 
been attending a man who I believe is now dead. They 
first called me to see him when he was practically 
dying. When I got there they were burning incense 
and paper and tinkling a bell, to send away the " vicious 
breath" of which he was supposed to be a victim. The 
room was only small, and at one end was the kang on 
which the man was propped in a half-sitting posture. 
There were also on the kang several men, women, and 
children. Every now and then they would give him a 
shake and call his name to try to wake him up, for he 
was unconscious. In the room I counted altogether 
twenty-one other people, relatives. They besought me 
if I could to save his life. " Use any method, and if he 

178 



Appendix. 

dies we shall not blame you." I did what I could, 
though I told them I feared he would die. He improved 
slightly, which raised their hopes, but he must have died 
in the night, as they have not been to-day. I saw they 
had got all his best clothes ready to put on him before 
he died, in accordance with their custom. They do not 
seem to have the slightest idea how to attend to the sick. 
What a contrast a sick-room in China and a sick-room 
at home I 

I am going to have prayers with the servants, teachers, 
helpers, and scholars once a week, and to take the ser- 
vice this day fortnight in the afternoon. 

The opium patients are gradually progressing, and 
several of them will be leaving this week. I wonder 
how much they have learned of the doctrine and what 
sort of impression they have gained. They have been 
studying a little catechism with the teacher who lives 
on the same premises with them. I was talking with 
the teacher this week. We had been reading the Sermon 
on the Mount, and he said to me, " I think if Confucius 
had lived in the same time and in the same country as 
Jesus Christ they would have had a great many things 
to talk about together." As you see, he puts Confucius 
on a level with Christ, but it was not an irreverent 
remark to make. I wonder when he will learn to put 
Jesus on a higher level ! Later he said in a half-tentative 
way, "There are many Christians who are not like this," 
referring to the Sermon on the Mount, a conclusion,, I 
fear, that too many have had to come to, both in this and 
in other lands. How one longs for something of the 
fragrance and of the radiance of Jesus Christ ! I am 
more and more convinced of the importance of the daily 
Ufe, a factor that is of far, far more value than the power 
to speak or preach. 

179 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

March 31, — I have heard a piece ol news. Dr. and 
Mrs. Jenkins are going home directly I get down 
from here. We had letters yesterday. I do not yet 
know the details. This will make a great deal of differ- 
ence to me, for it will mean that I shall be thrown into 
full work and responsibility at once, sharing the work 
with Dr. Charter. It will be no easy place for me to fill 
in my present stage. The greater part of the hospital 
management will fall on me. It will require all the dili- 
gence and application I am capable of, especially if I am 
to get a little language study and evangelistic work in. 

I want to tell you just one or two of the special things 
to pray for. One is from my own inner life. It is so 
terribly easy to let things which seem of pressing import- 
ance break in upon the time which ought to be regarded 
as the most important and valuable of the day, and time 
which, rightly used, is the only certain source of steady- 
ing and staying power, amid the multitude of duties that 
arise during the day. The second is in the control and 
management of the many Chinese servants and helpers 
that are associated with a hospital. This is an aspect of 
the work that is not thought so much of at home, but 
which provides an endless cause of petty difficulties and 
worries, specially to the new man. The third is that I 
may be able to carry on efficiently the work that Dr. 
Jenkins has done, and in something of the same spirit, 
for I have never seen him angry or cross or really 
irritable, despite the numberless little difficulties and 
interruptions which constantly arise. There are other 
things which will require all the grace and tact that may 
be bestowed on me. 

Apyil 5. — I am contemplating leaving here next Friday, 
and getting to Sianfu on April. 22. I took the service here 
on Sunday morning, and got on moderately well ; but I 

180 



Appendix. 

find it rather an effort to prepare sermons in Chinese. 
I have been visiting several cases, one a young man with 
pneumonia, who I hope is going to get better. There is 
a great deal that would be very attractive about perma- 
nent medical work here. The doctor would soon get to 
know personally a large number of people, and would 
be known by all. He would have officials among his 
patients, and would keep in closer touch with all classes 
of patients than is possible in a big city. This would 
have great advantages both from a medical and from a 
missionary point of view. I think I told you I have been 
attending the military official's wife. The second time I 
went he had heard I had a camera, and was anxious to 
have his photograph taken. I went along later and took 
quite a number of photographs of himself, his wife, his 
little boy, and his bodyguard. He is sending his little 
boy to our mission school, and wants him to learn Chris- 
tianity. He has been a good friend to the mission, and 
gave a feast specially in my honour, treating me as the 
chief guest. Mr. Smith and Mr. Shields were also pre- 
sent, and the magistrate whose visit I told you about ; 
also two or three secretaries from the various Yamens. 
The custom at these feasts is to take a mouthful or two, 
and then put your chopsticks down and chat a bit ; but 
they were all very friendly, and there was not much 
ceremony. 

The next day Mr. Smith had the military official Reu 
and the magistrate Peng to dinner, to English food. 
They seemed to enjoy all, specially the soup. By the 
kindness of Reu 1 have been able to do two days' journey 
in one day. I sent my boy and teacher on the day before 
I started with mules and luggage and my horse. They 
left my horse at the first stage, and went on the next day, 
while I started that day from Yenan on a horse that Reu 

i8i 



Cecil Robertson of Sianfu. 

lent me, accompanied by his special servant, who is on 
his way also to Sian. It was a lovely horse, and we 
reached the first stage by 11.30, having started at 
5.15 a.m. There was a meal waiting for me, since he 
had sent a man the day before to instruct his soldiers to 
prepare a meal for me, which I thoroughly enjoyed. I 
afterwards went on my own horse to the end of the 
second stage. 

I was quite busy with patients the last day or two. 
The opium patients and one or two others wanted to 
show their appreciation of what I had done, and so 
approached me through a middle man to know whether 
I would receive a tablet — the tablet being usually in 
these cases a piece of wood with characters carved on 
and all painted to extol the virtues of the recipient. 
I acquiesced, and, guided by the evangelist, they chose 
four excellent characters, the meaning of which is, 
" To succour the world his heart labours." All the 
names of the subscribers were also engraved on it, and 
it was hung up in the presence of all the givers and 
ourselves to the accompaniment of the letting off of 
crackers. 

Afterwards they all came in to drink tea, and I made 
a little speech, and the evangelist led in prayer. There 
is one thing about this for which I am glad : since their 
names are all on the board they are not likely to go back 
and take to opium again, for it would be such a loss of 
"face" — the one thing the Chinaman abhors above all 
else ; but I sincerely hope some of these men will later 
learn the truth, and become real disciples of our Master, 

I got back to Sianfu Friday, April 21. Dr. and Mrs. 
Jenkins will be leaving on May 5— all being' well. 



BILLING AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, GUILDFORD, BNGLAND 



