m  WITH 


SON 


[■■IIII1MM 


tea   PA/I^O     ■ 

Book    JlsZ 


j 


Copyright  U?. 


COPVR1GHT  DEPOSIT. 


Methods  With 
Beginners 


BY 

FRANCES  WELD  DANIELSON 


A   Textbook  in  the  Standard  Course  in  Teacher 

Training,    Outlined  and  Approved   by  the 

Sunday  School  Council  of  Evangelical 

Denominations. 


THIRD  YEAR  SPECIALIZATION  SERIES 


Printed  for  the 

Teacher  Training  Publishing  Association 

by 

THE    PILGRIM    PRESS 

BOSTON 


C    i 


$3X 


Copyright  1921 
By  FRANCES  WELD  DANIELSON 


©CI.A624413 
SEP  17  1921 

"He  1 


SUNDAY    SCHOOL    COUNCIL    STANDARD    COURSE 

IN   TEACHER  TRAINING 
Beginners'  and  Primary   Units 

Nos.  i  and  3  separate  for  each  department.  Periods 

1.  Specialized  Child  Study 

(Beginners'  and   Primary  Age) 10 

2.  Stories  and  Story  Telling 10 

3.  Beginners'   and    Primary   Methods 20 

Including     Practice    Teaching    and    Observation. 

40 
Junior    Units 

1.  Specialized   Child  Study    (Junior  age) 10 

2.  Christian    Conduct    for   Juniors 10 

3.  Junior  Teaching  Materials  and  Methods 10 

4.  Organization    and    Administration    of    the    Junior 

Department 10 

40 
Intermediate,  Senior  and  Young  People's  Units 
Separate  for  each  department. 

1.  Study   of   the   Pupil 10 

2.  Agencies  of  Religious    Education 10 

3.  Teaching  Materials  and  Methods 10 

4.  Organization   and   Administration  of  the   Depart- 

ment          10 

40 
General  Course  on  Adolescence.     Same  subjects 
as  above  but  covering  the  entire  period  12-24 
in  each  unit. 
Adult  Units 

1.  Psychology  of  Adult  Life 10 

2.  The  Religious  Education  of  Adults 10 

3.  Principles  of  Christian  Service 10 

4.  Organization    and    Administration    of    the    Adult 

Department    10 

40 

Administrative  Units 

1.  Outline  History  of  Religious  Education 10 

2.  The  Educational  Task  of  the  Local  Church 10 

3.  The  Curriculum  of  Religious  Education 10 

4.  Problems  of  Sunday  School  Management 10 

40 
Full  information  regarding  any  of  these  units  will  be  fur- 
nished by  denominational  publishers  on  application. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


EDITOR'S  INTRODUCTION 

SPECIALIZATION  COURSES  IN  TEACHER 
TRAINING 

In  religious  education,  as  in  other  fields  of  construc- 
tive endeavor,  specialized  training  is  today  a  badge  of 
fitness  for  service.  Effective  leadership  presupposes 
special  training.  For  teachers  and  administrative  offi- 
cers in  the  church  school  a  thorough  preparation  and 
proper  personal  equipment  have  become  indispensable 
by  reason  of  the  rapid  development  of  the  Sunday- 
school  curriculum,  which  has  resulted  in  the  wide- 
spread introduction  and  use  of  graded  courses,  in  the 
rapid  extension  of  departmental  organization  and  in 
greatly  improved  methods  of  teaching. 

Present-day  standards  and  courses  in  teacher  train- 
ing give  evidence  of  a  determination  on  the  part  of  the 
religious  educational  forces  of  North  America  to  pro- 
vide an  adequate  training  literature,  that  is,  properly 
graded  and  sufficiently  thorough  courses  and  text- 
books to  meet  the  growing  need  for  specialized  train- 
ing in  this  field.  Popular  as  well  as  professional  in- 
terest in  the  matter  is  reflected  in  the  constantly  in- 
creasing number  of  training  institutes,  community  and 
summer  training  schools,  and  college  chairs  and  depart- 
ments of  religious  education.  Hundreds  of  thousands 
of  young  people  and  adults,  distributed  among  all  the 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


Protestant  Evangelical  churches  and  throughout  every 
state  and  province,  are  engaged  in  serious  study,  in 
many  cases  including  supervised  practice  teaching, 
with  a  view  to  preparing  for  service  as  leaders  and 
teachers  of  religion  or  of  increasing  their  efficiency  in 
the  work  in  which  they  are  already  engaged. 

Most  of  these  students  and  student  teachers  are  pur- 
suing some  portion  of  the  Standard  Course  of  Teacher 
Training  prepared  in  outline  by  the  Sunday  School 
Council  of  Evangelical  Denominations  for  all  the 
Protestant  churches  in  the  United  States  and  Canada. 
This  course  calls  for  a  minimum  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty  lesson  periods  including  in  fair  educational 
proportion  the  following  subjects: 

(a)  A  survey  of  Bible  material,  with  special  refer- 
ence to  the  teaching  values  of  the  Bible  as  meeting  the 
needs  of  the  pupil  in  successive  periods  of  his  develop- 
ment. 

(b)  A  study  of  the  pupil  in  the  varied  stages  of  his 
growing  life. 

(c)  The  work  and  methods  of  the  teacher. 

(d)  The  Sunday  school  and  its  organization  and 
management. 

The  course  is  intended  to  cover  three  years  with  a 
minimum  of  forty  lesson  periods  for  each  year.  Fol- 
lowing two  years  of  more  general  study  provision  for 
specialization  is  made  in  the  third  year,  with  separate 
studies  for  Administrative  Officers,  and  for  teachers 
of  each  of  the  following  age  groups :  Beginners  (under 
6);    Primary     (6-8);    Junior     (9-11);    Intermediate 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


(12-14)  ;  Senior  (15-17)  ;  Young  People  (18-24)  and 
Adults  (over  24).  A  general  course  on  Adolescence 
covering  more  briefly  the  whole  period  (12-24)  is  also 
provided.  Thus  the  Third  Year  Specialization  of 
which  this  textbook  is  one  unit,  provides  for  nine 
separate  courses  of  forty  lesson  periods  each. 

Which  of  these  nine  courses  is  to  be  pursued  by  any 
student  or.  group  of  students  will  be  determined  by 
the  particular  place  each  expects  to  fill  as  teacher, 
supervisor  or  administrative  officer  in  the  church 
school.  Teachers  of  Junior  pupils  will  study  the  four 
units  devoted  to  the  Junior  Department.  Teachers  of 
young  people's  classes  will  choose  between  the  general 
course  on  Adolescence  or  the  course  on  Later  Adoles- 
cence. Superintendents  and  general  officers  in  the 
school  will  study  the  four  Administrative  units.  Many 
will  pursue  several  courses  in  successive  years  thus 
adding  to  their  specialized  equipment  each  year.  On 
another  page  of  this  volume  will  be  found  a  complete 
outline  of  the  Specialization  Courses  arranged  by  de- 
partments. 

A  program  of  intensive  training  as  complete  as  that 
outlined  by  the  Sunday  School  Council  necessarily  in- 
volves the  preparation  and  publication  of  an  equally 
complete  series  of  textbooks  covering  no  less  than 
thirty-six  separate  units.  Comparatively  few  of  the 
denominations  represented  in  the  Sunday  School 
Council  are  able  independently  to  undertake  so  large 
a  program  of  textbook  production.  It  was  natural, 
therefore,  that  the  denominations  which  together  had 


8  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


determined  the  general  outlines  of  the  Standard 
Course  should  likewise  cooperate  in  the  production  of 
the  required  textbooks.  Such  cooperation,  moreover. 
was  necessary  in  order  to  command  the  best  available 
talent  for  this  important  task,  and  in  order  to  insure 
the  success  of  the  total  enterprise.  Thus  it  came  about 
that  the  denominations  represented  in  the  Sunday 
School  Council,  with  a  few  exceptions,  united  in  the 
syndicate  production  of  the  entire  series  of  Specializa- 
tion units  for  the  Third  Year. 

A  little  more  than  two  years  have  been  required  for 
the  selection  of  writers,  for  the  careful  advance 
coordination  of  their  several  tasks  and  for  the  actual 
production  of  the  first  textbooks.  A  substantial  num- 
ber of  these  are  now  available.  They  will  be  followed 
in  rapid  succession  by  others  until  the  entire  series  for 
each  of  the  nine  courses  is  completed. 

The  preparation  of  these  textbooks  has  proceeded 
under  the  supervision  of  an  editorial  committee  repre- 
senting all  the  cooperating  denominations.  The  pub- 
lishing arrangements  have  been  made  by  a  similar  com- 
mittee of  denominational  publishers  likewise  represent- 
ing all  the  cooperating  churches.  Together  the  Edi- 
tors, Educational  Secretaries  and  Publishers  have  or- 
ganized themselves  into  a  voluntary  association  for  the 
carrying  out  of  this  particular  task,  under  the  name 
Teacher  Training  Publishing  Association.  The  actual 
publication  of  the  separate  textbook  units  is  done  by 
the  various  denominational  Publishing  Houses  in  ac- 
cordance  with   assignments   made  by  the   Publishers' 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


Committee  of  the  Association.  The  enterprise  as  a 
whole  represents  one  of  the  largest  and  most  signifi- 
cant ventures  which  has  thus  far  been  undertaken  in 
the  field  of  interdenominational  cooperation  in  re- 
ligious education.  The  textbooks  included  in  this 
series,  while  intended  primarily  for  teacher-training 
classes  in  local  churches  and  Sunday  schools,  are  ad- 
mirably suited  for  use  in  interdenominational  and 
community  classes  and  training  schools. 

This  particular  volume  entitled  Methods  With 
Beginners  is  one  of  four  specialization  units  for 
the  beginners'  department.  It  presents  in  an  interest- 
ing  and  readable  style  an  unusually  complete  study  of 
the  methods  of  work  to  be  used  in  this  department. 
Observation  and  practice  work  form  an  important  part 
of  the  course.  The  other  units  in  this  series  deal  with 
(i)  Specialized  Child  Study  and  (2)  Stories  and  Story 
Telling.  These  three  text-books  provide  a  remarkably 
comprehensive  and  valuable  training  course  for  teach- 
ers and  officers  in  the  Beginners'  Department  of  the 
church  school. 

For  the  Teacher  Training  Publishing  Association, 
HENRY  H.  MEYER, 

Chairman  Editorial  Committee. 
SIDNEY  A.  WESTON, 
Editor,  Congregational  Publishing  Society. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 11 

LESSON  I 

OFFICERS,   TEACHERS,   AND   CHILDREN 

Within  rather  wide  limits  the  child  now  has  control  over 
his  mental  life  independent  of  things  and  persons.  He  is  also 
introduced  at  this  time  to  a  wider  physical  and  social  environ- 
ment than  that  of  the  home.  It  is,  therefore,  preminently  a 
period  for  more  complete  mental  reorganization  and  the 
development  of  the  human  personality  into  an  individual  per- 
sonality.— E.  A.  Kirkpatrick,  in  The  Individual  in  the  Making. 

Teaching  methods. — Most  students  enter  upon  a 
course  in  teaching  methods  with  a  sense  of  under- 
taking something  mechanical,  like  running  a  machine. 
This  is  a  false  expectation.  Children  are  not  ma- 
chines, to  be  run.  They  are  personalities,  to  be  de- 
veloped. Machines  are  uniform.  Children  are  indi- 
vidual. The  teaching  method  to  which  one  child 
responds  may  have  no  effect  upon  another,  and  must 
be  modified  or  abandoned. 

A  student  of  teaching  methods,  therefore,  need  not 
look  forward  to  memorizing  a  set  of  rules,  which  will 
be  applied  according  to  directions.  She  will  have  to 
exercise  judgment  and  discernment  and  choice  in  the 
use  of  any  teaching  methods  with  her  particular  group 
of  children  and  with  the  various  members  of  the  group. 

Forget,  for  a  moment,  that  you  are  a  student,  and 
simply  look  at  four  interesting  pictures. 

The  first  picture. — The  first  picture  is  a  semi- 
circle   of    six   children    four   and   five    years    old   and 


12  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

their  teacher.  A  screen  hung  with  pictures  makes  the 
circle  complete.  The  teacher  speaks  of  two  absent 
ones,  and  with  the  children  counts  to  six.  She  writes 
"Six"  on  a  bit  of  paper  and  tells  a  child  to  put  it  and 
the  basket  of  pennies  that  have  been  collected  on  a 
stand  outside  the  door,  ready  for  the  school  secretary. 
The  little  group  gather  about  the  piano,  and  while 
the  teacher  plays  they  sing  together.  Informal  con- 
versation, prayers,  blackboard  work,  pantomime,  refer- 
ences to  pictures  and  story-telling  follow  one  another 
naturally  and  delightfully.  The  teacher  then  gives  out 
folders  containing  the  story,  helps  with  refractory 
buttons  and  tight  rubbers,  and  says  good-by  to  each 
child  in  the  line  that  passes  out.  As  she  puts  a  small 
purse  on  the  "Lost  Articles"  shelf  of  the  closet  she 
takes  down  her  record  book,  marks  the  attendance, 
makes  a  note  of  a  birthday  that  falls  the  next  week, 
and  empties  the  birthday  bank. 

This  is  a  picture  of  a  Beginners'  Department. 
Though  very  small,  it  has  the  essential  elements — 
children  and  a  teacher.  As  you  have  seen,  this  teacher 
easily  combines  the  offices  of  superintendent,  secretary, 
treasurer,  and  pianist. 

The  second  picture. — In  the  second  picture  little 
children  flock  into  a  Beginners'  room.  A  screen  be- 
tween door  and  chairs  hides  the  newcomers  from  those 
already  seated,  who  are  eagerly  engaged  in  conversa- 
tion with  their  teacher.  These  newcomers  are  not 
neglected.  An  assistant  removes  their  wraps  and 
collects  the  pennies.     She  makes  the  shy  children  feel 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  13 

at  home,  and  persuades  any  who  are  inclined  to  be 
boisterous  to  take  their  places  quietly.  When  it  is 
time  to  begin  thirty  small  chairs  are  filled.  The  assis- 
tant takes  her  place  at  the  piano  and  by  a  soft  melody 
induces  an  atmosphere  of  quiet  expectation.  She  then 
starts  a  greeting  song,  and  while  the  children  shake 
hands,  leaves  the  piano  to  usher  some  visitors  to  their 
seats  without  attracting  attention.  She  is  back  again 
at  her  post,  ready  for  the  opening  prayer,  and  has  the 
basket  of  money  on  the  teacher's  table,  in  time  for  the 
offering  service.  Her  watchword  is  "alertness,"  for, 
though  she  has  the  teacher's  program,  she  knows  that 
the  attitude  and  remarks  of  the  children  will  alter  it. 
A  card  on  the  piano  contains  titles  and  numbers  of 
familiar  songs,  so  she  is  prepared  for  any  child's  choice. 
Occasionally  she  starts  a  song  that  fits  into  the  thought 
of  the  hour.  She  finds  time  to  put  the  offering  and 
attendance  records  outside  for  the  school  secretary. 
She  does  not  make  out  her  own  records  till  after  the 
session,  as  she  is  much  too  interested  in  the  lesson. 
Besides,  her  records  include  not  merely  attendance  but 
causes  for  absence,  home  conditions,  and  plans  for 
keeping  in  touch  with  the  children.  In  addition  to  the 
duties  already  mentioned,  she  is  ready  to  distribute 
paper,  crayons,  or  other  material,  and  provide  damp 
cloths  to  wipe  chalk-stained  fingers.  At  the  close  of 
the  session  she  gives  out  the  folders,  helps  with  the 
wraps,  and  sends  home  folders  to  absent  pupils  by 
brothers  and  sisters. 

In  the  second  picture  you  see  a  Beginners'  Depart- 


14  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


ment  large  enough  to  require  an  assistant,  who  is  com- 
bined secretary,  treasurer,  and  pianist.  The  offices  of 
secretary  and  treasurer  are,  however,  minor  portions 
of  her  task  during  the  session.  It  is  more  important 
for  her  to  follow  the  program  with  appreciation  and 
protect  teacher  and  children  from  interruptions.  She 
is  quick  to  detect  and  remedy  poor  ventilation.  She 
does  not  allow  the  teacher  to  be  disturbed  by  late 
pupils,  or  the  program  to  be  retarded  by  her  delay  in 
finding  the  expected  song.  The  teacher  would  feel 
lost  without  her,  and  yet  is  scarcely  aware  of  her — the 
curious  attitude  one  has  toward  those  who  are  indis- 
pensable. 

Occasionally  this  picture  includes  a  mother  or  young 
girl  who  assists  often  enough  to  keep  in  touch  with 
the  department  and  serve  as  assistant  when  the  regular 
assistant  substitutes  for  the  teacher. 

The  third  picture. — The  third  picture  is  of  a 
double  semicircle  of  sixty  children.  We  see  a  pianist 
who  remains  at  the  piano,  for  there  are  two  other 
assistants.  One  acts  as  secretary  and  one  as  treasurer. 
They  do  not  allow  these  duties  to  absorb  their  attention. 
Much  of  their  work  is  done  after  the  session.  They 
greet  the  children,  help  in  removing  wraps,  collect  the 
pennies,  seat  visitors,  distribute  supplies  and  folders, 
attend  to  proper  ventilation,  and  save  the  teacher  from 
interruptions.  Any  spare  moments  they  may  have  are 
not  spent  in  counting  the  offering  or  computing  the 
average  attendance.  They  are  too  much  absorbed  in 
the  program  for  this.     They  realize  that  unnecessary 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  15 

tiptoeing  about  the  room,  or  putting  a  cabinet  in  order, 
or  whispered  colloquies  interfere  seriously  with  the 
atmosphere  of  the  room.  The  teacher  often  tells  them 
that  she  can  forgive  duties  neglected  because  of  inter- 
est in  the  program  far  better  than  close  attention  to 
petty  details  that  makes  them  oblivious  of  it ;  that  there 
is  a  certain  atmosphere  that  can  be  maintained  only 
when  pianist,  assistants  and  visitors  listen  to  the  story 
she  tells,  enjoy  the  songs  and  appreciate  the  children's 
responses. 

A  Cradle  Roll  class  of  twelve  children  three  years 
old  is  an  adjunct  to  this  department,  although  it  meets 
in  a  separate  room. 

The  fourth  picture. — The  fourth  picture  is  in  two 
parts.  One  part  shows  a  Beginners'  Department  con- 
sisting of  two  Beginners'  rooms,  each  with  fifty  chil- 
dren, divided  according  to  age.  The  entire  depart- 
ment numbers  one  hundred. 

The  second  part  pictures  another  department  of  one 
hundred,  in  which  all  the  children  meet  together,  in  a 
double  semicircle,  for  the  opening  service  and  a  short 
portion  of  the  circle  talk.  After  this  they  divide  into 
three  smaller  circles,  separated  by  screens,  for  the 
remainder  of  the  circle  talk  and  the  story  period,  and 
two  of  the  assistants  teach.  In  this  case  there  are  a 
superintendent,  two  other  teachers,  who  are  also  secre- 
tary and  treasurer,  a  pianist  and  two  additional  assis- 
tants. Each  person  has  a  certain  number  of  children 
for  whose  presence  she  is  responsible,  and  at  whose 


16  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


homes  she  calls.  A  Cradle  Roll  class  is  provided  for 
the  little  children  under  four. 

In  every  case,  had  you  glanced  into  the  room  a  half 
hour  before  the  session,  you  would  have  found  one  6r 
more  assistants  present  to  guide  early  comers  to  a 
table  on  which  lay  interesting  scrapbooks,  paper,  and 
crayons. 

The  atmosphere. — These  pictures  have  shown 
that  the  success  of  a  Beginners'  Department  depends 
in  great  measure  upon  its  homelikeness,  and  any  organ- 
ization which  obtrudes  itself  defeats  this  end.  In  its 
simplest  form  it  is  a  little  group  of  children  gathered 
about  a  teacher  for  religious  nurture.  Where  its  size 
demands  a  larger  teaching  corps,  its  informal  and  sym- 
pathetic atmosphere  is  still  guarded.  The  word 
"teacher"  has  been  used  instead  of  "superintendent"  to 
emphasize  this  informality,  and  because  it  is  customary 
for  the  superintendent  to  teach.  This  can  be  done,  as 
the  department  is  not  divided  into  classes,  but  all  meet 
together  with  a  common  lesson.  Occasionally  a  woman 
with  executive  rather  than  teaching  ability  superin- 
tends the  department,  and  the  teacher  as  well  as  assis- 
tants are  under  her  supervision. 

The  assistants. — It  may  seem  strange  that  in 
these  pictures  the  assistants  have  been  painted  most 
distinctly,  when,  after  all,  they  belong  in  the  back- 
ground. This  is  their  one  opportunity  for  prominence, 
as  hereafter  in  the  chapters  that  deal  with  the  program 
the  teacher  will  be  the  central  figure — the  teacher,  and 
her  children. 


Methods  for   Teachers  of  Beginners  17 


This  question  may  arise :  Who  are  these  assistants, 
and  how  are  they  secured?  In  several  cases  they  are 
young  girls  who  like  little  children,  and  who  have 
become  so  interested  in  the  work  in  this  department 
that  they  plan  to  become  teachers.  Others  are  already 
members  of  a  training  class,  and  get  observation  and 
practice  here.  Still  others  are  mothers,  who  at  first 
accompanied  shy  children,  became  fascinated  and 
gladly  serve  as  assistants. 

The  ideal  teacher. — The  first  chapter  is  not  com- 
plete without  a  sketch  of  a  Beginners'  teacher.  She 
has  two  necessary  qualifications — love  of  children  and 
love  of  God.  If  she  is  a  girl,  she  is  one  who  has 
not  only  enthusiasm  but  the  capacity  for  infinite 
patience.  If  she  is  an  older  woman,  she  is  one 
who  has  kept  a  child's  heart.  Frequently  she  is  a 
mother.  Her  fitness,  however,  does  not  depend  upon 
actual  motherhood,  but  upon  the  maternal  spirit,  which 
is  occasionally  lacking  in  mothers  and  sometimes 
found  in  one  unmarried.  Her  love  of  God  is  colored 
with  the  missionary  spirit,  that  craves  this  love  for  her 
children.  She  appreciates  little  children's  limitations 
and  sees  their  possibilities.  Her  keen  sympathy  with 
their  point  of  view  is  coupled  with  a  vision  of  the  part 
religion  should  play  in  their  lives. 

Is  this  a  discouragingly  idealistic  portrait?  It  should 
not  be,  for  the  Beginners'  teacher  often  has  at  first 
only  the  two  prime  characteristics,  and  her  portrait  is 
completed  by  those  to  whom  she  is  closely  drawn — 
her  children  and  God. 


18  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

The  children. — But  the  children  themselves,  for 
whom  the  department  exists — whence  do  they  come? 

If  the  department  is  newly  organized,  they  are  the 
young  children  who  were  a  misfit  in  the  Primary  De- 
partment. This  class  of  little  children  was  formed 
no  more  for  their  sakes  than  to  protect  the  older  chil- 
dren from  their  disconcerting  presence.  Now  that  the 
class  is  started  others  will  join. 

If  the  department  has  been  in  existence  for  some 
time,  the  membership  does  not  consist  of  little  chil- 
dren dropped  from  a  higher  department,  but  of  Cradle 
Roll  members  who  have  reached  the  age  of  four,  and 
whose  superintendent  has  notified  the  Beginners' 
teacher  of  this  fact.  Occasionally  a  group  of  these 
Cradle  Roll  graduates  is  promoted  at  the  annual  Pro- 
motion Day.  More  frequently  they  enter  one  by  one 
at  any  time  during  the  year  when  they  are  considered 
old  enough.  Where  there  is  a  Cradle  Roll  class  for 
children  three  years  old,  they  are  promoted  at  the  end 
of  one  year. 

It  is  almost  impossible  to  leave  this  topic  without 
speaking  of  the  charm  of  the  children,  for  most  of 
whom  entrance  into  the  Beginners'  Department  is 
their  first  venture  from  home.  However,  a  picture  of 
a  little  child  is  as  inadequate  as  one  of  a  fragrant  rose- 
bud, the  more  so  because  yesterday's  picture  would  not 
be  to-day's,  nor  to-day's  to-morrow's.  It  is  enough 
to  say  that  to  teach  little,  changing  children  is  to  one 
who  loves  them  a  constant  delight  spiced  with  unex- 
pected discoveries. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  19 

Questions 

i.  What  constitutes  a  Beginners'  Department  in  its 
simplest  form? 

2.  Who  in  addition  to  the  teacher   is  needed   in  a 
department  of  thirty,  and  what  are  her  duties  ? 

3.  Picture  a  department  of  sixty. 

4.  Describe  two   methods   of   conducting  a   depart- 
ment of  one  hundred. 

5.  Upon  what  kind  of  atmosphere  does  the  success 
of  a  Beginners'  Department  depend? 

6.  How  are  assistants  procured? 

7.  Give  a  sketch  of  the  ideal  Beginners'  teacher. 

Problems  for  Discussion 

A.  Whether    to    form    a    Beginners'    Department 
with  only  four  children  four  and  five  years  of  age.. 

B.  The  wisdom  of  starting  a  Beginners'  Depart- 
ment without  a  trained  teacher. 

C.  Allowing  assistants  practice  in  teaching. 


20  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


LESSON  II 
THE  ROOM  AND  ITS   FURNISHINGS 

The  mind  of  a  child  is  intensely  concrete.  He  lives  in  a 
world  of  perceptions,  rather  than  of  thought.  Round-eyed, 
quick  to  hear  and  eager  to  touch,  he  is  busy  absorbing  the 
world  about  him. — Luther  A.  Weigle,  in  The  Pupil. 

Little  children's  surroundings. — In  our  first  chap- 
ter you  were  asked  to  look  at  four  pictures.  They  were 
moving  pictures  of  teachers  and  children.  I  am  curi- 
ous to  know  whether  you  gave  any  thought  to  their 
environment,  and  whether  you  would  examine  as  care- 
fully four  pictures  of  vacant  Beginners'  rooms.  I 
doubt  it.  Interest  in  living  beings  transcends  interest 
in  walls  and  furnishings. 

To  be  sure,  there  are  surroundings  that  refuse  to  be 
mere  background.  There  is  the  brilliant  tinting  that 
announces  itself  loudly.  There  is  the  row  of  grave, 
ministerial  faces  on  the  wall  that  offers  an  odd  con- 
trast to  the  fresh  faces  in  the  circle  below.  There  are 
massive  adult  furnishings  that  crowd  the  children,  and 
large-flowered  carpets  that  call  attention  away  from 
small  feet.  There  are  stained-glass  figures  that  absorb 
the  light  which  should  be  cast  on  childish  ones,  and 
large  pictures  that  make  one  lose  sight  of  the  living 
child  portraits. 

Museums,  picture  galleries,  ladies'  parlors  or  prayer- 
meeting    rooms    are    not    nurseries.     The    Beginners' 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  21 

room  is  the  nursery  of  the  church,  where  the  spiritual 
life  of  her  little  children  is  fostered.  Let  the  interests 
of  children  themselves  determine  what  sort  of  place 
it  shall  be. 

Location  and  floor. — To  their  room  they  come 
trooping — not  upstairs,  lest  they  stumble,  nor  down- 
stairs, lest  they  lose  the  sunlight.  Now,  a  room  con- 
sists of  walls,  a  floor,  ceiling,  doors,  windows,  and  air. 
Suppose  we  consider  the  children's  relations  to  all 
these.  Shall  their  floor  be  covered  with  a  carpet? 
Unless  the  janitor  service  is  unusual,  this  will  be  a 
cause  of  dust-laden  air,  for  they  do  not  step  lightly. 
Shall  it  be  a  waxed  floor  ?  If  it  is,  there  will  be  many 
a  hurt  to  soothe,  for  they  do  not  step  carefully.  No ; 
let  them  cross  a  hard-wood  border  to  a  thick,  soft- 
tinted  rug  that  dulls  their  footsteps  and  forms  a  fitting 
background  for  highly  prized  new  shoes.  The  floor 
may  be  ordinary  boards  painted  an  inconspicuous  tint, 
and  the  rug  manufactured  from  bits  of  old  carpeting. 
Luxuries  are  not  always  possible,  yet  such  a  floor 
serves  the  children. 

The  ceiling. — As  they  come  in  they  look  about 
them,  their  eyes  eager  to  find  things  of  interest.  When 
they  look  up  we  wish  them  to  see  nothing  that  will 
hold  their  attention.  We  want  the  ceiling  forgotten. 
There  are  no  elaborate  decorations  or  gaudy  colors  or 
black  furnace  pipes — just  simple  whiteness.  It  may  be 
that  this  can  be  achieved  only  by  papering  a  cracked 
ceiling  and   covering  necessary  pipes   with  a  painted 


22  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

tin  jacket.  An  effect  of  inconspicuous  cleanliness  is 
all  that  is  necessary. 

The  walls. — The  walls  are  a  different  proposi- 
tion. We  shall  teach  much  by  means  of  our  walls, 
and  they  will  help  to  create  an  atmosphere.  They  are 
tinted  with  careful  reference  to  the  room's  location. 
If  it  is  lighted  from  the  north,  the  children  find  pale 
yellow  walls  radiating  sunshine.  Where  the  sunshine 
streams  in  through  the  windows  the  walls  are  the  soft 
green  of  early  leaves  or  the  blue  of  the  sky.  The 
woodwork  is  light  and  varnished,  or  of  the  same  tint 
as  the  walls,  or  painted  white.  The  bright  environ- 
ment creates  a  sense  of  well-being,  and  the  children's 
eyes  are  drawn  to  the  burlap  dado,  on  which  are  low- 
hung  pictures  of  the  stories  they  know  and  of  the 
outdoor  world.  Just  above  these  are  a  few  well- 
framed  pictures  that  are  always  there,  and  seem  a 
part  of  the  wall.  The  Sistine  "Madonna"  is  one, 
"Christ  Blessing  Little  Children"  is  another,  a  child 
praying  at  his  mother's  knee  a  third.  A  blackboard 
gives  a  promise  of  fascinating  work  to  be  done. . 

It  may  be  the  room  is  so  large  that  false  walls  have 
to  be  made  of  burlap  screens.  It  may  be  it  is  so  small 
that  the  walls  are  extended  by  means  of  a  piece  of 
burlap  fastened  upon  the  back  of  the  piano.  The 
principle  is  the  same.  Walls  are,  of  course,  primarily 
to  effect  seclusion,  but  they  serve  two  other  purposes — 
to  gain  for  the  room  the  right  atmosphere  through 
color  and  to  furnish  a  background  for  pictures. 

Doors. — Doors  are  to  be  ranked  with  "the  ceiling, 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  23 


in  our  hope  that  they  may  not  attract  attention.  In 
our  ideal  room  there  is  but  one  for  entrance  and  exit, 
hidden  by  a  screen,  that  late  comers  may  enter  un- 
noticed. If  other  doors  intrude  themselves,  they  are 
locked,  or  at  least  concealed  by  screens.  Watch  the 
children's  eyes  wander  from  the  pictures  to  an  open- 
ing door,  for  an  opening  door  possesses  the  charm  of 
the  unknown. 

Windows. — As  we  turn  from  doors  to  windows 
we  are  inclined  to  be  epigrammatic  and  say:  "Closed 
doors  and  open  windows !  Doors  few  and  windows 
many."  If  we  could  see  lungs  work  as  we  see  eyes 
and  muscles,  wre  might  be  more  particular  about  the 
air  we  provide.  To  have  windows  that  may  remain 
open  in  summer  and  can  be  opened  frequently  in 
winter  is  more  necessary  to  a  wholesome  environment 
than  the  most  aesthetic  coloring.  And  these  windows 
are  of  plain  glass.  Beginners  are  taught  much 
through  nature.  Nature  in  some  form  is  outside 
their  room.  If  they  cannot  observe  trees,  grass,  or 
birds,  they  can  at  least  see  the  sky  and  the  sun,  or 
the  rain  and  the  snow  and  the  action  of  the  mysterious 
wind.  It  may  be  that  a  stained-glass  window  must 
remain  in  the  rooixi,  but  another  window  can  be  cut 
that  will  let  in  both  air  and  the  wonderful  outdoors. 
A  window  that  cannot  be  kept  open  without  danger 
from  drafts  can  have  a  window  board  placed  beneath 
the  lower  sash,  that  allows  the  air  to  enter  between 
the  two  sashes. 

Furnishings. — As  we  let  the  children  tell  us  what 


24  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


kind  of  room  they  like,  we  will  let  their  needs  furnish 
it.  There  will  be  pandemonium  if  we  leave  them  un- 
seated, and  wriggling  and  inattention  if  we  seat  them 
uncomfortably,  so  the  first  necessity  is  small,  low 
chairs.  The  best  are  probably  the  Mosher  hygienic 
chairs,  but  almost  any  which  allow  the  feet  to  rest  on 
the  floor  are  satisfactory  for  the  short  session.  It  is 
wise  to  have  two  heights,  or  even  three — ten,  twelve 
and  fourteen  inches.  There  is  never  an  excuse  for 
dangling  feet,  as  ordinary  chair  legs  can  be  sawed  off 
if  new  chairs  are  an  impossibility. 

In  the  arrangement  we  shall  not  forget  to  make  the 
part  of  the  wall  containing  the  pictures  and  black- 
board a  part  of  our  circle,  completing  the  semicircle  of 
chairs.  A  double  semicircle  is  better  than  a  closed 
circle,  with  nothing  to  see  but  one  another.  Remem- 
bering the  lure  of  the  door,  we  see  that  the  backs  of  the 
majority  of  the  children  are  toward  it.  We  also  place 
the  seats  for  mothers  and  visitors  where  they  will  least 
attract  the  children's  notice. 

Next  in  importance  are  burlap  screens,  which  are 
invaluable  in  preventing  interruptions,  and  in  temper- 
ing the  heat  of  a  furnace  or  the  draft  from  an  open 
window. 

You  noticed  that  several  children  came  in  with  gifts 
of  flowers.  The  teacher  needs  a  low  table  for  these 
and  for  her  teaching  material.  When  a  new  table 
cannot  be  had,  a  second-hand  one  may  be  made  the 
required  height.     It  stands  beside  her,   forming  part 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  25 

of  the  magical  circle,  in  which  her  chair  is  of  the  same 
height  as  the  children's. 

There  is  something  that  may  take  all  the  magic  out 
of  the  circle,  however,  and  that  is  having  part  of  the 
children  uncomfortable  in  outer  garments,  and  the  rest 
throwing  their  wraps  on  chairs  and  piano  in  dis- 
orderly piles.  So  we  hasten  to  make  use  of  the  hooks 
in  the  clothes-room  and  passageway.  If  there  are  no 
such  places,  a  simple  rack  will  serve  the  purpose. 

Disorder  may  be  caused  by  supplies  as  well  as  cloth- 
ing. Unless  there  is  a  suitable  closet,  a  cabinet  with 
a  lock  is  needed  of  the  right  size  for  pictures,  folders, 
crayons,  drawing  paper,  paste,  song-books,  and  what- 
ever else  is  in  common  use. 

The  children  need  to  be  brought  into  the  right  spirit 
for  the  opening  prayer.  A  few  chords  from  a  piano 
accomplish  this.  No  other  instrument  is  as  well 
adapted  to  produce  effects  and  to  lead  children's  voices. 
If  a  piano  is  an  impossibility,  a  teacher's  voice  is  better 
than  an  inferior  organ  or  an  instrument  shared  vrith 
the  Primary  Department. 

Tables  for  the  children's  use  are  not  necessary.  It 
interrupts  the  program  far  less  to  kneel  upon  the  rug 
and  use  the  chair  seats  for  the  simple  forms  of  hand- 
work possible  for  Beginners.  Where  these  seats  are 
not  flat  or  are  of  cane,  tables  may  be  occasionally 
used,  though  many  teachers  prefer  in  that  case  to  use 
the  blackboard  or  a  long  strip  of  paper  fastened  to  the 
wall.  Freedom  for  movement  and  absence  of  any- 
thing that  causes  confusion  are,  the  great  essentials. 


26  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

Outdoor  sessions  and  outside  rooms. — Often  a 
Beginners'  room  even  approaching  the  ideal  is  a 
present  impossibility.  When  this  is  the  case  the 
class  can  be  held  outdoors  on  a  church  lawn  in 
suitable  weather,  in  a  neighboring  house  or  parsonage, 
or  even  in  a  corner  of  a  one-roomed  church.  Screens 
will  aid  in  giving  the  required  near-by  walls  and  sup- 
port for  pictures,  and  in  an  outdoor  session  shield  the 
class  from  distractions.  A  homelike  room  in  a  private 
house  forms  an  environment  infinitely  superior  to  a 
dark,  damp,  unattractive  church  room,  or  one  shared 
with  other  departments.  However,  no  far-sighted 
teacher  will  rest  content  with  this  makeshift,  for  in 
the  child's  church  itself  should  be  the  child's  special 
room. 

A  last  word. — Our  last  word  is  our  first — that  al- 
most more  important  is  what  is  left  out  of  the  Begin- 
ners' room  than  what  furnishes  it.  Whatever  may 
have  to  be  there  between  sessions,  allow  nothing  there 
during  that  one  hour  that  is  not  of  use  to  the  children. 
You  may  think  that  one  hour  a  week  is  not  worth  such 
infinite  pains.  Remember  that  it  is  this  room  which 
all  through  the  children's  lives  will  be  associated  with 
their  early  teaching  about  God. 

Questions 

I.  Contrast  a  poor  and  an  ideal  Beginners'  room  in 
respect  to  its  (a)  location,  (b)  floor,  (c)  ceiling,  (d) 
walls,  (e)  doors,  and  (/)  windows. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  27 


2.  Describe  furnishings  that  are  necessary. 

3.  Describe  additional  furnishings  that  are  desirable. 

4.  Tell  of  possible  substitutes  for  furnishings. 

Problems  for  Discussion 

How  close  one  can  come  to  ideal  surroundings  in 
(a)  the  corner  of  a  church  auditorium,  (b)  part  of  a 
Primary  room,  (c)  a  church  kitchen,  (d)  a  room  in  a 
near-by  parsonage  or  house. 

Assignments  for  Observation 

I.     Visit  a  Beginners'  room  and  report  as  follows: 
(i)   Number  of  children.      (Ask  after  the  session 
whether  this  was  an  average  attendance.) 

(2)  Ages  of  children. 

(3)  All  in  one  circle  or  subdivided. 

(4)  The  teaching  force. 

(5)  Degree  in  which  the  organization  obtruded  it- 
self. 

(6)  Characteristics  of  the  teacher. 

(7)  Atmosphere  of  the  department. 

(8)  Attitude  of  the  assistants. 

(9)  Location  and  size  of  room. 

(10)  Was  the  color  scheme  the  best  possible? 

(11)  Did  it  lack  any  essential  furnishings? 

(12)  Could  any  furnishings  have  been  removed  to 
advantage  ? 

(13)  Were    the    pictures    well    chosen    and    well 
placed  ? 

(14)  Was  the  room  neat  and  in  good  order? 

(15)  Was   there   a   convenient   place   for  the   chil- 
dren's wraps?  for  supplies? 

(16)  Suggest    any    desirable    changes    in    (a)    the 


28  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

room,    (b)   the   furnishings,    (c)    the  teaching   force, 
(d)  the  general  atmosphere. 

2.  Visit  a  week-day  kindergarten  and  compare  with 
a  Beginners'  department.  Note  (a)  features  that 
should  be  common  to  both;  (fe)  features  inappropriate 
to  a  short  Sunday  session. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  29 

LESSON  III 
THE  CHILD  IN  THE  ROOM 

Machines  or  human  beings — we  must  choose  which  we  shall 
make  of  our  children.  If  we  are  free  to  choose  *  *  *  we 
shall  of  course  choose  democracy. — Hugh  Hartshorne,  in 
Childhood  and  Character. 

Children,  teacher,  a  room — upon  their  relationship 
When  the  room  is  supreme. — There  are  depart- 
depends  the  conduct  of  the  department, 
ments  in  which  the  room  is  supreme.  This  happens  in 
two  cases — where  the  appointments  are  so  dainty  that 
the  children  are  constantly  warned  not  to  injure  them, 
and  when  they  are  so  poor  that  free  movement  and 
effective  teaching  are  impossible.  It  matters  little 
whether  a  child  is  told,  "Don't  touch,  you  might  hurt 
it,"  or  whether  there  is  nothing  pretty  to  touch.  He 
grows  equally  cramped  whether  he  is  kept  from  step- 
ping freely  over  a  newly  oiled  floor,  from  hopping  and 
crawling  in  impersonation  of  animal  life,  or  whether 
a  lack  of  floor  space  makes  such  action  out  of  the 
question.  He  must  not  use  colored  chalk  freely  upon 
the  new  blackboard — which  is  almost  worse  than  hav- 
ing no  blackboard  at  all.  The  result  is  the  same  in 
either  case — teacher  and  children  bow  down  to  environ- 
ment. The  equipment  which  was  outlined  in  the  last 
chapter  will  not  have  this  effect,  for  there  we  let  the 
needs  of  imaginary  children  dictate  what  it  should  be. 


30  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

An  autocracy. — There  are  departments  in  which 
the  teacher  and  her  assistants  are  supreme,  and  we 
have  an  autocracy.  The  room  is  well  policed.  Any 
child  who  is  not  good  is  dealt  with  in  the  circle  or 
removed  from  it.  Goodness  in  such  a  department 
means  quiet  and  obedience.  Spontaneity,  either  in 
speech  or  action,  is  repressed.  These  "good"  children 
recite  and  listen  and  answer ;  they  do  not  converse  and 
suggest  and  question.  They  are  there  to  "take  the 
course,"  and  "to  receive  instruction." 

It  is  a  rare  teacher  who  has  none  of  this  autocratic 
spirit.  It  is  a  simple  matter  to  lead  suggestible  chil- 
dren along  the  mental  path  of  the  teacher's  choice. 
Just  as  she  can  overcome  them  by  superior  physical 
strength,  so  she  can  win  out  in  a  mental  contest.  "But 
we  were  not  talking  about  new  shoes,"  she  can  say, 
insistently,  to  a  bold  interrupter,  "we  were  talking 
about  feeding  birds,"  which  she  continues  to  do  to  a 
dumb  but  listless  audience.  This  type  of  teacher  is 
satisfied  when  she  has  personally  conducted  her  class 
along  the  section  of  the  route  apportioned  to  that  hour. 
She  regards  it  as  her  trip,  and  allows  no  wandering  in 
attractive  bypaths,  chosen  by  the  children. 

Anarchy. — There  are  departments  in  which  the 
children  are  supreme,  and  we  have  anarchy.  The 
bugbear  which  usually  leads  to  this  is  the  fear  on  the 
teacher's  part  that  the  children  will  cease  attending 
or  will  dislike  her.  It  may  be  that  she  really  desires 
order,  but  doesn't  know  how  to  get  it.  The  result  is 
noise,  confusion,  weariness  on  the  part  of*  both  leader 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  31 

and  children,  and  nothing  accomplished — not  even  a 
happy  time,  for  license  never  means  happiness.  Such  a 
department  depends  upon  songs,  marches,  and  pic- 
tures to  catch  the  attention  or  to  drown  out  the  noise. 
Stories  are  shortened  to  their  least  possible  length, 
and  told  even  then  with  interruptions  and  lack  of 
attention. 

A  democracy. — The  ideal  department  is  a  de- 
mocracy, in  which  the  teacher  is  guided  by  the  chil- 
dren, and  they,  in  turn,  by  her.  Just  as  the  president 
of  a  true  democracy  listens  to  the  voice  of  the  people, 
so  this  teacher  keeps  close  to  her  children,  that  she 
may  satisfy  their  needs.  And  as  a  great  president 
leads  the  people  on,  because  he  sees  farther  than  they, 
so  the  wise  teacher  leads  as  well  as  follows. 

There  are  certain  social  laws  that  the  children  must 
learn  are  necessary  wherever  people  meet  together. 
One  is  respect  for  the  rights  of  others.  John  will  have 
to  curb  his  desire  to  tell  every  story  and  answer  every 
question,  and  give  way  to  somebody  else.  Each  child 
must  wait  his  turn  at  the  blackboard.  One  must  often 
sing  another  child's  favorite  song.  If  all  talk  at  once, 
nobody  is  listened  to.  Teasing  another  child  is  re- 
garded with  disapproval,  not  alone  by  the  teacher  but 
by  the  children.  So  is  interrupting  a  story.  In 
groups  of  little  children,  as  truly  as  in  any  community, 
there  is  public  opinion.  The  teacher  is  the  personality 
that  molds  it,  but  each  child  is  influenced  fully  as  much 
by  the  frown  or  favor  of  his  classmates  as  by  her. 

John  refuses  to  join  in  following  an  imaginary  pil- 


32  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

lar  of  cloud,  and  is  left  alone  in  the  circle,  while  the 
others  wind  about  the  room.  "  He  is  ignored  and  for- 
gotten. If  he  had  refused  because  of  shyness,  he 
would  rejoice,  but  his  motive  was  rather  a  desire  for 
prominence,  a  wish  to  be  independent  and  different. 
To  his  dismay  he  has  lost  favor  with  the  crowd,  and 
he  leaves  his  seat  and  joins  the  others. 

Sarah  is  officiously  attentive  to  the  small  child  next 
her.  The  child  resents  this,  and  she  finds  her  neigh- 
borhood shunned  by  the  younger  children. 

Janet  breaks  into  the  story  with  an  experience  of 
her  own,  utterly  unrelated,  which  is  promptly  cut  short 
by  the  teacher.  She  is  disappointed  in  finding  no  sym- 
pathy in  the  faces  of  the  children,  but  instead  impa- 
tience and  annoyance  that  she  should  interrupt  a  tale 
they  wished  to  hear. 

Sharing  ideals. — The  department,  little  by  little, 
comes  to  share  the  teacher's  ideals,  as  the  teacher, 
little  by  little,  has  discovered  what  ideals  are  possible 
for  children  of  four  and  five.  The  difficulty  of  main- 
taining these  ideals  comes  from  the  new  children  who 
are  constantly  entering,  without  any  experience  in 
adapting  themselves  to  a  group,  and,  toward  a  year's 
close,  from  those  just  ready  to  leave,  whose  sense  of 
new  powers  makes  them  feel  superior  to  common  laws. 

Directed  freedom  is  what  we  want  in  our  Beginners ■ 
classes.  It  means  on  the  teacher's  part  sympathetic 
appreciation  of  the  children's  spontaneous  acts  and  re- 
marks, coupled  with  a  sense  of  the  needs  of  all  chil- 
dren, which  must  not  be  thwarted  by  too  great  free- 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  33 


dom  on  the  part  of  any  single  child.  It  does  not  mean 
loss  of  individuality  to  have  little  attention  paid  to 
remarks  or  questions  or  acts  that  do  not  contribute  to 
the  interest  of  the  whole  class.  It  is  a  wholesome 
preparation  for  life. 

Reverence. — There  is  another  element  entering 
into  the  atmosphere  of  the  Beginners'-  room,  which 
makes  it  unlike  any  other  place  to  little  children.  This 
element  is  reverence.  The  sense  of  reverence  oc- 
curs at  other  times  and  in  other  places,  as  at  the  bed- 
time prayer,  during  grace  at  meals,  where  hymns  are 
sung  at  home,  but  it  is  peculiarly  associated  with  this 
room.  Each  Sunday  there  are  moments  of  prayer,  a 
quiet  hush,  when  all  are  thinking  of  God,  thrills  of 
wonder  at  his  creations,  the  sense  of  his  presence  given 
by  hymns.  His  part  in  human  affairs  is  shown  through 
Bible  stories.  The  spirit  of  worship  is  induced  through 
pictures.  The  realization  of  God's  Fatherhood  is  keen 
as  the  children  represent  in  play  the  outdoor  life  safe 
in  his  keeping. 

Reverence  means  neither  solemnity  nor  restraint. 
A  spirit  of  abandon  insures  it  more  surely  than  a  spirit 
of  reserve.  The  teacher  is  reverent  who  opens  her 
heart  to  the  gladness  and  wonder  and  charm  of  God's 
world.  Her  children  catch  her  attitude  and  "let  them- 
selves go,"  reveling  in  God's  sunshine,  participating 
through  play  in  God's  creations,  enumerating  happily 
and  enthusiastically  gifts  from  his  hand — the  new  shoes 
which  are  their  pride,  or  the  Sunday  school  which  is 


34  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

their  anticipation.  Did  you  ever  experience  the  de- 
lighted interest  that  comes  when  little  children  exam- 
ine a  bird's  nest,  made  by  God's  birds  without  hands? 
That  is  reverence.  Did  you  ever  gather  about  a 
Thanksgiving  gift  of  vegetables  and  fruits  and  enthuse 
over  the  colors,  telling  which  one  you  brought,  lifting 
some  and  smelling  others,  and  bow  your  head  in  appre- 
ciation of  the  power  that  can  make  a  big  pumpkin  and 
a  tiny  cranberry?  That  is  reverence.  Did  you  ever 
catch  the  spirit  of  worship  from  a  worshipful  picture 
and  then  sing  a  prayer-song?  That  is  reverence.  Did 
you  ever  wonder  where  the  fragrance  of  a  lily  comes 
from,  or  how  stars  could  be  hung  so  high?  That  is 
reverence.  Did  you  ever,  on  the  completion  of  a  fas- 
cinating Bible  story,  hold  the  Bible,  saying,  "The 
stories  about  God  are  here,"  and  watch  the  children's 
expression?  That  is  reverence.  Did  you  ever  call 
the  children  close  to  you,  after  a  story  of  God's  care, 
and  whisper  to  each  child  the  name  of  the  One  who 
cares,  and  watch  their  faces  as  they  hear  the  words 
"heavenly  Father"?    That  is  reverence. 

The  teacher's  attitude. — The  child's  behavior  in 
the  room  depends  to  a  large  extent  upon  the  respect 
paid  him  by  his  teacher.  Watch  many  a  teacher's  atti- 
tude toward  a  little  child  and  you  will  see  how  much 
surer  he  is  of  kindly  patronage  than  of  the  respect  he 
craves.  He  feels  instinctively  that  he  is  entitled  to 
respect,  even  though  he  is  small.  His  trust  is  won  by 
the  teacher  who  treats  him  with  the  same  courtesy  she 
would  show  an  adult,  who  recognizes  his  individuality 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  35 

and  pays  attention  to  his  opinion.  And  whom  a  child 
trusts  he  obeys  and  follows. 

The  teacher  who  respects  a  child  is  the  one  who 
encourages  initiative  and  originality.  Her  idea  of  good 
behavior  is  not  passivity,  either  mental  or  physical. 
When  she  discovers  the  ability  to  invent  she  does 
everything  in  her  power  to  allow  this  free  scope. 
When  she  finds  the  tendency  to  suggest  a  new  line  of 
thought  or  fresh  play,  she  gladly  follows  the  lead.  This 
gives  an  indescribable  sense  of  stimulation  to  the 
creative  child  or  the  child  with  the  qualities  of  leader- 
ship. 

Children,  teacher,  a  room — after  all,  it  is  the  teacher 
who  makes  of  any  room  a  prison  or  a  place  of  free, 
spontaneous,  joyous  growth. 

Questions 

i.  Describe  a  Beginners'  Department  in  which  (a) 
the  room  is  most  prominent,  (b)  the  teacher  rules, 
(c)  the  children  are  supreme,  (d)  ideal  conditions. 

2.  What  social  laws  must  the  children  obey? 

3.  Give  your  idea  of  what  directed  freedom  is. 

4.  How  can  children  be  reverent? 

5.  Describe  the  ideal  teacher's  attitude  (a)  of  re- 
spect to  the  children,  (&)  of  encouragement  to  chil- 
dren's initiative. 


36  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

LESSON  IV 
MATERIALS  FOR  RELIGIOUS  EDUCATION 

The  main  thing  for  us  as  students  of  child  psychology  to 
bear  in  mind  is  that  children  have  a  religious  nature.  To 
ignore  it  is  to  deprive  them  of  some  of  their  inheritance — 
after  all,  the  most  important  part.  But  the  fact  that  children 
have  by  nature  a  religious  impulse  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  they  will  grow  religious,  or  that  they  will  necessarily  have 
any  conscious  religious  experience  or  realization  of  God.  This 
tendency  needs  developing,  pruning,  directing,  feeding,  just  as 
any  other  does. — Norsworthy  and  Whitley,  in  The  Psychology 
of  Childhood. 

A  little  child's  religion. — The  reason  for  the  or- 
ganization and  equipment  outlined  in  the  first  two 
chapters  is  the  religious  nurture  of  little  children. 
"Religious  nurture"  is  a  phrase  we  glibly  use.  Ex- 
actly what  do  we  mean  by  it?  We  mean  something 
that  can  be  so  simply  stated  we  are  in  danger  of  failing 
to  realize  its  profundity.  Religious  nurture  is  making 
little  children  conscious  of  God  and  desirous  of  being 
good. 

We  might  go  further  and  say  that  it  is  opening  up 
to  little  children  fullness  of  life,  because  only  that  life 
is  complete  which  includes  God ;  that  it  is  assisting 
them  in  the  task  to  which  they  are  born — the  task  of 
discovering  God ;  that  it  is  the  answer  to  their  natural 
questionings  about  the  cause  and  origin  of  things ;  that 
it  is  initiating  them  into  "the  practice  of  the  presence 
of  God/' 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  37 

Nuture  means  promoting  growth,  and  religious  as 
well  as  physical  growth  depends  upon  food.  The  food 
upon  which  little  children's  spiritual  nature  will 
flourish  must  be  interesting  and  concrete,  and  will 
usually  take  the  form  of  stories.  These  will  be  stories 
interpreting  their  life,  or  capable  of  arousing  a  desir- 
able feeling,  or  embodying  a  religious  truth. 

Arrangement  of  stories. — The  stories  will  nat- 
urally be  arranged  in  some  order.  With  children  four 
and  five  years  old  it  is  immaterial  whether  or  not  this 
order  is  chronological.  It  is  important  that  the  stories 
shall  fit  into  the  course  of  the  year,  in  which  Thanks- 
giving and  Christmas  are  high  lights,  and  the  course 
of  the  seasons,  which  are  a  never-ceasing  delight.  Thus 
festival  days  and  seasons  will  be  interpreted  through 
stories. 

Thanksgiving  and  Christmas  stories. — Thanks- 
giving and  Christmas  determine  the  stories  for  Novem- 
ber and  December.  The  entire  month  of  December 
can  be  filled  with  stories  about  giving  or  the  baby 
Jesus.  This  is  done  in  the  Beginners'  Course  of  the 
International  Graded  Lessons,1  which  is  a  depart- 
mental course  of  one  hundred  and  four  lessons.  Each 
December  the  same  stories  occur.  The  old  idea  was 
to  save  the  story  of  Jesus'  birth  for  Christmas  Sunday. 
The  new  idea  is  to  tell  this  early  in  the  month,  so  that 
it  will  explain  Christmas  and  arouse  the  Christmas 
spirit.     Observe  how  Thanksgiving  comes  as  a  climax 


i  Outlines    can    be    obtained    from    denominational    publishing 
houses. 


38  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

to  stories  about  God's  care  and  people  who  gave 
thanks  for  it,  and  how  this  long  preparation  gives  an 
understanding  to  the  Thanksgiving  season.  Thus  two 
red-letter  days  of  a  child's  year  are  made  the  basis  of 
his  religious  education.  How  different  from  forcing 
upon  him  a  scheme  of  lessons  utterly  unrelated  to  his 
interests ! 

Examine  in  your  outline  of  the  International  Begin- 
ners' Course  the  stories  that  find  their  climax  in 
Thanksgiving  and  notice  the  series  of  Christmas 
stories. 

Nature  interpreted. — Then  again,  the  procession 
of  the  seasons  offers  the  best  possible  opportunities  for 
answering  those  questions  about  the  cause  of  outdoer 
happenings  that  children  constantly  ask. 

"See  the  feathers!  Who  is  shaking  a  pillow ?"  a 
child  asks  when  the  snow  falls. 

"Who's  turned  the  faucet?"  another  child  inquires 
when  the  rain  pours  down.  "Who  is  pulling  the  sun 
down  behind  the  hills?"  "Lift  me  up  high,  so  I  can 
see  the  wind."  "Who  painted  the  rainbow?  Who 
could  get  up  so  high?"  Thus  query  little  children, 
and  it  is  a  significant  fact  that  they  never  ask  "What?" 
but  "Who?" — which  proves  their  search  for  a  per- 
sonality. It  is  very  satisfying  to  point  out  God  as  the 
great  Cause  of  all  these  natural  events.  Through  wind 
and  storm,  through  flower  and  insect,  through  morn- 
ing sun  and  evening  star,  through  bird  and  beast,  the 
great  discovery  is  made  that  behind  everything  that 
is,  is  God. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  39 

Think  of  nature  happenings  that  seem  to  you  to  be 
of  particular  interest  to  little  children,  and  see  if  they 
are  made  use  of  in  the  Beginners'  Course  you  are 
examining. 

Worship. — Consciousness  of  God  and  love  for 
him  will  not  persist  without  some  expression  in  prayer 
or  praise.  .  Stories  that  make  communion  with  God  a 
natural  and  frequent  act,  and  songs  in  his  praise  a 
delight,  help  to  form  a  habit  of  worship  in  which  little 
children  show  charming  naivete  and  sincerity.  Exam- 
ine the  course  for  stories  of  this  character. 

Coworkers  with  God. — Children  early  show  a 
wish  to  exercise  their  own  powers,  not  so  much  to 
assist  others  as  to  prove  their  ability  to  do  so.  Thus 
there  comes  to  be  another  relationship  to  their 
parents  besides  that  of  dependence — helpfulness.  This 
same  relationship  should  exist  between  the  heavenly 
Father  and  little  children.  Many  a  winter  bird  will 
die  unless  it  receives  food  from  a  child's  hand.  Gar- 
den flowers  require  more  frequent  watering  than  the 
rain  gives.  Animal  pets  are  dependent  for  food  and 
shelter  upon  their  owners.  Even  the  happiness  of  the 
people  God  creates  depends  upon  their  helpfulness  to 
one  another.  Children  respond  heartily  to  this  appeal, 
heartily  and  with  startling  self-confidence.  "I  could 
make  a  tree  grow;  I'm  pretty  strong,"  said  Harold- 
Then,  as  a  concession,  "If  God  just  started  it." 

It  therefore  seems  quite  necessary  that  in  the  mate- 
rial for  a  child's  religious  education  there  should  be 
groups  of  stories  upon  the  children's  part  as  coworkers 


40  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

with  God.  Examine  the  course  under  consideration, 
and  mark  any  such  groups. 

Stories  about  Jesus. — The  whole  of  religion  for 
man  or  child  is  summed  up  in  the  two  great  com- 
mandments— "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with 
all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy 
mind";   "Thou   shalt   love   thy   neighbor   as   thyself. " 

This  second  commandment  finds  its  perfect  illus- 
tration in  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Not  alone  are 
the  stories  of  his  childhood  fascinating  to  little  chil- 
dren. His  deeds  of  kindness  and  mercy  find  a  respon- 
sive chord  in  their  hearts.  They  do  not  wonder  at  his 
power,  when  grown  to  manhood,  but  delight  that  he 
should  make  sick  people  well,  and  children  welcome; 
that  he  should  feed  a  supperless  multitude,  and  still 
a  storm. 

Pick  out  the  incidents  in  Jesus'  life  you  would  select 
for  little  children,  and  see  if  they  have  a  place  in  the 
Beginners'  Course. 

Stories  of  kindness  and  helpfulness. — Stories  of 
Jesus  are  not  the  only  incentives  to  helpful  kindness 
needed  by  little  children.  They  find  closer  parallels  to 
their  own  lives  in  incidents  of  people  who  show  tender 
sympathy  and  practical  help.  Nor  need  these  people 
necessarily  be  children.  Look  over  the  course  for  such 
stories,  and  notice  how  they  are  grouped. 

Stories  of  family  relationships. — In  The  Psychol- 
ogy of  Childhood,  by  Norsworthy  and  Whitley,  it  is 
said  that  "one  of  the  chief  moral  habits  needed  at  this 
age   is  obedience."     This  habit  is  gained  largely  at 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  41 


home,  and  may  be  called  in  the  beginning  a  relation- 
ship between  parent  and  child.  Examine  the  course 
to  find  stories  illustrating  obedience. 

Many  other  qualities  besides  obedience  enter  into  a 
happy  family  life.  Examine  the  course  for  stories  of 
kindness  and  the  opposite  in  family  life,  unselfishness, 
hospitality,  and  loving  service. 

Children  like  to  see  the  reflection  of  their  own 
activities  in  nature.  Do  you  find  any  such  analogies 
of  family  life  in  nature  in  these  stories? 

Interpretation  of  Easter. — For  little  children  the 
Easter  message  of  life  after  death  is  not  gained 
through  the  resurrection  story.  The  story  of  nature's 
awakening  after  the  winter's  sleep  is  a  preparation  for 
the  thought  of  continued  life  in  heaven.  "There  are 
no  dead,"  is  Tyltyl's  conclusion  in  "The  Bluebird." 
It  is  the  conclusion  we  covet  for  the  little  child,  whose 
instinctive  belief  is  in  eternal  life.  The  story  of  Jesus 
preparing  a  home  of  marvelous  charm  gives  a  little 
child  a  sense  of  pleasant  anticipation. 

Story  themes  and  repeated  stories. — Write  out 
the  story  themes  in  order,  and  decide  whether  this  is 
an  effective  outline  of  a  curriculum,  thinking  always 
of  the  child  as  he  is  and  the  religion  he  needs. 

Find  out  the  proportion  of  Bible  and  nature  stories, 
and  how  many  lessons  are  reserved  for  old  stories  to 
be  retold.  The  course  is  distinguished  for  its  repeti- 
tion of  familiar  tales. 

Bible  verses. — Notice  the  number  and  kind  of 
Bible  verses  that  are  given  for  use  with  the  children. 


42  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

Count  them,  write  them  down,  and  consider  how  many 
are  of  assistance  in  children's  religious  nurture,  as 
prayers,  or  to  clarify  the  themes  by  frequent  use. 

The  aim. — The  wording  of  the  aim  unfortunately 
gives  an  impression  of  theological  complexity  which 
is  unwarranted  by  the  simple  lessons.  Reduced  to  its 
simplest  terms  it  means  realization  of  God's  care, 
friendship  with  Jesus,  a  picture  of  the  home  in  heaven, 
and  a  little  child's  part  in  the  world's  work. 

Compare  this  with  the  expressed  aim  of  another 
course,  and  decide  whether  this  course  includes  the 
same  teaching:  "To  guide  the  pupil's  thought,  feeling 
and  conduct  in  his  human  relations  in  the  family,  at 
school,  at  play  and  elsewhere,  emphasizing  most  of  all 
ideal  relationships  in  the  family  life,  so  that  he  will 
begin  to  realize  himself  as  a  member  of  God's  family." 

General  plans. — This  Beginners'  Course  is  part 
of  a  system  of  lessons  that  is  graded  by  years.  It  dif- 
fers from  the  courses  that  follow  in  providing  lessons 
for  a  department  not  divided  into  grades,  and  so  it  is 
correctly  termed  a  departmental  course.  All  children 
in  the  department,  whether  four  or  five  years  old,  are 
taught  the  same  lesson,  whose  theme  is  so  interwoven 
into  the  informal  program  that  any  more  complicated 
plan  would  lead  to  confusion.  There  are  one  hundred 
and  four  of  these  lessons,  which  cover  the  period  a 
child  spends  in  the  department.  They  begin  in  Octo- 
ber and  are  closely  connected  with  the  seasons. 

Sources  of  stories. — The  stories  of  this  course  are 
from    the    Bible,    with   the   exception   of*  the    nature 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 43 


stories,  and  these  are  nearly  all  founded  upon  verses 
in  which  the  Hebrews  sought  God  through  his  crea- 
tions.    Louise  Seymour  Houghton  has  paid  a  wonder- 
ful tribute  to  the  efficacy  of  Bible  stories  in  little  chil- 
dren's religious   education.     And  because  no  teacher 
should  underrate  their  value,   a  quotation   from  her 
Telling  Bible  Stories  is  given  as  a  close  to  this  lesson : 
'The  relations  with  God  which  we  find  mirrored  in 
the  Old  Testament  stories  are  the  relations  of  a  child 
people  with  their  heavenly  Father ;  they  do  appeal  to 
the  child;  they  awaken  in  him  a  response,  not  of  the 
affections  only,  but  of  the  intellect ;  they  are  an  ade- 
quate and  a  compelling  force  to  lead  him,  while  yet  a 
little  child,  into  like  personal  relations  with  God.   And 
the  child  to  whom  the  sense  of  God  early  becomes 
second  nature  can  no  more  lose  it  than  he  can  lose 
the  art  of  walking  or  of  other  acquired  habits  which 
have  become  spontaneous." 

Questions 

In  this  lesson  suggestions  for  study  of  a  particular 
Beginners'  Course  occur  under  the  sections.  A  fur- 
ther test  for  this,  or  any  other  course  of  lessons,  may 
be  found  in  the  following  questions,  based  upon  the 
needs  of  a  little  child's  nature : 

i.  Are  there  stories  that  will  quiet  unreasoning 
fear  and  give  a  sense  of  trust  ? 

2.  What  stories  appeal  because  of  a  child's  help- 
lessness and  need  of  care? 

3.  Name  stories  satisfying  a  child's  curiosity. 


44  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

4.  Name  those  which  will  be  an  incentive  to  ac- 
tivity. 

5.  What  stories  appeal  because  of  a  child's  natural 
affection  ? 

6.  Will  all  the  stories  produce  happy  associations 
with  religious  ideas? 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  45 

LESSON  V 
BUILDING  A  PROGRAM 

A  child's  maturity,  his  experience,  his  interests  and  ideals, 
his  habits,  his  knowledge  determine  his  growth  and  interpre- 
tation in  religion  and  morals  just  as  surely  as  they  do  in 
arithmetic  and  literature. — Norsworthy  and  Whitley,  in  The 
Psychology  of  Childhood. 

Good  proportion  of  parts. — "Building  a  program" 
is  a  good  phrase,  for  it  implies  that  a  program  is  made 
with  its  parts  properly  proportioned  to  one  another. 
It  is  this  matter  of  proportion  which  distinguishes  a 
specimen  of  good  architecture,  and  also  its  adaptation 
to  the  use  for  which  it  is  designed.  So  with  one's 
program  for  the  Beginners'  Department. 

A  program  that  fails  usually  does  so  because  of  the 
disproportion  of  its  part,  and  the  explanation  may  be 
found  in  a  teacher's  capacity  or  preference.  When  she 
excells  as  as  a  story-teller,  she  is  likely  to  crowd  in 
an  extra  story.  If  working  with  materials  appeals  to 
her,  handwork  occupies  a  large  place.  She  may  be 
musical,  and  her  children  will  sing  frequently ;  or  dra- 
matic, and  the  possibilities  of  play  will  loom  large. 
She  may  wish,  above  anything  else,  to  cultivate  the 
missionary  spirit,  and  try  to  do  so  by  a  prolonged 
offering  service.  She  may  be  impressed  with  the  desir- 
ability of  good-fellowship,  and  stress  the  welcome.  In 
any  such  case  she  needs  to  proportion  her  program  and 


46  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

make  it  serve  the  children  rather  than  her  own  in- 
clination. 

A  plastic  program. — Another  preliminary  word 
needs  to  be  said  in  regard  to  the  program.  It  is  fatal 
to  the  spirit  of  freedom  unless  it  is  plastic,  while  free- 
dom is  equally  endangered  from  a  session  with  no  pro- 
gram. It  may  seem  paradoxical  to  suggest  that  a  pro- 
gram should  be  built  with  painstaking  care,  and  yet 
be  subject  to  change.  This  is  because  the  children 
for  whom  it  is  arranged  constitute  an  unknown  quan- 
tity, and  their  response  may  alter  it.  The  program 
that  is  well  planned  and  thoroughly  in  the  teacher's 
mind  is  the  one  which  can  be  easily  lengthened  in  one 
part  and  shortened  in  another. 

The  five  purposes. — The  program  has  five  dis- 
tinct purposes — to  create  a  sense  of  good-fellowship 
and  intimacy,  to  afford  opportunity  for  worship,  to  call 
forth  the  children's  ideas,  to  present  new  thoughts,  and 
to  give  scope  for  expression  on  their  part. 

The  first  is  accomplished  by  greetings,  the  second 
by  prayer  and  song,  the  third  is  provided  for  in  the 
circle  talk,  the  fourth  in  the  story  period,  and  the  fifth 
through  the  offering,  play,  and  handwork. 

The  greetings. — Consider  first  what  is  often 
called  the  "fellowship  service."  This  actually  begins 
in  the  welcome  given  at  the  door,  as  the  children  arrive 
and  their  wraps  are  removed.  It  must  have  in  addition 
a  distinct  place  in  the  program,  when  all  are  seated  in 
the  circle.  It  should  never  be  omitted,  but  should 
usually  be  shortened.     It  is  a  fallacy  to  consider  length 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  47 

necessary  for  effectiveness.  A  short  welcoming  song 
repeated  many  times  is  better  than  a  long  one.  Two 
or  more  children  may  pass  about  the  circle  shaking 
hands,  while  this  is  sung  again  and  again.  It  is  de- 
lightful to  be  welcomed  individually,  if  one  has  been 
absent  for  several  Sundays,  but  almost  as  satisfactory 
to  form  one  of  a  group  of  recent  absentees.  To  be 
greeted  as  a  newcomer  is  a  pleasure  if  one  is  not  shy, 
but  torture  if  one  is.  Every  child  enjoys  occasionally 
turning  to  mothers  and  visitors  and  shaking  hands  or 
singing  a  welcome;  but  if  this  occurs  every  Sunday, 
it  loses  the  charm  of  novelty. 

A  birthday  must  never  be  forgotten,  but  its  recog- 
nition need  take  little  time.  A  special  birthday  chair, 
or  one's  chair  decorated  with  a  ribbon  bow,  is  an  honor 
every  child  covets.  A  star  or  other  design  stuck  on  a 
birthday  calendar,  the  welcome  song  sung  to  the  birth- 
day child,  and  his  pennies  dropped  into  the  birthday 
bank  form  a  simple  and  satisfactory  celebration. 

The  same  warning  is  needed  for  a  Cradle  Roll  ad- 
mittance service.  The  program  is  planned  for  children 
four  and  five,  and  they  are  not  interested  in  a  long, 
sentimental  song  and  lengthy  prayer  about  babies. 
They  do  like  to  hear  of  the  baby  brothers  and  sisters 
who  will  one  day  come  to  the  church  school,  and  will 
give  interesting  items  concerning  them,  and  join  in  a 
tiny  prayer  or  song  about  them. 

The  entire  greeting  section  should  be  condensed  into 
five  or  six  minutes  and  often  less.  The  occasions  for 
an  extension  of  this  part  of  the  program  would  be  an 


48  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

unusual  number  of  birthdays.  It  is  advisable  to  admit 
Cradle  Roll  babies  monthly,  or  upon  Sundays  when 
there  are  no  birthdays  to  celebrate. 

Opening    music    and    prayer. — Previous    to    this 

greeting  service  there  will  usually  be  music  to  call 
attention  to  the  opening  of  the  session,  or  to  quiet  the 
children,  or  to  awaken  interest.  A  common  custom  is 
to  play  the  tune  of  a  new  song,  which  may  then  be 
sung  with  the  syllable  "la"  or  "loo." 

A  natural  climax  to  the  greetings  is  the  recognition 
of  God's  presence.  A  simple  prayer,  sung  or  spoken, 
furnishes  the  key-note  for  the  hour. 

The  offering  service.— The  offering  service  will 
follow.  The  offering  itself  is  often  taken  at  the  door, 
to  prevent  the  annoyance  of  dropped  pennies.  A 
better  method  is  to  collect  them  after  the  children 
are  seated,  as  otherwise  they  have  been  known 
to  regard  this  as  entrance  money.  In  any  case  there 
will  be  an  offering  service,  which  usually  will  be  a 
brief  mention  of  its  purpose,  and  sometimes  an  offering 
song,  a  march  or  a  prayer.  This  is  a  section  of  the 
program  that  will  be  expanded  at  certain  times,  the 
Christmas  season  notably.  Suppose  we  plan  for  ap- 
proximately five  minutes  for  this  section. 

The  circle  talk. — We  then  come  to  the  circle  talk, 
to  which  belongs  the  major  part  of  the  hour,  because 
it  allows  for  the  children's  response,  and  for  the  great- 
est freedom  on  their  part.  Its  varied  features  will  be 
treated  at  length  in  Lesson  XL     A  full  twenty  min- 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  49 

utes  should  be  allowed  for  it,  and  often  it  will  need 
extension  to  twenty-five  minutes  or  half  an  hour. 

The  rest  period. — To  insure  the  effectiveness  of 
the  story  period,  which  follows  and  forms  the  climax 
of  the  hour,  it  must  be  preceded  by  some  physical 
movements.  These  may  be  provided  for  in  a  three-  to 
five-minute  rest  period.  They  will  more  often  come  in 
naturally  as  play  at  the  end  of  the  circle  talk.  A  place 
is  made  for  this  in  the  program,  lest  it  be  forgotten. 

The  story  period  and  dismissal. — The  story  pe- 
riod will  occupy  from  ten  to  fifteen  minutes,  including 
a  possible  preparation  for  the  story,  the  story  itself, 
observation  of  the  picture,  and  a  prayer  or  song. 

Last  comes  the  distribution  of  the  papers,  putting  on 
the  wraps,  a  good-by  song,  and  an  orderly  dismissal, 
taking  from  eight  to  ten  minutes.  Our  finished  pro- 
gram will  read,  then,  like  this : 

Quiet  music   ) 

~       .  >     7  minutes. 

Greetings        ) 

Opening  Prayer  1 8  minutes. 

Offering  \ 

Circle    Talk 22  minutes. 

Rest  Period   3  minutes. 

Story  Period 12  minutes. 

Dismissal    8  minutes. 

Total   6o  minutes. 

Pre-session  activities. — In  schools  that  are  held 
in    the    morning   or   afternoon    some    children    arrive 


50  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

early,  and  there  is  usually  quite  a  group  waiting  for 
the  beginning  of  the  session — and  not  waiting  idly! 
This  time  can  be  made  interesting  by  having  on  a 
table  objects  of  nature,  mounted  pictures,  scrapbooks 
and  blocks  which  are  seasonal,  or  related  to  the  day's 
theme.  A  teacher  should  be  present,  but  the  children 
left  free  to  look  at  any  material  that  attracts  them. 
They  will  enjoy  taking  small,  mounted  pictures  from 
a  box  and  will  sometimes  arrange  them  in  a  story 
sequence. 

This  use  of  materials  will  not  only  keep  the  early 
comers  out  of  mischief ;  it  will  accomplish  something 
far  more  constructive.  The  children  will  come  to  the 
class  with  ideas  that  fit  into  the  theme  and  form  a 
real  preparation  for  the  lesson. 

Program  as  a  whole. — Think  now  of  the  program 
as  a  whole.  The  quiet  music  that  opens  the  session 
calls  together  children  whose  interest  is  already  awak- 
ened in  the  lesson  theme,  and  others  upon  whom  the 
influence  of  the  attractive  surroundings  has  a  subtle 
effect.  The  greetings  give  a  sense  of  happy  fellow- 
ship. God's  presence  is  recognized  in  the  opening 
prayer.  Through  the  offering  others  less  fortunate 
are  included  in  the  thought.  The  circle  talk  seems 
to  the  children  a  delightful  opportunity  to  talk,  to 
sing,  to  play,  to  enjoy  again  last  week's  story,  to  draw, 
to  pick  out  objects  in  pictures,  to  handle  flowers, 
shells,  and  birds'  nests.  They  do  not  realize  that  in 
its  variety  there  has  been  a  unity  of  thought  that  makes 
the    lesson    theme    intensely    vital.     Neither    do    they 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  51 

know  that  the  play  that  precedes  the  story  is  fitting 
their  bodies  to  be  quiet  during  it.  This  story  is  the 
climax  of  their  thinking,  which  is  intensified  by  prayer 
or  song  or  verse.  Receiving  leaflets  which  contain 
that  story,  and  perhaps  their  new  song  and  the  Bible 
verse,  gives  pleasant  anticipation  of  a  continuation  of 
the  lesson  in  their  own  homes,  to  which  they  now  go. 

Questions 

i.     What  are  the  elements  of  a  good  program? 

2.  Is  it  ever  allowable  to  change  a  well  planned 
program  ? 

3.  Name  the  five  distinctive  purposes  of  a  program. 

4.  Consider  what  parts  of  the  program  achieve 
these  purposes. 

5.  Write  out  a  program,  approximately  timed. 

Problems  for  Discussion 

A.  Show  how  at  the  Christmas  giving  season  one 
should  extend  one  part  of  the  program  and  cut  out 
others. 

B.  Make  over  the  program  to  allow  for  a  Sunday 
after  vacation,  when  many  greetings  are  essential. 

C.  Make  over  the  program  to  allow  for  twTo  old 
stories  to  be  retold,  at  the  children's  request. 

D.  Change  a  program  on  service  to  allow  for  some 
actual  service  to  be  performed  after  the  story. 

ASSIGNMNET    FOR    OBSERVATION 

Observe  a  Beginners'  session.  Criticize  the  pro- 
gram from  the  standpoint  of  (a)  proportion,  (b)  ef- 
fectiveness, (c)  adaptation  to  the  children's  response. 


52  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


Leave  your  notebook  at  home,  but  make  notes 
immediately  on  your  return.  The  following  questions 
will  help  you  to  make  a  critical  analysis : 

(i)  What  impressed  me  as  the  most  prominent 
features  of  the  program  ?  Was  there  any  part  I  should 
like  to  have  lengthened?  shortened? 

(2)  Was  there  real  worship?  effectiveness  in  the 
use  of  Bible  verses  ?  joy  in  the  songs  ?  interest  in  the 
story  ?  Where  effectiveness  was  lost,  was  there  a 
reason  ? 

(3)  Did  the  children's  remarks  influence  the  pro- 
gram? Were  they  allowed  to  exercise  initiative? 
Where  they  failed  to  respond,  was  an  effort  made  to 
win  their  interest?  Was  the  general  effect  that  of  a 
program  induced  by  the  children's  attitude,  or  one 
forced  upon  them  by  the  teacher  ? 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  53 

LESSON  VI 
WORSHIP  AND  PRAYER 

Prayer  is  not  merely  "asking  for  things,"  even  though  that 
asking  be  for  help  in  his  efforts  to  be  good,  and  for  God's 
blessing  upon  those  he  loves.  Prayer  is  communion  with  an 
unseen  Father;  and  when  the  child  prays,  that  which  matters 
most  is  his  attitude  toward  God,  and  not  the  form  of  his 
petitions. — Edith  E.  Read  Mumford,  in  The  Dawn  of  Religion 
in  the  Mind  of  the  Child. 

Little  children's  worship. — A  teacher  of  little 
children  realizes  how  natural  and  sincere  their  wor- 
ship is,  and  often  learns  through  them  to  strip  her  own 
prayers  of  the  formality  that  overlays  them.  A  child's 
worship  may  be  considered  in  its  three  phases — speak- 
ing to  God  in  words,  sung  or  spoken ;  reverent  but 
unexpressed  feeling;  and  the  wonder  that  is  usually 
aroused  through  God's  creations. 

Worship  is  peculiarly  dependent  upon  atmosphere. 
The  appointments  of  the  room,  which  have  been  dis- 
cussed, do  much  toward  creating  this  atmosphere;  so 
does  an  unobtrusive  yet  efficient  organization.  Most 
important  of  all  is  the  attitude  of  the  teacher  and 
assistants. 

The  opening  prayer. — In  our  program  we  put  an 
opening  prayer  after  the  welcome  song.  A  recogni- 
tion of  God's  presence  naturally  follows  the  greetings 
to  one  another,  to  children  made  important  by  recent 
birthdays  and  to  new  members,  and  the  references  to 


54  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

absent  ones  and  to  babies  who  will  some  day  come  to 
the  church  school.  This  prayer  is  repeated  or  sung. 
Usually  the  same  one  is  used,  and  the  familiar  words 
and  music  may  in  themselves  produce  a  worshipful 
spirit. 

Preparation  for  prayer. — The  teacher  sometimes 
feels  that  further  preparation  is  needed.  She  leads  her 
children  to  a  picture — "The  Angelus,"  or  "The  Child 
Samuel/'  or  a  modern  child  at  prayer.  She  speaks 
of  the  postures  of  the  man  and  woman  in  "The  An- 
gelus," as  an  example  for  one's  attitude  during  prayers, 
or  she  simply  bows  her  own  head  and  closes  her  eyes, 
or  she  suggests  that  this  be  done.  A  song  certain  to 
bring  about  a  reverent  frame  of  mind  is  the  following : 

"This  is  God's  house  and  he  is  here  to-day ; 
He  hears  each  song  of  praise  and  listens  while  we 
pray."1 

Possibly  the  desired  atmosphere  comes  through  a  ref- 
erence to  the  outdoor  world,  to  the  sunshine  sent  by 
God,  to  the  wonder  of  the  snow,  to  the  need  for  his 
rain. 

Rote  prayers. — The  important  thing  for  the 
teacher  to  remember  is  that  a  familiar  prayer  said  by 
rote  is  in  danger  of  becoming  a  mere  form.  This  is 
not  the  only  place  in  the  program  where  prayers  are 
said  or  sung.  They  may  come  anywhere  in  the  circle 
talk.  They  frequently  follow  the  story.  There  is 
sometimes  a  closing  prayer.     They  will  come  whenever 


i  Prom  Songs  for  Little  People,  the  Pilgrim  Press. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  55 

there  is  the  impulse  to  pray — and  the  impulse  to  pray 
will  depend  upon  the  degree  of  consciousness  of  God 
which  prevails.  Rote  prayers  must  be  very  simple  in 
thought  and  expression,  and  if  sung  the  music  should 
be  reverent  and  simple.  One  of  the  most  common  is 
this: 

"Father,  wre  thank  thee  for  the  night, 
And  for  the  pleasant  morning  light, 
For  rest  and  food  and  daily  care, 
And  all  that  makes  the  world  so  fair!"2 

Another  childlike  prayer-song  is  the  following: 

"Father  in  heaven,  we  pray  to  thee 
That  good  children  we  may  be."3 

Bible  verse  prayers. — When  the  Bible  verses 
suggested  with  the  lessons  are  prayers,  they  should  be 
used  as  such,  and  never  by  any  chance  as  recitations. 
Such  verses  are, — "Thou  hast  made  summer  and  win- 
ter" ;  "The  day  is  thine,  the  night  also  is  thine" ;  "Thou, 
Lord,  hast  made  me  glad";  "Help  me,  O  Lord  my 
God."  The  first  two  express  a  child's  consciousness  of 
God  the  Creator,  and  the  last  two  a  child's  apprecia- 
tion of  the  Author  of  his  happiness  and  his  help  in 
trouble.  They  frequently  are  exactly  the  words 
needed.  Bible  verses  that  form  a  good  prelude  to 
prayer,  thanksgiving  and  praise  are,  "Lord,  teach  us 
to  pray" ;  "I  will  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord" ;  "Let  us 
sing  unto  the  Lord." 


2  From  Songs  and  Games  for  Little  Ones,  Oliver  Ditson  Co. 

3  From  The  Children's  Year,  Milton  Bradley  Co. 


56  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

Spontaneous  prayers. — However,  little  children 
pray  otherwise  than  in  words  learned  by  heart,  and 
their  spontaneous  prayers  are  very  real  worship.  We 
all  know  of  original  requests  added  by  r  >ildren  to  their 
bedtime  petition,  "God  bless  mother  ana  daddy."  The 
atmosphere  at  the  Beginners'  session  ought  to  be  so 
homelike  that  a  similar  thing  happens.  The  teacher 
follows  a  talk  or  song  or  story  about  God's  care  by 
saying,  "Let's  bow  our  heads  and  tell  the  heavenly 
Father  things  we  are  glad  for.  Dear  heavenly  Father, 
I  am  glad  for  the  eggs  I  had  for  breakfast,  and  John 
is  glad  for — (my  new  shoes)  and  Mary  is  glad  for — 
(candy)  and  Sarah  is  glad  for — (ice-cream)."  A 
long  list  follows,  usually  of  material  comforts,  though 
a  child  may  speak  of  his  mother  or  a  new  baby  brother 
or  a  toy. 

Another  way  to  get  the  children's  cooperation  in 
prayer  is  to  pause  and  let  any  child  who  wishes  name 
something  he  is  glad  about.  The  objects  for  thanks 
may  be  named  in  the  circle,  with  eyes  open,  and  the 
prayer  of  thanks  come  at  the  close.  This  may  be  the 
chorus  of  "Can  a  Little  Child  like  Me."4 

"Father,  we  thank  thee, 
Father,  we  thank  thee, 
Father  in  heaven,  we  thank  thee." 

Or  a  very  simple  song  like  the  following: 


4  From  Laudes   Domini  for  the  Sunday   School   or   Songs  for 
Little  People. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  57 

"We  thank  the  heavenly  Father, 
We  thank  the  heavenly  Father, 
We  thank  the  heavenly  Father,  kind  and  good  !"5 

When  teachers  and  children  are  conscious  of  God's 
presence  informal  prayer  is  natural  and  frequent.  In 
the  midst  of  interesting  conversation  they  stop  and 
"tell  the  heavenly  Father  about  it."  The  weather 
leads  them  to  express  their  happiness,  or  a  home  expe- 
rience in  which  they  see  his  hand,  or  new  wearing* 
apparel.  "I  am  glad,"  or,  "It  makes  me  happy,"  states 
a  child's  appreciation  better  than,  "I  am  thankful." 

Under  worshipful  conditions  little  children  readily 
fall  in  with  a  suggestion  to  appeal  to  the  heavenly 
Father  for  help  to  be  good,  or  to  enumerate  the  things 
that  makes  them  glad,  or  to  make  a  confidant  of  him. 

Prayer  and  play. — Prayer  follows  play  very  nat- 
urally. This  will  seem  odd  only  to  one  not  in  close 
sympathy  with  little  children.  Play  as  used  in  the 
Beginners'  class  is  impersonation,  frequently  of 
creatures  and  objects  of  the  outdoor  world.  This 
in  itself  brings  to  mind  their  Creator.  But  that  is 
not  the  chief  reason  why  play  is  closely  akin  to 
prayer.  It  is,  rather,  because  both  are  natural 
expressions  of  child  nature.  The  imagination  that 
can  transform  a  child  into  a  bird  easily  pictures 
an  invisible  Father  of  both  bird  and  child.  A  nature 
that   has    expanded,    through    feeling   and    acting   as 


5FromO&;ecf  Lessons  for  the  Cradle  Roll,  the  Pilgrim  Press, 


58  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

something  outside  itself  feels  and  acts,  finds  it  some- 
how easier  to  realize  God. 

Worship  unexpressed. — Words  are  not  the  only  * 

evidence  of  worship.  Little  children  often  worship 
dumbly.  A  story  of  God's  protection  told  thrillingly 
fills  them  with  a  sense  of  his  part  in  the  world.  They 
feel  his  love.  A  hymn  sung  by  the  teacher,  or  soft, 
reverential  chords  arouse  in  a  musical  child  the  wor- 
shipful spirit.  A  picture  with  the  worshipful  feeling 
impresses  another  child  in  the  same  way.  Children's 
eyes  more  often  than  their  lips  tell  us  that  they  are 
worshiping. 

The  worship  of  wonder. — Closely  akin  to  this  is 
the  wonder  every  child  shows  at  some  object  of  nature 
that  to  adults  has  become  commonplace.  It  may  be 
falling  snowflakes  seen  from  the  window,  or  the  mys- 
tery of  the  wind  bending  trees  and  flattening  grass,  or 
a  flower  that  is  touched  and  smelled,  or  tiny  green 
leaves  that  have  come  magically  from  seeds  once 
planted.  The  wonder,  expressed  or  unexpressed,  is, 
"How  could  God?"  the  answer,  "But  he  did."  There 
is  reality  in  the  worship  of  wonder  that  is  often  lost 
in  formal  prayer.  The  sympathetic  teacher  feels  this 
as  she  learns  from  the  child  to  look  up  to  One  who 
can  hang  stars  in  space  and  perfume  a  lily  with  fra- 
grance that  can  neither  be  seen  nor  used  up. 

Betsey's  first  prayer. — The  following  description 

is  of  a  child's  spontaneous  prayer,  told  by  her  father: 

Betsey    was    only   two    years    old    but    already   her 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  59 

mother  had  taught  her  the  evening  prayer  of  child- 
hood,— 


'Now  I  lay  me  down  to  sleep, 

I  pray  thee,  Lord,  my  soul  to  keep. 

Thy  love  go  with  me  through  the  night, 

And  wake  me  with  the  morning  light." 


This  prayer  she  said  every  night — sometimes  rap- 
idly, sometimes  slowly,  often  hilariously — for  what 
could  it  mean  to  her?  God  was  only  a  name,  and  so 
the  beautiful  little  prayer  which,  when  understood,  is 
cherished  as  one  of  the  precious  associations  of  child- 
hood, was  simply  falling  from  her  lips  as  a  mental 
exercise.     She  had  not  learned  to  pray. 

But  one  evening  in  the  early  winter,  when  night  falls 
at  the  children's  bedtime,  she  saw  the  evening  star. 
With  awe  and  wonder  and  curiosity  she  watched  it  in 
the  sky. 

"Can  I  take  it  in  my  hands  ?"  she  said.  "How  does 
it  get  up  there  ?" 

"God  put  it  there/'  she  was  told. 

"How  does  he  put  it  there  ?" 

And  then  began  the  child's  first  real  teaching  about 
God,  and  then  came  her  first  real  prayer :  "Thank  you, 
God,  for  putting  the  little  stars  in  the  sky." 

After  this  nearly  every  winter  evening  found  Betsey 
and  me  at  the  window,  seeking  God  through  his  stars. 
I  taught  her  the  little  poem  of  worship : 


60  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

"Twinkle,  twinkle,  little  star, 
How  I  wonder  what  you  are, 
Up  above  the  world  so  high, 
Like  a  diamond  in  the  sky !" 

There  would  be  a  pause  after  the  last  line,  and  then 
she  would  usually  thank  God  in  her  own  words  for  the 
little  stars,  or  "little  lamps/-  in  the  sky. 

The  reality  of  those  prayers,  in  contrast  to  the  mean- 
ingless repetition  of  that  learned  by  rote,  convinced  me 
that  the  path  from  nature  to  God  is  very  direct  for  a 
little  child — perhaps  the  only  possible  path  for  feet  so 
easily  lost  in  one  more  circuitous. 


Questions 

i.     In  what  three  ways  do  little  children  worship? 

2.  Tell  how  a  worshipful  spirit  may  be  induced  for 
the  opening  prayer. 

3.  Name    other    parts    of    the    program    in    which 
prayers  or  song-prayers  may  occur. 

4.  Give  Bible  prayer  verses. 

5.  Suggest  when  informal  prayers  may  be  used. 

6.  What  connection  do  you  see  between  play  and 
prayer  ? 

7.  What  will  induce  reverent  feeling? 

8.  Explain  the  worship  of  wonder. 

Problems  for  Discussion 

A.  The  wisdom  of  suggesting  prayers  for  stated 
material  objects. 

B.  A  teacher  saw  that  none  of  her  children  had 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  61 


closed  their  eyes  throughout  a  prayer.     Where  was 
the  trouble? 

C.     A   teacher's   best   preparation   for   making  her 
children  worshipful. 

Assignment  for  Observation 

Do  not  spoil  the  atmosphere  of  worship  by  an  over- 
critical  attitude. 

1.  Compare  evidences  of  the  worshipful  spirit  in 
rote  and  spontaneous  prayers. 

2.  Watch  for  a  swift  transition  from  play  to  prayer. 

3.  Is  worship  frequent  and  informal? 

4.  Look  for  the  worship  of  wonder. 

5.  Suggest  a  remedy  for  any  lack  of  a  worshipful 
atmosphere. 


62  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

LESSON  VII 
MUSIC 

A  child  is  capable  of  religious  feeling  long  before  he  is 
capable  of  religious  thought.  Various  influences  combine  to 
strengthen  this  feeling.  When,  on  Sundays,  he  and  his  mother 
listen  to  the  solemn  pealing  of  the  organ  outside  the  church 
door;  or  when,  in  the  evening,  she  plays  to  him  in  the  soft 
twilight— again  and  again  the  sacred  music  arouses  and 
deepens  within  him  the  same  quiet  sense  of  awe  which  he 
experiences  each  night  when  his  mother  prays. — Edith  A.  Read 
Mumford,  in  The  Dawn  of  Religion  in  the  Mind  of  the  Child. 

Limited  use. — The  value  of  music  is  so  univer- 
sally accepted  that  the  danger  lies  in  too  free  use  of  it 
in  the  Beginners'  Department.  In  making  out  a  pro- 
gram it  is  a  simple  matter  to  indicate  songs,  old  and 
new,  that  illustrate  the  points  and  will  be,  supposedly, 
sung  with  enthusiasm.  The  actual  fact  is  that  little 
children  thoroughly  enjoy  only  familiar  songs,  and 
very  few  can  be  familiar  to  children  who  come  to- 
gether but  once  a  week  for  an  hour,  with  many  days 
between  in  which  to  forget. 

There  is  one  way  in  which  a  greater  variety  of  songs 
may  be  used  than  the  children  can  learn,  and  that  is 
by  having  one  occasionally  sung  by  the  teacher  and  her 
assistants.  It  takes  no  great  musical  ability  to  do  this. 
Anyone  who  can  carry  a  tune  and  takes  pains  to  enun- 
ciate clearly  satisfies  the  children.  A  story  may  be 
sung  as  well  as  told,  and  music  gives  pleasure  when 
one  merely  listens  to  it. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  63 


Even  this  should  not  be  overdone.  A  Beginners' 
session  is  not  a  musical  program,  and  only  as  many 
songs  should  occur  as  the  children  can  absorb.  The 
word  "absorb"  is  used  advisedly,  to  indicate  that  trans- 
fusion into  one's  being  which  takes  place  when  a  song 
or  a  story  is  truly  effective.  One  song  repeated  an 
indefinite  number  of  times  does  not  mean  monotony  to 
a  little  child,  nor  to  a  sympathetic  teacher. 

Songs  repeated. — One  instance  is  the  refrain 
spoken  of  in  the  last  lesson,  sung  as  various  reasons 
for  thanks  are  named.  Other  songs,  applicable  to  many 
common  experiences  in  a  child's  life,  and  so  coming 
in  appropriately  during  the  progress  of  the  circle  talk, 
are  the  following: 

"Happy  as  a  robin, 
Gentle  as  a  dove, 
That's  the  sort  of  little  child 
Every  one  will  love."1 — Emilie  Poulsson. 

Happy  Thought2 

"The  world  is  so  full  of  a  number  of  things, 
I'm  sure  we  should  all  be  as  happy  as  kings." 

— Stevenson. 
A  Thought2 

"It  is  very  nice  to  think 
The  world  is  full  of  meat  and  drink, 
With  little  children  saying  grace, 
In  every  Christian  kind  of  place." 

— Stevenson. 


i  From  In  the  Child's  World,  Milton  Bradley  Company.  Music 
in  Songs  for  Little  People,  The  Pilgrim  Press. 

2  Prom  A  Child's  Garden  of  Verses,  Charles  Scribner's  Sons. 
Music  in  Songs  for  Little  People. 


64  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

One  of  the  songs  that  can  be  repeated  with  slight 
variations  is  this: 

"Father  in  heaven,  I'm  glad  as  can  be 
For  the  good  milkman  who's  working  for  me.  J 

The  policeman,  postman,  fireman,  and  carpenter 
each  have  a  verse  in  the  song,  and  the  children  often 
elect  other  workmen  to  be  sung  about.  The  signal  to 
stop  this  song  usually  comes  from  the  teacher,  as  the 
children  find  it  fascinating.  Its  mission  is  accom- 
plished if  it  fills  the  children  with  enthusiasm  over 
those  who  work  for  them. 

Songs  of  one  verse  and  for  single  occasions. — 
Songs  of  but  one  verse  are  preferable,  and  are  becom- 
ing more  and  more  common.  This  is  particularly  the 
case  with  a  seasonal  song,  or  one  of  only  passing  value. 

It  is  rarely  worth  while  to  teach  a  song  for  a  single 
occasion,  such  as  New  Year,  for  example.  It  is  far 
better  to  change  the  words  ".New  Year"  to  the  Christ- 
mas greeting,  or  on  both  occasions  utilize  the  familiar 
"Good  morning  to  you"  as  a  seasonal  greeting.  The 
same  tune  can  carry  birthday  wishes  as  well. 

A  repertoire.— Let  us  think  out  a  well-chosen 
repertoire  for  our  department.  There  will  be  the  sin- 
gle greeting,  adapted  to  various  occasions,  the  opening 
prayer-song,  familiar  to  all,  because  it  is  sung  every 
Sunday,  and  a  short  seasonal  song.  Then  there 
should   be    some    expression    of    gratitude    so    simply 


3  From  The  Little  Child  and  the  Heavenly  Father. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  65 


phrased  that  it  can  be  sung  by  all  frequently,  and  a 
good-by  song,  coming  also  each  week. 

These  are  songs  reduced  to  their  lowest  terms.  Be- 
sides, there  probably  will  be  various  songs  interpreting 
the  themes,  as  they  come  along,  frequently,  as  was  sug- 
gested, sung  by  the  teacher  alone.  There  are,  of 
course,  other  endless  possibilities — a  Cradle-Roll  song, 
giving  song,  Bible  verses  set  to  music,  and  numerous 
songs  illustrating  the  thought  of  the  hour.  Regard 
most  of  these  as  temptations,  and  preserve  the  joy  that 
simplicity  gives  little  children. 

Quality  of  songs. — The  best  is  none  too  good 
even  for  Beginners.  The  best  means  words  and  music 
of  good  musical  and  literary  quality.  The  best  also 
means  music  that  is  rhythmic  and  within  the  compass 
of  a  little  child's  voice,  and  words  simple  as  well  as 
beautiful. 

The  limited  number  of  songs  possible  for  a  Begin- 
ners' Department  makes  it  most  desirable  that  each  one 
shall  be  well  worth  including. 

Music  without  words. — Music  without  words  has 
its  place  in  the  Beginners'  Department.  A  few  chords 
are  wonderfully  quieting.  A  happy  little  tune  arouses 
interest.  The  tune  of  a  familiar  hymn  gives  a  feeling 
of  reverence.  Music,  too,  often  accompanies  play,  and 
helps  the  stream  to  tinkle  as  it  winds,  and  birds  to  hop, 
and  trees  to  sway,  and  child-carpenters  to  pound 
briskly,  and  child-mothers  to  quiet  babies.  In  any 
such  use  of  music  it  is  important  that  there  shall  be 
no  thought  of  a  drill  or  doing  things  well  to  music- 


66  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

The  music  is  used  merely  to  intensify  the  play  spirit. 

The  purpose  of  songs. — We  are  more  likely  to 
use  songs  with  discrimination  if  we  appreciate  their 
purpose.  This  is  chiefly  to  arouse  or  increase  feeling. 
The  psychological  moment  for  a  song  of  thanks  is 
after,  not  before,  God's  gifts  have  been  mentioned  in 
conversation  or  story.  An  alert  teacher  will  suggest 
a  bright  song  when  the  children  are  listless.  She,  or 
the  pianist,  will  be  quick  to  perceive  when  conversation 
or  story-telling  or  play  or  handwork  are  losing  their 
effectiveness,  and  a  song  will  best  continue  the  thought. 
So  it  comes  about  that  songs  cannot  be  put  into  the 
program  didactically,  but  being  primarily  an  expres- 
sion of  feeling,  must  depend  upon  the  development  of 
feeling. 

Thus  songs  are  distributed  through  the  program 
rather  than  used  at  the  beginning  and  close,  as  in 
higher  departments.  The  continuous  session,  with- 
out separating  into  classes,  makes  this  possible. 

Methods  of  teaching  songs. — The  same  concep- 
tion of  the  purpose  of  songs  will  influence  methods  of 
teaching  them.  Words  that  are  to  be  used  in  express- 
ing emotions  must  be  learned  joyously  and  understand- 
ing!}^. The  simplest  songs  will  be  "absorbed"  without 
any  drill.  Teachers  are  too  ready  to  "snub  nature," 
as  some  one  puts  it.  Often  a  song  with  words  so 
simple  as  to  need  no  explanation  is  learned  through 
imitation.  Sing  and  sing  and  sing,  with  pictures,  con- 
versation or  objects,  to  make  interesting  and  clear 
what  you  are  singing  about,  and  soon  childish  voices 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  67 


will  join.     The  children  may  need  to  be  encouraged  to 
try,  but  that  is  all. 

A  song  taught. — Less  simple  songs  need  explana- 
tion and  teaching.  This  may  be  done  mechanically, 
line  by  line,  for  example: 

"Now,  children,  say  this  after  me: 

'Blooming  clover  blossoms.' 

"  'Blooming'  is  the  word — say  it.  Now  the  whole 
line.     Now  the  next: 

'Fresh  and  fair  to  see !' 

"Say  this  after  me.  Everybody!  I  didn't  hear 
Ruth.  Now  the  two  lines,  and  don't  forget  the 
'b-loom-ing',"  etc.  This  is  an  extreme  example  of 
drill  on  mere  words.  Suppose  instead  a  bunch  of 
clover  blossoms  is  examined  by  the  children  and  the 
teacher  says  quite  naturally: 

c  'Blooming  clover  blossoms,1 
Fresh  and  fair  to  see.' 

"Mary  may  hold  them  while  we  talk  to  them ; 

"  'Blooming   clover   blossoms, 
Fresh  and  fair  to  see.' 

"I  am  going  right  up  to  Mary  and  smell  of  the 
blooming  clover  blossoms  and  talk  to  them. 

"  'Blooming    clover   blossoms, 
Fresh  and  fair  to  see.' 


i  From  Song  Echoes  from  Child  Life,  Oliver  Ditson  Company. 


68  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

"Who  else  wants  to?  Who  else?  Shall  we  all  go? 
Clover  blossoms  have  other  visitors  besides  children. 
They  are  bees  that  buzz  and  go  after  honey.  Each 
child  may  go  to  one  of  us  teachers  and  let  us  show 
you  where  the  bees  find  the  honey. 

"Go  back  to  your  seats  and  I  will  tell  the  blooming 
blossoms  something  else. 

"  'While  you  live,  you  can  give 
Honey  to  the  bees.' 

"Let's  all  tell  them — again,  again. 

"I  shouldn't  want  to  step  on  them  and  crush  them 

in  the  fields,  should  you?     Show  me  how  carefully  you 

would   step   in   a  field  of  blooming  clover  blossoms, 

Carolyn. 

"  'And  we  will  not  crush  you 
Underneath  our  feet, 
While  we  go  to  and  fro, 
Through  the  fields  so  sweet/ 

"Let's  tell  them  the  rest  of  the  story.  Let's  tell 
them  all  about  it.  I  will  pick  out  some  red  clover  blos- 
soms. You  may  grow  here,  Mollie,  and  John  here, 
and  Sarah  here.  Let's  tell  these  children-clover  blos- 
soms the  first  of  the  story. 

"  'Blooming  clover  blossoms, 
Fresh  and  fair  to  see, 
While  you  live,  you  can  give 
Honey  to  the  bee.' 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  69 


"Let's  choose  some  bees  to  buzz  and  hum  and  get 
honey.  Let's  walk  through  the  fields  and  be  careful, 
and  tell  the  rest  of  the  story. 

"Now  I'll  sing  it  to  the  little  tune  we  hummed  last 
Sunday,  and  Miss  Brown  played  while  we  were  com- 
ing in.  Sing  with  me.  Let's  sing  it  while  we  walk 
through  the  fields.  Let's  sing  'Buzz  to  the  tune.  Let's 
be  getting  honey." 

Little  children's  singing. — A  group  of  little  chil- 
dren will  never  sing  correctly,  but  they  will  sing  joy- 
ously, and  that  is  all  we  desire.  There  will  always 
be  monotones,  usually  a  last  line  rendered  as  a  solo  by 
a  child  who  learns  through  repetition,  and  always 
some  who  enjoy  through  listening.  These  are  the 
children  who  may  hold  the  illustrative  picture  or 
object,  or  be  active  in  interpretative  play.  Occasionally 
a  musical  child  will  sing  a  song  alone,  and  the  chil- 
dren's musical  ability  be  tested  by  telling  what  songs 
the  piano  plays.  They  will  delight  in  choosing  favorite 
songs  by  whispering  their  choices  to  the  pianist,  or  by 
showing  or  drawing  pictures  about  their  songs.  If  a 
child  spontaneously  suggests  a  song  bearing  on  the 
subject,  how  satisfied  a  teacher  feels  that  music  is 
fulfilling  its  function  for  her  children ! 

Questions 

i.  Give  the  least  possible  number  of  songs  neces- 
sary for  the  Beginners'  Department. 

2.  Show  how  one  song  may  be  repeated  many  times 
without  monotony. 


70  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

3.  Explain  how  variety  may  be  obtained  without 
trying  to  teach  more  songs  than  children  can  learn. 

4.  What  place  has  music  without  words? 

5.  What  will  decide  the  number  of  songs  in  the 
program  ? 

6.  Illustrate  teaching  poorly  and  well  some  other 
song  than  the  one  used  as  an  example  in  this  chapter. 

7.  Give  your  idea  of  the  test  of  the  function  of 
music. 

Problems  for  Discussion 

A.  The  child  who  sings  loudly  his  own  words  dur- 
ing a  song. 

B.  The  child  who  refuses  to  try  to  sing. 

C.  The  child  who  sings  a  line  behind  the  others. 

D.  How  to  insure  the  use  of  songs  at  home. 


Methods  for   Teachers  of  Beginners  71 


LESSON  VIII 
GIVING  AND  THE  MISSIONARY  SPIRIT 

There  must  be  a  cooperative  group-life  in  the  class  in 
which  all  participate  as  best  they  can.  The  children  must  find 
some  enterprises  which  carry  out  in  one  way  or  another  some 
truly  Christian  motive.  The  best  condition  is  obtained  when 
this  enterprise  is  itself  definite  cooperation  with  others  out- 
side t  he  class,  whether  in  the  rest  of  the  school  or  with  some 
neighboring  family,  or  with  neglected  or  overfavored  children, 
or  with  children  of  distant  lands  who  are  needed  to  enlarge 
the  fellowship  of  the  Beginners,  and  who  also,  it  may  be,  need 
the  loving  help  of  our  children. — Hugh  Hartshorne,  in  Child- 
hood and  Character. 

The  offering. — A  part  of  every  Beginners'  pro- 
gram is  the  offering.  This  often  assumes  undue  im- 
portance in  the  eyes  of  a  teacher  or,  perhaps  we  should 
say  more  truly,  she  puts  the  wrong  emphasis  on  its 
importance.  First,  then,  we  must  consider  the  use 
that  is  made  of  the  money  brought  by  the  children. 

In  some  cases  all  or  part  goes  toward  a  fund  for 
buying  supplies.  In  other  words,  the  children  pay  for 
the  folders  and  story  papers  they  take  home,  for  the 
teachers'  text-books,  for  the  large  pictures  she  uses  in 
teaching,  and  occasionally  for  their  share  of  the 
pleasures  offered  them  by  the  school,  such  as  the 
annual  picnic  and  Christmas  gifts.  This  is  quite 
opposite  from  their  experiences  in  public  kindergarten, 
where  the  town  buys  all  supplies  through  a  system  of 
taxation  of  all  its  property  owners,  parents  or  other- 


72 Methods  for  Teachers  of  Begin n ers 

wise.  It  bars  out  any  honest  comment  upon  the  offer- 
ing, any  offering  prayer  or  suggestions  of  generosity. 
It  is  a  commercial  transaction,  paying  for  value  re- 
ceived. In  such  cases  there  is  usually  an  attempt  at 
an  additional  or  occasional  offering  that  is  actually  a 
gift. 

More  enlightened  churches  adopt  the  policy  of  the 
public  school,  and  tax  their  membership  for  supplies 
needed  for  the  religious  education  of  their  children. 
This  policy  regards  the  offerings  brought  by  the  chil- 
dren as  a  means  of  awakening  the  missionary  spirit, 
and  of  sharing  the  responsibility  for  certain  church 
expenses.  If  this  manner  of  financing  the  school  is 
impossible,  a  group  of  people  especially  interested  in 
little  children's  education  may  be  secured  to  furnish 
their  yearly  supplies,  or  the  teachers  and  parents  may 
undertake  this. 

Giving  to  the  church. — There  is  an  important 
difference  between  buying  their  own  educational  sup- 
plies with  their  offerings  and  giving  toward  some 
definite  church  object.  Even  little  children  should  feel 
some  responsibility  toward  the  up-keep  of  their  room, 
perhaps  giving  the  coal  that  heats  it,  each  year  adding 
something  to  its  permanent  equipment,  and  having  a 
part  in  every  great  church-improvement  enterprise, 
such  as  painting  a  door,  or  giving  a  certain  number 
of  bricks.  Such  giving  is  the  prelude  to  regular  adult 
giving  to  the  church. 

Gifts  to  outside  causes.— Besides  this  there 
should  be  gifts  to  causes  outside  one's  own  church. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  73 

Just  here  lies  our  great  danger  of  regarding  our  chil- 
dren as  means  to  an  immediate  rather  than  a  far-off 
end.  Instead  of  planning  in  a  statesmanlike  way  the 
best  methods  of  arousing  the  missionary  spirit,  we  are 
apt  to  make  use  of  the  children  in  the  support  of 
causes  that  appeal  to  us.  The  Beginners'  Department 
is  not  organized  as  a  philanthropic  institution.  It  is 
for  religious  nurture.  There  is  no  religious  education 
in  taking  the  children's  offering  for  causes  in  which 
they  have  not  the  slightest  interest.  This  is  exploi- 
tation, pure  and  simple.  A  discerning  teacher  terms 
this  highway  robbery,  just  as  she  calls  using  the  offer- 
ing to  buy  the  supplies  "turning  Sunday  school  into  a 
mere  news-stand."  By  no  stretch  of  the  imagination 
can  it  be  called  an  "offering." 

Choosing  the  cause. — There  are  plenty  of  causes 
which  will  interest  little  children,  but  every  cause  must 
be  tested  from  the  standpoint  of  the  child  rather  than 
the  cause.  "Is  it  capable  of  arousing  the  missionary 
spirit  in  children  four  and  five?"  we  ask,  for  our  task 
is  far  greater  than  to  support  a  particular  cause  at  a 
particular  time.  It  is  to  make  missionaries.  It  is  to 
so  direct  and  develop  the  inborn  instinct  of  kindly  feel- 
ing toward  one's  fellow  men  that  one's  wish  is  to 
share — food,  clothes,  money,  pleasures,  thoughts, 
friends, — everything  that  makes  one  happy.  The 
habit  of  regular  giving  is  a  part  of  this  large  program, 
but  the  cause  must  be  definite  and  appealing. 

Gaining  interest. — I  can  hear  some  teachers'  men- 
tal comment,  "Missionary  instruction  in  the  offering 


74  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

service/'  and  see  a  big  hole  in  the  program  for  this 
purpose.  This  is  neither  necessary  nor  wise.  Leave 
customs  of  other  lands  and  tales  of  people  unlike  us 
for  higher  departments.  It  is  enough  for  the  Begin- 
ners to  know  that  there  are  children  who  haven't 
enough  to  eat  or  to  keep  warm — children  far  away  or 
near  by,  it  doesn't  matter — just  children  like  them.  So 
they  transform  their  pennies  into  food  and  clothes 
magically,  as  they  drop  them  into  the  bank  or  basket. 

"Mine  is  bread,"  the  teacher  says.  "What  is  yours, 
Jack?"  "Ice-cream,"  asserts  Jack,  with  blissful  un- 
consciousness of  the  purchasing  power  of  one  cent. 
"Mine  is  oranges,"  cries  another.  "Candy!"  "Eggs!" 
"Chicken !"  chorus  the  rest.  It  is  a  very  real  offering 
indeed  when  a  little  tin  bank  is  crowded  full  of  real 
food,  and  an  entire  wardrobe  of  suits  and  new  shoes, 
hair  ribbons  and  sweaters.  The  magic  of  play  does  it. 
Do  you  see  how  much  more  effectually  than  stories  of 
customs  and  manners  and  tragedies?  Next  best  to 
packing  a  market-basket  for  a  local  family  is  crowding 
a  bank  with  play-food.  At  Christmas  the  money  may 
go  into  tiny  colored  silk  bags  on  a  miniature  tree,  and 
by  the  touch  of  a  child's  finger  each  bag  be  changed 
into  the  things  it  will  buy,  so  that  the  children  see  a 
wondrous  Christmas  tree  from  which  hang  bottles 
of  milk,  mittens,  candy,  caps,  and  cookies. 

Community  gifts. — Far-away  children  will  not 
arouse  the  spirit  of  giving  as  much  as  those  who  can 
be  really  seen — the  family  to  whom  one  takes  the 
Christmas  tree,  hung  with  gifts  bought  with  the  pen- 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  75 

nies ;  the  children's  hospital,  that  one  passes  on  the 
way  to  the  church  school,  for  which  a  picture  is 
bought ;  the  Home  where  the  yard  swarms  with  chil- 
dren who  do  not  know  some  Beginners  are  planning  to 
buy  gifts  for  them.  Such  near-by  "causes"  are  very 
interesting,  and  can  be  made  more  so  through  play. 
The  children  play,  for  instance,  that  they  are  sick  abed 
in  a  hospital  and  asleep.  One  child  places  the  gift 
picture  on  the  wall.  They  awake  and  exclaim  over  it, 
and  the  thrill  of  delight  they  experience  makes  giving 
very  attractive. 

Some  of  their  money  goes  still  nearer  home — to  their 
own  sick  classmates.  This  is  the  birthday  money, 
which  they  put  in  a  particular  receptacle.  They  choose 
what  the  money  shall  buy — a  tiny  blossoming  plant,  a 
toy,  a  little  book,  a  box  of  Japanese  water-flowers,  a 
big  orange — and  Monday  the  teacher  does  the  buying 
and  delivering.  Nor  does  it  dim  the  purity  of  a  child's 
good-will  to  anticipate  that  sickness  and  a  gift  may 
some  day  be  his  portion ! 

Place  in  program. — A  double  offering,  one  for 
missionary  enterprises  and  one  for  one's  own  church, 
with  the  birthday  bank  for  class  kindnesses,  is  feasible. 
Does  it  seem  to  you  that  this  way  of  making  giving 
interesting  will  use  up  more  than  the  time  for  the 
offering  given  in  our  tentative  program?  It  will, 
indeed,  and  not  every  Sunday  will  there  be  time  for  so 
much  elaboration ;  but  at  Thanksgiving  and  Christmas 
and  at  certain  other  times  of  the  year  the  use  of  the 
money   will   be   made   so   vivid  that   the   dropping  of 


76  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

pennies  will  always  bring  up  a  delightful  sense  of 
sharing  with  those  in  need,  and  the  birthday  pennies 
will  always  mean  some  friend  made  happy. 

Offering  service. — In  Lesson  V  the  offering  ser- 
vice was  included  as  a  part  of  each  Sunday's  program. 
Refer  to  the  suggestions  made  there.  Do  not  forget 
that  upon  the  offering  service  depends  the  value  of 
the  offering  in  the  minds  of  the  children.  Its  effective- 
ness does  not  necessitate  great  length,  but  it  does 
demand  impressiveness.  An  offering  song,  or  an  of- 
fering prayer,  or  a  word  or  two  of  comment  effects 
this.  Rarely  should  all  three  be  used.  Variety  in  the 
way  of  referring  to  the  offering  wins  attention.  The 
repetition  that  little  children  like  will  come  in  the 
manner  in  which  the  money  is  collected — either 
dropped  in  a  basket  during  a  march,  or  gathered  up 
by  appointed  children.  If  there  is  an  offering  song 
this,  too,  will  invariably  be  the  same  one. 

Source  of  the  offering. — There  are  teachers  who 
are  particular  that  the  children's  offering  shall  be 
money  earned  by  home  tasks.  This  seems  to  me 
straining  a  point  with  Beginners.  I  should  rather 
their  first  little  helpful  acts  at  home  should  be  done 
with  no  money  reward,  and  that  the  money  they  take 
for  the  offering  should  be  frankly  considered  a  de- 
lightful cooperation  between  their  parents  and  them- 
selves. Father's  pennies  give  father  a  share  in  the 
giving  that  is  made  so  important  and  so  pleasurable. 
I  see  no  reason  for  the  artificial  play  at  making  the 
money  the  value  of  work  rendered.     There  is  a  very 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  77 


great  value  in  never  forgetting  one's  money,  in  bring- 
ing extra  for  special  occasions,  and  in  paying  up  for 
absent  Sundays.  It  forms  the  habit  of  regular  giving. 
The  objection  sometimes  made  to  calling  the  offering 
"pennies"  seems  to  me  trivial.  Children  usually  do 
bring  pennies,  and  can  easily  be  led  to  want  to  bring 
more  than  one.  I  do  not  believe  this  early  habit  need 
be  a  cause  for  sticking  to  the  penny  offering  through- 
out one's  church-school  course. 

After  all,  you  will  see  that  immediate  causes  are 
helped  even  when  the  emphasis  is  upon  the  givers 
and  not  the  causes.  Check  yourself  up  short  every 
now  and  then  during  the  year  and  ask:  "Do  my 
children  know  to  what  they  are  giving?  Do  they 
delight  in  giving?  Do  they  give  regularly?  Have  I 
helped  them  to  enter  into  the  joy  of  the  recipients? 
Is  the  offering  service  so  perfunctory  that  the  mission- 
ary spirit  is  killed?  Is  it  so  elaborate  that  this  spirit 
is  stifled?  Is  their  giving  well  proportioned  between 
causes  near  at  hand  and  far  away? 

Questions 

1.  State  briefly  the  possible  uses  of  the  offering, 
and  their  effect  on  the  children. 

2.  Give  your  idea  of  the  most  ideal  way  to  finance 
the  Beginners'  Department. 

3.  How  can  giving  to  one's  church  be  made  in- 
teresting? to  children  one  never  sees?  to  those  in  the 
community?  to  sick  classmates? 

4.  Can  the  money  children  bring  be  a  real  gift  if 
they  do  not  earn  it? 


78  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


5.  Why  shall  the  purpose  of  the  offering  not  be 
emphasized  every  Sunday? 

6.  Explain  just  what  you  want  the  offering  to  ac- 
complish in  the  children's  religious  education. 

Assignment  for  Observation 

1.  Note  and  criticize  the  kind  and  amount  of  music 
used  and  its  effect. 

2.  Was  there  a  worshipful  spirit  and  to  what  do 
you  accredit  it?     If  not,  what  was  the  fault? 

3.  Watch  for  any  evidence  of  the  missionary  spirit 
connected  with  the  giving  or  purpose  of  the  offering. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  79 

LESSON  IX 
THE  USE  OF  PICTURES 

The  beautiful  is  as  useful  as  the  useful.  I'm  not  sure  but 
it's  more  so.— Victor  Hugo,  in  Les  Miserables. 

Pictures  and  children. — Were  an  argument  nec- 
essary to  assure  pictures  a  place  in  the  Beginners'  De- 
partment, we  might  go  back  to  the  first  books  that 
appeal  to  any  little  child  and  find  them  to  be  picture- 
books,  with  no  stories  whatsoever.  We  might  also 
offer  statistics  that  prove  beyond  the  shadow  of  a 
doubt  that  the  appeal  is  greater  through  the  eye  than 
through  the  ear. 

Pictures  belong  with  children  in  the  popular  mind 
as  much  as  stories  do,  and  one  cannot  imagine  the 
poorest  apology  of  a  Beginners'  room  without  them. 
One  can  imagine,  however,  pictures  that  are  inacces- 
sible, hung  so  high  they  are  quite  beyond  little  chil- 
dren's view.  One  can  also  imagine  a  teacher  clinging 
to  the  tradition  that  a  huge,  awkward  picture  roll  is 
necessary  for  class  teaching,  although  she  cannot  but 
realize  that  such  a  form  precludes  the  use  of  more 
than  one  picture  at  a  time.  One  who  has  observed 
the  delight  of  children  in  touching  and  talking  about 
pictures  that  illustrate  old  stories,  and  the  part  pictures 
play  in  awakening  thought,  is  satisfied  only  with  a  less 
cumbersome  form.     They  should  be  large  enough  to 


80  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

be  seen  by  a  moderate-sized  circle,  as  they  hang  on  the 
wall  or  are  held  by  the  teacher.  In  larger  classes  more 
than  one  copy  is  desirable. 

Limited  number. — The  temptation  with  pictures 
as  with  songs  is  to  use  too  many.  This  counteracts 
their  effectiveness.  Because  there  is  so  much  to  see, 
the  children  notice  nothing.  They  are  confused  and 
unconsciously  oppressed  by  the  mass  of  figure  and 
color  about  them,  and  when  asked  to  find  a  story  pic- 
ture, or  one  illustrating  the  theme,  are  bewildered 
among  so  many  possible  choices.  From  a  purely  peda- 
gogical standpoint,  as  well  as  from  artistic  considera- 
tions, too  many  pictures  are  bad.  It  is  fatal  to  make 
any  problem  so  difficult  as  to  discourage  a  child,  and 
Beginners  are  capable  of  only  simple  problems. 

Story  illustrations. — Let  us  think  first  of  the  pic- 
tures that  illustrate  the  stories.  These  help  the  children 
to  visualize  the  stories.  A  story  picture  is  nearly 
always  shown  directly  after  the  story  has  been  told. 
It  may  be  passed  from  child  to  child,  but  this  method 
leads  to  impatience  and  disorder.  A  better  way  is  to 
allow  a  group  to  gather  about  the  teacher,  as  she  holds 
it.  In  a  large  class  there  should  be  two  or  three  pic- 
tures, each  held  by  the  teacher  or  an  assistant,  and 
each  surrounded  by  its  little  group  of  interested 
children.  It  is,  of  course,  possible  for  the  children  to 
remain  in  their  chairs  and  look  at  the  picture,  but 
they  will  never  do  that  willingly,  as  touch  is  so  essential 
to  complete  appreciation.  Another  way  of  contenting 
everybody  is  to  show  the  single  large  picture  to  a  few 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  81 


children  at  a  time,  and  at  the  same  time  have  the 
folders  distributed,  so  that  each  one  has  a  picture, 
large  or  small,  to  examine. 

Waiting  for  comments. — Most  teachers  need  cau- 
tioning against  being  too  ready  to  make  comments  on 
the  pictures.  These  ought  to  come  spontaneously  from 
the  children.  A  question  about  what  they  see,  or  who 
can  find  the  principal  story  character,  is  permissible, 
but  it  is  usually  better  to  wait  and  let  the  children  say 
what  they  will,  unhindered. 

"There  he  is!  That's  Jesus."  " Where's  the  giant?" 
"I  see  the  squirrel."  "I  see  little  Lord  Jesus."  "Where 
are  the  cows  and  sheep?"  These  are  the  most  usual 
types  of  comments — interest  in  the  people  and  animals 
of  the  story.  The  small  folder  reproductions  elicit 
such  remarks  as,  "I've  found  my  squirrel,"  "I  see  my 
little  Lord  Jesus" — showing  a  sense  of  individual 
appropriation.  Rarely  a  response  of  feeling  will  come, 
as,  "Isn't  he  a  nice  man?"  "I  wouldn't  be  so  mean  to 
my  brother.  You  wouldn't  catch  me"  (with  one  arm 
about  his  brother,  commenting  on  the  picture  of  Joseph 
sold  into  slavery). 

Explanatory  pictures. — Occasionally  a  story  pic- 
ture paves  the  way  for  a  better  understanding  of  the 
story,  or  is  in  itself  an  introduction.  This  is  never 
the  case,  of  course,  when  the  picture  reveals  the  story 
plot.  A  picture  of  the  Wise-men  on  their  camels  may 
be  necessary  to  enable  the  children  to  vizualize  camels. 
The  picture  of  a  mother  giving  her  child  a  drink  will 
arouse  interest  in  a  story  of  God's  daily  gifts.     A  pic- 


82  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

ture  of  trees  makes  a  good  preparation  for  a  story  of 
God's  care  of  trees,  and  one  of  a  mother  and  baby 
is  an  excellent  approach  to  the  story  of  Jesus  and  the 
children. 

Place  in  the  room. — After  the  story  has  been  told 
and  commented  upon,  its  illustration  will  be  hung  low, 
and  remain  in  the  room  for  a  few  Sundays,  but  not  per- 
manently. It  is  important  that  it  shall  be  there  for  a 
time,  to  recall  the  story,  but  it  will  be  removed  when 
it  ceases  to  illustrate  the  theme  of  the  day  and  tends 
to  confusion  of  thought.  It  may  appear  again  on  a 
Sunday  when  stories  are  retold,  and  be  more  appre- 
ciated for  having  been  temporarily  out  of  sight. 

Illustrations  of  the  story  truth. — Another  type  of 
picture  illustrates  the  truth  of  the  story,  rather  than 
its  incidents.  This  is  often  the  case  when  a  story 
appears  in  the  course  a  second  time.  Children  giving 
milk  to  a  pet  cat  illustrates  kindness  to  animals  from 
a  child's  standpoint,  and  the  picture  of  David  and  the 
lamb  is  available  from  a  previous  use.  Children  doing 
errands,  amusing  babies,  saying  grace,  helping  old 
people,  and  otherwise  carrying  out  the  story  themes 
are  very  valuable  in  making  the  themes  clear  and  are 
usable  in  awakening  thought  and  inspiring  to  action. 
They  give,  also,  a  childlike  appearance  to  the  room, 
not  always  obtained  from  the  Bible  story  pictures. 
However,  it  might  be  said  in  passing  that  it  is  an 
erroneous  idea  that  children  are  interested  only  in 
pictures  of  children,  animals,  and  nature.  If  a  story 
has   appealed   they  want  to   see  how  the   characters 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  83 


looked,  and  find  more  real  satisfaction  over  David, 
Joseph,  Elijah,  and  Daniel  than  in  attractive  little 
nameless  boys  and  girls.  Old  Mother  Hubbard  and 
Jack  Sprat  and  his  wife  are  not  childlike  figures,  per  se, 
but  they  are  beloved  by  children. 

This  type  of  picture  we  need  to  use  with  restraint, 
the  more  so  because  it  is  so  easy  to  add  to  their  num- 
ber from  such  outside  sources  as  magazine  covers  and 
advertisements.  Suppose  your  object  is  to  impress  the 
charm  of  kindness  by  pictures.  You  have  added  to 
recent  pictures  of  stories  on  this  theme  a  new  picture 
of  a  child  feeding  chickens,  one  of  a  baby  being  amused 
by  a  sister,  and  a  third  of  a  child  handing  another  an 
orange.  These  pictures  hang  on  the  low  strip  of 
burlap  included  in  your  circle.  You  say,  "Jack,  find 
the  picture  of  somebody  who  was  kind,"  and  Jack, 
after  mature  deliberation  or  instantly,  according  to  his 
temperament,  touches  Elisha  on  his  way  to  his  little 
room,  or  the  shepherd  bringing  home  his  lost  sheep, 
or  a  child  in  one  of  the  new  pictures.  If  you  change 
to  the  question,  "Who  can  find  a  kind  person?"  you 
will  have  a  grand  rush  toward  the  pictures.  Some 
child  may  surprise  you  by  discovering  in  one  of  the 
permanent  pictures  the  answer  to  your  question — per- 
haps Jesus  in  the  midst  of  the  children.  A  shy  child 
may  need  to  be  encouraged  to  show  what  he  really 
knows,  and  a  cock-sure  child  to  prove  his  knowledge, 
but  this  use  of  pictures  is  sure  to  awaken  thought. 

Seasonal  pictures. — Another  kind  of  picture  is 
the  seasonal  picture.     Many  of  these  are  story  pic- 


84  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

tures,  as  much  of  the  teaching  is  through  nature.  To 
this  picture  may  be  added  an  infinite  number  obtained 
from  magazines  and. prints,  and  here  again  comes  the 
temptation  of  crowding  the  room  with  the  wealth  of 
material  available.  The  seasonal  story  pictures  will, 
of  course,  hang  on  the  wall  as  they  occur  in  the  course. 
A  use  of  additional  nature  pictures  that  will  be  novel 
and  so  call  attention  to  them  is  to  keep  them  hidden 
and  produce  them,  one  by  one,  to  an  eager  circle 
required  to  await  their  appearance  with  closed  eyes. 
Another  fascinating  use  of  such  pictures  is  to  have 
them  laid  upon  a  low  table  or  window-seat,  concealed 
by  a  screen,  and  then,  as  the  weather  or  a  seasonal 
event  is  mentioned,  to  send  a  child  to  the  table  to  find 
and  bring  back  "a  bluebird,"  or  "a  picture  of  sliding 
on  the  snow/'  or  "children  in  the  rain,"  as  the  case 
may  be.  Such  pictures  are  usually  colored,  and  pic- 
tures of  flowers  and  birds  are  not  attractive  to  children 
unless  they  are.  Squirrels,  cats,  horses,  and  cows,  on 
the  other  hand,  are  as  interesting  uncolored.  These 
colored  pictures  are  more  effective  in  contrast  to 
others  in  sepia. 

Use  of  pictures. — Great  variety  in  teaching  meth- 
ods comes  from  the  ingenious  use  of  pictures.  They 
serve  to  indicate  the  children's  choice  of  old  stories. 
Otherwise  their  replies  to  what  stories  they  want  re- 
told are  not  definite.  They  form  a  delightful  way  of 
choosing  songs,  particularly  seasonal  songs.  The  pic- 
tures of  Jesus  will  suggest  songs  about  him,  or  prayers 
to  him.    Once  in  a  while  an  unusually  thoughtful  child 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  85 


will  connect  a  picture  expressing  kindness  or  bravery 
or  happiness  with  a  song  that  has  the  same  theme.  A 
"picture  walk,"  passing  from  one  picture  which  sug- 
gests a  song  to  another,  is  very  interesting. 

Bible  verses  are  saved  from  becoming  mere  repe- 
titions by  connecting  them  with  pictures.  "Find  all 
the  pictures  that  make  you  think  'God  is  love/  "  the 
teacher  says,  and  the  response  is  surprising.  "  'Your 
heavenly  Father  feedeth  them/3'  she  repeats.  "Say 
this  to  any  pictures  of  birds  or  animals  in  this  room." 
There  is  an  eager  search,  and  not  only  nature  pictures 
are  pointed  out,  but  the  verse  is  repeated  about  the 
dogs  and  cow  and  donkey  in  LeRolle's  "Nativity," 
and  other  animals  or  birds  which  are  simply  picture 
details.  "  'God  is  my  helper/  "  the  children  say,  point- 
ing to  story  characters  who  might  say  this — to  Ish- 
mael,  Daniel,  and  Noah. 

Thus  are  pictures  only  incidentally  decorations. 
They  awaken  thought,  and,  as  was  suggested  in  the 
chapter  on  prayer,  they  are  one  of  the  means  of 
creating  a  worshipful  atmosphere. 

Questions 

i.  How  will  the  use  of  pictures  determine  their 
form? 

2.  What  is  the  function  of  story  pictures? 

3.  How  and  when  shall  they  be  shown? 

4.  What  type  of  picture  should  be  shown  before 
the  story? 

5.  How  long  should  a  story  picture  remain  in  the 
room? 


86  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

6.  To  what  use  can  pictures  illustrating  a  story's 
truth  be  put  ?     Illustrate  concretely. 

7.  Give  your  ideas  as  to  the  number  and  value  of 
seasonal  pictures. 

8.  Should  all  pictures  be  colored? 

9.  Suggest  various  uses  of  pictures. 

Problems  for  Discussion 

A.  A  department  cannot  afford  large  teaching  pic- 
tures and  individual  small  pictures,  with  the  attached 
story,  to  be  taken  home.    Which  should  you  choose? 

B.  Sources  for  extra  pictures. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  87 


LESSON  X 
THE  STORY  PERIOD 

The  here  and  now  disappears  as  the  narrator  lifts  his  invisi- 
ble wand,  and  the  listener  journeys  by  roads  of  never  ceasing 
wonders  into  lands  of  enchantment. — Katherine  Dunlap  Cather, 
in  Educating  by  Story-Telling. 

When  once  you  have  said  a  thing,  that  fixes  it,  and  you 
must  take  the  consequences. — Lewis  Carroll,  in  Alice  Through 
the  Looking-Glass. 

Let  me  never  tag  a  moral  to  a  story,  nor  tell  a  story  without 
a  meaning. — Henry  van  Dyke,  A  Writer s  Request  of  His 
Master. 

Place  of  the  story. — In  our  tentative  program 
the  story  period  was  made  the  climax.  The  reason 
for  this  was  to  send  the  children  home  when  the  finest 
impression  had  been  made,  with  nothing  following  to 
destroy  it.  There  is  little  question  that  the  story  makes 
the  finest  impression. 

Its  length. — The  story  itself  does  not  fill  the  en- 
tire period.  Little  children  cannot  listen  attentively 
more  than  six  or  eight  minutes,  and  five  or  even  three 
minutes  are  long  enough  for  the  usual  story.  In  order 
to  be  told  in  so  short  a  time  the  Beginners'  story,  more 
than  any  other,  needs  to  be  carefully  prepared.  Not 
an  instant  can  be  spent  in  rambling,  not  a  word  too 
many  put  in.  The  words  that  can  usually  be  spared 
are  adjectives.  The  sections  that  can  most  wisely 
be  skipped  are  the  descriptions.  The  sentences  that 
are  best  attended  to  are  the  short  ones. 


88  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

How  to  tell  it. — This  short  story  that  fills  a  part 
of  the  story  period  is  full  of  action,  and  told  simply 
yet  dramatically.  The  story-teller  does  not  feel  hur- 
ried, even  if  she  does  occasionally  hurry  her  words. 
Speaking  rapidly,  as  one  relates  interesting  events,  is 
a  very  different  matter  from  haste  for  fear  one  may 
not  get  through  in  time.  If  the  story  contains  pathos, 
it  is  told  with  feeling,  although  the  story-teller's  voice 
does  not  quaver.  Because  she  feels,  so  do  her  children. 
If  it  is  a  story  of  bravery  and  fine  action,  her  children 
are  thrilled  as  she  is.  If  the  story  is  impressive,  such 
as  those  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  children  reflect  the 
story-teller's  tender  appreciation.  A  story  of  familiar, 
every-day  happenings  is  told  in  a  quiet  and  intimate 
fashion. 

The  secret  of  story-telling  is  the  abandon  of  the 
story-teller.  She  tells  her  story  well  when  she  forgets 
herself.  She  tells  it  best  when  she  forgets  both 
herself  and  her  children.  Then  the  story  grips 
her.  She  lives  in  it.  She  is  not  telling  the  story.  She 
is  living  the  story.  The  inevitable  effect  upon  the 
children  is  that  they  forget  her  and  remember  the 
story.  It  grips  them.  They  live  in  it.  They  reflect 
her  feeling,  because  her  feeling  is  that  of  the  story 
characters.  If  she  exaggerates  this  feeling  for  the 
sake  of  effect,  curiously  enough,  the  effect  is  lost,  and 
her  listeners  remain  unmoved.  Artificiality  is  always 
detected. 

In  the  few  moments  allotted  her  she  has  the  oppor- 
tunity   of    making    a    vivid    and    lasting    impression. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  89 

Through  her  story  she  sums  up  the  thought  of  the 
hour,  or  gives  a  new  idea.  As  the  new  story  picture  is 
added  to  those  upon  the  wall,  just  so  truly  a  new 
story  picture  is  hung  in  the  picture  galleries  of  the 
children's  minds.  No  artist  who  succeeds  in  repro- 
ducing a  masterpiece  can  have  more  complete  satis- 
faction than  she,  when  she  paints  the  old  Bible  char- 
acters vividly.  No  landscape  painter  can  enjoy  better 
making  a  bit  of  beauty  permanent  than  she  enjoys 
showing  her  children  God  in  nature. 

Gaining  attention. — However,  story-telling  is  a 
subject  too  big  for  a  single  chapter  of  a  single  book, 
and  an  entire  unit  of  this  training  course  is  devoted  to 
it.1  The  function  of  this  lesson  is  to  discuss  the 
story  period,  of  which  the  story  itself  is  only  a  part. 

A  part  of  the  program  so  vital  and  yet  so  brief,  so 
impressive  and  yet  so  simple,  needs  to  be  protected 
from  harm,  as  a  precious  jewel  is  put  in  a  setting. 
This  setting  we  call  the  story  preparation.  In  the 
chapter  on  the  program  we  spoke  of  physical  prepara- 
tion through  movement  or  play,  which  prevents  in- 
attention caused  by  restlessness.  There  is  mental 
preparation  which  is  fully  as  important.  We  want  the 
children  to  anticipate  the  story,  and  to  get  the  most 
possible  out  of  it. 

The  teacher  may  arouse  anticipation  by  a  change 
of  grouping.  "Let's  all  sit  close  together  on  the  rug, 
while  I  tell  you  the  story/'  she  may  say;  or,  "Move 


l  Story-Telling,  by  Katherine  Dunlap  Cather. 


90 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


your  chairs  nearer  to  me,  for  the  story."  She  may 
simply  make  an  announcement,  as,  "Listen,  and  I  will 
tell  you  a  story";  or,  "Are — you — ready — for — the — 
story?"  She  may  put  an  end  to  the  confusion  of 
settling  down  after  play  by  remarking,  impressively, 
"When  the  clock  is  the  only  sound  I  hear,  I  shall  begin 
my  story" ;  or,  "I  have  closed  my  eyes.  When  I  can't 
hear  a  child  move,  I  shall  open  them  and  begin  my 


storv." 


She  may  hint  at  the  story  subject  as  "the  story  of  a 
baby,"  or  "a  sheep  story,"  or  "another  story  about 
Jesus."  She  may  get  the  children  to  talk  about  family 
life,  or  rainy  days,  or  ants,  or  whatever  may  be  the 
subject  of  the  story  to  be  told. 

She  may  show  a  picture  that  will  arouse  interest 
and  yet  not  give  away  the  story  plot.  You  remember 
in  the  lesson  on  pictures  several  subjects  were  men- 
tioned that  can  be  used  in  this  way. 

Story  preparation. — These  are  all  devices  for 
gaining  attention  and  arousing  interest.  There  is  an- 
other kind  of  story  preparation  that  may  be  necessary. 
This  is  an  explanation  of  something  unfamiliar  to  the 
children,  which  comes  into  the  story.  Explanations  in 
the  midst  of  a  story  are  decidedly  out  of  order,  so  any 
such  things  should  be  cleared  up  beforehand.  For 
instance,  the  camels  in  the  story  of  the  Wise-men,  or 
the  sheep  in  the  story  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  may  not 
be  familiar,  so  there  will  be  a  little  conversation  about 
sheep  or  camels,  with  pictures  or  toy  animals  for 
illustration. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  91 

Another  kind  of  story  preparation  is  to  focus  the 
thought  upon  the  truth  in  the  story,  so  that  the  chil- 
dren will  be  more  certain  to  get  its  message.  Sup- 
pose the  story  is  about  Jacob  sending  Joseph  to  find 
his  brothers.  Before  it  is  told  the  children  play  "doing 
errands"  for  the  teacher,  who  represents  the  mother. 
She  praises  their  quick  obedience,  care,  and  cheerful- 
ness, and  they  are  more  ready  to  see  these  same 
virtues  in  Joseph. 

The  story  may  be  "Ruth  in  the  Barley  Field,"  and 
it  is  preceded  by  crude  drawings  of  things  the  children 
use  in  helping  their  mothers.  By  this  means  they  are 
made  more  alert  to  appreciate  Ruth's  helpfulness.  The 
story  may  be  about  the  baby  Moses,  and  the  prepara- 
tion telling  what  their  mothers  did  to  get  them  ready 
for  Sunday  school. 

Story  preparation  will  not  be  lengthy,  nor  will  it  be 
the  same  each  Sunday.  It  will  be  carefully  planned, 
though  subject  to  change.  Its  test  is  whether  it  makes 
a  good  setting  for  the  story,  so  that  the  truth  in  the 
story  will  not  be  lost  and  its  charm  will  be  enhanced. 

Repetition  and  interruptions. — Little  children's 
response  to  a  story  may  be,  "Tell  it  again !"  If  there 
is  time  and  if  the  demand  from  one  is  seconded  by  the 
others,  by  word  or  look,  no  true  story-teller  will  hesi- 
tate. She  will  probably  need  to  suggest  a  moment  of 
play,  or  change  of  position  before  the  second  relation, 
but  she  is  certain  of  a  more  attentive  audience  to  a 
twice-told  tale  than  to  one  that  is  unfamiliar. 

So  much  is  said  in  these  days  about  allowing  chil- 


92  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

dren  freedom  that  the  question  arises  whether  even  for 
five  minutes  the  teacher  has  a  right  to  be  the  only 
speaker.  We  must  realize  that  interrupting  a  story  is 
a  different  matter  from  taking  part  in  the  circle  talk. 
The  child  who  interrupts  a  story  about  birds  with  a 
comment  upon  his  new  coat  deserves  to  be  rebuked  or 
ignored.  He  is  adding  nothing  to  the  enjoyment  of 
the  moment.  He  is  an  interrupter  and  not  a  contribu- 
tor. Suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  he  breaks  in  with, 
"A  bird  built  a  nest  right  in  my  tree."  The  sympa- 
thetic story-teller  welcomes  that  incident  as  part  of  her 
bird  story. 

The  story  of  Noah's  ark  is  not  interrupted  when  a 
child  adds  to  the  animal  pairs  entering  it  the  elephants 
which  the  teacher  failed  to  mention.  The  story  of 
"The  Rain  a  Helper"  gains  in  interest  if  child  voices 
join  in  the  repetitive  phrase,  "And  still  the  water- 
drops  lay  quietly  in  the  pond."  The  story  of  Jesus  and 
the  fishermen  does  not  lag  because  children  imitate 
the  teacher's  action  as  she  lowers  and  raises  a  net  in 
pantomime.  Interruptions  should  be  suppressed,  but 
the  question  to  be  considered  is,  What  are  interrup- 
tions ? 

After  the  story. — The  most  carefully  set  jewel 
might  still  be  lost  were  it  not  fastened  securely  to  the 
wearer's  breast.  So  too  the  story,  vivid  and  yet  sim- 
ple, set  in  careful  preparation,  may  be  forgotten  unless 
it  is  given  a  permanent  place  in  the  listeners'  hearts. 
After  the  story  the  one  thing  to  be  done  is  to  intensify 
the  feeling  it  has  created.    This  may  often  be  achieved 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  93 

by  a  song  which  expresses  the  same  thought,  by  a  brief 
prayer,  or  a  Bible  verse.  It  may  be  the  story  picture 
that  crystallizes  the  story  truth  so  perfectly  it  can 
never  be  forgotten.     It  may  be  an  additional  picture. 

Questions,  reviews,  or  handwork  that  merely  serve 
to  recall  the  story  incidents  are  a  waste  of  these  last 
moments.  Leave  such  things  till  next  week's  circle 
talk.  Do  you  wish  to  play  Chopin  with  one  hand  after 
listening  to  Paderewski?  That  unpleasant  and  un- 
pedagogical  process  known  as  "pointing  the  moral"  is 
simply  an  admission  of  failure  on  the  story-teller's 
part.     Her  story  was  her  chance  for  appeal. 

Occasionally  a  form  of  activity  may  be  suggested. 
For  example,  after  the  story  of  Mary's  gift  to  Jesus 
each  child  may  draw  in  color  a  flower  on  a  card  bear- 
ing the  words,  "A  flower  I  will  bring  for  my  minister 
next  Sunday."  An  act  of  service  may  well  follow  a 
story  of  service  and  form  the  climax  of  the  session. 
An  instance  of  this  is  to  follow  the  story  of  the  good 
Samaritan  by  selecting  from  several  gifts  already 
bought  with  the  birthday  money  one  suitable  for  a  sick 
classmate,  wrapping  it  carefully  in  tissue-paper  and 
tying  it  with  a  bright  ribbon. 

Summary. — To  sum  up  the  whole  subject  of  the 
story  period,  it  is  the  teacher's  opportunity  to  present 
new  thoughts,  closely  related  to  the  thoughts  expressed 
by  the  children  in  the  circle  talk.  Through  her  story 
she  arouses  feeling — of  love  to  God,  perhaps,  or  ten- 
der regard  for  animal  life,  or  friendliness.  Her  task 
is  to  make   sure   that   the   feeling   will  be   expressed 


94  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

somehow  and  at  some  time.  If  it  is  love  of  God,  it 
can  be  expressed  immediately  in  hymn  or  prayer;  if 
tenderness  toward  animals,  its  expression  will  come  at 
home,  and  the  resolve  to  care  for  pets  will  be  strength- 
ened by  such  a  song  as  "I  Love  Little  Pussy/'  or  such 
a  verse  as  "Be  ye  kind;"  if  friendliness  is  the  feeling 
awakened,  a  friendly  act  can  be  planned  or  executed 
before  the  session  closes.  Thus  feeling  is  aroused,  and 
the  feeling  is  carried  over  into  action. 

Questions 

1.  Why  is   the  story  placed  toward  the  close  of 
the  session? 

2.  Experiment  upon  the  length  of  time  you   can 
hold  a  Beginner's  attention  with  a  story. 

3.  Give  the  essentials  of  good  story-telling. 

4.  What  are  some  devices  for  gaining  attention? 

5.  Explain  two  types  of  story  preparation. 

6.  Under  what  circumstances  would  you  repeat  a 
story  ? 

7.  What  are  and  what  are  not  children's  interrup- 
tions to  the  story?     Explain  concretely. 

8.  Prepare  two  good  uses  and  one  poor  use  of  the 
few  moments  after  a  particular  story. 

Assignment  for  Observation 

1.  Visit  a  Beginners'  Department  and  observe  the 
story  period,  for  the  points  brought  out  in  the  lesson. 

2.  Visit  a  kindergarten  and  observe  the  story  prep- 
aration, the  story-telling  and  what  follows. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  95 


LESSON  XI 

THE  CIRCLE  TALK 

Every  pupil  must  have  a  chance  to  show  what  he  truly  is, 
so  that  the  teacher  can  find  out  what  he  needs  to  make  him  a 
complete  human  being. — John  Dewey,  in  Schools  of  To- 
morrow. 

What  it  is. — The  circle  talk  is,  in  three  words, 
the  child's  opportunity.  In  the  last  lesson  we  spoke 
of  the  story  as  the  teacher's  opportunity  to  present  new 
ideas  and  arouse  feeling,  and  said  that  she  has  a  right 
to  suppress  interruptions.  The  circle  talk  is  as  truly 
the  child's  chance  to  express  himself,  and  she  errs  if 
she  interferes  with  this.  The  wise  teacher  feels  that 
through  the  circle  talk  she  becomes  acquainted  with 
the  child,  so  that  she  "can  find  out  what  he  needs  to 
make  him  a  complete  human  being." 

This  does  not  mean  that  she  folds  her  hands  and 
allows  her  children  to  say  and  do  whatever  they  wish. 
The  result  of  this  would  be  anarchy,  as  described  in 
Lesson  III.  It  means,  rather,  that  she  encourages 
great  freedom  in  the  way  they  contribute  to  the  pre- 
vailing thought,  through  play,  retelling  stories,  songs, 
prayers,  handwork,  conversation,  and  Bible  verses. 
When  their  remarks  or  activities  make  no  such  con- 
tribution, she  ignores  them,  or  turns  them  into  the 
desired  channel. 

The  circle  talk  may  perhaps  best  be  described  by 


96  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

telling  what  it  is  not.  It  is  not  formal.  It  is  not 
without  a  plan.  It  is  not  affected  by  the  whim  of  a 
single  child,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  a  single  child's 
remark  often  influences  it.  It  is  not  primarily  for 
teaching  songs  and  Bible  verses,  although  stories  are 
retold  and  Bible  verses  used.  It  is  not  a  review  to  find 
out  how  much  the  children  know,  even  though  they  do 
reveal  here  their  acquaintance  with  Bible  stories  and 
verses.  It  is  not  to  teach  them  how  to  use  their  hands, 
though  handwork  is  prominent.  It  is  not  a  play  pe- 
riod, though  they  frequently  play.  It  is  not  for  nature 
study,  though  nature  is  prominent. 

The  circle  talk  is  a  period  of  much  freedom,  within 
the  bounds  of  a  common  subject.  Its  purpose  is  to 
interpret  this  subject — love,  kindness,  God's  care,  or 
whatever  it  may  be — through  song,  play,  story,  con- 
versation, objects  and  pictures,  prayer  and  handwork. 
It  encourages  the  children  to  participate  in  this  inter- 
pretation. 

An  illustration. — Let  us  suppose  the  general 
theme  to  be  "God's  Gift  of  the  Wind,  Sun,  and  Rain/' 
The  last  Sunday  the  story  was  "The  Sun  a  Helper"; 
the  week  before  "The  Wind  a  Helper."  To-day  the 
new  idea  presented  in  the  story  period  will  be  the  help 
received  from  God's  gift  of  rain.  In  her  plan  for 
the  circle  talk  the  teacher  seeks  to  bring  vividly  before 
the  children  the  gifts  of  wind  and  sun,  so  that  they  will 
experience  wonder  and  gladness.  To  accomplish  this 
she  makes  out  a  program,  in  the  following  order: 

I.  Tell  and  play  last  week's  story. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  97 

2.  Compare  a  pot  of  seeds  left  in  a  dark  closet  with 
one  placed  in  the  sunlight. 

3.  Sing  a  spring  song. 

4.  Draw  flowers. 

5.  In  connection  with  the  story  pictures  use  the 
Bible  verses,  "He  maketh  his  sun  to  rise,"  and,  "He 
causeth  his  wind  to  blow." 

6.  Observe  the  effect  of  the  wind  and  the  colors 
made  by  the  sun,  shown  through  a  prism. 

She  feels  certain  the  children  will  make  unexpected 
remarks.  She  anticipates  one  or  more  opportunities 
for  prayer.  She  expects  them  to  modify  her  plan,  and 
they  do,  so  that  the  circle  talk  works  out  as  follows: 

1.  Observation  of  the  work  of  the  wind,  which 
rattles  the  window.  All  go  to  the  window ;  tell  how 
the  wind  blew  them  along  to  Sunday  school ;  point  out 
the  swaying  trees  and  say,  "He  causeth  his  wind  to 
blow,''  and  express  their  wonder  in  an  improvised 
prayer. 

2.  Examining  the  wind  picture  and  referring  to 
that  story. 

3.  Playing  and  retelling  "The  Sun  a  Helper,"  be- 
cause a  child  points  to  that  story  picture,  which  hangs 
next  the  wind  picture. 

4.  One  child  is  chosen  to  get  the  box  of  seeds  put 
in  a  dark  closet  last  week.  The  others  close  their  eyes 
until  it  is  placed  in  the  circle.  He  is  chosen  because 
he  has  taken  no  part  in  playing  the  story  and  seems 
uninterested.  Another  child  is  selected  to  bring  the 
pot  of  seedlings  into  the  circle.     She  is  chosen  because 


98  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

she   needs   to   get   away   from   her   neighbor,   who   is 
teasing  her. 

5.  Bible  verse,  "He  maketh  his  sun  to  rise,"  used  as 
the  children  speak  of  the  seeds  which  the  sun  has 
waked  up. 

6.  Song  of  thanks.  The  atmosphere  of  wondering 
interest  as  the  seedlings  are  discovered  makes  this 
necessary. 

7.  Drawing  and  cutting  flowers.  One  child  asks  to 
cut  instead  of  draw  and  is  given  colored  paper  and 
scissors. 

The  spring  song  and  the  prism  are  not  used,  because 
of  lack  of  time. 

A  second  illustration. — The  general  theme  is 
Love  Shown  through  Care.  The  previous  Sunday 
the  lesson  was  on  care  of  animals  and  the  new  idea  to 
be  presented  this  week  is  cooperation  with  God  in 
tender  care  for  people,  with  the  good  Samaritan  as  the 
story.  I  will  indicate  how  the  circle  talk  was  modified 
by  numbering  the  original  plan  and  lettering  the  modi- 
fication. 

l  Conversation  about  the  children's  pets.  Bring- 
ing them  to  mind  through  blackboard  drawings. 

A.  Conversation  about  pets,  which  were  brought  to 
mind  through  mimicry.  A  child  begins  by  mimicking 
his  dog's  bark,  the  others  follow  suit,  and  so  the  plan 
of  blackboard  drawing  is  abandoned. 

2.  Playing  feed  pets. 

B.  Drawing  the  food  children  have  given  animal 
pets.     As  the  children  whisper  to  the  teacher  what 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  99 


their  pets  are,  she  draws  them  on  the  blackboard  and 
the  children  add  the  food — yellow  corn  in  front  of  the 
hen,  a  bone  on  the  dog's  plate,  milk  in  the  cat's  saucer. 
She  changes  her  plan  because  the  children  have  just 
been  impersonating. 

3.  Song,  "I  Love  Little  Pussy,"  sung  as  the  children 
find  pictures  of  cats  in  various  parts  of  the  room. 

C.  Song  sung  in  connection  with  the  drawing  of  the 
saucer  of  milk,  and  again  here. 

4.  Drawing  the  shepherd's  crook  and  stafif,  and 
other  details  of  "The  Story  of  a  Shepherd  and  His 
Sheep." 

D.  The  story  retold  just  as  it  was  the  last  Sunday. 
This  takes  the  place  of  illustration,  because  the  chil- 
dren have  just  been  drawing. 

5.  Choosing  Songs. 

E.  Pictures,  songs,  and  conversation.  After  the 
story  picture  is  pointed  out,  a  child  says  he  can  find  a 
picture  of  the  little  Lord  Jesus ;  another  says  he  sees 
one  of  birds.  As  the  interest  centers  in  pictures,  a 
choice  of  songs  is  not  suggested.  One  child  sees  an 
apple  in  a  picture,  and  says  he  ate  a  red  apple.  "Song 
of  the  Children's  Food"  is  started  by  the  pianist,  and 
one  child  after  another  names  an  article  of  food.  The 
teacher  adds  food  she  has  had,  and  they  all  sing  a  song 
of  thanks.  She  then  draws  their  thoughts  back  to  the 
theme  by  saying:  "God  gives  us  our  food.  He  de- 
pends upon  us  to  see  that  our  pets  get  some  of  this 
food,  and  to  take  care  of  them.  He  depends  upon  us 
to  help  take  care  of  sick  people  too.    Play  I  was  a  sick 


100  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

mother.  Who  will  give  me  a  drink  of  water?  a  shawl? 
Who  will  fan  me?  go  upstairs  to  get  my  handker- 
chief?" This  pantomime  furnishes  movement  and  a 
good  preparation  for  the  story. 

Thus  we  find  that  without  a  plan  the  teaching  would 
be  ineffective,  and  it  would  be  equally  so  without  ready 
response  to  the  children's  attitudes  and  needs. 

Use  of  pictures  and  objects. — Let  us  consider  the 
various  methods  one  can  use  to  interpret  the  lesson 
theme. 

First,  there  is  the  use  of  pictures,  illustrated  in  de- 
tail in  Lesson  IX.  The  children  will  frequently 
choose  this,  method  when  the  teacher  has  planned 
otherwise. 

Second,  there  is  the  use  of  objects.  A  real  bird's 
nest  is  much  more  interesting  than  a  flat,  pictured 
nest  that  cannot  be  handled  or  swung  to  and  fro.  A 
real  cotton  boll  is  soft  to  touch.  Real  flowers  have 
fragrance.  Real  shells  contain  songs  of  the  sea.  Such 
objects  make  the  Creator's  skill  convincing.  Some- 
thing of  their  teaching  value  depends  upon  the  way 
they  are  presented.  A  sense  of  importance  is  at- 
tached to  a  pot  of  seedlings  that  is  hidden  under  a 
handkerchief,  while  one  wonders  whether  the  seeds 
can  have  sprouted.  The  nest  in  a  covered  box,  which 
one  child  is  appointed  to  open ;  the  seashells  hidden 
about  the  room,  which  the  children  discover  and  take 
into  the  circle ;  the  Easter  lily  that  is  brought  from  an 
adjoining  room  after  the  story  of  a  brown  bulb  has 
been  told,  are  all  given  the  charm  of  mystery.     The 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  101 

teacher's  attitude  of  wonder  and  delight  will  also  be 
reflected  in  the  children. 

Use  of  stories,  Bible  verses,  and  prayer. — During 
the  circle  talk  the  story  of  the  preceding  Sunday  is 
retold  or  played  or  illustrated  or  talked  about.  Often 
other  old  stories  are  referred  to,  and  occasionally  re- 
told in  part.  Most  frequently  the  last  story  is  retold 
exactly  as  before,  with  the  assistance  of  the  children, 
who  delight  in  completing  sentences  and  joining  in 
familiar  phrases  like  a  small  Greek  chorus.  The 
teacher  should4  keep  clearly  in  mind  that  this  retelling 
is  not  an  examination  on  a  knowledge  of  the  story.  It 
is  a  repetition  of  interest  in  it.  Whether  the  children 
listen  to  it,  assist  in  retelling  it,  illustrate  it,  play  it, 
or  talk  about  its  picture,  they  should  experience  even 
more  fully  than  before  the  feeling  it  is  designed  to 
arouse. 

The  same  principle  holds  with  Bible  verses.  They 
are  for  use  in  strengthening  ideas  and  renewing  feel- 
ing. They  are  not  repeated  as  recitations.  "God  is 
love,"  the  children  say,  as  they  draw  his  gifts  to  them, 
or  point  them  out  in  pictures.  "Love  one  another/' 
they  repeat,  after  showing  in  pantomime  helpful  acts 
to  members  of  the  family. 

The  use  of  songs  is  discussed  in  detail  in  Lesson 
VII.  They  occur  frequently  in  the  circle  talk,  as 
worship,  to  interpret  thought  and  to  express  joy. 
Poems  are  used  less  frequently.  They  might  occur 
more  often.  Stevenson's  verses  and  the  words  of  sim- 
ple  songs   may  be   repeated   instead   of  sung  by   the 


102  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

teacher  and  some  of  them  taught  the  children.  The 
use  of  prayer  in  the  circle  talk  is  taken  up  in  Lesson 
VI.  Its  frequency  is  determined  by  the  atmosphere  of 
the  department. 

Play  and  handwork. — Play  has  been  frequently 
referred  to  in  these  lessons  as  a  favorite  form  of  chil- 
dren's self-expression.  Handwork  is  classed  with  it, 
because  in  order  to  be  effective  it  must  contain  much 
of  the  play  spirit.  Play  as  used  in  the  church  school 
is  not  mere  physical  exercise,  nor  is  handwork  train- 
ing in  skill.  They  are  both  means  of  expressing  a 
child's  thoughts  and  feelings,  and  a  sure  indication 
as  to  whether  the  lesson  truths  are  making  of  him 
"a  complete  human  being." 

A  child  takes  the  part  of  the  blind  man  groping  his 
way  to  the  pool,  washing  and  receiving  sight.  Other 
children  follow  this  bit  of  impersonation  by  drawing 
on  the  blackboard  objects  they  think  he  liked  best  to 
see.  In  both  ways  they  enter  into  the  joy  of  the  man 
on  receiving  his  sight,  and  there  follows  appreciation 
of  Jesus'  great  kindness. 

The  children  add  red  apples  to  the  tree  the  teacher 
has  drawn  on  the  board,  or  cut  red-paper  apples  and 
paste  to  the  tree  outlined  on  cardboard.  Instead  of 
this  one  child  represents  the  tree  and  the  children 
gather  from  his  arm-branches  imaginary  apples,  and 
fill  imaginary  baskets.  Whichever  is  done,  they  are 
filled  with  joy  for  the  harvest. 

One  after  another  the  children  show  in  pantomime 
helpful  deeds  they  can  perform  for  their  mothers  and 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  103 

the  rest  guess  what  these  are.  They  draw  objects  they 
use  in  such  acts,  which  are  guessed  by  the  others.  In 
either  case  through  the  imagination  helpfulness  is 
made  attractive. 

Handwork  or  play  which  is  not  the  expression  o£ 
thought  is  mere  pastime,  without  educational  value. 

Conversation. — Throughout  the  varied  activities 
of  the  circle  talk  runs  a  stream  of  conversation,  and  a 
teacher  needs  to  remember  that  conversation  implies 
more  than  one  person  talking.  She  makes  use  of  the 
children's  comments,  questions  and  remarks  to  inter- 
pret the  thought  of  the  hour.  She  is  also  quick  to  see 
when  they  indicate  that  a  child  has  received  an  erro- 
neous impression,  or  has  an  unsatisfied  need. 

It  is  here  in  the  circle  talk  that  every  pupil  has  "a 
chance  to  show  what  he  truly  is,  so  that  the  teacher 
can  find  out  what  he  needs  to  make  him  a  complete 
human  being." 


Questions 

i.  Write  out  the   various   activities    of   the   circle 
talk. 

2.  What  is  the  function  of  play?  handwork? 

3.  Why  are  songs  used?  poems? 

4.  When  do  the  children  pray? 

5.  Contrast  the  use  of  pictures  and  objects. 

6.  What  importance  has  conversation? 

7.  Tell  several  things  the  circle  talk  is  not. 

8.  Tell  what  the  circle  talk  is. 


104  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

Problems  for  Discussion 

A.  How  much  attention  should  be  paid  to  chil- 
dren's remarks  that  are  unrelated  to  the  subject. 

B.  Good  and  bad  handwork. 

C.  How  far  the  teacher  should  direct  play. 

fAsSIGNMENT    FOR    OBSERVATION 

Criticize  the  various  activities  of  the  circle  talk  as 
to  whether  they  (a)  interpret  the  lesson  truth,  (b)  are 
modified  by  the  children,  (c)  hold  the  interest  and  yet 
proceed  in  a  logical  sequence. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  105 

LESSON  XII 
THE  CHILD  DURING  THE  WEEK 

Our  selection  of  facts  for  study  is  based  on  our  interest  in 
tjie  child's  religious  development.  It  is  his  religious  acts  that 
most  concern  us. — Hugh  Hartshorne,  in  Childhood  and  Char- 
acter. 

The  Sunday  hour. — So  much  has  been  said  and 
written  about  the  inadequacy  of  a  single  hour  a  week 
for  religious  education  that  we  are  in  danger  of  under- 
rating the  effect  upon  little  children  of  the  church- 
school  session  which  recurs  every  week.  It  makes 
Sunday  for  them  a  red-letter  day,  its  coming  antici- 
pated, its  going  regretted.  Inadequate  it  is,  but  it  is 
not  ineffective.  Its  very  rarity  gives  it  a  certain  value, 
and  as  Thanksgiving  and  Christmas  influence  the  en- 
tire year,  so  this  Sunday  hour  shines  down  through 
the  week. 

Thinking  of  it  in  this  way  gives  us  the  clue  to  its 
best  use.  It  cannot  be  finished  and  complete;  it  can 
simply  start  something,  to  be  carried  on  during  the 
week.  It  is  not  an  hour  for  the  acquisition  of  facts, 
but,  rather,  one  in  which  new  impulses  are  gained  and 
new  feelings  awakened.  A  session  that  is  merely 
pleasurable  will  be  only  a  pleasant  memory.  A  session 
that  grips  the  imagination  and  suggests  certain  action 
has  far-reaching  results. 

A  teacher's  questions. — A  teacher  should  there- 


106  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

fore  test  her  work  by  its  power  to  project  itself  into 
the  days  between  Sundays.  Such  questions  as  the 
following  will  be  of  assistance :  Was  my  theme  con- 
nected closely  with  the  children's  every-day  life?  How 
will  it  affect  the  things  they  do?  Will  it  interpret 
religiously  the  things  they  see?  Why  am  I  certain 
they  will  remember  the  session?  What  particular 
Christian  act  did  I  succeed  in  making  desirable?  How 
shall  I  know  they  ever  perform  such  an  act?  Why 
do  I  feel  certain  that  they  will  think  about  God  during 
the  week?     How  shall  I  know  they  do? 

The  children  in  kindergarten. — No  teacher  can 
put  these  questions  to  herself  without  rinding  that  she 
has  no  data  for  the  answer.  If  she  is  truly  conscien- 
tious, she  will  fare  forth  to  get  acquainted  with  the 
week-day  children,  who  often  seem  scarcely  related  to 
the  Sunday  children. 

There  are  three  places  where  she  may  find  them — 
in  their  homes,  in  hers,  and  in  kindergarten.  If  the;y 
attend  kindergarten,  she  will  certainly  visit  them 
there,  not  once  but  frequently,  so  that  she  can  know 
what  ideas  they  are  getting,  where  the  subjects  dove- 
tail in  with  those  she  presents  and  where  they  differ, 
what  kindergarten  methods  are  suitable  for  her  Sun- 
day hour,  and  which  of  her  children  do  not  attend. 
She  finds  from  her  own  observation  and  from  talking 
with  the  kindergartner  traits  in  her  children  which 
her  slight  acquaintance  has  barely  suggested.  These 
visits  help  her  to   see   reasons   for  the   difference  be- 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  107 

tween  those  of  her  children  who  attend  kindergarten 
and  those  who  do  not. 

The  children  at  home. — The  best  answer  to  the 
teacher's  questions  is  to  be  found  in  the  children's 
homes.  Unless  she  is  a  frequent  visitor  there,  how- 
ever, she  hardly  gets  below  the  surface,  for  in  a  call 
upon  a  mother  and  child  the  mother  dominates  the 
situation  aad  the  child  rarely  shows  his  real  self. 
Nor  does  she  approve  of  comments  upon  the  child  in 
his  presence.  She  needs  to  see  the  mother  alone  to 
find  out  what  she  wants  to  know.  Where  she  is  inti- 
mate enough  to  go  in  and  out  freely,  to  join  in  the 
child's  play,  to  tell  him  stories,  to  put  him  to  bed  and 
hear  his  bedtime  prayer,  she  gets  to  know  this  par- 
ticular child  verv  well  indeed,  and  realizes  the  effect 
of  her  teaching. 

The  children  as  visitors. — Such  intimacy  is  not 
possible  with  all  of  her  children.  Another  way  of 
becoming  acquainted  with  them  is  to  have  them  in 
her  own  home.  She  may  invite  them  to  an  occasional 
party.  She  learns  to  know  them  better  individually 
if  they  visit  her  in  smaller  groups,  or  alone.  She 
enjoys  having  her  children  regard  their  teacher's  home 
as  a  place  of  delight,  where  they  are  always  welcome. 
Here  she  finds  out  very  soon  the  sort  of  appeal  her 
teaching  makes,  and  often  has  a  chance  to  supplement 
it.  They  test  the  new  song  she  thinks  of  using.  They 
give  her  constant  practice  in  story-telling.  They  reveal 
themselves  through  play.    They  ask  intimate  questions 


108  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

and  make  her  their  confidant.  Yes,  and  her  questions 
are  all  answered. 

Need  for  a  week-day  session. — There  are  commu- 
nities which  have  no  kindergarten ;  there  are  teachers 
too  busy  to  make  frequent  calls  upon  their  children; 
and  there  is  many  a  teacher  whose  home  cannot  be  a 
place  of  rendezvous  for  her  children.  Even  the  teacher 
who  can  see  her  children  in  all  three  ways  has  a  sense 
of  dissatisfaction,  for  the  questions  she  is  asking  her- 
self are  not  always  answered  to  her  liking.  She 
realizes  that  in  their  homes  and  kindergartens  she  is 
an  observer  merely,  and  even  in  her  own  home  she  is 
unable  to  see  many  of  her  children.  She  feels  the 
need  for  a  week-day  hour,  when  all  her  children  can 
be  with  her,  and  can  be  given  opportunities  to  perform 
acts  of  service.  This  is  her  interpretation  of  what  a 
week-day  school  of  religion  for  little  children  ought 
to  be. 

She  arranges  a  convenient  week-day  hour,  and 
selects  the  church-school  room  as  a  meeting-place. 
She  feels  that  the  children's  activities  for  other  people 
ought  to  be  associated  with  their  impulse  to  serve.  In 
the  room  on  Sunday  she  tries  to  give  them  a  conscious- 
ness of  God  and  a  wish  to  help  others.  In  this  same 
room  on  a  week-day  she  wants  them  to  become  godlike 
through  service. 

Training  in  service. — She  plans  with  infinite  care 
activities  easy  enough  for  them  to  perform  and  inter- 
esting enough  for  them  to  enjoy.  She  also  plans 
games,  an  occasional  story,  and  a  song  now  and  then, 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  109 


but  the  main  occupation  of  the  hour  is  doing  some- 
thing for  somebody.  It  is  a  training  in  service,  and 
follows  closely  the  Sunday  subjects. 

When  the  story  has  been  of  home  life,  gifts  are 
made  for  members  of  the  family — simple  things  little 
children  can  readily  make.  These  may  be  pin-balls, 
in  which  they  stick  the  pins,  for  their  mothers ;  paper 
toys  they  color  and  cut  out  for  little  brothers  and  sis- 
ters ;  blotters  pasted  on  attractive  post-cards  for  their 
fathers.  When  the  story  has  been  about  Jesus'  healing 
of  the  sick,  or  the  story  of  the  good  Samaritan  has 
been  told,  pictures  are  pasted  on  cards  for  hospital 
children,  a  box  of  scrapbook  material  is  packed  for  a 
sick  classmate,  or  paper  toys  are  colored  and  cut  out 
for  crippled  children.  When  the  theme  has  been  kind- 
ness to  animals,  a  tree  is  hung  with  food  for  winter 
birds,  or  a  bird's  drinking-place  is  put  on  the  church 
grounds,  or  an  expedition  is  made  to  the  woods  with 
nuts  for  squirrels  and  chipmunks,  or  to  the  zoo,  to 
become  acquainted  with  animal  life. 

At  Thanksgiving  a  gift  of  vegetables  and  fruit  is 
delivered.  At  Christmas  a  tree  is  trimmed  and  pre- 
sented to  a  needy  family  or  a  children's  institution. 
At  Easter  the  bulbs  planted  in  the  fall  and  cared  for 
all  winter  are  given  away  to  old  people  of  the  church. 

On  these  week-days  there  is  plenty  of  time  for  the 
activities  that  could  be  only  hinted  at  on  Sunday. 
Sometimes  a  bit  of  handwork  that  illustrates  a  story 
can  be  utilized  as  a  gift,  such  as  a  horse  cut-out,  made 
in  parts  fastened  together  with  brass  paper  fasteners, 


110  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

after  the  story  of  Prince  the  horse,  or  a  squirrel  scrap- 
book  made  after  a  squirrel  story,  or  animal  cut-outs 
after  the  story  of  Noah's  ark. 

Not  only  do  the  work  of  the  children's  hands  serve 
as  gifts,  but  they  practice  songs  to  sing  to  old  people 
and  stories  to  tell,  in  prose  and  verse.  Sometimes  the 
hour  resolves  itself  into  a  ride  to  a  home  where  there 
is  somebody  who  will  appreciate  an  entertainment  by 
little  children.  Sometimes  they  adjourn  to  a  near-by 
daisy  field  and  pick  big  bunches  of  flowers  to  send  to 
the  city.  Sometimes  they  gather  autumn  leaves  and 
arrange  them  in  a  basket  as  a  surprise  for  the  minister. 
Sometimes  they  pack  a  box  of  seashells  and  pebbles 
which  they  collected  on  their  vacation,  for  children 
who  have  never  been  to  the  seashore. 

Short-term  clubs  and  helpers. — The  teacher  who 
finds  a  week-day  session  every  week  impossible,  has  a 
Christmas  club  for  a  few  weeks  before  Christmas,  or 
an  Easter  club  in  the  springtime,  or  a  vacation  club 
in  the  summer,  in  which  she  provides  similar  activities. 

No  teacher  can  carry  on  such  week-day  work  with- 
out help.  Where  her  assistants  are  unable  to  do  this 
she  may  gain  the  cooperation  of  the  mothers  who  are 
obliged  to  come  with  their  children,  or  of  young  people 
in  the  church  school.  Camp-fire  girls  or  organized 
girls'  classes  make  excellent  assistants.  Teaching  ex- 
perience or  qualifications  are  not  necessary  in  over- 
seeing the  children's  occupations  and  in  preparing 
work  for  them  to  do.  This  is  a  splendid  opportunity 
for  young  people  to  engage  in  church  work  which  is 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  111 


within  their  capacity,  which  engages  their  interest, 
and  helps  them  to  become  acquainted  with  children. 

The  results. — In  this  week-day  contact  with  her 
children  the  teacher  not  only  finds  her  questions  re*- 
garding  the  effects  of  her  teaching  answered,  but  she 
becomes  better  acquainted  with  her  children,  so  that 
she  can  teach  them  more  wisely.  She  has  no  longer 
a  theoretical  knowledge  of  individuals;  she  has  child 
psychology  at  first-hand.  Individuals  separate  them- 
selves from  the  mass,  and  challenge  her  to  individual 
methods. 

The  effect  upon  the  children  is  a  feeling  of  intimate 
friendship  with  the  teacher  and  assistants  that  can 
never  be  gained  in  the  more  formal  Sunday  sessions. 
These  week-day  hours  of  work  together  for  others 
make  religion  practical  to  them.  It  is  pretty  certain 
that  faith  and  works  will  never  be  divorced  in  their 
minds. 

Questions 

1.  What  should  the  Sunday  session  accomplish? 

2.  Give  a  teacher's  test  questions  upon  her  success 
with  her  children.     Would  you  add  others? 

3.  In  what  places  can  she  find  the  answers? 

4.  What  help  can  she  expect  from  observing  her 
children  in  kindergarten? 

5.  How  far  will  calling  upon  children  in  their 
homes  answer  her  questions? 

6.  Why  are  children  visitors  to  be  desired? 

7.  What  is  the  need  of  a  week-day  session? 

8.  Explain  in  detail  a  week-day  session. 


112  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


9.  What  can  be  substituted? 

10.  How  can  assistants  be  secured? 

11.  What  results  should  a  teacher  gain  from  this 
means  of  contact  with  children,  for  herself  and  for  the 
children? 

Assignment  for  Observation 

1.  Observing  the  same  children  who  have  been 
observed  in  a  Beginners'  Department  (a)  in  kinder- 
garten, (b)  in  their  homes,  (c)  in  your  own.  After- 
ward jot  down  what  you  have  learned  about  little  chil- 
dren in  general  and  individual  children. 

2.  Observing  a  week-day  church-school  session  for 
Beginners. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  113 

LESSON  XIII 
RECORDS  AND  RECOGNITION 

The  superintendent  and  the  secretary  must  be  sympathetic 
coworkers  if  the  records  of  the  school  are  to  have  educational 
value. — Walter  S.  Athearn,  in  The  Organisation  and  Admin' 
ist ration  of  the  Church  School. 

The  need  for  records. — The  Beginners'  Depart- 
ment is  such  an  informal  organization  that  at  first 
thought  there  seems  little  need  for  records,  and  none 
for  recognition.  Referring  to  Lesson  I,  however,  one 
recalls  that  the  secretary  did  make  out  records,  and  a 
hint  was  given  of  the  scope  of  these  records. 

We  will  consider  the  things  that  should  be  recorded, 
and  under  each  subject  take  up  the  sort  of  records 
desirable  (i)  for  the  teachers,  (2)  for  the  children, 
(3)  for  the  parents,  (4)  for  the  school. 

Enrollment. — 1.  (For  the  teachers.)  The  most 
loosely  organized  department  has  a  list  of  members. 
This  may  consist  simply  of  the  children's  names.  It 
should  contain  besides  their  ages,  their  parents'  names 
and  addresses,  and  their  attendance  or  nonattendance 
at  kindergarten.  This  information  is  needed  by  the 
department  secretary  and  superintendent.  It  should 
be  kept  in  duplicate  record  books,  or  in  a  card  cata- 
logue accessible  to  both.  In  large  departments,  where 
the  assistants  have  groups  of  children  in  charge,  they 
should  be   furnished   with   record   books   or   duplicate 


114  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

cards  containing  this  information  about  the  children 
for  whom  they  are  accountable. 

When  a  class  is  promoted  from  the  Cradle  Roll  this 
information  is  handed  over  from  the "  Cradle  Roll 
superintendent  to  the  Beginners'  secretary.  When  a 
child  does  not  enter  from  the  Cradle  Roll  the  infor- 
mation is  obtained  by  the  secretary  from  the  person 
who  brings  him.  Little  children  are  often  brought  to 
visit  before  they  are  ready  to  become  members  of  the 
class.  The  secretary  finds  out  whether  they  are 
merely  visitors  before  enrolling  them. 

The  parents'  names  and  addresses  are  necessary  for 
a  calling  list  and  to  use  in  sending  notices,  messages, 
and  folders  to  absentees.  The  ages  and  week-day  edu- 
cation of  the  children  form  a  basis  for  promotion  and 
influence  teaching  methods. 

2.  (For  the  children.)  Children  may  show  Cradle 
Roll  certificates  on  entering  the  department,  and  take 
great  pride  in  doing  so.  This  occurs  only  when  a  class 
is  promoted  on  Promotion  Day.  Ordinarily,  children 
enter  the  Beginners'  Department  singly,  when  they  are 
old  enough,  not  waiting  for  Promotion  Day.  A  new 
member  may  be  given  an  attractive  card  on  which  his 
name  has  been  written  by  the  secretary,  following 
which  is  printed  "is  one  of  the  children  in  the  Begin- 
ners' Department  of  the church."  The  secre- 
tary has  these  cards  on  hand  every  Sunday.  Instead., 
he  may  be  shown  his  name,  which  the  secretary  has 
written  on  a  birthday  record  or  membership  chart, 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Begiruiers  115 

and  stick  a  colored  seal  next  it.     All  these  methods 
give  him  a  sense  of  membership. 

3.  (For  the  parents.)  A  class  of  children  pro- 
moted from  the  Cradle  Roll  on  Promotion  Day  may 
carry  home  notes  to  the  parents  expressing  the  Begin- 
ners' teacher's  pleasure  in  welcoming  them  to  the 
school,  and  her  hope  for  cooperation.  A  Mother's 
Letter,  forming  a  part  of  the  syndicate  Graded  Les- 
sons equipment,  outlines  the  Beginners'  lessons  and 
suggests  the  mother's  cooperation.  When  a  child  en- 
ters the  department  by  himself,  such  a  letter  may  be 
given  him  or  his  mother,  or  t  the  following  week  a 
personal  note  may  be  sent  to  the  parents. 

4.  (For  the  school.)  The  names  and  addresses  of 
the  children  who  enter  are  given  the  school  secretary 
by  the  department  secretary. 

Records  of  attendance. — 1.  (For  the  teachers.) 
The  secretary  keeps  the  attendance  record  in  a  depart- 
ment record  book,  which  is  accessible  to  the  superin- 
tendent, or  copies  the  record  into  the  superintendent's 
book,  and  each  week  she  gives  the  assistants  a  list  of 
the  absent  children  for  whom  they  are  accountable. 
These  records  are  kept  for  a  more  vital  purpose  than 
to  compute  the  average  attendance.  Folders  are  sent 
each  week  to  absentees.  Causes  for  absence  are  dis- 
covered through  calls,  telephoning,  notes,  or  inquiries. 
Where  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  absence  efforts 
are  made  to  encourage  better  attendance.  A  card 
showing  a  vacant  chair  in  a  circle  is  sent  a  child,  or 
a  call  is  paid. 


116  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

2.  (For  the  children.)  Any  plan  for  the  children 
to  record  their  attendance  must  take  a  minimum  of 
time,  or  it  should  be  abandoned.  Many  teachers  prefer 
to  make  much  of  children's  presence  through  the 
greeting,  and  speak  then  of  those  who  are  absent.  It 
is.  feasible  to  have  a  chart  containing  the  children's 
names  on  which  each  child  pastes  a  sticker  as  he  enters 
the  room.  ^\fter  the  session  has  begun  the  chart  is 
removed  by  an  assistant,  and  the  tardy  childrqn  paste 
on  their  stickers  at  the  door.  Otherwise  the  program 
is  interrupted.  However,  at  an  age  when  contagious 
diseases,  bad  weather,  and  distance  prevent  perfect 
attendance,  absences  should  be  regretted  rather  than 
censured.  It  is  not  usually  the  children's  fault  when 
they  are  absent. 

3.  (For  the  parents.)  For  this  very  reason  the 
parents'  cooperation  is  needed,  and  reports  of  their 
.children's  attendance  will  show  them  that  their  efforts 

in  getting  their  children  to  the  church  school  are  appre- 
ciated, or  their'  negligence  in  this  matter  noticed. 
These  reports  may  be  oral,  given  when  calling  or  tele- 
phoned. They  may  be  written  on  .postals.  They  may 
be  printed  forms  filled  in.  Their  value  lies  in  the 
regularity  with  which  they  are  given — monthly  or 
quarterly.  !j 

4.  (For  the  school.)  The  attendance  of  the  de- 
partment may  be  given  to  the  school  secretary  by 
means  of  the  card  system,  a  card  for  each  child. 

Records  of  offerings. — 1.  (For  the  teachers.)  The 
records  of  offerings  should  be  kept  in  the  same  book 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  117 

with  the  attendance,  and  the  amounts  given  by  the 
treasurer  to  the  secretary  when  these  offices  are  sepa- 
rate. Often  a  second  offering  or  a  birthday  offering 
is  taken,  which  is  in  charge  of  the  department,  and 
not  paid  into  the  school  treasury.  The  causes  to  which 
this  special  fund  goes  should  be  recorded. 

2.  (For  the  children.)  Occasionally  thrpughout 
the  year  the  treasurer  will  review  with  the  children  the 
records  of  their  offerings.  An  offering  chart  or  set  of 
mounted  pictures  makes  a  concrete  record — showing 
a  Christmas  tree  to  represent  the  one  given  to  the 
Children's  Home,  or  a  basket  of  food  to  record  the 
Thanksgiving  present,  and  a  plant  to  recall  the  Easter 
plant  that  was  bought. 

3.  (For  the  parents.)  As  the  offerings  are  really 
made  by  the  parents,  they  will  be  interested  to  look 
over  the  secretary's  records  or  the  children's  chart, 
as  they  visit  the  school. 

4.  (For  the  school.)  Records  of  special  gifts 
made  in  this  extra  offering  are  given  to  the  school 
treasurer  at  the  close  of  the  year. 

Public  records. — Some  Beginners'  and  Primary 
Departments  make  out  an  attractive  summary  of  their 
year's  work,  illustrating  it  with  photographs,  for  the 
children  to  keep  and  for  the  church  people.  This 
gives  an  idea  of  what  is  being  done  for  the  youngest 
children,  and  arouses  interest  and  often  assistance. 
The  adults  of  the  church  always  enjoy  entertainments 
given  by  these  children,  and  many  of  them  feel  ag- 
grieved because  the  modern  system  of  religious  edu- 


118  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


cation  keeps  them  in  a  separate  department,  and 
permits  no  opening  exercises  of  the  whole  school,  in 
which  they  can  be  viewed,  laughed  at,  and  admired. 
These  public  records  help  to  explain  the  importance 
of  the  attempt  of  the  church  school  to  give  the  young- 
est children  the  right  sort  of  religious  education. 

Private  records. — The  records  that  most  truly 
record  the  condition  of  the  class  cannot  be  made 
public.  They  are  usually  not  written  down  at  all, 
but  are  kept  in  the  teacher's  heart.  Occasionally  these 
records  are  given  orally  to  the  assistants  or  the  mother. 
A  rare  teacher  will  keep  a  private  record  for  her  own 
satisfaction.     It  will  run  something  like  this : 

Janet.  Less  shy.  Expressed  love  of  God  as  she 
listened  to  the  story. 

Robert.  More  helpful.  Forgets  himself  when  a 
younger  child  needs  assistance. 

Alice.  Growing  unruly.  Will  try  seating  her  beside 
a  younger  child  to  watch.  Later.  This  worked,  and 
in  giving  care  she  had  no  wish  to  misbehave. 

John.  Expresses  himself  best  through  drawing. 
Showed  fine  idea  of  hospitality  by  this  means. 

Sarah,  Seems  secretive.  Later.  She  confided  in 
me  about  her  new  brother.  Since  then  she  has  talked 
more. 

Such  a  record  strikes  the  very  heart  of  the  matter, 
but  good  taste  and  fine  feeling  will  prevent  a  teacher 
from  sharing  it  with  any  except  those  vitally  inter- 
ested. Its  items  will  never  be  made  the  subject  of 
common  talk. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  119 


Recognition. — The  Beginners  will  not  receive 
recognition  in  the  form  of  marks  or  credits  for  the 
work  done  in  the  department.  Bible  stories  retold  or 
Bible  verses  repeated  correctly  will  not  be  recorded. 
For  children  under  six  this  is  not  desirable.  Memori- 
zation and  self-expression  are  not  accounted  duties 
here.  There  is  recognition  of  birthdays,  and  of  atten- 
dance, as  has  been  said,  but  of  nothing  else. 

A  warning. — A  warning  is  needed,  lest  a  student 
gain  the  idea  that  an  unrecorded  achievement  is 
worthless.  No  Beginners'  teacher  ought  to  spend 
time  making  records  that  might  better  be  used  in  pre- 
paring her  lessons,  or  improving  her  surroundings,  or 
becoming  better  acquainted  with  her  children.  Record- 
keeping is  principally  the  work  of  the  secretary,  who 
turns  over  her  records  to  the  teacher  and  her  assis- 
tants. Through  simple  records  they  gain  the  ability 
to  evaluate  their  work,  and  to  improve  it. 

Questions 

i.     What  is  the  advantage  of  records? 

2.  Discuss  records  of  membership  (i)  for  the 
teacher,  (2)  for  the  children,  (3)  for  the  parents,  (4) 
for  the  school. 

3.  Discuss  in  the  same  way  records  of  attendance. 

4.  Discuss  records  of  offerings. 

5.  What  do  you  mean  by  public  records? 

6.  What  private  records  may  be  kept? 

7.  For  what  do  Beginners  receive  recognition? 

8.  What  warning  is  necessary? 


120  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

LESSON  XIV 
STANDARDS  FOR  PROMOTION 


Teaching  is,  after  all,  the  adaptation  of  our  methods  to  the 
normal  development  of  boys  and  girls,  and  their  education  can 
be  measured  only  in  terms  of  the  changes  which  we  are  able 
to  bring  about  in  knowledge,  skill,  appreciation,  reasoning,  and 
the  like. — Strayer  and  Norsworthy  in  How  to  Teach. 

It  is  not  necessary,  or  even  desirable,  that  the  child's  gen- 
eral ideas  shall  be  definite  and  accurate  at  this  time  (three  to 
six),  but  that  they  shall  be  started  in  the  right  direction. — 
E.  A.  Kirkpatrick,  in  The  Individual  in  the  Making. 


Fake  standards. — Standards  for  promotion  should 
not  be  considered  primarily  as  standards  of  know- 
ledge. A  certain  amount  of  knowledge  enters  in,  but 
the  amount  of  a  child's  knowledge  is  not  the  reason 
for  promoting  him  to  the  Primary  Department.  He 
may,  through  lack  of  regular  attendance,  know  very 
few  of  the  stories,  or  Bible  verses,  or  songs,  and  still 
be  eligible  for  promotion. 

•Nor  is  the  test  the  length  of  time  he  has  spent  in 
the  Beginners'  Department.  He  may  have  attended 
only  one  of  the  two  years,  and  be  ready  for  promotion. 
He  may  have  attended  only  a  few  months.  There  may 
be  some  children  in  the  Primary  class  he  enters  who 
have  never  attended  the  Beginners'  Department.  Be- 
cause of  this  possibility,  the  course  of  study  in  the 
International  Primary  first  grade  repeats  the  principal 
themes  of  the  Beginners'  Course. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  121 


The  standard  of  age. — The  chief  basis  for  promo- 
tion is  age.  At  six,  or  approximately  six,  the  children 
are  ready  to  enter  the  Primary  Department.  The  nor- 
mal child  of  six  is  better  off  there,  even  though  he  has 
missed  the  Beginners'  stories,  and  the  ideas  presented 
in  them. 

At  six  the  methods  of  the  Beginners'  Department 
are  inappropriate  and  outgrown.  Toward  the  close 
of  a  year  there  are  usually  one  or  more  precocious 
children  who  show  signs  of  this.  They  chafe  at  wait- 
ing for  the  little  ones'  remarks  or  attempts  at  story- 
telling. They  refuse  to  play.  They  are  eager  to  be 
prominent.  They  are  inclined  to  show  off.  Many  a 
child  who  has  been  a  real  trial  becomes  amenable  when 
transferred  to  the  Primary  Department. 

This  promotion  will  occur  on  the  annual  Promotion 
Day. 

The  standard  of  day-school  attendance. — Atten- 
dance upon  school  is  another  standard  for  promotion 
which  qualifies  the  test  of  age.  A  child  who  is  not 
quite  six  but  has  commenced  school  should  be  pro- 
moted and  be  in  Primary  Grade  I,  which  corresponds 
to  a  similar  school  grade. 

This  standard  is  difficult  to  set  up,  as  frequently 
little  children  commence  school  but  drop  out  after  a 
few  weeks.  The  question  will  then  arise  whether  they 
shall  be  put  back  in  the  Beginners'  Department. 

The  standard  of  play. — This  will  depend  some- 
what upon  their  playmates.  Play  grades  children. 
The  children  they  select  as  playmates   are   the  ones 


122  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


that  are  usually  fitted  to  be  their  classmates.  Thus 
age  and  school  attendance  may  need  to  be  qualified  by 
the  test  of  play.  Upon  these  three  tests  will  depend 
their  promotion.  The  final  test  applied  in  each  indi- 
vidual case  will  be  what  the  child  needs  to  make  him 
"a  complete  human  being.'' 

Stories  and  Bible  verses. — As  was  said,  promo- 
tion is  not  dependent  upon  the  amount  of  knowledge 
gained.  It  is  a  satisfaction  to  most  teachers  to  know 
that  their  children  are  familiar  with  certain  Bible 
stories  and  can  repeat  certain  Bible  verses.  To  one 
type  of  mind  a  list  of  Bible  verses  to  "pass  on"  seems 
desirable. 

There  is  no  such  passing  test  from  the  kindergarten 
to  the  first  grade,  in  the  public-school  system.  A 
kindergartner  would  dislike  to  have  her  children  leave 
her,  knowing  they  had  missed  certain  of  the  best 
stories  and  verses  and  songs  of  childhood,  yet  to  list 
these  as  a  basis  of  promotion  would  seem  absurd. 

A  Beginners'  teacher  may  wisely  list  the  most  im- 
portant Bible  and  nature  stories  and  the  Bible  verses 
that  best  express  a  little  child's  religion.  These  she 
uses  more  often  than  other  stories  and  verses  that 
possess  only  a  passing  value.  If  such  a  story  occurs 
on  a  Sunday  when  the  attendance  is  small,  she  may 
omit  a  less  important  story  the  following  Sunday,  and 
substitute  this.  Such  stories  she  retells  often,  and  re- 
fers to  frequently.  The  most  childlike  Bible  verses  she 
uses  repeatedly,  as  an  expression  of  thought.  She  is 
thus  making  sure  of  certain  knowledge  for  her  chil- 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  123 

dren.  The  children  to  be  promoted  are  kept  in  mind, 
and  she  often  considers  them  in  this  way:  "I  must 
find  out  whether  John's  mother  read  him  the  baby 
Moses  story  we  had  when  he  was  absent/'  "Mary 
doesn't  seem  to  be  interested  in  the  Nativity  picture.  I 
must  retell  the  story."  "Sara  looked  stupid  when  I 
suggested  finding  a  picture  about  'Be  ye  kind  one  to 
another.'  I  must  try  it  again."  "Helen  missed  the 
spring  nature  stories,  and  evidently  they  were  not  read 
her  at  home.  I  will  stop  in  and  tell  them  to  her  some 
day." 

Religious  ideas. — These  most  important  stories 
are  not  selected  only  for  the  appeal  of  the  incidents, 
but  for  the  ideas  they  convey.  The  Bible  verses  that 
a  teacher  most  wants  her  children  to  know  are  those 
that  express  a  fundamental  truth  or  command,  or  an 
appropriate  prayer. 

The  ideas  that  make  up  a  little  child's  religion  are 
well  expressed  in  the  Standard  for  a  Beginners'  De- 
partment. 

i.  Knowledge  of  the  power  of  God,  to  give  love, 
protection  and  care. 

2.  A  consciousness  of  God  as  his  heavenly  Father 
and  Jesus  Christ  as  his  friend. 

3.  Ideals  of  right  conduct. 

All  through  the  year  the  teacher  is  trying  to  give 
her  children  these  ideas.  As  the  year  draws  near  its 
close  she  tests  the  individual  children  to  be  promoted 
by  such  comments  as  the  following:  "Did  the  light 
way  John  replied  'God'  to  my  question  indicate  that  I 


124  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

was  tedious,  or  that  he  hasn't  a  real  sense  of  God  and 
love  of  him?"  "Lucy's  frequent  notice  of  the  pictures 
of  Jesus  prove  her  friendship  for  him/'  "Harry  needs 
more  nature  teaching.  He  sees  no  connection  be- 
tween nature  and  God,  and  exhibits  little  wonder." 
"Ruth's  use  of  'God  is  love/  when  I  asked  for  verses 
about  God's  taking  care,  shows  she  has  the  right  idea 
of  that  verse."  "Robert  was  able  to  make  a  keen 
distinction  between  those  who  are  doing  right  and 
those  who  are  doing  wrong  in  the  story  picture." 
"Maud's  face  is  often  in  itself  an  indication  of  her 
love  of  God."  "I  must  help  Barbara  gain  more  sense 
of  God's  power  behind  her  parents.  They  seem  all- 
sufficient  to  her." 

Such  individual  consideration  is  possible  with  the 
class  to  be  promoted,  when  it  might  not  be  with  the 
entire  department.  In  very  large  departments  the 
assistants  can  help  in  this,  and  talk  over  the  children 
with  the  teacher  from  their  angle.  The  teacher's  pri- 
vate records,  mentioned  in  the  last  lesson,  help  vastly 
in  this  regard. 

Conduct. — The  object  of  the  teacher's  work  is, 
of  course,  the  conduct  of  her  children,  and  this  is  the 
final  test  of  her  success.  She  will  therefore  look  very 
carefully  at  the  conduct  of  the  class  to  be  promoted, 
and  test  this  also  by  the  Standard  for  a  Beginners' 
Department. 

The  conduct  of  a  Beginner  may  manifest: 
I.  Love,  trust  and  reverence  for  God/ 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  125 

2.  Association  of  the  heavenly  Father  with  daily- 
life. 

3.  Right  behavior. 

4.  Love  for  God  through  prayer,  praise,  and  effort 
to  please  him. 

5.  Love  for  others  through  acts  of  helpfulness. 

The  teacher  watches  for  evidence  of  these  things  in 
the  class  to  be  promoted.  She  cannot  bear  to  send 
any  child  into  the  Primary  Department  without  the 
sense  of  God  as  an  every-day  Helper  and  a  wonderful 
Father.  She  looks  for  an  attitude  in  prayer,  in  praise 
songs,  and  during  stories  about  God  which  proves 
that  this  is  so.  She  sometimes  suggests  that  the  chil- 
dren ask  the  heavenly  Father  to  help  them  be  good. 

She  tests  their  behavior  individually.  She  looks  for 
an  improvement  in  obedience,  in  willingness  to  give  up 
to  others,  and  especially  in  helpfulness.  If  she  were 
asked  to  put  in  a  nutshell  the  great  idea  she  has  tried 
to  give  them,  she  would  say,  "Consciousness  of  God," 
and  for  the  great  virtue  she  has  tried  to  develop  would 
name  helpfulness.  Her  task  seems  to  her  to  be  mainly 
teaching  about  God,  and  training  in  service.  She 
watches  eagerly  for  evidences  of  these  things  in  the 
class  to  be  promoted. 

Promotion  service. — A  service  based  upon  this 
conception  of  tests  for  the  promoted  class  will  be  in 
the  nature  of  a  service  and  not  an  examination.  A 
story  may  be  told  by  the  teacher  and  children,  not  at 
all  to  show  how  well  they  know  it,  but  eagerly,  to 


126  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

give  the  audience  the  pleasure  the  story  gives  them. 
Story  pictures  may  be  shown  and  Bible  verses  re- 
peated that  explain  them,  not  with  the  appearance  of 
reciting  something  they  know  well,  but  of  telling  about 
their  beloved  pictures.  They  will  sing  to  praise,  or 
pray,  or  express  a  thought — never  to  "sing  well." 
Such  a  service  is  worthy  the  name,  and  actually  it  is 
passing  a  test — of  love  of  God  and  consciousness  of  his 
care,  of  ideals  of  goodness,  of  friendship  for  Jesus,  of 
happy-hearted  delight  in  their  religion.  A  word  of 
interpretation  will  assist  parents  and  friends  to  appre- 
ciate such  a  service. 

Influencing  the  children's  attitude. — Children  are 
so  suggestible  that  it  is  easy  for  a  teacher  to  make 
promotion  to  the  Primary  Department  seem  desirable 
or  something  to  be  dreaded.  No  doubt  it  will  be  hard 
for  her  to  part  with  them,  but  if  she  is  honestly  inter- 
ested in  their  welfare  she  will  rejoice  that  they  are 
ready  to  be  advanced.  She  begins  several  weeks  be- 
fore Promotion  Day  to  talk  to  them  alone  and  as  a 
group  about  being  promoted  and  arouses  keen  antici- 
pation. It  comes  to  be  considered  an  honor  to  belong 
to  the  graduating  class.  She  regards  it  as  a  high  com- 
pliment when  an  eager  little  face  looks  up  into  hers 
and  she  is  told,  "I  can  hardly  wait  to  go."  And  if  a 
timid  child  clings  to  her  and  confides  her  longing  to 
stay,  she  does  not  yield  to  a  weak  enjoyment  of  the 
child's  afTection,  but  paints  a  glowing  picture  of  the 
new  room  and  arranges  some  way  for  her  to  become 
acquainted    with    the    new    teacher.      The    Beginners' 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  127 

teacher  is  ambitious  to  send  out  a  class  enthusiastic 
and  expectant. 

Questions 

i.  What  is  the  standard  age  for  promotion  to  the 
Primary  Department?     Give  exceptions. 

2.  What  effect  has  attendance  at  school  upon  pro- 
motion ? 

3.  What  is  meant  by  the  standard  of  play? 

4.  How  does  a  wise  teacher  regard  a  child's  know- 
ledge of  Bible  stories  and  verses? 

5.  How  can  she  test  her  children's  religious  ideas? 

6.  How  can  she  test  their  conduct? 

7.  Write  out  a  Promotion  Service. 

8.  How  should  a  teacher  influence  the  children's 
attitude  toward  promotion? 

Problems  for  Discussion 

A.  Whether  a  child  five  and  a  quarter  years  old 
who  has  entered  school  shall  be  promoted  with  chil- 
dren of  six. 

B.  Whether  to  promote  a  child  of  six  well  devel- 
oped physically  but  not  mentally. 

C.  What  can  be  done  for  a  child  who,  according 
to  age  and  school  attendance,  should  be  promoted,  but 
whose  religious  ideas  and  conduct  are  not  satisfactory. 


128  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


LESSON  XV 
PLANNING  FOR  SPECIAL  DAYS 

What- is  any  festival  to  a  child?  It  is  what  he  remembers 
it  to  have  been;  his  delighted  expectation  reflects  past  pleas- 
ures.— Florence  Hull  Winterburn,  in  From  the  Child's  Stand- 
point. 

The  special  days. — Any  course  of  lessons  for  Be- 
ginners recognizes  the  importance  of  the  great  festi- 
val days— Thanksgiving,  Christmas,  and  Easter.  These 
festival  days  not  only  determine  the  lessons  that  pre- 
cede and  follow  them,  but  Easter  and  Christmas  Sun- 
days are  usually  celebrated  by  the  church  school,  and 
frequently  the  Beginners  are  given  a  part  in  this  gen- 
eral celebration.  In  some  schools  there  is  also  a 
general  Thanksgiving  service  on  the  Sunday  preceding 
Thanksgiving.  Children's  Day,  the  second  Sunday  in 
June,  is  set  apart  as  the  Sunday  in  which  the  children 
take  part  in  the  morning  service,  or  have  a  special 
service  later  in  the  day.  Promotion  Day  is  still 
another  of  the  church-school  special  days. 

Their  abuse. — Special  days  are  either  dreaded  or 
anticipated  by  both  teachers  and  children.  That  they 
are  strong  influences  in  the  church-school  year  is 
proved  by  the  intensity  of  the  feeling  in  regard  to 
them.  It  is  also  true  that  the  teacher  who  enjoys 
showing  off  her  children  may  anticipate  these  days  and 
the  children  who  do  not  enjoy  being  shown  off  may 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  129 

dread  them.  It  is  true,  again,  that  some  children  who 
dote  on  making  recitations  may  look  forward  to  a  cer- 
tain type  of  celebration  the  teacher  disapproves.  The 
manner  of  observing  these  special  days  determines 
their  value  or  abuse. 

They  are  abused  when  they  are  allowed  to  over- 
shadow the  Sundays  between,  which  are  made  to  seem 
unimportant  except  as  preparatory  to  these  red-letter 
days.  In  some  schools,  as  soon  as  Thanksgiving  is 
over,  drills  upon  Christmas  songs  begin;  Easter  reci- 
tations and  songs  precede  Easter  by  many  weeks :  and 
September  is  devoted  to  preparation  for  Promotion 
Dav. 

This  conception  of  the  festival  days  as  times  for 
display  is  an  abuse  of  them.  A  public  performance  in 
which  little  children  entertain  adults  is  a  celebration 
for  the  adults,  but  not  for  the  children.  Children  who 
are  shy  suffer  tortures,  particularly  as  they  often  make 
slips  which  cause  laughter.  Children  who  are  forward 
are  not  made  less  so  by  public  appearances.  When  the 
preparation  consists  of  tedious  rehearsals  and  drills  it 
takes  away  the  educational  value  of  these  special  days 
for  the  children,  and  the  delight  and  enthusiasm  they 
ought  to  arouse. 

Preserving  their  value. — Their  value  is  retained 
when  they*  are  observed. by  services  rather  than  per- 
formances, and  wrhen  these  services  are  childlike  and 
entered  into  with  joy  by  the  children.  For  such 
services  there  is  no  drilling,  but  the  songs  and  verses 
and  stories  are  used  in  the  spirit  of  services  as  truly 


130  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

in  preparation  as  upon  the  festival  days.  They  are 
familiar  through  constant  use  as  expressions  of  feel- 
ing, not  through  many  empty  repetitions  for  the  sake 
of  knowing  them  perfectly.  The  thoughts  of  the  chil- 
dren are  not  upon  their  appearance  or  upon  the  audi- 
ence, but  upon  the  words  they  say,  or  the  songs  they 
sing,  or  the  stories  they  tell. 

These  days  are  red-letter  days,  because  their  obser- 
vance is  childlike  and  natural  and  joyous.  The  prepa- 
ration is  a  preparation  of  interest  and  of  thought,  not 
of  memorizing  words  to  be  "rendered."  No  particular 
child  is  allowed  to  feel  himself  prominent,  but  the 
children  understand  that  each  one  is  a  contributor  to 
the  continued  story  told  by  Bible  verses,  poems,  and 
songs,  or  to  the  chorus  of  praise,  or  to  the  seasonal 
song  sung  together.  It  is  perfectly  possible  for  these 
little  children  to  have  a  part  appropriate  to  them,  and 
the  modern  departmentalized  school  needs  to  get 
together  occasionally  to  gain  esprit  de  corps.  It  is 
equally  true  that  no  department  should  be  forced  to 
take  part  in  a  celebration  to  which  it  contributes,  but 
from  which  it  receives  nothing.  Nobody  would  con- 
sider asking  the  Junior  Department  to  sing  at  a  service 
of  stories  and  songs  suitable  for  Beginners,  yet  the 
Beginners  are  often  expected  to  take  part  in  services 
in  which  the  appeal  is  far  above  them.  There  should 
be  at  least  a  story  for  them,  and  they  should  usually 
be  taken  to  their  own  room  after  their  part  of  the 
service. 

The  time   of  celebration. — The   preceding  para- 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  131 


graphs  apply  to  celebrations  of  the  entire  school,  in 
which  the  Beginners  have  a  part.  There  is  no  special 
day,  except  perhaps  Children's  Day,  whose  value  for 
little  children  is  not  diminished  by  giving  up  their 
entire  class  session  for  a  general  service.  They  may 
share  in  the  beginning  or  end  of  a  service  that  is 
held  for  the  entire  school,  but  their  own  class  session, 
particularly  on  a  special  day,  should  not  be  sacrificed. 
If  it  is,  this  is  done  because  the  older  members  of  the 
school  wish  to  be  entertained  or  to  exhibit  a  large 
school,  not  for  the  sake  of  the  children  themselves. 
It  is  in  their  own  room  in  their  own  class  session  that 
Christmas  and  Thanksgiving  and  Easter  can  be  inter- 
preted according  to  their  understanding,  and  give  joy 
and  occasion  for  delightful  memories.  Parents  and 
friends  can  be  invited  to  share  in  this  special-day 
session,  when  they  will  find  the  children  most  natural 
and  most  charming. 

An  afternoon  service  for  the  entire  school  can  be 
shared  by  little  children.  They  should  have  no  part 
in  an  evening  service.  It  is  pure  exploitation  to  keep 
children  up  beyond  then-  bedtime  at  a  high  nervous 
tension  to  entertain  an  audience  of  adults. 

The  Beginners'  Department  can  join  with  the  Pri- 
mary Department,  and  possibly  with  the  Junior  De- 
partment also,  in  brief  opening  or  closing  services  on 
a  special  day,  and  still  have  the  major  part  of  the  time 
for  their  own  session. 

Thanksgiving.  —  In  the  Beginners'  Course 
Thanksgiving  is   the   climax  of  the   autumn   lessons. 


132  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

If  the  children  take  part  in  any  school  service,  it  will 
be  by  a  song  or  by  saying  Bible  verses  that  have  been 
used  frequently  in  the  department,  after  which  they 
return  immediately  to  their  room. 

A  school  gift  of  fruit  and  vegetables  forms  an  appro- 
priate Thanksgiving  observance,  and  the  little  children 
can  join  in  this,  and  march  into  the  main  room,  each 
bringing  his  gift. 

Such  a  harvest  gift  can  be  made  as  a  department,  or 
with  the  Primary  Department,  and  will  make  the  day 
unforgetable  for  the  children. 

Christmas. — Christmas  is  the  high  light  of  the 
children's  year.  Its  joy  must  be  preserved  for  them, 
and  to  do  that  they  must  be  protected  from  exploitation 
and  undue  excitement.  Nothing,  as  was  said,  can 
interpret  Christmas  as  well  for  them  as  their  own 
class  session.  If  the  school  meets  together  for  a 
special  opening  service,  the  Beginners  will  happily  sing 
their  Christmas  song,  and  help  their  teacher  tell  the 
Christmas  story,  or  the  story  of  their  Christmas  gifts. 
In  one  such  brief,  opening  service,  a  certain  Begin- 
ners' class  proudly  displayed  a  tiny  Christmas  tree 
hung  with  colored  silk  bags  of  money  for  the  hungry 
children  of  Armenia.  With  intense  interest  they  told 
what  food  each  little  bag  represented,  as  the  teacher 
touched  them  one  by  one,  and  so  it  became  a  magical 
tree  to  all,  hung  with  bottles  of  milk,  loaves  of  bread, 
candy,  cookies,  and  sugar.  Thus  the  spirit  of  giving 
was  made  a  feature  of  the  Christmas  service. 

A  Christmas   Sundav  service  at  another  hour  may 


Methods  for   Teachers  of  Beginners  133 

include  a  little  children's  song  that  is  familiar  through 
long  use,  but  unless  a  story  suitable  for  them  is  pro- 
vided, they  will  neither  be  benefited  by  the  rest  of  the 
service,  nor  add  to  the  reverent  atmosphere. 

There  should  be  a  week-day  story-hour  or  Christ- 
mas-tree party.  If  this  is  for  the  Beginners  alone,  or 
the  Beginners  and  Primary  children,  stories,  games, 
gifts,  or  no  gifts  and  simple  refreshments  will  make 
up  the  program. 

In  some  schools  the  Christmas  tree  is  for  the  entire 
school,  and  the  various  departments  furnish  the  enter- 
tainment. The  Beginners  will  delight  in  this,  provided 
their  part  does  not  consist  of  wearisome  recitations. 
They  can  act  in  pantomime  parts  of  a  Christmas  story 
told  by  the  teacher,  for  example,  representing  the 
snowflakes,  the  wind  and  the  trees  in  "The  Promise," 
from  The  Story-Teller,  by  Maud  Lindsay.  They  can 
chop  down  a  tree  in  pantomime,  set  it  up,  hang  it 
with  imaginary  gifts,  and  show  in  pantomime  what 
these  gifts  are,  which  the  audience  guess.  They  can 
represent  the  toys  in  the  toy-shop,  also  to  be  guessed. 
In  such  ways  they  enjoy  themselves  thoroughly,  are 
under  no  tension,  and  delight  the  audience  by  their 
naturalness. 

Easter. — Easter  is  not  a  festival  in  which  little 
children  should  appear  conspicuously.  The  Easter  ap- 
peal is  not  the  same  for  them  as  for  older  pupils. 
They  may  sing  an  Easter  song  of  nature's  awakening, 
or  march  into  the  main  room  with  their  gift  of  a  plant 
or  flowers.     They  must  not  on  any  account  miss  their 


134  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


- 


own  class  session,  because  they  need  to  have  immor- 
tality explained  in  a  very  simple  way  on  this  day. 

One  school  had  the  lesson  periods  of  the  three  lower 
departments  come  first,  followed  by  a  closing  service 
together.  The  Beginners  entered  with  a  plant  they 
had  bought  as  an  Easter  gift,  and  sang  an  Easter 
greeting  and  an  Easter  nature  song,  each  child  repre- 
senting a  flower  that  "lifts  up  its  head  to  say,  'It's 
Easter  Day,  glad  Easter  Day.'  "  The  Primary  chil- 
dren with  their  teacher  told  a  story  that  the  Beginners 
could  understand,  and  the  Juniors  presented  to  the 
Beginners  and  Primary  children  Easter  gifts  that  they 
had  made. 

Children's  day. — On  the  children's  own  day  they 
will  naturally  have  a  part.  It  may  be  a  simple  con- 
tinued story,  told  in  Bible  verses,  songs,  poems  and 
perhaps  a  story.  It  may  be  simply  a  group  of  songs. 
It  may  be  a  circle  talk,  conducted  on  the  same  plan 
as  those  in  the  class  sessions.  It  will  at  any  rate  be 
childlike,  and  given  in  the  joyous  and  unconscious 
spirit  that  accompanies  anything  familiar  and  well 
understood,  and  that  is  absent  from  a  mere  perfor-, 
mance  laboriously  rehearsed. 

Promotion  day.  —  The  Beginners'  graduating 
class  should  of  course  be  included  in  the  Promotion 
service.  Their  part  will  be  retelling  stories  and  Bible 
verses  and  singing  songs  that  have  been  frequently 
used  in  their  department.  These  may  be  so  arranged 
as  to  give  an  idea  to  the  adults  of  the  scope  of  a  little 
child's   religion,   though  the   children   themselves   will 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  135 

have  no  idea  of  anything  mofe  than  sharing  favorite 
stories,  verses,  and  songs. 

Recognizing  the  danger. — The  danger  every  Be- 
ginners' teacher  needs  to  recognize  and  to  guard 
against  is  that  the  value  of  these  special  days  may  be 
lost  for  the  children  through  the  part  they  are  given 
in  their  celebration,  and  that  the  preparation  for  them 
may  degenerate  into  mere  drill  and  rehearsal.  Their 
function  is  not  attained  when  the  children  are  expected 
simply  to  make  these  days  interesting  to  older  people, 
often  at  a  sacrifice  of  naturalness  and  joy.  Older  peo- 
ple may  still  be  entertained  by  attending  festival  cele- 
brations in  which  the  children  take  part  with  un- 
affected childlikeness,  in  real  religious  services. 
Thanksgiving,  Christmas,  Easter,  Children's  Day,  and 
Promotion  Day  are  all  important  influences  in  the 
religious  education  of  little  children. 

Questions 

i.  Name  the  special  days  celebrated  by  the  church 
school. 

2.  Describe  how  they  may  be  abused. 

3.  How  should  their  value  be  preserved? 

4.  How  can  departments  combine  in  observing 
these  days? 

5.  Describe  Thanksgiving  observances. 

6.  How  may  Christmas  be  celebrated? 

7.  What  is  an  appropriate  observance  of  Easter? 

8.  What  principles  should  determine  the  obser- 
vance of  Children's  Day? 

9.  What  part  can  Beginners  have  in  Promotion 
Day? 


136  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


10.     What  dangers  should  a  teacher  guard  against? 
Problems  for  Discussion 

A.  How  to  insure  appropriate  observance  of  spe- 
cial days  when  this  observance  is  in  the  hands  of  a 
committee  who  do  not  share  the  ideals  of  the  Begin- 
ners' teacher. 

B.  Preventing  an  audience  from  showing  amused 
pleasure  at  the  children's  part  in  a  service. 

C.  Getting  the  children  together  for  any  necessary 
rehearsing. 

D^  How  through  these  special  days  to  give  the  chil- 
dren a  joyous  sense  of  belonging  to  the  large  school. 

E.  How  to  convince  the  church-school  officers  who 
want  to  see  the  whole  school  together  that  this  may 
be  done  on  special  days,  but  would  be  an  injustice  to 
the  children  if  it  occurred  frequently. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  137 

LESSON  XVI 
HOME  COOPERATION 

The  home  life  of  a  child  is  usually  a  determining  factor  in 
his  religious  and  moral  reactions. — Hugh  Hartshorne,  in 
Childhood  and   Character. 

Its  importance. — The  teacher  of  Beginners  needs 
home  cooperation  more  than  the  teacher  of  any  other 
grade,  because,  with  the  exception  of  the  minority  who 
attend  kindergarten,  her  children's  entire  time  is  spent 
at  home.  In  Lesson  XII  it  was  said  that  she  could 
only  expect  to  start  something  which  might  be  con- 
tinued in  the  homes.  In  a  sense  this  is  so  with  any 
teacher.  The  short  church-school  session  admits  of 
no  completed  work.  In  fact,  the  object  of  the  teach- 
ing is  to  interpret  life,  and  the  pupils'  response  must 
come  in  their  daily  actions.  With  older  pupils  home 
is  only  one  of  several  environments  in  which  they 
figure.  With  little  children  home  is  the  only  field  of 
action.  Teachers,  schoolmates  and  various  outside 
people  wield  as  strong  an  influence  upon,  older  chil- 
dren as  their  parents  do.  Parents  are  the  supreme 
influence  in  little  children's  lives.  Thus  it  is  easily 
seen  that  without  the  sympathetic  cooperation  of 
parents,  or  at  least  of  mothers,  a  Beginners'  teacher 
finds  her  hands  tied. 

Co-operation  in  making  attendance  regular. — In 
the  first  place,  the  children's  attendance  is  absolutely 


138  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


dependent  upon  the  parents.  They  cannot  come  to  the 
church  school  alone,  they  must  be  taken  home,  and  a 
parent  is  usually  obliged  to  stay  with  a  newcomer 
during  the  first  few  sessions. 

The  children  are  likely  to  assist  in  this  special 
cooperation.  They  nearly  always  enjoy  going  to  Sun- 
day school.  It  is  usually  their  first  adventure  into  the 
big  world  outside  their  homes.  It  forms  the  subject 
of  much  conversation  at  home.  "Is  today  Sunday?" 
is  a  common  question,  and  a  disappointing  answer 
brings  another — "Will  tomorrow  be?"  It  is  an  ex- 
ceptionally indifferent  parent  who  is  not  pleased  with 
this  display  of  interest  and  anxious  to  gratify  it.  Even 
the  indifferent  parent  will  do  so  in  the  interests  of 
peace.  What  a  little  child  wants  he  wants  very  much, 
and  is  perfectly  free  to  say  so. 

A  shy  child  may  need  to  have  his  interest  stimulated. 
In  this  case  the  mother  makes  the  Beginners'  class  the 
subject  of  frequent  comment.  If  she  is  wise,  she  will 
continue  regular  attendance  until  her  child's  timidity 
has  changed  to  interest. 

The  teacher's  friendly  personality  and  her  manner 
of  conducting  the  class  are,  of  course,  the  determining 
factors  in  gaining  the  children's  interest.  Her  atti- 
tude toward  the  mothers  who  bring  their  children  is 
as  great  a  factor  in  securing  their  cooperation.  Her 
unassumed  interest  in  their  children  and  enthusiasm 
over  her  work  will  predispose  them  to  cooperate. 

They  need,  however,  not  merely  a  general  impres- 
sion of  interest  and  capability  on  the  teacher's  part. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  139 

They  need  to  realize  their  own  responsibility  and  her 
dependence  upon  them.  Many  a  teacher  is  satisfied 
with  the  flattering  comments  of  mothers  who  admire 
her  teaching  ability.  She  should  turn  about  and  con- 
fess the  inadequacy  of  her  work  unless  supplemented 
by  theirs.  She  can  particularly  emphasize  the  need  of 
regular  attendance,  especially  to  a  parent  who  does  not 
realize  its  importance.  The  parents  who  accompany 
their  children  will  be  most  likely  to  appreciate  this. 
In  Lesson  XIII  the  suggestion  was  made  of  reports 
on  attendance  to  be  sent  to  the  parents  at  regular 
intervals. 

Co-operation  in  the  class  session. — Parents,  espe- 
cially mothers,  always  form  a  part  of  the  class  atten- 
dance. Their  presence  should  be  a  help.  It  is  fre- 
quently a  hindrance.  Mothers  who  exhibit  a  critical 
attitude  are  a  real  trial  to  any  teacher,  particularly  to 
one  who  is  young  and  inexperienced.  Mothers  who 
whisper  and  visit  with  one  another  spoil  any  session. 
Mothers  who  comment  upon  the  children  and  make 
them  self-conscious  by  laughing  at  their  quaint  re- 
marks are  a  real  menace  to  effective  teaching. 

It  is  safe  to  say  that  this  lack  of  cooperation  is  not 
intentional,  and  can  be  overcome  by  the  teacher.  The 
young  teacher  who  is  awed  by  a  critical  attitude  should 
neither  ignore  nor  endure  it,  but  take  the  bull  by  the 
horns,  frankly  confess  her  difficulty,  and  ask  for  as- 
sistance.  Mothers  who  assist  in  the  circle  or  are 
occasionally  appointed  to  tell  the  story  will  not  sit  on 
the  critic's  bench,  which  belongs  to  loafers.    Whisper- 


140  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

ing  mothers  will  respond  to  a  tactful  request  before  the 
session  for  assistance  in  keeping  the  atmosphere  one 
of  interest  and  order.  If  this  does  not  work,  a  sugges- 
tion to  the  children  for  silence,  "so  that  I  can  hear  the 
clock  tick,"  will  induce  mothers  to  share  in  this  silence. 
A  teacher  who  tells  parents  of  the  difficulty  she  her- 
self has  in  invariably  treating  the  children's  comments 
with  seriousness,  however  amusing  they  may  be,  will 
help  them  to  see  the  necessity  of  this  self-control. 
However,  to  give  mothers  some  responsibility  in  the 
session  will  best  secure  their  cooperation. 

Co-operation  in  use  of  teaching  material; — The 
children  carry  home  folders  containing  the  stories  they 
have  listened  to,  and  will  enjoy  hearing  again  and 
again.  It  lies  entirely  with  their  parents  or  some 
older  member  of  the  family  whether  they  shall  have 
this  pleasure  during  the  week,  and  thus  whether  the 
stories  shall  achieve  their  full  purpose.  Parents,  who 
are  so  often  called  upon  to  tell  stories,  should  look 
upon  this  as  a  delightful  way  of  solving  the  problem 
of  stories  to  tell.  A  teacher  can  do  much  to  help 
them  look  at  the  matter  in  this  light — as  stories  to  be 
told  and  enjoyed,  not  as  lessons  to  be  learned.  She 
can  suggest  that  the  bedtime  or  late  afternoon  story- 
hour  shall  include  the  last  church-school  story,  or  one 
of  the  well-beloved  older  ones,  and  that  Bible  stories 
will  bear  as  frequent  repetition  as  favorite  nursery 
tales. 

There  are  Bible  verses  and  often  words  of  songs  in 
these   folders,   which   parents   can   teach.   "  A  teacher 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  141 


should  put  frankly  before  the  parents  the  impossibilit} 
of  teaching  the  words  of  songs  in  the  brief  time 
allotted  her.  She  can  suggest  that  these  songs  be  said 
or  sung  at  bedtime.  She  should  also  explain  the  use 
of  the  Bible  verses  in  appropriate  connections,  rather 
than  as  mere  recitations — as  grace  at  meals,  as  addi- 
tional prayers,  as  comments  upon  nature,  daily  com- 
forts, pictures,  and  Bible  stories. 

Helping  the  children  remember. — During  the 
course  of  a  year  the  teacher  asks  the  children  to  bring 
various  things  to  Sunday  school.  Sometimes  these  are 
objects  of  nature,  sometimes  flowers  or  toys  to  give 
away,  sometimes  pictures  to  illustrate  a  seasonal  les- 
son, sometimes  extra  money  for  a  special  cause. 

She  does  not  trust  to  the  children's  memory,  but 
gives  them  something  to  take  home  as  a  reminder — 
notes  or  papers  on  which  they  have  drawn  the  flowers 
or  toys  or  pieces  of  money  they  expect  to  bring,  with 
an  explanation  written  above. 

The  mother's  cooperation  is  needed  here  or  such 
messages  accomplish  nothing. 

Giving  opportunities  for  self-expression. — Most 
important  is  the  parents'  cooperation  in  giving  their 
children  opportunities  to  express  the  lesson  teachings 
in  daily  life.  In  the  folders  published  by  the  syndicate 
a  section  entitled  "The  Mother's  Part"  gives  sugges- 
tions of  this  sort,  for  example,  that  care  of  pets,  or 
helpfulness  to  parents,  or  hospitality  be  emphasized. 
A  printed  message  is  often  overlooked.  It  needs  to  be 
reenforced  by  the  teacher's  word.     This  can  be  done 


142  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


after  the  session,  to  the  group  of  mothers  who  are 
ready  to  take  the  children  home.  Notes  pinned  to  the 
children's  coats  may  ask  for  this  important  home 
cooperation.  They  will  be  simple,  straightforward  re- 
quests, such  as,  "Will  you  give  John  an  opportunity  to 
care  for  a  pet  or  wild  birds  or  squirrels  ?"  "I  hope 
Mary  may  be  given  some  household  tasks  this  week/' 
"Will  you  encourage  such  games  as  house  and  dolls  ?" 
"A  good  additional  bedtime  story  can  be  found 
in ." 

Imagine  the  lasting  influence  of  a  child's  first  lessons 
in  religion  if  they  were  continued  at  home  in  such 
ways.  With  older  children  who  attend  public  school 
and  have  other  outside  interests,  there  can  be  no  single, 
dominant  thought  running  through  a  week.  A  little 
child's  week  can  be  a  continuous  impression  of  the 
Sunday  thought,  but  only  with  the  sympathetic  and 
energetic  cooperation  of  the  parents. 

The  teacher  in  such  a  case  is  merely  one  who  directs 
the  course  of  religious  education,  who  gives  new  im- 
pulses and  fresh  ideas  and  arouses  feeling.  What  is 
more  natural  than  that  the  parents,  and  particularly 
the  mothers,  should  re-emphasize  these  ideas,  and  fos- 
ter the  impulses,  and  encourage  expression  of  the 
feeKngs  throughout  the  week? 

Children  so  educated  will  always  associate  feeling 
with  action.  They  will  gain  the  habit  of  carrying  ideas 
and  impulses  into  life. 

How  to  gain  co-operation. — There  needs  to  be 
some  systematic  plan  to  gain  the  cooperation  of  the 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  143 


parents.  One  method  is  to  form  a  Parents-Teacher 
Association,  composed  of  the  parents  and  teachers  of 
the  Beginners',  Primary,  and  possibly  also  the  Junior 
Departments.  An  important  part  of  the  work  of  this 
association  should  be  a  study  of  the  lesson  courses. 
Each  year  new  members  will  come  in,  and  so  each 
year  the  general  plan  of  the  courses  should  be  ex- 
plained by  some  officer  or  teacher,  or  the  director  of 
religious  education,  and  the  particular  lessons  ex- 
plained by  a  department  superintendent  to  the  parents 
most  concerned.  A  mother  will  take  pains  to  assist 
at  home  in  lessons  which  are  familiar  to  her,  and  the 
importance  of  which  she  sees.  Child  study  and  dis- 
cussions of  parents'  problems  may  also  be  considered 
in  this  association,  and  will  aid  in  gaining  the  insight 
of  parents  and  their  assistance. 

Where  there  is  no  such  formal  organization,  there 
can  still  be  frequent  conferences  between  the  teachers 
and  mothers  of  the  Beginners.  The  best  results  come 
from  holding  these  at  stated  times,  and  considering 
the  lessons  and  problems  immediately  ahead.  At  least 
quarterly  conferences  with  parents  should  be  held,  in 
order  to  keep  the  interest  alive  and  the  cooperation 
constant. 

Printed  letters  accompany  one  Beginners'  course, 
to  induce  cooperation,  but  any  such  formal  aid  needs 
the  personal  equation  to  make  it  an  entire  success. 

In  calls  and  chance  meetings  with  the  children's 
mothers  the  truly  enthusiastic  teacher  will  show  how 
important  as  well  as  interesting  she  considers  her  work. 


144  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

She  will  discuss  the  children  and  what  she  is  trying  to 
do  at  that  particular  time,  and  so  gain  sympathy  on  the 
mothers'  part.  She  will  gain  as  much  as  she  will  give 
by  these  conversations,  for  the  mothers  will  tell  her 
of  the  response  of  their  children  to  her  teachings,  and 
help  her  to  know  their  particular  needs.  Cooperation 
with  parents  means  not  only  continuous  education  for 
the  children,  and  aid  to  the  parent,  but  important  help 
for  the  teacher. 

Questions 

1.  Why  is  home  cooperation  particularly  necessary 
for  Beginners  ? 

2.  How  is  attendance  dependent  upon  cooperation? 

3.  How   can   the   mothers'   cooperation   during  the 
class  session  be  secured? 

4.  What    cooperation    is    desirable    in    the    use    of 
teaching  material? 

5.  In  what  ways   do   mothers   need  to   assist   chil- 
dren's memories? 

6.  What  opportunities  can  parents  give  for  carry- 
ing out  the  lesson  truths  ? 

7.  Through    what    means    can    home    cooperation 
be  secured? 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  145 

LESSON  XVII 
PLANS  FOR  CONFERENCES 

In  the  direction  of  the  work  within  a  given  department  the 
principal  will  call  meetings  of  the  staff  of  that  department. — 
Walter  S.  Athearn,  in  The  Organization  and  Administration 
of  the  Church  School. 

It  is  frequently  vedp  helpful  to  call  meetings  of  the  workers 
in  two  adjacent  departments.  Let  each  department  tell  the 
other  just  what  it  is  trying  to  do,  what  methods  it  is  using 
and  why,  and  what  other  teachers  may  reasonably  expect  their 
graduates  will  be  and  know. — Ibid. 

Three  or  four  times  a  year  the  superintendent  may  profit- 
ably assemble  all  his  workers,  including  the  committee  on 
education,  principals  of  departments,  teachers,  officers,  leaders 
of  all  clubs  and  societies,  and  officers  of  all  clubs,  societies  and 
organized  classes.  This  group  is  sometimes  called  the  school 
council.  By  means  of  these  meetings  unity  of  ideals  is  pre- 
served.— Ibid. 

Conference  of  the  departmental  staff. — There 
should  be  regular  meetings  of  the  departmental  staff, 
in  order  to  correlate  the  work  and  give  esprit  de  corps. 
It  is  very  important  to  the  atmosphere  of  the  depart- 
ment that  the  assistants  should  understand  fully  the 
aim  of  the  course  of  lessons  and  the  truth  to  be  im- 
pressed each  Sunday.  If  it  is  possible,  each  assistant 
should  have  a  text-book.  If  not,  there  should  be  a 
typewritten  outline  for  each,  or  one  of  the  printed  out- 
lines furnished  by  the  denominational  houses. 

At  least  once  a  quarter  the  lessons  that  are  to  be 
taught  are  explained  by  the  department  superintendent. 
She  inspires  her  assistants  with  the  importance  of  the 


146  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


task  ahead,  points  out  the  results  she  hopes  for,  and 
asks  them  to  notice  the  effect  of  certain  stories.  She 
may  have  original  plans  to  initiate,  in  which  their  help 
is  needed.  Arrangements  for  one  of  the  special  days 
probably  need  to  be  made.  She  consults  with  the 
pianist  about  new  songs.  She  takes  up  any  practical 
matters  of  ventilation  or  equipment  that  require  atten- 
tion. She  goes  over  the  list  of  absentees  with  the 
secretary. 

It  is,  of  course,  much  better  if  these  conferences  can 
be  held  each  month.  In  this  case  they  may  be  con- 
nected with  the  Parent-Teacher  Association,  occurring 
just  before  or  just  after  a  general  meeting.  The 
mothers  will  enter  freely  into  the  discussions,  and  the 
explanation  of  the  lessons  and  their  aims  will  insure 
their  cooperation  at  home. 

Occasionally  a  superintendent  will  test  the  work  of 
the  department  b"  throwing  out  such  questions  as  the 
following : 

Is  our  department  orderly? 

Do  the  children  have  opportunities  for  free  expres- 
sion? 

Are  we  getting  into  ruts? 

Is  our  room  satisfactory,  or  are  we  contented  be- 
cause we  are  used  to  it?  Suppose  we  enter  it  as 
strangers  and  judge  it. 

Are  we  protected  from  interruptions? 

Are  we  telling  too  many  stories  ? 

Is  there  enough  variety  fn  our  songs?  enough  repe- 
tition? 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  147 

Do  we  pray  as  often  as  we  might? 

In  department  conferences  a  book  on  Beginners' 
methods,  similar  to  this  text-book,  may  be  studied,  or 
one  on  child  study,  or  the  conference  may  resolve  itself 
into  a  story-telling  class.  When  this  is  the  case,  time 
should  still  be  given  to  immediate  pressing  local  prob- 
lems. Subjects  similar  to  the  following  may  be  reported 
wpon  by  assistants : 

Seasonal  Pictures. 

Better  Ventilation. 

Improved  Cleanliness  of  Room. 

Transportation  for  Children  at  a  Distance. 

Helpful  Current  Magazine  Articles. 

Objects  for  Offerings. 

Intimate  discussions  of  individual  children  are  often 
a  part  of  these  conferences.  Here  materials  may  be 
prepared  for  week-day  work,  if  there  is  such  a  club, 
or  Christmas  presents  made  for  the  children. 

Informal  conferences  will  often  occur  among  the 
members  of  the  departmental  staff  before  or  after  a 
class  session  or  at  chance  meetings.  Indeed,  Begin- 
ners' teachers  are  so  enthusiastic  they  are  ready  to 
"talk  shop"  anywhere  and  at  any  time. 

Interdepartment  conferences. — Each  department 
should  keep  in  close  touch  with  the  departments  just 
below  and  above  it.  In  a  departmentalized  school 
there  is  the  danger  that  each  department  will  be  suf- 
ficient unto  itself,  and  that  its  teaching  force  will 
regard  it  as  all-important.  The  work  in  any  depart- 
ment is  stronger  when  it  is  considered  as  a  single  link 


148  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


in  a  chain.  Its  teaching  force  are  none  the  less  devoted, 
but  they  are  wiser.  Knowing  what  has  been  done 
before  for  the  children's  religious  education,  they 
understand  what  foundation  they  are  building  upon, 
and  neither  make  the  mistake  of  assuming  too  great 
development  nor  of  needless  repetition.  Knowing 
what  is  to  come  after,  they  are  saved  from  a  feverish 
attempt  to  cram  the  children  with  all  the  knowledge 
they  feel  they  ought  to  have. 

The  Beginners'  Department  superm  en^ent  should 
confer  with  the  Cradle  Roll  superintendent  and  the 
teacher  of  the  Cradle  Roll  class,  if  there  is  one.  Such- 
conferences  need  not  be  frequent  or  formal.  Over  the 
teacups  at  the  home  of  the  Beginners'  superintendent 
is  a  good  place  for  helpful  talks.  It  is  not  necessary 
that  the  whole  staff  shall  be  present,  although  they 
should  all  be  invited. 

The  Beginners'  superintendent  should  know  whether 
the  children  who  are  to  come  to  her  are  having  a 
Cradle  Roll  course  of  lessons,  such  as  Object  Lessons 
for  the  Cradle  Roll.  The  teacher  of  the  Cradle 
Roll  class  gives  her  any  such  course  to  examine,  or, 
if  these  lessons  are  taught  by  the  mothers  at  home,  the 
Cradle  Roll  superintendent  makes  her  acquainted 
with  it. 

Through  these  two  people  she  also  becomes  inter- 
ested in  the  children  who  will  soon  be  her  pupils,  and 
learns  something  of  their  home  life.  The  Cradle  Roll 
superintendent  and  teacher  gain  much  from  their  con- 
tact with  her,  and  she  gains  their  assistance  in  pre- 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  149 


venting  children  from  entering  the  Beginners'  Depart- 
ment too  soon,  and  their  aid  in  enrolling  children 
when  they  have  reached  the  age  of  four.  By  such 
informal  conferences  the  first  two  links  in  the  chain 
are  firmly  connected. 

The  Beginners'  and  Primary  Departments  also  need 
conferences.  These  may  be  held  in  connection  with 
the  Parent-Teacher  Association,  or  the  Beginners' 
conference,  preceding  or  following  the  general  pro- 
gram. There  is  great  value  in  having  the  mothers  of 
both  Beginners  and  Primary  children  meet  with  the 
teacher  of  both  departments  to  study  a  book  on  child 
psychology  or  to  practice  story-telling.  There  is  en- 
thusiasm in  numbers  and  stimulation  in  diverse  expe- 
riences and  points  of  view.  The  stafTs  of  both  depart- 
ments will  gain  from  this  interchange  of  thought. 
Sometime  during  the  year  the  Beginners'  Course  ought 
to  be  outlined  for  the  benefit  of  the  Primary  teachers, 
and  the  Primary  Course  for  the  benefit  of  the  Begin- 
ners' teachers.  A  comparison  of  the  two  will  follow, 
and  stories  and  Bible  verses  noted  that  occur  in  both, 
together  with  the  different  appeals.  It  is  particularly 
necessary  that  the  first-grade  Primary  teacher  should 
be  familiar  with  the  Beginners'  lessons,  to  know  what 
stories  the  children  have  heard,  and  what  religious 
ideas  she  can  expect  them  to  have. 

School  conferences. — The  Beginners'  superinten- 
dent, in  order  to  share  the  ideals  of  the  entire  school, 
and  to  have  a  voice  in  its  management,  should  attend 
the  occasional  conferences  of  the  entire  school.     She 


150  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

will  not  feel  herself  a  part  of  the  whole  educational 
scheme  unless  she  does  so.  She  will  have  the  oppor- 
tunity here  to  present  the  needs  of  her  department. 
She  will  also  realize  the  needs  of  the  other  depart- 
ments to  which  she  sends  her  children.  Other  super- 
intendents' ideals  may  raise  hers,  and  hers  may  raise 
theirs.  These  conferences  of  the  general  superinten- 
dent, heads  of  departments,  religious  education 
committee,  and  other  leaders  in  the  church  school  are 
necessary  for  discussions  of  general  policy  and  man- 
agement, and  in  order  that  each  department  shall  have 
equal  rights  and  attention. 

Time  for  conferences. — This  triple  program  of 
conferences  sounds  rather  difficult  for  a  busy  Begin- 
ners' superintendent  to  carry  out.  It  can  be  modified, 
however,  as  has  been  suggested,  by  combining  some 
items  in  a  single  meeting.  A  year's  conferences,  re- 
duced to  their  lowest  terms,  as  follows,  ought  to  be 
possible  for  any  Beginners'  teacher: 

Twe  school  conferences. 

Quarterly  Parent-Teacher  Association  meeting  or 
Mothers'  Club,  preceded  by  half-hour  Beginners'  staff 
conference. 

Occasional  informal  home  conferences  with  the 
Cradle  Roll  and  Primary  superintendents. 

Conferences  of  the  right  sort  are  an  inspiration  and 
a  real  help,  and  a  devoted  Beginners'  teacher  will  find 
time  for  what  is  truly  helpful. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  151 

Questions 

i.  Why  are  conferences  of  the  departmental  staff 
important  ? 

2.  How  often  should  these  be  held? 

3.  What  should  constitute  the  programs  ? 

4.  What  interdepartment  conferences  are  nec- 
essary for  Beginners'  teachers? 

5.  Describe  the  subjects  that  may  be  considered 
with  the  Cradle  Roll  superintendent. 

6.  What  kind  of  conferences  with  the  Primary 
teacher  are  helpful? 

7.  Why  are  conferences  of  the  school  leaders  im- 
portant ? 

8.  How  many  yearly  conferences  can  even  a  busy 
teacher  attend? 

Problems  for  Discussion 

A.  In  a  department  having  one  teacher  and  one 
assistant  whether  it  is  preferable  to  hold  conferences 
with  the  Primary  teachers  of  their  school,  or  with 
Beginners'  teachers  of  the  community. 

B.  When  the  teachers  have  little  leisure,  which 
conferences  are  most  importan" — departmental,  inter- 
departmental, or  school? 


152  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


LESSON  XVIII 

REPORTS  ON  PRACTICE  WORK  AND  OBSER- 
VATION   (I) 

The  right  spirit  for  the  task. — Specific  assign- 
ments and  instructions  were  given  last  week  by  your 
instructor  for  this  final  test  of  practice  in  the  teaching 
and  conduct  of  a  Beginners'  Department.  You  need 
in  addition  some  general  advice  concerning  the  spirit 
in  which  you  approach  this  task. 

As  far  as  possible  forget  yourself  and  the  teachers 
of  the  department  and  fix  your  attention  upon  the 
children.  Your  great  hope  is  to  satisfy  their  needs 
and  arouse  their  interest,  or  as  an  assistant  to  keep 
the  wheels  running  so  smoothly  that  others  may  do 
this. 

Prepare  thoroughly  for  your  assigned  duty,  with  the 
children  always  in  mind. 

Try  not  to  come  to  this  practice  work  tired,  or  ner- 
vous, or  late.  A  good  night's  rest,  an  early  arrival  and 
the  conviction  that  one  is  well  prepared  give  poise  and 
promise  success. 

In  your  observation  do  not  focus  your  attention 
upon  unessential  details.  Enter  into  the  spirit  of  the 
department  and  judge  it  with  a  right  sense  of  values. 

Preparation  for  the  first  Sunday's  work. — Reread 
Lesson  I,  and  Lessons  VII  or  XIII,  according  as  v^u 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  153 


are  to  take  the  position  of  general  assistant,  secretary, 
or  pianist. 

Prepare  in  a  specific  manner,  according  to  the  in- 
structions you  have  received. 

Regard  this  as  an  initiation  of  such  serious  value 
that  you  need  God's  help  to  perform  it  creditably. 

Making  a  report. — In  your  notebooks  make  two 
headings— " Practice  Work"  and  "Observation. "  Un- 
der them  put  the  following  subheadings  and  fill  in  to 
the  best  of  your  ability.  Prepare  these  reports  fully 
enough  to  give  orally  in  class  and  also  to  leave  with 
your  instructor. 


Practice  Work  as  Assistant 
Assignment 

(Whether  as  secretary,  pianist  or  general  assistant.) 


Preparation 

(General,  through  rereading  the  lessons  indicated, 
and  specific,  as  outlined  by  your  instructor  or  Begin- 
ners' superintendent.) 


Result 

(A  frank  statement  of  your  success  or  failure,  as 
you  see  it.  Show  where  you  fell  short  and  knew  it. 
Tell  any  unexpected  difficulties  that  arose,  and 
whether  you  were  able  to  cope  with  them.  Compare 
your  anticipation  of  your  work,  and  its  realization.) 


154  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

Notes 

(State  how  you  might  have  done  better.  Tell  how 
the  conditions  might  have  been  improved  so  as  to  make 
your  task  easier.  Write  whether  you  would  enjoy 
such  a  position  permanently.) 

Observation 

What  I  Particularly  Liked  and  Why. 

What  I  Particularly  Disliked  and  Why. 

Adjectives  which  Describe  the  General  Conduct  of 
the  Department. 

Adjectives  which  Describe  the  Department  as  it 
Might  Be  Improved. 

What  Impressions  I  Think  the  Children  Received. 

Any  Different  Impressions  They  Should  Have  Re- 
ceived. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  155 


LESSON  XJIX 

REPORTS  ON  PRACTICE  WORK  AND  OBSER- 
VATION (II) 

Preparation  for  second  Sunday's  teaching. — Re- 
read the  general  suggestions  in  Lesson  XVIII  for 
practice  work  and  observation. 

Reread  Lesson  X  of  this  book  and  the  chapter  on 
"How  to  Tell  the  Story,"  in  Story-Telling,  by  Cather, 
for  specific  help  in  story-telling. 

Prepare  your  story  early  in  the  week. 

Tell  it  aloud  to  yourself  or  to  a  child,  or  group  of 
children,  or  students,  at  least  once  every  day,  till  it  is 
thoroughly  your  own. 

In  the  class. — Because  the  story  comes  at  the  end 
©f  the  session,  do  not  allow  yourself  to  be  oblivious 
of  the  preceding  program.  The  best  preparation  will 
be  to  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  hour  and  so  identify 
yourself  with  the  children  that  you  will  long  to  share 
your  story  with  them.  Then  it  will  not  seem  a  task 
to  be  done,  but  a  chance  to  give  pleasure  and  help. 

The  report. — Forget  that  you  have  a  report  to 
write  till  you  are  at  home,  and  then  make  notes  under 
the  following  headings,  while  the  class  session  is 
fresh  in  your  mind. 


156  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


Practice   in    Story-Telling 
Preparation 

(General,  through  reading  the  chapters  indicated, 
and  preparation  of  the  particular  story  you  were  as* 
signed  to  tell.) 

Result 

Did  I  enjoy  telling  it?  If  not,  why? 

Did  I  forget  myself  ?  the  children  ? 

the  story? 

Did    the    children     enjoy    it?  How     do     I 

know? 

Did  I  tell  it  about  as  I  expected  to  ?  If  not, 

what  was  my  reason  for  making  changes? 

Did  the  children  get  the  impression  I  intended  they 
should?  How  did  I  know? 


What  did  I  do  after  telling  it?  Why? 

How  should  I  tell  it  differently  another  time  ? 
Do  I  expect  to  tell  a  story  to  a  child  this  week? 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  157 

Observation 

Whether  I  enjoyed  the  session  more  or  less  than 
last  week's,  and  the  reason. 

What  expressional  activities  were  used  and  whether 
they  were  effective. 

The   attitude   of   the    children.      Whether   it   might 
have  been  improved. 

A  problem  I  should  like  discussed  in  class. 


158  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 


LESSON  XX 

REPORTS  ON  PRACTICE  WORK  AND  OBSER- 
VATION (III) 

Preparation  for  third  Sunday's  teaching. — Reread 
Lesson  XI. 

Make  an  original  plan  for  a  circle  talk  based  on  the 
lesson  truth. 

Compare  this  with  the  circle  talk  in  the  teacher's 
text-book  and  combine  the  best  in  both. 

Present  your  plan  to  the  Beginners'  superintendent 
for  approval.  Accept  her  modification,  as  she  is  ac- 
countable for  the  work  done  in  her  department.  Come 
to  an  understanding  with  her  of  the  changes  bound  to 
be  made  because  of  the  children's  response  and  their 
remarks. 

Become  familiar  with  the  songs  used  in  the  depart- 
ment. * 

Become  acquainted  with  the  names  of  as  many 
members  of  the  class  as  possible. 

Find  out  exactly  the  time  allowed  you. 

Get  the  items  of  your  proposed  program  well  in 
mind,  so  no  notes  will  be  necessary. 

Prepare  any  necessary  material  for  handwork. 

Bach  day  consider  the  theme  of  your  circle  talk,  till 
it  becomes  part  of  you. 

In  the  class. — Keep  your  theme  well  in  mind,  so 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners  159 


that  you  will  be  quick  to  relate  the  children's  remarks 
to  it. 

Carry  out  your  program  as  planned  unless  there  are 
very  good  reasons  for  changing  it.  It  is  poor  peda- 
gogy to  change  for  the  sake  of  showing  you  can. 

You  are  necessarily  hampered  by  not  knowing  the 
children  well,  and  will  have  to  use  the  names  of  those 
you  know,  and  ignore  the  shy  ones. 

If  you  find  you  are  losing  control  of  the  children, 
suggest  a  change  of  position,  all  rising  to  sing,  or  give 
crisp  orders  to  stand,  rise  on  tiptoes,  turn  about,  and 
sit. 

Close  your  part  of  the  program  on  time,  even  though 
you  have  omitted  some  items. 

Fill  out  the  following  outline,  as  your  report : 

Practice  in  Conducting  the  Circle  Talk 

Preparation 

(General,  through  reading  the  chapter  suggested, 
and  preparation  of  the  particular  circle  talk  assigned.) 

Result 

Was  it  satisfactory  to  me?  to  the  children? 

to   the    superintendent    (as    far   as    I    could 
judge? 

Did  the  lesson  theme  run  through  the  program? 

Did  I  keep  to  my  tentative  program?  How 

was  it  influenced  by  the  children? 


160  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

Was    there    freedom    for    the    children?  an 

atmosphere  of  order? 

How  was  I  hampered  by  not  knowing  the  children 
well? 

What  reflections  on  my  story-telling  arise  from  the 
children's  references  to  it  or  their  retelling  of  it? 

Could  I  have  made  better  use  of  songs? 
drawing  ? 

Was  the  play  spirit  a  feature  of  the  program? 

Were  there  any  conditions  that  prevented  my  doing 
my  best?  If   so,   how   could   they   have   been 

remedied  ? 

Which  part  of  the  program  did  I  do  best — telling 
the    story    or    conducting    the    circle    talk? 
Which  brought  me  closer  to  the  children? 

Observation 

Comparison  of  my  own  story-telling  and  that  of  the 
story-teller  observed. 

Whether  the  few  moments  after  the  story  were  as 
effective  as  they  might  have  been. 

Whether  the  opening  service  formed  a  good  prepa- 
ration for  my  circle  talk. 


Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 161 

Exactly  what  feeling  the  children  went  home  with, 
different  from  that  they  had  on  entering. 

Outline  for  Summer  Observation  and  Practice 

Work 

Name  and  Address 

Name  of  School  in  which  Practice  Work  is  Done 

Subjects  for  Notes 

(Under  each  subject  make  notes  on  both  good  and 
poor  work  you  have  done  or  observed.  Be  explicit 
in  every  case  and  suggest  remedies  where  the  work 
was  poor.     Date  the  notes.) 

Story-Telling 
Practice  Work  Observation 

The  Circle  Talk 
Practice  Work  Observation 

Songs 
Practice  Work  Observation 

Handwork 
Practice  Work  Observation 


162  Methods  for  Teachers  of  Beginners 

Play 
Practice  Work  Observation 

Use  of  Pictures  and  Objects 
Practice  Work  Observation 

Relating  Children's  Remarks  to  the  Themes 
Practice  Work  Observation 

Prayer 
Practice  Work  Observation 

Arousing  the  Missionary  Spirit 
Practice  Work  Observation 

Discipline 
Practice  Work  Observation 

Week-Day  Class 
Practice  Work  Observation 

Observance  of  Birthdays 
Practice  Work  Observation 

Equipment 

General  Management 

Other  Notes 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Sept.  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066 
(724)779-2111 


