pa PE ye 
Faye Ser pian here 
: erwenren ye ot) 
See en 


— 
piano Sas 


a em ry 
ren arer tein ramen) 


we 
= 


a 
peer per wer er es 
ain ans ir pruners 
epee ain bee eee 
ee Re 
te 


Re ee aan = 
rr re eee 
So ee a aera nig 
Sap enecetete cement eee tes 
Se Sie adenine es ene ee naman 
ae ne IO At ae a aed gee SORE ee ao 

Ee reeehatn Seee bal ‘ Sanne ee wae 
nen — ne Se eS en gs eed ee a 
rE re ta nee : = . Se ar aA SS 
FT ea eae 
Sn nse = 6 6 OO 
Re ae A ee ee ean 
a ee raed 
pamper e ee 

ee ee 

: especie seen wee 
anes 2 aa OEE 2 rae Se va 
5 er eae Stare eee : Ee a bern ee Be ars nt aden ewer nro) 

Sr arse eees : = SSI ore pein eR eae eee ee ener 
a J 3 - ~ = ss ‘ et el ornare cna pare ~ ee 
eee EPP ORT TONS Oar tae So oh 37) 3 o eweaesesr ae) Se eae crabs ere eaeee ee ye 

3 eS : Sr en rane Sera ete ees 
TP SOT oe ee er anne Par APRS RAT AA DAP RIERA LS DS ae SPATE Ma AEE AT FE ly ORT eT ee he Sree eae Sere err 
Sos o esas re nat Fe Rae aaah sew ores momore aes pee aS eenerner ah hve ae Tas Seen Sata entertain bal ees) 
a OPO AAT AT TO PAE OT A Ee enn nen mnronereat Cater eae pes ae ere ete Pete teat en pe a 
earn aon on Bea ae 
: ¥ Sarees sata wren pee ses eraser 
ioeet BT = 


are ere ier 


Py 
. 
my 


Poe? Cheat aeet 
) rae Rye 


Ae os a9 
Patti aaeed 
- 


a aes ae 
TREE wh ae TPE POP PE) PROSE i # ma 
Raw erarpachasetcseeeasti ction ow Serta eegetetie cece eer 
SR TOS abapoap heen uek Cw amie pean pate eee PEER BE 
BustAbepeay sere kc see are Shen peer 
i 


ta pistebatstatetgichebaty te iy pa ies eet ie 4 Hr 








227s 
DAalanw 


22745 
Dei m 





b son. 


“Tig 


This book presente d to 
S.A. Lehman 
Memorial Library 
by 


Dr. W. O. Klopfenstein 





MINISTRY 


ON THE EPISTLE TO THE 


EPHESIANS 


By 


FORT WAYNE BIBLE COLLEGE 


LIBRARY 
BIBLE TRUTH PUBLISHERS 
239 Harrison St. Oak Park, Illinois 
Printed in U.S.A. 
CHRISTIAN LITERATURE CRUSADE 
BOX 186, 55 CHURCH STREET 
KINGSTON, JA., W.! 


i 


‘ Lae 
EPP 


_) % 











Me bhntiitdhondont A sae Aa foot 


= “ak SS 


fs 
s 


, 
Y 


ater of cs 


tier 


~ 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS ws ei 7 
SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS a ae 61 
COMPARISON OF THE EPISTLES TO THE ROMANS AND 
THE EPHESIANS .. 5 ab a he ME 103 
COMPARISON OF EPISTLES .. = >t — : 107 
WHAT GOD IS TO US IN CHRIST .. a ae jee 
"THE PRAYERS IN EPHESIANS I: 15-23 AND 3:14-21°- .. I16 
** NOT OF THE WORLD” .. ee a e rs 122 
ELECT OF GoD, HOLY AND BELOVED i ts Br 126 
EPHESIANSI:9 _ .. 5s 7 ~ ace a4 
THE POWER THAT WORKS IN US .. a es i eae 
GRACE AND GOVERNMENT .. a os fe cvaetae 
‘THOUGHTS ON EPHESIANS 4 e as nd eal kas 
GROWING UP IN CHRIST .. zs hes Da ia AES 
THE CHRISTIAN WALK .. aa es ee an 158 
‘** CHRIST LOVED THE CHURCH” .. ie Pe SSP. ue t > | 
CONFLICT IN HEAVENLY PLACES .. a Be os 167 














Prat 


eo 
Ww 
my 
7 


= 
tha 
‘* ; 
x 
* 
im, 
> 


 . 
Saal ag 

7% 

oo 

_ 

™ 

a 

y 

~~, 

oe = 

a De 

oo 


aT 
ae = 
a. 
ee 
aes 
a 

4 

~ 

= 





fo 





a 
Po nna 

y hag Se ye 
e 


a 
- 
2 
= 
‘ 
‘ 
; 
oe 
* 
i) ae 
a 






j ; 5 y ; 
a9 t. oe Avie Ls i if j - pe cil hi 







webs ond uN eae ‘y nee ee ales a: is aig 


TAS at 
eA at a it ay + <i al / ‘ (ame i ' 


NOTES ON THE 
EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


CHAPTER I. 


THE apostle seems here to dwell on the purposes of God with 
regard to us. He does not so much speak of the means which 
God has made use of in order to reconcile us with Himself 
(the satisfaction that has been made to His justice, though the 
Spirit dwells thereon likewise); but the subject is specially 
the blessedness in which God has placed us in His counsels 
of grace. 

It is certainly a blessed thing for us fully to understand the 
means which God has made use of, in order to bring us to 
Himself; but God has made known to us these things, in 
order that we may be occupied with the things to which we 
are called. It is in the enjoyment of these things that we put 
on the character of the Christian, and that the soul grows. 
They enter into our very existence ; and when the heart has 
laid hold of them, there is much more of the Christian and of 
testimony in us, so that, by the power of the Holy Spirit 
working in us, there results a much clearer and stronger point 
of attraction for the world. 

Those who dwell in Spirit in heaven partake of its spirit, 
and go on increasing in the things which they find there. They 
are in relationship with God ; they enjoy what God has given, 
and that is certainly most precious ; but above all, they enjoy 
God Himself: and here is the exceeding grace of Him who 
desires that we should always dwell near Him, and that we 
should know His thoughts and His counsels. This is what we 
should desire and seek after, and thus we shall understand 
better what is well pleasing to the Lord, and what is worthy 
of Him. Such are the subjects of which the apostle speaks to 
us in the chapter which is before us. 

Verses 1-3. In Jesus Christ, the Head of the body, we are 
blessed with all spiritual blessings. It is there God sets us ; 
and we know it, beloved, we know it, but more in theory than 
in practice. 

Verse 4. As I have already said, the apostle here not only 
speaks to us of the means, but of the source of our blessing in 
the unspeakable counsels of God, and of the end which God 
proposes to Himself; for it is said, ““.[That ye may be holy 


8 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


and without blame before him in love.” This is the thought 
of God about us: He wishes to have us before Him, and to 
have us there happy and for Himself. 

There is only one thing in which God does not suffice for 
Himself, and that is, in His love. His love has need of other 
beings beside Himself; in order to make them happy. He 
inet to have before Him beings in harmony with what He 
is, and He sets us before Him “ holy and without blame.”* 
This is what He is Himself, He who is the Holy One, He who 
certainly is without blame; for it is impossible to find any 
fault in Him. He calls Himself the Holy One; He is love! 
Well ; He sets us holy and without blame before Him in love. 
Precious and most important thought for us! He has resolved 
that the church should be such that He could take delight in 
her, and behold in her before Him the reproduction of Himself, 
the most perfect happiness possible. He sets before Him 
beings like to Himself, in order to make them as happy as it is 
possible ; He communicates to us His nature, and takes His 
delight in us. In order for that, He makes us “holy and 
without blame in love”; and these things are accomplished 
here below by the Spirit, though the effects are not fully 
shewn till above in the place of perfectness. So, where is our 
place even now below? Before Him; and this place is not a 
joy only, but the most precious thing that can be imagined, to 
be before Him! 

We do not like to be before Him when we are not holy; _ 
but when the conscience is cleansed by the blood of Christ, 
we are truly happy before Him. In_order that we may be 
happy before Him we must be holy, we must understand | the 
tastes of the divine nature—our nature. We ourselves must 
find our happiness in bei ing “holy and without blame in love.” 
The apostle John shews in his first epistle (chap. 4 : 13), that 
the divine nature is produced in the Christian: the Christian 
has received God’s own Spirit ; it is a man who loves, and God 
is in him and he in God. What is granted is nothing less than 
the communication of the divine nature, by which we dwell 
in God, and God in us, “‘ that we might be holy and without 
blame before him in love.” 

What we shall be above ought to be our aim here below, 
not as a task imposed, but as being made partakers of the 


* The first of these words speaks of the character, the other rather 
of the conduct. 








NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 9 


divine nature to the glory of God. Now if we would realise 
these things, our thoughts must be above, according to the 
nature of the grace which we have received. It is most 
strengthening for us to think of the things which are above—of 
their source, of Jesus, of the fulfilment of this purpose of God 
in glory. 

Verses 5-7. The apostle has ever this adoption in view ; 
God wills to have us for Himself before Him through Jesus, 
according to the good pleasure of His will, as His children. 
Now this is the glory of this grace which has placed us there. 
In these verses Paul speaks to us of the basis, of the means 
which God has employed, and on the certainty of which we 
can count. He speaks of it as a settled thing, as of a thing 
which we possess, and the possession of which, indeed, is 
necessary to us, in order that we may partake of all that of 
which he is about to speak to us. 

This is the door by which we have come in; and having 
passed through the door, in Jesus, I have the certainty of 
being in the house. But it would be sorrowful to have Jesus 
only as the door, though it is precious to understand that. If 
we are not sure of a hearty welcome, and of the love of the 
Father, we depreciate the riches of His grace, for ‘‘ we have 
redemption by his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according 
to the riches of his grace,” v. 7. If in uncertainty we do not 
enjoy this grace, we do not really acknowledge it; and in 
order to do so we must give ourselves up entirely to God, to 
the power of the love of Him who tells us to come inside. 
Here we may remark, that the Spirit, whilst declaring to us 
very plainly what is the means of our salvation, does not reason 
upon it as elsewhere, making known to us its character and its 
sufficiency ; but He speaks of it as of a privilege that we pos- 
sess; He tells us what we have in Christ, before shewing what 
belongs to those who enjoy the effect of this redemption. We 
have redemption ; and instructed in all things, we wait for 
the redemption of the body, in order to enjoy it. The only 
thing that we have to do is to contemplate the riches of the 
grace of God; this will be a means of drawing us close to 
Him. 

We have seen in the preceding verses the purposes of God 
with regard to us, and the means which He employs to render 
us partakers of them, namely, redemption through Christ’s 
blood, according to the riches of His grace. Now what we 


Io NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


have before us is the portion we have now here below, the 
understanding of the mystery of God. 

Verses 8, 9. God has given us of His grace in all wisdom 
and prudence. He is not content with only giving us this 
portion, by bringing us into it hereafter; but He wishes to 
give us now, here below, the knowledge of it in all wisdom and 
prudence, according to His good pleasure. We have not to do 
with a God who sets us before His justice, but with a God of 
grace who acts according to His own thoughts. God wills 
that the church should not be only such before Him, but that 
it should be also, here below, the depository of all His counsels ; 
that it should have the understanding of the mystery of His will. 

Verse IO gives us the explanation of this mystery. God 
gathers together in one all things in Christ in the dispensation _ 
of the fulness of times. All that which preceded was prepara- 
tory ; as the law, the prophets, etc. This verse speaks of the 
fulness of times, when God will arrange all things according 





to His mind, by setting Christ at the head of all things; and 
it is by being united to Him that we are made partakers of the 
inheritance. God acts of His own will to bring about what He 
wills. All shall be gathered together in one in Christ. It is 
by Him that all has been created, and by Him all is to be 
reconciled ; and this is set forth here as the result of the 
counsels of God. 

Verses II, 12. There are two parts in this mystery: I, 


ae od 


all things shall be put under the headship of Christ; 2, the 


church, which is His body, will have part in the inheritance. 
We shall be before God according to the perfection of His 
nature. Christ having been put to death, God and the sinner 
have met together. But here it is rather a question of the 
accomplishment of the mystery of the will of God for the glory 
of Christ. The church will have part in the inheritance. 
“in whom,” it is said, ‘‘ we have obtained an inheritance ” ; 
but the whole of the mystery is not the church only, and this 
is very simple if we receive the thoughts of the Bible; not, 
indeed, that we shall understand the whole extent of the glory, 
but we shall see that all things created are to be gathered 
together in one in Christ. 

In the Epistle to the Colossians Christ is presented as 
Creator; the Person of Christ is in the prominent place rather 
than the counsels of God as to the church. Christ is the 
first-born of every creature, and the first-born from the dead ; 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS Il 


Head of His body, which is the church. But here, in the 
Epistle to the Ephesians, it is the privileges of the church in 
Him which we are given to know. In verse 6 it is said that 
what we possess already is to the praise of the glory of His 
grace; and in verse 12, where he is speaking of the glory to 
come that is before us, it is said—‘‘ that we should be to the 
praise of his glory” The church has a portion quite apart 
and most glorious. All things are to be gathered together in 
one in Christ. The church, being united to Him, is made 
partaker of the inheritance, that we should be to the praise of 
His glory. The glory of God is understood by its being seen 
in us; and the world will then see that we have been loved 
as Christ is loved. 

Verse 12 might seem a difficulty, where it is said, ““ We who 
first hoped in Christ”; but he is here speaking of the Jews, 





who have believed before the revelation of Christ to the 
nation, at His second coming, and before the national call to 
the Jews at the end: such of the Jéws as have Bbéliéved; as 
have hoped beforehand, they are glorified with Him. 

Verses 13, 14. Verse 13 is spoken to us; it is not only 
both Jews and Gentiles who will partake of this inheritance ; 
but the church is given to know the will of God, by the gift 
of the Holy Spirit. This it is which distinguishes Christians 
who, having believed, are sealed with the Holy Spirit of 
promise. The Holy Spirit becomes a seal. We cannot receive 
the inheritance before Christ; the Spirit is given to us as 
earnest, whilst waiting for it. God sets His seal upon us, 
and this is a proof that a Gentile has part in the promises made 
to Abraham (for instance, Cornelius). 

There is a difference between regeneration by the Spirit 
and the presence of the Spirit as a seal. A person must have 
believed, for God to be able to put His seal on him; the 
Spirit may act before this, as for instance, in breaking up the 
heart; but it is not as a seal. Sometimes the power of the 
Spirit produces fruits in us; at other times it humbles us, 
making us sensible of good and evil; but this is not joy. The 
fact is, that this work is even more precious than the joy 
itself, because there are sometimes things in us which are not 
judged before God on account of the very joy. When God has 
given us the enjoyment of the true object which we ought to 
enjoy, He begins to break up the heart in order that the work 
may be deeper. The Spirit makes us sensible of the things 


I2 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


which are not according to God, and this knowledge of one’s 
self is necessary, in order that we may know God. I do not 
say that, if we were to walk exactly as God would have us, this 
work could not be carried on without the loss of the joy; 
but it is not generally so with the Christian. It becomes 
needful for God to turn us toward Himself, and to work 
inwardly, that we may discover what our carelessness has 
prevented us from seeing. Often this exhilarating joy of a 
Christian is found in one who has not judged things that ought 
to be judged in the presence of God. The wants and the 
desires which the Holy Spirit produces by regeneration are 
not the seal of the Spirit, any more than the joy which flows 
from the affections being occupied with a new and divine 
object, nor even the fruits which the Holy Spirit may produce 
when He dwells in us. The seal is the Holy Spirit Himself, 
given to that faith which is in Him who is our righteousness, 
and is the answer to all our wants; and then we have peace 
and joy. Itis the Spirit in us who is the seal. 

We ought not to be surprised, if we find it is the intention 
of God to shew us ourselves; at such times we do not see 
God, because He is making us see ourselves. Many persons 
think that the full and unwavering assurance of our salvation 
tends to make us careless as to the state of our souls ; but this 
is a mistake. The Holy Spirit has set His throne in our hearts, 
and if we will judge ourselves, we shall not be judged. It is 
He who makes us fully enjoy God, and who makes us judge 
what is not of God in us; who alone sets us in the truth, and 
gives us the assurance of what is accomplished for us. God in 
us, by His Spirit, judges the conduct and the heart ; but this 
does not prevent this Spirit being the seal which God has set 
upon us, the witness of His perfect and unchangeable love 
towards us, the strength of a life of liberty, the Spirit of 
adoption. We partake of it with Jesus; God put His seal 
upon Jesus Himself when He was in this world, after His 
baptism by John. 

ee Spirit ts the earnest of our. inheritance. And here, let 
is be observed, that the Word, in the New Testament, always 
employs the word us, when it speaks of Christians and of the 
things which concern them. The prophets saw that the things 


which were revealed to them were not for them, but for us 


(see 1 Peter 1:11); the Holy Spirit always says us. The 
possession is not yet granted: the Spirit is the €arnest of it. 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 13 


The possession of the inheritance depends on the redemption 
of our body. As to our souls, we are united to the Heir even 
now; this is why we groan, all the while that we have the 
promises, because of this body, the redemption of which is 
not yet accomplished ; and this redemption will take place at 
the resurrection. This is the enigma of the Christian; the 
Spirit gives him the certainty of his personal redemption, and 
this Spirit is the earnest of the inheritance. We shall be to 
the praise of His glory. Whilst waiting, the Spirit makes us 
sympathise with the groans of the creation; He helps our 
infirmities ; working in us, He takes knowledge of the misery 
with which we are outwardly bound up, and He intercedes for 
us. The Spirit becomes the fountain of thoughts, the subjects 
of which are in heaven ; and on the earth, the love of God is 
shed abroad in our hearts; Romans 5: 5. The Spirit searches 
our hearts and presents our wants before God; Romans 
8 : 26,27. In verse 5 of this chapter God gives us a picture of 
the portion of a Christian. That which is important for us is 
the description of the person to whom these things belong. 

Verse 15. There are two Tings to observe :_1, Christ was 
the object of the faith; 2, the saints were the object of the 
love. Christ being the object of faith, all those who are in 
Christ become also the objects of our love. The Holy Spirit 
dwells in the body (the church) as well as in the body of each 
Christian (1 Cor. 3: 163 chap. 6:19); and He knows all 
the members of the body: when we can mount up to the 
privileges of the Christian, we embrace all the body. The flesh 
does not understand these privileges; but the Holy Spirit 
understands them; and the consequence of this knowledge 
_will be love towards all the saints. 

Verse 16. It is a happy thing when our prayers are givings 
of thanks: we realise, then, the certainty of our privileges. 
If we think of the wretchedness of the saints, we are over- 
whelmed by it; but if we think of what Christ is for the 
Saints, we give thanks; we realise what God will do and 
does, for them and in them. God cannot be unfaithful to the 
love we have for all the saints; 1 Cor. 1: 4. Paul could 
handle the sword of the Spirit; he would not have known 
how to deal with the Corinthians, if he had not begun by 
taking notice of the good which grace had wrought in them. 
How different is the Christian’s way of acting, thinking, and 
judging, from the way of the world! There is not an expression 


14 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


more remarkable than that which Paul in this verse makes 
use of in speaking to the Corinthians. Paul was determined 
to act according to the Spirit of God. It is not that God can 
make light of sin, and not judge it: no, He will judge it severely 
in the saints, if there be evil among them ; but it is important 
for the church to handle it as God handles it. 

Verse 17. We find here two names attached to God: 
I, He is called the God of our Lord Jesus Christ; 2, the 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The prayer of chapter 3 is 
in relationship with the second of these titles, that of Father ; 
that of the seventeenth and the following verses of this chapter, 
with that of God. 

The_apostle also presents before us God as the Father of 
glory, that is to say, as the source, morally and in power, of all 
true glory. At the same time he sets before us the Lord Jesus 
entering as man into relationship with God, a bond which 
causes all the affection of God to rest upon Him, as the object 
in whom all the divine thoughts centre: this is why Paul says, 
““ The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory.” 


I_can consider Christ as a glorified Man, whose right has 
been established by God over all things; this is what Peter 
does in his epistles; he looks at Christ as a Man whom God 
had regarded in this manner, having raised Him from the 
dead. John, on the contrary, sees Christ in the glory of His 
divine Person, one with the Father, and as the sent One. In 
our Epistle Christ is presented to us as the object of the 
counsels of God, in whom the power of God is displayed. 
It is precious for us to see what is our position in Christ, to 
see that we are placed, as being His body, in the same position 
as Himself. The counsels of God concerning Christ and His 
body, are what is contained in this Epistle. 

The prayer which begins at this verse expresses the desire 
that we should enjoy the understanding which is given to us 
of the counsels of God, of the hope of His calling, of the riches 
of the glory of His inheritance in His saints, and the power 
which has placed us in this enjoyment. 

Verses 18-23. The union of Christ with the church is a 
union so real, that the body must be there, in order for Christ 
to be complete. It is man in resurrection who occupies this 
place: and this doctrine is essentially practical; as it gives 
the whole power of God in a life of resurrection here below, 
which sets us above the flesh. If we do not realise this life, 

















NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 15 


we walk as men; and the lively understanding of this life of 
resurrection brings death upon all that is not heavenly. The 
power of faith makes us walk according to heavenly places ; 
and it is nothing less than the power of God (the same power 
which raised Christ from the dead, and set Him at the right 
hand of God) which works in us both to will and to do. In 
these days the church has not miracles for its portion, but the 
power of the Spirit in the invisible world. 

Herein is the understanding of the mystery of Christ. All 
things will be gathered together in one in Him; and, being 
united to Him, we likewise enjoy this inheritance. God redeems 
and inherits all things in Christ, and God establishes Christ 
the heir over all things as Man; but the church is the body of 
Christ, united to Him in the enjoyment of this inheritance ; 
therefore it is said, ‘‘ the inheritance of God in the saints.” 

In Christ all is manifested—in Christ the Son, Heir of all 
things ; it is on Him that all hangs. But in the counsels of 
God, it is in us also that these things are manifested—in us, 
the saints; with whom God surrounds Himself in order to 
enjoy the fulness of His glory; as it is written, “‘ to the glory 
of God by us.” 

But there still remains one thing essentially necessary to our 
enjoyment of this glorious destiny which belongs to us in the 
counsels of God; it was not only needful to reveal to us the 
counsels of God, but also to raise us to the height of that 
which is given to us by placing us in a position, in a state 
whereby we are made capable of this enjoyment. Christ is 
the Heir of all things, and we are His co-heirs. In what way 
are we associated with Him so as to share in the inheritance of 
the glory? How did He Himself (the One who in grace 
partook of the consequences of sin on the cross) become raised 
to enjoy the glory ? God raised Him from the dead, and set 
Him according to His merits, and according to the dignity of 
His Person, at His own right hand, in the heavenly places, 
far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, 
and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also 
in that which is to come. He has taken the Man who was 
dead, and has set Him at His right hand in the glory. Man, 
in the Person of Christ, is raised above all except the throne, 
by which He has been raised. And is He alone ?>—No. The 
same power which raised Christ, and set Him at the right hand 
of God; the excellent greatness of that power which raised 


16 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


the Man who was dead to the right hand of God, works with 
the same might in him who believes. 

This is what raises us to the capacity and to the position 
where we can enjoy, and where we do enjoy, the glory of 
God in Christ. For if God has set Christ over all, by taking 
Him from among the dead, He has given Him also as Head to 
His body which is the church. We partake in this glory as 








fy, whi 
3 nema 
béing the body, the members of Him who inherits it; we 
partake of it according to the same energy which has set 
Christ there ; Christ thus exalted is Head over all things, and 
Head of His body, which is the church. The members have 
their part in the inheritance, by virtue of the working of the 
same power in them, which wrought in Christ when He was 
taken from among the dead and set at the right hand of God. 
The body is complement to the Head ; it is in this sense its 
fulness. Christ fills all in all: this is His glory. It is He who 


CaO 


divinely fills the whole universe—the church is the body of 


SRE Ta Cae rae ERS 








errno ramen 


lim who does it. 
This great and wonderful truth is unfolded practically and 
morally in chapter 2. But before going farther, let us here 
remark, that there are two things in which the operation of the 
Holy Spirit is manifested in the church—these are wisdom and 
power; but the one is manifested at the present time more 
than the other. It_is said, that Christ is the wisdom and the 
MA a SRE Ee on NE 
power of God. If you take the most advanced Christians, you 
will find in them more of wisdom and knowledge of the ways 
and counsels of God than of power. In the beginning of the 
church, the great mass of believers were less enlightened than 
at present ; but the power was greater, for the demons trembled. 
Though this power is precious, inasmuch as it is a testimony 
that Jesus, as Man, has conquered Satan; yet the most precious 
thing is wisdom and so much the more, as what we have now 
to do is to discern the evil and separate from it, and not to 
establish a new dispensation. However, God always gives 
that which suits the need of His church. 

And it is the same thing that we see in Joseph; first, when 
persecuted by his brethren; afterwards, when in Egypt. 
That which characterised him was his wisdom, his knowledge 
of the thoughts of God. This is what is now given to us, 
even the thoughts of God. The position of the church is 
known by spiritual understanding ; by wisdom I know what 
is my portion in Christ ; my affections are drawn towards what 








NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 17 


God has presented to me for eternity. The church, in a 
special way, has need to understand this ; she will then avoid 
the wiles of Satan. In Israel, when the enemies had the 
upper hand, it was knowing the thoughts of God which 
sustained those who were faithful. We see that the prophets 
of Judah, to whom God had entrusted His thoughts, did not 
perform a single miracle. Understanding of the thoughts of 
God will make us humble. It is a lowly position to know that 
we have nothing but what is in God. The effect spiritually 
will be to turn our hearts towards Him who is our portion ; 
and this will draw the church away from all that is of the 
world ; because God is about to take her up out of the world, 
this will force her to find her sources of joy and strength only 
in Him. Here, however, there is a character of power attached 
to such knowledge. It is the power of the resurrection which 
places us in the same position as Christ in heaven. That is 
our position, if we have spiritual intelligence : how power and 
wisdom are united! It is a work of power in us, and not our 
own wisdom. 


CHAPTER 2. 


Verses 1-3. The Gentiles were by sin morally there where 
Christ actually and outwardly placed Himself for sin; they 
were dead in their trespasses and in their sins. There they 
were walking according to the course of this world, floating 
with the stream according to the powerful and universal 
influence of Satan, who penetrates everywhere and reigns over 
everything, like the air, which is his seat; they were walking 
according to this spirit which is now working in the children 
of disobedience, in those who still continue far off from the 
deliverance wrought by the Lord. 

But was it only for the Gentiles ? Far from it; the apostle 
tells us, “‘ we also,” Jews, we were walking in the same lusts ; 
and by consequence, according to the moral truth of our nature, 
we were, says he, children of wrath—heirs by nature of the 
wrath of that God who could not mix Himself up with sin. 
All were children of wrath. It was their desert, according to 
their nature, which was opposed to God. 

Verses 4-7. The apostle has shewn where all men were ; 
he has done away with all distinction, by shewing what the 
nature was which was common to them all; and has reduced 
all men to the same ground, by bringing down the Jews through 


18 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


the lusts of the flesh to the same level morally as the Gentile, 
whom the Jew despised. Such was man in himself, Jew or 
Gentile. But God who is rich in mercy, when we (for all, 
Jew or Gentile, are now taken together) were dead in our 
trespasses and in our sins, has quickened us together with 
Christ. If the sin of their common nature united them all in 
the same position before God, His grace has set them with 
Christ, quickened together with Him, and thus together also 
as to one another. The resurrection unites in one for blessing 
those whom sin had really put far off from God. Thus God 
had raised up together, and made sit together in the heavenly 
places in Christ, believers from among either the Jews or the 
Gentiles. Thus the church enjoyed the fulness of blessedness 
in Christ, according to the power of the resurrection and the 
ascension by which God had set Christ at His right hand in 
heaven. Sin united sinners down here in one common misery ; 
grace has raised them to one peculiar and common glory, 
according to the power which had raised up Christ to this 
glory from the grave. 

But if children of -wrath, if thieves and Mary Magdalenes 
are found in the same glory as that conferred on the Son of 
God as the reward of His service here below; if even we 
ourselves are found participating in it, it is in order that 
God may shew in the ages to come the exceeding riches of His 
grace in His kindness towards us by Christ Jesus. When 
angels and principalities see a poor sinner and the whole 
church in the same glory as the Son of God, they will under- 
stand, as much as it is possible for them to understand of, the 
exceeding riches of the grace which has set us there. 

Verses 8,9. Allis the gift of God. It was not even through 
works that we had part in this glorious salvation, but. by faith, 
and this again the gift of God, that no man might boast. 
The glory of such a grace must all turn back again to God. 
He will make us understand that we are, indeed, blessed with 
all spiritual blessings in the heavenly places. What could we 
have more than to partake in the glory and the inheritance of 
Christ Himself, according to the power which has set Him 
there ? So we see that the portion and position of the church 
are heavenly. It is inasmuch as dead and risen with Christ 
from the dead, that she enjoys all His privileges. It is there 
above that she enjoys them. She is heavenly by the very fact 
of her existence. 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS I9 


Verses 10, 11. The Spirit presents to us another aspect of 
this work in contrast with the thought of any labour on our 
part, in order to obtain this glory. We are, inasmuch as we 
partake of that, His work, created by God. The works of man 
are excluded from it; ourselves are His workmanship. Is it 
then that works are left, and by the Christian ? No: they have 
their place; we are created for good works which God has 
- before prepared (for all is of Him), that we should walk in 
them. They are not the works of the law, that the man which 
does them should live by them; but God, having created in 
us this new and heavenly nature, had before prepared works— 
a walk suitable to them. The consequence of this work of 
Christ is, not only that we are created anew for this heavenly 
position: but, moreover, it sets us here below in order to 
make manifest His power. ‘These two great blessings flow 
from our being considered by God, as being really the body 
of Christ; that is to say, that we are possessors of the same 
glory there above, and that we are the dwelling of God here 
below. The church will be the fulness of Christ in glory, 
when all things will be subjected to Him; while waiting for it 
she ought to manifest the power of Christ in this world. 


Such is then the order, the ensemble, and the effect of this 
work of power wrought out by grace, according to the rich 
mercy of God, which has set us in the heavenly places in 
Christ, as the body of Christ; the fulncss of Him that filleth 
all in all; for it is no longer question of Jew or Gentile, but of 
spiritual blessings for those who are quickened and raised up 
together with Christ, according to the exceeding riches of that 
grace which has set the sinner in the same glory as the Son 
of God. What ought we not to be, since we have been made 
partakers of such privileges ; and that according to this great 
love with which God has loved us ? 


Verse 12. The Israelites were as far off from God morally ; 
but as to their position they were not without God in the 
world ; God was there, the covenant was there, as also the 
promises; whilst the Gentiles had nothing. The Gentiles 
were far off from God : outside the pale of the Jews, there was 
no way for them to draw near to God in a way that would be 
pleasing to Him; they were altogether separated from Him. 
We see, however, through the history of the Jews, that in after 
times God intended to act otherwise ; several signs, obscure 


20 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


certainly, shewed that God had another thought, as Rahab 
and others serve for examples. 


Verses 13-16. The blood of Christ does away all difference 
between those who were far off and those who were nigh. It 
is evident that the Jews, having put to death the Messiah, had 
destroyed every link between themselves and God: the middle 
wall of partition was broken down. They were like the nations, 
and more guilty than they. All that had belonged to them 
was entirely destroyed, and set aside by the death of Christ. 
That which had made the distinction of the Jew consisted in 
the ordinances by excluding the Gentiles who had no part in 
them. Now there is no longer need to know whether one is 
a Jew or a Gentile, for we see in verse 15 that the end of God 
is to take Jews and Gentiles in order to make one body of 
both. He has broken down the middle wall of partition, and 
wishes to form not the commonwealth of Israel again, but a 
new body in His presence, taken from either by the cross. 
It is evident that he who approaches to God by the cross has 
done with the Jewish ground. The apostle insists upon this 
point, that God, having laid this foundation in Christ, means 
to have but one body before Him; and then he shews how 
this is accomplished here below. If I draw near to God 
through the blood of Christ, I am a member of His body. 


Verse 17. God had made peace, through the blood of Christ, 
between Jews and Gentiles, by reconciling them both to 
Himself by the cross ; it is a new thing, a new man in Christ, 
in Jesus Himself. The apostle says it is the cross which has 
done it, by breaking down the middle wall of partition; and 
this oneness was established in principle, the moment Christ 
died. It is the cross which has done it; all difference is 
destroyed. The uppermost thought with God was to gather 
together in one, one glorious body in His presence; but in 
order to do so He must make peace and break down the 
middle wall of partition ; this is what was done by the cross of 
Christ. It is remarkable that it should be said that it is Christ 
who came to bring us peace, for it is not His spirit but Himself 
who brings us peace, this peace which is before God, which 
is accomplished. It is by Him that we have the enjoyment 
of it. Christ does not only produce good results in us; but 
He brings to us the good news of the peace which is made, 
and He brings it with Himself. ‘“‘ He came and preached 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 2I 


peace to them which were afar off, and peace to them which 
were nigh.” 

Verse 18. In this verse we see what is the way in which we 
draw nigh to God, the order of the Spirit in the heart being 
the inverse of that of grace. The Father acts by the Son, the 
Son in us by the Spirit, and as we now have the Spirit, it is 
by the Son that we address the Father. I cannot pray to God 
without the truth of the Trinity being manifested ; it is not an 
abstract doctrine, but enters into the practical relationships 
of every day. Now it is the Spirit which makes the unity, 
there where He works, being the bond of the oneness of the 
body. ‘“‘ Now therefore ye are no more strangers.” 

Verses 19, 20. It is necessary to observe that the prophets 
here spoken of are not the prophets of the Old Testament, 
but those of the New. Paul speaks of the apostles and prophets 
as forming the foundation. The question here is as to building 
upon it, not as to laying the foundation. The church is not 
built upon the prophets of the Old Testament; it is built 
since the death of the Lord Jesus, and the foundation on which 
it is built is Christ who was crucified. All the Jewish ordinances 
barred the way against those who were not of Israel ; the Jews 
had cast themselves away by putting Christ to death. The 
veil was rent: till then, God’s foundation had not been laid, 
the first stone of the church was not placed. Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob saw the promises afar off; they had believed and 
embraced them, and they will be in the heavenly glory; but 
the church had not then begun upon earth. It is upon earth 
that all has taken place: sin entered there, temptation also ; 
the law too was given upon earth ; Christ came into this world, 
the Holy Spirit also. By the Holy Spirit we can enter in within 
the veil ; now that the foundation is laid (that is to say, since 
the death of Christ), the Holy Spirit, who makes us able to 
enter, has been given to us. If we leave that, all is confusion, 
the church has no distinctive feature, nothing which distin- 
guishes it. 

The word “ prophets ” of verse 20 has led many into a 
mistake. Here it is quite a new revelation that is spoken of, 
one which could not be spoken of before. It was a hidden 
mystery. God could not reveal the church during the Jewish 
dispensation ; for the existence of the church then would have 
denied the special position of this people Israel. God could 
reveal that the Jews would be rejected and punished, and from 


22 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


the moment He brings out that, He turns back to the mercy 
which will cause the Jewish nation to return into blessing. | 
This is what will take place when the Jewish people will be 
the royal people upon earth, when Israel will be restored by a 
new covenant. But this new man, this new revelation, is 
that those who now believe and belong to Christ become 
members of His body ; and they are in the blessedness which 
belongs to it. Verse 19 expresses that we are in the house of 
God; and from verse 20 it is evident that, in order to begin 
to build, the corner stone must be laid. This is what we have 
seen before, and now we come to the results of it. Verse 21. 
We are not yet the temple of God; the church will be that 
holy temple in glory. 

Verse 22 describes what we are now; we are the habitation, 
the tabernacle, where God dwells by His Spirit, as of old, in 
the midst of the camp of Israel; hereafter we shall be a 
glorious temple. Whilst waiting, we are the habitation, the 
dwelling of God. The blessedness of the church flows out 
of that nearness. If we have the consciousness that we are 
the habitation of God, how can we defile the tabernacle ? 
There is not a blessing more important than this ; it is even 
higher than those which relate to our inheritance in the glory. 

When the apostle has spoken of God dwelling in us by the 
Spirit, he prays that we may be filled with all the fulness of 
God ; and there are here two things to remark: 1, the glory 
to come, and the church having part in this glory; 2, the 
habitation of God in us being united to Christ, we are the 
habitation of God by the Spirit. It is our present position: 
we have what is most blessed in this position. If we grieve 
the Spirit, we dishonour God who dwells in us: God then 
cannot act. When Satan by means of error has got entrance 
into any part, the church is troubled on every side. It is this 
power of Satan which has invaded the church of Rome. How 
precious it is that we should be the habitation of God, and 
how solemn a thing it is to have such a God in the midst of 
us! From the moment that there was an Achan in the camp, 
God could not act, He could not go forward; Israel was 
beaten because God was there. It is the same with the church 
of God; and if we forget it, God does not forget it. It is a 
precious thing to remember that, though we are in wretched- 
ness, God is with us; as it is said in Haggai 2: 4, when the 
Jews began to build, “‘ Be of good courage, for I am with 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 23 


you ”: whatever be your state of ruin, I am with you; My 
Spirit is with you as in the day that I caused you to come up 
out of Egypt. There is nothing but faith which can reconcile 
these two things—wretchedness and the love of God. 


CHAPTER 3. 


Verses 1-6. The apostle had set forth in the preceding 
chapters the hope of glory and the oneness of the body of 
Christ ; he had presented the Spirit given as the seal and 
earnest of the glory, the Spirit as the centre of the oneness ; 
and while we wait for this glory, he has presented the church, 
not only as the co-heir of this glory in hope, but as being the 
habitation of God by the Spirit during the present time. Paul, 
in these two chapters, shews us first the glory with Christ ; 
and afterwards the church, the bride of Christ and habitation 
of God by the Spirit. 

Now, introducing the Gentiles into the oneness of the body, 
the apostle says, “I, Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for 
you Gentiles.”’ All that follows from verse 1 to the end of the 
chapter is in parenthesis, as is seen by chapter 4:1, “I, 
therefore, the prisoner.” What is said at the beginning of 
chapter 4 is connected with the end of chapter 2, where it is 
seen that we are the habitation of God, the dwelling of God ; 
this is the calling of which it is said, ““I beseech you... to 
walk worthy of the calling with which ye are called.”” In such 
a position we are always humble; and this it is which enables 
us to walk worthy of the calling revealed. 

At the beginning of the chapter there are two things to 
observe : personal humility which leads us to walk in oneness ; 
and the individual gifts. There is one body, one Spirit, and 
the gifts alone are different in the members of the body. 
Chapter 3 is an unfolding of this truth, that the Holy Spirit 
dwells in His habitation, which is the church. Paul says, 
** T, Paul, prisoner for you Gentiles,” etc. ; and the consequence 
was, that since, as to the church, Paul would not place the Jews 
above the Gentiles, by reason of the malice of this people he 
became prisoner for the love of the Gentiles; here is the 
testimony which Paul gives about it. ‘“‘ That the Gentiles 
should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of 
His promise in Christ by the gospel.” It is wonderful how 
slow Christians are to understand the largeness of the counsels 


24 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


of God; for Paul was obliged to say even to the Ephesians, 
who were certainly a blessed church, if they had the under- 
standing of the ways of God as to him, Paul; “If so be ye 
have heard.” 

In general we are obliged to be much more occupied with 
the details of the Christian life than with the great principles 
of this life. God is patient; but it is sorrowful that the state 
of the church should be such. Because of the want of 
spirituality, the Spirit cannot go on to unfold the riches of 
the thoughts of Jesus ; He is then forced to be occupied with 
the walk, that the gospel may not be dishonoured. The under- 
standing of the counsels of God depends on the faithfulness 
of the walk, and what will be the consequence of this faithful 
walk ? It will be a state of struggle with all, especially with 
all that Judaises. It is impossible but that, in the actual state 
in which the world is, opposition should not be shewn against 
the one who is faithful; and the fact of having more light 
excites opposition even with Christians. Paul is a striking 
example of it. 

The apostle often repeats this; that the church has not 
been revealed in the Old Testament. Certainly, the prophets 
of the Old Testament confirm the blessed position of the 
church, inasmuch as this truth is based upon the blessing of 
God being extended even to the nations blessing which they 
(the prophets) had testified of. (Psalm 18 : 49; Deut. 32: 43; 
Psalm 117.) There it is the Gentiles who are to rejoice with 
His people; but what the church is, is never spoken of. In 
the Colossians it is said of Christ, ‘‘ Christ the hope of glory ” ; 
whilst that Christ whom the Jews expected was to be a Christ 
personally present—a Christ who was to bring in the glory 
(this will take place at the end)—so that a Christ who was 
only a hope when He was there was a thing which could not 
be understood. It was a mystery, of which the prophets had 
never said a word: they had spoken of a Christ who was to 
accomplish such or such things, but never of a Christ in us 
the hope of glory for the church. Christ as in us is the practical 
and actual point of this mystery. 

In Romans 16 : 26* the apostle teaches the same truth, that 


* I do not doubt but that in this passage the “‘ prophetic writings ” 
are those of the New Testament ; but the apostle constantly makes use 
o oe writings of the Old Testament, to shew grace extending to the 

entiles. 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 25 


the church was a mystery, unknown before the death of 
Christ. God had always had the thought of the church; but 
it was hidden. Paul, in his communications to the Gentiles, 
rests upon what the prophets had said of the grace of God 
towards the Gentiles, and he quotes these prophets ; Romans 
15: 9-12. It is certain that a Christ promised, and who was 
to be rejected, is clearly revealed in the prophets; but we 
know that this was an enigma for the Jews—‘‘ We have heard 
out of the law that Christ abideth for ever ”—and the thought 
of a Christ who had other members, and those too among the 
Gentiles, would have been still more incomprehensible. The 
church is united to Christ; and if we wish to find it in the 
Old Testament, we must seek Christ Himself, and see it in 
Him. See, for example, Isaiah 50:8: ‘‘ He is near that 
justifieth me ; who will contend with me ? let us stand together : 
who is mine adversary ? let him come near to me. Behold, 
the Lord God will help me; who is he that shall condemn 
me ?”’ and Romans 8 : 32, 33. 

This challenge to all the world (because it is God who 
justifies us), which in Isaiah is spoken by Christ Himself, is 
in the Romans applied to the church. God only sees Christ ; 
and these things are applied to us as being united to Christ. 
We are accepted in the Beloved. The thought of a people 
united to Christ by a spiritual life, or rather of a people united 
to Christ by one Spirit who was in Him and them, was never 
touched upon in the Old Testament. Christ Himself had not 
this position as Head of the body ; and consequently the Spirit 
was not yet thus given. 

The apostles and prophets, the foundation upon which the 
church is built, are not the prophets of old; for we see here 
it is things now revealed to these prophets that are spoken of, 
in contrast with the times past; they are then the prophets 
of the New Testament. In 1 Peter I: 12 it is written, that 
the ancient prophets knew it was not for them that these 
things were written; and verse 6 of this chapter explains to 
us this mystery, namely, that the Gentiles are fellow-heirs. 
It declares to us the good news, that the middle wall of partition 
was broken down by the death of Christ; that all that which 
had made the difference between Jews and Gentiles had 
disappeared, and that Jews and Gentiles were made one in 
Christ. We see the difficulty the apostle Peter had in admitting 
this truth (for example, with Cornelius); Paul was obliged 


26 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


to resist him at Antioch to the face. The ancient Jews had 
great difficulty in acknowledging this glorious truth, and the 
oneness of the church. 

Verses 7, 8. The apostle, seeing the excellency of that 
which had been given to him, sees himself less than the least 
of all saints ; and it ought to be the same with us. The sight 
of these excellent things lessens us in our own eyes ; and this 
humility will be the consequence of the realisation of our 
privileges. What a glorious testimony that all distinction 
should be done away! Jew and Gentile—all that belongs to 
man falls when in the presence of the counsels of God in 
Christ. Paul, while contemplating these counsels, saw that 
he was nothing. The name Gentiles expresses that all was 
grace. The promise made when the first Adam had sinned is 
a promise made to the second Man: the last Adam will bruise 
the serpent’s head. 

The unsearchable riches of Christ are those riches of which 
we cannot fathom the depth, so immense are they; and the 
glory which God will give to Christ, according to what He is, 
and according to the worth of His work, this is the measure 
of these unsearchable riches. All has been done by Christ 
and for Christ; all has been created by Him and for Him: 
and the fact of having presented Christ to the Gentiles outside 
the limited revelation of the ancient prophets, brought out the 
riches of Christ as unsearchable ; God can stand in presence 
of the power of sin, and in Christ, as Man, display the power 
of His grace for the manifestation of His glory. 

Verses 9-11. These are the counsels of God in Christ, 
and the position of the church ; never before had such wisdom 
been seen. Man might have been struck with wisdom in the 
creation ; with the interposition of God in the deluge ; Noah 
Kept; Abraham called; the law given; other wonders 
accomplished ; the government of God over His Jewish people. 
In all these, the wisdom of God was manifested ; but here is 
a wisdom altogether different. A heavenly church was not 
even known to angels. 

The Jewish people having rejected the Messiah, God’s 
plan as to the earth was suspended ; a new thought is brought 
in; a people whose position is after such sort that they have 
no place whatsoever save in heaven. Now God does not 
punish according to a rule distinctly revealed to man; there 
is no immediate government of God upon earth, though He 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 27 


still acts in providence ; but there is a people, in suffering it 
may be, but heavenly, in the midst of the world. God’s ways 
are of a new kind. 

It is striking to see what is now the position of the church 
set in sight of heaven ; it is in the heavenly places she bears 
witness ; her conflicts (Eph. 6) are in the heavens; her 
blessings are there also (Eph. 1); and it is there again that 
she is seated (Eph. 2); the witness borne by the church in 
the heavenly places, gives importance to the present testimony 
of the church down here. I do not here speak in thought of 
the glory to come; but in thought of God’s dwelling in the 
church by the Spirit. 

Christ came—He was rejected; quite another wisdom was 
then manifested. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob will be heirs in 
the glory ; but they have not been gathered together in one 
body in Christ like the Gentiles, according to the purpose of 
God before the world began. The fact of our election before 
the world was, adds nothing to the sovereignty of God; if 
God had elected us in time, His sovereignty would have been 
the same; but election before time—before the world was, 
shews that the church is NOT of the world, since she was 
before the foundation of the world in the counsels of God. 
Neither the position of the church, nor her life, hang upon 
anything in this world; the world is but the sphere through 
which she moves. 

Verse 12. This verse is the practical consequence of what 
has preceded. This position being based upon the love and 
upon the work of Christ, we are before God with a good 
conscience ; with a conscience perfected for ever. I am in 
Jesus, in the presence of God, by the faith that I have in 
Him—that is Jesus. Certainly, if I grieve the Spirit, the 
Spirit will be in me a Spirit of reproof ; but Christ has finished 
all. The work which He has done, is perfectly finished 
according to the thoughts of God, and He is in God’s presence 
according to the efficiency of these thoughts and of this work. 

Verse 13. The apostle begins his address to the Gentiles 
by saying, “‘I desire that ye faint not....” In how high a 
position were the Gentiles placed! Instead of being troubled 
in seeing the afflictions of Paul, they were to be strengthened 
by these means; for it was for their sake that Paul suffered 
as a witness of the privileges which God vouchsafed to them ; 
because he thought of them. The effect of ignominy in the 


28 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


world is to discourage those who are following it more or less ; 
but he who is faithful, like Moses, esteems that the reproach 
of Christ is better than all the treasures of Egypt, for it is our 
glory. God might have been pleased to be satisfied with Jews ; 
but He wished also for Gentiles. 

Verse 14. This prayer is addressed to the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ; it hangs on that intimate relationship 
between the Father and the Son into which we are brought. 
At the beginning of the epistle there is a prayer of quite a 
different character; and which is addressed to the God of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Verse 15. This verse includes the whole of intelligent 
creation, blessed before God; it embraces all the different 
races, Jews and Gentiles; not only God gathers the Jews in 
one as He did under the name of God, but, under the name 
of Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, He gathers in one all the 
nations dispersed at Babel, and all the hosts of heaven. The 
Lord Jesus has received, as Man, power over all men; the 
angels even will be subjected to Him as Son of the Father ; 
therefore it is said, “‘ Let all the angels of God worship him! ” 

Verses 16,17. It is more than glory that is spoken of here ; 
it is the fulness of the riches of His glory. This is what the 
apostle desires for them, in contrast with a Messiah in the 
midst of the people: “‘ That Christ may dwell in your hearts 
by faith.” Christ, set in glory, brings the Gentiles into it, 
and this is how we have part in these riches ; but in order to 
enjoy them, He must dwell in our hearts. The moment that 
God exalted Christ, the link with every family in heaven and 
on the earth was manifested and even formed, for it was new. 
The portion of the Gentiles, as well as the whole church, is 
to be united to Christ Himself, of whom every family is 
named (v. 15); He is the Head of the church, the manifest 
centre of the glory of God. The apostle desires that the 
efficacy of this power should be in us; not only that grace 
which comforts and which is most precious, but likewise that 
we should realise Christ exalted. 

As Son of God, Christ is the first name in this family which 
the Spirit reveals to us, that Spirit by whom we are strengthened 
in the inner man; for our feeble hearts, though they are 
converted to God, would be incapable without His help of 
entering into this glory and the extent of these counsels ; the 
trials of the flesh are not an obstacle to our realising these 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 29 


things ; the more the apostle suffered as prisoner, the more 
he entered into this mystery of the glory of Christ. His 
imprisonment was the cause of this epistle, as well as those to 
the Colossians, Philippians, and others: it is thus that God 
provides for the needs of His church. We ought so to lay hold 
of Christ glorified, as that He should be there with us; His 
presence ought to be realised and acted on constantly in the 
heart. 

Verse 18. The thought from the beginning of the epistle 
is not of Christ as making satisfaction to the justice of God ; 
but that power, that flow of love for the accomplishing certain 
counsels of grace, of which He is the fulness for us. Then 
Paul desires that having understood the accomplishment of 
this thought in the Person of Christ, we should understand the 
power of this mighty love which has glorified Christ by linking 
His glory with the blessing of poor sinners. When we appre- 
hend these things, we understand that all is love, and that we 
ought to live upon the love which has done all. 

It is by entering into the love which is the source of it, that 
we understand the immeasurable expanse which is spoken of 
in verse 18; that love of God whose thought is to put all 
things in subjection to Christ, and to glorify the church with 
Him. When we have understood this love, we can, in a certain 
sense, measure the ways of God which have brought us in 
there where God displays Himself, for it is not told us of what 
he is describing the length, the breadth, the depth and height, 
but it is love which has introduced us and orders all things. 
The Spirit includes the whole church, which is very nigh to 
God in this glory; it is impossible that any of its members 
should be set aside. 

Verse 19. What is said here is specially for us. The apostle 
desires that we should realise the love of Christ, which passes 
knowledge ; and that we should be strengthened to understand 
this love and to be rooted in Him, in order that we may be 
filled with all the fulness of God. If I am placed in the midst 
of infinity, I am not at the end of this infinity ; I am in infinity 
which I do not comprehend, which I do not measure, and I 
have no smaller measure than that: it is nothing less than the 
fulness of God. God fills all in all, and I am full of Him, and 
all this by the Spirit ; whatever be my littleness, I am in this 
blessed position. The Jews had no idea of this relationship 
which is named in heaven and on earth; but as for us, we 


Cc 27 


30 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


cannot go outside this wall of enclosure with which God has 
surrounded us, and which is God Himself; and this depends 
on the presence of the Spirit, making the church the habitation 
of God. God cannot be less than Himself; He does not 
cease to be Himself. The Spirit dwells in the church; she 
becomes the vessel of that which nothing can contain. 


Verse 20. Sometimes when we ask that God would grant 
us more than we can ask or think, they are blessings outside 
us which we desire; but here it is blessings in us, it is the 
power of the Spirit in the church. This it is which sets the 
church in the height of her position, and makes us feel our 
littleness. 

Verse 21. What is said here does not relate to the fulness 
of the glory to come. The hope hangs on it; nevertheless, 
it is not the hope here which is in question, but the realisation 
of the inner man, the habitation of God as a present, real 
thing. The essential thing exists already ; and it is that which 
is most intimate and most exalted, namely, to be filled with the 
fulness of God; Christ who has finished all is there, the 
Spirit of Christ dwells in us. Paul sees in this verse all the 
extent of the counsels of God. 


It is comforting for us, that this realisation of the inner man 
should be wrought out by a power which works in us in the 
midst of the weakness of the vessel, because it is the will of 
God. What we have to desire is to be strengthened in the 
inner man, that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith, that 
we may seek the glory of Christ in the church, and that all 
glory should be attributed to Him, if so be we have understood 
that it belongs to Him. If it be asked, “‘ Is the glory of Christ 
in the church ?”’ we hardly know how to answer. God grant 
us to desire this glory! 


CHAPTER 4. 


We have here the present and practical application of the 
principles which form the subject of this epistle. The 
beginning of this chapter joins on to the end of chapter 2, 
where is shewn to us what the calling of the Christian is. The 
apostle beseeches the Ephesians to walk worthy of this vocation. 
That which is its special mark is, the habitation of God on 
earth by the Spirit. The whole conduct of the Christian flows 
from the church being the habitation of the Spirit. When the 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 31 


Spirit is presented as the seal, this is more for the individual : 
it is not the church which is sealed, but she becomes the 
habitation of God, as does the individual also. The conduct 
of the Christian ought to flow out of the presence of God. 
There is a conduct which becomes this presence: not only 
ought I to obey God, but there is a manner of acting which 
flows out of this presence, and which is the expression of this 
dwelling of God in us. When God was in the temple there 
was something in particular which was suitable for that presence. 
We are His temple. The presence of the Spirit in us becomes 
power as much as motive. There are things which become the 
temple of God. The estimation that we form of one another 
depends on the same thing. 

Verses 1-3. The apostle does not speak of obedience, but 
of the Spirit which leads to it; the practical effect of the 
presence of God by the Spirit, is humility. Love always makes 
itself nothing. To have bad thoughts about oneself is humilia- 
tion, but not humility. Humility is produced by the presence 
of God ; we are occupied with God and not with ourselves ; 
God is there to comfort us and to bless us; the pride of man 
being broken down there is gentleness. This making nothing 
of oneself produces patience and love. When we know our- 
selves to be nothing, we have the consciousness of the strength 
of God; and more than that, there is the activity of love. 

Consciousness of the preciousness of the presence of God, 
gives us the energy of the Spirit of God, which makes us careful 
to keep the oneness of the Spirit, that is to say, the union of all 
the members of Christ as one temple in which God dwells in 
this world by His Spirit. The moment that I forsake this, the 
unity is broken. In the flesh we are two, in the Spirit we are 
one; and when, by the Spirit, we enjoy love, there is this 
desire to keep the oneness of the Spirit. The flesh is never 
peaceful, whereas in God all is peace and quietness. 

It is remarkable how often God is called the God of peace. 
Seer r ie 20. geen hessr 96 2723.5 Hely. 19 ¢ 207 \ The bond 
of peace is indeed the result of being thus in the presence of 
God ; it is on this account that the apostle adds, “ There is 
one body and there is one Spirit.”” Oneness is a thing which 
is actually realised on earth, the outward unity of the body in 
one expresses what there is within. If this bond of peace is 
wanting, the oneness of the Spirit is not kept. 

Verse 4. Paul turns back to the thought put forth in 


32 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


chapter 1, ‘‘ The hope of glory.” This same Spirit which 
has given the same hope, has given the oneness of the body ; 
this outward unity which manifests the Spirit as well as 
oneness in the glory. There is but one body here below. 

Verse 5. This verse describes the circumstances belonging 
to this oneness—all its interior and exterior relationships. It 
speaks of baptism as being the expression of the common faith. 

Verse 6. The apostle adds, “in you all.” One God and 
Father in us all; that is, His abode in us. ‘‘ Through all,” 
expresses the thought that He is everywhere in us all; He 
dwells there; He is there in His power, identifying Himself 
with His own. Spiritually He is in us, and as Ruler He is 
everywhere. ‘They who are partakers of this oneness, are 
united to Christ as Christ is to the Father; thus the Father 
is in us all. (See John 14: 20.) What a bond in this new 
creation! God Himself dwelling in us, in a body of weakness 
and of death! This is why we groan, being of the present 
creation, while at the same time we have the firstfruits of the 
Spirit ; we groan according to God, not only because of the 
misery which we feel as men, but according to God who will 
very soon deliver this world. 

Verse 7. The apostle now comes to the members of this 
wonderful body ; Christ is the power which unites this body 
to Himself, and He is also the energy in each one of its members. 
If I speak of the church as a body, there is more glory; the 
unity of the body connects itself with nearness to God rather 
than with our individuality. We ought to look upon the 
members of the body as in action for the good of this body ; 
evangelisation produces also this same end by bringing souls 
to the Lord. 

Verse 8. It is the same expression as is employed (Judges 
5 : 12) when Barak returned from delivering the captives of 
Israel, leading captive those who had led them captive. The 
people of God were captives of Satan ; Christ has triumphed 
over Satan, and has led him captive, and has brought along 
with Him the church delivered from his chains. Satan was 
the master, and Christ gains the victory over the strong man 
and delivers the church. Having delivered it from the power 
of Satan, He can communicate to us this same power which 
gains the victory over Satan. God has set this power of victory 
in man, in order that it may energise. Christ had the title, 
and when He shall return, even those who are not converted 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 33 


will be delivered, because Satan will be bound; but now he is 
not so. The church is the place of the manifestation of the 
Spirit for the destruction of the power of Satan; and this 
shews the importance of the presence of the Spirit in the body, 
presence which delivers us from the power of Satan, and makes 
us grow up into all that which is of the Head, even Christ. 
In Psalm 68 these gifts are also spoken of in connection with 
the Jews, when Israel will be re-established in glory; but 
Paul here makes no mention of the second part of the verse, 
omitting, “‘ Yea, for the rebellious also,’ because in the 
Ephesians all distinction is at an end, and has come to an end 
in the church. Now it is the whole connection in heaven and 
on earth; now it is gifts for men; the Jews were “ the 
rebellious ”’ (technical expression for the Jews) ; but hereafter 
they will be so no longer, and the Lord God will dwell among 
them. 

Verse 9. This verse sets before us the glory of the Person 
of Christ, who has gone up on high in order that to faith there 
should be between God Himself and the power of death 
nothing which is not filled to faith with the power of redemp- 
tion. The believer on earth is placed in this power of 
redemption, finding Christ everywhere. Christ having 
descended into hades, God has set Him at His right hand in 
order that He should fill all things. We see by this what will 
be the perfection of this work when all things will be reconciled 
by Christ. What an infinitely important position is that of 
the church, as the body and depository of the power of Christ! 
How little does she correspond to it! 

Verse 10. We have seen how Christ has come, then ascended 
up again, and who will hereafter reconcile all things. In the 
meanwhile, inasmuch as He is head of the body, He gives 
these gifts for the accomplishment of this special part of the 
mystery, namely, the edifying of His body; and it is of this 
part especially that mention is here made. God has desired 
to make us know what is the final end, the union of all things 
in Christ, and that of the body with Him. This great end is 
the position of the church as the centre of the glory; and 
Christ now employs the power with which He is filled for the 
edifying of this body. The consequence of this is, that He 
speaks of its members which serve for the edifying of this 
body, and of its members, which make it move and act. It is 
not then miracles, testimony of power borne to the world, 


34 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


which are here spoken of, but the joints of the body, in order 
that it may grow up into Him. 

Verse 11. Paul is not speaking of gifts, but of those who 
were themselves these gifts; he speaks of the gifts which 
edify the body, and not here of the Spirit distributing these 
gifts according to His will: Christ filling all things we are 
His members, partakers of this blessing. This is the difference 
between what is taught in 1 Corinthians 14 and in this chapter. 

Verses 12, 13. There is a difficulty which connects itself 
with this, namely, the duration of these gifts; we might have 
thought they should have been continued till the perfecting of 
the body of Christ. In order to be able to apprehend the part 
of this passage in which this difficulty is, we must enter into 
the state of the church. The Lord did not return immediately ; 
in the epistles He is always represented as about to return 
immediately ; this is why Paul looked at all the saints in the 
presence of His coming. He looked at the perfecting of the 
body for the return of Christ as a thing to be accomplished in 
the present time. We know that this has not taken place ; 
John 21: 22. But in truth the Lord cannot be untrue to the 
edification of His body; and here the question is not about 
the manifestation of the Spirit in power, but the communication 
of blessings on the part of the head by means of its members. 

The apostles and the prophets served as foundation, we 
can perceive this; and the others remained for building up 
even after these had departed. The ministrations which have 
lasted are those of evangelists, pastors, and teachers. What is 
said in the first place in verse 12 is the general and proper end 
of the gifts. Then follows the manner in which this grace, - 
which flows from the Head, for the perfecting of the saints, 
ought to act: it is by producing a ministry which is to work 
in building up the body: an evident proof that ministry is to 
last until we are all brought into the presence of Christ, and 
that this is brought about by the principle of the oneness of 
the body and by its edification as such. It is then important 
to see the end of this ministry. 

Verse 13 speaks of the unity of the faith and of the knowledge 
of the Son of God—in the which we have fellowship. Differ- 
ence of views there may be; but as it was said to the 
Philippians, ‘‘ God shall reveal even this unto you.” There 
is, therefore, the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the 
Son of God. Ministry is the means to it, and this ministry 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 4!I 


power of Christ, we ought to offer ourselves up to God; 
Rom. 12:1. It should also be remarked, that that which 
descends from God in love re-ascends always to God in love 
and devotedness to Him. What a blessed thought; and why 
do we not thus live ? for this is what we ought to be in our 
service for God. 

Verse 3. Paul supposes the Christian in that atmosphere 
- of God, in which there are no thoughts but those becoming 
saints. And we see here the place which money holds: the 
heart of man thinks that it is pleasanter to be rich than poor ; 
but here it is said that covetousness should not be so much as 
named among us. We see also to what extent, when in the 
presence of God, the standard of morality is different from 
what it would be if we only had regard to men. The apostle 
considers these things according to the Spirit of God, according 
to the thoughts of God, according to Christ working in him, 
Paul. The consequence of this is, that it is according to what 
becomes saints that we ought to act; we are to be followers 
of God. 

Verse 4. In the presence of Christ we shall find jesting 
unsuitable. It is not that he who walks in the light of God’s 
countenance is not happy. There is not a cloud on the joy 
of him who is in the presence of God; but such a Christian 
feels what the things are which do not become him who is 
called to imitate God. That the world should find such 
things suitable is natural enough: but “as the crackling of 
thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool; this also is 
vanity, ~ Eccles: 7: 6. 

Verses 5-7. A covetous person shall not inherit the kingdom 
of God. The covetous person in 1 Corinthians §, is placed, 
as to discipline, in the same position as fornicators, idolaters, 
etc. ; but it is more difficult to act towards a covetous person, 
because with him the sin is more hidden than seen outside. 
All these things are the flesh; but for him who walks after 
the Spirit they are judged. The natural man would rather 
have two crown-pieces than one; but the new nature is 
delivered from such lust, it finds not in such things its 
enjoyment. The apostle says here “‘ The kingdom of God and 
of Christ.”’ He follows the thoughts which are according to 
God and to Christ. If I think of God, it is divine light; if 
of Christ, it is this power manifested in a man. How precious 
for us to be able to say, It is there where I am, associated with 


42 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


them ; I am in the same atmosphere as God and Christ. It is, 
then, in this position that we judge all things. We ought not 
to associate with that which is not of God, because God is 
not there, and because we should no longer be in the atmosphere 
in which we are able to judge of things. 

Verse 8. It is thence that you have come out, says the 
apostle. It is not said “‘in darkness,’ but that those who are 
now partakers of the divine nature had ‘been darkness ; but 
now ye are light. It is the nature of God, of which we have 
been made partakers, which makes us see all; and it is thus 
that we are light in the Lord. Just in so far as we are in Jesus, 
it is thus that we walk. He that followeth Me, Jesus says, shall 
not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life; but he 
that walketh in the night stumbleth, because there is no light 
in him. The natural man has no light. 

Verse 9.' The nature of God and of Christ, when it is 
manifested in man here below, has for its character gentleness, 
meekness, practical righteousness, and truth. In the truth, 
each thought has its place before God: Christ was the truth. 
Each one of His acts answered to what He Himself was, and 
to what God Himself was ; either He was manifesting God or 
He was, as man, truth before Him. Each of my actions ought 
to answer to what I am before God: it is the subjection of the 
inner man. I ought to consider others in all my relationships 
with them, according to this righteousness and this truth 
(that is, according to what one is before God), and there there 
is neither unrighteousness nor untruthfulness. 

Verse 10. This verse is connected with what is said about 
light in verse 8; verse 9 is in parentheses. This is what we 
have to learn in our conduct. It is often said, that it is difficult 
to discover the will of God; but this is because we are not 
ready to meet with difficulties, and then we cannot find out 
His will. In this verse we have that moral state of soul which 
loves to please, which realises the spirit of the walk, and which 
realises the wishes of God in order to be acceptable to Him ; 
it is thus that, as children, we shew real thoughtfulness about 
Him whom we desire to please. In verse 9 it is the fruits 
which are the natural productions of the life of God in us that 
are enumerated; but in verse I0 it is the manner in which 
God works in us, our eyes being turned upon another than 
ourselves. This’ work of God in us is thus carried on. A 
child, while observing his father, learns what is pleasing to 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 39 


anger lasts, then there is bitterness, and the soul not being 
able to return into its rest, evil is shewn to be there; for this 
reason it is said, ‘“ Let not the sun go down upon your wrath.” 

Verse 27. This verse shews us that we ought not to open 
the door to Satan. If it is the flesh that is acting, then the 
wicked one can touch us ; but he cannot touch the new man, 
he cannot entice it; 1 John 5:18. If I give way to a thought 
which is not of God, then I give place to Satan; if I give way 
to anger, the enemy is there: we are then hindered in service, 
troubled in prayer ; and that is not to be wondered at. When 
our thoughts have been filled with present things, when we 
have been occupied with them not in their connection with 
God, we have given place to Satan; but if we have been 
occupied with our work with God before us, then this work in 
no way takes possession of our hearts as an object; our 
faculties are free; our affections are fresh; and, when we 
return to God, we are entirely God’s, having only acted in 
order to fulfil His will. How much time we lose! This is 
why it is said, ‘‘ Watch unto prayer.”’ We should do whatever 
we do, for God. 

Verse 28. It is interesting to see how God takes the most 
difficult materials in order to form something out of them. 
He takes the heart of man such as it is, in order to make of it 
a new thing by the life of the new Man, which He introduces 
there ; it is the Spirit which worketh these things, because 
it is the Spirit of love which is there. 

Verse 29. Here is seen the contrast between the old man 
and the new. It is one or the other which speaks ; it is mur- 
muring or giving of thanks. The matured Christian would 
only speak for edification; the new man, acting under the 
influence of the Spirit, will only take part in things which are 
for edification. 

Verses 30, 31. It is precious for us to know that the 
Christian has been sealed for the day of redemption, for the 
day when his body will be raised. When Christ shall have 
accomplished all that for which He died, our body (for Christ 
has redeemed it) will be raised, which has not yet taken place. 
It is said that Christ has been made to us wisdom, righteousness, 
sanctification, and redemption; redemption is put the last. 
It is not here the price paid for the purchase that is spoken of, 
but the result of this purchase. There are two things to be 
remarked in what follows: the new man and the Holy Spirit. 


40 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


The Holy Spirit is not created, He is an independent Being 
in us; we must not grieve Him. All that which accords not 
with the Holy Spirit is not suitable for the Christian. On the 
other hand, we see that we have full assurance: God has set 
His seal upon us; and this strengthens faith. We enter into 
the thoughts of God; we find there not only the motives of 
holiness, but also the power of holiness. That which assures 
me of redemption puts me on my guard not to grieve the Holy 
Spirit. If we are in the presence of our Father, His love 
prevents us from falling. It is thus that the Holy Spirit seals 
us for the day of redemption, and guards us from evil. 

Verse 32. My foundation being what God has done for 
me, I have the consciousness of the goodness of God. If I 
am blessed myself (see 1 Pet. 3 : 9), I can shew love to others ; 
feeling that God has pardoned me takes away all bitterness 
from my life, from my manner of acting. Our Father, having 
forgiven us, desires that our hearts should be in freedom 
towards all, and that we should act in peace and love. It is 
sweet to be thus set with God, representing in ourselves the 
character of God. 


CHAPTER 5. 


Verses 1,2. The first verse hangs on the preceding chapter ; 
as Gud has forgiven you, forgive one another. “ Be ye there- 
fore followers of God, as dear children.” The general principle 
is—Be ye followers of God, follow Him, walk in His steps, act 
on the same principles as He does. Inasmuch as we are the 
family of God, we ought to be like God our Father. There 
is something very sweet in this principle, and very different 
from that of the law; it produces in the heart quite other 
feelings; it is affection, it is the goodness of God which 
constrains us to waik. The apostle here introduces a principle 
which flows out of the last verse of the preceding chapter ; 
that is to say, to walk in love, to imitate God, to follow Christ. 
If God is love, Christ is also the expression of this love toward 
us ; we ought also to leave all for our brethren ; 1 John 3: 16. 
The motives of this conduct are expressed in the first and 
second verses, which we have just read. We ought to imitate 
God according to the heart of a child; and the effect of this 
love of God in the heart of a Christian is, that he gives up 
himself to the needs of his brethren. This is what was seen 
in Christ. Having the life of Christ, the divine nature and the 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 37 


in the walk is necessary, if we would not grieve the Spirit ; 
there must be the hidden life, that is to say, the heart must 
abide in Jesus ; in a word, Christ should be the end of all our 
life. There is enough love in Jesus to make His members grow. 

If we had sufficient love, we should draw out of Jesus what 
would produce this growth in others; and we need it in the 
present time when there are so many things that dim the 
testimony of the saints. Our part really is to be separate from 
evil ; we must see Christ so clearly as to be able to say, This 
or that is not of Christ; and if persons are overwhelmed by 
cares, it is impossible that Christ should be discerned by them 
so as to deliver them from things which are like Christ, but 
which still are not Himself. What we have to seek after is to 
be sufficiently spiritual as to be able to realise what Christ is ; 
the effect of this will be subjects of intercession, which will 
doubtless cause sorrow of heart, because the faults and failures 
of the members of the body are borne there ; but nevertheless, 
where love is in action, there will be always joy. 

Verse 17. There is a principle here, which it is of importance 
to have a firm hold of: it is, that the whole conduct of the 
Christian flows from salvation, and is not in order that he 
may be saved: it is not that we do not gain something, or 
that Paul does not exhort us to run towards the mark (1 Cor. 
9: 24); but the whole walk of the Christian ought to be the 
manifestation of a new life. The moment that we hear an 
exhortation as to conduct, and that we do not hear it as 
addressed to a saved person, the gospel is displaced. All must 
be addressed to me as a child of God; this is why the apostle 
says, ‘‘I beseech you,” etc. It is because of this grace that I 
beseech you. The moment that I mix up an exhortation with 
the freeness of salvation, man is not in the position in which 
Christ has set him; it may have the appearance of piety, but 
the fact remains, that if I exhort, and at the same time admit 
a question about salvation, I deny, and I have not a right 
consciousness of, the state of ruin in which man is, any more 
than of salvation. 

Verses 18, 19. This is the commentary and the centre of 
all that we have just said. Man is alienated from the life of 
God. In the times in which we live men would be ashamed 
to do what was then done openly; but this changes nothing 
as to the fact: whether a man is alienated from the life of God, 
or a heathen, it is the same thing. 


38 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


Verses 20-23. This is the truth which is in Jesus; if we 
are saved, we are created anew. And the verse which follows | 
explains to us this truth, namely Jesus, who is Himself the 
new Man. 

Verse 24. Here is the truth of the new man in us. The 
question is not of changing what we were, but God has given 
us a new life, eternal life. We have seen the manner in which 
the church is united to Jesus; the truth which is in Jesus is 
the presence of this life in the Christian. We ought to put off 
the old man in us, and to put on the new man. This hidden 
life must manifest itself in all that the man puts on. The old 
man is in itself a captive, a slave of sin, and a prey to the lusts 
which lead him away. Moral discernment is wanting. But 
where the new man is, there is also spiritual intelligence. We 
are renewed ; and this intelligence judges of things according 
to God. Man is free in the things of God; God is found 
there. We are capable of seeing things which are suitable 
for God. ‘‘ Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.” 
We then have the consciousness of the beauty of the things of 
God, and it is man who discerns them. The man who does 
not act by the power of the Spirit acts according to the flesh. 

We are created according to God. God is formed in us. 
Christ was the image of the invisible God: He manifested in 
His ways the character of God. Also the Christian is a new 
creation. ‘The apostle speaks, in this verse, of the power of 
God, which has produced that life in which we enjoy God. 
God has set His seal upon us; it is quite a new thing; the 
lusts of the old man are no longer in question, but the energy 
of the new man—that understanding which speaks according 
to truth. 

Verse 25. In this verse is seen how everything hangs on 
our union with Christ. There is evidently no bond either of 
love or of the Spirit with one to whom I lie; but if I lie to 
my brother, it is as if I deceived myself. The power of the 
life of Christ is also power in all the details of the Christian’s 
life. We are members one of another. 

Verse 26. We see here in the acting of the new man that 
there may be such a thing as being angry (for example, Christ 
in the case of the man who had the withered hand, Mark 3: 5) ; 
it is then indignation against evil. (See 2 Cor. 7: 11.) If it 
is the anger of the new man on account of evil, then, as soon 
as the evil is removed, the soul returns to its rest; but if 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 35 


always exists. If attention be paid to what is said about 
ministry, it will be seen that when the apostle speaks of the 
perfect man, he does not allude to the perfection which follows 
resurrection, but to the perfection of this knowledge. We 
have seen that this is connected with the basis which the 
Spirit has laid for all these truths ; that is Christ fulfilling all 
things and dwelling in us here below. The Holy Spirit, who 
dwells in the church, makes each member to grow according 
to that which is in Christ and according to the measure of 
Christ. As there is unity in the body, there is also the unity 
of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son. Here, the 
Spirit’s thought is to make all the members grow according to 
the revelation of the glory of Christ ; and this shews us what 
our desires ought to be, and what we ought to desire for our 
brethren. Christ has grace enough in Himself for this. We 
should desire that all Christians near us should be full of 
knowledge, even to the measure of the stature of the fulness 
of Christ; and this knowledge of the revelation of the glory 
of Christ here below, naturally produces fruits. Such is the 
meaning of the word “ perfection.”” The question is as to 
knowing Christ. Christ is altogether perfect as risen from the 
dead: the Christian is so when he has risen up to that position 
of Christ. Paul said, ‘‘ Not that I have already attained.” But 
he had attained to that spiritual joy, that knowledge which 
revealed to him the object set before him. When it is thus 
with the Christian, he is at peace, and he can grow as to 
practical conduct; he has the consciousness of being in that 
which is infinite, of being in the enjoyment of Christ before 
the Father, according to the accomplishment of all the counsels 
of God. As to his soul before God, he no longer travails, so 
to speak, as when he drew nigh to God, conscious in himself 
of his need of expiation. As to his soul, He has nothing to 
search after; all being accomplished, he finds himself set 
before God, in that fulness itself, even in reference to all the 
circumstances which may befall him; he knows that Christ 
has all power in heaven and in earth. 

Verse 14. If I have nothing to seek, I rest in quietness ; 
the place I am in is the fulness of the knowledge of God, 
sheltered from the deceivableness of men. The Christian, who 
possesses Christ, no longer seeks Him as one whom he has yet 
to find, though he seeks to grow in those things into which he 
has been brought; but in the church we see souls in a state 


36 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


very different from this, which is indeed sorrowful: generally, 
Christians need to be brought back to the position which has 
been purchased for them. A Christian is perhaps blessed with 
salvation, but he is occupied with the things of the earth; he 
has cares, and ministry must then be occupied with the 
sorrows which result thence. But where there are believers 
whose affections are full of Jesus, they can go onwards, and 
there is progress ; because where souls are living they seek 
after fresh graces. If we walk in individual faithfulness, we 
are able to be occupied with the things which are before us ; 
when this is not the case, we must be occupied with our own 
misery, and it is sorrowful to be occupied with things which 
are a loss in comparison of the knowledge of Christ. If we 
walk according to the knowledge that we have, we are lively, 
and the things which are before us attract us onward; we 
can, forgetting present things, be occupied with the grace that 
is in Christ. 

Verses 15, 16. Each member acts in its place; each part 
has its place. This place may be a hidden one, but it is not 
the less important; the thought presented is that of the 
growth of the body. A soul which is lively builds up others ; 
the Spirit acts in souls which turn not back; the gospel 
working produces inward blessing. We see as we have said, 
in the place where all fulness dwells all becomes grace, even 
trials; because they make us enjoy with intelligence the 
counsels of God. If an evil occurs, it becomes only the 
opportunity for manifesting the love of Jesus, and this serves 
to strengthen faith. But all consists in our growing up in 
the Head ; this is the only true growth which is in the knowledge 
of Jesus ; because this knowledge is that of grace. The Spirit 
acts by the word (through faith and understanding of the things 
of God), all the while it is my life which grows and communi- 
cates to me a developed manifestation of life. 

But let us go back to what we have a right to expect from 
the children of God; I am here speaking of the oneness of 
faith and of the knowledge of Christ. If love dwells in us, 
and we think of the members of Christ, that will lead us to 
ask that they may grow according to the measure of the stature 
of the fulness of Christ. But, alas! many are often more 
occupied with this present life than seeking the growth of 
souls. Love is of God, and it is always powerful. If we 
were in a healthy state, we should grow in God. Faithfulness 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 49 


by those with whom I am in this relationship, because I could 
not do evil “in the Lord”: it is a most simple principle. 

Verses 2, 3. Paul refers to this promise, which has often 
been a difficulty to some, as though temporal promises now 
belonged to a certain line of conduct. The citation only shews 
us how much God estimated obedience under the law. How- 
ever, I believe there is a blessing belonging to obedience to 
parents. But in the order of the government of God, in the 
ways of God with us personally in this world, there are 
important things which modify this. The Jewish system was 
the expression of the government of God in this world, and 
the blessing belonged to him who honoured his father and 
mother. 

Verse 4. This is an important truth for parents, and which 
flows from the church being a company apart. It is evident 
that God desires that the children of Christians should be 
brought up as Christians. I must act as a Christian with 
regard to my child, and not otherwise ; J must exercise towards 
him the discipline of God, and bring him up as a disciple—we 
do very wrong if we act otherwise. if it so happen that parents 
are converted at the moment their children are growing up, it 
will then be more difficult for these parents to bring them up in 
the manner we have just said. But God is faithful to direct 
these parents, and to guide them according to their need; it 
will be a subject of prayer for them. In the verse before us 
the apostle supposes children whom parents are beginning to 
bring up. 

If a Christian mother introduce or allow her child to go 
into the world, she must expect a strong reaction when her 
child is in the midst of the world; but God is faithful to the 
mother who acts faithfully according to the instructions of the 
Lord. The moment there is a duty, God is there; and God 
is faithful to make us succeed, though we may have to pass 
through many a painful hour. But, alas! we like what is most 
easy ; neither is it right for us to use the word as a law to 
make a child obey. We frequently hear parents say to their 
children that, if not good, God will punish them, thus putting 
them under a law; this ought not to be. I ought to be a 
Christian with my child. God cannot bless parents who make 
a severe law of the Christian religion with their children ; and 
much less when they allow themselves to go back to worldliness 
and worldly motives. They ought to be Christian as to their 


50 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


children, and to act towards them according to the truth into 
which God has brought themseives. 

Verses 5, 6. The expression, “‘ as unto Christ,” is striking. 
What is not done according to God ought not to be done; but 
as to our own will, we must have submission and spiritual 
discernment to know when submission ought to be absolute. 
When there is no evil, by submitting myself I act as from God, 
without asking whether the authority is wise or not; I am 
wise in obeying: and so, every time that the question is as 
to obeying my master, I do it without troubling myself about 
what he tells me; I do what he wishes, no matter what; I do 
it as in the sight of God and for God. 

Verse 7. It little matters where God has placed me in this 
world, provided I serve Christ; and this principle can be 
applied to the most ordinary things of life; even if I light a 
fire, I can do it as for the Lord; and how honourable this 
makes it! What I do is for Him, and because He wishes me 
to do it; and I do it with good will for the Lord Jesus, serving 
Him with love. 

Verse 8. The Christian religion has found its way into 
the midst of evil, and given liberty where there was none ; it 
has given it even to the poor slaves, and that without taking 
them out of their state of bondage. The gospel does not touch 
that position. Paul acknowledges slavery as a right, when he 
sends back Onesimus to his master, telling him that in grace 
he would treat this slave as a brother. Christ comes in where 
sin reigns. It is a power superior to all here below, and which 
subsists in the midst of what is found here. 

Verse 9. Ye are slaves of Christ, and servants of Christ, 
and with Him there is no acceptance of persons ; if servants, 
ye can serve Him, however low your condition be as to this 
world ; and if masters, ye ought to serve Him whatever are 
your advantages here below. 

Verse 10. Here is strength! What joy to be able to say, 
If I am weak, Christ is my strength! We do not enjoy this 
strength when we are at a distance from the Lord, and when 
we parley with circumstances, instead of retiring into Jesus 
by prayer. If we gave ourselves to prayer, all would soon be 
overcome. 

Verse 11. We must put on the whole armour of God ; for 
if we have only truth and not righteousness, or only righteous- 
ness and not truth, the devil may reach us. The first counsel 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 47 


present it to Himself “ glorious, having neither spot nor 
wrinkle, nor any such thing.” 

There is reference here to the last Adam and the church; 
of which Adam and Eve were the types. Whilst Adam slept, 
God built for him a wife (this is the literal force of the Hebrew 
word) and presented her to him when he awoke. It is the 
same here; whilst Christ is hidden, so to speak, in God, God 
builds the church ; and when it shall be perfected, it will be 
presented to Christ, or rather He will present it to Himself, 
being God and last Adam at the same time. 

It is a precious thing to see that Christ so well knows how 
to take His measures that there will not be the least thing in 
His spouse which will not satisfy His heart; she will not 
have a wrinkle when He presents her to Himself; and all is 
based upon this, that He has given Himself for her; not only 
He has given His body unto death, His life, but also Himself. 
There is nothing in Christ—not an affection, not an element 
of wisdom, nor energy of devotedness, not a thought, nor 
perfection—not one thing in all the self-devotedness of Christ 
for the church—upon which the Christian may not count. 

Verses 29-31. ‘There is in verse 29 something more than 
that which precedes. Not only Christ purifies the church by 
the word, but He nourishes and cherishes it; He considers 
its weakness ; He shews tenderness and love towards it to 
nourish it as being His own body. 

Verses 32, 33. It is said in verse 32, “‘ This is a great 
mystery.’ What the apostle had at heart was the relationship 
between Christ and the church. We see in the verses which 
we have just read, four things: 1, Christ gave Himself for the 
church; 2, He sanctifies it by the word; 3, He presents it 
to Himself without wrinkle; 4, He nourishes and cherishes 
it, by giving all that He has for it, in order to shew how dear 
it is to Him. He loves it as Himself. It is precious to have 
the inward consciousness of the affection of Christ for the 
church. This is an important truth, and it is essential to 
distinguish the difference of this love, which belongs to 
relationships which God has established, and the goodness of 
His nature towards all. The consequence of it is that Christ 
undertakes the whole work; we are only His, entirely His. 
It is not a law, but a tie which binds us to another, that is, 
Christ. The moment that the power of man works, it is no 
longer Christ who has taken all upon Him for us. 


48 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


CHAPTER 6. 


Verse 1. We cannot enter into the force of this expression, 
obedience in the Lord or according to the Lord, unless we 
take our place before the Lord with spiritual understanding. 
Christ, when He was with His mother and Joseph, had the 
power of the relationship in Himself; this power of judging 
good and evil led Him to obey. It is in like manner with us: 
we ought to obey as to that which regards our relationships 
in this world. We must understand our position in Christ, 
in order to be able to obey. God formed these relationships 
from the beginning; natural relationships are of God, but 
sin has corrupted all. Now this is what the Lord does: He 
does not bring in a remedy for this state of ruin; but He 
introduces a new man, having given Himself without sin in 
order to take away sin; and this new man is Christ. It is 
evident then that this new Man recognises what God has done 
in establishing these natural relationships; but in a manner 
superior to these very relationships. So when Christ began 
His ministry, He recognised nothing in this world; but He 
submitted to all as an individual, perfect in the midst of this 
evil. When He came into this world, He said, ‘‘ Wist ye not 
that I must be about my Father’s business ? ” 


Nevertheless, He submitted to those who stood to Him in 
the relationship of parents, until God called Him to His own 
proper service. He acted as from God, as superior to the 
obligation. The Christian, in ike manner, by his union with 
Christ is superior to his obligations, inasmuch as he has with 
God a new relationship beyond nature; but he recognises 
this obligation according to the intelligence which this new 
relationship gives to him, and the consequence is that He is 
infinitely more obedient, because he obeys as from God. But 
it is impossible that I do evil as from God, or that I prefer 
anything before the authority of Christ. I am made more 
subject according to the perfection of God in Christ; and 
likewise by the introduction of the new man, the strength of 
the obligation is maintained, but according to God. In order 
to act as Christ did in the world, we need spiritual discernment. 
God cannot deny the obligations which He has created; but 
if I act in these relationships, as being from above and not from 
below, I shall obey with all my heart, but in a superior position, 
which does not allow of the evil into which I might be drawn 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 45 


world would have no pleasure, nor enjoyment. The Spirit is 
there in power. When Christians have life amongst them, 
occupying themselves with the things which are properly 
theirs, instead of hesitating in spiritual things, then the life 
grows; the consequence is, that we see things according to 
God, we are able to give thanks for all things; we live and 
we dwell there. 

Verse 21. It is this spirit of gentleness which recognises 
Christ in a brother, and that spirit of submission which does 
not exalt itself; it is when Christians are united and mingle 
one with another that they realise these things, for individuality 
is often pride. 

Verses 22-24. What is said in these verses is strong: for, 
as is often the case, the wife may have more wisdom than her 
husband, but the effect of this wisdom will be for the wife to 
leave to her husband the place that God has given to him; 
for if the grace of God acts in the heart, the order which God 
has established reigns always, and if the wife governs, God is 
not there. But if this particular wisdom of God is recognised, 
the order of God is maintained, and blessing is the consequence. 

Verses 25, 26. There are always in the word positive 
directions, and it is never well for us not to follow them. We 
may remark here three things as to Christ and as to the church, 
which flow out of the love of Christ for the church: 1, He has 
loved the church and given Himself for it; 2, that He might 
sanctify it by the word ; 3, that He might present it to Himself 
a glorious church, etc. 

Verses 27, 28. Christ will present the church to Himself 
in glory. The order in which these things are placed gives 
such assurance. Christ does not sanctify the church before 
having redeemed it. No, it is when she belongs to Him that 
He devotes Himself to make her such as He would have her 
to be. We may remark here, it is not said that God loves the 
church ; nor is mention made of that loving-kindness of God 
which seeks to save souls, though His goodness is acting towards 
all men in sending Christ to them. ‘‘ God so loved the world, 
that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in him should not perish, but should have everlasting life.” 
But there is another thing which is not properly the goodness 
of God, either in the sense of providence, or in that of the love 
in His nature. God in His counsels desires to enter into a 
certain relationship with His own people; God desires to 


FORT WAYNE BIBLE COLLEGE Aas 
LIBRARY 


46 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


have children, and Christ a spouse. They are affections based 
upon a relationship which exists. If God has made us His ~ 
children He cannot do less than love us as such; once this 
relationship established, He cannot fail in it. It is never said 
that Christ has loved the world, while we have seen that God 
has loved the world; John 3:16. See also the character of 
the providential goodness of God; Jonah 4: 11. The good- 
ness of God, which watches over all His works, is precious ; 
we ought to act in the same way as following Him, we ought 
to love everybody ; Matt. 5 : 44-48. 

But there is another thought besides that of this goodness 
of God; there is a love, the consequence of an established 
relationship. God having set us in this relationship, the 
affections of God and of Christ flow forth naturally towards 
us who are the objects of it. God loves His children with a 
love which will never deny itself. Christ has made Himself 
responsible for all the debts of His spouse; and more, the 
church being the spouse of Christ, she has lost her earthly 
citizenship and acquired a heavenly one. Christ has become 
the one responsible for all that His church has done and will 
do ; the church, as the spouse of Christ, has lost her individu- 
ality, in order that she may pertain to Christ, her heavenly 
Bridegroom. Christ, as the anointed Man, felt a distaste for 
the world; He would none of this world; He would not 
have His affections there. The Christian, in like manner, ought 
not to be able to bear the world as to its objects of desire and 
its walk. Christ has given Himself in order to satisfy the justice 
of God and to conquer, for the church’s sake, the power of 
Satan ; having set her free, He is occupied with her, and, as 
she is not what He desires, He sanctifies her. The Spirit of 
God makes allusion here to a practice among the Jews, who 
purified themselves by washing in pure water. It is by the 
word that Christ cleanses and sanctifies the church; all the 
revelation of what God is is thus applied to the heart. This is 
why Jesus says, “‘I sanctify myself for their sakes”; I set 
Myself apart, as being the expression of all the thoughts of 
God, and I communicate them to Mine, that they also may be 
sanctified through the truth. Christ is not untrue to the 
thoughts of God. The word is the means of communicating 
them, it judges all in us and manifests what is in God. This 
is what Christ did here below. 

The final object of the work of Christ for the church is to 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 43 


him ; he learns what are his ways ; he knows what he would 
like in the circumstances which transpire. Thus we prove 
what is acceptable to the Lord. 

Verse 11. The experience of righteousness in us produces 
an entire separation from evil; it produces fruits of light. 
Paul insists upon the necessity of having no fellowship with 
the works of darkness. A Christian cannot join himself with 
these things, but rather even convict them. Verse 12. By this 
verse is shewn to us to what an extent our evil nature will go. 

Verse 13. This is the effect of light in Christ and in the 
Christian. We see nothing in the dark ; but the light manifests 
all. The natural man would be ashamed to do in the light 
what he does in the dark—things which would be done openly 
among the heathen. Christianity has necessarily destroyed, 
up to a certain point, the grossness of sin even with those 
who are not yet converted. The Christian is in the light which 
manifests all. The light applies itself to every connection 
which he could form with this world. 

Verse 14. The men of this world are dead, and the Christian 
who walks according to the spirit of this world is as if he were 
dead, slumbering amidst the dead, dreaming, it is true, some- 
times about his wretched position; but as to action, he is 
there amongst the dead; he does not know what to do, and 
how should he know? The same may be said of all that, in 
the Christian, which morally can be called sleep. It is a most 
sorrowful state in contrast with that which is described to us 
above. Christ cannot enlighten a soul thus placing itself 
among the dead; He can work in order to awaken such, but 
He does not give light to them that are asleep, to those who 
do not awake from among the dead. Since the light makes all 
manifest, there is a needs-be that the Christian should awake, 
and Christ will give him light. It is Christ Himself who is 
the source, the expression, and the measure of light for the 
soul that is awake. What use is light to him who will walk in 
darkness ? 

Verse 15. In heaven there will be no ‘“‘ Take heed” ; 
there we may give free way to perfect joy: there all is holy ; 
but down here in this life, in the midst of evil, we must take 
need, we must use wisdom. The man of the world, in order 
to avoid evil, must be skilled in the knowledge of the evil. 
The Christian has no need to think about evil; he must be 
wise without the knowledge of evil, as it is written, “‘ Simple 


44 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


concerning evil, wise as to that which is good ” (Rom. 16: 19), 
because full and divine knowledge of good in the midst of 
evil is what Christ gives. What He Himself was here contains 
no familiar acquaintance with evil; the child of God ought to 
possess that wisdom which is simple as a dove—spiritual 
wisdom. 

Verse 16. This is likewise wisdom ; it is to gain time in 
order to do good. The same expression is used in speaking 
of the magicians, the Chaldeans, in Daniel 2: 8; they gained 
time in order to conceal their inability, they had the prudence 
of this world. We need wisdom in order to be able to do 
good in spite of Satan, whose power makes the present time 
one of difficulty. If we have this wisdom for good, we shall 
escape the wiles of Satan ; we shall leave his nets on one side 
and pass on; we shail do the good that God may give us to 
do; we shall have time for God. If we are in God’s light, we 
shall walk in the simplicity of that which is good, and God will 
be with us. Let us think of God as Father and on what Christ 
did, in order to do like unto Him. If sleep overtake us, we 
must awake, and Christ will give us light. 

Verses 17, 18. Verse 16 had shewn us that we must redeem 
the time. The days are evil when God allows Satan to exercise 
his power, and they are so in general until Jesus return; but 
there are times when God permits the enemy to govern more 
directly, and others when He puts a check on him. The evil 
days are a chastisement, a humiliation for the church ; but he 
who is faithful has his way pointed out; he ought to redeem 
the time, to seize the opportunity of doing good; Neh. 6: 3. 
This is why it is said (v. 17), ‘‘ Be not unwise”; but there is 
also an energy, a force in the Spirit which is given to us, which 
is contrasted with the excitement by which the world thinks 
to produce faith—excitement which is evil—an evil course of 
life, the true character of which verse 18 shews us. When the 
Spirit descended upon the one hundred and twenty at Jerusa- 
lem, the world said, ‘‘ They are full of new wine.”” The power 
of the Spirit in truth does put a man beyond the power of 
what is natural to himself; the words rise to his lips as a 
fruit of the Spirit’s action, and he is the subject of a joy which 
flows over. In him who is full of the Holy Ghost there is what 
is not natural to man—something altogether extraordinary. 

Verses 19, 20. It is quite another life, it is a joy outside 
of the world’s range; it is a company apart, in which the 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 57. 


word of God to overthrow us. This word is called the sword 
of the Spirit, not of the understanding, but of the Spirit in 
us. It is the Spirit of God who alone can handle the sword 
of the word. It is the Spirit who recalls the suitable passage at 
the moment of temptation (we have a striking example of it in 
Christ in the hour of His temptation). We may reason about 
the things of God, but this does nothing for us against the 
enemy; the Spirit must act in us and apply the word. It is 
evident that if we have grieved the Spirit, if our loins are not 
girded, the Spirit cannot be there to handle the word ; on the 
contrary, in that case, Satan employs it against us. If the 
Christian has not this happy consciousness of being for God, 
he has nothing to say when Satan presents a temptation before 
him : the smallest warning of the word troubles and overthrows 
him, because the word is not through the Spirit a weapon in 
his hand against the enemy; but it is in the hand of the 
enemy against him. It is true that God uses the word as a 
means of convincing of sin, and thus awakes the soul by acting 
on the conscience ; but every time that this word is not made 
use of on the principle of grace, it is not the work of the Spirit 
of God. If this conviction of sin leads us to mistrust God, it 
does not proceed from Him, but from the enemy; the Spirit 
convinces of sin through the word, but it shews the refuge in 
Christ ; it does not drive to despair. 

The word is represented to us as a weapon for us to handle, 
for it works in two ways: first, the Spirit, in using the word, 
can act in us by presenting to us the object which fills our 
hearts with joy and hope; but besides, He can use it when 
He would convince us of sin. The Spirit will indeed shew us 
what are the consequences of sin, but He will never tell us 
that Christ is not sufficient for our soul. The Spirit cannot 
deny the testimony which He bears to the glory and to the work 
of Jesus in grace; He can use the holiness of God to produce 
in us the deepest feeling of sin; but He will never tell us that 
God is not the God of grace towards us. To the Christian 
who has peace, and to whom the love of the Father has been 
revealed, it is perfectly clear, that if he has any other feeling 
about sin, it is not the Spirit of God which produces it. If we 
have failed, the Spirit will make us sorrowful, but He will 
never tell us that the Master of the house is not our Lord ; 
this thought would be the fruit of unbelief. But here the apostle 
goes a little farther; he supposes faith to be in exercise, and 


58 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


he places the word in the hand. Satan will tell us that we are 
not able to use the sword of the Spirit. Then this same Spirit, 
who recalls the passage, silences Satan. Again, look at Christ 
in His temptation, Christ who never lost His confidence. The 
Spirit was there in power. Christ had His loins girded, and 
He had on the breastplate of righteousness ; He was calm and 
knew how to use the very passage which was suitable for the 
circumstance. Paul supposes a Christian who is standing fast 
in this power of the Spirit, and who completely stops the 
mouth of Satan, when he tries in a thousand ways to make 
him fall. Such a Christian, having all the defensive weapons, 
is able to handle the sword of the Spirit ; and when the Spirit 
in him is not grieved, He bears witness to the favour of God. 
The word of God is the most powerful of the weapons of the 
Christian’s strength. 

Verses 18-20. The second weapon which is given to us is 
prayer in the Spirit; it is that prayer which springs from the 
energy of the spiritual life when the Spirit is not grieved in 
us ; the same Spirit, which acting in us, uses the word, becomes 
a Spirit of intercession and seeks the interposition of God in 
favour of the saints, and of the work of God in the world. It 
is a soul at ease in the presence of God—a soul watching, 
instead of allowing itself to be surprised; and its prayers, 
instead of being complaints, will be according to the power of 
the Spirit ; we can then use prayer as men who have watched, 
and who have found in watching subjects for the intervention 
of God. We may be afflicted, cast down, without being under 
the power of the enemy. 

If I hear bad news, whether relating to the church of God 
or to a brother, it will make me sorrowful and cast me down, 
as it did Paul, who had fightings without and fears within. 
But though thus sorrowful, if Satan has nothing in us, the 
consequence of this depression will be communion with God, 
instead of having allowed our affections to wander; we are 
in the presence of God, we watch with Him in order to speak 
to Him ; but if this is not the case, Satan will take us unawares 
in moments of carelessness. If we walk with God, this will 
cause prayers according to the mind of God. The broken heart 
finds in Jesus the full certainty of God’s favour. The Philip- 
pians, in their suffering state, had met with God instead of 
being frightened by it (Phil. 1: 28); and though afflicted, 
if I am in the power of the Spirit, it will only cause more 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 55 


on all his walk in this world. God having given to the soul 
this place before Him, He begins to teach it to walk; and 
the walk of such a one here below partakes of this gospel of 
peace, of the peace which we first enjoy with God through the 
gospel, in virtue of the work of Christ, and which, setting us in 
communion with God, makes us happy in that which is good, 
and enables us, by this communion, to overcome the sin and 
rebellion of the heart. All that we meet with makes manifest 
in our walk by the Spirit the peace which we enjoy. It is 
beautiful to see a soul which brings the power of such peace 
into the world. 

In this faithful walk the Christian meets with the fiery darts 
of the wicked one; the more faithful he is, the more also 
will Satan seek to trouble him; if he can cause a wicked 
thought to cross the heart, that is a dart; but the soul of the 
faithful is at peace; nothing can trouble him, though Satan 
tries to disturb this peace. If secret self-complacency glides 
unto the heart, it is the enemy who seeks to take away our 
confidence. We see Christ in this calm and perfect confidence 
in the midst of His suffering (John 18 : 11), peace keeping His 
soul; not that He could feel joy in drinking the cup, but He 
felt it in receiving the cup from the hand of Him who gave it 
to Him: nothing could shake His confidence ; all the darts of 
Satan were quenched on the shield of faith. At the moment 
when He was broken-hearted, crushed by the iniquity of men, 
He said, ‘“‘ I thank thee, O Father,” Matt. 11: 25. When we 
meet with a trial, instead of complaining of others and reproach- 
ing them, we ought to take refuge in God; but frequently we 
do the very opposite, we distrust God; if we meet with 
difficulties, we reflect on God, and reproach Him with the 
iniquity of man. Satan seeks to produce mistrust; this is 
why the apostle says we must take the shield of faith. 

Verse 16. Entire confidence in God is needed. From the 
position we see all the storms below us, we are at peace; but 
if we have not this confidence, there are things which trouble 
us. This is our position: we are on the earth, the flesh still 
in us; Satan is in the heavens, but Christ is still higher, at 
the right hand of God. Christ (in order that faith may be put 
to the test) has not yet driven out Satan ; but if by faith we lay 
hold of the truth that Christ has done everything, that He has 
gained the victory over Satan, and that He is gone up far above 
all heavens to the right hand of God, we are then above all 


56 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


circumstances. I know Christ; I am near to God; I see 
things according to God and not according to circumstances. 
We see in Numbers, when the water failed, Israel threw the 
blame on God, and Moses thought about himself and his own 
personal importance. We frequently behave ourselves in the 
same way in affliction; but it is a want of confidence in God. 
Satan would like to break the links between us and God ; 
but God has given us evident proofs of His love by giving us 
His Son, who has all power in heaven and on earth. Satan 
cannot take from us His grace ; but if our loins are not girded 
about, our communion is interrupted. 

Verse 17. The salvation of a soul once brought nigh to 
God is a settled thing ; it is a helmet, a defence which guards 
him from the attacks of the enemy. There is a difference 
between this blessed position and that of working for salvation. 
In my battles with the enemy, I have on my head the assurance 
of salvation. He cannot touch me, I have eternal life; Satan 
cannot break in upon that. This gives boldness in the conflict ; 
having the consciousness that God has saved us, we go on, 
the head lifted up (not proudly as to the fear of God), but 
trusting in Him, fearing nothing. Such is the case when we 
have the affections on Christ; we are so set as to be enabled 
to go on with boldness, by power being given to us to use the 
armour of God. This is what God desires for us. It is a 
blessed position to stand fast in the conflict. Truth applies 
to the judgment in the inner man. Practical righteousness 
guards the conscience from the assaults of the enemy; the 
power of peace gives a character to our walk; confidence in 
the love of God quenches the poisoned arrows of doubt; the 
assurance of salvation gives us boldness to go onwards. 

We have seen in what precedes, that the apostle begins by 
setting before us that which gives inward strength, namely, 
the armour defensive against the attacks of the enemy. Now 
he speaks of the offensive weapons, and begins with the sword 
of the Spirit, as the means of resisting the power of Satan in 
the evil day ; he speaks of the sword as a means of standing ; 
the helmet is placed before the sword, because if there is not 
this confidence, this assurance, we cannot even handle the 
sword of the Spirit. All the threats, the warnings and precepts 
as to sanctification, become so many means, in the hands of 
Satan, to lay hold of us by, if we have not the confidence that 
God is for us ; without this confidence Satan can use even the 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 53 


governed by it. If our hearts are full of Jesus, we are sanctified 
by the truth, as it is in Jesus, which sets us free and which 
sanctifies us. 

The word “ reins ” expresses all that is within. The inner 
affections, the inmost thoughts, are turned towards God, the 
heart is with God; all that is not of Him being judged, I am 
in communion with Him, I am in His presence, taught by Him. 
The apostle urges that our thoughts, our affections, should be 
governed by the truth; that that which the Spirit teaches us 
should reign over our hearts. This is what we must begin 
with ; the heart must be at large, set free from the power of 
every lust and of every spiritual error; at liberty in the truth. 
We cannot be happy if we allow our hearts to go after all that 
presents itself to us ; for then, in our service, we are not able 
to resist Satan. Perhaps we are not aware of the evil; the 
effect of it is not at first felt, but in an evil day it will discover 
itself. (See Job.) Satan roams around us, and seeks to 
overthrow us; this is why we must not allow our hearts to go 
abroad after everything, without paying attention, or without 
being on our guard; because Satan will have thereby power 
over us in the evil day. The established Christian discerns 
good and evil; his thoughts no longer wander about here 
below. If our thoughts are in heaven with Jesus, we are in 
safety. It is impossible for us to be happy here below, if we 
do not walk in holiness. There, in heaven, we shall be able 
to let loose our hearts, because nothing will be there but 
holiness and the glory of God; but here, in the presence of 
the enemy with such deceitful hearts, we must have truth to 
govern them: ‘“ Having your loins girt about with truth.” 
It is the application of what is in Christ to the affections, in 
order that the heart may have the understanding of spiritual 
things, and we may walk according to Christ. 

Be it observed, that all we have just said is true of each and 
every Christian; for he is in the truth, he has righteousness 
by faith, he possesses the gospel of peace. But the apostle 
desires that we should use these graces in our practical walk. 
If our hearts are guided by the Spirit of Jesus, we have the 
consciousness of walking in practical righteousness in all that ~ 
concerns us; Satan will have nothing to say against us in the 
evil day, nothing which will weaken us in our conflicts with 
him. If the conscience is not good, if righteousness is not 
realised, we have no strength ; we must hide ourselves in the 


54 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


day of battle. When Satan attacks the children of God, he 
does it according to the holiness of God, and they would be 
overthrown by having things on their conscience about which 
a worldly person would feel no uneasiness. The Spirit acting 
on the conscience cannot but give to holiness all its strength ; 
and for him there is but the holiness of God. Also, the nearer 
we are to God, the more will Satan seek to surprise us. It is 
impossible for anyone to have a just estimate of the holiness of 
God unless standing fast in grace, and unless firm against the 
attacks of Satan. If we do not walk before God according to 
the light, which we profess to have, God’s strength is not with 
us; and frequently even God withdraws the light in which 
we did not choose to walk. If we have failed in anything, we 
must have recourse to grace. If habitually we walk in the 
Spirit, as soon as we have stumbled we shall judge ourselves 
before God, before Satan attacks us; for God is good and 
faithful in His grace, and we shall be calm. Christ was ever 
with His Father, and when the evil day came, He was calm. 
(See for him who has failed, the example of David, Psalm 
32:5: “‘ Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin,” etc.) That 
which the Spirit commands is to be clothed with the breastplate 
of righteousness ; because with this armour we have nothing 
on the conscience. A man cannot handle his sword if he is 
ill: God begins then, as we have said, by strengthening the 
man himself; then He speaks of the testimony which he 
ought to bear. God will have the soldier prepared for the 
battle. 

Verse 15. He who is holy and righteous in his practical 
walk is the one who is in communion with God, who is at 
peace and restful in all his connections with God, and vigilant 
as to that which is good, knowing that Satan goeth about ; 
but he is without fear, knowing that he walks together with 
God; and having nothing which disquiets him in his walk, 
the consequence is that he is at peace. This title of peace is 
one given to God more than any other; 1 Thess. § : 23; 
Heb. 13:20; Rom. 16: 20, etc. If there is one thought 
which is predominant in the character of God, it is peace. 
The soul which is thus in God is full of peace; he enjoys 
fully the gospel of God; he enjoys His grace; his soul is in 
peace, and coming forth from immediate communion with God 
to walk through this poor world, in this spirit of peace all his 
ways are marked with peace; this character sets its impress 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 51 


which the Spirit gives us here is to be strong in the Lord; and 
second, to have the whole armour of God; because the arms 
of man are useless against spiritual wickedness. The man of 
the world does not know that he is the object of the attacks 
of Satan, and in truth he is rather his slave, never having been 
delivered ; but the Christian is the object of his attack, and 
if he is not clothed with the whole armour of God, the darts 
of the enemy reach him. None can resist him but the one who 
is thus clothed, for Satan is always there using wiles and 
artifices ; he is often as a lion, but more habitually as a serpent, 
and he tries to reach us and introduce the point of his weapon ; 
he seeks to deal his blows wherever he finds a part of the body 
unprotected, not clothed with this armour of God. 

Verse 12. We wrestle not against flesh and blood, that is 
to say, not against man, as the Israelites who had to fight 
against the Canaanites. No! but against spiritual wickedness, 
against the powers of this world. When the flesh acts in the 
Christian, Satan can attack him ; the flesh has no power what- 
soever against Satan. ‘“‘ He that is born of God keepeth 
himself, and the wicked one toucheth him not,” 1 John 5: 18. 
We have a perfect example in Jesus. The new man in us is 
never tempted. These evil powers are in the heavens, whence 
they are not yet driven out; and in their wickedness they act 
not in a gross but in a spiritual manner. Christ is still sitting 
down, and His enemies are not yet put under His feet; but 
we have the promise, that the God of peace will bruise Satan 
under our feet shortly. It is of all importance not to be terrified 
by him, for in Christ we gain the victory over the enemy of 
our souls: but it is needful for us to be aware of these 
ambushes, and to know what is acting against us. 

That which guards us is the power of the Spirit in the 
path of obedience. The presence of the enemy in the heavens 
has spoiled and continues to spoil all the good that God ever 
committed to man; this is true, even in Christianity here 
below, because the heavens are not yet changed: the atmos- 
phere is evil. But it is said, “ Resist the devil, and he shall 
flee from you.” If Satan meets Christ in us, he flies, for Christ 
has conquered him; but the flesh does not resist him. If I 
am in the flesh, the enemy overthrows me, as we have an 
example in Peter. Peter, after his fall, could strengthen his 
brethren; because he had learnt to know himself and his 
weakness, as well as the power of the grace of Christ. It is 


52 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


well to remember that, when walking in the Spirit, we are 
sheltered from the darts of the enemy. 

Verse 13. In the preceding verses it is the general position 
of the child of God, in evil days, that is looked at. Here it is 
the armour more in detail that is spoken of. We have seen 
two things: 1, that we must be armed with the whole armour ; 
2, that we must be armed with the whole armour of God. 
This armour alone can resist the attacks of the enemy. There 
are times when we are attacked by the enemy, and when God 
permits that we should be more or less tried. The whole of 
this present dispensation is the evil day, during which Satan 
is allowed to exercise his power; Christ is absent from the 
earth, and Satan is allowed to exercise his power in it. There 
are moments when we enjoy in peace communion with the 
Lord, without being disturbed by the enemy: then all is 
peace ; but there are times also when we are made to feel the 
power of Satan—the power of Christ also, without doubt, 
but it is in order to fight. This is the reason it is said, “‘ Take 
the whole armour of God.” It is the resisting the manifest 
attacks of Satan that is here spoken of; not only, as in the 
case of the Israelites, of gaining certain victories, of conquering 
certain territories, and of making progress in the country ; 
this is not the immediate thought of the apostle. Inasmuch 
as we are filled with the Spirit, we already possess all things 5 
while at the same time we have to carry on a warfare in the 
heavenly places. Satan tries to destroy our confidence, to 
withdraw us from enjoying Christ, and to take from us the 
consciousness that we possess all things in Him. What we have 
to do then in this position, is to stand firm ; all is ours, and if 
we stand fast, we have all. Satan tries to prevent our standing ; 
this is why we are told to put on our armour and to stand fast. 

Verse 14. In this verse the means of resistance are set 
before me ; we must have our loins girded about with truth, 
or else we shall be like a ship with its sails spread, but no 
ballast—it would founder; the ballast which produces the 
equilibrium is necessary. It is written, “‘ Sanctify them by 
thy truth ; thy word is truth... .” and further on, “‘ For their 
sakes I sanctify myself, that they also may be sanctified through 
the truth.” Christ set Himself apart as the expression of all 
the truth of God in man; not that He had only the knowledge 
of the truth: Christ was Himself the truth. We ought not 
only to know the truth, but to have our affections filled and 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 65 


work was right; but soon false brethren came in unawares, 
Simon Maguses and I know not what, because man was put 
under responsibility, and the first thing he does is to sin. 
Noah had the sword put into his hands for governing, and the 
first thing he does is to get drunk. The law was given, and 
the first thing the Jews did was to make a golden calf. Priest- 
hood was set up, and the first day they offered strange fire, 
‘and Aaron never went into the holy place with the garments of 
glory and beauty. When royalty was set up, the son of David 
loved many strange women, and his heart went after their 
gods. The church was set up, and it failed. Christ will be 
the perfect Man; Christ will govern the world in righteous- 
ness; Christ is the perfect priest; Christ is perfect as the 
Son of David; He will arise to reign over the Gentiles. He 
will be glorified in His saints, and admired in all them that 
believe. Every one of the things put under the responsibility 
of man will be perfectly carried out. If I confound this 
accomplishment of purpose in Christ with what is placed under 
the responsibility of man, and attribute what belongs to the 
one to the other, I am justifying all the evil and corruption 
about us. That is the question now in the church of God. 

The body is never looked at as incomplete in itself, it would 
spoil the whole idea. When the purpose of God is brought 
out, it is looked at as in that purpose. In chapter 1 He gave 
Him to be Head over all things to the church, which is His body. 
There it is looked at as complete when all things are put 
under Him. All things are not yet put under Him: it is not 
accomplished yet; it is in counsels. The moment I get it 
down here, I get both the house and the body. 

Chapter 2 : 21 contains the same thought as Matthew 16: 18, 
and also the same as I Peter 2. 

Verse 22 is the house as set up now upon earth: only when 
God set it up, He set it up all right. ‘“‘ Ye are builded together 
for a habitation of God.” It is a present thing. 

The dwelling of God with men down here is a distinct 
definite fact, and the fruit of redemption. God never dwelt 
with man apart from redemption. He did not dwell with 
Adam; He never dwelt with Abraham, He never dwelt with 
anybody down here until Israel was redeemed out of Egypt. 
No doubt this was an outward redemption, still it was in a 
certain sense redemption. God redeemed His people out of 
the bondage of Egypt, and in the end of Exodus 29 He says, 


66 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


‘““ And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God, that 
brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dwell 
among them.” The moment redemption comes in, He makes 
the redeemed people His dwelling-place, and He comes down 
and dwells among them in the tabernacle. This was given 
up at the captivity when the times of the Gentiles began. 

Since Christ’s rejection and the accomplishment of the 
better redemption, the church is established on earth for God 
to dwell in. This habitation of God through the Spirit was 
set up, consequent upon redemption, but down -here it is 
trusted to man’s responsibility. What it has become now is 
Christendom. 

The increase of the body is spoken of in chapter 4. It is 
merely the fact that here it grows. You afterwards see the 
different gifts and all of them exercised, and you find the body 
grows up, just as a child grows up. There are persons brought 
in; but they come into it all as a complete thing. The 
individual persons come in and are a part of that growth. 
You get evangelists as well as pastors and teachers. Still 
when individuals come in, they are only part of the same 
body. So when I eat my body grows. Of course, they are 
mere figures after all. 

But in speaking of these things, you get the individual 
before anything of the body or the house. You will always 
find the individual has the first place. The individual relation- 
ship is with the Father; the corporate relationship is with 
Christ as a man: and the house relationship is with the Holy 
Ghost come down. There are the three. The first is that we 
have the adoption of children (sons) to Himself; and then that 
He has given Christ to be head over all things to the church, 
which is His body. Here is our relationship with Christ as 
raised and glorified, but before that comes all about the indivi- 
dual. Then in the third place there is the Holy Spirit come 
down to dwell. It makes a wonderful scheme and plan to 
put all these things together. 

If you look further to the application of all this to ministry, 
you see, when he is beginning, he says, “‘ Unto every one of 
us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ. 
Wherefore he saith [it is the ground and basis that is given for 
ministry], When he ascended upon high, he led captivity 
captive, and gave gifts unto men. Now that he ascended, 
what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 63 


the Spirit. Then we go on to individual gifts, and in verse 17 
we begin the practical exhortation for all saints, which is 
continued in chapter 5. At the end of chapter 5 occasion is 
taken from the case of the husband and wife to bring in the 
relationship of Christ and the church. After going into the 
different relationships in which saints are to be faithful, the 
conflict in heavenly places is taken up. 

Now another thing may be remarked as to the epistle, that 
is, that everything refers to heavenly places; not that we are 
not upon earth, for we are, but that now to principalities and 
powers in heavenly places may be known through the church 
the wisdom of God. We are blessed with all spiritual blessings 
in heavenly places, and we are sitting in heavenly places in 
Christ, we are a testimony to principalities and powers in 
heavenly places, and we are fighting with wicked spirits in 
heavenly places. Our blessing, our place, our testimony, and 
our conflict are all in these heavenly places. Now you will find 
that ministry here is connected with all these. 

Farther, what God is working in chapter 2 is that the whole 
building effectually framed together groweth into a holy 
temple. It is only growing up to this end. But moreover 
“ye are builded together for a habitation of God.” This is 
taking place. The holy temple will be in glory. They are to be 
a building for a temple even as Christ said, ‘“‘I will build my 
church.” The temple that is to be is that spoken of by the 
Lord in Matthew 16: ‘“‘ Upon the rock I will build my 
church, and the gates of hades shall not prevail against it.” 
You get it also in Peter, “ Ye also as living stones are built up 
a spiritual house, a holy priesthood.” There they are built 
up stone after stone. So in Ephesians, “and are built upon 
the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ 
himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all the building, 
fitly framed together, groweth unto an holy temple in the 
Lord.” It is growing unto an holy temple, but it is not yet 
finished. The house that Christ builds is a perfect thing, it 
is not finished yet, but what people commonly call the invisible 
church. But then there is an actually manifested thing by 
the Holy Ghost being here: ‘‘ Ye are builded together for a 
habitation of God through the Spirit.” 

In short there are two characters of the assembly, the body 
of Christ, and the habitation of God now by the Holy Ghost. 
When we speak of the body of Christ, the members are looked 


64 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


at as united to the Head in heaven, and, spoken of as the house, 
will be a holy temple ; when we speak of the habitation, it is 
by the Holy Ghost down here. It is the same thing as far as 
they went, but they soon ceased to be identical. 

In verse 21 it is a temple not yet completed; when it is 
completed, it will be in glory. We are builded together for a 
habitation of God through the Spirit (v. 22); this is the 
present thing. It is just the confounding of these two things 
that has made popery and ritualism. That is, they have 
attributed all the privileges which belong to what Christ is 
building and has not yet finished to the thing that is built 
on earth. .Now when you get a thing built upon earth, God 
sets it up#all right ; but like everything | else, like man himself 
when he was created, it is put into man’s responsibility. God 
carries on His own purpose, and against what Christ builds 
the gates of hades shall never prevail. But always: in the first 
instance, whatever God sets up, He puts into man’s responsi- 
bility ; and then it is all ruined. Nevertheless God’s purpose 
is‘all accomplished in Christ. This is true of everything. It is 
true of Israel. It is true of individual saints, and of the whole 
church. What Christ is carrying on, the gates of hades shall 
not prevail against. The administration of it is on earth. 
In 1 Corinthians 3 Paul says, “‘ As a wise master builder, I 
have laid the foundation and another buildeth thereon. Let 
every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.” This is 
not Christ’s building. It is not Christ carrying out, “I will 
build my church ”’; nor the living stones coming and growing 
into a holy temple. In the latter case there is no agent but 
Christ. It is He that is building; and therefore, of course, 
Satan’s power cannot prevail against it. In 1 Corinthians 3 
it is not Christ building; it is man’s responsibility, as it is 
said, “‘ Let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon.” 
Wood and hay and stubble can be built in ; and if you attribute 
to wood and hay and stubble the security of what Christ is 
doing, you will be making a grave mistake. Papists and 
Puseyites are taking what has been built by man, and con- 
founding it with Christ’s work, saying the gates of hades cannot 
prevail against it. They confound two different works. 

God set up right even what is upon earth: “the Lord 
added to the church* daily such as should be saved.”? God’s 


rE oe reading would run thus, ‘‘ was adding together daily,” 
etc.—ED. 


SUBSTANCE OF A 
READING ON EPHESIANS 


THE nature of the Epistle to the Ephesians is quite distinct 
from that of Romans. In Ephesians we have nothing to do 
with the responsibility of man ; we have with Christ, and man 
is looked at as dead in sins, and there is a new creation. Conse- 
quently the question of justification is not raised in Ephesians, 
but acceptance is. We have seen before that these are the 
two great subjects in connection with the gospel: namely, 
the meeting of the responsibility of man; and the counsels 
of God before ever there was a responsible man at all. These 
counsels are in the second Man, not in the first. The first 
man was the responsible one; the Lord Jesus is the Man of 
God’s counsels, the last Adam or second Man. In Ephesians 
these counsels of God are taken up ; in Romans the responsible 
man (in grace, but still responsible), sinners, every mouth 
stopped, and a propitiation through faith in Christ’s blood, 
the whole question of God’s meeting us in grace in our responsi- 
bility and failure, is fully brought out. In the Ephesians there 
is nothing of this. It begins with the counsels and intentions 
of God, and puts us in Christ. 


Now the structure of the epistle is this. In chapter 1 we 
have these counsels of God as to glory, as to Christ, and as 
to our inheritance. Only at the end the apostle begins to 
unfold how far the foundation is laid for their accomplishment 
in what He has already done. So that, after stating the 
counsels, he enters on what God has done. That is, He has 
taken Christ from the dead and set Him up far above all 
heavens, principalities, and powers, and every name named. 
He commences, observe, with the raising of Christ from the 
dead. There you get not merely counsels, but the accomplish- 
ment, so far as exalting the second Man into glory above all 
heavens. 


Chapter 2 shews how far God has accomplished that mighty 
work in us. We have been raised from being dead in sins 
and put into Christ, sitting in Him (not with Him, we are not 
there yet) in heavenly places. It is the operation of God 
putting us into His place. It is in Christ I am sitting, not 
with Him. This makes us God’s workmanship ; and then He 
brings us forth a step farther in making both Jews and Gentiles 


ote = cae 27 


62 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


one. It is still what He has accomplished or is doing so far. 
He has put down the middle wall of partition, and reconciled — 
us in one body by the cross, that is, down here; and He is 
not only building a holy temple to the Lord (it is not built 
yet), but we are builded together, Jews and Gentiles, for the 
habitation of God by the Spirit down here. This is what 
God has accomplished. He has raised Christ from the dead, 
and set Him in glory; He has raised us up spiritually from 
the dead and put us into Christ; He has abolished all differ- 
ences of Jew and Gentiles, and He has not only made peace 
between jew and Gentile, reconciling them, but He has 
reconciled them both in one body by the cross. They are 
reconciled to one another and reconciled to God, and they are 
going to be a temple, and they are builded together for a 
habitation of God through the Spirit, that is, down here. 
This is what is accomplished of His purposes, the foundation 
being laid for them all. 

In chapter 3 follows another thing. It is neither God’s 
counsels nor God’s operation, but Paul’s administration of 
all these, the dispensation committed to him. As to the 
substance of it, it is Paul’s administration of the mystery, not 
God’s counsels about it, but the apostle’s administration of it ; 
and at the end, as it refers to earth, there is the second prayer 
which is addressed to the Father of our Lord Jesus, where 
Christ is looked at as Son. The first prayer, which is found 
in chapter 1, is addressed to the God of our Lord Jesus as 
the glorified Man; but this is addressed to the Father, and 
Christ is looked at as Son, a divine Person. Therefore it is 
here not the object, or the thing objectively, but rather that 
Christ may dwell in our hearts, that is, power brought in down 
here according to His counsels. So that there is to be glory 
to God in the church in all ages. This is a power that works 
in us, as the other was toward us. 

Having the counsels, and the operation, and Paul’s adminis- 
tration, the effect is looked for in chapter 4 as regards there 
being a habitation of God through the Spirit down here; 
and then, secondly, here too the individual gifts. This goes 
down to the end of verse 16. Verse 17 begins the ordinary 
exhortations as to how to walk. They were to walk together. 
All distinctions of Jew and Gentile have disappeared. He has 
brought them together as one habitation of God through the 
Spirit, and now they are to walk together and keep the unity of 


NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 59 


lively intercession. It is precious to see what is produced by 
affliction, even by chastening ; if our walk is spiritual, it will 
only be an opportunity for gaining the victory, and for driving 
away Satan. All the members are united to the Head, and by 
His Spirit interested in all that concerns Him. They cannot 
always act themselves in such or such a case, but they can, 
like the centurion, say to Christ, “‘ Speak the word only, and 
my servant shall be healed.” 

As we have seen that the word of God is the sword of the 
Spirit, so also what importance does the Lord attach to prayer! 
There are two kinds of prayer: that which is the expression 
of our wants ; and that which being made in the energy of the 
Spirit, is therefore infallibly answered. Whether for handling 
the sword of the Spirit, or for prayer, the Christian life must 
already exist ; in order to be able to pray for others, our own 
life must be with God. There is amongst Christians too little 
intercession; because they come to a meeting for prayer, 
after leading a life of languishing, absorbed by present things. 
The consequence is, their prayers discover the weakness of the 
individual, and not the work of the Spirit for the good of the 
church. Too often alas! it is a settling as to our own failures. 
If we were watchful therein in our daily walk, our prayers 
would be intercessions, instead of supplications each day for 
our own faults. What we should desire is, that our individual 
prayers should be such as to enable us to pray for all saints ; 
without this they will never have this powerful energy of the 
Spirit. Satan will find some means for overthrowing Christians. 
How desirable this makes it that there should be some able to 
bring in the aid of God! The more, whether it be an individual 
or a body of persons, we are faithful as to our position in this 
world, the more shall we be exposed to the ambushes of the 
enemy ; and if we do not thus keep close to God, the enemy 
will find some way of making havoc. 

We see here, that the most faithful and advanced Christians 
feel their dependence upon God, and on all saints. The 
apostolic gift of Paul depended in one sense on the prayers of 
the saints : God intended it to be so, in order that the church 
might be united in its affections; 2 Cor. 1:11. The apostle 
was in a prominent position, and perhaps he received power 
through the prayers of a poor bed-ridden woman; but all 
hidden fruits will be seen in the last day. It is an encouraging 
thing to see that God honours the hidden members which are 


60 NOTES ON THE EPISTLE TO THE EPHESIANS 


the least honourable to the eyes of the flesh. This thought 
encourages us to walk humbly in our place. Frequently there 
are persons hidden out of sight, who are the means of blessing 
for those who are in a very prominent place. We ought to 
think of the praise which God gives, and not of that of men. 
The only thing in our service is to glorify God. If my heart, 
which no one sees, does not beat, I cannot run. There are 
individuals who are truly the heart of the church 3; it is not often 
the things that are seen which are the most precious in the 
sight of God. 

Verses 21-24. In these last verses, we have the expression 
of the tenderness of Paul in sending Tychicus to the Ephesians. 
We see how he counted upon the affection of the saints. 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 67 


of the earth? He that descended is the,same also that 
ascended up far above all heavens that he might fill all things. 
And he gave some apostles, and some prophets, and some 
evangelists, and some pastors and teachers.” We first get 
the basis of all these gifts, Christ, but not Christ on earth as 
the Jew had Messias. All this has disappeared from the 
apostle’s mind; and he sees Him going down into the dust 
of earth, and then ascending far above all heavens, whereof he 
takes up the effects. He went down into the lower parts of 
the earth, the grave, but hades for his soul. He went into the 
under world, the lower parts of the earth, and then He is 
far above all heavens. He has been below creation, for death 
and hades are in a certain sense below it, and then He is above 
it and in this way He fills all things. We see Christ in His 
redemption power filling everything. All service and ministry 
have their place in that, and they flow from it. He has come 
down where Satan had his power, death and hades (called 
hell). He goes down where Satan’s power was, and breaks it ; 
He leads captivity captive ; and He puts man in the glory of 
God in His own Person far above all heavens ; so that He has 
met on the one hand the power of evil, and on the other set 
man in the glory of God. As Man He gets these gifts, as we 
were reading in the Acts, ‘* Being by the right hand of God 
exalted and having received of the Father the promise of the 
Holy Spirit ” (the Holy Spirit is the promise of the Father), 
** he hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear.”’ He has 
done that as Man, not merely as God, observe; but Christ, 
in virtue of this redemption by which He fills all things, 
receives the Spirit and sends Him to men whom He has 
rescued out of Satan’s hands and builds up His church here. 
It gives a wonderful place to ministry. 

Here in Ephesians we find the individual saints the first 
object, as it is said, ‘‘ for (pros) the perfecting of the saints,” 
and then it is added “ for (eis) the work of the ministry, for 
the edifying of the body of Christ.” The first thing is that 
each saint should grow up to Him who is the head, that is, 
Christ. There are three objects. One object is first of all 
distinct. There is a different preposition in Greek. He does 
all things “‘ for the perfecting of the saints ” (there He is the 
first-born of many brethren); and it has these additional 
characters, it is for work of ministry down here, and for 
edifying the body as a whole. You must not lose sight of the 


68 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


individual when you get into the body. He carries on the 
perfecting of the saints to the end of verse 15, and in verse 16 
He comes to ministry and building up of the body. “ Till 
we all arrive at the unity of the faith” (that is, each individual, 
of course) ‘‘ and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the 
full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness 
of the Christ ” (nothing short of that) ; “‘ that we be no longer 
babes, tossed and carried about by every wind of that teaching 
which is in the sleight of men, in unprincipled cunning with 
a view to systematised error; but holding the truth in love, 
we may grow up to him in all things, who is the head, the 
Christ.” There we see individuals, and they grow up to 
Christ. Then he goes on—‘ From whom the whole body 
[now we have the corporate thing] fitted together and con- 
nected by every joint of supply, according to the working in its 
measure of each one part, worketh for itself the increase of the 
body to itself—building up in love.” That is the second 
thing, or additional aim. First, the individual saints grow up 
to the Head in everything, and, secondly, the building up of 
the body. It is the body building itself up; but still it is 
service and ministry. It is wonderful grace that He who 
went into the lower parts of the earth has gone to glory and 
has done this immense thing—put the saints in personal 
connection with Him. 

The prayer in chapter 3 is wonderful, “‘ that he might give 
you according to the riches of his glory to be strengthened 
with might by his Spirit in the inner man.”’ He asks that the 
power of the Holy Spirit might work in the heart of the indivi- 
dual, and that Christ might be in the affections, “‘ that Christ 
may dwell in your hearts by faith,” that is, that Christ may 
be realised by faith. I have now got Christ—who is the 
centre of the whole universe of blessedness—dwelling in my 
heart. Thus I have the centre in me, and this is perfect love 
sure enough, for we are dwelling in God and God in us; and 
thus rooted and grounded in love. Being there my heart 
takes in all the saints, ‘‘ rooted and grounded in love that ye 
may be able to comprehend with all saints.””’ You cannot 
leave them out, for they form part of this plan of God, the 
nearest circle to Christ. Then, getting the whole scene of 
God’s glory and purpose, we apprehend the breadth and 
length and depth and height, that is, the whole scene of God’s 
glory. All the glory that God surrounds Himself with we have 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 69 


by having Christ in the heart, by faith realised in the power 
of the Spirit. But as we might be lost in this glory, we get 
back to Christ with whom we are familiar, and he prays that 
we may “ know the love of Christ which surpasseth knowledge.” 
We find in this galaxy of glory ourselves perfectly intimate 
with the Person that is the centre of it all. He dwells in the 
heart, and we know the love of Christ. Accordingly this does 
not narrow, but really quite the contrary, because it passes 
knowledge. Therefore He says, “‘ to know the love of Christ 
which passes knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the 
fulness of God.”’ We have what surrounds God in the glory, 
and now having known the personal love of Christ we have got 
to God Himself. ‘‘ Now unto him that is able to do exceeding 
abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the 
power that worketh in us.”” This passage is generally quoted 
as referring to what God can do for us. People in their prayers 
say (piously no doubt ; I do not attribute any harm) that God 
can do more than they ask or think. That is quite true, but 
it is not what is here. He says, “‘ to him that is able to do 
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according 
to the power that worketh in us.”” Thus it is a very different 
thing. “‘ To him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus 
throughout all ages.” We are carried out into all this of which 
we have been speaking ; it is a power that works in us so that 
He is glorified in the church in all ages and of course now. 
That is where He sets us before He takes up the question of 
ministry. 

The prayer is not that we might know the hope of His 
calling and the glory of His inheritance, but that the Father 
of our Lord Jesus according to the riches of His glory may 
strengthen us with might. It is according to all this thing in 
which He is glorified that He strengthens us. In the first 
prayer he prays that the eyes of our hearts may be opened 
and we may know the things that are ours. The glory is ours 
and the inheritance is ours. Here he comes not to what is 
objective, but to what works in us. The prayer is to the 
Father, not to God; and He looks for Christ dwelling in our 
hearts. He is looking for power in us, not objects before us, 
“that we may be strengthened with might by his Spirit in 
the inner man.” He prays that this power may work in us, 
but it may not be working. He is not looking that we may 
know certain things that are ours, but that the things may 


7O SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


exist. I may not be strengthened with might in the inner man, 
though I may have the Spirit. It is a positive state he is 
praying for. 

The first prayer is not a prayer for anything to work in us, 
but that we may see the things, and He puts the things before 
us as objects. The things are ours. We have got the calling : 
we are partakers of the heavenly calling, as it is said in Hebrews, 
and if we have not got the inheritance actually, we are joint- 
heirs with Christ. He prays that the eyes of our hearts may 
be opened so that we may look at these things, but they are 
ours. It is wonderful that the Holy Ghost cannot shew us 
anything of glory that is not ours. The power spoken of at 
the end of the chapter which does the work in us, is a power 
that has taken us when dead sinners and put us in the Christ 
where Heis. But this is all settled. “‘ And what is the exceeding 
greatness of his power to usward who believe, according to the 
working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ, 
when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own 
right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality, 
and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is 
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to 
come.” There we find that you who were dead in sins He 
has quickened. That is the power that has wrought and made 
a Christian of me. Here is chapter 3 he is praying that the 
power may work in us now. Practically it is the realisation of it. 

In chapter 4 is one of the three “‘ worthys ” in the walk. 
We are called to walk worthy of God who has called us to His 
kingdom and glory; we are called to walk worthy of the Lord 
unto all pleasing ; and here we are called to walk worthy of 
the vocation wherewith we are called, that is, the habitation of 
God through the Spirit—the whole thing, but specially the 
last part. They are all brought into unity, reconciled to God, 
brought together as the habitation of God through the Spirit. 
Here he tells them to walk worthy of that calling. It is striking 
how he goes on directly to lowliness and meekness. This is 
the walk that is worthy of the vocation. We would feel our 
own nothingness if we thought of this place. It is very simple 
if we could take it practically. He has made us all one by the 
Spirit; we are all builded together like stones in a house ; 
and He looks to us walking in that unity and the spirit of 
peace. We are to walk in the sense of these great things and 
of our own nothingness. 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS Te 


There is threefold unity, one body, one Spirit, and ourselves 
called in one hope of our calling. We then get the outward 
profession, one Lord, one faith, one baptism ; and afterwards 
a still greater circle—one God and Father of all, above all, 
and through all, and in you all. In other words, we get unity 
of the Spirit, the unity of the lordship, and the unity in 
connection with one God and Father. It is the Spirit, the 
Lord, and God, as you find it in 1 Corinthians, where he speaks 
of gifts, diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit; diversities 
of administrations, but the same Lord; and diversities of 
operations, but the same God that worketh all in all. It is 
not Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; this is not the thought, 
though it is connected with it, but the Spirit and Lord and 
God. You have the Spirit, the active agent down here, the 
Lord under whose authority the work is carried on, and after 
all, it is a divine thing—the same God that works all in all. 
So it is in the Corinthians, but just the same principle as here. 
There is a difference between the gifts there and here, and a 
very important difference, though here as there the Spirit and 
the Lord and God. We have the Holy Ghost down here ; 
then Christ as Man in glory (He is more than that, but still 
He is Man; God has made Him Lord and Christ; He has 
got an official place. It is not that He has not a human nature, 
and a divine nature: that is all true; but He has an official 
place): one Lord, one faith, one baptism. Then follows a 
wider larger circle, one God, who is above all, through all, 
and (bringing it back to the internal power) He is in us all. 
Scripture is remarkably correct. Pantheism puts God into 
everything, and makes it all God; but Paul gives us the truth. 

Next we come to “everyone of us.”’ Each of us has his 
own special niche; we all fill some little service, whatever it 
is. ‘‘ Unto every one of us is given grace”: it is individualised. 
It is to every member of the body. 

*“ Every one ”’ 1s contrasted with that unity. He takes them 
first all as one thing, and then He takes them separately. It is 
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. We have 
Christ the giver now. You do not get this in 1 Corinthians 12 ; 
and the difference is an important one practically. There it is 
the Holy Ghost come down and distributing divinely. The 
Holy Ghost distributes to every man severally as He will, 
and therefore in the Corinthians they are merely looked at as 
powers. Must a man necessarily speak with a tongue because 


72 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


he is able to speak with it? No, says Paul, you must think 
of the building up of the church; everything must be done 
to edification. If the gift you have does not edify, you must be 
quiet. If there is no interpreter, you are not to speak. ‘That 
is, we have power, but power subject to the ordering authority 
of the Lord in the church of God. They were speaking two 
or three at a time. They said they were all speaking by the 
Holy Ghost, and they thought they must utter what they had 
got tosay. ‘“‘ No,” says the apostle, “‘ the spirits of the prophets 
are subject to the prophets.” There must be order. There 
was power, but this power was restrained and authorised by 
the God of order. The possession of power was no proof 
that the person possessing it was to exercise his power; he 
was only to exercise it when it would edify the church. In 
consequence we find in the Epistle to the Corinthians what 
are called sign-gifts. There are no miraculous gifts in 
Ephesians, whereas in 1 Corinthians appear healings, miracles, 
tongues and various signs of power, which you do not get here. 
There it is the Holy Ghost down here. Here we have Christ 
on high caring for His own body, and looking for its edification, 
and hence we have only those gifts which are permanent for 
its good. The apostles and prophets were the foundation. 
The foundation is not being laid now; but the other gifts 
are given till we all come to the unity of the faith, to a full- 
grown man. That is, it is not a mere question of power, but 
of the faithfulness of Christ to His own body, the assembly, 
which He nourishes and cherishes as a man does his own flesh. 

The word “ gift”? has a double sense. If you do not see 
this, you might be apt to take it in verse 7 as if it was Christ 
that is given. It denotes the giving as well as the thing given. 
Grace is merely a favour given, as a special grace conferred in 
giving a man such a qualification from Christ for service. 
To every one of us is given grace according to the measure of 
Christ’s gift. That is, I have got this grace, this thing that is 
conferred upon me, in the measure Christ has given it. You 
cannot say grace is given me to use a gift when the grace is 
given according to the measure of the gift of Christ. 

The grace is the gift. It is according to the measure of the 
giving of Christ that He gave this. If grace was given according 
to the measure of the gift of Christ, everyone would have 
perfect grace according to the gift He had given. 

It is character, it is God’s grace given; but it is a gift, 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 73 


whatever it may be. ‘“‘ To me is this grace given that I should 
preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ.” 

It is tantamount to every member of the body having a gift. 
Also He makes a distinction between permanent gifts and what 
every joint supplies. He does not give pastorship, He gives 
pastors. This is not unimportant, because Paul a prophet 
was not always prophesying, though always a prophet, and he 
was an apostle, though not always exercising his apostleship. 
Therefore Christ does not give apostleship but apostles. 
Taking it as such given to him, it is a certain position and place 
of service given to him, and he is that. Christ ascends up on 
high and gives him. In Psalm 68 it is said that, when He 
ascended up on high, He received gifts in man. The point is, 
that Christ as a man has gone up and is a giver. It is the 
measure of the gift of Christ, not of the Holy Ghost, though 
it operates by the Holy Ghost. 

Supposing I say I give to you an act of pastorship to-day, 
and that is all about it. This is not the case here. He gives 
the man as a pastor, and he is always a pastor, though God 
might deprive him of it if He liked. The man has that place 
and function. Paul was always an apostle. It was not a 
certain thing that came upon him and was gone, but he was 
an apostle always. When we get to the power of the Holy 
Ghost in 1 Corinthians, we read that God “ set in the church 
first apostles, then prophets ”; but it is much more an action 
of the Holy Ghost present down here as power. 

Here then we find what we have referred to already—we 
come to the immense truth, Christ going down to the place 
of death, His soul to hades, and His body to the grave; and 
then going far above all heavens and filling everything. Having 
led captivity captive, He now comes in power, and makes 
other men the instruments of His power. Then, being so 
exalted, He gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and 
some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers, for the 
perfecting of the saints, etc. 

There are first the apostles and prophets. They are passed 
away, but we have their writings, and these are precious. 
I mean we have not their personal presence, but are built 
upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets; and of 
course there is no foundation to be laid now. Then he takes 
that which must come first to have the church, for you cannot 
have pastors and teachers till you have had an evangelist to 


74 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


bring people there to be nourished. You see the foundation 
must be laid first, whence you have apostles and prophets 
first. Then how are you to get souls to be taught if there are 
no evangelists ? ‘“‘ How shall they hear without a preacher ? ” 
Hence evangelists come next. It is a most blessed gift. I 
think more of evangelists than of pastors and teachers. They 
face the world more for Christ. Still I believe a pastor is a 
rare gift. The work of the evangelist is simpler. He stands 
in the face of the world for Christ. A pastor must be like a 
doctor ; he must know the right food, and the right medicine, 
and the right diagnosis, and all the pharmacopeeia, and must 
know how to apply it too. In one sense it is a rare gift, and 
very precious. 

Pastor and teacher are distinct things, but they are in Greek 
(and indeed in English) joined. They are connected, but not 
absolutely one, because a pastor includes in a certain sense the 
other ; whereas a teacher has nothing to do with the office of 
pastor, so as to care for souls. I might expound the scripture, 
and yet not really have wisdom to deal with individual souls 
as a pastor has todo. That of pastor is a wider gift. Still they 
are closely connected, because you could hardly profit an 
individual without teaching him in a measure. A person may 
teach without being a pastor, but you can hardly be a pastor 
without teaching in a certain sense. The two gifts are closely 
connected, but you could not say they are the same thing. 
The pastor does not merely give food as the teacher ; the pastor 
shepherds the sheep, leads them here and there, and takes care of 
them. I think it is a thing greatly wanted, but I believe it is a 
rare gift and always was. Pastors must have a heart for the sheep. 
There are degrees of completeness in it, but that is what the 
pastor has to do. The testimony is in the evangelist, but his 
work is simpler. He carries the gospel to the poor sinner, 
whereas the pastor has saints on his heart and cares for them. 

One has taken some comfort out of the thought that the 
evangelist was not so important, for God would be sure to do 
the work. But it is not the way the apostle put it, for he says, 
“How shall they hear without a preacher ? and how shall 
they preach except they be sent?” There is nothing like 
going to the word of God. God can do anything He pleases 
in that way, I have no doubt; still His ordinary way is by 
preaching. 

The extent of an evangelist’s work is to announce the glad 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 75 


tidings. It extends till they receive Christ and remission of 
sins. The evangelist throws the net into the sea, and it gathers 
of every kind, and then the fishermen put the good fish into 
vessels. It is the same figure in that parable. No distinction 
is made there. The net is drawn to shore at the close of the 
dispensation. Their business was good fish. They got a lot 
of bad ones into the net, and they put the good ones into 
vessels. Hence it is now a question of sorting. Then an 
evangelist distinguishes between those truly converted and 
those not. That parable speaks in general of all. Those that 
were pulling at the nets were putting in the vessels too. 

But the evangelist has nothing to do inside the church as an 
evangelist. A man may not be a public speaker very much, 
but there will be evangelising going on, if there is much life. 
Saints always rejoice in the truth. There is a great deal of 
the teaching gospel now. Saints want the gospel very often 
as much as sinners (I mean the clear plain gospel); and 
therefore what I call a teaching gospel really has its place. It 
is another kind of thing from what awakens the sinner. 

It is a mixture of a teacher’s and evangelist’s work. You 
will hear one man praying and beseeching God to bring in 
poor sinners, and you will hear another praying that Christ 
may be glorified in His sheep; the one in principle has a 
pastor’s heart, and the other an evangelist’s. You thus see 
where a man’s heart is. The one is for people outside, and the 
other’s desire is that Christ’s sheep may glorify Him. 

Owing to the perverse teaching which is abroad, you have 
to get converted people to the gospel. It is not the same 
thing as going out to the highways and hedges, and compelling 
them to come in. To such one would preach not only about 
their sins, but the grace of Christ for them in their sins. 
Romans 3 comes before chapter 7; but I was in the seventh 
before I got to the third, because I had nobody to preach to 
me. The first thing a person wants to know is that he is 
guilty, and when he knows his guilt in his conscience and his 
responsibility, the blood of Christ meets it, and there 1s 
forgiveness and cleansing. 

Recollect we are talking about preaching the gospel when 
all the world professes to believe in Christ. When Peter 
preached the gospel to the Jews, he says, You have crucified 
and slain Him, and God has raised Him from the dead. You 
go and tell a sinner in the street that God has raised Him 


76 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


from the dead, and he will say, “‘ I know that as well as you.” 
They preached facts then. I believe that the gospel is really a 
great deal more powerful when we preach or bring forward 
the great facts of the gospel. There is immense power in 
these facts ; but at the same time in the ordinary sense they 
are admitted, and hence you have to press their power and 
value upon people. When they went to heathens first, they 
told them that God had sent His Son into the world, that the 
world had crucified Him, and that God had raised Him. If 
you tell that to people now, they do not deny it. We have now 
to take the other part, “‘ Be it known unto you, that through 
this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins.” This is 
the effect of it. I believe the more facts are brought forward 
by the evangelist, the more power will be in his testimony. 

It is not always knowledge. If a man has just got his soul 
saved, he is sometimes more in earnest than one who is a long 
time saved. You find persons just converted in that aspect 
better evangelists than others. But then you must bear in 
mind that we are evangelising in Christendom, we are not 
going to Hindoos or Chinese. If you do not take account of 
that, you will have a very superficial gospel. Evangelising in 
Christendom is not evangelising in heathendom; it is in 
worse case if you please. 

But take a fact, when a man’s sins are brought forward and 
you press it upon him—you shew him Christ. It is not the 
teaching that does the thing ; it is a certain character of gospel 
that deals with the condition of soul, and after it they cannot 
go on with what they have got. 

The parable in Matthew 13 is descriptive of the kingdom of 
heaven, how it goes on. You do not get directions how to do 
it, nor will directions ever do. If you want an evangelist, you 
must get a man who has love for souls ; and counsel as to the 
manner of it would never do anything. Of course I may 
suggest to another ; that is very well inits place. But the thing 
to be desired is a fervent spirit and love to souls. 

The gospel is the glory of His grace. I get a much clearer 
gospel in its first elements if I know the glory. It is a more 
teaching gospel. I may say, How can you stand before God 
in glory ? and Christ is in glory; and if you look to Christ, 
and He has borne your sins, they must be gone; for He has 
not got them in glory. This is the thing that gives peace to 
the conscience. I might take the coming of the Lord and 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 77. 


present it as terror, and it might be used to awaken the 
conscience, and there is nothing done till conscience is awakened. 
It is a bad sign to receive the word at once with joy, unless 
there has been a previous work. You must have one consciously 
brought into God’s presence, or you will never have anything 
real. There is no bringing the soul to God except by the 
conscience; because a man cannot be in God’s presence 
without his conscience being awakened. What a preacher has 
to do is to bring the light to bear on a man’s conscience, and 
make him thus find himself out in the light. 

There may be a preliminary work—what the old Puritans 
call the common operations of the Spirit. There may be 
appeals to the conscience, which may have reached it, and the 
soul going on as before. The conscience may be reached, and 
a man may be quickened, or he may not; and the conscience 
may be reached and bring out the bitterest enmity against 
God. The consciences of the people whom Stephen addressed 
were reached, and made them gnash with their teeth. When 
God quickens, the conscience is reached, and the man is made 
to feel he is asinner. The conscience may be reached, however, 
without that inward work as well as with it. 

Whenever the Holy Ghost works, it produces a want. In 
Nicodemus’s case, it went on to quickening. You have the 
words, “‘ Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost.” It is not His 
work in the sense of saving or quickening, but the conscience 
is reached. That is the reason why the Puritans call such the 
common operations of the Spirit. 

There is a conscience in every man. The fall of a tree may 
alarm a conscience. If God accompanies it in grace as He did 
in the case of Luther, whose friend was killed by a flash of 
lightning, the work is effectual. You see men alarmed and 
plunge into greater wickedness to get rid of it. They are 
distinct things, though they may go together. 

In the last of the seven parables the gospel is the net that 
takes the fish. But then they caught bad fish as well as good. 
It is all God’s work, but He employs workmen. Not only God 
works, but He works alone as to everything good. The net is 
cast into the sea. ‘‘ How shall they hear without a preacher ? ” 
is what God says. I quite admit God will have His own. 
Scripture is plain upon it, but He has His way of doing things. 
His ordinary way is by the foolishness of the preaching to 
save them that believe. ‘‘ Faith cometh by hearing, and 


78 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


hearing by the word of God.” This is the ordinary rule of 
God. I see two ways of God’s love manifested. One is His 
own essential blessedness in Himself; He gives us to enjoy 
this in communion by the Spirit. There is another thing in 
God, and that is, the activity of love towards those that have 
no communion with Him; and He gives us a part in it too. 
And the fact that He acts by instrumentality, as He speaks 
here, is an enormous blessing. He leaves poor creatures like 
us a part in this activity of saving souls. If it is man’s work, 
it is good for nothing. 

Servants are addressed in Luke 14, ‘‘ Go and compel them 
to come in.” And the point insisted on there is that, when 
the Jews would not come in, He would have the Gentiles. 
He first went and took the poor Jews, the poor of the flock, 
and brought them into His house, but they did not fill it, and 
then He sends to the Gentiles. He does not speak of whom 
He sends out. 

But I do not think you will ever teach anybody to be a good 
evangelist ; he must have it from God. He must have the 
love of souls in his heart. If he lean on the Lord, he will 
win souls. 

You cannot have the church without the evangelist. Looked 
at as an evangelist, you see his point of departure is the church 
because he is a member. When things were right, the power 
went from the centre and gathered into that centre. ‘“‘ The 
Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved.” 
All gifts are independent of the church ; they are all dependent 
on Christ. All service is simply to Christ. I quite admit 
discipline. If a man teaches wrong, he must be disciplined ; 
but the service is to Christ. They are all for the Lord, and I 
believe the Lord would add them to the church if things were 
in order. The church is what is formed upon earth in which 
He is to be glorified. It is where He glorifies Himself now in 
the world, and therefore the evangelist gathers people in. 
This is all true ; but when you take the person of an evangelist 
or pastor, he is Christ’s servant. He is a great deal happier if 
he goes in fellowship with the assembly, but the fact of 
evangelising is not the assembly’s act. The assembly will not 
go on well, unless there is a spirit of evangelising in it, to which 
the love of Christ will constrain them. I quite admit that 
which has taken place in connection with revivals: the action 
which converted, and that which gathered, have been in a 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 79 


measure disconnected. I see clearly in the operations at the 
beginning that they went together. The Lord then added to 
the church daily such as should be saved. This was the 
regular order of things. 

At the beginning there was the church which God had set 
up and power was there. They commend Paul to God, and 
he comes back and tells what God has done by his means. 
There is action and reaction, but now this has all got dislocated. 
You are in an immense thing called the church, which is far 
indeed from Christ. Therefore there is this difficulty for a 
man who feels pressed to go and speak to souls, when he does 
not know there is such a thing as the body of Christ. Ifa 
man was a heathen or Jew and became a Christian, he was 
added to the church, but that is not the case now; and 
therefore it requires more real power and wisdom to do the 
work rightly now, and not simple power merely which 
evangelises the sinner. 

We had most happy exercise of heart about it in ——. 
When they first went out, they did not know anything about 
the body of Christ. They went and devoted themselves to 
people that were gathered, some going to the world and some 
to sects, as they knew no better. The work goes on more 
slowly, but a great deal more solidly. They did not cease to 
evangelise, but it was more connected with Christ outside the 
world. It told more healthfully. After all there is as much 
real work done and a better kind of work. A difficulty arises 
that we are not preaching to heathens. If you go to China or 
India, the persons converted to Christ come amongst those 
Christians that are there. If you go and convert a man now, 
and he belongs to the Independents or Presbyterians or 
Methodists, he goes on with them. ‘The man belongs to 
Christ, but the whole thing is lost in a morass. By a clear 
gospel the person will get hold of things that will make it 
impossible to go on as he had been doing; he will be led to 
consider that to continue as he had been doing will not do. 
It is one of the reasons that hindered me from preaching in 
dissenting places, that the gospel I preached tends to break 
the whole system to pieces. How can a man who believes me 
preaching that by one offering he is perfected for ever, go and 
listen to a man that is dinning about the law every day ? If he 
does, the condition of his soul is lowered. I might not have 
been talking of any particular doctrines or separation from the 


80 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


body to which he belonged—and never would so speak; yet 
the preaching of a really full gospel would (if received) bring 
a man necessarily to that centre. 

If you preach a full gospel, it will tell in the way described. 
It will gather to Christ without effort or persuasion. Indeed 
I never could and never did make one Christian leave the 
systems. I believe that there are people among the poor 
Roman Catholics that will go to heaven. But there is one 
thing wrong, and that is all those divisions ; for I defy anybody 
to shew me such a thing in the word of God as what is now 
called the church. One must come out of confusion. But, 
further, we are told to keep the unity of the Spirit in the 
bond of peace. 

The gift of a pastor is a rare one. Could anyone exercise 
the office of a pastor without having a gift, that is, do a pastor’s 
work without being specially gifted ? He will do it very badly 
if he has not got the gift. If he does it really, he has got the 
gift—he cannot do it really without that. It is possible that 
I did not quite convey what I meant. In the present state of 
things is the work of a pastor done in any way by any one who 
has not the gift of a pastor, or can it be? Much depends on 
the spirit of the thing. You may have him in the place and 
office, but he cannot do the work of a pastor because he has 
not got the gift. Supposing a person says, I do not profess 
to have the gift of a pastor, and yet I must look after souls as 
well as Ican? One has no objection to that, for it is brotherly 
love. If you get a person in brotherly love doing what he can, 
it is very well: we all ought to care one for another. A very 
young Christian cannot do as much as an older one, but in a 
certain sense everybody ought to care for his brother. In 
verse 16 after the chief positive gifts, evangelists, pastors and 
teachers, which go on to the end, you get “‘ from whom,” 
that is, Christ, ‘the whole body fitly joined together and 
compacted by that which every joint supplieth.” That is 
what you refer to. One has not a specific gift and office, but 
he does whatever he can do. “ Fitly joined together and com- 
pacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the 
effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase 
of the body unto the edifying itself in love.’”? Here then all 
the members have something or other. They have each their 
place and service: one may exhort, one may have a little 
word of wisdom and never appear in public at all. There is 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 8I 


that which “every joint supplieth.” It is real and approved 
of Christ. 


It is connected with verse 7 of course: only there he spreads 
that out into these gifts of apostles, prophets, evangelists, 
pastors and teachers; and then he goes on to what ‘“‘ every 
joint supplieth.” You first get the positive gifts. A person 
may evangelise, though he be not actually an evangelist ; he 
may take an opportunity of speaking for Christ. Compare 
Acts 8 : 4. 

I leave every person to his own conscience as to places where 
he may be free to evangelise. At first I preached in every 
church or chapel where I was permitted ; but I found it was 
not a good plan. If I saw a man preaching the gospel honestly 
or fully in the streets and there was opposition, I could identify 
myself with him without asking who he was or where he came 
from ; but this is a different thing from planning to go out 
with him. I could not; but I leave every person free. You 
cannot control any man’s conscience; you may advise him. 
I do not conceal that I am outside the camp. It makes people 
angry sometimes; but I am deliberately outside the camp, 
altogether and totally, and I think I know what I am about 
from Scripture. If I go there, I mix myself up with what is 
in the camp, and I give an uncertain sound. My deliberate 
judgment is that in the present state of the church of God 
one should be outside these connections. I think it is all 
going on to judgment as fast as it can, and it is not charity to 
go on with it so as to enfeeble the testimony. I have seen it 
going on these forty or fifty years nearly, with persons 
attempting to go on with it; and I have never seen such 
persons either grow up into the truth or make others clear in 
their walk. After an experience of many years I am perfectly 
clear in my judgment about it. 


As to how far one could wish God speed to or have fellow- 
ship with any work going on outside, if I knew of a person 
preaching Christ even of contention, I would rejoice as the 
apostle says. I could not go and join with a man that was 
doing it in contention, yet I am glad he is preaching Christ. 


With certain preachers I would not have fellowship for 
special reasons. Itis a matter of discipline. I separate between 
having fellowship with Christ preached and co-operating with 
the men that preach. Do you think I should join with a man 


82 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


that preaches from contention? I am glad he is doing it in 
one sense, because Christ is made known by it. 

In this way I can own all ministry where it is true, apart 
from recognising a man in the sense of co-operating. It is the 
thing that gives a character to the evangelising itself. My 
experience is that it is not the way to get souls on. I have 
seen both done. I have seen brethren doing it; of course 
they stand or fall to their own Master. I would go with them 
in preaching the gospel, but not with the camp. I think it is 
a great thing for our souls to get hold of—you cannot expect 
the newly converted soul to get hold of it at once—that there 
is this immense system, ‘“‘ the camp,” which is not of God, 
though there are many people of God in it. Therefore you 
must leave individuals to judge in each case. But that which 
associates me with it I cannot do. It would be building again 
the things I destroyed. If I am to associate myself with it, 
why did I leave it? I never should attack anybody nor ask 
anybody to come. I never would and never did; but I am 
not going to be driven out of what is plain in Scripture. 

There is no true Christian that has not something or other 
given him for service in the body, merely perhaps a little bit 
of wisdom. Everybody has got something for service to the 
body, as a hand or foot or eye ; but not everybody a prominent 
gift as a pastor or evangelist. Everybody has got something 
according to the measure of what Christ has given him; and 
if he go beyond that measure, it will be mere human action 
or no good at all. 

We now come to the ordinary exhortation as to walk. He 
shews the state they were in—ignorance and sin. ‘“‘ As the 
truth is in Jesus”’; it is not doctrine, though doctrine is 
contained in it. The truth as it is in Jesus is the having put 
off the old man and put on the new—this having been done by 
faith. Then he adds, “and being renewed in the spirit of 
your mind.” ‘The putting off and the putting on are not in 
the present tense, whereas being renewed in the spirit of your 
mind is. The truth is, that you have put off the old man, but 
you do want renewing. In Colossians (chap. 3) this is distinct : 
“Lie not one to another, seeing ye have put off the old man 
with his deeds and have put on the new.” In the Epistle to 
the Ephesians he is not saying directly to them what they have 
done, but saying what the truth is in Jesus. So it is more 
abstract. The truth in Jesus is having put off and having put 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 83 


on. Being renewed is present; the renewing of the spirit of 
your mind is a thing that is always going on. 

After this we get another immensely important principle in 
the new man, which according to God is created in “ righteous- 
ness and holiness of truth.” This is the character of God 
Himself. ‘The first man was innocent; he was not righteous 
but innocent. There was no evil in him. To be righteous 
and holy you must have the knowledge of good and evil. God 
is perfectly righteous and perfectly holy. He judges with 
authority what is evil and good ; but innocence does not know 
good and evil. —The new man is after God. Another expression 
is found in the Colossians, which is of great importance— 
“renewed in knowledge according to the image of him that 
created him.”” There is a positive knowledge of God. It is 
not merely that there is an absence of sin, but I have a positive 
knowledge of God Himself, and it is what God is that is the 
character and essence of the new man. 

So Peter speaks of being ‘‘ made partakers of the divine 
nature.” It is not merely that a man is born again. It is the 
truth as it is in Jesus. Of course a man is born again. Abraham 
had to be born again; but he did not know anything about 
putting off the old man and putting on the new. You never 
find this in the Old Testament. You find there the knowledge 
of sin working, but the Old Testament saints did not make a 
difference between the old man and the new. The moment 
that death came in, the believer and man took his place with 
God in Christ, I get the old man and the new. 

We get here the putting on the new man, created after God 
in righteousness and true holiness. I have put on this new 
man, but then I have put off the old. It is a totally new thing. 
It is Christ who has died, so that the old thing is done with. 
For faith I have done with the flesh. I am not a debtor to 
the flesh; I am crucified with Christ: the old man is done 
with. We are quickened together with Christ. This is more 
than being born of God. Christ quickening as the Son of 
God, which He does—He quickeneth whom He will—is a 
different thing from being quickened with Christ as risen ; 
because, when I am quickened with Christ as risen, I have 
left all that is the old thing behind me and have gone into a 
resurrection-state. The old man is crucified with Christ. 
This is of all importance as being one of the two great elements 
of Christian walk. These are, first, the putting off the old 


84 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


man and the putting on the new; secondly, that the Holy 
Ghost dwell in us and we are not to grieve Him. These are 
the two grounds of Christian walk in Ephesians. 

To be made partakers of the divine nature is the moral 
character of it. It is after God; it is the pattern of what 
God is. God is righteous and God is holy; and now it is 
not merely setting us up as innocent, but we, being actually 
partakers of the divine nature, have a character according to 
what He is. It is after God, created in righteousness and 
holiness. 

It is morally like God’s nature, but still, that might be 
rather a bold way of saying it. Morally it is the same; else 
you could not delight in Him. He chose us in Christ that we 
should be “holy and without blame before him in love,” 
which is God’s nature. He is holy, He is blameless, He is 
love. And so it is with Christ. If you look at Him down here, 
He was holy and blameless, and He was here in love. So in 
Hebrews “he that sanctifieth,’ that is Christ, “and they 
that are sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not 
ashamed to call them brethren.” 

But the putting off the old man we had better not pass 
over. The Christian, in virtue of Christ’s death and having 
Christ as his life, as a Christian does not own the flesh at all. 
The mind of the flesh is enmity against God, but he does not 
own it. He has not to die to sin but to reckon himself dead, 
Christ having died and all being available for him. What 
Christ has done he reckons himself to have done in this respect. 
How can you be alive ? I say I am not, but Christ lives in me. 
** I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not I, 
but Christ liveth in me.”’ We have put off the old man (not, 
are to put it off), that is, if we have heard Him and have been 
taught of Him. Besides, this new man is after God. 

Observe the two in Romans 8. “ The law of the Spirit of 
life in Christ Jesus ” (that is, the new man) “ hath made me 
free from the law of sin and death ; for what the law could not 
do in that it was weak through the flesh, God, sending His own 
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, condemned sin 
in the flesh.” When Christ was on the cross, He not only 
bore our sins and put them away, but God condemned sin in 
the flesh there, so that I see it is all put off. Faith reckons it. 
Christ died to sin; He is the only Person that died to sin; 
so God reckons us alive unto God, not in Adam, but in Jesus 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 85 


Christ our Lord. My life in which I live is not flesh: ‘“‘ ye 
are not in the flesh,” but in Christ. When you come to realise 
it, you take the putting off first; you say I have put off the 
old man—I am not a child of Adam—and put on the new 
man, that is, Christ. In short I believe in the testimony of 
1 John § where it is said, ‘‘ this is the record [or, testimony] 
that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his 
Son. He that hath the Son hath life; he that hath not the 
Son of God hath not life.” It is entirely a new thing in Christ ; 
and as a proof that eternal life is not in Adam but in Christ, 
he shews the Spirit, and the water, and the blood—what has 
living power and what cleanses, what expiates—all coming 
consequent upon Christ’s death. The water came out of His 
dead side, as did also the blood, while the Spirit came after 
He was glorified. These are all witnesses that eternal life is 
not in the first man but in the Second. I reckon myself dead, 
I am crucified with Christ. Thus it is a nature that is after 
God Himself. Then we get another element—the Holy Ghost 
dwells in me, and I am not to grieve Him. 

The putting off of the old and the putting on of the new 
occur at the same time really; but practically, when you 
come to details, you find you have the one first, and then you 
realise the other. In real truth you put on the new man first. 
When you come to practice, you have to treat the old thing 
as dead, and the other comes free. In point of fact we must 
get the new man in order to treat the old man as dead. If the 
old man was treated as dead first, I would have no man at all. 
When I have got Christ as my life, I come to look at myself, 
and it is all over with the old man. There are many who own 
that they must be born again, but they do not recognise that 
they put off the old man. The moment I have got the death 
and resurrection of Christ, I say I am not a debtor to the 
old man. This is not merely the fact of being born again ; 
it is not merely saying I am born again, but the other thing I 
have put off, that is, to faith. 

Of course the old man is part of the old creation. “If any 
man be in Christ, there is a new creation.” We are the first- 
fruits of His creatures. ‘‘ He has begotten us that we might 
be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.” When he speaks of 
dealing with the condition I am in, which you do not get here 
but in Colossians, which is a little lower, he does not say, 
Mortify the old man, but your members which are upon earth. 


86 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


He does not allow any life but Christ—‘‘ Your life is hid with 
Christ in God.” ‘‘ Ye are dead”; now mortify (that is, put 
to death) your members. This implies power. It is never 
dying to sin, but that I am dead to sin and alive to God in 
Christ, and therefore I can mortify. 

Romans 8:13 (‘‘ Ye through the Spirit do mortify the 
deeds of the body”), and Colossians 3: 5 (“‘ mortify your 
members ’’) are but a different way of expressing the same 
thing. In Romans we are not viewed as risen with Christ, 
whereas in Colossians and Ephesians we are. In Romans we 
are presented as dead with Christ, because the object of Romans 
never is to take us out of our place in this world. It shews us 
that we are in Christ, but at the same time still here ; whereas 
in Colossians the apostle will not let them be alive in the 
world. ‘“‘ Why,” he says, “‘ as alive in the world, are ye subject 
to ordinances?” All ritualism flows from not knowing we 
are dead. 

Then we get another immensely important element, namely, 
that God dwells in us—the Holy Ghost; for we are told, 
“Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God.” The Christian is to 
do nothing that displeases God who dwells in him. You have 
no mortifying the members here in Ephesians. It is a new 
creation and nothing else. The epistle to the Colossians does 
not go as far as that to the Ephesians. In the former you get 
us risen, but not sitting in heavenly places as in the latter. 

If Romans puts us into Jordan, it does not go on to the 
coming out of Jordan. Colossians puts us up on the bank; 
but Ephesians takes us and sets us down in Canaan to eat the 
old corn of the land where there is no manna any more. You 
cannot say they are a figure of that, it is going into details, 
which the figure does not. You get a figure of the whole thing 
that I have passed through Jordan. I am not in the wilderness, 
but am in heavenly places, and seated there in Christ; and 
not till then do I get circumcised. You get this in Colossians. 
There are two things in the Romans: man is dealt with, 
looked at as alive in sin; and death is brought in—Christ’s 
death. By Christ’s death their guilt is gone, and by it also 
they died. They are in Christ, but they are looked at as 
persons that have died, though not risen with Him. In the 
Ephesians, although the fact is looked at, as to the doctrinal 
Statement, they are not looked at as alive in sin; they are 
dead in sins, which is another aspect of it, but the same state. 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 87 


When I am alive in sins I am dead towards God; there is 
not a single movement of thought, heart, or feeling in that 
state towards God. God can create me over again spiritually. 
Ephesians looks at a man as dead in sins, and says we are 
created in Christ Jesus. It is not justifying sinners there. 

The man is justified in Romans; he is a new creation 
entirely in Ephesians; while in Colossians you get both. 
In the latter there is death and the new creation, but not yet 
seated in heaven. They are looked at as on the earth, and 
there is a hope laid up for them in heaven—“ ye are dead, and 
your life is hid with Christ in God.” In chapter 2: 11, 12, 
we read, “‘ In whom also ye are circumcised with the circum- 
cision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins 
of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ ; buried with him 
in baptism [there I get the doctrine of Romans], wherein also 
ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of 
God, who hath raised him from the dead [I have now got 
beyond the Romans]. And you being dead in your sins and 
the uncircumcision of your flesh hath he quickened together 
with him.”’ There we get Colossian doctrine, but it does not 
take us up to heaven. When he speaks of that in Ephesians 
he says, “‘ He hath quickened us together with Christ, and hath 
raised us up together and made us sit together in heavenly 
places in Christ Jesus.’’ Colossians is, as it were, between 
Romans and Ephesians. Therefore in Colossians you get, 
instead of sitting in heavenly places, “‘ set your affections on 
things above,” “‘ the hope that is laid up for you in heaven,” 
and such expressions. He does not talk of the Holy Ghost in 
Colossians. What we find in Colossians is life, and this is as 
important in its place as the Holy Ghost dwelling in us. In 
Ephesians you get the Holy Ghost dwelling in us, and therefore 
the body; whereas in Colossians you never get the Holy 
Ghost mentioned except in the expression ‘‘ your love in the 
Spirit.” For example, in Ephesians we read, “ Putting away 
lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour, for we are 
members one of another,’ whereas in Colossians he says, 
‘Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old 
man with his deeds.” Instead of the Holy Ghost dwelling 
in us, it is God’s nature the measure of how we are to behave 
ourselves. 

The Holy Ghost works in the new nature, but is not said 
to dwell in it. It is said, that “‘ Christ may dwell in your 


88 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


hearts by faith.” The Holy Ghost operates in the new nature. 
Still the dwelling is never spoken of as in it, but in the body ; 
we need Christ to dwell in our hearts by faith. 

I have got a new nature, and of course have not to pray to 
get one. The effect of this is most striking. In the Ephesians 
we are brought to sit in heavenly places, we have put off the 
old man and put on the new, and we have the Holy Spirit of 
God dwelling in us. In Ephesians it is, ‘‘ As God in Christ 
hath forgiven you.” We have got the nature, the state that 
I am in, to be able to walk: we have put off the old and put 
on the new; and the Holy Ghost dwelling in us, and then we 
are told to be imitators of God as dear children. If it be said, 
How can we talk of imitating God (of course it is not Almighty 
power, but refers to moral things), how can poor worms such 
as we talk of imitating God? I answer, is not Christ your 
pattern? You are to follow that. This shews the absurdity 
of making it merely the law as our rule of life. Ifa dear child 
of God, I am to have a sense of it in my soul and exhibit it 
in my walk; I am “to walk in love as Christ hath loved us, 
and hath given himself for us as an offering and a sacrifice to God 
for a sweet-smelling savour.”” “‘ Hereby know we love, because 
he laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives 
for the brethren” ; we are to go and walk as He walked. 

We have had the two subjective elements (that is, the state 
I am in) consisting of the new man, and the old man put off, 
and the Holy Ghost dwelling in us. Then follow as a measure 
the two essential names of God—love and light. This is what 
Christ was in this world. ‘‘ While I am in the world,’ He 
says, “‘ I am the light of the world,” and He was the expression 
of divine love. You are to be an imitator of God, and if you 
ask, How can that be carried out in man ? you get Christ, that 
is, God manifested in a man. How clearly the thing is entirely 
above law! If law was carried out in the world, we should have 
the world all happy, and righteous, and peaceful; but this 
supposes the world to be all right. I am to care for another 
as much as for myself, but that will not do in this world, and 
therefore I get this, “‘ He gave himself.”’ It is not taking love 
to self as the measure of love to my neighbour, but going 
beyond the law, and giving oneself up for others. If all went 
on rightly, the law would be your rule now, but it is otherwise. 
As Christians, when you come to a world of wickedness, you 
have to follow God. 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 89 


Let us look at the double character of this love, which is 
entirely practical. There are two kinds—what I may call 
love up and love down; and they are entirely different in 
kind. The care of a father and his child will illustrate the 
difference. The father loves down, and the child loves up ; 
the one is to something above it, whereas the other is in 
condescending goodness. If you take a case of loving up, the 
more excellent the object the more excellent the affection. 
If one love a base thing, it is a base affection. If one love a 
man of noble character, it is a noble affection. If one love 
God, of course, it is the highest of all. Then on the other 
hand, if you take love down, the baser the object the greater 
the love. Such is the character of God’s love to us. We get 
both in Christ. He loved His Father perfectly as Man (which 
was loving up), and He loved us when vile sinners (which was 
loving down); and we are to go and do likewise. Therefore 
I read here ‘‘ as Christ hath loved us and given himself for 
us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour.” 
He gave Himself for us and to God. This is perfection. He 
had an infinitely high object, and an infinitely low one, and 
He was perfect both ways. We have to seek to walk as He 
walked. There is fellowship also one with another. Of 
course when we can see, the thing to imitate is Christ walking 
in love— as Christ loved us and gave himself for us, an 
offering and sacrifice to God.” 

This is the side of love wherein you are imitators of God. 
Then you get the other essential name of God, and that 1s, 
light ; which he says we are too. We are partakers of the 
divine nature—“ ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye 
light in the Lord.” God is love, and God is light, and in Him 
there is no darkness at all. We were darkness, but now in 
Christ we are light in the Lord. ‘“‘ Awake, thou that sleepest, 
and Christ shall give thee light.’ I get the full light in Christ, 
also the full love. Thus are the two essential names of God 
brought out. I am a partaker of the divine nature, and the 
Spirit of God dwells in me, and I am to act as God acted, and 
that acting was in Christ. “‘Awake, thou that sleepest,”’ that is, 
looking at Christians, not committing sins, but gone to sleep 
in the world. In the world the people are all dead: but ifa 
man goes to sleep, he is just as much alive as when awake, but 
he is as much as dead; he does not hear, nor speak, nor 
think ; he is like a dead man. Look at the Christian that is 


90 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


going on with the world—he is with the dead. What am I to 
do, then? Christ is the light of the world, and “ ye are the 
light of the world,” He says to His disciples. It is a wonderful 
exhibition. 

In 1 John it is said, “‘ If we walk in the light,” that is, 
absolutely ; but, realising position, we walk in it. It is posi- 
tion; we are actually there. It is not like standing in 
righteousness. Here he is looking at practice. Walking is a 
real thing. It is not as if I say, Christ is my righteousness. 
It is a real living place we are walking in. Of course he judges 
in detail all sins. All the Gentiles are walking in darkness—I 
refer to the passage in Ephesians. “ See then that ye walk 
circumspectly, not as fools but wise.” Uprightness is not 
sufficient. If I have to go through a bog, I may be perfectly 
sincere in seeking a house on the other side; but if I do not 
look about me, I may sink in the bog. I must look about me. 
It requires wisdom to go through this world, I mean as a 
Christian. 

The expression “‘ redeeming the time ” is apt to be always 
misapplied. It means seizing opportunities. You get it in 
Daniel 2, where the king speaks to the Magi: “I know ye 
would gain the time, because ye see the thing is gone from me.”’ 
They wanted to redeem the time. Here I am to walk in such 
a way, so full of Christ, that, when an opportunity offers, I 
can bring Him out. The days are evil. You cannot always 
have an opportunity; you might be casting pearls before 
swine; but you must be in a condition to embrace every 
opportunity. In Daniel it is “ gain the time,” or as in the 
margin “buy” the fit moment. A thousand more oppor- 
tunities would present themselves of bringing Christ before 
people if we were living in the power of the Spirit of God. 
The days are evil, we are told. The power of evil is there. 
You must not complain because the days are evil. The Lord 
can guide us through one day as well as another. 

“‘ Instant in season ”’ is to the saint. The time will come 
when they will not receive sound doctrine. This applies to 
the dealing with the saints. It is often applied to the gospel ; 
but the mischief is, that people take passages without reading 
the context. I am sure we could find a great many more 
seasons if we were faithful to Christ. ‘‘ Preach the word, be 
instant in season, out of season ; reprove, rebuke, exhort with 
all long-suffering and doctrine, for the time will come when 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS OI 


they will not endure sound doctrine ; but after their own lusts 
shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears ; 
and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall 
be turned into fables.”” He is evidently looking to Christians. 
Timothy was to go on earnestly pressing, because soon they 
would not listen to him. Whether it were seasonable or not, 
he was to go on with it, because very soon there would be no 
season at all. 

I do not think the apostle here means the gospel. The 
previous chapter speaks of the departure. He is speaking of 
the evil days. It is not that we are not to be preaching every- 
where we can to sinners, but the special thing he has in his 
mind is that the church would get into such a state that they 
would not listen to truth. When we preach the gospel now, 
we preach to people that call themselves Christians. You 
may meet infidels, itis true. It is of the last days he is speaking. 
In John’s time they were come in. It was the last time then, 
though morally developed since. Peter says, ‘‘ The time is 
come that judgment will begin at the house of God,” and 
Jude says, that these men “ have crept in unawares,”’ and also 
that these are they that the Lord comes to judge. 

The latter times bring it up to the last days, being the 
more general term: “In the latter days some shall depart 
from the faith,” and in the last days they shall have a form of 
godliness. It is rather more distinctly characteristic ; because 
in John you get the last days marked by antichrists being there. 
He does not use them to say they are the last of the latter. 
In the latter days you get celibacy and asceticism, as it is 
called ; so the apostle shews in Colossians. He speaks of that 
system which was already dawning. God allowed it all to 
begin before the apostle went, that we might have scripture 
upon it. It ripened afterwards. Therefore he speaks of the 
latter days as those coming in after he was gone. They are 
used in the Old Testament pretty much in the same sense. 
Still the last days are more definite. ‘‘ As ye have heard that 
Antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists.”’ 

We had before the oppositions of science, falsely so called, 
and the forbidding to marry and commanding to abstain from 
meats, and we all know it is going on since. In England you 
can hardly go into a cathedral without finding the monument 
of a bishop who lived forty days without eating anything: I 
have seen them when I used to go into such places. Now one 


92 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


may fast very profitably if one has occasion to do it. As such 
I recognise it: but to set about making a virtue of it in the 
way usually done is wrong because it went upon the principle 
that matter was an evil thing, and denied the atonement 
entirely, for they said that Christ could not have a body. 
This is the reason the apostle John insists He is come in flesh, 
and that His disciples had handled Him. It was denied that 
He was really a man in that way, because they thought all 
matter was a bad thing; and therefore the great thing to be 
done was to get the Spirit, which was good in everybody away 
from matter. Therefore they fasted to keep the matter down. 
This was a torment to the church. Though some of them 
were very strict, a great many were grossly immoral. It spread 
everywhere and affected even the orthodox. The Gnostics 
died out, but they left their taint in the church, and the whole 
system of celibacy and monasticism continued. I used once 
to fast in that way myself. On Wednesdays, and Fridays, 
and Saturdays I did not eat anything at all, but on the other 
days I did eat a little bread. I said, If I fast three days I can 
fast four, and if four, five, and if five, better six, and if six, 
better seven; and what then? I had better die. Thus there 
was something that made it impossible to go through with the 
thing. I went on with it, but God delivered me. 

The Spirit of God had them in view. They were dawning 
then, because it says, ““ The Spirit speaketh expressly that in 
the latter days some shall depart,” etc. You see that evil men 
and seducers wax worse and worse, and that, when once the 
evil was introduced, it could not be put out. 

It had been among the heathen before. The system of 
monasteries, and celibacy, and begging friars, was all in 
existence five hundred and forty years before Christ, and 
many think it was actually borrowed from the East. Certainly 
it is the same thing morally, but, as I said, many think it was 
actually borrowed from the East; as a great many of their 
doctrines were, I have no doubt. A Roman Catholic priest, 
when visiting the East, was perfectly astounded, and did not 
Know what to think when he found among the Buddhists 
exactly the same things as Roman Catholics had at home. He 
told them he was a Lama from the west, and he was received 
in all their monasteries and elsewhere. 

Returning to our epistle, we see that another element comes 
in. When we have them all in order, he says, “‘ Be not drunk 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 93 


with wine, wherein is excess; but be filled with the Spirit, 
speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns, and spiritual 
songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord.” 
Such is the joy they were to have, ‘‘ Giving thanks always for 
all things unto God and the Father in the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ.” There are two things—my own will gone, and 
the perfect certainty of God’s love. ‘“‘ Giving thanks always 
for all things’: take away my fortune and I say, ‘‘ Thank 
God.” It is not easy, and of course the will must be broken ; 
but on the other hand, God makes everything to work together 
for good to those that love Him. Then you get a spirit of 
grace, “‘ submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of 
Christ.”” It is not submitting to do evil if you want me to do 
it, but that in faith there is no will. If you want me to do 
wrong, I cannot do it because it is not God’s will, but in 
everything in which my will is concerned I give way to you. 
We are to submit to one another in the fear of Christ. It is 
what sitting in heavenly places produces upon earth. Christ, 
when here, could say He was in heaven, and He is given as our 
pattern, though to us it is purely by grace. 

Next, there are two other main subjects that follow—the 
love of Christ to- His church, and the conflict of the saints 
with spiritual wickedness in heavenly places. We have passed 
away from what we are with God, and now we come to the 
special relationship of Christ with the church. The main 
thing in His mind is the church. ‘“ The husband is the head 
of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church; and he 
is the Saviour of the body.” This I believe to be our body. 

I get two things He does in consequence of His love to the 
church. He gave Himself for it out and out. This is the first 
thing He does in consequence of His love to it. Then, having 
taken it to be His own, He sets about to make it what He 
likes. He does not make what He likes to be His own, but 
takes it to be His own to make it what He likes. Next, I get 
present sanctifying and washing by the word ; and afterwards 
His presenting it to Himself as a glorious church. This is 
special. It is not God loving poor sinners, but the special 
love of Christ to the church. The purification that we get 
here is that which we have in heaven; as far as it goes, it 1s 
the same nature, and quality, and standard, and measure, and 
everything else as will be in heaven. He washes it here that 
it may have no spot there. ‘“ Beholding with unveiled face 


E 27 


94 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


the glory of the Lord, we are being changed into the same 
image from glory to glory.” Looking at Christ in glory our 
hearts get filled with the motives that are there, and this 
effect is produced upon earth. The effect is produced here, but 
the motives are all above. He “ loved the church and gave 
himself for it.” This is the starting-point—‘ that he might 
sanctify it, having cleansed it by the washing of water by the 
word, that he might present the church to himself glorious, 
not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it 
should be holy and without blemish.” It is a great thing for 
us to see that the condition we are to be presented in to Christ 
is the power and measure of our sanctification here. 

It is manifest that we find the same thing all through the 
epistles. For instance, “‘ Beloved, now are we the sons of 
God: and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we 
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we 
shall see him as he is; and every man that hath this hope in 
him purifieth himself, even as he is pure.’”’ I know I shall be 
perfectly like Christ in glory, and I purify myself according to 
that standard. It is not that I am pure according to it. I take 
that measure and apply it now. Every step I take I see it 
clearer, and I may apply it to something else ; but this is the 
only thing I am looking at to judge by. 

In 1 Thessalonians 3 the same truth comes out in a striking 
way. “‘ The Lord make you to increase and abound in love 
one toward another and toward al] men, even as we do toward 
you ; to the end he may establish your hearts unblameable in 
holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.” This is a passage that 
looks perfectly unintelligible until you get hold of what I have 
been saying. Instead of saying unblameable in holiness before 
God at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, we should have 
said, “‘unblameable in your walk down here.” He looks at 
their realising their Christian position—“ to the end he may 
establish your hearts,’ and draws the veil and there they are 
unblameable when Christ comes. This is where it is all 
measured. 

But it is evidently a very important principle for this day 
and every other. All the perfection which is spoken of, 
Wesleyan or whatever it may be called, is clean gone. It does 
not come into the question, good or bad, because what I am 
shewn is the perfection of Christ in glory. I do not get it 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 95 


till I am in glory, and there is no other object presented to a 
Christian as the standard but Christ in glory. We are to be 
** conformed to the image of his Son that he might be the first- 
born among many brethren.” Again, “ As is the heavenly, 
such are they also that are heavenly ; and as we have borne 
the image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of the 
heavenly.”” Therefore the apostle said that he had not yet 
attained, but there was no other thing before him. He was 
always running on to it. We retain in heaven the impress got 
here ; but this is Christ. There may be degrees of realisation. 
We shall be perfectly like Christ when we get there; all of us 
will be perfectly like Him. We are predestinated to be con- 
formed to the image of God’s Son; and as we have borne the 
image of the earthy, we shall bear the image of the heavenly. 
I am like a person in a straight passage with a light at the end ; 
I have more of the light every step I take, but I do not get the 
light till I come to the end. When He shall appear, we shall 
be like Him. I get a sight of this, and say, This is what I am 
going to be. It sounds strange to say that we cannot be as 
Christ was here, because He was absolutely sinless, and if I 
say I have no sin I deceive myself. But I shall be like Him 
there, and this is brought to bear upon me now that I should 
have no motive working in my soul but Him there. This is 
what the apostle means when he says, “‘ not looking at the 
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen.” 

It has been said, indeed, that God would not give a measure 
that we could not attain to; but I take the bull by the horns 
and assert that He never gave one that a man could attain to. 
He made man innocent, and there was no demand necessary ; 
but the moment man becomes a sinner, God put something 
beyond him, which he is to run after. God gives him a law 
when he is in the flesh, and he is not subject to the law of God. 
It is an unattainable measure. Again, “‘ Be perfect as your 
Father in heaven is perfect.”? This is our measure. Are you 
as perfect as this? When things are fully developed, I get 
Christ in glory. This is perfectly unattainable here, because 
God wants me to be always running on and having the one 
thing always before me. ‘“‘ This one thing I do, forgetting 
those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those 
things which are before, I press toward the mark for the prize 
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” 

The meaning of John 17: 19 (“‘ For their sakes I sanctify 


96 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth ”’) 
is, that for their sakes Christ sets Himself apart as a model 
man (though I do not like the expression), that we might be 
made into His likeness. 

The passage in Hebrews 12 (“‘ Let us lay aside every weight 
and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with 
patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus ’’) 
is more the difficulties we have to encounter that he is looking 
at there. He says, Christ has got there; you take courage and 
run on. It is just the same race exactly. It is wonderful that 
we Shall really be conformed to the image of God’s Son, when 
we think of what we are. But it has nothing to do with our 
responsibility as to salvation. You are not set in this path 
until you are saved. Our responsibility as men, God’s creatures, 
is not affected: as responsible men we are lost. It is over in 
that sense. Take, by way of illustration, a man in business 
who has contracted debts ; suppose I go to him and tell him 
how he is to manage not to get into debt, he would only tell 
me I was mocking his misery, for he had nothing to manage. 
Responsibility is over in that sense; not that a man is not 
responsible for all he has done, but that he is ruined already, 
and of this the cross is the proof, because the highest act of 
grace is that Christ came to seek and save the lost. As to the 
history in Scripture, the whole system of probation concluded 
at the cross. ‘‘ Now,” said Christ, ‘‘ is the judgment of this 
world ”’; as it is also said in Hebrews, “‘ now once in the end 
of the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice 
of himself.’’ When it is all over with man, sovereign grace 
steps in, and saves people out of their ruined condition. A 
person may get all his debts paid, but be left without a penny 
to begin the work again. God has not dealt with us in that 
way. He has paid our debts, and has given us the same glory 
as His own Son. This was a matter of His counsels before the 
foundation of the world; and it belongs to all Christians. 
There is labour which God rewards, for every man shall 
receive his own reward according to his own labour; but in 
the likeness of Christ every saint will then be. 

We shall all be conformed to the image of God’s Son in 
glory. It was God’s counsel before the foundation of the 
world, but never brought out till the cross. He ‘“‘ hath saved 
us, and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works 
[which is responsibility], but according to his own purpose and 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 97 


grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world 
began, but now is made manifest by the appearing of our 
Saviour Jesus Christ.” It was before the world in God’s 
purpose about His people, but it was never brought out till 
Christ had laid the foundation for it in the cross. In Titus 1 
there is a similar statement, “In hope of eternal life which 
God that cannot lie promised before the world began; but 
hath in due times manifested his word through preaching.” 
All this glorious purpose, glorious for us and for God, never 
was brought out—never hinted at—until Christ laid a righteous 
ground for it in the cross. Then God brought it out and said, 
** That is what I am going to do.”? This with much more is 
what we find here in Ephesians. 

But we have to notice another thing also: ‘‘ No man ever 
yet hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth it, 
even as Christ the church, for we are members of his body, 
of his flesh, and of his bones.”? There I get not simply this 
purpose of presenting us to Himself, but how He loves and 
cherishes us as a man does his own flesh. It is His present 
care of the church. ‘‘ We are members of his body, of his 
flesh, and of his bones.” This shews that the church could 
not have existed at all till Christ was glorified, because it is 
with Christ as a man it is connected. It is not that the Son 
quickened us (though this is true), but that we are members of 
Christ’s body, of His flesh, and of His bones. 

After exhortations to children and parents, slaves and 
masters, there is another great subject in this Epistle, the 
conflicts of the saint. We do not find the conflict except in 
Ephesians. It is not a conflict of flesh and spirit, nor is it a 
conflict of conscience when a man is quickened. The Jews 
were slaves in Egypt as an unconverted man is in his sins. 
When God brought them into Canaan, were they at once to 
have rest? There was conflict; and the proper sense of 
conflict with Satan is for us in heavenly places. 

In the Authorised Bible ‘‘ high places ” is inserted in place 
of ‘‘ heavenly places,” which shews that the translators were 
afraid of the truth, and so altered the word. A similar alteration 
occurs in Revelation 4. There we get One seated on a throne, 
and the four and twenty elders also seated on thrones; but 
though the word in the original is quite the same, the translators 
altered the thrones of the elders into “ seats.”? In our epistle 
they were afraid to translate ‘“‘ heavenly places,’ and they made 


98 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


it ‘‘ high places ” ; but the word they have translated “‘ high ” 
here is the same as the one they have translated ‘‘ heavenly ” 
elsewhere, as chapter I: 3. 

People speak of Jordan as death, and quite rightly too, for 
it is a figure of death; but then is it not strange that, when 
they crossed over Jordan and got into Canaan, Joshua met a 
man with a sword drawn in his hand, and they had to fight ? 
Is it not strange that, as soon as heavenly places are entered, 
conflict has to be entered on ? Now what is Jordan? After 
passing through death into these heavenly places we begin to 
fight. Thus it does not mean actual rest in heaven as supposed. 
If I say I have put off the old man, this is the same as that I 
am dead with Christ. I have passed through death, and been 
circumcised with the circumcision of Christ, and now I can 
fight the battles of God with Satan. This is what we get here. 

Redemption brought us into the wilderness. The wilderness 
is our passing through this world where our flesh is tested. 
Canaan is the other part of the Christian’s life, where he 
reckons himself dead. Christ in spirit is there as the Captain 
of the Lord’s host, and He has to fight the battles of the Lord 
Himself. That is what we get in Canaan. I sometimes wonder 
that it does not strike people what an odd thing it is, that if 
Jordan means death, and Canaan heaven (which they do), 
fighting should characterise the place in Joshua, for the first 
thing he meets there is a man with a sword drawn in his hand. 
The whole book of Joshua is about the battles of the Lord. 
There we get death brought in, as we have been saying, 
reckoning ourselves dead—I am crucified with Christ. This 
is what Jordan is: ‘‘ If ye be dead with Christ.”’ By-and-by 
it will be our place of rest. Yes, heaven will be ours. I am not 
quarrelling with the use of the image in that way. Jordan is a 
type of death, and Canaan of heavenly places. In the account 
we get in Numbers they are going through the wilderness and 
tested by God; and in Canaan they fought with flesh and 
blood, which is a figure of spiritual wickedness in heavenly 
places. We do not get there till we have passed through 
Jordan, that is, till we are dead and risen with Christ. This is 
every Christian’s place; but I speak of realising it. 

The Christian is in both at the same time, but not in 
experience, though his condition down here affects his power 
of fighting. He must have the armour on. I have to go 
through the world with the cares of family or business, or 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 99 


meeting the contradiction of sinners. But this is not a moment 
in which I am fighting God’s battles: I am then fighting my 
own, so to speak. We are with God down here, or God is 
with us; and we fight with the devil in heavenly places. 
Until Revelation 12 he is in heaven. It is not where God dwells 
in unapproachable light ; he is not there; but how could he 
be the accuser of the brethren if he be not in heaven? He 
went with the sons of God about Job, for we find Satan was 
amongst them. You could not have him accuser of the brethren, 
if he were not there. He tempts them down here, but accuses 
them there. 

Suppose a Christian was preaching the gospel: in that 
would he be in wilderness circumstances ? No, he is rather 
fighting the battle there. He might be in wilderness circum- 
stances as to various things, but he is fighting the battles 
there, and he must use the wisdom of God against a subtle 
spiritual adversary. Suppose a man is attacked in the street 
and abused? You never get the question of the flesh away. 
When they did not consult Jehovah, they made mistakes, as in 
the case of Ai and Gibeon. Our contending with Satan would 
be against heresy, superstition, and other things. Satan may 
raise up opposition and violence in the streets, and hence the 
Christian would need wisdom; but you cannot separate the 
idea from having the flesh, because you will be making blunders. 
Thus there are doubts, and things of that kind, which Satan 
brings into the mind—infidelity, for instance. Satan in them 
acts directly; they are not mere temptations of an ordinary 
kind. 

In this connection he adds, “‘ Be strong in the Lord and 
in the power of his might.”” We have no strength of our own. 
We have nothing to do with any carnal or fleshly weapons. 
** God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound 
the wise.” As long as the saints lean upon flesh and influence, 
they are not leaning on God, but flesh. The world has all the 
upper hand there. 

Take an example in our Lord in His conflict in the wilderness. 
There was no sin in being hungry. This is hardly the kind of 
conflict ; still the Lord overcomes. There was more wilderness 
work ; still it was Satan. He too hindered the apostle from 
going to the Thessalonians. If one were endeavouring to 
make void all this truth, brought out up to this point, and say 
it was not true, it would be Satan’s work. Infidelity, and 


100 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


heresies, and things of that kind, are referred to in this warfare. 
In a case of discipline Paul says, “‘ we are not ignorant of his 
devices.” Satan was trying to divide Paul and the Corinthians, 
and he says, “‘ If you forgive it, I also forgive it. I see what 
Satan is at: he wants to make a split between us.” Error as 
to any doctrine is Satan’s power. I merely took the other as 
an example. In Canaan it is not so much as a roaring lion, but 
he might be. ‘“‘ In nothing terrified by your adversaries.” In 
the case of Paul being prevented by Satan from going to the 
Thessalonians, God allowed it in His providence, as He 
allows everything in that dealing. In the case of Job, it was 
God commenced the matter. He overrules all that. ‘“‘ We 
would have gone once and again, but Satan hindered us.” 
Opposition was raised up that he could not go. All that is 
conflict. - We do not believe enough that there is such a thing. 

The rulers of the darkness of this world are Satan and his 
angels. The darkness of the world is ignorance of God, who 
is light. Conflict of Satan is not characteristic of the wilder- 
ness. If there is anything of the kind, it is an attempt to go 
up and get beaten. They might have gone in at Kadesh- 
Barnea, but they did not; and when they found how foolish 
they were, they attempted and were beaten altogether. 

It is not what characterises the wilderness. God might 
give them a specimen of what they were to meet. He destroyed 
them unto Hormah. All our war is with the people that 
possess the land, that is, the devil and his angels. The wilder- 
ness is the patience of going through this world according to 
God. At Sinai is not the wilderness, it is totally apart. The 
general character of the wilderness is going through that 
where they had only manna and the cloud—Christ and the 
word and Spirit. They were to go through this world dependent 
on God. It is this characterises the wilderness, and not 
fighting. In Canaan they had not any manna. It meant 
characteristically the heavenly places, and the Lord set them 
to fight. In the type we get what characterises it. The first 
thing is the wiles of the devil ; itis not his power here. “ Resist 
the devil and he will flee from you.” He has no power if you 
resist him, so far as we are concerned. His wiles are dangerous 
enough. ‘“ We wrestle not against flesh and blood ” as Joshua 
did; we wrestle against wicked spirits in heavenly places. 
““ And having done all to stand ” (that is, to make good your 
ground), ‘‘ stand therefore, having your loins girt about with 


SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS IOI 


truth ” : you must have the mind and affections tucked up with 
the word of God. 

“Having on the breastplate of righteousness,” that is, 
practical righteousness. It is not before God, but with Satan 
here. If I have not practical righteousness, Satan has got 
something against me: I am afraid. It is a good conscience 
I must have; my loins thoroughly tucked up and in order. 
I must have a good conscience and be walking in the spirit 
of peace. 

We have not got the sword yet ; the defensive armour comes 
before the offensive. In that state (having a good conscience, 
and the spirit of grace and peace) I now come to the shield 
from Satan. I am to look up to God with entire confidence ; 
this is the shield of faith. Then comes the helmet of salvation. 
I can hold my head up; and, having got all the offensive 
armour complete, I take the sword. The sword of the Spirit 
is God’s word. 

And then, mark further, when I have got the armour and 
weapon, I am thrown back in entire dependence on the Lord— 
praying always. The word is first of all applied to myself— 
I am girded with truth, and, having got the rest of the armour, 
the word comes into activity which is the sword of the Spirit. 
Lastly I am cast entirely upon God. 

When I begin to take the sword, it may be service among 
saints or in the gospel. People have sometimes fancied that 
the armour of righteousness here described is Christ as our 
righteousness ; but this is with God. He is my righteousness 
with God; but I do not want armour against God; it is 
armour against wicked spirits I need. There is only one 
offensive weapon—the word. It is wonderful how the Lord 
has provided everything for us in Scripture. There is the 
love of Christ, who loves us like His own flesh; and the fighting 
with Satan follows. After we are put in our place, we get the 
love of Christ, and then follows the conflict with Satan. 

Watching is another element in it. He says in this place, 
watching with prayer. If I am watching in my path in every- 
thing with God, it turns to prayer. If my heart is engaged 
about the blessing of the saints, I cannot get on withoutit. 
Watching in it is perseverance in it. The object of Satan is 
to keep us from realising these heavenly things. There is 
conflict for the benefit of all, as well as for ourselves. We have 
to put the armour on ourselves, but when we have got it on, 


I02 SUBSTANCE OF A READING ON EPHESIANS 


we must fight Satan. The first part of verse 18, namely, 
* Praying always with all prayer and supplication,” refers to 
the individual, then to all saints. It is for themselves, and 
then it widens out. It is a general principle first. You get 
this constantly in the Ephesians; as for instance, “‘ That ye 
may be able to comprehend with all saints.””» The moment he 
gets to the thoughts and purposes of God, he cannot leave out 
the saints. 

Confidence is in God known in Himself. I am not likely 
to go and ask you for something if I have not confidence in 
you. ‘“‘ The mystery of the gospel,” in verse 19, includes not 
only the church but the whole testimony. Glad tidings take 
in really everything with Paul. He was a minister of the 
gospel in the whole creation under heaven, and a minister of 
the word to complete the word of God. 


COMPARISON OF THE EPISTLES TO 
THE ROMANS AND THE EPHESIANS 


AN attentive consideration of the Epistle to the Romans and 
that to the Ephesians, will afford us some interesting light on 
the question of the position of the believer in Christ. The 
whole question of our place in Christ is viewed under a different 
aspect in the two epistles. I would briefly consider this. The 
doctrine of redeeming grace may be viewed in two ways, 
God’s own purposes as to His children in glory may be 


Serer ee ems 


developed on the one hand } or the condition of man portrayed, 
and _met by grace visiting them in mercy to deliver them on 
the other. The Epistle to the Ephesians follows thé first of 
these methods ; the Epistle to the Romans, the second. 

In Ephesians we have at once the saints blessed with all 
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ—placed in 
the blessed image of God before Him, and adopted to be 
His children. Redemption itself comes as a means in the 
second place. The knowledge of the mystery—the gathering 
together in one all things in Christ, and our sealing as heirs 
till the redemption of the purchased possession follow. The 
Romans, after some introductory verses, commences by the 
description of the dreadful state in which fallen man was, 
unfolding the depravity of the Gentiles, the hypocrisy of those 
who pretended to moralise and yet were personally no better, 
and finally the sad condition of the Jews, who, if they had the 
law, broke it. In chapter 3, at the close, grace meets this 
state. But this leads to the consideration of the work of 
grace, in each epistle, in a different way. 

To speak first of the Ephesians, the sinner is seen dead in 
trespasses and sins—walking, doubtless, in them, but, before 
God, wholly dead. But even here this is not the first object 
presented. As chapter 1 presents the position in which the 
saint is placed, so the second the work which brings him 
into it. With this view, what is first brought before us is God’s 
power towards us manifested in what was wrought in Christ. 
God had raised Him from the dead, and set Him at His right 
hand, far above all principality and power, above and beyond 
all created glory, not only in this age, but in that to come, 
where all hierarchies will be in their true glory and unclouded 
elevation, but He above and out of them all. Divine power in 
its exceeding greatness had brought Him from death up there. 


104 COMPARISON OF THE EPISTLES 


As the origin of our life is before all worlds (John 1; 1 John - 
I), so our place before God is out of and above all worlds 
and creature powers. It is to be remarked here, however, 
that Christ Himself is looked at as already dead. The whole 
work is thus of God; for Christ being dead, is looked at, of 
course, as Man, and this wondrous power is exerted, and He, 
as Man, is at God’s right hand. Then the saints are brought 
before us, Gentiles or Jews, as alike children of wrath by nature, 
and are seen once utterly dead in trespasses and sins, quickened 
together with Him, and raised up together, and made to sit 
together in heavenly places in Christ. The whole is entirely 
God’s work. We are created again. It is not living men who 
have to be dealt with, who are without law and under law, 
must die with Christ, and are set free by death. They are found 
dead in sins, and we get the perfect full blessing of the work, 
because it is entirely God’s. Man is for nothing therein, for 
what has he to do with creation? He is created; all that 
man (that is, the believer) is is God’s work. Hence, also, 
remark, we have peace, making nigh, reconciling, exalting to 
sit in heavenly places in Christ, but not justifying ; because 
it is a living, responsible, existing man who has to be justified 
before God. But we have Christ exalted, and ourselves 
exalted in Him. It is God’s work in Christ and in us, not our 
being justified before God. 

If I turn now to the Romans, it is otherwise. I get Christ 
alive on the earth, come of the seed of David according to the 
flesh, and declared Son of God with power by resurrection. 
Still flesh could not live unto God, nor they that are in it 
please Him. Hence we find Christ as come in grace for them, 
not dead but dying, and then alive to God. I get the condition 
and quality of man, not simply the work of God as to one dead. 
So as to men; I get the means of standing in righteousness 
before God, and not an absolute work. Nor is this all. In 
the Romans the exaltation of Christ to the right hand of God 
is not contemplated, nor the union of the church with Him. 

ence we are not said to be quickened together with Him, 
nor made to sit in heavenly placés in Him: His exaltation is 
just mentioned in chapter = with “who even is at the right 
hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us ’—which 
last thought does not, of course, contemplate union. In 
chapter 12 the practical effect of union among ourselves is 
spoken of; but, in general, these topics form no part of the 


TO THE ROMANS AND THE EPHESIANS 105 


instruction of the epistle. Men are living, guilty beings, the 
whole world guilty before God; and to learn that, in the 
remediless state of their nature, death is the only remedy ; 
in itself fatal, doubtless, but perfectly saving when in Christ. 
It is atonement for all sin, and deliverance from the position 
in which we were: for death is evidently the end of that, and 
our life thus wholly new, Christ being risen from the dead, and 
we are to walk as alive to God through Him. We are justified 
by His blood ; and the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus 
has made me free from the law of sin and death. 

But. the Romans, as teaching the justification of a sinner, 


necessarily first views him as a sinner to be justified. Hence 
it goes through the whole question of law; and we have the 
experiences of the man not justified, though convinced of 
sin, and then justified from the sin—alive in conscience without 
law, dying under law, and alive in Christ, where there is no 
condemnation. ‘The practical process is gone through. The 
effect is this, that he is brought up to the point where the 
Epistle to the Sens ete eee him: “He finds that there 
is no escape from the condition he is in, as a child of Adam, 
or a Jew, but by death. Yet, were it his own, it would of 
course, lead him to judgment, not to justification, but where 
all guilt is proved. It is Christ who dies, and is set forth as 
a propitiation through faith in His blood; so that God is 
just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. That 
meets the case of guilt, but is not life; for so Christ would 
be dead, and we brought in Him into death. This could not 
in any way be. For not only would there be no life, but it 
would even prove, as the apostle shews in 1 Corinthians 15, 
that there was no remedy. Our faith would be vain ; we should 
be yet in our sins. But we believe that God has raised up our 
Lord Jesus Christ from the dead, who was delivered for our 
offences, and raised again for our justification. 

The consequence of this different view of things is seen in 
the practical result in man under the operation of God’s Spirit. 

In the Romans we have experiences flowing from the 
conflict of the newly introduced principle of life with flesh, 
or the effect of deliverance from it, by the knowledge of the 
power of deliverance in Christ. The former we find in 
chapter 7, where the conflict of the new nature with the lusts 
and will of the old under law are depicted; and the second in 


chapter 8, where the spiritual blessings of one who is made 


Mone crs someewse 





106 COMPARISON OF THE EPISTLES, ETC. 


free from the law of sin and death, by the law of the spirit of 
life in Christ Jesus, are drawn out before us in a way to 
produce the profoundest interest in the soul that enters into it. 

In the Ephesians the man is dead in sins, and transported 
into heavenly places by the operation of God; being created 
anew in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which God has afore 
prepared, that we might walk in them. The works belong to 
the new place and condition in which alone we are known in 
the Ephesians. God has afore prepared works for His new 
created ones. Hence, we have no experience of passing through 
conflict, and deliverance, and its results ; but there is a demand 
to walk worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called, and 
a desire that the saints, being rooted and grounded in love, 
may realise in their hearts, by Christ’s dwelling in them by faith, 
the full effect, even to filling to all the fulness of God, the 
greatness of the infinite scene of glory into which they are 
brought, and know that love of Christ which passeth knowledge. 

In result the general principle of the difference is this. In 
the Romans, the man is found alive in sin, is convicted of it, 
and has (Christ having died for him to put it away) to come, 
in the conviction of the hopeless badness of his nature, to 
death, and then rising again, alive through Jesus Christ, be 
thus justified before God, and by God, on the one hand, and 
alive in a new life on the other; then nothing shall separate 
him from the love of Christ. In the Ephesians the man is 
found dead in sins; but then he is raised up, and set in 
heavenly places in Christ (according to the power in which 
Christ, when dead, was raised of God, and set in the heavenly 
places, far above principalities and powers, and every name 
that is named), and brought as a new creation, children withal, 
and heirs into immediate nearness to God. The additional 
truth is brought out, that we are united to Christ in this place, 
as members of His body, and His heavenly bride. 

I cannot here—time does not allow it—do more than draw 
out the great general principles of the different aspects of truth 
presented by the two epistles. He who searches as a devout 
learner into the truth of God, will, I am sure, find (in what I 
here notice in these epistles) elements of deep and profitable 
instruction, as to his own relationship with God, the Christi- 
anity of his soul and of the word, and of his soul according to 
the word. Perhaps some one, for his own and our edification, 
may furnish us with further results which flow from it. 


COMPARISON OF EPISTLES 


THE comparison of certain epistles illustrates with much 
interest and instruction the path of the Christian. I send 
you the thoughts which have suggested the remark. I refer 
particularly to the Epistle of Peter, Colossians, and Ephesians. 

In Peter we have Christ risen, having accomplished redemp- 
tion ; then His own actings, in that resurrection, of that power 
of life which is the spring of all our hope, and sets it in lively 
exercise towards its end, which is in heaven, and hence makes 
a man, and even a Jew (who once had other thoughts), a 
Stranger and a pilgrim here. We will examine this in the 
statements of the epistles. 

But to make my meaning more clear, I will first refer to 
the Ephesians. There the saints are seen sitting in heaven— 
there already—not on the way there; their conflicts and 
position in general flow from this. Hence they are seen risen 
with Christ, seated in heavenly places in Him, and this, 
through union with their Head, by the Holy Ghost sent down ; 
on which last great fact their earthly position also depends. 

The Epistle to the Colossians is based indeed on the same 
principle; but there they were in danger of not holding 
the Head. Hence they are addressed on somewhat lower 
ground, and urged up to the point which should have been the 
spring from which their thoughts and feelings flowed. 

To turn now to the epistles themselves, remark, in Peter, 
the ground on which the Spirit of God places the saints, the 
sojourners of the dispersion, that is, the believing Jews 
scattered through the provinces. They are “ begotten again 
to a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the 
dead.” It is not that they are not risen with Him. Of course 
they were ; yet they are not viewed under this aspect, but as 
redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb 
without blemish and without spot; travelling through the 
wilderness towards Canaan—not seated in the land eating of 
the old corn of it (whatever conflicts were before them there), 
but through the efficacy of redemption made strangers and 
pilgrims in the desert. It is the Christian’s place here below— 
not the privilege and joy of faith, but the life of faith; and 
hence, all through which he passes here become not distractions 
for his heart, whether painful or pleasant, but trials of his 
faith. This is exceedingly gracious and loving of our God 


108 COMPARISON OF EPISTLES 


(and what is not ?), and the consequences in many respects 
exceedingly precious. 

In the Ephesians we have, however, the Christian in another 
point of view. Heaven is not presented as a hope; the 
Christian is there. It is not that the resurrection of Christ 
has begotten him to such a hope; the same power which 
raised Christ, and set Him at the right hand of God, far above 
all principality and power, has wrought in him; and he is 
raised up together with Him, quickened together, and sitting 
in heavenly places in Him. Thus he is viewed as in heaven in 
Christ the Head, not as hoping to arrive there. Peter views 
him as toiling along the road, being redeemed by the precious 
blood of Christ—as Israel in the desert, with Canaan before 
them; the Ephesians, as sitting there in his Head, Christ. 
Hence neither is the coming of Christ presented as a hope in 
the Ephesians. What is set before us in the way of hope, in 
the form of intelligence communicated of God, is the gathering 
together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, 
and which are on earth—in Him in whom we have received an 
inheritance. The power which has wrought in Christ has 
wrought in the believer, God having given Christ to be “ the. 
head over all things to the church, which is his body, the 
fulness of him that filleth all in all.’ God, of His great love 
wherewith He has loved us, has, when we were all together 
children of wrath, quickened us together with Him, and made 
us sit, raised up together, in heavenly places in Him. 

In Colossians, at first sight, we seem to have lost this 
position. But the epistle does but serve to bring out more 
distinctly the great and precious truth. The apostle is obliged 
to bring out heaven prominently before them. They needed 
this ; and we have, as in Peter, “‘ the hope which is laid* up 
for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before.” Why this 
difference where, nevertheless, Christ is put forward as the 
Head of the body? They were beginning alas! to be beguiled, 
and to be subject to ordinances, not holding the Head. But 
the apostle urges them, as it were, back to the point from 
which they were slipping away. He presses on them their 
resurrection with Christ; once dead in trespasses and sins, 
but buried in baptism with Him, and raised through faith in 
the operation of God who hath raised Him. If.dead with 
Christ, how could they, as alive, be subject to what related to 


* The word is different from the one Peter uses. 


COMPARISON OF EPISTLES I09 


flesh and perished with it? And then he draws the conclusion, 
which associates thé two practically: “If then ye be risen 

with Christ, séék the things which are above, where Christ 
sitteth at the right hand of God. Set your affections on 
things above, not on things on the earth; for ye are dead, 
and your life is hid with Christ in God.” This was their real 
position. They were indeed in danger of slipping away from 
it; but he urges them upward to their privilege and place 
in Christ. 

As regards the coming of the Lord, it is also introduced in 
a way which remarkably confirms this character of instruction. 
They were not taught to wait for Him as if they were on earth, 
and He to appear. Nor is it omitted in order to contemplate 
their association with Him in heaven. His appearance is 
spoken of; but then their association with Him, in a life 
which is with Him now hidden in God, is pressed upon them, 
by this remarkable truth, that when He appears, so identified 
were they with Him that they would appear with Him. Their 
hearts and affections, then, are urged upwards, but it was to 
lay hold on the consciousness that they were one with Him 
that was there. Their life was hid with Him there, but they 
were not holding the Head as they ought. I do not go farther 
here; perhaps I may, at another time, notice the different 
way the Lord’s coming is spoken of connected with this. 


WHAT GOD IS TO US IN CHRIST 


EPHESIANS I. 


THERE are two ways in which we may look at our relationship 
to God, and rightly: first, our coming to Him ; and secondly, 
our souls looking at the dealings of God towards us. 

Of Abel, it is said, by the Holy Spirit, God had respect 
unto his gifts—he came with his needed offering. We are 
looked at in the Epistle to the Hebrews as drawing near to 
God. Who could draw near unless he could bring Christ as 
an offering ? We must have that sacrifice in order to bring 
us near, consequently in that case our relationship to God is 
measured by our need. We come near because we find we 
cannot do without it, and we accept that offering as needed 
to accomplish it. 

In another way, the measure of God’s blessing we never 
know until we look on our relationship as measured by God’s 
thoughts of us—by all that which He loves to display when 
He satisfies His own heart of grace with His ways of shewing 
it out. We never enjoy our true blessing unless we see how 
He thus feels and acts. My mind must rise above what I am, 
to what God is ; then it is my mind is formed by the revelation 
of what God is. To this we are called. 

We must come in by our need, as the prodigal did. Man 
cannot by searching find out God. There cannot be any 
knowledge of God in grace by man’s competency to know Him. 
There_would be no need of grace if he could know God without 
it. If I can claim this grace, I do not need grace at all. The 
way a Sinner must come in must be by his need ; in that way 
he learns grace, learns love. But when I have got to God, it 
is another thing. Then He would form our minds and hearts 
by what He is Himself. I come as a sinner, because I need 
it—just as a hungry man needs food; but when brought, I 
have fellowship with the God who has brought me to Himself. 
The measure is given in this epistle—“ growing up into 
Christ, in all things.” It is a wonderful thing that God has 
called us into fellowship with Himself—to have the same 
thoughts, the same feelings as God, and to have them together. 
All flows down from Him and we are brought into it by grace, 
and we enjoy it just so far as we are emptied of self. 

First, He makes us partakers of the divine nature—the same 


nature as Himself. S gives the capacity—I do not say 


WHAT GOD IS TO US IN CHRIST III 


power. The new_ nature is ca acity; the Hol : Ghost_is 


ower. Ihe new nature is entirely dependent and obedient. 
The Holy Ghost being there gives me power. In the first 
Epistle of John this capacity is brought out in a remarkable 
manner (chap. 4). Every one that loveth is born of God— 
has this nature ; and he that loveth is born of God and knoweth 
God. Then being partakers of His nature, we, by virtue of 
the blood being sprinkled on us, have received the Holy Ghost 
which gives power. In order to communion there must be 
perfect peace as regards the conscience. There is no com- 
munion in conscience. I am alone as to my conscience, and 
so are you. In order to communion, I must have nothing to_ 
settle with conscience: a perfectly purged conscience is the 
basis of communion. We must know that God has séttled the 
whole question of sin. The moment a child of God fails, 
communion ceases. The Spirit then becomes a reprover to 
bring him back; but there is no communion. Communion is 
the full enjoyment of God and of divine things ; when there 
is nothing to think of as regards oneself. God can now let 
flow into his heart who has a conscience purged, all that He 
delights in. He loves to communicate what He Himself has 
joy in. All that Christ is is for us to enjoy. You are called 
into this place of Christ Himself—He, the Head of the body ; 
and that the delight God has in Christ should flow down into 
your heart. How rich then the saint must be! but he is entirely 
dependent on the Spirit of God for power. There is no power 
to enjoy anything without Him. There must be an emptying 
from self to enjoy what He gives. The Spirit of God has no 
place to act where self and imagination are in exercise. It is 
not the glory at the end that is so much the object of the 
believer’s thoughts, as the source of it—God Himself. There 
is more happiness in the fact of being in communion with 
Him than in the things He communicates: and I say again, 
because of its importance, a soul cannot have the enjoyment 
of the things of God without having peace, which is connected 
with the conscience. 

The beginning of this chapter shews how we are presented 
to God. It is a test, whether the judgment-seat brings any 
terror to your minds. Does it give you any uneasiness ? 
How does the saint get there? Christ comes to fetch him. 
He said, “‘ I will come again, and receive you unto myself.” 
Do you ever think of your coming before the judgment-seat 


I1I2 WHAT GOD IS TO US IN CHRIST 


being the effect of His having come to fetch you? Not sending 
for you, but coming Himself for you, because of His desire to 
have you with Him where He is, to be fashioned into the same 
image. You are to bear the image of the heavenly, as you 
have borne the image of the earthy. When you are there 
before the judgment-seat, you will be with Him, and like 
Him: every trace of God’s unwearied hand, all His patience, 
here brought out. We shall be like the One who is the Judge. 
You will never (I speak, of course, to saints now) be before 
the judgment-seat of Christ without His coming to fetch you 
into the same glory in which you are to be. It is the knowledge 
of grace, or redemption, that leaves me at perfect liberty ; 
and all my life should be a witness to the enjoyment of this 
blessedness into which we are being brought. The whole of 
this is through looking at Christ. He is the Firstborn among 
many brethren in the Father’s house. We shall be with 
‘Christ and like Christ before God the Father. There will be 
the blessedness of being with Christ, in the presence of the 
Father, loved as He is loved. This is what we have in this 
chapter—set in the presence of God. 

‘* Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 
We are blessed in Christ, and God is the God and Father of 
the Lord Jesus Christ. He is ‘‘my God and your God,” 
Christ said. There is no measure of any relationship out of 
Christ—nothing but condemnation out of Christ. If I have 
known what it is to be condemned, if I have known what sin 
is, and how God hates sin, I know there can be no hope for 
me out of Christ. But God has put away sin. God does not 
look at my sin, but on Christ. Just as I know my condition 
in Adam as ruined and condemned, so I know my place in 
Christ—accepted. How it throws us out of self-importance, 
self-dependence, self-glorying! We enter into the presence of 
God in Him who has perfectly glorified God. He is the God 
as well as the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ. There is that 
wrought in Christ which was hidden from ages and from 
generations, and He has gone back in virtue of what He has 
done to vindicate the character of God. We enter into the 
blessing in Him who has done all. We shall know God in 
virtue of what the Father bestows upon us. The Father brings 
many sons unto glory, and brings them back perfect through 
the work of Christ—‘‘ blessed us with all spiritual blessings 
in Christ’: none can be wanting; not an affection of God’s 


WHAT GOD IS TO US IN CHRIST II3 


delight is wanting. He brings us into His presence without 
one reserve of the affection that Christ has. We are brought 
back in Christ. Therefore all that Christ has we have. 

How he goes on to unfold it! ‘“‘ That we should be holy 
and without blame before him in love.” He is not content 
with a mere general account, but brings it out in detail that 
we may know it. Suppose I saw a person with an excellent 
character, and I felt I could never be like that person, I should 
not be happy. The fact of the excellency of the person, without 
the possibility of being like him, would make me miserable ; 
and to have him always before me would be all the worse. 
But in heaven I shall be with Christ, and see Him, without 
the possibility of being unlike Him. What divine inventiveness 
of love to make us happy, infinitely happy! What God does, 
and is, is infinite ; and it is so much the better that He will 
be always above us. 

We shall have perfect freedom of intercourse with Him. 
Moses and Elias were speaking with Him of His death (it may 
not be then so much of His death), but there will be com- 
munion with Him of all that He has. 

“Without blame.” Released from all that which would 
hinder my loving Him; therefore I am made “holy and 
without blame.” There is the proper joy of the heart—“ before 
him in love,” but no thought of equality ; ‘‘ wherein he hath 
abounded towards us in all wisdom and prudence.” Then 
there is another fact—‘*‘ Chosen in him before the foundation 
of the world.” ‘Thus we have His heart set upon us in eternity, 
The soul knows there is a persona ove from God towards 
himself, and the heart delights in that. So with Christ. In 
Revelation 2 there is the white stone He will give—proof of 
personal delight. There is the individual rejoicing in the love 
of Christ. 

How the Spirit seeks to draw out our affections by all this! 
He tells it all, and would have us know and enjoy it. He 
would have us know that we are going to heaven, and why. 
He would form our hearts by what He is doing, while bringing 
us in, ‘‘ having predestinated us unto the adoption of children ” 
—still in Christ and with Christ—“‘ by Jesus Christ unto 
himself.’ It is through Him, and in Him, and with Him I 
find it. It is having my heart fixed on God and the Father, 
that my affections may be drawn out to Him, and all is because 
** accepted in the beloved.”” God has not blessed angels like 






II4 WHAT GOD IS TO US IN CHRIST 


this. We are not servants only (we should be servants, to be 
sure), but we are brought into the confidence of children. 
Ought not a child to have confidence ? We have received the 
Spirit of adoption whereby we cry ‘“‘ Abba Father.” Our 
heart should answer to God’s outgoings of heart in grace, and 
reflect this grace, ‘‘ to the praise of the glory of his grace, 
wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved.” He has 
done ital.) | 

Remark here, that there is not as yet a word about the 
inheritance. I dwell on that, as shewing how the affections 
of the saint are formed. If I speak of the inheritance, it is 
something below me. All prophecy concerns the inheritance. 
But I am looking at what is above me, and my own blessedness 
is in what is above me. Subjects connected with the church, 
blessed as they are, as prophecy, etc., are below. He will 
exercise us about these things, but let me first get my relation- 
ship with my Father known. Do not talk of me, what I have, 
but of what Christ is, and what He has. My soul must enjoy 
the love that has given it all. The love that has saved is more 
than the things given. It is of importance to the saints to 
feel this in the presence of God. It is not mental power, but 
the heart right—a single eye—that is the great thing. Unless 
a soul gets its intelligence and direction from God, it never 
understands the ways and affections of God. His own affec- 
tions must be known and valued. If I have not known my 
place in the affections of my Father, I am not in a position to 
have the communion of His thoughts and purposes. When 
we were dead in sins, His heart was exercised for us. The 
sinner is here looked at as dead, not “living ”’ in sins (as in 
Colossians) and chastening, etc., for that, but in Ephesians 
** dead,” not a movement of life, when God comes and creates 
and blesses according to His own will. When our souls have 
known the value of Christ’s sacrifice bringing us to God, we 
are seen not in ourselves at all, but only in Christ. Then there 
is perfect rest. 

But afterwards he can tell us of the inheritance ; and then 
the prayer is that we may know the hope of His calling (which 
calling is not the inheritance). He has called us to be “‘ before 
him in love ” (v. 3-6); then verse 11 begins about the inherit- 
ance. Now I will shew you what Christ’s inheritance is, and 
you are to have it too. I must know I am a child and have 
the thoughts and affections of the child before I can have to 





WHAT GOD IS TO US IN CHRIST II5 


do with the inheritance. The end of the matter is that we are 
brought in to share the inheritance. 


How far are your hearts confiding in God’s rest only for 
how far is your confidence and 


your—wants, etc,? Rather how far is your confid 

delight in Him for Himself? The heart of the child will 
delight in the affections of the father. Do your thoughts 
about God flow from what God has revealed to you of Himself ? 
or are you reasoning about God—will He, or will He not, do 
it? When it is a settled thing with me that I am a sinner, 
what have I to reason about ? We want to be brought to this 
simple conviction: I am a sinner; and if I am a sinner, what 
am I todo? Can I look for anything from God on the ground 
of righteousness ? No. When brought to God I am brought 
to grace. What He is is the spring and source of the whole 
matter. We are in Christ. It could not be otherwise. We 
stand there now, by virtue of the atonement, in that position 
which makes the sin the very occasion for God to bless. 
Christ died for my sins, and God is “ faithful and just to 
forgive us our sins.” 

God is going to take us to heaven, to be happy with Christ 
there ; but He makes us happy out of heaven too. It is a 
difficult thing, but He does; and He would have the saints 
living up there where God is, and where we are going, and 
free from this present evil world. 


THE PRAYERS IN 
EPHESIANS 1 : 15-23 AND 3: 14-21 


ONE prayer is attached to the name of the God of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, because He is looked at as Man; the other to 
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, because He is looked 
at as Son. The beginning of chapter 1 gave us God’s calling, 
that we should be “ holy and without blame before him in 
love,” that we might receive “‘ the adoption of sons.” After 
stating. His. purpose concerning Christ. Himself, that_all things 
are to be gathered _ together _ in one in Him, the apostle goes 
on to the inheritance of wach which the Hol: Ghost i is the earnest, 
and then to 1 the 1¢ prayer for | ‘for them on n this ground. Att the very 
close of the. ‘chapter he adds our relationship | to Christ Himself, 
“the church which is his body.” It is always well for us to 
remember that Christ has purified to Himself a peculiar 
people, a people of possession, and we cannot rise up to the 
counsels of God and mind of Christ unless we be brought 
into these intentions of God. The most immediate and closest 
object of His thoughts is His saints. I_necessarily take in all 
saints if Iam. MESS ERAS le SO ee ae 
Christ_without taking in all of them; it is the very spirit of 
Christ Himself. 

There are two parts in this prayer of the apostle. The first 


is, that_they might know the place itself; the second, that 
they should know the _power that bro brou ought them there. The 
very fulness of the blessing we have got is that we are blessed 
with Him. As we were associated with the first Adam in 
ruin, so we are associated with the second Manin glory. There 
is nothing He has that He does not bring us into. This is 
the character of perfect love. Christ gives “‘ not as the world 
giveth.” ‘The world may give generously sometimes, but it 
has done with what it gives; Christ gives by introducing 
His own into what He is enjoying Himself. ‘Take glory : nthe 
glory which t thou | es me I have given. th them.” Take joy: 
“that my joy might remain i in n you. ~ "Fake p: peace : * peace 
I leave with you, iy f iv€"Unto you.’ Take Tove = 
“that thou hast loved them’as thou hast loved me.” Having 
become man and accomplished perfect redemption, He would 
not take the inheritance without His joint-heirs. He is the 
source and head of all the glory that is given. ‘“‘ What is the 





THE PRAYERS IN EPHESIANS I AND 3 117 


hope of His calling?” Not of your calling—this would not 
do at all. Here it has the fullest and highest character. He 
takes the heart up to these thoughts and counsels of God. 
We are called to be before God holy and without blame; we 
are called to be in Christ’s place before God, before the Father, 
perfectly answering to His love. He does not pray that they 
may have it, but that they may know it. 

As to His inheritance in the saints, if our minds took in the 
Jewish place compared with our own, this would be extremely 
simple. Whose land was Israel’s ? It was God’s inheritance ; 
and those in whom He inherited it were Israel. We are not an 
inheritance, but we are heirs of God. We have nothing below 
what God would have in His mind here. 

Observe the prayer is, “‘ that the eyes of your understanding 
may be enlightened.”’ We must not think that we ought not 
to know these things. The New Testament carefully tells us 
that we have them laid open to us expressly. ‘‘ But God hath 
revealed them unto us by his Spirit.”” ‘‘ Eye hath not seen, 
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the 
things which God hath prepared for them that love him ”— 
such was the state of the Jews ; but it is not our state. These 
things are not only given to us, but we are given to understand 
them ; we are not in the condition of the Old Testament at 
all. In _1 Corinthians 2 we have the three steps; revelation 
by the Holy Ghost; communication of the word givén by 
the Holy Ghost; and the reception of the word by the Holy 

a I ete inset est oagh toler aap 

Take the account of the heavenly city in the Apocalypse— 
—it means something. All those images are characteristic 
in Scripture; I quite admit they are only figures, but they 
convey thoughts. The more we live in the mind of God, the 
more intelligent we are. The same things I see through a 
glass darkly, I shall see more clearly, but not differently. Thus 
the ‘white stone” is a symbol full of power. We have 
common joys, but there is the immédiaté approbation of Christ 
to the individual. ‘‘ Gold” is always the sign of divine 
righteousness in itself. In the laver the priests were to wash 
and be clean; but with the sea of glass like crystal I walk 
upon purity. So “fire” is judgment, as “a sea of glass 
mingled with fire’; it is perfect purity as the result of 
judgment. “ The street of the city was pure gold, as it were 
transparent glass.’ Instead of walking through the dirt of 


118 THE PRAYERS IN EPHESIANS I AND 3 


this world, I am to walk in holiness and righteousness according 
to God. In the Apocalypse we do not go beyond the idea of 
God in government. 


Now we come to the power that brings us into these things. 
** According to the working of his mighty power which he 
wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead.” What 
an immense truth there is in connection with this! The 
Messiah was not merely the promised Son of David, but the 
One in whom all God’s counsels would be accomplished. He 
went down below all things, and then goes far above all 
heavens. This dead Man is raised above all principality and 
power. He had gone down into the place of death, and men 
are consequently looked at as dead in sins, not as living in 
them. 


It is well to note here that to look at the sinner as alive in 
sins, or as dead in them, is just the same state, but a different 
aspect of it. In Romans man is seen alive in sins, and Christ 
meeting that state. There is nothing of justification in 
Ephesians, not.a single stir of life there ;_ we were dead in the 
sins, and Christ died for the sins. God comes in and takes us 
all up together, looked at as in the mind and counsels of God. 
God quickens us together with Him. Christ comes down to 
this place of death, having cleansed our sins on the road, 
and God raises Him. Man 1s Tooked at-consequent'y as united 
to Christ. This you do not find in the other epistles. The 
same power has wrought in every individual who believes in 
Christ that wrought in Him. Christ had gone into death for 
us, entering into the whole thing in grace and finding us where 
we were, and, He having wrought the work that entitles Him 
to take us out of it, we are raised with Him, seated together in 
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. This is your place; He does 
not ask you what you think about it! There is no person who 
has the Spirit of Christ without this as his place. We are 
waiting for the adoption, the redemption of our body, but one 
must be either in Christ or out of Christ. There are never 
two places for the Christian. 


All things are to be put under Christ’s feet as Man, for God 
*“ gave him to be head over all things to the church, which 
is his body ”—a short sentence, but the whole mystery is in 
it. It is a quotation of Psalm 8, “ all things are put under his 
feet.”” In Psalm 2 He is seen as Son of David, King of Zion, 





THE PRAYERS IN EPHESIANS I AND 3 II9 


Son of God. Nathanael refers to this psalm; and Jesus says 
to him, “‘ Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels 
of God ascending and descending on the Son of man.” He is 
rejected, and then comes out Psalm 8. Now He is crowned 
with glory and honour, but we do not see all things put under 
His feet yet. He is now sitting on the Father’s throne. ‘‘ To 
him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne.” 
“Sit thou on my right hand,” says Jehovah, “till I make 
thine enemies thy footstool.” The day of grace is before that 
“till.” There is our comfort and blessing, that He has 
finished the work for His friends. ‘‘ By one offering he hath 
perfected for ever them which are sanctified.” We stand 
therefore between the work which He perfected at His first 
coming, and His second coming. We are not, like the Jews, 
waiting to see that His offering is accepted, because the Holy 
Ghost is come cut meanwhile and seals those who believe in 
Christ. I know the acceptance; I know that He is our fore- 
runner. Then He deals with His enemies. When thus set 
over all things, the Son Himself will be subject to Him who 
put all things under Him—a most blessed truth for us. He 
will reign while He brings all into absolute order for God ; 
when this has been done, He will take His place as Man and 
never give it up. He is the first-born among many brethren. 
Over everything He created, He is set as ee ; but a head 
without_a body would not be complete.” The stipplement is 
wanting ; the aah ISREOUY. ed eee 


SLPS ES ML LETT IS I 





No one ever mentions the church but Paul. Others may 
speak of a local church; and Christ said, ‘“‘ On this rock I 
will build my church”; but I am not speaking of this either. 
If the church had been revealed before the cross, you must 
make every Jew who was in it break the law. The essence 
of the church is that all are one, Jew and Gentile. 


The prayer in chapter 3 is addressed to the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. There the apostle does not ask that they 
may know all these thoughts and counsels of God, but that 
Christ may dwell in their hearts. He is not now looking at 
them objectively, but at Christ in them. He desires that 
they should have Christ actually, consciously, by faith dwelling 
in their hearts, settled in the perfectness of divine love, that 
they may be able to comprehend the breadth and length and 
depth and height—he does not say of what—while putting 


I20 THE PRAYERS IN EPHESIANS I AND 3 


Christ in the centre of all that glory. If I look at the breadth 
and length and depth and height, it is dazzling. If I found 
my closest friend the centre of the Queen’s court, I should 
be at home there at once. Is it that I have lost anything by 
this, that it is the humble lowly One who is dwelling in my 
heart ? Not a bit. 

Thus, if in chapter 1 we have exterior power bringing up 
Christ, or ourselves by grace, into a position of glory at God’s 
right hand, in chapter 3 we find divine power in us as in the 
position, and we sought to be strengthened and filled accor- 
dingly, in order to realise what it and God Himself is in the 
fulness of it. It is not God dealing with man, but Christ’s 
relation as Son and dwelling in us by faith—He, the centre 
and divinely entitled light of the fulness and display, dwelling 
in us to give competency to enter into all the scene. Rooted 
and grounded in love we are at the centre thus in its moral or 
rather divine springs, and so embrace all that partake of the 
divine nature, because it is the action of that nature. Thus 
we look out into the wide extended scene of glory, whose limit 
none can tell; yet still this is a display, not a source, a scene, 
not Himself. In love we are at the source of all. We know 
the love of Christ that passes knowledge. What I know it 
in has made it wholly and peculiarly mine, yes, mine as being 
nothing in it. Christ is divine, infinite in nature. It is so 
proved in the way it adapts itself to all my wants and weakness, 
known in adapting itself to them, yet known in itself. As 
Christ’s love it is for man, is manifested in man, and adapts 
itself to man; yet therein as divine it passes knowledge and 
brings man, as spiritual (he can feel, think, and apprehend as 
man), into the enjoyment of the scene, in which God is dis- 
played, and to God Himself according to His own fulness, 
and this filled with love as in the centre of it consciously. It 
is we, not brought into a scene by power, but filled up to the 
measure of the fulness of God, Christ dwelling in our hearts 
by faith. Thus love is the spring of power in us, so that we 
estimate the scene of that fulness according to the title, 
character, and nature of God in it, He Himself being the 
ultimate blessedness of which we are conscious. What makes 
us familiar there is, that that which is in us, and which is the 
central light of all, is One we know, who dwells in us by faith, 
the nearest and most confided in of all, yet the fulness of 
Deity is in Him. Compare Rev. 21 : 23. 


THE PRAYERS IN EPHESIANS I AND 3 I2I 


God “‘ is able to do exceeding abundantly according to the 
power that worketh in us.” This is what we are to look for 
now: has your heart got hold of this ? There is a power that 
works in us, and He can do exceeding abundantly above all 
we ask and think according to it. How little faith there is in 
the power of God! 

I believe everything is in ruin or confusion; but there is 
no ruin or confusion in the power of Christ. I never can think 
of a power of evil that is not below His power. 


“NOT OF THE WORLD” 


EPHESIANS I 


WE get here the whole scope of God’s thoughts and purposes. 
The Epistle to the Ephesians takes in two things : the presence 
and power of the Holy Ghost on earth, and the condition that 
we are in as the result of it; and what this is founded on, the 
exaltation of Christ at God’s right hand. Ephesians does not 
speak of the coming of the Lord, because the way our glory is 
brought about is not its subject, but the present blessing of 
the saints. There is a distinct part at the end where our 
conflict with Satan comes in, but the general scope is what 
I have said: the basis, the exaltation of Christ ; then purpose, 
what is in God’s mind; and then the knowledge of it, by the 
Holy Ghost come down. “‘ He raised him from the dead, and 
set him at his own right hand”; this was needed for us to 
know our place and the most important consequences flowing 
from it down here. The presence of the Holy Ghost who has 
come down from heaven, the seal of our being heirs, and the 
earnest of the inheritance, is our present condition, based 
upon Christ raised to the right hand of God. A Man is sitting 
at the right hand of God: a wonderful truth for us. His 
“delights are with the sons of men.” Being a Man, and having 
died and therein perfectly glorified God, God has raised Him 
from the dead, and set Him at His own right hand; and 
thereupon the Holy Ghost is come down here, so that we 
are associated with Him and the things that are on high, in 
heart and mind, though not yet there as to our bodies. This 
is where the heart has to be; our conversation is in heaven, 
for the Lord is there, not here; He is coming to make our 
bodies like unto His glorious body, but at present we have the 
Holy Ghost associating us with the place where He is. 

God has “ blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly 
places in Christ.” That is God’s mind. We are not yet there 
in fact, but it is the thought of God about us, and we ought 
to have it always before us. Blessings of the Jews in earthly 
places under Christ will be fulfilled in time, but for us it is 
“spiritual blessings,” and “in heavenly places,” and “in 
Christ”? Himself; and our present connection with it all 
comes through the Holy Ghost. 

We next get, in verses 4 and 5, two aspects of these spiritual 
blessings : they are brought before us in connection with the 


*“ NOT OF THE WORLD ” 123 


God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. That is, Christ is looked at as Son and 
looked at as Man. The Father owned Him in manhood as the. 
eet ee heen eevee, d “Son, in whom I am 
W Case is aed the Gok” of our Lord Jesus 
Christ as Man ; He j is called His Father as Son. 

This is the great basis of the wonderful place in which we 
are. It is man that God has in His mind put in this place of 
glory in His own Son. And this is not without its conse- 
quences, and those of the very highest nature. 

God’s choosing us before the foundation of the world is not 
what affirms in the time of choosing the sovereignty of grace, 
for, supposing for a moment that God were to choose us now, 
it would be just as sovereign an act as doing it then. The 
practical truth brought out in His choosing us before the 
foundation of the world is, that it proves that we have nothing 
whatever to do with the world; before its very joundation. 
we _were chosen; we have nothing’ to to do with it but to get 
through it. God would bring us into “this blessedness “with 
Himself w has nothing to do with’ 
just to go t eee *"unspotted ”; that is all we have to do 
with it. Our fae place was re with God before ever 
it existed. God had this thought to have a people in Christ, 
“holy and without blame before him in love.” This is what 
God Himself is. He thus brings us to be according to His 
own nature—“ holy and without blame” before Himself. 
We have an infinite object before whom we are, and having 
the divine nature we can enjoy that object. We are not taken 
out of the world yet, nor are meant to be; but we are to pass 
through it as Christ did. If one look at it in another point 
of view, it is just what Christ was Himself, and that before 
God. This is the thought of God. 

Then (v. 5) I get the Father. He might have had servants 
like the angels, but this was not His thought: ‘‘ He predestin- 
ated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to 
himself.” He insists on that, it is the blessed part of it—that 
it is before God, and to Himself as Father. If it be a relation- 
ship, it is to Himself. 

Thus we have the nature, ‘holy and without blame.” 
It does not say there “ according to the good pleasure of his 
will,” for God could not have beings in His presence in a 
sinful state. But when it is relationship, it is ‘‘according 












124 “ NOT OF THE WORLD ” 


to the good pleasure of his will’: He chooses to have us as 
sons. I get love, the nature of God—‘ in love ”—and love of 
predilection too. The place we get into is one that is according 
to the good pleasure of His will, and He brings us according 
to His own nature before Himself; there is not a cloud because 
He has “‘ made us accepted in the beloved ”—Christ assuredly ; 
but He gives that name to Him to mark the full character of 
the blessedness, and thus brings us into His own presence. 
This is the purpose; it does not say here how much of it 
is accomplished : it will not be fully until we are in the glory. 
Only in the end of the chapter we get what is accomplished in 
fact, as the groundwork of all our present enjoyment of it in 
spirit. God takes Christ out of death and sets Him at His own 
right hand in the heavenly places. ‘his is an_accomplished 


thing ; it is “ wrought in Christ”: Chri Christ _as Man is in the. 
glory of God. 


And then we get the third thing: the Holy Ghost has come 
down meanwhile. Before the purpose is accomplished, but 
when the work in Christ is accomplished, the Holy Ghost 
comes down, the seal with which God has s¢ sealed those ‘here 
who have part in His purpose, and the earnest_of their 
inheritance. We are then competent to see God’s plans about 
Christ Himself, His purpose “‘ to gather together in one all 
things in him, both which are in heaven and which are on 
earth.” Then it is glory. 7 

The first verses were our calling ; now it is our inheritance. 
And this inheritance is ‘‘ after the counsel of his own will.” 
It is sovereign grace to poor sinners that brings us into this 
place. It will not be accomplished until He come; it is in 
Him we have obtained it, being “‘ predestinated according to 
his purpose.” That which is believed in order to our being 
sealed is “the gospel of our salvation.” John the Baptist 
was the forerunner of Him who was to accomplish it; but 
now we have the glad tidings of it consequent on the actual 
exaltation of Christ, and the seal of the Holy Ghost as the 
earnest of what is to come. 

This is where we are whilst still in the world which is no 
part of the purpose of God, but in which, passing through 
discipline, we learn the difference between flesh and spirit ; 
it is His ways, but not part of His purpose. The Holy Ghost 
comes down from heaven, gives us to know Christ, reveals to 
us our inheritance, bears witness to us that we are “ heirs of 





“* NOT OF THE WORLD ”’ 125 


God and joint-heirs with Christ.” He makes us know where 
we are; that we belong to heaven and not to this earth at 
all. As we read in Proverbs: “ In the beginning of his way, 
before his works of old, from the beginning or ever the earth 
was, then I was by him, as one brought up with him, and my 
delights were with the sons of men,” so Christ became Man, 
and is gone into glory as our forerunner. 

I desire that our hearts may feel that in God’s thoughts and 
purposes He has given us a place that is not of the world at 
all, and that all our business in this world is to keep ourselves 
unspotted from it. I do not belong to this world; before 
the foundation of it I was chosen. It is not thus simply the 
sovereignty that does what it pleases, but that we, as Christians, 
do not belong to earth at all. Epistle of Christ is what we 
are ; we may not live up to it, but it is what we are called to: 
to manifest the second Man in the midst of the world that 
has rejected Him. 


ELECT OF GOD, HOLY AND BELOVED 


EPHESIANS I : 4-14 


Gop has purposed in Himself to have before Himself that 
which shall reflect His own blessedness—He taking pleasure 
in us, and we taking pleasure in Him; as it is said here, 
“that we should be holy, and without blame before Him in 
love.” He will have His people of the same nature as Himself, 
gathered around Himself, happy here, and for Himself. His 
thought is not merely that we should have an inheritance ; as 
we read of “the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the 
saints.”” He “ hath chosen us in Christ before the foundation 
of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before 
him in love; having predestinated us unto the adoption of 
children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good 
pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, 
wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved.” 

And this is just the character of this Epistle; the apostle, 
in speaking of redemption, does so, not so much as of something 
needed by us, in order to appear before God, as of these pur- 
poses of God concerning us. We may look at God as a Judge ; 
but, more than this, God is working for the display of the 
riches of the glory of His grace. 

This lifts up the soul. God has thoughts and intentions 
about us. As in the case of a young man, whom, a person has 
(in ordinary language) “‘ taken up,” and is about to provide 
for, it is not a question of what the one was, but of the thoughts 
and intentions of the other—of what, in a word, he is, and 
will do, for the young man ; so, though in a much more blessed 
sense, has God “‘ taken up ” poor sinners, that He might act 
towards them worthily of Himself, to the praise of the glory 
of His grace. The other thing remains true: God is a Judge, 
and “‘ we have redemption, forgiveness of sins, through his 
blood ”’ (Christ’s) ; and we must understand this before we 
can enjoy our privileges in Christ. 

God has “‘ taken us up.” Our very existence in the new 
creation, is the fruit of His purpose and thoughts about us. 
This has a double bearing. It shews how we are to measure 
what God is doing for us, as a question of God’s purpose ; 
and, besides being this measure, it makes us understand the 
source of it all. And this has a most happy effect: instead of 
looking at ourselves, and judging from ourselves, we look at 


ELECT OF GOD, HOLY AND BELOVED 127 


God. Nothing but life-giving power could ever have wrought 
this. Our thoughts about God are, that He is the source of 
all our blessing. As the young man, before alluded to, would 
have pleasure in thinking about the friend who had “ taken 
him up,” so this thought about God is a happy thought, and, 
moreover, one of great sanctifying power. 

God has “ predestinated us unto the adoption of children.” 
It is not here, simply, a question of purpose (of God’s counsel, 
and, therefore, sure): that to which He has predestinated us, 
is the present adoption of children. A poor sinner, a sinner 
of the Gentiles, having no title whatever to blessing, I trace 
all my title to God’s purpose, which He has purposed in 
Himself. This is true also of the Jews, though, in a certain 
sense, they stood on different ground ; Christ was “ a minister 
of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the pro- 
mises made unto the fathers’; but of the Gentiles it is said, 
“and that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy.” 
It is of grace, of God’s free thought about us. He has taken 
pleasure in us, as Joshua said to Israel: ‘* If the Lord delight 
in us, then He will bring us into this land, and give it unto 
us, a land which floweth with milk and honey.” We cannot 
boast in anything ; for we have not anything whatever wherein 
to boast, except in this, that God has taken delight in us to 
give us the adoption. The effect is most blessed; we know 
Himself—‘“ after ye have known God, or rather are known of 
God.’ What He has predestinated us unto, is not a distant 
thing, nor yet merely salvation (in the sense of escape from 
the wrath of God); it is the nearest place He could have put 
us into, not as with the Jews, ‘‘ I am a father to Israel, and 
Ephraim is my firstborn”: we are adopted with the “ adop- 
tion of children by Jesus Christ to himself, to the praise of 
the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in 
the Beloved.” Here we get not only the source but the 
manner—the source, God’s love ; the manner, in Christ. 

“The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us ’—the 
Word that was in the beginning with God, and was God. 
But the light shone in darkness and the darkness comprehended 
it not. It is not said that there was want of power, but that 
men’s deeds were evil, and that, therefore, they would not 
come unto the light. A Christian who is walking carelessly 
does not like a godly Christian to come into contact with 
him, he feels condemned; whenever the heart is not with 


128 ELECT OF GOD, HOLY AND BELOVED 


God, light makes it uneasy. But besides being light, “In him 
was life,’ and that is what we needed; while He shews us 
our evil, He is the good we need. Predestinated unto the 
adoption of children, it is in Him. Called according to God’s 
purpose, we are to be conformed to the image of His Son, 
that He might be the firstborn among many brethren. Of His 
fulness, have all we received, and grace for grace. We are 
brought into the presence of God in Jesus Christ. Therefore, 
when Jesus goes away, He says, “I ascend unto my Father, 
and your Father, unto my God and your God.” He has 
Himself met all our responsibility, otherwise the light would 
have been terrible. There are two things, substitution, and 
communication of life. In substitution, He stood alone. 
But guilt being taken away, we quickened together with Him, 
He presents us in the Father’s presence, as He is. 

‘** In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because 
that God sent his only-begotten Son into the world,-that we 
might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved 
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitia- 
tion for our sins.” But not merely has the Son of God visited 
us when we were in our sins, nor merely, either, been delivered 
for our offences. ‘“‘ Herein is our love [love with us] made 
perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, 
because as he is, so are we in this world.” We have no life 
except in Christ; we have no acceptance apart from Christ. 
He has made us accepted in the Beloved—the measure is 
just that. It is God’s delight to bring us, in Christ, and by 
Christ, into His own presence. We can go no farther ; “‘ truly 
our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus 
Christ,” writes John. We may enjoy it more and more, we 
may delight in it in deepened measure, but we cannot have 
anything beyond. When God speaks of glorifying Himself, 
or of our glorifying Him, it means through the display of 
what He is; it is God’s glory to display Himself; therefore, 
in this, which is to the glory of His grace, we have the display 
of Himself. 

And do not let us suppose that this goes beyond what we 
may think about (a very natural thought): the apostle says 
further on, ‘‘ For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant you, according 
to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by 
his Spirit in the inner man: that Christ may dwell in your 


ELECT OF GOD, HOLY AND BELOVED I29 


hearts by faith: being rooted and grounded in love, that ye 
may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, 
and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of 
Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with 
all the fulness of God,” chap. 3: 14-19. It is not a matter of 
human wisdom, learning, or attainment; in proportion as we 
become simple as little children, we shall understand these 
things, through the Holy Ghost. ‘“ God hath chosen the 
foolish things of the world to confound the wise.” It has 
nothing to do with human learning, except to set it aside; 
lowliness of mind is what is needed. 

“ The good pleasure of his will ” is not, simply, sovereignty— 
it is the good pleasure of His will. God is acting in His love, 
displaying the will of His grace, “‘ taking up” poor, wretched, 
vile sinners, and unfolding on these objects of His mercy, all 
the riches of His own goodness. The “ good pleasure of his 
will,” that which God takes delight in, is the ministering of 
the fulness of His blessing to us. Here the soul gets established. 
It is quite evident, that the measure of His goodness cannot 
be, in any sense, the measure of what we are, as deserving at 
His hands ; while it is His good pleasure, it is the good pleasure 
of His grace. And further, whilst I have need, for the establish- 
ment of my soul, to learn what He is, to be delighting in the 
goodness of God, it is this too which sanctifies. If I could 
be always thinking of what He is, I should be perfectly happy, 
and there would be the reflection in me of that with which 
my soul was occupied. 

We begin, often, at the wrong end. On what are we resting 
our acceptance? It is not anything in ourselves that will 
do. Or, it is a question of sanctification ? “‘ beholding as in 
a glass the glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same 
image, from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord” 
(that is, I look at the Lord, and, as a consequence of my 
looking at the Lord, I reveal to men what He is). Moses, on 
coming down from the mount, was not inquiring whether his 
face shone, in order to know if he had been with God; others 
saw this. 

It is such a comfort, to get to God and feel, that it is in 
Him, and from Him. 

Where, naturally, would our souls rest? It is quite a 
natural feeling, if we have been convinced of sin, that we 
should want to get at peace to know there is nothing against 


130 ELECT OF GOD, HOLY AND BELOVED 


us, but the apostle here, is looking at those whom God has 
*‘ taken up,” and He has “ made us accepted in the Beloved.” 
That is God’s thought about us; He has shewn us this grace 
in a particular way, and in a particular person—Christ. It is 
not merely a negative thing ; He takes as positive delight in us, 
as He does in Jesus. He is no double-measure God. 

** Put on as the elect of God,’ Paul writes to the Colossians, 
“holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness,” etc., saints, 
and beloved ones of God, objects of God’s love, God’s delight 
(the measure of which is Christ), thus He addresses them. 
If I am beloved of a person, this draws out love. So the 
consciousness of God’s love, God’s delight produces links in 
affection, that exist not without it. My thought of being 
accepted is not merely, that my sins are put away, so that I 
could stand before Him—I am the object of His delight ; 
holy affections are drawn out, and I pass through the world 
as a beloved one of God. We cannot suppose, in Christ’s 
going through this world (and this shews us our deficiency as 
Christians), one single thing of it, that acts on our hearts, 
acting on His; He was the beloved One of God—‘“‘ This is 
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,” and He was 
going through the world as such. Thus, too, should the 
Christian walk through the world with the consciousness of 
being beloved of God ; with this, we do not want the world— 
without it, we are obliged to turn to something that makes 
self the centre. 

Young or old, that is what we are—beloved of God. Perhaps, 
you will say, ““ Ah, but I am very proud, very worldly, I do 
not give up the things of the world.”’ Very likely not, and that 
is a reason for your being reminded of this, that you may. 

“In whom we have redemption through his blood, the 
forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace.” 
This is the leading thought in the apostle’s mind. And 
remark, he speaks of that which is positively possessed, not of 
something we are hoping for, or expecting ; He ‘‘ hath made 
us accepted in the Beloved,” we “‘ have redemption through 
his blood,” etc. This grace of God, this “ good pleasure of 
his will’? has planted and set us in it all. We may be prac- 
tically destitute of the joy of these things, but that is where 
we are. And He has given to those whom He has set in this 
place, the knowledge of His purpose as to the glory of Christ, 
as It goes on to say, “ wherein he hath abounded toward us in 


ELECT OF GOD, HOLY AND BELOVED I3I 


all wisdom and prudence ’”’; the apostle explains it, “‘ having 
made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his 
good pleasure, which he hath purposed in himself”; here 
again it comes from the good pleasure of His will, ‘“‘ that in 
the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather 
together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, 
and which are on earth.”” Having placed the saints in all this 
fellowship and blessing, He imparts (as with Abraham—‘“‘ Shall 
I hide from Abraham the thing that I am about to do ?”’) 
unto them His thoughts. Not only has He accepted us in 
Christ, but He will have everything brought under Christ’s 
dominion and power. He is to gather together in one, all 
things in Christ—“‘even in him, in whom also we have 
obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according to the 
purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his 
own will: that we should be to the praise of his glory, who 
first trusted in Christ. In whom ye also trusted, after that ye 
heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; in 
whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that 
Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance 
until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the 
praise of his glory.” We are joint-heirs with Christ. Hence 
the prayer at the end of the chapter. 

We cannot deny, we do not deny (whatever man’s efforts 
to make the best of the world), that sin is in the world ; there 
is not a single thing (take dress for instance) that does not tell 
us that. There is not a single thing we are buying or selling, 
a single thing we are looking upon, that is not, in some sort, 
a proof of sin. All that man does for pleasure, is necessitated 
by sin; Adam in Paradise had no need of it. What makes 
the world get on without God? The principle of sin; this 
is running through everything, it has got, so to speak, into the 
vital blood, and (though it be God’s creation through which 
it runs) it runs through everything. Man builds his city, 
invents his instruments of music (Gen. 4), and strives to make 
the world happy without God. Introduce God, and His 
amazing work, where men are occupied with gain or with 
pleasure, it is all wrong and out of place. Whether for pleasure, 
or for gain, God must be excluded. That is the character of 
the whole world, and to tack on the name of Christ does not 
mend it; an avaricious Christian (nominally such) is in 
nothing better than an avaricious heathen. God is lingering 


132 ELECT OF GOD, HOLY AND BELOVED 


over it, but the existence of the gospel in the world is proof 
that the world is lost. ‘‘ We know,” says John, ‘“‘ that the 
whole world lieth in the wicked one”; and again, ‘* All that 
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and 
the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.” 
As it is, as a plain matter of fact, it is not God’s inheritance. 
Who is called its god? Satan. God’s ttle cast away, through 
the lust of men, and the pride and power of Satan, whom they 
follow, God has designated Satan “‘ the god of this world,” 
and made known to us (those who are of faith) the mystery of 
His will. The apostle speaks here of hope (v. 18). We have 
obtained an inheritance in Christ, and all things are going to 
be put under Christ ; meanwhile (like Abraham, who had not 
so much as whereon to set his foot) “‘ having nothing and yet 
possessing all things,’ the Christian walks through the world, 
as one beloved of God, in the consciousness that he is the 
object of God’s purposes, and of God’s delrght. But what do 
we see in the Lord Jesus? Not merely that He has been 
designated the heir of all things; ‘‘ the Father loveth the 
Son, and hath given all things into his hand.” So too our 
proper delight is in knowing that we are beloved of God, and 
that God will have us before Himself, and for Himself—His 
delight in us, and our delight in Him. It is as a consequence 
of this love, that we shall have the glory of the inheritance. 
Where are our hearts ? what is our joy ? are we journeying, 
aye journeying, through the world in the blessed, joyful 
confidence of this secret of God? ‘Then will the world be to 
us a “dry and thirsty land”; instead of finding delight in 
things around, we shall have to guard against them as against 
that which would bring us down to Satan’s ground. Are we 
taking the world, with its pleasures and its gain? If so, we 
are entering into Cain’s portion, and not into that of Abel or 
Abraham: we are “‘ enemies of the cross of Christ.” Through 
these things Satan is deceiving the world. Are we taking the 
position (not of Adam before he sinned, not of Christ when 
He was in the world, neither of Christ in the glory, but) of 
the “‘ men of the earth ? ” 

The Lord give us to see, and so to estimate that which is 
God’s object, that we may have done with this present evil 
world. 


EPHESIANS 1:9 


Wuat has ail failed in the first Adam will all be accomplished 
in the last Adam, and much more, gloriously fulfilled. 
In Ephesians 1 there are two things as the portion of the 
church: one is not entirely fulfilled, and the other we have 
nothing of yet, the calling of God, and God’s inheritance. 
The calling we get in Ephesians 1: 4, 5. The first part of 
the calling is what is before God (v. 4), to be holy and without 
blame, etc. The second part of the calling is in connection 
with the Father (v. 5) as children. He has not only put us in 
a certain place, but has made known to us the mystery of His 
will, that is all His plan for Christ’s glory, which is to gather 
together in one all things in Him. And the moment that 
comes I get the inheritance—not the calling only, but the 
the inheritance. Of this we have nothing now but the earnest 
of the Spirit. We have the calling. Colossians presents the 
same general truth, but more developed as to Christ. 

In Colossians 1 : 15-18 I get the two headships of Christ— 
Head over all things, and Head of the body. He takes as Man 
what He created as God ; and, besides, He takes other men as 
fellow-heirs with Him. Thus we see in verse 21, that us who 
not only were in confusion and disorder, but were positively 
enemies, He reconciles. This consciousness has been lost 
by the professing church—that we are reconciled. The state 
of things is not reconciled; but we are reconciled. The 
inheritance we cannot have, till the true Heir take it. Christ 
is not sitting on His own throne now, but on His Father’s 
throne. When He sits down on His own throne, He will 
have us there with Him. He sits on His Father’s throne by 
His title of Son. “To him that overcometh will I give to 
sit down with me on my throne, even as I also overcame, and 
am set down with my Father on his throne.” Our present 
condition is to know that Christ is exalted, and we reconciled. 
But He has not taken the inheritance, nor, of course, have 
we. Our place before God is His calling—everything that is 
created will be our inheritance. 

In Psalm 2 you have the counsels of God about Christ, to 
set Him on Zion as king. Adonai shall have them in derision 
—not Jehovah as such. These two points, Christ set as king 
on the holy hill of Zion, and owned to be the Son of God, you 
find in Psalm 2. In Psalm 8, you do not get Him as Son of 


134 EPHESIANS I 


God, but as Son of man, put over everything that God has 
created—that He has created, for He is God. In John 1: 49 
you hear the Lord applying these two things. There Nathaniel 
owns Him as King of Israel, according to Psalm 2 and He says 
as it were, ‘‘ That is over: I am not going to be King of Israel 
now.” But you shall see greater things, the Son of man 
according to Psalm 8, with every creature subject. The place 
the church gets is to be joint-heirs. We take the place of 
suffering now. We only see half of Psalm 8 fulfilled yet. 
We see Him at the right hand of God, but not with all things 
put under Him. He is gathering now the joint-heirs. Nothing 
is yet fulfilled. For the redemption of the purchased posses- 
sion He must come again. 

Yet in Him we have redemption. There is no such thing 
recognised in Scripture, as a Christian doubting he is saved. 
And it is all a totally false pretension of humility. If my 
Father forgives me, and I doubt His forgiveness, I am not 
trusting Him. It is doubting God’s word, or not receiving the 
truths He gives us: we have not received the spirit of bondage 
again to fear. Let a man fear temptation—doubt his own heart, 
that is another thing; but not doubt God, or dread God. 
There is no such thing in scripture as a Christian without the 
Spirit of adoption, crying “‘ Abba, Father.” There is no 
such thing after Christ’s death recognised in Scripture as a 
Christian not knowing he is saved. The thief on the cross 
was as fit to go to heaven as Paul, and he went there; and 
none went not fit. I know that there is growth, of course ; 
but there is no meetness or fitness for heaven, except the work 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is not Christianity to doubt, 
though many a real honest Christian does doubt. It is 
Christianity to know we are reconciled. If you have not 
peace, you have not got what Christ left for you. He says, 
““ Come unto me, and I will give you rest.” If you have not 
rest, am I to say either you have not come? or Christ does 
not speak truth ? It may be bad teaching. Many a one will 
cry “‘ Abba, Father,’”’ most heartily in his prayers, who would 
not own, if you asked him, that he was a child of God. Of 
course, he has the Spirit of adoption, though he does not know 
it. It is just selfishness that makes him doubt. In Romans 7, 
what is it he is talking about? Just self—not Christ at all. 
Is that humility ? not a word about Christ and the Spirit! 
and I am told that is a Christian. There is nearly forty times 


EPHESIANS I 135 


“IT” and “ me,” and not once Christ and the Spirit, just the 
law and me; and poor things those are to bring together! 
Very useful for ploughing up, bringing down to self-knowledge. 
Then he sees there is no good in himself, and he gets set 
free, and it is all atan end. Romans 7 is just a quickened man, 
without the knowledge of redemption. 

In 2 Corinthians 5 : 18 we are reconciled, but the state of 
things is not reconciled. After that we have the Spirit of God 
taking up our infirmities, and sympathising with us, as we 
are—taking up our groans. 

When the Lord Jesus comes, the first thing He does is to 
take us up to Himself. He cannot take His inheritance till 
He get His joint-heirs. The object of Christ’s love is to take 
us into the enjoyment of all that He enjoys Himself. Is Hea 
son? I ama son. Is it life? He is my life. Is it peace? 
He says, My peace I leave with you. Is it love? As Thou 
hast loved Me I have loved them. There is nothing He has 
not taken us into. Of course, I do not mean His incommuni- 
cable Godhead. But He takes us into the same place with 
Himself, and over everything. When He comes again, then, 
and then only, we get the full fruit, when “he shall see the 
travail of his soul and shall be satisfied.” 

Psalm 22. As soon as He is heard from the horns of the 
unicorns, He says, “‘ I will declare thy name unto my brethren.” 
So in John 20. “I ascend to my Father and your Father, 
to my God and your God.”’ He is alone in the work of atone- 
ment, but as soon as that is accomplished, He says, Now I 
am going to have others with Me. “ In the midst of the church 
I will sing praise to thee.” When all the joint-heirs are 
gathered, then He comes and takes them all; and after that 
He begins to take the inheritance. The wilderness is the 
the place in which we are tested and tried, not for fighting. 
When we get into heavenly places to possess spiritual privileges, 
then we must fight Satan. Supposing I can say I am of the 
Lord’s host, I am dead, I have crossed Jordan—not merely 
redeemed or simply crossed the Red Sea; but if I am dead, 
crossed Jordan, and become one of the Lord’s host, then I 
need all His armour to fight His enemies ; and if I get a wedge 
of gold, or a Babylonish garment, it will be detected by my 
want of power, by my being conquered in the fight. 

When Christ takes us up there to be with Him, He puts 
Satan out. We shall be taken up to God and His throne 


136 EPHESIANS I 


(not the Father’s throne, that is the prerogative of Christ), 
then Satan is cast down. He will be in this world, then, in 
great rage, knowing his time is short ; but we shall be above 
it all. Satan will never get up there again. When, those 
years being over, the Lord comes with us (when He appears, 
we appear with Him), then Satan is put in the bottomless pit, 
and the kingdom is fulfilled. Satan then is not merely turned 
out of heaven, but out of earth too. Before judgment begins 
to be executed, we are in glory in Christ. He that believeth 
shall not come into judgment, John 5:24. There are two 
things in the chapter shewing Christ’s power: first, He 
quickeneth whom He will, this is, life-giving power; then 
judicial power, by which the wicked are obliged to own His 
power in spite of themselves. Christ will not have to make 
good His power in judgment where He has made it good in 
life. We are passed from death unto life. There is the resur- 
rection of judgment in John 5. We are raised in glory when 
He changes our vile bodies, and fashions them like His glorious 
body. We shall ALL be conformed to the image of God’s Son. 

But there is another privilege we have now by grace, that 
of being workers together with Him. So when that time 
comes, as regards the blessing of Christ I shall have that as 
much as Paul, but as regards the activity of love and its results, 
Paul will have fifty thousand times more than I. For instance, 
Paul will have the Thessalonians for his crown, and I shall 
not. There comes in every man’s little bit of service—in 
that you will have yours, and I mine. When He appears 
with us, then He sets up His kingdom. For Christ has a 
three-fold title. He created everything—that gives Him a 
title. He is the Son, and consequently the Heir; and He is 
the Man to whom God has determined to give everything— 
the title of redemption. 

If I look for the worst power of Satan now, I must look 
for it in the so-called church. The responsible church has 
totally failed. In 1 Corinthians 3 you get three cases: first, 
a wise master builder, who did his work well; then you get 
persons who build badly, but who are saved themselves, 
building with rubbish, as wood, hay, stubble; and lastly, if 
a man corrupt the church of God, him will God destroy. 
Think of men bringing in Gnosticism. I will not refer to 
modern times. This is not merely building badly (all do so) 
but it is antagonism to the church of God and even to Christ. 


EPHESIANS I 137 


Not one of the fathers, so-called, saving Irenaeus, held the 
full deity of Christ, or held redemption as Irenaeus did, 
who was a saint. They were affected with Platonic philosophy, 
which brought out Arianism after. Justin Martyr positively 
declares that the supreme God could not become a man—that 
it was a certain inferior Logos who did. People say we must 
have what was at the beginning. Knowing of nothing more 
primitive than Peter and Paul, I will therefore have what was 
at the beginning; but I will not have what was one hundred 
and forty years after the beginning. Justin Martyr was about 
so long after. 

In the four first of the seven churches we see the history of 
what is called the Apostolic succession ; in the three last, the 
history of Protestantism. There are three things in the 
Revelation: ‘‘ Things thou hast seen,” that is, the glory of 
Christ; ‘“‘ things that are,” that is, the seven churches ; 
“things which shall be hereafter,’? when we are caught up 
into heaven, and the final judgment of God sets in. In the 
first four churches, is given the complete history of the church 
to the end, closing in popery. There are two ways God uses 
to judge the existing thing by. He contrasts our condition 
with what He set up at first, and with the readiness to meet 
the Lord when He comes. The previous churches were 
referred back to what had been. Thyatira is referred on to 
His coming; and hence His coming is here first mentioned. 

In the last three churches the Lord’s coming is already 
named, and is kept before them till Laodicea, which is spued 
out. First, we have the Protestant warning, ‘‘a name to live 
and are dead.”” To Sardis He threatens what in Thessalonians 
is spoken of as only belonging to the world, His coming as a 
thief, that is, I will treat you just like the world. Philadelphia 
is a solemn word to us. It is the character of Christ which we 
are to suit ourselves to—‘‘ He that is holy, he that is true.” 
After Thyatira we never get a reference to what he had seen 
walking among the golden candlesticks. There is no ecclesias- 
tical position after that. What marks the thing the Lord owns 
now is, the absence of infidelity, or of ecclesiastical pretension : 
Christ’s word against all such pretensions, and Christ’s name 
against all infidelity. ‘“‘ Kept my word, and not denied my 
name”: the promise to these is complete identification with 
Himself—“ a pillar in the temple of my God—the name of my 
God—the city of my God—my new name.” To those who 


138 EPHESIANS I 


keep the word of His patience He says not now, “I will come 
to you as a thief, and ye shall not know when I come,” but, 
“Ye have had patience: have a little more, I will soon be 
with you.”” Those who had a little strength are made pillars 
in the temple of His God. 

We never get the direct work of God in the seven churches, 
because God cannot judge His own work. He walks through 
and sees how this thing has turned out and how that has ; 
but you never get a direct intervention of God all through. 
Isaiah’s prophecy, “the heart of this people is waxed fat,” 
etc., was spoken nearly eight hundred years before the 
judgment was executed in nearly the last piece of New Testa- 
ment history. Paul says in Acts 28, “‘ Well did Isaiah say, the 
heart of this people is waxed fat”; “‘ be it known unto you 
that the salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles,” etc. It is 
more than eighteen hundred years since it was said of the 
church, judgment must begin at the house of God; and for 
all this time God has borne with it, but assuredly the judgment 
of the church will come. 


THE POWER THAT WORKS IN US 


EPHESIANS 3: 16-21 


THE subject of prayer here is that there might be an inward 
power put forth by the Holy Ghost. Paul’s heart was desiring 
to see these saints in a deepening enjoyment of Christ, and 
this by an operation of the Spirit unlimited in its measure. 

They had the inner man. the divine nature communicated 
to them. God had looked upon them in His great love, not 
only quickened them, but given them out of His fulness. They 
were in a family every member of which is purged from sin. 
“I write unto you, children, because your sins are forgiven 
you.” The incorruptible seed is not the word of God, but 
that which is communicated by the word of God. The 
Christian is thus put into a position in which the creature 
does not stand. The first Adam was innocent but corruptible. 
The Second man was pure and incorruptible. The believer 
now (in spite of that which is corruptible in him) has received 
this incorruptible seed, and that by the word of God. This 
they had: yet the heart of the apostle was not satisfied, but 
_ must go forth with energy that God the Holy Ghost might 
act in them according to their individual need, and that 
“according to the riches of his glory,” not only eventually 
to be enjoyed, but a spring of power now to be given, and that 
without measure. It is the same Spirit to quicken and to 
strengthen now as will fill the whole bride. Paul put no limit 
short of this. 


“That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith’ (v. 17). 
This is not having happy feelings, or suavity of character, etc. 
It is one thing to be safe in the ark on the Ararat of God, and 
another thing for Christ to dwell in the heart by faith, Oh 
what a quantity of care goes out when Christ is there! If 
Christ is the master of the house, and dwelling in it, He does 
not let the dust and cobwebs accumulate, but He fills it 
altogether: and should a sudden start come to the heart, 
there will be found not fear, but Christ. 


Some people make love among believers into a command- 
ment. This is not the secret. If Christ is master of heart 
and conscience, He wiil teach brotherly love, and then will 
be comprehended “ with all saints what is the breadth, and 
length, and depth, and height,” v. 18. See the connection 


I40 THE POWER THAT WORKS IN US 


of understanding with being rooted, etc., here and in Colossians 
2:2. I shall not understand, save as divine (not human) 
affections are in exercise. Breadth, etc., of what? Soon after 
Christianity was launched, philosophy came in with progres- 
sion. Paul knew no length, breadth, etc., save what was in 
Christ ; Satan knows many, but they are only his depths and 
can be detected. 


Next, we are set in the fulness of God. Thus we have 
had first the inward strengthening by the Spirit; next, this 
is shewn by Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, rooted and 
grounded in love, that they might comprehend with all saints 
what is the length, and breadth, and depth, and height ; 
thirdly, by this they might be filled with all the fulness of God ; 
and fourthly, this is described as the power that works “‘ in us.” 
This fulness of God calls for something back. All that God 
gives Christ is yours: then I must praise Him. Can I be 
silent? Why not lift your voice to Him who is able to do 
exceeding abundantly above all you ask or think ? We cannot 
expect too much. 


Observe the distinct superscriptions of the prayers. The 
first is to God the Father of glory, the second is to the Father 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. The glory of Christ as the servant 
of God and the glory of the only begotten of the Father are 
quite separate. It is very different for Christ to say, “‘ My 
Father and your Father,” and ‘“‘ My God and your God.” 
When Christ took the servant’s place, God was the Father of 
glory to Him. 


Christ’s sympathy flows out according to need down here. 
We have His sympathies. If we knew more of Christ’s 
sympathies, the children of God might have more for one 
another. If full of sorrow yourself, go and sympathise with 
another, and your own will be gone. 


Many a saint, if he knew what Christ’s sympathy was, would 
wish to be left alone. Christ does not sympathise with my 
fleshly thoughts, but what He does is for the glory of God. 
He may have to break my will, and bring it to His. He will 
take up all the good, and He can make the face to shine; but 
it is of no use for us to ask for sympathy, if not set on the 
glory of God. 


Our sympathy with Him is another thing: but He cares 
for us; John 16. 


THE POWER THAT WORKS IN US I4I 


Let me ask (as exhortation) whether you pray for the acting 
of the Spirit as prayed for here. One of the reasons why the 
light and knowledge given connected with God and His 
Christ is so little entered into is connected with lack of prayer 
for the operation of the Spirit in this way. Christ is in heaven 
now. He was the centre of the thoughts of the little company 
who followed Him in Galilee. Why should not you and I 
have Him practically as the centre of our minds and hearts ? 
All with them was simply done in the light and at the word 
of their Master. Had they boats to launch, nets to let down, 
all was at His word. This is a challenge to our hearts as to 
every-day circumstances. His presence in our hearts changes 
everything. It is very hard to be discontented when He is 
in the heart. How the thoughts of one’s mind change with 
the company one is in! God has put us into a place where 
we may be sounding the unsoundable depths of the motives 
that have acted on Christ. 


GRACE AND GOVERNMENT 


EPHESIANS 4. 


AS soon as our hearts have personally found Christ connected 
with the glory of God, there are two things which we are 
called to enter into and distinguish. The first is the place of 
grace in which we stand as the children of God; in other 
words, the church’s or Christian’s position. The second is the 
government of God. This last unfolds itself in various ways. 
There is the millennial time, when a “ Prince shall reign in 
righteousness ”: and it shall be said of the Lord, “‘ Thou 
hast taken to thee thy great power.’’ Then shall “ the trees 
of the wood rejoice before the Lord.”’ Alli this blessing will 
be the effect of the government of God. 

In another sense God is always governing in providence 
now. “ The hairs of your head are all numbered.” But do 
we not see a righteous person often put into the greatest 
trouble ? This is not the normal effect of God’s government. 
In the millennial time there will be the proper natural results 
of the Lord reigning. In another sense, for us now, “ the 
Father judgeth every man’s work.”” He has, no doubt, com- 
mitted all judgment to the Son; but yet He chastens His 
children ; Heb. 12. Christ says, “‘ If any man will serve me, 
him will my Father honour.” ‘* He that loveth me shall be 
loved of my Father,” etc. This refers to the consequences of 
the child’s conduct. It is the Father’s government of His 
children ; it is the Father’s care watching over His children 
for their good, and is not like the government of the world in 
providence. God is dealing with the wicked now in grace. 

I have said this of the children’s position with the Father, 
that we may more undistractedly look to the Christian’s 
position. The position of the church shews the fulness of 
God’s grace. If I am one with Christ, there is no question 
of being accepted. If I am one with the Judge, I cannot look 
forward to the judgment with the thought of being condemned. 
Now it is certain that the church is the body of Christ, ‘* the 
fulness of him that filleth all in all.” ‘‘ We are members of 
his body,” etc. You must see the amazing bearing and import 
of this truth—one with Christ, to realise the privileges it 
brings us into. It carries us into a place unlike any other, as 
to acceptance, righteousness, etc. When once we have this 
divine teaching in our souls, all is simple. It becomes a matter 


GRACE AND GOVERNMENT 143 


of faith, and this produces a consciousness of relationship. 
If it is merely objective truth, it is of no value to me. I must 
be in it to know it and use it: and so with all these truths, 
you must be in them. You find the very prayers of a man 
betray where he is. A man cannot say “ Father ”’ in his soul, 
if he has not the consciousness of relationship. We cannot 
and ought not to have the enjoyment and feelings and affections 
belonging to it, if we have not it. The moment that through 
the teaching of God I have got into it, all is mine; not merely 
knowledge, but all peaceful and holy affections flow. 

So with the church of God. We shall never enter into it, 
if not on the ground of grace. I cannot suppose too much and 
too great blessings when I see them flowing from God Himself. 
If from ourselves, what could you or I expect? I should be 
ashamed to think of anything I can have if I bring myself in ; 
but if I bring Christ in, then I see nothing too much for Him. 

In every possible way God had put man to the test; and 
now all is done with, as to myself (not as to the Father’s 
government), and God is dealing in the way of grace. 

In Scripture we have the fullest, and most detailed history 
of all that our hearts are, the history of Israel, etc. All was 
the proving of sin, but now it is the putting away of sin. 
Righteousness was not yet declared when God was proving 
man. It was not accomplished. Where was righteousness to 
be found before 2? Never, till Christ sat down on the throne 
of God. Innocency there had been—grace there had been, 
for He was spit upon, etc., but righteousness there was not. 
It was prophesied of, promised, but not one righteous could 
be found. All that the trial of man resulted in was, that 
weighed in the balance, he was found wanting. 

See Jacob’s sons, law given, and the calf made before Moses 
came down from the mount. See priest, prophet, king. All 
flesh was grass. At last God’s Son came, and then they said, 
“Here is the heir, come let us kill him.” The end of that 
was, “‘ now is the judgment of this world.” It is not executed 
yet, of course, but the consequence of this is that the righteous 
One has sat down above. It is all over with the world. They 
see Him no more, except when He comes in the glory of His 
power. Christ the new Man is accepted, according to His 
prayer “ glorify thou me”’—‘“‘I have glorified thee on the 
earth,” and He was raised from the dead by the glory of the 
Father. There is our righteousness: all God’s ways having 


144 GRACE AND GOVERNMENT 


found man a sinner, even to the putting Christ to death, the 
righteousness of God is now declared—it is “ unto all, and 
upon all them that believe.” 

Man has come short; man is set aside, root and branch, 
irreclaimable: but there is another Man. Thus it is all grace 
from beginning to end. He is the Source of the life and 
Accomplisher of the righteousness, and He has taken His 
place on the throne of God, and that is the foundation of the 
church of God. So that now it is not merely the fact that a 
person who believes is saved, but he is one with the Head in 
heaven. This is the immense privilege of our position, and 
now is sent down that “ other Comforter ”’ to dwell in us and 
to abide with us for ever. We are one spirit with the Lord. 
The Spirit unites us to Him, the Head, and we are one with 
another also—one body. 

Here we discover the leading truth of what the church really 
is—‘“‘ raised up together and made to sit together in heavenly 
places in Christ.” In this epistle there is nothing said of men 
living in sins, as in other places ; but it speaks of being “ dead 
in trespasses and sins ” before this movement in the soul by 
God, who comes and finds the soul dead in sins, but He quickens 
it together with Christ. It is the whole power and working of 
the grace of God. We must get at the source, the perfect 
grace of God, before we can see where the church is set. We 
must be brought to that. Flesh can have no part. “ They 
that are in the flesh cannot please God.” ‘‘We are not in the 
flesh, but in the Spirit.” We have conflict with it indeed, but 
we are not in it; and now “henceforth know we no man 
after the flesh,” etc. The place of Christ at God’s right hand 
is our place. Workings within to the humbling of the soul 
must go on till we come to this; no good thing is in us— 
*“‘ dead in trespasses and sins.” Then, as of Israel, it can be 
said, ““ What hath God wrought ?”” Where and how am I to 
learn it? When I was dead, without any movement, Christ 
comes down. Not only is He come, but “ made sin for us 
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.” 
He has come down; and now what are we to expect? 
According to what God is: let us not reason from what we 
are of ourselves. ‘“ If God is for us, who can be against us ? ” 
If God “ spared not his own Son,” etc. We may reason from 
what He has done to what He will do; and if I say, How can 
He save me from my sins ? May I not say He must, when He 


GRACE AND GOVERNMENT 145 


has done that—given His Son, and raised Him from the dead ? 
Set down at God’s right hand is the key, as well as the ground, 
of the church’s place. What has God done all this for? For 
my sins. Christ was dead; He died for my sins; but why 
does He go up again? He is righteous, and has taken His 
place in heaven. The one righteous One was rejected on 
earth, and the one righteous One is taken to heaven. God was 
not ruling in righteousness on earth, and it would have been 
no adequate testimony to Him, the only righteous Man, for 
Him to have taken the righteous rule on earth then; but He 
would give Him a place in heaven, far above “‘ principalities 
and powers,” etc. 

It is an accomplished righteousness, and therefore a preached 
righteousness. Because He was accepted, He could send down 
the Holy Ghost, which we received after He went up. He had 
been sealed Himself as the righteous One down here; but 
now the Holy Ghost comes down and seals us, because we 
*‘ are made the righteousness of God in him.” 

Two things we have in consequence of this—the Spirit of 
adoption in our hearts, and union with Christ. We are not 
only blessed by Christ, but we are raised up together with, 
and made to sit together in, Him in heavenly places. All this 
is to shew we have it with Christ. Thus we are more than 
children of the Father, we are members of Christ. The Spirit 
was sent down to unite all the members in one body to the 
Head. If I am in the Spirit and not in the flesh (and you are 
in the Spirit and not in the flesh), how many Spirits are there ? 
One. It is one Spirit in you and in me. One Holy Ghost 
has been sent down, uniting the members to the Head in 
heaven. There is not only life (that was given to Christ), but 
the Holy Ghost is sent down to gather together in one body. 
The other form of our relationship to Christ is the bride, 
united thus with Him in all He is and has. Is He righteous ? 
so am JI. Has He life? so have I. I cannot think of having 
any life, any righteousness, any glory, but what Christ has. 
What a place this gives us! We were dead, but now are put 
into the same place with Christ. ‘“ As he is, so are we in this 
world.” This gives boldness in the day of judgment. In the 
earthen vessel surely we are, but “ as he is, so are we ”—“ bone 
of my bone.” There is an allusion in Ephesians 5 to Genesis 2. 
—We have entire association with Christ ; not only as a man 
cherishes his own flesh does Christ care for us. 


146 GRACE AND GOVERNMENT 


Eve was not lord in the garden of Eden, but Adam was. 
She was not the inheritance. What was shethen? A helpmeet, 
dependent on him, taken out of him, enjoying what her husband 
had as her portion. So is the church with Christ. The title 
is in Him, but it is His delight to confer it on her. He has 
more delight in her having it than Himself. Not only then is 
the church safe—of course that—but who will be the Judge ? 
Christ. How does He judge ? According to the righteousness 
He has given me. I get before the judgment-seat by being 
glorified. What does the apostle say? ‘“‘ Knowing, therefore, 
the terror of the Lord ””—does he speak of himself? No! 
“We persuade men.” If I see the terror of the Lord, I shall 
persuade others to take care and not despise the gospel. The 
glory of that day is the means of our present manifestation 
before God. 

How entirely different our thoughts when we see this as 
our portion! There, in Him, is in principle what the church 
is—righteousness accepted, and not that we have accepted it, 
but God has accepted it, and then the Holy Ghost has been 
sent down. The bride is not yet complete. There are souls 
yet to be gathered in, while His long-suffering continues. 
When complete we shall be no longer here. There is another 
aspect of the church; “* Builded together for an habitation of 
God through the Spirit.”” This is the earthly character (Eph. 2): 
and however man may have spoiled it all, it does not alter the 
fact on God’s part. God has a dwelling in His church. In 
paradise on earth God did not dwell. God was in heaven and 
man upon earth. Adam could not say, ‘‘ How amiable are 
thy tabernacles,” etc. ; but directly God works in grace, He 
brings man into His house. 

Man is to dwell with God, God will dwell with man; 
Exod. 15: 17; chap. 29: 45. God has given us a “ promise 
of entering into his rest.”” God has a rest in grace. The fruit 
of grace is that He is going to bring us into this. If I can 
fathom God’s heart, I can fathom grace. There is something 
in the blessed God we can never measure. Jesus is the measure. 
He has come down here, and He is gone into that blessed 
dwelling-place of God; and therefore He says, “ Let not 
your heart be troubled. I will come again and receive you 
unto myself, that where I am,” etc. There is a man gone 
before into the place where He will have us with Him. God 
cannot rest here, for He cannot rest where all is not according 


GRACE AND GOVERNMENT 147 


to His mind and heart; but there all will be according to 
Himself; (Exod. 29, and afterwards Solomon’s temple, but 
see Acts 7: 48). God had a house till they sinned it away ; 
but now God would have a house—the church, the habitation 
of God through the Spirit. 

Man having been placed in responsibility and in all failed, 
God now brings in all the blessedness of what He has done 
by His own power. Is He glorified in His saints? He will be 
admired in all them that believe. Is the church now what it 
was at first, when “ great grace was upon them all?” If you 
get half-a-dozen people together really in the Spirit, it is a 
triumph of grace—great occasion for thankfulness. It may 
indeed be said, Where is the beautiful flock? But God will 
have it. Down here, in its earthly character there is failure, 
but in the body there is no failure; it is not yet complete, for 
when the church is gathered, the long-suffering will be over. 
Therefore we know it is not all gathered; but the church at 
Jerusalem at the beginning was as much the habitation of God 
as when complete. There was no Achan in the camp then. 
Now “ false brethren have crept in unawares” (Jude), and 
these are specially the objects of the judgment of God. But 
all this does not alter the character of the habitation of God. 

Ephesians 4 gives administration of grace, in the gifts 
bestowed for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all 
come to the unity of the faith, the measure of the stature of 
the fulness of Christ. The apostles and prophets are the 
foundation, and then all that is needed is given. We may see 
weakness now, but there is nourishment in Christ the Head, 
and that cannot fail. 

In 1 Corinthians 12: 13, is one body, not merely having 
life: but “‘ we are all baptised into one body,” Jew and 
Gentile. Then he puts the whole train of gifts for the display 
of power. The apostles and prophets are carefully shewn in 
Ephesians 2, 3 and 4, to be the foundation; evangelists, 
pastors, teachers are to continue till the body is perfect. 
Whatever may be withheld in a time of ruin, the Lord gives, 
not what would take His people out of it, but fully and perfectly 
what they want in it. 

Now, having seen the privileges of our position, we must 
remember the obligation never ceases to be what Christ has 
set us to be—to walk in holiness. The presence of the Holy 
Ghost never ceases to be the Comforter who abideth for ever. 


148 GRACE AND GOVERNMENT 


The power is never absent. How is it then there is such 
weakness ? ‘“‘ Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God,” etc. “If 
thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light.” 
If my eye is not single, I cannot tell what to do or how to do 
it. The power is according to the will and holiness of God. 
The comfort is when God’s thoughts supplant ours. 

There is something strange in the want of confidence in 
divine love amongst saints—no consciousness of relationship. 
In the midst of failure, which one must and ought to feel, 
there is the Father’s love. Has not God said He would go 
with the people, because they are a stiff-necked people ? 

I am in a place of relationship with God, and this nothing 
touches. The superstitions, etc., of men all around cannot 
touch us, if one has a sense of God’s love. But what of the 
forgiveness of sins, etc.? Why, I know I had it ever so many 
years ago. The atonement? Why, this is the ground of it. 
** He that is born of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one 
toucheth him not.” 

Everyone now who has faith in Christ is a member of the 
body of Christ. Love, then, naturally flows to all. 


THOUGHTS ON EPHESIANS 4 


THE first part of this chapter gives ecclesiastical, the second, 
individual godliness. In the previous chapter this connects 
itself with it, that we have not the counsels of God simply, 
but the realisation and verification of these counsels in Christ 
dwelling in the heart by faith. 


First of all we see the thought in God before the foundation 
of the world, but now it has been brought out. God has 
brought these eternal counsels into actual realisation, and this 
leads, of course, to actual walk. God has brought out now 
(as soon as ever Christ had laid the foundation for it by the 
cross) “‘ one body and one Spirit.” 


Though the vocation looks back at the counsels of God, it 
is brought into actuality in this world. It is a sorrow to the 
heart, and it ought to be a much deeper sorrow to us, comparing 
these thoughts of God and their realisation. This is the 
revelation of God’s thought in full blessedness, but we see how 
little in any sense saints have acted up to the mind of God. 


This epistle first gives us the thought of God without 
reference to how far it has been accomplished or not, the 
mind of God as it is; though in chapter 3 we have the actual 
realisation of this in the power of the Spirit of God. Then 
comes the question of how far this is acted out. While Paul 
was there in the world, a continual struggle was going on; 
they were Judaising—dragging down, but the standard was 
never lowered. You will never find that God lowers the 
standard, whatever the failure. He never can lower the 
standard ; He may have and has long patience, but He cannot 
take a lower standard. There are two standards of judgment : 
one is what God set up at the first; the other is, are they 
prepared for Christ’s coming ? There must be the going back 
to what He gave at the first. Malachi takes the Israelites 
back to Horeb: ‘‘ Remember ye the law of Moses my servant 
which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel.”’ Surely 
He will accomplish His promises, but He never lowers the 
standard. There may be a degree of light possessed or not 
possessed ; He deals with this in grace: where there is light, 
more is given; but the standard is not lowered. 


Paul unfolds the vocation, and then calls on us to walk 
worthy of it, in the first part of chapter 4. The necessary 


I§0 THOUGHTS ON EPHESIANS 4 


effect of being brought so close to God as we are is lowliness 
and meekness ; how can it be otherwise? The greatness of 
the grace makes nothing of self. This is not easy. In Christ’s 
life you see it plainly enough, in Philippians also. Then the 
effect of lowliness and meekness is to manifest the unity of 
the Spirit. ‘“‘ With lowliness and meekness,” that is what we 
ought to be: then the effect to others will be longsuffering ; 
others may not be lowly and meek. Practically this brings 
God in and self is gone. The power of love walking with God 
brings in longsuffering to others. ‘“‘ Endeavouring to keep the 
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.” As servants of 
Christ, and self being gone, we are looking at others. “ Yea, 
and if I be offered [poured as a libation] upon the sacrifice and 
service of your faith, I joy and rejoice with you all.” 

The mere fact of their being Jews and Gentiles in the 
church, and the constant tendency among the Jews to think 
little of the Gentiles, made this needed, “‘ endeavouring to 
keep the unity of the Spirit,”’ not the unity of the body—God 
keeps that. Then it comes to be jealousy for Christ’s glory. 
What comes from the Spirit is always one; why are we not 
all agreed ? Because our own minds work; if we had only 
what we have learned from the Scripture, we should be all the 
same. The body is one that cannot be kept by our endeavours. 
All this is the practical realisation of what is in the purpose of 
God. If a man has the Spirit of Christ, he is a member of 
Christ. Jesus was the Christ on earth, but He was a Christ 
rejected: ‘“‘ Messiah shall be cut off, and shall have nothing.” 
Then a much larger scheme and purpose of God comes out. 
He that was the Messiah goes down to the lower parts of the 
earth; the Creator goes below creation, and now He is above 
all creatures. Having done that, He delivers persons from 
Satan and makes them vessels of His power for building up 
those that are delivered. When “he ascended up on high, 
he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.” You do 
not find miracles, tongues, signs of power here, but that which, 
as immutable and faithful Head, He gives for accomplishing 
His purpose. 

If you take the state of things here, through the unfaithful- 
ness of those to whom service was committed, ‘“‘ the wolf 
catcheth the sheep and scattereth them,”’ but he cannot touch 
the power of the Head. You may have everything upset, but 
everything works together for good; you never can touch 


THOUGHTS ON EPHESIANS 4 ISI 


that. But for this, if one was to think of the saints, he would 
break his heart. 

“I stand in doubt of you.” “I have confidence in you 
through the Lord.” You cannot touch the power and faithful- 
ness of the Head, nor confidence in the Head, though there is 
disorder all around. 

“For the perfecting of the saints ’—that is the object. 
The specific object of ministry is the perfecting of the saints. 
This never fails: and it is done in various ways. The 
Corinthians had all sorts of gifts, but they failed in walk. 
We find various differences among the saints. Individual 
perfecting is the direct object of Christ—that each individual 
should grow up to the standard of Christ. Then comes the 
increase of the body. The first object is, that my heart or 
your heart is to be up to the measure of Christ; consequent 
on that comes the increase of the body. It is wonderful if 
you take the sphere and scope there is here. Christ goes to 
the lower parts of the earth, then above all heavens; from 
thence comes ministry. 

We now get what the truth is in Jesus. If we have learned 
Him ourselves, we get this putting off the old man, and putting 
on the new. This is stated as a fact in Colossians: “* Seeing 
that you have put off the old man with his deeds, and have 
put on the new man.” The truth as it is in Jesus is the having 
put off the old man, and having put on the new. 

There are two great elements of the Christian life: one is 
this putting off the old man and putting on the new; the 
other, that the Holy Ghost dwells in us. ‘“ Be ye therefore 
imitators of God as dear children.”’ Supposing this done, 
God’s conduct is the rule and measure of mine. ‘“‘ Be ye 
perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect.”” We are in the 
new creation, we have Christ. Whatis Christ ? The manifesta- 
tion of God. The truth of my state and condition, the truth 
in Christ is that I have put off the old man, and put on the 
new. Christ is our life: it is a new creation—created after 
God “‘in righteousness and true holiness,” not as innocent 
Adam. In Colossians 3 it is expressed in another way, “ the 
new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of 
him that created him ”—that was not Adam’s case at all. 
God is known. I have got now the divine nature fully revealed 
in Christ, ina Man. We are created now after God; we have 
the knowledge of what God is, not of what man ought to be. 


152 THOUGHTS ON EPHESIANS 4 


If as a poor sinner, I am brought to God, I know His love 
the very first instant; I know the righteousness and love of 
God. There is growth, of course. I have Christ instead of 
Adam. I have put off the old man as nothing worth, and put 
on the new. We have to contend with the old as an enemy. 
I own nothing but Christ for my life. The knowledge of good 
and evil has come in, and I cannot take any standard of it 
(now Christ has revealed Him) but God Himself. 

God has made Himself known as Almighty, as Jehovah, 
and as Father. As Almighty, He said, ‘“‘ Walk before me and 
be thou perfect”; as Jehovah, ‘‘ Thou shalt be perfect with 
Jehovah thy God’”’; as Father, “‘ Be ye perfect, even as your 
Father which is in heaven is perfect.” 

The second great principle is, ‘‘ Grieve not the Holy Spirit 
of God whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.” 
The precious blood of Christ having been sprinkled upon us, 
the Holy Ghost dwells in us: this is of immense value to us. 
The new nature cannot reveal anything, the new nature has 
no power. What we see in Christ (there was power in Him, 
of course) is dependence and obedience; these are the great 
leading traits of the new man. The Spirit of God reveals the 
things of Christ, encourages me, shews me His faithfulness 
and His love, and is power in me. God is dwelling in me in 
power, giving me liberty, power, sonship, but at the same time 
the sense of God’s presence. ‘“ Know ye not that your body 
is the temple of the Holy Ghost ?” If He is grieved, the effect 
is that power is gone, and the conscience is bad; the Spirit 
then becomes a rebuker. If the queen were in the house, 
every right-minded man and every thing would bow to her. 

How our hearts cultivate things that are not of Christ! 
Whatever is not fit for His presence is not fit for my heart. 
How often things are allowed in the heart which make the 
heart unwilling (not at the bottom, of course) to let Christ 
back! It is to me a most striking expression of what the 
Christian is that he has put off the old man, and put on the 
new, and that, having the Holy Ghost dwelling in him, he is 
not to grieve the Holy Spirit. ‘ Be ye imitators of God as 
dear children.”” Grace has put us in the place distinctly ; 
and this is the way we are to walk. He takes the two essential 
names of God (He has many attributes), love and light; both 
are that in which we have to say to God. However could I 
imitate God ? you may say. But what do you think of Christ ? 


THOUGHTS ON EPHESIANS 4 153 


Is He not God ? and God just where we want Him? “‘ Awake, 
thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall 
give thee light.”” Do you look at Christ and see what that 
light is ? Christ is the pattern and model. If you wake up 
from the sleeping state of soul (sleep is for the time as bad as 
death), Christ will give you light. ‘“‘ Walk in love as Christ 
also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us, an offering 
and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet-smelling savour.” Christ 
gave Himself up entirely: the law never asked that; the law 
only said, “‘ love your neighbour as yourself.”” In a world of 
sin and sorrow there is another principle, the giving up of self 
for others; and I get another principle of Christ’s love, it 
was ‘“‘to God.” If as a creature I love an unworthy object, 
my love is unworthy. Divine love does not want a worthy ob- 
ject. “For us,” and “‘to God!”—if we reached that, we should 
get the right thing for Christians, the giving up of self and for 
a worthy object. What a picture of the Christian—the old 
man gone, the new man put on, the Holy Ghost in us, and 
Christ the pattern! Surely it is a blessed privilege and a 
truth. Christ’s love went on as a divine source when everybody 
was against Him. Oh! what a calling, beloved brethren. 
If we are only babes in Christ, we may be consistent with what 
we have got. Where a person does walk in that way with God, 
the soul is satisfied as with marrow and fatness in a dry and 
thirsty land. 

If we let Christ practically out of our hearts, it costs a deal 
to bring Him back again. 


GROWING UP IN CHRIST 


EPHESIANS 4: I-16. 


ONE cannot help seeing in such a passage as this the profound 
interest the Lord takes in blessing. There is profound love in 
it, as well as that it is a fact that He delights in blessing. His 
purpose is to bring us into the enjoyment of His own blessed- 
ness. His thoughts are blessings ; and there is none anywhere 
else but in Him. If I speak of blessing, it must be what is in 
the heart of God. A father’s thoughts of giving to his children 
are measured by his love for them. When we see what is in 
God’s heart for us, and that all His thoughts have the form 
and power of blessing, what must they be for us! He is bringing 
us to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ—this 
is to be the result ; but it is the principle and spring of blessing 
that was in my mind to speak upon. He is conforming us as 
to His own thoughts in blessing at the end. The objects of 
this love, we, abject sinners taken up by Him, shew the 
greatness of His love. 

Christ is the great Workman of it all. It is by Christ that 
He does it. When God sets about to bless, it is by the Son 
of His love. It is an immense foundation for us to rest upon— 
not only strong, but wide and large and deep. “ He that 
descended is the same also that ascended up far above all 
heavens, that he might fill all things.” ‘“‘ He descended first 
into the lower parts of the earth.” What, then, is to escape 
the power of Him, who has been borne up to the throne of 
God, after going down to the very lowest place of death under 
sin? He has been in the lowest place of misery and death, 
and is taken up to the highest place in glory—the throne of 
God—and all between is filled up by Christ. This nothing 
can escape. He went down to the place of death and sin, 
“* made sin for us,” and went up to the throne of God! There 
is strength for me a poor sinner, something to rest on. Yet it 
is not distant from us, but we have the consciousness of its being 
in and around us. It is said in Revelation of the “‘ city,” “‘the 
glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.” 

The Lamb is nearer to my heart than any. He has known 
me better than any, better than I know myself; and this 
Christ who dwells in our hearts by faith is the One we shall 
meet there. I shall find One in heaven nearer and dearer to 
my heart, than any one I know on earth. Nothing is so near 
to us as the Christ that is in us, and nothing is so near to God 


GROWING UP IN CHRIST 155 


as Christ. Yet the world is in a man’s heart. All that is 
agreeable and outwardly good in this world finds its echo in 
a man’s heart, and all the evil that has come in finds its place 
there too. Christ was here amidst it all. He met it all without 
having the evil in Him, yet He knows it all. Everything we 
feel, all that passes through the heart of man, Christ has gone 
through, not by grasping at the thing, but by resisting the 
evil. With all the sensibilities of the heart to good or evil 
(and this makes the heart of man such a wonderful thing) 
Christ can meet all. The centre key to all this is Christ: He 
has power to put away the evil. If there was one thing where 
my heart could not rest on Christ, it would be dreadful. All 
have the knowledge of good and evil, even the unconverted 
man. Without Christ he sets about racking his heart to find 
any good thing that is under the sun. All the best affections 
of a man are the occasion of his greatest distress, because sin 
has come in: the heart gets pulled and torn every way, but 
it must go through it. See a wife losing her husband, a mother 
her children. The instant I see Christ in all this trial, I find 
the perfect good God delights in. Divine sympathy is found 
in God Himself. I may have trial and conflict, I must have it 
in passing through the wilderness; but I become weaned from 
the thing that was a snare to me by looking to Christ in it. 
Present confidence in Christ is needed in trial (losing a 
near relative, etc.) but the practical effect is that every trial a 
man goes through gives him (if the heart is thus trusting) to 
know more and more of what Christ is to meet the need, and 
more of Christ as possessing Him. 

“I bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought you unto 
myself’; and there we find all the unfoldings of what God 
is in Christ. I cannot do without Christ. I want manna in 
the wilderness: God gives it to me; and not only do I get 
all this, water, manna, etc., but I have Christ Himself in it all. 
No matter what it is that exercises my heart in the knowledge 
of good and evil, and the need of the heart in consequence, » 
it makes Christ more known and more enjoyed. Our natural 
portion as Christians is to enjoy God. Where has God planted 
us ? In the enjoyment of an accomplished redemption ; and 
the result is that love has not only been manifested towards 
us, but poured out in us. The love of God is shed abroad in 
our hearts by the Holy Ghost which He has given unto us. 
We dwell in God—for His love is infinite, but I am in it; 


156 GROWING UP IN CHRIST 


I dwell in it, and He dwells in me: I, a poor thing, a nothing, 
dwell in Him. I must learn it, as a sinner, in Christ. A proud 
sinner will try to prescribe to God this and that, etc., but 
God will have His way ; and blessed it is that it should be so. 
We are “ builded together for an habitation of God through 
the Spirit ’—this is the ‘‘ vocation.”” What a thought! What 
a bringing down, not of heaven, but something more, by 
special blessing bringing Him down to dwell in us. God 
would not dwell in angels; there is not the same want in 
them, but He will make Himself better known to angels, 
through His kindness towards us by Christ Jesus. There is a 
great deal more for us than the bringing down heaven. “‘ Who- 
soever shall confess Jesus the Son of God, God dwelleth in 
him and he in God.” 

What is the first practical effect of this calling to be “ the 
habitation of God through the Spirit ?”’ “‘ With all lowliness 
and meekness,” etc. (chap. 4: 2). A vessel of God! All the 
passions of the flesh there, but having the presence of God 
makes us unspeakably happy; that is our portion! “In all 
lowliness,”’ etc. A man who is humble needs not to be humbled. 
There is no safety but in being low. Then what is the conse- 
quence if self is not working, and there is lowliness ? Why 
love works. I cannot be happy with you all, if self is working ; 
but if self is not working, love is, and I am full of love towards 
you all. What a spring of blessedness in communion there is ; 
so far as self is down, broken to pieces, there is an outgoing 
of perfect love to the brethren. ‘‘ Love is of God.” His 
nature is at work when we love one another. The spring of 
the fellowship we find just now is God being here. God is 
our joy, and love (God’s own nature) working, and God our 
common object. There are trials and difficulties for us all ; 
but there is blessed joy in knowing one another thus, and seeing 
Christ in one another. ‘“ Receive ye one another to the glory 
of God.” If we meet a Christian, though he may be a stranger, 
we can be more intimate with him than with one’s own family 
who are not. Why? Because God is there. 

Another thing observe, there is the consciousness of what 
this unity is. ‘‘ There is one body, and one Spirit, one Lord, 
one faith,” etc. We are brought together, not only through 
being united, but by what we possess together, one Lord, 
one faith, etc., rich or poor. Another has his particular trials, 
and I mine; but both have God. 


GROWING UP IN CHRIST 157 


** One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through 
all, and in you all.” God is above the world ; you cannot tell 
me of one thing God is not above, and therefore there is not 
one thing that can separate me from His love. He is “‘through 
all.” You cannot find yourself in trouble and God not there ; 
you cannot find yourself in any difficulty, perplexity, and not 
find God through it all. And He is “‘in you all.” He has 
come to be the spring of all happiness in us. If I know what 
water is, it is by drinking; if I know what sweetness is, it is 
by tasting it; if I know God, it is by His being in me. We 
can look upon one another and see God in us all. Then these 
light afflictions, what are they ? God is come to take possession 
of us, and He is the spring in our hearts also. He comes to 
make us love, because He loves. We shall find it is fully so 
in heaven. If anything is a safeguard against evil, it is that 
such an one dwells in us; but it is more—it is the spring in 
the new nature, God’s nature. 

The perfecting of the saints is before God, and should be 
before us. Christ is the object of His thoughts. I must have 
these loved ones like Christ; therefore what God does is to 
make them grow up unto Christ. In the unity of the body, 
and in all the communion, and through all the exercise of 
heart, we have the end of all. In ministering to you or you 
to me, it is to grow up into Christ, that there may be more of 
Christ in us. All the flow of Christian affection, all the 
enjoyment we have here, is for this end. I can look at my 
brother and know he is going to be in heaven with me. The 
enjoyment of all this shuts out the world: you are not thinking 
of your cares and troubles now. Fellowship with the brethren 
is perfect deliverance from all that is of the flesh ; flesh cannot 
enter into it, all that is of the world is gone. I am dead to it. 
Every bit of fellowship I have with a brother is a proof that 
outside things are gone and done with. The more we are 
individually full of divine things, the more this communion 
with each other is realised. Two together, if both are spiritual, 
open the sluices that all the wells in the world cannot dry up. 
The power of the Holy Ghost, that makes me overcome now, 
will make me enjoy heaven, where there is nothing else: 
“they that dwell in thine house will be still praising thee.” 
The power of evil, of the world, of Satan, is all gone. Our 
common joy now is in Christ, in the communion of His love ; 
and when we are with Him, it will be completely without alloy. 


G 27 


THE CHRISTIAN WALK 


WE find in Ephesians 4 and 5, a very seasonable unfolding 
of the principles of the Christian walk, of the height of the 
principles which ought to govern it, and of its moral elevation, 
to which I desire to draw the attention of your readers. In 
chapter 4 the apostle, after having developed Christian doctrine 
as to our relations with the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ (relations founded on these two names, and afterwards 
the relations of the church with Christ), begins his exhortations 
to Christians with respect to their walk. They ought not to 
walk as the rest of the nations in the corruption which was 
bound up with the state of darkness in which they were found ; 
they had not so learned the Christ, if they really knew what 
the truth is in Jesus, namely, to have put off the old man and 
put on the new man, which is created according to God in 
righteousness and holiness of truth. 

For there is the truth such as it is in Jesus; not that we 
should strip off, but, inasmuch as we are risen with Him, that 
we have put off the old man and put on the new man. There 
then is the first principle of the Christian walk: we have put 
on the new man; and here is its character, created according 
to God ; not only the absence of sin, which was realised in the 
first Adam, but according to God fully revealed to one who 
has already the knowledge of good and evil, and created 
according to the thoughts of God Himself as to good and evil, 
according to the estimate which God by His very nature has 
of good and evil. What an immense privilege! The new 
man, born of God, is, in his nature, the reflection, and the 
intelligent reflection, of the nature of God Himself. Wherefore 
the apostle John says he cannot sin because he is born of God. 
Also we find in the Epistle to the Colossians, which is parallel 
to this, “renewed into knowledge* according to the image 
of Him who has created him.” Such is the first principle of 
the Christian walk, a nature which comes from God, created 
as an expression and reflection of what He is in righteousness 
and holiness of truth. Here it is a life, a nature, that which 
we are. 

The second principle is the presence of the Holy Spirit. 
*“* Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God by whom you have been 


* The Greek word translated ‘‘ knowledge ’? means full knowledge, 
personal knowledge, so as to recognise anyone. 


THE CHRISTIAN WALK 159 


sealed for the day of redemption.” It is God Himself who 
dwells in us by His Spirit. Nothing unworthy of such a 
guest, unworthy of God Himself, ought to go on in us. Also, 
our walk should be characterised by that which characterises 
God Himself, for His love is active in us. Consequently 
we find here love also, and not only righteousness and holiness. 
We forgive one another, even as God in Christ has forgiven 
us. Christ being ascended on high, and thus the righteousness 
of God being established, ourselves perfectly purified by the 
blood of Jesus, the Holy Spirit is come down, and the bodies 
of the believers are become the temple of God. It is the seal 
of God put upon their persons, the earnest of their entire 
redemption and of their part in the inheritance of glory. 

The walk of the Christian ought then to be the manifestation 
of the divine nature, and of the ways of God in grace towards 
us. Such is the instruction which chapter 4 gives us; but 
chapter § furnishes still more light. Who is it that has been 
the expression of this nature in man down here below? 
Evidently it is the Saviour, the image of the invisible God. 
Thus, God Himself becomes the expression of this divine 
life in man, the model of our conduct. Let us examine our 
chapter 5 in this point of view, that we may draw from it the 
instruction it contains. 

“Be ye therefore imitators of God.” Have I not been 
right in speaking of the moral elevation of the Christian 
walk? Be imitators of God! Partakers of His nature and of 
the indwelling of His Spirit, we are called to imitate Him in 
the principles of His conduct. But then, as we have said, 
Christ is the perfect example of it; as the Holy Spirit goes on 
to say, ““ And walk in love, as Christ loved us and gave himself 
up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling 
savour.” This adds a very precious element to the principles 
of the Christian walk. Here love has not the character of the 
divine love which pardons, being above evil, when a wrong is 
done to us, as God pardons (in virtue of Christ) sin against 
Him. Here it is devotedness, an offering made of oneself to 
God. It is no more a law which would have one love his 
neighbour as himself, which would be blessedness without 
any remains of evil in the world. It is not loving God with 
all the heart, which supposes that evil is not there. It is a 
devotedness, which supposes evil, a necessity which is the 
occasion for the exercise of love. One is given up for others, 


160 THE CHRISTIAN WALK 


one is devoted. But for love in man, there must be a motive, 
an object. For this love to be perfect, the object, the motive 
of the love, must be perfect. If one is given up to a man, 
there may be a noble devotedness in it, but the motive is 
imperfect: love does not and cannot rise above its object. 
Just so, that there should be devotedness, there must be 
needy objects. These two elements are found in Christ. 
He gave Himself for us, for needy beings, objects of compas- 
sion on His part; but He gave Himself to God, infinite and 
perfect object, which could not have been, had He only given 
Himself to us and for us. 


It is thus we ought to walk, ready to sacrifice ourselves for 
our brethren, always in self-abnegation to serve them, whilst 
offering ourselves to God Himself, to Christ whose we are. 
Thus the measure of our conduct is that of God Himself, 
Christ being our example in His life here below, in order 
that we should add love, the bond of perfect action, to 
brotherly kindness. It is not said that we are love, which is 
God’s prerogative. He is love, and He loves, as to us, without 
any other motive than what He is; which could not be the 
case with a creature. We imitate Him in the matter of the 
wrongs that have been done to us. But the love which acts 
from itself towards others is of God alone. 


Again, light is a quality in itself, a purity which also manifests 
everything. It is the second name that God gives Himself 
to express what He is. God is light. So Christ, when He was 
in this world, was the light of the world. We were in darkness, 
we are light in the Lord. ‘Thus in the Epistle to the Philip- 
pians we find, respecting Christians, that which might be 
said in every point of Christ Himself, “‘ blameless and harmless, 
the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked 
and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the 
world, holding forth the word of life.”’ In this pure nature 
we share, inasmuch as we have Christ for our life—purity in 
motives, in thoughts according to the divine nature; that 
which, manifested in this world, manifested the true character 
of all that is around us. We are light in the Lord. 

Thus the two names, the only ones God gives Himself to 
express what He is, love and light, become the expression of 
what the Christian ought to be in his walk. He is even light 
in the Lord. 


THE CHRISTIAN WALK 161 


There exists another sort of motive and of rule, the relation- 
ships in which we are found, as father and children, husband 
and wife, master and slaves. We are in these relationships 
also with God and with His Christ. But it is another ground 
on which I do not enter at present. That of which I speak 
is the Christian character, as having divine life in Christ and 
the Holy Spirit: so that one has to imitate the conduct of 
God, and to take Christ for model on the earth. 


“CHRIST LOVED THE CHURCH ” 
EPHESIANS 5 : 22, 23. 


REMARK, beloved brethren, how the grace of God has associated 
us with Himself and with Christ, though, of course, remaining 
Himself meanwhile in the supremacy of infinite Godhead, in 
which none can be associated with Him; but He has made 
us partakers of the divine nature, and given us His Spirit to 
dwell in us, so that we realise what He is, and become one 
with Christ through being united to Him. 

We find, in the early part of Ephesians 5, that we are called 
to be ‘‘ imitators of God, as dear children, and to walk in 
love.” Love is His nature; and we see this exemplified in a 
man, if we take Christ as the pattern of it. ‘*‘ Walk in love, 
as Christ also hath loved us.” 

Besides this we get another word brought before us, which 
also expresses God’s nature: that is light; and it is said: 
**'Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the 
Lord: walk as children of light.” And, here too, Christ is 
given as the perfect expression of what is put before us. 
‘** Awake, thou that sleepest, and rise from the dead, and 
Christ shall give thee light.”” As a man in the world, He was 
the expression and pattern of light. 

But after this he adds, “ Be filled with the Spirit”; for, 
though we are made partakers of this divine nature, which is 
light, and we are called to love after the pattern of God in 
Christ, yet after all we are but poor human creatures, powerless 
in ourselves; and the Spirit is the only power we have for 
everything. 

In God’s mind it is everything for us to have fellowship 
with Himself. He has put us before Himself in love ; He has 
made us His sons and daughters—the objects of His delight ; 
and He should be the object of our delight. So much for the 
first relationship that we find here. It is with the Father as 
sons, and in this Christ is the Firstborn among many brethren. 

The second is union with Christ now glorified: ‘‘ We are 
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.” We 
are livingly united to Him, as members to a head. I cannot 
get closer to him than being a member of His body, and in 
the same glory with Himself. This relationship gives us the 
indissoluble union of Christ and the church. ‘* Husbands 
love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and 


** CHRIST LOVED THE CHURCH ” 163 


gave himself for it. . . and let the wife see that she reverence 
her husband.” Though quite true as regards husband and 
wife, it is a figure of Christ and the church. 

But, though we are united to Him, He is ever pre-eminent, 
and what even gives its value to this relationship is the 
necessary pre-eminence in it, as in everything, of Christ. 
When Moses and Elias were on the mount with the Lord, 
they were in the same glory as He was, and talking with Him 
of what was nearest His heart, and nearest His Father’s heart 
too; they were in familiar intercourse with Him. But, even 
then, the moment Peter talks about making three tabernacles, 
one for each, thus putting them on an equality, the Father’s 
voice comes in and owns His Son, and Moses and Elias at 
once disappear. I only use this to illustrate what I mean ; 
and so it must always be. There must always be the eternal 
blessedness and pre-eminence of His Person, and the nearer 
we get to Him the more conscious we shall be of this. If I 
know a man indeed intimately, I shall surely get to know his 
foibles. In Christ, the more I know Him, the more I shall 
only get to know deeper, and divine, excellence. There is no 
fear of near acquaintance diminishing respect towards Him: 
the more I feel His love, the more I shall feel that He is 
supreme in it. Intimacy with His love only shews out its 
excellence, and produces more adoration and love in me. 

God is supreme in love. It is not said in chapter § that 
we are to be love; we cannot be free and supreme in it; we 
are said to be light, because the new man partakes in the 
purity of His nature. And in the love of Christ we find the 
working of this supreme goodness, and in a man, so that 
following Him we can walk in it, though we cannot say we 
are love, as we say we are light. 

But, in the case of the church, at the close of chapter 5, we 
have a love of special relationship, not simply the goodness 
and sovereign love of God; yet the spring and source of all 
is in the unsought love of Christ, in which He acts in the 
thought of His own grace, when there was nothing to draw it 
out. He has to purchase what He loves, and form it for 
Himself. He “ gave himself for it’?: and when He gets it, 
He cleanses it for Himself. 

But there is yet another point of view. He presents it “‘ to 
himself.””> When God had made Eve, He presented her to 
Adam; but here we get the glory of Christ’s Person. Being 


164 “* CHRIST LOVED THE CHURCH ” 


a divine Person He presents the church to Himself, having 
formed it and perfected it, so as to be suited to Himself. 
He does all for the church. Let us now see a little of the way 
in which He does it. 

The first thing of all is His own unmotived love. ‘“‘ He 
loved the church,” perfectly, divinely, infinitely; we here 
find the utterness of His love. ‘“‘ He gave himself.”’ He did 
not only do something for it: ‘‘ He gave himself! ”’ And this 
is constantly repeated in the word ; it is even said that “‘ He 
gave himself for our sins,” our sins being that which was in 
the way between us and God. As I look at Christ’s love, I 
see that it had no motive but in itself, and it gives itself: 
nothing is held back. He is wholly and altogether mine ; 
He has given Himself, and all is lumped up in that. The self- 
sacrifice of Christ was absolute: it was Himself, all He is, 
and all He was in His perfection. The whole motive of His 
nature was engaged in it: “‘ He gave himself.’ And this is 
a wonderful thought, if our hearts could only get hold of it. 
It is not that He gave His blood, and gave His life, though 
that is true, and we may speak of it distinctively, for Scripture 
does ; but the point here is the character of His love; so it 
says, ‘‘ He gave himself.” The motive was self-giving. 

Mark here how, as regards the process of fitting the church 
for Christ, loving it and giving Himself for it goes first. It 
does not say, He cleansed and washed it so that He might 
have it, and then loved it because it was cleansed and fit to 
be loved. No. He gives Himself for it, and possesses it 
with a perfect title; Himself given for it, in the absolute 
completeness of His whole heart, according to which He has 
taken it to Himself. He gives Himself for it because He 
loved it; and now, He says, it must be cleansed and made fit 
for me. Not, it must be happy—happy it is, no doubt—but 
not only so; it must be made fit for Himself. I cannot be 
satisfied if a person I love is not what I like him to be—my 
children or wife, for example. It is not a feeling of discontent 
—I do not mean that—but a want of full satisfaction. So 
Christ sets about making the church what He would like it 
to be. He cleanses it by “‘ the washing of water by the word.” 
As He said before: ‘“* Sanctify them through thy truth: thy 
word is truth.” 

As the word comes from God, it judges all that is contrary 
to God, by the revelation of what is in God, so that it may 


“* CHRIST LOVED THE CHURCH ” 165 


make me like what it reveals. ‘‘ For their sakes,’’ He says, 
““I sanctify myself.” As Man, He set Himself apart as the 
perfect expression of what is divine in a man, or man according 
to God. So it is not that I am what I ought to be, but that 
I am connected with Christ, who is the expression of what 
I ought to be, and forms me into His likeness. ‘‘ We all, 
with open face beholding the glory of the Lord, are changed 
into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit 
of the Lord.” That is the way it cleanses: it purifies our 
motives, thoughts, and apprehensions, thus changing us into 
the same image from glory to glory. But He is the doer; 
He redeems us, cleanses us, sanctifies us, and presents us. 
There is also a thought here which is full of the deepest 
interest ; and that is, that we cannot separate the cleansing 
from the glory. The cleansing is according to the glory, and, 
when the body is changed, the state of holiness is according 
to the glory revealed ; see 1 Thessalonians 3 : 13, where we 
should have said “ unblameable in holiness ” in our walk ; 
but we read, in the presence “ of God, even our Father, at 
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.” We cannot really get 
on without looking at Christ in glory. It is said that “ He 
might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, 
or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy 
and without blemish.” That is the cleansing. Practical 
cleansing is by the power of the revelation of the glory of 
Christ. But let us always remember that this cleansing is 
not in order that we may belong to Him, but that it is ‘‘ Christ 
loved the church, and gave himself for it, that he might 
cleanse it.” | 
Another thing that we find as regards the church, and 
this ought to comfort us in these dark days, and in the darker 
ones which we see coming. He goes on to say: “‘ No man 
ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth 
it, even as the Lord the church.” It is not only that He fits 
it for Himself—makes it according to His own mind; but the 
same love that fits it, watches over it in the circumstances of 
weakness in which it is found, as it passes through the world. 
Why, he says, a man’s flesh is himself; Christ takes care of 
Himself in taking care of the church. As he said to Saul : 
“Why persecutest thou me?” You are touching Me in 
persecuting them. Christ does not separate the saints down 
here from Himself. He is interested in them, cares for them, 


166 ‘* CHRIST LOVED THE CHURCH ”’ 


nourishes and cherishes them as a man does the flesh of his 
own body. And in this He can never fail. The darkness may 
be great, and the power of evil strong, and growing stronger 
(not that God is not working, for He is; and when the enemy 
comes in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord will lift up a 
standard against him, and is doing so, and preparing the 
coming of the Lord), but no more than a man can hate himself, 
can Christ fail in doing this—nourishing and cherishing the 
church. 

The Lord has long patience with all this growing evil (we 
may pray that things may go quicker, that He would bring 
the end on more rapidly, calling in His own; but, if so, it 
will bring evil out more rapidly too, and the judgments that 
are coming on the earth, but yet we may desire it); but all 
through the faith of the saint can reckon on the care and love 
of Christ. You cannot put me in any circumstances where the 
love of Christ cannot suit me. 

Nor even does the working of unbelief hinder. For, when 
those who are believers cannot use the power that has been 
brought in against evil, what is to be done? We read, that 
when they brought one possessed of a demon to the disciples, 
and they could not cast him out, the Lord says: ‘‘ How long 
shall I be with you ? how long shall I suffer you?” If you 
cannot use the power I have brought in, what is the use of 
staying with you? But He adds, “ Bring him hither to me.” 
Even if the faith of the church fail, and one were alone in the 
trial, individual faith will always find grace in the Lord Jesus 
Christ for its want. Just as the father of the child cried out 
with tears: ‘“‘ Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief.” 
Christ cannot fail ; and we on our side must not be like Elijah, 
saying, ‘‘ Lord, they have thrown down thine altars, and slain 
thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; 
and they seek my life to take it away ”’ (and mark at the moment 
he had thrown down their altars and slain their prophets), 
and then run away. What we want to say is: Well, Christ 
never fails, and there cannot be a want in Christ’s church 
without there being an answer to it in Christ’s heart. 

All we want, beloved friends, is to have the eye fixed on 
Christ, from whom all grace and love flow, and to be sanctified 
in heart and spirit thereby, while waiting for Him, who has 
given Himself for us, so that we might be like Him even now, 
while walking through this world. 


CONFLICT IN HEAVENLY PLACES 


EPHESIANS 6: IO-18. 


THE very blessings of the church (as in Eph. 1: 3) set us 
into a sort of conflict, which, without such blessings, we 
should not have. So the church is subject to more failure 
than either Jews or Gentiles were, because they were not 
called to the same blessing. A Jew might do many things 
that would be monstrous in a Christian, and yet find no defile- 
ment in his conscience. The veil that was over the knowledge 
of God being rent, the light shines out ; and the consequence 
is that this light which has come out of the holy place cannot 
tolerate evil. Christians are in a more dangerous position, if 
not walking in the light, than Jews. Satan may draw and 
entice me with many things, which would have no power 
against me if I were not so favoured. ‘“‘ Be strong in the 
Lord”; here is the place of strength. There is no strength 
but in Christ—I have none at any time, except as my soul is 
in secret communion with Him, and through Him with God 
the Father. The direct power of Satan is toward this point, 
to keep our souls from living on Christ. Put on the whole 
armour of God; there is no standing against Satan without 
this. Strength is always the effect of having to do with God 
in the spirit of dependence. 


We see in 1 Samuel 14 the contrast between Saul and 
Jonathan ; between confidence in God overcoming all obstacles, 
and self failing with all the resources of royalty. Jonathan 
clambered up on his hands and feet, confident in God, and 
the enemies were overcome. Saul, when he saw the work 
going on, not knowing the Lord’s mind, calls for the priest. 
He had a right intention, but not a simplicity of dependence 
on God, when inquiring what he should do, and spoils all by 
his foolish oath. It is said of Jonathan that ‘“‘ he wrought with 
God.” God was with him, and he had strength and liberty, 
not a humiliation we have often felt, because he wrought with 
God. When we are walking in dependence on God, there 
will always be liberty before God. Jonathan knew what he 
should do, and took some honey, because he went on in liberty, 
for God was with him, whilst Saul in legality had put himself 
and the people into bondage. 

The word then, after grace in Christ has been fully shewn 


168 CONFLICT IN HEAVENLY PLACES 


throughout the epistle, is, “‘ Be strong in the Lord,” wv. Io. 
We have the privilege here of individual dependence on God. 
Everything may be dark, but the Lord tells us to be strong. 
This is always accompanied with lowliness of heart; come 
what will, when the Lord is rested on, we are strong. 


We are called to put on the panoply of God, to take it to 
us (v. 11-13). And no wonder: the conflict is not with 
men but with evil spirits (v. 12). Who but an unbeliever can 
overlook or despise them? They are principalities and 
authorities ; they are the universal lords of this darkness ; 
they are spiritual wickednesses in the heavenly places. Truly 
to withstand such we need the whole armour of God; which, 
remember, is not a question of standing but of practical power, 
and this is in entire dependence. 

If we pray, be it observed, without searching the word, or 
read the word without prayer, we may get no guidance, for 
Jesus said, “If my words abide in you, ask what ye will,” 
etc.; without this I may be asking some foolish thing that 
would not be given. We are to stand against the wiles of the 
devil, not his power. It is not knowing Satan that enables us 
to discover his wiles, but the keeping in God’s presence. It 
was always so with Christ, because He was always dependent 
on God. Stand, having your loins girt about with truth. 
Truth is never really ours but as the affections are ordered 
by it. If the soul of the hearer be not in communion with 
God in the truth he hears, his loins are not girt with it. The 
breastplate of righteousness supposes not merely this, but that 
we have nothing on the conscience (v. 14). Christ’s blood 
made it good ; and walking in the Spirit keeps it so. 

Verse 15. The gospel of peace is ours in Christ; but I 
must have the spirit of peace in my heart, and be sanctified 
by the God of peace, the soul in communion with God, with 
Him in the spirit of peace; and without this how can the 
saint walk as always having peace? He is thus prepared to 
walk by the gospel. 


Verse 16. Whether I look at the sin that made grace 
necessary, or at the power which caused me to enjoy it, I may 
walk in perfect peace against every source of sorrow. Every 
fiery dart is quenched by confidence in God—the shield of 
faith. It is as essential for the conflict as for saving the soul. 
We need to cherish confidence in the grace of God all through. 


CONFLICT IN HEAVENLY PLACES 169 


Verse 17. I hold up my head because I know I am safe ; 
salvation is mine. I must first get that which is internal: 
that which is wrought in me is power. Before I use the sword 
of the Spirit, I must first have the loins girded about with 
truth, the heart covered with righteousness, the feet shod 
with the preparation of the gospel of peace, and then (the 
shield of faith being up and the helmet of salvation on) I can 
take the sword of the Spirit. Nothing is more dangerous 
than to use the word if it has not touched my conscience. 
I put myself in Satan’s hands if I go beyond what I have 
from God, or what is in possession of my soul. To talk with 
saints on the things of God, beyond what I hold in communion, 
is most pernicious ; to fight without it is fatal. 


Verse 18. The word always must deal with ourselves 
before others, but prayer is the expression and exercise of 
dependence. If a person asks me a question, and I answer 
without speaking to God about it—going direct, it will be 
more likely to lead him from God than to God. When a 
question or difficulty comes, do we turn to God? We may 
have turned to God before, and the thing is answered, and 
we ought to have such power of prayer, that there would be 
no difficulty when any circumstance arises. If supplication 
be thus continual, there would be no occasion to ask Him 
about particular things when they come before us. 


** Supplication in the Spirit.” All acceptable prayer is 
not, I think, prayer in the Spirit. A wish or desire expressed 
to God, in all the confidence of a child to his father is heard, 
but this is not necessarily “‘ prayer in the Spirit.” It is the 
power of the Spirit in us looking for blessing as walking in the 
Spirit of God—that is such prayer; not even a difficulty 
here when living really in the power of communion. We have 
that energy of supplication which looks for answers—for all 
answers, and for myself too—watching thereunto with all 
perseverance. Suppose you begin the day with a sweet spirit 
of prayer and confidence in God: in the course of the day, 
in this wretched world you find a thousand cares and agitations ; 
but if you are spiritually exercised, alive to see the things of 
God, everything will be a matter of prayer and intercession, 
according to the mind of God. Thus humbleness and depen- 
dence should mark all a saint’s actions. 


Instead of being full of regret at what we may meet with, 


170 CONFLICT IN HEAVENLY PLACES 


if we are walking with Christ we shall see His interests in a 
brother—in the church. What a blessed thing to carry every- 
thing to God! The word in verse 18 refers to a man walking 
in the whole armour. 

The apostle took the love of the saints for granted. We 
also, if walking in the Spirit, can always count on others 
being interested in our affairs. 








ya = 
ee ee ea baer 
nl aT ae A 
a ee ee 
peer berger eet Bre) e 


Serre a pe eS aS eee 
sete? ee ~ ye ie 3 
ee eg ee tent oe ee ar a neve merger ne rac eeu ae Pes oer Pere eS 
Sea haat ely reahure Sune arena menue Pec wae apemcaraare 
See or Le eric h~ airy f quae ners D 
REY Seer 


Pee se eee 
arm haar pe ee ere a % “ ceo = z re ek ot pea aes ney f 
z te Bee : 5 = : rere are Sa rene pepe ee werent! presenter ee 
es ey : Pol deta Wf EET IET Oe SO OLE BET OP ap Len wesw 
Bo ar ran fae Cnn ae eee A a a ome 
See ae re ren a eae 


a ara rh BNA BIT Oe 
Se rer rer ance ere ee a oe So oe Seana 5 : 
See eae enti Seo She rea rere eae rare et 
ons : rage pean SOE yma TET 
‘ usr Be ee he eee ao 
Sree ernie ro ow er a aaa 
area ee ee era aN a I Ie ee ire hen re lie ar er eee 
Fibaicianasrnvesan peat tng lag tg og ig eA a Oe Ne Fen 
aa ae eae : - 
Ppa ra bre Pa wre ng nent Pe SETI ON Yee Be ee eg rareeraeey x " = ye ee eee 
Deiee a earet a coe n eee bee meer wee Se SSeTeeyC : es = De Fire bh ee : 
nS . Te ry ee re a taeete ttt pear epeir Sr Oe ener ede ST a oe 
. = 2 ~ ™: wanes Se rn Bae ee ene eo areca aa 
, - es ee eee rnc ese eine eres 3 
a ae ee ie ee al aera S ae enone ere ne See eed os 
perenne vate eshte at re ald a Foner fo z 
z Src Saar eater ee Tee ta One Sree : 
SS ee a Secor e ee ey Rea e ealon ne Ootaherelarrs hee 
P <—res eae pore ln rae oa eae perenne ere eS EE eS 
rare eer eee ora = aa : ; cS ey eee a = Poase rare : ey rons 
: ravens evens ie StS z ~ Sere on wis PUTIN ERR Ee SOTO 
See oar ered es sae a ee . ; 5 ore SE ay ele pas 
Sense Day Ss a a a a a SN Fe nol re Sere rk 
Ptr phe earee “ a= = Deemer Sr Te tare an She OT ae ea a ST SE 
a ~ 5 i - ers SANT A SOE Se on re ree shan ere ee er Be Sew ~ mor See ee Sn 
aon Lae Sa retraite ; sea Seseran tora 
Crea) Ce ral rcs range eters ee Se 
irae tm parses erence oe eee re = 
aarp ere Peter wren eaten ee oe = 
ches os ee eae 


er San EE Oe aaa 


Se yee re eree eat ele ere rer : ees inte te adm 





