Oo 


: a 


reEFEE EE 


== 
e 
= 

EF 

F 

Ge 


T 


i) 
n 


Tez Mas 


- MICROCOPY RESOLUTION TEST CHART 
NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS 
STANDARD REFERENCE MATERIAL 1010a 
(ANSI and ISO TEST CHART No. 2) 


aw 
ig WW Wic & 
Be 171 b- 


ERSITY 


761 03283 6009 


A Rt WH) 
im) ee i 
Ty | | 
i | 


~ VICTORIA 
it 


T 
| i 


1 

| 
1 By 
ite 
ry 


GEMS OF CHRISTIAN THOUGHT. 


EDITED BY 


heer. WH. DANIELS, A.M. || 


_ wae. kien 
<3 PRICE 25. CENTS. 2 
a le . 


Toronto, Out: 
PUBLISHED By A, H. HOVEY, 
48 KING STREET EAST. 


; AND 


GEMS OF CHRISTIAN THOUGHT. 


« 


Z —— Goronto, Ont: 
PUBLISHED By A. H. HOVEY, 

48 KING STREET EAsT, 
1877, 


CONTENTS: 


Biographies of Moody and Sankey 
Training and Methods of Mr. Moody 
Cap. I.—-New Stories from an oe Book: 
Story of a Blind Man 
The Story of Mephibosheth 
The Story of Barabbas 
Elijah and the Priests of Baal 
The Leper 
” ‘The Widow’s Son 
The Story of Naaman 
Prayer Meeting Talks. . 
Suggestions to Church Members 
Address: to Christians 
_ Christ the Good Samaritan 
Create a Clean Heart in Me, O.God 
God's Power to Save the Drunkard 
A Rainy Day Prayer Meeting 
The Prophet Daniel in Mr. Moody’s Version 
How to Study and Mark Your Bible... : , 
~ Hints on Bible Marking...... Rese eninueug Onte 
Signs used i in Bible Marking........ ere ee be 
Moody’s Gems of Christian Thought 


oie. 0 e428 


MY War tet it a) 


eee e ee 


BIOGRAPHY OF MOODY AND SANKEY. | 


senate i 


yy R. MOODY is a native of New England, thirty- 
im nine years old, and a Congregationalist by religious 
profession. In 1854 he obtained a situation in a 
Joston shoe-store, and it was during his short so- 
) journ there that he became a regular attendant at iy 
+ church. Leaving Boston, he went to Chicago, en- f E 
gaged in business, and began his work as a mis- ‘ 
‘sionary. He collected from the ‘stygets a large congregation 
of children, organised an efficient yaa of teachers, and soon . 
had under his control the most important mission enterprise ie 
in the West. His succesg was so rapid, that, in order to ac- 
commodate the jreds that flocked to receive his instruction 
he was obliged ttRafigage a large hall, which was soon filled 
to overflowing. His style of teaching was-most attractive. 
He was persuasive, sympathetic, and unusually considerate in 
« the choice of his subjects, and the method of dealing with 
them. Cheerful music, bright pictures, simple and appro- 
priate stories, and intense personal earnestness, were the chief 
elements of his success, ‘ : 
Finding this enterprise firmly established, he turned his 
attention to the condition of German, Swedish, Norwegian, 
Italian, and other childréh of foreign birth or descent, and in 
a short time had gathered together an immense number of 
them. The field of his particular usefulness appeared so Vi 
broad, and the necessity for his labor so urgent, that he was | 


——bliged to abandon his mercantile business and devote him- 
self wholly to his mission work. : : | 

In 1861, when large military camps were established at 

Chicago, he began .to work among the recruits, and as the 


war expanded. his field was correspondingly enlarged. He — 


4 BIOGRAPHY OF MOODY AND SANKEY. 


’ organised the Western branch of the Christian Commission, 
and became its President. Throughout the war he was con- 
tinually alternating between Chicago and the military field. 
Upon the close of that struggle he resumed his mission work, 

The Young Men’s Christian Association held their annual 
Convention of 1871 at Indianapolis, Ind. Mr. Moody at- 
tended. During tho session he was attracted by the deep 
fervor of one singer, and sought an introduction. Thus the , 
friendship and co-operation between Mr. Moody and Mr, 
Sankey had their birth. 

Mr. Sankéy is a native of Edinburgh, Pa,, son of the Hon. 
David Sankey, and thirty-six years old. In 1866 he united 
with the Methodist denomination, and possessing a gootl 

- voice, he determined to devote himself to Sunday-school 

singing. After his introduction to Mr. Moody hw began to 

assist in the labors at Chicago, and continued there until 
both sailed for Europe last winter. 

Returning in August, after conducting a series of religious » 
services in London, which, for length of time, number of par- 
ticipants, and beneficence of result, was without parallel, 
they received invitations from every quarter of the United 
States to inaugurate a similar revival. ‘Deciding at length to 
begin the work in Brooklyn, the Rink in that city was secured ; 
fitted up at an expense of $2,000 ; a stage was built capable 
of seating 500 people ; a.choir of 250 voices collected; and 
the services were opened on Sunday morning, October 24th, 
with an audience of at least 5,000 persons. Throughout the 
week the attendance increased so rapidly that Mr. Talmage’s 
Tabernacle was opened to accommodate those who could not 
find even standing-room in the immense Rink, both Mr. 
- Moody and Mr. Sankey spending a short time at each place. 

After the close of the Brooklyn meetings, similar services were 
held in Philadelphia, New, York, Chicago and Boston, with 
more than expected success. . “ 


Yommission, 
he was con- 
ilitary field. 
ission work, 
their annual 
- Moody at. 
ny the deep 
> Thus the , 
ly and Mr, 


of the Hon. 
36 he united 
sing a goorl 
inday-school 
he began to 

there until 


a of religious ~ 


imber of par- 
out parallel, 
f the United 
at length to 
was secured; 
built capable 
lected; and 
Yetober 24th, 
roughout the 
fr. Talmage’s 
sho could not 
k, both Mr. 
at each place. 
‘services were 


Boston, with 


men that he had been 


oe evangelical work had* extended no further 


MOQDY'S TRAINING AND METHORs. 
HIS GREAT THEMBg “GOD IS LOVE,” 


fy ERY much has been said of the simplicity of Mr. 
I) Moody’s religious belief, and how it has been en- 
IM) larged and intensified through Sunday-school and 
WA missionary work. The subject deserves further re- 
mark. It is now more than 15 years since the 
evangelist becanie thoroughly devoted to the ‘Chris- 
- \ tian cause, In the ‘beginning his sermons and ad- 
-, dresses to a large oxtent were composed of incidents occurring 
in his own experience, and though based upon a Scriptural 
text, the scenes in which he labored furnished a large part of 
the material for them. Ideas and suggestions wore thus con- 
tinually coming to his mind, and. he adopted a plan of plac, 
ing the notes of all his 
gathered a new thought or an appropriate story he varefully 
made a note of it and placed it in the proper envelope, Fre- 
quently he heard a sermon that pleased him, and, when next 
he addressed his own people, he preached as much of the 
same sermon as he could remember, and adde(l to it such 
Suggestions as came to*his own mind. Of this harmless 
plagiarism he made no secret, as he often confessed to clergy- 
most active life among people of two widely different classes 
—Christian workers like himself, and the suffering poor of 
Chicago—his daily experience furnished him with new stores 
of material which was carefully lodged in his memery or dis- 
tributed in the envelopos. Any one who hears him preach 
will be impressed with the remarkable appropriateness“of his 
stories. Until about six years ago Mr. Moody’s training for. 
than this. Ho 


sermons in large envelopes, and as ho | 


preaching their sermons, Leading a. 


read his Bibte-but ho had not studied it. Its truths he 


s 


he eee 


Spthick Spee 


6 NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


believed and urged upon his hearers with all the earnestness ~ 
of his nature, expounding them. by means of his pathetic 
stories, and closing with fervid exhortations. From the 
Bible he educed an elaborate system of morals, but in this the 
Book occupied for him a field hardly larger than that filled 
by the writings of Confucius or the teachings of the Stoics. 
Of its spirityality he taught little ; of the universal love of 
God he was to a large extent ignorant. 


In or about the year 1870, a “ boy preacher,” as he 
termed himself, whom Mr. Moody had met in England, sent 
him word one day that he would soon be in Chicago, and” 
would be glad to preach for him. Mr. Moody was out of 
the city on Sunday, and the young Englishman occupied his 
pulpit, preaching from the text “God so loved the world | 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever be- ~~ 
lieveth in Him should not perish, but‘should have everlasting 
life”? The sermon was repeated every evening during the © 
week to immense congregations. Mr, Moody came home and 
was astonished at the enthusiasm of his people. He became © 
intimate with ‘the young preacher and sought to learn the 
‘source of his success. He was told that men should preach 
God’s Word and not their own. They should study the . 
Bible. and not theology. To do this, only one. book was 
needed, and that was the Bible itself. Mz. Moody thought 
of this advice. He began to study his Bible, and saw that 
his methods had been to teach men to lead Christian lives by 
a thorough struggle with their own hearts and the wicked- 
ness of the world. But he learned that salvation should 
come through acceptance of the gifts which Christ offered to 

all. “As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he,” became the 
pole-star of his teachings. He made rapid progress in his 
studies,-and went to Europe for further aid. A Bagster 
Bible, with an index of subjects, Cruden’s Concordance, and 
a few commentaries composed his text-books. While in 

- Dublin, a friend gave him the Bible he now uses and the 
one which he always has with him at the meetings. On the 
fly-leaf it bears the inscription : “Ty, L. Moody, Dublin, 

- December, 1872. ‘God is love.’ W. Fay.” It is an, 8vo. 
Bagster, with flexible Llack morocco covers and turned edges. — 


This volume-has been Mr. Moody’s constant companion. It | 


)K. 


> earnestness — 
his pathetic 
From the 
utin this the 
n that filled 
fF the Stoics. 
yersal love of 


cher,” as he 
ingland, sent 
Chicago, and’ 
y was out of 
. occupied his 
ad the world 


shosoever be- © | 


ve everlasting 
g during the’ 
me home and 


He became — 


“to learn the 
should preach 


iid study the . 


me. book was 
foody thought 
and saw that 
istian lives by 
1d the wicked- 
lvation should 
hrist: offered to 
a,” became me 
rogress in his 
1. ee Bagster 
ncordance, and 
cs, While in 
y uses and the 
tings. On the 
joody, Dublin, 

It is an, 8vo. 


d turned edges. 
companion. It | 


- MOODY'S TRAINING AND METHODS. 7 


appears as if it had seen ten years’ service. Some of the 
leaves are worn through with usage, while. nearly all the 
margins have become yellow with many finger marks. In 
the Old Testament nearly every page is annotated freely. 
Especially is this true of ‘hose parts treating of the history 
of the Israelites, the chosea people of God. But in the New — 
Testament the pages are annotated in’ black, red, and blue 
ink to a wonderful extent. On many pages thirty marks 


- may be counted. Sometimes a few words are underscored or 
sterious numbers or letters ap- — 


encircled with. ink, while 
pear on nearly every page. Around the margins and at the 
heads of chapters'a few words may often be found comment- 
ing upon a neighboring verse or referring to some other 
passage. There ig scarcely a page in the New Testament 
where a dozen such annotations could not. be counted, while 
in sqme places:the whole margin is filled with them, and 
scarcely a verse has escaped Mr. Moody's pen. 


very evident. When reading a chapter he would name: 
kindred verses and give their places with the utmost facility. 
In the noon meetings held at the Tabernacle in Boston he 
also manifested this wide study of the Bible, though in a 
less marked degree. His two schools—missionary experience 
and Bible study—have formed him what he is, and constitute 


- the reservoirs from which the material of his sermons is 


drawn. His limited general education was obtained from a 
country school. A business experience and the large acquaint- 
ance he has made with men of the world and Jearned clergy- 
men have furnished him the remainder of his education. Of 
his imperfect school learning he is painfully aware, and has 
suffered much from the annoyance which it gives-him, In 
his-prayers and sermons he occasionally mentions “ this poor 


_ Stammering tongue.” About the time he began his Bible- 


readings in this country—in which he has met with a success — 
that leads a writer to call him “one of the most successful 
Bible teachers in America ”—he had serious inisgivings about 


the future of his work. Even now he often expresses his 


grief over some mistake he has made through his impulsive- 
ness In speech or manner. But he has changed immensely 


é 


co ee 
__ In the Bible readings which Mr. Moody gave in Chicago,,: « - 
_ the thorough acquaintance he had gained with the Bible was ie 


2 ee 
acne . : 
— ———————————— 


i} 

au 

} 

{ 
a 

i 


aE ES TE 


i 
ir 
} 


8. NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


within a few years. His early addresses some one called 
‘hailatorm harangues,” and a gentleman who knew him 
many years ago says the contrast between what he was then 
and ia now is “simply amazing.” When he was 17 years of 
age he left his Massachusetts home and went to Boston. A 


person who saw him then says: “there was far more of the | 


mountain than of the schools in his conversation and man- 
ner.” He went away with no other piety than a love for his 
widowed mother and a sturdy detetmination tobe an honest 
man, Among the boys in school he was a leading spirit, and, 
but for the entreaties of his mother, would have been. dis- 
missed by the teacher. ie 

‘o any one who studies Mr. Moody’s belief it will very 
soon appear that God’s love for the world is a large and.con- 
trolling element. ‘We work because we are. saved > we 


"don’t work to be saved. We work from the cross but not’ 
toward it.” | 


In the preaching of this Gospel, Mr. Moody finds an in- 


tense pleasure, which few other men seem to have in an equal 


degree in their work. He is one of the most cheerful and 


contented of men. His face is the picture of health. Des- 
pite his great exertions, he never yrows weary. For two- 


years he preached in England, two, three, and four times a 
day, without a vacation. Here in America he has labored for 
many months, and is unceasingly active, and he seems as 


strong and earnest and in as good spirits as when he began . 


his work. 


SSS a 


ae ee ee ee ee ee ee 


os te? 2. © pS & ww 


se eae 


OK. 


1e one called 
o knew him 
t he was then 
as 17 years of 
o Boston. A 


r more of the . 


ion and man- 
a love for his 
-be an honest 
ng spirit, and, 
ave been dis- 


f it will very 
large and. con- 
re saved : we 


cross bat not’ 


ly finds an in- 
ve in an equal 
; cheerful and 


health. Des- 
ary. For two 


1 four times a 
has labored for 
i he seems as 


vhen he began. 


CHAPTER I. 
NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


NE peculiar charm of Mr. Moody’s preaching is the 
fresh and life-like style in which he tells Bible 
stories. To him those Scripture characters are real - 
men and women ; and he makes them seem as oa : 
to his audience as to himeelf. 


- It is a little surprising at first to see those ancient 
worthies behaving themselves like citizens of London or 

- Chicago : wearing modern costumes, speaking English in Mr. 
Moody’s own vernacular, and permitting him to turn their 
heads and hearts inside out, in order to show his hearers 
what is going on in thera. But when the effect of the shock 
has passed away, the force and moral of their story begins to 
be appreciated as it scarcely could be, if set forth with 
Oriéntal stateliness of language, and covered with the dust — 
of remote antiquity. 

‘Irreverent people sometimes laugh at the idea of Shadrach, 
Meshach, and Abeg-nego, tumbling into. N: ebuehgdnezzar’s ; 
fiery furnace, in broadcloth coats and trousers, stove-pipe hats, 
and Wellington boots; or to hear King David telling his 
experience, like-a man in a Methodist class-meeting, and not 
always in grammatical style. But there is no small advan- 

_ tage in having these men modernized ; for thereby their trials. 
and their triumphs come home to men’s own ‘hearts, making 
them feel that the Scriptures are not out of date, but were 
written i the learning and encouragement of all ages and all. 


10 NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


people ; and leading them to say: What God did for these 
old-time believers, He ‘is just as willing to do for me. 

In thia chapter it is proposed to give some of those old 
stories in their new dress, as Mr. Moody tells them. 

It must be borne in mind that he never tells a story 
merely because it is interesting, or to help fill up the time, 
but always to illustrate and enforce the Gospel. — 


STORY OF A BLIND MAN. 


In the 18th chapter of the Gospel of St. Luke, you will | 


find Christ was going into Jericho ; and as He drew near the 
gates of the city, there was a poor blind man who sat by the 
wayside, begging people to give him a farthing, and’ crying 
out; “Have mercy on a poor, blind man !” This blind 
beggar met a man who said to him, “ Bartimeus, I have good 
news to tell you.” ‘“ What is it?” said the beggar.  “ There 
' ig a man of Israel who can,give you sight.” “Oh nb !” said 
the bithd. beggar ; “ there is no chance of my ever receiving 
my sight. I never shall see. In fact, I never saw the 
mother who gave me birth; I never saw the wife of my 
sosom ; I never saw my own children, I never saw in this 
‘world ; but I expect to see in the world to come.” 
Tet me tell you, I have just come down from Jerusalem, 
and I saw that village carpenter, Jesus of Nazareth ; and I 


saw & man who was born blind, who had received his sight’; . 


and I never saw a man with better sight. He doesn’t even 
have to use glasses.” Then hope rises for the first time in 
- this poor man’s heart, and he says, “ Tell me aow the man 
got his sight.” es eae 
“Qh,” says the other, “ Jesus first spat on the ground 


and made clay, and put it on his eyes "—why, that is enough — 


. to put a man’s sight out, to fill his eyes with clay !—‘‘and 
then He told him to wash: his eyes in the Pool of Siloam, 
~and he would ‘receive his sight. More than that, Bartimeus, 
He doesn’t charge you anything ; you have no fee to. pay ; 


you just tell Him what you want, and you get it, without — 


z 


| oo a ne . oan en} 


— F&F CO, hs "CO OF 


OK. 


lid for these 
me. 
of those old 
em. 
tells a story 
up the time, 


uke, you will | 


drew near the 
ho. sat by the 
g, and crying 
This blind 
3, I have good 
gar. , “ There 
Oh nb !” said 
yver receiving 
ever saw the 
e wife of my 
er saw in this 
Chee 
om Jerusalem, 
zareth ; and I 


red his sight’; . 


y doesn’t even 
s first time in 
ow the man 


n the ground 
that is enough ~ 
- clay !—‘and 
ool of Siloam, 
at, Bartimeus, 
0 fee to. pay ; 
yet it, without -- 


- sweetly as 


20 


; © STORY OF A BLIND MAN. VI 


money and without price. It does not need dukes, or lords, 
or influence ; you just call upon Him yourself; and if He ever 
comes this way, don’t let Him go back without your going to- 


~~ gee Jesus.” And Bartimeus said, “I will try it; there’s no 


harm in trying it.” I can imagine him being led by a child 
to his seat as usual, and that he is crying out, “ Please give a 
blind beggar a farthing.” He hears the footateps of the com- 
ing multitude, and inquires, Who is it passing? -What does 
the multitude mean? They tell him it is Jesus of Nazareth - 
passing by. The moment he hears that\he says, “ Why, that 
is the Man that gave sight to the blind!” The moment it 
reached his ear that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to 
ery out at the top of his voice, “ Jesus, thou Son of David, 
have mer¢y upon me!” Some of those who went before— 
rhaps Peter was one them—rebuked him, thinking the . 
Master was going up to Jerusalem to be crowned King, and 
did not want to be distracted. They never knew the Son of 
God" when He was here. He would hush every harp in 
heaven to hear a sinner pray ; no music would \delight Him ~ 
so much, But the blind man still lifted up his voice, and’ 
cried. louder, “‘l'hou Son of David, have mercy on me!” and 
the prayer reached the ears of. the Son of God, as\ prayer al- 
ways will ; and they led the poor blind man to Him. Well, 
when Jesus heard the blind beggar, He commanded him to 
be brought. So they ran to him, and said, “Be of good 
cheer ; the Master calls you; He has a blessing for you.” 
_ When Jegus saw him He said, ‘“‘ What can I do for you?” 
“Lord, that I may receive my sight.” “You shall have it ;” 


- and the Lord gave it to him. And now the beggar follows 


with the crowd, glorifying God. I can imagine he sang as 
Me Satrikey; no one sang sweeter than_he when 

he shouted, “‘ Hosanna to the Son of David !”—n6 one sang A 

louder than this.one who had received his sight. -Then he \ 


follows on with the crowd, which we see pressing into the 
» gates of the city. Ican imagine when he gets into the city \ 
he says to himself, “I will go down and see Mrs. Bartimeus,” . — \ . 


having, of course, after all those years of blindness, a curi- 
.osity to see what his wife looked like. - . 

_ As he is passing down the street, a man meets him, and 
turns round and says, “ Bartimeus, is that you ?” 


eos 


eats 


NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


' 


“ Yes; it’s me.” . ioe 
|\ «Well, I thought it was, and yet I thought my eyes inust 
degeive me. How did you get your sight?” 
\*F just met Jesus of: Nazareth outside the walls of the 
- cit, and I asked Him to have mercy on me; and He gave 
\my sight.” 
* Jesus of Nazareth ! is he in this part of the country 4” 
‘Yes ; He is on His way to Jerusalem. He is now going 
to the eastern gate.” - 
tT should like to see Him,” says the man, and away he 
rung! down the street ; but’ he cannot get a glimpse of Him, 
ittle of stature, on account of the great throng round — 
He runs to a sycamore tree, and says to himself, “ If 
I get|up there and hide, without any one seeing me, He can- 
not get by without my having a good look at Him.” ‘A great 


‘many rich men do not like to be seen coming to Jesus. Well, 
there| he is in the sycamore tree, on a branch hanging right 
‘the highway ; and he says to himeelf, “ He cannot get 
thout my having a good look at Him.” © All at once the 


4 comes in aight. He looks at John—“ Tflat’s not Him;” 
oks at Peter—“That’s not Him.” Then he sees One 
s fairer than the sonsof men. “ That’s Him!” And Zac- 

3, just peeping out from ‘amongst. the branches, looks | 

m| upon that. wonderful—yes, that mighty God-Man, in 

zament. At last the crowd comes to the ‘tree, and it looks 


m Him, bear in 
He knows -where each one of. 
Well, he said to 
s, “ Make haste and. come down.” ) 

added, ‘This is the last time I shall pass this way; 

That is the way He speaks to sinners,—‘‘ This 
last time [ shall pass.this way ; this may be your last. chance 
of eternity.” He may be passing away from some pica 


OK. 


my eyes inust 


e walls of the 
and He gave 


the country?” 
e is now going 


,and away he 


impse of Him, — 


throng round 
o himself, ‘ If 
ig me, He can- 
lim.” ‘A great 
o Jesus. Well, 
hanging right 
He cannot get 
All at once the 
fat’s not Him;” 
n he sees One 


m!” And Zac- 


ranches, looks — 


y.God-Man, in 
ee, and it looks 


dnder the tree. ~ 


id says to him, 
I can imagine 
told Him my 
tt Christ knew 
bout. you ; He 
think God does 
n Him, bear in 


sre each one of: 


ell, he said to 


THE STORY OF MEPHIBOSHETH. £3 


night. Oh sinner! make haste and come down and receive 
Him, There are some people in this nineteenth century who 
do nof believe in sudden conversions. I should like them to 
tell me where ‘Zacchszeus was. converted. He certainly was 
not converted when he went up into the tree ; he certainly 
was converted when he came down. He must have been con- 
verted somewhere between the branches and the ground. 
The Lord converted him just right there. People say they 
do not believe in sudden conversions; and that if a man is 


~ converted suddenly he won’t hold out—he won't be genuine. 


I wish we had a few men converted like Zacchwus in London ; 
it would make no small stir, When a man’ bégins to (make | 
restitution, it is a pretty good sign of conversion. Let men — 
give back money dishonestly obtained in London, and see 
how quick people will believe in conversion. Zaccheeus gave 
half hig goods to the poor. What would be said if some of 


- the rich\men of London did that? Zacchsous gave half his 


from any man falsely, -I restore him fourfold.” 1 think that 
is the other Half. But to get Christ is worth more than all 
his wealth. ing the next morning one of the servants 


goods a once ; and he says, “If I have taken anything 


of Zacchzwus yoing with a cheque for £100, and-saying, “ My 
master a few years ago took from you wrongfully about £25, — 


in Zaccheeus’s conversion. I wish a few cases like that would 
happen in London, and then people would not go on talking 
. 


‘and this is Fveore money.” That would. give confidence 


against sudden conversions. ‘ 


x 


THE STORY OF MEPHIBOSHETH. 


1 SAMUEL xx. \14, 18; and 2 SAMUEL ix. 
_ There is-a story, my friends, in the books of Samuel— 
away back as far'as the time of the kings of Israel—which 
will help us to understand the Gospel. It is about a man of , 


- the name of Mephibosheth. 


You remember what a hard time David had when Saul 
was hunting him to kill him, just\as wen hunt game. | 
Well: -one day David and his gooa friend J onathan were 


14 NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK, 


taking a walk together in the fields. Saul was very angry, 
and was bent on killing David; but his son Jonathan was 
looking out for a chance to save him. It had been revealed 
to him that David was to be king after his father, instead of 
himself; but this did not hinder his love for David. It must 
have been real, true friendship, that could stand such sort of 
thing ! 

After they had agreed upon a sign by which David was 
to know whether it was safe for him to stay around the court 
of the king, where he could see his friend once in a while ; or 
whether he must leave, and go off into the cave of Adullam, 
Jonathan says to him,— . 

“ David, it has been revealed to mo that you are to be 
king after my father. Now, I want you to promise me one 
thing: when you come to the throne, if any of the house of 
Saul are alive,.I want you to be good to them, for my sake.” 

“Tl do that, of course,” said David. So he made a 

solemn covenant to that effect, and then he went off to the 
cave of Adullam, to get out of the way of Saul, who was — 
bound to kill him if he could. ~ 
‘But God took care of David. You never can kill or harm 
a man, if God is taking care of him. - 
About four years after that, David heard that there had 
been a great battle over by Mount Gilboa, and that the Phil- 
istines had beaten the Israelites with great slaughter, and 
that Saul and Jonathan were both dead. So he got his men 
together, and went out after the enemies of the Lord and of 
Israel ; and it was not a great while before he had turned the 
tables on them, and set up his kingdom at Hebron. 

It must have been pretty near fourteen years after that 
before David remembervd his promise to his old friend Jona- 
“than. - It is a’great deal easier to make. promises than to keep 
them. How many broken vows has God written down 
against you to-night? But one day the king was walking in 
his palace at Jerusalem, where he had removed his capital ; 
and all at once -he happened to think of that promise. It is 
a good thing God does not forget His promise that way. - 

‘That's too bad !” said David. ‘I forgot all about that 
promise.’ I have been so busy fighting these Philistines, and 

fixing things up, that I have not had time to think of any-— 


YK, 


very angry, 
onathan was 
een revealed 
yr, instead of 
id. It must 
such sort of 


1 David was 
nd the court 
1 a while ; or 
of, Adullam, 


ou are to be 
mise me one 
the house of 
or my sake.” 
» he made a 
nt off to the 


ul, who was 


kill or harm 


1at there had 
hat the Phil- 
aughter,. and 
got his men 
Lord and of 
id turned the 
‘on. 

ars after that 
friend Jona- 


than to keep — 


rritten. down 
as walking in 
1 his capital ; 
comise. It is 
hat way. . 

ll about that 
hilistines, and 


think of any-— 


‘head. 


loved Mephibosheth for Jonathan's sake. 


THE STORY OF MEPHIBOSHETH. 15 


thing else.” So he called his servants in great haste, and said, 
“ Do any of you know whether there is any of Saul’s family 
living 7” 

One of them said there was an old servant of Saul’s by the 
name of Ziba, and maybe he could tell. 

‘Go and toll him I want him, right away.” 

Pretty soon Ziba came ; and David said, “ Ziba, do you 
know whether there is anybody of the house of Saul in my 
kingdom?” Ziba said there was one he knew of—a gon of 
Jonathan, by the name of Mephibosheth. 

Oh how that name, Jonathan, must have smitten the heart 
of David! One of the sons of his old friend living in his 


kingdom for as much as fourteen years, and he had never 


known it! What would Jonathan think of him for forgetting 
his promise that way! ° 

“Go, fetch him!” said David; go quick. Tell him I 
want him. I want to show him the kindness of God.” 


Now, my friends, where do you suppose Mephibosheth - 


was all this time ! Why, he was down at Lo-debar. Did you 


ever hear of that place? There may be some sailtre here : did: © 


you ever come across that port? When you have travelled 
on the railway, did any of you ever stop at. that station? — 


Ah ! yes ; that is where the whole human race are until * 


they come to Christ for salvation ; away down at Lo-debar,— 
which means, a place of no pasture. 

The king is in haste to‘keep his promise now. I seem to 
see them hurrying off ; maybe they take the king’s own char- 
iot, and rattle away to find this son of Jonathan, 

When they réached the little ou of-the-way place, I fancy 
there was a great commotion. ae 

‘‘ Where's Mephibosheth? The king wants him.” 

Poor fellow! when he heard that he hung down his 


‘He was afraid the king.wanted to kill him, because he was 
of the house of Saul, his old enemy. - : : 


Ah! my friends; that’s just the way sinners receive - 
' Christ’s offer of salvation Th 


. hink God hates them, and 
wants to cut their heads off. t that is a mistake. 
God loves them for Christ’s sake, a great deal more than David 


° . 


I never knew a. 


« 
en 
a7 - 


16 NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


sinner to take the Gospel right. They always think, at first, 
that it is too good to be true. 

“ Don’t be afraid,” said the dervants. ‘“ The king says he 
wants to show you the kindness of God. He is in a great 
hurry to see you; so get ready, and jump right into the char- 
iot. Don’t you seo the king has sent his own chariot to fetch 
yout” : | 

It did begin to look as if the king meant no hafm to him. 
But poor Mephibosheth had another difficulty. Ho was lame 
in both feet. He was a little fellow when David came to the 
throne ; and an old servant, who was afraid that all the house 
of Saul were going to be killed, took him up and ran away 
to hide him. Somehow he managed to drop the lad, and 
lamed him in both feet.: 

And now I can see poor Mephibosheth looking down at 
his feet. Maybe the toes turned in—or, he was club-footed, 
And he gays to himself, “I am not fit to go to the king. 1 
am a poor cripple. I am not fit to be seen among the tall, 
handeome servants of the palace in Jerusalem.” 

That's just the way with a convicted sinner. He is all the 
time thinking of his own aaworthiness, and saying to himself 
that he isn’t fit to be saved. 

“Never mind your fame feet, Mephibosheth ; so long as 
the king sends for you, it’s all right.” So they, take him up, 
and put him into the chariot, and start for Jerusalem on a run. 

soon as the king sees him, he takes hint in his arme, 
and cries out,-— . 

“Oh Mephiboshefh, the son of my dear old friend, Jona- 
than ! Larder sap all that belonged to the house of Saul ; 
and you 8 ive with me here in my palace!” =. 

What a happy man he must tev been to hear that ! 
Sinner, that is just what God says to the soul that comes to’ 
him in Jesus Christ. He takes us in His atms; He gives us 
a great fortune of love and grace; and He promises that we 
 ghall live with Him in His heavenly palace for ever. | 

- Some people think that Mephibosheth, like certain low- 
spirited Christians, after he went to live with the king, must 
have been all the time worrying over his lame feet. But I 
don’t think 80. He couldn't help it; and if David didn’t 
‘mind it, it was all right. So I think that when he dined 


fie ag % 
6) : 


IK. 
hink, at first, 


king says he 
is in a great 
nto the char- 
uriot to fetch 


hafm to him. 
He was lame 
1 came to the 
all the house 
and ran away 
the lad, and 


king down at 
s club-footed. 
the king. I 


ong the tall, | 


He is all the 
ing to himself 


h; so long as _— 


take him up, 
lem on a run. 
in his arms, 


friend, J ona- 
yuse of Saul ; 


o hear that ! 


that comes to’ 


, He gives us 
mises that we 
ver. | 
2 certain low- 
1e king, must 

feet. But I 


David didn’t 


1en he dined 


. THE STORY OF BARABBAS, 17 
with him in state, with the great lords and ladies all around 
him, he just stuck his club-feet under the table, and looked 
the king right in the face. 

That is the Gospel, my friends. We are God's enemies, 
and the children of His enemies. We are lame, and blind, 
and wretched, and ragged, and hateful by reason of our sins. 

ut the covenant of grace in Jesus Christ has been made ; 
and now God sends for you, poor sinner, tu come in Christ's 
name and eat bread at His table, and be in His house, and 
in His heart for ever. Will you como? Will you come nuw ? 


aac 
THE STORY OF BARABBAS. 


I have often thought what a night Barabbas must have - 
spent just before the day when Christ was crucified. 

As the sun goes down, he says to himself: To-morrow !— 
only to-morrow |! And I must die on the cross. They will 
hang me up bofore a crowd of people ; they will drive nails 
through my hands and feet ; they will break my legs with 
bars of iron ; /and in that awful torture I shall die before this 
time to-morrow, and go up to the judgment with all my crimes 
upon me. /- | 

Maybe, they let his mother come to see him once more 
before dark. Perhaps he had a wife and children, and they 
came to see him for the last time. | 

He couldn't sleep at all that night. He could hear some- 
body hammering in the prison-yard, and knew they must be 
making the: cross. . 

He would start up every now and then, thinking he heard 
the footateps of the officers coming for him. 

At last the light of the morning looks in through the bars 
of his prison, 

“To day—this very day—they will open that door and 
lead me away to be crucified !” 

_ Pretty soon he hears them coming. No mistake this 
time. They are unbarring the iron door, He hears them 
turning the key in the rusty lock. The door swings open ; 


there are the soldiers. ~ 


Ve 


Mi 


aie 
: 


18 NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


Good-bye to life and hope ! Death, horrible death now !-—- 
and, after death, what will there be then? 

The officer of the guard speaks to him :—“ Barabbas, you 
are free!” id 

He hears the strange words, but they make vpry 
impression on him, He is 80 near dead with fear at. , 
that the good news doesn’t reach him. He hears it; but 
thinks it is a foolish fancy. He is asleep and dreaming. He 
stands gazing a moment at the soldiers, and theh he comes to 
himself. mS 

“ Tort laugh at mo! don’t make sport of me! ‘Take.me 
away and crucify me ;-but don’t tear my soul to pieces ! us 

Again the officer speaks: “ You are free! Here; the 

. door is open: go out; go home.” . | 

Now he beging ake in the truth ; but it is so wonder- 

ful a thing to get Sut of the clutches of the Roman law, that 
the is afraid to believe the good news, And so he begins to 
— doubt, and to ask how it can be. 

They tell him that Pilate has promised the Jews the 
release of one prisoner that day ; and that the Jews have 
ehosen him instead of one Jesus of Nazareth, who was con- 
demned to be crucified. 

Now the poor man begins to weep. ‘This breaks his 
heart. He knows this Jesus. He hag seen Him do some of 
His miracles. He was in the crowdgiieMipg,pockets, when 

- Jesus fed the five @iwusand hungry |! 

‘What ! that just man to die 

‘man, @ murderer, to go free!” And in the midst of his joy 
: at his own release, his heart breaks at the thought that his 
., life.is saved at such a cost. 

“Sinner, that is the Gospel. Christ died for you, “ the 

‘do tho unjust.” “ He was bruised for our iniquities, and 

stripes we are healed.” i 
4 Come ae your ‘prison ; throw off the chains of sin. 
You were. justly condemned, but Jesus died for you. Let 
your heart break in penitence ; weep tears of love and joy.” 


4 


a “" 
Syl, A 
he Su 


JOK. 
death now !-— 


Barabbas, you 


ike oH 
bar aL ’ 
hears it; but 


dreaming. He 
sh he comes to 


ne! -Take,me 
to pieces |” 


! ~~ Heres--the 
t is so Be 
oman law, that 
0 he begins to 


the Jews the 
the Jews have 
who was con- 


his breaks his 
[im do some of 


= when 


of, u hifhway- 
1idst of his joy 
ought that his 


for yoy, “ the 


r iniquities, and 


. chains of sin. 
for you. Let 
‘love. and joy.” 


@ 


Pe 


ELIJAH AND THE PRIESTS OF BAAL, , 19 


» 
» Fi 


i | ) 
Ka ELIJAH AND THE PRIESTS OF BAAL. 


Let us go to Carmel for 4 fow minute. . ; 
King Ahab had forsaken the God of Israel, and all the 


» court people and “ upper ten” had followed his example. 


' But there was an old prophet out. in the” mountains, to 
whom God said: “Go to Ahab, and ¥oll him the heavens 
shall be shut up and there shall be no rain.” 

Away he goes to the wicked king. He bursts in apon 
him like a clap of thunder, gives his message, and hurties away. 


I suppose Ahab laughed at the old prophet. ‘* What £0 
more rain? Why, the fellow must be crazy !” 
Pretty soon the weather gets very dry. The earth is 


‘parched, and begins to crack open. The rivers have bat 
little water in them, and the brooks dry up altogether. The 
trees die; all the grass perishs, and the cattle die tom 
‘amine’; starvation ; death! If rain dovsn’t come pretty 
soon, there won’t be a live man or woman left in all the 
kingdom. 
yee day the king was talking with the prophet ‘Obadiah, 
ou see he did have one good man near him, along with 
all the prophets of the false god. Almost anybody likes to 
have ong good man within reach, even if he is ever so bad. 
He may be wanted in a hurry some time. 

“ See here, Obadiah,” says-King Ahab ; “ you go one way, 
and I'll go another,-and we'll see if we can’t find some water- 
somewhere,” 

Obadiah hadn’t got a great way before Elijah bursts out 
upon him. . : 

“Oh, Elijah ! is that you? Ahab has been hunting for 
you everywhere, and couldn't find you. He has sent off into 
ne the Kingdoms about, to have them fetch you if you were 
there,”. , 

“ Yes, I’m here,” says Elijah. 
want to see him.” ; \ 

“T dare not do that,” says Obadiah ; “for just as soon as 
I tell him you are here, the Spirit will catch you away and 
take you off somewhere else; and then the king will be very 
angry, and maybe he'll kill me.” Feet 


“ You go and tell Ahab I 


& 4 'y oP 
aes ee 
2 


20°‘ NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK, 


No,” says Elijah. “As the. Lord liveth, I will meet 
~~ Ahab face to face this day. 
- So Obadiah hurries off to tind Ahab, and tells him he has 
seen the prophet. 
«What ! Elijah?” 
“ Yes.” 
“ Why didn’t you bring him along?” 
“ He wouldn’t come. He says he wants you to come to 
him.” 
, Ahab wasn’t used to have people talk that way to him ; 
but he was anxious to see the prophet, so he went. And 
when he sees him he is very-angry, and cries, “ Art thou he 


that troubleth Israel ?” Re 


“Not at, all,” says Elijah. ‘You are the man who is 
troubling Israel—going off after Baal, and leading ever so 
many of the people with you. Now, we have had enough of 
this sort of thing. Some people are praying to God, and some 
are praying to Baal, and we must have this question settled. 
You just bring all your prophets and all the priests of Baal - 
up to Mount Carmel, and I also will come. We will make | 
us each an altar, and offer sacrifice on it; and the God that. 
answereth by fire, let Him be God.” ee es 

“ Agreed,” says Ahab ; and off he goes to tell his priests, 
"and get ready for the trial. > Tae 

_T fancy that was a-great day when that question was 
decided. 

All the places of business were closed, and everybody was 
going up to Mount Carmel. There must have been more — 
people on Mount Carmel than there are to-day at the races.* 
A better class of people, too ! ae 

There were eight hundred and fifty of. the prophets and — 
priests of Baal altogether. I fancy“I can see them going up 
in a grand procession, with the king in his chariot at their head. 

“ Fine-looking men, ain’t they ?” says one man to another 
as they go by. ‘‘They’ll be able to do great things up there 
on the mountain.” 

But there'’Elijah marched, all alone; a rough man, clad 
~ in the skins of beasts, with a,staffin his hand. No banners, 


' * This was given on Derby Day, at the Opera House, Haymarket, 


London. ; 


wate 


K, 
I will meet 


him he has 


1 to come to 
yay to him ; 
vent. And 


man who is 
ling ever so 


id enough of | 


od, and some 


ition settled. . 
iests of Baal - 
‘e will make . 
he God that. 


1 his priests, 
juestion was 


ery body was 


9 been more | 


t the races.* 


yrophets and 


mm going up 
at their head. 
in to another 


ings up there 


rh man, clad 
No banners, 


2, Haymarket, | 


Art thou he 


ELIJAH AND THE PRIESTS OF BAAL. “21 


no procession, no great men in his train! But the man who 
. could hold the keys‘of heaven for three years and six months 
was not afraid to be alone. ‘ | eis 
> .. Nowsays Elijah to the people, “ How long halt ye between 
‘two opinions? Let the priests of Baal build them -an altar 
and offer sacrifice, but put no -fire under; and I will do the 
same : and the God that answereth by fire, let Him be God,” 
So.the priests of Baal build their altar. | 
I am sure if God hadn't held him back, Satan would have 
brought up a little spark out of hell to set that sacrifice on. 
fire. But God wouldn’t let him. : | 
Then they begin to pray: “Oh Baal, hear us! Oh Baal, | 
hear us!” . : . 
__ Elijah might have said,“ Why haven't you prayed to 
Baal for water this dry weather? You might just as well 
have asked him for water as for fire.” ; 
| After a long time they begin to get hoarse, ates 
i‘ . “You must pray louder than that, if you expect Baal to 
-hear you,” says the old prophet. Maybe he is asleep ; pray 
louder, so as to wake him up.” — 
Poor fellows ! they haven’t any voice left ; 80 they begin to 
to prayin blood. Theycut themselves with knives,and lifttheir 
streaming hands and arms to Baal. But no firecomesdown, __ 


_ It is getting towards sundown. 

The prophet of the Lord builds an altar. Mind ; he 
doesn’t have anything to do with the altar of Baal, but he 
builds an entirely different one, on the ruins of the altar of the 
Lord which had been broken down, -  ° - . 

“We won't have anyhody saying there is any trick about 
this thing,” says the. prophet.. So they bring twelve barrels 
of water and pour over the altar. 1 don’t know how they — 
managed to get so much water; but they did it. ee a 

Then Elijah prays: “Oh God of Abraham and of Tsaac 

and of Jacob, let it be known this day that Thou art God in 


Israel,” 
He didn’t have to pray very loud. God heard him at once, 
and-—down came the fire! ! It burnt up the sacrifice, burnt 
up the wood, burnt up the water, and burnt up the very stones — 
_ Of the altar. Jehovah is God: nobody can halt any longer. 
Ah! but some of you say, “I too would have decided for 


22 + NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


_ God if I had been on Mount Carmel that day.” My friends, 
‘Calvary ig a great deal more wonderful than Carmel. The 
sacrifice Of-Christ on the cross is more wonderful than the 
sacrifice which was burned on that altar. . a 

Decide for Christ now, with Calvary in sight. Choose ye 
this day whom ye will serve. 


THE LEPER. 


See that. poor leper! Do you know what antawtpl i 


away lest they also come into that terrible plight. 

poor man who finds the marks of what -he thinks is this ter- 
rible disease upon his body. According.to the law, he must _ 
go to the priest and be examined. Alas! the priest says it is - 
the leprosy—nothing else. ; 
. Now the poor man, with broken heart, turns away from the 
~ Temple, and goes to hie house to say good-bye to his wife, and 
to take his children to his arms once more, before he goes | 
. away to spend the long years in the wilderness alone, or with 
other lepers like himself, until death shall come to deliver him — 
from his sufferings. What a sorry house is that! Surely 
this is worse than death itself. He goes out of his door with 
no hope of ever entering it again. He walks the street by 
himself, and if any one comes near him, he lifts up his voice 
in that mournful cry, “ Unclean! Unclean!” Out of the 
gates of the city he goes, away from all his friends and ac- 
_ quaintances, carrying with him the sorrow of separation and _— 
the seeds of death. One day he sees a crowd passing along 
the road, but he dares not go near enough to inquire what it 


is. All at once he happens-to-think-it-may—be that-Prophe 


IK, 
My friends, 
armel, The 


ful than the 


. Choose ye 


st, even from 
ase ‘is 80 con- 
the air near 
retches have 
selves, They 
y for charity, 
y, and hurry 
t. Here is a 
ks is this ter- 
law, he must 


riest says it is 5 


way from the 
his wife, and 


fore he goes | 


lone, or with 


to deliver him — 


hat! Surely 
his door with 
the street by 
; up his voice 

Out of the 
fiends and ac- 


sparation and | 


passing along 
quire what it 


~ 


THE WIDOW’S SON. 23 


of Nazareth whom he has heard of—that same man that, peo- 
ple said, could open the eyes of the blind, make lame men 
walk, and who had even raised the son of the widow from 
death, over there at Nain.» If.only it were He! At any rate 


he will take the chances, and cry out after Him ; and 80 he 


shouts, at the top of his voice, “‘ Have mercy upo ke 

the rest of the crowd aye afraid of him ; bat Te me va 
the midst, hears some one calling ; and, justas He always did 
when anybody wanted anything of Him, He stopped to find 
out what it was. - He is not afraid of the leper ; and so, while 
the rest of the crowd stand away by themselves, He calls the 
poor fellow to Him and asks him what he wants; and the - 
leper, with his heart full of anxious hope, replies “ Lord, if 
Thou wilt, Thou can’st make me clean.” “T will,” eays J esus: 
“be thou clean!” A strange sense of health and strength 
comes over the man. He looks at his handg, and finds the 
leprosy is all gone. He begins to pour out his heart in thanks 
to Jesus, who sends him away to the priests, saying, “ Go, 
— ae to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses com- 

Now I seem to see that cleansed leper hurryin 

show himself to the priest, to be sronoinied Saeed cae 


_ to the law ; and then hastening to his little home, to see his 


wife and children once more. «He bursts into the house - 
ing for joy. He stretches out his arms to his wife and little 
ones, saying, “ I am clean !’I am clean! Jesus did it—Jesus 
of Nazareth.” eteeay | 

Sinner, how glad you would be if Jesus hdd made you 
clean from the leprosy of sin !—and He is just as willing to 
cleanse you as He was to cleanse this poor loper. Come to 
Him just now. Ask Him to cleanse you, and hear Him say, 


_“T will: be thou clean !”. 


THE WIDOW’S SON. 


Think of that poor widow at Nain! She is an old woman 


now ; and her ‘only son, the staff of her life, is sick. How 
ne watches him ; sits up all night to see that he has his med- 


- 24 NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


icine at the right time; sits by his bedside all day, fanning 
him, keeping away the flies, moistening his parched lips with 
water !: Everything he asks for, she brings. The very best 
doctor is sent for; and when he comes and feels the pulse of 
the young man, and looks at his tongue, he shakes his head ; 
- and then the’ poor woman knows there is no hope for her boy. 
What an awful thought! My son, my only son must die ; 
what will become of me then? Sure enough, the doctor is 
right ; and in a little while the fever comes to its crisis, and 
the poor boy dies, with his head upon his mother’s bosom. 
The people come in to try to comfort the poor woman ; but it _ 
is of no use. Her heart is broken. She wishes she were. 
dead too. = eg. 

Some of you know what it js to look your last upon the. 
faces of those you love. Some of you mothers have wept hot 
tears upon the cold faces vf your sons.;5 = a 

Well: they make him ready . for burial an when the 
* time comes, they celebrate. the funeral service, and put him on 
the bier to carry him away to the grave. What a sad pro- 
cession ! - Just as. they come out of the city gates, they see a 
_ little company of thirteen dusty-looking travellers, coming up 

‘the road. There is One among them, tall and far fairer than 
the sons of men. Who can He be? He is moved with com- 
passion when He sees this little funeral procession ; and it 
does not take Him long to find out that that woman who 
walks next the bier is a. poor widow, whose only son she, is 
following to his grave. He tells the bearers to put down the 
- bier ; and while the mother wonders what is to be done, He 
bends tenderly over the dead man, and speaks to him in a low, 
- sweet voice, ‘“ Arise!” And the dead man hears Him. -: His 
body begins to move: the man who was dead is struggling 
with his graveclothes ; they unbind him, and now he sits up. 
He leaps off the bier, catches a sight, of his mother, remembers 
that he was dead and is now alive again; takes her in his 
_ arms, kisses her again and again, and then turris to look at 
the Stranger who has wrought this miracle upon him. _ He is 
ready to do anything for that Man—ready to follow Him to 
the death. - But Jesus does not ask that of him. He knows. 
his mother needs him ; and so He does not take him away to 


be one of His disciples, but gives him back to his old mother. 


OK. 


day, fanning 
hed lips with 
‘he very beat 
| the pulse of 
ces his head ; 
a for her boy. 
m must die; 
the doctor is 
its crisis, and 
ther’s bosom. 


oman; but it | 
1e8 she were . 


last upon the _ 


ave wept hot 


nd when the 
d put him on 
at a sad pro- 
98, they see a 
"8, coming up 
ar fairer than 


ed with com- 


sion ; and it 
/ woman who 
ily son she, is 


put down the | 


be done, He 
him in a low, 
rs Him. -- His 
is struggling 
yw he sits up. 


er, remembers 


ces her in his 
is to look at 
him. He is 
follow Him to 


He knows - 


> him away to 


THE STORY OF NAAMAN, 


I would have liked to see that 
city of Nain, arm-in-arm with his mother. What do you 
suppose he said to the people, who looked at him with won- 
der? Would he not confess that Jesus of N azareth had raised 
him from the dead? Would he not go everywhere, declaring 


~ to preach Christ, who can stand over all the graves, and say 
to all the dead bodies, “Arise!” How I pity the poor infidel, 
who has no Christ ; but who goes down to his death without 
any hope of resurrection! Is there a poor widow here to- 
night? Christ will have compassion on you. Your son is 
dead, maybe. Well, He will raise him up also at the last day 
and you along with him ; and give : 
to him, if you both have believed 
your hearts. 


in Jesus, and given Him 


4 


THE STORY OF NAAMAN. 


e 


I have been reading to you about @ person who was a: 
‘great man in his own country—a very honorable man, one 
whom the king delighted to honor. He stood -high in posi- 
tion, he was captain of the hosts of the king of Syria ; but he 
was a leper; and that threw a blight over his whole lifo. 
There was no physician to help him Sy: 
the eminent doctors. in Damascus could do him any good. 
Neither could any in Jerusalem. But I will tell you what they 
had in Syria : they had one of God’s children there—and she 
was a little girl. Naaman knew nothing about her, though 
she was one of his household. I can imagine this little Isra- 
elite, one day, as she said to Mrs. Naaman, her mistress, that 
there was a prophet in her country that could cure her master 
of Mis-leprosy. “Why!” says the mistress, “what are you 
talking about? Did you ever hear of anybody being cured 
of leprosy?” “Ah!” gaid the little girl, ‘it’s true, I can 
assure you: we have got physicians down there that can cure. 
anything.” So at last some one told the king what the little 
maid of Israel had said. Now Naaman stood high inthe 


25 


young man. re-entering the 


what the Lord had done for his dead body? Oh how I love . 


him back to you, and you. 


in all Syria. Noneof 


~ 


is old mother. 


*ing’s ie for he had just won a great 


victory. He wag 


| 


\ a 


26 . NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


called a lord; perhaps he was a prince—a sort of Syrian 
Prince Bismark, who stood near the throne. So the king 
said, ‘‘ You had better go down to Samaria, and see if there is 
anything ‘in it, and I will givé you letters of introdaction to 
the king of Israel.” ws 
Yés;he would give Naaman letters of introduction to the 
king. - That’s just man’s idea. _O£ course, if anybody could 
help him it was a king. Of course the king had power both 
with God and man. Oh, ny friends, it’s a good deal better-to 
know a man that knows God,! A man acquainte® with God 
has more power than ariy earthly king. Saas 
Away goes Naaman down to Samaria with his letter of. 
introduction, and he takes with him a bag of gold and silver. 
That man’s idea again : he is going’ to pay the great doctor. 
. > And he took about £100,000 sterling, as far as I can make it 
_ out, to pay this doctor's bill. There, are a yood many men 
who would willingly pay that.sum, if'with it they could buy 
the favor of God, and get rid of the curse of sin. Yes, if 
money could do it, how many would buy salvation! But, 
thank God, it is not in the market, for salé! You must buy . 
it on God's terms, and that is “without money and without ' 
price.” Naaman found that out. My dear friends, did you 
ever ask yourselves which is the worst—the leprosy of the 
body or the leprosy of sin? Why, for my own part I would 
a thousand times sooner have the leprosy eating my eyes out, 
and eating off-feet and arms ; I would rather be loathsome in - 
the sight of my fellow-men than die with the leprosy of sin 
in my soul, and be banished from God for ever.~’ The leprosy 
-of the body is bad, but the leprosy of sin is a thousand times 
worse. It has thrown the angels out of heaven ; it. has ruined 
the best and strongest mén that ever'lived {n the world. 
There is one thing about Naaman that I like—and that 
is, his earneatness of purpose. He was thoroughly in earnest. 
- A good many people say, “Oh, I don’t like such and such a 
" minister; I should like to know where he comes from, and 
* what. he has done, and whether any bishop has ever laid his 
“hands on his head.” My dear friends, never mind the minis- 
ter; it’s the message you want. Why, if some one were to 
send_me_a message, and the news were important, I shouldn't 
stop te ask about the messenger who brought it ; I should 


on 


)K. 


rt of Syrian 
So the king 
eo if there is 
iroduction to 


uction to the 
ybody could 
1 power both 
leal better-to 
e? with God 


his letter of. 
ld and silver. 
great doctor. 
[ can make it 
1 many men 
py could buy 
sin. Yes, if 
ation! But,: 
ou must buy. 
and without ‘ 
nds, did you | 


sprosy of the , 


part I would 
my eyes out, 
loathsome in | 
eprosy of sin 
* The leprosy 
ousand times 
it. has ruined 
3 world. — 
ke-—and that 
ly in earnest. 
h and such a 
es from, and 
ever laid his 
nd the minis- 
e one were to 


. Clean.” Wha 


THE STORY OF NAAMAN, ~ . 24 


want to read the news; I should/look at t ite | 
contents, and not at the boy who brought is ate ae 
with God’s message. ‘The good/ news is everything, the min- 
ister nothing. The Syrians looked down with contempt on 
the Israelites ; and yet this it man was willing to tala the 
good news from the lips of this poor little slave: Why, if I 
got lost in London, I should be willing to ask any body Which 
way to go—even if it were only a poor shoeblack. It is the 
way I want, not the person Who directs me. But there was - 
ne sabres in Naaman’s case { though he was willing to — 
ak les Shey of the little girl, he was not willing to take 


The stumbling-block of-pride stood in his way. 
dy the ‘prophet offered him was a terrible Hee a nride. 
I have no doubt he expected a grand reception from the kin : 
of Israel, to whom he brought letters of introduction He 
had been victorious on many a field of battle, and held hi h 
rank in the army—perhaps we may call him Major-General 
Naaman of Syria; or he might have been higher in rank even’ 
‘ than that. He had a letter of introduction from the king 
himself, and of course he would be received with high hon 25 
But instead of the king rushing out to meet hime sheath, 
heard of N aaman’s arrival and his object, he rent. his mantle 
in a rage, and said: “Amla God, that I can kill and ike 
, ee se ae i last the ae bethinks himself of Elisha tke 
a says, “ There is a man i 
‘may be able to. help you and cure your pea ee 
“Imagine Naaman’s pride reasoning thus: “ Surely the pro het 
_ will feel very iuch exalted and flattered that: I the ee 
SL es should come and call upon him.” — cio 
€ Crives up,in grand style to the prophet’s : 
oe emis as nobody seems to be Sate out eee hie 
- sends in his message : * Tell the prophet Major-General 
> federal Sea te gil and wishes to see him.” Elisha 
_ takes “ooly. | tte does not come out to see him. but 
--88 soon as he learns his errand; he sends hi eat eee 
“ns oe os : 8 his ) 
“Dip. seven pues in the river Jordan aid’ yea Gen he) | 
a terrible blow to his pride! io 


I can 


t, I shouldn't 
it; I should 


to “his servant, “What did you 


By Did I understand you aright ? Dip seven times in 


28 "NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK. 


Jordan! Why, we call the river Jordan a ditch in our 
country!” But the only answer he got was, “ My lord says 
Go and dip seven times in Jordan.”, I can fancy his indig- 
nation as he asks, “Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of 
Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? May I not 


) wash in them and be clean?” So he turned and went away 


ina rage. The fact was, Jordan never had any great reputa- 
tion as a river; it flowed into the Dead Sea, and that sea 
never had a harbour to it. And its banks were not half so 
beautiful as those of the rivers of Damascus. Yes, it was a 
dreadful blow to his pride. The truth was, that Damascus 
~ was une of the most beautiful cities in the world ; and it is 
sail that’ when Mahomet first saw it he turned his head 
away, for fear it should lead his thoughts away from heaven. 
Naaman went off in a rage ;-he got very angry. But I 
don't think much of that:; for if you notice when a man 
turns away in anger, he genérally cools down and comes 
back again. 2 
He thought the prophet would have come out to him 


very humble and very solemn, and bid him do some great — 


thing. Instead of that, Elisha; who was very likely busy 
writing, didn’t even come tothe door or the window; he 
- merely sent out the message, “Tell him to dip seven times 
in the Jordan.” of ‘ 

And away he went, saying, “J thought, I thought; I 
thought.” YT have heard that tale so often, and I am tired of 
it. I will tell you just what I think about it, and what I 
advise you to do— Give it up, Take God’s words, God's 
thoughts, God’s ways. A man to be converted has to give 
up his will, his ways, and his thoughts. I have often 
noticed that -when a man says, “If ever, I am converted, it 
will be this way or that,” God,leads him in quite a contrary 
direction. 3 | 

Whilst Naaman was turning the matter over in his 
mind, and thinking what was best to be done, one of his 
servants came and said—and-a very sensible remark it was: 
«“ My lord, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, 
would’st thou not have done it? how much rather, then, when ° 


—he saith to thee, Wash-and—be-cleant”—Yes, and 


“eal of truth-in that. Why, if Elisha hed said to him, “ Go 


kK 


itch in our 
y lord says 
his indig- 
, rivers of 
May I not 
went away 
reat reputa- 
id that sea 
not half ‘so 
38, it was a 
, Damascus 
; and it is 
d his head 
om heaven. 
ry. But I 


hen a man — 


and comes 


out to him 


some great — 


likely busy 
yindow ; he 
seven times 
thought ; I 
am tired of 
and what I 
rords, God's 
has to give 
have often 
onverted, it 
e a contrary 


yver in his 


one of his 


ark it was: 


great thing, 


, then, when ° 


_ —why, it was absurd: on the face of it ! 


. Jordan. for .all the world. 


y 


back to Syria on your hands and. knees,” he would most likely » 
If he. had said, “Go back all the way on one | 
_ foot,” he would have tried to do it.” Or if he had said, “Give | 


have done it. 


me a hundred thousand pounds for the medicine I\ prescribe, 
and thou shalt be cleansed,” no doubt he would have done it. 
But to tell him merely to dip in the river Jordan seven times 


“Why, if there is 
_such cleansing power in the watern of Jordan, does not every 


ae in Israel go down and dip in them, and be healed?” ie 


“ Well,” says the servant, “you have come a hundred and 
fifty miles ; and now don’t you think you had better do what 
he tells you?” © 

His anger is cooling down ; and he says, “ Well, I think 
I might as well try it.” That's the starting-point of his faith ; 
bufstill he thought it a foolish thing, and could not bring 
himself to believe that the result would be what the prophet 
had said. 

Naaman’s will was conquered at last. He got to that 
point where he was willing to obey ; and the Scripture tells 
us “ to obey is better than to sacrifice.” So he goes down to 
the river and takes the first dip; and as he comes up, I can 
imagine him looking at himself, and sa ing to his servant, 
“There! there I am, no better than I was when I went in. 
If one-seventh of the leprosy was gone, I should.be content.” 


Down he goes a second time, and he comes up puffing and > 


blowing, as much a leper as evér ; and 80 he goes down again 


and again, the third and fourth and fifth time, with the same 
result—as much a leper as ever. 


hen he comes up the 
sixth time, he looks at himself, and says, “ Ah! no better. 
What a fool I have made of myself! “How they must all 
laugh at me! I wouldn’t have the generals, and aristocracy 
of Damascus know that I have been dipping in this way in 


I'll make the seventh plunge.” He has not altogether lost 
faith ; and down he goes the seventh time, and up he comes 


_ again. He looks at himself, and shouts aloud for joy. “Lo, 
I am well! My leprosy is all gone—all gone! . My flesh | 


has come again as that of a little child. I never knew such a 


THE STORY OF NAAMAN, 29 


However, as I have gone so far, 


\ 


& 
o him, “Go 


thing. I never felt so happy in all my life. 
~ ‘yas a great and a happy man when I accomplished that vic- 


I thought T | 


30 NEW STORIES FROM AN OLD BOOK: - 


tory ; but, thank God | praise God !:I am the happiest man 
alive.” So he comes up out of Jordan and pyts on his clothes, 
and goes back to the prophet, and wants to pay him. 

That’s just the old story ; Naaman wants to give money 
for his‘cure. How many people want to do the same now-a- 
days! Why, it would haye spoiled the sity of grace, if the 
abe deo had taken anything! You may we a thank-offering 
to God's cause, not because you can be shvpd, but because you 
are saved. But the prophet refused to tdke anything ; and I 
can imagine no one felt more rejoiced than Elisha did. So 
Naaman starts back’ to Damascus, a very different. man than | 
he was when he léft it. ‘The. dark cloud has gone from his 
mind ; he is no Jongér a leper, in fear of dying from a loath- 
some disease. /He lost the.fajprosy in Jordan when he did 
what the mar of God told him’; and if you obey the voice of 
God, even while I am ‘speaking to you, the burden of your 
sins will fall from off you, and you shall be,cleansed. It is 
all pons y the power of faith. ee 


aa 


/ 
f 


OK: 
\appiest man 
n his clothes, 
him. 

) give money 
) same now-a- 
grace, if the 
hank-offering 
t because you 
thing ; and | 
sha did. So 


nt. man than | 


ong from his 
from a loath- 
when he did 
y the voice of 
irden of your 
ansed. It is 


CHAPTER II. 


PRAYER-MEETING TALKS. 


W to Conpuct Prayer-Meetinas.—I have noticed, 
in travelling up and down the country, and after 
mingling with a great many ministers that it is not 
the man that can preach the best that is the most 
successful, but the man who knows how to get his 
people together to pr He-hag more freedom. It is 
so much easier to preach to an audience that is in full 


| sympathy with you than to {those who are criticising all the 


time. It chills your heart thfough and through. Now, if we 
could only have our prayer-niéutings what they ought to be, 
and people go, not out of any sense of duty but because they 


_ delight to go, it would be a great help toa minister in his 


Sunday services. Now, I find it a great help in prayer-meet- 
ings to get the people right up close together, and then get - 
myself right down among them, I believe many a meeting is 
lost by the people being scattered. 

Another.important thing is to see that the ventilation is 
all right. Sometimes I have been in rooms where I think the 


_ air must have been in there five or six years. You cannot 


always trust the janitors to take care of it. The people get 
sleepy, and you think it your fault. Very often such a thing 
is the fault of bad ventilation. See that you get fresh air— 
not too hot, and not too cold, but pure. Then it is a good 
thing to have a subject. Let all the people know a week 


|. beforehand what the ‘subject is going to be. You take the 


subject. of “ Faith,” say, and ask a brother or two privately to 
say a littlg on the’subject. ‘If they say, “I cannot get: my 


thoughts together ;” or, “T am_so frightened when] get 
that I tremble all over,” then tell him just to get up arid — 
read a verse. - It won't be long before they will add a few 


* 


Cem 


32 PRAYER-MEETING TALKS. 


words to that verse, and after a while they will want to talk 
too much, and the meetings thus become very profitable to 
those men. What we want is variety, Instead of having 
Deacon Jones and Deacon Smith and Deacon Brown to do-all 
the praying and all the talking, have somebody else say some- 
thing in this way, and thus create an interest. 

f would not have the minister always take the lead, for I 
have noticed when the minister takes the lead, if he ever goes 
off there is a collapse. Now it seems to me a minister should 
get different ones into the chair, and when he goes off the 
meetings won’t miss him, and there will be no falling off. Not 
only that, but he is training his members to work, They will 
go out around the town and in school-houses, and preach the 
Gospel, and we multiply preachers and workers in that way if 
they are only just taught to take part. Now I believe that there 
are a great many in our church prayer-meetings who could be 
brought out and made to be a great help if the ministers would 
only pay their atténtion to it. How many lawyers, physicians, 
public s rs we have-who do nothing to actively help along 
the work, and I believe that difficulty could be removed if the 
minister would take a little pains. Let the father whose son 
has been converted get up and give thanks. Have once in a 
while a thanksgiving meeting. It wakes up achurch wonder- 
fully, once in a while to let the young converts relate their ex- 
periences. Then you say, what are you going to do with 
these men that ‘talk so long? I would talk to them pri- 
vately, and tell them they must try to be shorter. And it 
is a good thing sometimes for ministers themselves not. to be 

_ too long. Sometimee they read a good deal of Scripture, and | 
talk until perhaps only fifteen minutes is left, and then they 
tomplain because Deacon Smith or Jones or some one else — 
talks too long. Just let the minister strike the key note of 
the meeting, and if he can’t do that in ten minutes he can’t at 
all. Very often a minister takes up a chapter and exhausts it, 
and says everything he can think of in the chapter, and then | 
can you wonder a layman cannot say more who has had no 
study of the subject? Give out the subject a week ahead, 


ninister-take-five-orten-minutes-in-opening, and then— 
different ones take part. That would be a greater 


let the 
variety. When 9 man takes part he gets greatly interested 


7 


want to talk 
yrofitable to 
d of having 
wn to do all 
© BAY somMe- 


» lead, for I 
16 ever goes 
ister should 
yoes off the 
ng off. Not 

They will 
preach the 
that way if 
1@ that there 
ho could be 
isters would 
physicians, 
help along 
noved if the 
r whose son 
fe once in a 
rch wonder- 
ute their ex- 
to do with 
. them pri- 
er. And it 
s not to be 


ripture, and | 
1 then they | 


me one else 
key note of 
3 he can’t at 
exhausts it, 


r, and then | 


has had no 
reek ahead, 


PRAYER-MEETING TALKS. 33 


himself. It waa protty true what the old deacon said, that 
when he took part in the meetings they wero very interest- 
ing, and when he didn’t they seemed very dull. [Laugh- 


Sugorstion TO Cuurcut Mampers.—If the ministers would ' 
encourage their members to be scattered among the audience, 
to never mind their pew but sit back by the door if need be, 
or in the gallery, where they can watch the faces of the 
audience, it would be a good thing. In Scotland, I met a 


‘man who with his wife would go and sit among thom, as they 


said, to watch forsouls. When they saw any one who éeemed ° 
impressed they would go to him after the meeting and talk 
with him. Nearly all the conversions in that church during 
the last fifteen months had heen made through that influence. “ 
Now, if we could only have from thirty to fifty members of the 
church whose business it is just to watch, and you laymen 
and laywomen to afterwards clinch them in. The best wa 

in our regular churches is to let the workers all. help to pull 
the netin. You will get a good many fishes’; it won’t be now 
and then one, but acores and scores. Now a stranger coming 
into a church likes to have some one speak to him. He does: ' 
not feel insulted at all. A young man coming to New York 
a stranger and going to church, if some one asks him to go 
into the inquiry room it makes him happy and cheers him. 
Two young men came into our inquiry room here the other 
night, and after a convert talked to them, and showed them 
the way, the light broke in upon them. They, were asked, 
“Where do you go to church?” They gave the name of ‘the 


. church where they nad been going. Said one, “I advise you 


to go and see the minister of that church.” They ‘said, 
“We don’t want to go there any more; we have gone there 
for six years and no one has spoken to us.” . ; 
A man was preaching about Christians recognizing each. 
other in heaven, and some one said, ‘1 wish he would preach 
about recognizing each other on earth.” In one place where I 
preached there was no special interest. I looked over the 


g, and then— 


e a greater 


interested 


= 


great-hall of the-old—cireus—building-where—it-was-held,_and 
saw men talking to other men here and there. I said to the 


"Secretary of the Young Men's Christian Association who got 


& 


oy 


34. _ PRAYER-MEETING TALKS, 


up the meeting, “Who are these men?” He said, “ They 
are a band of workers.” They were all scattered through the . 
hall, and preaching and watching for souls. Out of the fifty 
of them, forty-one of their number had got a soul each and 
were talking and preaching with them. We have been asleep 
long enough. When the laity wake up and try-and help the 
ihinister, the minister will preach better. If the niinister finds 
he has not been drawing the net right, if a good man in his’ » 


_. church go to work and help him he will do better ; he will 


prepare the sermons with that one thing-in view. Will this — 
' draw men to Christ? Fe Ose: 
I don’t see how men can preach without inquiry meetings. 
I like to see the converts. (ne minister in Scotland said he 
did not believe in disturbing the impression. If he had made 
ah impression he did not want any one to say anything. He 
said, “After you sow the seed you don’t want to go and dig it 
- up to see whether it has sprouted.” But I told him, ‘The 
farmers all harrow it after it is sowed.” [Applause.] _ 


_ Appress To Curistians.—One thing has been laid upon - 
my mind in the last hour, and that is, that we should pray to 
God to fill us with the Spirit. We have had a good many 
questions asked us by the young converts about how they 
should go to work. ‘There is a great deal of -work done by 
people: who have not the power of the Spirit ; and to work ' 
without the power is like beating ‘against the air. 

I would call your attention fo one. thought ; the gift of 
the Spirit for service. We may besons and daughters of God ; 
but we may be sons and daughters without power. God hasa 
.great many children that, have not:got any power. Their 

words. aré idle words; they might just as well speak in an 
unknown tongue ; their speech is “as sounding brass and a — 
tinkling cymbal.” I suppose many of us have felt what: it is 
to be preaching as though we were preaching to the air, our 
own hearts not moved, nor any one else’s, When you go 
home, take your Bible an hour or two, studying up this one 
subject, the gift of the Holy Ghost for service. In the 4th 
chapter of Luke, the 18th verse, we read :- “ The Spirit of the 
Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed me to preach the 


gospel.” It was after the Spirit came upon Him that He 


said, “ They 


through the . 


; of the fifty 
ul each and 
been asleep 
nd help the 
inister finds 


man in his’ - 


ter ; he will 


Will this 


'y meetings. 
and said he 
16 had made 
thing. He 
p and dig it 
him, “The 
se.] 


| laid upon - 


nuld pray to 
good, many 


t how they — 


rk done by 


nd to work ' 


the gift of 
ers of God ; 

God has a 
er. Their 
speak in an 


brass and a | 


t what: it is 
the air, our 
en you go 
up this one 
In the 4th 


pirit of the 


preach the 


' received the Spirit there. 


PRAYER-MEETING TALKS, ~ 35 


commenced His ministry. Then He went back to N azareth, | 
and His work was blessed. © a ee oe 
We find in the 20th chapter of John, these words: “And ° 


when He said this He breathed on them and said unto them, 


receive ye the Holy Ghost.” Of course His disciples had 
been converted before this. Back in the 7th chapter of John » 
we find Him saying on that great day of the feast, “ If any 


man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink. He.that: be- 


lieveth on Me, as the Scripture hath said—out of his belly 
shall flow rivers of living water. Greater works than I have 


done you shall do, because I come of the Father, and the * 
- Holy Ghost shall be upon you which also tomes of. Him,” 


___If we are only imbued with power from on High, it} will 
then be ours to work for God. You cannot get water out of 


‘dry well; You may pump, and pump, and pump, and the 


old machine will squeak, but there won’t any water come. 
Sometimes pumps are dry, and you can’t make any water 
come until you pour a little in at the top. So we have got to 


have water poured on us, or we cannot get any more power. -ss i 


than a dry pump. What we want is this water of the Spirit. 


poured upon ourselves, Oh, may He pour it upon us this 
_afternoon. c ; roan. tage 


_ In the 20th chapter of Luke and the 22nd verse, it aays, 


_ “When He had said this He breathed on them and saith unto 


them, receive ye the Holy Ghost.” Of course the disciples 
Some persons think because they have had the Holy 

Ghost resting upon them at one time in power, it is going to | 

remain. But I tell you that many a man that got converted 


\ 


and received the Holy Ghost, and was used ten years ago for 


the service of the Lord, has not got the power that he once 
had. He may be a good Christian, but he has lost the power. 
The people in his church know it. They say to each other, 


_ “What has come,over our pastor?” He has not got: the 


unction, he has not got the Holy Ghost. Oh, shall we not 


seek and pray for it here to-day? May the God of heaven 


breathe upon us one breath from the upper world before we ; 
go hence! To see that we are not to be satisfied with being 
filled once, turn over into the 2nd_ chapter of Acts. He told. 


n_ that He 


His disciples to-go back to Jerusalem and tarry there until 


36 PRAYER-MEETING TALKS, 


they were imbued from on High.. Those men had already 
been converted before. My friends, I think we do not tarry 
at Jerusalem until we get the power. We forget about the 
Holy Ghost, and about the necessity of our being anointed for 
service. These very men that He breathed upon then were | 
afterwards filled with the Holy Ghost, as we read in the 4th 
chapter of Acts. Peter andJames and John had not remained 
full. We are greatly mistaken in thinking that we may re- 
main satisfied with past mercies of grace that God gave us 
away back these ten years ago. We do not love the fresh - 
manna. In the 3rd chapter of John comes Nicodemus. In 
the 4th chapter of John He holds out the cup of salvation, , 
and it becomes a well of water. The water always runs to one 
level as it comes down. The 4th chapter of John is a better 
Christian than the 3rd chapter. The best glories of a Chris- 
tian are mentioned in the 7th chapter, where it says: ‘“ Out 
of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.” In Luke we — 
find it mentioned asa well, in John, a river. You know there 
are two ways of digging wells now.. - In one process, they do 
~ not stop as soon as they have come to water ; but they dig on 
down carefully through the rock and sand, until they come to 
a lower strata, and a stream of the clearest crystal water starts 
. and gushes to the top, like a fountain. You do not have to 
pump the water up from such a well. It-comes of itself. 
While in England I met a minister whose health had _be- 
come so poor that he had to get an assistagt to help him - 
preach. He could only preach once a week, ahd not. always 
that. One day, in meeting, the Spirit of God came upon him 
anew, and he got freshly anointed. He came down to London - 
a year afterwards, and he told me that during the past year he 
had preached eight sermons a week. He said he had never 
_ been so well in all his life. I believe it is not work that — 
‘breaks down our health ; it,is pumping without the water ! 
What we want to do is just to wait on God until He gives it to 
‘us. I know a minister who told me he felt that he was preach- 
ing without this anointing, and he felt that his sermons had 
not béen blessed for a long, long time. I know it was my own 
experience. I never like to talk about myself; it alyays makes 
‘ me feel like a fool, but this may do some of you some good. 


About four years ago I got into a cold state. It did not 


had already 
lo not tarry 
t about the 
anointed for 


n then were | 


1 in the 4th 
ot remained 
we may re- 
od gave us 


ye the fresh - 


demus. In 


f salvation, . 


} runs to one 
1 is a better 


-of a Chris- 


ays: “ Out 


In Luke we — 
know there 
ess, they do. 


they dig on 
hey come to 
water starts 
not have to 
f itself. 

Ith had be- 


o help him - 


not. always 
1e upon him 


n to London - 
past year he 


> had never 
| work that 
the water ! 
[e gives it to 


was preach- 


ermons had 
was my own 
lways makes 
‘some good. 


PRAYER-MEETING TALKS. | 37 


seem as if there was any unction resting upon my ministry.‘ 
For four long months God seemed to be just showing me my- 
self. I found I was ambitious; I was not preaching for 
Christ ; I was preaching for ambition. I found everything in 
my heart that ought not to be there. For four months a 
wrestling went on within me, and I was a miserable man. 
But after four months the anointing came. It came upon me 
as L was’ walking in the streets of New York. Many a time 
I have thought of it since I have been here. At last I had 


‘yeturned to God again, and I was wretched no longer. _ I al- 
- most prayed, in my joy, “O, stay thy hand!” _ I thought this 


earthen vessel would break, He filled me so full of the Spirit. — 
If I have not beef a different. man since, I do not know my- 
self. I think I have accomplished more in the last four years 
than in.all the rest of my life. But oh, it was'preceded by a 
wrestling and a hard struggle! I think I have never got out 
of this miserable selfishness. There was a time when I want- 
ed to see my little ymneyard blessed, and I could not get out 
of it; but I could work for the’whole world now. I would 


_ like to go round the world and tell the perishing millions of 


a Saviour’s love. 

If in these closing months here we could get baptized by 
the Holy Ghost, would it not be blessed? Is there not a 
hungering and a thirsting to be filled to-day? ‘“‘ Blessed are 
they that hynger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall 
be filled.” ” There is the word of the Lord Jesus. Is He not 
here to-day? Is not He able to fill ua? If He would imbue 
us all, and expel all jealousy and sectarianism, would if not 
be blessed? He can conquer this earthly will and fill us with 
the Holy Ghost as were the early Christians, Your congre- 
gations will find your new anointing out, if you take the grace 
and the anointing away with you. They will say to each 
other directly, ‘‘ What does it mean? What has come over 
our minister?” O, God grant that self may lose its interest 
for us to-day, and that Jesus may burst upon-us with a new 


: view; that we may behold Him to-day as we never yet be- 


held Him ; and may He give us fresh anointing ! 


Curist THE Goop SaMARITAN.—Luke | x. 25.—In this 


Tt did not — 


picture-we get the whole z was-the-city-of 


“@ 


a 


38 PRAYER-MEETING TALKS, 


‘ peace. Jericho was a city condemned, and from one to the 
other was all the way down hill—an easy road to go, as the 
unfortunate: man thought when he started on his journey. 
But he fetl among thieves, who. stripped him and left hitr . 
half dead, and the priest and the Levite passed him by. 
_ These two men represent a large class of ‘people. We. can. 
imagine ‘the priest asking himgélf, “Am I my brother's ° 
keeper?” and complaining, ‘‘ What did he want-to go down 
there for, any way? Why didn’t he stay at home?” He was 
a great | deal better off in Jerusalem—he might Mave known | 
aomething would happen to him.” Some people think ‘they 
~ have done their duty when they blame the poor for their po- 
verty, and the unfortunate for the accidents which, happen 
to them. 

There is another class yho always begin to hildaephize 
the minute they see any suffering. ‘Why does God have 
these’things? Why does He have sin and. poverty in the. 
_ world, I would like to know? He needn’t have it ; “He could _ 
just as well have made a world without it.” But here comes 
the good Samaritan ; he does more than pity and phildso- 
phize ; he helps, gives oil, and lifts the poor fellow on his __ 
_ beast. He is not afraid to touch him. He don't stop to ask. * 

whether he is Jew or Gentile, or just what he is going to do - 
with the man if he gets him away from there. -Now a great 
many people ask us, “ What are you going to do with these 
young converts when. you get them? Where will you put 
them—into what  church—Methodist, Baptist, Episcopal ?” 
“Well, we don’t know ; we have not thought of.that ; we 
are trying to get then out of the ditch first.” “Oh, ‘well 
then, we don’t want to have anything to do with it ;. we want 
it to be done decently and in order, if we are going ‘to have a 
hand in it.” 
. “These people are no Samaritans ; ‘they won 7 have any- 
thing to do with the poor. fellows by the wayside if they 
cannot dispose of, them ever afterwards to suit theniselves. 
Let Us not condemn those who: have fallen into the ditch. 
ms ist is our'Good Bs tea He has done for us, cole tells 


. do for others. x, 


' 


Greate «. Cigan Heart in Me, O° Gop —Ps. li. 10.— 


» 


ot 
%e 4 . 
: a 

® 


one to the 
0 go, as the 
is journey, 


id left’ him . 


ad him by. 
2 We. can. 


y brother's ' 


to go down 
34” He was 


jave known | 


think ‘they 
or their po- 
ich. happen 


shilosophins 
; God have 


erty in the. 
3 "He could | 
here comes — 


nd_phildso- 


allow on his 
stop to ask. * 
going to do - 


Now a great 
with these 
i you put 
“piscopal ?” 
that ; we 

“Oh, well 
it ;. we want 
ig to. have a 


| have any- | 


side if they 
theniselves. 
9 the ditch. 
1s, an tells 


mh, 


' 


_ know what it is to have broken hearts and contrite ue 


PRAYER-MEETING:’ TALKS. 39 
It seems as-if heye is where we might well stop and say.a 
word. Is our heart clean in/the-sight of God? Has He 
renewed @ right spitit within ‘us? Do we show that in our 
home, in our’ daily life, in our business, and in our contuct 
with others? If we do not, it seems to-me it is better to be 
praying for ourselves than for others, that the world may see 
that. we have been with God’s Spirit. If we are a great way. 


"from Christ in all our ways, our words will be cold and empty, 


and we cannot reach the world. There is power enough in 


_ this room to move all New York, if we had the right spirit — 


and clean hearts. ‘A friend of mine told me he. had ‘been 


preaching some time without seeing any results in his church, 
and he began to cry. to God that he might have a blessing on 


his church: He said weeks.went on and the answer didn’t 


come, and he felt that he must either have a blessing or give __ 


up the ministry. He must havé souls or die, and he said 
that on one Sunday he threw himself on’ hie knees in his. 
study and ¢ried to God, “Oh, God! break this heart of mine 
and give me a contrite spirit. ” Just at- this moment he heard 


_a faint rap at the dour, and opening it, his little child, four 
-years old, entered. She had heard her father’s prayer, and 
» she said, te Father, I wish you‘would pray for me ; I want a 


clean heart.” ”, And,” said he, “ God broke my “heart, and 
at the next meeting, there were forty inquirers, after that ¢ one 
sermon.” ‘Oh, that our hearts may be tender, and may we 


Gop’s Power To Save THE Wacaeaee ——Jer. xxxii. 17.— 


“Oh, Lord God ! behold, Thou. hast made the heaven und the- 


Ue th by Thy great power and stretched-out am, and-there ix 
nothing too hard for Thee.” Mr. Moody said. he had taken- 
that chapter to every place where he had been. He had 


‘tried to find a substitute, but had never succeeded, He then 
’ gaid”: 


It’s just what’ we want to give. the keynote to. our: meet 
ings. Many of us look about and see so. many wretched. and 
wieked people that we become disheartened. But it’s as easy 


for God to save every drunkard and infidél in New York as 


ith is for Him to turn His hand over. Think of this earth 


ae i. 10. 


God has made, with its- mountains and rivers ! Some 3 


* 


40 * PRAYER-MEETING TALKS, ' . 


one 4 said it is only a bal] thrown from the hand of God, 
and another that the stars and ‘th¢ modn are only the fringe 
' of His garments. If God can do these great things, think 
you He.can’t save drunkards? If He could speak worlds into 


existence, can’t He save dead souls! I have more hope of: 
these prayer-meetings than of any others. But if we don’t . 


get a hold of God here we won’t anywhere.: I believe that 
, God answers prayers. If we ask a fish, He won't give us a 


stone. Some have said these meetings will pass away and do 
no good. But it won't be soif God is with us. The late ° 
war taught men how to. pray. It seems to nie that sone of . 


the best work I ever saw was among the soldiers. Those 
boys away from their mothers, how many. prayers were uttered 
for them, and how many were converted! I well remember 


a young lieutenant from Indiana. : In one of our meetings, . 


o 


when we had; been speaking of mothers’ prayers, he got up 
_-and”said the remarks reminded hin) of letters-he had received 


’ from his mother, expressing great anxiety about his soul. . 


He had told her that he would come to Christ after the war ; 
but she reminded him he might never see that time. Another 
letter came from his home, and that mother was dead. And 
with: the tears trickling down his cheeks, that noble young 


man told his tale, and came to know his. Saviour. Now we . 


come to-day to call upon the.Lord for a great blessing to rest 
upon this mighty city. . oo ; 


A -Ratiny Day Prayer MEETING.—Ps. cili.—There are 


four precious clauses in this Psalm, viz. : “ He forgiveth all’ 
thine iniquities ,” “He healeth all thy diseases 3” “He: 


redeemeth thy life from destruction,” and “ He crowneth thee 
‘with loving kindness.” Christianity is better than anything 
that the world can give. It satisfies us. That is what wealth 
cannot do. The crowns of I‘urope cannot give the peace and 
contentment that come from the Crown of Life. I like 
these rainy day prayer-meetings. It costs us something to 
_. get here. . 7 


JS 


"CA. = 
: 


nd of ‘God, 
the fringe 
ings, think 
worlds into 


re hope of: 
if we don’t , 


elieve that 
t yive usa 


way and do 
The late ° 
at sore of . 


rs. Those 
ere uttered 

remember 
r meetings, . 
he got up 
d received 


his soul. 


t the war ; 
_ Another 
sad. And 
ble young 


Now we | 


ing to rest 


[here are. 
giveth all 


s;” “He: 


meth thee 
anything 
hat wealth 
peace and 
. T like 
ething to 


JS 


» thing. we ask is: What was the secret of his success? ‘Well, a : 


- them and begins to coax them away 


4s 


a / | 


THE PROPHET DANIEL, IN MR. MOODY'S VERSION. _ . | 
ant O those who haye heard the stately and brilliant ora- a 
tion of Dr. Punshon on “Daniel in Babylon,” by . 
iw _ which this line of address was first suggested to Mr.° 
Mey Moody, thiis rendering of the story in homely lan- 
y* \ @ilage will be especially interesting. The contrast q 
“in style will. be striking, but the power and effect of © ‘ie 
the two discourses will be found almost identical. A diversity | 


‘CHAPTER III. . 


When we come to the life of such a man as Daniel, the first . fae 


my friends, I'll tell you what ‘I. think was the secret of this 


[ tell you, my friends, it would bes, great thing for our - 
young men to be able to say No! when the devil comes upto . 
mem ‘the God of their - | 

We don’t know just. how old he was when wa hear of him’: _.| 
first: probably about seventeen. The king Nebuchadnezzar * 
had given orders to take some of the. best_and. brightest_boys- 


@ 


~ among the Hebrew captives and bring them up among his ee 
Wise mgn. They. were to be taught the language and- the : 


- 


42 MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 


learning of the Chaldeans, and to be fed with meat and wine . 6a 
from the king's table. i bs 
“But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would riot'de- 5 rd 
file himself with the:portion of the king’s meat, nor with the ki 
wine which he drank.” There was something in the law of it 
| | his God forbidding him to eat meat or drink wine which had 
ae ‘been offered to idols; and Daniel knew that the king's meat th 
ae and the king’s wine had been offered to idols, 20 ‘he deter- lea 
Gat bes mined not totouch it. , . : | aha 
| | If he had been like a good many of our modern Christians, 
|< he would have said something like this: “ Well,-it can’t be to. 
helped. I don’t like to defile myself this way ; the law of | 
God forbids it; and if I were only home in J erusalem I never the 
would do it in the world. But'I really don’t see how we are ) the 
going to help it. We are slaves. Besides, it is the king’s 
apecial order ; and if he should hear of our disobedience, our the 
|» jyeada would come off.in no time. Really, we can’t beexpect- Hi blo 
|. gd to ran such a risk as that.” . 
's it; the devil told him tu do in Babylon as thé peo- and 
ple of Babylon do. But Daniel iad the courage to stand up a 
| to tha ley of his God, and say.no / oh a 
nsequences? Never mind the consequences. «There day 
wasn’t any such word in his dictionary when it came to hin 
obeying the law of his God. He was bound to do it, let the ) 
consequences be what they might. - 0 
Do you hear what it says here in this eighth verse of the HH you 
| iret chapter ‘Daniel purposed in'his heart.” That's tho Mf 
ae trouble with a great many people : they purpose to do right, of b: 
| but they only purpose in their heads, and that doesn't amount. ‘ 
| to much, If you are going to be Christians, you must purpose ‘ 
| - . to serve God away down in your hearts: “ With the heart HH tion 
| |. man believeth unto righteousness.” : healt 
| __. So when the servant who’ had charge of them came to and. 
| bring them. their dinner, Daniel and his three young friends 4 
told him they couldn't eat that meat and drink that wine, be- I 
| cause it was against the law of their God. Tee Dani 
Look at.timt! Daniel doesn’t. try to dodge the question “ 
at all; he gives: right out at once. Re 
I am afraid some of you, if you had been in his place, had 
mem] 


would have tried to hide behjnd some excuse, You would 


NIEL. 
sat and wine . 


rould riot: de- — 
nor with the 
in the law of 
e which had 
. king's meat 
so ‘he deter- 


n Christians, 
ll, it can’t be 


; the law of | 


salem I never 
e how we are ) 
is the king’s 
bedience, our 
n't, be expect- 


on as thé peo- 
e to stand up 


nces. ‘There 
n it came to 
do it, let the 


1 verse of the 
” That's the 
e to do right, 
oesn’t amount. 
must purpose 
Vith the heart 


hem came to 
young friends 
that wine, be- 


. the question 
See 


ay you weren't very wall ; 
* “agree with you. Not so with Daniel. He tells that heathen 


— and the Grace of God. - 


et 
a 
Et, 


é 


MOODY’S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL, 


43 


or that meat and wine didn’t 


* the true reason why he can’t. eat the kin 


king’s wine, and I have no doubt the m 
it. : 


g's meat or drink the 
an respected him for 


“ But, says he, “ it won't do'at all. If you don’t eat it, 
the king will find it out. “He'll 80@ you some time looking 
lean and thin, and he'll ask what ‘the matter is, and then | 
shall lose my head as ‘well as you.’ 

“Just try us for ten days,” says Daniel. “ Give us pulse 
to eat and water to drink, and see how we get along on it.” 

So the servant tried them on the pulse and water, and at 
the end of ten days they were the fattest and best looking of 
the whole crowd. : | 

Some people think wine makes them look better, and that 
they can’t get along without it.’ Look at their red noses and 


bloated faces ! 


I tell you, all the stimulant a person needs is the Word: | 
There was a soldier down in Tennessee when I was there, 
—a8 great strong, hearty fellow, who was a teetotaler. One 


day, when the army was going on a long march, a man offered 
him a drink of whiskey. 5 


“T am a teetotaler,” 
“Never mind that. 


-_ He took God's side in this ques- 
tion, and held to God’s terms, and God made him strong/and 
healthy ; gave him favor with those who saw his hongaty‘ 
and, above all, peace in his own soul. . a 
The next we hear of him is about two yearsafter,  —— 
T seem to see the officer coming in and laying his hand on 


| Daniel’s shoulder, and arresting him in the king’s name. 


«What's the matter?” says Daniel, / 
6 2 ,) . P 


in his place, 
i You would 


the officer. “The king 


hed a dream last night, and when he woke up he couldn't re- 
member it ; 0 he called all his Wise men together, and asked 


3 


44 MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 


them to tell him his dream, and then interpret it for him. 
Nobody could tell it. The king was so angry that he com- 
manded that all the wise men should be put to death. You 
belong to that schvol ;\so you will have to die.” 

“Tt seems to me the king is rather hasty,” says Daniel— 
cool and calm as a summer morning. “Just let him give us 
a little time, and I’ll show him his dream and the interpreta- 
tion also.” \ 

He knew his God and\ trusted in Him. All secrets belong 
to God. , 

That night Daniel and his three friends had a little prayer- 
meeting together. I have\no doubt they read the story of. 
Joseph ; how the dreams of old Pharaoh were revealed to him; 
and how he came to be a great man in Egypt afterwards. 
And then they went to sleep.\ 

I don’t think many of you, would have gone tu sleep with 

‘-such danger as that hanging over your heads. But Daniel 
step and in his sleep the king’s dream was revealed to 

im. , 

The next morning there was a great stir all about the 
palace. It had gone out that ayoung Hebrew captive was 
going to tell the king his dream, and save the lives of all the 

ige men of Babylon ; and everybody waa anxious to know 

about it. ad ; . 

- I can see the young man brought into the presence of the 
mighty monarch. He stands there without the slightest fear. 
His God, in whom he trusted, has made hini master of the 

- gituation. The King looks at him, and says, “ Young, man, 
can you tell me my dream and the interpretation of it?” 

“My God can !” answers Daniel ; and he begins. 

“In your dream, O king you saw an image——” — 

“ That's it /” says Nebuchadnezzar, his face lighting up 
all at once ; “ You've. got it ! I remember it all now.” 

“ Yes.” says Daniel; “‘my God revealed it to me last 
night in ‘a dream.” You see he doesn’t take any. credit to 
himself for it,. but gives the glory to his God. . 

“The head of this great image was gold, his breast and his 
of iron, and his feet part of iron and part of clay. And 
then, O king, you saw a stone cut out without hands, which | 


rT 


aise 


EL. 


it for him. 
at he com- 
ath. You 


s Daniel— 
jim give us 
interpreta- 


reta belong 


ttle prayer- 
he story of. 
led to him; 
afterwards. 


sleep with 
But Daniel 
‘evealed to 


about the 
paptive was 
s of all the 
us to know 


ence of the 
ghtest fear. 
aster of the 
oung, man, 
of it?” 

ns. 
lighting up 
ow.” 


to me last 


. 


y.credit to 


sast and his 


aa8,—his_legs- 


feet high and about nine feet wide. 


~ but his friends, Shadrach, 


MOODY’S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 45 


struck the image upon its feet, and crushed it to pieces fill it 
became like the dust of the summer threshing-floor.” 
“That's all right,” says the king. ‘ Now can you tell me 
the interpretation of it 
~ Now [ imagine somié of you would have tried to soften 
down the interpretation a little. 


It was a pretty hard thing 
for Daniel to stand up there before that great monarch, and 


tell him his kingdom was to be like the dust of a summer 


threshing-floor; but he did it. 

“Thou art this head of gold. And after thee shall arise 
another kingdom inferior to thoe; and another third king- 
domipf brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth. And 
the fourth ‘kingdom shall be strong’as iron, Afterwards it 
shall be divided, and become part strong and part weak. And 
in the days of those kings shall the God of heaven set up a 
kingdom which shall never bé destroyed ; j¢’shall break in 
pieces and destroy all those kingdoms, and it shall stand for 
ever.” 2 . 

The king was greatly pleased with Daniel, and made a. 
great man of him; and, for his sake, put his three friends 
into office. You see Daniel didn’t forget his friends when he 
got into a good place himself. §—s_— es 

Well: not long after that—maybe it was the droam| that 
put it into his head-Nebuchadnezzar made a great i age, 
and set it up in the plains of Dura.” It was about ninety 


made of solid gold. I rather think the king intendéd that imagd 
to represent himself. He was going to have universal re- 
ligion, and he was going to be the head of it,—there are some 


_ such people now-a-days,—and so he gave orders to have all the 
_ nobility and great officers of his kingdom brought together to 
worship the golden image which he had set up. 


I don’t know ‘where Danijel was at this ‘time. Perhaps 
he was away in sotne other part.of the kingdom on business ; 
Meshach, and Abed-nego, w 
there to represent him. Their enemies were there too. / A 


faithful servant of Gor is sure te have enemies, watching for 


-of-the-way: 


r 
ed eta inc. 


Some tn say it was © 


clay. And 


ands, which _ 


It was a great day when the image was unveiled. I seem 


: gee it flashing in the sunlight ; the vast throng of worship, 


46 MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 


pere standing around it ; and the king, at the head of a splen- 
did procession of his lords and ladies, coming across the plain 
with banners flying and music playing ; really, it must have 
been a trying time for those three men, who were so much 
out of fashion as not to bow down to the great idol when 
everybody else was doing it. — 

But the. law of their God and the law of the king were in 
conflict. The king said, Bow down ! God said, No !—and it 
didn’t take them a minute to decide what to do. 

Some pegple would have said, ‘ There’s no great harm in 
bowing with all the rest ; but then you needn’t worship, you 
know; just bend your, knees a little, but don’t say any pray- 
ers to the idol.” . 

Not a bit of it. These men were not going to compromise 


_ their consciences ; and their enemies knew it very well. The 


hour has arrived ; everything is ready ; the king makes a sign 
with his hand, and the cornete and sackbuts, and all the other 
instruments, give a great blast, and the whole multitude fall 
down on their faces before the great image which Nebuchad- 
nezzar the king has set up. No; not all! There are three 
pairs of stiff knees in that kingdom—three men who will not 
bow to the false god. Their enemies have taken care to put 
them in the, front rank, near to themselves, where they. can 
watch them, and so find occasion to accuse them to, the 
king. 

4 seen to see these fellows looking out of the corners of 
their. eyes, when, by the king’s command, they ought to have 
been worshipping the idol: and I hear them saying to them- 
selves, “ Aha! we have got you now!” and-so they go to tell 


' the king. 


“O king ! live for ever. Do you know that there are 
three men in your kingdom who will not obey you?” 

“ No: who are they?” 

“Three of. those Hebrew captives; they don’t bow down 


along with the rest of us ; and we thought you would like to | 


know it.” 
he, Bring bug to me, ay iy spb ina 2 em Tage 5 «ft 


like this.” 
It is B quite likely he would have seal their heads to be 


N 


NIEL. 


id of a splen- 
oss the plain 
it must have 
ere so much 
it idol when 


king were in 
No !—and it 


reat harm in 
worship, you 


ay any pray- 


) com promise 
y well. The 
makes a sign 
all the other 
nultitude fall 
h Nebuchad- 
eré are three 
who will not 
n care to put 
ere they. can 
them to, the 


he corners of 
ught to have 
‘ing to them- 
rey go to tell 


at there are 
out” 


’t bow-down . 


vould like to 


vat rage; “I 
ay-my_orders- 


heads to be 


MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 47 


taken off at once, if he had not remembered that they were 
particular friends of Daniel. 

Now they stand face to face with the great king, 

“What is ‘this I hear of you?” says Nebuchadnezzar. 
“They say you disobey my orders, and do not bow down and 
worship my golden image. Now, I will try you once more ; 
and then, if you don’t bow down, into the furnace you go.” 

We do not know who the speaker was on that occasion ; 
perhaps it was Shadrach. 
friends, looking calmly at the king, and thinking of the fiery 
furnace without trembling in the least, or feeling the slightest 


fear And this is what he says,— 


“ We are not careful to answer thee in this matter, O king. 
The God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burn- 
ing fiery furnace, and He will deliver us out of thing hand, 
O king. But whether Me deliver us or not, we will not bow 
down.” : 


“ Who is this God of yours, that is able to deliver you out 


of my hands?” says.the king, in a towering rage. “Qo and 
heat that furnace seven times hotter than ever, and take these 
fellows up, and thrust them into it. Be quick about it. I 
will not have such rebels in my kingdom.” x 

So some of the king’s servants hurry away:to the furnace 


to stir up the fire, and ‘others seize Shadrach, Meshach, and \ 


Abed-negu, and take them away ; and whet the furnace doors 
are opened, they come near to cast. them into the fire,—which 


is so hot that it burns the servants to death; but does not 


harm the men who are cast down headlong into it: Then the 
king goes and looks into the furnace; and what is his aeton- 
ishment at seeing four men, instead of three, walking in the 
midst of the fire, as safely as if they were in the king’s garden ! 

“Did T not tell‘You to cast in three men ?—and lo ! I see 
four walking about in the fire ; and the form of the fourth is 
like the Son of God.” , ay 

The Lord Himself was with His three faithful servants. 
The great Palestine Shepherd looked down from heaven, and 
saw those three sheep of His flock about to be cast into the 


He stands there with his two ° 


fire 5-and 


they suffe 


Bo. 


De cei 
bis 


5 3 . ; to see that 
1no harm. Ah! Jesus is always-with His people. . 
Though they pass through water, they shall not be drowned ; 


ry 


48 MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 


though they pass through tire, they shall not be burned. 
The tire burned off only the devil’s bands: it did not singe a 
hair of their heads. me 
Does not Christ say that the hairs of our heads are all 
numbered ? There is wonderful care and love in that. 
Did you ever know a mother who loved her little child so 


well that she would count the hairs on. its curly head? But 


"the Lord loves His children so well that “Ho counts their hairs 
——every one ; and not one of them comes to any harm, so long 
as His child is faithful to Him. There was not even the 


smell of fire upon their garments; and the king’s coun- ~ 


sellors, and princes, and’ governors, atid captains, and all 

together, saw these men upon whose bodies the fire had no 
power. | Re | oa 

My friends, let. us remember that it is always safe to do 

- what God wants us todo. If our way to heaven leads through 

fire and water, it is all the same: it is all right. . That is the 

proper way for us to go. ae Ce 

_. And now King Nebichadnezzar orders these men to come 
out ; and he restored them to their places again. He has 
found out who was the God that was able to deliver His ser- 
vants out of the hands of the king ; and [ am quite sure that, 
from this time, neither the king nur anybody else in Babylon 
ventured to say anything against those men, or against the 
God whom they worshipped, and who had delivered them out 
of the fiery furnace. 

. The king himself makes a decree, “that every people, 
nation, and language, which shall speak anything amiss 
against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, shall 
be cut in. pieces, and their houses shall. be made a dunghill, 


because there is no other God that can deliver after thia sort.” 


So the king promoted these men; and, instead of being 
burned to death in the furnace, they came to be more honor- 
able than ever. 

_The next thing that we hear of the king is, that he has 


had another dream. He seems to have been a great man for 


dreams, This time he saw a great tree which “ reached unto 


heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of all the earth oer 


and, behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from 


heaven, and cried aloud ; ‘ Hew down this tree, and dowr 


TEL. 


be burned. 
not singe a 


ads are all 
that. 
tle child so 


ead? But 


s their hairs 
rm, so long 
t even the 


ing’s coun- — 


18, and all 
ire had no 


safe to do 
ds through 
That is the 


en to come 

He has 
er His ser- 
: sure that, 
n Babylon 
against the 
1 them out 


ry . people, 
ing amiss 
nego, shall 

dunghill, 
thi’ sort.”. 

of being 
ore honor- 


at he has 


t.man for 


ched_unto 
arth 3... 
own from 


MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 49 


his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit ; let 
the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from its 
‘branches, Nevertheless, leave the stump of his rpots in the 
earth, . . .. Let his heart be changed from man’s, and let a 
beast’s heart be given untu him, and let seven times pass over 


. him : to the intent that the living may know that the Moat 
_ High ruieth in the kingdom of. men, and giveth it to whom- 


soever He will.’ ” : ae 
The king seems to have been as much puzzled by this 
dream as by the other ; and nobody could tell him what it 
meant, until he sent for Daniel. Even he was troubled about 
it at first ; but-presently the Lord showed it to him; and 


then he preached such a sermon to the king about his pride, 


and the necessity of repentance, that the king’s face turned 
pale, and his. knees began to shake, and it was not long before 


he lost his reason, and ‘wandered away from his palace, out 


into the woods and the deserts, and became more like a beast 
than aman. | ut at last the Lord. had Mercy on him, His 


- counsollors and princes gathered about him again, and brought 
_ him back to his palace. But the king’s heart was softened. 
I think he became truly converted to God; and from this 


time we don’t bear him saying any more: “ Is not this great 
Babylon that I have builded ?” But we hear him’ blessing 


the Most. High, and praising and honoring Him whose domin..-. 


ion, is everlasting, and whose kingdom is from generation to 
generation... : 
And now the king makes one more proclamation, differ- 
ent from all the others. _Up to this time he has been telling 
other people what to do; now he begins to spedk'of his own 


‘duty, and he says, “I, Nebuchadnezzar, will do this—I will 
- do that.” “T will praise and extol and honor the King of, 
_ Heaven, all of whose works are’ truth.” . He has found out 


his own duty. His heart is softened ; and although we do 
not hear anything more.of him, L have no doubt that Daniel 


and he used to walk the streets of Babylon, arm-in-arm, and | 


talk over their experiences together ; and when the king died, 
I feel quite sure that he went safely to heaven, to be wel- 
comed hy the God of Daniel 3 and through the long eternity 


King Nebuchadnezzar will. rejoice that that young man, — 
Dani } 


bek_his-stand for God when he came down to Baby- 


: . 
50 MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL, 


“lon, and did not follow the fashion of that wicked capital, 
thongh it might have cost him his life. 
_ The next thing we hear of Babylon is, that the grandson — 
of Nebuchadnezzar, a wild youny prince, called Belshazzar, 
~ has come to the throne. Ona certain occasion he makes 
_ Sreat feast to a thousand of his lords. They come together 
in a great banquet-chamber, and ‘they drink and carvuse all 
night long. They do not care for the armies of Cyrus, which 
are besieging the city. They trust in its high walls and its © 
gates of brass, and_ feel. themselves perfectly safe. At last, 
_ when the head of the young king has been quite turned with 
_ wine, he orders the golden vessels, which his grandfather 


_-\, captured from God’s temple at J erusalem, to be brought into 


«the banquet-hall, that they may drink wine out of them in 
_ honor of the god’s of Babylon. But while they are doing 
this impious thing, behold, a hand appears, writing -with its 
fingers upon the wall—the doom of the kingdom of Babylon. 
--- Drunk as he is, the miserable king is frightened. - 
“Bring in the wise men,” says he. 
come in haste, and stares at the 
is able to read or unde 


to do; 
him to 
Upharsin :” and the 
t to him. » 
ood many courtiers, if they 
pon the wall’ of the king’s 
meaning of it a little, and 
sth, for fear of offending the 
’s fashion at all. He reads it 
“ Mene: God hath numbered thy 


finished it, Tekel : Thou_art-weighed—in-the 


Le 


| capital, 


grandson — 


Ishazzar, 


makes a 


together 
ruuse all 
8, which 


; and its 


At last, 
ied with 


ndfather 


pht into 


them in — 


e doing 
with its 
abylon. 


ise men 
f them 
eye can 


reaches 
to him, 
. Was a 
secrets, 


wuld be — 


| MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 51 


balances, and art tound waiting. Peres; Thy kingdom is 


divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.” 

. Ah! poor miserable Belshazzar! Even now the soldiers 
of Cyrus have turned away the waters of. the Euphrates, and 
are coming into the city along tho empty banks. The soldiers 


- are battering away at the doors of your palace, and before 


morning your blood shall be spilled upon the stones, along 


with the wine which you have been drinking, out of the ves- 
sels from,God’s holy temple at Jerusalem. You are weighed m 


in God’s balance, and found wanting. 
My friends, suppose God should begin to wei 


the balances to-day 4 


Some one will ask me, “Mr, Moody, dare. you step into » 


the balances to-day, and be weighed? Do you know that you 
would be saved, if the Lord should bring you to judgment ?? 
Yes ; thanks be to God, Christ is able to save me—even me 

and He ggill save all of you who will cast off your sins, and 


. take Ch¥i#t instead. 


After awhile, Darius, the Mede, comes to the throne of. 


Babylon. He must have met Daniel somewhere in his trav- 


els, for no sooner does he set up the kingdom than he puts 
him into a place of great power. He chooses a hundred and 


twenty princes, whom-he places over the kingdom 3 and over — 
| - these princes he appoints three presidents, and he makes 


Daniel the president of the presidents; so that he really is 
the first man.in the kingdom, after the king: His business 
was to “see that the king suffered no‘damage ;” that. is, he 
was to keep watch of the accounts, to see that nobody cheated: 


_ the king. This must have been a very difficult. place, and 


Daniel must have had his hands full. He had to watch those | 
hundred and twenty rascals, who were all the while trying to 


steal something off the revenue ; rv, to go over their accounts 


te 


ee ’ Pita i capaay 
oe } o een : 
\ Ht ey ‘ 
j ciel 8 
- OMA, ry 
‘ 


: 5% MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 


} 
= | 
| , again and again, so as to be certain that they were correct to . 
+ @ penny... eee eb ice 3 a ey 
| _  ., [twas not long eles Daniel became very unpopular with 


the princes. I seem 
inthis way:— ag ae 
“There is that miserable ‘old Jew, Daniel: if we only had 

-him out of the way, we could make no end of money. We 

would very speedily be rich; we would have Our country 

~ houses and our city houses; and our fine horses‘and chariots, 


“hear them, talking amongst theméelves «, 


* and we would live in the very highest style, off the revenues 
ie of this kingdom ; but that old fellow watches ts as narrowly 
_s @8acat watches a mouse. We gan’t cheat him—even to a 
3 shilling.” . “Why,” says one,'“I never saw suc & mah ‘in 
‘ all my life: I gave in an account:the other day that was only 
_ & few poundy short ; and did fot he send it back to me, and 
“make me pay the difference? I wish he were ‘back in: Jeru-. 
salem, where he came from.” Se in a ss 
.| 7” Howéver, the king trusted Daniel ; and he was such a - 
“4, °_ thoroughly good and honest man that they really could find .. 
“is + no way't ‘Tevenge themselves upon him. | They talked it over 
= together in an again, and all agreed that there was'no . 
. chance of getting him out of the way, unless they could find 
", Something in his religion byNvhich they could bring him into 
|, trouble. ek ane aie ie 
_ “We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except 
. We find it against him conderning the law-of his God.” What. 
"an honor! , Nothing wrong with him—even in the eyes of 
these bad men—except that he was too faithful to his God ! _ 
How many of you are likely to be complained of on that - 
account ? Oe a eto lets Pea ae’ 
. ’ Finally, they hit upon a plan which they thought might 
Possibly succeed. One night they are closeted together in 
_ Secret; and one of the princes. says to the rest: “I think I _ 
have gotea plan ‘that will work. You know King Darius is | 
Very ‘popular, and he is very proud of it’ -The people praise ° 
« hith a great deal, and he likes it. Now suppose we ask him. 
to establish a royal decree, that whosoever shall ask. petition, off 
of any god or man for-thirty: days, save of the king, he shall 
__*. be cast into the den of lions,’ That will ba putting the king es 
-__in-the place-of-the gods, and he is most likely to be flattered § 


EL... 


correct to | 


pular with 


heméelves -, 


» only had 
ney. We 
r country 
L chariote, 
) revenues 
‘narrowly 
sven to a 
& mah in 
was oply 


) the, and » 


‘in: Jeru-. 
Save “ 


s such a ~ 
ould find . 


cf 


ry 0 


". pealing to his-vanity, 


6 


ee 


ument, with his 


pO 
Rag 


AS ae 


Il: They 
ately. It would not’ do’ to ‘ 


ee ee 
CN 


let... 


editover Mi «0 king, .we have been ‘thinking how pd 
) was no . c n oy, : : 
muld find ara: 
him into bli 
i], except 
.” What. 
8 eyes of 
lis God! 
on that - 
it might ta, All right,” said the princes, “We tho ght.you would. 
ether in ff like it’; and in order that there might’ not iyi ia, os iy 
think If have the document here already drawn up. Now if you-will . - | |i@- 
Darius is . “ee to stamp this with your siget-ring, we shall haveit = { 
6 praise ' Published right away.” ee re cane 
sk him. '» The king takes the document, reads: it. over, stamps his 
petition f- seal upon it ; and the committee go away laughing, and saying, 
a shal iL {Ha ha! old Hebrew, wo will have you in the ten of Tiong . 
eking '# night.” oa aS ae 
lattered - ‘The princes no time in ublishing i , 


* 
v 


54 MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 


the king. I can imagisie some one of Daniel's friends, who 

had seen the document, going up to his office in great haste, angry 
to give hitn warning that there was some trouble brewing. of the 
am “‘ Have you heard the news, Daniel? Those hundred and his f 

twenty princes have gone and ‘got Darius to publish a decree some 
that nobody shall ‘pray to any other god, exgept him, for prince 
thirty days. That is a conspiracy against you. Now I want TI 
to give you a little’advice ; and that is, to get out. of this under: 
towninahurry.” oe sere 7 t 
But Daniel says he can’t leave his business, He is afraid hear ¢) 
these hundred and twenty princes will cheat the revenues. Listen 
while he is away. His duty is right there, and he is deter. “N 
mined to stay there and attend to it. : Hebre: 
__ “Well, then; had you not better pray more secretly? You So 

have a habit, that is‘all well enough in ordinary times, of hurry 
going up to your chamber, where the windows opened towards Daniel 
fore th 
© 
the law 
oT 
the kin 
eT 
not mal 
than to 
pay 
*/ The 

Daniel, 
Poor D; 

66 

scouts it. He trampels it have kn 
hinder him from praying, No king shall frighten him out of that. * 
his duty. He attends to his-morning’s work ; looks over the There is 
accounts as usual ; and when twelve o'clock comes, he goes king, 


to his chamber, 


nds, who 
at’ haste, 
wing. 

dred and 
a decree 
him, for 
v I want 


; Of this. 


is afraid 
revenues. 


is deter- 


y? You 
;imes, of 
towards 
ay. And 


DOTS Can | 


ray, for 
ve some 
stop up 


are not ©: 


better, 
iy your 


» 


rCam-  ~R. 


Christ, 
es | 


3? He | 


n shall 


1 out of 


Daniel ; and the princes ldse no | 


ANIEL, 55 


Ber ; neither is he 
angry at the command of the king or the manifest wickedness ‘ 
of ‘those hundred and twenty princes, He prays for the king, 
his friend,—who, he is sure, has done this wickedness in 
© prays for his -enemies,. the 
princes, who are wickedly seeking to destroy him. ae 
Those men, have taken care that two witnesses shall be 
- underneath’ Daniel’s windows at the time when he us 
to pray. “Hark !” says one to the other. “Did you | 
ear that? The old man is up there praying, snte enough !° 
Listen :: he is not praying td ‘King Darius.” - . ene 
“No, says the other; “he is praying to the God of the , 
Hebrews.” hee a Na ‘ ; 
So they listen tilt the prayer is finished, .and then they | 
hurry Away to the princes, to-give their évidence: against 
ae timd in laying the matter be- 
fore the king, - . yoy ee j z 
_“ O-King Darius ! live-Tor ever, Is it not written that: 
the laws of the Medes and the Persians change not ?” 
- “Tt is,” said Darius ; “anything that ig stamped with 
the king’s seal cannot. be changed.” oes nies 
“ That is what we thought,” sai 
not make a decree, that no man shou 
than to the king ?” ee eer 


Daniel, 


had been made, and it could not be changed, ne 


even for the sake of Daniel himself. 


Af Darius had loved his friend only as much as Christ 


loves us, he would have gone down into the den of lions for 


, our King, counted not His life: too dear 
unto Him:elf, but. freely delivered it up for UB, sere 


| ree 


é 


oe 


is ; a r 
56 | MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL: 


At sundown the king's officers go for the old man, to take 
him away to the lions. They bind his hands behind his 
back, and lead him along the streets of Babylon towards the 
den. The whole city goes out to see the sad procession. The 
princes look out of their windows, and rub their hands, and 
laugh over the success of their wicked plot ; and the people 
look on in wonder, to gee such a sweet-faced old-man led away. 
to die like a criminal; and ‘poor Darius walks the chamber | 
of hts palace, wringing his hands in agony, saying, “Ah me ! 
_ I have destroyed my friend.” - 

But ‘Daniel walks with a firm: step. His old knees don’t 
shake a bit.- The wind of the evening plays with. bis white 
locks, and with a smile upon his face he goes to meet the 
lions. He has served his God now for seventy long years, 
and he feels sure that God will not desert him in this great | 
hour of trial. I can imagine him saying, ‘¢ My God can bring 

me out of the jaws of the lions just as easily as He has saved 
my three friends from the furnace of fire. But even if they 
_ eat. me, I shall only die for my God.” And. when they put 
him into the den, God sent one of His angels to shut. the 
mouths of'the lions,’ aes = ee 
At the hour of the evening prayer, Daniel kneels in the 
den ; and if he can get the points of the compass down there, 
, he prays with his face towards Jerusalem ; and then, taking 
one of the lions for his pillow, he ‘lies down and sleeps, as - 
- Sweetly as any man in Babylon. The king sits up all night, 
thinking what his folly has cost him—even the life of his 
moet faithful servant. But he remembers that the God of 
Daniel has done strange things. for them who trusted Him. 


. \ He has heard of Shadrach. and his friends coming out of the #f 
" fiery furnace ; and he knows that Daniel went into the den — 


- feeling that ‘his God would go.with him and save him. At 
' the first dawn .of day he orders out his chariot, and you can 
hear the: wheels’ rattling over the pavements of Babylon 
. "before. the people are up. Away he goes, with his horses on - 

the run, to the door of the dion’s-den ; springs out of the 
chariot ; looks down into it, and with a voice trembling with 


anxiety, cries out, “O Daniel, servant of the living God ; 
ig: God. 


om: thou servest continually, able to deliver 
thee from ‘the lionst” Be Ds gets aoe eg 


nan, to take 
behind his 
owards the 
ssion. The 
hands, and 


the people 


n led away. 
i6 chamber ' 


“Ah me! 


nees don’t 
_ bis white 
. meet the 
ong years, 


this great . 


| can bring 
has saved 
on if they 
- they put 
shut. the 


els in the — 


wn there, 
m, taking 


sleeps, as - 


all night, 
ife of his 
e God of 
ted Him. 
ut of the 


otheden # 


him. At 
| you can 
Babylon 


horses on - 
it of the. - 


ling with 
ng God ; 


MOODY'S SERMON ON PROPHET DANIEL. 


” Ct) 57 
Hark“ There comes upa voice out of the den. 
voice of Daniel ; to whom this morni 
of the resurrection. He. has been ‘dow 
and yet he isalive. . 
“O king ! live for dver. 
shut the lions’ y wena 


declares “that, i ~ 

tremble and fear b 

sighs and wonders in heaven a 
His servant from the 

_, May the. God of 

Daniek be in us ! 


T, may we be so hi 


, and all the ancient worthies, i 


0 deliver. 


CHAPTER IV. 


/ HOW'TO STUDY AND MARK YOUR BIBLE. 


HAVE been wonderfully cheered, said Mr. Moody, 

in going to the young: men’s meeting, to hear 

much scripture quoted. Any revival that don't 

bring people to their Bible is a sham; and will last 

only for a few weeks ; but if the people are brought 

to love the Word of God, there will be a revival that 
* will last 365 days ii the year. 

In Nehemiah viii. 2, we read that Ezra, the priest, brought 
the law before the congregation of both men and women in 
the street, and he read therein from morning until mid-day ; 
and in the eighth verse, it is said, “they read in the book, in 
the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused 
them to understand the reading.” I can imagine the priest 
réading the passage over twenty times until the people under- 
stood it. Bible Christians. are all tho time rejoicing in the 


Lord, for the Lord is their strength, but the people who . 


neglect their Bibles are in a backsliding state. 
Mr. Moody quoted Jeremiah xx.9, to show that Chris- 
tian men are constrained. to open their lips and ‘speak for the 


Lord. He said: If the Holy Ghost is our teacher, we wil] _ 
understand the Word of God. ‘The best thing to interpret 


the Bible ia the Bible itself, 


“There are three books every Christian ought to have ythe 
| - Bible, Cruden’s Concordance, and the “ Bible Text-Book.”* If 
~ 't you have not got them, get them to-morrow. - | 


Newepapers only tell you what has taken place ; this book 
tella you what is going: to take place. Take up one subject at 


Over the 


to the v 
then the 
Let us t 
some tri 


Greatest 


Is deepes 
Now su 


> Inheritan 


of this i 
the Rock 
world. V 
morning | 
not tell J 


- Mi lan 


ni ! t, ant 
apply to e 


* These may-be had of the 


oF this ne, 5 
Concordance, unabridged, $2.25. ‘The Bible Text-Book, $1.00. Sent 
by mail post paid to any address on, receipt of price, f 


with it a 
God. 


‘A man 


“a 
Le 


Moody, 
hear 

| don’t 
ill last 
prought 
yal that 


rought 
inen in 
d-day ; 
ook, in 
caused 
) priest 
under- 
in the 


le who. 


Chris- 
for the. 


ve will | 
Lerpret 


p: the 


Rte If 


s book 
ject at 


Word of God an 
) take up “ Blood ;” it 


reading i in t way. Tn © often put > 
_ 4 mark iu their Bible to k peopl p 


now where they left off. ° I hoed 
corn when a boy, and I used to put down 


try to master ubject, 
recommend the best Life of Ch 
mend four-—Mat 


_ over the whole Bib 


to the whole Bible, of everything, and 
then the other. parts d themselves to us, 
Let us take the Bible —to get at 
some truth. 


: ston the 
 Breatest de 6 best part 
Is deepest, H a 


uninteresting, 


’ : 
Sent 


_Wwords 
and left, énd 
the throne of 


dwells much with the Scrip. _ 


os 


60 STUDVING AND MARKING THE BIBLE. 


ture. Peter quoted Scripture at the day of Pentecost, when 
he was full of the Holy Ghost. This is the sword ‘of the 
Spirit.; What is a man good for if he has no weapon? We 
don’t know how to use this sword; we should get into the 
habit of using it. David gays, “ Thy Word have [ hid in my 
heart.” A good thing in a good place for a good purpose, If 
u lose your health, you lie upon your bed and feed upon tho 
Word of God. 
When you meet together to dino it is better to bring out 
the Bible than, to bring on wine, I was glad in England at 
seeing that done in a great many of the houses of, the upper * 
classes. An Englishman said to me, “ Moody, did you ever 
observe this, that Job is the key to the whole Bible - I said, 
“No, I never did.” . He said, “If you get a key to Job you 
get a key to the whole Bible.” “What has Job to do with 
the Bible?” He said, “I will tell you. I will divide the 
subject into seven’ heads, First, Job, before he was tried, was 
a perfect man untried. He was like Adam in Eden until 
. Satan came in. Second, he was tried by adversit, a Third, that tl 
“the wisdom of the world is represented by Job's iends try- ke 
ing to restore him. Sve what language they used, © They be wil 
were wonderfully wise men, but. they could not help Job out miles, 
of his difficulties. Men are miserable comforters when they have } 
do not understand the grace of God. Job could stand his, Bible 
scolding wife and. his boils better than these men’s arguments ; likely 
they made him worse instead of better. Fifth, God speaks, for a g 
and Job humbles himself in the dust, God, before He saves becom 
a man, brings him dewn into the dust. He does not. talk you wi 
about how he has fed the hungry and clothed the naked, but 
he says, ‘I am vile.’ Seventh, God restures him, and the 
lust end of Job was better than the first. So the last 
state of man is better than the first. It is better than the © If. 
state of Adam, because Adam might have lived ten thousand would 
years and then fallen; therefore it is better for us to be out- | on the 
side of Eden with Christ than that we should be in Eden - with th 
‘» without Him. God gave Job double as much wealth as he had my min 
. before, but He only gave him ten children. He had ten he ( ‘hould 
fore his calamity came upon him. That is worthy of notice. particul 
God would not admit that Job had lost any children. He \g andin 
gave. him ten here and ten in heaven.” an expl 


when 
of the 

We 
to the 
in my 
we, If 
on tho 


ng out 
and. at 
upper ’ 
u ever 
I said, 
b you 
> with 
le the 
d, was 
until. 
Chird, 
Js try- 
They 
ob out 
n they 
id his 
hents ; 
peaks, 
| Saves 
t talk 
d, but 
id the 
e last 
an the © 
yusand 
ye out- 
Eden — 
he had 
en. he- 


STUDYING AND, MARKING THE BIBLE. 61 


We want the Word of ‘God go hidden in our hearts that 
we will be constrained ‘to speak of Him, Man flinty hearts 
and scoffers have come to the meetings, but before they loft, 
ot have been converted to God, A man while in a saloon 


pic ed up a hewspyt maining a report of one of the meet- 
ngs, the first line Cahich was,“ Where art thou?” Tho 
was atruck with ithe wig fo himself, “I am not in the ri 
place,” and left. Haitiinato the meeting and was convegaH, 
and is now leading a@hristian life. . We must. take the Bible 
without prejudice, and _not, as Methodists, Baptists, Pres- 
byterians, or Episcopalians. I advise all to have a Bible 
which they can call their own, and to get the best that can 
be procured. ‘It might be said that it coat too much money ; 
but so much the better, it will be valued all the more, and 
will stand usage longer, I have carried the Bible I now use 
to California and to Europe and back, and nothing would in- . 
duce me to part with it, It has been a great comfort to me, 
and I have found much pleasure in it. It might be argued 
that the kind I recommend is too large for'a man to put in his 
ket. ' Then carry it under your arm; you should always 
willing to show your colors ; and if have to walk five 
miles, you will just be preaching a ser@ ve miles long. I 
have known a man convicted by seeing another carrying his 
Bible under his arm. Get a good Bible, for then you are 
likely to take better care of. it, Suppose you pay ten dollars 
for a good Bible, the older you grow the more precious will it 
become to you. “But be sure you don’t get: one so good that 
you will be afraid to mark it. 4S ae es 


t 


HINTS. ON BIBLE MARKING, 


If I were to go and hear Dr. Newton preach a sermon, I- 
would turn to my Bible, which. I always carry with me, and j 
on the margin mark down some of the heads of the discourse, 
with the date, and five years after, these heads would freshen 
my mind upon the sermon. Every one in studying the' Bible 


notice. 
6 He \ 


should make notes on the margin of any matter bearin g upon 
particular passages. “ It impresses the subject upon the mind, 
and in after years, if the necessity occur for a recurrence to it. 

an explanation can be given at once, 4 ee 


= 


‘ 62 | STUDYING AND MARKING THE BIBLE. 


In marking your Bible draw horizontal lines under the 
words required to convey the thought, and call them ‘‘Under- 
‘tines ;" and ‘then draw diagonal lines across the page to con- 
nect them ; these diagonal lines call “ Razlways.” 

~ In any given verse, underline only the word or words 
required to convey the thought ; leaving other words to be 
underlined in connection with other thoughts which may 
occur hereafter. ts - 
«- It often occurs that “ Railways” are connected with two or 
three separate parts of one verse. This can only be expressed 
by carefully observing the above Rule. 

The connection between an undefline and 4 “ Railway” 
should always be made at one end of the underline, and not 
in the middle of an underline. | 

Draw the “ Railways” on each page as nearly as possible 
at the same angle; by so doing, the print will be far less | 
‘interfered with. ij ae ne: 1 

: A “ Railway” continued into the Margin and ended with 
a letter or number, indicates that a similar continuation, with 
& corresponding, letter or number, will be found elsewhere on 
the same page (though it may be in the other column.): 
If a connection be needed with a distant page, the same 
is indicated by continuing the “ Railway” into the Margin, 
-; and writing at the end of the “ Railway” the chapter and 
verse with which it is connected, thus :—Sce page 47, Luke 
8. 50. oe ee we . 

A “Railway” may often be useful to connect a verse 
with a group-of jottings or foot notes, thus:—=See top of 
page 57, Ex. 28. 1. Also page 158, Heb. 2. 17. ; 

Never draw “‘ Railways” without a small Ruler, and a fine 
Etching Pen ; and be very careful that the underlines and the 
“* Railways” are drawn accurately. — eae 


Draw all lines as lightly as possible, particularly the , 

6e Railways.” Ree a | 
Make your own Marginal references as freely as possible, : 
writing each verse against the other, thus:—Heb. 2: 11= . 
Ex. 25. 19: write Heb. 2. 11 beside Ex. 25. 19; und Ex.- 
25. 19 beside Heb. 2. 11. ee | oa 
. In all jottings or “Notes,” be very concise, so as to oc- 


—cupy little ‘space: — 


oe 


STUDYING AND MARKING THE BIBLE. 63 


der the | i | eee : wer, 
‘Under-— ~ SIGNS AND. ABBREVEATIONS. or 
to con- ay 


words _ © signifies the new Rendering are b Alford, 


to be X signities a Foot-note or Head-note. 
ae “ “Trinity.” 
| two or - “©  — Contrast. | 
pressed Compare. 
ilway ” : ae 

ind not 


ossible 
‘ar less 
d. with 
n, with 
here on 
6 same 
flargin, 


ter and 
Y, Luke 


R verse 
top of 
da fine 
nd the 
ly the , 


ossible, : 
:d 


a Ex. 
3tooc- | 


CHAPTER V. 


‘MOODY'S GEMS ‘OF CHRISTIAN THOUGHT. 


od 


rR. MOODY'S peculiar aptness and power in-some of 
| his running comments on texts of Scripture will 
appear in the following selections :— 


| Poor drunkard! Come to Christ; Christ is 
stronger than strong drink ! 


ih tis 


Judas got near enough to Christi i kiss Him, and yet . 


went down to‘damnation. 


a a 


We have three great enemies : the world, the flesh, and 


the devil. But we have alao three great friends: the Father, | 


the Son, and the Holy Ghost. 


: You should be.in earnest about seeking God. He was in 
earnest when he gave His Son to die for sinners, Christ was 
in earneéé when he hung upon the cross, ’ 


A good many people are coniplaining all the time about 
themselves, and crying out :—‘ My leanness ! my leanness !” 
_ when they ought rather to say, “ My laziness ! my laziness !” 


A man once wanted to sell me a “ Book of Wonders.” I 
took it and lookedit over, and could not find anything in it 

_ about Calvary. What a mistake! “A book of wonders—and 

the greatest’ wonder of all left out! * 


@ 


“What shall I then do with Jesus which is called Christ?” 


~ Pilate has-Christ_on his hands, and now he wante-to-know 


how to get’rid of Him. So it is with every convicted soul 


& + 


vation, 


ome of 
re will 


rist is 


nd yet . 


h, and 


‘ather, 


was in 
st was 


} 


(3) 


for 


‘left-handed. 


i; Poor Pilate! Poor Herod ! 
How near they got to the kingdom of heaven, 
3 CH % ae 


choose Barabbas inste 


to become Christians thi 


There are some who 
with these 
jection. 


in his humility, 


for one woman scared - hig 


Peter, whose strong point was boldness, was 80 frightened by 


a maid, as to deny his Lon. . ; 
Let no time be spent in arguments: I beliove hat is a 
work of the devil, to take off attention and cause delay. Ifa 


man comes to argue, we, should go on oun knées, pray with _- 


him, and then let him* go. Job never fell until he got into 
an argumént with hia friends 
all his other afflictions, better than an argument. 


“ : (CQ ‘ 

_ It is said of David's mighty men that they weré right and 
They were wholly-consecrated ; they could use 
their left or their right hands for the king. That is what we 
want in London. Men whp are right-handed and left-handed 
for the King of Glory. Men who can use their eyes, and 
tongues, and ears, and everything for the Lord Jesus. : 


Paul said he was the “ chief of sinners ;” 


and if the chief . 
has gone up on high, there fg hope for else.—T 


The 


ie 4 


3 he could stand his boils, and" 


fe: 


makes us believe that we are good enough without sal- 


vation, if he can ;.and if ke cannot maké-us believe that, he 
; a *®- = 


te 


Ree 


\ 
a a 


66° GEMS OF CHRISTIAN THOUGHT. 


says, “ You are so bad the Lord won't have you "and so he . 
tries to make people believe they are either too good oxtoo —. 
bad to be converted. : ae au ete 


One reason why we don’t have more answers-to our prayers 
is because we are not thankful enough. Theydivine injunc- — 
tion is, “ Be careful for nothing ; but in’everything by. prayer 
and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made °° 
known unto God.” Some one has well said there are three 


things in this verse : tareful fog nothing—prayerful for every- 


thing—thankful for anything. -, 3 
* Naaman left onl y one thing in Samaria, and that was his sin | 
—his leprosy : and the only thing God wishes you to leave is ~ 
your sin. And yet it is the only thing you seem not to ‘care » 
about giving up. “Ob,” you say, “I love leprosy ; it is 80 


delightfal, I can’t give it up.’ I know God wants it, that He 


may make me clean. But I can't give it up.” Why, what . 
downright madness it is to love leprosy ! aire: 4 


_ “Now is the accepted time.” ‘The last night I‘preached in 
Farwell Hall, in Chicago, I made the greatest mistake of my . 
‘life. I told the people to take that text home with them and ©: 
_ pray over it. ‘But as we went out the fire-bells were ringing, 
and I never saw that audience again. The fire had. come. 
_ The city was in ashes ; and perhaps some of those very people © 
were burned up in it. There is no other time fo be saved but, 
now. - ae ence aes : 


u , “And now abideth faith, hope, charity—these three ; but . 
the greatest of these is charity.” Love is the greatest of God’s 


_ gifts, and of all the Christian virtues. ~I don’t think weshell =F 


require faith when we get to heaven. Before the throne of 
God we shall walk by sight, and-not by ‘faith. , N. or shall we 


: es : need ‘hope there, ‘as we:shall have attained to the full:measure — - 


of possession. Faith and hope will: be past, but love:will'gtill: : 
reign. Therefore love is called the greatest: = 2 


\ 


me;” the cry now is, “ Send some one else. Send the min-" 


X 


» epee 


‘“ stindy. the meaning of sme 
is that word “repentance,” Some peopigpite. saying, SW Wee. 
..,don’t Mr. ,.Moody tell’ us more about Tepentance?” - Walger 
“> | what is repentance? Some one says it is a “godly sorrow; — a 
; » for sin.” But I tell you a man can’t have a godly sorrow,  % 


: \ \nist, 3 
ere ee Ber’ 
ek ¢) é ; : 
Brie aa y) 


3 


7." GEMS: OF CHRISTIAN. THOUGHT. ; ee 


ty ister, send the church officers, the church wardens, the elders ; 
#,, bat not me. I have not got the abil r 
.: ents.” Ah! honestly say you have Not got the heart ; for if 


ity, the gifts, or the tal- 


the heart is loyal, God can use you. It is réally all a matter 

of heart. It does not take God & great while to qualify a 
man ‘for his workif he only. has the heart for it. 

‘The most powerful sermon Christ ever predched was His: - 

discourge to Nicodemias. I believe there have. been more souls 

. born again by reading the third chapter of St. John’s ‘Gospel 


than by reading any other chapter in the Bible. And that — 


‘ beautiful and wonderful sermon was preached to one man 


only ! ' If we Christians have the same mind that Christ had, 
not despising the day of small things, but each one of us doing 
what we can to bring some one to the Saviour, we shall see 
a great (work accomplished. = 8 8 = = 


Rh. “Our Lord said on one occasion, “There is no man that 


hath left house, or brethrén, or sisters, or father, or mother, 
or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospel’s, 


_ but he shall receive a hundredfold more in this present world, 

* and in the world to cdme:life everlasting.” But Peter an- ° 

". Wering said, “ Lo, we have left all, and follow | Thee.” “So 

“.. it always is. We make much of our sacrifi@éi What had 

the digcjples left << A few old broken nets, afft-some boats. 
What i 


d they g&t in exchange? -The kingdom of God! 


ge’ their dictionaries more ahd 
of these’ ible. words, . There ; 


I wish péople would. 


1 1 eg 


or @ godly anything-else till after he Tepents. _ Repentance. 


- means right-bout face! Some one says, “ Man is born with | 
"= his back’ towards God, and repentance is turning aquare 


ny 


\ +) 
sora 


-—When 
. height, things down: here begin to look very small ‘indeed. 


«—* NER: 


men going up in a ballvon have ascended & litfle 


“fess. fain 
mT Adhin ih 


<9 — igs eer tie 
* wae 


hd feet, right down itfto the bowels of the 
ron We Ve, don't you know that if would. be sheer mad-. 
ito climb up the steep sides off at shaft and so get 
.of the pit?’ Ofcourse, you couldn't leap out of it; in fact, 
A yyou couldn't get out ofit at all by yourself\:, But 1'll tell you 
é,—you could yet out of a coalpit fiftden;, bundred feet deep © 
@good deal quicker than you can got out of thé pit that Adam 
took you into. » When Adam went down. ittto it, he took’ the 
Whole human fimily with.him, ‘But: the’ 


ar 
" ‘out. 


Ais 
el eae 
sessit a 


it friend of, mire: was walking along the streets one dark 

+ night, when: he saw a man coming along with a lantern. As 

he came up closé. to'him, he noticed by t @.bright light that 

. the man had no eyes: He went past him ;:’but the thought 

, ‘:" atruck him, “ Surely that man is blind !*"| |He turned round 
» ;and gaid, “My friend, are you not ‘blind ?” “ Yes,” was the — 

| * answer, . “ Then what have you got.the lantern for?’ “I _ 


Sey atuimble over me.” that blind man, 


A 1 3 take a lesson frp 
— and hold up our ligh};burning with: (i 


a “heaven, that men may ‘not stumble overjammgs 


3 Lata eee q . : tae 
(i I ola of two men wh@@ 
. & ~~ Jiquor, Pdown one night to va 
‘+ they wanted to return home, so they’ 
. %Q They pulled away hard’ all night, wor 
“got to, the other side of the bay: ‘Wee 


Sewhy they never 
mane gray dawn of 


u ‘ever ga: dow in 0.4 coalpit, fifteen huh. 


ford can take us 


pe 


carry. the lantern,” said the blind man, “that people may not - 
dear radiance ‘of. , 
Mm the influence of . 


heir’ boat was tied; - 
and began 46 row. — 


r-) 
~~ 
_s 
Aa 
ee ¥ 


a ston 
notice 
find tl 
He al 
Maste 
6 You 
teach 


> 


broke, Denold, they red" 1e6Vvel Meesed the mooring 
» line or raised the anchor! ‘And that’s just the way. with 


A yt i A 
. an a wee oe - at = : . 


n owe 
LEeUS EEL 


GEMS OF CHRISTIAN: THOUGHT. 69 


many who are striving to enter the kingdom of heaven. They 


POLY.) cannot believe, because they are tied to this world. ‘Cut the 
they: cord! cut the cord! Set yourselves free from the clogging - 
te ane ' weight, of earthly things, and you will soon go on towards 
Re at, .. heaven." : 
‘Oa: 8 : \ . 
is "Read the 103rd Psalm, and mark how the Psalmist bids 
oe ug, “forget not all His benefits.” Some one has said we can- - 
o not remember them all, but we must not forget them all— 
o hob they are too numerous too keep them all in mind, but-let us. 
of the - keep some of them in mind. Observe five things in the 3rd 
r mad-. * 4th, ‘snd 5th verses of this psalm :—(1) “He forgiveth 
80 get thine iniquities.* (2) “He healeth all thy diseases.” ‘ (3) 
» fact, “‘ He redeemeth thy life from destruction.” (4) “ He. crown- 
1 you _ eth thee with loving-kindness and tender mercies.” But 
t deep _» there are very many crowned heads that are still not satistied. 
Adam _ God, therefore, does more,—(5) “He satistieth thy soul.” 9 
Ik’ the What more can we have thaif that ? | \ 
ike us x 4 . = i 
Sue: When Jesus, along with His little band of disciples, came 
to the grave wherein Lazarus was laid, they found it covered by 
> dark a stone. . Jggus could have removed the stone Himself; but, Ee 
Fs As # notice, ffe ile His followers to remove the stone. And we a 
t that find that after the Master had restored the dead man to life, | 
ought .. He also said to them: “ Loose him-and let him go.” The f- 
round < Master could have loosed him ; but He said to His disciples : | 
as the ~ “You looss Him.” What lesson does the Master’ mean to 4 
PASE toh #ile megns to teach His followers ; that, 
y not St 


teach us by thi 
whi Healone’ speak the word of life to dead souls, He 
We tore ie the” 


oe t one, and to loose the poor souls and 


‘man,’ Reus to ret Uigs 
ice ‘of , WP  glst them go. ‘He"would have ug to be co-workers with Him. 

- ff... Some people tell tis wade not "paker ily difference what 
ice of a man believes if he is only sincere. py, Qne Church is just as — 
tied ; _ good as another if you are only siggéte, Ido not believe any = 
> TOW ': (greater delusion ever cate out of the pit of hell than that. 


never ., It is ruining more souls at the-present.shan anything eles. I \ | 
wn of Hever igad of any,men more sipoars qr morgegraest than thove--r\ 
Oring meMjgg¥emeaunt Carmel—those ' falaé - s. . Thay. were 

with _ terri 


nove, AOISG. RrOppet by ? 
mrnest. . You do ‘not read ‘of men getting so. in’ 


in a 


_. distinguished reward. « They that be wise sh 


70 GEMS OF CHRISTIAN THOUGHT. 


earnest now that they take knives and ctit themselves, Look 
at them leaping upon their altars; hear their cry—Oh Baal! 
oh Baal!” We never heard that kind of prayer on this plat- 
form, They acted like. madmen. They were terribly in 
earnest: yet did not God hear their cry? They were all 
slain. ; “oy 


v 


You have all sinned aud come short of the glory of God, 
~ but God comes and says, “I will pardon you. Come now, and 
let us reason together.”- “ Now” is one of the words of the 


Bible the devil is afraid of-\ He says, “ Do not be in a hurry ; 


there is plenty of time : do not be good now.” He knows the - 


influence of that word “now.” “To-morrow ” is thé devil’s 
word. The Lord’s word is “now.” God says, “ Come now, 
and let us reason together. Thought your sins are as scarlet, 


they shall be white as snow. Thoughrthey be red as crimsony - 


I will make them as wool.” Scarlet and crimson are two fast 
colors ; you would not get the color out without destroyi 
the garment. God saya, “ Though your sins are as scarlet ati 

‘crimson, I will make them as wool and snows will do it 
now.’ me € : 


I have an idea that there are thousands of céownless saints 


in heaven. They. just barely get in at the doors. Phey have, 


indeed, been redeemed by the blood of the Lamb ; but there _ 
is no reward for them. They have sought their own ease in 


this world ; they have not. sought to work for Christ here 
below ; therefore, though admitted to heaven, they enjoy no 

| aH shine as the 
brightness of the firmament 3 and they that turn many to 


 Fighteousness as the stars for ever and ever.” But none of 


those that have lost heart, and have given up working for the 
-Master here, will shine as the stars, or receive the great’ reward 
hereafter: For those carelgss ones there is no bright glory, 
no place near the throne ; they have just got in at the gates 
- —that’s all! is nna 


- When it is dark and stormy here, strive te rise hi 


é 
a 
ng” . 


4 eng 
y* 
: 


higher, near to Ghrist ; and you will find it all calm there. 
You know that jt is the highest mountain peaks that catch the 
Seer : a ok ee 


GEMS OF CHRISTIAN THOUGHT. — 91 * 


Md ee : ; 
first rays of the sun. So those who rise highest catch the 
first news.from heaven. It: is those sunny Christians who go 
through-the world with smiles on theif faces, that win souls. 
And, on the other hand, it is those Christians who go through’ 
the world hanging their heads like bulrushes, that scare peo- 
ple away from religion, Why, it’s a libel on Christianity for 
& religious. man to go about with such a downcast look ! 
What does the Master say 1—'‘ My joy'I leave with you, ‘my 
joy I give unto you.” Depend upon it, if our minds were 
stayed upon Him, we should have perfect peace ; and with 
perfect peace we should have perfect joy. aay | 


“T waited patiently for the Lord, and He inclined ‘unto 
me; and heard my cry. He brought .me up also out an 
horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a@ roc 

_and established my goings ; and He hath puta new song » 
my mouth.” Now in those three verses that ‘ttle. word Hi? . 
occurs three times: He heard my cry ; He brought-tne up out 
of the pit; and He put a new song in my mouth. There is 
‘nothing there for the sinner to do—is there ? He. does it all. 

The great trouble people shave now-a-days is to make a new 
song for themselves. Why, you cannot sing without God | 
. tunes your heart and voice! You cannot establish your own 
goings. You have tried that—have you not? How many 
times have you tried to get the control over your temg 
said, I will do this, and I will do that, and have failed y 
_ time? You can’t do it yourselves. He must do the saving. 

“ Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom, 

of God.” -T often rejoice Christ did not say this to that womati 

- at the well, nor to that woman who was a sinner. If He had 

spok ¢o them, people would have said, ‘* Oh, that poor. 
won peded to be converted ; but Iam a m ral character— — 

'. Ido ndt need to be converted. Regeneration will do for har- 
lots, thieves, and drunkards ; but we who ate moral do not: 

‘need it.” But who did Christ say this to? He said it to 
Nicodiipus.,- Who was he? He was one of the-church dig-. 
nitari a stood as hic ASA Ww Man i rerusale a, except the. 

‘He belongedatip the enty rwers of the’ 


high priest himself. 
Jews ; he was a doctor of divinity,, pd taWiit:the law. There: 


% bs ‘ 
me eae 
wn : i ge 3 4 
’ J ‘ 
: 4 Read Pee 
' 
. . 


GEMS OF CHRISTIAN THOUGHT, 


is not one word of Scripture against him ; he was a man that - 
* Stood out before the w ifm as of pure and spotless char. 
, acter, And what dou" tdi vrs Except a man 
"be born again, he cannot gee the kingdom of God.” ip 
') ae ; 
‘WE Look at Poor old Pharoah down there in “Egypt, when 
“pt the plague of frogs was on him. What an awful time he must 
‘a ¥ have had! Frogs in the fields, and frogs in the houses ; frogs 
fy?’ in the bedrooms, and frogs in the kneading-troughs. When 
the king went to bed, a frog would jump on to his face; when 
he gut into a loaf of bread, ed was : frog in the middle ay 
it. “Nothing but everywhere! Frogs, frogs, frogs’! » He 
8 it as long en hie 3 and then he cok Moses, and, Bi, 
° bedied him to take them awey. “When w yourlike to “Ge 
have me do it?” says Moses. Now just listen to what he .€ 
saya You would think he would say, Now ! this minute! f 
have liad them long eneugh! But he says,—" 7o-norrow,” 
Kept the frogs another day, when he might have got rid of them 


" 
a, 
. 


till to-morrév, rl 


_ at once ! "That ts jus Jike you, sinner. You say yowdvant to be 
', saved ; but yo ate willing to kagp your hateful, hideous sins 
: Bing iq 
2 


ittstead ‘of bei of them now. 
4 : * ‘ ‘ 
Out &%... western country in the autumn, when men go 
hunting, and there has not been an Yain for months, some- 
times the 8 firéyend there comes up a 
lameg.just roll glong ‘twenty feet 
: or forty mileaen hour. 
ee it coming, what do they do? 
fast as the fire canrun. Not 
eo m that fire. They Just take a 
g around them, and let the fire sweep 
1 Memehey get into the burnt district and stand safe, 
hear the flames ‘roar ; they see death coming towards 
x |; butt they do not fear, they do not tremble ; because the 
. .° fire has passed-over the place where they are, and there is no 
~ danger. There is nothing for the fire to burn. e 
There is ee -peak thdt the wrath. of God’ h 
swept over ; that is Mount Calvary, and that-fire spent—its 
fury upon the bosom of the Son of God. Take your stand. ff; 
acts, a by the cross, and you will be safe for time and.eternity, “fF 


r 2 é , 
= Wi 

in , 
TF 


r bated 
c* 
& 4aF 


fu 
xe 
t 
f 


A 4 
We 


er one eee 


(WW EOITION.) 1000 
BOOK AGENTS WANTED 
TO shure 


THE LIVES AND LABORS 


MOODY & SANKEY; 


BEING A 


ULL HISTORY of these men, and of God's work in Great 
Britain and America through their agency ; and embrac- 
ing Mr. Moody's Sermons, as preached in Great Britain, 

New York, Chicago and Boston; his Prayer Meeting Talks, 
Bible Anecdotes and Illustrations used by him in the revival 
work; Mr. Sankey’s Addresses and Hymns, and everygiy 


interest connected with their wonderful career of 
conquest. 

It also contains a Memoir of the late P. P. Bliss, thel 
of the most popular and effective Hymns and Tunes i 
the Moody and Sone meetings. : 


By REY. ROBERT EOYD, DD, 


WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY REV. JOHN POTTS, OP TORONTO. 


Mllustrated with Portraits of Messrs. Moody, Sankey and Bliss, and 
Views of the Tabernacles in whioh the Revival 
Meetings were heid. 


eee i ee ee ne a eee pee ae ee ee —— 


“ This work gives the fullest account, that we have seen, of the gre: it religious -| 


awakening, both in the Old World and New, by —Methodist Magazine for March, 
1877. ‘ 


— a Parc an ran eede Os ee = eee eee ~ —— 


Published in one crown Bvyo. volume of over * 600 Pages, end bound > 
‘in neat and substantial English Muslin, stumped in black and gold, ond 

furnished to subscribers at only’${.76 per copy. very cheap. ” will be 

- gent by mail, post-paid, on Receipt of price). 


Address, seinen and full particulars, 


H. HOVEY, Publisher, 
: No. 48 KING STREET F 


